Phantasms of the Living (Edmund Gurney, Frederic W. H. Myers & Frank Podmore, 1886)
===================================================================================
Edmund Gurney, Frederic W. H. Myers & Frank Podmore — The SPR's landmark census of telepathic hallucinations — the founding evidence-base of psychical research. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (in.ernet.dli.2015.99141) — Vol. I. Scan via Internet Archive (phantasmsoflivin02gurn) — Vol. II.

s 

BY 

EDMUND  GURNEY,  M.X. 

LAW  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  OOLIEGE,  CAMBRIDGE, 

FREDERIC  W.  H.  MYERS,  M.A, 

LA  % FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE, 

f;r4 N & • POUfrM ORE,  IVf.A. 

VOLUME  I. 

LONUOK: 

MpfOMS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FQB  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH, 
14,  BfAjr’s  Ya»>.  JBW.  t . 

TRUBNER  and  CO.,  LUDGATE  HIIiL,  E.C. 

1888. 

PREFACE. 

LARGE  part  of  the  material  used  in  this  book  was  sent  to  the 
Jtfh  ore  a£  representatives  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research; 
and  the*  book  is  published  with  the  sanction  of  the  Council  of  that 
Society. 

The  division  of  authorship  has  been  as  follows : — As  regards  the 
writing  and  the  views  expressed,  Mr.  Myers  is  solely  responsible  for 
the  Introduction,  and  for  the  “Note  on  a Suggested  Mode  of 
Psychical  Interaction,”  which  immediately  precedes  the  Supplement ; 
and  Mr.  Gurney  is  solely  responsible  for  the  remainder  of  the  book. 
But  the  most  difficult  and  important  part  of  the  undertaking — the 
collection,  examination,  and  appraisal  of  evidence — has  been  through- 
out a joint  labour ; of  which  Mr.  Podmore  has  borne  so  large  a share 
thjthis  name  could  not  possibly  have  been  omitted*  from  the  title-  . 
p’age. 

In  the  free  discussion  and  criticism  which  has  accompanied  the 
progress  of  the  work,  we  have  enjoyed  the  constant  advice  and 
assistance  .of  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  to  each  of  whom  we  owe 
more  than  can  be  expressed  by  any  conventional  phrases  of 
obligation.  Whatever  errors  of  judgment  or  flaws  in  argument-may 
remain,  such  blemishes  are  certainly  fewer  than  they  would  have 
been  but  for  this  watchful  and  ever-ready  help.  Professor  and  Mrs, 
Sidgwick  have  also  devoted  some  time  and  trouble,  during  vacation- 

VI 

P HE  FACE. 

time,  to  the  practical  work  of  interviewing  informants  and  obtaining 
their  personal  testimony. 

In  the  acknowledgment  of  our  debts,  special  mention  is  due  .to 
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.  He  was  to  a great  extent  the  pioneer  of 
the  movement  to  which  it  is  hoped  that  this  book  may  contribute  ; 
and  the  extent  of  his  services  in  relation,  especially,  to  the  subject 

of  experimental  Thought-transference  will  sufficiently  appear  in  the 

« 

sequel.  Mr.  Malcolm  Guthrie,  Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  and  M. 
Charles  Richet  have  been  most  welcome  allies  in  the  sam«j  branch  Jf 
the  work.  Professor  Barrett  and  M.  Richet  have  also  supplied  seve:  .* 
of  the  non-experimental  cases  in  our  collection.  Mr.  F.  Y.  Edgeworth 
has  rendered  valuable  assistance  in  points  relating  to  the  theory  of- 
probabilities,  a subject  on  which  he  is  a recognised  authority.  Among 
members  of  our  own  Society,  our  warmest  thanks  are  due  to  Miss 
Porter,  for  her  well-directed,  patient,  and  energetic  assistance  in  every 
department  of  the  work  ; Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  has  given  us  the  benefit 
of  his  counsel ; and  Mrs.  Walwyn,  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  the 
Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Clerkenwell,  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald, 
of  Rhyl,  and  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  have  aided  us  greatly  in 
the  collection  of  evidence.  Many  other  helpers,  in  this  and  oth'er 
countries,  we  must  be  content  to  include  in  a general  expression  of 
gratitude. 

Further  records  of  experience  will  be  most  welcome,  and  should 
be  sent  to  the  subjoined  address. 

lit,  Dean’s  Yard,  S.  W. 
June,  1886. 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH. 

JUNE,  1886. 

PRESIDENT. 

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S. 

VICE-PRESIDENTS. 

The  Right  Hon.  Arthur  J.  Balfour,  M.P. 
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.E. 

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle. 

John  R.  Hollond,  M.A. 

Richard  H.  Hutton,  M.A.,  LL.D. 

The  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  M.A. 

The  Hon.  Roden  Noel. 

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S. 

Thb  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon. 

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  M.  A.,  Lit.  D.,  D.C.Y. 
W.  H.  Stone,  M.B. 

Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  M.A. 

HONORARY  MEMBERS. 

J.  C.  Adams,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 

William  Crookes,  F.R.S. 

The  Right  Hon.'  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P. 

John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L. 

Lord  Tennyson. 

Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.G.S. 

G.  F.  Watts,  R.A. 

viii 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH . 

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS . 

Dk.  Bernhkim,  Professeur  k la  Faculty  de  M6decine  de  Nancy. 

A.  Boutleroff,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  the  Imperial  University, 

St.  Petersburg. 

Henry  P.  BowdItch,  M.A.,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Physiology,  Harvard 
University,  U.S.A. 

Theodore  Bruhns,  Simferopol,  Russia. 

Nicholas  M.  Butler,  M.A.,*Ph.D.,  Acting  Professor  of  Philosophy, 
Ethics,  and  Psychology,  Columbia  College,  New  York,  U.S.Au 
A.  DobroslAvin,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Hygiene  in  the  Imperial  Academy 
of  Medicine,  St.  Petersburg.  0 

TChe  Chevalier  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  Florence. 

Dr.  C.  Fi£r$,  HOpital  de  la  Salpetriere,  Paris.  * • # 

Georoe  S.  Fullerton,  M.A.,  B.D.,  Adjunct  Professor  of  KLilosoph^, 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A. 

Grenville  Stanley  Hall,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Psychology  and 
Pedagogies,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  U.S.A. 

I)r.  Eduard  von  Hartmann,  Berlin. 

William  J ames,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  Harvard  University,  U.S.A. 
Pierre  Janet,  Professeur  agr6ge.de  Philosophie  au  Lycee  du  Havre. 

P.  Kovalevsky,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Psychiatry  in  the  University  of 
Kharkoff. 

MahAdeva  Vishnu  KAn^j,  B.A.,  Bombay. 

Dr.  A.  A.  Li^beault,  Nancy. 

Edward  0.  Pickering,  M.A.,  S.B.,  Phillips  Professor  of  Astronomy,  and 
Director  of  the  Observatory,  Harvard  University,  U.S.A. 

Dr.  Charles  Richet,  Professeur  agreg6  a la  Faculty  de  M6decine  de 
Parish 

Dr.  N.  Wagner,  Professor  of  Zoology  in  the  Imperial  University,  St. 
Petersburg. 

The  Rev.°R.  Whtttingiiam,  Pikesville,  Maryland,  U.S.A. 

COUNCIL . 

J.  0.  Adams,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Lowndean  Professor  of  Astronomy, 

Cambridge. 

F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.E.,  Professor  of  Physics,  Royal  College  of  Science, 
Dublin. 

Alexander  Oalder. 

-Walter  H.  Coppin. 

Edmund  Gurney,  M.A. 

Richard  Hodgson,  M.A. 

Oliver  J.  Lodge,  D.  Sc.,  Professor  of  Physics,  University  College, 
Liverpool. 

A.  Macalister,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Anatomy,  Cambridge. 

SOCIETY  FOE  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH. 

he. 

Charles  C.  Massey.  . 

The  Rev.  W;  Stainton  Moses,  M.A. 

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  M.A;  . 

Frank:  Podmore,  M.A. 

Lord  Rayleigh,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D. 

,E.  Dawson  Rogers. 

Henry  Sidgwick,  M.  A.,  Lit.  D.,  D.C.L.,  Knightbridge  Professor  of 
* Moral  Philosophy,  Cambridge. 

Henry  A.  Smith,  M.A. 

J.  Herbert  Stack. 

Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Physics,  The  Owens 
^College,  Manchester. 

Swi.  '’Thomson,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Experimental  Physics,' 
Cambridge. 

•Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  M.A 

HONORARY  TREASURER. 

Alexander  Calder,  1,  Hereford  Square,  London,  S.W. 

HONORARY  SECRETARY. 

Edmond  Gurney,  14,  Dean’s  Yard,  Westminster,  S.W. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  the  Society  includes  over  600  Members  and 
Associates.  The  privileges  and  conditions  of  membership  are  thus  defined 
in  the  Rules  : — 

Rule  IV. — The  Society  shall  consist  of  : 

(a)  embers,  who  shall  contribute  not  less  than  two 
guineas  annually,  or  a single  payment  of  twenty  guineas,  and 
who  shall  be  entitled  to  hold  any  of  the  offices  of  the  Society ; 

" to  rote  in  the  election  of  the  Governing  Council ; to  attend  all 
meetings  of  the  Society  ; to  use  its  Reading  Room  and  Library ; 
to  borrow  books  from  its  Library ; and  to  the  free  receipt  of 
any  journal, , transactions,  or  periodical  publication  which  may 
be  issued  by  the  Council. 

( b ) Associates,  who  shall  contribute  not  less  than  one 
guinea  annually,  or  a single  payment  of  ten  guineas,  and.  who 
shall  be  entitled  to  attend  all  meetings  of  the  Society,  except 
such  as  are  convened  for  business  purposes  only;  to  use  its 
Reading  Room  and  Library ; and  to  the  free,  receipt  of«the 
ordinary  published  Proceedings  of  the  Society,  and  of  the 
monthly  Journal. 

X 

SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH 

Rule  V. — All  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  shall  be 
elected  by  the  Council.  Every  candidate  for  admission  shall 
be  proposed  by  two  persons  who  are  Members  or  Associates  of 
the  Society,  or  shall  give  such  references  as  shall  be  approved  by 
the  Council. 

Rule  VI. — The  subscription  shall  become  due  immediately  on 
election,  and  afterwards  in  advance  on  the  first  day'  of  January 
in  each  year.  In  thef  case  of  any  Member  or  Associate  elected 
on  or  after  the  1st  October,  the  subscription  then  paid  shall  be 
accepted  as  for  the  following  year. 

Ladies  are  eligible  either  as  Members  or  Associates. 

Members  and  Associates  are  entitled  to  purchase  copies  of  all  the 
periodical  publications  of  the  Society  at  half  their  published^iv^e. 

The  following  note  appears  on  the  first  page  of  the  Society’s 
Constitution  - o 

“ To  prevent  misconception,  it  is  here  expressly  stated  that  Membership 
of  this  Society  does  not  imply  the  acceptance  of  any  particular  explana- 
tion of  the  phenomena  investigated,  nor  any  belief  as  to  the  operation,  in 
the  physical  world,  of  forces  other  than  those  recognised  by  Physical 
Science.” 

Reports  of  investigation,  or  information  relating  to  any  branch  of  the 
Society’s  work,  should  be  addressed  to  the  Hon.  Secretary,  14,  Dean’s 
Yard,  Westminster,  S.W.  ; letters  of  inquiry,  or  applications  for  Member- 
ship, should  be  addressed  to  the  Assistant-Secretary  at  the  same  address. 

The  Proceedings  of  the  Society  (of  which  nine  parts,  making  three 
bound  volumes,  have  been  published,  and  a tenth  will  appear  shoVtly,) 
may  be -obtained  from  all  booksellers  through  Messrs.  Triibner  and  C0.9 
Ludgate  Hill,  London,  E.C. ; or  on  direct  application  to  the  Assistant- 
Secretary,  14,  Daan’s  Yard,  Westminster,  S.W. 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOLUME  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

I. 

^ 1.  The  title  of  this  book  embraces  all  transmissions  of  thought  and 
(feeling  from  one  person  to  another,  by  other  means  than  through  the 

recogmsejpr 

apparitions 

of  sense;  and  among  these  cases  we  shall  include 

XXXV-XXXV1 

§ 2.  We  conceive  that  the  problems  here  attacked  lie  in  the  main 
traok  of  science  . . . xxxvi 

§ 3.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  merely  aims  at  the  free  and 
exact  discussion  of  the  one  remaining  group  of  subjects  to  which  such 
discussion  is  still  refused.  Reasons  for  such  refusal  . xxxvi-xxxix 

§ 4.  Reasons,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the  prosecution  of  our  inquiries 
may  be  drawn  from  the  present  condition  of  several  contiguous  studies. 
Reasons  drawn  from  the  advance  of  biology  . . . xxxix-xli 

. § 5.  Specimens  of  problems  which  biology  suggests,  and  on  which 
inquiries  like  ours  may  ultimately  throw  light.  Wundt’s  view  of  the 
^origination  of  psychical  energy xli-xlii 

§ 6.  Tlie  problems  of  hypnotism  ....  xlii-xliii 

§ 7,  Hope  of  aid  from  the  progress  of  “ psycho-physical  ” 
^quiries xliii-xliv 

§ 8.  Reasons  v for  psychical  research  drawn  from  the  lacunae  of 
anthropology xliv-xlv 

1 9.  Reasons  drawn  from  the  study  of  history,  and  especially  of  the 
comparativeJhistory  of  religions.  Instance  from  the  S.P.R.’s  investigation 
of  so-called  “ Theosophy  ” xlvi-xlviii 

§ 10.  In  considering  the  relation  of  our  studies  to  religion  generally 
we  observe  that,  since  telepathy  obliges  us  to  conceive  the  psychical 
element  in  man  as  having  relations  which  cannot  be  expressed  in  terms 

Xll 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . I. 

of  matter,  a possibility  is  suggested  of  obtaining  scientific  evidence  of  a 
supersensory  relation  between  man’s  mind  and  a mind  or  minds  'above 
his  own xlviii-li 

§ 11.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  if  our  evidence  to  recent  supernormal 
occurrences  be  discredited,  a retrospective  improbability  will  be  thrown  on 
much  of  the  content  of  religious  tradition  . li-liv 

12.  Furthermore,  in  the  region  of  ethical  and  aesthetic  emotion, 
telepathy  indicates  a possible  scientific  basis  for  much  to  which  men 
now  cling  without  definite  justification  . • . . 0 liv-lvii 

o 

§ 13.  Investigations  such  as  ours  are  important,  moreover,  for  the 
purpose  of  checking  error  and  fraud,  as  well  as  of  eliciting  lvii-lix 

II. 

8 14.  Place  of  the  present  book  in  the  field  of  psychical  research* 
Indications  of  experimental  thought-transference  in  the  normal  state, 
1876-1882  lx 

^ 15.  Foundation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  1882. 
Telepathy  selected  as  our  first  subject  for  detailed  treatment  on  account  of 
the  mass  of  evidence  for  it  received  by  us  ....  lxi 

§ 16.  There  is  also  a theoretic  fitness  in  treating  of  the  direct 
action  of  mind  upon  mind  before  dealing  with  other  supernormal 
phenomena lxii-  lxiii 

c 

§ 17.  Reasons  for  classing  apparitions  occurring  about  the  moment  of0 
death  as  phantoms  of  the  living , rather  than  of  the  dead  . lxiii-lxv  * 

V c 

§ 18.  This  boolf  then,  claims  to  show  (1)  that  experimental  telepathy 
exists,  and  (2)  that  apparitions  at  death,  &c.,  are  a result  of  something  * 
beyond  chance ; whence  it  follows  (3)  that  these  experimental  and  these 
spontaneous  cases  of  the  action  of  mind  on  mind  are  in  some  way 
allied lxv-lxvii 

§ 19.  As  to  the  nature  and  degree  of  this  alliance  different  views  may 
be  taken ; and  in  a “Note  on  a Suggested  Mode  of  Psychical  Interaction,” 
in  Vol.  II.,  a theory  somewhat  different  from  Mr.  Gurney’s  is  set 
forth  ‘ ,lxvii-lxix 

§ 20.  This  book,  however,  consists  much  more  largely  of  evidence 
than  of  theories.  This  evidence  has  been  almost  entirely  collected  by 
ourselves . lxix-lxx 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . I 

xiii 

§ 21.  Inquiries  like  these,  though  they  may  appear  at  firBt  to  degrade 
great  ^truths  or  solemn  conceptions,  are  likely  to  end  by  exalting  and 
affirming  them lxx-lxxi 

Additions  and  Corrections  . . . . . lxxiii-lxxx 

CHAPTER  I. 

Preliminary  Remarks  : Grounds  op  Caution. 

§ 1.  Tim  great  test  of  scientific  achievement  is  often  held  to  be  the 
power  tojpretitict  natural  phenomena;  but  the  test,  though  an  authoritative 
one  in  the  sciences  of  inorganic  nature,  has  but  a limited  application  to 
the  lienees  that  deal  with  life,  and  especially  to  the  department  of 
mental  phenomena 1-3 

§ 2.  In  dealing  with  the  implications  of  life  and  the  developments 
of  human  faculty,  caution  needs  to  be  exercised  in  two  directions.  The 
scientist  is  in  danger  of  forgetting  the  unstable  and  unmechanical  nature 
of  the  material,  and  of  closing  the  door  too  dogmatically  on  phenomena 
whose  relations  with  established  knowledge  he  cannot  trace ; while  others 
take  advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  limits  of  possibility  cannot  here  be 
scientifically  stated^  to  gratify  an  uncritical  taste  for  marvels,  and  to 
invest  their  own  hasty  assumptions  with  the  dignity  of  laws  . 3-5 

§ 3.  This  state  of  things  subjects  the  study  of  “ psychical”  phenomena 
*to  peculiar  disadvantages,  and  imposes  on  the  student  peculiar 
^obligations 5-6 

§ 4.  -And  this  should  be  well  recognised  by  those  who  advance  a 
conception  so  new  to  psychological  science  as  the  central  conception  of 
this  book*— to  wit,  Telepathy , or  the  ability  of  one  mind  to  impress  or  to  be 
impressed  by  another  mind  otherwise  than  through  the  recognised  chcmnela 
of  se 7ise.  (Of  the  two  persons  concerned,  the  one  whose  mind  impresses 
the  other  will  be  called  the  ogent9  and  the  one  whose  mind  is  impressed 
the  percipient)  6-7 

§ 5.  Telepathy  will  be  here  studied  chiefly  as  a system  of  factsy 
theoretical  discussion  being  subordinated  to  the  presentation  of  evidence. 
The  evidence  will  be  of  two  sorts— spontaneous  occurrences,  and  the 
results  of  direct  experiment ; which  latter  will  have  to  be  carefully 
distinguished  from  spurious  “ thought-reading  ” exhibitions  7-9 

xiv 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Experimental  Basis  : Thought-Transference. 

§ 1.  The  term  thought ’•transference  has  been  adopted  in  preference  to 
though Weading,  the  latter  term  (1)  having  .become  identified  with  exhi- 
bitions of  mwwZe-reading,  and  (2)  suggesting  a power  of  reading  a person’s 
thoughts  against  his  will  .......  10-11 

§ 2.  The  phenomena  of  thought-transference  first  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  competent  witnesses  in  connection  with  u mesmerism,”  and  were 
regarded  as  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  mesmeric  rapport  ; which  was 
most  prejudicial  to  their' chance  of  scientific  acceptance  . . 11-13 

§ 3.  Hints  of  thought-transference  between  persons  in  d’nottnal  state 
were  obtained  by  Professor  Barrett  in  1876;  and  just  at  that  time  the 
attention  of  others  had  been  attracted  to  certain  phenomena  at  the 
* 1 willing-game/  which  were  not  easily  explicable  (as, almost  all  the  so- 
called  4C  willing  ” and  “ thought-reading  ” exhibitions  are)  by  unconscious 
muscular  guidance.  But  the  is^ue  could  never  be  definitely  decided  by 
cases  where  the  two  persons  concerned  were  in  any  sort  of  contact  13-17 

§ 4.  And  even  where  contact  is  excluded,  other  possibilities  of 
unconscious  guidance  must  be  taken  into  account ; so  alsa  must  the 
possibility  of  conscious  collusion.  Anyone  who  is  unable  to  obtain  con- 
viction as  to  the  bona  Jides  of  experiments  by  himself  acting  as  agent  or 
percipient  (arid  so  being  himself  one  of  the  persons  who  would  have  to  take 
part  in  the  trick,  if  trick  it  were),  may  fairly  demand  that  the  responsi- 
bility for  the  results  shall  be  spread  over  a considerable  group  of  persons 
— a group  so  large  that  he  shall  find  it  impossible  to  extend  to  all  of  them  » 
the  hypothesis  of  deceit  (or  of  such  imbecility  as  would  take  th&  place  of  * 
deceit)  which  he  might  apply  to  a smaller  number  . ' . 17-2<)  - 

S 5.  Experiments  with  the  Creery  family  ; earlier  trials  . 21-22 

Crucial  experiments,  in  which  knowledge  of  what  was  to  be  trans- 
ferred (usually  the  idea  of  a particular  card,  name,  or  number)  was 
confined  to  the  members  of  the  investigating  committee  who  acted  as 
agents ; with  a table  of  results,  and  an  estimate  of  probabilities  22-26 
w In  many  cases  reckohed  as  failures  there  was  a degree  of  approximate 
success  which  was  very  significant . 27-28 

The  form  of  the  impression  in  the  percipient’s  mind  sterns  to  have 
been  sometimes  visual  and  sometimes  auditory ....  28-29 

6.  Reasons  why  these  experiments  were  not  accessible  to  a larger 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  /. 

xr 

number  of  observers ; the  chief  reason  being  the  gradual  decline  of  the 
percipient  faculty 29-31 

• 

§ 7.  In  a course  oi  experiments  of  the  same  sort  conducted  by  M. 
Charles  Richet,  in  Prance,  the  would-be  percipients  were  apparently  not 
persons  of  any  special  susceptibility ; but  a sufficient  number  of  trials 
were  made  for  the  excess  of  the  total  of  successes  over  the  total  most 
probable  if  chance  alone  acted  to  be  decidedly  striking  . * 31-33 

The  pursuit  of  this  line  of  inquiry  \>n  a large  scale  in  England 
has  produced  results  which  involve  a practical  certainty  that  some  cause 
„other  than  chance  has  acted 33-35 

§ £ Experiments  in  the  reproduction  of  diagrams  and  rough  draw- 
ings. In  a.  long  series  conducted  by  Mr.  Malcolm  Guthrie,  two  percipients 
and  a consjlterable  number  of  agents  were  employed  . . 35-38 

Specimens  of  the  results 39-48 

§ 9.  Professor  Oliver  J.  Lodge's  experiments  with  Mr.  Guthrie's 
“ subjects,"  and  his  remarks  thereon 49-51 

$ 10.  Experiments  in  the  transference  of  elementary  sensations — 
tastes,  smells,  and  pains  . ‘ . . . . / 51-58 

§11.  A different  department  of  experiment  is  that  where  the  trans- 
ference does  not  take  effect  in  the  percipient's  consciousness,  but  is 
exhibited  in  his  motor  system,  either  automatically  or  semi-automatically. 
Experiments  in*  the  inhibition  of  utterance  . . . 58-62 

§ HJ.  The  most  conclusive  cases  of  transference  of  ideas  which,  never- 
theless, do  not  affect  the  percipient's  consciousness  are  those  where  the  idea 
i&  reproduced  by  the  percipient  in  writing , without  his  being  aware  of 
wJiat  he  has  ’written,  Details*  of  a long  series  of  trials  carried  offt  by  the 
Rev.  P.  H:  and  Mrs.  Newnham 62-69 

The  intelligence  which  acted  on  the  percipient's  side  in  these  experi- 
ments was  in  a sense  an  unconscious  intelligence — a term  which  needs 
careful  definition 69-70 

^ § 13.  M.  Richet  has  introduced  an  ingenious  method  for  utilising  what 

ue  calls  “ mediumship  l> — i.e.,  the  liability  to  exhibit  intelligent  movements 
in  which  consciousness  and  will  take  no  part — for  purposes  of  telepathic 
experiixM^^  By  this  method  it  has  been  clearly  shown  that  a word  on 
which  the  agent  concentrates  his  attention  maybe  unconsciously  repro- 
duced  by  the  percipient  . . . . • . • , 71-77 

And  even  that  a word  which  has  only  an  unconscious  place  in  the 
agent's  mind  may  be  similarly  transferred  ....  77-79 

xvi 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . I. 

These  phenomena  seem  to  involve  a certain  impulsive  quality  in  the 
transference 79-80 

§ 14.  Apart  from  serious  and  systematic  investigation,  interesting 
results  are  sometimes  obtained  in  a more  casual  way,  of  which  some 
specimens  are  given.  It*  is  much  to  be  wished  that  moi*e  persons  would 
make  experiments,  under  conditions  whicli  preclude  the  possibility  of 
unconscious  guidance.  At  present  we  are  greatly  in  the  dark  as  to  the 
proportion  of  people  in  whom  tlie  specific  faculty  exists  . .«  81-85 

CHAPTER  III. 

Tub  Transition  from  Experimental  to  Spontaneous  Telepathy. 

‘*  * ^ # ‘ 

§ 1.  There  is  a certain  class  of  cases  in  which,  though  they  are  experiments 
on  the  agent’s  part,  and  involve  his  conscious  concentration  of  mihd  with 
a view  to  the  result,  the  percipient  is  not  consciously  or  voluntarily  a party 
to  the  experiment.  Such  cases  may  be  called  transitional . In  them  the 
distance  between  the  two  persons  concerned  is  often  considerable  86-87 

§ 2.  Spurious  examples  of  the  sort  are  often  adduced ; and  especially 
in  connection  with  mesmerism,  results  are  often  attributed  to  the 
operator’s  will , which  are  really  due  to  some  previous  command  or  sugges- 
tion. Still,  examples  are  not  lacking  of  the  induction  of  the  hypnotic 
trance  in  a “ subject  ” .at  a distance,  by  the  deliberate  exercise  of 
volition  . . . . . . . . . . 87-89 

55  3.  Illustrations  of  the  induction  or  inhibition  of  definite  actioniby  the 
agent’s  volition,  directed  towards  a person  who  is  unaware  of  lfis 
intent 89-91 

The  relation  v of  the  will  to  telepathic  experiments  is  liable  to  be  mis- 
understood. The  idea,  which  we  encounter  in  romances,  that  one  pers6n 
may  acquire  and  exercise  at  a distance  a dangerous  dominance  over 
another’s  actions,  seems  quite  unsupported  by  evidence.  An  extreme 
example  of  what  may  really  occur  is  given  ....  92-94 

§ 4.  Illustrations  of  the  induction  of  definite  ideas  by  the  agent’s 
volition 94-96 

§ 5.  The  transference  of  an  idea,  deliberately  fixed  on  by  the  agent,  to 
an  unprepared  percipient  at  a distance,  would  be  hard  to  establish,  since 
ideas  whose  origin  escapes  us  are  so  constantly  suggesting  themselves 
spontaneously.  Still,  telepathic  action  may  possibly  extend  considerably 
beyond  the  well-marked  cases  on  which  the  proof  of  it  must  depend  96-97 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

xvii 

* § 6.  Illustrations  of  the  induction  of  sensations  by  the  agent’s 

volition 97-99 

S 7.  And  especially  of  sensations  of  sight  . . . 99-102 

§ 8.  The  best-attested  examples  being  hallucinations  representing  the 
figure  of  the  agent  himself 102-110 

» 

§ 9.  Such  cases  present  a marked  departure  from  the  ordinary  type  of 
experimental  thought-transference,  inasmuch  as  what  the  percipient  per- 
ceives (the  ageht’s  form)  is  not  the  reproduction  of  that  with  which  the 
agent&  mind  has  been  occupied ; and  this  seems  to  preclude  any  simple 
physical  conception  of  the  transference,  as  due  to  “ brain  - waves,” 
sympathej^  (Vibrations,  &c.  A similar  difficulty  meets  us  later  in  most  of 
the  spontaneous  cases;  and  the , rapprochement  of  experimental  and 
spontaneous  telepathy  must  be  understood  to  be  limited  to  their  psychical 
aspect — a limitation  ^hich  can  be  easily  defended  . . 110-113 

CHAPTER  IV. 

General  Criticism  op  the  Evidence  for  Spontaneous  Telepathy. 

§ 1.  When  we  pass  to  spontaneous  exhibitions  of  telepathy,  the  nature 
of  the  evidence  changes  ; for  the  events  are  described  by  persons  who  played 
their  part  in  them  unawares,  without  any  idea  that  they  were  matter  for 
scientific  observation.  The  method  of  inquiry  will  now  have  to  be  the 
historical  method,  and  will  involve  difficult  questions  as  to  the  judgment 
of  human  testimony,  and  a complex  estimate  of  probabilities  114-115 

fc  , i 

• . • 

•§  2.  The  mo^t  general  objection  to  evidence  for  phenomena  transcend- 
ing the  recognised  scope  of  science  is  that,  in  a thickly  populated  world 
where  mal-observation  and  exaggeration  are  easy  and  common,  there  is 
(within  certain  limits)  no  marvel  for  which  evidence  of  a sort  may  not  be 
obtained.  This  objection  is  often  enforced  by  reference  to  the  supersti- 
tion of  witchcraft , which  in  quite  modern  times  was  supported  by  a large 

array  of  contemporary  evidence  115-116 

But  when  this  instance  is  carefully  examined,  we  find(l)  that  the*' 
direct  testimony  came  exclusively  from  the  uneducated  class ; and  (2)  that, 
owing  to  the  ignorance  which,  in  the  witch-epoch,  wa»  universal  as  to  the 
psychology  of  various  abnormal  and  morbid  states,  the  hypothesis  of 
unconscious  self-deception  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses  was  never  allowed 
for  116-117 

b 

XV1U 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

Our  present  knowledge  of  hypnotism,  hysteria,  and  hy  stero-epilep&y , 
enables  us  to  account  for  many  of  the  phenomena  attributed  to  demonic 
possession,  as  neither  fact  nor  fraud,  but  as  bond  fide  hallucinations  117-118 

While  for  the  more  bizarre  and  incredible  marvels  there  is  absolutely 
no  direct,  first-hand,  independent  testimony  118 

The  better-attested  cases  are  just  those  which,  if  genuine,  might  be 
explained  as  telepathic  ; but  the  evidence  for  them  is  not  strong  enough  to 
support  any  definite  conclusion ( 119 

§ 3,  The  evidence  for  telepathy  in  the  present  work  presents  a complete 
contrast  to  that  which  has  supported  the  belief  in  magical  occurrences. 
It  comes  for  the  most  part  from  educated  persons,  who  were  not  predisposed 
to  admit  the  reality  of  the  phenomena ; while  the  phenomena  them- 
selves are  not  strongly  associated  with  any  prevalent  beliefs  dr  habits  of 
thought,  differing  in  this  respect,  e.g .,  from  alleged  apparitions  of  the  dead. 
Still  we  must  not,  on  such  grounds  as  these,  assume  that  the  evidence  is 
trustworthy # . . 120-122 

§ 4.  The  errors  which  may  affect  it  are  of  various  sorts.  Error  of 
observation  may  result  in  a mistake  of  identity.  Thus  a stranger  in  the 
street  may  be  mistaken  for  a friend,  who  turns  out  to  have  died  *at  that 
time,  and  whose  phantasm  is  therefore  asserted  to  have  appeared.  But  it 
is  only  to  a very  small  minority  of  the  cases  that  follow  that  such  a 
hypothesis  could  possibly  be  applied 123-125 

Error  of  inference  is  not  a prominent  danger ; as  what  concerns  the 
telepathic  evidence  is  simply  what  the  percipient  seemed  to  himself  to  see 
or  hear,  not  what  he  inferred  therefrom  ....  125-126 

§ 5.  Of  more  importance  are  errors  of  narration , due  to  the  tendency 
to  make  an  account  edifying,  or  graphic,  or  startling.  Pn  first-hand 
testimony  this  tendency  may  l>e  to  some  extent  counterbalanced  by^the 
desire  to  be  believed ; which  has  less  influence  in  cases  where  the  narrator  is 
not  personally  responsible,  as,  e.g.y  in  the  spurious  and  sensational  anecdotes 
of  anonymous  newspaper  paragraphs,  or  of  dinner-table  gossip  . 126-129 

§ 6.  Errors  of  memory  are  more  insidious.  If  the  witness  regards 
the  facts  in  a particular  speculative  or  emotional  light,  facts  will  be  apt, 
in  memory,  to  accommodate  themselves  to  this  view,  and  details  will  get 
introduced  or  dropped  out  in  such  a manner  as  to  aid  the  harmonious  effect. 
Even  apart  from  any  special  bias,  the  mere  effort  to  make  definite  what 
has  become  dim  may  fill  in  the  picture  with  wrong  detail ; or  the  tendency 
to  lighten  the  burden  of  retention  may  invest  the  whole  occurrence  with 
a spurious  trenchancy  and  simplicity  of  form  . . . 129-131 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  L 

xix 

* § 7.  We  have  to  consider  how  these  various  sources  of  error  may 
affect  the  evidence  for  a case  of  spontaneous  telepathy.  Such  a’ case 
presents  a coincidence  of  a particular  kind,  with  four  main  points  to  look 
to  (1)  A particular  state  of  the  agent,  e.g.y  the  crisis  of  death  ; (2)  a 
particular  experience  of  the  percipient,  e.g.y  the  impression  of  seeing  the 
agent  before  him  in  visible  form  ; (3)  the  drfte  of  (1);  (4)  the  date 
of  (2) * . . 131-132 

§ 8.  The  risk  of  mistake  as  to  the  state  of  the  agent  is  seldom  appreci- 
able ; his  death,  for  instance,  if  that  is  what  has  befallen  him,  can  usually 
be  proved  beyond  dispute 132 

Fm%  the  experience  of  the  percipient,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have 
generally  nothing  but  his  own  word  to  depend  on.  But  for  what  is  required, 
his  word  isjoftea  sufficient.  For  the  evidential  point  is  simply  his  statement 
that  he  has  had  an  impression  or  sensation  of  a peculiar  kind,  which,  if  he 
had  it,#  he  knew  that  he  had  ; and  this  point  is  quite  independent  of  his 
interpretation  of  his  experience,  which  may  easily  be  erroneous,  e.g*y  if  he 
attributes  objective  reality  to  what  was  really  a hallucination  133-134 

The  risk  of  misrepresentation  is  smallest  if  his  description  of  his 
experience,  or  a distinct  course  of  action  clue  to  his  experience,  has 
preceded  his  knowledge  of  what  has  happened  to  the  agent  . 134-136 

§ 9.  Where  his  description  of  his  experience  dates  from  a time 
subsequent  to  his  knowledge  of  what  has  happened  to  the  agent,  there 
is  a possibility  that  this  knowledge  may  have  made  the  experience  seem 
more  striking  and  distinctive  than  it  really  was.  Still,  we  have  not 
detected  definite  instances  of  this  sort  of  inaccuracy.  Nor  would  the 
f§ct  (often  expressly  stated  by  the  witness)  that  the  experience  did  not 
at  the  time  of  its  occurrence  suggest  the  agent,  by  any  means  destroy — 
tliough  it  .would  of  course  weaken — the  presumption  that^it  was. 
telepathic  . . . . . . . . \ 9 . 136-138 

| 10.  As  regards  the  interval  of  time  which  may  separate  the  two 
events  or  experiences  on  the  agent’s  and  the  percipient’s  side  respectively, 
an  arbitrary  limit  of  1 2 hours  has  been  adopted — the  coincidence  in  most 
cases  being  very  much  closer  than  this  ; but  no  case  will  be  presented  as 
telepathic  where  the  percipient’s  experience  preceded, , by  however  short  a 
time,  some  grave  event  occurring  to  the  agent,  if  at  the  time  of  the 
percipient’s  experience  the  state  of  the  agent  was  normal  . 1 $8-1 40 

§ 11.  It  is  in  the  matter  of  the  dates  that  the  risk  of  mis-statement  is 
•'atest.  The  instinct  towards  simplification  and  dramatic  completeness, 
naturally  tends  to  make  the  coincidence  more  exact  than  the  facts 

warrant f . / v.  . . 140-142 

b 2 

XX 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  I. 

§ 12.  The  date  of  the  event  that  has  befallen  the  agent  is  often 
included  in  the  news  of  that  event;  which  news,  in  these  days  of 
posts  and  telegraphs,  often  follows  close  enough  on  the  percipient’s 
experience  for  the  date  of  that  experience  to  be  then  safely  re- 
called . . . . ’ 142-144 

§ 13.  But  if  a longer  interval  elapse,  the  percipient  may  assume  too 
readily  that  his  own  experier^pe  fell  on  the  critical  day;  and  as  time 
goes  on,  his  certainty  is  likely  to  increase  rather  than  diminisli.  Still,  if 
the  coincidence  was  then  and  there  noted,  and  if  the  attention  of  others 
was  called  to  it,  it  may  be  possible  to  present  a tolerably  strong  case  for 
its  reality,  even  after  the  lapse  of  a considerable  time  . 144-146 

§ 14.  These  various  evidential  conditions  may  be  ( arranged  in  a 
graduated  scheme 146-148 

c 

§ 15.  Second-hand  evidence  (except  of  one  special  type)  is  excluded 
from  the  body  of  the  work ; but  the  Supplement  contains  a certain 
number  of  second-hand  cases,  received  from  persons  who  were  well 
acquainted  with  the  original  witnesses,  and  who  had  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  becoming  thoroughly  acquainted  with  their  statement  of  the 
facts 148-149 

In  transmitted  evidence  all  the  risks  of  error  are  greatly  intensified, 
there  being  no  deeply-graven  sense  of  reality  to  act  as  a check  on 
exaggeration  or  invention.  Some  instances  are  given  of  the  breaking- 
down  of  alleged  evidence  under  critical  examination  . . 149-154 

A frequent  sort  of  inaccuracy  in  transmitted  evidence  is  the  shortening 
of  the  chain  of  transmission — second  or  third-hand  information  being 
represented  as  first-hand ; and  the  alleged  coincidence  is  almost  always 
suspiciously  exqct • 154-157 

§ 16.  A certain  separation  of  cases  according  to  their  evidential  value 
has  been  attempted,  the  body  of  the  work  being  reserved  for  those  where 
the  primd  facie  probability  that  the  essential  facts  are  correctly  stated  is 
tolerably  strong.  But  even  where  the  facts  are  correctly  reported,  their 
force  in  the  argument  for  telepathy  will  differ  according  to  the  class  to 
which  they  belong  ; purely  emotional  impressions,  for  instance,  and  dreams , 
are  very  weak  classes 158 

The  value  of  the  several  items  of  evidence  is  also  largely  affected  by 
the  mental  qualities  and  training  of  the  witnesses.  Every  case  must  be 
judged  on  its  own  merits  by  reference  to  a variety  of  points ; and  those 
who  study  the  records  will  have  an  equal  opportunity  of  forming  a judg- 
ment with  those  who  have  collected  -them — except  in  the  matter  of 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  I. 

xxi 

personal  acquaintance  with  the  witnesses,  the  effect  of  which  it  is 

impossible  to  communicate 159*-1C1 

• 

§ 17.  An  all-important  point  is  the  wrniber  of  the  coincidences 
adduced.  A few  might  be  accounted  accidental* ; but  it  will  be  impossible 
to  apply  that  hypothesis  throughout.  Nor  can  the  evidence  be  swept  out 
of  court  by  a mere  general  appeal  to  the  untrustworthiness  of  human 
testimony.  If  it  is  to  be  explained  away,  it  must  be  met  (as  wq  have  our- 
selves endeavoured  to  meet  it)  in  detail ; and  this  necessitates  the  confront- 
ing of  the  single  cause,  telepathy,  (whose  ct  priori  improbability  is  fully 
admitted,)  with  a multitude  of  causes,  more  or  less  improbable,  and  in 
cumulation  incredible 161-164 

§ 18.  Wiih^all  their  differences,  the  cases  recorded  bear  strong  signs 
of  belonging  to  a true  natural  group ; and  their  harmony, alike  in  what  they 
do  andPin  what  they  do  not  present,  is  very  unlikely  to  be  the  accidental 
result  of  a multitude  of  disconnected  mistakes.  And  it  is  noteworthy  that 
certain  sensational  and  suspicious  details,  here  conspicuous  by  their 
absence,  which  often  make  their  way  into  remote  or  badly-evidenced 
cases,  are  precisely  those  which  the  telepathic  hypothesis  would  not 
cover  164-166 

§ 19.  But  though  some  may  regard  the  cumulative  argument  here  put 
forward  for  spontaneous  telepathy  as  amounting  to  a proof,  the  proof  is 
not  by  any  means  of  an  eclatant  sort : much  of  the  evidence  falls  far  short 
of  the  ideal  standard.  Still,  enough  has  perhaps  been  done  to  justify  our 
undertaking,  and  to  broaden  the  basis  of  future  inquiry  . 166-169 

§ 20.  The  various  items  of  evidence  are,  of  course,  not  the  links  in  a 
chain,  but  the  sticks  in  a faggot.  It  is  impossible  to  lay  down  tfe?  precise 
number  of  sticks  necessary  to  a perfectly  solid  faggot  j^but  the  present 
collection  is  at  least  an  instalment  of  what  is  required  . 169-170 

• 

§ 21.  The  instinct  as  to  the  amount  of  evidence  needed  may  differ 
greatly  in  a mind  which  has , and  a mind  which  has  noty  realised  the  facts 
of  experimental  telepathy  (Chap,  ii.),  and  the  intimate  relation  of  that 
branch  to  the  spontaneous  branch.  Between  the  two  branches,  in  spite 
of  their  difference — a difference  as  great  in  appearance  as  that  between 
lightning  and  the  electrical  attraction  of  rubbed  amber  for  bits  of  straw — 
the  great  psychological  fact  of  a supersensuous  influence  of  mind  on  mind 
constitutes  a true  generic  bond 171-172 

xxii 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  L 

Note  ox  Witchcraft. 

The  statement  made  in  Chapter  iv.  as  to  the  lack  of  first-hand 
evidence  for  the  phenomena  of  magic  and  witchcraft  (except  so  far  as  they 
can  be  completely  accounted  for  by  modern  psychological  knowledge)  may 
seem  a sweeping  one.  'But  extensive  as  is  the  literature  of  the  subject, 
the  actual  records  are  extraordinarily  meagre  ; and  the  staple  prodigies, 
which  were  really  nothing  more  than  popular  legends,  are  quoted  and  re- 
' quoted  ad  nauseam.  Examples  of  the  so-called  evidence  which  supported 
the  belief  in  lycanthropy , and  in  the  nocturnal  rides  and  orgies  172-175 
The  case  of  witchcraft,  so  far  from  proving  (as  is  sometimes  represented) 
that  a more  or  less  imposing  array  of  evidence  will  be  forthcoming  for 
any  belief  that  does  not  distinctly  fly  in  the  face  of  average  public 
opinion,  goes,  in  fact,  rather  surprisingly  far  towards  "“proving  the 

contrary 176-177 

This  view  jf  the  subject  is  completely  opposed  to  that  of  Mr.  Lecky, 
whose  treatment  seems  to  suffer  from  the  neglect  of  two  important  distinc- 
tions. He  does  not  distinguish  between  evidence — of  which,  in  respect  of 
the  more  bizarre  marvels,  there  was  next  to  none ; and  authority — of  which 
there  was  abundance,  from  Homer  downwards.  Nor  does  he  discriminate 
tli©  wholly  incredible  allegations  ( e.y .,  as  to  transportations  through  the  air 
and  transformations  into  animal  forms)  from  the  pathological  phenomena, 
which  in  the  eyes  of  contemporaries  were  equally  supernatural,  and  for 
which,  as  might  be  expected,  the  direct  evidence  was  abundant  177-179 
A most  important  class  of  these  pathological  phenomena  were  subjective 
hallucinations  of  the  senses , often  due  to  terror  or  excitement,  and  ^some- 
times probably  to  hypnotic  suggestion,  but  almost  invariably  attributed  to 
the  direct  operation  of  the  devil.  Other  phenomena — of  insensibility, 
inhibition  of  utterance,  abnormal  rapport , and  the  influence  of  reputed 
witches  on  health — were  almost  certainly  hypnotic  in  character ; “ posses- 
sion ” is  often  simply  hystero-epilepsy  ; while  much  may  be  accounted  for 
by  mere  hysteria,  or  by  the  same  sort  of  faith  as  produces  the  modern 
“ mind-cures  ” .........  179-183 

Learned  opinibn  on  the  subject  of  witchcraft  went  through  curious 
vicissitudes ; the  recession  to  a rational  standpoint,  which  in  many  ways 
was  of  course  a sceptical  movement,  being  complicated  by  the  fact  that 
many  of  the  phenomena  were  too  genuine  to  be  doubted.  Now  that  the 
separation  is  complete,  we  see  that  the  exploded  part  of  witchcraft  never 
had  any  real  evidential  foundation ; while  the  part  which  had  a real 
evidential  foundation  has  been  taken  up  into  orthodox  physiological  and 
psychological  science.  With  the  former  part  we  might  contrast,  and 
with  the  latter  compare,  the  evidential  case  for  telepathy  . 183-185 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL  L 

xxiii 

CHAPTER  V. 

Specimens  op  the  Various  Types  of  Spontaneous  Telepathy. 

§ 1.  As  the  study  of  any  large  amount  of  the  evidence  that  follows  is 
a task  for  which  many  readers  will  be  disinclined,  a selection  of  typical 
cases  will  be  presented  in  this  chapter,  illustrative  of  the  various  classes 
into  which  the  phenomena  fall 186-187 

§ 2.  The  logical  starting-point  is  found  in  the  class  that  presents  most 
analogy  to  experimental  thought-transference — i.e.,  where  the  percipient's 
impression  is  not  externalised  as  part  of  the  objective  world.  An  example 
is  givftn  of  the  transference  of  pain,  and  a possible  example  of  the  trans- 
ference of  smell ; but  among  the  phenomena  of  spontaneous  telepathy, 
such  literal  * reproductions  of  the  agent’s  bodily  sensation  are  very 
exceptional 187-191 

§ 3.  Examples  of  the  transference  of  a somewhat  abstract  idea  ; of  a 
pictorial  image  ; and  of  an  emotional  impression , involving  some  degree  of 
physical  discomfort 191-198 

§ 4.  Examples  of  dreams , — a class  which  needs  to  be  treated  with  the 
greatest  caution,  owing  to  the  indefinite  scope  which  it  affords  for 
accidental  coincidences.  One  of  the  •examples  (No.  23)  presents  the' 
feature  of  deferment  of  percipience — the  telepathic  impression  having 
apparently  failed  at  first  to  reach  the  threshold  of  attention,  and  emerg- 
ing into  consciousness  some  hours  after  the  experience  on  the  agent’s 
side  i*  which  it  had  its  origin 198-203 

§ 5.  Examples  of  the  “ borderland ” class — a convenient  name  by  which 
tc  describe  cases  that  belong  to  a condition  neither  of  sleep  nor  of  jjrovably 
complete  waking  consciousness ; but  it  is  probable  tliaf  in  many  of  the 
cases  so  described  (as  in  No.  26),  the  percipient,  though  in  bed,  was  quite 
norjnally  awake 203-208 

§ 6.  Examples  of  externalised  impressions  of  sight}  occurring  in  the 
midst  of  ordinary  waking  life.  In  some  of  these  we  find  an  indication 
that  a close  personal  rapport  between  the  agent  and  percipient  is  not  a 
necessary  condition  of  the  telepathic  transference ; and  another  is  peculiar 
in  that  the  phantasmal  figure  is  not  recognised  by  the  percipient  208-221 

§ 7.  Examples  of  externalised  impressions  of  hearing ; one  of  which 
was  of  a recognised  voice,  and  one  of  an  inarticulate  shriek  . 221-225 

§ 8.  Example  pf  an  impression  of  .touch;  which  is  also,,  perhaps,  an 

XXIV 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  I. 

example  of  the  reciprocal  class,  where  each  of  the  persons  concerned  seems 
to  exercise  a telepathic  influence  on  the  other  . . < . 225-227 

• 

§ 9.  Example  of  the  collective  class,  where  more  percipients  than  one 
take  part  in  a single  telepathic  incident  ....  227-229 

§ 10.  Among  the  various  conditions  of  telepathic  agency,  the  death - 
cases  form  by  far  the  commonest  type.  Now  in  these  cases  it  is  not  rare 
for  the  agent  to  be  comatose  afid  unconscious  ; in  other  cases,  Again,  he 
has  been  in  a swoon  or  a deep  sleep ; and  there  is  a difficulty  in  under- 
standing an  abnormal  exercise  of  psychical  energy  at  sudh  seasons.  The 
explanation  may  possibly  be  found  in  the  idea  of  a wider  consciousness, 
and  a more  complete  self,  which  finds  in  what  we  call  life  very  imperfect 
conditions  of  manifestation,  and  recognises  in  death  not  a cessation  but  a 
liberation  of  energy  ........  229-231 

CHAPTER  YI. 

Transference  of  Ideas  and  Mental  Pictures. 

§ 1.  The  popular  belief  in  the  transference  of  thought,  without 
physical  signs,  between  friends  and  members  of  the  same  household,  is 
often  held  on  quite  insufficient  grounds  ; allowance  not  being  made  for  the 
similarity  of  associations,  and  for  the  slightness  of  the  signs  which  may  be 
half-automatically  interpreted  ......  232-233 

It  often  happens,  for  instance,  that  one  person  in  a room  begins 
humming  a tune  which  is  running  in  another’s  head  ; but  it  is  only  very 
exceptionally  that  such  a coincidence  can  be  held  to  imply  a psychical 
transference.  Occasionally  the  idea  transferred  is  closely  connected  with 
the  auditory  image  of  a word  or  phrase  . 2 3 4-*2 3 6 

§ 2.  Examples  of  the  transference  of  ideas  and  images  of  a simpler  or 

rudimentary  sort * 236-240 

# * 

3.  Examples  of  the  transference  of  more  complex  ideas,  representing 
definite  events ; and  of  the  occurrence  of  several  such  u veridical  ” 
impressions  to  the  saifce  percipients  .....  241-251 

§ 4.  Oases  where  the  idea  impressed  on  the  percipient  has  been  simply 
that  of  the  agent’s  approach — a type  which  must  be  accepted  with  great 
caution,  as  numerous  coincidences  of  the  sort  are  sure  to  occur  by  pure 
accident  • » • 251-254 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

XXV 

§ 5.  Transferences  of  mental  images  of  concrete  objects  and  scenes 
with  which  the  agent’s  attention  is  occupied  at  the  time  . 254^-266 

Some  of  thefce  impressions  are  so  detailed  and  vivid  as  to  suggest 
clairvoyance  : nor  is  there  any  objection  to  that  term,  so  long  as  we 
recognise  the  difference  between  such  telepathic  clairvoyance,  and  any 
supposed  independerit  extension  of  the  percipient’s’  senses  . 266-268 

Occasionally  the  percipient  seems  to  obtain  the  true  impression,  not 
by  passive  reception,  but  by  a deliberate  effort  . . . . 268 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Emotional  and  Motor  Effects. 

§ 1.  Eniotjonal  impressions,  alleged  to  have  coincided  with  some 
calamitous  event  at  a distance,  form  a very  dubious  class,  as  (>1)  in 
retrosp§ct,  after  the  calamity  is  realised,  they  are  apt  to  assume  a strength 
and  definiteness  which  they  did  not  really  possess;  and  (2)  similar  impres- 
sions may  be  common  in  the  soi-disant  percipient’s  experience,  and  he 
may  have  omitted  to  remark  or  record  the  misses — the  many  instances 
which  have  not  corresponded  with  any  real  event.  All  cases  must,  of 
course,  be  rejected  where  there  has  been  any  appreciable  ground  for 
anxiety  . . . . 269-270 

§ 2.  Examples  which  may  perhaps  have  been  telepathic ; some  of 
which  include  a sense  of  physical  distress  ....  270-279 

§ 3.  Examples  of  such  transferences  between  twins  . 279-283 

• 

# § 4.  Examples  where  the  primary  element  in  the  impression  is  a sense 
of  being  wanted , and  an  impulse  to  movement  or  action  of  a sort  unlikely 
to  have  suggested  itself  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  . 383-292 

The  telepathic  influence  in  such  cases  must  be # interpreted  as 
emotional,  hot  as  definitely  directing,  and  still  less  as  abrogating,  the  per- 
cipient’s power  of  choice  : the  movements  produced  may  be  such  as  the  * 
agent  cannot  have  desired,  or  even  thought  of  292-294 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Dreams. 

Part  I. — The  Relation  of  Dreams  to  the  Argument  for  Telepathy. 

§ 1.  Dreams  comprise  the  whole  range  of  transition  from  ideal  and 
emotional  to  sensory  affections ; and  at  every  step  of  the  transition  we 
find  instances  which  may  reasonably  be  regarded  as  telepathic  295-296 

xxvi 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . /. 

The  great  interest  of  the  distinctly  sensory  specimens  lies  in  the 
fundamental  resemblance  which  they  offer,  and  the  transition  which  they 
form,  to  the  externalised  ‘ 4 phantasms  of  the  living”  which • impress 
waking  percipients ; the  difference  being  that  the  dream-percepts  are 
recognised,  on  reflection,  as  having  been  hallucinatory,  and  unrelated  to 
that  part  of  the  external  world  where  the  percipient’s  body  is ; while  the 
waking  phantasmal  percepts  are  apt  to  be  regarded  as  objective  phenomena, 
which  really  impressed  the  eye^or  the  ear  from  outside  . . 296-297 

§ 2.  But  when  we  examine  dreams  in  respect  of  their  evidential  value 
*— of  the  proof  which  they  are  capable  of  affording  of  a telepathic  correspon- 
dence with  the  reality — we  And  ourselves  on  doubtful  ground.  ®or  (1) 
the  details  of  the  reality,  when  known,  will  be  very  apt  to  be  read  back 
into  the  dream,  through  the  general  tendency  to  mal^vague  things 
distinct ; and  (2)  the  great  multitude  of  dreams  may  seem  to  afford  almost 
limitless  scope  fo  accidental  correspondences  of  a dream  with  ait  actual 
occurrence  resembling  the  one  dreamt  of.  Any  answer  to  this  last  objection 
must  depend  on  statistics  which,  until  lately,  there  has  been  no  attempt 
to  obtain  ; , and  though  an  answer  of  a sort  can  be  given,  it  is  not  such  a 
one  as  would  justify  us  in  basing  a theory  of  telepathy  on  the  facts  of 
dreams  alone , . . 298-300 

$ 3.  Most  of  the  dreams  selected  for  this  work  were  exceptional  in 
intensity ; and  produced  marked  distress,  or  were  described,  or  were  in 
some  way  acted  on,  before  the  news  of  the  correspondent  experience  was 
known.  In  content , too,  they  were  mostly  of  a distinct  and  unusual  kind  ; 
while  some  of  them  present  a considerable  amount  of  true  detail  . 300-302 

And  more  than  half  of  those  selected  on  the  above  grounds  a^e 
dreams  of  death — a fact  easy  to  account  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy, 
and  diffnult  to  account  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  accident  . . . 303 

f 

§ 4.  Dreams  so  definite  in  content  as  dreams  of  death,  afford  an  op- 
portunity of  ascertaining  what  their  actual  frequency  is,  and  so  of  estima- 
ting whether  the  specimens  which  have  coincided  with  reality  are  or  are 
not  more  numerous  than  chance  would  fairly  allow.  With  aNview  to 
such  an  estimate,  a specimen  group  of  5,360  persons,  taken  at  random, 
have  been  interrogated  on  this  point ; and,  according  to  the  result,  the 
persons  who  have  had  a vividly  distressful  dream  of  the  death  of  a re- 
lative or  acquaintance,  within  the  last  12  years,  amount  to  about 
1 in  26  of  the  population.  Taking  this  datum  it  is  shown  that  the  number 
of  coincidences  of  the  sort  in  question  that,  according  to  the  law  of  chances, 
ought  to  have  occurred  in  the  12  years,  among  a section  of  the  population 
even  larger  than’that  from  which  we  can  suppose  our  telepathic  evidence 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . /. 

xxvii 

to  be  drawn,  is  only  1.  Now,  (taking  account  only  of  cases  where 
nothing  had  occurred  to  suggest  the  dream  in  a normal  way,),  we  have 
encountered  25  such  coincidences — i.c.,  a number  25  times  as  large  as 
would  have  been  expected  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  coincidence  is  due 
to  chance  alone  ' '/  > . 303-307 

Certain  objections  that  might  be  taken  to  this1  estimate*  are  to  a consider- 
able extent  met  by  the  precautions  that  have  been  used  . 308-310 

« 

* 

§ 5.  Tho  same  sort  of  argument  may  be  cautiously  applied  to  cases 
where  the  evenfe  exhibited  in  the  coincident  dream  is  not,  like  death, 
unique^  and  where,  therefore,  the  basis  for  an  arithmetical  estimate  is  un- 
attainable   311-312 

But  many  more  specimens  of  a high  evidential  rank  are  needed,  before 

dreams  can  rank  as  a strong  integral  portion  of  the  argument  for  telepathy. 

Meanwhile,  it  is  only  fair  to  regard  them  in  connection  with  the  stronger 

evidence  of  the  waking  phenomena  ; since  in  respect  of  many  of  them  an 

explanation  that  is  admitted  in  the  waking  cases  cannot  reasonably  be 

rejected  312-313 

« 

Part  II. — Examples  op  Dreams  which  may  be  Reasonably  Regarded 

as  Telepathic. 

§ 1.  Examples  gf  similar  and  simultaneous  dreams  . 313-318 

An  experience,  which  has  coincided  with  some  external  fact  or 
condition  may  be  described  as  a dream^  and  yet  be  sufficiently  exceptional 
in  character  to  preclude  an  application  of  the  theory  of  chances  based  on 
tHe  limitless  number  of  dreams  . . . . . 318-320 

§ 2.  Examples  of  the  reproduction,  in  the  percipient’s  dream,  of  a 
special  thought  of  the  agent’s,  who  is  at  the  time  awake  and  in  a normal 
state 320-322 

§ 3.  Examples  of  a similar  reproduction  where  the  agent  is  in  a dis- 
turbed state . 322-329 

§ 4.  Cases  where  the  agent’s  personality  appears  in  the  dream,  but  not 
in  a specially  pictorial  way.  Inadmissibility  of  dreams  that  occur 
at  times  of  anxiety,  of  dreams  of  trivial  accidents  to  children,  and  the 
like  329-337 

§ 5.  Cases  where  the  reality  which  the  eyes  of  the  a&ent  are  actually 

xxviii 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

beholding,  is  pictorially  represented  in  the  dream.  Reasons  why  the 
majority  of  alleged  instances  must  be  rejected  . . . 337-34:0 

The  appearance  in  the  dream  of  the  agent’s  own  figure,  which  is  not 
presumably  occupying  his  own  thoughts,  suggests  an  independent  develop- 
ment, by  the  percipient,,  of  the  impression  that  he  receives  . 340-341 

6.  The  familiar  ways  in  which  dreams  are  shaped  make  it  easy  to 
understand  how  a dreamer  might  supply  his  own  setting  and  imagery  to  a 
“ transferred  impression.”  Examples  where  the  elements  thus  introduced 
are  few  and  simple 341-356 

c 

§ 7.  Examples  of  more  complex  investiture,  and  especially  of  imagery 
suggestive  of  death.  Importance  of  the  feature  of  repetition  in  some  of 
the  examples 357-368 

§ 8.  Examples  of  dreams  which  may  be  described  as  clairvoyant , but 
which  still  must  be  held  to  imply  some  sort  of  telepathic  “agency”; 
since  the  percipient  does  not  see  any  scene,  but  the  particular  scene  with 
some  actor  in  which  he  is  connected  .....  368-388 

CHAPTER  IX. 

“ Borderland  ” Cases. 

§ 1.  The  transition-states  between  sleeping  and  waking — or,  more 
generally,  the  seasons  when  a person  is  in  bed,  but  not  asleep — seem  to 
be  specially  favourable  to  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  senses ; of ^ which 
some  are  known  as  illusions  hypnayoyiques ; others  are  the  prolongations 
of  dream-images  into  waking  moments  ; and  some  belong  to  neither  of  these 
classes?  though  experienced  in  the  moments  or  minutes  that  precede  or 
follow  sleep  ( 389-393 

§ 2.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  same  seasons  should  be  favourable 
also  to  the  hallucinations  which,  as  connected  with  conditions  external  to 
the  percipient,  we  should  describe,  not  as  subjective,  but  as  telepathic  393 
As  evidence  for  telepathy,  impressions  of  this  “ borderland  ” type 
stand  on  an  altogether  different  footing  from  dreams ; since  their  in- 
calculably smaller  number  supplies  an  incalculably  smaller  field  for  the 
operation  of  chance  ........  393-394 

Very  great  injustice  is  done  to  the  telepathic  argument  by  confound- 
ing such  impressions  with  dreams ; as  where  Lord  Brougham  explains 
away  the  coincidence  of  a unique  “ borderland  ” experience  of  his  own 
with  the  death  of  the  friend  whose  form  he  saw,  on  the  ground  that  the 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . /. 

xxi  x 

“ vast  numbers  of  dreams  ” give  any  amount  of  scope  for  sucli  “ seeming 
miracles  ” 394*~397 

§ 3.  Examples  where  the  impression  was  not  of  a sensory  sort  397-400 

§ 4.  Example  of  an  appa  rently  telepathic  illusion  liypnagcgique  400-402 

§ 5.  Auditory  examples.  Cases  where  the  sound  heard  was  not 

articulate*  * . . . . . % . . - . 402-405 

Oases  where  distinct  words  were  heard  ....  406-413 

* 

§ (^.  Visual  examples  : of  which  two  (Nos.  159  and  160)  illustrate 
the  feature  of  repetition ; another  (No.  168)  that  of  the  appearance  of 
more  than  *one  figure  ; and  two  others  (Nos.  170  and  171)  that  of  mis- 
recognition  on  the  percipient’s  part  .....  414-434 

• 

§ 7.  Cases  where  the  sense  of  touch  was  combined  with  that  of  sight  or 
hearing.  One  case  (No.  178)  presents  the  important  feature  of  marked 
haninosity  ..........  434-441 

$ 8.  Cases  affecting  the  two  senses  of  sight  and  hearing.  One  case 
(No.  189)  presents  the  feature  of  non-recognition  on  the  percipient’s 
part  ...........  441-456 

CHAPTER  X. 

Hallucinations  : General  Sketch. 

§ 1.  Telepathic  phantasms  of  the  externalised  sort  are  a species  belong- 
ing to  the  larger  genus  of  hallucinations;  and  the  genus  requirSS  some 
preliminary  discussion  . . . . . . * . , 4 37 

Hallucinations  of  the  senses  ; re  distinguished  from  other  hallucinations 
by  the  fact  that  they  do  not  necessarily  imply  false  belief  . . 458 

They  may  be  defined  as  percepts  which  lack , but  which  can  only  by 
distinct  reflection  be  recognised  as  lacking , the  objective  basis  which  they 
suggest ; a definition  which  marks  them  off  on  the  one  hand  from  true 
perceptions,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  remembered  images  or  mental 
pictures 459-460 

§ 2.  The  old  method  of  defining  the  ideational  and  the  sensory 
elements  in  the  phenomena  was  very  unsatisfactory.  It  is  easy  to  show 
that  the  delusive  appearances  are  not  merely  imagined , but  are  actually 
seen  and  heard — the  hallucination  differing  from  an  ordinary  percept  only 

XXX 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . /. 

in  lacking  an  objective  basis ; and  this  is  what  is  implied  in  the  word 
psycho-sensorial^  when  rightly  understood  ....  461-464 

§ 3.  The  question  as  to  the  physiological  starting-point  of  hallucina- 
tions— whether  they  are  of  central  or  of  peripheral  origin — has  been  warmly 
debated,  often  in  a very  one-sided  manner.  The  construction  of  them, 
which  is  central  and  the  work  of  the  brain,  is  quite  distinct  from  the  exci- 
tation or  initiation  of  them,  which  (though  often  central  also)  is  often 
peripheral — i.c.,  due  to  some  oVher  part  of  the  body  that  sets  the  brain  to 
work  ..........  464-468 

$ 4.  This  excitation  may  even  be  due  to  some  objective  external 
cause,  some  visible  point  or  mark,  at  or  near  the  place  whfere  the 
imaginary  object  is  seen  ; and  in  such  cases  the  imaginary  object,  which 
is,  so  to  speak,  attached  to  its  point,  may  follow  the  course  of  any  optical 
illusion  ( e.(/ doubling  by  a prism,  reflection  by  a mirror)  to  wh^ch  that 
point  is  subjected.  But  such  dependence  on  an  external  stimulus  does 
not  affect  the  fact  that  the  actual  sensory  element  of  the  hallucination,  in 
these  as  in  all  other  cases,  is  imposed  from  within  by  the  brain  . 468-470 

§ 5.  There  are,  however,  a large  number  of  hallucinations  which  a, re 
centrally  initiated , as  well  as  centrally  constructed — the  excitation  being 
due'neither  to  an  external  point,  nor  to  any  morbid  disturbance  in  the  sense- 
organs  themselves.  Such,  probably,  are  many  visual  cases  where  the 
imaginary  object  is  seen  in  free  space,  or  appears  to  move  independently  of 
the  eye,  or  is  seen  in  darkness.  Such,  certainly,  are  many  auditory 
hallucinations  ; some  hallucinations  of  pain  ; many  hallucinations  which 
conform  to  the  course  of  some  more  general  delusion  ; and  hallucina- 
tions voluntarily  originated 470-480 

§ (j.  Such  also  are  hallucinations  of  a particular  internal  kind  common 
among  mystics,  jn  which  the  sensory  element  seems  reduced  to  its  lowest 
terms;  and  which  shade  by  degrees,  on  the  one  side  into  more  externalised 
forms,  and  on  the  other  side  into  a mere  feeling  of  presence,  independent 
of  any  sensory  affection 480-484 

§ 7.  A further  argument  for  the  central  initiation  may  be  drawn  from 
the  fact  that  repose  of  the  sense-organs  seems  a condition  favourable  to 
hallucinations ; and  the  psychological  identity  of  waking  hallucinations 
and  dreams  cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  on  484-485 

§ 8.  As  regards  the  construction  of  hallucinations — the  cerebra 
process  involved  in  their  having  this  or  that  particular  form — the  question 
is  whether  it  t#kes  place  in  the  specific  sensory  centre  concerned,  or  in 
some  higher  cortical  tract 485-488 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

xxxi 

§ 9.  There  are  reasons  for  considering  that  both  places  of  construction 
are  available;  that  the  simpler  sorts  of  hallucination,  many  of  which 'are 
clearly  “ afterimages,”  and  which  are  often  also  recurrent,  may  take  shape 
at  the  sensory  centres  themselves  ; but  that  the  more  elaborate  and 
variable  sorts  must  be  traced  to  the  higher  origin  ; and  that  when  the 
higher  tracts  are  first  concerned,  the  production  of  the  hallucination  is  due 
to  a downward  escape  of  the  nervous  impulse  to  the  sensory  centre 

concerned * 488-494 

* 

§ 10.  The  construction  of  hallucinations  in  the  cortical  tracts  of  the 
brain,  proper  to  tlie  higher  co-ordinations  and  the  more  general  ideational 
activities,  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  view  that  the  specific  sensory 
centres  are  themselves  situated  not  below,  but  in,  the  cortex  . 494-495 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Transient  Hallucinations  of  the  Sane:  Ambiguous  Cases. 

£ 1.  Transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane  (a  department  of  mental 
phenomena  hitherto  but  little  studied)  comprise  two  classes:  (1) 
hallucinations  of  purely  subjective  origin;  and  (2)  hallucinations  of  tele- 
pathic origin — i.e.,  “ phantasms  of  the  living  ” which  have  an  objective 
basis  in  the  exceptional  condition  of  the  person  whom  they  recall  or 
represent.  Comparing  the  two  classes,  we  should  expect  to  find  a large 
amount  of  resemblance,  and  a certain  amount  of  difference , between 
them  496^497 

$ 2.  Certain  marked  resemblances  at  once  present  themselves  ; as  that 
(generally  speaking)  neither  sort  of  phenomenon  is  observably  connected 
#with  any  morbid  state;  and  that  each  sort  of  phenomenon  is  rare — 
occuiTing  to.  a comparatively  small  number  of  persons,  and  to  most  of  these 
only  once  or  twice  in  a lifetime 497-499 

$ 3.  But  in  pressing  the  comparison  further,  we  are  met  by  the  fact 
that  the  dividing  line  between  the  two  classes  is  not  clear ; and  it  is 
important  to  realise  certain  grounds  of  ambiguity , which  often  prevent  us 
from  assigning  an  experience  with  certainty  to  this  class  or  that  . 500-502 

§ 4.  Various  groups  of  hallucinations  are  passed  in  review; — u after 
images  ” ; phantasmal  objects  which  are  the  result  of  a special  train  of 
thought ; phantasms  of  inanimate  objects,  and  bf  animals,  and  non- vocal 
auditory  phantasms  ; visual  representations  of  fragments  o4  human  forms; 
auditory  impressions  of  meaningless  sentences,  or  of  groaning,  and  the 

xxxii 

St  NOP  SIS  OF  VOL . /. 

like  ; and  vi^iojis.of  the  “swarming”  type.  Nearly  all  specimens  of  these 
types  may  safely  fye  referred  to  the  purely  subjective  class  . 502-504 

It  is  whence  come  to  visual  hallucinations  representing  complete  and 
tia^ural-loftk ing  human  forms,,  and  auditory  hallucinations  of  distinct  and 
intelligible  words,  (though  here  again  there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  the 
majority  of  the  cases  to.be  purely  subjective,),  that  the  ambiguous  cases 
are  principally* to  be  found;  the  groun&of  ambiguity  being  that  either  (1) 
the  person  represented  has  been  in  an  only  slightly  unusual  state  ; or  (2)  a 
person  fu  a normal  state  has  been  represented  in  hallucination  to  more 
thaw  one  percipient  at  different  times;  or  (3)  an ‘'abnormal  state  of  the 
person  represented  has  coincided  with  the  representation  loosely , but  not* 
exactly  ; or  *(4)  the  percipient  has  been  in  a condition  of  anxiety , €atve>  or 
expectancy , ^rhicli  nfight  be  regarded  as  the  independent. cause  of  his 
experience . . . . . . . . . . * ‘ # . 504-506 

§ 5.  "The  evidence  that  mere  anxiety  may  produce  sensory  hallucination 
' is  sufficient  greatly  to  weaken,  as  evidence  for  telepathy,  any  case  where 
thtyt  condition  has  been  present  ......  506-509 

§ 6.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  form  of  awe  which  is  connected  with 
the  near  sense  of  death  ; and  (except  in  a few  “ collective”  cases)  abnormal 
experiences  which  have  followed  death  have  been  excluded  from  the  tele- 
pathic evidence,  if  the  fact  of  the  death  was  known  to  the  percipient. 
As  to  the  included  cases  that  have  followed  death  by  an  appreciable 
* interval,  reasons  ar£  gi^en  for  preferring  the  hypothesis  of  deferred 
development  to  that  of  post  mortem  influence — though  the  latter 
hypothesis  would  be  quite  compatible  with  the  psychical  conception  of 
telepathy  ..........  510-512 

§ There  is  definite  evidence  to  show  that  mere  expectancy  may  pro** 
duce  hallucination  . . . . . . . . 512-515 

One  type  which  is  probably  so  explicable  being  the  delusive  impression 
of  seeing  or  hearing  a person  whose  arrival  is  expected  . . 515-517 

- „ 8 8.  There  is,  however,  a group  of  arrival-cases  where  the  impending 
arrival  was  unknown  or  unsuspected  by  the  percipient ; or  where  the 
phantasm  has  included'  some  special  detail  of  appearance  Which  points  to 
a telepathy  origin  ........  517-518 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  I. 

. xxxiii 

CHAPTER  XII. 

THte  Development  ok  Telepathic"  Hallucinations. 

* . > % 

§ 1.  There  are  two  very  principal  ways  in  which  phantasms  of  telepathic 
origin  often  resemble  purely  subjective  hallucinations : (1)  gpidualness 
of  development ; and  (2)  originality  of  form  or  content,  showing  the- 
activity  of  the  percipient’s  own  mind  in  the  construction  . 51JM520 

- **  *_ 

§ 2.  Grhdual  development  js  briefly  illustrated  in  the  purely  subjective* 

class 020-522 

if* 

§ 3.*And  at  greater  length  in  the  telepathic  class.  It  ^uay  exhibit 
itself  (1)  in  delayed  recognition  of  the"  phantasm  on  the  part  of  the 
percipient  . . . . . . . . . 522-4)25 

Or  (2)  in  the  way  in  which  the  phantasm  gathers  visible  shape . 525-528  . 

Or  (5)  in  the  progress  of  the  hallucination  through  several  distinct 
stages,  sometimes  affecting  more  than  one  sense  . . . §28-534 

♦ 

§ 4 Onqiaality  of  construction  is  involved  to  some  extent  in  every 
sensory  hallucination  which  is  more  than  a mere  revival  of  familiar  images; 

but  admits  of  very  various  degrees 53i-536 

* 

§ 5.  In  telepathic  hallucinations,  the  signs  of  the  percipient’s  owtt 
constructive  activity  are  extremely  important.  For  the  difference  frorti 
the  results  of  experimental  thought-transference,  which  telepathic 
phantasms  exhibit,  in  representing  what  is  not  consciously  occupying  the 
agent’s  mind — to  wit,  his  own  form  or  voice — ceases  to  be  a difficulty  in 
proportion  as  the  extent  of  the  impression  transferred  from  the  agent"  to 
the  percipient  can  be  conceived  to  be  small,  and  the  percipient’s  own 
contribution  to  the  phantasm  can  be  conceived  to  be  large  . 556-537 

It  may  be  a peculiarity  of  the  transferred  idea  th%t  it  impels  the* , 
receiving  mind  to  react  on  it,  and  to  embody  and  project  it  as  a hallucina- 
tion ; but  the  form  and  detail  of  the  embodiment  admit — as*  in 
dream — of  many  varieties,  depending  on  the  percipient’s  own  idiosyncrasies 
and  associations 537~*540‘ 

§ 6.  Thus^the  percipient  may  invest  the  idea  pf  his  friend,  the*  agent, 
with  features  of  dress  or  appurtenance  that  his  own  memory  supply. 
(One  of  the  examples  given,  No.  202,  illustrates  a point  common  to  the 
purely  subjective  and  to  the  telepathic  class,  and  about  equally  rare  in 
either — the  appearance  of  more  than  one  figure)  . . . 540-546 

§ 7.  Or  the  investing  imagery  may  be  of  a more  fanciful  kind — some- 
times the  obvious  reflection  of  the  percipient’s  habitual  beliefs,  sometimes.  * 

XXXIV 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL . L 

the  mere  bizarrerie  of  what  is  literally  a “ waking  dream.”  Many  diffi- 
culties vanish,  when  the  analogy  of  dream  is  boldly  insisted  on  547-548 
Examples  of  phantasmal  appearances  presenting  features  which  would 

in  reality  be  impossible  . . * 548-550 

The  luminous  character  of  many  visual  phantasms  is  specially  to  be 
noted,  as  a feature  common  to  the  purely  subjective  and  to  the  telepathic 

class 550-551 

Examples  of  imagery  connected  with  ideas  of  death,  and  of  re- 
ligion . . ...  . . . . . . * 551-554 

. § 8.  Sometimes,  however,  the  phantasm  includes  details  of  dress  or 
aspect  which  could  not  be  supplied  by  the  percipient’s  mind.c  Such 
particulars  are  liable  to  be  incorrectly  described,  even  in  cases  where  the 
central  fact  of  the  telepathic  coincidence  is  correctly  reported  ; but  where 
genuinely  observed,  they  must  apparently  be  attributed  to  a conscious  or 
sub-conscious  image  of  his  own  appearance  (or  of  some  feature  6f  it)  in 
the  agent’s  mind,  to  which  the  percipient  obtains  access  by  what  may  be 
again  described  as  telepathic  clairvoyance . Examples  . . 554-569 

In  cases  where  the  details  of  the  phantasm  are  such  as  either  mind 
might  conceivably  have  supplied,  it  seems  simpler  to  regard  them  as  the 
contributions  of  the  percipient,  than  to  suppose  that  a clean-cut  and 
complete  image  has  been  transferred  to  him  from  indefinite  unconscious  or 

sub-conscious  strata  of  the  agent’s  mind  ....  569-570 

* 

§ 9.  The  development  of  a phantasm  from  the  nucleus  of  a transferred 
impression  is  a fact  strongly  confirmatory  of  the  view  maintained  in  the 
preceding  chapters,  as  to  the  physiological  starting  point  of  many  .halluci- 
nations. Especially  must  the  hypothesis  of  centrifugal  origin  (of  a process 
in  the  direction  from  higher  to  lower  centres)  commend  itself  in  cases 
where*the  experience  seems  to  have  implied  the  quickening  of  vague 
associations  and*  distant  memories,  whose  physical  record  must  certainly 
lie  in  the  highest  cerebral  tracts  . . . . . * 570-572 

§ 10.  Summary  of  the  various  points  of  parallelism  between  purely 
subjective  and  telepathic  phantasms,  whereby  their  identity  as  phenomena 
for  the  senses  seepas  conclusively  established.  But  they  present  also  some 
very  important  contrasts  . . . ?.  . . . 572-573 

INTRODUCTION. 

kclI  t6v  6(6v  roiovrov  egemara/jicu, 

(ro(f>ois  [jl(v  alviKrrjpa  6ar(f)droi)v  aei, 
cricaiois  $€  <j) av\ov  Kav  /Spa^ci  di ddvKukov. 

Sophocles. 

§ 1.  The  subject  of  this  book  is  one  which  a brief  title  is  hardly 
sufficient  to  explain.  For  under  our  heading  of  “ Phantasms  of  the 
_ Living,”  we  propose,  in  fact,  to  deal  with  all  classes  of  cases  where 
there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  mind  of  one  human  being  has 
affected  the  mind  of  another,  without  speech  uttered,  or  word 
written,  or  sign  made  ; — has  affected  it,  that  is  to  say,  by  other 
means  than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense. 

To  such  transmission  of  thoughts  or  feelings  we  have  elsewhere 
given  the  name  of  telepathy ; and  the  records  of  an  experimental 
proof  of  the  reality  of  telepathy  will  form  a part  of  the  present  work. 
But,  for  reasons  which  will  be  made  manifest'  as  we  proceed,  we  have 
included  among  telepathic  phenomena  a vast  class 1 of  cases  which 
seem  at  first  sight  to  involve  something  widely  different  from  a mere 
transference  of  thought. 

T refer  to  apparitions ; excluding,  indeed,  the  alleged  apparitions 
of  the  dead,  but  including  the  apparitions  of  all  persons  who  are  still 
living,  as  we  know  life,  though  they  may  be  on  the  very  brink  and 
border  of  physical  dissolution.  And  these  apparitions,  as  will  be  seen, 
are  themselves  extremely  various  in  character ; including  not  visual 
phenomena  alone,  but  auditory,  tactile,  or  even  purely  ideational  and 
emotional  impressions.  ' All  these  we  have  included  under  the  term 
. phantasm ; a word  which,  though  etymologically  a mere  variant  of 
phantom,  has  been  less  often  used,  and  has  not  become  so  closely 
identified  with  visual  impressions  alone. 

Such,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  our  title ; but  something  more  of 
explanation  is  necessary  before  the  tone  and  purport  of  the  book  can 

xxxvi 

INTRODUCTION. 

be  correctly  apprehended.  In  a region  so  novel  we  could  hardly  be 
surprised  at  any  amount  of  misinterpretation.  Some  readers,  for 
instance,  may  fancy  that  a bulky  and  methodical  treatise  on  phantoms 
can  be  but  a half-serious  thing.  Others  may  suspect  that  its 
inspiration  is  in  the  love  of  paradox,  and  that  a fantastic  craving  for 
originality  has  led  the  authors  along  a path  where  they  cannot  expect, 

and  can  hardly  desire,  that  the  sober  world  should  follow  them. 

€ 

• 

§ 2.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  state  at  once  that  we  have  no 
wish  either  to  mystify  or  to  startle  mankind.  On  fhe  contrary,  the 
conjoint  and  consultative  scheme  according  to  which  this  be  ok  has 
been  compiled  is  thus  arranged  mainly  with  a view  to  correcting  or 
neutralising  individual  fancies  or  exaggerations,  of  leaving  as  little  as 
possible  to  the  unchecked  idiosyncrasy  of  any  single  thinker.  And, 
again,  we  wrh  distinctly  to  say  that  so  far  from  aiming  at  any 
paradoxical  reversion  of  established  scientific  conclusions,  we  conceive 
ourselves  to  be  working  (however  imperfectly)  in  the  main  track  of 
discovery,  and  assailing  a problem  which,  though  strange  and  hard,  does 
yet  stand  next  in  order  among  the  new  adventures  on  which  Science 
must  needs  set  forth  if  her  methods  and  her  temper  are  to  guide  and 
control  the  widening  curiosity,  the  expanding  capacities  of  men. 

We.  anticipate,  in  short,  that  although  it  may  at  first  be  said  of  us 
that  we  have  performed  with  needless  elaboration  a foolish  and  futile 
task,  the  ultimate  verdict  on  our  work  will  rather  be  that  we  have 
undertaken — with  all  too  limited  a knowledge  and  capacity — to  open 
an  inquiry  which  was  manifestly  impending,  and  to  lay  the  foundation- 
stone  of  a study  which  will  loom  large  in  the  approaching  age. 

Our  only  ^paradox,  then,  is  the  assertion  that  we  arc  not 
paradoxical ; and  that  assertion  it  is  the  main  business  of  this 
Introduction  to  justify. 

§ 3.  For  this  purpose  two  principal  heads  of  exposition  will  be 
required.  In  the  first  place,  since  this  book  (for  whose  contents  we 
are  solely  responsible)  was  undertaken  by  us  at  the  request  of  the 
Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  is  largely  based 
on  material  which  that  Council  has  placed  at  our  disposal,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  say  something  as  to  the  scope  and  object  of  the  Society 
in  question  ; — its  grounds  for  claiming  a valid  scientific  position,  and 
its  points  of  interconnection  with  established  branches  of  philosophic 
inquiry. 

INTRODUCTION \ 

xxxvii 

And,  secondly,  it  will  be  needful  to  indicate  the  precise  position 
which  the  theme  of  this  book  occupies  in  the  field  of  our  investiga- 
tions ; the  reason  why 'we  have  isolated  these  special  phenomena  in 
a separate  group,  and  have  selected  them  for  discussion  at  this  early 
stage  of  the  Society’s  labours. 

A reader  of  the  programme  of  the  Society  will  probably  feel  that 
although  the  special  topics  to  which  attention  is  there  invited 
may  be  unfamiliar,  yet  its  general  plea  is  such  as  he  has  often  noted 
in  the  history  of  science  before.  “ To  approach  these  various  problems 
without  prejudice  or  prepossession  of  any  kind,  and  in  the  same  spirit 
of  exa»t  and  unimpassioned  inquiry  which  has  enabled  Science  to 
solve  so  many  problems,  once  not  less  obscure  nor  less  hotly  debated 
— phrases  like* these  have  no  more  of  novelty  than  there  might  be, 
for  instance,  in  the  proposal  of  a Finance  Minister  to  abolish  the  last  of 
a long  series  of  protective  embargoes.  Free  Trade  and  free  inquiry 
have  each  of  them  advanced  step  by  step,  and  by  dint  of  the  frequent 
repetition,  under  varying  difficulties,  of  very  similar,  and  very 
elementary,  truths.  The  special  peculiarity  of  our  topic  is  that  it  is 
an  article  (so  to  say)  on  which  the  Free  Traders  themselves  have 
imposed  an  additional  duty ; that  it  has  been  more  sternly  dis- 
countenanced by  the  men  who  appeal  to  experiment  than  by  the 
men  who  appeal  to  authority  * — that  its  dispassionate  discussion  has 
since  the  rise  of  modem  science  been  tabooed  more  jealously  than 
when  the  whole  province  was  claimed  by  theology  alone.  There  have 
been  reasons,  no  doubt,  for  such  an  exclusion ; and  I am  not  asserting 
that  either  Free  Trade  or  free  inquiry  is  always  and  under  all  circum- 
stances to  be  desired.  But  it  is  needful  to  point  out  yet  once  more, 
how  plausible  the  reasons  for  discouraging  some  novel  research  have 
often  seemed  to  be,  while  yet  the  advance  of  knowledge  has  rapidly 
shown  the  futility  and  folly  of  such  discouragement. 

It  was  the  Father  of  Science  himself  who  was  the  first  to 
circumscribe  her  activity.  Socrates,  in  whose  mind  the  idea  of  the 
gulf  between  knowledge  and  mere  opinion  attained  a dominant 
intensity  which  impressed  itself  on  all  ages  after  him, — Socrates 
expressly  excluded  from  the  range  of  exact  inquiry  all  such  matters 
as  the  movements  and  nature  of  the  sun  and  moon.  He  wished — and 
aS  he  expressed  his  wish  it  seemed  to  have  all  the  cogency  of  absolute 
wisdom — that  men’s  minds  should  be  turned  to  the  ethical  and 
political  problems  which  truly  concerned  them, — not  wasted  in  specula- 
tion on  things  uixknowable — things  useless  even  could  they  be  known. 

xxxviii 

INTRODUCTION. 

In  a kindred  spirit,  though  separated  from  Socrates  by  the  whole 
result  of  that  physical  .science  which  Socrates  had  deprecated,  we  find 
a great  modem  systematiser  of  human  thought  again  endeavouring 
to  direct  the  scientific  impulse  towards  things  serviceable  to  man  ; to 
divert  it  from  things  remote,  unknowable,  and  useless  if  known. 
What  then,  in  Comte’s*  view,  are  in  fact  the  limits  of  man’s  actual 
home  and  business  ? the  bounds  within  which  he  may  set  himself  to 
learn  all  he  can,  assured  that  all  will  serve  to  inform  hi&  conscience 
and  guide  his  life  ? It  is  the  solar  system  which  has  become  for  the , 
French  philosopher  what  the  street  and  market-place  of  Athens  were 
for  the  Greek.  And  this  enlargement  (it  need  hardly  be  said)  is  not 
due  to  any  wider  grasp  of  mind  in  Comte  than  in  Socrates,  but 
simply  to  the  march  of  science ; which  has  shown  us  -that  the  whole 
solar  system  does,  in  fact,  minister  to  our  practical  needs,  and  that 
the  Nautica1  Almanack  demands  for  its  construction  a mapping  of 
the  paths  of  those  ordered  luminaries  which  in  the  time  of  Socrates 
seemed  the  very  wanderers  of  Heaven. 

I need  not  say  that  Comte’s  prohibition  has  been  altogether 
neglected.  No  frontier  of  scientific  demarcation  has  been  established 
between  Neptune  and  Sirius,  between  Uranus  and  Aldebaran.  Our 
knowledge  of  the  fixed  stars  increases  yearly ; and  it  would  be  rash 
to  maintain  that  human  conduct  is  not  already  influenced  by  the 
conception  , thus  gained  of  the  unity  and  immensity  of  the  heavens. . 

To  many  of  the  comments  that  have  been  made  on  our  work, 
even  by  men  wbo  are  not  formal  Comtists,  the  above  reflections 
furnish  a fitting  reply.  But  it  is  not  only,  nor  perhaps  mainly,  on" 
account  of  the  remoteness  of  our  subject,  or  its  unimportance  to 
human  progress,  that  objection  is  taken  to  our  inquiry.  The 
criticisms  whie^i  have  met  us,  from  the  side  sometimes  of  scientific, 
sometimes  of  religious  orthodoxy,  have  embodied,  in  modernised 
phraseology,  nearly  every  well-worn  form  of  timid  protest,  or 
obscurantist  demurrer,  with  which  the  historians  of  science  have 
been  accustomed  to  give  piquancy  to  their  long  tale  of  discovery  and 
achievement.  It  would  have  been  convenient  had  these  objections 
been  presented  to  us  in  a connected  and  formal  manner.  / But  this 
has  not  been  the  case  ; and,  in  fact,  they  are  in  their  very  nature  too 
incoherent,  too  self-contradictory,  for  continuous  statement.  Some- 
times we  are  told  that  we  are  inviting  the  old  theological  spirit  to 
encroach  once  more  on  the  domain  of  science  ; sometimes  that  we  are 
endeavouring  to  lay  the  impious  hands  of  Science  upon  the  mysteries 

INTRODUCTION'. 

XXXIX 

of  Religion.  Sometimes  we  are  informed  that  competent  savants 
have  already  fully,  explored  the  field  which  we  propose  for  our 
investigation ; sometimes  that  no  respectable  man  of  science  would 
condescend  to  meddle  with  such  a reeking  mass  of  fraud  and  hysteria. 
Sometimes  we  are  pitied  as  laborious  triflers  who  prove  some  infinitely 
small  matter  with  mighty  trouble  and  pains ; sometimes  we  are 
derided  as  attempting  the  solution  of  gigantic  problems  by  slight  and 
superficial*  means. 

§ 4.  The  best  way  of  meeting  objections  thus  confused  and  contra- 
dictor^ will  be  to  show  as  clearly  as  we  can  at  what  points  our 
inquiries  touch  the  recent  results  of  science ; what  signs  there  are 
which  indicafe*the  need  of  vigorous  advance  along  the  lines  which  we 
have  cjiosen.  We  shall  show,  perhaps,  that  there  is  a kind  of 
convergence  towards  this  especial  need — that  in  several  directions  of 
research  there  is  felt  that  kind  of  pause  and  hesitancy  which  is  wont 
to  precede  the  dawn  of  illuminating  conceptions.  We  shall  not,  of 
course,  thus  prove  that  our  own  attempt  has  been- 'successful,  but  we 
shall  prove  that  it  was  justified  ; that  if  the  problems  which  we  set 
ourselves  to  solve  are  found  to  be  insoluble,,  the  gaps  thus  left  in  the 
system  of  thought  on  which  man’s  normal  life  is  based  will  be  such  as 
can  neither  be  ignored  nor  supplied,  but  will  become  increasingly 
palpable  and  increasingly  dangerous.* 

Let  us  consider  how  far  this  remark  can  be  justified  with  regard 
to  some  of  the  leading  branches  of  human  knowledge  in  turn.  And 
let  us  take  first  Biology,  the  science  which  on  the  whole  approaches 
the  closest  to  our  own  inquiries.  Biology  has,  during  the  last  half- 
century,  made  an  advafice  which,  measured  by  the  hold  exercised  on 
the  mass  of  cultivated  minds,  has  perhaps  had  no  parallel  since  the 
forward  stride  of  astronomy  and  physics  in  • the  days  of  Newton.  A 
glance  at  the  textbooks  of  the  last  generation,  in  physical  or  mental 
science, — Whewell’s  “ History  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,”  or  Mill’s 
“ Logic,” — as  compared,  for  instance,  with  the  works  of  their 
immediate  successor,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  shows  something  which  is 
not  so  much  progress  as  revolution — the  transformation  of  Biology 
from  a mere  special  department  of  knowledge  into  the  key  to  man’s 
remotest  history,  the  only  valid  answer  to  the  profoundest  questions 
as  to  his  present  being. 

For,  in  truth,  it  is  Biology  above  all  other  sciences  which'  has 
profited  by  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  In  evolution, — in  the  doctrine 

xl 

INTRODUCTION. 

that  the  whole  cosmical  order  is  the  outcome  of  a gradual 
development, — mankind  have  gained  for  the  first  time  a working 
hypothesis  which  covers  enough  of  the  known  facts  of  the  universe 
to  make  its  possible  extension  to  all  facts  a matter  of  hopeful 
interest.  And  Biology,  which  even  at  the  date  of  Whewell’s 
book  could  barely  make  good  its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a 
coherent  science  at  all,  has  now  acquired  a co-ordinating  and 
continuous  principle  of  unity  which  renders  it  in  some  respects 
the  best  type  of  a true  science  which  we  possess.  It  traces 
life  from  the  protozoon  to  the  animal,  from  the  brute  to  man; 
it  offers  to  explain  the  complex  fabric  of  human  thought  and 
emotion,  viewed  from  the  physical  side,  as  the  development 
of  the  molecular  movements  of  scarcely-differentiated  fragments 
of  protoplasm. 

And  along  with  this  increased  knowledge  of  the  processes  by 
which  man  has  been  upbuilt  has  come  also  an  increased  knowledge 
of  the  processes  which  are  now  going  on  within  him.  The  same 
inquiries  which  have  brought  our  organic  life  into  intelligible  relation 
with  the  whole  range  of  animal  and  vegetable  existence  have 
enabled  us  also  to  conceive  more  definitely  the  neural  side  of  our 
mental  processes,  and  the  relation  of  cerebral  phenomena  to  their 
accompanying  emotion  or  thought.  And  hence,  in  the  view  of 
some  ardent  physiologists,  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  probable 
that  we  are  in  fact  physiological  automata ; that  our  consciousness 
is  a mere  superadded  phenomenon — a mere  concomitant  of'  some 
special  intensity  of  cerebral  action,  with  no  basis  beyond  or  apart  from 
that  molecular  commotion  of  the  brain. 

But  this  view,  as  it  would  seem,  depends  in  great  part  upon 
something  whi^h  corresponds  in  the  mental  field  to  a familiar  optical 
illusion.  When  we  see  half  of  some  body  strongly  illuminated,  and 
half  of  it  feebly  illuminated,  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  brilliant 
moiety  is  not  the  larger  of  the  two.  And,  similarly,  it  is  the  increased 
definiteness  of  our  conception  of  the  physical  side  of  our  mental 
operations  which  seems  to  increase  its  relative  importance, — to  give  it 
a kind  of  priority  over  the  psychical  aspect  of  the  same  processes. 
Yet,  of  course,  to  the  philosophic  eye  the  central  probtem^of*  the 
relation  of  the  objective  and  subjective  sides  of  these  psycho-neural' 
phenomena  can  be  in  no  way  altered  by  any  increase  'of  definiteness  in 
our  knowledge  of  the  objective  processes  which  correspond  to  the 
subjective  states. 

INTRODUCTION. 

xli 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  one  singular  logical  corollary  which 
seems  thus  far  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  physiologist  and 
psychologist  alike.  It  is  this:  that  our  increased  vividness  of 
conception  of  the  physical  side  of  mental  life,  while  it  cannot  possibly 
disprove  the  independence  of  the  psychical  side,  may  quite 
conceivably  prove  it.  I will  again  resort  to  the  (very  imperfect) 
analogy  of  a partially-illuminated  body.  Suppose  that  one  hemisphere 
of  a globe»is  strongly  lit  up,  and  that  th*e  other  is  lit  up  by  faint  and 
scattered  rays.1  I am  trying  to  discern  whether  the  two  hemispheres 
are  symmetrically  marked  throughout.  Now  no  clearness  of  marks  on 
the  bright  hemisphere  can  disprove  the  existence  of  corresponding 
marks  on  the  dim  one.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  conceivable  that 
one  of  the  few*rays  which  fall  on  the  dim  hemisphere  may  reveal  some 
singular  mark  which  I can  see  that  the  bright  hemisphere  does  not 
possess.  And  the  brighter  the  bright  hemisphere  is  made,  the  more 
certain  do  I become  that  this  particular  mark  is  not  to  be  found 
on  it. 

§ 5.  I will  give  two  concrete  examples  of  what  I mean — one  of 
them  drawn  from  the  conclusions  of  a great  physiologist,  the  other 
from  the  obvious  condition  of  a new  branch  of  experimental  inquiry. 
1 shall  not  discuss  either  instance  in  detail,  since  I am  here  only 
endeavouring  to  show  that  with  increased  precision  in  psycho- 
physical researches  the  old  problems  of  free-will,  soul  and  body,  &c., 
are  presenting  more  definite  issues,  and  offering  a far  more  hopeful 
field  to  the  exact  philosopher  than  their  former  vagueness  allowed. 

My  first  illustration,  thenf  is  from  the  fonn  which  the  old 
free-will  controversy  has  assumed  in  the  hands  of  Wundt.  AVundt 
stapds,  of  course,  among  the  foremost  of  those  who  have  treated 
human  thought  and  sensation  as  definite  and  measurable  things, 
who  have  computed  their  rate  of  transit,  and  analysed  their 
elements,  and  enounced  the  laws  of  their  association.  It  is  not  from 
him  that  we  need  look  for  p.ny  lofty  metaphysical  view  as  to  the 
infinite  resources  of  spiritual  power, — the  transcendental  character 
of  psychical  phenomena.  But,  nevertheless,  Wundt  believes  himself 
able  to  assert  that  there  is  within  us  a residue — an  all-important 
residue — of  psychical  action  which  is  incommensurable  with  physio- 

1 The  analogy  will  _ be  closer  if  we  suppose  that  the  second  half  is  lit,  not 
dimly  but  from  within, — since  in  one  sense  consciousness  gives  us  more  information  as  to 
tl^e  psychical  than  as  to  the  physical  side  of  life, — though  it  is  information  of  a different 
quality. 

xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

logical  law.  So  far,  he  holds,  is  the  principle  of  conservation  of  energy 
from  covering  the  psychical  realm,  that  the  facts  of  mental  evolution 
proclaim  that  the  very  contrary  is  the  case ; — and  that  what  really  ob- 
tains is  rather  “ an  unlimited  new  creation  of  psychical  energy.”1  Nay, 
so  convinced  is  he  of  the  inadequacy  of  any  system  of  physiological 
determinism  to  explain  ' psychical  facts,  that  he  holds  that  we  must 
directly  reverse  the  materialistic  view  of  the  relation  of  the  corporeal 
to  the  psychical  life.  “ It  is*not  the  psychical  life,”  he  says,  “ which 
is  a product  of  the  physical  organisation ; rather  it  is  the  physical 
organism  which,  in  all  those  purposive  adjustments  which  distinguish 
it  from  inorganic  compounds,  is  itself  a psychical  creation.”2 

I am  not  here  expressing  either  agreement  or  disagreement  with 
this  general  view.  I am  merely  pointing  out  that  here  4s  an  opinion 
which,  whether  right  or  wrong,  is  formed  as  a result  not  of  vaguevess 
but  of  distinctness  of  physiological  conceptions.  And  my  illustration 
shows  at  any  rate  that  the  development  of  physiology  is  tending  not 
always  to  make  the  old  psychical  problems  seem  meaningless  or 
sterile,  but  rather  to  give  them  actuality  and  urgency,  and  even  to 
suggest  new  possibilities  of  their  solution. 

§ 6.  But,  to  come  to  my  second  instance,  it  is  perhaps  from  the 
present  position  of  hypnotism  that  the  strongest  argument  may  be 
drawn  for  the  need  of  such  researches  as  ours,  to  supplement  and 
co-ordinate  the  somewhat  narrower  explorations  of  technical 
physiology.  For  the  actual  interest  of  the  mesmeric  or  hypnotic 
trance — I am  not  now  dealing  with  the  rival  theories  which  these 
words  connote — the  central  interest,  let  us  say,  of  induced  somnam- 
bulism, or  the  sleep-waking  state — has  hardly  as  yet  revealed  itself 
to  any  section  of  inquirers. 

That  interest  lies  neither  in  mesmerism  as  a curative  agency, 
as  Elliotson  would  have  told  us,  nor  in  hypnotism  as  an  illustration 
of  inhibitory  cerebral  action,  as  Heidenhain  would  tell  us  now.  It 
lies  in  the  fact  that  here  is  a psychical  experiment  on  a larger  scale 
than  was  ever  possible  before  ; that  we  have  at  length  got  hold  of  a 
handle  which  turns  the  mechanism  of  our  being ; that  we  have  found 

: 1 “ Hier  gilt  vielmehr  ein  Gesetz  unbegrenzter  Neuschopfung  geistiger  Energie, 
welches  nur  durch  die  sinnliche  Bestimmtheit  des  geistigen  Lebens  gewisse  Hemnrungen 
erleidet.  ’’—Wundt,  Loyik,  II.,  p.  507.  , 

8 “ Nicht  das  geistige  Leben  ist  ein  Erzeugniss  der  physischen  Organisation,  soadern 
diese  ist  in  allem,  was  sie  an  zweckvollen  Einrichtungen  der  Selbstregulirung  und  der 
Energie- verwerthung  vor  den  Substanzcomplexen  der  unorganisehen  Natur  voraushat, 
eine  geistige  Schopfung.”— Wundt,  Loyik,  II.,  p.  471.  * 

Introduction.  xhu 

Pr 

a mode  of  shifting  the  threshold  of  consciousness  which  is  a dislocation 
as  violent  as  madness,  a submergence  as  pervasive  as  sleep,  and  yet 
is  waking  sanity ; that  we  have  induced  a change  of  personality 
which  is  not  per  se  either  evolutive  or  dissolutive,  but  seems  a mere 
allotropic  modification  of  the  very  elements  .of  man.  The  prime 
value  of  the  hypnotic  trance  lies  not  in  what  it  inhibits,  but  in  what 
it  reveals ; not  in  the  occlusion  of  the  avenues  of  peripheral  stimulus, 
but  in  the.  emergence  of  unnoted  sensibilities,  nay,  perhaps  even  in 
the  manifestation  of  new  and  centrally-initiated  powers. 

The  hypnotic  trance  is  an  eclipse  of  the  normal  consciousness 
which  «an  be  repeated  at  will.  Now  the  first  observers  of  eclipses  of 
the  sun  ascribe  them  to  supernatural  causes,  and  attribute  to  them 
an  occult  influence  for  good  or  evil.  Then  comes  the  stage  at  which 
men  note  their  effects  on  the  animal  organism,  the  roosting  of  birds, 
the  restlessness  of  cattle.  Then  come  observations  on  the  intensity'1 
of  the  darkness,  the  aspect  of  the  lurid  shade.  But  to  the  modern 
astronomer  all  this  is  trifling  as  compared  with  the  knowledge  which 
those  brief  moments  give  him  of  the  orb  itself,  in  its  obscuration. 
He  learns  from  that  transient  darkness  more  than  the  noon  of  day 
can  tell ; he  sees  the  luminary  no  longer  as  a defined  and  solid  ball, 
but  as  the  centre  of  the  outrush  of  flaming  energies,  the  focus  of  an 
effluence  which  coruscates  untraceably  through  immeasurable  fields 
of  heaven. 

There  is  more  in  this  parallel  than  a mere  empty  metaphor.  It 
suggests  one  of  the  primary  objects  which  psychical  experiment  must 
seek  to  attain.  Physical  experiment  aims  at  correcting  the  deliver- 
ances of  man’s  consciousness  with  regard  to  the  external  world  by 
instruments  which  extend  the.  range,  and  concentrate  the  power, 
and*  compensate  the  fallacies  of  his  senses.  And1  similarly,  our 
object  must  be  to  correct  the  deliverances  of  man’s  consciousness 
concerning  the  processes  which  are  taking  place  within  him  by 
means  of  artificial  displacements  of  the  psycho-physical  threshold ; 
by  inhibiting  normal  perception,  obliterating  normal  memory,  so  that 
in  this  temporary  freedom  from  preoccupation  by  accustomed  stimuli 
his  mind  may  reveal  those  latent  and  delicate  capacities  of  which  his 
ordinary  conscious  self  is  unaware^ 

§ 7.  It  was  thus,  in  fact,  that  thought-transference,  or  telepathy, 
was  first  discgve^ed.  In  the  form  of  community  of  sensation  between 
operator  and  subject,  it  was  noted  nearly  a century  ago  as  a 

xliv  INTRODUCTION. 

phenomenon  incident  to  the  mesmeric  trance.  Its  full  importance 
was  not  perceived,  and  priceless  opportunities  of  experiment  were 
almost  wholly  neglected.  In  order  to  bring  out  the  value  and  extent 
of  the  phenomenon  it  was  necessary,  we  venture  to  think,  that  it 
should  be  investigated  by  men  whose  interest  in  the  matter  lay  not 
in  the  direction  of  practical  therapeutics  but  of  psychical  theory,  and 
who  were  willing  to  seek  and  “ test  for  it  ” under  a wide  range  of 
conditions,  not  in  sleep-waking  life  only,  but  in  normal  waking,  and 
normal  sleep,  and,  as  this  book  will  indicate,  up  to  the  very  hour  of 
death. 

The  difficulties  of  this  pursuit  are  not  physiological  only:  But, 
nevertheless,  in  our  endeavours  to  establish  and  to  elucidate  telepathy, 
we  look  primarily  for  aid  to  the  most  recent  group  of  physiological 
inquirers,  to  the  psycho-physicists  whose  special  work — as  yet,  in  its 
infancy — has  only  in  our  own  day  been  rendered  possible  by  the 
increased  accuracy  and  grasp  of  experimental  methods  in  the  sciences 
which  deal  with  Life. 

The  list  of  Corresponding  Members  of  our  Society  will  serve  to 
show  that  this  confidence  on  our  part  is  not  wholly  unfounded,  and 
to  indicate  that  we  are  not  alone  in  maintaining  that  whatever  may 
be  the  view  of  these  perplexing  problems  which  ultimately  prevails, 
the  recent  advances  of  physiology  constitute  in  themselves  a strong 
reason — not,  as  some  hold,  for  the  abandonment  of  all  discussion  of 
the  old  enigmas,  but  rather  for  their  fresh  discussion  with  scientific 
orderliness,  and  in  the  illumination  of  our  modern  day.1 

§ 8.  From  Biology  we  may  pass,  by  an  easy  transition,  to  what  is 
commonly  known  as  Anthropology, — the  comparative  study  of  the 
different  races  «f  men  in  respect  either  of  their  physical  character- 
istics or  of  the  early  rudiments  of  what  afterwards  developcs  into 
civilisation. 

The  connection  of  anthropology  with  psychical  research  will  be 
evident  to  any  reader  who  has  acquainted  himself  with  recent 
expositions  of  Primitive  Man.  He  may  think,  indeed,  that  the 
connection  is  too  evident,  and  that  we  can  hardly  bring  it  into  notice 
without  proving  a good  deal  more  than  we  desire.  For  as  the  creeds 
and  customs  of  savage  races  become  better  known,  the  part  played  by 
sorcery,  divination,  apparitions  becomes  increasingly  predominant. 

1 The  French  Socidt4  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,  whose  President  is  M.  Charcot, 
has  already  published  several  observations  with  an  important  bearing  on  our  subject,  some 
of  which  will  be  found  in  Vol.  ii.  of  this  work. 

INTRODUCTION. 

xlv 

Mr.  Tylor  and  Sir  John  Lubbock  have  made  this  abundantly 
clear,  and  Mr.  Spencer  has  gone  so  far  as  to  trace  all  early  religion 
to  a fear  of  the  ghosts  of  the  dead.  In  the  works  of  these  and  similar 
authors,  I need  hardly  say,  we  are  led  to  regard  all  these  beliefs  and 
tendencies  as  due  solely  to  the  childishness  of  savage  man — as 
absurdities  which  real  progress  in  civilisation  must  render  increasingly 
alien  to  the  developed  common-sense,  the  rational  experience  of 
humanity.  # Yet  it  appears  to  me  that  as  we  trace  the  process  of 
evolution  from  savage  to  civilised  man  we  come  to  a point  at  which 
the  inadequacy  t>f  this  explanation  is  strongly  forced  on  our  attention. 
Certaiqjy  this  was  my  own  case  when  I undertook  some  years  ago  to 
give  a sketch  of  the  Greek  oracles.  It  soon  became  evident  to  me 
that  the  mas&.qf  phenomena  included  under  this  title  had,  at  any  rate, 
a psycho-physical  importance  which  the  existing  works  on  the  subject 
for  the"  most  part  ignored.  I scarcely  ventured  myself  to  do  more  ‘ 
than  indicate  where  the  real  nodi  of  the  inquiry  lay.  But  when  a 
massive  treatise  on  Ancient  Divination  appeared  from  the  leanied  pen 
of  M.  Bouehe-Leclercq,  I looked  eagerly  to  see  whether  his  erudition 
had  enabled  him  to  place  these  problems  in  a new  light.  I found, 
however,  that  he  explicitly  renounced  all  attempt  to  deal  with  the 
phenomena  in  more  than  a merely  external  way.  He  would  reconi, 
but  he  Avould  make  no  endeavour  to  explain ; — taking  for  granted, 
as  it  appeared,  that  the  explanation  depended  on  fraud  alone,  and  on 
fraud  whose  details  it  would  now  be  impossible  to  discover. 

I cannot  think  that  such  a view  can  any  longer  satisfy  persons 
adequately  acquainted  with  the  facts  of  hypnotism.  Whatever  else, 
whether  of  fraud  or  reality,  there  may  have  been  on  the  banks  of 
Cassotis  or  Castaly, — unde  superstitiosa  prirnum  sacra  euaidt  vox 
fern, — there  were  at  least  the  hypnotic  trance  and  bystero-epilepsy. 
And  until  these  and  similar  elements  can  be  sifted  out  of  the  records 
left  to  us,  with  something  of  insight  gained  by  familiarity  with  their 
modem  forms,  our  knowledge  of  Pythia  or  of  Sibyl  will  be  shallow 
indeed. 

Still  more  markedly  is  such  insight  and  experience  needed  in 
anthropology  proper — in  the  actual  observation  of  the  savage  peoples 
who  still  exist.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  shamans  and  medicine-men 
will  not  vanish  before  the  missionary  until  they  have  yielded  some 
fuller  lessons  to  the  psycho-physicist — until  the  annals  of  the 
Salpetriere  and  the  experiments  of  Dean’s  Yard  have  been  invoked  in 
explanation  of  the  weird  terrors  of  the  Yenisei  and  the  Congo. 

xlvi 

INTRODUCTION. 

§ 9.  Passing  on  from  Anthropology  to  history  in  its  wider  accepta- 
tion, we  find  these  psycho-physical  problems  perpetually  recurring,  and 
forming  a disturbing  element  in  any  theory  of  social  or  religious 
evolution.  The  contagious  enthusiasms  of  the  Middle  Ages — the 
strange  endemic  maladies  of  witchcraft,  vampirism,  lycanthropy — 
even  the  individual  inspiration  of  a Mahomet  or  a Joan  of  Arc — 
these  are  phenomena  which  the  professed  historian  feels  obliged  to 
leave  to  the  physician  and  th8  alienist,  and  for  which  the.  physician 
and  the  alienist,  in  their  turn,  have  seldom  a satisfactory  explanation. 

Nor  do  phenomena  of  this  kind  cease  to  appear  with  the  advance 
of  civilisation.  In  detailed  modern  histories,  in  the  biographies  of 
eminent  men,  we  still  come  upon  incidents  which  are,  at  any  rate  at 
first  sight,  of  a mpernornud 1 kind,  and  over  which  the  narrator  is 
forced  to  pass  with  vague  or  inadequate  comment.  r 

But  it  is,  of  course,  in  dealing  with  the  history  of  religion#  that 
our  lack  of  any  complete  grasp  of  psychical  phenomena  is  most 
profoundly  felt.  And  here,  also,  it  is  as  a result  of  recent  progress, — 
of  the  growth  of  the  comparative  study  of  religions, — that  we  are  able 
to  disengage,  in  a generalised  form,  the  chief  problems  with  which  our 
“ psychical  ” science,  if  such  could  be  established,  would  be  impera- 
tively called  on  to  deal. 

For  we  find  throughout  the  world’s  history  a series  of  great  events 
which,  though  differing  widely  in  detail,  have  a certain  general 
resemblance  both  to  each  other  and  to  some  of  those  incidents  both  of 
savage  and  of  ordinary  civilised  life  to  which  reference  has  already 
been  made. 

The  elements  which  are  common  to  the  great  majority  of  religions 
seem  to  be  mainly  two,  namely,  the  promulgation  of  some  doctrine 
which  the  religious  reformer  claims  to  have  received,  or  actually 
to  communicate,  in  some  supernormal  manner ; and  the  report  of  a 

1 “I  have  ventured  to  coin  the  word  * supernormal  * to  be  applied  to  phenomena 
which  are  beyond  what  usually  happens— beyond , that  is,  in  the  sense  of  suggesting  unknown 
psychical  laws.  It  is  thus  formed  on  the  analogy  of  abnormal . When  we  speak  of  an 
abnormal  phenomenon  we  do  not  mean  one  which  contravene. is  natural  laws,  but  one  which 
exhibits  them  in  an  unusual  or  inexplicable  form.  Similarly  by  a supemormal  phenomenon, 
I mean,  not  one  which  override*  natural  laws,  for  I believe  no  such  phenomenon  to  exist, 
but  one  which  exhibits  the  action  of  laws  higher,  in  a psychical  aspect,  than  are  discerned 
in  action  in  every-day  life.  By  higher  (either  in  a psychical  or  in  a physiological  sense),  I 
mean  t apparently  belonging  to  a more  advanced  stage  of  evolution.*” — Proceeding 8 of 
the  S.P.K.,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  30.  Throughout  this  treatise  we  naturally  need  a designation  for 
phenomena  which  are  inexplicable  by  recognised  physiological  laws,  and  belong  to 
the  general  group  into  the  nature  of  which  we  are  inquiring.  The  term  psychical 
(which  is  liable  to  misapprehension  even  in  the  title  of  our  Society)  can  hardly  be  used 
without  apology  in  this  specialised  sense.  The  occasional  introduction  of  the  word 
supcmornial  may  perhaus  therefore  be  excused. 

INTRODUCTION,  xlvii 

concurrent  manifestation  of  phenomena  apparently  inexplicable  by 
ordinary  laws. 

Now,  with  the  rise  of  one  religion  our  Society  has  already  had 
practically  to  deal.  Acting  through  Mr.  Hodgson,  whose  experiences 
in  the  matter  have  been  elsewhere  detailed,1,  a committee  of  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  investigated  the  claim  of  the  so- 
called  “ Theosophy,”  of  which  Madame  Blavatsky  was  the  prophetess, 
to  be  an  incipient  world-religion,  corroborated  by  miraculous,  or  at 
least  supernormal,  phenomena, — and  has  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
that  it  is  merely  a rdchaufd  of  ancient  philosophies,  decked  in  novel 
language,  and  supported  by  ingenious  fraud.  Had  this  fraud  not  been 
detected  and  exposed,  and  had  the  system  of  belief  supported  thereon 
thriven  and  spread,  we  should  have  witnessed  what  the  sceptic  might 
have  cited  as  a typical  case  of  the  origin  of  religions.  A Gibbon  of  our 
own  day,  reviewing  the  various  motives  and  tendencies  which  prompter 
spread,  revelations,  might  have  pointed  to  Theosophy  and  Mormonism 
as  covering  between  them  the  whole  ground ; — from  the  adroit 
advantage  taken  of  mystical  aspiration  in  the  one  religion,  to  the 
commonplace  action  of  greed  and  lust  upon  helplessness  and  stupidity 
which  forms  the  basis  of  the  other.  ; 

But  if  it  should  be  argued  from  these  analogies  that  in  no  case  of 
the  foundation  of  a religion  would  any  scientific  method  of  psychical 
inquiry  prove  necessary  or  fruitful,  if  we  knew  all  the  facts ; but  that 
such  developments  might  be  sufficiently  dealt  with  by  ordinary 
common-sense,  or,  like  Mormonism,  by  the  criminal  law,  the 
generalisation  would  be  hasty  and  premature.  We  need  -not  go  far 
back  to  discover  two  religions  whose  central  fact  is  not  a fact  of  fraud 
at  all,  but  an  unexplained  psychical  phenomenon.  I allude  £o  the 
vision-life  .of  Swedenborg,  and  the  speaking  with  ’tongues  which 
occurred  in  the  church  of  Irving, — each  of  which  constitutes  a central 
point  of  faith  for  a certain  number  of  intelligent  and  educated  persons 
at  the  present  day.  Of  neither  of  these  facts  can  Science  at  present 
offer  a satisfactory  explanation.  The  speaking  with  tongues  seems 
plainly  to  have  been  for  the  most  part  (though  not  entirely)  a 
genuine  automatic  phenomenon.  But  as  to  the  origin  of  such 
automatic  utterances  (conveyed  in  speech  or  writing),  as  to  the  range 
from  whiqh  their  contents  are  drawn,  or  the  kind  of  attention  which 
they  can  claim,  there  is  little  or  nothing  to  be  leamt  from  accepted 

1 Proceedings  of  the  S.P.K.,  Vol.  iii. 

xlviii 

INTRODUCTION. 

textbooks.  We  are  groping  among  the  first  experiments,  the  simplest 
instances,  on  which  any  valid  theory  can  be  based.1 

The  case  of  Swedenborg  carries  us  still  further  beyond  the  limits 
of  our  assured  knowledge.  Of  madness  and  its  delusions,  indeed,  we 
know  much ; but  it  would  be  a mere  abuse  of  language  to  call 
Swedenborg  mad.  His  position  must  be  decided  by  a much  more 
difficult  analogy.  For  before  we  can  even  begin  to  criticise  his 
celestial  visions  we  must  be  able  in  some  degree  to  judge  o^  his  visions 
of  things  terrestrial ; we  must  face,  that  is  to  say,  the  whole  problem 
of  so-called  clairvoyance,  of  a faculty  which  claims  to  be  not  merely 
receptive  but  active, — a projection  of  super-sensory  percipience :among 
scenes  distant  and  things  unknown. 

And  the  existence  of  such  a faculty  as  this  will  assuredly  never  be 
proved  by  a mere  study  of  the  transcendental  dicta  of  any  single  seer. 
This  problem,  too,  must  be  approached,  partly  through  the  hypnotic 
trance,  in  which  the  best-attested  instances  of  clairvoyance  are  alleged 
to  have  occurred,  and  partly  through  the  collection  of  such  supernormal 
narratives  as  some  of  those  which  find  place  in  the  present  book. 

Even  a sketch  like  this  may  indicate  how  complex  and  various 
may  be  the  problems  which  underlie  that  “ History  of  Sects  ” in  which 
a Bossuet.  might  see  only  the  heaven-sent  penalty  for  apostasy  against 
the  Church, — a Gibbon,  the  mere  diverting  panorama  of  the  ever- 
varying  follies  of  men. 

§ 10.  But  reflections  like  these  lie  on  the  outskirts  of  a still  larger 
, and  graver  question.  What  (it  is  naturally  asked)  is  the  relation  of  our 
study — not  to  eccentric  or  outlying  forms  of  religious  creed — but  to 
centra^  and  vital  conceptions ; and  especially  to  that  main  system  of 
belief  to  which  jn  English-speaking  countries  the  name  of  relig  ion  is 
by  popular  usage  almost  confined  ? 

Up  till  this  time  those  who  have  written  on  behalf  of  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research  have  studiously  refrained  from  entering  on 
this  important  question.  Our  reason  for  this  reticence  is  obvious 
enough  when  stated,  but  it  has  not  been  universally  discerned.  We 
wished  to  avoid  even  the  semblance  of  attracting  the  public  to  our 
researches  by  any  allurement  which  lay  outside  the  scientific  field. 
We  could  not  take  for  granted  that  our  inquiries  would  make  for  the 
spiritual  view  of  things,  that  they  would  tend  to  establish  even  the 
independent  existence,  still  less  the  immortality,  of  the  soul.  We 

1 See  papers  on  “ Automatic  Writing  ” in  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vole.  ii.  and  iii. 

INTRODUCTION. 

xlix 

shrank  from  taking  advantage  of  men’s  hopes  or  fears,  from  represent- 
ing ourselves  as  bent  on  rescuing  them  from  the  materialism  which 
forms  so  large  a factor  in  modem  thought,  or  from  the  pessimism 
which  dogs  its  steps  with  increasing  persistency.  We  held  it  to  be 
incumbent  on  us,  in  an  especial  degree,  to-  maintain  a neutral  and 
expectant  attitude,  and  to  conduct  our  inquiries  in  the  “ dry  light  ” of 
a dispassionate  search  for  truth. 

And  this  position  we  still  maintain.  This  book,  as  will  be  seen,  does 
not  attempt  to  deal  with  the  most  exciting  and  popular  topics  which 
are  included  in  our  Society’s  general  scheme.  And  we  shall  be 
careful^in  the  pages  that  follow  to  keep  within  our  self-assigned 
limits,  and  to  say  little  as  to  any  light  which  our  collected  evidence 
may  throw  qn  the  possibility  of  an  existence  continued  after  our 
physical  death. 

That  master  problem  of  human  life  must  be  assailed  by  more 
deliberate  approaches,  nor  must  we  gild  our  solid  arguments  with  the 
radiance  of  an  unproved  surmise.  But  it  would,  nevertheless,  be 
impossible,  in  a discussion  of  this  general  kind,  to  pass  over  the 
relation  of  psychical  research  to  religion  altogether  in  silence.  And, 
indeed,  since  our  inquiries  began,  the  situation  has  thus  far  changed 
that  we  have  now  not  anticipation  merely  but  a certain  amount  of 
actual  achievement  to  which  to  appeal.  We  hold  that  we  have 
proved  by  direct  experiment,  and  corroborated  by  the  narratives 
contained  in  this  book,  the  possibility  of  communications  between 
two  mjnds,  inexplicable  by  any  recognised  physical  laws,  but  capable 
(under  certain  rare  spontaneous  conditions)  of  taking  place  when  the 
persons  concerned  are  at  an  indefinite  distance  from  each  other.  And  • 
we  claim  further  that  by  investigations  of  the  higher  phenomena  of 
mesmerism,  and  of  the  automatic  action  of  the  jnind,  we  have 
confirmed’ and  expanded  this  view  in  various  directions,  and  attained 
a standing-point  from  which  certain  even  stranger  alleged  phenomena- 
begin  to  assume  an  intelligible  aspect,  and  to  suggest  further 
discoveries  to  come. 

Thus  far  the  authors  of  this  book,  and  also  the  main  group  of 
their  fellow-workers,  are  substantially  agreed.  But  their  agreement 
as  to  the  facts  actually  proved  does  not  extend, — it  is  not  even  to  be 
desired  that  it  should  extend, — to  the  speculations  which  in  one 
direction  or  another  such  facts  must  inevitably  suggest.  They  are 
facts  which  go  too  deep  to  find  in  any  two  minds  a precisely  similar 
lodgment,  or  to  adjust  themselves  in  the  same  way  to  the  complex  of 
d 

1 

INTRODUCTION. 

, pre-existent  conceptions.  The  following  paragraphs,  therefore,  must 
be.  taken  merely  as  reflecting  the  opinions  provisionally  held  by  a 
single  inquirer. 

I may  say,  then,  at  once  that  I consider  it  improbable  that  tele- 
pathy will  ever  receive  apurely  physical  explanation, — an  explanation, 
that  is  to  say,  wholly  referable  to  the  properties  of  matter,  as 
molecular  matter  is  at  present  k /own  to  us.  I admit,  of  course,  that 
such  an  explanation  is  logically  conceivable ; that  we  can  imagine 
that  undulations  should  be  propagated,  or  particles  emitted,  from  one 
living  organism  to  another,  which  should  excite  the  percipient 
organism  in  a great  variety  of  ways.  But  it  seems  to  me,y-and  1 
imagine  that  in  this  view  at  any  rate  the  majority  of  Materialists  will 
concur, — that  if  the  narratives  in  this  book  are  to  be  taljen  as,  on  the 
whole,  trustworthy,  the  physical  analogies  are  too  faint,  and  the 
physical  difficulties  too  serious,  to  allow  of  our  intruding  ambng  the 
forces  of  material  Nature  a force  which — unlike  any  other — would 
seem,  (in  some  cases  at  least),  neither  to  be  diminished  by  any  distance 
nor  to  be  impeded  by  any  obstacle  whatsoever. 

I lay  aside,  for  the  purposes  of  the  present  argument,  the  possibi- 
lity of  a monistic  scheme  of  the  universe,— of  a consenticns 
conspivans  continuata  coynatio  rerum  which  may  present  in  an 
unbroken  sequence  both  what  we  know  as  Matter  and  what  we  know 
as  Mind.  Such  a view, — though  to  higher  intelligences  it  may 
perhaps  be  an  intuitive  certainty, — can  for  us  be  nothing  more  than  a 
philosophic  opinion.  Our  scientific  arguments  must  needs  ber  based 
on  the  dualism  which  our  intellects,  as  at  present  constituted,  are  in 
fact  unable  to  transcend. 

I maintain,  therefore,  that  if  the  general  fact  of  telepathic 
communication  between  mind  and  mind  be  admitted,  it  must  also  be 
admitted  that  an  element  is  thus  introduced  into  our  conception  of 
the  aggregate  of  empirically  known  facts  which  constitutes  a serious 
obstacle  to  the  materialistic  synthesis  of  human  experience.  The 
psychical  element  in  man,  1 repeat,  must  henceforth  almost  inevitably 
be  conceived  as  having  relations  which  cannot  be  expressed  in  terms 
of  matter. 

Now  this  dogma,  though  wholly  new  to  experimental  science,  is, 
of  course,  familiar  and  central  in  all  the  higher  forms' of  religion. 
Relations  inexpressible  in  terms  of  matter,  and  subsisting  between 
spirit  and  Spirit, — the  human  and  the  Divine, — are  implied  in  the  very 
notion  of  the  interchange  of  sacred  love  and  love,  of  grace  and 

INTRODUCTION. 

li 

worship.  I need  hardly  add  that  the  reality  of  any  such  communion 
is  rigidly  excluded  by  the  materialistic  view.  The  Materialist,  indeed, 
may  regard  prayer  and  aspiration  with  indulgence,  or  even  with 
approval,  but  he  must  necessarily  conceive  them  as  forming  merely 
the  psychical  side  of  certain  molecular  movements  of  the  particles  of 
human  organisms,  and  he  must  necessarily  regard  the  notion  of 
Divine  response  to  prayer  as  an  illusion  generated  by  subsequent 
molecular  .movements  of  the  same  organisms, — the  mere  recoil 
and  reflux  of  the  wave  which  the  worshipper  himself  has  created. 

It  would,  of  course,  be  mere  offensive  presumption  to  draw  a 
parallel* between  our  telepathic  experiments  and  such  a relation  be- 
tween a human  and  a Divine  spirit  as  the  devout  soul  believes  itself 
to  realise  in  prayer.  One  side  of  that  communion  must  ex  hypothesi 
transcend  the  measurement  or  analysis  of  finite  minds.  But,  confining 
our  view  wholly  to  the  part  played  by  the  human  organism,  it  seems 
to  me  incontestable  that  our  experiments  suggest  possibilities  of 
influence,  modes  of  operation,  which  throw  an  entirely  fresh  light  on 
this  ancient  controversy  between  Science  and  Faith.  I claim 
at  least  that  any  presumption  which  science  had  established 
against  the  possibility  of  spiritual  communion  is  now  rebutted; 
and  that  inasmuch  as  it  can  no  longer  be  affirmed  that  our 
minds  are  closed  to  all  influences  save  such  as  reach  them  through 
sensory  avenues,  the  Materialist  must  admit  that  it  is  no  longer  an 
unsupported  dream  but  a serious  scientific  possibility,  that,  if  any 
intelligences  do  in  fact  exist  other  than  those  of  living  men,  influences 
from  those  intelligences  may  be  conveyed  to  our  own  mind,  and  may 
either  remain  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  or  rise  into 
' definite  consciousness,  according  as  the  presence  or  absence  of 
competing,  stimuli,  or  other  causes  as  yet  unknown  to  us,  may 
determine. 

§ 11.  I shall  leave  this  proposition  expressed  thus  in  its  most 
abstract  and  general  form.  And  I may  add, — it  is  a reflection  which 
I must  ask  the  reader*to  keep  steadily  in  mind, — that  any  support  or 
illumination  which  religious  creeds  may  gain  from  psychical  inquiry 
is  likely  to  affect  not  their  clauses  but  their  preamble  ; is  likely  to 
come,  not  as  a sudden  discovery  bearing  directly  on  some  specific 
dogma>  but  as  the  gradual  discernment  of  laws  which  may 
fundamentally  modify  the  attitude  of  thoughtful  minds. 

Now,  in  what  I have  called  the  preamble  of  all  revelations  two 

d 2 

lii 

INTRODUCTION. 

theses  are  generally  involved,  quite  apart  from  the  subject-matter, 
or  the  Divine  sanction,  of  the  revelation  itself.  We  have  to  Issume, 
first,  that  human  testimony  to  supernormal  facts  may  be  trustworthy  ; 
and  secondly,  that  there  is  something  in  the  nature  of  man  which 
is  capable  of  responding  to — I may  say  of  participating  in — these 
supernormal  occurrences.  That  is  to  say,  revelations  are  not  proved 
merely  by  large  external  facts,  perceptible  to  every  one  who  possesses 
the  ordinary  senses,  nor  again  are  they  proved  solely  by  what  are 
avowedly  mere  subjective  impressions,  but  they  are  largely  supported 
by  a class  of  phenomena  which  comes  between  these  two  extremes ; 
by  powers  inherent  in  certain  individuals  of  beholding  spiritual 
visions  or  personages  unseen  by  common  eyes,  of  receiving  information 
or  guidance  by  interior  channels,  of  uttering  truths  not  consciously 
acquired,  of  healing  sick  persons  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  with 
other  faculties  of  a similarly  supernormal  kind. 

And  I hope  that  I shall  not  be  thought  presumptuous  or  irreverent 
if  (while  carefully  abstaining  from  direct  comment  on  any  Revelation) 
I indicate  what,  in  my  view,  would  be  the  inevitable  effect  on  the 
attitude  of  purely  scientific  minds  towards  these  preliminary  theses, — 
this  'preamble,  as  I have  said,  of  definite  religions, — were  the  continued 
prosecution  of  our  inquiry  to  lead  us  after  all  to  entirely  negative 
conclusions,  were  all  our  evidence  to  prove  untrustworthy,  and  all  our 
experiments  unsound. 

For  in  the  first  place  it  is  plain  that  this  new  science  of  which  we 
are  endeavouring  to  lay  the  foundations  stands  towards  religion  in  a 
very  different  position  from  that  occupied  by  the  rising  sciences,  such 
as  geology  or  biology,  whose  conflict  or  agreement  with  natural  or 
revealed  religion  has  furnished  matter  for  so  much  debate.  The 
discoveries  of  those  sciences  can  scarcely  in  themselves  add  support  to 
a doctrine  of  man’s  soul  and  immortality,  though  they  may 
conceivably  come  into  collision  with  particular  forms  which  that 
doctrine  has  assumed.  Religion,  in  short,  may  be  able  to  assimilate 
them,  but  it  would  in  no  way  have  suffered  had  they  proved 
altogether  abortive. 

But  with  our  study  the  case  is  very  different.  For,  to  take  the 
first  of  the  two  preliminary  theses  of  religion  already  referred  to, 
the  question  whether  human  evidence  as  to  supernormal  occurrences 
can  ever  be  trusted  has  been  raised  by  our  inquiries  in  a much  more 
crucial  form  than  when  Hume  and  Paley  debated  it  with  reference  to’ 
historical  incidents  only.  We  discuss  it  with  reference  to  alleged 

INTRODUCTION. 

liii 

contemporary  incidents ; we  endeavor  to  evaluate  by  actual 
inspection  and  cross-examination  the  part  which  is  played  in  super- 
normal narratives  by  the  mere  love  of  wonder,  “ the  mythopceic 
faculty,”  the  habitual  negligence  and  ignoran.ee  of  mankind.  And  if 
all  the  evidence  offered  to  us  should  crumble  away  on  exact 
investigation — as,  for  instance,  the  loudly-vaunted  evidence  for  the 
marvels  connected  with  Theosophy  has  crumbled — it  will  no  doubt  be 
questioned  •whether  the  narratives  on  which  the  historic  religions 
depend  for  their  acceptance  could  have  stood  the  test  of  a 
contemporaneous  inquiry  of  a similarly  searching  kind. 

And*  more  than  this,  it  will  not  only  be  maintained  that  the 
collapse  of  our  modern  evidence  to  supernormal  phenomena  discredits 
all  earlier  recdrtls  of  the  same  kind  by  showing  the  ease  with  which 
such  marvels  are  feigned  or  imagined,  but  also  that  it  further 
discredits  those  records  by  making  them  even  more  antecedently 
improbable  than  they  were  before.  Not  only  will  it  be  said  that 
the  proved  fallibility  of  the  modern  witnesses  illustrates  the  probable 
fallibility  of  the  ancient  ones,  but  the  failure  of  the  inquiry  to  elicit 
any  indication  that  supernormal  faculties  do  now  exist  in  man  will 
■pro  tanto  throw  a retrospective  improbability  on  the  second  of  the 
preliminary  theses  of  religion,  which  assumes  that  some  such 
supernormal  faculty  did  at  any  rate  exist  in  man  at  a given  epoch. 
It  may  indeed  be  urged  that  such  faculties  were  given  for  a time,  and 
for  a purpose,  and  were  then  withdrawn.  But  the  instinct  of  scientific 
continuity,  which  even  in  the  shaping  of  the  solid  continents  is  fain  to 
substitute  for  deluge  and  cataclysm  the  tideway  and  the  ripple  and 
the  rain,  will  rebel  against  the  hypothesis  of  a bygone  ago  of  inward 
miracles, — a catastrophic  interference  with  the  intimate  nature  o i man. 

I will  illustrate  my  meaning  by  a concrete  example,  which  does 
not  involve  any  actual  article  of  Protestant  faith.  The  ecstacy  and 
the  stigmata  of  St.  Francis  are  an  important  element  in  Roman 
Catholic  tradition.  They  are  to  some  extent  paralleled  in  the  present 
day  by  the  ecstacy  and  the  stigmata  of  Louise  Lateau.  And  Catholic 
instinct  has  discerned  that  if  this  modern  case  be  decided  to  be 
merely  morbid,  and  in  no  true  sense  supernormal,  a retrospective 
discredit  will  be  cast  on  the  earlier  legend.  The  old  reluctance  of 
the  Catholic  Church  to  submit  her  phenomena  to  scientific  assessors 
, has  therefore  to  some  extent  been  overcome ; and  Catholic  physicians, 
under  ecclesiastical  authority,  have  discussed  Louise  Lateau’s  case  in 
the  forms  of  an  ordinary  medical  report. 

liv 

INTRODUCTION. 

Enough  will  have  Ijeen  said  to  indicate  the  reality  of  the 
connection  between  our  inquiries  and  the  preliminary  theses  of 
religion.  And  so  far  as  our  positive  results  go  in  this  direction,  they 
will  perhaps  carry  the  more  weight  in  that  they  are  independently 
obtained,  and  intended  to  subserve  scientific  rather  than  religious 
ends ; — coming,  indeed,  from  men  who  have  no  developed  theory  of 
their  own  to  offer,  and  are  merely  following  the  observed  facts 
wherever  they  may  seem  to  lead.  I see  no  probability,  I may  add, 
that  our  results  can  ever  supply  a convincing  proof  to  any  specialised 
form  of  religion.  The  utmost  that  I anticipate  is,  that  they  may 
afford  a solid  basis  of  general  evidence  to  the  independence  of 
man’s  spiritual  nature,  and  its  persistence  after  death,  on  which 
basis,  at  any  rate,  religions  in  their  specialised  forms  .may  be  at  one 
with  science,  and  on  which  the  structure  of  definite  revelation 
(which  must  be  up-built  by  historical  or  moral  arguments)  may 
conceivably  be  planted  with  a firmness  which  is  at  present  necessarily 
lacking. 

§ 12.  I have  been  speaking  thus  far  of  religion  in  its  full  sense,  as 
a body  of  doctrine  containing  some  kind  of  definite  assurance  as  to  an 
unseen  world.  But  the  form  of  religious  thought  which  specially 
characterises  our  own  day  is  somewhat  different  from  this.  We  are 
accustomed  rather  to  varying  attempts  to  retain  the  spirit,  the  aroma 
of  religion,  even  if  its  solid  substratum  of  facts  previously  supposed 
provable  should  have  to  be  abandoned.  The  discourses  on.  things 
spiritual  who  have  been  most  listened  to  in  our  own  day — as  Carlyle, 
Emerson,  Mazzini,  Renan,  Tennyson,  Matthew  Arnold,  Ruskin,  &c., — 
have  been  to  a very  small  extent  dogmatic  on  the  old  lines.  They 
have  expressed  Vague,  though  lofty,  beliefs  and  aspirations,  in  which 
the  eye  of  science  may  perhaps  see  little  substance  or  validity,  but 
which  nevertheless  have  been  in  a certain  sense  more  independent, 
more  spontaneous,  than  of  old,  since  they  are  less  often  prompted  by 
any  faith  instilled  from  without,  and  resemble  rather  the  awakening 
into  fuller  consciousness  of  some  inherited  and  instinctive  need. 

And  this  brings  us  by  an  easy  transition  to  the  next  topic,  on 
which  I wish  to  dwell.  For  I wish  to  point  out  that  the  emotional 
creed  of  educated  men  is  becoming  divorced  from  their  ncientijic 
creed ; that  just  as  the  old  orthodoxy  of  religion  was  too  narrow  to 
contain  men’s  knowledge,  so  now  the  new  orthodoxy  of  materialistic 
science  is  too  narrow  to  contain  their  feelings  and  aspirations  ; and 

INTRODUCTION. 

iv 

consequently  that  just  as  the  fabric  of  religious  orthodoxy  used  to  be 
strained  in  order  to  admit  the  discoveries  of  geology  or  astronomy,  so 
now  also  the  obvious  deductions  of  materialistic  science  are  strained 
or  overpassed  in  order  to  give  sanction  to  feelings  and  aspirations 
which  it  is  found  impossible  to  ignore.  My  inference  will,  of  course, 
be  that  in  this  vaguer  realm  of  thought,  as  well  as  in  the  more 
distinctly-defined  branches  of  knowledge  which  we  have  already 
discussed,  -the  time  is  ripe  for  some*  such  extension  of  scientific 
knowledge  as  we  claim  that  we  are  offering  here — an  extension  which, 
in  my  view,  lifts  us  above  the  materialistic  standpoint  altogether,  and 
which  gives  at  least  a possible  reality  to  those  subtle  intercommuni- 
cations between  spirit  and  spirit,  and  even  between  visible  and 
invisible  things,  of  which  Art  and  Literature  are  still  as  full  as  in 
any  “ of  Faith  ” which  preceded  us. 

I point,  then,  to  the  obvious  fact  that  the  spread  of  Materialism 
has  not  called  into  being  Materialists  only  of  those  simple  types  which 
were  commonly  anticipated  a century  since  as  likely  to  fill  a world  of 
complete  secularity. 

Materialists,  indeed,  of  that  old  unflinching  temper  do  exist,  and 
form  a powerful  and  influential  body.  It  would  have  been  strange, 
indeed,  if  recent  advances  in  physiology  had  not  evoked  new  theories 
of  human  life,  and  a new  ideal.  For  the  accepted  commonplaces  of  the 
old-fashioned  moralist  are  being  scattered  with  a ruthless  hand.  Our 
free  will,  over  great  portions,  at  least,  of  its  once  supposed  extent,  is 
declared  to  be  an  illusion.  Our  highest  and  most  complex  emotions 
are  traced  to  their  rudimentary  beginnings  in  the  instincts  of  solf- 
preservation  and  reproduction.  Our  vaunted  personality  itself  is 
seen  to  depend  on  a shifting  and  unstable  synergy  of  a number  of 
nervous  centres,  the  defect  of  a portion  of  which  cehtres  may  alter 
our  character  altogether.  And  meantime  Death,  on  the  other  hand, 
has  lost  none  of  his  invincible  terrors.  The  easy  way  in  which  our 
forefathers  would  speak  of  “ our  mortal  and  immortal  parts  ” is  hard 
to  imitate  in  face  of  the  accumulating  testimony  to  the  existence  of 
the  one  element  in  us,  and  the  evanescence  of  the  other.  And  since 
the  decay  and  dissolution  of  man  seem  now  to  many  minds  to  be  so 
much  more  capable  of  being  truly  known  than  his  survival  or  his 
further  evolution,  it  is  natural  that  much  of  the  weight  which  once 
belonged  to  the  prophets  of  what  man  hoped  should  pass  to  those 
who  can  speak  with  authority  on  what  man  needs  must  fear . Thus 
“ mad-doctors  ” tend  to  supplant  theologians,-  and  the  lives  of 

lvi 

.INTRODUCTION. 

lunatics  are  found  to  h|/vemore  lessons  for  us  than  the  lives  of  saints. 
For  these  thinkers  know  well  that  Man  can  fall  belmv  himself;  but  that 
he  can  rise  above  himself  they  can  believe  no  more.  A corresponding 
ideal  is  gradually  created;  an  ideal  of  mere  sanity  and  normality, 
which  gets  to  look  on  any  excessive  emotion  or  fixed  idea,  any 
departure  from  a balanced  practicality,  with  distrust  or  disfavour, 
and  sometimes,  rising  to  a kind  of  fervour  of  Philistinism,  classes 
genius  itself  as  a neu  ron  is. 

The  alienists  who  have  taken  this  extreme  view  have  usually, 
perhaps,  been  of  opinion  that  in  thus  discrediting  the  higher  flights  of 
imagination  or  sentiment  we  are  not  losing  much  ; that  these1  things 
are  in  any  case  a mere  surplusage,  and  that  the  ends  which  life  is 
really  capable  of  attaining  can  bo  compassed  as  well  without  them. 
But  if  the  mat  erialistic  theory  be  the  true  one,  these  limitations,of  ideal 
might  well  be  adopted  even  by  men  who  would  deeply  regret  what 
they  were  thus  renouncing.  It  might  well  seem  that  in  abandoning 
the  belief  in  any  spiritual  or  permanent  element  in  man  it  were  wise 
to  abandon  also  that  intensity  of  the  affections  which  is  ill-adapted 
to  bonds  so  perishable  and  insecure,  that  reach  of  imagination  which 
befitted  only  the  illusory  dignity  which  was  once  attached  to 
human  fates. 

But  in  fact,  as  I have  already  implied,  the  characteristic  movement 
of  our  own  country,  at  any  rate,  at  the  present  day,  is  hardly  in  this 
direction.  Our  prevalent  temper  is  not  so  much  'materialistic  as 
agnostic ; and  although  this  renouncement  of  all  knowledge  of 
invisible  things  does  in  a sense  leave  visible  things  in  sole  possession 
of  the  field,  yet  the  Agnostic  is  as  far  as  anyone  from  being  “ a hog 
from  Epicurus’  sty.”  Bather,  instead  of  sinking  into  the  materialistic 
ideal  of  plain  %ense  and  physical  well-being,  the  rising . schools  of 
thought  are  transcending  that  ideal  more  and  more.  Altruism  in 
morals,  idealism  in  art,  nay,  even  the  sentiment  of  piety  itself,  as  a 
decorative  grace  of  life, — all  these,  it  is  urged,  are  consistent  with  a 
complete  and  contented  ignorance  as  to  aught  beyond  the  material 
world. 

I need  not  here  embark  on  the  controversy  as  to  how  far  this 
aspiration  towards  “ the  things  of  the  spirit  ” is  logically  consistent 
with  a creed  that  stops  short  with  the  things  of  sense.  It  is  quite 
enough  for  my  present  purpose  to  point  out  that  here  also,  as  in  the 
case  of  more  definite  religions,  we  have  a system  of  beliefs  and  emotions 
which  may  indeed  be  able  to  accommodate  themselves  to  modern 

INTRODUCTION. 

Ivii 

science,  but  which  are  in  no  sense  supported  thereby ; — rather  which 
.science  must  regard  as,  at  best,  a kind  of  phosjlfiorescence  which  plays 
harmlessly  about  minds  that  Nature  has  developed  by  other  processes 
and  for  other  ends  than  these. 

For  my  argument  is  that  here  again,  as  in.  the  case  of  religion, 
telepathy,  as  we  affirm  it  in  this  book,  would  be  the  first  indication 
of  a possible  scientific  basis  for  much  that  now  lacks  not  only 
experimental  confirmation,  but  even  plaftsible  analogy.  We  have  seen 
how  much  support  the  preliminary  theses  of  religion  may  acquire  from 
an  assured  conviction  that  the  human  mind  is  at  least  capable  of 
receiving  supernormal  influences, — is  not  closed,  by  its  very  structure, 
as  the  Materialists  would  tell  us,  to  any  “ inbreathings  of  the  spirit  ” 
which  do  not  -appeal  to  outward  eye  or  ear.  And  somewhat  similar  is 
the  added  reality  which  the  discovery  of  telepathy  gives  to  the  higher 
flights,  the  subtler  shades,  of  mere  earthly  emotion. 

“ Star  to  star  vibrates  light : may  soul  to  soul 
Strike  thro’  some  finer  element  of  her  own  I ” 

The  lover,  the  poet,  the  enthusiast  in  any  generous  cause,  has  in 
every  age  unconsciously  answered  Lord  Tennyson’s  question  for 
himself.  To  some  men,  as  to  Goethe,  the  assurance  of  this  subtle 
intercommunication  has  come  with  vivid  distinctness  in  some  passion- 
shaken  hour.  Others,  as  Bacon,  have  seemed  to  gather  it  from  the 
imperceptible  indicia  of  a lifelong  contemplation  of  man.  But  the 
step  which  actual  experimentation,  the  actual  collection  and  collation 
of  evidence,  has  now,  as  wc  believe,  effected,  is  a greater  one  than  could 
have  b*een  achieved  by  any  individual  intuition  of  bard  or  sage.  For 
we  have  for  the  first  time  a firm  foothold  in  this  impalpable  realm ; 
we  know  that  these  unuttered  messages  do  truly  travel,  that  these 
emotions  mix  and  spread ; and  though  we  refrain  as  yet  from  further 
dwelling  cto  the  corollaries  of  this  far-reaching  law.  it  is  not  ’ because 
such  speculations  need  any  longer  be  baseless,  but  because  we  desire 
to  set  forth  the  proof  of  our  theorem  in  full  detail  before  we  do  more 
than  hint  at  the  new  fields  which  it  opens  to  human  thought. 

§ 13.  Pausing,  therefore,  on  the  threshold  of  these  vaguer  promises, 
I may  indicate  another  direction,  in  which  few  will  deny  that  a 
systematic  investigation  like  ours  ought  to  produce  results  eminently 
salutary.  It  ought  to  be  as  much  our  business  to  check  the  growth 
of  error  as  to  promote  the  discovery  of  truth.  And  there  is 
plenty  of  evidence  to  show  that  so  long  as  we  omit  to  subject  all 
alleged  supernormal  phenomena  to  a thorough  comparative  scrutiny. 

lviii 

INTRODUCTION. 

we  arc*  not  merely  postponing  a possible  gain  but  permitting  an 
unquestioned  evil. 

It  should  surely  be  needless  in  the  present  day  to  point  out  that 
no  attempt  to  discourage  inquiry  into  any  given  subject  which 
strongly  interests  mankind,  will  in  reality  divert  attention  from  the 
topic  thus  tabooed.  The  savant  or  the  preacher  may  influence 
the  readers  of  scientific  hand-books,  or  the  members  of  church 
congregations,  but  outside  that  circle  the  subject  will  be  pursued 
with  the  more  excited  eagerness  because  regulating  knowledge  and 
experienced  guidance  are  withdrawn. 

And  thus  it  has  been  with  our  supernormal  phenomena.  The 
men  who  claim  to  have  experienced  them  have  not  been . content  to 
dismiss  them  as  unseasonable  or  unimportant.  They  have  not 
relegated  them  into  the  background  of  their  lives  as  readily^  as  the 
physiologist  has  relegated  them  into  a few  paragraphs  at  the  end  of  a 
chapter.  On  tfte  contrary,  they  have  brooded  over  them,  distorted 
them,  misinterpreted  them.  Where  savants  have  minimised  they 
have  magnified,  and  the  perplexing  nodes  of  marvel  which  the  text- 
books ignore  have  become,  as  it  were,  the  ganglia  from  which  all 
kinds  of  strange  opinions  ramify  and  spread. 

The  number  of  persons  whose  minds  have  been  actually  upset 
either  by  genuine  psychical  phenomena,  or  by  their  fraudulent 
imitation,  is  perhaps  not  large.  But  the  mischief  done  is  by  no 
means  confined  to  these  extreme  cases.  It  is  mischievous,  surely — 
it  clashes  roughly  with  our  respect  for  human  reason  and  our  belief 
in  human  progress — that  religions  should  spring  up,  forms  of  worship 
be  established,  which  in  effect  do  but  perpetuate  a mistake  and 
consecrate  a misapprehension,  which  carry  men  not  forward  but 
backward  in  theftr  conception  of  unseen  things. 

The  time  has  not  yet  come  for  an  attempt  to  trace  in  detail  the 
perversion  which  each  branch  of  these  supernormal  phenomena  has 
undergone  in  ardent  minds ; — the  claims  to  sanctity,  revelation, 
prophecy,  which  a series  of  enthusiasts,  and  of  charlatans,  have  based 
on  each  class  of  marvels  in  turn.  But  two  forms  of  creed  already 
mentioned  may  again  be  cited  as  convenient  examples — the  Irvingite 
faith  of  the  misinterpretation  of  automatism,  the  Swedenborgian  of 
the  misinterpretation  of  (so-called)  ckdi'voyance.  Still  more  singular 
have  been  the  resultant  beliefs  when  to  the  assemblage  of  purely 
-psychical  marvels  a physical  ingredient  has  been  added,  of  a more 
disputable  kind.  For  linked  in  various  ways  with  records  of 

INTRODUCTION \ 

fix 

automatic  cerebration,  of  apparitions,  of  vision^  and  revelation,  come 
accounts  of  objective  sounds,  of  measurable  movements,  which  may 
well  seem  an  unwarrantable  intrusion  into  the  steady  order  of  the 
ponderable  world.  And  in  the  year  1848  certain  events,  whose 
precise  nature  is  still  in  dispute,  occurred  in  America,  in  consequence 
of  which  many  persons  were  led  to  believe  that  under  appropriate 
circumstances  these  sounds,  these  movements,  these  tangible 
apparitions, •could  be  evoked  or  reproduced  at  will.  On  this  basis  the 
creed  of  “ Modem  Spiritualism  ” has  been  upbuilt.  And  here  arises 
the  pressing  question — notoriously  still  undecided,  difficult  and 
complex  beyond  any  anticipation — as  to  whether  supernormal 
phenomena.of  this  physical  kind  do  in  fact  occur  at  all ; or  whether 
they  are  in  all  cases- — as  they  undoubtedly  have  been  in  many  cases 
— the  product  of  mere  fraud  or  delusion.  This  question,  as  it  seems  to 
us,  is  one  to  which  we  are  bound  to  give  our  most  careful  attention  ; 
and  if  we  have  as  yet  failed  to  attain  a decisive  view,  it  is  not  for 
want  of  laborious  observation,  continued  by  several  of  us  throughout 
many  years.  But  we  are  unwilling  to  pronounce  until  we  have  had 
ample  opportunities — opportunities  which  so  far  we  have  for  the 
most  part  sought  in  vain — of  investigating  phenomena  obtained 
through  private  sources,  and  free,  at  any,  rate,  from  the  specific 
suspicion  to  which  the  presence  of  a “ paid  medium  ” inevitably  gives 
rise. 

I need  not  add  further  illustrations  of  the  cautionary,  the  critical 
attitude  which  befits  such  a Society  as  ours  at  the  present  juncture. 
This  attitude  is  in  one  way  unavoidably  ungracious ; for  it  has 
sometimes  precluded  us  from  availing  ourselves  of  the  labours  of 
predecessors  whose  zeal  and  industry  we  should  have  been  gfad  to 
praiSe.  The  time,  we  hope,  will  come  when  enough  of  daylight  shall 
shine  upon  our  path  to  make  possible  a discriminating  survey  of  the 
tracks  which  scattered  seekers  have  struck  out  for  themselves  in  the 
confusion  and  dimness  of  dawn.  At  present  we  have  mainly  to  take 
heed  that  our  own  groping  course  shall  at  least  avoid  the  pitfalls  into 
which  others  have  fallen.  Anything  like  a distribution  of  awards  of 
merit  would  be  obviously  premature  on  the  part  of  men  whose  best 
hope  must  be  that  they  may  conduct  the  inquiry  into  a road  firm 
enough  to  enable  others  rapidly  to  outstrip  them. 

lx 

INTRODUCTION. 

II. 

§ 14.  Enough,  however,  has  now  been  said  to  indicate  the 
general  tenor  of  the  task  which  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research 
has  undertaken.  It  remains  to  indicate  the  place  which  the  present 
work  occupies  in  the  allotted  field,  and  the  reasons  for  offering  it  to 
public  consideration  at  this  early  stage  of  our  inquiry. 

We  could  not,  of  course,  predict  or  pre-arrange  the  order  in  which 
opportunities  of  successful  investigation  might  occur  to  the  searchers 
in  this  labyrinth  of  the  unknown.  Among  the  groping  experiments 
which  seemed  to  have  only  too  often  led  to  mere  mistake  and 
confusion, — the  “ thousand  pathways  ” 

“ qua  signa  sequendi 

Fnlleret  indeprensus  et  inremoabilis  error,” — 
it  was  not  easy  to  choose  with  confidence  our  adit  of  explora- 
tion. The  approrch  which  proved  most  quickly  productive  was  one 
from  which  it  might  have  seemed  that  there  was  little  indeed  to  hope. 
A kind  of  drawing-room  game  sprang  up — it  is  hard  to  say  whence — a 
method  of  directing  a subject  to  perform  a desired  act  by  a contact  so 
slight  that  no  conscious  impulsion  was  either  received  or  given.  Careful 
observers  soon  ranked  the  “ willing-game  ” as  an  illustration  of  in- 
voluntary muscular  action  on  the  willer’s  part,  affording  a guidance 
to  .which  the  subject  yielded  sometimes  without  being  aware  of  it. 
But  while  the  modus  operandi  of  public  exhibitions  of  this  misnamed 
“ thought-reading  ” was  not  difficult  to  detect,  Professor  Barrett  was 
one  of  the  first  who — while  recognising  all  these  sources  of  error — 
urged  the  duty  of  persistent  watching  for  any  residuum  of  true 
thought-transference  which  might  from  time  to  time  appear.  As 
will  be  seen  from  Chap.  II.  of  this  book  it  was  not  till  after  some 
six  years  of  inqtiiry  and  experiment  (1876-82)  that  definite  proof  of 
thought-transference  in  the  normal  state  could  be  placed  before  the 
world.  This  was  done  in  an  article  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for 
June,  1882,  signed  by  Professor  Barrett,  Mr.  Gurney,  and  myself. 
The  phenomenon  of  transmission  of  thought  or  sensation  without 
the  agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense  had  bqen  previously 
recorded  in  connection  with  the  mesmeric  state,  but,  so  far  as  we 
know,  its  occasional  occurrence  in  the  normal  state  was  now  for  the 
first  time  maintained  on  the  strength  of  definite  experiment.  And  the 
four  years  1882-1886  have  witnessed  a great  extension  of  those 
experiments,  which  no  longer  rest  on  the  integrity  and  capacity  of 
the  earliest  group  of  observers  alone. 

INTRODUCTION \ 

lxi 

§ 1 5.  The  foundation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  in 
1882  gave  an  opportunity  to  Mr.  Gurney  and  myself,  as  Hon.  Secs,  of 
a Literary  Committee,  to  invite  from  the  general  public  records  of 
apparitions  at  or  after  death,  and  other  abnormal  occurrences.  On 
reviewing  the  evidence  thus  obtained  we  were  struck  with  the  great 
predominance  of  alleged  apparitions  at  or  m«t,r  the.  mOMmoi 
jtgSjJjU-  And  a new  light  seemed  to  be  thrown  on  these  phenomena 
by  the  unexpected  frequency  of  accounts  of  apparitions  of  living 
persons,  coincident  with  moments  of  danger  or  crisis.  We  were  led 
to  infer  a strong  analogy  between  our  experimental  cases  of 
thought-transference  and  some  of  these  spontaneous  cases  of  what 
we  call  telepathy,  or  transference  of  a shock  or  impulse  from  one  living 
person  to  another  person  at  such  a distance  or  under  such  conditions 
as  to  negative  the  possibility  of  any  ordinary  mode  of  transmission. 
An  article,  signed  by  Mr.  Gurney  and  myself,  in  the  Fortnightly 
Review  for  March,  1883,  gave  a first  expression  to  the  analogy 
thus  suggested.  The  task  of  collection  and  scrutiny  grew  on  our 
hands ; Mr.  Podmore  undertook  to  share  our  labours  ; and  the  Council 
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  requested  us  to  embody  the 
evidence  received  in  a substantive  work. 

It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  the  theory  of  Telepathy,  experimental 
and  spontaneous,  which  forms  the  main  topic  of  this  book,  was  not 
chosen  as  our  theme  by  any  arbitraiy  process  of  selection,  but  was 
irresistibly  suggested  by  the  abundance  and  the  convergence  of 
evidence  tending  to  prove  that  special  thesis.  We  were,  and  are, 
equally  anxious  to  inquire  into  many  other  alleged  marvels — clair- 
voyance, haunted  houses,  Spiritualistic  phenomena,  &c. — but  telepathy 
is  the  subject  which  has  first  shown  itself  capable  of  investigation 
appearing  to  lead  to  a positive  result ; and  it  seemed  »well  to  arrange 
its  evidence  with  sufficient  fulness  to  afford  at  least  a solid  ground- 
work for  further  inquiry. 

And  having  been  led  to  this  choice  by  the  nature  of  the  actual 
evidence  before  us,  we  may  recognise  that  there  is  some  propriety  in 
dealing  first  with  an  issue  which,  complex  though  it  is,  is  yet  simple 
as  compared  to  other  articles  of  our  programme.  For  the  fact,  if 
it  be  one,  of  the  direct  action  of  mind  upon  mind  has  at  least 
a generality  which  makes  it  possible  that,  like  the  law  of  atomic 
combination  in  chemistry,  it  may  be  a generalisation  which,  though 
grasped  at  first  in  a very  simplified  and  imperfect  fashion,  may 
prove  to  have  been  the  essential  pre-requisite  of  future  progress. 

lxii 

INTRODUCTION '. 

§ 1C.  In  a certain  sense  it  may  be  said  that  this  hidden  action  of 
one  mind  on  another  comes  next  in  order  of  psychical  discovery  to  the 
hidden  action  of  the  mind  within  itself.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
the  earliest  scientific  attempts  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  so-called 
Spiritualism  referred,  them  mainly  to  “unconscious  cerebration,” 
(Carpenter),  or  to  what  was  virtually  the  same  thing,  “ unconscious 
muscular  action  ” (Faraday). 

Now  these  theories,  in  my  view,  were,  so  far  as  they  went,  not 
only  legitimate,  but  the  most  logical  which  could  have  been  suggested 
to  explain  the  scanty  evidence  with  which  alone  Faraday  and 
Carpenter  attempted  to  deal.  This  uncoiiscious^actionvof  the  mind 1 
was  in  reality  the  first  thing  which  it  was-- needful  to  take  into 
account  in  approaching  supernormal  phenomena.  I believe,  indeed, 
that  our  knowledge  of  those  hidden  processes  of  mentation  is  still  in 
its  infancy,  and  I have  elsewhere  endeavoured  to  assign  a wider  range 
than  orthodox  science  has  yet  admitted  to  the  mind’s  unconscious 
operation.1  But  the  result  of  this  further  analysis  has  been  (as  I 
hold)  not  to  show  that  ordinary  physiological  considerations  will 
suffice  (as  Dr.  Carpenter  seems  to  suppose)  to  explain  all  the  psychical 
problems  involved,  but  rather  to  reveal  the  fact  that  these  uncon- 
scious operations  of  the  mind  do  not  follow  the  familiar  channels 
alone,  but  are  themselves  the  facilitation  or  the  starting-point  of 
operations  which  to  science  are  wholly  new. 

To  state  the  matter  broadly,  so  as  to  include  in  a common  formula 
the  unremembered  utterances  of  the  hypnotic  subject,  and  the 
involuntary  writings  of  the  waking  automatist,  I would  maintain  that 
when  the  horizon  of  consciousness  is  altered  the  opening  field  of  view 
is  not  always  or  wholly  filled  by  a mere  mirage  or  refraction  of* 
objects  already4,  familiar,  but  does,  on  rare  occasions,  include  new 
objects,  as  real  as  the  old.  Aud  amongst  the  novel  energies  thus 
liberated  the  power  of  entering  into  direct  communication  with  other 
intelligences  seems  to  stand  plainly  forth.  Among  the  objects  in  the 
new  prospect  are  fragments  of  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  distant 
minds.  It  seems,  at  any  rate,  that  some  element  of  telepathy  is 
perpetually  meeting  us  throughout  the  whole  range  of  these  inquiries. 
In  the  first  place,  thought-transference  is  the  only  supernormal 
phenomenon  which  we  have  as  yet  acquired  the  power  of  inducing, 
even  occasionally,  in  the  normal  state.  It  meets  us  also  in  the 

1 See  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vols.  ii.  and  iii. 

INTRODUCTION. 

lxiii 

• hypnotic  trance,  under  the  various  forms  of  “ community  of  sensation," 
“ silent  willing,”  and  the  like.  Among  the  alleged  cases  of  “ mes- 
meric clairvoyance”  the  communication  of  pictures  of  places  from 
operator  to  subject  seems  the  least  uncertain  ground.  And  again, 
among  phenomena  commonly  attributed  to  “ spirits,”  (but  many  of 
which  may  perhaps  be  more  safely  ascribed  to  the  automatic  agency 
of  the  sensitive  himself,)  communication  of  thought  still  furnishes  our 
best  clue  to  "trance-speaking,”  “ clairvoyant  vision,”  answers  to  mental 
questions,  and  the  like.  It  need  not,  therefore,  surprise  us  if,  even  in 
a field  so  apparently  remote  from  all  ordinary  analogies  as  that  of 
apparitions  and  death-wraiths,  we  still  find  that  telepathy  affords  our 
most  satisfactory  clue. 

§ 17.  And  here  would  seem  to  be  the  fitting  place  to  explain 
why  we 'have  given  the  title  of  “Phantasms  of  the  Living  ” to  a 
group  of  records  most  of  which  will  present  themselves  to  the 
ordinary  reader  as  narratives  of  apparitions  of  the  dead. 

When  we  began,  in  a manner  to  be  presently"  described,  to 
collect  accounts  of  experiences  which  our  informants  regarded  as 
inexplicable  by  ordinary  laws,  we  were  of  course  ignorant  as  to  what 
form  these  experiences  would  mainly  take.  But  after  printing  and 
considering  over  two  thousand  depositions  which  seemed  pdmd  facie 
to  deserve  attention,  we  find  that  more  than  half  of  them  are 
narratives  of  appearances  or  other  impressions  coincident  either  with 
the  dea^h  of  the  person  seen  or  with  some  critical  moment  in  his  life- 
history. 

The  value  of  the  accounts  of  apparitions  after  death  is  lessened, 
•moreover,  by  a consideration  which  is  obvious  enough  as  soon  as  these 
narratives  o;,p>ne  to  be  critically  considered.  The  difficulty  in  dealing 
with  all  th  ^se  hallucinations — with  all  appearances  to  which  no 
persistent  three-dimensional  reality  corresponds — is  to  determine 
whether  they  are  veridical,  or  truth-telling — whether,  that  is,  they 
do  in  fact  correspond  to  some  action  which  is  going  on  in  some 
other  place  or  on  some  other  plane  of  being ; — or  whether,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  are  merely  morbid  or  casual — the  random  and 
meaningless  fictions  of  an  over-stimulated  eye  or  brain.  Now,  in 
the  case  of  apparitions  at  the  moment  of  death  or  crisis,  we  have  at 
any  rate  an  objective  fact  to  look  to.  If  we  can  prove  that  a great 
number  of  apparitions  coincide  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen,  we 
may  fairly  say,  as  we  do  say,  that  chance  alone  cannot  explain  this 

lxiv 

INTRODUCTION. 

coincidence,  and  that  there  is  a causal  connection  between  the  two 
events.  But  if  I have  a vision  of  a friend  recently  dead,  and  on 
whom  my  thoughts  have  been  dwelling,  we  cannot  be  sure  that  this 
may  not  he  a merely  delusive  hallucination — the  mere  offspring  of 
my  own  brooding  sorrow.  In  order  to  get  at  all  nearly  the  same 
degree  of  evidence  for  a dead  person’s  appearance  that  we  can  get 
for  a dying  person’s  appearance,  it  seems  necessary  that  the 
apparition  should  either  communicate  some  fact  known  only  to  the 
deceased,  or  should  be  noted  independently  by  more  than  one  person 
at  once  or  successively.  And  our  evidence  of  this  kind  is  at  present 
scarcely  sufficient  to  support  any  assured  conclusion.1 

When,  therefore,  we  are  consider  ag  whether  the  phantasms  of 
dying  persons  may  most  fitly  be  cons  dered  as  phantasms  of  the  dead 
or  of  the  living,  we  find  little  support  from  analogy  on  the  side  of 
podlmmou*  apparitions.  And  on  the  other  hand,  as  already  hinted, 
we  have  many  cases  where  the  apparition  has  coincided  with  violent 
shocks, — carriage  accidents,  fainting  fits,  epileptic  fits,  &c.,  which 
nevertheless  left  the  agent, — as  we  call  the  person  whose  semblance 
is  seen, — as  much  alive  as  before.  In  some  cases  the  accident  is 
(drnoxt  a fatal  one ; as  when  a man’s  phantom  is  seen  at  the  moment 
when  he  is  half-drowned  and  insensible.  In  tuch  a case  it  would 
seem  illogical  to  allow  the  mere  fact  of  his  restoration  or  non-restora- 
tion to  life  to  rank  his  phantom  as  that  of  a living  person  in  the  one 
case,  of  a dead  person  in  the  other.  It  seems  simpler  to  suppose  that 
if  two  men  fall  ovei’board  to-day  and  their  respective  phantpms  are 
seen  by  their  friends  at  the  moment, — then,  though  one  man  should 
be  restored  to  life  and  the  other  not, — yet  if  the  first  phantom  was 
that  of  a living  man,  so  also  was  the  second. 

Nay  mpre0  even  if  the  apparition  be  seen  some  hours  later  .than 
the  moment  of  apparent  death,  there  are  still  reasons  which  prevent 
us  from  decisively  classing  it  as  the  apparition  of  a dead  man.  In 
the  first  place,  the  moment  of  actual  death  is  a very  uncertain  thing. 
When  the  heart’s  action  stops  the  organism  continues  for  someVtime 
in  a state  very  different  from  that  of  ordinary  inanimate  matter.  \ In 
such  an  inquiry  as  ours  it  is  safer  to  speak,  not  of  death,  but  of  “'ehe 
process  of  dissolution,”  and  to  allow  for  the  possible  prolongation^^ 
some  form  of  psychical  energy  even  when,  for  instance,  the  attempt  to 
restore  respiration  to  a drowned  man  has  definitely  failed.  And  in 

1 See  Mrs.  Sidgwiek’s  paper  on  “ The  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society,  for 
Phantasms  of  the  Dead,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  Vol.  iii. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Ixv 

♦the  second  place,  we  find  in  the  case  of  phantasms  corresponding  to 
some  accident  or  crisis  which  befalls  a living  friend,  that  there  seems 
often  to  be  a latent  period  before  the  phantasm  becomes  definite  or 
externalised'  to  the  percipient’s  eye  or  ear.  Sometimes  a vague 
malaise  seems  first  to  be  generated,  and  then  when  other  stimuli  are 
deadened, — as  at  night  or  in  some  period  of  repose, — the  indefinite 
grief  or  uneasiness  takes  shape  in  the  voice  or  figure  of  the  friend 
who  in  fact  passed  through  his  moment  of  peril  some  hours  Wore. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  a deferment  of  this  kind  may  sometimes 
intervene  between  the  moment  of  death  and  the  phantasmal 
announcement  thereof  to  a distant  friend. 

These,  then,  are  reasons,  suggested  by  actual  experience,  for 
ascribing  our  V death- wraiths  ” to  living  rather  than  to  dead  men. 
And  there  is  another  consideration,  of  a more  general  order,  which 
points  in  the  same  direction.  We  must  not  rashly  multiply  the 
problems  involved  in  this  difficult  inquiry.  Now  Science,  it  is 
"needless  to  say,  offers  no  assurance  that  man  survives  the  tomb ; and 
although  in  Christian  countries  our  survival  is  an  established  doctrine, 
this  does  not  carry  with  it  any  dogma  as  to  the  possibility  that 
communications  should  reach  us  from  departed  spirits.  The 
hypothesis,  then,  that  apparitions  are  ever  directly  caused  by  dead 
persons  is  one  which  ordinary  scientific  caution  bids  us  to  be  very 
slow  in  introducing.  Should  it  afterwards  be  established  that 
departed  spirits  can  communicate  with  us.  the  interpretation  placed 
upon  various  cases  contained  in  these  volumes  may  need  revision. 
But  for  the  present  it  is  certainly  safer  to  inquire  how  far  they  can  be 
explained  by  the  influences  or  impressions  which,  as  we  know  by 
actual  experiment,  living  persons  can  under  certain  circumstances 
exert,  or  effect  on  one  another,  in  those  obscure  supewemsory  modes 
which  we  have  provisionally  massed  together  under  the  title  of 
Telepathy. 

§ 18.  The  main  theses  of  this  book,  then,  are  now  capable  of 
being  stated  in  a very  simple  form. 

I.  Experiment  proves  that  telepathy — the  supersensory 1 trans- 
ference of  thoughts  and  feelings  from  one  mind  to  another, — is  a 
fact  in  Nature. 

* 1 By  “ supersensory  ” I mean  ’independent  of  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.* 

I do  not  mean  to  assert  that  telepathic  perception  either  is  or  is  not  analogous  to  sensory* 
perception  of  the  recognised  kinds. 

lxvi 

INTRODUCTION. 

II.  Testimony  proves  that  phantasms  (impressions,  voices,  or: 
figures)  of  persons  undergoing  some  crisis, — especially  death', — are 
perceived  by  their  friends  and  relatives  with  a frequency  which  mere* 
chance  cannot  explain. 

III.  These  phantasms  then,  whatever  else  they  may  be,  are 
instances  of  the  supersensory  action  of  one  mind  on  another.  The 
second  thesis  therefore  confirms,  and  is  confirmed  by,  the  first.  For 
if  telepathy  exists,  we  should  anticipate  that  it  would  exhibit  some 
spontaneous  manifestations,  on  a scale  more  striking  than  our 
experimental  ones.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  apparitions  are 
rendered  more  credible  and  comprehensible  by  an  analogy  which  for 
the  first  time  links  them  with  the  results  of  actual  experiment. 

Such  are  the  central  theses  of  this  work, — theses  on  which  its 
authors,  and  the  friends  whom  they  have  mainly  consulted,  are 
in  entire  agreemer  t.  The  first  thesis  may,  of  course,  be  impugned 
by  urging  that  our  experiments  are  fallacious.  The  second  thesis 
may  be  impugned  by  urging  that  our  testimony  is  insufficient. 
The  third  thesis,  as  I have  here  worded  it,  is  hardly  open  to  separate 
attack ; being  a corollary  which  readily  folloAvs  if  the  first  two 
theses  are  taken  as  proved. 

This,  however,  is  only  the  case  so  long  as  the  third  thesis, 
which  asserts  the  analogy  between  thought-transference  and  appari- 
tions— between  experimental  and  spontaneous  telepathy — is  stated 
in  a vague  and  general  form.  So  soon  as  we  attempt  to  give  more 
precision  to  this  analogy — to  discuss  how  far  the  unknown  agency  at 
work  can  be  supposed  to  be  the  same  in  both  cases — or  how  far  the 
apparitions  may  be  referable  to  quite  other,  though  cognate,  laws, — we 
entei*  on  a field  where  even  those  who  have  accepted  the  analogy  in' 
general  terms*  are  likely  to  find  the  evidence  leading  them  to  some- 
what divergent  conclusions.  Of  two  men  independently  studying  our 
records  of  apparitions,  the  one  will  almost  inevitably  press  their 
analogy  to  simple  telepathy  further  than  the  other.  And  each  will  be 
able  to  plead  that  he  has  been  guided  as  far  as  possible  by  an  instinct 
of  scientific  caution  in  thus  judging  of  matters  strange  and  new.  The* 
Jirst  will  say  that  “ causes  are  not  to  be  multiplied  without  necessity,” 
and  that  we  have  now  in  telepathy  a vera  causa  whose  furthest 
possibilities  we  ought  to  exhaust  before  invoking  still  stranger,  still 
remoter  agencies,  whose  very  existence  we  are  not  in  a position  tq 
prove.  He  will  feel  bound  therefore  to  dwell  on  the  points  on  which 
our  knowledge  either  of  telepathy,  or  of  the  mechanism  of  hallucina- 

INTRODUCTION. 

lxvii 

tions  in  general,  throws  some  light ; and  he  will  set  aside  as  at 
present  inexplicable  such  peculiarities  of  our  evidence  as  cannot  well 
be  brought  within  this  scheme. 

The  second  inquirer,  on  the  other  hand,  will  perhaps  feel  strongly 
that  telepathy,  as  we  now  know  it,  is  probably  little  more  than  a 
•mere  preliminary  conception,  a simplified  mode  of  representing  to 
ourselves  a group  of  phenomena  which,  as  involving  relations  between 
minds,  may  probably  be  more  complex  than  those  which  involve  even 
the  highest  known  forms  of  matter.  He  will  feel  that  while  we  hold 
ope  clue  alone  we  must  be  careful  not  to  overrate  its  efficacy ; we 
must  be  bn  the  watch  for  other  approaches,  for  hints  of  inter-relation 
between  disparate  and  scattered  phenomena. 

It  is ' to  the  first  of  these  two  attitudes  of  mind, — the  attitude 
which  deprecates  extraneous  theorising, — that  Mr.  Gurney  and 
Mr.  Podmore  have  inclined ; and  the  committal  of  the  bulk  of  this 
work  to  Mr.  Gurney’s  execution  indicates  not  only  that  he  has  been 
able  to  devote  the  greatest  amount  of  time  and  energy  to  the  task, 
but  also  that  his  view  is  on  the  whole  the  most  nearly  central  among 
' the  opinions  which  we'  have  felt  it  incumbent  on  us  to  consult.  We 
have  no  wish, however,  to  affect  a closer  agreement  than  actually  exists; 
and  in  a “Note  on  a Suggested  Mode  of  Psychical  Interaction,”  which 
will  be  found  in  Vol.  II.,  I shall  submit  a view  which  differs  from  Mr. 
Gurney’s  on  some  theoretical  points. 

§ 19?  The  theories  contained  in  this  book,  however,  bear  a small 
proportion  to  the  mass  of  collected  facts.  A few  words  as  to  our 
^method  of  collection  may  here  precede  Mr.  Gurney’s  full  discussion 
(Chap.  IY.)  of  the  peculiar  difficulties  to  which  our  evidence  is 
exposed.  • , 

It  soon  became  evident  that  if  our  collection  was  to  be  satis, 
factory  it  must  consist  mainly  of  cases  collected  by  ourselves,  and  of  a 
great  number  of  such  cases.  The  apparitions  at  death,  &c.,  recorded  by 
previous  writers,  are  enough,  indeed,  to  show  that  scattered  incidents 
>of  the  kind  have  obtained  credence  in  many  ages  and  countries.  But 
they  have  never  been  collected  and  sifted  with  any  systematic  care  ; 
and  few  of  them  reach  an  evidential  standard  which  could  justify  us 
inlaying  them  before  our  readers.  And  even  had  the  existing  stock 
pf  testimony  been  large  and  well-assured,  it  would  still  have  been 
needful  for  us  to  collect  our  own  specimens  in  situ,. — to  see,  talk 
with,  and  correspond  with  the  persons  to  whose  strange  experiences . 

Ixviii 

INTRODUCTION. 

so  much  weight  was  to  be  given.  This  task  of  personal  inquiry, — 
whose  traces  will,  we  hope,  be  sufficiently  apparent  throughout  the 
present  work, — has  stretched  itself  out  beyond  expectation,  but  has 
also  enabled  us  to  speak  with  a confidence  which  could  not  have  been 
otherwise  acquired.  . One  of  its  advantages  is  the  security  thus 
gained  as  to  the  bona  Jules  of  the  witnesses  concerned.  They  have 
practically  placed  themselves  upon  their  honour ; nor  need  we  doubt 
that  the  experiences  havS  been,  as  a rule;  recoujited  in  all 
sincerity.  As  to  unintentional  errors  of  observation  and  memory, 
Mr.  Gurney’s  discussion  will  at  least  show  that  we  have  had  abundant 
opportunities  of  learning  how  wide  a margin  must  be  t left  for 
human  carelessness,  forgetfulness,  credulity.  “ God  forbid,”  said  the 
flute-player  to  Philip  of  Macedon,  “ that  your  Majesty  should  know 
these  things  as  well  as  I !” 

It  must  not,  however,  be  inferred  from  what  has  been  said  that 
our  informants  as  a body  have  shown  themselves  less  shrewd  or  less 
accurate  than  the  generality  of  mankind.  On  the  contraiy,  we  have 
observed  with  pleasure  that  our  somewhat  persistent  and  probing 
method  of  inquiry  has  usually  repelled  the  sentimental  or  crazy 
wonder-mongers  who  hang  about  the  outskirts  of  such  a subject  as 
this ; while  it  has  met  with  cordial  response  from  an  unexpected 
number  of  persons  who  feel  with  l'eason  that  the  very  mystery  which 
surrounds  these  incidents  makes  it  additionally  important  that  they 
should  be  recounted  with  sobriety  and  care.  The  straightforward 
style  in  which  most  of  our  informants  have  couched  their  narratives,  as 
well  as  the  honoured  names  which  some  of  them  bear,  may  enable 
the  reader  to  share  something  of  the  confidence  which  a closer  contact 
with  1;he  facts  has  inspired  in  our  own  minds. 

Again,  it  seemed  necessary  that  the  collection  offered  to.  the 
public  should  be  a very  large  one,  even  at  the  cost  of  including  iii  a 
Supplement  some  remote  or  second-hand  cases  besides  the  first-hand 
cases  which  alone  are  admitted  into  the  chapters  of  this  book.  If, 
indeed,  our  object  had  been  simply  to  make  out  a case  for  the 
connection  of  deaths  with  apparitions,  we  might  have  offered  a less 
assailable  front,  and  should  certainly  have  spared  ourselves  much 
trouble,  had  we  confined  ourselves  to  giving  in  detail  a few  of 
the  best-attested  instances.  But  what  we  desired  was  not  precisely 
this.  We  hope,  no  doubt,  that  most  of  our  readers  may  ultimately 
be  led  to  conclusions  resembling  our  own.  But  before  oUr  con-* 
elusions  can  expect  to  gain  general  acceptance  many  other 

INTRODUCTION \ 

lxix 

hypotheses  will  doubtless  be  advanced,  and  coincidence,  superstition, 
fraud,  hysteria,  will  be  invoked  in  various  coinbinations  to  explain 
the  evidence  given  here.  We  think,  therefore,  that  it  is  our  duty  in 
so  new  a subject  to  afford  full  material  for  hypotheses  discordant 
with  our  own;  to  set' forth  cases  drawn  from  so  wide  a range  of 
•society,  and  embracing  such  a variety  of  circumstances,  as  to  afford 
scope  for  every  modCof  origination  or  development  of  these  narratives 
which  the  critic  mawKiggest. 

Furthermore,  the  whole  subject  of  hallucinations  of  the  sane — 
which  hitherto  has  received  very  scanty  treatment — seems  fairly 
to  belorfjj  to  our  subject,  and  has  been  treated  by  Mr.  Gurney  in 
Chap.  XI.  • We  have  throughout  contended  that  a knowledge 
of  abnormal  'oY  merely  morbid  phenomena  is  an  indispensable 
pre-requisite  for  the  treating  of  any  supernormal  operations 
which  may  be  found  to  exist  under  somewhat  similar  forms  of 
manifestation. 

Once  more,  it  was  plainly  desirable  to  inquire  whether  hypotheses, 
now  admitted  to  be  erroneous,  had  ever  been  based  in  past  times  on 
evidence  in  any  way  comparable  to  that  which  we  have  adduced.  The 
belief  in  witchcraft,  from  its  wide  extent  and  its  nearness  to  our  own 
times,  is  the  most  plausible  instance  of  such  a parallelism.  And 
Mr.  Gurney,  in  his  Note  on  Chapter  IV.,  has  given  the  results  of  an 
analysis  of  witch-literature  more  laborious  than  previous  authors 
had  thought  it  worth  while  to  undertake.  The  result  is  remarkable ; 
for  it  appears  that  the  only  marvels  for  which  respectable  testimony 
was  adduced  consist  obviously  of  ignorant  descriptions  of  hypnotic 
and  epileptiform  phenomena  now  becoming  familiar  to  science; 
while  as  to  the  monstrous  stories — copied  from  one  uncritical 
writer  into  another — which  have  given  to  this  confh^Sd  record  of 
hypnotic  and  hysterical  illusions  the  special  aromas  (so  to  say)  of 
witchcraft  or  lycanthropy, — these  prodigies  have  scarcely  ever  the 
slightest  claim  to  be  founded  on  any  first-hand  evidence  at  all. 

§ 20.  But  while  the  material  here  offered  for  forming  an  opinion 
on  all  these  points  is,  no  doubt,  much  larger  than  previous  writers 
have  been  at  the  pains  to  amass,  we  are  anxious,  neverthe- 
less, to  state  explicitly  that  we  regard  this  present  collection  of 
,&cts  as  merely  preliminary ; this  present  work  as  merely  opening 
out  a novel  subject;  these  - researches  of  a few  persons  during  a 
lew  years  as  the  mere  first  instalment  of  inquiries  which  will  need 

lxx  INTRODUCTION. 

repetition  and  reinforcement  to  an  extent  which  none  of  n$  can  as 
yet  foresee. 

A change  in  the  scientific  outlook  so  considerable  as  that  to  which 
these  volumes  point  must  needs  take  time  to  accomplish.  Time  is 
needed  not  only  to  .spread  the  knowledge  of  new  facts,  but  also 
to  acclimatise  new  conceptions  in  the  individual  mind.  Such,  at 
least,  has  been  our  own  experience  ; and  since  the  evidence  which  has 
come  to  us  slowly  and  piecemeal  is  here  presented  to#other  minds 
suddenly  and  in  a mass,  we  must  needs  expect  that  its  acceptance  by 
them  will  be  a pai’tial  and  gradual  thing.  What  we  hope  for  first  is 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  those  who  are  willing  to  aid  ijp  in  our 
labours ; we  trust  that  the  fellow- workers  in  many  lands  to  whom  we 
already  owe  so  much  may  be  encouraged  to  further  collection  of 
testimony,  renewed  experiment,  when  they  see  these  experiments 
confirming  oue  another  in  London,  Paris,  Berlin, — this  testimony 
vouching  for  cognate  incidents  from  New  York  to  New  Zealand,  and 
from  Manchester  to  Calcutta. 

With  each  year  of  experiment  and  registration  we  may  hope  that 
our  results  will  assume  a more  definite  shape — that  there  will  be  less 
of  the  vagueness  and  confusion  inevitable  at  the  beginning  of  a novel 
line  of  research,  but  naturally  distasteful  to  the  savant  accustomed 
to  proceed  by  measurable  increments  of  knowledge  from  experi- 
mental bases  already  assured.  Such  an  one,  if  he  reads  this  book, 
may  feel  as  though  he  had  been  called  away  from  an  ordnance  survey, 
conducted  with  a competent  staff  and  familiar  instruments,  tq  plough 
slowly  with  inexperienced  mariners  through  some  strange  ocean  where 
beds  of  entangling  seaweed  cumber  the  trackless  way.  We  accept 
the  analogy ; but  we  would  remind  him  that  even  floating  weeds  of1 
novel  genera  Mi  ay  foreshow  a laud  unknown ; and  that  it  wa§  not 
without  ultimate  gain  to  men  that  the  straining  keels  of  Columbus 
first  pressed  through  the  Sargasso  Sea. 

§ 21.  Yet  one  word  more.  This  book  is  not  addressed  to  savants 
alone,  and  it  may  repel  many  readers  on  quite  other  than  scientific* 
grounds.  Attempting  as  we  do  to  carry  the  reign  of  Law  into  a 
sanctuary  of  belief  and  emotion  which  has  never  thus  been  invaded 
in  detail, — lying  in  wait,  as  it  were,  to  catch  the  last  impulse  of  the 
dying,  and  to  question  the  serenity  of  the  dead, — we  may  seem  to 
be  incurring  the  poet’s  curse  on  the  man  “who  would  peep  and* 
botanize  upon  his  mother’s  grave,” — to  be  touching  the  Ark  of  sacred 

INTRODUCTION. 

lxxi 

mysteries  with  hands  stained  with  labour  in  the  profane  and  common 
field. 

How  often  have  men  thus  feared  that  Nature’s  wonders  would  be 
degraded  by  being  closelier  looked  into!  How  often,  again,  have 
they  learnt  that  the  truth  was  higher  than  their  imagination  Y and 
that  it  is  man’s  work,  but  never  Nature’s,  which  to  be  magnificent 
must  remain  unknown ! How  would  a disciple  of  Aristotle, — fresh 
from  his  master’s  conception  of  the  fixed  stars  as  types  of  godhead, 
— of  an  inhabitance  by  pure  existences  of  a supernal  world  of  their 
own, — how  would  he  have  scorned  the  proposal  to  learn  more  of 
those  stars  by  dint  of  the  generation  of  fetid  gases  and  the  sedulous 
minuteness,  of  spectroscopic  analysis ! Yet  how  poor,  how  frag- 
mentary were*  Aristotle’s  fancies  compared  with  our  conception,  thus 
gained*of  cosmic  unity  ! our  vibrant  message  from  Sirius  and  Orion 
by  the  heraldry  of  the  kindred  flame ! Those  imagined  gods  are 
gone  ; but  the  spectacle  of  the  starry  heavens  has  become  for  us  so 
moving  in  its  immensity  that  philosophers,  at  a loss  for  terms  of 
wonder,  have  ranked  it  with  the  Moral  Law. 

If  man,  then,  shall  attempt  to  sound  and  fathom  the  depths  that 
lie  not  without  him,  but  within,  analogy  may  surely  warn  him 
that  the  first  attempts  of  his  rude  psychoscopes  to  give  precision  and 
actuality  to  thought  will  grope  among  “ beggarly  elements, ’’---will  be 
concerned  with  things  grotesque,  or  trivial,  or  obscure.  Yet  here 
also  one  handsbreadth  of  reality  gives  better  footing  than  all  the 
castles*of  our  dream  ; here  also  by  beginning  with  the  least  things  we 
shall  best  learn  how  great  things  may  remain  to  do. 

The  insentient  has  awoke,  we  know  not  how,  into  sentiency ; the 
sentient  into  the  fuller  consciousness  of  human  minds.  Yet  even 
human  self-consciousness  remains  a recent,  a perfunctory?  a superficial 
thing ; and  we  must  first  reconstitute  our  conception  of  the  microcosm, 
as  of  the  macrocosm,  before  we  can  enter  on  those  “ high  capacious 
powers  ” which,  I believe,  “ lie  folded  up  in  man.” 

F.  W.  H.  M. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

VOLUME  I. 

Pag?  5,  line  17.  For  morale  read  moi'al. 

Page  10,  line  10.  For  ab  read  ad . 

Page  12,  last  sentence  of  note.  These  words  are  happily  no  longer 
true.  £>ince  they  were  written,  both  Dr.  Li^beault  and  Professor  Beaunis 
have  made  experiments  in  telepathy,  some  of  the  results  of  which  will  be 
found  in  Vol.  II.,  pp.  333-4  and  G57-60. 

Page  16.  The  first  sentence  in  small  print  has  been  misplaced,  and 
should  be  omitted. 

Page  83,  line  3 from  bottom.  The  last  two  words  refer  to  a case 
which  it  was  afterwards  decided  to  omit. 

Page  88,  line  18.  Omit  the  figure  1.  Since  the  note  on  this  page  was 
written,  some  additional  evidence  has  been  obtained  as  to  the  effect  of 
concentration  of  the  operator’s  will  in  the  process  of  hypnotising.  See 
the  cases  quoted  in  the  Additional  Chapter,  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  680,  684,  685,) 
from  the  records  of  the  Society  de  Psychologie  Physiologique. 

Page  104.  After  the  signature  in  the  middle  of  the  page,  add:  “He 
tells  ua  that  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion  seen  the  figure  of  a living 
person  in  a place  where  it  was  not.” 

Page  107,  line  1.  The  first  word  should  be  had. 

Page  109,  last  line.  The  hope  expressed  has  been  realised  in  the 
interesting  case  No.  685,  given  in  Vol.  II.,  pp.  671-4. 

• Page  118,  second  note.  After  this  note  had  been  printed  off,  I came 
across  a passage  from  Die  Christliche  Mystik , by  J.  J.  von  Goerres,  in 
which  a learned  bishop,  Prudencio  de  Sandoval,  is  made  to  describe  a 
witch’s  journey  through  the  air  as  though  he  had  himself  been  a judicial 
Spectator  of  it.  A reference  to  Sandoval’s  own  account,  however*  in  his 
Historia  de  la  vida  y hechos  del  Emperador  Carlos  V.  (Pamplona,  1618), 
Vol.  I.,  p,  830,  shows  that  the  trial  of  the  witch  in  question  took  place  in 
1527.  Now  Sandoval  died  in  1621 ; clearly,  therefore,  he  could  not  have 
been  a first-hand  witness,  as  represented.  Nor  does  he  even  name  his 
authority;  and  discredit  is  thrown  on  his  sources  of  information  by 
JJorente,  in  his  Anales  de  la  Inquisition  de  Espafia  (Madrid,  1812),  p.  319. 

, As  the  passage  from  Goerres  was  quoted  in  a first-class  scientific  review, 
and,  if  accurate,  would  have  told  against  my  statements  as  to 'the  absence 
of  first-hand  evidence  for  alleged  magical  occurrences,  I have  thought  it 
worth  while  to  forestall  a possible  objection. 

lxxiv  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS . 

The  only  instance  that  I can  find,  during  the  witch-epoch,  of  definite 
first-hand  evidence  for  a marvel  of  a type  which  our  present  knowledge  of .. 
abnormal  bodily  and  mental  states  will  not  explain,  is,  as  it  happens;  not 
part  of  the  history  of  so-called  magic,  but  is  connected  with  the 
extraordinary  epidemic  of  religious  excitement  which  took  place  in  the 
Cevennes  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.  As  the  instance  seems  to  be 
a solitary  one,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  give  the  facts.  The  Thedtre  Sacrt 
des  Cevennes  (London,  1707)  contains  the  depositions  of  two  witnesses 
to  the  fact  that  they  saw  a man  named  Clary  stand  for  many  minutes, 
totally  uninjured,  in  the  mid£fc‘  of  a huge  fire  of  blazing  wood ; and  that 
they  immediately  afterwards  ascertained  by  their  own  senses  that  there 
was  not  a sign  of  burning  on  him  or  his  clothes.  This  is  the  sort  of 
case  which,  if  multiplied  by  scores  or  hundreds,  and  if  nothing  were 
known  against  the  character  of  the  witnesses,  would  support  the  ^iew  that 
an  apparently  strong  evidential  case  can  be  made  out  for  phenomena — 
being  matters  of  direct  observation — which  nevertheless,  for  the  scientific 
mind  are  impossible ; and  that  therefore  the  evidential  case  for  telepathy 
presented  in  this  book  may  be  safely  neglected  (see  p.  115).  «But  the 
character  of  the  two  deponents  mentioned  is  seriously  impugned  by  a 
third  witness,  the  celebrated  Colonel  Cavallier,  whose  probity  seems  never 
to  have  been  doubted  even  by  those  who  most  questioned  his  good  sense.1 
( Nouveaux  Memoires  pour  Servirct  V Histoire  des  Trois  Camiswrs,  London, 
1708,  pp.  6-9.)  He  describes  them  as  worthless  impostors,  as  to  whom 
it  was  easy  to  see  “ qu*  il  n’y  a pas  beaucoup  a compter  sur  ce  qu’  ils  disent, 
et  encore  moins  sur  ce  qu4 5 * * 8  ils  sont.”  See  also  the  account  given  of  them 
by  Dr.  Hutchinson,  a by  no  means  over- sceptical  writer,  who  seems  to  have 
had  the  moans  of  ascertaining  Cavallier’s  opinions  when  the  latter  was  in 
England.  (A  Short  View  of  the  Pretended  Spirit  of  Prophecy , London, 
1708,  pp.  9,  16.  See  also  A Preservative  against  the  False  Prophets  of  the 
7rirae#,  by  Mark  Vernons,  London,  1708,  p.  72;  and  Claims  Prophetica, 
London,  1707,  pp.  8,  9.)  As  regards  Colonel  Cavallier  himself,  we  have  to 
note  (1)  that  in  the  history  of  the  Cevennes  disturbances,  attriButed  to 
him  and  probably  drawn  up  from  recollections  of  his  conversations,  not  a 
word  on  the  subject  occurs ; and  that  the  only  direct  testimony  to  the 
occurfence  that  we  have  from  him,  as  far  as  I can  discover,  is  the  phrase, 
u Cela  est  vrai,”  applied  to  the  fire  of  Clary,  “ et  d’autres  choses  de  cette 
nature  ” (Melho&es  pour  Servir,  &c,  p.  10)  ;2  (2)  that  even  supposing  he  was 
an  eye-witness,  it  nowhere  appears  that  he  examined  Clary  after  the  ordeal, 
and  ascertained  that  his  clothes  and  hair  were  unsigned ; and,  as  Hutchinson 
remarks,  the  fire  may  have  been  “ a fire  of  straw,  that  is  no  sooner  kindled 
but  it  is  out  again.”  And  in  fact,  in  the  Histoire  des  Troubles  des  Cevennes, 
by  A.  Court  (Villefranche,  1760),  p.  442,  the  author  professes’  to  have 
found,  from  information  gathered  at  the  spot,  that  “ (1)  Clary  ne  s^ourna 

4 1 See,  for  instance,  the  Histoire  des  CamnanU  (London,  1754),  p.  333,  note.  The 

view  of  Cavallier  there  cited  from  De  Brueys’  Histoire  du  Fanatisme  (Utrecht,  1737), 

need  not  be  discounted  because  in  the  same  work  he  is  called  a sciUrot ; that  feeing 

l)e  Brueys*  generic  term  for  a Camisard  leader. 

8 No  further  testimony  ot  Cavaiher's  on  the  subject  seems  to  have  been  known  to  the 
author  of  the  Examen  du  Tht&tre  Sawt  dee  Cevennes  (London,  1708,  p.  34).  He  is  not , 
even  stated  to  have  been  present,  except  in  the  depositions  of  the  discredited  witnesses ; 
but  on  this  point  they  may  probably  be  trusted,  as  falsehood  would  have  been  at  once 
exposed. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

lxxv 

pas  dana  le  feu  ; (2)  11  y entra  deux  fois ; (3)  it  se  brdla  au  col  du  bras,  et 
fut  oblige  d s’arreter  au  lieu  de  Pierredon,  pour  se.fair  panser.” 

I confine  myself  to  this  single  case,  which  bears  directly  on  my 
discussion  of  evidence  in  Chapter  IV. ; but  since  no  topic  has  been  a 
greater  favourite  in  the  modem  literature  of  the  “supernatural  ” than  the 
phenomena  of  the  Cevennes,  it  may  be  useful  to  add  that  probably  no 
chapter  of  history  offers  equal  facilities  for  studying  the  natural  genesis 
of  modern  miracles. 

Page  120,  line  3 of  note.  For  Her  land  read  Bertrand. 

Page  130,  line  7.  For  cases  read  instances . 

* Page  140,  last  sentence  of  note.  Since  this  was  written,  a few  other 
instances  have  been  included  where  it  is  possible,  but  not  certain,  that  the 
12  hours!  limit  was  exceeded.  It  was  exceeded  in  case  138,  and  possibly 
in  case  lo5. 

Page  145,  last  sentence.  Since  this  was  printed,  some  further  cases 
have  been  received  of  considerable  exaggeration  of  the  closeness  of  a coin- 
cidence,#which  should  be  added  to  the  examples  mentioned  in  the  note. 

(1)  An  informant  sent  us  a sworn  affidavit  to  the  effect  that,  in  January, 
1852,  when  returning  from  China  onboard  the  “ Pilot,”  and  near  the  Cape, 
he  had  a vision  of  his  sister,  and  learnt  on  his  arrival  in  England  that  she 
had  died  “ about  the  time  ” of  the  vision.  We  find,  from  an  examination 
of  various  newspapers,  that  the  “ Pilot  ” was  in  the  East  Indies  up  to 
December,  1851,  and  was  at  Devonport  in  March,  1852;  so  that  she  may 
well  have  been  near  the  Cape  in  January,  1852.  But  we  find  from  the 
Register  of  Deaths  that  the  sister  died  on  June  29,  1851,  at  which  date, 
as  we  learn  from  the  Admiralty,  the  “ Pilot  ” was  at  Whampoa*  It  is  not 
likely  that  our  informant  was  mistaken  as  to  his  own  experience  having 
taken  place  on  the  return  voyage,  and  shortly  before  his  arrival  in  England. 
What  happened,  we  may  surmise,  is  that  he  was  told,  when  he  arrived 
after  a long  absence,  that  his  sister  had,  lately  died ; and  that  on  the 
strength  of  his  vision,  he  assumed  or  gradually  came  to  imagine,  that 
the  death  had  happened  only  several  weeks  before,  instead  of  several 
months. 

(2)  A gentleman  gave  us  a striking  account  of  a phantasm  of  a friend, 
therein  the. Transvaal  war,  who  appeared  in  his  room  eajdy^cme  morning, 
an'd  announced  that  he  had  been  shot  through  the  right  lung.  Such  a 
hallucination  being  absolutely  unique  in  our  informant's  experience,  he 
noted  the  time — 4.10  a.m. — by  a clock  on  the  mantelpiece,  and  waited 
feverishly  during  the  hours  that  elapsed  before  he  could  see  a newspaper 
at  his  club.  He  found  no  news  of  the  war.  In  the  course  of  the  day  he 
mentioned  his  vision  and  his  disquietude  to  an  acquaintance  at  the  club. 
The  next  morning  he  saw,  in  the  first  paper  that  he  took  up,  the  announce* 
ment  that  his  friend  had  been  killed — shot  through  the  right  lung,  as 
it  afterwards  proved — at  an  hour  (as  he  calculated)  closely  coincident  with 
that  of  his  vision.  We  found,  however,  from  the  London  Gazette,  that 
the  battle  in  which  this  officer  was  killed  did  not  begin  till  9.30  a>m. ; and 

► the  death  took  place  at  least  two  hours  later,  which  would  be  between  9 
and  10  a.m.  in  England.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  vision  must  Have preceded 
the  death  by  some  hours,  j f they  occurred  on  the  seme  day . But  an  examin- 

lxxvi 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

ation  of  the  newspapers  makes  it  seem  very  likely  that  the  vision  fell  on 
the  day  after  the  death.  The  battle  took  place  on  Friday,  and  Was 
announced  in  the  Saturday  papers ; but  the  death  was  not  announced  in 
the  morning  papers  till  Monday,  and  the  vision  which  is  represented  as 
having  occurred  on  the  day  next  before  the  announcement  of  the  deatk 
may  more  easily  be  supposed  to  have  occurred  on  the  second  day  than  oh 
the  third  day  before — i.e.,  on  the  Saturday,  not  the  Friday  morning. 
As  to  the  statement  that  the  papers  contained  no  war-news  on  the 
morning  of  the  vision,  that  #a  point  on  which  our  informant’s  memory 
might  easily  get  wrong,  as  they  did  not  contain  what  he  searohed  them  for. 

(?)  An  account  signed  by  three  witnesses  of  unimpeachable  character, 
and  purporting  to  be  a statement  made  to  them  on  Sept.  7,  1859,  by  T 
Crowley,  of  Dinish  Island,  records  a hallucination  which  he  e^erienced 
on  Saturday,  Aug.  13,  and  afterwards  connected  with  the  unexpected 
death  of  his  daughter,  Ellen,  which  took  place  at  a distance  a few  hours 
earlier.  This  daughter  had  been  an  inmate  of  a Dfcaf  and  Dumb 
Asylum.  From  the  secretary  of  this  institution  we  learnt  #that  the 
day  of  her  dea  n was  Sunday,  July  24,  1859;  and  we  procured  a 
certificate  of  her  burial  on  the  following  day.  It  is  probable  that 
those  who  took  down  the  statement  got  an  idea  that  the  coincidence  was  a 
close  one,  and  unconsciously  forced  the  wrong  date  on  an  uneducated  witness. 

(4)  Two  letters  have  been  handed  to  us,  written  by  a husband  to  his 
wife  on  Nov.  7 and  Dec.  28,  1874.  The  first  letter  describes  an  over- 
powering impression  of  calamity  at  home  which  the  writer  experienced, 
during  a voyage,  on  Friday,  Nov.  6,  and  which  he  immediately  mentioned 
to  a friend,  who  has  given  us  full  written  confirmation  of  the  fact.  In 
that  week  the  writer  of  the  letters  lost  a child,  who  died,  as  we  find 
from  the  Register  of  Deaths,  on  Tuesday,  Nov.  3.  Yet  the  second 
letter,  written  after  the  news  of  the  death  had  reached  the  father, 
says,  “ It  is  very  strange,  but  the  very  time — day  and  hour — of  our  boy’s 
death,  I could  not  sleep,”  and  then  follows  another  account  of  the.  very 
experience  which  was  before  described  (and  undoubtedly  correctly)  as 
having  happened  on  the  night  of  Nov.  6,  three  days  after  the  death. 

(3)  A lady,  who  did  not  remember  ever  to  have  dreamt  of  death  on' 
any  other  oq£S«ion,  told  us  that  one  night,  in  January,  1881,  she  had  a 
remarkably  vivid  dream  of  the  death  of  a relative  whom  she  did  not  know 
to  be  ill  or  likely  to  die  j and  that  on  coming  down  in  the  morning  she 
found  the  death  announced  in  the  Times  as  having  occurred  on  the  previous 
day.  She  did  not  (for  family  reasons)  communicate  the  name  of  the 
i person  who  died.  But  it  is  not  very  common  for  deaths  to  appear  in  the 
Times  on  the  day  after  that  on  which  they  occurred.  A list  was 
accordingly  made  out  of  all  the  persons,  corresponding  with  her  description 
m sex  and  age,  whose  deaths  were  so  immediately  announced  during  that 
month  ; and  the  list,  being  submitted  to  her,  her  relative’s  name  proved 
not  to  be  in  it.  The  death  must  therefore  have  preceded  the  dream  bv 
more  than  24  hours.  1 

(6)  Another  informant  gives  an  account  of  an  interesting  experience* 
swd  to  have  occurred  on  the  night  of  Sunday,  May  6,  1866,  and  remark- 
ably coinciding  with  the  death  of  the  narrator’s  brother,  lost  with  the 

additions  and  corrections . 

hexvii 

♦ u General  Grant.”  The  fate  of  this  ship  was  not  known  till  January,  1868, 
when  the  Melbourne  Argus  published  a “ narrative  of  the  survivors.” 
From  this  account  we  find  that  the  wreck  occurred  on  the  night  of  Sunday 
the  13th,  and  that  the  death  in  question  probably  occurred  on  the  morning 
of  the  14th  ; which,  allowing  for  longitude,  would  closely  correspond  with 
the  time  of  the  experience  in  England,  supposing  that  our  informant's 
date  was  wrong  by  a week.  This  may  very  likely’ have  been  the  case,  as, 
he  explains  that  all  he  is  clear  about  is  that  the  day  was  a Sunday  in  May 
which  he  spent  at  a particular  place.  But  unfortunately  he  had  said  in  a 
former  letter  that  the  date  May  6 was  imprtssed  on  his  mind  by  its  being 
his  own  birthday ; and  that  statement  cannot,  of  course,  be  ignored ; 
although  he  makes  it  tolerably  clear  that  he  really  only  inferred  long 
afterwards  that  that  was  the  day,  because  he  knew  for  certain  that  on  his 
birthday  fee  was  at  the  place  where  the  experience  occurred. 

Page  148,  line  7 from  bottom.  For  “ to  whom  the  percipient  has 
mentioned  his  experience  before  the  news*  of  the  corresponding  event  is 
known,”  read  “ who  has  been  informed  of  the  experience  of  the  percipient 
while  the>  latter  was  still  unaware  of  the  corresponding  event  ” ; and  in 
the  next  line  omit  “ afterwards.” 

Pages  149-151.  The  following  instructive  instance  of  the  difference 
between  first-hand  and  second-hand  evidence  shows  how  easily  a spurious 
telepathic  narrative  may  grow  up.  We  received  a second-hand  account 
to  the  effect  that  a friend  of  our  informant,  as  she  was  returning  from  a 
walk,  saw  her  sister  on  the  doorstep  just  entering  the  house,  entered 
herself  a few  moments  after,  was  told  by  the  servant  that  her  sister 
had  not  been  out,  went  upstairs,  and  found  her  dying  from  a sudden  fitr 
The  first-hand  account,  which  had.  been  given  to  us  some  years  before,  con- 
tains everyone  of  these  facts,  (modifying  one  of  them  by  the  statement 
that  the  sister  died  “ within  12  hours  ” after,)  but  adds  just  two  more. 
“ I,  being  very  blind , thought 1 I saw  her  before  me.”  “ I probably  mistook 
the  door,  there  being  two  on  the  same  doorstep  as  mine.”  How  completely 
the  aspebt  of  the  case  is  altered  by  these  few  additional  words,  appears  in 
the  most  natural  way  from  the  sentences  that  follow.  The  second-hand 
account  says,  " She  looked  upon  this  as  an  apparition , sent  to  her  to  break 
«the  sudden  shock,”  &c.  The  first-hand  account  says,  “ I never  imagined 
I had  really  seen  an  apparition  ; but  it  certainly  was  a merciful  mistake, 
as  it  in  a certain  sense  broke  the  shock  to  me,”  &c.  **** 

. Page  154,  second  paragraph.  The  particular  form  of  exaggeration 
in  second-hand  evidence,  which  represents  what  was  really  only  a dream 
as  that  far  rarer  and  more  striking  phenomenon — a waking  hallucination — 
v is  exemplified  in  connection  with  one  of  the  narratives  quoted  later,  No. 
429.  The  first-hand  account,  it  will  be  seen,  describes  the  experience 
sinjply  as  a dream  ; Aubrey  (. Miscellanies , London,  1696,  p.  60)  recounts 
it  as  a case  of  apparition . 

Page  158,  line  3.  “No  cases  are  given  which  are  not  first-hand.” 
Oases  256  and  257  are  exceptions ; but  see  Yol.  II.,  p.  83. 

Page  167,  line  1 of  note.  “The  suppressed  names  have  in  all  cases 
•been  given  to  us  in  confidence.”  In  the  Supplement  there  are  seven 

1 Thought  is  italicised  in  the  original : all  the  other  italics  are  mine. 

Ixxviii  ' ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS V 

exceptions  to  this  rule.  Five  of  them  are  cases  which  have  been  previously 
published  on  apparently  reliable  authority,  but  which  the  death  of  the 
person  responsible  for  them  has  prevented  us  from  tracing  to  their  source ; 
the  sixth  is  a MS.  case  of  the  same  description  ; and  in  the  seventh,  our 
informant,  though  perfectly  remembering  the  circumstances  of  his  con- 
nection with  the  original  witness,  cannot  recall  his  name.  In  a very  fev? 
other  cases  the  name  of  the  agent  has  not  been  learnt. 

Page  198.  After  the  small  print,  add: — We  have  verified  the  date 
of  the  death  in  two  local  newspapers.  The  day  was  a Sunday,  which  is  in 
accordance  with  the  evidence. 

Page  206,  note.  Since  this  note  was  printed,  some  independent  corro- 
boration has  been  obtained.  An  advertisement  was  inserted  for  us  in 
the  Daily  Picayune , the  leading  New  Orleans  newspaper,  offering  a sma^ 
reward  for  definite  information  as  to  the  fatal  accident  on  the  “ Alice.  ” 
For  some  months  no  information  was  given;  but  on  Jan.  6,  1886,  the 
editor  wrote  to  us  as  follows: — “To-day  a party  called’ At  the  Picayune 
office,  and  made  the  following  statement : 1 My  name  is  J.  L.  HalL  I was. 
a striker  on  tin.  steamer  “ Red  River  ” at  the  time  she  ran  into  the 
“ Alice,”  John  Collyer,  master,  at  a point  about  20  miles  above  New 
Orleans.  The  accident  occurred  at  10  o’clock  at  night,  in  January,  1856, 
The  day  of  the  month  1 do  not  remember.  The  “ Red  River  ” was  bound 
up  stream,  and  the  “ Alice  ” bound  down.  The  collision  broke  the 
starboard  engine  of  the  “ Alice  ” and  stove  in  her  upper  guards  and  boiler 
deck.  As  soon  as  possible  the  “ Red  River  ” went  to  the  assistance  of 
the  “ Alice,”  when  one  of  the  crew  of  the  disabled  boat  remarked  that  the 
captain  had  been  killed.  On  investigation,  Captain  Collyer  was  found 
lying  on  his  back  on  the  starboard  side  of  the  boiler  deck  of  his  boat,  with 
a severe  wound  in  the  head  and  life  extinct.  The  crew  of  the  “ Alice,” 
all  of  whom  were  negroes,  stated  that  Captain  Collyer  had  been  killed  by 
the  collision,  but  the  officers  of  the  “Red  River”  thought  otherwise,  as 
tlie  wound  in  his  (Captain  Collyer ’s)  head  appeared  to  have  bee*i  made 
before  the  two  boats  met,  and  the  blood  on  the  deck  was  coagulated. 
Probably  not  more  than  10  minutes  elapsed  from  the  time  the  collision 
took  place  until  the  body  of  Captain  Collyer  was  viewed  by  the  officers  of 
the  “ Red  River.”  After  helping  the  “ Alice  ” to  make  repairs,  the  “ Red 
River  ” proceed  on  her  voyage.  I cannot  say  positively,  but  I do  not 
think  the  killing  of  Captain  Collyer  was  ever  investigated.’  ” 1 

Page  207.  In  line  7,  “ the  next  day  ” means  the  day  following  that 
night ; but  in  line  9,  “ that  day  ” should  no  doubt  be'  “ the  next  day,”  as 
Oct.  21,  1881,  was  a Friday.  We  have  verified  the  date  of  the  death, 
Oct.  21,  1881,  in  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

Page  209,  line  4.  * West  should  be  followed,  not  preceded,  by  a comma. 

Page  214.  In  the  22nd  line  of  Mr.  Bard’s  account,  the  word  passed 
gives  a slightly  erroneous  impression ; standing  on  the  spot,  Mr.  Myers 
realised  that  come  very  near  would  be  the  more  correct  description. 

1 The  man  who  gave  this  account  doubtless  received  the  reward  of  a few  dollars 
which  had  been  placed  in  the  editor’s  hands.  In  only  one  other  instance  has  any  payment  • 
been  made  to  a witness  : in  that  case  the  evidence  had  been  spontaneously  given,  partly 
in  writing  and  partly  vied  voce } and  the  payment  was  simply  for  the  time  occupied  in 
drawing  up  a more  complete  written  statement. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS, 

lxxix 

Therefore,  on  p.  215,  line  4,  the  word  substantial  should  be  inserted  before 
accuracy . 

Page  236.  Mrs.  Barber  has  shown  to  Mr.  Podmore  the  note-book  in 
which  she  noted  the  occurrence,  and  from  which  her  letter  to  the 
Spectator  was  taken  almost  verbatim.  The  incident  was  recorded  on 
Jan.  11,  1880,  as  having  taken  place  on  Jan.  6,  She  adds  that  the 
governess  and  the  other  children  at  table  were  positive  that  she  had  not 
said  anything  about  the  dog,  and  were  as  much  astonished  as  she  was. 

Page  240.  Case  43  was  received  in  1844. 

Page  248.#  Since  case  49  was  printed,  we  have  received  the  following 
corroborative  account  from  Mrs.  Arundel : — 

“ Maniton,  Colorado. 

“ April  1st,  1886. 

“Not  being  very  well,  I was  lying  on  the  sofa  (not  asleep,  for  I had 
ray  baby  sitting,  qn  the  floor  beside  me,  playing).  Mr.  Arundel  was  away 
on  a sailing  excursion  with  some  friends,  and  I did  not  expect  his  return 
for  someedays.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I distinctly  heard  him  call  me  by 
name,  ‘Maggie/  a slight  pause  and  again  ‘ Maggie.’  The  voice  seemed  far 
off  and  yet  clear,  but  the  tone  such  as  he  would  use  if  needing  me.  The 
impression  was  so  distinct  that  I rose  and  went  out  on  to  the  porch  with 
the  thought,  ‘Can  they  possibly  have  returned  sooner  for  some  reason  V 
and  I so  fully  expected  to  see  him  there  that  I went  back  into  the  house 
with  a feeling  of  disappointment  and  some  anxiety,  too,  feeling  so  sure  I 
had  heard  his  voice . No  one  was  in  the  house,  my  servant  being  out. 
When  my  husband  came  home  he  was  much  startled  to  find  how  exactly 
his  experience  on  that  Sunday  afternoon  corresponded  with  my  vivid 
impressions.  It  could  not  have  been  mere  coincidence.  I must  add  that  I 
mentioned  my  experience  to  Mr.  Arundel  before  he  had  spoken  to  me  of  his. 

“ I have  had  impressions  more  than  once,  but  never  a false  one.  When 
Mr.  Arundel  first  crossed  to  America  he  met  with  a severe  storm.  The 
night  thkt  the  ship  was  in  great  danger  (though  it  is  impossible  to  define 
how),  I knew  and  felt  that  it  was  so.  I mentioned  it  to  my  friends,  who 
ridiculed  the  fancy ; nevertheless,  the  time  corresponded  precisely.1 

" Marguerite  Arundel?* * 

Ppge  261,  note.  On  vivd  voce  examination  of  the  witsMbr^ses,  it  seems 
probable  that  Portugal  did  enter  into  the  impression ; but  Mrs.  Wilson, 
differing  from  her  husband,  thinks  he  knew  that  his  brothers  were  going 
there — which  certainly  commends  itself  as  the  probable  explanation  of 
that  detail.  We  had  the  door,  which  has  been  repainted,  brought  up  to 
London,  in  order  that  the  paint  might  be  carefully  removed.  The  expert 
whom  we  employed  to  do  this  told  us  that  it  was  very  improbable  that  the 
pencil  marks  would  have  resisted  the  action  of  turpentine  and  the  friction 
of  the  repainting ; and  nothing  relating  to  the  incident  was  discovered. 

Page  263,  line  29.  Omit  that. 

Page  279,  line  17  from  bottom.  For  Inquiry  read  Inquiries , 

Page  292.  To  case  86  add  : — 

/ An  impression  of  this  sort,  occurring  at  what  may  naturally  have  been  a time  of 
anxiety,  has  no  evidential  weight.  The  distinctly  auditory  character  of  the  more  recent 
experience  places  it  in  quite  a different  category. 

lxxx 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTION'S . 

Another  letter  of  Mr.  Howell’s  explains  that  the  illness  consisted  in 
painful  spasms,  from  which  he  had  occasionally  suffered,  and  that  Mr. 
Howlands  “ held  him  quiet.”  It  is  not  clear  that  Mr.  Rowlands’  presence 
had  anything  to  do  with  his  recovery,  though  it  was  a great  support  to 
him.  But  as  the  illness  and  pain  seem  to  have  been  extremely  sudden, 
the  coincidence  is  striking. 

Page  303.  The  cases  in  the  Additional  Chapter  necessitate  a slight 
alteration  of  the  figures.  In  line  6,  for  147  read  149  ; and  in  line  8,  for 
78  read  79. 

Page  304,  bottom.  Some  further  returns,  received  since  this  page  was 
printed,  leave  unaltered  the  proportion  stated. 

Page  307,  line  1 of  second  note.  Omit  cases  138  and  420,  in  one  of 
which  it  appears  that  the  cleatli  and  dream  were  separated  by  rather  more 
than  12  hours,  and  in  the  other  that  the  occurrence  took  plsSie  before 
1874  ; and  add  702.  Owing  to  this  change,  24  must  be  substituted  for 
25  in  several  places  on  pp.  307  and  309. 

Page  309.  In  line  12,  for  105  read  107.  In  line  13,  for  70  jead  72  ; 
in  one  of  the  cases  added,  the  dream  is  alleged  to  have  been  at  once 
recorded  in  writing,  as  well  as  described.  In  line  17,  for  45  read  46,  and  for 
70  read  72.  In  line  22,  for  1 was  read  2 were . In  line  24,  for  22  read  21. 

Page  313,  note.  The  opening  words,  as  placed,  have  no  meaning.  The 
sentence  printed  last  should  be  the  first. 

Page  326,  line  26,  and  page  327,  line  9.  The  first  initial  should  be  T. 
In  conversation,  Mr.  Hoare  stated  that  he  is  positive  of  having  had  a 
positive  pain  at  the  back  of  his  head,  as  if  from  a blow,  on  the  day 
following  this  experience. 

Page  329,  lines  3 and  2 from  bottom.  For  Mount  Pleasant , Co * 
Dublin , read  Mount  Pleasant  Square , Dublin . 

Page  331,  line  7 from  bottom.  For  Hampstead  read  Hempstead . 

Page  337,  line  13  from  bottom.  For  ladian  read  Indicm. 

Page  350,  line  9 from  bottom.  For  we  read  /. 

Page  351,  case  119.  The  narrator  believes  that  the  death  took  place  in 
Glasgow,  where  the  young  man  certainly  lived ; but  no  entry  of  it  can 
be  discovere^J^1  the  Register  for  that  place,  and  it  is  possible  .that 
he  died  away  from  home. 

Page  357,  line  6 from  bottom.  Feature  should  be  in  Roman  type. 

Page  367,  note.  Visions  of  spectral  funerals  are  mentioned  by  W. 
Howells,  Cambrian  Superstitions , pp.  54-6,  64  ; and  by  Wirt  Sikes,  British 
Goblins , pp.  231-2.  An  apparently  telepathic  instance,  recorded  in  a 
collection  of  Border  legends  made  by  a Mr.  Wilkie,  may  be  found  in  W. 
Henderson’s  Folklore  of  the  Northern  Counties  of  England  and  the 
Borders,  p.  29. 

Page  376,  line  16.  “ Considering  that  our  night  is  their  day,”  <fcc. 

The  narrator  has  reckoned  the  difference  of  time  the  wrong  way.  The 
time  in  England  which  corresponded  with  the  accident  was  the  early 
morning  of  Jan.  9;  and  the  dream  which  took  place  on  the  night  ofc 
Jan.  9 must  have  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12  hours. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  kxxi 

Page  $83.  Since  case  143  was  printed*  Mrs.  Hobbs  (writing  from 
London,  Ontario,  on  Feb.  1,  1886,)  has  sent  us  a description  of  the  savage 
attack  on  her  husband,  winch  took  place,  she  says,  about  7 or  8 p.m.  on 
April  12,  1845. 

Page  394,  note.  It  is  true  that  Isaac  Walton’s  account  represents 
Dr,  Donne  as  declaring  that  he  was  certainly  awake ; but  Walton  is  a 
third-hand  witness.  See  p.  154,  second  paragraph,  and  the  above 
remarks  thereon. 

Page  408,  line  7 from  bottom,  and  p.  4^0,  line  19,  for  Mrs.  read  Miss . 

Asked  by*  her  daughter  to  say  “ whether  she  remembered  anything 
particular  taking  place  at  home  ” on  the  night  of  the  death,  Mrs.  Thompson 
gives  the  following  corroboration  : — 

“ 82,  Talbot  Street,  Moss-side,  Manchester. 

“June  30,  1886. 

“ I remember  distinctly  my  daughter  coming  to  my  room  several  times 
asking  me  if  I had  called  her,  or  if  I knew  who  had  called  her,  the  night 
during  wjiich  my  nephew,  Harry  Suddaby,  died. 

Mary  Thompson.” 

Page  411,  line  26.  For  Tutahihika  read  Tutatihika. 

Page  416,  first  line  of  case  161.  There  should  be  a blank  after 
Jam/tiary . The  narrator  afterwards  stated  that  she  thought  the  death 
“must  have  been  on  or  about  the  6th  of  January,  1870;  ” and  we  find 
from  the  Indian  Army  List , and  from  the  Times  obituary,  that  it  took 
place  on  that  day,  at  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.  She  tells  us  that  she  has  ex- 
perienced in  her  life  only  one  other  hallucination,  which  occurred  in  close 
connection  with  a bereavement  (see  p.  510). 

Page  419,  line  3 from  bottom.  By  “June  22nd,”  the  narrator 
undoubtedly  meant  “on  the  night  of  June  22-23,”  as  he  believes  the 
coincidence  to  have  been  exact. 

Page*  425,  case  168.  The  narrator  states  that  she  has  never 
experienced  a hallucination  of  vision  on  any  other  occasion. 

Page  427,  case  169.  The  narrator  states  that  she  has  never 
experienced  a hallucination  of  vision  on  any  other  occasion. 

Page  450,  line  6 from  bottom.  In  conversation,  Mr.  Clarke’s  soi$  has 
completely  Confirmed  the  account.  Mr.  Clarke  is  quite  confident  that 
Mrs.,  Palliaer  spoke  of  her  experience  as  a waking  one. 
s -Page  461,  line  15  from  bottom  of  note.  After  arms  omit  comma. 

Page  479.  Since  this  page  was  printed,  I have  received  another  instance 
of  hallucinations  voluntarily  originated.  A lady  who  has  had  a scientific 
training  tells  me  that  one  bright  June  day,  two  years  ago — when  lying  ill  in 
bed,  but  with  her  mind  especially  active — she  saw  the  gradual  formation, 
on  the  background  of  the  blind,  of  a statuesque  head,  which  then  changed 
into  another.  “ I tired  myself  calling  the  pictures  up  again  during  the 
afternoon.  They  seemed  as  clear  as  if  real,  but  after  the  first  flash  I was 
conscious  of  a mental  effort  with  regard  to  them.  Banishment  was  very 
easy ; it  only  needed  a relaxed  tension.” 

To  the  cases  mentioned  in  the  note  should  be  added  Dr.  Abercrombie’s 
description  of  a gentleman  (not  personally  known  to  him)  who  “ had  the 

' ■ / 

lxxxii 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

power  of  willing  up  spectral  figures  at  his  will,  by  directing  his  attention 
steadily  to  the  conception  of  his  own  mind ; and  this  may  either  consist 
of  a figure  or  a scene  which  he  has  seen,  or  it  may  be  a composition 
created  by  his  imagination.  But  though  he  has  the  faculty  of  producing 
the  illusion,  he  has  no  power  of  banishing  it ; and  when  he  has  called  up 
any  particular  spectral  figure  or  scene,  he  never  can  say  how  long  it  may 
continue.  The  gentleman  is  in  the  prime  of  life,  of  sound  mind,  in  good 
health,  and  engaged  in  business.  Another  of  his  family  has  been  affected 
in  the  same  manner,  though  in  a slighter  degree.”  {Inquiries  concerning 
the  Intellectual  Towers , 1838,  p.  363.) 

Pages  497-8.  Chap.  XT.  § 2.  The  compatibility  of  sensory  hallucinar 
tions,  even  of  a very  pronounced  sort,  with  sound  bodily  and  mental  health 
is  illustrated  in  the  passage  just  quoted  from  Abercrombie. 

Page  503,  lines  17,  18.  The  statement  that  hallucinations  of  the  sane 
and  healthy,  representing  non-human  objects,  seem  to  be  “ rarely  if  ever  ” 
grotesque  or  horrible,  is  rattier  too  sweeping.  An  exertion  should  at 
any  rate  be  made  for  certain  endemic  hallucinations.  (See  ybl.  II,, 
p.  189,  note.)  Line  20.  The  chandelier , having  been  included  in  the 
preceding  class,  should  not  have  been  mentioned  again. 

Page  506,  note.  For  § 4 read  § 5. 

Page  512,  line  15.  After  percipient  add  44  and  if  his  experience  was 
unshared  by  anyone  else.” 

Page  514,  first  paragraph.  Some  further  examples  of  auditory 
hallucinations  probably  due  to  expectancy  may  be  found  in  Howells’ 
Cambrian  Superstitions  (Tipton,  1831),  p.  65.  See  also  Sikes’s  British 
( roblins , p.  229. 

Page  534,  case  199.  We  learn  from  Mr.  B.  that  the  hallucination 
of  the  senses  here  described  is  the  only  one  he  has  ever  experienced. 

Page  o35,  line  12  from  bottom.  After  yarb  add  44  and  about  as  wide 
as  high.”  1 • 

Page  543.  To  case  201  add  : — We  learn  from  Mr.  J.  Wilson  Black, 
House  Surgeon  at  the  Northern  Infirmary,  Inverness,  who  has  kindly 
referred  to  the  books,  that  Archibald  Ramsay  was  admitted  to  that  insti- 6 
tution  on  Fel^i,  1875,  suffering  from  tumour  of  the  brain,  and  died  on 
March  9.  Mr.  Black  adds  : — 44  None  of  the  officials  at  present  in  the 
house  were  in  it  at  the  time  ; and  I am  consequently  unable  to  say  at  what 
hour  he  died.”  Mrs.  Bolland  has  kindly  endeavoured  to  find  out,  from  the 
Library  at  Gibraltar,  on  what  day  she  took  out  the  book  that  she  was 
reading ; but  without  success. 

Page  546,  lines  13,  14.  Mr.  Keulemans’  statement,  that  his  little 
boy  s fringe  could  not  have  grown  to  its  usual  length  in  a month,  might  be, 
questioned.  But  on  my  pointing  this  out  to  him,  he  explained  that  (being 
struck  by  the  fact  that  the  hair,  as  he  saw  it  in  his  vision,  was  just  as  he 
had  been  accustomed  to  see  it)  he  had  expressly  asked  his  mother-in-law 
what  was  the  state  of  the  child’s  hair  at  the  time  of  his  death  : and  she 
had  said  that  he  44  had.  very  little  hair— that  it  grew  straight  upright,  and* 
that  he  had  no  fringe  when  he  died.”  Mr.  Keulemans  has  no  difficulty  in 
accepting  tins  description,  as  he  has  recently  made  experiments  with  two 

additions  and  corrections . 

lxxxiii 

of  his  children,  aged  4 and  6,  with  a result  that  entirely  accords  with  it. 
The  rate  at  which  hair  grows  seems  to  differ  greatly  in  different  people. 

To  the  instances  cited  in  this  paragraph,  case  542  and  perhaps  case 
645  might  be  added.  In  line  4 of  note,  for  § 3 read  § 2. 

Page  547,  note.  To  the  case  mentioned,  add  Mr.  Wilkie’s  narrative 
referred  to  above  in  connection  with  p.  367.  Other  possible  examples 
of  the  bizarre  investiture  of  a telepathic  impression  may  be  found  in 
.Kelly’s  Curiosities  of  Indo-European  Traditions  and  Folk-lore , p.  104;  in 
G.  Waldron’s  Description  of  the  Isle  of  Man , pp.  69-70, — a case  to  which 
we  have  a close  parallel  on  good,  but  not  first-hand,  authority.  See  also 
Paul  Sebillot’s  Traditions  de  la  Haute  Bretagne , Yol.  I.,  pp.  265-9.  The 
percipient’s  free  construction  of  his  hallucination,  and  the  general  argument 
of  Chap.  XII.,  §§  5 and  7,  may  suggest  themselves  again  in  respect  of 
certain  experiences  which  could  not  be  included  in  the  evidential  case  for 
telepathy,  inasmuch  as  the  phantasm  differed  in  some  noticeable  point  from 
the  person  who,  yrere  its  source  telepathic,  would  be  the  “ agent.”  Thus 
Mr.  Sadlier  Stoney,  J.P.,  of  Ballyknockane,  Ballymackey,  Nenagh,  tells 
us  that  ©arly  one  summer  morning  he  was  startled  by  the  apparition  of  a 
female  figure  with  a white  handkerchief  in  her  hand,  who  approached  him, 
fixed  her  eyes  on  him,  shook  the  white  handkerchief,  and  then  suddenly 
disappeared.  He  had  time  to  tell  two  persons  of  this  experience,  before 
receiving  the  news  that  an  aunt,  whose  thoughts  for  a special  reason  were 
likely  to  turn  to  him  at  the  last,  had  died  about  two  hours  after  the  occur- 
rence of  his  vision.  He  has  had  no  other  hallucination  in  his  life.  But  the 
figure  bore  no  resemblance  to  his  aunt  as  he  knew  her,  and  was  that  of  a 
much  younger  person.  Another  informant,  writing  in  March,  1884,  told 
us  thaarwhen  nursing  a little  boy  on  the  night  of  April  10th,  1883,  she  had 
a distinct  waking  vision  of  a female  figure — coincidently  as  it  proved  (and 
we  have  verified  the  date  independently)  with  the  unexpected  death  of  a 
female  relative  of  the  child  who  was  much  devoted  to  him.  But  the 
figure  seen  had  the  face  of  the  child  himself,  which  might  readily  be 
accounted  for  as  an  “ after-image  ” due  to  fatigue. 

Page  551,  line  3 of  second  note.  For  case  read  and  Mr.  Atkins's  cases; 

and  omit  Mr.  Atkins’s  name  two  lines  lower  down. 

* • 

Page  55%*  line  9 from  bottom.  For  right  read  left.  Mr.  Colt  says 
tha.t  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion  experienced  a hall33ihation  of  the 
senses.  In  conversation,  he  applied  almost  the  same  words  to  the  appear- 
ance of  tenuous  blue  mist  as  Mr.  Lowell  used  (see  Vol.  II.,  p.  xxii.)  in 
describing  his  purely  subjective  phantasms. 

Page  559,  line  8.  For  Farningham  read  Farnborough . 

; Page  570,  last  line  of  note.  After  itself  insert  comma. 

Page  573,  top.  To  the  list  of  features  common  to  hallucinations  of 
thf  purely  subjective  and  of  the  telepathic  class,  should  be  added  frag- 
mentary appearances,  as  to  which  see  Yol.  II.,  p.  33,  note,  and  cases  116, 
24^  553,  57  2 ; and  also,  in  certain  auditory  experiences,  the  response  of 
thp  phantasmal  voice  to  words  of  the  hallucinated  person — as  to  which 
see  p.  476,  and  cases  538,  547,  568,  639,  654.  To  the  sixth  note,  add 
an4  tsase  686 . 

f 2 

CHAPTER  I. 

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS:  GROUNDS  OF  CAUTION. 

* 

§ 1.  Whatever  the  advances  of  science  may  do  for  the  universe, 
there  is  one  thing  that  they  have  never  yet  done  and  show  no  prospect 
of  doing — namely,  to  make  it  less  marvellous.  Face  to  face  with  the 
facts  of  Nature,  the  wondennent  of  the  modem  chemist,  physicist, 
zoologist,  is  far  wider  and  deeper  than  that  of  the  savage  or  the  child ; 
far  wider  and  deeper  even  than  that  of  the  early  workers  in  the  scientific 
field.  True  it  is  that  science  explains ; if  it  did  not  it  would  be 
worthless.  But  scientific  explanation  means  only  the  reference  of  more 
and  more  facts  to  immutable  laws ; and,  as  discovery  advances  in 
every  department,  the  orderly  marvel  of  the  comprehensive  laws 
merely  takes  the  place  of  the  disorderly  marvel  of  arbitrary  occur- 
rences. The  mystery  is  pushed  back,  so  to  speak,  from  facts  in 
isolation  to  facts  in  the  aggregate ; but  at  every  stage  of  the  process 
the  mystery  itself  gathers  new  force  and  impressiveness. 

What,  then,  is  the  specific  relation  of  the  man  of  science  to  the 
phenomena  which  he  observes  ? His  explanation  of  them  does  not  lead 
him  to  marvel  at  them  less  than  the  uneducated  person : whaf  does 
it  lead  him  to  do  for  them  that  the  uneducated  person 
cannot  do  ? “ To  predict  them  with  certainty,’1  it  will  no  doubt  lbe 
replied;  “which  further  implies,  in  cases  where  the  conditions  are 
within  his  control,  to  produce  them  at  will.”  But  it  is  important  to 
observe  that  this  power  of  prediction,  though  constantly  proclaimed 
as  the  authoritative  test  of  scientific  achievement,  is  very  far' 
indeed  from  being  an  accurate  one.  For  it  is  a test  which  is  only  ful- 
filled with  anything  like  completeness  by  a small  group  of  sciences — > 
those  which  deal  with  inorganic  nature.  The  physicist  can  pro- 
claim with  confidence  that  gravitation,  and  heat,  and  electricity 
(as  long  as  they  act  at  all)  will  continue  to  act  as  they. do  now; 
every  discovery  that  the  chemist  makes  about  a substance  is  a 

2 

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS  : 

[ CHAP. 

prophecy  as  to  the  behaviour  of  that  class  of  substance  for 
ever.  But  as  soon  as  vital  organisms  appear  on  the  scene,  there 
is  a change.  Not  only  do  the  complexities  of  structure  and  process, 
and  the  mutual  reactions  of  the  parts  and  the  whole,  elude  all  exact 
quantitative  formul® ; not  only  is  there  an  irreducible  element  of 
uncertainty  in  the  behaviour  from  moment  to  moment  of  the 
simplest  living  unit ; but  there  appear  also  developments,  and 
varieties,  and  “sports,”  Which  present  themselves,  to  us  as 
arbitrary- — which  have  just  to  be  registered,  and  cannot  be 
explained.  Not,  of  course,  that  they  are  really  arbitrary;  no 
scientifically  trained  mind  entertains  the  least  doubt  that  they  are  in 
evqry  case  the  inevitable  results  of  prior  conditions.  But  the  know- 
ledge of  the  expert  has  not  approximately  penetrated  to  the  secret 
of  those  conditions ; here,  therefore,  his  power  of  prediction  largely 
fails  him. 

This  applies  to  a great  extent  even  to  events  of  a uniform  and 
familiar  order.  Biological  science  may  predict  that  an  animal  will  be 
of  the  same  species  as  its  parents ; but  cannot  predict  its  sex.  It 
may  predict  the  general  characteristics  of  the  next  generatiorl'of  men ; 
but  not  the  special  attributes  of  a single  individual.  But  its  power 
of  forecast  is  limited  in  a far  more  striking  way — by  the  perpetual 
modification  of  the  very  material  with  which  it  has  to  deal.  It  is  able 
to  predict  that,  given  such  and  such  variations,  natural  selection  will 
foster  and  increase  them ; that  given  such  and  such  organic  taints, 
heredity  will  transmit  them : but  it  is  powerless  to  say  what  the  next 
spontaneous  variation,  or  the  next  development  of  heredity  will  be. 
It  is  at  work,  not  on  steadfast  substances  with  immutable  qualities, 
like  those  of  the  inorganic  world ; but  on  substances  whose  very0 
nature  is  to  oteange.  The  evolution  of  animal  existence,  from  proto- 
plasm upwards,  involves  ever  fresh  elaborations  in  the  composition  of 
the  vital  tissues.  Science  traces  the  issue  of  these  changes,  and  learns 
even  to  some  extent  to  foresee  and  so  to  guide  their  course ; it  can 
thus  lay  down  laws  of  scientific  breeding,  laws  of  medicine  and 
hygiene.  But  the  unconquerable  spontaneity  of  the  organic  world  is 
for  ever  setting  previous  generalisations  at  defiance ; in  great  things 
and  small,  from  the  production  of  a new  type  of  national  physique  to 
the  production  of  a new  variety  of  tulip,  it  is  ever  presenting  fresh 
developments,  whose  necessity  no  one  could  divine,  and  of  which  no 
one  could  say  aught  till  they  were  actually  there.  And  so,  though 
science  follows  closely  after,  and  keeps  up  the  game  with  spirit,  its 

1-1 

GROUNDS  OF  CAUTION. 

3 

«y- 

position  in  its  Wonderland  is  always  tather  like  that  of  Alice  in 
hers,  when  the  croquet-hoops  consisted  of  soldiers  who  moved  as 
often  as  they  chose.  The  game  is  one  on  which  it  will  never  be 
safe  to  bet  for  very  far  ahead ; and  it  is  one  which  wilf"  certainly 
never  end. 

And  if  this  is  true  of  life  in  its  'physical  manifestations,  it  is 
certainly  not  less  true  of  its  mental  manifestations.  It  is  to  the 
latter,  indeed,  that  we  naturally  turn  for  the  highest  examples  of 
mobility,  and  the  most  marked  exhibitions  of  the  unexpected.  An 
Athenian  of  Solon’s  time,  speculating  on  “ the  coming  race,”  might 
well  have  predicted  for  his  countrymen  the  physical  prowess  that  won 
Marathon,  but  not  the  peculiar  intellectual  vitality  that  culminated 
in  the  theatre  of  Dionysus.  At  the  present  moment,  it.  is  safer  to 
prophesy  that  the  next  generation  in  Germany  will  include  a good  many 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  short-sighted  persons  than  that  it  will  include 
a Beethoven.  Nor  will  it  surprise  us  to  find  the  “ sports  ” and 
uncertainties  of  vital  development  most  conspicuous  on  the  psychical 
side,  if  we  remember  the  nature  of  their  physical  basis.  For  mental 
facts  are  indissolubly  linked  with  the  very  class  of  material  facts 
that  science  can  least  penetrate — with  the  most  complex  sort  of 
changes  occurring  in  the  most  subtly-woven  sort  of  matter — the 
molecular  activities  of  brain-tissue. 

§ 2.  There  exists,  then,  a large  department  of  natural  events 
where  the  test  of  prediction  can  be  applied  only  in  a restricted  way. 
Whether  the  events  be  near  or  distant — whether  the  question  be  of 
intellectual  developments  a thousand  years  hence,  or  of  the  success  of  a 
“thought-transference”  experiment  in  the  next  five  minutes — there  is 
here  no  voice  that  can  speak  with  absolute  ahthority.  ’The  expert  gets 
his  cosmic  prophecies  accepted  by  pointing  to  the  perpetual  fulfilment 
of  his  minor  predictions  in  the  laboratory ; or  he  refutes  adverse 
theories  by  showing  that  they  conflict  with  facts  which  he  can  at  any 
moment  render  patent.  But  as  to  the  implications  and  possibilities 
of  life — the  constitution  and  faculties  of  man — he  will  do  well  to 
predict  and  refute  with  caution ; for  here  he  may  fail  even  to  guesp 
the  relation  of  what  will  be  to  what  is.  If  his  function  as  a prophet 
is  not  wholly  abrogated,  he  is  a prophet  ever  liable  to  correction  He 
is  obliged  to  deal  largely  in  likelihoods  and  tendencies ; and  (if  I may 
venture  on  a prophecy  which  is  perhaps  as  fallible  as  the  rest)  the 
interest  in  the  laws  that  he  is  able  to  lay  down  will  never 

B 2- 

4 

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS: 

[chap. 

supersede  the  interest  hi  the  exceptions  to  those  laws. 
Indeed  it  is  in  emphasising  exceptions  that  his  own  rSle  will 
largely  consist.  And  above  all  must  he  beware  of  setting 
up  any  arbitrary  “ scientific  frontier  ” between  the  part  of  Nature 
‘ that  he  knows  and  the  part  that  he  does  not  know.  He  can  trace 
the  great  flood  of  evolution  to  the  point  at  which  he  stands ; but  a 
little  beyond  him  it  loses  itselMn  the  darkness ; and  though  he  may 
realise  its  general  force  and  direction,  and  roughly  surmise* the  mode 
in  which  its  bed  will  be  shaped,  he  can  but  dimly  picture  the  scenes 
through  which  it  will  flow. 

But  if  the  science  of  life  cannot  be  final,  there  is  no  reason*why  it 
should  not  be  accurate  and  coherent.  And  if  the  scope  of  definite 
scientific  comprehension  is  here  specially  restricted,  and  the  unex- 
pected is  specially  certain  to  occur,  that  is  no  reason  for  abating  one 
jot.  of  care  in  the  actual  work  that  it  remains  possible  to  do — the 
work  of  sifting  and  marshalling  evidence,  of  estimating-  sources  of 
error,  and  of  strictly  adjusting  theories  to  facts.  On  the  contrary,  the 
necessity  for  such  care  is  only  increased.  If  incaution  may  be 
sometimes  shown  in  too  peremptorily  shutting  the  door  on  alleged 
phenomena  which  are  not  in  clear  continuity  with  established 
knowledge,  it  is  far  more  often  and  flagrantly  shown  in  the  claim  for 
their  admission.  And  it  is  undeniable  that  the  conditions  which  have 
been  briefly  described  expose  speculation  on  the  possible  developments 
of  vital  phenomena  to  peculiar  dangers  and  difficulties.  In  proportion 
as  the  expert  moderates  his  tone,  and  makes  his  forecasts  in  a tentative 
and  hypothetical  manner,  it  is  certain  that  those  who  are  not  experts 
will  wax  bold  in  assertion  and  theory.  The  part  of  the  map  that 
science  leaves  blank,  as  terra  incognita,  is  the  very  one  which 
amateur  geographers  wilF  fill  in  according  to  their  fancy,  or  on  the 
reports  of  uncritical  and  untrustworthy  explorers.  The  confidence  of 
ignorance  is  always  pretty  accurately  adjusted  to  the  confidence  of 
knowledge.  Wherever  the  expert  can  put  his  foot  down,  and  assert 
or  deny  with  assurance,  the  uninstructed  instinctively  bow  to  him.  He 
fearlessly  asserts,  for  instance,  that  the  law  of  the  conservation  of 
energy  cannot  be  broken ; the  world  believes  him,  and  the  inventors 
of  perpetual-motion-machines  gradually  die  off.  But  suppose  the 
question  is  of  possible  relations  of  human  beings  to  inanimate 
things  or  to  one  another,  new  modes  of  influence,  new  forms 
of  sensitiveness.  Here  responsible  science  can  give  no  confident 
denial;  here,  therefore,  irresponsible  speculation  finds  its  chance. 

GROUNDS  OF  CAUTION. 

. *•] 

It  has,  no  doubt,  modified  its  language  under  the  influence  of1 
half  a century  of  brilliant  physical  discovery.  It  takes  care  to 
shelter  its  hypotheses  under  the  name  of  law : the  loosest  of  philo- 
sophers now-a-days  would  hesitate  to  appeal,  as  the  elder  Humboldt 
appealed  sixty  years  ago,  to  a “sense  of  yearning  in  the  human  soul,” 
as  -a  proof  that  the  course  of  nature  may  suffer  exceptions.1  But 
the  change  is  often  rather  in  name  than  in  fact;  the  “natural” 
lends  itself  to  free  guessing  quite  aS-' easily  as  the  “ supernatural  ” ; 
and  nowhere  in  Nature  is  this  freedom  so  unchartered  as  in 
the  domain  of  psychic  life.  Speculation  here  is  not  only 
easy ; ,it  is,  unfortunately,  also  attractive.  The  more  obscure 
phenomena  and  the  more  doubtful  assumptions  are  just  those 
on  which  the  .popular  mind  most  readily  fastens ; and  the  popular 
tongue  rejoices  in  terms  of  the  biggest  and  vaguest  connotation. 
Something  also  must  be  set  down  to  a natural  reaction.  Even 
persons  whose  interest  has  been  earnest  and  intelligent  have  found 
scientific  morale,  hard  to  preserve,  in  departments  surrendered  by  a 
long-standing  convention  to  unscientific  treatment.  Thus,  in  their 
practice,  they  have  come  to  acquiesce  in  that  surrender,  and  have 
dispensed  with  habits  of  caution  for  which  no  one  was  likely  to  give 
them  credit ; while  in  their  polemic  they  have  as  much  resented  the 
stringent  demands  for  evidence,  in  which  their  opponents  have  been 
right,  as  the  refusal  to  look  at  it  when  it  is  there,  in  which  their 
opponents  have  been  wrong. 

§ 3.  The  above  facts,  and  the  peculiar  obligations  which  they 
involve,  should  never  be  lost  sight  of  by  the  serious  student  of 
“ psychical  ” 2 phenomena.  His  path  is  one  that  eminently  craves 
Avary  walking.  On  the  one  hand,  he  finds  new  dim  vistas  of 
study  opening  out  in  an  age  whose  ideal  of  scientific  studies 
is  formed  from  the  most  highly  developed  specimens  of  theta ; 
and  the  twilight  which  has  in  every  class  of  knowledge  preceded 
the  illuminating  dawn  of  law*  is  made  doubly  dark  and  dubious 
for  him  by  the  advanced  daylight  of  scientific  conception^ 
from  which  he  peers  into  it.  He  finds,  moreover,  that  the 

1 Brief e an  eine  Freundin , p.  61. 

2 The  specific  sense  which  we  have  given  to  this  word  needs  apology.  But  we  could 
find  no  Other  convenient  term,  under  which  to  embrace  a group  of  subjects  that  lie 
on  or  outside  the  boundaries  of  recognised  science,  while  seeming  to  present  certain  points 
of  connection  among  themselves.  For  instance,  this  book  will  contain  evidences  of  the 
relation  of  telejpcUhy—itB  main  theme— both  to  mesmerism  and  to  certain  phenomena  which 
are  often,  without  adequate  evidence,  attributed  to  minds  apart  worn  material 
organism^. 

6 PRELIMINARY  REMARKS:  [chap. 

marvellous  recent  extension  of  the  area  of  the  known  through 
additions  to  its  recognised  departments  and  multiplication  of  their 
connections,  has  inevitably  and  reasonably  produced  a certain  rigidity 
of  scientific  attitude — ;an  increased  difficulty  in  breaking  loose  from 
association  and  admitting  a new  department  on  its  own  independent 
evidence.  And  on  the  other  hand,  he  finds  himself  more  or  less  in. 
contact  with  advocates  of  new  departments  who  ignore  the  weight  of 
the  presumption  against  them^-who  fail  to  see  that  it  is  from  the 
recognised  departments  that  the  standard  of  evidence  must  be  drawn, 
and  that  if  speculation  is  to  make  good  its  right  to  outrun  science,  it 
will  certainly  not  be  by  impatience  of  scientific  canons.  On  this  side 
the  position  of  the  psychical  student  is  one  in  which  the  student  of 
the  recognised  sciences  is  never  placed.  The  physicist  never  finds  his 
observations  confronted  or  confounded  with  those  of  persons  whoplaim 
familiarity  with  his  subject  while  ignoring  his  methods : he  never  sees 
his  statements  and  his  theories  classed  or  compared  with  theirs.  He  is 
marked  out  from  his  neighbours  by  the  very  factof  dealing  with  subject- 
matter  which  they  do  not  know  how  even  to  begin  to  talk  about.  The 
“ psychicist  ” is  uot  so  marked  out.  His  subject-matter  is  in  large 
measure  common  property,  of  which  the  whole  world  can  talk  as 
glibly  as  he  ; and  the  ground  which  must  be  broken  for  science,  if  at 
all,  by  the  application  of  precise  treatment  has  already  been  made 
trite  in  connection  with  quite  other  treatment. 

§ 4.  The  moral  is  one  which  the  authors  of  this  undertaking  have 
every  reason  to  lay  to  heart.  For  the  endeavour  of  this  book,  almost 
throughout,  is  to  deal  with  themes  that  are  in  a sense  familiar, 
by  the  aid,  partly,  of  improved  evidential  methods,  but  partly  also  of 
conceptions  which  have  as  yet  no  place  in  the  recognised  psychology. 
Ndt,  indeed,  that  the  reader  is  about  to  be  treated  to  any 
large  amount  of  speculation ; facts  will  be  very  much  more 
prominent  than  theories.  Still,  the  facts  to  be  adduced  carry  us 
at  least  one  step  beyond  the  accepted  boundaries.  What  they 
prove  (if  we  interpret  them  rightly)  is  the  ability  of  one  mind 
to  impress  or  to  be  impressed  by  another  mind  otherwise  than 
through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  We  call  the  owner 
of  .the  impressing  mind  the  agent,  and  the  owner  of  the  im- 
pressed mind  the  percipient ; and  we  describe  the  fact  of 
impression  shortly  by  the  term  telepathy.  We  began  by  restricting 
that  term  to  cases  where  the  distance  through  which  the  transference 

GROUNDS  OF  CAUTION. 

7 

i] 

' of  impressions  took  place  far  exceeded  the  scope  of  the  recognised 
senses ; bat  it  may  be  fairly  extended  to  all  cases  ,of  impressions 
, conveyed  Without  any  affection  of  the  percipient’s  recognised  senses, 
whatever  may  be  his  actual  distance  from  the  agent.  I of  course  do 
not  mean  by  this  merely  that  the  channel  of  communication  is  unrecog- 
nised by  the  person  impressed — as  in  the  drawing-room  pastime  where 
hidden  pins  are  found  through  indications  which  the  finder  receives  and 
acts  on  withput  any  consciousness  of  guidance.  By  the  words  “otherwise 
than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense,”  I mean  that  the  cause 
or  condition  of  the  transferred  impression  is  specifically  unknown.  It 
may  sometimes  be  necessary  or  convenient  to  conceive  it  as  some 
special  supernormal  or  supersensuous 1 faculty ; and  in  that  case 
we  are  undoubtedly  assuming  a faculty  which  is  new — or  at  any 
rate  is  new  to  science.  But  we  can  at  least  claim  that  we  take 
this  step  under  compulsion ; not  in  the  light-hearted  fashion  which 
formerly  improvised  occult  forces  and  fluids  to  account  for  the  vagaries 
of  hysteria ; or  which  in  our  own  day  has  discovered  the  dawn  of  a 
now  sense,  or  the  relic  of  some  primeval  instinct,  in  the  ordinary 
exhibitions  of  the  “ willing-game.”  Our  inference  of  ah  unrecognised 
mode  of  affection  has  nothing  in  common  with  such  inferences  as 
these  ; for  it  has  been  made  only  after  recognised  modes  have  been 
carefully  excluded. 

§ 5.  It  is  not,  however,  with  the  ultimate  conditions  of  the 
phenomena  that  we  shall  be  chiefly  occupied  ; our  first  business  is  with 
the  reality,  rather  than  with  the  rationale,  of  their  occurrence.  Tele- 
pathy as  a system  of  facts  is  what  we  have  to  study.  Discussion 
•of  the  nature  of  the  novel  faculty  in  itself,  , and  apart  from  particular 
results,  will  be  as  far  as  possible  avoided.  . That,  if  it  exists,  it  has  im- 
portant relations  to  various  very  fundamental  problems — metaphysical, 
psychological,  possibly  even  physical — we  can  scarcely  doubt.  So 
far  from  the  scientific  study  of  man  being  a region  whose  boundaries 
are  pretty  well  mapped  out,  and  which  only  requires  to  be  filled  in 
with  further  detail  by  physiologists  and  psychologists,  we  may  come 
to  perceive  that  we  are  standing  only  on  the  threshold  of  a vast  terra 
incognita * which  must  be  humbly  explored  before  we  can  even  guess 
at  its  true  extent,  or  appreciate  its  relation  to  the  more  familia? 

* 1 It  seems  impossible  to  avoid  these  terms ; yet  each  needs  to  be  guarded  from  a 

probable'  miffunderstanding.  Supernormal  is  very  liable  to  be  confounded  with 
supernatural;  while  super  sensuous  suggests  a dogmatic  denial  of  a physical  side  to 
the  effect. 

8 

PRELIMINARY  REMARKS: 

[chap. 

realms  of  knowledge.  But  such  distant  visions  had  better  not  be 
lingered  over.  Before  the  philosophical  aspects  of  the  subject  can  be 
profitably  studied,  its  position  as  a real  department  of 'knowledge 
must  be  amply  vindicated.  This  can  only  be  done  by  a wide  survey' 
of  evidence;  the  character  of  the  present  work  will  therefore  be 
mainly  evidential. 

In  demonstrating  the  reality  of  impressions  communicated 
otherwise  than  through  the  known  sensory  channels,  we  rely  on  two 
distinct  branches  of  evidence,  each  of  which  demands  a special  sort  of 
caution.  The  larger  portion  of  this  work  will  deal  with  cases  of 
spontaneous  occurrence.  Here  the  evidence  will  consist  of  records  of 
experiences  which  we  have  received  from  a variety  of  sources — for  the 
most  part  from  living  persons  more  or  less  known  to  jjs.  Narratives 
of  the  same  kind  have  from  time  to  time  appeared  in  other 
collections.  These,  however,  have  not  been  treated  with  any 
reference  to  a theory  of  telepathy  such  as  is  here  set  forth ; nor 
have  their  editors  fulfilled  conditions  which,  for  reasons  to  be 
subsequently  explained  (Chap.  IV.),  we  have  felt  bound  to 
observe;  and  we  have  found  them  of  almost  no  assistance.  In 
scarcely  a single  instance  has  a case  been  brought  up  to  the 
standard  which  really  commands  attention.1  The  prime  essentials 
of  testimony  in  such  matters — authorities,  names,  dates,  corrobora- 
tion, the  ipsissima  verba  of  the  witnesses — have  one  or  all  been 
lacking;  and  there  seems  to  have  been  no  appreciation  of  the 
strength  of  the  d priori  objections  which  the  evidence  has  to  over- 
master, nor  of  the  possible  sources  of  error  in  the  evidence  itself.  It 
is  in  analysing  and  estimating  these  sources  of  error,  and  in  fixing  the 
evidential  standard  which  may  fairly  be  applied,  that  the  most' 
difficult  part  .of  the  present  task  will  be  seen  to  consist. 

But  though  the  records  here  presented  will  be  more  numerous, 
and  on  the  whole  better  attested,  than  those  of  previous  collections, 
the  majority  of  them  will  be  of  a sufficiently  well-known  type.  The 
peculiarity  of  the  present  treatment  will  come  out  rather  in  the 
connection  of  this  branch  of  our  evidence  with  the  other  branch.  For 
our  conviction  that  the  supposed  faculty  of  supersensuous  impression  is 
a genuine  one  is  greatly  fortified  by  a body  of  evidence  of  an  experi- 

1 An  exception  should  perhaps  be  made  in  favour  of  a few  of  the  late  Mr.  R.  Dale 
Owens  narratives.  The  Rev.  B.  Wrey*Savile’s  book  on  Apparitions  contains  so ms 
careful  work,  but  it  deals  chiefly  with  remote  cases.  Dr.  Mayo,  in  his'  Truths  contained 
in  Popular  Superstitions , adduces  very  inadequate  evidence;  but. he  has  given  (p.  07) 
what  is  perhaps  the  first  suggestion  of  a psychical  explanation. 

i.}  GROUNDS  OF  CAUTION.  9 

• mental  kind — where  the  conditions  could  be  arranged  in  such  It  way 
as  to  exclude  the  chances  of  error  that  beset  the  spontaneous  cases.  In 
considering  -this  experimental  branch  of  our  subject,  I shall  of  course, 
after  what  has  been  said,  be  specially  bound  to  make  clear  the 
distinction  between  what  we  hold  to  be  genuine  cases  and  the 
spurious  “thought-reading’'  exhibitions  which  are  so  much  better 
known  This  will  be  easy  enough,  and  will  be  done  in  the  next 
chapter. 

fCHAP. 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

§ 1.  It  is  difficult  to  get  a quite  satisfactory  name  for  the  experimental 
branch  of  our  subject.  “ Thought-reading  ” was  the.  .name  that  we 
first  adopted ; but  this  had  several  inconveniences.  Oddly  ^enough, 
the  term  has  got  identified  with  what  is  not  thougM-reading  at  all, 
but  muscle-reading — of  which  more  anon.  But  a more  serious 
objection  to  it  is  that  it  suggests  a power  to  read  anything  that  may 
be  going  on  in  the  mind  of  another  person — to  probe  characters  and 
discover  secrets — which  raises  a needless  prejudice  against  the  whole 
subject.  The  idea  of  such  a power  has,  in  fact,  been  converted  into  an 
ah  absurdum  argument  against  the  existence  of  the  faculty  for  which 
we  contend.  To  suppose  that  people’s  minds  can  be  thus  open  to  one 
another,  it  was  justly  enough  said,  would  be  to  contradict  the  assump- 
tion on  which  all  human  intercourse  has  been  carried  on.  Our  answer, 
of  course,  is  that  we  have  never  supposed  people’s  minds  to  be  thus 
open  to  one  another ; that  such  a supposition  would  be  as  remote  as 
possible  from  the  facts  on  which  we  rely ; and  that  the  most  accom- 
plished “ thought-reader’s  ” power  is  never  likely  to  be  a matter  of 
social  inconvenience.  The  mode  of  experimentation  may  reassure.those 
who  look  on  the  genuine  faculty  as  dangerous  or  uncanny ; for  ‘the 
results,  as  a rule,  have  to  be  tried  for  by  a distinct,  and  often  a very 
irksome,  process  of  concentration  on  the  part  of  the  person  whose 
“ thought  ” is  to  be  “ read.”  And  this  being  so,  it  is  clearly  important 
to  avoid  such  an  expression  as  “ thought-reading,”  which  conveys  no 
hint  that  his  thought  is  anything  else  than  an  open  page,  or  that  his 
mental  attitude  has  anything  to  do  with  the  phenomenon. 

The  experiments  involve,  in  fact,  the  will  of  two  persons; 
and  of  the  two  minds,  it  is  rather  the  one  which  reads  that  is  passive 
and  the  one  which  is  read  that  is  active.  It  is  for  the  sake  olf 
recognising  this  that  we  distinguish  the  two  parties  as  “ agent  ” and 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

11 

*•] 

" percipient,”  and  that  we  have  substituted  for  thought-reading , the 
term  thought-transference.  Thought  must  here  be  taken, as  including 
more  than  it  does  in  ordinary  usage ; it  must  include  sensations  and 
Volitions  as  well  as  mere  representations  or  ideas.  This  being  under- 
stood, the  name  serves  its  purpose  fairly  well,  as  long  as  we  are  on 
experimental  ground.  It  will  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  our  aim 
i$  to  connect  an  experimental  with  a spontaneous  class  of  cases ; .and 
Recording  to  t,hat  view  it  will  often  be  Convenient  to  describe  the 
former  no  less  than  the  latter  as  telepathic.  We  thus  get  what 
we  need,  a single  generic  term  which  embraces  the  whole  range  of 
phenomena  and  brings  out  tKeir  continuity — the  simpler  experimental 
forins  being  the  first  step  in  a graduated  series. 

' # i 

§ 2.  The  history  of  experimental  thought-transference  has  been  a 
singular  one.  It  was  not  by  direct  trial,  nor  in  what  we  should  now 
account  their  normal  form,  that  the  phenomena  first  attracted 
the  attention  of  competent  witnesses.  Their  appearance  was- 
connected  with  the  discovery  that  the  somnambulic  state  could  bo 
artificially  induced.  It  was  after  the  introduction  of  “ mesmerism”' 
or  “ magnetism  ” into  France,  and  in  the  course  of  the  investigation 
of  that  wider  subject,  that  this  special  feature  unexpectedly 
presented  itself.  The  observations  remained,  it  is  true,  extremely  few 
and  scattered.  The  greater  part  of  them  were  made  in  this  country, 
during  the  second  quarter  of  the  present  century ; and  took  the 
form  of  community  of  sensation  between  the  operator  and  the. 
patient.  The  transference  of  impressions  here  depended 
on  a specific  rapport  previously  induced  by  mesmeric  or  hypnotic 
operations— -passes,  fixation,  and  the  like.  To  us,  now,  this 
mesmeric-  rapport  (in  some,  at  any  rate,  of  its  manifestations) 
seems  nothing  more  than  the  -faculty  of  thought-transference 
confined  to  a single  agent  and  percipient,  and  intensified  in  degree 
by  the  very  conditions  which  limit  its  scope.  But  the  course  of  ^ 
discovery  inverted  the  logical  order  of  the  phenomena.  The  recognition 
of  the  particular  case,  where  the  exercise  of  the  faculty  was  narrowed 
‘down  to  a single  channel,. preceded  by  a long  interval  the  recognition 
of  the  more  general  phenomena,  as  exhibited  by  persons  in  a normal 
state.  The  transference  of  impressions  was  naturally  regarded  , as 
belonging  essentially  to  mesmerism.  As  such,  it  was  only  one  more 
wonder  in  a veritable  wonderland;  and  while  obtaining  on  that 
account  the  readier  acceptance  among  those  who  witnessed  it,  it  to 

12  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

some  extent  shut  out  the  idea  of  the  possibility  of  similar  manifesta- 
tions where  no  specific  rapport  had  been  artificially  established.* 

But  there  was  a further  result.  The  early  connection  of  thought- 
transference  with  mesmerism  distinctly  damaged  its  chance  of 
scientific  recognition.  Those  who  believed  fii  cognate  marvels  might 
easily  believe  in  this  marvel ; but  cautious  minds  rejected  the  whole 
possp  of  marvels  together.  And  one  can  hardly  wonder  at  this,  when* 
one  remembers  the  wild  and  ignorant  manner  in  which  the  claims  , 
of  Mesmer  and  his  followers  were  thrust  upon  the  world  A man  who. 
professed  to  have  magnetised  the  sun  could  hardly  expect  a serious 
hearing ; and  even  the  operators  who  eschewed  such  extravagant 
pretensions  still  too  often  advocated  their  cause  in  a language  that 
■could  only  cover  it  with  contempt.  Theories  of  “ odylic  ” force,  and  of 
imponderable  fluids  pervading  the  body — as  dogmatically  set  forth 
as  if  they  ranked  in  certainty  with  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation  of 
the  blood — were  not  likely  to  attract  scientific  inquiry  to  the  facts. 
And  in  the  later  developments  of  hypnotism — in  which  many  of  the 
■old  “ mesmeric  ” phenomena  have  been  re-studied  from  a truer  point 
of  view,  and  rapport  of  a certain  sort  between  the  hypnotist  and  the 
■“  subject  ” has  been  admitted — there  has  been  so  much  to  absorb 
observation  in  the  extraordinary  range  of  mental  and  physical 
effects  which  the  operator  can  command  by  verbal  or  visible 
•suggestion,  that  the  far  rarer  telepathic  phenomena  have,  so  to  speak, 

' been  crowded  out,1  The  consequence  is  that  after  nearly  a century 
of  controversy,  the  most  interesting  facts  of  mesmeric  history  are 
<juite  as  little  recognised  as  the  less  specialised  kinds  of  thought- 
transference,  which  have  only  within  the  last  few  years  been  seriously 
looked  for  or  definitely  obtained.  • * 

Some  of  the  older  cases  referred  to  will  be  found  quoted  in 
extenso  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Supplement.  Though  recorded 
for  the  most  part  in  a fragmentary  and  unsatisfactory  way,  it 
will  be  seen  that  they  do  not  lack  good,  or  even  high,  scientific 
authority.  The  testimony  of  Mr.  Esdaile,  for  many  years  Presidency 
Surgeon  in  Calcutta,  cannot  be  despised  by  any  instructed 
physiologist  in  our  day ; inasmuch  as  his  work  is  now  recognised  as 

1 I refer  specially  to  the  eminent  group  of  hypnotists  at  Nancy *~Dr.  Lidbeaulfc, 
Professor  Beaunis,  Professor  Bernheirn,  and  M.  Li^geois.  Dr.  Lidbeault  has  personally 
-described  to  us  several  instances  of  apparently  telepatldc  transference  which  he  has 
encountered  in  the  course  of  his  professional  experience ; and  some  observations  recorded 
by  Professor  Beaunis.  (in  his  admirable  article  on  hypnotism  in  the  Revue  PhiloBophtque  ' 
for  August,  1885,  p.  126),  at  any  rate  point,  as  he  admits,  to  a new  mode  of  sensibility. 
But  these  hints  have  not  been  followed  up. 

ii.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  15 

one  of  the  most  important  contributions  ever  made  to  the  rapidly- 
grooving  science  of  hypnotism.  No  one  has  denied  the  ability  and 
integrity  of  Dr.  Elliotson,  nor  (in  spite  of  his  speculative  extrava- 
gances) of  Reichenbach—rwho  both  witnessed  instances  of  hypnotic 
tel|pathy.  And  though  Professor  Gregory,  Dr.  Mayo,  the-  Rev. 
C.-H.  Townsend,  and  others,  may  not  have  been  men  of  acute 
scientific  intelligence,  they  were  probabjy  competent  to  conduct* 
and  to  record ’with  accuracy,  experiments  the  conditions  of  which 
involved  no  more  than  common  care  and  honesty.  We  cannot  but 
account  it  strange  that  such  items  of  testimony  as  these  men  supplied 
should  have  been  neglected,  even  by  those  who  were  most  repelled 
by  the  ignorance  and  fanaticism  which  infected  a large  amount  of 
the  mesmeric  literature.  But  since  such  was  the  fact,  the  observations 
will  hardly  now  make  their  weight  felt,  except  in  connection  with 
the  fuller  testimony  of  a more  recent  date.  It  is  characteristic  of 
every  subject  which  depends  on  questions  of  fact,  and  which  has  yet 
failed  to  win  a secure  place  in  intelligent  opinion,  that  any  further 
advance  must  for  the  most  part  depend  on  contemporary  evidence. 
We  may,  therefore,  pass  at  once  to  the  wholly  new  departure 
in  thought-transference  which  the  last  few  years  have  witnessed. 

§ 3.  The  novelty  of  this  departure — as  has  been  already  intimated 
—consists  in  the  fact  that  successful  results  have  been  obtained  when 
the  percipient  was  apparently  in  a perfectly  normal  state,  and  had 
been  subjected  to  no  mesmerising  or  hypnotising  process.  The  dawn 
of  the  discovery  must  be  referred  to  the  years  1875  and  1876.  It 
w^s  in  the  autumn  of  the  latter  year  that  our  colleague,  Professor  W. 
F.  Barrett, ‘brought  under  the  notice  of  the  British  Association,  at 
Glasgp-tf,  a cautious  statement  of  some  remarkable  facts  which  he 
had  encountered,  and  a suggestion  of  the  expediency  of  ascertaining 
how  far  recognised  physiological  laws  would  account  for  them.  The 
facts  themselves  were  connected  with  mesmerism  j1  but  the  discussion 
in  the  Press  to  which  the  paper  gave  rise  led  to  a considerable 
correspondence,  in  which  Professor  Barrett  found  his  first  hints  6f  a 
faculty  of  thought-transference  existing  independently  of  the  specific 
mesmeric  rapport. 

That  fhese  hints  happened  to  be  forthcoming,  just  ‘at  the. 
right  moipent,  was  a piece  of  great  good  fortune,  and  was  due 

1 Proceeding*  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Yol.  L,  pp.  241-2. 

14  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

primarily  to  a circumstance  quite  unconnected  with  science,  ancl  from 
which  serious  results  would  scarcely  have  been  anticipated— the 
invention  of  the  “ willing-game.”  In  some  form  or  other  this  pastime 
is  probably  familiar  to  most  of  my  readers,  either  through  personal 
trials  or  through  the  exhibitions  of  platform  performers.  The  ordinary 
process  is  this.  A member  of  the  party,  who  is  to  act  $s  “ thought- 
reader,”  or  percipient,  leaves  the  room  ; the  rest  determine  on  som& 
simple  action  which  he,  or  she,  is  to  perform,  or  hide  some  object  which 
he  is  to  find.  The  would-be  percipient  is  then  recalled,  and  his  hand 
is  taken,  or  his  shoulders  are  lightly  touched  by  one  or  more  of  the 
willers.  Under  these  conditions  the  action  is  often  quickly  performed 
or  the  object  found.  Nothing  could  at  first  sight  look  less  like  a 
promising  starting-point  for  a new  branch  of  inquiiy.  The  “ wilier  ” 
usually  asserts,  with  perfect  good  faith,  and  often  perhaps  quite 
correctly,  that  he  did  not  'push ; but  so  little  is  it  necessary 
for  the  guiding  impression  to  be  a push  that  it  may  be  the 
very  reverse — a slight  release,  of  tension  when  the  “ willed  ” 
performer,  after  various  minute  indications  of  a tendency  to 
move  in  this,  that,  or  the  other  wrong  direction,  at  last  hits 
on  the  right  one.  Even  when  the  utmost  care  is  used  to 
maintain  the  light  contact  with  absolute  neutrality,  it  is  impossible  to 
lay  down  the  limits  of  any  given  subject’s  sensibility  to  such  slight 
tactile  and  muscular  hints.  The  experiments  of  Drs.  Carpenter  and 
Beard,  and  especially  those  of  a member  of  our  own  Society,  the  Rev. 
E.  H.  Sugden,  of  Bradford,1  and  other  unpublished  ones  on  which  we- 
can  rely,  have  shown  us  that  the  difference  between  one  person  and 
another  in  this  respect  is  very  great,  and  that  with  some  organisations 
•a  variation  of  pressure  so  slight  that  the  supposed  “ wilier  ” may  be 
quite  unaware  of  exercising  it,  but  which  he  applies  according  as  the 
movements  of  the  other  person  are  on  the  right  track  or  not,  may 
afford  a kind  of  yes  or  no  indication  quite  sufficient  for  a clue. 
This,  indeed,  is  the  one  direct  piece  of  instruction  which  the  game 
has  supplied.  We  might  perhaps  have  been  to  some  extent  prepared 
for  the  result  by  observing  the  infinitesimal  touches  to  which  a horse 
will  respond,  or  the  extremely  slight  indications  on  which  we 
ourselves  often  act  in  ordinary  life.  But  till  this  game  was 
played,  probably  no  one  fully  realised-  that  muscular  hints,  so  slight 
as  to  be  quite  unconsciously  given,  could  be  equally  unconscioysly 

1 Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  i.,  pi  291;  Vol.  ii»,  p,  11. 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

15 

taken ; and  that  thus  a definite  course  of  action  might  be  produced 
without  the  faintest  idea  of  guidance  on  either  side.  In  some  cases 
it  appeared  that  even  contact  could  be  dispensed  with,  and  the 
guidance  was  presumably  of  an  auditory  kind — the  “subject” 
extracting  from  the  mere  footsteps  of  the  “ wilier,”  who  was.  following 
him  about,  hints  of  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction  at  the  course  he  was 
taking.1  But  though  this  remarkable  susceptibility  to  a particular 
order  of  impressions  was  an  interesting  discovery,’  the  results  which 
could  be  thus  explained  clearly  involved  nothing  new  in  kindl 
That  recognised  faculties  may  exhibit  unsuspected  degrees  of  refine- 
ment is  a common  enough  conception.  The  more  important  point  was 
that  there  were  certain  results  which,  apparently,  could  not  be  thus 
explained,  at  any  rate,  in  any  off-hand  way.  Occasionally  the  actions 
requiredaof  the  “ willed  ” performer  were  of  so  complicated  a sort,  and 
so  rapidly  carried  out,  as  to  cast  considerable  doubt  on  the  adequacy 
of  any  muscular  hints  to  evoke  and  guide  them.  Here,  then,  was  the 
first  indication  of  something  new — of  a hitherto  unrecognised' faculty ; 
and  by  good  fortune,  as  I have  said,  Professor  Barrett’s  appeal  for 
further  evidence  as  to  transferred  impressions  came  just  at  the  time 
when  the  game  had  obtained  a certain  amount  of  popularity,  and 
when  its  more  delicate  and  unaccountable  phenomena  had  attracted 
attention. 

Meanwhile  similar  observations  were  being  made  in  America. 
America,  indeed,  was  the  original  home  of  the  “ willing  ” entertain- 
ment ; and  it  is  to  an  American,  Dr.  McGraw,  that  the  credit  belongs 
of  having  been  the  first  (as  far  as  we  are  aware)  to  detect  in  it 
the  possible  germ  of  something  new  to  science.  In  the  Detroit 
j Ueview  of  Medicine  for  August,  1875,  Dr.  McGraw  gave  a clear 
account  of  the  ordinary  physiological  process — “ the  perception  by  a 
trained  operator  of  involuntary  and  unconscious  muscular  move- 
ments ; ” and  proceeded  as  follows : — 

“ It  seemed  to  me  that  there  were  features  in  these  exhibitions  which 
could  n6t  be  satisfactorily  explained  on  the  hypothesis  of  involuntary 
muscular  action,  for  ....  we  are  required  to  believe  a man  could 
unwillingly,  and  in  spite  of  himself,  give  information  by  unconscious 
and  involuntary  signs  that  he  could  not  give  under  the  same  circumstances 

by  voluntary  and  conscious  action It  seems  to  me  there  is  a 

hint  towards  the  possibility  of  the  nervous  system  of  one  individual  being 
uged  by  the  active  will  of  another  to  accomplish  certain  simple  motions.” 

. 1 See  the  record  of  Mr.  A.  E.  Outerbridge’s  experiments,  published  by  Dr.  Beard  in 
the  American  Popular  Science  Monthly  for  July,  187?. 

16  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : [chap. 

But  though  there  might  be  enough  in  the  phenomena  to  justify 
cautious  suggestions  of  this  sort,  the  ground  is  at  best  very 
uncertain.  Even  where  some  nicety  of  selection  is  involved, 
as,  for  instance,  when  a particular  note  is  to  be  struck  on. 
the  piano,  or  a particular  book  to  be  taken  out  of  a shelf,  still,  unless 
the  subject's  hand  moves  with  extreme  rapidity,  it  will  be  perfectly 
possible  for  an  involuntary  jyid  unconscious  indication  to  be'  given  by 
the  “ wilier  ” at  the  instant  that  the  right  note  or  book  is  reached. 
In  reports  of  such  cases  it  is  sometimes  stated  that  there  was  ,no 
tentative  process,  and  that  the  “ subject’s  ” hand  seemed  to  obey  the 
other  person’s  will  With  almost  the  same  directness  as  that  person’s 
own  hand  would  have  done.  But  this  is  a question  of  degree  as 
to  which  the  confidence  of  an  eye-witness  cannot  easily  be  imparted 
to  others.  It  may  be  worth  while,  however,  to  give  an  instance  of  a 
less  common  type  by  which  the  theory  of  muscular  guidance  does 
undoubtedly  seem  to  be  somewhat  strained. 

The  case  was  observed  by  Mr.  Myers  on  October  31st,  1877. 
The  performers  were  two  sisters. 

“ I put  my  hand  on  M.’s  shoulders,  and  thought  of  what  I wished 
her  to  do.  I wrote  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  on  scraps  of  paper.  I then 
thought  of  the  word  CLARA  and  showed  it  to  M.  behind  R.’s  back,  R. 
sitting  at  the  table.  M.  put  her  hands  on  R.’s  shoulders,  and  R.  with 
shut  eyes  picked  out  the  letters  0 L A R V — taking  the  V apparently  for 
a second  A,  which  was  not  in  the  pack — and  laid  them  in  a heap.  She 
did  not  know,  she  said,  what  letters  she  had  selected.  No  impulse  had 
consciously  passed  through  her  mind,  only  she  had  felt  her  hands  impelled 
to  pick  up  certain  bits  of  paper. 

“ This  was  a good  case  as  apparently  excluding  pushing.  The.  scraps 
were  in  a confused  heap  in  front  of  R.,  who  kept  still  further  confusing 
them,  picking  them  up  and  letting  them  drop  with  great  rapidity.  M.’s 
hands  remained  apparently  motionless  on  R.’s  shoulders, -and  ohe  can 
hardly  conceive  that  indications  could  be  given  by  pressure , from  the 
rapid  and  snatching  manner  in  which  R.  collected  the  right  letters, 
touohing  several  letters  in  the  course  of  a second.  M.,  however,  told  me 
that  it  was  always  necessary  that  she,  M.,  should  see  the  letters  which  R. 
was  to  pick  up.” 

Such  a case  may  not  suggest  thought-transference,  but  it  at  any 
rate  tempts  one  to  look  deeper  than  crude  sensory  signs  for  the 
springs  of  action,  and  to  conceive  the  governance  of  one  organism  by 
another  through  some  sort  of  nervous  induction.  It  at  any  rate 
differs  greatly  in  its  conditions  from  the  famous  bank-note  trick, 
where  a number  is  written  on  a board,  so  slowly,  and  ih  figures 
of  so  large  a size,  that  at  every  point  the  “ wilier  ” may  mark  his 

ii.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  ' 17 

opinion  of  the  direction  the  lines  are  taking  by  involuntary  muscular 
hints. 

It  would  be  useless  to  accumulate  further  instances.  The  best  of 
them  could  never  be  wholly  conclusive,  and  mere  multiplication  adds 
nothing  to  their  weight.  By  some  of  them,  as  I have  said,  the  theory 
of  muscular  guidance  is  undoubtedly  strained.  But  then  the  theory 
of  muscular  guidance  ought  to  be  strained,  and  strained  to  the  very 
utmost,  before  being  declared  inadequate ; and  it  would  always  be  a 
matter  of  opinion  whether  the  point  of  “ utmost  ” strain  had  been 
overpassed.  Dr.  McGraw  and  Professor  Barrett  surmised  that  it  had ; 
Dr.  Beard,  of  New  York,  was  confident  that  it  had  not.  The  contention 
between  “ mind-reading  ” and  “ muscle-reading  ” could  never  reach  a 
definite  issue  on  this  ground.  But  meanwhile  the  confident  and 
exclusive  adherents  of  the  muscular  hypothesis  had  a position  of 
decided  advantage  oyer  the  doubters,  for  they  could  fairly  enough 
represent  themselves  as  the  champions  of  science  in  its  war  with 
popular  superstitions.  The  popular  imagination  more  mo  had 
fastened  on  the  phenomena  en  bloc,  and  had  decided  that  they  were 
what  they  seemed  to  be — “ thought-reading.”  To  the  average  sight- 
seer a mysterious  word  is  far  more  congenial  than  a physiological 
explanation ; and  it  was,  of  course,  the  interest  of  the  professional 
exhibitor  to  adopt  and  advertise  a description  which  seemed  to 
invest  him  with  novel  and  magical  powers.  What  more  natural, 
therefore,  than  that  those  who  saw  the  absurdity  of  these  pretensions 
should  regard  further  inquiry  or  suspension  of  judgment  as  a 
concession  to  ignorant  credulity  ? “ Irving  Bishop,”  it  seemed  fair 
to  argue,  “ is  a professed  * thought-reader  ’ ; Irving  Bishop’s  tricks  are, 
at  best,  mere  feats  of  muscular  and  tactile  sensibility ; ergo  whoever 
believes  that  there  is  such  a thing  as  ‘ thought-reading  ’ is  on  a par  . 
with  the  crowd  who  are  mystified  by  Irving  Bishop.” 

§ 4.  If,  then,  the  ground  of  experiment  had  remained  unchanged — 
if  the  old  “ willing-game  ” had  merely  continued  to  appear  in  various 
forms — no  definite  advance  could  have  been  made.  But  on  the  path  of 
the  old  experiments,  a quite  new  phenomenon  now  presented  itself, 
which  no  one  could  have  confidently  anticipated,  but  for  which  the 
suggestions  drawn  from  the  most  advanced  phenomena  of  the 
“^willing-game  ” had  to  some  extent  prepared  the  way.  It  was 
discovered  that  not  only  transferences  of  impression  could  take  place 
without  contact,  but  that  there  was  no  necessity  for  the  result  aimed 

i o 1 

18 

TIIE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

at  to  involve  movements;  the  feet  of  the  transference  might  be 
shown  not — as  in  the  “ willing-game  ” — by  the  subject’s  ability  to  do 
something,  but  by  his  ability  to  discern  and  describe  an  object 
thought  of  by  the  “ wilier.”  Both  parties  could  thus  remain  perfectly 
still;  which  was  really  a more  important  condition  than  even  the 
absence  of  contact.  In  this  form  of  experiment,  muscle-reading  and 
all  the  subtler  forms  of  unconscious  guidance  are  completely  excluded ; 
and  the  dangers  which  remaifl  are  such  as  can,  with  sufficient  care,  be 
clearly  defined  and  safely  guarded  against.  Indications  of  a visual  kind — 
for  instance,  by  the  involuntary  direction  of  glances — have  no  scope  if 
the  object  which  the  percipient  is  to  name  is  not  present  or  visible  in 
the  room.  There  is,  of  course,  an  obvious  danger  in  low  whispering, 
or  even  soundless  movement  of  the  lips ; whilst  the  faintest  accent  of 
approval  or  disapproval  in  question  or  comment  may  give  a hint  as  to 
whether  the  effort  is  tending  in  the  right  direction,  and  thus  guide  to 
the  mark  by  successive  approximations.  Any  exhibition  of  the  kind 
before  a promiscuous  company  is  nearly  sure  to  be  vitiated  by  the 
latter  source  of  error.  But  when  the  experiments  are  carried  on  in  a 
limited  circle  of  persons  known  to  each  other,  and  amenable  to 
scientific  control,  it  is  not  hard  for  those  engaged  to  set  a watch  on 
their  own  and  on  each  other’s  lips ; and  questions  and  comments  can 
be  entirely  forbidden. 

I have  been  speaking  of  the  danger  of  involuntary  guidance. 
There  is,  of  course,  another  danger  to  be  considered— -that  of 
Voluntary  guidance — of  actual  collusion  between  the  agent  and  per- 
cipient. Contact  being  excluded,  such  guidance  would  have  to  be  by 
signals ; and  it  is  impossible  to  lay  down  any  precise  limit  to  the 
degree  of  perfection  that  a plan  of  signalling  may  reach.  The  long 
and  short  signs  of  the  Morse  code  admit  of  many  varieties  of 
application ; and  though  the  channels  of  sight  and  touch  may  be  cut 
off,,  it  is  difficult  entirely  to  cut  off  that  of  hearing.  Shufflings  of  the 
feet,  coughs,  irregularities  of  breathing,  all  offer  available  material. 
But  though  the  precise  line  of  possibilities  in  this  direction  cannot  be 
drawn,  we  are  at  any  rate  able  to  suggest  cases  where  the  line  would 
be  clearly  overpassed.  For  instance,  if  the  idea  to  be  transferred  from 
the  agent  to  the  percipient  is  inexpressible  in  less  than  twenty  words; 
Mid  if  hearing  is  the  only  sensory  channel  left  open;  and  if  it  is 
carefully  observed  that  there  are  no  coughs,  or  shufflings,  and  that  the 
agent’s  breathing  appears  regular,  then  one  seems  justified  in  saying 
that  the  necessary  information  could  not  be  conveyed  by  a code 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRAKSFEREFCE, 

19 

without  a very  considerable  expenditure  of  tiiqe,  and  a very 
abnormally  acute  sense  of  hearing  on  the  percipient’s  part  There  is 
no  relation  whatever  between  a private  experiment  perforated  under 
such  conditions  as  these,  and  the  feats  of  a conjurer,  like  Mr.  Maskelyne, 
who  commands  secret  apparatus,  and  whose  every  word  and  gesture 
may  be  observed  and  interpreted  by  a concealed  confederate. 

But  we  readily  admit  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  represent  any 
experiment  in  thought-transference  as  ^absolutely  crucial  where  the. 
good  faith  of  at  least  one  of  the  two  principals  is  not  accepted  as 
beyond  question,  and  where  the  genuineness  of  the  result  is  left  to. 
depend  on  the  perfection  with,  which  third  parties,  have  arranged 
conditions  and  guarded  against  signs.  The  conditions  of  a crucial 
result,  for  one.’s>  own  mind,  are  either  (1)  that  the  agent  or  the 
percipient  shall  be  oneself ; or  (2)  that  the  agent  or  percipient  shall 
be  some  one  whose  experience,  as  recorded  by  himself,  is  indis- 
tinguishable in  certainty  from  one’s  own ; or  (3)  that  there  shall  be 
several  agents  or  percipients,  in  the  case  of  each  of  whom  the 
improbability  of  deceit,  Sr  of  such  imbecility  as  would  take  the  place 
of  deceit,  is  so  great  that  the  combination  of  improbabilities  amounts 
to  a moral  impossibility.  The  third  mode  of  attaining  conviction  is 
the  most  practically  important.  For  it  is  not  to  be  expected  of  most 
people  that,  within  a short  time,  they  will  either  themselves  be,  or 
have  intimate  Mends  who  are,  successful  agents  or  percipients ; and 
they  are  justified,  therefore,  in  demanding  that  the  evidence  to  which 
they  might  fairly  refuse  credence  if  it  depended  on  the  veracity  and 
intelligence  of  one  or  two  persons,  of  however  unblemished  a 
reputation,  shall  be  multiplied  for  their  benefit.  Whatever  be  the 
Experimenter’s  assurance  as  to  the  perfection  of  his  conditions,  it  is 
in  the  nature  of  things  impossible  that  strangers,  who  only  read  and 
have  not  seen,  should  be  infected  by  it.  They  cannot  be  absolutely 
certain: that  this,  that,  or  the  other  stick  might  not  break:  then 
enough^  sticks  must  be  collected  and  tied  together  to  make  a faggot  of 
a strength  which  shall  defy  suspicion.1  As  regards  the  experiments 

- ■'  ■ if 

1 In* reference  to  the  objection  that  our  demand  for  quantity  of  evidence  shown  that 
we  know  the  quality  of  each  item  to  be  bad,  I may  quote  the  following  passage  from  a 
presidential  address  of  Professor  Sidgwick’s : “The  quality  of  much  of  our  evidence-*- 
when  considered  apart  from  the  strangeness  of  the  matters  to  which  it  refere—is  not  bad* 
but  very  good : it  is  such  that  one  or  two  items  of  it  would  be  held  to  establish  the 
occurrence,  at  any  particular  time  and  place,  of  any  phenomenon  whosd  existence  was 
generally  accepted.  Since*  .however,  on  this  subject  the  best  single  testimony  only  yields 
an  immovability  of  the  testimony  being  false  that  is  outweighed  oy  the  improbability  of 
the  fast  being  true,  the  only  way  to  make  the  sc rie  fall  on  the  aid©  of  the  testimony  is  to 
ihcrease  the  quantity.  If  the  testimony  were  not  good,  this  increase  of  quantity  would 

20  THE  EXPERIMENTA L BASIS:  [chap. 

of  which  I am  about  to  present  a sketch,  it  is  not  necessary  to  my 
argument  that  any  individual’s  honesty  shall  be  completely  assumed, 
in  the  sense  of  being  used  as  a certain  basis  for  conclusions.  The 
proof  must,  depend  on  the  number  of  persons,  reputed  honest  and 
intelligent,  to  whom  dishonesty  or  imbecility  must  be  attributed  if 
the  conclusions  are  wrong,  i.e.,  it  must  be  a cumulative  proof.'  Not 
that  we  have  ourselves  any  doubt  as  to  the  bona  fides  of  every  case  here 
recorded.  But  even  where  our  grounds  of  certainty  are  most  obvious, 
they  cannot  be  made  entirely  obvious  to  those  to  whom  we  and  our 
more  intimate  associates  are  personally  unknown ; while  outside  this 
inner  circle  our  confidence  depends  on  points  that  can  scarcely 
evon  be  suggested  to  others — on  views  of  character  gradually  built  up 
out  of  a number  of  small  and  often  indefinable  items'df  conversation 
and  demeanour.  We  may  venture  to  say  that  a candid  critic?  present 
during  the  whole  course  of  the  experiments,  would  have  carried  away 
a far  more  vivid  impression  of  their  genuineness  than  any  printed 
record  can  convey.  But  it  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  we 
discriminate  our  cases ; and  that  even  where  the  results  are  to  our 
own  minds  crucial — in  that  they  can  only  be  impugned  by  impugning 
the  honesty  or  sanity  of  members  of  our  own  investigating  Committee 
— we  do  not  demand  their  acceptance  on  this  ground  alone,  or 
attempt  accurately  to  define  the  number  of  reputations  which  should 
bo  staked  before  a fair  mind  ought  to  admit  the  proof  as  over- 
whelming. As  observations  are  accumulated,  different  “ fair  minds  ” 
will  give  in  at  different  points;  and  until  the  most  exacting  are 
satisfied,  our  task  will  be  incomplete. 

§ 5.  I mentioned  above  the  correspondence  which  followed  Pro- 
fessor Barrett’s  appeal  for  evidence.  In  this  correspondence,  ahnpng 
many  instances  of  the  higher  aspects  of  the  “ willing-game,”  there  was  a 
small  residue  which  pointed  to  a genuine  transference  of  impression 
without  contact  or  movement.  Of  this  residue  the  most  important 
item  was  that  supplied  by  our  friend,  the  Rev.  A.  M.  Creery,  then 

be  of  little  value ; but  if  it  is  such  that  the  hypothesis  of  its  falsity  requires  us  to  suppose 
abnormal  motiveless  deceit,  or  abnormal  stupidity  or  carelessness,  in  a person  hitherto 
reputed  honest  and  intelligent,  then  an  increase  in  the  number  of  cases  in  which  such  a 
supposition  is  required  adds  importantly  to  the  improbability  of  the  general  hypothesis. 
It  is  sometimes  said  by  loose  thinkers  that  the  ‘moral  factor 9 ought  not  to  come  in  at  all. 
But  the  least  reflection  shows  that  the  moral  factor  must  come  in  in  all  the  reasonings  qf 
experimental  science,  except  for  those  who  have  personally  repeated  all  the  experiments 
on  which  their  conclusions  are  based.  Any  one  wno  accepts  the  report  Of  the  experiments 
of  another  must  rely,  not  only  on  his  intelligence,  but  on  his  honesty : only  ordinarily  his 
honesty  is  so  completely  assumed  that  the  assumption  is  no  noticed/9 

n.]'  THOW GUT-TRANSFERENCE.  31 

resident  at  Buxton,  and  now  working  in  the  diocese  of  Manchester, 
He  had  his  attention  called, to  the  subject  in  October,  1880;  and  was 
early  struck  by  the  impossibility  of  deciding,  in  cases  where  contact 
was  employed,  how  far  the  powers  of  unconscious  muscular  guidance 
might  extend.  He,  therefore,  instituted  experiments  with  his 
daughters  and  with  a young  maid-servant,  in  which  contact  was 

altogether  eschewed.  * He  thus  describes  the  early  trials;— 

• 

44  Each  wSnt  out  of  the  room  in  turn,  while  I and  the  others  fixed  on 
some  object  which  the  absent  one  was  to  name  on  returning  to  the  room. 
After  a few  trials  the  successes  preponderated  so  much  over  the  failures 
that  we  were  all  convinced  there  was  something  very  wonderful  coming 
under  our  notice.  Night  after  night,  for  several  months,  we  spent  an 
hour  or  two  each  evening  in  varying  the  conditions  of  the  experiments, 
and  choosing  new  subjects  for  thought-transference.  We  began  by 
selecting  the  simplest  objects  in  the  room  ; then  chose  names  of  towns, 
names  ctf  people,  dates,  cards  out  of  a pack,  lines  from  different  poems, 

, <fec.,  in  fact  any  things  or  series  of  ideas  that  those  present  could  keep 
steadily  before  their  minds ; and  when  the  children  were  in  good  humour, 
and  excited  by  the  wonderful  nature  of  their  successful  guessing,  they  very 
seldom  made  a mistake.  I have  seen  seventeen  cards,  chosen  by  myself, 
named  right  in  succession,  without  any  mistake.  We  soon  found  that  a 
great  deal  depended  on  the  steadiness  with  which  the  ideas  were  kept 
before  the  minds  of  4 the  thinkers/  and  upon  the  energy  with  which  they 
willed  the  ideas  to  pass.  Our  worst  experiments  before  strangers  have 
invariably  been  when  the  company  was  dull  and  undemonstrative; 
and  we  are  all  convinced  that  when  mistakes  are  made  the  faqlt  rests,  for 
the  most  part,  with  the  thinkers,  rather  than  with  the  thought-readers.” 

In  the  course  of  the  years  1881  and  1882,  a large  number  of 
experiments  were  made  with  the  Creery  family,  first  by  Professor 
Barrett,  then  by  Mr.,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,by  Professor  Balfour  Stewart, 
1T.R.S.,and  Professor  Alfred  Hopkinson,  of  Owens  College,  Manchester, 
and,  after  the  formation  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  by  the 
Thought-transference  Committee  of  that  body,  of  which  Mr.  Myers 
and  myself  were  members.  The  children  in  turn  acted  as  “percipients,” 
the  other  persons  present  being  “agents,”  i.e.,  concentrating  their 
minds  on  the  idea  of  some  selected  word  or  thing,  with  the  intention 
that  this  idea  should  be  transferred  to  the  percipient’s  mind.  The 
thing  selected  was  either  a card,  taken  at  random  from  a full  pack ; or 
a name  chosen  also  at  random-;  or  a number,  usually  of  two  figures ; 
or  occasionally  some  domestic  implement  or  other  object  in  the  house. 
^The  percipient  was,  of  course,  absent  when  the  selection  was  made, 
andwben  recalled  had/iio  means  of  discovering  through  the  exercise 
of  tlie  senses  what  it  was?  unless  by  signals,  consciously  or  uncon- 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

2S 

(chap. 

sciously  given  by  one  or  other  of  the  agents.  Strict  silence  was 
maintained  throughout  each  experiment,  and  when  the  group  of 
agents  included  any  members  of  the  Creery  family,  the  closest  watch 
was  kept  in  order  to  detect  any  passage  of  signals ; but  in  hundreds 
of  trials  nothing  was  observed  which  suggested  any  attempt  of  the 
sort.  Still,  such  simple  objects  would  not  demand  an  - elaborate  code 
for  their  description;  nor  were  any  effective  means  taken  to  block 
the  percipent's  channels  of  sense — it  being  thought  expedient 
in  these  early  trials  not  to  disturb  their  minds  by  obtrusive  pre- 
cautions. We  could  not,  therefore,  regard  the  testimony  of  the 
inyestigators  present  as  adding  much  weight  to  the  experiments  in 
which  any  members  of  the  family  were  among  the  group  of  agents, 
unless  the  percipient  was  completely  isolated  from  that  group.  Such 
a case  was  the  following : — 

“Easter,  1881.  Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Creery  and  family,  and  W. 
F.  Barrett,  the  narrator.  One  of  the  children  was  sent  into  an  adjoining 
room,  the  door  of  which  I saw  was  closed.  On  returning  to  the  sitting- 
room  and  closing  its  door  also,  I thought  of  some  object  in  the  house, 
fixed  upon  at  random  ; writing  the  name  down,  I showed  it  to  the  family 
present,  the  strictest  silence  being  preserved  throughout.  We  then  all 
silently  thought  of  the  name  of  the  thing  selected.  In  a few  seconds 
the  door  of  the  adjoining  room  was  heard  to  open,  and  after  a very 
short  interval  the  child  would  enter  the  sitting-room,  generally  with 
the  object  selected.  No  one  was  allowed  to  leave  the  sitting-room  after 
the  object  had  been  fixed  upon ; no  communication  with  the  child  was 
conceivable  as  her  place  was  often  changed.  Further,  the  only  instruc- 
tions given  to  the  child  were  to  fetch  some  object  in  the  house  that  I would 
fix  upon,  and,  together  with  the  family,  silently  keep  in  mind  to  the 
exclusion,  as  far  as  possible,  of  all  other  ideas.  In  this  way  I wrote 
down,  among  other  things,  a hair-brush ; it  was  brought : an  orange;  if 
was  brought  : a -urine  glass  ; it  was  brought : an  apple;  it  was  brought : 
a toasting-fork ; failed  on  the  first  attempt,  a pair  of  .tongs  < being 
brought,  but  on  a second  trial  it  was  brought.  With  another  Child 
(atfiong  other  trials  not  here  mentioned)  a cup  was  written  down  by  me ; 
it  was  brought  : a saucer ; this  was  a failure,  a plate  being  brought ; 
no  second  trial  allowed.  The  child  being  told  it  was  a saucer,  replied, 

‘ That  came  into  my  head,  but  I hesitated  as  I thought  it  unlikely  you 
would  name, saucer  after  cup  as  being  too  easy.'  ” 

But,  of  course,  the  most  satisfactory  condition  was  that  only  the  . 
members  of  the  investigating  Committee  should  act  as  agents,  so  that 
signals  could  not  possibly  be  given  unless  by  one  of  them.  This  con- 
dition clearly  makes  it  idle  to  represent  the  means  by  Which  the 
transferences  took  place  as  simply  a trick  which  the  members!,  of  the 
investigating  Committee  failed  to  detect.  The  trick,  if  trick  there 

n.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  23 

was,  must  have  been  one  in  which  they,  or  one  of  them,  actively 
. skewed ; the  only  alternative  to  collusion  on  their  part  being  some 
piece  of  carelessness  amounting  almost  to  idiocy— such  as  uttering 
the  required  word  aloud,  or  leaving  the  selected  card  exposed  qn  the 
table.  The  following  series  of  experiments  was  made  on  April  13th, 
1882.  The  agents  were  Mr.  Myers  and  the  present  writer,  and  tw> 
ladies  of  their  acquaintance,  the  Misses  Mason,  of  Morton  Hall,  Retford, 
who  had  become  interested  in  the  subject  by  the  remarkable  successes 
which  one  of  them  had  obtained  in  experimenting  among  friends.1 
As  neither  of  these  ladies  had  ever  seen  any  member  of  the  Creery 
family  till  just  before  the  experiments  began,  they  had  no 
opportunities  for  arranging  a code  of  signals  with  the  children ; so 
that  any  hypothesis  of  collusion  must  in  this  case  be  confined  to  Mr. 
Myers  qr  the  present  writer.  As  regards  the  hypothesis  of  want  of 
intelligence,  the  degree  of  intelligent  behaviour  required  of  each  of  the 
four  agents  was  simply  this : (1)  To  keep  silence  on  a particular  sub- 
ject; and  (2)  to  avoid  unconsciously  displaying  a particular  card 
or  piece  of  paper  to  a person  situated  at  some  yards'  distance.  The 
first  condition  was  realised  by  keeping  silence  altogether ; the  second 
by  remaining  quite  still.  The  four  observers  were  perfectly  satisfied 
that  the  children  had  no  means  at  any  moment  of  seeing,  either 
directly  or  by  reflection,  the  selected  card  or  the  name  of  the  selected 
object.  The  following  is  the  list  of  trials : — 

Objects  to  be  named.  (These  objects  had  been  brought,  and  still  remained/ 
in  the  pocket  of  one  of  the  visitors.  The  name  of  the  one  selected  for 
trial  was  secretly  written  down,  not  spoken.) 

A White  Penknife.— Correctly  named,  with  the  colour,  the  first  trial. 
Box  of  Almonds. — Correctly  named. 

Threepenny  piece. — Failed. 

Box  of  Chocolate. — Button-box  said ; no  second  trial  given. 

(A  penknife  was  then  hidden ; but  the  place  was  not  discovered.) 

Numbers  to  be  named. 

i Five. — Rightly  given  on  the  first  trial. 

. Fourteen. — Failed. 

Thirty-three. — 54  (No).  34  (No).  33  (Right). 

Sixty-eight.— 58  (No).  -57  (No).  78  (No). 

Fictitious  names  to  be  guessed. 

Martha  Billings. — “ Biggis  ” was  said. 

1 See  Miss  Mason’s  interesting  paper  on  the  subject  in  McumiUan't  Magazine  for 
October,  1882. 

u 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : 

[chap. 

V 

Catherine  Smith. — “ Catherine  Shaw  ” was  said. 

Henry  Cotoper. — Failed. 

Cards  to  be  named. 

Two  of  clubs. — Right  first  time. 

Queen  of  diamonds. — Right  first  time. 

Four  of  spadee. — Failed. 

Four  of  hearts. — Right  first  time. 

King  of  hearts. — Right  firi^t  time. 

Two  of  diamonds. — Right  first  time. 

Ace  of  hearts. — Right  first  time. 

Nine  of  spades. — Right  first  time. 

Five  of  diamonds. — Four  of  diamonds  (No).  Four  of  hearts  (No). 

Five  of  diamonds  (Right). 

Two  of  spades. — Right  first  time. 

Eight  of  diamonds. — Ace  of  diamonds  said  ; no  second  trial  given. 

Three  of  hearts. — Right  first  time. 

Five  of  clubs. — Felled. 

A ce  of  spades.  — Failed . 

The  chances  against  accidental  success  in  the  case  of  any  one 
card  are,  of  course,  51  to  1 ; yet  out  of  fourteen  successive  trials  nine 
were  successful  at  the  first  guess,  and  only  three  trials  can  be  said  to 
have  been  complete  failures.  The  odds  against  the  occurrence  of  the 
five  successes  running,  in  the  card  series,  are  considerably  over 
1,000,000  to  1.  On  none  of  these  occasions  was  it  even  remotely 
possible  for  the  child  to  obtain  by  any  ordinary  means  a knowledge 
of  the  object  selected.  Our  own  facial  expression  was  the  only  index 
open  to  her ; and  even  if  we  had  not  purposely  looked  as  neutral  as 
possible,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  we  could  have  unconsciously 
carried,  say,  the  two  of  diamonds  written  on  our  foreheads. 

Subsequent  to  this  series,  the  Committee,  consisting  of  Pro(essotf 
Barrett,  Mr.  Myers,  and  the  present  writer,  made  a number  df 
experiments  under  similar  conditions,  which  excluded  contact  and 
movement,  and  which  confined  the  knowledge  of  the  selected  object 
— and,  therefore,  the  chance  of  collusion  with  the  percipient-vto  their 
own  group.  In  some  of  these  trials,  conducted  at  Cambridge,  Mrs.  F. 
W.  H.  Myers  and  Miss  Mason  also  took  part.  In  a long  series  con- 
ducted at  Dublin,  Professor  Barrett  was  alone  with  the  percipient. 
Altogether  these  scrupulously  guarded  trials  amounted  to  497 ; and 
of  this  number  95  were  completely  successful  at  the  first  guess,  and 
45  at  the  second.  The  results  may  be  clearer  if  arranged  in  a tabular 
form. 

full  pack  was  used,  from  which  a card  was  in  each  case  drawn  at  random, 
rbis  number  is  obtained  by  multiplying  each  figure  of  the  third  column  by  the  corresponding  figure  in  the  fourth  column 
\e.g.t  216  x A),  and  adding  the  products. 

Phis  entry  is  calculated  from  the  first  three  totals  in  the  last  horizontal  row,  in  the  same  way  that  each  other  entry  in  the  last  column 
is  calculated  from  the  first  three  totals  in  the  corresponding  horizontal  row. 

26  i 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

\ Mr.  F.  Y.  Edgeworth,  to  whom  these  results  were  submitted,  and 
who  ’ calculated  the  final  column  of  the  Table,  has  kindly  appended 
the  following  remarks : — 

“ These  observations  constitute  a chain  or  rather  coil  of  evidence, 
which  at  first  sight  and  upon  a general  view  is  seen  to  be  very  strong, 
-but  of  which  the  full  strength  cannot  be  appreciated  until  the 
concatenation  of  the  parts  is  considered. 

“ Viewed  as  a whole  the  ffable  presents  the  following  data.  There 
are  in  all  497  trials.  Out  of  these  there  are  95  successes  at  the  first 
guess.  The  number  of  successes  most  probable  on  the  hypothesis  of  mere 
chance  is  27.  The  problem  is  one  of  the  class  which  I have  discussed 
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  190,  &c.  The 
approximative  formula  there  given  is  .not  well  suited  to  the  present  case,1 
in  which  the  number  of  successes  is  very  great,  the  probability  of  their 
being  due  to  mere  chance  very  small,  in  relation  to  the  total  number  of 
trials.  It  is  better  tc  proceed  directly  according  to  the  method  employed 
in  the  paper  referred  to  (p.  198)  for  the  appreciation  of  M.  Richet’s 
result  EPJYEIOD.  By  this  method,2  with  the  aid  of  appropriate 
tables,3  I find  for  the  probability  that  the  observed  total  of  successes  has 
resulted  from  some  other  agency  than  pure  chance 

•999,  999,  999,  999,  999,  999,  999,  999,  98 

“ Stupendous  as  is  this  probability  it  falls  short  of  that  which  the 
complete  solution  of  our  problem  yields.  For,  measuring  and  joining  all 
the  links  of  evidence  according  to  the  methods  described  in  the  paper 
referred  to,  I obtain  a row  of  thirty-four  nines  following  a decimal  point. 
A fortiori , if  we  take  account  of  the  second  guesses. 

“These  figures  more  impressively  than  any  words  proclaim  the 
w certainty  that  the  recorded  observations  must  have  resulted  either  from 
‘ collusion  on  the  part  of  those  concerned  (the  hypothesis  of  illusion  being 
excluded  by  the  simplicity  of  the  experiments),  or  from  thought - 
trantference  of  the  sort  which  the  investigators  vindicate.” 

A large  number  of  trials  were  also  made  in  which  the  group  of 
agents  included  one  or  more  of  the  Creery  family ; and  as  bearing  on 
the  hypothesis  of  an  ingenious  family  trick,  it  is  worth  noting  that — 
except  where  Mr.  Creery  himself  was  thus  included — the  percentage 
of  successes  was,  as  a rule,  not  appreciably  higher  under  these 
conditions  than  when  the  Committee  alone  were  in  the  secret.4  When 

1 The  formula  is  adequate  *to  prove  that  an  inferior  limit  of  tfife  sought  probability 
is  *9099. 

2 Owing  to  the  rapid  convergency  of  the  series  which  we  have  to  sum  it  will  be  found 
sufficient  to  evaluate  two  or  three  terms. 

8 Tables  of  Logarithms,  and  of  the  values  of  log  V (x  + 1). 

4 Here,  for  instance,  is  Professor  Barrett’s  record  of  a casual  trial  made  on  August  4th, 
1882 — only  he  and  Mrs.  Myers  knowing  the  card  selected.  Eight  cards  were  successively 
drawn  from  a pack ; of  these,  three  were  guessed  completely  right— two  of  them  at  the 
first  attempt  and  the  third  at  the  second  attempt ; in  this  last  case  the  first  guess  was  the 
nine  of  clubs,  and  the  second  the  nine  of  spades,  that  being  the  card  chosen..  In  addition  to 
these  the  suit  was  given  rightly  three  out  of  the  remaining  five  times,  the  pips  or  court 
card  twice  out  of  the  five.  Immediately  after  this  experiment  the  two  younger  sisters  of 

n.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE ST 

Mr.  Creery  was  among  the  agents,  the  average  of  success  was  far 
higher;1  but  his  position  in  the  affair  was  precisely  the  same  as  our 
own ; and  the  most  remarkable  results  were  obtained  while  he  was 
himself  still  in  a state,  of  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the 
phenomena  which  he  was  investigating. 

One  further  evidential  point  should  be  noted.  Supposing  such 
a thing  os  a genuine  faculty  of  thought-transference  to  exist,  and  to 
be  capable,  for  example,  of  evoking  in  one  mind  the  idea  of  a card  on 
which  other  minds  are  concentrated,  we  might  naturally  expect  that 
the  card-pictures  conveyed  to  the  percipient  would  present  various 
degrees  of  distinctness,  and  that  there  would  be  a considerable  number 
of  approximate  guesses,  as  they  might  bo  given  by  a person  who  was 
allowed  one  fleeting  glimpse  at  a card  in  an  imperfect  light.  Such 
a- person  jnight  often  fail  to  name  thd  card  correctly,  but  his  failures 
would  be  apt  to  be  far  more  nearly  right  than  those  of  another 
person  who  was  simply  guessing  without  any  sort  of  guidance.  This 
expectation  was  abundantly  confirmed  in  our  experiments.  Thus,  in 
a series  of  32  trials,  where  only  5 first  guesses  were  completely 
right,  the  suit  was  14  times  running  named  correctly  on  the  first 
trial,  and  reiterated  on  the  second.  Knave  was  very  frequently 
guessed  as  King,  and  vice  versd,  the  suit  being  given  correctly. 

the  guesser  were  called  in  and  allowed  to  know  the  card  chosen  by  Mrs.  Myers  and 
Professor  Barrett.  The  results,  compared  with  the  preceding,  were  as  follows : — 

In  the  absence  of  the  sisters.  Eight  experiments.  Two  complete  successes  on  the 
first  attempt  and  one  on  the  second. 

With  the  assistance  of  the  sisters  as  agents.  Seven  experiments.  Two  complete 
successes  on  the  first  attempt  and  one  on  the  second. 

And  to  make  the  coincidence  more  curious,  the  partial  successes  were  identical  in 
number  with  those  of  the  previous  series. 

• 1 Even  the  successes  obtained  when  Mr.  Creery  was  helping^  us  were  less  remark- 

able than  those  which,  according  to  his  records,  had  been  obtained  in  the  earlier  trials, 
when  the  whole  affair  was  regarded  as  an  evening’s  amusement,  and  the  children  were 
without  any  sort  of  yine  or  anxiety.  Still,  with  his  assistance,  we  have  had  such 
successes  as  the  following.  Out  of  31  trials  with  cards  (the  chances  against  suc- 
cess by  accident  being  in  each  case  51  to  1)  17  rightly  guessed  at  the  first  attempt, 
at  the  second,  4 at  the  third;  8 consecutive  successes  in  naming  cards  drawn 
at  random  from  a full  pack ; and  the  following  series,  where  the  names  on  the  left  hand, 
written  down  'at  random  by  one  of  ourselves,  are  what  the  agents  silently  concentrated 
their  minds  on,  and  the  names  on  the  right  hand  are  what  the  percipient  said,  usually 
in  two  or  three  seconds  after  the  experiment  began : — 

William  Stubbs. — William  Stubbs. 

Eliza  Holmes. — Eliza  H 

Isaac  Harding. — Isaac  Harding. 

Sophia  Shaw. — Sophia  Shaw. 

Hester  Willis, — Cassandra,  then  Hester  Wilson, 

John  Jones . — John  Jones. 

Timothy  Taylor.— Tom,  then  Timothy  Taylor, 

Esther  Ogde. —Esther  Ogle. 

Arthur  Higgins.— Arthur  Higgins. 

Alfred  Henderson. --Alfred  Henderson. 

Amy  Erogmore.—Amy  Freemore.  Amv  Frogmore, 

Albert  Snelgrove. — Albert  Singrore.  Albert  Grover, 

28  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : [chap. 

The  number  of  pips  named  was  in  many  cases  only  one  off  the  right 
number,  this  sort  of  failure  being  specially  frequent  when  the 
number  was  over  six.  Again,  the  correct  answer  was  often  given, 
as  it  were,  piecemeal — in  two  partially  incorrect  guesses — the  pips 
or  picture  being  rightly  given  at  the  first  attempt,  and  the  suit 
at  the  second ; and  in  the  same  way  with  numbers  of  two  figures,  one 
of  them  would  appear  in  the  first  guess  and  the  other  in  the  second.1 

Before  we  leave  these  eafly  experiments,  one  interesting  question 
presents  itself,  which  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  wider  subject 
of  this  book.  In  what  form  was  the  impression  flashed  on  the 
percipient’s  mind  ? What  were  the  respective  parts  in  the 
phenomena  played  by  the  mental  eye  and  the  mental  ear?  The 
points  just  noticed  in  connection  with  the  partial  guessing  of  cards 
seem  distinctly  in  favour  of  the  mental  eye,  A king  looks  like  a 
knave,  but  the  name * have  no  similarity.  So  with  numbers.  .35  is 
guessed  piecemeal,  the  answers  being  45  and  43 ; so  57  is  attempted  as 
47  and  45.  Now  the  similarity  in  sound  between  three  and  thirty  in 
43  and  35,  or  between  five  and  fifty  in  45  and  57,  is  not  extremely 
strong ; while  the  picture  of  the  3 or  the  5 is  identical  in  either  pair. 
On  the  other  hand,  names  of  approximate  sound  were  often  given 
instead  of  the  true  ones ; as  “ Chester  ” for  Leicester,  “ Biggis  ” for 

1 To  illustrate  these  various  points,  I will  give  one  series  where  the  success  was  below 
the  average. 

Cambridge , August  3rd,  1882. 

Miss  Mary  Creery  was  outside  the  closed  and  locked  door, — a thick  and  well-fitting  one — 
and  a yard  or  two  from  it,  under  the  close  observation  of  a member  of  the 
Committee,  who  observed  her  attentively.  A card  was  chosen  by  one  of  the 
Committee  cutting  a pack  ; the  fact  that  the  card  had  been  selected  was  indicated 
to  the  guesser  by  a single  tap  on  the  door.  The  selected  card  was  placed  in  view 
of  all  the  agents,  who  regarded  it  intently.  After  the  guesser  had  named  a card 
loudly  enough  to  be  heard  through  the  door,  the  word  “ No  ” or  11  Right,”  as  the 
case  might  be,  was  said  by  one  of  the  Committee ; otherwise  complete  silence 
preserved. 

The  cards  chosen  are  printed  on  the  left,  the  guesses  on  the  right.  Two  guesses  only 
were  allowed. 

1.  Three  of  hearts.— Ton  of  spades  (No).  King  of  clubs  (No). 

2.  Seven  of  clubs . — Nine  of  diamonds  (No).  Seven  of  hearts  (No). 

3.  Ten  of  diamonds . — Queen  of  spades  (No).  Ten  of  diamonds  (Right). 

4.  Eight  of  spades . — King  of  clubs  (No).  Ten  of  spades  (No). 

5.  Nine  of  hearts . — Nine  of  clubs  (No).  Ace  of  hearts  (No), 

0.  Three  of  diamonds . — Six  of  diamonds  (No).  Ten  oi  diamonds  (No). 

7.  Knave  of  spades . — King  of  spades  (No).  Queen  of  clubs  (No). 

8.  Six  of  spades.— Six  of  spades  (Right). 

0.  Queen  of  clubs.— Queen  of  diamonds  (No).  Ten  of  clubs  (No). 

10.  Two  of  clubs. — Ten  of  diamonds  (No).  Ace  of  diamonds  (No), 

Here  there  were  only  two  complete  successes ; and  in  tabulating  results  and  computing 
averages  we  should  of  course  count  all  the  trials  except  the  third  and  eighth  as  complete 
failures.  But  the  result  numbered  7 was  on  the  verge  of  complete  success ; in  5 and  9 the 
correct  description  was  given  piecemeal;  and  in  2 the  number  of  pips  was  correctly 
given. 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

29 

Billings,  “ Freemore  ” for  Frogmore.  Snelgrove  was  reproduced  as 
“ Smgrore  ” ; the  last  part  of  the  name  was  soon  given  as  “ Grover,” 
and  the  attempt  was  then  abandoned — the  child  remarking  afterwards 
that  she  thought  of  “ Snail  ” as  the  first  syllable,  but  it  had  seemed  to 
her  too  ridiculous.  Professor  Barrett,  moreover,  successfully  obtained 
a German  word  of  which  the  percipient  could  have  formed  no  visual 
image.1  The  children’s  own  account  was  usually  to  the  effect  that 
they  “ seemed  see  ” the  thing ; but  thi§,  perhaps,  does  not  come  to 
much ; as  a known  object,  however  suggested,  is  likely  to  be  instantly 
visualised.  On  the  whole,  then,  the  conclusion  seems  to  be  that,  with 
these  “ subjects,”  both  modes  of  transference  were  possible ; and  that 
they  prevailed  in  turn,  according  as  this  or  that  was  better  adapted 
to  the  particular  case. 

§ 6.  I have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  our  series  of  trials  with  the 
members  of  the  Creery  family,  as  it  is  to  those  trials  that  we  owe 
our  own  conviction  of  the  possibility  of  genuine  thought-transference 
between  persons  in  a normal  state.  I have  sufficiently  explained  that 
we  do  not  expect  the  results  to  be  as  crucial  for  persons  who  were  not 
present,  and  to  whom  we  are  ourselves  unknown,  as  they  were  for  us ; 
and  that  it  cannot  be  “ in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  ” only 
that  such  a stupendous  fact  as  the  transmission  of  ideas  otherwise 
than  through  the  recognised  sensory  channels  will  be  established. 
The  testimony  must  be  multiplied ; the  responsibility  must  be  spread ; 
and  I shall  immediately  proceed  to  describe  further  results  obtained 
with  other  agents  and  other  percipients.  But  first  it  may  perhaps  be 
asked  of  us  why  we  did  not  exploiter  this  remarkable  family  further. 
It  was  certainly  our  intention  tot  do  what  we  could  in  this  direction, 
and  by  degrees  to  procure  for  our  friends  an  opportunity  of  judging 
for  themselves.  This  point,  however,  was  one  which  could  only  bo 
cautiously  pressed.  Mr.  Creery  was  certainly  justified  in  regarding 
his  daughters  as  something  more  than  mere  subjects  ■of  experiments, 
and  in  hesitating  to  make  a show  of  them  to  persons  who  might,  or 
rather  who  reasonably  must,  begin  by  entertaining  grave  doubts  as  to 
their  good  faith.  It  must  be  remembered  that  we  were  dealing,  not 
with  chemical  substances,  but  with  youthful  minds,  liable  to  be  reduced 
to  confusion  by  anything  in  the  demeanour  of  visitors  which  inspired 

- distaste  or  alarm ; and  even  with  the  best  intentions,  “ a childly  Way 
- • 

1 In  an  account  of  some  experiments  with  words,  which  we  have  received  from  a 
correspondent,  it  is  stated  that  success  was  decidedly  more  marked  in  cases  where  them 
was  a broad  vowel  sound* 

30  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

* 

with  children”  is  not  easy  to  adopt  where  the  children  concerned  are 
objects  of  suspicious  curiosity.  More  especially  might  these  considera- 
tions have,  weight,  when  failure  was  anticipated  for  the  first  attempts 
made  under  new  conditions.  And  this  suggests  another  difficulty,  which 
has  more  frequently  recurred  in  the  experimental  branches*  of  our 
work.  The  would-be  spectators  themselves  maybe  unable  or  unwilling 
to  fulfil  the  necessary  conditions.  Before  introducing  them,  it  is 
indispensable  to  obtain  some  guarantee  that  they  on  their  part  will 
exercise  patience,  make  repeated  trials,  and  give  the  “ subjects”  a fair 
opportunity  of  getting  used  to  their  presence.  Questions  of  mood,  of 
goodwill,  of  familiarity,  may  hold  the  same  place  in  psychical  investi- 
gation as  questions  of  temperature  in  a physical  laboratory ; and  till 
this  is  fully  realised,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  multiply  .testimony  to  the 
extent  that  we  should  desire.  ( * 

In  the  case  of  the  Greery  family,  however, .we  met  with  a difficulty 
of  another  kind.  Had  the  faculty  of  whose  existence  we  assured  our- 
selves continued  in  full  force,  it  would  doubtless  have  been  possible  in 
time  to  bring  the  phenomena  under  the  notice  of  a sufficient  number 
of  painstaking  and  impartial  observers.  But  the  faculty  did  not  con- 
tinue in  full  force ; on  the  contrary,  the  average  of  successes  gradually 
declined,  and  the  children  regretfully  acknowledged  that  their 
capacity  and  confidence  were  deserting  them.  The  decline  was* 
equally  observed  even  in  the  trials  which  they  held  amongst  them- 
selves; and  it  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  any  increased 
stringency  in  the  precautions  adopted.  No  precautions,  indeed,  could 
be  stricter  than  that  confinement  to  our  own  investigating  group 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  idea  to  be  transferred,  which  was,  from  the 
very  first,  a condition  of  the  experiments  on  which  we  absolutely 
relied.  The  fact  has  just  to  be  accepted,  as  an  illustration  .of  the 
fleeting  character  which  seems  to  attach  to  this  and  other  forms 
of  abnormal  sensitiveness.  It  seems  probable  that  the  telepathic' 
faculty,  if  we  may  so  name  it,  is  not  an  inborn,  or  lifelong  possession ; 
or,  at  any  rate,  that  very  slight  disturbances  may  suffice  .to  paralyse, 
it.  The  Creerys  had  their  most  startling  successes  at  first,  when  the 
affair  was  a surprise  and  an  amusement,  or  later,  at  short  and 
seemingly  casual  trials ; the  decline  set  in  with  their  sense  that  the 
experiments  had  become  matters  of  weighty  importance  to  us,  wad  of 
somewhat  prolonged  strain  and  tediousness  to  them.  So,  on  a minor 
scale,  in  trials  among  our  own  friends,  we  have  sqpn  a fortunate 
evening,  when  the  spectators  were  interested  and  the  percipient 

II, J ; TH0UGHT-TRAN8FERRRCR  $1„ 

excited  and  confident,  succeeded  by  a series  of  failures  when  the 
results  were  more  anxiously  awaited.  It  is  almost  inevitable  that  a 
percipient  who  has  aroused  interest  by  marked  success  on  several 
occasions,  should  feel  in  a way  respon&ible  for  furthter  results;  and 
yet  any  real  pre-occupation  with  such  an  idea  seems  likely  to  be 
fatal.  The  conditions  are  clearly  unstable.  But  of  course  the  first 
question  for  science  is  not  whether  the  phenomena  can  be  produced 
"to  order,  but  whether  in  a sufficient  number  of  series  the  proportion 
o(  success  to  failure  is  markedly  above  the  probable  result  of  chance. 

§ 7.  Before  leaving  this  class  of  experiments,  I may  mention  an 
interesting  development  which  it  has  lately  received.  In  the  Revue 
Philospphique  fpy  December,  1884,  M.  Ch.  Richet,  the  well-known 
savant  and  editor  of  the  Revue  Scientifique,  published  a paper,  entitled 
“ La  Suggestion  Mentale  et  le  Calcul  des  Probability, ” in  the  first 
part  of  which  an-  account  is  given  of  some  experiments  with 
cards  precisely  similar  in  plan  to  those  above  described.  A card 
being  drawn  at  random  out  of  a pack,  the  “ agent  ” fixed  his 
attention  on  it,  and  the  “percipient”  endeavoured  to  name  it. 
But  M.  Richet’s  method  contained  this  important  novelty:  that 
though  the  success,  as  judged  by  the  results  of  any  particular  series 
of  trials,  seemed  slight  (showing  that  he  was  not  experimenting  with 
what  we  should  consider  “ good  subjects  ”),  he  made  the  trials  on  a 
sufficiently  extended  scale  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  the  right  guesses 
were  on  the  whole,  'though  not  strikingly;  above  the  number  that 
pure  accident  would  account  for,  and  that  their  total  was  considerably 
above  that  number. 

• -This  observation  involves  a new  and  striking  application  of  the 
calculus  of  probabilities.  Advantage  is  taken  of  the  fact  that,  the 
larger  the  number  of  trials  made  under  conditions  where  success 
is  purely  accidental,  the  more  nearly  will  the  total  number  of  successes 
attained  conform  to  the  figure  which  the  formula  of  probabilities 
gives.  For  instance,  if  some  one  draws  a card  at  random  out  of  a full 
pack,  and  before  it  has  been  looked  at  by  any  one  present  I make  a 
guess  at  its  suit,  my  chance  of  being  right  is,  of  course,  1 in  4. 
Similarly,  if  the  process  is  repeated  52  times,  the  “probable”  number 
of  Successes,  according  to  thp  strict  calculus  of  probabilities,  is  13  ; in 
520  trials  the  probable  number  of  successes  is  130.  Now,  if,  we 
consider  only  % short  series  of  52  guesses,  I may  be  accidentally  right 
many  more  times  than  13  or  many  less  times.  But  if  the  series  be 

32  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : ' [chap. 

prolonged — if  520  guesses  be  allowed  instead  of  52 — the  actual 
number  of  successes  will  vary  from  the  probable  number  within  much 
smaller  limits;  and  if  we  suppose  an  indefinite  prolongation,  'the 
proportional  divergence  between  the  actual  and  the  probable  number 
will  become  infinitely  small.  This  being  so,  it  is  clear  that  if,  in  a 
very  short  series  of  trials,  we  find  a considerable  difference  between 
the  actual  number  of  successes  and  the  probable  number,  there  is  no 
reason  for  regarding  this  difference  as  anything  but  purely  accidental ; 
but  if  we  find  a similar  difference  in  a very  long  series,  we  are 
justified  in  surmising  that  some  condition  beyond  mere  accident  has 
been  at  work.  If  cards  be  drawn  in  succession  from  a pack,  and  I 
guess  the  suit  rightly  in  3 out  of  4 trials,  I shall  be  foolish  to  be 
surprised;  but  if  I guess  the  suit  rightly  in  3,0Q0  out  of  4,000’ 
trials,  I shall  be  equally  foolish  not  to  be  surprised. 

Now,  M.  Richet  continued  his  trials  until  he  had  obtained  a con- 
siderable total;  and  the  results  were  such  as  at  any  rate  to  suggest  that 
accident  had  not  ruled  undisturbed — that  a guiding  condition  had 
been  introduced  which  affected  in  the  right  direction  a certain  small 
percentage  of  the  guesses  made.  That  condition,  if  it  existed,  could 
be  nothing  else  than  the  fact  that,  prior  to  the  guess  being  made,  a 
person  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  guesser  had  concentrated  his 
attention  on  the  card  drawn.  Hence  the  results,  so  far  as  they  go, 
make  for  the  reality  of  the  faculty  of  “mental  suggestion.”  The 
faculty,  if  present,  was  clearly  only  slightly  developed ; whence  the 
necessity  of  experimenting  on  a very  large  scale  before  its  genuine 
influence  on  the  numbers  could  be  even  surmised. 

Out  of  2,927  trials  at  guessing  the  suit  of  a card,  drawn  at 
random,  and  steadily  looked  at  by  another  person,  the  actual  numbfer 
of  successes  was  789 ; the  probable  number,  had  pure  accident  pre- 
vailed, was  732.  The  total  was  made  up  of  thirty-nine  series  of  differ- 
ent lengths,  in  which  eleven  persons  took  part,  M.  Richet  himself 
being  in  some  cases  the  guesser,  and  in  others  the  person  who  looked 
at  the  card.  He  observed  that  when  a large  number  of  trials  were  made 
at  one  sitting,  the  aptitude  of  both  persons  concerned  seemed  to  be  ' 
affected ; it  became  harder  for  the  “ agent  ” to  visualise,  and  the 
proportion  of  successes  on  the  guesser’s  part  decreased.  If  we  agree 
to  reject  from  the  above  total  all  the  series  in  which  over  100  trials 
were  consecutively  made,  the  numbers  become  more  striking.1  Out  of 

1 It  should  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  introduction  of  any  principle  of  selection. 
<(fter  the  experiment,  is  always  objectionable.  For  some  more  or  less  plausible  reason  coula 
probably  always  be  found  for  setting  aside  the  less  favourable  results. 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

33 

II] 

1,833  trials,  he  then  got  510  successes,  the  probable  number  being 
only  458 ; that  is  to  say,  the  actual  number  exceeds  the  probable 
number  by  about  A. 

Clearly  no  definite  conclusion  could  be  based  on  such  figures  as 
the  above.  They  at  most  contained  a hint  for  more  extended  trials, 
but  a hint,  fortunately,  which  can  be  easily  followed  up.  We  are 
often  asked  by  acquaintances  what  thejj  can  do  to  aid  the  progress 
of  psychical  research.  These  experiments  suggest  a most  con- 
venient answer;  for  they  can  be  repeated,  and  a valuable  con- 
tribution made  to  the  great  aggregate,  by  any  two  persons  who 
have  a pack  of  "cards  and  a little  perseverance.1 

XJp  to  the  time  that  I write,  we  have  received,  in  all,  the  results 
of  17  batches  of  trials  in  the  guessing  of  suits.  In  11  of  the  batches 
one  person  acted  as  agent  and  another  as  percipient  throughout : the 
other  6 batches  are  the  collective  results  of  trials  made  by  as  many 
groups  of  friends.  The  total  number  of  trials  was  17,653,  and  the 
total  number  of  successes  was  4,760 ; which  exceeds  by  347  the 
number  which  was  the  most  probable  if  chance  alone  acted.  The 
probability  afforded  by  this  result  for  the  action  of  a cause  other 
than  chance  is  ‘999,999,98 — or  practical  certainty.2  I need  hardly  say 
that  there  has  been,  here  no  selection  of  results ; all  who  undertook 
the  trials  were  specially  requested  to  send  in  their  report,  whatever 
the  degree  of  success  or  unsuccess;  and  we  have  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  this  direction  has  been  ignored.  It  is  thus  an 
additional  point  of  interest  that  in  only  one  of  the  batches  did  the 
result  fall  below  the  number  which  was  the  most  probable  one  for 
mere  chance  to  give.  And  if  we  take  only  those  batches,  10  in 
number,  in  which  a couple  of  experimenters  made  as  many  as  1,000 
trials  and  over,  the  probability  of  a cause  other  than  chance  which 
the  group,  of  results  yields  is  estimated  by  one  method  to  be 
‘999,908,999, 96,  and  by  another  to  be  ‘999,999,999,999,2. 

To  this  record  must  be  added  another,  not  less  striking,  of 
experiments  which,  (though  part  of  the  same  effort  to  obtain  large 
collective  results,)  differed  in  form  from  the  above,  and  could  not 

* The  rules  to  observe  are  these  : (1)  The  number  of  trials  contemplated  (1,000,  2,000. 
or  whatever  it  may  be)  should  be  specified  beforehand.  (2)  Not  more  than  60  trials  should 
be  made  on  any  one  occasion.  (3)  The  agent  should  draw  the  card  at  random,  and  cut 
the  pack  between  each  draw.  (4)  The  success  or  failure  of  each  gueBS  should  be  silently 
recorded,  and  the  percipient  should  be  kept  in  ignorance,  of  the  results  until  the  whole 
series*  is  completed.  The  results  should  be  sent  to  me  at  14,  Dean’s  Yard,  S.W. 

2 For  these  calculations  we  have  again  to  thank  Mr.  F.  Y.  Edgeworth.  For  an 
explanation  of  the  methods  employed,  see  his  article  in  Vol.  iiL  of  the  Proceedings  of 
the  S.P.E.,  already  referred  to,  and  also  his  paper  on  “Methods  of  Statistics ” (tub,  fin,} 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Statistical  Society  for  1885. 

D 

34 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

therefore,  figure  in  the  aggregate.  Thus,  in  a set  of  D76  trials,  carried 
out  by  Miss  B.  Lindsay  (late  of  Girton  College),  and  a group  of 
friends,  where  the  choice  was  between  6 uncoloured  forum—' 
9 specimens  of  each  being  combined  in  a pack  from  which  the  agent 
drew  at  random — the  total  of  right  guesses  was  198,  the  odds,  against 
obtaining  that  degree  of  success  by  chance  being  1,000  to  1. 
In  another  case,  the  choice  lay  between  4 things,  but  these  were 
not  suits,  but  simple  colour  a — red,  blue,  green,  and  yellow.  The 
percipient  throughout  was  Mr.  A.  J.  Shilton,  of  40,  Paradise  Street, 
Birmingham  ; the  agent  (except  in  one  small  group,  when  Professor 
Poynting,  of  Mason  College,  acted)  was  Mr.  G.  T.  Cashmore, 
of  Albert  Road,  Handsworth.  Out  of  505  trials,  261  were  successes. 
The  probability  here  afforded  of  a cause  other  than  chance  is  con- 
siderably more  than  a trillion  trillions  to  1.  And  still  more 
remarkable  is  the  result  obtained  by  the  Misses  Wingfield,  of  The 
Redings,  Totteridge,  in  some  trials  where  the  object  to  be  guessed  was 
a niupber  of  two  digits — i.e.,  .one  of  the  90  numbers  included  in  the 
series  from  10  to  99 — chosen  at  random  by  the  agent.  Out  of  2,624 
trials,  where  the  most  probable  number  of  successes  was  29,  the 
actual  number  obtained  was  no  less  than  275 — to  say  nothing  of  78 
other  cases  in  which  the  right  digits  were  guessed  in  the  reverse 
order.  In  the  last  506  trials,  the  agent  (who  sat  some  6 feet  behind 
the  percipient)  drew  the  numbers  at  random  out  of  a bpwl;  the 
odds  against  the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  degree  of  success — 21 
right  guesses — obtained  in  this  batch  are  over  2,000,000  to  1. 
The  argument  for  thought-transference  afforded  by  the  total  cannot 
be  expressed  here  in  figures,  as  it  requires  167  nines — that  is,  the 
probability  is  far  more  than  the  ninth  power  of  a trillion  to  1.  c 
Card-experiments  of  the  above  type  offer  special  conveniences  for 
the  very  extended  trials  which  we  wish  to  see  carried  out : they  are 
easily  made  and  rapidly  recorded.  At  the  same  time  it  must  not  be 
assumed  that  the  limitation  of  the  field  of  choice  to  a v$ry  small 
number  of  known  objects  is  a favourable  condition ; it  is  probably 
the  reverse.  For  from  the  descriptions  which  intelligent  percipients 
have  given,  it  would  seem  that  the  best  condition  is  a sort  of  inward 
blankness,  on  which  the  image  of  the  object,  sometimes  suddenly 
but  often  only  gradually,  takes  shape.  And  this  inward  blankness 
is  hard  to  ensure  when  the  objects  for  choice  are  both, few 
and  known.  For  their  images  are  then  apt  to  importune  the  mind, 
and  to  lead  to  guessing;  the  little  procession  of  then!  marches  so 

it]  T.HOUGHT-TRA  KSFEREKCE.  35 

readily  across  the  mental  stage  that  it  is  difficult  to  drive  it  off,  and 
wait  for  a angle  image  to  present  itself  independently.  Moreover 
idiosyncrasies  on  the  guesser’s  part  have  the  opportunity  of  obtruding 
themselves — as  an  inclination,  or  a disinclination,  to  repeat  the  same 
guess  several  times  in  succession.  These  objections  of  course  reach 
their  maximum  if  the  field  of  choice  be  narrowed  down  to  two  things — 
as  where  not  the  suit  but  the  colour  of  the  cards  is  to  be  guessed.  And 
in  .fact  some  French  trials  of  this  type,  and  an  aggregate  of  6,500 
carried  out  by  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,1  give  a 
result  only  very  slightly  in  excess  of  the  most  probable  number. 

§ 8.  I may  now  pass  to  another  class  of  experiments,  in  which  the 
impression  transferred  was  almost  certainly  of  the  visual  sort,  inasmuch 
as  any  verbal  description  of  the  object  would  require  a group  of  words 
too  numerous  to  present  any  clear  and  compact  auditory  character. 
An  object  of  this  kind  is  supplied  by  any  irregular  figure  or 
arrangement  of  lines  which  suggests  nothing  in  particular.  We  have 
had  two  remarkably  successful  series  of  experiments,  extending  over 
many  days,  in  which  the  idea  of  such  a figure  has  been  telepathically 
transferred  from  one  mind  to  another.  A rough  diagram  being 
first  drawn  by  one  of  the  investigating  Committee,  the  agent  pro- 
ceeded to  concentrate  his  attention  on  it,  or  on  the  memory  which  he 
retained  of  it ; and  in  a period  varying  from  a few  seconds  to  a few 
minutes  the  percipient  was  able  to  reproduce  the  diagram,  or  a close 
approximation  to  it,  on  paper.  No  contact  was  permitted,  except  on 
a few  occasions,  which,  on  that  very  account,  we  should  not  present  as 
crucial ; and  in  order  to  preclude  the  agent  from  giving  unconscious 
h]nts — e.g.,  by  drawing  with  his  finger  on  the  table  or  making 
movements  suggestive  of  the  figure  in  the  air — he  was  kept  out  of 
the  percipient’s  sight. 

Of  the  two  series  mentioned,  the  second  is  evidentially  to  be 
preferred.  For  in  the  first  series  the  agent,  as  well  as  the  percipient, 
was  always  the  same  person ; and  we  recognise  this  as  pro  tanto  an 
objection.  Not  indeed  that  the  simple  hypothesis  of  collusion  would 

1 Report  by  Professors  J,  M.  Peirce  and  E.  C.  Pickering,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Society  for  Psychical  Mesearch  Vol.  i.,  p.  19.  This  Society  has  also  carried  out 
12,130  trials  with  the  10  digits — which  similarly  gave  a result  only  slightly  in  excess  of 
theoretic  probability.  But  here  the  digits  to  be  thought  of  by  the  agent  were  not  taken 
throughout  in  a purely  accidental  order,  but  in  regularly  recurring  decade,  in  each  of 
which  each  digit  occurred  once : and  consequently  the  later  guesses  (Both  within  the  same 
decad  and  hi  successive  decade)  might  easily  be  Biassed  by  the  earlier  ones.  This  system 
may  "lead  to?  interesting  statistics  in  other  ways;  but  to  give  thoughtrtransference  fair 
play  in  experiments  with  a limited  number  of  objects,  it  seems  essential  that  the  prder 
of  selection  shall  be  edtirely  haphazard,  and  that  the  guesser’s  mind  shall  be  quite 
'unembarrassed  by  the  notion  of  a' scheme. 

36  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  {chaps 

-at  all*  meet  the  difficulties  of  the  case.  Faith  in  the  power  of 
a secret  code  must  be  carried  to  the  verge  of  superstition,  before  ifc 
will  be  easy  to  believe  that  auditory  signals,  the  material  for  which 
(as  I pointed  out  above)  is  limited  to  the  faintest  variations  in  the 
signaller’s  method  of  breathing,  can  fully  and  faithfully  describe  a 
complicated  diagram;  especially  when  the  variations,  imperceptible  to 
the  closest  observation  of  the  bystanders,  would  have  to  penetrate  to 
the  intelligence  of  a percipient  whose  head  was  enveloped  in  bandage, 
bolster-case,  and  blanket.  But  in  spite  of  all,  suspicion  will, 
reasonably  or  unreasonably,  attach  to  results  which  are,  so  to  speak, 
a monopoly  of  two  particular  performers.  In  our  second  series  of 
experiments  this  objection  was  obviated.  There  were  two  percipients, 
and  a considerable  group  of  agents,  each  of  whom,  when  alone  with  one 
or  other  of  the.  percipients,  was  successful  in  transferring  his  impres- 
sion. It  is  this  series,  therefore,  that  I select  for  fuller  description. 

1 We  owe  these  remarkable  experiments  to  the  sagacity  and  energy 
of  Mr.  Malcolm  Guthriel  J.P.,  of  Liverpool.  At  the  beginning  of  1883, 
Mr.  Guthrie  happened  to  read  an  article  on  thought-transference  in 
a magazine,  and  though  completely  sceptical,  he  determined  to  make 
some  trials  on  his  own  account.  He  was  then  at  the  head  of  an 
establishment  which  gives  employment  to  many  hundreds  of  persons ; 
and  he  was  informed  by  a relative  who  occupied  a position  of  responsi- 
bility in  this  establishment  that  she  had  witnessed  remarkable  results 
in  some  casual  trials  made  by  a group  of  his  employees  after  busi- 
ness hours.  He  at  once  took  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  and 
went  steadily,  but  cautiously,  to  work.  He  restricted  the  practice 
of  the  novel  accomplishment  to  weekly  meetings ; and  he  arranged 
with  his  friend,  Mr.  James  Birchall,  the  hon.  secretary  of  the  Liver- 
pool Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  that  the  latter  shoiild  make 
a full  and  complete  record  of  every  experiment  made.  Mr.  Guthrie 
thus  describes  the  proceedings : — 

“ I have  had  the  advantage  of  studying  a series  of  experiments  ab  ovo. 
I have  witnessed  the  genuine  surprise  which  the  operators  and  the 
* subjects  ’ have  alike  exhibited  at  their  increasing  successes,  and  at  the 
results  of  our  excursions  into  novel  lines  of  experiment.  The  affair  has 
not  been  the  discovery  of  the  possession  of  special  powers,  first  made  and 
then  worked  up  by  the  parties  themselves  for  gain  or  glory.  The 
experimenters  in  this  case  were  disposed  to  pass  the  matter  over  altogether 
as  one  of  no  moment,  and  only  put  themselves  at  my  disposal  in  regard  to 
experiments  in  order  to  oblige  me.  The  experiments  have  all  been  devised 
and  conducted  by  myself  and  Mr.  Birchall,  without  any  previous  intimation 
of  their  nature,  and  could  not  possibly  have  been  foreseen.  In  fact  they 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

37 

have  been  to  the  young  ladies  a succession  of  surprises.  No  set  of 
experiments  of  a similar  nature  has  ever  been  more  completely  known 
from  its  origin,  or  more  completely  under  the  control  of  the  scientific 
observer.” 

I must  pass  over  the  record  of  the  earlier  experiments,  where 
the  ideas  transferred  were  of  colours,  geometrical  figures,  cards,  and 
visible  objects  of  all  sorts,  which  the  percipient  was  to  name — these 
being  similar  ip  kind,  though  on  the  whole  superior  in  the  proportion 
of  successes,  to  those  already  described.1  The  reproduction  of 
diagrams  was  introduced  in  October,  1883,  and  in  that  and  the 
following  month  about  150  trials  were  made*  The  whole  series  has 
been  carefully  mounted  and  preserved  by  Mr.  Guthrie.  No  one 
could  look  through  them  without  perceiving  that  the  hypothesis  of 
chance  or  jguess-work  is  out  of  the  question  ; that  in  most  instances 
some  idea,  and  in  many  a complete  idea,  of  the  original  must,  by 
whatever  means,  have  been  present  in  the  mind  of  the  person  who 
made  the  reproduction.  In  Mr.  Guthries  words, — 

“ It  is  difficult  to  classify  them.  A great  number  of  them  are  decided 
successes ; another  large  number  give  part  of  the  drawing ; others  exhibit 
the  general  idea,  and  others  again  manifest  a kind  of  composition  of 
form.  Others,  such  as  the  drawings  of  flowers,  have  been  described  and 
named,  but  have  been  too  difficult  to  draw.  A good  many  are  perfect 
failures.  The  drawings  generally  run  in  lots.  A number  of  successful 
copies  will  be  produced  very  quickly,  and  again  a number  of  failures — 
indicating,  I think,  faultiness  on  the  part  of  the  agent,  or  growing 
fatigue  on  the  part  of  the  4 subject.’  Every  experiment,  whether 
successful  or  a failure,  is  given  in  the  order  of  trial,  with  the  conditions, 
name  of  4 subject 9 and  agent,  and  any  remarks  made  by  the  ‘ subject  * 
specified  at  the  bottom.  Some  of  the  reproductions  exhibit  the  curious 
pUbnomenon  of  inversion,  These  drawings  must  speak  for  themselves. 
The  principal  facts  to  be  borne  in  mind  regarding  them  are  that  they 
have  been  executed  through  the  instrumentality,  a$  agents,  of  persons  of 
unquestioned  probity,  and  that  the  responsibility  for  then)  is  spread  over 
a considerable  group  of  such  persons  ; while  the  conditions  to  be  observed 
were  so  simple — for  they  amounted  really  to  nothing  more  than  taking 
care  that  the  original  should  not  be  seen  by  the  * subject ' — that  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  suppose  them  to  have  been  eluded.” 

V 

' \The  full  record  of  the  experiments  will  be  found  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R., 
VoL  i.,  p.  264,  &c.,  and  Vol.  h.,  p.  24;  &c.  There  is  one  point  of  novelty  which  is  thus 
described  by  Mr.  Guthrie:  “We  tried  also  the  perception  of  motion,  and  found  that 
the  movements  of  objects  exhibited  could  be  discerned.  The  idea  was  suggested  by  an 
experiment  tried  with  a card,  which,  in  order  that  all  present  should  see,  Amoved  about, 
and  was  informed  by  the  percipient  that  it  was  a cara,  but  she  could  not  tell  which  ope 
because  it  seemed  to  be  moving  about.  On  a subsequent  occasion,  in  order  to  test  this 
perception  of  motion,  I bought  a toy  monkey,  which  worked  up  and  down  on  a stick  by 
means  of  a string  drawing  the  arms  and  lens  together.  The  answer  was : 4 1 see  red  ana 
yellow,  and  it  is  darker  at  one  end  than  tne  other.  It  is  like  a flag  moving  about— it  is 
moving.  . . . Now  it  is  opening  and  shutting  like  a pair  of  scissors/  ** 

38  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : [eiur. 

' I give  a few  specimens — not  unduly  favourable  ones,  but 
illustrating  the  “ spreading  of  responsibility  ” to  which  Mr.  Guthrie 
refers.  The  agents  concerned  were  Mr.  Guthrie ; Mr.  Steel,  the 
President  of  the  Liverpool  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society ; Mr. 
Birchall,  mentioned  above ; Mr.  Hughes,  B.A.,  of  St.  John’s  College, 
Cambridge  ; and  myself.  The  names  of  the  percipients  were  Miss 
Relph  and  Miss  Edwards.  The  conditions  which  I shall  describe 
were  those  of  the  experiments  in  which  I myself  took  part ; and  I 
have  lir.  Guthrie’s  authority  for  stating  that  they  were  uniformly 
observed  in  the  other  cases.  The  originals  were  for  the 
most  part  drawn  in  another  room  from  that  in  which  the 
percipient  was  placed.  The  few  executed  in  the  same  room  were 
drawn  while  the  percipient  was  blindfolded,  at  fi’  distance  from 
her,  and  in  such  a way  that  the  process  would  have  bean  wholly 
invisible  to  her  or  anyone  else,  even  had  an  attempt  been  made  to 
observe  it.  During  the  process  of  transference,  the  agent  looked 
steadily,  and  in  perfect  silence  at  the  original  drawing,  which  was 
placed  upon  an  intervening  wooden  stand;  the  percipient  sitting 
opposite  to  him,  and  behind  the  stand,  blindfolded  and  quite  stilL 
The  agent  ceased  looking  at  the  drawing,  and  the  blindfolding 
was  removed,  only  when  the  percipient  professed  herself  ready  to 
make  the  reproduction,  which  happened  usually  in  times  varying 
from  half-a-minute  to  two  or  three  minutes.  Her  position  rendered 
it  absolutely  impossible  that  she  should  obtain  a glimpse  of  the 
original.  Apart  from  the  blindfolding,-  she  could  not  have  done  so 
without  rising  from  her  seat  and  advancing  her  head  several  feet ; 
and  as  she  was  very  nearly  in  the  same  line  of  sight  as  the  drawing, 
and  so  very  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  agent’s  field  of  vision, 
the  ^lightest  approach  to  such  a movement  must  have  been 
instantly  detected.  The  reproductions  were  made  in  perfect  silence, 
the  agent  forbearing  to  follow  the  actual  process  of  the  drawing  with 
his  eyes,  though  he  was,  of  course,  able  to  keep  the  percipient  under 
the  closest  observation. 

In  the  case  of  all  the  diagrams,  except  those  numbered  7 and  8, 
the  agent  and  the  percipient  were  the  only  two  persons  in  the 
room  during  the  experiment.  In  the  case  of  numbers  7 and  8,  the 
agent  and  Miss  Relph  were  sitting  quite  apart  in  a comer  of  the 
room,  while  Mr;  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards  were  talking  in  - another 
part  of  it.  Numbers  1-6  are  specially  interesting  as  being  the 
complete  and  consecutive  series  of  a single  sitting. 

Mr.  Uuthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.  No  contact. 

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Mis*  Kdvwmi 
No  contact. 

Mr.  Guthrie  nnd  Miss  Edwards 
No  contact. 

"li\ 

jr 

No.  6.  Original  Drawing. 

© 

Mr.  Guthrie  uud  Miss  Eduards.  No  contact. 

No.  6.  Reproduction. 

Mis<f  Edwards  almost  directly  said,  ‘'Are  you  thinking  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  with  shells  and  ashes?”  and  then 
Js  it  n snail  or  a fish  ? then  drew  as  above.  * 

42 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

No.  7.  Original  drawing. 

Mr.  Curacy  nml  Mixfl  ltelph.  Contact  for  halfa-minute  l»efore  tho  reproduction  was  drawn. 

No.  7.  Reproduction. 

ii.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE . 43 

Na  & Original  Drawing.  No.  & Reproduction. 

Mr.  Gurney  and  Miss  Rclph.  No  contact. 

No.  9.  ‘ Origjnal  Drawing. 

Vj  £ %J 

Mr,  Birchall  and  Miss  Helph.  No  contact. 

No.  9.  Reproduction. 

Mias  Ralph  said  aha  seemed  to  see  a lot  of  rings,  as  if  they  were  moving,  and  she  could  not  get  them  steadily  before 
' ’ her  eyes. 

14 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS 

[chap.  , 

No.  10.  Original  Drawing. 

no.  10.  Reproduction. 

No.  II.  Original  Drawing. 

. THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

47 

NO.  15.  ORIQINAL  Orawinq. 

W ' " 

Mr.  H tight*  »nd  Miss  Edwards.  No  uontat  t 

No.  15.  Reproduction 

Miss  Edwards,  said, M It  is  like  a mask  at  a pantomime/*  and  immediately  drew  ae  abora 

n.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE, 

49 

| 9.  Soon  after  the  publication  of  these  results?  Mr.  Guthrie  was 
fortunate  enough  to  obtain  the  active  co-operation  of  Dr.  Oliver  J. 
Lodge,  Professor  of  Physics  in  University  College,  Liverpool,  who  carried 
out  a long  and  independent  series  of  experiments  with  the  same  two 
percipients,  and  completely  convinced  himself  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  phenomena.  In  his  report,1  he  says : — 

« As  regards  collusion  and  trickery,  na  one  who  has  witnessed  the 
absolutely  genuine  and  artless  manner  in  which  the  impressions  are 
described,  but  has  been  perfectly  convinced  of  the  transparent  honesty 
of  purpose  of  all  concerned.  This,  however,  is  not  evidence  to  persons 
who  have  not  been  present,  and  to  them  I can  only  say  that  to  the 
best  of  my  scientific  belief  no  collusion  or  trickery  was  possible  under 

the  varied  circumstances  of  the  experiments When 

one  has  the  control  of  the  circumstances,  can  change  them  at  will  and 
arrange  one's  own  experiments,  one  gradually  acquires  a belief  in  the 
phenomena  observed  quite  comparable  to  that  induced  by  the  repetition 

of  ordinary  physical  experiments We  have  many  times 

succeeded  with  agents  quite  disconnected  from  the  percipient  in  ordinary 
life,  and  sometimes  complete  strangers  to  them.  Mr.  Birchall,  the  head- 
master of  the  Birkdale  Industrial  Schpol,  frequently  acted ; and  the 
house  physician  at  the  Eye  and  Ear  Hospital,  Dr.  Shears,  had  a success- 
ful experiment,  acting  alone,  on  his  first  and  only  visit.  All  suspicion  of 
a pre-arranged  code  is  thus  rendered  impossible  even  to  outsiders  who  are 
unable  to  witness  the  obvious  fairness  of  all  the  experiments.” 

The  objects  of  which  the  idea  was  transferred  were  sometimes 
things  with  names  (cards,  key,  teapot,  flag,  locket,  picture  of  donkey, 
and  so  on),  sometimes  irregular  drawings  with  no  name.  Professor 
Lodge  satisfied  himself  that  auditory  as  well  as  visual  impressions 
played  a part— that  in  some  cases  the  idea  transferred  was  that  of 
thte  object  itself,  and,  in  others,  that  of  its  name ; thus  confirming 
the  conclusion  which  we  had  come  to  in  the  experiments  with  the 
Creery  family.  Of  the  two  percipients  one  seemed  more  susceptible 
to  the  visual,  and  the  other  to  the  auditory  impressions.  A case 
where  the  auditory  element  seems  clearly  to  have  come  in  is  the 
following.  The  object  was  a tetrahedron  rudely  drawn  in  projection, 
thus — 

A 

The  percipient  said:  “ Is  it  another  triangle?”  No  answer  was  given, 
but  Professor  Lodge  silently  passed  round  to  the  agents  a scribbled 
message,  “ Think  of  a pyramid.”  The  percipient  then  said,  “ I only 

1 Proceeding!  of  the  S.P.R.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  189,  &c. 

B 

50  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

see  a triangle  ” — thea  hastily,  “ Pyramids  of  Egypt.  No,  I shan’t  do 
this.”  Asked  to  draw,  she  only  drew  a triangle. 

I will  give  only  one  other  case  from  this  series,  which  is  important 
as  showing  that  the  percipient  may  be  simultaneously  influenced  by 
two  minds,  which  are  concentrated  on  two  different  things.  The  two 
agents  being  seated  opposite  to  one  another,  Professor  Lodge  placed 
between  them  a piece  of  pqper,  on  one  side  of  which  was  drawn  a 
square,  and  on  the  other  a cross.  They  thus  had  different  objects  to 

□ X 

Originals.  Reproduction. 

contemplate,  and  neither  knew  what  the  other  was  looking  at ; nor 
did  the  percipient  know  that  anything  unusual  was  being  tried. 
There  was  no  contact.  Very  soon  the  percipient  said,  “ I see  things 
moving  about  ...  I seem  to  see  two  things  ...  I see  first 
one  up  there  and  then  one  down  there  ...  I don’t  know  which 
to  draw  ...  I can’t  see  either  distinctly.”  Professor  Lodge 
said : “ Well,  anyhow,  draw  what  you  have  seen.”  She  took  off  the 
bandage  and  drew  first  a square,  and  then  said,  “ Then  there  was  the 
other  thing  as  well  . . . afterwards  they  seemed  to  go  into  one,” — 
and  she  drew  a cross  inside  the  square  from  corner  to  comer,  adding 
afterwards,  “I  don’t  know  what  made  me  put  it  inside.”  The 
significance  of  this  experimental  proof  of  joint  agency  will  be  more 
fully  realised  in  connection  with  some  of  the  spontaneous  cases. 

The  following  passage  from  the  close  of  Professor  Lodge’s  report 
has  a special  interest  for  us,  confirming,  as  it  does,  the  accounts  which 
we  had  received  from  our  own  former  “ subjects,”  and  the  views  above 
expressed,  as  to  the  conditions  of  success  and  failure  : — 

“ With  regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  percipients  when  receiving  an 
impression,  they  seem  to  have  some  sort  of  consciousness  of  the  action  of 
other  minds  on  them ; and  once  or  twice,  when  not  so  conscious,  have 
complained  that  there  seemed  to  be  ‘ no  power  ’ or  anything  acting,  and 
that  they  not  only  received  no  impression,  but  did  not  feel  as  if  they  were 
going  to. 

“ I asked  one  of  them  what  she  felt  when  impressions  were  coming 
freely,  and  she  said  she  felt  a sort  of  influence  or  thrill.  They  both  say 
that  several  objects  appear  to  them  sometimes,  but  that  one  among  them 
persistently  recurs,  and  they  have  a feeling  when  they  fix  upon  one  tfiat  it 
is  the  right  one. 

“ One  serious  failure  rather  depresses  them,  and  after  a success  others 
often  follow.  It  is  because  of  these  rather  delicate  psychological  con- 

II.] 

TIIO  UGHT-TRANSFEREXCE. 

51 

<litions  that  one  cannot  press  the  variations  of  an  experiment  as  far  as  one 
would  do  if  dealing  with  inert  and  more  dependable  matter.  Usually  the 
presence  of  a stranger  spoils  the  phenomena,  though  in  some  cases  a 
stranger  has  proved  a good  agent  straight  off. 

“ The  percipients  complain  of  no  fatigue  as  induced  by  the  experiments, 
and  I have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any  harm  is  done  them.” 

-*  It  is  the  “ delicate  psychological  conditions  ” of  which  Professor 
liodge  here  speaks  that  are  in  danger  of  being  ignored,  just  because 
they  cannot  be  measured  and  handled.  The  man  who  first  hears  of 
thought-transference  very  naturally  imagines  that,  if  it  is  a reality,  it 
ought  to  be  demonstrated  to  hinx  at  a moment’s  notice.  He  forgets 
that  the  experiment  being  essentially  a mental  one,  his  own 
presence — so  far  d§  he  has  a mind — may  be  a factor  in  it : that  he  is 
demanding  that  a delicate  weighing  operation  shall  be  carried 
out,  while  he  himself,  a person  of  unknown  weight,  sits  judicially  in 
one  of  the  scales.  After  a time  he  will  learn  to  allow  for  the 
conditions  of  his  instruments,  and  will  not  expect  in  the  operations 
of  an  obscure  vital  influence  the  rigorous  certainty  of  a chemical 
reaction. 

I cannot  conclude  this  division  of  the  subject  without  a 
reference  to  a remarkable  set  of  diagrams  which  appeared  in  Science 
for  July,  1885 — the  first-fruits  of  the  investigation  of  thought- 
transference  set  on  loot  by  the  American  Society  for  Psychical 
Research.  Most  of  the  trials  were  carried  out  by  Mr.  W.  H. 
Pickering  (brother  of  the  eminent  astronomer  at  Harvard),  and  his 
sister-in-law.  Though  the  success  is  far  less  striking  to  the  eye  than 
in  {he  several  English  series,  the  evidence  for  some  agency  beyond 
•chance  seems,  on  examination,  irresistible. 

§ 10.  So  far  the  present  sketch  has  included  transference  of 
impressions  of  the  visual  and  auditory  sorts  only — impressions, 
moreover,  which  for  the  most  .part  represented  formed  objects  or 
definite  groups  of  sensations,  not  sensations  pure  and  simple. 
These  are  not  only  by  far  the  most  important  forms  of  the 
phenomenon,  in  relation  to  the  wider  spontaneous  operations  of 
telepathy  which  we  shall  consider  in  the  sequel;  but  are  also 
the  most  convenient  forms  for  experiment.  Moreover,  I have 
been  ‘tracing  the  development  of  the  subject  historically ; and  it 
was  in  connection  with  ideas  belonging  to  the  higher  forms  of 
sense  that  the  transferences  to  percipients  who  were  in  a normal 

* 2 

52 

TIIE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

state  were  first  obtained.  But  tjie  existence  of  such  cases  would 
prepare  us  for  transferences  of  a more  elementary  type, — transferences 
of  a simple  formless  sensation  and  nothing  more,  which  should  im- 
press the  percipient  not  as  an  idea,  but  in  its  direct  sensational 
character ; and  if  the  phenomena  be  arranged  in  a logical  scale  from 
the  less  to  the  more  complex,  such  cases  would  have  the  priority. 
For  their  exhibition,  it  is  naturally  to  the  lower  senses  that  we  should 
look — taste,  smell,  and  touch — which  last  (since  a certain  intensity 
of  experience  seems  necessary)  we  should  hardly  expect  to  prove 
effective  till  it  reached  the  degree  of  pain.  These  lower  forms  are, 
in  fact,  those  which  preponderate  in  the  earlier  observations  of 
mesmeric  rapport  in  this  country;  and  our  own  experiments  in 
mesmerism  have  included  several  instances  of  this’*sort.1  Thus  the 
discovery  that  a similar  “community  of  sensation”  might  exist 
between  persons  in  a normal  state,  and  without  any  resort  to 
mesmeric  or  hypnotic  processes,  not  only  filled  up  an  obvious 
lacuna,  but  gave  a fresh  proof  of  the  fundamental  unity  of  our 
maiy -sided  subject. 

In  ihe  case  of  taste,  we  owe  the  discovery  to  Mr.  Guthrie — the 
phenomenon  having  been,  we  believe,  first  observed  by  him  on 
August  80th,  1888,  and  first  fully  examined  in  the  course  of  a visit 
which  Mr.  Myers  and  the  present  writer  paid  to  him  in  the  following 
week.  Failing  to  obtain  very  marked  success  in  other  lines  of 
experiments,  it  occurred  to  us  to  introduce  this  novel  form ; but  the 
superiority  of  the  results  was  probably  due  simply  to  the  fact  that 
they  were  obtained  on  the  later  days  of  our  visit,  when  the  “ subjects” 
had  become  accustomed  to  our  presence. 

I will  quote  the  report  made  at  the  time : — 

“The  taste  to  be  discerned  was  known  only  to  one  or  more  of  the  three 
actual  experimenters ; and  the  sensations  experienced  were  verbally 
described  by  the  ‘ subjects  ’ (not  written  down),  so  that  all  danger  of 
involuntary  muscular  guidance  was  eliminated.  ° 

“ A selection  of  about  twenty  strongly-tasting  substances  was  made. 
These  substances  were  enclosed  in  srn'all  bottles  and  small  parcels,  pre- 
cisely similar  to  one  another,  and  kept  carefully  out  of  the  range  of 
vision  of  the  ‘subjects,’  who  were,  moreover,  blindfolded,  so  that  no 
grimaces  made  by  the  tasters  could  be  seen.  The  ‘ subjects,’  in  fact,  had 
no  means  whatever  of  knowing,  through  the  sense  of  sight,  what  was  the 
substance  tasted. 

SST£  \st±s  £ 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

53 

“ Smell  had  to  be  guarded  against  with  still  greater  care.  When  the 
substance  was  odoriferous  the  packet  or  bottle  was  opened  outside  the 
room,  or  at  such  a distance,  and  so  cautiously  as  to  prevent  any  sensible 
smell  from  escaping.  The  experiments,  moreover,  were  conducted  in  the 
close  vicinity  of  a very  large  kitchen,  from  whence  a strong  odour  of 
beefsteak  and  onions  proceeded  during  almost  all  the  time  occupied.  The 
tasters  took  pains  to  keep  their  heads  high  above  the  c subjects,'  and  to 
avoid  breathing  with  open  mouth.  One  substance  (coffee)  tried  was  found 
to  give  off  a slight  smell,  in  spite  of  all  precautions,  and  an  experiment 
made  with  this  has  been  omitted. 

“ The  tasters  were  Mr.  Guthrie  (M.G.),  Mr.  Gurney  (E.G.),  and  Mr. 
Myers  (M.).  The  percipients  may  be  called  R.  and  E.  The  tasters  lightly 
placed  a hand  on  one  of  the  shoulders  or  hands  of  the  percipients — there 
not  being  the  same  objection  to  contact  in  trials  of  this  type  as  where 
lines  and  figures  are  concerned,  and  the  ‘subjects’  themselves  seeming  to 
have  some  faith  yji  it.  During  the  first  experiments  (September  3rd 
and  4th)  there  were  one  or  two  other  persons  in  the  room,  who,  however, 
were  kept  entirely  ignorant  of  the  substance  tasted.  During  the  experi- 
ments silence  was  preserved.  The  last  fifteen  of  them  (September  5th) 
were  made  when,  only  M.  G.,  E.  G.,  and  M.,  with  the  two  percipients,  were 
present7.  On  this  evening  E.  was,  unfortunately,  suffering  from  sore 
throat,  which  seemed  to  blunt  her  susceptibility.  On  this  occasion  none  of 
the  substances  w^ere  allowed  even  to  enter  the  room  where  the  percipients 
were.  They  were  kept  in  a dark  lobby  outside,  and  taken  by  the 
investigators  at  random,  so  that  often  one  investigator  did  not  even  know 
what  the  other  took.  Still  less  could  any  spy  have  discerned  what  was 
chosen,  had  such  spy  been  there,  which  he  certainly  was  not. 

“ A very  small  portion  of  each  substance  used  was  found  to  be  enough* 
The  difficulty  lies  in  keeping  the  mean  between  the  massive  impression  of 
a large  quantity  of  a salt,  spice,  bitter,  or  acid,  which  confounds  the  specific 
differences  under  each  general  head,  and  the  fading  impression  which  is 
apt  to  give  merely  a residual  pungency,  from  which  the  characteristic 
flavour  has  escaped.  It  is  necessary  to  allow  some  minutes  to  elapse 
between  each  experiment,  as  the  imaginary  taste  seems  to  be  fully  as 
peAistent  as  the  real  one. 

September  3 rd,  1883. 

TASTER.  PERCIPIENT.  SUBSTANCE.  ANSWERS  GIVEN. 

1.  — M E Vinegar “ A*  sharp  and  nasty  taste.” 

2.  — M E Mustard  “Mustard.” 

3.  — M E Do “Ammonia.” 

4.  — M E Sugar  “I  still  taste  the  hot  taste  of  the 

mustard.” 

Sejiteviber  4th, 

T>, — E.  G-.  &M....  E Worcestershire  sauce...  “Worcestershire  sauce.” 

*>. — M.  G E • * Do “Vinegar.” 

7.  — E.'G.  & M....  E Port  wine “Between  eau  de  Cologne  and 

beer.” 

8. — M.  G E Do “ Easpberry  vinegar.” 

9.  — E.  G.  & M. ...  E Bitter  aloes “ Horrible  and  bitter.” 

10.-— M.  G E Alum  “ A taste  of  ink— of  iron — of 

vinegar.  I feel  it  on  my  lips 
— it  is  as  if  I had  been  eating 
alum.” 

54 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

TA8TER.  PERCIPIENT.  81  INSTANCE.  ANSWERS  GIVEN. 

11. — M.  G 13 Alum  (E.  perceived  that  M.  G.  was 

not  tasting  bitter  aloes,  as 
E.  G.  and  M.  supposed,  but 
something  different.  No 
distinct  perception  on  account 
of  the  persistence  of  the 
bitter  taste.) 

12.  — E.  G.  & M.  ...  E Nutmeg Peppermint- no— what  you 

put  in  puddings— nutmeg. 

13. — M.  G R I)o.  “Nutmeg.”1 

14. — E.  G.  4c  M.  ...  E Sugar  Nothing  perceived. 

15.  — M.  G R Do Nothing  perceived. 

(Sugar  should  bo  tried  at  an 
earlier  stage  in  the  series,  as, 
after  the  aloes,  we  could 
scarcely  taste  it  ourselves.) 

10. — E,  G.  & M E Cayenne  pepper  “ Mustard.” 

17.— M.  G It Do.  “ Cayenne  pepper.” 

(After  tl*e  cayenne  we  were 
unable  to  taste  anything 
further  that  evening.) 

September  7)th. 

18.— E.G.&M.  .. 

. E.. 

....  Carbonate  oi  soda  

19.— M G 

. R.. 

20.— E.  G.  & M.  .. 

E.. 

....  Cloves  

2L— E.G.  fcM.  .. 

E... 

. . . . Citric  acid  

22.— M.  G 

It... 

Do 

23. — E.  <4.  & M.  ... 

E... 

...  liiquorice  

24. — M,  G 

R... 

....  Cloves  

25. — E.  G.  Sc  M.  ... 

E... 

....  Acid  jujube  

26.— M.  G 

R... 

Do 

27.— E.  G.  Sc  M.  ... 

E... 

....  Candied  ginger  

28. — M.  G 

R... 

Do 

29.— E.  G.  Sc  M.  ... 

E.... 

...  Home-made  Noyau  

30. — M.  G 

R..., 

Do. 

loaf— carra  way  seeds.” 

(The  substance  of  the  seeds 
seemed  to  be  perceived  before 
their  taste.') 

• Salt.” 
•Cloves.” 

• Cinnamon.” 

44  Something  hard,  which 
giving  way— acid  jujube.” 

is 

44  Almond  toffy.” 

(M.  G.  took  his  ginger  in  the 
dark,  and  was  some  time 
before  he  realised  that  it  «was 
ginger.) 

31. - 

32. - 

-E.  G.  & M. 
•M.  G 

44  Port  wine.” 

(This  was  by  far  the  most 
strongly  smelling  of  the  sub- 
stances tried,  the  scent  of 
kernels  being  hard  to  conceal. 
Yet  it  was  named  by  E.  as 
salt.) 

E Bitter  aloes 44  Bitter/’ 

Do Nothing  perceived. 

R, 

1 In  some  cases  two  experiments  were  carried  on  simultaneously  with  the  same 
substance ; and  when  this  was  done,  the  first  percipient  was  of  course  not  told  whether  her 
answer  was  right  or  wrong.  But  it  will  i>erliaps  be  suggested  that,  when  her  answer  was 
right,  the  agent  who  was  touching  her  unconsciously  gave  her  an  intimation  of  the  fact 
by  the  pressure  of  his  hand ; and  that  she  then  coughed  or  made  some  audible*signal 
to  her  companion,  who  followed  suit.  Whatever  the  theory  may  be  worth,  it  will,  we 
think,  be  seen  that  the  success  of  the  second  jiercipient  with  the  nutmeg  was  the  only 
occasion,  throughout  the  series,  to  which  it  can  be  applied.  J 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

55 

" We  should  have  preferred  in  these  experiments  to  use  only  substances 
which  were  wholly  inodorous.  But  in  order  to  get  any  ‘ description  of 
tastes  from  the  percipients,  it  was  necessary  that  the  tastes  should  be  either 
very  decided  or  very  familiar.  It  would  be  desirable,  before  entering  on  a 
series  of  experiments  of  this  kind,  to  educate  the  palates  of  the 
percipients  by  accustoming  them  to  a variety  of  chemical  substances,  and 
also  by  training  them  to  distinguish,  with  shut  eyes,  between  the  more 
ordinary  flavours.  It  is  well  known  how  much  taste  is  helped  by  sight  and 
determined  by  expectation ; and  when  it  is  considered  that  the  percipients 
in  these  cases  were  judging  blindfold  of  the  mere  shadow  of  a savour,  it 
will  perhaps  be  thought  that  even  some  of  their  mistakes  are  not  much 
wider  of  the  mark  than  they  might  have  been  had  a trace  of  the  substance 
been  actually  placed  upon  their  tongues.” 

In  later  experiments,  Mr.  Guthrie  endeavoured  to  meet  the  difficulty 
caused  by  odorous  substances,  and  even  succeeded  in  obtaining  what 
appeared  to  be  transferences  of  smell-impressions.  The  ''subjects”  and 
the  agents  were  placed  in  different  rooms.  An  opening,  10|  inches 
square,  had  been  made  in  the  wooden  partition  between  the  two  rooms; 
and  this  had  been  filled  in  with  a frame,  covered  with  .india-rubber 
and  fitting  tightly.  Through  a slit  in  this  frame  the  agent 
(Mr.  Guthrie  or  his  relative,  Miss  Redmond)  passed  a hand,  which 
both  the  "subjects”  could  then  touch.  Under  these  conditions,  as 
far  as  could  be  judged,  it  was  impossible  for  any  scent  to  pass ; and, 
certainly,  if  any  did  pass,  it  would  have  needed  extreme  hyper- 
aesthesia  to  detect  it.  The  following  results  were  obtained  on 
December  5th,  1883 : — 

1.  — Miss  Redmond  tasted  powdered  nutmeg. 

E.  said  “ Ginger.” 

• R.  said  “ Nutmeg.” 

2.  — Mr.  G.  tasted  powder  of  dry  celery. 

E.* : “ A bitter  herb.” 

R. : “ Something  like  camomile.” 

3.  — Miss  Redmond  tasted  coffee. 

At  the  same  time,  without  any  previous  intimation,  Mr.  G.,  with  two 
pins,  pricked  the  front  of  the  right  wrist  of  Miss  Redmond. 

E.  said  : “ Is  it  a taste  at  all  ? ” Mr,  G.  : “ Why  do  you  ask  1 ” 

“ Because  I feel  a sort  of  pricking  in  the  left  wrist.”  She  was 
told  it  was  the  right  wrist,  but  said  she  felt  it  in  the  left. 

R.  : “ Is  it  cocoa  or  chocolate  ? ” Answer  given  in  the  negative. 

E.  : “Is  it  coffee?” 

4.  — Mr.  G.  tasted  Worcestershire  sauce. 

R.  : “ Something  sweet  . . also  acid  . . a curious  taste.” 

# E.  “ Is  it  vinegar  i ” 

5.  — Miss  Redmond  smelt  eau  de  Cologne. 

R.  : “ Is  it  eau  de  Cologne  ] ” 

56 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS  : 

[chap. 

6, — Miss  Redmond  smelt  camphor. 

E. : u Don’t  taste  anything.” 

R. : Nothing  perceived. 

7,  — Mr.  G.  smelt  carbolic  acid. 

R.  : “ What  you  use  for  tooth-ache  . . . creosote.” 

E.  afterwards  said  she  thought  of  pitch. 

8,  — Mr.  G.  Right  instep  pricked  with  pins. 

* E.  guessed  first  the  face,  then  the  left  shoulder  ; then  R.  localised  the 
pain  on  the  right  foot. 

The  pain  was  then  silently transferred  to  the  left  foot.  E.  localised  it 
on  the  left  foot.  Both  maintained  their  opinions. 

I will  quote  one  more  taste-series,  for  the  sake  of  illustrating  a 
apodal  point — namely,  the  deferment  of  the  percipients  consciousness 
of  the  sensation  until  a time  when  the  agent  had  himself  ceased  to 
feel  it.  This  fact  is  of  great  interest,  on  account*  of  the  marked 
analogy  to  it  which  we  shall  encounter  in  many  of  the  spontaneous 
telepathic-  cases.  The  instances  below  are  too  few  to  be  conclusive ; 
but  we  used  to  notice  the  same  thing  in  our  experiments  with  the 
Creery  fatuity — the  object  on  which  the  attention  of  the  agents  h&d 
been  concentrated  being  sometimes  correctly  named  after  the  experi- 
ment had  been  completely  abandoned  as  a failure. 

June  11  fJi3  1885, 

Dr.  Hyla  Groves  was  in  contact  with  Miss  Rclpb,  having  taken  a little 
salad  oil. 

R.  said:  “ I feel  a cool  sensation  in  my  mouth,  something  like  that 
produced  by  sal  prunello.” 

Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson  in  contact,  having  tasted  Worcestershire  sauce 
in  another  room. 

“ I taste  something  oily  ; it  is  very  like  salad  oil.”  (N.B.— Nothin^ 
at  all  had  been  said  about  the  substances  tasted  either  by 
Greves  or  Mr.  Johnson.)  A few  minutes  after  contact  with  Mr.  J, 
had  ceased,  R.  said,  “ My  mouth  seems  getting  hot  after  the*  oil.” 

Dr.  Greves  in  contact,  having  tasted  bitter  aloes. 

B.  said  : “ I taste  something  frightfully  hot  . . something  like 

vinegar  and  pepper  . . . Is  it  Worcestershire  sauce  ? ” 

Mr.  Guthrie  in  contact,  also  having  tasted  bitter  aloes. 

B.  said I taste  something  extremely  bitter,  but  don’t  know  what  it 
is,  and  do  not  remember  tasting  it  before  . . . It  is  a v.™ 

horrid  taste."  ■ a very 

The  possibility  of  the  transference  of  pain,  to  a percipient  in  the 
normal  state,  is  also  a recent  discovery.  In  December,  1882,  we  ob- 
tained some  results  which— with  our  well-tried  knowledge  of  the  per- 
cipients character— we  regard  as  completely  satisfactory:  but  our 
more  striking  successes  in  this  line  happen  to  have  been  with 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

57 

hypnotic  subjects.1  The  form  of  experiment  has  difficulties  of  its 
own.  For,  in  mercy  to  the  agent,  the  pain  which  it  is  hoped  to 
transfer  cannot  be  very  severely  inflicted;  and,  moreover,  in  such 
circumstances  of  investigation  as  Mr.  Guthrie’s,  it  is  only  a very 
limited  amount  of  the  area  of  the  body  that  can  practically  be  used— 
a fact  which  of  course  increases  the  percipient’s  chances  of  accidental 
success.  Still,  the  amount  of  success  obtained  with  Mr.  Guthrie’s 
“subjects,”  in  a normal  state,  is  such*  as  certainly  excludes  the 
hypothesis  of  accident.  In  some  of  the  most  remarkable  series, 
contact  has  been  permitted,  it  being  difficult  to  suppose  that  uncon- 
scious pressure  of  the  hand  could  convey  information  as  to  the  exact 
locality  of  a pain.2  But  complete  isolation  of  the  percipient  is,  no 
doubt,  a more  satisfactory  condition  ; and  at  seven  of  the  Liverpool 
meetings^  which  took  place  at  intervals  from  November,  1884,  to  July, 
1885,  the  experiment  was  arranged  in  the  following  way.  The 
percipient  being  seated  blindfolded,  and  with  her  back  to  the  rest  of 
the  party,  all  the  other  persons  present  inflicted  on  themselves  the 
same  pain  on  the  same  part  of  the  body.  Those  who  took  part  in  this 
collective  agency  were  three  or  more  of  the  following : Mr.  Guthrie, 
Professor  Herdman,  Dr.  Hicks,  Dr.  Hyla  Greves,  Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson, 
F.R.A.S.,  Mr.  Birchall,  Miss  Redmond,  and  on  one  occasion  another 
lady.  The  percipient  throughout  was  Miss  Relph. 

In  all,  20  trials  were  made.  The  parts  pained  were — 

1.  — Baek  of  left  hand  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

2.  — Lobe  of  left  ear  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

3.  — Left  wrist  pricked.  “ Is  it  in  the  left  hand  ?” — pointing  to  the 

back  near  the  little  finger. 

4.  — Third  finger  of  left  hand  tightly  bound  round  with  wire.  A lower 

joint  of  that  finger  was  guessed. 

5. -r-Left  wrist  scratched  with  pins.  “ It  is  in  the  left  wrist,  like 

being  scratched.” 

6.  — Left  ankle  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

7.  — Spot  behind  left  ear  pricked.  No  result. 

8.  — Right  knee  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

9.  — Right  shoulder  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

10.  — Hands  burned  over  gas.  “ Like  a pulling  pain  . . then  tingling, 

like  cold  and  hot  alternately  ” — localised  by  gesture  only. 

11.  — End  of  tongue  bitten.  “ It  is  in  the  lip  or  the  tongue.” 

12.  — Palm  of  left  hand  pricked.  “ Is  it  a tingling  pain  in  the  hand, 

here?” — placing  her  finger  on  the  palm  of  the  left  hand. 

13.  — Back  of  neck  pricked.  “ Is  it  a pricking  of  the  neck  ?” 

• 

1 See  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R,,  Vol.  i.,  pp.  225-6 ; VoL  ii.,  p.  250 

2 See,  for  instance,  the  reoord  of  Mr.  Hughes’s  series  in  Mr.  Guthrie's  “ Further 
Report,”  above  referred  to. 

58 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

14. — Front  of  left  arm  above  elbow  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

15.  — Spot  just  above  left  ankle  pricked.  Rightly  localised. 

16.  — Spot  just  above  right  wrist  pricked.  “I  am  not  quite  sure,  but  I 

feel  a pain  in  the  right  arm,  from  the  thumb  upwards,  to  above 
the  wrist.” 

17.  — Inside  of  left  ankle  pricked.  Outside  of  left  ankle  guessed. 

18.  — Spot  beneath  right  collarbone  pricked.  The  exactly  corresponding 

spot  on  the  left  side  was  guessed* 

19.  — Back  hair  pulled.  No  result, 

20.  — Inside  of  right  wrist  pricked.  Right  foot  guessed. 

Thus  in  1 0 out  of  the  20  eases,  the  percipient  localised  the  pain 
with  great  precision  ; in  0 the  localisation  was  nearly  exact,  and  with 
these  we  may  include  No.  10,  where  the  pain  was  probably  not 
confined  to  a single  well-defined  area  in  the  hands  of  all  the  agents; 
in  2 no  local  impression  was  produced  ; and  in  1,  the?  last,  the  answer 
was  wholly  wrong. 

§11.  We  may  pass  now  to  a totally  new  division  of  experimental 
cases.  So  far  the  effect  of  thought-transference  on  the  receiving  mind 
has  been  an  effect ! a c'>i'$ciov#iirM — the  actual  emergence  of  an  image 
or  sensation  which  the  percipient  has  recognised  and  described.  But 
it  is  not-,  necessary  that  the  effect  should  be  thus  recognised  by  the 
percipient ; his  witness  to  it.  may  be  unconscious,  instead  of  conscious, 
and  yet  may  be  quite  un mis tak cable.  The  simplest  example  of  this 
is  when  some  effect  is  produced  on  his  motor  system — when  the 
impression  received  causes  him  to  perform  some  action  which  proves 
to  have  distinct  reference  to  the  thought  in  the  agents  mind.1 

The  eases  fall  into  two  classes.  In  one  class  the  actions  are 
purely  automatic : in  the  other  some  conscious  idea  of  what  was  to 
be  done  has  preceded  and  accompanied  the  muscular  effect ; so  tlfat 
that  effect  would  be  at  most  semi-automatic.  To  begin  with  this 
semi-automatic  class ; it  might  be  thought  that  examples  would  be 
found  in  those  rarer  cases  of  the  “ willing-game  ” where  contact,  and 
movement  on  the  agents  part,  are  avoided.  But  we  have  received  no 

1 Even  an  effect  on  the  sensory  system  may  bear  witness  to  an  unconscious  impression 
if  it  is  an  indirect  effect,  led  up  to  by  certain  hidden  processes.  In  the  Proceedings  of 
the  S.  I . K.,  Yol.  ii.,  ]>p.  203-4,  a case  in  point  is  given.  A young  man’s 
fingers  having  been  concealed  from  him  by  a paper  screen,  anesthesia  and  rigidity 
were  repeatedly  produced  m one  or  another  of  them,  by  a process  in  which  the  con- 
centrated attention  of  the  “ agent  ” on  the  particular  finger  proved  to  be  an  indis- 
pensable element.  A psychical  account  of  this  result  seems  possible,  if  thought- 
transference  can  work,  so  to  speak,  underground.  Such  a case,  however,  clearly  points 
J?  so\uolhu^  thought-transference — to  some  sort  of  specific  influence  • 

though  the  subject  was  at  the  time  wide  awake,  and  in  a perfectly  normal  sttfte  ' 

that  find  authentic  cases  of  the 

direct  effect  of  volition  in  producing  the  identical  movement  willed— such  as  raisin* 
hand,  dropping  a book,  &e.  Some  of  these  will  be  given  in  the  next  chapter.  g 

ii.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  59 

records  of  such  cases  where  it  is  certain  that  the  precautions 
necessary  to  exclude  the  barest  possibility  of  slight  unconscious 
physical  signs  were  rigidly  enforced ; and  it  will  be  preferable  to 
describe  some  experiments  made  by  members  of  our  own  group,  where 
this  point  was*  kept  steadily  in  view.  We  have  had  several  interesting 
series  in  which  the  “ subject's  ” power  of  utterance  has  been  inhibited 
by  the  silent  determination  of  the  operator.  Our  first  experiments  of 
this  sort  were  made  in  January,  188&  The  “ subject”  was  our 
friend,  Mr.  Sidney  Beard,  who  had  been  thrown  into  a light  hypnotic 
trance  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith.  A list  of  twelve  Yeses  and  Noes  in 
arbitrary  order  was  written  by  one  of  ourselves  and  put  into  Mr. 
Smith's  hand,  with  directions  that  he  should  successively  “ will  ” the 
“ subject  ” to  respond  or  not  to  respond,  in  accordance  with  the  order 
of  the  ligt,  Mr.  Beard  was  lying  back  with  closed  eyes ; and  a tuning- 
fork  was  struck  and  held  at  his  ear,  with  the  question,  “ Do  you 
hear  ? ” asked  by  one  of  ourselves.  This  was  done  twelve  times  with 
a completely  successful  result,  the  answer  or  the  failure  to  answer 
corresponding  in  each  case  with  the  “ yes  ” or  “ no  ” of  the  written 
list— that  is  to  say,  with  the  silently  concentrated  will  of  the  agent. 1 

A much  more  prolonged  series  of  trials  was  made  in  November, 
1883,  by  Professor  Barrett,  at  his  house  in  Dublin.  The  hypnotist 
was  again  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith. 

“ The  * subject’  was  an  entire  stranger  to  Mr.  Smith,  a youth  named 
Fearnley,  to  whom  nothing  whatever  was  said  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
experiment  about  to  be  tried,  until  he  was  thrown  into  the  hypnotic  state 
in  niy  study.  He  was  then  in  a light  sleep-waking  condition — his  eyes 
were  closed  and  the  pupils  upturned — apparently  sound  asleep ; but  he 
readily  answered  in  response  to  any  questions  addressed  to  him  by  Mr. 
Smith  or  by  myself. 

“ I first  told  him  to  open  the  fingers  of  his  closed  hand,  or  not  to  open 
them,  just  as  he  felt  disposed,  in  response  to  the  question  addressed  to  him. 
That  question,  which  I always  asked  in  a uniform  tone  of  voice,  was  in 

1 Similar  trials  on  other  occasions  were  equally  successful ; as  also  were  trials  where 
the  tuning-fork  was  dispensed  with,  and  the  only  sound  was  the  question,  “Do  you 
hear?”  asked  by  one  of  the  observers.  On  these  latter  occasions,  however,  Mr.  Smith 
was  holding  Mr.  Beard’s  hand;  and  it  might  be  maintained  that  “yes”  and  “no” 
indications  were  given  by  unconscious  variations  of  pressure.  How  completely  uncon- 
scious the  supposed  “reader”  was  of  any  sensible  guidance  will  be  evident  from  Mr. 
Beard’s  own  account.  “During  the  experiments  of  January  1st,  when  Mr.  Smith 
mesmerised  me,  I did  not  entirely  lose  consciousness  at  any  time,  but  only  experienced  a 
sensation  of  total  numbness  in  my  limbs.  When  the  trial  as  to  whether  I could  hear 
sounds  was  made,  I heard  the  sounds  distinctly  each  time,  but  in  a large  number  of 
instances  I felt  totally  unable  to  acknowledge  that  I heard  them.  I seemed  to  know 
each  time  whether  Mr.  Smith  wished  me  to  say  that  1 heard  them ; and  as  I had  sur- 
rendered my  will  to  his  at  the  commencement  of  the  experiment,  I was  unable  to  reassert 
my  i>ower  of  volition  whilst  under  his  influence.  ” 

60 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

each  case,  4 Now,  will  you  open  your  hand  ? 9 and  at  the  same  moment  I 
pointed  to  the  word  4 Yes  7 or  * No/  written  on  a card,  which  was  held 
in  sight  of  Mr.  Hmith,  but  entirely  out  of  the  range  of  vision  6f  the 
‘subject/  even  had  his  eyes  been  open,  which  they  were  not.  Without 
the  slightest  change  of  expression  or  other  observable  muscular  movement, 
and  quite  out  of  contact  with  the  ‘subject/  Mr.  Smith  then  silently 
willed  the  subject  to  open  or  not  to  open  his  hand,  in  accordance  with  the 
‘Yes  7 or  ‘No.’  Twenty  successive  experiments  were  made  in  this  way ; 
seventeen  of  these  were  quite  successful,  and  three  were  failures.  But  these 
three  failures  were  possibly  due  to  inadvertence  on  Mr.  Smith’s  part,  as 
he  subsequently  stated  that  on  those  occasions  he  had  not  been  prompt 
enough  to  direct  his  will  in  the  right  direction  before  the  question  was  asked* 

“ The  experiment  was  now  varied  as  follows  : The  word  4 Yes  7 was 
written  on  one,  and  the  word  ‘No/  on  the  other,  of  two  precisely  similar 
pieces  of  card.  One  or  other  of  these  cards  was  handed  to  Mr.  Smith  at 
my  arbitrary  pleasure,  care,  of  course,  being  taken  thatjthe  ‘subject  7 had 
n9  opportunity  of  seeing  the  card,  even  had  he  been  awake.  When  4 Yes 9 
was  handed,  Mr.  Smith  was  silently  to  will  the  4 subject 9 te  answer 
aloud  in  response  to  the  question  asked  by  me, 4 Do  you  hear  me  V When 
4 No 9 was  handed,  Mr.  Smith  was  to  w ill  that  no  response  should  be  made 
in  reply  to  the  same  question.  The  object  of  this  series  of  experiments 
was  to  note  the  effect  of  increasing  the  distance  between  the  wilier  and  the 
willed,*  -the  agent  and  the  percipient.  In  the  first  instance  Mr.  Smith 
was  placed  three  feet  from  the  ‘subject,7  who  remained  throughout 
apparently  asleep  in  an  arm-chair  in  one  corner  of  my  study. 

“ At  three  feet  apart,  fifteen  trials  were  successively  made,  and  in  every 
ease  the  4 subject 7 responded  or  did  not  respond  in  exact  accordance  with 
the  silent  will  of  Mr.  Smith,  as  directed  by  me. 

“ At  six  feet  apart,  six  similar  trials  were  made  without  a single  failure. 

44  At  twelve  feet  apart,  six  more  triah  were  made  without  a single  failure. 

44  At  seventeen  feet  apart,  six  more  trials  were  made  without  a single  failure. 

44  In  this  last  case  Mr.  Smith  had  to  be  placed  outside  the  study  door, 
which  was  then  closed  with  the  exception  of  a narrow  chink  just  wide 
enough  to  admit  of  passing  a card  in  or  out,  whilst  I remained  in  the 
study  observing  the  4 subject.7  To  avoid  any  possible  indication  from  the 
tone  in  which  I asked  the  question,  in  all  cases  except  the  first  dozen 
experiments,  T shuffled  the  cards  face  downwards,  and  then  handed  the 
unknown  4 Yes’  or  ‘No7  to  Mr.  Smith,  who  looked  at  the  card  and  willed 
accordingly.  I noted  down  the  result,  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  looked 
at  the  card. 

14  A final  experiment  was  made  when  Mr.  Smith  was  taken  across  the 
hall  and  placed  in  the  dining-room,  at  a distance  of  about  thirty  feet  from 
the  4 subject/  two  doors,  both  quite  closed,  intervening.  Under  these  con- 
ditions, three  trials  were  made  with  success,  the  4 Yes7  response  being, 
however,  very  faint  and  hardly  audible  to  me,  who  returned  to  the  study 
to  ask  the  usual  question  after  handing  the  card  to  the  distant  operator. 
At  this  point,  the  4 subject 7 fell  into  a deep  sleep,  and  made  no  further 
replies  to  the  questions  addressed  to  him, 

“Omitting  these  final  experiments,  the  total  number  of  successive 
trials  at  different  distances  was  forty-three.  If  the  result  had  been  due 
to  accident,  there  would  have  been  an  even  chance  of  failures  and  of 

ilJ  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  61 

successes,— whereas  in  fact  there  was  not  a single  failure  in  the  entire 
series. 

“I  subsequently  made  a series  of  a dozen  successive  trials  in  an 
absolutely  dark  room,  conveying  my  intention  to  Mr.  Smith  by  silently 
squeezing  his  hand,  once  for  ‘No/  twice  for  ‘Yes/  Every  trial  was 
successful.  When  Mr.  Smith  was  placed  outside  the  darkened  room,  I 
handed  him  the  card  through  a small  aperture,  which  could  be  closed. 
Eight  trials  gave  six  resets  quite  right,  one  wrong,  and  one  doubtful. 
Afterwards  twenty  trials,  made  when  Mr.  Smith  was  recalled,  and  the 
room  lighted,  were  all  entirely  successful.  There  was,  I need  hardly 
say,  no  contact  between  operator  and  4 subject  ’ in  any  of  these 
experiments. 

44  The  difference  in  the,  power  of  the  will  of  the  hypnotist  and  that  of 
any  other  person  was  strikingly  manifest,  and  the  proof  of  the  existence  of 
a peculiar  ‘ rapport  ’ between  operator  and  subject  was  simply  over- 
whelming. I several  times  exerted  my  will  in  opposition  to  that  of  Mr. 
Smith — that  is  to  say,  willed  that  the  ‘subject  ’ should  or  should  not 
respond,  *when  Mr.  Smith  willed  the  opposite,  both  of  us  being  equally 
distant  from  the  4 subject.'  In  every  case  his  will  triumphed.  As  in  the 
case  of  Mr.  Beard,  the  4 subject,’  on  being  aroused,  stated  that  he  had 
heard  the  question  each  time,  but  that  when  he  gave  no  answer  he  felt 
unaccountably  unable  to  control  liis  muscles  so  as  to  frame  the  word. 

44  It  was  noticeable  that  neither  in  the  normal  nor  in  the  hypnotic 
state  was  this  subject  able  to  tell  any  word  or  number  or  describe  any 
diagram  thought  of  or  viewed  by  the  operator.  Only  his  ability  to  act  in 
a particular  way  could  be  controlled,  and  he  was  not  susceptible  to  even 
the  most  rudimentary  form  of  thought-transference  proper.” 

The  following  shorter  scries  with  another  operator,  Mr.  Kershaw,  of 
Southport,  and  with  Mrs.  Firth,  a sick-nurse,  as  “ subject,”  though  the 
precautions  were  less  elaborate  than  in  the  case  just  recorded,  was  to 
an  eye-witness  almost  equally  satisfactory.  For  the  trial  was  quite 
suddenly  suggested  to  Mr.  Kershaw  by  the  present  writer ; and  not 
only  was  it  planned  out  of  Mrs.  Firths  hearing,  but  Mr.  Kershaw 
himself  had  some  difficulty  in  understanding  what  was  wanted.  A 
variety  of  small  circumstances  combined  to  show  that  the  form  of 
experiment  was  entirely  new  both  to  operator  and  “ subject.” 

The  trial  took  place  at  Southport,  on  September  7th,  1883.  Mrs. 
Firth,  who  had  been  previously  thrown  into  a light  stage  of  trance, 
was  placed  in  a chair  in  the  middle  of  a bare  room.  Mr.  Kershaw  and 
I stood  about  three  yards  behind  her ; and  sight  of  us,  or  of  any  part 
of  us,  on  her  part  was  out  of  the  question.  The  window  was  in  the  wall 
in  front  of  her,  but  altogether  on  one  side ; and  there  were  no  other 
reflecting  surfaces  in  the  room.  I drew  up  the  subjoined  list  of  yeses: 
and  naes,  and  held  it  for  Mr.  Kershaw  to  see.  He  made  a quiet 
connecting  motion  of  the  hand  (not  touching  me*,  and  being  many 

62 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS; 

[chap. 

feet  from  Mrs.  Firth),  when  there  was  to  be  an  answer,  and  an  equally 
quiet  transverse  or  separating  pass  when  there  was  to  be  none.  I 
attribute  no  virtue  to  the  passes,  except  so  far  as  they  were  a means 
of  vivifying  Mr.  Kershaw's  silent  intention  to  himself.  The  passes 
were  almost  absolutely  noiseless,  and  the  extremely  faint  sound  which 
they  made,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  gentle  motion,  can  scarcely 
have  varied.  Complete  silence  wa^s  preserved  but  for  my  question, 
“ Do  you  hear '{  ” repeated  time  after  time,  in  a perfectly  neutral  tone ; 
and  there  did  not  appear  to  be  the  very  faintest  chance  of  signalling, 
even  had  there  been  an  opportunity  for  arranging  a scheme. 

1.  — Yes Right  (/./».,  Mrs.  Firth  responded). 

2.  — No  Right  (le.y  Mrs.  Firth  did  not  respond). 

3.  — -Yes Right. 

4.  Yes Right. 

5 --No  Right. 

f». — Yes Right. 

7.  — No  At  tirst  no  answer,  which  was  right : then 

1 gave  a veiy  loud  stamp,  which  pro- 
voked a “ Yes.*’ 

8.  — No  Right. 

9.  — Yes Right. 

1 will  add  one  more  short  series,  which  took  place  at  my  lodgings 
at  Brighton,  on  September  10th,  1883.  The  operator  was  Mr.  Smith  ; 
the  “ subject  ” an  intelligent  young  cabinet-maker,  named  Conway. 
Mr.  Smith  and  I stood  behind  him,  without  any  contact  with  him.  I 
held  the  list,  and  pointed  to  the  desired  answer  each  time.  The 
silence  was  absolute.  1 repeated  the  question,  “ What  is  your  name  ?” 
in  a perfectly  neutral  and  monotonous  manner. 

1.  — Yes Right  (ie.,  the  “subject”  said  “Conway”). 

2. — Yes Right. 

3.  — No This  time  the  answer  “ Conway  ” was  given  ; but  when 

the  next  question  was  asked,  the  “subject”  seemed 
unable  to  answer  for  some  seconds,  as  though  Mr. 
Smith’s  intention  had  taken  eifect  a little  too  late. 

4.  — Yes Right.  7.— Yes Right,  10.— Yes Right. 

T*. — No Right.  8. — No  Right.  11. — No  Right. 

6.— No Right.  9.— Yes Right.  12. — Yes Right. 

§ 12.  But  in  experiments  of  this  class  it  is  clearly  difficult  to  bo 
sure  that  the  conscious  idea  of  the  evoked  or  the  inhibited  action  does 
not  precede  or  accompany  the  muscular  effects.  Indeed,  as  we  have 
seen,  the  percipient  s own  account  has  sometimes  shown  that  it  did 
so.  I proceed,  then,  to  our  second  class  of  cases.  There  is,  fortunately, 
one  sort  of  act  where  the  verdict  of  the  performer  that  it  was 

it]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  ' 63 

automatically  performed  may  be  taken  as  conclusive ; the  act  of 
ivriting.  If  words  are  written  down  which  the  writer  is  obliged 
to  read  over,  and  even  to  puzzle  over,  just  as  anyone  else  might 
do,  in  order  to  learn  what  they  are,  his  unconsciousness  of  them 
in  the  act  of  writing  may  be  taken  as  established.  Now  written 
words  are  of  course  as  good  as  spoken  ones,  as  evidence  that  a particu- 
lar idea  has  been  in  some  way  communicated.  If,  then,  one  person’s 
automatic  writing  corresponds  unmistakeably  to  the  idea  on  which 
another  person’s  mind  was  concentrated  at  the  time,  and  if  the 
possibility  of  sensory  indications  has  been  excluded,  we  have  a clear 
example  of  some  novel  influence  acting,  not  only  without  the 
participation  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense,  but  without  the 
participation  of  the  percipient’s  conscious  intelligence.  Here  again 
we  find  the  advantage  of  the  generic  word  “ telepathy  ” — for  it  would 
clearly  be  inaccurate  to  call  a phenomenon  “ thought-transference” 
where  what  is  transferred  does  not  make  its  appearance,  on  the 
percipient’s  side,  as  thought  or  any  other  form  of  conscious 
perception. 

We  have  in  our  collection  several  examples  of  this  motor  form  of 
experimental  telepathy ; where  a mental  question  on  the  part  of 
some  one  present  has  been  answered  in  writing,  with  a planch ette1  or 
a simple  pencil,  without  any  consciousness  of  either  the  question  or  the 
answer  on  the  part  of  the  person  whose  hand  was  automatically 
acting.  But  the  following  group  of  cases  is  decidedly  the  most 
remarkable  that,  has  come  under  our  notice. 

The  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  Vicar  of  Maker,  Devonport,  has 
had  many  indications  of  spontaneous  transference  of  thought  from 
himself  to  his  wife  ;2  and  at  one  period  of  his  life,  in  1871,  he  carried 
out  a long  and  systematic  series  of  experiments,  which  were  of  the 
motor  type  that  we  are  now  considering — he  writing  down  a question 
and  the  planchette  under  his  wife’s  hands  replying  to  it.  He  recorded 
the  results,  day  by  day,  in  a private  diary,  which  he  has  kindly  placed 
at  our  disposal.  From  this  diary  I quote  the  following  extracts : — 

My  wife  always  sat  at  a small  low  table,  in  a low  chair,  leaning 
backwards.  I sat  about  eight  feet  distant,  at  a rather  high  table,  and  with 
my  back  towards  her  while  writing  down  the  questions.  It  was  absolutely 
impossible  that  any  gesture  or  play  of  features,  on  my  part,  could  have 

] A planchette  has  two  advantages  over  a simple  pencil.  It  is  very  much  more  easily 
moved  to  write ; and  it  is  very  much  easier  to  make  with  it  the  movements  necessary  for 
the  formation  of  letters,  without  realising  what  the  letters  are. 

2 See,  e.g,t  the  cases  quoted  in  Chap  v.,  §§  2 and  8. 

04 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS  : 

[chap. 

been  visible  or  intelligible  to  her.  As  a rule  she  kept  her  eyes  shut ; but 
never  became  in  the  slightest  degree  hypnotic,  or  even  naturally  drowsy. 

Under  these  conditions  we  carried  on  experiments  for  about  eight 
months,  and  I have  309  questions  and  answers  recorded  in  my  note-book, 
spread  over  this  time.  But  the  experiments  were  found  very  exhaustive 
of  nerve  power,  and  as  my  wife's  health  was  delicate,  and  the  fact  of 
thought-transmission  had  been  abundantly  proved,  we  thought  it  best  to 
abandon  the  pursuit. 

I may  mention  that  the  planchette  began  to  move  instantly,  with  my  wife. 
The  answer  was  often  half-written  before  I had  completed  the  question. 

On  first  finding  that  it  would  write  easily,  I asked  three  simple 
questions  which  were  known  to  the  operator;1  then  three  others,  unknown 
to  her,  relating  to  my  own  private  concerns.  All  six  having  been  instantly 
answered  in  a* manner  to  show  complete  intelligence,  I proceeded  to  ask: — 

7.2  Write  down  the  lowest  temperature  hero  this  winter. 

A.  8. 

Now,  this  reply  at  once  arrested  my  interest.  The  actual  lowest 
temperature  had  been  7 ‘6°  so  that  8 was  the  nearest  whole  degre’e  ; but  my 
wifo  said  at  once  that,  u she  had  been  asked  the  question,  she  would  have 
written  .7  and  not  8 • as  she  had  forgotten  the  decimal,  but  remembered 
my  having  said  that  the  temperature  had  been  down  to  7 something, 

I simply  quote  this,  as  a good  instance,  at  the  very  outset,  of 
perfect  transmission  of  thought,  coupled  with  a perfectly  independent 
reply  ; the  answer  being  correct  in  itself,  but  different  from  the  impression 
on  the  conscious  intelligence  of  both  parties. 

Naturally  our  first  desire  was  to  see  if  we  could  obtain  any  information 
concerning  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  which  was  operating  through  the 
planchette,  and  of  .the  method  by  which  it  produced  the  written  results. 
V\  e repeated  questions  on  this  subject  again  and  again,  and  I will  copy 
down  the  principal  questions  and  answers  in  the  connection. 

January  29th. 

13.  Is  it  the  operator’s  brain,  or  some  external  force,  that  moves  the 
planchette  % Answer  “ brain  ” or  “ force  ” 

A.  Will. 

14.  Is  it  the  will  of  a living  person,  or  of  an  immaterial  spirit,  distinct 
trom  that  person  % Answer  “ person  ” or  “ spirit.” 

A.  Wife.  * 

the  wife’s  Christian  name ; then,  my  favourite 

15.  (live  first 
for  her. 

(This  was  accurately  done.) 

27.  What  is  your  own  name  ? 

A.  Only  you. 

28.  We  are  not  quite  sure  of  the  meaning  of  the 
A.  Wife. 

Failing  to  get  more  than  this,  at  the  outset,  we  turned 
thought  after  question  114;  when,  having  been  closely 

name 

answer.  Explain. 

• i x — — 7 wetru  cioseiy  pr 

another  subject,  we  received  the  curt  reply — “Told  all  I know.” 

to  the  same 
pressed 

on 

r’'Ke*?ham  u~es  this  word  where  we  should  use  “ subiect  ” or 
The  numbers  prefixed  to  the  questions  are  those  in  the  noVbook. 

‘percipient,” 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

65 

if.] 

February  18^. 

117*  Who  are  you  that  writes,  and  has  told  all  you  know  ? 

A.  Wife. 

118.  But  does  no  one  tell  wife  what  to  write  ? If  so,  who  ? 

A.  Spirit. 

119.  Whose  spirit? 

A.  Wife's  brain. 

120.  But  how  does  wife’s  brain  know  (certain)  secrets  ? 

A.  Wife's  spirit  unconsciously  guides.  • 

121.  But  how  does  wife’s  spirit  know  things  it  has  never  been  told? 

A.  No  external  influence. 

122.  But  by  what  internal  influence  does  it  know  (these)  secrets  ? 

A.  You  cannot  know.  * 

March  1 5th. 

132.  Who,  then,  makes  the  impressions  upon  her? 

A.  Many  strange  things. 

133.  What  sort  of  strange  things  ? 

A,  Things  beyond  your  knowledge. 

134.  Do,  then,  things  beyond  our  knowledge  make  impressions  upon  wife  ? 
A.  Influences  which  no  man  understands  or  knows. 

136.  Are  these  influences  which  we  cannot  understand  external  to  wife  ? 
A.  External — invisible. 

137.  Does  a spirit,  or  do  spirits,  exercise  those  influences  ? 

A.  No,  never  (written  very  large  and  emphatically). 

138.  Then  from  whom,  or  from  whence,  do  the  external  influences  come? 
A.  Yes  ; you  will  never  know. 

139.  What  do  you  mean  by  writing  “ yes  ” in  the  last  answer  ? 

A.  That  I really  meant  never. 

April  1C )th. 

192.  But  by  what  means  are  my  thoughts  conveyed  to  her  brain  ? 

A.  Electro-biology. 

193.  What  is  electro-biology  ? 

• A.  No  one  knows. 

194.  But  do  not  you  know  ? 

A.  *No.  Wife  does  not  know. 

My  object  in  quoting  this  large  number  of  questions  and  replies  [N.B. 
those  here  given  are  mere  samples]  has  not  been  merely  to  show  the 
instantaneous  and  unfailing  transmission  of  thought  from  questioner  t6 
operator ; but,  more  especially,  to  call  attention  to  a remarkable  character- 
istic of  the  answers  given.  These  answers,  consistent  and  invariable  in 
their  tenor  from  first  to  last,  did  not  correspond  vnth  the  opinions  or 
expectations  of  either  myself  or  my  wife . Neither  myself  nor  my  wife  had 
ever  taken  part  in  any  form  of  (so-called)  “ spiritual  ” manifestations 
before  this  time ; nor  had  we  any  decided  opinion  as  to  the  agency  by 
which  phenomena  of  this  kind  were  brought  about.  But  for  such 
answers  as  those  numbered  14,  27,  137,  192,  and  194,  we  were  both  of  us 
totally  unprepared ; and  I may  add  that,  so  far  as  we  were  prepossessed 
hy  any  opinions  whatever,  these  replies  were  distinctly  opposed  to  such 
opinions.  ' In  a word,  it  is  simply  impossible  that  these  replies  should 

66  TllE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

have  been  either  suggested  or  composed  by  the  conscious  intelligence  of 
either  of  us. 

I had  a young  man  reading  with  me  as  a private  pupil  at  this  time. 
On  February  12th  he  returned  from  his  vacation;  and,  on  being  told  of 
our  experiments,  expressed  his  incredulity  very  strongly.  I offered  any 
proof  that  he  liked  to  insist  upon,  only  stipulating  that  I should  see  the 
question  asked.  Accordingly,  Mrs.  Nevvnham  took  her  accustomed  chair 
in  my  study,  while  we  went  out  into  the  hall,  and  shut  the  door  behind 
us . He  then  wrote  down  oij  a piece  of  paper  : — 

87.  What  is  the  Christian  name  of  my  eldest  sister? 

We  at  once  returned  to  the  study,  and  found  the  answer  already 
waiting  for  us  : — 

A.  Mina. 

(This  name  was  the  family  abbreviation  of  Wilhelmina ; and  I should 
add  that  it  was  unknown  to  myself.) 

I must  now  go  on  to  speak  of  a series  of  other  experiments,  of  a very 
remarkable  kind. 

We  soon  found  that  my  wife  was  perfectly  unable  to  follow  the 
motions  of  the  planchette.  Often  she  only  touched  it  with  a single 
finger ; but  even  with  all  her  fingers  resting  on  the  board,  she  never  had 
the  slightest  idea  of  what  words  Svere  being  traced  out.  It  struck  me 
that  it  would  be  a good  thing  to  take  advantage  of  this  peculiarity 
on  her  part,  to  ask  questions  upon  subjects  that  it  was  impossible 
for  her  to  know  anything  about.  I had  taken  a deep  interest  in  Masonic 
archreology,  and  I now  questioned  planchette  on  some  subjects  connected 
therewith. 

February  14  th. 

92.  What  is  the  English  of  the  great  word  of  the  R.A.  ? 

After  an  interruption,  of  which  I shall  speak  hereafter,  one  great 
word  of  the  degree,  but  not  the  one  I meant,  was  written,  very 
slowly  and  clearly. 

February  \§th. 

112.  What  is  the  translation  of  the  Great  Triple  Word  ? c 

A.  (The  first  syllable  of  the  word  in  question  was  written  correctly, 
and  then  it  proceeded.)  The  end  unknown.  Three  languages. 
Greece.  Egypt.  Syriac. 

1 15.  Who  are  you  that  know  ? 

(Answer  scrawled  and  illegible.) 

116.  Please  repeat  same  answer  legibly. 

A.  Manifestation  triune  person. 

March  2Gth. 

166.  Of  what  language  is  the  first  syllable  of  the  Great  Triple  R.A. 

Word? 

A.  Don’t  know. 

167.  Yes,  you  do.  What  are  the  three  languages  of  which  the  word  is 

composed  ? *-■' 

A.  Greek,  Egypt,  Syriac  first  syllable  ( correctly  given),  rest 
unknown. 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

67 

168.  ‘Write  the  syllable  which  is  Syriac. 

A.  (First  syllable  correctly  written.) 

169.  Write  the  syllable  which  is  Egyptian. 

A.  Second. 

170.  Can  you  not  write  the  syllable  itself  ? 

A.  Third  Greek. 

174.  Write  down  the  word  itself. 

' A.  First  three  and  last  two  letters  were  written  correctly,  but  four 
incorrect  letters,  partly  borrowed  froyi  another  vjord  of  the  same 
degree , came  in  the  middle. 

176.  Why  do  you  write  a word  of  which  I know  nothing  ? 

A.  Wife  tried  hard  to  tell  the  word,  but  could  not  quite  catch 
it. 

177.  Catch  it  from  whom  ? 

A.  Not  quite  sure. 

178.  Not  quite  sure«of  what  ? 

A.  I know  nothing.  Wife  doesn’t  quite  know. 

In  the  above  series  of  answers  we  have,  it  seems  to  me,  a very 
remarkable  combination  of  knowledge  and  ignorance.  There  is  a perfect 
appreciation  of  my  thoughts,  in  the  queries ; but  a strange,  persistent, 
almost  dogged,  incapability  of  seeing  my  thoughts,  in  the  replies. 
Especially  in  the  answer  to  116,  and  in  some  other  answers  [not  here 
quoted],  there  is  a reference  to  an  opinion  which  was  published  by  Dr, 
Oliver,  whose  works  I had  been  carefully  reading  about  four  months  before, 
but  with  whose  theory,  in  this  case,  I most  strongly  disagreed.  So  that 
here  was  an  opinion  intimated  which  it  was  impossible  that  the  operator 
could  have  been  aware  of,  and  which  the  questioner  had  absolutely  rejected 
as  untenable  ! 

182.  Write  out  the  prayer  used  at  the  advancement  of  a Mark  Master 
Mason. 

A.  Almighty  Ruler  of  the  Universe  and  Architect  of  all  worlds,  we 
beseech  Thee  to  accept  this,  our  brother,  whom  we  have  this  day 
received  into  our  most  honourable  Company  of  Mark  Master 
Masons.  Grant  him  to  be  a worthy  member  of  our  brotherhood; 
and  may  he  be  in  his  own  person  a perfect  mirror  of  all  Masonic 
virtues.  Grant  that  all  our  doings  may  be  to  Thy  honour  and 
glory,  and  to  the  welfare  of  all  mankind. 

This  prayer  was  written  off  instantaneously  and  very  rapidly.  It  is  a 
very  remarkable  production  indeed.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  not 
members  of  the  craft,  I may  say  that  no  prayer  in  the  slightest  degree . 
resembling  it  is  made  use  of  in  the  Ritual  of  any  Masonic  degree ; and 
yet  it  contains  more  than  one  strictly  accurate  technicality  connepted  with 
the  degree  of  Mark  Mason.  My  wife  has  never  seen  any  Masonic  prayers, 
whether  in  “ Carlile,”  or  any  other  real  or  spurious  Ritual  of  the  Masonic 
Order. 

Here,  then,  assuredly  was  a formula  composed  by  some  intelligence 
totally  distinct  from  the  conscious  intelligence  of  either  of  the  persons 
engaged  in  the  experiment. 

I proceeded  to  inquire  as  follows  : — 

p 2 

68 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap* 

183.  1 do  not  know  this  prayer.  Where  is  it  to  he  found  ? 

A.  Old  American  Ritual. 

184.  Where  can  1 get  one? 

A.  Most  likely  none  in  England.  T A * 

185.  Can  you  not  write  the  prayer  that  I made  use  of  m my  own 

A.  No,  I don't  know  it.  , , rrull* 

In  these  last  answers  we  see  a new  moral  element  introduced.  X 
is  evasion,  or  subterfuge,  of  a more  or  less  ingenious  kind ; and  totally 
foreign  to  the  whole  character  and  natural  disposition  of  the  operator.  A 
similar  attempt  at  deliberate  invention,  rather  than  plead  guilty  to  total 
ignorance,  is  contained  in  the  following  answers  : — 

May  7 th . 

255.  In  what  Masonic  degree  was  the  Triple  Word  first  used? 

A.  Wife  does  not  know. 

256.  Cannot  you  tell  her?  „ 

A.  How  can  wife  know  what  noK’One  else  does  ? 

257.  Hoes  no  one,  then,  know  the  answer  to  this  ? 

A.  No  one  knows  now. 

258.  What  do  you  mean  by  “ now”?  Did  anyone  once  know? 

A.  The  last  one  who  knew  died  at  least  twenty  years  ago. 

250.  What  was  his  name? 

A.  In  America ; don’t  know  name. 

[Many  more  instances  of  these  evasive  replies  oecu^.] 

May  10th. 

Planchette  again  gave  us  an  example  of  its  sense  of  the  humorous. 

I had  been  obliged  to  engage  a clergyman  who  was  not  a favourable 
specimen  of  his  profession,  as  I could  procure  no  one  else  in  time  to  get 
the  Sunday’s  work  done.  He  was  much  amused  with  planchette,  and 
desired  to  ask  : — rni^j 

277.  How  should  a bachelor  live  in  this  neighbourhood  ? 

(The  answer  was  illegible.) 

278.  Please  repeat  answer. 

A.  Three  months. 

(Planchette  evidently  did  not  catch  the  exact  query.) 

279.  I did  not  ask  how  long  but  how  ? 

A.  Eating  and  drinking  and  sleeping  and  smoking. 

That  clergyman  never  consulted  planchette  again. 

I will  conclude  with  a very  pretty  instance  of  a mistake  instantly 
corrected.  It  was  on  the  same  evening,  May  10th  ; I had  to  preach  on 
tho  following  Whit-Monday,  on  the  occasion  of  laying  a foundation-stone 
with  Masonic  ceremonial,  so  I asked  : — 

275.  Give  me  a text  for  Whit-Monday’s  sermon. 

A.  If  I go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  to  you. 

The  selection  of  a subject  suitable  for  Whitsuntide  is  plainly  the  first 
idea  caught  by  the  intelligence;  so  I proceeded  : ^ 

276.  Thai  -will  not  do  for  my  subject.  I want  a text  for  the  Monday's 

sermon.  * 

H.J  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.  69 

A.  Let  brotherly  love  continue. 

I will  add  one  example  where,  contrary  to  the  usual  rule,  the  idea 
;of  the  answer,  though  not  that  of  the  question,  reached  the  level  of 
^consciousness  in  Mrs.  Newnham’s  mind. 

' 59.  What  name  shall  we  give  to  our  new  dog  ? 

A Nipen. 

The  name  of  Nipen,  from  Feats  on  the  Fiord,  shot  into  the 
•operator’s  brain  just  as  the  question  was  asked. 

- The  above  quotations  form  a fair  sample  of  Mr.  Newnham’s 
'309  experiments  of  the  same  type ; and  no  one  who  admits  the 
bona  Jide8  of  the  record,  and  believes  that  Mrs.  Newnham,  sitting  with 
closed  eyes  eight  feet  behind  her  husband,  did  not  obtain  through  her 
senses  an  unconscious  knowledge  of  what  he  wrote,  will  deny  that 
some  sort  of  telepathic  influence  was  at  work,  acting  below  the  level  of 
the  percipient’s  consciousness.  The  experiments  are  further  interest- 
ing as  suggesting,'  in  the  character  of  many  of  the  replies,  an  uncon- 
scious intelligence — a second  self  quite  other  than  Mrs.  Newnham’s 
conscious  self.  “ Unconscious  intelligence  ” is  no  doubt  a somewhat 
equivocal  phrase,  and  it  is  necessary  to  know  in  every  case  exactly 
what  is  meant  by  it.  It  may  be  used  in  a purely  'physical  sense — to 
describe  the  unconscious  cerebral  processes  whereby  actions  are 
produced  which  as  a rule  are  held  to  imply  conscious  intelligence ; as, 
for  instance,  when  complicated  movements,  once  performed  with 
thought  and  effort,  gradually  become  mechanical.  But  it  may  be 
used  also  to  describe  psychical  processes  which  are  severed  from  the 
main  conscious  current  of  an  individual’s  life.  Unconsciousness  in 
any  further  sense  it  would  be  rash  to  assert ; for  intelligent  psychic 
process  without  consciousness  of  some  sort,  if  not  a contradiction  in 
terms,  is  at  any  rate  something  as  impossible  to  imagine  as  a fourth 
dimension  in  space.  The  events  in  question  are  outside  the  individual’s 
consciousness,  as  the  events  in  another  person’s  consciousness  are ; 
but  they  differ  from  these  last  in  not  revealing  themselves  as  part 
of  any  continuous  stream  of  conscious  life  ; and  no  one,  therefore,  can 
give  an  account  of  them  as  belonging  to  a self.  What  their  range  and 
conditions  of  emergence  may  be  we  cannot  tell ; since  their  very 
existence  can  only  be  occasionally  inferred  from  certain  sensible  effects 
to  which  they  lead.1  I may  recall  the  undoubted  phenomena  of  what 

1 Ii^nay  be  asked  what  right  I have  to  make  any  such  inference ; since  i\  la  rifjueur, 
the  effects,  toeing  sensible  and  physical,  do  not  require  us  to  suppose  that  they  had  any 
otherthan  physical  antecedents.  It  is  true  that  it  is  impossible  to  deiaonstrate  that  the 
physical  antecedents,  which  undoubtedly  exist,  have  any  psychical  correlative.  But  the 

70 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : 

[chap. 

has  been  termed  “double  consciousness,”  where  a double  psychical  life 
is  found  couueetcd  with  a single  organism.  In  those  cases  the  two 
selves,  one  of  which  knows  nothing  of  the  other,  appear  as  successive  ; 
but  if  we  can  regard  such  segregated  existences  as  united  or  unified  by 
bonds  of  reference  and  association  which,  for  the  partial  view  of  one  of 
them  at  least,  remain  permanently  out  of  sight,  then  I do  not  see 
what  new  or  fundamental*  difficulty  is  introduced  by  conceiving  them 
as  simultaneous ; and  simultaneity  of  the  sort  is  what  seems  to  be 
shown,  in  a fragmentary  way,  by  cases  like  the  present.  I shall  have 
to  recur  to  this  conception  in  connection  with  some  of  the  facts  ot 
spontaneous  telepathy  (see  pp.  280-1). 

A further  noteworthy  point  is  that  so  often  the  questions  and 
not  the  answers  in  the  agent’s  mind  should  have  been  telepathically 
discerned ; but  we  may  perhaps  conceive  that  the  impulse  first 
conveyed  set  the  percipient’s  independent  activity  to  work,  and  so 
put  an  end  for  the  moment  to  the  receptive  condition.  The  power  to 
reproduce  the  actual  word  thought  of  is  sufficiently  shown  in  the 
casc^  when*  names  were  given  (15  and  87),  and  in  some  of  the 
Masonic  answers;  and  the  following  examples  belong  to  the  same 
class. 

48.  What  name  shall  we  give  to  our  new  dog? 

A.  Yesterday  was  not  a fair  trial. 

49.  Why  was  not  yesterday  a fair  trial  ? 

A.  Dog. 

And  again  : — 

108.  What  do  1 mean  by  chatting  C.  about  a lilac  tree? 

A.  Temper  and  imagination. 

109.  You  are  thinking  of  somebody  else.  Please  reply  to  my  question. 

A.  Lilacs.  c 

Here  a single  image  or  word  seems  to  have  made  its  mark  on  the 
percipient’s  mind,  without  calling  any  originative  activity  into  play  ; 
and  we  thus  get  the  naked  reproduction.  In  these  last  examples 
we  again  notice  the  feature  of  deferred  impression.  The  influence 

results  in  question  have  often  no  analogy  to  the  automatic  actions  which  wear©  accustomed 
to  attribute  to  ‘‘unconscious  cerebration.”  They  are  not  the  effects  of  habit  and  practice: 
they  are  new  results,  of  a sort  which  has  in  all  our  experience  been  preceded  by  intention 
and  reflection,  and  referable  to  a self.  Perhaps  the  simplest  illustration  of  what  is  here 
meant  by  “ unconscious  intelligence  ” is  to  be  found  in  occasional  facts  of  dreaming \ For 
instance,  it  has  occurred  to  me  at  least  once,  in  a dream,  to  be  asked  a riddle,  to  give  it 
up,  and  then  to  be  told  the  answer— which,  on  waking,  I found  quite  sufficiently  pertinent 
to  show  that  the  question  could  not  have  been  framed  without  distinct  reference  to  it.  ’ Yet 
for  the  consciousness  which  I call  mine , that  reference  had  remained  wholly  concealed : so 
little  had  I known  myself  as  the  composer  of  the  riddle  that  the  answer  came  to^e  as  a 
complete  surprise.  The  philosophical  problem  of  partial  selves  cannot  be  here  enlarged 
on-  fora  discussion  of  the  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of  cerebral  localisation,  as 
well  as  for  further  quotations  from  Mr.  Newnhanrs  record,  I may  refer  the  reader  to  Mr. 
Myers  paper  on  4 Automatic  Writing,”  in  Vol.  iii.  pf  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.r! 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

71 

ii.] 

only  gradually  became  effective,  the  immediate  answer  being 
irrelevant  to  the  question.  We  may  suppose,  therefore,  that  the 
first  effect  took  place  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness.1 

§ 13.  I may  now  proceed  to  some  further  results  which  were 
obtained  with  percipients  of  less  abnormal  sensibility,  and  which 
demand,  therefore,  a careful  application  of  the  theory  of  probabilities. 

1 The  following  case,  though  not  strictly  experimental,  is  sufficiently  in  point  to  be 
worth  quoting.  Though  unfortunately  not  recorded  in  writing  at  the  time,  it  was 
described  within  a few  days  of  its  occurrence  to  Mr.  Podmore,  who  is  acquainted  with 
all  the  persons  concerned.  The  narrator  is  Miss  Robertson,  of  229,  Marylebone  Road,  W. 

“ About  three  years  ago  I was  speaking  of  planchette- writing  to  some  of  my  friends, 
when  ft  young  lady,  a daughter  of  the  house  where  I was  spending  the  evening,  mentioned 
that  she  had  played  with  planchette  at  school,  and  that  it  had  always  written  for  her. 
Thereupon  I asked  her  to  spend  the  evening  with  me,  and  try  it  again,  which  she  agreed 
to  do.  On  the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  she  had  arranged  to  come  to  me,  her  brother, 

expect  that ; planchette  never  does  what  one  wants,’  or  words  to  that  effect.  A couple 
of  hours  after,  we  tried  the  planchette,  Edith’s  hand  alone  touching  it.  It  almost 
immediately  wrote,  quite  clearly  : — 

‘I.  SPALDING.  £6:13:4.’ 

I had  forgotten  about  the  cheque,  and  I said,  * What  can  that  mean  ? ’ Upon  which 
Edith  replied,  ‘It  is  H.’s  cheque,  perhaps.’  I was  incredulous,  having  a long  acquain- 
tance with  planchette.  I said,  ‘ If  it  is  right,  send  me  word  directly  you  get  home ; I am 
sure  it  will  not  be.’  But  the  next  day  I received  a letter  from  Edith,  telling  me  that  she 
had  astonished  her  brother  greatly  by  telling  him  the  name  and  the  amount  on  the 
cheque,  which  was  perfectly  correct.  I have  read  this  account  to  the  young  lady  and  her 
brother,  who  sign  it  as  well  as  myself.  # » 

‘‘Nora  Robertson. 

“ E.  C. 

“D.  C.  H.  C.” 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Miss  Robertson  adds,  on  Feb.  12,  1885 : — 

“Miss  E.  C.  says,  in  answer  to  your  question,  that  she  is  quite  certain  she  could  not 
have  known,  or  surmised,  the  name  and  amount  of  the  cheque. 

“ I can  confirm  her  on  the  first  point,  for  I remember  questioning  everybody  all 
round  at  the  time.  She  had  just  returned  from  school,  and  knew  nothing  at  all  about  her 
mother’s  business  or  money  matters.  ” 

Here,  it  will  bo  observed,  the  impression  seems  not  only  to  have  been  unconscious, 
bi^  to  have  remained  latent  for  several  hours  before  taking  effect ; for  it  is  at  any  rate  the 
most  natural  supposition  that  the  transference  actually  occurred  at  the  time  when  the 
conversation  on  tne  subject  took  place  between  the  brother  and  sister. 

This  latency  of  an  impression  which  finally  takes  effect  in  distinct  automatic  or 
semi-automatic  movements,  may  be  seen  in  cases  which  have  no  connection  with  telepathy. 
It  occurs,  for  instance,  in  trie  following  “muscle-reading  ” experiment,  described  to  us  by 
Mr.  George  B.  Trent,  of  65,  Sandgate  Road,  Folkestone : — 

“March  24th,  1883. 

1 4 Some  two  months  back,  I was  asked  by  a gentleman,  who  had  read  of  my  experiments 
in  the  paper,  to  oblige  him  with  a stance.  I called  upon  him  one  afternoon,  and  he  told 
me  that  he  nad  hidden  some  object,  in  the  early  morning,  and  he  thought  he  had  given 
me  a puzzle,  I first  experimented  with  pins ; I led  him  to  their  hiding-places  at  once, 
without  the  least  hesitation.  I then  asked  him  to  concentrate  the  whole  of  his  thought^ 
on  what  he  had  done  in  the  morning.  I immediately  led  him  to  a davenport,  unlocked  it, 

, and  from  amongst,  I may  say,  perhaps  a hundred  papers  and  other  articles,  I selected 
three  photographs,  and  from  tne  three  I fixed  upon  one— that  of  his  wife.  He  then  said  he 
was  perfectly  astonished,  as  I had  positively  gone  through  an  experiment  he  had  set 
himself  to  do,  but  abandoned  in  favour  of  another  he  had  done.” 

It  seems  probable  that,  at  any  rate  in  the  earlier  stages  of  this  performance,  the  idea 
of  t&at  Was  to  be  done  was  not  consciously  present  in  the  “ willer’s  ” mind,  which  was 
’ apparently  concentrated  on  something  else.  And  if  so,  his  muscular  indications  must  have 
been  the  result  of  unconscious  cerebration— an  effect  of  nervous  activity,  continuing 
to  act  in  accordance  with  a previous  impulse  which  had  lapsed  from  consciousness. 

72 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

For  the  development  of  the  motor  form  of  experiment  in  this 
direction,  we  have  again  to  thank  M.  Richet;  who  here,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  card-guessing,  has  brought  the  calculus  to  bear  effectively 
on  various  sets  of  results  many  of  which,  if  looked  at  in  separation, 
would  have  had  no  significance.1  The  fact  that  the  “ subjects  ” of  his 
trials  were  persons  who  had  betrayed  no  special  aptitude  for  “mental 
suggestion,”  made  it  clearly  desirable  that  the  bodily  action  required 
should  be  of  the  very  sinfplest  sort.  The  formation  of  words  by 
a planchette- writer  requires,  of  course,  a very  complex  set  of 
muscular  co-ordinations:  all  that  M.  Richet  sought  to  obtain  was  a 
single  movement  or  twitch.  In  the  earlier  trials  an  object  was  hidden, 
and  the  percipient  endeavoured  to  discover  it  by  means  of  a sort  of 
divining-rod — the  idea  being  that  he  involuntarily- twitched  the  rod 
at  the  right  moment  under  the  influence  of  “mental  suggestion” 
from  the  agent,  who  was  watching  his  movements.  But  where  the 
subject  of  communication  is^  of  such  an  extremely  simple  kind,  very 
elaborate  precautions  would  be  needed  to  guard  against  unconscious 
hints.  Indications  from  the  expression  or  attitude  of  the  “agent” 
may  be  prevented  by  blindfolding  the  “ percipient,”  and  in  other 
ways ; but  if  the  two  are  in  close  proximity,  it  is  harder  to  exclude 
such  signs  as  may  be  given  by  involuntary  movements,  or  by  changes 
of  breathing.  M.  Richet’s  later  experiments  were  ingeniously  contrived 
so  as  to  obviate  this  objection. 

The  place  of  a planchette  was  taken  by  a table,  and  M.  Richet 
prefaces  his  account  by  a succinct  statement  of  the  orthodox  view  as  to 
“table- turning.”  Rejecting  altogether  the  three  theories  which  attri- 
bute the  phenomena  to  wholesale  fraud,  to  spirits,  and  to  an  unknown 
force,  he  regards  the  gyrations  and  oscillations  of  s&mce-tables  as  due 
wholly  to  the  unconscious  muscular  contractions  of  the  sitters.  It  thus 
occurred  to  him  to  employ  a table  as  an  indicator  of  the  movements 
‘that  might  be  produced,  by  “mental  suggestion.”  The  plan  of  the 
experiments  wras  as  follows.  Three  persons  (C,  D,  and  E,)  took 
their  seats  in  a semi-circle,  at  a little  table  on  which  their  hands 
rested.  One  of  these  three  was  always  a “ medium  ” — a term  used  by 
M.  Richet  to  denote  a person  liable  to  exhibit  intelligent  movements  in 
which  consciousness  and  will  apparently  take  no  part.  Attached  to  the 
table  was  a simple  electrical  apparatus,  the  effect  of  which  was  to  ring  a 
bell  whenever  the  current  was  broken  by  the  tilting  of  the  t^fele. 

..  .I..1  h*v,e  given  a fuller  description  and  criticism  of  M.  Richet’s  investigations  in 
Vol.  u.  of  the  Vroctulmgs  of  the  S.F.R.  ° 

n.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

73 

Behind  the  backs  of  the  sitters  at  the  table  was  another  table,  on 
which  was  a large  alphabet,  completely  screened  from  the  view  of  0, 
D,  and  E,  even  had  they  turned  round  and  endeavoured  to  see  it.  In 
front  of  this  alphabet  sat  A,  whose  duty  was  to  follow  the  letters 
slowly  and  steadily  with  a pen,  returning  at  once  to  the  beginning  as 
soon  as  he  arrived  at  the  end.  At  A’s  side  sat  B,  with  a note-book ; 
his  duty  was  to  write  down  the  letter  at  which  A’s  pen  happened  to 
be  pointing  whenever  the  bell  rang.  This  happened  whenever 
one  of  the  sitters  at  the  table  made  the  simple  movement 
necessary  to  tilt  it.  Under  these  conditions,  A and  B are  apparently 
mere  automata.  C,  D,  and  E are  little  more,  being  unconscious 
of  tilting  the  table,  which  appears  to  them  to  tilt  itself ; but  even 
if  they  tilted  it  consciously,  and  with  a conscious  desire  to  dictate 
words,  they  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  at  what  letter  A’s  pen  is 
pointing  at  any  particular  moment ; and  they  might  tilt  for  ever 
without  producing  more  than  an  endless  series  of  incoherent  letters. 
Things  being  arranged  thus,  a sixth  operator,  F,  stationed  himself 
apart  both  from  the  tilting  table  and  from  the  alphabet,  and  con- 
centrated his  thought  on  some  word  of  his  own  choosing,  which  he 
had  not  communicated  to  the  others.  The  three  sitters  at  the  first 
table  engaged  in  conversation,  sang,  or  told  stories ; but  at  intervals  the 
table  tilted,  the  bell  rang,  and  B wrote  down  the  letter  which  A’s 
pen  was  opposite  to  at  that  moment.  Now,  to  the  astonishment  of 
all  concerned,  these  letters,  when  arranged  in  a series,  turned  out  to 
produce  a more  or  less  close  approximation  to  the  word  of  which  F 
was  thinking. 

For  the  sake  of  comparing  the  results  with  those  which  pure 
accident  would  give,  M.  Richet  first  considers  some  cases  of  the  latter 
sort.  He  writes  the  word  NAPOLEON  ; he  then  takes  a box 
containing  a number  of  letters,  and  makes  eight  draws ; the  eight 
letters,  in.  the  order  of  drawing,  turn  out  tobeUPMTDEYV.  ‘ 
He  then  places  this  set  below  the  other,  thus : — 

NAPOLEON 

UPMTDEYV 

Taking  the  number  of  letters  in  the  French  alphabet  to  be  24,  the 
probability  of  the  correspondence  of  any  letter  in  the  lower  line  with 
the  letter  immediately  'above  it  is,,  of  course  & ; and  the  probability 
th^  in  the  whole  series  there  will  be  one  such  success  is  or 
If  we  reckon  as  a success  any  case  where  the  letter  in  the  lower  line 
corresponds  not  only  with  the  letter  above  it,  but  with  either  of  the 

74 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

neighbours  of  that  letter  in  the  alphabet 1 (e!jj.,  where  L has  above  it 
either  K,  L,  or  M),  then  the  chance  of  a single  success  in  the  series  is 
three  times  greater  than  before ; that  is,  it  is  1.  In  the  actual  result, 
it  will  be  seen,  there  is  just  one  success,  which  happens  to  be  a complete 
one — the  letter  E in  the  sixth  place.  It  will  not  be  necessary  to 
quote  other  instances.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  total  result,  of  trials 
involving  the  use  of  (J4  letters,  gives  3 exact  correspondences,  while 
the  expression  indicating  the  most  probable  number  was  27  ; and  7 
correspondences  of  the  other  type,  while  the  probable  number  was  8. 
Thus  even  in  this  short  set  of  trials,  where  accident  had  full  scope,  the 
experimental  result  very  nearly  coincided  with  the  strict  theoretic 
number. 

We  are  now  in  a position  to  appreciate  the  results  obtained  when 
the  factor  of  “ mental  suggestion  ” was  introduced.  In  the  first 
experiments  made,  M Riehet,  standing  apart  both  from  the  table  and 
from  the  alphabet,  selected  from  Littre’s  dictionary  a line  of  poetry 
which  was  unknown  to  his  friends,  and  asked  the  name  of  the  author. 
The  let  lei’s  obtained  by  the  process  above  described  were  JFARD; 
and  there  the  tilting  stopped.  After  M.  Richet’s  friends  had  puzzled 
in  vain  over  this  answer,  ho  informed  them  that  the  author  of  the 
lines  was  Racine  , and  juxtaposition  of  the  letters  thus — 

JFARD 
JE  AN  R 

shows  that  the  number  of  complete  successes  was  2,  which  is  about 
10  times  the  fraction  representing  the  probable  number ; and  that 
the  number  of  successes  of  the  type  where  neighbouring  letters  are 
reckoned  was  3,  which  is  about  5 times  the  fraction  representing  the 
probable  number.  M.  Riehet  tells  us,  however,  that  he  was  hot 
actually  concentrating  his  thought  on  the  author’s  Christian  name. 
Even  so,  it  probably  had  a sub-conscious  place  in  his  mind,  which 
might  sufficiently  account  for  its  appearance.  At  the  same  time 
accident  has  of  course  a wider  scope  when  there  is  more  than  one 
result  that  would  be  allowed  as  successful. 

It  is  clearly  desirable — with  the  view  of  making  sure  that  F’s 
mind,  if  any,  is  the  operative  one— not  to  ask  a question  of  which  the 

It  mi^t'bfl^iwi^ied'by  the*3itfiCTJtyf  on<th.l|^^y0^t  obktiniiuran 

coincidence  of  time  between  the  tilting  and  the  pSntbc  STkW 

tStastss  tsvazis  ssa  ® 23? 

mind,  as  to  what  the  letter  should  have  been.  * doubt>  m the  waders 

TUO  UGHT-  TRA  NS  FE HENCE. 

75 

»•] 

answer  might  possibly  at  some  time  have  beeu  within  the  knowledge 
of  the  sitters  at  the  table ; and  in  the  subsequent  experiments  the 
name  was  silently  fixed  on  by  F.  The  most  striking  success  was  the 
following : — 

Name  thought  of:  CHEVALON 
Letters  produced : C H E V A L 

Here  the  most  probable  number  of  exact  successes  was  0,  and  the 
actual  number  was  6. 

Taking  the  sum  of  eight  trials,  we  find  that  the  most  probable 
number  of  exact  successes  was  2,  and  the  actual  number  14 ; and  that 
the  most  probable  number  of  successes  of  the  other  type  was  7,  and  the 
actual  number  24.  It  was  observed,  moreover,  that  the  correspondences 
were  much  more*  numerous  in  the  earlier  letters  of  each  set  than  in 
the  later  ones.  The  first  three  letters  of  each  set  were  as  follows — 

J F A— N E F— F 0 Q— H E N— C H E— E P J— C H E— A L L 
J E A— L E G— E S T— H I G— D I E— DOR— C H E— Z K 0 
Here,  out  of  twenty-four  trials,  the  probable  number  of  exact 
successes  being  1,  the  actual  number  is  8 ; the  probable  number  of 
successes  of  the  other  type  being  3,  the  actual  number  is  17.  The 
figures  become  still  more  striking  if  we  regard  certain  consecutive 
series  in  the  results.  Thus  the  probability  of  obtaining  by  chance 
the  three  consecutive  correspondences  in  the  first  experiment  here 
quoted  was  *}a ; and  that  of  obtaining  the  6 consecutive  correspon- 
dences in  the'  CHEV  ALON  experiment  was  about  io6.6oo.ooo. 

The  experiment  was  repeated  four  times  in  another  form.  A line 
of  poetry  was  secretly  and  silently  written  down  by  the  agent,  with 
Itfie  omission  of  a single  letter.  He  then  asked  what  the  omitted 
letter  was  ; it  was  correctly  produced  in  every  one  of  the  four  trials. 
The  probability  of  such  a result  was  less  than 

And  now  follows  a very  interesting  observation.  In  some  cases,  after 
the  result  was  obtained,  subsequent  trials  were  made  with  the  mme  word, 
which  of  course  the  agent  did  not  reveal  in  the  meantime;  and  the 
amount  of  success  was  sometimes  markedly  increased  on  these  subse- 
quent trials.  Thus,  when  the  name  thought  of  was  d’O  R M 0 N T, 
the  first  three  letters  produced  on  the  first  trial  were  E P J 
„ „ „ second  „ EPF 

» » „ third  „ EPS 

„ » „ fourth  „ DOR  ....  ' 

Summing  up  these  four  trials,  the  probable  number  of  exact 
successea  was  0,  and  the  actual  number  was  3 ; the  probable  number 

76  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS : [chap. 

of  successes  of  the  other  type  was  1 or  at  most  2 ; and  the  actual 
number  was  10.  The  probability  of  the  3 consecutive  successes  in 
the  last  trial  was  about 

In  respect  of  this  name  d’Ormont,  there  was  a further  very 
peculiar  result.  On  the  fourth  trial,  the  letters  produced  in  the 
manner  described  stood  thus — DOBEMIOD 

Thus,  if  the  name  thought  of  were  spelt  DOREMOND, 
the  approximation  would  be  extraordinarily  close,  the  probability  of 
the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  5 consecutive  successes  being 
something  infinitesimal.1  Now,  as  long  as  we  are  merely  aiming  at 
an  unassailable  mathematical  estimate  of  probabilities  for  each 
particular  case,  it  does  not  seem  justifiable  to  take  ifs  of  any  sort  into 
consideration.  M.  Richet,  who  was  the  agent,  expre'ssly  tells  us  that 
he  was  imagining  the  T ame  spelt  as  d’Ormont ; and  on  the  strict 
account,  therefore,  the  success  reached  a point  against  which  the  odds, 
though  still  enormous,  were  decidedly  less  enormous  than  if  he  had 
been  imagining  the  other  spelling.  But  when  we  are  endeavouring  to 
form  a correct  view  of  what  really  takes  place,  it  would  be*  unintelli- 
gent not  to  take  a somewhat  wider  view  of  the  phenomena.  And  such 
a view  seems  to  show  that  in  those  underground  mental  regions  where 
M.  Richet’s  results  (if  more  than  accidental)  must  have  had  their 
preparation,  a mistake  or  a piece  of  independence  in  spelling  is  by 
no  means  an  unusual  occurrence.  The  records  of  automatism,  quite 
apart  from  telepathy,  afford  many  instances  of  such  independence. 
Thus  a gentleman,  writing  automatically,  was  puzzled  by  the  mention 
of  a friend  at  Front  nnao — a place  he  had  never  heard  of ; weeks 
afterwards  his  own  writing  gave  him  the  correct  name — Fond  die 
Lac.  Mr.  Myers’  paper,  above  referred  to,  contains  one  case  where  a 
planchette  wrote,  “My  name  is  Norman,”  presumably  meaning 
Normal ; and  another,  witnessed  by  Professor  Sidgwick,  where  the 
Greek  letter  x was  automatically  written  as  K H,  with  the  result 
that  for  a time  the  word  completely  puzzled  the  writer.  And  while 
engaged  on  this  very  point  I have  received  a letter  from  Mr.  Julian 
Hawthorne,  in  which  he  tells  me  that  the  spelling  of  the  planchette- 
writing  obtained  through  the  automatism  of  a young  child  of  his  own 
was  “ much  better  than  in  her  own  letters  and  journals.” 

I will  insert  here  an  incident  to  which,  since  it  occurred  in  connec- 
tion with  a person  who  has  been  detected  in  the  production  of  spurious 

1 Moreover  the  E in  the  4th  place  had  appeared  in  two  of  the  preceding  trials  and  the 
final  O D in  one  of  them. 

77 

n.]  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE, 

phenomena,  I wish  to  attribute  no  evidential  importance.  Through- 
out this  book  care  has  been  taken  to  rest  our  case  exclusively  on 
phenomena  and  records  of  phenomena  derived  from  (as  we  believe) 
quite  untainted  sources ; but  there  are  two  reasons  which  seem  to  me 
to  make  the  following  experience  worth  describing.  First,  those  who 
already  believe  in  thought-transference  will  feel  little  doubt  that  we 
have  here  an  instance  of  it,  which  is  in  itself  independent  of  the 
character  and  pretensions  of  the  percipioit ; and  this  being  so,  they 
will  find,  in  the  close  parallelism  that  the  case  presents  in  some 
points  to  M-  Richet’s  experiments,  an  interesting  confirmation  of  these. 
And  secondly,  it  may  be  useful  to  suggest  that  thought-transference 
is  probably  the  true  explanation  of  certain  results  professedly 
produced  by  “ spiritualistic  mediumship  ” ; for  till  telepathic  per- 
cipience  is  allowed  for,  as  a natural  human  faculty,  the  occasional 
manifestations  of  it  in  dubious  circumstances  are  certain  to  be  a 
source  of  confusion  and  error. 

On  September  2,  1885,  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and 
the  present  writer  paid  an  impromptu  visit  to  a professional  "medium” 
in  a foreign  town,  who  had  no  clue  whatever  to  our  names  and 
identity.  We  had  decided  beforehand  on  a name  on  which  to  con- 
centrate our  thoughts,  with  a view  to  getting  it  reproduced.  There 
was  no  opportunity  for  employing  M.  Richet’s  precautions  and  checks. 
The  “ medium,”  her  daughter,  and  the  three  visitors  sat  round  a table 
on  which  their  hands  were  placed,  and  the  present  writer  pointed  to 
the  successive  letters  of  a printed  alphabet ; at  intervals  the  sound  of 
a rap  was  heard,  and  the  letter  thus  indicated  was  written  down. 
Now  these  conditions  could  not  have  been  considered  adequate,  had 
the  result  been  that  the  name  in  our  minds  was  correctly  given ; for 
though  our  two  companions  were  not  apparently  looking  at  us  and 
not  in  contact  with  us,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that  some 
involuntary  and  unconscious  movement  on  our  part  revealed  to  one  of 
them  at  what  points  to  make  the  raps.  But  as  the  result  turned  out, 
it  will  be  seen,  I think,  that  this  objection  does  not  apply.  The  name 
that  had  been  selected  was  John  Henry  Pratt.  The  result  obtained 
in  the  way  described  was  JONHNYESROSAT. 

From  the  N in  the  fifth  place  to  the  end,  Dr.  Myers  and  myself 
regarded  the  letters  that  were  being  given  as  purely  fortuitous,  and  as 
forming  gibberish ; and  though  Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  detected  a 
method  in  them,  he  was  as  far  as  we  were  from  expecting  the 
successive  letters  before  they  appeared.  On  inspection,  the  method 

78  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS:  [chap. 

becomes  apparent.  If  in  three  places  an  approximation  (of  the  sort  so 
often  met  with  by  M.  Eichet)  be  allowed,  and  a contiguous  letter  be 
substituted,  the  complete  name  will  be  found  to  be  given,  thus  : — 

R PT 

JON  HNYES  ROSAT 

the  first  word  being  phonetically  spelt,  and  the  other  two  being 
correct  anagrams.  It  is  highly  improbable  that  such  an  amount 
of  resemblance  was  accidental;  and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that 
it  was  due  to  muscular  indications  unconsciously  given  by  us  in 
accordance  with  an  unconncious  arrangement  of  - the  letters  in  our 
minds  in  phonetic  and  anagrammatic  order.  If  these  suppositions 
be  excluded,  the  only  alternative  will  be  thought-transference — the 
letters  whose  image  or  sound  was  transferred  being  modified  by 
the  percipient  herself,  in  a way  which  seems,  from  some  experiments 
unconnected  with  thought-transference,  to  be  quite  within  the 
scope  of  the  mind’s  unconscious  operations. 1 But  in  whatever  way 
the  knowledge  of  the  letters  or  syllables  reached  the  “ medium’s  ” 
mind,  I see  no  reason  to  think  that  the  expression  of  it  by  raps 
was  other  than  a conscious  act.  The  sounds  were  such  as  would  be 
made  by  gently  tappiug  the  loot  against  the  wooden  frame  of  the  table  • 
and  at  a subsequent  trial  with  one  of  these  so-called  “ mediums  ” — 
the  daughter — I managed  by  very  gradually  advancing  my  own  foot 
to  receive  on  it  first  a part  and  ultimately  the  whole  of  the  impact. 
The  movement  required  to  make  the  raps  may  have  become  semi- 
automatic from  long  habit,  but  can  hardly  have  been  unconscious. 
I may  add  that,  out  of  a good  many  words  and  sentence^  which 
were  spelt  out  in  the  same  way  at  several  different  sittings,  me  case 
recorded  was  (with  a single  doubtful  exception)  the  only  one  that 
contained  the  slightest  indication  of  any  abnormal  faculty. 

To  return  to  M.  Riehet’s  experiments — a result  of  a different 
kind  was  the  following,  which  is  especially  noteworthy  as  due  to  the 
agency  of  an  idea  that  was  itself  on  the  verge  of  the  unconscious. 
M.  Richet  chose  a quotation  at  random  from  Littr6’s  dictionary,  and 
asked  for  the  name  of  the  author,  which  was  Legouv6.  The  letters 
produced  were  J OSEPHCHD,  which  looked  like  a complete 
failure.  But  the  quotation  in  the  dictionary  was  adjacent  to  another 
from  the  works  of  Joseph  Chenier ; and  M.  Richet’s  eye,  in  running 
over  the  page,  had  certainly  encountered  the  latter  name,  which  had 
probably  retained  a certain  low  place  in  his  consciousness.  Another 

1 For  a curious  case  of  the  automatic  production  of  anagrams,  see  Proceeding*  of  the 
S.P.R.,  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  226-31. 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

79 

n.j 

veryinteresting  case  of  a,  result  unintended  by  the  agent,  though 
probably  due  to  something  in  his  mind,  was  this.  The  name  thought 
of  was  Victor ; the  letters  produced  on  three  trials  were 

DALEN 
DAMES 
D ANDS 

— seemingly  complete  failures.  But  it  apjpeared  that  while  the  agent 
had  been  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  “ Victor,”  the  name  of  a 
friend,  Danet,  had  spontaneously  recurred  to  his  memory.  We  should, 
of  course,  be  greatly  extending  the  chances  of  accidental  success,  if  we 
reckoned  collocations  of  letters  as  successful  on  the  ground  of  their 
resemblance  to  any  one  of  the  names  or  words  which  may' have 
momentarily  found  their  way  into  the  agent’s  mind  while  the 
experiment  was  in  progress.  Here,  however,  the  name  seems  to  have 
suggested  itself  with  considerable  persistence,  and  the  resemblance  is 
very  close.  And  if  the  result  may  fairly  be  attributed  to  “ mental 
suggestion,”  then,  of  the  two  names  which  had  a certain  lodgment  in 
the  agent’s  mind,  the  one  intended  to  be  effective  was  ineffective,  and 
vice  versd. 

It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  in  the  few  hitherto  recorded  cases  of 
experimental  telepathy,  where  words  have  been  indicated  by  writing 
or  by  other  movements  on  the  percipient’s  part,  the  idea  or  word 
transferred  seems  as  often  as  not  to  have  been  one  which  was  not  at 
the  moment  occupying  the  agent’s  consciousness  ; that  is  to  say,  the 
influence  has  proceeded  from  some  part  of  the  agent’s  mind  which  is 
below  the  threshold  of  conscious  attention.  (See  p.  84  below,  and 
VqJ.  II.,  pp.  670-1.)  This  conception  of  unconscious  agency — of  an 
“ unconscious  intelligence  ” in  the  agent  as  well  as  in  the  percipient — 
will  present  itself  again  very  prominently  when  we  come  to  consider 
the  cases  of  spontaneous  telepathy.  But  the  experimental  instances 
have  a theoretic  importance  of  another  sort.  They  seem  to  exhibit 
telepathic  production  of  movements  by  what  is  at  most  an  idea,  an4 
not  a volition,  on  the  agent’s  part.  This,  indeed,  is  a hypothesis  which 
seems  justified  even  by  M.  Kichet’s  less  exceptional  results.  For  we 
must  remember  that  in  a sense  A is  throughout  more  immediately  the 
agent  than  F ; it  is  what  A’s  mind  contributes,  not  what  F’s  mind 
contributes,  that  produces  the  tilts  at  the  right  momenta1  But  this 

. . 1 ‘"When  A in  pointing,  began  at  the  beginning  of  the  alphabet,  the  sense  of  time 
might  conceivably  have  led  to  an  unconscious  Judgment  as  to  the  point  arrived  at.  This 
idea  had  occurred  to  M.  Richet.  It  seems,  however,  an  unnecessary  multiplication  of 
hypotheses  j for  we  leartt  from  him  that  in  some  trials  A began  at  uncertain  places,  and 

80 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

is  of  course  through  no  will  of  A’s ; he  is  ignorant  of  -the  required 
word,  and  has  absolutely  no  opportunity  of  bringing  his  volition  into 
play.  His  “ agency  ” is  of  a wholly  passive  sort ; and  his  mind,  as  it 
follows  the  course  of  his  pen,  is  a mere  conduit -pipe,  whereby  know- 
ledge of  a certain  kind  obtains  access  to  the  “ unconscious  intelligence”' 
which  evokes  the  tilts.  If,  then,  the  knowledge  manifests  itself  as 
impulse,  can  we  avoid  the  conclusion  that  in  this  particular  mode  of 
access — in  “ mental  suggestion  ” or  telepathy  as  such — a certain 
impulsive  quality  is  involved  ? We  shall  encounter  further  signs  of 
such  an  impulsive  quality  among  the  spontaneous  cases.1  (See  pp.  294, 
637-8.) 

But  of  course  the  relation  between  F and  the  “ medium,”  plays 
also  a necessary  part  in  the  result ; the  impulse  to  tilt  when  a 
particular  letter  is  reached  only  takes  effect  when  it  falls  (so  to  speak) 
on  ground  prepared  by  “ mental  suggestion  ” from  F — on  a mind  in 
which  the  word  imagined  by  him  has  obtained  an  unconscious 
lodgment.  The  unconscious  part  of  the  percipient’s  mind  would  thus 
be  the  scene  of  confluence  of  two  separate  telepathic  streams,  which 
proceed  to  combine  there  in  an  intelligent  way — one  proceeding  from 
F’s  mind,  which  produces  unconscious  knowledge  of  the  word,  and  the 
other  proceeding  from  A’s  mind,  which  produces  an  unconscious  image 

that  under  these  conditions  coherent  words  were  obtained.  The  fact  that  bo  often  the 
approximate  letter  was  given,  instead  of  the  exact  one,  might  seem  at  first  sight  to  favour 
the  hypothesis  of  unconscious  reckoning ; but  it  will  be  observed  that  exactly  the  eame 
approximations  took  place  in  our  own  experiment  (pp.77-8),  where  the  alphabet  was  in  the 
'^medium’s”  sight. 

1 The  impulse  might  no  doubt  bo  otherwise  accounted  for  if  we  supposed  that  a close, 
connection  was  established  in  F’s  mind  between  the  idea  of  the  object — ?>.,  the  successive 
letters — and  the  idea  of  the  movement , and  that  this  complex  idea  was  what  was  trans- 
ferred and  what  ultimately  took  effect.  But  it  is  hard  to  apply  this  hypothesis  to  cases 
where  a word  is  produced  which,  though  latent  in  F’s  inind,  has  no  resemblance  to  the  \jjord 
whose  production  he  is  willing.  The  transference  of, the  idea  of  the  latent  word,  even  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  right  word,  can  be  quite  conceived  ; but  can  wo  suppose  that,  sub- 
consciously or  unconsciously,  an  idea  of  movement  was  combined  with  the  idea  of  fys  letters 
in  the  agent’s  mind,  at  the  very  moment  when  that  on  which  his  attention  was  fixed,  and 
with  which  ex  hgpothesi  the  conscious  idea  of  movement  was  connected,  was  a quite 
different  set  of  letters  ? Can  we  suppose  that  the  idea  of  movement  overflowed  into  the 
unconscious  region  of  his  mind,  and  there  on  its  own  account  formed  an  alliance  with  alien 
elements,  the  effect  of  which  on  the  percipient  would  prevent  the  effect  intended?  It  must 
be  remembered  that  where  a word  which  is  not  the  one  intended  gets  transferred  from  F 
to  the  “ medium,”  there  is  no  knowledge,  conscious  or  unconscious,  on  F’s  part,  as  to  what 
that  word  will  be.  A number  of  words  are  latent  in  his  mind  ; one  of  these  finds  an  echo 
in  another  mind.  But  how  should  the  idea  of  movement  find  out  which  particular  one 
out  of  all  the  words,  is  destined  thus  to  find  an  echo,  so  as  to  associate  itself  with  it*  letters 
and  no  others  ? And  if  we  suppose  the  association  to  be  between  the  unconscious  idea  of 
movement  and  the  unconscious  idea  of  letters  in  general , this  is  no  less  dissimilar  and 
opposed  to  anything  that  the  conscious  part  of  F’s  mind  has  conceived.  For  it  is  not  in 
letters  as  such,  but  in  the  exclusive  constituents  of  a particular  word  that  he  is  interested  • 
if  indeed  he  is  interested  in  anything  beyond  the  word  as  a whole.  The  difficulty  here 
seems  to  justify  the  suggestion— with  which  I imagine  that  M.  Richet  would  agre^-that 
the  physiological  impulse  does  not  depend  on  any  idea  of  movement , or  any  special  direction 
of  the  agent  s will  to  that  result.  This  might  be  tested,  if  F were  a person  ignorant  of  the 
form  of  the  experiment,  and  out  of  sight  of  the  table. 

II.] 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

81 

of  the  successive  letters^1'  Another  possible  supposition  would  be  that 
F’s  thought  affects,  not  the  “ medium,”  but  A ; or  conversely,  that 
A’s  thought  affects,  pot  the  “ medium,”  but  F ; — that  A obtains 
unconscious ' knowledge  of  the  word,  or  that  F obtains  unconscious 
knowledge  of  the  letter,  and  so  is  enabled  to  communicate  an  impulse 
to  the  “ medium  ” at  the  right  moment.  And  we  should  then  have  to 
suppose  a secret  understanding  between  two  parts  of  A’s  or  F’s  mind, 
the  part  which  takes  account  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  the 
part  which  takes  account  of  the  letters  of  the  word — the  former  being 
conscious  and  the  latter  unconscious,  or  vice  versa,  according  as  A or 
F is  the  party  affected. 

One  hesitates  to  launch  oneself  on  the  conceptions  which  these 
experiments  opten  up;  but  the  only  alternative  would  be  to 
question  the  facts  from  an  evidential  point  of  view.  So  regarded, 
they  are  of  an  extremely  simple  kind ; and  if  their  genuineness 
be  granted,  we  are  reft  once  and  for  all  from  our  old  psychological 
moorings.  The  whole  question  of  the  psychical  constitution  of 
man  is  opened  to  its  furthest  depths ; and  our  central  con- 
ception-telepathy— the  interest  of  which,  even  in  its  simpler 
phases,  seemed  almost  unsurpassable,  takes  on  an  interest  of  a 
wholly  unlooked-for  kind.  For  it  now  ’appears  as  an  all-important 
method  or  instrument  for  testing  the  mind  in  its  hidden  parts,  and 
for  measuring  its  unconscious  operations. 

§ 14.  The  above  sketch  (together  with  some  further  examples  to 
be  given  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Supplement)  may  give  an  idea  of  the 
chief  experimental  results  so  far  obtained  in  the  course  of  serious  and 
systematic  research.  But  though  the  investigation  maybe  laboriously 
and  consecutively  pursued  by  those  who  make  a special  study  of  the 
subject,  it  is  one  which  admits  also  of  being  prosecuted  in  a more 
haphazard  and  sporadic  manner.  A group  of  friends  may  take  it  up  for 
a few  evenings,  and  then  get  tired  of  it ; and  it  is  quite  possible  for 
valuable  results  to  be  obtained  without  any  recognition  of  their 
value.  One  or  two  specimens  of  these  casual  successes  that  we  so 

1 It  will  be  seen  that  the  results  of  such  “unconscious  intelligence”  go 
considerably  beyond  the  received  results  of  mere  “ unconscious  cerebration.”  Un- 
conscious cerebration  is  amply  competent  to  produce  such  seemingly  intelligent 
actions  as  ordinary  writing;  but  what  is  now  done  more  resembles  the  formation 
of  a word  by  picking  letters  from  a heap,  or  type-writing  by  a person  who  is 
unused  to  his  instrument.  The  process  is  not  one  in  which  every  item  is  connected  by 
longstanding  association  with  the  one  before  and  after  it ; eyery  item  is  independent,  and 
implies  the  recognition,  at  an  uncertain  moment,  of  a particular  relation — that  between 
the  next  letter  required  for  the  word  and  the  same  letter  in  its  place  in  a quite  distinct 
aeries. 

O 

82 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[chap. 

frequently  hear  of  may  be  worth  giving,  if  only  because  the 
knowledge  that  such  results  are  obtainable  may  stimulate  further 
trials.  Oar  own  satisfaction  in  such  fragments  of  evidence  is  often 
more  than  counterbalanced  bv  the  impossibility  of  getting  our 
friends  to  devote  time  and  trouble  to  the  work. 

The  following  case,  received  in  September,  1885,  from  Mrs. 
Wilson,  of  Westal,  Cheltenham,  is  interesting  as  an  apparent  victory 
of  “thought-reading”  over  “muscle-reading.”  A group  of  five  “willers,” 
one  of  whom  was  in  contact  with  the  would-be  percipient,  were  to 
concentrate4  their  minds  on  the  desire  that  the  latter  should  sit  down 
to  the  piano  and  strike  the  middle  C.  Had  she  done  so,  the  result 
would  have  been  worth  little ; but  this  was  what  happened : — 

“ When  A.  I.  entered  blindfolded— her  hand  in  the  hand  of  B,  held  over 
the  forehen, d — M.  A.W.  was  possessed  with  the  desire  to  will  her,  without 
bodily  contact,  to  come  t > her  and  give  her  a kiss  on  the  forehead,  and  she 
at  once  exerted  (unknown  to  the  others)  all  her  will  to  achieve  this  object. 
A.  I.  came  slowly  up  to  M.  A.  W.,  till  she  stood  quite  close,  touching  her, 
and  commenced  bending  clown  towards  her,  when  M.  A.  W.,  thinking  it 
was  hardly  fair  to  succeed  against  the  other  ‘ willers,’  tried  to  reverse  her 
will,  and  with  intense  effort  willed  A.  I.  to  turn  away  and  not  give  the 
intended  kiss.  Slowly  A.  1.  raised  her  head,  stood  a moment  still,  then 
turned  in  another  direction  towards  the  piano,  but  not  near  it,  and  sat 
down  in  an  armchair.  A few  seconds  after  she  said  : ‘ I can’t  feel  any 
impression  now,  nor  any  wish  to  do  anything.’  She  was  released  from  her 
bandage  and  questioned  as  to  her  feelings.  ‘ Did  you  get  any  impression 
of  what  you  had  to  do  ? What  did  you  feel  i ‘ She  replied  : ‘ I liacl  a distinct 
feeling  that  I had  to  go  and  kiss  M.  A.  W.  on  the  forehead  ; but  when  I 
came  up  to  someone  and  bent  down  to  do  it,  I was  sensible  of  a strong 
feeling  that  I was  not  to  do  it — and  could  not  do  it ; and  after  that  I could 

get  no  impression  whatever.’  „ ..r  . 

* r “ Mary  A.  Wilson. 

“ Alice  M.  W.  Ingram.”  <* 

The  percipient  in  both  the  following  eases  was  our  friend,  the 
Hon.  Alexander  Yorke.  In  the  summer  of  1884  he  mentioned  to 
two  nieces,  as  a joke,  that  some  one  had  suggested  to  him  the 
possibility  of  discerning  tho  contents  of  letters  pressed  to  the  fore- 
head ; and  this  quack  suggestion  led  by  accident  to  an  apparently 
genuine  experiment  in  thought-transference. 

The  account  is  from  the  Misses  Adeane,  of  19,  Ennismore 
Gardens,  S.W. 

“Taking  a letter  from  a heap  on  my  mother’s  table,  I glanced  at  the 
contents,  and  then  placed  it  on  my  uncle’s  head,  where  he  held  it.  A 
minute  had  hardly  elapsed  before  he  said,  quite  quietly,  ‘This  letter  iSnot 
addressed  to  your  mother.’  He  then  paused,  as  if  waiting  for  another 
impression.  ‘ It  is  written  to  Charlie  ’ (my  brother),  and  another  pause. 

THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE. 

83 

«•] 

* by  an  uncle — not  a real  uncle — a sort  of  uncle/  Another  pause,  { It 
must  be  about  business/  At  this  point  I was  so  much  astonished  that  I 
could  not  help  telling  him  how  true  and  correct  all  his  impressions  had 
been,  which  practically  put  an  end  to  the  experiment  by  giving  a clue  as 
to  what  the  business  was,  <fcc.  My  younger  sister  was  the  only  other 
person  in  the  room  at  the  time.  The  letter  was  addressed  to  my  brother 
at  Oxford  by  his  trustee,  and  uncle  by  marriage,  and  related  to  business ; 
he  had  forwarded  it  to  my  mother  to  read,  and.  I selected  it  partly  by 
chance,  and  partly  because  I thought  if  Jbhere  was  only  guessing  in  the 
case  it  would  have  been  a puzzler.  My  uncle,  Mr.  Yorke,  does  not  know 

the  writer  of  the  letter  or  his 

handwriting. 

“ Marie  C.  Adeane. 
“Maude  Adeane.” 

Again,  the  mother  of  these  informants,  Lady  Elizabeth  Biddulph, 
writes  to  Us : . “June  12th,  1884. 

“My  girls  came  down  to  the  drawing-room  with  my  brother,  Mr., 
Alexander  Yorke,  about  3.30  on  Sunday  afternoon,  May  18th.  I was 
sitting  with  one  of  Mr.  Biddulph’s  brothers  and  his  sister,  Mrs.  L.  They 
had  just  brought  me  a letter  sent  by  mistake  to  31,  Eaton  Place. 
Presently  Captain  and  Lady  Edith  Adeane  came  in,  and  then  my  two  girls 
began  telling  us  of  what  had  happened  upstairs.  I immediately  rushed  at 
the  letter  I had  just  received,  and,  laughing,  held  it  to  Mr.  Yorke’s 
forehead ; he  objected,  saying,  4 1 shall  probably  fail,  and  then  you  will 
only  laugh  at  the  whole  thing/  He  thrust  my  hand  away,  and  I left  the 
matter  alone  and  went  on  talking  to  my  relations.  Presently  my  brother 
rose  to  go,  and,  hesitating  rather,  said,  4 Well,  my  dear,  the  impression 
about  that  letter  is  so  strong  that  I must  tell  you  the  Duchess  of  St. 
Albans  wrote  it/  It  urns  so.  She  does  not  correspond  with  me ; the 
' letter,  too,  having  been  addressed  by  mistake  to  31,  Eaton  Place,  made  it 
more  unlikely  there  should  be  any  clue,  and  its  contents  were  purely  of  a | 
business-like  character.  44  Elizabeth  P.  Biddulph/9 

On  another  similar  occasion,  the  present  writer  saw  a letter  taken 
up  casually  from  a writing-table,  and  held  to  Mr.  Yorke’s  forehead, 
in  such  a way  that  he  could  not  possibly  catch  a glimpse  of  the 
writing.  He  correctly  described  the  writer  as  an  elderly  man, 
formerly  connected  with  himself,  blit  could  not  name  him.  The 
writer  had,  iu  fact,  been  his  tutor  at  one  time.  It  need  hardly  be  said 
that  no  importance  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  holding  of  the  letters  to 
the  forehead.  In  every  case  the  writer  and  the  contents  of  the  letter 
were  known  to  some  person  in  the  percipient’s  immediate  vicinity 
-and  that  being  so,  any  other  hypothesis  than  that  of  thought- 
transference  is  gratuitous. 

The  following  incident  is  an  excellent  casual  illustration  of  the 
motor  form  of  experiment  to  which  the  “ Danet  ” and  *■  Jem  Myers" 
oases  belonged  (pp.  78-9.)  One  difference  indeed  there  is,  to  which 
some  would  attribute  importance  : the  names  telepathically  produced 

G 2 

84 

THE  EXPERIMENTAL  BASIS: 

[char 

in  the  present  instance  were  those  of  dead  persons.  But  where  the 
“ communication  ” contains  nothing  beyond  the  content,  or  the 
possible  manufacture,  of  the  minds  of  the  living  persons  present,  it 
seems  reasonable  to  refer  it  to  those  minds — at  any  rate  until  the 
power  of  the  dead  to  communicate  with  the  living  be  established  by 
accumulated  and  irrefragable  evidence. 

One  evening  in  August,  1885,  some  friends  were  assembled  in  a 
house  at  Rustington ; and  thS  younger  members  of  the  party  suggested 
“ table-turning,’ ” as  an  amusement.  Three  ladies — Mrs.  W.  B.  Richmond, 
Mrs.  Perceval  Clark,  and  another — were  seated  apart  from  the  larger 
group  ; and  a small  table  on  which  they  laid  their  hands,  and  which  was 
light  enough  to  be  easily  moved  by  unconscious  pressure,  soon  became 
lively.  The  alphabet  being  repeated,  the  sentence,  “ Harriet  knew  me 
years  ago,”  was  tilted  out.  The  name  of  me  was  asked  for.  “Kate 
Gardiner”  was  the  answer.  These  names  conveyed  nothing  to  the  three 
ladies  at  the  table,  but  they  caught  the  attention  of  a member  of  the 
other  group — Mr.  R.  u Morant.  This  gentleman  was  acting  as  holiday- 
tutor  to  Mrs.  Richmond's  boys,  and  had  not  before  that  been  acquainted 
with  any  of  the  party  ; nor  had  Mrs.  Richmond  herself  the  slightest 
knowledge  of  his  family-history.  On  hearing  the  names,  he  asked  that 
“ Harriet’s  ” surname  should  be  given.  The  name  “ Morant  ” was  tilted 
out.  In  reply  to  further  questions,  put  of  course  in  such  a way  as  not  to 
suggest  the  answers,  and  while  Mr.  Morant  remained  at  the  further  end 
of  the  room,  the  tilts  produced  the  information  that  Harriot  and  Kate 
met  at  Kingstown,  and  that  Harriet  was  Mr.  Morant’s  great-aunt,  his. 
father  “ Robin  ” Morant  being  her  nephew. 

We  have  received  in  writing  three  independent  and  concordant 
accounts  of  this  occurrence — from  Mrs.  Richmond,  from  the  third  lady  at 
the  table  (who  is  hostile  to  the  subject,  but  who  was  probably  the 
unconscious  percipient),  and  from  Mr.  Morant,  who  adds  : — 

“ I felt  distinctly  and  always  rightly,  when  it  would  answer,  and  what 
it  would  answer.  1 found  that  it  always  answered  the  questions  of  which 
I knew  the  answer ; and  was  silent  when  I did  not ; e.c/.,  it  would  not 
say  how  many  years  ago  [the  meeting  was].  I was  quite  ignorant  of  where- 
they  met ; that  was  the  only  answer  beyond  my  knowledge.  [It  is  not 
known  if  this  answer  was  correct.]  All  the  names  given  are  correct : my 
father’s . name  was  Robert,  but  he  was  always  called  Rohm.  Kate 
Gardiner  was  a friend  of  my  father  ; I believe  she  helped  to  arrange  his 
marriage  ; Harriet  Morant  was  his  aunt.  I am  ignorant  of  much  about 
this  aunt ; and  from  reading  some  old  correspondence  in  June,  I was  par- 
ticularly anxious  to  learn  more  about  these  names.  No  one  at  the  table  can 
possibly  have  known  anything  whatever  about  any  one  of  the  names  given.” 

It  is,  of  course,  a matter  of  interest  to  know  what  indications 
of  genuine  telepathy  may  be  afforded  by  these  less  systematic 
trials.  For  experiments  with  a comparatively  small  number  of 
“ subjects  ” (like  those  before  described),  however  conclusive  we 
may  consider  them  as  to  the  existence  of  a special  faculty,  afford 
no  means  of  judging  how  common  that  faculty  may  be.  If  it  exists* 

• n.]  thought-transference:  ss 

we  have  no  reason  to  expect  it  to  be  extremely  uncommon ; on  the 
contrary,  we  should  rather  expect  to  find  an  appreciable  degree  of  it 
tolerably  widely  diffused.  But  (putting  aside  the  results1  of  § 7, 
above,)  our  only  means,  at  present,  for  judging  how  far  this  is  the  case 
is  by  considering  the  evidence  of  persons  who  were,  so  to  speak, 
amateur  observers,  and  who  in  some  cases  were  not  even  aware  that 
the  matter  had  any  scientific  importance.  Such  evidence  must,  of 
course,  be  received  with  due  allowances,  and,  if  it  stood  alone,  might  be 
wholly  inadequate  to  establish  the  case  for  telepathic  phenomena ; 
but  if  these  be  otherwise  established,  it  would  be  illogical  to  shut  our 
eyes  to  alleged  results  which  fall  readily  into  the  same  class,  provided 
the  trials  appear  to  have  been  conducted  with  intelligence  and  care. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  this  last  proviso  at  once  excludes  the 
vast  majority  of  the  cases  which  one  reads  about  in  the  newspapers, 
or  hears  discussed  in  private  circles.  We  have  already  seen  that  the 
subject  of  “ thought-reading  ” has  obtained  its  vogue  by  dint  of 
exhibitions  which,  however  clever  and  interesting,  have  no  sort  of 
claim  to  the  name.  The  prime  requisite  is  that  the  conditions  shall 
preclude  the  possibility  of  unconscious  guidance  ; that  contact  between 
the  agent  and  the  percipient  shall  be  avoided ; or  that  the  form  of 
experiment  shall  not  require  movements,  but  the  percipient  shall  give 
his  notion  of  the  transferred  impression — card,  number,  taste,  or 
whatever  it  may  be — by  word  of  mouth.  That  these  conditions  have 
been  observed  is  itself  an  indication  that  experiments  have  been 
intelligently  conducted ; and  the  cases  of  this  sort  of  which  we  have 
received-  records  are  at  any  rate  numerous  enough  to  dispel  the  dis- 
quieting sense  that  the  possibility  of  accumulating  evidence  for  our 
hypothesis  depends  on  the  transient  endowment  of  a few  most 
exceptional  individuals.  I have , spoken  above  of  the  urgent 
importance  of  spreading  the  responsibility  for  the  evidence  as  widely 
as  possible — in  other  words,  of  largely  increasing  the  number  of 
persons,  reputed  honest  and  intelligent,  who  must  be  either  knaves 
or  idiots  if  the  alleged  transference  of  thought  took  place  through 
any  hitherto  recognised  channels.  And  our  hopes  in  this  direction 
are,  of  course,  the  better  founded,  in  so  far  as  the  necessary  material 
for  experimentation  is  not  of  extreme  rarity.  If  what  has  been  here 
said  induces  a wider  and  more  systematic  search  for  this  material,  and 
increased  perseverance  in  following  up  all  indications  of  its  existence, 
a very  distinct  step  will  have  been  taken  towards  the  general 
.acceptance  of -the  facts. 

CHAPTER  III. 

THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  TO  SPONTANEOUS 

TELEPATHY. 

| 1.  In  all  Hie  cases  of  the  action  of  one  mind  on.another  that  were 
considered  in  the  Last  chapter,  both  the  parties  concerned — percipient 
as  well  as  agent — were  consciously  and  voluntarily  taking  part  in  the 
experiment  with  a definite  idea  of  certain  results  in  view. 
Spontaneous  telepath}',  as  its  name,  implies,  differs  from  experi- 
mental in  precisely  this  particular — that  neither  agent  nor  percipient 
has  consciously  or  voluntarily  formed  an  idea  of  any  result  whatever. 
Something  happens  for  which  both  alike  are  completely  unprepared. 
But  between  these  two  great  classes  of  eases  there  is  a sort  of 
transitional  class,  which  is  akin  to  each  of  the  others  in  one  marked 
feature.  In  this  class  the  uf/ent  acts  consciously  and  voluntarily ; he 
exercises  a concentration  of  mind  with  a certain  object,  as  in  experi- 
mental thought-transference  ; he  is  in  this  way  truly  experimenting.1 
But  the  'percipient  is  not  consciously  or  voluntarily  a party  to  the 
experiment;  as  in  spontaneous  telepathy,  his  mind  has  not  been  in 
any  way  adjusted  to  the  result ; he  finds  himself  affected  in  a certain 
maimer,  ho  knows  not  bv  what  means. 

In  another  way,  also,  this  class  of  cases  serves  as  a connecting  linl- 
bc  tween  the  other  two.  For  it  introduces  us  to  results  produced  at  a 
much  greater  didance  than  any  of  those  that  have  been  so  far  described. 
Not  that  greater  distance  between  the  agent  and  percipient  is  in  any 
way  a distinguishing  mark  of  the  spontaneous,  as  opposed  to  the  experi- 
mental,  effects;  the  former  no  less  than  the  latter — aswe  shall  see  reason 
to  think — may  take  place  between  persons  in  the  same  room.  But  in 
the  large  majority  of  the  spontaneous  cases  that  we  shall  have  to  notice, 
the  distance  was  considerable.  And  in  the  transitional  class  we  meet 

‘ 1 It  »h«ul<l  be  observed,  however,  that  unless  he  records  his  experiment  at  the  time, 
the  case  will  stand  on  a different  footing  from  those  of  the  last  chapter. 

jn.]  TRANSITION  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  87, 

with  specimens  of  both  kinds — effects  produced  in  the  same  room,  and 
effects  produced  at  a distance  of  many  miles. 

| 2.  In  these  transitional  cases — as  in  those  of  the  last  chapter — 
the  effect  may  show  itself  either  in  ideas  and  sensations  which  the 
percipient  describes,  or  in  actions  of  a more  or  less  automatic'  sort. . 
The  motor  cases  have  been  by  far  the  most  heard  of,  and  are,  indeed, 
popularly  supposed  to  be  tolerably  Common ; but  this  idea  has 
no  real  foundation.  The  allegations  of  certain  persons  that, 
they  can  make  strangers  in  church  or  in  a theatre  turn  their 
heads  by  “ willing  ” that  they  should  do  so,  cannot  be  accepted  as 
establishing  even  a prima  facie  case.  Till  accurate  records  are  kept, 
such  cases  must  clearly  be  reckoned  as  mere  illusions  of  post  hoc 
'propter  hoc — of  successes  noted  and  failures  forgotten.  Authentic 
instances  of  the  kind  seem,  as  it  happens,  always  to  be  more  or  less 
closely  connected  with  mesmerism.  And  even  as  regards  mesmeric 
cases  where  a definite  action  or  course  of  action  is  produced  by  silent 
or  distant  control,  the  first  thing  to  remark  is  that  many  phenomena 
are  popularly  referred  to  this  category  which  have  not  the  slightest 
claim  to  a place  in  it.  The  common  platform  exhibition,  where  a 
profession  is  made  of  “ willing  ” a particular  person  to  attend,  and  he 
rushes  into  the  room  at  the  appointed  moment,  is  not  to  be 
attributed  to  any  influence  then  and  there  exercised,  but  is  the 
effect  of  the  command  or  the  threat  impressed  on  his  mind 
when  in  its  wax-like  condition  of  trance  on  a previous  evening. 
Nor,  as  a rule,  do  the  cases  where  “ subjects  ” are  said  to  be 
drawn  by  their  controller  from  house  to  house,  or  even  to  a 
distant  town,  prove  any  specific  power  of  his  will,  or  anything 
beyond  the  general  influence  and  attraction  which  he  has  established,' 
and  which  is  liable  every  now  and  then  to  recrudesce  in  his  absence, 
and  to  manifest  itself  in  this  startling  form.1 

1 Signs  of  this  general  mesmeric  influence  occur  occasionally  in  the  records  of 
witchcraft.  (See,  e.g.9  The  Discover y of  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft  practised  by  Jane  Wenhanh, 
London,  1712.)  It  would  scarcely  be  safe  to  interpret  in  any  other  way  such  an 
isolated  case  as  the  following  of  the  late  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson’s  : — 

“ Mr.  John  Dundas,  who  was  very  much  interested  in  mesmerism,  was  staying  with 
me  at  Fairfield,  about  eight  miles  from  Sutton.  He  one  evening  suggested  that  I 
should  try  and  influence  Mtb.  Thornton  at  a distance ; this  was  about  9 o’clock.  I tried, 
but  only  for  a few  minutes,  never  thinking  I should  succeed.  We  went  over  to  Sutton 
next  day,  when  Mr,  Harland  said,  ‘You  must  take  care  what  experiments  you  try  on 
Mrs.  Thornton,  as  she  has  become  so  sensitive  to  you,  that  she  not  only  goes  to  sleep  when 
yom  are  present,  but  last  night  after  dinner  she  went  to  sleep,  and  rushed  to  the  hall  door, 
* saying  she  must  go  to  Fairfield  as  Mr.  Thompson  wanted  her.  And  we  had  greatdifficulty 
in  waking  her.  . 

The  incident  is  a striking  one ; but  we  need  to  know  whether  Mrs.  Thornton  ever  behaved 
ih  the  manner  described  at  times  when  Mr.  Thompson  was  not  trying  to  influence  her. 

88  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

Very  much  rarer  are  the  really  crucial  cases  where  the  intended 
effect — the  origination  or  inhibition  of  motor-impulse — is  brought 
about  at  the  moment  by  a deliberate  exercise  of  volition.  In  some  of 
the  more  striking  instances,  the  inhibition  has  been  of  that  specific 
sort  which  temporarily  alters  the  whole  condition  of  the  “ subject, 
and  induces  the  mesmeric  trance.  In  the  Zoist  for  April,  1849,  Mr. 
Adams,  a surgeon  of*  Lymington,  writing  four  months  after  the  event, 
describes  how  a guest  of  his  own  twice  succeeded  in  mesmerising  the 
man-servant  of  a common  friend  at  a distance  of  nearly  fifty  miles, 
the  time  when  the  attempt  was  to  be  made  having  in  each  case  been 
privately  arranged  with  the  man’s  master.  On  the  first  occasion,  the 
unwitting  “ subject  ” fell  at  the  time  named,  7.30  p.m.,  into  a state  of 
profound  coma  not  at  all  resembling  natural  sleep,  from  which  he  was 
with  difficulty  aroused.  He  said  that  " before  he  fell  asleep  he  had 
lost  the  use  of  his  legs ; he  had  endeavoured  to  kick  the  cat  away, 
and  could  not  do  so.”  On  the  second  occasion  a similar  fit  was 
induced  at  9.30  a.rn.,  when  the  man  was  in  the  act  of  walking  across  a 
meadow  to  feed  the  pigs.1 * *  But  the  following  case  is  more  striking, 
as  resting  on  the  testimony  of  a man  whose  name  must  perforce,  be 
treated  with  respect  Dr.  Esdaile  says  : — 1 

(1)  “I  had  been  looking  for  a blind  man  on  whom  to  test  the  imagination 
theory,  and  one  at  last  presented  himself.  This  man  became  so 
susceptible  that,  by  making  him  the  object  of  my  attention,  I could 
entrance  him  in  whatever  occupation  he  was  engaged,  and  at  any 
distance  within  the  hospital  enclosure.  . . . My  first  attempt 

to  influence  the  blind  man  was  made  by  gazing  at  him  silently 
over  a wall,  while  he  was  engaged  in  the  act  of  eating  his  solitary 
dinner,  at  the  distance  of  twenty  yards.  He  gradually  ceased  to  eat,  and  in 
a quarter  of  an  hour  was  profoundly  entranced  and  cataleptic.  This  was 
repeated  at  the  most  untimely  hours,  when  he  could  not  possibly  know  of 
my  being  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  always  with  like  results.” 

1 Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance , pp.  227-8.  See  also  Mr.  Cattell’s  case  in  the 
Zoist)  Vol.  viii.,  p.  143 ; where  the  special  circumstances  seem  sufficiently  to  exclude  the 
hypothesis  of  expectancy. 

These  examples  of  distant  influence  have  a bearing  on  the  question  as  to  the  efficacy 
of  concentrated  attention  in  more  ordinary  mesmeric  processes.  Elliotson  asserts  that  hie 

own  manipulations  were  often  successful,  however  mechanically  and  inattentively  carried 
out ; and  Bertrand  (Du  Maynctismc  Animal , p.  341)  makes  a similar  remark.  Other 
operators  have  said  that  their  passes  were  ineffectual,  unless  Accompanied  by  distinct 
intention.  The  Rev.  0.  H.  Townshend  made  this  observation  in  an  experiment  with  the 
celebrated  naturalist,  Agassiz,  whom  he  was  mesmerising  while  himself  distracted  by  the 
non-arrival  of  some  expected  letters.  “ Although  I was  at  the  time  engaged  in  the 
mesmeric  processes  to  all  appearance  as  actively  as  usual,  my  patient  called  out  to  me 
constantly  and  coincidently  with  the  remission  of  my  thought,  4 You  influence  me  no 
longer  : you  are  not  exerting  yourself.’”  And  the  above  cases  certainly  favour  the  View 

that  the  exercise  of  any  si^ecific  influence  will  normally  have  a well-marked  psychical 
side.  It  is  interesting  to  find  Esdaile  making  the  same  observation  as  Townshend  in 
respect  even  of  the  very  definite  manipulations  of  his  Hindoo  assistants,  where,  if  any- 
where,  we  might  have  assumed  a purely  physical  and  mechanical  agency. 

in.]  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  88 

Gases  of  waking  a hypnotic  “ subject  ” by  the  silent  exercise  of  the 
will  h4ve  been  recorded  by  Reichenbach,1  and  by  the ' Committee 
Appointed  by  the  Drench  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine  to  investigate 
" animal  magnetism.”  In  their  Report,  published  in  1831,  this 
Committee  say  that  they  “ could  entertain  no  doubt  as  to  the  very 
decided  effects  which  magnetism  produced  upon  the  ‘ subject,’  even 
.Without  his  knowledge,  and  at  a certain  distance.” 

§ 3»  But,  besides  such  examples  of  the  induction  of  trance,  the 
.records  of  mesmerism  contain  a good  many  cases  of  the  induction  or 
inhibition  of  particular  actions  ; and  where  persons  who  appeared  to 
be  in  a perfectly  normal  state  have  had  their  will  similarly  dominated, 
or  their  actions  dominated  against  their  will,  it  has  almost  always, 
I think,  been  through  the  agency  of  some  person  who  has  given  in- 
dications of  considerable  mesmeric  power.  The  Rev.  J.  Lawson  Sisson, 
Rector  of  Edingthorpe,  North  Walsham,  (whose  interest  in  mesmerism, 
like  that  of  so  many  others,  began  with  the  discovery  of  his  own 
power  to  alleviate  pain,)  describes  the  following  experiment  as  having 
been  performed  on  an  incredulous  lady,  whose  first  experience  of  his 
influence  had  been  a few  moments9  subjection  to  the  slightest  possible 
hypnotic  process  in  the  course  of  the  evening.2 * 

(2)  “ Conversation  went  on  on  other  topics,  and  then  followed  a light 
supper.  Several  of  the  gentlemen,  myself  among  the  number,  were 
obliged  to  stand.  I stood  talking  to  a friend,  against  the  wall,  and  at  the 
back  of  Miss  Cooke,  some  three  or  four  feet  off  her.  Her  wine  glass  was 
filled,  and  I made  up  my  mind  that  she  should  not  drink  without  my 

* willing/  I kept  on  talking  and  watching  her  many  futile  attempts  to 
get  the  glass  to  her  mouth.  Sometimes  she  got  it  a few  inches  from  the 
level  of  the  table,  sometimes  she  got  it  a little  higher,  but  she  evidently 
felt  that  it  was  not  for  some  reason  to  be  done.  At  last  I said,  4 * * Miss 
Cooke,  why  don’t  you  drink  your  wine  ? * and  her  answer  was  at  once, 

* I will  when  you  let  me.’  ” 

‘ The  Zoist  contains  several  cases  of  apparently  the  same  kind ; 
though,  unfortunately,  the  narrators  have  seldom  recognised  the  need 
of  making  it  clear  that  the  possibility  of  physical  indications  was 
completely  excluded.  Thus  Mr.  Barth  records  of  a patient  of  his  own? 
(Vol.  VII.,  p.  280) : — 

1 Der  Sensitive  Mensch  (Stuttgart,  1855),  Vol.  ii.,  pp.  G65-0. 

_?  Fo*  remits  of  a still  simpler  type,  see  the  record  of  the  experiments  made  on 

f¥tit,in  the  Report  of  the  French  Committee  above  mentioned,  Mr.  Sisson  says  of 

one  of  his  subjects  that,  when  she  was  walking  many  yards  in  front  of  him,  and  engaged 

m conversation,  “ I could,  by  raising  my  hand  and  willing  it,  draw  her  head  quitebaek. 

It  fell  back,  neither  to  right  nor  left,  as  though  it  had  been  pulled  by  a cord.” 

90  TIIE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

(3)  “ Wlien  she  wished  to  leave  the  room,  I could  at  any  time  prevent 
her,  by  willing  that  she  should  stay,  and  this  silently.  I could  not  arrest 
her  progress  whilst  she  was  in  motion,  but  if  she  stood  for  a moment  and  I 
mentally  said  ‘Stand,5 * 7  she  stood  unable  to  move  from  the  spot.  If  she 
placed  her  hand  on  the  table  T could  affix  it  by  my  will  alone,  and  unfix  it 
by  will.  If  she  held  a ruler  or  paper-knife  in  her  closed  hand,  I could 
compel  her  by  will  alone  to  unclose  her  hand  and  drop  the  article. 
Frequently  when  she  lias  been  at  the  tea-table,  and  I quite  behind  and 
out  of  sight,  have  I locked  her  jaws  or  arrested  her  hand  with  her  bread-* 
find-butter  in  it,  when  half*  way  betwixt  her  plate  and  her  mouth. 

And  Mr.  N.  Dunscombo,  J.P.  (Zoist,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  438),  narrates  of 
himself  that,  having  attended  some  mesmeric  performances,  he  was 
for  some  time  at  the  mercy  of  the  operators  silent  will. 

(4)  “ He  lias  caused  me,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  leave  my  seat  in  one 
part  of  my  house,  and  follow  him  all  through  it  and  out  of  it  until  I 
found  him.  He  was  not  in  the  room  with  me,  neither  had  I the  slightest 
idea  of  his  attempting  the  experiment.  I felt  an  unaccountable  desire  to 
go  in  a certain  direction.’7 

Most  remarkable  of  all  art*  the  cases  of  acts  performed  under  the 
silent  control  of  the  late  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  of  Moorfields,  York, 
though  here  again  we  have  to  regret  that  the  signed  corroboration  of 
the  persons  affected  was  not  obtained  at  the  time.  Mr.  Thompson’s 
interest  in  mesmerism  lay  almost  entirely  in  the  opportunities  which 
his  power  gave  him  of  alleviating  suffering  ; and  having  succeeded  in 
giviug  relief  to  a patient,  it  is  to  him  a comparatively  small  matter 
to  be  able  to  say  (Zo  id,  Vol.  V.,  p.  257)  : — 

“ I have  often,  by  the  will,  made  her  perform  a series  of  trifling  acts, 
though,  when  asked  why  she  did  them,  she  has  answered  that  she  did 
them  without  observing  them,  and  had  no  distinct  wish  to  do  them  as 
far  as  she  was  aware,77 

Some  of  his  descriptions,  however,  are  more  explicit.  He  gave 
us  permission  to  publish,  for  the  first  time  on  his  authority,  an 
account  of  an  after-dinner  incident  which  made  much  sensation  in 
Yorkshire  society  when  it  occurred,  and  which  even  twenty  years 
afterwards  was  still  alluded  to  with  bated  breath,  as  a manifest  proof 
of  the  alliance  of  mesmerists  with  the  devil.  The  account  was  sent 
to  us  in  November,  1883. 

(5)  “ In  1837, 1 first  became  acquainted  with  mesmerism  through  Baron 

Dupotet.  The  first  experiment  I tried  was  upon  a Mrs.  Thornton,-  who 

was  staying  with  some  friends  of  mine,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  Harland,  of 

TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY . 

91 

in.] 

Sutton*  She  told  me  that  no  one  had  ever  succeeded  in  mesmerising 
her,  though  she  soon  submitted  to  being  mesmerised  by  me*  She  went  to 
sleep  at  once,  and  was  very  strongly  influenced  by  my  will.  One  night 
when  I was  dining  with  Mr.  Harland,  after  the  ladies'  had  left  the 
room?  some  gentleman  proposed  that  I should  will  her  to  come  back 
again,  which  I did.  She  came  directly,  and  after  this  I could  not  go  to 
the  house  without  her  going  to  sleep,  even  if  she  clid  not  know  that  I was. 
there.” 

In  the  same  letter,  Mr.  Thompson  continues : — 

“ I fyave  met  with  many  cases  of  thought-reading,  but  none  so  distinct 
as  in  a little  girl  named  Crowther.  She  had  had  brain-fever,  which  had 
caused  a protrusion  of  the  eyes.  Of  this  ill  effect  I soon  relieved  her,  and 
found  that  she  was  naturally  a thought-reader.  I practised  on  her  a good 
deal,  and  at  length*  there  was  no  need  for  me  to  utter  what  I wished  to 
say,  as  she  always  knew  my  thoughts.  1 was  showing  some  experiments 
to  a Dr.  Simpson,  and  he  asked  me  to  will  her  to  go  and  pick  a piece  of 
white  heather  out  of  a large  vase  full  of  flowers  there  was  in  the  room,  and 
bring  it  to  me.  She  did  this  as  quickly  as  if  I had  spoken  to  her.  All 
these  experiments  were  performed  when  the  girl  was  awake,  and  not  in  a 
mesmeric  sleep.” 

The  next  account  (received  in  1883)  is  none  the  less  interesting: 
that  it  is  of  a partial  failure  ; and  in  this  case  we  have  the  advantage  of 
the  percipients  own  testimony.  The  lady  who  sent  it  to  us  is  a cousin 
of  Mr.  Thompson’s  and  lias  had  other  similar  experiences ; but  at 
this  distance  of  time  can  only  recollect  the  following,  whose* 
absurdity  vividly  impressed  her  mind. 

(6)  “ I was  sitting  one  day  in  the  library.  No  one  else  was  in  the  room 
except  my  cousin,  Henry  Thompson,  who  was  reading  at  the  other  end  of 
the  room.  Gradually  I felt  an  unaccountable  impulse  stealing  over  me,, 
an  impulse  to  go  up  to  him  and  kiss  him.  I had  been  in  the  habit  of  kiss- 
ing him  from  childhood  upwards  at  intervals,  when  I left  the  sitting-room 
before  going  to  bed,  or  when  he  came  to  say  good-bye  at  the  termination 
of  a visit,  <fcc.,  as  a matter  of  course,  not  of  pleasure.  In  this  instance 
the  inclination  to  kiss  him  struck  me  as  being  so  extraordinary  and 
ridiculous  as  to  make  it  an  impossibility.  I have  no  recollection  of  leav- 
ing the  room,  though  I mwj  have  done  so,  but  in  the  evening  when  he 
said  to  me  at  dinner,  6 1 tried  to  will  you  to-day  and  failed/  I answered 
at  once,  ‘ I know  perfectly  wlim  you  were  willing  me,  and  what  you 
wanted  me  to  do,  though  I did  not  suspect  it  at  the  time.  But  you  were 
willing  me  to  kiss  you  in  the  library,  and  I had  the  greatest  inclination  to 
do  so ! ’ i And  why  would  you  not  ? * he  asked,  and  laughed  immo- 
derately at  my  answering  that  I was  so  astonished  at  myself  for  feeling  an. 
inclination  to  kiss  him  that  I resisted  it  at  once.  I had  never  been 
mesmerised  by  him,  and  my  will  was  not  subservient  to  his. 

“ L.  F.  0.* 

92  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

And  here  a word  may  be  in  place  as  to  the  relation  of  the  will  to 
telepathic  experiments  in  general.  That  the  will  of  the  agent  or 
operator  is  usually  in  active  play,  admits,  of  course,  of  no  doubt ; but 
the  nature  and  extent  of  its  operation  are  sometimes  misconceived. 
In  ordinary  thought-transference,  it  is  probably  effective  only  so  far  as 
it  implies  strong  concentration  of  the  agent’s  own  attention  on  the 
sensation  or  image  which  he  seeks  to  convey.  As  a rule  he  will 
naturally  desire  that  the  experiment  should  succeed ; but,  provided  only 
that  the  necessary  concentration  be  given,  there  is  nothing  to  show,  or 
even  to  suggest,  that  if  for  some  special  reason  he  desired  failure,  his 
desire  would  ensure  that  result.  It  is  somewhat  different  with  cases 
like  the  above,  where  a distinct  set  of  visible  actions — as  that  the 
performer  shall  walk  to  a particular  spot  or  select  a particular  object 
— is  the  thing  aimed  at;  in  so  far  as  there  the  desire  is  likely  to  be 
keener  and  more  jjersistent.  When  we  are  picturing  a series  of  move- 
ments, to  be  performed  bv  a person  in  our  sight,  wo  easily  come  to 
regard  that  person’s  physique  under  a half-illusion  that  we  can  direct 
it  from  moment  to  moment,  as  though  it  were  our  own  ; and  we  are 
more  on  edge,  so  to  speak,  than  when  we  are  merely  imagining 
(sayr)  a word  or  a number,  and  waiting  for  the  “subject”  to 
name  it,  or  write  it  down.  But  even  here  there  is  little  founda- 
tion for  the  idea  that  the  operator’s  will  in  anyr  way  dominate » the 
other  will,  or  that  he  succeeds  by  superior  “ strength  of  will  ” in 
! any  ordinary  sense.  It  is  still  primarily  an  image,  not  any  form  of 
force,  that  is  conveyed — but  an  image  of  movement,  i.e.,  an  image 
whose  nervous  correlate  in  the  brain  is  in  intimate  connection  with 
motor-centres;  and  the  muscular  effect  is  thus  evoked  while  the 
“ subject  ” remains  a sort  of  spectator  of  his  own  conduct.  The 
last  example  of  Mr.  Thompson’s  powers  goes  as  near  as  any’’  I know 
to  the  actual  production  of  an  effect  on  the  self-detemnini/ng 
faculty  of  a person  in  a normal  state;  but  even  here,  it  will  be 
observed,  the  action  induced  was  of  a simple  sort,  and  one  which  the 
4‘  subject  ” had  often  voluntarily  performed.  And  in  mesmeric  cases 
— as  in  the  experiments  on  inhibition  of  utterance  in  the  last  chapter 
— where,  no  doubt,  the  self-determining  faculty  is  often  to  a great 
extent  abrogated,  we  must  still  beware  of  concluding . that  the 
“ subject’s  ” will  is  dominated  and  directed  this  way  or  that  by  a 
series  of  special  jets  of  energy.  It  is  rather  that  his  instinct  of  choice, 
his  free-will  as  a whole,  has  lapsed,  as  one  of  the  general  features  of 
the  trance-condition.  It  is  worth  noting,  moreover,  that  in  none  of 

Iiu]  3 TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  ...  9$ 

the  cases  quoted  have  the  “wilier”  or  the  “ willed ” been  further 
removed  from  one  another  than  two  neighbouring  rooms.  The 
• liability  to  have  definite  acts  compelled  from  a distance,  which  figures 
{in  romance  and  in  popular  imagination  as  the  natural  and  terrible 
^result  of  mesmeric  influence,  is  precisely  the  result  for  which  we  can 
^find  least  evidence: 

!'  We  have,  however,  in  our  own  collection,  one  first-hand  case 
{where  the  distance  between  the  agent  *and  the  percipient  was 
. greater,  and  where  the  action  to  be  performed  was  of  a rather  more 
"complicated  sort.  We  received  the  case  in  1883  from  the  agent, 
Mr.  S.  H.  B.,  a friend  of  our  own.  The  first  part  of  the  account  was 
copied  by  us  from  a MS.  book,  in  which  Mr.  B.  has  recorded  this 
and  other  experiments. 

(7)  “On  Wednesday,  26th  July,  1882,  at  10.30  p.m.,  I willed  very 
strongly  that  Miss  V.,  who  was  living  at  Clarence  Road,  Kew,  should 
leave  any  part  of  that  house  in  which  she  might  happen  to  be  at  the  time, 
and  that  she  should  go  into  her  bedroom,  and  remove  a portrait  from 
her  dressing-table. 

“ When  I next  saw  her  she  told  me  that  at  this  particular  time  anti 
on  this  day,  she  felt  strongly  impelled  to  go  up  to  her  room  and  remove 
something  from  her  dressing-table,  but  she  was  not  sure  which  article  to 
misplace.  She  did  so  and  removed  an  article,  but  not  the  framed  portrait 
which  I had  thought  of. 

“ Between  the  time  of  the  occurrence  of  this  fact  and  that  of  our 
next  meeting,  I received  one  or  two  letters,  in  which  the  matter  is  alluded 
to  and  my  questions  concerning  it  answered. 

“S.  H.  B.” 

[This,  entiy  is  undated ; but  Mr.  B.  assures  us  that  it  was  written 
very  soon  after  the  event.  He  was  himself  at  Southall  on  the  evening 
in  question.] 

Mr.  B.  has  shown  the  letters  of  which  he  speaks  to  the  present  writer,, 
and  lias  allowed  him  to  copy  extracts. 

* On  Thursday,  July  27th,  without  having  seen  or  had  any  communica- 
tion with  Mr.  B.,  -Miss  Verity,  (now  residing  in  Castelain  Road,  W.,  who- 
allows  the  publication  of  her  name),  wrote  to  him  as  follows : — 

“ What  were  you  doing  between  ten  and  eleven  o’clock  on  Wednesday 
evening?  If  you  make  me  so  restless,  I shall  begin  to  be  afraid  of  you.  I 
positively  could  not  stay  in  the  dining-room,  and  I believe  you  meant 
me  to  b^,  upstairs,  and  to  move  something  on  my  dressing-table.  I 
want  to  ^ee  if  you  know  what  it  was.  At  any  rate,  I am  sure  you  were 
thinking  something  about  me.” 

Mfc  $,  then  wrote  and  told  Miss  Verity  that  the  object  he  had  thought 
of  was  Mir.  6. -s  photograph.  She  answered  : — 

“I  must  tell  you  it  was  not  G.’s  photo,  but  something  dn  my  table 

94  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap 

which  perhaps  you  would  never  think  of.  However,  it  was  really 
wonderful  how  impossible  I found  it  to  think  or  do  anything  until  I came 
upstairs,  and  I knew  for  certain  that  your  thoughts  were  here ; in  fact, 
it  seemed  as  if  you  were  very  near.” 

[These  extracts  were  copied  from  the  original  letters  by  the  present 
writer.  An  absolutely  concordant  account  was  given  to  him  in  conversation 
by  Miss  Verity,  in  whose  accuracy  he  has  complete  confidence.] 

We  have  a parallel  instance  to  this  on  equally  trustworthy 
authority ; but  the  person  impressed  has  a dread  of  the  subject/ and 
will  not  give  his  testimony  for  publication.1 

§ 4.  I now  turn  to  the  second  class  of  transitional  cases ; that 
where  idm*  and  Heimationx  unconnected  with  movement  are  excited, 
in  a person  who  is  not  a conscious  party  to  the  'experiment,  by  the 
concentrated  but  unexpressed  will  of  another.  And  here,  even  more 
than  before,  I ha\e  to  admit  how  scanty ‘in  every  sense  are  the 
accounts  which  former  observers  have  published.  Of  ideational  cases, 
one  of  the  most  striking,  if  correctly  reported,  is  that  given  by  the 
Ilev.  ij.  Lewis  in  the  Zoi*t.  Vol.  V.,  p.  324. 

“ Gateacre,  October,  1847. 

(8)  “One  evening,  at  a friends  house,  and  in  the  presence  of  several 
spectators,  E.  C.  was  put  into  the  sleep,  when  I suggested  to  the  magnetiser 
{Mr.  Lewis’s  son]  that  he  should  attempt  inducing  personation,  that  is, 
making  the  magnetised  person  assume  different  characters  by  means  of  the 
will  and  passes  alone. 

“ The  first  individual  agreed  upon  was  myself,  with  whom  E.  C.  was  well 
acquainted,  and  my  name  was  given  to  the  magnetiser  on  paper.  After  a 

3 The  following  cane,  though  sufficiently  like  the  above  to  be  worth  quoting,  cannot  be 
pressed  as  evidence;  for  there  is  an  appreciable  chance  that  the  impulse  felt  was 
accidental.  Its  interest  partly  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  ladies  concerned  report 
that  they  have  occasionally  had  very  striking  successes  in  the  ordinary  experimental 
thought-transference.  The  account  was  received  in  1884,  from  the  Misses  Barr,  of 
Apsley  Town,  East  Grins  to  ad. 

“ I and  my  sister  El  had  been  in  the  habit,  for  some  years,  of  trying  our  )x>wer  of 

4 will  ’ over  my  youngest  sister  H.,  and  had  succeeded  so  well  that  in  the  winter  of  1874-5, 
E-»  being  then  m London,  determined  to  test  her  will-power  over  H.,  who  was  then  living* 
in  the  North  of  Scotland.  E.  was  very  anxious  to  have  a certain  pair  of  shoes  sent  to  her 
in  time  for  a ball  to  which  she  was  going,  and  there  was  not  time  enough  for  a letter  to  go 
to  Scotland,  and  for  the  shoes  to  be  sent  by  post.  She  therefore  determined  to 3  4 will  H.’  to 
go  into  her  room  m the  house  in  Scotland,  fetch  the  shoes,  and  start  them  off  by  post. 

44  On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  H.  brought  the  shoes  into  the  drawing-room,  where  we 
were  sitting,  saying,  4 I’ve  a fixed  idea  that  E.  wants  these  shoes,  so  I am  just  going  to  send 
them  off  to  her.’  ° 

44  E,  was  delighted,  yet  half -surprised,  to  receive  them  on  the  following  day. 

44  Lizzie  Id  Barr.” 

41 1 perfectly  remember  the  above  incident,  and  also  the  vague  but  impressed  feeling** 
which  prompted  my  actions.  My  sister  E.  had  been  absent  in  England  for  some  weeks, 
•and  1 did  not  know  she  was  going  to  a ball.  It  was  a most  unusual  thing  for  me  to  enter 
tier  room  while  she  was  away,  and  I wondered  at  myself  for  doing  so,  and  especially  for 
opening  one  of  her  drawers. 

“ Harriet  A.  £k  Barr.” 

in.]  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  95 

few  passes  having  been  made  by  him  over  E.  C.,  she  assumed  rather  a 
dictatorial  tone,  complaining  of  interruption  when  spoken  to,  as  it  was 
Saturday  night,  when  she  was  busy  writing.  I shall  draw  a curtain  over  my 
Other  frailties,  and  proceed  to  the  mention  of  characters  well  known  in  the 
v^orld,  but  whom  E.  C.  had  never  seen. 

“The  first  of  these  was  Queen  Victoria.  With  regard  to  this  name  the 
company  observed  the  same  silence  as  before,  only  writing  it  on  paper, 
and  the  magnetiser  pursued  the  same  method  also  with  E.  C,  But 
the  dignity  which  she  very  soon  assumed,  the  lofty  tone  with  which 
die  asked  questions,  so  contrary  to  her  usual  disposition,  the  orders  she 
issued  to  the  various  persons  of  the  household,  and  especially  her  conver- 
sation with  Prince  Albert  (whose  person  the  magnetiser  had  assumed),1 *  her 
^monstrances  at  his  staying  so  long  from  the  castle  contrary  to  her  express 
commands,  and  her  threats  that  he  should  not  be  permitted  to  leave  again, 
excited  instantly  peals  of  laughter,  and  on  reflection,  the  most  intense 
astonishment. 

“ The  name  of  Sir  Robert  Peel  was  then  written  by  one  of  the  company, 
and  given  to  the  magnetiser.  He  then  magnetised  her,  and  she  soon  gave 
unequivocal  proofs  of  her  personating  the  noble  baronet  by  conversations 
with  the  Queen  on  the  state  of  the  country,  and  answering  several  political 
questions  in  accordance  with  his  well-known  sentiments. 

“ From  Conservatism  it  was  thought  the  best  step  next  to  take  was 
Liberalism,  and  the  name  of  Daniel  O'Connell  was  handed  to  the 
magnetiser.  Now  E.  C/s  replies  were  of  a different  nature,  whether  political 
or  religious ; but  there  was  one  question  which  she  answered  in  a peculiar 
manner,  yet  whether  in  unison  with  the  views  of  the  late  celebrated 
‘Liberator’  I know  not.  When  the  magnetiser  asked  her  what  she  thought 
of  the  English  Church  Establishment,  she  replied  that  the  6 Establishment 
was  already  on  crutches,  and  would  soon  be  down.' 

“The  last  personation  was  that  of  a young  lady  whom  E.  C.  had  never 
seen  or  heard  of,  and  who  was  then  more  than  one  hundred  miles  distant, 
but  her  mother  and  sisters  were  present.  The  same  mode/  of  secrecy  was 
adopted  in  this  as  well  as  in  all  other  instances,  so  that  it  was  impossible 
E.  C.  should  have  been  able  to  guess  the  name.  The  absent  person  was  the 
daughter  of  a lady  at  whose  house  these  experiments  were  made.  When 
E.  C.  was  willed  to  personate  the  proposed  character,  the  first  thing  she 
uttered  was  an  exclamation  of  surprise  at  finding  herself  suddenly  at  home. 
Being  asked  her  name,  she  ridiculed  the  idea  of  such  a question  being  put 
in  the  presence  of  her  family,  but  being  pressed  by  her  magnetiser  to 
pronounce  it,  and  promised  not  to  be  troubled  with  any  further  questions, 
she  ingeniously  said,  and  with  somewhat  of  an  arch  look,  that  it  began 
with  the  third  letter  in  the  alphabet.  On  being  told  that  she  had  not  given 
a direct  reply,  she  rather  pettishly  answered,  * Well,  then,  it  is  Clara/ 
Tim  was  the  fact . 

“Except  in  the  precise  order  in  which  these  cases  occurred,  I 
can  vouch  for  their  correctness,  having  been  present'  when  they 
happened. 

“ L.  Lewis.” 

1 It  i»  probably  to  be  understood  that  the  magnetiser  assumed  this  part  after  his 

“ subject  ” had  assumed  the  other. 

96  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

The  following  instance,  however,  has  more  weight  with  us,  who 
know  the  observer,  and  have  had  ample  proof  of  his  accuracy.  Mr.  G. 
A.  Smith,  of  2,  Elms  Road,  Dulwich,  (who  has  assisted  us  in  most  of 
our  mesmeric  work,)  narrated  the  incident  to  us  within  two  months, 
of  its  occurrence ; and  has  now  supplied  a written  account. 

(9)  “One  evening  in  September,  1882,  at  Brighton,  I was  trying  sonje 
experiments  with  a Mrs.  W.,  a c subject ’ whom  I had  frequently  hypnotised* 
I found  that  she  could  give*  surprisingly  minute  descriptions  of  spots  which 
she  knew — with  details  which, her  normal  recollection  could  never  have 
furnished.  I did  not  for  a moment  regard  these  descriptions  as  implying 
anything  more  than  intensified  memory,  but  resolved  to  see  what  would 
happen  when  she  was  requested  to  examine  a place  which  she  had  never 
been  to . I,  therefore,  requested  her  to  look  into  the  manager’s  room  ah 
the  Aquarium,  and  to  tell  me  all  about  it.  Much  to  my  surprise,  she* 
immediately  began  to  describe  the  apartment  with  great  exactness,  and 
in  perfect  conformity  with  my  own  knowledge  of  it.  I was  fairly 
astoni, sited  ; but  it  occurred  to  me  that  although  my  subject’s  memory 
could  not  be  at  work,  my  own  mind  might  be  acting  on  hers.  To 
test  this,  I imagined  strongly  that  I saw  a large  open  umbrella  on, 
the  table,  and  in  a minute  or  so  the  lady  said,  in  great  wonder: 

* Well!  how  odd,  there’s  a largo  open  umbrella  on  the  table,’  and  then 
began  to  laugh.  It,  therefore,  seemed  clear  that  her  apparent  know- 
ledge of  the  room  had  been  derived  somehow  from  my  own  mental  picture 
of  it ; but  I may  add  I was  never  able  to  produce  the  same  effect  again.” 

This  may  bo  fairly  reckoned  among  transitional  eases,  inasmuch 
as  the  lady  was  quite  unaware  at  the  time  that  any  person’s  influence 
was  being  brought  to  bear  upon  her. 

§ 5.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  both  these  last  examples  the  agent 
and  percipient  were  close  together,  and  the  latter  was  in  the  hypnotic 
state.  And  among  transitional  cases,  we  have  absolutely  no  specimens 
of  the  deliberate  transference  of  a perfectly  unexciting  idea — as  of  a 
card  or  a name — to  a distant  and  normal  percipient.  This  may 
appear  an  unfortunate  lacuna  in  the  transition  that  I am  attempting 
to  make ; but  the  fact  itself  can  hardly  surprise  us.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  in  most  of  our  experimental  cases  there  was  a true 
analogy  to  the  passivity  of  hypnotism,  in  the  adjustment  of  the 
percipient’s  mind,  the  sort  of  inward  blankness  and  receptivity  which 
he  or  she  established  by  a deliberate  effort;  that  even  where  this 
was  absent,  the  rapport  involved  in  the  mere  sense  of  personal 
proximity  to  the  agent  probably  went  for  something  in  the  results ; 
and  also  that  (with  few  exceptions)  the  sort  of  image  to  be  expected 
was  known — that  the  percipient  realised  whether  it  was  a card,  a 

TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY . 

9T 

*i.J 

name,  or  a taste.  That  an  impression  should  flash  across  q mind  in 
this  state  of  preparation  is  clearly  no  guarantee  that  anything  similar 
will  occur  when  the  percipient  is  occupied  with  wholly  different 
things,  while  the  agent  is  secretly  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  a 
card  or  a taste  in  another  place.  And  indeed  the  supposed  conditions 
— a purely  unemotional  idea  on  the  part  of  the  would-be  agent,  and 
a state  of  complete  unpreparedness  on  the  part  of  the  person  whom 
it  is  attempted  to  influence — seem  the  most  unfavourable  possible : 
where  the  percipient  mind  is  unprepared — that  is,  where  the  condition 
on  one  side  is  unfavourable — we  should  naturally  expect  that  a 
stronger  impulsive  force  must  be  supplied  from  the  other  side.  But 
we  have  further  to  note  that,  even  if  the  trial  succeeded,  the  success 
would  be  hard  *td  establish.  For  to  the  percipient  the  impression 
would  only  be  a fleeting  and  uninteresting  item  in  the  swarm  of  faint 
ideas  that  pass  every  minute  through  the  mind ; and  as  he  is  ex 
kypothesi  ignorant  that  the  trial  is  being  made,  there  would  be 
nothing  to  fix  this  particular  faint  item  in  his  memory.  It  would 
come  and  go  unmarked,  like  a thousand  others.  And  this  same 
possibility  must  be  equally  borne  in  mind  in  respect  of  spontaneous 
telepathy.  For  though  in  most  of  the  cases  to  be  quoted  in  the 
sequel,  a special  impulsive  force  will  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that 
the  agent  was  at  the  time  in  a state  psychically  or  physically 
abnormal,  we  must  not  be  too  positive  that  the  telepathic  action  is 
confined  to  the  well-marked  or  ostensive  instances  on  which  the 
proof  of  it  has  to  depend.  The  abnormality  of  the  agent’s  state, 
though  needed  to  make  the  coincidence  striking  enough  to  be 
included  in.  this  book,  may  not  for  all  that  be  an  indispensable  con- 
dition ; genuine  transferences  of  idea,  of  which  we  can  take  no 
account,  may  occur  in  the  more  ordinary  conditions  of  life  ; and  the 
continuity  of  the  experimental  and  the  spontaneous  cases  may  thus 
conceivably  be  complete.  Meanwhile,  however,  a certain  gap  in  the 
evidence  has  to  be  admitted ; and  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  pass 
on' to  the  more  extreme  cases  where  the  senses  begin  to  be  affected 
— the  percipients  having  been  for  the  most  part  in  a normal  state, 
and  at  various  distances  from  the  agents. 

§ 6.  The  sensory  cases  to  be  found  in  the  Zoist  are  a trifle  less 
fragmentary  than  some  that  I have  quoted,  but  depend  again  on  the 
Uncorroborated  statement  of  a single  observer.  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson 
(Vol.  IV,  p.  268)  says  : — 

H 

98  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap* 

(10)  “I  have  tried  an  amusing  experiment  two  or  three  times  very 
successfully  I have  taken  a party  (without  informing  them  of  my 
intentions)  to  witness  some  galvanic  experiments,  and  whilst  submitting 
myself  to  continued  slight  galvanic  shocks,  have  fixed  my  attention  on 
some  one  of  the  party.  The  first  time  I tried  this  I was  much  amused  by 
the  person  soon  exclaifning,  * Well,  it  is  very  strange  but  I could  fancy  that 
I feel  a sensation  in  my  hands  and  arms  as  though  I were  subject  to  the 
action 'of  the  battery/  I found  that  out  of  seven  persons,  four  experienced 
similar  sensations  more  or  less.  None  of  them  showed  any  symptom  of 
being  affected  before  I directed  my  attention  towards  them.  After  that 
they  were  made  acquainted  with  the  experiment,  I found  their  imagination 
sometimes  supplied  the  place  of  my  will,  and  they  fancied  I was 
experimenting  upon  them  when  I was  not  so.  This  we  so  often  see  in 
other  cases/’ 

Muscular  and  tactile  hallucinations  arc,  of  coursp,  eminently  of  a 
soft  which  may  be  produced  by  expectancy ; and  all  that  can  be  said 
is  that  Mr.  Thompson  seems  to  have  been  alive  to  this  danger.  I 
may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  state  of  this  gentleman  that,  as  far  as  we 
are  aware,  (and  we  have  questioned  both  a near  relative  of  his 
and  a bitter  detractor,)  it  was  never  alleged  that  he  was  an 
untrustworthy  witness,  or  prone  to  exaggerate  his  powers. 

The  impression  in  the  next  example  seems  to  have  been  on  the 
borderland  between  sensation  and  idea.  It  is  given  by  the  Rev.  L. 
Lewis  in  the  same  paper  as  the  account  above  quoted.  His  son  had 
resolved  to  test  the  statement  that,  in  a mesmeric  state,  a “ subject  ” 
might,  by  the  operator’s  unexpressed  will,  be  impressed  with  delusions 
such  as  are  usually  only  produced  by  direct  suggestion. 

(11)  “ The  girl  [one  whom  he  had  often  hypnotised]  being  gone  into  the 
sleep,  the  first  thing  that  occurred  to  him  was  that  she  should  imagine 
herself  a camphine  lamp,  which  was  then  burning  on  the  table.  He  wrote 
down  the  words,  which  were  not  uttered  by  anyone,  and  were  handed  to 
the  company.  Then,  without  speaking,  he  strongly  willed  that  she*  should 
be  a lamp,  making  over  her  head  the  usual  magnetic  passes.  E.  0.  was  in 
a few  minutes  perfectly  immovable,  and  not  a word  could  be  elicited  from 
her.  When  she  had  continued  in  this  strange  state  for  some  time,  he 
dissipated  the  illusion  by  his  will , without  awaking  her,  when  she 
immediately  found  her  tongue  again,  and  on  being  asked  how  she  had  felt  > 
when  she  would  not  speak,  she  replied,  ‘ Very  hot,  and  full  of  naphtha/  ” 

The  next  case  (contained  in  a letter  from  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson^ 
to  Dr.  Elliotson,  Zoist , Vol.V.,  Part  257,)  takes  us  a little  further;  for 
the  agent  and  percipient  were  at  a considerable  distance  from  one 
another ; and  though  the  experience  was  of  a vague  sort,  very  much 
more  was  produced  than  a mere  idea — namely,  a physical  impression 
of  the  agent’s  presence,  strong  enough  to  be  described  as  felt* 

mj  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  W 

(12)  **Ihava  tried,  several  experiments  on  persons  not  in  the  mesmeric 
state,  and  some  who  had  never  been  mesmerised.  I have  repeatedly  found 
that  I have  been  able,  by  will,  to  suggest  a series  of  ideas  to  some  persons, 
which  ideas  have  induced  corresponding  actions ; and  again,  by  fixing  my 
attentioh  upon  others,  and  thinking  on  some  particular  subject,  I have 
oft&  found  them  able  most  accurately  to  penetrate  my  thoughts.  Neither 
have  I observed  that  it  was  always  necessary  to  be  near  them,  or  to  be  in 
the  same  room  with  theta,  to  produce  these  effects.  . . . Some  months 

ago  I Was  staying  at  a friend's  house,  and  this  subject  came  under  dis- 
cussion. Two  friends  had  left  the  house  the  day  before.1  Neither  of 
them,  that  I am  aware  of;  had  ever  been  in  the  mesmeric  state ; but  I 
knew  that  to  some  extent  they  had  this  faculty.  I proposed  to  make  trial 
'whether  I could  will  them  to  think  I was  coming  to  see  them  at  that 
moment*  I accordingly  fixed  my  attention  upon  them  for  some  little  time. 
Six  weeks  elapsed  before  I saw  either  of  them  again  ; and  when  we  met  I 
had  forgotten  the  circumstance,  but  one  of  them  soon  reminded  me  of  it  by 
saying,  * I have  something  curious  to  tell  you,  and  want  also  to  know 
whether  you  have  ever  tried  to  practise  your  power  of  volition  upon  either 
of  us ; for  on  the  evening  of  the  day  I left  the  house  where  you  were 

staying,  I was  sitting  reading  a book  in  the  same  room  with  Mr. . 

My  attention  was  withdrawn  from  my  book,  and  for  some  moments  I felt 
as  though  a third  person  was  in  the  room,  and  that  feeling  shortly  after 
became  connected  with  an  idea  that  you  were  coming  or  even  then  present. 
This  seemed  so  very  absurd  that  I tried  to  banish  the  idea  from  my  mind. 

I then  observed  that  Mr. ?s  attention  was  also  drawn  from  the  book 

which  he  was  reading,  and  he  exclaimed,  ‘It  is  positively  very  ridiculous, 
but  I could  have  sworn  some  third  person  was  in  the  room,  and  that 
impression  is  connected  with  an  idea  of  Henry  Thompson.'  ” 

§ 7.  But  the  most  pronounced  cases  are  of  course  those  where 
an  actual  affection  of  vision  is  produced.  Here  previous  observations  of 
an  authentic  sort  almost  wholly  fail  us.2  I have  no  wish  to  extenuate 
the  negative  importance  of  this  fact.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be 
Temembered  how  very  exceptional,  probably,  are  the  occasions  on  which 
the  experiment  has  been  attempted.  When  the  i;wo  persons  concerned 

1 It  seems  practically  certain,  from  what  follows,  that  by  “the  day  before ” Mr. 
Thompson  meant  “earlier  in  the  day.”  Otherwise  the  case  would  have  had  no  relation 
to  what  he  is  sneaking  of. 

* It  i*haraly  necessary  to  say  that  we  cannot  reckon  in  this  class  hallucinations,  even 
■though  dependent  on  the  special  influence  of  another  person^  where  no  definite  exercise  of 
wm  has  been  exerted  by  that  person  at  the  time,  ^or  instance,  the  following  case  of 
Mr;  H.  Sv  Thompson’s  may  (in  default  of  more  precise  detail)  be  ascribed  to  faith  and 
imagination  on  the  part  of  the  “ subject.” 

“ Mr.*  Harland^s  wife  had  been  ill  for  three  years,  said  to  be  heart-disease,  with 
epasms  of  the  heartland  neuralgic  pains  in  head  and  spine.  A few  passes  removed  the 
pains,  and  m uie  course  of  a few  days  she  gained  so  much  strength  that  she  walked  round 
thegardem  which  she  had  not  done  for  three  years.  In  a few  aays  she  was  able  to  walk 
"to  a friend  s house  two  miles  off ; she  became  very  sensitive  and  slept  well.  I frequently 
put  her  to  sleep  at  night,  but  when  I did  not  go  to  her  house  I always  used  to  will  her  ta 
go  to  sleep,  ana  when  I asked  if  she  had  haa  a good  night,  she  used  to  say,  * I always 
have  a good  night  when  you  mesmerise  me,  ’ and  when  I said,  1 1 was  not  here  last  aught,* 
anean&wejfea,  Oh,  yes,  but  you  were,.  I heard  you  come  up  stairs  after  I had  gone  t o bed* 
and  knock  at  tay  door.  I said,  “ Gome  in,”  but  you  would  not  speak  to  me,  and  walked 
up  to  me,  and ‘held  your  hand  over  my  head,  saying,  “ Sleep,  ” and  I did  sleep,  and  had  a 
Very  good  night ; you  surely  were  in  the  house,  for  i saw  you  as  plainly  as  ldq now/” 

100  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap, 

in  a “ willing  ” experiment  have  been  together,  the  object,  as  a rule,  has 
been  to  produce  the  effect  which  shall  present  the  most  obvious  test 
for  spectators  or  for  the  agent  himself — namely,  motor  effects.  And 
when  some  one  of  the  few  persons  who  possess  an  appreciable  degree 
of  the  abnormal  power  has  attempted  to  exercise  it  at  a distance,  it  is. 
still  the  production  of  actions  that  he  would  most  naturally  aim  at ; 
for  it  is  in  this  direction  that  such  a power  has  been  popularly 
expected  to  show  itself.  Thus  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that 
deliberate  attempts  to  produce  a visual  hallucination  in  another 
person,  by  the  exercise  of  the  will,  have  been  very  few  apd  far  between. 
Still  this  is,  of  course,  no  complete  explanation  of  the  rarity  of  the 
phenomenon  ; for  no  definable  line  separates  these  rare  attempts  from 
the  ordinary  experiments  in  thought-transferenc'e,  when  the  agent 
concentrates  his  attention  on  a visible  object.  In  those  experiments 
there  is,  so  to  speak,  an  opportunity  for  a visual  hallucination,  if  the 
agent  is  able  to  produce  one.  But  the  percipient  has  never  (as  far  as 
I know)  received  more  than  a vivid  idea,  or  at  most  a picture  of 
the  object  in  the  mind’s  eye.  And  this  fact  sufficiently  indicates  that 
the  more  pronounced  sensory  result  is  one  requiring  most  special 
conditions — one  which  would  remain  extremely  rare  however  much  it 
were  sought  for,  and  the  proof  of  which  will  rightly  be  regarded  with 
all  the  more  jealous  scrutiny. 

The  previous  records  of  the  phenomenon  to  which  I can  point 
are  really  only  four  in  number ; 1 and  these  are  so  far  from  conclusive 
that  they  would  hardly  even  be  worth  mentioning,  if  stronger 
examples  could  not  be  added  from  our  own  collection.  The  first  case 
is  thus  meagrely  described  by  Dr.Elliotson  (Zoist,  Yol.  VIII.,  p.  69): — 

“ I have  a friend,  who  can,  by  his  will,  make  certain  patients  think  of 
any  others  he  chooses,  and  fancy  he  sees  those  persons : he*  silently 
thinking  of  certain  persons,  the  brain  of  the  patient  sympathises  with  his 
brain.  Nay,  by  silently  willing  that  these  persons  shall  say  and  do  certain  , 
things  which  he  chooses,  he  makes  the  patients  believe  they  see  these 
imaginary  appearances  doing  and  uttering  those  very  things.” 

1 We  cannot,  of  course,  recognise  as  even  on  the  threshold  of  evidence  the  following 
remote  and  third-hand  case  from  A Treatise  on  the  Second-Sight,  &c.,  by  “Theophilua 
Insulanus”  (Edinburgh,  1763),  p.  40.  But  it  is  curious  enough  to  be  worth  quoting,  the 
imperfection  of  the  alleged  transference  being  very  parallel  to  what  has  been  already 
observed  in  some  of  our  own  experiments. 

‘‘The  said  ensign  [viz.,  Ensign  Donald  Macleod],  a j>er8on  of  candour*  who  lived  then 
? i mformed  me  having  gone  with  his  wife  to  visit  hi?  father-in-law  in  the 

Isle  of  Skye,  night  coming  on,  they  were  obliged  to  put  up  wich  a cave  on  the  side  of 
Dough  Urn,  to  pass  the  night ; and  as  they  were  at  supper,  his  wife  took  a ctjbbock  of 
cheese  in  her  hand?  and,  having  covered  it  with  three  or  four  apples,  wished  it  in  a Beer’s 
hand,  who  lived  with  her  father,  and  who,  that  night,  by  her  second-sight,  saw  the  gentle* 
woman  offering  her  a cabbock  of  cheese,  but  was  at  a loss  to  know  what  the  round  things 
were  that  covered  it,  as,  perhaps,  she  had  seen  none  of  the  kind  in  her  lifetime,  until  her 
master  s daughter,  upon  her  arrival,  told  her  the  whole.” 

m.)  TO  SPONTANEOUS*,  TELEPATHY.  101 

That  a man  of  indisputable  ability  should  hay©  thought  such  a 
statement  of  such  a fact  adequate  is  truly  extraordinary.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  following  sentence  of  Dr.Charpignon’s  (Physiologic 
dn  Magnitisme,  -Paris,  1848,  p.  325) 

“Nous  avons  maintes  fois  forme  dans  notre  pensee  des  images  Actives, 
et  les  somnambules  que  nous  questionnions  voyaient  ces  images  comme  des 
r£alit&.” 

Even  if  these  descriptions  be  accurate  in  the  main,  we  are  unable 
to  judge  how  far  the  vision  was  really  externalised  by  the  patients. 
In. the  next  case  this  point  is  clear;  but  the  distinct  assurance  is 
still  lacking  that  the  agent  was  on  his  guard  against  the  slightest 
approach  to  a suggestive  movement.  The  incident  is  cited  in  the 
Annales  Mddico-Psychologiques,  6th  series,  Yol.  V.,  p.  379,  by  Dr. 
Dagonet,  doctor  at  the  Saint  Anne  Asylum. 

“ TJn  interne  [house-physician]  lui  dit : ‘Regardez  done,  Didier,  voilA  une 
jolie  femme.’  II  n’y  avait  personne.  Didier  reprit : * Mais  non,  elle  est  laide,’ 
et  il  ajoute  : * Qu’a-t-elle  dans  les  bras  ? ’ Ces  questions  se  rapportaient 
exactement  A ce  que  pensait  son  interlocuteur.  A un  certain  moment 
Didier  se  pr4cipita  meine  pour  empecher  de  tomber  l’enfant  qu’il  croyait 
voir  dans  les  bras  dela  femme  imaginaire  dont  on  lui  parlait.” 

This  is  a specimen  of  the  stray  indications  of  thought-transference 
that  may  bo  found  even  in  strictly  scientific  literature ; but  the 
significance  of  the  phenomenon  seems  to  have  been  altogether  missed. 
It  is  described  among  a number  of  observations  of  an  ordinary  kind, 
made  on  an  habitual  somnambulist,  and  as  though  it  were  quite  on  a 
par  with  the  rest. 

The  next  account,  though,  like  Dr.  Charpignon’s,  first-hand  from 
the  agent,  is  more  remote,  and  equally  uncorroborated.  It  is  to  be 
found  in  an  article  by  Councillor  H.  M.  Wesermann,  in  the  Archiv 
fur  den  Thierischen  Magnetismus , Yol.  VI.,  pp.  136-139 ; and  is 
dated  Diisseldorf,  June  15th,  1819.  The  first  four  items  in  the  list 
are  impressions  alleged  to  have  been  made  on  a sleeping  percipient ; 
but  the  fifth  is  a waking  and  completely  externalised  hallucination. 

“ First  Experiment  at  a Distance  of  Five  Miles. — I endeavoured  to  • 
acquaint  my  friend,  the  Hofkammerrath  G.  (whom  I had  not  seen, 
with  wliom  I had  not  spoken,  and  to  whom  I had  not  written,  for  thirteen 
years),  # with  the  fact  of  my  intended  visit,  by  presenting  my  form  to'  him 
in  his  sleep,  throughthe  force  of  my  will.  When  I unexpectedly  went 
tg  him  dn  the  following  evening,  he  evinced  his  astonishment  at  having 
seen  me  in  a dream  on  the  preceding  night. 

102  THE  TRANSITION  MROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap., 

“ Second  Experiment  at  a Distance  of  Three  Miles . — Madam©  W.,  in  her 
sleep,  was  to  hear  a conversation,  between  me  a;id  two  other  persons, 
relating  to  a certain  secret;  and  when  I visited  her  on  the  third  day 
she  told  me  all  that  had  been  said,  and  showed  her  astonishment  at  this 
remarkable  dream. 

" Third  Experiment  at  a Distance  of  One  Mile.r — An  aged  person  in  (J. 
was  to  see  in  a dream  the  funeral  procession  of  my  deceased  friend  S.,  and 
when  I visited  her  on  the  next  day  her  first  words  were  that  she  had  in 
her  sleep  seen  a funeral  procession,  and  on  inquiry  had  learned  that  I was 
the  corpse.  Here  then  was  & slight  error.  ; 

“ Fourth  Experiment  at  a Distance  of  One-Eighth  of  a Mile. — Herr 
Doctor  B.  desired  a trial  to  convince  him,  whereupon  I represented  to  him 
’a  nocturnal  street-brawl.  He  saw  it  in  a dream,  to  his  great  astonishment. 
[This  means,  presumably,  that  he  was  astonished  when  he  found  that  the 
actual  subject  of  his  dream  was  what  Wesermann  had  been  endeavouring 
to  impress  on  him.]  . v 

“ Fifth  Experiment  at  a Distance  of  Nine  Miles . — The  intention  was  that 
Lieutenant  N.  should  see  in  a dream,  at  1 1 o'clock  p.m.%  a lady  who  had 
been  five  years  dead,  who  was  to  incite  him  to  a good  action.  Herr  H., 
however,  contrary  to  expectation,  had  not  gone  to  sleep  by  11  o'clock,  but 
was  conversing  with  his  friend  S.  on  the  Frencli  campaign.  Suddenly  the 
door  of  the  chamber  opens ; the  lady,  dressed  in  white,  with  black  kerchief 
and  bare  head,  walks  in,  salutes  S.  thrice  with  her  hand  in  a friendly  way, 
turns  to  N.,  nods  to  him,  and  then  returns  through  the  door.  Both 
follow  quickly,  and  call  the  sentinel  at  the  entrance  ; but  all  had  vanished, 
and  nothing  was  to  be  found.  Some  months  afterwards,  Herr  S.  informed 
me  by  letter  that  the  chamber  door  used  to  creak  when  opened, 
but  did  not  do  so  when  the  lady  opened  it — whence  it  is  to  be  inferred  that 
the  opening  of  the  door  was  only  a dream-picture,  like  all  the  rest  of  the 
apparition.,,1 

To  such  a record,  if  it  stood  alone,  we  should  attach  very  little 
importance,  in  default  of  any  evidence  as  to  the  intellectual  and  moral 
trustworthiness  of  Wesermann.  There  is,  fortunately,  no  necessity 
for  dwelling  on  these  cases,  as  the  possibility  of  the  alleged 
phenomenon  will  certainly  not  be  admitted  except  on  the  strength 
of  contemporary  and  corroborated  cases. 

§ 8.  In  the  examples  that  I am  about  to  quote,  one  grave  defect 
must  at  once  be  admitted.  Though  in  all  of  them  testimony  is  given 
by  both  agent  and  percipient,  the  agent  in  every  case,  and  the 
percipients  in  one,  withhold  their  names  from  publication.  . We,  of 
course,  regret  this  restriction  exceedingly;  but  it  can  hardly  he 
deemed  unnatural  or  unreasonable.  It  must  be  remembered  that 

© - , . 

Nasse’a  ZeiUchrift  fUr  Psychische  Aerize  (Leipzig)  ‘for  1820,  Part  IV,,  pp. 
7p7-7o7,  Wesermann  again  describes  the  first  and  fifth  of  these  experiments,  and  etatea 
that  the  trials  were  mode  in  the  autumn  of  1808.  • * 

in.}  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  103 

these  cases  of  apparitions  intentionally  produced  stand  in  a most 
peculiar  position,  as  compared  even  with  the  other  remarkable- 
incidents  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  the  present  work.  In 
the  case  of  the  more  normal  telepathic  phantasm,  neither  party  is 
in  the  least  responsible  for  what  occurs.  A dies  or  breaks  his  leg ; 
B thinks  that  he  sees  A’s  form  or  hears  his  voice ; neither  can  help 
it ; if  their  experiences  coincide,  that  is  not  their  business ; perhaps 
it  is  a chance.  But  in  the  present  class  of  cases,  the  agent  determines 
tb  do  something  that  to  most  of  his  educated  fellow-creatures  will, 
appear  a miracle  ; and  however  little  he  himself  may  share  that  view, 
he  may  still  have  good  grounds  for  shrinking  from  the  reputation 
either  of  a miracle-worker  or  of  a miracle-monger.  The  percipient’s 
position  is  somewhat  different ; but  modem  miracles  are  by  no  means 
tempting  things  to  get  publicly  mixed  up  with,  even  for  a person 
whose  share  in  them  has  been  passive.  And  the  extreme  rarity  of 
the  phenomenon  is  another  daunting  fact.  For  a single  specimen  of. 
this  deliberate  type  of  phantasm,  we  have  a hundred  specimens  of  the 
wholly  spontaneous  type;  and  the  witness  who  is  willing  to  give  his 
name  for  publication,  where  he  is  assured  that  he  will  find  himself 
in  numerous  and  respectable  company,  may  fairly  hesitate  when 
aware  that  the  incident  he  records  is  almost  unexampled. 

However,  it  may  be  hoped  that  this  difficulty,  like  others,  will 
gradually  be  removed  by  a modification  of  public  opinion  on  the 
whole  subject.  Meanwhile,  I can  but  give  the  evidence  under  the 
conditions  imposed.  In  the  first  case,  the  agent  is  slightly  known  to 
us.  The  percipient  is  our  friend,  the  Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  who 
believes  that  he  has  kept  a written  memorandum  of  the  incident,  but 
has  been  prevented  by  a long  illness,  and  by  pressure  of  work,  from 
hunting  for  it  among  a large  mass  of  stored-away  papers.  The' 
agent’s  account  was  written  in  February,  1879,  and  includes  a few 
purely  verbal  alterations  made  in  1883,  when  Mr.  Moses  pronounced 
it  correct. 

(13)  “ One  evening  early  last  year,  I resolved  to  try  to  appear  to  Z,  at . 
some  -miles  distance.  I did  not  inform  him  beforehand  of  the  intended 
experiment ; but  retired  to  rest  shortly  before  midnight  with  thoughts 
intently  fixed  on  Z,  with  whose  room  and  surroundings,  however, 

I was  quite  unacquainted.  I soon  fell  asleep,  and  awoke  next 
morning  unconscious  of  anything  having  taken  place.  On  seeing  Z a 
few  days  afterwards,  I inquired,  ‘ Did  anything  happen  at  your  rooms  on 
Saturday  night ? ’ ,*Yes,’  replied  he,  ‘a  great  deal  happened.  I had 

been  (fitting  over  the  fire  with  M,  smoking  and  chatting.  About  12,30  he 
rase  to  leave,  and  I let  him  out  myself.  I returned  to  the  fire  to  finish 

104  THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap, 

ifry  pipe,  when  I saw  you  sitting  in  the  clmir  just  vacated  by  him.  I looked 
intently  at  you,  and  then  took  up  a newspaper  to  assure  myself  I was  not 
dreaming,  but  on  laying  it  clown  I saw  you  still  there.  While  I gazed 
without  speaking,  you  faded  away.  Though  I imagined  you  must  be  fast 
asleep  in  bed  at  that  hour,  yet  you  appeared  dressed  in  your  ordinary 
garments,  such  as  you  usually  wear  every  day/  ‘ Then  my  experiment 
seems  to  have  succeeded/  said  I.  ‘ The  next  time  I come,  ask  me 
what  I want,  as  I had  fixed  on  my  mind  certain  questions  I intended  to 
ask  you,  but  I was  probably  waiting  for  an  invitation  to  speak/ 

“ A few  weeks  later  the  experiment  was  repeated  with  equal  success, 
I,  as  before,  not  informing  Z when  it  was  made.  On  this  occasion  he 
not  only  questioned  me  on  the  subject  which  was  at  that  time  under  very 
warm  discussion  between  us,  but  detained  me  by  the  exercise  of  his 
will  some  time  after  I had  intimated  a desire  to  leave.  This 
fact,  when  it  came  to  be  communicated  to  me,  seemed  to  account 
for  the  violent  and  somewhat  peculiar  headache  which  marked  the  morn- 
ing following  the  experiment ; at  least  1 remarked  at  the  time  that  there 
was  no  apparent  cause  for  the  unusual  headache ; and,  as  on  the  former 
occasion,  no  recollection  remained  of  the  event,  or  seeming  event,  of  the 
preceding  night.” 

Mr.  Moses  writes  : — 

“ 21,  Birchington  Road,  N.W., 

• “ September  27th,  1885.  ^ 

“ This  account  is,  as  far  as  my  memory  serves,  exact ; and,  without 
notes  before  me,  I cannot  supplement  it. 

“ W.  Stainton  Moses.” 

The  next  case,  otherwise  similar,  was  more  remarkable  in  that 
there  were  two  percipients.  The  narrative  has  been  copied  by  us  from 
a MS.  book  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B/s,  to  which  he  transferred  it  from  an 
almanack  diary,  since  lost. 

(14)  “ On  a certain  Sunday  evening  in  November,  1881,  having  been 
reading  of  the  great  power  which  the  human  will  is  capable  of 
exercising,  I determined  with  the  whole  force  of  my  being,  that  T would 
be  present  in  spirit  in  the  front  bedroom  on  the  second  floor  of  a house 
situated  at  22,  Hogarth  Road,  Kensington,  in  which  room  slept  two 
ladies  of  my  acquaintance,  viz.,  Miss  L.  S.  Y.  and  Miss  E.  C.  V.,  aged 
respectively  25  and  11  years.  I was  living  at  this  time  at  23,  Kildare 
Gardens,  a distance  of  about  3 miles  from  Hogarth  Road,  and  I had  not 
mentioned  in  any  way  my  intention  of  trying  this  experiment  to  either  of 
the  above  ladies,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  was  only  on  retiring  to  rest 
upon  this  Sunday  night  that  I made  up  my  mind  to  do  so.  The  time  at, 
which  I determined  I would  be  there  was  1 o’clock  in  the  morning,, and  I 
also  had  a strong  intention  of  making  my  presence  perceptible. 

“ On  the  following  Thursday  I went  to  see  the  ladies  in  question,  and, 
in  the  course  of  conversation  (without  any  allusion  to  the  subject  on  my 
part),  the  elder  one  told  me,  that,  on  the  previous  Sunday  night,  she  had 
been  much  terrified  by  perceiving  me  standing  by  her  bedside,  and  that 

III. 

TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

105 

shescrearaedwhen  the  apparition  advanced  towards  her,  and  awoke  her 
little  sister,  who  saw  me  also. 

“ I asked  her  if  she  was  awake  at  the  time,  and  she  replied  most 
decidedly  in  the  affirmative,  and  upon  my  inquiring  the  time  of  the 
occurrence,  she  replied,  about  1 o’clock  in  the  morning. 

. “ This  lady,  at  my  request,  wrote  down  a statement  of  the  event  and 
signed  it. 

u This  was  the  first  occasion  upon  which  I tried  an  experiment  of 
this  kind,  and  its  complete  success  startled  me  very  much. 

u Besides  exercising  my  power  of  volition*  very  strongly,  I put  forth 
an  effort  which  I cannot  find  words  to  describe.  I was  conscious  of  a 
mysterious  influence  of  some  sort  permeating  in  my  body,  and  had  a 
distinct  impression  that  I was  exercising  some  force  with  which  I had 
been  hitherto  unacquainted,  but  which  I can  now  at  certain  times  set  in 
motion  at  will. 

“S.  H.  B.” 

SOf  the  original  entry  in  the  almanack  diary,  Mr.  B.  says : “ I 
lect  having  made  it  within  a week  or  so  of  the  occurrence  of  the 
experiment,  and  whilst  it  was  perfectly  fresh  in  my  memory.”] 

Miss  Verity’s  account  is  as  follows  : — 

11  January  18th,  1883. 

“ On  a certain  Sunday  evening,  about  twelve  months  since,  at  our  house 
in  Hogarth  Road,  Kensington,  I distinctly  saw  Mr.  B.  in  my  room,  about 
1 o’clock.  I was  perfectly  awake  and  was  much  terrified.  I awoke  my 
sister  by  screaming,  and  she  saw  the  apparition  herself.  Three  days  after, 
when  I saw  Mr.  B.,  I told  him  what  had  happened  ; but  it  was  some  time 
before  I could  recover  from  the  shock  I had  received,  and  the  remembrance 
is  too  vivid  to  be  ever  erased  from  my  memory. 

“ L.  S.  Verity.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  V erity  adds  : — 

“I  had  never  had  any  hallucination  of  the  senses  of  any  sort 
whatever,” 

Miss'E.  C.  Verity  says  : — 

“ I remember  the  occurrence  of  the  event  described  by  my  sister  in  the 
annexed  paragraph,  and  her  description  is  quite  correct.  I saw  the 
apparition  which  she  saw,  at  the  same  time  and  under  the  same 
circumstances. 

“ E.  C.  Verity.” 

Miss  A.  S,  Verity  says  : — 

“ I remember  quite  clearly  the  evening  my  eldest  sister  awoke  me  by 
calling  to  me  from  an  adjoining  room  ; and  upon  my  going  to  her  bedside* 
; where  she  slept  with  my  youngest  sister,  they  both  told  me  they  had  seen 
S.  H.  B.  standing  in  the  room.  The  time  was  about  1 o’clock.  S.  H.  B» 
was  in  evening  dress,  they  told  me. 

“ A.  S.  Verity.” 

106  , THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chak 

. . [Mr.  B.  does  not  remember  how  he  was  dressed  pn  the  night  of  the 
Occurrence. 

Miss  E.  C.  Verity  was  asleep  when  her  sister  caught  sight  of  the 
figure,  and  was  awoke  by  her  sisters  exclaiming,  “ There  is  S.”  The  name 
had  therefore  met  her  ear  before  she  herself  saw  the  figure ; and  the 
hallucination  on  her  part  might  thus  be  attributed  to  suggestion.  But  it  is 
against  this  view  that  she  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  and  cannot 
therefore  be  considered  as  predisposed  to  such  experiences.  The  sisters  are 
.both  equally  certain  that  the  figure  was  in  evening  dress,  and  that  it  stood  in 
one  particular  spot  in  tlie  room.  The  gas  was  burning  low,  and  the 
phantasmal  figure  wa3  seen  with  far  more  clearness  than  a real  figure 
would  have  been. 

The  witnesses  have  been  very  carefully  cross-examined  by  the  present 
writer.  There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  their  mention  of  the  occurrence 
to  S.  H.  B.  was  spontaneous.  They  had  not  at  first  intended  to  mention 
it ; but  when  they  saw  him,  their  sense  of  its  oddness  overcame  their 
resolution.  Miss  Verity  is  a perfectly  sober-minded  and  sensible  witness, 
with  no  love  of  marvels,  and  with  a considerable  dread  and  dislike  of  this 
particular  form  of  marvel.] 

The  next  case  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.’s  is  different  in  this  respect,  that  the 
percipient  was  not  consciously  present  to  the  agents  mind  at  the 
time  that  he  made  his  attempt.  The  account  is  copied  from  the 
MS.  book  mentioned  above. 

(15)  “ On  Friday,  December  1st,  1882,  at  9.30  p.m.,  I went  into  a room 
alone  and  sat  by  the  fireside,  and  endeavoured  so  strongly  to  fix  my  mind 
upon  the  interior  of  a house  at  Kew  (viz.,  Clarence  Road),  in  which 
resided  Miss  V.  and  her  two  sisters,  that  I seemed  to  be  actually  in  the 
house.  During  this  experiment  I must  have  fallen  into  a mesmeric  sleep, 
for  although  I was  conscious  I could  not  move  my  limbs.  I did  not  seem 
to  have  lost  the  power  of  moving  them,  but  T could  not  make  the  effort 
to  do  so,  and  my  hands,  w hich  lay  loosely  on  my  knees,  about . 6 inches 
apart,  felt  involuntarily  drawn  together  and  seemed  to  meet,  although  I 
was  conscious  that  they  did  not  move.  ♦ 

“At  10  p.m.  I regained  my  normal  state  by  an  effort  of  the  will,  and 
then  took  a pencil  and  wrote  down  on  a sheet  of*  note-paper  the  foregoing 
statements. 

“ When  I went  to  bed  on  this  same  night,  I determined  that  I would 
be  in  the  front  bedroom  of  the  above-mentioned  house  at  12  p.m.,  and 
remain  there  until  I had  made  my  spiritual  presence  perceptible  to  the 
inmates  of  that  room. 

“ On  the  next  day,  Saturday,  I went  to  Kew  to  spend  the  evening, 
and  met  there  a married  sister  of  Miss  V.  (viz.,  Mrs.  L.)  This  lady  x had 
only  met  once  before,  and  then  it  was  at  a ball  two  years  previous  to  the 
above  date.  We  were  both  in  fancy  dress  at  the  time,  and  as  we  did  not 
exchange  more  than  half-a-dozen  words,  this  lady  would  naturally  have 
lost  any  vivid  recollection  of  my  appearance,  even  if  she  had  remarked  it. 

“ In  the  course  of  conversation  (although  I did  not  think"  for  a 
moment  of  asking  her  any  questions  on  such  a subject),  she  told  me  th&t 
on  the  previous  night  she  had  seen  me  distinctly  upon  two  occasions*  She 

TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

10T 

iilJ 

, spent  the  night  at  Clarence  Hoad,  and'  had  slept  in  the  front* 
bedroom.  At  about  half-past  9 she  had  seen  me  in  the  passage,  going- 
from  one  room  to  another,  and  at  12  p.m.,  when  she  was  wide  awake,  she 
had  seen  me  enter  the  bedroom  and  walk  round  to  where  she  was  sleeping, 
ahd  take  her  hair  (which  is  very  long)  into  my  hand.  She  also  told  me 
that  the  apparition  took  hold  of  her  hand  and  gazed  intently  into  it, 
whereupon  she  spoke,  saying,  * You  need  not  look  at  the  lines,  for  I have 
never  had  any  trouble.’  She  then  awoke  her  sister,  Miss  V.,  who  was 
sleeping  with  her,  and  told  her  about  it.  After  hearing  this  account,  I 
took  the  statement  which  I had  written  down  on  the  previous  evening, 
from  my  pocket,  and  showed  it  to  some  of  the  persons  present,  who  were* 
much  astonished  although  incredulous. 

I asked  Mrs.  L.  if  she  was  not  dreaming  at  the  time  of  the  latter 
experience,  but  this  she  stoutly  denied,  and  stated  that  she  had  forgotten 
what  I was  like,  but  seeing  me  so  distinctly  she  recognised  me  at  once. 

“ Mrs.  L.  is  a lady  of  highly  imaginative  temperament,  and  told  me  that 
she  had  been  subject,  since  childhood,  to  psychological  fancies,1 * *  &c.,  but 
the  wonderful  coincidence  of  the  time  (which  was  exact)  convinced  mo 
that  what  she  told  me  was  more  than  a flight  of  the  imagination.  At 
my  request  she  wrote  a brief  account  of  her  impressions  and  signed  it. 

“ S.  H.  B.” 

[Mr.  B.  was  at  Southall  when  he  made  this  trial.  He  tells  me  that 
the  above  account  was  written  down  about  ten  days  after  the  experiment, 
and  that  it  embodies  the  entry  made  in  his  rough  diary  on  the  night  q£ 
the  trial.] 

The  following  is  the  lady’s  statement,  which  was  forwarded  to  Mr.  B., 
he  tells  us,  “ within  a few  weeks  of  the  occurrence  ” : — 

11 8,  Wordsworth  Road,  Harrow. 

“On  Friday,  December  1st,  1882,  I was  on  a visit  to  my  sister, 
21,  Clarence  Road,  Kew,  and  about  9.30  p.m.  I was  going  from  the  bedroom 
to  get  some  water  from  the  bathroom,  when  1 distinctly  saw  Mr.  S.  B.,  whom 
I had  only  seen  once  before,  about  two  years  ago,  walk  before  me  past  the- 
bathroom,  towards  the  bedroom  at  the  end  of  the  landing.  About  11 
o’clock  we  retired  for  the  night,  and  about  12  o’clock*  I was  still  awake, 
and  the  door  opened  and*Mr.  S.  B.  came  into  the  room  and  walked  round 
to  the  bedside,  and  there  stood  with  one  foot  on  the  ground  and  the 
other  knee  resting  on  a chair.  He  then  took  my  hair  into  his  hand, 
after  which  he  took  my  hand  in  his,  and  looked  very  intently  into* 
the  palm.  4 Ah,’  I said  (speaking  to  him),  ‘you  need  not  look  at  the 
lines,  for  I never  had  any  trouble.’  I then  awoke  my  sister ; I was  not. 
nervous,  but  excited,  and  began  to  fear  some  serious  illness  would 
befall  her,  she  being  delicate  at  the  time,  but  she  is  progressing  more 
favourably  now. 

“ H.  L.”  [Full  name  signed.] 

1 Meed  to  explain  this  phrase,  Mr.  B.  say$ : “I  have  never  heard  of  Mrs,  L,  having 

bad  any  hallucination*.  The  fancies  I alluded  to  were  simply  a few  phenomena  accounted 

for  on  the  ground  of  1 telepathic  * rapport  between  herself  ana  Mr.  L*,  such  as"  having  a. 
distinct  impression  that  he  was  coming  home  unexpectedly  (whilst  absent  in  the  North  of 

England),  and  finding  on  several  occasions  that  the  impressions  were  quite  correct.” 

108 

TIIE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

Miss  Verity  corroborates  as  follows : — 

“ I can  remember  quite  well  Mrs.  L.’s  mentioning  her  two  visions^— -one 
at  9.30  and  one  at  12 — at  the  time,  and  before  S.  H.  B.  came,  tyhem, 
he  came , my  sister  told  him,  and  immediately  he  took  a card  (or  paper,  I 
forget  which)  out  of  his  pocket,  containing  an  account  of  the  previous 
evening,  I consider  this  testimony  quite  as  good  as  if  Mrs.  L.  were 
.giving  it,  because  I can  recall  so  well  these  two  days. 

“ My  sister  has  told  me  that  she  never  experienced  any  hallucination 
of  the  senses  except  on  this  occasion. 

ff  “ L.  S.  Verity.” 

The  present  writer  requested  Mr.  B.  to  send  him  a note  on  the 
night  that  he  intended  to  make  his  next  experiment  of  the  kind, 
and  received  the  following  note  by  the  first  post  on  Monday, 
March  24th,  1884. 

4 “ March  22nd,  1884. 

(16)  “ Dear  Mr.  Gurney,— I am  going  to  try  the  experiment  to-night 
•of  making  my  presence  perceptible  at  44,  Norland  Square,  at  12  p.m.  I 
. will  let  you  know  the  result  in  a few  days. — Yours  very  sincerely, 

“ S.  H.  B.” 

The  next  letter  was  received  in  the  course  of  the  following  week 

, “ April  3rd,  1884. 

<r  Dear  Mr.  Gurney, — I have  a strange  statement  to  show  you,  re- 
specting my  experiment,  which  was  tried  at  your  suggestion,  and  under 
■the  test  conditions  which  you  imposed. 

“ Having  quite  forgotten  which  night  it  was  on  which  I attempted  the 
projection,  I cannot  say  whether  the  result  is  a brilliant  success,  or  only  a 
slight  one,  until  I see  the  letter  which  I posted  you  on  the  evening  of  the 
•experiment. 

“Having  sent  you  that  letter,  I did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  make  a 
anote  in  my  diary,  and  consequently  have  let  the  exact  date  slip  my 
memory. 

u If  the  dates  correspond,  the  success  is  complete  in  every  detail,  and 
I have  an  account  signed  and  witnessed  to  show  you. 

“I  saw  the  lady  (who  was  the  subject)  for  the  first  time  last  night, 
•since  the  experiment,  and  she  made  a voluntary  statement  to  me,  which 
I wrote  down  at  her  dictation,  and  to  which  she  has  attached  her  sig- 
nature. The  date  and  time  of  the  apparition  are  specified  in  this  statement, 
and  it  will  be  for  you  to  decide  whether  they  are  identical  with  those 
given  in  my  letter  to  you.  I have  completely  forgotten,  but  yet  I fancy 
that  they  are  the  same. 

# “S.  H.  B.” 

This  is  the  statement : — 

“ 44,  Norland  Squar^  W. 

“ On  Saturday  night,  March  22nd,  1884,  at  about  midnight,  I had  ft 
distinct  impression  that  Mr.  S.  H.  B.  was  present  in  my  room,  and  I 
distinctly  saw  him  whilst  I was  quite  widely  awake.  He  came  toVards 
me,  and  stroked  my  hair.  I voluntarily  gave  him  this  information,  when, 
he  called  to  see  me  on  Wednesday,  April  2nd,  telling  him  the  time  ami 

m.)  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  109> 

1 ^ 

the  circumstances  of  the  apparition,  without  any  suggestion  on  his  part. 
The  appearance  in  my  room  was  most  vivid,  and  quite  unmistakeable. 

“L.  a Verity." 

. Miss  A.  S.  Verity  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

. « I remember  my  sister  telling  me  that  she  had  seen  S.  H.  B.,  and 
that  he  had  touohed  her  hair,  before  he  came  to  see  us  on  April  2nd. 

“A.  S.  V." 

Mr.  B.’s  own  account  is  as  follows  : — 

“On  Saturday,  March .22nd,  I determined  to  make  my  presence  percep- 
tible to  Miss  V,,  at  44,  Norland  Square,  Notting  Hill,  at  12  midnight, 
and  as  I had  previously  arranged  with  Mr.  Gurney  that  I should  post  him 
a letter  on  the  evening  on  which  I tried  my  next  experiment  (stating  the 
and  other  particulars),  I sent  a note  to  acquaint  him  with  the  above 

facts. 

“ About  ten  days  afterwards  I called  upon  Miss  V.,  and  she  voluntarily 
told  me,  that  on  March  22nd,  at  12  o’clock  midnight,  she  had  seen  me  so 
vividly  in  her  room  (whilst  widely  awake)  that  her  nerves  had  been  much 
shaken,  and  she  had  been  obliged  to  send  for  a doctor  in  the  morning. 

“S.  H.  B.” 

[Unfortunately  Mr.  B.’s  intention  to  produce  the  impression  of  touch- 
ing the  percipient’s  hair  is  not  included  in  his  written  account.  On 
August  21st,  1385,  he  wrote  to  me,  “I  remember  that  I had  this  intention  J ’’’ 
and  I myself  remember  that,  very  soon  after  the  occurrence,  he  mentioned 
this  as  one  of  the  points  which  made  the  success  “ complete  in  every 
detail  ” ; and  that  I recommended  him  in  any  future  trial  to  endeavour 
instead  to  produce  the  impression  of  some  spoken  phrase.] 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  all  these  instances  the  conditions  were 
the  same — the  agent  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  the  object  in  view 
before  going  to  sleep.  Mr.  B.  has  never  succeeded  in  producing  a. 
similar  effect  when  he  has  been  awake.  And  this  restriction  as  to 
time  has  made  it  difficult  to  devise  a plan  by  which  the  phenomenon 
could  be  tested  by  independent  observers,  one  of  whom  might  arrange 
to  be  in  the  company  of  the  agent  at  a given  time,  and  the  other  in 
that  of  the  percipient.  Nor  is  it  easy  to  press  for  repetitions  of  the 
experiment,  which  is  not  an  agreeable  one  to  the  percipient,  and  is 
followed  by  a considerable  amount  of  nervous  prostration.  Moreover, 
if  trials  were  frequently  made  with  the  same  percipient,  the  value  of 
success  would  diminish;  for  any  latent  expectation  on  the  percipient’s 
part  might  be  argued  to  be  itself  productive  of  the  delusion,  and  the 
coincidence  with  the  agent’s  resolve  might  be  explained  as  accidental. 
We  have,  of  course,  requested  Mr.  B.  to  try  to  produce  the  effect  on 
ourselves ; but  though  he  has  more  than  once  made  the  attempt,  it 
has  not  succeeded.  We  can  therefore  only  wait,  in  the  hope  that 
time  will  bring  fresh  opportunities,  and  that  other  persons  may  be 

110 

THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

induced  to  make  the  trial.  I am  strongly  sensible  of  the  natural 
repulsion  which  descriptions  of  such  isolated  marvels  are  likely  to 
produce  in  most  educated  minds,  and  the  more  so  when  the  details  are 
of  a slightly  ludicrous  kind.  But  the  evidence  to  the  facts  is  of  such  a 
■quality  that  it  could  not  have  been  suppressed  without  doing  grave 
injustice  to  the  case  for  telepathy.1 

§ 9.  But  even  a reader'who  can  sufficiently  rely  on  our  knowledge 
of  the  witnesses  to  feel  that  the  evidence  is  important,  may  find  an 
objection  of  another  kind.  He  may  question  our  right  to  make  any 
theoretic  connection  between  the  experimental  results  before 
•discussed  and  these  last-described  cases.  I have  called  the 
phenomena  of  the  present  chapter  transitional,  and  have  pointed 
out  the  way  in  which  they  form  a bridge  from  the  experimental 
thought-transference  of  the  last  chapter  to  the  spontaneous  telepathy 
that  will  occupy  us  for  the  future.  But  it  may  seem  that  .the  line  of 
■connection  is,  after  all,  only  an  external  one ; and  that  there  is  a deep 
essential  difference — a gulf  which  cannot  be  thus  lightly  crossed — 
between  the  more  ordinary  facts  of  thought-transference  and  these 
apparitions  of  the  agent.  It  is  not  only  that  in  the  latter  the 
percipient’s  impression  has  been  of  an  external  object — of  something 
not  merely  flashed  on  the  mind,  but  independently  located  in  space  : 

1 It  is,  of  course,  of  prime  importance  in  cases  of  this  sort  to  obtain  the  direct  testimony  of 
both  the  parties  concerned.  Partly  for  the  lack  of  this,  and  partly  because  the  percipient  nad 
received  an  intimation  (though  a considerable  time  before)  that  the  experiment  was  some 
day  to  be  tried,  we  do  not  lay  stress  on  tHe  following  example.  At  the  same  time  it  is  worth 
quoting,  as  we  believe  the  narrator  (who  is  personally  known  to  the  present  writer)  to  be  a 
•careful,  as  he  is  certainly  an  honest,  witness.  Mr.  John  Moule,  of  Codicote,  Welwyn, 
Herts,  tells  us  that  as  a young  man  he  had  considerable  success  as  a mesmerist, 

“In  the  year  1855,  J felt  very  anxious  to  try  and  affect  the  most  sensitive  of  my 
mesmeric  subjects  away  from  my  house,  and  unknown  to  them.  I chose  for  this  purpose 
•a  young  lady,  a Miss  Drasey,  and  stated  that  some  day  1 intended  to  visit  her  wherever 
she  might  be,  although  the  place  might  be  unknown  to  me ; and  told  her,  if  anything 
particular  should  occur,  to  note  the  time,  and  when  she  called  at  my  house  again,  to  state 
if  anything  had  occurred.  One  day  about  two  months  after  (I  not  having  seen  her  in  the 
interval)  I was  by  myself  in  my  chemical  factory,  Redman’s  Row,  Mile  End,  London,  all 
alone,  and  I determined  to  try  the  experiment,  the  lady  being  in  Dalston,  about  three 
miles  off.  I stood  up,  raised  my  hands,  and  willed  to  act  on  the  lady.  I soon  felt  that  I 
had  expended  energy.  I immediately  sat  down  in  a chair,  and  went  to  sleep.  I then  saw 
in  a dream,  my  friend  coming  down  the  kitchen  stairs,  where  I dreamt  I was.  She  saw 
me,  and  suddenly  exclaimed,  ‘Oh!  Mr.  Moule,’  and  fainted  away.  This  I dreamt,  and 
then  awoke.  I thought  very  little  about  it,  supposing  I had  had  an  ordinary  dream ; but 
about  three  weeks  after  she  came  to  my  house,  and  mated  to  my  wife  the  singular  occur- 
rence of  her  seeing  me  sitting  in  the  kitchen,  where  she  then  was,  and  that  sh4  fainted 
away,  and  nearly  dropped  some  dishes  she  had  in  her  hands.  All  this  I saw  exactly  in 
my  dream,  so  that  I described  the  kitchen  furniture  and  where  I sat,  as  perfectly  as  if  X 
bad  been  there,  though  I had  never  been  in  the  house.  I gave  many  details,  and  she  said, 
‘It  is  just  as  if  you  had  been  there.*  After  this,  she  made  me  promise  that  1 would  never 
do  it  again,  as  she  would  never  feel  happy  with  the  idea  of  me  appearing  to  her.  Some 
time  after  this,  she  left  this  country  for  Australia  and  died  a few  years  afterwards.” 

If  this  record  is  accurate,  the  case  differs  from  those  given  in  the  text,  inasmuch  as  the 
effect  was  reciprocal , the  agent  himself  being  telepathically  impressed.  ~ 

TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

Ill 

ut] 

that  , might  be  a mere  question  of  degree.  The  more  radical 
difference  is  this — that  what  the  one  party  perceived  was  not  that 
on  which  the  mind  of  the  bther  party  had  been  concentrated.  , In 
a “tlhought-transference  ” experiment  of  the  normal  type,  the 
percipients  image  or  idea  of  a card  or  diagram  is  due  (as  we  hold) 
to  the  feet  that  the  agent  has  been  directing  his  attention  to  that 
.very  image  or  idea.  But  in  the  case  of  these  will-produced  phantasms, 
the. agent  has  not  been  picturing  his  own  visible  aspect.  So  far  as 
he  has  been  thinking  of  himself  at  all,  it  has  been  not  of  his  aspect 
particularly,  but  of  his  personality,  and  of  his  personality  in  relation 
to  the  percipient.  It  is  thus  probable  that  the  percipient's  aspect 
has  formed  a larger  part  of  the  agent’s  whole  idea  than  his  own ; yet 
it  is  his  aspect,  and  nothing  else,  that  is  telepathically  perceived. 
And  a similar  departure  from  the  normal  experimental  type  will 
meet  us  again  in  the  large  majority  of  the  spontaneous  telepathic 
cases.  In  some  of  these,  the  content  of  the  agent’s  mind,  at  the  time 
when  the  percipient  received  some  sensory  impression  of  him,  has 
been  a forcible  idea  of  the  percipient,  and  of  himself  in  relation  to 
the  percipient;  in  others,  we  shall  find  that  even  this  bond  was  lacking, 
and  that  the  percipient’s  impression  cannot  be  even  loosely  identified 
with  any  part  of  the  conscious  contents  of  the  agent’s  mind. 

These  facts  have,  no  doubt,  a very  real  theoretic  importance  : they 
reveal  an  incompleteness  in  our  transition  which  must  be  admitted 
without  reserve.  As  long  as  the  impression  in  the  percipient’s 
mind  is  merely  a reproduction  of  that  in  the  agent’s  mind,  it 
is  possible  to  conceive  some  sort  of  physical  basis  for  the  fact 
of  the  transference.  The  familiar  phenomena  of  the  transmission 
and  reception  of  vibratory  energy  are  ready  to  hand  as  analogies — 
the  effect,  for  instance,  of  a swinging  pendulum  on  another  of  equal 
length  attached  to  the  same  solid  support;  or  of  one  tuning-fork 
or  string  on  another  of  the  same  pitch ; or  of  glowing  particles 
of  a gas  on  cool  molecules  of  the  same  substance.  Still  more 
tempting  are  the  analogies  of  magnetic  and  electrical  induc- 
tion. A permanent  magnet  brought  into  a room  will  throw 
any  surrounding  iron  into  a similar  condition;  an  electric  current 
in  one  coil  of  wire  will  induce  a current  in  a neighbouring 
coil;  though  here  even  the  medium  of  communication  is  un- 
known., So  it  is  possible  to  conceive  that  vibration- wavas,  dr 
nervous  induction,  are  a means  whereby  activity  in  one  brain  may 
evoke  a kindred  activity  in  another — with,  of  course,,  a ftifriifeg 

112 

THE  TRANSITION  FROM  EXPERIMENTAL  [chap. 

correspondence  of  psychical  impressions.  Even  here,  perhaps,  the 
conception  should  rather  be  regarded  as  a metaphor  than  an 
analogy.  We  have  only  to  remember  ’that  the  effect  of  all  the 
known  physical  forces  diminishes  with  distance — whereas  we  shall 
find  reason  to  think  that,  under  appropriate  conditions,  an  idea 
may  be  telepathically  reproduced  on  the  other  side  of  the  world 
as  easily  as  on  the  other  side  of  a room.  If,  therefore,  we  use  • 
words  like  force,  impulse,  impact,  in  speaking  of  telepathic 
influences,  this  must  not  be  held  to  imply  the  faintest  suspicion 
of  what  the  force  is,  or  any  hypothesis  whatever  which  would 
co-ordinate  it  with  the  recognised  forces  of  the  material  world. 
Not  only,  as  with  other  delicate  phenomena  of  life  and  thought,  is  the 
subjective  side  of  the  problem  the  only  one  that  We  can  yet  attempt 
to  anatyse  : we  do  not  even  know  where  to  look  for  the  objective  side. 
If  there  really  is  a physical  counterpart  to  the  fact  of  transmission — 
over  and  above  the  movements  in  the  two  brains  which  are  the 
termini  of  the  transmission — that  counterpart  remains  wholly 
unknown  to  us. 

But  a much  more  serious  difficulty  in  the  way  of  any  physical 
conception  of  telepathy  presents  itself  as  soon  as  we  pass  to  the  cases 
where  the  image  actually  present  in  the  agent’s  mind  is  no  longer, 
reproduced  in  the  percipient’s.  A is  dying  at  a distance ; B sees  his 
form.  We  may  perhaps  trace  a relation  between  the  processes  in 
their  two  minds  ; but  it  certainly  does  not  amount  to  anything  like 
identity  or  distinct  parallelism.  That  being  so,  there  can  be  no  such 
simple  and  immediate  concordance  as  we  have  supposed,  between  the 
nervous  vibrations  of  their  two  brains  ; and  that  being  so,  there  is  no 
obvious  means  of  translating  into  physical  terms  the  causal  connection 
between  their  experiences.  This  difficulty  will  take  a Somewhat 
different  aspect  when  we  come  later  to  consider  the  part  which  the 
mind’s  unconscious  operations  may  bear  in  telepathic  phenomena. 
We  may  see  grounds  for  thinking  that  a considerable  community  of 
experience  (especially  in  emotional  relations)  between  two  persons  may 
involve  nervous  records  sufficiently  similar  to  retain  for  one  another 
some  sort  of  revivable  affinity,  even  when  the  experience  has  long  lost 
its  vividness  for  conscious  memory.  Meanwhile  it  is  best  to  admit 
the  difficulty  without  reserve,  and  to  state  in  the  most  explicit  way* 
that  in  the  rapprochement  between  experimental  thought-transference 
and  spontaneous  telepathic  impressions  we  are  confining  ourselves  to 
the  psychical  aspect;  we  connect  the  phenomena  as  being  in  all  cases 

iH,j  TO  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  113 

affections  of  one  mind  by  another,  occurring  otherwise  than  through 
the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  The  objector  may1  urge  that  if  we 
ha/ve  not,  we  ought  to  have,  a physical  theory  which  will  embrace  all 
thd  phenomena — that  we  ought  not  to  talk  about  a rapport  between 
A’s  mind  and  B’s  unless  we  can  establish  a bridge  between  their  two 
brains.  This  seems  rather  to  assume  that  the  standing  puzzle  of  thoi 
. relation  between  cerebral  and  psychical  events  in  the  individual,  B, 
can  only  be  stated  in  one  crude  form — viz.',  that  the  former  are  prior 
and  produce  the  latter ; and  though  for  ordinary  purposes  such  an 
expression  is  convenient,  the  convenience  has  its  dangers.  Still, 
as  the  converse  proposition — that  the  psychical  events  are  the 
prior — would  be  equally  dangerous,  a crux  remains  which  we 
cannot  evade.  Since  we  cannot  doubt  that  B’s  unwonted  experience 
has  its  appropriate  cerebral  correlate,  we  have  to  admit  that 
the  energy  of  B’s  brain  is  directed  in  a way  in  which  it  would 
not  be  -directed  but  for  something  that  has  happened  to  A.  In  this 
physical  effect  it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  an  external  physical 
antecedent  is  not  involved  ; and  the  relation  of  the  antecedent  to  the 
effect  is,  as  I have  pointed  out,  hard  to  conceive,  when  the  neural 
tremors  in  A’s  brain  are  so  unlike  the  neural  tremors  in  B’s  brain  as 
they  must  presumably  be ' when  A’s  mind  is  occupied  with  his 
immediate  surroundings,  or  with  the  idea  of  death,  and  B’s  mind  is 
occupied  with  a sudden  and  unaccountable  impression  or  vision  of  A. 

But  however  things  may  be  on  the  physical  plane,  the  facts  of 
which  we  present  evidence  are  purely  psychical  facts;  and  on  the- 
psychical  plane,  we  can  give  to  a heterogeneous  array  of  them  a certain 
orderly  coherence,  and  present  them  as  a graduated  series  of  natural 
phenomena.  Can  it  be  asserted  that  this  treatment  is  illegitimate 
unless  ,a  concurrent  physical  theory  can  also  be  put  forward  ? It  is^ 
surely  allowable  to  do  one  thing  at  a time.  There  is  an  unsolved 
mystery  in  the  background ; that  we  grant  and  remember ; but  it  need 
not  perpetually  oppress  us.  After  all,  is  there  not  that  standing 
mystery  of  the  cerebral  and  mental  correlation  in  the  individual — a 
mystery  equally  unsolved  and  perhaps  more  definitely  and  radically 
insoluble— at  the  background  of  every  fact  and  doctrine  of  the 
recognised  psychology  ? The  psychologists  work  on  as  if  it  did  not 
exist,  Or  rather  as  if  it  were  the  most  natural  and  intelligible  thing  in 
the  w^rid,  and  no  one  complains  of  them.  All  that  we  claim  is  a 
similar,  freedom. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  FOR  SPONTANEOUS 

TELEPATHY. 

§ 1.  We  have  now  to  quit  the  experimental  branch  of  our  subject. 
We  have  been  engaged,  so  far,  with  cases  of  thought-transference 
deliberately  sought  for  and  observed  within  the  four  walls  of  a room, 
both  the  agent  and  the  percipient  being  aware  of  the  object  in  view ; 
and  with  the  further  cases  where — though  the  distance  between  the 
agent  and  the  percipient  was  often  greater,  and  the  latter  had  no 
intimation  of  what  was  intended — there  was  still  a deliberate  desire 
on  the  agents  part  to  exert  a telepathic  influence,  and  a concentration 
of  his  mind  on  that  object.  For  the  remainder  of  our  course  we  shall 
be  entirely  occupied  with  cases  where  no  such  desire  or  idea  existed 
— where  the  effect  produced  on  the  percipient,  though  we  connect  it 
with  the  state  of  the  agent,  was  certainly  not  an  effect  which  he  was 
aiming  at  producing.  And  this  change  in  the  character  of  the  facts 
is  accompanied  by  a marked  change  in  the  character  of  the  evidence 
— a change  for  which  some  of  the  transitional  cases  in  the  last  chapter 
have  already  prepared  us.  Our  conclusions  will  now  have  to  be  drawn 
from  the  records  of  persons  who,  at  the  time  when  the  phenomena 
which  they  describe  took  place,  were  quite  unaware  that  thes£  would 
ever  be  used  as  evidence  for  telepathy  or  anything  else.  Nor  have 
my  colleagues  and  I any  observations  of  our  own  to  compare  with 
what  our  witnesses  tell  us : the  facts  are  known  to  us  only  through 
the  medium  of  their  report,  and  we  shall  have  to  decide  how  far  the 
medium  may  be  a distorting  one.  Our  method  of  inquiry  will  thus  be 
the  historical  method  ; and  success  will  depend  upon  the.  exercise  of  a 
wider  and  less  specialised  form  of  common-sense  than  was  required  in 
the  experimental  work.  A great  many  more  points  have  to 'be  taken 
into  account  in  weighing  human  testimony  than  in  arranging  the 
conditions  of  a crucial  trial  of  thought-transference.  There,  one 
precise  and  simple  form  of  danger  had  to  be  guarded  against^ — the 

IV,}  EVIDENCE  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  115 

possibility  of  conscious  or  unconscious  physical,  signs:  here,  dangers 
multiform  and  indeterminate  will  have  to  be  allowed  for.  We  shall 
be  brought  face  to  face  with  questions  of  character,  of  the  general 
behaviour  of  human  beings  in  various  circumstances,  and  of  the 
unconscious  workings  of  the  human  mind ; and  a quite  different  sort 
of  logic  must  come  into  play,  involving  often  a very  complex 
estimate  of  probabilities. 

So  all-important  is  it  for  our  purpose  to  form  a correct  judgment 
as  to  the  possible  sources  of  error  in  this  new  department  of  evidence* 
that  I have  thought  it  best  to  devote  the  present  chapter  entirely  to 
that  subject. 

§ 2.  First,  then,’ to  face  the  most  general  objection  of  all.  This  may 
perhaps  be  stated  as  follows.  All  manner  of  false  beliefs  have  in  their 
day  been  able  to  muster  a considerable  amount  of  evidence  in  their 
support,  much  of  which  was  certainly  not  consciously  fraudulent. 
The  form  of  superstition  varies  with  the  religious  and  educational 
conditions  of  the  time ; but  within  certain  limits  a diligent  collector 
will  be  able  to  obtain  evidence  for  pretty  well  anything  that  he 
chooses.  There  is,  of  course,  a line — and  every  age  will  have  its  own 
line — beyond  which  it  would  be  impossible  for  anyone  who  wished  to 
be  thought  sane  and  educated  to  go ; for  instance,  it  would  be  impossible* 
in  the  present  day  to  obtain  anything  like  respectable  contemporary 
testimony  for  the  transformation  of  old  women  into  hares  and  cats. 
But  short  of  this  line  there  is  always  a range  of  ideas  and  beliefs  as  to 
which  opinion  is  divided — which  it  is  perfectly  allowable  to  repudiate, 
and  which  science  may  treat  with  scorn,  but  which  it  is  not  a sign  of 
abnormal  ignorance  or  stupidity  to  entertain.  And  within  this  range, 
evidence'  and  even  educated  evidence,  for  the  beliefs  will  pretty 
certainly  be  forthcoming.  For  however  much  advancing  knowledge 
may  have  limited  the  field  of  superstition,  the  fund  of  possibilities  in 
the  way  of  mal-observation,  misinterpretation,  and  exaggeration  of 
facts  is  still  practically  inexhaustible  ; and  with  such  a fund  to  draw 
on,‘  the1  belief,  or  the  mere  desire  or  tendency  to  believe,  in  any 
particular  order  of  phenomena  is  sure,  now  and  again,  to  light  on  facts 
which  can  be  made  to  yield  the  semblance  of  a proof. 

Now,  though  it  is  difficult  to  deny  the  force  of  this  argument  when 
stated  in  general  terms,  I think  that  it  can  be  shown  not  seriously 
to  invalidate  the  evidence  which  is  here  relied  on  as  proof  of  the 
reality  ofv  spontaneous  telepathy.  For  the  sake  of  comparison  it  will 

i 2 

116 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

t>e  worth  while  to  glance  at  the  most  striking  example  that  modern 
times  supply  of  the  support  of  false  beliefs  by  a large  array  of 
contemporary  evidence — the  case  of  witchcraft. 

We  may  begin  by  excluding  the  enormous  amount  of  the  witch- 
evidence  which  consisted  in  confessions  extracted  by  torture,  terror,  or 
false  promises — “ the  casting  evidence  in  most  tryals,”  as  Hutchinson 
says ; and  also  the  large  class  of  cases  where  the  actual  facts  attested 
would  not  be  disputed  ; — as  where  a woman  was  condemned  because 
a child  who  had  been  with  her  hung  its  head  on  its  return  home,  and 
rolled  over  in  its  cradle  in  the  evening;  or  because  a good  many 
people  or  cattle  had  fallen  sick  in  her  village ; or  because  she  kept  a 
tamo  frog,  presumed  to  be  her  “imp  ” ; or  because  on  the  very  day 
that  she  had  scolded  a carter  whose  cart  knocked  up  against  her 
house,  the  self-same  cart  stuck  in  a gate,  and  the  men  who  should 
have  emptied  it  at  night  felt  too  tired  to  do  so.1  Putting  these  cases 
aside  as  irrelevant,  anyone  who  looks  carefully  into  the  remaining 
records  will  find  (1)  that  the  actual  testimony  on  which  the  alleged1 
facts  were  believed  came  exclusively  from  the  uneducated  classes; 
and  (2)  that  the  easy  acceptance  of  this  evidence  ,by  better  educated 
persons  was  due  to  the  ignorance  which  was  at  that  time  all  but 
universal  respecting  several  great  departments  of  natural  phenomena 
— those  of  hallucination,  trance,  hysteria,  and  mesmerism.  This 
ignorance  took  effect  in  the  following  way — that  every  piece  of  evidence 
to  marvellous  facts  was  perforce  regarded  as  presenting  one  simple 
alternative : — either  the  facts  happened  as  alleged ; or  the  witnesses 
must  be  practising  deliberate  fraud.  The  latter  hypothesis  was,  of 
course,  an  easy  one  enough  to  make  in  respect  of  this  or  that 
individual  case,  and  was  supported  by  indisputable  examples ; but  it 
could  not  long  be  applied  in  any  wholesale  manner.  The 'previous 
character  of  many  of  the  persons  involved,  the  aimlessness  of  sUeh  a 
fraud,  the  vast  scale  of  the  conspiracy  which  would  have  had  to  be 
organised  in  order  to  impose  it  on  the  world,  and  above  all  the  fact 
that  many  of  the  witnesses  brought  on  themselves  nothing  but  oppro- 
brium and  persecution  by  their  statements,  made  it  practically,  impos- 
sible to  doubt  that  the  testimony  was  on  the  whole  honestly  given. 
Fraud,  then,  being  excluded,  there  remained  nothing  but  to  believe 

1 Lilienthal,  Die  Hexenprocme  der  bciden  Sttidte  Braunsberg  (Konigsberg,  18Q1),  p.  162 ; 
A Detection  of  Chelmsford  Witches  (London,  1579) ; Malleus  Maleficai*um  (Lyons,  1620), 
VoL  i.,  p.  242 ; Mtiller,  Beitrage  xur  Qeschichte  des  Hexenglauhem  (Brunswick*  1654), 
p.  35,  &c. ; Ady,  Candle  in  the  Dark  (London,  1656),  p,  135 ; Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay 
Consenting  Witchcraft  (London,  1720),  p.  147. 

V.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.,  117 

the  facts  genuine.  Sane  men  and  women  spoke*  with  obvious  sincerity 
<*f  what  they  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes ; how  could  such  a proof 
lie  gainsaid  ? This  is  a point  which  Glanvil  and  other  writers  of  the 
1?itch-epoch  are  for  ever  urging ; if  wo  reject  these  facts,  they  argue. 
We  must  reject  all  beliefs  that  have  their  basis  in  human  testimony. 

'}  Happily  we'  have  now  a totally  different  means  of  escaping  from 
the  dilemma.  We  know  now  that  subjective  hallucinations  may 
possess  the  very  fullest  sensory  character,*  and  may  bo  as  real  to  the 
percipient  as  any  object  he  ever  beheld.  I have  myself  heard  an 
epileptic  subject,  who  was  perfectly  sane  and  rational  in  his  general 
oonduct,  describe 'a  series  of  interviews  that  he  had  had  with  the  devil, 
with  a precision,  and  an  absolute  belief  in  the  evidence  of  his 
senses,  equal  to  anything  that  I ever  read  in  the  records  of  the 
witches’  compacts.  And  further,  we  know  now  that  there  is  a condi- 
tion, capable  often  of  being  induced  in  uneducated  and  simple  persons 
with  extreme  ease,  in  which  any  idea  that  is  suggested  may  qjb  once 
•take  sensory  form,  and  be  projected  as  an  actual  hallucination.  To 
those  who  have  seen  robust  young  men,  in  an  early  stage  of  hypnotic 
trance,  staring  with  horror  at  a figure  which  appears  to  them  to  be 
walking  on  the  ceiling,  of  giving  way  to  strange  convulsions  under  the 
impression  that  they  have  been  changed  into  birds  or  snakes,  there  will 
be  nothing  very  surprising  in  the  belief  of  hysterical  girls  that  they 
were  possessed  by  some  alien  influence,  or  that  their  distant  perse- 
cutor was  actually  present  to  their  senses.  It  is  true  that  in 
hypnotic  experiments  there  is  commonly  some  preliminary  process 
by  which  the  peculiar  condition  is  induced,  and  that  the  idea  which 
originated  the  delusion  has  then  to  be  suggested  ab  extra.  But  with 
sensitive  “subjects”  who  have  been  much  under  any  particular 
influence,  a mere  word  will  produce  the  effect ; nor  is  there  any  feature 
id  the  evidence  for  witchcraft  that  more  constantly  recurs  than  the 
touching  of  the  victim  by  the  witch.1  Moreover,  no  hard  and  fast  line 
exists  between  the  delusions  of  induced  hypnotism  and  those  of 
spontaneous  trance,  or  of  the  grave  hystero-epileptic  crises  which  mere 
terror  is  now  known  to  develop.  And  association  between  persons 
who  were  possessed  with  certain  exciting  ideas  would  readily  account 
for  the  generation  of  a mutually  contagious  influence ; as  in  cases 

where  magic  rites  were  performed  by  several  persons  in  company ; or 

\ 

> \ 

1 Tims/ in  a case  mentioned  by  De  l’Ancre,  in  the  Tableau  da  VIneonstanee  de* 
mauvais  Anges  et  Demons  (Paris,  16X2)  p.  115,  all  the  children  who  believed  themselves 
to  have  been  taken  to  a “Sabbath,”  stated  that  the  witch  had  passed  her  hand  over  their 
faces,  or  placed  it  on  their  heads. 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [char/ 

118 

where  a whole  household  or  community  was  affected  with  some 
particular  delusion. 1 

The  above  seems  a sufficient  explanation  of  the  testimony  which 
to  the  eyes  of  contemporaries  appeared  the  strongest — the  testimony 
of  “ possessed  ” persons,  and  of  the  professed  participators  in  the  in- 
cantation-scenes and  nocturnal  orgies.  As  regards  the  alleged 
statements  of  independent  persons  who  testified  to  having  witnessed 
the  aerial  rides,  transformations  into  animal  forms,  and  such-like 
marvels,  I would  remark  in  the  first  place  that  the  literature  of 
witchcraft  may  be  searched  far  and  wide  without  encountering 
half-a-dozen  first-hand  statements  of  the  sort;2  and  in  the 
second  place,  that  there  is  a characteristic  of  uneducated  minds 
which  is  only  exceptionally  observed  in  educated  adults — the 
tendency  to  confound  mental  images,  pure  and  simple,  with 
matters  of  fact.  This  tendency  naturally  allies  itself  with  any  set 
of  images  which  is  prominent  in  the  beliefs  of  the  time ; and  it  is 
certain  now  and  then  to  give  to  what  are  merely  vivid  ideas  the* 
character  of  bond  fide  memories.  The  imagination  which  may  be 
unable  to  produce,  even  in  feeble-minded  persons,  the  belief  that 
they  see  things  that  are  not  there,  may  be  quite  able  to  produce 
the  belief  that  they  have  seen  them — which  is  all,  of  course,  that 
their  testimony  implies. 3 

There  is,  however,  one  small  class  of  phenomena  connected  with 
witchcraft  which  stands  on  different  ground,  as  regards  the  quality  of 

1 A True  and  Just  Record  of  the  Information  taken  at  St.  Oseyt  in  Essex  (London,  1582); 
Potts,  Wonderfull  Disco  ceric  of  Witches  in  the  Gountie  of  Lancaster',  Ac.  (London,  1613); 
the  case  of  the  Flowers  in  A Collection  of  Rare  and  Curious  Tracts  relating  to  Witchcraft 
between  the  Years  JGIS  and  ICG//,  pp.  19,  21 ; (llanvil,  Sadducismus  Triumphatns,  p. 
$81 ; Hutchinson,  Op.  cit.,  i>.  53;  Durbin,  A Narrative  of  Some  Extraordinary  Things 
(Bristol,  1800),  p.  47  ; Horst,  Zonber-Bibliothck , p.  219;  Madden,  Phantaswriata,  Vol.  i., 
pp.  346-7 ; T.  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts  Bay  (Boston,  1692),  Vol.<*  ii.,  p.  18  ; 
Riche t,  V Homme  et  V Intelligence  (Paris,  1884),  p.  392. 

* If  “ first-hand  ” be  restricted  (as  it  is  throughout  this  book)  to  statements  in  the 
witness’s  own  words,  1 cannot  point  to  a single  such  statement ; but  in  the  above 
phrase  I mean  merely  the  author’s  statement  of  what  was  told  directly  to  himself. 
The  circumstantial  evidence  (also  very  meagre)  for  these  miracles  stands  on  different 
ground ; as  there  the  facts  recorded  are  quite  credible,  and  only  the  inference  need 
be  rejected.  For  example,  the  external  evidence  relied  on  for  the  supposed  transformations 
was  usually  that  the  accused  proved  to  have  some  bodily  hurt  on  the  same  day  as  a wolf 
or  some  other  animal  had  been  wounded. 

3 Another  explanation  might  be  attempted,  if  (on  the  analogy  of  certain  Indian  ' 
juggling  tricks)  we  could  suppose  the  spectator  to  have  been  unawares  subjected  to  a 
mesmeric  glamour,”  whereby  the  suggestion  of  the  magical  occurrence  was  enabled  to 
develop  in  his  mind  into  an  actual  vision  of  it.  One  story  in  the  Malleus  MaUficamm , 
where  a girl  appeared  to  herself  and  to  her  friends  to  be  a mare,  while  a priest  (over  whom 
the  evil  influence  had  no  power)  saw  her  as  a girl,  strongly  recalls  some  of  the  Indian 
stories.  See  also  tho  curious  account  of  imps  which  appears  in  Witches  of  Huntingdon, 
Renfrew,  and  Essex  (London,  1646).  Such  a result  would,  however,  enormously  trans- 
cend the  range  of  mesmeric  influence  as  so  far  recognised  in  the  West ; and  we  certainly 
need  not  strain  hypotheses  to  save  the  credit  of  writers  like  Sprenger. 

IV.] 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY, i- 

llfr 

the  evidence  adduced  for  it.  A few  cases  are  recorded,  on  really 
respectable  authority,  of  a remarkable  susceptibility,  shown  by 
persons  whom  we  might  now  recognise  as  hypnotic  “ subjects,”  to  the 
conscious  or  unconscious  influence  of  some  absent  person  supposed 
to  be  a witch ; and  perhaps  also  of  abnormal  powers  of  discernment 
on  the  part  of  the  supposed  witches  themselves.  These  alleged 
telepathic  cases  naturally  fell  into  discredit  along  with  all  the  other 
phenomena  of  occult  agency.  For  the*  belief  in  witchcraft  faded 
and  ultimately  died  as  a whole  ; not  because  each  sort  of  phenomenon 
was  in  turn  exposed  or  explained,  or  because  any  critical  account 
of  hallucinations  and  popular  delusions  was  forthcoming,  or  even 
because  a certain'  amount  of  distinct  fraud  was  proved,  but  because 
the  general  tide  of  uncritical  opinion  took  a turn  towards  scepticism 
as  to  matters  supernatural.  Now  we  are  certainly  not  concerned 
to  maintain  that  this  or  that  instance  of  alleged  telepathic  influence 
ought  to  have  been  allowed  to  stand  as  genuine,  when  belief  in 
• the  more  fantastic  phenomena  was  undermined.  It  is  probable 
that  in  the  former,  as  in  the  latter,  the  influence  of  imagination 
was  not  allowed  for,  and  that  the  different  items  of  evidence 
were  never  tested  and  compared  in  the  manner  that  true 
scientific  scepticism  would  dictate.  We,  at  any  rate,  have  difficulty 
enough  in  testing  the  accuracy  of  contemporary  evidence,  and 
certainly  are  not  going  to  rest  any  part  of  our  case  on  the  records 
of  a by-gone  age.  But  if  anyone  who  has  studied  the  evidence  for 
witchcraft  urges  these  cases  as  a proof  that  the  more  recent  telepathic 
evidence  is  unworthy  of  attention,  it  is  reasonable  to  remark  that  if 
telepathy  is  in  operation  now,  it  was  probably  in  operation  then; 
and  that  the  only  cases  of  supposed  magic  with  which  persons  of  sense 
and  education  seem,  at  the  time,  to  have  come  to  close  quarters  were 
similar  in  character  to  cases  for  which  persons  of  sense  and  education, 
are  still  found  to  offer  their  personal  testimony.1 

1 Of  the  early  records  the  best  known  is  the  evidence  of  the  Pfcre  Surin  and  others  in 
respect  of  the  hysterical  epidemic  in  the  Ursuline  convent  at  Loudun,  in  1633.  But 
perhaps  the  most  carefully  observed  case  is  the  older  one  given  in  the  Most  Strange  and 
Admirable  Discovery  of  the  Three  Witches  of  Warboys  (London,  1503),  of  which  Sir  W. 
Scott’s  account  ( Demonology  and  Witchcraft , p.  238)  gives  a very  imperfect  idea.  Another 
example  of  much  the  same  kind  is  given  in  G.  More’s  True  Discourse  against  S, 
Harsnet  (London,  1600).  The  cases  where  the  victim  showed  uneasiness  when  the 
absent  witch  was  at  large,  and  relief  when  she  was  bolted,  though  quite  inconclusive, 
seem  occasionally  to  have  been  rationally  tested.  ( Witchcraft  further  Displayed , 
London,  1712,  p.  21 ; History  of  the  Witches  of  Renfrewshire , Paisley,  1809,  p.  184  : 
Radducismus  Debellatus,  London,  1698,  p.  47. ) The  assertions  that  “possessed  persons’9 
were  able  to  read  secrets,  present  sometimes  this  sign  of  sobriety,  that  the  revelations  ar 
said  to  have  concerned  only  past  and  present,  not  future,  things  (see,  e.g.,  Lercheimer, 
Ein  Christlich  Redenken  und  Erinnerang  von  Zaubcrei,  Heidelberg,  1685 ; and  Majolus,  Dies 
Caniculares,  Mainz,  1614,  p.  593) ; but  as  such  a power  finds  no  parallel  in  the  telepathy  of 

120  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

But  in  whatever  light  these  residual  cases  be  regarded,  the  general 
conclusion  remains  the  same — that  the  phenomena  which  were 
characteristic  of  witchcraft,  and  which  are  an  accepted  type  of 
exploded  superstitions,  never  rested  on  the  first-hand  testimony  of, 
educated  and  intelligent  persons ; and  the  sweeping  assertion  which 
is  often  made  that  such  persons  were,  in  their  day,  witnesses  to  the 
truth  of  these  absurdities  needs,  therefore,  to  be  carefully  .guarded. 
What  the  educated  and  intelligent  believers  did  was  to  accept  from 
others,  as  evidence  of  objective  facts,  statements  which  were  really  only, 
evidence  of  subjective  facts.  And  they  did  this  naturally  and  excusably, 
because  they  lived  at  a time  when  the  science  of  psychology  was  in  its, 
infancy,  and  the  necessary  means  of  correction  were  not  within  their 
reach.1 

One  further  criticism  may  be  madu  as  to  the  mental  condition  of 
those  who  were  in  any  direct  sense  witnesses  to  the  facts.  They  were 
invariably  persons  inclined  to  such  beliefs  to  begin  with — who  had 
been  brought  up  in  them  and  had  accepted  them  as  a matter  of 
course.  Wo  have  no  record  of  anyone  who  had  all  his  life  declined 
to  admit  the  reality  of  the  alleged  phenomena,  and  who  was  suddenly 
convinced  of  his  mistake  by  coming  into  personal  contact  with  them. 

§ 3.  We  arc  now  in  a position  to  perceive,  by  comparison,  how  the 
case  stands  with  the  evidence  for  telepathy  which  awaits  examina- 
tion. It  would  almost  be  sufficient  to  say  that  the  comparison  is 
an  absolute  contrast  in  respect  of  every  point  which  has  been 
mentioned.  A very  large  number  of  our  first-hand  witnesses  are 

our  day,  it  is  satisfactory  ratlier  than  otherwise  to  find  that  it  is  supported  by  hardly 
anything  that  can  bo  called  evidence.  The  strongest  item  is  perhaps  the  testimony  of 
Poncet  to  the  jiowers  of  some  of  the  concitlsionnaires  of  St.  M^dard  (see  Bertand,  Du 
Magn4tisme  Animal , Paris,  1826,  p.  435).  Nor  do  the  “ thought-reading  ” stories  about 
Somers  {e.g.,  in  Darrell’s  Brief  Apotogie  and  Detection , London,  1599  and  1600),  and  about 
Bscot  de  Paime  (De  l’Ancre,  Jjlncredultte  ct  Mcxcreance  du  Sortittge,  Paris.  1622)  reach 
oven  the  lowest  evidential  grade.  It  would  be  useless  to  multiply  indecisive  instances.  If 
the  least  wretchedly-attested  cases,  even  in  the  most  wretched  collections  of  witch-anec- 
dotes, turn  out  to  be  those  which  admit  of  a telepathic  explanation,  yet  much  stronger  cases 
might  well  be  damned  by  such  company.  And  though  some  of  the  less  credulous  authors, 
who  have  a real  notion  of  natural  causes  and  of  what  constitutes  proof,  seem  to  havb  felt 
the  evidence  for  supersensuous  communications  to  bo  too  strong  to  resist  (e.g.,  Cotta  in 
The  Infallible , True  and  Assured  Witch , London,  1625)  their  general  position  is  too 
wavering  for  their  authority  to  have  any  weight.  One  rises  from  their  works  feeling  that  * 
this  was  the  side  of  the  subject  which  had  produced  on  them  the  strongest  impression 
of  reality ; and  that  is  all  that  can  be  said, 

1 I am  speaking— it  must  be  remembered — of  the  attitude  of  educated  and  intelligent  - 
persons  towards  assertions  which  might  (however  loosely)  be  described  as  evidence.  That 
such  persons  often  showed  themselves  credulous  and  uninquiring  in  attaching  Value  to  - 
mere  legends  and  local  gossip  is  of  course  true  enough,  but  does  not  conoem  the  present 
argument.  For  a justification  of  the  above  remarks,  see  the  Note  on  Witchcraft  at  the  end 
of  this  chapter. 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

w.j 

educated  and  intelligent  persons,  whose  sobriety  of  judgment  has  never 
been  called  in  , question.  For  the  most  part,  moreover,  they  have 
been  in  no  way  , inclined  to  admit  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,  prior 
to  themselves  encountering  them.  By  many  of  them  even  what  they 
themselves  narrate  has  not  been  regarded  with  special  interest ; while* 
others,  who  have  been  unable  to  get  behind  their  own  experience, 
have  expressed  scepticism  as  to  the  existence  of  the  phenomena  as  a. 
class.1  The  facts  themselves  have  no  'special  affinity  with  any 
particular  form  of  faith ; they  are' not  facts  in  a belief  of  which  any 
one  is  specially  brought  up.  And  here  we  may  contrast  telepathy, 
not  only  with  the  comparatively  modem  superstition  of  witchcraft, 
but  with  phenomena  of  much  older  and  wider  acceptance — the 
alleged  apparitions  of  the  dead.  The  continued  existence  of  departed 
friends  and  relatives  has  been  one  of  the  most  constant'  elements  of 
religious . belief ; and  that  myths  should  grow  up  respecting  their 
appearances  to  survivors  is  what  might  have  naturally  been  looked 
for.  But  even  in  respect  of  the  most  striking  sort  of  phenomena  with 
which' we  shall  here  be  concerned — apparitions  at  the  time  of  death — 
we  do  not  find  in  men’s  prevalent  habits  of  thought,  at  any  stage  of 
culture,  elements  which  would  be  particularly  likely  to  produce  a 
myth  on  the  subject.  And  as  a matter  of  fact,  if  we  go  to  the  classes 
of  persons  whose  beliefs  have  no  special  relation  to  evidence,  we 
do  actually  find  the  one  myth  prevalent,  and  not  the  other.  The 
idea  of  apparitions  after  death  has  a wide  and  strong  hold  on  the 
popular  mind  ; the  idea  of  apparitions  at  the  time  either  of  death, 
or  of  serious  crises  in  life,  has  no  established  vogue.  Instances 
are,  no  doubt,  to  be  met  with  in  books  of  history,  biography, 
and  travel ; and  the  range  which  such  notices  cover  is  itself 
important,  as  showing  that  the  idea,  though  so  far  from  universally, 
prevalent,  is  for  all  that  not  in  any  sense  a speciality  of  particular  - 
times  or  localities.  But  though  numerous,  the  instances  are  sporadic  ; 
they  appear  as  isolated  marvels,  which  even  those  who  experienced 
them  regarded  as  such,  and  not  as  evidences  to  any  widely-believed, 
reality.'  So  much  is  this  the  case  that  to  many  persons  with. 

t 

. 1 It  is  amusing  sometimes  to  encounter  arbitrary  fragments  of  scepticism;  combined, 

’with  a belief  in  the  “ supernatural  ” character  of  many  of  the  coincidences  which  we  are* 
endeavouring  to  account  for  as  natural.  Thus  a gentleman  contributes  a case  to* 
Knowledge  (May  16th,  1884)  and  concludes  his  letter  thus : “Personally,  I do  not  believk 
in  apparitions,  nor  in  anything  akin  thereto ; but  coincidences  such  as  you  record  from, 
week  to  week  must  have  hapjxmed  to  most  of  us,  and  obtuse  indeed  must  the  individual 
be  who  does , not  think  that  there*  is  something  supernatural  sometimes  even  in  coin- 
cidences.” 

y&  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

•whom  we  have  conversed  on  the  subject  we  find  that  the  very 
idea  of  such  jfhenomena  is  practically  new ; and  that  “ apparitions,” 
whether  delusions  or  realities,  have  always  been  considered  by  them 
as  apparitions  of  the  dead.1  And  if  this  is  true  of  the  more  striking 
telepathic  cases,  d,  fortiori  is  it  true  of  the  less  striking.  The  class  of 
apparitions  and  impressions  which  have  corresponded  with  the  death  of 
the  “ agent  ” has  only  been  vaguely  recognised ; the  class  which  have 
corresponded  with  a state  of  passing  excitement  or  danger  can  hardly 
be  said  to  have  been  recognised  at  all.  Even  persons  with  whose 
general  way  of  thinking  they  might  seem  compatible  are  apt  to  be 
repelled  by  their  apparent  uselessness,  and  certainly  are  not  wont  to 
exhibit  any  d priori  belief  in  their  reality  ; while  to  others  who  have 
encountered  them,  they  have  appeared  in  the  objectionable  light  of  a 
puzzle,  without  analogies  and  without  a place  in  the  recognised  order 
of  Nature. 

But  though  I think  that  it  is  not  hard  to  distinguish  the 
evidence  on  which  we  rely  from  the  evidence  for  various  forms  of 
popular  superstition,  and  to  show  that,  as  a matter  of  fact,  telepathy  is 
rjwt  a popular  superstition,  I am  far  from  denying  a certain  degree 
of  force  to  the  line  of  objection  above  suggested.  Ignorance, 
credulity,  and  a predisposition  to  believe  in  a particular  order  of 
marvels,  are  not  the  only  sources  of  unconscious  falsification  in  human 
testimony;  and  it  by  no  means  follows,  because  these  particular 
elements  of  error  are  absent,  that  a bond  fule  first-hand  narrative  of 
contemporary  facts  is  trustworthy.  And  having  briefly  considered 
certain  dangers  and  objections  from  which  we  think  that  our  telepathic 
evidence  is  free,  I proceed  now  to  consider  certain  others  to  which  it 
is  to  a certain  extent  exposed,  and  to  explain  the  means  by  which  we 
have  endeavoured  to  obviate  or  reduce  them. 

1 Next  to  these,  the  best-recognised  class  are  undoubtedly  the  premonitory  apparitions 
of  “second  sight.” 

Since  the  above  remarks  were  written,  T am  glad  to  find  them  implicitly  confirmed  by 
ti  very  high  authority  on  myth  and  folk-lore,  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.  In  the  Nineteenth 
Century  for  April,  1885,  he  showed  very  clearly  and  amusingly  how  the  same  types  of 
ghost-story  ” are  found  in  the  most  distant  places,  and  in  the  most  diverse  stages  of 
culture — whether  owing  to  some  common  basis  of  fact,  or  to  the  same  pervading  love  of 
the  mysterious,  or  (as  is  sometimes  undoubtedly  the  case)  to  the  survival  of  remnants 
•of  primitive  superstitions  in  the  midst  of  an  advancing  civilisation.  But  though  most  of 
his  instances  are  drawn  from  barbarous  countries,  he  “ has  not  encountered,  among 
■savages,  more  than  one  example  ” pointing  to  a belief  in  what  we  call  telepathic  impres- 
sions ; and  even  that  one  is  a very  doubtful  example.  There  is,  as  I have  said,  a certain 
.amount  of  sporadic  evidence  that  the  phenomena  have  been  noticed  at  many  • different 
times  and  places ; but  of  any  i>ervading  belief,  such  as  would  cause  people  to  be  on  the 
<qui  vive  for  them  and  would  ensure  a perpetual  supply  of  spurious  evidence,  neither  we  nor 
apparently  Mr.  Lang  can  find  any  indication  whatever. 

133 

tv.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

§ 4.  It  will  be  best  to  enumerate,  one  by  one,  the  general  sources 
of  error;which  may  affect  the  testimony  of  honest  and  fairly-educated 
persons,  to  events  that  are  both  unusual  and  of  a sort  unrecognised 
by  contemporary  science.  We  shall  thus  be  able  to  observe  in 
detail  how  far  each  is  likely  to  have  affected  the  evidence  here 
brought  forward. 

. The  most  obvious  danger  may  seem  to  lie  in  errors  of  observation 
and  inference.  And  first  as  to  errors  of  observation.  The  phenomena 
with  which  these  have  to  do  are  naturally  objective  phenomena.  It 
is  only  in  reference  to  the  objective  world  that  observation  can  be 
proved  to  be  accurate  or  faulty;  the  faulty  observation  is  that 
which  interprets  real  things  in  a way  that  does  not  correspond  with 
reality.  Now  misinterpretation  of  this  sort  may  undoubtedly  produce 
spurious  telepathic  cases ; and  wherever  we  can  suppose  it  to  have 
been  possible,  we  are  bound  to  exclude  the  case  from  our  evidence. 
Thus  we  have  a group  of  narratives  of  the  following  type,  in  which 
it  is  possible  to  suppose  a mistake  of  identity. 

Mrs.  Campbell,  of  Dunstaffnage,  Oban,  wrote,  in  June,  1884 : — 

“ Two  years  ago  one  of  our  tenant  farmers  was  very  ill,  and  my  brother 
asked  me  to  inquire  how  he  was,  on  my  way  back  from  a walk  I was  going 
to  take  with  a cousin  of  mine.  W e went,  but  on  passing  the  old  man’s 
house  I forgot  to  go  in,  and  soon  we  arrived  at  our  avenue,  when  my 
cousin  reminded  me  of  not  having  asked  for  the  sick  man.  I thought  of 
returning,  when  I distinctly  saw  the  old  man,  followed  by  his  favourite 
dog,  cross  a field  in  front  of  us,  and  go  into  his  house,  and  I remarked  to 
my  cousin,-  who  also  had  seen  the  old  man  and  his  dog,  that  as  he  was  so 
well  that  he  was  able  to  walk  about,  there  was  not  much  use  in  going  to 
inquire  for  him,  so  we  went  on  home.  Hut  on  arriving  there,  my  brother 
came  to  tell  us  that  the  old  man’s  son  had  just  been  to  say  that  his  father 
had  just  died.” 

Here  it  is  possible,  and  therefore  for  evidential  purposes  necessary, 
to  assume  that  the  figure  seen  was  a neighbour,  or  perhaps  the  old 
man’s  son.1  The  next  incident,  given  in  the  words  of  Mrs.  Saxby, 
of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon,  was  narrated  to  her  and  other  friends 
by  the  late  Rev.  G.  Ridout,  Yicar  of  Newland,  Gloucestershire,  on. 
whom  it  had  made  a very  serious  impression. 

“ My  sister  and  I were  left  orphans  when  we  were  extremely  young. 
We  were  very  fond  of  each  other.  When  I was  nearly  grown  up,  I was 
sent  to  Magdalen  College,  Oxford.  While  there,  one  day  when  I was 

• ' 

1 I may  say  here,  once  for  all,  that  our  gratitude  to  an  informant  is  none  the  less 
because  his  or  her  experience  may  not  have  appeared  relevant  to  the  direct  argument  of 
this  book.  Such  cases  have  often  been  very  useful  and  instructive  in  other  ways. 

124  v GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap, 

walking  in  the  cloisters,  I saw  my  sister  walking  before  me,  dressed  in- 
white.  I knew  that  she  was  not  staying  in  Oxford,  and  I was  much 
Surprised  at  seeing  her  there — but  I had  no  doubt  whatever  th&t  it  was 
my  sister.  She  passed  along  the  cloister  before  me,  I following' dose 
behind  her  till  she  turned  the  first  angle.  To  my  surprise,  when  I reached 
the  same  place,  instead  of  seeing  her  before  me,  she  was  gone. 
Immediately  the  conviction  that  she  was  dead  seized  me,  and  I felt 
myself  strengthened  to  receive  the  tidings  of  her  death,  which  reached  me 
next  day.” 

The  disappearance  here  seems  to  have  been  strangely  sudden ; 
but  we  have  not  been  able  to  cross-examine  the  witness ; and  one 
knows  that  people  of  flesh  and  blood  do  sometimes  get  out  of  sight 
round  comers  in  odd  ways.  Again,  the  Rev.  C.  Woodcock,  Rector  of 
All  Saints’,  Axminster,  writes : — 

“January  8th,  1884. 

“ The  following  fact  was  often  narrated  in  my  presence  by  my  father, 
who  has  been  dead  upwards  of  thirty  years.  He  was  once  invited,  when 
a young  man,  to  breakfast  on  the  ground-floor  at  St.  James’s  Palace,  to 
meet  a particular  friend.  He  was  punctual  to  the  appointed  hour  ; but 
not  so  the  expected  guest.  The  hour  had  struck,  but  neither  party  present 
was  willing  to  sit  down  without  the  mutual  friend.  They  had  not  long  to 
wait  for  seeming  satisfaction,  for  as  each  stood  at  a window  opposite  the 
thoroughfare  to  the  park,  both  exclaimed  at  the  same  moment,  ‘ Oh  1 
there  he  is,’  and  the  host,  so  fully  satisfied  in  his  ocular  assurance,,  went 
to  the  door  on  the  other  side  of  the  house,  to  welcome  his  friend,  instead 
of  waiting  for  his  announcement.  He  stood  there  in  vain ; the  friend 
never  appeared,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all  present ; for  two  persons 
standing  at  different  windows  agreed  that  they  saw  him  pass  at  the 
identical  moment.  Within  an  hour,  a man-servant  appeared  to  announce 
that  his  master,  the  expected  guest,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  that 
morning.  My  father  was  a member  of  the  Madras  C.  S. ; the  name  of  his 
host  I forget.” 

Here  the  eyes  of  two  persons  were  concerned ; but  they  were  in  an 
expectant  state  of  mind,  which  is  eminently  favourable  to  such 
mistakes.  In  another  case,  two  gentlemen  crossed  Piccadilly  under 
the  impression  that  they  saw  a friend,  who,  as  it  turned  out,  died  in 
India  on  that  day.  But  it  is  needless  to  multiply  instances  ; in  all  of 
them  the  figure  seen  has  been  out  of  doors,  and  at  some  yards’  distance ; 
and  these  being  the  very  circumstances  in  which  we  know  that' 
spurious  recognitions  often  take  place,  there  is  nothing  surprising,  in 
an  occasional  coincidence  of  the  sort  described.  Similarly,  a person 
may  hear  a call,  perhaps  of  his  own  Christian  name,  outside  'his 
bouse,  and  may  mistake  the  voice  for  that  of  a friend ; and,  " in- due 
course,”  as  our  informants  sometimes  say,  the  news  of  that  friend’s 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY > 

129 

iy.) 

4eath  may  arrive.1 * *  But  it  is  only  'to  an  inconsiderable  fraction  of 
the  evidence  here  presented  that  such  explanations  could  by  any 
^possibility  be  applied.  The  large  majority  of  the  alleged  experiences 
are,  on  the  face  of  them,  subjective  phenomena,  in  the  sense  that  they 
S^re  independent  of  any  real  objects  in  the  environment,  and  of  any 
mistakes  possible  in  connection  with  such  objects,  and  are  due  to  a 
peculiar  affection  of  the  percipient’s  own  mind.  This  mode  of 
Regarding  them  (and  the  reservations  with  which  the  word 
subjective  ” must  be  used)  will  be  fully  explained  in  the  sequel.  It 
is  enotigh  for  the  present  to  note  that  the  witness  who  would  be  an 
unsafe  authority  if  he  said  “ Sea-serpents  exist,”  may  be  a safe 
authority  if  he  says,  “ I saw  what  appeared  to  be  a sea-serpent  ” ; and 
this  amount  of  assertion  is  all  that  the  telepathic  evidence  involves. 
All  the  accuracy  of  observation  required  of  the  witness  has  to  do  with 
what  he  seemed  to  himself  to  see,  or  to  hear,  or  to  feel. 

Nor  in  our  cases  is  the  danger  of  errors  of  inference  so  serious  as 
might  be  imagined.  A man  may , no  doubt,  see  something 
odd  or  indefinite,  at  the  time  that  his  mother  dies  at  a distance,  and 
may  infer  that  it  bodes  calamity ; and  if,  after  he  hears  of  the  death, 
he  infers  and  reports  that  he  saw  his  mother’s  form,  the  error  will  be 
a very  grave  one.  But  it  will  be  more  convenient  to  treat 
retrospective  mistakes  of  this  sort  under  the  head  of  errors  of  memory. 
And  with  a percipient’s  interpretation  of  his  impression  at  the 
'i moment  we  have  really  very  little  concern.  He  may  see  the 
apparition  of  a relative  in  his  room,  and  infer  first  that  it  is  the 
relative’s  real  figure  in  flesh  and  blood,  and  next  that  it  is  the 
relative’s  spirit.  Neither  inference  has  any  relation  to  our  argument. 

1 Thp  following  example  has  a comic  as  well  as  a tragic  side.  A gentleman,  with 
whom  the  present  writer  is  well  acquainted,  had  attained  some  skill  in  ‘ 4 ventriloquism,” 
and  qsed  occasionally  to  amuse  himself  by  mystifying  his  friends.  He  was  one  day  idly 
swinging  on  a trapeze  in  the  Ramsgate  Gymnasium,  and  was  chatting  with  the  wife  and 
daughter  of  Mr.  R.,  the  manager  of  the  place,  who  were  at  a window  above  him. 

b (i  It  occurred  to  me  to  put  my  powers  into  practice  for  the  benefit  of  everybody,  so  I 
delivered  myself  of  a long,  low  wail,  carefully  muffled  and  made  distant,  so  as  to  resemble 
a cry  from  the  rocks  on  tne  seashore  below.  Without  really  thinking  much  of  what  I waft 
doing,  I amused  myself  for  about  a minute  by  producing  * Oh’s  ! * Suddenly  there  was  a 
disturbance  above,  Mr.  R.  rushed  upstairs,  and  I saw  his  wife  hurried  off  by  her  family  in. 
a state  of  collapse.  I supposed  she  had  been  taken  ill,  and  thought  no  more  of  the 
matter. 

“ I did  not  attend  the  gymnasium  for  the  next  few  days ; but  a friend  who  did  learnt 
what  the  mystery  was.  It  appears  that  Mrs.  R.,  who  had  several  sons  abroad,  had 
received,  at  one  time  or  another,  what  you  call  ‘ telepathic  ’ indications  of  any  illness  or 
death  happening  to  any  of  them.  My  imitation  of  a distant  person  in  distress  had  been 
heard  ana, regarded  by  her  as  one  of  these  telepathic  messages,  and  implanted  in  her  mind 
the  belief  that  a son,  who  was  abroad,  and  from  whom  they  had  not  heard  for  some  time, 

had  at  that  Moment  died.  So  convinced  was  she  that  the  voice  she  heard  was  that  of  her 
dying  son,  that  she  refused  to  listen  to  any  comf ortings,  and  gave  herself  up  to  despair*  She 
- did  nob  recover  from  the  shock  for  upwards  of  three  weeks,  and  never  quite  forgave  toe. 

126  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

The  only  fact  that  concerns  us  is 'the  fact  that  he  had  the  subjective 
impression  of  seeing  his  relative.  I may  refer  once  more,  by  way  of 
contrast,  to  the  case  of  witchcraft,  where  the  very  basis  of  the 
superstition  was  error  of  inference, — error  shown  (and  by  the  more 
intelligent  class  exclusively  shown)  not  in  the  giving  but  in  the 
interpreting  of  testimony. 

§ 5.  The  tendencies  to  error  which  more  vitally  concern  us 
fall  broadly  into  two  classes — tendencies  to  error  m 'narration, 
and  tendencies  to  error  of  memory.  Let  us  ask,  then,  what 
are  the  various  conscious  or  unconscious  motives  which  may  cause 
persons  who  belong  to  the  educated  class,  and  who  have  a general 
.character  for  truthfulness,  to  narrate  experiences  of  telepathic 
impressions  in  a manner  which  is  not  strictly  accurate. 

One  motive  which  has  undoubtedly  to  be  allowed  for  in  some  cases 
is  the  desire  to  make  the  account  edifying.  This  danger  naturally 
attaches  to  the  evidence  for  any  class  of  facts  which  can  be  regarded, 
however  erroneously,  as  transcending  natural  law.  Enthusiastic 
persons  will  value  an  unusual  occurrence,  not  for  its  intrinsic  interest, 
but  for  its  tendency,  if  accepted,  to  convert  others  to  their  own  way  of 
belief ; and  they  will  be  apt  to  shape  and  colour  their  account  of  it  with 
a view  to  the  desired  effect.  Intent  on  pointing  the  moral,  they  will 
unconsciously  adorn  the  tale.  This  source  of  error  is  one  which  it  • 
is  specially  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  where  some  particular  type  of 
story  is  connected  with  a particular  religious  sect.  The  literature  of 
the  Society  of  Friends,  for  instance,  is  remarkably  rich  in  accounts 
of  providential  monitions  and  premonitions ; and*  it  supplies  also 
a considerable  number  of  telepathic  cases.  But  we  have  already 
seen  that  telepathy  does  not  specially  lend  itself  to  the  support  of 
definite  articles  of  faith.  Nor  is  any  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to 
study  our  evidence  likely  to  maintain  that  errors  of  narration  have 
largely  entered  into  it  under  the  influence  of  a propagandist  zeal  It 
is  rather  for  the  sake  of  completeness  than  on  account  of  its  practical 
importance  that  such  a possibility  has  been  mentioned.1 

1 Curiously  enough,  the  only  socially  “edifying”  incident  which  has  reached  us  on 
what  seemed  good  authority,  turns  out  to  lie  quite  inadmissible  as  evidence.  The  account 
was  received  from  the  Rev.  G.  B.  Simeon,  of  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Gainsborough,  of  whose 
•accuracy  we  feel  no  doubt.  He  says : — 

,, t . „ , , . “January  10th,  1884. 

W hen  I was  in  Oxford,  a story  was  going  about  to  the  effect  that  Dr.  Ptwey  had 

Sr1  af>l,ai'\t'(in »'»  High  Street,  and  I undertook  to  ask  him  whether  it  was  true.  He 
aa  )ut  t“at  G*e  report  was  probably  founded  on  the  following  truth : — 

Two  clergymen,  A and  B,  well  known  to  himself  and  very  great  friends,  were 
together  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Oxford.  One  of  them,  B,  went  away  on  a visit.  The  ■ 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

127 

«T.] 

, A faP  more  frequent  and  effective  source  of  error  in  narration  is  the 
tendency  to  make  the  account  graphic  and  picturesque.  Among" 
human  beings,  the  motives  which  prompt  narration  of  matters 
unconnected  with  business  or  the  mere  machinery  of  life  are  mainly 
two, — a desire  to  interest  one’s  auditor ; and  a desire  to  put  oneself 
en  evidence,  to  feed  one’s  own  self-esteem  by  attracting  and  retaining- 
the  attention  of  others.  The  influence  of  each  of  these  motives  is 
towards  making  the  story  as  good  a one  as’possible.  And  though,  as 
I have  already  said,  a good  deal  of  our  evidence  comes  from  persons 
who  profess  to  have  had  no  bias  in  favour  of  the  reality  of  such  events 
as  they  describe,  and  to  wish  rather  that  they  had  not  occurred,  still 
the  instinct  to  make  what  one  says  seem  worth  saying  is  too  general 
for  it  ever  to  be  safe  to  assume  its  absence.  In  such  a subject  as  ours, 
this  instinct  will  find  its  chief  opportunity  in  making  things  appear 
marveUom.  The  reader  must  decide  for  himself  how  far  the  evidence 
to  be  here  presented  bears  the  stamp  of  the  wonder-mongerer  or 
raconteur.  The  desire  to  make  people  open  their  eyes  is  no. doubt 
perfectly  compatible  with  a habit  of  truthfulness  in  the  ordinary 
affairs  of  life.  Still,  the  desire,  as  a rule,  is  actually  to  see  the  eyes 
opening ; and  the  danger  is  therefore  greater  in  the  case  of  a story 
which  is  told  off-hand  and  viva  voce  for  the  sake  of  immediate  effect, 
than  in  the  case  of  evidence  which  is  first  written  down  at  leisure,  and 
has  then  to  undergo  the  ordeal  of  a careful  and  detailed  scrutiny. 
Nor  must  we  forget  that  there  is  another  instinct  which  tends  directly 

other,  A,  was  in  the  garden,  and  saw  his  friend  B come  in  at  the  gate  and  approach  him. 
On  expressing  his  surprise  at  seeing  him  return  sooner  than  was  expected,  ms  friend  B 
replied,  in  an  agitated  manner,  ' I have  been  in  hell  for  half  an  hour  because  I loved  the 
praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God,  ’ and  turning,  immediately  left  the  garden.  In 
the  course  of  the  next  day,  A,  going  out  into  the  ] >arish,  met  a third  person,  who  stopped? 
him  and  said,  'Do  you  know,  sir , that  devoted  servant  of  God , B,  is  dead  suddenly?1  On 
further  inquiry  he  found  he  had  died  the  previous  day  shortly  before  his  appearance  in  the 
garden. 

**  The  underlined  words  were  exactly  those  used  by  Dr.  Pusey,  and  the  whole  manner  of 
his  telling  made  me  feel  sure  that  A was  himself,  although  I did  not  like  to  ask  him  point 
blank.  But  he  assured  mo  he  knew  it  to  be  time,  and  that,  doubtless,  it  had  given  rise  to 
the  story  going  about  Oxford.  I fear  you  will  think  that,  like  most  of  those  things,  it 
lacks  the  full  details,  which  probably  none  but  Dr.  Pusey  could  give,  and  which  I felt  it 
would  be  presumptuous  to  ask  for.” 

The  same  story — with  some  differences  of  detail — is  reported  to  have  been  told  by  Dr. 
•Pusey,  as  a personal  experience,  to  the  Sisters  in  Osnaburgh  Street  (see  p.  25  of 
Sisterhood s of  the  Church  of  England  by  Margaret  Goodman).  Nevertheless,  we  are 
forced  to  conclude  that  those  to  whom  Dr.  Pusey  narrated  the  incident  were  mistaken 
m.a,^PP0Bi»g  him  to  refer  to  himself.  For  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  doubt  that  a. story 
published  as  long  ago  as  1819,  in  the  Imperial  Magazine  (Liverpool),  p.  963,  and  given 
also  in  the  lAfe  of  Mr . W.  Bramwell , 1839,  is  the  original  of  what  he  told.  The  vision 
appears  there  as  a dream,  not  a waking  percept.  Otherwise  the  central  incident  i» 
the  same*  and  the  very  words  used  by  the  phantom  are  almost  identical.  But  the 
names  of  the  parties  are  not  given,  and  all  our  guarantee  for  the  correctness  of  the- 
account  vanishes.  This  case  is  of  interest,  as  showing  the  importance  of  probing  & 
witness  as  thoroughly  as  possible  whiles  one  is  in  the  way  with  him. 

128  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

to  discourage  wonder-mongering,  at  any  rate  in  the  narration  of 
•unusual  personal  experiences — the  instinct  to  win  belief.  Where  the 
risk  of  being  disbelieved  is  appreciable,  a sense  of  accuracy  becomes 
also  a sense  of  security : a thing  being  credible  to  oneself  just  because 
it  is  fact,  the  consciousness  of  not  exaggerating  the  fact  begets  a 
«ort  of  trust  that  others  must  somehow  find  it  credible.  And  with 
the  class  from  whom  our  evidence  is  chiefly  drawn,  this  influence 
seems  not  less  likely  to  be  Operative  than  the  desire  to  say  something 
startling.  The  latter  tendency  is  more  prone  on  the  whole  to  affect 
second-hand  witnesses,  who  do  not  feel  bound  to  exercise  any  economy 
<of  the  miraculous,  who  can  always  fall  back  on  the  plea  that  they  are 
only  telling  what  was  told  to  them,  and  who  may  easily  be  led  into 
inaccuracies  by  the  analogy  of  other  marvellous  stories/ 

And,  indeed,  it  is  a matter  of  ordinary  observation,  by  no  means 
confined  to  “psychical  research,”  that  where  the  subject  of  narration 
has  nothing  to  do  with  merit,  and  what  is  alleged  to  have  been  done  or 
suffered  is  not  of  a sort  to  attract  admiration  to  the  doer  or  sufferer, 
the  more  extravagant  sort  of  stories  are  given,  not  as  personal 
■experiences,  but  on  the  authority  of  some  one  else.  If  there  is 
•exaggeration,  it  is  “ a friend  ” who  is  to  blame  ; and  this  term  is  used  on 
such  occasions  with  considerable  latitude.  I have  already  noted  how,  in 
the  case  of  witchcraft,  the  most  bizarre  incidents  do  not  rest  on 
anything  like  traceable  first-hand  testimony.  This  remark  is 
applicable  in  a general  way  to  the  whole  field  of  evidence  for 
marvellous  events,  as  recorded  in  modern  literature ; and  the  same 
fact  has  been  very  noticeable  with  respect  to  the  evidence,  of  very 
various  sorts  and  qualities,  which  has  come  under  the  attention  of  my 
colleagues  and  myself  during  the  last  few  years.  We  have  often 
taken  the  trouble  to  trace  and  test  the  matter  of  those  sensational 
newspaper-paragraphs  which  get  so  freely  copied  from  one  journal 
into  another ; but  in  scarcely  one  per  cent,  of  the  cases  has  the 
■evidence  held  water.  And  in  the  ordinary  talk  of  society,  where 
there  is  often  a show  or  assertion  of  authority  for  the  statements 
made,  one  gradually  learns  to  diagnose  with  confidence  the  accounts 
which  profess  to  be  second  or  third  hand  from  the  original,  but  of 
which  no  original  will  ever  be  forthcoming.  An  example  is  the  well- 
known  tale  of  the  dripping  letter,  handed  to  a lady  by  the  phantasmal 
flgure  of  a midshipman  who  had  been  drowned  before  he  could  texecute 
his  commission.  If  the  newspaper-anecdotes  were  like  bubbles  that 
^•reak  in  the  pursuer’s  hand,  a society-marvel  of  this  stamp  may  be 

IV.] 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS - TELEPATHY , 

12  9 

. more  fitly  compared  to  a will-o’-the-wisp : one  never  gets  any  nearer. 

to  it.  Then  there  is  the  young  lady  who  was  preserved  from  a 
, railway  accident  by  seeing  the  apparition  of  her  famed  on  the  platform 
; of  three  consecutive  stations — which  induced  her  to  alight.  Here  I 
was  actually  promised  an  introduction  to  the  heroine : what  I finally 
r .received  was  a reference  to  “ a friend  of  the  lady  who  told  the  story.” 
Or,  again,  there  is  the  tale  of  second-sight,  so  widely  told  during  the 
last  three  years,  where  the  visitor  saw  a daughter  of  the  house 
■"  stabbed  by  a*  stranger,  whom  he  has  since  identified  as  her  husband, 

, and  has  remorselessly  dogged  in  hansom  cabs.  Three  or  four  times 
have  we  been,  so  to  speak,  “one  off”  this  story;  but  the  various 
clues  have  shown  no  sign  of  converging';  and  we  still  occasionally 
hear  of  the  happy -couple  as  on  their  honeymoon. 

§ 6.  Turning  now  to  the  sources  of  error  in  memory,  we  find  the 
danger  here  is  of  a more  insidious  kind,  in  that  comparatively  few 
persons  realise  the  extent  to  which  it  exists  in  their  own  case.  • For 
one  who  is  innocent  of  any  desire  to  impress  his  auditor  in  any 
particular  way,  and  who  simply  desires  to  tell  the  truth,  it  is  not  easy 
to  realise  that  he  may  be  an  untrustworthy  witness  about  matters 
concerning  himself.  The  weaknesses  of  human  memory,  and  the 
precautions  which  they  necessitate,  will  be  so  frequent  a topic  in  the 
sequel  that  a brief  classification  will  here  suffice.  ‘ 

We  must  allow,  in  the  first  place,  for  a proneness  to  believe  in 
supernatural  influences  and  providential  interpositions.  Persons  who  are 
interested  in  such  ideas  will  be  keenly  alive  to  any  phenomena  which 
seem  to  transcend  a purely  materialistic  view  of  life.  They  will  be 
apt  to  see  facts  of  this  class  where  they  do  not  exist,  and  to  interpret 
in  this  Sense  small  or  vague  occurrences  which  if  accurately  examined 
at  the  time  might  have  been  otherwise  explained.  And  where  this 
tendency  exists,  it  is  almost  inevitable  that,  as  time  goes  on,  the 
occurrence  should  represent  itself  to  memory  more  and  more  in  the 
desired  light,  that  inconvenient  details  should  drop  out,  and  that  the 
remainder  should  stand  out  in  a deceptively  significant  and  harmonious 
form.  Of  the  cases  to  be  here  presented,  however,  only  a very  small 
proportion -betray  any  idea  on  the  part  of  the  witness  that  what  he 
recounts  has  any  special  religious  or  philosophical  significance.  Our 
informants  have  had  no  motive  to  conceal  from  us  their  real  view  of 
the  facts ; and  if  they  narrate  an  incident  as  simply  strange  or 

K. 

130  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chat. 

unaccountable,  we  have  no  right  to  assume  their  evidence  to  have  been 
coloured  by  an  emotional  sense  that  materialism  had  been  refuted  ; 
in  their  person,  or  that  supernatural  communications  had  been  ! 
permitted  to  them.  Indeed,  as  regards  religious  and  emotional  pre- 
possessions, we  are  certainly  justified  in  thinking  that  they  have  rather 
beeu  hindrances  than  helps  to  the  presentation  of  an  abundant  array . 
of  evidence.  For  it  has  happened  in  many  cases  that  persons  whose 
testimony  would  have  been  a valuable  addition  to  the  case  for 
telepathy,  have  felt  their  experiences  to  be  too  intimate  or  too 
sacred  for  publication.1 

But  apart  from  any  bias  of  an  emotional  or  speculative 
ort,  wo  must  certainly  admit  a general  tendency  in  the  human 
mind  to  make  any  picture  of  facts  definite.  • To  many  people 
vagueness  of  emotion  or  of  speculation  is  a delight ; but  no  one 
enjoys  vagueness  oi  memory.  In  thinking  of  an  event  which  was 
in  any  way  shadowy  or  uncertain,  there  is  always  a certain  irk- 
someness in  realising  clearly  how  little  clear  it  was.  The  same 
applies,  of  course,  to  events  at  which  we  look  back  through  any  con- 
siderable interval  of  time.  The  very  effort  to  recall  them  implies 
an  effort  to  represent  them  to  the  mind  as  precisely  and  com- 
pletely as  possible,  and  it  is  often  not  observed  that  the  precision 
thus  attained  is  not  that  of  reality. 

Lastly,  there  is  a general  tendency  to  lighten  the  burden  of 
memory  by  ximplifyimj  its  contents — by  bringing  any  group  of 
connected  events  into  as  round  and  portable  a form  as  possible.  This 
may,  of  course,  only  result  in  the  loss  of  excrescences  and  subordinate 
features,  while  the  essential  incident  is  left  intact.  But  we  shall 
find  instances  further  on  where  simplification  really  alters  the 
character  of  the  evidence.  Details  may  not  simply  drop  out ; they 
may  undergo  a change,  and  group  themselves  conveniently  round 
some  central  idea.  It  might  reasonably  be  expected,  and  wer  oar- 
‘ selves  certainly  began  by  expecting,  that  error  from  this  soOTCe  would 
always  tell  in  the  direction  of  actual  distortion  and  exaggeration ; if 
the  aspect  of  the  case  was  to  some  extent  striking  and  Significant,  .to 
begin  with,  it  would  seem  likely  that  this  aspect  of  it  should  become 

i / 

1 To  take  a single  instance— a lady  sends  ns  an  unsensational  narrative  of  the 
ordinary  type,  as  to  how  one  day  in  1882,  when  just  about*  to  sit  down?  to  the  piano,  she 
saw  close  to  her  the  figure  of  an  old  school-friend,  who,  as  it  turned  out,  died  on  that  day 
at  a distance.  “I  am  confident,”  she  says,  “ of  having  seen  the  vision,  though  my 
common-sense  makes  me  wish  to  put  it  down  to  imagination.  I never  saw  apv  vision  of 
any  kind  before  or  since.”  But  we  are  withheld  from  quoting  the  account  in  a form  which 
could  have  any  evidential  value,  by  her  feeling  that  such  publication  would  be  wrong*  . 

131 

IV,  1 FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

more  pronounced  as  it  assumed  a more  isolated  place  in  the  mind, 
and  "lost  its  Connection  with  the  normal  stream  of  experience  in  the 
course  of  which  it  appeared.  As  a matter  of  fact,  however,  this  is  by 
no  means  always  what  happens.  For  instance,  we  have  met  with 

* several  cases  of  the  following  sort.  An  impression  of  a remarkable 
kind,  and  which,  if  telepathy  exists,  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  tele- 
pathic, has  been  produced  on  a percipient  while  in  a state  which  he 
recognised  at  the  time  as  one  of  complete  wakefulness,  and  which 

• was  practically  proved  to  be  so  by  the  fact  that  he  did  not  wake  from 

' it — that  it  formed  a connected  part  of  his  waking  life.  But  in  the 

natural  gravitation  towards  easy  accounts  of  things,  he  gradually 
gets  to  look  back  on  this  experience  as  a dream ; that  is,  he  allows 
the  verdict  of  subsequent  memory  to  supplant  the  verdict  of  imme- 
diate consciousness.  We  must  not  then  say  in  our  haste,  all  men — or 
all  memories — are  exaggerators.  Even  where  evidence  has  been  modi- 
fied in  passing  through  several  mouths,  a comparison  between  later 
and  earlier  versions  of  the  same  narrative  has  sometimes  shown  that 
its  more  striking  and  significant  characteristics  have  lost  rather  than 
gained  by  the  transmission.  But  this  is  no  doubt  the  exception. 

§ 7.  Such,  in  brief  outline,  are  the  principal  sources  of  error  which 
may  in  a general  way  be  supposed  to  affect  the  sort  of  evidence  with 
which  we  are  concerned  ; and  our  next  step  must  be  to  fix  with  pre- 
cision what  the  actual  opportunities  for  perversion  are.  The  evident® 
for  telepathy  has  a certain  type  and  structure  of  its  own,  and  we 
must  realise  what  this  is,  in  order  to  know  where  to  look  for  the  weak 
points.  What,  then,  are  the  essential  elements  of  a typical  telepathic 
phenomenon?  They  consist  in  two  events  or  two  states,  of  a more 
-or  less  remarkable  kind,  and  connected,  as  a rule,  by  certain  common 
characteristics  ; and  of  a certain  time-relation  between  the  two.  For 
•example,  if  a flawless  case  is  to  be  presented,  it  would  be  of  the 
following  type  and  composition  : It  would  comprise  (1)  indisputable 
evidence  that  A (whom  we  call  the  agent)  has  had  an  unusual 
experience — say,  has  died ; (2)  indisputable  evidence  that  B (whom 
we  call  the  percipient)  has  had  an  unusual  experience  which  includes 
■a  certain  impression  of  A — say,  has,  while  wide  awake,  had  a vision 
of  A in  the  room  ; (3)  indisputable  evidence  that  the  two  events  co- 
incided«in  time: — which,  of  course,  implies  that  their  respective  dates 
can  be.  accurately  fixed.  When  I call  such  evidence  as  this  flawless, 
I do  not,  of  course,  mean  that  it.  is  conclusive : the  fact  that  the  two 

x2 

132  ' ' GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap., 

P* 

events  occurred,  and  the  fact  that  they  occurred  simultaneously,’ 
might  be  placed  beyond  dispute,  and  the  coincidence  might, 
for  all  that,  be  due  not  to  telepathy,  but  to  chance  alone.  But 
though  no  single  case  can  prove  telepathy,  no  case  where  the  above 
conditions  are  not  to  some  extent  realised  can  even  help  to  prove  it. 
Briefly,  then,  if  the  account  of  some  alleged  instance  of  telepathy 
is  evidentially  faulty,  there  must  be  misrepresentation  as  to  one 
or  more  of  the  following  items:  (l)  the  state  of  the  agent ; (2)  the 
experience  of  the  percipient ; (3)  the  date  of  (1) ; (4)  the  date 
of  (2).  4 ' 

Now  the  evidence  where  the  chances  of  misrepresentation  have 
primarily  to  be  considered  is  clearly  that  of  the  'percipient.  It  is  the 
percipient’s  mention  of  his  own  experience  which  makes,  so  to  speak, 
the  ground-work  of  the  case ; unless  the  percipient  gives  his  own 
account  of  this  experience,  the  case  is  in  no  sense  a first-hand  one  ; 
whereas  if  such  an  account  is  given  we  should  consider  the  evidence 
first-hand,  even  though  the  account  of  the  ar/evt’s  state  is  not 
obtained  from  himself.  Of  course  when  the  agent  is  in  a position  to 
give  an  account,  it  is  important  that  his  evidence  should  be  procured ; 
but  this  is  impossible  in  the  numerous  cases  where  his  share  in  the 
matter  consists  simply  in  dying.  In  these  cases,  then,  we  are 
dependent  on  others  for  evidence  as  to  the  agent’s  side  of  the 
occurrence ; and  primarily  often  on  the  percipient,  who  is  our  first  and 
indispensable  witness  for  the  whole  matter.  This  being  premised, 
we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  discovering  where  the  risks  of 
misrepresentation  really  lie. 

§ 8.  Taking  the  above  four  items  in  order,  the  first  of  them — the 
state  of  the  agent — is  the  one  where  the  risk  is  smallest.  To -take  the 
commonest  case,  the  very  fact,  death,  which  makes  it  impossible  to 
obtain  the  agent’s  personal  testimony,  is  an  event  as  to  which,  of  all 
others  in  his  history,  it  is  least  likely  that  a person  who  knew  him 
should  be  in  error.  It  is  one  also  as  to  which  corroboration  of  the 
percipient’s  statement  is  often  most  easily  obtained ; either  from  the 
verbal  testimony  of  surviving  relatives  and  friends,  or  from  contem- 
porary letters,  notices,  and  obituaries.  And  where  the  event  which 
has  Wallen  the  agent  falls  short  of  this  degree  of  gravity,  it  is 
probably  still  sufficiently  out  of  the  common  for  the  ascertainment  of 
it  by  the  percipient  and  others  to  have  been  natural  and  easy ; and 
& fortiori  sufficiently  out  of  the' common  to  have  stamped  itself  on 

133 

iv.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

the  memory  qf  the  agent  himself,  who  may  now  be  available  as  a 
witness.1 

When  we  come  to  the  next  item — the  experience  of  the  percipient 
—the  risk  of  misrepresentation  seems  decidedly  to  increase.  For  the 
witness  is  now  recounting  something  purely  personal,  for  the  occurrence 
of  which  he  can  produce  no  objective  proofs.  He  says  that  he  saw 
something,  or  heard  something,  or  felt  something,  which  struck  him  as 
remarkable  (in  many  cases,  indeed,  as  unique  in  his  experience),  and 
this  has  to  be  taken  on  his  word ; no  external  observation  of  him  (even 
were  anyone  present  with  him  at  the  time)  could  reveal  whether  he 
was  actually  experiencing  these  sensations  which  he  afterwards 
described.  Now  to  a careless  glance  it  may  seem  that  there  is  a 
loophole  here,  through  which  enough  error  may  enter  to  invalidate 
the  whole  case.  It  may  be  said  that  the  percipient  was  perhaps 
nervous,  or  unwell,  or  imaginative ; and  that  a report  of  impressions 
which  are  received  under  such  conditions  cannot  be  relied  on  as 
evidence.  But  in  what  was  said  above  as  to  errors  of  observation, 
this  objection  has  been  practically  answered.  It  would  be  in  place  if 
the  question  were  whether  what  he  thought  he  perceived  was  really 
there ; but  it  is  not  in  place  when  the  question  is  simply  what  he 
thought  he  perceived.  We  are  discussing  the  experience  of  the 
percipient  as  the  second  of  the  four  heads  under  which  misrepresenta- 
tion may  enter.  Now,  misrepresentation  of  this  experience  would 
consist  simply  in  the  statement  that  he  had  had  certain  sensations  or 
impressions  which  he  had  not  had:  misinterpretation  of  the 
experience — e.g.,  if  he  imagined  that  his  friend  was  actually  physically 
present  where  his  form  had  been  seen  or  his  voice  heard — has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  evidential  point.  Grant  that  the  percipient’s  senses 
played  Kim  false — that  his  impression  was  a hallucination  ; that,  as  I 
have  said,  is  the  very  light  in  which  we  ourselves  regard  it ; it  may 
even  be  the  light  in  which  he  regarded  it  himself.  That  does  not 
prevent  its  being  an  unusual  experience ; and  it  is  simply  as  an 

1 The  less  exceptional  the  event,  the  less  of  course  is  the  evidential  force  of  the  case, 
and  the  more  important  it  is  to  obtain  the  direct  testimony  of  the  agent.  A lady  of  my 
acquaintance  informed  me  that  on  the  21st  of  October,  1883,  she  had  a startling 
ana  distressing  vision  of  a kind  unique  in  her  experience— in  which  she  seemed  to  pay  a 
visit  to  a former  school-fellow,  whom  she  had  not  heard  of  for  more  than  ten  years,  to 
console  her  in  a recent  bereavement.  The  extent  of  my  informant’s  agitation  and  distress 
was  testified  to  by  a near  relative,  to  whom  she  had.  at  once  narrated  her  experience. 
A few  da^s  afterwards  a notice  in  the  Times  obituary  showed  that  her  friend’s  husband 
had  died  on  October  20th.  Had  the  widow’s  thoughts,  then,  in  her  fresh  sorrow,  turned 
to  her  early  associate  and  sympathetically  impressed  tier  ? The  widow,  perhaps,  might 
have  told  us ; but  on  inquiry  we  find  that  tne  wife  had  died  some  years  before  fter 
husband. 

134  * GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  TIIE  EVIDENCE  [ch^p. 

uausual  experience,  which  included  an  impression  of  his  friend,  that, 
it  has  a place  in  the  evidence. 

Now  the  probability  that  this  unusual  experience  has  been 
misrepresented  will  be  very  different,  according  as  the  mention  of  it  by 
the  percipient  precedes  or  follows  his  knowledge  of  what  has  befallen 
the  agent..  If  he  gives  his  account  in  ignorance  of  that  event,  and 
independently  of  any  ideas  which  it  might  be  calculated  to  awake  in 
his  mind,  there  seems  no  gVound  at  all  for  supposing  that  he ' has 
coloured  his  statement,  at  any  rate  in  any  way  which  would  affect  its 
evidential  value,,  If  A,  a person  with  a general  character  for  truthful- 
ness, and  with  no  motive  to  deceive,  mentions  having  had  an  unusual 
experience — a hallucination  of  the  senses,  an  unaccountable 
impression,  or  whatever  he  likes  to  call  it — which  was  strongly 
suggestive  of  B,  no  one  will  tell  him  that  he  is  romancing  or 
exaggerating,  and  that  he  had  no  such  impression  as  he  reports.  He 
will  simply  be  told  that  his  nerves  are  overstrung,  or  that  he  has  had 
a waking  dream,  or  something  of  that  sort.  And  this  assumption  of 
the  truth  of  the  statement  could  of  course  not  be  impugned  merely 
because  it  subsequently  turned  out  that  B died  at  the  time. 

Hence,  one  of  the  points  to  which  we  have,  throughout  our 
inquiry,  attached  the  highest  value,  is  the  proof  that  evidence  of  the 
percipient’s  experience  was  in  existence  prior  to  the  receipt  of  the 
news  of  the  agent’s  condition.  This  prior  evidence  may  be  of  various 
sorts.  The  percipient  may  at  once  make  a written  record  in  a diary, 
or  in  a letter  which  may  have  been  preserved.  Where  this  has  been 
the  case,  we  have  always  endeavoured  to  obtain  the  document  for 
inspection.1  Or  he  may  have  mentioned  his  hallucination  or 

1 There  are  cases  where  a sort  of  exactitude  is  required  which  makes  documentary 
evidence  almost  indispensable.  An  instance  may  be  found  in  the  following  account,  sent  to 
us  by  Miss’Weale,  who  wrote  from  Nepaul,  Croft  Road,  Torquay. 

“ January  26th,  1884* 

“ I had  been— not  on  the  day  when  the  following  was  heard,  but  for  some  days  previously 
— wondering  why  Dr.  Pusey  had  not  replied  to  a letter  which  I had  written  to  him ; when* 
sitting  in  our  London  drawing-room  one  day  at  about  half-past  2 in  the  d&yf  I suddenly 
heard  Dr.  Pusey  speaking  as  if  in  a low  voice  close  beside  me.  I was  not  cogitating  about 
him.  but  suddenly  and  distinctly  heard  his  voice  speaking.  The  words  were  an  answer  to 
my  letter  written  many  days  previously,  and  I so  felt  it  to  be  the  reply  that  I went  to  my 
writing-table  and  wrote  it  all  down,  and  the  day  and  hour ; and  moreover  (how  I know  not) 
it  was  borne  in  on  me,  * Why  he  is  at  Pusey  Hall,  and  that  is  why  he  has  not  sooner 
replied,  ’ and  so  it  turned  out  to  be#  A few  days  after  came  a letter  from  him,  written  from 
Pusey  Hall.  The  beginning  of  the  letter  bore  the  date  of  the  day  in  question  when  I had 
heard  his  voice,  but  the  end  was  dated  the  day  previous,  and  in  the  letter  were  the  precise 
sentences  I had  heard.  * . . . 

“ C.  J.  Dobatea  Weaxjb*”  . 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Weale  adds  : — <• 

“ It  was  not  one  sentence  or  two,  but  one  side  full  of  a small  sheet  of  note-paper,  such, 
as  he  usually  wrote  on,  but  I don’t  carry  long  letters  about  with  me,  and  could  not  tell  you 
the  wording  now.  I scribbled  down  my  waking  dream  as  to  Dr.  Pusey ’s  words,  being 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY . 

135 

IV.}  ' 

impression  to  some  one  who  made  a note  of  it,  or  who  distinctly 
remembers  that  it  was  so  mentioned ; and  whenever  this  has  been 
done,  we  have  endeavoured  to  get  written  corroboration  from  this 
second  person.  Evidence  of  this  class  affords  comparatively  little 
opportunity  for  the  various  sorts  of  error  which  we  have  passed 
in  review.  No  amount  of  carelessness  of  narration,  or  of  love  of  the 
marvellous,  would  enable  a witness  to  time  his  evidence  in  correspon- 
dence with  an  event  of  which  he  was  ignorant,  nor  to  fix  on  the 
right  person  with  whom  to  connect  his  alleged  experience.  Errors 
of  memory  are  equally  unlikely  to  take  a form  which  makes  the 
impression  correspond  with  an  unknown  event;  and  danger  from  that 
source  is,  moreover,  at  a minimum,  in  cases  which  are  distinguished  by 
the'  very  fact  that  the  impression  has  been  itself  recorded  imme- 
diately, or  very  shortly,  after  its  occurrence. 

But  apart  from  the  actual  records  of  the  experience  in  writing 
or  in  someone  else’s  memory,  it  may  have  produced  action  of  a 
sufficiently  distinct  sort  on  the  percipient’s  part ; for  instance,  it  may 
have  so  disturbed  him  as  to  make  him  take  a journey,  or  write  at 
once  for  tidings  of  the  agent’s  condition.  Such  immediate  action, 
which  can  often  be  substantiated  by  others,  affords  a strong  indepen- 
dent proof  that  the  impression  had  occurred,  and  had  been  of  an 
unusual  kind.  And  even  if  ho  has  done'  none  of  these  things,  yet  if 

amazed  at  the  vivid  sense  of  his  presence  and  voice,  and  all  I wrote  down  was  in  the 
note.” 

Now  everything  hero  depends  on  the  exact  accuracy  of  the  words.  They  wero 
admittedly  an  answer  to  a letter,  and  their  general  tenor  might  easily  have  been  surmised  ; 
unless,  therefore,  the  words  were  identical , tho  case  could  be  explained  as  a hallucination 
of  hearing  of  a sufficiently  ordinary  type.  We  have  obtained  no  complete  assurance  as  to 
the  verbal  identity ; and  we  have  not  been  able  to  compare  the  letter  with  the  note 
made  at  the  time,  which  has  probably  been  destroyed. 

A similar  criticism  will  apply  to  the  following  well-known  case,  written  down  in  tho 
first  instance  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Wilkins,  a Dissenting  minister  at  Weymouth  (who  died 
in  1800),  and  endorsed  by  the  late  Dr.  Abercrombie,  of  Edinburgh,  a man,  I need  hardly 
say,  of  great  scientific  acumen : — 

“Joseph  Wilkins,  while  a young  man,  absent  from  home,  dreamt,  without  any 
apparent  reason,  that  ne  returned  home,  reached  the  house  at  night,  found  the  front  door 
locked,  entered  by  the  back  door,  visited  his  mother’s  room,  found  her  awake,  and  said  to 
her,  4 Mother,  t am  going  on  a long  journey,  and  am  come  to  bid  you  good-bye. * A day 
or  two  afterwards  this  young  man  received  a letter  from  his  father,  asking  how  he  was* 
and  alleging  his  mother’s  anxiety  on  account  of  a vision  which  had  visited  her  on  a night 
which  was,  in  fact,  that  of  the  son’s  dream.  The  mother,  lying  awake  in  bed,  had  heard 
some  one  (fry  the  front  door  and  enter  by  the  back  door,  and  had  then  seen  the  son  enter 
her  room,  heard  him  say  to  her,  4 Mother,  I am  going  on  a long  journey,  and  am  come  to 
bid  you  good-bye,  ’ and  had  answered,  1 0 dear  son,  thou  art  dead  ! * words  which  the  son 
also  h$d  heard  Her  say  in  his  dream.” 

From  an  evidential  point  of  view,  everything  again  depends  on  the  identity  of  tho 
words  dreamt  and  the  words  heard.  And  as  we  do  not  hear  that  Dr.  Abercrombie  com- 
pared a note  of  the  dream  made  at  the  time  with  the  father’s  letter,  we  have  no  assurance 
that  Mr.  Wilkins  (by  a lapse  of  memory,  or  through  failure  to  perceive  where  the  critical 
point  lay),  did  not  afterwards  convert  into  absolute  identity  what  w&b  really  a mere 
general  resemblance*  This  would  at  once  reduce  the  case  to  a mere  “ odd  coincidence.” 

136 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

i he  describes  a state  of  discomfort  or  anxiety,  following  on  his  ex- 
perience and  preceding  his  receipt  of  the  news,  this  must,  at  any  rate, 
be  accounted  a fresh  item  of  testimony,  confirmatory  of  the  mere 
statement  that  such-and-such  an  unusual  experience  had  befallen 
him;  and  it  is  sometimes  possible  to  obtain  the  corroboration  of 
others  who  have  noticed  or  been  made  aware  of  this  anxiety,  even 
though  the  source  of  it  was  not  mentioned.  If,  however,  he  has  kept 
his  feelings,  as  well  as  their  cause,  to  himself,  there  is,  of  course, 
nothing  but  his  subsequent  memory  to  depend  on.  Here,  therefore, 
we  shall  have  aJ  transition  step  to  the  next  evidential  class,  where 
the  percipient’s  own  perception  of  the  importance  of  the  experience, 
and  any  possibilities  of  the  confirmation,  date  from  a time  when 
the  condition  of  the  agent  has  become  known. 

§ 9.  Cases  of  this  type  are  of  course,  as  a class,  less  satisfactory. 
It  is  here  that  some  of  the  recognised  tendencies  to  error — the  impulse 
to  make  vague  things  definite,  and  the  impulse  to  make  a group  of  facts 
compact  and  harmonious — may  find  their  opportunity.  The  error, will, 
of  course,  not  arise  without  a certain  foundation  in  fact:  the  news 
that  a friend  has  died  is  not  in  itself  calculated  to  create  a wholly 
fictitious  idea  that  one  has  had  an  unusual  experience  shortly  before 
the  news  arrived.  But  an  experience  which  has  been  somewhat  out 
of  the  common  may  look  quite  different  when  recalled  in  the  light  of 
the  subsequent  knowledge.  It  may  not  only  gain  in  significance  ; its 
very  content  may  alter.  A person  perhaps  heard  his  name  called 
when  no  one  was  near,  and,  not  being  subject  to  hallucinations  of 
hearing,  he  was  momentarily  struck  by  the  fact,  but  dismissed  it  from 
his  mind.  A day  or  two  afterwards  he  hears  of  a friend’s  death.  It 
then  occurs  to  him  that  the  events  may  have  been  connected.  He 
endeavours  to  recall  the  sound  that  he  heard,  and  seems  to  hear  in  it 
the  tones  of  the  familiar  voice.  Gradually  the  connection  that  he  has 
at  first  only  dimly  surmised,  becomes  a certainty  for  him;  and  in 
describing  the  occurrence,  without  any  idea  of  deceiving,  he  will 
mention  his  friend’s  voice  as  though  he  had  actually  recognised  it  at 
the  time.  In  the  same  way,  something  dimly  seen  in  an  imperfect 
light  may  take  for  subsequent  memory  the  aspect  of  a recognisable 
form ; or  a momentary  hallucination  of  touch  may  recur  to  the  mind  as 
a clasp  of  farewell. 

Now  such  possibilities  cannot  be  too  steadily  kept  in  view,  during 
the  process  of  collecting  and  sifting  evidence.  At  the  same  time,  we 

IV.] 

FOE  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY,  13? 

. have  detected  no  definite  instance  of  this  sort  of  inaccuracy.  Now 
the  number  of  alleged  telepathic  cases  which  we  have  examined  (a 
; number  of  which  the  narratives  given  in  this  book  form  less  than  a 
third)  seems  sufficiently  large  for  the  various  types  of  error  that 
really  exist  to  have  come  to  light ; and,  as  a matter  of  fact,  certain 
; types  have  come  to  light,  and  have  helped  us  to  a view  of  what  may 
be  called  the  laws  of  error  in  such  matters.  If,  then,  a particular 
form  of  inaccuracy  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence  from  our  consider- 
able list  of  proved  inaccuracies,  it  maybe  concluded,  we  think,  not 
to  have  been  widely  operative.  It  would  be  a different  matter  if 
the  cases  of  the  lower  evidential  class  stood  alone — if  we  were 
unable  to  present  any  cases  where  the  percipient’s  identification  of 
the,  impression  received  with  the  particular  personality  of  the  agent 
had  been  established  beyond  dispute.  But  in  face  of  the  large 
number  of  those  stronger  instances,  it  would  be  unwarrantably 
violent  to  suppose  that  in  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  other  cases  where  the 
percipient  declares  that  the  identification  was  clear  and  unmistakeable, 
he  is  giving  fictitious  shape  and  colour  to  a purely  undistinctive 
impression. 

But  there  is  yet  another  reason  for  allowing  this  inferior 
evidence  to  stand  for  what  it  is  worth.  For  even  if  we  make  very 
large  allowance  for  inaccuracy,  and  suppose  that  in  a certain  number 
of  these  cases  the  visible  or  audible  phantasm,  afterwards  described  as 
recognised,  was  really  unrecognised  at  the  moment,  the  evidence  for 
a telepathic  production  of  it  does  not  thereby  vanish.  If,  indeed,  a 
witness’s  mental  or  moral  status  were  such  that  he  might  be  supposed 
capable  of  giving  retrospective  and  objective  distinctness  to  what  was 
an  utterly  indefinite  impression,  with  no  external  or  sensory  character 
at  all,  his  testimony  would,  of  course,  be  valueless ; simply  because  we 
could  not  assure  ourselves  that  he  had  not  had  experiences  of  that 
sort  daily,  so  that  the  coincidence  with  the  real  event  would  lose  all 
significance.  , But  in  the  case  of  a witness  of  fair  intelligence,  the 
point  remains  that  the  presence  of  a human  being  was  suggested  to 
his  senses  in  a manner  which  was-  in  his  experience  markedly 
unusual  or  unique,  at  the  time  that  a human  being  at  a distance  with 
whom  he  was  more  or  less  closely  connected,  was  in  a markedly 
unusual  or  unique  condition.  By  itself  such  evidence  might  fairly, 
perhaps  be  regarded  as  too  uncertain  to  support  any  hypothesis.  'But- 
if  a case  for  telepathy  can  be  founded  on  the  stronger  cases,  where 
the  immediate  reference  of  the  impression  to  the  agent  is  as  much 

138 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap.' 

established  as  the  fact  of  the  impression  itself,  then  we  have  no  right 
to  lay  down  as  an  immutable  law  of  telepathic  experience  that 
such  a reference  is  indispensable.  Recognition  is  beyond  doubt  the 
best  of  tests  ; and  in  a vast  majority  of  our*  cases  we  have . the 
percipient’s  testimony,  and  in  a very  large  number  corroborative 
testimony  as  well,  to  the  fact  of  recognition.  But  distinctness  and. 
unusualness  in  the  experience  are  also  evidential  points.  We  have, 
indeed,  a whole  class  of  eases  where  the  percipient  has  expressly 
stated  that  a phantasm  which  coincided  with  the  supposed  agent’s 
death  was  unrecognised,  and  where,  therefore,  the  distinctness  and 
unusualness  of  the  impression  were  the  only  grounds  for  paying  any 
attention  to  the  coincidence.  Such  cases  may  be  far  from  proving 
telepathy;  yet  if  telepathy  be  a vera  causa,  it  would.be  unscientific 
to  leave  them  out  of  account. 

§ 10.  So  much  for  the  evidence  of  the  state  of  the  agent,  and  of 
the  experience  of  the  percipient,  regarded  simply  as  events,  of  which 
we  want  to  know  (1)  to  what  extent  we  can  rely  on  the  description  that 
we  receive  of  them ; (2)  to  what  extent  the ' presumption  of  a 
telepathic  connection  between  them  is  affected  by  the  sort  of  in- 
accuracies that  may  be  revealed  or  surmised.  The  sketch  that  has 
been  given  is,  of  course,  a mere  outline.  It  must  wait  for  further 
amplifications  of  detail  till  we  come  to  examine  the  evidence  itself. 
Meanwhile  it  may  serve  to  prepare  the  reader’s  mind  and  to  indicate 
what  special  points  to  be  on  the  look-out  for.  But  of  thqse  four 
essential  items  of  a case,  as  to  which  the  opportunities  and  the  effect 
of  misrepresentation  were  to  be  specially  considered,  two  still  remain, 
namely,  the  precise  dates  of  the  two  items  already  discussed — of  the 
agent’s  and  the  percipient’s  respective  shares  in  the  incident.  It  is. 
clearly  essential  to  a telepathic  case  that  these  dates  should  approxi- 
mately coincide  ; and  error  in  the  assertion  of  this  coincidence . is  & 
possibility  requiring  fully  as  much  attention  as  error  in  the  description, 
of  the  two  events. 

But  here  the  reader  may  fairly  ask  where  the  line  of  error  is  to  be. 
drawn.  Must  the  coincidence  be  exact  to  the  moment  ? And,  if  dot* 
what  degree  of  inexactness  may  be  permitted  before  we  cease  to  regard  * 
a case  as  supporting  the  telepathic  hypothesis  ? * It  is  unfortunately 
not  easy  at  this  point  to  give  any  satisfactory  answer  to  this  question. 
Two  distinct  questions  are  in  fact  involved.  The  first  is  a question, 
of  natural  fact : What  are  the  furthest  limits  of  time  within  which  its 

IV.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  13^ 

\ 

appeases,  on  a review  of  the  whole  subject,  that  a single  telepathic 
.phenomenon  may  really  be  included  ? At  what  distance  of  time,  from 
the  death  of  an  absent  person,  may  a friend  receive  telepathic, 
intimation  of  the  fact  ? The  second  question  is  one  of  interpretation 
land  argument.  It  will  be  a most  important  part  of  our  task  hereafter 
;to  estimate  the  probability  that  it  was  by  chance,  and  not  as  cause 
• and  effect  that  the  two  events  occurred  at  no  very  great  distance  of 
time  from  one  another.  The  wider  the  interval,  the  greater,  of  course,, 
pods  this  probability  become  ; in  other  words,  the  larger  the  scope  that 
“we  give  to  “ coincidences  ” which  we  are  willing  to  regard  as  primA 
facie  telepathic  in  origin,  the  greater  is  the  chance  that  we  shall'  be 
wrong  in  so  regarding  them.  Now,  unless  some  provisional  limit  were 
assigned  to  the  interval  which  may  separate  the  two  events,  it  would 
be  impossible  to  obtain  numerical  data  for  calculating  what  the. 
force  of  the  argument  for  chance  really  is,  and  how  far  the  prini& 
facie  claim  for  some  cause  beyond  chance  is  justified.  This  point 
will  be  made  clear  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  second  volume,  which 
deals  with  “ the  theory  of  chance-coincidence  ” ; meanwhile  it  will  be 
convenient  to  defer,  both  these  questions,  and  to  make  the  following 
brief  statement  without  discussion  or  explanation. 

There  is  one  class  of  cases  which  are  not  available  for  a numerical, 
estimate  at  all — those,  namely,  where  the  agent’s  condition  is  nob 
strictly  limited  in  time ; for  instance,  where  he  is  merely  very  ill,  and 
no  particular  crisis  takes  place  at  or  near  the  time  when  the 
percipient’s  impression  occurs.  This  indefiniteness  is,  of  course,  a. 
serious  evidential  weakness.  But  in  a vast  majority  of  the  cases  to  be 
brought  forward  the  event  that  befalls  the  agent  is  short  and  definite. 
If,  then,  the  experience  of  the  percipient  does  not  exactly  coincide 
with  that  event,  it  must  either  follow  or  precede  it.  And  first,  if  it 
follows  it ; then  it  will  be  convenient  to  limit  the  interval  within 
which  this  must  happen  to  12  hours.  I may  mention  at  once 
that,  in  most  t>f  our  cases,  the  coincidence  seems  to  have  been 
very  considerably  closer  than  this.  But  in  a few  cases  the  12; 
hours’  limit  has  been  reached;  and  if  we  found  that,  though, 
some  error  in  evidence  had  made  the  coincidence  appear  to 
have  been  closer  than  it  really  was,  yet  after  correction  the  12. 
hours  seemed  not  to  have  been  over-passed,  we  should  still 
treat  tjie  case  as  having  a primA  facie  claim  to  be  considered 
telepathic,  • Next  as  to  the  cases  where  the  percipient’s  impression 
precedes  some  marked  event 'or  crisis  in  the  existence  of  the  other 

140 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

person  concerned;  the  question  will  then  be,  What  was  that 
other  person’s  condition  at  the  actual  time  that  the  impression 
occurred  ? If  it  was  normal,  we  should  not  argue  here  for  any 
connection  between  the  experiences  of  the  two  parties.  For  instance, 
we  should  not  treat  as  evidence  for  telepathy,  an  impression,  however 
striking,  which  preceded  by  an  appreciable  interval  an  accident  or 
■sudden  catastrophe  of  any  sort.1  But  it  may  happen  that  the 
percipient’s  impression  falls*  within  a season  in  which  the  condition 
of  the  other  party  is  distinctly  abnormal — say  a season  of  serious 
illness;  and  tfiat,  it  likewise  precedes  by  less  than  12  hours  the 
crisis — usually  death — with  which  that  season  closes.  And  these 
cases  will  not  only  have  a primd  facie  claim  to  be  considered 
telepathic,  but  will  also  admit  of  being  used  in  a strict  numerical 
estimate. 

§ 11.  To  return  now  to  the  evidential  question,  it  is.really  in  the 
matter  of  dates,  rather  than  facts,  that  the  risk  of  an  important  mis- 
take is  greatest.  In  the  first  place,  dates  are  hard  things  to 
remember:  many  persons  who  have  a fairly  accurate  memory  for 
facts  which  interest  them  have  a poor  memory  for  dates.  This  is 
a natural  failing,  and  it  is  also  one  that  may  easily  escape  notice ; 
for  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances  Avhere  a personal  experience  is 
afterwards  recounted,  the  whole  interest  centres  in  the  fact,  and 
none  at  all  in  the  date.  But  in  examining  the  evidence  for  an 

1 For  instance,  a trustworthy  informant  has  given  us  the  following  account : — 

December,  1883. 

“ On  November  5th,  1855,  I was  staying  at  a country  house  with  several  friends. 
It  being  a wet  day,  we  amused  ourselves  by  reading  aloud,  of  which  I did 
,»  large  share ; but  1 was  so  overcome  by  the  impression  that  a very  dear  brother  was 
♦drowning,  that  ice  had  broken,  and  that  he  was  drawn  under  it  by  the  current,  that  I 
•could  not  at  all  follow  the  purport  of  the  book,  and  when  alone  dressing  for  dinner  could 
♦only  control  my  distress  by  arguing  that  there  could  be  no  fear  of  ice  accidents,  as  the 
weather  was  exceptionally  mild  at  that  time.  We  afterwards  learned  my  brother  had 
been  in  very  actual  peri),  having  jumped  into  a canal  dock  to  rescue  a companion,  who} 
being  short-sighted,  had  fallen  in  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening.  He  was  then  an  under- 
graduate at  Cambridge,  and  I was  in  Wales.  He  received  a medal  from  the  ‘ Humane 
Society,*  and  a watch,  Ac.,  from  members  of  his  college,  in  recognition  of  the  act.  I have 
never  had  any  similar  impression  of  death  or  danger  to  any  one.”  [The  friends  with 
whom  our  informant  was  staying  perfectly  remember  her  mentioning  to  them  what  she 
had  experienced.] 

The  brother— the  Kev.  J.  C.  Williams  Ellis,  of  Gay  ton  Rectory,  Blis  worth — 
•confirms  the  facts  as  far  as  he  was  concerned  ; but  from  nis  account,  and  that*  of 
Mr.  A.  Tibbits.  of  44,  Oakfield  Road,  Clifton,  who  was  also  present,  we  can  fix  the 
time  of  the  accident  at  about  6.30  p.m.  Now  further  inquiry  has  elicited  the  fact  that  the 
lister’s  depression  began  early  in  the  afternoon,  and  reached  its  climax  soon  after  5. 
Her  experience  was  certainly,  therefore,  not  telepathic  in  origin. 

The  history  of  the  Wheatcroft  case,  quoted  in  Chap,  ix.,  affords  another  illustration  of 
■this  point : had  the  death  not  been  eventually  proved  to  have  preceded,  and  not  followed, 
the  vision,  the  case  could  not  have  been  used.  I may  add  that  in  this  one  instanoef  the 
12  hours’  limit  was  possibly,  but  not  certainly,  exceeded. 

IV.] 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY, 

HI 

alleged  telepathic  case,  much  more  than  ordinary  human  frailty  in 
the  matter  of  dates  has  to  he  considered.  It  is  just  here  that  the 
action  of  the  various  positive  tendencies  to  error,  above  enumerated, 
is  really  most  to  be  apprehended.  Two  unusual  events — say  the 
, death'  of  a friend  at  a distance  and  the  hearing  of  a voice  which 
certainly  sounded  like  his — have  happened  at  no  very  great  distance 
of  time.  The  latter  event  recalls  the  former  to  the  mind  of  the 
' person  who  experienced  it;  and  on  reflection,  he  feels  that  the 
. character  of  the  one  connects  it  in  a certain  way  with  the  other. 

• True,  he  has  kept  no  record  of  the  day  and  hour  when  he  heard  the 
voice ; or  his  friend  may  have  died  in  South  America,  and  no 
accurate  report  of  the  date  of  the  occurrence  may  ever  have  reached 
England ; but  the*  connection  which  has  been  surmised  cannot  but 
raise  a presumption  that  the  two  events  corresponded  in  time  as  well 
as  in  character.  “ Why,  otherwise,  should  I have  heard  the  voice 

# at  all  ? ” the  person  who  heard  it  will  argue : “ I am  not  given 

to  hearing  phantasmal  voices.  I did  not  know  how  to  account  for  it 
before ; but  now  I see  my  way  to  doing  so.”  This  train  of  thought 
being  pursued,  it  will  seem  in  a very  short  time  that  the  two  events; 
must  have  been  simultaneous  ; and  what  can  that  mean  but  that  they 
were  simultaneous?  And  the  fact  thus  arrived  at  will  remain  the  point 
of  the  story,  as  long  as  it  continues  to  be  told.  In  allowing  his  mind 
to  act  thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  percipient  has  merely  followed 
the  easy  and  convenient  course.  There  was  something  baffling  and 
aimless  in  the  occurrence  of  the  phantasmal  voice,  without  rhyme  or 
reason,  at  a time  when  the  hearer  was  in  good  health  and  not  even 
thinking  of  his  friend.  Rhyme  and  reason — significance  and 
coherence — are  supplied  by  the  hypothesis  that  his  friend,  finding 
death  imminent,  was  thinking  of  him.  It  does  not  occur  to  him  that 
this  account  of  the  matter  is  in  itself  harder  to  accept 
than  the  fact  of  an  auditory  hallucination.  To  realise  this 

would  require  a certain  amount  of  definite  psychological  know- 
ledge. Things  are  sufficiently  explained  for  him  if  they  seem  to 
cohere  in  an  evident  way.  Or  if  he  is  sensible  that  his  version  of 
the  matter  introduces  or  suggests  a decided  element  of  the  marvellous, 
still  the  marvel  is  of  a sort  which  is  a legitimate  subject  of  human 
speculation,  and  with  which  it  is  interesting  to  have  been  in’  personal 
contact.  And  not  only  has  his  reason  thus  followed  the  line  of 
least  resistance:  his  memory  has  also  been  relieved  by  the  unity 
-which  he  has  given  to  its  contents.  It  has  now  got  a single  and  well- 

142  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

compacted  story  to  cany,  instead  of  two  disconnected  items;  It  has, 
so  to  speak,  exchanged  two  silver  pieces,  of  different  coinages  afyd 
doubtful  ratio,  for  a single  familiar  florin. 

The  above  is  no  mere  fancy  sketch ; it  represents  what  is  really 
not  unlikely  to  occur.  When  we  were  just  now  considering  how  fer 
an  honest  and  intelligent  witness  is  likely  to  imagine  afterwards  that 
a passing  impression  which  at  the  time  was  vague  and  unrecognised 
had  really  been  distinct  and  recognised,  it  will  be  remembered  that 
such  a perversion  seemed  decidedly  unlikely — that  we  saw  no'  ground 
for  assuming*  that  an  error  of  that  type  had  entered  into 
(anything  like  a majority  of  the  cases  where  we  have  no  conclusive 
■evidence  that  it  has  not  entered.  But  with  the  dates  it  is  otherwise. 
We  have  received  several  illustrations  of  the  liability  of  even  first-hand 
witnesses  to  make  times  exactly  coalesce  without  due  proof  of  their 
having  done  so,  or  even  in  spite  of  proof  that  they  did  not  do  so. 
Having  by  a reasoning  process  of  a vague  kind  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  two  events  were  simultaneous,  they  will  be  apt  to  note  any 
items  of  facts  or  inference  which  tell  in  this  direction,  and  npt  such  as 
may  tell  in  the  other.  An  informant  sometimes,  by  his  very 
•accuracy,  reveals  the  attitude  of  mind  which,  might  easily  produce 
inaccuracy  in  other  cases.  He  will  tell  us  that  all  that  was  proved 
was  that  the  death  fell  in  the  same  month  as  the  impression ; but 
that  it  is  “ borne  in  on  him  ” that  it  was  at  the  same  hour.  A good 
many  people  upon  whom  such  a conviction  is  “ borne  in”  will  treat  that 
ns  if  it  were  itself  the  evidence  required.  One  sort  of  case  in  which 
the  tendency  in  question  has  been  specially  evident  is  that  where 
the  death  has  taken  place  at  a great  distance  from  the  percipient. 
The  instinct  of  artistic  perfection  overshoots  the  mark,  when  a 
ship's  log  in  the  Indian  Ocean  shows  that  death  took  place  at  a 
•quarter-past  3,  and  a clock  on  an  English  mantelpiece  reveals  that 
that  is  the  very  minute  of  the  apparition.  Telepathy,  like  electricity, 
may  “ annihilate  space  ” ; but  it  will  never  make  the  time  of  day  at 
' tWo  different  longitudes  the  same.  This  particular  error  would  not, 
it  is  true,  completely  vitiate  the  case  from  our  point  of  view,  since  the 
12  hours  interval  would  not  have  been  exceeded;  but  pro  tanto 
it,  of  course,  diminishes  the  credit  of  the  witness. 

§ 1-2.  Let  us  now  examine  the  two  dates  separately,  and  see  where 
the  danger  more  particularly  lies,  and  what  tests  and  safeguards  can 
be  adopted.  And  first  as  to  the  date  of  the  event  that  bas  befallen  the- 

xv.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  142*. 

agent.  As  we  have  seen,  it  is  almost  always  first  from  the  percipient’s 
side  that  we  hear  of  this  event,  and  to  him  the  knowledge  of  it  came 
•as  a piece  of  news,  sometimes  by  word  of  mouth,  sometimes  in  a 
letter  or  telegram,  occasionally  in  some  printed  form.  In  *veiy  many 
cases  the  date  would,  of  course,  be  part  of  the  news.  Now,  if  his  own 
’experience  was  impressive  enough  to  have  caused  him  real  anxiety 
or  curiosity,  and  if  his  recollection  is  clear  that  the  news  came  almost 
immediately  afterwards — say  within  a couple  of  days — and  that  the 
time  of  the  two  events  was  there  and  then  compared,  and  found  to 
coincide,  the  coincidence  will  then  rest  on  something  better,  at  any 
rate,  than  the  mere  memory  of  a date.  It  will  depend  on  the  memory 
that  a certain  unusual  and  probably  painful  state  of  mind  received 
remarkable  justification,  and  that  this  justification  in  turn  produced 
another  state  of  mind  which  was  also  of  an  unusual  type.  If  there 
was  really  no  such  synchronism  as  is  represented,  then  not  only  the 
abstract  fact  of  correspondence,  but  a distinct  and  interesting  piece  of 
mental  experience  must  have  been  fictitiously  imagined.1  Now,  it 
may  be  said,  I think,  as  a rule,  that  a fictitious  imagination  of  this 
sort  needs  some  little  time  to  grow  up ; that  it  is  decidedly  improb- 
able that  any  case  whifh  is  definitely  recorded  very  soon  after  the 
event  will  have  suffered  this  degree  of  misrepresentation.  But  a few 
years  will  give  the  imagination  time  to  play  very  strange  tricks.  We 
have  had  one  very  notable  proof  of  this,  in  a case  where  a curiously 
detailed  vision  of  a dead  man,  which  (so  far  as  we  can  ascertain) 
must  have  followed  the  actual  death  by  at  least  three  months, 
was  represented  to  us,  after  an  interval  of  ten  years,  by  the 
persop,  who  had  seen  it — a witness  of  undoubted  integrity — 
as  having  occurred  on  the  very  night  of  the  death.  We  may 
be  right/'  in  regarding  so  complete  a lapse  of  memory  on  the  part 
of  an  intelligent  witness  as  exceptional ; but  we  should  certainly  not 
be  justified  in  assuming  that  it  is  exceptional ; and  no  case  of 
anything  like  that  degree  of  remoteness  can  be  relied  on,  without  some 

1 Hie  Rev.  W.  G.  Payne,  of  Toppesfield,  Essex,  sends  us  a case  of  a parishioner, 
Mrs,  Epen  Dowsett — “a  quiet,  sensible  person,” of  whose  good  faith  he  was  certain — who 
narrated  to  him  the  fact  of  her  having  been  startled  by  tne  appearance  of  her  husband, 
who  was  absent  at  Alexandria,  and  who  died  suddenly  at  that  very  time.  4<  Feeling  sure 
that  this  foreboded  evil  tidings,  she  became  very  anxious ; so  much  so  that  the  clergyman 
of  the  parish  came  several  times  to  try  to  console  her.  All  his  efforts  to  dismiss  the 
thought  from  her  mind  availed  nothing,  and  a settled  conviction  laid  hold  of  her  that  her 
husband  was  dead,”  The  case  is  not  one  that  we  should  lay  any  stress  on,  as  it  comes 
to  u$  second-hand  (the  percipient  being  dead),  and  we  do  not  know  who  the  clergyman 
was  who  was  told  of  the  apparition  before  the  news  arrived.  But  it  illustrates  the  point 
mthe  text.  Where  an  apparition  causes  such  distress  and  apprehension  as  tins,  its  date 
has  at  least  a good  ohance  of  getting  fixed  in  the  mind ; and  the  greater,  therefore,  is  the 
likelihood  for  the  coiacicUncS  to  be  noted  correctly. 

144  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  TIIE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

evidence  beyond  the  percipient’s  mere  present  recollection  that  the 
event  which  befell  the  agent  took  place  at  the  time  mentioned.  The 
evidence  may  be  of  various  sorts.  If  the  exact  date  of  the  percipient’s 
experience  can  be  proved,  then  it  is  often  possible  to  fix  the  other 
date  as  the  same,  by  letters,  diaries,  or  obituaries,  or  by  the  verbal 
testimony  of  some  independent  witness.  If  no  such  evidence  is 
accessible,  or  even  if  the  exact  date  of  the  percipient’s  experience  is 
forgotten,  it  may  still  be  possible  to  obtain  corroboration  of  the 
coincidence  from  someone  who  was  immediately  cognisant  of  the 
percipient’s  experience,  and  who  had  independent  means  of 
ascertaining  tin;  further  fact  and  of  noting  the  connection  at  the 
time.  But  the  absence  of  a written  record  of  either  event  is,  of 
course,  a decidedly  weak  point. 

§ 13.  But  on  the  whole,  the  danger  that  the  closeness  of  the 
coincidence  may  be  exaggerated  depends  rather  on  mis-statement 
of  the  date  of  the  percipient’s  than  of  the  aye  id’s  share  in  the 
alleged  occurrence.  Clearly  the  fact  that  some  one  has  died  or  has 
had  a serious  accident,  or  has  been  placed  in  circumstances  of  some 
unusual  sort,  is  likely  to  be  known  to  more  persons,  and  to  be  more 
frequently  recorded  in  some  permanent  form,  than  the  fact  that 
some  one  has  had,  or  says  he  has  had,  an  odd  hallucination.  And 
clearly  also,  if  one  of  the  points  is  fixed,  and  the  other,  by  hasty 
assumption  or  defective  memory,  is  moved  up  to  it,  the  moveable  date 
is  likely  to  be  that  of  the  event  which  has  no  ascertainable  place  in 
the  world  of  objective  tact.  As  a rule,  it  is  at  any  rate  possible  at  the 
time  to  obtain  certainty  as  to  the  date  of  what  has  befallen  the  agent ; 
and  therefore  if  the  percipient  has  been  struck  by  his  experience  and 
retains  evidence  of  its  date,  either  in  writing  or  in  the  memory  of 
others  to  whom  he  mentioned  it,  he  will  very  likely  be  prompted, 
when  he  hears  of  the  other  event,  to  assure  himself  as  to  what  the 
degree  of  coincidence  really  was.  But  the  converse  case  is  very 
different.  If  the  percipient  does  not  record  his  experience  at  the  time  of 
its  occurrence,  even  a'Aveek’s  interval  may  destroy  the  possibility  of 
making  sure  what  its  .exact  date  was  ; and  therefore,  however  certain 
the  date  of  the  other  event  may  be,  assurance  as  to  the  degree  of 
coincidence  will  here  be  unattainable.  It  is  often  expressly  recognised 
as  such  by  the  percipient  himself;  and  then  one  can  only  regret  that 
the  importance  of  the  class  of  facts — if  facts  indeed  they  tire — Has  been, 
so  little  realised  that  the  simple  measures  which  woujd  have  ensured 

IV.] 

' FOB  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY- 

14$ 

accurate  evidence  have  not  been  taken.  But  where  the  account  given 
is  one  of  accurate  coincidence,  we  cannot  be  satisfied  without  good 
evidence  that  the  point  was  critically  examined  into  at  the  time. 
It  may,  of  course,  happen  that  the  percipient  has  a clear  recollection 
that  the  coincidence  was  adequately  made  out  at  the  time,  although 
he  can  produce  no  documentary  evidence  which  would  establish  it ; 
and  if  others  confirm  his  memory  in  this  respect,  that  is  so  far 
satisfactory.  Such  unwritfen  confirmation,  however,  will  have  little 
independent  force,  unless  the  person  who  gives  it  was  made  aware  of 
the  percipient’s  experience  within  a very  short  time  of  its  occurrence. 

But  though  the  danger  here  must  bo  explicitly  recognised,  it  is 
important  not  to  exaggerate  its  practical  scope.  The  coincidence  may 
have  been  reported  as  closer  than  it  was ; but  it  may  still,  in  a 
majority  of  cases,  be  fairly  concluded  to  have  fallen  within  the  12 
hours  limit*  As  a rule,  the  news  of  what  has  befallen  the  agent 
arrives  soon  enough  for  not  more  than  a space  of  two  days  to  intervene 
between  the  percipient’s  knowledge  of  this  event  and  the  time  when, 
to  make  the  coincidence  complete,  his  own  experience  must  have  taken 
place.  We  are  not,  therefore,  making  a large  demand  on  his  memory ; 
we  are  only  requiring  that  he  shall  remember  that  an  experience, 
which  he  represents  as  remarkable,  befell  him,  or  did  not  befall  him, 
on  the  day  before  yesterday.  No  doubt,  after  a lapse  of  years,  tho 
evidential  value  of  what  a person  reports  ceases  to  have  a close  relation 
to  the  knowledge  of  the  facts  which  it  seems  pretty  certain  he  must 
have  had  at  the  time.  But  tho  demands  made  at  the  time  on  the 
intelligence  either  of  the  percipient,  or  of  anyone  else  who  had  the 
opportunity  of  asking  questions  and  forming  conclusions,  are  so  slight 
that  we  may  fairly  take  contemporary  written  records  of  the  matter, 
or  even^ later  verbal  corroboration,  as  having  a considerable  claim  to 
attention,  even  when  the  best  evidence  of  all — evidence  whose  existence 
preceded  the  arrival  of  the  news — is  wanting.  And  it  is  important  to 
notice  that,  while  we  have  had  several  coincidences  reported  to  us  as 
having  been  close  to  the  hour,  which  turned  out,  on  further  inquiry  or 
elg ruination  of  documents,  to  have  been  only  close  to  the  day,  we  have 
hardly  had  a single  case  where  a similar  correction  has  proved  that  the 
12  hours  limit  was  really  over-passed.1  A good  many  coincidences, 

1 We  have,  however,  a case  where  a death  was  reported  to  us  as  having  taken  place 
At  S a*im,  aud.  where,  on  reference  to  the  letter  in  which  it  was  announced,  it  waft  found 
to  have.taken  place  at  6 p.m.  The  evidence  on  the  percipient’s  side  seemed  satisfactory, 
9A  we  received  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  she  mentioned  her  impression  at  the  time  m 
a unique  and  very  distressing  one,  without  any  knowledge  that  her  brother,  who  died  in 
JkmaiCh  waft  even  ill ; and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  impression  did  actually  fait 

L 

140  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

no  doubt,  have  been  represented  as  extremely  close,  where  no 
independent  evidence  on  this  point  has  been  accessible,  and  closer 
inquiry  has  occasionally  revealed  that  the  assertion  rested  only  on  a 
guess*  But  wholly  to  neglect  cases  where  the  exactitude  of  the 
coincidence  is  not  brought  within  the  1 2 hours  limit  would  clearly  be 
unreasonable,  provided  that — on  the  evidence — it  is  not  likely  that 
tliis  limit  was  much  exceeded,1  and  not  certain  that  it  was  exceeded 
at  all.  Such  cases  must,  of  course,  bo  excluded  from  any  numerical 
estimate  based  on  precise  data ; but  they  may  fairly  be  allowed  their 
own  weight  on  the  unhid. 

§ 14.  We  see,  then,  that  cases  where  the  alleged  correspondence  of 
facts  and  coincidence  of  dates  is  sufficiently  close  to  afford  apriimd  facie 
claim  for  telepathic  action  may  present  very  various  degrees  of 
strength  and  weakness  ; and  it  may  be  convenient  to  summarise  the 
evidential  conditions,  according  to  their  value,  in  the  following  tabular 
form.  (The  words  “ the  news  ” mean  always  the  news  of  what  has 
befallen  the  supposed  agent.) 

A.  Where  the  event-  which  befell  the  agent,  with  its  date,  is 
recorded  in  printed  notices,  or  contemporary  documents  which  we 

within  the  jieriod  of  serious  illness.  But  the  impression  was  a dream  ; and  a dream  of 
death,  however  remarkable  in  its  character,  which  is  separated  from  the  actual  event 
by  18  hours,  cannot  be  included  in  our  evidence.  In  another  very  similar  case,  the 
(percipients  impression  was  stated,  and  apparently  correctly,  to  have  occurred  m the 
Crimea  on  January  11th,  1878,  and  the  death  (of  a sister)  in  England  to  have  taken  place 
on  the  same  day.  But  on  examining  the.  letter  in  which  the  news  was  announced,  we  find 
that  the  death  actually  took  place  on  a Wednesday  ; and  Wednesday  fell  noton  the  11th  but 
on  the  9th.  The  assumed  coincidence,  therefore,  altogether  breaks  down. 

1 This  question  of  likelihood  must  be  carefully  weighed,  according  to  "the 
circumstances.  The  following  case,  from  the  Rev.  Canon  Sherlock,  of  Sherlockstown, 
Naas,  which  was  published  in  our  first  report  on  the  subject  as  possibly  telepathic,  is  a 
.specimen  of  what  we  certainly  should  not  now  feel  justified  in  regarding  as  evidence. 

“.During  the  Indian  Mutiny,  my  brother  was  serving  (as  ensign)  in  the 
72nd  Highlanders.  At  that  time  I was  an  undergraduate  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin,  and  living  at  Sandgrove,  near  Kingstown.  One  night  about  2 o’clock  I 
was  reading  by  the  fire,  when  I heard  myself  distinctly  called  by  my  brother,  the 
tone  of  his  voice  being  somewhat  raised  and  urgent;  looking  round  I saw  his 
head  and  the  upi>er  part  of  his  body  quite  plainly.  He  appeared  to  be  looking  at  me,  and 
was  about  7 or  8 feet  distant.  I looked  steadily  at  him  for  about  half  a minute, 
when  he  seemed  gradually  to  fade  into  a mist  and  disappear.  The  date  of  this  occurrence 
I,  unfortunately,  lost  note  of,  but  upon  my  brother’s  return  from  India  and  my  casually 
mentioning  that  I had  so  seen’  him,  we  talked  the  matter  over,  and  both  came  to  the 
♦conclusion  that  the  apparition  coincided  with  a dangerous  attack  of  illness,  in  which  my 
brother  suddenly  awoke  with  the  impression  that  he  was  suffocating,  at  which  moment  he 
thought  of  me.  The  attack  was  brought  on  by  sleeping  during  a forced  inarch  through  a 
country  great  j>art  of  which  was  under  water.  This  is  the  only  apparition  that  I have 
-ever  experienced,  and  there  was  no  anxiety  on  my  mind  which  could  nave  given  rise  to  it, 
as  we  had  quite  recently  had  a letter  from  my  brother,  written  in  good  health  and  spirits. 

B “W.  Sherlock.” 

If  one  dismisses  all  <1  priori  leanings  to  a telepathic  explanation,  there  is  nothing  in 
this  account  which  renders  it  unlikely  that  the  two  events  were  separated  by  (say)  10 
{lays,  or  that  the  event  in  England  preceded  the  one  in  India. 

IV.]  ' FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  147 

have  examined ; or  is  reported  to  us  by  the  agent  himself  indepen- 
dently, or  by  some  independent  witness  or  witnesses  ; and  where 

(1)  The  percipient  (a)  made  a written  record  of  his 
experience,  with  its  date,  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence, 
which  record  we  have  either  seen  or  otherwise  ascertained 
to  be  still  in  existence  ; or  (/3)  before  the  arrival  of  the 
news,  mentioned  his  experience  to  one  or  more  persons,  by 
whom  the  fact  that  he  so  mentioned  it  is  corroborated ; 
or  (y)  immediately  adopted  a special  course  of  action  on 
the  strength  of  his  experience,  as  is  proved  by  external 
evidence,  documentary  or  personal. 

(2)  The  documentary  evidence  mentioned  in  (la)  and 
(ly)  is  alleged  to  have  existed,  but  has  not  been  accessible  to 
our  inspection  ; or  the  experience  is  alleged  to  have  been 
mentioned  as  in  (1/3),  or  the  action  taken  on  the  strength 
of  it  to  have  been  remarked  as  in  (ly),  but  owing  to  death 
or  other  causes,  the  person  or  persons  to  whom  the 
experience  was  mentioned,  or  by  whom  the  action  was 
remarked,  can  no  longer  corroborate  the  fact. 

This  second  class  of  cases  is  placed  here  for  convenience, 
but  should  probably  rank  below  the  next  class.  At  the  same 
time  the  fact  that  the  percipient’s  experience  was  noted  in 
writing  by  him,  or  was  communicated  to  another  person, 
or  was  acted  on,  before  the  arrival  of  the  news,  is  not  one 
which  is  at  all  specially  likely  to  be  unconsciously  invented 
by  him  afterwards. 

(3)  The  percipient  did  not  (a)  make  any  written  record, 
nor  (/3)  make  any  verbal  mention  of  his  experience  until 
after  the  arrival  of  the  news,  but  then  did  one  or  both ; of 
which  fact  we  have  confirmation. 

This  class  is  of  course,  as  a rule,  decidedly  inferior  to  the 
first  class.  At  the  same  time,  cases  occur  under  it  in 
which  the  news  was  so  immediate  that  the  fact  of  the 
coincidence  could  only  be  impugned  by  representing  the  whole 
story  as  an  invention.1 

(4)  The  immediate  record  or  mention  on  the  arrival 
of  the  news  is  alleged  to  have  been  made,  but  owing  to 
loss  of  papers,  death  of  friends,  or  other  causes,  cannot  be 
confirmed. 

1 See,  for  instance,  Mrs.  Severn’s  case,  Chap,  v.,  § 2. 

h 2 

148 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

k 

(5)  The  percipient  alleges  that  he  remarked  the 
coincidence  when  he  heard  the  news ; but  no  record  or 
mention  of  the  circumstance  was  made  until  some  time 
afterwards. 

Such  cases,  of  course,  rapidly  lose  any  value  they  may 
have  as  the  time  increases  which  separates  the  account 
from  the  incident.  Still,  sometimes  we  have  been  able  to 
obtain  the  independent  evidence  of  some  one  who  heard  an 
account  previous  to  the  present  report  to  us ; or  we  have 
ourselyes  obtained  two  reports  separated  by  a considerable 
interval.  And  where  a comparison  of  accounts  given  at 
different  times  shows  that  they  do  not  vary,  this  is  to  some 
extent  an  indication  of  accuracy. 

B.  Where  the  percipient  is  our  sole  authority  for  the  nature  and 
date  of  the  event  which  he  alleges  to  have  befallen  the  agent. 

In  many  of  these  cases,  the  percipient  is  also  our  sole 
authority  for  his  own  experience:  and  the  evidence  under 
this  head  will  then  be  weaker  than  in  any  of  the  above  classes. 
But  where  wo  have  independent  testimony  of  the  percipient’s, 
mention  of  the  two  events,  and  of  their  coincidence,  soon 
after  their  occurrence — he  having  been  at  the  time  in  such 
circumstances  that  he  would  naturally  know  the  nature  and 
date  of  what  liad  befallen  the  agent — the  case  may  rank  as 
higher  in  value  than  some  of  those  of  Class  A (5). 

§ 15.  The  evidence  which  I have  so  far  analysed  is  first-hand 
evidence — in  the  sense  that  the  main  account  comes  to  us  direct 
from  the  percipient.  The  present  collection,  however,  includes  (in  the 
Supplement)  a certain  number  of  second-hand  narratives  ; and  it  will 
be  well,  therefore,  to  consider  briefly  what  are  the  best  sorts  of 
second-hand  evidence,  and  what  kinds  of  inaccuracy  are  most  to  be 
apprehended  in  the  transmission  of  a telepathic  history  from  mouth  to* 
mouth. 

There  is  one,  and  only  one,  sort  of  second-hand  evidence 
which  can  on  the  whole  be  placed  on  a par  with  first-hand ; 
namely,  the  evidence  of  a person  to  whom  t!he  percipient  has. 
mentioned  his  experience  before  the  news  of  the  correspond- 
ing event  is  known,  and  who  afterwards  has  had  equal  oppor- 
tunities with  the  percipient  for  learning  the  truth  of  that  event* 
and  confirming  the  coincidence.  The  second-hand  witness’s  testimony 
in  such  a case  is  quite  as  likely  to  be  accurate  as  the  percipient’s ; for 
though  his  impression  of  the  actual  details  will  no  doubt  be  less  vivid. 

tv.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  149 

yet  on  the  other  hand  he  will  not  be  under  the  same  temptation  to 
exaggerate  the  force  or  strangeness  of  the  impression  in  subsequent 
retrospection.  Specimens  of  this  class  have  therefore  been  admitted 
to  the  body  of  the  work,  as  well  as  to  the  Supplement.  Putting 
this  exceptional  class  aside,  the  value  of  second-hand  evidence 
chiefly  depends  on  the  relation  of  the  first  narrator  to  the 
second.  A second-hand  account  from  a person  only  slightly 
acquainted  with  the  original  nafrator  is  of  very  little  value; 
not  only  because  it  is  probably  the  report  of  a story  which  has  been 
only  once  heard,  and  that,  perhaps,  in  a hurried  or  casual  way  ; but 
also  because  the  less  the  reporter’s  sense  of  responsibility  to  his 
informant,  the  less  also  will  be  his  sense  of  responsibility  to  the  facts, 
and  the  greater  the  temptation  to  improve  on  the  original.1  But  we 
cannot  so  lightly  dismiss  the  testimony  of  near  relatives  and  close 
friends  to  a matter  which  they  have  heard  the  first-hand  witness 
narrate  more  than  once,  or  narrate  in  such  a manner  as  convinced  .them 
that  the  alleged  facts  were  to  him  realities,  and  had  made  a lasting 
impression  on  his  mind.  Here  we,  at  any  rate,  have  a chance  of 
forming  a judgment  as  to  the  character  of  the  original  authority;,  we 
can  make  tolerably  certain  that  what  we  hear  was  never  the  mere 
anecdote  of  a raconteur ; and  we  have  grounds  for  assuming  in  our 
own  informants  a certain  instinct  of  fidelity  which  may  at  any  rate 
preserve  their  report  from  the  errors  of  wilful  carelessness  and 
exaggeration.  It  not  infrequently  happens,  too,  that  we  can  obtain 
several  independent  versions  from  several  second-hand  witnesses,  which 
may  mutually  confirm  one  another ; and  contemporary  documentary 
evidence,  may  give  further  support  to  the  case. 

The  risks  of  error  in  transmitted  evidence  are,  of  course,  in  many 
respects  the  same,  in  an  intensified  form,  as  those  of  original  evidence. 
To  a person  who  is  told  something  which  sounds  surprising  by  some 
one  else  who  has  experienced  it,  the  central  marvel  is  apt  to  standout 
in  memory  with  undue  relief;  and  the  various  details  and  considera- 
tions which  might  modify  the  marvellous  element  will  drop  out  of 
sight.  One  is,  of  course,  familiar  with  the  same  process  in  the  case 
of  almost  any  anecdote  or  witticism  that  gets  at  all  repandw : the 

1 A lady  has  described  to  us  a hallucination  which  presented  to  her  the  form  of  he® 
father-in-law,.  who  nad  been  dead  14  years.  An  acquaintance,  to  whom  she  once 
mentioned  this  experience,  had  reported  it  to  us  as  the  apparition  of  her  brother,  with  the 
addition  that  “ a short  time  afterwards  she  received  news  of  her  brother’s  death,  which 
had  taken  place  at  the  very  time  of  the  apparition.”  There  is  a touch  of  nature  in  the 
faot  that  the  author  of  this  amended  version  considers  the  original  witness  “ not  at  all  an 
imaginative  person.” 

150 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

point  is  retained,  the  details  and  surroundings  vary.  For  purposes  of 
Amusement  such  variations  may  be  wholly  unimportant ; for  purposes 
of  evidence  they  may  be  all-important.  Facts,  moreover,  are  very 
much  easier  to  improve  than  bun  mot h and  the  like,  and  with  the 
second-hand  narrator  the  tendency  to  make  things  picturesque 
and  complete,  by  the  addition,  omission,  or  transformation  of 
details,  is  naturally  stronger  in  that  there  is  no  deeply-graven  sense 
of  the  reality  to  act  as  a check  on  it.  A gentleman,  who  signs 
himself  “ Rector,”  writes  to  the  Daily  Telegraph,  and  describes  a 
uumber  of  elorgyihen  sitting  round  a table,  on  the  evening  when  the 
late  Bishop  of  Winchester  met  with  his  fatal  accident.  “ One  of 
them  said,  ‘ There  is  the  Bishop  looking  in  at  that  window.’  Another 
immediately  said,  ‘No,  he  is  at  this  window.’”  What  really 
happened — as  we  learn  from  Mr.  G.  W.  Paxon,  who  was  present 
at  the  scene  referred  to — was  that  a strange  figure  passed  the  three 
windows  of  the  dining-room  at  Wotton,  but  that  “ it  was  not  possible 
for  the  gentlemen  present  ” (who,  by  the  way,  were  three  only, 
and  all  laymen)  to  identify  it.  Mr.  Evelyn  went  out  to  see  who« 
it  could  be,  but  it  had  disappeared  with  mysterious  rapidity. 
And  that  is  the  whole  story.  Again,  a young  man,  we  are  told,  was 
dying  in  London,  his  friends  being  unaware  of  his  whereabouts.  A 
sister  of  his  in  Edinburgh,  who  was  also  dying,  “ said  that 
she  was  present  at  the  death-bed  of  her  brother ; she  gave  an  outline 
of  his  room,  and  told  Ilia  name  and  number  of  the  street.”  A 
friend  of  our  informant's,  Mr.  David  Lewis,  of  21,  St.  Andrew 
Square,  Edinburgh,  was  then  asked  to  inquire,  went  to  the  address, 
and  found  (as  he  informs  us)  that  the  young  man  had  just  died  there. 
But  on  more  careful  inquiry  from  the  lady’s  husband,  we  learn 
that  though  his  wife  described  the  room,  she  did  not  see  the*  name  of 
the  street ; and  that  he  himself  knew  his  brother-in-law’s  address  at 
the  time,  and  had  actually  received  a letter  saying  that  he  was  very 
ill  and  not  expected  to  live.  The  description  of  the  room-even  if 
proved  to  be  correct — could  have  no  evidential  force  unless  extremely 
minute.  All  that  remains  to  be  accounted  for,  therefore,,  is  the 
lady’s  impression  as  to  her  brother’s  condition;  and  though  her 
husband  is  sure  that  she  could  not  have  known  it  in  any  ordinary 
way,  it  is  impossible  for  outsiders— remembering  that  the  knowledge 
did  exist  in  the  house  at  the  time— to  share  his  confidence.  Again,  a 
gentleman  tells  us  how  his  grandfather,  when  taking  a walk  at 
Honfleur,  on  November  24th,  1859,  saw  the  apparition  of  his  (our 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

151 

rr.} 

informant’s)  sister,  Vho  expired  at  that  time  in  England  He 
followed  the  figure,  and  it  disappeared  on  reaching  his  garden.  “ In 
conversation  afterwards  the  very  wrapper  worn  by  the  deceased  was 
described.”  We  obtain  a copy  of  the  original  letter  in  which  the 
grandfather  described  the  occurrence,  and  find  that  he  was  walking 
“ in  the  dark  and  a drizzling  rain  ” when  he  observed  something  very 
white.  “ It  appeared  to  be  a lady  in  white,  without  a bonnet,  but 
a large  white  veil  over  her  head.  It  disappeared  at  the  door  of  a 
house.-  This  took  place  as  near  the  time  of  dear  Sarah’s  departure  as 
possible.”  Here,  therefore,  the  second-hand  account  i introduced  the 
recognition,  omitted  the  uncertain  light,  and  altered  the  placo  of 
disappearance.  O.nce  more,  a lady  has  had  a strong  impression  of 
her  husband’s  being  in  danger,  at  a time  when  he  actually  had  a 
narrow  escape  in  a railway  accident.  In  this  accident  a number  of 
cattle  were  killed,  and  the  line  was  red  with  their  blood.  The  story 
comes  round  to  us  that  the  wife  had  not  only  an  impression  of 
danger,  but  a vivid  picture  of  blood. 

It  is  amusing  sometimes  to  find  that  evidence  breaks  down  on 
the  exact  point  which  has  been  held  to  be  its  most  convincing 
feature..  The  following  narrative,  though  a third-hand  one,  seemed  to 
have  some  claim  to  attention,  as  it  reached  us  from  two  independent 
quarters;  and  the  two  accounts  so  completely  agree  that  we  may 
assume  that  we  have  the  correct  version  of  the  second-hand  witness. 
Mr.  W.  C.  Morland,  of  Lamberhurst  Court  Lodge,  Kent,  (who  vouches 
for  no  more  than  that  he  repeats  exactly  what  he  was  told,)  writes  to 
us  as  follows : — 

“ August  11th,  1883. 

“ My  wife’s  great-uncle  was  private  secretary  to  Warren  Hastings  in : 
-India,  and  one  day,  when  sitting  in  Council,  they  all  saw  a figure  pass 
through  the  Council-room  into  an  inner  room,  from  which  there  was  no 
other  exit.  One  of  the  Council  exclaimed,  * Good  God  ! that  is  my 
father. ’ Search  was  made  in  the  inner  room,  but  nothing  could  be  found, 
and  Warren  Hastings,  turning  to  his  secretary,  said,  ‘ Cator,  make  a not© 
of  this,  and  put  with  the  minutes  of  to-day’s  Council.’  As  a small 
incident  in  the  story,  it  was  noticed  that,  the  figure  had  one  of  our 
modern:  pot  hats.  Some  months  after,  a ship  arrived  bringing  the  news 
of  the  old  gentleman’s  death  and  the  first  pot  hats  that  had  been  seen 
in  India. 

“ I simply  tell  it  you  as  I heard  it  from  a Mr.  Sparkes,  who  is 
now  dfead,  and  who,  as  well  as  my  wife,  was  great-nephew  to — and 
probably  heard  it  from — the  old  Mrs  Cator  who  was  present  at  the 
Council.  I never  heard  him  say  whether  he  heard  it  direct  from  Mr. 

152  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

Oator  but  I think  it  likely,  as  he  was  rather  nearly  related,  and  from  his 
age  must  have  known  him.”  ' 

Precisely  similar  details  were  given  by  Mr.  Sparkes  to  the 
Rev.  B.  Wrey  Savile,  who  has  published  the  case  in  his  book  On 
Apparitions ; in  this  account  the  Member  of  Council  who 
recognised  his  father  figures  as  Mr.  Shakespeare.  Now  the  official 
minutes  of  the  Supreme  Council  have  been  searched  for  us;  but  it  does 
not  appear  either  that  Mr.  Shakespeare  was  a* Member  of  Council 
at  the  time,  or  that  Mr.  Cater  was  Hastings’  private  secretary, 
though  he  was  certainly  in  the  Company’s  service.  We  learn, 
however,  from  the  Superintendent  of  Records  at  the  India  Office 
that  “it  is  believed  that  the  registers  of  the  Company’s  servants 
in  India  at  that  early  date  were  not  always  quite  accurate”;  so 
that  these  discoveries  would  not  alone  have  thrown  serious  suspicion 
on  |he  report.  And  the  chimney-pot  hat  seemed,  at  any  rate, 
something  respectable  to  stand  by.  The  phantom,  in  fact,  owed 
his  character  to  his  hat;  for  it  is  hard  to  imagine  how  Mr.  Cator 
or  Mr.  Sparkes  could  have  gratuitously  introduced  such  a feature 
into  the  story.  But  the  curious  perfection  of  the  detail  as  to  the 
simultaneous  arrival  of  the  news  and  of  the  real  hats  at  once 
suggests  scrutiny  of  the  dates.  All  the  accounts  of  chimney-pot 
hats  that  we  have  been  able,  to  find  agree  that  they  came  into 
use  between  1790  and  175)5,  though  they  seem  to  have  been 
worn  in  France  as  early  as  1787.  They  cannot,  therefore,  have 
reached  India  before;  the  termination  of  Hastings’  governorship 
in  1785.  Thus  the  case  at  once  assumes  a mythical  air;  and  the 
most  we  can  assume  is  that  probably  some  odd  coincidence  occurred.1 

I will  add  a case;  where  the  instinct  that  we  have  noticed,  to  make 
evidence  picturesque,  has  so  far  overleapt  itself  as  to  supply  the  very 
means  of  confutation.  The  late  Mrs.  Howitt  Watts  gave  us  the 
narrative  as  from  her  mother,  who  had  “ many  times  heard  it  related” 
by  her  mother,  the  percipient,  and  so  far  it  is  third-hand.  But  Mrs. 
Watts  had  also  heard  it  from  her  grandmother’s  own  lips..  The 
occurrence  took  place  at  Heanor,  in  Derbyshire. 

1 Very  comparable  is  an  account  which  we  have  received,  written  by*  the  late  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Balneavis — describing  how,  when  a child,  he  was  woke  by  his  mother,  who  had  - 
had  a terrifying  vision  of  her  husband  “putting  a corpse  in  full  uniform  on  a sofa,  and 
afterwards  covering  it  over  with  a white  sheet  ” ; and  how  his  father  was  “ at  the  very  * 
time  performing  these  offices  for  Sir  T.  Maitland,  Governor  of  Malta,  With  whom  he 
had  been  dining,  and  who  “droi>ped  down  dead  at  table.”  We  find  from  the  Annual 
Jlegtater  that  Sir  T.  Maitland  was  taken  ill  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  at  the  house  of  a 
friend,  and  died  there  in  the  evening,  in  bed,  after  being  speechless  for  8 hours. 

IV*] 

FOE  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY^ 

153 

11  My  mother's  family  name,  Tantum,  is  an  uncommon  one,  which  I do 
not  recollect  to  have  met  with  except  in  a story  of  Miss  Leslie's*  My 
mother  had  two  brothers,  Francis  and  Richard.  The  younger,  Richard,  I 
knew  well,  for  he  lived  to  an  old  age.  The  elder,  Francis,  was,  at  the  time 
of  the  occurrence  I am  about  to  report,  a gay  young  man,  about  twenty, 
unmarried,  handsome,  frank,  affectionate,  and  extremely  beloved  by  all 
classes  throughout  that  part  of  the  country.  He  is  described,  in  that  age 
of  powder  and  pigtails,  as  wearing  his  auburn  hair  flowing  in  ringlets  on  his 
Shoulders,  like  another  Absalom,  and  was  much  admired,  as  well  for  his 
personal  grace  as  for  the  life  and  gaiety  of  his  manners. 

“ One  fine  calm  afternoon,  my  mother,  shortly  after  a confinement,  but 
perfectly  convalescent,  was  lying  in  bed,  enjoying,  from  her  window,  the 
sense  Of  summer  beauty  and  repose ; a bright  sky  .above,  and  the  quiet 
village  before  her.  In  this  state  she  was  gladdened  by  hearing  footsteps 
which  she  took  to  be  those  of  her  brother  Frank,  as  he  was  familiarly 
called,  Approaching  the  chamber-door.  The  visitor  knocked  and  entered. 
The  foot  of  the  bed  was  towards  the  door,  and  the  curtains  at  the  foot, 
notwithstanding  the  season,  were  drawn,  to  prevent  any  draught.  Her 
brother  parted  them,  and  looked  in  upon  her.  His  gaze  was  earnest,  and 
destitute  of  its  usual  cheerfulness,  and  he  spoke  not  a word.  ‘ My  dear 
Frank,'  said  my  mother,  * how  glad  I am  to  see  you  ! Come  round  to  the 
bedside ; I wish  to  have  some  talk  with  you.' 

“He  closed  the  curtains,  as  complying;  but  instead  of  doing  so, 
my  mother,  to  her  astonishment,  heard  him  leave  the  room,  close 
the  door  behind  him,  and  begin  to  descend  the  stairs.  Greatly 
amazed,  she  hastily  rang,  and  when  her  maid  appeared  she  hide  her  call 
her  brother  back.  The  girl  replied  that  she  had  not  seen  him  enter  the 
house.  But  my  mother  insisted,  saying  4 He  was  here  but  this  instant. 
Run  ! quick  ! Call  him  back  ! I must  see  him.' 

44  The  girl  hurried  away,  but,  after  a time,  returned,  saying  that  she 
could  learn  nothing  of  him  anywhere ; nor  had  anyone  in  or  about  the 
house  seen  him  either  enter  or  depart. 

44  Now,  my  father’s  house  stood  at  the  bottom  of  the  village,  and  6jese 
to  %the  high-road,  which  was  quite  straight ; so  that  any  one  passing  along 
it  must  have  been  seen  for  a much  longer  period  than  had  elapsed.  The 
girl  said  «she  had  looked  up  and  down  the  road,  then  searched  the  garden— 
a large,  old-fashioned  one,  with  shady  walks.  But  neither  in  the  garden 
nor  on  the  road  was  he  to  be  seen.  She  had  inquired  at  the  nearest 
cottages  in  the  village  ; but  no  one  had  noticed  him  pass. 

“ My  mother,  though  a very  pious  woman,  was  far  from  superstitious  ; 
yet  the  strangeness  of  this  circumstance  struck  her  forcibly.  While  she 
lay  pondering  upon  it,  there  was  heard  a sudden  running  and  excited 
talking  in  the  village  street." 

Briefly,  the  cause  of  the  disturbance  was  that  Mr.  Francis  Tantum 
had  just  been  killed.  He  had  been  dining  at  Shipley  Hall,  about  a 
mile  off,  and  was  riding  home  after  the  early  country  dinner  of  that  day 
— somqwhat  elated,  it  may  be,  with  wine.  He  stopped  at  the  door  of  ax* 
ale-house  at  Heanor,  where  he  offended  the  young  man  who  served  him, 
Tby  striking  him  with  his  whip.  The  youth  ran  into  the  house,  seised  a 
carving-knife,  darted  back,  and  stabbed  him. 

154 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

. 'This  story  obtained  a certain  currency,  having  been  published  by 
Mr.  Dale  Owen  in  his  Footfalls.  Yet  the  simple  precaution  of 
getting  independent  evidence  as  to  the  time  of  the  death  goes  far  to 
ruin  its  character.  A certificate,  sent  to  us  by  the  rector  of  the  parish, 
shows  that  Mr.  F.  Tantmn  was  buried  on  the  4<th  of  February,  and 
that  his  age  was  30.  And  this  does  more  than  merely  disturb  our 
picture  of  the  quiet  summer  scene,  and  of  the  Absalom  of  twenty. 
The  time  of  year  shows  that  the  percipient’s  vision  probably  took 
place  after  dark ; so  that  “ any  one  passing  along  the  high-road  ” 
might  very  well  not  have  been  seen  a minute  after  his  departure 
and  the  inquiries  at  the  cottages  would  have  been  worth  little  or 
nothing.  But  these  researches,  as  they  are  described,  must  have 
taken  time;  and  as  the  news  of  the  murder  would  be  likely  to 
spread  fast,  we  should  conclude  that  that  event  took  place  decidedly 
after  the  vision.  Thus  there  appears  no  adequate  reason  why  the 
apparition  should  not  have  been  the  real  man — his  conduct,  though 
undoubtedly  odd,  being  explicable  by  the  state  of  slight  intoxication 
which  the  narrative  suggests. 

But  apart  from  sensational  additions,  details  are  apt  to  creep  in. 
which  seem  sober  and  innocent  enough,  but  which  make  the  whole 
difference  from  an  evidential  point  of  view.  A very  striking  narrative 
reaches  us  from  a second-hand  source,  as  to  how  an  officer  in  India 
saw  one  day  his  father,  long  deceased,  issue  from  a wood  leading  his 
mother  by  the  hand ; how  the  latter  addressed  some  words  to  her  son, 
and  the  pair  then  vanished ; and  how  he  afterwards  learnt  that  his 
mother  had  died  in  England  on  that  very  day.  We  happened  already 
to  have  a first-hand  account  of  the  incident,  in  which  the  visitation 
that  coincided  with  the  death  was  described  not  as  a vx  thing  'percept, 
but  as  a dream.  The  enormous  difference,  for  the  purpose  of  our 
argument,  which  this  point,  involves  will  abundantly  appear  in  the 
sequel.  Again,  in  transmitted  cases  it  is  quite  remarkable  how  often 
the  percipient  “ made  a note  ” of  his  experience  at  the  time  of  its 
occurrence — an  act  of  foresight  in  which  percipients,  to  judge  from 
their  own  first-hand  accounts,  seem  only  too  apt  to  fail. 

In  transmitted  evidence  which  is  more  remote  than  second-hand, 
another  frequent  point  is  that  the  chain  of  transmission  is  shortened 
— that  a narrative  which  has  really  passed  through  two  or  through 
three  mouths  will  be  represented  as  having  passed  only  through  one 
or  through  two.  For  instance,  a gentleman  tells  us  of  a striking 
telepathic  phantasm  which  appeared  to  a friend  of  his,  a sea-captain. 

IV,] 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

15S 

oft  board  ship*  Nautical  phantasms  are  not  a favourite  class  of  ours  J; 
the  evidence  is  too  apt  to  “ suffer  a sea-change  ” and  even  tho 
guarantee,  offered  to  us  in  respect  Of  another  specimen,  that  “ the 
crewhad no  difficulty  in  believing  it,”  is  not  completely  reassuring. 
But  the  present  example,  at  any  rate,  proved  quite  too  superlatively 
nautical ; for  it  turned  out  that  the  sea-captain  was  not  the  original 
witness,  but  had  heard  the  story  from  another  sea-captain ; and  that 
this  sea-captain  had  heard  it  from  the  “ man  at  the  wheel  ” ; whom 
we  have  hot  troubled  for  it.  Again,  a story  which  has  been  more  than 
once  printed  by  Spiritualistic  writers  begins  as  follows : — “ Mrs. 
Crawford,  in  the  Metropolitan  Magazine  in  1836,  tells  us  that  the- 
then  Lord  Chedworth  was  a man  who  suffered  deeply  from  doubts  ” — 
and  then  describes’ how  the  apparition  of  a sceptical  friend  of  Lord 
Chedworth’s  presented  itself  one  night,  told  him  that  there  was  a. 
judgment  to  come,  and  disappeared — the  news  of  the  friend’s  death 
arriving  “in  due  course”  next  morning.  On  referring'  to  Mrs. 
Cranford’s  own  account,  we  find  the  hero  of  the  story  described  as. 
“ Lord  Chedworth,  the  father  of  the  late  lord  ” ; and  even  this> 
description  is  incorrect,  as  the  fourth  baron — with  whose  death  in 
1804  the  title  became  extinct — succeeded,  not  his  father,  but  his. 
uncle.1 * 3  This  possible  shortening  of  the  chain  of  evidence  is  a point 
that1  must  never  bo  lost  sight  of  when  the  account  was  given  orally 
to  the  last  witness,  and  was  not  made  tho  subject  of  minute  inquiry.4 

1 The  story  which  “drags  at  each  remove  a lengthening  chain, ” even  though  the* 
removes  be  in  the  direction  of  its  source,  is  a type  that  has  become  very  familiar  to  us. 
The  following  is  a sample  of  many  a correspondence  which  is  more  amusing  in  retrospect, 
than  in  reality. 

Miss  A.  described  to  me  a remarkable  incident,  as  related  to  her  by  the  Rev.  B.,  who 
had  hoard  of  it  from  the  lady  to  whom  it  occurred. 

The  Rev.  B.,  on  being  applied  to,  said  that  he  had  heard  of  it,  not  from  the  lady  to- 
whom  it  occurred,  but  from  the  Rev.  C. 

The  Rev.  0.  was  applied  to,  but  had  only  heard  the  story  from  the  Rev.  D. ; with  - 
whose  appearance  on  the  scene  hope  revived. 

The  Rev.  D.  reported  that  he  had  not  heard  the  story  from  the  heroine  of  it,  but  from 
a friend  <>f  hers,  Mi’s.  E.,  who  would  procure  it  from  the  heroine. 

Mrs.  E.,  in  turn,  reported  that  her  authority,  Miss  F.,  was  not  herself  the  heroine,  but- 
had  been  informed  by  Miss  G.,  who  was. 

Miss  F.,  on  being  applied  to,  had  only  heard  Miss  G.’s  story  third -hand,  but  referred 
me  to  Miss  H.,  a nearer  friend  of  Miss  G.  ’s. 

Miss  H.  kindly  applied  to  Miss  G.,  but  reported,  as  the  result,  that  MissG.’s  own 
information  was  only  third  or  fourth  hand. 

Such  is  the  last  state  (as  far  as  I am  concerned  at  any  rate)  of  a story  which  began  by* 
being  third-hand  and  has  been  traced  back  through  seven  mouths. 

3 For  instance,  a friend  of  the  present  writer  reports  as  follows 

“About  ten  years  ago  Admiral  Johnson,  of  Little  Baddow,  Essex,  told  me  as  follows  : 
One  day  he  was  walking  with  companions  m a wood  when  he  suddenly  saw  his  brother 
Arthur,  in  uniform,  and  said,  * There’s  my  brother ! ’ It  was  discovered  afterwards  that, 
the  brother  died  at  that  time,” 

We  have  failed  to  trace  this  occurrence  ; and  it  may  be  surmised  as  possible  that  the 
hero  of  the  story,  which  was  told  in  casual  conversation,  was  not  Admiral  Johnson. 

156  GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

But  perhaps  no  feature  of  the  transmitted  narratives  is  on  the  whole 
so  suggestive  as  the  wonderful  exactness  of  the  all-important  time- 
coincidence;  which  in  these  cases  we  must  be  doubly  careful  of 
assuming  to  have  been  founded  on  a genuine  coincidence  of  a less' 
exact  kind  (p.  139).  Thus,  a gentleman  strikingly  describes  to 
us  how  a friend  of  his,  while  walking  in  Barnsley,  and  when  no  one' 
was  within  30  yards  of  her,  felt  herself  seized  by  two  hands  round  the 
waist ; her  only  “enlightenment  on  the  matter”  being  that  “ on  the 
very  same  afternoon^  her  brother  went  down  with  the  ill-fated  training 
ship,  the  ‘ Eurydice.’  ” On  applying  direct  to  the  lady,  we  find  that  the 
hallucination  took  place  “ two  days  before  the  dreadful  accident.”  The 

himself,  but  some  one  else.  That  is,  the  story  may  be  third' -hand,  and  is  of  no  evidential 

value. 

The  following  narrativ  * from  Mrs.  Lonsdale,  of  Lichfield,  is  another  instance  in 
poi  nt 

“1  was  sitting  next  my  dear  old  friend,  l)r.  (since  Sir  Thomas)  Watson,  at  a London 
•dinner-party.  1 think  some  one  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  table  said  to  him,  ‘ A physician 
in  your  extensive  practice  must  hoar  and  see  strange*  things  sometimes.’  He  said,  * Indeed 
we  do.’  He  then  turned  to  me  and  said,  ‘ know  that  1 am  a matter-of-fact  person, 
And  I will  now  tell  you  the  strangest  of  all  the  strange  things  that  ever ‘happened  to  me. 

“ * 1 was  tallied  in,  some  years  ago,  to  see  a man,  a stranger  tome,  who  had  been  taken 
dangerously  ill  at  his  chambers  in  the  Temple.  Directly  I saw  him  I knew  that  he  had 
not  more  than  24  hours  to  live,  and  1 told  him  that  he  must  lose  no  time  in  settling  any 
worldly  affairs,  and  in  sending  for  any  relations  whom  he  might  wish  to  see.  He  told  me 
he  had  only  one  near  relation,  a brother,  who  was  in  one  of  the  Midland  counties.  By  my 
patient’s  desire,  I sat  down  and  wrote  to  the  brother,  telling  him  that  if  he  would  find  the 
sick  man  still  alive  he  must  come  off  at  once,  on  receipt  of  my  letter.  The  next  morning, 
while  I was  visiting  my  patient,  who  was  then  sinking  fast,  the  brother  arrived.  As  he 
•came  in  at  the  door,  the  dying  man  fixed  his  eyes  on  his  face  and  said,  “ Ah  ! brother,  how 
d ye  do — 1 saw  you  last  night,  you  know.”  To  my  infinite  surprise,  the  brother,  instead  of 
.apjiearing  to  take  these  words,  as  I did,  for  the  dreamy  wanderings  of  extreme  weakness, 
replied,  quietly,  “ Ah  ! yes— so  you  did— so  you  did.”  All  was  over  in  a very  short  time, 
And  when  we  left  the  bedroom  together,  I could  not  help  asking  the  brother  what  those 
strange,  words  meant.  He  said,  “ You  may  well  ask,  but  as  sure  as  I see  you  now,  I saw 
my  brother  in  the  middle  of  last  night ; he  came  out  of  a cupboard  at  the  foot  of  my  bed, 
dnd  after  gazing  at  me  for  a minute  or  two,  without  speaking,  he  disappeared.”  ’ ” 

An  account  of  what  appears  to  be  the  same  incident  is  given,  as  authentic,  but 
without  names,  by  Dr.  Elliots*  »n,  in  the  Zoht^  Vol.  viii.,  p.  "0.  But  on  the  other  Band, 
*Bir  T.  Watson’s  family,  to  whom  we  applied,  seem  never  to  have  heard  of  the  story  ; 
which  we  may  therefore  not  unreasonably  suppose  to  have  been  narrated  as  a friend's 
•experience.  * 

I give  one  more  instance — worth  nothing  of  course  as  it  stands — in  the  hope  of 
inducing  some  renders  to  take  down  at  the  time  the  names  and  addresses  ‘of  casual 
acquaintances  who  seem  to  have  bond  fide  evidence  to  produce.  The  account  was  sent 
to  us  by  Mrs.  Pritchard,  of  The  Cottage,  Bangor,  North  Wales,  on  February  7th.  1884. 

I much  regret  that  I am  not  able  to  give  you  the  name  and  address  of  the  lady  Fi,e., 
Mrs.  Pritchard’s  informant]  for  1 do  not  know  it  myself.  I met  her  at  the  Bar- 
month  Hotel  last  summer.  She  told  me  that  upon  one  occasion,  when  her  husband  had. 
left  home  for  a couple  of  days,  she  had  a most  painful  impression  that  he  was  being 
•crushed.  When  he  returned  she  ran  up  to  him,  saying,  ‘ Oh,  T’m  so  glad  you  have  come 
back  safely,  for  I’ve  had  a dreadful  feeling  that  you  were  crushed.’  Her  husband  then  told 
her  that  he  had  seen  a woman  crushed  to  death  by  the  train  close  by  where  he  stood,  ahd 
it  affected  him  greatly — he  couldn’t  get  it  out  of  his  mind,  and  it  prevented  him  sleeping. 

“ I have  written  to  Barmouth  to  try  and  find  out  the  name  of  these  people,  but  as  no 
visitors’  book  is  kept  at  the  hotel,  they  were  unable  to  give  me  any  information.  I think 
the  name  was  Dickenson,  and  I know  that  the  husband  is  a solicitor  in  one  of  the  English 
towns— a young  man.” 

Here  if  we  could  have  discovered  the  address,  the  account  might  possibly  have  been, 
made  first-hand ; at  present  we  should  not  be  safe  in  giving  it  even  as  second-hand* 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

IT.] 

1ST 

more  remote  the  incident,  and  the  less  the  authority  for  the  story,  the 
more  clinching  the  correspondence  becomes,  till  its  perfection  is  really 
quite  wearisome.  “ On  the  day  of  his  vision,  and  at  that  very  moment 
his  Mend  was  passing  away,”  is  quite  the  accepted  sort  of  formula. 
We  may  htrat  far  in  such  accounts  before  we  find  any  guarding 
clauses,  as  that  “ the  hour  of  death  was  never  exactly  ascertained,”  or 
“the  vision  was  in  the  morning,  but  the  death  did  not  take  place  till 
the  afternoon  ” — clauses  which  are  common  enough,  be  it  observed* 
in  first-hand  records. 

. It  would,  however,  not  be  fair  to  leave  this  list  of  causes  which 
diminish  the  amount  of  presentable  second-hand  evidence,  without 
adding  that  of  the  more  reliable  sort  of  second-hand  (no  less  than  of 
first-hand)  cases,  a' considerable  number  are  withheld  from  publication 
from  motives  with  which  it  is  hard  altogether  to  sympathise.  Persons, 
who  have  a really  accurate  knowledge  of  some  incident  in  which 
a deceased  relative  has  been  concerned,  and  who — seeing  that  the 
incident  did  no  dishonour  to  any  one’s  head  or  heart — have  no  scruple 
in  ' publishing  it  at  casual  dinner-parties,  become  sometimes  almost 
morbidly  scrupulous  •when  there  is  a question  of  making  it  available, 
even  in  an  anonymous  form,  for  a scientific  purpose. 

Here  I may  close  this  preliminary  survey  of  the  possibilities  of 
error  which  must  be  constantly  kept  in  view  in  the  investigation  of 
alleged  telepathic  cases,  and  which  must  be  either  excluded  by 
evidence  or  carefully  allowed  for.  Both  the  dangers  and  the  safe- 
guards will,  of  course,  be  better  realised  when  we  come  to  the  details  ’ 
of  particular  cases.  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  give  a similar 
synopsis  of  the  evident  ial  flaws  and  weaknesses  which  are  not  in  any 
sense  errors.  Some  of  these  may  be  apparent  on  the  veiy  face  of  the , 
evidence ; as  when  the  percipient  expressly  states  that  his  impression  ' 
was  of  an  undefined  sort,  or  was  of  a sort  which  he  had  experienced 
on  other  occasions  without  the  correspondence  of  any  real  event,  or 
that  the  coincidence  of  dates,  though  close,  was  not  exactly  ascertained. 
Others  may  appear  when  we  take  all  the  circumstances  into  considera- 
tion, although  the  percipient  may  fail  to  admit  them ; for  instance,  a. 
person  who  is  in  decided  anxiety  about  an  absent  relative  or  Mend 
may  be  regarded  as  to  some  extent  predisposed  to  subjective  impres- 
sions Which  suggest  his  presence,  so  that  the  accidental  coincidence 
ofsu<jh  an  impression  with  some  actual  crisis  that  is  apprehended  W&J 
be  regarded  as  not  violently  improbable.  All  such  topics,  however, 
will  find  a more  convenient  place  in  the  sequel. 

158 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  T1IE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

§ 16.  And  now  with  regard  to  the  cases  that  have  been  included 
in  the  evidential  part  of  the  present  work.  A certain  separation  has 
been  attempted.  In  the  main  body  of  the  book,  no  cases  are  given 
which  are  not  first-hand,  or  of  the  particular  second-hand  sort  which 
(as  explained  on  p.  148)  is  on  a par  with  first-hand ; and  in  which  the 
'primd  facte  probability  that  the  facts  stated  are  substantially  correct 
is  not  tolerably  strong.  But  the  Supplement  includes  a good  many 
second-hand  accounts;1  as  well  as  first-hand  accounts  where  the 
evidence,  from  lack  of  corroboration  or  other  causes,  falls  short  of 
the  standard  previously  attained.  Our  principle  in  selecting  cases 
for  the  Supplement  has  been  to  take  only  those  which-r— supposing 
telepathy  to  be  established  as  a fact  in  Nature — would  reasonably  be 
regarded  as  examples  of  it.  Their  existence  adds'  force  to  the  proof 
•of  telepathy ; but  we  should  not  have  put  them  forward  as  an 
■adequate  proof  by  themselves.  This  separation,  however,  does  not 
apportion  the  evidential  weight  of  the  two  divisions  with  rigid 
precision  For,  given  a certain  amount  of  assurance  that  the  facts 
are  correctly  reported,  the  value  of  the  facts  in  the  argument  for 
telepathy  will  vary  according  to  the  class  to  which  they  belong. 
There  are  strong  classes  and  weak  classes.  Now  the  body  of  the  work 
Includes  specimens  of  purely  emotional  impressions,  and  of  dreams — r 
■classes  which  we  shall  find  by  their  very  nature  to  be  weak ; and 
more  weight  might  reasonably  be  attached  to  some  case  in  the 
Supplement,  even  though  less  completely  attested,  if  it  belonged 
to  the  strongest  class,  which  we  shall  find  to  be  the  class  of 
waking  visual  phantasms.  And  even  within  the  limits  of  a-  single 
class,  it  is  impossible  to  evaluate  the  cases  with  exactness.  A 
phantasm  of  sight  or  sound  which  does  not  at  the  moment  suggest 
the  appearance  or  voice  of  an  absent  friend,  may  still — if  unique  in 
the  percipient’s  experience,  and  if  the  coincidence  of  time  with  the 
friend’s  death  is  exact— have  about  an  equal  claim  to  be  considered 
telepathic  with  a distinctly  recognised  phantasm,  the  coincidence  of 
which  with  the  death  (though  it  may  have  been  exact)  cannot 
with  certainty  be  brought  closer  than  three  or  four  days. 

Then  as  regards  the  mere  accuracy  of  the  records — though  it  has 
been  possible  to  draw  up  a sort  of  table  of  degrees,  such  a table,  of 
•course,  affords  no  final  criterion.  It  is  a guide  in  the  dissection  of 

' 1 We  have  seen  that  there  is  one  sort  of  second-hand  evidence  which  mdst  rank 

as  on  a par  with  first-hand.  On  the  same  principle  there  is  one  sort  of  third-hand 
evidence  which  must  rank  as  on  a par  with  second-hand.  A few  third-hand  accounts  of  this 
type  have  been  admitted  to  the  Supplement ; and  one  or  two  others  by  special  exception* 

159 

iv,]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

testimony.;  it  directs  attention  to  important  structural  points;  but 
it  takes  no  account  of  the  living  qualities,  the  character,  training, 
and  habits  of  thought  of  witnesses.  We  have  included  no  cases  where 
the  witnesses  were  not,  to  the  best  of  our  belief,  honest  in  intention, 
and  possessed  of  sufficient  intelligence  to  be  competent  reporters 
of  definite  facts  with  which  they  had  been  closely  connected.  But 
the  report,  say,  of  a sceptical 1 lawyer  or  man  of  science,  who  had 
totally  disbelieved  in  the  whole  class  of  phenomena  until  convinced 
by  his  own  experience,  is  naturally  stronger  evidence  than  the 
report  of  a lady  who,  whether  owing  to  natural  proclivities  or  to 
want  of  scientific  training,  has  no  sense  of  any  <1  priori  objections 
to  the  telepathic  hypothesis.  The  report  of  a person  who  has  seen 
the  phantasm  of  a • friend  at  the  time  of  his  death,  but  considers 
that  the  coincidence  may  have  been  accidental,  is  stronger  evidence 
than  the  report  of  a person  who  would  regard  such  a supposition 
as  irreverent.  Each  case  must  be  judged  on  its  merits,  by 
reference  to  a considerable  number  of  points ; 2 and  as  far  as 

1 It  occasionally  happens,  however,  that  scepticism,  no  less  than  superstition,  may 
mar  the  evidence.  We  nave  received  a case  where  two  sisters  in  England,  sleeping 
apparently  in  different  rooms,  saw  the  form  of  another  sister  who  was  just  dying  in 
Germany;  but,  “having  a horror  of  encouraging  superstitious  fancies,”  they  purposely 
abstained  from  making  an  exact  note  of  the  day  and  hour,  and  neither  of  them 
mentioned  what  she  had  seen  to  the  other.  And  thus  the  triumph  of  robust  common- 
sense  has  been  to  prevent  the  verification  of  a date  ! 

2 Among  the  variety  of  considerations  involved,  it  is  impossible  to  hope  for  more  than 
a general  approval  of  our  principles  of  admission.  The  cases  on  the  line  often  present  a 
very  puzzling  array  of  pros  and  com.  Take,  for  instance,  the  following  first-hand  instance* 

On  February  10th,  1884,  Mrs.  Longley,  of  4,  Liveqxx)l  Lawn,  Ramsgate,  a respectable 
married  woman,  who  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  heard  a voice 
call  “Mother”  three  times.  She  knew  that  she  was  awake,  as  she  had  been  restless,  and 
was  amusing  herself  by  seeing  how  long  the  moon  would  take  to  cross  a certain  pape  of 

flass.  She  thought  that  her  son,  who  was  sleeping  in  a room  above  her  own,  must  be  ill ; 

ut -on  going  up,  she  found  him  fast  asleep.  She  tells  us  that  she  looked  at  the  clock  on 
the  stairs,  and  noticed  that  it  was  3.15  a.m.  Nine  days  afterwards  she  received  the  news 
that  her  eldest  and  much-loved  son,  who  was  at  sea,  had  been  drowned,  at  about  that 
hour,  on  a moonlight  night,  and  that  his  first  cry  was,  “ Mother,  mother,  mother  ! Save 
me  for  my  mothers  sake.”  Her  husband,  she  says,  went  to  Grimsby,  and  learnt  these 
details  from  the  captain  of  the  vessel,  and  also  made  out  that  the  night  was  the  same  as 
that  of  her  own  experience. 

Now  the  incidents  here  are  recent ; and  we  need  feel  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  either  of 
the  unusual  auditory  impression  (which  Mrs.  Longley  mentioned  to  several  people 
besides  her  own  family  before  the  news  arrived),  or  of  the  death.  These  are  the  pros. 
“The  cons  are  &s  follows.  (1)  The  voice  was  unrecognised.  This,  however,  would  not  alone 
be  fatal  to  the  evidence ; and  in  one  way  it  even  tells  in  favour  of  the  telcp&thie 
explanation,  as,  had  the  voice  suggested  the  son  at  sea,  it  would  have  been  easier  to 
.ascribe  the  impression-  to  latent  anxiety  on  his  account.  (2)  The  narrator  is  quite 
uneducated ; and  times  and  intervals  are  matters  in  which  the  memory  of  uneducated 
persons  is  specially  apt  to  get  hazy.  (3)  She  is  certain  that  her  husband,  and  the  son 
who  was  at  home,  would  not  corroborate  her  statement  in  writing— her  husband  in 
particular  having  an  aversion  to  signing  documents.  (4)  No  note  having  been  taken, 
nothing  that  the  husband  could  say  now  would  convince  us  that  he  was  justified  in  hia 
conclusion  as  to  the  coincidence  of  day ; and  though  the  date  of  the  death  might  still  be. 
ascertained  by  independent  inquiry,  this  would  not  help  us,  as  the  exact  date  of  the 
voice  is  irrecoverable. 

The  inclusion  of  Buch  a case  would  perhaps  not  have  injured  our  argument ; but  we 
nave  felt  it  safer  to  reject  it. 

160 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [char 

* written  testimony  goes,  the  reader  will  have  the  same  opportunities* 
as  we  have  had  for  forming  an  opinion.  We  have  done  ouar 
best  to  obtain  corroborative  evidence  of  all  sorts,  whether  from 
private  sources,  from  public  notices,  or  from  official  records.  We 
have  often  failed ; and  these  failures,  and  other  evidential  flaws,  have 
been  brought  into  ([  fear)  wearisome  prominence.  In  quotations,  care 
has,  of  course,  been  taken  to  give  the  exact  words  of  witnesses. 
The  only  exceptions  are  that  (1)  we  have  occasionally  omitted 
reflections  and  other  matter  which  formed  no  part  of  the  evidence^ 
and  (2)  we  haye  corrected  a few  obvious  slips  of  writing,  and 
introduced  an  occasional  word  for  the  sake  of  grammatical 
coherence,  where  the  narrative  has  come  to  us  piecemeal,  or  where 
the  above-named  omissions  have  been  made.  But  in  no  case  have  we 
made  the  slightest  alteration  of  moaning,  or  omitted  anything  that 
could  by  any  possibility  be  held  to  modify  the  account  given.  A few 
cases  have  been  summarised,  in  whole  or  in  part ; but  here  the  form 
of  the  sentences  will  show  that  they  are  not  quotations.  Any 
word  or  phrase  interpolated  for  other  than  grammatical  reasons  is 
clearly  distinguished  by  being  placed  within  square  brackets. 

One  advantage,  however,  which  we  ourselves  have  had,  cannot 
be  communicated  to  our  readers — namely,  the  increased  power  of 
judgment  which  a personal  interview  with  the  narrator  gives.  The 
effect  of  these  interviews  on  our  own  minds  has  been  on  the 
whole  distinctly  favourable.  They  have  greatly  added  to  our  confi- 
dence that  what  we  are  here  presenting  is  the  testimony  of 
trustworthy  and  intelligent  witnesses.  And  if  the  collection  be 
taken  as  a whole,  this  seems  a sufficient  guarantee.  It  follows 
from  the  very  nature  of  telepathic  cases  (as  distinguished,  say, 
from  the  alleged  phenomena  of  “ ghost-seeing  ” or  of  “ Spiritual- 
ism ”)  that  the  evidence  often  in  great  measure,  so  to  speak,. 
'makes  itself- — the  agent’s  side  in  the  matter  being  beyond  dispute.. 
Thus  a valid  case,  as  has  been  shown  above,  might  perfectly  well  rest 
on  the  testimony  of  a person  whose  own  interpretation  of  it  was 
totally  erroneous,  and  whose  intelligence  and  memory  were  only 
adequate  to  reporting  truthfully  that  he  thought  he  saw  so-and-so* 
in  his  room  yesterday  or  the  day  before.  But  we  have  naturally 
preferred  to  be  on  the  safe  side.  We  have,  therefore,  excluded  all 
narratives  where,  on  personal  acquaintance  with  the  witnesses,  we- 
felt  that  we  should  be  uneasy  in  confronting  them  with  4 critical 
cross-examiner ; and  we  have  frequently  thought  it  right  to  exclude* 

IV.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  101 

oases,  otherwise  satisfactory,  that  depended  > on  the  reports  of 
uneducated  persons.1  Nor,  I think,  will  the  reader  find  much 
to  suggest  perversion  of  facts  through  superstitious  d prioi'i  fancies. 
The  majority  of  our  witnesses,  as  already  stated,  have  had  no 
special  belief  in  the  phenomena,  except  so  far  as  they  have  them- 
selves come  in  contact  with  them ; and  even  where  their  interest 
has  been  awakened,  it  has  seldom  been  of  a more  intense  kind 
than  might  naturally  be  excited  by  a remarkable  passage  of 
personal  or  family  experience.  They  have  not,  for  instance,  been  at 
all  in  the  attitude  towards  the  subject  which  is  now  ours,  and 
which  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader  may  come  to  share.  Thus  even 
on  this  score,  their  common-sense,  in  the  ordinary  straightforward  „ 
meaning  of  the  term,  could  hardly  be  impugned.  Perhaps  even  so 
general  a testimonial  to  character  as  this  is  somewhat  of  an  im- 
pertinence ; to  give  it  precision  in  particular  cases  would,  as  a rule, 
be  out  of  the  question.  But  however  little  weight  such  an 
expression  of  opinion  may  have,  the  mere  statement  that  we  are,  in 
the  majority  of  cases,  personally  acquainted  with  our  witnesses,  has 
a distinct  bearing  on  the  evidence ; for  it  practically  implies  that 
they  gave  us  their  account  in  such  a way  that  their  good  faith  is 

pledged  to  it. 

♦ 

§ 17.  But  there  is  (quantity  as  well  as  quality  to  consider:  the 
basis  of  our  demonstration  needs  to  be  broad  as  well  as  strong.  Wo 
might  have  a few  correspondences  perfect  in  every  detail,  a few 

^ 1 First-hand  evidence,  where  the  witness  cannot  be  cross-questioned,  is  at  once  in- 
validated by  any  doubt  as  to  the  case  that  may  have  been  felt  by  persons  who  were 
more  immediately  cognisant  of  it.  The  well-known  Norway  story  is  an  instance.  In 
“Early  .Years  and  Late  Reflections,”  by  Clement  Carlyon,  M.D.,  there  is  a signed 
account  by  Mr.  Edmund  Norway  of  a vision  of  his  brother’s  murder  that  he  had 
while  in  command  of  the  Orient  on  a voyage  from  Manilla  to  Cadiz.  Mr.  Arthur 
S.  Norway,  son*  of  the  murdered  man  and  nephew  of  Mr,  Edmund  Norway,  tells  us 
that  the  account  was  taken  down  by  Dr.  Carlyon  from  his  uncle,  at  the  latter’s  house  ; he 
himself  also  has  heard  it  from  his  uncle’s  own  lips.  It  describes  with  some  detail  how  in 
a vision,  on  the  night  of  February  8th,  1840,  Mr.  Edmund  Norway  saw  his  brother  set 
upon  and  killed  by  two  assailants  at  a particular  spot  on  the  road  between  St.  Col  urn  b 
and  Wadebridge ; and  how  he  immediately  mentioned  the  vision  to  the  second  officer, 
Mr.  Henry  Wren.  The  brother  was  actually  murdered  by  two  men  at  that  spot,  on  that 
night,  and  the  details — as  given  in  the  coiifession  of  one  of  the  murderers,  William 
Lightfoot — agree  with  those  of  the  vision.  But  Mr.  Arthur  Norway  further  tells  us  that 
another  of  his  uncles  and  the  late  Sir  William  Molesworth  “investigated  the  dream  at  th<* 
time.  Both  were  clever  men,  and  they  were  at  that  time  searching  deeply  and  experi- 
menting ill  mesmerism— so  that  they  were  well  fitted  to  form  an  opinion.  They  arrived 
at  the  conclusion  that  the  dream  was  imagined.”  Mr.  Arthur  Norway  has  also  heard  Mr. 
Wren  S]feak  of  the  voyage,  but  without  any  allusion  to  the  dream.  This  is  just  a case, 
therefore^  where  we  may  justly  suspect  that  detail  and  precision  have  been  retrospectively 
introduced  into  the  percipients  experience. 

It  almost  goes  without  saying,  in  a case  like  this,  that  sooner  or  later  we  shall  be  told 
that  the  vision  was  inscribed  m the  ship’s  log : and  Mr.  Dale  Owen  duly  tells  us  so.  Mr. 
Arthur  Norway  expressly  contradicts  the  fact. 

it 

162 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [cha*. 

coincidences  precise  to  the  moment,  established  by  evidence  which 
was  irresistible  ; and  pure  accident  might  still  be  the  true  explanation 
of  them.  Later,  however,  it  will  be  proved,  as  I think,  beyond  the 
shadow  of  a doubt,  that  that  line  cannot  be  taken  in  respect  of  the 
several  hundreds  of  coincidences  included  in  these  volumes.  And  the 
large- majority  of  persons  who  regard  the  book  from  an  evidential 
point  of  view,  and  who  start  with  the  legitimate  it  priori  prejudice 
against  the  whole  class  of  phenomena,  will  certainly  take  other  ground. 
They  will  take  exception  to  the  evidence  as  it  stands.  They  will  not 
"be  concerned  to  deny  that  there  would  be  an  enormously  Strong  case 
for  the  reality  of  telepathy,  supposing  the  correspondence  and  coinci- 
dences to  have  occurred  exactly  as  stated;  but  they  will  take  the 
ground  that  they  did  not  so  occur ; and  will  frame  various  hypotheses, 
according  to  which  it  should  be  possible  that  the  evidence  should  be 
thus,  and  the.  facts  otherwise. 

' Now  not  only  is  the  endeavour  to  frame  such  hypotheses  legiti- 
mate : it  has  been  throughout  an  indispensable  part  of  our  own  work. 
Even  improbable  hypotheses  ought  to  be  carefully  considered  ; for  we 
have  no  desire  to  underrate  the  a priori  improbability  of  our  own 
hypothesis  of  telepathy.  It,  is  extremely  difficult  to  compare  the 
improbability  of  any  particular  combination  of  known  conditions  with 
the  improbability  of  the  existence  of  ahitherto  unknown  condition. 
But  the  point  on  which  we  desire  to  lay  stress  is  the  number  of 
improbable  hypotheses  that  will  have  to  be  propounded  if  the 
telepathic  explanation  is  rejected.  Of  course,  this  point  may  be 
evaded  by  including  all  the  hypotheses  needed  in  a single 
sweeping  assumption,  as  to  the  general  untrustworthiness  of  human 
testimony.  This  mode  of  argument  would  be  perfectly  legitimate 
if  we  were  presenting  a collection  of  unsifted  second  and  third- 
hand  stories ; but  it  will  scarcely  seem  equally  so  in  application 
to  what  we  do  present.  The  evidence  (or  at  any  rate  a very 
large  amount  of  it)  is  of  a sort  which  merits  attention,  even 
from  those  who  most  fully  share  the  views  that  I have 
endeavoured  to  express  as  to  the  chances  of  error  in  the  records 
of  unusual  occurrences.  It  cannot  be  summarily  dismissed;  if  it 
is  to  be  got  rid  of,  it  must  be  explained  away  in  detail.  And 
it  is  the  continued  process  of  attempts  to  explain  away  whigh  may, 
we  think,  produce  on  others  the  same  cumulative  effect  as  it  has 
produced  on  ourselves.  The  attempts  have  been  made  on  thfe  liness 
already  sketched ; and  so  far  as  any  reader  agrees  that  thq  risks 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS - TELEPATHY, 

163 

w.]. 

and  vulnerable  points  have  been  carefully  considered  in  the  abstract, 
he  may  be  willing  provisionally  to  accept  an  assurance  that  a 
similar  careful  and  rationally  sceptical  mode  of  examination  has 
been  applied  to  the  concrete  instances.  The  work  is,  no  doubt, 
wearisome,  but  there  is  no  avoiding  it  for  anyone  who  wishes  to 
form  a fair  independent  opinion  as  to  what  the  strength  of  the 
case  for  telepathy  really  is.  The  narratives  are  very  various,  and 
their  force  is  derived  from  very  various  characteristics ; the  endeavour 
to  account  for  them  without  resorting  to  telepathy  must,  therefore, 
be  carried  through  a considerable  number  of  groups,  before  it  produces 
its  legitimate  effect  on  the  mind.  That  effect  arises  from  the 
number  arid  variety  of  the  improbable  suppositions,  now  violent,  now 
vague — contradictory  of  our  experience  of  all  sorts  of  human  acts  and 
human  relations — that  have  to  be  made  at  every  turn.  Not  only  have 
we  to  assume  such  an  extent  of  forgetfulness  and  inaccuracy,  about 
simple  and  striking  facts  of  the  immediate  past,,j  as  is  totally  unex- 
ampled in  any  other  range  of  experience.  Not  onljAhave  we  to  assume 
that  distressing  or  exciting  news  about  another  person  produces  a 
havoc  in  the  memory  which  has  never  been  noted  iiiv  connection  with 
distress  or  excitement  in  any  other  form.  We  must  loeave  this  merely 
general  ground,  and  make  suppositions  as  detailed  a?\  the  evidence 
itself.  We  must  suppose  that  some  people  have  a way  o\(  dating  their 
letters  in  indifference  to  the  calendar,  or  making  entries  in  their 
diaries  on  the  wrong  page  and  never  discovering  the  errors  and  that 
whole  families  have  been  struck  by  the  collective  hallucination  that 
one  of  their  members  had  made  a particular  remark,  the  subs^nce  of 
which  had  never  even  entered  that  member’s  head ; and  that  it  i8  a 
recognised  custom  to  write  mournful  letters  about  bereavements  wF.qoh 
have  never  occurred ; and  that  when  A describes  to  a friend  how  Ihp 
has  distinctly  heard  the  voice  of  B,  it  is  not  infrequently  by  a slip  of 
the  tongue  for  0 ; and  that  when  D says  he  is  not  subject  to  halluci- 
nations of  vision,  it  is  through  momentary  forgetfulness  of  the  fact 
that  he  has  a spectral  illusion  once  a week ; and  that  when  a wile 
interrupts  her  husband’s  slumbers  with  words  of  distress  or  alarm,  it 
is  only  her  fun,  or  a sudden  morbid  craving  for  undeserved  sympathy; 
and  that  when  people  assert  that  they  were  in  sound  health,  in  good 
’■spirits^  and  wide  awake,  at  a particular  time  which  they  had  occasion 
to  note,  it  is  a safe  conclusion  that  they  were  having  a nightmare,  dr 
were'  fhe  prostrate  victims  of  nervous  hypochondria.  Every  one  of 
these  improbabilities  is,  perhaps,  in  itself  a possibility  k but  as  the 

164 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

narratives  drive  us  from  one  desperate  expedient  to  another,  when 
time  after  time  we  are  compelled  to  own  that  deliberate  falsification 
is  less  unlikely  than  the  assumptions  we  are  making,  and  then  again 
when  we  submit  the  theory  of  deliberate  falsification  to  the  cumulative 
test,  and  see  what  is  involved  in  the  supposition  that  hundreds  of 
persons  of  established  character,  known  to  us  for  the  most  part  and 
unknown  to  one  another,  have  simultaneously  formed  a plot  to  deceive 
us — there  comes  a point  where  tlw/  reason  rebels.  Cdmmon-sense- 
persists  in  recognising  that  when, 'phenomena,  which  are  united  by  a 
fundamental  characteristic  and  have  every  appearance  of  forming  a 
single  natural  group,  arc  presented  to  be  explained,  an  explanation 
which  multiplies  causes,, is  improbable,  and  an  explanation  which 
multiplies  improbable  causes  becomes,  at  a certain  point,  incredible. 

§ 18.  I am  awfyfe  that  in  its  abstract  form,  and  apart  from  actual 
study  of  the  cases,  this  reasoning  must  be  wholly  unconvincing.  But 
meanwhile  the  alignment  for  the  general  trustworthiness  of  our 
evidence  may  be  put  in  another,  and,  perhaps,  clearer  light.  Amid 

|?s,  the  cases  present  one  general  characteristic — an 
of  one  person,  having  no  apparent  relation  to  any- 
i except  the  unusual  condition,  otherwise  unknown  to> 
>erson.  It  is  this  characteristic  that  gives  them  the 
have  just  said,  of  a true  natural  group.  Now 
ice  of  these  words  may  easily  escape  notice.  They 
d as  well  as  a theoretic  bearing.  They  involve* 
pothesis  that  the  facts,  if  truly  stated,  are  probably 
cause ; but  they  involve,  further,  a very  strong- 
re  facts  ore  truly  stated.  Let  us  suppose,  for  the 
amount  of  laxity  of  memory  and  of  statement  may 
be  expected  even  from  first-hand  witnesses,  belonging  to  the 
educated  class.  And  let  us  ignore  all  the  heterogeneous  improba- 
bilities which  we  were  just  now  considering;  and  assume  that  the 
mistakes  mentioned,  and  other's  like  them,  may  occur  at  any 
moment.  What,  then,  is  the  likelihood  that  all  these  various 
causes — all  these  errors  of  inference,  lapses  of  memory,  and  exaggera- 
tions and  perversions  of  narration — will  issue  in  a consistent  body  of 
evidence,  presenting  one  well-defined  type  of  phenomenon,  free  in. 
every  case  from  excrescences^  or  inconsistent  features,  and  explicable 
and  completely  explicable,  by  one  equally  well-defined  hypothesis  ? 
What  is  the  likelihood  that  a number  of  narratives,  which  are  assumed 

IV.] 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

165 

to  have  diverged  in  various  ways  from  the  actual  facts,  should  thus 
converge  to  a single  result  ? Several  hundreds  of  independent  and 
first-hand  reporters  have,  wittingly  or  unwittingly,  got  loose  from  the 
truth,  and  are  well  started  down  the  inclined  plane  of  the  marvellous. 
Yet  all  of  them  stop  short  at  or  within  a given  line — the  line  being 
the  exact  one  up  to  which  a particular  explanation,  not  of  theirs  but 
of  ours,  can  be  extended,  and  beyond  which  it  could  not  be  extended. 
Tempting  marvels  lie  further  on — marvels  which  in  the  popular  view 
are  quite  as  likely  to  be  true  as  the  facts  actually  reported,  and  which 
the  general  traditions  of  the  subject  would  connect  with  those  facts. 
But  bur  reporters  one  and  all  eschew  them.  To  take,  for  instance,  the 
group  of  cases  which  the  reader  will  probably  find  to  be  the  most 
interesting,  as  it  is  also  the  largest,  in  our  collection — apparitions  at  the 
time  of  death.  Why  should  not  such  apparitions  hold  prolonged 
converse  with  the  waking  friend  ? Why  should  they  not  produce 
‘physical  effects — shed  tears  on  the  pillow  and  make  it  wet,  open  the 
door  and  leave  it  open,  or  leave  some  tangible  token  of  their  presence  ? 
It  is  surely  noteworthy  that  we  have  not  had  to  reject,  on  grounds 
like  these,  a single  narrative  which  on  other  grounds  would  have 
been  admitted.  Have  all  our  informants  drawn  an  arbitrary 
line,  and  all  drawn  precisely  the  same  arbitrary  line,  between 
the  mistakes  and  exaggerations  of  which  they  will  be  guilty, 
and  the  mistakes  and  exaggerations  of  which  they  will  not? 
We  might  imagine  them  as  travellers,  ignorant  of  zoology,  each  of 
whom  reports  that  he  has  landed  on  a strange  shore,  and  has 
encountered  a strange  animal.  Some  of  the  travellers  have  been 
nearer  the  animal,  and  have  had  a better  view  of  him  than  others, 
and  their  accounts  vary  in  clearness;  but  these  accounts,  though 
independently  drawn  up,  all  point  to  the  same  source ; they  all 
present  a consistent  picture  of  the  self-same  animal,  and  what  is 
more,  the  picture  is  one  which  zoology  can  find  ,no  positive  cause  to 
distrust.  We  find  in  it  none  of  the'  familiar  features  of  myth  or  of 
untrained  fancy ; the  reports  have  not  given  wings  to  a quadruped,  or 
horns  and  hoofs  to  a carnivor ; they  contradict  nothing  that  is  known. 
Can  we  fairly  suppose  that  this  complete  agreement,  alike  in  what 
they  contain  and  in  what  they  do  not  contain,  is  the  accidental  result 
of  a hundred  disconnected  mistakes  ? 

It  is  most  instructive,  in  this  connection,  to  compare  first-hanft 
(and  the  better  sort  of  second-hand)  narratives  with  others.  I have 
already  spoken  of  the  greater  general  sobriety  of  the  first-hand 

166  . GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [cha*. 

evidence.  I may  now  add  that  the  auspiciously  startling  details 
which  often  characterise  the  more  remote  narratives  are  precisely  of 
the  sort  which  the  telepathic  hypothesis  could  by  no  possibility  be 
made  to  cover.  To  wet  the  pillow  or  leave  the  door  open  would  be 
quite  an  ordinary  breach  of  manners  for  the  popular  “ ghost  ” or  the 
second-hand  apparition1  of  doubtful  authority.  I have  mentioned 
the  real  dripping  letter  conveyed  by  the  phantasmal  midshipman. 
I may  further  recall  the  scar  reported  to  have  been  left  on  the  lady’s 
wrist  by  the  touch  of  tjic  well-known  ‘Beresford”  apparition  ; and  the 
wounds  alleged  to  have  been  produced  on  the  bodies  of  absent  witches, 
by  blows  and  sword  thrusts  directed  to  their  “ astral  ” appearances. 
No  marvels  in  the  least  resembling  these  find  any  place  in  our  first- 
hand records ; yet  why  should  they  not,  if  those  records  are  funda- 
mentally untrustworthy  V The  existence  of  such  features  in  other 
narratives  sufficiently  shows  how  wide  is  the  possible  range  of  incidents, 
in  stories  where  the  ordinary  limitations  of  communication  between 
human  beings  are  alleged  to  have  been  transcended.  Of  this  wide 
field,  the  hypothesis  of  the  action  of  mind  on  mind,  which  we  are 
endeavouring  to  develop,  covers  only  a single  well-defined  portion. 
By  what  fatality,  if  error  is  widely  at  work  in  the  case  of 
our  first-hand  evidence,  do  its  results  always  fall  inside  and  not 
outside  this  very  limited  area  ? If  our  witnesses  are  assumed  to  sit 
loose  to  the  facts  which  they  have  known,  why  should  they  bring  their 
accounts  into  rigid  (though  pui’ely  accidental)  conformity  with  a 
theory  which  they  have  not  known  ? 

§ 19.  What  I have  here  indicated  is  the  general  impression  pro- 
duced by  the  evidence  on  our  own  minds.  In  our  view,  the  reality  of 
telepathy  (even  apart  from  a consideration  of  the  experimental  evi- 
dence) may  be  not  unreasonably  taken  as  proved.  Having  formed  this 
view,  we  are  bound  to  state  it ; but  we  expressly  refrain  from  putting  it 
forward  dogmatically,  and  from  saying  that  to  reject  it  would  argue  want 
of  candour  or  intelligence.  We  hold  that,  in  such  a matter,  it  is  idle  to 
attempt  to  define  the  lino  of  complete  proof ; and  the  proof  given — if 
it  be  one — is  far  from  being  of  an  eclutant  or  overwhelming  sort. 
To  those  who  do  not  realise  the  strength  of  the  d priori  pre- 
sumption against  it,  it  may  easily  look  more  overwhelming  than  it 
is.  To  others,  again,  it  may  appear  that,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
faculty  has  acted  as  widely  as  we  have  supposed,  the  highest 
evidential  standard  ought  to  have  been  reached  in  a larger  number  of 

IV.}.  FOR  SPONTANEOUS,  TELEPATHY.  16T 

cases.  To  us  it  rather  seems  that  the  evidence  that  we  find  is  just 
about  what  might  have  been  expected.  We  see  nothing  in  the.  mere 
existence  of  telepathy  that  would  tend  to  make  reserved  people 
mention  strange  experiences,  or  to  make  careless  or  busy  people  keep 
conscientious  diaries — or  generally  that  would  lead  the  persons 
immediately  connected  with  a telepathic  case,  in  which  their  emotions 
may  be  deeply  involved,  to  act  with  a single  eye  to  producing  a 
clinching  piece  of  evidence  for  the  future  benefit  of  critical 
psychological  inquirers.  It  would,  of  course,  be  useless  for  us  to  urge 
that  evidence  which  falls  short  of  the  best  is  still  as  good  as  can  be 
expected,  unless  we  were  able  to  present  a certain  nucleus  of  fairly 
conclusive  cases  ; and  this  we  think  we  can  do.  But  if  the  proof  is  held 
to  demand  more  cases  of  the  highest  evidential  quality,  we  must  trust 
to  time  for  them.  The  ideal  collection  would,  of  course,  be  one  where 
every  independent  instance  should  be  so  evidentially  complete  that  it 
must  be  either  (1)  telepathic,  or  (2)  a purely  accidental  coincidence  of 
a most  striking  kind,  or  (3)  the  result  of  a fraudulent  conspiracy  to 
deceive  in  which  several  persons  of  good  character  and  reputation  have 
taken  part.  In  our  view,  this  point  has  been  reached  in  a sufficient 
number  of  the  examples  here  given  to  exclude  the  second  and  third 
of  these  alternatives ; but  these  examples  constitute  only  a very 
small  minority  compared  with  the  mass  of  cases  which  are  merely 
confirmatory — strongly  confirmatory,  as  we  think,  but  still  confirnf ar- 
tery only  and  not  crucial.  And  the  collection  so  far  falls  short  of  the 
ideal. 

In  saying,  then,  that  telepathy  may  not  unreasonably  be  taken  as 
proved,  I do  not  wish  for  a moment  to  imply  that  the  proof  which  we 
give  is  the  one  which  we  should  eventually  desire  to  see  given.  To  no  , 
reader,*  we  think,  will  the  various  imperfections  and  weak  spots  of  our  : 
case  be  more  patent  than  they  have  been  to  ourselves.  Some  of  these 
are  beyond  remedy — as  the  absence  of  contemporary  documents. 
Others  may  possibly  be  remedied  at  a later  stage — for  instance,  the 
suppression  of  names. 1 It  has  been  impossible  to  bring  home  to  all 

1 The  suppressed  names  have  in  all  cases  been  given  to  us  in  confidence ; and  in  some 
instances  with  permission  to  mention  them  to  any  persons  who  have  any  bond  fide  interest 
in  the  subject.  Purely  anonymous  cases  can  of  course  have  no  weight  at  all.  I subjoin 
a couple  of  cases,  which  are  of  a normal  type,  and  have  quite  the  air  of  being  bond  fide f as 
samples  of  a numerous  class  which  have  to  be  treated  as  waste  paper.  The  fouotying 
account  appeared  in  the  Times  for  December  26th,  1868,  in  a review  of  Scott?s  Jtem&n- 
ology  dm  Witchcraft . The  writer,  who  is  here  perforce  anonymous,  says  that  it  “J has 
quite  recently  fallen  under  our  own  observation.” 

“ A young  English  lady  had  been  betrothed  to  an  officer  before  his  departure  to  the 
East.  During  her  lover’s  absence  she  was  taken  abroad  by  her  mother,  and  on  their 

168 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

our  informants  that  where  a person  refuses  to  a phenomenon, 
belonging  to  a certain  class,  the  direct  testimony  which  he  would  give, 
if  needful,  to  any  other  sort  of  personal  experience,  the  world  is  Sure  to 
take  the  view  that  he  lacks  that  complete  assurance  of  the  reality  of 
the  experience  which  alone  can  make  his  evidence  worthy  of  serious 

arrival  late  one  evening  at  a French  inn  they  found  it  necessary  to  occupy  rooms  on 
different  floors.  As  Miss  C.  was  in  the  act  of  getting  into  bed  late  at  night,  she 
suddenly  beheld  the  form  of  her  lover  standing  in  a remote  corner  of  her  chamber.  His 
countenance  was  extremely  sad,  and  she  observed  that  round  his  right  arm  he  wore  a band 
of  crane.  Indignant  at  the  conduct  of  her  betrothed  in  entering  her  sleeping  apartment, 
she  called  on  him  loudly  to  depart ; the  form  of  her  lover  remained  si>eecnle&s,  but  as  she 
lifted  up  her  voice  his  brow  grew  yet  sadder,  and  as  he  glided  silently  out  of  the  room  he 
seemed  a prey  to  the  gloomiest  feelings.  After  a time  Miss  C.  summoned  up  sufficient 
courage  to  descend  to  her  mother  and  recite  her  adventure.  They  caused  diligent  search 
to  be  made  for  the  returned  officer,  but  without  success.  Nor  could  the  smallest  trace  of 
him  be  afterwards  discovered.  Several  weeks  later  the  young  lady  received  the  news  of 
her  lover’s  death  in  a general  action  in  India.”  • 

If  such  an  account  as  this  appeared  in  a leading  newspa]>er  now,  we  should  hope  of 
course  to  obtain  the  means  of  sifting  it.  But  cases  like  the  following  could  not  be  pursued 
without  great  expense  in  local  advertising. 

“ Birmingham,  December  15th,  1882. 

“Hear  Sir,- -I  have  much  pleasure  in  forwarding  the  following  perfectly  authentic 
account.  It  has  never  before  been  made  known  beyond  our  own  immediate  circle,  and  I 
relate  it  to  you  in  the  hoj>e  that  it  may  be  instrumental,  with  others  of  greater  importance, 
in  establishing  the  fact  that  there  is  indeed,  and  in  truth,  a future  existence. 

“A  long  time  ago  whin  my  mother — who  is  now  dead — was  a girl,  she  was  staying  with 
her  cousin,  who  was  in  delicate  health  ; they  were  reading  or  chatting  when,  suddenly,  the 
latter’s  attention  was  drawn  to  the  door,  and  she  exclaimed,  with  delight,  * Why,  there’s 
grandma!  Why  did  you  not  say  she  was  here?*  The  two — especially  the  latter— were 
great  favourites  of  the  old  lady.  Mother,  hearing  this,  at  once  turned  round,  but  saw 
nothing,  but  at  once  left  the  room,  fully  expecting  to  find  her  among  the  other  members  of 
the  family.  But  being  told  that  the  old ‘lady  was  not  there  she  returned  with  the 
information  to  her  cousin,  who  loudly  protested  that  they  were  deceiving  her,  as  she  had 
been  again,  during  mother ’s  absence,  and  she  had  a ribbon  in  her  cap  which  she  had  sent 
her  a short  time  before,  on  her  birthday  anniversary.  Mother  again  went  to  the  other 
members  of  the  family  with  this  news.  They,  of  course,  thought  it  strange,  and  told  the 
girl  that  it  was  only  imagination.  On  the  following  day,  however,  news  arrived  that  at 
that  very  time  the  old  lady  had  passed  away. 

“This  is  perfectly  true,  and  can,  if  necessary,  be  corroborated  by  my  brother,  who  is  a 
clergyman. 

“You  may  make  any  use  you  like  of  this  communication,  but  I do  not  wish  my  name 
and  address  to  be  published,  and  so  subscribe  myself,  yours,  &c., 

“Well-Wishee.” 

The  signature  probably  expresses  the  truth  ; but  for  all  that  it  effectually  prevents  the 
narrative  from  being  “instrumental  in  establishing ” any  fact  whatever.  But  ev,en  more 
tantalising  than  anonymity  is  an  insufficient  address.  The  following  is  a case  which  this 
cause  has  rendered  abortive.  Inquiries  for  the  locality  have  been  made  all  over  the 
British  Isles  without  success. 

“Gurnet  Bay. 

“January  1st,  1884. 

“ I do  not  believe  in  supernatural  visitations,  and  the  following  experiences  of  my 
mother  may  be  outside  the  range  of  your  inquiries. 

“ My  mother,  while  an  infant,  lost  her  father  by  an  accident,  and  was  brought  up  by  a 
maternal  uncle,  who  was  greatly  attached  to  her,  and  for  whom  she  had  the  most 
unbounded  affection.  Learning  that  he  was  about  to  be  married,  and  not  being  able  to 
endure  a divided  affection,  she  left  him,  came  up  to  Hampshire,  married,  ana  settled 
there,  occasionally  hearing  from  him.  The  night  on  which  her  uncle  died  she  was  sleep- 
ing with  a middle-aged  lady  named  Pay.  At  the  moment  of  her  uncle’s  death,  as  it 
afterwards  appeared,  she  awoke  in  great  agitation,  exclaiming,  ‘ My  God  l my  uncle’s 
dead,’  and  frightening  her  companion,  who  awoke  at  the  same  time.  So  vivid  was  the 
impression  that  she  made  immediate  preparation  to  go  to  Box,  near  Bath,  where  her 
uncle’s  residence  was.  On  her  arrival  she  found  that  he  had  died  at  the  time  and  under 
exactly  the  circumstances  she  had  seen  in  her  dream,  having  strongly  desired  to  see  her 
at  the  last. 

“E.  J.  a’Court  Smith.” 

jy.]  FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  ' 16$ 

attention.  This  is  not  always  just ; since  the  reason  why  he  suppresses 
his  name  may  be,  not  that  he  doubts  the  truth  of  his  evidence, 
but  that  he  regards  the  truth  in  this  particular  department  of 
Nature  as  something  disgraceful  or  uncanny;  or  it  may  be  mere 
fear  of  ridicule,  or  a shrinking  from  any  form  of  publicity.  But. 
meanwhile  the  defect  must  not  be  extenuated.  Even  minor  points 
may  detract  from  the  businesslike  look  of  the  work.  Informants 
whose  evidence  is  otherwise  satisfactory  sometimes  feel  it  a sort 
of  mysterious,  duty  to  throw  a veil  over  something — if  it  is  only 

to  put  C for  Clapham.  A dash  is  the  last  refuge  of  the 

occult.  We  must  not  be  held  to  be  blind  to  these  blots  because 
we  have  printed  the  evidence  in  which  they  occur.  But  the  case, 
as  it  stands,  seeme'd  worth  presenting,  and  the  time  for  presenting 
it  seemed  to  have  arrived.  Even  if  it  be  weaker  than  we  think 
it,  there  is  the  future  as  well  as  the  past  to  think  of.  By  far 
the  greater  part  of  the  telepathic  evidence,  even  of  the  last  twenty 
years,  has  undoubtedly  perished,  for  all  scientific  purposes ; we 
want  the  account  for  the  next  twenty  years  to  be  different.  But 
it  is  only  by  a decided  change  in  the  attitude  of  the  public  mind 
towards  the  subject  that  the  passing  phenomena  can  be  caught  and 
fixed ; and  it  is  only  by  a wider  knowledge  of  what  there  already  is 
to  know  that  this  change  can  come  about.  Thus  our  best  chance  of 
a more  satisfactory  harvest  hereafter  is  to  exhibit  our  sheaf  of 
gleanings  now.  If  telepathy  is  a reality,  examples  of  it  may  be 
trusted  to  go  on  occurring ; and  with  the  increase  of  intelligent 
interest  in  psychical  research  we  may  hope  that  the  collection  and 
verification  of  good  first-hand  evidence  will  gradually  become  easier, 
and  that  the  necessity  of  careful  contemporary  records,  and  of  complete 
attestation,  will  be  more  widely  perceived. 

§ 20.  Meanwhile  it  may  be  just  worth  while  to  forestall  an  objec- 
tion— which,  as  it  has  been  made  before,  may  be  made  again — to  the 
argument  from  numbers.  It  has  been  urged  that  no  accumulation  of 
instances  can  make  up  a solid  case,  if  no  individual  instance  can  be 
absolutely  certified  as  free  from  flaw.  But  the  different  items  of 
inductive  proof  are,  of  course,  not  like  the  links  of  a deductive  chain. 
The  true  metaphor  is  the  sticks  and  the  faggot ; and  our  right  to  treat 
any  particular  case  as  a stick  depends,  not  on  its  being  so  flawlessly 
strong,  as  evidence  for  our  hypothesis,  that  no  other  hypothesis  can 
possibly  be  entertained  with  regard  to  it,  but  on  the  much  humbler ' 

170 

GENERAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  [chap. 

fact  that  any  other  hypothesis  involves  the  assumption  of  something 
in  itself  improbable.  Third-hand  ghost-stories,  and  the  ordinary 
examples  of  popular  superstitious,  have  no  claim  to  be  regarded  as 
sticks  at  {ill,  since  the  rejection  of  the  popular  explanation  of  them 
involves  no  improbable  assumptions  of  any  kind  ; at  best  they  are  dry 
reeds,  and  no  multiplication  of  their  number  could  ever  make  a 
respectable  faggot.  But  in  every  one  of  the  examples  on  which 
we  rest  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  the  rejection  of  that  hypothesis 
does,  as  I have  pointed  out,  involve  the  assumption  of  something 
in  itself  improbable ; and  every  such  example  adds  to  the  cumula- 
tive force  of  the  argument  for  telepathy.  The  multiplication 
of  such  examples,  therefore,  makes  a thggot  of  ever-increasing 
solidity. 

When  made  explicit,  this  seems  too  plain  to  be  denied ; but  an 
extreme  case  may  perhaps  make  the  point  even  clearer.  If,  since  the 
world  began,  nobody  had  ever  died  without  a phantasm  of  him 
appearing  to  one  or  more  of  his  friends,  the  joint  occurrence  of  the 
two  events  would  have  been  a piece  of  universally  recognised 
knowledge  ; of  the  cause  of  which  we  should,  to  this  day  possibly  not 
know  more,  and  could  not  possjbly  know  less,  than  we  know  of  the 
cause  of  gravitation.  Nor,  if  the  attestation  had  been  forthcoming  in 
the  case  of  only  half  the  deaths,  would  its  significance  have  been 
much  more  likely  to  be  disputed;  nor  if  it  had  been  forthcoming  in  the 
case  of  a quarter,  or  a tenth,  or  even  a hundredth  of  the  number.  But 
those  who  admit  this,  practically  admit  that  there  is  a c'onceivable 
number  of  well  attested  cases  which  they  would  regard  as  conclusive 
evidence  of  telepathy.  We  may  ask  them,  then,  to  name  their 
number ; and  if  they  do  so,  we  may  not  unreasonably  proceed  to 
inquire  the  grounds  of  their  selection.  A writer  on  the  subject 
lately  named  5000  as  the  mark  ; but  can  he  make  his  reasons  explicit 
for  considering  5000  as  conclusive,  and  4000,  or  even  1000,  as. 
inconclusive  ? In  course  of  time  we  hope  that  his  minimum  may  be 
reached;  but  any  limit  must  be  to  a great  extent  arbitrary.  We  shall 
be  content  if  impartial  readers,  who  do  not  feel  convinced  that  an 
adequate  inductive  proof  has  been  attained,  are  yet  brought  to  see 
that  our  object  and  method  are  scientifically  defensible  ; while  we,  on. 
our  side,  fully  admit  that  the  adequacy  of  the  present  collection 
does  not  admit  of  demonstration,  and  are  perfectly  willing  that  it 
should  be  regarded  as  only  a first  imperfect  instalment  of  what  is 
needed. 

FOR  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

*v.]. 

| 21.  Perhaps,  after  all,  the  difference  of  instinct  as  to  what  really 
is  needed  may  be  considerably  less  than  at  first  sight  appears.  For  we- 
have  not  been  able  to  regard  the  alleged  phenomena  in  the  completely 
detached  fashion  which  most  of  those  who  consider  them  naturally 
adopt.  We  are  unable  to  determine  how  far  the  impression  on  our 
own  minds  of  the  evidence  for  spontaneous  telepathy  has  been 
dependent  on  our  conviction  of  the  genuineness  of  cognate 
experimental  cases.  These  latter  being  for  the  most  part  trivial, 
recent,  and  little  known,  it  is  not  surprising  that  comparatively 
few  persons  should  have  considered  them,  and  that  still  fewer  should 
have  grasped  their  bearing  on  the  spontaneous  cases.  But  to  anyone 
who  accepts  the  experimental  results,  the  d,  priori  presumption 
against  other  forms  of  supersensuous  communication  can  hardly 
retain  its  former  aspect.  The  presumption  is  diminished — the 
hospitality  of  the  mind  to  such  phenomena  is  increased — in  a 
degree  which  is  none  the  less  important  that  it  does  not  admit  of 
calculation.  A further  step  of  about  equal  importance  is  made 
when  we  advance  to  the  better-evidenced  of  the  transitional  cases; 
though  here  again  the  effect  on  our  own  minds,  duo  to  our  know*  • 
ledge  of  the  persons  concerned,  cannot  be  imparted  to  others^ 
Attention  has  been  duly  drawn  to  the  difficulty  of  embracing  these- 
several  classes  in  a common  physical  conception ; but  on  psycho- 
logical ground  we  cannot  doubt  that  we  are  justified  (provisionally 
at  any  rate)  in  regarding  them  as  continuous.  Remembering  the- 
existence  of  the  transitional  class,  we  may  regard  the  extremes  as. 
not  more  remote  from  one  another  than  the  electrical  phenomena, 
of  the  cat’s  coat  from  those  of  the  firmament.  Electricity,  indeed, 
affords  in  this  way  a singularly  close  parallel  to  telepathy.  “ The- 
spontaneous  apparitions  of  the  dying  ” (I  quote  Mr.  Myers’  words)- 
“ may  stand  for  the  lightning ; while  the  ancient  observations  on 
the  attraction  of  amber  for  straw  may  fairly  be  paralleled  by  our 
modest  experiments  with  cards  and  diagrams.  The  spontaneous, 
phenomena,  on  the  one  hand,  have  been  observed  in  every  age, 
but  observed  with  mere  terror  and  bewilderment.  And,  on  the 
other,  hand,  candid  friends  have  expressed  surprise  at  our  taking 
a serious  interest  in  getting  a rude  picture  from  one  person’s- 
mind  into  another,  or  proving  that  ginger  may  be  hot  in  the- 
mouth  • by  the  effect  of  unconscious  sympathy  alone.  Yet  we 
hold  that  these  trivial  cases  of  community  of  sensation  are  tfae 
germinal  indications  of  a far-reaching  force,  whose  higher  manifes- . 

172 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

[cttAP. 

tations  may  outshine  these  as  the  lightning  outshines  the  sparks  on 
Puss's  back.  We  hold  that  the  lowest  telepathic  manifestations 
may  be  used  to  explain  and  corroborate  the  highest/'  Their  con- 
ditions differ  widely ; so  widely,  indeed,  as  to  supply  indirectly 
an  argument  for  the  genuineness  of  the  facts,  since  totally  distinct 
and  independent  hypotheses — that  of  collusion  in  the  one  case, 
and  of  forgetfulness  or  exaggeration  in  the  other — would  be  needed 
to  refute  them.  Yet,  with  all  this  difference  of  conditions,  when 
we  compare  the  facts  of  either  class  with  any  facts  which  the 
accepted  psychology  includes,  we  cannot  help  recognising  the  great 
common  characteristic — a supersensuous  influence  of  mind  on  mind 
— as  a true  generic  bond.  Where  that  characteristic  is  found, 
there  we  have  a natural  group  of  phenomena  which  differ  far 
more  fundamentally  from  all  other  known  phenomena  than  they 
can  possibly  differ  among  themselves.  Their  unity  is  found  in 
contrast.  Till  more  is  known  of  their  causes,  it  may  bo  impossible 
for  science  to  establish  their  inner  relationships,  just  as  it  is 
impossible  to  establish  the  degrees  of  affinity  between  casually 
selected  members  of  a single  human  community.  But  they  draw 
together,  so  to  speak,  on  the  held  of  science,  even  as  men  of  one 
race  draw  together  when  cast  among  an  alien  population. 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

In  saying  that  there  is  a total  absence  of  respectable  evidence,  and  an 
almost  total  absence  of  any  first-hand  evidence  at  all,  for  those  alleged 
phenomena  of  magic  and  witchcraft  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  the 
results  of  diseased  imagination,  hysteria,  hypnotism,  and  occasionally, 
perhaps,  of  telepathy,  I have  made  a sweeping  statement  which  it  may 
perhaps  seem  that  nothing  short  of  a knowledge  of  the  whole  witch* 
literature  of  the  world  could  justify.  I have,  of  course,  no  claim  to 
this  complete  knowledge.  My  statement  depends  on  a careful  search 
through  about  260  books  on  the  subject  (including,  I think,  most  of  tho 
principal  ones  of  the  16th,  17th,  and  18th  centuries),  and  a large  number 
of  contemporary  records  of  trials. 1 Such  a list  is  certainly  very  far 
from  exhaustive.  But  as,  on  the  one  hand,  the  450  works  which  Le 

„ 1 The  greater  part  of  this  irksome  task  has  been  carried  out  for  me  with  rare  zeal  and 
intelligence  by  my  friend,  Miss  Porter,  to  whom  I must  here  once  again  express  my 
obligations. 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT 1 

17$ 

if-1 

Loyer  professed  to  have  studied,  before  writing  his  Lime  des  Spectre »r 
did  not  fortify  him  with  the  trustworthy  record  of  a single  case,  so,  on 
the  other  hand,  a much  smaller  assortment  may  suffice  to  support, 
very  wide  negative  conclusions.  To  those  who  have  travelled  over 
the  same  ground,  the  reason  will  be  obvious.  Every  student  of  records  of 
abnormal  or  “ supernatural  ” events  must  have  been  struck  by  the  way  in 
which  the  same  cases  keep  on  reappearing  in  one  work  after  another. 
Even  the  most  credulous  partisans  exercise  a sort  of  economy  of  the* 
marvellous,  in  so  far  as  they  find  that  copying  out  old  marvels  is  a great 
saving  of  time  and  responsibility.  And  this  is  very  specially  the  case  with 
the  literature  now  in  question.  Bodin’s  Demonomanie  and  the  Malleus 
Malejicarum  supplied  generations  of  theorists  with  their  pittance  of  facts 
and  not  even  the  Beresford  ghost  has  done  such  hard  and  continuous  duty 
in  the  cause  of  superstition  as  some  few  of  the  witch-cases. 

Considering  the  enormous  place  that  lycanthropy,  for  instance,  plays* 
in  the  interminable  discussions  as  to  what  the  devil  could  do,  and  how  he 
did  it,  it  is  strange  to  realise  what  the  evidence  (outside  confessions1) 
actually  was.  Putting  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Lot’s  wife  out  of  the* 
question,  the  main  burden  of  the  proof  seems  really  to  rest  on  about  four 
cases.  Either  it  is  the  11th  century  legend,  quoted  from  William  of 
Malmesbury,  of  the  two  old  women  who  kept  an  inn,  and  transformed 
their  guests  into  asses  ; or  it  is  the  equally  mythical  tale  of  the  wood- 
cutter who  wounded  three  cats,  and  declared  that  three  women 
afterwards  accused  him  of  having  wounded  theyn  ; or  it  is  Peter  JStubbe,, 
against  whom  the  evidence  was  that  the  villagers  lit  on  him  unexpectedly,, 
while  they  were  hunting  a wolf  ; or  it  is  the  man  who,  having  cut  off  a. 

wolfs  paw,  drew  from  his  pocket  the  hand  of  his  host’s  wife,  whom  he 

found  sitting  composedly  without  it — a story  told  to  Boguet  (as  a joke  for 
aught  we  can  tell)  by  a person  who  professed  to  have  picked  it  up  in  travel- 
ling through  the  locality.  Even  the  credulous  De  1’ An  ere 2 admits  that,, 

with  wide  opportunities,  he  has  not  come  on  the  track  of  any  transformations 
— a fact  which  seems  to  have  a good  deal  impressed  him.  But  in  the  eyes  of 
other  writers,  perpetual  citation  seems  to  have  imparted  to  the  classical 
legends  just  mentioned  the  virtue  of  good  first-hand  testimony.  Glanvil  gives* 

1 When  we  remember  the  ways  in  which  confessions  were  obtained  the  regard  in 
which  they  were  held  appears  the  most  amazing  fact  in  the  whole  history  of  witchcraft.. 
The  common  view  is  quaintly  illustrated  in  an  account  of  Peter  Stubbe  (translated  from 
the  Dutch,  London,  1590) ; where  it  is  said  that  Peter  “ after  being  put  to  the  rack,  and 
fearing  the  torture,  volluntarilyr  confessed  his  whole  life.”  Even  where  no  violent 
means  were  used,  the  mind  of  the  accused  would  be  unhinged  by  starvation,  enforced 
sleeplessness,  or  mere  despair.  And  as  if  this  was  not  enough,  we  have  the  dismal  record  ■ 
of  cheats  and  quibbles— e.r/.,  the  promising  his  life  to  the  accused  if  he  would  confess, 
meaning  eternal  l ife.  We  have  also,  no  doubt,  to  allow  for  the  morbid  vanity  and  shame- 
lessness which  is  a symptom  of  advanced  hysteria.  (See  Richet,  op.  cit p.  364.) 

* Tableau  de  VJneonstanee  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  Demons  (Paris,  1612),  p.  3X2. 

174 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

[CBAFt 

^mother  case  where  a panting  old  woman  was  suddenly  seen  in  the  places 
-of  a hunted  hare,  on  the  authority  or  a huntsman;1  but  there  are 
features  in  the  account  which  strongly  suggest,  as  Glanvil  admits,  that 
the  huntsman  was  a wag.  I find  another  less  known  English  example 
of  the  kind ; and  the  manner  of  its  appearance  is  significant.  The  record 
-of  the  trial  of  the  Essex  witches  in  1645 2 contains,  first,  all  manner  of 
"first-hand  evidence  to  witches’  “ familiars  ” — evidence  which  must  have 
been  easy  enough  to  get,  considering  that  a man  who  had  looked  through 
a cottage  window,  and  seen  a woman  holding  a lock  of  wool  that  cast  a 
shadow,  was  believed  when  he  described  these  objects  as  her  white  and, 
black  imps  ;:i  and  then  at  last  we  have  a case  of  transformation  into  an 
tanimal,  at  which  point,  sure  enough,  the  evidence  becomes  second-hand, 
and  the  witness  has  heard  the  tale  from  a man  who  he  knew  “would  not 
speak  an  untruth.”  A transformation  case  which  Webster  mentions  as 
given  on  first-hand  testimony  was  afterwards  confessed  to  have  been  an  im- 
posture.3 4 I have  found  but  a single  item  of  independent  evidence  to  the 
phenomenon  which  is  first-hand,  in  the  sense  of  having  been  given  direct  to 
the  writer  who  records  it.  This  is  in  Spina’s  Qiuestio  de  Strigibus 
{Rome,  1576,  p.  53),  and  is  to  this  effect:— a cobble?,  being  annoyed  by 
a cat,  dealt  blows  at  it,  after  which  an  old  woman  turned  out 
to  have  some  hurts  which  she  was  not  known  to  have  received.5 
'To  be  quite  fair,  I should  add  that  llodin  says  that  one  Pierre 
Mamor  wrote  a little  tractate,  in  which  he  professed  to  have 
actually  seen  a transformation-  —this  being  the  only  case  that  I have  come 
across  where  a man  of  .sufficient  education  to  write  something  that  was 
printed  is  even  cited  as  bearing  personal  testimony  to  such  marvels. 

It  is  the  same  with  the  witches’  compacts,  and  with  the  nocturnal  rides 
qpwid  orgies.  'Putting  aside  confessions,  the  evidence  is  of  the  flimsiest  sort, 
’and  is  copied  and  re-copied  with  untiring  pertinacity  ; while  many  of  the 
•miraculous  tales  are  mere  country  gossip,  which  do  not  even  pretend  to 

3  Sadducisvius  Trinmphatus  (London,  108!)),  p.  387.  Glanvil’s  own  theory  is  that  the 
hare  was  a demon,  and  that  the  witch  was  invisibly  hurried  along  with  it,  to  put  her  out 
of  breath.  > 

2 A Collection  of  Curious  Tracts  relating  to  Witchcraft , &t\  (London,  1838). 

3 Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay  concerning  Witchcraft  (London,  1720),  p.  00.  It  is 
•an  interesting  instance  of  the  intimate  relation  between  persecution  and  the  vitality  of  the 
persecuted  doctrines,  that  imps  are  little  mentioned  except  in  this  country,  where,  as 
Hutchinson  says,  “the  law  makes  the  feeding,  suckling,  or  rewarding  of  them  to  be 
felony.  ” 

4 The  Displaying  of  8 opposed  Witchcraft  (London,  1077),  p.  278. 

5 This  story  also  appears  as  a treasure  in  the  Compendium  Malefaarvm  (Milan, 
1620).  In  the  only  other  case  given  by  Spina  (who,  be  it  observed,  is  one  of  the  very 
♦chief  authorities)  the  evidence  was  that  a witch  told  two  people  that  certain  deceased  cats 
had  been  witches.  In  the  treatment  of  the  old  dateless  legends,  the  taste  of  the  narrator 
-counted  for  something.  Thus,  Olaus  Magnus  {Historic  de  Gentihus  Sepkntrionalibus, 
Home,  1555,  p.  044)  reports  that  once  upon  a time  an  accused  person  was  closely  confined 
and  watched,  till  he  duly  transformed  himself.  Majolus,  telling  the  story  half  a century 
later,  says  that  the  watchers  watched  iu  vain 

TV.]  * NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT  1T5 

rest  on  any  authority,  Holland  says,  w I cannot  hear  that  any  wise  man 
or  honest  man  tell  us  any  thing,  which  hath  been  himself  either  a party 
or  a witness  of  such  horrible  bargains.”1  “ What  credible  witness  is  there 
brought  at  any  time,”  says  Reginald  Scot,  “ of  this  their  corporal,  visible, 
and  incredible  bargain ; saving  the  confession  of  some  person 
diseased  both  in  body  and  mind,  wilfully  made  or  injuriously  constrained?”2 
As  regards  transportations,  the  most  superstitious  writers  have  never 
themselves  come  into  anything  like  close  contact  with  the  marvels  that 
they  record,  ■ Habbakuk,  and  the  Sabine  peasant  who  inadvertently 
dispersed  an  assembly  by  a pious  ejaculation,  figure  in  the  records  with 
almost  unbroken  regularity.  I am  aware  of  only  two  cases  in  which  it  is  even 
rumoured  that  a person  has  been  actually  observed  travelling  through  the 
air;3  and  whenever  a “ Sabbath”  has  been  seen,  or  persons  have  been 
found  far  from  their  homes  in  the  morning — presumably  because  the  devil, 
who  was  carrying  them  back  from  the  revels,  dropped  them  at  the  sound 
of  the  Angelus — the  witnesses  are  shepherds  or  peasants  (in  one  case  a 
butler),  who  have  not  been  cross-examined  or  even  interviewed.  Grillandus  4 
says  that  he  had  been  at  first  inclined  to  disbelieve  in  bodily  transporta- 
tions, but  that  longer  experience  had  changed  his  view.  He  then  gives  a 
couple  of  hearsay  stories  about  people  found  in  the  fields,  and  a few 
confessions.  Binsfcld5  considers  transportation  certain,  on  the  strength 
of  some  village  gossip  (copied  in  part  from  Grillandus).  A story  quoted 
by  Horst  from  the  De  Hirco  Nocturne  of  Schercrtz,  of  a young  man 
found  on  the  roof  towards  morning,  is  apparently  a typical  case  of  natural 
somnambulism.  The  Malleus  fVol.  I.,  p.  171)  tells  how  s.ome  young 
man  saw  a comrade  carried  off  by  invisible  means ; but  the  prominent  fact 
in  the  story  is  that  they  were  having  a drinking  bout.0 

1 A Treatise  against  Witchcraft  (Cambridge,  1590),  p.  31. 

* The  Discovery  of  Witchcraft  (London,  1584),  p.  48.  See  also  his  criticism  on 
Rodin,  p.  23;  and  cf.  Christian  Thonfks,  Kurtze  Lchrsiitze  von  dem  Luster  der  Zaubcrcy 
•(1706),  p,  31* 

J Mallen.%  Vol.  i.,  p.  175 ; Scot,  Op.  cit.,  p.  07.  On  the  general  omission  of  any  sort  of  in- 
vestigation of  stories,  see  Dell5  Osa,  Die  Nichtigkeit  der  Hcxerey  (Frankfort,  1760),  p.  508. 

4 Tractatus  de  Sortilegiis  (Lyons,  1536),  cap.  7. 

5 Tractatusde  Confessionihus Maleficarum ct  Sagarum  (Trbves,  1 591),  pp.  223-30  and  343-5.  ' 
See  also  Spina,  Op . ct£.,p.  108;  Remy.  Dcvmonolatria (Lyons,  1595),  pp.  112,  ll5 ; GlanviJ, 

Op.  city  p.  143.  The  testimony  to  the  effect  that  the  persons  roputea  to  have  been  at 
tne  nocturnal  orgies  had  never  really  left  their  beds,  must  have  been  well  known— see,  e.g.9 
•T.  Baptista  Porta,  Magi  a Natural™  (Naples,  1558),  p.  102;  Wier,  De  Prmtigiis  Dcemonum, 
&c.  (Basle,'  1568),  p.  275  ; Godelmann,  Tractatus  de  Magis,  Venejicis,  et  Lamiis  (Frankfort* 
1591),  Lib.  p.  39;  Remy,  Op.  cit.,  p.  110;  Compendium  Maleficarum>  p.  81;  Menghi, 
Compendia  deW  Arte  Esmrcista  (Bologna  1590),  p.  439  ; Elich,  Dannonomagia  (Frankfort, 
1607),  p.  131 ; Hutchinson,  Op.  cit .,  pp.  100,  125  ; but  the  figure  that  remained  at  home 
might,  of  course,  be  accounted  for  as  ah  optical  delusion  caused  by  the  devil,  or  as  due  to 
his  direct  .personation  (see  Gayot  de  Pitaval,  Causes  C6Ubrest  Amsterdam,  1775,  p.  153}* 
But  if  thejflnperstition  could  thus  defy  direct  counter-evidence,  we  get  a fresh  idea  of  the 
feebleness  of  its  own  evidential  support  from  the  fact  that  both  sceptics  and  believers  seem 
sometimes  to  have  forgotten  that  the  question  was  one  of  evidence  at  all.  Thus,  G. 
Tartarotti  (Del  Congresso  Nottumo  ddle  Lamie , Venice,  1749)  bases  his  elaborate  argument 

176  NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT.  [chap. 

In  all  these  matters  we  may  be  sure  that,  had  there  been  better 
evidence  to  record,  it  would  have  been  recorded. 

Similarly  in  the  trials  of  witches,  where  (if  we  exclude  the  confessions) 
nearly  all  the  alleged  facts  can  now  be  accepted  and  explained  on 
physiological  and  psychological  principles,  the  sameness  is  so  great  that, . 
after  our  research  lias  been  carried  to  a certain  point,  we  feel  sure  that  no 
new  types  will  be  forthcoming.1  Even  the  questions  arid  suggestions 
used  for  entrapping  the  accused  seem  to  have  become  stereotyped  forms, 
and  the  very  indictments  came  to  be  hurried  over,  as  almost  taken  for 
granted/2  Spec  says  that  it  never  even  entered  into  his  head  to  doubt 
the  existence  of  witches,  till  he  studied  the  judicial  evidence/1 

On  the  whole,  then,  the  sweeping  statement  mentioned  at  the 
beginning  of  the  foregoing  chapter — that  in  modern  societies  a more 
or  less  imposing  army  of  so-called  evidence  can  be  obtained  for  the 
support  of  any  belief  or  crotchet  that  is  less  than  an  outrage  on  the 
popular  common-sense  of  the  time — is  veiy  far  from  receiving  support 
from  the  history  of  witchcraft.  The  stock  example  which  was  to  prove 
the  view  in  fact  goes  somewhat  surprisingly  far  to  disprove  it.  For 
at  no  period  would  the  conditions  seem  to  be  more  favourable 
for  a really  impressive  record  of  marvellous  phenomena  than  during  the 
15th  and  16th  centuries.  The  art  and  literature  of  the  epoch  show  high 
imaginative  development,  and  a keen  appetite  for  variety  and  detail ; 
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  majority  of  able  and  educated  minds  were  not 
fore-armed,  in  at  all  the  same  way  as  now,  by  a sense  of  cl  priori 
impossibilities  and  of  a uniform  Nature,  and  the  belief  in  the  incalculable 
power  and  malignity  of  the  devil  was  nearly  universal.4  One  would  have 

entirely  ori  collateral  difficulties— as  that,  if  the  witches  really  feasted  at  their  meetings, 
they  ought  to  come  back  surfeited  and  happy,  instead  of  hungry  and  tired ; and  that  if  they 
could  escape  from  their  bedrooms  they  ought  to  be  able  to  escape  from  prison.  And,  similarly, 
the  author  of  the  Critiche  on  this  book,  (Venice,  1751)  refutes  Tartarotti  by  a long  chain 
of  theoretic  reasoning  suppoited  by  many  orthodox  authorities,  but  not  by  a single  fact. 

1 Compare,  for  instance,  the  cases  in  Pitcairn’s  Criminal  Trials  of  Scotland 
(Edinburgh,  1833) ; Cannaert’s  Olim  Proves  ties  SorcUres  en  Belgique  (Ghent,  1845) ; 
Rueling’s  Ansziige  einiger  merkwiirdigen  Hexcnprozessen  (Gottingen,  1780) ; Muller,  Op. 
tit.  See  also  Iieuss,  1st  Sored  l eric  an  JO  me  et  an  17  me  Siicle,  particulUrement  en  Alsace 
(Paris,  1871),  ]>.  107 ; Haas,  Die  Hexcnprozesse  (Tubingen,  1805),  p.  80 ; and  Soldan, 
OescMchtc  tier  Hexcnprozessen  (Stuttgart,  1880),  pp.  385-380.  A similar  repetition  of  stock 
stories,  and  a similar  monotony  of  detail,  are  observable  in  the  New  England  records. 

a See  Haas,  Op.  tit.,  p.  70 ; Lilionthal,  Op.  tit.,  p.  03 ; Rapp,  Die  Hexenpt'ozesse 
(Innsbruck,  1874),  pp.  21,27 . Rapp  (i>.  143)  specially  remarks  on  the  sameness  of  the- 
confessions  as  due  to  the  sameness  of  the  judge’s  questions. 

3 Cautio  Criminal  is  (Frankfort,  1032),  p.  308. 

4 This  belief  was  held  alike  by  the  credulous  majority  and  the  sensible  minority;  and 
it  is  interesting  to  see  how  the  latter  contrived  to  make  controversial  use  of  it.  For 
instance,  G.  Gifford,  an  author  who  is  almost  modern  in  his  view  of  the  influence  of  the 
mind  on  the  body,  in  his  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  (London,  1003),  p.  L,  argues  for  the* 
worthlessness  of  confessions  on  the  ground  that  “ the  tostimonie  of  a witch  in  many  things  - 
at  her  death  is  not  any  other  than  the  testimonie  of  the  divell,  because  the  diyell  hath 
deceived  her,  and  made  her  beleeve  things  which  were  nothing  so.”  And  Hhtchinson, 
Op.  tit.,  p.  90,  ridicules  the  test  of  torture  on  similar  grounds,  “ since  the  devil  will  pretend 
torture  when  he  feels  none,  and  fall  down  when  he  needs  not.”  Of*  D*Autun» 
L' Incrididite  Scat-ante  et  la  CreduliU  Ignomnte  (Lyons,  1671),  p.  791. 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT 

177 

xv.] 

expected,  then,  that  every  village  would  swell  the  direct  testimony  to 
transformations  and  witches’  “ Sabbaths  ” ; and  that  even  philosophers 
who  regarded  the  Evil  One  as  an  abiding  source  of  sensory  delusion  might 
occasionally  have  had  their  own  senses  deluded.  But  we  can  only  take  the 
record  that  we  find,  and  it  is  as  monotonous  as  it  is  meagre.  Not  only  do 
the  philosophers  and  their  friends  seem  to  have  enjoyed  complete  immunity 
from  Satanic  visitations,  but  even  in  the  lower  social  strata  the  magical 
incidents  (other  than  those  which  modern  science  can  accept  and  explain) 
are  extremely  few  and  far  between ; and  the  evidence  for  them — if  the 
word  be  used  with  any  degree  of  strictness — is  practically  non-existent.1 

I must  specially  insist  on  this  point ; as  my  view  seems  completely 
opposed  to  that  given  in  the  account  from  which  most  English 
readers  have  probably  formed  their  idea  of  the  subject — the  brilliant 
first  chapter  in  Mr.  Lecky’s  History  of  Rationalism . Mr.  Lecky’s 
treatment  appears  to  me  to  suffer  from  the  want  of  two  important 
distinctions.  In  the  first  place,  he  does  not  separate  the  fact  of  the  wide 
belief  in  the  magical  phenomena,  and  the  array  of  authorities  that 
could  be  cited  on  the  side  of  that  belief,  from  the  evidence  for  particular 
events — the  statements  of  bond  fide  witnesses.  For  every  grain  of 
testimony  there  is  no  difficulty  in  finding  a ton  of  authority.  2 And  in  the 
second  place,'  lie  does  not  explicitly  discriminate  between  the  wholly  bizarre 

1 Writers  of  the  most  opposite  views  confirm  what  the  records  of  trials  would 
sufficiently  prove — that  the  natural  stronghold  of  witchcraft  was  among  tho  most  ignorant 
and  backward  sections  of  tho  population,  liodin  {()]>.  cit.,  p.  IBS)  says  that  witches  were 
commonest  in  villages.  Bernard  ( Guide  to  Grand  Jurt/men  in  Cases  of  Witch crtifty 
London,  1627,  p.  22)  says  that  “ fear  and  imagination  make  many  witches  among  country- 
people,  ” and  asserts  that  only  those  who  think  much  about  witches  are  ever  troubled  with 
them.  Glanvil  (Op.  cit p.  498)  .thinks  it  an  important  fact  that  “all  people  in  the 
country  about  were  fully  persuaded  ” of  the  reality  of  one  of  his  cases.  D’Autun 
(Op.  cit.,  p 507)  traces  tho  rumour  of  witchcraft  to  the  imagination  of  villagers.  Tartarotti 
(Op.  cit.,  p.  105)  describes  the  supposed  attendants  at  the  “ Sabbath  ” as  poor,  weak,  ill-fed 
creatures.  Hutchinson  (Op.  cit.,  p.  153)  remarks  that  “ country-people  are  wonderfully 
bent  to  make  the  most  of  all  stories  of  witchcraft.”  Sir  G.  Mackenzie  (The  Laws  and 
Customs  of  Scotland  in  Matters  Criminal,  Edinburgh,  1009)  says:  “Those  poor  people 
who  are  ordinarily  accusod  of  the  crime,  are  poor  ignorant  creatures,  and  ofttimes  women 
who  understand  not  the  nature  of  what  they  are  accused  of  ” ; and  Pitcairn  speaks  of 
convictions  “on  the  slenderest  evidence,  afforded  by  the  testimony  of  ignorant  and 
superstitious  country-people.”  These  extracts  might  be  multiplied  to  any  extent. 

2 Thus  Bodin’s  chapter  on  lycanthropy  contains,  as  Mr.  Lecky  truly  observes, 
“ immense  numbers  of  authorities.”  But  it  is  surely  important  to  notice  that  among  the 
chief  of  them  are  Homer,  Ovid,  and  Apuleius  ; that  Virgil  is  quoted  as  a frequent 
eye-witness  of  the  phenomenon  on  the  strength  of  the  8th  Eclogue ; and  that  the  only 
instances  for  which  a shadow  of  evidence  is  adduced  are  the  following : — Three  confessions 
unsupported  by  any  external  evidence,  one  of  which  (to  be  just)  is  said  not  to  have  been 
extorted ; one  confession  with  the  additional  piece  of  evidence  reported  at  third-hand, 
that  the  accused  man  had  a wound  which  the  witness  recognised  as  one  that  he  had 
inflicted  on  a wolf ; a report  of  a prosecution  which  was  abandoned,  against  some  men  who 
had  wounded  some  cats ; the  eternal  story  above  mentioned  of  the  wood-cutter  and 
the  three  cats ; and  Pierre  Mamor’s  testimony,  also  mentioned  above.  The  list  is  surely 
not  aft  •imposing  one ; and  becomes  even  less  so  when  we  find  Bodin  quite  equally 
impressed  with  the  fact  that  the  author  of  another  book,  dedicated  to  an  emperor  .had 
seen  a man,  not  committing  the  crime,  but  condemned  for  it ; or  chat  some  one  who  had 
been  in  Livonia  reported  that  the  people  there  were  all  believers. 

N 

178 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

[CHAP, 

and  incredible  side  of  the  subject,  and  its  scientific  or  pathological  side. 
Of  course  “ belief  in  witchcraft  ” may  be  taken  to  mean  simply  a group  or 
system  of  wrong  inferences,  drawn  under  a strong  instinct  of  demonic 
agency ; and  in  that  light  the  belief  can  doubtless  be  treated  as  a whole— 
as  a single  though  complex  superstition.  But  “witchcraft”  may  also  be 
used,  and  is  frequently  used  in  Mr.  Lecky’s  own  pages,  to  denote  the  facts 
alleged — for  instance,  that  old  women  were  carried  through  the  air — and 
not  the  inference  drawn,  that  it  was  the  devil  who  carried  them.  And 
this  is  the  meaning  that  naturally  becomes  prominent  when  the  question  is 
of  the  evidence  for  witchcraft — the  actual  testimony  that  men’s  senses  bore 
to  it.  JFor  instance,  Mr.  Lecky  says  (pp.  14-16)  that  “the  historical 
evidence  establishing  the  reality  of  witchcraft  is  so  vast  and  varied  that  it 
is  impossible  to  disbelieve  it  without  Avhat,  on  other  subjects,  we  should 
deem  the  most  extraordinary  rashness.  ...  In  our  own  day,  it  may 
be  said  with  confidence  that  it  would  bo  altogether  impossible  for  such  an 
amount  of  evidence  Lo  accumulate  round  a conception  which  had  no 
substantial  basis  in  fact.  . . . Tf  it  were  a natural  but  a very 
improbable  fact,  our  reluctance  to  believe  it  would  have  been  completely 
stifled  by  the  multiplicity  of  the  proofs.”  Here  the  “evidence”  and 
“ proofs”  clearly  refer  rather  to  facts  than  to  inferences  ; and  it  is  implied 
in  the  whole  tone  of  the  passage  that  the  facts  referred  to  belong  to  the 
miraculous  class  which  is  now  universally  discredited.  I can,  therefore, 
only  express  my  entire  dissent  from  the  statements  made,  at  any  rate 
until  they  receive  better  support  than  Mr.  Lecky  supplies.  He  tells  us, 
for  instance,  that  Boguet  “is  said  to  have  burnt  600  persons,  chiefly  for 
lycantliropy.”  If  this  be  true,  it  still  gives  us  no  hint  as  to  what  the 
evidence  was ; judging  by  analogy,  we  should  suppose  that  it  consisted  in 
confessions,  probably  made  under  torture.1  Did  600  persons,  or  100,  or 
even  10  persons  ever  bear  testimony  before  Boguet  that  they  had  seen  a 
man  or  woman  converted  into  a wolf?  If  so,  it  is  surely  remarkable  that 
his  own  book  (Discours  des  borders , Lyons,  1608)  contains  (besides  a few 
confessions  and  a few  of  the  stock  fables)  only  two  lycantliropy  cases — the 
evidence  for  one  being  that  a child  who  had  been  injured  by  a wolf 
declared,  in  the  fever  which  followed,  that  the  animal’s  paws  were  like 
hands ; and  for  the  other  that  a peasant  woman  who  had  been  desperately 
frightened  by  a wolf,  said  afterwards  that  its  hind  feet  had  had  human 
toes.  So  again,  Mr.  Lecky  (p.  127)  seems  completely  to  sympathise  with 
OlanviFs  statement  that  the  evidence  for  “ the  belief  of  things  done  by 
persons  of  despicable  power  and  knowledge,  beyond  the  reach  of  art  and 

1 Sde  Kanoldt,  Supplement  urn  Hi  curieuser  nnd  n utzbarcr  Anmcrkungen,  &c.  (Bautzen, 
1728),  p.  63.  Fur  a proof  that  even  a writer  who  was  rather  inclined  to  ridicule 
the  subject  could  still  regard  confession  under  torture  as  conclusive  of  this  crime,  see 
Feucer,  Commentarius  de  pmcipuis  Divimtionum  fjfeneribus  (Hanover,  1607),  p.  280. 

IV.] 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

179 

ordinary  nature,”  was  overwhelming.1  And  truly  Glanvil  does  speak  of 
“ the  attestation  of  thousands  of  eye  and  ear  witnesses,  and  those  not  of 
the  easily  deceivable  vulgar  only,  but  of  wise  and  grave  discemers.”  But 
this  is  a typical  example  of  the  very  confusion  which  I am  trying  to  clear 
up.  If  thousands  of  wise  and  grave  discerners  saw  the  incredible  marvels 
with  their  own  eyes,  how  is  it  that  in  not  a single  case  has  the  record  been 
preserved  ? If  on  the  other  hand  they  saw  only  the  credible  marvels — fits 
and  the  like — and  believed  the  incredible  ones,  on  extraordinarily  feeble 
testimony  but  under  an  extraordinarily  strong  prepossession,  in  what  sense 
can  it  be  asserted  that  there  was  then  “ overwhelming  evidence  ” for  what 
would  now  be  denied  ? 

In  brief,  when  it  is  a question  of  evidence,  we  should  naturally  expect 
to  fipd  a strongly-marked  division  between  that  part  of  the  superstition 
where  the  wrong  inference  was  drawn  from  spurious  facts,  such  as 
lycanthropy  and  the  nocturnal  orgies,  and  that  part  where  the  wrong 
inference  was  drawn  from  genuine  facts,  such  as  the  phenomena  of 
somnambulism  or  epilepsy.  And  my  contention  is  that  this  strongly 
marked  division  actually  exists,  and  that  for  the  former  class  of  marvels 
there  was  practically  no  evidence — no  professedly  first-hand  observation. 
For  the  latter  class,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  was  naturally 
abundant,  however  wrongly  interpreted. 

To  pass  now  to  this  latter  class — that  is  to  say,  to  the  physiological 
and  psychological  aspects  of  the  subject.  I have  said  that  many 
phenomena,  which  in  their  way  were  sufficiently  genuine,  were 
misinterpreted,  because  the  sciences  which  should  have  explained  them 
were  still  unborn.  But  though  anything  like  a complete  and  critical 
explanation  of  these  phenomena  was  impossible,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that 
the  witch-literature  presents  a constant  succession  of  sensible  writers 
{chiefly  English  and  German),  who  wholly  rejected  the  common  view  of 
them.  As  early  as  the  15th  century,  and  often  during  the  16th,  works 
appeared  in  which  the  objective  nature  of  the  more  bizarre  incidents  is 
denied,  and  they  are  treated  as  hallucinations;  almost  invariably,  however, 
as  hallucinations  of  a supernatural  kind,  caused  directly  by  the  devil.2  This 
comparatively  rational  view  of  the  transportations,  transformations, 

1 Sadducismus  Trimnphatus,  p.  3. 

2 Molitor,  Dc  Lamiis  (Cologne,  1480),  cap.  vi. ; Wier,  Op.  cit?  pp.  21G,  236,  352,  371 ; 
•Daneau,  Les  borders  ( Geneva,  1574),  p.  104;  Kemy,  Op.  cit.,  Lib.  ii.  cap.  v. ; Saur,  J Win 
kiirtze  Warnung,  &c.  (Frankfort,  1582) ; Del  Rio,  Disq uis i ti ones  Magicai  (Louvain,  1599), 
Vol.  i.,  pp.  207*8  ; Gifford,  Op.  cit .,  p.  K 3,  (but  cf.  his  Discourse  of  Subtill  Practices , Lon- 
don, 1587,  p.  E,  where  he  attributes  to  certain  of  the  devil’s  “ counterfeit©  shewes  of  a 
bodie  ” a kind  of  objectivity);  Flagellum  Hcrcticoi'um  Fa  sc  ina  riorum  (Frankfort,  1581),  p.  5; 
Holland,  Op.  cit.,  p.  31.  Neuwaldt  (Exegesis  Purgationis,  Helmstedt.  1585,  p.  D 6)  gives  an 
elaborate  description  of  the  process.  The  view  could  claim  the  authority  of  St.  Augustine 
(De  Civitate  Dei,JAh.  xviii.).  Godolmann  ( Tractatux  dc  Magis,  Vencficis , et  Lamiis,  Frankfort, 
1591)  is  perhaps  the  only  one  of  the  German  16th  century  writers— and  in  this  respect  may 
be  bracketed  with  Scot  and  Montaigne— who  gets  distinctly  beyond  this  notion ; but  see 

180 

NOTE  ON  WJTCHCRAFT . 

[chap* 

Ac.,  was  gradually  adopted  in  the  course  of  the  17th  century  even  by 
the  credulous  writers;1 2  while  the  rational  writers  come  to  recog- 
nise more  distinctly  the  influence  of  terror  and  excitement  on  weak 
minds,  and  hallucination  begins  to  be  regarded  as  a natural  phenomenon.  * 
Ady  even  recognises  a case  (Cayidle  in  the  Dark , p.  65)  where  mere 
entrabiement , apart  from  terror,  was  sufficient  to  produce  a hallucination  in 
an  excitable  “ subject  ” — a boy  who  was  employed  to  assist  in  calling 
up  imps,  by  imitating  the  quacking  of  ducks,  having  so  imposed  on  a 
minister  that,  even  when  shown  the  cheat,  “ he  would  not  be  persuaded 
but  that  he  saw  real  ducks  squirming  about  the  room.,,  And  throughout 
we  meet  witli  cases  of  sensory  delusion  which  may  with  great  probability 
be  referred  to  hypnotic  suggestion  ; being  very  similar  to  the  effects  which 
are  produced  in  our  day  on  the  platform  of  professional  “mesmerists.”' 
I have  mentioned  J)e  I*  An  ore’s  instance  of  the  children  supposed  to  have 
been  taken  to  a “Sabbath.”  Bodin  ( Op . cit p.  138)  describes  how 
Trois-Escholles  made  a circle  of  spectators  mistake  a breviary  for  a 
pack  of  cards;  Boguet  (Op.  cit.,  p.  360)  mentions  the  celebrated 
Escot  do  Panne  as  having  been  able  to  make  persons  see  cards 
differently  to  what  they  really  were,  and  mentions  another  case  (Sir 
A<lvis , p.  89)  where  a witch  made  a woman  see  rubbish  as  money  ; 
Reiny  and  Del  Bio  describe  similar  feats  performed  by  one  Jean 
de  Yaux.  It  is  of  course  impossible  to  be  sure  that  these  were  not 
mere  conjuring  feats ; but  Del  Rio  seems  to  have  been  awake  to  that 
hypothesis,  and  to  have  thought  it  quite  untenable. 

As  specimens  of  other  effects  which  may  fairly  be  accounted  for  as 
hypnotic,  1 may  mention  the  following.  Occasionally  witches  are  said  to 
have  shown  insensibility  to  torture;  of  which  a self-induced  trance 

also  Yalrick  Von  den  Zaiihcrern , Hezcn,  &c.  (translated  from  the  Dutch,  Cologne,  1576) ; 
Erastus,  Deux  Dialogues  (translated  from  the  Latin,  1579),  p.  776;  and  Scribonius,  De 
Sagarun  Naturd  (Marburg.  1588),  p.  70.  [t  was  naturally  in  connection  with  the  human 
organism  that  the  idea  of  Satanic  control  survived  longest.  The  devil’s  power  'over  the 
external  world — shown,  e.g.,  in  raising  tempests — was  as  completely  believed  in  as  his 

Swer  over  men,  by  the  ablest  writer  of  the  Middle  Ages  ; but  on  this  question  Professor 
uxley  does  not  stand  further  from  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  than  did  Wier  (Op.  cit.  p.  2641. 

1 E.g.,  King  James  I.,  Damwnologic  (London,  1003),  p.  40  ; Nynauld,  De  la  Lycanthropie 
(Paris,  1015),  p.  20 ; Glanvil,  Op.  cit.,  p.  507.  As  to  transportations,  it  remained  a very 
favourite  compromise  that  they  were  occasionally  genuine,  but  as  a rule  illusory  ; see,  for 
instance,  the  Corollaria  to  the  Disputatio  de  Fascinationc , held  at  Coburg  in  1764.  For  a 
proof  that  the  possibility  of  a purely  subjective  hallucination  had  as  little  dawned  on 
Glanvil  in  the  17th  century  as  on  Michael  Psellus  in  the  11th,  sec  Sudd.  Triumph , p.  405  ; 
whore  the  only  alternative  tosupixising  an  apparition  to  have  been  “Edward  Avon’s  ghost” 
is  to  suppose  it  “ a ludicrous  daemon.  D’Autun  (VlncrhbiUte  Scaraivbc , &c.),  an  author 
whose  desire  to  be  just  to  both  sides  gives  him  a sort  of  half-\Vay  position,  still  believes, 
in  1671,  that  the  witch  or  the  devil,  and  not  tho  brain  of  the  percipient,  is  responsible 
for  hallucinations  (pp.  65,  876).  It  is  more  remarkable  that  Hutchinson,  an  eminently 
sensible  writer,  who  belonged  to  a later  date,  still  seems  to  believe  (Op.  cit.,  p.  106)  that 
the  devil  assumed  the  form  of  tho  delusive  image. 

2 Bekker,  De  Bcto  verde  Wereld  (Leewarden,  1601),  p.  247,  in  the  German  translation  of 

IV.] 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

181 

affords  the  readiest  explanation. 1 There  are  occasional  cases  of  inhibition, 
of  a sort  to  which  we  have  abundant  modern  parallels  in  connection 
with  hypnotism,  but  none,  as  far  as  I am  aware,  except  in  that 
connection.  2 Remy  {Op.  cit.,  p.  221)  gives  an  apparent  example  of  the 
inability  of  the  “ subject  ” to  drop  an  object  which  his  controller  insists  on 
his  holding.  In  Dr.  Lamb  Revived , or  Witchcraft  Condemned \ 
{London,  1653),  p.  20,  a case  of  the  production  of  hypnotic  sleep  is 
described  by  an  eye-witness.  The  description  in  Glanvil  {Op.  cit.}  p. 
342)  of  a “subject  ” who  showed  the  well-known  symptoms  of  muscular 
rigidity,  and  of  rapport  with  a single  person,  is  again  strongly  suggestive 
of  hypnotic  trance.  The  rapport , shown  in  exclusive  sensitiveness  to  the 
witch’s  touch  or  approach,  reappears  in  Saint  Andres  Lettres  aw 
JSnjet  de  la  Magie  '(Paris,  1725),  p.  213;  and  in  The  Tryal  of  Bridget 
Bishop  at  Salem  in  1692  ; 3 where  also  the  “subjects”  are  described 
as  having  displayed  the  phenomenon  of  imitation  of  the  witch’s  postures 
and  gestures.  The  “ subject’s  ” craving  to  get  to  the  witch  is  another 
significant  feature.  (See  above,  p.  87,  note.)  We  should  probably  have 
had  a much  larger  amount  of  definite  hypnotic  evidence  had  such  a tiling 
as  hypnotism  been  recognised  at  the  time — observations  made  under  the 
influence  of  wrong  theories  being  naturally  one-sided  and  defective. 

With  respect  to  demoniacal  possession,  we  find  a progress  of  opinion 
to  some  extent  parallel  with  that  observed  in  the  treatment  of  hallucin- 
ations ; but  the  belief  in  the  Satanic  agency  was  here  naturally  more 
tenacious  ; and  where  the  actual  possession  was  doubted,  the  investigators 
often  fell  into  the  opposite  error  of  concluding  that  the  victims  could 
have  nothing  the  matter  with  them,  and  must  be  consciously  shamming. 4 

1 Wier,  Op.  cit.,  482  ; Scot,  Op.  cit.,  p.  22,  quoting  Grillandus  ; Del  Rio,  Op.  cit.,  Vol. 
ii.,  p.  06 ; Le  Loyer,  Litre  des  Sartres,  chap.  12  ; Hexcn-procmc  am  dem  17™ 
Jahrhundevt  (Hanover,  1802),  p.  78.  The  phenomenon  was  much  discussed  as  the 
“ maleficium  tacitumitatis.”  The  same  has,  of  course,  been  recorded  of  religious  martyrs,  , 
and  has  been  ascribed  to  ecstasy  ; but  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  the  mental  ana 
spiritual  bondition  of  the  supposed  witches  to  have  been  such  as  would  make  that  term 
applicable ; and  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  merely  hysterical  anaesthesia  should  supervene  at 
the  critical  moment.  It  is,  however,  probably  to  hysteria  that  we  should  attribute  what- 
ever of  truth  there  may  have  been  in  the  idea  of  the  devil’s  mark — the  alleged  insensibility 
of  restricted  areas  of  the  body.  (See  Richet,  Op.  cit.,  p.  304.) 

2 A case  in  the  Patholoyia  Ikvmoniaca  of  J.  Caspar  Westphal  (Leipzig,  1707),  p.  48, 
which  the  author  seems  to  have  personally  observed,  closely  resembles  somo  of  the 
cases  given  above  in  Chap.  iii.  The  mere  inhibition  of  utterance,  either  produced  in  the 
victim  by  the  supposed  persecutor’s  presence  (A  Philosophical  Endeavour  in  the  Defence  of 
the  Being  of  Witches  and  Appantions,  London,  1668,  p.  129),  or  by  the  idea  of  it  (G.  More, 
A True  Discourse,  &c.,  London.  1600,  p.  20  j Witchcraft  further  Displayed,  London,  1712, 
p.  7) ; or  in  the  witch  herself  when  attempting  to  repeat  the  Lord’s  Prayer  (Glanvil,  Op. 
cit.,  p.  377),  may,  of  course,  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  hysteria  or  imagination. 

3 Mather,  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  Woi'ld  (Boston,  1693),  p.  106. 

4 Segu  for  instance,  Dr.  Harsnet’s  Discovery  of  the  fraudulent  Practices  of  Joht v 
Darrell,  v .A.  (London,  1599),  and  the  controversy  to  which  it  gave  rise.  But  of  cours 
a certain  number  of  cases  were  undoubtedly  fraudulent ; see  The  Disclosing  of  a Late 
Counterfeited  Possession, he.  (London,  1574.)  It  seems  to  have  depended  very  much  on 
accidental  circumstances  whether  hysterical  girls  were  pitied  as  victims  or  denounced 
as  cheats. 

182 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

[chap- 

Webster  [Op.  cit.,  p.  248)  is,  perhaps,  the  earliest  English  writer  who  insists 
on  purely  natural  causes  as  sufficient  to  explain  possession.  As  regards  the 
whole  question  of  the  influence  of  the  reputed  witches  on  health,  it  is  here 
probably  that  we  should  have  had  the  most  distinct  indications  of 
hypnotic  agency  had  the  idea  of  hypnotism  been  there  to  colligate  the  facts.1 
And  much  must,  no  doubt,  be  set  down  to  the  morbid  craving  for  notoriety 
which  is  now  one  of  the  best  known  symptoms  of  hysteria.  But  as 
regards  the  larger  number  of  the  alleged  phenomena,  the  rational 
inference — that  the  effects  wore  due  to  imagination  or  fright — might,  as 
we  now  see,  have  been  drawn  from  the  evidence  of  even  the  most  credul- 
ous writers.  Bodin,  for  instance,  insists  on  the  necessity  of  faith  on  the 
part  of  the  sufferer,*2  and  reports  not  a single  case  of  curing  where  the 
witch  was  not  actually  present.’1  His  records,  and  those  of  many 
others,  are  precisely  parallel  to  what  our  newspapers  describe  of  the 
“ mind-cures  ” in  Boston  and  Bethshan,  and  might  be  accepted  to-day 
without  difficulty  by  orthodox  medical  opinion.4  Cases  where  there  was 
rapid  improvement  in  the  victim’s  health  on  the  condemnation  of  the 
supposed  witch  come  into  the  same  category/’  Similarly  in  cases  of 
injurious  effects — we  constantly  hear  that  the  sufferer  had  been  touched, 
or  at  the  very  least  lixedly  looked  at,  by  the  supposed  witch/’  Great 
stress  was  laid  on  the  confession  of  the  celebrated  Gaufridi  that 
he  had  breathed  on  his  numerous  victims.7  And  if  we  bear  in  mind  the 
prevalent  belief  that  the  witch  commanded  the  full  powers  of  the 
devil,  we  need  not  refuse  to  connect  the  threats  and  angry  words  of 
unpopular  old  women  with  a certain  proportion,  at  any  rate,  of  the 

1 On  the  beneficial  effects  of  the  supposed  witch’s  touch  and  strokings,  see,  for 
instance,  the  sensible  Cotta,  The  Infallible , True  and  A mu  red  Witch,  (London,  1025),  p.  138; 
Deodat  Lawson,  Further  Account  of  the  Trials  of  the  New  England  Witches  (London,  1093), 
p.  8;  Lamberg,  Criminal  Vnfahren  (Nuremberg,  1835),  p.  27  ; Miscellany  of  the  SpaldiiKj 
(Hub  (Aberdeen,  1841),  Vol.  i.,  pp.  92,  119.  Even  in  the  present  century,  mesmeric  cures 
have  been  attributed  to  the  devil.  (See  Lecky,  Op.  cit.,  p.  109.) 

- Cf.  A Pleasant  Treatise  of  Witches  (London,  1073),  p.  109 ; Kemy,  ' Op.  cit ., 
348. 

3 Bodin  has  a firm  belief  that  a witch  could  cause  death  by  a word  ; but  character- 
istically adduces  no  evidence.  He  is  also  ]*Tsuaded  that  the  disease  which  is  removed 
from  one  person  must  be  transferred  to  another— a view  which  he  supports  by  a single 
supposed  instance. 

4 See,  for  example,  Prof.  G,  Buchanan’s  paper  on  “ Healing  by  Faith  ” in  the  Lancet, 
for  1885,  Vol.  i.,  p.  1117.  Cf.  Dell’  Osa,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  29,  30. 

n See,  for  instance,  Mackenzie,  Op.  cit.,  p.  50  ; and  the  account  of  Dorothy  Durant’s 
restoration  when  the  verdict  was  given  against  Amy  Duny,  in  the  Tryal  of  Witches  at 
the  Assizes  held  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds , before  Sir  Matthew  Hale  (London,  1082). 

{i  Kemy,  Op.  cit.,  p.  312;  Del  Kio,  Op.  cit.,  Vol.  i.,  p.  34;  De  l’Ancre,  V Incredulity 
et  MtscrAance  du  SovtiWje  (Paris,  1022),  p.  108 ; Goldschmidt,  Verworffentr  Uexen-urui 
Zauber-Advocat  (Hamburg,  1705),  p.  454 ; Pitcairn,  passim.  ? 

7 Michaelis,  Histoirc  Admirable  (Paris,  1013),  Part  II.,  p.  118 ; Calinet,  Traite  sur 
les  Apparitions  (Senones,  1759),  Vol.  i.,  pp.  37,  138.  See  also  Westphal,  Op.  cit.,  p.  48  ; 
and  the  history  of  Hartley,  the  kissing  witch,  in  G.  More’s  True  Discourse. 

IV.]  NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT.  183 

illnesses  which  are  so  freely  testified  to  as  having  soon  after  supervened.1 
It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  reputed  witches  possibly  included 
in  their  ranks  a fair  sprinkling  of  the  amateur  medical  practitioners  of 
the  time.’2  This  is  a feature  of  the  witch-history  which  is  more  prominent 
in  foreign  than  in  English  records.  In  Cannaert  ( Op . cit.)  and  Reuss 
(Op.  cit.)  constant  mention  is  made  of  bewitched  powders ; and  in  the 
foreign  trials  generally,  more  stress  is  laid  on  poisoning  than  on 
anything  else.  Reuss  is  of  opinion  that  the  hallucinations  were  in  many 
cases  the  result  of  drugs.  At  the  same  time  we  find  that,  among  the 
credulous  writers  of  the  witch-epoch,  a witch  and  a poisoner  were  often 
regarded  as  synonymous ; and  the  stories  of  the  powders  may  have 
rested  on  much  the  same  evidence  as  those  of  the  imps.  As  far  as  I know, 
no  one  ever  deposed  to  having  seen  the  drug  administered.3 

The  above  slight  sketch  may  serve  to  suggest  that  learned  opinion  on 
the  question  of  witchcraft  lias  a history  of  its  own  of  a rather  complex 
kind ; and  some  recognition  of  this  seems  necessary  to  supplement  the 
view  of  the  decline  of  the  belief  so  forcibly  set  forth  by  Mr.  Lecky*  As 
regards  the  place  of  witchcraft  in  the  popular  regard,  the  effect  of  the 
advancing  spirit  of  rationalism  was  no  doubt  more  unconscious  and 
indiscriminate — undermining  the  superstition  without  exactly  attacking 
it  in  detail ; putting  the  whole  subject,  so  to  speak,  out  of  court,  not 
through  a reasonable  refutation  of  its  claims,  but  through  a general 
change  of  instinct  and  mood  in  respect  of  miraculous  events.  But 
professed  students  still  felt  it  their  business  to  analyse  the  phenomena,  and 
exercised  their  minds  on  the  various  points  in  turn.  And  the  consequence 
is  that  the  works  of  the  abler  writers  present  us  with  a curious  and 
gradually-shifting  medley  of  a priori  convictions  and  scientific  reasonings 
and  of  beliefs  and  disbeliefs,  often  oddly  inconsistent  and  oddly 
harmonised  in  the  same  mind.  Binsfeld,  who  firmly  believes  in  the 
“ Sabbaths,”  draws  the  line  at  the  dancing  with  Diana  and  Herodias ; 
because  as  for  Diana,  there  is  no  such  person,  and  Herodias,  though 
existing  in  hell,  is  a soul  only,  and  not  a woman.4  Boguet  thinks  that 
witches  pursue  and  eat  children,  but  that  they  are  not  really  wolves. 
Majolus  and  Nynauld  believe  in  transportations,  but  not  in  transforma* 
tions.  Wier  pours  scorn  alike  on  lycanthropy  and  on  the  night-rides ; but  he 
has  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  the  devil  can  transport  people,  and  that  he 

1 Mackenzie,  Op.  cit.,  p.  48  ; D’Autun,  Op.  cit.,  p.  480 ; Miscellany  of  the  Spalding 
Club , Vol.  i.,  pp.  84,  131,  144;  Pitcairn,  passim.  Wagstaffe  (The  Question  of  Witchcraft 
Debated,  London,  1671)  seems  to  be  the  first  author  who  expressly  recognises  that,  m 
questions  of  coincidence,  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  operation  of  chance. 

* See  P.  Christian,  Histoire  dc  la  Magic  (Paris,  1870),  p.  400 ; he  gives  quite  an 
elaborate  witches’  pharmacopoeia.  Cf.  Sir  A.  C.  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies , p.  85. 

8 See  Saint  Andre,  Op.  cit.,  p.  285. 

4 Op.  cit.,  p.  349. 

184  NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT . [chap. 

. does  prevent  his  votaries  from  feeling  torture.1  Neither  he  nor  Cotta 
have  grasped  the  idea  that  hysterical  girls  can  play  tricks,  and  produce 
from  their  mouths  objects  which  they  have  previously  placed  there.2 
Perkins  considers  that  such  effects  as  transformation,  and  injury  by 
the  mere  power  of  the  eye,  quite  transcend  the  devil’s  range ; 3 but 
this  view  in  no  way  shakes  his  faith  in  the  reality  of  magical  powers. 
Mdric  Casaubon,  though  so  far  emancipated  as  to  surmise  that  “ super- 
natural ” things  may  in  time  be  explained,  yet  writes  * expressly  to 
confute  “ the  Sadducism  of  these  times,”  disapproves  of  Scot,  and  can 
say  nothing  harsher  of  Bodin  and  Remy  than  that  they  were  “in 
some  things  perchance  more  credulous  than  I should  be.”4 * *  His 
impartiality  is  quite  tantalising.  Thus,  as  regards  certain  alleged  cures, 
he  presents  us  with  four  alternatives,  quoted  from  Franciscus  & Victoria, 
from  which  we  may  suit  ourselves: — either  the  healers  cheat;  or  they 
heal  by  the  power  of  the  devil ; or  by  the  grace  of  God ; or  by  some 
specific  natural  gift.  D’Autun,  a writer  who  wholly  repudiates  the 
extremer  marvels,  and  who  is  remarkable  for  his  humanity,  yet  cannot 
resist  the  evidence  of  confessions,  which  a modern  reader  regards 
with  mingled  scorn  and  indignation. r>  Even  in  the  18th  century, 
Acxtelmeier,  who  does  not  lack  sense,  and  who  attributes  the  midnight 
revels  to  dream,  yet  cannot  shake  off  the  effect  on  his  mind  of  the  feeble 
stories  about  the  persons  found  in  the  fields  in  the  morning ; 0 and  a 
little  earlier  Wagstaffe,  one  of  the  most  open-minded  of  all  the  writers  on 
the  subject — who  expressly  attributes  much  of  the  deception  to  “ want  of 
knowledge  in  the  art  of  physic” — is  yet  convinced  that  there  were  genuine 
cases  of  wounding  the  witch  at  a distance  by  striking  at  her  apparition.7 
Bayle  and  La  Bruyere,  as  Mr.  Lecky  has  observed,  held  a similar  uncertain 
position. 

For  any  wide  historical  analysis  of  the  grounds  of  opinion  and  of 
certainty  in  the  human  mind,  no  literature  could  better  repay  detailed 
study  than  that  which  these  brief  citations  illustrate.  But  ' enough 
has  perhaps  been  said  for  my  present  purpose — which  is  merely  to  show 
that,  if  the  gradual  tendency  of  the  great  body  of  public  opinion  on  the 
subject  of  witchcraft  was  to  put  aside  evidential  questions,  and  simply  to 

1 Op.  cit.,  pp.  236,  238, 242.  Cf.  Cooper,  Mystery  of  Witchcraft  (London,  1617),  p.  268. 

a A case  where  the  fraud  was  exj>osed  is  given  by  Hutchinson,  Op,  cit.,  p.  283. 

3 A Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft  (Cambridge,  1608),  pp.  33,  140. 

4 Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity  (title  of  the  first  edition,  London,  1668),  pp.  28, 147,  169. 

Op,  cit.,  p.  164. 

H Misanthropus  Audax  (Augsburg,  1710),  pp.  32,  36. 

7 Op,  cit.,  pp.  118,  114.  Of  the  more  bizarre  ideas  this  was  perhaps  the  qpe  that 
lingered  longest  among  rational  writers.  The  author  of  A Philosophical  Endeavour , &c., 
p.  128,  Glanvil  (Op,  cit,,  p.  34),  and  Mather  (Op,  cit.,  p.  106),  have,  of  course,  no  doubt 
on  the  subject.  A case  in  which  fraud  was  afterwards  discovered  is  given  by  Thacker, 
Essay  on  Demonology  (Boston,  1831),  p.  107. 

IV.J 

NOTE  ON  WITCHCRAFT. 

185 

turn  away  from  the  phenomena  as  incredible  and  absurd,  there  was  in  the 
reflective  and  literary  world  a strong  tendency  to  cling,  wherever  possible, 
to  tradition  and  <i  priori  conceptions,  and  for  that  purpose  to  press  to  the 
very  utmost  such  items  of  evidence  as  were  to  be  found.  Had  evidence 
and  inference,  necessarily  and  throughout,  gone  hand  in  hand,  and  had  the 
abnormal  occurrences  all  been  of  a piece — all  of  that  bizarre  and  incredible 
kind  which  Mr.  Lecky’s  treatment  too  much  implies — then  critical  as  well 
as  uncritical  minds  might  have  drifted  away  from  them  in  the  silent  and 
indifferent- way  which  he  depicts.  But  many  of  the  abnormalities  were  far 
too  real  and  tangible  to  be  thus  drifted  away  from  ; and  it  often  happened 
that  these,  through  the  wrong  inferences  to  which  they  gave  rise,  lent  a 
sort  of  unsound  support  to  the  more  incredible  and  the  worse-attested 
incidents.  Thus,  one,  author  after  another,  in  the  gradual  recession  to  the 
rational  standpoint,  draws  and  defends  what,  to  us  now,  looks  like  an 
arbitrary  line  between  fact  and  fable  ; but  the  effect  of  this  more  critical 
treatment  was,  on  the  whole,  to  keep  in  view  the  large  mass  of  phenomena 
which  science  can  still  accept  as  fact,  and  some  of  which,  indeed — notably 
those  of  hysteria,  hystero-epilepsy,  and  hypnotism — are  only  now  beginning 
to  make  their  full  importance  felt.  And  thus  the  position  taken  up  in  the 
foregoing  chapter  is  maintained.  The  part  of  the  case  for  witchcraft  which 
is  now  an  exploded  superstition  had  never,  even  in  its  own  day,  any  real 
evidential  foundation  ; while  the  part  which  had  a real  evidential  foundation 
is  now  more  firmly  established  than  ever.  It  is  with  the  former  part 
that  we  would  directly  contrast,  and  with  the  latter  that  we  might  in  some 
respects  compare,  our  own  evidential  case  for  telepathy. 

[chap. 

CHAPTER  V. 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  OF  SPONTANEOUS 

TELEPATHY. 

§ 1.  We  now  come  to  the  actual  evidence  for  spontaneous  telepathy. 
As  has  been  explained,  the  proof  is  cumulative,  and  its  strength  can 
only  be  truly  estimated  by  a patient  study  of  a very  large  mass 
of  testimony.  But  to  wade  through  a number  of  the  cases  is  far 
from  an  attractive  task.  They  are  very  unexciting — monotonous 
amid  all  their  variety — as  different  from  the  Mysteries  of  Udolpho 
as  from  the  dignified  reports  of  a learned  society,  and  far  more 
likely  to  provoke  slumber  in  the  course  of  perusal  than  to 
banish  it  afterwards.  And  for  the  convenience  of  those  who  desire 
neither  to  toil  nor  to  sleep,  it  will  be  well  to  disregard  logical 
arrangement,  and  to  present  at  once  a few  preliminary  samples.  This 
chapter,  therefore,  will  include  a small  batch  of  narratives  which  may 
serve  as  types  of  the  different  classes  of  telepathic  phenomena,  while 
further  illustrating  various  important  evidential  points.  At  the 
present  stage  it  will,  no  doubt,  be  open  to  anyone  who  accepts  the 
facts  in  these  cases  as  essentially  correct  to  regard  every  one  of  the 
coincidences  as  accidental.  The  reasoning  that  will  prevent  this 
conclusion  must  still  be  taken  on  trust ; it  could  not  be  given  now 
without  delaying  the  concrete  illustrations  till  the  reader  would  be 
weary  of  waiting  for  them.  Nor  would  it  be  profitable  at  this  place 
to  enter  fully  into  the  principles  of  the  classification,  which  can  only 
be  made  clear  in  connection  with  the  evidence.  I will  therefore  sketch 
here  the  main  headings,  without  comment,  trusting  to  the  further 
development  of  the  work  to  justify  the  arrangement  adopted. 

We  find  our  most  distinct  line  of  classification  in  the  nature  of 
the  percipient’s  impression.  This  at  once  divides  the  cases  into  two 
great  families — those  (A)  where  the  impression  is  sensory  and  exter- 
nalised, and  those  (B)  where  it  is  not  sensory  or  externalised.  In 
the  first  division  the  experience  is  a percept  or  quasi-percept — some- 

TYPES  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

187 

▼•3 

thing  which  the  person  seems  to  see,  hear,  or  feel,  and  which  he- 
instinctively  refers  to  the  outer  world.  In  the  second  division,  the 
impression  is  of  an  inward  or  ideal  kind — either  a mental  image,  or 
an  emotion,  or  a mere  blind  impulse  towards  some  sort  of  action. 
There  is  also  a small  group  of  cases  (C)  which  it  is  not  easy  to  assign 
to  either  division — those,  namely,  where  the  experience  of  the  per- 
cipient is  sensory  without  being  an  external-seeming  affection  of 
sight,  hearing,  or  touch — for  instance,  a physical  feeling  of  illness  or 
malaise.  This  small  group  will  be  most  conveniently  treated  with  the 
emotional  division,  into  which  it  shades.  Further,  each  of  these 
divisions  is  represented  in  sleeping  as  well  as  in  waking  life,  so  that 
dreams  form  a comprehensive  class  (D)  of  their  own ; and  the 
externalised  division  is  also  strongly  represented  in  a region  of 
experience  which  is  on  the  borderland  (E)  between  complete  sleep 
and  complete  normal  wakefulness.  Lastly,  there  are  two  peculiarities, 
attaching  to  certain  cases  in  all  or  nearly  all  the  above  divisions, 
which  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  form  the  basis  of  two  separate 
classes.  The  first  of  these  is  the  reciprocal  class  (F),  where  each  of 
the  persons  concerned  seems  to  exercise  a telepathic  influence  on  the 
other ; and  the  second  is  the  collective  class  (G),  where  more  per- 
cipients than  one  take  part  in  a single  telepathic  incident. 

§ 2.  Now  the  logical  starting-point  for  the  following  inquiry  will 
naturally  be  found  in  the  cases  which  present  most  analogy  to  the 
results  of  experimental  thought-transference.  All  those  results,  it  will 
be  remembered,  were  of  the  non, -externalised,  type.  I shall  therefore 
start  with  inward  impressions,  ideal  and  emotional,  and  shall  advance, 
through  dreams — where  each  of  us  has,  so  to  speak,  an  outer  as  well 
as  an  inner  world  of  his  own — to  the  “borderland  ” and  waking  impres- 
sions which  seem  to  fall  on  the  senses  in  an  objective  way  from  the 
outer  world  that  is  common  to  us  all. 

But  though  the  impressions  received  by  the  percipient  in  the- 
experimental  cases  had  no  external  quality,  a good  many  of  them 
were  distinctly  sensory — one  important  branch  being  transference 
of  pains.  And  if  the  parallel  between  experimental  and  spontaneous 
effects  be  a just  one,  we  might  fairly  expect  to  find  cases  where  a 
localised  pain  has  been  similarly  transferred  from  one  person  to  another 
at  a distance.  I will  open  this  preliminary  batch  of  narratives  with 
just  such  a case,  the  simplest  possible  specimen  of  group  C,  and  as 
pure  an  instance  of  transference  of  sensation,  unattended  by  any  idea 

188 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

or  image,  as  can  well  be  conceived.  The  parties  concerned  are  Mr. 
Arthur  Severn,  the  distinguished  landscape-painter,  and  his  wife; 
and  the  narrative  was  obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Ruskin. 
Mrs.  Severn  says  : — 

“ Brant  wood,  Coniston. 

“ October  27th,  1883. 

(17)  “I  woke  up  with  a start,  feeling  I had  had  a hard  blow  on  my 
mouth,  and  with  a distinct  sense  that  I had  been  cut,  and  was  bleeding  under 
my  upper  lip,  and  seized  my  pocket-handkerchief,  and  held  it  (in  a little 
pushed  lump)  to  the  part,  as  I sat  up  in  bed,  and  after  a few  seconds,  when 
£ removed  it,  I was  astonished  not  to  see  any  blood,  and  only  then  realised 
it  was  impossible  anything  could  have  struck  me  there,  as  I lay  fast  asleep 
in  bed,  and  so  I thought  it  was  only  a dream  !-  -but  I looked  at  my  watch, 
*md  saw  it  was  seven,  and  finding  Arthur  (my  husband)  was  not  in  the 
room,  1 concluded  (rightly)  that  he  must  have  gone  out  on  the  lake  for  an 
-early  sail,  as  it  was  so  fine. 

“ I then  fell  asleep.  At  breakfast  (half-past  nine),  Arthur  came  in 
rather  late,  and  I noticed  he  rather  purposely  sat  farther  away  from  me 
than  usual,  and  every  now  and  then  put  his  pocket-handkerchief  furtively 
up  to  his  lip,  in  the  very  way  I had  done.  I said,  4 Arthur,  why  are  you 
doing  that  ? 1 and  added  a little  anxiously,  4 I know  you’ve  hurt  yourself ! 
but  I’ll  tell  you  why  afterwards.’  He  said,  4 Well,  when  I was  sailing,  a 
sudden  squall  came,  throwing  the  tiller  suddenly  round,  and  it  struck  me 
<a  bad  blow  in  the  mouth,  under  the  upper  lip,  and  it  has  been  bleeding  a 
good  deal  and  won’t  stop.’  I then  said,  4 Have  you  any  idea  what  o’clock 
it  was  when  it  happened  ? ’ and  he  answered,  4 It  must  have  been  about 
seven.’ 

44  I then  told  what  had  happened  to  me , much  to  his  surprise,  and  all 
who  were  with  us  at  breakfast. 

44  It  happened  here  about  three  years  ago  at  Brantwood,  to  me. 

44  Joan  R.  Severn.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries  Mrs.  Severn  writes  : — 

44  There  was  no  doubt  about  my  starting  up  in  bed  wide  awake,  as  I 
stuffed  my  pocket-handkerchief  into  my  mouth,  and  held  it  pressed  under 
my  upper  lip  for  some  time  before  removing  it  to  4 see  the  blood,’ — and 
was  much  surprised  that  there  was  none.  Some  little  time  afterwards  I 
fell  asleep  again.  I believe  that  when  I got  up,  an  hour  afterwards,  the 
impression  was  still  vividly  in  my  mind,  and  that  as  I was  dressing  I did 
look  under  my  lip  to  see  if  there  was  any  mark.” 

Mr.  Severn’s  account  is  as  follows : — 

44  Brantwood,  Conistoli. 

“November  15th,  1883. 

44  Early  one  summer  morning,  I got  up  intending  tQ  go  and  sail  on  the 
lake  ; whether  my  wife  heard  me  going  out  of  the  room  I don’t  know,  she 
probably  did,  and  in  a half-dreaifty  state  knew  whfcre  I was  going. 

44  When  I got  down  to  the  water  I found  it  calm,  like  a mirror,  and 
remember  thinking  it  quite  a shame  to  disturb  the  wonderful  reflections  of 

t.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY \ 189 

the  opposite  shore.  However,  I soon  got  afloat,  and  as  there  was  no  wind, 
contented  myself  with  pulling  up  my  sails  to  dry,  and  putting  my  boat  in 
order.  Soon  some  slight  air  came,  and  I was  able  to  sail  about  a mile 
below  Brantwood,  then  the  wind  dropped,  and  I was  left  becalmed  for 
half -an-h our  or  so,  when,  on  looking  up  to  the  head  of  the  lake,  I saw  a 
dark  blue  line  on  the  water.  At  first  I couldn't  make  it  out,  but  soon  saw 
that  it  must  be  small  waves  caused  by  a strong  wipd  coming.  I got  my 
boat  as  ready  as  I could,  in  the  short  time,  to  receive  this  gust,  but  some- 
how or  other  she  was  taken  aback,  and  seemed  to  spin  round  when  the 
wind  struck  her,  and  in  getting  out  of  the  way  of  the  boom  I got  my  head 
in  the  way  of  the  tiller,  which  also  swung  round  and  gave  me  a nasty  blow 
in  the  mouth,  cutting  my  lip  rather  badly,  and  having  become  loose  in  the 
rudder  it  came  out  and  went  overboard.  With  my  mouth  bleeding,  the 
mainsheet  more  or  less  round  my  neck,  and  the  tiller  gone,  and  the  boat 
in  confusion,  I could  n9t  help  smiling  to  think  how  suddenly  I had  been 
humbled  almost  to  a wreck,  just  when  I thought  I was  going  to  be  so* 
clever  ! However,  I soon  managed  to  get  my  tiller,  and,  with  plenty  of 
wind,  tacked  back  to  Brantwood,  and,  making  my  boat  snug  in  the  harbour,, 
walked  up  to  the  house,  anxious  of  course  to  hide  as  much  as  possible  what 
had  happened  to  my  mouth,  and  getting  another  handkerchief  walked 
into  the  breakfast-room,  and  managed  to  say  something  about  having  been 
out  early.  In  an  instant  my  wife  said,  ‘ You  don't  mean  to  say  you  have 
hurt  your  mouth  ? ' or  words  to  that  effect.  I then  explained  what  had 
happened,  and  was  surprised  to  see  some  extra  interest  on  her  face,  and 
still  more  surprised  when  she  told  me  she  had  started  out  of  her  sleep 
thinking  she  had  received  a blow  in  the  mouth  ! and  that  it  was  a few 
minutes  past  seven  o’clock,  and  wondered  if  my  accident  had  happened 
at  the  same  time ; but  as  I had  no  watch  with  me  I couldn't  tell,  though,, 
on  comparing  notes,  it  certainly  looked  as  if  it  had  been  about  the  same 
time. 

“Arthur  Severn.” 

Considering  what  a vivid  thing  pain  often  is,  it  might  seem  likely 
that  this  form  of  telepathy,  if  it  exists,  would  bo  comparatively 
common,  in  comparison  with  the  more  ideal  or  intellectual  forms 
which  are  connected  with  the  higher  senses.  This,  however,  is  not  so. 
It  is  conceivable,  of  course,  that  instances  occur  which  go  unnoticed. 
For,  apart  from  injury,  even  a sharp  pain  is  soon  forgotten ; and 
unless  the  copy  reproduced  the  original  with  excruciating  fidelity,  a 
sudden  pahg  might  be  referred  to  some  ordinary  cause,  and  the 
coincidence  would  never  be  noted.  We,  however,  can  only  go  by  what 
is  noted.  I mentioned  that  even  in  experimental  trials  the 
phenomenon  has  been  little  observed  except  with  hypnotised 
<c  subjects,”  and  on  the  evidence  we  must  allow  its  spontaneous 
appearance  to  be  even  rarer.  The  stock  instance  is  that  of  the  brothers, 
Charles  and  Louis  Blanc,  the  latter  of  whom  is  alleged  to  have  felt  a 
shock  through  one  of  his  arms  at  the  moment  that  his  brother’s  arm 

190 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VAltlOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

was  pierced  in  a duel.1  But  this  is  a third-hand  story  at  best ; and  the 
•above  is  our  only  first-hand  instance  where  the  pain  was  of  an 
unusual  kind,  and  was  Very  exactly  localised.  It  is  specially  for  cases 
■of  this  sort — most  interesting  to  science,  but  with  neither  pathos  nor 
■dignity  to  keep  them  alive — that  the  chance  of  preservation  will,  we 
trust,  be  improved  by  the  existence  of  a classified  collection,  where 
they  may  at  once  find  their  proper  place. 

What  lots  been  said  of  pains  applies,  mutati#  mutandis,  to  all 
•affections  of  the  lower  senses.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the  exception  and 
not  the  rule  for  the  spontaneous  transferences  to  reproduce  in  the  per- 
cipient the  exact  sensation  of  the  agent  (p.  Ill);  and,  in  the  second 
place,  such  reproduction  (or  at  any  rate  the  evidence  for  it)  seems  almost 
wholly  confined  to  i lie  higher  senses  of  sight  and  hearing.  Thus,  though 
avo  found  that  transference  of  tarff**  had  been  a very  successful  branch 
■of  the  experimental  work,  we  have  no  precisely  analogous  record  in 
the  spontaneous  class.  The  nearest  approach  is  a case  which  concerned 
the  sense  of  smell,  but  where  there  was  no  direct  transference  of 
sensation  as  such.  The  case  is,  however,  worth  quoting  here  on 
.•another  ground,  as  illustrating  one  of  the  evidential  points  of  the  last 
'chapter — namel),  that  the  strength  of  any  evidence,  in  the  sense  of 
the  assurance  which  it  produces  that  the  facts  are  correctly  reported, 
is  a very  different  thing  from  its  strength  as  a contribution  to  the 
proof  of  telepathy.  Thus,  no  one  probably  will  care  to  dispute  the 
facts  in  the  following  narrative  ; but  the  coincidence  recorded  is  little, 
if  at  all,  more  striking  than  most  of  us  occasionally  encounter;  and 
recourse  to  the  telepathic  explanation  can  only  be  justified  by  our 
knowledge  that  the  two  persons  concerned  have,  on  other  occasions, 
given  very  much  more  conclusive  signs  of  their  power  of  super- 
sensuous  communication.2  The  Iiev.  P.  H.  Newnham,*of  Maker 
Vicarage,  Devonport,  writes  to  us : 

“January  26th,  1885. 

(18)  “In  March,  1861,  T was  living  at  Houghton,  Hants.  My  wife 

1 See  A Memoir  of  C.  Moyne  I ounrj  (1871),  pp.  341-2.  The  locality  of  the  wound 
-has  been  variously  given.  The  lady  who  gave  the  account  to  the  subject  of  the  memoir 
professed  to  have  heard  it  from  Louis  Blanc,  at  Dr.  Ashburner’s  dinner-table  : and  also 
to  have  been  shown  the  scar  of  Charles  Blanc’s  arm  after  dinner.  A curiously  paral- 
lel case- where  the  absent  husband  was  struck  by  a ball  in  the  forehead,  and  the  wife  felt 
the  ^ wound— is  recorded  by  Borel,  Histaviaruni  it  Obsirmtionmn  Mcdicophmicarum 
inUmee  u\  (Paris,  Cent,  n.,  obs.  47  ; but  only  on  the  authority  of  “persons 

\\  orthy  of  credit.  This  is  the  earliest  record  that  I can  recall  of  a non-externalised 
telepathic  impression  of  at  all  a definite  sort.  s 

“ PP;  . ,M.r-  Newnham  has  further  told  us  that  coincidences  oAhought  of  a 
T'1nl?ing  H?nd  °?f,r  to  hlmseIf,and  hls  matters  of  daily  experience'.  But 

% V?eS°  frV“  the  ,nn"er0UH,  Amnestic  cases  which  pure  accident  will  account 
for  (Chap.  vi.  1),  a written  record  would  have  to  be  accurately  kept  from  day  to  day. 

V.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY \ 191 

was  at  the  time  confined  to  the  house,  by  delicacy  of  the  lungs.  One  day, 
walking  through  a lane,  I found  the  first  wild  violets  of  the  spring,  and 
took  them  home  to  her. 

“ Early  in  April  I was  attacked  with  a dangerous  illness  ; and  in  June 
left  the  place.  I never  told  my  wife  exactly  where  I found  the  violets, 
nor,  for  the  reasons  explained,  did  I ever  walk  with  her  past  the  place 
where  they  grew,  for  many  years. 

“In  November,  1873,  we  were  staying  with  friends  at  Houghton  ; and 
myself  and  wife  took  a walk  up  the  lane  in  question.  As  we  passed  by 
the  place  the  recollection  of  those  early  violets  of  1 2£  years  ago  flashed 
upon  my  mind.  At  the  usual  interval  of  some  20  or  30  seconds  my  wife 
remarked,  4 It’s  very  curious,  but  if  it  were  not  impossible,  I should  declare 
that  I could  smell  violets  in  the  hedge.’ 

“ I had  not  spoken,  or  made  any  gesture  or  movement  of  any  kind,  to 
indicate  what  I was  thinking  of.  Neither  had  my  memory  called  up  the 
perfume.  All  that  I thought  of  was  the  exact  locality  on  the  hedge  bank ; 
my  memory  being  exceedingly  minute  for  locality.” 

Mr.  Newnham’s  residence  at  Houghton  lasted  only  a few  months,  and 
with  the  help  of  a diary  lie  can  account  for  nearly  every  day’s  walking 
and  work.  “My  impression  is,”  lie  says,  “ that  this  was  the  first  and  only 
time  that  I explored  this  particular  * drive  ; ’ and  I feel  certain  that  Mrs. 
Newnham  never  saw  the  spot  at  all  until  November,  1873.  The  hedges 
had  then  been  grubbed,  and  no  violets  grew  there.” 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Newnham’s  account : — 

“May  28th,  1885. 

“I  perfectly  remember  our  walking  one  day  in  November,  1873,  at 
Houghton,  and  suddenly  finding  so  strong  a scent  of  violets  in  the  air  that 
I remarked  to  my  husband,  ‘ If  it  were  not  so  utterly  impossible,  I should 
declare  I smelt  violets ! ’ Mr.  Newnham  then  reminded  me  of  his 
bringing  me  the  first  violets  in  the  spring  of  1861,  and  told  me  that  this 
was  just  about  the  spot  where  lie  had  found . them.  I had  quite  forgotten 
the  circumstance  till  thus  reminded.” 

§ 3.  Wc  may  now  pass  to  illustrations  of  Class  B — the  class  of 
ideal  and  emotional  impressions.  The  following  is  a well-attested  case 
of  the  transference  of  an  idea.  It  was  sent  to  us  by  our  friend,  the  Be v. 
J.  A.  Macdonald,  of  19,  Hey  wood  Street,  Cheetham,  Manchester,  who 
wrote : — 

(19)  “When  I was  in  Liverpool,  in  1872,  I heard  from  my  friend, 
the  late  Rev.  W.  W.  Stamp,  D.D.,  a remarkable  story  of  the  faculty  of 
second  sight  possessed  by  the  Rev.  J olin  Drake,  of  Arbroath,  in  Scotland. 
I visited  Arbroath  in  1874,  and  recounted  to  Mr.  Drake  the  story  of  Dr. 
Stamp,  which  Mr.  Drake  assented  to  as  correct,  and  he  called  his  faculty 
4 clairvoyance.’  Subsequently,  in  1881, 1 had  the  facts  particularly  verified 
by  Mrs.  Hutcheon,  who  was  herself  the  subject  of  this  clairvoyance  of 
Mr.  Drake, 

" “When  the  Rev.  John  Drake  was  minister  of  the  Wesleyan  Church  at 
Aberdeen,  Miss  Jessie  Wilson,  the  daughter  of  one  of  the  principal  lay 

192  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

office  bearers  in  that  church,  sailed  for  India,  to  join  the  Rev.  John 
Hutcheon,  M.  A.,  then  stationed  as  a missionary  at  Bangalore,  to  whom 
she  was  under  engagement  to  be  married.  Mr.  Drake,  one  morning,  came4 
down  to  Mr.  Wilson’s  place  of  business  and  said,  ‘Mr.  Wilson,  I am 
happy  to  be  able  to  inform  you  that  Jessie  has  had  a pleasant  voyage,  and 
is  now  safely  arrived  in  India.’  Mr.  TVilson  said,  ‘How  do  you  know 
that,  Mr.  Drake?’  to  which  Mr.  Drake  replied.  ‘I  saw  it.’  ‘But,’  said 
Mr.  Wilson,  ‘it  cannot  be,  for  it  is  a fortnight  too  soon.  The  vessel  has 
never  made  the  voyage  within  a fortnight  of  the  time  it  is  now  since  Jessie 
sailed.’  To  this  Mr.  Drake  replied  : ‘Now  you  jot  it  down  in  your  book 
that  John  Drake  called  this  morning  and  told  you  that  Jessie  has  arrived 
in  India  this  morning  after  a pleasant  voyage.’  Mr.  Wilson  accordingly 
made  the  entry,  which  Mrs.  Hutcheon  assures  me  she  saw,  when  she 
returned  home,  and  that  it  ran  thus:  ‘Mr.  Drake.  Jessie  arrived  India, 
morning  of  June  5th,  i860.’  This  turned  out  to  have  been  literally  the 
case.  The  ship  had  fair  winds  all  the  way,  and  made  a quicker  passage  by 
a fortnight  than  ever  she  had  made  before.” 

The  above  account  was  sent  by  Mr.  Macdonald  to  Mr.  Drake  for 
verilication,  and  the  following  reply  received  from  the  Rev.  Crawshaw 
Ha  rgreaves  : — 

“ Wesleyan  Manse,  Arbroath. 

“April  29th,  1885. 

“My  Dear  Sir, — Mr.  Drake  is  sorry  your  communication  of  the  2nd 
last,  has  been  so  long  unanswered ; but  two  days  after  receiving  it  he  had 
a paralytic  seizure,  which  has  not  only  confined  him  to  bed,  but  taken  from 
him  the  use  of  one  side. 

“Ho  now  desires  me  to  answer  your  inquiries,  and  to  say  that  the 
account,  which  you  enclosed  and  which  he  now  returns  to  you,  is  correct, , 
except  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  ever  calling  it  ‘clairvoyance.’  It  was 
neither  a ‘dream,’  nor  a ‘vision,’  but  an  impression  that  he  received 
between  the  hours  of  8 and  10  in  the  morning,  when  his  mind  was  as  clear 
as  ever  it  was,  an  impression  which  he  believes  was  given  him  by  God  for 
the  comfort  of  the  family.  Moreover  this  impression  was  so  clear  and 
satisfactory  to  himself  that  when  Mr.  Wilson  said  ‘It  cannot  be,’  Mr. 
Drake  replied,  ‘You  jot  it  down,’  as  warmly  as  if  his  statement  of  any 
ordinary  circumstances  had  been  doubted  by  a friend. 

“Mr.  Drake  hopes  these  particulars  will  be  enough  for  your  purpose. — 
Believe  me,  dear  sir,  yours  very  truly, 

“C.  Hargreaves.” 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Hutclieon’s  account  of  the  incident,  received 
quite  independently  : — 

“Weston-super-Mare. 

“February  20th,  1885. 

“ The  facts  are  simply  these.  I sailed  for  India  on  March  3rd,  1860, 
in  the ‘Earl  of  Hard wickc,’ a good,  but  slow,  sailing-vessel.  About  16 
weeks  were  usually  allowed  for  the  voyage,  so  that  we  were  not  due  in 
Madras  till  about  the  middle  of  June.  Our  voyage,  however  being  an 
uncommonly  rapid  one,  we  cast  anchor  in  tlve  roads  of  Madras  on  the 
morning  of  June  5th,"  taking  our  friends  there  quite  by  surprise. 

v-3 

OP  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

193 

“ On  this  same  morning,  my  former  pastor,  an  able  and  much  esteemed 
Wesleyan  minister,  called  on  my  father  at  an  unusually  early  hour,  when 
the  following  conversation  passed  : — 

“ * Why,  Mr.  D.,  what  takes  you  abroad  at  this  early  hour  ? ’ 

“ ‘ 1 have  come  to  bring  you  good  news,  Mr.  W.  Your  daughter  Jessie 
has  reached  India  this  morning,  safe  and  well.’ 

“ ‘That  would  indeed  be  good  news,  if  we  could  believe  it;  but  you  forget 
that  the  ship  is  not  due  at  Madras  before  \lie  middle  of  June.  Besides, 
how  could  you  get  to  know  that  ? * 

“‘Such,  however,  is  the  fact/  replied  Mr.  D.,  and,  seeing  my  father’s 
incredulous  look,  he  added  : ‘ You  do  not  believe  what  I say,  Mr.  W.,  but 
just  take  a note  of  this  date.’ 

“To  satisfy  him,  my  father  wrote  in  his  memo,  book : ‘Rev.  J.  D.  and 
Jessie.  Tuesday,  5th  June,  I860.’ 

“In  due  time,  tidings  confirming  Mr.  D.’s  statement  arrived,  greatly  to 
the  astonishment  of  my  friends.  He,  however,  manifested  no  surprise,  but 
simply  remarked,  ‘ Had  I not  known  it  for  a fact  I certainly  should  not 
have  told  you  of  it.’ 

“ These  particulars  I received  by  letter  at  the  time,  and  on  our  return 
home,  7 years  later,  we  heard  it  from  my  father’s  own  lips.  He  is  no  longer 
with  us,  but  the  above  are  the  plain  facts  as  lie  gave  them,  and  the  little 
memo,  in  his  handwriting,  which  he  gave  me  as  a curiosity,  lies  before  me  now. 

% “Jessie  Hutciieon.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hutcheon  adds  : — 

“March  23rd. 

“ I felt  inclined  to  smile  at  the  idea  that  I could  possibly  be  mistaken 
as  to  a date  so  memorable  in  my  life’s  history,  and  immediately  preceding 
my  marriage.  However,  to  render  assurance  doubly  sure,  I have  referred 
to  both  my  husband’s  diary  and  my  own,  in  each  of  which  my  landing  in 
India  on  the  5th  of  June  has  an  important  place. 

“ The  entry  made  by  my  husband  is  as  follows  : ‘ N.B. — 5th  June,  1860  ; 
a memorable  day  ! The  4 Hardwicke  ’ has  arrived.  What  a quick  voyage  ! 
Miss  Wilson  and  mission  party  well.’  ” 

[Mr.  Macdonald  tells  us  that  he  believes  Mr.  Drake  had  many  such 
experiences,  but  that  he  found  him  so  reticent  that  he  despaired  of 
getting  an  account  of  them  from  him.  And  Mr.  Drake’s  death  has  now 
made  the  attempt  impossible.] 

v As  regards  the  facts  here,  the  narrative  will  probably  be  accepted  as 
trustworthy.  As  regards  the  inference  that  may  be  drawn,  the  case 
is  eminently  of  a sort  where  the  character  of  the  professing  percipient 
(in  other  points  than  the  mere  desire  to  be  truthful)  ought  to  be 
taken  into  account.  From  a person  “ given  to  little  surprises/’  or 
who  posed  as  a diviner  if  one  out  of  a hundred  guesses  hit  the  mark, 
the  evidence  would  deserve  no  attention  ; from  a person  of  grave  and 
reticent*  character,  it  is  at  any  rate  worthy  of  careful  record. 

In  the  last  example,  the  idea  apparently  transferred  was  of  a 
somewhat  abstract  kind — the  impression  of  a mere  event,  without  any 

1U  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

concrete  imagery’.  But  the  ideal  class  includes  many  instances  of  a 
distinctly  pictorial  kind,  where  a scene  is  as  clearly  presented  to 
the  inward  eye  as  the  image  of  a card  or  diagram  in  some*  of  our 
experimental  cases.  The  following  account  of  a vivid  mental  picture 
of  this  sort  was  received  from  Mrs.  Bettany,  of  2,  Eckington  Villas, 
Ashbourne  Grove,  Dulwich. 

“ November,  1884. 

(20)  “ When  I was  a child  T had  many  remarkable  experiences  of  a 
psychical  nature,  which  1 remember  to  have  looked  upon  as  ordinary  and 
natural  at  the  time. 

“On  one  occasion  (I  am  unable  to  fix  the  date,  but  I must  have  been 
about  10  years  old)]  was  walking  in  a country  lane  at  A.,  the  place  where 
my  parents  then  resided.  T was  reading  geometry  as  I walked  along,  a 
subject  little  likely  to  produce  fancies  or  morbid  phenomena  of  any  kind, 
when  in  a moment,  I saw  a bedroom  known  as  the  White  Room  in  my 
home,  and  upon  the  floor  lay  my  mother,  to  all  appearance  dead.  The 
vision  must  have  remained  some  minutes,  during  which  time  my  real 
surroundings  appeared  to  pale  and  die  out ; but  as  the  vision  faded,  actual 
surroundings  came  back,  at  first  dimly,  and  then  clearly. 

“ I could  not  doubt  that  what  I had  seen  was  real,  so,  instead  of  going 
home,  1 went  at  once  to  the  house  of  our  medical  man  and  found  him  at 
home.  He  at  once  set  out  with  me  for  my  home,  on  the  way  putting 
questions  1 could  not  answer,  as  my  mother  was  to  all  appearance  well 
when  l left  home. 

“I  led  the  doctor  straight  to  the  White  Room,  where  we  found  my 
mother  actually  lying  as  in  my  vision.  This  was  true  even  to  minute 
details.  She  had  been  seized  suddenly  by  an  attack  at  the  heart,  and 
would  soon  have  breathed  her  last  but  for  the  doctor’s  timely  advent.  I 
shall  get  my  father  and  mother  to  read  this  and  sign  it. 

“Jeanie  Gw;ynne-Brttany.” 

“We  certify  that  the  above  is  correct. 

“S.  G.  Gwynne. 

“ J.  W.  Gwynne.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bettany  says  : — 

(1)  “I  was  in  no  anxiety  about  my  mother  at  the  time  1 saw  the 
vision  I described.  She  was  in  her  usual  health  when  I left  her. 

(2)  “ Something  a little  similar  had  once  occurred  to  my  mother.  She 
had  been  out  riding  alone,  and  the  horse  brought  her  to  our  door  hanging 
half  off  his  back,  in  a faint.  This  was  a long  time  before,  and  she  never 
rode  again.  Heart  disease  had  set  in.  She  was  not  in  the  habit  of  fainting 
unless  an  attack  of  the  heart  was  upon  her.  Between  the  attacks  she 
looked  and  acted  as  if  in  health. 

(3)  “ The  occasion  I described  was,  I believe,  the  only  one  on  which  I 
saw  a scene  transported  apparently  into  the  actual  field  of  vision,  to  the 
exclusion  of  objects  and  surroundings  actually  present. 

“I  have  had  other  visions  in  which  I have  seen  events  happening  as 
they  really  were , in  another  place,  but  I have  been  also  conscious  of  real 
surroundings. 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

195 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  she  adds  : — 

(!)♦“  No  one  could  tell  whether  my  vision  preceded  the  fact  or  not. 
My  mother  was  supposed  to  be  out.  No  one  knew  anything  of  my  mother’s 
being  ill,  till  I took  the  doctor  and  my  father,  whom  I had  encountered 
at  the  door,  to  the  room  where  we  found  my  mother  as  I had  seen  her  in 
my  vision. 

(2)  “The  doctor  is  dead.  He  lias  no  living  relation.  No  one  in  A. 
knew  anything  of  these  circumstances. 

(3)  “ The  White  Room  in  which  I saw  my  mother,  and  afterwards 
actually  found  her,  was  out  of  use.  It  was  unlikely  she  should  be  there. 

“She  was  found  lying  in  the  attitude  in  which  T had  seen  her.  I 
found  a handkerchief  with  a lace  border  beside  her  on  the  floor.  This  I 
had  distinctly  noticed  in  my  vision.  There  were  other  particulars  of 
coincidence  which  I cannot  put  here.” 

Mrs.  Bettany’s  father  has  given  the  following  fuller  account : — 

“I  distinctly  remember  being  surprised  by  seeing  my  daughter,  in 
company  with  the  family  doctor,  outside  the  door  of  my  residence ; and  I 
asked  4 Who  is  ill?’  She  replied,  ‘Mamma.’  She  led  the  way  at  once  to 
the  * White  Room,’  where  we  found  my  wife  lying  in  a swoon  on  the  floor. 
It  was  when  I asked  when  she  had  been  taken  ill,  that  I found  { it  must 
have  been  after  my  daughter  had  left  the  house.  None  of  the  servants  in 
the  house  knew  anything  of  the  sudden  illness,  which  our  doctor  assured 
me  would  have  been  fatal  had  lie  not  arrived  when  he  did. 

“My  wife  was  quite  well  when  T left  her  in  the  morning. 

“8.  G.  G WYNNE.” 

If  this  vision  suggests  clairvoyant,  owing  to  the  amount  of 
detail  presented,  we  must  still  notice  that  it  includes  nothing  which 
was  not,  or  had  not  recently  been,  within  the,  consciousness  of  the 
.supposed  agent.  This  point  will  claim  further  notice  at  a lat^r  stage. 
But  the  case  is  chiefly  useful  as  illustrating  an  evidential  point, 
which  it  .will  be  very  important  to  bear  in  mind  in  studying  the  mass 
of  narratives  in  the  sequel — namely,  that  possible  inaccuracy  as  to 
details  may  leave  the  substantial  fact  which  makes  for  telepathy 
quite  untouched.  It  might,  no  doubt,  be  fairly  urged  that  the 
vision  described  may  have  assumed  its  distinctness  of  detail  in  the 
percipient’s  mind  only  after  the  details  of  the  actual  scene  had  met 
her  eyes.  A child’s  mind  might  easily  be  undiscriminating  in  this 
respect ; and  moreover  Mrs.  Bettany  is  by  nature  a good  visualiser ; 
which  may  perhaps  be  supposed  to  involve  a slight  tendency  to 
retrospective  hallucination — to  mistaking  vividly-conceived  images 
for  memories  of  actual  experiences.  But  even  if  this  hypothesis  be 
pressed  to  the  uttermost,  the  fact  that  she  unexpectedly  fetched  the 
doctor  remains;  and  if  her  whole  impression  of  her  mother’s 
critical  condition  was  only  a subsequent  fancy,  this  very  exceptional 

196 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[CIIAP. 

step  must  have  been  taken  without  a reason.  That  is  to  say,  we  can 
only  reject  what  is  the  substantial  part  of  the  evidence  by  supposing 
a distinctly  improbable  thing  to  have  happened.  And,  that  being 
so,  the  evidence  is  a true  stick  in  the  telepathic  faggot  (p.  169). 

I will  supplement  these  two  last  cases  by  a third,  in  which  their 
respective  points,  the  abstract  idea  of  an  event  and  the  concrete  picture 
of  a scene,  were  both  presented.  This  case  will  also  illustrate  an 
evidential  point.  It  occasionally  happens  that  a number  of  occur- 
rences, perhaps  trivial  in  character,  and  each  of  them  likely  enough 
to  be  dismissed  as  merely  a very  odd  coincidence,  fall  to  the  experience 
of  one  person  ; and  if  he  is  observant  of  his  impressions,  he  may 
gradually  become  conscious  of  a certain  similarity  between  them, 
which  leads  him  to  regard  them  as  telepathic,  or  at  any  rate  as 
something  more  than  accidental.  Before  it  can  be  worth  while  to 
consider  such  evidence,  we  must  have  reason  to  believe  that  the 
witness  is  a good  observer,  and  alive  to  the  very  general  mistake  of 
noting  hits  and  not  misses  in  these  matters.  Such  an  observer  we 
believe  that  we  have1  found  in  Mr.  Kculemans,  of  34,  Matilda  Street, 
Barnsbury,  ?sT.,  a well-known  scientific  draughtsman,  of  whose  care 
and  accuracy  we  have  had  several  examples.  He  has  experienced  so 
many  of  these  coincidences  that,  even  before  our  inquiries  quickened 
his  interest  in  the  matter,  he  had  been  accustomed  to  keep  a record 
of  his  impressions — which,  according  to  his  own  account,  were  invari- 
ably justified  by  fact.  Some  more  of  his  eases  will  be  given  in  the 
sequel.  The  one  here  quoted  is  trivial  enough  (except  perhaps  to  the. 
baby  who  fell  out  of  bed),  and  of  little  force  if  it  were  a single  experi- 
ence. Yet  it  will  be  seen  that  the  impression  was  precise  in  character, 
was  at  once  written  down,  and  proved  to  be  completely  correct.  We 
may  perhaps  assume  Mrs.  Kculemans  to  have  been  the  agent. 

“ October  16th,  1883. 

(21)  “My  wife  went  to  reside  at  the  seaside  on  September  30th  last, 
taking  with  her  our  youngest  child,  a little  boy  13  months  old. 

“ On  Wednesday,  October  3rd,  I felt  a strong  impression  that  the  little* 
fellow  was  worse  (he  was  in  weak  health  on  his  departure).  The  idea  then, 
prevailed  on  my  mind  that  he  had  met  with  a slight  accident ) and 
immediately  the  picture  of  the  bedroom,  in  which  he  sleeps,  appeared  in  my 
mind’s  eye.  It  was  not  the  strong  sensation  of  awe  or  sorrow,  as  I had 
often  experienced  before  on  such  occasions ; but,  anyhow,  I fancied  he  had 
fallen  out  of  the  bed , upon  chairs,  and  then  rolled  down  upon  Jhe  floor. 
This  was  about  11  a.m.,  and  I at  once  wrote  to  my  wife,  asking  her  to  let 
me  knoAv  how  the  little  fellow  was  getting  on.  I thought  it  rather  bold 
to  tell  my  wife  that  the  baby  had,  to  my  conviction,  really  met  with  an. 

V.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY . 197 

accident,  without  being  able  to  produce  any  confirmatory  evidence.  Also  I 
considered  that  she  would  take  it  as  an  insinuation  of  carelessness  on  her 
part ; therefore  I purposely  wrote  it  as  a post  scriptnm. 

“ I heard  no  more  about  it,  and  even  fancied  that  this  time  my  impression 
was  merely  the  consequence  of  anxiety.  But  on  Saturday  last  1 went  to 
see  my  wife  and  child,  and  asked  whether  she  had  taken  notice  of  my 
advice  to  protect  the  baby  against  such  an  accident.  She  smiled  at  first, 
and  then  informed  me  that  he  had  tumbled  out  of  the  bed  upon  the  chairs 
placed  at  the  side,  and  then  found  his  way  upon  the  floor,  without  being 
hurt.  She  further  remarked,  ‘ You  must  have  been  thinking  of  that  when 
it  was  just  too  late,  because  it  happened  the  same  day  your  letter  came, 
some  hours  previously/  I asked  her  what  time  of  the  day  it  happened. 
Answer  : ‘About  11  a.m/  She  told  me  that  she  heard  the  baby  fall,  and 
at  once  ran  upstairs  to  pick  him  up. 

“ I am  certain,  without  the  shadow  of  a doubt,  that  I wrote  immediately 
after  the  impression;  and  that  this  was  between  11  and  11.30  in  the 
morning.” 

I have  seen  the  letter  which  Mr.  Keulemans  wrote  to  his  wife.  The 
envelope  bears  the  post-mark  of  Worthing,  October  3rd  ; and  the  postscript 
contained  the  following  words  : — 

" Mind  little  Gaston  does  not  fall  out  of  bed.  Put  chairs  in  front  of  it. 
You  know  accidents  soon  happen.  The  fact  is,  I am  almost  certain  he  has 
met  with  such  a mishap  this  very  morning.” 

Mrs.  Keulemans’  aunt  supplied  the  following  testimony,  a day  or  two 
after  Mr.  Keulemans’  letter  of  October  16th. 

“ 36,  Teville  Street,  Worthing. 

“Mrs.  Keulemans  (my  niece)  and  her  baby  are  staying  at  my  house. 
The  baby  had  fallen  out  of  bed  the  mottling  of  the  day  the  letter  [i.e., 
Mr.  Keulemans’  letter]  was  received. 

“C.  Gray.” 

The  next  account  illustrates  an  emotional  impression,  with  a 
certain  clement  of  physical  discomfort.  The  experience  appears  to 
have  been  of  a very  unusual  sort,  and  the  coincidence  of  time  to  have 
been  exact ; the  case  is  therefore  a strong  example  of  a weak  class. 
The  narrator  is  Miss  Martyn,  of  Long  Melford  Rectory,  Suffolk. 

“ September  4th$  1884. 

(22)  “On  March  16th,  1884,  I was  sitting  alone  in  the  drawing- 
room, reading  an  interesting  book,  and  feeling  perfectly  well,  when 
suddenly  I experienced  an  undefined  feeling  of  dread  and  horror ; I looked 
at  the  clock  and  saw  it  was  just  7 p.m.  I was  utterly  unable  to  read  so  I 
got  up  and  walked  about  the  room  trying  to  throw  off  the  feeling,  but  I 
could  not ; I became  quite  cold,  and  had  a firm  presentiment  that  I was 
dying.  This  feeling  lasted  about  half-an-hour,  and  then  passed  oft*,  leaving 
me  a good  deal  shaken  all  the  evening ; I went  to  bed  feeling  very  weak, 
as  if  I hjtd  been  seriously  ill. 

“ The  next  morning  I received  a telegram  telling  me  of  the  death  of  a 
near  and  very  dear  cousin,  Mrs.  K.,  in  Shropshire,  with  whom  I had  been 
most  intimately  associated  all  my  life,  but  for  the  last  two  years  had  seen 

198 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

very  little  of  her.  I did  not  associate  this  feeling  of  death  with  her  or 
with  any  one  else,  but  I had  a most  distinct  impressiou  that  something 
terrible  was  happening.  This  feeling  came  over  me,  I afterwards  found, 
just  at  the  time  when  my  cousin  died  (7  p.m.).  The  connection  with  her 
death  may  have  been  simply  an  accident.  £ have  never  experienced 
anything  of  the  son  before.  [ was  not  aware  that  Mrs.  K.  was  ill,  find 
her  death  was  peculiarly  sad  and  sudden. 

“K.  M.” 

Mr.  White  Cooper,  through  whose  kindness  we  obtained  this  account, 
writes  as  follows : — 

“ 19,  Berkeley  Square. 

"“April  7th,  1885. 

44  I have  asked  Miss  Murtyn  whether  she  had  told  anyone  about  her 
feeling  of  horror  on  March  16th,  before  she  heard  of  the  death  of  her 
cousin.  She  told  me  she  had.  She  was  quite  convinced,  and  perfectly 
remembered  telling  Miss  Mason  the  same  evening,  after  Miss  Mason  had 
come  from  church,  that  she  had  had  a peculiar  feeling  of  horror  and  dread 
for  which  she  could  give  no  account.  1 then  questioned  Miss  Mason  and 
enclose  what  she  dictated.” 

Miss  "Mason  says  : — 

41  The  Rectory,  Long  Melford,  Suffolk. 

“ April  5th,  1885. 

“I  well  remember  Miss  Martyn  telling  me  that  a feeling  of  horror  and 
an  indescribable  dread  came  over  her  on  Sunday  evening,  March  16th, 
1884,  while  we  were  in  church,  and  she  was  alone  in  the  drawing-room. 
That  she  was  unable  to  shake  it  off  and  felt  very  restless,  and  got  up  and 
walked  about  the  loom.  She  did  not  refer  to  anyone,  and  could  give  no 
cause  for  this  peculiar  feeling.  \ am  under  the  impression  that  she  told 
me  the  same  evening  (Sunday)  and  before  she  heard  of  the  death  of  her 
cousin,  but  £ am  not  certain  whether  it  was  on  Sunday  or  Monday  that  she 
told  me  about  it. 

“Anna  M.  Mason.” 

§ 4.  The  next  ease  illustrates  the  class  of  dream h (D).  I am 
aware  that  the  very  mention  of  this  class  is  apt  to  raise  a prejudice 
against  our  whole  inquiry.  I shall  explain  later  why  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  draw  conclusive  evidence  of  telepathy  from  dreams,  and 
why  we  mark  off  the  whole  class  of  dreams,  which  are  simply  remem- 
bered as  such,  from  the  cases  on  which  we  rest  our  argument ; but  I 
shall  also  hope  to  show  that  dreams,  though  needing  to  be  treated 
with  the  greatest  caution,  have  a necessary  and  instructive  place  in 
our  conspectus  of  telepathic  phenomena.  As  to  the  evidential  force 
of  the  present  case,  it  will  be  enough  to  point  out  that  the  percipient 
states  the  experience  to  have  been  unique  in  his  life;  and  that 
the  violence  ot  the  effect  produced,  leading  to  the  very  unusual  entry 
in  the  diary,  puts  the  vision  outside  the  common  run  of  dreams  which 

v*3 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

199 

may  justly  be  held  to  afford  almost  limitless  scope  for  accidental 
coincidences.  The  narrative  is  from  Mr.  Frederick  Wingfield,  of  Belle 
Isle  en  Terre,  Cotes  du  Nord,  France. 

“ 20th  December,  1883. 

(23)  “ I give  you  my  most  solemn  assurance  that  what  1 am  about  to 
relate  is  the  exact  account  of  what  occurred.  I may  remark  that  I am  so 
little  liable  to  the  imputation  of  being  easily  impressed  with  a sense  of  the 
supernatural 1 that  I have  been  accused,  and  with  reason,  of  being  unduly 
sceptical  upon  matters  which  lay  beyond  my  powers  of  explanation. 

“On  the  night  of  Thursday,  the  25th  of  March,  1880,  I retired  to  bed 
after  reading  till  late,  as  is  my  habit.  I dreamed  that  I was  lying  on  my 
sofa  reading,  when  on  looking  up,  I saw  distinctly  the  figure  of  my  brother, 
Richard  Wingfield-Baker,  sitting  on  the  chair  before  me.  I dreamed  that 
I spoke  to  him,  but  that  he  simply  bent  his  head  in  reply,  rose  and  left  the 
room.  When  I awoke  I found  myself  standing  with  one  foot  on  the 
ground  by  my  bedside,  and  the  other  on  the  bed,  trying  to  speak  and  to 
pronounce  my  brother’s  name.  So  strong  was  the  impression  as  to  the 
reality  of  his  presence  and  so  vivid  the  whole  scene  as  dreamt,  that  I left 
my  bedroom  to  search  for  my  brother  in  the  sitting-room.  I examined  the 
chair  where  I had  seen  him  seated,  I returned  to  bed,  tried  to  fall  asleep 
in  the  hope  of  a repetition  of  the  appearance,  but  my  mind  was  too  excited, 
too  painfully  disturbed,  as  I recalled  what  I had  dreamed.  I must  have, 
however,  fallen  asleep  towards  the  morning,  but  when  I awoke,  the 
impression  of  my  dream  was  as  vivid  as  ever — and  I may  add  is  to  this 
very  hour  equally  strong  and  clear.  My  sense  of  impending  evil  was  so 
strong  that  I at  once  madfe  a note  in  my  memorandum  book  of  this 
* appearance,’  and  added  the  words,  ‘God  forbid.’ 

“ Three  days  afterwards  I received  the  news  that  my  brother,  Richard 
Wingfield-Eaker,  had  died  on  Thursday  evening,  the  25th  of  March,  1880, 
at  8.30  p.m.,  from  the  effects  of  the  terrible  injuries  received  in  a fall  while 
hunting  with  the  Blaekmore  Yale  hounds. 

“ I will  only  add  that  I had  been  living  in  this  town  some  12  months ; 
that  I had  not  had  any  recent  communication  with  my  brother ; that  I 
knew  him  to  be  in  good  health,  and  that  he  was  a perfect  horsenmn.  I did 
not  at  once  communicate  this  dream  to  any  intimate  friend — there  was 
unluckily  none  here  at  that  very  moment — but  I did  relate  the  story  after 
the  receipt  of  the  news  of  my  brother’s  death,  and  showed  the  entry  in  my 
memorandum  book.  As  evidence,  of  course,  this  is  worthless  ; but  I give 
you  my  word  of  honour  that  the  circumstances  I have  related  are  the 
positive  truth. 

“Fred.  Wingfield.” 

“ February  4th,  1884. 

, “ I must  explain  my  silence  by  the  excuse  that  I could  not  procure  till 
to-day  a letter  from  my  friend  the  Prince  de  Lueinge-Faucigny,  in  which 
he  mentions  the  fact  of  my  having  related  to  him  the  particulars  of  my 
dream  on  the  25th  of  March,  1880,  He  came  from  Paris  to  stay  a few 

1This  expression  cannot  be  excluded,  when  the  words  of  our  informants  are  quoted. 
We,  ourselves,  of  course,  regard  all  these  occurrences  as  strictly  natural . 

200 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

days  with  me  early  in  April,  and  saw  the  entry  in  my  note-book,  which  I 
now  enclose  for  your  inspection.  You  will  observe  the  initials  R.  B.  W.  B., 
and  a curious  story  is  attached  to  these  letters.  During  that  sleepless 
night  I naturally  dwelt  upon  the  incident,  and  recalled  the  circumstances 
connected  with  the  apparition  Though  I distinctly  recognised  my  brother’s 
features,  the  idea  flashed  upon  me  that  the  figure  bore  some  slight 
resemblance  to  my  most  intimate  and  valued  friend,  Colonel  Bigge,  and  in 
my  dread  of  impending  evil  to  one  to  whom  1 am  so  much  attached,  I wrote 
the  four  initials,  lit.  B.  for  Richard  Baker,  and  W.  B.  for  William  Bigge. 
When  the  tidings  of  my  brother’s  deatli  reached  me  I again  looked  at  tho 
entry,  and  saw  with  astonishment  that  the  four  letters  stood  for  my 
brother’s  full  name,  Richard  Baker  Wingfield-Baker,  though  I had  always 
spoken  of  him  as  Richard  Baker  in  common  with  the  rest  of  my  family. 
The  figure  I saw  was  that  of  my  brother ; and  in  my  anxious  state  of  mind 
I worried  myself  into  the  belief  that  possibly  it  might  be  that  of  my  old 
friend,  as  a resemblance  did  exist  in  the  fashion  of  their  beards.  I can  give 
you  no  further  explanations,  nor  can  I produce  further  testimony  in 
support  of  my  assertions. 

“ Fred.  Wingfield.” 

[WitJi  this  letter,  Mr.  Wingfield  sent  me  the  note-book,  in  which, 
among  a number  of  business  memoranda,  notes  of  books,  etc.,  I find  the 
entry — “ Appearance — Thursday  night,  25th  of  March,  1880.  R.  B.  W.  B. 
God  forbid  ! ”] 

The  following  letter  was  enclosed  : — 

“Coat-an-nos,  2 fevrier,  1884. 

“Mon  cher  ami, — Je  nai  aucun  effort  de  memoire  k faire  pour 
me  rappeler  le  fait  dont  vous  me  parlez,  car  j’en  ai  conserve  un  souvenir 
ties  net  et  tres  precis. 

“ Je  me  souviens  parfaitement  quo  le  dimanehe,  4 avril,  1880,  6tant 
arrive  de  Paris  le  matin  memo  pour  passer  ici  quelques  jours,  j’ai  ete 
d^jeflner  avec  vous.  Je  me  souviens  aussi  parfaitement  quejevous  ai 
trouv<$  fort  <hnu  de  la  douloureusc  nouvelle  qui  vous  etait  parvenue 
quelques  jours 1 auparavant,  de  la  mort  de  Fun  des  messieurs  vos 
freres.  Je  me  rappelle  aussi  comine  si  le  fait  s’etait  passe  liier,  tant  j’en 
ai  ete  frappe,  que  quelques  jours  avant  d’apprendre  la  triste  nouvelle 
vous  aviez  un  soir,  etant  deja  couche,  vu,  ou  cru  voir,  mais  en  tous  cas> 
.ies  distmctement,  votre  fr6re,  celui  dont  vous  veniez  d’apprendre  la 
mort  subite,  tout  pres  de  votre  lit,  et  que,  dans  la  conviction  oil  vous 
etiez  que  c etait  bien  lui  que  vous  perceviez,  vous  vous  etiez  leve  et  lui 
aviez  addresse  la  parole,  et  qu’a  ce  moment  vous  aviez  cesse  de  le  voir 
comme  s’ll  rttnit  evanoui  ainsi  qu’un  spectre.  Je  me  souviens  encore 
que,  sous  1 impression  de  l’emotion  bien  naturelle  qui  avait  ete  la  suite 
de  cet  element,  vous  l’aviez  inscrit  dans  un  petit  carnet  ou  vous 
avez  1 habitude  d eenre  les  faits  saillants  de  votre  tres  paisible  existence 
et  que  vous  mavez  fait  voir  ce  carnet.  Cette  apparition,  cette  vision' 
ou  ce  songe,  comme  vous  voudrez  Fappelcr,  est  inscrit,  si  j’ai  bon 
souvenir,  a la  date  du  24  ou  du  25  fevrier/  et  ce  n’est  que  deux  «ou  trois 

C lay  aul)aravanV’  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  number  of  the 

u J ls  llgnt’  bU^est  that  fivner  is  a mere  slip  of  the  i>en  for  mam. 

v.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  201 

jours  apr&s  que  vous  avez  re§u  la  nouvelle  officielle  de  la  mort  de  votre 
frfere. 

“ J'ai  et6  d’autant  moins  surpris  de  ce  que  vous  me  disiez  alors,  et  j'en  ai 
aussi  conserve  un  souvenir  d’autant  plus  net  et  precis,  coniine  je  vous  le 
disais  en  corame^ant,  que  j’ai  dans  ma  famille  des  faits  similaires  auxquels 
je  crois  absolument. 

“ Des  faits  semblables  arrivent,  croyez-le  bien,  bien  plus  souvent  qu’on 
lie  le  croit  g&ieralement ; seulenient  on  ne  veut  pas  toujours  les  dire, 
parceque  Ton  se  mefie  de  soi  ou  des  autres. 

“ Au  revoir,  cher  ami,  a bientOt,  je  l’espere,  et  croyez  bien  a Vexpression 
des  plus  sinc&res  sentiments  de  votre  tout  devoue 

“ Faucigny,  Prince  Lucinge.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wingfield  adds  : — 

“ I have  never  had  any  other  startling  dream  of  the  same  nature,  nor 
any  dream  from  which  I woke  with  the  same  sense  of  reality  and  distress, 
and  of  which  the  effect  continued  long  after  I was  well  awake.  Nor  have 
1 upon  any  other  occasion  had  a hallucination  of  the  senses.” 

The  Times  obituary  for  March  30th,  1880,  records  the  death  of  Mr.  R. 
B.  Wingfield-Baker,  of  Orsett  Hall,  Essex,  as  having  taken  place  on  the 
25th,  The  Essex  Independent  gives  the  same  date,  adding  that  Mr.  Baker 
breathed  his  last  about  9 o’clock. 

It  will  be  seen  here  that  the  impression  followed  the  death  by  a few 
hours — a feature  which  will  frequently  recur.  The  fact,  of  course, 
slightly  detracts  from  the  evidential  force  of  a case,  as  compared  with 
the  completely  simultaneous  coincidences ; inasmuch  as  the  odds 
against  the  accidental  occurrence  of  a unique  impression  of  someone's 
presence  within  a few  hours  of  his  death,  enormous  as  they  are,  are 
less  enormous  than  the  odds  against  a similar  accidental  occurrence 
within  five  minutes  of  the  death.  But  the  deferment  of  the  impression, 
though  to  this  slight  extent  affecting  a case  as  an  item  of  telepathic 
evidence , is  not  in  itself  any  obstacle  to  the  telepathic  explanation.  We 
may  recall  that  in  some  of  the  experimental  cases  the  impression  was 
never  a piece  of  conscious  experience  at  all ; while  in  others  the  latency 
and  gradual  emergence  of  the  idea  was  a very  noticeable  feature 
(pp.  56, 63-71,  84).  This  justifies  us  in  presuming  that  an  impression 
which  ultimately  takes  a sensory  form  may  fail  in  the  first  instance  to 
reach  the  threshold  of  attention.  It  may  be  unable  to  compete,  at 
the  moment,  with  the  vivid  sensory  impressions,  and  the  crowd  of 
ideas  and  images,  that  belong  to  normal  seasons  of  waking  life; 
and  it  may  thus  remain  latent  till  darkness  and  quiet  give  a 
chance  for  its  development.  This  view  seems  at  any  rate  supported 
by  the  fact  that  it  is  usually  at  night  that  the  delayed  impression 
— if  such  it  be — emerges  into  the  percipient's  consciousness.  It  is 

202 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap- 

supported  also  by  analogies  which  recognised  psychology  supplies. 
I may  refer  to  the  extraordinary  exaltation  of  memory  sometimes 
observed  in  hypnotic  and  hystero-epileptic  “ subjects  ” ; or  even  to 
the  vivid  revival,  in  ordinary  dreaming,  of  impressions  which  have 
hardly  affected  the  waking  consciousness.  . 

Mr.  ’Wingfield’s  vision  had  another  unusual  feature  besides  the 
violence  of  its  effect  on  him.  It  represented  a single  figure,  without 
detail  or  incident.  It  was,  so  to  speak,  the  dream  of  an  apparition; 
and  in  this  respect  bears  a closer  affinity  to  “ borderland  ” and  waking* 
cases  than  to  dreams  in  general.  It  will  be  worthwhile  to  quote  here 
one  dream-case  of  a more  ordinary  type  so  far  as  its  content  is  con- 
cerned, but  resembling  the  last  in  its  unusual  and  distressing  vividness. 
The  supposed  agent  in  this  instance  experienced  nothing  more  than  a 
brief  sense  of  danger  and  excitement,  which,  however,  may  have  been 
sufficiently  intense  during  the  moments  that  it  lasted.  The  account 
is  from  Mrs.  West,  of  Hildegarde,  Furness  Road,  Eastbourne. 

“ 1883. 

(24)  “ My  father  and  brother  were  on  a journey  during  the  winter. 
I was  expecting  them  home,  without  knowing  the  exact  day  of  tlieir  return. 
The  date,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  was  the  winter  of  1871-72.  I had 
gone  to  bed  at  my  usual  time,  about  11  p.m.  Some  time  in  the  night  I had  a 
vivid  dream,  which  made  a great  impression  on  me.  I dreamt  I was  look- 
ing out  of  a window,  when  1 saw  father  driving  in  a Spids  sledge,  followed 
in  another  by  my  brother.  They  had  to  pass  a cross-road,  on  which  another 
traveller  was  driving  very  fast,  also  in  a sledge  with  one  horse.  Father 
seemed  to  drive  on  without  observing  the  other  fellow,  who  would  without 
fail  have  driven  over  father  if  he  had  not  made  his  horse  rear,  so  that 
I saw  my  father  drive  under  the  hoofs  of  the  horse.  Every  moment  I 
expected  the  horse  would  fall  down  and  crush  him.  I called  out  4 Father  l 
father  ! ’ and  woke  in  a great  fright.  The  next  morning  my  father  and 
brother  returned.  J said  to  him,  4 1 am  so  glad  to  see  you  arrive  quite 
safely  as  I had  such  a dreadful  dream  about  you  last  night/  My  brother 
said,  4 You  could  not  have  been  in  greater  fright  about  him  than  I was/ 
and  then  he  related  to  me  what  had  happened,  which  tallied  exactly  with 
my  dream.  My  brother  in  his  fright,  when  he  saw  the  feet  of  the  horse 
over  father’s  head,  called  out,  4 Oh  ! father,  father ! ’ 

44 1 have  never  had  any  other  dream  of  this  kind,  nor  do  I remember 
ever  to  have  had  another  dream  of  an  accident  happening  to  anyone  in 
whom  I Avas  interested.  I often  dream  of  people,  and  when  this  happens 
I generally  expect  to  receive  a letter  from  them,  or  to  hear  of  them  in  the 
course  of  the  next  day.  I dreamt  of  Mrs.  G.  Bidder  the  night  before  I 
received  her  letter  asking  me  for  an  account  of  this  dream ; and  I told  Mr. 
West,  before  we  went  down  to  breakfast,  that  I should  have  a letter  that 
day  from  her.  I had  no  other  reason  to  expect  a letter  from  her,mor  had 
I received  one  for  some  time,  I should  think  some  years,  previously. 

44  Hilda  West/' 

V.] 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

205 

Mrs.  West’s  father,  Sir  John  Crowe,  late  Consul-General  for  Norway,, 
is  since  dead  ; but  her  brother,  Mr.  Septimus  Crowe,  of  Librola,  Mary’s 
, Hill  Road,  Shortlands,  sends  us  the  following  confirmation : — • 

u I remember  vividly,  on  my  return  once  with  my  father  from  a trip 
I to  the  North  of  Norway  in  the  winter  time,  my  sister  meeting  us  at  the 
hall  door  as  we  entered,  and  exclaiming  how  pleased  she  was  to  see  us, 
and  that  we  were  safe,  as  she  said  at  once  to  me  that  she  had  had  such  an 
unpleasant  dream  the  evening  before.  I said,  ‘ What  was  it  ? ' She  then 
minutely  explained  to  me  the  dream,  as  she  related  it  to  you,  and  which  is- 
in  accordance  with  the  facts.  It  naturally  astonished  my  father  and 
**  myself  a good  deal,  that  she  so  vividly  in  her  sleep  saw  exactly  what 
happened,  and  I should  say,  too,  she  dreamt  it  at  the  very  time  it 
happened,  about  11.30  p.m. 

“ Septimus  Crowe.”  1 

This,  again,  is  a good  example  of  a weak  class.  But  in  the  present 
instance  we  at  any  rate  possess  Mrs.  Wests  testimony  that  her  experi- 
ence was  unique;  and  we  have,  further,  Mr.  Crowe’s  testimony  that  the 
dream  was  accurately  described  before  the  facts  were  known.  It  was. 
described,  no  doubt,  in  a conversation  with  him — a person  whose  mind 
was  full  of  the  facts,  and  lie  probably  did  not  keep  silence  during  the 
whole  course  of  his  sister’s  narration : I have  already  noted  that  the 
unprepared  actors  in  these  cases  are  not  likely  to  conduct  themselves, 
at  the  moment  with  a deliberate  eye  to  the  lawlessness  of  their 
evidence  for  our  purposes  some  years  afterwards.  But  it  would  be 
straining  a sceptical  hypothesis  too  far  to  assume  that  his  interposed 
comments  formed  the  real  basis  of  the  scene  in  Mrs.  West’s  memory* 
while  he  himself  remained  completely  unconscious  that  he  was 
supplying  the  information  which  he  appeared  to  be  receiving. 

§ 5.  1 We  now  come  to  an  example  of  the  “ borderland  ” class  (E)— 

1 Our  friend  Mrs.  Bidder,  the  wife  of  Mr.  G.  Bidder,  Q.C.,  sends  us  the  following 
recollection  of  the  narrative  as  told  at  her  table  by  Mr.  S.  Crowe,  who  is  her  husband’s, 
brother-in-law. 

“Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey. 

“ 10th  January,  1883. 

‘‘The following  was  related  at  our  table  by  my  husband’s  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Septimus. 
Crowe.  His  father,  since  dead,  was  Sir  John  Crowe,  Consul-General  for  Norway. 

“ 4 My  father  and  I were  travelling  one  winter  in  Norway.  We  had  our  carrioles  a* 
sledges,  and  my  father  drove  first,  1 following.  One  day  we  were  driving  very  quickly 
down  a steep  hill,  at  the  bottom  of  which  ran  a road,  at  right  angles  with  the  one  we  were 
on.  As  we  neared  the  bottom  of  the  hill  we  saw  a carriole,  going  as  quickly  as  ourselves* 
just  ready  to  cross  our  path.  My  father  reined  in  suddenly,  his  horse  reared  and  fell  over* 
and  I could  not,  at  first,  see  whether  he  was  hurt  or  not.  He,  luckily,  had  sustained  no* 
injury,  and  in  due  time  we  reached  home.  My  sister,  on  our  approach,  rushed  out, 
exclaiming : “Then  you  are  not  hurt  ? I saw  the  horse  rear,  but  I could  not  see  whether 
you  were  hurt  or  not.  * ” 

It  will  be  seen  that  if  Mrs.  Bidder’s  report  is  strictly  accurate,  there  is  a discrepancy  aa 
to  which  of  the  two  horses  it  was  that  reared.  But  even  eye-witnesses  of  a sudden  and 
confusing  accident  might  afterwards  differ  in  such  a point  as  this. 

204 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

the  class  where  the  percipient,  though  not  asleep,  was  not,  or  cannot  be 
proved  to  have  been,  in  a state  of  complete  normal  wakefulness.  The 
case  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritual  Maijazine  for  1861,  by  Dr. 
Collyer,  who  wrote  from  Beta  House,  <8,  Alpha  Road,  St.  Johns 

Wood,  N.W.  . „ 

“April  loth,  1861. 

(25)  “ On  January  3rd,  1856,  my  brother  Joseph  being  in  command  of 
the  steamer  ‘ Alice/  on  the.  Mississippi,  just  above  New  Orleans,  she  came  in 
collision  with  another  steamer.  The  concussion  caused  the  flagstaff  or 
pole  to  fall  with  great  violence,  which,  coming  in  contact  with  my 
brother’s  head,  actually  divided  the  skull,  causing,  of  necessity,  instant 
death.  In  October,  1857,  I visited  the  United  States.  When,  at  my 
father’s  residence,  Camden,  New  Jersey,  the  melancholy  death  of  my 
brother  became  the  subject  of  conversation,  my  mother  narrated  to  me 
that  at  the  very  time  of  the  accident,  the  apparition  of  my  brother 
Joseph  was  presented  to  her.  Tiiis  fact  was  corroborated  by  my  father 
and  four  sisters.  Camden,  New  Jersey,  is  distant  from  the  scene  of  the 
accident,  in  a direct  line,  over  1,000  miles,  and  nearly  double  that  distance 
by  the  mail  route.  My  mother  mentioned  the  fact  of  the  apparition  on 
the  morning  of  the  -1th  of  January  to  my  father  and  sisters ; nor  was  it 
until  the  16th,  or  13  days  after,  that  a letter  was  received  confirming  in 
•every  particular  the  extraordinary  visitation.  It  will  be  important  to 
mention  that  my  brother  William  and  his  wife  lived  near  the  locality  of 
the  dreadful  accident,  now  being  in  Philadelphia;  they  have  also 
corroborated  to  me  the  details  of  the  impression  produced  on  my  mother/* 

Dr.  Collyer  then  quotes  a letter  from  his  mother,  which  contains  the 

following  sentences : — 

“Camden,  New  Jersey,  United  States. 

“ March  27th.  1861. 

“My  beloved  Son, — On  the  3rd  of  January,  1856,  I did  not  feel  well, 
and  retired  to  bed  early.  Some  time  after,  I felt  uneasy  and  sat  up  in 
bed;  I looked  round  the  room,  and,  to  my  utter  amazement,  saw  Joseph 
standing  at  the  door,  looking  at  me  with  great  earnestness,  his  head 
bandaged  up,  a dirty  night-cap  on,  and  a dirty  white  garment  on, 
something  like  a surplice.  He  was  much  disfigured  about  the  eyes  and 
face.  It  made  me  quite  uncomfortable  the  rest  of  the  night.  The  next 
morning,  Mary  came  into  my  room  early.  I told  her  that  I was  sure  I 
was  going  to  have  bad  news  from  Joseph.  I told  all  the  family  at  the 
breakfast  table;  they  replied,  £It  was  only  a dream,  and  all  nonsense/ 
but  that  did  not  change  my  opinion.  It  preyed  on  my  mind,  and  on  the 
16th  of  January  I received  the  news  of  his  death;  and  singular  to  say, 
both  William  and  his  wife,  who  were  there,  say  that  he  was  exactly 
nttired  as  I saw  him. 

“ Your  ever  affectionate  Mother, 

“Anne  E.  Collyer.” 

Dr.  Collyer  continues : — » 

“ It  will  no  doubt  be  said  that  my  mother’s  imagination  was  in  a 
morbid  state,  but  this  will  not  account  for  the  fact  of  the  apparition  of  my 
brother  presenting  himself  at  the  exact  moment  of  his  death.  My  mother 

v,]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  205 

had  never  seen'  him  attired  as  described,  and  the  bandaging  of  the  head 
did  not  take  place  until  hours  after  the  accident.  My  brothel*  William  fold 
me  that  his  head  was  nearly  cut  in  two  by  the  blow,  and  that  his  face  was 
dreadfully  disfigured,  and  the  night-dress  much  soiled. 

“ I cannot  wonder  that  others  should  be  sceptical,  as  the  evidences  I 
have  had  could  not  have  been  received  on  the  testimony  of  others  ; we  must, 
therefore,  be  charitable  towards  the  incredulous. 

“ Robert  H.  Collyer,  M.D.,  F.C.S.,  <fcc.” 

On  our  applying  to  Dr.  Collyer,  he  replied  as  follows : — 

“ 25,  Newington  Causeway,  Borough,  S.E. 

“ March  15th,  1884. 

“ In  replying  to  your  communication,  I must  state  that,  strange  as  the- 
circumstances  narrated  in  the  a Spiritual  Magazine  of  1861  are,  I can  assure 
you  that  there  is  not  a particle  of  exaggeration.  As  there  stated,  my 
mother  received  the # mental  impression  of  my  brother  on  January  3rd, 
1856.  My  father,  who  was  a scientific  man,  calculated  the  difference  of 
longitude  between  Camden,  New  Jersey,  and  New  Orleans,  and  found  that 
the  mental  impression  was  at  the  exact  time  of  my  brother’s  death.  I 
may  mention  that  I never  was  a believer  in  any  spiritual  intercourse,  or 
that  any  of  the  phenomena  present  during  exalted  conditions  of  the  brain 
are  spiritual^  I am,  and  have  been  for  the  last  40  years,  a materialist, 
and  think  that  all  the  so-called  spiritual  manifestations  admit  of  a 
philosophical  explanation,  on  physical  laws  and  conditions.  I do  not  desire-, 
to  theorise,  but  to  my  mind  the  sympathetic  chord  of  relationship  existed 
between  my  mother  and  my  brother  (who  was  her  favourite  son),  when 
that  chord  was  broken  by  his  sudden  death,  she  being  at  the  time  favourably 
situated  to  receive  the  shock. 

“ In  the  account  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine,  I omitted  to* 
state  that  my  brother  Joseph,  prior  to  his  death,  had  retired  for  the  night 
in  his  berth ; his  vessel  was  moored  alongside  the  levee  at  the  time  of  the 
collision  by  another  steamer  coming  down  the  Mississippi.  Of  course,  my* 
brother  was  in  his  nightgown . He  ran  on  deck  on  being  called,  and 
informed  that  a steamer  was  in  close  proximity  to  his  own.  Theso 
circumstances  were  communicated  to  me  by  my  brother  William,  who 
was  on  the  spot  at  the  time  of  the  accident.  I do  not  pretend  to  account 
for  the  apparition  having  a bandage,  as  that  could  not  have  been  put  for 
some  time  after  death.  The  difference  of  time  between  Camden,  New 
Jersey,  and  New  Orleans  is  nearly  15°,  or  one  hour. 

“ My  mother  retired  for  the  night  on  3rd  January,  1856,  at  8 p.m.„ 
which  would  mark  the  time  at  New  Orleans  7 p.m.  as  the  time  of  my 
brother’s  death.” 

Mr.  Podmore  says  : — 

u I called  upon  Dr.  Collyer  on  25th  March,  1884,  He  told  me  that, 
he  received  a full  account  of  the  story  verbally  from  his  father,  mother, 
and  brother  in  1857.  All  are  now  dead  ; but  two  sisters — to  one  of  whom 
1 have  written — are  still  living.  Dr.  Collyer  was  quite  certain  of  the- 
precise  coincidence  of  time.” 

The  following  is  from  one  of  the  surviving  sisters  : — 

“ Mobile,  Alabama,  12th  May,  1884. 

“I  resided  in  Camden,  New  Jersey,  at  the  time  of  my  brother’s  death* 

206  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap 

He  lived  in  Louisiana.  His  death  was  caused  by  the  collision  of  two 
steamers  on  the  Mississippi.  Some  part  of  the  mast  fell  on  him,  splitting 
liis  head  open,  causing  instantaneous  death.  The  apparition  appeared  to  my 
mother  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  It  stood  there  for  some  time  gazing  at  her, 
and  disappeared.  The  apparition  was  clothed  in  a long  white  garment, 
with  its  head  bound  in  a white  cloth.  My  mother  was  not  a superstitious 
person,  nor  did  she  believe  in  Spiritualism.  She  was  wide  awake  at  the 
time.  It  was  not  a dream.  She  remarked  to  me  when  I saw  her  in  the 
morning,  ‘I  shall  hear  bad  news  from  Joseph/  and  related  to  me  what  she 
had  seen.  Two  or  three  days1  from  that  time  we  heard  of  the  sad  accident. 
I had  another  brother  who  was  there  at  the  time,  and  when  he  returned 
home  I inquired  of  him  all  particulars,  and  how  he  was  laid  out.  His 
description  answered  to  what  my  mother  saw,  much  to  our  astonishment. 

“ A.  E.  COLLYER.” 

Hero  we  have  no  direct  proof  of  the  exactness  of  the  coincidence  ; 
"but  Dr.  Col  Iyer  is  clear  on  the  fact  that  the  matter  was  carefully 
inquired  into  at  'he  time.  As  to  the  alleged  resemblances  between 
the  phantasm  and  the  real  figure,  we  shall  find  reason  further  on  to 
think  that  the  impression  of  the  white  garment,  may  have  been  really 
transferred.  But  the  criticism  made  above  in  respect  of  Mhs.  Bettany's 
narrative  again  applies  : we  cannot  account  it,  certain  that  points  Avere 
< not  read  back  into  the  vision,  after  Mrs.  Oollyer  had  learnt  the  actual 
aspect  Avhich  the  dead  man  presented.  It  will  be  observed,  too,  that 
the  more  striking  details — especially  that  of  the  bandage — could  not 
in  any  case  help  the  telepathic  argument.  For  if  the  son  Avho  was 
killed  Avas  the  “agent”  of  his  mother's  impression,  any  correspondence 
of  the  phantasmal  appearance  with  features  of  reality  Avhich  did 
not  come  into  existence  till  after  death  must  plainly  have  been 
accidental.  We  shall  afterwards  encounter  plenty  of  instances  Avhere 
the  percipient  supplements  the  impression  that  he  receives  Avith 
elements  from  his  own  mind,  and  especially,  in  death-cases,  Avith 
elements  symbolic  of  death ; and  it  is  not  impossible  that  in  the  present 
instance  the  Avhite  garment  and  bandaged  head  Avere  a dim  repre- 
sentation of  grave-clothes. 

Mrs.  Collyer  would  probably  have  affirmed  that  at  the  time  of  her 
vision  she  Avas  completely  awake.  That  the  percipient  in  the  next 
example  Avas  completely  awake  is,  I think,  nearly  certain  ; but  as  he 
Avas  in  bed,  the  account  may  serve  as  a transition  to  the  cases  where 
the  matter  admits  of  no  doubt.  Mr.  Marchant,  of  Linkfield  Street, 
Redhill,  formerly  a large  farmer,  Avrote  to  us  in  the  summer  of  1883 : 

, ' i 

1 Thi^  if  probably  incorrect,  as  it  differs  from  Dr.  Collvcr  s and  the  mother's 
statement ; but  the  point  does  not  seem  important.  I should  add  that  we  have  failed  to 
obtain  from  iNew  Orleans  independent  corroboration  as  to  the  day  and  hour  of  the  accident. 

V.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY \ 207 

* (26)  “About  2 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  October  21st,  1881,  while  I 
was  perfectly  wide  awake,  and  looking  at  a lamp  burning  on  my  washhand- 
stand,  a person,  as  I thought,  came  into  my  room  by  mistake,  and  stopped* 
looking  into  the  looking-glass  on  the  table.  It  soon  occurred  to  me  it 
represented  Robinson  Kelsey,  by  his  dress  and  wearing  his  hair  long 
behind.  When  I raised  myself  up  in  bed  and  called  out,  it  instantly 
.disappeared.  The  next  day  I mentioned  to  some  of  my  friends  how 
strange  it  was.  So  thoroughly  convinced  was  I that  I searched  the  local 
papers  that  day  (Saturday)  and  the  following  Tuesday,  believing  his  death 
would  be  in  one  of  them.  On  the  following  Wednesday,  a man,  who 
formerly  was  my  drover,  came  and  told  me  Robinson  Kelsey  was  dead. 
Anxious  to  know  at  what  time  he  died,  I wrote  to  Mr.  Wood,  the  family 
undertaker  at  Lingfield ; he  learnt  from  the  brother-in-law  of  the  deceased 
that  he  died  at  2 a.m.  He  was  my  first  cousin,  and  was  apprenticed 
formerly  to  me  as  a miller  ; afterwards  he  lived  with  me  as  journeyman  ; 
altogether,  8 years.  I never  saw  anything  approaching  that  before. 
I am  72  years  old,  and  never  feel  nervous  ; I am  not  afraid  of  the  dead  or 
their  spirits.  I hand  you  a rough  plan  of  the  bedroom,  tfcc.” 

To- another  letter,  inquiring  as  to  Robinson  Kelsey’s  state  of  health 
previous  to  his  death,  Mr.  Marchant  replied  : — 

“ Robinson  Kelsey  had  met  with  an  accident.  His  horse  fell  with 
him,  and  from  that  time  he  seemed  at  times  unfit  for  business.  He  had  a 
farm  at  Penshurst,  in  Kent.  His  friends  persuaded  him  to  leave  it.  He 
did,  and  went  to  live  on  his  own  property,  called  Batnors  Hall,  in  the 
parish  of  Lingfield,  Surrey.  I had  not  been  thinking  about  him,  neither 
liad  I spoken  to  him  for  20  years.  About  3 or  4 years  before  his  death  I 
saw  him,  but  not  to  speak  to  him.  I was  on  the  up-side  platform  of  Red- 
hill  Station,  and  I saw  him  on  the  opposite  down-side.  In  the  morning 
after  seeing  the  apparition,  I spoke  about  it  to  a person  in  the  house.  In 
the  evening,  I again  spoke  about  it  to  two  persons,  how  strange  it  was. 
It  was  several  days  after  our  conversation  about  what  I had  seen  that  I 
heard  of  his  death.  These  people  will  confirm  my  statement,  for  after  I 
heard  of  the  death  I spoke  of  it  to  the  same  people,  that  ray  relation  died 
the  same  night  as  1 saw  the  apparition.  When  I spoke  to  these  three 
persons  I did  not  know  of  his  death,  but  had  my  suspicions  from  what  I 
had  seen.  As  the  apparition  passed  between  my  bed  and  the  lamp  I had 
a full  view  of  it ; it  was  unmistakeable.  When  it  stopped  looking  in  the 
glass  I spoke  to  it,  then  it  gently  sank  away  downwards. 

“ Probably  it  was  10  days  before  I found  out,  through  Mr.  Wood,  the 
hour  he  died,  so  that  these  persons  I spoke  to  knew  nothing  of  his  death 
at  the  time. 

“ George  Marchant.” 

We  have  received  the  following  confirmation  of  this  incident : — 

“July  18th,  1883. 

“We  are  positive  of  hearing  Mr.  Marchant  one  day  say  that  he  saw 
the  apparition  of  Robinson  Kelsey  during  the  previous  night. 

# “ Ann  Langeridge,  Linkfield  Street,  Redhill. 

“ Matilda  Fuller,  Statibn  Road,  Redhill. 
“William  Miles,  Station  Road,  Redhill.” 

208 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

[Mr.  Anthony  Kelsey,  of  Lingfield,  Surrey,  brother-in-law  and  cousin 
of  Robinson  Kelsey,  has  confirmed  October  ‘21st,  1881,  as  the  date  of  the 
death,  but  has  forgotten  the  hour ; and  Robinson  Kelsey's  widow  having 
since  died,  Mr.  Merchant's  recollection  on  this  point  cannot  now  be 
independently  confirmed.  As  to  the  hour  of  the  apparition,  again, 
Mr.  Marchant’s  statement  is  only  a conclusion,  drawn  from  his  regular 
habit  of  waking  once  in  the  middle  of  the  night  at  about  2.  But  there 
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  day  of  the  death  and  of  the  vision  was 
the  same. 

On  February  12th,  1*84, 1 had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Marchant,  who  is  a 
very  vigorous  and  sensible  old  man,  with  a precise  mind.  He  went  through 
all  the  details  of  his  narrative  in  a methodical  manner,  and  his  description 
corresponded  in  every  particular  with  the  written  account,  which  was  sent  to 
me  many  months  before.  Mr.  Marchant  was  positive  that  he  never  had  any 
other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  and  laughed  at  the  very  idea  of  such  things. 
He  quite  realised  the  ordinary  criticisms  which  might  be  made  about  a 
nocturnal  vision,  e.//.,  that  he  had  had  a glass  too  much,  and  also  realised 
their  absurdity  as  applied  to  his  own  case.  I cannot  doubt  his  statement 
that  he  lias  been  a most  temperate  man.  He  showed  me  in  his  bedroom  the 
precise  line  that  the  figure  took ; appearing  at  his  right  hand,  then  passing 
along  in  front  of  a lamp  which  was  on  the  washhand  stand,  and  finally 
standing  between  the  foot  of  his  bed  and  the  dressing-table.  He  described 
Kelsey's  long  and  bushy  back  hair  as  a very  distinct  peculiarity.  In  answer 
to  inquiries  on  this  point  he  says  : “ I have  not  any  doubt  whatever  that 
Robinson  Kelsey  did  have  that  peculiarity  of  the  hair  at  the  day  of  his  death. 
My  recollection  of  him  is  as  clear  as  if  I had  his  photo  before  me.”  The 
figure  was  visible,  he  thinks,  for  nearly  a minute ; but  the  length  of  time 
in  sucli  cases  is  of  course  likely  to  be  over-estimated.  I likewise  saw  Mrs. 
Langeridge,  a sensible  person,  without  any  belief  in  “ ghosts,”  who  at  once 
volunteered  the  remark  that  Mr.  Marchant  described  his  vision  to  her  next 
morning.] 

This  case  is  remarkable  from  the  fact  that  there  was  no 
immediate  interest  between  the  two  parties — though  it  is  of  course 
possible  that  the  dying  man's  thoughts  reverted  to  his  kinsman  and 
old  employer.  But  comments  on  this  point  must  be  reserved. 

§ 6.  We  now  come  to  examples  of  the  most  important  class  of 
all,  Class  A — externalised  impressions,  occurring  to  persons  who  are 
up,  and  manifestly  in  the  full  possession  of  their  waking  senses.  Of 
this  class  the  most  important  examples  are  visual  impressions,  or 
apparitions.  But  I will  first  give  a case  which  is  on  the  line  between 
Classes  A and  B,  a vision  not  absolutely  externalised  in  space,  but 
where  the  mental  image  took  on  a sort  of  vividness  and  objectivity* 
which  the  percipient  believes  to  have  been  unexampled  in  his 
experience.  The  coincidence  with  the  death  of  the  agent  was 

V.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY.  209 

apparently  quite  exact ; and  we  have  the  testimony  of  a third  person 
to  the  fact  that  the  percipient  mentioned  his  impression  immediately 
on  its  occurrence.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  Bawlinson,  of  Lansdown  Court, 
West  Cheltenham. 

“September  18th,  1883. 

(27)  “ I was  dressing  one  morning  in  December,  1881,  when  a certain 
conviction  came  upon  me  that  someone  was  in  my  dressing-room.  On 
looking  round,  I saw  no  one,  but  then,  instantaneously  (in  my  mind’s  eye, 

I suppose),  every  feature  of  the  face  and  form  of  my  old  friend,  X., 
arose.  This,  as  you  may  imagine,  made  a great  impression  on  me,  and  I 
went  at  once  into  my  wife’s  room  and  told  her  what  had  occurred,  at 
the  same  time  stating  that  I feared  Mr.  X.  must  be  dead.  The  subject 
was  mentioned  between  us  several  times  that  day.  Next  morning, 
I received  a letter  from  X.’s  brother,  then  Consul-General  at  Odessa, 
but  who  I did  not  know  was  in  England,  saying  that  his  brother 
had  died  at  a quarter  before  9 o’clock  that  morning.  Ihis  was  the 
very  time  the  occurrence  happened  in  my  dressing-room.  It  is  right  to 
add  that  we  had  heard  some  two  months  previously  that  X.  was 
suffering  from  cancer,  but  still  we  were  in  no  immediate  apprehension 
of  his  death.  I never  on  any  other  occasion  had  any  hallucination  of 
the  senses,  and  sincerely  trust  I never  again  shall. 

“ Ron.  Rawlinson.” 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Rawlinson’s  account : — 

& “June  18th,  1883.  * 

“ My  husband  was  dressing,  a few  months  ago,  one  morning  about  a 
quarter  to  9 o’clock,  when  he  came  into  my  room,  and  said  : ‘ I feel  sure 
X.’  (an  old  friend,  of  his)  ‘is  dead.’  He  said  all  at  once  he  felt  as  i£ 
there  was  someone  in  the  room  with  him,  and  X.’s  face  came  vividly 
before  his  mind’s  eye ; and  then  he  had  this  extraordinary  conviction  of 
X.’s  death..  He  could  not  get  the  idea  out  of  his  mind  all  day. 
Strange  to  say,  the  next  morning  he  had  a letter  saying  X.  had  died 
the  morning  before  at  a quarter  to  9,  just  the  very  time  my  husband  came 
into  my  room.  About  two  months  before  we  had  heard  that  X.  had  an 
incurable  complaint,  but  we  had  heard  nothing  more,  and  his  name  had  not 
been  mentioned  by  anyone  for  weeks.  I ought  to  tell  you  that  my  husband 
is  the  last  person  in  the  world  to  imagine  anything,  and  he  had  always- 
been  particularly  unbelieving  as  to  anything  supernatural.”1 

A reference  to  the  Consul’s  letter,  and  to  the  Times  obituary,  has 
fixed  the  date  of  the  death  as  December  17th ; but  the  date  of  the 
vision  was  not  written  down  at  the  time : we  therefore  have  to 
trust  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rawlinson’s  memory  for  the  fact  that  it  took 
place  on  the  day  before  the  letter  was  received.  Not,  however— be 
it  obsei^ed — to  their  memory  now,  but  to  their  memory  at  the  time 
when  the  letter  was  received;  and  considering  the  eflect  that  the 

1 See  p.  199,  note.  “X.”  in  the  abore  accounts  is  our  own  substitution  for  the  real 
name. 

F 

210  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

occurrence  had  on  their  minds,  we  can  scarcely  suppose  them  to 
have  agreed  iri  referring  it  to  the  preceding  day,  if  several  days  had 
really  intervened 

In  the  next  case  the  coincidence  was  certainly  close  to  within  a 
very  few  minutes,  and  may  have,  been  exact.  The  impression  was 
again  completely  unique  in  the  percipient's  experience,  and  was  at 
once  communicated  to  a third  person,  whose  testimony  to  that  point 
we  have  obtained.  “ N.  J.  S.,”  who,  though  he  uses  the  third  person,  is 
himself  the  narrator,  is  personally  known  to  us.  Occupying  a position 
ot  considerable  responsibility,  he  does  not  wish  his  name  to  be 
published;  but  it  can  be  given  to  inquirers;  and  “lie  will  answer 
any  questions  personally  to  auyone  having  a wish  to  arrive  at  the  truth.” 
The  account  was  received  within  a fewT  weeks  of  the  occurrence. 

(2S)  “ N.  J.  S.  and  F.  L.  were  employed  together  in  an  office,  were 
brought  into  intimate  relations  with  one  another,  which  lasted  for  about  eight 
years,  And  held  one  another  in  very  great  regard  and  esteem.  On  Monday, 
March  19th,  1883,  F.  L.,  in  coming  to  the  office,  complained  of  having 
suffered  from  indigestion ; he  went  to  a chemist,  who  told  him  that  his 
liver  was  a little  out  of  order,  and  gave  him  some  medicine.  He  did  not 
seem  much  better  on  Thursday.  On  Saturday  he  was  absent,  and  N.  »T.  S. 
has  since  heard  he  was  examined  by  a medical  man,  who  thought  he  wanted 
a day  or  two  of  rest,  hut  expressed  no  opinion  that  anything  was  serious. 

“On  Saturday  evening,  March  24th,  INr.  J.  S.,  avIio  had  a headache,  was 
sitting  at  home.  He  said  to  his  wife  that  lie  was  wlrat  he  had  not  been 
for  months,  rather  too  warm  ; after  making  the  remark  he  leaned  back  oil 
the  couch,  and  the  next  minute  saw  his  friend,  F.  L.,  standing  before  him, 
dressed  in  his  usual  manner.  *T.  S.  noticed  the  details  of  his  dress, 
that  is,  his  hat  with  a black  band,  his  overcoat  unbuttoned,  and  a stick  in 
Iiis  hand  ; he  looked  with  a fixed  regard  at  N.  J.  S.,  and  then  passed  away, 
N.  J.  b.  quoted  to  himself  from  J oh,  ‘ And  lo,  a spirit  passed  before  me 
and  the  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  up.’  At  that  moment  an  icy  chill  passed 
through  him,  and  his  hair  bristled.  He  then  turned  to  his  wife  a??d  asked 
her  the  time  ; she  said,  * 12  minutes  to  9.’  He  then  said,  ‘ The  reason  I 
ask  you  is  that  F.  L.  is  dead.  I have  just  seen  him.  She  tried  to 
persuade  him  it  was  fancy,  hut  he  most  positively  .assured  her  that  no 
argument  was  of  avail  to  alter  his  opinion. 

“ Tlie  next  day>  Sunday,  about  3 p.m.,  A.  L.,  brother  of  F.  L.,  came  to 
the  house  of  N.  J.  b.,  who  let  him  in.  A.  L.  said,  1 1 suppose  you  know 
what  I have  come  to  tell  you?’  N.  J.  S.  replied,  ‘Yes,  your  brother  is 
dead.  A.  L.  said,  ‘I  thought  you  would  know  it.’  N.  J.  S.  replied, 
Why  ? A.  L.  said,  ‘ Because  you  were  in  such  sympathy  with  one 
another.’  N.  J.  S.  afterwards  ascertained  that  A.  L.  called  on  Saturday, 
to^see  his  brother,  and  on  leaving  him  noticed  the  clock  on  the  stairs  was 

minutes  to  9 p.m.  F.  L.’s  sister,  on  going  to  him  at  9 p.m.,  found  him 
dead  from  rupture  of  the  aorta. 

This  is  a plain  statement  of  facts,  and  the  only  theory  N.  J*  S.  has  on 

V.] 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

211 

the  subject  is  that  at  the  supreme  moment  of  death,  F.  L.  must  have  felt  a 
great  wish  to  communicate  with  him,  and  in  some  way  by  force  of  wilL 
impressed  his  image  on  N.  J.  S.’s  senses.” 

In  reply  to  our  inquiries  Mr.  S.  says  : — 

“11th  May,  1883. 

“ (1)  My  wife  was  sitting  at  a table  in  the  middle  of  the  room  under 
a,  gas  chandelier,  either  reading  or  doing  some  wool  work.  I was  sitting 
on  a couch  at  the  side  of  the  room  in  the  shade  ; she  was  not  looking  in  the 
direction  I was.  I studiously  spoke  in  a quiet  manner  to  avoid  alarming 
her ; she  noticed  nothing  particular  in  me. 

“ (2)  I have  never  seen  any  appearance  before,  but  have  disbelieved 
in  them,  not  seeing  any  motive. 

“ (3)  Mr.  A.  L.  told  me  that  in  coming  to  inform  me  of  his 
brother’s  death,  he  wondered  what  would  be  the  best  way  of  breaking 
the  matter  to  me,  when  without  any  reason  except  the  knowledge  of 
our  strong  mutual  regard,  it  seemed  to  flash  upon  his  mind  that  I might 
know  it. 

“ There  had  been  no  instances  of  thought- transmission  between  us. 

“ There  are  many  slight  details  which  it  is  nearly  impossible  to 
describe  in  writing,  so  I may  say  that  I shall  be  most  willing  to  give  you 
<a  personal  account  and  answer  any  questions  at  any  time  you  should  be 
in  town. 

“ There  is  one  thing  which  strikes  me  as  singular : the  instant 
-certainty  I felt  that  my  friend  was  dead,  as  there  was  nothing  to  lead  up 
to  the  idea,  and  also  that  I seemed  to  accept  all  that  passed  without 
feeling  surprise,  and  as  if  it  were  an  ordinary  matter  of  course. 

“N.  J.  S.” 

Mrs.  8.  supplies  the  following  corroboration  : — 

“ September  18th,  1883. 

“ Oil  the  evening  of  the  24th  March  last,  I was  sitting  at  a table 
reading,  my  husband  was  sitting  on  a couch  at  the  side  of  the  room ; he 
asked  me  the  time,  and  on  my  replying  12  minutes  to  9,  he  said,  ‘The 
reason  why  I ask  is  that  L.  is  dead,  I have  just  seen  him.’  I 
answered,  ‘ What  nonsense,  you  don’t  even  know  that  he  is  ill ; I dare- 
say when  you  go  to  town  on  Tuesday  you  will  see  him  all  right/ 
However,*  he  persisted  in  saying  he  had  seen  L.,  and  was  sure  of  his 
death.  I noticed  at  the  time  that  he  looked  very  much  agitated  and  was 
very  pale. 

“ Makja  S.” 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  F.  L/s  death  took  place  on 
March  24th,  1883. 

In  a later  communication  Mr.  S.  says  : — 

“February  23rd,  1885. 

“ In  compliance  with  your  request,  I have  asked  Mr.  A.  L.  to  send 
you  the  statement  of  what  came  to  his  knowledge  with  reference  to 
the  time  of  his  brother’s  death.  # . 

“I  have  often  thought  the  matter  over  since.  I am  unable  to  satisfy  my 
own  mind  as  to  the  ivhy  of  the  occurrence,  but  I still  adhere  to  every 
particular,  having  nothing  to  add  or  withdraw.” 

' p 2 

212  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

Mr.  LAs  brother  corroljorates  as  follows : — 

“ Bank  of  England. 

“ February  24th,  1885. 

“ Mr.  S.  having  informed  me  that  you  have  expressed  a wish  that  1 
should  corroborate  some  statements  made  by  him  relative  to  my  brother 
Frederick’s  sudden  death,  I beg  to  send  you  the  following  particulars. 

“On  Saturday,  March  24th,  1883,  my  brother  having  been  absent 
from  business,  I called  about  8 p.m.  to  see  him,  and  found  him  sitting  up 
in  his  bedroom.  I left  him,  apparently  much  better,  and  came  down  to- 
the  dining-room  about  8.40,  where  I remained  with  my  sister  for  about 
lialf-an-hour,  when  I left,  and  she,  going  upstairs,  immediately  upon  my 
departure,  found  her  brother  lying  dead  upon  the  bed,  so  that  the  exact 
time  of  his  death  will  never  be  known.  On  my  way  over  to  Mr.  S.  the  next- 
day,  to  break  the  news  to  him,  the  thought  occurred,  to  me — knowing  the 
strong  sympathy  between  them — ‘ 1 should  not  be  surprised  if  he  has  had 
some  presentiment  of  it  ’ ; and  when  he  came  to  the  door  to  meet  me,  I 
felt  certain  from  his  look  that  it  was  so,  hence  I said,  ‘ You  know  what  I 
have  come  for/  and  he  then  told  me  that  he  had  seen  my  brother  Frederick 
in  a vision  a little  before  9 on  the  previous  evening.  I must  tell  you  I 
am  no  believer  in  visions,  and  have  not  always  found  presentiments, 
correct,  yet  I am  perfectly  certain  of  Mr.  S.’s  veracity,  and  having  been 
asked  to  confirm  him,  willingly  do  so,  though  I strengthen  a cause  I am. 
not  a disciple  of. 

“ A.  C.  LA 

An  attempt  to  form  a numerical  estimate  of  the  probability  (or 
improbability)  that  the  coincidence  in  this  case  was  accidental  will 
be  found  in  Chapter  XIII. 

The  next  case  again  exhibits  the  slight  deferment  of  the 
percipient’s  experience  which  I have  already  mentioned  (p.  201). 
But  its  chief  interest  is  as  illustrating  what  may  be  called  a local,  as 
distinct  from  a personal,  rapport  between  the  parties  concerned. 
The  percipient,  at  the  moment  of  his  impression,  was  comtemplating* 
a spot  with  which  the  agent  was  specially  connected,  and  which  may 
even  have  had  a very  distinct  place  in  her  dying  thoughts  ; and  it  is- 
natural  to  find  in  this  fact  a main  condition  why  he,  of  all  people, 
should  have  been  the  one  impressed.  The  case  was  thus  narrated  tc> 
us  by  the  Rev.  C.  T.  Forster,  Vicar  of  Hinxton,  Saffron  Walden : — 

“ August  6th,  1885. 

(29)  “My  late  parishioner,  Mrs.  de  Freville,  was  a somewhat 
eccentric  lady,  who  was  specially  morbid  on  the  subject  of  tombs,  tfec. 

“ About  two  days  after  her  death,  which  took  place  in  London,  Majr 
8th,  in  the  afternoon,  I heard  that  she  had  been  seen  that  very  night  by 
Alfred  Bard.  I sent  for  him,  and  he  gave  me  a very  clear  and  circum- 
stantial account  of  what  he  had  seen. 

V.] 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

213 

“ He  is  a naan  of  great  observation,  being  a self-taught  naturalist,  and 
I am  quite  satisfied  that  he  desires  to  speak  the  truth  without  any 
exaggeration. 

“ I must  add  that  I am  absolutely  certain  that  the  news  of 
Mrs.  de  Freville’s  death  did  not  reach  Hinxton  till  the  next  morning* 
May  9th.  She  was  found  dead  at  7.30  p.m.  # She  had  been  left  alone  in 
her  room,  being  poorly,  but  not  considered  seriously  or  dangerously  ill. 

“ C.  T.  Forster  ” 

The  following  is  the  percipient’s  own  account : — 

“July  21st,  1885. 

“ I am  a gardener  in  employment  at  Sawston.  T always  go  through 
Hinxton  churchyard  on  my  return  home  from  work.  \ On  Friday,  May  8th, 
1885,  I was  walking  back  as  usual.  On  entering  the  churchyard  I looked 
rather  carefully  at  the  ground,  in  order  to  see  a cow  and  donkey  which 
used  to  lie  just  inside  the  gate.  In  so  doing,  I looked  straight  at  the 
square  stone  vault  in  which  the  late  Mr.  de  Fr6ville  was  at  one  time 
buried.  I then  saw  Mrs.  de  Freville  leaning  on  the  rails,  dressed  much  as 
I had  usually  seen  her,  in  a coal-scuttle  bonnet,  black  jacket  with  deep 
crape,  and  black  dress.  She  was  looking  full  at  me.  Her  face  was  very 
white,  much  whiter  than  usual.  I knew  her  well,  having  at  one  time 
been  in  her  employ.  I at  once  supposed  that  she  had  come,  as  she  some- 
times did,  to  the  mausoleum  in  her  own  park,  in  order  to  have  it  opened 
and  go  in.  I supposed  that  Mr.  Wiles,  the  mason  from  Cambridge,  was 
in  the  tomb  doing  something.  I walked  round  the  tomb  looking  carefully 
at  it,  in  order  to  see  if  the  gate  was  open,  keeping  my  eye  on  her  and  never 
more  than  five  or  six  yards  from  her.  Her  face  turned  and  followed  me. 
I passed  between  the  church  and  the  tomb  (there  are  about  four  yards 
between  the  two),  and  peered  forward  to  see  whether  the  tomb  was  open, 
as  she  hid  the  part  of  the  tomb  which  opened.  I slightly  stumbled  on  a 
hassock  of  grass,  and  looked  at  my  feet  for  a moment  only.  When  I 
looked  up  she  was  gone.  She  could  not  possibly  have  got  out  of  the 
churchyard,  as  in  order  to  reach  any  of  the  exits  she  must  have  passed  me. 
So  I took  for  granted  that  she  had  quickly  gone  into  the  tomb.  I went 
up  to  the  door,  which  I expected  to  find  open,  but  to  my  surprise  it  was 
shut  and  had  not  been  opened,  as  there  was  no  key  in  'the  lock.  I rather 
hoped  to  have  a look  into  the  tomb  myself,  so  I went  back  again  and  shook 
the  gate  to  make  sure,  but  there  was  no  sign  of  any  one’s  having  been  • 
there.  I was  then  much  startled  and  looked  at  the  clock,  which  marked 
9.20.  When  I got  home  I half  thought  it  must  have  been  my  fancy,  but 
I told  my  wife  that  I had  seen  Mrs.  de  Freville. 

“Next  day,  when  my  little  boy  told  me  that  she  was  dead,  I gave  a 
start,  which  my  companion  noticed,  I was  so  much  taken  aback. 

“ I have  never  had  any  other  hallucination  whatever. 

“Alfred  Bard.’* 

Mrs.  Bard’s  testimony  is  as  follows  : — 

“July  8th,  1885. 

“ When  Mr.  Bard  came  home  he  said,  ‘ I have  seen  Mrs.  de  Freville 
to-night,  leaning  with  her  elbow  on  the  palisade,  looking  at  me.  I turned 

214 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

again  to  look  ?tt  her  and  s he  was  gone.  She  had  cloak  and  bonnet  on/ 
He  got  home  as  usual  between  9 and  10  ; it  was  on  the  8th  of  May,  1885. 

“ Sarah  Bard.” 

[Mr.  .Myers  was  conducted  over  Ilinxton  churchyard  by  Mr.  Forster, 
and  can  attest  the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Bard’s  description  of  the  relative 
position  of  the  church,  the  tomb,  and  the  exits.  The  Times  obituary 
confirms  the  date  of  the  death.] 

The  next  case  is  of  a more  abnormal  type.  We  received  the  first 
account  of  it  through  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  Martin,  of  Ham  Coui't, 
Upton-on-Severn,  Worcester. 

“December  14tli,  1882. 

(50)  “ Helen  Alexander  (maid  to  Lady  Waldegrave)  was  lying  here  very 
ill  with  typhoid  fever,  and  was  attended  by  me.  I was  standing  at  the  table 
by  her  bedside,  pouring  out  her  medicine,  at  about  4 o’clock  in  the  morning 
of  the  4th  October,  18^0  I heard  the  call-hell  ring  (this  had  been  heard 
twice  before  during  the  night  in  that  same  week),  and  was  attracted  by  the 
door  of  the  room  opening,  and  by  seeing  a person  entering  the  room  whom 
l instantly  felt  to  be  the  mother  of  the  sick  woman.  She  had  a brass 
candlestick  in  her  hand,  a red  shawl  over  her  shoulders,  and  a flannel 
petticoat  on  which  had  a hole  in  the  front.  I looked  at  her  as  much  as  to> 
say,  * I am  glad  you  have  001110/  but  the  woman  looked  at  me  sternly,  as 
much  as  to  say,  * Why  wasn’t  1 sent  for  before  V I gave  the  medicine  to 
Helen  Alexander,  and  then  turned  round  to  speak  to  the  vision,  but  no  one 
was  there.  She  had  gone  She  was  a short,  dark  person,  and  very  stout. 
At  about  G o’clock  that  morning  Helen  Alexander  died.  Two  days  after, 
her  parents  and  a sister  (tamo  to  Antony,  and  arrived  between  1 and  2 
o’clock  in  the  morning ; l and  another  maid  let  them  in,  and  it  gave  me  a 
great  turn  when  I saw  the  living  likeness  of  the  vision  I had  seen  two 
nights  before.  1 told  the  sister  about  the  vision,  and  she  said  that  tile- 
description  of  the  dress  exactly  answered  to  her  mother’s,  and  that  they  had 
brass  candlesticks  at  home  exactly  like  the  one  described.  There  was  not 
the  slightest  resemblance  between  the  mother  and  daughter. 

“ Francks  Reddkll.” 

This  at  first  sight  might  be  taken  for  a mere  delusion  of  an 
excitable  or  over-tired  servant,  modified  and  exaggerated  by  the 
subsequent  sight  of  the  real  mother.  If  such  a case  is  to  have 
evidential  force,  we  must  ascertain  beyond  doubt  that  the  description 
of  the  experience  was  given  in  detail  before  any  knowledge  of  the 
reality  can  have  attected  the  percipient  s memory  or  imagination. 
This  necessary  corroboration  has  been  kindly  supplied  by  Mi's.  Pole- 
Oarew,  of  Antony,  Torpoint,  Devonport. 

“ 31st  December,  1883. 

“Tn  October,  1880,  Lord  and  Lady  Waldegrave  came  with  their  Scotch 
maid,  Helen  Alexander,  to  stay  with  us.  [The  account  then  describes  how 
Helen  was  discovered  to  have  caught  typhoid  fever.]  She  did  not  seem  to 
be  ^ ery  ill  in  spite  of  it,  and  as  there  seemed  no  fear  of  danger,  and  Lord 

v.]  OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY . 215 

and  Lady  Waldegrave  had  to  go  a long  journey  the  following  day 
(Thursday),  they  decided  to  leave  her,  as  they  were  advised  to  do,  under 
their  friends’  care. 

“ The  illness  ran  its  usual  course,  and  she  seemed  to  he  going  on  perfectly 
well  till  the  Sunday  week  following,  when  the  doctor  told  me  that  the 
fever  had* left  her,  but  the  state  of  weakness  which  had  supervened  was 
such  as  to  make  him  extremely  anxious.  I immediately  engaged  a regular 
nurse,  greatly  against  the  wish  of  Reddell,  my  maid,  who  hrd  been  her 
chief  nurse  all  through  the  illness,  and  who  was  quite  deviled  to  her. 
However,,  as  the  nurse  could  not  conveniently  come  till  the  following  day, 
I allowed  Reddell  to  sit  up  with  Helen  again  that  night,  to  give  her  the 
medicine  and  food,  which  were  to  be  taken  constantly. 

“At  about  4.30  that  night,  or  rather  Monday  morning,  Reddell  looked  at 
her  watch,  poured  out  the  medicine,  and  was  bending  over  the  bed  to  give 
it  to  Helen,  when  the  call-bell  in  the  passage  rang.  She  said  to  herself, 
‘There’s  that  tiresome  bell  with  the  wire  caught  again.’  (It  seems  it  did 
occasionally  ring  of  itself  in  this  manner.)  At  that  moment,  however,  she 
heard  the  door  open,  and  looking  round,  saw  a very  stout  old  woman  walk 
in.  She  was  dressed  in  a nightgown  and  red  flannel  petticoat,  and  carried 
an  old-fashioned  brass  candlestick  in  her  hand.  The  petticoat  had  a hoi© 
rubbed  in  it.  She  walked  into  the  room  and  appeared  to  be  going  towards 
the  dressing-table  to  put  her  candle  down.  She  was  a perfect  stranger  to 
Reddell,  who,  however,  merely  thought,  ‘ This  is  her  mother  come  to-  see 
after  her,’  and  she  felt  quite  glad  it  was  so,  accepting  the  idea  without 
reasoning  upon  it,  as  one  would  in  a dream.  She  thought  the  mother  looked 
annoyed,  possibly  at  not  having  been  sent  for  before.  She  then  gave 
Helen  the  medicine,  and  turning  round,  found  that  the  apparition  had  dis- 
appeared, and  that  the  door  was  shut.  A great  change,  meanwhile,  had 
taken  place  in  Helen,  and  Reddell  fetched  me,  who  sent  off  for  the  doctor, 
and  meanwhile  applied  hot  poultices,  &c.,  but  Helen  died  a little  before  the 
doctor  came.  She  was  quite  conscious  up  to  about  half-an-hour  before  she 
died,  when  she  seemed  to  be  going  to  sleep. 

“ During  the  early  days  of  her  illuess  Helen  had  written  to  a sister, 
mentioning  her  being  unwell,  but  making  nothing  of  it,  and  as  she  never 
mentioned  any  one  but  this  sister,  it  was  supposed  by  the  household,  to 
whom  she  was  a perfect  stranger,  that  she  had  no  other  relation  alive. 
Reddell  was  always  offering  to  write  for  her,  but  she  always  declined, 
saying  there  was  no  need,  she  would  write  herself  in  a day  or  two.  No 
one  at  home,  therefore,  knew  anything  of  her  being  so  ill,  and  it  is,  there- 
fore, remarkable  that*  her  mother,  a far  from  nervous  person,  should  have 
said  that  evening  going  up  to  bed,  ‘ I am  sure  Helen  is  very  ill.’ 

“ Reddell  told  me  and  my  daughter  of  the  apparition,  about  an  hour 
after  Helen’s  death,  prefacing  with,  ‘ I am  not  superstitious,  or  nervous, 
and  I wasn’t  the  least  frightened,  but  her  mother  came  last  night,’  and  sho 
then  told  the  story,  giving  a careful  description  of  the  figure  she.  had  seen. 
The  relations  were  asked  to  come  to  the  funeral,  and  the  father,  mother, 
and  sister  came,  and  in  the  mother  Reddell  recognised  the  apparition,  as  I 
did  also,  for  Reddell’s  description  had  been  most  accurate,  even  to  the 
expression,  which  she  had  ascribed  to  annoyance,  but  which  was  due  to 
deafness.  It  was  judged  best  not  to  speak  about  it  to  the  mother,  but 
Reddell  told  the  sister,  who  said  the  description  of  the  figure  corresponded 

216 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[CHAF. 

exactly  with  the  probable  appearance  of  her  mother  if  roused  in  the  night ; 
that  they  had  exactly  such  a candlestick  at  home,  and  that  there  was  a 
hole  in  her  mother’s  petticoat  produced  by  the  way  she  always  wore  it.  It 
seems  curious  that  neither  Helen  nor  her  mother  appeared  to  be  aware  of 
the  visit.  Neither  of  them,  at  any  rate,  ever  spoke  of  having  seen  the 
other,  nor  even  of  having  dreamt  of  having  done  so. 

“F.  A.  Pole-Carew.” 

[Frances  Reddell  states  that  she  has  never  had  any  hallucination,  or 
any  odd  experience  of  any  kind,  except  on  this  one  occasion.  The  Hon. 
Mrs.  Lyttelton,  of  Selwyn  College,  Cambridge,  who  knows  her,  tells  us 
that  “ she  appears  to  be  a most  matter-of-fact  person,  and  was  ap- 
parently most  impressed  by  the  fact  that  she  saw  a hole  in  the  mother’s 
flannel' petticoat,  made  by  the  busk  of  her  stays,  reproduced  in  the 
apparition.”] 

Mrs.  Pole-Care \vs  evidence  goes  far  to  stamp  this  occurrence  as 
having  been  something  more  than  a mere  subjective  hallucination. 
But  it  will  be  observed  that  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  who  was 
the  agent.  Was  it  the  mother  ? If  so,  we  find  nothing  more 
definite  on  the  agent’s  part,  as  a basis  for  the  distant  effect, 
than  a certain  amount  of  anxiety  as  to  her  daughter’s  condition ; 
while  the  fact  that  Reddell  and  she  were  totally  unknown 
to  one  another  would  show,  even  more  conclusively  than  did  Mr. 
Marchant’s  case  above,  that  a special  personal  rapport  between  the 
parties  is  not  a necessary  condition  for  spontaneous  telepathic 
transference.  Thus  regarded,  the  case  would  considerably  resemble 
the  instance  of  local  rapport  last  quoted — the  condition  of  the 
telepathic  impression  being  presumably  the  common  occupation  of 
the  mind  of  both  agent  and  percipient  with  one  subject,  the  dying 
girl.  But  it  is  also  conceivable  that  Helen  herself  was  the  agent ; 
and  that  in  her  dying  condition  a flash  of  memory  of  her  mother’s 
aspect  conveyed  a direct  impulse  to  the  mind  of  her  devoted  nurse. 

The  last  five  cases  have  all  been  recent.  I will  now  give  an 
example  which  is  70  years  old.  It  will  show  the  value  that  even 
remote  evidence  may  have,  if  proper  care  is  exercised  at  the  time ; 
and  it  points  the  moral  which  must  be  enforced  ad  nauseam,  as 
to  the  importance  of  an  immediate  written  record  on  the  percipient’s 
part.  The  account  was  received  from  Mrs.  Browne,  of  58,  Porchester 
Terrace,  W.  On  May  29th,  1884,  Mr.  Podmore  wrote  : — 

“ May  29th,  1884. 

(31)  “I  called  to-day  on  Mrs.  Browne,  and  saw  (1)  a document  in  the 
handwriting  of  her  mother,  Mrs.  Carslake  (now  dead),  which  purported 
to  be  a copy  of  a memorandum  made  by  Mrs.  Browne’s  father,  the  late 
Captain  John  Carslake,  of  Sidmouth.  Appended  to  this  was  (2)  a note. 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

217 

v-J 

also  in  Mrs.  Carslake’s  handwriting,  and  signed  by  her  ; and  (3)  a 
copy,  also  in  Mrs.  Carslake’s  handwriting,  of  a letter  froin  the  Rev.  E. * 
B r,  of  Sidmouth. 

“Mrs.  Browne  told  me  that,  as  far  as  she  knows,  the  originals  of  (1) 
and  (3)  are  no  longer  in  existence. 

“ Document  (4)  is  a note  from  Mrs.  Browne  herself. 

“The  Middleburg  referred  to  is  apparently  the  town  of  that  name 
in  the  Netherlands.” 

(1) 

“Thursday,  July  the  6th,  1815. — On  returning  to-day  from  Middle- 
burg with  Captain  T.,  I was  strongly  impressed  with  the  idea  that 
between  2 and  3 I saw  my  uncle  John  cross  the  road,  a few  paces  before 
me,  and  pass  into  a lane  on  the  left  leading  to  a mill,  called  Oily  Moulin, 
and  that  when  he  arrjved  at  the  edge  of  the  great  road,  he  looked  round 
and  beckoned  to  me. 

“Query. — As  he  has  long  been  dangerously  ill,  may  not  this  be 
considered  as  an  omen  of  his  having  died  about  this  time  ? 

“John  Carslake.” 

(2) 

“ He  had  not  been  thinking  of  his  uncle,  but  talking  with  Captain  T. 
about  a sale  where  they  had  been ; he  was  quite  silent  afterwards,  and 
would  not  tell  the  reason.  On  going  on  board  he  went  to  his  cabin  and 
wrote  the  time  he  saw  his  uncle,  and  wrote  to  Mr  B. 

“T.  Carslake.” 

(») 

“ Long,  in  all  probability,  before  this  can  reach  you,  you  will  have 
been  informed  that  precisely  at  the  minute  in  which  his  apparition  crossed 
your  path  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Middleburg  your  dear  and  venerable 
uncle  expired.  I think  it  proves,  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  his  last 
and  affectionate  thoughts  were  fixed  on  you.  The  fact  you  have  stated 
is  the  strongest  of  the  kind,  in  which  I could  place  such  full  confidence 
in  the  parties,  that  / ever  knew. — E.B.” 

[Judging  from  Mr.  Carslake’s  own  account,  it  seems  unlikely  that 
the  writer  of  this  can  have  known  the  coincidence  to  have  been  as  close 
as  he  describes.], 

(4) 

“ May  29th,  1884. 

“ I remember  more  than  once  hearing  this  story,  exactly  as  it  is  told 
here,  from  my  father’s  own  lips.  I remember  that  he  added  that  the 
figure  wore  a peculiar  hat,  which  he  recognised  as  being  like  one  worn 
by  his  uncle.  “ T.  L.  Browne.” 

The  next  example  repeats  the  peculiarity  that  the  percipient's 
impression,  though  unique  in  his  experience,  did  not  at  the  moment 
suggest  the  agent ; but  it  differs,  as  will  be  seen,  from  Frances 
ReddelUs  case.  We  received,  it  from  the  Rev.  Robert  Bee, 
now  residing  at  12,  Whitworth  Road,  Grangetown,  near  Southbank, 
Yorkshire. 

218  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

“ Colin  Street,  .Wigan, 

“ December  30th,  1883. 

(32)  “ On  December  18th,  1873,  I left  my  house  in  Lincolnshire  to 
visit  my  wife’s  parents,  then  and  now  residing  in  Lord  Street,  Southport. 
Both  my  parents  were,  to  all  appearance,  in  good  health  when  I started. 
The  next  day  after  my  arrival  was  spent  in  leisurely  observation  of  the 
manifold  attractions  of  this  fashionable  seaside  resort.  I spent  the  evening 
in  company  with  my  wife  in  the  bay -windowed  drawing-room  upstairs, 
which  fronts  the  main  street  of  the  town.  I proposed  a game  at  chess, 
and  we  got  out  the  board  and  began  to  play.  Perhaps  half-an-hour  had 
been  thus  occupied  by  us,  during  which  I had  made  several  very  foolish 
mistakes.  A deep  melancholy  was  oppressing  me.  At  length  I remarked  : 

1 It  is  no  use  my  trying  to  play,  I cannot  for  the  life  think  about  what  I 
am  doing.  Shall  we  shut  it  up  and  resume  our  talk?  I feel  literally 
wretched/ 

“‘Just  as  you  like/  said  my  wife,  and  the  board  was  at  once  put 
aside. 

“This  was  ab  »ut  half-past  7 o’clock;  and  after  a few  minutes7 
desultory  conversation,  my  wife  suddenly  remarked:  ‘/  feel  very  dull 
to-night.  I think  I will  go  downstairs  to  mamma,  for  a few  minutes.’ 

“ Soon  after  my  wife’s  departure,  I rose  from  my  chair,  and  walked  in 
the  direction  of  the  drawing-room  door.  Here  I paused  for  a moment, 
and  then  passed  out  to  the  landing  of  the  stairs. 

“ It  was  then  exactly  10  minutes  to  8 o’clock.  I stood  for  a moment 
upon  the  landing,  and  a lady,  dressed  as  if  she  were  going  on  a business 
errand,  came  out,  apparently,  from  an  adjoining  bedroom,  and  passed  close 
by  me.  1 did  not  distinctly  see  her  features,  nor  do  I remember  what  it 
was  that  T said  to  her. 

“ The  form  passed  down  the  narrow  winding  stairs,  and  at  the  same 
instant  my  wife  came  up  again,  so  that  she  must  have  passed  close  to  the 
stranger,  in  fact,  to  all  appearance,  brushed  against  her. 

“ I exclaimed,  almost  immediately,  ‘ Who  is  the  lady,  Polly,  that  you 
passed  just  now,  coming  up  ? ’ 

“Never  can  I forget,  or  account  for,  my  wife’s  answer.  ‘I  passed 
nobody/  she  said. 

“ ‘ Nonsense/  I replied ; ‘You  met  a lady  just  now,  dressed  for  a walk. 
She  came  out  of  the  little  bedroom.  L spoke  to  her.  She  must  be  a 
visitor  staying  with  your  mother.  She  has  gone  out,  no  doubt,  at  the 
front  door.’ 

“ ‘It  is  impossible/  said  my  wife.  ‘ There  is  not  any  company  in  the 
house.  They  all  left  nearly  a week  ago.  There  is  no  one  in  fact  at  all 
indoors,  but  ourselves  and  mamma.’ 

“ ‘ Strange/  I said  ; ‘ I am  certain  that  I saw  and  spoke  to  a lady,  just 
before  you  came  upstairs,  and  I saw  her  distinctly  pass  you ; so  that  it' 
seems  incredible  that  you  did  not  perceive  her.’ 

“ My  wife  positively  asserted  that  the  thing  was  impossible.  We  went 
downstairs  together,  and  I related  the  story  to  my  wife’s  mother,  who  was 
busy  with  her  household  duties.  She  confirmed  her  daughter’s  .previous 
statement.  There  was  no  one  in  the  house  but  ourselves. 

“ The  next  morning,  early,  a telegram  reached  me  from  Lincolnshire ; 
it  was  from  my  elder  sister,  Julia  (Mrs.  T.  W.  Bowman,  of  Prospect 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

219 

House,  Stechford,  Birmingham),  and  announced  the  afflicting  intelligence, 
that  our  dear  mother  had  passed  suddenly  away  the  night  before ; and 
that  we  ( i.e.y  myself  and  wife)  were  to  return  home  to  Gainsborough  by 
the  next  train.  The  doctor  said  it  was  heart  disease,  which  in  a few 
minutes  had  caused  her  death.” 

After  giving  some  details  of  his  arrival  at  home,  and  of  the  kindness 
of  friends,  Mr.  Bee  continues  : — 

“ When  all  was  over  and  Christmas  Day  had  arrived,  I ventured  to 
ask  my  brother  the  exact  moment  of  our  mother’s  death. 

“ ‘ Well,  father  was  out,’  he  said,  ‘ at  the  school-room,  and  I did  not  see 
her  alive.  Julia  was  just  in  time  to  see  her  breathe  her  last.  It  was,  as. 
nearly  as  I can  recollect,  10  minutes  to  8 o'clock.’ 

“I  looked  to  my  wife  for  a moment,  and  then  said:  ‘Then  X saw 
her  in  Southport,  and  can  now  account,  unaccountably,  for  my  impres- 
sions.’ 

“Before  the  said  19tli  of  December  I was  utterly  careless  of  these 
things;  1 had  given  little  or  no  attention  to  spiritual  apparitions  or 
impressions. 

“ Robt.  Bee.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Bee  adds  : — 

“ My  mother  died  in  her  dress  and  boots ; she  was  taken  ill  in  the- 
street,  and  had  to  be  taken  to  a neighbour’s  house  in  Gainsborough  a few 
paces  from  her  own  house.  The  figure  resembled  my  mother  exactly  as  to* 
size,  dress,  and  appearance,  but  it  did  not  recall  her  to  my  mind  at  tho 
time.  The  light  was  not  so  dim  that,  if  my  mother  had  actually  passed  mo 
in  flesh  and  blood,  1 should  not  have  recognised  her.”  * 

We  learn  from  the  obituary  notice  in  the  Lincolnshire  Chronicle  that 
Mr.  Bee’s  mother  died  on  December  1 9th  187«‘1,  in  Mr.  Smithson’s  shop* 
in  Gainsborough,  of  heai't  disease ; and  that  her  usual  health  was  pretty 
good. 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  is  the  only  case  of  hallucina- 
tion that  he  has  experienced,  Mr.  Bee  answers  “ Yes.” 

He  further  adds 

“ The  gas  light  over  the  head  of  the  stairway  shone  within  a frosted 
globe,  and  was  probably  not  turned  on  fully . 

“The  fact  is,  that  there  was  ample  light  to  see  the  figure  in,  but  just  as 
the  face  might  have  been  turned  to  me,  or  was  turned  to  me,  I could  not,, 
or  did  not,  clearly  discern  it.  Many,  many  times,  my  regret  and 
disappointment  when  I recall  this  fact  have  been  deeply  felt.” 

Mrs,  Bee  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

“January  9th,  1884. 

“ If  anything  I can  say  to  you  will  be  of  any  use,  I will  willingly  give 
my  testimony  to  all  my  husband  has  said.  I remember  perfectly  ten  years 
ago  my  visit  to  my  mother’s,  and  my  husband’s  unaccountable  restlessness 
on  the  particular  evening  mentioned,  also  Mr.  Bee  asking  me,  after  I had 
been  downstairs,  if  I had  met  a lady  on  the  stairs.  I said,  ‘ No,  I do  not 
think  there  is  any  one  in  the  house  but  us.’  Mr.  Bee  then  said,  1 Well,  a 
lady  has  passed  me  just  now  on  the  landing;  she  came  out  of  the  small 

220  SPECIMENS  OF  TEE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

bedroom  and  went  downstairs ; she  was  dressed  in  a black  bonnet  and 
shawl/  I said,  ‘ Nonsense,  you  must  be  mistaken/  He  said,  ‘ I am 
certain  I am  not,  and  I can  assure  you  I feel  very  queer/  I then  went  to 
ask  mamma  if  there  was  anyone  in  the  house,  ancl  she  said  no,  only 
ourselves ; still  Mr.  Bee  insisted  someone  had  passed  him  on  the  landing, 
although  we  tried  to  reason  him  out  of  it.  i 

“In  the  morning,  while  we  were  in  bed,  we  received  a telegram  stating 
that  Mrs.  Bee  had  died  suddenly  the  night  before.  I said  at  once,  ‘Robert, 
that  was  your  mother  you  saw  last  night/  He  said  it  was.  When  we  got 
to  Gainsborough  we  asked  what  time  she  died  ; we  were  told  about  10 
minutes  to  8,  which  was  the  exact  time ; also  that  she  was  taken  suddenly 
ill  in  the  street  (wearing  at  the  time  a black  bonnet  and  shawl)  and  died 
in  10  minutes. 

“ Mary  Ann  Bee/* 

Mrs.  Bourne,  a sister  of  Mr.  Bee’s,  writes  to  us  : — 

“ Eastgate  Lodge,  Lincoln. 

“October  2nd,  1885. 

“My  mother  died  on  December  19th,  1873,  about  JO  minutes  to  8 in 
the  evening ; it  might  be  a little  later  or  a little  earlier.  Her  attack 
resembled  a fainting  lit,  and  lasted  from  30  to  40  minutes.  At  the 
commencement  of  it,  she  said  a few  words  to  my  sister,  when  I was  not 
present ; afterwards  I believe  she  never  opened  her  eyes  or  spoke  a^ain, 
though  we  tried  our  utmost  to  induce  her  to  do  so.  Q 

“ Marian  , Bourne.” 

* 

If  this  case  is.  accurately  reported,  thp  figure  seen  cannot  be 
supposed  to  have  been  a real  person ; for — to  say  nothing  of  the 
unlikelihood  that  a strange  lady  would  bo  on  the  upper  floor  on  some 
unknown  errand — Mrs.  Bee’s  arrival  upstairs  followed  so  instan- 
taneously on  her  husband’s  observation  of  the  figure  that  a real 
person,  according  to  his  impression,  must  have  come  into  actual  contact 
with  her.  The  fact  that  the  form  did  not  at  tho  moment  suggest  Mr. 
Bee  s mother  tends,  no , doubt,  to  weaken  the  case  as  evidence  for 
telepathy,  to  this  extent, — that  if  a person  has  the  one  hallucination 
of  his  life  at  the  moment  that  a near  relative  dies  this  singular 
coincidence  may  with  less  violence  be  ascribed  to  accident  if  the  hallu- 
cination is  merely  an,  appearance— an  unrecognised  figure— than  if  it 
is  the  appearance  of  that  particular  relative.  The  phantasm  not  being 
individualised,  the  conditions  for  the  operation  of  chance  are  so  far 
widened.  Still,  there  are  two  strong  evidential  points.  The  coin- 
cidence of  time  seems  to  have  been  precise ; and  the  resemblance 
to  the  supposed  agent  “as  to  size,  dress,  and  appearance”  is  described 
as  exact.  As  for  any  theoretic  difficulty  that  might  be  felt  in  the 
fact  of  non-recognition,  I will  make  at  this  point  only  one  remark. 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

221 

If  we  are  prepared  (as  experiment  has  prepared  us)  to  admit  that 
telepathic  impressions  need  not  even  affect  consciousness  at  all — if 
it  is  possible  for  some  of  them  to  remain  completely  unfelt — it  does 
npt  seem  specially  surprising  that  others  should  issue  on  the  mental 
stage  with  various  degrees  of  distinctness  and  completeness. 

§ 7.  So  much  for  visual  examples.  I will  now  give  an  illustration 
of  externalised  impressions  of  the  auditory  sort.  The  case  differs  in 
another  respect  from  the  foregoing  visual  examples  ; for  though,  as  in 
most  of  them,  the  agent  died,  the  percipient's  experience  preceded 
the  death  by  some  hours ; and  that  being  so,  we  must  clearly  connect 
this  experience  with  the  serious  condition  in  which  her  friend 
actually  was,  not  with  that  in  which  he  was  about  to  be.  The- 
narrative  is  from  Miss  Sandars,  of  Lower  Sough  ton,  Northop> 
Flintshire. 

“ 1884. 

(33)  “ On  the  morning  of  October  27tli,  1879,  being  in  perfect  health 
and  leaving  been  awake  for  some  considerable  time,  I heard  myself  called 
by  my  Christian  name  by  an  anxious  and  suffering  voice,  several  times  in 
succession.  I recognised  the  voice  as  that  of  an  old  friend,  almost  play- 
fellow, but  who  had  not  been  in  my  thoughts ' for  many  weeks,  or  even 
months.  I knew  he  was  witli  his  regiment  in  India,  but  not  that  he  had 
been  ordered  to  the  front,  and  nothing  had  recalled  him  to  my  recollection. 
Within  a few  days  I heard  of  his  deatli  from  cholera  on  the  morning  I 
seemed  to  hear  his  call.  The  impression  was  so  strong  I noted  the  date* 
and  fact  in  my  diary  before  breakfast. 

“A.  E.  Sandars.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Sandars  says  : — 

“ I was  never  conscious  of  any  other  auditoiy  hallucination  whatever. 
I do  not  think  I mentioned  the  subject  to  any  one,  as  I believe  we  had 
friends  with  us.  I still  have  my  diary  preserved.” 

[The  present  writer  has  seen  the  page  of  the  diary,  and  the  reference- 
to  the  strange  experience,  under  the  date  of  Monday,  October  27th,  1879.) 

We  find  from  the  East  India  Service  Register  for  January,  1880,. 
that  the  death  of  Captain  John  B.,  Native  Infantry  (Bombay  Division),, 
took  place  on  October  27th,  1879,  at  Jhelum.  (This  is  the  gentleman, 
mentioned  by  Miss  Sandars;  the  “Major” in  her  account  is  a mistake.) 
The  Times  obituary  of  November  4th,  1879,  mentions  that  the  death  was. 
due  to  cholera. 

Miss  Sandars  was  requested  to  find  out  the  exact  hour  of  the  death. 
She  learns  that  it  took  place  at  10  p.m.  (about  5 p.m.  in  England)* 
She  adds : “ So  that  would  not  make  the  time  agree  with  the  hour  of 
hearing  his  call.  The  cry  may  have  come,  however,  when  the  illness 
began  first.” 

222 

SPECIMENS  OF  TIIE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

In  the  last-quoted  visual  example,  the  figure  seen  was  un- 
recognised. I will  now  give  a parallel  auditory  case,  where  the 
sound  heard  by  the  percipient  suggested  at  the  moment  no 
particular  person.  The  account  is  from  a gentleman  of  good  position, 
whom  I must  term  Mr.  A.  Z.  He  has  given  us  the  full  names  of 
all  the  persons  concerned,  but  is  unwilling  that  they  should  be 
published  on  account  of  the  painful  character  of  the  event  recorded. 

“ May,  1885. 

(34)  “ Tn  1876,  1 was  living  in  a small  agricultural  parish  in  the  East 
of  England,  one  of  my  neighbours  at  the  time  being  a young  man,  S.  B.,1 
who  had  recently  come  into  the  occupation  of  a large  farm  in  the  place. 
Pending  the  alteration  of  his  house  he  lodged  and  boarded  with  his  groom 
sit  the  other  end  of  the  village  furthest  removed  from  my  own  residence, 
which  was  half  a mile  distant  and  separated  by  many  houses,  gardens,  a 
plantation,  and  farm  buildings.  He  was  fond  of  field  sports  and  spent 
much  of  his  spare  time  during  the  season  in  hunting.  He  was  not  a 
personal  friend  of  mine,  only  an  acquaintance,  and  I felt  no  interest  in 
him  except  as  a tenant  on  the  estate.  I have  asked  him  occasionally  to 
my  house,  as  a matter  of  civility,  but  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  was 
never  inside  bis  lodging*. 

“ One  afternoon  in  March,  1876,  when  leaving,  along  with  my  wife, 
■our  railway  station  to  walk  home,  l was  accosted  by  S.  B.  ; he  accom- 
panied us  as  far  as  my  front  gate,  where  he  kept  us  in  conversation  for 
some  time,  but  on  no  special  subject.  I may  now  state  that  the  distance 
from  this  gate,  going  along  the  carriage  drive,  to  the  dining  and  breakfast- 
room  windows  is  about  60  yards  ; both  the  windows  of  these  rooms  face  the 
north-east  and  are  parallel  with  the  carriage  drive.  On  S.  B.  taking  leave 
•of  us  my  wife  remarked,  ‘Young  B.  evidently  wished  to  be  asked  in,  but 
I thought  you  would  not  care  to  be  troubled  with  him/  Subsequently — 
about  hnlf-an-hour  later  1 again  met  him,  and,  as  T was  then  on  my  way 
to  look  at  some  work  at  a distant  part  of  the  estate,  asked  him  to  walk 
with  me,  which  he  did.  His  conversation  was  of  the  ordinary  character; 
if  anything,  he  seemed  somewhat  depressed  at  the  bad  times  and  the  low 
prices  of  farming  produce.  I remember  he  asked  me  to  give  him 
some  wire  rope  to  make  a fence  on  his  farm,  which  I consented  * to  do. 
Returning  from  our  walk,  and  on  entering  the  village,  1 pulled  up  at  the 
cross-roads  to  say  good  evening,  the  road  to  his  lodgings  taking  him  at 
right  angles  to  mine.  I was  surprised  to  hear  him  say,  ‘Come  and  smoke 
a cigar  with  me  to-night.7  To  which  I replied,  ‘I  cannot  very  well,  I am 
engaged  this  evening/  ‘ Do  come/  he  said.  ‘ No/  I replied,  ‘I  will  look 
in  another  evening/  And  with  this  we  parted.  We  had  separated  about 
40  yards  when  he  turned  around  and  exclaimed,  ‘Then  if  you  will  not 
come,  good-bye/  This  was  the  last  time  I saw  him  alive. 

“ T spent  the  evening  in  my  dining-room  in  writing,  and  for  some  hours 
T may  say  that  probably  no  thought  of  young  B.  passed  through  my  mind. 
The  night  was  bright  and  clear,  full  or  nearly  full  moon,  still,  and. without 

1 These  are  not  the  right  initials  of  the  name. 

V.] 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

22S 

wind.  8ince  I had  come  in  slight  snow  had  fallen,  just  sufficient  to  make 
the  ground  show  white. 

“ At  about  5 minutes  to  10  o’clock  I got  up  and  left  the  room,  taking 
up  a lamp  from  the  hall  table  and  replacing  it  on  a small  table  standing  in 
recess  of  $he  window  in  the  breakfast-room.  The  curtains  were  not 
drawn  across  the  window.  I had  just  taken  down  from  the  nearest  book- 
case a volume  of  4 Macgillivray’s  British  Birds  ’ for  reference,  and  was  in 
the  act  of  reading  the  passage,  the  book  held  close  to  the  lamp,  and  my 
shoulder  touching  the  window  shutter,  and  in  a position  in  which  almost 
the  slightest  outside  sound  would  be  heard,  when  I distinctly  heard  the 
front  gate  opened  and  shut  again  with  a clap,  and  footsteps  advancing  at 
a run  up  the  drive ; when  opposite  the  window  the  steps  changed  from 
sharp  and  distinct  on  gravel  to  dull  and  less  clear  on  the  grass  slip  below 
the  window,  and  at  the  same  time  I was  conscious  that  someone  or  some- 
thing stood  close  to  me  outside,  only  the  thin  shutter  and  a sheet  of  glass 
dividing  us.  1 could  hear  the  quick  panting  laboured  breathing  of  the 
messenger,  or  whatever  it  was,  as  if  trying  to  recover  breath  before 
speaking.  Had  lie  been  attracted  by  the  light  through  the  shutter? 
Suddenly,  like  a gunshot,  inside,  outside,  and  all  around,  there  broke  out 
the  most  appalling  shriek- -a  prolonged  wail  of  horror,  which  seemed  to 
freeze  the  blood.  It  was  not  a single  shriek,  but  more  prolonged,  com- 
mencing in  a high  key,  and  then  lfes  and  less,  wailing  away  towards  the 
north,  and  becoming  weaker  and  weaker  as  it  receded  in  sobbing  pulsations 
of  intense  agony.  Of  my  fright  and  horror  I can  say  nothing — increased 
tenfold  when  I walked  into  the  dining-room  and  found  my  wife  sitting  quietly 
at  her  woi'k  close  to  the  window,  in  the  same  line  and  distant  only  10  or 
12  feet  from  the  corresponding  window  in  the  breakfast-room.  She  had 
heard  nothing.  I could  see  that  at  once ; and  from  the  position  in  which 
she  was  sitting  I knew  she  could  not  have  failed  to  hear  any  noise  outside 
and  any  footstep  on  the  gravel.  Perceiving  I was  alarmed  about  some- 
thing, she  asked,  4 What  is  the  matter? ’ 4 Only  someone  outside,’  I said. 

4 Then  why  do  you  not  go  out  and  see  ? You  always  do  when  you  hear 
any  unusual  noise.’  T said,  4 There  is  something  so  queer  and  dreadful 
about  the  noise.  I dare  not  face  it.  It  must  have  been  the  Banshee 
shrieking.’ 

44  Young  S.  B.,  on  leaving  me,  went  home  to  his  lodgings.  He  spent 
most  of  .the  evening  on  the  sofa,  reading  one  of  Whyte  Melville’s  novels. 
He  saw  his  groom  at  9 o’clock  and  gave  him  orders  for  the  following  day. 
The  groom  and  his  wife,  who  were  the  only  people  in  the  house  besides 
S.  B.,  then  went  to  bed. 

44  At  the  inquest  the  groom  stated  that  when  about  falling  asleep,  lie 
was  suddenly  aroused  by  a shriek,  and  on  running  into  his  masters  room 
found  him  expiring  on  the  floor.  It  appeared  that  young  B.  had  undressed 
upstairs,  and  then  came  down  to  his  sitting-  room  in  trousers  and  night- 
shirt, had  poured  out  half-a-glass  of  water,  into  which  he  emptied  a small 
bottle  of  prussic  acid  (procured  that  morning  under  the  plea  of  poisoning 
a dog,  which  he  did  not  possess).  He  walked  upstairs,  and  on  entering 
his  room  drank  off  the  glass,  and  with  a scream  fell  dead  on  the  floor.  All 
this  happened,  as  near  as  I can  ascertain,  at  the  exact  time  when  I had 
been  so  much  alarmed  at  my  own  house.  It  is  utterly  impossible  that  any 
sound  short  of  a cannon  shot  could  have  reached  me  from  B.’s  lodgings, 

224  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

through  closed  windows  and  doors,  and  the  many  intervening  obstacles  of 
houses  and  gardens,  farmsteads  and  plantations,  <fcc. 

“ Having  to  leave  home  by  the  early  train,  1 was  out  very  soon  on  the 
following  morning,  and  on  going  to  examine  the  ground  beneath  the 
window  found  no  footsteps  on  grass  or  drive,  still  covered  wityi  the  slight 
sprinkling  of  snow  which  had  fallen  on  the  previous  evening. 

“The  whole  thing  had  been  a dream  of  the  moment— an  imagination 
call  it  what  you  will ; I simply  state  these  facts  as  they  occurred,  without 
attempting  any  explanation,  which,  indeed,  I am  totally  unable  (to  give 
The  entire  incident  is  a mystery,  and  will  ever  remain  a mystery  to  me.  I 
did  not  hear  the  particulars  of  the  tragedy  till  the  following  afternoon, 
having  left  home  by  an  early  train.  The  motive  of  suicide  was  said  to  be 
a love  affair.” 

In  a subsequent  letter  dated  June  12th,  1885,  Mr.  A.  Z.  says  : — 

“ The  suicide  took  place  in  this  parish  on  Thursday  night,  March  9th, 
1876,  at  or  about  10  p.m.  The  inquest  was  held  on  Saturday,  11th,  by 

, the  then  coroner.  He  has  been  dead  some  years,  or  I might  perhaps 

have  been  able  to  obtain  a copy  of  his  notes  then  taken.  You  will 

probably  find  some  notice  of  the  inquest  in  the of  March  17th.  I 

did  not  myself  hear  any  particulars  of  the  event  till  my  return  home  on 
Friday  afternoon,  17  hours  afterwards.  The  slight  snow  fell  about  8 o’clock 
— not  later . After  this  the  night  was  bright  and  fine,  and  very  still. 
There  was  also  a rather  sharp  frost.  I have  evidence  of  all  this  to  satisfy 
any  lawyer. 

“ 1 went  early  the  next  morning  under  the  window  to  look  for 
footsteps  just  before  leaving  home  for  the  day.  Perhaps  it  is  not  quite 
correct  to  call  it  snow  ; it  was  small  frozen  sleet  and  hail,  and  the  grass, 
blades  just  peeped  through,  but  there  was  quite  enough  to  have  shown  any 
steps  had  there  been  any. 

“ I was  not  myself  at  the  inquest,  so  in  that  case  only  speak  from 
hearsay.  In  my  narrative  I say  the  groom  was  awoke  by  ‘ a shriek.’  I 
have  asked  the  jnan  [name  given],  and  cross-questioned  him  closely  on  this, 
point ; and  it  is  more  correct  to  say  by  i a series  of  noises  ending  in  a 
crash  ’ or  ‘ heavy  fall.’  This  is  most  probably  correct,  as  the  son  of  the 
tenant  [name  given],  living  in  the  next  house,  was  aroused  by  the  same 
sort  of  sound  coming  through  the  wall  of  the  house  into  the  adjoining 
bedroom  .in  which  he  was  sleeping. 

“ I do  not,  however,  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  any  material  noises* 
heard  in  that  house  or  the  next  had  any  connection  with  the  peculiar  noises* 
and  scream  which  frightened  me  so  much,  as  anyone  knowing  the  locality 
must  admit  at  once  the  impossibility  of  such  sounds  travelling  under  any 
conditions  through  intervening  obstacles.  I only  say  that  the  scene  enacted 
in  the  one  was  coincident  with  my  alarm  and  the  phenomena  attending  it  in 
the  other. 

“ I find  by  reference  to  the  book  of  [name  given],  chemist,  of , 

that  the  poison  was  purchased  by  young  8.  B.,  on  March  8th.  I enclose  a 
note  from  Mrs.  A.  Z , according  to  your  request.” 

The  enclosed  note,  signed  by  Mrs.  A.  Z.,  also  dated  June  12th,  1885, 
is  as  follows  : — 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY 

225 

“ I am  able  to  testify  that  on  the  night  of  March  9th,  1876,  about  10 
o’clock,  my  husband,  who  had  gone  into  the  adjoining  room  to  consult  a 
book,  was  greatly  alarmed  by  sounds  which  he  heard,  and  described  as  the 
gate  clapping,  footsteps  on  the  drive  and  grass,  and  heavy  breathing  close 
to  the  window — then  a fearful  screaming. 

“ I did  not  hear  anything.  He  did  not  go  to  look  round  tlie  house,  as 
lie  would  have  done  at  any  other  time,  and  when  I afterwards  asked  liirn 
why  he  did  not  go  out,  he  replied,  * Because  I felt  I could  not.’  On  going 
to  bed  he  took  his  gun  upstairs ; and  when  I asked  him  why,  said, 
i Because  there  must  be  someone  about/ 

“ He  left  home  early  in  the  morning,  and  did  not  hear  of  the  suicide  of 
Mr.  S.  B.  until  the  afternoon  of  that  day.” 

, An  article  which  we  have  seen  in  a local  newspaper,  describing . the 
suicide  and  inquest,  confirms  the  above  account  of  them. 

Asked  if  he  had  had  any  similar  affections  which  had  not 
corresponded  with  reality,  Mr.  A.  Z.  replied  in  the  negative. 

The  criticism  made  on  Mr.  Bee’s  case  will  of  course  apply  again 
here;  the  percipient’s  failure  to  connect  his  impression  with  the 
agent  is,  jwo  tanto,  an  evidential  defect.  But  the  fact  remains  that 
he  received  an  impression  of  a vividly  distressful  and  horrible  kind — 
of  a type,  too,  rarely  met  with  as  a purely  subjective  hallucination 
among  sane  and  healthy  persons1 — at  the  very  time  that  his 
companion  of  a few  hours  back  was  in  the  agony  of  a supreme  crisis. 

§ 8.  Telepathic  impressions  of  the  sense  of  touch  are  naturally 
hard  to  establish,  unless  some  other  sense  is  also  affected.  In  the  cases 
in  our  collection,  at  all  events,  a mere  impression  of  touch  has  rarely  or 
never  been  sufficiently  remarkable  or  distinctive  for  purposes  of 
evidence.  The  case,  therefore,  which  I select  to  illustrate  tactile 
impression  is  one  where  the  sense  of  hearing  was  also  concerned. 
And  the  example,  as  it  happens,  will  serve  a double  purpose ; for 
it  will  also  illustrate  the  phenomenon  of  recipvocality , which,  as  I 
have  said,  we  make  the  basis  of  a separate  class  (F).  The 
narrator  is  again  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  of  whose  telepathic 
rapport  with  his  wife  we  have  had  such  striking  experimental  proof, 
and  who  describes  himself  as  “ an  utter  sceptic,  in  the  true  sense  of 
the  word.” 

(35)  “In  March,  1854,  I was  up  at  Oxford,  keeping  my  last  term,  in. 
lodgings.  I was  subject  to  violent  neuralgic ' headaches,  which  alwaya 
culminated  in  sleep.  One  evening,  about  8 p.m.,  I had  an  unusually 
violent  one ; when  it  became  unendurable,  about  9 p.m.,  I went  into 

1 See  Chapter  xi.,  §4. 

Q 

226  SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

my  bedroom,  and  flung  myself,  without  undressing,  on  the  bed,  and  soon 
fell  asleep. 

“ I then  had  a singularly  clear  and  vivid  dream,  all  the  incidents  of 
which  are  still  as  clear  to  my  memory  as  ever.  I dreamed  that  I was 
stopping  with  the  family  of  the  lady  who  subsequently  became  my  wife. 
All  the  younger  ones  had  gone  to  bed,  and  I stopped  chatting  to  the  father 
and  mother,  standing  up  by  the  fireplace.  Presently  I bade  them  good- 
night, took  my  candle,  and  went  oft*  to  bed.  On  arriving  in  the  hall,  I 
perceived  that  my  ji< niece  had  been  detained  downstairs,  and  was  only  then 
near  the  top  of  the  staircase.  I rushed  upstairs,  overtook  her  on  the  top 
step,  and  passed  my  two  arms  round  her  waist,  under  her  arms,  from 
behind.  Although  I was  carrying  my  candle  in  my  left  hand, 
when  I ran  upstairs,  this  did  not,  in  my  dream,  interfere  with  this 
gesture. 

“On  this  I woke,  and  a clock  in  the  house  struck  10  almost  immedi- 
ately afterwards. 

“ So  strong  was  the  impression  of  the  dream  that  I wrote  a detailed 
account  of  it  next  morning  to  in y fiancee. 

“ Crossing  mg  letter , not  in  answer  to  it,  I received  a letter  from  the 
iady  in  question:  ‘Were  you  thinking  about  me,  very  specially,  last 
night,  just  about  10  o'clock?  For,  as  I was  going  upstairs  to  bed,  I 
distinctly  heard  your  footsteps  on  the  stairs,  and  felt  you  put  your 
arms  round  my  waist.' 

“ The  letters  in  question  are  now  destroyed,  but  we  verified  the  state- 
ment made  therein  some  years  later,  when  we  read  over  our  old  letters, 
previous  to  their  destruction,  and  we  found  that  our  personal  recollections 
had  not  varied  in  the  least  degree  therefrom.  The  above  narratives  may, 
therefore,  be  accepted  as  absolutely  accurate.  “P.  H.  Newniiam.” 

Asked  if  his  wife  has  ever  had  any  other  hallucinations,  Mr.  Newnham 
replied,  “ No,  Mrs.  N.  never  had  any  fancy  of  either  myself  or  any  one  else 
being  present  on  any  other  occasion/' 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Newnham's  account  : — 

“June  9th,  1884. 

“ I remember  distinctly  the  circumstance  which  my  husband  has 
described  as  corresponding  with  his  dream.  I was  on  my  way  up  to  bed, 
as  usual,  about  10  o'clock,  and  on  reaching  the  first  landing  T heard 
distinctly  the  footsteps  of  the  gentleman  to  whom  I was  engaged,  quickly 
mounting  the  stairs  after  me,  and  then  I as  plainly  felt  him  put  his  arms 
round  my  waist.  So  strong  an  impression  did  this  make  upon  me  that  I 
wrote  the  very  next  morning  to  the  gentleman,  asking  if  he  had  been 
particularly  thinking  of  me  at  10  o'clock  the  night  before,  and  to  my 
astonishment  I received  (at  the  same  time  that  my  letter  would  reach  him) 
a letter  from  him  describing  his  dream,  in  almost  the  same  words  that 
I had  used  in  describing  my  impression  of  his  presence. 

“M.  Newniiam.” 

[It  is  unfortunate  that  the  actual  letters  cannot  be  put  in  evidence. 
But  Mr.  Newnham's  distinct  statement  that  the  letters  were  ^examined, 
and  the  coincidence  verified,  some  years  after  the  occurrence,  strongly 
confirms  his  own  and  his  wife's  recollections  of  the  original  incident.]  - 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

227 

v.] 

In  this  case  it  would,  no  doubt,  be  possible  to  suppose  that  Mr* 
Newnham  was  the  sole  agent,  and  that  his  normal  dream  was  the 
source  of  his  fiancee’s  abnormal  hallucination.  But  it  is  at 
least  equally  natural  to  suppose  a certain  amount  of 
reciprocal  percipience — a mutual  influence  of  the  two  parties  on  one 
another.  We  shall  meet  with  more  conclusive  examples  of  the 
mutual  effect  further  on ; and  it  need  in  no  way  disturb  our 
conception  of  telepathy.  For  if  once  the  startling  fact  that  As  mind 
can  affect  B’s  at  a distance  be  admitted,  there  seems  no  <1  priori 
reason  for  either  affirming  or  denying  that  the  conditions  of  this  affec- 
tion are  favourable  to  a reverse  telepathic  communication  from  B s 
mind  to  A’s.  Indeed,  if  in  our  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  these 
conditions  any  sort  of  surmise  were  legitimate,  it  might  perhaps 
rather  lean  to  the  probability  of  the  reciprocal  influence ; and  the 
natural  question  might  seem  to  be,  not  why  this  feature  is  present, 
but  why  it  is  so  generally  absent.  Meanwhile  it  is  enough  to  note 
the  type,  and  to  observe  that  the  telepathic  theory,  as  so  far  evolved, 
will  sufficiently  cover  it. 

§ 9.  Finally,  the  class  of  collective  percipience  (G)  may  be  illustrated 
by  an  instance  which  (since  visual  cases  have  preponderated  in  this 
chapter)  I will  again  select  from  the  auditory  group.  It  was  received 
in  the  summer  of  1885,  from  Mr.  John  Done,  of  Stockley  Cottage, 
Stretton. 

(36)  “ My  sister-in-law,  Sarah  Eustance,  of  Stretton,  was  lying  sick 
unto  death,  and  my  wife  was  gone  over  to  there  from  Lowtoji  Chapel  (12 
•or  13  miles  off),  to  see  her  and  tend  her  in  her  last  moments.  And  on  the 
night  before  her  death  (some  12  or  14  hours  before)  I was  sleeping  at 
home  alone,  and  awaking,  heard  a voice  distinctly  call  me.  Thinking  it 
was  my  niece,  Rosanna,  the  only  other  occupant  of  the  house,  who  might 
be  sick  or  in  trouble,  I went  to  her  room  and  found  her  awake  and 
nervous.  I asked  her  whether  she  had  called  me.  She  answered ‘No; 
but  something  awoke  me,  when  I heard  someone  calling ! ’ 

“ On  my  wife  returning  home  after  her  sister's  death,  she  told  me  how 
•anxious  her  sister  had  been  to  see  me,  ‘ craving  for  me  to  be  sent  for,* 
and  saying  ‘ Oh,  how  I want  to  see  Done  once  more ! ’ and  soon  after 
became  speechless.  But  the  curious  part  was  that  about  the  same  time 
she  was  ‘craving,'  I and  my  niece  heard  the  call. 

“John  Done.” 

In  a subsequent  letter  Mr.  Done  writes : — 

“In  answer  to  your  queries  respecting  the  voice  or  call  that  I heard 
on  the  night  of  July  2nd,  1866,  I must  explain  that  there  was  a strong 
sympathy  and  affection  between  myself  and  my  sister-in-law,  of  pure 
brotherly  and  sisterly  love  ; and  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  me 

Q 2 

228 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES  [chap. 

by  the  title  of  ‘Uncle  Done/  in  the  manner  of  a husband  calling  his  wife 
€ mother ’ when  there  are  children,  as  in  this  case.  Hence  the  call  being 
* Uncle,  uncle,  uncle!’  leading  me  to  think  that  it  was  my  niece' (the  only 
other  occupant  of  the  house  that  Sunday  night)  calling  to  me. 

“ Copy  of  funeral  card  : ‘ In  remembrance  of  the  late  Sarah  Eustanee, 
who  died  July  3rd,  1866,  aged  45  years,  and  was  this  day  interred  at 
Stretton  Church,  July  6th,  1866/ 

“ My  wife,  who  went  from  Lowton  that  particular  Sunday  to  see  her 
sister,  will  testify  that  as  she  attended  upon  her  (after  the  departure  of 
the  minister),  during  the  night  she  was  wishing  and  craving  to  see  me, 
repeatedly  saying,  ‘ Oh,  I wish  I could  see  Uncle  Done  and  Rosie  once 
more  before  I go  ! ’ and  soon  after  then  she  became  unconscious,  or  at 
least  ceased  speaking,  and  died  the  next  day;  of  which  fact  I was  not  aware 
until  niy  wife  returned  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  J uly. 

u I hope  my  niece  will  answer  for  mo  ; however,  I may  state  that  she 
reminds  me  that  she  thought  I was  calling  her  and  was  coming  to  me, 
when  she  met  me  in  the  passage  or  landing,  and  1 asked  her  if  she  called  me. 

“ I do  not  remember  ever  hearing  a voice  or  call  besides  the  above  case.”’ 

On  August  7th,  1885,  Mr.  Done  writes: — 

“ My  wife  being  sick  and  weak  of  body,  dictates  the  following  state- 
ment to  me  : — 

“ I,  Elizabeth  Done,  wife  of  John  Done,  and  aunt  to  Rosanna  Done 
(now  Sewill),  testify  that,  on  the  2nd  of  July,  1866,  I was  attending 
upon  my  dying  sister,  Sarah  Eustance,  at  Stretton,  12  miles  from  my  homo 
at  Lowton  Chapel,  Newton  le  Willows  ; when  during  the  night  previous  to 
her  death,  she  craved  for  me  to  send  for  my  husband  and  niece,  as  she 
wished  to  see  them  once  more  before  she  departed  hence,  saying  often  * Oh, 
I wish  Done  and  Rosie  were  here.  Oh,  I do  long  to  see  Uncle  Done. 
Soon  after  she  became  speechless  and  seemingly  unconscious,  and  died 
some  time  during  the  day  following.  « Elizabeth  Done.” 

Mr.  Done  adds  : — 

“ In  thinking,  conversing,  and  writing  about  the  strange  occurrence, 
several  incidents  have  come  to  my  mind,  one  of  which  is  that,  feeling 
unsettled  in  my  mind  during  the  day  after  having  heard  the  voice  calling- 
me,  and  feeling  a piesentiment  that  my  dear  sister-in-law  was  dead,  I, 
towards  evening,  set  oli‘  to  meet  a train  at  Newton  Bridge,  which  I believed 
she  would  come  by,  returning  home,  if  her  sister  was  dead  as  I expected \ 
N.B.  There  was  an  understanding  that  she  was  to  stay  at  Stretton  to 
attend  upon  Mrs.  Eustance  until  her  demise  or  convalescence. 

“ I met  my  wife  some  few  hundred  yards  from  the  station  and  could 
see  by  her  countenance  that  my  surmises  were  correct.  She  then  told  me 
the  particulars  of  her  sister’s  death,  how  she  longed  to  see  me  and  Rosanna. 
I then  told  her  of  our  being  called  by  a voice  resembling  hers  some  time 
in  the  night  previous , when  she  (my  wife)  said  she  (Mrs.  Eustance)  often 
repeated  our  names  during  the  night  before  becoming  unconscious/’ 

The  niece  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

‘"11,  Smithdown  Lane,  Paddington,  Liverpool. 

“August  21st,  1885. 

“ At  my  uncle’s  and  your  request  I write  to  confirm  the  statement  of 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

229 

T-] 

uncle  respecting  the  voice  I heard,  as  follows : I was  awakened  suddenly 
without  apparent  cause,  and  heard  a voice  call  me  distinctly,  thus  : ‘ Rosy, 
Rosy,  Rosy  I ’ Thinking  it  was  my  uncle  calling,  I rose  and  went  out  of 
jny  room,  and  met  my  uncle  coming  to  see  if  I was  calling  him.  We  were 
the  only  occupants  of  the  house  that  night,  aunt  being  away  attending 
upon  her  sister.  The  night  I was  called  was  between  2nd  and  3rd  of  July, 
1866.  I could  not  say  the  time  I was  called,  but  I know  it  was  the  break 
of  day.  I never  was  called  before  nor  since. 

“ Rosanna  Sewill.” 

The  percipients  in  this  case  may  perhaps  have  been  in  a some- 
what anxious  and  highly-wrought  state.  Now  that  is  a condition 
Avhich — as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel — tends  occasionally  to  produce 
purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  senses.  It  is  true  that  the 
impression  of  a call  which  was  imagined  to  be  that  of  a healthy  person 
close  at  hand,  and  was  in  no  way  suggestive  of  the  dying  woman, 
does  not  seem  a likely  form  for  subjective  hallucination  due  to 
anxiety  about  her  to  take ; still,  the  presence  of  the  anxiety  would  have 
prevented  us  from  including  such  a case  in  our  evidence,  had  only  a 
single  person  been  impressed.  But  it  must  be  admitted  as  a highly 
improbable  accident  that  two  startling  impressions,  so  similar  in 
character  and  each  unique  in  the  life  of  the  person  who  experienced 
it,  should  have  so  exactly  coincided. 

§ 10.  The  above  may  serve  as  examples  of  the  several  groups, 
classified  with  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  percipient's  impression. 
But  it  will  be  seen  that  the  agent  has  also  been  exhibited  in  a great 
variety  of  conditions — in  normal  waking  health,  in  apparently  dream- 
less sleep  (pp.  103-9),  in  dream,  in  physical  pain,  in  a swoon,  in  the 
excitement  of  danger,  in  dangerous  illness,  and  in  articulo  VLOrtis, 
the  death  being  in  one  case  accidental  and  instantaneous,  in  another 
the  result  of  a sudden  seizure,  and  in  others  the  conclusion  of  a 
prolonged  illness.  And  amid  this  variety  the  reader  will,  no  doubt, 
have  been  struck  by  the  large  proportion  of  death  cases — a proportion 
which  duly  represents  their  general  preponderance  among  alleged 
cases  of  spontaneous  telepathy.  They  constitute  about  half  of  our 
whole  collection.  Now  this  fact  raises  a question  with  respect  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  which  may  be  conveniently 
noticed  at  once;  since  it  bears  an  equal  relation  to  nearly  all  the 
chapters^  that  follow,  while  such  answer  as  I can  give  to  it  depends 
to  some  extent  on,  what  has  preceded. 

We  are,  of  course,  accustomed  to  regard  death  as  a completely 

230 

SPECIMENS  OF  THE  VARIOUS  TYPES 

[chap. 

unique  awl  incomparably  important  event ; and  it  might  thus  seem, 
on  a superficial  glance,  that  if  spontaneous  telepathy  is  possible,  and 
the  conditions  and  occasions  of  its  occurrence  are  in  question,  no 
more  likely  occasion  than  death  could  be  suggested.  But  on  closer 
consideration,  we  are  reminded  that  the  actual  psychical  condition 
that  immediately  precedes  death  often  does  not  seem  to  be  specially 
or  at  all  remarkable,  still  less  unique;  and  that  it  is  this  actual 
psychical  condition — while  it  lasts,  and  not  alter  it  has  ceased — that 
veally  concerns  us  hen'.  Our  subject  is  phantasms  of  the  liviny : 
we  seek  the  conditions  of  the  telepathic  impulse  on  the  hither  side  of 
the  dividing  line,  in  the  closing  passage  of  life ; not  in  that  huge 
negative  fact — the  apparent  cessation  or  absence  of  life — on  which 
the  common  idea  of  death  and  of  its  momentous  importance  is 
based.  And  tlv  closing  passage  of  life,  in  some  of  the  cases  above 
quoted,  and  in  many  others  that  are  to  follow,  was,  to  all  appearance, 
one  of  more  or  less  complete  lethargy  ; a state  which  (on  its  psychical 
side  at  any  rate)  seems  in  no  way  distinguishable  from  one  through 
which  the  agent  has  passed  on  numerous  previous  occasions — that  of 
deep  sleep.  Nor  are  the  cases  which  issue  in  death  the  only  ones  to 
which  this  remark  applies:  in  the  more  remarkable  cases  of  Chap.  III., 
the  agent  was  actually  in  deep  sleep  ; Mrs.  Bettany’s  mother  was  in 
a swoon  (p.  194) ; and  other  similar  instances  will  meet  us.  Here, 
then,  there  appears  to  be  a real  difficulty.  For  how  can  we  attribute- 
an  extraordinary  exercise  of  psychical  energy  to  a state  which  on  its 
psychical  side  is  quite  ordinary,  and  in  which  psychical  and  physical 
energies  alike  seem  reduced  to  their  lowest  limits  ? 

It  may,  no  doubt,  be  replied  that  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that 
the  psychical  condition  is  ordinary  ; that  the  nervous  condition  in  the 
lethargy  of  approaching  death,  and  even  in  a fainting-fit,  may  diffei- 
greatly  from  that  of  normal  sleep,  and  that  this  difference  may  be 
somehow  represented  on  the  psychical  side,  even  though  the  ostensible 
psychical  condition  is  approximately  nil.  But  a completer  answer 
may  possibly  be  found  in  some  further  development  of  the  idea  of 
the  “ unconscious  intelligence  ” which  was  mentioned  above  (pp.69,70). 
We  there  noted  stray  manifestations  of  psychical  action  that  seemed, 
unconnected  with  the  more  or  less  coherent  stream  of  experience  which 
we  recognise  as  a self;  and  a probable  relation  of  these  was  pointed 
out  to  those  curious  cases  of  “ double  consciousness,”  in  which  two  more 
or  less  coherent  streams  of  experience  replace  one  another  by  turns, 
and  the  same  person  seems  to  have  two  selves.  Many  other  cognate 

V.] 

OF  SPONTANEOUS  TELEPATHY. 

231 

facts  might  be  mentioned,  which  enable  us  to  generalise  to  some 
extent  the  conceptions  suggested  by  the  more  prominent  instances. 
But  since  for  present  purposes  the  topic  only  concerns  us  at  the  point 
where  it  comes  into  contact  with  telepathy,  I must  ask  the  reader 
to  seek  those  further  facts  elsewhere ; and  to  accept  here  the 
statement  that  the  more  these  little-known  paths  of  psychology 
are  explored,  the  more  difficult  will  it  appear  to  round  off  the  idea  of 
personality,  or  to  measure  human  existence  by  the  limits  of  the 
phenomenal  self.1  Now  the  very  nature  of  this  difficulty  cannot  but 
suggest  a deeper  solution  than  the  mere  connection  of  various 
streams  of  psychic  life  with  a single  organism.  It  suggests  the 
hypothesis  that  a single  individuality  may  have  its  psychical  being, 
so  to  speak,  on  different  planes ; that  the  stray  fragments  of 
“ unconscious  intelligence,”  and  the  alternating  selves  of  “ double 
consciousness,”  belong  really  to  a more  fundamental  unity,  which 
finds  in  what  we  call  life  very  imperfect  conditions  of  manifestation ; 
and  that  the  self  which  ordinary  men  habitually  regard  as  their 
proper  individuality  may  after  all  be  only  a partial  emergence. 
And  this  hypothesis  would  readily  embrace  and  explain  the  special 
telepathic  fact  in  question ; while  itself  drawing  from  that  fact  a 
fresh  support.  By  its  aid  we  can  at  once  picture  to  ourselves  how  it 
should  be  that  the  near  approach  of  death  is  a condition  excep- 
tionally favourable  to  telepathic  action,  even  though  vital  faculties 
seem  all  but  withdrawn,  and  the  familiar  self  has  lapsed  to  the  very 
threshold  of  consciousness.  For  to  the  hidden  and  completer  self 
the  imminence  of  the  great  change  may  be  apparent  in  its  full  and 
unique  impressiveness ; nay,  death  itself  may  be  recognised,  for 
aught  we  can  tell,  not  as  a cessation  but  as  a liberation  of  energy. 
But  this  line  of  thought,  though  worth  pointing  out  as  that  along 
which  the  full  account  of  certain  phenomena  of  telepathy  may  in 
time  be  sought,  is  not  one  that  I can  here  pursue. 

1 In  addition  to  Dr.  Azam’s  well-known  case  of  Felida,  I may  refer  specially  to 
Professor  Verriest’s  “ Observation  de  trois  existences  cdr^brales  distinctes  chez  le 
nieme  sujet,”  in  the  Bulletin  de  V Academic  Royale  de  Medicine  de  Belgique,  3rd  Series, 

Vol,  xyi. ; the  case  of  Louis  V , with  his  six  different  personalities,  reported 

by  various  French  observers  (Camuset,  Annalcs  Medicopsychologiqucs,  1882,  p.  75;  Jules 
voisin,  Archives  de  Neurologic,  September,  1885 ; Bourru  and Burot,  Revue  Philosophique, 
October,  1885,  and  Archives  de  Neurologic,  November,  1885) ; and  the  hypnotic  experi- 
ments described  by  Mr.  Myers,  in  his  paper  on  “ Human  Personality,”  Proceedings  or  the 
S.P.R.,  Part  x.  A theory  of  the  transcendental  self,  in  its  relation  to  various  abnormal 
states,  has  been  worked  out  at  length  in  Du  Prel’s  Philosophic  der  Mystik  (Leipzig,  1885). 

[chap. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

§ 1.  The  advanced-guard  of  cases  in  the  last  chapter  has  afforded  a' 
glance  at  the  whole  range  of  the  phenomena.  But  we  must  now 
start  on  a methodical  plan,  and  take  the  narratives  in  groups  according 
to  their  subject-matter.  The  groups  will  follow  the  same  order  as  the 
preceding  specimens ; but  though  theoretically  the  best,  this  order 
has  the  practical  disadvantage  that  it  puts  the  weakest  classes 
first.  Of  the  two  great  divisions,  the  externalised  impressions  are  by 
far  the  most  remarkable  in  themselves,  and  by  far  the  most  conclusive 
as  evidence ; but  as  they  constitute  the  extreme  examples  of 
telepathic  action,  they  are  logically  led  up  to  through  the 
'non-external ised  group,  which  presents  more  obvious  analogies  with 
the  experimental  basis  oi  our  inquiry.  I must,  therefore,  beg  the 
reader  who  may  be  disappointed  by  much  of  the  evidence  in  this  and 
the  two  following  chapters,  to  note  that  it  is  no  way  presented  as 
conclusive ; and  that  though  it  is  well  worthy  of  attention  if  the  case 
for  spontaneous  telepathy  is  once  made  out,  it  is  only  when  we  come 
to  the  borderland  examples  of  Chap.  IX.  that  the  strength  of  the  case 
begins  rapidly  to  accumulate. 

The  great  point  which  connects  many  of  the  more  inward  impres- 
sions of  spontaneous  telepathy  with  the  experimental  cases  is  this — 
that  what  enters  the  percipient’s  mind  is  the  exact  reproduction  of 
the  agent’s  thought  at  the  moment.  It  is  to  this  class  of  direct 
transferences,  especially  between  persons  who  are  in  close  association, 
with  one  another,  that  popular  belief  most  readily  inclines — as  a rule, 
without  any  sufficient  grounds.  Nothing  is  commoner  than  to  hear 
instances  of  sympathetic  flashes  between  members  of  the  same 
household — cases  where  one  person  suddenly  makes  the  very  remark 
that  another  was  about  to  make — adduced  as  evidence  of  some  sort  of 
supersensuous  communication.  But  it  is  tolerably  evident  that  a 

VI.] 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS. 

233 

number  of  such  “ odd  coincidences  ” are  sure  to  occur  in  a perfectly 
normal  way.  Minds  which  are  in  habitual  contact  with  one  another 
will  constantly  react  in  the  same  way,  even  to  the  most  trifling 
influences  of  the  moment ; and  the  sudden  word  which  proves  them 
to  have  done  so  would  have  nothing  startling  in  it,  if  the  whole  train 
of  association  that  led  up  to  it  could  be  exposed  to  view.  Moreover, 
physical  signs  which  would  be  imperceptible  to  a stranger,  may  be 
easily  and  hall-automatically  interpreted  by  a familiar  associate ; and 
thus  what  looks  sometimes  like  divination  may  perfectly  well  be  due 
to  unconscious  inference.  It  is  very  rarely  that  conditions  of  this  sort 
can  be  with  certainty  excluded.  Still,  experimental  thought-trans- 
ference would  certainly  prepare  us  to  encounter  the  phenomenon 
occasionally  in  ordinary  social  and  domestic  life ; and  one  or  two 
examples  may  be  given  which  have  a strong  prinut  facie  air  of 
being  genuine  specimens. 

One  frequent  form  of  the  alleged  transferences  is  that  of  tunes. 
It  is  matter  of  very  common  observation  that  one  person  begins 
humming  the  very  tune  that  is  running  in  some  one  else’s  head. 
This  admits,  as  a rule,  of  a perfectly  simple  explanation.  It  is  easy 
to  suppose  that  some  special  tune  has  been  a good  deal  “ in  the  air  ” 
of  a house,  half  unconsciously  hummed  or  whistled,  as  tunes  often, 
are,  and  that  thus  the  coincidence  is  an  accident  which  may  very 
readily  occur.  At  the  same  time,  if  the  telepathic  faculty  exists, 
tunes  should  apparently  be  a form  of  “ thought  ” well  calculated  for 
transference:  With  many  people  the  imagining  of  a tune  is  the  sort 
of  idea  which  comes  nearest  to  the  vividness  of  actual  sensation. 
And  moreover,  it  contains  not  only  the  representation  of  sensory 
experience,  but  also  a distinct  motor  element — an  impulse  to 
reproduction.  A person  with  a musical  ear  can  silently  reproduce  a 
tune,  with  such  an  inward  force  as  almost  produces  the  illusion  of 
driving  it  into  objective  existence.  Such  an  incident  as  the  following, 
therefore,  where  there  is  no  question  of  a family  knowledge  of  the 
tune,  or  of  its  having  been  in  any  way  in  the  air,  is  of  decided 
interest ; though,  of  course,  the  actual  force  of  any  single  case  of  the 
sort  is  very  small.1  We  received  the  account  from  Sir  Lepel  Griffin, 
K.C.S.I. 

1 The  phenomenon  is  not  without  experimental  support.  Just  a century  agp, 
Puys^gur  wrote,  of  one  of  his  “ magnetised  ” subjects:  “ Je  le  for9ais  h se  donner 
beaucoup  de  mouvement  sur  sa  chaise,  comme  pour  danser  sur  un  air,  qu  *en  chantant 
metUalement  je  lui  faisais  r^p^ter  tout  haut.”  (Memoires,  <fcc.,  du  Magnttisme  Animal » 
3rd  edition,  p.  22.  See  also  l)r.  Macario,  Du  Sommeil , de»  JUvest  et  du  Somnambutisme „ 

234 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

44  63a,  Pall  Mall. 

“ February  14th,  1884. 

(37)  “Colonel  Lyttleton  Annesley,  Commanding  Officer  of  the  lltli 
Hussars,  was  staying  in  my  house  some  time  ago,  and  one  afternoon, 
having  nothing  to  do,  we  wandered  into  a large  unoccupied  room,  given 
up  to  lumber  and  packing  cases.  Colonel  A.  was  at  one  end  of  this  long 
room  reading,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  while  I opened  a box,  long 
forgotten,  to  see  what  it  contained.  I took  out  a number  of  papers  and 
old  music,  which  I was  turning  over  in  my  hand,  when  I came  across  a 
song  in  which  I,  years  before,  had  been  accustomed  to  take  a part,  4 Dai 
tuo  stellato  soglio,’  out  of  4 Mose  in  Egitto/  if  I remember  right.  As  I 
looked  at  this  old  song,  Colonel  A.,  who  had  been  paying  no  attention 
whatever  to  my  proceedings,  began  to  hum  4 Dal  tuo  stellato  soglio/  In 
much  astonishment  I asked  him  why  he  was  singing  that  particular  air. 
He  did  not  know.  He  did  not  remember  to  have  sung  it  before  ; indeed 
I have  not  ever  heard  Colonel  A.  sing,  though  lie  is  exceedingly  fond  of 
music.  1 told  him  that  I was  holding  the  very  song  in  my  hand.  He 
was  as  much  astonished  as  I had  been,  and  had  no  knowledge  that  I had 
any  music  in  my  hand  at  ail.  I had  not  spoken  to  him,  nor  had  I 
hummed  the  air,  or  given  him  any  sign  that  I was  looking  over  music. 
The  incident  is  curious,  for  it  is  outside  all  explanation  on  the  theory  of 
coincidence.” 

Later,  Sir  L.  Griffin  wrote  : — 

44  28th  April,  1884. 

44 1 promised  to  write  to  you  when  I received  a reply  front  General 
Lyttleton  Annesley,  to  whom  I had  written,  in  the  same  words  I had 
used  to  you,  the  little  incident  which  struck  you  as  noteworthy.  I 
may  mention  that  it  had  never  formed  the  subject  of  conversation  or 
correspondence  between  us  from  the  day  that  it  happened  until  now. 
He  says  : 4 1 perfectly  recollect  the  incident  you  refer  to  about  the 
song  44  Dal  tuo  stellato  soglio.”  I had  my  back  to  you  at  the  time 
you  were  taking  out  the  music,  and  did  not  even  know  what  you  were 
doing.  I was  close  to  a window  and  you  were  at  the  bottom  end  of 
the  room.  In  fact  your  account  is  exact  to  the  minutest  point., 

44LepkIi  Griffin.” 

We  have  other  cases  in  which  the  transferred  impression  was  not 
of  a tune,  but  of  a word  or  phrase,  while  still  apparently  of  an 
auditory  sort,  conveying  the  sound  of  the  word  rather  than  its  mean- 
ing. When  the  two  persons  concerned  have  been  in  close  proximity, 
it  is,  of  course,  difficult  to  make  sure  that  some  incipient  sound  or 
movement  of  the  lips,  on  the  part  of  the  supposed  agent,  did  not 

p.  184.  Mr.  Guthrie*  has  successfully  repeated  the  experiment  several  times  with  a 
“subject”  in  a normal  .state  (Proceedings of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  iii.) — with  contact,  it  is  true, 
which  prevents  the  results  from  being  quite  conclusive.  Still,  the  only  element  in  a tune 
which  could  be  conveyed  with  any  accuracy  by  minute  movements  is  the  rhythm . Now 
this  could  only  be  conveyed  by  sudden  movements  at  definite  moments— a vqjry  different 
matter  from  the  continuous  slightly- varied  pressure  of  the  willing  -game ; while  even 
supposing  that  these  discrete  and  accurate  indications  could  be  unconsciously  given,  it  is. 
hard  to  believe  that  they  could  lead  on  to  the  identification  of  the  tune,  unless  their 
rhythmic  character  were  consciously  perceived. 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

235 

VL] 

supply  an  unconscious  suggestion.1  But  the  following  case  cannot  bo 
so  explained.  We  received  it  from  Mr.  J.  G.  Keulemans,  who 
was  mentioned  above  (p.  196)  as  having  had  a number  of  similar 
experiences. 

“November,  1882. 

(38)  “In  the  summer  of  the  year  1875,  about  eight  in  the  evening* 
I was  returning  to  my  home  in  the  Holloway  Itoad,  on  a tramcar,  when  it 
flashed  into  my  mind  that  my  assistant,  Herr  Schell,  a Dutchman,  who 
knew  but  little  English  (who  was  coming  to  see  me  that  evening),  would 
ask  me  what  the  English  phrase,  i to  wit/  meant  in  Dutch.  So  vivid  was. 
the  impression  that  I mentioned  it  to  my  wife  on  arriving  at  my  house* 
and  I went  so  far  as  to  scribble  it  down  on  the  edge  of  a newspaper  which 
I was  reading.  Ten  minutes  afterwards  Schell  arrived,  and  almost  his. 
first  words  were  the  inquiry,  ‘ Wat  is  het  Hollandsch  voor  “ to  wit”  V (The 
words  scribbled  on  the  newspaper  were  not  in  his  sight,  and  he  was  a good 
many  yards  from  it.)  I instantly  showed  him  the  paper,  with  the 
memorandum  on  it,  saying,  c You  see  I was  ready  for  you.1 * *  He  told  me 
that  he  had  resolved  to  ask  me  just  before  leaving  his  house  in  Kentish 
Town,  as  he  was  intending  that  evening  to  do  a translation  of  an  English 
passage  in  which  the  words  occurred.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
such  translations  in  order  to  improve  his  knowledge  of  English.  The  time 
of  his  resolution  corresponded  (as  far  as  we  could  reckon)  with  that  of  my 
impression.” 

[Unfortunately  no  corroboration  of  this  occurrence  is  now  obtainable  ; 
but  the  incident  of  the  newspaper  does  not  seem  a likely  one  to  have- 
been  unconsciously  invented.] 

The  next  case,  if  correctly  reported,  is  of  a transitional  sort ; for 
though  it  was  a distinct  idea,  and  not  a mere  sound-image,  that 
seems  to  have  been  transferred,  the  transference  was  probably  con- 
nected with  the  fact  that  the  words  were  actually  on  the  tip  of 

1 For  instance,  we  should  not  be  justified  in  laying  stress  on  such  an  occurrence  as. 
the  following,  described  to  us  by  Mr.  1 )ismorr,  of  Thelcrest  Lodge,  Gravesend. 

“November  19th,  1884. 

“A  somewhat  curious  little  incident  occurred  this  morning,  which,  though  not  of  any 
value,  might  be  of  interest  to  you. 

“Last  evening  a friend  of  mine,  Mr.  F.  P.,  and  I,  unable  to  fix  upon  a suitable  name- 
for  a new  invention  of  ours,  agreed  to  think  it  over  and  communicate  the  names  selected 
tliis  morning. 

“ The  only  names  I could  think  of  at  all  suitable  were  three,  ‘ Matchless, 5 ‘Marvel/ 
and  ‘ Express, ’ 

“We  met  in  the  train,  and  I said  to  P.,  ‘Have  you  thought  of  any  name?’  he- 
re plied  ‘Yes,*  and  leant  across  to  mention  it,  but  suddenly  stopped  short,  and  said,  ‘Tell 
me  yours.’  I at  once  commenced,  as  I thought,  to  give  the  three  1 had  selected  in  the 
order  named ; but  quite  as  much  to  my  surprise  as  that  of  Mr.  I\,  the  first  name  I 
mentioned  was  the  word  ‘Superb,’  a name  that  had  never  entered  my  mind,  but  strangely 
enough  the  actual  name  that  P.  had  settled  on  and  was  about  to  mention. 

“ As  there  was  not  any  reflection  whatever,  nor  time  for  it,  between  P.’s  question 
and  my  rejoinder,  it  struck  me  as  rather  curious. 

“ J.  8.  Dihmorb/ 

[Mr.  P.  admits  the  fact,  but  would  rather  his  name  did  not  appear.] 

This  may  have  been  a lucky  chance,  or  it  may  have  been  that  Mr.  F.,  before  checking 
himself,  had  given  a hint  of  the  coming  word. 

236 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

the  agent’s  tongue.  This  fact,  of  course,  suggests  again  the  chance  of 
unconscious  suggestion  by  actual  sound  or  movement  of  the  lips ; 
but  such  an  explanation  seems  here  practically  excluded  by  the 
length  of  the  sentence.  The  case  was  recorded  in  the  Spectator  of 
June  24th,  1882,  and  has  been  confirmed  to  us  by  the  writer. 

“ Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield. 

“June  22nd. 

(39)  “ I had  one  day  been  spending  the  morning  in  shopping,  and  re- 
turned by  train  just  in  time  to  sit  down  with  my  children  to  our  early  family 
dinner.  My  youngest  child — a sensitive,  quick-witted  little  maiden  of  two 
years  and  six  weeks  old — was  one  of  the  circle.  Dinner  had  just  com- 
menced, when  I suddenly  recollected  an  incident  in  my  morning’s  experience 
which  I had  intended  to  tell  her  ; and  I looked  at  the  child  with  the  full 
intention  of  saying,  4 Mother  saw  a big,  black  dog  in  a shop,  with  curly 
hair,’  catching  her  eyes  in  mine,  as  I paused  an  instant  before  speaking. 
Just  then  something  called  oft*  my  attention,  and  the  sentence  was  not 
uttered . What  was  my  amazement,  about  two  minutes  afterwards,  to 
hear  my  little  lady  announce,  4 Mother  saw  a big  dog  in  a shop.7  I gasped. 
“ Yes,  I did  ! 7 I answered  ; 4 but  how  did  you  know  ? 7 4 With  funny  hair/ 
she  added,  quite  calmly,  and  ignoring  my  question.  4 What  colour  was  it, 
Evelyn? 7 said  one  of  her  elder  brothers;  4 was  it  black?7  She  said, 

4 Yes.7 

44  Now,  it  was  simply  impossible  that  she  could  have  received  any  hint 
of  the  incident  verbally.  I had  had  no  friend  with  me  when  I had  seen 
the  dog.  All  the  children  had  been  at  home,  in  our  house  in  the  country, 
four  miles  from  the  town  ; 1 had  returned,  as  I said,  just  in  time  for  the 
•children’s  dinner,  and  I had  not  even  remembered  the  circumstance  until 
the  moment  when  I lixed  my  eyes  upon  my  little  daughter’s.  We  have 
had  in  our  family  circle  numerous  examples  of  spiritual  or  mental  insight 
or  foresight ; but  this,  I think,  is  decidedly  the  most  remarkable  that  has 
over  come  under  my  notice. 

“Caroline  Barber.” 

§ 2.  In  the  next  ease  (which  might  fairly  have  been  included 
under  the  head  of  experiments)  we  break  away  altogether  from  the 
auditory  symbols  of  thought,  and  have  a transference  of  an  idea  pure 
and  simple.  For  even  if  the  agent  was  formulating  his  thought  to 
himself  he  would  naturally  do  so  in  English,  while  the  percipient 
described  Ids  impression  in  Italian.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Robert 
Browning,  and  was  first  cited  by  Mr.  James  Knowles,  in  a letter 
to  the  Spectator  of  January  30th,  1869. 

(40)  “Mr.  Robert  Browning  tells  me  that  when  he  was  in  Florence  some 
years  since,  an  Italian  nobleman  (a  Count  Giunasi,  of  Ravenna),*  visiting 
at  Florence,  was  brought  to  his  house  without  previous  introduction,  by 
an  intimate  friend.  The  Count  professed  to  have  great  mesmeric  or 

YI.] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

237 

clairvoyant  faculties,  and  declared,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Browning’s  avowed 
scepticism,  that  he  would  undertake  to  convince  him,  somehow  or  other,, 
of  his  powers.  He  then  asked  Mr.  Browning  whether  he  had  anything 
about  him  then  and  there,  which  he  could  hand  to  him,  and  which  was  in 
any  way  a relic  or  memento.  This,  Mr.  Browning  thought,  was,  perhaps, 
because  he  habitually  wore  no  sort  of  trinket  or  ornament,  not  even  a 
watch-guard,  and  might,  therefore,  turn  out  to  be  a safe  challenge.  But 
it  so  happened,  that  by  a curious  accident,  he  was  then  wearing  under  his. 
coat-sleeves  some  gold  wrist-studs  to  his  shirt,  which  he  had  quite  recently 
taken  into  wear,  in  the  absence  (by  mistake  of  a sempstress)  of  his  ordinary 
wrist-buttons.  He  had  never  before  worn  them  in  Florence  or  elsewhere, 
and  had  found  them  in  some  old  drawer,  where  they  had  lain  forgotten 
for  years.  One  of  these  studs  he  took  out  and  handed  to  the  Count,  who 
held  it  in  his  hand  awhile,  looking  earnestly  in  Mr.  Browning’s  face,  and 
then  he  said,  as  if  much  impressed,  4 C’6  qualche  cosa  che  mi  grida  nelF 
orecchio,  44  Uccisione,  uccisione  ! ” ’ [There  is  something  here  which  cries, 
out  in  my  ear,  * Murder,  murder  ! ’] 

44  4 And  truly/  says  Mr.  Browning,  4 those  very  studs  were  taken  from 
the  dead  body  of  a great-uncle  of  mine,  who  was  violently  killed  on  his. 
estate  in  St.  Kitts,  nearly  SO  years  ago.  These,  with  a gold  watch  and 
other  personal  objects  of  value,  were  produced  in  a court  of  justice,  as. 
proof  that  robbery  had  not  been  the  purpose  of  the  slaughter,  which  was 
effected  by  his  own  slaves.  They  were  then  transmitted  to  my  grand- 
father, who  had  his  initials  engraved  on  them,  and  wore  them  all  his  life. 
They  were  taken  out  of  the  nightgown  in  which  he  died,  and  given  to  me, 
not  my  father.  1 may  add  that  I tried  to  get  Count  Giunasi  to  use  his. 
clairvoyance  on  this  termination  of  ownership,  also ; and  that  he  nearly 
hit  upon  something  like  the  fact,  mentioning  a bed  in  a room,  but  ho 
failed  in  attempting  to  describe  the  room —situation  of  the  bed  with 
respect  to  windows  and  door.  The  occurrence  of  my  great-uncle’s  murdei* 
was  known  only  to  myself,  of  all  men  in  Florence,  as  certainly  was  also* 
my  possession  of  the  studs.’  ” 

Mr.  Browning,  in  a letter  to  us,  dated  the  21st  of  July,  1883,  affirms 
that  the  account  44  is  correct  in  every  particular  ” — adding,  44  My  own 
explanation  of  the  matter  has  been  that  the  shrewd  Italian  felt  his  way 
by  the  involuntary  help  of  my  own  eyes  and  face.  The  guess,  however* 
attained  to,  was  a good  one.” 

If  a spurious  diviner  can  thus  feel  his  way  as  far  as  murder,  and 
even  Mr.  Browning’s  expression  is  so  inadequate  to  veil  his  thought, 
then  indeed  is  our  daily  life  compassed  with  dangers  of  which  genuine 
telepathy  has  shown  no  trace. 

With  this  account  it  is  interesting  to  compare  the  following,  from 
Miss  Caroline  B.  Morse,  of  Northfield,  Vermont. 

44  April,  1884. 

(41)  44 1 early  became  conscious  of  a peculiar  sensitiveness  to* 
the  undertones  — the  unuttered  thoughts  — of  others.  Later,  this 
tendency  developed  into  an  occasional  lightning-like  reading  of  facts 
that  apparently  came  to  me  through  none  of  the  ordinary  sensory 

238 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap* 

channels,  and  which  always,  whatever  their  nature,  gave  me  a shock  of 
surprise.  As  an  instance : About  1 3 years  ago  I went  with  an  uncle  to 
a jeweller’s  shop  to  see  a wonderful  clock.  I had  never  met  the  proprietor 
of  the  shop  ; he  was  known  to  my  uncle,  who  introduced  him  as  he  came 
forward  and  stood  with  us  before  the  clock.  At  that  instant  came  a 
'sensation  as  if  every  nerve  in  my  body  had  been  struck.  The  affable 
jeweller  had  extended  his  hand,  but  with  a shudder,  that  only  habitual 
self-control  repressed,  I said  within  myself  : * I cannot  touch  your  hand— 
there  is  blood  upon  it — you  are  a murderer. ’ Outwardly,  1 merely  bowed 
and  looked  at  the  clock  as  if  nothing  could  interest  me  so  much,  thus 
ignoring  the  proffered  hand.  Several  weeks  after,  I learned  that  the 
jeweller  and  a companion,  when  young  men,  had  been  accused  of  and  tried 
for  the  murder  of  a pedlar.  They  escaped  conviction  through  the  garbled 
testimony  of  the  chief  witness,  who  at  the  preliminary  hearing  had  made 
n clear  statement  strongly  against  them. 

“Caroline  B.  Morse.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Mr.  B.  T.  Merrill. 

“ Montpelier,  Vermont. 

“ May  31st,  1884. 

“ I think  it  was  in  the  fall  of  1871  that  I asked  my  niece,  Miss  C.  B. 
Morse,  to  go  with  me  to  see  a musical  clock.  We  went  into  his  shop.  I 
introduced  the  jeweller;  he  reached  out  his  hand  to  shake  hands  with  her, 
but  she  refused  to  take  his  hand.  After  we  left  the  shop,  I asked  her 
why  she  did  not  shake  hands  with  him.  She  did  not  make  much  reply, 
and  1 did  not  know  the  real  reason  till  long  afterwards.  I did  not  then 
know  that  the  jeweller  had  been  tried  for  murder,  but  some  time  after 
learned  the  facts  from  some  of  the  residents  of  this  place. 

“ Benjamin  T.  Merrill.”1 

In  contrast  to  this  purely  ideal  sort  of  horror,  I may  quote  the 
following  two  cases  where  the  impression,  though  still  extremely 
indefinite  in  character,  was  still  sufficiently  concrete  to  suggest  the 
very  presence  of  the  object. 

The  first  account  was  given  to  us  by  Miss  Charlotte  E.  Squire, 
then  residing  at  Feltham  Hill,  Middlesex  (now  Mrs.  Fuller  Maitland). 

1The  following  account  of  a parallel  incident  occurs  in  the  Zvist,  Vol.  \\,  p.  409,  in  a 
letter  from  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend  to  Dr.  Klliotson.  ' 

“ October  0th,  1852. 

“There  is  a curious  story  that  M.  Woodley  de  Cerjat  wanted  you  to  know.  I believe 
he  wrote  it  to  Dickens  to  tell  you  again.  However,  I may  as  well  repeat  it. 

“A  young  lady,  a friend  of  M.  Cerjat’s,  who  had  been  with  her  family  at  Lausanne, 
was  taken  ill  at  Berne  with  typhus  fever.  Her  doctor  found  her  one  day  in  a lucid 
interval  (she  was  generally  delirious),  but  no  sooner  had  he  touched  her  hand  than  she 
seemed  to  pass  into  an  extraordinary  state,  and  cried  out,  ‘ Oh  that  poor  child  ! that  poor 
little  boy  ! why  did  you  cut  his  head  open  ? How  is  he  now  ? * The  doctor,  astonished, 
replied,  ‘ I left  him  well ; I hope  he  will  recover,’  and  tried  to  calm  the  patient.  But  when 
he  got  out  of  the  room,  he  said,  ‘ That  was  the  most  extraordinary  thing  I ever  knew  in  my 
life.  I am  come  from  trepanning  a boy  whose  head  had  been  injured,  but  there  was  no 

human  means  by  which  Miss could  have  known  it,  as  I am  only  this  moment  come 

direct  from  the  hoy  here,  and  no  one  knew  of  the  accident,  nor  had  Miss ’s  nurse  ever 

left  the  room.’  The  explanation  seems  to  be  that  the  touch  of  the  doctor’s  hand  threw  the 
young  lady  into  clairvoyance.  She  is  since  dead,  and  M.  de  Cerjat  attended  her  funeral.” 

VI.] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

239 

' “ January  17th,  1884. 

(42)  “ My  brother  and  I were  travelling  together  from  Cologne  to 
Flushing.  We  were  alone  in  the  carriage  when  suddenly  my  brother,  who 
had  been  half  asleep,  said  to  me  that  he  had  an  odd  idea  that  some  one  else 
was  in  the  carriage  sitting  opposite  to  me.  The  very  same  idea  had  struck 
me  just  before  he  spoke. 

'“Though  my  feet  were  on  the  opposite  seat,  I was  certain  that  some  one 
was  there,  though  I was  wide  awake  and  never  saw  the  slightest  appearance 
of  anything.  The  impression  only  lasted  for  a moment,  but  it  was  strange 
that  our  thoughts  should  have  been  simultaneous.  This  happened  three 
years  ago.” 

Asked  if  this  impression  was  a unique  experience  in  her  life,  Miss 
Squire  replied  that  it  was. 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Mr.  W.  Barclay  Squire : — 

“The  incident  took  place  in  the  second  week  of  February,  1881.  My 
sister  and  myself  had  been  to  Hanover,  and  were  returning  home  vid 
Flushing.  We  were  alone  in  a first-class  carriage,  I sitting  with  my  face 
to  the  engine,  she  with  her  back,  at  the  diagonal  corners  of  the  carriage. 
In  the  evening,  as  we  drew  near  to  Flushing,  I was  dozing,  or  rather  in 
that  half-awake,  half-asleep  state  when  dreams  become  mixed  up  with 
reality,  and  actual  objects  become  mingled  with  dream  images.  From  this 
state  I suddenly  woke,  under  the  vivid  impression  that  a figure  was  seated 
in  the  corner  of  the  carriage  opposite  my  sister,  i.e.y  at  the  other  end  of  the 
seat  on  which  I was.  The  impression  was  quite  transitory,  but  so  vivid  as 
to  wake  me  thoroughly,  though  the  figure  was  vague  and  dark,  as  if  muffled 
up  in  a cloak,  no  features  being  visible.  I immediately  mentioned  the 
hallucination  to  my  sister,  when  she  told  me  she  had  a similar  one.  I was 
careful  to  note  that  there  were  no  bags  or  rugs  on  the  seat  on  which  I saw 
the  figure,  which  could  have  given  rise  to  its  appearance  by  some  fanciful 
combination.  ^ “ W.  Barclay  Squire.” 

Asked  whether  he  had  ever  had  any  other  hallucinations  of  vision,  Mr. 
Squire  replied  that  when  quite  a child  he  had  seen  figures,  which  were  to  be 
accounted  for  by  an  “ almost  continual  state  of  delicate  health.  I never 
saw  figures  from  the  time  I was  about  7 or  8 until  this  experience  in  the 
railway  carriage.” 

It  naturally  occurred  to  us  that  the  impression  might  have  been 
unconsciously  suggested  to  one  of  the  two  persons  by  the  other,  through 
some  unconscious  gesture  or  sudden  change  of  feature.  But  the  following 
communications  seem  decisive  against  this  hypothesis : — 

“39,  Phillimore  Gardens,  W. 

“March  15th,  1885. 

“ The  idea  of  a third  presence  in  the  railway  carriage  occurred  to  both 
my  brother  and  myself,  without  either  of  us  ever  having  seen  the  other's 
face.  I had  my  eyes  closed  at  the  time,  and  as  we  were  sitting  on  the 
same  side  of  the  carriage  we  could  not  see  each  other's  faces. 

« C.  E.  Fuller  Maitland.” 

“ I am  certain  the  impression  on  my  part  was  entirely  spontaneous,  and 
not  suggested  by  any  action  or  look  of  my  sister. 

“ W.  Barclay  Squire.” 

240  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chap. 

[It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  there  is  a discrepancy  as  to  the 
positions  in  the  carriage.] 

K 

Supposing  this  incident  to  have  been  telepathic,  it  is  natural  to 
regard  Mr.  Squire  as  the  agent,  and  his  impression  of  the  strange 
presence  as  the  momentary  survival  of  a dream.  But  in  the  next 
example,  if  we  surmise  that  a sort  of  waking  nightmare  of  one  of 
the  three  sisters  affected  the  other  two,  we  cannot  at  all  assign  their 
respective  shares  in  the  occurrence.  The  writer  of  the  narrative  is 
well  known  as  an  authoress  and  practical  philanthropist. 

(43)  “ It  was  on  a Saturday  night,  the  end  of  October,  or  early  in 

November,  1848,  that  I was  staying  at  St.  M ’ s Vicarage,  Leicester. 

My  two  sisters  were  at  home,  at  H.,  about  14  or  15  miles  from  Leicester. 
The  room  in  which  1 slept  was  large  and  low,  opening  into  a broad,  low 
corridor  ; the  nursery  was  on  the  same  floor  ; the  rest  of  the  family  slept 
on  the  one  below.  I had  been  asleep  for  some  time,  and  was  not  consci- 
ously dreaming  at  all.  I was  awoke  instantaneously,  not  by  any  sound, 
but  intensely  awake,  starting  up  in  a panic  —not  of  fear,  but  of  horror, 
knowing  that  something  horrible  was  close  by.  The  room  was  still  dimly 
lighted  by  the  dying-out  lire.  I suppose  it  was  seeing  the  room  empty 
made  me  at  ouce  know  that  whatever  it  was,  it  was  still  outside  the  door, 
for  I rushed  at  once  to  lock  iU  The  impression  I had  was  so  vivid  that  I 
'can  only  describe  it  by  speaking  of  ‘ It ’ as  objective.  ‘ Tt 9 was  living,  not 
human,  not  physically  dangerous  ; I think  it  was  malevolent,  but  the  over- 
powering consciousness  I had  was  horrible  ; I did  not  represent  it  to  myself 
in  any  shape  even,  except  as  an  indefinite  blackness,  like  a cloudy  pillar,  I 
suppose.  The  presence  seemed  to  stay  outside  the  door  five  minutes  (but 
probably  it  was  a much  shorter  time),  and  then  it  simply  was  not  there. 
Whilst  it  was  there  I knew  that  it  was  nearly  2 o’clock,  and  the  church 
bells  chimed  2,  about  ten  minutes,  as  I suppose,  after  it  ceased.  Whilst  it 
was  there  I was  very  angry  with  myself  for  being  so  absurd ; and  I 
remember  wondering  whether  a young  German,  who  was  living  there  as  a 
pupil,  a protege  of  Ohauncey  Townsend’s,  could  be  mesmerising  me.  He 
had  been  telling  us  about  mesmerism  and  clairvoyance  the  day  before,  but 
I had  not  the  slightest  faith  in  either,  at  any  rate  not  in  C.  H.  T.’s 
accuracy  of  observation. 

“I  went  home  on  the  following  Tuesday,  and  that  night,  in  talking 
over  my  visit  with  my  two  sisters,  I told  them  what  a strange  delusion  I 
had  had. 

“ They  were  both  astonished,  and  related  a similar  experience  each  had 
had  on  the  same  Saturday  night,  or  rather  Sunday  .morning,  for  both 
agreed  their  impression  at  the  time  had  been  it  was  about  or  near  2. 
They  were  sleeping  in  separate  rooms,  but  next  each  other. 

“ R.  was  awoke  in  the  same  sudden  manner,  with  the  consciousness 
that  something  dreadful  or  harmful  was  near,  not  in  her  room,  but  a little 
way  off.  Her  iiripression  was  the  same  in  character,  but  less  viVid  than 
mine. 

“E.  was  awoke  suddenly,  as  I had  been,  with  a sense  of  intense  horror. 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

241 

vi*] 

Some  presence,  fearful,  evil  and  powerful,  was  standing  close  by  her  side  ; 
she  was  unable  to  move  or  cry  out ; it  seemed  to  her  also  to.be  a spiritual 
presence.  Her  room  was  quite  dark,  so  she  could  see  nothing.  Her 
impression  was  at  the  time  so  much  more  overpowering,  and  it  was  so  much 
closer  to  her,  that  it  seemed  to  me,  on  talking  it  over,  to  have  been  the 
cause  of  ours.  Not  one  of  us  for  a moment  connected  it  with  a ghost. 
That  notion  never  occurred  to  us. 

“ R.  and  E.  had  told  each  other  before  my  return,  1 believe  on  the  next 
day.  Afterwards  we  told  the  strange  coincidence  to  my  father  and 
mother.  She  thought  she  had  also  been  awoke  by  a cry,  if  T remember 
right,  that  night ; but  her  recollection  was  too  vague  to  be  relied  upon. 

“ Nothing  ever  came  of  it,  except  that  the  known  date  of  the 
commencement  of  E.’s  fatal  illness  was  the  Saturday  following.  But 
neither  she,  so  far  as  I know,  nor  we  ever  thought  of  it  in  this  connection. 
She  was  very  much  interested  in  it  afterwards,  but  not  in  the  slightest 
degree  uneasy  or  alarmed  at  it,  only  eager  to  find  out  how  the  coincidence 
could  be  accounted  for.  I was  28  at  the  time  ; E.  was  just  25.” 

[R.  remembers  this  incident  vaguely,  and  can  add  nothing.] 

§ 3.  We  now  come  to  cases  where  the  impression  was  of  a more 
definite  sort,  representing  actual  people  and  actual  events.  It  is  not 
very  uncommon  for  people  to  affirm  that  they  have  had  a series  of 
$uch  impressions,  of  which  the  majority  have  corresponded  with  reality. 
As  a rule  these  statements  have  no  force  as  evidence  for  telepathy  ; 
partly  because  we  have  no  means  of  judging  how  far  the  idea  may 
not  have  been  suggested  in  some  normal  way;  partly  because  the 
impression  has  not  been  recorded  at  the  time,  and  it  is  specially  easy 
to  suppose  that  failures  may  have  been  forgotten,  while  a lucky  guess 
has  been  remembered.  We  have,  however,  an  instance  where  two 
witnesses  were  concerned,  each  of  whom  professes  to  have  had  other 
similar  experiences,  and  where  the  particular  incident  narrated  is 
adequately  confirmed.  The  witnesses  are  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  H.  Saunders, 
now  residing  at  St.  Helen’s,  near  Hyde.  Mr.  Saunders  says : — 

“I  have  mentally  noted  frequent  ‘vivid  impressions  ' during  many 
years  past,  and  in  the  majority  of  instances,  when  such  impressions  have 
appeared  to  be  spontaneous  and  intuitive,  the  facts  have  actually 
corresponded.” 

Mrs.  Saunders  says : — 

u I have  had  other  similar  strong  impressions  at  distant  intervals,  and 
as  far  as  I can  recollect  they  have  corresponded  with  the  reality.  I cannot 
say  if  I have  had  any  such  impressions  which  have  not  corresponded 
with  the'reality,  but  my  opinion  is  that  I have  had  none  such.” 

Mr.  Saunders’  account  of  the  particular  incident  is  as  follows 

R 

242 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap.. 

“ San  Claudio,  Sandown,  Isle  of  Wight. 

“ March  12th,  1883. 

(44)  “On  Thursday  evening  last  (8th  inst.)  in  the  house  of  friends  with 
whom  we  were  staying  at  Tavistock,  Devon,  I suddenly  asked  my  wife 
4 What  she  was  thinking  of  ? ’ She  replied,  ‘ I cannot  get  M.  R.  and  A.  F. 
F.  out  of  my  head  all  day  ; they  will  run  through  all  my  thoughts.'  I 
replied,  ‘ What  makes  you  think  of  them  ? ' She  said,  ‘ I don't  know,  but 
it  seems  just  as  if  they  were  married/ to  which  I asked,  ‘Have  you  any 
reason  to  suppose  they  would  be  married  to-day?'  She  replied,  ‘Oh  no  ! 
I am  sure  Mary  wouldn’t  be  married  during  Lent.'  I then  allowed  my 
mind  to  travel  to  the  house  where  M.  R.  resided  in  London,  when  I became 
immediately  conscious  of  receiving  the  strongest  possible  conviction  that 
they  were  married  that  day,  so  that  I quickly  but  firmly  replied,  4 They  are 
married  to-day , and  we  shall  see  the  weddiny  announced  in  the  Times  on 
Saturday ,'  at  which  there  was  a general  titter.  However,  I was  so 
convinced  of  the  accuracy  of  our  joint  thoughts  that  1 foolishly  offered  to 
wager  the  whole  of  my  belongings  on  the  truth  of  it,  and  until  seeing  the 
confirmation,  I was  anxious  to  risk  anything  in  support  of  my  belief.  I 
may  here  mention  that  there  were  present,  who  could  testify  to  the  fore- 
going conversation,  three  independent  witnesses,  quite  unknown  to  the 
persons  referred  to  as  M.  R.  and  A.  F.  Neither  of  the  latter  had  been 
seen  nor  communicated  with  by  my  wife  for  nearly  six  months,  but  I had 
seen  them  once  about  three  months  before.  We  knew  they  were  to  be 
married,  but  understood  not  until  April  or  May.  This  knowledge  and  the 
-question  of  Lent  made  my  wife  doubtful  as  to  the  fulfilment  of  her 
presentiment  when  I pressed  her  finally  at  noon  on  Saturday  ; soon  after 
which,  on  reaching  Exeter  Station,  I procured  a copy  of  the  Timesy  and 
before  opening  it  again  declared  my  conviction  absolutely  unshaken.  As 
you  may  have  guessed,  there  was  the  notice  of  marriage,  as  having  taken 
place  on  the  8th  inst.,  all  right.  [We  have  verified  this  fact  independently.] 
I may  conclude  by  saying  this  notice  is  all  we  know  of  the  wedding,  no 
communication  having  passed  between  us  and  any  member  of  the  bride 
or  bridegroom's  family,  &rc.  Further,  if  you  deem  it  of  sufficient 
importance  I will  supply  correct  names  and  addresses  of  all  parties 
interested,  as  I feel  sure  our  Tavistock  friends  could  not  object  to 
contributing  to  scientific  truth  by  testifying  to  the  facts." 

The  ladies  who  were  present  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Saunders  had  this 
impression  corroborate  as  follows,  in  a letter  written  to  Mr.  Saunders  from 
Harleigh  House,  Tavistock : — 

“ After  a lengthy  discussion  you  both  emphatically  concluded  that  she 
was  married  on  that  day.  We  were  quite  sceptical  at  the  time,  but  on 
receipt  of  the  Times  the  proofs  were  quite  convincing. 

“Lily  Sampson. 

“ Kathleen  Sampson.” 

Here  the  state  of  the  supposed  agent  or  agents  was  presumably 
excitement  of  a happy  nature.  This,  however,  is  rarely  tlje  case — 
which  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  indicating  the  superior  vividness  of 
pains  over  pleasures.  Impressions  of  death,  illness,  or  accident  are 

VI/1 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

243 

the  almost  unbroken  rule.  I will  first  quote  eases  where  a distinct 
Idea  of  the  particular  event  was  produced,  without  any  distinct 
representation  of  the  actual  scene. 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Herbert  Davy,  of  Burdon 
Place,  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

“ December  20th,  1883. 

(45)  “ A very  old  gentleman,  living  at  Hurworth,  a friend  of  my 
husband's  and  with  whom  I was  but  slightly  acquainted,  had  been  ill  many 
months.  My  sister-in-law,  who  resides  also  at  H.,  often  mentioned  him 
in  her  letters,  saying  he  was  better  or  worse  as  the  case  might  be. 

44  Late  last  autumn  my  husband  and  I were  staying  at  the  Tynedale 
Hydropathic  Establishment.  One  evening  I suddenly  laid  down  the  book 
I was  reading,  with  this  thought  so  strong  upon  me  I could  scarcely 
refrain  from  putting  it  into  words  : 4 I believe  that  Mr.  C.  is  at  this 
moment  dying/  So  strangely  was  I imbued  with  this  belief — there  had 
been  nothing  whatever  said  to  lead  to  it — that  I asked  my  husband  to  note 
the  time  particularly,  and  to  remember  it  for  a reason  I would  rather  not 
state  just  then.  4 It  is  exactly  7 o'clock/  he  said,  and  that  being  our 
dinner  hour,  we  went  downstairs  to  dine.  The  entire  evening,  however,  I 
was  haunted  by  the  same  strange  feeding,  and  looked  for  a letter  from  my 
sister-in-law  next  morning.  None  came.  But  the  following  day  there  was 
one  for  her  brother.  In  it  she  said : 4 Poor  old  Mr.  C.  died  last  night 
at  7 o’clock.  It  was  past  post  time,  so  1 could  not  let  you  know 
before/” 

Mr.  Davy  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ December  27th,  1883. 

44 1 have  a perfect  recollection  of  the  night  in  question,  the  20th 
October,  1882,  when  my  wife  asked  me  to  tell  her  the  time.  1 told  her 
the  time,  as  she  4 had  a reason  for  knowing  it/  she  said.  She  afterwards 
told  me  that' reason.  “Herbert  Davy.” 

The  following  is  a copy  of  an  obituary  card , referring  to  the  Mr.  C.  of 
the  narrative : — 

“In  loving  memory  of  John  Colling,  of  Hurworth-on-Tees,  avIio  died 
October  the  20th,  1882,  aged  84  years.” 

Mrs.  Davy  has  had  one  other  experience,  to  be  quoted  later,  which 
-also  corresponded  with  a death.  With  this  exception,  she  states  that  the 
present  case  was  quite  unique  in  her  experience. 

• [In  an  interview  with  Professor  Sidgwick,  on  April  15th,  1884,  Mrs. 
Davy  described  the  impression  as  strong  and  sudden,  not  emotional,  but 
merely  the  sudden  conviction  that  Mr.  Colling  was  at  that  moment  dying, 
though  a strange  feeling  of  sadness  followed  and  remained  during  the 
•evening.  “She  called  it  strange,”  says  Professor  Sidgwick,  44 meaning 
(as  I understand)  that  her  interest  in  Mr.  C.  was  too  slight  to  account  for 
it;  and  she  has  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  thought  of  her  at  the 
moment  of  death.  In  this  case  her  recollection  of  the  uniqueness  and 
strength  6f  her  conviction  is  confirmed  by  her  request  to  her  husband  to 
note  the  time ; she  was  certain  that  she  had  never  on  any  other  occasion 
made  a similar  request  in  consequence  of  a similar  impression.  Her  belief 

244  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chak 

at  the  time  was  not  the  result  of  any  reasoning  process  leading  her  to 
have  confidence  in  her  impression.”] 

The  next  ease  is  from  Miss  A.  S.  Jarry,  of  Settle,  Yorkshire. 

“June  2nd,  1884. 

(46)  “ I was  making  a hurried  tour  in  the  North  of  Italy,  having 
left  a sister  at  home,  who  for  some  time  past  had  been  subject  to  sudden 
attacks  of  illness.  Owing  to  short  halts,  and  some  uncertainty  as  to 
these,  1 had  not  had  any  tidings  from  home  for  nearly  a fortnight* 
Although  much  disappointed  at  this,  I can  confidently  say  that  I had  not 
dwelt  upon  the  thought  so  as  to  induce  any  nervous  anxiety.  One 
evening,  in  Venice,  at  about  half-past  10,  the  certain  conviction  was. 
suddenly  forced  upon  me  that  my  sister  was  ill.  The  impression  was  so 
distinct  that  it  would  have  been  impossible,  in  any  case,  to  doubt  the 
reality  of  the  fact,  but  having  had  two  similar  communications  some 
years  before  in  the  case  of  my  mother’s  illness,  I knew  quite  well  that 
my  sister  was  ill.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
measure  time  accurately ; my  impression  was  that  I had  been  about  two 
hours  arranging  in  my  own  mind  to  leave  Venice  by  the  earliest 
morning  train,  when  suddenly  an  assurance  as  strong  as  the  first  was. 
conveyed  that  all  cause  for  anxiety  had  passed  away.  On  my  return 
home  1 found  that  both  impressions  had  been  correct,  as  my  sister’s 
account  subjoined  will  show.  1 also  send  the  evidence  of  a friend  to 
whom,  on  the  following  morning,  I communicated  the  impressions  of  the? 
night.  “ A.  S.  Jarry.” 

Miss  Jarry  s sister  writes  : — 

“ Having  for  some  time  bceu  liable  to  sudden  attacks  in  my  head* 
the  symptoms  of  which  were  great  confusion  of  thought,  an  attack  was 
never  surprising.  On  the  night  of  April  21st,  1882,  as  I was  preparing- 
for  bed  (being  at  the  house  of  a friend),  I all  at  once  felt  that  I was  not 
in  my  own  room  at  home,  and  I could  not  account  for  that  circumstance  * 
for  some  moments,  it  might  be  minutes,  I did  not  know  where  I was* 
At  last  I became  clear  on  that  point,  but  not  as  to  the  reason  of  my 
being  there.  I was  so  far  clear  as  to  know  that  at  the  time  I was  ill* 
and  that  I must  hasten  into  bed  as  soon,  but  with  as  little  movement,  as 
possible.  It  was  about  10.30  p.m.  the  attack  came  on ; it  continued  to 
cause  great  and  distressing  confusion  for  about  2 hours.  The  time  I 
was  quite  aware  of,  as  a clock  near,  striking  the  quarters,  marked  tho 
time  accurately.  After  this,  clearness  of  mind  gradually  returned,  and  I 
felt  convinced  I was  recovering.  I heard  2 a.m.  strike  before  I fell 
asleep,  but  before  that  time  I had  felt  convinced  all  danger  was  over, 

“ M.  L.  Jarry.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  A.  S.  Jarry  says  : — 

“June  30th,  1884. 

u My  impression  of  my  sister’s  illness  occurred  on  the  same  night,  and* 
as  exactly  as  can  be  ascertained  at  that  distance,  at  the  same  time  as  her 
illness  occurred.  By  comparing  notes  as  strictly  as  can  be,  th$  certainty 
of  all  danger  being  over  coincided  exactly  with  her  consciousness  that  she 
was  going  to  fall  into  a refreshing  sleep.  I told  my  impression  to  Miss* 
Barnett  on  the  following  morning.  The  previous  correct  impression  to 

VI.] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES \ 

245 

which  I alluded  in  the  account  I sent  you,  referred  to  two  communications 
of  precisely  the  same  nature  in  the  cases  of  two  distinct  illnesses  of  my 
mother's.1  The  impressions  were  equally  clear  and  unmistakeable.  I 
have  never  had  any  false  impression." 

Miss  Julia  Barnett  confirms  as  follows  : — 

“81,  Fitzwilliam  Street,  Huddersfield. 

“ Miss  Barnett  begs  to  say  that  she  is  able  to  bear  testimony  to  the 
accuracy  of  the  statements  contained  in  Miss  Jarry  s letter,  as  she  shared 
her  room  the  night  the  strong  impression  of  her  sister's  illness  came  over 
her,  and,  on  awaking  in  the  morning,  received  from  her  a vivid  account  of 
the  distress  she  had  endured  whilst  (as  it  appeared  to  her)  her  sister's 
attack  lasted. 

“ Miss  Barnett  can  also  state  that,  on  arriving  at  home,  she  learned 
from  the  elder  Miss  Jarry  that  the  latter  had  really  had  an  attack  on 
the  night,  and  at  the  hour,  when  the  certainty  of  it  was  felt  by  her 
sister.  “Julia  Barnett."' 

Here  the  noteworthy  points  are,  of  course,  the  sudden  resolution 
to  start  homewards  next  morning,  and  the  distinct  and  unaccountable 
cessation  of  the  anxiety.  But  in  both  these  last  cases  the  percipient 
was  aware  that  the  supposed  agent  was  in  a state  where  the  event 
surmised  was  not  wholly  improbable,  which  reduces  the  force  of  the 
evidence.  There  are  many  cases  of  sudden  accident  where  this 
objection  does  not  apply. 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Muir,  of  42,  Holland  Park,  W. 

“April  7th,  1885.  * 

(47)  “In  the  year  1849  I was  staying  in  Edinburgh.  One  Sunday 
ns  I was  dressing  my  second  boy  (aged  5 years)  for  church  at  about  10.30 
n.m.,  he  looked  up  at  me  and  said,  ‘Mother,  Cousin  Janie  is  dead.'  I 
-asked  him  winch  Cousin  Janie  he  meant,  and  he  answered,  ‘Cousin  Janie 
at  the  Cape,  she's  dead.'  I then  tried  to  make  him  explain  why  he 
thought  so,  but  he  only  kept  repeating  the  statement.  This  ‘ Cousin  J anie ' 
was  a girl  of  about  16  who  had  been  staying  in  Edinburgh,  and  had  gone 
out  to  the  Cape  with  her  parents  some  months  before.  She  had  been 
very  fond  of  my  boys,  and  had  often  played  with  them.  I was  rather 
■ ■struck  by  the  way  the  child  kept  repeating  what  he  had  said,  and  wrote 
down  the  day  and  the  hour,  and  told  my  mother  and  sisters.  Some  time 
-afterwards  the  Cape  mail  brought  the  news  that  the  girl  had  died  on  that 
very  Sunday.  She  had  been  badly  burnt  the  night  before,  and  had 
lingered  on  till  a little  after  midday. 

“Alice  Mum." 

In  answer  to  questions,  Mrs.  Muir  says  : — 

(1)  “The  child  was  not  in  the  habit  of  saying  odd  things  of  this 
kind. 

• 

1 We  have  received  full  accounts  of  these  other  cases ; but  as  they  occurred  at  a time 
when  Miss  Jarry  was  in  distinct  anxiety  about  her  mother,  they  cannot  be  presented  as 
evidence, 

246 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap- 

(2)  “ As  to  the  kind  of  impression  I could  discover  nothing. 

(3)  “I  have  no  record  in  writing,  but  it  is  possible  that  my  mother 
and  sisters  may  remember  the  occurrence.” 

On  November  25th,  1885,  Miss  M.  A.  Muir  wrote  : — 

“All  that  we  have  gathered  is  that  neither  my  grandmother  nor  my 
mother’s  two  sisters  have  any  distinct  remembrance  of  the  occurrence. 
The  person  who  seemed  to  have  been  most  impressed  by  it  was  a sister* 
who  died  some  years  ago.  J remember  hearing  her  describe  her  feeling 
of  wonder  and  awe,  when  the  news  came  and  they  found  the  child’s, 
words  were  true  ” 

Very  similar  is  the  following  incident,  of  which  the  first  account 
was  sunt  to  us  bv  Mr.  0.  B.  Curtis,  of  9,  East  54th  Street,  New 
York. 

“November  20tli,  1884. 

(48)  “ The  incident  f have  to  relate  occurred  18  years  ago,  the  present 
month.  My  Avife  at  the  time  was  making  a visit  at  the  house  of  her 
sister,  about  300  miles  from  this  city,  in  the  central  part  of  the  State  of 
New  York.  Thirty  miles  distant  a brother  resided  with  his  family* 
among  them  a son,  David,  about  1 2 years  of  age. 

“ One  afternoon,  my  Avife  was  sitting  Avitli  her  sister,  while  a child  of 
the  latter,  a girl  3 years  of  age,  Avas  amusing  itself  with  toys  in  another 
part  of  the  room.  Suddenly  the  child  ceased  its  play  and  ran  to  my  wife* 
exclaiming,  4 Auntie,  Davie’s  drowned.’  Not  being  attended  to  at  once* 
the  child  repeated  the  Avords  ‘ Davie’s  drowned.’  The  aunt,  thinking  she 
had  not  heard  correctly,  asked  the  mother  Avhat  the  child  said,  when  the 
words  were  again  repeated.  Nothing,  however,  Avas  thought  of  the  matter 
at  the  time,  the  mother  simply  saying  the  little  one  was  probably  only 
repeating  what  it  had  heard  from  some  one. 

“A  few  hours  later  a telegram  Avas  received,  announcing  that  at  just 
about  the  time  these  words  were  spoken,  David,  the  child’s  cousin,  with  a. 
brother,  a year  or  tAvo  older,  were  drowned  Avhile  skating  40  miles  away. 

“ Charles  R Curtis.” 

[The  Penn  Yan  Express  for  January  9th,  1867,  describes  the  accident 
ashaATing  occurred  on  the  afternoon  of  January  2nd.  Mr.  Curtis  is,  there- 
fore, not  correct  in  saying  it  occurred  in  November.] 

On  February  6th,  1885,  Mr.  Curtis  sent  us  a copy  of  the  following 
statement  from  his  sister-in-laAv,  Mrs.  Ogden. 

“ Kings  Ferry,  Ngav  York. 

“On  the  afternoon  of  January  2nd,  1867,  my  little  daughter,  Augusta* 
aged  3 years,  was  playing  Avith  her  dolly,  sitting  near  her  aunt,  who  was. 
spending  the  day  at  my  house  in  Genoa,  New  York.  Her  little  cousins* 
Darius  and  David  Adams,  aged  1 1 and  9 years,  to  the  younger  of  whoin 
she  Avas  tenderly  attached,  were  Irving  in  Penn  Yan,  New  York,  25  miles 
away.  The  cousins  had  not  met  since  the  preceding  summer  or  early 
autumn. 

“While  busy  with  her  play,  the  child  suddenly  spoke,  and  said* 

* Auntie,  Davie  is  droAvned  ! ’ Her  father,  who  was  present,  and  I,  heard 

VI.]  AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES \ 247 

her  distinctly.  I answered,  4 Gussie,  what  did  you  say  ? ’ She  repeated 
the  words,  4 Davie  is  drowned  ! ’ Her  aunt,  who  was  not  familiar  with 
the  childish  accent,  said,  4 Gussie,  I do  not  understand  you ’ ; when  the 
child  repeated  for  the  third  time,  4 Auntie,  Davie  is  drowned ! ’ I 
chanced  to  look  at  the  clock,  and  saw  it  was  just  4. 

44 1 immediately  turned  the  conversation,  as  I did  not  wish  such  a 
painful  thought  fastened  on  the  child’s  mind. 

44 1 cannot  recall  that  any  allusion  had  been  made  to  the  boys  that 
day ; neither  was  I aware  that  my  daughter  even  knew  the  meaning  of 
the  word  drowned.  She  simply  uttered  the  words  without  apparent 
knowledge  of  their  import. 

44  That  evening  a telegram  came  from  my  brother,  saying,  4 My  little 
boys,  Darius  and  Davie,  were  drowned  at  4 o’clock  to-day  while  skating 
on  Kenks  Lake.’  44  E.  M.  0,” 

The  impression  of  a very  young  child,  corresponding  to  such  an 
accident  as  this,  has  far  more  force  than  that  of  an  adult  would 
generally  have ; for  seasons  when  relatives  are  supposed  to  be 
skating  or  boating  are  likely  times  for  nervous  apprehensions, 
which  will  naturally  now  and  then  be  fulfilled.1  The  following  case 
is  a strong  one  of  its  kind ; since  the  coincidence  appears  to  have 
been  close  to  the  hour,  while  the  ground  for  nervousness,  such  as  it 
was,  extended  over  a good  many  days.  The  impression,  moreover, 
seems  to  have  been  of  a peculiarly  definite  and  startling  kind,  being 
almost  if  not  quite  externalised  as  actual  sound.  The  account  is 
from  the  Rev.  A.  W.  Arundel,  who  wrote  from  Colorado  Springs, 
U.S.A.,  in  1884. 

(49)  44  In  the  fall  of  187.5,  I took  a trip  to  Madison,  Ohio,  to  Johnson’s 
Island,  Kelly’s  Island,  and  neighbouring  points.  There  were  nine  of  us  in 
all,  and  our  conveyance  was  a small  sailing  vessel.  One  Sunday  morning 
we  crossed  from  Cedar  Point  to  Sandusky,  in  order  to  attend  church. 
During  the  service  a heavy  storm  came  up,  and  when  we  went  down  to  the 
landing,  on  our  return,  we  found  a pretty  rough  sea.  We  ventured,  how- 

1 To  a person  who  is  constitutionally  free  from  nervousness,  and  who  recognises  the 
impression  received  as  having  been  an  unique  one,  such  an  incident  will  naturally  seem 
more  striking  than  it  does  to  others.  This  description  applies  to  Mrs.  Rachel  Tuckett,  of 
♦Southwood  Lawn,  Highgate  (a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends),  who  tells  us  that  on 
August  10th,  1878,  she  was  impressed,  in  a way  unknown  in  her  previous  experience, 
with  a sense  that  some  member  of  a party  who  had  gone  out  on  a steam  yacht  hat!  fallen 
overboard.  This  accident  had  actually  happened  at  that  very  time  to  her  daughter  (now 
Mrs.  Green),  who  remembers  her  mothers  mentioning  the  impression  to  her  when  she 
returned  home,  dripping  wet. 

We  have  a similar  case  from  Mr.  J.  N.  Maskelyne,  the  celebrated  conjurer.  When 
a boy  he  was  nearly  drowned.  He  says : “ The  last  thing  I could  remember  was  a vivid 
picture  of  my  home.  I saw  my  mother,  and  could  describe  minutely  where  she  sat,  and 
what  she  was  doing.  ” This,  however,  would  clearly  not  be  evidence  for  telepathy,  unless 
what  the  mother  was  doing  was  something  very  unusual,  which  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  th^case.  But  on  Mr.  Maskelyne ’s  return  home,  though  he  concealed  from  her  what 
had  happened,  “she  questioned  me  closely,  and  said  she  felt  strangely  anxious  about  me, 
and  thought  some  accident  had  befallen  me.”  The  percipient’s  first-hand  testimony  cannot, 
however,  be  obtained.  Nor  have  we  any  means  of  knowing  the  number  of  such  maternal 
impressions  about  childish  accidents  that  go  unconfirmed. 

248 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

ever,  to  try  and  get  across,  and  in  the  end  succeeded  ; but  in  the  trial  we 
had  a very  narrow  escape.  We  had  gone  about  halfway,  when  a very 
heavy  gust  of  wind  struck  our  little  vessel,  and  turned  her  over  on  her  side. 
The  water  rushed  in,  and  it  seemed  almost  impossible  to  keep  her  afloat. 
There  we  wer$  clinging  to  the  side  that  was  still  out  of  water,  and 
expecting  every  moment  to  be  swamped.  By  dint  of  almost  superhuman 
effort,  those  who  had  sufficient  presence  of  mind  cut  away  all  the  sail  we 
were  carrying,  and  the  boat  righted  just  enough  to  allow  the  men  to  bale 
out  some  of  the  water.  We  managed,  after  one  or  two  almost  hopeless 
struggles,  to  get  ashore.  Now  just  at  the  moment  of  greatest  danger, 
when  escape  seemed  impossible,  I thought  of  my  wife  and  child  a hundred 
miles  away.  I thought  of  them  in  a sort  of  agony,  and  felt  that  to  leave 
them  was  impossible.  If  ever  there  was  an  unuttered  cry  for  loved  ones 
it  was  at  that  moment.  This  was  on  the  Sunday  afternoon. 

“ I reached  home  on  the  following  Saturday  afternoon.  Having  to 
preach  that  Sunday  I held  no  conversation  with  my  wife  that  morning, 
and  it  was  not  until  Sunday  after  dinner  that  we  had  an  opportunity  for 
a chat.  Just  as  I was  about  to  commence  an  account  of  my  trip,  my  wife 
said,  ‘ By-the-way,  I had  a very  peculiar  experience*  last  Sunday,  just 
about  this  time.  T was  lying  on  the  lounge,  when  all  at  once  I had  a 
startling  impression  that  you  wanted  me,  and  even  fancied  I heard  you 
call.  I started  up  and  listened,  and  went  out  onto  the  porch,  and  looked 
up  and  down  the  road,  and  acted  altogether  in  a very  agitated  way/ 

“This  happened,  as  nearly  as  we  could  determine  by  comparing  notes, 
at  precisely  the  same  hour  that  I was  clinging  to  that  side  of  the  sinking 
boat,  and  facing  what  seemed  to  be  the  possibility  of  a watery  grave.  I 
do  not  believe  it  was  coincidence.  It  must,  I think,  be  explained  in  some 
other  way. 

“Alfred  W.  Arundel, 

“Pastor  1st  U.E.  Church.” 

The  next  case  is  well-known,  having  been  published  in  the  Life 
of  Bishop  Wilberforce , Vol.  I.,  p.  397. 

(50)  “ The  Bishop  was  in  his  library  at  Cuddesdon,  with  three  or  four  of 
his  clergy,  writing  with  him  at  the  same  table.  The  Bishop  suddenly  raised 
his  hand  to  his  head,  and  exclaimed,  ‘ I am  certain  that  something  has 
happened  to  one  of  my  sons/  It  afterwards  transpired  that  just  at  that 
time  his  eldest  son’s  foot  (who  was  at  sea)  was  badly  crushed  by  an 
accident  on  board  his  ship.  The  Bishop  himself  records  the  circumstance 
in  a letter  to  Miss  Noel,  dated  March  4th,  1847:  he  writes:  ‘It  is 
curious  that  at  the  time  of  his  accident  I was  so  possessed  with  the 
depressing  consciousness  of  some  evil  having  befallen  my  son  Herbert,  that 
at  last  on  the  third  day  after,  the  13th,  I wrote  down  that  I was  quite 
unable  to  shake  off’  the  impression  that  something  had  happened  to  him, 
and  noted  this  down  for  remembrance/  ” 

[We  have  not  been  able  to  discover  whether  the  letter  contained 
anything  more  on  the  subject,] 

In  the  next  case,  though  it  seems  certain  that  the  percipient's 
experience  was  mentioned  at  the  moment,  we  unfortunately  cannot 

VI.] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

m 

obtain  her  own  account,  or  her  friend's  confirmation,  as  Mr.  Smith 
has  changed  his  residence,  and  we  have  failed  to  trace  him.  Ho  was 
personally  known  to  Professor  Barrett,  to  whom  the  account  was 
first  sent. 

“ Leslie  Lodge,  Ealing,  W. 

“October  10th,  1876. 

r (5!)  “ I had  left  my  house,  10  miles  from  London,  in  the  morning  as 
usual,  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  was  on  my  way  to  Victoria  Street,  West- 
minster, having  reached  Buckingham  Palace,  when  in  attempting  to  cross 
the  road, recently  made  muddy  and  slippery  by  the  water  cart,  I fell,  and  was 
nearly  run  over  by  a carriage  coming  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  fall 
and  the  fright  shook  me  considerably,  but  beyond  that  I was  uninjured. 
On  reaching  home  I found  my  wife  waiting  anxiously,  and  this  is  what 
she  related  to  me  : She  was  occupied  wiping  a cup  in  the  kitchen,  which 
she  suddenly  dropped,  exclaiming,  4 My  God ! he's  hurt.'  Mrs.  S.,  who 
was  near  her,  heard  the  cry,  and  both  agreed  as  to  the  details  of  time  and 
so  forth.  I have  often  asked  my  wife  why  she  cried  out,  but  she  is  unable 
to  explain  the  state  of  her  feelings  beyond  saying,  4 1 don't  know  why  ; I 
felt  some  great  danger  was  near  you.'  These  are  simple  facts,  but  other 
things  more  puzzling  have  happened  in  connection  with  the  singular 
intuitions  of  my  wife. 

44  T.  W.  Smith." 

As  Mr.  Smith  was  cognisant  of  his  wife's  distress,  and  probably 
heard  her  tale  before  informing  her  of  what  had  befallen  him,  this 
evidence  is  practically  first-hand  (see  p.  1 48) ; but  it  is  incomplete, 
since,  for  ought  we  can  tell,  Mrs.  Smith  may  have  had  similar  alarms 
that  did  not  correspond  with  reality — which  would  diminish  the 
improbability  of  an  accidental  success. 

There  is  a similar  defect  in  the  next  piece  of  evidence — this  time 
owing  to  the  fact  that  M.  Ollivier  will  not  answer  our  letters.  Ho 
probably  thinks  his  own  account  sufficient,  and  does  not  see  the 
importance,  for  our  purposes,  of  fuller  information. 

44  Janvier  20,  1883." 

(52)  44  Le  10  octobre,  1881,  je  fus  appele  pour  service  medical  k la 
eampagne  k trois  lieues  de  chez-moi.  C'<$tait  au  milieu  de  la  nuit,  une  nuit  tr&s 
sombre.  Je  m'engageai  dans  un  petit  chemin  creux,  domine  par  des 
arbres  venant  former  une  voute  au  dessus  de  la  route.  La  nuit  6tait  si 
noire  que  je  lie  voyais  pas  k conduire  mon  eheval.  J e laissai  l'animal  se 
diriger  k son  instinct.  11  etait  environ  9 lieures  ; le  sentier  dans  lequel  je 
me  trouvais  en  le  moment  etait  parseme  de  grosses  pierres  rondes  et 
presentait  Une  pente  tres  rapide.  Le  eheval  allait  au  pas  tr&s  lentement. 
Tout  k coup,  les  pieds  de  ’devant  de  l’animal  fl^chissent  et  il  tombe 
subitemenl,  la  bouche  portant  sur  le  sol.  Je  fus  projete  naturellement 
par-dessus  sa  tete,  mon  epaule  porta  k terre,  et  je  me  fracturai  une 
clavicule. 

250  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chap,. 

“ En  le  moment  mSme,  ma  femme,  qui  se  deshabillait  chez  elle  et  se 
preparait  a se  mettre  au  lit,  eut  un  pressentiment  intime  qu’il  venait  de 
ntWriver  un  accident ; un  tremblement  nerveux  la  saisit,  elle  se  mit  a 
pleurer  et  appelle  la  bonne.  ‘ Yenez  vite, j’ai  peur ; il  est  arrive  quelquo 
malheur  ; mon  mari  est  mort  ou  blesse.’  Jusqu’a  mon  arrivee  elle  retint 
la  domestique  prfes  d elle,  et  ne  cessa  de  pleurer.  Elle  voulait  envoyer  un 
homme  a ma  recherche,  mais  elle  ne  savait  pas  dans  quel  village  j*4tais 
alle.  Je  rentrai  chez  moi  vers  1 heure  du  matin.  J’appela  la 
domestique  pour  m*6clairer  et  desseller  mon  cheval.  ‘Je  suis  blesse,* 
dis-je,  ‘je  ne  puis  bouger  l’epaule.’ 

“ Le  pressentiment  de  ma  femme  etait  confirme. 

“Voil&,  monsieur,  les  faits  tels  qu’ils  se  sont  passes,  etjesuis  tres 
heureux  de  pouvoir  vous  les  envoyer  dans  toute  leur  verite. 

“A.  Olliviek, 

“ Medecin  a Huelgoat,  Finistere.” 

I have  pointed  out  the  evidential  importance  of  ascertaining 
whether  such  impressions  as  these  have  been  unique  in  the 
percipient’s  experience.  But  occasionally,  where  the  same  percipient 
lias  had  several  such  impressions,  all  of  them  are  alleged  to  have 
corresponded  with  a real  event — or  (as  we  may  say  for  brevity)  to 
have  been  veridical.  We  found  such  a percipient  in  Mrs.  Gates,  of 
44,  Montpellier  Road,  Brighton,  whom  we  know  personally,  and  who 
has  given  us  several  instances  of  the  singular  sympathy  existing 
between  herself  and  her  children,  and  manifesting  itself  by  marked 
disquiet  at  moments  when  they  are  in  danger  or  pain,  although  she 
may  have?  no  means  of  knowing  it. 

To  our  inquiries  whether  she  had  ever  noticed  any  failures,  she 
said  * — 

“ I cannot  recall  any  occasion  of  my  experiencing  ominous  sensations 
with  regard  to  certain  of  my  children  that  have  been  entirely  groundless  ; 
still,  the  results  have  been  of  less  importance  than  my  emotions  presaged. 
For  instance,  on  a certain  evening,  about  three  months  ago,  I was  troubled 
about  my  son  Ross.  I received  a letter,  which  he  must  have  been  writing 
while  I was  so  nervous  about  him,  and  this  is  the  postcript : — 

“ ‘ Excuse  bad  writing.  I am  feeling  downright  ill  to-night,  cold 
shivers,  headache,  and  intense  thirst.  I think  Tm  in  for  a fever,  &c.,  &c/ 
“ He  had,  however,  no  illness ; the  feverish  symptoms  passed  away.” 

Now,  this,  of  course,  is  quite  unavailable  as  evidence ; but  several 
such  inconclusive  incidents  could  hardly  be  held  to  weaken  the  force* 
of  more  striking  ones.  Here,  for  instance,  is  a case  where  the 
coincident  crisis  was  more  sudden  and  serious. 

“ November  21st,  1882. 

“My  son  Ross,  a fine,  tall  young  fellow,  is  musical  attendant  at 
an  establishment  for  the  mentally  afflicted  near  Bath.  Sitting  with  my 

VI.]  AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES.  251 

family,  on  Monday  afternoon,  I remarked  to  my  son-in-law,  Mr.  Evelyn 
Dering,  ‘ I’m  so  unhappy  this  afternoon  about  Ross,  I can  think  of 
nothing  but  him.  What  a nuisance  I am  to  people  ! * This  moAiing  I 
received  a letter  from  my  son  in  which  he  says,  ‘ I had  a narrow  escape  on 
Monday  afternoon  ; one  of  our  patients,  named  Rummell,  attacked  me  with 
a chair.  After  a close  struggle,  I managed  to  blow  my  whistle,  and  get 
help  from  the  next  apartment.  I was  by  myself  with  a large  number  of 
men,  the  other  attendants  being  out  and  on  duty  in  other  places;  but 
thank  goodness  I did  not  get  hurt/  tfcc.,  &c.  This,  then,  was  happening 
at  the  very  time  those  singular  feelings  possessed  me.” 

Mr.  Evelyn  Dering  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

" 5,  Hova  Villas,  West  Brighton. 

“ I write  to  confirm  what  Mrs.  H.  S.  Gates  gave  you  particulars  of* 
It  was  certainly  previous  to  receiving  the  letter  from  her  son  Ross  that 
she  expressed  to  me  the  painful  anxiety  she  was  suffering  on  his  account.” 

The  next  instance  is  more  definite  still,  and  may  be  numbered  as 
an  evidential  case. 

(53)  “One  August  morning,  in  1874  or  1875,  at  breakfast,  the  well- 
known  feeling  stole  over  me.  Waiting  till  all  had  left  the  table  excepting  my 
second  daughter,  I remarked  to  her,  ‘ 1 am  feeling  so  restless  about  one  of 

my  absent  boys  ! It  is ; and  I feel  as  if  I was  looking  at  blood  ! r 

The  son  in  question,  in  a letter  received  a few  days  later,  inquired  of  Mrs* 
Gates  as  follows  : 4 Write  in  your  next  if  you  had  any  presentiments- 

during  last  week.  We  were  going  to canal,  fishing,  and  I got  up  at 

the  first  sound  of  the  bell,  and  taking  my  razor  to  shave,  began  to  sharpen 
it  on  my  hand,  and  being,  I suppose,  only  half  awake,  failed  to  turn  the 
razor,  and  cut  a piece  clean  out  of  my  left  hand.  An  artery  was  cut  in 
two  places,,  and  bled  dreadfully/  ” 

[The  fact  of  Mrs.  Gates’s  alarm  and  vision  of  blood  has  been  confirmed 
to  us  independently  by  the  daughter,  Mrs.  Darnley,  to  whom  she  described 
it  at  the  moment.  The  letter,  which  we  have  seen,  was  dated  August  16th, 
but  without  the  year.  The  full  description  shows  that  the  pain  was 
exceedingly  severe,  and  that  the  writer  had  fainted.] 

§ 4.  There  is  one  interesting  group  of  cases  where  the  idea 
apparently  impressed  oil  the  percipient  has  been  simply  that  of  the 
agent’s  approach.  But  here,  again,  great  caution  is  necessary.  Popular 
opinion  is  extremely  apt  to  invest  presentiments  of  this  sort  with  a 
character  to  which  they  have  no  claim.  Every  day,  probably,  a large 
number  of  people  have  a more  or  less  strong  impression,  for  which  they 
Can  assign  no  distinct  reason,  that  some  particular  person  is  near  them 
or  is  coming  to  see  them.  That  with  some  people  such  an  impression 
should  |>rove  correct  often  enough  to  be  remarked  on,  is  only  what  we 
should  naturally  expect;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  impression,  when 
apparently  confirmed  in  this  way,  would  look  to  .memory  more 

252 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

definite  and  confident  than  it  had  really  been.  "When  it  is  always 
about  the  same  person  that  the  impression  is  felt,  there  is  more 
privid  facia  ground  for  supposing  that  it  may  be  telepathic.  But 
-still  the  circumstances  may  make  it  quite  unavailable  as  evidence. 
For  instance,  Mr.  Rowland  Rowlands,  of  Bryncethin,  Bridgend,  tells 
11s  that  when  he  was  manager  of  the  Pen-y-graig  Collieries,  a man 
who  was  acting  under  him  as  foreman  (since  dead)  had  constantly  to 
<•0100  to  his  house  on  business  in  the  middle  of  the  night. 

“ I was  invariably  aware  of  his  coming,  in  dream,  before  he  actually 
appeared,  and  would  leave  my  bed  and  watch  for  him  at  the  window.  He 
himself  noticed  this,  and  told  the  other  men  that  he  never  came  but  he 
found  me  at  the  window  watching  for  him.” 

But  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  being  waked  at  night  for  a 
-special  purpose  know  the  way  in  which  the  expectation  will  often 
haunt  their  dreams  ; and  in  the  absence  of  more  definite  assurance 
that  the  man  was  never  expected  when  he  did  not  come,  and 
that  he  never  came  unexpected,  accident  is  the  reasonable  explanation 
of  the  coincidences.  Mrs.  Wheeler,  of  106,  High  Street,  Oxford,  tells  us 
that  in  the  summer  of  I860,  she  had  a similar  impression  “dozens  of 
times  ” with  respect  to  the  coming  of  a friend  from  Iffley,  and  that  it 
never  played  her  false.  But  this  friend  was  a constant  visitor,  and  if 
she  came  thirty  times  in  the  course  of  a few  months,  and  Mrs.  Wheeler 
had  the  impression  on  six  of  these  occasions  (which  is,  perhaps,  a fair 
scientific  translation  of  “dozens”),  accident  again  would  easily  account 
for  the  case.  Mrs.  Stella,  of  Chieri,  Italy,  tells  us  how,  when  she  was 
ill  years  ago,  a son,  who  was  quartered  six  miles  oft',  got  away  at 
night  on  five  or  six  occasions,  against  rules  and  at  considerable  risk, 
to  inquire  about  her  at  the  lodge. 

“ Although  unconscious  and  frequently  delirious,  I always  knew  when 
he  came,  and  called  him,  showing  signs  of  eagerness  and  restlessness.  At 
first  they  treated  it  as  pure  raving  on  my  part,  but  on  inquiry  they  found 
that  he  had  been  there  during  the  night.” 

This  is  a more  plausible  sample,  since  telepathic  sensibility  seems 
often  heightened  in  illness;  still,  the  necessary  precision  is  wholly 
lacking.  We  have,  however,  stronger  cases,  of  which  a couple  may 
be  worth  quoting  here.  The  first  is  remarkable  from  the  extreme 
improbability  of  the  visit ; the  second  from  the  number  of  times  in. 
succession  that  the  impression  proved  correct. 

Miss  M.  E.  Pritchard,  of  Tan-y-coed,  Bangor,  says : — 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

253 

«] 

“ January  30th,  1884. 

(54)  “ One  night,  at  12  (/clock,  I felt  a conviction  that  a friend  of  ours, 
Mr.  Jephson,  was  coming  to  see  us  very  shortly.  I mentioned  it  to  my 
sister,  who  merely  said  it  was  very  improbable,  as  he  must  be  on  his  way 
to  Canada,  as  such  was  his  intention  when  we  had  last  seen  him. 

“It  was  greatly  to  her  astonishment  when  he  actually  arrived  next 
morning  at  9 a.m.  When  questioned  as  to  the  time  of  his  arrival  we 
found  it  corresponded  to  the  time  of  my  remark,  and,  still  moro  curious, 
he  was  then  thinking  of  coming  straight  down  to  see  us,  but  decided  to 
wait  till  morning.  This  was  in  March,  1880,  as  far  as  I can  remember.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Pritchard  adds  : — 

“ February  7th,  1884. 

“ In  reply  to  your  question  as  to  whether  any  other  previous  impres- 
sions had  not  turned  out  true,  I think,  as  far  as  I can  remember,  any  deep 
impression  I have  ever  had  as  to  anyone  calling  has  invariably  been 
true.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Miss  Pritchard’s  sister : — 

“ Tan-y-coed,  February  8th,  1884. 

“I  distinctly  remember  my  sister  telling  me  (at  the  time)  of  her 
impression  that  a friend  was  on  his  way  to  see  us,  which  turned  out  to  bo 
the  fact. — E.  B.  Pritchard.” 

Mr.  Robert  Castle,  estate  agent  to  many  of  the  Oxford  colleges, 
and  well  known  to  Mr.  Podmore,  writes  as  follows : — 

“Oxford,  13th  October,  1883. 

(55)  “In  the  years  1851  and  1852,  when  I was  from  15  to  17  years  of 
age,  I was  left  in  charge  of  a considerable  extent  of  building  and  other 
estate  work  at  Didcot,  Berks,  at  which  some  50  or  60  men  were  employed 
and  for  so  young  a person  a good  deal  of  responsibility  was  put  upon  me, 
as  I was  only  visited  occasionally,  about  once  a fortnight  on  an  average, 
by  one  of  the  seniors  responsible  for  the  work. 

“ Occasionally  this  senior  was  my  brother  Joseph,  about  eight  years 
older  than  myself,  and  who  had  always  taken,  even  for  a brother,  a very 
great  deal  of  interest  in  my  welfare,  and  between  whom  and  myself  a. 
very  strong  sympathy  existed. 

“ I was  very  rarely  apprised  by  letter  of  these  visits,  but  almost 
invariably  before  my  brother  came  (sometimes  the  day  before,  at  other 
times  at  some  previous  hour  on  the  same  day)  it  would  suddenly  come 
into  my  mind  as  a quite  clear  and  certain  thing,  how,  I cannot  say,  that 
my  brother  was  coming  to  see  me,  and  would  arrive  about  a certain  hour, 
sometimes  in  the  morning  and  sometimes  in  the  afternoon,  and  I cannot 
remember  a single  occasion  on  which  I had  received  one  of  these  vivid 
impressions,  on  which  he  did  not  arrive  as  expected. 

“I  nkd,  without  thinking  particularly  about  it,  got  to  act  upon  the- 
faith  of  .these  impressions  as  much  as  if  I had  received  a letter ; and  the 
singularity  of  the  occurrence  was  not  brought  very  forcibly  to  my  own 
mind  until  one  day  when  the  foreman  asked  me  to  give  him  instructions 
us  to  how  a portion  of  the  work  should  be  carried  out — when  I answered 

254 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

him  quite  naturally,  ‘ Oh,  leave  it  to-day,  Joe  will  be  here  about  4 o’clock 
this  afternoon,  and  I would  rather  wait  and  ask  his  advice  about  it.’ 

u The  foreman,  who  had  access  to  my  office,  and  usually  knew  what 
letters  I received,  said,  c Perhaps  it  would  be  as  well,  but  I didn’t  know 
that  you  had  received  a letter  from  Oxford.’ 

“ I had  to  explain  to  him  that  I had  not  received  a letter,  and  that  it 
was  merely  by  an  impression  I knew  my  brother  was  coming,  and  upon 
this  I got  a hearty  laugh  only  for  my  credulity. 

“ As  my  brother  turned  up  all  right  at  the  time  named,  the  foreman 
would  not  be  convinced  that  I had  not  been  playing  a trick  upon  him, 
and  that  I had  not  received  a letter  and  put  it  away  so  that  he  might  not 
know  of  it. 

“ The  strangeness  of  the  matter  then  induced  me  to  arrange  with  the 
foreman  always  to  let  him  know,  as  soon  as  1 might  have  the  opportunity, 
on  the  occurrence  of  these  impressions,  so  that  he  might  check  them  as 
well  as  myself ; and  he,  although  he  gave  up  all  attempts  to  explain  the 
singularity  of  the  tiling,  came  afterwards  to  trust  the  certainty  of  their 
being  right  as  much  as  I did  myself. 

“ I told  my  brother  of  them,  who  was  very  much  puzzled  and  could 
not  account  for  so  strange  an  occurrence ; but  on  comparing  my 
statements  as  to  the  time  when  the  impressions  occurred  to  me,  in  a 
number  of  cases,  he  said  that,  so  far  as  lie  could  check  the  time,  it  would 
seem  to  have  been  always  at  or  about  the  time  when  he  first  received 
liis  instructions,  or  knew  of  the  arrangement  having  been  made  for  him 
to  come. 

“ As  both  the  foreman  and  my  brother  have  been  dead  for  some 
years  past,  I have  no  means  of  comparing  their  recollections  of  these 
matters  with  my  own. 

“ Perhaps  I should  add  that  my  brother  was  living  at  Oxford  at  the 
time,  10  miles  or  so  from  Didcot;  and  that  although  I was  visited  from 
time  to  time  by  other  gentlemen  beside  my  brother,  I cannot  remember 
having  had  these  previous  impressions  in  any  case  except  his.” 

“ Robert  Castle.” 

Here  real  pains  seem  to  have  been  taken  to  test  the  phenomenon 
fairly;  but  the  case  is  rather  remote,  and  it  is  very  unfortunate  that  no 
notes  were  taken  at  the  time.  Some  further  specimens  will  be  found 
in  the  Supplement ; and  parallel  cases  where  there  was  an  actual 
sensory  impression  of  the  person  about  to  arrive  will  be  found  in 
€hap.  XIV. 

§ 5.  So  far,  the  impressions  that  corresponded  with  real  events  have 
4x11  been  ideas  of  a more  or  less  abstract  kind ; the  fact  was  realised,  but 
no  image  of  the  actual  scene  was  called  up  in  the  percipients  mind. 
We  now  come  to  a series  of  more  concrete  impressions — still  belonging, 
however,  to  the  non-sensory  family ; for  though  they  have  evoked 
sensory  images  with  more  or  less  distinctness,  they  have  not  suggested 

VI.] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

255 

to  the  percipient  any  actual  affection  of  the  senses.  And  they  continue 
to  present  this  marked  point  of  analogy  to  the  results  of  experimental 
thought-transference,  that  the  images  or  the  scene  evoked  before  the 
percipient’s  mind  reflected  (either  wholly  or  in  great  part)  the  images 
or  scene  with  which  the  agent’s  attention  was  actually  occupied. 

In  alleged  transferences  of  this  distinct  and  detailed  sort , it  is,  of 
course,  essential  to  the  evidence  that  the  scene  with  which  the 
percipient  is  inwardly  impressed  should  not  be  one  that  might,  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  things,  have  been  pictured  correctly,  or  with 
sufficient  correctness  for  the  description  to  seem  applicable.  The 
tendency  to  make  the  most  of  such  correspondences  must  here  be  care- 
fully borne  in  mind.  For  instance,  a lady  of  our  acquaintance  communi- 
cated the  following  experience.  An  old  friend  of  hers  in  Wales  had 
been  earnestly  longing  to  receive  the  Communion  on  a particular 
Sunday,  but  was  prevented  by  illness.  On  this  Sunday,  our  informant, 
who  was  in  London,  and  who  was  unaware  of  her  friend’s  desire,  and 
had  never  seen  the  church — 

“ Had  a vision  of  her  sitting  quietly  in  her  place  in  the  little  village 
church,  waiting  to  receive  the  rite.  The  church  was  evidently  much 
neglected,  and  the  floor  and  the  matting  were  thickly  covered  with  dust. 
On  inquiry,  I was  assured  that  such  was  the  condition  of  the  church. 
The  phantasm  appeared  as  really  present  at  the  spot  to  which  my  friend’s 
desire  had  focussed  her  thoughts.” 

But  here,  it  will  bo  seen,  the  one  detail  that  the  narrator 
(who  was  much  given  to  visualising)  would  not  have  boon  quite 
likely  to  imagine  spontaneously,  was  the  dusty  condition  of  the  church. 
Even  that  is  a doubtful  exception  ; and  it  is  moreover  a point  which 
would  be  very  likely  to  get  unconsciously  worked  into  the  vision  after 
the  actual  state  of  the  case  was  learnt.  The  following  cases  seem  to  be 
free  from  these  objections.  The  first  shall  be  another  specimen  from 
the  Remarkable  series  of  impressions  which  have  been  experienced  by 
Mr.  J.  G.  Keulemans  (see  pp.  196 'and  235). 

“November,  1882. 

(56)  “ One  morning,  not  long  ago,  while  engaged  with  some  very  easy 
work,  I saw  in  my  mind’s  eye  a little  wicker  basket,  containing  five  eggs, 
two  very  clean,  of  a more  than  usually  elongated  oval  and  of  a yellowish  hue, 
one  very  round,  plain  white,  but  smudged  all  over  with  dirt ; the  remaining 
two  bore  no  peculiar  marks.  I asked  myself  what  that  insignificant  but 
sudden  image  could  mean.  I never  think  of  similar  objects.  But  that 
basket  remained  fixed  in  my  mind,  and  occupied  it  for  some  moments. 
About  two  hours  later  I went  into  another  room  for  lunch.  I was  at  once 

256 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

struck  with  the  remarkable  similarity  between  the  eggs  standing  in  the 
egg-cups  on  the  breakfast  table  and  those  two  very  long  ones  I had  in  my 
imagination  previously  seen.  ‘ Why  do  you  keep  looking  at  those  eggs  so 
carefully? 9 asked  my  wife  ; and  it  caused  her  great  astonishment  to  learn 
from  me  how  many  eggs  had  been  sent  by  her  mother  half  an  hour  before. 
She  then  brought  up  the  remaining  three  ; there  was  the  one  with  the  dirt 
on  it,  and  the  basket,  the  same  I had  seen.  On  further  inquiry,  I found 
that  the  eggs  had  been  kept  together  by  my  mother-in-law,  that  she  had 
placed  them  in  the  basket  and  thought  of  sending  them  to  me  ; and,  to  use 
her  own  words,  ‘ I did  of  course  think  of  you  at  that  moment.’  She  did 
this  at  10  in  the  morning,  which  (as  I know  from  my  regular  habits)  must 
have  been  just  the  time  of  my  impression. 

“J.  G.  Keulemans.” 

. Mrs.  Keulemans  tells  us  that  she  has  almost  forgotten  the  incident. 
“ All  1 can  say  is  that  my  husband  looked  at  some  eggs  and  made  the 
remark  that  he  had  seen  them  before.  I know  he  told  me  my  mother  had 
sent  them.” 

Here  the  very  triviality  of  this  incident,  as  well  as  the  smallness: 
and  definiteness  of  the  object  visualised,  makes  the  resemblance  to 
cases  of  experimental  thought-transference  specially  close.1 

In  the  examples  which  follow,  the  idea  of  something  less  circum- 
scribed than  a single  object,  and  more  of  the  nature  of  a complete 
scene,  seems  to  have  been  transmitted.  We  will  begin  with  a case 
when  the  visualisation,  if  there  was  any,  was  extremely  vague.  Miss 
M.  E.  Pritchard,  Tan-y-coed,  Bangor  (the  contributor  of  case  54? 
above),  writes : — 

“ January  30th,  1884. 

(56)  “Two  years  ago  I awoke,  one  night,  with  a curious  sensation  of 
being  in  a sick  room,  and  of  the  presence  of  people  who  were  anxiously 
watching  the  bedside  of  some  person,  who  was  dangerously  ill.  It  was  not 
till  some  time  after  that  we  heard  that  one  of  my  sisters,  then  living  in 
Florida,  had  been  very  ill  of  a fever,  and  was  at  the  time  of  the  incident 
in  a most  critical  state. 

“Maggie  E.  Pritchard.” 

1 Mr.  Keulemans  is  a trained  observer,  and  has  made  a careful  study  of  his  peculiar 
mental  pictures,  the  subjects  of  which  range  from  single  objects,  as  in  the  above  case,  to 
complete  scenes.  He  says  : “ They  are  always  marked  by  a strange  sensation.  There  is  no 
attempt  on  my  part  to  conjure  them  up — on  the  contrary,  they  come  quite  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly,  binding  my  thoughts  so  fixedly  to  the  subject,  as  to  render  all  external 
influences  imperceptible.  Whenever  I took  the  trouble  to  ascertain  whether  my 
impressions  corresponded  to  real  events,  I found  them  invariably  to  do  so,  even  in  tho 
most  minute  details.”  But  his  cases  naturally  differ  in  their  evidential  force.  He  tells  us, 
for  instance,  that  on  New  Year’s  Eve,  1881,  he  had  a vivid  picture  of  his  family  circle  it* 
Holland,  but  missed  from  the  group  his  youngest  sister,  a child  of  14,  whose  absence  from 
home  on  such  an  occasion  was  most  improbable.  He  wrote  at  once  to  ask  if  this  sister  wa# 
ill ; but  the  answer  was  that,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  she  had  been  away  from  home. 
This  may  plainly  have  been  an  accidental  coincidence. 

YI.] 

AND . OF  MENTAL  PICTURES . 

257 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Pritchard  adds  : — 

“ I have  never  had  any  other  experience  of  an  impression  of  sickness  or 
death. 

“The  impression  of  sickness  was  not  the  continuation  of  a dream  and 
hardly  a distinct  waking  impression.  I woke  from  a heavy  sleep  with  a 
great  sense  of  oppression,  which  gradually  seemed  to  assume  a distinct 
impression.  It  lasted  about  half  an  hour,  that  is,  the  actual  impression, 
but  I had  a great  feeling  of  uneasiness  for  several  days.  I have  never  had 
any  hallucinations  or  dreams  of  death.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Miss  Pritchard’s  sister : — 

“February  8th,  1884. 

“ I recollect  my  sister  telling  me  of  her  feeling  of  being  in  a sick  room 
with  people  watching  round  a bedside.  She  did  not  mention  it  to  me  till 
the  morning  (it  occurred  during  the  night).  It  did  not  make  much 
impression  on  me  at  the  time — not  till  afterwards,  when  we  heard  of, 
our  sister’s  dangerous  illness. 

“ E.  B.  Pritchard.” 

The  next  instance  is  somewhat  more  definite.  It  is  from  Mr# 
John  Hopkins,  of  23,  King  Street,  Carmarthen. 

“ May  2nd,  1884. 

(58)  “ One  evening,  in  the  early  spring  of  last  year  (1883),  as  I was 
retiring  to  bed — but  whilst  I was  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  good  health  and 
active  senses — I distinctly  saw  my  mother  and  my  younger  sister  crying. 

I was  here  in  Carmarthen,  and  they  were  away  in  Monmouthshire,  80  miles 
distant.  They  distinctly  appeared  to  me  to  be  giving  way  to  grief,  and 
I was  at  once  positive  that  some  domestic  bereavement  had  taken  place. 

I said  to  myself,  ‘ I shall  hear  something  of  this  in  the  morning.’  When 
the  morning  came  the  first  thing  which  was  handed  to  me  was  a letter 
from  my  father  in  Monmouthshire,  stating  that  they  had,  on  the  day  of 
writing,  had  intelligence  that  my  nephew  had  just  died.  The  little  boy 
was  the  son  of  my  elder  sister,  living  in  North  Devon.  There  was  no 
doubt  but  that  my  mother  and  younger  sister  had  both  given  way  to 
grief  on  the  day  of  my  strange  illusion,  and  it  was  in  some  mysterious 
manner  communicated  to  my  mind — together  with  a certain  presentiment 
that  I was  on  the  eve  of  intelligence  of  a death  in  the  family.  I 
thought  it  most  probable,  though,  that  the  imaginative  faculty  added — in 
a purely  local  manner — the  idea  of  speedy  intelligence  to  the  communica- 
tion which  the  mind  received  in  some  strange  way  from  Monmouthshire. 

“ It  was  the  only  occurrence  of  the  sort  I have  ever  experienced. 

“John  Hopkins.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hopkins  says  : — 

“May  15th,  1884. 

“ I,  at  Carmarthen,  had  news  on  the  following  morning,  as  I 
thoroughly  expected  to,  of  a death — that  of  a nephew.  I had  no 
opportunity  of  mentioning  the  circumstance  to  anyone  before  the  letter 
came.  X am  sorry  to  say,  too,  tliat  I have  destroyed  the  letter. 

“ As  to  the  reality  of  the  scene  in  my  mind — speaking  as  correctly 
as  I can  at  this  distance  of  time  from  the  occurrence  (about  a year  ago) — - 

s 

258  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chap. 

I don’t  think  the  affair  did*  produce  a picture  on  my  mind  more  vivid 
than  might  have  been  summoned  there  by  closing  the  eyes  and  putting 
some  strain  upon  the  imagination.  It  certainly  did  not  make  the  outward 
eye  fancy  it  saw  something,  as  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle  has  suggested  may  be 
the  case  in  some  instances.  But  there  was  this  peculiarity.  The  scene 
was  impressed  upon  my  mind  without  closing  of  the  eyes  or  any  other 
inducement  to  absent-mindedness  and  without  the  imagination  from  myself, 
so  far  as  I can  say,  going  out  in  that  direction.  It  was  also  more  firmly 
riveted  upon  my  mind  than  any  passing,  or  what  one  may  term  accidental 
impression  would  be.  It  was  fixed  there.  I could  not  get  rid  of  it,  and 
I felt  certain  it  meant  something,  which  it  certainly  did. 

“ Although  the  locale  was  familiar  to  me,  I don’t  think  there  had  been 
more  wanderings  of  memory  to  it  than  to  other  places  I knew,  and  the 
state  of  grief  which  my  relatives  were  in  may  be  said  to  have  been  the  only 
exceptional  feature.” 

The  scene,  however,  sometimes  makes  a much  more  vivid  impres- 
sion than  this.  Here  arc  a couple  more  eases  from  the  rather  con- 
siderable group  where  the  event  that  befalls  the  agent  is  either  death 
or  a near  approach  to  deatli  by  drowning.  One  example  of  this  sort 
lias  already  occurred  (p.240);  and  their  number  altogether  is  sufficient 
to  suggest  that  this  particular  condition  on  the  agents  part  is,  for 
some  unknown  reason,  a specially  favourable  one  for  the  generation 
of  the  telepathic  impulse. 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Paris  ( nee  Griffiths),  of 
33,  High  Street,  Lowestoft. 

u April  30th,  1884.  . 

(59)  “We  were  a family  of  eight.  Twenty  years  ago  we  were 
all  at  home  but  one,  H.  This  was  by  no  arrangement,  but  by 
what  seemed  a series  of  coincidences.  H.  was  to  join  us  on 
Wednesday,  August  3rd,  to  leave  his  situation,  and  spend  a few 
days  at  home  before  entering  on  his  new  one.  On  the  Sunday  previous 
to  his  coming  we  had  been  to  church- -I  for  the  first  time  after  a 
protracted  illness.  My  sister  was  too  much  occupied  with  her  inf  ant  niece, 
and  had  not  been  with  us.  We  met  my  sister’s  friend,  Miss  J.,  a Russian 
lady,  highly  accomplished,  and  very  intelligent.  She  walked  home  with 
us,  and  we  insisted  on  her  staying  to  our  early  dinner.  My  sister  was 
delighted  to  have  her  to  recount  the  precocious  charms  of  our  infantile 
treasure.  It  was  a very  pleasant  morning. 

“ I have  given  these  details  rather  minutely  to  show  that  there  was 
nothing  in  the  surrounding  circumstances  to  cause  depression.  .My  sister 
was  in  good  health,  even  better  than  usual.  Well,  we  had  gone  through 
the  first  course;  the  second  was  being  placed  on  the  table,  when  Miss  J. 
asked  { Where  is  Marianne  ? ’ — my  sister.  My  mother  remarked  that  she  had 
left  the  room  some  minutes  since,  and  did  not  seem  well.  I immediately 
went  out,  and  after  looking  all  through  the  house  and  not  finding  her,  went 
into  the  garden.  There  I found  her  sitting  with  her  head  resting  on  her 
hands,  looking  into  what  was  called  the  6 quarry  ’ — an  unused  working,  < 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

m 

VI.] 

then  and  for  years  before  flooded.  From  whete  she  sat  she  could  see  the 
water  looking  so  still  and  black.  She  was  quite  unaware  of  my  presence. 
I put  my  hands  on  her  shoulders,  and  asked,  ‘ What  is  the  matter  ? ’ She 
evidently  neither  felt  nor  heard  me.  I then  went  to  her  side  and  sh&ll 
never  forget  the  expression  of  her  face.  She  looked  perfectly  paralysed 
with  fear  and  horror.  Her  eyes  seemed  riveted  to  that  water,  as  if  she 
was  witnessing  an  awful  scene,  and  could  give  no  help.  ‘ What  is  the 
matter,  my  dear  ? ’ She  was  still  insensible  to  my  presence  and  touch.  In 
a few  seconds  she  gave  such  a cry  of  suppressed  agony  and  said,  ‘ Oh,  lie's 
gone.'  She  then  seemed  to  become  aware  of  my  presence  and  turned  a 
look  of  agonised  entreaty  on  me,  and  yet  there  was  a little  relief.  Presently 
she  said,  ‘ Oh,  J.,  do  go  away  and  leave  me.'  I begged  her  to  come  in,  and 
then  as  if  she  could  bear  it  no  longer  she  said,  ‘ Oh,  J.,  he’s  gone.  Oh, 
God,  he’s  gone,  my  poor  dear  H.J  I begged  her  not  to  restrain  herself  so 
terribly,  but  to  tell  me  what  was  wrong.  Very  slowly,  as  if  it  cost  her 
unspeakable  suffering,  she  said,  ‘ There  is  something  terrible  taking  place/ 
I lightly  answered,  ‘ Of  course,  that  is  true  all  the  year  round.  When  is 
the  moment  but  that  some  soul  is  meeting  its  Author  ? ’ She  shivered,  and 
after  a good  deal  of  persuasion  she  returned  with  me  into  the  room — she 
evidently  not  wishing  to  excite  or  trouble  me.  I thought  no  more  of  it. 
Miss  J.  had  gone  with  her  to  her  room  and  had  insisted  on  her  lying  down, 
and  induced  her  to  relieve  herself  by  telling  her,  Miss  J.,  all  about  it.  She 
was  so  much  impressed  with  what  she  had  heard  that  she  left  my  sister, 
promising  to  return  after  afternoon  service.  At  about  3 o’clock  that 
afternoon  we  received  the  news  of  the  death  of  our  dear  II.  by  drowning 
and  of  his  friend,  G.  He  was  on  his  way  to  church  with  the  other 
members  of  the  choir.  Tempted  by  the  delightful  weather,  and  the 
inviting  look  of  the  water,  several  of  them  proposed  a ‘dip/  ‘just  one  for 
the  last  time,  H.’  He  complied,  was  first  in,  and  had  only  gone  into  water 
up  to  his  knees,  when  he  called  out  that  he  was  drowning.  His  companions 
were  panic-stricken,  and  declared  afterwards  that  they  could  .not  move. 
One  at  last  recovered  presence  of  mind  sufficient  to  shout,  and  then 
to  run  the  short  distance  to  the  church,  and  called  out,  ‘G.,  H.  is 
drowning,  come,  quick/  G.  rushed  out,  undressing  as  he  went,  and 
throwing  his  clothes  along  the  road,  jumped  in,  and  would  undoubtedly 
have  saved  him,  but  II.  clutched  hold  of  him,  and  they  both  sank  to  rise  no 
more,  just  a few  minutes  before  2 o’clock,  and  at  the  moment  my  sister 
called  out,  * He’s  gone/ 

“We  found  her  in  a deep  sleep,  looking  years  older,  but  quite  prepared 
for  the  news,  for  when  my  brother  roused  her,  she  said,  ‘ Have  they 
come  ? Thoy  have  not  brought  him  hoqie  yet,  have  they  ? ’ Miss  J. 
came,  seemingly  quite  prepared  to  hear  of  our  sorrow.  She  told  me 
afterwards  that  my  sister  had  described  the  scene  and  the  place,  although 
she  had  certainly  never  been  there.  There  was  no  precedent  for  his 
bathing  on  Sunday,  nothing  to  suggest  to  her  mind  the  possibility  of  his 
doing  so. 

“ Had  I been  the  recipient  of  this  ‘warning,’  ‘ presentiment/ 

* revelation,’  or  whatever  it  may  be  called,  weakness  and  consequent 
nervousness  might  have  been  urged  as  a predisposing  cause,  but  it  could  not 
he  urged  in  my  sister’s  case.  She  was  twenty-seven  at  the  time,  and  we  have 
always  been  pronounced  ‘ sensible  women  with  no  nonsense  about  them/ 

s 2 

260 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Paris  writes : — 

* May  10th,  1884. 

“ My  sister  and  Miss  J.  are  both  dead.  ...  In  answer  to  your 
next  inquiry  I have  written  to  my  father  to  ask  the  questions  as  to  the 
distance,  &c.  He  thinks  ‘ Bo’ness/  where  the  accident  took  place,  was 
about  13  or  14  miles  from  Blackball  (where  the  family  were  then  residing). 
I think  I said  3 o’clock  the  news  reached  us.  He  puts  it  a little  later.  As 
to  the  character  of  the  water,  it  was  the  Firth  of  Forth ; but  I know 
nothing  of  the  place.  My  father  says  there  was  a steep  place,  caused  by 
water  running  in  from  an  engine  in  connection  with  Mr.  Wilson’s  works 
there,  and  that  H.  got  into  that  deep  pool.  The  time  of  afternoon  service 
was  from  2 till  3.30.  Perhaps  you  know  that  in  the  Scotch  churches 
there  is  only  a short  interval  between  the  services.  My  brother  was  nearly 
19.  As  to  there  being  any  special  reason  why  my  sister  should  have  had 
the  experience  rather  than  myself,  there  are,  to  my  mind,  two.  First,  she* 
was  of  a much  more  contemplative  cast  of  mind.  She  was  dreamy,  I very 
active.  But  the  second  is,  to  my  mind,  the  most  powerful  reason  in 
this  instance.  You  will  have  observed  in  all  large  families  the  members, 
pair  off,  on  the  principle  of  like  drawing  to  like,  I suppose.  She  and  II. 
paired  off. 

“ Jane  Paris.” 

The  Airdrie  Advertiser  tor  Saturday,  August  6th,  1864,  confirms  the 
fact  that  the  accident  took  place  on  the  afternoon  of  the  previous  Sunday. 

The  following  ease  is  given  on  the  authority  of  the  late  Dr. 
Goodall  Jones,  of  G,  Prince  Edwin  Street,  Liverpool;  and  as  he 
was  not  only  made  cognisant  of  the  percipient’s  impression  immedi- 
ately after  its  occurrence,  but  also  actually  saw  the  percipient  in  the 
state  of  excitement  which  the  impression  had  produced,  and  many 
hours  before  the  coincident  event  had  been  heard,  of,  his  account  may 
be  taken  as  on  a level  With  first-hand  evidence,  and  perhaps  even 
in  this  particular  instance  as  preferable  to  first-hand  evidence.  Dr. 
Jones  wrote  to  us  : — 

“ November  28th,  1883. 

(60)  " Mrs.  Jones,  wife  of  William  Jones,  a Liverpool  pilot,  living  at 
46,  Virgil  Street  [since  removed  to  15,  St.  George’s  Street,  Everton],  was. 
confined  on  Saturday,  February  27th,  1869.  On  my  calling  next  day,. 
Sunday,  February  28th,  at  3 p.m.,  her  husband  met  me,  saying  he  was 
jusjb  coming  for  me,  his  wife  was  delirious.  He  said  that  about  half-an- 
hour  before  he  was  reading  in  her  room,  when  she  suddenly  woke  up  from 
a sound  sleep,  saying  that  her  brother,  William  Roulands  (also  a Liverpool 
pilot),  was  drowning  in  the  river  (Mersey).  Her  husband  tried  to  soothe 
her  by  telling  her  that  Roulands  was  on  his  station  outside,  and  could 
not  be  in  the  river  at  the  time.  She,  however,  persisted  that  she  had  Been 
him  drowning.  News  arrived  in  the  evening  th&t  about  the  t^me  named, 
2.30  p.m.,  Roulands  was  drowned.  There  was  a heavy  gale  outside } the* 
pilot  boat  was  unable  to  put  a pilot  on  board  an  inward-bound  ship,  and 
had  to  lead  the  way  in.  When  in  the  river,  opposite  the  rock  lighthouse. 

VI] 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

261 

another  attempt  was  made,  but  the  small  boat  ujfcet,  and  Roulands  and 
another  pilot  were  drowned.  When  Mrs.  J ones  was  informed  qf  his  death 
she  calmed  down,  and  made  a good  recovery.” 

The  following  two  cases  differ  from  most  of  the  preceding,  in  that 
the  condition  of  the  agent  was  only  slightly  abnormal,  and  the  pro- 
bability that  the  impressions  of  the  percipients  were  telepathic  rests 
entirely  on  the  exactitude  of  detail  in  the  correspondence.  The 
first  is  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson,  of  Wale  House,  Winding  Road, 
Halifax. 

“May,  1884. 

(61)  “About  the  year  1858,  on  a Sunday  afternoon, as  I sat  with  my  wife 
by  my  fireside  in  Halifax  (my  brothers  Tom  and  George  having  gone  to* 
Africa),  in  awaking  from  a nap,  I saw  my  brothers  in  Portugal 1 in  a row  in 
the  street  over  a dog  which  I saw  Tom  take  by  the  tail,  and,  with  a swing 
round,  pitch  over  a bridge  into  the  water.  I told  my  wife  what  I had 
seen,  and  the  impression  was  so  strong  that  I wrote  the  particulars, 
together  with  the  date,  with  a pencil  on  the  cupboard  door.  In  about  a 
month  afterj  I had  a letter  from  my  brothers  stating  that  they  had  arrived 
safely  in  Africa,  and  mentioning  that  on  their  way  they  called  at  Lisbon, 
and  there  got  into  a row  through  Tom’s  throwing  a dog  over  a bridge  into 
the  water,  and  that  they  had  narrowly  escaped  getting  locked  up  about  it. 
The  information  contained  in  the  letter  showed  also  that  the  time  of  the 
incident  corresponded  exactly  to  the  time  of  my  vision. 

“John  Ambler  Wilson.” 

“ The  foregoing  statement  is  quite  true. — Saraii  Ann  Wilson.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wilson  says  : — 

“March  30th,  1885. 

“ I did  not  know  that  my  brothers  were  likely  to  go  near  Lisbon.  I do 
not  remember  either  churches  or  ships.  I was  standing  on  a bridge  over  a 
river,  and  all  along,  so  far  as  I saw,  were  woodyards  with  wooden  workshops. 
With  regard  to  the  letter  in  which  my  brothers  spoke  of  the  accident,  I 
never  keep  letters.” 

The  following  is  from  a daughter  of  Mr.  Wilson  : — 

“ Heath  Villas,  Halifax. 

“ April  12th,  1885. 

“ I remember,  when  a child,  seeing  my  father  start  up,  open  the  cup- 
board door,  and  write  there  something  which  he  had  just  related  to  my 
mother  that  he  had  seen  in  a vision.  And  I remember  that  a letter  came 
from  my  uncles,  which  was  said  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  vision,  I have 
often  heard  the  particulars  referred  to  by  my  father  since. 

“Annie  S.  Oakes.” 

The  next  case  is  much  fuller  of  detail.  The  name  of  Jhe  narrator, 
Mrs.  L.,#is  only  withheld  from  publication  because  her  friends  would. 

1 It  is  not  meant  that  the  idea  of  Portugal  formed  part  of  Mr.  Wilson’s  impression. 

262  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chap. 

object  to  its  appeanjpce.  She  has  had  other  similar  experiences,  but 
the  following  is  the  only  one  which  she  can  accurately  recall. 

“January,  1885. 

(62)  “ Some  years  ago,  the  writer,  when  recovering  from  an  illness, 
had  a remarkable  experience  of  ‘ second-sight.’  It  was  thus  : — 

“A  friend  had  been  invited  to  dinner,  whom  the  writer  was  most 
anxious  to  consult  on  a.  subject  of  grave  anxiety.  At  7 o’clock  the  servant 
came  to  ask,  ‘If  dinner  should  be  served  or  not,  as  the  guest  had  not 
arrived.’ 

“The  writer  said  at  once,  and  without  hesitation,  ‘No,  put  off  the 

dinner  till  8 o’clock.  Mr.  A.  will  arrive  at Station  by  7.45  train; 

send  the  carriage  there  to  meet  him.’ 

“The  writer’s  husband,  surprised  at  this  announcement,  said,  ‘ Why 
did  you  not  tell  us  this  before,  and  when  did  Mr.  A.  let  you  know  of  the 
delay  in  his  arrival  ? ’ 

“The  writer  then  explained  that  there  had  been  no  intimation  from 
Mr.  A.,  but  that  as  she  had  been  lying  there,  on  the  couch,  and 
anxiously  hoping  to  see  her  guest,  she  had  had  a distinct  vision  of  him,  at 
a certain  place  (mentioning  the  name  of  the  town)  ; that  she  had  seen 
him  going  over  a ‘ House  to  Let  ’ ; that,  having  missed  the  train  and  also 
the  ferry,  he  had  crossed  the  l iver  in  a small  boat  and  scrambled  up  the 
steep  bank,  tripping  in  doing  so,  and  that  he  had  run  across  a ploughed 

field,  taking  up  the  train  at  a side  station,  which  would  arrive  at t-  at 

a quai'ter  to  8 p.m. 

“ The  writer  gave  all  these  particulars  without  any  sort  of  mental 
effort,  and  felt  surprised  herself  at  the  time  that  they  should  arise  to  her 
mind  and  tongue. 

“Presently  Mr.  A.  arrived  full  of  apologies,  and  surprised  beyond 
measure  to  find  his  friend’s  carriage  awaiting  him  at  the  station.  He  then 
went  on  to  explain  that  he  had  that  morning  quite  suddenly  taken  it  into 

his  head  to  leave  town  for , and  finding  it  so  fresh  and  healthy  a 

place,  he  had  been  tempted  to  look  over  some  houses  to  let,  hoping  to 
be  able  to  get  one  for  a few  weeks  in  the  season  ; that  he  had  lost  time 
in  doing  this,  and  missed  botli  train  and  ferry ; that  he  had  bribed  a 
small  boat  to  row  him  over ; that  in  getting  up  the  side  bank,  he  fell, 
which  delayed  him  again,  but  that  he  had  just  contrived  to  catch  the  train 
at  a siding,  by  running  breathless  over  a field ; that  he  had  intended  to 
telegraph  on  arriving  at  the  station,  but,  meeting  the  carriage  there, 
lie  had  felt  bound  to  come  on,  to  explain  and  apologise,  in  spite  of  delay, 
and  ‘ morning  dress,’  tfcc.,  &c.” 

The  following  is  a letter  from  Mr.  A.  to  Mrs.  L.  : — 

“ February  J 6th,  1885/ 

“Dear  Mrs.  L., — Anent  that  Indian  incident,  your  seeing  me,  and 
what  I was  doing  at  Barrackpore  one  evening,  you  yourself  being  in 
Calcutta  at  the  time. 

“It  is  now  so  long  ago,  13  years,  I think,  that  I cannot  recall  all  the 
circumstances,  but  I do  remember  generally. 

“ I left  home  one  morning  without  the  intention  of  going  from  Cal- 
cutta during  the  day,  but  I did  go  from  Calcutta  to  Barrackpore  an^ 
spent  some  time  in  looking  through  the  bungalows  to  let. 

ti.]  AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES.  2$3 

* 

“I  remember  I crossed  in  a small  boat— not  by  the  ferry,  and  niy 
impression  is  that  I did  not  ’land  at  the  usual  jetty,  but,  instead,  at  the 
bank  opposite  the  houses  which  I wished  to  see. 

“ I missed  the  train  by  which  I would  ordinarily  have  travelled,  and 
consequently  arrived  in  Calcutta  considerably  later  than  your  usual  dinner- 
hour. 

“ X cannot  remember  distinctly  that  I found  any  gharry  at  the  Bar- 
rackpore  train,  Calcutta  Station,  but  you  may  probably  remember  whether 
you  sent  the  gharry  ; but  I do  remember  my  astonishment  that  you  had 
put  back  dinner  against  my  return  from  Barraekpore  by  that  particular 
train,  you  having  had  no  previous  direct  knowledge  of  my  having  gone  to 
Barraekpore  at  all. 

“ I remember,  too,  your  tolling  me  generally  what  I had  been  doing  at 
Barraekpore,  and  how  I had  missed  the  earlier  train.  And  on  my 
inquiry,  ‘ How  on  earth  do  you  know  these  things  ? ’ you  said,  ‘ I saw 
you/  Expecting  me  by  that  train  I can  quite  understand  your  having 
sent  the  carriage  for  me,  although  that  particular  item  is  not  clearly  on 
my  memory. 

“ I can  well  remember  that  at  the  time  of  the  incident  you  were  in  a 
very  delicate  state  of  health. 

“ Bo  you  remember  that  other  occasion  in  Calcutta,  a holiday,  when 
Mrs.  L.  called,  I being  out,  and  on  her  inquiring  for  mo  your  informing 
her  that  T had  gone  to  the  bootmakers  and  the  hatters,  you  having  had 
no  previous  intimation  from  me  of  any  such-  intention  on  my  part  ? and 
our  astonishment  and  amusement  when  I did  a little  later  turn  up,  a new 
liat  in  my  hand,  and  fresh  from  registering  an  order  at  the  bootmakers  ? 

“ These  have  always  appeared  to  me  very  extraordinary  incidents,  and 
the  first,  especially,  incapable  of  explanation  in  an  ordinary  way.” 

Mrs.  L.  recollects  the  other  incident  referred  to,  but  that  she  is  not 
inclined  to  think  it  of  much  importance. 

She  adds : — 

“ The  river  crossed  was  the  Hooghly  from  Serampore  to  Barraekpore, 
where  the  house  was  situated  which  Mr.  A.  looked  over.  The  station  he 
arrived  at  was  in  Calcutta,  T think  called  the  South  Eastern,  but  of  this 
I am  not  sure.” 

The  next  account  is  from  a lady  who  is  an  active  philanthropist, 
and  as  practical  and  unvisionary  a person  as  could  be  found.  She  has 
no  special  interest  in  our  work,  and  withholds  her  name  on  the  ground' 
that  her  friends  would  dislike  or  despise  the  subject.  This  is  one  of 
the  ways  in  which  the  present  state  of  thought  and  feeling  often 
prevents  the  facts  from  having  their  legitimate  force. 

“May  9th,  1883. 

(63)  “It  happened  one  Tuesday  last  January.  I was  going  to  start  for 
one  of  my  usual  visits  to  Southampton.  In  the  morning  I received  a letter 
from  a friend  saying  he  was  going  to  hunt  that  day,  and  would  write  next , 
day,  so  that  I should  get  the  letter  on  my  return  home.  In  the  train, 
being  tired,  I put  down  my  book  and  shut  my  eyes,  and  presently  the 

264 

TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS 

[chap. 

whole  scene  suddenly  occurred  before  me — a hunting  field  and  two  men 
riding  up  to  jump  a low  stone  wall.  My  friend’s  horse  rushed  at  it,  could 
not  clear  it,  and  blundered  on  to  his  head,  throwing  off  his  rider,  and  the 
whole  scene  vanished.  I was  wide  awake  the  whole  time.  . My 
friend  is  a great  rider,  and  there  was  no  reason  why  such  an 
accident  should  have  befallen  him.  Directly  I arrived  at  South- 
ampton I wrote  to  him,  simply  saying  I knew  he  had  had 
a fall,  and  hoped  he  was  not  hurt.  On  my  return  late  on  Wednesday 
night,  not  finding  the  promised  letter,  1 wrote  a few  lines,  merely  saying  I 
should  expect  to  hear  all  about  his  spill  next  day,  and  I mentioned  to  two 
people  that  evening  on  my  return  what  I had  seen ; also  that  Tuesday 
evening,  dining  with  friends,  I spoke  of  what  had  happened  in  the  train, 
and  they  all  promptly  laughed  at  me.  On  Thursday  morning  I received  a 
letter  from  my  friend,  telling  me  he  had  had  a fall,  riding  at  a low  stone 
wall,  that  the  horse  had  not  been  able  to  clear  it,  and  had  blundered  on  to 
his  head,  that  he  was  not  much  hurt,  and  had  later  on  remounted.  He  had 
not,  when  he  wrote,  received  either  of  my  letters,  as  my  Tuesday  one  only 
arrived  in  Scotland  on  Thursday  morning,  and  my  Wednesday  one  on 
Friday.  When  he  received  my  letters,  he  only  declared  I must  have  been 
asleep.  Nothing  of  the  sort  ever  happened  to  me  before  or  since.  It  all 
seemed  very  natural  and  did  not  alarm  me. 

“ H.  G.  B.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  B.  adds  : — 

“ My  friend,  who  is  a hard-headed  Scotchman,  declined  to  say  another 
word  about  it.  All  I know  is  that  there  were  two  horsemen  riding  up  to 
the  same  spot.” 

In  a personal  interview,  Mrs.  B.  told  the  present  writer  that  her  vision 
took  place  about  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  that  she  had  heard  from 
her  friend  that  his  accident  took  place  “ after  lunch.”  She  had  no  idea  of 
disaster , and  felt  sure  lie  was  not  much  hurt.  She  cannot  say  whether 
her  eyes  were  open  or  shut,  but  is  certain  that  the  experience  was  an 
altogether  unique  one. 

Very  similar  to  this  incident  is  the  following,  which  seems  to 
take  us  up  to  the  very  furthest  point  when  the  experience  can  still 
be  described  as  a mental  picture.  The  percipient  herself  might  have 
been  puzzled  to  say  afterwards  whether  the  vision  had  or  had  not 
seemed  to  engage  her  bodily  eye.  (Compare  the  parallel  quasi- 

auditory  impression  above,  case  49.)  The  account  is  in  Sir L/s 

own  words.  His  reason  for  withholding  his  name  is  Lady  L/s  dislike 
of  the  subject. 

(64)  “ Some  time  ago  Mr.  and  Mrs.  [now  Sir  — and  Lady]  L.  were  at 
his  father’s  country  house  at  S.,  where  they  generally  spent  the  autumn. 
Mrs.  L.  was  not  feeling  well,  and  lay  on  the  sofa  or  bed  all  the  day,' 

“ About  11  o’clock  Mr.  L.  told  her  he  was  going  to  drive  in  the  dog-catt 
to  the  neighbouring  town,  about  nine  miles  off.  This  was  not  an  unusual 
thing,  and  he  left  her  to  go.  Some  four  or  five  hours  afterwards,  on  his 
return  home,  he  went  straight  up  to  her  room  to  see  how  she  was,  and 
found  her  greatly  disturbed.  She  said,  * Oh,  I am  so  glad  to  see  you  back ; 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

265 

vi.3 

I have  had  such  a horrid  fright,  a sort  of  dream,  or  rather  vision,  for  I was 
not  asleep.  I thought  I saw  you  run  away  with  ; but  it  was  quite  absurd, 
for  I knew  you  were  in  the  dog-cart,  and  I fancied  I saw  two  horses.’  Mr. 
Jm  inquired  when  she  saw  it,  and  she  said  about  an  hour  ago. 

“ Now  the  facts  were  these:  On  leaving  Mrs.  L.  about  11  that 
morning,  Mr.  L.?s  father  saicl  he  would  accompany  him,  and  Mr.  L. 
accordingly  counter-ordered  the  dog-cart  and  ordered  a phaeton  and  pair, 
but  naturally  he  did  not  think  of  telling  Mrs.  L.  of  the  change  of  plan. 
Coming  out  of  the  town,  Mr.  L.  was  driving,  and  they  were  run  away  witliy 
one  of  the  horses  having  bolted,  and  for  about  200  yards  or  more  it  was 
found  impossible  to  stop  the  horses,  when  an  intervening  hill  gave  them 
'the  opportunity  The  time  when  this  happened,  as  nearly  as  possible, 
coincided  with  the  time  when  Mrs.  L.  saw  what  she  described  as  a visiont 
not  a dreamy  and  the  detail  as  to  the  two  horses  is  remarkable,  because 
Mrs.  L.  was  ignorant  of  the  change  of  plan.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Sir  — L.  adds  : — - 

“September  15th,  1884. 

“ The  narrative  has  often  been  told  by  me  in  my  wife’s  presence,  and 
there  can  be  no  discrepancy  or  doubt.  It  is  a true  and  circumstantial 
account  of  what  happened  about  1866  or  1867,  1 think.” 

We  received  the  next  account  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  J. 
Bradley  Dyne,  of  2,  New  Square,  Lincoln’s  Inn.  The  incident  took 
place  in  his  house  at  Highgate,  and  the  narrator  is  his  sister-in-law. 
The  case  brings  us  again  to  the  very  verge  of  actual  sensory  hallu- 
cination. It  seems  also  to  be  an  extreme  instance  of  a deferred  or 
latent  telepathic  impression — the  death  of  the  agent  (allowing  for 
longitude)  having  preceded  the  percipient’s  experience  by  about  10 
hohrs.  This  feature  does  not  seem  specially  surprising,  when  we 
remember  how  actual  impressions  of  sense  may  pass  unnoted,  and  yet 
emerge  into  consciousness  hours  afterwards,  either  in  dream  or  in 
some  moment  of  silence  and  reciieiUement.  (See  above,  pp.  201-2.) 

“ 1883. 

(65)  “ I had  known  Mr. as  a medical  man,  under  whose  treat- 

ment I had  been  for  some  years,  and  at  whose  hands  I had  experienced  great 
kindness.  He  had  ceased  to  attend  me  for  considerably  more  than  a year 
at  the  time  of  his  death.  I was  aware  that  he  had  given  up  practice,  but 
beyond  that  I ki^w  nothing  of  his  proceedings,  or  of  the  state  of  his 
health.  At  the  time  I last  saw  him  he  appeared  particularly  well,  and  even 
made  some  remark  himself  as  to  the  amount  of  vigour  and  work  left  in  him. 

“On  Thursday,  the  16th  day  of  December,  1875,  I had  been  for  some 
little  time  on  a visit  at  my  brother-in-law’s  and  sister’s  house  near  London. 
I was  in  good  health,  but  from  the  morning  and  throughout  the  day  I 
felt  unacpountably  depressed  and  out  of  spirits,  which  I attributed  to  the 
gloominess  of  the  weather.  A short  time  after  lunch,  about  2 o’clock,  1 
thought  I would  go  up  to  the  nursery  to  amuse  myself  with  the  children, 
and  try  to  recover  my  spirits.  The  attempt  failed,  and  I returned  to  the 

266  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS  [chap. 

dining-room,  where  I sat  by  myself,  my  sister  being  engaged  elsewhere. 

The  thought  of  Mr. came  into  my  mind,  and  suddenly,  with  my  eyes 

open,  as  I believe,  for  I was  not  feeling  sleepy,  I seemed  to  be  in  a room 
in  which  a man  was  lying  dead  in  a small  bed.  I recognised  the  face  at 

once  as  that  of  Mr. , and  felt  no  doubt  that  lie  was  dead,  and  not 

asleep  only.  The  room  appeared  to  be  bare  and  without  carpet  or 
furniture.  I cannot  say  how  long  the  appearance  lasted.  I did  not 
mention  the  appearance  to  my  sister  or  brother-in-law  at  the  time.  I 
tried  to  argue  with  myself  that  there  could  be  nothing  in  what  I had  seen, 

chiefly  on  the  ground  that  from  what  I know  of  Mr. ’s  circumstances 

it  was  most  improbable  that,  if  dead,  lie  would  be  in  a room  in  so  bare 
and  unfurnished  a state.  Two  days  afterwards,  on  December  18th,  I left 
my  sister’s  house  for  home.  About  a week  after  my  arrival,  another  of 

my  sisters  read  out  of  the  daily  papers  the  announcement  of  Mr. ’& 

death,  which  had  taken  place  abroad,  and  on  December  16tli,  the  day  on 
which  I had  seen  the  appearance. 

“ I have  since  been  informed  that  Mr. had  died  in  a small  village 

hospital  in  a warm  foreign  climate,  having  been  suddenly  attacked  with 
illness  whilst  on  his  travels.” 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Dyne  says  : — 

“ My  sister-in-law  tells  me  that  the  occasion  which  1 mentioned  to  you 
is  absolutely  the  only  one  on  which  she  has  seen  any  vision  of  the  kind.” 

We  learn  from  Mr. ’s  widow  that  the  room  in  which  he  died 

fairly  corresponded  with  the  above  description,  and  that  tl \&  hour  of  death 
was  3.30  a. m. 

These  latter  narratives  might  suggest  a sort,  of  incipient  clair- 
voyance} But  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  it  would  be 
rash  to  ascribe  any  phenomenon  to  independent  clairvoyance,  which 
could  * by  any  possibility  be  regarded  as  telepathic  ; for  the  simple 
reason  that  the  phenomena  on  record  which  (if  correctly  reported)  must 
beyond  doubt  have  been  due  to  independent  clairvoyance,  are 
extremely  rare  in  comparison  with  those  which,  if  correctly  reported, 
can  be  accounted  for  by  thought-transference.  Thus  in  the  last 
example — granting  the  possibility  of  deferred  impressions — there 
is  no  difficulty  in  connecting  the  idea  of  the  room,  and  even  the 
idea  of  actual  death,  with  the  perceptions  and  thoughts  of  the 
dying  man.  It  would  be  inconvenient,  however,  to  refuse  the 
term  clairvoyance  to  cases  where  telepathic  action  reaches  such  a, 
pitch  that  the  percipient  seems  actually  to  be  using  the  senses  of 
so;ne  person  or  persons  at  the  distant  scene.  And  it  will perhaps* 
suffice  to  save  confusion,  if  we  note  at  once  the  difference  between  ' 
clairvoyance  of  this  extreme  telepathic  type  (which  is  still  faitfy 

1 As  regards  the  appearance  of  the  agent’s  own  figure  in  the  scene,  see  the  reinarks  on 
some  parallel  dream-cases,  Chap,  viii.,  Part  ii.,  end  of  § 5. 

AND  OF  MENTAL  PICTURES. 

267 

VI.] 

within  the  scope  of  this  book),  and  any  supposed  extension,  for  which 
no  conditioning  “ agency  ” can  be  assigned,  of  the  percipient’s  own 
senses. 

Among  the  cases  to  bo  here  quoted,  none  perhaps  strains  the 
hypothesis  of  a conditioning  agency  more  than  the  following.  It  in 
from  a Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  who  fears  professional 
injury  if  he  were  “ supposed  to  defend  opinions  at  variance  with 
general  scientific  belief,”  and  does  not  therefore  allow  his  name  to 
$,ppear.  He  is  candid  enough  to  admit  that  if  every  one  argued  as 
he  does,  “ progress  would  be  impossible.” 

“ May  20th,  1884. 

(66)  “Twenty  years  ago  [abroad]  I had  a patient,  wife  of  a parson.. 
She  had  a peculiar  kind  of  delirium  which  did  not  belong  to  her  disease* 
and  perplexed  me.  The  house  in  which  she  lived  was  closed  at  midnight* 
that  is,  the  outer  door  had  no  bell.  One  night  I saw  her  at  9.  When 
I came  home  I said  to  my  wife,  ‘ I don’t  understand  that  case ; I wish 
I could  get  into  the  house  late.’  We  went  to  bed  rather  early.  At 
about  1 o’clock  I got  up.  She  said,  4 What  are  you  about ; are  you  not 
well ? ’ I said,  4 Perfectly  so.’  4 Then  why  get  up  ? ’ 4 Because  I can  get 

into  that  house.’  4 How,  if  it  is  shut  up  ? ’ 4 1 see  the  proprietor  standing 

under  the  lamp-post  this  side  the  bridge,  with  another  man.’  4 You  have 
been  dreaming.’  4 No,  I have  been  wide  awake  ; but  dreaming  or  waking, 
I mean  to  try.’  I started  with  the  firm  conviction  that  I should  find  the 
individual  in  question.  Sure  enough  there  he  was  under  the  lamp-post* 
talking  to  a friend.  I asked  him  if  he  was  going  home.  (I  knew  him 
very  well.)  He  said  he  was,  so  I told  him  I was  going  to  see  a patient, 
and  would  accompany  him.  I was  positively  ashamed  to  explain  matters  ; 
it  seemed  so  absurd  that  I knew  he  would  not  believe  me.  On  arriving 
at  the  house  I said,  4 Now  I am  here,  I will  drop  in  and  see  my  patient.’' 
On  entering  the  room  I found  the  maid  giving  her  a tumbler  of  strong 
grog.  The  case  was  clear ; it  was  as  I suspected — delirium  from  drink. 
The  next  day  1 delicately  spoke  to  the  husband  about  it.  He  denied  it, 
and  in  the  afternoon  I received  a note  requesting  me  not  to  repeat  the 
visits.  Three  weeks  ago  I was  recounting  the  story  and  mentioned  the: 
name.  A lady  present  said  : 4 That  is  the  name  of  the  clergyman  in  my 
parish,  at  B.,  and  his  wife  is  in  a lunatic  asylum  from  drink  ! ’ ” 

[In  conversation  with  the  present  writer,  the  narrator  explained  that 
the  vision — though  giving  an  impression  of  externality  and  seen,  as  he: 
believes,  with  open  eyes — was  not  definably  located  in  space.  He  had 
never  encouhtered  the  proprietor  in  the  spot  where  he  saw  him,  and  it 
was  not  a likely  thing  that  he  should  be  standing  talking  in  the  streets, 
at  so  late  an  hour.] 

' This  is  certainly  a perplexing  incident.  But  if  we  regard  it  as, 
more  thaju  an  accidental  coincidence,  we  can  hardly  help  supposing 
that  the  connection  between  the  proprietor  of  the  house  and  the  desire 
with  which  the  physician  was  preoccupied,  was  at  any  rate  one  of  the 

268  TRANSFERENCE  OF  IDEAS.  [chap. 

■conditions  which  enabled  the  proximity  of  the  former  to  affect  the 
latter ; so  that  we  may  still  be  within  the  limits  of  telepathic  com- 
munication between  mind  and  mind. 

I had  hoped  to  conclude  this  chapter  with  a case  showing  how 
a special  condition  of  the  percipient’s  mind  may  open  the  door  (so  to 
speak)  to  a telepathic  impression,  and  also  exemplifying  the  occurrence 
of  a series  of  these  vivid  mental  pictures  to  a single  percipient.  On 
the  occasions  referred  to,  a deliberate  effort  on  the  percipient’s  part 
seems  to  have  been  involved  in  receiving,  or  rather  in  obtaining,  a 
true  impression  of  the  aspect  and  surroundings  of  absent  persons ; but 
unless  we  would  assert  (which  We  have  no  grounds  for  doing)  that  the 
continued  existence  of  those  persons,  and  their  pre-established  relation 
to  the  percipient,  were  not  necessary  conditions  for  the  impression, 
we  must  still  hold  them  to  have  been  technically  the  agents.  One  of 
these  agents,  however — a medical  man — while  unable  to  resist  the 
proofs  which  he  has  received  of  this  sort  of  telepathic  invasion,  has  so 
invincible  a dread  and  dislike  of  the  subject  that  for  the  present,  in 
•deference  to  his  wishes,  the  account  is  withheld  from  publication.  To 
believe  and  tremble  ” is  not  a very  scientific  state  of  mind,  and  it  is 
■one  for  which  we  trust  that  there  will  be  less  and  less  excuse  as 
psychical  research  is  gradually  redeemed  from  supernatural  and 
superstitious  associations.  Meanwhile,  we  must  treat  it  with  in- 
dulgence ; merely  noting  how  the  very  qualities  which  have  so  often 
operated  to  swell  lists  of  spurious  marvels  may  equally  operate  to 
hamper  the  record  and  recognition  of  facts. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

§ 1.  We  come  next  to  a class  of  cases  which  are  characterised  not  so< 
much  by  the'  distinctness  of  the  idea  as  by  the  strength  of  the 
emotion  produced  in  the  percipient.  In  some  of  these  the  emotion 
has  depended  on  a definite  idea,  and  has  been  connected  with  a sense- 
of  calamity  to  a particular  individual,  or  a particular  household  : in 
others  it  has  not  had  reference  to  any  definite  idea,  and  has  seemed 
at  the  time  quite  causeless  and  unreasonable.  Sometimes,  again, 
the  analogy  with  experimental  cases,  in  the  direct  reflection  of 
experience  from  mind  to  mind,  is  distinctly  retained,1  the  experience 
of  the  percipient  seeming  actually  to  reproduce  that  of  a relative- 
or  friend  who  is  in  some  physical  or  mental  crisis  at  a distance ; while- 
in  other  cases  a peculiar  distress  on  the  one  side  is  so  strikingly  con- 
temporaneous with  an  unique  condition  on  the  other,  that  we  cannot 
refuse  to  corisider  the  hypothesis  of  a causal  connection. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  evidence,  this  class  of  emotional' 
impressions  clearly  requires  the  most  careful  treatment.  There  is  all 
the  difference  between  a sensory  impression,  and  even  between  the- 
more  distinct  “ mental  pictures  ” of  the  last  chapter,  and  a mere  mood.. 
We  have  no  grounds  for  assuming  that  the  news  (for  instance)  .of  a 

1 The  emotional  class  of  impressions  is,  of  course,  a field  peculiarly  ill-adapted  for 
deliberate  experiment.  Strong  emotion  cannot  be  summoned  up  at  will  by  an  experi- 
menter even  in  his  own  mind ; while,  if  it  exists,  it  probably  betrays  itself  in  ways 
beyond  his  control.  Cases  are,  indeed,  alleged  where  a secret  grief  or  anxiety  on  a, 
mesmeriser’s  part  has  been  reflected  in  the  demeanour  of  his  “subject.”  But  this  would 
not  necessarily  prove  more  than  that  the  “subject”  was,  so  to  speak,  hyperaesthetic  to. 
slight  physical  signs  of  mental  disturbance — which  would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  the- 
one-sided  concentration  of  his  mind  that  is  shown  in  other  ways,  r.g.,  in  his  frequent 
deafness  to  any  other  voice  than  that  of  his  operator.  I may  quote  for  what  they  are  worth 
the  following  observations  of  Mr.  H.  S»  Thompson  {Zoist,  v.  257):  “One  patient  who. 
was  highly  sensitive,  and  whom  I mesmerised  for  a nervous  disorder,  could,  when  awake, 
point  out  immediately  whatever  part  of  my  head  was  touched  by  a third  person.  If  I 
mesmerised  her  when  I was  in  spirits,  she  was  hi  spirits  also ; if  I was  grave,  she  was; 
grave ; and  I never  dared  mesmerise  her  when  I was  suffering  from  any  annoyance.  I did 8 
not  find  that  she  often  had  distinct  thoughts  corresponding  with  my ’own,  even  when  I 
tried  to  impress  her  by  will  with  them.  But  she  has  experienced  and  shown  a feeling* 
corresponding  with  the  thoughts  I had.” 

270  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

friend’s  death  will  incite  a man  of  sense  and  honesty  to  say  that  he  saw, 
heard,  felt,  or  strongly  pictured  something  unusual  at  or  near  the 
time  of  its  occurrence,  unless  he  really  did  so ; but  it  is  easy  to 
suppose  that,  having  chanced  to  be  slightly  out  of  spirits  at  the  time, 
he  afterwards  seems  to  remember  that  he  was  very  much  depressed 
indeed.,  and  even  filled  with  a boding  of  some  impending  calamity. 
Nay,  since  a person  who  is  oppressed  by  gloom  and  apprehension  will 
•often  embrace  in  mental  glances  the  small  group  of  persons  with 
whom  his  emotional  connection  is  strongest,  he  may  recall,  when  one 
of  these  persons  proves  actually  to  have  been  passing  through  a crisis 
at  the  time,  that  this  particular  one  was  present  to  his  mind,  and  may 
•easily  glide  on  into  thinking  that  it  was  with  him  that  the  sense  of 
apprehension  was  specially  connected.  In  these  cases,  then,  it  is  of 
prime  importance  that  the  percipient’s  impression  shall  be  mentioned 
or  otherwise  noted  by  him  in  an  unmistakeable  way  before  the 
receipt  of  news  as  to  the  supposed  agent’s  condition.  And  even  when 
we  have  clear  proof  that  the  ('motion  was  really  of  a strongly-marked 
•character,  it  is  necessary  further  to  obtain  some  assurance  that  such 
moods  are  not  of  common  occurrence  in  the  percipient’s  experience. 
Failing  this,  it  is  safest  to  regard  any  unusual  character  that  may  after- 
wards be  attributed  to  the  emotion  as  the  result  of  its  being  after- 
wards dwelt  on  in  connection  with  the  coincident  event.. 

It  need  hardly  be  added  that  all  cases  must  be  rejected  where 
there  has  been  any  appreciable  cause  for  anxiety,  however  unmistake- 
•able  and  unique  the  impression  may  bo  shown  to  have  been.  Thus  it 
•cannot  be  regarded  as  usual  for  a lady  who  is  at  a friend’s  .house,  and 
intending  to  remain  there  for  a week  or  two,  to  find  herself  suddenly 
and  irrationally  impelled,  by  the  certainty  of  a domestic  calamity, 
to  pack  her  boxes  and  sit  waiting  for  a telegram — which  (to  borrow 
the  phrase  of  a business-like  informant)  was  shortly  delivered  “as  per 
presentiment.”  But  the  surmise  which  was  thus  confirmed  related 
to  a baby  grandchild  at  home  ; and  though  she  had  not  heard  that 
it  was  ailing,  those  who  watch  over  the  health  of  young  children  are 
•often,  of  course,  in  a more  or  less  chronic  state  of  nervousness. 

§ 2.  I will  first  quote  a case  where  the  emotional  impression  had  , 
•certain  definiteness  of  embodiment.  The  narrator  unfortunately  does 
not  allow  the  publication  of  his  complete  name ; but  he  impressed 
Professor  Sidgwick,  who  examined  him  personally,  as  a sensible  and 
trustworthy  witness. 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

271 

VII.] 

“ Edinburgh. 

“December  27th,  1883. 

(67)  “In  January,  1871,  I was  living  in  the  West  Indies.  Ontli£7th 
of  that  month  I got  up  with  a strange  feeling  that  there  was  something 
happening  at  my  old  home  in  Scotland.  At  7 a.m.  T mentioned  to  my 
sister-in-law  my  strange  dread,  and  said  that  even  at  that  hour  what  I 
dreaded  was  taking  place. 

“ By  the  next  mail  I got  word  that  at  1 1 a.m.  on  the  7th  January 
my  sister  died.  The  island  I lived  in  was  St.  Kitts,  and  the  death  took 
place  in  Edinburgh.  Please  note  the  hours  and  allow  for  difference  in 
time,  and  you  will  notice  at  least  a remarkable  coincidence,  [The  longitude 
qf  St.  Kitts  is  about  62°.]  1 may  add  I never  knew  of  her  illness. 

“ Andrew  C n.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  C n adds  : — 

“January  8th,  1884. 

“ I never  at  any  other  times  had  a feeling  in  any  way  resembling  the 
particular  time  I wrote  about. 

“ It  would  be  very  difficult  to  get  the  note  from  my  sister-in-law  as 
she  now  lives  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  I seldom  hear  of  her. 

“ At  the  time  I wrote  about  I was  in  perfect  health,  and  in  every 
way  in  comfortable  circumstances.” 

* [We  have,  of  course,  repeatedly  urged  our  informant  to  apply,  or  to 
allow  us  to  apply,  for  his  sister-in-law's  recollection  of  this  incident ; but 
without  success.] 

The  next  case,  from  our  friend  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox  Powys,  is  still 
more  indefinite,  and  would  not  be  worth  quoting  but  for  our  own 
well-grounded  assurance  that  the  account  is  free  from  exaggeration. 

“ Milford  Lodge,  Godaiming. 

“February  16th,  1884. 

(68)  “ About  3 months  ago  as  I was  sitting,  quietly  thinking,  between 
5 and  7 p.m.,  I experienced  a very  curious  sensation.  I can  only  describe 
it  as  like  a cloud  of  calamity  gradually  wrapping  me  round.  It  was 
almost  a physical  feeling,  so  strong  was  it ; and  I seemed  to  be  certain,  in 
some  inexplicable  way,  of  disaster  to  some  one  of  my  relations  or  friends, 
though  I could  not  in  the  least  fix  upon  anybody  in  particular,  and  there 
was  no  one  about  whom  I was  anxious  at  the  time.  I do  not  remember 
ever  experiencing  such  a thing  before.  I should  say  it  lasted  about- 
lialf-an-hour.  This  happened  on  a Saturday,  and  on  Monday  I got  a letter 
from  my  sister,  written  on  the  Saturday  evening  to  go  by  the  post  which 
leaves  at  7 p.m.,  in  which  she  told  me  she  had  received  a telegram,  an 
hour  or  so  ago,  informing  her  of  the  dangerous  illness  of  her  brother-in- 
law;,  at  which  she  was  greatly  upset.  This  appeared  to  be  a very  probable 
explanation  of  my  extraordinary  presentiment,  and  I wrote  and  told  her 
all  about  it*  at  once. 

• “A.  C.  Powys.” 

[Mrs.  Powys  tells  us  that  she  mentioned  her  impression  at  the  time*  to 
her  husband;  but  he  cannot  recall  the  fact.]  * 

272  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

A single  impression  of  so  vague  a kind  as  this  cannot,  of  course, 
go  for  much.  And  though  it  is  so  far  against  the  hypothesis  of  acci- 
dental coincidence  that  the  narrator  states — and,  we  believe, 
accurately — that  the  experience  was  unique,  yet  this  very  uniqueness 
involves  a certain  difficulty.  For  if  she  could  be  once  telepathically 
impressed  by  an  agent  whose  emotional  excitement  at  the  time, 
though  considerable,  was  clearly  not  extreme,  we  cannot  but 
wonder  that  so  remarkable  a sensibility  should  have  found  no  other 
occasion  to  manifest  itself.  There  is  more  evidential  force  in  the* 
occurrence  of  several  such  impressions  to  the  same  person — provided, 
of  course,  that  'they  have  all  corresponded  with  facts.  Such  seems  to 
have  been  the  experience  of  Mr.  J.  D.  Harry,  whom  we  do  not 
know  personally,  but  who  has  been  described  to  us  by  two  common 
acquaintances  as  an  acute  man  of  the  world.  He  wrote  to  us  as 
follows,  in  1882,  from  The  Palms,  St.  Julian’s,  Malta: — 

(69)  “ I lost  my  brother  in  Cornwall,  and  my  uncle  in  Devonshire. 
Neither  of  them  had  been  ill  more  than  three  days,  and  no  communication 
whatever  had  taken  place  with  me  from  the  time  they  were  first  attacked 
until  their  deaths ; nevertheless  I felt  so  depressed  on  each  occasion,  from 
the  time  they  were  taken  ill,  that  I could  scarcely  perform  the  duties  of 
my  office,  the  peculiar  feeling  lasting  until  the  announcements  in 
each  case  were  made.  It  was  nearly  the  same  feeling  of  depression 
previous  to  my  mother’s  death,  whose  illness  was  likewise  very  sudden  and 
unknown  to  me. 

“John  D.  Harry/’ 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  had  ever  had  similar  depressions, 
which  had  not  had  any  correspondence  with  reality,  Mr,  Harry 
replied  : — 

“ You  ask  if  I ever  felt  similarly  depressed.  You  have  my  assurance* 
that  I never  experienced  a like  feeling,  except  in  the  three  instances* 
named  ; indeed,  all  those  who  know  me  well  would  tell  you  that  in  their 
belief  I. am  the  last  person  to  become  so  affected.  During  the  three  or 
four  serious  illnesses  I have  undergone,  when  the  hopes  of  my  family  and 
friends  were  despaired  of,  I was  still  cheery/’ 

[Here  we  have  to  depend  entirely  on  the  narrator’s  memory  ; and  the 
case  does  not  conform  to  the  rule  that  the  marked  character  of  the 
experience  shall  be  en  evidence  before  the  news  is  known.] 

In  the  next  example  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to'  the  striking* 
nature  of  the  percipient’s  experience  ; which,  indeed,  was  so  distinctly 
physical  in  character  as  to  suggest  the  actual  sensory  transference 
of  which  Mrs.  Severn’s  case  (p.  188)  was  our  most  precise 
example.  Our  informant  is  Mrs.  Reay,  of  99,  Holland  Road* 
Kensington. 

VII.] 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 

273 

“August  14th,  1884, 

^70)  “I  will  endeavour  to  write  you  an  account  of  the  incident,  related 
for  you  by  my  friend,  Mr.  E.  Moon.  His  sister  was  staying  with  me  at  the 
time.  It  was  in  February,  but  I don't  remember  what  year.  We  were 
kitting  chatting  over  our  5 o'clock  tea ; I was  perfectly  well  at  the  time, 
and  much  amused  with  her  conversation.  As  I had  several  notes  to  write 
before  dinner,  I asked  her  to  leave  me  alone,  or  I feared  1 should  not  get 
them  finished.  She  did  so,  and  I went  to  the  writing-table  and  began  to 
write. 

“ All  at  once  a dreadful  feeling  of  illness  and  faintness  came  over  me, 
and  I felt  that  I was  dying.  I had  no  power  to  get  up  to  ring  the  bell  for 
assistance,  but  sat  with  my  head  in  my  hands  utterly  helpless. 

“ My  maid  came  into  the  room  for  the  tea  things.  I thought  I would 
keep  her  with  me,  but  felt  better  while  she  was  there,  so  did  not  mention 
my  illness  to  her,  thinking  it  had  passed  away.  However,  as  soon  as  I 
lost  the  sound  of  her  footsteps,  it  all  came  back  upon  me  worse  than  ever. 
In  vain  I tried  to  get  up  and  ring  the  bell  or  call  for  help ; I could  not 
move,  and  thought  I was  certainly  dying. 

“ When  the  dressing  bell  rang  it  roused  me  again,  and  I made  a great 
effort  to  rise  and  go  to  my  room,  which  I did  ; but  when  my  maid  came  in 
I w«ris  standing  by  the  fire,  leaning  upon  the  mantelpiece,  trembling  all 
over.  She,  at  once  came  to  me  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  I said  I 
did  not  know,  but  that  I felt  very  ill  indeed. 

“ The  dinner  hour  had  arrived,  and  my  husband  had  not  come  home. 
Then,  for  the  first  time,  it  flashed  upon  my  mind  that  something  had  happened 
to  him  when  I was  taken  ill  at  the  writing-table.  This  was  the  first  time  I 
had  thought  about  him,  so  that  it  was  no  anxiety  on  my  part  about  him  that 
had  caused  my  illness.  The  next  half-hour  was  spent  in  great  suspense, 
then  he  arrived  at  home  with  his  messenger  with  him  ; he  was  almost  in 
an  unconscious  state  and  remained  so  for  about  24  hours.  When  he  was 
well  enough  for  me  to  ask  him  about  his  illness  he  said  he  had  been  very 
well  indeed  all  day,  but  just  as  he  was  preparing  to  leave  his  office  he 
became  suddenly  very  ill  (just  the  same  time  that  I was  taken  ill  at  the 
writing-table),  and  his  messenger  had  to  get  a cab  and  come  home  with 
him  ; he  was  quite  unable  to  be  left  by  himself. 

“ Emily  Reay.” 

Mr.  Reay,  Secretary  of  the  London  and  North-Western  Railway,  con- 
firms as  follows : — 

“September  18th,  1884. 

“ I perfectly  well  recollect,  on  the  evening  of  my  severe  and  sudden 
attack  of  illness,  my  wife  asking  me  some  questions  about  it,  when,  after 
hearing  what  I had  to  say,  she  told  me  that  almost  at  the  same  instant  of 
time  (soon  after  5 p.m.),  when  writing,  she  was  seized  with  a fit  of 
trembling  and  nervous  depression,  as  if  she  were  dying.  She  went  to  her 
room,  and  remained  there  in  the  same  state  until  the  dinner  hour,  and  as 
* I did  not  arrive  by  that  time  she  instinctively  felt  that  something  had 
happened  to  me,  and  was  on  the  point  of  sending  to  the  office  to  inquire 
when  I left,  when  I was  brought  home  in  a cab.  At  the  time  of  my 
seizure  I was  writing,  and  it  was  with  much  difficulty  that  I was  enabled 
to  finish  the  letter.  “ S.  Reay.” 

t 

274  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . [chap. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Reay  adds  : — 

“ I never  at  any  other  time  in  my  life  had  the  slightest  approach  to  die 
sensations  I experienced  when  the  sudden  illness  came  over  me,  under  the 
circumstances  mentioned  to  you.  I never  in  my  life  fainted,  nor  have  I 
any  tendency  that  way.  The  feeling  which  came  over  me  was  a dreadful 
trembling,  with  prostration,  and  a feeling  that  I was  going  to  die;  and  I 
had  no  power  to  rise  from  the  writing-table  to  ring  for  assistance.  I have 
never  had  the  same  feeling  since,  and  never  before  that  time.” 

The  uniqueness  of  the  experience  may  be  readily  accepted  as 
stated,  in  a case  where  its  physical  character  was  so  distinct  as  this. 
But  even  in  judging  of  more  doubtful  cases,  an  inference  which  the 
percipient’s  description  might  hardly  warrant  may  sometimes  be 
fairly  drawn  from  the  permanent  effect  made  on  his  mind.  The 
following  account,  for  instance,  is  very  likely  to  provoke  a smile,  and 
is  in  itself  wholly  inconclusive ; yet  the  impression  was  at  any  rate 
sufficiently  marked  to  force  the  reality  of  sympathetic  transferences 
on  the  mind  of  a scientific  witness,  who  candidly  records  it  in  a book 
largely  devoted  to  the  exposure  of  spurious  “ psychical”  marvels. 
Dr.  E.  L.  Fischer,  of  Wurzburg,  in  his  Lev  Sogenannte  Leben 
Magnet ismus  oder  Hypnotismun  (Mainz,  1883),  says  that  as  a 
student  at  the  University,  he  enjoyed  extremely,  good  spirits,  but 
was  one  morning  oppressed  by  an  extraordinary  gloom,  which  his 
companions  noticed. 

(71)  “During  the  whole  afternoon  I remained  in  this  state  of  dismal 
wretchedness.  All  at  once  a telegram  arrived  from  home,  informing  me 
that  my  grandmother  was  taken  very  ill,  and  that  she  was  earnestly  longing 
for  me.  There  I had  the  solution  of  the  riddle.  Nevertheless  from  that 
hour  my  melancholy  gradually  decreased,  and  in  spite  of  the  telegram  it 
completely  disappeared  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon.  In  the  evening  I 
received  a second  message,  to  the  effect  that  the  danger  was  over.  In  this 
way  the  second  phenomenon,  the  rapid  decrease  of  my  wretchedness— a 
circumstance  which  in  itself  was  surprising,  inasmuch  as  the  melancholy 
should  naturally  rather  have  increased  after  the  receipt  of  the  first  news — 
received  its  explanation.  For  the  afternoon  was  just  the  time  when,  the 
change  in  the  patient’s  condition  for  the  better  took  place ; and  the  danger 
to  her  life  once  over,  her  yearning  for  my  presence  had  decreased  ; while 
simultaneously  my  anxiety  was  dispelled.” 

Dr.  Fischer  was,  I think,  wrong  in  accepting  this  incident  (and  a 
very  few  more  like  it),  as  sufficient  evidence  for  the  fact  of  telepathy ; 
but  right  in  placing  it  on  record  for  what  it  is  worth.  • 

In  the  majority  of  the  emotional  cases,  the  natural,  bond  between 
the  two  persons  concerned  has  been  of  the  closest.  And,  CettiMs 

vn.j 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS \ 

275 

paribus,  the  nearer  tie  of  blood  increases  the  probability  of  the 
telepathic  explanation,  wherever  the  hypothesis  of  natural  anxiety 
for  a beloved  relative  is  excluded  by  the  fact  that  the  emotion  is  con- 
nected with  no  special  person.  We  received  the  following  case  from 
$frs.Bull,  of  Mossley  Vicarage,  Congleton. 

“January  3rd,  1885, 

(72)  “On  the  evening  of  January  28th,  1863,  I had  met  several  old 
friends  at  dinner  at  a friend’s  house  near  Manchester,  in  which  neighbour- 
hood I had  been  paying  visits.  My  return  home  to  my  father's  house  was 
fixed  for  the  next  afternoon.  T ought  to  say  that  between  that  father  and 
me,  his  first-born  child,  a more  than  common  bond  of  affection  and 
sympathy  existed,  arising  from  circumstances  I need  not  mention,  and  I 
was  looking  forward  to  my  return  with  earnest  longing.  The  evening  had 
been  bright  and  happy,  surrounded  by  friends  I valued.  When  t was 
about  to  leave,  my  hostess  pressed  me  to  play  for  her  a very  favourite  old 
march.  I declined,  on  account  of  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  and  keeping 
horses  standing.  She  said,  * It  is  not  yet  12,  and  I have  sent  the  carriage 
away  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.’  I sat  down  laughing,  and  before  I played 
many  bars,  such  an  indescribable  feeling  came  over  me,  intense  sadness 
heralded  a complete  break  down,  and  T was  led  away  from  the  piano  in 
hysterics.  By  10  o’clock  the  next  morning  I got  a telegram,  to  say  my 
father  had  gone  to  bed  in  his  usual  health,  and  at  a quarter  to  12  the 
night  before  had  passed  away  in  an  epileptic  fit,  having  previously  said  to 
my  sister  how  glad  he  was  to  think  of  seeing  me  so  soon,  and  when  she 
bid  him  good-night,  praying  God  to  give  them  both  a quiet  night  and 
sleep. 

“A.  M.  Bull.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bull  says  : — 

“ Since  reading  your  letter  last  night,  I have  carefully  gone  over  the 
guests  of  that  dinner  party,  and  find  them  all  gone  but  one,  Frank  Ashton, 
Esq.,  The  Laurels,  Twickenham,  and  he  is  too  ill  to  read  or  to  answer  a 
letter.  At  the  time  I speak  of,  I was  the  widow  of  the  Rev.  J. 
Lowthian,  vicar  of  Wharton.  My  father  was  the  Rev.  John  Jackson, 
vicar  of  Over.  I never  experienced  a similar  feeling.  I am  not  at  all 
. naturally  inclined  to  depression,  and  am  perfectly  free  from  what  is 
commonly  understood  by  superstition.” 

The  Chester  Courant  for  February  4th,  1863,  says  that  the  death  of  the 
Rev.  J.  Jackson  took  place  on  January  28th,  very  suddenly.  He  hadt 
preached  on  the  Sunday,  and  had  been  out  on  the  Tuesday  preceding  the  w 
Wednesday  night  when  his  fatal  fit  attacked  him. 

The  writer  of  the  following  narrative  is  the  editor  of  a ^veil-known 
northern  newspaper,  and  was  formerly  special  foreign  correspondent  of 
a London  .paper.  A few  weeks  before  the  occurrence  here  described, 
he  had  a curious  impression  corresponding  with  the  death  of  a friend, 
which  is  narrated  in  the  following  chapter. 

276 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 

[chap. 

“ December  11th,  1884. 

(73)  “ On  the  3rd  of  May  in  the  same  spring  [1882],  my  wife,  while 
taking  tea  with  my  daughter,  was  suddenly  seized  with  an  epileptic  fit,  fell 
heavily  to  the  floor  and  striking  her  forehead  on  the  fender ; she  was  never 
conscious  again,  but  died  the  next  day.  This  accident  happened  between 
3 and  4 o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  For  nearly  5 years  my  wife  had 
intermittently  suffered  from  epilepsy,  but  for  some  3 months  before  her 
death  seemed  to  have  completely  recovered,  which  apparent  fact  had 
caused  much  joy  in  our  little  family  circle,  as  the  poor  dear  had* been  a 
great  sufferer.  I set  this  down  to  show  that  her  death  or  serious  illness 
was  not  at  all  expected  at  the  time  it  happened. 

“ On  the  morning  of  the  3rd  of  May  I left  for  the  City,  and  as  my 
wife  kissed  her  hand  to  me  at  the  window  T thought  how  remarkably  well 
and  ‘ like  her  old  self ' she  appeared.  I went  to  business  in  ‘ high  spirits,' 
and  left  her  in  the  same ; but  somewhere  about  the  time  she  fell — neither 
my  daughter  nor  I have  been  able  to  fix  the  time  within  an  hour — I 
suddenly  fell  into  such  a fit  of  gloom  that  I was  powerless  to  go  on  with 
my  work  and  could  only  sit  with  my  face  between  my  hands,  scarcely  able 
to  speak  to  my  colleagues  in  the  same  office,  who  became  alarmed  as  they 
had  never  seen  me  in  any  but  a cheerful  mood.  I was  at  the  time  editing 
England , and  as  friend  after  friend  dropped  into  my  room,  and  wanted  to 
know  what  ailed  me,  I could  only  explain  my  sensation  in  a phrase  (which 
they  and  I well  remember)  which  I kept  repeating,  namely,  ‘ I have  a 
horrible  sense  of  some  impending  calamity.'  So  far  as  I am  aware,  my 
thoughts  never  once  turned  to  my  home.  If  they  had,  I think  I should  not 
have  accepted,  as  I did,  an  invitation  to  dine  with  a friend  at  a restaurant 
in  the  Strand,  pressed  on  me  for  the  express  purpose  of  ‘ cheering  me  up.' 
I was  telegraphed  for  to  our  office  in  the  Strand,  but  by  an  accident  it  was 
not  forwarded  to  me  to  Whitefriars  Street  at  my  editorial  room  : so  that 
I never  saw  my  wife  until  after  1 2 at  night,  when  my  8 or  9 hours  of 
fearful  depression  of  spirits  (as  it  instantly  struck  me)  were  accounted  for. 
I may  add  that  I am  naturally  of  a buoyant  temperament,  in  fact  I may 
say  far  above  the  average  of  people  in  that  respect,  and  I was  never  to  my 
knowledge  ever  so  suddenly  or  similarly  depressed  before.  My  wife,  in 
this  case  you  will  observe,  was  not  dead  but  simply  unconscious  when  my 
fit  of  low  spirits  set  in. 

“ There  are  several  witnesses  who  can  testify  to  these  facts,  for  when 
it  became  known  at  the  office  that  my  wife  was  dead  the  strong  coincidence* 
of  my  suddenly  1 turning  so  queer  ' was  a topic  of  conversation  there*  I 
have  nothing  to  add  but  that  we  (my  wife  and  I)  had  been  married  for 
25  years,  and  were  extremely  fond  of  each  other,  and  we  were  both,  I 
should  say,  of  a sympathetic  temperament,  perhaps  more  than  ordinarily 
so." 

Mr.  Podmore  says  : — 

. “ September  1st,  1885. 

“I  called  to-day  at  Mr. ’s  house.  He  was  out  of  town,  but  his 

son  and  daughter  were  at  home. 

“ As  regards  Mr. ’s  depression  on  the  day  of  his  wife's  fatal  attack 

they  both  assured  me  that  he  spoke  of  this  immediately  after  his  return 
home  on  the  evening  of  that  day,  and  has  frequently  mentioned  it  since. 

VII.  J 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

277 

The  son  has  also  heard  one  of  his  father's  colleagues,  Mr.  Green,  describe 
the  circumstance  as  something  quite  remarkable.  Mr.  Green  told  him 
that  both  himself  and  others  present  in  the  office  did  all  they  could  to  rally 
Mr. b^t  failed.” 

[A  full  vivd  voce  account  of  the  incident  has  been  given  by  the  narrator 
to  our  friend  and  helper,  Mr.  A.  G.  Leonard.] 

“ Netherworton  House,  Steeple  Aston,  Oxon. 

“September  16th,  1885. 

“Dear  Sir, — My  friend  Mr. , of  England , has  asked  me  to 

corroborate  the  fact  that  he  suffered  from  a singular  depression  all  the  day 
of  his  wife’s  fatal  seizure.  I was  in  his  company  most  of  the  day,  and  can 
fully  corroborate  his  statement. — Yours  truly, 

“C.  E.  Green.” 

The  next  case  is  from  a lady  who  is  willing  that  her  name  should 
be  given  to  any  one  genuinely  interested  in  this  case.  She  is 
known  to  the  present  writer  as  a sensible  and  clear-headed  witness, 
as  far  from  sentimentality  or  superstition  as  can  well  be  conceived. 

“October  27th,  1885. 

(74)  “On  the  Saturday  before  Easter,  1881,  my  husband  left  London 
for  Paris.  On  the  Saturday  or  Sunday  evening  he  was  taken  ill,  at  the 
hotel,  with  congestion  of  the  brain,  and  wandered  about  the  place  delirious. 
Subsequently  he  was  put  in  a room,  and  although  a man  was  in  attendance, 
he  was,  in  regard  to  medical  advice,  &c.,  quite  neglected.  He  remained 
there  some  days,  and  by  looking  in  his  papers  his  name  was  discovered, 
and  his  family  were  communicated  with. 

“ On  the  afternoon  of  Easter  Monday,  my  sons  and  my  daughter  had 
gone  out,  leaving  me  at  home.  . I fell  into  an  altogether  extraordinary 
state  of  depression  and  restlessness.  I tried  in  vain  to  distract  myself 
with  work  and  books.  I went  upstairs  and  felt  beside  myself  with  distress, 
for  what  reason  I could  not  tell ; I argued  with  myself,  but  the  feeling 
increased.  I even  had  a violent  fit  of  weeping — a thing  absolutely  alien 
to  my  character.  I then  put  on  my  things,  and,  in  the  hope  of  ridding 
myself  of  the  uncomfortable  feeling,  took  a hansom  cab,  and  drove  about 
Hyde  Park  for  about  three  hours — a thing  which  I should  have  considered 
myself  stark  mad  for  doing  at  any  other  time.  T should  have  been  the 
last  person  to  spend  eight  shillings  on  cab  fare  for  nothing.  On  receiving 
the  news  I went  over  to  Paris,  where  I arrived  on  the  Thursday,  and  my 
husband  just  knew  me.  The  nurse  engaged  to  nurse  him  told  me  that  she 
was  asked  by  the  waiter  if  my  Christian  name  was  M.  [Mrs.  S.’s  name, 
and  a not  very  common  one],  as  that  was  the  name  that  my  husband  was 
constantly  calling  out  during  his  delirium.  He  died  some  days  afterwards. 

“M.  S” 

I learn  from  both  Mrs.  S,  and  her  son  that  she  mentioned  Her  remark- 
able experience  to  her  family  on  the  Monday  evening.  One,  of  her  sons 
writes: — 

278  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . chap. 

“I  beg  to  corroborate  my  mother’s  account  of  the  circumstances 
mentioned.  Her  distress  and  the  circumstances  of  the  cab  drive  are 
entirely  foreign  to  her  character.  My  father  was  in  delicate  health, 
although  seldom  actually  ill.  > 

“E.  S.  ” 

In  answer  to  some  questions  addressed  to  Mrs.  S.,  Mr.  E.  S.  replies  : — 

“ My  mother  had  no  particular  anxiety  about  my  father’s  health.  He 
left  on  the  Saturday  for  Paris,  and  was  then  in  his  usual  health,  and  she 
did  not  particularly  connect  her  feelings  with  him.” 

[We  suggested  a difficulty  as  to  the  driving  about  Hyde  Park,  since  it 
is  only  in  a restricted  portion  of  that  park  that  cabs  are  permitted  to  pass. 
But  Mrs.  kS.  adheres  to  the  word.] 

In  the  following  case  a very  marked  depression  of  spirits  was 
followed  by  a vivid  dream.  The  latter  may  of  course  be  easily 
accounted  for  as  following  naturally  on  the  former;  but  the  emotional 
depression,  which  coincided  in  time  with  the  fatal  turn  in  the  illness 
of  a near  relative,  seems  to  have  been  a unique  experience  in  the 
life  of  a person  of  strong  mental  and  physical  health.  The  narrator, 
a physician,  refuses  permission  to  publish  his  name  on  the  ground 
that  he  is  a “ confirmed  unbeliever”;  though  in  conversation  with 
him  I was  unable  to  learn  what  exactly  his  unbelief  was  of,  and  in 
what  exactly  its  confirmation  had  consisted. 

“March  7th,  1885. 

(75)  “ When  a boy  about  14  years  of  age,  I was  in  school  in 
Edinburgh,  my  home  being  in  the  West  of  Scotland.  A thoughtless 
boy,  free  from  all  care  or  anxiety,  in  the  ‘ Eleven  ’ of  my  school,  and 
popular  with  my  companions,  I had  nothing  to  worry  or  annoy  me.  I 
boarded  with  two  old  ladies,  now  both  dead. 

“ One  afternoon — on  the  day  previous  to  a most  important  cricket 
match  in  which  1 was  to  take  part — 1 was  overwhelmed  with  a most 
unusual  sense  of  depression  and  melancholy.  I shunned  my  friends  and 
got  ‘ chaffed  ’ for  my  most  unusual  dulness  and  sulkiness.  I felt  utterly 
miserable,  and  even  to  this  day  1 have  a most  vivid  recollection  of  my 
misery  that  afternoon. 

“ I knew  that  my  father  suffered  from  a most  dangerous  disease  in 
the  stomach — a gastric  ulcer — and  that  he  was  always  more  or  less  in 
danger,  but  I knew  that  he  was  in  his  usual  bad  health,  and  that  nothing 
exceptional  ailed  him. 

“That  same  night  1 had  a dream.  I was  engaged  in  the  cricket 
match.  I saw  a telegram  being  brought  to  me  while  batting,  and  it  told 
me  that  my  father  was  dying,  and  telling  me  to  come  home  at  once. 
I told  the  ladies  with  whom  I boarded  what  my  dream  had  been,  and  told 
them  how  real  the  impression  was.  I went  to  the  ground,  and  was 
engaged  in  the  game,  batting,  and  making  a score.  I saw  a*  telegram 
being  brought  out,  read  it,  and  fainted.  I at  once  left  for  home,  arid 
found  my  father  had  just  died  when  1 reached  the  house.  The  ulce^ 

VII.] 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

279 

iu  the  stomach  had  suddenly  burst  about  4 o’clock  on  the  previous 
day,  and  it,  was  about  that  hour  that  I had  experienced  the  most 
unusual  depression  I have  described.  The  sensations  I had  on  that 
afternoon  have  left  a most  clear  and  distinct  impression  on  my  mind, 
and  now,  after  the  lapse  of  15  years,  I well  remember  my  miserable 
feelings. 

“J.  D.,  M.D.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Dr.  D.  says  : — 

“ I most  certainly  never  had  a similar  experience  of  depression,  or  such 
a vivid  dream  as  the  one  I tried  in  my  letter  to  explain.  , Both  the 
depression  and  the  dream  were  quite  exceptional,  and  have  left  a most 
clear  impression  on  my  memory. 

“ I fear  I cannot  name  any  individual  schoolfellow  who  noticed  my 
most  unwonted  silence  and  quietness  on  that  afternoon,  but  I distinctly 
remember  their  chaffing  me  for  not  joining  as  usual  in  the  afternoon’s 
practice.” 

■i 

§ 3.  On  the  supposition  that  a dose  natural  bond  between  two 
persons  is  a favourable  condition  for  telepathic  influence,  there  is 
one  group  of  persons  among  whom  we  might  expect  to  find  a 
disproportionate  number  of  instances — namely,  tivim.  As  a matter 
of  fact,  we  have  a certain  number  of  twin  cases,  which,  though  actually 
small,  is  indisputably  disproportionate,  if  we  remember  what  an 
infinitesimally  small  proportion  of  the  population  twins  form.  I will 
quote  here  the  three  examples  which  properly  belong  to  this  chapter. 
It  may  be  of  interest  to  compare  them  with  tfie  cases  given  by  Mr.  F. 
Galton  ( Inquiry  into  Human  Faculty,  pp.  226-231),  of  consentaneous 
thought  and  action  on  the  part  of  twins.  Mr.  Galton  attributes  the 
coincidences  to  a specially  close  similarity  of  constitution.  The  pair 
may  be  roughly  compared  to  two  watches,  which  begin  to  go  at  the 
same  hour,  and  keep  parallel  with  one  another  in  their  advance 
through  life.  This  theory  seems  fairly  to  account  for  the  occurrence 
of  special  physiological  or  pathological  crises  at  the  same  point  of  the 
two  lives.  The  twins,  though  separated,  have  their  croup  or  their 
whooping-cough  simultaneously.  This  explanation,  however,  seems 
a little  strained  when  applied  to  the  simultaneous  purchase  in 
different  towns  of  two  sets  of  champagne-glasses  of  similar  pattern, 
owing  to  a sudden  impulse  on  the  part  of  each  of  the  twins  to  surprise 
the  other  with  a present.  If  it  were  possible — which  it  can  hardly 
be- — to  make  sure  that  there  had  been  no  previous  mention  of  the 
subject  between  the  brothers,  and  that  the  idea  was  really  and 
completely  impromptu,  one  might  hint  that  the  coincidence  here  was 
telepathic.  And,  at  any  rate,  the  cases  to  be  now  quoted  seem  outside 

280  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

the  range  of  a pre-established  physiological  harmony : with  them*,  the 
alternative  is  between  telepathy  and  accident. 

The  first  account  is  from  the  Rev.  J.  M.  Wilson,  head-master  of 
Clifton  College,  a Senior  Wrangler  and  well-known  mathematician. 

“ Clifton  College. 

“ January  5th,  1884. 

(76)  “ The  facts  were  these,  as  nearly  as  I can  remember. 

“ I was  at  Cambridge  at  the  end  of  my  second  term,  in  full  health, 
boating,  football-playing  and  the  like,  and  by  no  means  subject  to  hallucin- 
ations or  morbid  fancies.  One  evening  I felt  extremely  ill,  trembling, 
with  no  apparent  cause  whatever ; nor  did  it  seem  to  me  at  the  time  to  be 
a physical  illness,  a chill  of  any  kind.  I was  frightened.  I was  totally 
unable  to  overcome  it.  I remember  a sort  of  struggle  with  myself, 
resolving  that  I would  go  on  with  my  mathematics,  but  it  was  in  vain  : I 
became  convinced  that  I was  dying. 

“ I went  down  to  the  rooms  of  my  friend,  W.  E.  Mullins,  wfio  was  on 
the  same  staircase,  and  I remember  that  he  exclaimed  at  me  before  I 
spoke.  He  put  away  his  books,  pulled  out  a whisky  bottle  and  a back- 
gammon board,  but  I could  not  face  it.  We  sat  over  the  fire  fora  bit,  and 
then  he  fetched  some  one  else  (Mr.  E.  G.  Peckover),  to  have  a look  at  me. 
I was  in  a strange  discomfort,  but  with  no  symptoms  I can  recall,  except 
mental  discomfort,  and  the  conviction  that  I should  die  that  night. 

“Towards  11,  after  some  3 hours  of  this,  I got  better,  8md  went 
upstairs  and  got  to  bed,  and  after  a time  to  sleep,  and  next  morning  was 
quite  well. 

“ In  the  afternoon  came  a letter  to  say  that  my  twin  brother  had  died 
the  evening  before  in  Lincolnshire.  I am  quite  clear  of  the  fact  that  I 
never  once  thought  of  him,  nor  was  his  presence  with  me  even  dimly 
imagined.  He  had  been  long  ill  of  consumption  ; but  I had  not  heard  of 
him  for  some  days,  and  there  was  nothing  to  make  me  think  that  his 
death  was  near.  It  took  me  altogether  by  surprise. 

“James  M.  Wilson.” 

[We  have  applied  to  Mr.  Mullins,  but  he  cannot  now  recall  the 
incident.] 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wilson  says  : — 

“ I never  experienced  any  similar  nervous  depression.  It  was  a sort 
of  panic  fear,  the  chill  of  approaching  death  that  was  on  me.  The  hours 
did  not  exactly  coincide  ; my  brother  died  some  4 hours  before  I was  so 
seized.” 

If  we  are  right  in  regarding  this  incident  as  probably  telepathic, 
it  is  one  of  the  numerous  cases  where  the  impression  has  lain  latent 
for  a considerable  time  before  affecting  consciousness.  Mr.  Wilson’s 
description  of  his  experience  strongly  recalls  that  of  Miss  Martyn 
(p.  197),  who,  it  will  be  remembered,  “ became  quite  cold,  and  had  a 
firm  presentiment  that  she  was  dying.” 

VII. 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

281 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  James  Carroll,  who,  when  he  wrote,  was 
in  attendance  on  an  invalid,  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Wood,  The  Priory, 
Roehampton.  I have  had  a long  interview  with  him,  as  well  as  a 
good  deal  of  correspondence  ; and  I have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the 
facts  are  correctly  recorded. 

“ July,  1884. 

(77)  “ I beg  to  forward  my  experience  of  about  six  years  ago,  while 
living  in  the  employment  of  Colonel  Turbervill,  near  Bridgend,  Glamorgan, 
and  a twin  brother  in  the  same  capacity  with  a lady  at  Chobham  Place, 
Bagshot,  Surrey. 

“I  may* mention  that  my  brother  and  I were  devotedly  attached  from 
children,  and  our  resemblance  to  each  other  so  remarkable  that  only  one 
or  two  of  our  family  then  living,  and  oldest  friends  could  distinguish  any 
difference  between  us.  Up  to  June  17th,  1878,  I had  not  known  my 
brother  to  have  one  day’s  illness,  and  in  consequence  of  having  about  this 
time  recovered  heavy  financial  loss,  there  was  this  and  other  unusual  cause 
for  cheerfulness.  But  on  the  morning  of  the  date  given,  about  h^f-past 
11,  I experienced  a strange  sadness  and  depression.  Unable  to  account 
for  it,  I turned  to  my  desk,  thinking  of  my  brother.  I looked  at  his  last 
letter  to  see  the  date,  and  tried  to  detect  if  there  was  anything  unusual 
in  it,  but  failed.  I wrote  off  to  my  brother,  closed  my  desk,  and  felt 
compelled  to  exclaim  quite  aloud,  ‘ My  brother  or  I will  break  down.’ 
This  I afterwards  found  was  the  first  day  of  his  fatal  illness. 

“ I wrote  again  to  him,  but  in  consequence  of  his  being  ill  I received 
no  reply.  We  usually  wrote  twice  a- week.  1 tried  to  persuade  myself 
his  silence  was  due  to  being  busy.  On  the  following  Saturday,  the  22nd, 
while  speaking  to  Mr.  Turbervill,  a sudden  depression,  which  I had  never 
before  realised,  and  which  I feel  impossible  to  describe,  came  over  me.  I 
felt  strange  and  unwell.  I retired  as  soon  as  possible,  thankful  my  state 
of  mind  had  not  been  noticed.  I would  have  gone  to  my  room,  but  felt  it 
might  be  noticed,  and  felt  frightened  too,  as  if  something  might  suddenly 
happen  to  me. 

“ I went,  instead,  into  the  footman's  pantry,  where  they  were  cleaning 
the  plate,  and  sat  down,  suppressed  my  feelings,  but  alluded  to  a dulness 
and  concern  for  my  brother.  I was  speaking,  when  a messenger  entered 
with  a telegram  to  announce  my  brother's  dangerous  state,  and  requesting 
my  immediate  presence.  He  died  on  the  following  Monday  morning.  It 
is  clearly  proved  that  at  the  time  I felt  the  melancholy  described  he  was 
speaking  of  me  in  great  distress.  We  were  never  considered  superstitious, 
and  I was  never  apt  to  feelings  of  melancholy. 

u My  brother  and  I were  well  known  to  Dr.  Young,  of  30,  West- 
bourne  Square,  Paddington ; to  Mr.  Trollope,  Solicitor,  31,  Abingdon 
Street,  Westminster, 

“James  Carroll.” 

t 

In  reply  to  inquiries  Mr.  Carroll  says  : — 

“ August  8th,  1884. 

“ I find  it  difficult  now,  after  the  lapse  of  time  and  many  changes,  to 
get  the  memory  of  friends  to  recall  the  subjects  of  our  correspondence.  I 
left  South  Wales  on  the  death  of  n>y  brother,  and  have  been  moving  about 

282  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . [chap.  . 

among  strangers  ever  since ; circumstances  on  this  part  of  the  matter  are 
singularly  against  me, 

« “ You  asked  in  your  previous  letter,  Was  the  impression  of  distress 
and  apprehension  which  I described,  rare  to  me  in  my  experience  f I 
never  before  felt  anything  like  it,  except  in  a milder  form,  before  the 
death  of  my  mother,  about  14  years  ago,  while  I was  at  Lord  Robarts’ 
seat  in  Arnhill,  and  my  mother  in  London.  The  sensation  then  was. 
about  two  or  three  days  previpus  to  her  death.  I have  always  been  an 
opponent  to  ghost  theory,  and  till  my  brother’s  death  I never  thought  to 
entertain  the  idea  that  there  could  be  any  unseen  power  in  the  thought  of 
apparitions. 

“My  brother’s  death  was  from  a cold  neglected,  and  inflammation 
rapidly  setting  in.  We  were  twins,  his  age  at  time  of  death  39  about. 
From  our  extraordinary  resemblance  we  were  well  known.  I may 
mention  my  brother  being  the  only  near  relation,  left. 

“ I sent  to  Ireland  for  signatures  to  a distant  relative,  who  was  with 
me  as  an  adopted  son  shortly  after  my  brother’s  death,  for  about  two 
years.  He  is  about  18  years  of  age  ; his  name,  too,  is  James  Carroll.  His 
corroboration  comes  very  close  to  the  time. 

“ An  old  friend,  of  25  years,  30  I think,  holding  a good  position  in 
one  of  our  chief  banking  houses,  also  promised  to  corroborate,  a day  or 
two  ago.  I enclose  now  a note  from  him,  just  received.  He  remembers 
the  subject.  I often,  just  after  my  brother’s  death,  spoke  of  it  to  him. 

“J.  C.” 

A nephew  and  namesake  of  Mr.  Carroll’s  writes  as  follows: — 

“ Clonmel,  Ireland. 

“August  10th,  1884. 

“ I hereby  certify  that  Mr.  Carroll  frequently,  during  the  early  part 
of  my  residence  with  him,  about  5 years  ago,  spoke  of  the  presentiment 
he  describes  in  a letter  written  to  you,  a copy  of  which  he  has  sent  me. 

“ James  Carroll.” 

The  following  is  a letter  to  Mr.  Carroll  from  Mr.  James  Martin,  of  1, 
Oak  Villa,  Avenue  Road,  Acton. 

“August  16th,  1884. 

“ Dear  James  — From  the  time  of  your  brother’s  death  till  the  present, 

I have  spent  much  time  in  your  society.  I remember  well  the  account 
you  gave  me  of  the  dreadful  depression  of  mind  you  passed  through  just 
previous  to  his  death.  It  was  singular,  but  true. 

“James  Martin.” 

[Mr.  Carroll  showed  me  a letter  written  by  Mrs.  Benyan,  his 
brother’s  employer,  at  the  time  when  the  brother  was  dangerously 
ill.  The  letter  is  to  a solicitor,  and  expresses  a desire  that  he,  James 
Carroll,  should  be  informed  of  the  illness.  It  proves  that  the  illness  was 
sudden  and  that  J.  C.  was  unaware  of  it.] 

\ 

The  following  case  is  less  striking,  but  is  worth  giving  in  connection 
with  the  others.  We  received  it  from  Mr.  A.  J.  Maclean,  of  the  Clergy 
School,  Leeds. 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

283 

YU.} 

* “ June  8th,  1884. 

(78)  “ About  three  years  ago  my  twin  brother  was  yachting  off  Norway 
for  six  weeks.  One  Sunday  I (who  was  then  at  college)  felt  certain  that 
there  was  something  wrong  with  my  brother  and  spoke  of  it  freely  (I 
cannot  remember  to  whom).  When  I saw  my  brother  1 mentioned  this 
circumstance.  My  brother  had  kept  a diary,  and  on  the  day  in  question 
they  had  encountered  a storm,  in  which  masts  were  injured  and  things 

. washed  away.  They  gave  up  all  for  lost.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Maclean  says  : — 

“June,  1884. 

“ I could  not  say  whether  my  brother  had  any  thoughts  about  me  on  the 
day  he  was  in  danger  of  being  shipwrecked,  but  I certainly  had  a vivid 
impression  that  he  was  in  danger  the  same  day  on  which  it  happened.  He 
was  yachting  at  the  time,  and  was  off  the  coast  of  Norway.  He  is  not  the 
sort  of  man  to  experience  anything  in  the  way  of  hallucination,  and  if  he 
did  think  of  me  cLt  the  time  he  would  take  no  notice  of  it,  or  even  forget  it 
altogether  the  next  minute.  I feel  sure  I should  get  but  very  little  infor- 
mation bearing  on  the  subject  from  him.  1 only  know  that  he  was  in 
actual  danger,  and  furthermore  that  I myself  was  convinced  at  the  time 
that  something  was  happening  to  him,  and  mentioned  the  fact  to  several 
friends  at  the  time — being  at  Oxford — though  I cannot  possibly  remember 
to  whom  I expressed  my  fears.  He  is  a twin  brother. 

“Arthur  J Maclean.” 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  especially  as  to  whether  he  had  ever  had 
similar  impressions  which  had  not  corresponded  with  reality,  Mr.  Maclean 
says  : — 

“June  20th,  1884. 

“ My  impression  with  regard  to  my  brother's  danger  is  the  only  one  I 
ever  remember  having. 

“ I am  afraid  I cannot  possibly  remember  to  whom  I mentioned  my 
fears  at  the.  time,  as  I was  at  college,  and  there  were  so  many  I might  have 
told. 

“Arthur  Maclean.” 

§ 4.  We  may  now  pass  to  a group  of  these  cases  in  which  the  ' 
primary  elem'ent  of  the  emotional  impression  is  a sense  of  being 
wanted — an  impulse  to  go  somewhere  or  do  something. 

The  first  case  is  from  the  Rev.  E.  D.  Banister,  of  Whitechapel 
Vicarage^  Preston. 

“ November  12th,  1885.  , 

(79)  “ My  father  on  the  day  of  his  death  had  gone  out  of  the  house 
about  2.30  p.m.  to  have  his  usual  afternoon  stroll  in  the  garden  and 
fields.  He  had  not  been  absent  more  than  7 or  8 minutes  when,  as  I 
was  talking  to  my  wife  and  sister,  I was  seized  with  a very  urgent  desire 
to  go  to  him.  (The  conversation  related  to  a visit  which  we  proposed  to 
p&y  that*  afternoon  to  a neighbour,  and  no  allusion  was  made  to  my 
father.)  The  feeling  that  I ought  to  go  and  see  him  came  upon  me  with 
irresistible  force.  I insisted  upon  all  in  the  house  going  out,  to  find  my 

284  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

father.  I was  remonstrated  with — my  very  anxiety  seeming  so  unreason- 
able. My  father’s  afternoon  stroll  was  a regular  habit  of  life  in  fine 
weather,  and  I had  no  reason  to  give  why  on  that  particular  occasion  I 
must  insist  on  his  being  found.  Search  was  made,  and  it  was  my  sad  lot 
to  find  him  dead  in  the  field,  in  a place  which,  according  to  the  route  he. 
ordinarily  adopted,  he  would  have  reached  about  7 or  8 minutes  after 
leaving  the  house. 

“ My  idea  is  that  when  he  felt  the  stroke  of  death  coming  upon  him 
he  earnestly  desired  to  see  me,  and  that,  by  the  operation  of  certain 
psychical  laws,  that  desire  was  communicated  to  me. 

“ E.  D.  Banister.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries  Mr.  Banister  adds  : — 

“ In  reply  to  your  letter  I have  to  state  : — 

“ 1.  Vivid  impressions  of  the  kind  I have  related  are  utterly  unknown 
to  me ; the  one  related  is  unique  in  my  experience. 

“ 2.  There  was  not  the  least  cause  for  anxiety  owing  to  the  absence 
of  my  father.  It  only  seemed  a short  time  since  he  had  gone  out  of  the 
room,  and  on  this  account  my  urgency  was  deemed  unreasonable. 

“ 3.  The  date  was  January  9th,  1883.”  [We  have  confirmed  this  date 
by  the  obituary  in  the  Preston  Chronicle .] 

Mr.  Banister’s  wife  and  sister  supply  the  following  corroboration  : — 

“ We  have  seen  the  statement  which  Mr.  Banister  has  forwarded  to 
the  Psychical  Kesearch  Society  relating  to  the  strong  impression  by 
which  he  was  irresistibly  urged  in  search  of  his  father  on  the  afternoon 
of  January  9th,  1883,  and  we  are  able  to  confirm  all  details  given  in  that 
statement. 

“ Mary  Banister. 

“ Agnes  Banister.” 

The  following  instance  is  from  Mrs.  C.,  of  11,  Upper  Hamilton 
Terrace,  N.W. 

“December  17th,  1883. 

(80)  “ On  December  2nd,  1877,  I was  at  church.  My  children  wished 
to  remain  to  a christening.  I said,  ‘ I cannot,  somebody  seems  calling  me; 
something  is  the  matter.’  I returned  home  to  find  nothing;  but  next 
morning  two  telegrams  summoned  me  to  the  deathbed  of  my  husband,  from 
whom  I had  had  a cheerful  letter  on  the  Saturday,  and  who  left  me  in 
excellent  spirits  the  Thursday  before.  I only  arrived  in  time  to  see  him 
die.” 

The  following  is  the  sons’  corroboration  : — 

“ We  remember,  perfectly,  our  mother  leaving  the  church,  saying  she 
felt  she  was  wanted,  someone  was  calling  her.  The  next  day  our  father 
died,  December  3rd,  1877. 

“George  0. 
“John  A.  C,” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  0.  says  : — * 

“February  19th,  1884.  * 

(1)  “T  cannot  say  that  the  experience  of  some  one  calling  me  was 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 

285 

VII.] 

unique.  I have  often  had  strong  impressions  of  things  occurring,  and  suclfc  • 
things  have  happened,  but  not  having  set  down  the  dates,  I could  not  be 
sufficiently,  certain  to  satisfy  myself.1 

(2)  “ My  husband  wrote  me  a cheerful  letter  on  the  Friday,  November 
30th, and  on  the  Saturday,  December  1st,  only  mentioning  that  he  was  a little 
bilious,  but  that  he  was  going  to  Leicester  that  afternoon.  He  was,  how- 
ever, so  much  worse  that  afternoon  that  he  went  to  bed.  In  the  night  he 
was  found  by  a gentleman  to  be  out  of  bed,  and  unable  to  get  in,  and  he 
mistook  thte  gentleman  for  me.  All  Sunday  he  was  dying,  and  my  friends 
could  not  telegraph,  and  there  was  no  train.  0'n  Monday  I received  two 
telegrams,  early  in  the  morning.  ‘ As  soon  as  I read  your  letter  my  sons 
both  said  they  remembered  the  circumstance  quite  well,  and  signed  the 
enclosed.  George  was  10  years  old,  John  12  years.” 

[Asked  whether  she  would  have  been  certain  to  stay  for  the  christening 
under  ordinary  circumstances,  Mrs.  C.  replied  in  the  affirmative ; and  that 
the  boys  were  disappointed.  She  is  without  any  theory  on  these  matters  ; 
and  simply  reports  an  undoubted  experience.] 

The  following  case  is  very  similar  : — 

“ Cathedral  Yard,  Winchester. 

“January  31st,  1884. 

(81)  “I  respectfully  beg  to  offer  you  a short  statement  of  my  experience 
on  a subject  which  I do  not  understand.  Let  me  premise  that  I am  not  a 
scholar,  as  T left  school  when  12  years  of  age  in  1827,  and  I therefore 
hope  you  will  forgive  all  sins  against  composition  and  grammar.  I 
am  a working  foreman  of  masons  at  Winchester  Cathedral,  and  have 
been  for  the  last  9 years  a resident  in  this  city.  I am  a native  of 
Edinburgh. 

“ It  is  now  more  than  30  years  ago  that  I was  living  in  London,  very 
near  where  the  Great  Western  Railway  now  stands,  but  which  was  not 
then  built.  I was  working  in  the  Regent’s  Park  for  Messrs.  Mowlem, 
Burt,  and  Freeman,  who  at  that  time  had  the  Government  contract  for 
3 years  for  the  masons’  work  of  the  capital,  and  who  yet  carry  on  a mighty 
business  at  Millbank,  Westminster.  I think  it  was  Gloucester  Gate,  if  I 
mistake  not.  At  all  events,  it  was  that  gate  of  Regent’s  Park  to  the  east- 
ward of  th6  Zoological  Gardens,  at  the  north-east  comer  of  the  park.  The 
distance  from  my  home  was  too  great  for  me  to  get  home  to  meals,  so  I 
carried  my  food  with  me,  and  therefore  had  no  call  to  leave  the  work  all 
day.  On  a certain  day,  however,  I suddenly  felt  an  intense  desire  to  go 
home,  but  as  I had  no  business  there  I tried  to  suppress  it, — but  it  was  not 
possible  to  do  so.  Every  minute  the  desire  to  go  home  increased.  It  was 
10  in  the  morning,  and  I could  not  think  of  anything  to  call  me  away  from 
the  work  at  such  a time.  I got  fidgety  and  uneasy,  and  felt  as  if  I must 
go,  even  at  the  risk  of  being  ridiculed  by  my  wife,  as  I could  give  no  reason 
why  I should  leave  my  work  and  lose  6d.  an  hour  for  nonsense.  However, 
I could  not  stay,  and  I set  off  for  home  under  an  impulse  which  I could 
not  resist. 

. 1 One  of  these  cases,  however,  seems  to  have  been  quite  precise,  and  will  be  found  in 

Chap,  xii.,  §7. 

280  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS , [chap. 

u When  I reached  my  own  door  and  knocked,  the  door  was  opened  by 
my  wife’s  sister,  a married  woman,  who  lived  a few  streets  off.  She  looked 
surprised,  and  said,  ‘ Why,  Skirving,  how  did  you  know  ? ’ ‘.Know  what  ? ’ 
I said.  ‘ Why,  about  Mary  Ann.’  I said,  ‘I  don’t  know  anything  about 
Mary  Ann’ (my  wife).  ‘Then  what  brought  you  home  at  present  ? ’ J 
said,  ‘ I can  hardly  tell  you.  I seemed  to  want  to  come  home.  But  what 
is  wrong  V I asked.  She  told  me  that  my  wife  had  been  run  over  by  a cab 
and  been  most  seriously  injured  about  an  hour  ago,  and  she  had  called  for 
me  ever  since,  but  was  now  in  fits,  and  had  several  in  succession.  I went 
upstairs,  and  thougli  very  ill  she  recognised  me,  and  stretched  forth  her 
arms  and  took  me  round  the  neck  and  pulled  my  head  down  into  her  bosom. 
The  fits  passed  away  directly,  and  my  presence  seemed  to  tranquillisO  her, 
so  that  she  got  into  sleep,  and  did  well.  Her  sister  told  me^that  she  had 
uttered  the  most  piteous  cries  for  me  to  come  to  her,  although  there  was 
not  the  least  likelihood  of  my  coming.  This  short  narrative  lias  only  one 
merit ; it  is  strictly  true. 

“ Alexander  Skirving.” 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  the  time  of  the  accident  corresponded 
with  the  time  when  he  felt  a desire  to  go  home,  Mr.  Skirving  says  : — 

“ I asked  my  wife’s  sister  what  time  the  accident  occurred,  and  she 
» said,  ‘ An  hour  and  a-half  ago  ’ — that  is  from  the  time  I came  home.  Now, 
that  was  exactly  coincident  with  the  time  I wanted  to  leave  work.  It 
took  me  an  hour  to  walk  home;  and  I was  quite  half-an  hour  struggling  in 
my  mind  to  overcome  the  wish  to  leave  work  before  I did  so.” 

He  adds:  “You  ask  me  if  I ever  had  a similar  impression  on  any 
other  occasion.  I never  had.  It  was  quite  a single  and  unique 
experience.” 

Mr.  Skirving’s  wife  is  dead.  His  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Yye,  is  in  New 
Zealand.  Her  husband,  writing  from  Otago  on  July  1st,  1885,  says 
that  she  cannot  now  give  particulars  of  the  occurrence  though  she 
remembers  the  accident  very  well. 

In  the  next  case — from  Mrs.  Wirgman,  of  121,  Dawson  Place, 
Westbourne  Park,  W. — the  percipient’s  line  of  action  was  still  more 
abnormal. 

(82)  “ In  1845  1 had  moved  from  Germany  to  a small  town  in 
Belgium  ; on  my  arrival  an  English  lady  called  on  me, to  offer  her  aid  in 
finding  a house.  While  talking  to  her  I suddenly  exclaimed,  ‘ I must 
go  to  England.’  T then  and  there  started  in  order  to  catch  the  boat 
from  Antwerp.  On  reaching  London  I remarked  the  numerous  persons 
I saw  in  mourning.1  I drove  to  my  parents’  lodgings  at  the  West  End, 
and  on  my  cousin  coming  to  the  cab  door  I inquired  who  it  was,  my 
father  or  my  mother.  I found  my  mother  well,  my  father  dying ; his 
last  conscious  words  had  been,  ‘ Fan  will  be  here  on  Thursday,’  and  so  I 
waSj  to  the  intense  surprise  of  my  relations,  some  of  whom  hadt  written* 
not  anticipating  immediate  clanger,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  inexpljc-, 

1 This  is  merely  intended  to  mark  the  gradually  increasing  definiteness  of  the  alarm. 

VII,]  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 287 

able  impulse,  1 certainly  should  not  have  reached  London  in  time  to  see 
my  father  again.” 

[In  conversation  Mrs.  Wirgman  described  to  Mr.  Myers  the  extreme 
inconvenience,  and  apparent  folly,  of  her  return  to  England,  which  she 
undertook  without  any  definite  notion  as  to  its  object,  and,  as  it  were,  in 
spite  of  herself.] 

In  the  next  case — from  Mr.  Pae,  of  30,  Gordon  Street,  Gateshead- 
on-Tyne — there  may  have  been  a certain  amount  of  latent  anxiety  on 
the  narrators  part  respecting  his  fathers  condition  of  health.  On 
the  other  hand  his  impression  seems  to  have  reached  the  pitch  of 
actual  plfysical  discomfort,  and  certainly  affected  his  actions  in  an 
unexpected  way. 

(83)  “ I dreamt  that  my  father  died  before  I got  his  portrait  painted. 

This  dream  I told  so  often  when  my  father  was  in  good  health  that  it  became 
a standing  jest.  Three  months  before  he  died  he  took  a slight  pain  in  his 
shoulder,  and  I said  to  myself,  4 Is  he  going  to  die  ? 5 So  I . did  begin  to 
paint  his  portrait,  but  next  day  he  was  all  right  again,  so  the  portrait  did 
not  make  headway.  Three  months  after,  Isabella  (my  wife)  and  I had 
arranged  to  go  to  the  theatre  one  night.  It  was  arranged  that  I would  get 
tea  in  Newcastle  and  meet  Isabella  at  the  High  Level  Bridge  end  (she 
had  to  come  in  from  the  Low  Fell,  where  we  lived).  All  went  well.,  I 
got  to  the  High  Level.  As  I was  standing  waiting  for  her,  I felt  all 
of  a sudden  that  if  I could  wish  myself  anywhere  in  the  world  at  that 
moment  it  .would  be  in  our  kitchen  at  the  Low  Fell.  I tried  to  shake 
the  feeling  off,  but  it  got  worse  and  worse.  When  Isabella  came,  I 
didn’t  make  any  movement  in  the  direction  of  the  theatre.  She  saw 
something  was  the  matter.  I explained  the  feeling.  She  said,  ‘Try 
and  shake  it  off.’  But  no!  I couldn’t.  She  said,  ‘Then  let  us  go 
home.’  When  we  got  home  to  the  kitchen  we  found  my  father  in  an 
apoplectic  fit — quite  powerless.  He  had  remained  to  take  care  of  the 
children.  He  died  the  next  day.  He  never  spoke;  and  of  course  the  portrait 
was  never  finished. 

“William  Pae.” 

“ I distinctly  remember  my  husband’s  concern  when  I met  him  at 
the  High  Level,  and  confirm  all  he  relates  about  his  father’s  death. 

“ Isabella  Pae.” 

[Our  active  helper,  Mr.  E.  T.  Nisbet,  of  51,  Eldon  Street,  Newcastle- 
on-Tyne,  mentions  that  “Mr.  Pae,  when  describing  the  feeling  that 
came  oyer  him  while  waiting  at  the  High  Level,  puts  his  hands  on  his  chest 
and  presses  them  against  it  at  short  intervals,  and  says,  ‘ J ust  like  that,’  ”] 

The  late  Mr.  Cromwell  F.  Yarley,  the  well-known  electrician, 
records  %n  experience  in  which,  as  he  believed,  he  made  a deliberate 
and  successful  attempt  to  impress  his  wife’s  mind,  not,  however, 
by  way  of  experiment,  but  in  a, crisis  of  great  danger  (R&port  of 

288 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

the  Dialectical  Society  on  Spiritualism,  p.  162).  He  had  been  in 
the  habit  of  inhaling  chloroform  to  relieve  constriction  of  the  throat, 
and  one  day  fell  back  on  his  bed,  powerless  to  move,  with  the  sponge 
on  his  mouth.  Mrs.  Varley  was  in  the  room  above,  nursing  a sick 
child. 

(84)  “ I made,  of  my  will,  a distinct  impression  on  her  brain  that  I 
was  in  danger.  Thus  aroused  she  came  down  and  immediately  removed  the 
sponge,  and  was  greatly  alarmed.  I then  used  my  body  to  speak  to  her,  and 
I said,  * T shall  forget  all  about  it,  and  how  this  came  to  pass  unless  you 
remind  me  in  the  morning,  but  be  sure  to  tell  me  what  made  you  come 
down,  and  I shall  then  be  able  to  recall  the  circumstances.'  following 
morning  she  did  so,  but  I could  not  remember  anything  about  it ; I tried 
hard  all  the  day,  however,  and  at  length  I succeeded  in  remembering,  first 
a part,  and  ultimately  the  whole.” 

With  so  much  forcing  of  the  memory,  however,  the  evidence  here 
cannot  be  ranked  as  much  better  than  second-hand  ; and  Mrs. 
Varley  s account  of  the  incident  has  not,  I believe,  been  placed  on 
record.1 * * * * * 

The  next  case  involves  a far  less  momentous  experience, 
but  strains  the  hypothesis  of  accident  considerably  more.  It  is  from 
Bt.  Major  Kobbe,  U.S.  Army. 

“Mt.  Vernon  Barracks,  Ala. 

“July  31st,  1884. 

(85)  “ In  1858  or  1859,  while  at  home  in  New  York  city,  I one  day  . 
felt  a desire  to  Visit  Greenwood  Cemetery  some  six  or  seven  miles  distant 
on  Long  Island,  where  my  family  owned  a vault,  &c. 

" When  I arrived  there  I found  my  father  standing  uncovered  at  an 
open  grave,  in  which  he  had  just  had  placed,  the  remains  of  an  infant  son, 
who  had  died  before  my  birth;  he  had  had  the  remains*  removed 
from  the  vault  and  placed  in  the  grave  for  final  interment,  and  the 
workmen  were  on  the  point  of  putting  in  the  first  spadeful  of  earth  as  I 
came  up. 

“When  we  left  the  cemetery  together  I remarked  on  the  singular 
coincidence  which  had  brought  me  there  at  the  nick  of  time ; it  quickly 
and  naturally  came  out  that  my  father  had  left  a message  at  home  for  me  to 
meet  him  there  at  the  time  I really  did  do  so.  This  message  I never  received* 
for  the  simple  reason  that  I had  not  gone  home. 

“ The  ‘ coincidence 9 is  remarkable  because — 

“1.  In  those  days  the  cemetery  was  not  pleasant  or  convenient  of 
access. 

1 I should  mention  that  Mr.  Yarley’s  own  view  of  this  occurrence,  and  of  another 

which  will  be  quoted  in  Chapter  xvii.,  is  different  from  that  here  adopted.  But 

telepathy  seems  quite  adequate  to  cover  the  facts.  The  sense  of  being  “out  of  the 

body,”  which  is  what  appears  most  powerfully  to  have  impressed  him,  is  a known  form  of 

pathologic  experience,  or— as  I should  regard  it— of  hallucination.  (See  Chapter  xiv.,  §5/ 

note  on  Mrs.  Stone’s  case.) 

289 

vn]  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 

4 

“2.  Neither  my  father,  myself,  nor  other  members  of  the  family  ever 
went  there,  or  for  that  matter  ever  spoke  of  the  place.  With  the 
exception  of  two  infant  children  who  had  died  many  years  before,  none 
of  our  relatives  were  buried  there,  and,  as  far  as  I know,  no  one  of  the 
family  had  been  there  for  many  years.  Most  of  them  had  never  been 
there. 

“ 3.  There  was  and  had  been  no  reason  why  J should  ever  think  of  the 
place,  and  I had  never  had  any  intention  or  desire  to  visit  it. 

u 4.  Had  I been  a few  minutes  earlier  or  later  (say  half-an-hour  at  the 
most)  I would  not  have  met  my  father,  and  it  is  probable  would  never  have 
heard  of  the  matter.  His  messenger  would  have  reported  to  him  that  I 
had  not  received  his  message,  and  he  would  probably  not  have  mentioned 
it  to  me.  ' 

“ To  put  the  matter  in  a nutshell,  a message  was  left  for  me  to  be  at  a 
certain*  undesirable  and  unfrequented  place,  inconvenient  of  access  and 
taking  some  hours  to  reach  by  boat  and  other  conveyance.  I do  not  receive 
the  message,  but  obey  it  implicitly  to  the  minute. 

“William  A.  Kobbi!:.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Major  Kobbe  says  : — 

“ My  father  died  about  4 years  ago.  Since  my  very  remarkable  meeting 
with  him  in  the  cemetery  I have  been  at  home  at  long  intervals  only,  and 
for  short  periods  of  time,  and  for  this  reason,  I suppose,  never  had  occasion 
to  mention  the  matter  to  him,  or  to  any  other  member  of  the  family.  1 
have,  since  his  death,  spoken  of  it  to  others.  I am  now,  and  always  have 
been,  entirely  free  from  superstition  of  any  kind,  and  have,  in  common 
with  all  of  my  relatives  and  race,  uncommonly  strong  nerves,  unexcitable 
temperament,  and  an  aversion  to  ‘isms’  of  all  kinds.  Nothing  of  a. 
similar  nature  ever  happened  to  me  before  or  since,  and  I never  had  any 
premonition  or  impression  of  any  kind  that  I could  not  and  did  not  care- 
fully and  easily  trace  to  its  source. ” 

We  requested  Major  Kobbe  to  find  out  if  his  mother  remembered  the 
incident.  He  finds  that  she' does  not  remember  it,  adding,  “ The  part  my 
mother  played  in  the  matter,  while  all-important  as  evidence,  was  a matter 
of  slight  moment  to  her  at  the  time.” 

It  is  necessary,  of  course,  to  be  sure  that  the  line  of  action 
adopted  by  the  percipient  was  really  an  unlikely  one.  It  may  look  so, 
without  really  having  been  so.  For  instance,  Miss  Lindsay,  of  58, 
Lloyd  Street,  jGrreenheys,  Manchester,  has  given  us  an  account  of 
an  unusually  long  walk  which  she  suddenly  undertook  against  advice, 
with  the  view  of  seeing  an  aunt  who  wtis  almost  a stranger  to  her. 

“The  day  was  very  unsuitable  for  a walk  of  a number  of  miles.  It 
threatened  to  rain,  and  began  before  I had  got  far  on  my  way.  I took  a 
wrong  turning',  too,  in  a brown  study/  and  returned  in  a loop  to  the  same. 
r°ad,  so  that  I found  myself,  late  in  the  afternoon,  again  near  the  tram 
terminus,  by  which  I might  have  gone  home,  instead  of  near  my  destination*  , 
By  this  time  my  thin  print  dress  was  soaked  through  by  the  rain,  for  I had 

290 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . 

[OHikP. 

no  cloak,  yet  1 never  thought  of  turning  homewards.  After  walking 
some  14  miles,  I arrived  at  the  house,  to  find  that  my  aunt  had  died 
suddenly  of  acute  rheumatism  that  morning. 

“ Now,  looking  back  on  the  matter,  I see  that  native  obstinacy 
might  account  for  my  starting  in  spite  of  counsel  and  weather,  but  it 
would  not  account  for  my  visiting  a relation  I did  not  know  well,  and 
whonj  I did  know  to  be  particular  about  appearances,  in  a dripping  dress. 
What  1 am  particularly  sure  about  is,  that  it  never  once  struck  me  that 
my  proceeding  was  odd  ; which,  to  my  mind,  proves  conclusively^  that  the 
initial  impulse  must  have  been  stronger  than  an  every-day  freak/ 

Still,  it  may  have  been  a freak,  though  not  an  “ every-day  ” one. 
Miss  Lindsay  had  just  returned  from  the  seaside  “in  excellent 
health,  though  in  circumstances  of  considerable  worry.”  Thus  an 
excuse  for  a long  walk  may  have  been  readily  caught  at,  and  the 
“ native  obstinacy  ” may  have  done  the  rest.  The  case,  moreover, 
lacks  the  important  evidential  point  which  marked  those  that  preceded 
it — the  dewire  on  the  part  of  the  supposed  agent  for  the  other  person  s 
presence.  We  have  another  case  where  a walk  was  suddenly  taken, 
and  pursued  in  torrents  of  rain,  in  spite  of  two  attempts  to  return, 
under  an  idea  that  an  acquaintance  was  on  the  point  of  death.  She 
died  the  same  evening.  But  she  had  been  for  some  years  an  object 
of  care  to  the  person  who  visited  her,  and  though  the  latter  says,  “,I 
had  not  seen  her  for  some  weeks,  possibly  months  before,  and  I did 
not  know  she  was  ill  or  likely  to  die,”  the  case  is  one  which  we  can 
hardly  include. 

Our  doubt  as  to  what  can  be  considered  unlikely  conduct  on  the 
percipient’s  part  has  relegated  a good  many  alleged  cases  of  this  class 
to  the  Supplement.  Among  these  are  two  of  considerable  interest. 
One  of  them  is  from  Mr.  Frederick  Morgan,  of  Nugent  Hill,  Bristol, 
who  records  how  he  once  made  a sudden  and  unaccountable  exit  in 
the  middle  of  a lecture,  and  walked  home,  unconscious  of  having  done 
anything  unusual,  to  find  his  house  in  imminent  danger  from  fire,  and 
his  mother  strongly  desiring  his  presence.  We  have  Mr.  Morgan’s 
assurance  that  he  was  thoroughly  interested  in  the  discourse,  and 
had  even  noticed  a friend  with#  whom  he  had  planned  to  walk  home 
when  it  was  over;  otherwise  the  impulse  to  leave  a lecture-room 
might  not  seem  the  best  possible  specimen  of  an  abnormal  experience. 
The  second  case  is . from  the  Dr.  Fischer  quoted  a few  pages  back; 
who  went  to  a jubilee  dinner,  and  “ had  not  been  at  table  jnore  than 
an  hour,”  when  he  was  forced  to  go  out  by  an  overpowering  conviction 
that  some  one  was  in  need  of  his  assistance.  This  heroic  step,  takfcn 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS1* 

291 

vrt] 

on  a comparatively  empty . stomach,  was  (as  it  turned  out)  fully 
justified.  But  we  must  remember  that  an  impression  of  being  wanted 
is  a very  deep  and  abiding  element  of  a medical  mans  experience. 

The  following  case  is  better  worth  quotation,  for  the  very  reason 
that  the  percipient  was  not  a doctor.  We  received  it  from  Mr.  Row- 
lands, of  Bryncethin,  near  Bridgend,  mentioned  above  (p.  252). 

“July  2nd,  1884; 

(86)  “ There  was  a Calvinistic  Methodist  minister,  named  Thomas 
Howell,  Kinffig  Hill,  near  Bridgend.  He  was  preaching  at  Pen-y-graig, 
and  resided  not  far  from  my  house.  I was  disturbed  in  my  mind  about  him 
‘about  12  or  1 o’clock  in  the  morning.  I rose  from  bed  and  put' my  clothes 
on,  went  to  his  lodgings  and  knocked  at  his  door,  and  told  them  that  I 
was  disturbed  about  the  minister.  I went  in  and  up  to  his  bedroom,  and 
found  him  sitting  down  on  the  side  of  the  bed,  sweating,  and  as  ill  and  as 
painful  as  could  be.  This  happened  about  6 years  ago.  You  can  write  to 
Mr.  Howell  if  you  wish. 

“ Rowland  Rowlands.” 

Mr.  Howell  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

“ Longlands,  Wyle. 

“July  16  th,  1884. 

“ I beg  to  inform  you  that  the  contents  of  the  enclosed  letter,  which  I 
received  from  you,  sent  to  you  from  Mr.  Rowland  Rowlands,  are  quite  true, 
and  more  than  is  stated  in  his  letter.  The  night  it  took  place,  August 
10th,  1879,  I shall  never  forget,  for,  I believe,  had  it  not  been  that  some 
unknown  agency  sent  me  assistance,  that  I would  have  realised  the 
mysteries  of  another  world  in  a short  time. 

“ The  narrative  is  simply  this : I was  preaching  at  Pen-y-graig,  the 
Sabbath  referred  to.  I slept  in  a house  near  the  chapel.  After  the  service  a 
few  friends  sat  awhile  with  me  conversing.  After  they  left,  about  10  o’clock, 
I took  a little  food,  a cup  of  tea  and  a small  bit  of  bread  and  butter,  and 
retired  to  sleep  about  half-past  10,  quite  healthy,  feeling  no  pain  or 
uneasiness  whatever.  Somewhere  between  12  and  1 o’clock  I awoke  with 
a severe  attack  of  pain  in  the  stomach, — remained  a little  in  bed,  but, 
thinking  death  had  struck  me,  I turned  out  on  the  bedside  and  attempted 
to  call  the  landlady,  but  failed  to  do  so.  I could  not  move  any  further  nor 
speak.  In  a few  minutes  I heard  a voice  at  the  door,  outside,  calling 
the  landlady,  who  was  in  bed.  He  succeeded  in  awaking  her  and 
she  replied  from  the  landing — ‘ Who  is  there  ? ’ To  which  Mr.  Rowlands 
replied,  ‘ Open  the  door  at  once  ; I have  been  disturbed  in  bed  ; there  is 
something  the  matter  with  the  preacher.’  To  which  she  replied,  ‘I  don’t 
think  so ; he  has  not  called.’  I heard  Mr.  Rowlands  speak  again  : 6 Make 
haste,  Mrs.  Phillips,’  which  time,  I believe,  Mrs.  Phillips,  the  landlady,  was 
dressing  herself,  and  ran  downstairs  and  opened  the  door.  Mr.  Rowlands 
and  herself  came  to  my  bedroom  at  once  and  knocked  at  my  door. 
Receiving  no  answer,  Mr.  Rowlands  opened  the  door,  and  found  me  in  the 
position  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  you.  He  asked  me,  ‘ What  is  the 
matter  with  you,  Mr.  Howell  ? ’ to  which  I could  not  reply.  I was  by 

v 2 

292  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS.  [chap. 

this  time  speechless.  He  told  me  again,  ‘I  was  disturbed  in  my  bed 
about  you  ; shall  we  have  a doctor  ? * to  which  I shook  my  head,  meaning 
‘ No.’  I thought  everything  was  almost  over.  A few  moments  again  I 
was  unconscious  and  for  hours  after  knew  nothing.  When  I came  to 
myself,  I saw  Mr.  Rowlands  and  Mrs.  Phillips  in  the  room.  They 
remained  with  me  till  the  morning.  I gradually  got  better,  and  when 
Mr.  Rowlands  left  me  between  7 and  8 o'clock,  he  remarked  to  me, 

* ‘ I really  thought  you  were  going  to  die.  Ifow  strange,  was  it  not,  that 
I w%s  disturbed  so!  Can  you  account  for  it V I replied,  ‘No,  if  it 
was  not  that  the  Almighty  had  sent  you  to  save  me.’ 

. “ I have  no  more  to  say  nor  explain,  but  I know  the  facts  are  true. 

“Tiios.  Howell.” 

And  here  I may  recall  what  was  said  above  (p.  92)  on  the 
subject  of  will  in  relation  to  telepathy.  The  remarks  which  were 
made  d pro/m  of  experimental  cases  derive  strong  confirmation 
from  the  more  recent  evidence.  It  is  clear,  I think,  that  in 
the  cases  last  considered  the  telepathic  influence  should  be 
interpreted  as  primarily  emotional , rather  than  controlling  or 
directive.  In  none  of  them  should  I regard  the  determination 
of  the  percipient’s  motor-impulse  as  at  all  directly  due  to  the 
strong  desire  of  the  agent  that  he  should  act  in  that  particular 
manner.  I doubt  if  any  amount  of  the  most  determined  “ willing,” 
on  the  part  of  the  strongest-minded  friend  or  relative,  would  have 
brought  Mr.  Skirving  from  his  work,  Mr.  Rowlands  from  his  bed,  or 
Dr.  Fischer  from  his  dinner.  But  we  may  quite  conceive  that  Mrs. 

1 Skirving’s  distress  and  agitation  might  set  up  in  her  husband’s  mind 
a disturbance  associated  with  the  idea  that  he  was  needed  ; and  this 
might  naturally  affect  his  behaviour  in  the  same  way  as  an  actual 
knowledge  of  the  circumstances  would  have  done,  without  the 
slightest  abrogation  of  his  normal  power  of  choice.  In  Mr.  Morgan’s 
case,  the  transferred  impression  (if  it  was  one)  did  not  reach  the 
level  of  an  idea  at  all,  nor  did  the  disturbance  even  take  the  form  of 
distress,  but  only  made  itself  felt  in  the  complete  distraction  of  his 
mind  from  its  obvious  and  normal  activities.  But  such  distraction 
implies  a genuine  disturbance  ; and  since  the  idea  of  the  locality — 
home — would  naturally  have  a * permanent  place  at  the  back- 
ground of  his  mind,  it  is  not  hard  to  see  how  the  disturbance 
might,  be  attracted  into  this  obvious  channel,  and  might  thus 
transform  itself  into  a motor-impulse  by  a process  which  ‘ quite: 
eluded  consciousness. 

J will  i Uustrate  this  view  by  a final  and  extreme  case,  where  the 
movements  produced  in  the  percipient  were  not  such  as  the  ageut 

293 

vn.]  EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS. 

can  have  desired,  or  even  thought  of.  The  narrator  is  Dr.  Li6beault, 
of  4*,  Rue  Bellevue,  Nancy. 

*■  t 

“ 4 Septembre,  1885. 

(87)  “ Je  m’empresse  de  vous  bcrire  au  sujet  du  fait  de  communication 
depensee  dont  je  vous  ai  parle  lorsque  vous  in’  avez  fait  l’honneur  d’assis- 
ter  k mes  seances  hypnotiques  a Nancy.  Ce  fait  se  passa  dans  une  famille 
frangaise  de  la  Nouvelle-Orleans,  et  qui  etait  venue  habiter  quelque  temps 
Nancy,  pour  y liquider  une  affaire  d’int^ret.  J’avais  fait  connaissance  de 
cette  famille  parceque  son  chef,  M.  G.,  m’avait  amen6  sa  niece,  Mile.  B., 
pour  que  je  la  traitasso  par  les  procbdes  hypnotiques.  Elle  etait  atteinte 
d’une  anbmielbg&re  et  d’une  toux  nerveuse  contraet^es  a Coblentz,  dans 
une  maison  d7education  ou  elle  etait  professeur.  Je  parvins  facilement  k 
la  mettre  en  somnambulisme,  et  elle  fut  gubrie  en  deux  seances.  La  pro* 
duction  de  cet  etat  de  sommeil  ayant  demontr^  k la  famille  G.  et  k Mile. 
B.  quelle  pourrait  facilement  devenir  medium  (Mme.  G.  6tait  medium 
spirite),  cette  demoiselle  s7exerga  a evoquer,  k l’aide  de  la  plume,  les  esprits, 
auxquels  elle  croyait  sin  cerement,  et  au  bout  de  deux  mois  elle  fut  un 
remarquable  medium  ecrivante.  C’est  elle  que  j’ai  vue  de  mes  yeux  tracer 
rapideinent  des  pages  d Venture  qu’elle  appelait  des  messages,  et  cela  en 
des  termes  choisis  et  sans  aucune  rature,  en  meme  temps  qu’elle  tenait 
conversations  avec  les  personnes  qui  rentouraient.  Chose  curieuse,  elle 
n'avait  nullement  conscience  de  ce  qu’eJle  ecrivait ; * aussi,7  disait-elle,  ‘ce 
ne  peut  etre  qu’un  esprit  qui  dirige  ina  main,  ce  n’est  pas  010!/ 

“Un  jour — c etait,  jo  crois,  le  7 Fevrier,  1868 — vers  8 heures  du 
matin,  au  moment  de  se  mettre  k table  pour  dejeuner,  elle  sentit  un 
besoin,  un  quelquechose  qui  la  poussait  k ecrire  (c7etait  ce  qu’elle  appelait 
une  trance)-  -et  elle  courut  immediatement  vers  son  grand  cahier,  ou  elle 
traga  f^brilement,  au  crayon,  des  caracteres  indechiftrables.  Elle  retraga 
les  memos  caracteres  sur  les  pages  suivantes,  et  enlin  Texcitation  de  son 
esprit  se  calmant,  on  put  lire  qu7  une  personne  nominee  Marguerite  lui 
atiiiongait  sa  mort.  On  supposa  aussitbt  qu7  une  demoiselle  de  ce  nom  qui 
6tait  son  amie,  et  habitait,  comme  professeur,  le  m6rae  pensionnat  de 
Coblentz  ou  elle  avait  exerce  les  meme  fonctions,  venait  d7y  mourir.  Toute 
la  famille  G.,  compris  Mile.  B.,  vinrent  immediatement  chez  moi,  et  nous 
deeid&mes  de  verifier,  le  jour  meme,  si  ce  faitde  mort  avait  reellementeu 
lieu;  Mile.  B.  ^crivit  k une  demoiselle  anglaise  de  ses  amis,  qui  exergait 
aussi  les  memes  fonctions  d’institutrice  dans  le  pensionnat  en  question ; 
elle  pr^texta  un  motif,  ayant  bien  soin  de  ne  pas  reveler  le  motif  vrai. 
Poste  pour  poste,  nous  regumes  une  reponse  en  anglais,  dont  on  me  copia 
la  partie  essentielle — rbponse  que  j7ai  retrouvee  dans  une  portefeuille  il  y 
a k peine  quinze  jours,  et  egaree  de  nouveau.  Elle  exprimait  retonnement 
d%  cette  demoiselle  anglaise  au  sujet  de  la  lettre  de  Mile.  B.,  lettre 
qu’elle  n’attendait  pas  sit6t,  vu  que  le  but  ne  lui  en  paraissait  pas  assez 
motive.  Mais  en  meme  temps,  l7amie  anglaise  se  h&tait  d’annoncer  k 
not  re  medium  que  leur  amie  commune,  Marguerite,  etait  morte  le  7 
Fevrier  vers  les  8 heures  du  matin.  En  outre,  un  petit  carre  de  papier 
imprimb  btait  interre  dans  la  lettre  ; c7btait  un  billet  de  mort  et  de  faire 
paH.  Inutile  de  vous  dire  que  je  vbrifiai  l’enveloppe  de  la  lettre,  et  que 
la  lettre  me  parut  venir  rbellement  de  Coblentz. 

294 

EMOTIONAL  AND  MOTOR  EFFECTS . [chap. 

‘ Seulemeut  j’ai  eu  depuis  des  regrets.  C’est  de  n’avoir  pas,  dans 
l’iut£r£t  de  la  science,  demands  k la  famille  G.  d’  aller  avec  eux  verifier  au 
bureau  t&egraphique  si,  r^ellement,  ils  n’auraient  pas  re$tt  une  dep^che 
t&egraphique  dans  la  matinee  du  7 Kvrier.  La  science  ne  doit  pas  avoir 
de  pudeur ; la  verity  ne  craint  pas  d’etre  vue.  Je  n’ai  comme  preuve  de 
la  veracite  du  fait  qu’uue  preuve  morale  : c’est  Phonorabilite  de  la  famille 
G.,  qui  in’  a paru  toujours  au  dessus  de  tout  soupgon. 

“A.  A.  Liebeault.” 

[Apart  from  the  improbability  that  the  whole  family  would  join  in  a 
conspiracy  to  deceive  their  friend,  the  nature  of  the  answer  received  from 
Coblentz  shows  that  the  writer  of  it  cannot  have  been  aware  that  any 
telegraphic  announcement  had  been  sent.  And  it  is  in  itself  unlikely  that 
the  authorities  of  the  school  would  have  felt  it  necessary  instantly  to  - 
communicate  the  news  to  Mdlle.  B.] 

This  example,  it  will  be  seen,  differs  from  the  preceding  in  the 
distinctness  of  the  idea  which— albeit  latent  in  the  percipient’s 
mind — we  must  hold  to  have  been  transferred.  Its  chief  "interest, 
however,  lies  in  the  completeness  and  complexity  of  the  automatism 
evolved.  It  exhibits  a spontaneous  telepathic  impulse  taking  effect 
through  the  motor-system  of  the  percipient  in  the  very  way  that 
M.  Riehets  or  our  own  deliberate  efforts  took  effect  on  the 
“ medium  ” (pp.  72-7).  The  parallel  could  not  well  be  closer;  and 
our  view  of  the  essential  continuity  of  experimental  and  spontaneous 
telepathy  could  hardly  receive  stronger  support. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

DREAMS. 

.t'  Past  I. — The  Relation  op  Dreams  to  the  Argument  fob  Telepathy. 

§ 1.  The  inward  impressions  of  distant  events  with  which  I have  so 
far  dealt  have  all  been  waking  impressions.  They  have  visited  the 
percipient  in  the  midst  of  his  daily  employments,  and  have  often 
caused  emotions  that  seemed  quite  incongruous  with  the  normal 
current  of  life  in  which  they  mingled.  But  there  is  another 
department  of  experience  which  we  are  accustomed  to  consider  as  par 
excellence  the  domain  of  inward  impressions,  and  from  which  the 
normal  current  of  life  is  altogether  shut  off — the  department  of 
dreams.  And  this  department,  where  inward  ideas  and  images 
dominate  unchecked,  is  also  one  which  covers  so  large  a period  of 
human  existence  as  to  make  it  d priori  probable  that  a considerable 
number  of  “ transferred  impressions  ” (supposing  such  things  to  exist) 
would  fall  within  it.  It  would  naturally,  therefore,  suggest  itself  as 
our  next  field  of  inquiry. 

But  dreams  not  only  fall  in  naturally  at  this  point ; they  are  a 
means  of  advance.  They  comprise  in  themselves  the  whole  range 
of  transition  from  ideal  and  emotional  to  • distinctly  sensory 
affections  ; and  they  thus  supply,  a most  convenient  link  between  the 
vaguer  sort  of  transferred  impressions  and  the  more  concrete  and 
definitely  embodied  sort.  The  telepathic  communications  of  the  last 
two  chapters,  even  where  connected  with  recognisable  images  of 
persons  and  things,  did  not  affect  sight  or  hearing  in  such  a way  as 
to  suggest  the  physical  presence  of  the  objects.  Now  many  dreams' 
-are,  of  just  this  impalpable  kind.  The  material  objects  which  figure 
ih  them  are  often  the  very  vaguest  of  images,  not  localised  in  any 
particular  spot.  It  is  the  general  idea,  the  generalised  form,,  of  a 
person  Ifliat  presents  itself,  not  a figure  in  a special  attitude  or  dad 
in  a special  dress;  events  pass  through  the  mind  clothed  in  the 
faintly  represented  imagery  in  which  a waking  train  of  memory  or. of 

296 

THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS  [chap. 

fc. 

reverie  will  embody  its  contents.  Such  a dream  only  ditfers  from  a 
waking  reverie  in  that  it  has  not  to  compete,  on  the  field  of  attention, 
with  any  objective  facts ; it  is  not  contrasted  with  the  immediate 
experience  which  the  external  world  forces  at  every  moment  on  the 
waking  senses ; and  it  is,  therefore,  itself  accepted  as  immediate 
experience.  With  some  persons  it  is  rare  for  their  dreams  ever  to 
emerge  into  more,  concrete  actuality  than  this;  and  telepathy  often 
seems  to  act  in  dreams  of  just  such  a veiled  and  abstract  kind. 
From  this  lowest  stage  the  transition  is  a gradual  one  up  to  the  most 
vivid  and  detailed  dream-imagery,  the  features  of  which  are  engraved 
on  the  memory  as  sharply  as  those  of  a striking  scene  in  waking 
life ; 1 and  at  every  step  of  the  transition  we  find  evidence  (how  far 
conclusive  will  he  seen  later)  to  the  action  of  telepathy. 

It  is  only,  however,  when  wo  come  to  the  most  distinctly  sensory 
class  of  all  that  the  full  theoretic  importance  of  dreams  can  be  realised. 
To  make  this  clear,  I must  ask  a moment’s  indulgence  for  a statement  of 
some  very  obvious  facts.  Vivid  dreams  present  themselves  to  us  in  hvo 
very  different  aspects.  There  is  first  the  standpoint  which  we  occupy 
when  we  are  dreaming  them.  From  that  standpoint,  the  world  with 
which  they  present  us  is  often  as  external  as  the  real  one ; and  our 
perceptions  in  that  world  are  perceptions  of  outward  and  abiding 
things,  among  which  we  live  and  move  with  as  much  sense  of  reality 
as  if  we  had  never  known  the  disillusion  of  waking.  To  the  dreamer, 
his  more  vivid  and  concrete  images  are  actual  percept.*,  calling  his 
senses  (in  physiological  language  his  sensory  centres)  into  play  just 
as  external  reality  would.  But  there  is  of  course  a totally  different 
standpoint  from  which  to  regard  dreams,  namely,  the  external  and 
critical  one  that  we  habitually  assume  during  waking  life.  We  'then 
think  of  them  merely  as  that  floating  phantasmagoria  whose 
transience  and  unreality  have  been  the  theme  of  philosophers  and 
poets  ; which  has  very  singular  relations  to  time,  and  no  real  relations 

1 Thoso  whose  dreams  are  habitually  of  the  more  ideal  and  impalpable  sort  have 
sometimes  a difficulty  in  realising  the  extreme  sensory  vividness  of  dreams  at  the  other 
end  of  the  scale,  dreamt  often  by  persons  who  have  no  exceptional  power  of  visualising 
when  awake.  1 myself  lately  dreamt  that,  meeting  a stranger  in  Bond  Street,  I was 
arrested  by  a certain  familiarity  in  the  face,  which  1 continued  to  scrutinise  with  puzzle d 
eagerness,  till  I at  last  identified  it  with  a portrait  in  the  Grosvenor  Gallery  of  the  preced- 
ing year.  Awake,  1 can  scarcely  recall  the  portrait  at  all. 

I have  also  heard  it  asserted  that  (apart  from  actual  external  sounds)  the  sense,  of 
hearing  is  never  distinctly  exercised  in  dreams.  I jiever  had  a more  vivid  dream  than 
one  of  a few  nights  back,  where  some  rifle-shooting,  in  the  midst  of  which  I foflnd  myself, 
caused  me  again  and  again  precisely  the  same  dread  before  the  sound  came,  and  the  same 
intense  irritation  when  it  came,  as  I associate  with  the  firing  of  a pistol  on  the  stage. , I 
could  distinctly  trace  this  dream  to  a similar  (though  less  acute)  irritation  which  I had 
suffered  from  the  cracking  of  whips  in  a foreign  city  on  the  previous  day.  * 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

297 

YIII.J 

at  all  to  our  familiar  space — unless,  indeed,  we  loosely  identify  it  with 
its  physical  Conditions,  and  localise  it  in  the  brain.  Dreams,  then,  have 
' this  peculiarity : they  are  distinct  affections  of  the  senses,  which  yet, 
in  reflecting  on  them,  we  rarely  or  never  confound  with  objective 
facts ; waking  hallucinations,  on  the  other  hand — spectral  illusions  or , 
ghostly  visitants — are 'often  so  confounded.  The  sleeping  experiences 
are  marked  off  from  external  reality  in  the  minds  of  all  of  us  by  the  very 
fact  that  we  wake  from  them ; our  change  of  condition  makes  their 
Vanishing  seem  natural ; and  thus  looked  back  on,  they  will  often 
seem  to  have  been  mere  vague  representations,  i.e.,  something  Less 
than  affections  of  the  senses.  The  waking  experiences  ‘cannot  be 
woke  from  ; their  vanishing  seems  unconnected  with  the  percipient 
and  therefore  unnatural;  and  thus  looked  back  on,  they  will  often 
seem  to  have  been  independent  realities,  i.e.,  something  more  than 
affections  of  the  senses. 

Now  it  is  as  affections  of  the  senses,  and  not  as  independent 
realities,  that  our  Class  A,  the  externalised  sort  of  “ phantasms  of 
the  living,”  are  treated  in  this  book.  In  the  theory  that  the 
percipient  is  impressed  from  a distance,  and  in  the  very  word 
phantasm,  it  is  implied  that  what  he  sees  or  hears  has  no  objective 
basis  or  existence  in  that  j>art  of  the  external  world  where  his 
body  is  situated ; and  whether  he  be  asleep  or  awake,  his  relation 
to  what  he  perceives,  and  of  this  to  reality,  is  the  same.  But  I shall 
be  proceeding  by  the  easiest  route  if  (so  far  as  the  evidence  will  allow) 

I first  trace  the  occurrence  of  the  telepathic  phantasms  in  the 
region  of  experience  where  sensory  phantasms  of  some  sort  are  normal 
and  familiar,  and  are  habitually  judged  of  rightly  as.affcctions  of  the 
inner  sense,1  before  passing  to  the  region  where  phantasms  of  any 
sort  are  abnormal  and  unfamiliar,  and  are  perpetually  judged  ef 
wrongly  as  affections  of  the  outer  sense.  The  rapprochement  which 
will  thus  be  established  between  the  sleeping  and  the  waking  cases 
will  receive  further  and  interesting  illustration  in  certain  interme- 
diate stages  which  we  shall  encounter  on  the  way.  We  shall  find  that 
one  set  of  phenomena  merges  into  the  other  by  gradual  steps,  and 
that  this  “borderland”  is  itself  a region  specially  rich  in  the  telepathic 
impressions. 

) This  term  implies  that  sensation,  from  a physical  point  of  view,  is  inverted  j that  the 
initial  stimulation  takes  place  in  the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain,  and  that  the  stimulation 
of  the  special  sensory  apparatus  jb  produced  by  a downward  centrifugal  current.  The  point 
will  be  further  noticed  in  connection  with  waking  hallucinations  (see  pp.  487-8).' 

298  THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS  [chap. 

§ 2.  But  though  dreams  thus  present  a logical  point  of  departure, 
they  also  form  in  many  ways  the  most  assailable  part  of  our  case. 
They  are  placed  almost  in  a separate  category  by  their  intimate  con- 
nection with  the  lowest  physical,  as  well  as  the  highest  psychical/ 
operations.  The  grotesque  medley  which  constantly  throng  through 
the  gate  of  ivory  thrust  into  discredit  our  rarer'  visitants  through  the 
gate  of  horn.  And  before  proceeding  further,  it  will  be  well  to 
examine  with  some  care  the  general  evidential  value  of  dreams,  in 
relation  to  a theory  of  transferred  impressions.  The  field  may  seem 
a fair  one  enough,  as  long  as  we  keep  to  general  expectations ; if 
telepathy  is  a reality,  here  is  a probable  scene  of  telepathic  events. 
But  what  opportunities  does  it  afford  for  confirming  these  expectations 
by  accurate  and  convincing  evidence  ? This  is  a question  which  may 
rapidly  convert  our  hopes  into  doubts. 

The  first  objection  to  dreams,  as  evidence  for  transferred  impres- 
sions of  distant  conditions  or  events,  is  this — that  dreams  being  often 
somewhat  dim  and  shapeless  things,  subsequent  knowledge  of  the 
conditions  or  events  may  easily  have  the  effect  of  giving  body  and 
definiteness  to  the  recollection  of  a dream.  When  the  actual  facts 
are  learnt,  a faint  amount  of  resemblance  may  often  suggest  a past 
dream,  and  set  the  mind  on  the  track  of  trying  accurately  to  recall 
it.  This  very  act  involves  a search  for  details,  for  something  tangible 
and  distinct ; and  the  real  features  and  definite  incidents,  which  are 
now  present  in  the  mind  in  close  association  with  some  general 
scene  or  fact  which  actually  figured  in  the  dream,  will  be  apt  to  be 
unconsciously  read  back  into  the  dream.  They  make  part  of  the 
original,  of  which  the  mind  conceives  the  dream  to  have  been  a 
picture;  and  the  picture,  when  evoked  in  memory,  will  only  too 
probably  include  details  drawn  from  the  original.  After  we  have  once 
realised  the  matter  in  its  full  distinctness,  it  becomes  almost  impossi- 
ble to  recall  with  due  indistinctness  the  distant  and  shadowy 
suggestion  of  it.1  Dreams  in  this  way  resemble  objects  seen  in  the 
dusk ; which  begin  by  puzzling  the  eye,  but  which,  when  once  we 

1 The  possibilities  referred  to  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  cases. 

Mr.  R.  O’Shaughnessy,  M.P.,  writes  to  us  : — 

“ House  of  Commons,  April  20th,  1883. 

“ One  night,  when  I was  in  my  teens,  I dreamt  that  I was  passing  by  the  house  of  Mr. 
J.,  who  lived  near  us ; that  I saw  his  nursery  maid  coming  down  the  steps,  carrying  a 
baby  in  her  arms,  and  preceded  by  a boy  five  or  six  years  old  ; that  I asked  her  if  this 
boy  was  Mr.  J.’s  eldest  son  ; that  she  said  ‘Yes,’  and  that  I then  said,  ‘ Well*  he’s  not 
a beauty,-  but  he  promises  to  be  a fine  fellow.  He  is  very  like  hjis  father.’  Such 
was  my  dream.  A few  minutes  after  I awoke,  my  father,  in  whose  room  I slept,  told  me# 
without  my  having  made  any  allusion  to  Mr.  «T.,  that  he  had  on  the  previous  day  passed 
by  Mr.  J.rs  house;  had  seen  the  nurse  and  baby  coming  out,  and  the  boy  preceding 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

299 

VIII.] 

know  or  think  we  know  what  they  are,  seem  quite  unmistakeable  and 
even  full  of  familiar  detail.  For  our  purposes,  therefore,  it  is  of 
prime  importance  that  the  dream  shall  be  told  in  detail  to  some  one 
on  whose  memory  we  can  rely ; or,  better  still,  written  down,  or  in 
some  way  acted  on,  at  the  time,  and  before  the  confirmation  arrives. 
Nearly  all  the  evidence  to  be  brought  forward  has,  at  any  rate,  this 
mark  of  accuracy. 

But  there  is  a more  general  and  sweeping  objection.  Millions  of 
people  are  dreaming  every  night ; and  in  dreams,  if  anywhere,  the 
range  of  possibilities  seems  infinite  ; can  any  positive  conclusion  be 
drawn  from  such  a chaos  of  meaningless  and  fragmentary  impressions? 
Must  not  we  admit  the  force  of  the  obvious  a priori  argument,  that 
among  the  countless  multitude  of  dreams,  one  here  and  there  is 
likely  to  correspond  in  time  with  an  actual  occurrence  resembling 
the  one  dreamed  of;  and  that  when  a dream  thus  “comes  true,” 
unscientific  minds  are  sure  to  note  and  store  up  the  fact  as  something 
extraordinary,  without  taking  the  trouble  to  reflect  whether  such 
incidents  occur  oftener  than  pure  chance  would  allow  ? Can  the 
chances  be  at  all  estimated  ? Are  any  valid  means  at  hand  for 
distinguishing  between  a transferred  impression  and  a lucky 
coincidence  ? What  degree  of  exactitude  of  date  and  circumstance 

them;  had  addressed  to  the  nurse  the  very  questions  and  remarks  I had  dreamt  I 
addressed  to  her,  and  received  the  answer  1 had  dreamt  she  made  me.” 

In  a case  like  this,  one  realises  how  a vague  dream,  excited,  perhaps,  by  some  remark 
heard  oyer  night,  may  have  fallen  into  delinite  shape  as  the  details  of  the  real  scene 
were  one  by  one  recounted. 

Mrs.  Nind,  of  Midleton  House,  Westcombe  Park,  Blackheath,  tells  us  how, 
when  about  20  years  of  age,  she  saw  in  a dream  a brother,  of  whose  whereabouts  his 
family  had  long  been  ignorant,  “lying  on  the  deck  of  a ship,  greatly  exhausted. 
I saw  in  my  dream  the  name  of  the  ship,  ‘Zenobia.’  A few  days  after,  in  the  morning 
paper,1 1 read  the  ‘Zenobia ’ was  picked  up  at  sea  waterlogged,  near  the  south  coast  of 
Ireland,  the  crew  and  passengers  suffering  from  great  exhaustion,  having  been  many 
hours  working  at  the  pumps,  exactly  as  I had  dreamt.  I told  it  at  once,  and  was 
impressed  by  the  facts  coming  true  in  the  course  of  a few  days.  ” 

The  brother  was  actually  on  that  ship.  But  the  whole  j)ith  of  the  statement  is  that 
the  name  of  the  ship  was  correctly  seen ; and  this  is  just  a point  where  unsupported 
memory  cannot  be  relied  on.  The  name  might  so  easily  seem  to  have  been  seen,  when  once  it 
became  associated  with  the  reality ; and  a coincidence  which  is  striking  to  begin  with,  is 
all  the  more  likely  to  become  perfect  in  memory.  (It  is  fair,  however,  to  mention  that 
the  same  lady  has  had  at  least  two  other  dreams  which  strikingly  corresponded,  and 
which  were  mentioned  by  her  before  the  reality  was  known ; one  of  the  bursting  of  a g[un 
on  board  the  ‘Viper, 5 of  which  her  brother  was  master ; the  other  of  her  sister  “lying  faint 
in  someone’s  arms,”  at  a time  when  the  sister  had  fallen  and  severely  sprained  her  ankle.) 

Again,  Mrs.  Liddell,  of  18,  Brae  Street,  Liverpool,  tells  us  that  in  November,  1882, 
her  brother,  an  engineer  employed  on  a steamer,  appeared  to  her  in  a dream,  looking  a 
good  deal  knocked  about,  and  with  some  teeth  out,  and  said,  “It  is  all  for  the  best”: 
and  her  husband  testifies  to  her  immediate  mention  of  the  dream.  The  brother  had 
actually  been  wrecked  at  the  time : “ when  he  arrived  home  he  had  lost  some  of  his  teeth, 
and  had  been  well  knocked  about.”  But  everything  depends  on  the  detail  of  the  teeth, 
which  the  husband  does  not  mention.  They  were  lost  in  reality ; were  they  lost  itt  the 
dreamt  Iji  the  absence  of  notes  or  corroborative  testimony,  we  cannot  be  sure.  This 
list  could  be  easily  extended. 

300  THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS  [chap. 

must  bo  reached,  before  we  consider  even  a striking  correspondence 
as  worth  attention  ? And  what  proportion  of  striking  correspon- 
dences are  we  to  demand,  before  we  consider  that  the  hypothesis  of 
chance  is  strained  in  accounting  for  them  ? 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  there  has,  so  far,  been  a 
complete  lack  of  the  statistics  which  alone  could  form  the  basis  for  an 
answer  to  these  questions.  It  has  never  been  known  with  any 
certainty  what  proportion  of  people  habitually  dream,  what  pro- 
portion of  dreams  are  remembered  at  all,  in  what  proportion 
of  these  remembered  dreams  the  memory  is  evanescent,  and  in 
what  proportion  it  is  profound  and  durable.  This  latter  point 
may  be  specially  hard  to  establish  satisfactorily  in  a particular  case, 
as  it  is  affected  by  the  question  whether  a persons  attention  is 
habitually  directed  to  his  dreams,  and  also  by  the  question  whether  he 
has  happened  to  recount  a particular  dream  to  others,  and  so  to  stamp 
it  on  his  own  memory.  By  making  inquiries  on  a large-scale,  however, 
a considerable  approximation  to  certainty  may  be  attained  oil  these 
and  various  other  points  of  importance.  A good  deal  has  been  done 
in  this  Avay  during  the  last  two  years  ; and  though  we  do  not  feel  that 
the  results  are  such  as  would  allow  us  to  base  a theory  of  telepathy 
upon  the  fads  of  dreams  alone,  we  think  that  they  do  much  to 
diminish  the  a priori  plausibility  of  the  theory  of  chance,  as  a 
sufficient  explanation  of  all  cases  of  marked  correspondence  between  a 
dream  and  an  external  event. 

§ 3.  The  points  to  be  considered  have  to  do  both  with  the 
intensity  and  with  the  content  of  the  dream  ; let  us  consider  them  in 
order.  * 

First  as  to  intensity.  An  exceedingly  small  proportion  of 
dreams  are  remembered  with  distinctness  several  hours  after  waking. 
Even  of  the  dreams  which  dwell  in  the  memory,  an  exceedingly  small 
proportion  produce  any  appreciable  amount  of  distress  or  excitement. 
And  of  these  more  impressive  dreams,  an  exceedingly  small  proportion, 
prove  their  intensity  by  being  in  any  way  acted  on.  What  I have 
termed  intensity  may  be  indicated  in  another  way,  by  the  rapid 
repetition  of  a distinct  dream  two  or  three  times  on  the  same  night ; 
and  this,  too,  when  there  is  no  apparent  cause  to  prompt  the  dream, 
seems  to  be  a comparatively  rare  occurrence  (see  p.  357).  The  dreams 
to  be  cited  in  this  book  will  nearly  all,  I think,  be  distinguishable  by, 
one  or  other  of  these  tests  of  exceptional  intensity.  And  in  proportion 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY . 

301 

VIII.] 

as  the  dreams  which  coincide  with  the  event  dreamed  of  are  thus 
found  to  be  in  some  other  way  exceptional — in  proportion  as  the  class 
to  which  they  belong  is  found  to  form  a small  and  sparse  minority 
among  the  swarming  multitude  of  unmarked  dreams — in  that  propor- 
tion does  it  clearly  become  unreasonable  to  argue  that  the  coincidences 
$re  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  law  of  chances.  The  argument 
which  might  seem  effective  so  long  as  we  had  the  whole  multitude  of 
dreams  to  range  over — that  multitude  seeming  sufficient  to  give  the 
law  of  chances  ample  scope — assumes  quite  a different  aspect  when  we 
find  ourselves  limited  to  the  comparatively  small  group  of  interne 
dre&ms. 

Next  as  to  content.  Before  we  can  give  weight  to  a dream- 
coincidence  as  pointing  to  anything  beyond  the  operation  of  chance, 
we  should  inquire  whether  the  event  dreamed  of  is  distinct, 
unexpected,  and  unusual.  If  it  combine  all  three  characteristics  in  a 
high  degree,  its  evidential  value  may  be  very  considerable ; in 
proportion  as  the  degree  falls  short,  or  the  combination  fails,  the 
evidential  value  sinks  ; and  none  of  the  characteristics  taken  alone, 
even  though  present  in  a high  degree,  would  lead  us  to  include  a 
dream,  in  the  present  collection.  Thus,  the  dream-content  must  be 
neither  a vague  impression  of  calamity  nor  of  happiness ; nor  a 
catastrophe  on  which  the  sleeper’s  mind  is  already  fixed  ; nor 
some  such  ordinary  event  as  has  frequently  occurred  in  waking 
experience.  It  may,  indeed,  be  not  the  less  significant  for  being 
trivial.;  but  in  that  case  it  must  be  of  a bizarre  or  unlikely 
. kind.1’  Then  again,  amount  of  detail,  and  the  number  of  con- 
nected events,  arc  of  immense  importance,  as  each  subsequently 
verified  detail  tells  with  ever-mounting  strength  against  the 
hypothesis  of  accidental  coincidence.  Once  more,  dream-content 
must  be  considered  to  some  extent  in  relation  to  the  dream-habits  of 
the  particular  dreamer.  Before  estimating  the  value  of  the  fact  that 
a person  has  dreamt  of  the  sudden  death  of  a friend  on  the  night 
when  the  death  took  place,  we  should  have  to  ascertain  that  that 

1 It  is  not  easy  to  draw  the  line  here.  How,  for  instance,  ought  the  following  case 
to  be  regarded?  We  received  the  account  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  James  Sime ; the 
narrator  is  Mrs,  Bellr  of  Windmill  Road,  Hamilton. 

“July  21st,  1884. 

'“In  the  autumn  of  1875,  my  father  and  I left  home  for  Perthshire,  giving  the  use  of 
our  Hamilton  house  to  an  uncle.  On  Wednesday  night,  previous  to  our  return  home,  I 
jdteamt  that  my  cousin  had  broken  the  handle  of  a vegetable-dish,  and  said  to  her  sister, 
‘Don’t  teU,  for  I see  the  soup-tureen  handle  has  been  mended,  and  1 shall  mend  this  too.’ 
I told  this  dream  to  my  father  at  breakfast  on  Thursday  morning.  He  laughed,  and 
begged  me  not  to  peak  of  it  to  my  cousins,  lest  they  should  say  I haa  been  thinking  evil 

302  THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS  [chap. 

porson  is  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  of  distressing  or  horrible  evented 
In  respect  of  these  various  points,  the  instances  to  be  cited,  her£ 
and  in  the  Supplement,  are  the  sifted  survival  of  many  less  definite 
coincidences  in  which  the  popular  imagination  would  find  a marvel. 
And  in  the  case  of  this  residue,  where  we  have  complete  fulfilment  of 
some  of  the  above  conditions,  over  and  above  the  close  proximity  in 
time,  or  (it  may  be)  absolute  synchronism,  of  the  event  and,  the 
dream,  the  question  as  to  a causal  connection  between  the  two  is, 
at  any  rate,  not  to  be  swept  out  of  court  by  a mere  general  appeal 
to  the  doctrine  of  chances. 

But  there  is  a further  point  in  the  content  of  the  dreams  that 
correspond  with  real  events — true  dreams,  as  we  may  for  brevity  call 

of  thorn.  However,  when  we  got  home  on  Friday,  just  as  my  friends  were  leaving,  I said 
in  joke,  ‘Oh  ! you  didn’t  tell  me  you  had  broken  the  handle  of  the  vegetable-dish. 

“My  cousin  at  oner  turned  to  her  sister,  and  said,  ‘Did  you  tell  ?’  I was  amazed, 
and  said,  ‘ You  don't  mean  to  say  you  broke  it.’  She  said,  ‘Yes,  T did,  on  Wednesday, 
and  I told  my  sister  to  say  nothing  about  it  to  you,  anti  I would  mend  it  like  the  soup- 
tureen.’ 

“ Agnes  J.  Bell.” 

Tn  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bell  says  : — 

“ I have  to  state  that  T am  not  a great  dreamer,  but  the  dream  in  question  struck  me 
as  so  exceptional  that  I repealed  it  in  detail  to  my  father  in  the  morning.” 

Mrs.  Bell’s  father  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ Auchingramont  Road,  Hamilton. 

“ August  2nd,  1884. 

“I  recollect,  iu  the  autumn  of  1875,  while  at  Comrie,  my  daughter  telling  me  one 
morning  of  a dream  she  had  about  one  of  her  cousins  breaking  a vegetable-dish.  . 

“On  returning  to  Hamilton  we  found  the  dream  verified. 

“ Daniel  Clauke,” 

Another  informant  tells  us— and  her  statement  is  corroborated — how  she  announced 
to  her  family  one  morning,  on  the  strength  of  a dream,  that  a cousin  of  theirs  had  been  in 
bed  with  a quinsey,  but  would  come  to  see  them  that  day.  He  came,  and  said  he  had  been 
kept  away  by  a quinsey,  a malady  from  which  he  had  never  suffered  before.  But  on 
inquiry  we  find  that  quinsey  was  a familiar  idea  in  the  dreamer’s  family,  as  a governess 
had  frequently  had  it;  ana  the  coincidence  thus  seems  too  clearly  within  the  range  of 
chance. 

1 For  example,  we  have  not  admitted  the  following  case,  which  was  sent  to  us 
by  the  Rev.  T.  C.  Skeggs,  >f  14,  Fitz  warren  Street,  Pendleton,  Manchester. 

“June  17  th,  1884. 

“ In  the  year  1872  I was  in  China.  T dreamed  that  a lady  friend  in  England  was  in 
great  trouble.  For  about  two  days  I could  not  rid  myself  of  the  thought  of  her  distress. 
The  nature  of  her  trouble  was  not  at  all  defined  to  my  own  minci,  only  that  she  was 
prostrate  with  grief.  About  six  weeks  later  the  mail  brought  me  news  of  her  father’s 
death,  of  whom  she  was  passionately  fond,  and  of  course  she  was  j^roportionatelv 
distressed.  The  painful  impression  caused  by  my  dream  led  me  to  note  the  date  at  which 
it  occurred,  and  when  I compared  it  with  the  news  contained  in  my  letter,  I found  it’ 
tallied  with  the  date  of  her  father’s  death. 

“The  lady  was  an  intimate  friend,  12  years  older  than  myself,  and  we  had  many 
interests  in  common  with  each  other  ; these  formed  a bond  of  sympathy. 

“T.  C.  Skeggs.” 

In  another  letter  Mr.  Skeggs  adds  : “ T do  not  often  dream  of  personal  friends.  One 
point  connected  with  that  dream  was  exceptional,  viz.,  the  duration  of  the  impression.” 
The  mere  fact  of  distress,  however,  hardly  affords  a definite  enough  coincidence  for  the 
case  materially  to  help  the  telepathic  argument ; and  inquiry  brought  out  a “ dream-habit  ” 
which  still  further  lowers  its  value  in  this  connection.  “ Am  I a great  dreamer?  ! 
am.  I frequently  dream  of  horrors  that  are  so  vivid  .to  my  mind  as  to  leave  me  quite 
exhausted  m the  morning.” 

VIII*] 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

303 

them — which  cannot  but  strike  the  attention  as  soon  as  we  begin  to 
■examine  actual  specimens.  It  is  that,  among  true  dreams,  by  very  far 
the  largest  class  is  the  class  where  the  truth  is  death — i.e.,  where  the 
event  dreamt  of  as  happening  to  another  is  of  that  most  restricted  kind 
which  can  only  happen  once  in  each  individual’s  experience.  Out  of 
the  147  coincident  dreams  which  are  included  in  this  book — as 
at  least  clearly  finding  in  telepathy,  if  it  exists,  their  most  natural 
explanation — no  less  than  78  have  represented  or  suggested  death. 
This,  it  will  be  seen,  is  entirely  in  accordance  with  a theory  of  causal 
connection  between  event  and  dream,  where  the  abnormal  state 
of  the  person  dreamt  of  is  regarded  as  part  of  the  cause ; but 
it  is  not  at  all  in  accordance  with  what  we  should  expect  accident  to 
bring  about.  Nor  could  this  argument  well  be  met  by  the  assumption 
that  it  is  only  in  the  case  of  a very  grave  event  that  the  accidental 
correspondence  attracts  attention  and  gets  recorded.  For  this  would 
mean  that  the  dreams  of  death  which  happen  to  correspond  with 
reality  are  one  specially-remembered  class  among  the  total  number  of 
accidentally- true  dreams.  Now  it  will  be  admitted  that  dreams 
of  death  constitute  a minute  proportion  of  all  dreams ; it  would 
follow,  then,  on  the  above  assumption,  that  accidentally-true  dreams 
of  death  constitute  a similarly  minute  proportion  of  all  accidentally- 
true  dreams  But  at  this  rate  the  total  number  of  “ true  dreams” — in 
other  words,  the  number  of  coincidences  which  the  doctrine  of  chances 
will  have  to  cover — swells  to  a most  prodigious  and  unmanageable 
figure.  It  is  just  because  a “ true  dream  ” is  a very  exceptional 
occurrence,  that  it  was  possible  even  to  attempt  to  account  for  it 
as  an  accident ; if  the  “ accident  ” is  for  ever  “ coming  off,”  so  much 
the  .worse  for  that  attempt. 

§ 4.  But  the  fact  that  a singular  and  marked  event,  such  as 
death,  is  in  so  large  a proportion  of  cases  the  central  feature  of  the 
“ true  ” dreams,  supplies  more  than  a general  argument ; it  supplies 
the  means  for  an  actual  numerical  estimate  whereby  the  adequacy  of 
the  chance-hypothesis  maybe  tested.  For  dreams  of  so  definite  a 
character,  and  which  admit  of  being  so  clearly  and  briefly  described, 
are  quite  a fit  subject  for  statistics ; there  is  a possibility  of  finding 
out  approximately  what  the  actual  frequency  of  a dream  of  this  sort 
is ; and  we  shall  then  have  the  first  necessary  datum  for  deciding 
whether  the  frequency  of  the  cases  where  it  coincides  with  reality,  is, 
or  is  not,  greater  than  chance  would  fairly  allow.  If  it  turned  out  that 

304 

THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS 

{chap. 

all  of  us  about  once  a week  had  a marked  and  distressing  dream  of  the 
death  of  some  friend  or  other,  then,  since  people  who  are  somebody’s 
friends  are  perpetually  dying,  the  coincidence  of  such  a dream  with 
the  real  event  might  be  expected  to  occur  by  pure  accident  in  a 
large  number  of  cases.  But  if  only  a small  minority  of  us  could 
recall  ever  having  had  such  a dream  at  all,  the  case  would  be 
reversed.  The  object,  then,  is  to  ascertain  from  a number  of  people, 
large  enough  and  promiscuous  enough  to  be  accepted  as  a fear 
specimen  of  the  whole  population,  what  percentage  of  them  have  had 
the  experience  in  question.  With  this  view,  efforts  have  been  made 
during  the  last  two  years  to  obtain  a large  number  of  answers  to 
the  following  question  : — 

Since  January  1st,  1874,  have  you  ever  had  a dream  of  the 
death  of  some  person  known  to  you,  which  dream  yon  marked  as  an 
exceptionally  vivid  one,  and  of  which  the  distressing  impression 
lasted  for  as  long  as  an  hour  after  you  rose  in  the  morning  ? 

This  question  has  been  put  to  5,300  persons,  as  to  whom  it  was 
not  known  beforehand  whether  their  answer  would  be  “ Yes  ” or 
“ No.”  Of  these  persons,  173  answered  “ Yes.”  Excluding  7 of 
these  ©uses,  in  which  the  dreamer  was  at  the  time  in  a state  of 
distinct  anxiety  as  to  the  person  whose  death  was  dreamt  of,  we  have 
a remainder  of  160.  These  include  a good  many  cases  where  it 
proved,  on  further  inquiry,  that  the  terms  of  the  question  had  not 
been  exactly  met,  as  the  impression  had  not  endured  in  any  vivid  or 
distressing  way.  They  also  include  3 cases  where  the  mind  of  the 
dreamer  had  been  exceptionally  directed  to  the  person  dreamt  of ; 
and  3 cases  where  the  person  dreamt  of  was  in  the  same  room  as  the 
dreamer,  which  may  have  had  some  tendency  to  produce  the  dream — r 
one  gentleman  expressly  stating  his  suspicion  that  his  dream  was 
caused  by  some  sound  made  by  his  companion.  We  may,  therefore, 
accept  the  166  as  a liberal  estimate.  But  18  of  these  persons  pro- 
fessed to  have  had  a dream  of  the  sort  inquired  about  more  than  once. 
It  will  be  again  a liberal  estimate  if  wo  suppose  each  of  these  to 
have  experienced  3 distiuct  examples  within  the  specified  time;  and 
the  most  convenient  way  of  taking  account  of  these  repetitions  will 
be  to  add  36  to  the  166,  making  202.  With  this  substitution,  ^ of 
the  whole  number  of  persous  asked  may  be  taken  to  have  given  an 
affirmative  answer.  Now,  the  persons  asked  were  a quite  promiscuous  , 
body,  and  a body  large  enough  to  be  safely  regarded  as  a fair  average 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

305. 

vm.] 

sample  of  the  population ; just  as  a similar  number  of  persons,  taken 
at  random,  would  be  accepted  as  a fair  Sample  for  purposes  of 
statistics  on  short  sight,  or  colour-blindness.  Wfe  may  conclude, 
then,  that  the  number  of  persons  who  can  recall  having  had — during 
the  twelve  years  1874-1885,  and  without  special  assignable  cause — 
the  experience  named  in  the  question,  amount  to  1 in  26  of  the 
population  of  this  country. 

The  question  next  occurs,  ought  we,  in  making  our  calculation,  to 
assign  any  limit  to  the  area  of  acquaintances  from  whom  the  person 
dreamt  of  may  be  drawn,  and  of  whom  a certain  proportion  will,  in 
the  natural  course  of  things,  die  within  a period  of  12  years  ? On 
general  grounds  it  may  fairly  be  argued  that  the  slightness  of  connec- 
tion between  two  persons  would  diminish  the  chance  that  one  would 
dream  accidentally,  no  less  than  the  chance  that  he  would  dream 
telepathiccdly,  of  the  death  of  the  other  and  that  therefore  a vivid 
dream  of  the  death  of  a stranger,  or  of  a slight  acquaintance,  when  it 
coincides  with  the  death,  tells  neither  more  nor  less  in  favour  of  the 
action  of  something  beyond  chance  than  a similarly  vivid  and 
coincident  dream  of  the  death  of  a near  relative.  It  will  be  seen, 
moreover,  that,  as  far  as  the  numerical  estimate  goes,  it  is  unimpor- 
tant how  large  or  how  small  we  take  the  area  to  be ; because 
whatever  number  of  persons  we  include,  on  the  average  the  same 
proportion  of  the  number  will  die  within  any  given  time.  Thus 
assuming  this  proportion  who  die  to  be  one-fourth  of  the  whole  number, 
then,  if  we  took  a very  large  circle  of  acquaintances,  say  400,  the 
death  of  any  of  whom,  if  dreamt  of  when  it  occurred,  would  count  as 
one  of  our  coincidences,  we  should  have  to  reckon  that  100  of  them 
actually  die  in  the  course  of  the  time  ; and  if  we  took  a very  small 
circle  of  just  the  immediate  relatives  of  the  dreamer,  say  4,  we  should 
have  to  reckon  that  1 of  them  dies  in  the  course  of  the  time.  And 
the  chance  of  an  accidental  coincidence  in  the  specified  period 
between  the  single  dream  of  death  and  the  death  itself  is  practically 

1 It  is  not  always  easy  to  find  out,  from  a brief  description,  the  strength  of  the  bond 
that  has  existed  between  two  persons.  But  I think  I am  safe  in  saymg  that  ttye  dreams  of 
death  in  Which  the  person  dreamt  of  is  not  linked  to  the  dreamer  bV  a rathe^  close  tie  of 
kinship*  or  affection,  do  not  amount  to  10  per  cent,  of  the  whole  number.  In  other  respects, 
the  dreams  do  not  seem  to  follow  any  line  of  & priori  likelihood — e A,  they|conc©ra  the 
death  of  young  persons  quite  as  much  as  of  old  ones.  \ I 

I may  point  out  that  a different  estimate  would  have  to  be  made  f on  dr eamsiir eamt  by 
several  dreamers  about  the  same  person : e.m,  an  accidental  coincidence  of  Iream  and 
death  is  leito  improbable  than  usual  where  the  person  dreamt  of  is  a mrommfnt  public 
character,  because  he  is  (so  to  speak)  within  the  dream-horizon  of  an  imtnense  number  of 
people* " But  this  proviso  has  no  practical  importance,  as  no  cases  of  the  kind  o&urin  my 
statistics.  v 1 *!• 

W 

306 

THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS 

[chap. 

the  same  in  both  these  cases.  For  though  there  will  he,  on  the  one 
hand,  much  less  chance  of  its  being  the  right  individual  that  is 
dreamt  of  when  the  choice  is  among  400  than  when  it  is  among  4,  on 
the  other  hand  the  100  deaths  will  give  100  (or  nearly  100)  nights 
on  which  the  coincident  dream  will  have  its  chance  of  being  dreamt, 
instead  of  only  1 night.  Logically,  therefore,  there  is  no  necessity  for 
limiting  the  area  in  question.  Let  the  number  of  any  one’s  acquaint- 
ance be  called  x.  Then,  whether  x be  large  or  small,  all  that  concerns 
us  is  the  proportion  of  the  x persons  who  die  within  the  specified 
period  of  12  years ; and  this  proportion,  since  the  death-rate  per  year 
is  about  022,  may  be  taken  as  '264,  or  a little  more  than  one-fourth. 

The  estimate  from  the  above  data  is  as  follows.  The  probability 
that  a person,  taken  at  random,  will  have  a vivid  dream  of  death  in 
the  course  of  12  years  is  ^ ; the  probability  that  any  assigned  member 
of  the  general  population,  and  therefore  that  any  particular  dreamt- 
of  person,  will  die  within  12  hours  of  an  assigued  point  of  time 
is  t88<j  X nfa;  hence  the  probability  that,  in  the  course  of  12  years,  a 
vivid  dream  of  death  and  the  death  of  the  person  dreamt  of  will  fall 
within  12  hours  of  one  another  is  & x tisita  x uls  = T3i?sre.  (If  x, 
the  number  of  the  dreamer’s  circle  of  friends,  be  taken  into  account, 
we  then  have,  as  the  probability  that  any  one  of  the  dreamer’s  circle 
should  die  within  the  particular  24  hours  defined  by  the  dream, 
x X X t3oo  X ale ; and  as  the  probability  that,  if  some  one  of 
the  dreamer’s  circle  dies  within  the  particular  24  hours,  it  should  be 
the  particular  one  dreamt  of,  - ; whence  the  probability  of  this  double 
event  = £ x x x sV  X liHhr  X sh,  i.e.,  the  result  is  unaltered.) 
That  is  to  say,  each  group  of  431,363  persons  in  the  population  of  the 
United  Kingdom  will  produce  one  such  coincidence  in  the  given  time. 
Now  let  it  be  supposed  for  a moment  that  our  appeal  for  evidence  has 
effectively  reached  as ’large  a section  of  the  population  as  this:  let  it  be 
supposed,  that  is  to;!  say,  that  the  number  of  persons  from  whom  we 
should,  directly  or  Indirectly,  have  received  examples  of  such  coinci- 
dences, if  Ijheyhad'nad  them  to  communicate,  amount  to  431,363.  In 
that  case,  then,  the  number  of  such  coincidences  which  we  ought,  by 
the  doctrine  of  chances,  to  have  encountered  is  1.  The  number  which 
we  have  actually  encountered — of  vivid  dreams  of  death,  narrated  to  us 
at  first-hand,1  areamt  since  January  1st,  1874,  by  persons  free  from 
anxiety,  and  falling  within  12  hours  of  the  death  of  the  persoq  dreamt 

1 In  three  caajBs  the  evidence,  though  not  actually  from  the  dreamer,  is  of  the  sort 
described  in  Vo}!  it,  p.  148,  as  on  a par  with  first-hand. 

307 

vm.]  TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

of l— -is  25;  that  is,  a number  25  times  larger  than  the  doctrine  of 
chances  would  have  allowed  us  to  expect.2  (And  this  number 
is  very  much  below  what  we  are  justified  in  assuming.  For  while 
my  colleagues  and  I are  probably  disposed  rather  to  overrate  than 
to  underrate  the  extent  to  which  the  world  is  acquainted  with 
our  proceedings,  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  actual  number  of  persons 
from  whose  collective  experiences  our  examples  are  drawn  really 
approaches  half  a million,  as  above  supposed.  (In  Chap.  XIII.,  I 
shall  show  grounds  for  thinking  that  a quarter  of  the  number 
assumed  would  still  probably  be  much  above  the  mark.)  Moreover, 
6 of  the  25  coincidences  are  represented  as  having  been  extremely 
close  ; in  3 other  cases  the  interval  was  at  any  rate  not  more  than  4 
hours,  and  in  another  was  from  3 to  6 hours ; while  in  10  more,  where 
death  and  dream  are  merely  stated  to  have  fallen  on  the  same  night, 
the  coincidence  may  have  been  exact,  and  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
inexact  to  the  extent  of  anything  like  12  hours.  Again,  dreams  are 
excluded  where  the  actual  fact  of  death  was  not  in  some  way  presented, 
even  though  the  dying  person  was  dreamt  of  in  a remarkable  way.3 
But  most  markedly  have  I understated  the  case  in  this  respect,  that  I 

1 With  5 possible  exceptions,  where  the  12  hours’  limit  may  not  have  been  nearly 
reached,  but  where  it  may  have  been  exceeded.  In  2 of  these  cases,  the  death  took  place 
in  the  afternoon  and  the  dream  followed  the  same  night ; in  the  3 others,  the  death  was 
either  on  the  night  of  the  dream  or  in  a day  contiguous  to  that  night,  but  its  hour  is  not 
known.  Two  dreams  are  excluded  which  are  known  to  have  followed  the  death  by  a 
very  little  more  than  12  hours,  the  death  not  having  been  heard  of  in  the  interval? 

a Nos.  23,  114,  116,  118,  126,  127,  134,  138,  141,  283,  j309,  420,  423,  426,  427,  428,  443, 
448,  4^0,  462,  454,  455,  456,  458,  459.  No.  23  is  included,  though  not  literally  a dream  of 
death,  on  account  of  the  very  strong  impression  that  it  produced  of  the  death  of  the 
person  represented  in  it.  I am  excluding  6 cases  where  some  ground  for  anxiety  as  to  the 
condition  of  the  person  dreamed  of  existed*  even  though  no  special  anxiety  is  remembered 
to  have  been  felt;  the  person  who  died,  in  one  of  these  cases,  was  old  and  infirm;  in 
another  was  known  to  be  slightly  unwell ; and  in  two  others  was  at  sea.  Another  dream 
is  excluded  which  was  not  literally  of  death,  though  .interpreted  as  such  by  the  dreamer ; 
and  yet  another  where  the  fact  of  the  coincidence  of  the  dream  with  a sudden  death  Was 
stated,  but  the  witness  found  the  subject  too  painful  to  give  details.  Of  the  24  included 
dreams,  11  were  of  the  deaths  of  near  relatives ; and  4 or  5 concerned  persons  who  were 
outside  the  circle  of  intimate  acquaintance. 

* I would  draw  special  attention  to  this  point.  For  when  we  come  to  deal  with  the 
waking  cases,  where  a phantasm  of  a person  is  seen  or  heard  at  the  time  of  his  death,  they 
may  seem  to  present  a marked  difference  from  the  dreams  that  will  be  quoted  as  having 
coincided  with  death, — these  last  being  distinctly  dreams  of  death),  whereas  it  is  only  in  a 
minority  of  the  waking  cases  that  any  idea  of  death  was  conveyed.  The  waking  percipient 
may  have  rnmnised  the  death,  from  the  fact  that  he  had  seen  or  heard  the  phantasm ; but 
the  phantasm  itself,  more  often  than  not,  was  simply  the  natural -looki^  appearance  or 
natural-sounding  voice  of  the  “agent.”  We  must  remember,  then,- that  fd>r  aught  We 
know,  telepathically  caused  dreams  of  just  this  type  may  occtfc;  but  junless  they 
present  specially  remarkable  features  (as  in  Mr.  Wingueld’s  case,  p.  199),  wje  should  not 
cite  them  as  having  even  a primd  facie  claim  to  be  considered  telepathic,  jusft  because  of 
the  immense  scope  for  chance-coincidence  that  dreams  afford.  We  demand!  more  of  a 
drekm — that  it  shall  suggest  the  right  event,  and  not  merely  the  right  \persorvr~ before  we 
think  it  worth  considering ; and  the  dreams  to  be  quoted  correspond  with  the \rarer  type 
of  waking  cases,  where  the  phantasmal  representation  has  in  some  way\  distinctly 
suggested  death.  \ 

Iw  % 

308 

THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS 

[ OBAP. 

have  introduced  nothing  but  the  bare  fact  of  death,  and  have 
neglected  the  points  of  detail  which  in  some  instances  add  in- 
definitely to  the  difficulty  of  regarding  the  coincidence  as  a chance.  1 

The  above  is  a tolerably  clear  computation ; and  its  validity  could 
only  be  rebutted  in  two  ways — (1 ) by  impugning,  on  evidential  grounds, 
the  cases  of  coincidence  that  we  allege ; (2)  by  impugning  the 
approximate  accuracy  of  our  initial  datum — that  within  the  last  12 
years  not  more  than  1 person  in  20  has,  without  clear  cause,  had  a 
markedly  distressing  and  haunting  dream  of  the  death  of  an 
acquaintance. 

The  evidential  value  of  the  alleged  coincidences  will  be  better 
estimated  when  we  consider  some  of  the  actual  specimens.  But  as 
regards  the  initial  datum,  on  which  the  calculation  depends,  there 
are  objections  the  force  of  which  must  be  at  once  admitted.  Dreams 
in  general,  it  may  be  said,  fade  away  from  our  memory  because  there 
is  nothing  to  stamp  them  there ; but  if  it  happens  that  some  real 
event  recalls  a recent  dream,  then,  by  the  principle  of  association,  this 
dream  will  obtain  a more  permanent  lodgement  in  our  mind.  Now 
the  death  of  relatives  or  friends  is  the  sort  of  real  event  which  it  is 
practically  certain  that  we  shall  hear  of  very  soon  after  it  occurs.  A 
dream  of  such  an  occurrence  is  therefore  practically  certain  to  get 
stamped  in  the  way  described,  if  it  has  been  at  all  synchronous  with 
the  fact.  And  it  is  thus  allowable  to  suppose  that  a large  number  of 
such  dreams  may  occur  which  lapse  unnoted  from  the  mind,  but  any  one 
of  which,  had  news  of  the  real  event  been  received  immediately 
afterwards,  would  have  been  recalled  and  associated  with  it,  and 
would  have  then  added  a case  to  the  list  of  “ remarkable  coincidences.’" 

This  argument  is  to  a considerable  degree  met  by  the  terms  of 
the  question.  What  is  asked  is  not  merely  whether  people  have 
had  a dream  of  death ; but  whether  they  have  had  one  which  has 
haunted  them  for  at  least  an  hour  after  rising  in  the  morning ; and  it 
will  not  be  maintained  that  an  experience  of  that  sort  is  so  likely  to 
vanish  utterly  from  -the  memory  as  an  ordinary  dream.  But  it  might, 
no  doubt,  be  rejoiped  that  perhaps  a good  many  of  the  coincident 
dreams  weijjjy  jfylarked  at  the  time  by  any  special  vividness  or  impres- 
siveness ; Si  drea/t  the  dreamer  came  to  imagine  this  peculiarity  of 
character  4dlim  ^ream>  after  ^ come  to  assume  importance  in 
his  eyes  fi  F ne  discovery  that  it  had  coincided  with  the  jreality. 
And  I mft^ly  recognise  that  when  the  argument  begins  to  turn  on 
such  a per  ’ s the  degree  of  vividness  which  a dreamer,  looking  back 

VIII.]  TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY . 309 

* '' 
to  a dream  through  the  medium  of  subsequent  impressions,  can  swear 
that  it  possessed,  anything  like  positive  proof  becomes  impossible.  A 
dream  so  looked  back  to  may  get  charged  with  an  emotional  character, 
just  as  we  saw  above  that  it  might  get  filled  in  with  a precision  of 
detail,  which  it  did  not  really  possess.  But  I must  hero  draw  special 
attention  to  the  safeguards  already  mentioned.  Our  collection  includes 
a remarkably  high  proportion  of  cases  where  the  coincident  dream  was 
marked  as  exceptional  in  character — at  the  time,  and  before  the  real 
event  was  known — by  being  immediately  narrated  as  such  to  some- 
one else,  (who,  if  accessible,  has  of  course  been  questioned  as  to  his 
memory  of  the  fact) ; or  by  being  noted  in  writing ; or  by  being  in 
some  way  acted  on.  Of  the  105  dream-examples  recorded  in  this 
book  on  the  first-hand  testimony  of  the  dreamer,  70  are  alleged 
to  have  been  described,  11  more  to  have  been  recorded  in  writing  (in 
one  instance  by  a relative  of  the  dreamer’s),  and  9 more  to  have  been 
in  some  marked  way  acted  on,  before  the  corresponding  event  was 
known ; and  in  45  of  the  70  cases  where  the  dream  was  at  once 
described,  we  have  also  the  independent  testimony  of  the  person  to 
whom  it  was  described.  In  18  other  cases,  we  have  the  testimony  of 
the  person  to  whom  the  dream  was  described  before  the  corresponding 
event  was  known,  but  not  the  dreamer’s  own  account.  Of  the  25  dreams 
used  in  my  numerical  estimate,  1 was  recorded  in  writing,  and  23 
others  are  alleged  to  have  been  mentioned,  before  the  fact  of,  the 
death  was  known ; and  in  22  of  the  23  cases,  we  have  independent 
testimony  to  this  mention  from  the  person  to  whom  it  was 
made.  And  I must  further  point  out  that,  in  order  to  explain  away 
the  result  of  the  above  computation  in  the  way  suggested,  it  would 
have  to  be  assumed  not  only  that  a great  many  dreams  of  death  pass 
unnoted  and  leave  no  impression,  while  still  of  such  a nature  that  a 
vivid  impression  of  them  would  revive  if  news  corresponding  to  them . 
were  subsequently  heard ; it  would  have  to  be  assumed  that  such  an 
experience  befalls  very  nearly  every  adult  in  the  country  at  least  once, 
within  the  twelve  years.  For  our  conclusion  was,  that  coincident  dreams 
of  death  were  more  than  25  times  as  numerous  as  the  law  of  chances-^— 
according  to  the  datum  which  our  census  gave  us — wquffi^TfW.  There- 
fore to  make  the  law  of  chances  applicable  as  an  explF  jgy  ■ we  must . 
multiply  our  initial  datum  by  25  ; that  is,  instead  of  astfc,  ju«i  j 1 person 
out  of  every  26  to  have  had  the  required  dream,  w&^“^  t assume 
25  out  of  every  26 — that  is  practically  eveiyone— to  haj“  ^jd  ifcj  nay, 
on  the  more  probable  estimate  of  our  area  of  inquiry  (p.^  »,  we  must 

310 

THE  RELATION  OF  DREAMS 

[chap. 

assume  that  on  the  average  every  one  has  had  it  as  many  as  four  times 
Avithin  the  given  period ; though  96  per  cent,  of  them  forget  all  about 
it.1  A good  many  of  my  readers  will,  I think,  altogether  repudiate 
such  a supposition  in  their  own  case.  I believe,  indeed,  that  a perfectly 
impartial  census  would  have  given  a decidedly  smaller  proportion  than 
1 in  26.  For  it  is  practically  impossible  to  carry  out  a census  of  the  sort 
required  without  getting  an  unfair  proportion  of  Yeses.  Persons  who 
have  only  No  to  say  in  answer  to  such  a question  as  was  propounded, 
are  apt  to  think  that  there,  is  no  good  in  saying  it ; and  if  they 
receive  a printed  form,  instead  of  writing  their  answer  on  it  and 
returning  it,  they  are  apt  to  consign  it  to  the  wastepaper-basket — 
probably  often  with  a vague  notion  that  what  was  wanted  was  a Yes, 
and  that  sensible  people,  who  do  not  have  exceptional  experiences, 
ought  not  to  encourage  the  superstitions  of  those  who  do.2 

§ 5.  As  pointed  out  above,  it  is  only  where  the  coincident  dream 
exhibits  some  sort  of  unique  event,  such  as  death,  that  we  can  obtain 
the  statistical  basis  necessary  for  an  arithmetical  estimate  of  chances. 
A very  few  remarks,  however,  seem  worth  making  on  dreams  which 
offer  less  hope  of  a definite  conclusion. 

Certain  other  marked  events,  such  as  unexpected  dangers  and 
accidents,  are  comparable  to  death,  though  standing  much  below  it, 
in  the  tAvo  main  points — the  comparative  infrequency  of  their 
forming  the  subject  of  a markedly  distressing  dream,  and  the  com- 
paratively large  proportion  (though  absolutely,  of  course,  a very  small 
proportion)  of  cases  in  which  such  a dream,  when  it  does  occur, 
coincides  Avith  reality.  And  even  when  we  come  down  to  unusual 
events  of  a more  commonplace  type,  or  to  a detailed  nexus  of  more 
or  less  familiar  incidents — where  it  is,  of  course,  out  of  the  question  to 
get  any  sort  of  numerical  basis  for  computation — the  same  sort  of 
argument  may  still  b^  cautiously  applied.  It  is  true  that  the  coin- 
cidences do  not  now;  occur  among  any  comparatively  small  group  of 
dreamers , such  as  the  dreamers  of  death — the  order  of  dream 
which  is  iioav  in  question  being  common  to  all  who  dream  at  all ; 

1 If  it  be  objected  that  such  an  extreme  assumption  would  not  be  required,  as 
persons  who  have  tlie  dream  may  have  it  repeatedly,  I can  reply  that  hardhr  any 
of  the  persons  from  whom  we  have  received  accounts  of  “ coincidental  ” dreams 
of  death  recall  having  dreamt  of  death  except  on  that  one  occasion ; and  ^ it  would 
be  even  odder  thaft  many  of  them  should  have  completely  forgotten  a number  of  such 
vivid  experiences  pan  that  they  should  have  completely  forgotten  one. 

2 A further  account  of  the  census  of  which  the  above  inquiry  formed  part  will  be 
found  in  Chapter/  xiii. 

VIII.] 

TO  THE  ARGUMENT  FOR  TELEPATHY. 

311 

but  they  still  occur  among  a comparatively;  small  group  of  dreams. 
In  the  cases  which  form  a considerable  proportion  of  our  collec- 
tion, where  the  dream  was  at  once  narrated  as  an  exceptionally 
odd  or  vivid  one,  the  proof  of  its  exceptional  oddness  or  vividness  is 
at  once  supplied.  And  further,  an  immensely  large  class,  the  purely 
fantastic  dreams,  to  which  no  real  event  could  possibly  be  recognised 
as  corresponding,  are  excluded ; as  also  are  the  commonest  class  of  all 
where  the  dreamer  is  not  the  spectator  but  the  hero  of  the  dream,  and 
no  unusual  incident  or  precise  series  of  incidents  is  presented  as 
occurring  independently  to  others — who,  if  present,  merely  make  a 
necessary  background,  or  take  their  share  of  speech  and  action  in 
conjunction  with  the  dreamer.  The  distant  event,  or  series  of  events, 
with  which  the  dream  corresponds,  must  both  be  possible  (for  it 
actually  occurs),  and  must  centre  round  some  one  other  than  the 
dreamer;  and  the  consequent  necessity  that  the  marked  point  or 
points  of  the  dream  shall  both  be  possible  and  shall  centre  round 
some  one  other  than  the  dreamer,  immensely  reduces  the  list  of 
dreams  which  come  into  the  reckoning ; and  to  the  same  extent 
reduces  the  primd  facie  plausibility  of  the  hypothesis  that  the  coincir 
(lence  is  due  to  chance.  No  doubt,  after  all  deductions,  the  number 
of  dreams  which  remain  to  be  taken  into  account,  before  we  can 
decide  as  to  the  chances  of  accidental  coincidences  with  reality,  is 
here  many  times  larger  than  our  former  restricted  class,  which  was 
concerned  with  a single  unique  event ; it  may  conceivably  be  many 
thousands  of  times  larger.  But,  whatever  the  multiple,  it  is  hard  to 
believe  that  the  number  of  events — even  of  more  or  less  curious 
events — which  it  is  possible  to  dream  of  as  occurring  to  other  people, 
does  not  bear  an  even  larger  ratio  to  the  single  event  of  death.  For 
what  limit  can  we  so  much  as  conceive  to  the  sum  of  the  details!  of 
circumstance  which  the  whole  dreaming  population  of  the  country 
can  connect  in  imagination  with  the  various  members  of  their 
respective  acquaintance  ? 

Such  considerations  do  not,  of  course,  amount  to  an  argument  for 
telepathic  correspondences  on  this  wider  ground — the  data  are  far  too 
indefinite  for  that.  But  they  at  least  suggest  that  the  adequacy  of 
the  chance-theory  is  not  quite  so  obvious  as  is  sometimes  assumed.* 

. This  preliminary  sketch  of  the  evidential  aspect  of  dreams  may,  • 
pprhaps,  prevent  misunderstanding.  Among  considerations  so  complex 
and  data  so  uncertain,  it  is  not  easy  to  sum  up  a view  m very  precise 
terms ; but  our  general  position  has  been  made  sufficiently  cWarby  my 

312 

RELATION  OF  DREAMS  TO  THE  ARGUMENT,  [chap. 

.statement  that  wte  should  not,  with  our  present  evidence,  have  under- 
taken to  make  out  a case  for  telepathy  on  the  ground  of  dreams  alone. 

. The  question  whether  a case  could  be  completely  made  out  on  that 
ground,  though  it  may  be  worth  debating,  seems  incapable  of 
final  settlement,  until  a very  large  section  of  the  population  takes  to 
keeping  a daily  record  of  their  dream-experiences.  -A  much  larger 
number  of  examples  is  needed  for  which,  even  taken  in  isolation,  a 
high  evidential  rank  could  be  claimed — whether  from  the  amount  of 
detail  in  the  coincidence,  as  in  cases  134,138,  and  142,  or  from  some  such 
exceptional  features  as  marked  Mr.  Wingfield’s  case  (p.  199).  But 
meanwhile  an  argument  of  a quite  different  sort  can  be  imported  from 
the  department  of  evidence  on  which  we  mainly  rely — the  evidence  of 
telepathic  impressions  of  distant  events  received  in  the  waking  state. 
The  probabilities  of  some  real  causal  connection  between  event  and 
impression  in  the  less  conclusive  cases  cannot  be  fairly  weighed 
without  regard  to  the  existence  of  the  more  conclusive ; and  that 
dreams  form,  on  the  whole,  the  less  evidentially  conclusive  class  can 
be  no  ground  for  tabooing  them,  unless  we  can  assign  special  reasons 
why  sleep  should  be  a condition  adverse  to  telepathic  influence.  In 
the  conception  of  telepathy  which  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader  will 
by  degrees  come  to  share,  no  such  reasons  appear ; while  the 
resemblances  and  the  transition-cases,  already  referred  to,  between 
the  sleeping  and  the  waking  phenomena,  make  it  practically  im- 
possible to  reject  in  the  one  class  an  explanation  which  we  admit  in 
the  other.  The  examples  which  I shall  proceed  to  give  require  no 
further  justification.  They  are  not  needed  to  prove  our  theory ; but 
many  of  them  almost  inevitably  fall  under  it  as  soon  as  it  is  proved  ; 
and  we  have  no  right  to  disregard  any  light  which  they  may  throw 
on  it. 

VIII.] 

TELEPATHIC  DREAMS. 

313 

Part  II. — Examples  of  Dreams  which  may  be  reasonably 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

§ 1.  On  surveying^  a large  number  of  cases  where  a dream  has 
corresponded  in  time  with  the  real  occurrence  of  the  event  or  events 
which  it  represented,  in  such  a way  as  strongly  to  suggest  that  it  had 
its  source  in  a telepathic  impulse,  we  find  that  they  at  once  fall  into 
distinct  classes.  In  the  first  class,  the  agent  is  in  a normal  state,  or 
is  himself  also  dreaming : the  external  event  here  is  simply  the 
occurrence  to  the  agent  of  a particular  thought  or  dream  ; and  the 
percipient’s  impression  is  concerned  simply  with  the  content  of  that 
thought  or  dream,  not  with  the  agent  himself.  In  all  other  classes 
the  agent  is  in  some  condition  or  situation  which  is  more  or  less 
abnormal ; and  the  percipient  has  an  impression  of  the  agent  as  in 
this  situation,  but  an  impression  which  may  take  various  forms.  Not 
infrequently  the  central  fact  is  dreamt  of  merely  as  a fact — as  some- 
thing the  dreamer  hears  of,  or  becomes  aware  of,  as  having  occurred, 
without  himself  in  any  way  coming  into  contact  with  it.  In  another 
class  of  cases,  he  perceives  the  principal  actor  in  the  matter  dreamt  of 
— the  dying  person,  if  death  is  the  occasion — in  such  a manner  as  to 
suggest  the  actual  catastrophe  ; this  suggestion  being  often  connected 
with  some  special  imagery  or  symbolism.  And  in  yet  another  class,  he 
seems  himself  transported  into  the  actual  scene — to  be  an  actual 
spectator  of  the  event. 

I will  begin  then  with  some  specimens  of  the  first  class,  where 
the  dream  has  close  relation  to  something  that  is  in  the  agent’s  mind, 
but  the  agent’s  own  personality  does  not  specially  figure  in  it.1  These 
are,  of  course,  the  cases  which  come  nearest  to  experimental  thought- 
transference  ; and  an  additional  point  of  resemblance  is  that  they  are 
especially  apt  to  occur  when  the  agent  and  percipient  are  in  tolerably 
close  proximity.  One  marked  group  of  these  cases  is  the  simultaneous 
occurrence  of  the  same  dream  to  two  persons.  Such  ah  occurrence 
would  not  be  likely  to  be  heard  of  except  when  the  two  dreamers 

^ 1 This  is,  of  course,  a mere  evidential  rule;  but,  owing  to  the  immense  scope  fq* 
accidental  coincidences  that  dreams  afford,  it  must  be  strictly  applied.  For  example,  Mrs* 
Sidney  Smith,  of  7,  The  Terrace,  Barnes,  tells  us  of  an  extraordinary  and  indescribable 
horror  which  she  experienced  in  sleep,  on  tne  night  of  a brother’s  very  tragic  death ; but  as 
she  did  not  connect  the  impression  with  her  brother  till  she  heard  that  he  was  missing,  the 
case  cannot  be  even  provisionally  admitted.  We  must  insist  on  the  fulfilment  hi  at  least 
one  of  two  conditions : either  the  thought,  or  the  personality,  of  the  agent;  must  be 
distinctly  represented  in  the  dream. 

314  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

were  nearly  relHed  ot  were  living  in  the  same  house  ; indeed,  unless 
the  correspondence  were  extraordinarily  close  and  detailed,  it  is  only 
the  fact  of  the  dreamers’  belonging  to  a narrowly  restricted  circle  that 
could  justify  one  in  attaching  the  slightest  importance  to  it. 
In  a wider  circle,  coincidences  of  the  sort  might  obviously  happen, 
and  probably  do  happen,  by  pure  accident.  But  relationship  or  habitual 
propinquity  involves,  of  course,  the  chance  that  some  item  of  joint 
waking  experience  has  been  the  independent  source  of  both  dreams ; 
and  no  case  would  be  admissible  where  any  recent  cause  of  this  sort 
could  be  traced.1  One  of  the  strongest  evidenital  features  would 
be  the  repetition  of  the  occurrence  with  the  same  two  persons ; as 
recorded,  for  instance,  in  a communication  read  to  the  Psychological 
Society  on  February  15th,  1877,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  presiding. 

(88)  “Mr.  E.  P.  Toy  stated  that  he  and  his  wife  were  in  the  habit  of 
dreaming  upon  the  same  subject  at  the  same  time  ; this  did  not  arise  from 
mere  coincidence,  or  in  consequence  of  certain  matters  being  naturally 
uppermost  in  their  minds,  for  trifling  things  were  dreamt  of  which  had 
not  been  in  their  thoughts  previously.  One  night  he  dreamt  that  he  had 
been  charged  by  a bull,  and  so  did  she  ; on  another  occasion  he  dreamt  that 
he  was  at  the  funeral  of  a favourite  child,  and  he  did  not  grieve,  although 
he  liked  the  child  very  much  ; his  wife  dreamt  the  same  thing ; and  they 
often  had  similar  experiences.” 

Mr.  Toy  wrote  to  us,  from  Littlehampton,  in  November,  1883:— 

4 4 The  circumstances  occurred  some  8 or  10  years  ago  and  the  particulars 
have  faded  from  my  memory,  as  also  from  Mrs.  Toy’s.  I can  only  confirm 
the  general  facts  as  related  in  my  note  to  Serjeant  Cox. 

44  While  writing,  I may  mention  a still  more  extraordinary  dream.  I 
dreamed  that  for  some  reason  or  other  I had  poisoned  a woman,  and  the 
same  night  Mrs.  Toy  had  a very  vivid  dream,  in  which  she  thought  I was 
going  to  be  tried  for  having  committed  a murder.  I do  not  think  I am  of 
a blood-thirsty  disposition,  and  do  not  remember  to  have  been  reading  any- 
thing to  have  suggested  the  dream,  so  the  coincidence  was,  to  say  the 
least,  very  striking. 

44  Edmund  Toy.” 

[The  force  of  these  coincidences  is  diminished  but  not  destroyed  by  the 
fact,  which  Mr,  Podmore  elicited  in  conversation,  that  both  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Toy  have  frequent  and  vivid  dreams.] 

1 For  example,  we  have  a quite  recent  case  where  a brother  and  sister  (Mr.  and  Miss 
Dawson,  of  Richmond  Cottage,  Worthing)  dreamt,  on  the  same  night  and,  apparently,  at 
the  same  hour,  3 a.m.,  that  their  dog  bit  the  brother  in  the  foot.  The  brother’s 
dream  was  a very  vivid  one,  as  he  woke  with  a scream,  which  was  heard  by  his  mother ; 
and  both  dreams  were  independently  described  next  morning.  The  dog  had  never' bitten 
anyone  before,  and  had  been  perfectly  friendly  with  Mr.  Dawson,  and  no  mention  had  been 
made  of  any  risk  connected  with  him ; so  that  the  coincidence  seemed  a striking  one.  But 
on  making  more  precise  inquiries,  we  found  that  soon  afterwards  he  did  actually 
bite  Mr.  Dawson,  wno  had  since  been  “ynable  to  approach  him.”  It  is  possible,  therefore, 
to  supposje  that  the  idea  of  risk  may  have  been  latent  in  the  family* 

VIII.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  315 

The  following  case  is  from  the  Rev.  J.  Page  Hopjfe,  of  Lea  Hurst, 
Leicester. 

“September  15th,  1884. 

(89)  “ Last  week  I dreamt  of  a ‘ dead  * friend,  and  of  this  friend  doing 
an  exceedingly  strange  thing.  It  impressed  me  very  much,  but  I said  not  a 
word  concerning  it  to  any  one.  Next  morning,  at  breakfast,  my  wife 
hastened  to  tell  me  that  she  had  dreamt  a singular  dream  (a  very  unti&ual 
tiling  for  her  to  say  anything  about),  and  then  she  staggered  me  by 
telling  me  what  she  had  dreamt.  It  was  the  very  thing  that  I had 
dreamed.  We  slept  in  different  rooms,  she  having  to  attend  to  a sick 
child,  and  I not  being  very  well.  I do  not  care  to  tell  you  the  dream ; 
but  the  special  action  in  both  dreams  was  something  extremely  curious 
and  monstrously  improbable.  My  wife  ended  her  description  by  saying, 
‘ Then  she  tried  to  say  something,  but  I could  not  make  it  out/  I heard 
and  remembered  what  was  said,  and  that  was  the  only  difference  in  our 
dreams.  We  had  not  been  in  any  way  talking  about  our  ‘dead  9 friend. 

“J.  Page  Hopps. 

“Mary  Hopps.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hopps  says  : — 

“T  would  rather  not  go  into  details,  especially  in  writing,  though  I 
think  Mr.  Gurney  is  right  in  wishing  for  them.  Some  day  I may  give 
them,  but  what  I told  him  in  my  first  letter  is  literally  true.  The  dream 
was  an  intensely  improbable  one.  One  curious  thing  about  it  was  that, 
while  looking  at  the  appearance,  I knew  perfectly  well  I was  lying  in  the 
particular  bed  I was  in,  and  on  the  left-hand  side,  with  my  head  towards 
the  door.  When  I awoke,  I was  in  precisely  that  position.” 

Mrs.  Fielding,  of  Yarlington  Rectory,  near  Bath,  writes : — 

“November,  1885. 

(90)  “ The  other  night  my  husband  and  I dreamt  at  the  same  hour , 

the  same  dream — a subject  on  which  neither  of  us  had  been  thinking  of 
for  months.  It  was  a dream  of  wandering  about  our  first  home,  and  in  it 
looking  at  the  same  spot.  « jANE  e.  Fielding.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Fielding  adds  : — 

“ I do  not  remember  anything  more  about  the  dream  I spoke  of.  ii 
was  17  years  since  we  left  Linacre  Court,  near  Dover,  the  place  my 
husband  and  I dreamt  of  at  the  same  hour.  We  both  dreamt  of  walking 
about  the  old  place — and  the  old  woodman — just  before  we  awoke ; ana 
we  had  not  been  either  of  us  thinking  of  it  in  the  least. 

“ My  husband  laughs  at  all  such  things  as  having  any  import,  but  to 
please  me  wrote  the  enclosed.” 

The  enclosure  was : — \ 

“ I remember  awaking  one  morning  about  three  weeks  ago,\  and  my 
wife  telling  me  she  had  had  a long  dream  about  our  first  married  \^u>me.  I 
said  ‘How  strange,  as  I have  been  dreaming  the  same  just  before  I (awoke/ 

“J.  M.  Fielding.” 

Asked  as  to  the  detail  of  the  woodman,  Mrs.  Fielding  replied,  “ We 
both  saw  the  woodman  in  our  dream.” 

316 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

Mr.  Merrifield,  of  24,  Vernon  Terrace,  Brighton,  tells  us  that, 
about  1865,  he  had  a most  distressing  dream  (witlv one  exception 
totally  unlike  any  other  that  he  can  recall),  in  which  his  death  was 
foretold  to  him  as  about  to  happen  within  24  hours.  The  impression 
was  so  painfully  acute  that  he  could  not  shake  it  off  during  the 
following  day;  and  he  actually  had  an  irrational  feeling  of  relief  when 
he  woke  on  the  second  morning  and  realised  that  the  24  hours  were 
over.  He  then  told  the  whole  story  to  his  wife. 

(91)  “ She  immediately  said,  ‘ I noticed  that  you  woke  up  the  night 
before  last,  and  I had  awakened  from  the  same  cause.  I had  dreamed  most 
vividly  that  I was  a widow,  and  the  pillow  was  actually  wet  with  my  tears. 
I never  had  such  a vivid  dream  before,  and  it  has  troubled  me  ever  since. 
I would  not  tell  you,  but  it  was  a relief  to  me  when  I saw  you  coming 
home  to  dinner  last  night.’” 

Mrs.  Merrifield  adds  : — 

“ I saw  myself  dressed  in  weeds. — M.  A.  M.” 

The  following  example — from  Mrs.  Willmore,  of  33,  Castellain 
Road,  Maida  Hill,  W. — is  curiously  similar,  but  depends  on  a single 
memory. 

iri  1884a 

(92)  “ The  dream  you  ask  me  to  narrate  took  place  in  185{  t Net 
near  Paris.  I had  a vivid  impression  that  I was  dying,  and  Mike 
a start  to  hear  my  husband  sobbing  so  painfully  that  I aro 
ask  what  was  the  matter,  upon  which  he  said  that  he  had  dn  kr] 
was  just  on  the  point  of  dying.  These  two  dreams  must  havq1  * w// 

ulars*? 

Jfinr 
' i to 

both  of  us  simultaneously,  and  seem  to  me  to  be  a curious*!  /L  3 ctf 
thought-transference.  I may  add  that  there  was  such  great)  °^'  f a^hy 
between  my  husband  and  myself  that,  one  day  not  long  before  his.  death, 
I well  remember  his  saying  that  we  should  soon  not  need  the  communica- 
tion of  speech.” 

The  next  example  is  peculiar  in  that  the  percipient’s  impression 
seems  due  to  a dream  of  the  agent’s  of  which  the  latter  retained  no 
memory.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  amount  of  information  con- 
veyed exceeds  what  we  can  reasonably  account  for  by  the  agent’s 
having  talked  in  his  sleep.  It  is  from  our  friend  Mr.  F.  Corder,  of 
46,  Charlwood  Street,  S.W.,  a gentleman  of  very  high  reputation  in 
the  musical  world.  He  was  at  one  time  in  the  habit  of  hypnotising 
his  wife  for  her  health ; and  “ at  the  time,”  he  says,  “ she  gave  me 
repeated  proofs  that  she  was  able  to  ransack  my  mind  and  memory 
far  better  than  I myself  could ; but  this  was  when  desired  to  do  so”~*~ 
where^is  the  case  to  be  cited  was  spontaneous. 

viii. J REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  317 

(93)  Extract  from  Mr.  Corder’s  diary,  August  19th,  1882 : — 

“ Health  fcjH|>toms  much  the  same.  Put  her  (Mbs.  Corder)  to  sleep 
before  she  got  up,  in  order  to  Ipow  the  exact  hours  at  which  restoratives 
were  to  be  given.  She  fiiwsaid,  ‘ I can’t  attend  yet  to  those  things ; I am 
thinking  out  your  thought/  I requested  an  explanation.  ‘ About  Jimmy 

B ; it  is  so  strange,  because  I never  saw  him  in  ,my  life  ; but  you  were 

thinking  about  him/  I was  ready  to  swear  that  I had  not  been  thinking  of 
my  old  schoolfellow  for  many  a long  day,  and  was  about  to  say  so  when 
she  went  on : ‘ You  were  dreaming  of  him  last  night,  and  said,  “ Poor 
Jimmy”  in  your  sleep,  so  I was  obliged  to  follow  out  your  thought  this 
morning/  She  then  went  on  to  remind  me  how  the  said  Jiinmy  had  gone 
to  a party  with  my  brothers,  sisters  and  self  (this  was  at  Christmas,  1865, 
long  before  1 knew  her) ; how  he  drank  too  much,  and  was  ill  for  several 
days  at  our  house,  my  mother  nursing  him.  Not  only  had  I absolutely  no 
remembrance  of  the  dream  (or  indeed  of  having  dreamed  at  all),  but  the 
incident  itself  had  so  completely  faded  from  my  mind  that  it  was  only  by 
the  greatest  effort  of  memory  that  I could  recall  it.” 

Mr.  Oorder  further  says  : — 

“ On  questioning  my  eldest  sister  some  weeks  later  all  these  details,  which 
1 had  absolutely  forgotten,  were  corroborated.  It  is  impossible,  of  course, 
that  my  wife  can,  even  in  casual  talk,  have  ever  heard  of  this  trivial 
incident  of  my  boyhood,  any  more  than  of  other  matters  connected  with  the 
same  event,  which  she  also  detailed.  But  more  curious  than  anything  i& 
the  fact — for  fact  I suppose  it  is — that  I could  have  dreamed  of  these 
entirely  forgotten  matters,  that  they  should  again  have  passed  away, 
leaving  no  trace,  and  that  yet  she  should  read  them  in  my  mind  the  next 
morning  !’* 

In  another  communication  Mr.  Corder  adds  : — 

“March  19th,  1884. 

“ I may  say  that  I was  absolutely  incredulous  both  as  to  the  truthi  of 
the  dream-incident,  and  my  having  dreamed  it ; but  the  moment  I asked 
my  sister  about  J.  B.  having  been  ill  in  our  house,  she  (whose  memory  for 
youthful  scenes  is  very  strong)  said  unhesitatingly,  1 Of  course ; don’t  you 

remember  it  was  at  the  Me s’  ball?  He  drank  too  much  wine  and** 

came  home  in  our  cab.  M.  and  C.  carried  him  up  to  bed/  Those  are 
nearly  my  sister’s  very  words.  There  was  no  discrepancy  whatever  between 
her  account  of  the  matter  and  my  wife’s,  but  I cannot  now  remember 
whether  the  latter  related  it  with  especial  minuteness  of  detail.  Certainly 
the  least  discrepancy  in  the  two  accounts  would  have  struck  me,  as — the 
incident  being  so  entirely  forgotten  by  myself — I applied  evqry  Word, 
utterqd  by  both  to  my  mind,  to  revive  the  dormant  recollection/’ 

M$ss  Corder  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

M The  Rocks,  East  Bedf ont,  near  Feltham,  Middlesex, 

“ April  4th,  1885. 

“ As  y0&  ask  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  incident  so  strangely 
referred  to  by  Pauline,  I will  put  down  what  I remember.  One  night  when 
we  were  living  either  at  Haddo  or  Canterbury  Villas  (the  latter  I\  think) 

318  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap- 

the  boys  went  to  a party  at  the  Me s’,  and  there,  it  appeared,  our  young 

friend  Jimmy  B.  took  too  much  refreshment.  I forget  ifjj|fc  was  still  with 
the  Rev.  G.  M.  or  in  rooms ; but  at  all  events  they  were  afraid  to  take, 
him  home,  and  brought  him  to  our  place.'  I and  R.  were  awakened 
by  the  noise  the  boys  made  in  conveying  J.  up  to  C/s  room  on  the  floor 
above  us ; so  we  listened,  and  became  aware  of  the  proceedings,  which  we 
did  not  then  fully  understand.  Next  day  J.  had  to  keep  in  bed,  and  the 
mother  went  up  and  waited  on  him.  He  was  very  unwell,  and  if  I 
remember  rightly  only  got  up  at  tea  time,  when  he  took  a cup  of  tea  with 
us,  and  then  returned  to  his  place.  I have  an  impression  that  the  mother 
sent  for  Dr.  Burton,  who  administered  something.  As  to  the  notion  that 
I or  R.  could  ever  have  told  Pauline  this  story  in  any  of  our  former  talks, 

I am  certain  that  we  have  never  done  so.  J.  left  England  so  long  before 
we  met  Pauline  that  he  was  only  mentioned  once  or  twice,  as  the  chief 
instigator  of  our  dramatic  performances  in  early  days.  Moreover,  this 
story  is  not  at  all  what  I should  relate  about  a friend ; and  I can  safely 
swear  that  it  was  never  mentioned  to  anyone. 

“This  is  all  X remember,  and  it  is  quite  distinct  in  my  remembrance 
now. 

“Charlotte  Corder.” 

[In  spite  of  Miss  Corder’s  evidence,  it  is,  of  course,  within  the  range 
of  possibility  that  the  incident  had  been  described  in  Mrs.  Corder’s 
presence ; but  it  would  then  be  extremely  odd  that,  on  its  recurring  to 
her,  it  should  not  have  recurred  as  a thing  previously  heard  of,  but 
should  have  seemed  to  her  like  entirely  new  information.  We  have, 
moreover,  in  Mr.  Corder’s  exclamation,  “ Poor  Jimmy,”  a considerable 
presumption  that  his  dreaming  thoughts  did  actually  revert  to  his  old 
friend.  The  case,  however,  would  hardly  have  been  included,  had  we  not 
felt  able  to  rely  on  Mr.  Corderos  statement  as  to  the  peculiar  rapport 
which  at  that  time  existed  between  himself  and  his  wife.] 

The  next  case  is  perhaps  best  regarded  as  one  of  simultaneous 
dreams,  though  the  one  of  the  two  parties  who  would  most  naturally 
be  regarded  as  the  percipient  feels  positive  that  she  was  awake.  It 
belongs  in  one  respect  to  a later  class,  since  the  agent’s  personality 
ahd  presence  distinctly  figured  in  the  percipient’s  experience. 

Miss  Constance  S.  Bevan,  of  74,  Lancaster  Gate,  W.,  says : — 

“ February  18th,  1884. 

(94)  “ On  June  10th,  1883,  I had  the  following  dream.  Someone  told 
me  that  Miss  Elliott  was  dead.  I instantly,  in  my  dream,  rushed  to  her  room, 
entered  it,  went  to  her  bedside  and  pulled  the  clothes  from  off  her  face. 
She  was  quite  cold ; her  eyes  were  wide  open  and  staring  at  the  ceiling. 
This  so  frightened  me  that  I dropped  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and  knew  no 
more  unjtil  I was  half  out  of  bed  in  my  own  room  and  wide  awake.  The 
time  was  5 o’clock  a.m.  Before  leaving  my  room  I told  this  dream  to  my 
sister,  as  it  had  been  such  an  unpleasant  one. 

“ Constance  S.  Bevan/’ 

VIII.] 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

. 319 

Mias  Elliott  feays : — 

u February,  1884. 

“ I awoke  on  the  morning  of  June  10th,  and  was  lying  on  my  back 
with  my  eyes  fixed  on  the  ceiling,  when  I heard  the  door  open  and  felt 
some  one  come  in  and  bend  over  me,  but  not  far  enough  to  come  between 
my  eyes  and  the  ceiling ; knowing  it  was  only  0.,  I did  not  move,  but  instead 
of  kissing  me  she  suddenly  drew  back,  and  going  towards  the  foot  of  the 
bed,  crouched  down  there.  Thinking  this  very  strange,  I closed  and 
opened  my  eyes  several  times,  to  convince  myself  that  I was  really  awake, 
and  then  turned  my  head  to  see  if  she  had  left  the  door  open,  but  found  it 
still  shut.  Upon  this  a sort  of  horror  came  over  me  and  I dared  not  look 
towards  the  figure,  which  was  crouching  in  the  same . position,  gently 
moving  the  bed-clothes  from  my  feet.  I tried  to  call  to  the  occupant  of 
the  next  room,  but  my  voice  failed.  At  this  moment  she  touched  my  bare 
foot,  a cold  chill  ran  all  over  me  and  I knew  nothing  more  till  I found 
myself  out  of  bed  looking  for  C.,  who  must,  I felt,  be  still  in  the  room.  I 
never  doubted  that  she  had  really  been  there  until  I saw  both  doors 
fastened  on  the  inside.  On  looking  at  my  watch  it  was  a few  minutes 
past  5, 

“K.  Elliott.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Miss  C.  S.  Sevan’s  sisters  : — 

“Before  leaving  our  room,  my  sister  Constance  told  all  about  the 
dream  she  had  had  in  the  early  morning. 

“C.  Elsie  Bevan.” 

“ The  first  thing  in  the  morning,  Miss  Elliott  told  me  all  about  her 
unpleasant  dream,  before  speaking  to  anyone  else. 

“Antonia  Bevan.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  C.  S.  Bevan  says  : — 

“ This  is  the  first  experience  I have  ever  had  of  the  kind,  and  I have 
not  walked  in  my  sleep  more  than  three  times  in  my  life  ; the  last  time 
was  about  a year  ago  ; on  no  occasion  have  I left  the  room.  I do  not  have 
startling  or  vivid  dreams  as  a rule.  I did  not  look  at  my  watch  after 
waking,  but  the  clock  struck  5 o’clock.”  * ' 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Elliott  says : — 

“ Although  I am  accustomed  to  have  very  vivid  dreams,  I have  never 
had  one  of  this  kind  before.  When  I found  my  friend  was  not  in  the 
room,  and  that  the  doors  were  securely  fastened  on  the  inside,  I looked  at 
my  watch ; it  was  a few  minutes  past  5. 

“ I have  never,  I1  believe,  walked  in  my  sleep.  There  are  two  doors  to 
my  bedroom.  One  was  locked  on  the  inside ; the  handle  was  broken  oft’  the 
other  on  the  outside.  Thus  it  was  impossible  for  anyone  to  open  it  except 
from  the  inside.” 

one,  probably,  will  regard  this  as  an  accidental  coincidence ; but 
ypothesis  of  sleep-walking  had  to  be  carefully  considered,  I have  seen 
the  rooms,  and  examined  the  door  of  which  the  handle  is  described  as 
having  been  broken  off.  Miss  Bevan  had  been  (as  was  often  the  ipase)  in 

320  DREAMS  WHICH  MA  7 BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

Miss  Elliott's  room  over-night,  and  on  her  shutting  the  door  at  her 
departure,  the  outside  handle  fell  off.  She  remembers  its  doing  so;  and 
•Miss  Elliott  heard  it  fall,  and  saw  it  on  the  floor  outside  when  she  left  her 
room  in  the  morning.  Miss  Elliott  says  that  it  remained  unscrewed,  and 
so  liable  to  be  shaken  off  every  time  the  door  closed,  for.  about  two 
months  that  summer.  I unscrewed  it,  and  tried  to  move  the  latch  by 
turning  the  stump,  but  found  it  utterly  impossible ; and  to  fit  the  handle 
on  again  without  pushing  the  stump  inwards,  and  so  losing  all  chance 
of  opening  the  door,  was  a work  of  very  considerable  care.  But  even  on 
the  violent  supposition  that  Miss  Bevan  left  her  room  noiselessly  in  her 
* sleep,  picked  up  the  handle,  deftly  adjusted  it,  turned  it,  and  entered— 
there  remains  an  additional  difficulty.  For,  in  departing,  she  must  have 
shut  the  door  after  her  in  such  a way  as  to  jerk  the  handle  off  again. 
This  would  make  a loud  sound  ; yet  it  was  not  heard  by  Miss  Elliott,  who, 
on  the  hypothesis  in  question,  was  awake ; nor  did  it  wake  Miss  Bevan 
herself,  nor  an  aunt  of  hers  who  was  sleeping  in  a room  with  which  Miss 
Elliott's  communicated.  It  seems  almost  incredible  that  she  should  have 
shut  the  ddor  carefully  after  her,  taken  off  the  handle,  and  deposited  it  on 
the  floor.  Both  the  door  of  communication  between  Miss  Elliott's  and 
the  aunt's  rooms,  and  the  free  door  of  the  latter  room  were  locked,  the 
former  on  Miss  Elliott's  side.  Miss  Bevan  has  never  left  her  room , or 
, anything  like  it,  on  the  three  occasions  on  which  she  has  walked  in  her 
deep.  Moreover,  she  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room  as  a sister  who  is  a 
very  light  sleeper,  and  she.  considers  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that 
she  should  have  left  her  room  without  waking  this  sister.  Her  room  is 
separated  from  Miss  Elliott's  by  a passage  and  a long  staircase.  Miss 
Bevan  is  not  a “ dreamer,”  and  very  rarely  has  a dream  which  she 
thinks  it  worth  while  to  mention.] 

Two  points  in  this  case  deserve  special  notice.  In  the  first 
place,  whatever  we  call  Miss  Elliott's  experience,  it  was  wholly 
unlike  an  ordinary  dream  ; it  was  in  itself  as  unusual  in  character  as 
a “ spectral  illusion,”  or  distinct  waking  hallucination  of  vision. 
Evidentially,  this  is  very  important ; for  it  at  once  renders  irrelevant 
the  theory  of  accidental  coincidence,  so  far  as  that  theory  depends 
on  the  scope  for  accident  which  the  vast  number  of  dreams  affords. 
The  second  point  is  the  possibility,  at  any  rate,  that  the  two  ex- 
periences , were  not  only  simultaneous  but  reciprocal ; that  is  to  say, 
that  Miss  Bevan's  dream  may  not  have  been  simply  the  independent 
source  of  Miss  Elliott's  impression,  but  may  have  itself  been  modified1 
by  that  impression. 

§ 2.  Passing  now  to  examples  where  the  supposed  agent  was 
awake,  but  in  a perfectly  ordinary  and  unexcited  state,  .we  must 
still,  of  course,  reject  cases  where  any  normal  cause  for  the  dream 
can  be  plausibly  assigned.  Thus  Mr.  F.  J.  Jones,  of  Heath  Bank, 

REGARDED  AS , TELEPATHIC , 

321 

▼ni.] 

Mossley  Road,  Ashton-under-Lyne,  tells  us  how  his  little  daughter 
astonished  him  by  starting  up  from  her  sleep,  saying,  “ Something 
has  gone  wrong  with  the  ‘ Gogos  * boilers.”  The  “ Gogo ” belonged 
to  a firm  with  which  Mr.  Jones  was  connected,  and  it  was  afterwards 
discovered  that  the  boilers  had  at  that  very  time  suffered  an 
accident  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay.  The  coincidence  remains,  therefore, 
♦an  odd  one  ; but  we  should  certainly  be  inclined  to  refer  the  child's 
dream  to  some  scrap  of  grown-up  conversation  that  had  been  for- 
gotten. Mr.  E.  W.  P.,  of  Barton  End  Grange,  Nailsworth,  describes* 
how  in  a half- wakeful  state  he  had  been  imagining  himself  to  be 
reading  “ The  Book  of  Days,”  till  it  seemed  to  become  too  dark  to 
see — when  all  at  once  his  wife  said  in  her  sleep,  “ You  should  not 
read  in  bed,  it  is  so  bad  for  the  eyes”  On  inquiry,  we  find  that 
Mrs.  P.  is  not  in  the  habit  Of  talking  in  her  sleep ; but  we  find  also 
that  Mr.  P.  has  often  read  in  bed,  and  that  his  wife  has  often  re- 
monstrated with  him  about  it.  The  following  cases  seem  free  from 
such  objections. 

Mrs.  Crellin,  of  62,  Hilldrop  Crescent,  N.,  says  : — 

“ January,  1884. 

(95)  “ My  husband  and  I often  find  our  thoughts  occupied  by  the 
same  subject,  though  there  has  been  no  apparent  direction  given  to  our 
thoughts  by  surrounding  circumstances,  and  the  subject  of  our  thoughts 
may  be  distant  in  time  and  place.  This  rather  curious  incident  occurred 
12  years  ago.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  I awoke,  and  remaining  awake 
I tried  to  recall  one  of  Tennyson’s  poems,  but  was  puzzled  as  to  the  first 
word.  Was  it  ‘ Home  they  brought/  or  * Back  they  brought  her  warrior 
dead  ’ ? My  husband  had  been  soundly  asleep,  but  suddenly  turned  round, 
and  on  my  saying  * Are  you  awake  ? ’ he  replied,  ‘ Yes,  and  I awoke  with 
the  words  on  my  lips,  ‘ Home  they  brought  her  warrior  dead.’  As  we 
had  not  been  reading  the  poem  together,  it  seemed  a curious  occurrence  of 
sympathy.  I am  quite  sure  that  I had  not  uttered  a word  of  the  poem 
aloud,  for  I was  very  anxious  not  to  disturb  my  husband’s  rest  in  his 
then  rather  delicate  state  of  health.  ” 

Mr.  Crellin  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

* “January  19th,  1884. 

, “ X have  a distinct  recollection  of  the  incident,  reported  to  you  by 

my  wife,  referring  to  Tennyson’s  lines,  * Home  they  brought  her  warrior 
dead/ 

“On  my  awaking  from  sleep  she  asked  me,  ‘Are  you  awake V I 
replied,  ‘Yes,  and  with  these  words  on  my  lips,  “Home/”  <fcc.  She  said, 

‘ Those  arfe  the  very  words  I want  to  be  sure  about.  I have  been  trying 
to  recollect  whether  “ Home  ” or  “ Back  ” is  the  word  with  which  the 
poem  < begins/ 

x 

322 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

“ I had  not  recently  been  reading  Tennyson,  and  cannot  account  lor 
what  I have  just  narrated. 

“Philip  Crellin/’ 

[It  is,  no  doubt,  possible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Crellin  unconsciously 
recited  the  line  aloud ; but  not  only  is  she  certain  that  she  did  not,  but 
she  had  at  the  time  a special  reason  for  silence.] 

The  next  incident  concerns  the  same  two  persons ; but  here 
possibly  it  was  the  dreamer  who  was  the  agent.  Mrs.  Crellin  says : — 
* “August,  1884. 

(96)  “ I mentioned  to  you  my  husband’s  awaking  from  sleep  and  repeat- 
ing the  line  from  Tennyson  which  I had  been  trying  to  remember.  That 
seemed  to  me  a brain- wave  and  it  was  immediate  in  its  action  ; but  what 
of  a deferred  brain- wave  ? Thus,  three  weeks  ago,  I was  unable  to  sleep 
during  the  early  hours  of  the  night.  I thought,  amongst  other  things,  of 
a rather  comic  piece  of  poetry  which  my  husband  used  to  repeat  years 
ago.  I stuck  at  one  line  and  could  not  recall  it.  However,  I fell  asleep, 
and  three  or  four  hours  after  awoke,  to  find  it  was  time  to  rise.  My  husband, 
after  a good  night’s  rest — undisturbed  by  poetry  or  prose — awoke  also ; 
he  stretched  out  his  hand  towards  me,  and  repeated  the  line  I had  failed 
to  remember  in  the  night,  and  which  did  not  occupy  my  thoughts  wjien 
I awoke  in  the  morning.  This  seemed  a strange  delay  in  giving  the 
response.” 

[We  do  not  regard  it  as  specially  strange.  See  pp.  201-2.] 

Mr.  Crellin  says  : — 

“62,  Hilldrop  Crescent,  N. 

“ August  20th,  1884. 

“ My  wife  has  told  you  of  an  incident  which  I am  able  to  confirm.  I 
awoke  one  morning  recently  and  immediately  said  to  her,  1 And  his  skin, 
like  a lady’s  loose  gown,  hung  about  him  ’ — this  being  a line  of  some 
humorous  verses  learnt  by  me  when  a youth,  and  which  1 have  occasion- 
ally recited  for  the  amusement  of  my  friends,  but  which  I had  not 
repeated  or  thought  of  for  a long  period.  My  wife  at  once  • said  that 
whilst  lying  awake  during  the  night  (I  being  asleep)  she  had  been  trying 
to  recall  this  very  line.  I know  of  nothing  that  can  have  brought  the 
line  to  my  mind  and  lips  at  the  moment. 

“ Philip  Crellin.” 

§ 3.  We  come  now  to  cases  where  the  agent’s  mind  was  in  a more 
or  less  disturbed  state.  The  following  account  is  from  our  friend  Miss 
Mason,  of  Morton  Hall,  Retford,  Notts.  It  was  first  printed  in 
connection  with  a record  of  some  thought-transference  experiments, 
in  Macmillan's  Magazine  for  October,  1882. 

(97)  “The  most  remarkable  case  I have  ever  come  across  was  an 
accidental  one,  where  I had  no  intention  of  experimenting.  During  the 
summer  of  1878  I happened  to  be  staying  at  Oban,  and  on  the  1st  of 
August  went  to  see  the  Falls  of  Lora,  so  well-known  that  I shall  not 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

323 

VIII,} 

undertake  a long  description  of  them.  Loch  Etive,  which  is  a branch  of  the 
larger  Loch  Linnhe,  is  on  a lower  level.  This  difference  in  level  occurs  at 
its  mouth,  and  is  so  abrupt  that,  when  the  tide  is  out,  it  leaves  an  ir- 
regular waterfall  between  the  two.  The  mass  of  sea-water  rushes  from 
Loch  Linnhe  into  Loch  Etive,  shaped  into  all  kinds  of  cataracts  and  hollow 
whirlpdbls,  and  is  approached  either  by  standing  on  rocks  of  some  height 
above  the  Falls,  or  on  lower  ones,  almost  on  a level  with*  the  eddies 
belQW  them. 

" It  is  natural,  on  looking  into  such  whirlpools  and  watching  how 
, irresistibly  anything  thrown  into  them  is  sucked  down,  to  wonder  whether 
anyone  who  fell  in  could  possibly  be  saved.  I was  at  the  time  in  extreme 
anxiety  about  some  friends  of  mine  who  were  in  great  trouble,  of  which  I 
alone  knew,  and  might  not  tell ; and  without  intending  it,  I applied  the 
picture  metaphorically  to  the  case,  fancying  my  friends  in  the  whirlpools 
and  myself  trying  to  save  them.  The  picture  impressed  me  so  forcibly  in 
this  state  of  mind,  that  for  the  rest  of  the  day  I never  got  rid  of  it.  Soon 
after  I returned  to  a place  where  I had  left  my  maid,  more  than  120  miles 
from  Oban,  and  on  the  7th  of  the  same  month  something  brought  my 
anxiety  and  its  accompanying  picture  before  me  even  more  vividly  than 
before.  I could  think  of  nothing  else  the  whole  evening.  To  speak 
absurdly,  I felt  possessed  by  that  scene  to  my  fingers’  ends.  All  night  long 
I never  closed  my  eyes,  but  lay  awake,  seeing  my  friends  in  the  whirlpools 
and  trying  to  pull  them  out.  My  maid,  who  slept  in  a room  above  mine, 
had  undressed  me  as  usual,  but  I hardly  spoke  to  her,  for  I could  not  tell 
her  of  my  anxiety,  and  had  not  another  idea  in  my  head  to  talk  about. 
When  she  called  me  in  the  morning,  she  at  once  began  to  say  that  she  had 
never  passed  so  strange  a night,  for  every  time  she  fell  asleep  she  awoke 
dreaming  of  the  same  place — ‘Water  rushing  over  rocks,  and  the  most 
dreadful  whirlpools/  and  that  she  was  ‘ standing  on  high  rocks,  trying  to 
save  people  out  of  them  with  ropes.’  ‘ And/  she  said,  ‘ it  was  not  a 
waterfall  of  a river,  it  was  a waterfall  of  the  sea.1 

“ This  expression  is  remarkable,  for  there  is  perhaps  hardly  a place 
in  the  world,  except  the  Falls  of  .Lora,  to  which  it  would  exactly 
apply.  Without  telling  her  why,  I questioned  her  in  detail  as  to 
all  the  features  of  the  place  she  had  dreamed  of,  and  anyone  who 
wishes  for  the  full  and  minute  description  she  gave  me  has  only  fa 
look  at  that  given  by  any  local  guide-book  of  the  Falls  of  Lora.  The 
only  part  of  her  dream  which  did  not  reflect  my  thoughts  was  that  the 
persons  whom  she  was  trying  to  save  from  drowning  were  not  the  same 
that  I was  thinking  of.  It  was  not  until  she  had  told  me  all  she  could,  that  I 
gave  her  my  reason  for  wishing  to  know  so  much  about  her  dream,  and 
said  I had  been  thinking  of  the  place  she  had  described.  Now  she  had 
never  been  to  Oban,  and  had  never  heard  or  read  anything  about  the  Falls. 
Ifhad  never  so  much  as  mentioned  them  to  her,  and  she  had  seen  no  one 
else  flit  any  time  who  had  been  there,  nor  had  she  ever  seen  a picture  or  a* 
photograph  of  the  place.  Of  this,  both  she  and  I were  absolutely  certain.' 
If,  therefore,  the  picture  was  not  impressed  by  my  mind  directly  upon 
hers/ the  .only  posable  alternative  is  that  of  coincidence;  and  the  coinci- ’ 
dence  of  her  dreaming  of  such  an  unusual  scene  and  circumstances  at  the 
same  time  that  I was  thinking  of  them  so  intently,  would  be  doubly 
extraordinary,  because  it  was  not  a single  dream,  but  one  repeated 

x 2 

324 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAT  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

throughout  the  nighty  her  anxiety  to  save  the  drowning  persons  waging 
her  again  and  again.  The  Uiaid  is  a matter-of-fact,  middle-aged  Woman, 
who  has  lived  nearly  all  her  life  in  my  family,  and  was  my  nurse.  Though 
a Welshwoman,  she  has  none  of  the  imagination  supposed  to.  be  an 
endowment  of  her  race,  and  has  displayed  no  talent  for  thought-reading ; 
her  position  enables  her  to  dispense  with  ceremonies,  and  she  refuses  to  ‘be 
bothered  witli  such  nonsense.’  She  still  lives  with  us,  is  in  the  house  at 
this  moment,  and  wishes  she  did  not  remember  the  circumstances.  I am 
not  trusting  to  memory  alone,  for  J not  only  entered  the  facts  in  my  diary, 
but  wrote  a full  account  of  them  the  next  day  in  a letter  to  a friend,  and* 
having  told  the  story  at  the  time,  have  other  witnesses  to  prove  that  I do 
not  exaggerate/’ 

The  dreamer  says  : — 

“This  account  of  the  circumstances  is  correct.  I had  never  he&rd 
Miss  Mason  mention  her  trouble.  But  I have  forgotten  many  of  the 
details  of  the  dream.1 

. “ Margaret  Herbert.” 

Miss  Mason’s  mother  says  : — 

“ I have  heard  both  iny  daughter  and  my  maid  speak  of  the  occurrence 
and  describe  it. 

“M.  Mason.” 

To  pass  from  water  to  fire — the  evidential  force  of  the  following 
case  is  not  easy  to  estimate,  without  knowing  how  frequent  dreams  of 
conflagrations  are  ; but  this  particular  dreamer,  at  any  rate,  can  recall 
no  similar  experience,  and  has  never  in  his  life  made  a written 
note  of  a dream  except  on  this  occasion.  Mr.  D.  B.  W.  Sladen,  of  26, 

Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  W.,  writes  : — 

“January  4th,  1886. 

(98)  “In  December,  1881,  we  were  living  at  6,  George  Street,  (East) 
Melbourne,  Victoria.  My  father  resided  then,  as  he  does  now,  at  Philli- 
more  Lodge,  Kensington,  W.  In  those  days  I always  went  to  bed  about 
midnight.  I awoke  suddenly,  tremendously  startled  by  a dream  that  my 
father’s  house  was  on  fire.  The  dream  impressed  me  so  vividly  that  I felt* 
convinced  that  a fire  had  actually  happened  there,  and,  striking  a light,  I 
walked  across  the  room  to  the  dressing-table,  on  which  my  diary  lay  (I 
used  generally  to  jot  down  the  events  of  the  day  just  before  turning  in),  aud 
made  a brief  entry  of  it,  there  and  then,  first  looking  at  my  watch  in  order 
to  be  able  to  set  down  the  time,  which  I found  to  be  1 a.m.  I had,  there- 
fore, been  in  bed  less  than  an  hour,  which  of  itself  seems  to  add  an 
extraordinary  feature  to  the  case  (I  refer  to  my  sinking  to  sleep,  dreaming, 

1 With  regard  to  these  words,  Miss  Mason  says  : — 

“April  12th,  1885. 

“My  old  nurse  has  such  a dislike  to  the  subject  .of  thought-transference,  which  she 
considers  ‘nonsense/  that  she  would  never  have  told  me  of  her  dream  if  she  had  knotfai 
that  it  afforded  an  instance.  And  when  I told  her  afterwards  how  her  jdreafti 
had  answered  to  my  thoughts,  she  was  so  angry  at  having  unconsciously  supplied  me  with 
an  instance,  that  she  always  refused  to  talk  of  it  again,  though  I have  often  tried  to  make 
her  do  so.  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  she  should  have  forgotten  some  of  the 
details  of  a dream  nearly  7 years  ago.” 

mu]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 325 

and  waking  up,  as  after  a long  sleep,  in  so  short  a space  of  time).  The  entry 
in  my  diary  is,  as  it  was  likely  to  be  when  ste&iding  out  of  bed,  very  brief  : 
1 At  night  I dreamt  that  the  kitchen  in  my  father's  house  was  on  fire . I 
awoke  and  found  that  it  was  i a.m'  I kept  my  diary  in  a plain  paper 
book;  and  the  entry  comes  below  what  I did  up  to  midnight  on 
December  22nd.  What  I further  still  remember  distinctly  of  the  vision  is 
this— that  in  it,  the  servants'  bedrooms  (which  are  really  at  the  top  of  my 
father's  house,  while  the  kitchen,  &c.,  are  at  the  bottom)  were  adjoining  the 
kitchen  suite,'  all  on  one  floor,  and  that  the  smoke-  and  blaze  seemed 
general.  Further,  I remember  distinctly,  though  I just  made  a bare  entry 
in  my  diary  and  hurried  back  to  bed,  that  two  of  my  father's  maids,  named 
Coombes  and  Caroline  respectively,  were  the  only  persons  except  myself 
present  in  the  vision,  and  that  I seemed  to  have  no  impulses  and  no  power 
’of  moving,  but  was  merely  a spectator ; nor  did  the  idea  of  any  risk  to 
myself  form  part  of  the  impression. 

a Six  or  seven  weeks  afterwards  (mail  contract  between  London  and 
Melbourne  is  42  days)  I received  a letter  from  my  father,  dated  De- 
cember 22nd,  1881.  He  wrote  : ‘We  had  a tire  on  Sunday  evening  while 
we  were  at  church.  Coombes  went  with  a wax-taper  to  tidy  her  room, 
and,  I suppose,  blew  it  out  and  put  it  down  with  sparks.  Very  soon 
after  she  left,  a ring  at  the  bell  that  the  attic  was  on  fire  put  Caroline 
on  her  mettle,  while  the  other  lost  her  head.  She  dashed  it  out  with 
water  before  the  window-frame  was  burnt  through,  and  subdued  it. 
Fifteen  pounds  will  repair  the  damage — two  chests  of  drawers  much 
burnt,  wearing  apparel,  & c.  I gave  her  a sovereign  for  her  pluck, 
as  the  roof  would  have  been  on  fire  in  another  five  minutes.' 

“Now  I wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  what  has  attracted  my 
attention  most.  The  Sunday  before  December  22nd,  1881,  was  Decem- 
ber 18th.  I had  the  communication,  therefore,  in  my  sleep,  not  on  the 
actual  day  of  the  fire,  but  on  the  day  on  which  my  father  wrote  the 
letter.  At  Kensington,  where  my  father  was  writing,  Australian  letters 
have  to  be  posted  in  the  branch  offices  about  5 p.m.  My  dream  was  at 
1 a.m.  Time  in  Victoria  is  hours  ahead  of  English  time.  When  I 
was  having  the  communication,  therefore,  it  was  about  3.30  p.m.  in 
Kensington.  Now  with  the  mail  going  out  at  5 p.m.,  3.30  would  have 
been  a very  natural — I think  I may  say  a most  natural  time  for  my  father 
to  be  finishing  a letter  to  me.  [Mr.  Sladen,  sen.,  confirms  this.]  I,  therefore, 
had  my  magnetic  communication  when  he  was  at  once  focussing  his  mind 
on  me,  and  focussing  his  mind  on  the  fire,  in  order  to  tell  me  about  it. 

“ I have  asked  my  wife,  and  she  remembers  perfectly  my  waking  her 
up,  and  telling  her  that  I had  dreamt  that  my  father's  house  was  on  fire, 
and  was  so  convinced  of  its  betokening  an  actual  occurrence  that  I should 
make  a note  of  it  in  my  diary  there  and  then.'' 

“Douglas  B.  W.  Sladen.” 

[Mr.  Sladen  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  inspect  the  diary  and  letter.] 

In  the  next  example  the  correspondence  is  of  a more  distinct 
kind.  Mrs.  Walsh,  of  the  Priory,  Lincoln,  writes : — 

“ February,  1884. 

(99)  “ The  gentleman  who  teaches  music  in  my  house  tells  me  that 

326 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

if  anything  sad  or  terrible  happens  to  any  one  he  loves  he  always  has.  an 
intimation  of  it.  * 

“ I am  very  fond  of  him,  and  I know  lie  looks  on  me  as  a very  true 
old  friend,  and  one  of  my  sons,  now  in  India,  is  the  dearest  friend  he 
has. 

u I went  out  one  morning  about  9 o’clock,  carrying  books  °for  the 
library,  and  being  very  busy,  took  the  short  way  to  town.  On  some  flags 
in  a very  steep  part  of  the  road,  some  boys  had  made  a slide.  Both  my 
feet  flew  away  at  the  same  moment  that  the  back  of  my  head  resounded 
on  the  flags.  A policeman  picked  me  up,  saw  1 was  hurt,  and  rang  at  the 
Nurses’  Home  close  by,  to  get  me  looked  to.  My  head  was  cut,  and 
while  they  were  washing  the  blood  away,  I was  worrying  myself  that  I 
should  be  ill,  and  how  should  I manage  my  school  till  the  end  of  the  term. 
I told  no  one  in  my  house  but  my  daughter,  and  no  one  but  the  policeman 
had  seen  me  fall.  I asked  my  daughter  to  tell  no  one.  I had  a miserable 
nervous  feeling,  but  I pretended  to  her  it  was  nothing.  The  next  morning 
after  a sleepless  night,  I could  not  get  up.  It  was  my  habit  to  sit  in  the 
drawing-room  while  the  music  lessons  were  given,  so  my  daughter  went  in 

to  tell  Mr. that  I had  had  a bad  night,  and  was  not  yet  up.  He 

said,  1 1 had  a wretched  night,  too,  and  all  through  a most  vivid  dream.’ 
‘ What  was  it  ? ’ she  asked.  ‘ I dreamed  I was  walking  by  the  Nurses’ 
Home,  and  I came  on  a slide,  both  my  feet  slipped,  and  I fell  on  the  back 
of  my  head.  I was  helped  to  the  Home,  and  while  my  head  was  being 
bathed  I was  worrying  myself  how  I should  manage  my  lessons  till  the 
end  of  the  term,  and  the  worrying  feeling  would  not  go.’  ” 

The  percipient,  Mr.  J.  J.  Hoare,  12,  St.  Nicholas  Square,  Lincoln, 

wnfpti  • 

. “ March  3rd,  1884. 

“ I shall  be  very  pleased  to  relate  the  account  of  a dream,  as  described 
by  Mrs.  Walsh  most  accurately,  which  took  place  on  a Tuesday  evening 
early  in  November  of  1882.  The  dream  consisted  of  this  : .1  supposed  I 
was  going  down  the  Greystone  Stairs,  when  I had  a fall  at  the  first  flight, 
was  picked  up,  and  helped  by  a policeman  to  the  Nurses’  Institute,  about 
20  yards  from  the  imaginary  fall,  being  there  attended  by  a nurse.  I was 
much  perplexed  as  to  how  I should  manage  to  finish  my  work  during  the 
term  This  was  followed  the  next  morning  by  a severe  headache  in  the 
region  of  the  imaginary  blow. 

“ On  seeing  Miss  Walsh  the  following  morning,  I was  told  by  her  that 
Mrs.  Walsh  was  unwell,  but  not  the  cause.  1 replied  I too  felt  unwell 
and  accounted  for  it  through  the  dream.  Mrs.  Walsh  related  to  me  the 
same  evening  her  own  adventure,  which  in  every  detail  exactly  coincided 
with  my  dream  as  happening  to  myself.  I in  no  way  knew  of  Mrs.  Walsh’s 
mishap  till  the  evening  after,  when  told  by  herself. 

“ In  another  instance,  whilst  staying  in  Devonshire,  I received  an 
impression,  or  felt  a conviction,  that  something  had  happened  to  Mrs. 
Walsh.  I think  I wanted  to  write,  so  confident  was  I of  something 
having  taken  place,  but  desisted  because  I had  left  Lincoln  through  an 
outbreak  of  small-pox  in  the  house  next  my  rooms,  only  the  previous 
week,  so  was  unwilling  to  correspond.  On  my  return  here,  I found  otxt 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

327 

VIII.] 

that  both  my  day  [i.*.,  the  day  of  the  impression]  and  the  accident — a 
fall — were  true. 

“ In  many  other  instances  have  I received  similar  experiences,  and  so 
confident  have  I been  always  of  their  accuracy  that  I have  written  to  the 
persons  and  places,  and  always  received  confirmation  of  my  impressions, 
I have  jhad,  I think,  10  or  12  impressions.  They  are  quite  unlike  fits  of 
low  spirits  and  indigestion,  and  I can  easily  distinguish  them  from  such, 
as  in  every  case  I have  been  most  conscious  of  outside  action. 

“J.  J.  Hoare.” 

The  following  case  is  an  interesting  dream-parallel  to  the  waking 
cases  of  the  last  chapter  where  the  impression  on  the  percipient’s 
mind  was  of  being  wanted.  (See  especially  Mr.  Rowlands’  case,  p.  291.) 
The  account  is  from  Mr.  Joseph  Albree,  of  40,  Wood  Street,  Pittsburgh, 
Pa^U.S.A. 

“ September  25th,  1884. 

(100)  “In  the  winter  of  18634,  a captain  in  the  regular  army  of  the 

United  States  came  to  P on  recruiting  service,  accompanied  by  a 

second  lieutenant.  Very  soon  after  his  arrival  the  captain  was  taken  sick 
with  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  As  I had  known  him  intimately  since  his 
boyhood,  he  sent  for  me.  I had  him  removed  to  a private  house,  and  cared 
for  him  until  he  died,  two  days  after.  His  companion,  the  lieutenant, 
remained  in  the  city  for  10  days  after  the  captain’s  death,  awaiting  orders. 
He  was  a man  of  unusually  reticent  disposition ; and  being  an  entire 
stranger  in  the  city,  and  knowing  no  one  but  the  person  who  had  been  at 
the  death  of  his  associate  officer,  he  spent  much  time  in  my  company.  At 
length  he  received  orders  to  proceed  at  once  to  a distant  point.  I bade 
him  good-bye  one  evening,  he  intending  to  take  an  early  train  on  the 
following  morning,  and  I never  expecting  to  see  him  again. 

“ Three  nights  after  that,  on  Saturday,  I awakened  suddenly,  with  the 
idea  that' some  person  was  calling  me,  and  that  I was  wanted  immediately. 
1 was  conscious  of  having  had  a very  vivid  dream,  but  could  not  recall  any 
part  of  it.  There  was  present  in  my  mind  the  very  uncomfortable  feeling 
that  I was  wanted  at  once.  While  sitting  up  in  bed,  endeavouring  to 
collect  ray  thoughts,  the  city  bell  struck  midnight.  After  looking  into 
the  rooms  where  the  children  were,  and  finding  them  all  asleep,  I lay 
ddwn  again,  striving  unsuccessfully  to  recall  a single  incident  of  the 
dream.  All  Sunday  and  Monday  I was  impressed  with  a consciousness  of 
some  duty  unperformed. 

“ On  Tuesday  evening,  on  my  way  home,  an  almost  irresistible  impulse 
came  over  me  to  turn  aside  from  my  direct  way,  down  a little  street 
leading  in  another  direction.  Standing  a moment  on  the  street  comer  at 
the  parting  of  ways,  I turned  off,  walked  a few  blocks,  and  came  to  the 
hotel  where  the  lieutenant  had  lodged,  I went  into  the  office,  and  having 
no  business  or  object  in  going  there,  I asked  the  clerk  when  Lieutenant  O. 
left.,  The  clerk  said,  ‘ There  he  sits,  in  the  reading-room/  After  a very 
brief  greeting,  he  asked  me  to  go  to  his  room.  Following  him  up  the 
stairway,  the  corner  of  a panel  on  the  landing  seemed  to  bring  clearly  to 
my  paind  the  full  details  of  my  Saturday  night’s  dream.  From  that  point 

328  . DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

* . v 

the  stairs,  hall  ways,  the  room  into  which  he  led  me,  the  furniture  and 
general  appearance,  all  were  strangely  familiar,  although  I had  never  Been 
there  Before.  The  lieutenant's  first  words  on  closing  the  door  werS,  ST., 
did  you  ever  faint?*  He  then  told  me,  that  his  transportation  order  not 
having  arrived,  he  had  not  been  able  to  leave  at  the  time  fixed;  that  on 
the  preceding  Saturday,  while  reading  in  the  reading-room,  he  glanced  at 
the  clock,  and  noticing  it  was  5 minutes  of  12  o'clock,  took  a light,  went 
immediately  to  his  room,  placed  the  lamp  on  the  table,  fell  on  the  bed; 
losing  consciousness  and  knowing  nothing  until  broad  daylight  on  the 
Sunday  winter  morning,  when  he  found  himself  dressed,  lying  across  the 
Bed,  suffering  intense  pain  in  his  forehead.  His  last  conscious  thought  had 
been,  ‘ If  J.  was  here  he  could  help  me.'  All  that  he  told  me  was  just 
what  I had  dreamed  on  the  preceding  Saturday  night — the  exact  hour 
of  the  occurrence  with  the  lieutenant,  and  the  vivid  dream  with  me  being 
fixed  at  midnight. 

' “ I have  seen  or  heard  nothing  of  the  lieutenant  since  that  evening^ 

“Joseph  Albree.” 

[As  the  details  of  the  dream  were  not  independently  remembered,  we 
should  not  be  justified  in  attaching  any  importance  to  the  apparent 
recognition  of  the  scene,  when  the  percipient  actually  s^w  it.] 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Albree  says  : — 

“In  reply  to  your  favour  of  the  7th  inst.,  I can  only  say  that  my 
experience  was  such  that  no  person  could  aid  me,  and  I probably  did  not 
mention  it  to  any  one  but  my  wife.  While  she  fully  recalls  what  I told 
her  after  my  return  from  the  hotel,  she  does  not  remember  that  I spoke  to 
her  before  I saw  the  lieutenant.  And  yet  I can  scarcely  think  it  probable 
i hat  I did  not,  in  the  morning,  speak  of  my  troubled  feelings,  of  my  arising, 
turning  up  the  gas,  and  going  into  the  children's  room.  I have  never 
seen  or  heard  of  the  lieutenant  since.  The  circumstances  of  our  acquain- 
tance were  so  peculiar  and  touching,  and  our  relations  so  intimate  for 
three  weeks,  that  failing  to  hear  from  him  I long  since  concluded  that  he 
. fell  in  the  active  service  to  which  he  had  been  ordered. 

“You  ask  if  I have  ever  had  an  experience  that  was  not  similarly 
confirmed.  Only  once.  I very  seldom  dream,  but  when  I do  the  dreams 
are  vivid.  Once  I dreamed  that  a lady  friend  had  been  murdered.  The 
time,  place,  circumstances,  and  persons  concerned  were  strongly  marked. 
But  the  lady  had  been  in  no  danger,  and  is  still  living." 

The  next  example — from  Mrs.  Montgomery,  of  Beaulieu,  Co.  Louth’ 
— is  remarkable  in  several  ways. 

“February,  1884. 

(101)  “ Nearly  30  years  ago  I lost  a sister.  The  place  where  she  die# 
being  at  some  distance,  my  husband  went  to  the  funeral  without  me.  I 
went  to  bed  early,  and  had  a frightful  dream  of  the  funeral  ceremony.  I saw 
my  brother  faint  away  at  the  service,  and  fall  into  the  grave.  I awoke* 
with  the  horror  of  the  dream,  just  as  my  husband  entered  the  room  Oh  his 
return  from  the  funeral,  which  had  taken  place  at  least  eight  hours  before. 

I asked  him  to  tell  me  if  anything  unusual  had  happened,  as  I had  had  a 
terrible  dream,  and  I related  it.  He  said,  4 Who  in  the  world  tolcf  you 

Vtu.]  ; REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  329 

that?  .1  never  intended  telling  you.’  I said,  ‘ 1 only  dreamt  it.  Just  as 
you  were  coming  in,  I awoke.’  ” ( 

[In  this  narrative  a few  words  are  taken  from  an  account  received 
from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Montgomery  Moore,  as  the  letter  received  from  Mrs. 
Montgomery  herself,  giving  the  greater  part  of  the  details,  took  this 
previous  account  for  granted.  The  account,  as  it  stands,  was  sent  to  Mrs. 
Montgomery,  who  then  replied,  “ The  paper  is  quite  accurate  ” — making 
one  trifling  correction.  Mr.  Montgomery  gave  Mrs.  Montgomery  Moore 
a verbal  confirmation  of  the  occurrence,  which  had  greatly  impressed  both 
him  and  his  wife.] 

'Here  the  picture  transferred  to  the  percipient’s  dream  was  a 
{precise  and  detailed  one.  It  was  of  a sort  which  might  at  first  sight 
seem  more  fitly  to  belong  to  a later  class,  where  something  of  the 
nature  of  clairvoyance  is  suggested.  Nor  would  the  eight  hours’ 
interval  between  the  event  and  the  dream  be  an  objection  to  this 
view ; for  I have  already  mentioned  that  the  deferment  or  latency  of 
telepathic  impressions  is  specially  frequent  in  dream  and  “ border- 
land” cases ; as  though  the  idea  or  image  had  been  unable  to 
compete  with  the  vivid  sensations  which  external  realities  force  on 
the  mind,  and  only  got  its  chance  of  emerging  into  consciousness 
when  the  senses  were  closed  to  these  contending  influences.1  But 
seeing  that  at  the  moment  of  Mrs.  Montgomery’s  dream  her  husband 
was  just  about  to  enter  her  room,  with  the  shock  of  the  burial-scene 
probably  still  fresh  in  his  mind,  it  is  at  any  rate  conceivable  that  he 
then,  and  not  the  brother  at  the  earlier  time,  transmitted  the 
impression. 

§ 4.  We  come  now  to  the  larger  family  of  cases,  in  which  the 
ageqt’s  personality,  and  not  merely  his  particular  thought,  is  reflected, 
and  the  dream  conveys  a true  impression  of  his  state,  or  of  somp 
event  connected  with  him.  I will  first  give  a few  examples  where 
the  fact  which  is  a reality  is  presented  or  suggested  without  the 
agent’s  visible  appearance  in  the  dream,  and  without  any  distinct 
sense  on  the  percipient’s  part-  of  being  present  at  the  scene.  The 
following  narrative,  from  Mrs.  Lincoln,  now  residing  at  91,  South 

Circular  Road,  Dublin,  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  in  1875. 

(■ 

»“On  the  morning  of  February  7th,  1855,  at  Mount  Pleasant, 
in,  where  I lived,  I awakened  from  a troubled  sleep  and  dream, 
e^els^ming,  ‘John  is  dead/  My  husband  said,  ‘Goto  sleep,  you  are 

' V f1  iTeletoathic  dreams  of  the  “clairvoyant  ” order  seem  capable  of  this  deferment,  just 
like  any  others : see  for  instance  Mrs.  Storie’s  case  below  (p.  370). 

33Q 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap, 

% 

dreaming/  I did  sleep,  and  again  awoke  repeating  the  same  words,  and 
asking  him  to  look  at  the  watch  and  tell  me  what  o’clock  it  was  then ; he 
did  so  and  said  it  was  2 o’clock.  I was  much  impressed  by  this  dreafti,  and 
next  day  went  to  the  city  to  inquire  at  the  house  of  business ; Mr.  John 
C.  being  at  Dundrum  for  the  previous  month.  [He  was  not  a relative,  but 
a very  intimate  friend.]  When  I got  to  the  house  I saw  the  place^  dosed 
up,  and  the  man  who  answered  the  door  told  me  the  reason.  i Oh ! ma’am, 
Mr.  John  0.  is  dead.’  ‘When  did  he  die  V I said.  ‘ At  2 this  morning,’ 
he  said.  I was  so  much  shocked  lie  had  to  assist  me  to  the  waiting-room 
and  give  me  water.  I had  not  heard  of  Mr.  C.’s  illness,  and  was  speaking 
to  him  a fortnight  previously,  when  he  was  complaining  of  a slight  cold, 
and  expected  the  change  of  Dundrum  would  benefit  him,  so  that  he  should 
return  to  town  immediately.  I never  saw  nor  heard  of  him  after  until  I 
dreamt  the  foregoing. 

“ Emily  Lincoln.” 

Mr.  Lincoln  says  : — 

“ [ certify  to  the  correctness  of  the  facts  of  my  wife’s  awakening  me  at 
the  date  stated,  asking  me  the  time,  Ac.,  and  to  the  further  fact  of  the 
unexpected  death  of  Mr.  0.  at  the  time. 

“ Henry  Lincoln.” 

We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Freeman's  Journal  that  Mr.  C. 
died  onEeb.  7th,  1855. 

[In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  from  Mr.  Lincoln  that  his  wife 
never  talked  in  her  sleep ; and  she,  when  asked  whether  her  ordinary 
dreams  were  as  vivid  as  this,  replied  in  the  negative.  It  appeared,  how- 
ever, that  she  had  had  several  dreams  which  she  regarded  as  premonitory, 
and  as  having  been  fulfilled.] 

The  next  account  was  first  given  in  England,  April  1st,  1882,  by 
its  then  editor,  under  the  nom  de  plume  “ Coriolanus .”  He  tells  us 
that  the  publication  of  his  name  would  deprive  him  of  an  actual 

benefit;  but  he  allows  us  to  say  of  him  what  is  said  above  in 

connection  with  case  73  (p.  275).  The  experience  here  described  is 
again  his  own. 

(103)  “In  connection  with  the  awfully  sudden  death  of  my  friend, 

Mr.  E.  0.  Barnes,  the  artist,  I can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the 

following  extraordinary  coincidence.  At  6 o’clock  last  Sunday  morning 

Ji.e.,  March  26th,  1882],  the  exact  time  of  his  decease,  an, intimate 
riend  of  the  late  artist,  who  was  unaware  of  the  fact  that  Barnes 
was  ill,  suddenly  alarmed  an  entire  household  by  sitting  up  in  bed 
whilst  fast  asleep  and  shouting  loudly  twice,  as  if  in  intense  agony". 
Three  members  of  his  family  ran  to  his  bedside  to  inquire  if  he  were  ill,  when 
slowly  awaking  and  rubbing  his  eyes,  he  said  he  was  perfectly  well,  but 
supposed  it  was  the  storm  which  had  affected  him.  At  breakfast  he  was 
playfully  rallied  upon  the  occurrence,  and  more  than  once  expressed  the 
hope  that  nothing  was  amiss  with  Iris  old  friend  Barnes.  At  dinner  time 
a messenger  arrived  with  the  dreadful  news.  I have  set  this  down  for;  the 

Vin.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC*  331 

benefit  of  thinkers.  I know  the  faots  to  be  as  I have  stated  them.  Was 
there  a mysterious  cord  of  sympathy  suddenly  snapped* when  the  artist 
breathed  his  last,  and  his  friend  was  at  that  very  moment  so  mysteriously 
convulsed  f Who  knows  ? ” 

Writing  to  us  on  December  11th,  1884,  the  narrator  adds : — 

“The  occurrence  made  the  more  impression  on  my  family,  as,  on 
account  of  the  great  attachment  they  knew  to  exist  between  Mr.  Barnes 
and  me,  they  dreaded  to  tell  the  sad  news,  and  in  fact  only  gently  broke 
it  at  breakfast  time  on  the  Monday  morning.  They  were  much  struck  by 
my'  frequent  references  to  Barnes  during  Sunday,  after  they  had  received 
the  intelligence  from  his  eldest  son,  who  called  at  my  house  about  1 o’clock. 
The  deceased  and  I had  known  one  another  for  many  years.” 

Mr.  Podmore  called  at  the  witness’s  house  on  September  1st,  1885,  but 
found  only  his  son  and  daughter  at  home.  Writing  on  the  day  of  his  call, 
he  says  : “ I questioned  the  daughter  on  the  Barnes  incident.  She  could 
at  first  remember  no  details  at  all ; but  after  reading  through  the  extract 
from  England , she  told  me  that  she  had  a distinct  recollection  of  going  to 
her  father’s  room,  when  roused  by  his  cry,  to  ascertain  whether  he  or  her 
brother  were  ill.  She  did  not  remember  his  mentioning  the  name  of 
Barnes  at  breakfast,  or  that  the  news  of  the  death  had  been  withheld 
from  her  father  until  the  Monday  morning.  But  she  told  me  that  she 
remembered  reading,  a few  days  afterwards,  the  paragraph  in  England 
describing  the  occurrence ; and  that,  had  any  of  the  details  been  incorrect, 
the  fact  that  her  father  had  made  a mistake  would  certainly  have  dwelt  in 
her  memory.  The  son  had  been  absent  from  home  at  the  time.” 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  such  sudden  startings  from  sleep,  with  the 
strong  impression  of  a definite  event,  but  without  the  memory  of  any 
dream  leading  up  to  the  impression,  seem  by  no  means  common  occur- 
rences, outside  the  cases  which  have  coincided  with  some  weighty 
reality.  For  every  fresh  point  beyond  the  fact  of  coinciding  with  reality, 
that- distinguishes  the  dreams  that  we  are  considering  from  ordinary 
dreams,  goes,  of  course,  to  strengthen  the  argument  against  chance  as 
the  , source  of  the  coincidences,  and  to  establish  these  cases  as  a 
distinct  natural  class. 

The  next  case,  in  its  absurdity  and  precision,  is  a great  contrast* 
to  the  last.  We  received  it  from  the  Rev.  A.  B.  McDougall,  now  of 
Hemel  Hampstead,  and  at  that  time  a scholar  of  Lincoln  College, 
Oxford. 

“November,  J882. 

(104)  “ On  the  night  of  January  10th,  1882, 1 was  sleeping  in  one  of  the 
suburbs  of  Manchester  in  the  house  of  a friend,  into  which  house  several 
rats  had*  been  driven  by  the  excessive  cold.  I knew  nothing  about  these 
rat%  but  during  the  night  I was  waked  by  feeling  an  unpleasantly  cold 
something  slithering  down  my  right  leg.  I immediately  struck  a light  and 

332  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

' 

flung  off  the  beduclothes,  and  saw  a rat  run  out  of  my  bed  under  the  fire- 
place. I told  my  friend  the  next  morning,*  but  he  tried  to  persuade  me  I 
had  been  dreaming.  However,  a few  clays  afterwards 1 a rat  was  caught  in 
my  room.  On  the  morning  of  January  11th,  a cousin  of  mine  [Miss  E.  j. 

McDougall,  since  married],  who  happened  to  be  staying  in  my  own 
home  on  the  south  coast,  and  to  be  occupying  my  room,  came  down  to 
breakfast,  and  recounted  a marvellous  dream,  in  which  a rat  appeared  to 
be  eating  off  the  extremities  of  my  unfortunate  self.  My  family  laughed 
the  matter  off.  However,  on  the  13th,  a letter  was  received  from  me 
giving  an  account  of  my  unpleasant  meeting  with  the  rat  and  its 
subsequent  capture.  Then  every  one  present  remembered  the  dream'^ny 
cousin  had  told  certainly  5<S  hours  before,  as  having  occurred  on  the  night 
of  January  10th.  My  mother  wrote  me  an  account  of  the  dream,  ending 
up  with  the  remark,  ‘ We  always  said  E.  was  a witch ; she  always  knew 
about  everything  almost  before  it  took  place.’  ” 

Here  the  point,  of  course,  is  that  an  exceedingly  improbable 
incident  is  associated  in  the  dream  with  the  right  person.  It  is 
worth  noting  that  we  have  no  exact  parallel  to  such  an  incident  as 
this  among  our  waking  cases.  Thus,  if  the  dream  was  telepathic,  its 
very  triviality  may  illustrate  in  a new  way  the  favourable  effect  of  sleep 
on  the  percipient  faculty. 

Dreams  happening  at  times  when  the  person  dreamt  of  is  known 
to  be  in  peril  are,  as  a rule,  inadmissible  as  evidence.  Thus  we 
have  a case  where  the  mother  of  a lieutenant  in  the  army 
dreamt,  on  the  ldght  of  the  storming  of  the  Redan,  that  her 
son  was  wounded  in  the  left  arm.  The  subsequent  newspaper  account 
described  him  as  having  been  severely  injured  in  the  right  arm; 
but  his  mother  persisted  in  her  view  that  the  dream  was  correct,  and  it 
proved  to  have  been  so.  But  a dream  concerning  a wound  is  a very 
likely  one  for  a mother  to  have  under  the  circumstances ; and 
the  detail  is  quite  insufficient.  In  the  same  class  we  must  include 
mothers’  dreams  of  accidents  to  children,  even  apart  from  any 
special  grounds  of  anxiety — the  form  of  dream  being  a not  uncommon 
one,  and  real  accidents  (if  we  include  trivial  ones)  being  common 
enough  to  make  it  certain  that  striking  coincidences  will  every 
now  and  then  occur  by  chance.  Thus,  the  wife  of  a rector  in  the 
West  of  England  tells  us  how  she  once  dreamt  that  one  of,  heir 
little  girls,  who  was  on  a visit,  had  fallen  down  in  the  street  and 
cut  her  forehead  over  the  left  eye,  and  how  the  morning’s  post 

i \ . ,•  i 

1 There  is  a slight  apparent  discrepancy  between  these  words  and  the  date  * df  the 
letter  in  which  the  capture  is  afterwards  said  to  have  been  mentioned.  The  letter*  fere 
destroyed  ; and  Mr.  McDougall  rightly  prefers  to  leave  the  words  as  they  stand-  They, 
of  course,  in  no  way  affect  the  central  mcident. 

nih]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 338 

brought  the  news  of  that  precise  accident.  The  rector  (who  is 
sceptical  on  these  matters)  testifies  to  the  fact  that  his  wife  mentioned 
to  him  her  dream  “ that  the  child  had  fallen  down  and  cut  her 
forehead;”  and  also  to  the  fact  that  “the  next  post  brought  the 
news”*  He  says  nothing  about  the  street  or  the  left  eye, — details 
which  may  have  been  read  back  into  the  dream  afterwards.  But  in 
any  case  the  accident  is  of  a common  type  ; the  amount  of  6orrect 
detail  is  small ; and  moreover  it  came  out  in  conversation  with  the 
lady  that  she  dreams  a good  deal,  and  pays  attention  to  her  dreams. 
However  completely  telepathy  were  established,  we  should  still  doubt 
whether  such  a coincidence  as  this  ought  to  be  referred  to  it. 

As  an  interesting  contrast,  I may  quote  the  following  case,  which 
is  from  Mrs.  Hobbs,  (wife  of  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Hobbs,  formerly  a 
missionary  at  Beerbhoom,  Bengal,)  now  resident  at  Tenbury,  in 
Worcestershire.  The  narrative  was  first  written  out  for  a friend, 
probably  in  1877. 

(105)  “ During  our  residence  in  India  as  missionaries,  our  children 
remained  at  home,  either  residing  with  my  sister  or  at  school,  and  about 
the  years  1864  or  1865  our  eldest  boy  was  at  school  at  Shireland  Hall, 
near  to  Birmingham.  The  principal  was  Rev.  T.  II.  Morgan,  now  Baptist 
minister  at  Harrow-on-the-Hill. 

“ One  night,  during  the  summer  of  one  of  the  years  I have  mentioned, 
I was  awakened  from  my  sleep  by  my  husband  asking,  ‘What  is  the 
matter,  J.  ? Why  are  you  eeping  so  ? I could  let  you  sleep  no  longer, 
you  were  crying  so  much.’  I replied  that  I was  dreaming,  but  could  not 
tell  the  dream  for  some  minutes.  It  had  seemed  so  like  a reality  that  I 
was  still  weeping  bitterly. 

“ I dreamed  that  the  sister  (who  acted  as  guardian  to  our  boys  in 
our  absence)  was  reading  to  me  a letter  giving  a detailed  account  of 
how  our  Harry  died  of  choking,  while  eating  his  dinner  one  day  at  school. 

*‘  When  sufficiently  composed  I again  went  to  sleep ; but  when  I awoke 
in  the 'morning  the  effect  of  my  dream  was  still  upon  me.  My  husbahd 
tried  to  rally  me,  saying,  ‘It  is  only  a dream , think.no  more  about  it.’ 
But  my  heart  was  sad,  and  I could  not  shake  it  off. 

“Tn  the  course  of  the  day  I called  on  a friend,  the  only  other 
European  lady  in  the  station.  I told  her  why  I felt  troubled,  and  she 
advised  me  to  make  a*  note  of  the  date,  and  then  I should  know  how  to 
understand  my  dr^am  when  a letter  of  that  date  came  to  hand.  Our 
letters  at  that  time  came  to  us  vid  Southampton,  and  nearly  six  weeks 
must  elapse  before  I could  hear  if  anything  had  trahspired  on  that 
particular  date,  even  if  a letter  could  have  been  despatched  at  once ; but  it 
might  not  have  been  the  ‘ mail  day,’  and  that  would  give  some  additional 
days  for  me  to  wait.  They  were  weary  weeks,  but  at  length  the  looked* 
for  l^ttef*  arrived,  and  it  contained  no  reference  to  what  I (had  anticipated* 
I felt  truly  ashamed  that  I had  permitted  a dream  to  influence  me,  and 
k thought  Ho  more  about  it. 

334 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  .[chap. 

“ A fortnight  later  another  letter  from  my  sister  came  in,  bearing  an 
apology  for  not  having  told  me  in  her  last  what  a narrow  escape  f roih  death 
our  Harry  had  experienced,  and  then  went  on  to  detail  what  I had  dreamed, 
with  the  additional  piece  of  intelligence  that  just  as  his  head  had  dropped 
on  the  person  supporting  him,  and  die  was  supposed  to  be  dead,  the  piece 
of  meat  passed  down  his  throat,  and  lie  shortly  after  revived,  and  was 
quite  well  at  the  time  of  her  writing. 

“ That  boy  is  now  a minister  of  the  Gospel,  and  about  a year  ago  I was 
talking  with  him  about  my  strange  dream,  when  a friend  who  was  present 
said  to  him,  ‘ Do  you  remember  what  you  thought  about  when  you  were 
choking V He  replied,  ‘Yes,  I distinctly  remember*  thinking,  I wonder 
what  my  mother  will  do  when  she  hears  I am  dead.’  ” 

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hobbs  says  : — 

“ July  24th,  1884. 

“ I have  not  had  any  other  dream  of  a like  kind.  I am  not  able  to 
say  how  near  in  time  the  dream  was  to  the  event ; but  that  it  was  very 
near  to  the  event  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  1 reckoned  up  the  earliest 
time  when  I could  get  any  information  from  England,  supposing  that  the 
dream  really  pointed  to  anything  ; and  though  no  news  came  to  the  time 
expected,  yet  the  next  letter  that  came  apologised  for  not  having 
mentioned  it  in  the  former  letter.  So  that  the  space  between  the  eyent 
and  the  dream  would  be,  at  most,  the  space  between  the  dream  and  the 
next  mail  leaving  England  for  India.” 

Mr.  Hobbs  says  : — 

“So  far  as  I am  concerned  in  the  above  account,  written  by  my  wife, 
Jane  Ann  Hobbs,  I declare  it  to  be  quite  correct. 

“ William  Ayers  Hobbs.” 

The  following  account  is  from  the  son,  who  is  Baptist  minister  at 
Tenbury. 

“July  29th,  1884. 

“ I remember  that  I had  a sharp,  short  struggle  for  breath,  accompanied 
by  a bursting  sensation  in  the  head  and  singing  in  the  ears  ; then  I rolled 
over ; the  pain  in  the  head  was  succeeded  by  a drowsy,  dreamy  feeling ; a 
mist  gathered  before  my  eyes,  and  I wa^  just  on  the  point  of  losing 
consciousness  when  the  persistent  thumps,  which  were  being  administered 
to  my  back  by  the  anxious  spectators,  jerked  the  beef  out  of  my  throat, 
and  I revived.  I had  no  direct  thought  of  my  mother,  as  I imagine,  for 
this  reason  : I was  left  in  the  care  of  an  aunt,  when  my  parents  went  to 
India ; and  as  the  whole  of  my  training  since  I was  four  years  old  had 
been  undertaken  by  this  aunt,  prior  to  my  going  to  Birmingham,  it  was  to 
her  that  my  thoughts  reverted  when  I was  choking ; and  I distinctly 
remember  that  the  thought  flashed  through  my  mind, c How  ever  will  Aunt 
Maria  write  to  India  about  this.’  I quite  believed  I was  dying. 

“H.  V.  Hobbs.” 

[In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  ascertained  that  the  family  are  in  no 
way  given  to  real  or  supposed  “ psychical  ” experiences.] 

Tin.]  * REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  335 

Here  the  .unusualness  of  the  accident,  and  the  uniqueness  and 
emotional  vividness  of  the  dream  may,  we  think,  be  safely  accepted. 
The  slight  amount  of  discrepancy  between  the  final  sentences  of 
the  mother’s  and  the  son’s  account  can  hardly  be  held  to  affect 
the  general  trustworthiness  of  Mrs.  Hobbs’  narrative  ; and  it  will  be 
noticed  that  the  agent’s  account  of  his  own  thoughts  harmonist 
specially  well  with  the  actual  nature  of  the  percipient’s  impression, 
which  was  that  the  news  was  conveyed  to  her  by  her  sister — the  very 
person  on  whom  her  son  imagined  that  sad  duty  as  devolving. 

The  following  case,  though  the  dream  was  of  an  accident  to  a son, 
is  strong  of  its  kind — the  form  of  the  accident  being  uncommon,  and 
the  idea  of  it  particularly  strongly  impressed.  It  is  from  Mrs.  A.  G. 
Sparrow,  of  Derwent  Square,  Liverpool. 

“November,  1882. 

(106)  “Three  or  four  years  ago,  I dreamt  that  my  eldest  son  had 
broken  his  hand  at  football.  Next  day  came  a letter  saying  he  had  sprained 
his  left  hand.  I was  so  impressed  by  my  dream  that  I telegraphed  to  the 
head  master,  asking  if  the  boy’s  hand  was  broken.  I received  a reassuring 
reply  saying,  ‘ Only  a bad  sprain,  and  doing  well.’  When  he  returned  home 
at  the  holidays  we  at  once  saw  that  the  hand  had  been  broken  and  had 
joined  without  being  properly  set,  and  he  will  carry  the  ridge,  caused  by 
the  join,  to  his  grave.” 

[Mrs.  Sparrow  tells  us  that  she  has  had  no  other  dreams  which 
impressed  her  similarly.  The  incident  of  the  telegram  is  not  likely  to  have 
been  unconsciously  invented.] 

Perils  by  sea  are  another  very  common  subject  of  dreams;  and 
where  a large  number  of  people  are  living  a life  of  more  than  average 
risk,  and  a large  number  of  relatives  on  land  are  living  under  a more 
or  less  constant  sense  of  this  risk,  accidental  coincidences  between 
dreams  and  casualties  are,  of  course,  certain  to  occur.  Especially  will 
this  be  the  case  where  the  relatives  live  by  the  seaside,  and  where 
the  very  storm  that  destroys  life  on  one  element  may  disturb  slumber 
on  the  other.  We  have  quite  a little  collection  of  cases  where  wives 
or  mothers  of  seafaring  men  have  dreamt  of  fatal  accidents  which  then 
prove  to  have  actually  occurred.1  Such  incidents  have  not  usually 

t 1 To  give  one  example— my  friend,  the  Rev.  R.  B.  F.  Elrington,  Vicar  of  Lower 
Brixbam  (who  has  met  with  several  such  cases),  vouches  for  the  fact  that  the  following 
occurrence  in  his  parish  was  described  hours  before  the  arrival  of  the  news  confirming  the 
fears  which  it  occasioned ; and  he  certifies  to  the  good  character  of  the  witnesses. 

“In  the  early  spring  of  1881,  Mrs.  Barnes,  of  Brixham,  Devonshire,  whose  husband 
was  at  sea,  dreamt  that  nis  fishing- vessel  was  run  into  by  a steamer.  Their  boy  was  with 
him,  and  she  called  out  in  her  dream.  * Save  the  boy  1 9 At  this  moment  another  son 
steeping  in  the  next  room  rushed  into  hers,  crying  out,  ‘Where’s  father?9  She  asked 

336 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  fofiAR 

any  claim  to  be  considered  as  even  primd  facie  evidence  for  telepathy* 
Every  now  and  then,  however,  “ sea-dreams  ” present  an  amount  of 
correct  detail  that  prevents  us  from  rejecting  them.  Such  a case  is 
the  following,  from  Mr.  A.  Ashby,  of  34,  Windmill  Road,  Croydon, 
Surrey.  , ‘ * 

“October  17th,  1882. 

(107)  “ The  following  incident  happened  in  about  1870.  I awoke  in 
the  morning  and  said  to  my  wife,  * I have  been  with  our  son  Alexander  * (he 
was  chief  mate  of  a ship  on  a voyage  to  Port  Natal,  South  Africa).  With 
great  interest  she  listened  to  my  dream.  ‘ Well/  I said,  ‘he  is  in  anything 
but  a comfortable  position.  The  captain  is  confined  to  his  cabin,  not  able 
to  come  on  deck  ; the  men,  with  the  exception  of  one  and  a boy,  likewise 
ill ; he  has  the  whole  duty  of  the  ship  to  attend  to,  cook,  navigator,  and, 
in  fact,  everything  to  attend  to  ; nursing  requires  a considerable,  part  of 
his  time.’  The  ship,  if  my  memory  is  correct,  was  four  or  five  hundred 
tons  burden.  Well,  sir,  I dream  but  very  little ; and  on  more  than  one 
occasion  my  dreams  have  been  verified  by  coming  events. 

“We  got  a letter  from  my  son  in  due  course,  and  if  I had  been  on 
board  and  seen,  I could  not  have  more  accurately  described  the  position  of 
affairs  on  board ; fortunately,  weather  and  wind  were  (as  my  dream 
indicated)  favourable,  or  the  result  of  this  complication  of  adverse 
circumstances  might  have  had  a disastrous  termination. 

“ A.  Ashby.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Ashby  says  : — 

“November  29th,  1882. 

“ T have  nothing  to  add  to  the  narrative  of  my  dream.  I did  not,  as  I 
should  now  do,  make  a minute  of  such  a dream.  At  the  time,  I thought, 
as  of  other  dreams,  it  is  only  a dream.  Only  on  receipt  of  my  son’s  letter, 
dated  from  Port  Natal,  South  Africa,  did  the  coincidence  and  singularity 
of  the  phenomena  bring  to  my  mind  the  dream,  and  how  it  exactly 
corresponded  with  the  actual  state  of  affairs  on  board  the  ship  at  the  time 
it  occurred.  I may  mention  my  wife  and  daughter  have  reviewed  the  time 
and  circumstance,  and  their  memory  is  clear  as  to  my  relating  the  dream 
in  the  morning.  The  scene  is  as  fresh  on  mind  and  memory  as  if  it  had 
occurred  yesterday.” 

[In  an  interview  with  Mr.  Podmore  on  October  8th,  1883,  Mr.  Ashby 
mentioned  that  he  dreams  very  little.  At  this  interview  his  wife  and 

daughter  both  stated  that  they  recollected  hearing  of  the  dream 
* 

what  he  meant,  when  he  said  he  had  distinctly  heard  his  father  come  upstairs  and  kick 
with  his  .heavy  boots  against  the  door,  as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  when  he  returned 
from  sea.  The  boy’s  statement  and  her  own  dream  so  alarmed  the  woman  that  early  next 
morning  she  told  Mrs.  Strong  and  other  neighbours  of  her  fears.  News  afterwards  came 
that  her  husband’s  vessel  had  been  run  into  by  a steamer,  and  that  he  and  the  boy  weke 
drowned.” 

This  might  seem,  at  first  sight,  a favourable  specimen,  owing  to  the  alleged  double 
percipience.  But  it  is  impossible  to  rely  on  a report,  from  uneducated  witnesses,  of, 
a confused  scene  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  If  the  boy  heard  the  sound  whiefy  his  father 
“ was  in  the  habit  ” of  making,  why  should  he  have  taken  fright?  We  cannot  be  sure 
that  he"  did  not  imagine  he  had  heard  the  sound  after  he  had  been  infected  with 
mother’s  alarm ; for  if  this  were  so,  the  story  might  still  easily  have  become  just  what  .it, 
now  is. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

337 

vtti.] 

immediately  after  its  occurrence  and  before  its  verification,  but  they  could 
add  nothing  to  the  above  narrative.] 

, § 5.  This  case  forms  a natural  transition  to  the  group  where 
the  reality  is  not  only  presented  in  a pictorial  way,  but  the 
dream-scene  corresponds  (in  whole  or  in  part)  with  what  the 
eyes  of  the  supposed  agent  are  actually  beholding.  The  majority, 
perhaps,  of  the  alleged  dream-cases  are  of  this  pictorial  sort ; 
but  most  of  them  have  to  be  set  aside,  on  the  ground  either  of 
inaccuracy  of  detail,  or  of  the  connection  of  the  dream  with  matters  > 
that  have  been  recently  occupying  the  waking  mind.  Thus  a widow 
whose  husband,  was  killed  by  an  accident  at  sea  gives  us  a circum- 
stantial account  of  her  coincident  dream — “a  vessel,  like  her 
husband’s,  wholly  dismasted — the  bare  hull  merely — being  lowered 
by  ropes  down  a beach,  and  all  the  crew  assisting  ” ; and  declares , 
that  the  scene  of  her  dream  was  exactly  what  was  described  in 
the  letter  which  afterwards  brought  her  the  news.  It  appears, 
however,  that  the  narrator  had  never  seen  the  actual  ship;  and 
inspection  of  the  letter  shows  that,  except  the  dismasting,  the 
details  of  the  dream  had  no  counterpart  whatever  in  reality.  Thus 
all  that  remains  is  the  simple  coincidence  of  the  dream  and  the 
death ; and  such  coincidences,  in  the  case  of  casualties  at  §ea,  must, 
as  we  have  seen,  be  generally  excluded.  We  apply  this  rule  even 
where  the  date  of  the  dream  has  been  immediately  noted  in  a diary, 
and  where  we  have  every  assurance  that  it  was  unique  in  the 
dreamer’s  experience.  Again,  Mrs.  Barter,  of  Careystown,  White- 
gate,  Co.  Cork,  has  kindly  given  us  an  account  of  a dream  which 
she  had  at  the  time  of  the  Indian  Mutiny.  She  seemed  to  see 
her  husband,  then  adjutant  in  the  75th  Foot,  wounded,  and  in  the 
act  of  binding  up  his  leg  with  his  puggeree,  when  four  men  of  his 
regiment  lifted  him  up  and  took  him  into  a battery.  “ I at  once 
wrote  it  to  him  and,  in  reply  to  my  letter,  heard  that  such  an  event 
had  actually  taken  place.”  The  coincidence  was  extremely  close, 
and  .Golonel  Barter,  C.B.,  has  confirmed  the  account.  He  was 
carried  into  a battery  by  four  sergeants ; and  he  is  nearly  sure 
that  his  wife  mentioned  sergeants  in  her  first  account  of  her  dream. 
But, ! ion  being  specially  asked  as  to  the  puggeree,  he  stated  that  he 
bound  up  his  leg  not  with  a puggeree,  but  with  a black  silk  necktie. 
This!  defect,  combined  with  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Barter  was  in  & 
nervous  state,  and  had  another  disturbing  and  quite  unveridicaj 

338  DREAMS  WHICH  MAT  BE  SEASONABLY  [chap. 

dream  about  ber  husband  during  the  same  campaign,  prevents  us 
from  allowing  weight  to  the  correspondence.  So,  again,  Mrs.  ’Powles, 
of  Wadhurst,  West  Dulwich,  has  given  us  an  account  Of  a dream 
which  her  late  husband  narrated  to  her  at  the  time,  in  which 
he  saw  his  brother,  Dr.  Ralph  Holden,  who  was  exploring*  in  the 
interior  of  Africa,  lying  under  a large  tree,  supported  by  a man,  and 
either  dead  or  dying.  They  learnt  from  another  explorer,  Mr. 
Green,  that  Dr.  Holden  had  died  at  just  about  that  time,  under  a 
large  tree,  in  the  arms  of  his  native  servant ; and  Mr.  Holden  recog- 
nised the  scene  of  his  dream  in  a sketch  of  the  spot  which  Mr. 
Green-had  taken.  But — to  say  nothing  of  the  indefiniteness  of  the 
time-coincidence — the  entourage  is  such  as  the  idea  of  the  death 
of  an  African  traveller  might  readily  enough  suggest,  quite  apart 
from  telepathy;  and  the  sight  of  the  sketch  would  be  precisely 
calculated  to  give  spurious  retrospective  definiteness  to  the  dream- 
scene.  And  once  more,  a most  vivid  dream  (with  a remarkable 
amount  of  correct  detail,  as  well  as  several  important  discrepancies,)’ 
in  which  a coachman,  sleeping  at  a distance  from  his  stables,  saw  a 
pony  taken  out,  harnessed,  and  then  after  a time  brought  back,  on 
the  one  single  night  on  which  this  ever  actually  happened,  has 
been  dismissed,  as  too  much  connected  with  the  dreamer’s  normal 
train  of  ideas ; though  his  master  (Mr.  J.  S.  Dismorr,  of  Thelcrest 
Lodge,  Gravesend)  and  another  witness  both  testify  to  the  feet 
that  the  dream  was  described  before  the  reality  was  known. 

The  following  cases  seem  free  from  these  objections,  there  having 
been  no  cause  for  anxiety  on  the  percipient’s  part,  and  nothing  to 
suggest  the  scene.  The  first  is  from  the  Rev.  Canon  Warburton. 

“The  Close,  Winchester. 

“July  16th,  1883, 

(108)  “ Somewhere  about  the  year  1848, 1 went  up  from  Oxford  to  stay 
a day  or  two  with  my  brother,  Acton  Warburton,  then  a barrister,  living  at 
10,  Fish  Street,  Lincoln’s  Inn.  When  I got  to  his  chambers  I. found  a 
note  on  the  table  apologising  for  his  absence,  and  saying  that  he  had  gone 
to  a dance  somewhere  in  the  West  End,  and  intended  to  be  home  .soon 
after  1 o’clock.  Instead  of  going  to  bed,  I dozed  in  an  arm-chair,  but 
started  up  wide  awake  exactly  at  1,  ejaculating  ‘ By  Jove ! he’s  down  J.’  and 
seeing  him  coming  out  of  a drawing-room  into  a brightly  illuminated 
landing,  catching  his  foot  in  the  edge  of  the  top  stair,  and  falling  headlong, 
just  saving  himself  by  his  elbows  and  hands.  (The  house  was  one  winch 
I had  never  seen,  nor  did  I know  where  it  was.)  Thinking  very  little  of’ 
the  matter  I fell  a-doze  again  for  half-an-hour,  and  was  awakened  by  -ray 
brother  suddenly  coming  in  and  saying,  ‘ Oh,  there  you  are  I I have-just 
had  as  narrow  an  escape  of  breaking  my  neck  as  I ever  had  in  my  Ufe. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

'339 

VIII.] 

Coming  out  of  the  ballroom,  I caught  my  foot,  and  tumbled  full  length 
down  the  stairs/ 

“ That  is  all.  It  may  have  been  ‘ only  a dream,’  but  I always  thought 
it  must  have  been  something  more. 

“ W.  Warburton.” 

In  a*second  letter  Canon  Warburton  adds  : — 

“ July  20th,  1883. 

“ My  brother  was  hurrying  home  from  his  dance,  with  some  little  self- 
reproach  in  his  mind  for  not  having  been  at  his  chambers  to  receive  his 
guest,  so  the  chances  are  that  he  was  thinking  of  me.  The  whole  scene 
was  vividly  present  to  me  at  the  moment,  but  I did  not  note  particulars 
any  more  than  one  would  in  real  life.  The  general  impression  was  of  a 
narrow  landing  brilliantly  illuminated,  and  I remember  verifying  the 
correctness  of  this  by  questions  at  the  time. 

“This  is  my  sole  experience  of  the  kind.” 

[The  last  words  are  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  had  had 
similar  vivid  visions  which  had  not  corresponded  with  any  real  event.] 

For  the  next  case  we  are  indebted  to  Mrs.  Swithinbank,  of 
Ormleigh,  Mowbray  Road,  Upper  Norwood,  who  is  well  acquainted 
with  Mrs.  Fleming,  the  narrator. 

“ October  17tli,  1882. 

(109)  “Three  years  ago,  when  staying  at  Ems  for  my  health,  one 
morning  after  having  my  bath,  I was  resting  on  the  sofa  reading.  A 
slight  drowsiness  came  over  me  and  I distinctly  saw  the  following : — 

“ My  husband,  who  was  then  in  England,  appeared  to  me  riding  down 
the  lane  leading  to  my  father’s  house.  Suddenly  the  horse  grew  restive, 
then  plunged  and  kicked,  and  finally  unseated  his  rider,  throwing  him 
violently  to  the  ground.  I jumped  up  hastily,  thinking  I had  been  asleep ; 
and  on  my  going  down  to  luncheon  L related  to  a lady  who  was  seated 
next  to  me  what  I had  seen,  and  made  the  remark,  4 1 hope  all  is  well  at 
home.’  My  friend,  seeing  I was  anxious,  laughed  and  told  me  not  to  be 
superstitious,  and  so  I forgot  the  incident,  until  2 days  afterwards  I 
received  a letter  from  home  saying  my  husband  had  been  thrown  from  his 
horse  and  had  dislocated  his  shoulder.  The  time  and  place  of  the  accident 
exactly  agreed  with  my  vision. 

. ' 44  Laura  Fleming.” 

[Asked  whether  she  can  recall  other  dreams  of  a similarly  vivid  and 
feahstic  kind,  Mrs.  Fleming  answers  in  the  negative.] 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Chambers  Leete,  of  28,  Aberdeen 
Parkj  Road,  Highbury,  N.  It  may  be  compared  with  Mrs.  Bettany's 
waking  case  (p.  194). 

^ “ September,  1884, 

(tlO)  “On  the  night  of  about  the  12th  of  August,  1878,  I had  a 
dream  which  greatly  troubled  me,  and  caused  me  to  feel  quite  ill,  it  seethed 
so  rehl.  ' I distinctly  saw  my  mother  lying  on  a couch  in  a deathlike  appear- 
ance,> my  father  and  brother  by  her  side.  She  looked  at  me,  but  could 

340  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

not  speak ; the  vividness  awoke  me.  Falling  asleep  1 dreamt  the  second 
time  that  she  was  dead. 

“ After  writing  home,  I learned  that  on  the  night  of  my  dream  my 
mother  had  been  seized  with  a prolonged  fainting  fit.  I was  in  perfect 
health  when  I went, to  bed,  but  awoke  with  a terrible  headache. 

“Alice  E.  Leete.” 

In  another  communication,  Mrs.  Leete  adds  : — 

“ At  the  time  of  my  dream  I was  companion  to  a lady  in  Dorsetshire* 
We  had  driven  from  a house  called  the  Priory,  Wareham,  to  the  Orange, 
about  4 miles  distant.  It  was  on  the  night  of  our  arrival  this  very  vivid 
dream  occurred  to  me.  I mentioned  it  to  her  (and  also  to  her  housekeeper, 
who  left  soon  after),  she  remarking  first  how  ill  I looked,  and  she  told  me 
not  to  let  it  worry  me  but  write  a letter  to  inquire  if  anything  was  the 
matter  at  home,  which  I did,  but  of  course  could  not  get  an  answer  for 
two  days,  when  I received  a reply  saying  my  mother  had  had,  on  the  night 
I named,  a dreadful  fainting  fit  from  which  they  thought  she  would  not 
recover.  I am  afraid  if  I wrote  to  her  ladyship  she  would  not  remember 
the  circumstance,  having  so  many  things  to  occupy  her  mind,  and  as  she 
thought  so  little  about  it  at  the  time  I feel  sure  it  would  not  be  any  use 
troubling  her. 

“ I can  safely  say  that  neither  before  nor  since  have  I experienced  a 
similar  dream  to  the  one  of  which  I have  sent  you  particulars.” 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  the  details  of  the  scene  corresponded 
with  her  dream,  Mrs.  Leete  says  : — 

“ In  reply  to  your  inquiry  I am  unable  to  speak  positively  at  this 
distance  of  time,  but  am  under  the  impression  that  the  scene  did 
correspond.” 

Such  incidents  as  these  really  belong  to  the  class  which  may  be 
described  as  clairvoyant , and  which  I am  reserving  for  the  end  of 
the  chapter ; but  I have  brought  forward  these  few  examples  for  the 
sake  of  a special  observation.  In  all  the  earlier  dream-cases  of  this 
chapter,  the  role  of  the  percipient  was  purely  passive ; the  impres- 
sion received  by  him  was  apparently  a direct  and  literal  repro- 
duction, in  whole  or  in  part,  of  what  was,  or  had  been,  consciously 
in  the  agent's  mind.  But  these  last  narratives  have  introduced  the 
same  difference  as  appeared  in  the  concluding  cases  of  Chapter 
VI. : though  the  scene  which  the  dreamer  pictured  was  the  very  one 
in  which  the  agent  was,  the  agent's  own  figure,  with  which  his  own 
attention  was  certainly  not  occupied,  appeared  in  the  dream.  If, 
therefore,  this  part  of  the  percept  was  transferred  ready-made  (so  to 
speak)  from  the  agent's  mind,  it  must  have  been  from  a sub-conscious 
part  of  his.  mind.  Such  a view  would  present  no  serious  difficulty; 
for  probably  everyone,  after  early  childhood,  retains  at  the  background 
of  his  mind  a dim  realisation  of  his  own  personality  in  connection  with 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

341 

inn.] 

his  outer  aspect;  and  we  have  had  proofs  that  a person  may  transmit 
an  idea  of  which  he  is  at  the  moment  quite  unaware.1  At  the  same 
time,  the  cases  where  the  agent’s  figure  appeal's  are  equally  sugges- 
tive of  another  explanation,  and  one  which  will  prove  of  the  highest 
importance  in  the  sequel.  They  bring  us  to  the  point  where  we  may 
suppose  that  the  percipient  is  often  himself  the  source  of  a great 
part  of  what  he  seems  to  perceive ; that  he  is  no  longer  passively 
receptive,  of  the  impression  which  comes  to  him  from  without,  but 
actively  modifies  and  elaborates  it.  Thus,  granted  an  idea  of  the 
agent  to  be  transmitted,  the  appearance  of  the  agent’s  figure  in  the 
telepathic  picture  will  be  no  more  remarkable  than  that,  on  reading 
a friend’s  name  in  a letter,  I should  be  able  instantly  to  project  his 
image  on  my  mental  camera.  It  is  only,  however,  in  the  next  group 
of  cases  that  this  new  rdle  of  the  percipient  becomes  obvious. 

§ 6.  It  will  be  useful  at  this  juncture  to  recall  the  more  familiar 
ways  in  which  dreams  are  shaped.  We  all  know  that  physical  disturb- 
ances— whether  of  sound,  or  light,  or  cold,  or  touch— will  excite  dreams, 
in  which  the  disturbance  appears  as  an  element,  sometimes  without 
undergoing  any  change,  sometimes  in  some  transfigured  but  still 
quite  recognisable  form.  Now  in  such  cases  we  of  course  trace  the 
dream  to  the  externally-produced  impression  ; but  the  impression  is  a 
mere  nucleus,  which  the  dreaming  mind  embodies,  it  may  be,  in  a 
long  and  complicated  series  of  self-spun  fancies,  and  which  twenty 
dreaming  minds  would  embody  in  twenty  different  ways.  So  with 
mental  disturbances ; a recent  sorrow,  or  exciting  work  overnight,  is 
as  effective  a nucleus  as  a knock  at  the  door  or  an  uncomfortable 
posttire.  -The  established  idea  works  on,  amid  the  floating  crowd  of 
images  which  are  the  potential  material  of  dreams,  and  attracts  a 
certain  number  of  them  into  a more  or  less  grotesque  connection 
with  itself. 

There  will  thus  be  little  difficulty  in  supposing  that  a percipient 
whom  a strong  “ transferred  impression  ” invades  in  his  sleep  may 
similarly  combine  !it  with  his  own  dream-imagery.  We  have  no 
reason  to  imagine  his  own  activity  to  be  suspended,  or  his  mind 
made  a tabula  rasa  for  foreign  images.  We  should  not,  therefore, 
demand  of  telepathic  dreams  any  sober  and  literal  transcription  of, 
actual  events.  We  should  rather  expect  to  find  the  ordinary  dream 

1 See  pp.  78-9,  84,  103-9. 

342  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  . [cha*>. 

< , 

elements,  the  medley  of  images,  the  impossibilities  and  incongrui- 
ties, no  less  prominent  here  than  elsewhere.  The  root  idea  beiiag 
given  by  the  “ transferred  impression,”  it  may  then  become  the  sport 
of  irresponsible  fancy,  which  develops  it  either  in  some  haphazard 
way,  or  in  accordance  with  the  dreamer’s  habitual  lines  of  thdught  Or 
emotion ; so  that  the  real  event  is  announced  either  in  a manner 
typically  dream-like  and  fantastic,  or  oftener,  perhaps,  in  a manner 
which  is  to  some  extent  symbolic. 

I will  begin  with  cases  where  the  element  thus  supplied  is  of 
the  slightest,  possible  amount.  In  the  following  three  examples  the 
dreamer  may  be  supposed  simply  to  give  the  most  obvious  auditory 
form  to  the  impression  received ; though  in  the  second  and  third  it  is, 
no  doubt,  equally  possible  to  suppose  a direct  auditory  transfer,  as  in 
some  of  the  experimental  cases. 

The  first  case  is  from  Miss  Barr,  of  Apsley  Town,  East  Grinstead, 
who  has  been  mentioned  above  (p.  94,  note). 

“ 1884. 

(ill)  “In  the  early  part  of  1882,  I had  been  working  a good  deal 
amongst  the  navvies  employed  on  the  new  railroad,  near  East  Grinstead,  and 
had  been  particularly  interested  in  the  case  of  one  man,  ‘ Darkey,’  as  he  was 
called  by  his  fellow-workmen.  I had  become  very  intimate  with  the  man, 
and  he  had  told  me  all  his  previous  history,  and  I had  used  my  best 
endeavours  to  keep  him  from  drink.  On  the  night  of  Easter  Tuesday, 
1882,  I dreamed  that  I heard  the  voice  of  the  man  calling  me  from  the 
bottom  of  a well.  I told  my  sister  of  it  in  the  morning,  and,  during  the 
course  of  the  day,  a messenger  came  to  fell  me  that  the  man  had  actually 
fallen  down  a well  overnight,  from  which,  though  in  no  danger,  he  had 
been  extricated  with  some  difficulty.  “ L.  Babb.” 

Miss  Barr’s  sister,  Miss  Harriett  A.  L.  Barr,  has  added  her  signature  to 
this  account,  in  attestation  of  having  heard  the  dream  narrated  on  the 
following  morning. 

[The  idea  of  “ the  bottom  of  a well  ” is  one  that  can  be  easily  conceived 
to  have  been  read  back  into  the  dream,  after  the  reality  was  known. 
But  the  case  does  not  depend  on  that  detail.] 

Here  we  may  be  practically  certain  that  the  man  did  not  actually 
call  on  Miss  Barr  by  name,  as  there  could  have  been  no  chance  of  her 
hearing  him. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  George  Gouldrick,  of  16,  Union  Street, 
Hereford. 

“ 1883., 

(112)  “ In  the  month  of  April,  1876,  I dreamt  that  an  invalid,  named  ' 
Mary  ScaffulL  widow,  an  inmate  of  Johnson’s  Hospitals,  Commercial  Road, 
Hereford  (ana  whose  husband  had  been  an  officer  in  the  gaol  of  which  I 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

343 

viu.] 

was  governor),  was  crying  out  for  water ; it  appeared  to  have  been  a long 
dream,  and  the  cry  seemed  to  be  kept  up  for  some  time.  When  I was 
sitting  at  breakfast  with  my  family  next  morning,  I asked  my  wife  when 
she  had  seen  Mrs.  Scaffull  last ; she  replied,  4 Some  9 days  ago.  I took 
her  a rice  pudding ; I could  not  get  into  the  house,  the  door  being  locked. 
I therefore  had  to  leave  it  at  her  sister’s,  who  .was  living  in  the  neighbour- 
hood* with  a request  that  when  she  went  to  see  her,  to  take  it  to  her ; 
the  dish  has  been  returned,  therefore  I conclude  she  had  the  contents. 
Why,  what  is  the  matter,  you  seem  troubled  about  her  ? ’ I then  told  her 
my  dream,  and  said,  4 1 have  determined  to  go  after  breakfast  and  see  what 
state  she  is  in,’  She  answered,  4 I am  glad  to  hear  you  say  so.’ 

“ As  I approached  the  house,  1 could  hear  a cry  of  distress  proceeding 
from  some  one  of  the  inmates  of  the  hospitals.  I put  my  finger  on  the 
Iktch  of  the  door  occupied  by  Mrs.  Scaffull,  when  I heard  the  following 
supplication  proceed  from  her  in  the  most  distressing  tone  : 4 Will  some  kind 
Christian  friend  give  me  some  water  ? ’ I took  a jug  from  her  lower  room, 
went  to  the  pump  and  filled  it,  then  took  it  with  all  haste  to  her  bedside. 
When  she  saw  me  there  with  the  water  she  said,  4 Oh,  Mr.  Gouldrick,  the 
Lord  has  sent  you  here,  God  Almighty  bless  you  for  bringing  me  this 
water.’  She  then  drank  copiously  of  it,  and  said,  4 It’s  the  sweetest  Water 
I have  ever  tasted  all  my  life  long,’  She  died  the  same  week,  at  the  age 
of  77  years.  44  Geo.  Gouldrick.” 

Mr.  Gouldrick’s  daughter  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

44  December  11th,  1883. 

44 1 was  present  at  the  breakfast-table  when  my  father  related  his  dream. 
I remember  all  that  happened,  and  can  therefore  corroborate  all  he  has 
written.  My  mother  has  since  died.  She  was  present  also,  and  we 
expressed  our  astonishment  when  he  returned  home  and  told  us  what  had 
happened.  The  only  reason  I am  aware  of  that  the  neighbours  (who  heard 
all)  did  not  attend  to  her  cry,  was  that  she  was  in  receipt  of  7s.  per  week 
more  than  they  were,  and  that  caused  an  ill-feeling  towards  her. 

44Hannah  Gouldrick.” 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Morris  Griffith,  of  6,  Menai  View 
Terrace,  Bangor,  N.W. 

44  1884. 

(113)  44  On  the  night  of  Saturday,  the  11th  of  March,  1871, 1 awoke  in 
much  alatfm,  having  seen  my  eldest  son,  then  at  St.  Paul  de  Loanda  on  the 
south-west  coast  of  Africa,  looking  dreadfully  ill  and  emaciated,  and  I heard 
his  voice  distinctly  calling  to  me.  I was  so  disturbed  I could  not  sleep  again, 
but  every  time  I closed  my  eyes  the  appearance  recurred,  and  his  voice 
sounded  distinctly,  calling  me  ‘Mamma.’  I felt  greatly  depressed  all 
through  the  next  day,  which  was  Sunday,  but  I did  not  mention  it  to  my 
husband,  as  he  w^is  an  invalid,  and  I feared  to  disturb  him.  We  were  in 
the  habit  of  receiving  weekly  letters  every  Sunday  from  our  youngest  son, 
then  in  Ireland,  and  as  none  came  that  day,  I attributed  my  great 
deptessi&n  to  that  reason,  glad  to  have  some  cause  to  assign  to  Mr.  Griffith* 
rathpr  then  the  real  one.  Strange  to  say,  he  also  suffered  from  intense 
low  Spirits  all  day,  and  we  were  both  unable  to  take  dinner/*  he  rising  fropa 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

344 

the  table  saving,  1 1 don’t  care  what  it  costs,  I must  have  the  boy  back/ 
alluding  to  his  eldest  son.  I mentioned  my  dream  and  the  bad  night  I had 
had  to  two  or  three  friends,  but  begged  that  they  would  say  nothing  of  it 
to  Mr.  Griffith.  The  next  day  a letter  arrived  containing  some  photos  of 
my  son,  saying  he  had  had  fever,  but  was  better,  and  hoped  immediately  to 
leave  for  a much  more  healthy  station,  and  written  in  good  spirits.  We 
heard  no  more  till  the  9th  of  May,  when  a letter  arrived  with  the  news  of 
our  son’s  death  from  a fresh  attack  of  fever,  on  the  night  of  the  11th  of 
March,  and  adding  that  just  before  his  death  he  kept  calling  repeatedly  for 
me.  I did  not  at  first  connect  the  date  of  my  son’s  death  with  that  of  my 
dream  until  reminded  of  it  by  the  friends,  and  also  an  old  servant,  to 
whom  I had  told  it  at  the  time.  I append  my  signature  in  attestation  of 
the  report  being  a true  and  correct  one,  and  also  the  signature  of  Kate  Dew, 
who  perfectly  remembers  the  date  and  circumstances,  and  attests  the  truth 
of  the  above. 

“Mary  G.  Griffith. 

“Kate  Dew.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Griffith  says  : — 

“The  experience  came  to  me  as  a dream,,  but  upon  waking  my  distress 
was  so  great  at  the  extreme  reality  of  the  impression  of  seeing  my  son 
ldoking  so  very  ill  and  suffering,  and  the  anguish  of  his  voice  in  calling  me 
by  name,  that  although  I tried  for  hours  afterwards  to  sleep  again,  I was 
unable  to  do  so  from  the  haunting  return  of  the  scene  and  voice,  whenever 
I closed  my  eyes.  My  husband  had  no  dream,  but  all  the  next  day  he, 
like  myself,  became  deeply  depressed  about  our  son,  although  I ha$  said 
nothing  to  him  on  the  subject.  Towards  evening  some  friends  came  in,  and 
the  impression  faded,  and  the  following  morning,  upon  receiving  my  son’s 
letter  with  photographs,  I lost  all  feeling  of  anxiety  about  him.” 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Mrs.  Griffith  says  : — 

(1)  “I  have  never  in  all  my  life,  before  or  since,  had  any  such 
distressing  dream,  nor  am  I ever  discomposed  in  any  way  by  uncomfortable 
dreams. 

(2)  “ I never  remember  at  any  time  having  any  dream  from  which  I 
have  had  any  difficulty  in  knowing  at  once,  whilst  awakening,  that  I had 
been  dreaming,  and  never  confuse  the  dream  with  reality. 

(3)  “I  also  unhesitatingly  assure  you  that  I have  never  had  any 
hallucination  of  the  senses  as  to  sound  or  sight.” 

The  following  is  part  of  a letter  to  Mr.  Richard  M.  Griffith — dated 
Loanda,  March  26th,  1871 — which  I have  been  allowed  to  copy. 

“ Dear  Sir, — It  is  my  sorrowful  duty  to  inform  you  that  your  son, 
Mr.  R.  M.  Griffith,  died  in  my  house  on  the  11th  inst.  He  was  staying 
with  me  awaiting  the  arrival  of  machinery  from  England,  but  fell  sick 
about  the  beginning  of  the  month,  and  gradually  sank,  notwithstanding  all 
our  efforts  to  save  him. — Yours  very  truly,  Alexander  Smith.” 

And  now  we  come  to  the  large  and  important  group  where  the 
percipient  forms  a very  distinct  picture  of  the  agent,  whose  figure  tod 
aspect  (sometimes  with  the  addition  of  speech)  is  not  a mere  element 

nil.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . *■  545 

in  a scene,  but  the  one  thing  prominently  represented.  I will  still 
keep  for  a time  to  simple  cases,  where  the  mental  image  that  is 
conjured  up  corresponds  pretty  closely  to  the  reality. 

The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  W.  D.  Wood  Rees,  of 
Holmtf  Villa,  Market  Weigh  ton. 

“May,  1885. 

(114)  “In  1874,  when  reading  for  college,  I frequently  visited  a 
man  named  William  Edwards  (of  Llanrhidian,  near  Swansea),  who  was 
then  seriously  ill ; he  often  professed  pleasure  at,  and  benefit  from,  my 
ministrations.  He  at  length  recovered  so  far  as  to  resume  work.  I left 
the  neighbourhood,  and  amid  new  scenes  and  hard  work,  I cannot  say 
that  I ever  thought  of  him. 

“I  had  been  at  college  some  12  months,  when  one  night,  or  rather 
early  morning  between  12  at  midnight  and  3 in  the  morning,  I had  a most 
vivid  dream.  I seemed  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  above-named  William 
Edwards  calling  me  in  earnest  tones.  In  my  dream  I seemed  to  go  to 
him  and  saw  him  quite  distinctly.  I prayed  with  him  and  saw  him  die. 
When  I awoke  the  dream  seemed  intensely  real,  so  much  that  1 remarked 
the  time,  3 a.m.  in  the  morning.  I could  not  forget  it  and  told  some 
college  friends  all  particulars.  The  next  day  I received  a letter  from 
my  mother,  with  this  P.S.  : * The  bell  is  tolling ; I fear  poor  William 
Edwards  is  dead/  On  inquiry  I found  that  he  did  die  betwen  12 
and  3 ; that  he  frequently  expressed  the  wish  that  I were  with  him.  I 
had  no  idea  that  he  was  ill.  “W.  D.  Wood  Rees.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Rees  says  : — 

“ My  dream  took  place  between  midnight  and  3 in  the  morning. 
William  Edwards  died  within  that  time.  My  mother  wrote  her  letter 
just  after  breakfast,  when  the  death-bell  was  tolling  for  him — just  at  the 
time  I mentioned  my  dream  to  some  friends.  I received  the  letter  either 
the  next  night  or  the  morning  after.  It  was  generally  a two  days'  post. 
I was  particular  to  inquire  if  the  death  took  place  the  night  of  my  dream  ; 
it  did . 1 have  not  the  date  of  the  occurrence,  but  can  get  it,  no  doubt 

from  inquiring  the  date  of  the  man’s  death.  I had  no  object  in  making 
any  note  of  it  then.  The  friends,  I believe,  were  Rev.  G.  L.  Rees, 
Howden,  Rev.  J.  W.  Roberts  (dead),  and  I think,  the  Rev.  T.  S. 
Cunningham ; I will  ask  him.  I have  on  other  occasions  dreamt  of 
deaths,  but  have  not  taken  any  trouble  to  investigate  them.  I have 
sometimes  dreamt  I saw  a person  dying,  and  then  heard  they  were  ill. 
The  vividness  and  reality  of  the  case  I mention  caused  me  to  take  such 
notice  of  it.” 

The  Rev.  G.  L.  M.  Rees  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ Howden,  East  Yorkshire. 

“June  11th,  188$. 

“ The  statement  made  by  my  brother,  the  Rev.  W.  D.  W.  Rees, 
relative,  to  the  death  of  William  Edwards,  is  quite  correct.  I perfectly 
remember  his  relating  to  me  a dream  respecting  his  death,  previous  tp  the 
intelligence  reaching  us  at  college. 

“ G.  Jj . M.  Rees/' 

346 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

f We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  William  Edwards  died  &t 
Llanrhidian  on  October  14th,  1875.] 

It  would  be  tedious  here  to  multiply  cases  where  the  mere  fact 
of  death  has  been  vividly  dreamt  of,  without  more  detail  than  this* 
Yet  it  is  in  their  multiplication  that  the  whole  force  of  such  cases 
consists,  and  a single  coincidence  of  the  sort  might  always  be 
explained  as  accidental.  Other  examples,  belonging  to  the  important 
group  which  was  used  in  my  numerical  calculation  (pp.  304-7),  will 
be  found  in  the  Supplement. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Fielding,  of  Yarlington  Rectory,  Bath, 

who  was  also  the  narrator  of  case  90,  above. 

' “January,  1884. 

(115)  “ T some  time  ago  had  rather  a remarkable  vision,  but  it  was  of 
the  living.  I have  an  only  son,  about  20,  always  in  robust  health,  then  in 
lodgings  in  London.  Never  were  mother  and  son  more  to  one  another 
than  we  are.  One  night  [ awoke  heart-broken  by. seeing  him  in  bed  very 
ill.  I stood  weeping  by  his  bed,  lifting  his  white  face  in  my  two  hands, 
and  saying  lie  must  be  dying.  On  my  husband  waking  I told  him  it  all, 
and  those  at  breakfast  next  morning,  and  said  ‘ Let  us  see  if  it's  only  a 
dream.’  A week  passed,  and  my  usual  letter  did  not  come  from  my  son. 
After  a time  one  came,  saying  lie  had  been  ill  in  bed  a week,  too  ill  to  let 
me  know,  and  the  landlady  had  nursed  him  through  it.  * 

“Jane  E.  Fielding.’ 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Fielding  adds  : — 

“ I found  my  son’s  letter  telling  of  the  illness  I spoke  of,  and  find  it 
was  written  on  the  1 5th  July,  1882,  a Saturday,  and  my  vision-dream 
— for  it  was  too  distinct  for  a common  dream ; yet  I was  not  wide  awake, 
and  could  not  vouch  I had  seen  the  picture  consciously , yet  it  was  most 
real — took  place  either  on  the  night  of  12th  or  13th  July,  and  I find  both 
my  husband  and  son-in-law  remember  my  speaking  of  it,  though  the  dates 
escape  them.  I now  quote  from  my  son’s  letter : 4 1 go  back  to  the  City 
on  Monday,  but  I thought  it  was  no  use  telling  you,  to  make  you  anxious, 
of  my  attack  of  quinsey  till  I was  better ; and  the  doctor  and  my 
landlady  nursed  me  most  carefully,  and  now  I can  swallow.’  It  has  much 
pain,  this  complaint,  and  it  was  that  look  of  pain  I saw  on  his  face  in  my 
vision  that  gave  me  such  pain.  I can  swear  to  the  vision  having  been 
before  the  letter  came.  Were  I in  the  least  dubious,  I should  be  the  first 
to  say  so,  having  a glimpse  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  science . I can’t 
recall  any  other  such  i clear-seeing.’  I never  had  a dream  like  this  before.” 

I have  seen  Mrs.  Fielding’s  letter  to  her  son,  dated  Monday,  July  24th> 
in  which  she  says,  “On  Thursday  morning  [i.e.,  July  13th,]  when  I came 
down  to  breakfast,  I said  to  Tom  and  Arthur  [her  son-in-law  with  whom 
she  now  lives],  ‘ 1 hope  Charlie  is  well ; for  I had  such  a queer 
dream  of  finding  him  lying  in  bed  on  his  face,  and  when  I turned  it  roufed 
it  was  ghastly  pale  and  ill-looking — and  I was  so  sighing  all  day  after,  aftd 
expected  to  hear,  as  I did,  you  were  ill.’  Now  that’s  funny  ! Shows  hoif 
our  souls  are  closely  united.  Arthur  is  just  saying  to  me  he  ‘ quite  remembers 
my  telling  him  my  dream.’  ” 

nu.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  H7 

[This  practically  proves  tliat  Mrs.  Fielding  is'  accurate  in  saying  that 
her  dream  was  described  before  the  news  was  known.  But  the  force  of 
the  coincidence  is  of  course  weakened  by  the  faot  that  the  illness  extended 
over  several  days.] 

In#the  next  case  the  form  of  the  vision — a figure  at  the  bedside — 
suggests  not  So  much  a genuine  dream  as  the  sort  of  semi-waking 
hallucination  which  will  be  considered  in  the  next  chapter  (compare 
also  Mr.  Wingfield's  case,  p.  199).  The  narrator  is  Mrs.  L.  H. 
Saunders,  of  St.  Helens,  near  Ryde,  who  was  concerned  in  case  44 
(p.  242). 

“ March  18th,  1885. 

(116)  ‘‘Towards  morning  of  the  10th  January,  1885,  I was  conscious 
of  a young  woman  standing  l>y  my  bedside  clad  in  a grey  dressing  gown, 
holding  in  her  arms,  towards  me,  a child.  The  woman  was  weeping 
bitterly,  and  said,  ‘ Oh  ! Mrs.  Saunders,  I am  in  such  trouble.’  I instantly 
recognised  her  as  Mrs.  0.  R.  Seymour,  and  was  about  to  interrogate  her 
as  to  her  trouble,  when  I was  awakened  by  my  husband  asking  me  what 
was  the  matter,  as  I seemdd  so  distressed.  I told  him  I had  had  such  a 
sad  dream  about  poor  Fanny  Goodall  (maiden  name  of  Mrs.  C.  R.  S.),  but 
it  really  was  to  me  more  than  a dream — so  much  so,  that  after  rising  I 
communicated  it  to  the  governess,  Miss  Monkman,  also  to  the  nurse  and 
servant.  I decided  to  send  to  her  mother,  Mrs.  Goodall,  to  inquire  if  she 
had  received  any  tidings  of  her  daughter,  who  was  resident  in  New 
Zealand  with  her  husband  and  two  children,  but  as  on  after  consideration 
I felt  it  might  cause  her  alarm,  I altered  my  intention.  This  dream  or 
vision  made  so  deep  and  lasting  an  impression  that  I constantly  alluded  to 
it  to  members  of  our  household,  until  circumstances  occasioned  my  calling 
on  Mrs,  Goodall  about  the  beginning  of  this  month,  March,  1885,  when  I 
made  particular  inquiries  for  her  daughter ; and  on  being  assured  that  she 
was  well,  according  to  letters  by  the  most  recent  mail,  I ventured  to 
express  my  gratification,  giving,  as  my  reason  for  such,  a narration  of  the 
‘ vision ’ that  had  not  even  then  ceased  to  haunt  me  ; which  elicited  from 
Mrs.  Goodall  and  both  of  her  daughters,  who  were  present,  fervent  hopes 
that  all  was  well  with  Mrs.  Seymour.  [This  has  been  completely  con- 
firmed by  letters  from  Mrs.  Goodall  and  her  two  daughters.]  On  the  12th 
of  March,  1885,  I again  called  on  Mrs.  Goodall,  who  on  receiving  me,  with 
much  emotion  said,  ‘ Oh,  have  you  heard  the  bad  news  of  Fanny  ? I have 
thought  so  much  of  what  you  told  me  ; her  dear  little  Dottie  has  gone.  I 
will  read  you  her  letters,’  both  of  which,  although  coming  by  different 
mails,  had  only  been  received  within  the  past  24  hours.  I should  mention 
thaj|>  although  I have  felt  very  interested  in  and  thought  much  of  Mrs.  0. 
R,  S.  before  and  since  her  departure  from  this  country,  yet  I have  never 
corresponded  with  her ; but  I now  learn  that  she  invariably  mentioned  me 
in  her  home  correspondence,  and  felt  much  indebted  to  me  for  some  trifling 
kindness  I had  been  able  to  show  her  in  the  past.  I am  able  to  fix  the 
dafcfe  of  my  vision  from  circumstances  which  I need  not  here  relate* 

“Bessie  Saunters,” 

348  BREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

/ , ‘ j 

The  force  of  the  coincidence  seems  not  much  affected  one  way  or 
the  other  by  the  following  addition  : — 

“ In  reply  to  your  question,  I have  had  distressing  dreams  relating  to 
death  at  intervals,  which  have  not  corresponded  with  reality ; but  those 
you  are  already  cognisant  of  [viz.,  this  one  and  another  which  corresponded 
with  reality1]  are  the  only  ones  which  impressed  themselves  sufficiently  to 
induce  me  to  take  steps  to  discover  if  they  did  correspond  with  the 
reality,  although  I may  have  mentioned  their  purport  casually  at  the 
time.” 

Mr.  Latimer  H.  Saunders  writes : — 

“ March  18th,  1885. 

“I  clearly  remember  on  or  about  the  10th  of  January,  1885,  early 
morning,  suddenly  awaking,  and  finding  my  wife  leaning  forward  in  bed. 
I asked  her,  * What  was  the  matter  ? ’ She  seemed  agitated,  and  replied 
to  the  follow ing  effect : “ Oh,  I have  had  such  a horrid  dream  ! Fanny 

'Goodall  was  standing  here  at  my  side,  quite  close,  holding  out  the  child  in 
such  distress,  but  I could  not  tell  what  she  wanted ; it  was  so  real,  I could 
have  touched  her,  but  you  awoke  me.’  Before  rising,  my  wife  repeated 
the  incident  in  detail.  Late  on  March  1 2th,  she  told  me  the  sequel. 

u Fortunately,  I can  safely  fix  the  date  as  being  the  morning  of  either 
the  9th,  10th,  or  11th  of  January,  as  during  that  month  these  were,  owing 
to  circumstances,  the  only  possible  occasions  on  which  the  incident,  as 
related,  could  have  occurred,  while  my  mental  impression,  independently 
arrived  at,  strongly  points  to  the  10th  as  the  day. 

“Latimer  H.  Saunders.” 

Miss  E.  A.  Monkman,  in  a letter  to  Mrs.  Saunders  (dated  16, 
Castledine  Road,  Anerley,  16th  March,  1885),  of  which  I have  seen  a 
copy,  gives  exactly  similar  testimony  as  to  Mrs.  Saunders's  description  of 
her  dream  at  the  time,  and  adds  that  it  must  have  been  on  the  9th  or 
10th  of  the  month.  And  on  March  20th,  a servant  in  the  house, 
unprompted  (as  Mrs.  Saunders  assures  us),  dictated  the  following 
statement : — 

“I  remember  Saturday  morning,  the  10th  of  January  last.  The 
mistress  came  into  the  kitchen  to  speak  about  the  flue.  After  doing  so 
she  told  me  of  such  a bad  dream  she  had  had  of  Mrs.  Seymour,  of  New 
Zealand,  coming  to  her  bedside  with  her  little  child  in  her  arms.  Mrs.  Sey- 
mour was  crying  so  bitterly,  and  imploring  her  for  help. — E.  Dawson.” 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  letter  received  from  Mrs.  Seymour  by 
Mrs.  Goodall,  dated  January  15th,  1885. 

“I  do  not  know  how  to  write  it,  mother.  Dottie  is  dead  ; a week  ago 
this  very  Thursday  evening  she  was  taken  ill,  and  on  Saturday  at  10 
minutes  to  10  in  the  evening,  she  died.” 

[Allowing  for  longitude,  the  dream  must  have  preceded  the  death  by  a 
few  hours.] 

1 In  this  second  case  (as  to  which  we  again  have  Mr.  Saunders’s  testimony  to  the  fact 
that  the  dream  was  described  before  the  reality  was  known)  the  dream  was  that  a friend 
alighted  from  a hearse,  and  entered  clad  in  deep  mourning ; and  it  fell  on  the  night  on 
which  that  friend’s  mother,  whom  she  was  attending,  unexpectedly  died. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

349 

Viil] 

Very  similar  is  the  form  of  impression  described  in  the  next 
case,  obtained  (through  the  * kindness  of  ,Mr.  J.  B.  Johnston,  of  17, 
Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh)  from  Herr  Heinrich  von  Struve,  whose 
German  account  is  here  translated. 

“ 25,  Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh. 

“July  10th,  1885. 

(117)  “In  1838,  I was  on  terms  of  friendship  with  a captain  of  the 
2nd  Hussars,  Herr  von  R.,  his  company  being  quartered  in  a little  town 
in  Silesia,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  I was  residing  on  my  property. 
Early  one  morning  I had  ridden  into  the  town,  and  visited  Von  R.,  whom 
I found  taking  coffee  with  his  wife.  While  we  were  sitting  chatting 
together,  Von  R.  said  to  his  wife,  ‘Lina,  our  friend  Pogerell  died  last 
night/  ‘ What  a thing  to  say,  Albert ! 7 his  wife  replied  ; ‘ Pogerell  was 
here  only  the  day  before  yesterday,  well  and  happy.7  ‘Very  likely,7  said 
Von  R. ; ‘ but  the  fact  is  as  I have  said.  Last  night  he  stood  by  my  bed, 
and  said,  “ Farewell,  R. ; I am  departing  to  the  great  army.  Greet  my 
cousin  G.  from  me,  and  ask  him  not  to  be  angry  that  I have  not 
mentioned  him  in  my  will,  as  he  is  well  off,  and  my  other  relatives  are 
poor  and  need  support.77  7 Some  minutes  after  Von  R.  had  told  us  this,  a 
messenger  was  announced,  who  entered,  bringing  from  the  commanding 
officer  of  both  of  them  in  W.,  where  the  company  of  Captain  von  Pogerell 
was  stationed,  the  announcement  that  ‘ Captain  von  Pogerell  had  a 
paralytic  stroke  last  night,  and  died.7  The  town  of  W.,  where  Von 
Pogerell  was,  was  4 German  miles  [about  1 2 English  miles]  distant  from 
the  place  where  we  were ; the  road  was  bad,  and  there  was  no  ordinary 
means  of  communication.  It  was,  therefore,  inconceivable  that  any  earlier 
news  than  that  which  this  messenger  brought  could  have  reached  Von  R. 
He  was  a sober  man,  completely  honest  and  truthful,  who,  except  among 
very  intimate  friends,  never  spoke  of  his  gift  of  seeing  apparitions — a gift 
which  he  took  no  pride  in.  He  would  mention  such  experiences  casually 
to  his  wife  in  the  morning,  or  when  his  friends  pressed  him  on  the  subject. 

“ Von  R.  related  to  me  some  other  highly  interesting  cases  of  the  sort; 
but  I do  not  add  them,  not  having  been  myself  a party  to  them,  as  I was 
to  the  one  which  I have  narrated. 

“H.  von  Struve.77 

[In  an  English  account  which  Herr  von  Struve  has  signed  as  correct, 
it  appears  that  Pogerell  was  not  an  intimate  friend,  and  that  there  had 
been  no  special  reason  for  thinking  of  him. 

The  case  is  one  where  the  evidence  of  a person  who  was  not  the 
percipient  is  stronger  than  that  of  the  percipient  himself  would  have  been 
(see  p.  148).  After  an  interval  of  47  years,  the  mere  memory  of  a 
coincident  dream — for  in  the  absence  of  more  distinct  evidence  we  must 
not  assume  that  it  was  a waking  vision — would  have  very  little  force.  But 
Herr  von  Struve  himself  would  of  course  be  awake,  when  sitting 
talking^  to  his  friends  ; and  the  scene  in  its  various  stages — the  statement 
of  Von  R:,  the  conversation  that  ensued,  and  the  arrival  of  the  messenger 
' — if  really  only  imagined  afterwards,  would  constitute  an  oddly  distinct 
and  detailed  piece  of  retrospective  hallucination.] 

350 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [cha* 

The  next  case,  from  the  daughter  of  an  officer  of  high  position  in 
the  Austrian  service,  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  W. 
E.  H.  Lecky,  who  is  a Friend  of  the  narrator. 

“ Newbury,  January,  1884. 

(118)  44  One  night,  a few  years  ago,  I had  a very  vivid  dream  about 
some  one  1 had  known  as  a boy  in  the  Bedford  Grammar  School,  but  of  whom 
I had  not  heard  anything  for  a long  time.  I dreamt  that  he  came  to  me, 
draped  in  a long  white  garment,  and  that  he  said  to  me,  4 1 am  so  glad 
it  is  all  over/  and  putting  his  head  on  my  shoulder,  he  sighed  deeply, 
and  said,  ‘I  am  so  tired/  I woke  from  the  fancied  touch  and  did  not  go 
to  sleep  again  for  some  time.  It  made  such  an  impression  on  me  that  I 
told  my  sisters  the  next  morning.  A few  days  after,  one  of  my  sisters 
brought  me  a paper  with  the  announcement  of  my  friend’s  death  in  it, 
and,  strange  to  say,  he  died  the  very  night  I dreamt  about  him. 

44  L.  K.  D.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries  Miss  L.  K.  D.  says  : — 

44  February  29tli,  1884. 

“ I have  been  trying  to  ascertain  the  exact  date  of  my  dream  about 
my  friend’s  death,  but  cannot  remember  anything  nearer  than  that  it  was 
some  time  in  the  spring  of  1878.  I had  not  seen  him  for  nearly  four 
years,  and  certainly  had  not  talked  or  even  thought  about  him  for  some 
time,  I might  say  years.  I don’t  remember  ever  having  such  a vivid 
dream  before  or  after.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Miss  L.  K.  D/s  sister  : — 

44  January  10th,  1884. 

44  With  regard  to  my  sister’s  dream  about  the  person  she  knew  as  a 
boy  in  Bedford,  I can  remember  distinctly  that  she  told  her  dream  to 
us  all  at  breakfast  before  we  heard  of  the  death. 

44  A.  M.  D.” 

Here  the  long  white  garment  might  be  taken  as  representing  the 
actual  dress  which  the  supposed  agent  was  wearing ; for  if  a person's 
sub-conscious  idea  of  his  own  aspect  may  be  the  source  of  a tele- 
pathic impression,  that  impression  might  very  naturally  include  his 
garb  at  the  time.  But  we  should  prefer  to  regard  this  particular 
investiture  a$  supplied  by  the  percipient's  mind  to  its  own  dream- % 
image. 

In  the  following  cases  the  dream  contained  the  additional  feature 
of  conversation  between  the  dreamer  and  the  agent.  This  is,  of  course, 
a clear  instance  of  something  superadded  by  the  dreamer's  own 
creative  activity. 

Miss  K.  Gibson,  of  3,  Huntley  Gardens,  Glasgow,  says; — 

£ 

“ November,  1 883. 

(119)  “In  August,  1 867,  my  sister  and  I went  to  spend  a few  days  with 

VIII.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  351 

\ 

airiend  In  the  country. , , We  were  a very  merry,  and  youthful  party;  and  I 
da  not  think  one  grave  or  solemn  thought  crossed  any  of  our  minds.  The 
brother  our  hostess  having  been  married  the  week  previously,  had  sent 
a box  of  wedding  cake,  and  according  to  the  old  custom  we  all  determined 

* to  sleep  on  the  wedding  cake,  and  to  tell  our  dreams  in  the  morning/ 
Early  on  the  morning  of  Thursday,  I awoke,  and  when  I fell  asleep  again, 

I dreamt  I found  myself  in  a very  bare,  cheerless  room,  in  the  comer  of 
Which  stood  a bed ; on  it  was  lying  a young  man.  I at  once  recognised 
him  as  a friend  of  my  brother’s,  whom  I had  last  seen  (for  only  the 
second  time  in  my  life)  the  previous  Christmas,  a tall,  strong,  handsome 
young  fellow,  in  apparently  high  health  and  spirits.  I saw  him  now,  a 
shadow  of  his  former  self,  his  face  drawn  and  colourless,  his  eyes  un- 
naturally large  and  bright ; his  hand,  which  was  lying  outside  the 
bedclothes,  was  thin  and  wasted,  the  great  blue  veins  standing  up  like 
cords,  and  his  lingers  plucked  restlessly  at  the  coverlet.  His  hollow 
cough  sounded  incessantly  through  the  room.  I went  up  to  him.  ‘ Why, 

Mr. ,’  I said,  ‘ how  very  ill  you  look  ; what  is  the  matter V ‘I  am 

dying/  he  said,  ‘ I caught  cold  a month  ago,  and  neglected  it ; it  has 
settled  on  my  chest,  and  the  doctors  say  I am  dying  of  rapid 
consumption.’ 

“ When  I rose  in  the  morning,  I could  hardly  bear  to  tell  my  dream, 
but  it  had  all  been  so  painfully  vivid,  and  haunted  me  so,  that  I told  jny 
sister  before  we  went  down  to  breakfast.  I was  much  teased  by  my  kind 
hostess,  but  I would  not  speak  of  the  dream  to  any  one.  On  the  following 
Saturday  evening  we  went  home.  I did  not  see  my  brother  until  the. 
Sunday  morning.  When  at  breakfast  he  said,  ‘ Did  you  hear,  girls,  of 
poor  M/s  death  ? ’ ‘ No,’  we  said,  ‘ when  did  it  take  place  i ’ 1 Early  on 

Thursday  morning ; he  caught  cold  a month  ago,  neglected  it,  it  settled 
on  his  chest,  and  he  died  of  rapid  consumption.’ 

“ I may  add  that  not  only  did  I hardly  know  Mr. , having  only 

seen  him  twice,  but  I do  not  think  I had  even  heard  his  name  mentioned 
from  the  time  I saw  him  at  Christmas,  till  the  morning  I dreamt  of  his 
death.  I was  only  a child  at  the  time. 

“ K.  Gibson.” 

Miss  Gibson’s  sister  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ November  17th,  1883.  , 

“ I quite  remember  my  sister  dreaming  as  she  relates  above.  It  made 

quite  an  impression  on  both  of  us  when  my  brother  mentioned  Mr. ’s 

death.  “ M.  H.  Murray.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Gibson  says : — 

(l)f“I  have  at  various  times  had  vivid  dreams  of  deaths  whidh 
hove  not  come  true,  and  whose  origin  I could  trace.”  [This  final  clause 
pretents  this  statement  from  weakening  the  case  as  much  as  it  would 
otherwise  do.] 

* “I  <|0  not  know  if  Mr.  M.’s  room  was  ‘bare  and  cheerless/  I 
* do  know  that  he  died  in  lodgings. 

(3)  “The  words  in  my  dream  and  those  of  my  brother  exactly 
corresponded/’ 

f Professor  Sidgwick,  after  an  interview  with  Miss  Gibson,  April  20th; 
says  ' 

352 

DREAMS  WHICH  MA  Y BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

“ She  informed  me  that  she  did  not  take  much  interest  in  the  subject 
of  my  inquiries.  She  was  quite  sure  of  the  exact  correspondence  of  the 
statements  in  her  dream — ‘caught  cold  ’ — ‘month  ago’ — ‘ neglected.it ’ — 

* settled  on  chest  ’ — * rapid  consumption  ’ — with  the  statements  of  her 
brother ; and  her  sister  also  noted  the  correspondence.  She  knew  the 
young  man  was  poor,  so  that  the  * bare  cheerless  ’ room  would  be  naturally 
suggested ; but  she  had  never  heard  of  him  as  consumptive : she  could 
have  had  no  other  image  of  him  from  memory  except  that  of  a strong, 
healthy  man.  She  was  not  interested  in  the  young  man,  and 
believes  that  she  had  not  thought  of  him  between  the  Christmas  when  she 
saw  him  and  the  time  of  the  dream  and  death.  It  was  not  remarkable 
that  she  told  the  dream,  as  she  had  rather  a habit  of  dreaming  and  of 
telling  curious  dreams — not  from  any  belief,  but  merely  as  curious.  What 
was  unusual  was  that  she  was  reluctant  to  tell  it,  and  only  told  it  to 
her  sister.”] 

Supposing  this  dream  to  have  been  tolepathically  originated,  it  is 
difficult  to  know  how  much  of  its  content  was  supplied  to,  and  how 
much  by,  the  dreamer.  Given  the  idea  of  consumption,  the  develop- 
ment is,  perhaps,  not  too  detailed  to  have  been  independently 
imagined. 

The  following  very  similar  case  is  from  Mrs.  Jarratt,  of  96, 
Dalberg  Road,  S.W.  I need  hardly  say  that  the  mere  recollection  of 
a childish  dream  would  not  have  been  admitted  as  evidence : the 
evidence  is  the  mother’s  attestation  that  the  dream  was  described 
before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived. 

“December  10th,  1883. 

(120)  “ While  I was  a little  girl,  about  10  years  old,  an  old  friend  of 
ours,  particularly  dear  to  me,  a Danish  gentleman  (formerly  tutor  to  the 
young  Princes  of  Denmark,  and  afterwards  teacher  of  languages  in  the 
High  School,  San  Francisco),  sought  to  improve  his  position  by  going  to  the 
city  of  Mexico.  Some  months  after  he  left,  I dreamed  that  I saw  him 
sitting  in  my  father’s  office,  and  immediately  ran  up  to  him,  exclaiming, 

* I’m  so  glad  you’ve  come  back.’  He  put  his  hand  up,  as  if  to  repulse  me 
gently,  and  said  gravely,  ‘You  must  not  come  near  me.  I am  dying  in 
Mexicoof  the  sore  throat,  and  I have  come  to  tell  your  father.’  I drew 
back,  grieved  and  shocked,  and  woke.  The  next  day  I told  everyone  of 
my  dream,  and  was  well  laughed  at ; but  my  father  had  not  heard  for 
some  time  past  of  our  friend,  nor  did  he  till  three  weeks  after  I overheard 
a gentleman  say  to  him,  ‘ Well,  doctor,  have  you  heard  about  your  friend 

H V My  father  having  replied  in  the  negative,  the  gentleman 

continued,  ‘I  was  told  he  died  at  Mexico,  three  weeks  ago,  of  sore 
throat.  ’ “ Lita  Jarratt.” 

In  answer  to  some  questions,  Mrs.  Jarratt  adds  : — 

(1)  “My  old  friend’s  name  was  George  J.  Hansen.  I Remember  my 
father  remarking  that  my  dream  must  have  occurred  at  the  same  tin#  as 
the  death,  or  at  any  rate  close  upon  it. 

vin.] 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

353 

7 (2)  “As  the  occurrence  took  place  some  20  years  ago,  as  well  as  I can 
remember,  it  would  be  a little  .difficult  to  find  the  people  to  whom  I told 
my  dream  before  its  fulfilment,  but  I told  it  to  everyone  who  would  listen, 
which  they  were  not  all  inclined  to  do,  or  if  they  did,  they  ridiculed 
me  heartily.” 

Mrs.  Jarratt’s  mother,  Mrs.  Farrar,  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ I beg  to  state  that  I perfectly  remember  my  daughter  telling  me  all 
about  her  dream  within  a few  hours  of  its  having  occurred.  It  afterwards 
struck  us  all  (her  father  as  well  as  myself  and  several  friends,  most  of 
whom  unfortunately  are  since  dead  or  have  disappeared)  as  being  very 
remarkable  on  account  of  its  having  occurred  almost  simultaneously,  as 
far  as  we  could  learn,  with  Mr.  Hansen’s  actual  decease.” 

Miss  H.  Franconi  wrote  to  us  as  follows  from  1237,  Stockton  Street, 
San  Francisco : — 

“July  13th,  1884. 

“In  regard  to  the  dream  that  my  friend  Mrs.  Jarratt  had,  I only 
remember,  as  it  is  many  years  ago,  that  she  dreamt  of  Mr.  Hansen  and 
told  me  all  about  it  the  following  morning — but  what  the  dream  was 
about  I cannot  remember.” 

; [In  conversation,  Mrs.  J arratt,  who  is  a very  clear-headed  and  sensible 
witness,  gave  me  the  additional  detail  that  even  in  her  dream  “sore 
throat  ” struck  her  as  an  odd  thing  to  die  of.  This  is  not  a point  as  to 
which  memory  can  at  all  be  relied  on ; but  the  mere  fact  that  it  seems  to  be 
remembered  is  some  slight  confirmation  of  the  evidence  that  the  actual 
disease  was  mentioned  in  the  dream.  The  degree  of  exactitude  in  the 
coincidence  does  not,  however,  seem  to  have  been  established  with 
certainty  even  at  the  time.] 

The  next  case  is  uncorroborated ; but  the  style  of  the  narrator 
does  not  suggest  exaggeration.  If  the  description  is  accurate  the 
dream  was  remarkably  vivid,  and  included  a minute  point  of 
correct  detail.  It  is  from  Mr.  E.  J.  Hector,  of  Valencia,  Port  Pirie, 
South  Australia. 

“July  5th,  1884. 

(121)  “On  the  night  of  my  father’s  death,  the  31st  July,  1863, 1 went 
to  bed  as  usual,  about  11  p.m.,  in  my  usual  good  health,  with  a candle 
and  matches  on  a chair  at  the  side  of  my  bed.  I usually  read  for  half-an- 
hour  in  bed,  and  did  so  on  this  occasion.  I remember  distinctly  my  last 
ponderings  were  on  the  very  unsatisfactory  scheme  of  life.  Man  learns 
gradually  from  childhood  to  mature  age ; and  just  when  he  has  acquired  by 
experience  and  observation  the  knowledge  how  to  make  the  best  of  life,  he 
dies ; and  his  successor  has  to  start  at  the  same  point  as  he  started  from. 
Whether  I thought  of  my  ' father  in  connection  with  this,  I do  not 
remember.  In  the  night  or  morning  I had  a very  vivid  dream.  I saw  my 
father  in  bed  at  the  Savings’  Bank,  in  the  room  he  usually  occupied ; there 
was  a sperm  candle  burning  on  a chair  close  to  his  bed.  I was  sitting  in  a 
chair  close  to  his  bed,  and  saw  that  he  was  dying  and  felt  very  distressed  ; 
he  was  lying  on  his  back  and  turned  round  and  looked  at  me,  saying,  with 

354  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chaW 

a smile,  ‘ Never  mind,  my  dear  boy,  I feel  that  I am  going/  and  seemed  to 
be  dying.  The  next  thing  was  total  darkness.  I must  have  waked  up 
for  I found  the  matches,  and  to  reassure  myself  lighted  the  candle,  glad  to 
find  it  was  a dream.  It  struck  me  as  the  most  vivid  I had  ever  had,  but 
I confidently  banished  it  at  once,  and  slept  soundly  again  till  morning.  I 
looked  at  my  watch  and  noted  the  time ; it  was  4 a.m.  * 

“ The  dream  never  troubled  me  again,  until  I saw  a man  coming  to 
me  in  the  vineyard,  at  about  10  a.m.,  with  the  fatal  telegram  from  a 
friend,  that  my  father  was  dead ; but  as  soon  as  I saw  a strange  man 
hurrying  down  to  me,  a presentiment  occurred  to  me  that  my  dream 
had  been  true.  I may  say  that  I never  believed  in  dreams,  and  do 
not/  since  that  event,  which  I think  was  only  a most  extraordinary, 
coincidence,  and  was  just  the  continuation  of  my  train  of  thought, 
commenced  during  my  waking  moments  and  continued  throughout  my 
sleep,  or  perhaps,  rather  renewed,  as  it  is  not  likely  I should  continue 
dreaming  from,  say  11.30  p.m.  until  4 a.m.  Strange  to  say,  the  same  smile 
was  on  my  father’s  face  when  I (at  6 p.m.,  or  eight  hours  after  he  was 
fottiid  dead  in  his  bed)  saw  him,  and  he  lay  in  the  room  I dreamt  he  was  in, 
and  the  wick  of  the  sperm  candle  at  his  side  was  bent  towards  the  door, 
precisely  as  I saw  it  in  my  dream,  on  the  chair.  The  servant  told  ns  he 
went  to  bed  as  usual  at  10  to  11  p.m.,  and  not  getting  up  as  usual,  she 
knocked  at  his  door,  but  no  answer  being  given,  opened  the  door  at  8 a.ih., 
and  found  him  dead. 

“ I had  no  cause  of  anxiety.  My  father  was  in  excellent  health.  This 
was  the  first  vivid  dream  I ever  had,  and  I do  not  remember  dreaming  of 
others  dying,  or  doing  anything  extraordinary.  I am  not  much  of  a dreamer. 

“ Since  then,  however,  I had  a vivid  dream  of  the  death  of  my  mother 
— not  so  clear  or  impressive  as  the  other — but  nothing  happened,  and  1 
remember  tracing  this  also  to  some  kindred  train  of  thought,  just  before 
dropping  off  to  sleep.  I am  not  a believer  in  any  premonitory  spiritual  * 
communication.  “E.  J.  Hector.” 

The  South  Australian  Register  for  August  1,  1863,  says  that  Mr. 
John  Hector,  manager  of  the  Savings’  Bank  of  S.  Australia,  having 
retired  to  rest  in  his  usual  good  health,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  in  the 
morning,  and  that  the  doctor  pronounced  death  to  have  occurred  from  * 
apoplexy  about  three  hours  previously. 

[It  is  clearly  by  a slip  that  Mr.  E.  J.  Hector  has  spoken  of  the  night 
of  the  31st  of  July  instead  of  the  30th.] 

The  coincidence  in  this  case,  as  in  any  other,  may  have  been 
accidental,  as  the  narrator  supposes ; bufc  he  does  not  tell  us  what 
part  of  his  previous  train  of  thought  found  its  “ continuation  ” in  the 
wick  of  the  sperm  candle — which,  if  rightly  remembered,  looks  like  a 
fragment  of  telepathic  clairvoyance. 

The  next  two  cases  are  from  Mrs.  Freese,  of  Granite  Lodge, 
Chislehurst.  The  occurrence  of  several  such  experiences  to  the  same 
person  is  in  itself  a point  of  interest,  provided  that  that  person'fe; 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

30& 

recollection  as  to  their,  having  been  of  an  exceptionally  vivid  and 
disturbing  character  can  be  relied  on.  , 

r “March,  1884. 

(122)  “In  July,  1871,  my  aunt  Mary  staying  with  me,  and  tny 
hu&banc^  not  feeling  at  all  well,  it  was  decided  he  should  go  to  H.  to  spend 
a fortnight  at  the  Vicarage  with  my  married  sister,  Mrs.  B.  This  place 
was  specially  chosen  because  he  enjoyed  so  much  riding  with  my  brother-in- 
law  or  alone,  as  the  case  might  be,  and  horse-exercise  was  so  good  for  him, 

a A few  days  after,  I had  a vivid  dream  about  him,  which  I told  to  my 
aunt  at  breakfast  time.  I dreamed  I was  walking  along  the  road  to  H., 
about  njidway  between  the  N.  station  and  the  Vicarage,  when  I saw  my 
husband  sitting  on  a gate  by  the  roadside.  I was  struck  by  his  sad 
expression  of  countenance,  and  went  up  to  him  asking  him  if  he  was 
enjoying  himself.  ‘Not  at  all/  said  he,  and  added,  ‘I  have  just  been 
thinking  I will  go  on  to  the  station  and  take  the  train  home,  and  will  you 
believe  it,  they  won’t  let  me  ride  either  of  the  horses.’  While  expressing 
my  astonishment  I woke. 

“ I remarked  to  my  aunt  upon  the  absurdity  of  the  part  about  the 
horses,  as  they  were  the  chief  inducement  for  him  to  pay  this  visit,  and 
were  always  before  at  his  disposal.  I heard  from  my  husband  every  day, 
but  he  wrote  always  cheerfully,  and  made  no  reference  to  the  horses  at  all. 
A few  days  later  he  returned  earlier  than  he  was  expected,  and  in  the 
evening,  when  walking  with  him  in  the  garden,  he  began  to  describe  to  me 
his  visit,  telling  me  he  had  not  enjoyed  it  at  all.  He  had  been  very 
wretched  and  lonely  (for  my  sister  had  been  unusually  busy,  also  her 
husband),  and  that  one  day  in  a lonely  walk  towards  N.  he  sat  on  a gate 
by  the  roadside  to  rest,  and  almost  made  up  his  mind  to  go  on  to  N. 
and  take  the  first  train  back  to  town,  telegraphing  to  my  sister 
some  excuse,  but,  fearing  to  hurt  their  feelings,  he  desisted ; and, 

‘ worse  than  that/  said  he,  ‘ what  will  you  say  when  I tell  you  I have  not 
been  once  on  horseback.  For  some  reason  or  another  they  would  jaot  let 
tue  ride  either  horse.  One  went  down  the  other  day,  and  in  future,  I 
believe,  no>  one  is  to  ride  them.’  I kept  calling  out,  ‘ My  dream ! my 
dream ! ’ as  he  went  on,  and  when  I related  it  to  my  husband  he  could 
scarcely  believe  it.  He  would  not  write  either  about  his  depression  or 
disappointment^  as  he  did  not  wish  to  cloud  me. 

“ Octavia  Freese.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Freese  adds : — 

“ I do  not  think  I am  given  to  vivid  dreams.  That  about  my  husband 
was  exceptionally  vivid.  I call  exceptionally  vivid  a dream  that  takes  hold 
of  me,  and  that  I cannot  forget  all  the  next  day.  The  aunt  to  whom  I 
told  it  has  since  died.  I have  no  idea  whether  my  husband  sat  on  the  gate 
before  or  after  my  dream,  nor  did  I try  to  ascertain  that  at  the  time/r 

(|23)  “In  September,  1881,  I had  another  curious  dream,  so  vivid 
that  I seemed  to  see  it. 

*{  My  two  boys  of  18  and  16  were  staying  in  the  Black  Forest,  under 
the  dare  of  a Dr.  Fresenius.  I must  say  here  that  I always  supposed  the 
boys"  would  go  everywhere  together,  and  I never  should  have  supposed 
that  Ain  that  lonely  country,  so  new  to  them,  they  would  be  out  after  dark* 

356  DREAMS-  WHICH  MA  Y BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

My  husband  and  I were  staying  at  St.  Leonards,  and  one  Saturday  night  I 
woke  at  about  12  o’clock  (rather  before,  as  I heard  it  strike)  having  just 
seen  vividly  a dark  night  on  a mountain,  and  my  eldest  boy  lying  on  his 
back  at  the  bottom  of  some  steep  place,  his  eyes  wide  open  and  saying, 
“ Good-bye,  mother  and  father,  l shall  never  see  you  again.’  I woke  with 
a feeling  of  anxiety,  and  the  next  morning  when  I told  it  to  my  husband, 
though  we  both  agreed  it  was  absurd  to  be  anxious,  yet  we  would  write 
and  tell  the  boys  we  hoped  they  would  never  go  out  alone  after  dark.  To 
my ] surprise  my  eldest  boy,  to  whom  I wrote  the  dream,  wrote  back 
expressing  his  great  astonishment,  for  on  that  Saturday  night  he  was 
coming  home  over  the  mountains,  past  11  o’clock  ; it  was  pitch  dark,  and 
he  slipped  and  fell  down  some  12  feet  or  so,  and  landed  on  his  back, 
looking  up  to  the  sky.  However,  he  was  not  much  hurt  and  soon  picked 
himself  up  and  got  home  all  right.  He  did  not  say  what  thoughts  passed 
through  his  mind  as  he  fell. 

“ Oct avi a Freese.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Freese  adds  : — 

“ Before  my  son  wrote  about  his  fall  in  the  Black  Forest,  I related  my 
dream  to  my  husband,  and  as  he  seemed  a little  moved  by  it,  I wrote  an 
account  of  it  to  my  boy,  saying  his  father  did  not  wish  them  to  be  out 
after  dark  alone.  I had  not  told  my  boy  when  it  was,  deeming  that 
immaterial,  but  when  in  his  letter,  received  days  after,  he  said,  * Was  it 
Saturday  night,  because  then  so-and-so  ? ’ I remembered  what  I should 
not  otherwise  have  noted,  that  it  was  Saturday  night ; for  on  the  Sunday 
morning  my  husband,  being  much  worried  about  some  business  matter, 
elected  to  spend  the  morning  with  me  in  the  Helds  instead  of  going  to 
church,  and  as  much  to  divert  his  mind  as  anything  I related  to  him  my 
dream  of  the  night  before.” 

Mrs.  Freese  sent  us  the  letter  from  her  son,  which  contained  the 
following  passage : — 

“With  regard  to  your  dream:  did  you  dream  it  on  September 
3rd  ? if  so  it  was  on  that  night,  coming  home  rather  late,  that 
I fell  down  a precipice  of  8 feet,  or  perhaps  more,  in  the  dark,  and  might 
have  broken  my  neck,  but  didn’t.  However,  I don’t  think  you  will  find  me 
walking  about  after  dark  more  than  I can  help  as  the  roads  are  very  dark, 
and  the  fogs  in  the  village  awful. 

“ Fred.  E.  Freese.” 

[September  3rd,  1881,  was  a Saturday.] 

Mr.  Freese  writes  : — 

“March  17th,  1884. 

“ Mrs.  Freese  has  read  to  me  the  paper  she  has  sent  you,  and  I feel 
bound  to  say  that  both  the  dreams  she  refers  to  concerning  myself  and  our 
eldest  son  I well  remember,  and  noted  them  at  the  time  she  described 
them,  together  with  the  circumstances  that  strangely  accompanied  them. 

“J.  W.  Freese.” 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  noted  them  in  writing , Mr. 
Freese  replies  that  he  did  not.  “ It  struck  me  at  the  time  as  yery 
remarkable,  but  life  was  then  with  me  too  busy  to  leave  time  to  dwell 
upon  the  subject.” 

nil.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC \ ; 357 

§ 7.  In  the  foregoing  samples  the  elements  with  which  the 
dreamer  may  be  supposed  to  have  invested  the  telepathic  impression 
have  been  few  and  simple.  We  now  come  to  cases  where  definitely 
new  elements  have  been  introduced,  and  the  impression  which 
corresponds  with  reality  acts  as  the  germ  of  a quite  imaginary 
dream-picture. 

The  following  narrative  was  taken  down  in  writing  by  Mrs. 
Saxby,  of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon,  at  Tranent  Lawn,  Clevedon,  on 
November  17th,  1883,  and  was  read  over  to  the  narrator,  Miss  C.  A., 
who  certified  that  it  was  correct.  Miss  C.  A.  thinks  that  the  occur- 
rence took  place  in  1855. 

(124)  “ When  we  were  living  at  Leamington,  I had  a remarkable  vision. 
I was  sleeping  with  my  sister  Maria.  Suddenly  the  curtains  of  our  bed,  at 
the  side  I slept,  were  undrawn,  and  Mr.  L.  appeared  standing  there.  He 
said,  addressing  me  by  name,  ‘ My  mother  is  dead/  I tried  to  persuade 
myself  I had  been  dreaming,  and  Maria  said  I had  dreamt  it ; but  after  a 
short  time  the  same  thing  was  done  again,  and  the  same  announcement 
made.  I was  rather  chaffed  at  breakfast  because  of  the  story  I told.  After 
breakfast  I went  into  the  drawing-room  to  practise.  Presently  I heard, 
myself  called,  and  1 went  out  on  the  balcony  to  listen.  It  was  the  daughter 
of  the  man  whom  I had  seen  twice  at  night,  and  the  granddaughter  of  the 
old  lady  whose  death  had  been  announced.  She  was  riding  on  horseback. 
She  said,  1 Have  you  heard  ? My  father  is  sent  for,  and  mv  grandmother  is 
dead ! ’ ” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  percipient’s  sister  : — 

“ November  24th,  1883. 

“ I quite  recollect  my  sister  Charlotte  telling  me  of  the  apparition  or 
vision  she  saw  of  our  friend  appearing  at  her  bedside  and  saying  t his 
mother  was  dead,’  and  its  being  corroborated  the  next  morning  by  his 
daughter  riding  up  to  our  house,  and  telling  us  her  ‘ grannie  was  dead.’  She 
was  taken  seriously  ill  the  night  before,  her  father  was  sent  for,  and  she 
died  soon  after  his  arrival.  “ A.  M.  A.”. 

* 

It,  seems  safer  to  regard  this  experience  as  a dream,  thaif  as 
that  very  much  rarer  phenomenon,  a waking  hallucination ; but  we 
must  - not  overlook  the  importance  of  the  fact  that  the  dream  was 
almost  immediately  repeated.  This  feature  has  occurred  be/ore,  and 
will  occur  again  ;x  and  it  is  one  which  seems  to  be  decidedly  commoner 
in  cases  of  coincident  or  (as  we  should  say)  veridical  dreams  than  in 
dreams  generally.  Inquiries  which  have  recently  been  made  of  more’ 
than  2000  persons,  taken  at  random,  have  shown  that  less  than  10  per 
cent,  of ’them  could  recall  having  even  on  a single  occasion  dreamt  the 

i See  pp.  330,  340,  343,  365,  3?0,  and  Chap.  iii.  of  the  Supplement. 

358  DREAMS  WHICH  MA 7 BE  REASONABLY  [chap; 

same  dream  more  than  once  on  the  same  night — though  it  is  of  course 
by  no  means  uncommon  to  have  a fixed  familiar  dream  which  recurs 
again  and  again  during  long  tracts  of  life.1 * *  No  doubt  memory 
cannot  be  entirely  trusted  on  such  a matter ; but  it  may  be  said  with 
tolerable  confidence  that  recurrences  on  the  same  night  are,  decidedly 
rare ; and  it  is  therefore  most  unlikely  that  this  particular  feature 
should  by  accident  occur  with  noticeable  frequency  in  the  com- 
paratively small  group  of  dreams  which  have  corresponded  with  a 
real  external  event. 

In  the  next  case,  the  details  and  images  supplied  are  of  a medical 
sort,  and  have  distinct  reference  to  the  dreamers  own  profession.  The 
first  part  of  the  account  is  from  Mr.  C.  Burges,  of  4,  Lincoln’s  Inn 
Fields,  and  is  given  here  by  the  kind  permission  of  the  Phasmato- 
logical  Society  of  Oxford.  Mr.  Burges  has  revised  it  for  publication. 

(125)  “Although  I am  now  a solicitor,  I was  for  the  first  8 years  of  my 
career  a sailor,  and  on  one  of  my  voyages,  I,  being  the  second  officer  of  an 
Indiaman,  had  a cabin  in  common  witli  the  doctor  of  the  ship.  The  doctor  4 * 
was  named  John  Woolcott.  As  second  officer,  I,  of  course,  had  the  middle 
watch,  which  meant  my  being  on  deck  between  12  midnight  and  4 a.m. 
every  night.  I went  down  to  the  cabin  at  the  end  of  the  watch,  at  about ' 
4.30  one  morning,  and  turned  in  as  usual.  Some  time  before  I had  to  get 
up  to  relieve  the  deck  at  8,  the  doctor  called  me  up,  and  said  that  he  had 
had  a terrible  dream.  He  thought  that  he  saw  his  mother  dying,  and 
whilst  she  was  lying  in  that  state  a cousin,  a medical  man,  who  was  a 
surgeon  in  the  Artillery,  and  whom  he  believed  to  be  at  that  moment  in 
China  (it  was  the  time  of  the  Chinese  war,  in  1845),  had  suddenly 
appeared  in  the  room,  and  when  he  saw  his  aunt,  said,  6 You  are  entirely 
wrong  in  supposing  what  is  the  matter  with  her  ; she  is  not  dying  from 
what  you  say,  but  from  such  and  such  a complaint, ’ which  he  named. 

I do  not  at  the  present  moment  recollect  what  the  diseases  were, 
but  the  distinction  was  a well  defined  one.  He  also  said  that  another 
surgeon,  who  is  still  living,  and  whose  name  I do  not  like  to,  give, 
was  present,  and  insisted  that  the  patient  was  dying  of  the  complaint 
first  named. 

“ From  that  time  to  the  end  of  the  voyage  the  doctor  was  so  much 
impressed  with  this  dream  that  he  was  quite  a dispirited  man,  sufficiently 
so  to  occasion  remark.  When  our  ship  arrived  in  the  East  India  Docjcs, 
he  came  back  to  me,  as  he  was  just  going  ashore,  I not  being  able  to  leave 
so  soon,  and  said,  i It  is  all  right,  old  fellow,  the  dream  is  all  wrong ; 

1 Two  cases  have  been  reported  to  us  of  a dream  of  death  occurring  to  the  same  person 

on  three  consecutive  nights,  without  any  correspondence  whatever  with  any  simultaneous 

reality.  Another  informant  (the  Rev.  u.  S.  Taylor,  of  1,  Guinea  Street,  Redcliflf,  Bristol) 

reports  a similar  baseless  experience  on  two  consecutive  nights ; and  a fourth  (Mrs.  Bacon,  ‘ 

of  Much  Hadham),  on  either  two  or  three  consecutive  nights,  the  person  dreamt  of  singularly 

enough  dying  suddenly  a week  afterwards.  But  we  do  not  happen  to  have  heard  of  any 
similar  case  where  the  recurrence  was  on  the  same  night. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

309 

via] 

there  is  my  brother  Edward  on  shore,  waiting  for  me,  and  he  is  not 
in  mourning/ 

“ The  fact,  however,  unfortunately  proved  to  be  that  his  mother  had 
died,  and  that  his  cousin,  the  surgeon,  had  returned  from  China  in  charge 
of  invalids,  and  was  present  at  the  death-bed,  as  dreamed*  The  brother, 
on  coming  down  to  meet  the  ship,  had  put  on  coloured  clothes,  so  as  not  to 
give  my  friend  a sudden  shock. 

“G.  B.” 

Mr.  Woolcott,  F.R.C.S.,  consulting  surgeon  of  the  Kent  County 
Ophthalmic  Hospital,  to  whom  the  above  was  sent,  says : — 

“ 4,  Elms  Park  Terrace,  The  Elms,  Ramsgate. 

“December  20th,  1883. 

“ The  statement  about  my  mother’s  death  and  the  dream  at  sea  is 
correct.  The  dream  and  the  death  occurred  at  the  same  time,  or  within  a 
few  days  of  each  other.  I was  on  board  the  Plantagenet , East 
Indiaman,  and  we  had  just  left  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  on  our  homeward 
bound  voyage,  at  which  place  I had  received  letters  from  home  stating 
‘ All  well.’  There  was  more  in  the  dream,  concerning  a post-mortem 
examination,  but  it  is  of  too  painful  a nature  to  mention,  relating  to  the 
difference  of  opinion  concerning  the  nature  of  the  complaint  my  mother 
died  of,  and  the  medical  men  were  of  different  opinions  about  it.  I think 
a very  remarkable  point  about  my  dream  at  sea,  in  1845,  was  that  I 
thought  a cousin  of  mine,  a surgeon  in  the  Royal  Artillery,  was  present 
at  my  mother’s  death.  This  proved  to  be  the  case.  I had  thought  he  was 
away  in  China,  and  had  no  idea  of  when  he  would  return  to  England ; 
but  he  had  unexpectedly  come  back,  and  had  been  summoned  to  her 
bedside  in  consultation,  as  stated  in  the  narrative.  My  cousin  was  James 
E.  T.  Parrett,  late  surgeon  Royal  Artillery,  now  deceased.  This  dream 
haunted  me  frequently  during  the  rest  of  the  voyage  home,  and  on  several 
occasions  awoke  me  in  the  night  thinking  about  it.  I could  not  shake 
it  off.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Woolcott  says  : — 

“ I have  had  startling  dreams  at  other  times,  but  they  have  not  been 
concerning  the  death  of  any  person. 

“John  Woolcott.” 

[Here  the  time-coincidence  cannot  be  brought  with  certainty  closer 
than  a few  days.  On  the  other  hand,  the  detail  of  the  cousin’s  presence 
is  a strong  evidential  point.] 

In  the  next  case,  a definite  scene  is  depicted,  suggestive  of  death 
and  appropriate  to  the  person  who  had  actually  died ; but  everything 
beyond  the  true  impression  of  the  death  is  supplied  by  the  dreamer. 
The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Herbert  Bolland  (n&e  Cary,  granddaughter  of 
th$  translator  of  Dante),  of  7,  Cranbury  Terrace,  Southampton.  The 
experience  was  quite  unique  in  her  life,  and  exemplifies — what  will  be 
suggested  by  other  cases — a possible  effect  of  illness  in  heightening 
the  peifeipient  faculty. 

“ July,  1884.  * 

(126)  “In  September,  1879, 1 was  in  B s,  and  laid  up  with  a rather 

360 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLE  [chap. 

sharp  attack  of  fever,  kept  to  my  room,  and  seeing  no  one.  In  the  middle 
of  one  night  I was  awoke,  as  was  my  husband  also,  by  a most  piercing 
shriek  ; he  knew  it  was  I who  had  cried  aloud,  whilst  I had  thtjen  no  idea 
of  it.  But  I began  to  tell  him  that  I had  been  dreaming  his  sister  was 
teasing  me,  and  I looked  up  and  saw  (and  as  I came  to  that  point  I was 
again  seized  with  horror)  a tall  man,  (lead,  being  carried,  with  his  hair, 
which  was  very  thick,  falling  back  from  his  face.  The  figure  impressed 
me  with  the  idea  of  being  upheld  by  four  men,  but  I did*  not  see  any  of 
them.  I knew  the  figure  at  once,  and  kept  saying,  ‘ The  Coloners  dead, 
the  Coloners  dead/  and  it  was  an  hour  or  two  before  my  husband  could 
calm  me,  and  I could  go  to  sleep  again.  At  last  I did  so,  however,  and 
the  next  sound  we  heard  was  the  servant  knocking  at  our  door,  and  calling 
out,  ‘ Get  up,  sir,  the  Colonel's  dead  ; you're  wanted.' 

“ Colonel  F.  had  died  after  a short  illness,  of  which  1 knew  nothing  at 
all.  My  husband  thought  lie  had  a cold,  but  had  not  named  it  to  me  or 
been  anxious  about  it  himself,  and,  as  far  as  I was  concerned,  my 
acquaintance  with  him  was  of  the  slightest,  so  that  if  I had  been  told  he 
had  a cold,  I should  not  have  thought  about  it  again. 

“ 1 may  add  that  I have  said  many  times,  when  asked  to  explain  it,  I 
believe  it  was  caused  by  Major  White,  who  was  with  the  F.'s,  thinking  of 
us,  and  what  a shock  it  would  be,  as  my  husband  was  the  only  other  R.E. 
officer  there,  and  would  have  to  arrange  for  the  funeral  next  day.  That 
was  what  seemed  to  me  likely,  because  I have  noticed  all  my  life  that  I 
frequently  speak  of  the  subjects  which  are  in  the  thoughts  of  my  friends 
and  companions  without  any  apparent  cause,  and  have  been  accustomed 
to  speak  of  it  as  the  result  of  ‘ my  sixth  sense/  because  I did  not  know 
what  else  to  call  it.  It  has  often  been  a subject  of  annoyance  to  me  in 
one  way,  which  was  that,  with  one  very  dear  friend,  our  letters 
invariably  crossed  (though  very  infrequently  written),  so  that  we  never 
felt  as  if  we  had  an  answer.  She  complained,  and  so  did  I,  but  we  could 
not  alter  it. 

“Kate  E.  Bolland.” 

[We  find  from  the  Army  List  that  Colonel  F.  died  on  September  7tli, 
1879.] 

The  following  is  from  Lieut.-Colonel  Bolland,  R.E.  : — 

“July  20th,  1884. 

“With  regard  to  Colonel  F.,  I cannot  say  I remember  that  Mrs. 
Bolland  mentioned  his  name,  though  she  may  have  done  so  ; but  having 
awoke  me  with  a terrific  scream  at  about  1 a.m.,  on  the  8th  September, 
1879  (which  1 think  was  the  date),  she  told  me  she  had  been  dreaming  of 
my  sister,  and  when  looking  up  to  speak  to  her  she  saw  a tall  man,  dead, 
being  carried  by  four  other  men,  his  head  dropping,  and  long,  thick  hair 
falling  back. 

“She  was  terribly  frightened,  and  it  was  some  time  before  we  again 
got  to  sleep.  The  next  sound  I heard  was  the  servant  knocking  at  my 
door,  and  calling  out,  4 Get  up,  sir,  you  are  wanted  ; the  Colonel  is  dead ! ' 
I had  known  Colonel  F.  was  ill,  but  had  not  thought  seriously  of  it,  nor 
had  I named  it  to  my  wife,  who  had  herself  been  ill  some  days  with  denzie 
fever.  If  I had  thought  of  his  illness  at  all  it  would  have  been  without 

VUI.] 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

361 

any  anxiety,  as  I had  heard  he  was  better,  and  able  to  lie  on  the  sofa. 
is  now  some  years  since  these  things  happened,  and  I may  not  be  correct* 
in  my  remembrance  of  all  details ; but  as  to  both  the  waking 1 and  the 
sleeping  impressions  being  named  to  me  before  the  events  which  they 
seemed  to  have  indicated  were  known,  or  could  be  known,  to  us  in  any  , 
ordinary  way,  I am  positive. 

. “G.  Herbert  Bolland.” 

[In  conversation  with  the  present  writer,  Colonel  Bolland  spontaneously 
referred  to  the  extraordinary  character  of  the  scream.] 

Colonel  Bolland's  account  suggested  some  doubt  in  his  mind  as  to 
whether  his  wife  had  actually  identified  the  dead  man  before  the  news  of 
the  death  was  known  ; and  this  point  was  accordingly  inquired  about.  In 
his  keply,  Colonel  Bolland  mentioned  that  for  some  time  past  his  hearing 
has  been  somewhat  imperfect  and  uncertain,  and  he  continues : — 

“ I can  safely  say  that  Mrs.  Bolland,  from  the  time  of  the  event,  has 
always  said  she  said,  ‘It  is  the  Colonel/  and  I have  never  told  her  that 
I did  not  hear  her,  never  doubting  but  that  she  said  it.  She,  however,  is 
much  surprised  that  I never  mentioned  the  fact  of  not  having  lieai#  it. 
Her  description  at  the  time  left  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  it  was 
Colonel  F.  She  said  she  saw  a long  (or  perhaps  tall)  man  being  carried, 
with  his  long  hair  falling  back.  Colonel  F.  wore  his  hair  long  for  a 
military  man  of  the  present  day,  so  the  short  description  she  gave  me 
identified  the  man,  as  long  hair  is  so  rarely  worn  by  military  men.  We 
may  even  have  discussed  whether  it  was  he,  but  I don't  remember  her 
saying  almost  at  once,  ‘ It  is  the  Colonel.'  ~ My  wife  has  a very  much 
better  memory  for  conversations  than  I have,  so  that  I will  not  undertake 
to  say  that  we  did  not  discuss,  between  1 a.m.  and  6 a.m.,  whether  or  not 
it  was  Colonel  F. ; but  I am  certain  I did  not  hear  my  wife  say  at  once, 
immediately  after  her  short  description  of  the  dream,  ‘It  is  the  Colonel/, 
but  she  may  have  said  it  without  my  hearing  it.  Mrs.  Bolland  is  so 
minutely  accurate  in  repeating  a conversation,  that  I feel  sure  her  version 
is  much  more  to  be  relied  on  than  iny  own." 

And  Mrs,  Bolland  adds  : — 

“July  27th,  1884. 

“ As  regards  my  own  opinion  of  what  happened  after  my  dream  about 
. Colonel  F.,  I have  not,  nor  ever  had,  any  doubt  that  it  was  he  I saw.  I 
can  see  the  whole  scene  before  me  now,  as  I saw  it  then,  and  I cannot  get 
over  my  impression  that  I mentioned  his  name  at  once,  or  rather,  as  soon 
as  I came  upon  the  recollection  of  what  had  made  me  scream.  I think 
I have  told  you  that,  although  my  own  scream  awoke  me,  I did  not  at 
once  know  I had  been  frightened,  or  that  I had  cried  out.  But  in  r 
describing  my  dream  to  my  husband,  I suddenly  came  upon  the  picture 
again,  and  then  I was  so  frightened  it  was  some  time  before  I could  get 
over  it.” 

fl  received  by  pure  accident  a confirmation  of  the  fact  that  Mrs, 
Bolland  mentioned  Colonel  F.  at  the  moment.  I was  sitting  at  tea  with 

1 This  refers  to  another  case,  which  will  be  found  in  Chap,  xii,,  § 6. 

362 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [ouft 

Colonel  and  Mrs.  Holland  ; and  the  conversation  turning  on  telepathy,  but 
*no  mention  having  been  made  of  the  above  case,  a sister  of  Colonel 
TBoUand’s,  who  was  present,  suddenly  said  to  Mrs.  Holland,  “ Do  you 
remember  about  that  time  when  you  called  out,  ‘ There’s  the  Colonel  * ? j> 
It  turned  out  that  she  remembered  these  words  as  having  ocourred  in  a 
letter  from  Mrs.  Holland,  which  described  the  incident  immediately  after 
its  occurrence ; and  neither  of  them  could  recall  that  the  subject  had  been 
afterwards  talked  of  between  them.] 

* 

We  come  now  to  cases  where  a distinctly  fantastic  element 
appears ; the  reality  is  bodied  forth  in  a dream-scene  which  has  no 
relation  to  actual  possibilities. 

The  following  case  is  remarkable  in  that  there  were  two 
percipients,  for  one  of  whom  the  distant  event  was  embodied  in  a 
fantastic,  and  for  the  other  in  a more  normal,  manner.  The  doubling 
of  the  experience  of  course  enormously  increases  the  improbability 
that  the  coincidence  was  accidental ; but  it  is  open  to  us  to  suppose 
that  only  one  of  the  dreams  was  directly  connected  with  the  absent 
friend,  and  that  this  dream  produced  the  other,  on  the  analogy  of 
some  of  the  cases  of  simultaneous  dreaming  already  given.1  Miss 
Varah,  of  40,  James  Street,  Cowley  Road,  Oxford,  writes  : — 

“January,  1885. 

(127)  “A  friend  of  mine,  Mr.  Adams,  was  seriously  ill,  and  we  were 
expecting  his  death.  I had  a dream  that  I saw  the  corpse  of  his  wife  laid 
out  upon  a bed,  though  we  had  no  reason  to  suppose  that  she  was  even  ill. 
A friend  with  whom  I was  staying  also  dreamed  that  she  saw  Mrs.  Adams 
a corpse.  [This  is  not  accurate.]  The  morning’s  post  brought  news  of 
her  dangerous  illness,  and  a telegram  during  the  morning  announced  her 
death.  My  friend  and  I told  each  other  our  dreams  in  the  morning  at 
breakfast.  My  friend  had  called  for  her  letters  before  coming  down  in  the 
morning,  fearing  bad  news.  “Marianne  Varah.”  '* 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Varah  tells  us  that  Mrs.  Adams  died 
between  11  and  1,  on  the  night  of  February  25th,  1876,  and  we  find  the 
25th  given  as  the  date  in  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Sheffield  Daily 
Telegraph;  but  she  docs  not  know  the  exact  hour  of  her  dream.  She  adds, 
“ The  dream  described  is  the  only  one  I believe  I ever  had  of  the  kind.” 

Miss  Varah’s  friend,  the  late  Mrs.  Muller,  wrote  as  follows  : — 

“ 8,  Bevington  Road,  Oxford. 

“January,  1885. 

“I  dreamed  that  I was  at  Hastings,  on  the  shore.  I saw  my 
friend,  Miss  Adams,  running  towards  me.  She  passed  me  by,  and  then  took 
off  her  hat  and  bent  her  head  down  into  the  sea.  I tried  to  grasp  her  by 
her  clothes,  but  she  cried  out,  ‘ Don’t  stop  me,  for  my  mother  is  dying.’ 

} This  alternative  will  be  considered  in  Chap,  xviii.,  on  “ Collective  Cases. n 

vtii.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 303 

In  the  morning  I jumped  out  of  bed  on  hearing  the  post,  and  said  to, 
Marianne  Varah,  * Have  you  had  a letter  from  Mias  Adams  ? There 
must  be  something  the  matter  with  her  mother/  Miss  Varah  answered, 
*1  have  a letter,  but  have  not  opened  it.  1 have  had  a very  strange 
dream,  but  I thought  nothing  of  it,  because  Mr.  Adams  is  so  ill/  Miss 
Varah  then  opened  her  letter,  and  called  out,  ‘You  are  right/  There 
were  a few  lines,  ‘ My  mother  is  dangerously  ill : doctors  say  no  hope. 
We  will  send  a telegram/  The  telegram  came  during  the  morning  of 
February  24th,  1876,  [clearly  a mistake  for  26th,]  saying  she  was  dead. 
She  had  been  in  perfect  health  the  day  before. 

“ Neither  Miss  Varah  nor  myself  are  at  all  given  to  dreams,  and  had 
not  till  then  believed  in  them  at  all. 

“Emily  E.  Muller.” 

The  next  account  is  contained  in  a letter  from  Brigade-Surgeon 
Wright,  Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,  St.  James’  Street,  S.W.,  to  his 
% sister. 

“October  18th,  1884. 

(128)  “You  asked  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  extraordinary 
dream  I had  in  India,  on  the  occasion  of  our  mother's  death.  It  was  more 
vivid  than  an  ordinary  dream,  and  impressed  itself  so  much  on  me  that 
directly  I awoke,  which  was  at  the  conclusion  of  the  dream,  I looked  at 
my  watch,  and,  allowing  for  the  difference  of  time  between  India  and 
England,  my  mother  was  dying  at  the  moment  of  my  dream. 

“I  was  out  deer-stalking  during  the  month  of  April,  1869,  in  the 
territory  of  our  feudatory  chief,  the  Maharajah  of  Gualior,  who  provided 
me  with  a guard  of  Sepoys,  while  in  the  jungle,  to  protect  me  from 
Dacoits.  On  the  night  of  April  15th  I slept  outside  the  village  of 
Kurkurree,  under  a large  variety  of  fig  tree  called  in  India  a burgot  tree. 
I dreamed  that  my  father  (who  died  in  1854)  and  mother  appeared  to  me; 
the  latter  addressed  and  kissed  me  and  asked  me,  ‘ Where  is  Maggie  ? ' [the 
narrator's  wife.]  She  then  receded  gradually  and  disappeared.  I noted 
carefully  the  date  and  hour.  When  I returned  from  there  to  Theusie, 
where  my  regiment  was  stationed,  I got  a letter  from  my  mother,  written 
as  if  she  was  in  excellent  health  and  spirits ; but  soon  after  came  two 
letters,  one  from  my  brother  James,  and  one  from  my  brother-in  l&w, 
Arthur  Wright.  I opened  my  brother's  first,  and,  after  the  first  paroxysms 
of  grief  had  lessened,  eagerly  scanned  it  to  see  if  the  death  corresponded 
with  my  dream,  but  no  date  was  mentioned.  Deeply  have  I often  since 
regretted  not  having  called  somebody  in  before  opening  letter  No.  2 
in  order  to  fully  verify  the  circumstance.  For  really,  now  that  the  sad 
' intelligence  was  known  to  me,  Arthur’s  letter  was  opened  by  me  more  to 
see  if  it  coincided  as  to  the  date  of  her  death  and  my  dream,  and  I then 
found,  that  it  coincided  exactly. 

[ “ T.  Wright.” 

%n  a letter  to  us,  Mr.  Wright  says : — 

j,’\  “October  24th,  1884. 

“The  dream  took  place  about  midnight,  which,  allowing  for  the 
difference  of  time  between  India  and  England,  makes  the  coincidence  very 

364 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

close.  I did  look  at  my  watch  directly  I awoke,  but  regret  very  much  not 
having  taken  written  notes  at  the  time.  I awoke  at  the  end  of  the  dream. 
Death  was  Suggested  to  my  mind  by  seeing  my  mother  accompanied  by  my 
father,  who  had  predeceased  her  by  15  years.  I have  not  often  dreamt  of 
my  relatives  in  a vivid  way.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  lie  adds  : — 

“ I was  not  awake.  The  impression  produced  was  that  arising  from  a 
very  vivid  dream.  The  date  of  my  dream  being  April  15th,  was  far  more 
than  an  inference,  it  was  a certainty ; as  when  I got  the  two  letters 
announcing  my  mother's  death  (one  from  my  brother  and  one  from  my 
brother-in-law)  I opened  my  brother’s  first,  and  after  recovering  somewhat 
from  the  shock  of  the  sad  intelligence,  I eagerly  re-perused  it  to  see  if  the, 
date  of  the  death  corresponded  with  that  of  my  dream,  but  found  that  no 
date  was  mentioned.  1 then  hurriedly  opened  the  second  letter,  with  a 
view  of  seeing  the  date  of  her  death,  and  then  for  the  first  time  learned 
that  she  died  on  the  15th  April,  the  date  of  my  dream.” 

Miss  Wright,  Secretary  of  the  Girls’  Friendly  Society,  3,  Victoria 
Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  S.W.,  says  : — 

“October  18th,  1884. 

“ My  mother  died  ou  April  15th,  1869,  at  8 p.m.  Her  death  waff 
sudden.  She  was  only  24  hours  ill,  and  was  quite  unconscious  for  4 hours 
before  her  death. 

“Lucy  O.  Wright.” 

Here  the  dreamers  mind  embodied  the  idea  of  death  in  the  figure 
of  a long  deceased  relative.  More  commonly  the  imagery  in  such 
cases  is  drawn  from  the  familiar  earthly  symbols  of  death — coffins, 
funeral  processions,  and  graves.  A few  examples  may  be  given  here ; 
others  will  be  found  in  the  Supplement.  The  following  account  is 
from  the  Rev.  0.  C.  Wambey,  of  39,  Canal,  Salisbury. 

“April,  1884. 

(129)  “In  my  bachelor  days  I lived  for  two  years  at  C.,  in  the  out- 
skirts of  London.  On  a certain  night  I dreamed  that  Mr.  W.,  with  whom 
I was  acquainted,  and  myself  were  walking  in  the  cloisters  of  Westminster 
Abbey. 

“He  abruptly  bade  me  ‘Good-bye,'  saying  that  he  must  go  to  a 
particular  gravestone.  I — in  my  dream — entreated  him  not  to  go,  but  to 
come  back  with  me  out  of  the  cloisters.  4 No,  no,'  he  replied,  4 1 must  go, 

I am  fated  to  go.'  With  that  he  broke  from  me,  hurried  to  the  stone,  and 
sank  througli  the  floor.  The  next  morning  I mentioned  the  dream  to 
my  landlady,  and  told  her  it  was  my  firm  conviction  that  my  friend  was 
dead. 

“ The  next  morning's  post  brought  me  a letter  from  my  brother,  who 
stated  that  on  the  previous  night  Mr.  W.  had  died  suddenly  from  disease" 
of  the  heart.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wambey  says  : — 

VIII.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC.  365 

“May  17th,  1884.  4 

, “ This  occurred  between  June,  1855,  and  June,  1856;  I forget  the 
month  and  day. 

“I  mentioned  the  dream  to  my  landlady  next  morning.  The  last 
time  I saw  Mr.  W.,  he  was  in  his  usual  health,  and  I had  received  no 
intimation  whatever  that  he  was  ailing,  before  I had  the  dream. 

, “Just  at  this  time  I cannot  recall  any  dream  I may  have  had  of  a 
friend's  death,  but  I have  dreamt  of  a friend’s  marriage,  which  dream 
was  fulfilled  by  the  event,  which  took  many  by  surprise ; it  appeared 
Wholly  improbable.  Nothing  had  occurred  to  lead  me  to  dream  of 
Mr.  W .” 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  N.  T.  Menneer,  Principal  of  Torre 
College,  Torquay. 

“December  18th,  1883. 

(130)  “I  thought  you  would  be  interested  in  the  following  account 
of  a strange  dream  that  came  under  my  notice  some  26  years  ago. 

“ My  wife,  since  deceased,  had  a brother  residing  at  Sarawak,  and  at 
the  time  to  which  I refer,  staying  with  the  Raja,  Sir  James  Brooke. 

“The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  second  volume  of  ‘The 
Raja  Of  Sarawak,’  by  Gertrude  L.  Jacob,  p.  238.  “ ‘Mr.  Wellington  ’ (my 

wife’s  brother)  ‘was  killed  in  a brave  attempt  to-  defend  Mrs.  Middleton 
and  her  children.’  The  Chinese,  it  appears,  taking  Mr.  Wellington  for 
the  Raja’s  son,  struck  off  his  head. 

“And  now  for  the  dream.  I was  awoke  one  night  by  my  wife, 
who  started  from  her  sleep,  terrified  by  the  following  dream.  She  saw 
her  headless  brother  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  with  his  head  lying 
on  a coffin  by  his  side.  I did  my  best  to  console  my  wife,  who  continued 
to  be  much  distressed  for  some  considerable  time.  At  length  she  fell 
asleep  again,  to  be  awoke  by  a similar  dream.  In  the  morning,  and 
for  several  days  after,  she  constantly  referred  to  her  dream,  and 
anticipated  sad  news  of  her  brother. 

“ And  now  comes  the  strangest  part  of  the  story.  When  the  news 
reached  England  I computed  approximately  the  time,  and  found  it 
coincided  with  the  memorable  night  to  which  I have  referred . 

“N.  T.  Menneer.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Menneer  adds : — 

“ My  deceased  wife  never  had,  as  far  as  I know,  similar  distressing 
dreams  of  death  to  which  no  real  event  corresponded. 

“ There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Chinese  struck  off  his  head.  Particulars 
of  his  fate  were  sent  to  Mr.  Wellington’s  father  by  the  Raja  himself. 

u In  saying  I calculated  the  time  and  found  it  to  correspond  approcci- 
mately,  I probably  gave  you  a wrong  impression.  I did  not  note  down 
the  date  of  the  dream,  but  when  the  news  reached  England  I calculated 
the  usual  time  of  such  a voyage,  and  found  it  corresponded  with  the  time 
I considered  had  elapsed  Since  the  night  of  the  dream.” 

[JPrqfessor  Sidgwick,  after  an  interview  with  Mr.  Menneer,  on 
September  17,  1884,  wrote 

“ He  said  that  Mrs.  Menneer  had  no  definite  idea  where  her  brother 

366 

DREAMS  WHICH  MA  Y BE  REASONABLY  [chap;  . 

haJd  gone ; they  had  not  heard  from  him  since  his  departure ; fche  had 
certainly  no  idea  that  he  would  be  engaged  in  military  operations  at  all, 
still  less  that  he  would  be  engaged  with  Chinese.  In  fact  she  wAs  in  no 
state  of  alarm  about  him  at  all.  Mr.  Menneer  said  that  they  did  not 
put  down  the  date  of  the  dream  at  the  time,  and  that  when  the  news 
came  he  could  not  remember  it  exactly  : but  he  took  pains  to  calculate  it 
at  the  time,  and  satisfied  himself  that  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  death  as 
nearly  as  he  could  reckon.  He  had  not  been  a believer  in  dreams 
previously.  He  heard  the  particulars  of  the  death  from  Mr.  Wellington, 
the  father.”]  * 

This  dream,  if  it  in  to  be  telepathically  explained,  must  apparently 
have  been  due  to  the  last  flash  of  thought  in  the  brother’s  conscious- 
ness. It  may  seem  strange  that  a definite  picture  of  his  mode  of 
death  should  present  itself  to  a man  in  the  instant  of  receiving  an 
unexpected  and  fatal  blow ; but,  as  Hobbes  said,  “ thought  is  quick.” 
The  coffin,  at  any  rate,  may  be  taken  as  an  item  of  death-imagery 
supplied  by  the  dreamer’s  mind.  The  repetition  of  the  dream  should 
again  be  noted  (p.  357). 

In  the  following  cases  the  imagery  of  death  is  still  more 
elaborately  developed.  Mrs.  Hilton,  a lady  actively  engaged  in  most 
practical  work,  and  not  in  the  least  a “ visionaiy  ,”  has  given  us  the 
following  accounts. 

“ 234,  Burdett  Road,  E. 

“ April  10th,  1883. 

(131)  “The  dream  which  I am  about  to  relate  occurred  about  2 years 
ago.  I seemed  to  be  walking  in  a country  road,  with  high  grassy  banks  on 
either  side.  Suddenly  I heard  the  tramp  of  many  feet.  Feeling  a strange 
sense  of  fear,  I called  out,  4 Who  are  these  people  coming  ? ’ A voice  above 
me  replied,  ‘ A procession  of  the  dead.’  I then  found  myself  on  the  bank 
looking  into  the  road  where  the  people  were  walking,  five  or  six  abreast. 
Hundreds  of  them  passed  by  me — neither  looking  aside  nor  looking  at 
each  other.  They  were  people  of  all  conditions  and  in  all  ranks  of  life.  I 
saw  no  children  amongst  them.  I watched  the  long  line  of  people  go  away 
into  the  far  distance,  but  I felt  no  special  interest  in  any  of  them,  until.  I 
saw  a middle-aged  Friend,  dressed  as  a gentleman  farmer.  I pointed  to 
him  and  called  out,  ‘Who  is  that,  please  V He  turned  round  and  said  in 
a loud  voice,  ‘lam  John  M.,  of  Chelmsford.’  Then  my  dream  encfed. 
Next  day,  when  my  husband  returned  from  his  office  he  told  me  that  John 
M.,  of  Chelmsford,  had  died  the  previous  day. 

“ I may  add  that  I only  knew  the  Friend  in  question  by  sight  and 
cannot  recollect  ever  speaking  to  him.” 

[We  find  from  a newspaper  obituary  that  J.  ^M.’s  death  took  place*  on  ; 
January  14th,  1880.] 

(132)  “ About  a year  ago,  I had  a dream  very  similar  to  the  preceding 
one.  Tne  locality  was  the  same.  The  only  difference  was  that  I was 
standing  in  the  road,  trying  to  prevent  a little  girl  from  joining  the.  pro- 

36? 

vni.}  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

cession. ' The  lady,  in  whose  charge  the  child  was  and  who  was  standing  by’ 
me  iri  the  road,  said,  * I am  giving  her  into  the  charge  of  Charles  P.,  of 
Darlington,'  mentioning  the  name  of  a well-known  member  of  the  Society 
of  Friends.  I replied,  ‘That  is  not  Charles  P.’  I called  out  as  before,  - 
‘ Who  are  you,  please  1 ’ A young  man  in  the  procession  turned  round 
and  said*  I am  J.  O.'  Next  morning  I heard  that  J.  G.  had  died  rather 
suddenly  in  the  night.  I knew  this  young  man,  but  not  intimately,  and 
I had  not  seen  him  for  months. 

“Again,  a third  time,  I found  myself  in  the  same  place,  but  my  terror 
was  so  extreme,  that  I kneeled  on  the  bank  and  prayed  that  I might  not 
witness  the  march  of  the  dead.  Instantly  I was  removed  and  the  tramp 
of  the  terrible  procession  ceased.  I never  discovered  that  anyone  whom 
I knew  died  at  the  time  of  this  last  dream. 

. “ In  each  of  these  three  dreams  I seemed  to  be  under  the  influence 
and  dread  of  some  unseen  power. 

“Marie  Hilton.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  the  first  of  these  cases,  Mrs.  Hilton  says : — 

“ I did  not  know  that  John  M.  was  ill,  and  had  not  even  heard  his 
name  mentioned  ; I could  not  trace  any  reason  why  he  should  have  been  in 
my  thoughts.”  • 

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  the  second  case,  she  says  : — 

“ I recognised  the  little  girl  as  the  child  of  a friend.  I had  not  heard 
anything  about  the  child  to  make  me  dream  of  her.  Charles  P.  had 
been  dead  for  some  years  at  the  date  of  the  dream.” 

The  absence  of  any  ascertained  coincidence  on  the  third 
occasion,  is,  of  course,  as  far  as  it  goes,  an  argument — but  not  a strong 
one — in  favour  of  regarding  the  two  previous  coincidences  as 
accidental.  The  tendency  on  the  dreamer’s  part  to  symbolise  death 
in  one  particular  way  is  neither  against  nor  in  favour  of  the 
telepathic  explanation.1 

While  on  the  subject  of  symbolic  dreams,  I may  observe  thaf 
many  persons  profess  to  have  a particular  recurrent  dream,  which  in 
itself  has  no  obvious  relation  to  - death,  but  which  proves  in  fact  to 
coincide  more  or  less  closely  with  deaths  or  other  calamities  that 
affect  them.  I need  hardly  say  that  such  statements  have  no 
evidential  value,  unless  we  can  be  sure  that  they  are  more  than  the 
loose*  assertions  of  persons  who  see  no  importance  in  noting  misses  as 
well  as  hits,  and  to  whom  it  is  no  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the 
supposed  correspondence  that  the  two  events  were  separated  perhaps 
by  a month’s  interval.  In  most  of  such  cases,  indeed,  the  dream 

is*worth  noting  that  these  dreams— for  all  their  bizarrerte — seem  to  belong  to  a 
known  type.  Our  friend,  Mr.  J.  A.  Symonds,  has  given  us  an  account  of  a Swiss 
Todtm-vothSeher,  who  sees  a procession  of  the  dead  going  along  a path  with  a high  bank 
onone  side, 

368 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

precedes  the  event  and  is  professedly  taken  as  a “ warning  ” ; so 
that,  however  well  attested,  they  could  have  no  place  in  this  book. 
Occasionally,  however,  a person  who  professes  this  remarkable  gift, 
can  supply  sufficiently  circumstantial  evidence  to  have  sortie  claim  to 
attention  ; and  one  rather  striking  instance  of  the  sort  will  be  found 
in  the  Supplement. 

§ 8.  We  come  now  to  the  final  class  of  cases,  where  the  dreamer 
seems,  as  it  were,  to  be  transported  to  the  actual  scene  of  the  event. 
These  cases,  like  the  final  cases  of  the  6t.h  chapter,  cannot  but  suggest 
certain  phenomena  of  the  waking  state  which  are  other  than  those 
of  thought-transference — the  phenomena  of  so-called  clairvoyance. 
But  I must  again  draw  attention  to  the  radical  differences  in 
the  phenomena  which  that  word  may  be  made  to  cover.  There 
axe  certain  alleged  facts  of  waking  clairvoyance  which,  if  true, 
would  drive  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  percipient’s  powers 
of  vision  were  independent  of  the  thoughts,  either  actually 
passing  oi*  latent,  in  the  minds  of  others.  No  doubt  very  many 
facts  have  been  loosely  ascribed  to  clairvoyance,  which  we  should 
now  regard  as  simple  examples  of  thought-transference.  This  has 
been  owing  partly  to  the  blindness  of  writers  on  clairvoyance 
to  the  enormous  difficulties  which  the  assumption  of  such  a faculty 
involves ; but  still  more  to  the  lack,  until  lately,  of  accurate 
experiments  in  thought-transference.  But  there  remain  facts  which — 
if  the  testimony  of  Robert  Houdin  and  other  experts  can  be  trusted — 
no  possible  extension  of  the  theory  of  thought-transference  will  cover ; 
and  in  which,  though  the  particular  result  obtained  depended  in  some 
manner  on  the  particular  person  who  sought  to  obtain  it,  the  range 
of  perception  altogether  transcended  the  past  or  present  contents  of 
that  person’s  mind.  Now  with  such  cases  as  these  we  have  nothing 
to  do  in  the  present  work.  Even  should  some  of  the  examples  to  be 
adduced  seem  to  take  us  beyond  the  confines  of  thought-transference 
in  any  literal  sense,  they  will  still  not  take  us  beyond  the  confines  of 
telepathy — of  a theory  which  implies  some  sort  of  influence  of  the 
mind  of  an  agent  on  the  mind  of  a percipient.  The  percipient  m$y 
observe  a scone,  into  the  midst  of  which  he  finds  himself  mentally 
transported,  with  such  completeness  of  detail,  and  for  such  a length 'of 
time,  as  at  any  rate  to  suggest  some  actual  exercise  on  it  of  his  own 
independent  perceptional  powers ; but  it  will  still  be  a scene  with 
some  principal  actor  in  which  he  is  in  some  way  linked.  He  may  see 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

369 

Tilt.] 

a death-bed  and  the  surrounding  mourners ; but  we  have  no  sort  of 
reason  to  suppose  that  he  could  similarly  see  any  death-bed.  There 
has,  at  any  rate,  been  an  agent,  in  the  sense  of  a particular  person 
whose  actual  presence  in  the  scene  has  to  be  accepted  as  a condition 
of  the*  percipient’s  imagined  presence  ; and  however  novel  and 
exceptional  the  way  in  which  the  percipient’s  range  of  knowledge 
may  seem  to  be  extended,  these  further  glimpses  still  take  place 
apparently  not  in  any  chance  direction,,  but  in  a direction  marked 
out  by  his  previous  affinities  with  other  minds.  But  in  fact  the 
process  need  not  seem  so  exceptional,  if  we  recall  once  more  the  right 
which  experiment  has  given  us  to  draw  on  parts  of  the  agent’s  mind 
which  are  below  the  level  of  ostensible  consciousness.  For  in  none 
of  the  cases  to  be  here  cited  do  the  percipient’s  impressions  extend 
beyond  what  has  been  before  the  mind — though  certainly  beyond 
what  has  been  before  the  attention — of  persons  actually  present  at 
the  scene. . We  may  perhaps  be  led  sometimes  to  conceive  several  of 
these  minds  as  contributing  to  the  impression.  But  some  of  the 
experimental  results  have  already  introduced  on  a small  scale  the 
notion  of  joint  agency,1  and  may  thus  enable  us  to  maintain  the 
analogy  between  experimental  and  the  spontaneous  telepathy  in 
a manner  which  least  of  all  might  have  been  expected. 

I may  cite  at  once  the  two  cases  which  seem  the  furthest  removed 
from  any  of  the  preceding,  inasmuch  as  the  “agency”  in  them  is 
specially  hard  to  conceive.  They  happen  to  be  at  the  two  extremes 
of  the  trivial  and  the  tragic.  The  first  is  reported  by  a witness — 
Miss  Busk,  of  16,  Montagu  Street,  W. — who  is  strongly  adverse  to 
the  telepathic  theory,  and  holds  the  view  that  all  the  alleged  coin- 
cidence's are  accidental,  and  that  the  more  numerous  they  are,  the 
more  clearly  accidental  must  they  be. 

(133)  “ I dreamt  that  I was  walking  in  a wood  in  my  father’s  place  in 
Kent,  in  a spot  well  known  to  me,  where  there  was  sand  under  the  firs; 

I stumbled  over  some  objects,  which  proved  to  be  the  heads,  left  pro- 
truding, of  some  ducks  buried  in  the  sand.  The  idea  impressed  me  os  so 
comical  that  I fortunately  mentioned  it  at  breakfast  next  morning,  and 
one  or  two  persons  remember  that  1 did  so.  Only  an  hour  later  it 
happened  that  the  old  bailiff  of  the  place  came  up  for  some  instructions 
unexpectedly,  and  as  he  was  leaving  he  said  he  must  tell  us  a strange  thing 
that  had  happened : there  had  been  a robbery  in  the  farmyard,  and  some 
stolen  ducks  had  been  found  buried  in  the  sand,  with  their  heads  protruding, 
in  tiie  very  spot  where  I had  seen  the  same.  The  farm  was  underlet,  and  I 

1 See  Professor  Lodge’s  experiment,  p.  50 ; and  the  remarks  on  M.  Richet’s  later 
results,  p.  80. 

370 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [cuak 

had  not  even  any  interest  in  the  ducks,  to  carry  my  thoughts  towards 
them  under  the  nefarious  treatment  they  received. 

“R.  H.  Buafo.” 

Miss  Busk’s  sister,  Mrs.  Pitt  Byrne,  who  was  present  when  this  dream 
was  told,  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ I distinctly  remember,  and  have  often  since  spoken  of,  the* circum- 
stance of  Miss  R.  H.  Busk’s  relating  to  me  her  dream  of  ducks  buried  in 
the  wood,  before  the  bailiff  who  reported  the  incident  came  up  to  town. 

44  J.  Pitt  Byrne.” 

The  next  case  is  remarkable  for  the  number  of  points  of' corre- 
spondence, though  the  dream  is  typically  fantastic  and  confused.  The 
narrative  is  from  Mrs.  Storie,  of  8,  Gilmour  Road,  Edinburgh.  It  was 
written  by  her,  she  1 ells  us,  the  day,  or  the  day  after,  the, news  of  the 
fatal  accident  arrived,  merely  as  a relief  to  herself,  and  without  an 
idea  of  any  further  use.  She  prepared  an  account  for  us  in  a more 
finished  form;  but  it  seems  preferable  to  give  the  original  rough 
notes,  which  she  has  kindly  allowed  us  to  copy.  The  brother  in  this 
case  was  a twin  with  herself  (see  p.  279). 

“ Hobart  Town. 

“July,  1874. 

(134)  “On  the  evening  of  the  18th  July,  I felt  unusually  nervous.  This 
seemed  to  begin  [with  the  occurrence  of  a small  domestic  anifoyancel 
about  halfpast  8 o'clock.  When  I went  to  my  room  I even  felt  as  if 
someone  was  there.  I fancied,  as  I stepped  into  bed,  that  someone  in 
thought  tried  to  stop  me.  At  2 o’clock  I woke  from  the  following 
dream.  It  seemed  like  in  dissolving  views.  in  a twinkle  of  light  I 
saw  a railway,  and  the  puff  of  the  engine.  I thought,  4 What’s  going 
on  up  there?  Travelling?  I wonder  if  any  of  us  are  travelling  and  I 
dreaming  of  it.’  Someone  unseen  by  me  answered,  4 No ; something 
quite  different — something  wrong.’  4 1 don’t  like  to  look  at  these  things,’ 
I said.  Then  I saw  behind  and  above  my  head  William’s  upper  half 
reclining,  eyes  and  mouth  half  shut ; his  chest  moved  forward  con- 
vulsively, and  he  raised  his  right  arm.  Then  he  bent  forward,  saying, 
4 I suppose  T should  move  out  of  this.’  Then  I saw  him  lying,  eyes 
shut,  on  the  ground,  flat.  The  chimney  of  an  engine  at  his  head.  I 
called  in  excitement,  ‘That  will  strike  him  ! ’ The  ‘someone’  answered 
1 Yes — well,  here’s  what  it  was  ’ ; and  immediately  I saw  William  silting 
in  the  open  air — faint  moonlight — on  a raised  place,  sideways.  He 
raised  his  right  arm,  shuddered,  and  said,  4 1 can’t  go  on,  or  back,  No .’ 
Ther\  he  seemed  lying  flat.  I cried  out,  4 Oh  ! Oh  ! ’ and  others  seemed 
to  echo,  4 Oh  ! Oh  ! ’ He  seemed  then  upon  his  elbow,  saying,  ‘"Now  it 
comes.’  Then,  as  if  struggling  to  rise,  turned  twice  round  quickly, 
saying, 4 Is  it  the  train?  the  train>  the  train?  his  right  shoulder  rever- 
berating as  if  struck  from  behind.  He  fell  back  like  fainting ; his  eyes 
rolled.  A large  dark  object  came  between  us  like  panelling  or  wood,  and 

vm.j  REGARDED  A$  TELEPATHIC , * 371 

rather  in  the  dark  something  rolled  over,  and  like  an  arm  was  thrown  up,' 
and  the  whole  thing  went  away  with  a swish.  Close  beside  me  on  the 
ground  there  seemed  a long  dark  object,  I called  out,  ‘They’ve  left 
something  behind,  it's  like  a man/  It  then  raised  its  shoulders  and  head 
and  Jell  down  again.  The  same  someone  answered,  ‘Fes,  sadly’  [?  ‘ Yes’ 
sadly.]  • After  a moment  I seemed  called  on  to  look  up,  and  said,  c Is 
that  thing  not  away  yet  ? ’ Answered,  ‘ No’  And  in  front,  in  light,  there 
was  a railway  compartment  in  which  sat  Rev,  Mr.  Johnstone,  of  Echuce.  I 
said, ‘ What’s  he  doing  there  i ’ Answered,  ‘ He’s  there.’  A railway  porter 

went  up  to  the  window  asking,  ‘ Have  you  seen  any  of .’  I caught  no 

'more,  but  I thought  he  referred  to  the  thing  left  behind,  Mr.  Johnstone 
seemed  to  answer  * No  ’ ; and  the  man  went  quickly  away — I thought 
to  look  for  it.  After  all  this  the  someone  said,  close  to  me,  ‘Now  I’m 

a tall  dark  figure  at  my  head 

going.’  I started,  and  at  once  saw  William’s  back  at  my  side.  He 
put  his  right  hand  (in  grief)  over  his  face,  and  the  other  almost  touching 
my  shoulder,  he  crossed  in  front,  looking  stern  and  solemn.  There  was  a 
flash  from  the  eyes,  and  I caught  a glimpse  of  a fine,  pale  face  like  ushering 
him  along,  and  indistinctly  another.  I felt  frightened,  and  called  out  ‘ Is 
he  angry  ? ‘ O,  no.’  ‘ Is  he  going  away  ? ’ Answered,  ‘ Yes,’  by  the  same 
someone , and  I woke  with  a loud  sigh,  which  woke  my  husband,  who  said, 

‘ What  is  it  ? ’ I told  him  I had  been  dreaming  ‘ something  unpleasant  ’ — * 
named  a ‘railway,’  and  dismissed  it  all  from  my  mind  as  a dream.  As 
I fell  asleep  again  I fancied  the  ‘ someone  ’ said,  ‘ It’s  all  gone,’  and 
another  answered,  ‘ I’ll  come  and  remind  her.’ 

“ The  news  reached  me  one  week  afterwards.  The  accident  had  hap- 
pened to  my  brother  on  the  same  night  about  half  past  9 o’clock.  Rev. 
Mr.  Johnstone  and  his  wife  were  actually  in  the  train  which  struck  him. 
He  was  walking  along  the  line,  which  is  raised  2 feet  on  a level  country. 
He  seemed  to  have  gone  16  miles — must  have  been  tired  and  sat  down  to 
take  off  his  boot,  which  was  beside  him,  dosed  off  and  was  very  likely 
roused  by  the  sound  of  the  train ; 7 6 sheep-trucks  had  passed  without 
touching  him,  but  some  wooden  projection,  likely  the  step,  had  touched 
the  right  side  of  his  head,  bruised  his  right  shoulder,  and  killed  him 
instantaneously.  The  night  was  very  dark.  I believe  now  that  the 
someone  was  (from  something  in  the  way  he  spoke)  William  himself.  The 
face  with  him  was  white  as  alabaster,  and  something  like  this  [a  small 
sketch  pasted  on]  in  profile.  There  were  many  other  thoughts  or  words 
seemed  to  pass,  but  they  are  too  many  to  write  down  here. 

The  voice  of  the  ‘ someone  ’ unseen  seemed  always  above  the  figure 
of  William  which  I saw.  And  when  I was  shown  the  compartment  of 
the  damage  with  Mr.  Johnstone,  the  someone  seemed  on  a line  between 
me  and  it — above  me.” 

In  an  account-book  of  Mrs.  Storie’s,  on  a page  headed  July,  1874,  we  , 
find  18th  day'  marked,  and  the  words,  “ Dear  Willie  died,”  and  * 
“ Dreamed,  dreamed  of  it  all,”  appended. 

The  first  letter,  from  the  Rev.  J.  0.  Johnstone  to  the  Rev.  John 
Stone,  announcing  the  news  of  the  accident,  is  lost.  The  following  are 
extracts  from  his  second  and  third  letters  on  the  subject : — 

2 a 2 

372 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

“ Echuce. 

“ 10th  August,  1874. 

“ The  place  where  Hunter  was  killed  is  on  an  open  plain,  and  thfcre 
was  consequently  plenty  of  room  for  him  to  escape  the  train  had  he  been 
conscious ; but  I think  Meldr urn’s  theory  is  the  correct  one,  that  he 
had  sat  down  to  adjust  some  bandages  on  his  leg  and  had  thoughtlessly 
gone  off  to  sleep*  There  is  only  one  line  of  rails,  and  the  ground  is 
raised  about  2 feet — the  ground  on  which  the  rails  rest.  He  had 
probably  sat  down  on  the  edge,  and  lain  down  backwards  so  as  to  be 
within  reach  of  some  part  of  the  train.  It  was  not  known  at  the  time 
that  an  accident  had  occurred.  Mrs.  Johnstone  and  myself  were  in  the 
train.  Meldrum  says  he  was  not  very  much  crushed.  The  top  of  the 
skull  was  struck  off,  and  some  ribs  were  broken  under  the  arm-pit 
on  one  side.  His  body  was  found  on  the  Sunday  morning  by  a herd- 
boy  from  the  ad  joining  station.” 

“August  29th,  1874. 

“The  exact  time  at  which  the  train  struck  poor  Hunter  must  have 
been  about  9.55  p.m.,  and  his  death  must  have  been  instantaneous.” 

The  above  corresponds  with  the  account  of  the  inquest  in  the 
Riverine  Herald  for  July  22nd.  The  Melbourne  Argus  also  describes  the 
accident  as  having  taken  place  on  the  night  of  Saturday,  the  18th. 

[The  following  remarks  are  taken  from  notes  made  by  Professor 
Sidgwick,  during  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Storie,  in  April,  1884,  and  by 
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  after  another  interview  in  September,  1885  : — 

Mrs.  Storie  cannot  regard  the  experience  exactly  as  a dream,  though 
she  woke  up  from  it.  She  is  sure  that  it  did  not  grow  more  definite  in 
recollection  afterwards.  She  never  had  a series  of  scenes  in  a dream  at 
any  other  time ; and  she  has  never  had  anything  like  a hallucination. 
They  were  introduced  by  a voice  in  a whisper,  not  recognised  as  her 
brother’s.  He  had  sat  on  the  bank  as  he  appeared  in  the  dream.  The 
engine  she  saw  behind  him  had  a chimney  of  peculiar  shape,  such 
as  she  had  not  at  that  time  seen  ; and  she  remembers  that  Mr.  Storie 
thought  her  foolish  about  insisting  on  the  chimney — unlike'  (he  said) 
any  which  existed  ; but  he  informed  her  when  he  came  back  from 
Victoria,  where  her  brother  was,  that  engines  of  this  kind  had  just  been 
introduced  there.  She  had  no  reason  to  think  that  any  conversation 
between  the  porter  and  the  clergyman  actually  occurred.  The  persons 
who  seemed  to  lead  her  brother  away  were  not  recognised  by  her,  and  she 
only  saw  the  face  of  one  of  them. 

Mr.  Storie  confirms  his  wife  having  said  to  him  at  the  time  of  the 
dream,  “ What  is  that  light  f ” Before  writing  the  account  first  quoted, 
she  had  just  mentioned  the  dream  to  her  husband,  but  had  not  described 
it.  She  desired  not  to  think  of  it,  and  also  was  unwilling  to  worry  him 
about  it  because  of  his  Sunday’s  work.  This  last  point,  it  will  be 
observed,  is  a confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the  dream  took  place  on:4he 
Saturday  night;  and  “it  came  out  clearly”  (Mrs.  Sidgwick  s^ys)  “that 
her  recollection  about  the  Saturday  night  was  an  independent  recollection, 
and  not  read  back  after  the  accident  was  known.”  The  strongly  nervous 
state  that  preceded  the  dream  was  quite  unique  in  Mrs.  S.’s  experience. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

m 

Xllh] 

But  as  it  appeared  that,  according  to  her  recollection,  it  commenced  at 
least  an  hour  before  the  accident  took  place,  it  must  be  regarded  as  of  no 
importance  evidentially.  The  feeling  of  a presence  in  the  room  was  also 
quite  unique.] 

He*e  the  difficulty  of  referring  the  true  elements  in  the  dream  to 
the  agent's  mind  exceeds  that  noted  in  Mr.  Menneers  case  (p.  365 ; 
but  see  pp.  230-1).  For  Mr.  Hunter  was  asleep ; and  even  if  we  can 
conceive  that  the  image  of  the  advancing  engine  may  have  had  some 
place  in  his  mind,  the  presence  of  Mr.  Johnstone  could  not  have  been 
perceived  by  him.  But  it  is  possible,  of  course,  to  regard  this  last 
item  of  correspondence  as  accidental,  even  though  the  dream  was 
telepathic.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  dream  followed  the  accident 
by  about  4 hours ; such  deferment  is,  I think,  a strong  point  in  favour 
of  telepathic,  as  opposed  to  independent,  clairvoyance  (see  p.  329). 

To  come,  however,  to  less  abnormal  cases — the  following  account 
is  from  Mr.  J.  T.  Milward  Pierce,  who  has  a cattle-ranche  in  Nebraska. 

“Blyville  P.O.,  Knox  County,  Nebraska,  U.S.A. 

“ December  5th,  1885. 

(135)  “ I have  just,  or  rather  a month  ago,  had  a very  unpleasant 
accident  which  has  fortunately  turned  out  all  right  and  has  given  me  the 
pleasure  of  forwarding  to  you  a very  complete  and  unmistakeable  case  of 
* second  sight.’  I think  it  better  to  enclose  the  two  letters  you  will  find 
herein,  as  I received  them  to-day.  They  are  in  answer  to  two  of  mine 
dated  about  the  2nd  or  3rd,  about  a week  after  the  accident. 

“/The  accident  occurred  at  7 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  *26th  of 
October.  I fainted  from  loss  of  blood,  and  was  lying  for  a few  moments 
on  the  ground.  I was  walking  towards  a pair  of  French  windows,  with 
my  hands  in  my  pockets,  when  I stumbled  over  a chair  and  fell  right 
through  the  lowest  pane  of  glass,  face  foremost,  cutting  my  nose  off  on  one 
side*  and  nearly  taking  an  eye  out — so  you  will  see  my  sister’s  dream  was 
pretty  accurate.  I also  enclose  a statement  made  by  two  residents  here 
of  this  end  of  the  case,  which  will,  I hope,  make  it  complete.  I may  say 
our  time  is  6£  hours  ahead  of  England.  “ Jno.  % M.  Pierce.” 

Mr.  Pierce  enclosed  the  following  statement : — 

“On  Monday,  October  26th,  about  7 o’clock  a.m.,  Mr.  J.  T.  M. 
Pierce  fell  through  a French  window,  cutting  his  face  badly,  and  la^  on 
the  floor  insensible  i for  several  minutes.  « j Watson.  * 

“0.  J.  Hunt.” 

JPhe  enclosures,  from  Mr.  Pierce’s  sister  and  mother,  are  dated  re- 
spectively November  15th  and  17th,  1885.  Miss  Pierce,  after  condolences 
as  Jo  the  accident,  writes  : — 

3)5  you  know  it  is  the  oddest  thing,  but  on  the  26th  of  October,  I 
dmmt  that  I saw  you  lying  on  the  ground  quite  unconscious,  your  face 
bleeding  and  looking  so  dreadful.  I woke  up  calling  to  you.  I told  Kate 

374 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap* 

directly  I came  down,  and  we  both  marked  the  date.  I told  mother,  tool* 
I had  had  a bad  dream  about  you,  but  I did  not  describe  it  for  fealr  of 
frightening  her.  Was  it  not  strange?  It  was  such  a vivid  dream,  it 
struck  me  very  much,  but  I did  not  mention  it  in  my  last  letter ; to  you  j 
I thought  you  would  laugh  about  it.  But  it  is  strange — on  the  very 
day  too.” 

In  Mrs.  Pierce's  letter,  the  following  sentence  occurs  : — 

“Was  not  May's  dream  singular?  She  came  down  that  morning 
you  were  hurt,  and  told  Kate,  every  particular  of  it  agreeing  with  the 
time  you  were  hurt.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Pierce  writes  : — 

“Frettons,  Danbury,  Chelmsford. 

• “ December  31st,  1885. 

“On  the  night  of  the  26th  October  ( i.e .,  26-27),  I dreamt  I saw  my 
brother,  lying  on  the  ground,  his  face  bleeding  and  dark ; he  was  quite 
unconscious.  I called  to  him,  but  he  did  not  answer,  and  was  stooping 
towards  him,  calling  him  by  name,  when  I awoke.  It  was  so  vivid  a 
dream  that  it  produced  a great  impression  upon  me,  and  I felt  as  though 
some  accident  had  befallen  him.  I cannot  tell  at  all  what  time  in  the 
night  it  was.  In  the  morning  I told  my  sister,  and  put  down  the  date,  also 
mentioning  it  to  one  or  two  others  ; but  to  my  sister  I described  it  in  the 
same  words  that  I have  now  used.  * 

“ I am’  not  at  all  accustomed  to  having  bad  dreams  about  friends  ; 
indeed,  I never  remember  having  had  one  before.  Neither  am  I 
superstitious,  but,  nevertheless,  I felt  convinced  that  something  un- 
toward had  occurred.  So  when  the  letter  came,  just  three  weeks  lifter 
the  accident,  1 knew  it  was  the  confirmation  of  my  fears. 

“ M.  Pierce.”  , 

[The  coincidence  was  not  as  close  as  Mrs.  Pierce's  words  would  imply ; 
and  she  seems  to  have  mistaken  the  morning  on  which  the  dream  was 
mentioned.  When  Mr.  Pierce  was  lying  on  the  floor  as  described,  the 
time  of  day  at  Chelmsford  would  be  between  1.30  and  2 p.m.  Therefore 
the  dream  on  the  following  night  must  have  been  at  least  8 hours,  and  may 
have  been  more  than  12  hours,  after  the  event.  See  the  remark  on  defer- 
ment made  in  connection  with  the  last  case.] 

The  following  narratives  are  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Montgomery 
Moore,  now  residing  at  Gipsy  Lodge,  Norwood. 

“ A.  Adjutant-General’s  House,  Royal  Barracks,  Dublin. 

“December  5th,  1883. 

(136)  “I  had  driven  my  husband,  then  commanding  the.  4th  Hussars,  out 
in  the  carriage  very  early  one  morning,  on  his  way  to  a shooting  expedition. 
I returned  home,  rather  tired  and  exhausted,  about  8 o’clock  a.m,  j and 
after  breakfasting,  lay  down  on  my  bed  before  dressing  for  the  day  .and 
fell  asleep.  I dreamed  that  a small  blue  three-cornered  note  was  ^brought 
in  to  me,  which  contained  these  words: — rf  , 

“ 4 My  dear  Mrs.  M.  M., — I know  the  Colonel  is  away ; but  would  ydti 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

375 

vm.] 

look  in  his  room  f6r  the  rules  of  the  “ Kriegspiel  ” 1 You  will  find  them,  I 
think,  on  his  table.  Yours  sincerely, — George  Philips/  i 

“ J awoke,  aiid  never  having  lieard  that  there  were  4 Kriegspiel  * rules, 
I laughed  at  having  dreamed  of  it.  When  I had  finished  dressing,  l 
went  into  the  drawing-room,  and  on  the  piano  just  outside  my  door,  I saw 
the  ideiftical  blue  three-cornered  note,  which  I found  contained  the  exact 
words  written  exactly  as  I had  seen  them  in  my  dream.  I mentioned  it 
in  my  answer  to  Major  Philips  ; for  going  to  my  husband’s  room,  I found 
the  little  book  of  rules  on  his  table.  This  was,  I believe,  in  March, 
1877.”  . 

(137)  11 A thing  of  the  same  kind  occurred  in  April  or  May  just  after. 

I was  asleep  in  an  armchair  on  a very  hot  day,  about  4 p.nn,  when  I 
dreamed  of  receiving  a note  from  a lady,  asking  us  to  come  to  lawn  tennis. 
She  was  a person  I was  not  intimate  with,  and  to  whose  house  I had 
never  been.  I woke  and  saw  a note  on  the  table  by  me,  which  a servant 
had  put  down  noiselessly.  On  opening  it  I found  it  was  an  invitation  to 
lawn  tennis,  from  the  lady  of  whom  I had  dreamed,  and  in  the  very  words 
I had  dreamed  of  reading.”  44  Jane  Montgomery  Moore.” 

# Asked  whether  she  had  had  any  similar  experiences  which  had  not 
corresponded  with  reality,  Mrs.  M.  Moore  replied,  *4  No,  I don’t  think  I 
ever  had.” 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Mrs.  M.  Moore  says  : — 

<c  Probably  both  notes  were  written  before  T was  asleep.  Both  places 
from  which  they  came  were  very  near  to  our  house.” 

Here  the  immediate  comparison  of  the  reality  with  the  dreams, 
and  also  the  fact  that  the  dreams  contained  apparently  no  extraneous 
features,  make  it  specially  unlikely  that  the  correspondences  were 
fictitiously  “ read  back.”  And  if  not,  the  cases  seem  typical  examples 
of  telepathic  clairvoyance ; for  no  one  probably  will  suppose  that  the 
percipient  could  have  obtained  a similar  vision  of  notes  with  whose 
writers,  and  in  whose  contents,  she  had  no  concern. 

The  next  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Miss  Richardson,  of  47,  Bedford 
Gardens,  Kensington,  W.,  who  says  : — 

(138)  “The  writer  is  a very  worthy  wife  of  a shopkeeper  at  home, 
who  told  me  the  occurrence  some  years  ago  then  with  more  detail,  as  it 
was,  fresh  in  her  memory ; and  her  husband  can  vouch  for  the  facts  told 

# hiui  at  the  time,  and  the  strange  4 uncanny  ’ effect  of  the  dream  on  her 
mitid  for  some  time  after.” 

From  Mrs.  Green  to  Miss  Richardson. 

44  Newry,  21st  First  Month,,  1885. 

*“Dear  Friend, — In  compliance  with  thy  request,  I give  thee  the 
particulars  of  my  dream. 

J saw  two  respectably-dressed  females  driving  alone  in  a vehicle  like 
a mineral- water  cart.  Their  horse  stopped  at  a water  to  drink  ; but  as 
th^re  no  footing,  he  lost  his  balance,  and  in  trying  to  recover  it  he 

376 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  m [chak 

plunged  right  in.  With  the  shock,  the  women  stood  up  and  shouted  for 
help,  and  their  hats  rose  off  their  heads,  and  as  all  were  going  down  I 
turned  away  crying,  and  saying,  * Was  there  no  one  at  all  to  help  them?’ 
upon  which  I awoke,  and  my  husband  asked  me  what  was  the  matter*  I 
related  the  above  dream  to  him,  and  he  asked  me  if  I knew  them.  I said 
I did  not,  and  thought  I had  never  seen  either  of  them.  The  impression 
of  the  dream  and  the  trouble  it  brought  was  over  me  all  day.  I remarked 
to  my  son  it  was  the  anniversary  of  his  birthday  and  my  own  also — the 
10th  of  First  Month,  and  this  is  why  I remember  the  date. 

“The  following  Third  Month  1 got  a letter  and  newspaper  from  my 
brother  in  Australia,  named  Allen,  letting  me  know  the  sad  trouble  which 
had  befallen  him  in  the  loss,  by  drowning,  of  one  of  his  daughters  and  her 
companion.  Thou  wilt  see  by  the  description  given  of  it  in  the  paper  how 
the  event  corresponded  with  my  dream.  My  niece  was  born  in  Australia* 
and  I never  saw  her. 

“Please  return  the  paper  at  thy  convenience.  Considering  that  our 
night  is  their  day,  I must  have  been  in  sympathy  with  the  sufferers  at  the 
time  of  the  accident,  on  the  1 Oth  of  First  Month,  1878. 

“It  is  referred  to  in  two  separate  places  in  the  newspaper.” 

The  passage  in  the  Inylewood  Advertiser  is  as  follows  : — , 

“Friday  evening,  January  11th,  1878. 

“ A dreadful  accident  occurred  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wedderbum, 
on  Wednesday  last,  resulting  in  the  death  of  two  women,  named  Lehey  and 
Allen.  It  appears  that  the  deceased  were  driving  into  Wedderburn  in  a 
spring  cart  from  the  direction  of  Kinypanial,  when  they  attempted  to 
water  their  horse  at  a dam  on  the  boundary  of  Torpichen  Station.  The 
dam  was  10  or  12  feet  deep  in  one  spot,  and  into  this  deep  hole  they  must 
have  inadvertently  driven,  for  Mr.  W.  McKechnie,  manager  of  Torpichen 
Station,  upon  going  to  the  dam  some  hours  afterwards,  discovered  the 
spring  cart  and  horse  under  the  water,  and  two  women’s  hats  floating  on 

the  surface The  dam  was  searched,  and  the  bodies  of  the  two 

women,  clasped  in  each  other’s  arms,  recovered.” 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  evidence  given  at  the  inquest: — 

“Joseph  John  Allen,  farmer,  deposed  : — ‘ I identify  one  of  the  bodies  as 
that  of  my  sister.  I saw  her  about  11  a.m.  yesterday.  . . . The. 

horse  had  broken  away  and  I caught  it  for  her.  Mrs.  Lehey  and  my 
sister  met  me  when  I caught  the  horse.  . . . They  then  took  the 

horse  and  went  to  Mr.  Clarke’s.  I did  not  see  them  afterwards  alive/ 
William  McKechnie  deposed: — ‘About  4 p.m.  yesterday,  I was  riding 
by  the  dam  when  I observed  the  legs  of  a horse  and  the  chest  above  the 
water.’  ” 

Mr.  Green  confirms  as  follows  : — 

“Newry,  15th  Second  Month,  1885. 

“Dear  Friend,  Edith  Richardson, — In  reference  to  the  dream  that 
my  wife  had  of  seeing  two  women  thrown  out  of  a spring  cart  by  their,  horse 
stopping  to  drink  out  of  some  deep  water,  I remember  she  was  greatly 
distressed  about  it,  and  seemed  to  feel  great  sympathy  for  them.  It 
occurred  on  the  night  of  the  9th  of  J anuary.  I 

“The  reason  I can  remember  the  date  so  well  is  that  the  10th  was  the 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

377 

Till.] 

anniversary  of  my  wife  and  our  son’s  birthday.  As  the  day  advanced  she 
seemed  to  get  worse,  and  I advised  her  to  go  out  for  a drive ; when  she 
returned  she  told  me  she  was  no  better,  and  also  said  she  had  told  the 
driver  not  to  go  near  water,  lest  some  accident  should  happen,  as  she  had 
had  such  a dreadful  dream  the  night  beforo,  at  the  same  time  telling  him 
the  nathre  of  it.  As  my  wife’s  niece  did  not  live  with  her  father  he  was 
not  told  of  it  until  the  next  morning,  which  would  be  our  evening  of  the 
10th,  and  which  we  think  accounted  for  the  increased  trouble  she  felt  in 
sympathy  with  him.  « Tnos.  Green.” 

Mrs.  Green  can  recall  no  other  dream  of  at  all  the  same  character. 

[The  amount  of  correspondence  in  detail  is  here  considerable.  The 
fact  that  the  figures  seen  were  merely  recognised  as  “ two  females  ” 
diminishes,  of  course,  the  force  of  the  coincidence ; though  perhaps  one 
would  .hardly  expect  identification  of  persons  unknown  to  the  percipient.] 

In  the  next  case  the  percipient  withholds  her  name  from  pub- 
lication, on  the  ground  that  she  takes  no  interest  in  our  work,  and 
only  wrote  down  the  account  at  her  aunts  request. 

Mrs.  P.,  of Rectory,  writes  : — 

“March  4th,  1885. 

(139)  “My  niece  has  written  down  the  dream.  She  adds  to  her  plain 
account,  in  writing  to  me,  that  she  thinks  it  rather  more  remarkable  that 
she  should  have  dreamt  it,  being  a person  who  hardly  ever  dreams,  unlike 
her  mother  and  sister,  who  never  sleep  without  dreaming.  She  also  says 
she  has  often  regretted  not  having  written  it  down  at  the  time,  but  can 
safely  sign  all  she  has  stated.  “ J L P ” 

“March  3rd,  1885. 

“ My  aunt  has  asked  me  to  try  and  recall  a dream  that  I dreamt  many 
year's  ago  about  an  old  man,  the  road-mender  in  our  village,  whom  I had 
known  and  loved  from  my  earliest  childhood.  He  was  naturally  a bright 
cheerful  old  man,  but  was  at  the  timo  I am  speaking  of  in  extremely  low 
spirits  on  account,  as  we  supposed,  of  his  wife,  who  was  very  ill  and 
wretched,  lying  on  what  proved  to  be  her  death-bed.  On  the  morning  of 
my  dream  my  sister  and  myself  had  both  been  awake  at  6 o’clock,  and  I 
had  fallen  to  sleep  again  before  the  servant  came  in,  as  usual,  about  7 o’clock. 
On  my  waking  from  this  sleep  I told  my  sister  that  I had  had  a very 
painful  dream  about  old  William  Thompson,  whom  I had  seen  in  my  dream 
running  down  the.  lane  towards  the  Church  fields,  in  his  grey  stockings, 
looking  very  miserable,  and  I turned  to  her  and  said,  ‘I  fear  old  William  is 
going  to  make  away  with  himself.’  I hardly  finished  telling  my  sister  the 
dream  when  our  servant  came  in  to  call  us,  and  said  that  our  father  (the 
rector  of  the  parish)  had  been  sent  for  in  a great  hurry  to  old  William 
• Thompson,  who  had  just  been  found  in  the  Church  fields  with  his  throat 
cut.  Tie -was  without  his  shoes,  and  when  my  father  got  to  him  he  was 
still  alive.  These  are  the  circumstances  as  accurately  related  '■■$&  I Can 
Nepali  them. 

378 

Q RE  A MS  WHICH  MA  Y BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

“I  may  add  that  1 am  not  generally  a dreamer  and  have  Ho' 
recollection  of  any  other  dream  about  death. 

a 

[We  learn  independently  that  the  death  took  place  on  April  4,  i860.] 

Miss  S.  S.  P.’s  sister  writes  : — 

..  “ I fear  I cannot  tell  you  more  about  my  sister’s  dream  than  she  hats, 
already  stated,  but  as  you  wish  to  have  what  she  has  said  confirmed  by 
another  person,  I will  add  that  I perfectly  remember  her  telling  me  the 
dream  before  the  servant  came  into  the  room  and  told  us  of  the  sad  death 
of  the  old  man. 

“J.  M.  P.” 

The  next  case  also  has,  unfortunately,  to  be  given  with  initials 
only,  as  the  writer  fears  that  her  friends  would  object  to  publicity.  It 
belongs  to  a class  which,  as  we  have  seen,  must  be  treated  with  great 
caution — dreams  occurring  in  seasons  of  anxiety.  Still,  judging  from 
its  effects,  the  experience  must  have  been  of  a very  unusual  kind. 

“ January,  1885, 

(140)  “In  the  year  1857,  I had  a brother  in  the  very  centre  of  the 
Indian  Mutiny.  1 had  been  ill  in  the  spring,  and  taken  from  my  lessors  in 
the  school-room.  Consequently  I heard  more  of  what  was  going  on  from  the 
newspapers  than  a girl  of  13  ordinarily  would  in  those  days.  We  were  in 
the  habit  of  hearing  regularly  from  my  brother,  but  in  the  June  and  July 
of  that  year  no  letters  came,  and  what  arrived  in  August  proved  to  have 
been  written  quite  early  in  the  spring,  and  were  full  of  the  disturbances 
around  his  station.  He  was  in  the  service  of  the  East  India  Company — 
an  officer  in  the  8th  Native  Infantry.  I had  always  been  devoted  to  him, 
and  I grieved  and  fretted  far  more  than  any  of  my  elders  knew  at  his 
danger.  1 cannot  say  I dreamt  constantly  of  him,  but  when  I did 
the  impressions  were  vivid  and  abiding. 

“ On  one  occasion  his  personal  appearance  was  being  discussed,  and  I 
remarked,  ‘ He  is  not  like  that  now,  he  lias  no  beard  nor  whiskers,’  and 
when  asked  why  I said  such  a thing,  I replied,  ‘ I knew  it,  for  I had  seen 
him  in  my  dreams,’  and  this  brought  a severe  reprimand  from  my 
governess,  who  never  allowed  ‘such  nonsense  ’ to  be  talked  of. 

“On  the  morning  of  the  25th  September,  quite  early,  I awoke  from  a 
dream  to  find  my  sister  holding  me,  and  much  alarmed.  I had  screamed 
out,  struggled,  crying  out,  6 Is  lie  really  dead  1 ’ When  I fully  awoke  I felt  a 
burning  sensation  in  my  head.  I could  not  speak  for  a moment  or  two  ; 
I knew  my  sister  was  there,  but  I neither  felt  nor  saw  her. 

“In  about  a minute,  during  which  she  said  my  eyes  were  staring 
beyond  her,  I ceased  struggling,  cried  out,  4 Harry’s  dead,  they  have  shot 
him,’  and  fainted.  When  I recovered  I found  my  sister  had  been  sent 
away,  and  an  aunt  who  had  always  looked  after  me,  sitting  by*  my  bed;. 
In  order  to  soothe  my  excitement  she  allowed  me  to  tell  h^r  ttiy 
dream,  trying  all  the  time  to  persuade  me  to  regard  it  as  a natural 
consequence  of  my  anxiety.  When  in  the  narration  I said  he  AVas  radiitgjk 
with  another  officer,  and  mounted  soldiers  behind  them,  she  exclaimed^ 

: vm/}  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . * 379 

4 My  dear,  that  showfc  you  it  is  only  a dream,  for  you  know  dear  Harry  is 
in  an  infantry,  not  a cavalry,  regiment/  Nothing,  however,  shook  my 
feelings  that  I had  seen  a reality ; and  slie  was  so  much  struck  by  my 
persistence,  that  she  privately  made  notes  of  the  date,  and  of  the  incidents, 
even  to  the  minutest  details  of  my  dream,  and  then  for  a few  days  the 
matterMropped,  but  I felt  the  truth  was  coming  nearer  and  nearer  to  all. 
In  4 short  time  the  news  came  in  the  papers — shot  down  on  the  morning 
of  the  25th  when  on  his  way  to  Lucknow.  A few  days  later  came  one  of 
his  missing  letters,  telling  how  his  own  regiment  had  mutinied,  and  that 
he  had  ;been  transferred  to  a command  in  the  12th  Irregular  Cavalry, 
bound  to  join  H&velock’s  force  in  the  relief  of  Lucknow. 

44  Some  eight  years  after,  the  officer  whd  was  riding  by  him  when  he  fell, 
Captain  or  Major  Grant,  visited  us,  and  when  in  compliance  with  my  aunt’s 
request  he  detailed  the  incidents  of  that  sad  hour,  his  narration  tallied 
(even  to  the  description  of  the  buildings  on  their  left)  with  the  notes  she 
had  taken  the  morning  of  my  dream.  I should  also  add  that  we  heard  my 
brother  had  made  an  alteration  in  his  beard  and  whiskers  just  about  the 
time  that  I had  spoken  of  him  as  wearing  them  differently. 

“L.  A.  W.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries  Miss  W.  says  : — 

44  As  to  date,  the  dream  concerning  my  brother’s  death  took  place  in 
the  morning  half  of  the  night  of  the  25th  of  September ; and  I think  I 
noted  in  my  MS.  that  an  aunt  to  whom  I related  the  dream  at  the  time 
was  so  struck  by  the  pertinacity  with  which  I adhered  to  the  various 
particulars,  that  she  put  down  the  date  and  also  the  details  of  the  dream. 

44 1 have  always  been  a dreamer.  I never  had  the  same  sort  of  dream 
of  death,” 

Miss  W.  further  tells  us  that  her  aunt  is  certain  that  she  never 
destroyed  her  notes  of  the  dream,  but  does  not  know  where  they  are,  and 
is  top  old  to  be  worried.  She  adds  : 44  My  sister  perfectly  remembers  all 
about  it.”  The  sister,  however,  will  not  write  out  her  recollections — con- 
sidering that  attention  to  such  matters  is  ridiculous. 

[We  cannot  feel  certain  that  Miss  W.  is  correct  in  saying  that  her 
brother’s  death  took  place  on  the  25th.  The  East  India  Register, , which 
ought  to  be  the  most  correct  authority,  says  that  he  was  killed  on  the 
26th, ; and  in  that  case  his  death  may  have  exactly  coincided  with  her 
vision.  There  was  hard  fighting  on  both  days ; and  in  some  accounts  the 
names  of  the  officers  who  fell  on  the  two  days  are  grouped  without 
discrimination.  Allen’s  Indian  Mail , however,  gives  the  25th  as  the  date 
o£  Lieutenant  W.’s  death.  If  that  is  right,  then  the  coincidence  could 
o^xly  have  been  exact  on  the  supposition  that  the  date  of  the  vision  given 
in  Miss  'W’^Jirst  account  is  the  correct  one.] 

£ The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Hunter,  of  St.  Catherine’s,  Linlithgow, 
it  somewhat  resembles  Mrs.  Storied  case,  (p.  370)  in  the  mixture  of 
apparently  true  perception  with  foreign  or  symbolic  elements— as 
though  the  vision  were  a scene  which  a painter  or  dramatist  had 
roamed  on  facts  which  he  had  only  once  heard  hastily  described* 

380 

DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

“ July  23rd,  J885. 

(141)  <(Iam  almost  afraid  to  give  particulars  about  the  dream  I hod,  as 
it  is  now  some  time  ago,  and  I had  not  been  remembering  it  much.  I wrote 
to  Mr.  Hunter  [her  brother-in-law]  at  the  time,  and  he  has  unfortunately 
not  kept  my  letter,  so  I must  trust  to  my  memory. 

“The  date  I do  not  recollect.  The  time  was  2 o'clock,  I think.  I knew 
then,  as  I looked  at  my  watch  when  I awoke,  and  Mr.  Hunter 
told  me  it  was  just  the  hour  at  which  the  event  took  place. 

“I  thought  I was  at  the  Manse,  Cockburnspath,  where  he  lives,  and  I saw 
Mrs.  Hunter  evidently  ill.  She  went  to  her  room.  I heard  the  doctor's  trap 
pass  the  house,  and  every  one  was  rushing  to  get  him,  but  he  was  gone. 
My  sister-in-law  kept  calling  for  me,  but  I could  not  reach  her.  By-and* 
bye  a doctor  arrived,  and  the  nurse,  a stranger  to  me,  came  to  my  room 
with  an  infant.  She  was  putting  white  satin  on  the  dress,  and  I remon- 
strated, saying  that  was  only  for  dead  infants.  She  replied,  1 And  isn't  it- 
right  to  do  it  to  this  one  V and  I looked  and  saw  the  child  was  dead,  and  I 
knew  it  was  a boy.  I awoke,  felt  anxious,  fell  asleep,  and  again  dreamt 
the  same,  except,  I think , the  first  part,  that  of  seeing  Mrs.  Hunter. 

“ When  I awoke  I just  remarked  to  my  husband  I hoped  nothing  had 
gone  wrong,  and  told  him  my  dream  during  breakfast. 

“Not  hearing  anything  for  two  days  T had  almost  dismissed  all  thought 
of  it  from  my  mind,  but  I was  a little  surprised  to  find  I had  been 
dreaming  a fact. 

“ I knew  quite  well  that  my  sister-in-law  expected  her  confinement  [not, 
however,  for  two  months— see  below],  but  had  no  misgivings,  as  she  had 
been  so  strong  before.  I had  engaged  a nurse  for  her,  and  she  was  not  the 
woman  I saw  in  my  dream.  I knew  the  assistant  who  was  with  the  doctor 
then,  but  I did  not  see  him  in  my  dream,  only  I knew  it  was  not  Dr. 
Black. 

“I  believe  I never  fall  asleep  for  any  time,  however  short,  without 
dreaming  something  or  otli£r,  consequently  I seldom  let  my  dreams  trouble 
me.  I am  anxious  to  prevent  undue  importance  being  given  to  my  dreams, 
and  I don't  think  I ever  had  one  of  the  kind  before,  and  certainly  not 
since.  I have  dreamt  the  same  thing  more  than  once,  but  very  rarely, 
and  never  in  the  same  night  as  I did  this  one.  “A.  Hunter.” 

The  following  is  Dr.  Hunter's  corroboration,  written  on  J uly  30th,  1885. 

“ I have  only  now,  while  taking  a brief  holiday,  found  time  to  give  you 
confirmation  of  the  curious  dream  my  wife  had  on  the  night  of  my  sister- 
in-law's  illness.  When  she  awoke  in  the  morning  her  first  remark  was 
‘ I hope  nothing  serious  has  happened  to  J essie.  I have  had  such  a horrid 
dream  about  her ; I dreamt  she  had  miscarried,  and  the  child  was  dead.' 

This  she  repeated  more  than  once.  “ George  Hunter,  M.D.” 

* 

The  Rev.  J.  Hunter  writes,  from  the  Manse,  Cockburnspath,  N.B 

“July  24th,  1885. 

“ You  ask  if  I can  recall  the  fact  of  receiving  a note  from  my  sisterdm- 
law  making  mention  of  her  dream.  We  usually  hear  from  her  on  the 
Monday  evenings,  and  it  is  very  possible  that  she  might  have  mentioned  it 
in  such  a note  ; but  I am  sorry  that  I cannot  definitely  recall  it.  I Gfad 
from  my  diary,  however,  that  I met  Mrs.  Hunter  of  Linlithgow  on  the 

VIII.]  REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 381 

Tuesday  following,  ill  Edinburgh,  and  went  out  with  her  to  Linlithgow  j 
vand  I am  perfectly  positive  that  I heard  of  it  on  that  Tuesday,  if  not  on 
the  night  before:  I have  always  regarded  it  as  a strange  occurrence,  and 
have  no  manner  of  doubt  that  her  dream  corresponded,  in  a large  measure, 
with  the  actual  event.  The  event  took  place  about  1 o’clock  in  the 
morning,  December  17th,  1882,  a Sunday.  The  baby  lived  only  a minute 
or  two.  Mrs.  Hunter  tells  me  that  she  saw  Dr.  Black,  our  medical 
practitioner,  drive  past  her  window,  and  that  he  was  not  at  home.  True 
enough,  Dr.  Black  was  not  at  home  at  the  time,  but  on  a holiday.  It  was  the 
assistant,  Dr.  Basil,  who  came  after  the  confinement  was  about  over.  It 
was  premature,  and  not  expected  for  about  two  months.  Mrs.  Hunter  of 
Linlithgow  had  arranged  with  my  wife  to  come  here  during  the  confine- 
ment [she  had  attended  her  on  a similar  occasion  in  the  previous  year], 
but  there  was  no  expectation  of  it  at  the  time.” 

[It  is  of  course  a point  against  the  telepathic  explanation,  that  the 
person  dreamt  of  was  to  some  extent  on  Mrs.  Hunter’s  mind.  On  the 
other  side  we  have  the  very  exact  coincidence  of  the  dream  with  an  event 
which  was  not  regarded  as  imminent,  and  a considerable  amount  of 
correspondence  in  detail.] 

The  next  account  (which  wc  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Lieut.- 
Colonel  J.  D.  Brockman)  is  from  Dr.  A.  K.  Young,  J.P.,  F.R.S.C.I., 
of  The  Terrace,  Monaghan,  Ireland.  It  is  slightly  abridged  from  the 
original. 

November,  1882. 

(142)  One  Monday  night  in  December,  1836,  Dr.  Young  had  the 
following  dream,  or,  as  he  would  prefer  to  call  it,  revelation.  He  found 
himself  suddenly  at  the  gate  of  Major  N.  M.’s  avenue,  many  miles  from 
his  home.  Close  to  him  were  a group  of  persons,  one  of  them  a woman 
with  a basket  on  her  arm,  the  rest  men,  four  of  whom  were  tenants  of  his 
own,  while  the  others  were  unknown  to  him.  Some  of  the  strangers 
seemed  to  be  murderously  assaulting  H.  W.,  one  of  his  tenants,  and  he 
interfered. 

“ I struck  violently  at  the  man  on  my  left,  and  then  with  greater 
violence  at  the  man’s  face  to  my  right.  Finding  to  my  surprise  that  I did 
not  knock  him  down  either,  I struck  again  and  again,  with  all  the  violence 
of  a man  frenzied  at  the  sight  of  my  poor  friend’s  murder.  To  my  great 
amazement  I saw  that  my  arms,  although  visible  to  my  eye,  were  without 
substance  ; and  the  bodies  of  the  men  I struck  at  and  my  own  came  close 
together  after  each  blow  through  the  shadowy  arms  I struck  with.  My 
blows  were  delivered  with  more  extreme  violence  than  I think  I 
ever  exerted ; but  I became  painfully  convinced  of  my  incompetency.  I 
have  no  consciousness  of  what  happened,  after  this  feeling  of  unsubstan- 
tiality came  upon  me.” 

Next  morning  Dr.  Young  experienced  the  stiffness  and  soreness  of 
violent  bodily  exercise,  and  was  informed  by  his  wife  that  in  the  course 
4i  the  night  he  had  much  alarmed  her  by  striking  out  again  and 
again*  with  his  arms  in  a terrific  manner,  4 as  if  fighting  for  his  life/  He 
in  turn  informed  her  of  his  dream,  and  begged  her  to  remember  the  names 
<H  those  actors  in  it  who  were  known  to  him.  On  the  morning  of  the 

382  . DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [chap. 

following  'day,  Wednesday,  he  received  a letter  from  his  agent,  who 
resided  in  the  town  close  to  the  scene  of  the  dream,  informing  him  that 
'his  tenant,  H.  W.,  had  been  found  on  Tuesday  morning  at  Major*  N,  M.’s 
gate,  speechless  and  apparently  dying  from  a fracture  of  the  skull,  and 
that  there  was  no  trace  of  the  murderers.  That  night  Dr.  Young  started  for 
the  town,  and  arrived  there  on  Thursday  morning.  On  his  way  to  a meeting 
of  magistrates  he  met  tho  senior  magistrate  of  that  part  of  the  country,' 
and  requested  him  to  give  orders  for  the  arrest  of  the  three  men  whom, 
besides  H.  W.,  he  had  recognised  in  his  dream,  and  to  have  them  examined 
separately.  [Dr.  Young  has  given  us  in  confidence  the  names  of  these 
four  men ; and  says  that  to  the  time  of  their  deaths  they  * never  knew  the 
grounds  of  their  arrest.  J This  was  at  once  done.  The  three  men  gave  identical 
accounts  of  the  occurrence,  and  all  named  the  woman  who  was  with  them  ; 
she  was  then  arrested,  and  gave  precisely  similar  testimony.  They  said 
that  between  11  and  12  on  the  Monday  night  they  had  been  walking 
homewards  all  together  along  the  road,  when  they  were  overtaken  by 
three  strangers,  two  of  whom  savagely  assaulted  H.  W.,  while  the  other 
prevented  his  friends  from  interfering. 

H.  W.  did ‘not  die,  but  was  never  the  same  afterwards;  he  subse- 
quently emigrated.  Of  the  other  parties  concerned,  the  only  survivor 
(except  Dr.  Young  himself)  gave  an  account  of  the  occurrence  to  the 
archdeacon  of  the  district  in  November,  1881,  but  varied  from  the  true 
facts  in  stating  that  lie  had  taken  the  wounded  man  home  in  his  cart. 
Had  this  been  the  case,  he  would  of  course  have  been  called  on  for  his 
testimony  at  once. 

Dr.  Young  tells  us  that  for  many  years  he  did  not  mention  his 
experience  except  to  his  wife  (now  deceased) ; and  in  answer  to  an  inquiry 
whether  any  independent  record  of  the  assault  could  be  procured,  he 
replied : — 

“We  had  not  at  that  time  any  local  paper  to  record  such  an  event; 
and  as  the  attack  was  not  followed  by  destruction  of  life,  and  as  there  was 
Hot  any  clue  to  the  intended  assassins,  the  occurrence  passed  into  oblivion. 

I pass  the  spot  where  I was  conscious  of  the  attack  very  frequently ; and 
I can  point  with  my  finger  to  within  a foot  or  two  of  where  I fought 
(shadowy),  and  the  positions  of  all  the  parties  present.  Had  not  my  wife 
been  present  and  awake  when  I was  so  profoundly  asleep,  and  witnessed 
the  amazing  and  alarming  violence  of  the  blows  I made  (a  matter  she 
spoke  of  afterwards  to  me  more  than  once,  with  terror),  I never  could 
have  accounted  for  the  very  wretched  feeling  of  weariness,  prostration, 
and  pain  with  which  I got  from  my  bed  on  the  next  morning.” 

We  have  a case  singularly  like  this  in  detail,  where  a gamekeeper 
dreamt  of  taking  part  in  an  affray  with  four  poachers  at  the  very 
spot  where  such  an  event  actually  and  simultaneously  took  place. 
The  dream  in  this  case  is  confirmed  as  having  been  described  before 
the  reality  was  known  ; but  is  too  directly  in  the  beaten  track  of  the 
dreamer’s  waking  ideas  to  be  presented  as  a parallel  to  the*  foregeu ag: 
narrative. 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC. 

383 

VIII.J 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Manifold,  of  Barnaboy, 
Frankfort  King’s  County,  Ireland.  We  obtained  it  through  the 
kindness  of  the  Rev.  J.  B.  Keene,  of  Navan. 

1 “January,  1884. 

(143)  “ I once  dreamt  that  an  uncle  (Dr.  Hobbs),  whom  I had  not  seen 
for  somfe  time,  was  driving  with  his  wife  in  a gig,  when  he  was  attacked  from 
behind,  beaten,  and  left  on  the  roadside.  The  next  morning  I told  my 
dream  to  my  sister,  who  had  been  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  and^we 
thought  no  more  of  it  till  the  afternoon,  when  a horse  messenger  came  30 
miles  to  tell  my  father  his  brother  had  been  beaten  to  death.  The  circum- 
stances were  exactly  as  I had  dreamt,  but  he  did  not  die  then,  and  is  still 
alive  in  America.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Manifold  writes  : — 

“ February  5th,  1884. 

“ I delayed  answering  yours  of  the  28th  January  as  I had  written  to 
ask  a lady  whom  I thought  might  have  remembered  my  having  told  my 
dream,  relative  to  my  uncle’s  accident,  before  we  had  heard  of  it,  but  she 
does  not  remember ; and  my  sister,  to  whom  T alluded,  has  been  dead 
some  years.  I am  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  of  distressing  things,  but 
have  on  other  occasions  dreamt  of  persons  and  things  I had  not  seen  or 
thought  of  for  a long  time,  and  soon  after  have  heard  from  or  heard  some- 
thing particular  of.  Dr.  Hobbs  was  dragged  from  his  gig,  beaten  on  the 
road,  and  thrown  into  a bog  hole,  supposed  to  be  dead,  near  the  town  of 
Borrisokane,  Co.  Tipperary,  I think  about  the  year  1846.  I was  at  the 
time  unmarried,  living  at  Green  Hills,  Frankford,  22  miles  apart,  and  had 
no  previous  knowledge  of  any  ill-feeling  towards  him,  or  anything  to  lead 
me  to  suppose  such  treatment  would  be  likely  to  occur.  I wish  I could 
have  given  you  more  satisfactory  testimony,  but  under  the  circumstances 
am  unable  to  do  so. 

* “ J.  Manifold.” 

We  find  an  account  of  the  accident  in  the  Neyutgh  Guardian  for 
April  16th,  1845 — which  completely  agrees  with  the  above.  Two  of  Dr. 
Hobbs’  assailants  were  identitied,  and  sentenced  to  transportation. 

The  next  account,  which  first  appeared  in  a letter  in  the 
Religio-Plyilosoph ical  Journal , is  from  Dr.  Bruce,  of  Micanopy,  Fla,, 
U.S.A.  The  case  might  have  been  reserved  as  “ collective/!  but  for 
the  fact  that  one  of  the  dreams,  though  vivid  and  alarming,  was 
probably  not  so  distinctive  as  was  afterwards  imagined,  and  moreover 
was  possibly  dreamt  on  the  night  preceding  that  on  which  the  tragic 
event  took  plaqe  (see  p.  140). 

“February  17th,  1884, 

(144)  “On  Thursday,  the  27th  of  December  lAst,  I returned  from 
Gainesville  (12  miles  from  here)  to  my  orange  grove,  near  Micanopy.  I have 
only  a small  plank  house  of  three  rooms  at  my  grove,  where  I spend  most 

384  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  RE  REASONABLY'  [chaf. 

of  my  time  when  the  grove  is  being  cultivated.  There  was  no  one  ya  the 
house  but  myself  at  the  time,  and  being  somewhat  fatigued  with  my  ride, 
I retired  to  iny  bed  very  early,  probably  6 o’clock  ; and,  as  I am  frequently 
in  the  habit  of  doing,  I lit  my  lamp  on  a stand  by  the  bed  for  the  purpose 
of  reading.  After  reading  a short  time,  I began  to  feel  a little  drowsy, 
put  out  the  light,  and  soon  fell  asleep.  Quite  early  in  the  night  I was 
awakened.  I could  not  have  been  asleep  very  long,  I am  sure.  1 felt  as 
if  I had  been  aroused  intentionally,  and  at  first  thought  someone  was 
breaking  into  the  house.  I looked  from  where  I lay  into  the  other  two  rooms 
(the  doors  of  both  being  open)  and  at  once  recognised  where  I was,  and  that 
there  was  no  ground  for  the  burglar  theory  ; there  being  nothing  in  the 
house  to  make  it  worth  a burglar’s  time  to  come  after. 

“ 1 then  turned  on  my  side  to  go  to  sleep  again,  and  immediately  felt 
a consciousness  of  a presence  in  the  room,  and  singular  to  state,  it  was 
not  the  consciousness  of  a live  person,  but  of  a spiritual  presence.  This 
may  provoke  a smile,  but  I can  only  tell  you  the  facts  as  they  occurred 
to  me.  I do  not  know  how  to  better  describe  my  sensations  than  by 
simply  stating  that  I felt  a consciousness  of  a spiritual  presence.  This 
may  have  been  a part  of  the  dream,  for  I felt  as  if  I were  dozing  off  again 
to  sleep ; but  it  was  unlike  any  dream  I ever  had.  I felt  also  at  the  same 
time  a strong  feeling  of  superstitious  dread,  as  if  something  strange  and 
fearful  were  about  to  happen.  I was  soon  asleep  again  or  unconscious,  at 
any  rate,  to  my  surroundings.  Then  I saw  two  men  engaged  in  a slight 
scuffle ; one  fell  fatally  wounded — the  other  immediately  disappeared.  I 
did  not  see  the  gash  in  the  wounded  man’s  throat,  but  knew  that  his  throat 
was  cut.  I did  not  recognise  him,  either,  as  my  brother-in-law.  I saw  him 
lying  with  his  hands  under  him,  his  head  turned  slightly  to  the  left,  his 
feet  close  together.  I could  not,  from  the  position  in  which  I stood,  see 
but  a small  portion  of  his  face  ; his  coat,  collar,  hair  or  something  partly 
obscured  it.  T looked  at  him  the  second  time  a little  closer  to  see  if  I 
could  make  out  who  it  was.  I was  aware  it  was  someone  I knew,  but 
still  could  not  recognise  him.  1 turned,  and  then  saw  my  wife  sitting  not 
far  from  him.  She  told  me  she  could  not  leave  until  he  was  attended 
to.  (I  had  got  a letter  a few  days  previously  from  my  wife,  telling  me 
she  would  leave  in  a day  or  two,  and  was  expecting  every  day  a letter 
or  telegram,  telling  me  when  to  meet  her  at  the  dep6t.)  My  attention 
was  struck  by  the  surroundings  of  the  dead  man.  He  appeared  to  be 
lying  on  an  elevated  platform  of  some  kind,  surrounded  by  chairs, 
benches,  and  desks,  reminding  me  somewhat  of  a school-room.  Outside 
of  the  room  in  which  he  was  lying  was  a crowd  of  people,  mostly  females, 
some  of  whom  I thought  I knew.  Here  my  dream  terminated.  I awoke 
again  about  midnight;  got  up  and  went  to  the  door  to  see  if  there 
were  any  prospect  of  rain ; returned  to  my  bed  again,  and  lay  there  until 
nearly  daylight  before  falling  asleep  again.  I thought  of  my  dream  and 
was  strongly  impressed  by  it.  All  strange,  superstitious  feelings  had 
passed  off. 

“It  was  not  until  a week  or  10  days  after  this  that  I got  a letter 
from  my  wife,  giving  me  an  account  of  her  brother’s  death.  Her  letter, 
which  was  written  the  day  after  his  death,  was  mis-sent.  The  account  she 
gave  me  of  his  death  tallies  most  remarkably  with  my  dream.  Her  brother 
was  with  a wedding  party  at  the  dep6t  at  Markham  station,  Fauquier 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC . 

385 

vi*l} 

Co,,  Va.  He  went  into  a store  near  by  to  see  a young  man  who  kept  a 
bar-room  near  the  dep6t,  and  with  whom  he  had  some  words.  He  turned 
and  left  the-  man,  and  walked  out  of  the  store.  The  bar-room  keeper 
followed  him  out,  and  without  further  words  deliberately  cut  his  throat. 
It  was  a most  brutal  and  unprovoked  murder.  My  brother-in-law  had  on 
his  ovegsoat,  with  the  collar  turned  up.  The  knife  went  through  the 
collar  and  clear  to  the  bone.  He  was  carried  into  the  store  and  laid  on 
the  counter,  near  a desk  and  show  case.  He  swooned  from  loss  of  blood 
soon  after  being  cut.  The  cutting  occurred  early  Thursday  night, 
December  27th.  He  did  not  die,  however,  until  almost  daylight,  Saturday 
moriiing.  • 

“ I have  not  had  a complete  account  of  my  sister-in-law’s  dream.  She 
was  visiting  a young  lady,  a cousin,  in  Kentucky.  They  slept  together 
Friday  night,  I think,  the  night  of  her  brother’s  death.  She  dreamed  of 
seeing  a man  with  his  throat  cut,  and  awoke  very  much  alarmed.  She 
awok©  her  cousin,  and  they  got  up  and  lighted  the  lamp  and  sat  up 
until  daylight.  That  day  she  received  a telegram  announcing  her 
brother’s  death. 

“ I cannot  give  you  any  certain  explanation  of  these  dreams.  I do 
not  believe  that  they  are  due  to  ordinary  causes,  but  to  causes  of  which 
science  does  not  at  present  take  cognisance. 

“Walter  Bruce.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Dr.  Bruce  says  : — 

“July  9th,  1884. 

'“  I have  never  had  another  dream  similar  to  the  one  related  in  the 
letter.  I have  at  times  had  dreams  that  were  vivid,  or  from  some  cause  im- 
pressed themselves  upon  my  mind  for  a time,  such  as  anyone  would  be 
likely  to  have.  I cannot  call  to  mind,  though,  any  of  special  importance, 
or  with  any  bearing  upon  the  dream  in  question. 

“ I did  not  mention  the  dream  to  any  one  before  receiving  the  letter 
confirming  it.  I live  in  rather  a retired  place  in  the  country,  and  if  I 
saw  any  one  during  that  time,  to  whom  I would  care  to  relate  the  dream, 
it  did  not  occur  to  me  to  do  so. 

“You  ask  me  how  my  wife  knew  of  the  circumstances  of  her  brother’s 
death.  She  was  visiting  her  relatives  in  Va.  at  the  time,  and  was  present 
when  her  brother  died.” 

The  following  account  is  from  Dr.  Bruce’s  sister-in-law,  Mrs. 
Stubbing : — 

“March  28th,  1885. 

“Whilst  in  Kentucky  on  a visit,  in  the  year  1883, 1 had  a dream,  in 
.which  I saw  two  persons — one  with  his  throat  cut.  I could  not  tell  who  it 
was,  though  I knew  it  was  somebody  that  I knew,  and  as  soon  as  I heard  of 
my  brother’s  death,  I said  at  once  that  I knew  it  was  he  that  I had  seen 
murdered  in  my  dream ; and  though  I did  not  hear  how  my  brother  died, 
I tpld  my  cousin,  whom  I was  staying  with,  that  I knew  he  had  been 
murdered.  This  dream  took  place  on  Thursday  or  Friday  night,  I do 
nottfcemember  which.  I saw  the  exact  spot  where  he  was  murdered,  and 
just  as  it  happened.  ' 

•*  “ Aknie  S.  Stubbing.” 

386  DREAMS  WHICH  MAY  BE  REASONABLY  [oha*. 

(“The  Thursday  and  Friday  night  mentioned  in  this  account  are 
December  26th  and  27th,  1883.  It  was  upon  the  Thursday  night  my 
dream  occurred. — Walter  Bruce.”) 

In  reply  to  questions,  Mrs.  Stubbing  says 

“ Yes,  I saw  one  man  cut  the  other.  The  wound  was  told  to  me  to  be 
just  like  what  I had  seen  in  my  dream.  I received  a telegram  announcing 
the  death  of  my  brother  on  Saturday  morning.  No,  I never  hajd  any  such 
dream  as  that  before.” 

As  a last  example,  I will  quote  in  its  entiretycan  account  of  a 
series  of  these  quasi-clairvoyant  impressions,  occurring  to  a single 
percipient  in  connection  with  "the  same  agent.  The  narrative  is 
from  Mrs.  Vatas- Simpson,  now  residing  at  New  Town,  near  Brisbane. 
Though  parts  of  it  may.  appear  fanciful  and  subjective,  cross-examin- 
ation made  it  hard  to  doubt  that  these  dreams,  and  others  closely  corre- 
sponding with  facts,  took  place  before  the  facts  were  known.  But  in 
the  absence  of  written  records,  mere  stray  fragments  have  survived. 

“ 82,  Akerman  Road,  Brixton. 

“September,  1884. 

(145)  “ My  eldest  son  and  firstborn  child  left  me  to  go  to  Australia  in 
1851.  The  compact  between  us  was  that  at  a certain  time  we  were  mutually 
to  think  of  each  other  every  day.  He  arranged  the  hours  for  himself,  which 
arrangement  caused  my  hours  to  be  from  2 a.m.  until  4 a.m.  He  did  not 
appear  to  notice  that  it  might  interfere  witli  my  night’s  rest,  nor  did  I say 
so,  but  most  truly  can  I state  as  a fact , that  during  all  these,  years 
there  has  not  been  one  night  that  I have  not  been  awake  at  the  time 
specified ; in  sickness ; under  the  power  of  soporifics  ; or  weary  from 
exhausted  activity,  still  I started  up  as  the  hour  arrived.  This  may, 
perhaps,  in  some  measure  account  for  the  close  communion  we  have  had 
together,  for  not  only  have  I seen  him  and  been  with  him,  but  have  heard 
the  words  he  uttered. 

(1)  “I  saw  my  son  on  his  horse  in  a wild  part  of  the  country,  and  saw 
him  dash  into  a foaming  torrent.  The  horse  could  with  difficulty  stem  the 
turbid  river,  and  my  son  kept  cheering  him  on  by  word  and  hand.  After 
struggling  on  for  some  time  I saw  them  land  safely  on  the  banks  of  the 
stream,  and  my  son  put  his  face  against  the  neck  of  his  horse  for  a fe’Vj 
minutes,  the  noble  creature  returning  the  caress,  panting  and  dripping  as 
he  was.  Then  my  son  looked  round  at  me,  and  said,  distinctly,  t Mother, . 
mother,  he  has  saved  me.’  That  was  all,  but  a letter  coming  in  di\e# 
course  as  usual,  told  me  of  this  incident,  and  the  exact  words  jny  son  said 
when  he  felt  himself  once  again  on  terra  firma.  So  our  spirits  had  held 
communion. 

(2)  “ I saw  my  son  on  an  open  plain.  He  kept  looking  at  me.  He 
took  from  his  baggage  some  articles  of  clothing,  spread  them  out,  shook 
his  head,  and  put  them  down,  then  looked  at  me ; I mean  by  that,  the 
looked  up  from  the  shirt  or  socks  he  had  in  his  hand  as  though  he  gazed 
afar  off.  After  disposing  of  these  things  in  various  ways,  and  seeming  to 

REGARDED  AS  TELEPATHIC , , 

387 

vm«] 

be  in  deep  thought,  he  slowly  put  them  away  again  and  started  on  his 
journey  across  country. 

“ The  letter  came  saying,  * Oh  ! mother  dear,  that  I had  your  precious 
industrious  fingers  to  mend  my  things  for  me,  my  socks  and  flannels,  and 
sew  on  my  buttons/  then  narrating  exactly  what  he  had  done  on 
the  wide  plains,  thus  confirming  in  every  particular  my  vision  of  him. 
He  had  travelled  from  Melbourne  to  Carpentaria,  on  foot  and  on 
horseback. 

(3)  “ I saw  my  son  nursing  a little  child,  then  dash  over  the  plains 
on  horseback  without  a hat,  then  dig  a hole  and  place  with  much  care, 
and  very  slowfy,  something  in  it,  then  kneel  down  and  with  his  hands 
slowly  fill  the  hole  with  earth.  He  had  a book,  from  which  he  appeared 
to  be  reading,  which,  by-the-bye,  I thought  very  remarkable.  He  slowly 
ipid  with  much  solemnity  left  the  spot,  book  in  hand,  but  did  not  turn  to 
look  at  me. 

“Then  came  the  letter.  On  the  wild  sheep  plains  he  was  living  with, 
a man  and  his  wife  and  little  children.  His  pet  was  taken  ill.  He  mounted 
horse  to  go  16  miles  for  doctor — too  late!  his  little  favourite  was  dead. 
He  dug  the  grave  himself,  and  with  his  own  hands  put  the  little  child  into 
its  last  resting-place,  and  with  prayer-book  in  hand  read  a portion  at  the 
grave. 

(4)  “ I saw  my  son  in  a stream  of  flowing  water.  He  now  and  then 
saifck  down  out  of  view,  but  came  to  the  surface  again.  It  was  a very 
distressing  dream  to  me,  because  I saw  two  black  objects  near  him  and 
feared  they  were  chasing  him.  I was  much  troubled. 

“ The  letter  from  him  gave  me  an  account  of  the  swimming  across  a 
river,  accompanied  by  two  blacks,  who  were  travelling  the  same  way. 

“ Then  came  a period  of  distress  to  me,  because  I felt  that  something 
had  come  between  my  son  and  me.  At  the  usual  time  for  dwelling  upon 
his  love  for  me,  and  his  loving  remembrance  of  all  he  had  promised,  I found 
an  obstacle  of  some  sort.  It  grieved  me  sadly.  I could  not  understand  it. 
Someone  always  stood  between  us  ■ a shadow  was  always  hovering  about. 
I saw  him  in  a cloud,  or  a mist  rose  between  us,  or  he  passed  from  me 
looking  back  at  me.  There  was  no  longer  any  communion.  My  daughters 
found  something  distressed  me,  and  I told  them  that  I feared  for  ;their 
brother  Alfred.  They  tried  to  keep  me  contented,  but  I felt  deserted. 
The  letter  came.  He  was  married ; and  never  since  have  I been  blessed 
by  having  communion  with  him.” 

[Jdrs.  Simpson  has  explained  in  conversation  that  there  was  not  the  ^ 
slightest  breach  of  affection  ; only  these  peculiar  communications  ceased.] 

* 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Simpson  adds  : — 

“I  have  never  at  any  time  made  a secret  of  my  constant  communion 
with  my  loved  son.  All  my  family  have  heard  my  dreams,  as  they^  took 
place— often  at  the  very  time — and  then  have  seen  the  corroboration  of 
them  when  my  letters  arrived  from  Queensland.  I have  no  letters  in  my 
possession,  though  they  are  only  lately  destroyed.  Could  I have  foreseen 
the  future,  as  it  is  now,  I should  most  certainly  have  preserved  a record  of 
all  events,  with  the  dates." 

388  TELEPATHIC  DREAMS . [chap, 

“ The  dreams  are  purely  matters  of  recollection.  I fancy  that  I never 
wrote  them,  as  I was  often  very  suffering  at  the  time.  But  they  were 
always  related  to  one  or  more  of  the  family  at  the  time  they  occurred. 

“ In  my  last  to  Ada  [her  daughter],  I asked  her  as  to  my  dreams,  and 
she  sends  a few  lines,  which  I copy  from  her  letter : — 

“ * With  regard  to  your  dreams  I am  not  very  clear,  but  I remfember, 
when  we  were  at  Shanklin,  you  dreamt  that  something  happened  to  Alfred, 
and  there  was  water,  and  something  dark  kept  close  to  him.  That  is  all  I 
remember  of  the  dream.  You  told  Mary  and  me  about  it,  and  you  wrote 
it  down,  and  said  we  should  hear  something  more  about  it.  In  my  heart 
I thought  it  stuff.  However,  by  the  next  mail  came  a letter,  saying  that 
on  such  a day,  giving  the  date  and  hour,  Alfred  was  on  horseback 
(I  think),  and  something  happened  to  the  horse,  and  he  would  have 
been  drowned  but  for  some  black  men,  who  rescued  and  took  care  of 
him.  It  is  years  since  I thought  of  it,  but  once  set  off,  I daresay  more 
would  come  to  me/ 

“ Accept  this  at  what  it  is  worth.  You  see  she  has  combined  two  of 
my  dreams.” 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  only  letter  of  the  son’s  bearing 
on  these  experiences  that  can  be  found ; it  refers  to  the  third  case. 

" I arranged  for  the  funeral  this  afternoon.  My  poor  horse  suffered, 
as  you  may  suppose,  hard  riding.  Twenty-third.  Three  times  rode  to 
Roma — 18  miles  and  more  before  1 p.m.  ; then  we  started  to  the  burial 

ground I put  Willy  into  his  coffin,  and  into  his  grave.  As 

a baby  I nursed  him  to  sleep,  and  into  his  cradle  ; now  I went  down  into 
his  grave,  and  drew  the  ropes  from  under,  so  that  he  was  not  shaken.  A 
sad  day’s  work.” 

This  may  conclude,  for  the  present,  the  subject  of  dreams.  If  with 
respect  to  some  of  the  cases  cited  I have  used  expressions  implying 
that  we  regard  them  as  pretty  certainly  telepathic,  this  is  on  the 
understanding,  as  I have  explained,  that  telepathy  is  established 
independently  of  them.  But  though  we  do  not  regard  this  branch  of 
evidence  as  proving  our  thesis,  the  study  of  it  will  materially  assist 
our  future  progress. 

IX.] 

CHAPTER  IX. 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

§ 1.  In  the  cases  of  the  last  chapter,  the  percipient,  at  the  moment  of 
percipience,  was  distinctly  asleep.  But  the  passage  from  sleep  to 
waking  admits  of  many  degrees ; and  a very  interesting  group  of 
cases  remain  which  cannot  properly  be  classed  as  dreams,  and  yet 
which  do  not  appertain  to  seasons  of  complete  normal  wakefulness. 
The  discussion  of  these  experiences,  which  occur  on  the  borderland 
of  sleeping  and  waking,  will  form  the  natural  transition  to  the  waking 
phenomena  with  which  we  shall  be  occupied  during  the  remainder 
of  our  course.  The  whole  set  of  cases  in  which  telepathic  impressions 
take  a sensory  form  really  belong  to  one  large  genus  ; whatever  the 
state  of  the  percipient  may  be,  percepts  or  g"wcm-percepts  which  are 
not  originated  by  anything  within  the  normal  range  of  his  sense- 
organs  are  and  must  be  hallucinations.  For  convenience,  however,, 
that  term  is  confined  to  waking  experiences,  for  which  there  is  no 
other  designation.  Accordingly,  as  I have  before  spoken  of  veridical 
dreams,  I shall  in  future  have  to  speak  of  veridical  hallucinations  ; 
and  we  are  now  to  take  the  step  which  leads  from  the  one  class  to 
the  other. 

There  are  certain  reasons  why  this  borderland  might  be  expected 
to  be  rich  in  telepathic  phenomena.  An  impression  from  a distant 
mind*  may  or  may  not  originate  a sensory  hallucination ; but  if  it 
does  so,  this  seems  more  specially  likely  to  occur  at  any  season,  or  in 
why  state  of  the  organism,  which  happens  to  be  favourable  to  sensory 
hallucinations  in  general.  Now  the  state  between  sleeping  and 
waking  has  this  character.  Persons  who  have  never  had  hallucinations 
of  the  senses  at  any  other  times,  have  experienced  them  in  the 
moments  which  immediately  precede,  or  immediately  follow,  actual 
sleep.  And  though  neither  form  of  experience  is  common,  an 
examination  of  a number  of  instances  seems  to  show  that  conditions 

390 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[ CHAP. 

which  come  nearest  to  those  of  sleep  are  more  favourable , than 
those  of  ordinary  waking  life,  for  the  bodying  forth  of  subjective 
phantasms.* 

Of  the  hallucinations  which  precede  sleep,  the  best-known  class 
have  received  the'  name  of  “ illusions  hypnagogiques.”  They  have 
been  carefully  described  by  Muller,  Maury,  and  other  writers,  who 
have  themselves  experienced  them.  For  the  most  part  they  seem  to 
begin  with  an  appearance  of  bright  points  and  streaks,  which  then 
form  a more  or  less  complicated  pattern,  or  develop  into  a scene  or  land- 
scape.2 In  these  cases,  it  is  probable  that  the  origin  of  the  phenomena 
is  a slightly  abnormal  condition  of  the  retina,  and  that  elements  of 
actual  sensation  from  this  peripheral  source  form  the  basis  of  the 
phantasmagoria  which  the  mind  elaborates.  But  there  is  another 
form,  involving  no  peculiarity  of  the  external  organ,  where  some 
object  that  has  been  actually  seen  during  the  day  seems  to  reappear 
before  the  eyes  with  all  the  vividness  of  reality.  Maury  gives  a case 
of  an  “ after-image  ” of  the  sort,  which  well  exemplifies  the  stage 
between  reality  and  dream.  After  a fatiguing  day,  his  eyes  had  been 
gladdened  by  the  sight  of  a beefsteak,  which  was  to  form  his  dinner. 
After  dinner  he  became  drowsy ; and  in  this  state  he  had  a distinct 
vision  of  this  very  steak,  apparently  as  real  and  palpable  as  ever. 
Lapsing  then  into  actual  sleep,  he  had  a vivid  dream,  in  which  the 
steak  again  reappeared.  Here  it  is  clear  that  the  “ hypnagogic  ” 
hallucination  was  as  truly  the  projection  of  the  percipient’s  own  mind 
as  the  dream. 

^The  halhicinations  which  immediately  follow  sleep  are  not  in- 
frequently the  result  of  a previous  dream,  some  feature  of  which  is 
prolonged  into  waking  moments,  and  becomes  temporarily  located 
among  the  objects  that  meet  the  eye.  An  Oxford  undergraduate  tells 
me  that,  having  had  a very  vivid  dream  of  being  chased  by  a figure 
in  green,  he  woke  and  saw  the  green  figure  in  the  middle  of  his 
room.  “ I had  no  doubt  that  I was  awake,  for  I saw  the  light*  from 
the  street  lamp  shining  on  my  door.  The  figure  was  not  in  this  light . 
but  nearer  the  bed,  and  the  green  tinge  was  very  perceptible.”  The’ 
Rev.  E.  H.  Sugden,  of  Bradford,  writes  to  me : “ Once  I had  a most 

1 The  same  seems  to  hold  good  in  distinctly  morbid  cases.  (See  Dr.  Pick’s  remarks 
in  the  Vienna  Jahrbuch  fur  Psychiatric  for  1880,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  50.)  Dr.  Maudsley  says 
that,  in  recovery  from  chronic  alcoholism,  the  hallucinations  continue  to  occur  between 
sleeping  and  waking,  when  they  have  ceased  to  occur  at  other  times.  ( The  Pathology 
of  Mind,  p.  485.) 

2 See  some  excellent,  examples  in  the  next  chapter,  p.  474. 

.IX.]  “BORDERLAND”  CASES.  391 

vivid  dream  about  a man  whom  I knew  veil.  On  suddenly  waking, 
I saw  him,  in  the  light  of  early  morning,  standing  at  my  bedside  in  • 
the  very  attitude  of  the  dream.  I looked  at  him  for  a second  or  two, 
and  then  putting  my  foot  out,  I kicked  at  him ; as  my  foot  reached 
him,  hd  vanished.”  Another  informant  had  a dr'eam,  in  the  train,  of 
looking  at  her  watch,  and  on  waking  saw  the  dial  before  her  eyes 
“ larger  than  the  real  one,  and  blue  : after  a few  moments  it  flickered 
and  went  out  like  a candle.”  In  these  cases  the  impression  was  scarcely 
more  than  momentary ; but  other  informants — among  them  Professor 
Balfour  Stewart — have  told  me  of  similar  experiences  of  their  own 
which  lasted  a good  many  seconds ; and  in  the  stock  example  of 
the  books,  the  dream-baboon  remained  grinning  in  a comer  even 
while  the  percipient  was  sufficiently  himself  to  walk  across  the  room — 
a striking  illustration  of  the  psychological  identity  of  the  dreaming 
and  the  waking  image.1 

More  striking  are  the  cases  where  the  images,  though  immediately 
following  sleep,  are  not  a continuance  of  a dream,  or  at  any  rate  of  a 
dream  of  which  the  slightest  memory  survives.  Of  course  these 
experiences  may  not  all  have  been  hallucinations  in  the  strict  sense, 
but  only  misinterpretations  of  actual  sensation — that  is  t(>  say,  some 
article  of  furniture  or  real  object  in  the  room  may  have  served  as  the 
basis  for  the  delusive  image  ; and  momentary  illusions  of  this  sort  are 
perhaps  not  very  uncommon.2  But  even  so,  the  mind  has  imposed 

1 An  attempt  to  ascertain  the  frequency  of  such  experiences  formed  part  of  the  sta- 
tistical inquiry  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter.  But  unfortunately  I cannot  record  an 
exact  result.  The  question  as  first  asked  was—  Have  you  experienced  dream-images 
which  persist  into  waking  moments  ? but  on  making  further  inquiry  of  a good  many  of 
the  persons  who  answered  “yes,”  I found  that  they  nad  not  understood  persist  to  mean 
persist  as  visible  objects , After  these  words  were  introduced,  very  few  yeses  were 
received  ; and  I think  it  would  be  safe  to  say  that  the  persons  who  can  recall  such  a visible 
persistence,  do  not  amount  to  1 per  cent,  of  the  population. 

2 For  instance,  Mr,  Paul  Bird,  of  30,  Strand,  Calcutta,  tells  me  that  some  years  ago 
he  woke,  and  saw  a native  standing  against  the  wall,  who  on  being  regarded  sank  into  a 
squatting  posture:  “ I jumped  out  of  bed,  caught  the  intruder  by  the  throdt,  and  found 
he  was  a dirty  linen  bag,  with  the  neck  tied.  Not  till  I actually  clutched  the  neck  was  I con- 
vince^.” Mr.  Morrifield,  of  24,  Vernon  Terrace,  Brighton — with  whom  figures  seen  (ki  wak- 
ing last  long  enough  for  him  “ to  reason  that  though  I have  been  mistaken  before,  there  can 
bq  no  mistake  this  time,  and  to  insist  upon  this  to  my  wife,  who  remonstrates  says,  “ If 
•there  is  any  light  object  in  the  room,  or  any  dress  or  polished  piece  of  furniture  on  which  the 
light  falls,  my  figure  generally  shapes  itself  about  that.  ” Even  a persistent  dream-image  may 1 
attach  itself  to  an  external  basis.  Thus  Miss  I.  Bidder,  of  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham, 
tells  me  of  a nightmare  from  which  a most  distinct  demon  survived  after  she  woke.  Bhe  sat 
ii$.' to  inspect  its  hand,  which  was  clutching  the  bed-rail ; but  “ it  faded  into  the  ornaments 
oyer  the  mantel-piece.” 

We  may  regard  as  the  lowest  grade  of  such  illusion  the  impression  of  waking 
among  unknown  surroundings.  Thus  one  correspondent  tells  me  that  she  has 
u wateffed  the  room  gradually  take  its  usual  form,  which  on  first  waking  had  been  some 
place  quite  different.  And  another  inf oimant  writes : “The  room  I apparently  woke 
m;  was  a large  room,  with  the  chief  space  between  the  foot  of  the  bed  ana  the  opposite , 
boundary  wall,  which  looked  an  immense  way  off,  and  the  light  did  not  appear  to  cotoe  in  at 

392 

“ BORDERLAND  ” 

[chap*. 

its  own  creation  from  within  on  what  met  the  eye  from  without ; and 
such  cases,  therefore,  still  bear  out  my  point,  that  the  tendency  to 
externalise  and  objectify  mental  images  is  strongest  at  one  special 
season  of  waking  life.  Of  302  cases  of  hallucinations  of  sight 
(exclusive  of  those  given  as  telepathic  evidence  in.  this*  book), 
of  which  I have  collected  first-hand  accounts  during  the  last  three' 
years,  as  many  as  43 — that  is,  a seventh  of  the  whole  number — 
have  taken  place  during  the  first  few  moments  after  waking.  It 
is  equally  noteworthy  that  of  the  remainder,  66*  making  in  all 
more  than  a third  of  the  whole  number,  occurred  to  persons  who  were 
in  bed — a proportion  far  in  excess  of  that  which  the  number  of 
waking  minutes  spent  in  bed  bears  to  the  total  number  of  waking 
minutes.  Few  of  these  cases,  moreover,  were  of  a character  that 
would  allow  us  to  class  them  as  illusions  hypnagogiques.  They 
did  not  visit  persons  who  were  familiar  with  such  visions  as  sleep 
approached ; nor  did  they  originate  or  develope  in  any  way  that 
suggests  an  unusual  or  fatigued  condition  of  the  retina.  Nor  again 
could  by  any  means  all  of  them  be  explained,  like  M.  Maury’s 
beefsteak,  as  “ after-images  ” — revivals  of  past  impressions  ; for  out 
of  the  43  cases  first  mentioned  only  23,  out  of  the  66  other  cases 
only  26,  represented  a face,  form,  or  object  that  was  recognised; 
while  in  several  even  of  these  cases  the  person  whose  figure  appeared 
was  a deceased  friend  or  relative  who  had  not  been  actually  seen  for 
months  or  years.  Similarly,  of  187  first-hand  cases  of  auditory  hallu- 
cination in  my  collection,  63,  or  more  than  one  third  of  the  whole  num- 
ber, took  place  in  bed.  Of  these,  19  are  described  as  either  awakening 
the  person,  or  occurring  in  the  very  first  moment  of  waking,  and  in  10 
of  the  19  the  sound  was  a recognised  voice ; of  the  remaining  44,  17 
were  unrecognised  voices,  21  were  non- vocal  sounds  such  as  ringings 
and  knocks,  and  only  1 6 represented  recognised  voices.  It  would 
seem,  theri,  that  the  reasons  which  make  bed  a specially  favourable 
place  for  such  experiences  are  to  be  sought,  not  only  in  the  physio- 
logical peculiarities  of  the  moments  immediately  contiguous  to  sleep, 
but  in  the  riiore  general  conditions  of  quiet  and  passivity,  of  a’ 
comparatively  ancemic  brain,  and  of  the  partial  lapse  of  the  higher 
directive  psychical  activities.  We  cannot,  I think,  safely  reckon 

the  right  place,  though  on  the  same  side  of  the  room  as  the  window  really  was.  I lay  and 
pondered,  feeling  as  if  there  was  something  inexplicable  in  the  place,  sure  that  I was  wide 
awake.  As  I wondered,  all  the  strangeness  of  the  room  and  the  added  space  vanished*  and 
I found  myself  again  in  a small,  narrow  room,  with  the  wall  almost  close  to  the  bottom  of 
the  bed.” 

.IX.] 

“ BORDERLAND ” CASES. 

393 

darkness  as  among  these  conditions,  as  a large  proportion  of  the  cases, 
have  occurred  when  the  room  was  light — for  instance,  in  the  early 
hours  of  a.  summer  morning. 

t 

§ 2»  At  any  rate,  bed  being — from  whatever  causes — a place 
favourable  to  phantasms,  it  is  reasonable  to  surmise  that  it  may  be  a 
place  favourable  to  the  phenomena  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  this 
book — the  phantasms  that  coincide  with  reality.  And  such,  in  fact, 
it  .proves  to  be.  • Considering  how  small  a portion  of  our  waking-life 
is  included  in  the  few  moments  after  waking  from  sleep,  or  even  in 
the  short  periods  of  wakefulness  that  normal  healthy  persons  pass  in 
bed,  it  is  remarkable  how  large  a proportion  of  our  veridical 
examples  (a  number  little  less  than  the  total  of  dreams,  and  amouiit- 
ing  to  about  a fourth  of  the  externalised  waking  cases,)  fall  within 
these  seasons.  And  regarded  as  evidence  of  telepathy,  it  will  be  seen 
that  these  cases  stand  on  an  altogether  different  footing  from  the 
dream-cases  proper  with  which  they  have  seemed  in  one  way  so 
closely  allied.  Dreams,  as  we  saw,  are  so  frequent  and  various  as  to 
afford  an  immense  scope  for  accidental  coincidences  ; it  is  far  other- 
wise with  these  borderland  impressions,  or  at  any  rate  with  those  of 
them  which  the  perceiver  himself  is  able  clearly  to  differentiate  from 
dreams.  If  I have  called  them  the  commonest  form  of  waking 
hallucination  among  sane  and  healthy  people,  this  is  not  to  be 
understood  as  meaning  that  they  are  absolutely  common ; on  the 
contrary,  they  are  decidedly  exceptional.  Out  of  5,569  persons,  taken 
at  random,  I find  that  only  18  are  able  to  recall  having  within  the 
last  twelve  years  had  a visual  experience,  and  only  23  an  auditory 
experience,  of  this  kind.1  If  then  we  find  a considerable  number  of 
cases  where  an  experience  of  the  sort  has  coincided  with  the  death  (or 
some  distinct  crisis  in  the  life)  of  the  person  whose  presence  the 
hallucination  suggested,  the  fact  is  at  once  noteworthy ; and  the 

1 I may  explain  that  the  statistics  about  hallucinations,  of  which  use  was  made  on  the 
preceding  page,  were  not  the  result  of  inquiries  addressed  to  a known  and  limited  number 
*>f  persons,  but  of  testimony  which  has  reached  me  in  the  more  general  course  of 
psychological  investigation.  For  the  purpose  then  # in  view — namely,  to  ascertain  the 
proportion  which  “borderland  ” hallucinations  bear  to'hallucinations  ip  general — statistics 
thus  drawn  from  an  unlimited  circle  are  of  course  in  place.  But  it  is  quite  a different 
matter  wheft  we  wish  to  discover  how  common  the  phenomena  are,  in  the  sense  of  dis- 
covering what  proportion  of  people  have  had  experience  of  them.  The  only  way,  then,  is 
to  make  a definite  inquiry  on  the  subject  of  a certain  number  of  persons,  large  enough  to 
be  accepted  as  a fair  sample  of  the  population.  This  method  of  numerical  inquiry  was 
exemplified  to  some  extent  in  the  discussion  on  dreams ; but  I am  reserving  for  a separate 
chapter  (Chap,  xiii.,  at  the  beginning  of  Vol.  ii.)  the  more  detailed  account  of  it,  and  of 
its  bearing  on  the  theory  that  the  coincidences  on  which  stress  is  laid  in  this  book  were 
due  not  to  telepathy  but  to  chance. 

394 

“ BORDERLAND ” CASES . 

[chap.. 

number  of  such  coincidences  that  we  can  adduce  affords  a strong  and 
independent  proof — far  stronger,  at  any  rate,  than  was  afforded  by  our 
list  of  coincident  dreams — that  telepathy  and  not  accident  is  the 
explanation  of  them.  Nor  is  the  comparatively  small  number  Of 
persons  who  have  experience  of  distinct  “ borderland  ” hallucinations 
the  only  point  wherein  this  class  is  superior  in  evidential  force  to 
dreams.  We  can  here,  as  a rule,  be  far  more  certain  that  the  par- 
ticular impression  recorded  was  really  of  a sort  unique  or  highly 
exceptional  in  the  particular  percipients  experience.  This  uniqlie 
character  is,  no  doubt,  as  we  have  seen,  often  asserted  of  dreams  proper 
which  afterwards  prove  to  have  coincided  with  reality.  But  there  we 
lacked  complete  assurance  that  similar  dreams  which  did  not  coincide 
with  reality  had  not  slipped  out  of  memory.  The  impressions  to  be 
described  in  this  chapter,  on  the  other  hand,  have  a character  and  an 
intensity  which  would  ordiuarily  ensure  their  being  remembered,  even 
if  no  coincidence  were  established.  Many  of  them,  indeed,  seem  to  have 
been  distinctly  waking  impressions,  belonging  to  a state  of  open  eyes 
and  alert  senses,  which  was  continued  into  normal  waking  life  without 
any  break  or  any  feeling  of  change  whatever.  Still,  as  they  occurred 
to  persons  who  were  in  bed,  and  at  seasons  when  the  faculties  are  apt 
to  be  in  an  unstable  condition,  and  when  the  stage  of  consciousness 
from  moment  to  moment  may  be  hard  to  define,  it  is  safest  to 
distinguish  them  from  similar  phenomena  occurring  during  active 
waking  hours  no  less  than  from  those  of  sleep.1 

I may  quote  at  once  a case  which  illustrates  the  immense 
importance  to  the  argument  of  distinguishing  the  experiences  of  the 
“ borderland  ” from  those  of  sleep.  The  following  passage  occurs  in' 
the  Life  and  Times  of  Lord  Brougham , written  by  himself  (1871), 
pp.  201-203,  and  was  originally  an  entry  in  his  journal.  The  entry 
must  apparently  have  been  made  very  soon  after  the  occurrence 
which  it  describes ; as  we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  had  the  fact  of 
his  friend's  death,  which  he  learnt  soon  afterwards,  been  known  to 

i Since  we  make  so  broad  au  evidential  distinction  between  these  “borderland ” 
impressions  and  dreams,  it  is  clearly  incumbent  on  us  to  treat  doubtful  cases  in  the  way 
least  favourable  to  our  argument,  and  to  refer  them  to  the  dream-class.  Thus  in  the 
well-known  apparition-case  recorded  in  Isaac  Walton’s  Life  of  Lh\  Donne,  it  is  very 
probable  that  Dr.  Donne,  who  had  been  left  alone  aft^r  dinner,  was  dozing.  So,  when  the 
word  vision  is  used,  without  special  mention  that  the  percipient  was  awake,  we  are  bound 
to  assume  that  he  was  asleep.  This  would  exclude  such  a case  as  Ben  J onson’s  “vision 
of  his  boh,  “ with  a bloodie  cross©  upon  his  forehead,”  which  synchronised  with  the  child  & 
death  at  a distance  by  the  plague,  as  narrated  by  Drummond  of  Hawthomden.  - For 
taken  as  a dream , the  experience,  occurring  at  what  was  very  possibly  a time  of  anxiety, 
would  not  afford  a sufficiently  remarkable  coincidence. 

IX.]  “ BORDERLAND ” CASES.  395 

him  at  the  time  of  writing,  he  would  have  included  it  in  the  account. 
In  December,  1799,  Lord  Brougham  was  travelling  in  Sweden  with 
friends. 

(146)  We  set  out  for  Gothenburg,  [apparently  on  December  18th] 
determining  to  make  for  Norway.  About  1 in  the  morning,  arriving  at  a 
decent  inn,  we  decided  to  stop  for  the  night.  Tired  with  the  cold  of 
yesterday,  I was  glad  to  take  advantage  of  a hot  bath  before  1 turned  in,  and 
here  a most  remarkable  thing  happened  to  me — so  remarkable  that  I 
must  tell  the  story#from  the  beginning. 

" After,  I left  the  High  School,  I went  with  G.,  my  most  intimate 
friend,  to  attend  the  classes  in  the  University.  There  was  no  divinity 
class,  but  we  frequently  in  our  walks  discussed  and  speculated  upon 
many  grave  subjects — among  others,  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and 
on  a future  state.  This  question,  and  the  possibility,  I will  not  say  of 
ghosts  walking,  but  of  the  dead  appearing  to  the  living,  were  subjects  of 
much  speculation : and  we  actually  committed  the  folly  of  drawing  up  an 
agreement,  written  with  our  blood,  to  the  effect  that  whichever  of  us 
died  the  first  should  appear  to  the  other,  and  thus  solve  any  doubts  we 
had  entertained  of  the  ‘life  after  death/  After  we  had  finished  our 
classes  at  the  college,  G.  went  to  India,  having  got  an  appointment 
there  in  the  Civil  Service.  He  seldom  wrote  to  me,  and  after  the 
lapse  of  a few  years  I had  almost  forgotten  him ; moreover,  his  family 
having  little  connection  with  Edinburgh,  I seldom  saw  or  heard  anything 
of  them,  or  of  him  through  them,  so  that  all  the  schoolboy  intimacy  had 
died  out,  and  I had  nearly  forgotten  his  existence.  I had  taken,  as  I have 
said,  a warm  bath,  and  while  lying  in  it  and  enjoying  the  comfort  of  the 
heat,  after  the  late  freezing  I had  undergone,  I turned  my  head  round, 
looking  towards  the  chair  on  which  I had  deposited  my  clothes,  as  I was 
about  to  get  out  of  the  bath.  On  the  chair  sat  G.,  looking  calmly  at  me. 
How  I got  out  of  the  bath  I know  not,  but  on  recovering  my  senses  I 
found  myself  sprawling  on  the  floor.  The  apparition,  or  whatever  it  was, 
that  had  taken  the  likeness  of  G.,  had  disappeared. 

“This  vision  produced  such  a shock  that  I had  no  inclination  to 
talk  about  it,  or  to  speak  about  it  even  to  Stuart ; but  the  impression 
it  made  upon  me  was  too  vivid  to  be  easily  forgotten ; and  so  strongly 
was  I affected  by  it,  that  I have  here  written  down  the  wholo  history, 
with  the  date,  19th  December,  and  all  the  particulars,  as  they  are  now 
fresh  before  me.  No  doubt  I had  fallen  asleep;  and  that  the  appear- 
ance presented  so  distinctly  to  my  eyes  was  a dream,  I cannot  for  a 
T&O ment  doubt;  yet  for  years  I had  had  no  communication  with  G., 
nor  had  there  been  anything  to  recall  him  to  my  recollection ; nothing 
had  taken  place  during  our  Swedish  travels  either  connected  with  t G, 
or  with  India,  or  with  anything  relating  to  him  or  to  any  member  of 
his  family.  I recollected  quickly  enough  our  old  discussion  and  the 
bargain  we  had  made.  I could  not  discharge  from  my  mind  the  impres- 
sion' thfifib  G.  must  have  died,  and  that  his  appearance  to  me  was  to  be 
received  by  me  as  a proof  of  a future  state,  yet  all  the  while  I felt  con* 
vi&ced  that  the  whole  was  a dream ; and  so  painfully  vivid,  so 

396  “BORDERLAND”  CASES.  [cha* 

* unfading  was  the  impression,  that  I could  not  bring  myself  to  talk  of  it, 
or  to  make  the  slightest  allusion  to  it.” 

In  October,  1862,  Lord  Brougham  added  as  a postcript: — 

“ I have  just  been  copying  out  from  my  journal  the  account  of  this 
strange  dream  : Certissima  mortis  imago  / And  now  to  finish  the  story, 
begun  about  60  years  since  Soon  after  my  return  to  Edinburgh,  there 
arrived  a letter  from  India,  announcing  G.’s  death,  and  stating  that  ho 
had  died  on  the  19th  of  December  ! 

“ Singular  coincidence  ! yet  when  one  reflects  on  the  vast  numbers  of 
dreams  which  night  after  night  pass  through  our  brains;  the  number  of 
coincidences  between  the  vision  and  the  event  are  perhaps  fewer  and  less 
remarkable  than  a fair  calculation  of  chances  would  warrant  us  to  expect. 
Nor  is  it  surprising,  considering  the  variety  of  our  thoughts  in  sleep,  and 
that  they  all  bear  some  analogy  to  the  affairs  of  life,  that  a dream  should 
sometimes  coincide  with  a contemporaneous  or  even  with  a future  event. 
This  is  not  much  more  wonderful  than  that  a person,  whom  we  had  no 
reason  to  expect,  should  appear  to  us  at  the  very  moment  we  have  been 
thinking  or  speaking  of  him.  So  common  is  this,  that  it  has  for  ages 
grown  into  the  proverb,  4 Speak  of  the  devil.*  I believe  every  such 
seeming  miracle  is,  like  every  ghost  story,  capable  of  explanation.” 

Lord  Brougham’s  evidence  in  a matter  of  this  kind  cannot  be 
fairly  impugned  on  the  ground  that  his  character  for  public  veracity 
was  not  always  above  reproach.  He  clearly  took  no  special  pride  or 
pleasure  in  the  incident,  and  he  advances  a thoroughly  rationalistic 
explanation  of  it.  But  of  course  the  long  interval  which  elapsed 
between  his  hearing  of  the  date  of  the  death  and  his  recording  it  in 
writing,  greatly  diminishes  the  evidential  value  of  the  case.  I quote 
it  rather  for  the  sake  of  the  important  fallacy  in  the  concluding 
remarks. 

Lord  Brougham,  we  see,  rests  his  view  that  the  coincidence  in 
his  case  was  accidental  on  the  “ vast  numbers  of  dreams.”  But  was 
his  experience  a dream  ? This  is  no  mere  question  of  a name.  Let 
us  make  the  supposition  that  no  death  had  occurred,  and  that  the . 
experience  remained  one  which  there  is  not  even  a primd  facie  excuse 
for  surmising  to  be  anything  but  purely  subjective : does  it  thereby 
subside  at  once  into  the  general  ruck  of  dream-experiences  ? Is  it 
indistinguishable  in  intensity  and  character  from  those  countless 
multitudes,  of  which  it  would  be  true  and  relevant  to  say  that  the 
scope  afforded  by  them  for  chance-coincidences  is  practically 
unlimited?  We  can  but  accept  what  Lord  Brougham  himself  has 
told  us,  and  answer  these  questions  by  an  emphatic  negative.  The 
complete  consciousness  of  the  real  place  and  time,  the  intention  to 
get  out  of  the  bath,  the  percipient's  sense  of  his  own  actual  posture 

“ BORDERLAND ” 

397 

i?-] 

when  he  caught  sight  of  the  figure,  and  the  whole  detail  of  the 
account,  are  all  very  unlike  ordinary  dreaming.  But  apart  from  such 
points  as  these,  is  it  a well-known  result  of  an  ordinary  dream  that 
the  dreamer,  dn  recovering  his  senses,  finds  himself  “ sprawling  on 
the  floor*”  ? On  waking  from  an  ordinary  dream,  are  we  wont  to 
remark,  as  a point  of  interest,  that  “the  apparition  has  disappeared”? 
Is  it  characteristic  of  an  ordinary  dream  to  be  so  painfully  vivid  and 
unfading  that  the  dreamer  cannot  bring  himself  to  make  the  slightest 
allusion  to  it  ? *Call  such  an  experience  a dream,  or  call  it  (as  we 
should  do)  a “ borderland  ” hallucination — the  only  relevant  question 
is,  how  often  does  its  like  occur  ? In  Lord  Brougham’s  own  long  life, 
at  any  rate,  it  was  unique  and  unparalleled.  In  arguing,  therefore, 
that  the  'coincidence  was  not  so  very  remarkable  after  all,  because 
“ dreams  ” are  so  numerous  and  various  that  one  of  them  here  and 
there  is  .likely  by  chance  to  strike  on  truth,  he  makes  himself  the 
slave  of  a word.  The  instance  is  instructive,  as  showing  the  tendency 
of  prepossessions,  however  legitimate  and  scientific  in  themselves,  to 
lead  on  to  illegitimacies  of  procedure.  Lord  Brougham  is  rightly 
certain  that  his  experience  is  not  supernatural — is  “capable  of 
explanation  ” ; and  then,  as  the  only  natural  explanation  that  occurs 
to  him  is  chance,  he  becomes  equally  certain  that  that  must  be  the 
right  one,  wrests  facts  into  conformity  with  it,  and  refers  a very 
uncommon  thing  to  a class  of  very  common  things. 

§ 3.  To  come,  however,  to  our  own  collection — before  introducing 
the  characteristic  sensory  cases,  I will  quote  a couple  of  “borderland” 
examples  of  the  more  ideal  type  which  has  been  prominent  in  the 
preceding  chapters.  In  the  first  case,  the  transferred  impression  (if 
such  it  was)  did  not  even  suggest  an  idea  to  the  percipient  until  it 
actually  took  shape  in  an  exclamation  of  her  own.  The  narrator’s 
family  dislike  the  subject,  and  her  name  is  accordingly  suppressed. 

“ December  22nd,  1883. 

— (147)  “Two  years  ago  my  son  was  ill  in  Durban,  Natal.  I was  told  by 
his  medical  attendant,  who  is  also  my  son-in-law,  that  the  illness  was  serious, 
but  I had  no  reason  to  suppose  it  was  expected  to  end  fatally.  Of  course, 
I,  his  mother,  was  anxious ; but  there  came  better  accounts,  and  at  last  a 
letter  from  my  son  himself.  He  spoke  of  being  really  stronger,  expressed 
regret  at  his  enforced  long  silence,  and  added  he  hoped  now  to  write 
regularly  again.  The  load  was  lifted  from  my  mind,  and  I remarked  I . 
felt  happier  than  I had  done  for  months.  At  this  time  I too  was  ill,  and 
had  a trained  nurse  with  me.  A few  nights  after  the  receipt  of  the  letter, 

398 

« BORDERLAND ” CASES \ 

[CHA*. 

I thought  I haul  been  lying  awake,  and  requiring  to  call  my  nurse  who 
was  in  my  room,  I sat  up  in  bed  and  called  loudly,  ‘ Edward,  Edward/  I 
was  roused  by  nurse  answering,  ‘ 1 fear,  ma’am,  your  son  will  not  be  able 
to  come  to  you/  I tried  to  laugh  it  off,  but  a chill  struck  to  my  heart* 
I noted  the  hour,  3.40  on  Sunday  morning.  Without  mentioning  my 
fears,  I recounted  the  incident  to  my  daughters,  but  I looked  fpr  the  bad 
news  to  come,  and  on  Monday  recei  ved  the  cable  message,  ‘ Edward  died 
last  night/  Subsequently  letters  named  the  hour  as  being  identical  with 
that  in  which  I had  involuntarily  sent  forth  my  cry  for  my  loved  one. 
[This  is  not  quite  correct.]  His  sister,  Mrs.  C.,  in  writing  to  me,  said, 
4 O ! mother,  his  one  crave  was  for  you,  and  to  the  last  moment  tl|e 
yearning  he  had  for  you  seemed  to  dwell  in  Ins  eyes/  I may  add  We  were 
more  than  even  mother  and  son  usually  are  to  one  another.  I believe  in 
that  one  moment  our  souls  were  permitted  to  meet,  and  I thank  God  for 
the  memory  of  that  hour. 

“C.  E.  K.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  K.  says  that  her  son  had  had  delicate 
health,  and  “ for  years  l used  to  get  up  through  the  night  and  listen  to 
his  breathing,  and  lived  in  the  constant  apprehension  of  learning  sudden 
bad  news  if  lie  were  out  of  my  sight.”  She  adds,  “ No  doubt  I was  thinking 
of  him,  but  not  painfully,  for  I had  had  his  letter,  and  I thought  he  was 
getting  well.  It  certainly  was  not  a dream — 1 sat  up  in  bed  to  call  my 
nurse,  when,  to  my  surprise  and,  for  an  instant,  amusement,  I uttered  the 
cry,  ‘Edward,  Edward/  The  great  point  is,  of  course,  whether  the  hour 
was  exactly  that  of  his  death.  My  son  died  during  the  night,  or  rather, 
early  in  the  morning,  of  Sunday,  August  28th,  1881.  During  that  same 
night  I uttered  my  cry  to  him.  It  was  the  only  timd  in  my  life  that 
anything  of  the  kind  took  place.  I never  talked  in  my  sleep,  nor  had  any 
experience  the  least  like  this  before  or  since.” 

The  following  is  from  Mrs.  K/s  daughter  : — 

“January  23rd,  1884. 

“ I remember  that  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  August  my  mother 
told  me  of  the  curious  coincidence  of  which  she  has  written  to  you.  She 
told  me  when  I went  into  her  room  the  first  thing,  and  the  nurse  was 
also  in  her  room. 

“ E.  E.  K.” 

'It  having  been  pointed  out  to  Mrs.  K.  that  her  daughter  said  the 
29th,  not  the  28th,  of  August,  she  explains  : — 

“ My  daughter,  E.  E.  K.,  says  I told  her  of  my  cry  in  the  morning  of 
the  day  after  I uttered  it ; of  course,  it  was  therefore  on  the  28th  that 
everything  occurred.  In  writing  to  you  she  did  not  realise  that  the  deatK 
and  my  cry  were  both  after  midnight , and  simply  writing  from  memory, 
put  the  29th,  as  being  the  day  after  the  28th.  There  is  no  doubt 
Edward’s  death  and  my  cry  occurred  during  the  night  of  the  27th,  or 
rather  in  the  early  morning  of  the  28th.” 

[This  is  not  very  clearly  expressed ; but  there  seems  little  doubt  that 
the  cry  took  place  on  Sunday  morning,  August  28th,  and  was  mentioned 
to  E.  E.  K.  a few  hours  later.] 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

ix.] 

399 

Mrs.  K.  kindly  wrote  to  another  daughter  at  Durban,  to  make  sure 
of  the  exact  time  of  the  death  ; and  quotes  the  following  passage  from  the 
reply  •— 

“ Edward  died  at  20  minutes  before  5 a.m. ; his  watch  was  just  beside 
him,  and  as  he  drew  his  last  breath,  I looked  at  the  time  and  said, 
‘ Mother^ will  be  awake  I how  will  she  bear  it?”’  The  writer  adds 
that  her  husband’s  entry  in  his  diary  for  August  28th,  1881,  is,  “Ned 
died  4.40  a.m.,” 

Allowing  for  longitude  the  cry  here  followed  the  death  by  about 
an  hour.  Mrs.  ^K.’s  preoccupation  with  her  son’s  condition  is,  of 
course,  a weak  point  in  the  evidence  : on  the  other  hand  she  is  very 
certain  of  the  uniqueness  of  the  experience.  If  the  case  was 
telepathic,  its  peculiar  nature  would  strikingly  support  the  view 
already  advanced,  that  a telepathic  impression  may  be  produced  below 
the  threshold  of  consciousness.  And  on  that  view  the  slight 
deferment  of  the  further  effect  by  which  the  impression  is  plainly 
manifested  becomes  completely  intelligible. 

The  next  case  is  very  similar  to  No.  103  (p.  330),  but  the  effect  on 
the  percipient  is  even  more  unlike  that  of  any  ordinary  dream.  And 
from  the  evidential  point  of  view,  even  those  who  most  strongly 
realise  the  scope  that  the  vast  number  of  dreams  affords  for  accidental 
coincidences,  will  hesitate  to  assume  that  a vast  number  of  boys  of  16 
get  up,  dress,  and  wait  for  messengers  in  the  middle  of  the  night. 
The  narrative  is  from  a paper  called  “ Man,  Trans-Corporeal  ” — by 
Dr.  C.  B.  Radcliffe,  of  25,  Cavendish  Square,  W. — which  appeared  in 
the  Contemporary  Review  for  December,  1874. 

(148)  “My  grandmother,  a lady  considerably  over  70  years  of  age, 
resided  with  my  parents,  and  I was  [at  the  time  of  the  occurrence] 
staying  at  a place  about  4 miles  away  from  home.  Everybody  at  home 
was,  to  all  appearance,  in  good  health,  and  had  been  so  for  a long  time, 
and  on  that  particular  night  I went  to  bed  and  fell  asleep,  without  at  aii 
divining  what  was  so  soon  to  happen. 

“ I have  no  remembrance  of  having  dreamt,  and  all  I know  is,  that 
after  having  slept  for  a couple  of  hours,  I woke  with  full  conviction 
that  my  grandmother  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill,  that  a messenger 
was  on  his  way  to  fetch  me,  and  that  I should  not  reach  home  before 
.flll  was  over.  A moment  or  two  later  I got  up,  lit  a candle,  looked 
at-  my  watch,  dressed,  and  waited  at  the  window  in  the  full  belief 
that  my  grandmother  was  then  dead  and  that  I should  have  to  go 
presently ; and  as  I expected,  so  it  was,  the  messenger  arriving  just  as 
I was  -ready  to  return  with  him,  and  the  death  happening,  as  it  proved 
afterwards,  at  the  very  moment  I had  looked  at  my  watch.  I had  not 
any  impression  at  the  time  that  there  was  anything  supernatural  in  the 
way  in  which  the  intelligence  was  thus  conveyed  to  my  mind.  I remember 
nothing  like  a feeling  of  fear  at  the  time,  and  I did  not  (I  was  a lad  of 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES . 

400 

, [chap. 

not  more  than  16  years  of  age)  perplex  myself  with  reasoning  on  the 
subject.” 

[We  find  that  this  incident  took  place  in  1837,  and  no  corroboration  is 
now  procurable.  In  deciding  whether  to  include  a case  of  this  degree  of 
remoteness,  the  intellectual  status  of  the  narrator  must  naturally  be  a 
chief  consideration.  Dr.  Radclifte  tells  us  that  it  stands  out  very  clearly 
in  his  memory,  and  that  everybody  who  knew  him  at  the  time  heard  of  it.] 

§ 4.  To  pass  now  to  definitely  sensory  cases,  I will  first  quote 
one  which  is  interesting  as  a perfect  example  of  an  “ illusion  hypnago - 
gique”  suggested  apparently  by  the  ideas  in  a neighbouring  mind. 
Miss  Deering,  of  Louisville,  Kentucky,  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

“October  18th,  1884. 

(149)  “ 1 very  distinctly  remember  that  one  day,  a few  years  ago,  my 
father  lay  down  for  a few  minutes,  as  at  that  time  usual  before  going  to  his 
office  in  the  afternoon.  Seated  on  a stool  beside  him,  and  with  my  left  hand 
enfolded  in  one  of  his,  I read  the  book  in  which  I was  at  the  time 
interested,  for  5 or  possibly  7 minutes.  At  the  end  of  that  time  he  turned 
his  face  toward  fne,  and  seeing  that  the  room  was  shaded,  remarked : 
4 Anna,  you  will  injure  your  eyes  reading  in  this  dim  light.’  4 And  I do 
not  particularly  like  this  book/  I responded.  I held  in  my  hand  a 
historical  novel,  the  name  of  which  I am  sorry  I cannot  recollect,  but  I 
remember  vividly  that  the  passage  T had  just  read  purported  to  be  one  of 
the  last  scenes  in  the  life  of  Marie  Antoinette,  and  I remember' as  dis- 
tinctly that  in  that  scene  a tall  man  carried  a coffin  from  a room  in  which 
Marie  Antoinette  and  some  attendant  ladies  were  at  the  time  standing. 
I remember  that  in  the  story  that  tall  man  stood  prominently  in  the  fore- 
ground, and  that  my  mind  was  strained  under  the  part  he  took  in  that 
scene  almost  to  the  verge  of  repugnance. 

44  In  reply  to  ray  fathers  question  why  I did  not  like  the  book,  I 
replied  in  substance  as  in  the  foregoing,  and  he  immediately  told  me  that 
he  had  just  seen  what  I had  described,  and  had  opened  his  eyes  and 
turned  his  face  toward  me  to  dissipate  the  scene,  which  for  the  moment  he 
had  looked  upon  as  an  isolated  phantasm. 

“Anna  M.  Deering.” 

Mr.  Deering  writes : — 

“Louisville,  Kentucky,  U.S. 

44  October  21st,  1884. 

44  While  I lay  with  my  daughter’s  hand  in  mine,  as  she  relates  in  the 
accompanying  memoir,  I fell  into  the  semi-slumber  usual  with  me  on  lyingf 
down  to  rest  for  a few  minutes  after  my  luncheon,  early  in  the  afternoon. 
At  these  times  I very  seldom  fall  asleep,  but  simply  into  a species,  of 
slumber,  in  which  I frequently  find  myself  in  a kind  of  rayless  or  moon- 
less moonlight,  looking,  and  this  usually  with  serene  pleasure,  at  near- 
by gardens,  slopes,  rivulets,  and  various  little  vistas,  which  more  times 
than  otherwise  vanish  at  my  bidding,  and  except  I fall  asleep,'  are 
immediately  replaced  by  others.  Sometimes  these  are  peopled  with 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

401 

«•) 

apparently  living  figures,  and  frequently  these  also  dissolve  at  my 
bidding  and  are  replaced  by  others.  There  is,  however,  this  difference ; 
anyr  control  I exercise  for  the  purpose  of  a change  seems  to  be  more 
immediate  and  more  absolute  over  a change  of  figures  than  over  a change 
of  scenes. 

“Iam  quite  sure  that  at  these  times  I do  not  fall  into  any  condition 
that  fairly  can  be  called  pathological. 

“ Under  the  slumber  now  under  consideration,  my  attention  became 
fixed  on  a tall  thin  man,  with  head  uncovered,  beardless,  and  dressed  in 
black.  He  came  toward  the  foot  of  the  bed  on  which  I lay  from  the  left ; 
and  perhaps  I shpuld  note  that  my  daughter  sat  upon  my  left.  Immedi- 
ately I saw  several  other  figures ; and  though  these  stood  outside  the  lines 
or  field  of  my  direct  vision,  I remember  distinctly  that  they  made  on  me 
an  impression  of  sympathy  with  powerlessness.  I might  think  that  the 
sympathy  touched  me  through  the  countenance  of  .the  man,  were  it  not 
that  he  impressed  me  witli  also  the  opposite  of  powerlessness.  His  age 
seemed  to  be  about  50,  his  face  oblong,  a little  sallow,  seriously  thoughtful, 
and  withal  indicative  of  great  but  quiet  firmness  in  action,  whether  from 
a sense  of  duty  based  on  his  own  judgment,  or  duty  under  a sense  of 
obedience,  I cannot  determine ; though,  in  the  absence  of  any  appearance 
of  the  vindictive,  I think  or  at  least  am  inclined  to  think  that  alike  his 
presence  and  his  action  were  based  on  simply  an  obedience  to  some  rightful 
authority.  This  action  was  a reverent  stepping  forward,  and  a silent 
laying  of  his  hands  on  a coffin  that  seemed  to  rest  across  the  foot  of  the 
bed.  The  moment  I saw  the  coffin  I thought : I do  not  like  this  scene ; 
please  go  away  and  let  something  more  agreeable  come  in.  But  the  scene 
would  not  change,  and  again  I thought : Please  go  away  and  let  something 
more  agreeable  come  in;  and  again  the  scene  would  not  change.  He 
raised  the  coffin,  it  seemed  as  easily  as  though  it  had  been  that  of  an 
infant,  and  was  in  the  act  of  stepping  backward,  as  though  withdrawing 
from  a presence,  when  I thought : Then  I will  not  prolong  this  slumber ; 
I will  open  my  eyes  and  arouse  myself.  And,  on  immediately  doing  so,  I 
spoke  to  my  daughter  as  she  narrates,  and  then,  without  anything  like 
amazement,  listened  to  her  description  from  the  book. 

“ I have  been  minute,  as  in  the  foregoing,  because  I wish  to  put  every 
feature  of  and  every'  impression  given  me  by  the  scene  carefully  on  record, 
against  a search  which  I purpose  to  keep  up  for  the  book  out  of  which  my 
daughter  at  the  time  sat  reading.  She  did  not  then  or  ever  read  to  me 
what  she  had  read,  but  simply  and  in  her  own  language  drew  the  scene ; 
and  this  in,  perhaps  as  few  words  as  she  has  now  written  it,  nor  have  we 
since  that  time  in  any  particular  way  conversed  about  it.  My  impression 
is,  that  the  book  she  read  was  an  octavo  in  paper  covers,  but  its  name  or 
Author,  or  whose  it  was  or  what  became  of  it,  neither  of  us  can  recollect ; 
nor  do  either  of  us  at  this  time  remember  any  of  the  scenes  immediately 
preceding  or  attending  the  tragic  death  of  Marie  Antoinette,  as  these  are, 
or  may  be,  recorded  in  history. 

“ William  Dberino.” 

TWs  incident  was  originally  related  in  the  Louisville  Medical  Neyoe 
by  Professor  Palmer,  a letter  from  whom  is  appended. 

* 2 c 

402  “BORDERLAND”  CASES.  [chap. 

“ University  of  Louisville,  Kentucky,  U.S.  A. 

“September  26th,  1883: 

“ The  article  appearing  on  the  other  side  is  true  in  every  particular. 
The  gentleman,  a resident  of  this  city,  a man  of  high  nervous  organisa- 
tion, was  born  in  Belfast,  U.S.A.  Between  himself  and  his  daughter 
exists  a degree  of  attachment  rarely  seen  in  such  kinship.  I related  the 
incident  as  he  gave  it  to  me. 

“E.  R.  Palmer,  M.D., 

“ Professor  of  Physiology,”  &c. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  value  of  this  narrative,  as  affording- evidence 
of  thought-transference,  must  be  proportional  to  the  degree  of  ex- 
actness with  which  the  correspondence  between  the  dream  and  the 
description  in  the  book  can  be  made  out.  It  might,  therefore,  be 
considerably  increased  if  the  book  could  be  discovered  ; but  we  have 
failed  to  find  any  historical  novel,  or  any  memoir  or  history,  containing 
the  incident.  Even  as  it  stands  the  coincidence  is  certainly  remark- 
able ; but  as  Miss  Deering’s  description  preceded  her  father’s  account 
of  his  vision,  it  is  possible  that  its  similarity  to  the  description 
became  unconsciously  somewhat  stronger  in  recollection  than  it  was 
in  reality. 

This  particular  type  is  in  any  case  unusual.  Looking  at  the 
“ borderland  ” impressions  of  the  higher  senses  as  a class,  we  at  once 
observe  the  same  important  change  as  struck  us  in  the  course  of 
our  survey  of  dreams  (pp.  341-2).  The  experience  of  the  percipient  is 
henceforth  no  longer  (or  only  very  rarely)  a direct  reproduction  op 
embodiment  of  the  idea  or  sensation  of  the  agent ; it  is  something  in 
which  his  own  creative  faculties  are  at  work.  He  is  the  author  of  his 
impression  in  the  same  sense  as  before  he  was  the  author  of  his  dream. 
I merely  note  this  in  passing,  reserving  further  discussion  of  this  point 
till  the  subject  of  waking  hallucinations  can  be  treated  as  a whole. 

§ 5.  We  will  first  take  examples  where  a single  sense  only  is 
concerned,  and  will  begin  with  the  sense  of  hearing.  There  is  a 
group  of  cases  where  what  has  been  heard  has  suddenly  awakened  the 
percipient — not,  however,  as  the  climax  of  a dream,  but  with  thg. 
vivid  and  instantaneous  impression  of  a sound  externally  caused.  It 
may,  no  doubt,  be  suggested  that  in  such  cases  the  sound  is  the 
climax  of  a dream  of  which  no  memory  survived.  But  if  so,  the 
immediate  oblivion  of  the  dream  serves  to  set  off  the  specially 
startling  nature  of  the  experience  in  the  moment  of  waking ; and 
such  instantaneous  startings  from  apparently  dreamless  sleep,  wjjfch  a 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

403 

. «•] 

definite  sound  in  the  ears  which  has  no  objective  reality,  are  at  any 
rate  sufficiently  rare  to  justify  us  in  regarding  them,  for  purposes  of 
evidence,  as  borderland  and  not  as  dream  experiences.  The  cases, 
however,  differ- considerably  in  their  evidential  force.  In  some  which 
have  m»st  powerfully  impressed  the  imagination  of  the  percipients, 
the  sound  has  been  inarticulate  and  of  the  nature  of  a scream,  not 
identified  with  the  person  afterwards  assumed  to  have  been  the 
agent.  Now  this  of  course  diminishes  the  improbability  that  its 
synchronism  with  an  exceptional  state  of  that  person  was  acci- 
dental. And  again,  it  is  difficult  in  such  circumstances  to  prove 
conclusively  that  the  sound  may  not  have  been  due  to  some  normal 
cause  which  was  hot  discovered;  for  odd  sounds  at  night  are  not 
uncommon,  and,  till  accounted  for,  may  have  a peculiarly  exciting 
effect.  As  regards  the  first  of  these  objections,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered, on  the  other  hand,  that  screams  are  a very  unusual  form 
of  purely  subjective  impression — my  large  collection  of  waking 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  does  not  include  a single  instance ; 
while  they  do  not  seem  an  unlikely  form  to  be  taken  by  a hallu- 
cination which  is  the  sensory  embodiment  of  a sudden  undefined 
idea  of  death  or  calamity.1  As  to  the  likelihood  of  a real  external 
sound  whose  source  was  not  discovered,  the  reader  will  be  able  to 
form  his  own  judgment  from  the  cases  themselves. 

The  following  account  is  from  Viscount  L. 

“ November  5th,  1884. 

(150)  “Thirty  years  ago  and  upwards  [August  13th,  1849],  I was 
staying  with  my  father  at  our  place  in  Ireland.  I was  then  my  father’s 
second  son,  having  an  elder  brother.  I was  awoke  out  of  my  sleep  by 
violent  screams,  so  much  so  that  I got  up  and  walked  all  over  the  house  to 
endeavour  to  ascertain  where  the  screams  came  from.  All  appeared,  as 
far  as  I could  judge,  quite  regular  and  quiet  in  the  house  (a  very  large 
one),  and  I went  back  to  bed  and  thought  no  more  about  it.  On  inquiry 
in  the  morning,  nobody  had  heard  the  screams  except  myself.  But  2 days 
after,  I received  a letter,  stating  that  my  elder  and  only  brother  had  died 
at  Ramsgate,  after  6 hours’  illness,  of  cholera,  and  died  about  the  hour 
when  I certainly  heard  screams.” 

<•«  In  answer  to  inquiries,  Lord  L.  says : — 

s “I  never  in  my  life  experienced  any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the 
senses.” 

Now  no  doubt  the  wind  sometimes  plays  odd  tricks  ; and,, 
moreover,  it  is  possible  to  be  awoke  by  a scream  of  one’s  own 

1 Sec  the  discussion  and  examples  of  “rudimentary  hallucinations,”  Chap,  xiv., 
§4,  and  Chap,  xv.,  §6. 

2 0 2' 

404  “ BORDERLAND  ” CASES.  [chap, 

which  seems  to  the  bewildered  sense  to  have  been  external.1  But  if  a 
healthy  man  gets  out  of  bed  and  walks  all  over  a large  house  merely 
because  the  wind  is  high,  he  is,  one  would  think,  likely  to  remark 
that  the  wind  is  high  ; and  the  sounds  which  so  ring  in.  his 
waking  ears  as  to  prompt  this  unusual  course  would  at  any©  rate  be 
likely  to  be  noticed  by  someone  else.  The  use  of  the  plural  word 
“screams”  is  also  worth  noting,  as  opposed  to  the  view  that  the 
sleeper  woke  himself  by  some  shrill  exclamation;  indeed,  his  sex 
would  alone  make  this  explanation  less  plausible  than  in  some  other 
cases.  But  the  case  is  remote  in  time,  and  depends  on  a single 
memory.  This  last  objection  does  not  apply  to  the  following 
account,  from  Mrs.  Purton,  of  Field  House,  Alcester. 

“ March  16th,  1884. 

(151)  “In  the  autumn  of  1859,  we  were  expecting  my  youngest  brother 
home  from  Australia,  after  an  absence  of  eight  years.  He  was  a passenger 
on  board  the  ‘ Royal  Charter.’  The  night,  or  rather  in  the  early  dawn  of  the 
fatal  morning  of  the  wreck  of  that  unhappy  vessel,  I suddenly  started  out 
of  my  sleep  and  found  myself  seizing  hold  of  my  husband’s  arm,  horrified 
at*  the  most  awful  wail  of  agony,  which  appeared  to  me  to  fill  the  house. 
Finding  my  husband  still  asleep — he  was  a medical  man,  and  had  been  out 
the  whole  of  the  previous  night,  so  was  unusually  tired — I slipped  out  of 
bed  and  went  round  to  look  at  all  the  children  and  to  the  servants’  room, 
but  found  all  quietly  sleeping,  so  thinking  it  must  have  been  the  wind 
only  which  so  disturbed  me,  I lay  down  again,  but  could  not  sleep.  I 
noticed  that  day  was  just  breaking.  In  the  morning  I asked  different 
people  if  they  had  been  disturbed  by  any  unusual  noise,  but  no  one  had 
heard  it. 

“The  post  brought  a letter  from  a cousin  in  Liverpool,  telling  u?  the 
4 Royal  Charter  ’ was  telegraphed  as  having  arrived  at  Queenstown,  and 
we  might  expect  to  see  Frank  very  shortly.  We  passed  the  day  in  most 
joyful  anticipations  of  the  meeting.  My  mother  had  his  room  prepared,  a 
good  fire  burning,  and  his  night-shirt  and  slippers  laid  out  for  use,  and  a 
nice  supper  ready.  Wheels  were  heard,  but,  instead  of  Frank,  my  cousin 
appeared.  She,  as  soon  as  the  awful  news  of  the  wreck  reached  Liver- 
pool, started  off  herself  to  bring  us  the  melancholy  tidings.  Even  then  I 
did  not  connect  the  fearful  sounds  I heard  with  the  wreck,  but  when  the 
newspapers  came  and  I read  the  accounts  of  the  eye-witnesses  of  the 
wreck,  and  of  the  screams  which  rent  the  air  as  the  ship  broke  her  back 
and  all  on  board  were  overwhelmed  in  the  waves,  I could  only  shudder 
and  exclaim,  i That  was  what  I heard.’  It  was  months  before,  I could 
forget  the  horror  which  thrilled  my  very  soul  at  the  remembrance  of  that 
awful  night. 

“Frances  A.  Photon.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Purton  adds : — 

1 In  proof  of  this,  see  Mrs.  Holland's  ease  on  p.  860. 

« BORDERLAND » CU&B& 

406 

IX.] 

a i never  have  had,  at  any  other  time  than  the  one  I mentioned  to  yon, 
a vivid  dream  of  death,  or  an  auditory  hallucination  of  any  kind.” 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a letter  written  to  Mrs.  Purton  by 
her  daughter,  Miss  Sarah  Sophia  Purton,  who  was  about  12  years  old  at 
the  time : — 

« i distinctly  remember  your  speaking  of  the  cry  of  distress  you  heard 
when  the  ‘ Royal  Charter  ’ was  lost.  My  remembrance  of  it  is  that  you 
woke  with  this  cry  ringing  in  your  ears,  and  got  up  at  once,  quietly, 
without  disturbing  my  father,  who  had  been  out  late  somewhere  to  a 
patient.  You  found  it  was  about  3 o’clock.  You  then  went  to  the 
nursery  and  to  each  room  where  anyone  was  sleeping,  but  finding  all  was 
quiet  and  right  you  went  back  to  bed.  I fancy  you  inquired  next  mom- 
ing  if  anyone  had  heard  the  sound  which  disturbed  you,  but  could  not 
swear  to  this.” 

Miss  Purton  writes  to  us  : — 

“ April  7th,  1884. 

“To  the  best  of  my  recollection  my  mother  spoke  of  the  cry  she  heard 
the  following  morning.  I distinctly  remember  her  saying  when  she  heard 
of  the  terrible  cry  as  the  vessel  parted  and  went  down,  ‘ There,  that  was 
the  cry  I heard,’  and  the  thrill  it  gave  me  at  tho  time,  but  this  must  have 
been  a day  or  two  after  the  occurrence — either  just  before  or  after  she  had 
visited  the  scene  of  the  wreck. 

“S.  S.  Pubton.” 

Here,  the  vivid  character  of  the  impression,  and  the  fact  that  it 
was  unique  in  the  percipient’s  experience,  will  probably  be  accepted 
without  dispute.  And  if  so,  the  coincidence— though  easy  enough 
to  regard  as  accidental  if  it  stood  alone  or  nearly  alone— seems  fairly 
admissible  as  an  item  in  a cumulative  proof  of  telepathy.1 

i We  have  received  a similar  case  from  Mr.  D.  H.  Wilson,  of  Rosemont,  Hyferes,  who 
was  told  by  an  intimate  friend.  Miss  Maclean,  that  she  was  awakened  one  morning  by  an 
appalling  shriek  and  marked  the  hour ; and  that  at  that  exact  time  allowing  for  longitude) 
her  brother  met  with  a violent  death  in  Australia.  But  we  have  not  been  able  to  trace  Miss 
Maclean ; and  in  this  somewhat  doubtful  type,  first-hand  evidence  is  specially  requisite. 

The  following  case,  though  it  is  first-hand,  and  though  the  incident  is  unique  m the 
narrator’s  experience,  is  open  to  objections  of  another  kind.  The  account  is  from  Muw 
Dora  Kennedy,  of  Rockville,  Rainhill,  and  was  obtained  through  the  kindness  of  the  late 

Dr.  Noble,  of  Manchester.  ,,  September  29th,  1884. 

“ A voung  married  sister  of  mine  lived  in  the  country,  and  was  recovering  from  a 
long  iUn^  through  which  I had  nursed  her.  We  went  to  Liverpool  tocorwuRher 
•doctor,  and  to  spend  a few  days  with  a relative.  Dunng  the  course  of  the  visit,  I had  to 
teave  &er  in  the  care  of  an  aunt,  whilst  I went  home  for  a short  time  to  Manchester.  In 
the  middle  of  my  first  night  at  tome,  I was  suddenly  awakenedby 
jumping  out  of  bed,  saw  my  mother  coming  into  the  room  n",avi"§  JJSKJ, 

and  been  awakened  by  a scream,  she  thought  something  terrible  had  happ^ned^  uadamd 
me  what  it  was*  I thought  and  said  at  once  (as  I felt  quite  sure)  that  something  had  hap* 
penedto  my  sister  in  Liverpool  The  next  morning  I returned  to  my  sister,  and  on  my 
i mw that they  were  greatly  alarmed.  M vaunt  told  me .that 
got  ujfto  give  my  sister  her  usual  medicine,  and  by  mistake  took  • 

taining  laudanum,  and  gave  a dose,  fortunately  my 

before  it  was  discovered/*  When  my  aunt  knew  what  ehe  had  done,  she , W 

scream,  and  said,  ‘Oh,  I have  killed  her ! if  only  her  mother  and  Pora  (myself)  were 

406 

“ BORDERLAND  CASES. 

[chap* 

To  come  now  to  cases  where  distinct  words  are  heard— in  the 
following  example  the  voice  heard  was  at  once  connected  with  a 
particular  person;  but  still  not  with  the  person  whom,  if  the 
incident  be  interpreted  telcpathically,  we  must  regard  as  the  agent. 
The  account  was  obtained  for  us  by  Miss  Fripp,  of  Lul worth  •House, 
Hampstead  Hill  Gardens,  from  her  grandmother,  Mrs.  Roe. 

(152)  “ Some  years  since,  when  in  manifestly  good  health,  I was 
aroused  by  what  appeared  to  be  some  one  at  my  bedroom  door,  calling 
1 Mary  Anne,  Mary  Anne/  It  seemed  like  my  mother’s  voice,  who  had 
been  dead  two  or  three  years.  T aroused  my  husband,  but  there  was  no 
one  at  the  door  or  anywhere  on  the  same  floor.  Going  upstairs  to  my 
son’s  bedroom,  it  was  so  full  of  smoke  that  I was  nearly  suffocated,  till  I 
could  open  the  window,  when  I found  my  son  apparently  asleep  but  quite 
insensible,  till  we  got  him  into  the  air ; and  then  when  we  aroused  him, 
he  remembered  when  he  came  up  to  bed  he  laid  the  pipe  he  had  been 
smoking  on  a pile  of  handkerchiefs,  which  had  been  put  on  the  dressing- 
table,  and  were  completely  burnt  and  the  table  injured,  but  no  flames. 
Our  medical  man  thought  had  I not  gone  in  just  in  time  my  son  would 
have  been  dead. 

“ Mary  Anne  Roe.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Fripp  writes  : — 

“ June  25th,  1884. 

“ I have  asked  Mrs.  Roe  the  questions  you  sent  me,  and  I find — 

“(1)  She  has  never  had  other  dreams  which  impressed  her  in  the  same 
way  as  the  two  she  wrote  an  account  of.  [The  other  dream  was  about  the 
wreck  of  her  son  at  sea.] 

“ (2)  My  mother  was  in  the  house  when  my  grandmother  had  the 
warning  about  the  fire.  My  grandfather  told  her  in  the  morning  that 
Mrs.  Roe  insisted  on  getting  out  of  bed,  as  she  fancied  she  had  heard  her 
mother’s  voice  calling  her  outside  the  door. 

“ (3)  There  was  no  smell  of  smoke  in  the  room ; Mrs.  Roe’s  room  was 
on  a different  landing,  quite  apart  from  her  son’s  room. 

“J.  Fripp.” 

Here  again  we  have  a case  which  might  be  variously  described  as 
an  accident  or  as  “special  providence,”  if  it  stood  alone,  but  which 
cannot  be  excluded  from  our  cumulative  argument.  If  telepathic,  it  is  a 

near.*  My  sister  also  told  me  how  ardently  she  had  longed  for  me.  I never  doubted  (for 
we  were  deeply  attached  to  each  other)  but  that  her  longing  for  me  had  an  influence  over* 
me,  and  that  in  some  way,  we  at  home  had  been  made  aware  of  the  scream.  I was  never 
troubled  with  morbid  fancies.” 

Here  the  reference  of  the  sound  to  a particular  person  was  clearly  not  due  to  recogni- 
tion, but  merely  to  the  fact  that  that  person  was  at  the  time  a special  object  of  solicitude. 
But  in  what,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  case  weaker  than  Lord  L.’s  or  Mrs.  Purton’s,  quoted 
above  ? The  answer  is  that  the  fact  of  a second  person’s  sharing  in  the  experience  is  a 
strong  (though  not  a conclusive)  argument  for  supposing  the  sound  to  have  been  a real 
one,  the  source  of  which  did  not  happen  to  be  discovered.  It  will  be  readily  seen  how  much 
more  probable  this  hypothesis  is  in  the  present  case  than,  e.g.>  in  the  case  given*  above 
(p.  227}  as  an  example  of  collective  telepathic  percipience,  — which  happened  also  to  be 
of  the  “ borderland  ” type.  ' 

. IX.]  “ BORDERLAND  ” CASES.  407 

good  instance  of  total  unconsciousness  on  the  part  of  the  agent. 
(Seep.  230.) 

The  next  example — received  in  1883  from  the  Rev.  Andrew 
Jukes — resembles  the  last  in  that  the  voice,  though  recognised, 
was  ndt  that  of  the  agent,  but  of  a person  some  time  deceased. 
In  neither  instance  is  there  any  reason  to  regard  this  feature 
as  other  than  a purely  subjective  element  supplied  by  the  per- 
cipient’s own  brain — a piece  of  dream-like  investiture  in  which  the 
telepathic  impression  clad  itself.  (See  above  pp.  341-2,  and  below, 
Chap.  XII.,  § 5.)  Mr.  Jukes’s  case,  however,  differs  from  the  preced- 
' ing  in  the  important  evidential  point  that  the  words  heard  bore  a 
distinct  relation  to  the  agent. 

“ Upper  Eglinton  Road,  Woolwich. 

(153)  11  On  Monday,  July  31st,  1854, 1 was  at  Worksop,  staying  in  the1 
house  of  Mr.  Heming,  the  then  agent  there  to  fche  Duke  of  Newcastle. 
Just  as  I woke  that  morning — some  would  say  I was  dreaming — I heard 
the  voice  of  an  old  schoolfellow  (C.  C.),  who  had  been  dead  at  least  a year 
or  two,  saying,  * Your  brother  Mark  and  Harriet  are  both  gone/  These 
words  were  echoing  in  my  ears  as  I woke.  I seemed  to  hear  them. 
My  brother  then  was  in  America;  and  both  were  well  when  I had 
last  heard  of  them ; but  the  words  respecting  him  and  his  wife  were  so 
vividly  impressed  upon  my  mind  that  before  I left  my  bedroom  I wrote 
them  down,  then  and  there,  on  a scrap  of  an  old  newspaper,  having  no 
other  paper  in  the  bedroom.  That  same  day  I returned  to  Hull, 
mentioned  the  circumstance  to  my  wife,  and  entered  the  incident, 
which  had  made  a deep  impression  on  me,  in  my  diary,  which  I still 
have*  I am  as  certain  as  I can  well  be  of  anything  that  the  entry  is  a 
transcript  of  what  I wrote  on  the  bit  of  newspaper. 

“On  the  18th  of  August  (it  was  before  the  Atlantic  telegraph),  I 
received  a line  from  my  brother's  wife,  Harriet,  dated  August  1st, 
saying  that  Mark  had  just  breathed  his  last,  of  cholera  ; after  preaching 
on  Sunday,  he  had  been  taken  ill  with  cholera  on  Monday,  and  had  died 
on  Tuesday  morning ; that  she  herself  was  ill,  and  that  in  the  event  of 
her  death  she  wished  their  children  should  be  brought  to  England.  She 
died  the  second  day  after  her  husband,  August  3rd.  I immediately 
started  for  America,  and  brought  the  children  home. 

“ The  voice  I seemed  to  hear,  and  which  at  first  I thought  must  have 
• been  a kind  of  dream,  had  such  an  effect  on  me  that,  though  the  bell  rang 
for  breakfast,  I did  not  go  down  for  some  time.  And  all  that  day,  and  for 
days  after,  I could  not  shake  it  off.  I had  the  strongest  impression,  and 
indeed,  conviction,  that  my  brother  was  gone. 

“ I ought  perhaps  to  add  that  we  had  no  knowledge  of  the  * cholera 
being  in  the  neighbourhood  of  my  brother’s  parish.  My  impression  wag 
that  both  he  and  his  wife  must,  if  the  voice  were  true,  have  been  taken 
away  by  some  railway  or  steamboat  accident.  But  you  should  notice 
that  at  the  moment  when  I seemed  to  hear  this  voice  my  brother  was 

408 

« BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap. 

not  dead.  He  died  early  next  morning,  August  1st,  and  his  wife  nearly- 
two  days  later,  namely,  August  3rd.  I do  not  profess  to  explain  it — I 
simply  state  the  facts  or  the  phenomena.  But  the  impression  made  on  me 
was  profound,  and  the  coincidence  itself  is  remarkable. 

“Andrew  Jukes.” 

Mr.  Jukes  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  inspect  the  record  in  hiB  diary.  J 
had  hoped  to  be  able  to  incorporate  this  verbatim  in  the  account ; but  he 
has  private  reasons — quite  unconnected  with  the  present  case — for  desiring 
that  this  should  not  bo  done. 

In  conversation,  I learnt  from  him  that  the  words  he  beard  formed,  in 
fact,  the  continuation  of  a dream,  but  that  the  dream  had  not  been  about 
his  brother  and  sister-in-law  ; and  he  has  dictated  to  me  the  words,  “ My 
impression  is  that  the  remark  passed  while  I was  awake."  He  has  never 
on  any  other  occasion  in  his  life  made  a written  note  of  a dream. 
Asked  if  he  could  recall  having  experienced  an  auditory  hallucination 
on  any  other  occasion,  he  replied  that  he  had  “never  experienced  any- 
thing of  the  kind,”  except  that  on  One  occasion  he  had  a subjective’ 
impression  of  hearing  music. 

Considering  the  uniqueness  of  the  impression  in  this  case,  it  is  not 
evidentially  important  to  decide  at  what  exact  stage  of  the  waking 
process  the  auditory  experience  took  place.  That  experience  may 
fairly  be  assigned  to  the  “ borderland,”  on  the  ground  partly  of 
Mr.  Jukes’s  conviction  that  he  was  more  awake  than  asleep,  and 
partly  of  the  fact  that  the  supposed  agent  or  agents  had  not  figured 
in  the  preceding  dream.  The  time  of  its  occurrence,  however,  was 
not  that  of  either  of  the  two  critical  moments  of  death  in  Americas 
If  it  coincided  with  any  special  moment,  it  must  probably  have  been 
with  the  first  shock  of  alarm  in  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Jukes,  at  the  idea  of 
cholera  in  her  household.  But  this  is  conjecture  only ; we  do  not 
know  how  early  on  the  Monday  it  was  that  the  first  symptoms  of 
illness  were  apparent ; and  the  evidential  force  of  the  case  is  so  far 
diminished. 

The  following  example,  where  the  voice  was  not  recognised,  pre- 
sents the  interesting  point  of  immediate  repetition,  which  we  shall 
encounter  in  some  of  the  visual  cases  (see  p.  414).,  The  narrator 
is  Mrs.  Thompson,  of  106,  Boston  Street,  Hulme,  Manchester. 

“January  12th,  1884. 

(164)  “In  the  autumn  of  1873  my  cousin  Harry,  to  whom  I Was. 
engaged,  suddenly  came  to  spend  a few  days  with  my  family,  then  staying 
in  London.  We  made  a bet  for  some  gloves  at  parting.  After  paying 
several  visits  in  the  country,  he  returned  to  his  home  in  Yorkshire. 
During  this  time  we  had  no  letter  from  or  news  about  him.  * 

“On  December  18th  I awoke  in  the  night,  hearing  someone  earnestly 

.IX.] 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

m 

calling  me  by  name.  I rose,  and  went  down  to  my  .mother’s  room  on  the, 
floor  beneath,  and  asked  her  if  she  knew  who  hfui  called  me.  She  said  I 
must  have  been  dreaming,  and  told  me  to  go  back  to  bed.  I did  so,  and 
again  heard  my  name  called  distinctly.  I went  again  to  my  mother,  who 
was  a little  vexed  with  me,  as  she  feared  I should  disturb  my  father,  who 
was  sleeping  in  the  room  adjoining.  I therefore  went  back  to  bed,  feeling 
ill  at  ease.  I don’t  think  that  I fell  asleep  again,  but  am  not  quite  sure, 
but  shortly  after  heard  the  voice  distinctly  calling  me  for  the  third 
time.  I was  now  thoroughly  alarmed,  and  dared  not  stay  upstairs 
alone,  so  went  again  to  my  mother,  and  stayed  with  her  the  rest  of 
the  night.  • 

“ The  next  day  we  heard  that  Harry  Suddaby  had  died  in  the  night, 
from  a short  attack  of  bronchitis.  I asked  if  Harry  had  called  me 
really,  but  no  one  remembered  his  doing  more  than  sending  his  love. 

“ Christine  Thompson.” 

The  Register  of  Deaths  gives  the  date  of  the  death  as  December 
19th,  1873.  It  no  doubt  took  place  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning. K 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Thompson  says  : — 

“April  27th,  1885. 

“ I have  never  had  any  experience  similar  to  that  of  which  I sent  you 
an  account,  and  am  too  practical  a mortal  to  believe  in  anything  at  all 
resembling  ‘visions’  or  ‘hallucinations.’  It  was  rather  against  my 
judgment  that  I was  persuaded  to  send  you  the  account.” 

In  the  next  case — from  Mr.  Everitt,  of  Holders  Hill,  Hendon,  and 
first  published  in  Light  for  Jan.,  1883 — the  voice  was  recognised. 
Though  remote,  the  incident  is  of  a sort  that  might  well  make  a 
vivid  impression. 

(155)  “When  quite  a youth,  I had  a remarkable  experience,  in  some 
respects  not  unlike  that  which  the  reprover  of  Job  had.  In  the  silence  and 
darkness  of  the  night  I was  suddenly  awakened  from  a deep  sleep,  and  I 
heard  a voice,  and  I have  no  doubt  that  I might  have  seen  a spirit  if  I 
had  not  been,  like  Eliphaz,  so  greatly  frightened ; but  I heard  a voice, 
and  that  voice  I recognised  as  the  voice  belonging  to  the  dearest  object  I 
had  in  this  world.  I had  no  reason  at  the  time  to  believe  otherwise  than 
that  the  person  to  whom  the  voice  belonged  was  in  good  health  and 
many  miles  from  where  I was;  yet  I heard  and  recognised  the  voice 
of  my  dear  mother,  who  called  me  by  the  familiar  name  she  always- 
used,  and  strange  to  say  she  told  me  • ‘ she  was  dead,’  and  the  next 
post  brought  the  tQP  true  and  too  sad  news  of  her  sudden  departure  from 
earth-life. 

“ I have  always  from  a boy  up  to  the  present  time  locked  my  bedroom 
door  on  retiring  for  the  night.  At  the  time  there  was  no  one  sleeping  in 
the  room  but  myself. 

. “ I was  not  in  a drowsy  state  when  I woke  up,  but  all  my  senses  were 
as  pl&r  and  as  vivid  as  they  are  now  I am  writing  this ; they  could  not 
have  been  more  so  if  any  one  shook  me  and  shouted,  ‘Jump  up,  the  house 
is  on  fire.’-  Indeed,  the  feeling  and  belief  was  then,  and  still  is,  that  I was 

410 

" BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap.  . 

suddenly  awakened  from  a sound  sleep  by  someone  in  the  room,  and  X felt 
certain  by  a slight  noise  or  movement  which  I heard  that  there  was  some- 
one bending  over  me ; which  feeling  was  confirmed  by  the  sound  of  my 
mother's  soft  and  gentle  voice  which  said  ‘ Tommy 5 three  times  in  a way 
as  though  she  wanted  or  expected  me  to  answer  her,  and  she  then  said, 

‘ Your  mother  is  dead.'  * 

“ You  can  better  imagine  my  feelings  than  I can  describe  them.  I 
told  my  fellow  apprentice  in  the  morning  what  I had  experienced,  and 
said  I was  afraid  that  I should  hear  bad  news  from  home.  My  father 
wrote  to  my  eldest  brother  asking  him  to  call  and  break  the  sad  news  to 
me,  which  he  did.  I anticipated  him  by  relating  what*  I had  heard  the 
previous  night.  « Thoma8  EvERirr.” 

The  brother  mentioned  in  this  account  is  dead.  In  a letter  written  on 
the  5th  of  December,  1884,  Mr.  Everitt  adds  : — 

“ I showed  my  fellow-apprentice  my  nightshirt,  which  was  wet  with 
perspiration  from  covering  my  head  over  with  the  bedclothes;  his 
evidence  would  be  more  valuable  than  my  brother’s,  but  I have  not  the 
remotest  knowledge  as  to  where  he  is,  not  having  seen  or  heard  anything 
of  him  for  nearly  forty  years.  My  wife,  even  before  she  was  my  wife,  had 
often  heard  me  speak  of  it ; the  members  of  my  family  have  on  different 
occasions  heard  me  refer  to  it,  but  all  this,  of  course,  would  carry  but 
little  or  no  weight  with  it  to  the  outside  public.  I only  mention  it  now 
as  showing  how  sure  and  certain  the  experience  was.” 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Mr.  Everitt  says  : — 

“The  date  of  my  mother’s  death  was  the  night  of  June  1st,  1841.  It 
was  the  same  night  that  she  made  me  conscious  of  her  presence,  and  also 
of  her  death.”  The  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  the  date  given.  4 

[Mr.  Everitt  has  since  had  one  other  auditory  hallucination,  which 
also  represented  his  mother’s  voice.] 

The  following  account  is  from  a gentleman  residing  at  Tynemouth; 
who  has  at  present  a reason,  which  I regard  as  sufficient,  for  with- 
holding his  name  from  publication,  but  will  withdraw  this  restriction 
after  an  interval  of  a few  years. 

“December,  1884. 

(156)  “On  December  29th,  or  30th,  1881,  about  1 a.m.,  I awoke 
hearing  my  name  called.  Nobody,  was  in  the  house,  the  servants  being 
away  for  a holiday.  1 recognised  the  voice  of  my  father.  . * 

“ Next  afternoon  I received  a telegram  saying  he  was  unwell,  and  on 
arriving  I learnt  from  the  doctor  that  my  father  had  been  unconscious* 
and  had  repeatedly  called  for  me  during  the  night  in  question.  I had  no 
idea  of  his  illness  at  the  time,  and  believed  him  to  be  perfectly  well.  . The 
attack  was  very  short  and  severe.  He  was  in  Dumfries,  and  I at  Tyne- 
mouth, Northumberland.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  our  informant  says  : — 

“ December  27th,  1884. 

“ I paid  no  attention  to  the  ‘ auditory  experience,'  although  the  thing 

"BORDERLAND"  CASES. 

411 

.ix.] 

came  to  my  mind  while  dressing,  and  probably  should  never  have  given  it 
further  attention  if  I had  not  been  struck  by  the  fact  that  apparently  at 
or  about  the  same  time  my  father,  although  unconscious,  had  been 
calling  for  me.  I had  no  means  of  comparing  the  exact  times,  as  neither 
the  doctor  (whose  name  I forget,  and  who  is  now  dead)  nor  I noted  them. 
Shis  curious  coincidence  impressed  the  fact  on  my  mind,  the  more  so  as  I 
have  never  been  able  to  find  any  reasonable  explanation  of  the  case ; and 
as  the  tendency  of  my  education  has  been  to  believe  nothing  that  can’t  be 
accounted  for  logically,  I have  almost  come  to  doubt  the  fact,  and  in 
consequence  have  kept  it  to  myself: 

" I never  have*  had,  either  before  or  since  the  case  I mentioned  already, 
any  hallucination  of  the  senses.  It  may  perhaps  have  some  bearing  on  the 
case,  so  I add  this  postscript  to  say  that  at  one  time,  when  in  sound 
health,  my  father  was  one  of  the  most  skilful  amateur  mesmerists  I ever 
knew  ; his  power  over  some  people  being  quite  extraordinary,  and  some- 
times it  was  exerted  almost  unconsciously  by  him.” 

In  the  next  two  cases,  the  words  that  the  percipient  heard  seem 
actually  to  have  been  uttered  (and,  therefore,  to  have  been  heard)  by 
the  agent ; and  we  may,  if  we  please,  refer  the  examples  to  that 
rarer  type  where  a sensation  seems  to  have  been  quite  literally 
transferred,  as  contrasted  with  the  cases  where  the  percipient  supplies 
a sensory  embodiment  to  a less  definite  telepathic  impression.1 

The  first  account  was  sent  to  us  by  the  Rev.  Augustus  Field, 
vicar  of  Pool  Quay,  Welshpool.  He  describes  it  as  an  “ Extract  of  a 
letter  received  by  me  from  my  brother,  Henry  C.  Field  (Surveyor  and 
Civil  Engineer),  resident  at  Tutahihika,  Wanganni,  New  Zealand,  in 
reply  to  letters  we  had  written  to  him  telling:  about  our  mother’s 
death!” 

“March  7th,  1874. 

(157)  “ I was  deeply  interested  in  the  account  of  our  mother’s  last 
illness,  and  was  particularly  struck  by  the  circumstance  of  my  name  being 
called,  because  I heard  it.  I am  not  accustomed  to  dream,  and  am  sure 
I speak  far  within  the  mark  when  I say  that  I have  not  dreamed  a 
dozen  times  since  my  marriage,  23  years  since.  Dreams,  too,  are 
.supposed  to  arise  from  something  affecting  one’s  mind,  and  producing 
some  temporary  strong  impression,  and  in  this  case  there  was  nothing 
which  could  affect  me  in  that  direction,  but  some  quite  the  reverse. 

# " Our  first  horticultural  show  of  the  season  took  place  on  November 

2?th.  I won  several  prizes ; and  after  the  show  closed  at  10  p.m.,  I had 
to  take  home  some  of  my  smaller  exhibits,  and  arrange  for  getting  the 
others  home  next  morning.  It  was  thus  near  midnight  when  I reached 

home,  and  the  only  things  talked  about  by and  myself  afterwards 

were  the  show  and  matters  of  local  interest.  If  anything,  therefore,  were 
likely  to  be  on  my  mind  when  I fell  asleep,  it  would  probably  be  one  or 

1 Compare  the  dream-cases  Nos.  112  and  113  ; and  several  examples  in  Chapters 
xiv.  and  xv. 

412 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap.. 

other  of  the  above  matters*  I do  not  know  how  long  I slept,  but  my  first 
sleep  was  over  and  I was  lying  in  a sort  of  half-awake,  half-asleep  state, 
when  I distinctly  heard  our  mother’s  voice  say  faintly,  1 Harry,  Harry  ! ' 
and  when  daylight  came  and  I thought  the  matter  over,  I Vondered  what 
could  have  possessed  me  to  fancy  such  a thing.  Our  Uncle  0.  and  his 
family  called  me  Harry,  and  Uncle  B.  sometimes  did  so,  and  the  O.’s  allb 
called  me  Harry,  but  with  these  exceptions  I was  called  Henry  by  all  our 
relations.  It  is  possible  our  mother  may  have  called  me  1 Harry  ’ during  my 
very  early  childhood,  but  so  long  as  I can  remember  she  always  called  our 
father  6 Papa  ’ and  me  c Henry.’  It  seemed  to  me,  therefore,  so  utterly 
absurd  that  I should  fancy  her  calling  me  by  a name  that  I never  recol- 
lected to  have  heard  her  use,  that  I mentally  laughed  at  the  idea  and 
wondered  how  such  a thing  should  have  entered  my  head.  Still  the* 
circumstance  struck  mo  as  so  strange  that  I underlined  the  date  on 
the  margin  of  my  working  diary  in  order  that  if  anything  should  occur  to 
corroborate  it  I might  be  certain  as  to  the  time.  Directly,  therefore,  after 
I reached  home  with  S.’s  and  your  letters,  1 turned  to  the  diary  and  found 
the  underlined  date  was  November  28th.  It  was  evidently  during  the 
afternoon  of  November  27th  that  our  mother  uttered  my  name  (this  would 
have  been  so,  A.  F.) ; and  allowing  for  the  difference  of  longitude,  t*he 
time  would  be  early  morning  of  the  28th  with  us,  so  that  I don’t  think 
there  can  be  any  question  that  the  call  actually  reached  my  ear.  I am 
only  sorry  that  I was  not  sufficiently  awake  to  note  the  exact  time,  but 
. should  fancy  it  to  have  been  between  2 and  3 o’clock  in  the  morning, 
which  would  represent  a few  minutes  later  on  the  previous  afternoon  »with 
you.  The  whole  circumstance,  however,  only  adds  another  to  the  number- 
less ones  which  prove  that  our  minds  or  souls  possess  powers  of  which  we 
have,  as  yet,  a most  imperfect  knowledge,  and  means  of  communication 
with  each  other  which  are  beyond  our  finite  comprehension.” 

The  Rev.  A.  Field  adds  : — 

“ I certify  that  the  above  is  a correct  extract  from  my  brother’s  letter* 
written  to  me  from  Wanganui  on  the  above  date.  I may  add  that  a few 
weeks  before  we  received  this  letter  from  him,  my  sister  also  had  a lefter 
from  my  brother,  in  which  he  entered  at  some  length  into  her  future 
movements,  and  offered  her  a home  if  she  should  like  to  accept  it,  on  one 
of  his  acquired  sections  in  Wanganni  or  Turahina.  My  brother 
alludes  to  his  having  so  written  in  a subsequent  portion  of  the  letter  from 
which  I have  quoted , and  says  that  he  believes  he  was  led  to  do  this  partly 
in  consequence  of  the  idea  which  the  circumstance  he  had  described  had 
left  on  his  mind,  viz.,  the  probable  death  of  our  mother.” 

Miss  Field  wrote  to  us  in  October,  1885  : — 

“On  26th  November,  1873,  while  sitting  by  my  mother’s  bed,  I heard* 
her  say  most  plainly,  ‘ Harry,  Harry.’  On  the  following  day  she  died. 
In  course  of  time  we  heard  from  my  brother  in  New  Zealand  that  at  a 
corresponding  time  (their  night)  he  distinctly  heard  the  same  in  his 
mother’s  voice,  and  noted  the  fact  in  his  diary.  , 

“Sophia  Hughes  Field.” 

In  a subsequent  communication,  Mr.  Field  says  : — * 

“ The  following  extract  from  my  diary  is  conclusive 'as  to  the  correct 
date  of  my  mother’s  death  : — 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASHS. 

413 

IX.] 

“ November,  1873,  . 

ut  Thursday,  27th,  arrived  in  London  at  5.30  h.m.,  by  train,  to  70, 
Bassington  Road.  Pound  mother  conscious,  <&c.  j ftead,  &c.,  with  her  at 
frequent  intervals  through  the  day.  K.  and  A.  (my  brother  and  sister) 
arrived.  Gradually  weajker,  and  at  last,  5.45  p,m.,  she  passed  away/ 

♦ “ Yqu  will  understand  my  object  in  giving  you  these  full  particulars. 

I myself  heard  (as  I thought)  my  mother  mention  my  brother’s  name,  and 
spoke  of  it  to  my  sister  and  my  aunt.  I think  they  told  me  that  she  had 
mentioned  his  name  several  times  during  her  last  brief  illness.  She  was 
seized  with  paralysis  on  Wednesday,  26th,  and  her  speech  became  more 
and  more  affecte<|.  It  was  this  that  made  me  feel  uncertain  whether  my 
brother’s  name  was  really  mentioned  in  my  hearing  by  my  mother  or  not. 
In  consequence  of  what  my  aunt  and  sister  said,  I could  have  no  longer 
any  doubt.” 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Stent,  living  at  14,  Singapore 
Road, . Ealing  Dean,  a former  valued  servant  of  Miss  Craigie,  of  8, 
McGill  College  Avenue,  Montreal,  to  whom  she  gave  a completely 
concordant  account,  which  we  have  seen. 

“June  1st,  1885. 

(158)  “Miss  Craigie  has  written  to  me  to  ask  me  to  send  yotr the 
account  of  Elizabeth  calling  for  Mr.  Reggy  and  me.  She  called  him  and 
me.  I was  not  dreaming,  for  she  called  ‘Reggy’  and  ‘ Cook  ’ so  plainly 
I could  not  rest  in  bed ; and  I told  the  housemaid,  E.  Morris,  and  we 
wondered  what  it  meant.  I could  not  go  that  day,  but  I went  the  next, 
and  the  porter  told  me  she  died  the  morning  before  at  20  minutes  to  4.  I 
went  to  the  infirmary  the  day  she  was  buried,  and  the  old  dame  in  the  bed 
next  to  hers  told  me  she  called  for  Reggy  and  Cook  with  her  last  breath. 
It  troubled  me  much,  for  we  had  been  friends  for  years,  and  I went  to  see 
her  as  often  as  I could.  I never  had  anything  of  the  kind  happen  to  me 
before,  and  she  called  us  so  plain.  I have  often  wondered  what  it  could 
j&ean,  and  I shall  never  forget  it. 

“E.  Stent.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Stent  says  : — 

" I send  you  the  name  of  my  dear  friend  ; it  was  Elizabeth  Membr^y. 
The  day  she  died  was  October  18th,  at  Chelsea  Infirmary,  near  the 
Consumption  Hospital  at  South  Kensington  ; but  I am  sorry  I can  tell 
you  nothing  about  Elizabeth  Morris,  having  lost  sight  of  her.  Elizabeth 
has  been  dead  four  years  this  October.  She  was  my  dearest  friend,  and 
was  more  to  me  than  a sister,  but  was  no  relation  to  me — only  my  dear 
friend.  I think  the  bond  of  sympathy  was  very  strong  between  us ; only 
de&th  could  break  at.  We  told  our  troubles  to  one  another ; for  years 
past  we  did  not  do  anything  without  talking  about  it  first.  Mr.  Jteggy 
was  the  son  of  the  lady  where  we  lived  in  service  together,  and  she  was 
vejry  fond  of  him,  and  he  went  to  the  infirmary  to  see  her  as  often  as  he 
could  find  time.” 

medical  superintendent  of  the  Chelsea  Infirmary,  writes  to  us 
“X  fiqd  tliat  Elizabeth  Membrey  was  in  this  Infirmary  from  July  15th 
until  October  18th,  1881,  when  she  died/’ 

414 

"BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

[chap. 

* § 6.  I pass  now  to  the  cases  where  the  sense  of  sight  alone  was 
concerned.  The  fi^st  instance  was  thus  narrated  by  the  Bishop  of 
Carlisle,  in  the  Contempora'i'y  Review  for  January,  1884. 

(159)  “ A Cambridge  student,  my  informant,  had  arranged,  some  years 
ago,  with  a fellow  student  that  they  should  meet  together  in  Cambridge  at 
a certain  time  for  the  purpose  of  reading.  A short  time  before  going  up 
to  keep  his  appointment,  my  informant  was  in  the  South  of  England. 
Waking  in  the  night,  he  saw,  as  he  imagined,  his  friend  sitting  at  the  foot 
of  his  bed.  He  was  surprised  at  the  sight,  the  more  so  as  his  friend  was 
dripping  with  water.  He  spoke,  but  the  apparition  (for  so  it  seems  to 
have  been)  only  shook  its  head  and  disappeared.  This  appearance  of  the 
absent  friend  occurred  twice  during  the  night.  Information  was  soon 
received  that  shortly  before  the  time  of  the  apparition  being  seen  by  the 
young  student,  his  friend  had  been  drowned  whilst  bathing.” 

Having  learnt  that  the  Bishop’s  informant  was  Archdeacon  Farler, 
we  applied  to  this  gentleman,  who  wrote  to  us  on  Jan.  9,  1884  : — 

“ Pampisford  Vicarage,  Cambridge. 

“The  fact  of  having  witnessed  the  vision  was  mentioned  the  next 
morning  at  breakfast,  several  days  l>efore  I received  the  news  of  my 
friend’s  death,  to  my  tutor,  John  Kempe,  Esq.,  his  wife,  and  family.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Kempe  are  now  dead,  but  it  is  probable  his  family  might 
remember  the  circumstance,  although  they  were  but  children  at  the  time. 
I was  staying  at  Long  Ashton,  in  Somersetshire ; my  friend  died  in  Kent. 
As  I did  not  feel  frightened  at  the  time  of  the  vision,  I have  always 
spoken  of  it  rather  as  a singular  dream  than  an  apparition. 

“The  date  of  my  vision  was  either  the  2nd  or  3rd  of  September,  1878, 1 
but  I have  not  my  memoranda  with  me  to  be  quite  sure.  I also  saw  the 
vision  again  about  the  17th  of  the  month.  These  are  my  sole  experiences 
of  an  apparition.  I have  never  experienced  any  sort  of  sensory 
hallucination. 

“ J.  P.  Farler.”  ^ 

Mr.  W.  J.  Kempe  writes  that  Archdeacon  Farler  certainly  told  him 
of  the  occurrence,  but  he  does  not  remember  exactly  when.  Other  mem- 
bers of  the  family,  who  have  been  applied  to,  were  either  away  from  home 
at  the  time,  or  too  young  to  be  told  of  the  matter. 

Here  the  repetition  during  the  night  reminds  us  of  several  of  the 
dream-examples,  and  of  case  154  above.  The  feature  in  waking 
cases  is  of  special  interest.  For  repetition  after  a short  interval  is  an 
occasional  feature  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations;2  and  this  poin£ 
may  be  added  to  many  others  which  will  occupy  us  hereafter,  showing 

1 This  is  an  error.  The  year  was  first  written  1888,  and  then,  by  an  obvious  slip,  the 
second  8 was  altered  to  a 7,  instead  of  to  a 6.  Mr.  W.  J.  Kempe  writes  to  us  from  Xong 
Ashton  School : — “ I fancy  the  occurrence  took  place  in  18(58 ; my  father  died  in  18744” 
Owing  to  Archdeacon  Farler ’s  absence  from  England,  we  have  not  been  able  to  verify 
the  date  of  the  death.  # 

a See  Chapter  xii.,  § 10.  In  Dr.  J essopp’s  experience  {Athencmm  for  Jan.  10,  1880), 
the  figure  which  he  saw  disappeared  suddenly,  and  re-appeared  after  about  five  minutes  ; 
and  my  own  collection  includes  a very  similar  case. 

IX.] 

« BORDERLAND  * CASES. 

415 

the  fundamental  identity,  in  relation  to  the  percipient's  senses,  of 
subjective  and  telepathic  phantasms.  The  subsequent  vision  on  the 
17th  may  be  attributed  to  the  emotional  excitement  of  the  recent 
bereavement. 1 

The  feature  of  repetition  occurs  again  in  the  next  case.  The 
percipient,  Major  A.  P.  Scott  Moncrieff,  is  dead ; but  his  widow,  who  * 
describes  his  experience,  was  cognisant  of  it  before  the  news  of  the 
death  arrived. 

“ May  20th,  1885. 

(160)  “The  circumstances  of  the  dream  or  vision,  as  far  as  I can 
remember  at  this  distance  of  time,  were  these.  A.  awoke  me  one  night, 
and  said,  < I have  had  a strange  dream  about  S.,  and  I fancied  I saw  her 
standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed ; indeed,  I had  to  rub  my  eyes  to  convince 
myself  that  she  was  not  really  there.’  He  fell  asleep,  and  again  dreamt 
the  same,  and  this  made  a powerful  impression  upon  his  mind,  with  almost 
a depressing  effect.  He  was  in  perfect  health  at  the  time,  and  of  a 
thoroughly  practical  nature  ; not  at  all  given  to  sentimentality.  He  had 
also  no  reason  to  believe  that  S.  was  in  frail  health.  Some  weeks  after, 
the  news  came  of  her  death,  and  by  comparing  dates,  and  allowing  for 
the  difference  of  time  between  India  and  Scotland,  the  event  must  have 
taken  place  during  the  period  of  these  dreams ; but  whether  at  the  time 
of  the  first  or  the  second,  I cannot  remember.  This  happened  on  the  7th 
September,  1852. 

“Elizabeth  H.  S.  Moncrieff.” 

Mr.  R.  Scott  Moncrieff,  of  4,  Mardale  Crescent,  Edinburgh,  writes 
to  us : — 

“ I very  well  remember  my  brother,  the  late  Major  A.  P.  Scott 
Moncrieff  (whose  widow  has  written  the  preceding  narrative)  telling  me 
of  this  apparition,  as  he  believed  it  to  have  been,  of  our  sister  Susan,  after 
the  news  reached  us  of  her  death  in  Edinburgh,  on  September  7th,  1852, 
r was  living  in  Calcutta  at  that  date  ; my  brother  was  with  his  regiment 
at  Dinapore.  In  the  month  of  November,  I was  on  a visit  to  his  house 
in  Hazareebagh,  where  he  was  then  living  with  his  wife  ; and  it  was  then 
that  he  told  me  of  the  apparition.  As  he  was  a man  of  a very  unromantic, 
practical  character,  always  ready  to  ridicule  a ghost  story,  I was  the  more 
struck  with  the  depth  of  the  impression  left  on  his  mind  by  the  vividness 
of  the  apparition,  as  he  believed  it  to  have  been,  which  had  led  to  his 
taking  a note  of  the  date  in  writing. 

“ He  told  me  that  after  having  been  asleep  for  a time,  during  the  night 
#of  that  date  (which  must  have  been  the  7th  September),  he  awoke,  feeling 
tfie  heat  rather  trying  ; that  he  saw,  by  a light  burning  in  the  room,  the 
punkah  swinging  above  the  bed,  and  then  saw  our  sister  Susan  standing 
at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  gazing  at  him  very  earnestly ; that  he  was  so 
surprised,  he  sat  up,  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  looked  again,  seeing  her  still 
there,  that  he  exclaimed,  ‘0,  Susan!’  (I  think  he  added,  4 what  are  you 
doing  here  ? ’ but  I am  not  certain  that  these  were  his  words  ; though  I am 

1 See  Chapter  xi.,  § 6 ; but  see  also  the  remarks  on  Mr.  Keulemans  case,  p,  445. 

416 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap. 

certain  that  he  did  utter  some  such  words  after  saying,  1 0,  Susan  ! ’) ; 
that  his  wife  awoke’on  hearing  him  speak,  and  said,  * What  is  it,  Alick  1 ’ 
or  words  of  similar  import;  but  that  he,  fearing  lest,  in  the  state  of 
health  she  was  then  in,  it  might  prove  injurious  to  her  to  be  tpld  what  he 
believed  he  had  seen,  said  he  had  awakened  from  a dream,  but  did  not  tell 
her  how  fully  he  was  convinced  he  had  been  awake  when  he  saw  the 
apparition  of  his  sister,  which  had  disappeared  before  his  wife  had 
spoken  to  him.  * « R.  Scott  Moncrieff.” 

Miss  Scott  Moncrieff,  of  44,  Shooter’s  Hill  Road,  S.E.,  corroborates  as 
follows : — 

“ 1 heard  the  same  account  from  my  brother,  Majdr  Scott  Moncrieff, 
on  his  return  from  India. 

“Mary  Anne  Scott  Moncrieff.” 

[As  a matter  of  form,  we  have  verified  the  date  of  death,  in  the 
obituary  of  the  Scotsman . But  such  verification  of  course  adds  nothing 
unless  the  date  of  the  percipient’s  experience  is  independently  remembered.] 

The  next  example  is  from  Miss  Barr,  of  East  Grinstead,  who  has 
been  already  mentioned  (p.  342). 

(161)  “ On  the  night  of  January,  1871,  I awoke  up  with  the  idea  that 

someone  was  moving  by  the  bedside.  I was  a little  frightened,  and  I saw 
the  curtain  at  the  side  of  the  bed  slightly  pulled  aside,  and  a hand,  with 
the  back  turned  towards  me,  appearing  round  the  curtain.  I recognised 
the  ring  on  the  hand  as  that  of  my  cousin  and  dear  friend  [Captain  C, 
M.J.  I told  my  sister  in  the  morning  that  I had  seen  a hand,1  wearing 
a ring,  but  did  not  tell  her  that  I had  recognised  the  ring,  as  I did  not 
care  to  make  too  much  of  the  incident.  On  that  day,  as  we  learnt  from 
a letter  received  a few  days  afterwards,  my  cousin  died  in  Canada,  from 
the  effect  of  an  accident.  (<  ^ Barr  ” 

Mrs.  and  Miss  Harriet  Barr  have  also  attested  with  their  signatures 
the  fact  that  the  vision  was  narrated  before  the  news  of  the  death 
was  received. 

We  have  received  the  following  account  from  our  friend  Mr. 
J*  A.  Symonds. 

“Davos,  1882. 

(162)  “ I was  a boy  in  the  Sixth  Form  at  Harrow ; and,  as  head  of  Mr. 
Rendall’s  house,  had  a room  to  myself.  It  was  in  the  summer  of  1858.  ‘ I 
woke  about  dawn,  and  felt  for  my  books  upon  a chair  between  the  bed 
and  the  window ; when  I knew  that  I must  turn  my  head  the  other  way, 
and  there,  between  me  and  the  door,  stood  Dr.  Macleane,  dressed  in  a 
clergyman’s  black  clothes.  He  bent  his  sallow  face  a little  towards  me 
and  said,  c I am  going  a long  way — take  care  of  my  son/  While  I was 
attending  to  him  I suddenly  saw  the  door  in  the  place  where  Dr.  Macleane 

1 On  this  fragmentary  form  of  apparition,  see  Chap,  xi.,  § 4, 

“BORDE&LAND”  CASES. 

417 

?*•] 

had  been.  Dr.  Macleane  died  that  night  (at  what  hour  I cannot  precisely 
say)  at  Clifton.  My  father,  who  was/a  great  friend  of  his,  was  with  him\ 
I was  not  aware  that  he  was  more  than  usually  ill.  He  was  a chronic 
invalid.  « j 0HN  Addington  Symonds.” 

We  Jearn  from  the  Rev.  D.  Macleane,  of  Codford  St.  Peter,  Bath, 
that  his  father,  Dr.  Macleane,  “died  at  Clifton  at  a quarter  before 
6 a.tn.,  on  May  14th,  1858.” 

[Mr.  Symonds  has  had  one  or  two  purely  subjective  visions  when  in  a 
waking  state.] 

The  following  case  is  from  the  Rev.  W.  J.  Ball,  of  6,  Pemberton 
Terrace,  Cambridge.  It  is  apparently  a good  example  of  the  vivid 
survival  of  a dream-image  into  waking  moments — an  experiepce  which 
Mr  Ball  tells  us  he  cannot  recollect  to  have  occurred  to  him  on  any 
other  occasion. 

(163)  “ During  my  college  days  I had  a very  dear  and  intimate  chum, 
R.  F.  Dombrain.  We  used  to  walk  together,  read  together,  pray  together, 
and  would  have  thought  it  wrong  to  keep  any  secret  from  each  other.  We 
hoped  to  go  together  into  the  foreign  mission-field ; but  my  friend  was 
ready  to  go  before  I was,  and  it  was  while  he  was  in  London  making 
arrangements  about  going  abroad  that  he  was  seized  with  a very  bad  fever, 
and  his  life  for  some  time  despaired  of.  At  last  he  recovered  and  returned 
to  Dublin,  where  I saw  him  several  times.  He  was  not  quite  restored  to 
health,  but  I hoped  he  would  soon  be  so.  This  was  the  state  of  things 
when  I went  down  to  the  County  Limerick,  in  the  spring  of  1853.  I 
received  a few  letters  from  my  friend  which  told  me  of  gradually  improving 
health.  I was  busily  occupied  about  my  mission  work  at  the  village  of 
Doon,  and  felt  perfectly  at  ease  about  my  dear  friend’s  recovery. 

“ A few  days  had  elapsed  without  any  tidings  reaching  me,  when  on 
the  morning  of  the  14th  of  April  I had  the  most  vivid  dream  I remember 
ever  to  have  seen.  I seemed  to  be  walking  with  young  Dombrain,  amidst 
some  beautiful  scenery,  when  suddenly  I was  brought  to  a waking  condition 
by  a sort  of  light  appearing  before  me.  I started  up  in  my  bed,  and  saw 
before  me,  in  his  ordinary  dress  and  appearance,  my  friend,  who  seemed  to 
be  passing  from  earth  towards  the  light  above.  He  seemed  to  give  me  one 
loving  smile,  and  I felt  that  his  look  contained  an  expression  of  affectionate 
separation  and  farewell.  Then  I leaped  out  of  bed,  and  cried  with  a loud 
voice,  * Robert,  Robert/  and  the  vision  was  gone. 

u In  the  house  there  was  sleeping  a young  servant  boy,  whose  name  was 
•also  Robert.  He  came  running  into  my  room,  saying  that  my  loud  cry 
had  awakened  him  from  sound  sleep,  and  that  he  thought  I was  ill.  The 
whole  scene  was  so  impressed  upon  my  mind  that  I felt  the  death  of  my 
friend  just  as  really  as  if  I had  been  by  his  bedside,  and  seen  him  pass 
away.  I had  looked  at  my  watch  and  found  the  time  3 minutes  past  5.  I 
knew  that  at  that  moment  my  friend’s  spirit  had  passed  from  his  body,  I 
could  think  of  nothing  else.  A class  of  Scripture  readers  came  to  me  at 
10  o’clock  that  morning.  I told  them  I could  not  speak  to  them  of  the 
appointed  subject,  but  must  tell  them  what  had  occurred,  and  fgr  a long 

2 D 

418 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[chap. 

time  I lectured  them  entirely  on  the  subject  of  the  future  state,  and  the 
separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body.  During  the  whole  of  the  day  the  , 
some  sad  gloom  weighed  down  my  mind  which  I should  have  felt  had  I 
been  with  my  friend  at  his  death-bed.  I wrote  to  my  sister  asking  for 
particulars,  and  I wished  to  know  the  exact  time  the  death  had  taken 
place.  Never  once  did  the  slightest  doubt  cross  my  mind  that  my  friend 
had  died. 

“The  following  morning  I received  a letter  from  my  sister,  stating  that 
for  a few  days  Mr.  Dombrain  had  not  been  so  well,  and  that  at  3 minutes 
past  5 in  the  morning  he  had  quietly  passed  away  from  this  world.  Since 
then  I have  very  often  mentioned  the  circumstance  to^  friends,  and  the 
deep  impression  made  by  the  event  can  never  pass  from  my  mind.  I 
lately  wrote  to  my  sister  asking  her  to  tell  me  what  she  remembered  about 
the  dream.” 

Miss  BalFs  reply  contained  the  following  passage,  the  original  of  which 
was  sent  to  us : — 

“ 12,  Upper  Leeson  Street,  Dublin. 

“July  17th,  1884. 

“ I have  not  a distinct  remembrance  of  the  dream.  1 have  heard  you 
allude  to  it  from  time  to  time,  and  feel  quite  confident  of  its  reality. 

“S.  P.  Ball.” 

We  find  from  the  obituary  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  that  Mr. 
Dombrain’s  death  took  place  at  Dublin,  on  April  14th,  1853. 

The  appearance  of  light  in  this  case  is  to  be  noted  (see  cases  178 
and  184  below). 

The  next  account  is  from  the  Rev.  C.  0.  Wambey,  of  39,  Canal, 
Salisbury. 

“April,  1884. 

(164)  “Mr.  B.,  with  whom  I was  intimately  acquainted  before  he  left 
England,  was  appointed  to  the  mathematical  mastership  in  Elizabeth 
College,  Guernsey.  Some  10  years  after  his  appointment,  I accepted 
a temporary  sole  charge  in  the  island,  and  renewed  my  acquaintance 
with  my  quondam  friend  ; indeed,  I was  with  him  some  portion  of 
nearly . each  day  during  my  stay  in  Guernsey.  After  my  return  to 
England,  we  maintained  a regular  correspondence.  In  the  last  letter  I 
had  from  him,  he  described  himself  as  being  in  unusually  good  health  and 
spirits. 

“ One  morning  I surprised  my  wife  by  telling  her  that  poor  B.  was 
dead — that  he  had  appeared  to  me  in  the  night.  She  endeavoured  to 
assuage  my  grief,  suggesting  that  the  apparition,  whateyer  it  may  haVe 
been,  was  due  to  my  indisposition.  I had  been  ailing  for  some  time.  I 
answered  that  I had  received  too  certain  intelligence  of  my  friend’s  death. 

“ A few  days  subsequently,  I had  a letter  in  a black-edged  envelope, 
bearing  the  Guernsey  postmark.  In  that  letter  Mrs.  B.  told  me  that  her 
husband  had  died  after  a few  hours’  illness,  and  that  during  that  illness  he 
frequently  spoke  of  me” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wambey  says  : — 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

419 

.**] 

4<  I have  seen  other  forms  than  that  I have  mentioned.  My  grand* 
father  appeared  to  me  on  the  night  in  which  he  died;  but  I was  in  the 
house  at  the  time,  and  he  had  been  sinking  for  many  hours. 

" From  his  widow’s  letter  I ascertained  that  Mr.  B.  died  the  night  in 
which  he  appeared  to  me.  I was  awake — I could  hardly  have  been  deluded 
on  this  point — when  my  friend  appeared  to  me. 

“ I did  not  notice  his  dress,  I was  so  engrossed  with  his  face — his 
look. 

“ Mrs.  Warnbey  endorses  the  statement  that  I told  her  next  morning  I 
had  seen  my  friend,  and  that  I was  sure  he  was  dead. 

“ I forget  the  date  of  Mr.  B.’s  appearing,  I think  it  was  in  1870. 
Unfortunately  my  diary  for  that  period  is  in  the  warehouse  with  my 
, furniture,  and  is  not  accessible,  otherwise  I could  furnish  you  with 
dates.” 

We  learn  from  a son  of  Mr.  B.’s  that  the  date  of  his  father’s  death 
was  October  27th,  1870. 

Mrs.  Warnbey  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“ Salisbury. 

“May  17th,  1884. 

u My  husband,  the  Rev.  0.  C.  Warnbey,  the  morning  after  he  had  seen 
Mr.  B.,  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  me,  and  with  much  grief  expressed 
his  firm  conviction  that  his  friend  was  dead. 

“M,  B.  Wambey,” 

Our  informant  in  the  next  case,  Captain  P.,  withholds  his  name 
from  publication,  as  the  percipient  would  object  to  its  appearance. 
It  will  be  seen  that  she  admits  the  occurrence. 

“ December,  1884. 

(165)  “Some  time  at  the  end  of  1868,  I was  discussing  with  a lady  of 
my  acquaintance  the  question  of  making  compacts  to  appear  after  death.  I 
doubted  whether  such  compacts  could  be  fulfilled  ; she  stoutly  maintained 
that  they  could  be.  Finally  we  agreed  to  make  such  a compact  ourselves 
— that  whichever  of  us  first  died  should  appear  after  death  to  the  other. 

“At  the  beginning  of  the  next  year  I went  on  a voyage  in  the  merchant 
ship  ‘Edmund  Graham,’  of  Greenock,  to  Australia,  and,  on  the  22nd  of 
June,  when  we  were  between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  Australia 
(lat.  40°  S.,  long.  22  E.),  and  the  ship  running  before  a heavy  gale  of 
wind,  the  sea  swept  over  the  deck  and  washed  7 of  us,  myself  among  the 
number;  overboard.  I gave  myself  up  for  lost,  and  I remember  well  that 
I thought  of  the  panorama  of  their  past  lives  which  drowning  men  are  said 
•to  see,  and  hoped  th&t  the  show  would  commence.  Then  I regretted  I was 
without  my  pilskin,  as  the  water  would  have  time  to  wet  me  through 
before  death,  and  I expected  to  find  it  very  cold ; as  far  as  I can  recollect, 
this  was  all  that  passed  through  my  mind.  The  next  moment  I caught 
hold  of  a loose  rope  that  was  hanging  from  the  ship,  and  hauled  myself 
on  deck.  The  others  were  drowned.  This  took  place  between  3 and  4 a.m. 
on  June  22nd.  A few  months  afterwards  I had  a letter  at  Bombay,  from  ' 
my  friend,  in  which  she  mentioned  that  on  the  night  of  the  22nd  June  she 
had  seen  me  in  her  room. 

9 n 9. 

420 

"BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[chap, 

“ When  I saw  her  again,  I received  from  her  a full  account  of  the 
circumstances.  She  t*>ld  me  that  she  woke  up  suddenly  in  the  night*  and 
saw  me  at  the  other  end  of  the  room,  and  that  I advanced  towards  her. 
Whether  she  noticed  the  dress  which  I was  wearing  1 cannot  say,  I have 
often  since  heard  her  describe  the  incident.  As  far  as  I can  recollect,  she 
told  me  the  precise  time  of  the  appearance  ; and  my  belief  is  that  it 
coincided  in  time  with  my  being  washed  overboard.  Though  I cannot 
recollect  calculating  the  difference  of  time,  by  reference  to  the  longitude,  I 
think  it  most  likely  that  I did  so  and  found  the  times  to  correspond.  I 
was  certainly,  at  that  time,  quite  alive  to  the  fact  that  22°  of  longitude 
would  make  a sensible  difference  in  the  apparent  time,  i 

“M.  P.” 

The  following  is  a portion  of  a letter  from  the  percipient  to 
Captain  P. : — 

“ I enclose  the  papers  you  gave  me  to  look  at  the  other  night,  and  in 
looking  over  the  printed  notes  of  the  Society,  I see  (as  a Catholic)  I can 
have  nothing  to  do  with  it. 

“You  can  tell  your  friend  the  reason  I decline  saying  anything  about 
it  is  because  I am  a Papist,  and  that  I consider  those  sort  of  things  much 
too  sacred  to  make  the  topic  of  conversation  at  any  modern  scientific 
meeting.  ” 

These  last  remarks  exemplify  what  was  said  above  (p.  130)  as  to. 
a particular  class  of  obstacles  which  our  investigation  has  to 
encounter,  and  which  we  can  only  trust  to  time  to  remove. 

The  next  case  is  one  of  the  very  few  which  is  here  quoted  from 
a previous  collection.  It  was  first  published  by  Mr.  Dale  Owen,  in  his 
Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World , pp.  299-303.  One 
of  us  has  seen  the  percipient,  Mrs.  Wheateroft,  who,  however,  finds 
herself  precluded  by  family  reasons  from  giving  any  further  account* 

(166)  “For  the  following  narrative  I am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of 
London  friends.  Of  the  good  faith  of  the  narrators  there  cannot  be  a doubt. 

“In  the  month  of  September,  1857,  Captain  G.  W.,  of  the  6th 
Dragoon  Guards,  went  out  to  India  to  join  his  regiment.  His 
wife  remained  in  England,  residing  at  Cambridge.  On  the  night 
between  the  14th  and  15th  of  November,  1857,  towards  morning, 
she  dreamed  that  she  saw  her  husband,  looking  anxious  and  ill,  upon 
which  she  immediately  awoke,  much  agitated.  It  was  bright  moonlight ; 
and,  looking  up,  she  perceived  the  same  figure  standing  by  her  bedside.* 
He  appeared  in  his  uniform,  the  hands  pressed  across  the  breast,  the  hair, 
dishevelled,  the  face  very  pale.  His  large  dark  eyes  were  fixed  full  upon 
her;  their  expression  was  that  of  great  excitement,  and  there  was  a 
peculiar  contraction  of  the  mouth,  habitual  to  him  when  agitated,  , She 
saw  him,  even  to  each  minute  particular  of  his  dress,  as  distinctly  as  she 
had  ever  done  in  her  life;  and  she  remembers  to  have  noticed  between 
his  hands  the  white  of  the  shirt-bosom,  unstained,  however,  with  Wood. 
The  figured  seemed  to  bend  forward,  as  if  in  pain,  and  to  make  pm  effort 

. IX.}  “ BORDERLAND ” CASES.  421 

to  speak ; but  there  was  no  sound.  It  remained  visible,  the  wife  thinks, 
as  long  as  a minute,  and  then  disappeared. 

“ Her  first  idea  was  to  ascertain  if  she  was*  actually  awake.  She 
rubbed  her  eyes  with  the  sheet,  and  felt  that  the  touch  was  real.  Her 
little  nephew  was  in  bed  with  hSr : she  bent  over  the  sleeping  child,  and 
listened* to  its  breathing;  the  sound  was  distinct;  and  she  became  con- 
vinced that  what  she  had  seen  was  no  dream.  It  need  hardly  be  added 
that  she  did  not  again  go  to  sleep  that  night. 

“Next  morning  she  related  all  this  to  her  mother,  expressing  her 
conviction,  thougli  she  had  noticed  no  marks  of  blood  on  his  dress,  that 
Captain  W.  wa*  either  killed  or  grievously  wounded.  So  fully  im- 
pressed was  she  with  the  reality  of  that  apparition  that  she  thenceforth 
refused  all  invitations.  A young  friend  urged  her,  soon  afterwards,  to  go 
with  her  to  a fashionable  concert,  reminding  her  that  she  had  received 
from  Malta,  sent  by  her  husband,  a handsome  dress-cloak,  which  she  had 
never  yet  worn.  But  she  positively  declined,  declaring  that,  uncertain  as 
she  was  whether  she  was  not  already  a widow,  she  would  never  enter  a 
place  of  amusement  until  she  had  letters  from  her  husband  (if,  indeed,  he 
still  lived)  of  later  date  than  the  14th  of  November. 

“ It  was  on  a Tuesday,  in  the  month  of  December,  1857,  that  the 
telegram  regarding  the  actual  fate  of  Captain  W.  was  published  in 
London  It  was  to  the  effect  that  he  was  killed  before  Lucknow  on  the 
fifteenth  of  November. 

“ This  news,  given  in  the  morning  paper,  attracted  the  attention  of 
Mr.  Wilkinson,  a London  solicitor,  who  had  in  charge  Captain  W.’s 
affairs.  When,  at  a later  period,  this  gentleman  met  the  widow,  she 
informed  him  that  she  had  been  quite  prepared  for  the  melancholy  news, 
but  that  she  felt  sure  her  husband  could  not  have  been  killed  on  the  15th 
of  November,  inasmuch  as  it  was  during  the  night  between  the  14th 
and  15th  that  he  appeared  to  herself. 1 

“The  certificate  from  the  War  Office,  however,  which  it  became  Mr. 
Wilkinson’s  duty  to  obtain,  confirmed  the  date  given  in  the  telegram,  its 
tenor  being  as  follpws  : — 

‘No.  9,579.  ‘War  Office. 

‘ J anuary  30th,  1858. . - 

‘These  are  to  certify  that  it  appears,  by  the  records  in  this  office, 
that  Captain  G.  W.,  of  the  6th  Dragoon  Guards  [a  mistake,  as  Mr.  Dale 
Owen  points  out,  for  6th  (Inniskilling)  Dragoons],  was  killed  in  action 
on  the  15th  November,  1857. 

(Signed)  ‘ B.  Hawjbs.’ 

“While  Mr.  Wilkinson’s  mind  remained  in  uncertainty  as  to  the 
exact  date,  a remarkable  incident  occurred,  which  seemed  to  cast  further 
suspicion  on  the  accuracy  of  the  telegram  and  of  the  certificate.  That 
gentleman  was  visiting  a friend,  whose  lady  has  all  her  life  had  per- 

LThe  difference  of  longitude  between  London  and  Lucknow  being  about  6 hours,  3 or 
4 o’clock  a.fti.  in  London  would  be  8 or  9 o’clock  a.m.  at  Lucknow.  But  it  was  in  the 
i n the  morning,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel,  that  Captain  W.  Was  killed. 

' Had  he  fallen  on  the  15th,  therefore,  the  apparition  to  his  wife  would  have  appeared 
several  hours  before  the  engagement  in  which  he  fell,  and  while  he  was  yet  alive  and  well. 
— tB.D.0.] 

422 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

{chap*  . 

ception  of  apparitions,  while  her  husband  is  what  is  usually  called  an 
impressible  medium  j facts  which  are  known,  however,  only  to  their 
intimate  friends.  Though  personally  acquainted  with  them,  I am  not  at 
liberty  to  give  their  names.  Let  us  call  them  Mr.  and  Mrs.  N. 

“Mr.  Wilkinson  related  to  them,  as  a wonderful  circumstance,  the 
vision  of  the  Captain’s  widow  in  connection  with  his  death,  and  described, 
the  figure  as  it  had  appeared  to  her.  Mrs.  N.,  turning  to  her 
husband,  instantly  said  : — 

“‘That  must  be  the  very  person  I saw  the  evening  we  were  talking 
of  India,  and  you  drew  an  elephant  with  a howdah  on  his  back.  Mr. 
Wilkinson  has  described  his  exact  position  and  appearance ; the  uniform 
of  a British  officer,  his  hands  pressed  across  his  breast,  his  form  bent 
forward  as  if  in  pain.  The  figure,’  she  added  to  Mr.  W.,  ‘appeared 
just  behind  my  husband,  and  seemed  looking  over  his  left  shoulder.1  ” 

[Mr.  and  Mrs.  N.,  who  were  Spiritualists,  then  obtained  what  pur- 
ported to  be  a message  from  their  strange  visitant,  saying  that  he  had 
been  killed  that  afternoon  by  a wound  in  the  breast ; but  the  message 
may  perfectly  well  have  been  the  automatic  result  of  their  own  ideas,  as  it 
contained  nothing  beyond  what  they  might  have  guessed  from  the 
nature  of  the  apparition.  This  occurred  at  9 in  the  evening ; and  the 
date  was  fixed  as  the  fourteenth  of  November,  by  the  date  on  a bill  which 
was  receipted,  as  it  was  remembered,  on  the  same  evening.] 

“This  confirmation  of  the  widow’s  conviction  as  to  the  day  of  her 
husband’s  death  produced  so  much  impression  on  Mr.  Wilkinson  that  he 
called  at  the  office  of  Messrs.  Cox  and  Greenwood,  the  army  agents,  to 
ascertain  if  there  was  no  mistake  in  the  certificate.  But  nothing  there 
appeared  to  confirm  any  surmise  of  inaccuracy.  Captain  W.’s  death  was 
mentioned  in  two  separate  despatches  of  Sir  Colin  Campbell ; and  in  both 
the  date  corresponded  with  that  given  in  the  telegram. 

“So  matters  rested,  until,  in  the  month  of  March,  1858,  the  family  of 
Captain  W.  received  from  Captain  G.  C.,  then  of  the  Military  Train,  a 
letter  dated  near  Lucknow,  on  the  19th  December,  1857.  This  letter 
informed  them  that  Captain  W.  had  been  killed  before  Lucknow,  while* 
gallantly  leading  on  the  squadron,  not  on  the  15th  of  November,  as. 
reported  in  Sir  Colin  Campbell’s  despatches,  but  on  the  fourteenth , in  the 
afternoon . Captain  C.  was  riding  close  by  his  side  at  the  time  he  saw  him 
fall.  He  was  struck  by  a fragment  of  shell  in  the  breast,  and  never  spoke 
after  he  was  hit.  He  was  buried  at  the  Dilkoosha  ; and  on  a wooden 
cross  erected  by  his  friend,  Lieutenant  R.,  of  the  9th  Lancers,  at  the  head 
of  his  grave,  are  cut  the  initials  G.  W.,  and  the  date  of  his  death,  the  14th 
of  November,  1857. 1 

“The  War  Office  finally  made  the  correction  as  to  the  date  of  death* 
but  not  until  more  than  a year  after  the  event  occurred.  Mr.  Wilkinson, 
having  occasion  to  apply  for  an  additional  copy  of  the  certificate  in 
April,  1859,  found  it  in  exactly  the  same  words  as  that  which  I have 

1 It  was  not  in  his  own  regiment,  which  was  then  at  Meerut,  that  Captain  W.  was 
serving  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Immediately  on  arriving  from  England  at  Cawnpore,  he 
had  offered  his  services  to  Colonel  Wilson,  of  the  64th.  They  were  at  first  declined,  but 
finally  accepted,  and  he  joined  the  Military  Train,  then  starting  for  Lucknow.  It  was  in 
their  ranks  that  he  fell.  [R.  I).  0.] 

.IX.} 

"BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

423 

given,  only  that  the  14th  of  November  had  bee^  substituted  rfor  the 

ISA1  ; 

“ This  extraordinary  narrative  was  obtained  by  me  directly  from  the 
parties  themselves.  The  widow  of  Captain  W.  kindly  consented  to 
examine  and  correct  the  manuscript,  and  allowed  me  to  inspect  a copy  of 
Captain*  C/s  letter,  giving  the  particulars  of  her  husband’s  death.  To  Mr. 
Wilkinson  also  the  manuscript  was  submitted,  and  he  assented  to  its 
accuracy  so  far  as  he  is  concerned.  That  portion  which  relates  to  Mrs.  N. 
I had  from  that  lady  herself.  I have  neglected  no  precaution,  therefore, 
to  obtain  for  it  the  warrant  of  authenticity. 

“It  is  especially  valuable,  as  furnishing  an  example  of  a double 
apparition.  Nor  can  it  be  alleged  (even  if  the  allegation  had  weight)  that 
the  recital  of  one  lady  caused  the  apparition  of  the  same  figure  to  the 
other.  Mrs.  W.  was  at  the  time  in  Cambridge,  and  Mrs.  N.  in  London ; 
and  it  was  not  till  weeks  after  the  occurrence  that  either  knew  what  the 
other  had  seen. 

“Those  who  would  explain  the  whole  on  the  principle  of  chance 
coincidence  have  a treble  event  to  take  into  account ; the  apparition  to 
Mrs.  N.,  that  to  Mrs.  W.,  and  the  actual  time  of  Captain  W/s  death,  each 
tallying  exactly  with  the  other/’ 

Mr.  W.  Wilkinson,  of  Winton  House,  Ealing,  W.,  writes  to  us : — 

“ November  5th,  1884. 

“ Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen  personally  investigated  the  case,  and 
submitted  the  messages  to  Captain  Wheatcroft’s  widow.  I revised  the 
part  belonging  to  me,  and  that  part  which  referred  to  the  appearance  to 
Mrs.  Nenner  was  revised  by  her  and  her  husband,  Professor  Nenner.  I 
gave  the  original  certificates  of  death  by  the  War  Office  to  Mr.  Owen. 

“ W.  M.  Wilkinson/' 

[The  Mr.  N.  mentioned  was  the  Rev.  Maurice  Nenner,  Professor  of 
Hebrew  at  the  Nonconformist  College,  St.  John’s  Wood.  Both  Mr.  and 
•Mrs.  Nenner  are  dead. 

It  should  be  observed  that  there  was  no  provable  recognition  of 
Captain  Wheatcroft  by  Mrs.  Nenner.  We  only  know  of  the  following 
points  to  connect  her  vision  with  Captain  Wheatcroft’s  death  : — Similarity 
of  attitude ; uniform  of  a British  officer ; wound  in  the  breast ; date ; 
and,  apart  from  Mrs.  Wheatcroft’s  vision,  there  is  nothing  remarkable 
in  this  combination.  But  it  is  certainly  curious  that  on  that  day  she 
should  -have  had  a vision  which  corresponded,  at  least  up  to  a certain 
point,  with  what  Mrs.  Wheatcroft  saw.2 

We  do  not  know  the  hour  of  Captain  Wheatcroft’s  death,  as  he  may 

1 The  originals  of  both  these  certificates  are  in  my  possession ; the  first  bearing  date 
30th  January,  1858,  and  certifying,  as  already  shown,  to  the  15tK ; the  second  dated  5th 
April,  1859,  and  testifying  to  the  14th.  [R.  D.  0.] 

2 There  is  another  curious  incident,  connected  with  this  case.  In  a letter  written  on 
July  28th,  1876,  to  the  Rev.  B.  Wrey  Savile,  and  kindly  sent  by  him  to  me,  a clergyman  of 
the  Midland  counties  gives  permission  to  use  his  fife’s  testimony  to  the  fact  that 
Captain  Wheatcroft  “ appeared,  on  the  date  named,  to  an  old  playfellow  and  friend  of 
his^*— -herself.  I have  corresponded  with  the  clergyman  in  question,  but  further  details 
cannot  how  be  procured. 

424 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

[chap. 

not  have  died  the  moment  that  he  was  struck.  If  the  death  was 
immediate,  it  must  have  preceded  Mrs.  Wheatcroft’s  vision  by  at  feast 
12  hours.  See  p.  140,  note.] 

The  next  account  was  received,  in  1883,  from  Mr.  de  Gu6rin,  now 
residing  at  98,  Sandgate  Road,  Folkestone.  It  is  impossible  to  be 
certain  that  the  coincidence  was  as  close  as  the  narrator  imagines ; 
but  the  presumption  is  to  some  extent  favoured  by  the  fact  that*he 
was  the  percipient  in  a similar  but  more  remarkable  *case,  which  will 
be  cited  in  a later  chapter  (Chap.  XVIII.,  § 2).  ■ 

(167)  “My  brother  Henry  died  in  Exeter  in  July,  1855.  I was  then 
on  a voyage  home  [from  Shanghai].  I was  very  ill  at  the  time.  We  were 
within  one  or  two  degrees  of  the  line,  fearfully  hot.  I had  been  in  bed 
about  a couple  of  hours  and  was  wide  awake,  when  I saw  an  almost 
exactly  similar  vision  [ i.e .,  similar  to  the  other  case  referred  to] 
of  Henry.  I immediately  called  out  to  my  fellow  passenger : 
4 Frank,  my  brother  Henry  is  dead,  I have  just  seen  him.’  I 
wrote  to  this  gentleman  [Mr.  Francis  L.  Brine,  Finsbury  Distillery, 
Finsbury  Square]  to  ask  if  he  remembered  anything  about  it.  He  replies  : 
4 Too  many  yeajs  have  rolled  by  since  to  enable  me  to  recall  the  details  to 
which  you  refer,  but  I believe  every  word  ‘of  it.  When  my  father  died,  I 
wrote  to  my  sister  in  India,  and  she  wrote  back  to  say,  44 1 knew  of  our 
sad  loss,  at  the  time  it  occurred  ; dear  father  came  to  wish  me  good-bye 
also.”  ’ 1 * * 

44  Wm.  C.  L.  dr  Gu&rin.” 

[In  conversation,  Mr.  de  Guerin  told  the  present  writer  that  he  believes 
his  brother  to  have  died  on  the  day  of  the  vision.  We  find  from  the 
Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on  July  19th,  1855  ; but  the 
day  of  the  vision  cannot  now  be  independently  fixed.  It  occurred  at  abojit# 
11  p.m.,  near  the  island  of  Ranbon,  which  is  almost  exactly  antipodal* 
to  England  ; and  the  death  took  place  at  3 p.m. ; so  that,  if  the  day  was 
the  same,  the  vision  preceded  the  death  by  some  4 hours.  Mr.  de  Guerin 
knew  his  brother  to  have  been  suffering  from  a lingering  illness,  but  had  no 
immediate  apprehension  of  the  end.  He  had  last  heard  of  him  in  April.] 

1 Mr.  Brine  has  kindly  sent  us  a letter  from  his  sister  (who  is  too  much  out  of  health 
to  be  questioned  in  detail)  m which  the  following  passage  occurs : — 

* ‘ You  remember  my  seeing  poor  father  when  he  was  dying.  And  you  must  have  heard  our 
poor  mother  speak  of  her  brother,  when  at  Bishop’s  Waltham  school,  seeing  his  father 
(our  grandfather)  when  dying.  When  he  was  sent  for  his  remark  was,  4 1 know  what  1* 
have  to  go  home  for ; my  father  is  dead ; I saw  him  pull  the  bed-curtain  aside  in  the 
night.’  ” Another  sister  of  Mr.  Brine’s  mentions  a still  more  striking  experience  of  her  own, 
which  should  have  been  a good  case,  as  she  at  once  wrote  down  the  date  of  her  seeing  the 
phantasm  ; but  she  declines  further  correspondence. 

As  bearing  on  this  family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influences,  I may  mention  that  a 
sister  of  Mr.  ae  Guerin’s  was  a joint  percipient  with  him  in  the  case  which  is  to  be  cited 
later ; and  also  that  Mr.  de  Guerin  told  me  that  there  had  been  similar  instances 4u  their 
mother’s  (the  Head)  family ; one  of  whom  (Mr.  de  Guerin’s  grandfather)  had  sfeen  a 
phantasmal  hearse  drive  up  to  his  father’s  door  on  the  morning  that  the  father  die&*~he 

himself  not  knowing  of  the  death  or  of  its  imminence,  as  he  was  not  staying  at  the  house ' 
and  was  approaching  it  as  a visitor. 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

425 

lx.] 

The  next  narrative  is  of  a more  uncommon  character.  There  are 
reasonable  grounds,  in  this  instance,  for  withholding  the  name  of  the 
narrator,  Mrs.  T.,  from  publicity. 

(168^  “On  November  18th,  1863,  I was  living  near  Adelaide,  and  not 
long  recovered  from  a severe  illness  at  the  birth  of  an  infant,  who  was  then  5 
months  old.  My  husband  had  also  suffered  from  neuralgia,  and  had  gone 
to*  J^y  with  friends  at  the  seaside  for  the  benefit  of  bathing.  One  night 
during  his  absence  the  child  woke  me  about  midnight ; having  hushed  him 
off  to  sleep,  I sai(^  4 Now,  sir,  I hope  you  will  let  me  rest ! ’ T lay  down, 
and  instantly  become  conscious  of  two  figures  standing  at  the  door  of  my 
room.  One,  M.N.  [these  are  not  the  real  initials],  whom  I recognised  at 
' once,  was  that  of  a former  lover,  whose  misconduct  and  neglect  had 
compelled  me  to  renounce  him.  Of  this  I am  sure,  that  if  ever  I saw  him 
r in  my  life,  it  was  then.  I was  not  in  the  least  frightened  ; but  said  to 
myself,  as  it  were,  ‘ You  never  used  to  wear  that  kind  of  waistcoat/  The 
door  close  to  which  lie  stood  was  in  a deep  recess  close  to  the  fireplace, 
for  there  was  no  grate;  we  burnt  logs  only.  In  that  recess  stood  a man 
in  a tweed  suit.  I saw  the  whole  figure  distinctly,  but  not  the  face,  and 
for  this  reason : on  the  edge  of  the  mantelshelf  always  stood  a morocco 
leather  medicine  chest,  which  concealed  the  face  from  me.  (On  this  being 
stated  to  our.  friends,  the  Singletons,  they  asked  to  go  into  the  room  and 
judge  for  themselves.  They  expressed  themselves  satisfied  that  would  be 
the  case  to  any  one  on  the  bed  where  I was.)  I had  an  impression  that 
this  other  was  a cousin  of  *M.  N/s,  who  had  been  the  means  of  leading  him 
astray  while  in  the  North  of  England.  I never  saw  him  in  my  life  ; he 
died  in  India. 

“ M.  N.  was  in  deep  mourning  • he  had  a look  of  unutterable  sorrow 
upon  his  face,  and  was  deadly  pale.  He  never  opened  his  lips,  but  I read 
his  heart  as  if  it  were  an  open  book,  and  it  said,  4 My  father  is  dead,  and 
I have  come  into  his  property/  I answered,  ‘ How  much  you  have  grown 
like  your  father  ! ’ Then  in  a moment,  without  appearing  to  walk , he 
stood  at  the  foot  * of  the  child’s  cot,  and  I saw  distinctly  the  blueness 
of  h^s  eyes  as  he  gazed  on  my  boy,  and  then  raised  them  to  Heaven  as  if 
in  prayer.  i* 

“ All  vanished.  I looked  round  and  remarked  a trivial  circumstance, 
viz.,  that  the  brass  handles  of  my  chest  of  drawers  had  been  rubbed  very 
bright.  Not  till  then  was  I conscious  of  having  seen  a spirit,1  but  a 
feeling  of  awe  (not  fear)  came  over  me,  and  I prayed  to  be  kept  from 
harm,  although  there  was  no  reason  to  dread  it.  I slept  tranquilly,  and  in 
the  morning  I went  across  to  the  parsonage  and  told  the  clergyman’s  wife 
what  I had  seen.  She,  of  course,  thought  it  was  merely  a dream.  But 
no— if  it  were  a dream  should  I not  have  seen  him  as  I had  known  him , a 
yquhg  man  of  22,  without  beard  or  whiskers  ? But  there  was  all  the 
difference  that  16  years  would  make  in  a man’s  aspect. 

“ On  Saturday  my  husband  returned,  and  my  brother  having  ridden 

out  |o  see  us  on  Sunday  afternoon,  I told  them  both  my  vision  as  we  sat 

' , 

1 1 must  note  here,  as  once  before  in  relation  to  the  word  “supernatural,”  that  wfc  are 
in  no  way  responsible  for  the  views  which  our  informants  express  or  imply. 

426 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[chap. 

together  on  the  verandah.  They  treated  it  so  lightly  that  I determined 
to  write  it  down  in  my  diary  and  see  if  the  news  were  verified.  And  from 
that  diary  I am  now  quoting.  Also  I mentioned  it  to  at  least  12  or  14- 
other  people  and  bid  them  await  the  result. 

“And  surely  enough,  at  the  end  of  several  weeks,  my  sister-in-law 

wrote  that  M.  N.’s  father  died  at  C Common  on  November  18th, 

1863,  which  exactly  tallied  with  the  date  of  the  vision.  He  left  ,£45,000 
to  be  divided  between  his  son  and  daughter,  but  the  son  has  never  been 
found.  ' * 

“ Many  people  in  Adelaide  heard  the  story  before  the  confirmation 
came,  and  I wrote  and  told  M.  N.’s  mother.  She  was  much  distressed  about 
it,  fearing  he  was  unhappy.  She  is  now  dead.  My  husband  was 
profoundly  struck,  when  he  saw  my  diary  corresponding  exactly  to  the 
news  in  the  letter  1 had  that  moment  received  in  his  presence.” 

[Mr.  T.  has  confirmed  to  us  the  accuracy  of  this  narrative ; and  Mrs  , 
T.  has  shown  to  one  of  us  a memorandum  of  the  appearance  of  two  figures, 
under  date  November  18th,  in  her  diary  of  the  year  1863;  and  a news- 
paper obituary  confirms  this  as  the  date  of  the  death.  We  learn  from  a 
gentleman  who  is  a near  relative  of  M.  N.’s,  that  M.  N.,  though  long  lost 
sight  of,  was  afterwards  heard  of,  and  outlived  his  father.] 

If  we  regard  this  vision  as  telepathic,  the  agent  can  apparently 
only  have  been  the  dying  man  ; and  the  case  would  then  seem  to  be 
an  extreme  instance  of  the  very  rare  type  where  the  agent’s  person- 
ality doos  not  appear,  but  some  idea  or  picture  in  his  mind,  is 
reproduced  in  the  percipient’s  mind  with  a force  that  leads  to  an 
actual  percept.  For,  as  the  narrator  herself  suggests,  had  she  bodied 
forth  the  idea  of  M.  N.  from  her  own  unaided  resources,  she  would 
almost  certainly  have  pictured  him  with  the  aspect  that  had  been 
familiar  to  her.  But  though  we  have  to  draw  on  the  father’s  mind 
for  the  unfamiliar  features,  we  must  not  forget  the  possibilities  of 
agency  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness  (pp.  78-9,  230).  And  it 
is  at  least  worth  suggesting  that  the  percipient’s  mind  brought  its  own 
affinities  to  bear — exercised,  so  to  speak,  a selective  influence ; 
and  that  thus  it  was  rather  owing  to  her  special  interest  in  the  son 
than  to  the  conscious  occupation  of  his  father’s  mind  with  him,  that 
the  telepathic  impulse  manifested  itself  to  her  in  this  particular 
form.  As  for  the  appearance  of  the  second  figure,  it  may  possibly 
have  been  also  telepathically  produced ; but  I prefer  to  lay  stress  on 
it  simply  as  one  of  the  numerous  indications  that  these  waking 
percepts  are  really  dream-creations,  not  objective  presences. 

We  obtained  the  next  case  through  the  kindness  of  Miss  Jleale, 
Principal  of  the  Ladies’  College,  Cheltenham,  to  whom  it  was  sent 
by  the  narrator,  Miss  T.  J.  C. 

IX.] 

« BORDERLAND ” CASES , 

42T 

(169)  “ When  I was  between  13  and  14,  I went  to  spend  a few  days  at 
the  nouse  of  some  friends,  where  I shared  a room  with  a companion  a year 
older.  Happening  to  awake  one  night,  I saw  distinctly  the  figure  of  a 
vman  (in  what  might  have  been  a loose  dressing-gown)  standing  before 
the  dressing-table  with  his  back  towards  the  bed,  and  holding  out  one 
hand  as  »if.  feeling  his  way.  I remember  rubbing  my  eyes  to  convince 
myself  I was  not  dreaming,  and  on  my  looking  up  a minute  after,  the 
figujfe  was  gone.  This  startled  me,  and  I awoke  my  companion  She, 
however,  tried  to  persuade  me  it  must  have  been  her  brother  (the  only 
man  in.  the  house),  and  that  he  had  probably  come  in  to  look  what  o’clock 
it  was  by  an  old  watch  which  always  stood  on  the  dressing-table,  and  was 
considered  a great  authority  in  the  house.  (T  forgot  to  say  there  was 
, bright  moonlight  shining  into  the  room.)  Only  half  convinced  I fell 
asleep  again,  and  at  breakfast  next  morning  asked  C.  (my  companion’s 
brother)  what  he  had  been  doing  in  our  room  the  previous  night.  He 
said  he  had  certainly  not  been  there,  but  asked  what  I had  seen,  and  on 
my  telling  him,  looked  so  startled  and  pained  that  I did  not  pursue  the 
subject. 

“A  few  days  after  this,  his  mother  told  me  that  C.  had  seen  the  figure 
in  his  room  the  same  night  on  which  I had  seen  it  in  mine,  and  had 
recognised  it  as  that  of  a very  great  friend  and  old  shipmate  of  his  own. 
When  C.  left  the  navy  on  account  of  ill-health,  this  friend  got  leave  to 
spend  a few  days  on  shore  with  him,  and  on  parting  with  him,  said, 
‘Well,  whoever  dies  first  will  come  and  see  the  other.’  On  the  day  on 
which  Mrs.  B.  spoke  to  me  of  the  occurrence,  0.  had  heard  of  the 
death  of  his  old  shipmate.  It  had  taken  place  on  board  ship,  off*  the 
coast  of  Spain,  on  the  night  on  which  tlie  apparition  was  seen  by  C. 
and  myself.  “ T T f*  ” 

Miss  C.  writes  to  us : 

“ 1,  Clarendon  Place,  Stirling. 

“February  28th,  1884. 

“ The  above  story  was  sent  by  me  to  Miss  Beale  some  years  ago.  The 
tC f mentioned  in  it  has  been  dead  for  many  years,  and  his  mother’s 
memory  is  ‘so  much  impaired  by  age  and  infirmity  as  to  make  her  evidence 
of  no  value.  I do  not  know,  that  I can  add  anything  to  what  I haye 
already  written.  The  occurrence  is  as  fresh  in  my  memory  as  when  it 
happened.  I was  almost  a child  at  the  time,  and  no  idea  of  my  having 
seen  a spirit  ever  entered  my  head,  until  Mrs.  B.  spoke  to  me  of  the  death 
of  her  son’s  friend.  The  two  rooms  (the  one  in  which  ‘C.’  slept  and  that 
in  which  my  companion  and  I slept)  were  on  the  same  floor,  and  near 
each  other.” 

This  case,  if  oorrectly  reported,  contains  the  remarkable  feature 
of  double  percipience ; which,  however,  will  be  more  conveniently 
discussed  at  a later  stage  (Chap.  XVIII,).  Evidentially,  I may  observe* 
the  narrator’s  recollection  of  what  she  learnt  about  “ C.”  ’s  experience 
makes  it  more  probable  that  she  is  accurate  as  to*  the  coincidence, 
than  If  she  were  merely  recalling  a childish  experience  of  her  own. 

We  owe  the  following  case  to  the  Rev.  T.  Williams,  Rector  of 

428 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

[CHA*y 

Aston-Clinton,  Tring.  The  first  note,  written  down  by  Mr*  Williams 
from  his  sister’s  account  of  the  occurrence,  was  copied  from  his  diary 
by  the  present  writer. 

(170)  “ Mrs.  Stewart,  sister-in-law  of  Jane,  my  sister’s  servant,  came  up 
to  ask  if  any  news  from  home.  She  said,  with  her  husband  in  bed — moon* 
light — chest  of  drawers  between  window — saw  her  mother  standing — felt 
perfectly  awake — she  hid  her  face — a third  time  looked  up — heard  [ ? saw  ] 
nothing,  but  heard  men  calling  up — knew  exact  time.  She  came  up  to  my 
sister’s  and  related  this  the  same  day — said  dreading  to  hear  knock  at  door 
all  day — fearing  to  hear  of  something  having  happened  to  her  mother. 
Her  friends,  who  lived  at  Church  Stretton,  came  a month  after  to 
christening  of  her  baby ; in  mourning — said  mother’s  sister,  who  exact 
image  of  her  mother,  had  died  at  the  very  time  of  her  vision — but  friends 
did  not  tell  Mrs.  Stewart,  because  of  her  condition.  This  written  from  my 
sister’s  account,  who  saw  Mrs.  Stewart  on  the  day  of  the  vision,  and 
heard  account  of  what  seen  from  herself.”  The  date  1880  is  added.  . 

The  following  account  is  from  the  husband  of  the  percipient,  who  is 
herself  dead.  His  mother’s  name  is  also  appended  to  the  statement. 

“ April,  1885. 

“Mrs.  Stewart,  the  wife  of  a carpenter,  living  in  Abergavenny, 
Monmouthshire,  and  who  [Mrs.  S.J  is  since  dead,  was,  in  the  year  1874,  in 
bed,  and  early  one  morning,  being  sure  she  was  awake  (for  she  had  just  heard 
the  railway  men  being  called  to  their  work  by  the  call  boy),  she  looked  up 
to  see  the  time,  and  in  one  corner  of  her  room  she  saw  distinctly  what  she 
thought  was  her  mother,  intently  looking  at  her.  She  was  startled,  and 
lud  her  face.  On  looking  again  the  vision  was  still  there,  but  on  looking 
up  a third  time  it  had  disappeared.  Mrs.  Stewart  came  up  that  day  to  see 
a sister-in-law  who  was  in  service  near  the  town,  to  ask  if  she  had  had  any 
tidings  from  her  home  (the  impression  the  vision  had  made  was  so  great),  but 
nothing  had  been  heard.  Time  passed  on,  and  all  seemed  forgotten,  when 
some  of  her  friends  came  up  to  Abergavenny,  to  the  christening  of  a little, 
baby,  born  in  the  meantime.  They  were  in  mourning,  and  inquiries  were 
made  as  to  the  friend  mourned  for,  when  it  was  told  that  on  the  night 
Mrs.  Stewart  thought  she  saw  her  mother,  a sister  of  the  mother’s,  to  whom 
she  bore  a great  likeness,  had  died  about  the  hour  named,  at  some  distance 
off ; but  they  did  not  tell  Mrs.  Stewart  of  the  death  until  some  weeks  after 
it  happened,  as  Mrs.  Stewart  was  in  delicate  health  and  much  attached  to 
her  aunt.  “John  Stewart.” 

Miss  Williams,  of  Abergavenny,  writes  on  July  1,  1885 : — 

“ Mrs.  Stewart  was  not  an  excitable  woman,  had  never  had  any 
hallucination  of  the  senses,  and  was  a quiet,  somewhat  silent  person.  Her 
mother-in-law  is  now  living  in  Abergavenny,  and  is  a very  sensible, 
respectable,  practical  woman.  She  probably  heard  Mrs.  Stewart  speak  of 
the  occurrence  soon  afterwards,  and  was  anxious  to  add  her  testimony  to 
the  statement.  I probably  mentioned  the  statement  to  my  brother  in 
1880,  and  he  set  it  down  in  his  notebook.”  ^ 1 

In  reference  to  this  last  sentence,  Mr.  Williams  says,  “ I am  inore 
inclined  to  think  that  I heard  of  it  within  a day  or  two  after  it  happened, 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES . 

429 

XX.] 

and  that  if  I added  the  date  1880,  it  must  have  been  the  date  of  my  copy- 
ing it  into  my  notebook  from  some  loose  memoranda.” 

Here  we  have  a singular  feature — an  appearance  which  suggested 
not  the  agent  but  a person  closely  resembling  her.  The  case  thus 
stands  ift  a sort  of  midway  position  between  the  more  normal  cases 
and  the  class  of  unrecognised  phantasms,  of  which  several  specimens 
have  already  been  given  (pp.  218,  884,  409,  427).  The  same 
peculiarity  occurs  in  the  next  case.  The  narrator,  Miss  R.,  was  willing 
to  have  her  nami  and  address  published  ; but  her  family  disliked  the 
idea,  and  we  have  acted  in  accordance  with  their  wishes. 

“ May  8th,  1879. 

(171)  “In  the  year  1861  my  parents  were  living  in  Soho  Square, 
and  I and  my  brother  Alfred,  aged  24,  were  living  with  them.  On  the 
15th  October  my  brother  went  to  spend  the  evening  at  the  house  of  an  old 
schoolfellow,  where  it  was  not  unusual  for  him  to  remain  for  the  night,  in 
order  to  avoid  coming  home  at  a late  hour.  It  was  customary  for  him, 
if  he  happened  to  come  home  after  my  parents  had  gone  to  bed,  to^  go 
quietly  to  my  mother’s  bedside  and  to  give  her  a kiss  if  she  were  awake, 
and  if  not,  to  leave  his  hat  upon  the  dressing-table  as  a sign  that  he  had 
been  there. 

“ She  went  to  bed  on  October  1 5th  without  expecting  his  return  that 
night,  but  after  her  first  sleep  she  awoke  up  suddenly  and  saw  him  as 
she  thought,  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed ; she  said  softly,  ‘ I am  not 
asleep,  my  dear,’  but  he  went  away  instead  of  going  to  kiss  her ; and 
this  surprised  her. 

“On  the  morning  of  the  16th  October,  at  breakfast  time,  she  said 
to  me  : 4 Where  is  Alfred  ? ’ I replied,  ‘ He  did  not  come  home  last 
night,-  mamma, ’ She  answered,  6 Oh,  yes,  he  did ; and  he  came  into  my 
room  when  he  was  partly  undressed,  but  lie  did  not  speak  to  me  as 
usual.’  In  the  course  of  an  hour  my  brother  came  in,  and  my  mother 
asked  him  if  he  had  been  into  her  room  during  the  night.  He  assured 
her  he  had  not  been  home.  She  said,  ‘It  is  very  strange,  for  I apn 
quite  convinced  that  someone  was  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed  when  I ‘ 
awoke  in  the  night.’ 

“At  about  mid*day  a letter  arrived  to  inform  us  that  our  cousin, 
Frank,  only  a few  years  older  than  my  brother  Alfred,  had  died  at 
1 o’clock  that  morning  in  London.  My  mother  instantly  exclaimed,  c It 
was  Frank  whom  I saw  ! I can  recall  him  to  mind  distinctly  as  I saw 
l\im,  and  though  at,  the  time  I thought  I was  looking  at  Alfred,  yet  I 
thought  there  was  something  strange  in  his  appearance,  and  I could  not 
understand  why  he  came  in  to  see  me  without  his  coat  on.’” 

We  find  the  date  of  death,  October  16th,  1861,  confirmed  by  the 
obituary  in  the  Times, 

On  March  20th,  1884,  the  narrator  informed  Mr.  Podmore  as  follows 

“Before  writing  this  account,  I wrote  a letter  to  my  cousin’s  family  to 
confirm  my  recollection  of  the  time  at  which  he  died,  and  received  an 
answer  to  the  effect  that  he  died  at  1 a.m.  There  was  no  very  great 

430 

“ BORDERLAND » CASES. 

[ CHAP, 

likeness  between  my  brother  and  my  cousin ; merely  a general  family 
resemblance.  Both  were  fair ; but  Frank  was  taller  than  Alfred,  and  had 
a fine  beard,  whilst  Alfred  had  but  a slight  one.  « j » 

Miss' R.’s  brother  says:—  “March  20th,  1884. 

“ I remember  this  circumstance,  but  attach  no  importance  ip  it,  and 
detect  nothing  of  the  marvellous  in  the  narrative.  “ G A R.” 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Duthio,  housekeeper  to  the  Rev.  J.  C. 
Macphail,  of  Pilrig  Manse,  Edinburgh,  who  writes  : — 

“ December  8th,  1885. 

(172)  “ My  son  has  shown  me  the  paper  signed  by  our  housekeeper, 
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Duthie,  and  has  told  me  of  your  desire  to  be  assured  of 
her  reliability.  Mrs.  Duthie  has  been  with  me  for  more  than  30  years, 
and  I know  her  to  be  one  on  whose  statement  the  fullest  reliance  may  be 
placed. 

Mrs.  Duthie  writes  : — 

“ J.  Caldbr  Macphail.” 

“ Pilrig  Manse,  Edinburgh. 

“ August  22nd,  1885. 

“ In  August,  1883,  the  family  of  the  Rev.  J.  C.  Macphail  had.all  gone 
to  the  country,  leaving  me  alone  in  the  house.  An  intimate  friend  of  mine, 
a Miss  Grant,  who  lived  in  Aberdeen,  had  been  for  some  time  seriously  ill, 
and  I was  anxious  about  her,  though  I did  not  know  that  death  was  near. 
On  Sunday  night,  the  26th  of  August,  about  8 o’clock,.!  retired  to  my 
room,  which  is  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  house,  with  a flight  of  stairs 
leading  up  to  the  door.  I got  into  bed,  and  was  lying  half-asleep,  with 
my  face  to  the  wall,  when  I felt  that  someone  was  bending  over  me, 
looking  into  my  face.  I opened  my  eyes,  and  looked  up  into  the  face  of 
my  friend  Miss  Grant.  I started  up  in  bed,  and,  looking  round,  saw  Miss 
Grant’s  figure  leaving  the  room.  I then  got  out  of  bed,  and  going  to  the, 
door,  looked  down  stairs,  but  no  one  was  to  be  seen.  1 went  down  the 
stairs  into  the  kitchen,  but  no  one  was  there,  nor  was  there  a trace  of 
anyone.  * I looked  at  the  clock,  and  saw  it  was  a few  minutes  past  9,  and 
then  went  back  to  bed,  feeling  very  uncomfortable,  and  certain  something 
had  happened  to  my  friend.  All  next  day  (Monday)  I felt  unhappy  about 
it,  and  awaited  anxiously  to  hear  of  my  friend  ; but,  as  there  was  no  one 
else  in  the  house,  I did  not  mention  my  experience  of  the  previous  night 
to  anyone.  That  night  I received  information  from  Aberdeen  that  my 
friend  had  died  at  9 o’clock  on  the  previous  night — at  the  very  time  I had 
seen  her  form  in  Edinburgh. 

“ I have  never  had  a hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion. 

“Elizabeth  Duthie.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries  Mrs.  Duthie  says  : — 

44 1 am  quite  certain  that  this  experience  fell  on  a Sunday  ; though  I 
forget  the  exact  day  of  the  month ; and  I could  not  have  imagined  that  it 
fell  on  the  Sunday  after  I got  the  news,  for  I heard  of  the  death  the  very 
next  day.’ 

IX.] 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

431 

Mrs.  Duthie  ha a dent  us  a printed  notice  which  she  received,  to  this 

effect “ 22,  Thistle  Street,1  Aberdeen. 

“ 27th  August,  1883. 

“ Helen  Grant  died  here  last  night  at  9 o’clock. 

(Signed)  “Wm.  Grant.” 

Mr.  <3.  W.  Macphail  writes  : — 

“ Mrs.  Duthie  told  my  mother  of  her  strange  experience  less  than  a 
month  after  the  event,  and  I learnt  it  shortly  after  from  Mrs.  Duthie.” 

The  next  case  is  a deposition  made  by  Mrs.  Still,  (known  in  her 
professional  capacity  as  Mrs.  Byrne),  who  was  introduced  to  Mr. 
Myers  by  Mrs.  Longe,  of  Coddenham  Lodge,  Cheltenham. 

“Cheltenham,  December  27th,  1882. 

(173)  “Mrs.  Byrne  was  stewardess  on  the  steamer  i Lyra/  Captain 
Gilpin,  in  the  River  Plata  line  of  steamers.  One  morning — probably 
between  6 and  7,  but  she  had  no  watch — she  was  lying  in  her  berth.  She 
awoke,  and  saw  Captain  Gilpin's  head  passing  slowly  along  her  berth 
-and  looking  at  her.  This  was  a familiar  gesture  on  his  part,  as  he  used 
to  be  friendly  with  Mrs.  Byrne,  and  ask  her  to  sit  on  a seat  outside  his 
cabin,  jand  used  to  look  through  his  window  in  this  way  when  he  thought 
she  was  sitting  there.  Mrs.  Byrne  got  up  at  once,  and  went  into  the 
pantry,  and  there  heard  that  Captain  Gilpin  had  been  killed  (though 
not  instantaneously)  by  the  fall  of  a spar  at  6 that  morning.” 

An  extract  from  the  official  log-book,  obtained  by  us  from  the  General 
Register  and  Record  Office  of  Shipping  and  Seamen,  shows  that  the 
accident  to  Captain  Prince  Gilpin  took  place  at  5.30  a.m.,  February  19th, 
1878,  on  the  “Laplace,”  not  the  “Lyra.”  He  was  crushed  against  the 
engine-room  skylight  by  a heavy  sea  ; and  his  death  was  due  to  fracture 
of  the  ribs  and  injuries  to  the  lungs.  This  would  quite  correspond  with 
Mrs.  Byrne's  statement  that  his  death  was  not  instantaneous. 

* • 

[The  coincidence  here  must  have  been  very  close  ; as  there  cannot  have 
been  more  than  a short  interval  between  Captain  Gilpin's  death  and  Mrs. 
Byrne's  natural  time  for  rising,  and  in  this  interval,  apparently,  the  vision 
occurred.  The  short  period  within  which  the  whole  contents  of  the 
narrative  are  comprised  is  further  of  importance  as  making  the  case  an 
easy  one  to  carry  correctly  in  the  memory ; and  it  seems  very  unlikely 
that  the  percipient  should  have  come  to  imagine  that  she  got  up 
immediately  after  her  vision  and  ascertained  what  had  occurred,  if  the 
vision  really  took  place  on  some  other  morning.  Mrs.  Byrne  had  been 
o:i  two  previous  voyages  with  Captain  Gilpin.  She  has  experienced  one 
other  visual  hallucination,  which  may  have  been  purely  subjective.] 

, The  lady  who  narrates  the  following  case  desires  that  her  name 
may  not  be  published. 

“May,  1885. 

(174)  “ An  attack  of  rheumatism  and  nervous  prostration  left  me  far 
from  well  for  some  weeks  last  spring,  and  one  night  I had  $ 

432 

“ BORDERLAND ” (MW. 

[OHAP. 

► 

unaccountable  vision  which  has  left  a vivid  impression  upon  my  memory. 
I had  gone  to  bed  early  and  was  lying  awake  alone,  with  a night  light 
burning  in  order  in  some  degree  to  dispel  the  gloom.  Suddenly  across  the 
lower  end  of  the  room  passed  Major  G.’s  figure,  dressed  in  his  usual  every* 
day  costume,  neither  his  features  nor  his  figure  any  whit  altered.  It  was  no 
dream,  nor  was  I in  the  least  delirious  or  wandering,  therefore  a conviction 
seized  me  that  something  must  have  occurred ; in  consequence  I 
particularly  marked  the  hour,  when  the  clock  struck  11  shortly  afterwards. 
The  next  morning  I was  not  the  least  surprised  when  my  sister  handed  me 
a note  from  Miss  G.  announcing  her  brother’s  death,  and  was  fully  prepared 
before  reading  it  to  find  that  he  had  passed  away  before  11  the  previous 
evening — which  presentiment,  strange  to  say,  was  fully  verified ; Major 
G.  having  died  at  a quarter  to  11.  Major  G.  had  returned  in  a bad 
state  of  health  from  Egypt,  where  he  had  been ' serving  in  the  campaign 
of  1883.  For  some  time  he  appeared  to  recover  and  was  able  to  go  about 
and  enter  into  society  during  the  winter,  but  during  the  last  month  the 
old  symptoms  had  returned,  and  gradually  he  grew  worse  and  worse,  until 
no  hopes  of  his  recovery  were  entertained.  Though  not  personally  intimate 
with  him,  we  were  well  acquainted  with  his  family,  and  naturally  his  case 
formed  a topic  of  conversation  among  us.  We  had  also  received  bad 
accounts  a few  days  before  and  were  aware  that  he  was  in  a critical 
condition  ; nevertheless  at  the  time  of  liis  death  he  had  been  quite  yout  of 
my  thoughts  and  mind.  I had  never  before  had  any  apparition  of  any 
description  whatsoever,  nor  has  this  one  been  followed  by  any  other. 

“ C.  P.” 

Miss  Scott  Moncrieff,  of  44,  Shooter’s  Hill  Road,  Blackheath,  says : — 

“ As  I was  at  [the  town  where  Miss  P.  lives]  at  the  time,  I can  myself 
so  far  confirm  the  story  as  to  mention  that,  on  the  day  after  it  occurred, 
we  heard  that  the  young  lady  had  been  so  shaken  in  her  nerves  by  her 
illness  that  she  had  been  seeing  what  you  would  call  a ‘ hallucination/ 
and  was  going  to  Melvern  for  change  of  air.” 

She  adds  that  Miss  P.  was  staying  with  her  when  the  above  account 
was  written,-  and  that  as  to  the  date,  “ both  she  and  I remembered  that 
it  was  on  a Thursday  near  the  end  of  March  or  beginning  of  April.” 

We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  that  Major  G.  died  on  Thursday , 
April  3rd,  1884. 

In  an  interview  with  Mr.  Myers,  December  26th,  1885,  Miss  P.  added 
the  following  details : — 

Major  G.’s  phantom  was  in  his  ordinary  walking  costume — hat  and 
ulster — in  which  Miss  P.  was  accustomed  to  see  him.  The  figure  passed 
quickly  across  the  end  of  the  room  without  turning  its  head,  but  the  face 
as  well  as  the  figure  were  distinctly  recognisable.  The  figure  made  no 
noi§e,  and  disappeared  as  it  reached  the  wall.1  MissP.  at  once  conjectured 
that  Major,  G.  must  be  passing  away  ; but  she  felt  no  fear.  Although 

1 The  mode  of  movement  and  of  disappearance  here  described  are  npt  infrequent  in 
visual  hallucinations.  In  my  collection  (p.  392),  besides  about  a dozen  cases  where  the 
disappearance  was  through  a door,  behind  a curtain,  into  a corner,  and  so  on,  1 find  four 
where  it  was  respectively  through  the  wall,  into  the  wall,  through  the  window,  and  into 
a bookcase.  Movement  of  some  sort,  as  will  be  seen  later,  is  an  extremely  frequent 
feature  of  both  subjective  and  telepathic  phantoms. 

IX.] 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

433 

Major  G,  was  known  to  be  fatally  ill,  there  was  po  expectation  of  his 
death  from  day  to  day.  He  was  not  prominently  before  Miss  P.’s  mind* 
Miss  P.  was  somewhat  out  of  health  at  the  time,  but  never  suffered  from 
any  kind  of  hallucination  of  sight  or  hearing,  She  did  not  mention  the 
incident  to  her  family  for  fear  of  ridicule. 

Miss. P.’s  sister  (to  whom  the  incident  was  first  told)  said  that  she 
remembered  receiving  next  morning  the  letter  as  to  Major  G.’s  death ; and 
also  remembered  that  some  time  later  Miss  P.  told  her  of  the  incident. 

the  knowledge  of  the  percipient  that  Major  G.  was  in  a 
critical., state,  is,  of  course,  an  element  of  weakness  ; but  it  remains  a 
remarkable  coincidence  that  she  should  have  had  her  one  experience  of 
a sensory  hallucination  at  the  exact  hour  of  his  death.] 

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Rimciman,  of  11,  Tonsley  Hill, 
Wandsworth,  S.W. 

“May  5th,  1884. 

(175)  “On  the  morning  of  December  2nd,  1883,  at  about  7 o’clock  in 
the  morning,  I had  a dream  which  merged  into  a waking  hallucination  as 
follows : — I dreamt  Mr.  J.  H.  Haggit  was  lying  on  my  bed,  beside  me, 
outside  of  the  bedclothes.  I dreamt  I saw  him  there,  and  I also  thought 
I saw  him  there  after  dreaming.  I arose  and  rested  on  my  right 
elbow,  looking  at  him  in  the  dusky  light.  There  was  a very  small  jet  of 
gas  burning  in  the  room.  I reflected,  4 Am  I awake,  or  is  this  a dream?’ 
I cannot  yet  answer  this  question  to  my  own  satisfaction  ; I cannot  tell 
when  my  dream  merged  in  my  waking  thoughts.  I only  am  sure  that  as. 
the  figure  disappeared  I was  as  wide  awake  as  I am  now.  He  was  dressed 
in  grey  tweed,  as  I had  been  used  to  see  him  actually  dressed.  He  was 
turned  from'  me  so  that  I could  only  partially  see  his  face.  Yet  I was 
certain  it  was  he.  I was  alarmed  and  shocked  to  find  my  dream  a reality 
— as  I then  thought  it.  I was  about  to  speak  when,  in  a twinkling,  the 
image  of  Mr.  H.  was  gone.  I was  leaning  on  my  right  arm  and  half 
raised  from  the  bed.  It  was  only  half  light,  our  gas  burning  but  turned 
low:  I mentioned  the  matter  on  that  day  to  Mr.  G.  Aynsley,  of  No.  3, 
Glover  Terrace,  South  Shields.  I was  oppressed  during  the  whole  day  by 
the  unusual  experience  of  the  morning,  and  hence  spoke  to  the  above  and 
another  twice  about  the  incident. 

“ I had  a note,  next  day  I think,  saying  that  Mr.  H.  died  about  6 houra 
after  his  fancied  presence  in  my  bed. 

“ I knew  that  Mr.  H.  was  afflicted,  as  he  had  been  for  8 years  or  so,  by 
bronchial  asthma.  As  he  had  lived  so  long  in  spite  of  great  suffering,  I 
quite  thought  he  would  live  longer.  I had  no  idea  he  was  near  death. 

, e “ I believe  this  was  a merely  natural  occurrence.  I am  not  orthodox 

in  religion.  - « Thomas  Runciman.” 

We  find  the  date  of  the  death  confirmed  by  the  obituary  of  the 
Darlington  and  Stockton  Times . 

Mr.  Aynsley  corroborates  as  follows : — 

“ 3,  Glover  Terrace,  South  Shields. 

“May  20th,  1884. 

“ I remember  hearing  Mr.  Thomas  Runciman  speak  of  a vivid  dream 

2 x 

434 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap* 

and  hallucination  which  he  had  had  on  the  day  that  Mr.  Haggit  died.  He 
told  me  that  he  dreamt  that  he  saw  him  lying  on  the  bed  beside  him,  in  his 
ordinary  dress,  but  very  pale  and  haggard.  He  was  so  impressed  that  he 
awoke,  and  saw  him  quite  plainly  there.  I ascertained  afterwards  that  he 
had  died  about  6 hours  after,  on  the  day  that  Mr.  Runciman  related  the 
circumstance.  ATHi|Uy.„ 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Runciman  writes 

“ With  regard  to  my  having  had  any  other  hallucination,  I have  had 
others,  but  lapse  of  time  and  inattention  have  quite  dimmed  the  remem- 
brance of  them.  They  were  of  a different  kind  to  this  last  case.  They 
were,  I should  say,  simply  4 nightmare  J or  4 daymare.’  I’hat  is,  they  were 
such,  that  I quite  believe  I was  asleep  while  experiencing  them.  In  the 
last  case  I had  not  a peculiar  sense  of  breaking  out  of  sleep  at*  once,  and 
with  a snap,  as  it  were.  I lender  my  idea  but  imperfectly  in  the 
preceding  sentence — perhaps  I would  more  truly  describe  myself  as 
breaking  free,  not  from  what  was  sleep,  but  from  a tyrannous  mistake  as  to 
my  circumstances  at  the  time.  This  sense  was  absent  in  the  last  case.  I 
believe  I might  be  awake,  I even  think  I was  awake,  with  the  image  of  a 
dream  still  strongly  on  my  mind.  But  in  the  earlier  cases  I concluded 
long  ago  that  I was  asleep  and  vividly  dreaming  till  the  image  disappeared. 
Briefly  I cannot  be  sure  in  the  latter  case  that  I was  asleep,  although  all 
experience  would  go  to  say  I was.  In  the  earlier  cases  many  years  ago  I 
concluded  that  waking  had  caused  what  looked  real  to  disappear.  * But  do 
not  think  for  one  moment  that  I consider  the  last  case  any  less  a delusion 
than  the  former.  I only  try  to  describe  my  experience  and  belief  at  the 
moment  of  hallucination.  It  is  diflicult  to  define  the  difference  in 
these  cases.” 

[In  conversation  with  our  colleague,  Mr,  R.  Hodgson,  Mr.  Runciman 
mentioned  that  he  found  afterwards  from  the  servant  that  at  the  time  of* 
his  hallucination  Mr.  Haggit  was  apparently  suffering  intense  agony.  * The 
figure  was  not  part  of  his  dream  at  all,  lie  saw  it  when  he  woke.  Haggit 
was  lying  almost  on  his  right  side,  as  it  were,  between  Runciman  and* hi# 
wife,  with  left  side-face  exposed  and  eye  open,  but  the  body  was  motion- 
less, though  it  seemed  to  Mr.  Runciman  to  be  alive.  In  addition  to  the 
low  gaslight,  the  dusky  light  of  the  morning  was  coming  through  the 
window,  the  blind  of  which  was  up.  The  light  was  sufficient  for  Mr. 
Runciman  to  see  the  time  by  his  watch.] 

§ 7.  I will  now  give  some  examples  where  two  senses  were 
concerned.  The  following,  from  Mr.  D.  H.  Wilson,  of  Rosemont, 
Hydros,  includes  an  impression  of  weight  as  well  as  of  sight.  The 
case  belongs  to  the  group  where  the  agent  is  comatose  (pp.  230, 40§)* 

“1876. 

(176)  “ My  mother  told  me  one  morning,  when  I went  to  seelier,  that  in 
the  previous  night  she  had  had  a startling  experience.  She  was  awakened  by 
feeling  a heayy  weight  on  her  feet,  and  on  sitting  up  saw  the  form  of  her 
husband  (my  father  was  then  thousands  of  miles  away)  seated  on  the  bed, 
in  his  nightshirt,  and  having  the  appearance  of  a corpse.  After  "a  ieyr 
' moments  the  form  vanished.  I recommended  my  mother  to  record  this' 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES . 

435 

experience  in  her  diary,  and  she  did  so.  In  due  course  she  was  informed 
by  her  husband  that  on  that  particular  night  lie  was  in  a state  of  coma, 
haying  been  delirious  for  some  days,  and  his  life  was  quite  despaired  of  by 
the  doctors.  « D H Wilson.” 

In  qpswer  to  our  inquiries,  Mr.  Wilson  wrote  in  February,  1884  : — 

“ My  mother  (who  is  no  longer  alive)  had  never  seen  anything  of  the 
kind  previously,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge.”  He  thinks  that  the  occur- 
rence was  in  the  winter  of  1862. 

Mi\Wilson,s  sister,  Mrs.  Kimber,  of  3,  Roland  Gardens,  S.W.,  has 
given  us  a completely  concordant  account,  but  cannot  recall  how  long 
after  the  incident  it  was  that  her'  mother  told  her  of  it.  She  says,  “At 
the  time  of  the  apparition,  all  hope  of  his  [her  father's]  life  had  ceased.” 

In  the  following  cases  the  sense  of  touch  becomes  more  definite ; 
and  in  the  first  of  them,  if  memory  can  be  trusted,  even  the  sense  of 
smell  was  concerned — projected,  as  we  hold,  like  the  other  sensory 
features,  from  the  percipients  own  mind.1  Mrs.  Brooke,  of  Woodlands, 
Kennford,  Exeter,  narrates  : — 

“ June  29th,  1884. 

(177)  “I  have  a very  vivid  recollection  that,  towards  dawn  (?)  on  the 
morning  of  August  3rd,  1867,  I was  roused  from  my  sleep  to  find  my 
brother,  an  officer  in  the  1 6th  Lancers,  then  quartered  in  Madras,  standing 
by  the  bed.  .My  impression  is  that  lie  bent  over  me,  kissed  me,  and  passed 
quietly  from  the  room,  making  signs  to  me  not  to  speak,  and  that  I was 
full  of  joy,  thinking  he  had  returned  home  unexpectedly,  and  lay  awake 
till  the  maid  called  me,  when  my  first  words  to  her  were  that  my  brother 
had  come  home  and  I had  seen  him.  I remember  my  bitter  disappoint- 
ment when  at  last  made  to  believe  that  this  was  not  so,  and  that  it  was 
quite  impossible  I could  have  seen  him ; also  that  I was  scolded  and  silenced 
for  holding  to  my  story. 

# “I  cannot  remember  how  much  time  elapsed  before  the  news  came  by 
telegram  that  my  brother  died  suddenly  of  jungle  fever  on  August  2nd ; 
full  particulars  did  not  reach  us  for  weeks  later,  and  it  was  not  till  long 
afterwards  that  I put  two  and  two  together,  as  the  saying  is,  and,  found 
that,  as  I then  and  now  firmly  believe,  my  favourite  brother  came  to  me 
at  the  hour  of  his  death. 

“ The  date  I fixed  by  reference  to  a childish  diary  I then  kept,  long 
since  destroyed,  but  I cannot  give  you  the  exact  hours.  I know  by  letters 
that  my  brother  died  soon  after  10  o’clock  p.m.  on  August  2nd,  and  I 
know  that  my  room  was  not  quite  dark  when  I saw  him,  and  that  I did  not 
fall  asleep  again  before  morning  on  August  3rd.  u ^ Brooke.” 

The  Army  List  confirms  Aug.  2,  1 867,  as  the  date  of  death.  The  vision 
seems  to  have  followed  the  death  by  9 or  10  hours. 

1 This  feature  occurred  in  case  18,  p.  191,  which,  however,  differed  in  the  point  that 
the  Bmell  represented  what  was  occupying  the  agent’s  mind.  I may  remark  that,  except 
in  disease,  subjective  hallucinations  of  smell— or  at  any  rate  cases  that  can  be  clearly 
identi&ed  as  such— seem  very  rare ; I have  only  two  first-hand  specimens  in  my  large 
collection— besides  one  or  two  where  a hallucination  of  smell  has  survived  as  the  conse- 
quence of  a dream.  In  one  case  of  this  latter  sort  (which  I cannot  obtain  first-hand  for 
publication),  a distinct  smell  of  death  followed  on  a dream  which  is  alleged  to  have 
coincided  with  the  unexpected  death  of  the  person  dreamt  of. 

436  “ BORDERLAND”  CASES.  [chap. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Brooke  says  : — 

“I  fear  that  at  this  distance  of  time,  17  years,  I shall  not  be  able  to 
find  anyone  who  remembers  my  mentioning  my  vision  of  my  brother,  unless 
it  might  be  the  maid,  who  was  with  me  for  more  than  16  years,  and  I will 
write  to  her  and  find  out  if  she  recollects  it. 

“ I have  never  had  any  4 hallucination  of  the  senses/  on  any  other 
occasion  than  that  you  know  of.” 

[In  this  other  case  what  seemed  to  be  seen  was  the  unaccountable 
opening  of  a locked  door.] 

In  a personal  interview  with  Mrs.  Brooke,  Professor  Sid gwick  obtained 
the  following  additional  details  : - 

She  was  13  years  old.  She  was  quite  sure  it  was  not  a dream.  It 
was  quite  impossible  that  it  could  have  been  some  one  else,  mistaken  for 
her  brother.  The  room  seemed  to  be  full  of  a peculiar  scent  which  her 
brother  was  fond  of.  She  had  written  to  tbe  maid  who,  however,  said,  in 
reply,  that  she  had  only  a vague  recollection  of  the  incident. 

Wo  must  not  forget  that  “ borderland  ” impressions,  or  rather, 
perhaps  I should  say,  dreams  which  the  dreamer  mistakes  for  waking 
percepts,  are  probably  commoner  in  early  youth  than  in  later  years ; 
and  in  such  a case  as  Mrs.  Brookes,  therefore,  the  evidential  superiority 
which  I have  pointed  out  as  distinguishing  waking  from  sleeping 
experiences  could  not  rightly  be  insisted  on.  At  the  same  time, 
whatever  name  we  give  them,  we  have  no  grounds  for  thinking  that 
imaginary  percepts  so  vivid  and  convincing  as  those  here  described 
fall  to  the  lot  of  any  considerable  proportion  of  children. 

In  the  next  case  the  imagery  supplied  by  the  percipients  mind 
is  very  marked,  and  reminds  us  of  some  of  the  former  dream  cases; 
The  narrator  is  Miss  Schmidt,  of  Ducklington  Rectory,  near  Witney. 

44  June,  1884. 

(178)  uOn  New  Year’s  Eve,  1852,  I awoke  about  12.40  a.m.  and  found 
my  room  so  brilliantly  illuminated  that  I imagined  I had  forgotten  to  put 
out  my  candle,  and  that  something  must  have  caught  fire.  I got  up  and, 
on  looking  round,  saw  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  a coffin  resting  on  chairs,  on 
each  of  which  was  a silver  candlestick  with  a large  wax  taper  alight";  in 
the  coffin  was  the  figure  of  my  father.  I put  out  my  hand  and  touched 
him,  when  it  became  quite  dark.  I felt  for  my  matchbox  and  lighted  "a 
candle,  looked  at  my  watch  and  wrote  down  the  time.  The  next  morning 
I told  my  friend,  with  whom  I was  staying  in  Paris  at  the  time,  and  on 
the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  January  we  received  a letter  from  Marseilles, 
saying  that  my  father  had  died  suddenly  at  12.40  on  New  Year’s  Eve,  and 
that  he  had.  expressed  such  a strong  wish  to  see  his  youngest  g child 
myself)  again  just  before  his  death.  « jj  Schmidt.” 

Miss  Schmidt  has  had  one  other  vision,  which,  however,  was  seen  on 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES.  ' 

437 

IX.] 

different  occasions  by  several  persons  and  can  scarcely  be  taken  to  prove 
any  special  liability  to  hallucinations.  Asked  Whether  she  had  ever 
experienced  any  others,  she  says  “ No.”  She  was  requested  to  put  us  in 
the*  way  of  procuring  the  corroboration  of  her  friend,  who  is  a Russian. 
On  March  12th,  1885,  she  writes  : — 

“I  have  taken  all  the  steps  I feel  I can  justifiably  take  with  regard  to 
securing  for  vou  the  testimony  of  the  Princess  D.  [name  given].  It  has 
already  given  me  a great  deal  of  awkward  unpleasantness  when  inquiring 
at  the  J^ussian  Embassy,  &c.,  as  the  Prince  and  Princess  are  much  mixed 
up  in,  politics,  and  Russians  are,  as  perhaps  you  know,  not  a little 
suspicious  of  the  inquiries  of  strangers.” 

The  most  remarkable  feature  in  this  ease  is  the  light.  The 
appearance  of  a dark  room  as  being  filled  with  light  is  a form  of 
hallucination  (or  of  hypera^sthesia)  which  is  occasionally  experienced 
on  waking,  apart  from  any  further  abnormality.  I have  received 
at  least  five  well  marked  instances  of  the  sort,  not  including  those 
where  there  has  been  a further  development  of  the  hallucination — a 
luminous  figure,  or  a figure  in  addition  to  the  light.1  The  full 
interest  of  this  point  will  appear  later.  (See  Chap.  Xtl.,  § 7.) 

The  next  case  was  first  printed  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for 
February,  1863.  The  narrator  is  the  late  Mr.  George  Barth,  of  6, 
Highfield  Villas,  Camden  Road,  N. 

(179)  “ On  the  14th  of  May,  1861,  our  son  George,  a most  excellent  and 
religious  youth  of  19  years,  was  removed  from  this  to  the  spirit- world. 
Perceiving  that  the  time  of  his  departure  was  near,  his  mother  and  I 
alone  watched  by  his  bedside.  When  the  last  breath  had  been  taken  in  and 
expired,  I quietly  remarked,  ‘ He  is  now  gone/  His  mother  inquired 
the  time,  and  then  observing  the  rising  sun  just  shining  over  the  blind 
t>f*tke  room,  which  had  an  aspect  to  the  east,  she  said,  ‘See!  the 
natural  sun  is  just  rising  as  our  dear  boy  is  rising  to  his  Heavenly  home/ 
I Have  an  object  in  noting  the  rising  of  the  sun  at  the  moment  of  his 
departure. 

“Mr.  Williams,  of  Romford  and  Bishopsgate  Without,  a highly 
intelligent  and  worthy  man,  is  united  to  our  eldest  daughter.  At  this 
time  hp  was  staying  at  his  house  in  the  City,  his  wife  having  been  only*, 
a few  days  previously  confined.  He  was  sleeping  in  a room,  the  window 
of  which  faced  the  east.  He  states  that  he  was  soundly  asleep,  his  hands 
outside  the  bedclothes,  when  he  was  suddenly  aroused  by  feeling  each  of 
liis  hands  firmly  grasped  and  pressed.  He  instantly  sat  up,  and  by  tli£ 
bedside  stood  George,  holding  his  hands  and  smiling  in  his  face  with  a look  of 
peculiar  sweetness  and  kindness.  George  was  attired  (seemingly)  in  his 

1 It  is  recorded  by  Despine  pfere,  De  VEmploi  du  MagnUisme  Animal  (Paris,  1840),  p.  240, 
that  his  patient,  Estelle,  saw  all  the  objects  in  a perfectly  dark  room.  A friend  tells  me 
that  she  has  oh  several  occasions,  when  feverish,  had  a “ borderland  ” hallucination  of  a 
cat.  which  she  has  actually  pursued  about  the  room.  On  all  these  occasions  the  room, 
which  was  in  reality  dark,  has  appeared  light— the  light  fading  out  as  the  hallucination 
vanished. 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

438 

[chap. 

nightdress.  Mr.  Williams  was  not  at  all  alarmed  ; he  knew  it  was  George 
in  the  spirit,  and  his  presence  filled  his  brother-in-law'  with  a calm  feeling 
of  peace  and  happiness,  which  remained  for  many  hours.  They  thus  held 
hands  and  looked  on  one  another  for  a minute  or  longer;  then  the 
grasp  relaxed,  and  George’s  spirit  faded  away.  [See  p.  425,  note]. 

“Mr.  Williams  noticed  that  the  rising  sun  was  shining  into  his  room, 
over  the  blind.  His  impression  was,  and  still  is,  that  he  saW  George  by 
this  light  and  not  by  any  other.  At  8 o’clock  Mr.  William*  went  to  his 
wife’s  room  and  told  her,  in  the  presence  of  his  mother  and  the  nurse, 
that  George  was  dead.  ‘ Have  you  heard  from  father?’  was  thC'liatural 
query.  ‘ No ; but  1 have  seen  George — he  came  for  a minute  this 
morning  at  sunrise.’  ‘ Oh,  nonsense  ! you  have  been  dreaming,  James.’ 
‘ Dreaming  ! 1 never  was  more  awake  in  my  life.  I not  only  saw 

^him,  but  I felt  his  hands  pressing  mine.’  ‘ Nonsense,  James ; I know, 
poor  boy,  how  ill  he  is,  but  father  does  not  expect  him  to  go  yet.  I 
still  hope  to  be  up  and  able  to  see  him.’  Mr.  Williams  quietly 
rejoined,  ‘ You  will  see,  dear.  Mind,  we  shall  presently  have  a letter 
or  messenger  from  papa,  telling  us.’  Tn  an  hour  later  Mr.  Williams 
received  the  letter  which  he  expected. 

“Mr.  Williams  and  George  were  mutually  much  attached;  in  all 
his  boyhood  anxieties  his  brother  James  was  George’s  confidant  and 
friend.  Hence  a parting  visit  and  a parting  smile,  and  last  friendly 
grasp  of  the  hands  was  that  which  a departing  spirit  might  be  glad  to 
give  to  his  friend  and  brother ; but  lie  could  not  go  in  the  body,  nor  give 
it  while  his  body  kept  him. 

“George  Barth.” 

The  Times  obituary  confirms  the  date  of  the  death. 

Two  daughters  of  Mr.  Barth  write  to  us  as  follows  : — 

“Delmar  Villa,  520,  Caledonian  Road. 

“April  20th,  1885. 

“ The  extract  you  send  from  the  Spiritual  Magazine  was  written 

by  my  dear  father,  in  order  to  giv  e a correct  account  of  my  brother 

Georges  appearance  to  my  brother-in-law,  Mr.  James  Williams. 
incident  was  spoken  of  at  the  time  it  occurred  amongst  us  all  in  my 
father’s  house ; likewise  I visited  my  sister  and  brother-in-law  the  day 
following  George’s  death,  and  heard  the  account  from  himself. 

“ My  father’s  reason  for  sending  the  notice  to  the  magazine  arose  from 
some  friend  having  published  an  incorrect  statement. 

“Charlotte  Walenn.” 

“3,  Park  Place  West,  Gloucester  Gate,  N.  W.  i 

“July  29th,  1884. 

“ I was  a very  young  child  at  the  time  of  my  brother  George*s 

death.  The  only  confirmation  I can  give  you  is  the  fact  of 

hearing  ipy  father  speak  of  the  occurrence  to  friends  interested  in  such 
matters,  on  several  occasions,  just  as  it  is  stated  in  his  narrative.  > My 
eldest  sister,  Mrs.  Williams,  has  been  dead  some  years,  but  my  brother- 
in-law  is  still  alive,  and  will,  no  doubt,  give  you  any  help  in  the  njyatter. 

“ Alice  Barth  (Mrs.  Frederick  Usher).”  . 

[The  account  was  sent  to  Mr.  Williams,  who  resides  at  Fefn  Bank, 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

439 

IX.] 

Crowborough,  Tonbridge  Wells.  He*  made  no  corrections  in  it,  and 
referred  to  it  in  a manner  which  implied  its  substantial  accuracy ; but  he 
declined  any  further  correspondence  on  the  subject;] 

The  following  account  is  from  Mr.  George  J.  Coombs,  Sheriffs 
Officer  for  the  County  of  Nottingham. 

44  Journal  Chambers,  Pelham  Street,  Nottingham. 

“December  28th,  1883. 

(18&)  “In  the  middle  of  the  month  of  June,  1880,  my  aunt  left 
Salisbury  and  went  to  the  Washington  Hotel,  Liverpool,  where  I joined 
her  from  Nottingham,  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  her  off  to  America,  on 
board  the  Allan  Line  steamer,  Circassia n,  the  following  day. 

44  Her  business  was  to  realise  some  property.  She  was  getting  into 
years,  and  very  much  pressed  me  to  accompany  her,  but  I was  unable  to 
leave  my  business  for  so  long  a time.  She,  however,  made  me  promise  to 
meet  her  on  her  return,  and  said  it  was  her  intention  to  spend  the  winter 
at  Nottingham  before  returning  to  Salisbury. 

“ About  the  25th  July  following,  at  4 o;clock  in  the  morning,  while 
in  bed,  I suddenly  awoke  and  said  to  my  wife,  4 Someone  has  taken  hold 
of  my  hand ; the  hand  was  quite  cold.  I believe  it  was  my  aunt ; I saw 
her  rush  out  of  the  room.’  The  door  was  open  on  chain,  and  I immedi- 
ately jumped  out  of  bed  to  see,  and  the  chain  was  still  on.  I said  to  my 
wife,  4 My  aunt  is  dead,  and  she  has  come  again  over  the  water/  to  which 
she  replied,  4 You  are  dreaming  ; you  had  too  much  supper  last  night  ’ ; to 
which  I said,  4 No,  I am  positive  of  the  impression.’ 

44 1 received  a letter  from  a solicitor  in  Hamilton,  about  a fortnight  after- 
wards, announcing  my  aunt’s  decease,  and  a reference  to  the  dates  convinced 
my  wife  that  she  died  at  the  very  time  I had  the  visitation.  When  I left 
liiy  aunt  in  the  steam  tug  which  accompanied  the  Circassian  down  the 
Mersey,  her  farewell  words  were,  4 1 shall  see  you  first  when  I come  back.’ 
- 44  George  J.  Coombs.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Coombs  adds  that  the  vision  was  not 
# distinct,  but  that  the  hallucination  is  unique  in  his  experience. 

Mrs.  Coombs  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

44  July  25th,  1884. , 

44 1 very  well  remember  the  morning  when  my  husband  awoke  early, 
and. said  he  saw  his  aunt  rush  out  of  the  bedroom,  and  that  she  had  taken 
hold  of  hig  hand  ; also  that,  when  the  news  of  Mrs.  Rumbold’s  death  came 
from  Hamilton,  the  remark  was  made  that  it  was  the  very  date  my 
husband  narrated  his  dream.  I cannot  fix  the  date  without  an  Almanac 
of  1880,  but  it  was  * our  Village  Feast  Monday  morning,  which  is,  I 
believe,  the  third iweek  in  July.  “S  A Coombs” 

We  asked  if  it  was  possible  to  obtain  corroboration  as  to  the  date  of  the 
death.  Mr.  Coombs  sent  us  the  solicitor’s  letter  ; but  this  letter  assumes 
knowledge  of  the  death,  and  was  not  written  till  September  27th.  The 
letter  received  by  Mr.  Coombs  44  about  a fortnight  ” after  the  death,  and 
which  must  be  the  one  by  which  the  coincidence  was  fixed,  is  the  follow- 
ing. It  is  undated,  but  the  postmarks  are  Hamilton,  July  21st,  and 
Nottingham,  August  5th. 

440 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES. 

[chap.. 

“ 188,  l£ing  Street  East,  Hampton,  Canada. 

“ Dear  Sir, — I am  sorry  to  have  the  painful  task  to  inform  you  $ f 
the  death  of  your  aunt,  Mrs.  Rumbold.  She  came  to  me  on  a visit  oh 
J uly  3rd,  feeling  very  poorly.  I thought  it  must  be  over-fatigue,  and 
probably  after  a rest  she  would  be  better.  She  continued  getting  worse 
and  lingered  on  till  the  19th. — Yours  truly,  * 

“A.  Jarvis.” 

[Monday  in  the  third  week  of  July,  in  1880,  fell  on  the  19th,  which 
is  so  far  in  favour  of  the  accuracy  of  Mrs.  Coombs*  memory,  ft  seems 
practically  beyond  doubt  that  at  the  time  that  the  news  arrived,  Mr. 
Coombs,  as  well  as  his  wife,  fixed  the  date  of  the  drealn  as  Monday  the 
19th;  and  the  fact  that  in  his  letter  to  us,  written  more  than  3 years 
afterwards  without  reference  to  documents,  he  says  “ about  the  25th,”  is, 
therefore,  unimportant. 

We  learn,  however,  from  Mrs.  Jarvis  that  Mrs.  Rumbold  died  at 
4 p.m. ; so  that  the  impression,  though  falling,  of  course,  within  a time 
of  most  serious  illness  altogether  unknown  to  the  percipient,  preceded  the 
actual  death  by  about  16  hours.] 

In  the  next  case,  the  sense  of  touch  was  associated  with  that  of 
hearing.  Though  the  evidence  is  that  of  an  uneducated  witness,  the 
facts  are  well-evidenced  ; and  it  is  at  any  rate  a primd  facie  mark  of 
accuracy  that  the  want  of  exact  coincidence  of  time  is  expressly 
noted.  The  first  part  of  the  account  was  written  down  by  a careful 
assistant  at  Bangor. 

“December,  1883. 

(181)  “My  present  housemaid’s  mother,  Ellen  Williams,  one  night  in 
1872,  distinctly  and  suddenly  felt  the  pressure,  as  of  some  one’s  hand  upon 
her  breast,  at  the  same  time  heard  the  voice  of  her  son,  ‘ Ffoulk,’  then  a lad 
at  sea,  saying  twice,  * Mother,  mother.’  She  was  not  asleep,  and  she 
told  her  husband  at  once  that  she  was  sure  it  was  her  boy’s  voice,  ajad, 
that  she  feared  there  was  something  the  matter  with  him.  When  they 
saw  notice  of  the  arrival  of  the  ship  in  Liverpool,  they  wrote  at  once.  A 
reply  came  from  the  captain  that  the  boy  had  died  of  yellow  fever,  six 
days  out  from  Rio  de  Janeiro,  giving  the  date,  which  corresponded 
exactly  with  the  mother’s  note  of  the  occurrence.  She  is  still  living  in 
the  same  place,  near  Port  Dinorwic,  in  Carnarvonshire.  She  never  had 
any  similar  experience  before  or  since,  and  has  no  objection  to  the  mention 
of  her  name.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries  our  informant  writes  : — 

“ I fear  Mrs.  Williams  could  not  write  the  details  herself,  but  she 
might  dictate  to  another.  Her  daughter  tells  me  she  was  then  a child  at 
home,  and  remembers  that  her  father,  who  has  since  died,  did  all  he  could 
to  convince  his  wife  that  her  fears  were  groundless,  and  would  not  let 
her  dwell  on  the  subject.  They  did  not  hear  of  the  death  till  some 
months  after,  and  the  captain  sent  the  date,  which  was  copied  into  the 
family  Bible.” 

And  later  she  adds  : — 

.IX.J 

« BORDERLAND " CASES.* 

441 

“I  have  had * an  interview  with  Mrs.  Ellen  Williams,  in  the  presence 
of  her  daughter,  and  have  translated  exactly  what  she  said  in  Welsh.  She 
insisted  upon  the  night  of  the  Jfih  being  the  time  of  her  impression,  The 
captain's  statement  that  the  6th  was  the  date  of  death  makes  a material 
difference.  • I copied  the  spelling  of  Pernambuco  as  it  was  written  on  the 
fly-leaf  ef  the  Bible." 

The  following  is  the  percipient's  testimony  : — 

“January  9th,  1884. 

“Thereby  declare  that  on  the  night  of  the  4th  of  February,  1872, 
about  1 o'clock,  I distinctly  saw  my  son  Ffoulk,  looking  very  weak  and 
ill,  and  felt  the*  pressure  of  his  hands  and  heard  his  voice  saying, 
* Mother  ! mother  ! ' I did  not  know  if  I was  asleep.  I believed  not.  I 
mentioned  it  at  once  to  my  husband,  who  did  not  understand  my  feelings. 

“ We  did  not  hear  till  the  following  Good  Friday  of  his  death,  which 
the  captain  said  took  place  on  the  6th  of  February,  I do  not  know  at 
what  hour. 

“Witness  my  mark,  Ellen  Williams,  her  -f  mark. 

“ In  the  presence  of  my  daughter,  who  also  testifies  that  I spoke  of 
it  at  once,  and  commonly,  and  remained  in  great  anxiety  until 
the  news  reached  us.  « Mary  Williams.” 

The  record  in  the  family  Bible  stands  : — 

“Ffoulk  died  at  sea,  6th  of  February,  1872,  in  lat.  5*51  S.,  long. 
34*35  W.,  of  the  yellow  fever,  on  board  the  barque  ‘ Barbadoes,'  on  his 
passage  from  Pernabucca  to  Liverpool." 

Our  original  informant  adds  : — 

“June  25th,  1884. 

“ I recollect  pressing  the  question  at  the  time,  as  to  whether  Ellen 
Williams  had  ever  had  any  impression  or  hallucination  of  any  kind,  and 
she  positively  denied  ever  having  experienced  such,  except  on  that  one 

occasion." 

• • 

[The  two  days'  interval  between  the  impression  and  the  death,  if 
correctly  remembered,  of  course  weakens  the  case  fot*  evidential  purposes. 
Still,  the  impression  almost  certainly  corresponded  with  a time  of  unfore- 
seen and  desperate  illness.] 

§ 8.  Lastly,  we  have  a group  where  the  two  higher  senses  pf 
sight  and  hearing  were  both  concerned.  The  following  account  is  from 
Jtiss  Kate  Jenour,  of  23,  Belsize  Square,  South  Hampstead,  N.W., 

“November,  1884. 

(182)  “On  the  4th  May,  1883,  when  on  board  H.  M.  S.  ‘Spartan,' 
oil  my  way  to  Capetown,  I was  awoke  by  hearing  someone  in  my  cabin, 
which  I alone  occupied,  when  to  my  surprise  I saw  the  figure  of  a friend  of 
mine  standing  by  my  berth.  It  then  disappeared,  and  by  the  first  mail 
after  «my  arrival  at  Capetown,  I received  the  news  of  my  friend's  death, 
which  took  place  at  10.30  p.m.  on  that  night.  I told  2 or  3 passengers 
on  board,  who  made  a note  of  it." 

442 

[chap.. 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Jenour  says  : — 

“ I was  certainly  awake  ; I had  no  sense  of  awaking  afterwardsy  but 
the  sense  of  waking  before  I saw  the  figure,  my  first  impression  having 
been  that  the  steward  had  come  in  to  shut  the  port-hole.  I had  a light 
burning  in  my  cabin.  The  figure  looked  quite  solid  and  natural,  and  was 
in  day-dress.  I knew  the  girl  to  be  consumptive,  but  had  not  thought  of 
her  as  likely  to  die,  and  indeed  had  not  been  thinking  about  her  at  all  \ 
she  was  an  acquaintance  and  neighbour,  but  not  an  intimate  friend. 

“I  think,  the  vessel  was  about  half-way  to  the  Cape.  Ne^fcday  t 
described  what  I had  seen  to  my  cousin,  Mr.  Jenour,  Captain  Wait,  Mr. 
Frames,  who  is  now  a lawyer  at  Grahamstown,  and  Mik  Hope  Hall.  I 
was  so  impressed  that  I could  not  Help  speaking  of  it,  in  spite  of  expecting 
to  be  lifughed  at : had  it  been  a dreamy  I should  have  thought  nothing  of  it. 

“ I aiu  certain  1 mentioned  the  date  of  my  vision  in  my  first  letter  to 
my  father,  written  when  1 got  to  the  Cape,  and  before  the  news  of  the 
death  reached  me  ; and  T am  also  certain  that  when  I received  the  news 
of  the  death,  1 noted,  and  my  cousin  noted,  that  the  dates  were  the  same. 

I cannot  now  be  sure  of  the  exact  day. 

“ T have  had  no  other  such  waking  vision  except  once,  soon  after,  at 
Capetown  ; when  I saw  the  figure  of  a dressmaker  whom  I knew  in 
England,  and  who  (as  I learnt  on  my  return  to  England)  had  died  about 
the  same  time ; but  the  date  was  not  fixed. 

“ K.  J.” 

We  find  from  the  obituary  in  the  Times  that  the  death  took  place  on 
May  2, 1883. 

[Miss  Jenour’s  cousin  is  unfortunately  at  a distance,  and  his  address 
cannot  at  present  be  ascertained.  Captain  Wait  writes,  in  April,  1886, 
that  he  does  not  recall  Miss  J enour’s  mention  of  the  incident.  The  fact  of 
the  coincident  death  not  being  then  known,  such  a narration  might  * 
naturally  make  very  little  impression.  I wrote  to  ask  Mr.  Frames  if  he 
remembered  any  singular  announcement  made  by  Miss  Jenour  during  the 
voyage ; but  he  replied  in  the  negative.] 

Miss  Jenour’s  father  writes  on  I^ov.  1,  1885  : — 

“ I can  positively  state  that  by  the  next  mail  to  the  Cape,  after  the 
death  of  a young  friend  of  ours,  I wrote  to  my  daughter  ; but  before  my 
letter  can  have  reached  her,  she,  on  arriving  at  Capetown,  wrote  to  me 
to  say  that  the  lady  in  question  had  appeared  to  her  in  her  cabin,  at  sea, 
between  Madeira  and  the  Cape,  and  that  she  mentioned  the  fact  the 
following  morning  to  her  relatives  and  friends  on  board.  On  comparing 
dates,  it  was  certain  that  the  appearance  was  on  the  same  day  that  the  lady 
died.’  Since  then,  my  relatives  have  confirmed  this  in  every  particular. 

“H.,J.  Jenour.” 

Mr.  Jenour  is  certain  that  his  daughter’s  letter  contained  the  date  of 
her  vision,  and  he  has  kindly  searched  for  the  letter.  He  writes,  on 
Dec.  1,1885 

“The  letter  I most  wanted  I cannot  find ; but  have  one  dated  June  5th, 
in  which  my  daughter  again  refers  to  Miss  B.’s  death,  and  adds,  **  On  the 

IX.] 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

443 

2nd  of  May,1  in  thh  night,  or  rather  morning,2  I awoke  up  and  saw 
Edith,  standing  by  my  bed.  I told  about  it  at  the  time/  The  lady  died 
at  half-past  10  o’clock  at  night/’ 

Mr.  Jfcnour  tells  me  that  it  was  the  close  coincidence  of  time  that  specially 
jstruck  him,  and  he  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  others.  Miss  Jenour 
is  equally  confident  that  the  coincidence  of  time  was  noted  in  Capetown ; 
though,  as  she  has  mentioned,  her  memory  does  not  retain  the  exact 
date.  We  find  from  the  Times that  the  “ Spartan  ” left  Plymouth  on  the 
20th  o£ April,  and  arrived  at  Capetown  on  the  10th  of  May ; therefore 
her  redirection  that  “ the  vessel  was  about  half-way  ” is  not  far  wrong. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Richardson,  of  Coombe  Down,  Bath. 

“ August  26th,  1882. 

(183)  ‘ ‘ On  September  9th,  1848,  at  the  siege  of  Mooltan,  my  husband, 
Major-General  Richardson,  C.R.,  theiv  adjutant  of  his  regiment,  was  most 
severely  and  dangerously  wounded,  and  supposing  himself  dying,  asked 
one  of  the  officers  with  him  to  take  the  ring  off  his  linger  and  send  it  to  his 
wife  who,  at  that  time,  was  fully  150  miles  distant,  at  Ferozepore.  On  the 
night  of  September  9th,  1848,  I was  lying  on  my  bed,  between  sleeping 
and  waking,  when  I distinctly  saw  my  husband  being  carried  off  the  field, 
seriously  wounded,  and  heard  his  voice  saying,  ‘Take  this  ring  off*  my 
finger,  and  send  it  to  my  wife/  All  the  next  day  I could  not  get  the 
sight  or  the  voice  out  of  my  mind.  In  due  time  I heard  of  General 
Richardson  having  been  severely  wounded  in  the  assault  on  Mooltan. 
He  survived,  however,  and  is  still  living.  It  was  not  for  some  time  after 
the  siege  that  I heard  from  Colonel  L.,  the  officer  who  helped  to  carry 
General  Richardson  off  the  field,  that  the  request  as  to  the  ring  was 
actually  made  to  Jlim,  just  as  I had  beard  it  at  Ferozepore  at  that  very  time. 

“M.  A.  Richardson.” 

The  following  questions  were  addressed  by  us  to  General  Richardson, 
whose  answers  are  appended. 

. ,(1)  Does  General  R.  remember  saying,  when  he  was  wounded  at 
Mooltan,  ‘Take  this  ring  oft*  my  finger,  and  send  it  to  my  wife,’  or  words 
to,this  effect  ? 

“ Most  distinctly ; 1 made  the  request  to  my  commanding  officer, 
Major  E.  S.  Lloyd,  who  was  supporting  me  while  my  man  had  gone  for 
assistance.  Major  Lloyd,  I am  sorry  to  say,  is  dead.” 

(2)  Can  he  remember  the  time  of  this  incident  ? Was  it  morning, 
noon,  or  night  ? 

“ As  far  as  memory  serves,  I was  wounded  about  9 p.m.  on  Sunday, 
the  9th  September  1848/’ 

(3)  Had  General  R.,  before  he  left  home,  promised  or  said  anything 
to  Mrs..  It.  as  to  sending  his  ring  to  her,  in  case  he  should  be  wounded  ? 

“ To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  never.  Nor  had  I any  kind  of 

r 

. 1 The 'date  of  the  dream  in  the  first  account,  the  4th  of  May,  was  given  from  memory 
only,  oUnder  the  impression  that  the  death  had  occurred  on  that  aay—not  from  any 
independent  record. 

* Theo  vision  took  place  soon  after  midnight— -which  of  course  would  make  its  actual 
daW  May  3. 

444  “BORDERLAND”  CASES.  [chap, 

presentiment  on  the  subject.  I naturally  felt  that  with  such  a fire  as  we 
were  exposed  to  I might  get  hurt.” 

The  details  as  to  the  ring  seem  fairly  to  raise  this  case  out' of  the- 
category  of  mere  visions  of  absent  persons  who  are  known  to  be  in 
danger, and  with  whom  the  percipents  thoughts  have  been  ahxiously 
engaged. 

The  next  case  was  received  towards  the  end  of  1882,  from  Mr.  J. 
(1.  Keulemans,  who  has  already  been  mentioned  more  than  once 
(pp.  1 96,  285,  255).  * 

(184)  In  December,  1880,  he  was  living  with  his  family  in  Paris.  The 
outbreak  of  can  epidemic  of  sin  all-pox  caused  him  to  remove  three,  of  his 
children,  including  a favourite  little  boy  of  5,  to  London,  whence  he 
received,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  month,  several  letters  giving  an 
excellent  account  of  their  health. 

“On  the  24th  of  January,  1881,  at  half-past  7 in  the  morning,  I was 
suddenly  awoke  by  hearing  his  voice,  as  I fancied,  very  near  me.  I saw 
a bright,  opaque,  white  mass  before  my  eyes,  and  in  the  centre  of  this 
light  I saw  the  face  of  my  little  darling,  his  eyes  bright,  his  mouth  smiling.1 
The  apparition,  accompanied  by  the  sound  of  his  voice,  was  too  short  and 
too  sudden  to  be  called  a dream  : it  was  too  clear,  too  decided,  to  be 
called  an  effect  of  imagination.  So  distinctly  did  1 hear  his  voice  that  I 
looked  round  the  room,  to  see  whether  lie  was  actually  there.  The  sound 
I heard  was  that  of  extreme  delight,  such  as  only  a happy  child  can  utter. 

T thought  it  was  the  moment  lie  woke  up  in  London,  happy  and  thinking 
of  me.  I said  to  myself,  ‘ Thank  God,  little  Isidore  is  happy  as  always/  ” 

Mr.  Keulemans  describes  the  ensuing  day  as  one  of  peculiar  brightness  # 
and  cheerfulness.  He  took  a long  walk  with  a friend,  with  whom  he 
dined  ; and  was  afterwards  playing  a game  of  billiards,  when  he  again  saw 
the  apparition  of  his  child.  This  made  him  seriously  uneasy,  and  in  spite 
of  having  received  within  3 days  the  assurance  of  the  child’s  perfect? 
health,  he  expressed  to  his  wife  a conviction  that  he  was  dead.  Next  day 
a letter  arrived  saying  that  the  child  was  ill ; but  the  father  was  convinced 
that  this  was  only  an  attempt  to  break  the  news  ; and,  in  fact,  the  child  had 
died,  after  a few  hours’  illness,  at  the  exact  time  of  the  first  apparition. 

Mrs.  Keulemans  says  : — 

“ May  29th,  1885. 

“ I remember  that,  the  day  when  little  Isidore  died,  my  husband 
said  that  he  felt  strongly  impressed  that  there  was  something  wrong 

«. 

1 Mrs.  Luther,  of  Adelaide  Crescent,  Brighton,  has  supplied  us  with  a very  close  parallel 
to  this  form  of  impression,  in  a case  which  we  do  not  include  in  our  evidence,  since  the 
vision,  though  coinciding  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen,  may  have  been  due  to  the 
percipient’s  state  of  anxiety  about  him.  The  incident  was  related  to  Mrs.  Luther  by  her 
friend,  Miss  D.  Brooke  (since  dead),  within  a year  of  its  occurrence.  “ Suddenly  her 
attention  was  called  from  the  thoughts  of  her  young  friend,  which  filled  her  mind  at  the 
time,  by  a bright  light  shining  in  the  looking-glass.  She  thought  some  one  must  have 
entered  the  room,  but  on  looking  at  the  glass,  she  saw  in  the  midst  of  the  bright  light 
which  therein  appeared,  her  young  friend,  with  a peaceful,  happy  smile  upon  his  face.  As 
she  looked,  it  and  the  light  gradually  disappeared,  and  she  was  left  again  in  comparative 
darkness.’  See  also  cases  163  and  178  above,  and  compare  the  disc  of  light  in  case  220. 

“ HORDE  BLAND  ” CASES. 

is:] 

445 

with  the  little  boy'  in  London.  It  was  in  the  evening  that  he 
asked  me  whether  I had  received  any  news  from  my  mother  vabout 
Isidore.  I replied  that  no  letter  had  come,  and  asked  him  why  he  wanted 
to  know.  He  made  the  same  remark  as  before,  but  would  not  further 
explain  himself.  I tried  to  dispel  his  gloomy  forebodings  by  referring  to 
a letter  we  had  from  my  mother,  stating  that  Isidore  was  very  happy,  and 
was  singing  all  day  long.  My  husband  did  not  seem  pacified.  When  the 
letter  mentioning  his  illness  came,  my  husband  was  very  much  dejected,  and 
told  me  that  it  was  no  use  trying  to  make  a secret  of  it,  as  he  knew  the 
worst  had  happened.  He  said  afterwards  that  he  had  seen  a vision. 

“ A.  Keulemans.” 

The  second  apparition  in  this  case  may  be  regarded  as  a sort 
of  recrudescence  of  the  first.  (See,  however,’  Chap.  XII.,  § 6.)  With 
respect  to  this  feature  of  repetition  after  a good  many  hours  or  days, 
I may  mention  that  I have  but  one  example  of  it  in  my  collection 
of  purely*  subjective  hallucinations,  and,  except  iu  very  markedly 
pathological  cases,  it  seems  to  be  extremely  rare— rarer  than  the 
more  immediate  repetition  of  which  I spoke  in  connection  with  case 
159,  above.  It  is  perhaps  allowable  to  surmise  its  connection  with  a 
special  character  of  intensity  in  some  of  these  telepathically  produced 
impressions.  Other  telepathic  examples  are  Nos.  218  and  240. 

In  the  next  example  the  repetition  was  of  the  more  immediate 
sort,  recalling  cases  159  and  160,  above.  The  account  is  from  Mrs. 
Sherman,  of  Muskegon,  Michigan,  and  was  received  through  the  kind- 
ness of  Mr.  F.  A.  Nims,  solicitor,  of  that  city,  who  has  known  Mrs. 
Sherman  and  her  family  for  years. 

“Muskegon,  Michigan. 

“November  18th,  1885. 

(185)  “On  the  4th  of  July,  1868,  my  sister  Lizzie  and  myself  left 
Detroit  and  went  to  Saginaw,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a short  visit  with 
friends  there.  Our  train  was  due  in  Saginaw  about  7 p.m.,  but  through 
detention  did  not  arrive  there  until  between  10  and  11.  Owing  to  the 
lateness  of  the  hour  of  arrival,  we  did  not  go  to  the  residence  of  our 
friends,  but  to  the  Bancroft  House,  then  the  principal  hotel  in  that  city. 
The  weather  was  very  warm,  our  ride  had  been  very  dusty,  and  we  were 
very  , tired.  We  had  supper,  and  soon  after  retired.  My  sister  and  I 
occupied  the  same  room  and  bed.  It  was  nearly  or  quite  12  o’clock  when 
we  retired.  As  I now  recollect,  I went  immediately  to  sleep.  I was 
awakened  by  feeling  what  seemed  to  be  a hand  on  my  shoulder.  I saw  my 
brother  Stewart  standing  by  the  bedside,  and  I had  an  impression  at  the 
same  time  that  my  brother-in-law  Phillip  Howard  was  also  in  the  room. 
My  brother  said  to  me  : * Kate,  mother  wants  you  ; get  up  and  go  home.’ 
I at  once  became  very  much  excited  and  awakened  my  sister,  and  told  her 
that  I had  seen  Stewart  and  what  he  had  said,  and  that  I felt  sure  that 
mother  was  sick  or  in  trouble,  or  that  something  unusual  had  happened  to 
her.  We*  got  up  and  immmediately  after  heard  the  clock  strike  one.  There 

446  “BORDERLAND”  CASES \ [chap. 

was  bright*  moonlight  that  night,  and  all  objects  in  the  room  and  .outside 
the  windows  were  plainly  visible.  There  had  been  a menagerie  in  town 
that  day,  and  it  was  yet  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  we  could  hear  th h noises 
of  the  animals,  and  talked  about  them.  My  sister  did  not  share  in  my  alarm 
or  anxiety,  and  ridiculed  what  she  called  my  < Ghost  Story,’  and  we  soon 
retired  again.  My  mind  was  somewhat  troubled  with  what  had«occurred> 
and  I did  not  go  to  sleep  quite  so  soon  as  my  sister  did,  but  I did  go  to  sleep 
again,  and  the  air  being  somewhat  cooler,  before  going  to  sleep  I had 
pulled  the  sheet  up  over  my  neck.  While  asleep  I was  again  awakened 
by  feeling  the  sheet  pulled  down  off  me,1  and  I again  saw'  my  brother 
Stewart,, and  he  repeated  the  same  language  as  on  the  first  occasion.  At  this 
time  his  appearance  was  very  much  more  persistent  than  before,  but  his 
face  seemed  to  retire  and  gradually  fade  away/2  He  looked  pale  and  ill,  but 
at  that  time  my  concern  and  anxiety  was  on  account  of  my  mother.  1 
supposed  that  she  was  threatened  with  some  serious  - illness,  and  that  the 
appearance  had  relation  to  that.  T again  aroused  my  sister  and  told  her 
what  had  occurred,  and  we  both  got  up  and  dressed,  and  did  not  retire  again 
that  night.  I am  not  sure  that  I mentioned  the  circumstahce  to  any 
of  our  friends  that  day.  If  I did,  I am  not  in  a position  now  to  obtain  the 
verification  of  it. 

“We  returned  home  on  the  afternoon  of  Monday,  the  6th  of  July, 
arriving  there  between  6 and  7 o’clock.  We  found  our  father  and 
mother  very  much  disturbed  in  consequence  of  a telegram  which  they  had 
received  to  the  effect  that  Stewart  was  dying.  When  my  mother  com- 
municated the  news  to  us  I answered  ‘ He  is  dead  * ; for  then  the 
significance  of  what  had  occurred  at  Saginaw  first  flashed  upon  me.  It 
was  but  a very  short  time  after  this,  the  same  evening,  that  we  received 
another  telegram  giving  the  tidings  of  his  death.  My  sister  Lizzie  had 
received  a letter  from  him  but  a day  or  two  before  we  went  to  Saginaw, # 
in  which  he  promised  to  make  us  a visit  in  the  following  October,  and 
there  was  nothing  to  afford  any  ground  for  anxiety  on  his  account  in  the 
letter.  As  T have  been  since  informed,  lie  died  about  a quarter  before  1 
o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  July,  about  the  time  of  his  first 
appearance  to  me,  as  near  as  I can  ascertain. 

“ I have  a letter  from  my  sister  Lucy,  the  wife  of  Phillip  Howard,  at 
whose  house  he  died,  giving  full  particulars  of  his  death,  from  which  it 
seems  that  he  was  taken  suddenly  and  violently  ill  on  the  3rd  or  4th  of 
July,  of  what  was  supposed  to  be  yellow  fever. 

“ During  his  illness  he  talked  a great  deal  about  our  mother,  and  seemed 
in  his  delirium  to  be  watching  for  her  and  to  think  that  she  was  coming 
to  see  him.  He  died,  as  stated,  that  Sunday  morning,  and  was  buried  by 
order  of  the  authorities  on  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day. 

“ You  inquire  if  I have  ever  had  any  previous  hallucination  of  that 
kind.  I have  never  had  but  one ; that  occurred  when  I was  7 years  old. 
At  that  time  a young  girl,  a relative  and  playmate  of  mine,  was  ill  with 
some  form  of  fever.  I had  not  been  allowed  to  see  her  for  two  or  three 
days.  On  waking  one  morning,  I saw  or  dreamed  she  came,  and  kissed 
me  and  bid  me  good-bye.  This  was  before  I had  arisen.  My  mother 

1 1 need  hardly  point  out  that  this  sensation  is  no  more  a proof  of  at*  objective 
presence  than  any  other  feature  of  the  hallucination.  * 

2 Compare  p.  444,  note  ; and  see  Chap,  xii.,  § 10,  and  Yol  ii.,  p.  97,  first  note. 

.IX.]  “ BORDERLAND ” CASES.  U7 

soon  afterwards  came  into  the  room,  and  I , told  her  that  — had  come 
and  kissed  roe  and  bid  me  good-bye.  Within  a few  minutes  after  this 
some  one  of  the  family  came  from  the  house  where  the  little  girl  resided 
and  said  that  she  was  dying.  My  mother  immediately  went  over  to  the 
house,  which  was  not  far  9ff,  and  when  she  arrived  there  the  little  girl  was 
already  dead.  ^ 

, “ These  are  the  only  cases  of  what  you  call  ‘ hallucination  ’ that  have 
occurred  in  my  experience. 

“ The  occurrences  at  Saginaw  were  real,  and  I have  never  had  a doubt 
about. brother,  in  some  way  or  form,  appearing  to  and  communicating 
with  me.  „ “ Kate  Sherman.” 

Mrs.  Sherman’s  sister,  Mrs.  Park,  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

J 

• “ Muskegon,  Michigan. 

“ I have  read  the  foregoing  statement  signed  by  my  sister,  Mrs.  S., 
and  am  able  from  my  own  recollection  to  confirm  the  same,  except,  of 
course,  that  I did  not  myself  see  my  brother,  Stewart  Paris,  or  his 
apparition*  at  the  same  time  that  my  sister  did. 

“ At  the  time  of  the  occurrences  at  Saginaw,  I supposed  what  my 
sister  said  that  she  saw  to  be  a dream,  or  something  of  that  character,  and 
gave  the  matter  no  serious  thought  or  consideration  until  our  return  home 
the  nekt  day,  when  we  learned  of  our  brother’s  illness  and  death. 

“ I remember,  however*  that  what  my  sister  said  she  saw  made  a very 
strong  impression  upon  her,  and  that  she  said,  and  seemed  to  believe,  that 
some  serious  illness  or  misfortune  had  occurred  or  was  about  to  occur  to 

our  mother. 

“ Elizabeth  O.  Park.” 

Mr.  Nims  adds  that  he  had  hoped  to  get  a statement  from  Mrs.  Paris, 
mother  of  Mrs.  Sherman  and  Mrs.  Park;  but  “ while  she  remembers 
hearing  about  the  vision  on  her  daughters’  return  from  Saginaw,  she  is 
unable  to  say  whether  it  was  before  or  after  the  news  of  the  death.” 

The  next  case  is  from  Miss  Bibby,  of  Ghaceley  Lodge,  Tewkesbury. 

. ' “1883. 

(186)  “In  the  early  autumn  of  1860,  when  I was  between  19  and  20, 1 
was  staying  with  friends  who  lived  near  Rugby.  I had  gone  to  bed  and 
fallen  asleep,  and  was  awakened  by  a consciousness  of  some  one  being  irv 
the  room.  I saw,  as  I imagined,  my  grandfather  standing  at  the  foot  of  the 
bed.  He.  was  then,  as  far  as  I knew,  at  his  own  house  a few  miles  out  of 
Liverpool.  Immediately  the  figure  moved  to  the  side  of  the  bed,‘  the 
curtains  of  which  had  not  been  drawn.  The  figure  did  not,  so  far  as  I 
rthnember,  touch  either  the  bed  or  the  curtains.  The  only  remark  he 
yjtade  was  ‘ Goodnight,  Miss  Nellie,  Ma’am’ — he  was  always  in  the  habit 
of  calling  me  ‘ Nellie  ’ and  sometimes  in  fun,  ‘ Miss  Nellie,  Ma’am,’  quoting 
the  way  in  which  Irish  servants  used  to  address  my  grandmother,  after 
whom  I was  christened.  He  was  the  only  person  who  ever  called  me  * Miss 
Nellie  ’ or  ‘ Nellie,’  my  father  having *a  great  objection  to  all  pet  names, 

♦ “ I soon  fell  asleep  again,  and  next  day  mentioned  the  circumstance 
td  my  friends,  and  the  day  after  received  from  my  father  the  news  of  my 
grandfather’s  sudden  death,  about  the  time  when  he  had  appeared  to  me. 
So  littlef’did  I anticipate  such  news  that  before  I broke  the  black  seal  on 

448  “ BORDERLAND ” CASES.  [chap., 

my  father’s  letter  I exclaimed,  * Dear  me,  I fear  poor  Edward  has  gone/ 
alluding  to  my  youngest- brother  who  had  been  ailing  for  some  time.’ 

Ellen  Bibby.” 

[The  corroboration  of  the  friends  with  whom  Miss  Bibby  was  staying, 
cannot  unfortunately  be  obtained,  as  she  has  lost  sight  of  them.]  , 

C * 

The  next  account  is  from  Miss  Hosmer,  the  celebrated  sculptor. 

(187)  “An  Italian  girl  named  Rosa  was  in  my  employ  for  some  time, 
but  was  finally  obliged  to  return  home  to  her  sister  on  account  of 
confirmed  ill-health.  When  I took  my  customary  exercise  on  horseback  I 
frequently  called  to  see  her.  On  one  of  these  occasions  I called  about 
6 o’clock  p.m.,  and  found  her  brighter  than  I had  seen  her  for  some  time 
past.  I lmd  long  relinquished  hopes  of  her  recovery,  but  there  was  nothing 
in  her  appearance  that  gave  me  the  impression  of  immediate  danger.  I 
left  her  with  the  expectation  of  calling  to  see- her  again  many  times.  She 
expressed  a wish  to  have  a bottle  of  a certain  kind  of  wine,  which  I 
promised  to  bring  her  myself  next  morning. 

“ During  the  remainder  of  the  evening  I do  not  recollect  that  Rosa 
was  in  my  thoughts  after  I parted  from  her.  I retired  to  rest  in  good 
health  and  in  a quiet  frame  of  mind.  But  I woke  from  a sound  sleep  with 
an  oppressive  feeling  that  someone  was  in  the  room.  I reflected  that  no 
one  could  get  in  except  my  maid,  who  had  the  key  of  one  of  the  two  doors 
of  my  room — both  of  which  doors  were  locked.  I was  able  dimly  to 
distinguish  the  furniture  in  the  room.  My  bed  was  in  the  middle  of  the 
room  with  a screen  round  the  foot  of  it.  Thinking  someone  might  be 
behind  the  screen  1 said,  ‘ Who’s  there  ? ’ but  got  no  answer.  Just 
then  the  clock  in  the  adjoining  room  struck  5 ; and  at  that  moment  I saw 
the  figure  of  Rosa  standing  by  my  bedside ; and  in  some  way,  though  I 
could  not  venture  to  say  it  was  through  the  medium  of  speech,  the 
impression  was  conveyed  to  me  from  her  of  these  words : ‘Adessoson 
felice,  son  contenta.’  And  with  that  the  figure  vanished. 

“ At  the  breakfast  table  I said  to  the  friend  who  shared  the  apartment 
with  me,  ‘ Rosa  is  dead.’  ‘What  do  you  mean  by  that?’  she  inquired; 

‘ You  told  me  she  seemed  better  than  common  when  you  called  to  see  her 
yesterday.’  T related  the  occurrence  of  the  morning,  and  told  her  I tad  a 
strong  impression  Rosa  was  dead.  She  laughed,  and  said  I had  dreamed 
it  all.  I assured  her  I was  thoroughly  awake.  She  continued  to  jest  on 
the  subject,  and  slightly  annoyed  me  by  her  persistence  in  believing  it  a 
dream,  when  I was  perfectly  sure  of  having  been  wide  awake.  To  settle 
the  question  I summoned  a messenger,  and  sent  him  to  inquire  how  Rosa 
did.  He  returned  with  the  answer  that  she  died  that  morning  at  9 
o’clock. 

“ I was  living  in  the  Via  Babuino  at  the  time. 

“ The  above  has  been  written  out  by  Miss  Balfour,  from  the  account 
given  by  Lydia  Maria  Child  [to  whom  Miss  Hosmer  had  narrated  the 
facts]  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  September  1st,  1870,  with  corrections 
[of  a trifling  kind]  dictated  by  me,  July  15th,  1885. 

“ H.  G.  Hosmcr.” 

“ MORDAHbAhD  " CASES. 

m 

IX.] » 

The  account  given  by  Miss  Child,  which  Miss  Hosmer  pronounced 
cprrect  at  the  time,  gives  a few  more  details,  tending  to  show  that  she 
was  quite, awake  for  an  appreciable  time  before  her  vision.  “I  heard  in 
the  apartments  below  familiar  noises  of  servants  opening  windows  and 
doors.  An  old  clock,  with  ringing  vibrations,  proclaimed  the  hour.  I 
counted  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  and  resolved  to  rise  immediately.  Ajs 
I raised  *my  head  from  the  pillow,  Rosa  looked  inside  the  curtain  and 
smiled  at  me.  I was  simply  surprised,  <fcc.” 

4 [Miss  Hosmer  does  not  remember  the  exact  date  of  the  occurrence, 
but  sajrs  it  must  have  been  about  1856  or  1857.  The  old  lady  with  whom 
she  was  residing  is  dead.] 

We  received  the  following  account  from  the  Rev.  J.  Barmby,  of 
Httington  Vicarage,  Durham,  who  writes : — 

, 44  December  29th,  1884. 

(188)  “ What  follows  was  communicated  orally  to  the  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler 
Librarian  and  Hebrew  Lecturer  in  the  University  of  Durham,  by  Mr 
Clarke,  one  of  the  principal  tradesmen  in  Hull,  on  the  9th  of  October,  1872. 
Mr.  Fowler  took  notes  in  writing  of  what  Mr.  Clarke  told  him  at  the 
time,  which  notes  he  handed  to  me  in  the  same  month  / of  October.  I put 
them  into  the  following  form  after  receiving  them,  anq  have  no  doubt  of 
their  substance  and  details  being  exactly  given.  Thfc  events  related  had 
occurred  about  four  years  previously  to  Mr.  Fowler’s  interview  with  Mr. 
Clarke.” 

“Mr.  Clarke,  of  Hull,  had  known  for  twenty  years  a Mrs.  Palliser,  of  the 
same  place.  She  had  an  only  child,  a son  called  Matthew,  who  was  a sailor. 
Being  of  the  age  of  22,  he  had  sailed  from  Hull  to  New  York.  About  a 
month  after  his  departure,  Mrs.  Palliser  came  to  Mr.  (plarke  in  tears,  and 
said,  4 Oh,  Mr.  Clarke,  poor  Mat’s  drowned.’  Mr.  C . said,  4 How  have 
you  got  to  know  ? ’ She  replied,  4 He  was  drowned  last  night  going  on 
board  the  ship,  in  crossing  the  plank,  and  it  slipped ; I ,saw  him,  and  heard 
him  say,  44  Oh,  mother.”  ’ She  stated  that  she  had  been  in  bed  at  the  time, 
but* was  sure  she  was  wide  awake;  and  that  she  had  seen  also  her  own 
mother,  who  had  been  dead  many  years,  at  the  bedfoot  crying,  and 
making  some  reference  to  the  event.  Mr.  C.  said  to)  her,  4 Oh,  it’s  all 
nonsense,  I don’t  believe  anything  of  the  sort.’  She  earnestly  persisted  in 
her  conviction,  and  called  on  Mr.  C.  perhaps  half-a-dozen  times  during  the 
ensuing  week.  In  order  to  pacify  her,  he  undertook  to  write  to  the  agent 
of  her  son’s  ship  at  New  York.  This  she  had  wished  hiin  to  do,  thinking 
that  he,  as  a business  man,  would  know  better  how  to  write  than  herself. 
After  the  despatch  of  the  letter,  Mrs  P.  kept  calling  on  Mr,  C.  about  every 
week,  to  ask  if  he  had  heard  anything.  In  about  a month’s  time  a letter 
arrived  from  New  York,  addressed  to  4 Mrs.  Palliser,  care  Ipf  Mr.  Clarke/ 
It  Was  opened  by  Mr.  Clarke’s  son,  in  the  presence  of  Mrs;  Palliser,  who, 
before  it  was  opened,  said,  4 Aye,  that’ll  contain  the  news  of  his  being 
drowned/  The  letter  conveyed  the  intelligence  that  Matthew  Palliser,  of 
such  a rihip,  had  been  drowned  on  such  a night  through  the  upsetting  of  a 
plank  jas  he  was  going  aboard  the  ship.  The  night  specified  was  that  of 
Mrs.  P/s  vision.  * 

“Mr.  Olarke  described  Mrs.  Palliser  as  4 a well-educated  woman,  a very 

% f 

450 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

[CHAP* 

respectable  old  lady  who  had  seen  better  days,’  about  65  years  of  age.  She 
had,  he  said,  been  a widow  for  some  years  before  her  son  was  drowfred. 
She  was  then  living  in  a passage  leading  out  of  Blackfriars  Gate,  in  Hull. 
He  had  seen  her  ‘the  day  before  yesterday/  She  had  told  the  story 
‘ thousands  of  times/  and  it  was  well-known  in  Hull.” 

The  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler,  of  Bishop  Hatfield’s  Hall,  Durham,  writes  : — 

“ November  26th,  1884* 

“ I know  nothing  about  the  case  I mentioned  to  Mr.  Barmby  beyond 
what  I gave  him  in  writing. 

“ Mr.  Olarke,  a tradesman  in  Hull,  told  me  of  the  case  of  Mrs.  Palliser, 
and  got  her  to  come  to  his  office,  in  Queen  Street,  Hull,  for  me  to  take 
down  from  her  own  lips  the  notes  I gave  to  Mr.  Barmby.  I took  great 
pains  to  get  the  whole  of  the  story  correctly. 

tut  ™ t ..  “ J.  T.  Fowler.” 

Mr.  Clarke  writes  : — 

“ Winterton  Hall,  Doncaster. 

“January  20th,  1885. 

“ Widow  Palliser  was  a woman  who  had  seen  better  days,  and  worked 
•for  my  firm,  Clarke  and  Son,  Clothiers,  Queen  Street,  Hull.  She  had  an 
only  soil,  Matthew.  I assisted  her  in  getting  him  to  sea.  One  morning 
she  came  to  me  with  tears  rolling  down  her  cheeks  and  said,  ‘ Mat’s  dead  ; 
1 saw  him  drowned  ! Poor  Mat,  the  last  words  he  said  were,  “ Oh  ! my 
dear  mother.”  He  threw  up  his  hands  and  sank  to  rise  no  more/  I asked 
how  she  knew.  She  said,  ‘ I saw  him  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  the 
plank  that  he  walked  upon  slipped  on  one  side,  and  he  fell  overboard 
between  the  quay  and  the  ship  and  was  drowned.  My  own  mother,  who 
had  been  dead  many  years,  came  to  the  foot  of  my  bed  and  said,  “ Poor 
Mat’s  gone ; he’s  drowned.”  ’ I then  said,  4 Why,  Mat’s  in  New  York  ’ 
(I  always  felt  interested  in  this  woman  and  her  son).  4 Yes,’  she  said, 
4 he  was  drowned  last  night  at  New  York  ; I saw  him/ 

44  Mrs.  P.’s  object  in  coming  to  me  was  to  ask  if  I would  write  to  the 
agent  in  New  York  to  ascertain  the  facts.  1 said  I would,  and  wrote 
stating  that  a poor  widow  had  an  only  son  on  board  such  a ship,  and 
she  had  a vision  that  an  accident  (I  said  nothing  about  drowning) 
had  happened  to  her  son,  and  I would  take  it  as  a great  favour 
if  he  would  ascertain  and  tell  me  all  particulars.  In  about  3 to  5 
weeks  (she  came  day  by  day  to  ask  if  we  had  received  a reply,  always 
saying  that  she  knew  what  the  answer  would  be),  at  length,  the  letter 
arrived.  We  sent  for  Mrs.  P.,  and  before  the  letter  was  opened  by  my 
son,  I said  to  her,  4 What  will  be  its  contents?’  She  at  once  and  decidedly 
said  that  4 Mat  was  drowned  on  the  very  night  that  she  saw  him.  an£  in 
going  on  board  the  ship  the  plank  slipped,  and  he  fell  overboard  between  the 
quay  and  the  ship.’  So  it  was.  Mrs.  P.  was  then  wearing  mourning  for  Mat! 

44  My  son  and  half-a-dozen  young  men  can  verify  this  if  needful. 

“ Mrs-  R died  soon  after-  “ M.  W.  Clarke.” 

44  Reproduction  of  the  letter  received  from  the  agent  of  the ' ship,  as 
nearly  as  1 and  my  son  can  remember  : — 

‘“New  York,  date  unknown. 

44  4 1 have  made  inquiries  of  Matthew  Palliser,  age  about  20?  and  learn 

“ BORDERLAND  ” CASES . 

that  he  fell  off  a plank  in  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  got  drowned 
on * The  date  was  the  same  as  Mrs.  Palliser  said. 

“ ‘ The  mate  has  charge  of  his  chest,  and  will  give  it  to  his  mother 
when  the  ship  arrives  in  Liverpool/  ” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Olarke  adds : — ..  A ..  . _ _ 

# ^ “April  6th,  1885. 

“ We  have  no  copy  of  the  agent’s  letter,  but  both  my  son  and  myself 
and  others  are  certain  that  Mrs.  P.’s  vision  and  the  agent’s  account  of  the 
accidept  were  the  same , both  as  to  the  time  and  cause,  viz.,  that  Mrs.  P.  saw 
her  son  slip  off  the  plank  in  going  on  board  his  ship,  and  that  he  was 
drowned  between  the  quay  and  the  ship  ; agent’s  account  that  he  fell  off 
the  plank  and  was  drowned,  at  the  time  mentioned,  between  the  ship  and 
the  quay.  Mrs.  P.  died  soon  after  the  event,  which  in  my  opinion 
shortened  her  life.” 

[In  the  absence  of  a written  note,  we  cannot  of  course  be  perfectly 
certain  that  Mrs.  Palliser  did  not  read  back  the  details  of  the  plank  and 
the  quay  into  her  vision  after  the  arrival  of  the  news,  and  that  Mr.  Clarke 
is  right  in  his  recollection  of  having  heard  these  details  from  the  first. 
But  there  can  hardly  be  a doubt  that  the  vision  was  described  as  a very 
impressive  one  before  the  arrival  of  the  news  ; and  Mr.  Clarke’s  interest 
in  the  matter  may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  made  him  careful  in  his 
scrutiny  of  the  dates.] 

* flf  correctly  reported,  this  case  curiously  combines  a sort  of  clair- 
voyant vision1  with  a more  ordinary  apparition,  j the  figure  at  the 
foot  of  the  bed — the  latter  being  of  an  eminently  [ borderland  ” type. 
Such  dream-like  combinations  (see  pp.  425-6)  h4ve  a very  special 
bearing  on  the  connection  which  I am  seeking  td  establish  between 
sleeping  and  waking  telepathic  percepts.2  \ 

The  next  account — from  Mrs.  Woodham,  of  5,  Royal  Naval  Cottages, 
Penge — was  obtained  through  the  kindness  of  the  Hon.  Roden  Noel. 

“ June  26th,  1884. 

(189)  “ I had  in  my  service  a charwoman,  of  about  qO  years  of  age,  who 
had  served  me  faithfully  for  more  than  20  years.  Her  husband  had  been  one 
of  my  husband’s  coastguardmen,  and  on  his  death  the  poor  woman  had 
to  work  to  support  herself  and  four  children,  two  of  whom  turned  out 
badly.  I had  helped  her  as  much  as  I could  besides  employing  her,  and 
found  her  very  valuable  in  being  trustworthy,  She  regarded  me  with 
great  affection,  and  used  to  say  to  my  daughters  that  thqre  was  no  one  to 
her  like  i the  mistress/  as  she  always  called  me.  » 

,f  “ In  August  [a  mistake  for  October]  of  last  summer  I had  agreed  to 
visit  my  sister,  who  resides  in  Edinburgh,  and  having  fixed  the  day, 
a Wednesday,  had  arranged  for  Mrs.  Halahan  to  come  as  usual.  My 
son,  who  was  going  with  me,  persuaded  me  to  set  out  on  the  day  previous. 
Mrs.  H.  arrived,  expecting  to  see  me.  Strange  to  say,  she  was  very  much 
taken  aback  and  moved,  and  exclaimed,  ‘ The  mistress  gone  without  seeing 

1 See  pp.  266,  and  368-9.  - 

8 Foe  a purely  subjective  waking  hallucination  which  represented  a living  and  a dead 
]jerson,  see  p.  499,  note.  ' 

452 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES . 

[chap. 

me.*  She  went  to  my  house  as  usual  during  my  absence  (about  a month). 
One  day,  while  working  at  my  married  daughter’s  house,  she  was  taken 
suddenly  ill,  about  6 o’clock  in  the  evening— was  conveyed  home  in  a 
cab,  and  died  next  morning. 

44  Meanwhile  my  daughters  did  not  mention  to  me  the  death  of  my 
dear  servant,  but  only  that  she  was  ill,  knowing  it  would  grieve  me  ; but 
just  at  the  time  of  her  death  (10  days  before  I returned  home)  I was 
sleeping  in  the  room  with  my  sister  in  Edinburgh,  when,  in  the  dusk  of 
the  morning,  I was  awakened  by  a loud  knock,  and  saw  the  figure  of  a 
woman  in  a loose  dress,  standing  at  the  side  of  the  beef  looking 
towards  me.  I sat  up,  and  said  emphatically,  * Who  aj*e  you,  and  what 
do  you  want  ? ’ I repeated  the  question  twice,  which  awoke  my  sister, 
who  asked  who  I was  speaking  to  ? I replied,  4 To  the  woman  standing 
there.1  Immediately  the  figure  melted  away  like  a shadow.  I was  so 
impressed  with  what  I had  seen  that  I went  up  to  the  room  on  several 
successive  evenings,  wondering  whether  that  shadow-like  form  would  again 
appear,  but  it  never  came.  On  returning  home,  the  first  question  I asked 
my  daughter  was  about  my  old  servant,  as,  thinking  she  was  ill,  I wished 
to  go  to  see  her.  I was  astonished  and  grieved  at  the  news  of  her  death. 
All  at  once  the  truth  flashed  across  my  mind,  and  I exclaimed,  4 Why,  I 
saw  her  myself/  and  then  related  to  my  son  and  daughter  the  above  facts. 
My  description  was  so  clear  and  vivid  that  they  were  equally  impressed  as 
to  its  truth,  and  feel  as  sure  as  I do  of  the  occurrence  being  a fact. 

44  I never  saw  anything  of  the  sort  before,  nor  have  I or  my  family 
ever  believed  in  ghosts ; but  they  implicitly  believe  this,  knowing  that  I 
am  in  no  way  fanchfil.  I feel  sure  that  my  dear  servant  (who  was,  I find, 
speechless  for  some  hours  before  her  death)  had  me  on  her  mind.  I 
can  only  think  that  the  dusk  of  the  morning  and  the  darkness  of  the 
room  (between  5 and  6 in  the  morning,  the  hour  at  which  she  died)  pre- 
vented my  recognising  the  features,  but  I can  truly  vouch  for  the  above  facts* 

44  Eleanor  *E.  Woodham.” 

The  account  of  the  narrator’s  sister  (March  5,  1886)  is  that  Mrs. 
Woodham  awoke  her  in  the  dusk  of  the  morning  by  saying  twice,  44  Who 
are  you  ? ” and  when  asked  to  whom  she  was  speaking,  replied*  “ Don’t 
you  see  that  woman  standing  there  ? ” pointing  to  the  side  of  the  bed  ; 
then,  on  her  sister’s  remarking,  44  You  must  have  been  dreaming,  ” she 
replied,  44 1 have  been  awake  for  some  time,  and  distinctly  saw  her  there.” 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Woodham  assured  the  present  writer  that  she 
has  never  had  any  other  visual  hallucination.  The  dress  of  the 
phantasm,  so  far  as  observed,  sufficiently  corresponded  with  , Mrs. 
Halahan’s  usual  aspect ; but  the  only  at  all  distinctive  point  was  the 
covering  of  the  head — not  a cap  but  a loose  wrap  or  shawl,  ]NJrs.« 
Woodham  was  once,  when  a girl,  woke  in  the  same  way  by  a loud  knock 
which  could  not  be  traced  to  any  objective  source ; and  this  experience, 
she  says,  precisely  coincided  with  the  death  of  a relative  in  the  house;  It 
is  noteworthy  that  though  her  sister  is  a very  light  sleeper,  and  though  it 
was  very  near  her  usual  hour  of  waking,  the  loud  knock  did  not  wake  her ; 
this  is  at  any  rate  some  proof  that  it  was  hallucinatory.  Mrs.  Woodham 
is  able  to  fix  the  hour  of  her  experience,  as  she  did  not  go  to  sleepagain, 
and  the  work  of  thehousehold  began  soon  after.  Her  son  andf  daughter 

IX,]  , “BORDERLAND"  CASES . 483 

personally  confirmed  the  narrative  as  to  the  points  in  which  they  were 
concerned  j and  Miss  Woodham  remembered  that  the  hour  of  the  dentil 
was  stated  to  her  to  have  been  6 a.m.  At  my  request  she  went  to  see 
Mrs.  Halahan’s  daughter,  who  confirmed  the  faet  that  this  was* the  hour. 
Thus,  supposing  the  days  to  have  been  the  same,  the  coincidence  was 
extremely  close.  Mrs.  Woodham  is  not  certain  of  the  exact  number  of 
days  which  elapsed  between  her  experience  and  her  return  home,  but  thinks 
they  did  not  exceed  a fortnight ; and  she  did  her  best  at  the  time,  by  going 
over  the  events  of  these  intervening  days,  to  fix  the  date  of  her  vision ; but 
all  that  could  be  fixed  with  certainty  was  a very  close  approximation  with 
the  death ; which  /m  In  Memoriam  card,  copied  by  Miss  Woodham,  fixes 
as  October  23,  1883. 

The  evidential  weight  of  this  case  is  of  course  reduced,  not 
only  by  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  day  of  the  vision,  but  by  the 
fact  that  the  figure  was  not  recognised.  But  theoretically,  as  I have 
pointed  out  above  (p.  221),  the  mere  lack  of  recognition  would  not 
be  a serious  difficulty.  If,  as  we  have  seen  reason  to  think,  a telepathic 
disturbance  may  take  place  below  the  threshold  of  consciousness,  if 
its  manifestation  may  be  delayed  for  hours,  if  it  may  first  reveal 
itself  in  semi-automatic  movements,  or  in  an  idealess  cry  (as  in  case 
1 47)— there  seems  no  reason  why,  when  it  takes  more  distinct 
sensory  form,  this  form  should  not  be  itself  an  imperfect  development, 
an  embodiment  of  an  idea  that  has  only  partially  been  apprehended. 
This,  however,  will  become  clearer  in  connection  with  the  whole 
subject  of  the  development  of  telepathic  hallucinations  (Chap.  XII.). 

The  next  and  concluding  case  is  from  Mrs.  Li^htfoot,  a lady  who 
is  none  the  worse  witness  because  she  takes  not  the  slightest  interest 
jn  .our  work.  The  names  and  dates  were  filled  in  by  the  present 
writer,  immediately  after  a personal  interview,  January  30,  1884. 

' ‘*51,  Shaftesbury  Road,  Ravetiscourt  Park,  W. 

“ January  11th,  1884, 

(190)  “In  giving  the  following  experience,  I may  premise  that  as  a child, 
and  since,  I have  comparatively  had  but  little  knowledge  (as  a personal 
experience)  of  fear ; and  in  the  existence  of  ghosts1  I have  always 
disbelieved.  Did  1 ever  see  or  hear  sights  or  sounds  for  which,  on 
examination,  I could  not  account,  I have  always  come  to  the  conclusion 
thpt  they  arose  from  natural  causes  which  were  beyond  my  reach  of 
inquiry — hence  I always  refused  to  accept  anything  without  proof,  and,  I 
may  add,  that  I have  rarely  been  convinced. 

**  Some  10  years  ago,  when  in  India,  I contracted  a great  friendship, 
which,  was  reciprocated,  for  a lady,  Mrs.  Reed,  the  wife  of  an  officer.  She 
had  dot  been  very  strong,  but  when  I parted  from  her  with  the  intention, 
of  returning  to  England,  no  danger  (the  word  had  not  even  been  mentioned) 
Was  anticipated,  and  for  some  few  months  after  my  return  I heard  from 
her,  bright  and  cheerful  letters  enough.  In  them  she  certainly  spoke  of 

454 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[chjm>. 

with  a great  degree  of  pleasure.  i into  h„+  also*  for  the 

« It  was  my  practice  not  only  to  go  to  bed  very  late,  but  also  tor  the 

last  half-hour  to  pick  up  a book,  the  most  uninteresting  and * 
was  possible  to  find,  and  so  try  to  soothe  the  mmd.  The  o 
commenced  to  really  feel  sleepy  1 would  lower  toe 

point  (for  I did  not  care  to  extinguish  it,  as  I had  a child .of  3 ^ sleepmg ^n 
the  same  room),  and  then  I could  always  compose  myself  comfortably  to  a 
sleen  into  which  1 could  then  fall  in  a very  few  minutes. 

“On  the  night  of  September  21st,  1874,  I had  followed  this  exact 
routine.  1 had  put  aside  my  book,  lowered  the  gas,  and  at  a little  after 
midnight  I was  sound  asleep.  As  I knew  afterwards,  I must  have  slept 
about  3 hours,  when  1 was  suddenly  aroused  (and  was,  so  far  as  I know, 
perfectly  vide  awake)  by  a violent  noise  at  my  door,  which  was  locked.  I 
have  some  recollection  of  feeling  astonished  (of  fear  I then  had  none)  at 
amino  or  rather  hearing  within  the  instant  my  door  thrown  violently  open, 
as  though  by  someone  in  great  anger,  and  I was  instantly  conscious  that 
someone,  something,  what  shall  I call  it,  was  in  the  room.  For  the 
hundredth  part  of  a second  it  seemed  to  pause  just  within  the  room,  and 
then  by  a movement,  which  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe  but  it 
seemed  to  move  with  a rapid  pusli — it  was  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  Again 
a pause ; foe  again  the  hundredth  part  of  a second,  and  the  figure-shape 
rose.  I heard  it,  but.  as  it  got  higher  its  movements  quieted,  and  presently 
it  was  above  my  bed,  lying  horizontally,  its  face  downwards,  parallel  with 
my  face,  its  feet  to  my  feet,  but  with  a distance  of  some  3 or  4 feet 
between  us.1  This  for  a moment,  whilst  I waited  simply  in  astonishment 
and  curiosity  (for  I had  not  the  very  faintest  idea  of  either  who  or  what  it 
was),  but  no  fear,  and  then  it  spoke.  In  an  instant  I recognised  the 
voice,  the  old  familiar  imperious  way  of  speaking,  as  my  Christian  name, 
sounded  clear  and  full  through  the  room.  4 Frances/  it  repeated,  4 1 want 
you ; come  with  me.  Come  at  once.7  My  voice  responded  as  instan- 
taneously, ‘Yes,  111  come.  What  need  for  such  a hurry?7  and  then  came 
a quick  imperative  reply,  * But  you  must  come  at  once  ; come  instantly, 
and  without  a moment's  pause  or  hesitation.7  I seemed  to  be  drawn 
upwards  by  some  extraordinary  magnetic  influence,  and  then  just  a$ 
suddenly  and  violently  thrown  down  again. 

“ In  one  second  of  time  the  room  was  in  a deathly  stillness,  and  the 
words,  4 She  is  dead/  were  simply  burnt  into  my  mind.  I sat  up  in  bed 
dazed,  and  71010,  for  the  first  time,  frightened  beyond  measure.  I sat  ve%f 
still  for  a few  moments,  gradually  making  out  the  different  forms  in  the 
room,  then  I turned  the  gas,  which  was  just  above  my  head,  full  on,  only 

1 This  rather  bizarre  form  of  impression  has  a close  parallel  in  the  case  of  a ] 
subjective  experience,  described  to  us  by  Mrs.  Pirkis,  of  the  High  Elms,  Nutfield,  S 
who  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination.  She  was  one  night  sleeping  with  her  iL*—  , 
both  being  in  perfect  health— when,  suddenly  waking,  she  saw  a figure  kneeling  over  her* 
sister,  “a  foot  or  something  less  above  her,  in  reversed  position,  face  towards  the  toot  of 
the  bed.  It  was  a beautiful  picture.  I lay  watching  it,  I should  say,  for  about  4 or  5 
minutes,  till  it  melted  away  as  1 looked.”  * 

“BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

456 

to  see  that  the  room  was  totally  unchanged.  At  the  foot  of  my  bed,  at 
some  distance  from  it,  was  the  child’s  iron  cot.  I got  up  and  looked  at 
him ; he  was  sleeping  quite  peacefully,  and  had  evidently  been  totally 
undisturbed.  I went  to  the  door,  to  find  it  fast  locked . I opened  it,  and 
gazed  into  the  passage — total  silence  and  stillness  everywhere.  I went 
into  the  next  room,  where  there  were  sleeping  two  other  children  and  their 
nurse,  to  find  equal  quietness  there.  Then  I returned  to  my  room,  and  I 
must  confess  it,  with  an  awful  fear  oppressing  me.  She  had  come  once — 
might* she  not  come  again  ? I wrote  down  the  date  and  the  hour,  and 
then  opening  shutter  and  window  only  looked  out  for  the  welcome  dawn. 

“ I went  dowi^  to  breakfast  that  morning,  but  said  nothing  of  the  details 
of  my  dream,1 *  only  mentioning  that  I had  had  a very  bad  and  a very 
vivid  one.  Afterwards  I found  I could  settle  to  nothing,  and  at  last  was 
becoming  positively  so  ill  that  I was  obliged  to  go  back  to  bed.  That 
same  afternoon,  curiously  enough,  a sister  came  to  see  me,  who  had  been 
abroad  witji  me,  and  whilst  there  had  known  and  liked  this  same  friend. 
She  saw  I was  much  upset  about  something  of  which  I did  not  care  to 
speak,  and,  by  way  of  cheering  me  up,  began  telling  me  news  of  various 
mutual  friends.  At  last,  during  a slight  pause,  she  said,  1 By-the-way, 
have  you  heard  anything  lately  of  Mrs.  Reed  ? when  last  I heard  she 
was  not  very  well.’  Instantly  came  my  reply,  4 Oh,  she  is  dead/  and  it 
was  only  my  sister’s  look  of  blank  horror  and  astonishment  that  recalled 
me  to  myself.  ‘ What  do  you  mean,  when  did  you  hear  ? 9 came  from  her 
in  rapid  utterance,  and  then  I bethought  me  how  indeed  did  I hear — who 
had  told  me  ? But  tell  her  the  dream  I could  not,  so  I merely  answered, 
‘ You  will  see  that  I am  right  when  you  look  in  the  newspapers — how  I 
have  heard  of  it  I will  tell  you  some  other  time/  and  directly  I changed 
the  conversation.  The  visit  did  good,  however,  for  1 got  up  and  went  out 
with  her,  and  I can  only  say  that  the  impression  my  manner  and  words 
made  upon  her  was  so  deep  that  the  moment  she  arrived  home  she  sat 
down  and  wrote  to  a lady  in  the  West  of  England — one  who  knew  us  ally 
and  who  heard  by  every  mail  from  her  husband,  ivho  was  in  the  same 
•place  as  our  friend.  My  sister  told  her  exactly  what  I had  said, 
and  begged  that  she  would  at  once  send  her  particulars,  since  I had 
not  done  so.  By  return  came  the  reply  : — 

“ * I cannot,  dear  Lady  B.,  in  the  least  understand  your  letter,  nor 
what  your  sister  can  possibly  mean.  The  last  foreign  mail  only  came  in 
this  morning  ’ (after  the  date,  of  course,  of  my  dream),  ‘ and  so  far  from 
being  “ dead  ” my  husband  tells  me  Mrs.  Reed  is  much  better  ; therefore, 
where  Mrs.  L.  (myself)  can  have  obtained  her  news  is  beyond  my 
Comprehension,  for  it  is  quite  impossible  that  she  can  have  had  later  news 
than  mine,  in  fact,  not  so  late,  since  my  foreign  letter  Arrived  after  your 
vfsit  to  her/  [This  is  iibt  a copy,  but  a reminiscence  of  the  letter.]  * 

“ And  so  the  matter  rested,  but  within  a month  from  the  date  of  my 
dream  came  the  news  of  Mrs.  Reed’s  death,  on  September  21st. 

“ I have  but  little  now  to  add.  The  bereaved  husband  returned  to 
England  and  called  upon  me.  He  gave  me  some  details  of  the  last  days, 
and  on  my  asking  whether  he  remembered  her  last  words,  he  turned  to  me 

1 Thqagh  the  narrator  twice  uses  this  word,  she  certainly  did  not  regard  her  expert 

enee  as  a dream*  * 

456 

"BORDERLAND”  CASES. 

[oha% 

with  quite  a look  of  surprise,  and  said,  * Why,  Mrs.  Lightfoot,  * I believe 
your  name  was  the  last  she  mentioned/  Further,  it  was  many  months 
afterwards  before  my  sister  again  broached  the  subject,  but  at  last  one  day 
she  said,  1 1 do  wish  you  would  tell  me  how  you  knew  of  Mrs.  Reed  s 
death/  Of  course  I then  told  her,  and,  I may  add,  that  so  deep  was  the 
impression  produced  upon  her  that  even  in  her  last  illness,  which  occurred 
7 or  8 years  afterwards,  she  spoke  of  it.  For  myself  I never  really 
recovered  the  shock  for  a long  time,  and  even  now  the  impression  is  as* 
vivid  as  though  it  had  only  happened  yesterday.  r , • 

“Frances  W.  Lightfoot.” 

Both  the  Calcutta  Englishman  and  the  Pioneer  Mail  e( Allahabad)  give 
September  20th,  1874,  as  the  date  of  Mrs.  Reed’s  death.  Mrs.  Lightfoot 
has  unfortunately  not  kept  her  note  of  the  day  and  hour.  As  she  has  now 
no  independent  recollection  of  the  date  of  her  experience,  but  only 
remembers  the  fact  of  the  coincidence , and  as  it  is  practically  certain  that 
she  beard  the  correct  date  of  the  death,  the  20th,  which  has  sirfce  become 
converted  in  her  memory  to  the  21st,  it  seems  tolerably  safe  to  assume 
that  her  experience^  fell  on  the  night  of  the  20th,  that  is,  on  the  early 
morning  of  the  21st — not  on  the  night  of  the  21st,  as  stated  in  the 
account. 

♦ In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  the  only  occasion  on  which 
she  has  had  a sensory  hallucination  of  this  kind,  Mrs.  Lightfoot  answered 
“ Yes.”  She  adds  that  her  sister,  Lady  B.,  “ mentioned  the  matter  at  once 
to  several  friends  and  relatives.”  This  sister  has  since  died. 

[In  conversation,  Mrs.  Lightfoot  confirmed  again  the  fact  of  having  had 
no  sort  of  visual  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  She  once,  and  once 
only,  has  had  another  remarkable  auditory  experience,  when  the  sudden 
hearing  of  her  Christian  name  saved  her  from  a terrible  fall  in  the 
dark.  The  origin  of  the  sound  was  carefully  inquired  into  and  could  not 
be  ascertained. 

As  a proof  of  the  absolute  conviction  produced  in  her  that  her  friend 
was  dead,  she  told  me  that  she  had  prepared  a birthday  present  to  send 
her,  and  the  box  was  actually  soldered  up,  and  had  been  going  by  the  next 
mail ; but  she  felt  it  impossible  to  send  it. 

She  had  been  under  the  impression  that  the  time  of  death  exactly  coin- 
cided with  her  vision ; but  she  had  reckoned  difference  of  longitude  the 
wrong  way.  Mrs.  Reed’s  husband  informed  her,  on  her  inquiry,  that  the 
death  took  place  at  11,  that  is  11  p.m.  (as  she  thinks  of  September  21st, 
but  no  doubt  of  September  20th) ; and  the  vision  was  probably, 
therefore,  8 or  9 hours  after  it.  * 

My  Oppression  of  Mrs.  Lightfoot  entirely  corresponds  with  her  own 
description  of  herself — that  she  is  a practical  person,  and  without  any  so»t 
of  predisposition  to  frights  or  visions.  The  present  one  gave  her  a most 
severe  shock,  the  effects  of  which  lasted  for  some  time.] 

In  this  chapter,  various  points  of  interest  or  difficulty  have  been 
passed  over  with  very  inadequate  comment.  It  seemed  better, 
however,  not  to  forestall  the  more  complete  discussion  of  the  gelation 
of  telepathy  to  sensory  impressions,  which  will  shortly  follow. 

CHAPTER  X. 

HALLUCINATIONS  : GENERAL  SKETCH. 

§ 1.  We  are  now  approaching  the  most  important  division  of  our 
subject.  So  far  the  impressions,  possibly  or  probably  telepathic,  that 
we  have  considered,  have  been  (I)  the  non-externaliaed  sort  (chiefly 
ideal  or  emotional,  but  sometimes  with  a physical  element)  occurring 
during  the.  hours  of  normal  waking  life ; and  (2)  this  sort,  and 
also  the  externalised  t sort,  occurring  either  in  sleep  or  in  a bodily  and 
mental  state  which,  though  not  that  of  sleep,  is  yet  to  some  extent 
distinguishable  from  that  of  ordinary  waking  life.  The  class,  then, 
that  remains  to  be  considered  is  the  externalised  sort — impressions  of 
sight,  hearing,  or  touch — occurring  to  persons  who  are  quite  clearly 
wide  awake.  The  reader  will  not  now  need  to  be  told  to  what 
family  of  natural  phenomena  I am  about  to  refer  this  class.  Some- 
thing is  presented  to  the  percipient  as  apparently  an  independent 
object  (or  as  due  to  an  independent  object)  in  his  material  environ- 
•ment ; but  no  such  object  is  really  there,  and  what  is  presented  is  a 
phantasm.  Whatever  peculiarities  such  an  experience  may  present, 
there,  can  be  no  mistake  as  to  its  generic  characteristics:  it  is  a 
hallucination. 

It.  is  naturally  only  with  one  particular' species'  of  the  great  family 
of  hallucinations — the  veridical  Species  which  psychology  has  so  far 
pot  recognised — that  I am  here  directly  concerned.  But  it  is  not 
easy  to  treat  the  single  species  satisfactorily,  without  either  assuming 
or  supplying  a certain’ Amount  of  information  with  regard  to  the 
family^' to  which  it  belongs.  To  assume  this  information  would  hardly 
be. safe ; for  though  most  educated  persons  may  have  a general  idea 
wfyat  hallucinations  are,  the  idea  is  not  always  the  result  of  "very 
close,  oir  critical  study.  It4seems  better  then,  to  err,  if  at  all,  on  the 
side  of  excess,  and  to  devote  one  chapter  to  a brief  general  sketch, 
of  the  subject ?n  attempting  which  I shall  endeavour  to  avoi<£  aide 

458  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

issues,  and  to  confine  myself  to  points  that  will  aid  comprehension 
in  the  sequel. 

Is  it  possible  to  treat  Hallucinations  as  a single  class  of  pheno- 
mena, marked  out  by  definite  characteristics  ? The  popular  answer 
would  no  doubt  be  Yes — that  the  distinguishing  charactei'istic  is 
some  sort  of  false  belief.  But  this  is  an  error : in  many  of  the  best, 
known  cases  of  hallucination — that  of  Nicolai,  for  instance — the-  per- 
cipient has  held,  with  respect  to  the  figures  that  he  saw  or  the  voices- 
that  he  heard,  not  a false  but  a true  belief ; to  wit,  that  they  did  not 
correspond  to  any  external  reality.  The  only  sort  of  hallucination 
which  is  necessarily  characterised  by  false  belief  is  the  purely 
non-sensoiy  sort — as  where  a person  has  a fixed  idea  that  everyone  is- 
plotting  against  him,  or  that  he  is  being  secretly  mesmerised  from  a 
distance.  Of  hallucinations  of  the  senses,  belief  in  their  reality, 
though  a frequent,  is  by  no  means  an  essential  feature  ; a tendency  to 
deceive  is  all  that  we  can  safely  predicate  of  them. 

If  we  seek  for  some  further  quality  which  shall  be  distinctive  of 
both  sensory  and  non-sensory  hallucinations,  the  most  hopeful 
suggestion  would  seem  to  be  that  both  sorts  are  idiosyncratic  and 
unshared.  However  false  a belief  may  be,  we  do  not  call  it  a 
hallucination  if  it  has  “ been  in  the  air,”  and  has  arisen  in  a natural 
way  in  a plurality  of  minds.  This  is  just  what  an  idde  fixe  of  the- 
kind  above  mentioned  never  does  : A may  imagine  that  the  world  is 
plotting  against  him ; but  B,  if  he  spontaneously  evolves  a similar 
notion,  will  imagine  that  the  world  is  plotting  not  against  A,  but 
against  himself.  Instances,  however,  are  not  wanting  where  the  icNe ' 
fixe-  of  an  insane  person  has  gradually  infected  an  associate  ; 1 and  as 
contact  between  mind  and  mind  is,  after  all,  the  “ natural  way  ” of 
spreading  ideas,  we  can  make  no  scientific  distinction  between  these 
cases  and  those  where,  e.g.,  the  leader  of  a sect  has  instilled  delusive 
notions  into  a number  of  (technically)  sane  followers.  But  again, 
hallucinations  of  the  senses  are  also  occasionally  shared  by  several 
persons.  Most  of  the  alleged  instances  of  this  phenomenon  are,  no 
doubt,  merely  cases  of  collective  ' illusion — an  agreement  in  the 
misinterpretation  of  sensory  signs  produced  by  a real  external  object ; 

1 A distinct  description  of  folie  a deux  seems  to  have  been  first  given  in  I860,  by 
Baillarger,  in  the  Gazette  des  H6pitaux.  The  subject  was  developed  in  1873  by  Lae&gtte  and 
Falret,  in  an  essay  reprinted  in  Lasfegue’s  Etudes  MkdxcaXes . See  also  £.  O.  Seguin  ip  the 
Archives  of  Medicine  (New  York,  1879),  i.,  p.  334 ; Dr.  Marandon  de  Montyel,  in  the 
Annates  Midico-mychologiques,  6th  series,  Vol.  v.,  p.  28 ; and  G.  Lehmann  in  the  Archiv 
ftlr  Psychiatrie  (Berlin),  Yol.  xiv.,  p.  145. 

X.] 

HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH. 

45& 

but  wide  inquiries  have  brought  to  light  a certain  number  of 
instances  which  I regard  as  genuine  and  spoptaneous  collective 
hallucination#.  If  then  sensory  and  non-sensory  hallucinations  agree 
in  being  as  a rule  unshared,  they  agree  also  in  presenting  marked 
exceptions  to  the  rule — exceptions  easy  to  account  for  in  the  latter 
class,  and  peculiarly  difficult  .in  the  former.  The  conclusion  does 
not  seem  favourable  to  our  chance  of  obtaining  a neat  general 
definition  which  will  embrace  the  two ; and  in  abandoning  the  search 
for  one,  I can  only  point,  with  envy,  to  the  convenient  way  in  which 
French  writers  are  enabled  not  to  combine  but  to  keep  them  apart, 
,by  appropriating  to  the  non-sensory  species  the  words  dilire  and 
conception  dilirante. 

Let  us  then  try  to  fix  the  character  of  hallucination#  of  the 
senses  independently.  The  most  comprehensive  view  is  that  all  our 
instinctive  judgments  of  visual,  auditory  and  tactile  phenomena  are 
hallucinations,  inasmuch  as  what  is  really  nothing  more  than  an 
affection  of  ourselves  is  instantly  interpreted  by  us  as  an  external 
object.  In  immediate  perception,  what  we  thus  objectify  is  present 
sensation ; in  mental  pictures,  what  we  objectify  is  remembered  or 
represented  sensation.  This  is  the  view  which  has  been  worked  out 
very  ingeniously,  and  for  psychological  purposes  very  effectively,  by 
M.  Taine ; 1 but  it  is  bettor  adapted  to  a general  theory  of  sensation 
than  to  a theory  of  hallucinations  as  such.  To  adopt  it  here  would 
drive  us  to  describe  the  diseased  Nicolai — when  he  saw  phantoms  in 
the  room,  but  had  his  mind  specially  directed  to  the  fact  that  they 
were  internally  caused — as  lees  hallucinated  than  a healthy  person  in 
the  unreflective  exercise  of  normal  vision.  I prefer  to  keep  to  the 
ordinary  language  which  would  describe  Nicolai’s  phantoms  as  the 
real  specific  case  of  hallucination.  And  I should  consider  their 
distinctive  characteristic  to  be  something  quite  apart  from  the 
question  whether  or  not  they  were  actually  mistaken  for  real  figures 
— namely,  their  marked  resemblance  to  real  figures,  and  the  conse- 
quent necessity  for  the  exercise  of  memory  and  reflection  to  prevent 
so  mistaking  them.  The  definition  of  a sensory  hallucination  would 
thus  be  a percept  which  lacks,  hut  which  can  only  by  distinct  reflec- 
tion be  recognised  as  lacking,  the  objective  basis  which  it  suggests. 2 

* fit  V Intelligence,  Vol.  i,,  p.  408,  &e. 

Objective  basis  is  to  be  taken  as  a short  way  of  naming  the  possibility  of  being  shared 
by  aty  persons  with  nonnal  senses.  But  in  that  case,  now  far  will  the  definition  fairly 
allow  for  collective  hallucinations  ? This  question  will  be  considered  in  Chap%  xviii.  X may 
mention  that,  owing  to  the  special  difficulties  which  collective  hallucinations  present,  I 
have  nbt  fncluded  them  in  the  statistics  given  above,  pp.  392-3,  and  below,  pp.  503, 5X0. 

460  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

It  may  be  objected  that  this  definition  would  include  illusions.  The 
objection  could  be  obviated  at  a cost  of  a little  clumsiness ; but  it 
seems  sufficient  to  observe  that  illusions  are  merely  the  sprinkling, 
of  fragments  of  genuine  hallucination  on  a background  .of  true 
perception.  And  the  definition  seems  otherwise  satisfactory.  For 
while  it  clearly  separates  hallucinations  from  true,  perception,  it 
equally  clearly  separates  them  from  the  phenomena  with  which  they 
have  been  frequently  identified — the  remembered  images  or"  mental 
pictures  which  are  not  perceptions  at  all.  It  servgs,  for  instance, 
to  distinguish,  on  the  lines  of  common  sense  and  common  language, 
between  the  images  of  “ day-dreams  ” and  those  of  nighf-dreams.  In 
both  cases  vivid  images  arise,  to  which  no  objective  reality 
corresponds ; and  in  neither  case  is  any  distinct  process  of  reflection 
* applied'  to  the  discovery  of  this  fact.  But  the  self-evoked  waking- 
vision  is  excluded  from  the  class  of  hallucinations,  as  above  defined, 
by  the  point  that  its  lack  of  objective  basis  can  be  and  is  recognised 
vnthout  any  such  process  of  reflection.  We  have  not,  like  Nicolai, 
to  consider  and  remember,  before  we  can  decide  that  the  friends 
whose  faces  we  picture  are  not  really  in  the  room.  We  feel  that  our 
mind  is  active  and  not  merely  receptive — that  it  is  the  mind’s  eye 
and  not  the  bodily  sense  which  is  at  work,  and  that  the  mind  can 
evoke,  transfigure,  and  banish  its  own  creatures ; without  attending 
to  this  fact,  we  have  it  as  part  of  our  whole  conscious  state.  Dreams 
of  the  sensory  sort  on  the  other  hand  are  pure  cases  of  hallucination, 
forcing  themselves  on  us  whether  we  will  or  no,  and  with  an  impres- 
sion of  objective  reality  which  is  uncontradicted  by  any  knowledge, 
reflective  or  instinctive,  that  they  are  the  creatures  of  our  brain. 

But,  though  the  definition  may  be  sufficient  for  mere  purposes  of 
classification,  it  takes  us  but  a very  little  way  towards  understanding 
the  real  nature  of  the  phenomena.  It  says  nothing  of  their  origin ; 
and,  though  it  distinguishes  them  from  mere  normal  acts  of 
imagination  or  memory,  it  leaves  quite  undetermined  the  faculty  or 
faculties  actually  concerned  in  them.  And  when  we  pass  on  to  these 
further  points,  we  find  ourselves  in  a most  perplexed  field,  where 
doctors  seem  to  be  as  much  at  variance  as  philosophers.  , The  debate, 
most  ardently  carried  on  in  France,  has  produced  a multitude  of 
views; but  not  one  of  the  rival  theorists  seems  ever  to  have  convinced 
any  of  the  others.  The  contradictions  might  even  seem  to  lie  in,  the 
facts  themselves;  for  what  single  guiding,  clue  shall  be  found  tp 
phenomena  of  which  some  occur  only  in  the  light,  others ' only  in  the 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENS  UAL  SKETCH. 

.*•3 

m 

dark ; s6rae  are  connected  with  hyperesthesia  of  the  senses,  others 
with  blindness  and  deafness ; some  are  developed,  others  dispersed, 
by  fixity  of  gaze ; some  are  promoted  by  silence  and  solitude,  others 
by  the  stir  of  the  streets ; some  are  clearly  relevant,  others  as  clearly 
irrelevant,  to  the  percipient’s  mental  pid  moral  characteristics  ? Still 
progress  has  been  made,  to  this  extent  at  any  rate,  that  it  is  now 
comparatively  easy  to  see  where  the  disputed  points  lie,  and  to  attack 
them  with  precision. 

| 2.  It  was,  of  course,  evident  from  the  first  that  there  was  a 
certain  duality  of  nature  in  hallucinations.  In  popular  language, 
the  mind  and  the  sense  were  .both  plainly  involved:  the  halluci- 
nated person  not  only  imagined  such  and  such  a thing,  but 
imagined  that  he  mw  such  and  such  a thing.  But  the  attempts 
at  analysing  the  ideational  and  the  sensory  elements  have  too 
often  been  of  a very  crude  sort ; the  state  of  hallucination  has  been 
represented  as  one  in  which  ideas  and  memories — while  remaining 
ideas  and  memories  and  not  sensations  — owing  to  exceptional 
vividness  took  on  the  character  of  sensations.  . By  the  older  writers, 
especially,  it  was  not  realised  or  remembered  that  sensations  have 
no  existence  except  as  mental  facts ; and  that,  so  far  as  a mental 
fact  takes  on  the  character  of  a sensation,  it  is  a sensation.  This  was 
clearly  stated,  as  a matter  of  personal  experience,  by  Burdach  and 
Muller ; in  the  French  discussions,  the  merit  of  bringing  out  the  point 
with  new  force  and  emphasis  belongs  to  Baillarger.1  He  showed 

• 1 In  the  long  and  rather  barren  debates  which  took  place  in  the  Socittt  Medico- 
psychologique  during  1855  and  1856,  Baillarger,  no  doubt,  insisted  too  strongly  on  an 
absolute  gulf  between  percepts  (true  or  false)  and  the  ordinary  images  of  fancy  or  memory. 
But  his  opponents  made  a far  more  serious  mistake  in  so  far  identifying  the  two  as  not  to 
petceive  a difference  of  kind,  at  the  point  where  the  sensory  element  in  the  mental  fact 
reaches  such  abnormal  strength  as  to  suggest  the  real  presence  of  the  object.  Griesiager’s 
statement  (Die  Pathologic  und  Thcrapie  der  Psychuehen  Krankheiten , p.  91),  and  Wundt’s 
(OrundzUge  der  Physiologischen  Psychologies  Vol.  ii.,  p.  353)  seem  too  unguarded  in  the  same 
respect.  In  a case  which  I have  received,  a child  of  four  stopped  in  her  play,  looked  intently 
at  the  wall,  then  “ ran  to  it,  crying  out  i My  mother,*  threw  her  little  arms  as  if  it  were 
round  a person,  saying  again,  *My  mother,’  and  seemed  wonderfully  surprised  at  the 
rfact  that  there  was  no  substance  to  clasp.”  A child  of  four  does  not  throw  its  arms 
round  a memory.  Nicolai’s  case  is  here  very  instructive.  He  experimented  on  himself, 
add  found  that  however  vividly  he  pictured  in  his  mind  the  persons  of  his  acquaintance, 
He  could  never  succeed  in  externalising  them  in  such  a way  as  to  make  them  the 
least  comparable  to  his  phantoms ; and  his  testimony  on  this  point  is  the  strongest 
ixi  that  his  particular  phantoms  cannot  have  been  of  the  most  vivid  sort,  since  he 
was,  always  able  to  distinguish  them  from  realities . Even  more  distinct  mental 
images — the  result  of  a rarer  visualising  power— may  fall  far  short  of  hallucination. 
Raphael,  who  saw  his  “Transfiguration  ” In  the  air,  Talma,  who  asserted  that  he  worked 
himself  into  the  necessary  state  of  excitement  on  the  stage  by  peopling  the  theatre  with 
skeletons,  are  not  recorded  to  have  ever  really  localised  their  images  as  objects  here 
concealed  the  walls  and  the  furniture.  It  is  worth  noting  that  probably  no  recollected 
visual  itqage  was  ever  so  absolutely  and  flawlessly  correct  as  a good  musician’s  silent 

vocation  of  music^ either  by  memory  or  by  reading  of  the  noted  symbols;  but  even  he 
is  far  from  mistaking  his  vivid  silent  impression  for  actual  sonority.  I may  add  that  as 

462 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap.. 

that  when  the  hallucinated  person  says  “ I see  so  and  so,”  ‘‘1  hear  so 
and  so,”  the  words  are  literally  true.  If  the  person  goes  on  to  say 
“ You  ought  also  to  see  or  hear  it,”  he  is  of  course  wrong ; but  when 
he  says  that  he  sees  or  hears  it,  his  statement  is  to  be  taken  without 
reserve.  To  him,  the  experience  is  not  something  like  or  reflated  to 
the  experience  of  perceiving  a real  external  object : it  is  identical 
with  that  experience. 1 To  the  psychology  of  our  day  this  may  seem  a 
tolerably  evident  truth.  Still  it  is  easy  to  realise  the  difficulty  that 
was  long  felt  in  admitting  that  any  experience  that  * wag  dissociated 
from  the  normal  functions  of  the  sense-organs  could  be  completely 
sensory  in  character.  Popular  thought  fails  to  see  that  the  physical 
question  which  for  practical  purposes  is  all-important — whether  the 
object  is  or  is  not  really  there — is  psychically  irrelevant ; and  a man 
who  has  been  staring  at  the  sun  will,  as  a rule,  think  it  less  accurate 
to  say  that  he  sees  a luminous  disc  wherever  he  looks  than  to  say  that 
lie  fancier  it.  The  best  corrective  to  such  a prejudice  is-  the  following 
experiment  of  Fechner’s. 

Two  small  slits  arc  made  in  a shutter,  and  one  of  them  is  filled 

with  a piece  of  red  glass.  The  opposite  wall  is  therefore  lit  by  a 

mixture  of  white  and  red  light.  A stick  is  now  placed  across  the  red 

slit ; its  shadow  is  of  course  cast  on  the  wall ; and  the  part  of  the  wall 

occupied  by  the  shadow,  though  illuminated  only  by  white  rays  from 

the  other  slit,  appears — owing  to  the  optical  law  of  contrast — a bright 

green.  Let  this  shadow  now  be  looked  at  through  a narrow  tube, 

which  prevents  any  part  of  the  wall  external  to  the  shadow  from 

being  seen.  Nothing  red  is  now  in  the  spectator’s  view,  so  that  there 

can  be  no  effect  of  contrast : the  red  glass  may  even  be  removed ; 

none  but  white  rays  are  passing  to  his  eye  from  the  shadow  ; yet  its 

colour  remains  green.  And  in  this  case  the  chances  are  that,  unless 

previously  warned,  he  will  tell  the  exact  truth ; he  will  admit,  and 

even  persist,  that  what  he  sees  is  green.  He  will  scout  the  idea  that 

the  green  is  a mere  memory  of  what  he  saw  before  he  applied  th«v 

tube ; he  will  assert  that  it  is  presented  to  him  as  an  immediate  fact. 

• 

longagoas  1832  the  late  Dr.  Symonds,  of  Bristol,  drew  exactly  the  right  distinction 
between  images  and  hallucinations.  (Lecture  reprinted  in  Miscellanies,  p.  241.)  It  is 
■curious  to  find  the  same  line  drawn  in  the  earliest  really  scientific  attempt  to  degl  with 
the  subject  that  I have  met  with— the  dissertation  against  Hobbes  and  Spinoza  in 
Falck’s  fie  ficemonologid  recentiorum  Autorum  (1692) ; but  Falck  still  thinks  that 
hallucinations  are  a mode  in  which  daemons  sometimes  manifest  their  presence. 

1 It  may  even  be  superior  in  distinctness  to  the  percept  of  a real  object ; as  when 
a short-sighted  person  who,  during  the  hypnotic  trance,  nad  been  impressed  with  a halluci- 
nation representing  horsemen  at  some  distance,  saw  them  clearly,  and  remarked  on  this 
peculiarity.  (Richet,  V Homme  et  V Intelligence,  p.  234.)  See  also  Mr.  Schofield’s ‘'case,  and 
the  remarks  on  it,  Chap.  xiv..  § 3. 

X.]  HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH.  463 

And  su6k  is  assuredly  the  state  of  the  case ; but  it  is  a state  which, 
from  the  moment  that  he  has  put  the  tube  toi  his  eye,  is  kept  up 
purely  as  a hallucination,  and  without  regard  to  the  facts  of  the 
external  world.  The  delusion  is  of  course  instantly  dispelled  by  the 
removal  of  the  tube — when  he  perceives  that  the  only  light  in  the 
room  is  white,  and  that  the  shadow  is  grey ; but  for  all  that  he  will 
probably  never  doubt  again  that  a genuine  hallucination  of  the  senses 
is  something  more  than  mere  fancy.” 

It"  is  impossible  to  be.  too  particular  on  this  point ; for  high 
authorities,  even  in  the  present  day,  are  found  to  contest  it.  When 
a person  who  habitually  speaks  the  truth,  and  who  is  not  colour- 
blind, looks  at  an  object  and  says,  “ My  sensation  is  green,”  they 
contradict  him,  and  tell  him  that  however  much  he  sees  green,  his 
sensation  is  grey.  Whether  this  be  a mere  misuse  of  language,  or  (as 
it  seems  to  me)  a misconception  of  facts,  it  at  any  rate  renders 
impossible  any  agreement  as  to  the  theory  of  hallucinations.  For  it 
ignores  the  very  point  of  Baillarger’s  contention — that  images 
sufficiently  vivid  to  be  confounded  with  sensory  percepts  have  become 
sensory  percepts. 

When  once  the  truth  of  this  contention  is  perceived,  it  is  also 
perceived  that  the  previous  speculations  had  been  largely  directed  to 
•a  wrong  issue ; and  that  the  dual  character  of  a false  perception  is 
after  all  no  other  than  that  of  a true  perception.  A hallucination, 
like  an  ordinary  percept,  is  composed  of  present  sensations,  and  of 
images  which  are  the  relics  of  past  sensations.  If  I see  the  figure  of 
a,  man,  then — alike  if  there  be  a man  there  and  if  there  be  no  man 
there — my  experience  consists  of  certain  visual  sensations,  com- 
ppunded  with  a variety  of  muscular  and  tactile  images,  which 
represent  to  me  properties  of  resistance,  weight,  and  distance;  and 
also  with  more  remote  and  complex  images,  which  enable  me  to  refer 
the  object  to  the  class  man,  and  to  compare  this  specimen  of  the 
class  with  others  whose  appearance  I can  recall.  If  Baillarger"  did 
* pot  carry  out  his  view  of  hallucinations  to  this  length,  the  whole 
development  exists  by  implication  in  the  term  by  which  he  described 
them — j psycho-sensorial . The  particular  word  was  perhaps  an 

unfortunate  one ; since  it  suggests  (as  M.  Binet  has  recently  pointed 
out l)  that  the  psychical  element  is  related  to  the  sensorial  somewhat 
as  the  soul  to,-the  body ; and  so,  either  that  psychical  events  are 
independent  of  physical  conditions,  or  that  sensations  are  not  psychical 

9 

1 Mevue  PhilosophiQueiot  April,  1884,  p.  393. 

464  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH . [chap. 

events.  Ideo-aenaational  would  avoid  this  difficulty;  but  the 
obverse  term  which  M.  Binet  proposes — cerebrosensorial — is  on  the 
whole  to  be  preferred.  For  this  brings  us  at  once  to  the  physical 
ground  where  alone  the  next  part  of  the  inquiry  can  be  profitably 
pursued — the  inquiry  into  origin.  From  the  standpoint  of, to-day, 
one  readily  perceives  how  much  more  definite  and  tangible  the 
problems  were  certain  to  become,  as  soon  as  they  were  translated  into 
physiological  terms.  So  far  as  the  controversy  had  been  conducted 
on  a purely  psychological  basis,  it  had  been  singularly  barren.  In 
the  vague  unlocalised  use,  “ the  senses  ” and  other  ever-recurring 
terms  become  sources  of  dread  to  the  reader.  But  as  soon  as  it  is 
asked,  where  is  the  local  seat  of  the  abnormal  occurrence  ? and  on 
what  particular  physical  conditions  does  it  depend  ? — lines  of 
experiment  and  observation  at  once  suggest  themselves,  and  the 
phenomena  fall  into  distinct  groups. 

§ 3.  In  its  first  form,  the  question  is  one  between  central  and 
peripheral  origin.  Do  hallucinations  originate  in  the  brain — in  the 
central  mechanism  of  perception?  or  in  some  immediate  condition 
of  the  eye,  or  of  the  ear,  or  of  other  parts  ? or  is  there  possibly  some 
joint  mode  of  origin  ? 

For  a long  time  the  hypothesis  of  an  exclusively  central  origin 
was  much  in  the  ascendant.  But  this  was  greatly  because — as  already 
noted — Esquirol  and  the  older  writers  did  not  recognise  the  sensory 
element  as  truly  and  literally  sensation,  but  regarded  the  whole 
experience  as  simply  a very  vivid  idea  or  memory.  If  the  central 
origin  is  to  be  established,  it  must  be  by  something  better  than 
arbitrary  psychological  distinctions.  Hibbert  and  Ferriar,  going  to 
the  other  extreme,  contended  that  the  memory  was  a retinal  one ; if 
a man  sees  what  is  not.  there,  they  held,  it  can  only  be  by  a direct 
recrudescence  of  past  feeling  in  his  retina.  “ But,”  urged  Esquirol, 
“ the  blind  can  have  hallucinations  of  vision ; the  deaf  can  have 
hallucinations  of  hearing ; how  can  these  originate  in  the  peripheral'0 
organs  ? ” The  obvious  answer,  that  this  did  not  necessarily  throat 
the  point  of  origin  back  as  far  as  the  cerebrum,  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  forthcoming ; and  the  opposite  party  preferred  to  fall  back 
on  definite  experiment.  They  pointed  out,  for  instance,  that  visdal 
hallucinations  often  vanish  when  the  eyes  are  closed ; or  that  they  may 
be  doubled  by  pressing  one  eyeball.  There  was  not  enough  here, 
however,  to  show  that  the  external  organs  so  much  as  participated  in 

HALL XfClN A TIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH. 

465 

*3 

the  process,  much1  less  that  they  originated  it,  even  in  these 
particular  cases  5 while  for  other  cases  the  observations  did  not 
hold.  The  fact  that  external  objects  are  hidden  from  new  by  the 
interposition  of  our  own  eyelids  or  any  other  opaque  obstacle,  has 
become* to  us  a piece  of  absolutely  instinctive  knowledge;  and  we 
should  surely  expect  that  an  object  which  was  but  the  spontaneous 
projection  of  a morbid  brain,  might  still  be  suppressed  by  movements 
and  sensations  which  had  for  a lifetime  been  intimately  associated 
with  the  suppression  of  objects.  And  as  for  the  doubling  by  pressure 
of  one  eyeball,  it  might  ^fairly  have  been  represented  as  telling 
ngai^t  the  ’ theory  of  retinal  origin.  For  the  impression — not 
coming  from  without — would  cover  the  same  retinal  spot  after  the 
displacement  of  the  eyeball  as  before ; and  the  natural  hypothesis 
seems  certainly  to  be  that  retinal  identity  would,  in  its  mental  effect, 
overpower  the  sensation  of  the  moved  eyeball’s  position.1 

An  immense  advance  was  made  by  Baillarger,  who  maintained 
the  central  origin  by  really  scientific  arguments.  He  pointed  out  (1) 
that  the  external  organ  may  often  be  affected  by  local  irritants — 
inflammation,  blows,  pressure,  galvanism — without  the  production  of 
any  mt>re  pronounced  fonn  of  hallucination  than  flashes,  or  hum- 
mings;  that  is  to  say,  the  peripheral  stimulation  sometimes  fails  to 
develop  hallucination,  even  under  the  most  favourable  conditions ; (2) 
that  there  is  a frequent  correspondence  of  hallucinations  of  different 
senses — a man  who  sees  the  devil  also  hears  his  voice,  and  smells 
sulphur — and  that  it  is  impossible  to  refer  this  correspondence  to 
abnormalities  of  the  eye,  ear  and  nose,  occurring  by  accident  at  the 
same  moment ; (3)  that  hallucinations  often  refer  to  dominant  ideas — 
a religious  monomaniac  will  see  imaginary  saints  and  angels,  not 
imaginary  trees  and  houses.  Hence,  argued  Baillarger,  “ the  point 
of  departure  of  hallucinations  ” is  always  “ the  intelligence  ” — the 
imagination  and  memory — which  sets  the  sensory  machineiy  in 
motion.2  He  naively  admitted  that  how  this  action  of  an  immaterial 
principle  on  the  physical  apparatus  takes  place  passes  all  conception ; 
but  it  might  be  forgiven  to  a medical  man,  writing  forty  years  ago,  if 

# \ The  obliteration  by  closure  of  the  eyes  is  certainly  not  invariable.  See,  e,g:,  Dr* 

• Voisjn,  Lecons  CUniques  sur  les  Maladies  Mentalcs , p.  72.  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Hersohel,  in  his 
Fammar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  p.  406,  has  described  some  hallucinations  of  his 
. own,  of  which  #<  the  impression  was  very  strong — equally  so  with  the  eyes  open  or  dosed/* 
As  regards  the  failure  of  lateral  pressure  to  double  the  image,  I do  not  know  whether  any 
clear  case  has  been  recorded.  Brewster,  indeed,  speaks  of  the  immobility  of  the  image 
when  the  eyeball  is  displaced ; but  he  made  no  sufficient  distinction  between  actual 
hallucinations  and  mental  pictures ; while  he  had  an  odd  notion  that  even  the  latter  were 
“ painted  # on  the  retina.  ( Letters  of  Natural  Magic , 1868,  p.  181.) 

a Baillarger,  Des  hallucinations,  pp.  426,  469,  470. 

2 a 

466  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  : [chak 

he  had  not  fully  realised  “ brain  as  an  organ  of  mind,”  and.so  did  hot 
see  that  what  he  took  for  a special  puzzle  in  the  theory  of-  hallucina- 
tions, is  simply  the  fundamental  puzzle  involved  in  every  mental  act. 
Passing  him  this,  we  may  say  that  his  treatment  of  the  question 
entitles  him  to  the  credit  of  the  second  great  discovery  about 
hallucinations.  He  had  already  made  clear  their  genuinely  sensory 
quality ; he  now  made  equally  clear  the  fact  that  the  mind  (or  its 
physical  correlate)  is  their  creator — that  they  are  brain^products 
projected  from  within  outwards.  , 

This  is  a most  important  truth ; but  it  is  very  far  from  b'eing  the 
whole  truth.  Baillarger  saw  no  via  media  between  the  . theory 
which  he  rejected — that  the  nerves  of  sense  convey  to  the  brain 
impressions  which  are  there  perceived  as  the  phantasmal  object — and 
the  theory  which, he  propounded,  that  “ the  intelligence  ” for  us, 
the  brain,  as  the  seat  of  memories  and  images)  of  its  own  accord 
and  without  any  impulse  from  the  periphery,  excites  the  sensory 
apparatus.  It  seems  never  to  have  struck  him  that  there  may  be 
cases  where  the  sense-organ  supplies  the  excitant,  though  the  brain 
supplies  the  construction — that  irritation  passing  from  without 
inwards  may  be  a means  of  setting  in  motion  the  constructive 
activity.  He  took  into  account  certain  states  of  the  organ — e.g., 
fatigue  produced  by  previous  exercise — as  increasing  the  susceptibility 
to  excitation  from  “ the  intelligence,”  and  so  as  conditions  favourable 
to  hallucination ; but  he  got  no  further. 

The  facts  of  hallucination  absolutely  refuse  to  lend  themselves  to 
this  indiscriminate  treatment.  Following  the  path  of  experiment, 
we  are  almost  immediately  confronted  with  two  classes  of  phenomena, 
and  two  modes  of  excitation.  We  need  not  go,  indeed,  beyond  the 
elementary  instances  already  mentioned.  Fechner’s  experiment, 
where  green  was  seen  by  an  eye  on  which  only  white  rays  were 
falling,  fairly  illustrates  Baillarger’s  doctrine — the  green  being 
produced  not  by  an  outer  affection  of  the  eye,  but  by  an  inner 
affection  of  the  brain.  But  in  the  case  of  a person  who  has  been 
staring  at  the  sun,  the  “ after-image  ” or  hallucination  can  be  clearly 
traced  to  a continuing  local  effect  in  that  small  area  of  the  retina 
which  has  just  been  abnormally  excited ; and  it  will  continue  to 
present  itself  wherever  the  eye  may  turn,  until  rest  has  restored  this 
area  to  its  normal  condition.  A still  simpler  form  of  change  in  the 
external  organ  is  a blow  on  the  eye ; and  the  resulting  “sparks”  are 
genuine  though  embryonic  hallucinations. 

x'] 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH. 

467 

Such  cases  as  these  last  are,  however,  hardly  typical ; for  in  them 
the  hrain  is  not  truly  creative;  it  merely  gives  the  inevitable  response 
to  the  stimuli. that  reach  it  from  below.  They  are,  moreover,  normal 
experiences,  in  the  sense  that  they  would  occur  similarly  to  all 
persons  .with  normal  eyes.  Let  us  then  take  another  instance,  where 
the  mind’s  creative  rdle  is  fully  apparent,  while  at  the  same  time  the 
primary  excitation  is  clearly  not  central.  Certain  hallucinations — as 
is  well  known — are  unilateral,  i.e.,  are  perceived  when  (say)  the 
right  eye  or  ear.is  acting,  but  cease  when  that  action  is  obstructed, 
though  the  left  eye  or  ear  is  still  free.  Now  this  in  itself  could  not 
be  taken,  as  some  take  it,1  for  a proof  that  the  exciting  cause  was 
not  central ; it  might  be  a lesion  affecting  one  side  of  the  brain. 
But  very  commonly,  in  these  cases,  a distinct  lesion  is  found  in  the 
particular  eye  or  ear  on  whose  activity  the  hallucination  depends.2 
It  is  then  natural  to  conclude  that  the  hallucination  was  the  result 
of  the  lesion,  and  that  the  one-sidedness  of  the  one  depended  on  the 
one-sidedness  of  the  other ; and  the  justice  of  the  conclusion  has  been 
proved  in  many  cases  by  the  fact  that  the  hallucination  has  ceased 
when  the  local  lesion  has  been  cured.  Other  cases  which  strongly 
suggest  a morbid  condition  of  the  external  organ  are  those  where  the 
imaginaxy  figure  moves  in  accordance  with  the  movements  of  the  eye. 
The  visual  hallucinations  of  the  blind,  and  the  auditory  hallucinations 
of  the  deaf,  would  also  reasonably  be  referred  to  the  same  class — the 
seat  of  excitation  being  then,  not  necessarily  the  external  organ  itself, 
but  some  point  on  the  nervous  path  from  the  organ  to  the  brain. 
In, the  case,  for  instance,  of  a partly-atrophied  nerve,  the  morbid 
excitation  would  be  at  the  most  external  point  where  vital 
function  continued.3  It  should  be  noted,  in  passing,  that  a distinct 
lesion,  e.g.,  atrophy  of  the  globe,  of  one  eye  may  give  rise,  to 
hallucinations  of  the  sound  eye 4 — the  sight  of  which  then  receives, 

1 Dr.  R4gis  in  L'Enciphale,  1881,  p.  61 ; Prof.  Ball  in  L'Enciphale,  1882,  p.  5. 

• Dr.  R4gis  in  L'Enciphale,  1881,  p.  46 ; Dr.  Voisin  in  the  Bulletin  Giniral  de  Thira- 

jSeutiaue,  December  16, 1868,  and  Op.  cit.,  p.  68,  &c. ; Dr.  Despine,  Psychologic  NatureUe, 
V ol.  n.,  p.  29 ; Krafft-Ebing,  Die  Sinnesdelirien,  p.  25 ; Dr.  Koppe’s  paper  on  “ Gehors- 
stqj-ungen  und  Psy chosen,”  in  the  Allgemeinc  Zcitschrijt  fur  Psychiatric,  Vol.  xxiv.,  pp.  18- 
28  and  39-46.  1 : 

* Delusions  due  to  visceral  disturbances  are  often  quoted  as  cases  of  hallucination 
excited  from  parts  below  the  brain.  Thus  a woman  dying  of  peritonitis  declares  that  an 
ecclesiastical  conclave  is  being  held  inside  her  (Esquirol,  Maladies  Mentales,  Vol.  L, 
p.  211).  But  here  there  is  a prior  and  independent  basis  of  distinct  sensation ; so  that  the 
experience  would  at  most  be  an  illusion.  And  it  is  hardly  even  that ; for  one  cannot  say 
that  dte  false  object  is  sensorially  presented  at  all ; no  one  knows  what  a conclave  in  sum 
a lucidity  would  actually  feel  like ; the  conclave  is  merely  a Mire— an  imagination 
suggested  by  sensation,  but  which  does  not  itself  take  a sensory  form. 

4 Vienna  Asylum  Report,  1868,  cited  by  Griesinger,  Op.  cit.,  p.  88. 

2 « 2 

468  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap.. 

so  to  speak,  the  rebound  of  the  central  disturbance  initiated  by 
its  fellow. 

§ 4.  But  we  may  now  proceed  a step  further.  The:  excitation 
may  be  external  not  only  in  the  sense  of  coming  from  the  pxtemal 
organ,  but  in  the  sense  of  coming  from  the  external  world . It 
may  be  due  not  to  any  abnormality  of  the  eye  or  the  nerve,  but 
to  the  ordinary  stimulus  of  light-rays  from  real  objects.'  Some 
interesting  evidence  on  this  point  has  been  lately  described  by  M. 
Binet.1  His  experiments  were  conducted  on  five  hysterical  'young 
women  at  the  Salpetriere,  who,  when  hypnotised,  could  be  made  to 
see  anything  that  was  suggested  to  them ; and  also  on  an  insane 
patient  at  St.  Anne,  who  had  a standing  visual  hallucination  of  her 
own.  The  results  confirmed  the  rule  first  enunciated  by  M.  F6r4 — 
that  “ the  imaginary  object  is  perceived  under  the  same  conditions  as 
a real  one  ” ; and  to  this  M.  Binet  adds  the  further  conclusion,  that  a 
sensation  derived  from  a real  external  source,  occupying  the  same 
position  in  space  as  the  imaginary  object  seemed  to  occupy,  was  an 
indispensable  factor  of  the  hallucination.  Space  fails  me  to  describe 
the  results  in  detail.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  a prism  applied  to 
one  eye  doubled  the  imaginary  object ; 2 that  a spy-glass  removed 
or  approximated  it  according  as  the  object-glass  or  eye-piece  was 
applied  to  the  patient’s  eye  ; that  a mirror  reflected  the  object  and 
gave  a symmetrical  image  of  it ; and  that  the  optical  effect,  as  regards 
angles  of  deviation  and  reflexion  and  all  the.  details  of  the  deception, 
was  in  every  case  precisely  what  it  would  have  been  had  the  object 
been  real  • instead  of  imaginary.  Here  then  we  seem  fairly  driven 
outside  the  patient’s  own  organism ; the  conclusion  is  almost 
irresistible  that  some  point  of  external  space  at  or  near  the  seat 
of  the  imagined  object  plays  a real  part  in  the  phenomenon.  To  this 
point  M.  Binet  gives  the  name  of  point  de  replre  ; and  he  regards 
it  as  producing  a nucleus  of  sensation  to  which  the  hallucination 
accretes  itself.  When  the  point  de  replre  is  in  such  a position  as 
to  be  reflected  by  the  mirror,  then  the  imaginary  object  is  reflected, 
and  not  otherwise ; the  object  is,  so  to  speak,  attached  to  its  point  de 
reph'e,  and  will  follow  the  course  of  any  optical  mutations  to  which 
its  sensory  nucleus  is  subjected.3 

1 In  the  Revue  Philoeophique , April  and  May,  1884. 

2 This  observation  was  first  made  by  M.  F&4 ; see  Le  Progris  MtdiccU,  1881,  p.  1041. 

3 The  full  explanation  of  these  phenomena  .seems  to  be  as  follows.  If1  the  point  de 
reprire  is  not  at,  but  close  to  the  spot  where  the  imaginary  object  appears  (as  seems  to 

x.]  , HALLUCINATION®:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  469 

, In  these  caseB,  it  will  be  seen,  the  experience  was  really  a sort  of 
monstrous  illusion — totally  different,  however,  - from  ordinary  mis- 
interpretations of  sensory  impressions ; for  we  must  beware  of  con- 
founding the  excitation  that  comes  from  the  point  de  repfae  with 
the  .sensory  element  of  the  hallucination  itself.  The  former  is  an 
unnoticed-  peg  for  the  percept  j the  latter  is  its  very  fulness  and 
substance,  and  is  entirely  imposed  or  evoked  by  the  brain,  not  supplied 
, to  it.  The  type  is  too  interesting  to  pass  over : at  the  same  time, 
I am  bound  to, say  that  it  seems  to  be  extremely  rare.  I have 
made  ’many  endeavours  to  obtain  the  prism-effects  with  hypnotised 
(but  -not  hysterical)  “ subjects  ” ; but  I have  never  succeeded, 
except  when  some  conspicuous  real  object  had  first  been  put 
under  the  instrument, ' and  the  idea  of  doubling  had  thus  been 
prominently  suggested.1  Professor  Bernheim,  of  Nancy,  tells  me 

have  been  the  case  in  some  of  the  experiments),  there  is  no  difficulty.  The  point  de 
repire  is  then  itself  part  of  what  is  all  along  perceived  ; and  in  any  effects  produced  on  it 
by  optical  apparatus,  it  will  carry  the  neighbouring  object  with  it  by  association . If, 
however,  tne  actual  area  covered  by  the  object  is  sufficiently  distinguished  from  its 
surroundings  to  act  itself  as  point  de  reptre,  and  no  other  possible  points  de  rep&re  exist  hi 
the  field  of  vision,  the  case  is  different,  but  can  still  be  explained.  It  will  not  be 
disputed  that  a slightly  longer  time  is  necessary  for  the  formation  of  the  image  of 
a suggested,  object  and  the  conversion  of  this  image  into  a percept,  than  for  the 
experience  of  sensation  from  an  object  actually  before  the  eyes.  When,  therefore,  the 
operator  points  to  a particular  place  on  the  white  table-cloth,  and  says,  ‘‘There  is  a 
brown  butterfly,  ” we  may  supjiose  that  in  the  patient’s  consciousness  a real  sensation  of 
white  precedes #by  an  instant  the  imposed  sensation  of  brown.  So  when  the  card-board 
on  which  a non-existent  portrait  has  just  been  seen  is  again  brought  before  the  patient’s 
eyes,  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  recognition  of  it  as  the  same  piece  of  white  card-board 
(known  by  its  points  de  rep&re)  precedes  by  an  instant  the  hallucinatory  process  and  the 
re-imposition  of  the  portrait.  That  there  is  this  instant  of  true  sensation  seems  to  be 
shown,  indeed,  by  one  of  M.  Binet’s  experiments.  The  patient  having  been  made  to  see 
an  imaginary  portrait  on  a blank  piece  of  card-board,  this  was  suddenly  covered  by  a 
. sheet  of  paper.  The  patient  said  that  the  portrait  disappeared  for  a moment , but  then 
reappeared  on  the  paper  with  complete  distinctness.  We  may  thus  fairly  conclude  that 
an  area  which  was  actually  seen  before  the  hallucination  was  induced  in  the  first  instance, 
will  also  be  actually  seen  for  a moment  when  vision  is  redirected  to  it  (or  its  reflection), 
after  the  optical  apparatus  has  been  brought  into  play.  During  that  moment,  it  will,  of 
course,  be  seen  under  the  new  illusive  optical  conditions ; and  association  may  again 
cause  the  object  which  supplants  it  to  follow  suit.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  t0( 
suppose  that  the  supplanted  area  continues  further  to  provoke  the  hallucination,  in  the 
same  sense  that  the  white  rays  provoked  the  green  percept  in  Fechner’s  experiment.  The 
rays  which  are  lost  to  consciousness  continue  to  excite  the  sensorium  physically ; and 
this  physical  excitation  will  have  definite  peculiarities,  corresponding  to  the  distinguishing 
,<*narks  of  the  area  whence  it  comes.  Double  this  excitation  by  a prism,  or  reflect  it  from 
another  quarter,  and  the  percept  which  it  provokes  may  naturally  be  doubled  or  seen  in 
the  new  direction.  So,  if  both  eyes  were  employed  in  Fechner’s  experiment  (p.  462), 
ntight  the  gTeen  percept  be  artificially  doubled. 

1 In  this  connection;  I may  quote  the  following  spontaneous  case— -where  the 
imagination  of  the  percipient  may  probably  have  been  adequate  to  conjure  up  the 
reflected  figure.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Adrian  Stokes,  M.R.C.S.,  of  16,  Howell  Itoad, 
St.  David**,  Exeter. 

“When  I was  living  in  Bedford  Street  North,  Liverpool,  in  the  year  1857 (I  think),  my 
wife  roused  me  from  sleep  suddenly  and  said,  1 Oh  ! Adrian,  there’s  Agnes ! * I started  up, 
crying,  * Where  ? Where  ? ’ but,  of  course,  there  was  no  Agnes.  My  wife  then  told  me 
that  die  had  awoke,  and  had  seen  the  form  of  her  only  sister.  Agnes,  sitting  on  the 
ottqman  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  On  seeing  this  form  she  felt  frightened  5 but  then, 
recalling  her  courage,  she  thought  if  the  figure  were  real  she  would  be  able  to  see  it 

470  HALLUCINATION'S : GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap.. 

that  he  has  also  made  repeated  trials,  and  has  never  confirmed 
the  results  of  the  SalpStri&re.  And  one  further  reservation  must  be 
made.  It  is  just  conceivable  that  the  changes  wrought  on  the 
imaginary  percept  were  due,  not  to  the  optical  instruments,  but  to 
thought-transference.  For  M.  Binet  and  his  assistants  Ofi  course., 
knew  themselves,  in  each  case,  the  particular  optical  effect  to  be 
expected.  An  experimenter  who  has  not  expressly  recognised  the 
reality  of  thought-transference  would  never  think  of  so  arranging 
his  experiment  that  he  himself  should  not  know,  till  after  the  result, 
which  instrument  was  in  use  or  what  was  its  position ; nor  indeed  is 
it  easy  to  imagine  how  such  a condition  could  in  practice  be  f&rried 
out.  We  have  reason,  moreover,  to  think  that  the  hypnotic  rapport, 
Which  enables  the  operator  to  impose  a hallucination  on  the 
“ subject,”  is  a condition  decidedly  favourable  to  telepathic  influence. 
The  point  seems  worth  suggesting,  if  only  because  thought-trans- 
ference is  a possibility  which  will  assuredly  need  to  be  taken  into 
account  at  many  points,  in  that  wide  investigation  of  hysterical 
conditions  which  is  assuming  so  much  prominence  in  France.  It 
would  be  most  interesting  if  a state  of  hallucination  turned  out  to 
be  one  in  which  the  “ subject  ” is  specially  susceptible  to  “ transferred 
impressions.” 

§ 5.  But  in  any  case,  imaginary  objects  which  are  projected  on  a 
convenient  flat  surface  form  a very  outlying  class.  For  the  common* 
run  of  visual  hallucinations,  even  of  those  seen  in  good  light,  we 
cannot  assume  the  necessity  of  any  objective  points  de  rep&re,* or* 
any  definite  external  stimulation  of  the  retina.1  On  the  contrary, 

reflected  in  the  mirror  of  the  wardrobe,  which  she  had  in  full  view  as  she  lay  in  bed. 
Directing  her  eyes,  therefore,  to  the  mirror,  there  she  saw,  by  the  light  of  the  fire  that  was 
burning  brightly  in  the  prate,  the  full  reflection  of  the  form  seated  on  the  ottoman,  looking 
at  a bunch  of  keys  which  she  appeared  to  hold  in  her  hand.  Under  the  startling  effect 
caused  by  this  sight,  she  called  me  to  look  at  it,  but,  before  I was  awake,  the  form  and  its 
reflection  had  vanished.  It  was  not  a dream,  my  wife  is  certain. 

“When  my  wife  sawher  sister  sitting  at  the  foot  of  our  bed  looking  at  the  bunch  of  keysy 
she  (the  sister)  was  clad  in  the  ordinary  indoor  dress  of  the  time.  I remember  the  start 
of  surprise  with  which  I awoke  ana  exclaimed.  My  wife  has  never,  that  I know  of, 
experienced  any  hallucination  or  delirium  ; and  is  a woman  of  excellent  sense  and  judg- 
ment. She  never  saw  any  other  vision  but  that  one.” 

1 It  should  be  observed  that  light  may  favour,  and  darkness  hinder,  the  projection  of  a 
phantasm,  owing  to  the  different  effect  of  the  one  and  the  other  on  th & general  physiological 
state.  The  presence  of  light  might  thus  be  a necessity,  quite  apart  from  any 
distinguishable  points  de  rephre ; and  this  may  apply  not  only  to  a crucial  case — as, 
>frhere  Prof  essor  Bernheim  made  a hypnotic  “ subject  ’see  a phantom-balloon  in  a cloudless 
blue  sky— but  to  the  common  type  of  hallucinations  which  cease  when  the  room  is 
darkened.  In  the  same  way  the  presence  of  light  is  occasionally  found,  to  be 
a condition  of  auditory  hallucinations.  (Ball,  Lemons  sur  les  Maladies  * Mentalcs, 
p.  116.)  See  also  the  very  interesting  case  given  by  Professor  F.  Jolly  in  the 

x.]  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  471 

they  have  every  appearance  of  being  centrally  initiated,  as  well  as 
centrally  constructed.  For  instance,  it  is  quite  ,-as  easy  to  make  the 
patient  see  objects  in  free  space — say,  out  in  the  middle  of  the  room ; 
and  such  is  the  common  form  of  spontaneous  hallucination,  both  of 
.sane  and  insane  persons,  where  human  figures  are  seen.  The  eyes 
are  then  focussed,  not  on  the  real  objects  from  which  points  de  rep&re 
woulfl  have  to  be  supplied,  but  on  the  figure  itself ; which  may 
be  much  nearer  than  the  wall  behind  it  and  may  thus  require  a 
very  different'  adjustment  of  the  eyes.  For  eyes  adjusted  to  the 
imaginary  object,  the  real  objects  behind,  though  in  the  line  of  sight, 
may  be  quite  outside  the  range  of  clear  vision ; and  we  can  scarcely 
suppose  points  de  rep&re  to  excite  a percept  whose  position  is  such 
that,  for  it  to  be  visible,  they  themselves  must  cease  to  be  so.  And 
the  difficulty  of  regarding  external  points  of  excitation  as  a necessary 
condition  becomes  even  greater  when  the  hallucination  is  a moving 
one.  I refer  not  to  the  cases  where  the  imaginary  figure  follows  the 
movements  of  the  eye,  owing  to  some  morbid  affection  of  that  organ 
which  acts  as  a real  moving  substratum  for  it,  but  to  those  where  the 
eye  follows  the  figure  in  its  seemingly  independent  course.  Here  we 
should  have  to  assume  that  the  point  de  repere  keeps  changing ; 
that  is,  as  the  imaginary  figure  passes  along  the  side  of  the  room,  in 
front  of  a multitude  of  different  objects — pictures,  paper,  furniture, 
&c. — the  very  various  excitations  from  these  several  objects  act  in 
turn  as  the  basis  of  the  same  delusive  image.  There  seem  no  grounds 
for  such  an  assumption.  What  is  there  to  produce  or  to  guide  the 
. selection  of  ever-new  points  de  repkre  ? To  what  external  cause 
could  we  ascribe  the  perpetual  substitution  of  one  of  them  for 
another  ? On  the  view  that  the  figure  may  be  centrally  initiated, 
no  less  than  centrally  constructed,  none  of  these  difficulties  occur. 
Such  a figure  may  just  as  well  appear  in  the  empty  centre  of  the 
room  as  on  a piece  of  card-board,  and  may  just  as  well  move  as  stand 
still.  Stronger  still  are  cases  where  the  hallucination  is  not  in  the 
line  of  vision.  Dr.  Charcot  has  noted  a curious  form  of  unilateral 
hallucination,  which  occurs  sometimes  to  hysterical  patients  with 

Archiv  fUr  Psychiatric,  Vol.  iv.,  p.  495.  His  paper  is  on  the  production  of  auditory 
, hallucinations  by  the  application  of  an  electric  current  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ear. 
In  one  case,  he  shows  good  reason  for  attributing  the  hallucination,  not  to  a stimulation  of 
the  auditory  nerve,  but  to  a transference  to  the  auditory  centre  of  the  stimulus  given  to 
fibres  of  ths  fifth  nerve.  For  the  subjective  sounds  aid  not,  as  in  all  the  other  cases, 
correspond  in  a regular  way  to  the  opening  and  closing  of  the  current,  but  appeared  under 
all  conditions  in  which  pain  was  produced!  See  also  Koppe  (Op.  cit .,  p.  54)  on  the  same 
subject* 

4*72  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

normal  eyes,  on  the  side  on  which  they  are  hemiaruftsthetic — 
animals,  passing  rapidly  in  a row  from  behind  forwards,  which 
usually  disappear  when  the  eyes  are  turned  directly  them.1 
Anpther  type  where  the  hallucination  passes  out  of  the  range  of 
direct  vision  is  presented  by  Bayle’s  case,  where  a spider  used,  first  to 
appear  life-size,  and  then  gradually  to  expand  till  it  filled  the  whole 
room.2  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel  describes  an  analogous  experience  of  his 
own.  The  same  sort  of  argument  applies  to  hallucinations  where  a 
figure  appears  repeatedly,  but  only  in  one  place,  while  still  not  an 
illusion  due  to  any  real  feature  in  the  place — as  in  the  case  of  a patient 
of  Morel’s,8  who  always  saw  a headless  man  at  the  bottom  of  the 
garden,  or  of  an  informant  of  my  own  whose  phantasmal  visitant 
confined  itself  to  a particular  bed ; and  also  where  the  percipient  is 
haunted  by  a figure  which  can  be  seen  only  in  one  direction,  as  in 
Baillarger’s  case  of  a doctor  who  could  not  turn  without  finding  a 
little  black  cow  at  his  side.4  The  mind  may  locate  its  puppet  accord- 
ing to  its  own  vagaries  ; and  this  last  experience  is  very  like  a sensory 
embodiment  of  the  well-known  delusion  that  somebody  is  always 
behind  one. 

We  find,  however,  our  clearest  examples  of  the  central  initiation  of 
hallucinations,  when  we  turn  to  cases  where  excitation  from  the 
outer  world  is  plainly  absent.  This  class  includes  phantasms  seen  in 
complete  darkness,5  and  also  hallucinations  of  pain,  and  probably  the 

1 Le  Progris  Medical,  1878,  p.  38.  It  is  probable  that  an  attentive  regard  is  a 
condition  for  the  establishment  of  points  de  rcptre.  In  the  case  of  M,  Binet’s  “ subjects,” 
a certain  peculiarity  in  the  fixed  regard,  which  might  act  in  this  way,  is  strongly 
suggested  by  the  following  fact.  In  some  cases,  after  a screen  had  been  interposed 
between  the  patient’s  eyes  and  the  imaginary  object,  she  continued  to  see  not  only  that 
object  (say,  a mouse),  but  a real  object  (say,  a hat)  on  which  it  had  been  placed.  Thus  th© 
hat  assumed  the  pro^rty— shared  by  the  imaginary  mouse,  but  unshared  by  any  other 
real  objects— of  remaining  as  a percept  in  spite  of  an  opaque  barrier.  Kahlbaum  describes 
a patient  who  saw  the  form  of  his  deceased  child  only  when  he  fixed  his  eyes  steadily  on  a 
point.  (“  Die  Sinnesdelirien  ” in  the  Allgemeine  Zeitschrift  fiir  Psychiatric  Vol.  xxiii,  p.  7.; 
and  see  also  below,  p.  493,  second  sentence.  But  in  the  general  run  of  spontaneous 
hallucinations,  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  regal'd  has  any  of  this  exceptional 
intentness. 

2 Revue  Medicate , 1825,  Vol.  i.,  p.  34. 

J Trait?  des  Maladies  Men  tales,  p.  357, 

4 Baillarger,  Des  Hallucinations,  p.  312  Ball,  Lerons  sur  les  Maladies  Mentales,  p.  73, 

8 Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel  mentions  that  some  of  his  own  hallucinations  could  be  seen 
with  open  eyes  only  if  the  darkness  was  complete.  {Op.  cit .,  p.  407.)  Some  of  Nicolai’s 
visions  could  only  be  seen  when  the  eyes  were  shut ; ana  this  was  also  a feature  of  a very 
interesting  case  recorded  by  Dr.  Pick  (in  the  Vienna  Jahrbuch  /Hr  Psychiatric  for  1880, 
Vol.  ii.,  p.  50),  where  nevertheless  the  figures  seen  gave  an  impression  of  complete  exter- 
nality. and  were  often  addressed  by  the  patient.  Schfile  records  a similar  instance. 
[Hanabuch  der  Gei steskran khti te n , p.  128.)  In  the  Gazette  Mtdicale  de  Paris  for  March  21, 
1885  Professors  Bernheim  and  Cnarpentier  describe  some  experiments  made  in  a dark 
room,  where— points  de  rcplre  being  necessarily  absent — the  visual  hallucination*  of 
hypnotic  “ subjects  ” proved  not  to  be  modifiable  by  optical  instruments  in  fch^ttuy  above 
described. 

x.]  HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH  473 

large  majority  of  auditory  hallucinations,  which  have  so  far  been 
disregarded.  Here  the  alternative  is  simple.  * The  initiation  must 
either  occur  in  the  brain,  or  be  due  to  some  morbid  or  abnormal 
condition  of  the  outer  sensory  apparatus.  We  have  already  duly 
noted  the  lat'ter  mode  as  a frequent  one.  But  the  fact  that  certain 
hallucinations  have  been  undoubtedly  due  to  injury  of  the  external 
organ  does  not  establish,  or  even  strongly  suggest,  the  existence  of  a 
similar 'condition  in  cases  where  it  defies  detection.1  As  a rule, 
where  the  abnormal  condition  has  been  made  out,  hallucinations 
have  not  been  its  only  result.  The  ulceration  of  the  cornea  which 
initiates  visual  hallucinations  has  begun  by  affecting  the  vision  of 
real  objects.  Illusions,  or  false  perceptions  of  colour,  usually  precede 
the  appearance  of  more  distinct  phantasms.2  So,  in  cases  of  more 
transient  abnormality-'— such  as  the'  illusions  hypnagogiques 
mentioned  in  the  last  chapter — other  signs  precede  the  hallucination. 
The  obseiyer,  whose  eyes  are  heavy  with  sleep,  begins  by  seeing 
luminous  points  and  streaks,  which  shift  and  change  in  remarkable 
ways ; and  it  is  from  these  as  nuclei  that  the  subsequent  pictures 
develop.  Similarly  one  of  the  seers  of.  “ Faces  in  the  Dark  ” (St. 
James's  Gazette,  February  10th,  15th,  and  20th,  1882)  described  the 
frequent  vision  of  a shower  of  golden  spangles,  which  changed  into  a 
flock  of  sheep.  Now,  since  our  physiological  knowledge  leaves  no 
doubt  that  the  points,  streaks  and  spangles  are  due  to  the  condition 
of  the  retina,  it  is  safe  in  such  cases  to  conclude  that  this  condition 
has  initiated  the  hallucination.  But  it  is  not  equally  safe  to  conclude 
that  the  process  must  be  the  same  for  cases  where  the  points,  streaks 
and  spangles  are  absent.  I do  not  forget  that  even  a normal  eye  is 
subject  to  affections  which  escape  attention  until  a special  effort 
is  made  to  realise  them.  But  wherever  the  hallucination  can  be 
gradually  traced  in  its  development  from  more  rudimentary  sensations, 
these  last  seem  to  be  very  distinct  and  exceptional  things,  unknown  in 
ordinary  experience.  Moreover,  the  vision  itself  is  commonly  of 
a changing  kind — the  features  developing  rapidly  out  of  one  another ; 
Often  also  of  a smarming  kind — detailed  landscapes,  elaborate  kaleido- 
scopic patterns,  showers  of  flowers,  lines  of  writing  on  a luminous 

• i For  statements  of  the.opposite  view  see  (as  well  as  M.  Binet’s  papers  above  referred 
tfo)  professor  Ball,  in  L'Encephale,  1882,  p.  6.,  and  Maladies  Mentalet,  p.  Ill,  &e. ; and 
the  classical  paper  of  Dr.  Regis  on  unilateral  hallucinations,  L’Eneiphale,  1881,  p.  44. 

* Dr!  Max  Simon  in  the  Lyon  Midieal,  Vol.  xxxv.,  p.  438 ; Voisin,  Op.  eit.,  p.  70. 

474 

HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH  [cha?. 

ground,  and  so  on.^  Now,  compare  such  experiences  with  ordinary 
cases  of  “ ghost-seeing  ” in  the  dark.  A man  wakes  in  the  night,  $jid 
sees  a luminous  figure  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  Here  the  hallucination 
comes  suddenly,  single  and  complete,  to  a person  whose  eyes  are  open 
and  unfatigued ; it  is  not  preceded  by  any  peculiar  affection  of  vision, 
is  not  developed  out  of  anything,  and  does  not  move,  or  swarm,  or 
develop  fresh  features  ; nor  does  it  fulfil  the  test  of  hallucinations  due 
to  the  state  of  the  external  organ,  by  moving  as  the  eye  "moves.2 

* Galton,  Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty , pp.  159-1G3  ; Maury,  Le  Sommeil  et  let  IlSves, 
p.  331.  Probably  the  first  clear  description  of  these  phenomena  is  that  given  by  Yair, 
Bishop  of  Pozzuolo,  DcFascino  Libri  tres  (Venice,  1589),  p.  112.  The  following  eases — 
the  first  from  Mrs.  Willert,  of  Headington  Hill,  Oxford,  the  second  sent  to  us  by  the 
Rev.  *T.  A.  Macdonald,  of  Manchester,  in  the  words  of  his  wife — are  as  good  specimens 
as  could  be  found.  Mrs.  Willert  wrote  on  Dec.  20,  1883 

“ The  pictures  I see  generally  appear  at  night  before  going  to  sleep,  always  in  complete 
darkness,  and  I believe  usually  when  I am  rather  tired.  I can  see  them  with  my  eyes  open, 
but  the  colours  are  much  less  brilliant  than  when  my  eyes  are  shut.  I am  quite  conscious  at 
the  time  of  the  unreality  of  the  scenes — indeed,  they  seem  to  be  very  much  like  the  constantly 
changing  slides  of  a magic  lantern,  and  I should  say  of  the  same  size  ; when  they 
disap]>ear  everything  is  black  again.  I see  all  kinds  of  things,  generally  in  quick  succes- 
sion ; never,  however,  blending  into  one  another.  I can  never  recall  the  same  picture 
however  much  I try.  I see  landscapes,  interiors  and  exteriors  of  houses,  &c.,  and  single 
objects,  such  as  flowers,  books,  boots,  feathers,  pots,  &c.,  &c.,  and  sometimes  figures — of 
which,  however,  I can  never  distinguish  the  faces.  Once  or  twice  I have  seen  a little 
scene  enacted.  I remember  one  distinctly.  I saw  a man  in  the  dress  of  the  last  century 
riding  down  a lane.  As  he  came  forward,  two  men,  also  on  horseback,  rushed  out  on  him 
from  behind  some  trees  and  knocked  him  down.  I longed  to  know  the  end  of  this  little 
story,  but  it  disappeared.  I am  never  conscious  that  the  things  I see  have  any  connection 
with  what  I have  been  thinking  of,  nor  do  I ever  remember  to  have  recognised  a place  I 
know  amongst  the  many  landscapes  I see.” 

Mr.  Willert  tells  me  that  his  wife  can  always  narrate  these  visions  as  they  pass,  and 
is  certainly  wide  awake  at  the  time. 

Mrs.  Macdonald  says : — 

“ For  many  years  I have  been  accustomed  to  see  multitudes  of  faces  as  I lie  awake 
m bed,  generally  before  falling  asleep  at  night,  after  waking  up  in  the  morning,  or  if 
I should  wake  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  They  seem  to  come  up  out  of  the  darkness, 
as  a mist,  and  rapidly  develop  into  sharp  delineation,  assuming  roundness,  vividness, 
and  living  reality.  Then  they  fade  off  only  to  give  place  to  others,  which  subceed 
with  surprising  rapidity  and  m enormous  multitudes.  Formerly  the  faces  were  wonder- 
fully  ugly.  They  were  human,  but  resembling  animals,  yet  such  animals  as  have  no 
fellows  m the  creation,  diabolical-looking  things.  So  curiously  and  monstrously 
frightful  were  they  that  1 cannot  conceive  whence  they  could  have  come  if  not  from 
the  infernal  world.  I could  not,  certainly,  at  other  times,  by  any  voluntary  effort  of 
imagination,  conjure  up  anything  even  remotely  approaching  their  frightfulness.  Latterly 
the  facets  have  become  exquisitely  beautiful.  Forms  and  features  of  faultless  perfection 
now  succeed  each  other  in  infinite  variety  and  number.” 

1 will  add  one  more  experience,  which  would,  I think,  be  specially  hard  to  refer  to  the  . 
Licht-tiauh  of  the  eye,  inasmuch  as  it  had  an  obvious  cause  of  another  sort.  A.friend 
wrote  to  me  on  Sep.  21),  1885 : — 

“ Between  sleeping  and  waking  this  morning,  I i>erceived  a dog  running  about  ink 
field  (an  ideal  white-and-tan  sporting  dog,  ‘bred  out  of  the  Spartan  kind,’  &c.),  and  the 
next  moment  heard  a dog  barking  outside  the  window.  Keeping  my  closed  eyes  on  the 
vision,  I found  that  it  came  and  went  with  the,  barking  of  the  dog  outside ; getting  fainter, 
however,  each  time.” 

2 M.  Binet  treats  all  “ ghost-seers  ” as  so  paralysed  with  terror  that  they  do  not  move 
their  eyes  from  the  figure — which  leaves  it  open  to  him  to  guess  that  the  figure  would 
move  if  their  eyes  moved.  Brewster  (Natural  Magic , p.  130)  had  the  same  idea/  To 
Wundt,  also,  stationary  hallucinations  that  can  be  looked  away  from  seem  unknown  as 
a distinct  and  fairly  common  type,  and  he  inclines  to  regard  them  as  meredllusipns. 
Brewster’s  own  case  of  Mrs.  A.,  and  the  well-known  cases  given  by  Paterson  (Edinburgh 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  - 

475 

.*] 

St£ch  visions  are  commonly  explained — and  often,  no  doubt,  with 
justice — as  due  to  nervousness  or  expectancy.  But  nervousness  and 
expectancy  act  by  exciting  the  mind,  not  by  congesting  the  retina ; 
they  work  on  the  imagination,  and  their  physical  seat  is  not  in  the. 
eye,  bwt  in  the  brain.  We  should  conclude,  then,  that  the  brain 
initiates  the  hallucination;  and  that  nocturnal  visions,  which  vary 
so  greatly  both  in  themselves  and  in  the  general  conditions  of 
their  appearance,  vary  also  in  their  seat  of  origin. 

The  auditory  cases  are  even  plainer.  For  here  the  hypothesis  of 
points  de  replre  seemsquite  out  of  the  question.  It  has  never  been 
observed  that  the  hallucinations  occur  when -the  attention  is  being 
fixed  on  particular  external  sounds,  or  begin  or  cease  synchronously 
with  the  beginning  or  cessation  of  such  sounds : in  fact  silence  seems 
to  be  a specially  favourable  condition  for  them.  The  only  alternative, 
therefore,  to  supposing  them  to  be  centrally  initiated,  is  to  suppose 
some  abnormality  in  the  external  organ  itself.  Such  an  abnormality 
has  often  been  detected;  and  even  when  not  absolutely  detected, 
it  may  sometimes  be  inferred  from  other  symptoms.  Thus,  an 
enlarged  carotid  canal,  or  a stoppage  which  produces  an  unwonted 
pressure  on  the  vessels,  will  first  make  itself  felt  by  hummings  and 
buzzings ; hallucination  then  sets  in,  and  imaginary  voices  are  heard, 
which  we  should  naturally  trace  to  the  local  irritation  that  produced 
the  former  sounds.1  But  the  analogy  is  not  obvious  between  these 

Medical  and  Surgical  Journal , January,  1843)  would  alone  suffice,  I think,  to  refute  this 
view.  See  also  Kandinsky’s  and  Schroder  van  der  Kolk’s  experiences  (Archiv  fiir 
Psychiatric , 1881,  p.  461,  and  De  Pathologic  en  Therapie  der  Krankzinnigkeid , p*  27). 
I nave  in  my  possession  a good  many  examples  where  the  imaginary  figure  has  been 
looked  away  from  and  back  to  again.  («ee,  for  instance,  Mr.  Turner’s  case,  quoted  below, 
p.  491.)  Tne  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham  tells  us  of  three  occasions,  during  the  autumn 
of  1883,  on  which  he  saw  and  recognised  in  church  the  figures  of  persons  who  proved 
not  to  have  been  there.  In  two  of  the  three  cases  the  figure  thus  seen  had  peculiarities 
which  made  it  quite  unmistakeable,  and  was  observed  in  the  same  place  more  than 
once  during  the  service,  just  as  any  real  member  of  the  congregation  might  have  been. 
The  third  case  is  this : — 

“I  went,  as  usual,  to  the  school,  about  a quarter-of-an-hour  before  service,  and  either 
spoke  or  nodded  to  all  the  teachers  present.  I particularly  noticed  one  in  whom  I am 
much  interested,  sitting  with  her  class,  nodded  to  her,  and  she  smiled  back  again.  Subse- 
quently, in  church,  I,  noticed  her  again,  and  counted  her  (I  always  count  my 
congregations)  twice  over : once,  when  I counted  the  entire  number  present ; once,  when 
(counted  children  and  adults  separately.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  the  girl  had  not 
been  present.  I think  I was  never  so  surprised  in  my  life.  I made  several  inquiries, 
but  there  was  no  mistake.  She  had  been  detained  at  home,  much  to  her  vexation  and 
annoyance,  during  the  whole  afternoon  on  which  I had  seen  her  in  two  different  places, 
ahd  had  had  my  eye  upon  her,  practically,  the  whole  time.” 

1 The  abnormality  may  be  of  the  most  transient  kind.  Thus  on  one  occasion  I myself 
distinctly  traced  the  illusion  of  hearing  steps  accompanying  my  own  to  the  recurrent 
variations  in  the  blood-flow  of  the  ear,  caused  by  the  very  act  of  stepping.  But  I may  add 
that  hummings  are  sometimes  experienced  where  no  cause  whatever  can  be  discovered  in 
tha&ondfciion  of  the  ear ; and  thus  may  possibly  themselves  be  centrally  initiated.  (See 
Koppe,  Op.  cit.,  p.  50.) 

476 

, HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

cases  and  those  where  there  are  no  huramings  and  buzzings,  and  no 
grounds  for  supposing  that  there  is  stoppage  or  lesion  of  any  sort. 
Among  a numerous,  though  much  neglected,  class  of  phenomena — 
the  casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane — the  commonest  form  by  very 
far  is  for  persons  to  hear  their  name  called  when  no  one  is  by.*  The 
experience  is  often  remarkably  distinct,  causing  the  hearer  to  start 
and  turn  round.  It  is  not  at  all  connected  with  conditions  fhat 
produce  blood-pressure,  such  as  lying  with  one  ear  closely  pressed  on 
the  pillow:  it  comes  in  a sudden  and  detached  way, , and  apparently 
at  quite  accidental  moments.  Another  experience  which  I have 
myself  occasionally  had  when  going  to  sleep,  but  without  any  ex- 
ternal pressure  on  the  ear,  is  for  sentences  which  are  floating  in  my 
head  to  take  on  a slightly  externalised  form — a central  “illusion 
hypnagogique,”  in  contrast  to  the  visual  sort  which  are  due  to  the 
Lichtstaub  of  the  retina.  And  when  we  come  to  insane  cases, 
we  find  a more  positive  refutation  of  peripheral  origin.  A well- 
known  form  of  hallucination  occurs  in  the  form  of  dialogue ; the 
patient  returns  answers  to  the  voices  that  haunt  him,  and  is 
answered  in  turn.  He  can  regulate  the  course  of  his  own  delusion. 
Dr.  V.  Parant  has  recently  reported  the  case  of  an  asylum-patient 
who,  when  thwarted  or  annoyed,  would  go  to  special  spots  to  consult 
imaginary  advisers;  the  replies  she  received — it  need  hardly  be 
said — always  corresponded  with  her  own  desires  and  prejudices. 
Another  insane  woman  used  to  play  “ odd  and  even  ” with  an 
imaginary  prefect  of  police,  whose  guesses  were  always  wrong.1  We 
clearly  cannot  suppose  here  an  intermittent  abnormality  of  the  ear, 
which  always  sets  in  by  chance  at  the  very  moment  when  the 
imaginary  speaker’s  replies  fall  due.  It  may  be  added  that  even 
where  a distinct  morbid  cause  can  be  traced,  it  is  as  often  as  not  a 
central  cause.  After  a long  course  of  alcohol,  a man  begins  to,  hear 
voices;  but  alcohol,  while  admittedly  affecting  brain-tissue,  has  no 
recognised  tendency  to  affect  the  ear. 

Again,  we  have  to  remember  the  clear  relation  which  often 
exists  between  sensory  hallucinations  and  more  general  ideas  and 
delusions.2  This  remark,  which  is  a common-place  of  alienists, 
applies  far  beyond  the  limits  of  insanity.  One  of  the  commonest 

1 Ann.  Medico-psych.,  6th  series,  Vol.  vii.,  p.  679 : Ball,  Maladies  Mentaks,  jx  98. 
See  also  Kahlbaum,  Op.  cit p.  10;  the  cases  described  by  Hich&t  in  the  Ann.  Medico- 
psych.  for  1856,  pi  389 ; and  M.  Sandras’  own  experience  in  the  same  journal  for  1855,  \r.  542. 

2 L41ut,  L'Amvlettc  de  Pascal ? p.  101 ; Krafft-Ebing,  Op.  cit.,  p.  19 ; Griesingeg,  Op+cit., 
pp.  97-8 ; Wundt,  Op.  cit.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  366  ; Dagonet,  Lcs  Maladies  Mentales , p.  94. 

x.]  HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH.  477 

incidents  of  the  witch-cases  is  the  apparition  of  the  supposed 
witch  to  the  victim.  The  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  must 
surely  be  sought  in  the  pre-occupation  of  feeble  and  excitable 
minds  with  a particular  terrifying  subject.  And  these  cases  present  a 
further.feature,  the  importance  of  which  has,  I think,  escaped  notice, 
and  which  points  still  more  decisively  to  a purely  cerebral  origin. 
They,  comprise  the  most  remarkable  examples  on  record  of  halluci- 
nations'of  pain.  The  verdict  of  the  victims’  senses  often  was  that 
the  witeh  was, not  only  visibly  present,  but  was  torturing  them.1 
The  "pains  were  often  distinctly  localised,  and  were  specifically 
described — as  beating;  scratching,  pinching,  biting ; while  the  parts 
affected  were,  of  course  not  being  externally  excited  more  than  any 
other  part  of  the  body.  ‘ > 

A further  argument  for  the  central  initiation  of  many 
hallucinations  of  the  distinctly  morbid  sort  may  be  drawn  from 
the  course  which  the  morbid  process  takes.  The  first  stage  is  often 
not  a sensory  hallucination  at  all ; it  is  a mere  delusion  ; the  patient 
thinks  that  plots  are  being  concocted  against  him.  After  a time  his 
secret  enemies  begin  to  reveal  themselves,  and  he  hears  their  abusive 
and  threatening  language.  We  surely  cannot  ascribe  the  sensory 
experience  here  to  a lesion  of  the  ear  which  happens  to  occur 
independently,  but  regularly,  at  this  particular  stage  ; it  follows,  on 
the  other  hand,  in  the  most  natural  way,  if  we  regard  it  as  imposed 
from  within,  as  soon  as  the  disease  has  gone  far  enough"  for  the  mind 
to. clothe  its  imaginary  fears  in  a more  vivid  form.  Specially 
conclusive  in  this  respect  are  the  cases  where  voices  begin  to  address 
the  patient  in.  the  most  internal  way,  without  sound,  and  only  after  a 
time  take  on  a distinctly  audible  character.2  But  the  most 
interesting  of  all  the  cases  in  point  are  those  where  one  type  of 
hallucination  assails  one  side  of  the  body  and  another  the  other.8 
They  confirm  what  was  said  above — that  the  mere  fact  of  a 
hallucination  being  unilateral,  or  peculiar  to  one  side  of  the  body, 
though  suggesting  , a defect  in  the  external  organ,  is  by  no  means  a 
» 

' 1 Mather,  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  (Boston,  1693),  p.  105 ; Magnolia  Christi 

Americana  (London,  1702),  pp.  68,  69,  72,  75 ; Deodat  Lawson,  Further  Account  of 
Tryals  of  the  New  England  Witches  (London,  1693),  p.  2;  Sadducmnus  Tnumphatus , 
(London,  1689),  p.  875;  Sadducismus  Lebellatus  (London.  1698);  p.  3;  Boulton,  Compute 
History  of  Mdgick  (London,  1715),  Vol.  ii.,  p.  31 ; Durbin,  A Narrative  of  Sopie 
Extraordinary  Things  (Bristol,  1800),  p.  17;  Ewti  Hexenprocesse  in  Ballenstedt  (Quedlin- 
burg,  1863),  p.  66. 

- 8 Griesinger,  Op,  tit.,  p.  91.  The  bearing  of  this  fact  on  the  theory  of  central 
origin  hjts  been  noted  by  Mr.  Stilly,'  Illusions,  p.  119. 

* * See  Dr.  M&gn&n’s  account  in  the  Archives  de  Neurologic , Vol.  vi.,  p.  386. 

478  . HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

proof  of  it.1  The  double  sensory  experience  follows  with  exactness 
the  course  of  the  delusions.  The  patient  first  suffers  from  melancholy 
and  discouragement ; this  develops  into  a belief  that  he  is  surrounded 
by  enemies ; and  he  then  hears  insulting  voices  on  the  right  side. 
To  this  unhappy  stage  succeeds  in  due  course  one  of  exaltation  and 
self-esteem ; the  patient  believes  himself  to  be  some  royal  personage. 
And  now  encouraging  and  eulogistic  voices  present  themselves  on 
the  left  side.  “ The  good  and  the  evil  genii  form  a sort  of  Manicheism 
which  governs  him.”  Here  the  imagination,  as  its  operations  become 
more  complex  and  establish  an  opposition  of  character  between 
its  creatures,  takes  advantage  (so  to  speak)  of  the  fact  that  the- body 
has  two  opposite  sides;  it  locates  friends  and  foes  just  as  they 
might  be  located  in  a picture  or  a play  which  represented  an 
impending  contest.  It  will  scarcely  be  maintained  that  by  acci- 
dent the  left  ear  began  to  be  locally  affected  just  at  the  time 
when  the  development  of  the  plot  necessitated  the  entrance  of  the 
friendly  power  upon  the  scene.  Another  case  involves  the  sense  of 
touch.  A man,  after  praying  for  a year  that  his  actions  might  be 
Divinely  guided,  heard  a voice  say,  “ I will  save  thy  soul  ” ; and  from 
that  time  forward  he  felt  his  left  or  his  right  ear  touched  by  an 
invisible  attendant,  according  as  he  was  doing  right  or  wrong.2  Did 
the  auditory  hallucination  coincide  by  chance  with  the  commencement 
of  local  irritation  in  the  pinna  ? Dr.  Magnan  adds  three  examples  of 
alcoholism,  where  abuse  and  threats  were  heard  on  one  side,  praise  and 
consolation  on  the  other.  In  these  cases  there  were  crises  of  fury,  in 
which  hallucinations  of  all  the  senses  took  place,  involving  both  sides 
alike,  and  masking  the  more  ordinary  condition.  On  the  decline  of 
these  crises,  the  opposed  auditory  hallucinations  recommenced. 
It  seems  impossible  to  resist  Dr.  Magnan’s  view,  that  the  poison, 
distributed  through  the  whole  brain,  provokes  at  times  a general  qrisis  ; 
but  that  when  this  subsides,  it  localises  its  action  at  the  weakest  spot. 
Should  this  happen  to  be  the  auditory  centre  on  one  side,  a single 

1 Cf.  Dr.  A.  Robertson  in  the  Report  of  the  International  Medical  Congress , 1881,  Vol. 
iii.,  pp.  632-3.  A gentleman  who  wntes  to  me  from  the  Junior  United  Service  Club,  and 
who  describes  himself  as  “ a military  physician  of  long  foreign  service  and  not  of  super- 
stitious tendencies,”  says  that  as  a youth  he  was  once  transported  with  passion  during  an 
argument.  “ There  was  a large  knife  lying  on  the  table,  and  I distinctly  heard  a voice 
whisper  into  my  right  ear , ‘ Take  up  that  knife  and  use  it.’  I danced  over  my  shoulder 
involuntarily  for  the  speaker  ” — who  of  course  was  not  visible?  There  was  no  question  of 
lesion  here,  either  of  tne  sense-organ  or  of  the  brain  ; for  my  informant  has  never  had  any 
other  hallucination  in  his  life.  Tnat  a whisper  should  thus  be  located  in  one  ear  is  specially 
natural ; since  it  corresponds  with  our  usual  way  of  receiving  real  whispers. 

2 IMmonoma nie  des  Sorciers , Paris,  1582,  pp,  11-12.  For  a wonder  (see  p.  1^7)  Rodin 
gives  the  case  at  first-hand ; and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  its  truth. 

x.]  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  47$ 

unilateral  hallucination  would  be  the  result;  but  if  both  centres 
remain  affected  the  projection  may  assume  the  complex  two-sided 
form. 

’ But  perhaps  the  strongest  cases  of  all  in  favour  of  a'  purely 
central  initiation  yet  remain — the  cases  of  hallucination  voluntarily 
originated.1  Wigan’s  instance  has  often  been  quoted,  of  the  painter 
who,  after  carefully  studying  a sitter’s  appearance,  could  project  it 
visibly  ihto  space,  and  paint  the  portrait  not  from  the  original  but 
from  the  phantasm.2  He  ended  by  confounding  the  phantasmal 
figures  with  real  ones,  and  became  insane.  Baillarger  reports  another 
painter,  Martin,  as  having  similarly  projected  pictures,  which  so 
interested  him  that  he  requested  anyone  who  took  up  a position  in 
front  of  them  to  move.8  And  I may  add  that  in  one  of  the  cases 
of  persistent  dream-images  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter,  my  in- 
formant, Lieut.-Colonel  Hartley,  of  Hartley,  near  Dartford,  remarks, 
“ I can  always  produce  this  phenomenon,  if  I know  that  I am 
dreaming,  by  opening  my  eyes,  which  wakes  me,  but  the  dream- 
image  persists.”  I confess  that  I should  have  been  tempted  to 
regard  the  voluntary  cases  as  conclusive  evidence  of  central  initiation, 
had  I not  found  so  high  an  authority  as  Professor  Ball  explicitly 
claiming  them  as  hallucinations  provoked  by  an  “abnormal  sensation.”* 
He  does  not  tell  us  what  the  abnormal  sensation  is,  or  what  causes 
it.  He  contents  himself  with  pointing  out  that  hallucinations  are  very 
like  dreams ; that  some  dreams  are  (and,  therefore,  apparently,  all 

1 It  is  odd  to  find  involuntar incss  not  infrequently  taken  as  the  distinctive  ab- 
normality in  hallucinations  (Falret,  On.  cit p.  281 ; Buchez  and  De  Castelnau  in  the 
F/ench  debates  of  1855-0) ; and  the  odder,  inasmuch  as  not  only  may  hallucinations  be 
voluntary,  but  the  mental  pictures  and  memories,  from  which  they  are  to  be  distinguished, 
are  often  of  course  involuntary. 

2 The  Duality  of  the  Mind , p.  124. 

8 See  also  Cardan,  De  Varietate  Rci'um,  (Basle,  1557)  p.  314,  who  says  he  has  always 
been  shy  of  mentioning  the  peculiarity—-"  Cum  volo,  video  quae  volo,  ocuhs,  non  vi  mentis.” 
Kahlbaum  (Op.  cit.,  p.  33),  and  Maisonneuve  (Rechcrches  et  Observations  sur  V Epileptic, 
Paris,  1803,  p.  295),  give  each  an  instance ; and  Sir  II.  Holland  (Chapters  on  Mental 
Physiology , p.  47)  says  that  he  has  met  with  several  cases.  One  of  the  seets 
( of  “ Faces  in  the  Dark  ” reported  that  he  could  produce  the  vision  of  the  spangles 
’ and  sheep  at  will.  His  case  differs,  however,  from  those  given  in  the  text.  For, 
in  the  first  place,  his  vision  was  one  of  old  standing ; and,  in  the  seoond  place,  his 
retina  must  have  been  pretty  constantly  in  the  abnormal  state.  I should  thus  ascribe 
the  phenomenon  to  a concentration  of  attention  on  actual  visual  sensations,  which  fell  by 
habit  into  the  familiar  lines.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether,  after  the  spangles 
had  appeared,  it  was  possible  to  check  their  development  into  sheep. 

4 Op.  cit.,  p.  122.  This  error  (as  it  seems  to  me)  depends  on  what  has  become  a very 
common  misreading  of  the  term  “ psycho-sensorial.”  The  theory  so  designated  is  often 
described  as  a “ theorie  mixte  the  “ mixture  ” being  of  the  “ imagination  ” and  of  some 
prior  "abnormal  sensation,”  which  sets  the  imagination  to  work.  But  hallucinations  (as 
we  Have  seen)  are  psycho-sensorial  in  virtue  not  of  their  antecedents,  but  of.  their  content— 
bec&upe  they  are  things  actually  seen  and  actually  heard . The  “ sensorial  ” element  in 
them  is  ifbt  the  incentive  or  the  raw  material  of  the  abnormal  activity,  but  its  product. 

480 

HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH [chap; 

dreams  must  be)rprovoked  by  external  stimulation — say  a knock  at 
the  door ; and  that  we  can  sometimes  direct  the  course  of  a dream 
at  will : ergo , it  is  easy  .to  see  how  some  people  may  start  a hallucin- 
ation. at  will.  It  would  be  more  to  the  purpose  if  he  would 
introduce  us  to  a dreamer  who  can  designedly  start  a pre-arranged 
dream  by  knocking  at  his  own  door. 

§ 6.  There  is  only  one  other  point,  in  relation  to  the  question 
of  origin,  that  needs  special  mention ; and  that  concerns  hallu- 
cinations of  what  may  be  called  the  lowest  or  mrost  rudimentary 
grade.  There  is  a class  of  experience  which  all  the  writers  who 
describe  it 1 agree  to  treat  as  a quite  unique  type,  and  of  ■ which* 
frdquent  examples  have  been  observed  among  religious  mystics, 
and  jpersons  who  believe  themselves  to  be  in  direct  communica- 
tion1 with  spiritual  guides.  They  describe  a voice  which  is 
yet  soundless,  which  utters  the  “ language  of  the  soul  ” inside  them, 
and  which  they  hear  by  means  of  a “ sixth  sense,”  and  without  any 
apparent  participation  of  the  ear.  “ I should  hear  the  voice  just 
as  well  if  I were  stone-deaf,”  such  a person  will  say ; “ my  ear 
has  nothing  to  do  with  it.” 2 Owing  to  the  absence  of  a definable 
sensory  quality,  Baillarger  distinguished  this  class  as  psychic 3 
hallucinations,  in  opposition  to  psycho-sensorial ; and  M.  Binet 
himself,  who  insists  on  an  external  or  peripheral  basis  for  all 
other  hallucinations,  is  inclined  to  treat  these  as  exceptional,  and, 
to  grant  them  an  origin  from  within.  As  one  who  holds  that  that 
is  equally  the  origin  of  a large  number  of  the  undoubted  psycho- 
sensorial  hallucinations,  I cannot  recognise  this  exception ; and  to  ’ 
me  the  class  in  question  is  of  interest,  not  as  distinguished  from 
the  psycho-sensorial  family,  but  as  a true  species  of  that  genus, 
presenting  the  sensorial  element  reduced  to  its  very  lowest  terms. 

I regard  it  as  the  first  stage  of  a graduated  series — the  embryonic 
instance  of  the  investiture  of  an  image  or  representation  with  a 
sensory  or  presentative  character.  In  proportion  as  the  sensorial' 
element  in  hallucination  is  attenuated  and  dim,  or  full  and  distinct, 
will  the  perception  appear  internal  or  external;  and  these  cases 
are  simply  the  most  internal  sort,  between  which  and  the  most 

1 I find  that  I must  except  Dr.  Dagonet  (Op.  eit.,  p.  92) ; who,  however,  is  certainly 
wrong  in  regarding  the  phenomena  in  question  as  necessarily  indicative  of  insanity. 

8 Kftppe,  Op.  tit.,  p 94. 

3 The  term  must,  of  course,  not  be  confounded  with  our  special  sense  of  the  word 
“ psychical,  ” explained  on  p.  5,  note. 

X.J 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH. 

481 

external  sort  thereexist  various  degrees  of  partial  extemalisation. 
This,  view  has  surely  everything  to  recommend  ;it.  We  can  but  take 
the  .perceive*’®  own  account — that  he  has  a distinct  impression  of 
words;  and  that  this  impression  has  an  actuality  which  clearly 
separates  it  from  the  mere  image  or  memory  of  words.  How  cam 
this  separation  be  conceived,  except  by  recognising  the  presence  of  a 
genuine,  though  faint,  sensorial  element?1  The  question  is  of 
importance  to  my  argument;  for  to  admit  a genuine  sensory 
element  in  the  most  " internal  ” species  of  hallucination — which  all 
agree  'to  be  centrally  initiated — will  practically  be  to  admit  a similar 
initiation  for  other  psycho-sensorial  hallucinations. 

* The  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  of  Maker  Vicarage,  Devonport,  already 
so  often  mentioned,  has  supplied  me  with  some  examples  which  are 
eminently  in  point.  He  has  had  on  several  occasions  “ psychic  ” 
hallucinations  in  the  ordinary  sense — an  impression  of  words  which 
“ seem  to  be  formed  and  spoken  within  the  chest.”  But  he  has  also 
experienced  and  clearly  distinguished  another  type  of  hallucination — 
a soundless  voice  which  yet  seems  to  speak  into  his  right  ear  (he  is 
deaf  of  the  left  ear),  and  which  thus  produces  the  sense  of  externality, 
though  not  of  actual  sound.  We  must  surely  recognise  this  as  the 
stage  just  above  that  of  “ psychic  ” hallucination.2  And  we  meet  with 

1 Of  what  exactly  this  element  may  consist  is  another  question.  Dr.  Max  Simon 
(in  the  Lyon  Medical,  Yol.  xxxv.,  pp.  435,  486)  has  made  the  suggestion  that  what  is 
felt  is  a muscular  impulse  to  form  the  words,  rather  than  the  sound  of  them — an  impulse 
exhibited  in  its  extreme  form  in  the  irrepressible  continuous  vociferation  of  mania ; and  on 
this  account  he  even  refuses  to  regard  the  experience  as  hallucination  at  all.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  the  constitution  of  tne  phantasmal  words  may  be  a complex  one,  and . may 
include  an  embryonic  sense  of  muscular  impulse.  But  it  seems  certain  that  the  patient  s 
sensation  is  of  something  other  and  mdre  than  this.  For  him,  the  words  are  not  suggested 
or  initiated,  but  actually  and  completely  impressed.  The  impression  is  not  recognised  as 
impulse  any  more  than  as  sound  ; but  it  is  an  impression  of  objective  reality.  Here,  then,, 
we  surely  trace  the  characteristic  hallucinatory  element.  The  close  connection  between 
the  auditory  and  speech  centres  is  well  illustrated  in  the  following  case  of  undoubted  hal- 
lucination, recorded  by  Holland  {Medical  Notes  and  directions,  1840,  p.  232).  A slight 
concussion  of  the  brain  having  produced  a temporary  inability  to  find  the  right  words  ana 
to  speak  coherently,  the  patient  was  some  days  later  amused  by  hearing,  as  it  seemed 
close  to  his  ear,  a dialogue  in  which  the  phrases  exhibited  precisely  similar  defects.  (See 
Dr.  A.  Pick’s  remarks  in  the  Prager  Medicinische  Wochenschrift  for  October  31,  1883.) 

* The  most  interesting  case  known  to  me  of  the  speaking  “ within  the  chest  ” forma 
another  instructive  link,  since  the  internal  voice  is  expressly  described  as  audible,  and  as 
producing  a strong  impression  of  a second  person’s  presence.  A Yorkshire  vicar,  whose 
name  I may  mention  but  not  print,  writes  tome:— 

« In  the  autumn  of  the  year  1858,  I was  staying  at  Invercargill,  the  most  southern 
part  of  New  Zealand.  There  was  only  one  hotel  there  in  those  days,  kept  by  a Dane. 
There  was  no  village  of  any  kind ; the  place  was  as  wild  as  could  be.  When  I had  been 
about  two  days  at  this  inn,  I heard  myself  addressed  by  name,  and  f ojind  that  the  speaker 
was  one  of  the  sailors  who  had  worked  the  vessel  in  which  I had  sailed  from  xCngland  to 
New  Zealand.  He  was  a man  I‘knew  well,  because  he  was  on  one  occasion  put  m irons 
for  mutinous  language,  on  our  passage,  and  I had  often  spoken  with  him  both  before  and 
since  that  tfvent.  When  the  ship  reached  the  Heads,  as  the  entrance  to  Port  Chalmers  is 

2 H 

482 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap.. 

exactly  parallel  degrees  of  visual  extemalisation.  I have  received 
several  accounts  from  persons  who  profess  to  see  with  the  “spiritual, 
eye,”  and  whose  language  betrays  the  struggle  to  describe  something 

called,  this  man,  with  five  or  six  others  of  the  crew,  deserted,  taking  the  ship's  ^hale-boat 
in  the  darkness  of  night,  and  leaving  it  on  the  beach. 

“In  the  evening  I went  into  the  large  kitchen  of  the  hotel,  where  this  man  and  several 
others  were  sitting  round  the  fire,  smoking  and  drinking.  The  landlord  was  there,  and  we 
were  all  very  friendly  together.  I found  that  three  or  four  of  the  men  were  also  some  of 
the  men  who  had  deserted,  though  I did  not  remember  them  at  first.  They  told  u|e  fhey 
were  going  in  the  morning  to  the  Island  of  Ruapuke,  where  there  was  a missionary,  as 
. one  of  the  party  wished  to  be  married,  and  there  was  no  minister  on  the  mainland  in  that 
neighbourhood.  I said  I should  rather  like  to  see  the  mission-station,  and  they  said  they 
meant  to  stay  there  a day  or  two  before  returning,  as  there  were  a great  many  wild  boars 
in  the  island  and  would  have  some  hunting,  sleeping  in  their  boat  at  night.  They  told 
me  they  had  plenty  of  provisions— meat,  fish,  bread,  and  so  on,  besides  beer  and  spirit^ 
and  one  or  two  bottles  of  champagne  for  the  wedding  breakfast.  They  said  it  would  be 
necessary  to  start  about  4,  as  it  was  high  water  on  the  bar  about  5,  and  the  bar  was . 
a very’  shallow  one  at  the  point  they  desired  to  cross  it.  They  were  all  most  eager  for  me 
to  join  them,  and  I had  thoroughly  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  thing,  and  promised  to 
go  if  they  would  call  me.  I remember  rising  up  to  go  to  bed,  and  saying,  4 Well,  as  I 
shall  have  to  be  up  before  4,  I won’t  sit  up  any  longer.’  It  was  then  about  11.  They 
said  they  were  all  going  to  4 turn  in  ’ directly,  and  would  rouse  me  up,  never  fear  : 
‘Don’t  you  be  afraid,  we  won’t  go  without  you,*  or  words  to  that  effect. 

“I  left  them  with  the  fullest  intention  of  going  with  them  I ever  had  of  doing  any- 
thing in  my  life.  The  thing  was  settled.  That  was  why  I was  going  to  bed,  otherwise  I 
should  have  stayed  another  hour  at  least.  I had  no  candle  on  the  way,  but  usually  struck 
a match  when  I reached  the  bedroom,  and  lit  the  candle  in  the  room.  When  I left  the 
kitchen  I walked  through  a good-sized  room,  or  second  kitchen,  and  into  the  front  part  of 
the  inn,  and  came  to  the  staircase.  I had  got  up  about  four  or  five  stairs,  when  someone 
or  something  said,  ‘Don’t  go  with  those  men.'  There  was  certainly  no  one  bn  the  stairs, 
but  I stood  still  and  said,  ‘ Why  not  ? ’ The  voice,  which  seemed  as  if  some  other  person 
spoke  audibly  inside  my  chest  (not  to  the  ear),  said  in  a low  tone,  but  with  commanding 
emphasis,  * You  are  not  to  go.  ’ 4 But,  ’ said  I,  4 1 have  promised  to  go.’  The  answer  came 

again,  or  rather  I should  say  the  warning,  4 You  are  not  to  go.’  4 How  can  I help  it  ? ’ I 
expostulated,  4 they  will  call  me  up.’  Then,  most  distinctly  and  emphatically,  the  same 
internal  voice,  which  was  no  part  of  my  own  consciousness,  said,  4 You  must  bolt  your 
door.’  All  this  time  I had  stood  still  on  the  staircase.  I did  not  even  remember  there 
was  a bolt  to  the  door,  for  I recollect  just  for  a moment  thinking  I must  and  would  go,  and 
then  such  a strange  feeling  of  mysterious  peril  that  I wondered  how  I should  secure  the 
door  in  case  there  was  no  lock  or  bolt.  On  reaching  the  room  I lit  the  candle,  and  felt  very 
queer,  as  if  some  supernatural  presence  was  very  near  me.  There  was  a strong  common, 
iron  bolt  to  the  door,  I discovered  on  examination.  As  a proof  that  there  haa  been  no 
mere  revulsion  of  feeling,  I may  mention  that  even  now  I hesitated  whether  to  secure  the 
door  or  not,  so  anxious  was  I to  go,  and  so  accustomed  in  those  days  (I  was  only  19  years 
old)  to  doing  my  own  will  at  all  hazards.  At  the  very  last  moment  (it  was  quite  a 4 toss 
up  * which  it  should  be)  I bolted  the  door  and  got  into  bed,  A great  calm  succeeded  the 
past  agitation,  and  I soon  fell  asleep. 

“The  next  thing  I heard  was  about  3,  in  the  morning  (I  suppose),  a hammering 
at  the  door,  as  I had  expected.  I was  wide  awake,  but  .gave  ho  reply.  Then  I heard  voices, 
and  the  door  violently  shaken  and  kicked  at.  But  I did  not  speah,  for  I knew  I should 
have  been  over  persuaded  if  I had  called  out.  I did  not  mean  to  go.  At  last,  after  a 
thundering  noise,  I heard  them  cursing  and  swearing,  as  well  as  shouting.  But  I lay  still 
as  a mouse.  So  at  last  they  gave  it  up  and  went  away.  I lay  awake  some  little  time 
wondering  whether,  after  all,  I had  not  been  foolish,  and  then  fell  into  a sound  sleep. 

44  About  9 o’clock  I went  down  into  the  breakfast-room,  where  a military  gentleman,  a 
captain  or  colonel,  was  at  his  breakfast.  As  I entered  the  room,  he  said,  4 Have  you  heard 
what  has  happened  ? * 4 No,’  said  I,  4 1 am  just  down.’  4 Why/  he  said,  * it  seems  that  a 
• party  left  this  hotel  this  morning  for  Ruapuke.  and  their  boat  has  been  upsized  on  the 
bar,  and  they  are  every  one  of  them  drowned / I said,  4 Why,  I was  to  nave  gone  with  t 
them,  and  very  nearly  did.*  4 Then,’  said  he,  4 you’ve  had  a lucky  escape/  J told  him  I 
had  had  tfkina  of  warning  not  to  go,  and  had  bolted  toy  door,  &c.  \ out  I did  hot  tell 
him  all  the  details.  ' ; 

“Two  or  three  of  the  men’s  bodies  were  washed  up  on  the  beach  that  day,  and 
the  rest  in  a few  days  more.  Not  one  of  them  was  saved,  and  if  I had  been  with 
them  I must  have  perished  without  a doubt.”  0 

x.]  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH  483 

that  is  indescribable— seeing  that  is  not  seeing,  a perception  of  objects 
which,  yet  dre  not  perceived  as  in  the  external  world.  And  just 
higher  in  the  scale  we  have  the  stage  of  Blake’s  visionary  experiences. 
He  constantly  saw  slightly-objectified  figures,  with  which  he  was  on 
such  familiar  terms  as  to  take  their  likenesses;  but  on  only  one 
occasion  in  his  life  did  he  see  a “ghost” — i.e.,  had  a completely 
objectified  hallucination — which  so  terrified  him  that  he  rushed  out 
of  the  house,1 

In  the  same  connection,  it  is  of  interest  to  observe  that  below  even 
the  lowest  stage  of  sensory  hallucination  there  is  . a type  of  delusion 
which  may  take  a very  distinct  form,  and  which  looks  like  potential 
hallucination — namely,  the  sense  of  a presence,  felt  not  merely  in  the 
general  way  which  probably  every  one  has  experienced,  but  as  the 
presence  of  a particular  person.  It  is  well  exemplified  in  the 
following  account,  from  Mr.  W.  de  V.  Wade,  of  The  Downs, 
Dunmow : — 

“ About  4 years  ago  I awoke  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morning,  with  a 
curious  feeling  that  a great  friend  of  mine,  who  is  in  India,  was  in  my 
room.  *1  do  not  think  'I  had  been  dreaming  about  him.  I felt  an 
irresistible  impulse  to  call  out  his  name,  and,  although  I was  wide  awake, 
it  took  me  some  moments  to  realise  that  he  could  not  be  in  the  room.  It 
was  quit©  dark,  and  as  soon  as  I had  satisfied  myself  that  it  was  merely  a 
delusion,  I went  off  to  sleep  again.  Some  time  in  1882  I was  thinking 
about  my  brother,  who  is  in  America,  before  I went  to  sleep.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night  I suddenly  woke  up,  with  the  feeling  that  he  was 
in  the  room  and  had  spoken  to  me.  I actually  listened  for  a second  or 
two,  in  the  anticipation  that  he  would  speak  again.  Hearing  nothing,  I 
Controlled  a great  inclination  to  call  out  his  name,  and  then,  after  arguing 
to  myself  that  it  must  be  all  nonsense,  I went  to  sleep.” 

Another  of  my  correspondents  has  had  a similar  impression  with 
respect  to  a sister.  “ On  one  or  two  occasions  the  feeling  has  befen  so 
strong  that  I have  got  up  and ’left  the  room.”  The  close  connection 
between  a vivid  sense  of  presence  and  actual  hallucination  is  further 
shown  by  examples  where  the  one  developes  into  the  other., ' Thus, 
Mr.  Joseph  Kirk,  of  the  Audit  Office,  Royal  Arsenal,  Woolwich, 
informs  me  that’ a niece  of  his  had,  one  night,  an  overwhelming  sense 
of  an  unseen  visitant,  which  lasted  some  time  before  it.  culminated  in 
a dear  auditory  impression,  the  words,  “ I must  go  now — good  night.” 
Another  informant — a lady  of  vigorous  practical  intelligence — 
experienced  lately  a similar  subjective  conviction  of  &•  particular 
Inend’s  presence  (probably  due  to  the  fact  that  she  was  apprehending 

For  further  examples  of  different  degrees  of  externalisation,  see  Chap,  xiv,r  §1. 

,9  w 9 

484  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap 

* 

news  of  this  friend’s  death),  and  then  saw  her  form,  “ standing  in  a 
natural  attitude  and  looking  straight  at  my  face.  The  dolour  of  her 
dress  and  cap,  and  the  fashion  of  both,  were  absolutely  familiar  to 
me.”  In  such  a process  as  this,  we  seem  to’ see  the  central  origin 
absolutely  laid  bare. 

§ 7.  The  general  conclusion  from  the  foregoing  paragraphs  is 
plain — that  hallucinations  of  the  senses  may  bo  spontaneously  initiated 
by  the  brain ; that  they  are  often  a pure  projection  of  the  brain  from 
within  outwards.  The  hypnotic  “ subject  ” will  smack  his  lips  over 
the  sweetness  of  sugar  when  there  is  nothing  in  his  mouth — will  sniff 
with  delight  at  a piece  of  wood  when  told  it  is  a rose.  When  the 
brain  does  for  sight  and  hearing  what  it  there  does  for  taste  and 
smell,  we  have  a percept  which  differs  from  an  ordinary  external 
percept  only  in  lacking  the  objective  basis  which  it  suggests.  And 
looking  back  from  this  point,  we  can  completely  account  for  the  fact 
noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  hallucinations  occur  with 
disproportionate  frequency  to  people  who  are  in  bed.  For  it  is  only 
natural  that  images  should  assume  the  unwonted  vividness  of 
sensations  especially  at  those  moments  when  the  external  organs 
of  sense  are  not  occupied  with  other  sensations.  We  know  that 
the  sort  of  day-dream  which  comes  nearest  to  hallucinations  is 
favoured  by  repose  of  the  sense-organs;  that  when  we  want  to 
call  up  the  vivid  image  of  a scene,  to  make  it  as  real — as  sensorial — 
as  possible,  we  close  our  eyes.  One  step  farther,  and  we  realise 
the  complete  continuity  of  the  waking  and  the  sleeping  phenomena. 
Dreams  are  by  far  the  most  familiar  instances  of  the  projection 
by  the  mind  of  images  that  are  mistaken  for  realities:  indeed,  it 
is  just  because  they  are  so  familiar,  and  waking-hallucinations  • 
comparatively  so  rare,  that  there  is  a danger  of  overlooking  the 
psychological  identity  of  the  two  classes.  We  might  call  dreams 
the  normal  form  of  hallucination,  or  waking  hallucinations  the 
pathological  form  of  dreaming ; and  we  might  present  the  waking- 
dreams  of  haschisch-poisoning  and  of  starvation1  as  a sort"  of' 
intermediate  link.  The  normal  dream  disappears  when  sleep  departs ; 
having  been  able  to  impose  its  images  as  realities  only  because  in 
Bleep  our  sensoxy  faculties  are  to  a great  extent  benumbed,  and 

1 See  the  interesting  case  of  Mr.  Everts,  in  Scribner’s  Magazine  for  November,  1871. 
Dagonet  considers  that  fasting,  meditation  and  solitude  favour  hallucinations  by 
“ diminishing  the  impressionability  of  the  senses  ” to  external  stimuli.  (Op.  tit.,  p.  93.) 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH. 

480 

*0 

images  cannot  therefore  be  compared , with  actual  presentations. 
Thus  the  normal  dream  cannot  survive  the  corrective  which  the  con- 
tact of  the  waking-senses  with  the  external  world  supplies ; it  fades 
like  a candle  at  sunrise;  and  its  images,  if  they  survive,  survive' as 
images  «and  nothing  more,  memories  of  a vanished  world.  The 
hallucination,  or  pathological  dream,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not 
require  to  be  thus  guarded  from  comparison  with  real  presentations ; 
its  “ images  ” are  able  to  resist  the  normal  corrective,  for  they  are 
often  as  fully  charged  with  sensory  quality  as  the  external  realities 
which  compete  with  them. 

§ 8.  * I may  now  proceed  to  an  altogether  different  question — 
namely,  at  what  part  or  parts  of  the  brain  the  consh'uctive  process  takes 
place,  and  in  what  it  can  be  conceived  to  consist.  The  distinction  that 
has  so  long  occupied  us,  between  central  and  peripheral  initiation,  may 
henceforth  be  dismissed ; for  wherever  initiated,  hallucinations  are 
assuredly  constructed  by  the'  brain  from  its  own  resources.  An  initia- 
ting stimulus  may  probably  come  from  any  point  on  the  line  from  the 
external  organ  to  the  central  terminus,  along  which  a nervous  current 
passes  in  our  normal  perception  of  objects.  But  that  stimulus  will 
clearly  not  determine  what  the  imaginary  object  shall  be,  or  invest  it 
with  any  of  its  qualities : it  will  merely  set  the  constructive  machineiy 
in  motion ; and  the  same  stimulus — the  same  inflammation  of  the  eye 
or  ear — may  set  the  machinery  in  motion  a hundred  times,  and  each 
time  evoke  a different  hallucination.  Where  then,  and  what,  is  this 
.constructive  machinery  ? It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  attempt  any 
minute  account  of  the  various  theories,  which  have  for  the  most  part 
rested  on  anatomical  observations ; and  the  more  so,  that  their  details 
are  still  subjudice.  But  in  a more  general  way  the  problem  can  be 
stated,  and  even  I think  to  some  extent  determined. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  certain  sensory  centres  are  connected 
jn  a special  way  with  hallucinations.  This  follows,  as  soon  as  the 
full  sensory  character  of  the  phenomena  is  recognised ; for  that 
(Character  can  only  be  the  psychical  expression  of  physical  changes  at 
the  “ sensory  centres  ” — the  spots  where  (in  the  ordinary  crude  but 
; convenient  language)  impressions  are  transformed  into  sensations, 
i As  to  the -exact  locality  of  these  spots,  there  is  a conflict  of  views, 
which  may  be  to  some  extent  reconciled  if  we  regard  the  process  as 
taking  place  in  several  stages.  Some,  (Luys,  Ritti,  Foumh?)  believe 
the  principal  scene  of  action  to  be  the  large  mid-way  masses  called 

486  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chaK 

the^optic  thakuni ; others  (Schroder  van  der  Kolk,  Meynert,  Kahl- 
baum,  Kandinsky)  would  place  it  lower  down — the  centre  for  vision, 
for  instance,  in  the  corpora  quadrigemina ; while  others  again 
(Hitzig,  Ferrier,  Tamburini)  locate  it  higher  up,  in  the  cortex  itself 
But  the  authorities  are  generally  agreed  in  connecting  the  several 
forms  of  sense  with  several  limited  areas,  distinct  from  the  larger 
tracts  associated  with  the  most  highly-developed  phenomena  of 
intelligence. 

A diagram  may  make  the  relation  of  the  parts  cjearer. 

Let  A represent  the  retina  of  the  eye,  which  in  itself  has  ho  more 
power  of  seeing  than  a mirror  has.  Let  B represent  the  group  of  cells 
■ in  the  brain  which  constitutes  the  sensory  centre — say  the  “visual- 
ising centre” — and  which  is  excited  into  activity  whenever  sight 
takes  place.  And  let  C represent  the  cortical  or  exterior  substance 
of  the  hemispheres  of  the  brain,  part  of  which  is  excited  into,  activity 
whenever  any  of  the  higher  psychical  faculties — intelligent  perception, 
imagination,  comparison,  memory,  volition — are  called  into  play.  A is 
connected  with  B by  the  fibres  of  the  optic  nerve,  and  B is  connected 
with  C by  other  nerve-fibres.  Now  any  disturbance  of  the  cells  at  B 
which  reaches  a certain  intensity  will  be  accompanied  by  the 
sensation  of  sight ; and  when  this  disturbance  is  propagated  ^ 
onwards  in  the  natural  course  from  B to  C,  this  sensation  will  | 
develop  into  a complete  percept — an  object  for  the  mind — which 
can  be  reflected  on, compared  with  other  objects, and  remembered.  <g) 
But  the  indispensable  event — the  disturbance  or  discharge 
at  B — may  itself  originate  in  several  different  ways.  It  may  be  „ 
excited  (1)  normally,  from  A,  by  the  stimulus  of  external  rays  ® 
of  light,  which  makes  us  see  surrounding  objects;  (2)  acci- 
dentally, from  A,  by  the  stimulus  of  a blow  on  the  eye,  which  makes 
us  see  sparks ; (3)  pathologically,  by  morbid  irritation  at  A,  or  on  the 
line  , of  nerve  A B ; and  (4)  pathologically  or  abnormally,  but 
spontaneously,  at  B itself. 

Now  for  one  view  of  the  construction  of  hallucinations  these  data 
are  sufficient.  We  have  only  to  suppose  that  in  cases  (3)  and  (4)  the 
agitation  at  the  sensory  centre  falls  readily  into  certain  lines  and 
combinations,  so  as  not  only  to  produce  a large  variety^of  sensations — • 
colours,  if  it  be  the  visual  centre,  sounds,  if  it  be  the  auditory  one — but 
to  arrange  these  elements  in  various  definite  groups.  Everything  will 
now  proceed  precisely  as  if  these  effects  had  been  due  to  the  presence 
of  a real  object.  The  excitation  will  pursue  its  ordinary  upward  course 

X.] 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH 

4#7 

to  the  highest  parts  of  the  brain,  and  will  lead  to  intelligent  perception 
of  the  sensory  group  as  an  object ; while,  in  the  most  ^complete  or 
“ external  ” form  of  hallucinations,  it  is  possible  that  by  a yet  further 
process  a refluent  current  passes  downwards  to  the  external  organ,1 
to  whiph  the  perception  is  referred,  just  as  though  its  object  were, 
really  acting  on  the  eye  or  ear  from  outside.  There  then  is  tho  full- 
fledged  hallucination ; and  its  creative  machinery,  according  to  this 
view,  lies  wholly  in  the  sensory  centre. 

But  there  is  another  view.  I have  noted  four  ways  in  which  the 
machinery  may  be  set  in  motion ; but  there  is  a fifth  possible  way. 
The  -excitation  may  come  downwards  from  C — from  the  seats  of 
ideation  and  memory.  And  clearly  this  sort  of  excitation  will  have 
a dominance  of  its  own.  It  will  have  its  own  psychical  counterpart — 
an  idea  or  a memory ; and  when  it  sets  the  sensory  machinery  in 
motion,  that  machinery  will  not  now  produce  or  combine  a group 
of  sensations  .determined  by  its  own  activity;  but  will  merely 
embody,  or  as  we  might  say  execute , the  idea  or  memory  imposed 
on  it.  Here,  then,  the  only  machinery  which  is  in  any  sense 
constructive  is  situated  in  the  higher  ideational  tracts.  But  as 
long  as  the  nervous  activity  is  confined  to  the  ideational  tracts, 
though  there  is  construction,  there  is  no  hallucination.  That  word  is 
never  used  to  describe  the  mere  image  or  memory  of  an  object ; and 
in  serving  as  a basis  to  such  an  image  or  memory,  however  vivid,  the 
cells  at  0 are  merely  performing  their  normal  functiona  It  is  only 
when  the  activity  escapes  downwards,  with  such  force  as  strongly 
to’ stimulate  the  cells  at  the  lower  centre,  that  sensation  floods 

t 1 Krafft-Ebing,  Qp.cit .,  p.  IX;  Despine,  Etude  Scicntifique  sur  Ic  SomnarnJbulismef 
l).  328 ; Tamburim  in  the  Revue  Scientifique , 1881,  p.  189 ; Wundt,  Op . cit.,\  o 1.  ii.,  p.  368, 
This  point,  however,  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  established.  The  mere  subjective  fact  of  the 
reference  to  the  external  organ  would  not  prove  (as  Tamburini  seems  to  assume)  that  the 
organ  had  been  actually  excited  by  a refluent  current.  Nor  (for  the  reason  given,  on  p.  485) 
can  a proof  be  found  m the  fact  that  pressure  on  the  side  of  one  eyeball  doubles  the 
phantom— -a  result  which  must  be  attributed  either  to  the  doubling  of  some  point  dc  reptre, 
or  to  the  association  bi  the  sense  of  lateral  pressure  with  the  doubling  of  real  objects.  Nor 
does  the  fact  that  “hypnagogic  illusions,  hallucinations  which  consist*  in  the  surviving 
of  dream-images  into  waking  moments,  and  hypnotic  hallucinations,  can  give  rise  to  after- 
images (as  noted  by  H.  Meyer,  Gruithuisen,  and  MM.  Binet  and  F4r4,  respectively),  imply 
more  than  the  brief  continuance  of  excitation  at  the  central  cells.  A stronger  case,  at  first 
sight,  is  that  described  by  Dr.  Pick,  of  Prague,  where  only  the  upper  halves  of  imaginary 
figures  were  seen  with  the  right  eye ; and  where  it  was  ascertained  that  the  field  of  vision 
was  defective  over  nearly  the  whole  of  the  upper  half  of  the  right  retina^  to  which,  of 
course,  the  lower  *half  of  the  figure  would  have  corresponded,  but  in  which  the 
ophalmogbope  revealed  no  abnormality.  But  even  this  is  not  conclusive?  as  to  a refluent 
current;  fur  Dr.  Pick  may  be  right  in  supposing  that  some  lesion  of  the nerve-fibres 
connected  with  this  portion  of  the  retina  had  led  to  functional  inactivity  of  the  corre- 
sponding part  of  the  centre  itself.  I may  add,  for  what  it  is  worth,  an  observation  of  Sir 
J.  % w,  Herschel  on  hie  own  hallucinations  seen  in  the  dark,  that  “ the  forma  were  not 
modified  by  slight  pressure  [of  the  eye],  but  their  degree  of  visibility  was  much  and 
capriciously  varied  by  that  cause.” 

488  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap.. 

«►  , 

the  image,  and  we  get  the  delusive  percept  or  hallucination.  The 
force  of  this  downward  current  may  exhibit  all  degrees.  It  is 
probable  that  even  for  the  barest  idea  or  memory  of  an  object 
there  is  some  slight  downward  escape,  causing  a slight  reverbera- 
tion at  B ; and  where,  as  in  rare  morbid  cases,1  the  escape  is 
wholly  barred,  all  power  of  calling  up  visual  images  is  lost.  With 
every  increase  in  the  force  of  the  escape,  there  will  be  a rise  'of 
sensory  quality,  and  a nearer  approach  to  absolute  hallucination; 
and  every  stage  will  thus  be  accounted  for,  from  the  picture  "-in 
the  mind’s  eye  ” to  the  phantom  completely  externalised  in  space. 
On  this  view,  the  provenance  of  the  phenomenon  clearly  cannot  be 
assigned  to  a single  locality : the  hallucination  is  constructed  at  one 
place,  but  it  only  becomes  hallucination  at  another.  We  do  not 
dispute  whether  a photograph  comes  into  existence  in  the  camera  or 
in  the  developing-room. 

§ 9.  Here,  then,  are  the  two  possibilities:  (1)  that  hallucinations 
are  produced  by  an  independent  activity  of  the  specific  sensory 
cells — the  sensations  which  arise  there  being  perceived  as  objects 
when  the  nervous  current  passes  upwards  to  the  higher  parts  of  the 
brain ; (2)  that  the  part  played  by  the  specific  sensory  cells  is  only 
a response  to  what  may  be  called  ideational  excitation,  propagated 
downwards  from  the  higher  tracts  where  the  image  has  been  formed. 

In  attempting  to  decide  between  these  possibilities,  not  much 
assistance  is  to  be  had  from  direct  pathological  and  physiological 
observations.  These  have  been  mainly  directed  to  an  end  rather 
the  converse  of  mine — to  utilising  the  facts  of  hallucination  for 
fixing  the  locality  of  the  centres,  by  inspection  of  the  brains  of 
persons  who  have  been  in  life  markedly  hallucinated ; and  even 
so  not  very  successfully  ; for  cerebral  pathology,  as  Ball  trenchantly 
remarks,  has  a way  of  lending  itself  to  the  demonstration  of 
whatever  one  wants.2  We  are  thus  thrown  back  on  less  direct 

1 In  the  Archives  de  Neurologic,  Vol.  viM  p.  352,  there  is  cited  44  un  cas  de 
suppression  brusque  et  isolde  de  la  vision  mentale  des  signes  et  des  objets,”  wheife 
the  suppression  extended  to  dreams.  44  Je  reve  seulement  paroles,  tandis  que  je 
poss&lais  auparavant  dans  mes  roves  la  perception  visuelle.” 

2 Lesions  rarely  confine  themselves  neatly  to  specific  areas.  We  find  Dr.  Luys, 
the  chief  advocate  of  the  optic  thalami  as  the  primary  seat  of  hallucinations,  admitting 
.the  constant  spread  of  lesions  from  the  thalami  to  the  cortex  (Gazette  des  Hdpitaux, 
December,  1880,  p.  46);  and  Dr.  W.  J,  Mickle  (Journal  of  Mental  Science , October*  1881, 
p.  382),  considers — as  the  result  of  a number  of  very  careful  necropsies— that  in  cases 
of  hallucination  44 thalamic  disease  plays  a less  important  part  than  cortical.”  But  on 
the  other  hand,  he  did  not  find  that  the  lesions  were,  definitely  associated  avith  the 
spots  on  the  cortex  which  Ferrier  and  the  advocates  of  restricted  cortical  localisation 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH . 

48*9 

arguments,  dferived  from  the  nature  of  the  hallucinations  themselves. 
And  I thihk  the  mistake  has  again  been  in  imagining  that  one 
or  other  of  two  alternatives  must  be  exclusively  adopted — that 
either  the  lower  or  the  higher  origin  of  hallucinations  is  the 
^univerfial  one.  All,  I think,  that  can  be  fairly  said  is  that,  while 
first  mode  of  origin  is  a probable  one  for  some  cases,  the 
aecBhd  mode  is  a certain  one  for  others. 

J’or  simple  and  recurrent  forms  of  hallucination,  much  may  be 
said  in  favour  of  the  lower  origin.  It  is  in  accordance  with  all 
that  we  knows  or  conjecture  as  to  nerve-tissue,  that  certain 
cell-modifications  and  radiations  of  discharge  would  be  rendered  easy 
by  exercise ; and  thus  the  changes  to  which  any  morbid  excitement 
gives  rise  might  naturally  be  the  same  as  have  often  before  been 
brought  about  by  normal  stimulation  from  the  retina  or  the  ear. 
The  elements  would  fall  readily,  so  to  speak,  into  the  accustomed 
pattern.  An  object  which  has  been  frequently  or  recently'  before 
the  eyes,  a word  or  phrase  that  has  been  perpetually  in  the  ear 
— these  may  certainly  be  held  capable  of  leaving  organic  traces  of 
their  presence,  and  so  of  establishing  a sort  of  lower  memory;  as 
markedly  shown,  for  instance,  in  cases  where  uneducated  persons  have 
in  delirium  recited  passages  of  some  strange  language,  of  which  the 
sound  but  not  the  sense  has  at  some  past  time  been  familiar  to  them. 
That  this  lower  memory  should  act  automatically  seems  natural 
enough  when  we  remember  how  large  a part  even  of  the  higher 

memory  is  also  automatic  : an  unsought  word,  suddenly  reverberating* 

• 

mark  out  am  the  visual  and  the  auditory  centres ; while  lesions  at  these  spots— the 
angular  gyrus  and  the  first  tem^ro-sphenoidal  convolution— seem  to  be  found  in 
cases  where  no  hallucination  has  been  observed*  (Journal  of  Mental  Science,  October,  1881, 
p.  381,  find  January,  1882,  p.  29.)  This  want  of  correspondence  will  seem  less  surprising, 
if  we  remember  that  in  the  vast  number  of  casual  hallucinations  nothing  that  could  be 
called  a lesion  exists ; that  for  the  delusions  of  sleep,  of  the  delirium  of  fever,  or  fasting,  of 
the  early  stages  at  any  rate  of  haschish  and  opium-eating,  only  the  general  physiological 
explanation  can  be  given  that  they  are  due  to  some  change  in  the  constitution  or  distri- 
bution of  the  blood  ; and  also  that  the  more  persistent  hallucinations  of  the  insane  belong; 
as  a rule,  to  the  'earlier  period  of  irritation,  rather  than  to  the  later  one  when  marked 
lesion  has  supervened,  and  dementia  is  creeping  on.  Even  if  we  take  subsequent 
cortical  lesion  as  a sign  that  the  weak  spot  existed  from  the  first  in  the  highest  part 
<4  the  brain,  this  would  be  no  proof  that  the  specific  sensory  centre  is  cortical.  If 
lesions  are  not  ttaund  to  be  locally  restricted,  much  less  are  irritations;  and  there  is 
nothing  to  refute  the  supposition  above  made,  that,  when  the  hallucination  occurs^  a 
current  has  passed  downwards  to  the  lower  centre — the  mischief  m the  cortex  having 
beep  primarily  an  excitant  ideational  activities  only,  and  the  hallucination  being 
due  (as  Dr.  Mickle  well  expresses  it)to  “ a tumultuous^  disorderly  reaction  of  disturbed 
ideational  centres  upon  sensorial.”  * The  same  may  be  said  of  the  artificial  irritation  of  the 
“cortical  centres  ” during  life.  Ferrier  regards  the  movements  which  result  when  an 
electrical  stimulus  is  applied  to  these  areas,  as  an  indication  that  visual  or  auditory 
sensations  (i.e.,  hallucinations)  have  been  evoked.  We  may  quite  accept  this  interpretation, 
but  still  suppose  that  the  primary  seat  of  the  sensation  was  not  the  spot  where  the 
stimulus  was  applied,  but  a lower  centre  on  the  path  along  which  the  irritation  passed. 

490  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

in  the  sensorium,  is  on  a,  par  with  the  images  that  emerge  into 
consciousness  without  our  being  able  to  connect  then*  with  oqr 
previous  train  of  ideas.  Now  it  is  remarkable  how  large  a number 
of  hallucinations  are  of  this  primitive  type.  I mentioned  above  that, 
among  the  sane,  the  commonest  of  all  cases  is  to  hear  the  name 
called;  and  even  with ‘the  insane,  the  vocabulary  of  the  imaginary 
voices  often  consists  of  only  a few  words,  usually  threatening  or 
abusive,  but  sometimes  quite  neutral  in  character.1  1 So  of 
optical  hallucinations.  With  the  sane,  a large  number  consist 
in  the  casual  vision — an  after-image ,2  as  wo  might  say — of  a near 
relative  or  familiar  associate.  A friend,  who  has  had  considerable 
experience  of  the  persistence  of  a dream-image  into  the  first  few 
moments  of  wTaking,  tells  me  that  “sometimes  these  images  return 
during  the  day,  or  continue  appearing,  always  suddenly,  for  several 
days  after.”  The  Rev.  Robertson  Wilson,  writing  from  the  United 
Presbyterian  Manse,  Strath  Devon  House,  Dollar,  tells  me  that  at 
a time  when  he  was  in  disordered  health  owing  to  overwork,  he 
used  to  take  long  excursions,  and  especially  interested  himself  in 
the  inscriptions  in  country  churchyards. 

“One  day,  after  having  spent  a considerable  time  in  inspecting  a 
village  churchyard,  what  was  my  horror  and  consternation  to  find,  on 
leaving  it,  that  wherever  my  eyes  rested  I could  descry  nothing  but 
monumental  inscriptions.  The  dust  on  the  roadside  somehow  seemed  to 
form  itself-  into  letters.  The  macadamised  highway  seemed  written  all 
over  with  mourning,  lamentation,  and  woe ; and  even  when  I turned  my 
. gaze  to  the  stone  dykes  on  either  side  of  the  way,  it  was  only  to  find  that, 
by  some  subtle  chomistry  of  my  brain,  the  weather-stains  and  cracks 
shaped  themselves  into  words  which  I could  plainly  decipher,  and  found  to 
be  of  the  same  nature  as  those  which  I had  recently  been  reading  in  the 
churchyard.  Every  time  that  autumn  and  winter  that  I paid  a vjsit  to  a 
churchyard,  the  experience  recurred  ; and  on  more  than  one  occasion  also 
without  that  exciting  cause.” 

Mr.  G.  Lyon  Turner,  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  Lancashire 
Independent  College,  Manchester,  tells  me  that  he  saw  one  pight, 
suspended  from  the  ceiling  of  the  room,  which  he  knew  to  be  plain, 

“A  large  chandelier  with  some  10  scroll-shaped  branches,  and  the  jets 
shining  brightly  through  the  ground-glass  globes  at  the  end  of  each.  I at 
once  recognised  the  chandelier  as  a duplicate  of  the  chandelier  which  hung 

1 On  this  subject,  see  Dn’V.  Parent  in  the  Ann.  Medico-psych.,  6th  series.  VoL  vii., 
p.  384  ; Kahlbaum,  Op.  eit.,  p.  6 ; and  Kraepelin’s  paper,  “ Ueber  Truywahmehmungen,  ” 
m the  Viertdjahrschrifi  fur  Wissenschaftliche  Philosophic  for  1881,  p.  225.  These 
embryonic  hallucinations  often  develop  into  more  complex  form  ; Ball,  Op.  eit.,  p.  67. 

2 This  is  a convenient  description ; but  it  must  not  be  held  to  imply  apy  retinal 
affection,  of  the  sort  that  Hibbert,  Ferriar,  and  Brewster  supposed.  See  p.  487,  note. ' 

HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH 

m 

t 

in  the  college  chapel  connected  with  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon’s  college 
at  Cheshupt,  where  I received  my  training  for  the  ministry.  I moved  my 
head,  to  see  whether  the  phantom  moved  too.  But  no,  it  remained  fixed ; 
and  the  objects  behind  and  beyond  it  became  more  or  less  completely 
visible  as  I moved,  exactly  as  would  have  been  the  case  had  it  been  a real 
chandelier.”  Mr.  Turner  woke  his  wife,  who  naturally  saw  nothing. 

Another  correspondent  saw  a spectral  figure  enter  his  room  and 
stand  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  “ Of  course  I put  my  head  under  the 
bed-clothes,  and  yet  I saw  it.”  It  seems  so  unlikely  that  the  imagina- 
tion, would  attract  its  visitor  “ under  the  bed-clothes,”  that  one  prefers 
to  suppose  a mechanical  continuance  of  reverberation  at  the  lower 
centre ; and  the  more  so  that  the  spectre  was  a sort  of  after-image, 
'based  on  the  memory  of  a picture.  More  persistent  cases  are  still 
frequently  of  a single  object.  I have  mentioned  the  doctor  and  the 
black  cow,  and  the  headless  man  at  the  bottom  of  the  garden ; 
similarly  a lady,  when  in  bad  health,  always  saw  a cat  on  the 
staircase;  and  among  the  insane,  a 'single  imaginary  attendant*  is 
tolerably  common.1  Wherever  such  simple  cases  are  not  connected 
with  any  special  ddire  or  any  fixed  set  of  ideas,  they  may,  I think, 
be  fairly  (though  of  course  not  certainly)  attributed  to  an  activity 
following  the  lines  of  certain  established  tracts  in  the  sensorium.  . We 
might  compare  this  locality  to  a kaleidoscope,  which  when  shaken  is 
capable  of  turning  out  a certain  limited  number  of  combinations. 

On  the  other  hand,  hallucinations  produced  at  the  will  of  the 
percipient  must  first  take  shape  above  the  sensory  centres.  For  it  is 
indisputable  that  the  idea  of  the  object  to  be  projected — the  picture, 
face,  sentence,  or  whatever  it  may  be — must  precede  its  sensory 
embodiment  as  a thing  actually  seen  or  heard ; and  the  idea,  as  well . 
as  the  volition,  is  an  affair  of  the  higher  tracts.  And  apart  from  these 
rare  voluntary  specimens,  the  astonishing  variety  and  complexity  of 
more  common  cases — whether  visual  appearances  or  verbal  sequences 
— seem  absolutely  to  drive  us  to  a higher  seat  of  manufacture ; for 
they  demand  a countless  store  of  elements,  and  limitless  powers  of 
ideal  combination.  The  patient  listens  to  long  discourses,  or  holds 
’conversations  with  his  invisible  friends ; and  what  is  heard  is  no  echo 
of  former  phrases,  but  is  in  every  way  a piece  of  new  experience.  So, 
too,  the  number  and  variety  of  visual  hallucinations  which  may  occur 
to  a single  person,  sometimes  even  within  the  space  of  a few  minutes, 
is  astonishing.  The  physiologist  Bostock,  who  had  many  hallucinations 

1 Blandford,  Insanity  and  its  Treatment,  \\  155 ; Kahlbaum,  Op.  tit.,  p.  3;  Binet  in 
the  Revue  Phitosophique  for  May,  1884,  p.  500. 

402  HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH?  [chap 

ik 

at  a time  when  he  was  suffering  from  nervous  exhaustion,  says  that 
he  did  not  in  a single  instance  see  any  object  with  whieh  he  had 
been  previously  acquainted.  Nicolai,  who  was  never  otherwise  than 
perfectly  sane,  and  who  eventually  recovered,  continually  saw 
troops  of  phantoms,  most  of  them  of  an  aspect  quite  new  to  him; 
and  in  insanity  such  a phenomenon  is  common  enough.  So,  too, 
the  seers  of  Faces  in  the  Dark  (p.  473),  who  had  in  the  course 
of  their  lives  seen  many  thousands  of  phantasmal  faces,  had5  never 
seen  one  that  they  recognised.  Mrs.  Macdonald,  quqted  above,  has 
only  occasionally  recognised  a face ; and  another  of  my  correspon- 
dents, who  has  been  similarly  troubled,  says,  “ The  faces  I have 
seen  have  always  been  unknown  faces.”  Even  in  the  perfectly  casual' 
hallucinations  of  the  sane  and  healthy,  what  is  seen  is  less  commonly 
a mere  revival  of  an  object  which  the.  eyes  have  previously 
encountered  than  an  unrecognised  person.1  A lady  of  my  acquaint- 

1 The  following  case  is  of  special  interest ; being  the  most  marked  instance  of  a 'Merc 
revival-  that  I have  encountered  ; while  at  the  same  time  clearly  due  to  a train  of  thought 
and  memory  involving  the  highest  cerebral  tracts.  The  account  is  from  the  Rev.  P.  H. 
Newnham. 

“ 9ne  *iy  parishioners  is  an  old  woman,  now  in  her  85th  year.  Though  poor  and 
in  receipt  of  parish  relief,  her  education  has  been  good.  She  retains  her  faculties  in  almost 
undiminished  power.  She  is  always  bright  and  cheerful,  and  I never  saw  any  very  aged 
person  at  all  her  equal  for  a wholesome  common-sense.  I- am  very  much  attached  to  her ; 
and  for  some  years  past  have  always  sent  her  a little  present  on  her  birthday  (January  6th), 
and  have  visited  her  either  on  the  day  itself,  or  as  soon  after  it  as  possible. 

“This  year  I visited  her  on  January  6th,  and  after  I had  offered  the  usual  congratula- 
tions, she  said,  with  a little  air  of  injured  innocence,  ‘ It’s  2 years  since  you  came  to  me 
on  my  birthday,’  or  words  to  that  effect.  I felt  quite  sure  she  was  mistaken,  and  told  her 
so ; but  she  was  confident  she  wap  right ; and  I did  not  contest  the  point ; but  when  I said 
good-bye,  added  as  a last  word,  1 Mind.  I can’t  believe  about  those  2 years.’  On 
returning  home  I referred  to  my  parish  books,  and  found  that  her  birthday  in  1884  fell  on 
Saturday,  and  that  being  unable  to  go  down  and  see  her  myself,  I had  sent  my  curate  to 
her,  with  a message  and  our  little  gifts. 

“On  April  14th,  being  down  in  the  village  where  she  lives,  she  called  on  me  in  my 
class-room,  and  begged  me  to  come  and  see  her,  as  she  had  something  particular  to  tell  me. 
On  my  going  to  see  her,  she  reminded  me  of  our  conversation  on  January  6th,  and  of  my 
parting  words;  and  said  that  she  now  knew  she  had  4 told  me  a great  story,’  and 
wanted  to  beg  my  forgiveness.  And  how  she  had  found  out  her  mistake  was  as ' 
follows ; — 

“ On  the  night  of  March  24th  she  went  to  bed  early,  but  could  not  sleep.  This  was 
unusual  with  her.  She  lay  awake  over  3 hours,  with  no  desire  to  sleep.  She  could  not 
understand  it ; but  lay  very  quiet  and  happy,  thinking  of  nothing  particular.  All  at  once 
my  late  curate  passed  into  the  room,  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  (This  gentleman 
had  left  me  on  January  8th,  having  obtained  an  appointment  as  Naval  Chaplain.)  As  she 
lay  in  the  bed  the  curtains  shut  on  the  view  of  the  door,  so  that  she  cannot  say  whether 
he  entered  the  door  or  not.  He  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  with  a little  basket  under  his 
arm,  and  told  her  that  I could  not  come  to  see  her  myself,  but  would  come  as  soon  as  I 
could,  and  meantime  had  sent  her  a present,  which  he  had  in  the  little  basket.  Having 
delivered  this  message,  he  disappeared. 

“And  then 'it' flashed  upowher  memory  that  this  was  the  exact  reproduction  of  an  ’ 
actual  scene  which  had  taken  place  on  January  6th,  1884.  Everything  was  the  same: 
position,  manner,  words,  exactly  as  it  had  been  on  that  day.  And  my  poor  old  friend  was 
almost  broken-hearted  to  think  how  she  had  forgotten,  and  said  what  was”  untrue  about  me. 

“ I simply  give  the  narrative  as  she  told  it  to  me.  I visited  her  again, a week  later  and 
made  her  repeat  the  stonr.  She  did  so  without  the  slightest  alteration  of  facts.  £ cross- 
questioned  her  thoroughly  as  to  details,  the  mode  of  entry  of  the  figure,  the  appearance  of 

X,]  HALLUCINATIONS:  GENERAL  SKETCH,  m 

ance,  who  has  been  occasionally  subject  to  seeing  figures  on  awakening 
from  sleep,  and  who  tells  me  that  the  experience  has  had  no 
perceptible  connection  with  health,  says  that  on  no  single  ™™»jnAn 
has  the  face  been  a known  face,  though  the  faces  are  often  so  clearly 
seen  that,  if  subsequently  met,  they,  would  be  at  once  recognised. 
Another  informant,  who  says  that  she  can  evoke  figures  at  any 
time  by  looking  intently  before  her,  adds  that  she  “cannot  tell 
beforehand  what  kind  they  will  be,  though  able  after  a minute  or  two 
to  describe  the,  features  and  dress  to  anyone  that  is  by.”  Here,  then, 
we  have  an  immense  amount  of  high  creative  work — of  what  in 
psychical  terms  we  should  call  par  excellence  the  work  of  the  imagina- 
tion ; and  this  is  work  which  we  have  good  grounds  for  supposing 
that  the  highest  cortical  tracts,  and  they  alone,  are  capable  of 
performing.  From  our  experience  of  the  number  and  mobility  of  the 
ideas  and  images  that  the  mind  in  a normal  state  can  summon  up  and 
combine,  we  know  that  the  cells  of  the  highest  cerebral  areas  are 
practically  unlimited  in  their  possible  groupings  and  lines  of  dis- 
charge ; but  we  have  no  right  to  assume  the  same  inexhaustible 
possibilities  as  existing  independently  in  any  specific  sensory  centre 
— we  fnight  almost  as  well  expect  a kaleidoscope  to  present  us 
with  an  ever-fresh  ^series  of  elaborate  landscapes.  The  very 
common  implication,  of  two  or  more  senses  must  also  surely  be 
accounted  for  by  supposing  a simultaneous  excitation  of  the  several 
centres  involved,  from  a common  higher  point ; for  the  difficulty, 
pointed  out  by  Baillarger,  of  referring  the  correspondence  to 
simultaneous  but  independent  abnormalities  of  the  external  organs 
applies  equally  to  the  specific  centres.  And  over  and  above  all  this 
we  can  point  to  the  constant  connection  between  the  delusions,  the 
conceptions  delirantes,  of  the  insane  and  their  sensory  hallucina- 
tions, which  makes  it  almost  impossible  not  to  regard  the  latter  as  a 

it,  &c.,  &c.  She  simply  said  that  everything  was  as  natural  as  life  : that  she  was  wide 
awake ; that  it  was  no  dream  or  anything  of  the  kind.  t I pressed  her  as  to  the  words 
spoken ; whether  they  were  soundless  or  internally  spoken  words  ; but  here  again 
she  was  perfectly  clear ; the  words  were  spoken  aloud,  just  as  they  were  in  the  actual  occur- 
rence. She  waif  perfectly  aware  all  the  time  that  it  was  a vision  ; and  never  for  a moment 
thought  it  either  the  real  man,  or  his  ‘ghost.*  She  is  not  in  the  slightest  degree 
superstitious.  ” 

I may  add  the  following  parallel  though  much  less  elaborate  instance.  Mr.  Alfred 
Wedgwood,  of  20,  ShomcMe  Road,  Folkestone,  describes  how,  having  been  trying 
unsuccessfully  in  the  course  of  the  day  to  recall,  the  French  for  It  does  not  matter, 
he  saw,  just  as  he  was  stepping  into  bed*  a sheet  of  paper  a foot  broad  between  him  and 
t;he  sheets,  with  IT  IMPORTS  in  large  letters  stretching  all  across  \%.  He  could  t have 
sworn  that  the  object  was  really  there,  and  immediately  told  his  wife  of  the  experience, 
as  she  Justifies.  We  must,  of  course,  attribute  this  hallucination  to  the  previous  gropings 
after  the  word. 

iU  HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH.  [chap. 

particular  effect . of  the  more  widely  diffused  cerebral  disturbance ; 
while  even  with  sane  persons  of  low  mental  development,  we  may 
note  in  a more  general  way  the  prevalence  of  a particular  form  of 
hallucination  during  the  prevalence  of  a particular  superstition — as 
in  the  witch-cases  above  mentioned.  The  conclusion  seems  to  be  that 
for  many  hallucinations  the  mode  of  origin  can  be  no  other  than  the 
centrifugal — i.e.,  a process  in  the  direction  from  higher  to  lower 
centres.1 

« 

§ 10.  I have  throughout  tried  to  express  what  I have  called  the 
centrifugal  theory  in  such  terms  that  it  might  be  accepted  even  by 
those  who  locate  the  sensory  centres  .themselves  not  below,  but  in, 
the  cortex.  According  to  these  physiologists,  the  whole  double 
transformation,  of  physical  impressions  into  visual  or  auditory 
sensations,  and  of  these  sensations  into  complete  perceptions  and 
mnemonic  images,  would  be  practically  referred  to  one  place.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  this  view  seems  at  times  connected  with  the 
want  of  a due  psychological  distinction  between  sensation  and 
perception.  But  even  supposing  a specific  centre  of  sensation  to 
be  thus  equally  the  seat  of  psychic  functions  higher  than  sensation, 
it  would  still  be  none  the  less  liable  to  be  stimulated  by  parts  of 
the  cortex  external  to  itself ; and  the  nature  of  many  hallucinations 
would  still  indicate  that  they  depend  on  • this  stimulation,  and  not  on 
a mere  spontaneous  quickening  of  morbid  activity  in  the  centre* 
itself.  For  instance,  a girl  is  violently  distressed  by  seeing  her.  home 
in  flames,  and  for  days  afterwards  sees  fire  wherever  she  looks.2  Ope 
must  surely  trace  the  hallucination  to  the  distress,  and  so  to  an 
“escape  of  current”  from  the  seat  of  ideas  and  images  other  than  visual 
ones.  Again,  in  the  conditions  described  above,  where  the  hallucin- 
ations faithfully  reflect  the  changes  of  the  whole  moral  and  intellectual 
bias,  the  local  excitement  in  the  sensory  centre  would  still  be  traceable 
to  an  abnormally  strong  irradiation  from  the  regions  where,  the 
highest  co-ordinations  take  place — these  regions  being  themselves,  ex 
hypotfiesi,  already  in  a state  of  pathological  activity.  The  other 
'hypothesis  would  be  that  the  mere  hyper-excitability  at  the  centre 

1 The  view  has  been  maintained  that  this  process  consists  merely  in  the  removal  of 
an  inhibition  normally  exercised  on  the  sensory  centres  from  above.  (See,  e.g.,  Kandinsky 
in  the  Archivfiir  Psychiatric  for  1881.)  But  this  seems  to  ignore  the  whole  of  the  facts 
which  support  the  theory  of  “ideational  excitation.  ” 

3 Griesingcr,  Op.  tit.,  p.  99.  For  an  auditory  case,  see  the  account,  in  the  hyon 
Medical,  Vol.  xxxv.,  p.  437,  of  a young  Frenchman  who  was  rendered  insane  by 
the  German  invasion,  and  who  was  then  haunted  by  the  sound  of  gunB  firing. 

HALLUCINATIONS : GENERAL  SKETCH. 

496 

x.] 

itself  made  it  impossible  for  images  to  arise  without  getting*  hurried 
on,  so  to  £peak,  into  sensations  by  the  violence  of  the  nervous 
vibrations.1  But  then,  what  should  cause  images  belonging  to  one 
particular  order  of  ideas— the  order  which  happens  to  be  diseased— to 
be  picked  out  for  this  fate  in  preference  to  any  others  ? The  hyper- 
excitable  centre  in  itself,  as  an  arena  of  images,  could  have  no  ground 
for  such  a partial  selection  among  the  crowd  of  them  which  emerge 
during  every  hour  of  waking  life  Among  the  endless  and  multiform 
vibrations  involved,  why  should  the  excessive  amplitude  that  corre- 
sponds to  sensation  be  confined  to  a particular  set  ? A reason  must 
exist.  The  unique  agreement  between  the  sensory  hallucinations  and 
the  more  general  moral  and  intellectual  disorder  must  have  its  par- 
ticular physical  counterpart ; and  for  this  “ a strong  downward  escape 
of  current  ” is  at  any  rate  a sufficiently  comprehensible  metaphor. 

1 This  seems  to  be  what  Wundt  has  in  view  when  he  speaks  of  hallucinations  as 
orginating,  not  in  an  actual  irritation, , but  in  a heightened  Irritability,  of  the  sensory 
centres  (Op.  cit Vol.  ii.,  p.  357) ; and  such  a state  may  doubtless  contribute  t6  the  effect, 
even  where  the  disturbance  is  plainly  propagated  from  above.  There  are  even  special 
cases  of  ‘^ideational  excitation  ” of  which  an  abnormal  strain  or  instability  at  the  lower 
place  seems  a more  prominent  condition  than  an  abnormal  pressure  at  the  higher.  We 
might  thus  explain  tne  echoing  hallucinations,  where  a person  finds  that  what  he  is  reading 
to  himself  repeats  itself  audibly— the  occasion  for  the  discharge  being  here  no  doubt  the 
slight  reverberation  which  the  mere  idea  of  words  may  be  supposed  to  set  up  at  the 
auditory  centre.  (See  Kraepelin,  Op.  cit.,  p.  356.)  Very  comparable  are  the  hallucina- 
tions which  present  themselves  only  when  a certain  amount  of  external  stimulation  is 
supplied.  For  example,  a man  finds  an  old  hallucination  of  hearing  recur  when  people  are 
talking  in  his  neighbourhood,  though  able  at  the  same  time  to  distinguish  what  they  are 
saying;  another  is  troubled  by  insulting  voices  at  night  only  when  the  patients  in 
adjoining  rooms  are  audibly  speaking  or  moving.  And  with  these  may  perhaps  be 
classed  tne  hallucinations,  primarily  due  to  lesions  of  the  eye,  which  are  found  to  be 
greatly  favoured  by  a multiplication  of  external  impressions,  as  by  a visit  to  a busy  city. 
(Kahlbaum,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  7,  8,  27  ; Koppe,  Op.  cit.,  p.  49 ; Voisin,  Op.  cit.,  p.  71.) 

CHAPTER  XI. 

TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SAJSE  : AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

§ 1.  We  have  briefly  surveyed  hallucinations  in  their  more  general 
aspecta  But  before  concentrating  our  view  exclusively  on  the 
peculiar  telepathic  species,  we  shall  do  well  to  pause  for  a little  at  an 
important  sub-genus  to  which  that  species  belongs,  but  of  which  it 
forms  numerically  only  a small  part — namely,  transient  hallucinations 
of  the  sane. 

These  hallucinations,  of  course,  like  all  others,  are  the  creation  of 
a mind  in  an  abnormal  state  ; but  the  abnormality  may  arise  in  two 
very  different  ways.  In  the  large  majority  of  .cases  it  is  purely 
subjective  and  in  some  sense  pathologic ; and  the  percepts  have  no 
objective  basis  at  all  outside  the  perceiving  organism.  In  a com- 
paratively small  residue  of  cases  the  abnormality  is  not  pathologic 
or  subjective,  but  consists  (as  we  hold)  in  an  impression  or  impulse* 
transferred  from  another  mind.  The  percepts  still  conform  perfectly 
to  the  definition  of  a sensory  hallucination,  in  lacking  the  objective 
basis  which  they  suggest ; for  that  basis  would  be  the  actual  physical 
presence  of  some  human  body,  with  its  weight,  its  power  of  setting 
the  air  in  vibration  by  the  breath  and  vocal  chords,  and  all  its  other, 
attributes.  But  an  objective  basis  of  another  sort  they  have — 
namely,  the  exceptional  condition  of  the  person  whom  they  recall  or 
represent.  Now,  having  regard  to  these  facts  of  origin,  we  might 
fairly  expect  that  a careful  comparison  of  the  purely  subjective  and 
the  telepathic  experiences  would  reveal  a large  amount  of  resem- 
blance, but  also  a certain  amount  of  difference,  between  them.  And 
in  no  way  can  we  better  approach  the  telepathic  or  “veridical” 
class  than  by  following  out  this  comparison. 

The  available  material,  for  the  task  is,  unfortunately,  far  from 
abundant ; for  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  have 
met  with  singularly  little  attention  from  psychologists.  Hqre  and 

XI.]  “transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  m 

there  a medical  man,  or  a writer  of  repute,  has  been  led  to  make  some, 
observations  by  finding  a “subject”  in  himself;  a few  cases  of  very 
marked  abnormality,  where  the  phenomena  have  been  recurrent  and 
distressful,  have  become  celebrated — students  of  the  literature  get  to 
dread  the  very  names  of  Nicolai  and  “ Mrs.  A.  ” ; and  the  hypnotic 
cases  have  an  interest  of  their  own,  owing  to  the  important  place 
which  hypnotism  is  fast  taking  in  mental  science.  But  no  attempt, 
so  far  I know,  has  been  made  to  obtain  wide  statistics  of  perfectly 
casual  cases — of  hallucinations  in  which,  if  they  are  still  technically 
pathologic,  the*  abnormality  has  been  of  the  slightest  and  most 
transient  kind.  The  collection  which  J have  formed  during  the  last 
two  years,  numbering  more  than  500  cases,  is  at  any  rate  large 
enough  to  support  certain  general  conclusions. 

§ 2.  And  first,  as  regards  the  bodily  and  mental  condition  of  the 
percipient.  Probably  the  common  view  of  hallucinations  of  the  sane, 
so  far  as  they  are  recognised  at  all,  is  that  they  mk  in  all  cases  due 
to  disease  or  morbid  excitement,  or  at  the  veiy  least  to  indigestion. 
Ask  the  first  twenty  rational  men  you  meet  how  they  would  account 
for  a phantasmal  visitant  if  they  themselves  saw  one  : as  many  as  ten 
perhaps  will  answer,  “ I should  conclude  that  I had  dined  or  supped 
too  well.”  “ Lobster-salad  ” is  an  explanation  which  I have  personally 
heard  suggested  many  times.  It  may  bo  at  once  noted,  then,  as  a 
point  of  interest — one,  moreover,  in  which  the  casual  and  the  telepathic 
classes  completely  agree — that  in  not  a single  instance  known  to  me 
has.  the  hallucinated  person,  according  to  his  own  account,  been 
suffering  at  the  time  from  indigestion.  Lobster-salad  is  the  parent  of 
nightmares,  of  massive  impressions  of  discomfort  and  horror ; not, 
however,  as  a rule,  even  in  dreamland,  of  the  distinct  and  minute 
visualisation,  and  the  clear-cut  audition,  which  constitute  the  more 
specific  hallucinations  of  sleep ; and  certainly  not  -of  waking 
hallucinations.  Nor  is  morbid  excitement  of  a more  general  sort  a 
’frequent,  though  it  is  an  occasional,  condition ; and  the  same 
may  be  said  of  the  ordinary  nervous  exhaustion  that  follows  hard 
work.  We  have  only  to  recall  that  the  commonest  occasions 
of  all  for  delusions  of  the  waking  senses  are  the  moments  or 
minutes  that  immediately  follow  a night’s  rest  (p*.  392).  For 
the  majority  of  cases,  the  only  rule  that  we  can  lay  down  as 
to  the  nature  of  the  peculiar  disturbance  involved  is  a negative 
one— -that  it  is  not  observably  connected  with  any  morbid  state. 

2 i 

498  . TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:  "[chap. 

Thus  the  one  of  my  informants  who  has  had  perhaps  the  most  inte- 
resting experiences  of  subjective  hallucinations,  says,  “ It,  is  when  I 
am  at  my  best  physically,  and  when  my  mental  faculties  are  keenly 
interested  in  something,  that  the  pictures  are  most  frequent  and  vivid. 
They  are  mostly  quite  the  antipodes  of  my  mental  occupation.”  A 
gentleman  who  has  repeatedly  had  the  hallucination  of  hearing  his 
name  called,  tells  me  that  this  has  always  occurred  during  his  holi- 
days, when  he  was  specially  well  and  taking  much  exercise.  And 
out  of  489  visual  and  auditory  cases  (waking  and  “ borderland  ”),  I 
find  that  only  24  occurred  to  persons  who  were  in  a decidedly 
abnormal  physical  state — ill,  or  fainting,  or  overtired,  or  .under 
anaesthetics.  Certain  exceptional  though  slight  derangement  there 
must  undoubtedly  be ; but  the  hallucination  itself  is  usually  the 
only  symptom  of  it ; and  as  little  in  the  purely  subjective  as  in  the 
telepathic  class  can  we  lay  our  finger  on  any  special  predisposing 
condition. 

The  puzzle  is  the  greater  in  that  the  phenomenon  of  waking 
hallucination  in  a sane  and  healthy  subject  (as  the  numbers  to  be 
presently  given  will  show),  is  a rare  one — rare  not  merely  in  the  sense 
of  occurring  to  only  a small  percentage  of  the  population,  but  in  the 
sense  of  occurring  to  most  of  these  only  once  or  twice  in  a life-time. 
One  would  have  expected  that  any  state  of  the  brain  which  was  liable 
to  occur  at  all  without  assignable  provocation,  would  be  liable  to  occur 
repeatedly.  We  should  account  it,  for  instance,  a very  odd  fact  if  a 
person  had  had  one  or  two  extremely  distinct  dreams  in  his  life,  and 
had  had  no  other  experience  whatever  of  dreaming.  But  we  can  only, 
take  the  statistics  as  we  find  them.  And  this  peculiar  rarity  of  purely 
subjective  hallucinations  of  the  senses  at  any  rate  helps  to  explain 
a similar  peculiarity  in  the  telepathic  class.  Our  telepathic  Evidence 
will  show  that  the  hallucination  which  the  percipient  describes  is 
almost  always  the  single  and  unique  instance  in  his  experience.  Now 
at  first  sight  this  seems  strange,  inasmuch  as  many  percipients  have 
been  in  quite  as  intimate  connection  with  other  persons  as  with  the 
“agent”  of  their  one  phantasmal  visitation ; and  some  of  these  persqps 
have  died  or  have  passed  through  a crisis  similar  to  that  to  which  we 
trace  tjie  visitation  in  the  one  instance.;  why  then  has  it  never  been 
repeated  ? The  only  answer  would  seem  to  be  that  hallucinations, 
even  when  telepathic  in  origin,  depend  further  on  some  exceptional 
condition  of  the  percipient  himself.  And  this  answer  can  nqw  be 
supported  by  the  analogy  of  the  non-telepathic  class ; where  the 

-xi.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES . 

499 

conditions,  unnoticed  and  innocuous  to  health  as  they  so  often  are, 
are  yet  so*exceptional  that  they  may  occur  only  once  in  a life-time. 

The  same  observation  will  further  tend,  I think,  to  remove  a 
certain  vague  prejudice  which  the  telepathic  evidence  encounters  in 
the  minds  of  persons  who  have  never  met  with  an  instance  of  hallu- 
cination of  any  sort.  Such  persons  can  often  hardly  bring  them- 
selves to  conceive  that  a sane,  healthy,  waking  mind  can  really 
get  momentarily  off  the  rails,  and  can  feign  voices  where  there  is 
silence,  and  figures  where  there  is  vacancy,  though  ear  and  eye 
are  both  alert  and  discharging  their  normal  functions.  Even 
supposing  transferred  impressions  possible,  they  will  say,  why 
under  their  influence  should  sound  and  sober  senses  exhibit  a 
perfectly  isolated  piece  of  eccentricity,  and  just  for  a minute,  once  in  a 
life-time,  fall  victims  to  delusions  such  as  we  commonly  associate  with 
sick-beds  and  madhouses  ? This  vague  a priori  objection  will 
disappear  when  the  statistics  of  transient  hallucinations  are  better 
known ; seeing  that  the  isolated  piece  of  eccentricity  does  undoubtedly 
occur — how  or  why  we  cannot  say — in  numbers  of  instances  with 
which  telepathy  has  nothing  whatever  to  do.1 

1 This  difficulty  in  believing  that  isolated  cases  of  distinct  sensory  hallucination  may 
occur  to  persons  who  are  in  sound  bodily  and  mental  health,  was  shown  in  some  of  the 
comments  which  followed  Dr.  Jessopp’s  account  of  his  own  experience  (“An  Antiquary’s 
Ghost-story,”  in  the  Athenaeum  for  January  10th,  1880) ; for  it  seemed  to  be  thought  that 
his  narrative,  as  it  stood,  was  incredible,  and  that  he  must  have  been  dreaming,  I could 
parallel  that  case  with  scores  of  otherB,  but  select  the  two  following  as  of  special  interest* 
The  first  is  from  a distinguished  Indian  officer. 

“ I had  been  taking  luncheon  with  some  friends,  and  after  it  was  over,  my  host  pro- 
posed that  I and  my  fellow  guest  should  accompany  him  to  see  some  alterations  he  was 
making  in  his  grounds.  After  we  had  been  out  some  little  time  looking  at  these  changes, 
a native  servant  approached  me  with  a message  from  my  hostess,  asking  me  to  go  into  the 
house  to  speak  to  her.  I at  once  left  my  friends,  and  accompanied  the  man  back  to  the 
house,  following  him  through  the  verandah  into  the  room  where  the  luncheon  had  been 
laid.  There  he  left  me,  and  I waited  for  my  hostess  to  come,  but  no  one  appeared ; so 
after  a few  minutes,  I called  her  by  name,  thinking  she  might  not  be  aware  that  I had 
come  in.  Receiving  no  answer,  after  once  again  repeating  her  name,  I walked  back  into 
the  verandah,  where,  on  entering,  I had  observed  a durzee  (or  tailor)  at  work,  and  asked 
him  where  the  man  was  who  came  in  with  me.  The  durzee  replied,  ‘ Your  Excellency, 
no  one  came  with  you.’  ‘ But,’  I said,  * the  man  lifted  the  chik  ’ (the  outside  verandah 
blind)  ‘ for  me.’  ‘No,  your  Excellency,  you  lifted  it  yourself,’ the  durzee  answered. 
Much  puzzled,  I returned  to  my  friends  in  the  grounds,  exclaiming,  ‘ Here’s  a good  joke; 
and  then,  telling  them  what  had  happened,  ana  what  the  durzee  had  said,  I asked  them 
if  they  had  not  seen  the  servant  who  called  for  me  shortly  before.  They  both  said  they 
had  seen  no  qnA”  ‘ Why,  you  don’t  mean  to  say  I have  not  been  into  the  house  ? I said. 
*Oh,  yes ; you  were  in  the  midst  of  saying  something  about  the  alterations,  when  you 
suddenly  stopped,  and  walked  back  to  the  house ; we  could  not  tell  why,  they  both  said. 
I was  in  perfect  health  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and  continued  to  be  so  after  it. 

The  next  account  is  from  Dr.  Charles  M.  Smith,  of  Frankhn,  St.  Marys  Parish, 
Louisiana.  He  narrates  that  a lady  of  his  acquaintance,  Mrs.  P.,  lost  her  life  at  Last 
Island,  in  the  terrible  hurricane  of  August  1856.  “Nearly  two  months  afterwards,  on 
my  way  to  visit  a patient  in  the  country,  I met  Mr.  Weeks,  a brother  of  Mrs.  P*,  and  in 
the  buggy  with  him  a lady  so  wonderfully  like  Mrs.  P.  that,  but  for  my  knowledge  of  her 
death,  Twohld  have  declared  it  to  be  herself.  The  carriage  and  horses  used  bv  Mr.  Weeks 
were"  easily  distinguished  by  certain  well-marked  peculiarities  from  any  other  in  thepansh. 

' and  I these  as  distinctly  as  the  occupants  themselves.”  Dr,  Smith  bowed,  ana  called 
Mr.  Weeks  by  name,  but  no  notice  was  taken,  and  the  buggy  passed  on.  Returning  home 

2 I 2 

500  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:  [chap. 

§ 3.  These  characteristics,  then — (1)  the  general  absence  of  any 
obvious  predisposing  cause,  of  any  assignable  abnormality  of  mind 
or  body,  in  the  person  affected,  (2)  the  comparatively  small  number 
of  persons  affected,  and  (3)  the  very  frequent  uniqueness  of  the 
affection  in  the  respective  experiences  of  these  persons — may  be 
reckoned  as  distinct  grounds  of  resemblance  between  the  purely 
subjective  and  the  telepathic  classes.  Another  marked  character- 
istic that  they  have  in  common  is  (4)  the  usually  very  brief  duration 
of  the  phantasm : both  sorts  of  affection  are  emphatically  transient 
hallucinations  of  the  sane — the  majority  of  cases  being  almost 
momentary,  and  very  few  probably  extending  to  half  a minute. , And 
again  (5)  the  disproportionate  number  of  “ borderland  ” experiences  in 
both  classes  is  a fifth  important  common  point.  These  five  heads  of 
resemblance  are  those  which  a broad  view  of' the  phenomena  at  once 
reveals.  Our  next  step  would  naturally  be  to  see  if  more  detailed 
resemblances  exist  between  special  groups  of  cases  in  the  two 
classes  ; and  every  common  feature  that  we  find  will  of  course  go  to 
strengthen  the  conclusion  that  the  telepathic  phantasms  are  indeed 
hallucinations,  and  not  (as  some  have  held)  quasi-material  appear- 
ances. At  this  point,  however,  we  find  ourselves  confronted  by  a 
problem  of  considerable  difficulty  as  well  as  interest, which  requires  to 
be  carefully  considered. 

The  difficulty  is  this.  If  the  characteristics  of  the  two  classes 
of  hallucination  are  to  be  discussed  and  compared,  it  is  obviously 
assumed  that  we  know,  on  inspection,  which  cases  ought  to  be  referred 
to  the  one  class,  and  which  to  the  other.  Now,  though  the  elements  • 
of  a telepathic  case  have  been  made  tolerably  plain,  and  in  the 
main  the  grounds  of  distinction  may  be  clear  enough,  the  attempt 
actually  to  draw  a dividing  line  will  very  soon  show  us  that  at  present 
no  such  line  can  be  drawn.  With  the  discovery  that  one  person’s 
senses  can  be  affected  by  something  that  is  happening  to  another 
person  at  a distance,  our  point  of  view  is,  in  fact,  altered  in  relation  . 
to  the  whole  subject  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  pane.  Ever 
since  the  abandonment  of  the  idea,  once  widely  held,  that  delusions  Of 
the  senses  were  the  direct  and  (in  a manner)  objective  productions 
of  the  devil, 1 the  universal  assumption  has  been  that  they  are . all 

an  hour  later,  he  made  particular  inquiry,  and  found  that  no  persons  in  the  least  resem- 
bling those  he  had  seen  had  arrived  in  the  village ; and  he  afterwards  learnt  that  Mr. 
Weeks  had  been  at  his  home  30  miles  away  at  the  time.  “The  conclusion  seemed  in- 
evitable,” he  adds,  “ that  the  whole  affair  was  an  optical  delusion.” 

1 See  above,  p.  179. 

XI.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

501 

purely  subjective  phenomena — even  the  belief  in  “ ghosts  ” having 
been  really  no  exception  to  the  rule,  since  the  believers  have  not 
regarded  these  as  hallucinations  at  all,  but  as  independent  entities. 
Now  when  telepathy  of  the  externalised  type  is  admitted,  ttio  first 
effect,  «of  course,  is  to  destroy  the  generality  of  the  old  assumption  by 
driving  it  quite  decisively  off  a certain  part  of  the  field : it  is  involved 
in  the  new  doctrine  that  a certain  number  of  sensory  hallucinations 
— the  majority,  namely,  of  those  which  have  markedly  corresponded 
to  real  and  unforeseen  events — can  no  longer  possibly  be  regarded  as 
purely  subjective.1  But  the  effect  does  not  stop  short  here.  The 
new  -vera  causa,  which  has  decisively  occupied  one  comer  of  the  field, 
throws,  so  to  speak,  a shadow  of  doubt  over  the  rest ; for  while  we 
perceive  its  reality,  we  have  as  yet  neither  probed  its  conditions  nor 
measured  its  range.  I have  already  pointed  out  (p.  97)  that  the  action  of 
telepathy  cannot  be  dogmatically  limited  to  those  most  conclusive 
cases  on  which  our  evidential  proof  of  it  must  depend ; and  if  its 
reality  in  the  world  renders  the  old  doctrine  of  the  subjectivity  of 
hallucinations  definitely  untenable  in  some  cases,  we  need  not  be 
surprised  if  in  others  it  renders  it  doubtful , and  doubtful,  moreover, 
in  various  degrees.  Thus,  between  the  hallucinations  which  are 
clearly  subjective  and  those  which  are  clearly  telepathic,  there  will  be 
a neutral  region,  where  neither  explanation  can  be  adopted  with 
certainty.  Now,  on  all  accounts  it  is  important  that  this  neutral 
region  should  be  recognised  and  defined.  It  is  important  theoretically, 
because  in  time  we  may  learn  more  of  the  conditions  of  the 
phenomena,  and  may  be  able  to  assign  them  with  confidence  to  this 
class  or  that ; but  even  more  is  it  important  evidentially,  because,  till 
the  grounds  of  doubt  are  understood,  there  is  always  a risk  that  purely 
subjective  cases  will  be  misinterpreted,  and  will  be  reckoned  into 
the  cumulative  proof  of  telepathy,  or  in  some  other  way  laid  to  the 
account  of  supernormal  influences.  It  seems  advisable,  therefore,  to 
take  a glance  along  the  whole  line  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the 
sane,  up  to  the  point  at  which  the  action  of  telepathy  is  (in  our  view) 
Clearly  assured.  I will  make  my  survey  as.  rapid  as  possible,  being 
loth  to  detain  the  reader  among  these  subjective  and  dubious  cases, 

■ 1 *At  this  point,  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  is  of  course  not  assumed  to  have  been 
proved ; the  proof  is  a loner  cumulative  process,  which  will  be  carried  on  to  the  end  of  the 
book.  But  it  would  have  been  intolerably  inconvenient,  both  to  writer  and  reader,  to 
defer  all  attempts  at  logioal  treatment  and  analysis  until  the  whole  of  the  cases  had  been 
presented  en  masse.  I may  take  leave  therefore,  by  anticipation,  to  describe  as  telepathic 
the  incidents  which  every  reader-  who,  in  the  end,  agrees  that  telepathy  is  a true  fact  in 
Nature,  will  agree  in  regarding  as  almost  certainly  true  examples  of  it. 

502  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:  [chap. 

while  the  main  body  of  the  telepathic  evidence  is  perforce ' kept 
waiting. 

§ 4.  In  the  first  group,  the  cause  of  the  phenomena  is,  by  excep- 
tion, quite  clear.  The  hallucination  is  an  after-image — th6  direct 
reproduction  of  some  object  or  sound  with  which  the  senses  of  the 
percipient  have  been  particularly  occupied  ; and  though  we  may  not 
always  be  able  to  say  why  the  reproduction  takes  place  at  sqch  and 
such  a moment,  the  purely  subjective  character  of  the  experience 
is  obvious.  It  is  sometimes  due  to  mere  fatigue  of  the  retina ; it 
occurs,  for  instance,  after  long  gazing  at  objects  through  a microscope. 
Some  examples  due  to  a more,  central  cause  have  been  given  in  the 
preceding  chapters;  e.g.,  M.  Mau’ry’s  hypnagogic  vision  of  the  beef- 
steak (p.  890),  Mr.  Wilson’s  visions  of  the  tombstones,  and  Mr.  Turner’s 
phantom-chandelier  (p.  490), — the  latter  case  being  remarkable  for  the 
length  of  time  which  had  elapsed  since  the  real  object  had  been  seen. 
Another  type  is  where  the  original  impression  has  been  of  a distress- 
ing kind.  Thus,  Dr.  Andral  reports1  that,  having  received  a shock  from 
the  condition  of  a child’s  body  in  the  dissecting-room,  he  was  startled 
next  morning,  on  waking,  by  a vivid  repetition  of  the  spectacle.  I 
have  a similar  first-hand  case  from  a friend,  who  in  girlhood  suffered  for 
several  nights  from  a hallucination  caused  by  the  unaccustomed  sight 
of  death ; and  another  where  a lady  had  a vivid  waking  vision  of  > a 
servant  who  had  startled  her  some  hours  before.  The  transcript 
is  not  always  quite  literal.  Thus,  a gentleman  tells  me  that  the 
figure  of  a deceased  friend,  whom  he  had  just  been  seeing  in  his 
coffin,  appeared  to  him,  but  in  his  living  aspect  and  carrying  a port- 
folio ; and  another  informant — the  Rev.  J.  M.  Blacker,  of  121,  St. 
George’s  Road,  S.W. — who  one  morning  had  a vision  of  the  upper 
parts  of  three  cooks  in  white  caps,  was  able  to  trace  the  impression 
unmistakeably  to  a recently-seen  placard,  but  noticed  nevertheless 
that  the  resemblance  was  only  of  a general  kind.  As  good  auditory 
examples,  I may  mention  the  hallucination  of  hearing  the  bells  of 
the  Town  Hall  at  Manchester  play  “ Auld  Lang  Syne,”  experienced 
more  than  once  by  a lady  when  sleeping  in  a room  where  she  had  on 
former  occasions  heard  the  actual  performance ; and  a case  where  a 
young  lady,  who  had  suffered  considerably  from  the  manners  ‘ of 
young  schoolboy  brothers,  was  afterwards  startled,  when  alone,  by 
such  remarks  as  “ Shut  up,”  and  “ Get  out  of  the  way.” 

1 Kraft-Ebing,  Die  Sinnesdeliricn,  p,  16. 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

m 

XI.] 

Under  the  same  head  may  fairly  be  reckoned  such  cases  as  Mr. 
A.  Wedgwood’s  (p.  493,  note),  where  the  phantasmal  object,  though  not 
reproducing  anything  that  had  recently  been  before  the  eyes,  is  the 
immediate  and  indisputable  result  of  a very  special  train  of  thought... 

Comparable,  again,  are  representations  of  an  object  or  a sound 
which  depend  on  the  fapt,  not  that  it  has  been  seen  or  heard,  but 
that  it  is  about  to  be  seen  or  heard — that  the  percipient  is  expecting 
it ; but  “Us  in  almost  all  the  visual  experiences  of  this  sort  the  object 
has  been  a livjng  human  forfi),  the  cases  will  fall  more  conveniently 
into  a later  group. 

Int  the  next  group  the  object  seen,  or  the  sound  heard,  is 
non-human  in  character,  but  is  no  longer  traceable  to  any  special 
previous  occupation  of  the  mind  or  the  senses.  Such  cases  are 
common  in  insanity  and  in  disease,  and  the  hallucination  is  then  often 
of  a grotesque  or  horrible  sort.  They  also  occur,  though  forming  a 
decided  minority,  among  the  Avaking  hallucinations  of  sane  and 
healthy  persons ; but  seem  then  to  be  rarely,  if  ever,  grotesque  or 
horrible.  The  most  grotesque  case  that  I have  received  is  a vision  of 
dwarfish  gnomes  dancing  on  the  wall ; but  this  was  seen  by  a ‘young 
child.  A star,  a firework  bursting  into  stars,  a firefly,  a chandelier,  a 
croAvn,  landscape-vignettes,  a statue,  the  end  of  a draped  coffin 
coming  in  through  the  door,  a bright  oval  surrounding  the 
Avords  “Wednesday,  October  15,  Death” — these  are  the  principal 
phantasms  of  inanimate  objects  in  my  collection.  Another  known 
type,  described  by  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel,  is  a geometrical  pattern, 
Avhich  sometimes  takes  very  complicated  forms.  I have  also  three 
cases  where  the  hallucination  was  of  a dog,  and  another  where  it  was 
of  running  cats,  indefinite  in  colour  and  form  (this  last,  however, 
occurring  only  when  the  brain  Avas  exhausted).  Out  of  my  302  visual 
cases  (p.  392),  only  20  belong  to  this  non-human  type.  The  non-vocal 
auditory  cases  are  also  comparatively  few  in  number — 41  out  of  the 
total  of  187.  They  comprise  tappings,  tickings,  knocks,  and  crashes  j1 
the  sound  of  footsteps  or  of  a door  opening ; 7 cases  of  the  ringing 
<Jf  bells,  2 of  the  striking  of  clocks,  and  7 of  music.  Such  types 
seem,  on  the»very  face  of  them,  to  be  altogether  remote  from  tele- 
.pathy ; and  though  we  shall  find  further  on  that  this  is  not  quite 
universally  the  case — that  there  are  instances  of  strong  and  unique 

X Some  of  these  may  possibly  have  been  real  noises  whose  cause  was  not  ascertained* 
But  J haue  included  no  case  where  my  informant  aid  not  himself  hold  this  explanation  to 
be  excluded. 

I 

5&4  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE : [chap.  . 

hallucinations  of  light  or  noise  which  have  too  markedly  coincided 
with  some  external  crisis  for  the  hypothesis  of  telepathic  origin  to 
be  ignored — the  vast  majority  of  these  non-human  phantasms  may 
be  safely  pronounced  purely  subjective  affections. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  another  smaller  group  of  visual  halluci- 
nations which  represent  fragments  of  human  forms.  Thus,  two  of  my 
informants  on  waking  from  sleep,  and  a third  when  awake  and  - up, 
have  distinctly  seen  an  imaginary  hand  and  arm  ;1  another  some- 
times sees  a little  finger  in  the  air  ; another  wihen  recovering 
from  illness,  had  a vision  of  decapitated  heads ; ahother  has 
suffered  at  times  from  an  appearance  of  eyes  and  part  of  a'  face 
floating  by ; and  with  these  may  be  classed,  as  auditory  parallels, 
cases  where  what  has  been  heard  has  been  a sound  of  groaning, 
or  undistinguishable  sounds  of  talking,  or  short  meaningless 
sentences — a class  of  which  I have  some  half-dozen  specimens. 

We  must  regard  as  a separate  type  the  cases  where  faces  or 
forms  appear  either  in  rapid  succession  or  in  a multitudinous  way. 
Several  varieties  of  this  experience  were  described  in  the  last  ’ 
chapter  (pp.  473-4).  I have  one  other  example,  where  crowds  of 
people  and  animals  made  their  appearance  every  night  for  months  ; 
but  the  percipient  in  this  case  was  in  weak  health.  We  have  seen 
that  this  type  is  probably  connected  with  the  Licht-staub  of  the 
retina,  and  its  subjectivity  will  not  be  questioned.  It  scarcely 
belongs  to  the  family  of  transient  hallucinations  at  all,  since — 
alone  among  the  waking  hallucinations  of  persons  in  apparently 
normal  health — these  swarming  and  changing  visions  are  liable  to 
last  for  a considerable  time. 

And  finally  we  come  to  the  visual  cases  representing  complete 
and  (more  often  than  not),  quite  natural-looking  human  forms, 
usually  alone  but  occasionally  in  company,  and  occasionally  also  with 
the  addition  of  some  independent  'object,  such  as  a carriage  or  a 
coffin ; and  to  the  parallel  auditory  cases  where  distinct  and  in- 
telligible words  are  heard,  which  are  not  (as  in  the  first  group)  mere 
echoes  of  vividly-impressed  phrases.  These  phenomena — which 
comprise  the  great  majority  of  the  whole  number  of  transient 
hallucinations,  of  the  sane — fall  at  once  into  two  great  classes ; .that 
where  the  figure  or  voice  is  recognised,  and  that  where  it  is 
unrecognised.  Of  both  these  classes,  as  of  the  previous  ones,  it 

1 We  have  had,  however,  a telepathic  example  of  this  type,  in  case  161,  p.  416. 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

505 

. «•] 

may  at  once  be  said  that  the  majority  of  the  instances  included  in 
them  are  in  no  way  available  to  prove  influence  from  another  mind. 
Where  the  figure  or  voice  has  been  recognised,  the  absent  person 
whose  presence  was  suggested  has  generally  been  in  a quite  normal 
state  at  the  time;  and  where  the  figure  or  voice  has  been  un- 
recognised, no  crisis  affecting  any  person  nearly  connected  with  the 
percipient  has  coincided  with  the  hallucination.  The  recognised 
phantasms  have,  moreover,  usually  represented  persons  whom  the 
percipient  was, habitually  seeing  in  real  life — often  a relative  or  a 
servant  living  in  the  same  house — so  that  the  delusion  may 
still 'be  explained  by  the  analogy  of  after-images;  or  else  they 
have  represented  dead  persons  whose  memory  was  dear  to  the 
percipient,  and  whose  images  might  readily  be  evoked  by  memory.1 
Of  the  unrecognised  phantasms  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
they  represented  any  one  at  all,  even  in  those  cases — the  majority  of 
the  whole  number — where  the  non-recognition  was  not  due  to  any 
indistinctness  in  the  phantasm,  but  was  of  the  same  kind  as  when 
in  real  life  we  see  a face  or  hear  a voice  which  we  perceive  at  once 
to  be  strange  to  us.  But  while  as  a rule  so  clearly  subjective, 
these  human  and  well-developed  forms  of  hallucination  include  also 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  instances  which  will  be  presented  in  the 
following  chapters  as  telepathic.  It  is  naturally  among  them, 
therefore,  that  the  ambiguous  cases  to  which  I have  referred  are 
principally  to  be  found. 

The  main  grounds  of  ambiguity  (apart  from  mere  uncertainties  as 
to  matters  of  fact,  which  are  not  now  in  question,)  are,  I think  four  in 
number,  and  are  summed  up  in  the  following  types2 : — 

(1) .  Coincidentally  with  a “ recognised  ” hallucination,  the  person 
whose  presence  it  suggested  has  been  in  a condition  more  or  less 
unusual ; but  we  may  fairly  doubt  whether  it  was  unusual  enough  to 
justify  even  a provisional  supposition  that  it  affected  the  percipient. 

(2)  At  the  time  of  a “ recognised  ” hallucination,  the  person  whose 
presence  ijt  suggested  has  been  apparently  in  a perfectly  normal 
condition ; but  the  same  hallucination  has  been  repeated,  and 
repeated  to  different  percipients ; and  the  improbability  that  the 
independent  hallucinations  of  several  persons  should  by  accident 

1 See  above,  p.  490.  The  term  “ after-image  ” in  connection  with  the  apparitioiw  of 
dead  people  was  suggested  in  a paper  privately  communicated  to  me  by  Mr.  J.  Jacobs. 

9 To  be  quite  complete,  this  list  ought  perhaps  to  include  the  ambiguity  which  is 
involved  in  the  percipients  failure  to  connect  his  impression,  at  the  time,  with  the  supposed 
agent ; but  this  point  is  sufficiently  noticed  elsewhere  (pp.  221,  452-3,  and  Chap,  xu.,  §5). 

506  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:  [ohap. 

represent  the  same  person  suggests  some  special  power  of  influence 
in  the  latter.1 

(3)  The  person  whose  presence  the  hallucination  presented  has 
been  in  a decidedly  abnormal  condition  at  a time  sufficiently  near 
the  time  of  the  hallucination  for  the  correspondence  to  he  observed ; 
but  the  correspondence  has  not  been  exact ; and  the  doubt  is  whether 
the  amount  of  discrepancy  is  such  as  to  admit,  or  such  as  to  preclude, 
the  hypothesis  of  a causal  connection.  The  question  here  is  the  one 
which  was  early  raised,  when  we  were  considering  thg  elements  of  a 
telepathic  case  (pp.  138-9),  and  was  then  left  undecided. 

(4)  The  case  is  so  far  suggestive  of  telepathy  that,  at  or  "very 
near  the  time  of  the  hallucination,  some  absent  person  has  been  in 
circumstances  which  might  seem  to  identify  him  as  the  agent ; but 
there  is  also  evidence  of  a condition  in  the  percipient’s  own 
mind  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  independent  cause  of  his 
experience. 

Let  us  begin  with  this  last  head,  and  inquire  of  what  nature  an 
independent  subjective  cause  of  the  phenomena  now  in  question  is 
likely  to  be. 

Though  for  the  most  part,  as  I have  said,  the  predisposing 
conditions  of  these  rare  and  transient  delusions  entirely  elude  us,  just 
three  emotioual  states  can  be  named  which  are  present  often  enough 
to  warrant  a suspicion  that  they  may  bo  truly  efficacious.  These  are 
special  forms  of  anxiety;  of  awe;  and  of  expectancy.  We  will 
consider  them  in  order. 

§ 5.  First,  then,  as  to  anxiety.  A person  who  has  been  brood- 
ing over  the  state  of  some  absent  friend  or  relative  suddenly  has 
a hallucination  which  suggests  that  person’s  presence.  Now  suppose 
that  the  crisis  which  was  apprehended — say  the  death  of  the  person 
whose  serious  illness  was  the  cause  of  the  anxiety — turns  out 
afterwards  to  have  occurred  at  the  same  time  as  the  hallucination. 
Let  us  take  a couple  of  cases — one  auditory,  the  other  visual. 

The  following  account  is  from  Mr.  Timothy  Cooper,  late  of  21; 
Cadogan  Terrace,  Victoria  Park,  E. 

“ January,  1882. 

“ My  father,  was  a Baptist  minister  at  Soham,  Cambridgeshire.  In  the 
year  1849,  being  one  of  a large  family,  I went  from  home  to  begin  the 
battle  of  life.  There  was  great  love  between  my  mother  and  me.  jJWfhOn 
I Md  been  away  about  a year  I was  sent  for  in  a hurry  to  see  my  dear 

1 For  illustrations  of  this  very  rare  and  isolated  type,  see  Chap,  xiv.,  §*4. 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES . 

.»•] 

m 

mothet*,  who  was  thought  to  be  dying.  I got  leave  of  absence  for  a week 
and  went  home,  and  the  last  day  before  Returning  to  business,  while 
sitting  by  my  mother's  side,  I said,  ‘ Mother,  if  it  is  possible,-  when  you 
pass  away  will  you  come  and  tell  me  ? ’ She  said,  1 £ will  if  I possibly 
can.'  On  tlie  morning  of  October  7th,  1850,  I awoke  and  felt  like  a soft 
hand  tqjich  me,  and  heard  the  well-known  voice*  say,  ‘1  am  gone,'  and 
something  seemed  to  glide  away  from  my  side.  I awoke  the  young  man 
whd  was  sleeping  with  me,  and  said,  ‘ My  mother  is  gone.  She  has  just 
been  here  and  told  me  so,; ' and  just  as  I said  it  the  clock  standing  on  the 
stairs  struck  3.  The  news  came  to  hand  that  my  mother  had  died  at  five 
minutes  to  3. 

“Timothy  Cooper.” 

We  have  verified  the  ("ate  of  death  in  the  Baptist  Reporter. 

Th’e  next  account  is  from  Miss  Summerbell,  of  140,  Kensington 
Park  Road,  W.,  who  has  had  no  other  hallucination  of  vision.  This 
one  was  mentioned  at  once  to  the  friend  with  whom  she  was  staying. 

“November,  1882; 

“ I do  not  know  how  far  the  following  story  will  be  considered 
significant,  as  I was  in  much  anxiety  about  the  gentleman  whom  it 
concerns  at  the  time.  I have  been  for  many  years  on  terms  of  close 
intimacy  with  the  family  of  a Dutch  nobleman  [Jonkheer  Huydecoper], 
who  reside  in  Holland.  Early  in  July  last,  I received  a letter  frgm  the 
eldest  daughter  of  the  house,  saying  that  her  father  was  seriously  ill. 
From  that  time  I received  news  of  his  condition  every  day.  On  the  27th 
J uly,  I received  a post  card,  saying  that  he  was  slightly  better.  I was 
staying  at  the  time  at  the  Spa,  Tunbridge  Wells,  and  suffering  much  from 
neuralgia.  On  the  night  of  the  27th,  I was  lying,  unable  to  sleep  from 
pain ; no  doubt  I dozed  now  and  then,  but  I firmly  believe  that  I was 
awake  when  what  I am  about  to  relate  occurred.  It  was  beginning  to  be 
light,  and  I distinctly  saw  every  object  in  the  room.  I do  not  know 
whether  it  is  necessary  to  say  that  in  Holland,  when  a person  of  distinc- 
tion dies,  a 4 prieur  d'enterrement 5 is  employed.  This  man  is  dressed  in 
black,  with  ^Jress  coat,  knee-breeches,  and  cocked-hat,  with  bands  of  crape 
hanging  from  the  corners.  It  is  his  office  to  go  to  all  the  houses  where 
the  deceased  was  known  and  announce  the  death.  On  the  morning  of 
which  I speak,  I saw  the  door  of  my  room  open,  and  a 4 prieur  cl'enterre- 
ment ' enter.  He  said  nothing,  but  stood  with  a long  paper  in  his  hand. 
I remember  distinctly  wondering  whether  I had  fallen  asleep  and  was 
dreaming ; I looked  round  and  saw  the  furniture,  and  the  window,  with 
'the  dim  light  coming  through  the  closed  blind.  I looked  at  my  watch  ; 
it  was  nearly  5 o'clock.  I looked  towards  the  man,  but  he  was  gone.  It 
is  nearly  6 years  since  I lived  for  any  time  in  Holland,  and  I had  forgotten 
the  custom  of  announcing  deaths ; or  at  least,  I had  not  thought  of  it  for 
years.”  Miss  SummerbelFs  friend,  as  it  proved,  had  died  about  an  hour- 
anfl-4-balf  before  her  #i$ion.  # • 

{We  may  note  here  how  curiously  the  idea  of  death,  in  working  itself 
out,  availed’  itself  of  materials  that  had  long  been  dormant — the  slumber* 
ing  -memories  which  associated  Dutch  customs  with  Dutch  friends  m 
the  Tperdfpient  s mind.] 

508  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE : [ohap. 

Supposing  these  incidents  to  be  correctly  reported,  which  we 
have  no  reason  to  doubt,  what  is  the  most  probable  interpretation  of 
them  ? Is  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the  percipients  were  a 
sufficient  cause  for  what  they  respectively  heard  and  saw  ? If  so, 
the  coincidence  between  the  death  and  the  hallucination  w®uld  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  very  conditions  which  led  to  the 
death  were  also  indirectly  (through  the  anxiety  connected  with 
them)  the  cause  of  the  hallucination.  But  to  answer  the  question,1 
we  need  some  independent  evidence  of  the  power  of  simple  anxiety 
about  an  absent  person  to  produce  a distinct  delusion  of  the  waking 
senses.  Anxiety  is  readily  enough  assumed  as  a veva  causa  of 
such  delusions,  just  as  lobster-salad  is ; but  can  the  assumption  be 
supported  ? Not  very  completely,  it  must  be  admitted.  The  cases  are 
nearly  all  of  the  same  indecisive  type;  for  the  condition  of  an 
absent  person  which  is  sufficiently  exceptional  to  create  grave 
anxiety  about  him  is,  as  a rule,  also  sufficiently  exceptional  to  afford  a 
conceivable  occasion  for  telepathic  influence,  supposing  telepathic 
influences  to  be  facts  in  Nature;  and  the  hallucination  can,  there- 
fore, <5hly  be  assumed  to  be  certainly  due  to  anxiety  by  rejecting  d 
'priori  the  other  explanation.  Thus,  in  the  collection  of  hallucinations 
which  I have  mentioned,  I find  none  of  such  a type  as  this — that  a 
mother,  in  great  anxiety  for  a sailor  son,  seems  to  see  his  figure  in 
the  room,  though  really  the  weather  at  sea  has  been  calm  and4 * * * * * *  he 
has  met  with  no  mishap.  Still,  evidence  pointing  in  this  direction 
does  exist.  For  instance,  the  records  of  witchcraft  contain  many  cases, 
which  there  is  no  reason  to  call  in  question,  ot  apparitions  of  ihe 
supposed  witch  to  the  supposed  victim — ind *eed  Bernard 2 mentions 
this  form  of  hallucination  as  one  of  the  signs  of  “ possession”;  the 
experience  seems,  however,  to  have  been  invariably  connected  with 
a thoroughly  morbid  and  hysterical  condition  of  the  percipient. 

1 A caution  may  not  be  out  of  place  against  the  common  habit  of  deciding  such 
questions  off-hand,  from  a single  instance,  by  mere  bias.  Some  informants  have  sent^  us 
cases  of  the  sort  expressly  as  subjective  experiences ; others  as  proofs  that  the  dying 
jjerson’s  thoughts  turned  to  them  at  the  last.  But  if  the  proof  of  telepathy  itself  requires 
an  accumulated  mass  of  evidence  much  more  must  the  decision  in  these  doubtful  instances. 

2 Guide  to  Grand  Jurymen , 1627.  As  typical  instances  I may  refer  to  the  History 

of  the  Witches  of  Renfrewshire,  pp.  74-5 ; the  report  of  the  Tryal  of  Witches  at  Bury 

St,  Edmunds  on  the  Tenth  Day  of  March , 1664  (published  in  1682),  where  some  of  the 

victims  who  saw  the  form  of  Amy  Duny  saw  apparitions  of  c&ts  and  mice  as  well ; &nd 

the  Tryals,  Examination , and  Condemnation  of  Four  Notorious  Witches  at  a Worcester 

assizes,  where  the  child  who  had  the  hallucination  had  apparently  been  previously 

unhinged  by  fright,  and  shortly  died.  As  a rule,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  apparitions 

took  mace  during  ilfits”—i.e.,  hysteric  or  epileptic  seizures  \ but  this  seems  not  to.have 

been  invariable.  See  Deodat  Lawson’s  Further  Account  of  the  Tryals  of  the  New 

Engkvnd  Witches , (London,  1093,)  p.  9. 

XX.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

500 

Again}  an  unusually  absorbing  possession  of  the  mind  with  the  person 
whose  form  appears,  at  the  very  moment  when  the  appearance  takes 
place,  may  make  even  an  “ambiguous”  experience  seem  almost 
beyond  question  subjective.  Thus  a lady  writes  to  us : — 

“ Esther  more  than  10  years  ago  a person  with  whom  I had  had  much 
to  do  was  lying  dangerously  ill.  In  the  evening  of  a certain  day  I was 
standing  in  my  own  room,  thinking  of  her  case  and  reproaching  myself  for 
one  or  two  things  in  connection  with  my  conduct  to  her,  when  I turned 
suddenly  round  and  saw  her  gazing  steadily,  very  steadily,  and  reproach- 
fully at  me.  She  died  that  night.  She  was  not  a near  relative  or  an 
intimate  friend.” 

In  • the  case  of  auditory  hallucinations,  the  evidence  is  clearer : 
some  of  these,  occurring  in  circumstances  of  anxiety,  bear  the 
conclusive  mark  of  a purely  subjective  experience.  A sister  in 
trouble'  about  her  brother,  who  has  had  an  accident,  hears  the  words, 
“ Your  brother  is  dead.”  A mother  nursing  her  son  in  a dangerous 
crisis  hears  an  imaginary  voice  say,  “ You  can’t  save  him.”  In  impres- 
sions corresponding  so  closely  to  the  hearer’s  state  of  mind,  and  not 
corresponding  to  the  actual  facts,  there  can  be  no  question  of  telepathy. 
On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that  anxiety  has  a 
certain  independent  tendency  to  promote  hallucinations.  Even  so,  we 
might  fairly  enough  argue  that  it  is  as  likely  to  facilitate  telepathic 
hallucinations  as  to  produce  purely  subjective  ones.  But  when  the 
question  is  of  admitting  cases  to  the  present  collection,  the  assumption 
ought  always  to  be  made  against  the  telepathic  hypothesis ; and  our 
principle  has  been  to  regard  anxiety  which  has  reached  a certain  pitch 
as?  distinctly  weakening  the  evidential  value  of  a coincidence,  though 
great  perfection  in  other  points — as  for  instance,  a complete  identity 
of  time — might  more  than  outweigh  the  objection.  The  fact  that  the 
anxiety  may  not  have  been  actually  dominating  consciousness  at  the 
moment  of  the  hallucination  cannot  be  held  to  remove  the  probability 
(such  as'  it  is)  that  the  hallucination  was  subjectively  caused ; for 
it  is  -the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  for  hallucinations  'which  can 
be  at  all  connected  with  previous  experience  to  be  developed  from 
ideas  that  are  quite  latent.1 

1 Hie  following  are  instances  in  point,  which  we  certainly  should  not  feel  justified  in 
presenting  in  the  cumulative  proof  of  telepathy.  . ,,  • . . , 

1 Miss  JBmma  Schau,  of  4,  Clifton  Road,  Camden  Square,  N.W.,  wntmg  in  April, 
1883,  recordsthat,  at  the  time  of  the  Danish-German  war,  she  was  woke  by  the  soundof 
a heavy  tread  slowly  approaching  her ; and,  then,  when  completely  awake,  saw  a shadowy 
form  stand  bv  her,  and  recognised  the  presence  of  her  favourite  brother,  who  was  in  the 
field,  and,  who,  as  it  proved,  had  been  killed  on  that  morning.  . 

" From  the  last  letters  that  we  had  received  from  my  brothers,  complaining  of  their 

gio  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:'  [chap 

§ 6.  The  next  predisposing  condition  of  hallucinations  tlfat  we 
have  to  consider  is  awe,  in  that  special  form  which  is.  connected 
with  the  near  sense  of  death,  and  with  which  elements  of  grief 
and  regret  are  often  mingled.  It  is  remarkable  how  large  a 
proportion  of  phantasms  of  the  recognised  sort  represent*  friends 
or  relatives  twhose  recent  death  is  being  mourned.  Out  of  230 
cases,  I find  that  27  are  of  this  type  ; of  which  6 took  place  on.  the 
day  or  the  morrow,  4 within  a very  few  days,  and  the  rest  within 
a very  few  weeks,  of  the  death.1  Now  the  reader  may  ask 
how  an  emotional  condition  due  to  a death  can  affect  ’ the  inter- 
pretation of  any  phantasms  that  could  possibly  be  regarded  as 
telepathic ; for  telepathy,  as  treated  in  this  book,  is  an  action 
between  the  minds  of  Living  persons.  But  it  must  be  remembered 
that  we  have  already  assumed  the  possibility  of  a certain  period  of 
latency  in  telepathic  impressions.  That  a certain  period  has  followed 
a death  before  the  occurrence  of  the  hallucination  representing  the 
person  who  has  died,  is  not,  therefore,  fatal  to  a telepathic  explanation 
of  the  case ; and  the  question  how  far  the  percipient’s  own  emotional 
state  • is  to  be  preferred  as  an  explanation  will  depend,  to  some 
extent,  on  the  length  of  this  intervening  period.  We  are,  therefore, 
led  on  to  the  wider  question — by  how  large  an  interval  must  two 
experiences  be  separated  before  the  possibility  that  they  may  be 
telepathically  connected  is  excluded  ? This,  it  will  be  seen,  is  the 
very  question  involved  in  No.  3 of  the  four  grounds  of  ambiguity 
above  set  forth. 

Putting  aside  for  the  moment  any  special  theory,  it  will  be  seen 
that  the  argument  for  a causal  connection  between  an  event  of  one 
class,  A,  and  an  event  of  another  class,  B,  arising  from  the  frequency 
with  which  such  events  approximate  to  one  another  in  time,  is  not  an 

inactivity,  I had  reason  to  believe  that  they  would  not  be  in  this  engagement  [the  battle 
of  Midsunde],  and  I went  to  bed  with  my  mind  free  from  anxiety  on  their  account.” 

The  next  narrative  was  sent  to  us  in  German  by  Fraulein  Wilhalmine  Ivens,  of  Altee 
152,  Altona,  Holstein,  who  has  had  no  other  hallucination.  The  incident  was  mentioned 
to  our  friend,  Miss  Porter,  almost  immediately  after  its  occurrence. 

“Aug.  31,  1884. 

“ In  the  summer  of  the  year  1873,  I was  staying  for  some  weeks  at  mV  home.  My 
father  became  ill,  and  shortly  before  my  return  to  England  he  went  to  the  country  to 
recruit.  At  the  beginning  of  September  I returned  to  London.  I was  anxious  about  my 
father;  but  a letter  which  I received  in  the  middle  of  September  reassured  me.  On 
September  23rd,  while  in  the  house,  I heard  my  mother  call  me  twice ; and  in  the  garden 
I heard  my  name?  distinctly  called  once,  in  my  mother’s  voice.  On  the  night  of  September 
23-24,  my  father  died.  On  the  25th,  I received  the  news  that  he  had  reached  home  very 
ill,  and  the  26th  brought  me  the  intelligence  of  his  death.” 

1 1 am  excluding  some  cases  where  the  interval  is  known  to  have  been  as  great  as  2 
months ; but  including  some  which  are  stated  to  have  occurred  “soon”  or  “yery  soon ” 
after  the  death,  without  specification  of  time.  * 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

xi-1 

511 

argument  whose  force  stops  suddenly  at  any  predictable  point.  It  is 
an  ’argument  whose  force  gradually  diminishes  in  proportion  as  the 
correspondences  of  time  throughout  a series  of  cases  get  less  and 
less  precise,  and  only  becomes  inappreciable  when  marked  gaps 
begin  to  occur  in  the  series.  Thus  the  fact  that  certain  psychical 
phenomena  form  a cluster,  comparatively  thick  at  first. and  gradually 
becoming  more  and  more  sparse,  in  the  few  days  that  follow 
deaths,,  would  strongly  indicate  some  common  bond  of  connection 
between  the  phenomena  and  the  deaths,  even  if  such  a thing  as 
telepathy  in  connection  with  living  persons  had  never  been  observed. 
But  ps  a matter  of  fact,  we  find  the  cluster  of  cases  as  thick  just  before 
life  has  ceased  as  just  after.  Hence  the  presumption  of  a single 
common  cause  for  the  whole  group. 

Now  not  only  is  telepathy  the  only  common  cause  which  it  seems 
possible  to  name ; and  not  only  is  it  the  cause  which  is,  so  to  speak, 
in  possession  of  the  field : it  is  a cause  with  which,  up  to  a certain 
point  after  death,  the  theory  of  an  emotional  origin  cannot  even  come 
into  competition.  For  however  efficacious  grief,  or  the  general  awe 
which  death  inspires,  may  be  to  provoke  hallucinations  representing 
the  dead  person,  the  grief  and  awe  cannot  operate  till  the  fact  of  his 
death  is  known ; and  for  any  one  at  a distance  from  him,  this  knowledge 
must  necessarily  follow  the  death  at  a very  appreciable  interval.  Up 
to  that  point,  then,  we  must  hold  that  there  is  an  appreciable  chance 
that  the  hallucination  is  telepathic  in  character,  and  that  an  impres- 
sion, received  from  the  agent  before  or  at  death,  has  lain  latent  for 
a .while  in  the  percipient’s  mind.  At  the  same  time  this  theory  of 
latency  is  one  that  ought  not  to  be  strained.  The  fact  that  in  the 
majority  of  our  cases  there  seems  to  be  no  latency  at  all,  and  that  in 
another  large  group  the  period  of  latency  is  short,  establishes  a sort 
of  presumption  that  it  is  not  likely  ever  to  be  very  long;  and  whilo 
admitting  that  any  limitation  that  we  can  make  is  arbitrary,  we 
prefer — for  evidential  purposes — to  draw  the  line  early,  and  (as 
explained  in  Chap.  IV.)  we  have  drawn  it  at  12  hours  after  death. 

The  pases,  however,  where  knowledge  of  the  death,  and  the 
emotion  caused  by  it,  have  preceded  the  hallucination,  stand  on  very 
different  ground.  A new  element  is  now  introduced,  which  has 
seemed  to  many  weighty  authorities  a full  and  sufficient  explanation 
of  all  post-mortem  phantasms.  I am  not  aware,  indeed,  that  any 
' crucial  instance  has  ever  been  forthcoming—- that  anyone,  believing 
a friend  to  be  dead  who  was  really  in  a perfectly  normal  state,  has 

5,12  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE:  {chap. 

seen  his  “ ghost.”  Moreover,  most  of  those  who  have  attributedc^osf- 
mortem  phantasms  to  the  percipient’s  emotional  condition,  have  done 
so  under  an  & priori  conviction  that  with  physical  death  all 
possibility  of  affecting  others  must  necessarily  cease — a conviction 
which  we  do  not  share.1  At  the  same  time,  death  is  so  wholly 
unique  a fact  in  human  experience  that  it  seems  reasonable  to  \>eli&ve 
the  ideas  and  emotions  connected  with  it  capable  of  producing  very 
unique  effects ; and  personally  I am  disposed  to  regard  such  ideas  and 
emotions  as  probably  the  sufficient  cause  of  any  hallucinations,  that 
'-occur  while  they  are  present,  as  long  as  such  hallucinations  present  no 
features  which  the  percipient’s  mind  would  have  been  unable  to 
supply.  The  presumption  is  at  any  rate  so  strong,  that  no  experiences 
of  any  sort — even  though  otherwise  admissible,  as  following  within 
the  12  hours’  limit — have  been  included  in  our  telepathic  evidence, 
if  the  fact  of  the  death  was  already  known  to  the  percipient ; and 
this  principle  is  the  easier  to  justify  in  that  the  day  immediately 
succeeding  a death  seems  the  most  likely  of  all  periods  for  abnormal 
subjective  impressions  connected  with  the  death  to  occur. 

§ 7.  The  remaining  head  that  we  have  to  consider  is  expectancy. 
The  evidence  as  to  the  power  of  this  condition  of  mind  to  produce 
waking  hallucinations  is  rather  more  definite  than  in  the  case  of 
anxiety.  Braid  describes  a lady  who,  as  soon  as  the  idea  was  sug- 
gested to  her,  saw  coruscating  flames  issue  from  the  poles  of  a magnet, 
or  wherever  she  believed  the  influence  of  the  magnet  to  extend ; and 

1 As  our  telepathic  theory  is  a psychical  one,  and  makes  no  physical  assumptions,  it 
would  be  perfectly  applicable  (though  the  name  perhaps  would  be  inappropriate)  to  the 
conditions  of  disembodied  existence.  And  it  may  be  quite  fairly  asked  why  this  pos- 
sibility was  not  taken  account  of  above,  in  connection  with  the  phantasms  that  have 
shortly  followed  deaths.  What  need  is  there,  it  may  be  said,  to  trace  these  phenomena 
to  a state  of  the  agent  preceding  or  exactly  synchronising  with  his  physical  decease,  when 
his  psychical  life  may  be  supposed  to  be  continuing  after  the  gtbat  change  ? The  answer 
is  that  the  point  is  not  one  of  theoretic  possibilities,  but  of  evidence;  and  that  the  evidence 
for  no8t-mortem , communications  seems  to  us  inconclusive.  In  all  the  evidential  cases 
cited  in  this  book,  the  very  keystone  of  the  argument  is  tlio  coincidence — more  or  less  close, 
but  always  close  enough  to  be  remarked— with  death  or  some  other  external  fact.  That— 
and  often  that  alone— is  the  obstacle  to  regarding  the  cases  as  purely  subjective : failing 
that,  very  special  and  peculiar  features  must  be  present,  to  establish  even  aupresumption 
of  some  exciting  cause  external  to  the  percipient’s  own  mind.  For  example,  the  same 
hallucination  might  affect  several  persons  independently  and  at  different  times ; or  the 
phantasm  might  convey  information,  afterwards  discovered  to  be  true,  of  something  which 
the  percipient  had  never  known— this  last  condition  being  probably  the  only  one  which  .could 
prove  an  intelligent  external  cause.  A certain  amount  of  evidence  of  both  these  types 
exists,  of  a quality  which  makes  it  imperative  on  us  to  keep  our  minds  open  for  more; 
but  at  present  it  will  bear  no  sort  of  comparison  with  the  evidence  for  telepathy.  For  a 
sketch  and  criticism  of  the  present  state  of  the  question,  see  Mrs.  Sidgwick’s paper  “On 
the  Evidence,  collected  by  the  S.P.R.,  for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,”  in  Vol.  in.  of 
the  Proceedings . ° * 

XX.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

5\3 

in  thtf  dark,  liability  .to  this  form  of  delusion  seems  not  very  uncom- 
mon. Crycial  examples  of  a more  developed  type — except  in  crises 
of  epidemic  excitement  (see'Voi.  II,  pp.  187-S)— are  less  easy  to  find. 
I have  one  daylight  case  where  a man  who  was  searching  for  a 
tennis-ball  had  a distinct  apparition  of  the  missing  object  in  a spot 
where  it  was  not.  And  expectancy  may  probably  be  answerable  for 
a good  many  apparitions  seen  in  rooms  believed  to  be  “ haunted”  I 
select  the  following  example,  however,  as  free  from  all  superstitious 
associations,  and  as  almost  certainly  a hallucination,  and  not  a mere 
illusion.  A barrister — whose  name  I am  at  liberty  to  mention,  but 
not  fo  print — writes  to  me  : — 

* “December  21st,  1885. 

“Tn  October,  1885,  I was  stopping  for  the  night  at  the  Swan  Hotel  at 
B.,  on  circuit.  My  bedroom  was  No.  17.  My  friend  K.,  a brother 
barrister,  occupied  No.  16.  Between  No.  17  (my  room)  and  No.  18  there 
was  a communicating  door,  and  before  retiring  to  rest  I was  under  the 
impression  that  the  door  was  between  my  room  and  iny  friend  K/s.  I had 
told  my  friend  K.  so,  when  bidding  him  good-night,  and  he  had  jokingly 
remarked  that  he  would  come  in  and  frighten  me  during  the  night.  I dis- 
covered before  going  to  bed  that  our  rooms  did  not  communicate.  I must 
have  been  asleep  some  hours,  when  I woke  up  with  a sensation  that>  some- 
one was  close  to  my  bed,  and  feeling  about  the  other  side  of  the  chintz 
curtain  at  the  head  of  the  bed.  I could  hear  the  rustling  and  crackling 
of  the  curtain  close  to  my  face.  I felt  perfectly  unable  to  ijnoVe,  or 
protect  myself — not  through  any  fear,  but  from  a »want  of  power  of 
movement,1  After  a few  seconds  this  powerlessness  went  off,  and  I sprang 
out  of  bed,  and  saw  the  figure  of  my  friend  K.  retreating  towards  the  foot 
of  the  bed.  He  kept  his  face  averted,  his  head  a little  bent,  but  I could 
see  the  wire  and  one  of  the  glasses  of  his  spectacles  as  he  turned  from 
me  ; he  was  dressed  in  his  night-shirt.  And  what  made  me  believe  in  the- 
reality  of  the  appearance  was  the  4 solidity  * of  the  white  nightdress,  and 
the  light  on  the  spectacles.  The  room  was  in  dim  light,  owing  to  gas- 
lamps  in  street,  and  a fanlight  over  door  admitting  light  from  gas  in 
passage.  I grasped  at  my  friend  with  both  hands,  and  supposed  I had 
missed  him  as  my  hands  met  in  the  grasp.  I attempted  again  to  grasp 
him,  when  he  disappeared  as  if  through  the  floor  under  the  washing-stand. 

I then  realised,  with  some  interest,  that  it  was  a hallucination,  and  I 
sat  on  the  bed,  wide  awake,  interested  in  thinking  it  over.  I told  K.  of 
it  next  morning.  I am  uncertain  whether  there  was  a fan-light  over  the 
door,  but  ouch  was  my  impression  at  the  time  : anyway,  the  room  was 
light.  “T.  H.  L.” 

“ K.”  sent  me  a completely  concordant  account  a-  month  earlier.  He- 
says  *that  he  never  walked  in  his  sleep,  and  adds  : — - . • 

u I had  no  notion  where  L.’s  room  was  that  night,  but  afterwards 

1 1 have  two  other  cases  where  a subjective  hallucination  seen  on  waking  was  accom- 
panied b/ inability  to  speak  or  move.  See  also  the  telepathic  case  No.  210,  below. 

5J4  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE : {chap. 

found  that  it  was  separated  from  mine  by  a passage.  I don’t  thii&k  the 
sleep-walking  theory  is  possible ; and  he  is  quite  clear  as  to  my  vanishing.’ * 

c 

The  auditory  examples  are  commoner  and  clearer.  As  might 
be  expected,  they  are  specially  connected  with  sounds  which 
occur  in  an  isolated  way,  such  as  those  of  bells  and  clocks.  Thus  a 
lady  tells  me  that  more  than  once,  in  her  student-days,  when 
wondering  what  time  it  was,  she  distinctly  heard  the  college  clock 
strike,  and  then  ascertained  that  the  impression  had  been  a delusion. 
She  has  also  heard  an  imaginary  “ Come  in,”  after  knocking  at  a door. 
Another  lady  not  unfreqiiently  had  a similar  clock-hallucination  when 
she  was  afraid  of  being  late  in  the  morning.  A gentleman  tells  me  that 
he  has  had  the  hallucination  of  hearing  billiard-balls,  when  in  bed  near 
a billiard-room.  That  the  habit  of  half-unconsciously  looking  out  for 
any  particular  sound  has  a tendency  to  produce  a phantasm  of  it  is 
also  shown  by  the  experience  of  domestic  servants.  I have  cases  from 
two  members  of  this  class  who  occasionally,  when  at  their  household 
work,  have  heard  the  voice  of  their  mistress  calling  them  in  tones 
as  unmistakeable  as  if  they  were  real.  And  another  informant  tells 
me  that  she  distinctly  heard  her  father’s  voice  call  to  her  one  morning, 
“ Come,  Sissy,  it’s  past  8,  you’re  late,”  and  ascertained  that  he  had 
said  nothing.  No  one  will  doubt  that  such  experiences  as  these  are 
purely  subjective.t 

Cases  occur,  however,  where  the  other  explanation  seems  less 
clearly  excluded.  Mr.  Charles  Ede,  of  Wonersh  Lodge,  Guildford,  a 
doctor  by  profession,  and  who  describes  himself  as  a very  unlikely  person 
to  be  “ deceived  by  morbid  fancies,”  sends  us  the  following  example. 
Some  ladies  who  lived  about  half-a-mile  from  him  had  a large  alarm- 
bell  outside  their  house,  and  one  night  he  seemed  distinctly  to  hear 
the  sound  of  this  bell  He  learnt  afterwards  that  there  had  been  an 
alarm  of  thieves  that  night,  and  that  at  the  very  time,  1.30  a.m.,  when 
he  was  startled  by  the  sound,  his  friends  had  been  on  the  point  of 
ringing  the  bell  in  the  hope  that  it  would  bring  him ; but  they  had 
not  actually  rung  it.  The  hallucination  may  have  been  due  to  the 
sub-conscious  idea  of  a possible  summons  in  Mr.  Ede’s  mind ; and  thp 
coincidence  may  probably  have  been  accidental ; but  if  such  a thing  as 
telepathy  exists,  the  probability  does  not  amount  to  certainty.  Again, 
a clergyman  'is  awakened  at  7.30  one  morning  by  the  sound  of  his 
name,  ascertains  that  no  one  has  called  him,  and  learns  in  less  than 
an  hour  that  a friend,  for  whom  he  was  fulfilling  a trust,  had 
unexpectedly  died  at  7.30  that  morning.  He  has  never  on  any  other 

XI.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES. 

515 

occasion  heard  an  imaginary  voice.  Still,  an  experience  of  this  sort 
which  faHs  at  the  very  time  when  the  hearer  is  in  the  habit  of 
being  woke,  and  when  the  organism  may  be  supposed  to  be  uncon- 
sciously expectant  of  a sudden  sound,  must  be  classed  as  ambiguous. 

A type  of  case  which  often  makes  a great  impression  on  those 
who  experience  it  is  where  the  expectation  is  of  some  one’s  arrival. 
The  following  auditory  specimen  is  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox  Powys, 
already  mentioned  (p.  271). 

“July,  1882. 

* “i  was  expecting  my  husband  home,  and  shortly  after  the  time  he 
ought  to  have  arrived  (about  10  p.m.)  I heard  a cab  drive  up  to  the  door, 
the  bell  ring,  my  husband’s  voice  talking  with  the  cabman,  the  front  door 
open,  and  his  step  come  up  the  stairs.  I went  to  the  drawing-room,  opened 
it,  and  to  niy  astonishment  saw  no  one.  I could  hardly  believe  he  was 
not  there,  the  whole  thing  was  so  vivid,  and  the  street  was  particularly 
quiet  at  the  time.  About  20  minutes  or  so  after  this  my  husband  really 
arrived,  though  nothing  sounded  to  me  more  real  than  it  did  the  first 
time.  The  train  was  late,  and  he  had  been  thinking  I might  be  anxious. 

“ Amy  C.  Powys.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Powys  adds  : — 

“ To  me  the  whole  thing  was  very  noisy  and  real,  but  no  one  else  can 
have  heard  anything,  for  the  bell  I heard  ring  was  not  answered.  It  was 
a quiet  street  in  town,  and  there  was  no  vehicle  of  any  kind  passing  at 
the  time ; and  on  finding  no  one  on  the  landing  as  I expected,  I went  at 
once  to  the  window,  and  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen,  and  no  sound  to  be 
heard,  which  would  have  been  the  case  had  the  cab  been  driven  off.” 

NoW  the  hearing  of  a bell,  and  the  hearing  of  a carriage  driving 
up,  are  both  ' known  forms  of  subjective  impression,  even  apart 
from  expectancy,  nor  is  there  anything  odd  in  their  combination ; 
and  if,  as  I suspect,  slight  hallucinations  of  such  non-vocal  sounds 
are  tolerably  common,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  expectancy  might 
exaggerate  them.  The  recognised  voice  was,  no  doubt,  a more  ■ 
distinctive  feature ; but  in  the  percipient’s  circumstances,  and 
after  the  other  sounds  heard,  this  seems  too  natural  an  addition  to 
warrant  us  in  connecting  it  with  the  fact  that  her  husband’s 
thoughts  happened  to  be  directed  to  her  at  the  time.  And  if  this 
oase  may  »be  dismissed,  A fortiori  may  others  of  a less  prolonged 
and  complicated  kind — especially  those  lacking  the  distinct  timbre* 
element  of  bell  and  voice,  and  so  more  easily  accounted  for  as  mere 
misinterpretations  of  real  sounds  whose  source  wa^  not  evident. 

In  the  parallel  visual  cases,  the  impression  is,  at  any  rate,  often 
of  the  most  distinctive  and  unmistakeable  kind ; and  it  is  impossible 
not*to  be  struck  by  the  number  of  instances  in  which  this  startling 
* 2 k 2 

5*16  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  SANE : [chap. 

experience — the  single  visual  hallucination  of  a persons  life— has 
represented  the  figure  of  a friend  or  relative  who  was  on  his  !way  to  the 
place  where  his  figure  appeared,  and  whose  mind  was  probably  to 
some  extent  picturing  his  own  arrival.1 * * * * * * *  None  the  less,  I think, 
if  expectancy  existed  on  the  percipient's  part,  must  it  be  assumed 
to  have  been  the  sufficient  cause  of  the  hallucination.  Such  a case 
as  the  following,  sent  to  us  by  the  Rev.  F.  R.  Harbaugh  (Pastor  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church),  Red  Bank,  Monmouth  Co.,  New  "Jersey, 

U.S.A.,  is  very  instructive.  t 

“ February  7th,  1884. 

“ While  a resident  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  I made  an  appoint- 
ment to  meet  a personal  friend.  At  the  appointed  hour  I was  at  the 
designated  place.  My  friend  was  tardy  in  his  appearing.  After  a while, 
however,  I saw  him  approaching  (or  thought  I did).  So  assured  was  I 
of  his  advance  that  I advanced  to  meet  him,  when  presently  he 
disappeared  entirely.  * ' 

“ The  locality  where  I thought  I saw  his  approach  was  open,  and 
unobstructed  by  any  object  behind  which  he  could  have  disappeared.  Only 
by  leaping  a high  brick  wall  (an  enclosure  of  a burying-ground)  could 
he  have  secreted  himself.  The  hallucination  was  complete — so  distinct 
as  to 9 'lead  me  to  advance  to  meet  him  without  a thought  of  Optical 
illusion. 

“ I immediately  went  to  the  office  of  my  friend,  and  there  learned 
from  him  that  he  had  not  been  away  from  his  desk  for  several  hours. 

“ F.  R.  HARBAUGH.” 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Harbaugh  adds  : — 

*■ 

“ The  appointment  was  forgotten  by  my  friend,  as  he  stated  in  his 
apology  when  I entered  his  office.” 

Telepathy  from  an  unconscious  region  of  the  defaulter's  mind 
would  scarcely  be  a plausible  explanation  of  this  occurrence. 

At  first  sight  it  may  perhaps  seem  strange  that  the  ordinary 
every-day  sort  of  expectancy  which  existed  in  these  cases  should  be  a 
sufficient  cause  for  so  rare  and  startling  a delusion.  But  remembering 
that  in  the  majority  of  startling  delusions  of  the  sort  there  is  no 

1 The  following  case,  from  Mrs.  Smith,  of  9,  Morden  Road,  Blackheath,  is  a typical 
one.  **  • 

44  My  father  and  mother  lived,  when  young,  near  to  St.  Albans,  in  a house  separated 
by  three  fields  from  the  high  road.  My  father  had  been  staying  in  Warwickshire,  and 
was  returning  by  the  night  mail  coach.  My  mother  had  risen  early  to  be  ready  for  his 

return,  and  after  seeing  that  breakfast  and  a bright  fire  were  ready  for  his  reception,  she 

took  her  work  to  the  window  and  sat  there  awaiting  my  father’s  return.  She  presently 

looked  up  and  saw  him  approaching ; she  watched  him  until  close  to  the  house,  when  she 

went  to  the  house  door  intending^  meet  him,  but  he  had  vanished.  Half  an  hour  after- 

wards he  really  arrived.  My  mother  was  a Quakeress  of  exceeding  truthfulness,  and 

possessing  to  the  full  the  perfect  self-command  and  self -repression  inculcated  by  her  sect. 

1 have  often  heard  her  say  that  she  never  had  seen  my  father  more  distinctly  than  on  that 
occasion.” 

XI.] 

AMBIGUOUS  CASES . 

5f7 

assignable  cause  at  all,  and  that  a person  m&y  therefore  be  on  the 
very  verge  of  hallucination  without  knowing  it,  we  may  not  unreason- 
ably suppose  that  a very  slight  ostensible  cause  might  give  the  final 
impulse.  It  must  be  noticed,  moreover,  that  in  these  arrival-cases 
the  alternative  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  subjective  origin  of  the  hallu- 
cination is  by  no  means  clear.  For  what  would  the  telepathic, 
explanation  involve  ? That  on  the  agent’s  part  the  mere  sense  of  being 
about*  to  arrive,  with  thoughts  perhaps  affectionately  turning 
to  the  percipient,  is  adequate  to  generate  a telepathic  impulse. 
Now  have  we  any  right  to  make  such  an  assumption  ? 

§ '8.  This  question,  it  will  be  seen,  brings  us  round  to  the  head  of 
ambiguity  numbered  1 in  the  above  list ; — where  the  doubt  was 
whether  a supposed  agent’s  condition  is  abnormal  enough  for  a 
synchronous  hallucination  of  the  percipient  to  form  with  it  a 
coincidence  deserving  of  attention.  And  it  happens  that  it  is  only 
in  the  arrival- cases  that  this  question  has  practically  been  difficult 
to  decide.  Many  individual  incidents  of  other  types  have,  of  course, 
been'  excluded  from  our  evidence,  on  the  ground  that  the  abnormality 
of  the  alleged  agent’s  condition  was  only  slight,  or  that  it  was  pro- 
longed over  a considerable  time  ; 1 but  these  arrival-cases  seem  to 

♦ 

1 I give  the  following  case  as  an  interesting  puzzle  : the  reader  must  decide  whether 
or  not  it  affords  evidence  for  telepathy.  The  narrator,  Mr.  W.  A.  8.,  is  an  unexception- 
able witness,  and  has  never  had  any  other  visual  hallucination. 

" January  14th,  1883. 

“ In  the  month  of  April,  1871,  about  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  I was  sitting  in  the 
drawing-room  of  my  father’s  house,  in  Pall  Mall.  The  window  of  the  room  fronted  south  ; 
and  the  sun  was  shining  brightly  in  at  the  window.  I was  sitting  between  the  fire-place 
and  the  window,  with  my  back  to  the  light ; my  niece  was  sitting  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  fire-place ; and  opposite  me,  at  the  further  comer  of  the  room,  was  a door,  partly  open, 
leading  directly  to  the  staircase.  I saw  what  I supposed  at  the  first  moment  to  be  dirty 
soapy  water  running  in  at  the  door  ; and  I was  in  the  act  of  jumping  up  to  scold  the 
housemaid  for  upsetting  the  water,  when  I saw  that  the  supposeuVater  was  the  tail  or 
train  of  a lady’s  dress.  The  lady  glided  in  backwards,  as  if  sne  had  been  slid  in  on  a slide, 
each  part  of  her  dress  keeping  its  place  without  disturbance.  She  glided  in  till  I could  see 
the  whole  of  her,  except  the  tip  of  her  nose , her  Ups,  and  the  tip  of  her  chin,  which  were 
hidden  by  the  edge  of  the  door , Her  head  was  slightly  turned  over  her  shoulder,  and  her 
eye  also  turned,  so  that  it  appeared  fixed  upon  me.  She  held  her  arm,  which  was  a very 
fine  one,  in  a peculiar  way,  as  if  she  were  proud  of  it.  She  was  dressed  in  a r»ale  blue 
evening  dress,  worked  with  white  lace.  I instantly  recognised  the  figure  as  a lady  whom 
it  had  knowif  some  25  years  or  more  before  ; and  with  whom  I had  frequently  danced.  She 
was  a bright,  dashing  girl*  a good  dancer,  and  we  were  good  friends,  but  nothing  more. 
She  had  afterwards  married,  and  I had  occasionally  heard  of  her,  but  do  not  think  I had 
seen  her  for  certainly  more  than  20  or  25  years.  She  looked  much  as  1 used  to  see  here- 
with Jong  curls  and  bright  eyes,  but  perhaps  something  stouter  and  mop  matronly. 

“ I said  to  myself,  ‘This  is  one  of  those  strange  apparitions  i have  often  heard  of.  I 
will  watch  it  as  carefully  as  I can.’  My  niece,  who  did  not  see  the  figure,  in  the  course  of 
a minute  or  two  exclaimed,  ‘Uncle  A.,  what  is  the  matter  with  you?  you  look  as  if  you 
saw  a ghost  ! ’ I motioned  her  to  be  quiet,  as  I wished  to  observe  the  thing  carefully  \ and 
an  impression  came  upon  me  that  if  I moved  the  thing  would  disappear.  I tried  to  find 
outnvfietfter  there  was  anything  in  the  ornaments  on  the  walls,  or  anything  else  which 
could  suggest  the  figure : but  I found  that  all  the  lines  close  to  her  cut  the  outline  of  her 

5l8  TRANSIENT  HALLUCINATIONS  OF  THE  ' SANE.  [chap. 

form  a distinct  little  class  of  their  own.  It  happens  also  that  some 
of  them  have  presented  features  which  tell  rather  strongly‘in  favour 
of  a telepathic  origin.  For  instance,  the  vision  representing  the 
coming  person  has  included  some  detail  of  dress  or  appearance  which 
the  percipient’s  mind  would  have  been  most  unlikely  to  supply ; or 
.again,  though  the  person  whom  the  vision  represented  was  actually 
about  to  arrive,  his  arrival  was  improbable  and  unexpected,  and 
therefore  the  vision  could  not  be  connected  with  the  percipient’s 
attitude  of  mind.  Such  instances — though  forming  to$  small  a group , 
to  be  conclusive — do  not  seem  any  longer  to  be  ambiguous  in  at  all 
the  same  degree  as  those  before  considered,  and  they  may  fairly  take 
their  place  among  the  positive  evidence  in  a later  chapter. 1 On  the 
other  hand — in  view  of  the  fact  that  in  the  vast  majority  of  the  cases 
where  the  evidence  for  telepathy  reaches  a certain  strength,  the  agent 
is  doing  or  suffering  something  much  more  remarkable  than  merely, 
returning  home — we  do  not  feel  that  the  telepathic  explanation  can 
claim  any  high  degree  of  probability  in  any  arrival-case  where  the 
hallucination  has'  not  presented  some  exceptional  evidential  feature  ; 
and  accordingly  no  such  case  has  been  admitted  in  the  sequel. 

The  discussion  of  these  ambiguous  cases  has  not,  I hope,  been 
altogether  without  positive  instruction  ; but  it  was  necessary,  if  only 
to  clear  the  way  for  further  examination  of  the  telepathic  phantasies. 
For  if  the  question  whether,  or  in  what  sense,  those  phantasms  are 
hallucinations  requires  us  to  compare  them  with  other  hallucinations 
of  the  sane,  the  comparison  must  clearly  be  confined  to  cases  which 
are  certainly  subjective,  to  the  exclusion  of  cases  which  may  conceiv- 
ably themselves  be  telepathic. 

figure  at  all  sorts  of  angles,  and  none  of  these  coincided  with  the  outline  of  her  figure,  and 
the  colour  of  everything  around  her  strongly  contrasted  with  her  colour.  In  the  course  of 
a few  minutes,  I neard  the  door-bell  ring,  and  I heard  my  brother’s  voice  in  the  hall.  He 
came  upstairs,  and  walked  right  through  the  figure  into  the  room.  The  figure  then  began 
to  fade  away  rather  quickly,  at  first  losing  the  colours  and  then  the  form ; and  thougn  I 
tried,  I could  in  no  way  recall  it. 

“ I frequently  told  the  story  in  society,  treating  it  always  as  something  internal  rather 
than  external,  and  supposing  that  thelaay  was  still  alive  ; and  rather  making  a joke  of  it 
than  otherwise.  Some  years  afterwards  I was  staying  with  some  friends  in  ’Suffolk  and® 
told  the  story  at  the  dinner  table,  saying  that  it  was  no  ghost,  as  the  lady  was  still  alive. 
The  lady  of  the  house  said,  ‘ She  is  not  alive  as  you  suppose,  but  she  has  been  dead  some 

?ears.’  We  looked  at  the  peerage,  and  we  found  she  had  died  in  1871.  (I  afterwards 
ound  out  that  she  had  died  in  November,  whereas  the  apparition  was  in  April.)  .The 
conversation  continued  about  her,  and  I said,  4 Poor  thing,  I am  sorry  she  is  dead.  I have 
had  many  a merry  dance  with  her.  What  did  she  die  of  ? ’ The  lady  of  the  house  said, 

* Poor  thing,  indeed,  she  died  a wretched  death;  she  died  of  cancer  in  the  face.’  She 
never  showed  me  the  front  of  her  face  ; it  was  always  concealed  by  the  edge  of  the  door.” 

1 See  Chap.  xiV.,  §7.  In  § 6 will  be  found  a few  cases  where  even  the  condition 
of  arrival  was  lacking,  and  the  coincidence  that  suggests  telepathy  depended  sirflply  oti  a 
peculiarity  of  dress  or  aspect. 

XII.] 

CHAPTER  XII. 

' THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

§ 1.  The  main  points  which  I shall  illustrate  in  the  present  chapter 
are  two : (1)  the  gradual  development  of  many  telepathic  hallucina- 
tions ; and  (2)  the  frequent  embodiment  of  the  idea  which  is  at  the 
•root  of  them  in  an  original,  improbable,  or  fantastic  manner — its 
clothing  upon  (so  to  speak)  with  images  that  indicate  a distinct 
process  of  mental  activity.  Both  of  these  points  present  themselves 
also  in  hallucinations  of  the  sane  of  the  purely  subjective  clasp ; and 
the  consideration  of  them  will,  I think,  sufficiently  establish  tho 
parallelism — as  phenomena  for  the  senses — of  subjective  and  telepathic 
phantasms. 

_ As  regards  gradual  development, — one  form  of  it  might  be  found 
in  that  deferment  of  tho  percipient’s  experience,  which  is  as  frequent 
a feature  in  the  phantasmal  group  as  we  have  found  it  to  be  in 
other  groups  of  telepathic  cases.1  We  should  scarcely  look  for  any 
very  precise  analogy  to  this  deferment  in  the  purely  subjective  class ; 
inasmuch  as  the  connection  of  a purely  subjective  hallucination  with 
an  idea  which  has  previously  obtained  unconscious  lodgment  in  the 
mind  must,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  be  hard  to  establish.  I 
may,  however,  reference  more  to  the  IT  IMPORTS  incident,  and  to 
the  other  case  described  at  p.  492  note,  where  an  idea  which  was  so 
far  latent  that  even  a deliberate  search  for  it  failed  to  evoke  it, 
projected  itself  in  sensory  form  at  what  appeared  to  be  a quite  casual 
moment.  I will  add  an  experience  which  has  been  described  to  me 
by  a naval  Captain,  who  has  never  in  his  life  had  any  other  hallucina- 
tion’ of  the  senses.  During  his  first  important  command,  he  twice 
in  one  night  had  a distinct  auditory  impression  of  the  words, 
“ Captain  F.,  come  on  deck  ” — the  reality  of  the  impression  being 

1 See,  e.g.,  pp.  201,  265,  329. 

*>20 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

t> 

shown  by  the  fact  that  he  obeyed  the  imaginary  summons.  He  does 
not  recall  any  preceding  knowledge  of  danger.  But  it  turned  out 
that  the  course  which  the  ship  was  running  was  in  fact  a dangerous 
one ; and  it  is  natural,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  some  sub-conscious 
idea  that  his  presence  might  be  needed  shaped  itself  in  this  ofitward 
form.1 

But  the  development  of  which  I wish  here  to  speak  is  that 
which  occurs  after  the  abnormal  experience  has  actually  commenced. 
Such  development  may  take  various  forms.  Thus:i(l)  The  figure, 
may  be,  recognised  only  some  moments  after  it  has  been  perceived, 
or  even  after  it  has  ceased  to  be  perceived;  or  (2)  the  phantasm  itself 
may  take  shape  gradually;  or  (3)  the  process  of  illusion  may  in- 
clude several  distinct  stages.  In  all  these  cases  we  may  suppose  that 
the  idea,  at  first  but  dimly  conceived  and  vaguely  apprehended,  is 
working  itself  into  definiteness  (as  so  often  occurs  in  the  processes  of 
abstract  reasoning),  and  that  the  character  of  the  projection  under- 
goes a corresponding  change.  Nowhere  do  we  more  clearly  see  the 
affinity  of  the  waking  hallucinations  to  dreams,  which  often,  of 
course,  exhibit  the  working  out  of  an  idea  in  a prolonged  and 
elaborate  form. 

§ 2.  And  first  very  briefly  to  exhibit  these  types  among  purely 
subjective  experiences — the  following  case,  which  most  of  my  readers 
will  probably  refer  to  that  class,  is  one  where  the  phantasm  was  only 
recognised  in  the  instant  of  or  after  disappearance.  The  narrator  is 
Mr.  R.  Gibson,  of  Mulgrave  Cottage,  Limerick. 

“ February  25th,  1884. 

“As  well  as  I can  remember,  it  was  in  the  year  1862.  I know.it  was  . 
in  the  early  part  of  my  courting  days,  so  that  it  must  have  been  1862  or 
1863.  I was  walking  home  one  night  about  10  p.m. — the  night  was  not 
dark,  I could  see  clearly  for  many  yards  ahead — whftn  I met  face  to  face 
a man  in  the  bye-road  which  leads  from  the  high  road  to  my  father’s  house. 

I felt  that  sort  of  start  one  does  when  you  feel  you  are  coming  against 
something  in  the  dark,  without  actually  striking  against  it.  Then  the 
thought  came,  ‘ Confound  his  impudence,  why  does  he  not  move-  out  of  my 
way  ?’  and  I stepped  straight  forward,  intending  to  walk  bang  into  him, 
but  as  I stepped  right  up  to  him,  with  my  chest  up  to  him,  he  was  gone, 
and  the  instant  as  he  vanished  I thought,  ‘ Oh,  Lord,  that  is  my  Grand- 
father Gibson.*  I felt  rather  queer,  I can  tell  you,  but  I looked  well 
round,  and  there  was  no  one  near.  I carefully  went  to  that  place  night 
after  night  again,  and  watched  the  spot  often  other  nights  over  our  wall, 

1 The  more  striking  case  quoted  in  the  note  on  pp.  481-2,  may  without  improbability 
be  attributed  to  a similar  latent  idea  of  danger. 

.XII.]  TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS.  521 

and  I*eould  never  either  see  or  think  I saw  anything  again.  My  grand- 
father was  dead  about  11  years  at  the  time,  and  was  never  much  in  my 
thoughts,  as  I had  never  been  much  with  him  ; and  at  the  time  I was 
thinking  only  of  the  events  of  the  evening,  as  I suppose  most  young  men 
madly  in  love,  as  I was,  would  have  been.  I was  about  as  happy  and  as 
full  of  health  and  life  as  I suppose  any  fellow  could  possibly  be.  It  was 
quite  a puzzle  to  me  for  many  years  what  it  could  have  been  for ; but  I 
think  I know  now.”  [This  last  sentence  merely  refers  to  the  fact  that 
Mr.  Gibson  was  at  that  time  becoming  involved  in  an  affair  that  turned 
out  unfortunately.] 

The  gradual  formation  of  the  phantasm  is  a decidedly  rare 
phenomenon.  M.  Marillier,  in  one  of  the  most  interesting  accounts  of 
subjective  hallucination  ever  published,1  says  of  his  own  experiences, 
“ C’est  un  fait  interessant  k noter  que  les  hallucinations  n’apparaissent 
pas  d’ordinaire  d’emblee,  mais  qu’elles  se  d6veloppent  et  grandissent, 
se  rapprochent  peu  a peu,  tandis  qu’elles  disparaissent  toujours 
brusquement.”  On  the  whole,  I think  that  it  is  less  uncommon  for 
the  disappearance  to  be  gradual — a fading  away,  occasionally  accom- 
panied by  an  expansion  of  the  figure.2  Other  cases  do  not  get  beyond 
the  stage  of  indefinite  cloudy  forms.  But  I have  very  few  subjective 
cases  where  a definite  object  took  shape  out  of  a vague  mass.  One  of 
these  belongs  to  the  “ swarming  ” class — the  faces,  sometimes  hideous 
and  sometimes  beautiful,  being  described  by  my  informant  as  develop- 
ing out  of  mist.  Another  informant  tells  me  that  during  fainting-fits, 
to  which  in  boyhood  he  was  rather  liable,  he  always  saw  white 
cloudy  masses  pass  in  front  of  him,  which  gradually  assumed  a 
general  resemblance  to  human  forms.  A third  case  is  from  Mr. 
Robert  Collings,  of  118,  Earl’s  Court  Road,  S.W.  When  a boy,  he 
awoke  one  night,  and  found  the  moon  brightly  illuminating  the  side 
of  the' room  facing  the  bed. 

“ While  gazing,  1 distinctly  saw — rising  in  the  moonlit  space  between 
the  curtains  at  the  foot  of  the  bed — what  appeared  to  be  vapour  or 
cloud,  and  as  this  grew  higher,  it  gradually  assumed  the  shape  of  a draped 
female  figure,  holding  towards  me  in  one  hand  a lamp  and  in  the  other  a 
>l>asin.  frojn  which  steam  seemed  to  rise.  The  form  vanished  slowly,  and 
*1  afterwards  fell  asleep  without  experiencing  either  fear  or  horror.” 

[Mr.  Collings’  brother,  who  was  sharing  his  room  at  the  time,  writes, 
from  the  Royal  Naval  Club,  Portsmouth,  that  he  distinctly  remembers 
heating  of  this  vision  immediately  afterwards.] 

1 Revue  PhiLotophiquc  for  February,  1886,  p.  212. 

• * For  example,  Mr.  I.  Nicholl,  of  32,  Lancaster  Gate,  W.,  describes  to  me  a waking 
haHucinsftion  representing  a child  of  his,  whom  he  **  saw  in  his  night-gown,  coming  from 
the  window.  It  increased  in  size  and  gradually  vanished.” 

522  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  [chap. 

This  experience  may  probably  be  accounted  for  as  a recrudes- 
cence of  what  the  boy’s  eyes  had  shortly  before  beheld  'on  several 
occasions  during  a trifling  illness.  The  case,  however,  ought  strictly 
to  rank  as  ambiguous,  because  the  relative  who  had  tended  him  in 
this  illness  had  just  died  (see  p.  512).  It  will  be  seen  that  the  dis- 
appearance, as  well  as  the  appearance,  was  gradual. 

The  occurrence  of  subjective  hallucinations  in  several  stages  is, 
on  the  other  hand,  common  enough.  I have  mentioned  the  occasional 
development  of  an  undefined  impression  of  a presence  into  definite. 
Visible  or  audible  form  (p.  483,  and  see  Vol.  II.,  p.  201).  In  another 
case,  as  to  the  subjective  character  of  which  I myself  entertain 
little  doubt,  my  informant  describes  seeing  an  unusual  Light  on 
the  staircase,  looking  up,  and  then  perceiving  a deceased  relative 
standing  with  a candle  on  the  stairs.  Dr.  Jessopp  (p.  499,  note)  saw 
a large  white  hand,  before  he  turned  round  and  beheld  the  complete, 
form  of  his  nocturnal  visitor.  But  the  more  usual  type  is  where  two 
or  more  senses  are  concerned.  So  marked  an  instance  as  the  in- 
cident of  the  servant  and  the  message,  quoted  above  (p.  499,  note), 
is  no  doubt  exceptional ; but  a figure  which  speaks,  or  which  shakes 
the  percipient’s  arm ; the  sound  of  footsteps  or  of  an  opening  door, 
followed  by  an  entrance ; a voice  and  a kiss — such  incidents,  though 
far  less  frequent  than  hallucinations  of  the  single  senses,  are  yet 
well  represented  among  the  subjective  delusions  of  the  sane.  t 

§ 3.  I turn  now  to  the  telepathic  cases.  The  most  striking 
case  of  delayed  recognition  in  our  collection  is  perhaps  that  of  Mr. 
Marchant  above  (p.  207).  A case  where  the  phantasmal  figure  was 
taken  first  for  one  person  and  then  for  another,  the  latter  being  the 
one  who  died  at  the  time,  will  be  found  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  71.1  In  the 

1 See  also  case  501,  and  compare  the  very  parallel  dream-case,  No.  455.  There  is 
a curious  case  in  the  Supplement,  Chap,  v.,  § 2,  where  a phantasm  was  not  recognised 
at  the  first  moment,  owing  to  its  appearing  too  near  the  face  of  the  percipient 

As  it  happens,  we  have  only  one  simple  auditory  example  of  delayed  recognition ; 
and  that  one  cannot  be  presented  as  a numbered  item  in  the  telepathic  evidence,  since 
the  12  hours’  limit  (p.  1391  is  known  to  have  been  slightly  exceeded.  The  Uccount  was0 
written  down,  a few  montns  after  the  occurrence,  from  the  dictation  of  the  percipient — 
Sister  Bertha,  Superior  of  the  House  of  Mercy  at  Bovey  Tracy,  Newton  Abbot— who 
read  it  through  on  December  29th,  1885,  pronounced  it  correct,  and  signed  it. 

e “ On  the  night  of  the  10th  of  November,  1801  (I  do  not  know  the  exact  hour),  I.  was 
up  in  my  bed  watching,  because  there  was  a person  not  quite  well  in  the  next  room.  I 
heard  a voice,  which  I recognised  at  once  as  familiar  to  me,  and  at  first  thought  of  my 
sister.  Iteaid,  in  the  brightest  and  most  cheerful  tone,  ‘ I am  here  with  you.’  I answered 
looking  and  seeing  nothing,  * Who  are  you  ? ’ The  voice  said,  ‘ You  mustn’t  know  yet.*  I 
heard  nothing  more,  and  saw  nothing,  and  am  certain  that  the  door  was  not  opened  or 
shut.  I was  not  in  the  least  frightened,  and  felt  convinced  that  it  was  Lucy’s  [Miss 
Lucy  Gambier  Parry’s]  voice.  Ihave  neve?  doubted  it  from  that  moment.  1 had  not 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

52a 

xii.] 

two  fallowing  examples,  the  face  of  the  apparition  seemed  familiar, 
though  the  percipient  could  not  at  the  time  identify  it.  The  first 
is  from  Mr.  T.  W.  Goodyear,  of  Highfield  Villa,  Winchester. 

“ February  9th,  1884. 

(191)  “I  may  remark  first  of  all  I am  considered  by  my  friends  as 
possessing  iron  nerves,  am  passionately  fond  of  athletics,  and  certainly  not 
given  to  letting  imagination  or  fear  run  off  with  my  senses.  But  although 
I can  without  boasting  say  I hardly  know  what  fear  is,  I am  peculiarly 
susceptible  to  mental  impressions  $ that  is,  I can  often  tell  what  is  passing 
ijn  the  minds  of  others  (especially  my  wife)  when  out  walking  with  them.— 
so  much  so  that  I have  almost  frightened  one  or  two  people  by  offering 
to  tell  them  the  subject  bn  which  they  were  thinking,  and  in  some  cases 
exactly  what  they  were  thinking  about  that  subject.  However,  I daresay 
that  is  common  enough,  but  what  I am  particularly  writing  you  on  is 
to  tell  you  two  facts,  one  of  which  occurred  10£  years  ago,  and  the  other 
7 years  ago  nearly.  [For  the  second  case  see  Vol  II.,  p.  115.1  It  seems 
a long  time  ago  to  be  reproduced,  but  to  me  the  scenes  are  fresh  as  if  they 
only  happened  yesterday. 

“ The  first  was  this.  I was  going  from  the  house  I lived  at  to  a shop 
kept  by  my  brother,  and  when  about  half  way,  it  came  on  to  rain  very 
fast.  1 called  in  at  the  house  of  a lady  friend  and  waited  some  time,  but 
it  did -not  clear,  and  as  I was  afraid  my  brother  would  be  leaving,.  I said 
I must  go.  I rose  to  do  so,  and  went  into  the  hall,  and  my  friend  rushed 
away  up  stairs  to  get  an  umbrella,  leaving  me  in  the  dark.  In  the  higher 
part  of  the  door  was  a glass  window,  and  1 all  at  once,  in  the  darkness, 
saw  a face  looking  through  that  window.  The  face  was  very  well  known 
to  me,  though  for  the  instant  I did  not  associate  it  with  the  original,  as 
she  was#300  miles  away.  I instantly  opened  the  door,  found  nobody  there, 
and  then  searched  the  ivy  with  which  the  porch  and  house  are  covered. 
Finding  nothing,  and  knowing  it  was  impossible  anyone  could  have  got 
away,  I then  for  the  first  time  inquired  of  myself  whose  was  the  face  I 
lnfd  seen.  I at  once  knew  the  face  was  that  of  a married  sister-in-law  of 
my  wife’s.  I told  all  our  family  of  the  circumstance  directly  I got  home, 
and  judge  of  our  dismay  when  we  had  a letter  to  say  she  died  at  the  very 
hour  I*  saw  her.  Monday  was  the  evening  I saw  the  face,  and  on 
Wednesday,  when  we  were  at  dinner,  the  letter  came. 

“T.  W.  GOODYEAR.” 

In  answer  to  the  usual  question,  Mr.  Goodyear  replies  that  he  has 
had  no  other  experience  of  a visual  hallucination. 

heard  of  her  being  worse ; the  last  account  had  been  good,  and  I was  expecting  to  hear 
fhat  she  was  at  Torquay.  In  the  course  of  the  next  day  (the  11th),  mother  told  me  that 
she  had  died  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  rather  more  than  12  hours  before  I heard 
her  voice.” 

The  narrator  informs  us  that  she  has  never  in  her  life  experienced  any  other 
hallucination  of  the  senses.  9 • 

Mrs.  Gambier  Parry,  of  Highnam  Court,  Gloucester  (step-mother  and  cousin  of  the 
“ Lucy  ” of  the  narrative),  writes 

“ Sister  Bertha  (her  name  is  Bertha  Foertseh)  had  been  Jiving  for  many  years  as 
German  governess  to  Lucy  Anna  Gambier  Parry,  and  was  her  dearest  friend.  She  came 
to  us  at  oifbe  on  hearing  of  Lucy’s  death,  and  told  me  of  the  mysterious  occurrence  of  the 
night  before.”  J 

§24  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  ' [chap. 

Miss  Goodyear  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

“Hartley  Wintney,  Winchfield.^ 

“March  12th,  1884. 

“ My  brother  (Mr.  Goodyear,  of  Winchester)  says  you  wish  confirma- 
tion of  a statement  he  made  as  to  seeing  the  face  of  a friend — who  lived 
some  300  miles  off — the  evening  she  died.  We  are  none  of  us  likely  to 
forget  the  assertion  he  made  as  to  seeing  the  face,  one  evening  some  12 
years  or  so  ago  ; still  less  the  great  astonishment  when  two  days  after 
(midday  of  second  day)  we  had  a letter  to  say  she  had  died  on  that  particular 
evening.  My  other  brother,  who  was  away  from  home,  was  written  to 
on  the  intervening  day,  and  mention  was  made  of  the  strange  affair,  so 
- that  he,  too,  could  corroborate  the  statement,  as  his  letter  would  reach 
him  before  the  one  announcing  the  death  reached  us. 

“ Mary  Appleton  Goodyear.” 

A brother  of  Mr.  T.  W.  Goodyear  writes  : — 

“March  19th,  1884. 

“ I recollect  my  brother  mentioning  the  strange  occurrence  of  seeing 
the  face  of  a friend  a day  before  her  death,  though  he  was  in  Hampshire 
and  she  in  Yorkshire.  I have  not  kept  my  letter,  or  would  forward  it  to 
you,  but  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  the  account. 

“ G.  A.  Goodyear.” 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
November  3,  1872  ; consequently  12J,  not  10£,  years  before  Mr.  Goodyear 
wrote  to  us.  Mr.  Goodyear  seems  also  to  have  made  an  error  as  to  the 
day  of  the  week  ; for  Nov.  3 was  a Sunday.  But  it  seems  very  unlikely 
that  at  the  time  both  he  and  his  sister  should  have  been  wrong  in  their 
identification  of  the  evening  of  the  vision  as  that  of  the  death.  Mr.  G.  A. 
Goodyear’s  words  “ a day  before  her  death,”  if  more  than  a slip  of  writing, 
can  hardly  weigh  against  the  evidence  of  the  other  two  witnesses  : anrf  so 
far  as  they  had  any  weight,  it  would  tell  against  the  supposition  that  the 
vision  was  as  late  as  Monday. 

In  the  next  case  our  informant  is  unwilling  to  have  Kpr 
name  published,  as  relatives  might  object ; but  says  that  “ the 
narrative  can  be  verified  by  private  communication.” 

“ Belgravia  Institute  for  Trained  Nurses. 

“ December,  1884. 

(192)  “On  the  afternoon  of  Sunday,  December  18th,  1864,  my  father-in- 
law,  Mr.  B.,  my  husband,  and  I were  sitting  in  the  dining-room  at  D.  Hall. 
The  room  was  a large  one,  about  26ft.  by  30ft.  ; on  one  side  was  the 
fireplace,  with  a door  at  each  side ; opposite  the  fireplace  were  three 
windows ; standing  with  your  back  to  the  fireplace,  at  the  end  of  the 
room  on  your  right,  were  two  more  windows,  and  on  your  left  a blank 
wall.  These  windows  were  some  height  from  the  ground,  probably  7ft  or 
more,  so  that  no  one  could  look  in  unless  standing  on  a chair.  It. was 
dark,  and  we  Were  witting  round  the  fire,  the  shutters  not  having  been 
closed.  Mr.  B.  faced  the  two  windows,  I sat  on  the  other  side  of  the 
fireplace,  with  my  back  to  the  said  windows,  my  husband  being  in  the 
middle  facing  the  fire.  Suddenly  Mr.  B.  said,  ‘ Who  is  that  lookyig  iff  at 
the  window  ? ’ pointing  to  the  furthest  of  the  two  windows.  We  laughed, 

xn.] 

TELE  PA  TUIC  HALL  UCINA  TIONS. 

m 

knowfhg  that  no  one  could  look  in,  as  there  was  nothing  there  for  them 
to  Stand  oyi,  Mr.  B.  persisted  in  his  assertion,  saying  that  it  was  a 
woman  with  a pale  face  and  black  hair ; that  the  face  was  familiar  to 
him,  but  he  could  not  remember  her  name;  and  he  insisted  on  my 
husband  going  round  the  outside  of  the  house  one  way,  whilst  he  went 
the  other.  They,  however,  saw  no  one.  As  they  went  out  I looked  at 
the  clock.  The  time  was  5.45  p.m. 

On  the  following  Tuesday  I heard  of  the  death  of  my  mother,  Mrs. 
Ranking,  who  had  died  at  St.  Peter's  Port,  Guernsey,  exactly  at  5.45  p.m . 
on  Sunday,  December  18$A,  the  hour  at  which  the  face  appeared  at  the 
window.  She  had  been  delirious  before  her  death,  and  calling  piteously 
for  me.  Directly  Mr.  B.  heard  of  her  death  he  exclaimed,  ‘ It  was  Mrs. 
Ranking's  face  I saw  in  the  window  on  Sunday  ' (he  had  only  seen  my 
motlier  two  or  three  times).  We  were  not  aware  that  my  mother  was 
seriously  ill.  I do  not  presume  to  offer  any  scientific  explanation  of  these 
facts,  but  I firmly  believe  that  my  mother’s  last  thoughts  were  of  me,  her 
eldest  child.  I had  only  been  married  two  months,  and  she  had  not  seen 
me  since  my  wedding-day.  “]£.  A.  B.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  B.  says : — 

“ Both  my  father-in-law  and  my  husband  are  dead.  I know  of  no 
independent  way  in  which  I can  fix  the  date  of  the  apparition,  but  I 
know  that  my  husband  and*I  had  been  to  church  that  afternoon,  and  if 
you  l6ok  in  any  almanack  for  1864,  you  will  see  that  December  18th  Jin  that 
year  was  on  a Sunday,  and  that  was  the  day  on  which  my  mother  died." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  Mrs.  Ranking  died  on  Sunday, 
December  18,  1864,  “after  a short  illness." 

[I  have  had  a thoroughly  satisfactory  interview  with  Mrs.  B.,  who  is 
anything  but  a sentimental  witness.  She  showed  me  a photograph  of 
D.  HaH,  which  made  it  evident  that  the  face  at  the  window  cannot  have 
belonged  to  a real  person.  Even  a tall  man's  head  could  not  have  been  visible 
from  inside  the  room  where  the  party  were  sitting,  the  ledge  being  more 
than  6 feet  from  the  ground  ; and  there  was  nothing  under  the  window 
to  climb  up  by.  Still,  the  father-in-law  would  not  be  persuaded  but  that 
it  was  a real  face,  though  of  course  totally  unable  to  account  for  it.  He 
was  certain  he  knew  the  face,  though  unable  to  put  a name  to  it.  He  had 
seen  Mrs.  Ranking  only  twice.  It  is  practically  certain  that  he  had 
never  had  any  other  hallucination ; and  he  was  most  unwilling  to  regard 
this  as  one.  The  deafh  was  very  sudden,  from  dysentery.  Mrs.  B.  distinctly 
remembers  noting  the  time,  5.45,  while  her  husband  and  father-in-law 
were  searching.  The  light  was  bright  firelight.] 

In  tlfe  next  two  cases  we  have  the  feature  of  gradual  formation, 
as  well  as  delayed  recognition.  The  following  account  appeared  in 
the  Church  Quarterly  Review  of  April,  1877,  pp.  210-211. 

• • 

(193)  “In  the  house  in  which  these  pages  are  written  a tall  and  wide 
staircase  window,  with  a northern  aspect,  throws  a strong  side-light  on 
the  entrance  into  the  chief  living  room,  which  stands  at  the  end  of  a 
pdssag£  running  nearly  the  length  of^the  house.  It  was  after  mid-day,  in 

526 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

r [chap. 

mid-winter,  many  years  since,  that  the  writer  left  his  study,  which*  opens 
into  the  passage  just  mentioned,  on  his  way  to  his  early  dinnejr.  The b day 
was  rather  foggy,  but  there  was  no*  density  of  vapour,  yet  the  door  at  the 
end  of  the  passage  seemed  obscured  by  mist.  As  he  advanced,  the  mist, 
so  to  call  it,  gathered  into  one  spot,  deepened,  and  formed  itself  into  the 
outline  of  a human  figure,  the  head  and  shoulders  becoming  more  apd  more 
distinct,  while  the  rest  of  the  body  seemed  enveloped  in  a gauzy,  cloak- 
like vestment  of  many  folds,  reaching  downwards  so  as  to  hide  the  feet, 
and  from  its  width,  as  it  rested  on  the  flagged  passage,  giving  a pyramidal 
outline.1  The  full  light  of  the  window  fell  on  the  object,  which  was  so 
thin  and  tenuous  in  its  consistency  that  the  light  on  the  panels  of  a highly 
, varnished  door  was  visible  through  the  lower  part  of  th#  dress.2  It  was 
altogether  colourless,  a statue  carved  in  mist.  The  writer  was  so  startled 
that  he  is  uncertain  whether  he  moved  forward  or  stood  still.  He  was 
rather  astonished  than  terrified,  for  his  first  notion  was  that  he  was 
witnessing  some  hitherto  unnoticed  effect  of  light  and  shade.  He  had  no 
thought  of  anything  supernatural 3 till,  as  he  gazed,  the  head  was  turned 
towards  him,  and  he  at  once  recognised  the  features  of  a very  dear  friend. 
The  expression  of  his  countenance  was  that  of  holy,  peaceful  repose,  and 
the  gentle,  kindly  aspect  which  it  wore  in  daily  life  was  intensified  (so  the 
writer,  in  recalling  the  sight,  has  ever  since  felt,)  into  a parting  glance  of 
deep  affection.  And  then,  in  an  instant,  all  passed  away.  The  writer 
can  only  compare  the  manner  of  the  evanescence  to  the  way  in  which  a 
jet  of -steam  is  dissipated  on  exposure  to  cold  air.  Hardly,  till  then,  did 
he  realise  that  he  had  been  brought  into  close  communion  with  the  super- 
natural. The  result  was  great  awe,  but  no  terror,  so  that  instead  of 
retreating  to  his  study,  he  went  forward  and  opened  the  door  close  to 
which  the  apparition  had  stood. 

“ Of  course,  he  could  not  doubt  the  import  of  what  he  had  seen ; and 
the  morrow’s  or  the  next  day’s  post  brought  the  tidings  that  lii#  friend 
had  tranquilly  passed  out  of  this  world,  at  the  time  when  he  was  seen  by 
the  writer.  It  must  be  stated  that  it  was  a sudden  summons,  that  the 
writer  had  heard  nothing  of  him  for  some  weeks  previously,  and  th$t 
nothing  had  brought  him  to  His  thoughts  on  the  day  of  his  decease.” 

The  widow  of  the  narrator  writes  to  us  : — 

u Pozzoforte,  Bordighera. 

“December  18th,  1883. 

«. 

“ The  article  in  the  Church  Quarterly  to  which  you  refer  was  written 
by  my  husband,  but  I regret  to  say  that  I can  add  no  particulars  relating 
to  the  experience  he  therein  relates.  He  never  could  talk  of  it — could 

X 1 «. 

1 For  this  sort  of  formation,  compare  cases  311  and  315,  and  Mr.  Dix’s  case  in  the 
Supplement,  Chap,  iv.,  § 1.  The  appearance  of  mist  is  described  in  other  cases  which  do 
not  present  the  same  gradual  development ; see,  e.g,,  case  210  below ; Mrs.  Perryn’s 
case  m the  Supplement,  Chap,  v.,  § 1,  where  the  figure  seemed  to  have  a cloudy  fringe ; 
Mme.  Vavin’s  case  in  |,he  Supplement,  Chap,  iv.,  § 4,  where  it  remained  cloud-like 
throughout ; and  compare  the  appearance  of  “ massed  and  disordered  drapery”  in  case  252. 

2 This  peculiarity  has  been  observed  in  purely  subjective  hallucinations ; see.  Vol.  ii., 
p.  38,  note. 

8 I must  again  point  out  that  this  unfortunate  word  is  quite  opposed  to  our  own  view 
of  the  phenomena.  w 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS . 

527 

scarcely  bear  to  refer  to  it  even.1  I do  not  think  that  he  ever  had  any  other 
experience  of  the  same  kind.” 

The  next  account  is  from  a lady  known  to  the  present  writer, 
whose  only  reason  for  withholding  her  name  and  address  is  her  fear 
that  a near  relation  might  object  to  their  publication.  The  descrip- 
tion seems  to  warrant  us  in  regarding  the  visual  experience,  at  any 
rate,  as  a waking  and  not  a mere  “ borderland  ” specimen. 

“December  17th,  1883. 

(194)  “Years  ago,  a friend  and  myself  made  the  time-worn  arrange- 
ment that  whichever  died  first  would  endeavour  to  return  to  visit  the  other. 
Some  years  after,  I asked  this  man’s  sister  to  remember  me  to  him  and 
say,  *d;d  he  remember  his  promise,  and  having  received  for  answer 

4 Perfectly,  and  I hope  I shall  appear  to , and  not  she  to  me/  the 

whole  matter  passed  out  of  my  mind.  My  friend  was  in  New  Zealand, 
his  sister  I don’t  know  where.  One  night  I awoke  with  a feeling  some 
one  was  in  the  room.  I must  tell  you  that  I always  have  a bright  light 
burning  on  a table,  not  far  from  my  bed.  I looked  about,  and  presently 
saw  something  behind  the  little  table  ; felt  myself  grow  perfectly  cold  ;2 
was  not  in  the  least  frightened,  rubbed  .my  eyes  to  be  sure  I was  quite 
awake,  and  looked  at  it  steadfastly.  Gradually  a man’s  head  and  shoulders 
were  perfectly  formed,  but  in  a sort  of  misty  material,  if  I .may  use  such 
a word.  The  head  and  features  were  distinct,  but  the  whole  app&irance 
was  not  substantial  and  plain ; in  fact  it  was  like  a cloud,  formed  a.s  a 
man’s  head  and  shoulders.  At  first  I gazed  and  thought,  who  is  it,  some 
one  must  be  here,  but  who  ? Then  the  formation  of  the  head  and  forehead 
(which  are  most  marked  in  my  friend)  made  me  exclaim  to  myself 
4 Captain  W .’  The  appearance  faded  away. 

“ I •got  up  and  put  the  date  down  ; and  waited  until  news  from  New 
Zealand  was  possible.  I made  inquiries  about  my  friend,  never  doubting 
but  that  he  was  dead.  The  answer  always  came  4 No  news.’  At  last  this 
also, ‘We  are  so  anxious,  it  is  so  long  since  we  have  heard.  We  shall 
again  wait  another  mail,  and  write  to  so-and-so.’  And  then  came  the  news, 
a mere  scrap,  ‘ Have  had  a severe  fall  off  the  coach ; can’t  write ; head  all 
wrong  still.’  That  was  all,  and  pretty  much  the  exact  words  as  far  as  I 
can  remember.  In  due  time  we  heard  more.  He  had  fallen  off  the  coach, 
and  was  insensible  for  some  time,  and  then,  as  he  had  said,  his  head  was 
not  clear  for  a while*  I have  never  had  the  slightest  doubt  but  that,  while 
insensible,  his  spirit  came  here.  The  appearance  to  me  was  coincident 
with  the  time  of  his  insensibility.  I have  never  had  but  this  one 
experience  of  an  apparition.  “E.  W.  R.” 

• In  a subsequent  letter,  Miss  R.  adds  : — 

- ‘ “January  1st,  1884. 

“ I put  the  date  down  in  a book  I use  daily  : there  is  a page  for  every 
day  • in  the  month.  I mentioned  it  to  several  pefople-*~quite  3 or  4. 
One  was  extremely  amused  because  my  friend  had  not  died  \ which  she 

This  being  so,  it  would  scarcely  be  justifiable  to  publish  his  name. 

• 3 As*to  this  sensation  see  Vol.  ii.,  p.  37,  jpte. 

528  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  '[chap. 

always  used  to  assure  me  was — she  was  sure — a cause  of  sincere^. tegret 
to  me.” 

The  present  writer  has  seen  the  book,  which  is  one  containing  reading 
for  every  day  of  the  month.  The  words  written  in  pencil,  on  the  page  of 
the  15th  day,  are:  “Night  of  this  day,  March,  *74.” 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Miss  R.  adds  : — 

“I  saw  his  sister,  1 should  say  fully  a year  and  a-half  before  I saw  him 
myself,  but  as  this  is  not  to  be  substantiated  in  any  possible  way — and  is 
only  a thought — I cannot  verify  it.  I certainly  did  not  write  to  him  or 
hear  from  him,  between  the  time  of  my  sending  the  message  and  receiving 
the  answer,  and  his  appearing.  I am  not  aware  that  I had  had  anything 
to  recall  him  to  me  particularly. 

“ My  sister  has  written  the  note  on  the  other  sheet.  She  feels  as  sure 
as  I do  that  I told  her  very  soon  afterwards,  but  does  not  like  to  write 
more  positively.” 

The  following  is  the  sister’s  note  : — 

“ Ditchingham. 

“May  1st,  1884. 

“ As  far  as  I can  remember,-  my  sister  told  me  of  her  vision  soon  after 
it  occurred,  and  before  the  news  of  her  friend’s  accident  arrived.  It  is 
so  many  years  ago  that  I cannot  speak  more  positively. 

“Mother  C.” 

[In*  conversation,  Miss  R.  especially,  and  unasked,  confirmed  the*  fact 
that  the  feeling  of  a presence  in  the  room  preceded  the  vision.  She 
described  the  formation  of  the  figure  as  like  a cloud  taking  a definite 
shape.  She  further  said  that  the  hair  of  the  head  which  appeared  was 
distinctly  grey , and  that  this  was  the  chief  reason  why  she  did  not  sooner 
recognise  the  face.  Her  friend  had  black  hair  when  she  last  saw  him, 
and  she  had  never  thought  of  him  otherwise ; but  she  found  out  after- 
wards that  he  had  become  grey,  and  was  so  at  the  time  of  his  accident.1  She 
also  stated  that  she  had  ascertained  beyond  a doubt  that  her  vision  fell 
during  the  period  of  her  friend’s  insensibility.] 

The  previous  compact  in  this  case  is  to  be  specially  noted. 
It  is  a feature  which  we  have  already  encountered  (cases  146,* 
165,  169)  and  shall . encounter  again  (see  Vol.  II.,  p.  66).  In  the 
next  two  examples,  again,  a feeling  of  a presence  preceded  the  visual 
hallucination.2  Miss  Rogers,  of  56,  Berners  Street,  W.,  narrates  as 
follows : — 

“October,  1884. 

(195)  “ I was  on  a visit  at  Colnbrook,  in  Buckinghamshire,  iii  1878,  and 
one  night  when  I went  to  bed,  and  while  yet  fully  awake,  I felt  an  influence 

1 As  to  this  point  see  the  beginning  of  § 8 below ; and  compare  cases  449  and  515, 
where  a still  more  marled  change  \n  the  aspect  of  the  agent’s  hair  reappears  in  the  Vision. 

2 Cf.  the  “borderland  ” case,  No.  172,  where  the  apparition  was  preceded  by  a feeling 

as  of  “someone  bending  over.”  In  such  cases  one  may  suspect  that  what  is  described 
as  a sense  of  presence  (as  sometimes  in  ordinary  life)  is  really  a faint  auditory  impres- 
sion, not  noticed  as  such  and  here  of  course  hallucinatory,  like  the  visual  impression 
which  it  introduces.  Cf,  case  182.  201,  ° 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS . 

529 

as  if  *)me  one  was  in  the  room.  I sat  up  to  see  what  it  was,  and  saw  my 
grandmother,  in  the  plaid  cloak  she  usually  wore,  leaning  upon  my  mother's 
arm.1  I looked  round  the  room  to  see  whether  the  vision  could  have  arisen 
from  any  reflection  from  the  mirrors  in  the  room,  and  while  doing  so  I saw 
the  figures  walk  slowly  round  the  room  and  disappear.  I afterwards  ascer- 
tained ^hat  my  grandmother  died  in  London  about  the  time  I had  seen  the 
apparition  in  Buckinghamshire. 

“Rate  Rogers." 

In  conversation,  Miss  Rogers  told  Mr.  Podmore  that  she  was  not 
absolutely  certain  as  to  the  year  in  whicli  this  incident  occurred. 
Subsequently  she  found  from  the  Times  obituary  (as  we  had  meanwhile 
discovered  from  *the  Register  of  Deaths)  that  her  grandmother,  Mrs. 
Macdonald,  died  on  March  14,  1877.  . 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Rogers  says  that  she  has  had  no  other 
hallucination.  She  adds  that  the  phantasm  was  seen  “ soqh  after  getting 
to  bed,  about  10  p.m.  " ; and  that  “on  my  return  home,  J heard  that 
my  grandmother  had  passed  away  just  about  the  time  of  my  vision." 

Appended  is  a letter  from  Mrs.  Rogers,  (a  sister  of  our  valued  helper, 
the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,)  who  was  herself  nursing  her  mother  at  the 

time-  “ October  30th,  1884. 

“ On  receipt  of  your  letter  relative  to  the  hour  of  my  mother’s  death,  I 
made  inquiries  of  those  who  remembered  the  time,  and  I find  she  died 
nearer  to  12  o'clock  p.m.  The  reason  my  daughter  mentioned  10  las  the 
time  of  the  vision  only  depended  Upon  the  usage  of  the  family  she  was 
visiting,  who  generally  retired  at  10.  Her  memory  could  not  serve  her  to 
fix  the  time  exactly ; besides,  in  cases  of  visitors  being  in  the  house,  the 
family  remained  up  later.  The  exact  time  of  the  appearance  cannot  be 
noted  now,  only  that  on  reflection  my  daughter  thinks  it  would  be  later 
than  10*  Besides,  she  would,  perhaps,  have  remained  up  a long  time  in 
her  room,  conversing  with  the  lady  of  the  house,  before. going  to  bed,  as 
was  often  the  habit.  It  was  between  7 and  8 years  ago  that  this 
experience  occurred,  and  my  daughter  cannot  fix  exact  times  and  hours  ; 
but,  at  the  time,  she  thinks  her  vision  corresponded  with  the  time  of  the 
death.  My  daughter  is  very  ’sorry  that  a more  definite  account  cannot  be 
rgiven  of  the  circumstances.  The  facts  can  be  depended  upon,  but  the 
hours  and  times  have  entirely  slipped  our  memories. 

u My  daughter  suggests  that  she  was  so  greatly  attached  to  her  grand- 
mother that,  in'  so  continually  thinking  of  her,  the  vision  might  have 
come  through  the  influence  of  strong  imagination ; but  it  impressed  itself 
upon  her  mind  at  the  time  as  a real  presence,  and  she  told  me  about  it 
on  her  return  to  town.  She  did  not  expect  her  grandmother's  death  just 
tjien,  as  sl*B  had  been  ailing  for  years,  and  the  death  occurred  rather 

suddenly,  v ^ 

“Jane  M.  Rogers." 

.In  conversation,  Mrs.  Rogers  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  Miss 
Rogers,  being  absent  from  home,  did  not  know  of  &ny  change  in  her 
grandmother's  condition. 

The  following  is  a letter  from  Miss  R.’s  friend,  Mrs.  F,  She  is  nob 
1 As  to  the  appearance  of  the  se'^nd  figure,  see  p.  545  below. 

630 

TIIE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  ' 

[chap. 

explicit  as  to  the  vision  having  been  mentioned  before  the  news  of  the 
death  arrived.  But  we  presume  she  means  to  imply  that  it  was,  as  the 
question  was  definitely  asked  ; and  in  a previous  short  note  she  uses  the 
words,  “Kate  certainly  seemed  to  know  her  grandmother  was  dead, 
before  the  news  reached  us.”  « April  8th,  1885. 

“ Mrs.  R.  has  sent  your  note  to  me,  asking  me  to  reply  to  it ; but  it  is 
really  little  I can  tell  you  in  reference  to  the  matter,  beyond  that  Miss  R. 
felt  convinced  that  her  grandmother  was  dead  before  the  news  reached  us, 
from  a dream  or  yision1  (whichever  you  like  to  call  it)  that  she  had  had.  I 
cannot  give  you  her  words  as  she  told  it  to  me.  The  fact  that  Miss  R. 
had  a vivid  dream  in  reference  to  the  death  of  her  grandmother,  did  not 
strike  me  as  anything  but  natural.  She  was  always  deeply  attached  to 
her,  and  doubtless  had  gone  to  bed  with  an  anxious  mind,  knowing  that 
her  grandmother  was  ill.  “ C.  B.  F.” 

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  J.  G.  F.  Russell,  of  Aden,  Aberdeen- 
shire. 

“32,  Upper  Brook  Street. 

“January  3rd,  1886. 

(196)  “ Early  in  October,  1872,  whilst  at  H.  M.  Embassy,  at  Constan- 
tinople, to  which  1 belonged,  when  crossing  a garden  (which  separated  the 
secretary’s  house,  where  I lived,  from  the  Ambassador’s  palace),  on  my  way 
to  dine  there,  about  8 o’clock  in  the  evening  (it  was  about  dusk),.  I felt 
some  irresistible,  magnetic  sort  of  influence  compel  me  to  turn  round  and 
look  behind  me.2  I saw  an  indistinct  white  form,  about  the  height  of  a 
human  being,  gazing  at  me,  as  if  it  were  trying  to  attract  my  attention. 
It  was  only  a very  few  yards  off.  I at  once  walked  towards  it,  and  spoke, 
but  it  vanished.3  So  convinced  was  I that  something  had  got  within  the 
precincts  of  the  Embassy  walls  and  gates  (all  being  well  secured 'and 
watched),  that  I returned  to  my  own  quarters,  examined  the  closed  gate, 
and  questioned  the  guard  on  duty  as  to  whether  any  stranger  could  have 
entered.  c Impossible,’  he  said ; and  our  sporting  dogs,  none  of  which  were 
white,  were  sleeping  peacefully  on  the  doorsteps.  I then  returned,  through 
the  same  garden,  to  the  Embassy  Palace,  tp  dinner,  and  back  again  at 
night.  I saw  nothing.  Again  I made  inquiry  whether  any  intruder  had 
entered  the  gates,  but  it  was  proved  to  me  to  be  materially  impossible  ;* 
nor  could  any  one  have  scaled  the  high  wall,  or  disappeared  as  quickly  as 
did  the  white  figure  when  I advanced  towards  it. 

“Very  soon  after,  I learnt  that  a married  aunt  of  mine,  to  whom  my 
family  and  myself  were  much  attached,  had  died  in  my  father’s  house,  in 
the  North  of  Scotland,  during  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  on  which  I 
saw  the  figure.  “ J.  G.  F.  Russell.” 

Mr.  Russell  adds,  in  reply  to  inquiries  : — 

“ I have  no  recollection  of  mentioning,  at  the  time  I saw  the  ‘ white 
figure  ’ in  question  at  Constantinople,  to  any  one  but  the  guard  at  the  gate 
that  I had  seen  anything ; I may  have  done  so,  but  anyhow  I could  now 

1 As  to  the  great  injustice  done  to  the  telepathic  argument  by  confounding  dreams 
and  waking  visions,  S8e  above,  pp.  394-7,  and  v ol.  ii.,  pp.  2,  3. 

2 Compare  case  162,  where  Mr.  Symonds  says,  “I  knew  that  I must  turn  my  head.” 

2 As  regards  the  vanishing  of  hallucinations  on  sudden  speech  or  movement,  see 

Vol.  ii.,  p.  91,  second  note.  ' . 

.XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

531* 

get  no  corroborative  testimony  from  my  then  colleagues.  I have  no 
record  in  my  book  as  to  the  evening  when  I saw  the  white  figure.  I 
simply  recollect  that,  on  hearing  of  her  death,  1 found  it  was  on  the  same 
day,  and  making  allowance  for  distance  at  the  same  hour,  as  when  I saw 
the  said  apparition.  When  I heard  of  my  aunt's  death  from  my  wife,  I 
replied  fhat  on  that  night  I had  seen  a strange  white  apparition." 

We  learn  from  Mr.  Russell  that  he  has  had  no’other  experience  of  the 
sort,  with  the  exception  of  a single  faint  impression  of  a shadowy  figure 
at  a time  when  he  was  out  of  health,  and  the  very  palpable  “ apparitions  ” 
that  may  be  seen  at  stances. 

. His  diary,  though  it  contains  no  mention  of  the  incident  above 
described,  affords  a means  of  confirming  the  coincidence,  lie  finds  from 
it  that  he  dined  at  the  Embassy  on  September  26th,  September  28th,  and 
October  1st.  On  the  two  latter  occasions  he  visited  elsewhere  after  dinner, 
and  returned  home  by  the  quay  ; but  on  September  26th,  when  the  party 
was  a large  and  gay  one,  he  returned  home  by  the  route  through  the 
garden  ; and  on  passing  through  the  scene  of  his  odd  experience,  he 
distinctly  remembers  saying  to  himself,  “Well,  that  apparition  has  not 
spoilt  my  evening ; let  us  see  if  it  will  come  to  me  again."  It  was  on  the 
26th  of  September,  1872 — as  we  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  two 
Aberdeen  papers — that  his  aunt  died.  Mr.  Russell  says,  “As  far  as  my 
wife  can  Recollect,  the  hour  of  my  aunt's  death  was  between  4 and  5 p.w.* 
— which  would  be  between  6 and  7 at  Constantinople ; thus  the -vision 
followed  the  death  by  between  1 and  2 hours. 

In  the  following  case  a visual  phantasm  first  appear^,  and  then 
words  are  heard  which,  in  the  mind  of  both  agent  and  percipient, 
were  probably  of  all  others  the  most  significative  of  the  bond 
betweeif  them.  The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Bishop,  formerly  Miss  Bird,  the 
well-known  traveller  and  authoress.  The  account,  received  in  March, 
1886,  is  almost  identical  with  a second-hand  version  which  was  given 
to*  us  in  March,  1883.  When  travelling  in  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
Miss  Bird  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  a half-caste  Indian,  Mr, 
"Nugent,  known  as  “Mountain  Jim,”  over  whom  she  establish*  d a 
considerable  influence.1 

(197)  “ On  the  day  in  which  I parted  with  Mountain  Jim,  he  was  much 
moved  and  much  excited.  I had  a long  conversation  with  him  about 
' mortal  life  and  immortality,  and  closed  it  with  some  words  from  the  Bible. 
He  was  greajtly  impressed,  but  very  excited,  and  exclaimed,  ‘ I may  not 
see  you  again  in  this  life,  but  I shall  when  I die.'  1 rebuked  him  gently 
for  Iiis  vehemence,  but  he  repeated  it  with  still  greater  energy,  adding, 
‘And  these  words  you  have  said  to  me,  I shall  neyer  forget,  and  dying 
I swear  that  I will  see  you  again,'  4 . . 

“We  parted  then,  and  for  a time  I heard  that  he  was  doing  better, 
then  that  he  had  relapsed  into  wild  ways,  then  that  he  was  very  ill  after 
being  wounded  in  a wild  quarrel,  then  lastly  that  he  was  well,  and 
plaiyiing*  revenge.  The  last  news  I got  when  I was  at  the  Hotel 

1 See  A Lady's  Life  in  the  Rocky  Mmfyain*,  Letters  vi-ix.  and  xiii.xvii. 

2 l 2 

*532 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

Interlaken,  Interlaken,  Switzerland,  with  Miss  Clayton  and  the*  Kers. 
Shortly  after  getting  it,  in  September,  1874,  I was  lying* on  my' bed 
about  6 a.m.,  writing  to  my  sister,  when,  looking  up,  I saw  Mountain  Jim 
standing  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  me,  and  when  I looked  at  him  he  very 
slowly  but  very  distinctly  said,  ‘ I have  come,  as  I promised  ’ ; then  waved 
his  hands  towards  me,  and  said,  ‘ Farewell/  v 

u When  Miss  Bessie  Ker  came  into  the  room  with  my  breakfast,  we 
recorded  the  event,  with  the  date  and  hour  of  its  occurrence.  In  due 
time  news  arrived  of  his  death,  and  its  date,  allowing  for  the  difference 
of  longitude,  coincided  with  that  of  his  appearance  to  me.  ' 

“ 1.  B.” 

„ € * 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bishop  says  that  she  has  never  had  any 
other  hallucination  of  the  senses  ; that  she  had  last  seen  Mountain  Jim  at 
St.  Louis,  Colorado,  on  December  11th,  1873  ; and  that  he  died  &t  Fort 
Collins,  Colorado.  She  hopes  to  be  able  to  show  us  the  diaries  in  which 
the  date  was  recorded  ; but  she  wrote  from  abroad,  and  under  very  great 
pressure. 

We  have  procured  a copy  of  some  of  the  testimony  given  at  the  inquest 
at  Fort  Collins,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  death  took  place  on 
Sept.  7,  1874,  between  2 and  3 p.m. — which  would  correspond  with  about 
10  p.m.  at  Interlaken.  Therefore,  if  the  vision  took  place  on  the  8th 
of  September,  it  followed  the  death  by  8 hours ; but  if  it  took  place  on  the 
7th,  then  the  12  hours’  limit  was  exceeded  by  some  4 hours. 

In  the  next  two  eases  there  is  a distinct  hallucination  of  sound* 
suggestive  of  some  one  entering  or  approaching  the  room  (compare 
the  “ borderland  ” cases  182  and  190);  and  in  the  second  of  the 
two,  a short  interval  elapses  before  the  visual  percept  is  developed. 

Mrs.  Stella,  of  Chieri,  Italy,  writes,  on  January  14th,  1884  : — 

(198)  “ When  I was  about  15,  I was  staying  on  a visit  to  Dr.  J.  G%  of. 
Twyford,  Hants,  and  I formed  a friendship  with  my  host’s  cousin,  a boy  of 
17.  We  became  inseparable,  boating  and  riding  together  and  sharing  all 
our  fun,  just  like  brother  and  sister.  He  was  very  delicate,  and  I took 
care  of  him,  and  looked  after  him,  until  we  never  passed  an  hour  away 
from  each  other.  I tell  you  this  to  show  there  was  not  a particle  of  morbid 
sentiment  between  us ; we  were  like  two  boys  together. 

“ One  night  Mr.  G.  was  sent  for  to  see  his  cdusin,  who  had  been  taken 
suddenly  very  ill  with  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  and  the  poor  boy  died . 
the  next  night.  They  did  not  tell  me  how  ill  he  was,  so  I was  quite 
unaware  of  his  danger,  and  therefore  not  anxious  in  any  way.«  The  night 
he  died,  Mr.  G.  and  his  sister  . went  round  to  their  aunt’s  house,  leaving  me 
alone  in  the  drawing-room.  There  was  a bright  fire,  and  like  many  girls 
I delighted  to  sit  by  the  fender,  reading  by  firelight.  Not  knowing  of  my 
friend’s  danger  I ^Vas  not  uheasy,  only  vexed  that  he  could  not  come  and 
spend  the  evening  with  me,  so  I felt  lonely.  I was  reading  quietly 
when  the  door  opened,  and  Bertie  (my  friend)  walked  in.  I jumped 
up  to  get  him  an  arm-chair  near  the  fire,  as  he  looked  cold,  and  hfe  had 
no  greatcoat  on,  and  as  it  Wks  snowing,  I began  to  scold  him  for 

TELEPA  THIC  IIALL TJCIX A TIONS . 

533* 

XII.] 

coming  out  without  his  wraps.  He  did  not  speak  but  put  up  his  hand  to 
his  6hest  ami  shook  his  head,  which  I mistook  to  mean  his  cold  wa&  on 
his  chest  and  that  he  had  lost  his  voice,  to  which  he  was  subject.  So  I 
reproached  him  again  for  his  imprudence.  While  speaking,  Mr.  G.  came 
in  and  asked  me  to  whom  I was  speaking.  I said,  ‘There's  that 
tiresome  boy  without  his  coat  and  such  a bad  cold  he  can't  speak ; 
lend  him  a coat  and  send  him  home.'  I shall  never  forget  the  horror 
and  amazement  on  the  good  doctor's  face,  as  he  knew  (what  I did  not\ 
that  the  poor  boy  had  died*  half-an-hour  ago  and  he  was  coming  to  break 
the  new?  to  me.  His  first  impression  was  that  I had  already  heard  it,  and 
that  I ha’d  lost  mv  senses.  I could  not  understand  either  why  he  made 
lhe  leave  the  room,  and  spoke  to  me  as  if  I were  a small  child.  For  a few 
moments  we  were  at  cross  purposes,  and  then  he  explained  to  me  thatr 
I hacf  Jiad  an  optical  illusion ; he  did  not  deny  that  1 had  seen  Bertie 
with  my  eyes,  but  explained  it  all  most  scientifically,  as  he  was 
anxious  not  to  frighten  me  or  leave  a distressing  impression.  I have 
never  spoken  of  it  to  any  one  before  now,  partly  as  it  is  a most 
distressing  remembrance,  and  partly  in  the  fear  of  being  thought  fanciful 
and  being  disbelieved.  My  mother  said  1 was  dreaming,  and  forbad  me 
ever  to  mention  it.  I was  not  dreaming,  but  reading  a book  called  ‘ Mr. 
Verdant  Green,'  not  at  all  a book  to  send  one  to  sleep,  and  I well 
remember  at  the  time  the  door  opened  I was  laughing  heartily  over  some  of 
its  absurdities. 

“I. 

Asked  if  she  has  ever  had  any  other  visual  hallucination,  Mrs.  Stella 
answers  in  the  negative  ; and  adds  that  she  is  “ not  at  all  imaginative  or 
nervous."  She  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination  which  was  veridical,  and 
is  described  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  109.  She  cannot  recall  the  exact  date  ; but 
we  find  Jrom  the  Medical  Register  that  Dr.  J.  G.  was  only  at  Twyford 
from  1864  to  1873 — within  which  period  the  occurrence  must  have  fallen. 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  Mrs.  Stella  adds  : — 

**“  Their  (the  G.'s)  house  must  have  been  a quarter-of-an-hour's  walk 
from  Mr.  G.'s,  and  Bertie  died  about  20  minutes  before  he  left  the  house. 
The  apparition  had  been  in  the  room  about  5 minutes  when  Mr.  G.  came 
in.  What  to  me  has  always  been  so  strange  is,  that  I heard  the  handle 
of  the  door  turn  and  the  door  open  ; in  fact,  it  was  the  noise  of  the  lock 
turning  which  caused  me  to  look  up  from  my  book.  The  figure  walked 
across  the  room  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  fireplace,  and  sat  down 
while  I lighted  the  candles.  It  was  all  so  real  and  natural  that  I can 
hardly  realise  even  now  that  it  was  not  so. 

“ With  regard  to  the  5 minutes  I daresay  the  time  was  not  quite  so 
long,  although  some  minutes  may  have  elapsed  between  the  entrance  of  the 
apparition  and  that  of  Mr.  G.  The  only  light  in  the  room  was  that  of  the 
tire,  and  as,  of  course,  I had  no  idea  but  what  it  was  the  real  4 Bertie ,'  I 
did* not  take  much  notice  of  him,  I purposely  did  ^not  Jtsk  him  any 
questions  on  account  of  his  apparent  inability  to  talk,  and  I myself  went 
on  speaking  in  order  to  give  him  time  to  regain  breath,  which,  on  account 
of  his  delicate  chest,  often  occurred,  and  his  silence  for  5 minutes  or  even 
longer  would  not  have  astonished  me,  as  the  cold  outside  was  intense,  and 
great  cold  often  oppressed  his  breathing.  There  was  nothing  in  his 

•534  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  '[chap. 

appearance  that  struck  me  as  different  from  usual,  except  his  paleness  and 
silence,  and  to  both  I was  accustomed. 

U1  am  sorry  to  say  that  Mr.  G.  died  about  10  years  ago'.  Unfortu- 
nately the  circumstance  was  never  mentioned  to  any  members  of  my 
family;  partly  because  Mr.  G.  advised  me  to  say  nothing,  and  partly  from 
my  own  fear  of  being  laughed  at,  as  I was  very  young  at  the  time.” 

[Here,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  the  central  fact  of  the  coincidence  is 
independent  of  the  details,  and  is  far  more  likely'  than  they  to  have  been 
correctly  retained  in  memory.] 

The  second  case  is  from  Mr.  B.,  confidential  clerk  to  a firm 
with  a principal  of  which  we  are  well  acquainted.  Ke  withholds  his 
name  front  publication,  having  a strong  dislike  to  the  subject.  The 
account  is  in  the  words  of  Mr.  D.  H.  Wilson,  of  Rosemont,  Hy&res, 
but  has  been  read  over  and  corrected  by  Mr.  8.  The  fact  that  the 
percipient  had  just  got  up  and  opened  his  door  may  be  taken  as  a 
proof  that  he  was  awake  when  the  visual  experience  took  place. 

“October  24th,  1883.  # 

(199)  “ Mr.  B.  is  a gentleman  whom  I have  known  for  more  than  15 
years.  He  is  practical,  shrewd,  and  very  trustworthy.  I am  indebted  to  him 
for  the  following  narration  : One  morning,  a few  months  ago,  at  5 o’clock, 
he  was  awakened  by  a noise  outside  his  room,  but  near  his  room  door. 
Opening  the  door  lie  saw  no  person.  He  returned  to  bed,  and  had 
scarcely  composed  himself  when  he  was  very  disconcerted  by  seeing  the  form 
of  a lady  friend  of  his  glide  or  flit  across  the  room.  He  thereupon 
woke  Mrs.  B.  and  informed  her  of  the  fact.  This  was  Saturday,  and 
at  the  end  of  the  next  week  Mr.  B.  called  at  the  house  of  his  friend, 
the  subject  of  his  vision,  and  was  informed  that  the  lady  had  thrown  herself 
out  of  the  window  the  previous  Saturday  at  about  5 o’clock  in  the  morning, 
and  was  instantaneously  killed,” 

In  this  example  we  observe  a failure  to  co-ordinate  the  elements 
into  a completely  natural-seeming  incident.  A feature  in  Mr.  Keule- 
fnans’  case  (p.  444)  has  been  reserved  for  mention  here  as  illustrating' 
the  same  point.  He  says  : — 

“ The  sound  [of  the  child’s  voice]  did  not  proceed  from  the  locality 
where  the  vision  [of  the  child]  was  seen,  nor  did  it  seem  to  be  in  any  way 
produced  by  the  organs  of  speech  belonging  to  the  apparition ; for  the  • 
mouth  did  not  move.  I heard  the  voice  at  a short  distance,  and  on  my 
right  side,  simultaneously  with  the  vision,  which  appeared  at  a greater 
distance,  on  my  left,  or  rather  in  front  of  me.” 

§ 4.  So  much,  then,  for  gradual  development.  I proceed  to. my 
second  main  point — the  embodiment  of  the  idea  which  is  at  the  root 
of  the  hallucination,  in  a manner  that  is  to  some  extent  original,  and 
implies  a creative  process  carried  out  by  the  percipient’s  own  mind. 

There  is  no  need  to  illustr^,e  this  process  at  any  length  in*  the 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

535 

purefy  subjective  class.  A certain  amount  of  it  is,  in  fact,  involved 
in  ‘every  sensory  hallucination  which  is  anything  more  than  ,a  mere 
momentary  revival  of  familiar  images,  due,  as  I have  suggested;  to  a 
disturbance  at  the  sensory  centre,  unprompted  by  any  Agitation  in 
the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain  (pp.  489-90).  Wherever  the  higher  tracts 
of  the  brain  are  the  first  in  action,  and  the  hallucination  represents 
an  object  which  the  senses  have  never  actually  encountered,  there 
clearly  the  mind  has  more  or  less  created  its  object;  and  of  the 
transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane  the  majority  seem  to  belong  to 
' this  "class.  A special  type  that  is  worth  noting  is  where  the  hallucin- 
ation is  in  part  mere  reminiscence  and  in  part  a new  creation.  For 
example,  a gentleman  tells  me  that,'  having  been  compelled  to  kill 
a favourite  dog,  he  very  soon  afterwards  had  the  subjective  vision 
of  a dog  running  across  the  lawn,  and  pursued  by  a man  in  a white 
flannel  jacket ; and  my  friend  Mrs.  Hunter,  of  2,  -Victoria  Crescent, 

’ St.  Helier’s,  describes  how,  having  just  dismissed  for  the  night  a 
young  daughter  under  15  years  of  age,  heard  her  lock  her  door,  locked 
her  own,  and  resumed  her  own  train  of  thought,  she  looked  up,  and 
there  the  child  “ stood  smiling,  in  dressing-gown  and  hair  floating  down 
her  back,  just  as  she  had  left  me,  but  with  a baby  in  her  arms  ” — the 
apparition  lasting  for  a few  seconds.1  A good  example  of  a 
subjective  hallucination  whose  development  from  the  root-idea  is 
obvious,  is  a visionary  crown,  clearly  seen  by  a lady  hovering  near  the 
head  T>f  a preacher  to  whom  she  was  listening  (as  she  implies)  with 
sympathy  and  admiration.  As  more  or  less  fantastic  instances,  L 
may  mention  the  apparition,  out  of  doors,  of  a tall  female  figure,  which 
went  on  in  front  of  the  percipient,  and  whose  head  then  left  its  body ; 
a man  in  parti-coloured  Oriental  garb,  and  with  a face  like  a king 
on  a ‘card  ; and  some  curious  appearances  of  “ flats,”  human-looking 
figures  without  any  apparent  depth,  by  which  a gentleman  tells  me 
that  he  has  been*more  than  once  visited.  Peculiarities  in  costume 
and  appurtenances  are  very  common ; a woman  in  grave-clothes,  a 
woman  in  brocaded  silk  with  a small  book  in  her  hand,  a black  man 
with  a 4aiife  in  his  hand,  a sweet-looking  creature  in  a low  black 
dress  and  mantilla,  a tall  man  with  dark  curly  hair  and  in  antique 
dress,  a woman  with  a crown  and  a child,  recalling  a statuette, 
of'  the  Virgin — such  are  among  the  visual  hallucinations  in  my 
collection  which  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  other  than  purely 
subjective  affections.  Of  auditory  cases,  some  that  have  been  already 

1 Cf,  Mr,  Blae^er’s  case,  p.  502. 

$36 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

given  show  the  construction  from  a root-idea  in  the  percipient’s  taind 
very  plainly — e.g.,  the  words,  “ You  can’t  save  him,”  “ Your  brother 
is  dead,”  “ Take  up  that  knife  and  use  it  ” (pp.  509, 478,  note).  Another 
good  example  is  that  of  a clergyman’s  wife,  who  tells  me  that  she 
was  once  startled  by  the  remark,  “ Those  ladies  will  borrow  money 
from  George  to-day,”  while  she  was  sitting  alone,  and  picturing  a call 
which  her  husband  was  paying  to  some  impecunious  parishioners 
whom  she  mistrusted — unless,  indeed,  the  fact  that  the  loan  was 
actually  requested  be  held  to  make  the  case  “ ambiguous.”1  The 
'hearing  of  long,  original  discourses  could,  of  course,  not  be  reckoned 
as  a transient  hallucination,  and  is  a type  which  scarcely  occurs  at  all 
among  hallucinations  of  the  sane ; but  occasionally  a very  few  words 
may  be  quite  sufficient  to  show  independence  of  mental  action — as 
where  a lady  who  was  expecting  to  be  called  by  her  sister  in  the 
morning,  distinctly  heard,  in  fictitious  tones,  not  the  qxpected 
message,  but  the  much  more  agreeable  one,  “ Not  five ; don’t  get 
up  yet.” 

§ 5.  And  now  to  turn  to  the  parallel  features  of  original  or 
fantastic  construction  in  the  telepathic  class  of  hallucinations.  The 
question  as  to  the  existence  and  interpretation  of  these  features  is 
of  *uch  special  importance  to  my  general  argument  that,  at  the  risk 
of  wearying  the  reader,  I must  make  its  bearings  plain. 

I must  recur  for  a moment  to  the  breach  which  has  been^  more 
than  once  noted  (pp.  111-2,  190,  and  234)  as  dividing  telepathic 
phantasms  from  the  less  concrete  forms  of  telepathy,  and  especially 
from  the  results  of  experiments  in  thought-transference.  To  resume 
the  two  marked  points  of  difference : — in  the  experiments,  (1)  the 
“ subject”  never  perceives  the  transferred  image  as  an  actual  sight  or 
sound — there  is  never  an  external  hallucination ; and  (2)  the  image 
always  represents  the  precise  object  which  is  consciously  occupying 
the  agent's  mind  ; whereas  in  the  case  of  the  spontaneous  phantasms 
the  percept  (1)  appears  to  be  external,  and  (2)  represents  something 
’’which  is  certainly  not  consciously  occupying  the  agent’s  mind — to 
wit,  his  own  form  or  voice.1  Here  is  an  undoubted  cm c.  \$hen  the 

1 I am  here  speaking  of  the  common  type  of  spontaneous  cases.  There  are  other 
cases,  both  visual  and  auditory,  which  conform  more  nearly  to  the  experimental  type, 
in  so  far  as  something  that^is  occupying  the  sensed  or  the  mind  of  the  agent  is  distinctly 
represented  in  the  phantasmal  appearance  (see  e.g.f  cases  151,  157,  158,  220,  221,  267,  268, 
269,  270,  288,  291).  But  such  representation  is  decidedly  exceptional,  and  in  visual  cases 
applies  usually  to  only  a single  feature  in  the  appearance ; e.g.f  in  case  210  below  we  might 
trace  the  perception  of  the  wound,  and  in  case  213  the  perception  of  the  checked  shawl, 
to  the  agent’s  conscious  thought,  but  not  the  perception  of  his  or  her  complete  figiJSre. 

TELE  PA  THIC  HA  LL  UCINA  T10NS. 

53£ 

XII.] 

agentfis  painfully  concentrating  his  attention  on  a card,  with  the  object 
of  getting  the  impression  of  it  transferred  to  the  percipient,  one  might 
have  imagined  that  he  was  in  a stronger  and  more  hopeful  condition  for 
producing  a telepathic  effect  than  when  his  thoughts  are  wandering 
at  random,  and  are  perhaps  not  occupied  with  the  percipient  at  all ; 
and  yet  the  effect  on  the  percipient  seems  often  to  be  of  a far  more 
dominant  and  startling  kind  in  the  latter  case  than  in  the  former. 
' We  may  observe  further  that  just  the  two  forms  of  telepathic  impres- 
sion which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  experiment,  do  occasionally  reach 
the  pitch  oi haWucinat  ion — the  transferences  of  pains  and  of  tastes — 
are  conspicuous  by  their  absence  from  the  records  of  spontaneous 
cases,  the  latter  being  totally  unrepresented  and  the  former  very  rare  ; 
while,. on  the  other  hand,  the  spontaneous  class  abounds  in  specimens 
where  the  psychical  condition  of  the  agent — whether  sleeping, 
swooning,  or  dying — has  apparently  lapsed  to  the  very  verge  of 
nothingness.  Spontaneous  t elepathy  would  thus  seem  to  depend  as 
little  on  the  agent’s  intensity  of  feeling  (for  what  can  be  more 
intensely  felt  than  acute  physical  pain  ?)  as  on  his  intensity  of 
concehtration ; or,  if  some  actual  intensity  of  experience  be  imagined 
for  him  even  at  moments  when  it  is  least  apparent  (Chap.  V.,  § 10), 
it  will  at  any  rate  not  be  imagined  as  abnormal  preoccupation  w^h 
his  own  physical  attributes. 

.Now  it  is  manifest  that  these  differences  may  be  reduced,  in 
proportion  as  the  extent  of  the  impression  actually  transferred  from 
the  agent  to  the  percipient  in  the  phantasmal  cases  can  be  con- 
ceived to  be  small,  and  the  part  which  the  percipient’s  own  creative  ‘ 
energy  supplies  can  be  conceived  to  be  large.  If  we  are  at  liberty 
to  assume  that  even  a dim  and  shadowy  idea,  when  once  it  obtains 
a lodgment  in  the  mind,  may  body  itself  forth  as  a sensory  phantasm, 
clearly  all  that  we  shall  have  to  suppose  transferred  from  the  one 
mind  to  the  other  is  a dim  and  shadowy  idea.  We  shall  thus  shift, 
so  tq  speak,  the  responsibility  for  the  hallucination  to  the  percipient’# 
mind;  which  we  shall  conceive  as  actively  generating  and  projecting  it 
under  a peculiar  form  of  impulse,  instead  of  passively  receiving  a full- 
fledged  percept  from  the  agent’s  mind,  where  nothing  in  the  least 
resembling  such  a percept  had  any  conscious  place. 

An  unknown  quantity — the  peculiar  form  ofriinjfulse — has,  no 
doubt,  here  to  be  assumed ; for  unless  the  transferred  idea  involves  a 
certain  impulsive  force  which  causes  the  mind  to  react  on  it,  and  to 
project  it  as  a hallucination,  why  doo»it  not  remain  as  a mere  idea  ? 

£38  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  '[chap. 

It  might,  indeed,  be  not  unreasonably  replied  that  it  rZoes  remafti  as  a 
mere  idea  in  many  cases,  as  we  saw  in  the  6th  chapter  ; 'and  that 
there  may  be  many  other  cases  where  it  never  reaches  the  stage 
of  even  a conscious  idea — never  forces  itself  on  the  attention  at  all, — 
and  where,  therefore,  we  never  hear  anything  about  it  (see  »p.  97). 
We  have  already  had  numerous  experimental  instances  of  what  may 
be  called  “ underground  telepathy  ” : in  Mr.  Newnham’s  cases,  for 
instance,  (pp.  64-70),  no  one  would  ever  have  known  that  there  had 
been  a transference  of  ideas,  but  for  the  fact — which  was  not  in  any 
tvay  vital  to  the  transference — that  Mrs.  Newnham  fiad  her  hand  oh 
a planchette  at  the  time.  And  if  we  could  conceive  that  a great 
deal  of  upon  tarn  eou»  telepathy  takes  place  similarly  underground  and 
unnoticed,  then  we  might  regard  the  sensory  phantasms  as  a sort 
of  accidental  group — as  just  the  cases  which  here  and  there  get  above 
ground,  owing  to  some  exceptional  favouring  condition  in  the 
percipient.  The  question  why  an  idea  that  has  been  telepathically 
transferred  should  give  rise  to  a hallucination,  might  thus  be 
answered  by  saying  that  it  does  so  only  in  the  proportion  in  which 
purely  subjective  ideas  develop  purely  subjective  hallucination^ — the 
specific  cause  being  as  unknown  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  Alt 
tl^s,  however,  is  highly  hypothetical ; and  we  need  not  shrink 
from  the  provisional  hypothesis  that  a telepathically-conveyed  idea 
which  is  to  some  extent  charged  with  emotion,  really  has  a certain 
peculiar  tendency  to  develop  into  hallucination.  Our  very  ignorance 
in  some  measure  justifies  this  assumption  ; for  unable  as  for  the  most 
part  we  are  to  connect  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane  with  any 
antecedent  condition  at  all,  we  need  the  less  scruple  to  admit  a novel 
condition  when  we  find  one.  And  in  connection  with  such  an  onward 
passage  of  the  impression,  it  is  very  pertinent  to  recall  the  particular 
impulsive  quality  which  we  found  to  attach  to  some  of  the  experi- 
mental transferences — where  the  impulse  took  effect  not  in  sensory 
but  in  muscular  disturbances,  (see  pp.  74-9,  and  84.)1 

To  return,  however,  to  the  actual  content  of  the  percepts,  and 

1 I may  note  further  how  the  very  fact  of  an  unrecognised  telepathic  pfiantasm  bears, 
witness  to  ithe  suggested  specific  tendency  of  telepathic  impressions  to  pass  into  hallucina- 
tions. We  have  had  instances,  in  former  chapters,  of  vague  but  strong  impressions,  not 
connected  by  the  percipient  at  the  time  with  any  particular  person,  which  afterwards 
seemed  to  have  b^en  due  to  the  condition  of  a particular  person.  Now  one  would  have 
supposed,  if  an  undistirfetive  telepathic  idea  was  to  assume  more  definiteness,  that  it  must 
be  by  becoming  a distinctive  idea , an  idea  of  the  particular  agent.  But  what  we  find  is  that 
the  undistinctive  telepathic  idea  sometimes  becomes  more  definite  in  a quite  different  way 
— namely,  by  becoming  an  undistinctive  percept,  an  unrecognised  form.  It  is  hurried  on 
into  hallucination,  so  to  speak,  without  having  first  declared  itself  as  an  idea  i : it  assumes 
the  definiteness  oi  visible  shape,  while  ye4^ts  content  or  message  remains  indefinite/ 

XII.]  TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS.  53,9 

theii*  relation  to  the  ideas  from  which  they  spring.  If  once  it,  he 
granted  that  the  telepathic  phantasm  need  not  be  the  literal  embodi- 
ment of  any  clearly-defined  idea  or  image,  but  may  be  worked  out 
from  a suggestion  of  a vague  kind,  we  should  certainly  be  prepared 
for  variety  and  independence  in  the  working-out.  The  mind  is  no 
mere  collection  of  separate  compartments,  into  which  new  ideas  will 
fit  and  then  rest  in  a passive  way ; but  an  organism  of  interacting 
parts,  -where  any  change  or  any  intruding  element  may  set  in  motion 
whole  trains  of  images  and  associations.  We  know  what  small  and 
dim  suggestions  will  sometimes  set  large  tracts  of  mental  machinery 
to  work ; we  may  therefore  well  credit  the  vaguer  or  sub-conscious 
order  of  telepathic  impressions  with  such  a power.  What  more 
natural,  then,  than  that  these  further  images  and  associations  should 
be  embodied  in  the  sensory  projection  ? We  have  already  noted  the 
process  in  dreams ; we  found  the  telepathic  impression  operating  not 
to  suspend  or  fetter,  but  simply  to  invoke  and  inform,  the  spontaneous 
activities  of  the  dreaming  condition.  We  have  since  caught  the 
percipient  mind  at  work,  so  to  speak,  in  the  gradual  stages  which 
waking  hallucinations  often  present ; and  we  have  noted  the 
originative  activity  which  often  goes  to  the  shaping  of  purely 
subjective  specimens.  What  is  now  suggested  is  that  the  waging 
mind  may  unconsciously  react,  as  in  a dream,  on  the  nucleus  of  a 
“ transferred  impression,”  and,  in  the  act  of  externalising  the  percept, 
may  invest  it  with  its  own  atmosphere  and  imagery.1  We  shall  thus 
have  a ready  explanation  for  many  degrees  of  distinctness  and 
individualisation,  and  many  diversities  of  character,  in  what  is  perceived. 
Suppose  the  same  kind  of  real  event — say  the  peaceful  death  of  an  aged 
parent — to  occur  in  twenty  cases,  and  in  each  of  them  to  produce  a 
real  and  unique  sort  of  disturbance  in  some  absent  person’s  mind ; 
then,  if  that  disturbance  clothed  itself  in  some  sensory  form — or,  in 
our  language,  if  it  reached  the  point  of  causing  a hdlluc  ini  it  ion — such 
hallucination  might  take  twenty  different  forms.  One  percipient  may 
hear  his  parent’s  voice ; another  may  imagine  the  touch  of  his  hand 
upon  hii?  head  ; a third  may  see  him  in  his  wonted  dress  and  aspect ; 
a fourth  may  see  him  as  he  might  appear  when  dying ; a fifth 

‘ ’ 1 The  psychological  identity  of  hallucinations  and  dreams— alik^in  subjective  and  in 
telepathic  cases — is  a point  which  I am  the  more  anxious  to  enforce  in  that  there  seems 
sometimes  to  be  a difficulty  in  catching  it.  Por  example,  a leading  daily  paper  contrasts 
members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  with  the  sensible  people  who  belike  that 
all  those  apparitions  and  stories  of  second-sight  which  engage  the  curiosity  of  that  Society 
may  be  relegated  to  the  limbo  of  waking  dreams.”  With  the  substitution  of J class  for 
“ limbo,”  this  “ relegation  ” is  precisely  what -the  present  argument  seeks  to  effect. 

540 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

may  see  him  in  some  transfigured  aspect ; a sixth  may  see  a figure 
or  hear  a voice  resembling  his,  but  not  recognise  it,  or  recognise  it 
only  in  recollection  ; and  others  may  invest  the  disturbing  idea  with 
every  sort  of  visible  symbolism,  derived  from  their  minds’  habitual 
furniture  and  their  wonted  trains  of  thought. 

§ 6.  This  frequent  activity  of  the  percipient’s  mind  in  the 
elaboration  and  projection  of  his  percept  forms  a ready  key  to  much 
of  the  evidence  that  follows.  How,  for  instance,  on  any  theory  of 
merely  passive  affection  of  the  percipient’s  mind  or  senses,  could  we 
account  for  the  appearance  of  a dying  friend,  attired  in  the  style  of 
dress  which  was  habitual  to  him  at  the  time  when  the  percipient 
associated  with  him,  but  which  has  been  discontinued,  or,  at  any  rate, 
is  not  that  in  which  he  would  be  pictured  in  his  own  mind  ? The 
“ ghosts  of  clothes  ” in  general — a stock  bugbear — are  the  simplest 
things  in  the  world  to  explain  on  a theory  of  telepathic  impressions ; 
but  the  ghosts  of  old  clothes — how  could  they  be  impressed  ab  extra ? 
What,  on  the  other  hand,  is  more  natural,  when  once  the  percipient’s 
active  share  in  the  phenomenon  is  recognised,  than  that  he  should  do 
what  we  saw  Mr.  W.  A.  S.  do  in  the  neutral  case  quoted  above  (p.  517, 
note) — that  he  should  invest  the  idea  of  his  friend  with  the  visual 
traits  that  memory  supplies,  and  should  project  the  figure  into  space 
in  its  most  familiar  aspect  ? 

A few  instances  of  this  sort  may  be  quoted.  The  first  isv  from 
Miss  Cressy,  of  Riverhead,  near  Sevenoaks. 

“ December  18th,  1883. 

(200)  “ My  younger  brother  was  in  Australia,  and  had  not  written  to  his 
family  for  some  four  or  five  months,  from  which  my  mother  had  concluded  he 
must  be  dead.  I was  sitting  with  her  and  my  sister  in  our  dining-room  one 
morning,  about  11  o’clock,  engaged  with  my  sister  in  writing  a German 
exercise.  Being  at  a loss  for  the  right  declension,  I looked  up,  repeating 
the  declension,  when  I saw  my  brother  standing  on  the  lawn  in  front  of 
the  window,  apparently  looking  at  us.  I jumped  up,  saying  to  my  mother, 
‘ Don’t  be  frightened,  mother,  but  there  is  T.  come  back  all  right.’  (My 
mother  had  heart  disease,  and  I feared  the  sudden  shock.)  ‘Where?’  said 
my  mother  and  sister,  ‘ I don’t  see  him.’  ‘ He  is  there,’  I answered,  ‘for 
I saw  him  ; he  is  gone  to  the  front  door,’  and  we  all  ran  to  the  door.  My 
father,  who  was  in  his  library,  heard  the  commotion,  and  opened  life  door 
to  ask  the  cause.  I had  by  this  time  opened  the  front  door,  and  not 
seeing  my  brothef*,  I thought  he  was  hiding  for  funtomong  the  shrubs,  so 
I called  out,  ‘ Come,  T.,  come  in,  do  not  play  the  fool  or  you  will  kill 
dear  mother.’  No  one  answered,  and  then  my  mother  exclaimed,  ‘Oh, 
you  did  * not  see  him  really,  he  is  dead,  I know  he  is  dead.’  J w^s 
mystified,  but  it  did  not  seem  to  me^the  right  solution  of  the  mystery.  I 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS . 

541 

could  not  think  he  was  dead,  he  looked  so  honestly  alive.  To  tell  the 
truth,  I believed  for  some  time  that  he  was  in  the  garden.  However,  he 
was  not,  nor  was  he  dead.  About  a year  afterwards  he  returned  home, 
and  when  recounting  his  troubles,  he  told  us  that  he  had  been  very  ill,  and 
that  while  he  was  delirious  he  had  constantly  requested  his  comrades  to 
lay  hiyi  under  the  great  cedar  tree  on  his  father’s  lawn,  and  turning*  to 
my  father  he  went  on,  ‘ Yes,  father,  and  do  you  know  I seemed  to  see  the 
dear  old  place  as  plain  as  I do  now.’  1 When  was  that  1 9 said  my  father. 
He  gave  the  date,  and  my  mother,  who  had  written  it  down,  looked  and 
said,  * Why,  that  was  the  very  time  when  your  sister  declared  she  saw  you 
on  the  •lawn.’  ‘Yes/  said  my  father,  ‘ and  your  mother  at  once  killed 
you,’  and  there*was  a good  laugh  at  my  expense. 

“I  have  often  thought  over  it,  but  have  never  been  able  to  account  for 
it.  • This  brother  was  not  a particular  favourite.  Had  it  been  my  sister,  I 
could  have  supposed  that,  as  she  was  rarely  absent  from  my  mind,  I might 
have  conjured  up  her  form  in  my  imagination.  Then  I would  have  bitten 
my  tongue  out  rather  than  have  startled  my  mother.  But  1 never  doubted 
for  a moment  that  my  brother  was  there.  I was  about  25  years  of  age,  and 
had  no  theory  as  to  ghosts  or  spirits  in  general.  I was  at  that  time  far  too 
much  occupied  with  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  the  family  to  have  time  to 
dwell  on  such  fancies,  and  was  also  too  matter-of-fact  to  think  much  about 
such  phenomena.  I remember  at  the  time,  that  I saw  my  brother  dressed 
as  he  usually  was  when  he  came  home  from  London,  not  as  he  was  when 
he  left  home,  nor  as  he  could  be  in  Australia,  nor  as  I had  ever  sr>en  him 
when  walking  in  the  garden.  He  had  on  a tall  fiat  and  a black  cloth  suitv 
neither  of  which  had  he  taken  with  him.  Of  course,  at  the  moment  none 
of  these  thoughts  occurred  to  me,  but  when,  in  consequence  of  the  jokes 
and  ridicule  at  my  expense,  I tried  to  follow  up  the  ideas  that  had  been 
flpating  through  my  mind,  to  see  whether  they  had  any  connection  with  my 
absent  brother,  I could  make  nothing  of  it. 

“A.  Cressy.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Cressy  adds  : — 

“ I have  delayed  answering  your  last  communication  in  the  hope  of 
recalling  the  name  of  some  person  still  living  to  whom  I had  mentioned 
the  vision  about  which  1 wrote  to  you,  but  I am  sorry  to  say  there  is  no- 
one.  I only  am  left  of  all  the  party.  You  ask  when  it  occurred.  As 
nearly  as  1 can  renumber  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  1854.  My  brother 
left  England  for  Melbourne  in  September  or  October,  1852.  As  nearly 
a*  I can  remember,  I got  his  first  letter  at  the  beginning  or  middle  of 
May,  1853.  We  got  three  or  four  letters  in  succession,  the  last  saying 
that  he  $nd  his  companions  were  going  to  Fryers  Creek  diggings.  Then 
we  heard  nothing  rqore  for  eight  months.  During  those  eight  months  it‘ 
was  that  I saw  him  ?as  I have  described.  I believe  it  was  February,  1854. 

“ 1 have  never  before  or  since  had  any  apparition,  and  that  was  the 
reason  I wrote  you  the  account  of  it,  because  it  s<*>med>  to  me  to  prove 
that  it  was  no  hallucination,  but  simple  fact.  I was  then  young  and 
vigorous;  I had  no  superstitions,  never  having  experienced  any  ex<jep- 
tional  sorrows : those  I had  gone  through  were  common  enough,  and  more 
calculated  to  develop  the  matter;of<Soct  side  of  my  character  than  to 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

342 

[cxiap. 

V , 

induce  a morbid  or  dreamy  imagination.  That  brother  was  always  s&id  to 
be  very  like  me,  and  it  is  a singular  fact  that  i*i  matter  of « health  ‘we 
suffered  very  much  alike.  He  always  leant  on  me' when  in  any  trouble, 
and  his  thoughts  during  that  illness  might  almost  unconsciously  have 
wandered  to  me.”  ! 

[Miss  Cressy  tells  me  that  her  recollection  of  her  mother’s  entry®  of  the 
date  in  her  pocket-book,  and  of  the  reference  to  this  date  after  her 
brother's  return,  is  quite  distinct ; and  it  is  a confirmation  of  this  that, 
unprompted  by  me,  she  had  made  a search  for  the  book,  which,  however, 
could  not  be  found.  She  considers  that  the  dress  and  rapid  disappear- 
ance of  the  figure  would  alone  exclude  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity  ; < 
but,  in  fact,  the  figure  was  close  to  the  window ; and  had  not  the 
recognition  been  absolute  and  startling,  she  would  never,  she  says,  have 
exclaimed  as  she  did,  since  the  importance  of  not  causing  any  shock  to  her 
mother  was  much  on  her  mind.] 

The  next  case  (which  again  exemplifies  the  development  of  a 
feeling  of  presence  into  distinct  hallucination)  is  from  Mrs.  Bolland, 
the  narrator  of  case  12C  above. 

“ 7,  Cranbury  Terrace,  Southampton. 

“July,  1884. 

(201)  “About  March,  1875,  the  circumstances  hereafter  detailed  happened 
to  me  at  Gibraltar.  X wrote  an  account  of  them  from  memory  in  1878. 
It  was  published  in  All  the  Year  Round , of  August,  I think,  that  year, 
but  I have  not  since  seen  it,  so  I can  only  give  the  story  as  far  as  I 
remember  it  now. 

“ I was  lying  down  in  my  drawing-room  on  a bright  sunshiny  afternoon, 
reading  a chapter  on  Chalk  Streams  in  ‘ Kingsley's  Miscellanies/  when,  I 
, suddenly  felt  that  some  one  was  waiting  to  speak  to  me.  1 looked  u#  from 
my  book  and  saw  a man  standing  beside  an  arm-chair,  which  was  about 
6 feet  from  me.  He  was  looking  most  intently  at  me,  with  an  extraordi- 
nary earnest  expression  in  his  eyes,  but  as  I walked  forward  to  speak  to 
him,  lie  disappeared.1 

“ The  room  was  about  18  feet  long,  and  at  the  further  end  of  it  I saw 
our  serVant  [Pearson],  holding  open  the  door  as  if  he  had  admitted  a 
visitor.  Thinking  that  perhaps  he  too  was  but  a delusion,  I spoke  to  him, 
asking  if  anyone  had  called.  To  which  he  replied,  4 No  one,  ma’am/*  and 
walked  away.  I then  tested  myself  as  to  whether  Ii  had  been  sleeping, 
seeing  that  it  was  10  minutes  since  I lay  down.  T said  to  myself  what  I 
thought  I had  read,  began  my  chapter  again,  and  in  10  minutes  l*ad 
readied  the  same  point. 

. , then  thought  it  over  again.  I knew  ;the  face  quite  well,  \>ut  could  f 
not  say  whose  it  was,  but  the  suit  of  clothes  impressed  me  strongly  as  being 
exactly  like  one  which  my  husband  had  given  to  a servant  named  Ramsay 
the  previous  year.  This  man  was  a discharged  soldier  Whom  I had  found 
in  a dying  s$ate  ein  Inverness,  and  who  had  been  taken  into  our  service 
after  leaving  the  infirmary.  He  tprned  out  badly  and  I had  to  send  him 
away  jbefore  we  went  to  Gibraltar  [in  February,  1875],  but  lie  was- taken  on 
as  waiter  at  the  Inverness  Club,  and  I had  no  cause  to  be  anxious  about  him 
* , « 

1 Of.  case  196,  and  see  *^0^  ii.,  p*  91,  second  note. 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS . 

XII.] 

543 

as  I thought  he  was  well  and  doing  well,  and  would  probably  profit  by  his 
past  experience  and  keep  that  situation. 

44 1 told*my  husband  when  lie  came  in  what  I had  seen,  and  also  told  his 
coloners  wife  (now  Lady  Laffan),  but  did  not  put  down  the  date.  But 
almost  as  soon,  I believe,  as  a letter  could  have  come  from  Inverness  my 
liusban^  received  one  from  his  late  sergeant,  to  say  that  Ramsay  was  dead, 
but  giving  po  particulars.  To  this  my  husband  wrote  that  he  was  sorry, 
and  would  like  to  hear  ‘any  particulars  of  his  illness  and  death.*  This 
was  the  answer  : ‘Ramsay  died  in  hospital,  raving,  and  calling  incessantly 
for  Mrs*.  Bolland.’ 

“ I will  only  add  that  I believe  the  face  of  the  man  I saw  was  that  of 
•Ramsay  asT  had  known  him  at  first,  when  I visited  him  as  a dying  man 
in  the  infirmary.  But  seeing  him  every  day  as  my  servant,  and  in  health, 
it  had  passed  from  my  mind,  or  rather  did  not  connect  itself  with  this  man 
in  my  memory. 

“ I may  add  that  I had  been  in  ill-health  for  some  years,  but  at  that 
time  was  stronger  than  I ever  was  in  my  life,  the  warm  climate  suiting  me 
— so  well  that  l felt  a strength  and  enjoyment  of  life  for  its  own  sake, 
which  was  a delight  to  me. 

* “ Kate  E.  Bolland.” 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bolland  adds  : — 

“This’ is  the  only  instance  in  which  I have  ever  experienced  a hallu- 
cination of  the  sense  of  sight.” 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  Lieut. -Colonel  Bolland,  R.E! 

“July  20th,  1884. 

“With  regard  to  the  apparition  at  Gibraltar,  Mrs.  Bolland  mentioned 
it  to  me  an  hour  or  two  after  she  saw  it,  which  would  be  about  4 or  5 
o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  * ^ 

“ She  said  she  knew  the  face,  but  she  could  not  say  whose  it  was,  bujb 
distinctly  recognised  the  clothes  worn  as  being  like  a suit  I had  given  to 
Ramsay  wtyen  in  Inverness. 

“The  news  of  his  death  was  a shock,  coming  shortly  afterwards;  and 
I wrote  to  my  late  sergeant  on  the  Ordnance  Survey  at  Inverness  (Sergeant 
Dedman,  R.E.),  tor  particulars,  with  the  result  which  Mrs.  Bolland  has 
told  you. 

“G.  Herbert  Bolland.” 

We  find  that  this  account  completely  agrees  with  the  fuller  0n4  in 
All  the  Year  Round . That  account,  however,  contains  a more  complete 
explanation  of  the  non-recognition  6f  the  face.  As  regards  the  momentary 
mistaking  of  the  man  for  a visitor,  these  words  occur : “ I will  Only 

remind  you  that,  as  far  as  appearances  went,  the  man  was  a gentleman. 
*He  had  gentle  birth  on  one  side,  was  always  refined  in  his  manners,  and,’ . 
moreover,  'wras  cessed  in  a suit  of  clothes  of  which  no  gentleman  need  have 
been  ashamed.”  The  paper  boncludes  with  the  following  additional 
incident: — * _ 

“ There  is  one  odd  fact  as  a pendant  tq  this  little  story.  The 
man  Pearson,  *hom  *ve  had  just  brought  all  the  way  from  the  Ultima 
Thule  of  the  ancients,  at  great  expense,  gave  warning  that  day,  because,  m 
said,  ‘ the  house  was  haunted.*  He  gav®  no  explanation  and  I said  nothing. 

544  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  '[chap. 

as  the  reason  of  his  sudden  wish  to  leave  only  reached  me  through  my 
maid.  You  will  remember  that  he  stood  at  the  door,  having  f apparently 
shown  in  my  mysterious  visitor.  Had  his  notice  to  quit  come  a day  later, 
I should  have  said  he  heard  other  servants  speaking  of  the  circumstance 
in  houses  where  I had  mentioned  it.  But  he  gave  it  that  day  and  before 
1 had  spoken  of  it  at  all.  Nor  have  I heard  up  to  this  moment  \^hat  he 
meant.  Puzzled  but  not  alarmed  myself,  I would  not  risk  frightening  my 
household,  so  when  my  maid  told  me  what  he  had  said,  I only  replied 
‘ Nonsense ! ’ and  that  was  the  end  of  it.  He  left  US,  and  the  news  of 
Ramsay’s  death  came  after  he  had  gone,  or  I think  I should  have  felt 
inclined  then  to  question  him.” 

t , 

The  narrator  in  the  following  case,  Miss  S.,  fears  that  publication 
of  her  name  might  be  disadvantageous  to  her. 

“ March  11th,  1884. 

(202)  “In  August,  1881, 1 had  been  ordered  by  my  doctor  to  take  absolute 
rest,  not  even  to  read  at  all,  and  to  do  no  work  whatever.  I therefore 
took  lodgings  in  a cottage  near  London  for  a few  weeks.  During  the  last 
6 or  7 years,  I had  been  rather  intimate  with  a lady  (Mrs.  A.),  whose 
daughter  I had  instructed  during  that  period.  This  lady  had  gone  to  the 
sea-feide  with  her  family  during  the  summer  holidays,  but  had  sent  me  a 
message,  before  she  left  town,  that  the  suddenness  of  her  departure  had 
prevented  her  from  coming  to  see  me,  but  that  she  would  certainly  do  so 
on  her  return.  In  the  meantime  I had  heard,  through  mutual  friends, 
tltfit  she  and  her  family  were  in  good  health,  and  would  probably  return 
about  the  middle  of  September. 

“ About  3 weeks  after  Mrs.  A.’s  departure,  1 was  expecting  a friend 
to  come  and  see  me,  and  had  ordered  a carriage,  to  take  her  a drive.  The 
'morning  proved  wet,  and  she  did  not  come,  and  after  waiting  sometime,  I 
went  out  alone,  in  an  open  landau,  at  about  3.30  or  perhaps  as  late  as 
4 p.m.  I had  not  left  the  house  more  than  20  minutes,  when,  in  an  open 
lane,  I saw  coming  towards  me  Mrs.  A.  with  one  of  her  younger  children. 
She  was  sitting  in  her  own  victoria,  which  I knew  well.  As  she  sat  I saw 
only  the  three-quarter  face ; but  I recognised  the  bonnet,  and  also  the 
sealskin  jacket,  which  she  was-  wearing,  as  one  that  she  generally  wore  in 
winter^  I remember  them  particularly,  because  it  struck  me,  as  the 
carriage  approached,  that  it  was  very  odd  of  her  to  be  wearing  a sealskin 
jacket  in  August.  Just  as  the  carriage  came  up  to  'me,  and  was  passing 
me,  so  near  that  if  I had  put  out  my  arm  I could  have  touched  it,  I sat  up, 
and  called  out,  * Oh,  Mrs.  A.’  She  did  not  move  or  turn  her  formvtowards 
me,  but  seemed  to  be  half-turned  towards  the  child,  who  sat  on  the  further 
side  of  me.  I was  very  much  astonished  at  this,  and  then  I turned  round, 
to  look  after  the  Victoria,  and,  as  far  as  my  recollection  serves  me,  I saw  it 
slowly  drive  away.  I am  perfectly  sure  that  I could  not  have  been 
mistaken ; I was  never  more  certain  of  anything  in  my  life  than  that  I had 
actually  seen  my  friend  and  her  little  child. 

“For  the  next  10  minutes  or  so,  I was  puzzling  to  think  what  could 
have  brought  her  back  to  London,  and  was  very  vexed  with  myself  for  not 
having  at  once  told  the  coachman  to  turn  and  drive  after  the  carriage.  * I 
did,  however,  as  soon  as  I could  coWect  my  senses,  tell  him  to  drive  hoine 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS . 

54& 

xn.] 

as  quickly  as  possible  \ and  as  soon  as  I reached  the  cottage  I said  to  mv 
landlady,  ‘There  is  a lady  and  a little  girl  waiting  for  me  upstairs,  I 
suppose  i ’ When  she  assured  me  that  there  was  not,  I at  once  sent  the 
servant  over  to  my  sister’s  house,  about  10  minutes’  walk  off,  to  see  if  Mrs. 
A.  had  perhaps  gone  there.  When  the  servant  came  back  with  no  tidings 
of  her,  J was  very  much  astonished,  and  couldn’t  help  wondering  over  it 
for  the  rest  of  the  evening. 

“ Two  or  three  days  afterwards,  I asked  the  landlady  to  get  me  a daily 
paper,  feeling  a longing  to  read  something  ; and,  at  my  landlady’s  urgent 
entreaty  not  to  tire  myself,  I said  that  I would  only  look  at  the  births, 
deaths  and  marriages.  There  I saw  the  announcement  of  the  death  of  Mrs. 
.A.  at  the  sea-sid^,  on  the  very  day  when,  as  I thought,  I had  passed  her 
in  her  carriage,  near  London.  : 

“•I  afterwards  learned  from  her  relations  fMt  she  had  died  after  a very 
short  illness,  at  6 p.m.  on  that  day,  and  that  she  had  lain  in  a state  of 
unconsciousness  for  some  hours  before  her  death.  It  could  not  have  been 
much  less  than  two  hours  before  her  death — that  is  during  the  time  when 
she  lay  unconscious — that  I saw  her.  “E.  L.  S.” 

We  find  the  announcement  of  the  death  in  three  London  daily  papers 
for  August  30th,  1881. 

In  conversation,  Miss  S.  stated  that  she  had  never  been  the  subject  of 
any  hallucination.  She  is  short-sighted,  but  wears  suitable  glasses,  and 
was  wearing  them  on  this  occasion.  No  corroborative  testimony  # can  be 
obtained.  The  landlady  was  very  old,  and  very  unlikely,  even  if  now*  alive, 
to  .remember  so  trifling  an  incident  as  Miss  S.’s  question  about  the 
supposed  callers  ; and  Miss  S.’s  sister  was  absent  from  home  when  the 
inquiry  was  made  at  her  house. 

.This  might  conceivably  have  been  a case  of  mistaken  identity; 
But  it  •would  have  been  an  extraordinary  one;  and  the  sealskin  jacket 
in  August  would  have  been  as  odd  a costume  for  any  real  person  as- 
Miss  S.  conceived  it  to  be  for  her  friend.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that 
visions  of  .horses  and  carriages  are  a known  species  of  purely  subjec- 
tive hallucination  and  it  is  therefore  not  as  strange  as  it  might 
appear  that  a telepathic  hallucination  should  assume  this  elaborate 
form.  But  more  important  is  the  appearance  of  a second  human 
figure — that  of  the  dying  friends  child.  I have  already  (p,  426) 
pointed  to  a similar  feature  in  one  of  the  “ borderland  ” cases- 
as  an  indication  that  telepathic  percepts,  in  their  sensory  character r 
are  really  projections  from  within.  I may  now  point  out,  as  a fresh 
instance  of  parallelism  between  telepathic  and  casual  subjective 

1 Cf.  Dr.  C.  M.  Smith’s  case,  p.  499.  note  ; and  see  also  some  collective  hallucinations 
in  Chap,  xviii.,  § 5,  and  the  apparently  telepathic  case,  Vol.  n#  p.  9?.  - Occasionally  a. 
subjective  experience  takes  a still  more  elaborate  form.  Thus  an  informant  who  at  one 
time  had  a slight  tendency  to  visual  hallucination,  describes  seeing,  when  quite  awake, 
the  details  of  a complete  funeral  procession.  In  Chap,  v.,  &3,  of  the  Supplement  a* 
somewhat  similar  telepathic  case  will  be  quoted  ; see  ako  case  207  below*  But  the  more 
elaborate  scenes,  as  far  as  I can  judge,  are  generally  of  the  less  externalised  sort  which 
were  treated  in  Chap.  vi.  as  vivid  mental  pictures,  not  sensory  hallucinations. 

2 M 

546  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  {chap. 

phantasms,  the  extreme  rarity  of  the  cases  in  which  a second  figure 
thus  appears.  In  my  large  collection  of  subjective  hallucinations  of 
vision — putting  out  of  the  question  the  peculiar  illusions  hypna- 
yoyiques  (pp.  473-4) — I find  only  seven  cases,  that  is,  less  than  3 per 
cent.,  presenting  more  than  one  human  figure  ;*  three  of  c which 
occurred  to  percipients  who  were  in  bed,  while  in  two  others  the 
percipients  were  extremely  young.  And  among  the  telepathic 
examples  in  this  book,  I find  almost  exactly  the  same  proportion. 

As  further  illustrating  the  construction  of  the  phantasm  from 
material  which  the  percipient’s  mind  supplies,  I rtiay  mention  a‘ 
point  in  case  184.  On  the  day  when  little  Isidore  left  Paris 
for  London,  his  hair  was  cut  very  short;  and  the  long  “fringe,” 
which  was  removed,  could  not  (he  says)  have  grown  to  its  customary 
length  in  the  month  which  followed  before  the  death.  But,  as 
Mr.  Keulemans  says,  “ In  my  memory  his  image  still  preserved  the 
usual  features,  with  the  fringe  over  his  forehead  ; and  on  the  morning 
when  the  vision  awoke  me,  I saw  him  with  the  fringe  over  his  fore- 
head.”2 In  another  borderland  case  quoted  in  Chap.  IV.,  §1,  of  the 
Supplement,  where  the  phantasm  of  a dying  female  relative  appeared, 
the  dress — “ out-door  walking  costume,  the  bonnet  being  a prominent 
part  of  it  ” — was  that  in  which  the  percipient  had  last  seen  her,  nine 
years  previously;  and  in  a waking  case  in  the  Supplement, Chap. V.,  § 1, 
where  the  phantasm  represented  the  percipient’s  mother,  “ the  attire 
was  the  same  in  which  I had  last  seen  her  several  years  before.*’ 

1 See  Dr.  Smith’s  case,  p.  499,  note,  and  Mrs.  Hunter’s  case  described  in  § 4,  above. 
Further  telepathic  instances  are  Nos.  188,  195  ; Mrs.  Gordon’s,  E.  M.  Arndt’s,  and  Miss 
Osborne’s  cases,  in  the  Supplement.  Chap,  iv.,  §§  1,  3,  and  4;  Engelhardt’s  case  in  the 
Supplement,  Chap,  v.,  § 3 ; Miss  Walker’s  case  in  the  Supplement,  Chap,  ix.,  § 4 ; besides 
the  cases  in  which  a complete  scene  with  several  figures  has  been  represented,  as  No.  299, 
and  the  experiences  narrated  by  Miss  Wilkinson  and  Miss  Page,  in  the  Supplement, 
Chap,  iv.,  ^§2  and  5.  In  case  185  there  was  the  sense  of  a second  person’s  presence,  but 
the  hallucination  was  of  one  figure  only.  The  dream-case,  No.  128,  is  also  worth  com- 
paring, as  illustrating  the  identity  of  the  process  by  which  the  sleeinng  and  the  waking 
mind  may  react  upon  and  embody  a telepathic  impression.  e 

2 It  may  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Keulemans  had  in  the  evening:  a second  vision  of 

his  child,  which  was  treated  above  as  a mere  recrudescence  of  the  morning’s  hallucination. 
Mr.  Keulemans  himself,  however,  is  inclined  to  explain  it  otherwise.  His  grounds  are  hhat 
this  second  vision,  which  took  place  in  the  bright  gaslight  of  the  billiard-room,  represented 
the  boy’s  figure,  in  an  attitude  suggestive  of  death,  enclosed  as  it  were  in  a dark  cellar  or 
vault,  with  a little  window  in  it ; and  he  afterwards  found  that  at  that  hour  tfee  dead  body 
had  been  taken  to  a mortuary,  which  he  afterwards  saw,  and  which  vividly  recalled  the 
visionary  scene.  (I  attach  more  importance  to  these  details  than  I should  otherwise 
do,  on  account  of  the  care  which  Mr.  Keulemans  has  brought  to  bear  on  the  study  of  his 
own  visual  impressions,  and  of  his  training  in  habits  of  accurate  observation.)  He  suggests 
that  this  second  vkion  wfas  due  to  - a telepathic  impulse  from  his  wife’s  mother,  who  Had 
the  body  conveyed  to  the  mortuary  and  whose  thoughts  were  naturally  directed  to  him. 
Now  on  this  view  of  the  “agency  ” the  experience  none  the  less  involves  an  independent 
contribution  on  the  part  of  the  percipient.  For  ho  saw  the  child’s  figure,  though  as  if 
dead,  in  his  little  blue  sailor  suit ; whioh  was  familiar  to  him,  but  which  we  can  hardly 
conceive  to  have  been  present,  in  association  with  the  ideas  of  death  and  burial,  in  hia 
mother-in-law’s  mind*  ** 

XII.]  * ' 

TELE  PA  THIC  HALLUCIXA  TIONS. 

54? 

§ V . The  examination  of  these  precise  points  may  lead  us  on  to 
more  general  ground.  If  we  admit  a power  in  the  percipient  to 
evolve  a waking  dream  from  the  nucleus  of  a “transferred  impres- 
sion,” we  at  once  get  rid  of  what  has  been  a very  real  obstacle  to  the 
recognition  of  the  telepathic  evidence.  Phantasms  having  often  been 
conceived  as  in  some  way  objective  and  independent  presences,  it  has 
seemed  to  the  sceptic  that  all  idea  of  reality  about  them  was  suffi- 
ciently refuted,  if  they  possessed  features  which  were  a clear  reflection 
of  the  percipient’s  beliefs  and  ideas.  Students  of  folklore  and  of  com- 
parative thaumatolOgy  have  observed  that  such  phenomena,  in  various 
times  and  countries,  have  borne  a perceptible  relation  to  prevalent 
habits  and  opinions;  and  if  specimens  which  have  coincided  with,  and 
so  seemed  to  announce  and  typify,  unusual  events,  have  borne  a 
similar  relation,  it  has  been  easy  to  argue  for  their  purely  subjective 
character  from  this  subordinate  point,  and  to  ignore  the  essential 
point — the  fact  of  the  coincidence.  This  wrong  issue  is  precluded,  as 
soon  as  .the  analogy  of  dream  is  boldly  insisted  on,  and  the  pheno- 
mena are  described  as  hallucinations,  not  presences,  and  as  veridical, 
not  objective.  Any  presumption  against  them,  as  sentimental,  or 
superstitious,  or  fantastic,  then  loses  its  basis.  The  naked  fact  of 
coincidence  can  no  more  be  sentimental  or  superstitious  than  stoical  or 
sceptical ; but  subjective  colourings  may  attach  to  waking  hallucin- 
ations as  easily  as  to  dreams  ; and  it  cannot  seem  surprising  .that  the 
same  mental  habits  and  traditions  which  give  a particular  character 
to  so  many  of  the  hallucinations  which  are  illusory  through  and 
through — hallucinations  and  nothing  more — should  give  a similar 
character  to  some  of  the  hallucinations  which  are  not  illusory  through 
^ and  through,  but  are  projected  under  the  stimulus  of  a true 
impression  from  the  mind  of  some  absent  person.  The  same 
1 cast  of  ideas  through  the  dominance  of  which  a devote  may  receive 
a false  impression  that  she  has  met  the  Virgin  in  a wood,  may  very 
natprally  lead  her,  or  one  like  her,  on  the  receipt  of  a true  impression 
that  some  beloved  relative  is  dying,  to  body  forth  the  figure  as  robed 
in  white  afid  with  a radiant  face ; and  much  more  bizarre  apparitions 
than  this  might,  on  the  same  principle,  be  accepted  as  having  a causal 
connection  with  a real  event.1  The  opportunity  for  observing  such 
phenomena  in  telepathic  cases  is,  no  doubt,  limited  by*the  fact  that 

1 See  for  instance,  the  narrative  of  the  apparition  of  the  Gwrach  y Rhibyn,  to 
Sikes’s  British  Goblins,  p.  217,  which  was  related  to  the  author  at  first-hand,  in  1878- 
This  .extraordinary  phantasm,  a dreaded  local  celebrity,  seems  on  the  occasion  described 
to  have  supplied  the  embodiment  for  a real  telejJfcthic  impression. 

2 m 2 

5r 48 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[OHAP* 

cases  of  any  evidential  weight  are  almost  confined  to  quite  modern 
days,  and  for  the  present  to  the  more  advanced  nations^;  but  it  i& 
possible  that  as  interest  in  the  subject  increases,  a wider  area  will  be 
covered.  Meanwhile  we  have  quite  enough  cases  to  illustrate  the 
point.  * 

As  examples  of  phantasmal  appearances  presenting  features  which 
would  in  reality  be  impossible,  the  following  three  accounts  may  serve. 
The  first  is  from  Mrs.  Allom,  of  18,  Batoum  Gardens,  West  Kensing- 
ton Park,  W. 

“ Junh  28th,  1885. 

(203)  “ 1 have  not  the  least  objection  to  giving  an  account  of  the 
apparition  I had  of  my  mother,  which  appeared  to  me  at  the  time  of  her 
death,  although  it  is  a subject  I have  very  rarely  mentioned,  partly  that  it 
is  an  occurrence  I hold  very  sacred,  and  partly  that  I do  not  care  to  have 
my  story  doubted  or  laughed  at. 

“ I went  to  school  in  Alsace  in  October,  1852,  when  I was  17,  leaving 
my  mother  in  England  in  delicate  health.  About  Christmas,  1853,  14 
months  after  I left  home,  I heard  that  my  mother’s  health  was  worse,  but. 
I had  no  idea  that  she  was  in  any  danger.  It  was  the  last  Sunday  in 
February,  1854,  between  1 and  2 o’clock,  I was  seated  in  a large  school-room 
reading,  when  suddenly  the  figure  of  my  mother  appeared  to  me  at  the  far 
end  of  the  room.  She  was  reclining  as  if  in  bed,  in  her  night-dress.  Her 
face  was  turned  towards  me  with  a sweet  smile,  and  one  hand  was  raised 
and  pointing  upwards. 

“Gently  the  figure  moved  across  the  room,  ascending  as  it  went  until  it 
disappeared.  Both  the  face  and  figure  were  wasted  as  if  by  sickness,  as  I 
never  had  seen  her  in  life,  and  deadly  pale.  f 

“ From  the  moment  T saw  the  apparition  I felt  convinced  my  mother 
was  dead.  So  impressed  was  I that  I was  unable  to  attend  to  my  studies  ; 
and  it  was  positive  pain  to  me  to  see  my  younger  sister  playing  and 
amusing  herself  with  her  companions. 

“Two  or  three  days  after,  my  governess,  after  prayers,  called  me  to  her 
private  room.  As  soon  as  we  entered  1 said,  ‘ You  need  not  tell  me.  1 
know  my  mother  is  dead  ! 9 She  asked  me  how  I could  possibly  know  I 
gave  no  explanation,  but  told  her  I had  known  it  for  three  days.  I after- 
wards heard  my  mother  died  on  that  Sunday,  at  the*  time  I had  seen  her, 
and  that  she  had  passed  away  in  an  unconscious  state,  having  been  uncon- 
scious for  some  day  or  two  before  her  death.  * 

“ I am  by  no  means  an  imaginative,  sensitive  woman,  and  never  befoi’e 
or  since  have  I experienced  anything  similar. 

“ Isabel  Allom.” 

Mrs.  Allom’s  Mother  was  Mrs.  Carrick,  wife  of  Mr.  Thomas  Carrick, 
the  well-known  miniature-painter.  She  has  kindly  obtained  for  me  a copy 
of  an  entry  inscribed  by  her  father  in  an  old  family  Bible,  which  states 
that  Mrs.  Carrick  died  on  January  30th,  1854  ; and  we  have  verified  the 
date  in  the  Times.  This  day,  we  find,  was  a Monday,  not  a Sunday. 

[Mrs.  Allom  is  sure  that  shq,  has  never  had  a hallucination  on  any 

TELEPATHIC  HA  LL  VC  IN  A TIONS. 

549 

XII.] 

otheif  occasion,  She  once,  however,  had  a rather  marked  illusion,  when 
a Christmas-tree  assumed  momentarily,  to  her  eyes,  the  aspect  of  her 
mothers  form.  She  is  a practical  person,  and  assures  me  that  she  has  all 
her  life  been  free  from  fancies  and  superstitions.  Her  sister  was  delicate 
and  nervous,  and  on  that  account  Mrs.  Allom  did  not  tell  her  of  the 
vision  •above  described.  If  she  is  correct  in  her  recollection  that  her 
experience  was  on  a Sunday,  and  is  not  "merely  inferring  that  by  com- 
bining her  recollection  of  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  with  her  idea 
that  the  death  was  on  a Sunday,  the  hallucination  must  still  have  fallen 
at  a tftne  of  most  critical  illness.  That  she  has  said  February,  instead  of 
Januarjr,  seems  to  be  an  obvious  slip  either  of  writing  or  memory ; as 
that  «the  visionP  should  have  followed  the  death  by  a month,  or  even 
by  a week,  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  rest  of  the  statement.] 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  C.,  the  narrator  of  case  80  above,  to 
which  the  following  sentence  was  appended : — 

(204)  “ At  another  time  I saw  a figure  of  a friend  pass  before  me, 
ascending.  I received  a letter  to  say  she  had  died  that  night.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  adds  : — 

“February  19th,  1884. 

“As  £o  your  question  relating  to  the  vision  of  my  friend,  I was  saying 
my  prayers,  and  immediately  mentioned  it  to  my  husband  [since  deceased], 
and  have  subsequently  mentioned  it  to  others.  She  was  in  Cheltenham, 
and  I had  left  her  shortly  before,  she  promising  to  come  to  town  to  consult 
a doctor  on  a painful  but  not  dangerous  complaint.  It  appears  she  had 
eaten  a pork  chop,  and  was  very  sick.  Her  husband  not  apprehending 
any  danger,  asked  a friend  to  see  to  her  and  stay  with  her,  while 
he* went  to  business.  She  was  sick  all  day,  and  to  their  horror,  died  that 
night.  “ E.  0.” 

Mrs.  C.  further  mentions  that  she  has  a ring  which  gives  Sept.  25, 
1852,  as  the  date  of  her  friend’s  death. 

* [In  conversation,  Mrs.  C.,  who  is  a practical  person  with  no  leaning  to 
superstitious  fancies,  told  me  that  she  was  not  thinking  of  her  friend 
when  the  vision  was  seen.  It  was  completely  external,  but  in  the  air,  so 
to  speak,  and  high  up.  It  is  the  only  hallucination  that  Mrs.  C.  has  ever 
experienced.] 

The  next  case  is  from  the  Memoir w of  Georg  iana,  Lady 
Cfaitterton  (1878),  by  E.  H.  Dering,  the  second  husband  of  Lady 
Chatterton,  ,pp.  185-186.  The  author  says : — 

(205)  *“In  March,  1869,  while  we  were  at  Malvern  Wells,  an  event 
occurred,  which  the  reader  will,  of  course,  take  for  what  he  thinks  it  is  worth, 
but  which  I cannot  see  my  way  to  explain  as  a coincidence.3  She  (i.e.,  Lady 
Cliatterton)  had  a great  regard  for  Father  Hewitt,  O.S.B.*  \ and  he  had 
always  shown  a very  marked  sympathy  for  her  in  her  difficulties.  One 
afternoon  she  said,  ‘ I am  sure  that  dear  Father  Hewitt  is  dead.  I saw 

* 1 Thjs  word  is  often,  but  very  unfortunately,  used  as  equivalent  to  chance- 
coincidence. 

550 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

•[chap. 

him  just  now,  when  I went  upstairs,  as  clearly  as  possible,  dressed  ih  the 
Benedictine  habit,  only  it  was  of  dazzling  whiteness.  He  spemed  high 
above  me  in  the  air,1  and  he  looked  at  me.  I knew  then  that  he 
was  dead.’  It  was  about  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  The  next 
morning’s  post  brought  us  the  news  that  he  died  at  the  time  when  she 
saw  him.”  # • 

In  reference  to  this  incident,  Lady  Chatterton’s  niece,  Mrs.  Ferrers, 
of  Baddesley  Clinton,  Knowle,  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

“ March  24th,  1885. 

“ I was  with  her  at  Malvern  Wells  at  the  time,  in  some  lodgings  that 
we  hired  for  a few  weeks;  and  Father  Hewitt  was  then  at  Woolton,  a» 
village  in  Warwickshire,  my  aunt  and  Mr.  Dering  renting  Woolton*  Hall 
that  year.  I cannot  give  you  the  exact  date,  but  I remember  that  it,  was 
one  day  in  Easter  week  of  that  year  (1869).  I was  in  the  drawing-room  of 
those  lodgings  after  luncheon,  about  a quarter-past  2 o’clock,  when  my 
aunt  came  downstairs  from  her  bedroom  and  told  me  that  she  was  quite 
sure  Father  Hewitt  was  dead  for  she  had  seen  him,  &c.  We  all  knew  that 
he  was  ill  of  one  of  his  usual  severe  attacks  of  gall-stones,  but  that  com- 
plaint is  not  considered  a fatal  one,  and  so  we  were  full  of  hopes  that  we 
should  find  him  better  on  ouV  return  home.  He  was  one  of  the  best  and 
dearest  of  our  friends,  and  his  death,  corroborated  the  next  morning  by 
hearing  his  name  given  out  at  Mass,2  to  be  prayed  for  among  the  dead,  was. 
a heavy  blow  to  us  all.  We  afterwards  heard  that  he  had  died  at  2 o’.elock 
on  the  day  my  aunt  saw  him. 

“ Rebecca  H.  Ferrers.” 

[We  learn  from  the  Provincial  of  Canterbury,  the  Rev.  H.  E.  Moore, 
that  the  date  of  the  Rev.  Peter  Joseph  Hewitt’s  death  was  March  11th, 
1869.  Easter  Sunday  in  that  year  fell  on  March  28th;  Mrs.  Ferrets  is 
therefore  mistaken  in  supposing  the  occurrence  to  have  taken  place  in 
Easter  week;  but  this  is  not  material.  The  coincidence  was  probably 
exact  to  a quarter-of-an-liour.] 

The  luminous  appearance  of  the  figure  here  should  be  specially 
remarked.  For  luminosity  is  a sufficiently  frequent  feature  both  in 
purely  subjective  and  in  telepathic  hallucinations,  to  be  included  as  a 
fresh  point  of  resemblance  between  the  two  classes.  It  is  possibly  to 
definite  hallucinations  of  this  character  that  w§  should  trace  the 
widely-diffused  superstition  which  finds  in  a mysterious  light  the  sign 
of  a supernatural  presence  ;3  but  considering  ^how  natural  the 

1 Other  examples  of  a figure  seen  above  the  percipient,  or  ascending,  are  Nos.  163  and  1 

352,  and  the  case  recorded  by  Wesley,  given  in  the  Supplement,  Chap,  iv.,  § 31'  * 

2 In  this  detail  there  is  an  apparent,  though  perhaps  not  a real,  discrepancy  from 
Mr.  Dering’s  account.  ^ 

3 See  Mr.  Andrew  Lang’s  remarks  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  April,  1885,  p,  629. 
The  following  passage  occurs  in  Rink’s  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo  (1875),  p.  .43. 

“ The  Supernatural  Rulers,  or  Inue,  as  far  as  they  may  be  perceived  by  the  natural  senses, 
generally  nave  the  appearance  of  a fire  or  bright  light ; ana  to  see  them  is  in  every  case 
very  dangerous,  partly  by  causing  tantaminy  nek— viz. , frightening  to  death— -partly  as 
foreshadowing  the  death  of  a relative  (ndsdrnek).  ” Superstitions  of  this  sort  are  likely 
enough  to  produce  the  very  experiences  on  which  they  feed ; but  the,  hallucinations*  of 
light  described  in  the  present  work  are  certainly  not  suggestive  of  anything  like 
tantaminynrk . 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

5§1 

symbolism  of  light  is  in  connection  with  supernatural  ideas,  such  a 
hypothesis  is  perhaps  superfluous.  It  is  at  any  rate  not  passible  to 
reverse  the  process,  and  to  trace  the  hallucinations  to  the  superstition  5 
for  they  go  on  occurring  in  the  present  day,  as  my  collection  alone 
would  show,  to  persons  who  have  no  previous  acquaintance  with  or 
belief  in  the  superstition.  The  light  occurs  in  various  forms  and 
degrees.  One  form  already  mentioned  (p.  437)  is  the  impression  of 
a dark  room  as  illuminated,  which  is  sometimes  experienced  on 
waking.  In  the  group  of  non-human  phantasms  described  above,  we 
found  a star,  a firework,  a firefly,  a bright  oval,  a chandelier  (p.  503, 
and  see  also  Vol.  II.,  pp.  193-4).  Among  the  subjective  human 
phantasms,  six  appeared  with  a candle  in  the  hand.  In  a consider- 
able number  of  the  nocturnal  cases,  though  no  special  radiance  is 
mentioned,  the  aspect  of  the  figure  seems  to  have  been  far  more  distinct 
and  detailed  than  that  of  a real  person  would  have  been,1 — e.g.,  the 
’ grotesque  appearance  mentioned  in  Vol.  II.,  p.  237,  note,  which  was 
remarkable  for  brilliance  of  costume,  “ disappeared,  leaving  the  room 
in  darkness  ” ; and  in  other  cases  the  figure  has  appeared  as  radiant.2 

The  position  in  which  the  phantasm  was  projected  in  thcrlast  two 
cases  quoted  may  have  been  the  result  of  some  dim  idea  of  departure 
or  transition.  In  other  cases  there  is  the  distinct  symbolism  of  death. 
Two  such  cases,  of  the  “ borderland  ” class,  have  been  already  given 
(Nos.  178  and  190).  The  following  example  belongs  to  a season  of 
active  waking  life.  The  percipient,  Lieut.-Colonel  Jones,  of  8,  Sussex 
Place,  N.W.,  is  a man  as  free  from  superstition  as  can  well  be 
. imagined,  who  has  never  experienced  any  other  hallucination  what- 
ever. He  has  shown  us  a letter,  written  at  the’ time,  in  which  his 
father  alludes  to  the  apparition. 

(206)  “In  1845  I was  stationed  with  my  regiment  at  Mouhnein,  in 
Burrnah.  In  those  days  there  was  no  direct  mail  and  we  were  dependent 
upon  the  arrival  of  sailing  vessels  for  our  letters,  which  sometimes  arrived 
in  batches,  and  occasionally  were  months  without  any  news  from  home. 

* “On  the  evening  of  the  24th  of  March,  1845,1  was,  with  others, 
dining  at  a,friend’s  house,  and  when  sitting  in  the  verandah  after  dinner, 
with  the* other  guests,  in  the  middle  of  a conversation  on  some  local  affairs, 
I all  at  once  distinctly  saw  before  me  the  form  of  an  open  coffin,  with  a 

l Saa  tv  4K9  nnfiA  and  Vol.  li.  o.  72.  note- 

one 
Ghap, 

Ohap, 
Luminosity 

552 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

favourite  sister  of  mine,  then  at  home,  lying  in  it  apparently  dead.  I 
naturally  ceased  talking,  and  every  one  looked  at  me  with  astonishment, 
and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  I mentioned,  in  a laughing  manner, 
what  I had  seen,  and  it  was  looked  upon  as  a jnke.  I walked  home  later 
with  an  officer  very  much  my  senior  (the  late  Major-General  George 
Briggs,  retired,  Madras  Artillery,  then  Captain  Briggs),  who  renewed  the 
subject,  and  asked  whether  I had  received  any  news  a § to  my  sister’s 
illness.  I said  no,  and  that  my  last  letters  from  home  were  dated  some 
three  months  prior.  He  asked  me  to  make  a note  of  the  circumstance,  as 
he  had  before  heard  of  such  occurrences.  I did  so,  and  showed  him  the 
entry  I made  opposite  the  day  of  the  month  in  an  almanack.  On  the  17th 
of  May  following,  I received  a letter  from  home  announcing  my  sister’s 
death  as  having  taken  place  on  that  very  day — viz.,  the  24th  of 
March,  1845. 

‘R.  Waller  Jones.” 

[As  to  the  coincidence  of  hour,  Colonel  J ones  only  learnt  that  the 
death  occurred  in  the  morning  of  the  24th.  His  vision  was  seen  after  an 
early  dinner,  so  that,  allowing  for  longitude,  the  correspondence  of  time 
was  certainly  near,  and  may  "have  been  exact.  There  had  been  a very, 
close  attachment  between  sister  and  brother.] 

We  may  regard  the  next  two  cases — one  visual  and  o.ne  audi- 
tory— as  exemplifying  the  religious  investiture  of  a telepathic  impres- 
sion. The  first,  in  which  the  accuracy  of  the  description  “ waking 
dream  ” is  specially  well  shown,  is  from  Mrs.  Larcombe,  of  8,  Runton 
Street,  Hornsey  Rise,  N.,  a sensible  and  superior  person  who  has  seen 
a good  deal  of  the  world.  She  has  had  no  other  hallucination,  unless 
an  unexplained  appearance  seen  by  her  in  early  childhood,  and'  by 
others  as  well  as  herself,  was  of  that  character. 

“ 17th  July,  1882. 

(207)  “When  I was  about  18  or  19,  I went  to  stay  in  Guernsey; 
This  would  be  about  30  years  ago.  About  10  a.m.,  one  day,  I was  sitting 
in  the  kitchen,  blowing  up  the  fire  with  the  bellows.  I heard  some  very 
beautiful  music,  and  stopped  to  listen,  at  the  same  time  looking  up.  I 
saw  above  me  thousands  of  angels,  as  tight  as  they  could  be  packed, 
seeming  to  rise  far  above  and  beyond  me.  They  were  only  visible  as  far 
as  the  head  and  shoulders.  In  front  of  them  all  I saw  my  friend,  Anne 
Cox.  As  I looked  and  listened,  the  music  seemed  to  die  away  in  the 
distance,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  angels  seemed  to  pass  away  into  the 
distance,  and  vanish  like  smoke. 

“ I ran  up  to  Miss  White,  the  young  lady  staying  in  the  house,  and , 
told  her  what  I had  seen.  She  said,  ‘ You  may  be  sure  your  friend,  Anne 
Cox,  has  gone  to  Heaven.’  I wrote  home  at  once,  to  Lyme  Regis,  and 
found  that  Anne  Cox  had  died  that  very  day. 

“ Anne  Cox  jmd  ^ had  been  very  close  friends.  She  was  just  my  own 
age,  and  was  almost  like  a sister  to  me. 

“M.  A.  Larcombe.” 

[Mrs.  Larcombe  states  positively  that  she  was  in  no  anxiety  about  her 
friend,  and  had  no  knowledge  of  hor  illness.  She  cannot  recall  where  the 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

deatlf  occurred,  and  it  has  therefore  been  impossible  to  discover  its  exact 
date.]  - * 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Udny,  of  61,  West  bourne  Park  Villas,  W. 

“July,  1883. 

(208)  “This  family  story  fell  wijbhin  my  own  recollection,  and  I can 
vouch  ?or  the  accuracy  of  the  facts.  The  dates  put  it  beyond  any  question 
of  being  imagined  after  the  circumstances  had  occurred. 

“ In  January,  1850,  my  husband  (George  Udny,  of  the  Bengal  Civil 
Service)  was  in  Calcutta,  and  T was  living  in  London.  His  sister  Emily 
/Mrs.  Ryan)  was  living  near  me  in  London,  and  her  husband,  Edmund 
. Jtyaiij  was  in  Calcutta. 

“ On  the  20th  February,  1850,  I received  a letter  from  my  husband, 
saying  poor  Edmund  was  very  ill.  Owing  to  some  political  news  of 
importance  my  letter  of  the  9th  had  come  with  a Government  dispatch  a 
day  later  than  the  ordinary  mail  of  the  8th,  the  regular  mail-day. 

“ Soon  after  receiving  my  letter,  on  the  same  day,  my  sister-in-law, 
Emily  Ryan,  came  to  me  in  great  anxiety  to  know  if  1 had  any  later  news 
of  her  husband  than  the  9th,  as  she  also  had  heard  he  was  very  ill.  I 
explained  to  her  liow  impossible  it  was  that  there  should  be  any  later  news, 
as  the  9th  itself  was  later  than  I had  ever  known  the  mail  leave  before. 
She  then  explained  the  reason  for  her  extreme  anxiety  for  news  to  the 
10th  January,  and  told  me  the  following  curious  circumstance  : — 

“K)n  the  10th  January,  she  had  been  engaged  in  her  devotions  between 
1 1 a.m.  and  noon,  according  to  her  custom ; for  she  was  in  the  habit  of 
rising  late,  and  did  not  make  her  appearance  in  the  family  circle  till  the 
middle  of  the  day.  While  thus  engaged  on  her  knees,  and  making  her 
husband  the  special  subject  of  her  prayers,  she  thought  some  one  spoke 
quite  distinctly  close  to  her  ear,  1 Pray  not  for  him,  he  is  in  Eternity.  Be 
still  argi  know  that  I am  God.’ 

“ She  was  so  much  astonished,  she  thought  some  one  must  have  come 
into  the  room  unperceived  by  her,  and  rose  from  her  knees  and  looked 
around  her,  but  could  see  no  one.  She  was,  howe\rer,  so  much  impressed 
By  the  circumstance  that  she  wrote  it  down  at  once,  with  the  date  of  day 
and  hour,  and  sealing  up  the  paper,  carried  it  downstairs  and  gave  it  to  the 
.care  of  a young  niece  living  in  the  house  (Tempe  Raikes),  telling  her  to 
keep  the  seal  unbroken  till  she  asked  for  it.  , , 

“On  the  morning  she  came  to  me,  20th  February,  hearing  of  her 
.husband's  serious  illitess  on  the  8th  January,  she  had  asked  for  er  sea  ec 
note  and  had  broken  the  seal  and  read  in  the  presence  of  her  mother  and 
au»t  the  above  circumstance,  and  finding  the  date,  which  she  had 
forgotten,  only  two  days  later  than  her  news  from  Calcutta,  came  off  to 
yne  to  inquire!  for  later  news,  but  only  heard  my  letter  of  the  9t  . 

“She  had,  therefore,  to  await  the  arrival  of  another  ^ fortnight- 

after— when  the  letters  of  the  23rd  January,  arriving  on  the  8th  March, 
told  her  that  her  poor  husband  had  died  on  the  10th  January,  between  5 
an'd ‘6  p.m.— the  exact  time,  allowing  for  the  difference  of  .longitude,  that 
she  had  been  forbidden  to  pray  for  him  in  London.  ^ ^ ^ Udnt.” 

* We  find  from  notices  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazim^nAthe  Annual 
Blister  that  Mr.  E.  B.  Ryan  died  at  Calcutta,  on  Jan.  10,  1850. 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

m 

" [chap. 

Mrs.  Udny  showed  Mr.  Podmore  the  notes  (committed  to  pa\>er  on 
April  27,  1861,  in  order  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the  occurrence)  from 
which  this  account  was  taken.  Mrs.  Ryan,  now  Mrs.  Hermon,  cannot  be 
questioned  on  the  subject. 

In  a second  letter,  Mrs.  Udny  adds  : — ^ 

u I have  just  received  the  enclosed  from  my  niece — the  Tempk  Raikes 
of  my  family  story.  I think  you  will  find  it  very  satisfactory  as  to  the 
main  facts  of  the  story.  I think  you  will  find  my  dates  are  more 
accurate  than  my  niece’s ; she  has  got  a little  confused  as  to  the  hours — 
perhaps  not  allowing  for  the  difference  of  longitude.  I distinctly 
remember  Mrs.  Ryan’s  telling  me  that  she  was  praying  between  11  and  12* 
a.m.,  and  I think  I mentioned  in  my  mem.  to  you  that  her  husband  died 
about  5 o’clock  p.m.,  because  my  husband  wrote  that  to  me  from  Calcutta* 
And  the  singular  thing  which  struck  me  at  the  time  was  that  the  difference 
would  be  exactly  that  of  the  longitude.” 

The  enclosure  was  as  follows  : — 

“ 25,  Victoria  Square,  Clifton. 

u September  16th,  1883. 

“ About  the  story  of  Aunt  Hermon  [formerly  Ryan],  the  facts,  as  far 
as  I can  recollect,  are  that  she  wrote  out  what  had  happened  oije  morning 
at  her  private  prayers,  and  gave  me  the  sealed  letter  about  it,  and  said  in 
a few,  weeks  she  would  either  ask  me  for  it  to  burn  it,  or  to  read  ft  out* 
Six  weeks  after,  when  she  heard  of  Uncle  Ryan’s  death,  she  asked  for  it 
and  gave  it  to  her  mother ; and  in  it  she  had  written  that,  while  praying 
for  her  husband  (from  whom  she  had  heard  nothing  for  6 months),  a voice 
came  to  her  ears,  4 He  is  in  Eternity.’  She  went  on,  thinking  it  a silly 
fancy,  and  again  it  said,  ‘ It  is  too  late,  he  is  in  Eternity.’  She  was  so 
convinced  of  its  truth  she  left  oft’  and  was  sure  she  would  hear  something 
had  happened.  He  had  died  that  very  morning  at  4 o’clock,  for  me  had 
dated  her  letter,  and,  moreover,  she  was  quite  prepared  when  his  death 
was  announced  to  her.  The  overland  mail  in  those  days  took  six  weeks, 
coming. 

“Tempe  S.  Bright  (nee  Raikes).” 

§ 8.  To  return,  however,  to  the  details  of  the  phantasmal 
appearance — the  theory  which  I have  advanced  #s  to  the  projection 
of  the  percept  has  received  illustration  in  cases  where  all  its  features, 
could  be,  and  in  my  view  have  been,  supplied  by  the  percipient's 
mind.  But  it  must  now  be  added  that  there  is  a converse  type* 
where  the  dress  or  aspect  includes  features  which  equally  clearly 
could  not  be  supplied  by  the  percipient's  mind ; and  here 
the  former  explanation  will,  of  course,  not  apply.  In  cases , of 
this  type,  tfie  afctual  aspect  of  the  agent,  at  the  time  of 
the  occurrence,  has  included  some  marked  variation  from  any- 
thing that  the  percipient  would  naturally  picture.  If,  then,  the 
phantasmal  appearance  includes  this  same  feature,  it  must  be  an 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

. *«•] 

5fyr> 

element  that  the  impressing  -mind  has  contributed,  and  not  the 
impi'essed;  in  other  words,  we  must  here  admit  that  a ready-made 
concrete  image,  and  not  a mere  idea,  has  been  transferred  from  one  to 
the  other.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  such  an  image  occupies  a 
certaifl  place  in  the  agent’s  mind ; and  when  a peculiarity  of  aspect 
is  temporary  and  accidental,  it  is  sometimes  a very  prominent  part  of 
consciousness.  Even  when  the  peculiarity  (as  it  appears  to  the 
percipient)  is  one  to  which  the  agent  himself  has  become  accustomed 
- — as  a change  jn-  the  growth  or  colour  of  the  hair — the  fact  remains, 
that  a certain  sense  of  one’s  own  aspect  probably  always  exists  at  the 
background  of  consciousness.  This  it  is  which  sometimes,  at  the 
season  when  latent  ideas  are  apt  to  assume  arbitrary  prominence, 
creates  for  the  scantily-clad  dreamer  such  embarrassing  situations ; 
this  it  is  which,  in  rare  but  well-attested  cases,  projects  the  apparition 
(purely  hallucinatory,  as  I should  hold)  of  a person’s  own  self  or 
“ double  ” and  I may  again  recall  the  experimental  indications  that 
even  idgas  which  cannot  be  recognised  as  part  of  consciousness, 
at  all  may  be  susceptible  of  telepathic  transference  (pp.  78-9,  84)* 
I do  not  indeed  pretend  that  the  analogy  here  can  givd  • entire 
satisfaction ; or  that  the  translation  of  a vague  sub-conscious 
image  in  one  mind  into  a sharply-defined,  and  at  the  same  time 
a perfectly  correct,  percept  in  another,  is  a fact  for  which  the 
rest  of  our  evidence,  whether  of  experimental  or  of  spontaneous, 
transferences,  would  have  ever  prepared  us.  All  that  I would  claim 
is  that  it  is  a fact  which  the'  conception  of  psychical  transferences  is. 
not  inadequate  to  embrace.  Another  conception  no  doubt  there  is — 
that  of  some  independent  exercise  of  the  percipient’s  own  faculties 
— which  suggests  itself  in  respect  of  this  type  of  experience,  as  before 
in  the  cases  where  the  percipient’s  point  of  observation  seemed 

1 These  experience  * seem  to  be  of  two  sorts.  Sometimes  the  percipient’s  impression  is 
that  his  own  point  of  observation  has  been  transferred  to  a point  outside  his  body,  whence 
he  sees  his  body  in  the  place  where  it  really  is.  An  instance  is  given  in  yd*  ii.,  p.  85. 
nofe  ; and  my  collection  of  hallucinations  includes  two  other  cases  of  the  kind,  in  one  of 
which  the  “ subject  ” was  under  chloroform,  and  in  the  other  was  recovering  from  fever. 
.Another  cor  res  turn  dent  has  had  impressions  of  the  same  sort,  which  seem  to  have  stopped 
’short  of  actual  Hallucination.  He  writes : “ I have  occasionally  felt  as  though  I knew  that 
the  body  was  lying  in  the  bed,  but  that  the  spirit  was  hovering  about  it,  and  contemplating 
it.  When  this  is  the  case  I am  apt  to  feel  some  difficulty  in  waking,  and  even  feel  * 
little  unwell  through  the  following  morning.”  With  these  experiences  should  w compared 
-the  less  marked  cases  where  the  impression  is  simply  of  “going  out  of  oneself  ,a  well- 
known  feature  of  various  abnormal  conditions  ; see  for  iustancapMr.  warley  s description 
above  referred  to  (p.  288,  note) ; Mrs.  W.’s  case  below  (p.  507) ; and  Cardan,  De  VanekUe 
Jicrum  (Basle,  1557),  p.  314.  But  in  another  class  of  cases  the  percipient  retains  MS 
normal  point  of  observation,  and  simply  sees  a phantasm  representing  himself  at  a place 
which  is  really  vacant.  An  instance  of  this  is  case  333  (Vol.  II.,  p.  217)  > and  I have, 
another  # chloroform- case  in  which  the  patient^  a medical  man,  seemed  to  see  his  own. 
" double  ” contemplating  him. 

£56  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  [chap 

transferred  to  a distant  scene  (pp.  .266,  340,  368-9).  But  in  the 
absence  of  more  distinct  contemporary  evidence  for  such  ‘exercise,  I 
think  that  we  should  avoid  even  provisionally  resorting  to  a theory 
which  introduces  problems  as  formidable  as  any  that  it  can  be 
employed  to  explain.  And  in  the  present  cases,  as  in  the  formfer  ones, 
since  nothing  is  perceived  that  is  definitely  outside  the  agent’s  range 
of  knowledge,  the  extension  of  the  percipient’s  faculties — his 
iiai'T'Voyance,  if  we  like  to  call  it  so — may  still  be  perfectly  well 
regarded  as  a telepathic  extension,  an  abnormally  increased  power  of  0 
receiving  impressions  from  another  mind,  or  rather  a power  of 
receiving  impressions  from  the  more  withdrawn  strata  of  another 
mind,  under  conditions  of  crisis  or  excitement. 

To  come  now  to  the  evidence — as  to  which  one  preliminary  remark 
is  needed.  Some  of  the  cases  to  be  quoted  are,  I think,  clearly  of  the 
type  described  ; others  are  also  instances  of  it,  if  quite  correctly 
recorded.  But  we  must  remember  that  a narrative  which  is  com- 
pletely correct  as  to  the  central  facts  which  go  to  prove  the  telepathic 
origin  of  the  phantasm,  may  yet  be  inexact  in  the  particulars  which 
now  become  important.  A striking  coincidence  is  rather  apt  to 
suggest  to  the  imagination  a detailed  correspondence ; and  the 
percipient,  in  looking  back  to  his  experience  after  hearing  of  certain 
features  which  belonged  to  the  aspect  of  his  dying  friend,  may  come 
to  imagine  that  they  were  represented  in  the  phantasm.  ^ Every 
example,  therefore,  must  be  weighed  with  this  possibility  in  tfiew. 

A genuine  instance  of  this  type,  I believe,  was  the  one 
.already  quoted  (No.  194)  where  the  grey  hair  was  a detail  *o,f 
appearance  which  Miss  R.  had  never  imagined,  and  was  very 
unlikely  to  conjure  up.  Another  is  the  following,  received  in  1882 
from  Captain  G.  F.  Russell  Colt,  of  Gartsherrie,  Coatbridge,  N.B. 

(210)  “I  was  at  home  for  my  holidays,  and  residing  with  my  father  and 
mother,  not  here,  but  at  another  old  family  place  in  Mid-Lothian,  built  by 
.an  ancestor  in  Mary  Queen  of  Scots’  time,  called  Inveresk  House,  jtfy 
bedroom  was  a curious  old  room,  long  and  narrow,  with  a window . at  one 
•end  of  the  room  and  a door  at  the  other.  My  bed  was  on  the  rjght  of  the 
window,  looking  towards  the  door.  I had  a very  dear  brother  (my  eldest 
brother),  Oliver,  lieutenant  in  the  7 th  Royal  Fusiliers.  He  was  about 
19  years  old,  and  had  at  that  time  been  some  months  before  Sebastopol. 
I corresponded  .frequently  with  him  ; and  once  when  he  wrote  in  low  spirits, 
not  being  well,  I said  in  answer  that  he  was  to  cheer  up,  but  that  if  any- 
thing did  happen  to  him,  he  must  let  me  know  by  appearing  to  me  in  my 
room,  where  We  had  often  as  boys  together  sat  at  night  and  indulged  in  a 
surreptitious  pipe  and  chat.  Tljis  letter  (I  found  .subsequently)  ‘he 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

55  T 

received  as  he  was  starting  to  receive  the  Sacrament  from  a clergyman  who 
has. since,  related  the  fact  to  me.  Having  done  this,  he  went  to  the 
entrenchments  and  never  returned,  as  in  a few  hours  afterwards,  the 
storming  of  the  Redan  commenced.  He,  on  the  captain  of  his  company 
falling,  took  his  place,  and  led  his  men  bravely  on.  He  had  just  led  them 
within  the  walls,  though  already  wounded  in  several  places,  when  a bullet 
struck  him  on  the  right  temple  and  he  fell  amongst  heaps  of  others,  where 
he  was  found  in  a sort  of  kneeling  posture  (being  propped  up  by  other 
dead  bodies)  36  hours  afterwards.  His  death  took  place,  or  rather  he  fell, 
though  he  may  not  have  died  immediately,  on  the  8th  September,  1855. 

“ That  night  I awoke  suddenly,  and  saw  facing  the  window  of  my 
, room,  by  my  beside,  surrounded  by  a light  sort  of  phosphorescent  mist,  ai 
it  were,  my  brother  kneeling.  I tried  to  speak  but  could  not.  I buried  my 
head,  in  the  bedclothes,  not  at  all  afraid  (because  we  had  all  been  brought 
up  not*  to  believe  in  ghosts  or  apparitions),  but  simply  to  collect  my  ideas, 
because  I had  not  been  thinking  or  dreaming  of  him,  and,  indeed,  had 
forgotten  all  about  what  I had  written  to  him  a fortnight  before.  I 
decided  that  it  must  be  fancy,  and  the  moonlight  playing  on  a towel,  or 
something  out  of  place.  But  on  looking  up,  there  he  was  again,  looking 
lovingly,  imploringly,  and  sadly  at  me.  I tried  again  to  speak,  but  found 
myself,  tongue-tied.  I could  not  utter  a sound.  I sprang  out  of  bed, 
glanced  through  the  window,  and  saw  that  there  was  no  moon,  but  it  was 
very  dark  and  raining  hard,  by  the  sound  against  the  panes,  I turned, 
and  still  saw  poor  Oliver.  I shut  my  eyes,  walked  through  it,1  and 
reached  the  door  of  the  room.  As  I turned  the  handle,  before  leaving 
the  room,  I looked  once  more  back.  The  apparition  turned  round  his 
head  slowly  and  again  looked  anxiously  and  lovingly  at  me,  and  I saw 
then  for  the  first  time  a wound  on  the  right  temple  with  a red  stream  from 
it.  . His  face  was  of  a waxy  pale  tint,  but  transparent-looking,  and  so  was 
the  reddish  mark.  But  it  is  almost  impossible  to  describe  his  appearance. 
I only  know  I shall  never  forget  it.  I left  the  room  and  went  into  a 
friend’s  room,  and  lay  on  the  sofa  the  rest  of  the  night.  I told  him  why. 
I -told  others  in  the  house,  but  when  I told  my  father,  he  ordered  *me 
not  to  repeat  such  nonsense,  and  especially  not  to  let  my  mother  know. 

“ On  the  Monday  following, 2 * he  received  a note  from  Sir  Alexander 
Milne  to  say  that  the  Redan  was  stormed,  but  no  particulars.  I told  lny 
friend*  to  let  me  know  if  lie  saw  the  name  among  the  killed  and  wounded 
before  me.  About  a fortnight  later  he  came  to  my  bedroom  in  his  mother’s 
house  in  Athole  Crescent,  in  Edinburgh,  with  a very  grave  face.  I said, 
‘ I suppose  it  is  to  tell  me  the  sad  news  I expect ; ’ and  he  said,  4 Yes/ 
Both  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  and  one  or  two  officers  who  saw  the 
body  confirmed  the  fact  that  the  appearance  was  much  according  to  my 
^description,  find  the  death-wound  was  exactly  where  I had  seen  it.  But 
none  could  say  whether  he  actually  died  at  the  moment.  His  appearance, 
if  so,  must  have  been  some  hours  after  death,  as  he  appeared  to  me  a 
few  minutes  after  2 in  the  morning.  Months  later,  a small  prayer-book 

1 In  my  collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations  there  is  a case  where  this  very 

expression  is  used.  It  occurs  also  in  the  “ ambiguous  ” case,  p.  517,  note. 

• * Communication  with  the  Crimea  was  then  conducted  by  telegraph  for  only  part  of 

the*  way.* 

558 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

,[chajp. 

and  the  letter  I had  written  to  him  were  returned  to  Inveresk,  found 
in  the  inner  breast  pocket  of  the  tunic  which  he  wore  at  his  death*  I 
have  them  now.” 

The  account  in  the  London  Gazette  Extraordinary  of  September  22nd, 
1855,  shows  that  the  storming  of  the  Redan  began  shortly  after  noon  on 
September  8th,  and  lasted  upwards  of  an  hour  and  a-half.  We  learn  from 
RusselFs  account  that  “ the  dead,  the  dying,  and  the  uninjured,  were  all 
lying  in  piles  together  ” ; and  it  would  seem  that  the  search  for  the 
wounded  was  still  continuing  on  the  morning  of  the  9th.  The  exact  time 
of  Lieut.  Oliver  Colt’s  death  is  uncertain. 

In  a further  communication,  Captain  Colt  says  : — 

“ My  father  received  Admiral  Milne’s  message  just  as  we  were  starting 
in  the  drag — a large  party — on  a visit  to  some  ruins,  several  miles  off. 
He  was  driving,  and  I was  sitting  next  to  him,  and  he  remarked,  4 It  was 
we}I  I told  you  not  to  say  anything  about  having  seen  your  brother  Oliver 
to  your  mother.  I hope  you  will  forbid  it  to  be  mentioned  by  any  one 
whom  you  told,  as  it  might  doubly  alarm  her  now,  since  this  news.’  ” 

Captain  Colt  mentioned  several  persons  who  could  corroborate  this 
narrative.  We  received  the  following  letter  from  his  sister,  Mrs.  Hope, 
of  Fermoy.  « 

“ December  12th,  1882. 

“Oft  the  morning  of  September  8th,  1855,  my  brother,  Mr.  Colt‘  told 
myself,  Captain  Ferguson  of  the  42nd  Regiment,  since  dead,  and  Major 
Borthwick  of  the  Rifle  Brigade  (who  is  living),  and  others,  that  he  had 
during  the  night  awakened  from  sleep  and  seen,  as  he  thought,  my  eldest 
brother,  Lieut.  Oliver  Colt  of  the  Royal  Fusiliers  (who  was  in  the  Crimea), 
standing  between  his  bed  and  the  door  ; that  he  saw  he  was  wounded 
in  more  than  one  place — I remember  he  named  the  temple  as  one  place — 
by  bullet-wounds  ; that  he  aroused  himself,  rushed  to  the  door  with  closed 
eyes  and  loQked  back  at  the  apparition,  which  stood  between  him  and  the 
bed.  My  father  enjoined  silence,  lest  my  mother  should  be  made  uneasy; 
but  shortly  afterwards  came  the  news  of  the  fall  of  the  Redan  and  my 
brother’s  death.  Two  years  afterwards,  my  husband,  Colonel  Hope,  invited 
my  brother  to  dine  with  him  ; the  former  being  still  a lieutenant  in  the 
Royal  Fusiliers,  the  latter  an  ensign  in  the  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers.  While 
dining,  they  were  talking  of  my  eldest  brother.  Myr  husband  was  about 
to  describe  his  appearance  when  found,  when  my  brother  described  what 
he  had  seen,  and  to  the  astonishment  of  all  present,  the  description  of  the 
wounds  tallied  with  the  facts.  My  husband  was  my  eldest  broth€r’s 
greatest  friend,  and  was  among  those  who  saw  the  body  as  soon  as  it 
was  found.” 

[It  will  be  seen  that  this  corroboration  varies  from  the  previous 
account  in  two  points,  which,  however,  do  not  greatly  affect  its  value.  The 
date  was  really,  September  9th,  not  the  8th — but  it  is  very  natural  that 
the  vision  should  have  become  associated  with  the  memorable  date,  which 

was  of  course  the  8th  ; and  the  figure  was  kneeling,  not  standing.] 

* 

For  present  purposes,  the  derail  to  be  noticed  here  is,  of  course,  the 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

sm 

XII.] 

position  of  the  wound : stress  can  hardly  be  laid  on  the  correspon- 
dence in  ■%  kneeling  posture.  But  the  appearance  of  “ phosphor- 
escent mist  ” is  another  point  of  interest  (see  p.  526,  first  note) ; 
as  is  also  the  percipient’s  previous  request  to  his  brother  to  appear  to 
him,  wjrich  assimilates  the  case  to  the  one  where  a distinct  compact  to 
this  effect  had  been  made  (Yol.  II.,  p.  66). 

The  next  account,  which  we  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Major  Taylor, 
of  tha  Royal  Military  College,  Farningham,  is  from  a lady,  Miss  L., 
who  withholds  her  name  from  publication,  in  deference  to  the  views 
'of  a near  relative. 

' , » 

(21*1)  “ On  one  of  the  last  days  of  July,  about  the  year  1860,  at  3 
o’clock  p.m.,  I was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  at  the  Rectory,  reading, 
and  my  thoughts  entirely  occupied.  I suddenly  looked  up,  and  saw  most 
distinctly  a tall,  thin  old  gentleman  enter  the  room  and  walk  to  the  table. 
He  wore  a peculiar  old-fashioned  cloak,  which  I recognised  as  belonging 
to  my  great-uncle.  I then  looked  at  him  closely,  and  remembered  his 
features  and  appearance  perfectly,  although  I had  not  seen  him  since  1 
was  quite  j*,  child.  In  his  hand  was  a roll  of  paper,  and  he  appeared  to  be 
very  agitated.  I was  not  in  the  least  alarmed,  as  I firmly  believed  he 
was  toy  uncle,  not  knowing  then  of  his  serious  illness.  I asked  .him  if 
he  wanted  my  father,  who,  I said,  was  not  at  home.  He  then  appeared 
still  more  agitated  and  distressed,  but  made  no  remark.  He  then  left  the 
room,  passing  through  the  half-open  door.  I noticed  that,  although  it  was 
a very  wet  day,  there  was  no  appearance  of  his  having  walked  in  mud  or 
rain.  He  had  no  umbrella,  but  a thick  walking-stick,  which  I recognised 
at  onc^when  my  father  brought  it  home  after  the  funeral.  On  question- 
ing the  servants  they  declared  that  no  one  had  rung  the  bell,  neither  did 
they  see  anyone  enter.  My  father  had  a letter  by  the  next  post,  asking  him 
to  go  at  once  to  my  uncle,  who  was  very  ill  in  Leicestershire.  He  started 
at  once,  but  on  his  arrival  was  told  that  he  had  died  exactly  at  3 o’clock 
that  afternoon,  and  had  asked  for  him  by  name  several  times  in  an 
anxious  and  troubled  manner,  and  a roll  of  paper  was  found  under  his 
pillow*. 

“ I may  mention  that  my  father  was  his  only  nephew,  and,  having  no 
son,  he  always  led  him  to  think  that  he  would  have  a considerable  legacy. 
Such,  however,  was  not  the  case,  and  it  is  supposed  that,  as  they  were 
absays  good  friends,  he  was  influenced  in  his  last  illness,  and  probably, 
when  too  late,  he  wished  to  alter  his  will. 

' “E.  F.  L.” 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  L.  adds  : — 

i(  I told  my  mother  and  an  uncle  at  once  about  the  strange  appearance 
before  the  news  arrived,  and  also  to  my  father  directly  he  Returned,  all  of 
whom  are  now  dead.  They  advised  me  to  try  to  dismiss  it  from  my 
memory,  but  agreed  that  it  could  not  * be  imagination,  as  I described  my 
uncle  so  exactly ; and  they  did  not  consider  me  to  be  either  of  a nervous  or 
superstitious  temperament. 

560 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

Jchap. 

“ I am  quite  sure  that  I stated  the  facts  truthfully  and  corree&ly  to 
Major  Taylor.  The  facts  are  as  fresh  in  my  memory  as  if  they  only 
happened  yesterday,  although  so  many  years  have  passed  away. 

“ I can  assure  you  that  nothing  of  the  kind  ever  occurred  to  me  before 
or  since.  [This  is  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  Miss  L.  had  eyer 
had  a hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.]  Neither  have 
I been  subject  to  nervous  or  imaginative  fancies.  This  strange  apparition 
was  in  broad  daylight,  and,  as  I was  only  reading  the  Illustrated  News- 
paper, there  was  nothing  to  excite  my  imagination.” 

[A  notice  in  the  Leicester  Chronicle  shows  that  the  death  occurred  on 
August  4,  1855,  and  the  incident  is  therefore  more  remote  than  Miss. 
L.  imagined.] 

The  next  account  is  from  Dr.  Bowstcad,  of  Caistor.  Though 
remote  in  date,  the  main  incident  does  not  seem  likely  to  have  been, 
greatly  modified  in  memory. 

“July,  1883. 

(212)  “ In  September,  1847,  I was  playing  in  a cricket  match,  and  took 
the  place  of  long-field.  A ball  was  driven  in  my  direction,  which  I ought  to 
have*  caught,  but  missed  it,  and  it  rolled  towards  a low  hedge ; I and 
another  lad  ran  after  it.  * When  I got  near  the  hedge  I saw  the  apparition 
of  my  half-brother,  who  was  much  endeared  to  me,  over  the  hedge,  dressed 
in  a shooting  suit  with  a gun  on  his  arm  ; he  smiled  and  waved  his  hand 
at  me.  I called  the  attention  of  the  other  boy  to  the  same,  but  when  we 
looked  again  the  figure  had  vanished.  I,  feeling  very  sad  at  the  time, 
went  up  to  my  uncle,  and  told  him  of  what  I had  seen;  he  took  out  his. 
watch  and  noted  the  time,  just  10  minutes  to  1 o’clock. 

“ Two  days  after,  I received  a letter  from  my  father,  informing  me  of 
the  death  of  my  half-brother,  John  Mounsey,  which  took  place  [at  Lincoln) 
at  10  minutes  to  1.  His  death  was  singular,  for  on  that  morning  lie  said 
he  was  much  better,  and  thought  he  should  be  able  to  shoot  again. 
Taking  up  his  gun,  he  turned  round  to  my  father,  asking  him  if  he  had 
sent  for  me,  as  he  particularly  wished  to  see  me.  I was  a great  favourite 
of  his.  My  father  replied  the  distance  was  too  far  and  expense  too  great 
to  send  for  me,  it  being  over  100  miles.  At  this  he  put  himself  into  a 
passion,  and  said  he  would  see  me  in  spite  of  them  all,  for  he  did  not 
care  for  expense  or  distance.  Suddenly  a blood  vessel  on  his  Jungs  burst, 
and  he  died  at  once.  He  was  at  the  time  dressed  in'*  shooting-suij},  and 
had  his  gun  on  his  arm.  I knew  he  was  ill,  but  a letter  from  my  father 
previous  to  the  time  I saw  him  told  me  he  was  improving  an4  that w he 
might  get  through*  the  winter  ; but  his  disease  was  consumption,  and  he 
had  bleeding  from  the  lungs  three  months  before  his  death.  t,  . 

“Rowland  Bowstead1,  M.D.” 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  John  Mounsey  died 
on  September  23,  1847. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Dr.  Bowstead  says  : — 

“ No  note  was  taken  at  the  time,  only  my  uncle,  at  whose  school  I was- . 
at  the  time,  looked  at  his  watch  and  noted  the  time,  but  never  thought- 
anything  about  the  occurrence.  # He  himself  had  once  a similar  thing 

XII.] 

TELEPA THIC  HALLUCINATION*. 

m 

happen  to  himself  when  an  uncle  died ; but  not  so  vividly  as  mine.  There 
is  not  a soul  now  living  to  get  any  information  from,  for  the  lad  who  was 
with  me  and  who  did  not  see  anything,  although  he  looked  in  the  same 
direction,  is  now  dead  ; but  the  announcement  of  the  death  2 days  after- 
wards told  of  my  brother’s  death  at  the  time  I saw  him.  All  the  family 
connexion  are  dead  ; his  son  died  in  1853,  apd  his  wife  in  1854.  I have 
had  no  hallucinations  since.” 

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  dress  of  the  apparition  did  not  contain 
any  features  that  were'  new  to  the  percipient — to  whom  the  sporting 
aspect  of  his  Toother  may  have  been  both  familiar  and  interesting ; 
still,  the  correspondence,  if  accurately  remembered,  is  remarkable. 
This  .case  deserves  consideration  from  those  who  would  attribute 
“ phantasms  of  the  living  ” to  a diseased  state  of  body  or  mind  in  the 
percipient.  A cricketing  school-boy,  in  full  exercise,  is  rarely  a prey  to 
physical  ills ; and  though  his  mental-  condition  after  just  missing  a 
patch  may  be  a pitiable  one  enough,  it  is  not  one  that  we  commonly 
associate  with  hysteria  or  superstition. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  John  Hernaman,  A.K.C.,  F.S.A.,. 
Head  Master  of  the  Lambeth  Boys’  School,  Hercules  Buildings, 
London,  S.E.  He  tells  us  that  this  account  (which  we  received  in 
1884)  was  written  within  two  years  of  the  occurrence ; and  that  he 
has  had  no  other  experience  of  hallucinaiion. 

.(213)  “When  I lived  in  Bishopsgate,  my  rooms  were  at  Salvador 
House.*  It  was  a grand  old  house,  iormcrly  the  home  of  a Spanish 
Ambassador,  it  had  undergone  strange  vicissitudes.  . . . My  apartments, 
consisted  of  a . suite  of  five  rooms,  which  I occupied  with  my  house- 
keeper, a middle-aged  woman,  and  her  son,  a youth  of  18,  who  waited  on 
me.  I gave  up  three  of  the  suite  for  their  use,  reserving  only  two  very 
large  rooms,  which  communicated  with  each  other,  for  my  own. 

“ Well,  one  night  as  T lay  asleep,  I all  at  once  woke  to  perfect  con- 
•sciousness,  as  wide  awake  as  I am  now  ; and  there,  in  the  embrasure  raa  e 
by  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  stood  a little  old  woman  m her  night-dress 
and  cap,  with  a smal!  black  and  white  checked  shawl,  as. far  as  1 could 
make  out,  like  a duster-pattern,  over  her  shoulders.  I want  you  par- 
ticularly to  remember  the  shawl.  I knew  her  well,  and,  as  I lay,  remarked 
to  myself  on  the  beauty  and  transparency  of  her  complexion,  while  a 
Soft  lambent  light  seemed  to  play  over  the  whole  figure,  such  as  you  would 
see  on  your  fingers  when  you  rub  a match,  or  the  liquid  gleaming  phos- 
phorescence1 one  sometimes  finds  ridging  the  wavelets  at  sea.  ^n  jiotmg 
this,  the  work  of  an  instant,  an  intense  and  indescribable Reeling  took 
possession  of*  me,  beginning  somewhere  in  the  regioft  of  the  feet,  > 
passing  up  my  spine, * reached  my  head,  where  ‘each  particular  hair  did. 

9 x 

\Cf.  tfie  “ phosphorescent  mist  ” in  case  210. 
2 See  Vol  ii.,  p.  37#  note. 

562 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

stand  on  end/  Vexed  and  annoyed  with  myself,  I turned  away  from  the 
sight,  as  the  chime  of  St.  Botolph’s  struck  the  quarter  to  2.  When  the 
sounds  had  died,  and  after  the  clock  had  struck  the  hour,  I ' fell  asleep 
again,  and  rested  undisturbed  till  morning. 

44  On  going  downstairs,  T met  one  of  our  clergy,  the  Rev.  George 
Wrench, the  greatest  friend  I had  in  Bishopsgate,  [since  deceased,]  a$d  said, 

4 Laugh  at  me  ! Here  am  I,  a man  supposed  to  be  educated,  of  average 
intelligence,  at  least,  living  in  the  very  centre  of  the  centre  of  civilisation, 
an  utter  disbeliever  in  ghosts,  and  yet  last  night  I saw  one/  4 Nonsense  ! ’ 
said  he.  4 ’Tis  true  ! ’ I tepeated.  4 Well,  come,  who  was  it  ? ’ 4 Mss.  P.,’ 
I answered.  4 You  don’t  say  so  ! Do  you  know  she  is  very  ill  ? ’ i Not  1/ 

4 But  she  is  though,’  rejoined  he,  and  we  chaffed  each  pther  about  the 
strange  visitant. 

44  Well,  al}  that  day  I went  about  nty  work  and  never  gave  my  ghost 
a thought,  retired  to  bed  as  usual,  slept  well  and.  woke  exactly  at  the 
same  time  as  on  the  night  previous.  This  I know  by  the  jingle  of  the  chimes 
immediately  after  waking,  and  the  clock  striking  the  succeeding  hour  of  2. 
The  same  intense,  indescribable  feeling  passed  over  me— that  horrid, 
creepy  dread,  but  I resolutely  turned  *from  the  side  on  which  the  em- 
brasure lay,  and  reproached  myself  for  being  a fool.  Nor  would  I look; 
and  yet  I felt  assured  of  her  presence. 

44  When  I got  up,  I found  that  she  had  sent  a message  wishing  to  see 
me.  She  was  the  attendant  on  the  pews  at  my  side  of  the  church,  a poor 
widow'  woman  of  quiet,  gentle  manners,  a friend  of  my  housekeeper’s, 
who  sometimes  came  in  to  help  if  we  had  any  extra  company.  Often 
when  I have  gone  round  to  the  kitchen,  she  has  risen  up  respectfully, 
while  I used  to  say,  4 How  much  you  remind  me  of  my  dear  old  mother,’ 
and  have  more  than  once  caressingly  stroked  her  hair,  I went  to  see  her. 
There  she  lay  in  her  little  bed — so  clean  and  tidy — so  peaceably  passing 
away  in  a trance-like  calm.  She  at  once  recognised  my  voice,  #vhen  a 
pleased  smile  of  restful  satisfaction  seemed  to  play  over  her  face.  [Mr. 
Hernaman,  then  read  a passage  of  the  Bible  to  the  patient.]  As  I was 
leaving  the  room,  on  turning  to  look  at  her,  I noticed  how  striking 
were  the  points  of  resemblance  to  the  figure  in  the  embrasure,  but 
it  was  incomplete — the  shawl  was  wanting.  So  I said  to  her  sister 
who  was  nursing  her,  4 Have  you  ever  during  her  illness  had  thrown 
about  her  a little  black-and-white  checked  shawl?’  I gave  no  reason* 
for  my  question,  4 No,  sir ! ’ was  the  answer,  4 No  ! We  haven’t  such 
a thing  in  the  house  ! ’ Then  suddenly  she  exclaimed,  4 Oh ! do  you 
mean  a little  brown-and-white  plaid,  like  this  ? ’ making  a sudden  dive 
behind  a box  near  the  bed’s  head,  from  which  she  brought  up  the  identical 
shawl,  a brown-and-white  checked , which  she  at  once  placed  found  the 
shoulders  of  the  invalid,  and  the  picture  was  complete.  * * My 

rest  [next  night]  was  sound  and  undisturbed  till  the  morning,  when 
George,  my  housekeeper’s  son,  came  rushing  into  the  bedroom,  after  a hasty 
knock,  with  a face  full  of  fright,  and  said,  4 If  you  please,  sir,  Mrs.  P. 
wants  you  again  I’  c While  T dressed,  my  friend  laughed  at  me  and  joked 
immoderately.  George  brought  me  in  a cup  of  coffee,  which  I hastily 
swallowed  while  dressing;  but  before  I could  get  to  her  house,  which 
was  hard  by,  she  had  passed  away. 

44  All  I have  said  with  regard  to  myself  is  true  as  it  occurred  tfl  me 

xn.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

563 

and  yet  my  judgment  refuses  to  believe  it.  1 consulted  a medical  friend, 
I was  so. annoyed  with  myself  for  thinking  the  thing  possible  for  a 
moment.  He  too  laughed  at  me,  but  wished  George  to  occupy  the  spare 
bed  till  my  holidays  came,  which  were  close  at  hand. 

“ I did  learn  some  months  later  that  she  had  saved  a little  money not 

much,  #about  <£90,  I believe— and  was  very  anxious  indeed  that  I should 
have  charge  of  it  for  her  two  children,  who  were  living  at  home  with  her. 

“John  Heknaman.” 

Ifl  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hernaman  adds,  On  March  7th,*  1885 

“ The  matt«T*to  which  you  refer  occurred  some  14  years  ago.” 

We  applied  to  Mr.  Francis  Tee,  of  Finsbury  Street,  E.C.,  a brother  of 
the  Mrs.  P.  of  the  narrative,  and  he  sent  us  a mourning  card  which 
showed  .that  Mrs.  P. 'died  on  Dec.  14,  1871,  aged  53  years. 

Here  the  shawl  is  the  important  detail.  Other  noteworthy  points 
are  the  light  (pp.  550-1),  and  the  sort  of  attempt  at  a repetition  on 
the  second  night,  which  mdy  or  may  not  have  been  a mere 
recrudescence  of  the  previous  impression  (see  p.  445). 

The  ppxt  account  is  from  Mr.  J.  H.  Bedfern,  of  20,  Great  Ancoats 
Street,  Manchester,  who  has  been  carefully  crostf-examined  vivd  voce. 

“January,  1883. 

(214)  “ My  wife  died  in  December,  1874.  While  apparently  in  her  usual 
health,  and  without  any  premonitory  symptoms,  she  was  suddenly  seized  with 
an  illness  (effusion  of  serum  on  the  brain),  which  in  a few  days  terminated 
in  death.  For  something  like  36  hours  previous  to  death  she  was  in  a 
comatose  state,1  and  thus  she  passed  away.  She  had  an  aunt,  a widow,  to 
whom  she  was  much  attached.  Her  aunt  resided  4 or  5 miles  away  from 
us,  but  twice  or  thrice  a year  she  came  to  see  us,  and  usually  stayed  a few 
days  or  a week,  and  one  of  these  visits  was  always  at  New  Year’s  time. 
My  wife  died  a few  days  before  Christmas  Day,  and  in  due  course  the 
funeral  took  place.  The  day  after,  having  obtained  the  address  of  her 
aunt — for  I did  not  before  know  it — I sent  her  a ‘ memorial  card/  think- 
ring  it  might  prevent  the  shock  she  might  probably  experience*  if  she  came, 
*and  only  then  learned  the  death  of  her  niece.  ' 

“The  New  Year  oame,  but  she  came  not.  \Ve  wondered  and  talked 
about  her  for  nearly  3 months,  but  heard  nothing.  One  Sunday  afternoon, 
at  tea,  my  daughter  sprang  up  from  the  table  exclaiming,  4 There’s  aunt 
coming  up  the  garden ; ’ and  surely  it  was  her  indeed.  We  ran  to  meet 
her,  and  brought  her  into  the  house.  Overcome  with  emotion  she  sank 
idto  a chaii*  and  wept  for  some  time.  At  length,  becoming  calmer,  we 
learned  that  she  had  been  seriously  ill  for  some  time.  Her  account  of  the 
matter  was  this  : — 

V On  the  day  of  my  wife’s  death  she  was— in  the  evpnin^— engaged  in 
tljp  kitchen  in*  the  performance  of  some  domestic  duties.  Turning  round 
from  a table  at  which  she  had  been  engaged,  she  saw  my  wife  coming  out 
of  a lobby  into  the  kitchen,  and  approaching  her  with  a smile  upon  her 

1 £ee  Chap,  v,,  § 10,  and  compare  cases  152,  17J,  202,  203,  217,  277,  452,  561. 

2 n 2 

564 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

face,  her  arras  extended  as  if  to  greet  her  (her  usual  manner  of  welcoming 
anyone).  She  herself  advanced  to  meet  her  niece,  and  expecting*  to 
embrace  her,  when  suddenly  ‘she  was  gone/  and  she  herself  was  alone. 

“ Confused  and  wondering,  she  looked  about  her,  and  noticed  the  time, 
8.30  p.ra.  by  the  clock. 

“ I asked  her  if  she  had  been  thinking  about  her  or  talking  bf  her. 
She  said  she  had  not  thought  of  her  for  days.  I asked  her  if  there  was 
any  other  woman  in  the  house  with  herself.  She  replied,  ‘ Yes,  one,  who, 
feeling  unw-ell,  had  gone  to  lie  down  some  hours  before.’  Shortly  after- 
wards this  person  came  downstairs.  She  asked  her  ‘ had  she  been  'down 
before?’  Her  reply  was  ‘No,  I fell  asleep.’  ‘ I said  nothing  to  her,’  said 
she,  ‘ for  I knew  she  had  not ; besides,  I could  never  hafe  mistaken  her 
for  Sarah  ’ (my  wife).  ‘She  was  much  older,  and  had  dark  hair,  while 
Sarah’s  was  light  find  golden.  I could  have  mistaken  no  one  for  Sarah, 
but/  she  added,  ‘ I saw  her  as  plainly  as  I see  you  now.’ 

“ My  wife  died  at  8.40  p.ra.  There  might  be  a difference  in  the 
clocks. 

“ Tn  answer  to  a question,  she  said  that  her  niece  was  not  in  her  usual 
dress.  She  had  on  a long  white  robe  or  night-dress,  with  frillings  at  the 
neck  and  wrists.  Her  hair  was  not  gathered  up  and  arranged  as  usual, 
but  was  drawn  from  the  fore  part  of  her  head  and  fell  down  her  back. 
That  described  her  appearance  exactly.  [The  italics  are  mine.— E.G.]  The 
doctop;  had  directed  her  hair  to  be  loosed  and  drawn  back  from  the 
forehead,  and  it  hung  down  her  shoulders  and  back. 

“ She  said  that  she  had  no  idea  that  my  wife  was  in  any  but  her  usual 
health,  not  thinking  of  any  evil.  A few  days  afterwards  she  went  to 
spend  a few  days  with  a friend  whom  she  had  promised  to  stay  with  for  a 
short  time  at  Christmas.  Returning  home,  the  letter  was  handed  her,  and 
she  was  jokingly  told  that  it  had  been  waiting  for  her  a week.  Opening 
it,  she  saw  the  name  and  the  date.  The  whole  thing-  -forgotten4'' for  the 
time — flashed  upon  her  mind,  and  she  fell  off  from  the  chair,  remembering 
no  more  until  days  afterwards  she  found  herself  in  bed,  where  she 
remainecl  until  within  a few  days  of  her  coming  again  to  see  us. 

“ The  letter  was  afterwards  discovered  upon  the  floor.  She  had  said 
nothing  of  the  appearance  to  any  in  the  house.  They  did  not  understand 
the  thing  at  all.  The  medical  man  called  in  to  attend  her,  said  that  she- 
had  received  some  great  mental  shock,  and  for  some  time  he  feared  that 
she  would  not  recover  from  it.  < 

“ I give  you  these  facts  just  as  they  are,  making  no  comments  upon 
them,  simply  vouching  for  their  accuracy. 

“ J.  H.  Reufern?’ 

We  find  from  a notice  in  the  Manchester  Guardian  that  Mrs.  Redfern 
died  on  December  18,  1874.  Mr.  Redfern  tells  us  that  the  aunt  died 
about  a year  before  lie  sent  us  the  account. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Redfern  adds,  on  March  19tli,  1883:* — 

“ I never  knew  who  the  medical  man  was ; doubtless  someone  in  the 
neighbourhood  called  in  in  a hurry.  The  persons  with  whom  my  wife’s 
aunt  were  living  resided  in  Gorton,  4 miles  south-east  of  this  city.  • The 
master  failed  in  business  over  >8  months  ago,  took  it,  I believe,'  sadly  to 

TELE  PA  TRIG  If  A L LUC  IN A IVORS. 

565 

XII.] 

heart,  and  in  a few  months  died.  From  what  I have  heard,  his  widow 
left  the- neighbourhood  of  Manchester  shortly  afterwards.  The  woman 
in  the  house  with  my  wife's  aunt  at  the  time,  of  whom  she  inquired  as 
to  whether  she  had  before  come  downstairs,  confirmed  the  fact  that  she 
had  not ; this  woman  has  since  left  the  place.  The  old  lady  was  clear- 
headed and  truthful,  and  repeated  the  story  often,  and  in  the  same 
manner,  to  the  last.  I think  upon  referring  to  the  MS.  you  will  see 
that  she  had  no  knowledge  or  idea  of  her  niece's  illness ; she  said  that 
th£  thought  of  her  death  never  entered  her  mind.  She  noted  the 
day^ind  the  hour.  She  had  arranged  to  visit  some  friends,  and  to  stay 
with  them  foiyjb  short  time.  She  went  a day  or  two  after.  I had  not 
her  address,  [i<e.,  at  Gorton,]  but  in  a few  days  obtained  it,  and  sent  per 
post  a memorial  card.  It  appears  that  during  the  time  of  her  absence 
upon  this  visit,  this  card  (of  course  in  ah  envelope)  was  delivered.  Upon 
her  return  it  was  handed  to  her.  Not  thinking  anything  about  it  she 
opened  it,  read  it,  let  it  drop,  and  swooned.  She  was,  I believe,  uncon- 
scious for  a long  time,  and  a long  illness  followed.  We  wondered  that  .we 
never  saw  or  heard  from  her." 

Mr.  John  Robert  Redfern,  of  41,  Bickley  Street,  Moss  Side,  Man- 
chester (a  cashier,  and  foreign  and  corresponding  clerk  in  a firm  of 
shippers),  says  : — 

• “June  28th,  1883. 

.“With  reference  to  the  appearance  at  the  time  of  her  death  of  my 
mother  to  her  aunt,  Nancy  Juison,  T can  state  that  the  account  furnished 
by  my  father  as  given  by  her  is  a correct  one.  I have  heard  the  state- 
ment from  herself,  and  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  of  her  veracity,  or  as 
to  her  convictions  on  the  subject.  I knew  her  intimately  all  my  life  up  to 
her  death." 

* Mrs.  Hannah  Lees,  of  Clifton  Crescent,  Rotherham,  says  : — 

“ June  5th,  1883. 

“ The  account  of  my  sister’s  death  (Mrs.  Redfern)  and  her  appearance 
to  my  Aunt  Nancy,  as  given  by  Mr.  J.  H.  Redfern,  is  just  as  narrated  by 
*my  aunt,  and  I am  satisfied  as  to  the  truth  of  aunt’s  statement,  and  her 
belief  in  the  matter." 

[The  testimony  here  is  not  first-hand.  Had  the  aunt  been  alive  we  should, 
of  course,  have  obtained  her  account  from  herself.  But  since  we  reckon 
as  on  a par  with  first-hand  evidence  the  testimony  of  persons  who  have 
been  made  aware  of  the  percipient’s  experience  before  the  percipient  has 
learnt  the  event  that  has  befallen  the  agent  (p.  148),  we  may  regard  as 
practically  on  the  same  level  a case  where  the  percipient’s  experience, 
though’not  described  to  the  witnesses  before  the  news  was  known,  produced 
an  effect-*~her  prolonged  absence  through  illness — which  they  remarked  on 
and  wondered  at.] 

The  next  case,  from  Mr.  Rouse,  of  Jarvis  Road,  Croydon  (agent 
for  Cockerells,  coal  merchants),  is  another  marked  instance  of 
deferred  recognition  (see  § 3).  As  regards  the  special  point  of  dress, 
it  is  inconclusive  ; as  though  the  aspect  of  the  agent  was  at  the  time 
actuafly  as  represented  in  the  phantasm,  it  was  also  probably  an  aspect 

566  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  (jChap. 

familiar  to  the  percipient.  Writing  to  us  on  the  11th  of  June,  188$,  Mr. 
Rouse  explains  that  in  the  early*  part  of  1873  he  had  been  a member 
of  a circle  which  met  to  investigate  spiritualistic  phenomena.  At 
each  of  the  seances,  which  were  held  in  a private  house,  he  sat  next 
to  the  same  lady,  Mrs.  W.,  between  whom  and  himself  a strong 
sympathy  existed.  On  one  occasion  Mr.  Rouse  had  to  go  to  Norwich 
on  the  day  when  the  sitting  was  usually  held.  Late  on  the  evening 
of  that  day  he  went  out  for  a walk  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town. 

(215)  “ It  was  in  the  brightest  moonlight,  about  fulf^Soon,  1 should 
think,  with  hardly  a cloud  in  the  sky  ; yet  there  was  a thick  white  haze 
overhanging  the  fields.  After  walking  a little  distance  I found  myself  on 
the  top  of  a small  hill,  which  enabled  me  to  see  a considerable  distance  along 
the  road  in  front  of  me,  the  only  living  object  apparently  in  view  being  a 
lupnan  form  in  the  middle  of  the  road,  yet  so  far  off  that  I could  not  tell 
if  it  was  a woman  or  a man,  and  did  not  take  much  notice  of  it. 
However,  in  walking  on,  I soon  made  it  out  to  be  a woman,  and  concluded 
it  was  a country  woman  walking  into  Norwich.  The  next  moment  I began 
to  fear  that,  the  time  and  place  being  so  lonely,  the  woman  would  be  afraid 
to  pass  me.  I,  therefore,  under  this  feeling,  got  as  near  as  possible  to  one 
side  of  the  road,  thus  giving  her  all  the  width  on  the  other  side  to  pass ; 
but,  to,  my  astonishment,  she  also  left  the  middle  of  the  road,  and  took  the 
same  side  as  myself,  as  if  determined  to  meet  me  face  to  face.  I then 
walked  into  the  middle  of  the  road,  thinking  I would  avoid  her,  but,  to  my 
surprise,  the  woman  did  the  same,  so  I then  concluded  to  walk  on  as  we  were. 

“ I had  not  advanced  many  more  steps,  however,  before,  instead  of  a 
country  woman,  as  I imagined,  with  eggs  and  poultry  for  next  day’s  market, 

I could  plainly  see  that  the  figure  before  me  was  a well-dressed*,  lady 
in  evening  dress,  without  bonnet  or  shawl.  I could  see  some  ornament  or 
flower  in  her  hair,  gold  bracelets  on  her  bare  arms,  rings  on  her  fingers, 
and  could  hear  the  rustle  of  her  dress.  She  now  seemed  to  approach  me 
more  rapidly,  and  I noticed  that,  if  T stepped  in  the  least  degree  out  of  the 
direct  line  between  us,  she  did  the  same.  In  the  next  minute  I felt 
certain  that  I had  seen  the  lady  before,  and  immediately  afterwards  T 
recognised  her  as  Mrs.  W.  I had  not  the  least  fear,  for  she  was  so  l’eal 
that  T thought  she  had,  like  myself,  unexpectedly  and  suddenly  got  to 
Norwich.  I,  therefore,  met  her  without  the  least  * shake  or  tremble, 
delighted  to  see  my  friend.  We  approached  within  about  5 feet  of  each 
other  ; she  gazed  at  me  very  intently  as  I thought ; she  held  out  her  hand 
to  me,  and  I could  see  her  face  and  lips  move  as  if  about  to  speak*  to  me. 

I was  in  the  act  of  taking  her  hand  to  greet  her,  but  had  not  torched  her,  ) 
when  some  iron  hurdles  which  formed  the  fencing  of  the  cattle  market, 
rang  as  if  they  were  being  struck  with  an  iron  bar.  This  startled  me,  and 
unconsciously  I turned  round  to  see  what  made  the  noise.  I could  see 
nothing,  and  instantly  turned  again  to  Mrs.  W.  but  she  was  gone. 

“Now  it  was  that  I began  to  tremble,  and  for  some  time  I felt  that  she° 
was  still  near  me,  although  I could  not  see  her.  But  I soon  pulled  myself 
together  and  walked  back  to  Norwich  and  my  bedroom,  but  not  to  sleep,  for 
I could  not  get  rid  of  the  feeling  thfyt  perhaps  my  friend  had  suddenly'&ied’or 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

567 

met  Vith  some  serious  accident.  I,  therefore,  wrote  to  a gentleman  in  London 
— a mutual  friend — telling  him  what  I had  seen  and  what  my  fears  were, 
asking  him  to  be  very  careful,  but  to  make  inquiries  about  Mrs.  W.,  as  to 
her  welfare,  and  what  and  where  she  was  on  that  night  and  time.  The 
next  day’s  post  brought  me  the  welcome  tidings  that  Mrs.  W.  was  quite 
well  tmA  in  good  health,  that  at  the  very  time  I saw  her,  about  1 1 p.m., 
shp  was  sitting  in  her  usual  place  in  the  circle  in  London,  and  that  there, 
for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  she  had  fallen  into  a trance  which  frightened 
the?  other  sitters  very  much,  and  they  had  great  difficulty  in  bringing  her 
baeR*  to  ordinary  life.  “ John  Rouse.” 

Mrs.  W.  la***  read  through  the  above  account,  and  writes  to  us  as 
follows,  in  Junfc,  1883  : — 

“It  is  perfectly  correct.  I quite  remember  the  stances  and  the 
particular  occasion  to  which  Mr.  Rouse  refers,  when  I became  unconscious 
one  night,  at  about  11  o’clock,  and  on  recovery  had  no  recollection  of 
anything  but  that  I had  gone  suddenly  out  of  myself 1 My  dress  at  the 
time  of  the  occurrence  is  stated  quite  correctly.  I also  remember  one  of 
our  circle  calling  with  Mr.  Rouse’s  letter,  to  ascertain,  at  his  request, 
. whether  *1  was  still  in  earthly  form.  Talking  over  the  matter  with  him, 
and  afterwards  with  the  others,  all  agreed  as  to  the  time  of  my  becoming 
oblivious.  I have  never  had  the  same  experience  before  nor  since  then. 

* “ L.  E.  W.” 

[The  evidence  here  will,  of  course,  suffer  in  the  eyes  of  many,  fyom  the 
fact  that  both  agent  and  percipient  were  at  the  time  attending  stances. 
It  must  also  be  mentioned  that  on  such  occasions  Mr.  Rouse  has  seen  or 
imagined  vague  appearances.  He  has,  however,  only  on  one  other 
occasion  (when  again  there  were  singular  points  of  correspondence  with 
reality)  had  anything  like  a distinct  hallucination  ; and  he  is  a sensible 
and  chear-headed  man.] 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Peek,  of  3,  Fairfax  Place,  Dartmouth. 

“ October,  1884. 

(216)  “On  the  25th  of  April,  1867,  at  about  11  o’clock  at  night,  I was 
alone  in  the  lower  part  of  the  house,  to  see  if  the  doors  were  securely 
fastened,  and  the  dogs  housed  and  fed.  Having  satisfied  myself  upon  these 
points,  I had  lifted  my  hand  to  turn  out  the  gas  in  the  kitchen,  when  some- 
thing drew  my  eyes* towards  the  doorway,  and  I saw  for  the  space  of  a few 
seconds  a figure  standing  there,  dressed  in  lightish  coloured  clothes,  with 
long  boots  on,  as  if  for  riding ; the  face  was  shadowy,  yet  I thought  I could 
re8ogni*se  the  contour  of  my  brother,  who  lives  in  Natal.  When  it  was 
gone,  I hurried  up  the  stairs  to  the  dining-room,  where  others  of  the 
household  .were  sitting  ; they  noticed  how  frightened  I seemed,  and  when 
I told  them  about  it  tried  to  laugh  me  out  of  my  fear,  but  I felt  convinced 
in  my  own  mind  as  to  the  reality  of  my  experience,  and  noted  the  day  of 
the  month. 

“ About*  six  weeks  afterwards,  I received  a letter  fforn  my  brother 

9 

1 It  occasionally  happens  at  stances— whether  owing  to  the  attitude  of  expectancy  or 
to  .some  other  condition — that  a sitter  falls  into  an  odd  unconscious,  or  semi-conscious  state  ; 
which  would  have  nothing  alarming  in  it  to  any  one  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of 
hypnotism.  As  to  the  subjective  sense  of  “ going  out  of  oneself  ” see  above,  p.  555,  note. 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[pHAP. 

5Q8 

tolling  me  that  his  wife  was  taken  very  ill  on  the  25th  of  JSt pril, 
while  he  was  away  on  a journey,  from  which  he  returned  that  same  day, 
only  in  time  to  start  at  once  for  his  mother-in-law,  leaving  his  wife 
without  anyone  to  care  for  her  except  two  Kaffir  girls,  for  their  farm 
was  many  miles  from  any  other  dwelling.  He  spoke  in  his  letter  of  the- 
great  distress  of  mind  he  suffered  during  his  long  ride  of  30  miles,  at 
the  thought  of  leaving  his  apparently  dying  wife,  and  how  often  he 
wished  I had  been  near  to  help  him  in  his  trouble. 

“Anna  W.  Peek.”* 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Peek  says  : — 

“ I can  assure  you  that  the  vision  you  received  an  GSRsunt  of  from 
me  is  the  only  one  1 have  ever  witnessed. 

“My  brother  returned  late  at  night  from  a journey,  and  started  again 
on  a ride  of  30  or  more  miles  over  a rough  road  in  the  Little  Tugela 
district,  so  he  would  certainly  be  on  his  journey  at  2 o’clock  a.m. 
[which,  however,  would  correspond  with  midnight,  not  1 1 p.m.,  in 
England.] 

“ I will  get  my  husband  and  another  gentleman,  who  was  staying 
with  us,  to  sign  their  names  in  testimony  that  1 spoke  of  it,  to  them , 
directly  I came  into  the  room  where  they  were,  after  seeing  the  vision. 
The  day  following,  T mentioned  it  to  my  uncle,  who  advised  me  to  take  a 
note  of  the  date.” 

“ hereby  bear  testimony  to  the  foregoing  statement. 

“ Robert  Peek. 

“G.  H.  Collins.” 

[The  coincidence  here  is  not,  of  course,  as  striking  as  in  many  other 
cases,  as  the  condition  of  the  agent  was  not  of  an  extremely  abnormal 
sort;  but  the  special  direction  of  his  thought  to  the  percipient,  if  correctly 
recorded,  may  fairly  be  taken  into  account.] 

Here  again  the  dress  seen  was  not  so  unusual  that  one  might  not 
conceive  it  to  have  been  independently  supplied. by  the  percipients, 
brain  in  the  act  of  projecting  the  phantasm  ; but  the  other  hypothesis 
would  at  any  rate  be  in  place. 

The  next  case  is  also  a doubtful  one  as  regards  the  dress ; since 
when  a man  is  telepathically  impressed  to  conjiyre  up  his  father’s 
image,  it  is  undeniably  possible  for  him,  out  of  his  own  mental 
resources,  to  conjure  it  up  in  a night-cap.  Still  such  an  aspect 
was  very  much  out  of  keeping  with  the  scene  in  which  the  phantasm 
was  located.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Timothy  Cooper,1  mentioned  ‘‘ 
above  (p.  506),  and  appeared  in  Light  for  January,  1882. 

(217)  “ In  the  year  1871,  I was  living  at  Seaview,  Seaton  Carew,  going 
daily  to  Stockton-on-Tees  to  business.  It  was  race  week  in  August,  and 

1 Mr.  Cooper  unfortunately  went  to  reside  in  America  before  it  was  possible  for  us 
to  make  his  {lersonal  acquaintance  ; but  we  have  had  a satisfactory  account  of  him.  His 
father  was  the  Rev.  James  Cooper,  for  many  years  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church -at 
Amersham.  r 

XI,.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

569 

SO  a busy  time.  I was  going  down  into  the  cellar  to  fetch  butter  for  a 
customer,  and  as  I was  on  the  top  step,  I saw  my  father  standing  at  the 
bottom  of’the  cellar  steps  in  his  shirt  and  night-cap,  and  he  seemed  to 
walk  into  the  cellar.  I went  down  and  fetched  the  butter  and  looked 
for  my  father,  who  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  I went  up  and  said  to  my 
employer's  wife,  ‘ I must  go  home  now,  for  my  father  will  not  last  long, 
and  wants  to  see  me.’  So  on  the  last  day  of  the  races  I started,  and  arrived 
at  Amersham,  my  father’s  residence,  a journey  of  about  250  miles.  On  the 
Saturday  afternoon  I inquired  of  my  sister  how  my  father  was  at  the  timo 
I Ifutl  seen  him  at  Stockton.  She  said  he  lay  as  if  dead  for  more  than 
half-andiour ; in  fact,  they  held  a looking-glass  to  see  if  he  breathed.  He 
died.November^3rd,  1871.  “Timothy  Cooper.” 

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  in  the  Nonconformist. 

[The  impression  in  this  case  seems  to  have  prompted  the  percipient  to 
take  a long  journey ; but  we  do  not  know  in  what  degree  previous  anxiety 
may  have  contributed  to  it.] 

Sufficient  illustrations  have  now  been  given  of  the  two  types 
of  case,  where  special  features  of  dress  and  aspect  may  lead  us  pretty 
confidently  to  refer  the  detailed  form  which  the  hallucination  takes 
to  the  percipient  and  to  the  agent  respectively.  But  the  majority 
of  visual  telepathic  phantasms,  as  we  shall  find  later, ^present  no  such 
special  features:  the  aspect  of  the  figure  is  free  from  striking 
peculiarities,  and  the  dress  little  noticed,  and  such  as  either  of  the 
two  persons  concerned  might  readily  picture  as  natural  and  familiar. 
In  all  such  cases,  and  alike  whether-  the  agent  is  or  is  not  so  habited 
at  the  moment,  it  seems  to  me  reasonable  to  refer  the  details  of  the 
appearance  to  the  percipient’s  mind.  As  compared  with  our  total 
ignorance  concerning  the  prior  process  of  transference,  our  view  of  the 
immediate  process  in  the  percipient  which  issues  in  sensory  halluci- 
nation may  be  said  to  be  knowledge  ; in  it  we  at  any  rate  have  the 
analogy  of  subjective  hallucinations  to  go  by.  Inasmuch,  then,  as 
a member  of  a civjlised  community  has  been  impelled  to  project  a 
phantasm — for  there  it  stands,  projected — it  is  in  accordance  with 
analogy,  and  we  may  almost  say  inevitable,  that  he  should  project 
it  in  'some  dress ; and  it  is  surely  simpler  (as  I have  suggested 
above)  ft>  suppose  that  he  does  this  wholly  from  his  own  resources, 
which  are  adequate  for  the  purpose,  than  to.  suppose  that  a detailed 
image  is  supplied,  to  him,  clean-cut  and  complete,  from  indefinite 
^unconscious  or  sub-conscious  strata  of  the  agentfs  mind.  The 
point  becomes  clearest  • when  there  is  a clear  choice  of  familiar 
dresses.  For  example,  a son  sees  the  phantasm  of  his  mother 
“ dressed  in  a peculiar  silver-grey  %dress,  which  she  had  originally 

570 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

[chap. 

got  for  a fancy-ball”  (Vol.  II.,  p.  81).  That  he  should  so 
'project  her  image,  under  a sudden  telepathic  influence  received  from 
her  (p.  538),  no  more  needs  explanation  than  that  any  other 
item  of  past  experience  should  present  itself  unsought  in  memory  or 
dream ; but  that  she  should  so  tranem.it  her  image  would  de&ldedly 
need  explanation ; for  even  if  she  was  conscious  at  the  time — which 
she  most  likely  was  not — unless  her  mmd  was  consciously  engaged 
with  this  particular  dress,  what  disturbance  can  we  assume  of-  the 
quite  impartial  state  of  latency  in  which  her  ideas  ~ f . her  Various 
dresses  would  be  1 There  being  no  sudden  call  on  her — as  there  is 
on  her  son — to  represent  her  image,  there  would  be  no  impulse  to 
the  selection'  (Whether  conscious  or  casual)  of  one  particular 
form  of  representation.  And  the  same  argument  will  apply 
wherever  the  phantasmal  costume,  or  any  part  of  it,  is  such  as 
would  not  form  an  almost  necessary  element  in  the  agent’s  conscious- 
ness at  the  time.  In  most  cases  where  costume  is  noticed  at  all,  it 
includes  particulars  the  choice  of  which  presents  no  difficulty  if  we 
leave  the  percipient  to  make  it,  among  the  various  familiar  aspects 
of  the  friend  whose  image  he  is  ex  hypothesi  impelled  to  construct ; 
but  any  precedence  of  which  over  others  on  the  agent’s  side  would 
imply  a detailed  activity  of  construction,  occurring  not  only  without 
consciousness,  but  apparently  without  cause;  since  there  is  no 
ground  for  connecting  the  construction  (least  of  all  the  unconscious 
construction)  of  highly  elaborated  visual  images  with  the  conditions 
of  spontaneous  telepathic  agency.1 

§ 9.  Before  quitting  the  subject  of  the  development  of  telepathic 
phantasms,  I may  be  allowed  to  point  out  its  relation  to  the 
physiological  sketch  at  the  close  of  the  10th  chapter ; for  it  happens 
to  supply  substantial  confirmation  to  the  views  of  centrifugal  origin 
there  maintained.  The  whole  idea  of  morbid  excitation  from  the 

1 Any  hypothesis  that  the  condition  of  agency  in  itself  (i.e.,  apart  from  that  reaction 
of  the  percipient  on  the  impression  to  which  I have  attributed  its  projection  in  sensory 
form)  tends  to  elicit  and  transmit  out  of  the  recesses  of  the  agent’s  mind  some  definite  ' 
image  of  his  own  aspect,  would  seem  open  to  this  objection,— that  there  are  a large 
number  of  telepathic  phantasms — notably  the  a uditory  class — in  which  nothing  connected 
with  the  agent’s  aspect  appears.  Apart  from  literal  representations  of  some  conscious 
thought  or  sensation  of  the  agent  (p.  536,  note),  it  has  seemed  an  adequate  hypothesis  that 
the  particular  form,  of  sensory  development  is  determined  on  the  percipient's  side  ; Arid 
it  would  be  very  difficult  to  combine  with  this  the  hypothesis  that  sometimes  the  form, 
is  compelled  to  be  visual  by  the  preponderating  force  in  the  agent's  mind  of  a latent 
image  of  his  own  aspect.  For  if  the  image  is  latent,  and  has  no  particular  relevance  to 
the  circumstances  of  the  moment,  such  an  image  has  had  just  the  same  amount  of 
presence  in  the  agent’s  mind,  and  just  as  much  (or  little)  chance  of  telepathicatiy 
asserting  itself  in  the  non-  visual  cases. 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

571 

XII.] 

more*  external  parts  of  the  sensory  apparatus  becomes  hero 
irrelevant*  All  that  has  been  said  in  this  chapter  as  to  the 
development  of  the  hallucination  from  the  nucleus  of  a transferred 
impression  marks  out  the  higher  part  of  the  brain — the  part  which  is 
conceited  with  ideas  or  general  images  of  persons  and  things,  and  not 
with  immediate  perception  of  them — as  the  place  where  the  abnormal 
process  starts;  the  hallucination  itself  being  due  to  the  down- 
ward promulgation  of  the  disturbance  from  these  higher  tracts  to  the 
specific*  senary  centre  concerned.  Especially  must  this  origin 
commend  itself  in  respect  of  the  phantasms  which  are  bodied  forth  in 
a more  or  less  fanciful  fonn,  with  elements  which  are  clearly  the 
percipient’s  own  contribution,  but  which  he  wtfuld ' never  have 
contributed  had  not  telepathy  supplied  an  idea  for  him  to  clothe. 
But  perhaps  the  cases  where  the  hypothesis  is  most  helpful  are  those 
of  which  Mr.  Marchant’s  (p.  207)  is  the  type,  where  no  obvious  rapport 
exists  between  the  two  parties  concerned. . How — we  naturally  ask — 
coidd  the  idea  of  Kelsey  be  impressed  on  Mr.  Marchant’s  mind  with 
such  force  as  to  embody  itself  in  a visible  phantom,  when  Kelsey’s 
mind  was  presumably  not  occupied  either  with  Mr.  Marchant  or  with 
himself  in  relation  to  him  ? From  a physiological  point  of  view  the  fact 
becomes  less  startling  if  we  suppose  the  primary  change  in  Mr. 
Marchant’s  brain  to  take  place  at  the  part  which  is  the  great  store- 
house of  old  impressions  ; at  the  part,  moreover,  where  an  appropriate 
physical  basis  may  be  found  not  only  for  distinct  and  recognisable 
images,  but  for  sub-  conscious  ideas  and  memories,  and  for  the  most 
distant  and  intangible  associations.  In  the  register  of  the  brain  it  is 
seldom  that  a record,  once  made,  is  so  utterly  obliterated  that,  under 
suitable  conditions,  it  may  not  be  revived.  And  if  once  a relation  be 
i established  between  two  persons,  and  the  records  of  it  registered  in 
their  two  brains,  itfcmay  be  possible  for  the  same  harmony  occasionally 
to  manifest  itself  between  those  records — even  though  they  be  long 
suyk  below  the  level  of  conscious  attention — as  between  the 
immediate  impressions  of  the  moment ; and,  this  once  granted,  we 
•have  seen  how  the  physiological  process  may  lead  on  to  the  projection 
of  the  visible  phantom.1  In  psychical  terms,  I see  no  reason  why 

1 I have  sufficiently  emphasised  the  difficulty  of  expressing  the  transmission  of 
telepathic  impassions  in  physical  terms  (pp.  110-113).  And  though  I hqjre  suggest  that  the 
difficulty  is  lessened  if  we  may  draw  on  unconscious  parts  of  the* mind,  and  old  records  in 
the  brain,  my  physiological  point  is  independent  of  this  suggestion,  and  is  limited  to  the 
l>ercipient’s  own  organism.  There  certain  nervous  changes  do  undoubtedly  take  place,  in 
correspondence  with  the  psychical  fact  of  the  hallucination ; and  my  object  is  to  snow 
tha*  whai  we  observe  as  to  the  psychical  fact  may  be  best  accounted  for  on  a particular 
view  of  the  physical  process. 

572 

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF 

j,[ciIAP. 

sub-conscious  ideas  and  memories  which  are  in  no  distinct  way  pfesent 
to  consciousness,  such  as  Kelsey’s  sense  of  his  old  relationship  to  ‘Mr. 
Marchant,  should  not  evoke  similar  blind  movements  in  Mr. 
Marchant’s  mind,  which,  gathering  strength,  might  lead  him  to  body 
forth  the  vision  of  his  old  acquaintance.  A hallucination  w$iich  is 
thus  initiated  by  the  quickening  of  long-buried  memories,  and  of 
dim  tracts  of  emotional  association,  is  the  most  conspicuous  example 
of  the  projection  of  an  idea  from  within  outwards  ; and  the  tremor  to 
which  the  sensoriuiu  reverberates  will  presumably  sta'^di  the'  inmost 
penetralia  of  cerebral  process. 

§ 10.  The  parallelism  between  telepathic  and  purely  subjective 
hallucinations  has  now  been  traced  out  in  the  most  essential  particulars. 
To  the  five  heads  of  resemblance  enumerated  in  the  last  chapter 
(p.  500),-  the  present  chapter  has  added  the  various  modes  of  gradual 
development,  and  of  original  or  fantastic  embodiment ; the  special 
point  with  respect  to  luminosity  (pp.  550-1)  ; and  the  general  but  not 
invariable  limitation  of  the  percept  to  a single  human  figure(pp.  545-0). 
I may  .note  further  the  interesting  negative  characteristic  that  (-with 
very  rare  exceptions)  neither  subjective  disturbances  nor  transferred 
impressions  seem  to  produce  visual  hallucinations  representing  a 
person  who  is  actually  present  with  the  percipient  at  the  time.1  One 
fails  at  first  sight  to  see  why  this  should  be.  If  pre-occupation 
of  the  percipient’s  mind  with  the  person  seen  is  to  go  for  anything 
in  the  subjective  cases,  is  not  the  mind  often  completely  pre-oceupied 
with  a person  who  is  present  ? and  if  rapport  is  to  go  for  anything  hi 
the  telepathic  cases,  is  not  rapport  often  at  its  maximum  of  strength 
with  a person  who  is  present  ? I suppose  the  explanation  must  be 
analogous  to  the  reason  why  the  stars  are  not  visible  by  day;  and 
that  vision  of  friends  who  are  absent  depends  on  a vague  sense  of 
remoteness  and  abstraction  in  relation  to  them,  " the  possibility  of 
which  is  swamped  by  their  presence.  The  possibility  seems,  indeed, 
to  be  to  some  extent  affected  by  the  presence  of  any  companion— a 
large  majority  of  hallucinations,  alike  of  purely  subjective  and  of 
telepathic  origin,  taking  place  when  the  percipient  is  alone. 

Various  other  points  of  frequent  or  occasional  resemblance  between 
the  two  classes  retrain,  which  have  been  noted  or  will  Jbe  noted  as 

L 

1 I have  encountered  only  Heven  instances  of  the  kind,  two  of  which  are  described 
later  (Yol.  ii.,  p.  24,  note,  and  p.  218).  The  negative  fact  is  worth  pointing  out ; but 
positive  instances  (unless  perchance  “ collective,’5  like  case  333),  would,  of  course,  be 
more  naturally  interpreted  as  purely  subjective,  on  the  analogy  of  after-images,  (p.  505), 
than  as  telepathic. 

XII.] 

TELEPATHIC  HALLUCINATIONS. 

573 

they*  occur  iu  the  examples,  and  need  here  only  be  briefly 
summarised.  Such  are  the  various  degrees  of  extcrualisation 
rudimentary  appearances;2  rapid  repetitions;8  movement  in  the 
figures  ^seen  ;4  gradual  disappearance  ;5  special  modes  of  disappear- 
ance ^''disappearance  on  sudden  speech  or  gesture  ;7  the  fact  that 
the  hallucination  is  unshared  by  other  persons  who  may  be  in  the  hallu- 
cinated person’s  company  or  vicinity ; 8 and  the  fact  that  every  now  and 
‘then  the  liability  to  either  type  of  hallucination  seems  hereditary.® 

Of  still  g.  -^ter  importance  are  the  contrast* < that  exist  between 
the  phenomena  of  the  two  classes;  e.g.,  the  great  superiority  in 
number  of  visual  over  auditory  cases  in  the  telepathic  class,  which  is 
the  reverse  of  what  obtains  in  the  purely  subjective ; and  the  large 
proportion,  in  the  purely  subjective  class,  of  unrecognised  phantasms, 
which  are  decidedly  exceptional  in  the  telepathic.  But  these 
jioints  of  contrast  are  chiefly  interesting  as  bearing  on*  a larger 
question  which  I can  now  no  longer  defer — the  question  whether 
the  case^.  presented  as  telepathic  can  reasonably  be  regarded  as  more 
than  merely  accidental  coincidences;  and  they  will  find  their 
appropriate  place  in  the  next  chapter. 

1 Vol.  it. , p.  33,  note. 

2 Pp.  480-3  ; Vol.  ii„  pp.  29-38, 120,  137. 

P.  414 ; Vol.  ii.,  pp.  105,  237,  note. 

# 4 This  feature  is  so  common,  in  both  classes,  that  I need  hardly  call  special  attention 
to  it  where  it  occurs.  In  this  chapter  alone,  for  instance,  we  have  encountered  it  in  7 
cases— ‘Nos,  198, 199,  202,  203,  204,  211,  215. 

5 See  above,  p.  521.  and  Vol.  ii.,  p.  97. 

0 See  p.  432,  note,  and,  f.t/.,  case  211,  above. 

7 Vol.  ii.,  p.  91,  second  note ; and  add  case  540  to  the  list. 

8 See  above,  p.  223,  and  Vol.  ii.,  p.  105,  second  note,  The  cases  where  the  experience 
affects  mor^  than  one  person  will  be  discussed  in  Chap,  xviii.,  and  may  pernaps  be 
found  to  supply  a fresh  point  of  resemblance  between  hallucinations  of  subjective  and 
of  telepathic  origin. 

0 Vol.  ii.,  p.  132,  note. 

END  OF  VOLUME  I. 

PRINTED  BY  TUB  NATION U,  PRESS  AGENCY,  UNITED,  WtflTEtRlARS  STREET,  LONDON,  E.C.


**********************************************************************
END OF VOL. I — VOL. II FOLLOWS
**********************************************************************


'  '.  f'M,i.^y.''Wii'yi*  tilt-: 

m 

Mm-' 

rip* 

aA^- 

^'# 

Boston 

Medical  Library 

8  The  Fenway 

PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIVING. 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School 

http://www.archive.org/details/phantasmsoflivin02gurn 

PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIYING 

BY 

EDMUND     GURNEY,    M.A, 

LATE  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE, 

FREDERIC    W.    H.    MYERS,    M.A. 

LATE  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE, 

FRANK    PODMORE,    M.A. 

VOLUME    II. 

LONDON  : 

ROOMS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH, 

14,  Dean's  Yard,  S.W. 

TRUBNER  AND  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL,  E.C. 

1886. 

x% 

FURTHER   ADDITIONS   AND    CORRECTIONS. 

Page  vi,  line  13.  For  247  read  248.  Line  18.  For  "nearly  a 
trillion  of  trillions  of  trillions  "  read  ''  about  a  thousand  billion  trillion 
trillion  trillions." 

Page  16,  line  23.  If  only  cases  are  reckoned  where  the  auditory 
phantasm  was  recorded  or  described  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived, 
the  odds  will  be  reduced  to  about  a  million  to  1. 

Page  17,  line  29.  If  only  cases  are  reckoned  where  the  visual 
phantasm  was  recorded  or  described  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived, 
the  odds  will  be  reduced  to  about  a  hundred  billion  trillions  to  1. 

Page  21,  end  of  §  8.  In  the  numei'ical  estimates,  I  have  throughout 
confined  the  reasoning  to  sensory  experiences,  and  have  not  attempted  to 
extend  it  to  the  ideal  and  emotional  impressions  which  were  considered  in 
the  6th  and  7th  chapters.  This  is  because  a  trustworthy  census  of  strong 
but  purely  subjective  impressions  of  these  commoner  and  often  vaguer 
kinds  would  have  been  imjDossible  to  obtain.  There  is,  however,  one 
important  point  which  concerns  the  non-sensory  experiences  as  well  as  the 
sensory,  and  which  ought  not  to  be  omitted  from  the  argument  ;  the 
occurrence,  namely,  at  various  times,  to  a  single  percipient,  of  several 
"  veridical "  impressions,  sometimes  similar,  sometimes  different  in  type. 
(See  p.  77,  note.)  It  is  clear  how  enormously  this  multiplication  of  the 
coincidences  in  one  person's  history  multiplies  the  already  enormous  odds 
against  chance  as  their  cause. 

Page  24,  line  3  of  note.     For  40  read  39 

Page  26,  line  8  of  note.  For  32  read  31.  This  correction  will  slightly, 
but  not  appreciably,  afiect  the  subsequent  estimate. 

Page  50,  case  233.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that  she 
woke  her  sister  at  the  time  of  her  experience,  and  also  described  it  to  her 
fai\iily  at  breakfast,  before  the  news  of  the  death  anived.  Her  sister — 
who  probably  supposed  it  to  be  a  dream,  and  fell  asleep  again  at  once — 
had  no  recollection  of  it  when  it  was  referred  to  some  years  ago. 

Page  52,  case  235.  The  narrator's  first  initial  is  G.  We  have  applied 
to  the  gentleman  to  whom  the  earlier  account  was  sent ;  but  he  forwarded 
it  to  some  one  else,  and  cannot  now  recollect  to  whom.  The  friend  with 
whom  Colonel  Swiney  was  staying  has  long  since  left  Norfolk,  and  we 
have  not  been  able  to  trace  him. 

Page  68,  line  23.     For  296  read  246. 

Pages  139-41,  case  296.  Further  knowledge  and  a  more  critical 
study  of  this  case  suggest  doubts  as  to  whether  it  should  have  been 
included.  It  will  be  seen  that  three  important  points — the  impression  of 
seeing  the  handle  turn,  the  getting  out  of  bed  to  search,  and  Mr.  Phillips's 
statement  as  to  his  wife's  having  imagined  herself  to  be  in  the  narrator's 
house — are  not  mentioned  in  the  diary,  but  only  in  the  account  written 
more  than  3|^  years  afterwards.  Moreover,  it  appears  probable  from  an 
inspection  of  the  diary  that  the  entry  for  Oct.  23  was  not  written  on 
that  day,  but  after  the  news  of  the  death  had  arrived  on  the  following- 
day  ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  unlikely  that  the  description,  "  steps  as  of 
a  female  walking  aimlessly,"  was  to  some  extent  suggested  by  the  news. 

Page  346,  line  5.  For  maladie  read  malade.  With  this  account  should 
be  compared  the  apparent  instance  of  thought-transference  in  a  case  of 
hysterical  catalepsy,  recorded  by  Dr.  Bristowe  in  the  British  Medical 
Jotirnal  iov  Yeh.  8,  1879. 

Page  390,  line  1.     For  Kirkbright  read  Shuck  burgh. 

Page  393,  case  419.  A  first-hand  account  from  Mr.  John  A.  Orr, 
F.R.C.S.I.,  of  Fleetwood,  shows  that  the  dream  on  which  the  mother  acted 
had  conveyed  no  more  than  the  idea  of  her  son's  serious  illness,  and,  more- 
over, had  been  dreamt  some  nights  before  the  accident,  as  she  arrived  on 
the  morning  of  its  occurrence.     The  case  should,  therefore,  be  omitted. 

Page  397,  case  424.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that 
the  ex2Derience  was  a  very  vivid  impression  on  waking,  rather  than  an 
actual  dream.  The  impression  was  sufficiently  disquieting  to  keep  her 
awake  for  several  hours. 

Page  398,  case  425.  In  conversation,  Mrs.  Tandy,  a  daughter  of  the 
narrator's,  who  has  heard  the  percipient  describe  her  vision,  expressed  a 
distinct  opinion  that  she  spoke  of  it  as  a  tvaking  experience. 

Page  404,  case  432.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that 
her  dreams  are  rarely  painful  or  distressing,  and  that  she  has  never  on  any 
other  occasion  taken  action  on  a  dream. 

Page  461,  first  line  of  case  499.     For  1877  read  1867. 

Page  469,  case  505.  The  narrator  not  only  told  her  sister  of  her  ex- 
perience on  the  morning  (Tuesday)  after  it  occurred,  but  wrote  the  same 
day  to  England,  expressing  her  uneasiness  about  her  nephew,  and  asking 
if  anything  was  wrong  with  him  ;  and  Mrs.  Wilkinson,  (of  63,  Harcourt 
Terrace,  Redcliffe  Square,  S.W.,)  the  boy's  mother,  remembers  receiving 
this  letter  on  the  Wednesday  evening,  while  she  was  herself  in  the  act 
of  writing  to  tell  Miss  Wilkinson  of  the  accident.  (Miss  Wilkinson  was 
therefore  mistaken  in  saying  that  her  sister-in-law  wrote  on  the  day 
after  the  accident.)  Mrs.  Wilkinson  further  mentioned  in  conversation 
that  on  the  Monday,  while  lying  in  a  semi-conscious  state,  the  boy 
constantly  asked  whether  his  aunt  had  been  told  of  the  accident.  He  was 
much  attached  to  her,  and  had  been  nursed  by  her  through  a  serious 
illness. 

Page  474,  case  509.  We  have  procured  an  official  certificate  from  New 
South  Wales,  which  corroborates  the  narrator's  statement  that  her  mother 
died  on  June  17,  1868. 

Page  513,  case  556.  The  name  of  the  percipient  has  been  privately 
communicated. 

Page  515,  case  558.  We  have  now  received  a  written  account  of 
this  incident  from  another  daughter  of  the  percipient,  who  was  present  at 
the  time.  It  was  inferred  that  the  dying  man  spoke  of  the  little  grandson 
of  whose  sudden  illness  and  death  he  had  been  kept  in  ignorance,  froin  the 
fact  of  his  turning  to  the  child's  mother  and  addressing  her  in  the  way 
desci'ibed  (the  second  account  substitutes  "  Don't  fret  "  for  "  Never  mind"); 
but  it  ought  to  be  added  that  he  had  lost  a  son  of  the  same  name  24  years 
before. 

Page  524,  end  of  case  569.  The  name  of  the  percipient  has  now 
been  privately  communicated. 

Page  566,  line  4  from  bottom.  The  narrator  explains  (Dec.  22,  1886) 
that  her  father  was  "  an  amateur  doctor  "  only ;  he,  had  been  a  solicitor 
by  profession,  but  had  studied  medicine. 

Page  584,  line  29,  and  page  585,  line  4.     For  Heaton  read  Seaton. 

SYNOPSIS   OF  VOLUME  II. 

Additions  and  Corrections ■   .       xxi-xxvii 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

The  Theory  op  Chance-Coincidence. 
§  1.  Assuming  the  substantial  correctness  of  much  of  the  evidence 
for  phantasms  which  have  markedly  coincided  with  an  event  at  a  distance, 
how  can  it  be  known  that  these  coincidences  are  not  due  to  chance  alone  ? 
In  examining  this  question,  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  waking  cases 
from  dreams — in  which  latter  class  (as  we  have  seen)  the  scope  for  chance- 
coincidences  is  indefinitely  large  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         1-4 

§  2.  The  answer  to  this  question  depends  on  two  points — the  frequency 
of  phantasms  which  have  markedly  coincided  with  real  events,  and  the 
frequency  of  phantasms  which  have  not.  If  the  latter  class  turned  out  to 
be  extremely  large — e.g.,  if  we  each  of  us  once  a  week  saw  some  friend's 
figure  in  a  place  which  was  really  empty — it  is  certain  that  occasionally 
such  a  subjective  delusion  would  fall  on  the  day  that  the  friend  happened 
to  die.  The  matter  is  one  on  which  there  have  been  many  guesses,  and 
many  assertions,  but  hitherto  no  statistics    .....         4-6 

§  3.  To  ascertain  what  proportion  of  the  population  have  had 
experience  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  a  definite  question  must  be 
asked  of  a  group  large  and  varied  enough  to  serve  as  a  fair  sample  of  the 
whole.  The  difficulty  of  taking  such  a  census  has  been  much  increased  by 
a  wide  misunderstanding  of  its  purpose         .....         6-8 

§  4.  But  answers  have  been  received  from  a  specimen  group  of  5,680 
persons ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  this  number  sufficient         8-10 

§  5,  It  may  be  objected  that  persons  may  have  wrongly  denied  such 
experiences  (1)  through  forgetfulness — but  the  experiences  of  real  im- 
portance for  the  end  in  view  are  too  striking  to  be  readily  forgotten ; 
(2)  by  way  of  a  joke  or  a  hoax — but  this  would  lead  rather  to  false 
confessions  than  false  denials  ;  (3)  in  self-defence — but  such  error  as  may 

vi  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II. 

have  been  produced  by  this  motive  has  probably  been  more  than  counter- 
balanced in  other  ways     ........         10-12 

§  6.  First  as  to  auditory  hallucinations,  representing  recognised  voices — 
in  the  last  12  years  such  an  experience  has,  according  to  the  census, 
befallen  1  adult  in  every  90  ;  but  it  would  have  had  to  befall 
7  in  every  10,  to  justify  the  assumption  that  the  cases  recorded  in  this 
work  on  first-hand  testimony,  of  the  coincidence  of  the  experience 
in  question  with  the  death  of  the  person  represented,  were  due  to 
chance.  The  odds  against  the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  said  coinci- 
dences are  more  than  a  trillion  to  1  .  .  .  .  .         .  12-16 

§  7.  Next  as  to  visual  hallucinations,  representing  a  recognised  face 
or  form — in  the  last  12  years  such  an  experience  has,  according  to  the 
census,  befallen  1  adult  in  every  247  ;  but  it  would  have  had  to 
befall  every  adult  once,  and  most  adults  twice,  to  justify  the  assumption 
that  the  cases  recorded  in  the  present  work  on  first-hand  testimony,  of  the 
coincidence  of  the  experience  in  question  with  the  death  of  the  person 
represented,  were  due  to  chance.  The  odds  against  the  accidental 
occurrence  of  the  said  coincidences  are  nearly  a  trillion  of  trillions  of 
trillions  to  1 16-18 

§  8.  The  extreme  closeness  of  some  of  the  coincidences  afibrds  the  basis 
for  another  form  of  estimate,  which  shows  the  improbability  of  their 
accidental  occurrence  to  be  almost  immeasurably  great      .         .         18-20 

And  a  number  of  further  cases  and  further  considerations  remain,  by 
which  even  this  huge  total  of  improbability  would  be  again  swelled. 
The  conclusion,  therefore,  after  all  allowances,  that  at  any  rate  a  large 
number  of  the  coincidences  here  adduced  have  had  some  other  cause  than 
chance  seems  irresistible  ........         20-21 

§  9.  An  argument  of  a  quite  different  sort  may  be  drawn  from  certain 
peculiarities  which  the  group  of  coincidental  hallucinations  present,  when 
compared,  as  a  whole,  with  the  general  mass  of  transient  hallucinations 
of  the  sane.  The  chief  of  these  peculiarities  are  (1)  the  decided  pre- 
ponderance of  visual  cases  over  auditory,  and  (2)  the  immense 
preponderance  of  cases  where  the  figure  or  voice  was  recognised  as 
representing  some  one  known  to  the  percipient :  whereas  among  clearly 
subjective  hallucinations  there  is  a  very  great  preponderance  of  auditory 
cases,  and  almost  an  equality  between  recognised  and  unrecognised 
phantasms,  the  preponderance  being  slightly  with  the  latter      .         22-25 

Another  striking  point — the  preponderance  of  cases  in  which  the 
distant  event  with  which  the  phantasm  coincides  is  death,  or  one  of  the 
crises  that  come  nearest  to  death — again  marks  out  the  coincidental 
phantasms  as  a  distinct  group  of  natural  phenomena  .         ,         25-28 

SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  11.  -  vii 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Further  Visual  Cases  Occurring  to  a  Single  Percipient. 

§  1.  Visual  hallucinations  may  present  various  degrees  of  apparent 
externalisation,  beginning  "with  what  is  scarcely  more  than  a  picture  in 
the  mind's  eye,  and  ending  with  a  percept  which  seems  quite  on  a  par 
with  all  surrounding  objects.  Examples  of  these  varieties  in  telepathic 
phantasms        ..........         29-37 

§  2.  Examples  of  completely  externalised  phantasms.  In  connection 
with  one  case  (No.  225)  it  is  shown  that  a  slight  liability  to  subjective 
hallucinations  (which  a  few  telepathic  percipients  have  exhibited)  need 
not  seriously  affect  the  probability  that  a  particular  experience  was 
telepathic.  Another  case  (No.  242)  is  remarkable  in  that  the  actual 
percipient  had  no  direct  connection  with  the  agent,  but  was  in  the  vicinity 
of  a  person  intimately  connected  with  him         ....         38-62 

§  3.  Cases  where  the  hypothesis  of  illusion  or  mistaken  identity  has 
to  be  taken  into  account.  This  hypothesis  would  not  exclude  a  telepathic 
origin,  as  telepathic  illusions  are  quite  conceivable  phenomena.  But  more 
probably  these  cases  were  hallucinations  ;  and  if  so,  their  telepathic  origin 
would  hardly  be  doubtful.  One  of  them  (No.  243)  exhibits  the  point  of  a 
previous  compact  between  the  agent  and  percipient,  that  whichever  died 
first  should  endeavour  to  make  the  other  sensible  of  his  presence.  Such 
a  compact,  latent  in  either  mind,  may  quite  conceivably  have  some 
conditioning  efficacy  ........         62-73 

§  4.  Cases  of  a  rudim,entary  type — perhaps  of  arrested  development — 
not  representative  of  a  human  form  ;  they  might  be  compared  to  a  motor 
effect  which  is  limited  to  a  single  start  or  twitch.  The  class  is  too  small 
to  carry  any  conviction  on  its  own  account,  but  its  type  is  not  so 
improbable  as  might  at  first  appear  ......         73-76 

§  5.  Certain  cases  involving  no  coincidence  with  any  ostensibly 
abnormal  condition  of  the  agent.  (1)  Instances  where  several  percipients, 
at  different  times,  have  had  hallucinations  representing  the  sam,e  person, 
in  whom  a  specific  faculty  for  producing  telepathic  impressions  may  there- 
fore be  surmised       .........         77-90 

§  6.  And  (2)  instances  where  a  presumption  that  a  hallucination  was 
.  not  purely  subjective  is  afforded  by  peculiarities  of  dress  or  aspect  in  the 
figure  presented        .........         90-96 

§  7.  And  (3)  instances  where  the  phantasm  appears  at  a  time  when  the 

viii  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II. 

person  whom  it  represents  is,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  actually  approach- 
ing him,  with  thoughts  more  or  less  consciously  turned  in  his  direction. 
The  last  two  examples  (Nos.  265  and  266)  are  auditory  .         .         96-100 

CHAPTER  XY. 

Further  Auditory  Cases  Occurring  to  a  Single  Percipient. 

§  1.  Cases  where  the  phantasm  has  been  of  a  recognised  voice — the 
words  heard  having  been,  certainly  in  some  cases  and  possibly  in  others, 
those  which  the  distant  agent  was  uttering.  One  case  (No.  269)  illustrates 
the  feature  of  repetition  after  a  short  interval        .         .         .         101-108 

§  2.  Cases  where  what  was  heard  was  the  percipient's  own  name — 
which  is  a  very  common  form  of  purely  subjective  hallucination. 

In  most  of  these  cases  there  may  probably  have  been  a  certain  occupa- 
tion of  the  agent's  thoughts  with  the  percipient     .         .         .  108-114 

§  3.  Cases  where  the  phantasm  has  been  of  an  unrecognised  voice. 
In  one  instance,  (No.  279)  several  experiences  of  the  sort,  in  close 
coincidence  with  the  deaths  of  relatives,  have  occurred  to  the  same 
percipient     ..........         114-118 

§  4.  Oases  where  the  impression  was  of  a  complete  sentence,  convey- 
ing either  a  piece  of  information  or  a  direction,  projected  by  the  percipient 
as  a  message  from  without    .......         118-124 

§  5.  An  example  where  the  sound  heard  was  vocal,  but  not  recognised 
and  articulate       .........         124-125 

§  6.  Phantasms  of  non-vocal  noises  or  shocks.  These  are  parallel  to 
the  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations ;  but  need  a  more  jealous  scrutiny, 
since  odd  noises  are  often  due  to  undiscovered  physical  causes  in  the 
vicinity.  Still,  some  impressions  of  the  sort  are  pretty  clearly  hallucina- 
tory ;  and  the  form  is  one  which  telepathic  hallucinations  seem  occa- 
sionally to  take.  The  final  case  (No.  291)  suggests  the  possibility  of 
family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influences  .         .         .         125-132 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Tactile  Cases,  and  Cases  Affecting  More  than  One  of  the 
Percipient's  Senses. 

§  1.  Purely  subjective  impressions  of  touch,  of  at  all  a  distinct  kind, 
are  rare  ;  and  when  they  occur,  may  often  be  accounted  for  as  illusions  due 

SYNOPSIS    OF    VOL    II.  ix 

to  an  involuntary  muscular  twitch.     It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that 
telepathic  hallucinations  of  this  type  should  be  rare       .         .  133-134 

The  most  conclusive  examples  are  those  where  an  affection  of 
touch  is  combined  with  one  of  sight  or  hearing.     Examples  ,  135-139 

§  2.  Combined  affections  of  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  :  one 
case  (No.  299)  is  peculiar  in  that  the  person  who  was  probably  the  agent 
was  in  the  percipient's  company  at  the  time  .         .         .         139-149 

§  3.  A  case  where  the  impressions  of  sight  and  hearing  were  separated 
by  some  hours      .........         149-152 

CHAPTER    XVII. 

Recipeocal  Cases. 

§  1.  It  occasionally  happens  that  at  the  time  when  A  telepathically 
influences  B,  A  on  his  side  has  an  impression  which  strongly  suggests  that 
B  has  reciprocally  influenced  him.  The  best  proof  of  this  is  where  A 
expresses  in  words  some  piece  of  knowledge  as  to  B's  condition.  Other 
more  doubtful  cases  (of  which  a  few  are  quoted)  may  be  provisionally 
referred  to  the  same  type ;  but  unless  A's  description  includes  something 
which  he  could  not  have  known  or  guessed  in  a  normal  manner,  his 
alleged  percipience  of  B  cannot  be  assumed  to  have  been  more  than  mere 
subjective  dream  or  vision    .......  153-158 

§  2.  Examples  of  apparently  reciprocal  action.  They  may  be  regarded 
as  special  cases  of  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  "  ;  A's  percipience  of  B  being 
apparently  active  rather  than  passive,  and  due  to  some  extension 
of  his  own  faculties,  connected  with  the  abnormality  of  condition 
that  occasions  his  agency,  and  not  to  any  special  abnormality  in  B's 
condition      ..........  158-166 

The  cases  which,  on  the  evidence,  would  be  clearly  reciprocal,  are  so 
few  in  number  as  to  justify  a  doubt  whether  they  represent  a  genuine 
type.  Supposing  them  to  be  genuine,  however,  their  rarity  is  not  hard  to 
account  for ;  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  time  will  bring  us  more  well- 
attested  specimens        .  .  .■        .         ,  .  ,         .         .  167 

X  "         STJVOPSIS  OF  VOL  II. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Collective  Cases. 

§  1.  Phantasms  which  have  affected  the  senses  of  more  than  one  per- 
cipient, are  a  specially  perplexing  class.  On  the  face  of  them,  they 
suggest  a  real  objective  presence  of  the  person  seen  or  heard.  But  such 
"objectivity"  (unless  conceived  as  some  illusive  form  of  matter)  can 
hardly  be  defined  except  just  as  a  temporary  existence  in  more  minds  than 
one  :  it  does  not  explain,  but  merely  repeats,  the  fact  that  the  experience 
is  collective  ..........         168-170 

In  the  absence  of  evidence  (worthy  of  the  name)  that  a  telepathic 
phantasm  has  ever  given  a  test  of  physical  reality — e.g.,  by  opening  a  door 
or  a  window — we  are  led  to  inquire  how  far  the  phenomena  of  collective 
hallucination  can  be  covered  by  a  theory  of  purely  psychical  impressions. 
Two  views  (which  will  subsequently  prove  capable  of  amalgamation) 
present  themselves  : — (1)  that  A,  at  a  distance,  produces  simultaneous 
telepathic  impressions  on  the  minds  of  B  and  C,  who  happen  to  be  together; 
(2)  that  B's  impression,  however  originated,  passes  on  to  C  by  a  process 
of  thought-transference — the  hallucination  itself  being,  so  to  speak, 
infectious 170-171 

§  2.  The  Jirst  of  these  hypotheses  presents  great  difficulties.  For  our 
review  of  telepathic  hallucinations,  so  far,  has  shown  that  they  may  take 
very  various  forms,  and  may  be  projected  at  various  intervals  of  time 
(within  a  range  of  a  few  hours)  from  the  crisis  or  event  to  which  we  trace 
them  ;  so  that,  supposing  several  persons  to  have  been  the  joint  recipients 
of  a  telepathic  impression,  it  seems  most  improbable  that  they  should 
independently  invest  it  at  the  same  moment  with  the  same  sensory  form. 
Nor,  again,  should  we  expect  to  find,  among  those  jointly  affected,  any 
person  who  was  a  stranger  to  the  distant  agent ;  nevertheless,  cases  occur 
where  such  a  person  has  shared  in  the  collective  percipience.  And  yet 
again,  on  this  theory  of  independent  affection  of  several  persons,  there 
seems  no  special  reason  why  they  should  be  in  one  another's  company  at 
the  time,  since  the  agent  may  presumably  exercise  his  influence  equally  in 
any  direction ;  nevertheless,  cases  where  the  percipients  have  been  apart 
are,  in  fact,  extremely  rare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  171-172 

A  few  examples  of  the  sort  are  given;  but  in  several  even  of  these,  the 
percipients,  though  not  together,  were  very  near  one  another,  and  had 
been  to  some  extent  sharing  the  same  life      ....  173-183 

§  3.  As  to  the  second  of  the  proposed  hypotheses— that  one  percipient 
catches  the   hallucination  from    another  by   a   process    of   thought-trans- 

SYJVOFSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xi 

ference — the  question  at  once  suggests  itself  whether  such  communicability 
is  ever  found  in  cases  where  no  distant  agent  is  concerned — cases  of 
purely  subjective  hallucination.  Such  an  idea  would,  no  doubt,  be  as  new 
to  scientific  psychology  as  every  other  form  of  thought-transference ;  but 
transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane  have  been  so  little  studied  or  collected 
that  it  is  not  surprising  if  the  evidence  for  collective  experiences  of  the 
sort  has  escaped  attention — though  collective  illusions  have  sometimes 
been  described  as  hallucinations   .         .         .         .         .         .         183-184 

It  is  in  collective  cases  that  the  importance  of  distinguishing  illusions 
from  hallucinations  becomes  plain.  In  illusions,  the  persons  affected 
receive  an  actual  sensory  impression  from  a  real  object,  the  error  being 
simply  in  their  way  of  interpreting  it ;  and  in  the  interpretation  they  are 
often  greatly  at  the  mercy  of  one  another's  suggestions.  Many  historical 
incidents — such  as  visions  of  signs  in  the  heavens  and  of  phantom 
champions — might  be  thus  explained 184-186 

In  other  alleged  instances  of  "  collective  hallucination "  there  is  no 
proof  that  the  impression  was  really  more  than  a  vivid  mental  picture, 
evoked  under  excitement.  And  even  where  the  image  probably  has  been 
externalised  in  space — as,  e.g.,  in  religious  epidemics,  or  in  experimentation 
with  hypnotised  subjects — most  cases  may  be  at  once  explained,  without 
any  resort  to  thought-transference,  as  due  to  a  common  idea  or  expectancy. 
(Apart,  however,  from  special  excitement  or  from  hypnotism,  the  power 
of  mere  verbal  suggestion  to  produce  delusions  of  the  senses  may  easily  be 
exaggerated) 186-188 

It  is  only  when  these  various  conditions  are  absent — when  the  joint 
percept  is  clearly  hallucination,  and  is  also  projected  by  the  several 
percipients  without  emotional  preparation  or  suggestion — that  the 
hypothesis  of  thought-transference  from  one  percipient  to  another  can 
reasonably  be  entertained 189-190 

§  4.  The  examples  to  be  adduced,  of  collective  hallucinations,  not 
apparently  originating  in  the  condition  of  any  absent  living  person, 
include  cases  which  may  be  regarded  by  some  as  indicating  post-mortem 
agency.  It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  the  vexed  question  as  to 
whether  the  power  of  exercising  psychical  energy  can  or  cannot  continue 
after  physical  death.  Whatever  answer  that  question  received,  these  cases 
would  still,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  (for  reasons  set  forth  in  §  2,)  bear 
witness  to  a  quite  mundane  transference  between  the  minds  of  the  living 
percipients  .  .  .  .         .         .  .  .  .  ,  190-192 

§  5.    Fiswa^  examples.     Hallucinations  of  light        .  .  192-194 

Various  out-of-door  experiences,  not  easy  to  explain  as  illusions  194-198 
Examples  of  the  simultaneous  appearance  of  an  unrecognised  figure  to 

xii  SYIfOFSIS  OF  VOL.  11. 

two  percipients,  who  in  most  instances  were  in  each  other's  company  at 
the  time.  The  two  impressions  received  in  several  cases  were  not  precisely 
similar,  and  in  one  (No.  322)  were  markedly  different    .  .  198-207 

Similar  appearances  of  recognised  phantasms ;  one  o£  which  (case  333) 
represented  the  form  of  one  of  the  percipients       .  .  .  208-218 

The  auditory  class  requires  special  care,  owing  to  the  liability  9f  real 
sounds  (whose  source  is  often  uncertain)  to  be  misinterpreted.  Examples 
of  voices       ..........         218—221 

And  of  mMsica?  hallucinations  .  .  .  .  .  221-223 

The  examples  may  at  all  events  show  that  a  purely  psychical  account  of 
these  joint  experiences  is  possible.  It  is  not,  indeed,  obvious  why  hallucina- 
tions of  the  senses  should  be  a  form  of  experience  liable  to  transmission  from 
mind  to  mind  ;  but  as  regards  the  cases  which  are  telepathically  originated, 
some  explanation  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  fact  that  they  at  any  rate 
involve  a  disturbance  of  a  very  peculiar  kind         .  .  .  224-225 

§  6.  Collective  hallucinations  of  telepathic  origin.    Auditory  examples, 
representing  vocal  sounds       .......  226-230 

And  non-vocal  sounds      .......  230-235 

Visual  examples.  In  two  of  these  (JSTos.  345  and  346)  the  experiences 
of  the  several  percipients  were  not  precisely  similar.  Another  case 
(No.  349)  affords  an  opportunity  for  estimating  the  probability  of  a 
collective  mistake  of  identity         ......  235-264 

§  7.  The  fact  that  in  most  of  the  examples  the  two  percipients,  B  and 
C,  were  together  suggests  that  mere  community  of  scene,  or  of  immediate 
mental  occupation,  may  establish  a  rapport  favourable  to  "psychical" 
transferences         .........  264-266 

And  this  conception  may  lead  us,  in  cases  where  a  distant  agent.  A,  is 
concerned,  to  an  amalgamation  of  the  two  hypotheses  (see  §  1)  which  have 
hitherto  been  treated  separately.  C's  experience,  qua  hallucination,  that 
is  to  say  in  its  sensory  character,  may  be  derived  from  B's ;  but,  for  all 
that,  A  may  be  telepathically  affecting  C.  It  may  be  A's  joint  influence 
on  B  and  C  that  has  conditioned  the  transference  of  sensation  between 
them ;  or,  in  cases  where  C  holds  no  intimate  relation  to  A,  a  rapport  may 
be  established,  ad  hoc,  between  A  and  C  by  the  rapport  of  both  of  them 
with  B — who  thus  serves,  so  to  speak,  as  a  channel  for  C's  percipience  ;  and 
this  would  even  help  to  explain  the  cases  where  B  is  not  himself  con- 
sciously percipient         ........         266-268 

The  conception  of  rapport  through  community  of  mental  occupation 
might  explain  the  various  cases  where  the  telepathic  influence  seems  to 
have  been  locally  conditioned,  by  the  presence  of  the  percipient  in  a  place 
that  was    interesting  to  the  agent.     And    the   idea    may  receive  a  still 

SYIfOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xiii 

further  extension  in  cases  where   there  is  reason  to   suppose  a  reciprocal 
telepathic  clairvoyance  of  the  scene  on  the  agent's  part         .  268-269 

Conjectures  of  this  sort  concerning  the  more  outlying  telepathic 
phenomena  have  an  air  of  rashness ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  "  psychical  " 
transferences  are  possible,  when  once  admitted,  opens  up  a  scheme  of 
Idealism  within  whose  bounds  (if  bounds  there  be)  the  potential  unity 
between  individual  minds  is  at  any  rate  likely  to  realise  itself  in  surprising 
ways  ...........         270 

CONCLUSION. 

§  1.  The  case  for  spontaneous  telepathy,  being  essentially  a  cumulative 
one,  hardly  admits  of  being  recapitulated  in  a  brief  and  attractive  form. 
Nothing  but  a  detailed  study  of  the  evidence — dull  as  that  study  is — can 
justify  definite  conclusions  concerning  it.  After  all,  the  dulness  is  perhaps 
not  greater  than  attaches  to  the  mastery  of  details  in  other  departments 
of  knowledge  ;  and  it  cannot  be  too  clearly  realised  that  what  the  research 
requires  is  not  sensational  incidents,  but  verified  dates  .  271-272 

§  2.  The  present  instalment  of  evidence,  with  all  its  defects,  may  yet, 
by  making  the  idea  of  telepathy  better  understood,  facilitate  collection  in 
the  future ;  and  already  various  difficulties  and  prejudices  show  signs  of 
giving  way  ...........        273 

§  3.  But  though  a  fair  field  is  sure,  in  time,  to  be  allowed  to  the 
work,  its  advance  must  depend  on  very  wide  co-operation  ;  and  the  more  so 
as  the  several  items  of  proof  tend  to  lose  their  efiect  as  they  recede  into 
the  past.  The  experimental  investigations  must  be  greatly  extended,  the 
spontaneous  phenomena  must  be  far  more  intelligently  watched  for  and 
recorded,  before  the  place  of  telepathy  in  scientific  psychology  can  be 
absolutely  assured         ........         273-274 

NOTE  (BY  MR.  MYERS)  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OE 
PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION. 

§  1.  The  hypotheses  contained  in  this  note  are  tentatively  advanced, 
but  may  at  least  direct  observation       .  .  .  .  .         .277 

§  2.  The  theory  which  represents  a  veridical  phantasm  as  the  externat- 
isation  of  a  telepathic  impression  encounters  a  difficulty  in  the  fact  that 
when  two  (or  more)  persons  are  together  the  phantasm  is  usually,  though 
not  always,  perceived  by  hoth        ......  277-278 

xiv  jSYMOFSIS  of  vol.  II. 

§  3.  This  complex  fact  seems  in  the  first  place  inconsistent  with  the 
popular  theory  of  a  material  ghost,  or  "  meta-organism," — a  theory  on 
other  grounds  objectionable ;  ......         278-279 

§  4.  Nor  can  we  always  assume  a  separate  telepathic  impulse  from  A  to 
B  and  from  A  to  C.  Mr.  Gurney  therefore  supposes  a  fresh  telepathic 
communication  from  B  to  C :         .  .  .  .  .  .         .         279 

§  5.  But  no  such  cases  of  communication  of  hallucinations  are  recorded 
by  alienists  who  have  treated  of  "  folie  a  deux  "  ;  .         .         279-280 

§  6.  And  in  morbid  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  no  degree  of  duration  or 
intensity  seems  to  effect  this  communication  of  the  hallucination  to 
bystanders 280-282 

§  7.  Moreover,  in  Mr.  Gurney 's  collection  of  casual  hallucinations  of 
the  sane,  there  are  no  collective  cases  which  are  indisputably 
falsidical;  .........         282-284 

§  8.  Alleged  phantasms  of  the  dead,  for  instance,  cannot  all  be  classed 
with  certainty  as  merely  illusory  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge  .  ..........        284 

§  9.  It  may  be  better,  then,  to  fall  back  on  observation  of  the  experi- 
mental cases,  and  to  note  that  in  them  the  percipient  exercises  a  species  of 
supernormal  activity     ........         284-286 

§  10.  Such  activity,  if  pushed  further,  might  become  first  telepathic 
clairvoyance,  then  independent  clairvoyance  .         .         .         286-287 

§  11.  Clairvoyant  perception  seems  to  be  exercised  in  inverse  ratio  to 
activity  of  normal  faculties,  and  to  be  stimulated  by  influence  from  another 
mind    ............        287 

§  12.  If  this  be  so,  we  have  an  analogy  which  throws  light  on  cases 
in  this  book  where  a  dreaming,  or  even  a  waking,  percipient  becomes 
conscious  of  a  distant  scene  ;......         287-289 

§  13.  And,  furthermore,  our  cases  suggest  that  correspondently  with 
clairvoyant  perception  there  may  be  phantasmogenetic  efficacy  :     .         289 

§  14.  So  that  all  the  persons  present  together  may  be  equally  likely  to 
discern  the  phantasmal  correlate  of  the  dying  man's  clairvoyant  perception ; 
and  collective  cases  will  no  longer  present  a  unique  difficulty  .  289-290 

§  15.  And  this  will  hold  good  whatever  view  we  take  of  the  relation 

SYJVOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xv 

to  space  or  matter,  either  of  the  clairvoyant  percipience  or  of  its  phantasmal 
correlate 290-291 

§  16.  This  view  suggests  test-experiments.  Points  to  be  noticed  in  a 
collective  hallucination ;        .  .  .         .  .  .         .  291-292 

§  17.  And  in  a  hallucination  induced  by  hypnotic  suggestion  292-293 

§  18.  But  if  the  dying  man's  conception  of  himself  is  thus  presented 
as  a  quasi-percept  to  a  group  of  persons  collectively,  then  some  cases  where 
there  is  one  percipient  only  may  be  similarly  explained  .         .  293-294 

§  19.  If  we  consider  the  indications  of  origin  in  one  or  the  other  mind 
given  by  the  dress  of  phantoms,  we  find  no  clear  case  where  such  origin 
must  be  referred  to  the  percipient's  mind  ;    .  .  .  .  294-297 

§  20.  And  the  symbolism  of  phantoms  also  is  generally  such  as  may 
have  been  common  to  both  minds  .....         297-298 

§  21.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  cases  where  the  dying  man's  actual 
dress  at  the  moment,  though  an  improbable  one,  is  reproduced  by  the 
phantom,  which  thus  is  clothed  according  to  the  dying  man's  conception 
of  himself,  and  probably  not  according  to  the  percipient's  antecedent 
conception  of  him  ;.........  298 

§  22.  And  the  symbolism  of  the  figure  sometimes  conveys  true  infor- 
mation, or  is  in  other  ways  probably  referable  to  the  dying  man    299-300 

§  23.  And  the  cases  of  imperfect  or  deferred  recognition  seem  similarly 
to  indicate  that  the  aspect  of  the  apparition  has  not  been  determined  by 
the  percipient  himself  ........  300-301 

§  24.  Moreover,  the  attraction  which  determines  the  phantasmal 
presence  seems  sometimes  to  be  local  rather  than  personal ;  as  if  the 
percipient  merely  saw  an  apparition  which  was  generated  by  causes 
independent  of  himself  .  .         .         .  .  .  .  301-302 

§  25.  It  may  be  said  that  on  this  view  the  mass  of  our  cases  should  be 
reciproccbl.  But  in  order  to  prove  a  case  reciprocal  it  is  necessary  that 
clairvoyant  percipience  should  be  recollected,  which  is  a  rare  thing  302-303 

§  26.  Still  further,  the  agent's  death  often  prevents  his  recounting  such 
percipience  as  he  may  have  enjoyed.  His  last  words  sometimes  indicate 
that  there  has  been  such  percipience.     Dr.  Ormsby's  case     .  303-306 

§  27.  In  our  few  cases  ol  voluntary  self-j^rojection  the  experience  seems 
rarely  to  have  persisted  into  waking  memory  ;       .  .         .         306-307 

xvi  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II. 

§  28.  And  after  clairvoyant  dreams  the  fact  of  the  clairvoyant  m-yas'iori 
may  be  forgotten  till  revived  by  accidental  presence  in  the  scene  thus 
discerned      ...........        307 

§  29.  Invasion,  however,  is  sometimes  remembered ;  faintly  and 
brokenly  by  an  agent  waking  at  the  time  ;    .  .  .  .  307-308 

§  30.  More  often  and  more  distinctly  by  an  agent  sleeping  at  the 
time 308 

§  31.  Such  reciprocity  seems  further  facilitated  by  a  state  of  trance 
or  delirium  ..........         309-310 

§  32.  Stages  by  which,  in  this  view,  veridical  phantasms  gradually 
approach  a  reciprocal  type    .......  310-311 

§  33.  Power  of  the  death  or  crisis  of  one  person  to  evoke  the 
clairvoyant  percipience,  and  invite  the  supernormal  invasion,  of  another. 
Parallel  with  clairvoyance  mesmerically  induced   .  .  .  311-312 

§  34.  A  true  classification  must  depend  on  the  condition  and  crises  of 
the  unconscious  rather  than  of  the  conscious  self  .  .  .  312-314 

§  35.  In  the  meantime  reciprocal  percipience  may  be  taken  as  the  type 
of  a  fully-developed  veridical  hallucination ;  its  relation  to  space  and 
matter  being  as  yet  unknown         .  .  .         ,.  .  .  .        314 

§  36.  Suggested  analogy  of  telepathic  with  vital  or  organic  com- 
munication .........         314-316 

SUPPLEMENT. 

INTRODUCTION. 

§  1.  The  supplementary  evidence  for  telepathy,  like  that  in  the  main 
body  of  the  work,  consists  of  experimental  cases  (Chap.  I.)  and  of 
spontaneous  cases  (Chaps.  II. -IX.)       ......         321 

§  2.  The  spontaneous  cases,  in  the  aggregate,  have  less  force  than  those 
which  have  preceded — the  chances  of  error  in  many  of  them  being  very 
appreciable,  and  some  of  them  being  second-hand.  Still,  the  evidence  is  for 
the  most  part  of  a  character  which  allows  us  to  suppose  that  the  essential 

SYJ^rOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xvii 

point  has  been  truly  retained,  even  though  details  may  have  been  altered 
or  added 321-322 

§  3.  And  since  this  evidence,  which  might  not  prove  the  reality  of 
spontaneous  telepathy,  is  sufficient,  even  alone,  to  establish  a  very  strong 
presumption  for  it,  it  lends  an  important  support  to  the  cumulative 
argument  already  presented  .......  322-323 

CHAPTER  I. 

Further  Examples  of  Thought-Transperence,  Principally  in 

Hypnotic  Cases. 

§  1.  Experiments  in  the  transference  of  tastes  and  pains     .       324-329 

Occasionally  the  transference  seems  to  be  from  the  "  subject  "  to  the 

operator  ..........       330-331 

§  2.  Examples  of  the  power  of  the  ivill  in  producing  the  hypnotic 
condition,  or  in  evoking  particular  actions     ....  331-334 

§  3  Transferences  of  ideas  unconnected  with  movement.  One 
remarkable  record  (No.  366)  exemplifies  a  very  long-continued  suscepti- 
bility on  the  percipient's  part.  Several  of  the  cases,  here  treated  as 
telepathic,  have  been  attributed  without  sufficient  grounds  to  independent 
clairvoyance  .....  ...  334-348 

CHAPTER  II. 

Ideal,  Emotional,  and  Motor  Cases. 

§  1.  Examples  of  spontaneous  thought-transference  of  a  tolerably 
literal  kind,  several  of  which  suggest  a  fugitive  faculty  of  percipience 
developed  by  illness      ........         349-362 

§  2.  Examples  of  an  apparently  abnormal  intuition  of  the  approach 
or  proximity  of  certain  persons      .  .  .  .  .  .  363-36.5 

§  3.  Cases  where  the  "  agency "  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  assign, 
and  which  recall  the  Creek  notion  of  4>rjM      ....  365-370 

§  4.  Emotional  impressions  (involving  in  one  case — No.  391 — distinct 
physical  discomfort)  which  the  percipients  connected  at  the  moment  with 
particular  individuals   ........  370-374 

VOL.    II.  b 

lii  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II. 

§  5.  Emotional  impressions  not  so  connected     .  .  .  374-376 

§  6.  Examples  of  motor  effects  .....         376-379 

CHAPTER  III. 

Deeams. 

§  1.  Examples  of  simultaneous  dreams  corresponding  in  con- 
tent               380-383 

§  2.  Examples  of  dreams  which  have  seemed  to  represent  some 
thought  or  mental  picture  in  thQ  imndi  oi  3u  waking  &gent         .  383-393 

§  3.  Examples  of  dreams  which  have  directly  corresponded  with  a 
real  event  (usually  death)  that  befell  the  agent       .  .  .  393-401 

§  4.  Examples  of  pictorial  dreams  with  a  similar  correspondence ; 
in  many  of  which  the  dreamer  has  invested  the  idea  with  original 
(symbolic  or  fantastic)  imagery     ......         401-428 

§  5.  Examples  of  dreams  that  may  be  described  as  telepathically 
clairvoyant,  in  several  of  which  (Nos.  481-4)  the  object  prominently 
presented  has  been  a  letter     .......         428-448 

CHAPTER  IV. 

"  Borderland  "  Cases. 

§  1.  First-hand  cases  of  rather  remote  date  :  Visual  cases  449-459 

Auditory  cases         ......••  459-461 

§  2.  First-hand  and  more  recent  cases  :  Visual  cases          .  461-470 

Auditory  cases 470-474 

§  3.  A  group  of  first-hand  cases  taken  from  printed  sources  474-477 

§  4.  Second-hand   cases  from  informants  who  were  nearly  related  to 

the  original  witnesses   ........  477-496 

§  5.  And  from  informants  who  were  not  so  related  .          .  496-508 

SYJ^OPSIS  OF   VOL.   11.  xix 

CHAPTER   Y. 

Visual  Oases. 

§  1.  First-hand  death-cases      .         .  .  .  .  .  509-523 

§  2.  First-hand  cases  where  the  conditioning  event  on  the  agent's  side 
was  something  other  than  death    ......         523-532 

§  3.  Second-hand  cases  from  informants  who  were  nearly  related  to 
the  original  witnesses.  In  connection  with  one  of  these  cases  (No.  583) 
some  remarks  are  made  on  the  Scotch  "  second  sight "  ;  another  case  (No. 
586)  illustrates  the  difference  between  the  right  and  the  wrong  sort  of 
transmitted  evidence    .  .       •  .  .  .  *         .         .  532-542 

§  4.  Second-hand  cases  from  informants  who  were  not  nearly  related 
to  the  original  witnesses        .......  543-558 

§  5.  Ancient  cases,  which,  by  rare  exception,  were  recorded  in  such  a 
way  as  to  have  permanent  value   ......         558-560 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Auditory  and  Tactile  Cases. 

§  1.  Oases  where  the  impression  was  of  distinct  words      .  561-568 

§  2.  Cases   where  the   impression  apparently   represented  what  was 

actually  in  the  agent's  ears  at  the  time           ....  568-570 

§  3.  Non-vocal  cases 570-574 

§  4.  Tactile  cases 574-576 

A  case  suggesting  a  peculiar  sympathy  of  physical  condition  576-577 

CHAPTER   VII. 

Oases      affecting      more      than      one      of      the      Percipient's 
Senses 578-589 

CHAPTER   VIII. 
Reciprocal  Cases 590-599 

VOL.  II. 

h  2 

XX  SYJVOFSIS   OF   VOL   II. 

CHAPTER   IX. 

Collective  Cases. 
§  1.  Three  outlying  cases         .         ...         .         .         .         600-603 

§  2.  Visual  cases,  apparently  connected  with  the  condition  of  a  distant 
agent,  occurring  to  percipients  who  were  apart      .  .  .  603-607 

§  3.  And  to  percipients  who  were  together       .         .         .         607-623 

§  4.   Visual  cases  where  it  is  doubtful  whether  there  was  any  "agency" 
on  the  part  of  the  person  whom  the  phantasm  represented     .  623-630 

§  5.  Auditory  cases,     where    the   impression   was   of    a    recognised 
voice  ..........         631-634 

§  6.  And    where   the   impression    was    of    inarticulate    or    non- vocal 
sounds  634-641 

ADDITIONAL   CHAPTER 

Of  Cases  received  too  late  for  Insertion  in  their  Proper  Places. 

§  1.  Experimental  cases — 

Reproduction  of  diagrams  .....         642-653 
Transference   of     ideas    of    numbers,  words,  and 

objects         .......         653-666 

Transference  of  tastes  .....         666-669 

Transference   of    ideas   below   the   threshold   of 

consciousness       ......         669-671 

§  2.  Transitional  cases- 
Production  of  visual  phantasms  at  a  distance       .         671-676 
Hypnotic  effects  at  a  distance      ....  676-687 

§  3.  Spontaneous  cases  of  various  types.  The  last  two 
(Nos.  701  and  702)  afford  a  specially  good 
illustration  of  the  psychological  identity  of 
dreams  and  hallucinations  .....  687-705 

Table  of  numbered  cases  ......  707-722 

Analysis  op  the  Table     .......         723 

Index 725-733 

ADDITIONS    AND    COEEECTIONS. 

VOLUME  II. 

Page  13,  line  13  from  bottom.  "  One  in  every  90  of  the  population." 
The  probability  that  the  ratio  ^,  observed  in  the  specimen-group,  may  be 
fairly  assumed  as  correct  for  the  whole  population,  admits  of  precise 
determination.  A  general  idea  of  its  degree  of  correctness  may  be 
obtained  from  the  following  analogue,  which  I  owe  to  Mr.  F.  Y.  Edge- 
worth.  Suppose  5680  balls  to  be  drawn  from  a  bag  containing  immense 
numbers  of  black  and  white  balls,  mixed  in  a  certain  ratio.  If  the  real 
ratio  of  black  balls  to  the  total  be  g^,  the  odds  against  our  drawing  so 
small  a  proportion  of  black  balls  as  -^ — i.e.,  the  odds  against  the  ratio 
appearing  to  be  -^ — are  about  10  to  1.  If  the  real  ratio  be  eV?  the  odds 
against  its  appearing  to  be  so  small  as  ^q  are  about  500  to  1.  If  the  real 
ratio  be  ^,  the  odds  against  its  appearing  to  be  so  small  as  yV  a.re  more 
than  100,000  to  1.  It  will  become  obvious,  I  think,  as  we  proceed,  that 
even  in  this  last  contingency — on  the  violently  improbable  assumption 
that  the  true  ratio  of  hallucines  in  the  population  is  double  that  observed 
in  the  specimen  group — my  general  conclusion  would  remain  safe,  even  for 
the  auditory  cases ;  and  a  fortiori  for  the  visual  cases,  where  a  far  smaller 
ratio  is  substituted  for  ^q.  But  it  is  enough  to  notice  that  practically,  as 
the  ratio  for  the  population  is  as  likely  to  be  less  than  the  specimen-ratio 
as  greater,  and  as  it  cannot  differ  from  it  very  materially  on  either  side, 
the  specimen-ratio  may  safely  be  used. 

Page  24,  line  1.  For  13  read  12,  and  for  6  read  7.  Lines  17-22. 
Among  the  "  recognised "  visual  cases,  I  include  three  where  the  figure 
seen  did  not  represent  the  person  who  was  probably  the  agent.  I  do  not 
reckon  on  either  side  two  cases  of  mis-recognition,  which  might  equally 
well  be  described  as  partial  recognition;  nor  three  cases  where  the  recogni- 
tion was  retrospective ;  nor  four  "  collective  "  cases  where  one  of  the  per- 
cipients recognised  the  agent,  but  the  other  was  a  stranger  to  him.  I 
reckon  in  the  unrecognised  class  three  cases  where  the  percipient  was  a 
stranger  to  the  agent,  but  described  his  appearance  correctly.  Among 
the  "  recognised  "  auditory  cases,  I  include  two  where  the  voice  heard  was 
not  that  of  the  supposed  agent.  I  do  not  reckon  on  either  side  case  279; 
nor  case  507  where  the  recognition  was  retrospective ;  nor  the  case  of 
mis-recognition.  No.  570. 

Page  25,  note.  The  slight  difference  from  the  numbers  given  in 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  392  and  498,  is  due  to  cases  received  since  those  pages  were 
printed  off. 

xxii  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

Page  26,  lines  12  and  13.  For  399  read  401,  and  for  303  read  304. 

Page  27.  "  The  only  way  of  meeting  this  argument,"  &c.  In  more 
technical  language,  the  point  stands  thus.  The  determination  of  the 
a  posteriori  probability  that  certain  events  took  place  by  chance  depends 
not  only  on  the  "  objective  "  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  such  events 
under  a  regime  of  chance,  but  on  d  priori  probabilities  depending  (except 
in  imaginary  problems  about  bags  and  balls)  on  what  Professor  A.  Marshall 
has  felicitously  called  "  that  abstract  and  essence  of  past  experience  which 
is  on  the  one  side  science,  and  on  the  other  practical  instinct."  And  as 
Mr.  P.  Y.  Edgeworth  remarks,  in  writing  to  me  on  this  topic,  "  Scratches 
or  ordering  boots  might  be  as  unique  experiences  as  death,  or  at  any  rate 
not  materially  more  frequent ;  yet  all  would  agree  that  the  d  priori 
probability  of  a  causal  connection  between  a  phantasm  and  ordering  boots 
is  nil;  while  as  to  death,  many  would  think  differently."  Now  in 
applying  this  remark,  it  must  be  remembered  that  that  which  alone  could 
make  a  number  of  the  coincidences — whether  between  phantasms  and 
orderings  of  boots,  or  between  phantasms  and  deaths — explicable  as 
accidental  occurrences,  would  be  the  universal  though  unknown  and 
unnoticed  prevalence  of  spectral  illusions.  This  is  itself  a  huge  im- 
probability, determined  as  such  by  the  relation  of  the  statistical  results  of 
my  census  to  complex  a  priori  probabilities  concerning  facts  of  human 
memory  and  testimony.  And  what  I  have  implied  in  the  text  is  simply  that 
it  is  an  improbability  so  huge  as  to  outweigh  the  a  priori  improbability  of  a 
causal  connection  between  phantasms  and  deaths,  though  not  perhaps  the 
a  priori  improbability  of  a  causal  connection  between  phantasms  and 
orderings  of  boots. 

Page  37,  first  note.  Since  this  note  was  printed,  I  have  met  with  an 
interesting  case  of  the  peculiar  sensation  described,  in  connection  with 
purely  subjective  hallucinations.  Mr.  J.  Russell  Lowell  tells  me  that  in 
past  years  he  had  frequent  hallucinations  of  vision,  of  both  the  recognised 
and  the  unrecognised  sort,  which  greatly  interested  him ;  and  that  the 
experience  was  ushered  in  (he  believes  invariably)  by  a  feeling  of  marked 
chill,  which  seemed  to  ascend  from  the  feet  to  the  head. 

Page  37,  second  note.  Mr.  Lowell  also  tells  me  that  though  the  figures 
he  saw  were  sometimes  quite  natural-looking,  at  other  times  they  were  of 
the  semi-transparent  sort  here  described,  allowing  the  wall  or  furniture  to 
be  seen  through  them.  He  spoke  of  these  as  looking  as  if  composed  of 
"  blue  film  " — a  description  which  is  of  great  interest,  when  taken  in  con- 
nection with  some  of  the  telepathic  cases,  e.g.,  Nos.  210,  311,  315, 
485,  555. 

Page  39,  line  2  from  bottom.  Por  Act  read  Acte. 

Page  42,  case  226.  In  conversation,  General  H.  informed  Mr.  Pod- 
more  that  the  native  who  was  with  him  at  the  time  of  his  experience  was 
not  facing  the  figure,  but  still  would  probably  have  been  aware  of  the 
presence  of  a  real  person  who  occupied  the  spot  where  the  figure  was  seen. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxiii 

Page  66  note.     For  case  197  read  cases  197  and  509. 

Page  67,  case  245.  The  narrator  has  added,  in  conversation,  that  he 
was  in  Huddersfield  for  the  day  only,  and  that  his  sudden  resolve  necessi- 
tated his  telegraphing  to  the  friends  with  whom  he  was  staying.  For  the 
moment  he  does  not  know  the  address  of  these  friends;  but  he  hopes  to 
procure  us  their  recollections  as  to  the  receipt  of  this  telegram  and  his 
subsequent  explanation  of  it. 

Page  71,  case  249.  The  following  corroboration  is  supplied  by  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Coates,  of  156,  Waperton  Road,  Bradford,  who  were  with  Mr. 
Carr  at  the  time  : — 

"June  23,  1886. 

"  We  shall  only  be  able  to  confirm  the  statement  of  Mr.  T.  Carr.  So 
far  as  we  can  remember,  while  we  were  sitting  in  the  room,  T.  0.  came 
from  his  chair  to  the  window  ;  and,  while  looking  out  of  the  window,  he 
made  the  remark,  '  Ah,  there  is  [X.]  coming  to  see  us,'  and  stepped  back 
from  the  window,  waiting  to  hear  a  knock  at  the  door,  which  however  did 
not  come.  T.  C.  remarked  that  he  must  have  gone  up  the  yard,  and  looked 
at  the  clock  to  see  what  time  it  was.  We  afterwards  heard  that  at  the 
time  we  thought  [X.]  was  in  the  yard,  he  was  just  about  dying. 

"Charles  Coates. 

"  Annie  Coates." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Coates  gave  the  time  as  about  4  p.m. ;  and  spoke 
of  Mr.  Carr's  consulting  his  watch. 

Page  72,  case  250.  In  conversation  I  have  learnt  from  Mr.  Schofield 
that  he  had  been  absent  from  home  for  some  days — which  explains  his 
having  heard  nothing  of  the  illness.  The  deceased  had  a  warm  affection 
for  his  mother. 

Page  85,  case  257.  Since  this  case  was  printed,  a  hallucination 
representing  the  same  person  has  been  seen  by  a  fourth  percipient.  Mrs. 
Olanville  writes  from  Shute  Haye,  Walditch,  Bridport,  on  Aug.  23,  1886 : — 

"  After  breakfast  this  morning,  I  was  outside  the  breakfast-room 
window,  looking  about,  when  I  saw  Mrs.  Stone  walking  up  one  of  the  paths 
by  the  side  of  the  lawn.  I  followed  her.  The  path  is  long  and  winds 
round.  I  saw  her  turn  the  corner  into  a  path  that  led  through  the  orchard, 
but  when  I  came  there  I  could  not  see  her.  I  wondered  at  her  walking 
so  quickly  as  to  go  out  of  sight,  and  strolled  on,  following  the  path,  which 
led  me  back  to  the  house.  Here  I  saw  Mrs.  Stone  talking  to  the  gardener. 
She  was  surprised  when  I  asked  her  how  I  could  have  missed  her,  and 
said  she  had  not  been  walking  at  all,  had  not  left  her  plants.  Well,  I  saw 
her,  her  black  dress,  her  white  cap,  her  walk,  Mrs.  Stone  certainly,  but 
whether  out  of  herself,  or  by  an  impression  on  my  brain,  I  cannot  tell 
— but  I  never  saw  anything  more  distinctly."  [A  plan  of  the  paths  was 
enclosed.] 

Mrs.  Stone  writes,  Aug.  25,  1886  : — 

"  You  wish  me  to  give  an  account  of  my  proceedings  when  Mrs.  Glan- 

xxiv  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

ville  saw  my  double.  About  10  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  August  23rd, 
I  had  gone  direct  from  the  house  to  water  some  flowers  in  a  greenhouse 
marked  in  Mrs.  Glanville's  plan.  My  mind  was  rather  disturbed  at  not 
hearing  from  my  son.  I  was  watering  in  a  rather  dazed,  mechanical  way, 
but  did  not  lose  consciousness.  Walking  from  the  place  I  met  Mrs.  Glan- 
ville,  who  said,  '  How  could  you  get  here  without  my  seeing  you  ? '  I  had 
not  been  near  the  spot  where  she  saw  me." 

The  percipient  in  this  case  has  had  one  other  visual  hallucination 
representing  a  living  person,  which  was  very  likely  telepathic.  She  thus 
describes  it : — 

"  I  remember  one  experience  of  the  same  sort  happening  when  I  was  a, 
girl.  I  certainly  did  see  an  old  gentleman  in  the  street  who  was  then  on 
his  death-bed,  but  nobody  would  believe  it.  He  was  standing  outside  his 
shop-door ;  there  were  two  other  men  with  him.  I  can  see  him  now  in 
my  mind's  eye — a  tall  thin  man  ;  I  knew  his  face  quite  well.  When  I 
said  at  dinner  that  Mr.  Worth  was  better,  for  I  had  seen  him  in  the  street, 
my  father  told  me  he  had  just  called,  and  Mr.  Worth  was  very  ill,  in  fact 
dying,  and  I  must  be  mistaken." 

Page  112,  case  277.  The  narrator  has  explained  to  me  that  her 
mother  was  taken  ill  on  the  Saturday  night,  and  lay  all  that  night  and  the 
next  day  on  the  sofa,  muttering  to  herself,  but  not  thought  to  be  dying. 

Page  116,  case  281.  We  have  procured,  from  the  Acting  Registrar- 
General  at  Fiji,  a  certificate  which  shows  that  the  death  took  place  on 
Sept.  8,  1875.  But  we  learn  from  the  Astronomer-Royal  that,  until 
recently,  the  nomenclature  of  days  of  the  month  at  Piji  followed  the  rule 
of  Australia.  Sept.  8,  1875,  therefore,  began  there  nearly  12  hours  before 
it  began  here  ;  so  that  unless  the  deceased  was  bathing  late  in  the  evening, 
the  narrator's  experience  must  have  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12 
hours.  This,  of  course,  is  on  the  supposition  that  the  experience  was 
really  on  the  night  of  the  8th,  and  not  of  the  7th ;  in  which  latter  case 
the  coincidence  might  have  been  exact.  The  narrator  is  sure  that  the  8th 
was  the  date — not,  however,  from  any  independent  recollection  of  the 
number  8,  but  on  the  ground  that  she  referred  to  her  diary  after  she  heard 
of  the  death,  and  verified  the  coincidence,  which  she  then  mentioned  to 
one  or  two  persons.  But  it  will  be  seen  from  her  account  that,  for  aught 
she  knew,  the  death  might  have  occurred  on  the  7th ;  and  therefore  the 
days  would  have  seemed  to  her  to  have  very  probably  coincided  if  the  day 
which  she  found  noted  in  her  diary  was  also  the  7th.  Should  the  diary 
ever  be  found,  the  point  may  be  cleared  up. 

Page  123,  case  287.  Since  this  case  was  printed,  I  have  learnt  from 
Dr.  Joseph  Smith  that  he  was  seeing  Mrs.  Gandy  nearly  every  day.  He 
nevertheless  feels  pretty  confident  that  his  experience  was  not  due  to  any- 
thing that  he  had  heard  or  observed — arguing  that  that  explanation  of  it,  if 
it  had  been  the  true  one,  would  have  occurred  to  him  at  the  time.  But 
extremely  slight  and  transient  impressions  may,  for  aught  we  know,  serve 
as  the  germ  of  subsequent  hallucinations,  just   as   they  may  serve   as  the 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxv 

germ   of   subsequent  dreams  ;  and  the   case  ought  not,  I  think,  to  have 
received  an  evidential  number. 

Page  199,  case  319.  Both  witnesses  are  positive  that  the  case  was  not 
one  of  mere  illusion ;  though  it  was  dusk,  there  was  enough  light  for  the 
clergyman  to  observe  that  the  figure  outside  was  rather  badly  dressed, 
besides  difiering  from  Dr.  Cant  in  being  considerably  stouter  and  wearing 
a  beard.  They  discussed  the  matter  the  same  evening,  at  about  1 1  p.m. 
In  the  interval,  something  had  occurred  by  which  Dr.  Cant  tells  us  that 
he  was  a  good  deal  impressed.  At  about  8  p.m.  he  was  called  to  visit 
a  stranger,  who  was  dying,  and  who  had  expressly  desired  his  attend- 
ance ;  and  he  was  startled  by  the  close  (though  not  exact)  resemblance 
of  this  man  to  the  hallucinatory  figure. 

Page  209,  case  326.  Mrs.  R.'s  sister.  Miss  Norman,  of  Stone,  Stafibrd, 
has  sent  the  following  independent  testimony,  dated  June  21,  1886  : — 

"  After  the  lapse  of  so  many  years,  the  statement  I  now  write  is  all 
that  I  can  remember  of  seeing  my  father  and  mother  walking  together,  in 
the  year  1843,  in  the  village  where  we  then  resided.  At  the  time,  my 
father  was  from  home,  very  ill ;  and  my  mother,  to  the  best  of  my  remem- 
brance, was  out  on  that  day.  I  have  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  the 
vision,  which  I  think  remarkable.  My  parents  were  walking  together 
by  the  churchyard  wall,  close  to  the  parsonage.  This  happened  in  September, 
1843." 

Mrs.  R.  writes  that  she  is  confident  that  neither  she  nor  the  man- 
servant saw  her  mother's  figure  : — "  He  saw  just  what  I  saw — my  father 
entering  the  church  by  the  vestry  door."  After  so  long  an  interval,  it  is 
likely  enough  that  the  sisters'  accounts  might  differ,  even  if  their  expe- 
riences had  been  identical.  But  it  seems  quite  possible,  on  the  analogy  of 
several  other  cases,  that  the  simultaneous  hallucinations  were  not  exactly 
identical. 

Page  237,  line  24.  After  Mr.  R.  Hodgson  insert  "  and  later  the 
present  writer." 

Page  247,  lines  4,  5.  The  testimony  in  question  has  now  been 
obtained,  and  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Lakeside  Cottages,  Newby  Bridge. 

"June,  1886. 

"  It  was  one  evening,  about  4  years  ago,  that  I  sat  in  the  kitchen,  at  Lin- 
dale  Parsonage,  at  supper,  and  looking  at  the  window  I  saw,  at  the  side  of  the 
blind,  which  was  not  hanging  quite  straight,  a  very  pale  face  looking  at 
me.  It  was  turned  sideways  when  I  first  saw  it,  and  thinking  it  was  one  of 
the  young  men  from  the  village  come  up  to  make  game  of  us,  I  made  a  face 
at  it ;  then  it  turned  full  face  towards  me,  and  I  saw  that  it  was  the  face  of 
Mrs.  John  Robinson,  my  present  husband's  first  wife.  It  looked  very  pale. 
I  watched  it  with  the  other  servants  for  about  3  minutes  perhaps,  and  then 
it  dropped  down  and  disappeared.     I  could  see  all  round  it,i  so  that  I 

1  Compare  cases  553  and  572.     . 

xxvi  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

could  see  that  it  was  not  a  real  face,  and  it  was  too  close  to  the  window 
for  that.     It  looked  as  if  resting  on  the  sill. 

"  I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion  seen  anything  which  was  not 
really  there.  "  Helen  Robinson." 

Page  297,  line  14.     Before  p.  546  insert  Yol.  I. 

Page  336,  case  366.  The  phenomena  of  mesmeric  rapport  described  in 
this  case  strongly  suggest  a  specific  influence  exercised  by  the  operator,  of 
a  sort  not  as  yet  recognised  in  the  various  scientific  theories  of  hypnotism ; 
but  a  more  decisive  proof  of  such  an  influence  is  of  course  afibrded  if  the 
same  operator  has  produced  kindred  efiects  on  more  than  one  "  subject." 
After  the  case  in  the  text  was  printed,  I  heard  from  Mrs.  Pinhey  of 
another  occurrence  which,  from  this  point  of  view,  is  of  the  greatest 
interest,  besides  supplying  a  parallel  to  the  examples  of  the  telepathic 
production  of  hypnotic  sleep  given  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  88,  and  below,  pp.  679-87. 
During  the  period  when  the  events  described  in  case  366  were  proceeding, 
Mrs.  Pinhey  was  staying  with  some  friends  at  Pakenham,  and  was 
requested  by  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan,  one  of  the  party,  to  try  to  induce 
-mesmeric  sleep  in  another  guest.  Miss  Lofit.  Mrs.  Pinhey  was  rather 
unwilling,  but  at  last  consented. 

"  The  experiment  was  quite  successful  as  far  as  it  went.  Miss  L.  soon 
went  off  into  the  sleep  and  was  laid  upon  a  bed  in  that  state.  I 
believe  she  did  not  wake  for  some  hours.  The  Trevelyans  and  Miss  Lofit 
were  to  leave  the  next  day,  and  before  they  did  so  Sir  Walter  startled  me 
by  making  the  following  request :  '  Would  I,  as  an  experiment  and  to 
oblige  him,  undertake  to  retire  at  a  certain  hour,  which  he  fixed,  that 
evening,  and  make  the  usual  passes  with  an  intention  of  again  mesmerising 
Miss  Lofit,  who  would  by  that  time  be  with  him  and  his  wife  at  a  hotel 
at  Lincoln  or  Leicester,  or  some  town  which  he  named  but  which  I  have 
now  forgotten  % '  Again  I  hesitated.  *  *  However,  curiosity,  and  a 
comfortable  assurance  that  there  could  be  nothing  in  it,  gradually  con- 
quered my  repugnance,  and  I  promised  to  make  the  attempt,  heartily 
hoping  that  it  might  not  succeed.  The  Trevelyans  and  Miss  Lofit  all  left 
at  about  noon  for  the  railway  station,  and  travelled  by  train  to  their 
destination.  The  day  passed  as  usual,  and  I  began  to  feel  more  confidence 
and  could  almost  laugh  at  my  former  fears.  When  the  appointed  time 
came,  I  retired  quietly  to  my  own  room,  and,  imagining  Miss  Lofit  before 
me,  I  made  the  usual  passes  ^  just  as  I  had  done  the  evening  before,  and  for 
about  the  same  length  of  time.  It  appeared  very  absurd  and  I  could  not 
help  laughing  at  the  situation;  but  I  kept  my  own  counsel  and  said 
nothing  to  anyone. 

"  A  day  or  two  later,  when  I  had  returned  home,  a  letter  came  for  me 
from  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan.  It  informed  me  in  a  few  words  that  at  the 
preconcerted  hour  Miss  Lofft  was  sitting  at  table  after  tea  or  supper,  that 
she  suddenly  began  to  feel  very  drowsy,  said  her  sensations  were  the  same 
as  when  she  was  being  mesmerised,  and  that  at  last  she  slept  much  as  she 
had  done  the  evening  before,  though,  I  think,  less  deeply  and  for  a  shorter 
time.  I  confess  that  I  was  so  astonished  at  this  news,  and  found  it  so 
disagreeable   and  bewildering,  that  I  destroyed  the  letter,  an  act  I  have 

1  Possibly  effective  indirectly,  as  aiding  concentration  of  attention. 

ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxvii 

often  since  regretted,  and  said  as  little  as  possible  about  the  matter  to 
anyone.  I  instinctively  felt  that  it  would  be  commonly  regarded  as  so 
incredible  that  I  had  better  say  nothing  about  it,  lest  it  should  throw 
discredit  upon  the  other  experiments.  Nevertheless,  the  main  facts  are 
perfectly  true,  though  I  will  not  undertake  to  answer  for  every  detail. 
For  instance,  it  is  certainly  true  that  Miss  LofFt  was  affected  in  the  way  I 
have  described,  but  I  cannot  remember  to  what  exact  extent." 

[A  niece  of  Miss  Lofft  tells  us  that  she  remembers  Mrs.  Pinhey  mes- 
merising her  aunt  at  Pakenham  ;  but  she  was  not  told  of  the  subsequent 
experiment.] 

Of  course  if  this  occurrence  stood  alone,  the  most  natural  hypothesis 
would  be  that  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan  had  in  some  way  betrayed  what  was 
being  attempted,  and  that  the  trance  was  caused  by  suggestion  and 
expectancy.  But  in  view  of  other  cases  of  the  same  sort,  and  especially  of 
the  recent  French  records,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  was 
sufficiently  on  his  guard  not  to  mar  his  own  carefully-planned  experiment, 
and  that  the  incident  was  genuinely  telepathic. 

Page  413,  case  445.  We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the 
lady's  death  took  place  on  March  2,  1843.  The  narrator  tells  me  that 
there  was  no  immediate  apprehension  of  it — that,  for  aught  he  knew, 
"  she  might  have  lived  for  20  years."  He  thinks,  but  cannot  be  sure, 
that  his  eyes  were  open. 

Page  422,  lines  4  and  16.  For  Harley  read  Holies.  The  note  to 
this  case  (within  brackets)  is  not  quite  correct,  as  a  sailing-vessel  bound 
for  Melbourne  might  have  6  weeks'  start,  and  still  be  outstripped  by  a 
steamer.  But  even  with  this  correction,  the  time  of  the  second  dream 
cannot  be  brought  into  correspondence  with  any  customary  hour  for  a 
London  funeral. 

Page  460,  second  note.  For  568  read  569  ;  for  639  read  638 ;  for  654 
read  653. 

Pas:e  485,  case  522.  A  sister  of  the  narrator's,  who  had  also  heard  of 
the  experience  from  her  father's  lips,  confirms  the  account  given. 

Page  511,  case  552.  In  conversation,  Mrs.  Rooke  mentioned  that 
she  saw  the  figure  as  she  was  coming  out  after  prayers,  all  the  students 
being  behind  her.  This  is  important,  as  telling  against  the  hypothesis  of 
mistaken  identity.  She  regards  that  hypothesis  as  out  of  the  question,  the 
recognition  of  the  face  being  complete.  The  dress  was  a  grey  suit  with 
black-barred  pattern,  and  cap  to  match,  such  as  the  young  man  had  been 
used  to  wear  at  the  college.  Mrs.  Rooke  did  not  mention  her  experience 
to  her  husband,  not  liking  to  appear  superstitious ;  but  both  he  and  she 
agree  that  she  mentioned  it  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the  death  arrived, 
which  was  about  6  weeks  later ;  the  words  "  many  months "  in  her 
account  seem  therefore  to  be  a  slip. 

Page  612,  note.  Omit  659,  and  add  cases  30,  190,  198,  495,  530, 
537,  591. 

XIII.] 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE. 

§  1.  An  issue  has  now  to  be  seriously  considered  which  I  have 
several  times  referred  to  as  a  fundamental  one,  but  which  could 
not  be  treated  without  a  preliminary  study  of  the  subject  of  sensory 
hallucinations.  That,  as  I  have  tried  to  show,  is  the  order  of 
natural  phenomena  to  which  "phantasms  of  the  living"  in 
general  belong ;  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  projections  of  the 
percipient's  brain  by  which  his  senses  are  deceived.  We  have 
further  found  that  in  a  certain  number  of  cases — which  may  be 
taken  as  representing  the  still  larger  number  to  be  cited  in  the 
following  chapters — a  phantasm  of  this  kind  is  alleged  to  have 
coincided  very  closely  in  time  with  the  death,  or  some  serious  crisis 
in  the  life,  of  the  person  whose  presence  it  suggested.  The  question 
for  us  now  is  whether  these  coincidences  can,  or  cannot,  be  ex- 
plained as  accidental.  If  they  can,  then  the  theory  of  telepathy — 
so  far  as  applied  to  apparitions — falls  to  the  ground.  If  they 
cannot,  then  the  existence  of  telepathy  as  a  fact  in  Nature  is  proved 
on  the  evidence;  and  the  proof  could  only  be  resisted  by  the 
assumption  that  the  evidence,  or  a  very  large  part  of  it,  is  in  its 
main  features  untrustworthy.  It  is  very  necessary  to  distinguish 
these  two  questions — whether  the  evidence  may  be  trusted ;  and  if 
trusted,  what  it  proves.  It  is  the  latter  question  that  is  now  before 
us.  The  character  of  the  evidence  was  discussed  at  some  length  in 
the  fourth  chapter,  and  is  to  be  judged  of  by  the  narratives  quoted 
throughout  the  book.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is  assumed  that 
these  narratives  are  in  the  main  trustworthy ;  that  in  a  large 
proportion  of  them  the  essential  features  of  the  case — i.e.,  two  marked 
experiences  and  a  time-relation  between  them — are  correctly  recorded. 
Here,  then,  is  the  issue.  A  certain  number  of  coincidences  of  a 
particular  sort  have  occurred:   did  they  or  did  they  not  occur  by 

VOL.    II.  B 

2  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

chance  ?  Now  there  are  doubtless  some  who  do  not  perceive  that  this 
question  demands  a  reasoned  examination  at  all.  They  settle  it  a 
'priori.  "  One  is  constantly  coming  across  very  startling  coincidences," 
they  observe,  "  which  no  one  thinks  of  ascribing  to  anything  but 
chance;  why  should  not  these,  which  are  no  more  startling  than 
many  others,  be  of  the  number  ?  "  This  idea  need  hardly  detain  us  : 
the  point  in  our  cases  is,  of  course,  not  that  the  coincidence  is  start- 
ling  1 — that  alone  would  be  insignificant — but  that  the  same  sort  of 
startling  coincidence  is  again  and  again  repeated.  That  is  clearly 
a  fact  which  demands  treatment  by  a  particular  method,  often  vaguely 
appealed  to  as  "  the  doctrine  of  chances."  The  actual  application  of 
that  doctrine,  however,  even  to  simple  cases,  seems  to  require  more 
care  than  is  always  bestowed  upon  it. 

Especially  is  care  required  in  the  simple  preliminary  matter  of 
deciding,  before  one  begins  to  calculate,  what  the  subject-matter  of 
the  calculation  is  to  be — what  precise  class  of  phenomena  it  is  to 
which  the  doctrine  of  chances  is  to  be  applied.  I  need  only  recall 
Lord  Brougham's  treatment  of  his  own  case  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  396-7).  His 
attempted  explanation,  as  we  saw,  entirely  depended  on  his  miscalling 
his  experience,  and  referring  it  to  the  class  of  dreams — a  class 
numerous  enough,  as  he  rightly  perceived,  to  afford  scope  for  numbers 
of  startling  coincidences.  And  his  remarks  illustrate  what  is  really  a 
very  common  outside  view  of  psychical  research.  Dreams,  and 
hallucinations,  and  impressions,  and  warnings,  and  presentiments — it 
is  held — are  the  "  psychical  "  stock-in-trade  ;  and  these  phenomena 
are  all  much  on  a  par,  and  may  all  be  shown  by  the  same  arguments 
to  be  undeserving  of  serious  attention.  There  has  been  the  more 
excuse  for  this  view,  in  that  those  who  have  claimed  objective  validity 
for  what  others  dismiss  as  purely  subjective  experiences  have  often 
themselves  been  equally   undiscriminating.     Even  this  book  might 

1  It  is,  however,  something  to  get  even  the  startling  character  of  the  coincidence 
admitted.  For  there  are  writers  of  repute  who  seem  to  think  that  the  whole  occurrence 
receives  a  sufficient  rationalistic  explanation  when  some  plausible  subjective  cause  for  the 
hallucination  has  been  suggested.  The  Abbd  de  St.  Pierre,  after  telling  the  well-known 
story  of  Desfontaines'  appearance  to  his  friend  Bezuel,  at  the  time  of  the  former's  death 
by  drowning,  and  while  the  latter  was  apparently  in  a  swoon,  opines  that  the  swoon  was 
the  cause  of  the  apparition  ;  and  Ferriar,  who  agrees  with  the  Abb^  in  this,  and  adds,  "  I 
know  from  my  own  experience  that  the  approach  of  syncope  is  sometimes  attended  with 
a  spectral  appearance,"  agrees  with  him  also  in  leaving  the  little  detail  of  the  drowning 
wholly  out  of  account.  So  with  respect  to  the  story  told  by  Baronius,  of  the  appearance 
of  Ficino,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  to  Michael  Mercato,  who  was  studying  philosophy. 
Ferriar  (instead  of  making  inquiry  into  the  evidence  of  dates,  which  would  show  the  story 
tn  be  spurious)  explains  that  Mercato 's  study  of  philosophy  may  have  revived  the  idea  of 
his  friend  in  a  vivid  manner.  It  would  certainly  be  a  very  vivid  manner  that  could 
kill  the  friend  at  a  distance. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  3 

lead  a  critic  who  confined  his  perusal  to  the  headings  of  the  chapters 
to  imagine  that  dreams  form  a  corner-stone  of  the  argument ;  and  in 
admitting  that  topic  at  all,  we  have  so  far  laid  ourselves  open  to 
misunderstanding.  Thus  a  distinguished  foreign  critic  of  our  efforts 
thought  the  subjective  nature  of  what  we  regard  as  telepathic 
incidents  sufficiently  proved  by  the  suggestion  that  "  any  physician 
will  consider  it  quite  within  the  bounds  of  probability  that  one  per 
cent,  of  the  population  of  the  country  are  subject  to  remarkably  vivid 
dreams,  illusions,  visions,  &c,,"  and  that  each  of  these  persons  is 
"  subject  to  a  dream  or  vision  once  a  week."^  It  is  obvious  enough 
that  in  circles  whose  members  have  "  spectral  illusions  "  of  their 
friends  as  often  as  once  a  week,  the  approximate  coincidence  of  one  of 
these  experiences  with  the  death  of  the  corresponding  person  will  be 
an  insignificant  accident.  But  we  have  not  ourselves  met  with  any 
specimen  of  this  class;  and  the  present  collection  comprises  first-hand 
accounts  of  recognised  apparitions,  closely  coinciding  with  the  death  of 
the  original,  from  109  percipients,  of  whom  only  a  small  minority  can 
recall  having  experienced  even  a  single  other  visual  hallucination  than 
the  apparition  in  question.^  Once  again,  then,  let  me  repeat  that, 
though  this  work  connects  the  sleeping  and  the  waking  phenomena  in 
their  theoretic  and  psychological  aspects,  it  carefully  and  expressly 
separates  them  in  their  demonstrational  aspect.  The  extent  to  which 
either  class  demonstrates  the  reality  of  telepathy  can  only  be  known 
through  the  application  of  the  doctrine  of  chances ;  but  the  application 

1  Another  trap  lies  in  the  word  hallucination  (see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  458-9);  which  in 
this  book  is  strictly  limited  to  sensory  affections,  but  which  common  usage  often 
applies  to  purely  mental  errors.  But  for  this  equivoque,  an  eminent  physiologist  would 
perhaps  hardly  have  thought  he  made  a  point  against  us  in  the  remark — a  rather  rash 
one  from  any  point  of  view — that  our  evidence  is  manifestly  derived  for  the  most  part 
"from  a  class  of  persons  given  to  hallucination,  especially  clergymen  and  women,  who 
are  naturally  inclined  to  believe  marvels."  (Deutsche  Rundschau  for  January,  1886,  p.  45.) 
Among  509  informants  from  whom  I  have  received  accounts  of  apparently  subjective 
hallucinations  of  sight  and  hearing,  I  find  the  proportion  of  females  to  males  almost 
exactly  3  to  2,  and  clergymen  most  sparsely  represented.  Of  the  527  percipients 
concerned  in  the  hallucinations  of  sight  and  hearing  which  are  included  as  telepathic 
evidence  in  these  volumes,  241,  or  more  than  46  per  cent.,  are  males  ;  286,  or  less  than  54 
per  cent.,  are  females  ;  and  28,  or  between  5  and  6  per  cent.,  are  ministers  of  religion. 
The  slight  preponderance  of  female  informants  may  probably  be  due  to  their  having, 
as  a  rule,  more  leisure  than  men  for  writing  on  matters  unconnected  with  business. 

2  Explicit  denials  have  been  given  by  73  out  of  the  109.  From  22  others  no  answer 
has  been  obtained  on  the  point,  either  through  our  own  failure  at  first  to  realise  its 
importance,  or  owing  to  death  or  some  unavoidable  cause  ;  but  of  these  22,_  the  majority 
have  pretty  clearly  implied  that  what  they  describe  was  a  unique  experience.  Of  the 
14  who  can  recall  some  further  instance  or  instances,  4  have  had  a  single  apparently 
subjective  hallucination  under  exceptional  conditions  of  bad  health  or  mental  strain ; 
3  have  had  one  such  experience  when  in  a  normal  state  ;  and  7  have  had  several  such 
experiences — some  of  which,  however,  differed  from  the  telepathic  cases  in  not  representing 
a  living  figure,  while  others  were  themselves  either  probably  or  possibly  of  telepathic 
origin.  I  may  add  that  in  a  large  number  of  other  cases,  not  given  in  the  actual  words  of 
the  percipient,  there  is  very  good  reason  to  believe  the  experiences  to  have  been  unique. 

VOL.    II.  B    2 

4  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

must  be  made  to  them  separately,  not  together ;  we  must  not,  like  Lord 
Brougham,  argue  to  one  class  from  the  data  of  the  other.  I  have  already 
applied  the  doctrine  to  a  particular  class  of  dreams,  with  results 
which,  though  numerically  striking,  left  room  for  doubt,  owing  to  the 
peculiar  untrustworthiness  of  memory  in  dream -matters.  It  remains 
to  apply  it  to  the  waking  phantasms;  and  here  I  think  that  the 
results  may  fairly  be  held  to  be  decisive. 

§  2.  It  is  clear  that  the  points  to  be  settled  are  two: — the 
frequency  of  the  phantasms  which  have  markedly  corresponded 
with  real  events  ;  and  the  frequency  of  phantasms  which  have  had 
no  such  correspondence,  and  have  been  obviously  and  wholly 
subjective  in  character.  These  points  are  absolutely  essential  to 
any  conclusion  on  the  question  before  us  ;  and  if  not  settled  in  any 
other  way,  they  must  be  settled  by  guesses  or  tacit  assumptions. 
The  theory  of  chance-coincidence,  as  opposed  to  that  of  telepathy, 
has  so  far  depended  on  two  such  assumptions.  The  first  is  that  the 
coincidences  themselves  are  extremnely  rare.  They  can  then  be 
accounted  for  as  accidental.  For  we  know  that  there  are  such  things 
as  hallucinations  representing  human  forms,  which  do  not  correspond 
with  any  objective  fact  whatever  outside  the  organism  of  the  per- 
cipient ;  and  it  would  be  rash  to  deny  that  the  death  of  the  person 
represented  may  now  and  then,  in  the  world's  history,  have  fallen 
on  the  same  day  as  the  hallucination.  The  second  assumption  is 
that  these  purely  subjective  apparitions  of  forms  are  extremely 
common.  It  can  then  be  argued  that  even  a  considerable  number 
of  them  might  fall  on  the  same  day  as  the  death  of  the  corresponding 
human  being.  Supposing  that  we  could  each  of  us  recall  the  occa- 
sional experience  of  gazing  at  friends  or  relatives  in  places  which  were 
really  empty,  then — since  people  are  perpetually  dying  who  are  the 
friends  and  relatives  of  some  of  us — every  year  might  yield  a 
certain  crop  of  the  coincidences. 

But  as  soon  as  we  make  these  assumptions  explicit  and  look  at 
them,  we  see  how  baseless  and  arbitrary  they  are.  Why  should 
either  of  them  be  admitted  without  challenge?  The  second  one 
especially  seems  opposed  to  what  we  may  call  the  common-sense 
view  of  ordinary  intelligent  men.  The  question  whether  or  not  a 
very  large  proportion  of  the  population  have  had  experience  of 
morbid  or  purely  subjective  hallucinations  is  one,  I  submit,  where 
the  opponents  of  the  chance-theory  might  fairly  take  their  stand 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  5 

on  the  ordinary  observation  of  educated  persons,  and  have  thrown 
on  others  the  onus  of  proving  them  wrong.  On  this  point  a  broad 
view,  based  on  one's  general  knowledge  of  oneself  and  one's  fellows, 
does  exist ;  and  according  to  it,  "  spectral  illusions " — distinct 
hallucinations  of  the  sense  of  vision — are  very  far  from  the  everyday 
occurrences  which  they  would  have  to  be  if  we  are  to  suppose  that, 
whenever  they  coincide  in  time  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen, 
they  do  so  by  accident.  Nay,  if  we  take  even  one  of  our  critics,  and 
bring  him  fairly  face  to  face  with  the  question,  "  If  you  all  at  once 
saw  in  your  room  a  brother  whom  you  had  believed  to  be  a  hundred 
miles  away  ;  if  he  disappeared  without  the  door  opening ;  and  if 
an  hour  later  you  received  a  telegram  announcing  his  sudden  death 
— how  should  you  explain  the  occurrence  "  ?  he  does  not  as  a  rule 
reply,  "  His  day  and  hour  for  dying  happened  also  to  be  m/ij  day  and 
hour  for  a  spectral  illusion,  which  is  natural  enough,  considering 
how  common  the  latter  experience  is."  The  line  that  he  takes  is, 
"  The  supposition  is  absurd ;  there  are  no  really  authentic  cases  of 
that  sort."  Under  the  immediate  pressure  of  the  supposed  facts,  he 
instinctively  feels  that  the  argument  of  chance-coincidence  would 
not  seem  effective. 

Still,  "  common-sense" — though  it  would  support  what  I  say — 
is  not  here  the  true  court  of  appeal.  And,  moreover,  it  is  not  unani- 
mous. On  the  second  point,  as  on  the  first,  I  have  received  the  most 
divergent  replies  from  persons  whom  I  have  casually  asked  to  give  a 
guess  on  the  subject ;  and  some  have  guessed  the  frequency  of  the 
purely  subjective  hallucinations  as  very  much  below  what  it  actually 
is.  The  moral — that  we  cannot  advance  a  step  without  statistics- 
seems  pretty  obvious,  though  the  student  of  the  subject  may  read 
every  word  that  has  ever  been  published  on  both  sides  of  the 
argument  without  encountering  a  hint  of  the  need.  There  is  plenty 
of  assertion,  but  no  figures ;  and  a  single  instance,  one  way  or  the 
other,  seems  often  to  be  thought  decisive.  To  A,  who  has  himself 
seen  a  friend's  form  at  the  time  of  his  death  at  a  distance,  the 
connection  between  the  two  facts  seems  obvious;  B,  having  heard  of  a 
phantasm  of  a  living  person  which  raised  apprehensions  as  to  his 
safety,  but  which  "  came  to  nothing,"  is  at  once  sure  that  A's  case 
was  "  a  chance."  I  have  even  seen  this  view  expanded,  and  a  lead- 
ing review  gravely  urging  that  the  coincidences  must  be  regarded 
as  accidental,  if  against  every  hallucination  which  has  markedly 
corresponded  with  a  real  event  we  can  set  another  which  has  not. 

6  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

This  is  certainly  a  statistical  argument — of  a  sort — and  might  be 
represented  as  follows: — At  the  end  of  an  hour's  rifle-practice  at 
a  long-distance  range,  the  record  shows  that  for  every  shot  that 
has  hit  the  bull's-eye  another  has  missed  the  target :  therefore  the 
shots  that  hit  the  bull's-eye  did  so  by  accident. 

§  3.  Perhaps  the  neglect  of  statistics  has  in  part  been  due  to  an 
apparent  hopelessness  of  attaining  a  sufficient  quantity  of  reliable  facts 
on  which  to  found  an  argument — to  an  idea  that  any  census  on  which 
a  conclusion  could  be  founded  would  have  to  be  carried  out  on  a 
scale  so  vast  as  to  be  practically  impossible.  "  Do  you  intend,"  I  have 
been  sometimes  asked,  "  to  ask  every  man  and  woman  in  England 
whether  he  or  she  has  experienced  any  subjective  hallucination 
during,  say,  the  last  twenty  years,  and  also  to  get  a  complete  record 
of  all  the  alleged  coincidences  within  the  same  period,  and  then  to 
compare  the  two  lists  ? "  Happily  nothing  at  all  approaching  this  is 
required.  We  shall  find  that  approximately  accurate  figures  are 
necessary  only  on  one  point — the  frequency  of  the  subjective  halluci- 
nations ;  and  this  can  be  ascertained  by  making  inquiries  of  any 
fraction  of  the  population  which  is  large  and  varied  enough  to  serve 
as  a  fair  sample  of  the  whole.  Even  this  smaller  task,  however,  is  a 
very  tedious  one,  consisting,  as  it  does  for  the  most  part,  in  carefully 
registering  negative  information.  The  believer  in  telepathy  may  feel 
that  he  is  doing  much  more  to  advance  his  belief  by  narrating  a 
striking  positive  instance  at  a  dinner  party  than  by  ascertaining,  for 
instance,  from  twenty  of  his  acquaintance  the  dull  fact  that  they  have 
never  experienced  a  distinct  visual  hallucination.  Just  in  the  same 
way  a  scientific  lecturer  may  win  more  regard  at  the  moment  by  a 
sensational  experiment  with  pretty  colours  and  loud  explosions  than 
by  laborious  quantitative  work  in  his  laboratory.  But  it  must  be 
persistently  impressed  on  the  friends  of  "  psychical  research  "  that  the 
laborious  quantitative  work  has  to  be  done  ;  and  it  is  some  satisfaction 
to  think  that  the  facts  themselves  may  stand  as  material  for  others  to 
deal  with,  even  if  the  conclusions  here  drawn  from  them  are  incorrect. 

Nor  has  the  dulness  of  the  work  been  by  any  means  the  only  diffi- 
culty :  its  purpose  has  been  widely  misconceived,  and  its  scope  has 
thereby  been  much  curtailed.  The  proposal  for  a  numerical  estimate 
was  introduced  in  a  circular  letter,  every  word  of  which  might  have 
been  penned  by  a  zealous  sceptic,  anxious  above  all  things  to  prove 
that,  in  cases  where  the  phantasm  of  a  distant  person  has  appeared 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  7 

simultaneously  with  the  person's  death,  the  coincidence  has  been  an 
accidental  one.  Not  a  syllable  was  used  implying  that  the  authors  of 
the  letter  had  themselves  any  opinion  as  to  whether  phantasms  to 
which  no  real  event  corresponds  are  or  are  not  common  things ;  it 
was  simply  pointed  out  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  idea  how 
common  they  are,  before  deciding  whether  phantasms  to  which  real 
events  do  correspond  are  or  are  not  to  be  fairly  accounted  for  by 
chance.  And  since  sensory  hallucinations,  whatever  their  frequency, 
are  at  any  rate  phenomena  as  completely  admitted  as  measles  or 
colour-blindness,  it  did  not  occur  to  us  that  the  following  question 
could  possibly  be  misunderstood : — 

Since  January  1,  1874,  have  you — when  in  good  health, 
free  from  anxiety,  and  completely  awake — had  a  vivid  impression 
of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  human  being,  or  of  hearing  a 
voice  or  sound  ^uhich  suggested  a  human  presence,  when  no  one 
was  there  ?     Yes  or  no  ?  ^ 

Clearly,  the  more  yeses  are  received  to  this  question — i.e.,  the 
commoner  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  prove  to  be — the 
stronger  is  the  argument  for  chance  as  an  adequate  explanation  of  the 
instances  of  coincidence ;  the  more  noes — the  rarer  the  purely 
subjective  hallucinations  prove  to  be — the  stronger  the  argument 
that  the  death  or  other  crisis  which  coincides  with  the  apparition 
is  in  some  way  the  cause  of  the  apparition.  We  should  have 
expected,  if  any  injustice  was  to  be  done  us,  that  it  would  have 
taken  the  form  of  attributing  to  us  an  inordinate  desire  for  noes. 
To  our  amazement  we  found  that  we  were  supposed  to  be  aiming 
exclusively  at  yeses — and  not  only  at  yeses,  but  at  yeses  expanded 
into  orthodox  "ghost-stories" — to  be  anxious,  in  fact,  that  every  one  in 
and  out  of  Bedlam  who  had  ever  imagined  something  that  was  not 
there,  or  mistaken  one  object  for  another,  should  tell  us  his  ex- 
perience, with  a  view  that  we  might  immediately  interpret  it  as 
due  to  the  intervention  of  a  bogey.  A  more  singular  instance  of 
the  power  of  expectancy — of  the  power  of  gathering  from  words  any 

1  This  comprehensive  question  has  been  actually  asked  in  several  parts.  As  first 
put,  for  example,  it  contained  no  limitation  as  to  date — as  I  was  anxious  to  oVjtain 
accounts  of  as  many  hallucinations  of  the  sane  as  possible;  and  the  fact  that  any 
experience  recorded  had  or  had  not  fallen  within  the  specified  period  of  12  years  was 
ascertained  by  subsequent  correspondence.  The  details  of  the  experience  were  also  a 
matter  of  subsequent  inquiry. 

I  need  hardly  warn  the  reader  not  to  confound  the  group  of  hallucinations  belong 
ing  to  the  limited  number  of  persons  who  were  expressly  asked  the  above  question,  with 
the  large  collection  of  similar  exxaeriences  which  has  been  frequently  mentioned  in  some 
of  the  preceding  chapters.  That  large  collection  includes  the  smaller  group,  and  also 
census-cases  which  fell  outside  the  12  years'  limit ;  but  it  includes  also  a  far  larger 
number  of  cases  which  were  received  quite  irrespectively  of  the  census. 

8  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

meaning  that  a  critic  comes  predisposed  to  find  there — can  hardly 
be  conceived.  A  statistical  question  on  a  perfectly  well-recognised 
point  in  the  natural  history  of  the  senses  was  treated,  in  scientific 
and  unscientific  quarters  alike,  as  a  manifesto  of  faith  in  "  super- 
natural "  agencies ;  and  we  found  ourselves  solemnly  rebuked  for  ignor- 
ing the  morbid  and  subjective  character  of  many  hallucinations — that 
is  to  say,  for  ignoring  the  fact  which  we  had  set  forth  as  the  very  basis 
of  our  appeal,  and  from  which  its  whole  and  sole  point  was  derived. 
§  4.  If  I  have  dwelt  thus  on  difiiculties  and  misconceptions,  it  is 
not  that  I  may  boast  of  having  altogether  triumphed  over  them.  On 
the  contrary,  they  have  made  it  impossible  to  attain  more  than  a 
fraction  of  what  I  once  hoped.  I  began  with  the  idea  that  the 
census  might  be  extended  to  50,000  persons ;  the  group  actually 
included  numbers  only  5705.  Still,  though  this  is  certainly  not  a 
showy  number,  any  one  who  is  familiar  with  work  in  averages 
will,  I  think,  admit  that  it  is  adequate  for  the  purpose ;  and  the 
friends  who  have  assisted  in  the  collection  of  the  answers  (to  whom 
I  take  this  opportunity  of  offering  my  grateful  thanks)  need 
certainly  not  feel  that  their  labour  has  been  in  vain.  It  is  possible 
for  a  small  group  to  be  quite  fairly  representative.  Thus,  if  50 
males  were  taken  at  random  from  the  inhabitants  of  London,  if  the 
heights  of  their  respective  owners  were  measured,  and  added  together, 
and  if  the  total  were  divided  by  50,  the  result  might  be  taken  as 
representing,  within  extremely  small  limits  of  error,  the  average 
height  of  adult  male  Londoners ;  we  should  not  get  a  much 
more  correct  result  by  taking  the  mean  of  500,  or  500,000  heights. 
This  is  the  simplest  sort  of  case.  When  it  is  a  question  of  what 
proportion  of  the  population  have  had  a  certain  experience  which 
many  of  them  have  not  had,  we  must  take  a  larger  specimen- 
number,  adjusting  it  to  some  extent  by  our  rough  previous  know- 
ledge. For  instance,  if  we  want  to  know  what  proportion  of  the 
inhabitants  of  London  have  had  typhoid  fever,  it  would  not  be  safe 
to  take  50  of  them  at  random,  and  then,  if  we  found  that  10  of 
these  had  had  the  illness,  to  argue  that  one-fifth  of  the  inhabitants 
of  London  had  had  it.  Our  rough  knowledge  is  that  a  great  many 
have  not  had  it,  and  that  a  good  many  have ;  and  in  such  circum- 
stances we  should  probably  get  a  very  appreciably  more  certain 
result  by  enlarging  our  representative  group  to  500.^      If,  again,  the 

1  In  the  recently  issued  Supplement  to  the  Registrar-General's  Reports  for  1870-80. 
he  bases  his  conclusions  as  to  the  proportionate  deadliness  of  different  diseases  in  the 
various  occupations  on  batches  of  500-1000  deaths. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  9 

experience  was  of  extraordinary  rarity,  such  as  leprosy,  the  number 
of  our  specimen-group  would  have  to  be  again  increased ;  even  if  we 
took  as  many  as  500,000  people  at  random,  that  is  about  one-ninth  of 
the  population,  and  ascertained  that  one  of  them  was  a  leper,  it 
would  not  be  safe  to  conclude  that  there  were  nine  lepers  in  London. 
Now  our  rough  knowledge  as  to  hallucinations  would  place  them  in 
this  regard  very  much  more  on  a  par  with  typhoid  fever  than  with 
leprosy.  We  realise  that  a  great  many  people  have  not  had  experience 
of  them ;  but  we  realise  also  that  they  are  in  no  way  marvellous  or 
prodigious  events.  And  if  a  group  of  5705  persons  seems  a  some- 
what arbitrary  number  by  which  to  test  their  frequency,  the  view  that 
it  is  too  small  and  that  50,000  would  be  greatly  preferable,  is  one 
that  can  at  any  rate  hardly  be  held  with  consistency  by  advocates  of 
the  theory  of  chance-coincidence.  For  the  main  prop  of  that  theory, 
as  we  have  seen,  is  the  assumption  that  purely  subjective  hallucina- 
tions are  tolerably  common  experiences ;  whereas  it  is  only  of 
decidedly  rare  experiences  that  the  frequency,  in  relation  to  the 
whole  population,  would  be  much  more  correctly  estimated  from  the 
proportion  of  fifty  thousand  people  that  have  had  them  than  from 
the  proportion  of  five  thousand  people  that  have  had  them.  How- 
ever, the  adequacy  of  the  latter  number  approves  itself  most  clearly 
in  the  course  of  the  census  itself.  We  find  as  we  go  on  that 
hallucinations  are  sufficiently  uncommon  to  force  us  to  take  our 
specimen-group  of  persons  in  thousands,  not  in  hundreds,  but 
not  so  uncommon  as  to  force  us  to  take  very  many  thousands  : 
after  the  first  thousand  is  reached  the  proportion  of  "  yeses  "  to 
"  noes "  keeps  pretty  uniformly  steady —  as  would,  no  doubt,  be 
the  case  if  the  question  asked  related  not  to  hallucinations  but  to 
tj^hoid  fever. 

As  regards  the  sort  of  persons  from  whom  the  answers  have 
been  collected — if  there  have  been  any  answers  from  persons  whose 
deficiencies  of  education  or  intelligence  rendered  them  unfit  subjects 
for  a  simple  inquiry  bearing  on  their  personal  experience,  they  form, 
I  may  confidently  say,  an  inappreciable  fraction  of  the  whole. 
Perhaps  a  fourth  of  the  persons  canvassed  have  been  in  the  position 
of  shopkeepers  and  artisans  or  employes  of  various  sorts ;  but  the 
large  majority  have  belonged  to  what  would  be  known  as  the 
educated  class,  being  relatives  and  friends  of  the  various  collectors.  It 
is,  no  doubt,  safest  to  assume  that  a  certain  degree  of  education  is  a 
pre-requisite  to  even  the  simplest  form  of  participation  in  scientific 

10  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

work ;  and  this  condition,  it  will  be  observed,  in  no  way  detracts  from 
the  representative  character  of  the  group.  A  few  thousand  educated 
persons,  taken  at  random,  present  an  abundantly  sufficient  variety  of 
types ;  and,  indeed,  for  the  purpose  in  view,  the  group  is  the  more 
truly  representative  for  belonging  mainly  to  the  educated  class, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  from  that  class  that  the  majority  of  the  cases 
which  are  presented  in  this  work  as  probably  telepathic  are  also  drawn. 

§  5.  To  say,  however,  that  the  answers  came  in  the  main  from  an 
educated  class,  is  not,  of  course,  a  guarantee  of  the  accuracy  of  the 
census ;  and  before  giving  the  actual  results  it  may  be  well  to 
forestall  some  possible  objections. 

It  may  be  said,  to  begin  with,  that  people  may  have  had  the 
experience  inquired  about,  but  may  have  forgotten  the  fact.  This 
is  the  objection  which  was  considered  above  in  respect  of  dreams  of 
death,  and  which  there  seemed  to  have  decided  force.  In  respect  of 
waking  hallucinations  of  the  senses,  its  force  is  very  much  less.  No 
doubt  hallucinations  may  exhibit  all  degrees  of  vagueness ;  and  it  is 
very  possible  that  extremely  slight  and  momentary  specimens  may 
make  little  impression,  and  may  rapidly  be  forgotten ;  but  for  the 
purposes  of  the  census  it  would  not  in  the  least  matter  that  persons 
whose  experience  had  been  of  this  slight  and  momentary  kind  should 
answer  no  instead  of  yes.  It  would  have  been  unwise  to  complicate  the 
question  asked  by  an  attempt  to  define  the  extent  of  vividness  that  the 
hallucination  must  have  reached,  to  be  reckoned  as  an  item  in  our 
census;  but  clearly  the  only  subjective  hallucinations  of  which  it 
really  concerns  us  to  ascertain  the  frequency  are  those  which  are 
in  themselves  as  distinct  and  impressive  as  the  hallucinations  that 
we  represent  as  telepathic;  and  any  that  fall  below  this  point  of 
distinctness  and  impressiveness  have  no  bearing  on  the  argument. 
And,  per  contra,  it  will  be  seen  that  by  not  limiting  the  wording  of 
the  question  to  distinct  and  impressive  hallucinations,  the  collector 
exposes  himself  to  receiving  the  answer  "  yes  "  from  persons  whose 
hallucination  actually  was  very  vague  and  momentary,  but  who  do, 
as  it  happens,  remember  its  occurrence.  In  point  of  fact,  this  has 
occurred  a  good  many  times ;  and  the  swelling  of  the  list  of  yeses  by 
this  means  probably  outweighs  any  losses  of  what  should  have  been 
genuine  yeses  through  failure  of  memory.  For  consider  what  such 
failure  of  memory  would  imply.  A  fact  of  sight,  hearing,  or  touch, 
as  clear  and  unequivocal  as  most  of  the  sensory  impressions  which 
we   adduce    as    evidence   for   telepathy,    must   be   very  clear   and 

xiii.l  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE,  11 

unequivocal  indeed.  And  the  absence  of  the  normal  external  cause 
of  such  an  impression,  when  recognised,  can  hardly  fail  to  give 
rise  to  genuine  surprise — the  surprise  that  follows  a  novel  and 
unaccountable  experience :  this  has  been  the  result  of  almost  all 
the  "  telepathic  "  phantasms,  quite  independently  of  the  news  which 
afterwards  seemed  to  connect  them  with  reality.  Now,  can  it  be  a 
common  thing  for  an  experience  as  unusual  and  surprising  as  this  to 
be,  within  a  dozen  years  or  any  shorter  period,  so  utterly  obliterated 
from  a  person's  mind  that  his  memory  remains  a  blank,  even  when 
he  is  pointedly  asked  to  try  and  recall  whether  he  has  had  such  an 
experience  or  not  ? 

A  second  objection  is  this.  It  has  been  suggested  that  untrue 
answers  may  be  given  by  persons  wishing  to  amuse  themselves  at 
our  expense.  Now  I  cannot  deny  that  persons  may  exist  who  would 
be  glad  to  thwart  us,  and  amuse  themselves,  even  at  the  cost  of 
untruth.  But  when  the  question  is  put,  "  Do  you  remember  having 
ever  distinctly  seen  the  face  or  form  of  a  person  known  to  you,  when 
that  person  was  not  really  there  ? "  it  is  not  at  once  obvious  whether 
the  amusing  untruth  would  be  "  Yes  "  or  "  No."  In  neither  case 
would  the  joke  seem  to  be  of  a  very  exhilarating  quality ;  but,  on  the 
whole,  I  should  say  that  "  Yes "  would  be  the  favourite,  as  at  any 
rate  representing  the  rarer  and  less  commonplace  experience.  "  Yes  " 
is,  moreover,  the  answer  which  (as  I  have  explained)  it  has  been  very 
generally  thought  that  we  ourselves  preferred;  so  that  to  give  it 
might  produce  a  piquant  sense  of  fooling  us  to  the  top  of  our  bent. 
But  the  reader  has  seen  that,  so  far  as  the  census  might  be  thus 
affected,  it  would  be  affected  in  a  direction  adverse  to  the  telepathic 
argument ;  for  the  commoner  the  purely  casual  hallucinations  are 
reckoned  to  be,  the  stronger  is  the  argument  that  the  visions  which 
correspond  with  real  events  do  so  hy  chance.  And  if  the  number  of 
these  coincident  visions  makes  the  chance-argument  untenable,  even 
when  the  basis  of  estimation  is  affected  in  the  way  supposed,  a 
fortiori  would  this  be  the  case  if  the  yeses  were  reduced  to  their  true 
number. 

Yet  another  objection  is  that  persons  who  have  had  hallucinations 
may  sometimes  be  disinclined  to  admit  the  fact,  and  may  say  "  No  " 
instead  of  "  Yes "  in  self-defence.  This  source  of  error  must  be 
frankly  admitted ;  but  I  feel  tolerably  confident  that  it  has  not 
affected  the  results  to  a  really  detrimental  extent.  Any  reluctance 
to  give  the  true  answer  is,  as  a  rule,  observable  at  the  moment ;  and 

12  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

in  most  cases  it  disappears  when  the  purpose  of  the  census  is 
explained,  and  careful  suppression  of  names  is  guaranteed.  And 
against  this  tendency  to  swell  the  noes  may  be  set  several  reasons 
why,  quite  apart  from  untruth,  a  census  like  this  is  sure  to  produce 
an  unfair  number  of  yeses.  Quite  apart  from  any  wish  to  deceive,  the 
very  general  impression  that  yeses  were  what  was  specially  wanted 
could  not  but  affect  some  of  the  answers  given,  at  any  rate  to  the 
extent  of  causing  indistinct  impressions  to  be  represented  as  vivid 
sensory  experiences  ■}  and  it  has  also  led  some  of  those  who  have 
aided  in  the  collection  to  put  the  questions  to  persons  of  whom  it  was 
known  beforehand  that  their  answer  would  be  yes.  Moreover, 
when  question-forms  to  be  filled  up  are  distributed  on  a  large 
scale,  it  is  impossible  to  bring  it  home  to  the  minds  of  many 
of  the  persons  whose  answer  would  be  "  No  "  that  there  is  any 
use  in  recording  that  answer.  They  probably  have  a  vague  idea 
that  they  have  heard  "  negative  evidence "  disparaged,  and  fail 
to  see  that  every  percentage  in  the  world  involves  it — that  we 
cannot  know  that  one  man  in  100  is  six  feet  high  without 
evidence  that  99  men  in  100  are  not  six  feet  high.  This  difficulty 
has  been  encountered  again  and  again ;  and  on  the  whole  I  have  no 
doubt  that  the  proportion  of  yeses  is  decidedly  larger  than  it  ought 
to  be.  Fortunately,  incorrectness  on  this  side  need  not  trouble  us — ■ 
its  only  effect  being  that  the  telepathic  argument,  if  it  prevail,  will 
prevail  though  based  on  distinctly  unfavourable  assumptions. 

§  6.  And  now  to  proceed  to  the  actual  results  of  the  census,  and 
to  the  calculations  based  thereon.  I  will  begin  with  auditory  cases. 
Of  the  5705  persons  who  have  been  asked  the  question,  it  appears 
that  96  have,  within  the  last  12  years,  when  awake,^  experienced  an 
auditory  hallucination  of  a  voice.  The  voice  is  alleged  to  have  been 
unrecognised  in  48  cases,  and  recognised  in  44,  in  13  of  which  latter 
cases  the  person  whose  voice  seemed  to  be  heard  was  known  to  have 
been  dead  for  some  time.     In  the  remaining  4  cases  it  has  been 

1  For  instance,  a  lady  who  answers  that  she  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination,  and  is 
■written  to -with  the  view  of  finding  out  in  what  it  had  consisted,  then  states  that  "it 
was  not  an  auditory  experience,  but  merely  a  feeling  that  something  had  happened." 
Here  the  answer  could  be  rectified ;  but  even  the  many  hundreds  of  letters  that  have 
been  %vritten  on  the  subject  have  not  served  to  eliminate  all  doubtful  cases. 

2  I  have  not  made  a  separate  calculation  for  "borderland  "  cases;  as  the  attempt  to 
obtain  separate  statistics  under  that  head  would  have  complicated  the  census,  and  the 
only  chance  of  carrying  it  through  successfully  was  to  keep  it  as  simple  as  possible. 
The  question  as  to  hallucinations  specially  included  the  condition  of  being  awake ;  but 
naturally  some  of  the  experiences  recorded  had  taken  place  when  the  hallucinated  person 
was  in  bed  (Vol.  i.,  p.  393).  I  reckon  these  cases  among  the  yeses ;  and  I  include  similar 
experiences  in  the  group  of  coincidental  hallucinations  which  appears  later  in  the 
calculation. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  13 

impossible  to  discover  whether  the  voice  was  recognised  or  not ;  the 
numbers  being  so  even,  I  shall  perhaps  be  justified  in  assigning  2  of 
these  to  one  class,  and  2  to  the  other.  The  computation  will  be 
clearer  if  we  consider  only  the  cases  in  which  the  voice  was 
recognised,  and  the  person  whom  it  suggested  was  living  ;  these,  then 
may  be  taken  as  33.  But,  out  of  the  33  persons,  10  ^  profess  to  have 
had  the  experience  more  than  once.  Such  cases  of  repetition,  or  at 
any  rate  most  of  them,  might  fairly  have  been  disregarded ;  for  since 
the  large  majority  of  the  persons  who  have  had  one  of  the  coinci- 
dental hallucinations,  which  appear  later  in  the  calculation,  can  recall 
no  other  hallucination  besides  that  one,  I  might  in  the  same  propor- 
tion confine  the  present  list,  which  consists  wholly  of  non-coincidental 
or  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  to  similarly  unique  experiences, 
and  leave  out  of  account  those  occurring  to  people  who  seem  rather 
more  pre-disposed  to  such  affections.  However,  in  order  to  make 
ample  allowance  for  the  possibility  that  the  witnesses  in  the  coinci- 
dental cases  may  have  had  subjective  hallucinations  which  they  have 
forgotten,  let  us  take  the  repetitions  into  account ;  and  let  us  suppose 
each  of  the  10  persons  just  mentioned  to  have  had  4  experiences 
of  the  sort  within  the  specified  12  years.  The  most  convenient 
way  of  making  this  allowance  will  be  to  add  30  to  the  former  total 
of  33 — i.e.,  to  take  the  number  of  persons  who  have  had  the 
experience  under  the  given  conditions  as  63.  This  amounts  to  1 
in  every  90  of  the  group  of  5705  persons  named,  or  (if  that  group 
be  accepted  as  fairly  representative  of  the  population  of  this  country) 
1  in  every  90  of  the  population. 

Let  us  now  see  what  the  proportion  of  the  population  who  have 
had  such  an  experience  ought  to  be,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the 
similar  impressions  of  recognised  voices  presented  in  this  book  as 
telepathic  were  really  chance-coincidences.  As  before  in  the  case 
of  dreams  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  303-7),  I  take  cases  where  the  coincidence  of 
the  hallucination  was  with  death — the  reasons  for  this  selection  being 

(1)  that  death  is  the  prominent  event  in  our  telepathic  cases ;  and 

(2)  that  for  the  purpose  of  an  accurate  numerical  estimate  it  is 
important  to  select  an  event  of  a  very  definite  and  unmistakeable 
kind,  such  as  only  happens  once  to  each  individual.  Again  also,  in 
accordance  with  the  official  returns  which  give  jfl^  as  the  annual 
death-rate,  the  proportion  of   anyone's  relatives  and  acquaintances 

^  Some  of  these  cases  were  quite  clearly  "  after-images  "  (see  Vol.  i.,  p.  502).  One 
informant  describes  the  impressions  as  very  faint,  and  another  experienced  them  only 
when  over-tired. 

U  TEE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

who  die  in  the  course  of  12  years  is  taken  as  —^  ;  and  as  we 
have  seen  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  305-6),  it  will  make  no  appreciable  difference 
to  the  calculation  whether  a  person's  circle  of  relatives  and  acquaint- 
ances, the  voice  of  any  one  of  whom  his  hallucination  may  represent, 
is  large  or  small.  The  probability,  then,  that  a  person  hallucinated 
in  the  way  supposed  will,  by  accident,  have  his  hallucination  within 
12  hours  on  either  side  of  the  death  of  the  relative  or  acquaintance 
whose  voice  it  represents,  is  1  in  ^'^  ^  ^H^  ^°°°,  or  fg^^.  That  is 
to  say,  each  coincidental  hallucination  of  the  sort  in  question  implies 
16,590  purely  subjective  cases  of  the  same  type.  Now  our  collection 
may  be  reckoned  to  include  13  first-hand  and  well-attested  coinci- 
dental cases  of  this  kind,  which  have  occurred  in  this  country  within 
the  specified  time.^  On  the  hypothesis,  therefore,  that  these  cases 
were  accidental,  the  circle  of  persons  from  whom  they  are  drawn  ought 
to  supply  altogether,  in  the  specified  12  years,  215,670  examples. 

The  next  point  to  decide  is  the  size  of  the  circle  from  which  our 
coincidental  cases  are  drawn.  The  number  here  is  not  one  that  it  is 
possible  to  estimate  accurately:  what  must  be  done,  therefore,  is  to 
make  sure  that  our  margin  is  on  the  side  adverse  to  the  telepathic 
argument,  i.e.,  to  take  a  number  clearly  in  excess  of  the  true  one. 
Our  chief  means  of  obtaining  information  has  been  by  occasional 
requests  in  newspapers.  A  million-and-a-half  would  probably  be 
an  outside  estimate  of  the  circulation  of  the  papers  which  have 
contained  our  appeals ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  every  para- 
graph in  a  paper  is  studied  by  every  person,  or  by  a  tenth  of  the 
persons,  whom  the  paper  reaches.  However,  I  will  make  the 
extreme  assumption  that  as  many  as  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  people 
have  by  this  means  become  aware  of  the  kind  of  evidence  that 
was  being  sought — an  assumption  which  probably  arrogates  to  us 
who  sought  it  many  times  as  much  fame  as  we  really  possess ;  and 
I  will  allow  another  50,000  for  those  who  have  become  aware  of 
the  object  of  our  work  through  private  channels.  This  would  raise 
the  number  of  the  circle  from  whom  our  evidence  is  drawn  to 
300,000,  or  about   sV  of  the  adult  population.^       No  one,  I  think, 

1  Nos.  33,  158,  184,  190,  197,  272,  273,  278,  298,  300,  310,  340,  702.  In  one  of  these  cases, 
No.  197,  it  is  possible,  on  the  facts  stated,  that  the  12  hours'  limit  was  slightly  exceeded. 
I  have  not  included  case  613,  as,  though  there  were  only  a  very  few  people  by  whom  the 
percipient  could  have  been  addressed  as  "Pa," — which  was  the  word  he  heard — and 
one  of  these  died  at  the  time  at  a  distance,  the  father  did  not  identify  the  voice  with  the 
particular  son  who  died. 

2  In  the  "adult  population"!  mean  to  include  all  persons  above  15  years  of  age. 
In  the  Supplement  to  the  45th  Annual  Report  of  the  Registrar-General,  p.  xix.,  the 
proportion  of  such  persons  is  given  as  "64  of  the  whole  ;  which  would  make  their  number 
about  24,000,000. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHAFCE-COINCIDENGE.  15 

will  maintain  on  reflection,  that  I  am  taking  too  low  an  estimate. 
Would  anyone,  for  instance,  suppose  that  if  he  canvassed  the  first 
1000  adults  whom  he  met  in  the  streets  of  any  large  town,  he  would 
find  that  12  or  13  of  them  had,  within  the  last  three  years,  been  aware 
of  what  we  wanted,  and  of  the  address  to  which  information  might  be 
sent  ?  and  for  rural  districts  such  a  supposition  would  be  even  more 
violent.  But  I  am  further  supposing  that  this  area  of  300,000  persons 
has  been  drained  dry — again  an  extravagant  concession  ;  for  though 
it  is  easily  assumed  that  anyone  who  has  ever  had  a  "  psychical  "  ex- 
perience is  desirous  to  publish  it  abroad,  as  a  matter  of  fact  people  do 
not  usually  take  the  trouble  to  write  a  letter  about  family  and  personal 
matters  to  perfect  strangers,  on  the  ground  of  a  newspaper  appeal ; 
and  I  have  already  mentioned  that  we  ourselves  know  of  much 
evidence  which  the  reluctance  or  indifference  of  the  parties  concerned 
has  made  unavailable  for  our  collection  ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  doubt 
that  much  more  remains  unelicited  even  among  those  whom  our 
appeal  has  reached.  A  further  strong  argument  for  the  existence 
of  these  unelicited  facts  is  the  very  large  proportion  of  our  actual 
cases  that  has  been  drawn  from  a  circle  of  our  own,  unconnected 
with  "psychical"  inquiry — from  the  friends,  or  the  friends'  friends, 
of  a  group  of  some  half-dozen  persons  who  have  had  no  such  ex- 
periences themselves,  and  who  have  no  reason  to  suppose  their  friends 
or  their  friends'  friends  better  supplied  with  them  than  anybody  else's.^ 
Here,  then,  is  the  conclusion  to  which  we  shall  be  driven,  if  our 
coincidental  cases  were  really  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  and 
the  coincidence  was  an  accident : — that  in  a  circle  of  300,000,  within 
12  years,  215,670  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  type  in  question 
have  taken  place  ;  that  is  that,  on  an  average,  7  persons  in  every  10 
have  had  such  an  experience  within  the  time.  But  the  result  of  the 
census  above  described  showed  the  proportion  to  be  1  person  in  every 
90  only.     Thus  the  theory  of  chance-coincidence,   as  applied  to  this 

1  An  approximation  to  an  estimate  of  the  actual  circle  whom  we  have  effectively 
reached  may  perhaps  be  made  as  follows : — Of  the  24  coincidental  dreams  of  death, 
mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  .307,  4  were  derived  from  a  canvassed  group  of  5360  persons; 
of  the  13  coincidental  auditory  hallucinations  mentioned  above,  none  were  derived  from 
the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons ;  and  of  27  coincidental  visual  hallucinations 
(of  a  definite  type  to  be  explained  immediately),  1  was  derived  from  a  canvassed 
group  of  5705  persons.  Thus  of  64  coincidental  experiences  of  specified  sorts,  5,  or  about 
one-thirteenth,  were  obtained  by  canvassing  a  body  which  (to  take  a  mean)  we  may  call 
5535  :  we  may  surmise,  then,  that  the  circle  from  whom  the  whole  number  were  drawn 
amounts  to  about  13  times  5535,  or  71,955.  This  is  no  doubt  a  very  rough  calculation ; 
the  number  of  coincidental  (or,  as  we  should  say,  telepathic)  experiences  yielded  by  a 
random  group  of  5535  persons  being  too  small  for  us  to  be  confident  that  it  represents 
the  average  proportion  in  other  groups  of  the  same  size.  But  the  estimate  is  probably  not 
so  inexact  but  that  it  may  safely  be  taken  as  showing  the  assumption  of  300,000,  made  in 
the  text,  to  be  extravagantly  unfair  to  the  telepathic  argument. 

16  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

class  of  cases,  would  require  that  the  proportion  of  those  who  have  not 
had,  to  those  who  have  had,  a  subjective  hallucination  of  a  recognised 
voice  should  be  63  times  as  large  as  it  has  been  shown  to 
be ;  that  is,  would  require  either  that  the  subjective  hallucinations 
should  be  63  times  as  numerous  as  they  actually  are,  or  else 
that  the  circle  from  whom  our  coincidental  cases  are  drawn  should 
amount  to  63  times  the  assumed  size — in  other  words,  that  our 
existence  and  objects  should  have  been  prominently  before  the 
minds  of  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  adult  population  of  the  country ! 
Another  form  of  the  estimate  is  as  follows.  The  probability  that 
a  person,  taken  at  random,  will,  in  the  course  of  12  years,  have  the 
form  of  hallucination  in  question  is  ^;  the  probability  that  any 
assigned  member  of  the  general  population,  and  therefore  any 
particular  person  whose  phantasmal  voice  is  heard,  will  die  within 
12  hours  of  an  assigned  point  of  time  is  iMo  ^  sis;  hence  the 
probability  that,  in  the  course  of  12  years,  a  hallucination  of  this 
form  and  the  death  of  the  person  whose  voice  seems  to  be  heard 
will  fall  within  12  hours  of  one  another  is  ^  x  iMo  ^  shs,  or  almost 
exactly  1  in  1,500,000.  And  the  circle  from  which  our  coincidental 
cases  are  drawn  is  assumed  to  be  300,000.  From  these  data  it  may 
be  calculated  that  the  odds  against  the  occurrence,  by  accident,  of  as 
many  coincidences  of  the  t5rpe  in  question  as  that  circle  produced,  are 
more  than  a  trillion  to  1. 

\  7.  But  the  reductio  ad  ahsurdum  becomes  far  more  striking 
when  we  apply  the  doctrine  of  chances  to  visual  cases.  Out  of  the 
5705  persons  taken  at  random,  of  whom  the  above  question  was  asked, 
only  21  could  recall  having,  in  the  conditions  named  and  within  the 
specified  12  years,  experienced  a  visual  hallucination  representing  a 
living  person  known  to  them.  But  two  of  the  21  had  had  2 
experiences  of  the  sort ;  so  let  us  take  the  total  as  23.-^  That  is,  the 
experience  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  one  248th  of  the  group  of 
persons  asked,  or,  if  that  group  be  fairly  representative,  to  1  person  in 
every  248  of  the  population.^     Now,  just  as  before,  each  coincidental 

1  This  is  a  liberal  allowance ;  for  it  includes  several  cases  where  there  was  such  an 
amount  of  anxiety  or  expectancy  on  the  part  of  the  hallucinated  person  as  would  prevent 
us,  if  it  were  present  in  a  coincidental  case,  from  including'  such  a  case  in  our  telepathic 
evidence.  In  7  of  the  cases,  the  form  seen  was  an  "  af ter-imag'e  "  of  what  had  been,  for 
some  time  previously,  part  of  the  perceiver's  daily  visual  experience. 

2  It  will  be  seen  that  1  in  248,  though  a  small  proportion,  is  yet  quite  large  enough  to 
make  it  likely  that  most  of  us  should  casually  have  heard  of  a  case  or  two  of  the  kind. 
For  there  are  probably  more  than  248  jDersons  whom  we  are  each  of  us  sufficiently  near  to 
make  it  natural  that  an  unusual  experience — such  as  a  distinct  "spectral  illusion" — 
befalling  one  of  them,  should  directly  or  indirectly  reach  our  ears.  This  is  worth  noting, 
because  one  sometimes  hears  the  statement,  "  Why  /  heard  the  other  day  of  a  person 

-xiii.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  17 

hallucination  of  the  sort  in  question,  supposing  it  to  have  been 
purely  subjective  and  the  coincidence  to  have  been  accidental,  should 
stand  for  16,590  purely  subjective  hallucinations.  But  our  collection 
includes  31  first-hand^  and  well-attested  coincidental  cases  of  this 
type,  which  have  occurred  in  this  country  within  the  specified  time  ;^ 
and  the  circle  of  persons  from  whom  they  were  drawn — liberally 
supposed,  as  before,  to  number  300,000 — ought,  therefore,  to  supply 
altogether,  in  the  specified  12  years,  514,290  examples.  That  is  to 
say,  it  ought  to  have  happened  on  an  average  to  everybody  once, 
and  to  most  people  twice,  within  the  given  time,  distinctly  to  see  an 
absent  relation  or  acquaintance  in  a  part  of  space  that  was  actually 
vacant.  But  the  census  has  shown  that,  within  the  given  time,  only 
about  1  in  every  248  persons  has  had  such  an  experience  even  once. 
Thus  the  group  of  visual  coincidental  cases  now  in  question,  if  ascribed 
to  accident,  would  require  either  that  the  subjective  hallucinations 
should  be  more  than  396  times  as  numerous  as  they  actually  are ; 
or  else  that  the  circle  from  whom  our  coincidental  cases  are  drawn 
should  amount  to  more  than  396  times  the  assumed  size — in  other 
words,  that  our  existence  and  objects  should  have  been  prominently 
before  the  minds  of  every  adult  member  of  a  population  5  times  as 
large  as  the  existing  one. 

The  second  form  of  estimate  in  the  last  section,  applied  to  visual 
cases,  will  give  as  the  probability  that  the  hallucination  and  the 
death  will  fall  within  12  hours  of  one  another,  „^g  x  ^^  x  ^^  or 
1  in  4,114,545.  And  the  circle  from  which  our  coincidental  cases 
are  drawn  is  assumed  to  be  300,000.  From  these  data  it  may  be 
calculated  that  the  odds  against  the  occurrence,  by  accident,  of  as  many 
coincidences  of  the  type  in  question  as  the  31  which  that  circle  pro- 
duced, are  about  a  thousand  billion  trillion  trillion  trillions  to  1. 
Or,  to  put  it  in  yet  another  way — the  theory  of  chances,  which  gives  1 
as  the  most  probable  number  of  coincidences  of  the  type  in  question 
for  every  4,114,545  of  the  population  to  yield,  will  give  6  as  the  most 

who  had  been  disturbed  by  seeing  an  apparition  of  a  friend,  and  nothing  came  of  it," 
made  as  though  it  amounted  to  a  proof  that  such  experiences  were  common  enough  to 
afford  scope  for  any  number  of  marked  coincidences. 

1  In  3  of  the  cases  the  evidence  is  not  first-hand  from  the  percipient,  but  is  of  the 
nature  described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  148. 

2  Nos.  26,  27,  28,  29,  170,  172,  173,  174,  175,  182,  184,  195,  197,  199,  201,  202,  214,  231, 
236,  237,  238,  240,  249,  298,  300,  350,  355,  695,  697,  702,  and  the  case  described  in  Vol.  i.,p. 
130,  note.  As  regards  recognition,  Nos.  170  and  355  do  not  stand  on  quite  the  same  ground 
as  the  other  cases.  I  am  not  reckoning  case  241,  where  the  recognition,  such  as  it  was, 
was  retrospective ;  nor  case  500,  where  it  seems  at  any  rate  as  likely  as  not  that  the  12 
hours'  limit  was  somewhat  exceeded.  In  3  cases,  Nos.  197,  201,  231,  it  is  possible,  on  the 
facts  stated,  that  the  limit  was  exceeded  ;  but  in  the  two  latter  cases  this  is  very  impro- 
bable, and  the  coincidence  may  have  been  exact. 

VOL.    II.  C 

18  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

probable  number  for  the  whole  adult  population  to  yield,  within 
the  given  period.  Yet  we  draw  more  than  5  times  that  number  from 
a  fraction  of  the  adult  population  which  can  only  by  an  extravagantly 
liberal  estimate  be  assumed  to  amount  to  an  80th  part  of  the  whole, 
and  which  has  been  very  inadequately  canvassed. 

§  8.  In  the  above  estimates,  I  have  allowed  to  the  so-called 
coincidence  the  rather  wide  limit  of  12  hours.  But  in  most  of  the 
actual  cases  it  has  been  much  closer  than  this  ;  and  it  will  be  worth 
while  to  show  how  a  single  case  of  very  close  coincidence  may 
legitimately  strengthen  the  argument.  First,  it  must  be  unre- 
servedly admitted  that  a  single  case,  if  it  stood  alone  and  no  similar 
one  had  ever  been  heard  of,  would  have  no  cogency  whatever  as 
evidence  of  the  operation  of  anything  beyond  chance.  The  most 
extraordinary  coincidence,  as  above  remarked,  may  yet  be  totally 
insignificant.  The  a  priori  improbability  that  the  tallest  man  of  the 
century  will  be  born  during  a  transit  of  Venus  is  enormous  ;  but  such 
a  conjunction  of  events,  if  it  happened,  might  be  at  once  and  with 
moral  certainty  ascribed  to  accident ;  and  wdth  equal  certainty  might 
it  be  predicted  that  such  a  conjunction  would  never  recur.  And 
without  resorting  to  imaginary  examples,  we  often  encounter 
conjunctions  and  coincidences  which  would  have  appeared,  before 
they  happened,  to  be  extremely  improbable,  but  the  happening  of 
which  is  none  the  less  clearly  accidental.  The  odds  are  very  great 
against  two  of  the  foremost  men  in  a  century  being  born  on  the  same 
day ;  yet  this  happened  in  the  case  of  Darwin  and  Lincoln,  and  no 
one  imagines  that  one  birth  depended  on  the  other.  "  Extraordinary 
coincidences  "  are,  in  fact,  quite  ordinary  things ;  and  only  when 
previous  experience  has  given  us  ground  for  suspecting  (however 
faintly)  that  the  conjunction  in  time  or  special  combination  is  due  to 
some  positive  causal  link,  can  we  connect  the  a  priori  improbability 
of  a  new  case  with  an  a  posteriori  argument  that  cases  of  that 
type    are   not   due    to   chance.^      Now  the  result   of  §  7   may  be 

1  In  a  general  way,  coincidences  where  previous  experience  affords  some  ground  for 
suspecting  (however  faintly)  a  cause  other  than  chance  are  distinguished  from  coin- 
cidences where  no  such  ground  exists  by  this  fact — that  the  latter  sort  of  cases,  if 
A  priori  highly  improbable,  are  not  mentioned  or  described  until  after  they  have  happened. 
From  the  mere  fact  that  they  do  not  belong  to  any  known  or  surmised  type,  they  do  not 
enter  into  anyone's  head  :  no  one  suggests,  without  any  sort  of  grounds,  that  a  particular 
thing  will  happen  to  some  one  at  a  particular  time,  or  predicts  any  particular  highly 
improbable  coincidence,  and  then  afterwards  finds  this  thing  or  this  coinci- 
dence actually  occurring.  Now  it  will  scarcely  be  contended  that  the  co- 
incidence of  an  apparition  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen  is  a  combination  of  events 
which  has  never  entered  anyone's  head  ;  for  it  has  entered  the  heads  even  of  those  who 
deny  that  it  has  ever  occurred,  or  who  ascribe  its  occurrence  to  accident.  But  the  idea 
lias  of    course  had   much  more  than  this    negative  sort  of  existence  ;  there  has  been  a 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  19 

summarised  as  follows.  The  census  leads  us  to  infer  that,  during 
the  years  1874-85,  out  of  300,000  inhabitants  of  this  country 
taken  at  random,  ^^  ^05°'°°°  *^^  ^'^0^  have  had  a  recognised  visual 
hallucination,  representing  a  living  person,  which  did  not  coin- 
cide with  the  death  of  that  person.  And  during  the  same  period, 
out  of  the  same  number  of  persons  (supposing  our  inquiries  really 
to  have  extended  to  so  wide  a  circle,)  at  least  31  have  had  a 
recognised  visual  hallucination  which  did  coincide — in  the  sense  of 
falling  withing  12  hours  of — the  death  of  the  person  seen.  That  is,  out 
of  1209-1-31  or  1240  hallucinations,  31,  or  1  in  40,  have  fallen  within 
12  hours  of  the  death  of  the  person  seen.  Now  let  us  apply  this 
conclusion  to  case  28  (Vol.  I.,  p.  210).  When  Mr.  S.  had  his  visual 
hallucination  representing  his  friend,  he  would  have  been  justified  in 
regarding  the  probability  that  his  friend  would  prove  to  have  died 
within  12  hours  of  the  vision  as  1  in  40 ;  whereas,  if  there  was  no 
ground  at  all  for  surmising  that  a  causal  connection  may  exist  be- 
tween deaths  and  apparitions,  he  would  only  have  been  justified  in 
regarding  the  probability  of  his  friend's  dying  on  that  day  as  about 
1  in  20,440 — estimated  from  the  death-rate  which  tables  of  mortality 
give  for  men  of  his  friend's  age  (48  years).  But  it  will  be  observed 
that  the  death  and  the  apparition,  for  aught  we  know,  were  abso- 
lutely simultaneous,  and  at  any  rate  were  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
of  one  another.  Since,  however,  the  death  may  have  occurred  12 
minutes  before  or  12  minutes  after  the  apparition,  we  must 
take  into  account  the  double  period ;  or,  to  allow  for  difference 
of  clocks,  let  us  say  half-an-hour.  Now,  on  the  supposition 
that  telepathy  is  a  reality  in  the  world,  closeness  of  coincidence 
rather  increases  than  otherwise  the  probability  that  the  death 
and  the  apparition  in  any  particular  case  are  causally  connected ; 
whereas  the  probability  of  a  death  accidentally  falling  in  a  particular 
half-hour  is,  of  course,  48  times  less  than  that  of  its  falling  on  a 
particular  day.  Thus  the  a  priori  probability  that  the  death,  if  uncon- 
nected with  the  apparition,  would  fall  in  the  particular  half-hour  in 
which  the  apparition  fell,  was  1  in  981,120  ;  and  in  considering  the 
question  of  connection,  it  is  this  extremely  small  degree  of  probability 
which  has  to  be  contrasted  with  the  1  in  40  which  we  have  taken  as 

good  deal  of  positive  belief  that  such  combinations  occur,  and  that  their  occurrence  implies 
a  causal  connection  between  the  death  and  the  apparition.  And  though  this  belief  may 
have  been  rash  and  premature  before  the  necessary  statistics  had  been  obtained,  I  have 
tried  in  the  last  two  sections  to  show  that  it  may  now  be  justified  by  precise  calculation. 

VOL.    II.  c    2 

20  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.        [chap. 

about  the  true  a  iDriori  probability  that  this  particular  half-hour 
would  prove  to  be  that  of  the  death. 

But  the  significance  of  extreme  closeness  of  coincidence  may  be 
yet  more  strikingly  suggested,  if  we  consider  the  probability  of  the 
joint  event  before  either  part  of  it  has  occurred.  My  census  gives  ^\s 
as  the  probability  that  a  particular  individual  would  within  12  years 
have  a  visual  hallucination  of  a  friend  not  known  to  be  dead.  Mr.  S. 
has,  say,  x  friends,  of  whom  about  a  fourth  would  naturally  die  in 
this  period  ;  and  the  period  comprises  210,240  half-hours.  Thus  the 
probability  of  Mr.  S.'s  hitting  off  by  chance  such  a  coincidence  as  he 
did  hit  off  was  aia  X  i  X  |  X  ^t^wIq'  o^  about  1  in  208  millions.^ 
It  might,  I  think,  be  safely  said  that,  in  the  world's  history,  no  one 
has  ever  contemplated  the  possible  participation  of  himself,  or  of  any 
other  specified  person,  in  an  event  of  this  degree  of  unlikelihood,  and 
has  afterwards  found  his  idea  realised.  But  apart  from  this,  the  points 
to  be  specially  weighed  are  (1)  that  Mr.  S.'s  case  was  drawn  from  a  very 
inconsiderable  fraction  of  the  population — a  fraction  liberally  estimated 
at  sV  ;  and  (2)  that  this  fraction  of  the  population  has  supplied  many 
other  parallel  instances  of  great  closeness  of  coincidence.  Taking  only 
the  "borderland"  and  waking  phantasms  recorded  on  first-hand  testi- 
mony in  the  main  body  of  this  work,  I  find  that  66  of  them  are  repre- 
sented as  having  occurred  within  an  hour  of  the  event  on  the  agent's 
side — which  event  in  41  of  the  66  cases  was  death;  15  more,  according 
to  the  facts  stated,  were  within  two  hours  of  the  event,  which  in  10  of 
the  15  cases  was  death  ;  and  in  nearly  all  these  cases,  as  well  as  in 
several  others,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  coincidence  was  absolutely 
exact.  I  do  not  forget,  what  I  have  expressly  pointed  out  in  Chapter 
IV.,  that  exaggeration  of  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  is  a  likely 
form  for  exaggeration  in  such  matters  to  take  f  but  in  a  considerable 

1  The  denominator  of  the  third  of  the  four  fractions  which  are  multiplied  together 
will  diminish  or  increase  according  as  the  period  considered  is  longer  or  shorter  than  12 
years.  Otherwise  the  length  of  the  period  is  not  material ;  since  the  first  fraction  may- 
be assumed  to  vary  inversely  with  the  last. 

The  death,  it  will  be  observed,  might  happen  in  any  half -hour  ;  and  therefore  the 
total  of  half -hours  must  be  reckoned,  without  deduction  of  those  in  which  a  waking 
hallucination  would  be  impossible  —as  in  sleep  ;  or  of  those  in  which  it  would  be  specially 
improbable — as  during  conversation  or  active  exercise.  The  case  is  like  that  of  drawing 
two  tickets  simultaneously  from  two  bags,  one  of  which  contains  the  numbers  frjm_  1  to 
100,  and  the  other  the  niimbers  from  1  to  1000.  The  probability  that  the  two  tickets 
drawn  will  bear  the  same  number  is  not  x^^  but  xinju-  I  neglect  the  remote  chance  that 
several  friends  might  die  in  one  half -hour — which,  however,  can  be  shown  not  to  affect 
the  result. 

-  Thus  it  would  be  quite  unjustifiable  to  add  to  the  list  a  number  of  cases  in  the 
Supplement  where  the  coincidence  is  stated  to  have  been  exact.  Still  the  Supplement 
contains  several  accounts— c.r/.,  Nos.  508,  510,  569,  584,  599— which  may  fairly  be  assumed 
to  be  correct  in  this  particular. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  21 

number  of  the  cases  mentioned,  good  reason  is  shown  for  believing 
it  to  have  been  as  close  as  is  stated. 

But  the  huge  total  of  improbability  is  nothing  like  complete. 
Nothing  has  been  said  of  the  aggregate  strength  of  the  cases  where 
the  phantasm  was  unrecognised.  Nothing  has  been  said  of  the  large 
array  of  cases  where  the  coincident  event  was  not  death,  but  some 
other  form  of  crisis — a  class  which  does  not  lend  itself  easily  to  a 
precise  numerical  estimate,  but  whose  collective  force,  even  if  it  stood 
alone,  would  be  very  great.  Once  more,  each  of  the  two  classes  of 
cases — the  "  reciprocal  "  and  the  "  collective  " — which  still  await  dis- 
cussion, includes  specimens  of  visual  and  auditory  phantasms  ;  and 
some  of  these  afford  an  immensely  higher  probability  for  a  cause  other 
than  chance,  than  the  more  ordinary  cases  where  only  one  person  is 
impressed.  For  the  improbability  of  one  sort  of  coincidence,  that 
between  B's  unusual  hallucination  and  A's  condition — has  now  to  be 
multiplied  by  the  improbability  of  another  sort  of  coincidence,  that 
between  B's  hallucination  and  a  second  unusual  impression  (whether  a 
hallucination  or  of  some  other  form)  on  the  part  of  A  or  C.  Nor 
even  so  will  the  argument  for  telepathic  phantasms  be  nearly 
exhausted.  For  it  will  have  been  observed  that  throughout  I  have 
been  taking  into  account  nothing  beyond  the  bare  facts  of  the  death 
and  the  hallucination,  and  altogether  neglecting  the  correspondences 
of  detail  which  in  some  cases  add  indefinitely,  and  almost  infinitely, 
to  the  improbability  of  the  chance  occurrence. 

It  would  be  very  easy  to  amplify  this  reasoning,  and  to  extend  and 
vary  the  computations  themselves ;  but  the  specimens  given  are 
perhaps  sufficient.  They  cannot  possibly  be  made  interesting  ;  but 
they  are  indispensable  if  the  question  is  ever  to  be  set  at  rest,  and  the 
appeal  to  the  doctrine  of  chances  to  be  anything  better  than  empty 
words.  Figures,  one  is  sometimes  told,  can  be  made  to  prove 
anything ;  but  I  confess  that  I  should  be  curious  to  see  the  figures 
by  which  the  theory  of  chance-coincidence  could  here  be  proved  ade- 
quate to  the  facts.  Whatever  group  of  phenomena  be  selected,  and 
whatever  method  of  reckoning  be  adopted,  the  estimates  founded  on 
that  theory  are  hopelessly  and  even  ludicrously  overpassed.  With  so 
enormous  a  margin  to  draw  on,  there  is  no  particular  temptation  to 
exaggerate  the  extent  to  which  the  evidence  for  the  phenomena 
is  to  be  relied  on.  In  some  cases  it  is  possibly  erroneous ;  in  many 
it  is  undoubtedly  incomplete  ;  narratives  may  have  been  admitted 
which  a  more  sagacious  criticism  would  have  excluded.     But  after 

22  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  [chap. 

all  allowances  and  deductions,  the  conclusion  that  our  collection 
comprises  a  large  number  of  coincidences  which  have  had  some  other 
cause  than  chance  will  still,  I  believe,  be  amj)ly  justified.-^ 

I  9.  But  I  have  not  yet  done.  There  are  considerations  of  a 
quite  different  kind  which  still  further  strengthen  the  argument  for 
telepathy  as  against  chance.  At  the  close  of  the  last  chapter,  I 
briefly  referred  to  certain  points  of  contrast  between  the  telepathic 
and  the  purely  subjective  class  of  hallucinations.  I  have  now  to  take 
up  this  thread  and  to  show  that,  though  the  hallucinations  which 
may  be  regarded  as  telepathic  or  veridical  include  many  cases  which 
may  differ  from  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  only  in 
the  fact  of  being  veridical,  yet  the  group,  as  a  whole,  presents  some 
well-marked  peculiarities. 

The  first  of  these  peculiarities  is  the  great  'preponderance 
of  visual  cases.  Among  hallucinations  of  the  insane,  the  proportion 
of  auditory  to  visual  cases  is  often  given  as  about  3  to  1 ; 
this  estimate,  however,  seems  to  have  been  merely  copied  by 
one  writer  from  another  since  the  days  of  Esquirol ;  and  I  am 
not  aware  that  any  statistics,  on  a  large  scale,  have  been  obtained  or 
published.  Dr.  Savage,  however,  tells  me  that  he  thinks  that  this  is 
about  the  usual  proportion  at  Bethlem  Hospital ;  and  Dr.  Lockhart 
Robertson  writes  to  me,  "  Esquirol  has  put  the  proportion  lower  than 
I  should  do,  I  should  say  5  to  1  at  least ;  auditory  hallucinations 
are  very  frequent,  visual  rare."  With  respect  to  the  transient  hallu- 
cinations of  the  sane,  so  far  as  the  results  of  my  census  are  accepted, 
there  is  no  doubt  on  the  matter.  We  have  seen  that,  out  of  5705 
persons  taken  at  random,  46  proved  to  have  had,  within  the  last  12 
years,  an  auditory  hallucination  of  the  "  recognised  "  type,  of  whom  10 
had  had  the  experience  more  than  once ;  and  only  21  a  visual  one, 
of  whom  2  had  had  the  experience  more  than  once.  It  becomes,  then, 
at  once  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  of  the  hallucinations  which,  with- 
in the  same  period,  have  coincided  with  real  events,  31  should  be 
visual,  and  only  13  auditory — or  26  and  8,  if  we  omit  5  which  affected 
both  senses  ;  while  the  whole  collection  of  numbered  cases  in  this  work 
includes  271  phantasms  which  were  visual  without  any  auditory  element, 
and  85  only  which  were  auditory  without  any  visual  element.      This 

1  I  have  given  no  separate  estimate  of  the  coincidental  cases  which  happened  before 
•Jan.  1,  1874  ;  as  to  do  so  would  have  been  simply  to  reproduce  the  reasonings  of  §§  6  and 
7  with  rather  less  striking  results.  Nor  have  I  taken  account  of  the  experiences^  of 
foreigners,  as  these  could  not  be  brought  into  relation  to  statistics  on  subjective 
hallucinations  belonging  to  this  one  country.  But  these  further  cases  have  a  true 
force  of  their  own,  in  indicating  the  general  diffusion  of  the  phenomena. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  23 

difference  would  alone  be  a  serious  objection  to  explaining  the  coinci- 
dences as  accidental.  Nor  could  the  advocates  of  the  chance-theory 
fairly  evade  the  objection  by  attributing  the  inversion  of  the  ordinary 
proportion  to  faults  of  evidence.  For  why  should  evidence  be  faulty  in 
this  partial  and  one-sided  way?  Why  should  people's  memories  deceive 
them  more  as  to  the  fact  of  having  seen  something  on  a  particular  day 
than  as  to  the  fact  of  having  heard  something  ?  On  the  telepathic 
theory,  on  the  other  hand,  the  peculiarity  seems  to  admit  of  explana- 
tion. The  majority  of  the  auditory  cases,  in  transient  hallucinations  of 
the  sane,  are  of  hearing  the  name  called,  or  of  hearing  some  short 
familiar  phrase ;  and  of  such  cases,  as  we  saw  above  (Vol.  I.,  pp. 
489-90),  the  most  natural  physiological  explanation  is  that  they  are 
not  produced  by  a  downward  stimulation  from  the  higher  tracts  of 
the  brain,  but  are  due  to  a  sudden  reverberation  at  the  sensory  centre 
itself,  which  is  readily  excited  to  vibrations  of  a  familiar  type.  The 
telepathic  hallucinations,  on  the  other  hand,  were  traced  (as  far  as 
their  development  in  the  percipient  is  concerned)  to  a  stimulation 
passing  downwards  to  the  sensory  centres  from  the  higher  or 
ideational  tracts  of  the  brain.  There  is,  then,  no  difficulty  in 
supposing  that  the  auditory  centre  is  more  prone  than  the  visual 
to  spontaneous  recrudescence  of  vibrations ;  but  that  the  downward 
excitation,  which  hurries  ideas  and  images  on  into  delusive  sensory 
percepts,  finds  a  readier  passage  to  the  visual  centre  than  to  the 
auditory — or  at  any  rate  that,  where  the  idea  of  a  particular 
individual  is  to  be  abnormally  embodied  in  a  sensory  form,  it  is 
more  natural  and  direct  to  visualise  it,  in  a  shape  that  conveys 
his  permanent  personal  attributes,  than  to  verbalise  it  in  some 
imagined  or  remembered  phrase. 

A  subordinate  point,  but  one  which  is  still  worth  noting,  is  that 
the  proportion  of  cases  where  more  senses  than  one  have  been  con- 
cerned is  considerably  larger  in  the  telepathic  than  in  the  purely 
subjective  class  of  hallucinations — which  seems  to  imply  what  may 
be  called  a  higher  average  intensity  in  the  former  class.  Out  of  590 
subjective  cases,  I  find  that  49,  that  is,  a  trifle  over  8  per  cent,  of  the 
whole  number,  are  alleged  to  have  concerned  more  senses  than  one  ; 
of  which  24  were  visual  and  auditory,  8  visual  and  tactile,  13  auditory 
and  tactile,  and  4  concerned  all  three  senses.  Taking  the  telepathic 
evidence,  I  find  that,  out  of  423  cases  where  a  sensory  hallucination 
seems  to  have  been  distinctly  externalised,  80,  or  19  per  cent,  of  the 
whole  number,  are  alleged  to  have  concerned  more  senses  than  one  ; 

24  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

of  which  53  were  visual  and  auditory,  13  visual  and  tactile,  6  auditory 
and  tactile,  and  8  concerned  all  three  senses.  I  may  add  that  the 
proportion  of  19  per  cent,  remains  exactly  the  same  if  only  the 
first-hand  cases  included  in  the  body  of  the  work  be  taken  into 
account,  and  cannot  therefore  be  attributed  to  exaggeration  of  the 
facts  in  those  narratives  in  the  Supplement  which  are  given  at 
second-hand.^ 

The  next  distinguishing  mark  of  the  class  of  phantasms  which 
have  coincided  with  real  events  is  the  enormous  proportion  of  them  in 
which  the  figure  or  the  voice  was  recognised.  In  the  purely  subjec- 
tive class  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  recognised  and 
unrecognised  phantasms  seem  to  be  about  equal  in  number.  Thus, 
if  we  confine  ourselves  to  cases  where  a  human  presence  was 
suggested,  of  the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons,  17  had  seen 
unrecognised  figures,  to  21  who  had  seen  recognised  ones;  and  50 
had  heard  unrecognised  voices,  to  46  who  had  heard  recognised  ones. 
Of  the  visible  phantasms  described  in  this  work  as  probably  tele- 
pathic, which  represented  human  forms  or  faces  without  any  sound 
of  a  voice,  237  have  been  recognised,  and  only  13  unrecognised. 
Of  the  phantasms  described  in  this  work  as  probably  telepathic,  which 
consisted  simply  of  voices  uttering  words,  36  have  been  of  a  recog- 
nised and  21  of  an  unrecognised  voice  ;  but  among  these  211  include  6 
cases  where  the  words  heard  were  as  closely  associated  with  the  agent  as 
if  the  tone  had  been  his,  since  they  actually  named  him  ;  and  a  seventh 
where  a  place  specially  connected  with  him  was  named.  Out  of  38  cases 
which  included  both  a  form  and  a  voice,  the  phantasm  was  unrecognised 
in  only  2.  It  may  be  said  that  the  fact  of  recognition  is  the  very 
fact  which  has  led  us  to  refer  the  phantasm  to  the  telepathic  class, 
and  that  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  recognised  phantasms 
preponderate  in  our  evidence.  But  this  is  not  what  has  happened. 
Important  as  the  recognition  is,  and  greatly  as  the  lack  of  it  detracts 
from  the  evidential  force  of  a  case,  it  is  the  coincidence,  not  the 
recognition,  that  we  have  throughout  regarded  as  the  main  point ; 
and  cases  have  never  been  suppressed  for  lack  of  recognition  alone, 
provided  the  coincidence  was  close — non-recognition  being  easily 
explicable  on  the  view  of  telepathic  hallucinations  above  propounded 

1  If  only  the  subjective  cases  received  from  the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons  be 
considered,  those  which  concerned  more  than  one  sense  amount  to  less  than  4  per  cent.  ; 
while  of  the  40  special  coincidental  cases  enumerated  in  p.  14,  first  note,  and  p.  17,  second 
note,  8,  that  is  20  percent.,  concerned  more  than  one  sense — or  17-J  per  cent,  if  we  exclude 
one  case.  No.  199,  where  it  is  not  quite  certain  that  what  was  heard  was  not  a  real  sound. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  25 

(Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40).  The  fact  is  simply  that  we  have  received  com- 
paratively few  cases  of  unrecognised  phantasms  of  human  figures  or 
voices  which  have  closely  coincided,  and  afterwards  been  associated, 
with  some  marked  event  closely  affecting  the  percipient ;  and  those 
which  we  have  received,  on  trustworthy  authority,  have  been 
included  in  our  collection.  And  if  it  be  further  suggested  that  the 
persons  concerned  are  themselves  little  likely  to  remark  the  coinci- 
dence, if  the  phantasmal  form  or  voice  was  not  recognised,  my 
reply  is  (1)  that  this  seems  a  very  sweeping  assumption  ;  and  (2) 
that  so  far  as  it  is  valid  as  an  argument,  it  implies  the  existence 
of  a  large  number  of  unnoted  cases,  over  and  above  those  which  it 
is  possible  to  collect,  of  those  very  coincidences  whose  perpetual 
repetition  is  already  such  a  mountainous  obstacle  to  the  theory  that 
they  occur  by  chance.^ 

Further  knowledge  may  possibly  bring  to  light  other  points  in 
which  the  hallucinations  that  have  corresponded  with  real  events — 
taken  in  their  immediate  aspect  as  phenomena  and  quite  apart  from 
this  correspondence — may  be  distinguished  from  the  general  body 
of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  And  while  the  resemblances, 
brought  out  in  the  two  preceding  chapters,  between  the  coincidental 
and  the  non-coincidental  or  purely  subjective  experiences,  were 
sufficient,  I  think,  to  show  that  the  coincidental  cases  are  truly 
hallucinations  of  the  percipient's  senses,  clearly  every  feature  which 
can  be  named  as  distinguishing  these  hallucinations, — every  feature 
which  tends  to  separate  them  off  as  a  restricted  group — thereby 
increases  the  difficulty  of  attributing  the  correspondences  to 
chance. 

The  last  point  to  which  I  must  call  attention,  as  conflicting  with 

^  It  may  still  be  thought  that  the  visual  and  the  recognised  phantasms  are  at  any 
rate  more  interesting  than  the  auditory  and  the  unrecognised,  and  that  that  is  a  reason 
for  their  preponderating  among  the  telepathic  cases  that  we  have  received.  I  would 
admit  this  to  some  extent.  That  some  difference  in  the  record  is  made  by  the  superior 
interest  of  visual  and  of  recognised  phantasms,  may  be  argued  from  the  numbers  in 
my  total  collection  of  hallucinations,  putting  aside  those  presented  as  telepathic  evidence. 
Thus,  in  spite  of  the  visual  hallucinations  being  shown,  by  the  canvassing  of  a  limited  group 
of  persons,  to  be  the  rarer  phenomena,  I  have  a  total  of  311  visual  cases  to  only  187 
auditory — a  fact,  by  the  way, which  may  suggest  how  Krafft-Ebing  (Die  Sinnesdelirien, 
p.  32),  Griesinger  (Die  Pathologie  und  Therapie  der  PsycMschen  Krankkeiten.  p.  100)  and 
Wundt  (Grundziige  der  Physiologischen  Psychologie,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  353)  have  been  led  into 
asserting  that  the  visual  class  is  the  more  numerous.  Again,  among  cases  where  a  human 
presence  was  suggested,  in  spite  of  the  recognised  and  unrecognised  classes  being  shown, 
by  the  canvassmg  of  a  limited  group  of  persons,  to  be  about  equal,  I  have  172  visual 
examples  of  the  recognised  sort  to  only  116  of  the  unrecognised,  and  82  auditory  examples 
of  the  recognised  sort  to  only  64  of  the  unrecognised.  Still,  remembering  that  the 
vitally  interesting'  point  in  the  coincidental  cases  is,  after  all,  the  coincidence,  and  not  the 
mere  form  of  the  phantasm,  the  allowance  which  may  thus  be  fairly  made  cannot,  I  think, 
suffice  to  explain  the  proportions  given  in  the  text. 

26  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-GOINGIDEFCE.         [chap. 

the  theory  of  chance-coincidence,  is  a  characteristic  not  of  the 
telepathic  phantasms  themselves,  but  of  the  distant  events  with 
which  they  and  other  telepathic  impressions  coincide  ;  but  it  none  the 
less  serves  to  distinguish  these  coincidences  as  due  to  a  definite  and 
peculiar  cause.  It  is  the  very  large  proportion  of  cases  in  which 
the  distant  event  is  death}  It  is  in  this  profoundest  shock  which 
human  life  encounters  that  these  phenomena  seem  to  be  oftenest 
engendered ;  and,  where  not  in  death  itself,  at  least  in  one  of  those 
special  moments,  whether  of  strong  mental  excitement  or  of  bodily 
collapse,  which  of  all  living  experiences  come  nearest  to  the  great 
crisis  of  dissolution.  Thus  among  the  668  cases  of  spontaneous 
telepathy  in  this  book,  399,  (or  among  423  examples  of  the  sensory  ex- 
ternalised class,  303,)  are  death-cases,  in  the  sense  that  the 
percipient's  experience  either  coincided  with  or  very  shortly  followed 
the  agent's  death ;  while  in  25  more  cases  the  agent's  condition,  at 
the  time  of  the  percipient's  experience,  was  one  of  serious  illness 
which  in  a  few  hours  or  a  few  days  terminated  in  death.  Nor,  in 
this  connection,  can  I  avoid  once  more  referring  to  the  large  number 
of  cases  in  which  the  event  that  befell  the  agent  has  been  death 
(or  a  very  near  approach  to  it)  by  drowning  or  suffocation.  Out 
of  the  399  death-cases  just  mentioned,  there  are  35,  or  nearly  9  per 
cent.,  where  the  death  was  by  drowning, — clearly  a  very  much  higher 
proportion  than  deaths  of  this  particular  form  bear  to  all  deaths, 
for  even  of  accidental  deaths  among  the  male  population,  only  5  per 
cent,  are  due  to  drowning — and  in  6  other  cases  the  agent's  escape 

1  The  point  is  one  to  which  I  have  adverted  in  connection  with  dreains(  Vol.  i. ,  pp.  308-10), 
But  there  we  saw  a  certain  force  in  the  objection  that  the  coincident  dreamof  death  might 
get  remembered  just  by  virtue  of  the  coincidence,  while  other  equally  vivid  dreams  of 
death  might  be  forgotten.  Let  us  see  what  would  be  implied  if  a  similar  supposition  were 
made  in  the  case  of  the  waking-hallucinations.  Taking  the  number  of  adults  in  the 
country  as  24  millions,  then,  even  on  the  extravagant  assumption  which  I  made  as  to  the 
size  of  the  area  from  which  our  cases  are  drawn,  the  probable  number  of  coincidental 
phantasms  for  the  United  Kingdom,  during  the  last  12  years,  amounts  to  as  many  as  32  x 
80,  or  2560.  Now  the  census  gives -i^iyV^^—;  or  96,744,  as  the  number  of  persons  in  the 
United  Kingdom  who,  on  being  asked,  would  remember  having  had  a  purely  subjective 
visual  hallucination  of  this  type.  Therefore,  if  these  were  all  the  hallucinations  that 
had  occurred,  1  in  every  38  of 'them  would  correspond  with  the  death  of  the  person  whose 
figure  appeared ;  that  is  to  say,  for  each  hallucination,  the  probability  that  it  would 
coincide  with  the  death  would  be  1  in  38.  Now  for  each  of  the  remembered  hallucina- 
tions we  found  the  probability  of  the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  coincidence  to  be 
^^_.  We  thus  arrive  at  the  total  which  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations, 
remembered  and  unremembered,  will  have  to  reach  in  order  to  bring  the  probability 
of  an  accidental  coincidence  up  to  u\  :  they  will  have  to  be  altogether  ^i^  or  436 
times  as  numerous  as  the  remembered  cases.  But  as  1  person  in  248  remembers  a  case, 
this  will  mean  either  that  nearly  every  sane  and  healthy  adult  in  the  country,  while 
awake,  has  seen  a  phantasm  representing  a  living  acquaintance  twice  within  the  last  12 
years,  or  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  them  have  seen  such  a  phantasm  more  than 
twice ;  and  that  435  'out  of  every  436  of  these  startling  experiences  have  been  totally 
forgotten  by  the  persons  affected. 

XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  27 

from  such  a  death  was  a  narrow  one.^  And  if  we  do  not  insist  on 
the  form  of  death,  but  only  on  its  suddenness,  the  above  proportion  still 
remains  a  very  striking  fact  ;  since  deaths  by  accident,  even  among 
males,  are  only  a  little  over  4  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  deaths. 

We  do  not  know  why  the  conditions  of  death  generally,  or 
of  sudden  death,  or  of  any  particular  form  of  death,^  or  of  excite- 
ment or  collapse,  should  be  effective  ;  but  we  at  all  events  know 
that  the  conditions  are  themselves  unusual.  Similarly  in  most 
cases  of  experimental  thought-transference,  the  agent's  mind  is 
unusually  occupied  by  its  concentrated  fixation  on  a  single  object ; 
and  whether  it  be  in  the  curiosities  of  an  afternoon  or  in  the  crises 
of  a  lifetime  that  telepathy  finds  its  occasion,  the  peculiarity  of  the 
agent's  state  has  at  any  rate  that  degree  of  explanatory  power  which 
succeeds  in  connecting  the  rare  effect  with  the  rare  cause.  In  neither 
case  can  we  trace  out  the  actual  process  whereby  the  percipient  is 
influenced ;  but  we  have  the  same  sort  of  ground  for  refusing  to 
attribute  to  chance  the  oft-repeated  apparitions  at  the  time  of  death, 
as  the  oft-repeated  successes  in  guessing  cards  and  reproducing 
diagrams. 

The  only  way  of  meeting  this  argument  would  be  to  show  that 
similar  coincidences  have  been  frequently  met  with  in  connection 
with  definite  events  which  produced  no  unusual  physical  or  mental 
state  in  the  person  to  whom  they  occurred.  For  instance,  if  B  at  a 
distance  has  a  vision  of  A  on  the  day  that  A  scratches  his  finger  or 
orders  a  new  pair  of  boots,  it  would  seem  wholly  irrational  to  connect 
the  two  facts.  Accordingly,  if  many,  or  even  several,  such  coincidences 
were  on  record,  I  should  have  to  admit  that  the  operations  of  chance 
altogether  overpass  my  estimate,  and  that  the  data  on  which  the 
previous  argument  rested  must,  therefore,  be  somehow  defective. 
Or,  to  take  a  case  where  some  emotional  disturbance  is,  as  a  rule, 
involved,  if  it  proved  to  be  not  extremely  uncommon  to  have  a 
vision  of  an  absent  friend  on  the  morning  of  his  marriage,  I  should 
feel  *  that  my  argument  was  so  far  weakened ;  for  it  would  be 
difficult    to   suppose    that   the   emotions   connected  with   that    one 

1  Tvfos.  48,  59,  60,  105,  138,  159,  165,  188,  236,  281,  282,  297,  341,  349,  416,  487,  513, 
525,  528,  529,  535,  536,  537,  540,  541,  559,  570,  581,  582,  583,  596,  600,  603,  608,  636,  648, 
659,  662,  664,  674,  675.  I  have  explained  (Vol.  i.,  pp.  335-6)  that  cases  are  not 
admitted  as  evidence  where  the  percipient's  experience  might  be  attributed  to  his  own 
state  of  apprehension  as  to  the  agent's  fate. 

2  At  the  same  time,  with  respect  to  drowning,  one  cannot  but  recall  the  peculiar 
vividness  and  concentration  of  psychical  life  which  (from  the  accounts  of  many  persons 
who  have  been  ultimately  rescued)  seem  to  characterise  the  earlier  stages  of  that  form 
of  death. 

28  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap. 

morning  stood  distinctly  apart  from  those  of  other  seasons  dedi- 
cated to  happiness  and  the  affections.^  But  in  point  of  fact  we  do 
not  find  that  coincidences  of  these  types  prevail.  The  coincidental 
phantasms  seem  limited  to  seasons  of  exceptional  crisis  or  excite- 
ment on  the  agent's  part ;  and  this  limitation ,  in  once  more 
marking  out  these  phantasms  as  a  distinct  group  of  natural  pheno- 
mena, strongly  confirms  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  statistical 
results. 

I  am  not  forgetting,  in  these  final  remarks,  what  I  have  expressly 
stated  before  (Vol.  I.,  p.  97),  that  the  action  of  telepathy  must  not  be 
dogmatically  confined  to  those  examples  of  striking  coincidence  which 
are  suitable  to  be  quoted  in  demonstration  of  it ;  and  even  in  respect 
of  such  extreme  affections  as  hallucinations  of  the  senses,  I  should 
hesitate  to  assert  that  they  cannot  be  due  to  an  absent  agent  whose 
condition  is  not  markedly  abnormal.^  I  regard  it,  however,  as  so 
unlikely  that  this  is  often  their  source — I  regard  the  probability  as  so 
enormous  that  a  phantasm  seen  or  heard  by  A  only,  and  representing 
B  who  is  at  the  time  living  a  piece  of  ordinary  life,  is  of  purely 
subjective  origin — that  the  above  argument  remains  in  my  view  a 
fair  one ;  and  it  is  at  any  rate  fairly  addressed  to  those  (whom  of 
course  I  have  had  chiefly  in  view  throughout  the  present  chapter) 
who  have  not  hitherto  admitted  or  considered  the  case  for  telepathy 
even  as  based  on  the  markedly  coincidental  examples. 

1  In  accordance  with  this  view,  and  in  the  absence  of  very  special  details,  we 
should  feel  bound  to  exclude  from  our  evidence,  as  an  "ambiguous  case,"  any  stray 
coincidence  of  the  sort  that  we  encountered.     The  following  is  an  instance : 

Miss  Keith  Breinner,  daughter  of  Captain  Bremner,  the  chief  constable  of  Tif eshire, 
was  sitting  at  the  window  of  the  dining-room  in  the  forenoon  (precise  hour  forgotten)  of 
the  18th  June,  1884,  when  looking  out  of  the  window  she  saw,  in  a  flowor-bed  about  20 
feet  distant,  what  seemed  to  her  the  face  of  Mary  D.,  growing_  out  of,  a  yellow  pansy. 
The  face  was  quite  distinct  and  life-like,  and  seemed  to  be  laughing  as  it  looked  at  her. 
Miss  Bremner  is  quite  certain  that  what  she  saw  was  not  merely  a  fancied  resemblance  in 
one  of  the  flowers  to  Miss  D.'s  face.  The  face  was  too  clearly  and  distinctly  seen  for 
that.  Moreover,  it  seemed  to  be  of  the  size  of  life.  There  could  have  been  no  mistake 
about  it.  Miss  Bremner  did  not  look  long.  She  turned  away,  and  the  face  was  gone 
when  she  looked  again.  Later  in  the  day  she  told  her  mother  what  she  had  seen,  and 
Mrs.  Bremner  remarked,  "I  wonder  when  Mary  D.  will  be  married  ;  it  should  be  about 
this  time."  They  heard  afterwards  that  Miss  D.  had  actually  been  married  on  that  day, 
and  at  about  the  time  when  Miss  Bremner  saw  the  apparition  of  her.  Miss  Bremner  has 
never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses. 

This  account  was  written  down  by  Mr.  Podinore  after  an  interview  with  Miss 
Bremner,  and  submitted  to  her.     She  writes  : — 

"  The  above  account  correctly  describes  what  I  saw. — Keith  Bremner." 
Mrs.  Bremner  wrote  from  Sandilands,  Cupar,  Fife,  on  September  22nd,  1884  : — 
"Mrs.  Bremner  begs  to  inform  Mr.  Podmore  that  her  daughter  told  her  immediately 
she  saw  the   face   in  the  pansy.      Mr.  Podmore's    written   statement   is    quite   correct. 
The  wedding  took  place  on  Wednesday,  the  18th  of  June." 

"'   See,  for  example,  the  cases  in  Chap,  xiv.,  §  7. 

XIV.] 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT. 

§  1.  In  Chapter  XII.,  a  good  many  specimens  of  telepathic  phantasms 
were  quoted,  in  illustration  of  certain  special  points ;  and  particularly 
as  showing  what  part  in  the  phenomena  we  may  attribute  to  the 
obscure  action  of  the  agent's  and  of  the  percipient's  mind  respec- 
tively, and  how  the  original  impulse  may  become  modified  in  transitu. 
A  still  larger  number  of  cases  remain,  of  which  only  a  few  present  speci- 
ally noticeable  characteristics  of  dress,  or  development,  or  phantasmal 
imagery  ;  but  which  have  their  share  with  the  others  in  the  cumu- 
lative proof  of  telepathy,  and  include  moreover  several  fresh  features 
and  types.  The  present  chapter  will  be  devoted  to  visual  examples. 
In  the  "  General  Sketch  of  Hallucinations  "  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  480-3 
and  488),  I  mentioned  the  various  degrees  of  externalisation 
that  the  phenomena  may  present ;  beginning  with  the  ideal  picture 
which  is  not  a  sensory  hallucination  at  all — which  is  realised  as 
a  purely  internal  impression,  as  seen  by  the  "  mind's  eye " ;  and 
ending  with  the  actual  percept,  which,  though  equally  the  product 
of  the  percipient's  mind,  seems  to  take  its  place  in  the  external 
world  on  a  par  with  all  the  other  objects  within  his  range  of 
vision.  Now  between  these  first  and  last  stages  there  seems  a  wide 
gap ;  and  if  our  review  of  telepathic  incidents  had  to  pass  at  one 
step  from  the  vivid  pictures  flashed  from  mind  to  mind,  to  the 
phantasmal  figure  "  out  in  the  room,"  there  might  be  a  certain 
difficulty  in  conceiving  two  such  diffierent-seeming  phenomena  as 
having  a  similar  origin.  It  is  satisfactory,  then,  to  be  able  to  point 
to  several  intermediate  stages.  That  such  stages  are  found  in  the 
telepathic,  as  well  as  in  the  purely  subjective  or  pathological,  class  of 
phantasms,  is  only  a  fresh  indication  that  telepathic  phantasms,  in 
spite  of  their  peculiar  origin,  are  worked  (so  to  speak)  by  the  ordinary 
mechanism  of  hallucination. 

30  FURTHER  VISUAL   CASES  [chap. 

I  may  first  quote  a  case  which  shows  how  the  percipient  may  him- 
self be  doubtful  as  to  the  degree  of  externality  that  the  phantasmal 
appearance  had.  In  the  summer  of  1884,  Mr.  Henry  H.  Howorth, 
M.P.,  of  Eccles,  Manchester,  filled  up  a  question-form  with  the 
information  that  one  morning,  in  1857,  he  had  a  visual  hallucination 
representing  a  great-uncle  ;  and  added  : — 

(218)  "  My  great  uncle  died  at  the  very  time  ;  and  someone  came  to 
bring  me  home  from  school,  where  I  then  was.  I  don't  think  I  was  at  all 
excitable  or  impressionable.  My  uncle  was  a  very  unlikely  person  for  me 
to  have  thought  about.  He  had  been  for  years  troubled  with  gout  of  a 
chronic  type,  but  was  otherwise  hearty  and  well,  and  to  a  boy  had  the 
appearance  of  robust  health.  He  was  much  attached  to  my  mother  and 
her  children. 

"  Henry  H.  Howorth." 

Recounting  the  same  incident  on  December  2nd,  1885,  Mr.  Howorth 
wrote  : — - 

"  I  was  a  young  boy  about  12  years  old,  and  at  school  at  Whalley, 
when  I  felt  an  overpowering  sense  that  something  very  serious  had  hap- 
pened to  my  great-uncle,  who  had  been  a  foster-father  to  my  mother,  and 
was  much  attached  to  me.  The  same  day  someone  came  to  fetch  me  home, 
as  he  had  died.  When  you  look  across  a  gap  of  30  years,  memory  is 
blunted  as  to  details,  and  I  cannot  pretend  to  fill  in  the  story.  I  never 
remember  having  a  similar  visitation." 

On  my  pointing  out  that  the  second  account  difiered  from  the  first  in 
making  no  mention  of  any  visual  experience,  Mr.  Howorth  wrote  : — 

"  I  could  not  say  at  this  distance  of  time  whether  the  experience  I  had 
was  visual  or  mental  merely,  for  the  distinction  in  the  case  of  a  boy  would 
perhaps  not  be  marked  in  the  memory,  I  can  only  say  the  impression  was 
a  very  vivid  and  sharp  one." 

I  should  regard  this  indistinctness  of  memory  as  a  tolerably  sure 
sign  that  the  impression  was  not  of  the  truly  sensory  (that  is,  of 
the  most  unique  and  startling)  sort,  but  rather  a  vivid  mental 
picture  of  the  type  noticed  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  209,  and  further  exemplified 
in  the  6th  chapter.  In  the  stage  next  above  this,  the  observer  may 
still  find  it  hard  to  say  whether  what  impresses  him  is  purely  ideal, 
or  whether  his  sense-organs  are  partly  concerned — there  being  a  sense 
of  externality,  but  not  exactly  a  projection  into  the  surrounding 
world.  Case  66  (Vol  I.,  p.  267)  was  really  an  example  in  point — the 
scene  having  apparently  been  something  more  than  a  vivid  mental 
picture  but  not  confounded  with  the  objective  world,  or  located  in 
the  actual  place  where  the  percipient  was  at  the  time.  Very  similar  is 
an  experience  which  befell  a  master  at  a  large  public  school,  in  the 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  31 

summer  of  1874  or  1875.  Having  been  detained  at  home  while  a 
party  of  boys,  accompanied  by  some  masters  and  ladies,  made  a 
steamer  excursion,  he  was,  he  says, 

(219)  "  Standing  vacantly  at  the  door  of  his  house,  doubtless  thinking  of 
the  absentees  and  conjecturing  how  they  were  then  employed.  Suddenly  he 
seemed  to  see  a  boy  slip,  when  crossing  the  landing  stage  from  the  quay  to 
the  vessel,  and  fall  into  the  water,  wounding  his  mouth  as  he  fell.  There 
the  vision  ended.  Mr.  A.  [the  narrator]  returned  to  his  work,  in  which  he 
was  absorbed,  until  the  return  of  Mrs.  A.  ;  but  so  vivid  was  the  impression 
on  his  mind  of  the  reality  of  the  occurrence  that  he  had  looked  at  his 
watch  and  noted  the  time  exactly. 

"  On  his  wife's  return  Mr.  A.  at  once  said  to  her,  '  Did  you  get  that 
boy  out  of  the  water  ? ' 

"  '  Oh,  yes ;  there  was  no  harm  done  beyond  the  fright.  But  how 
should  you  know  anything  about  it  ?  I  am  the  first  to  arrive ;  tliey  are 
walking.     /  di'ove.' 

"  '  Well,  how  about  his  lip '?     Was  it  badly  cut  1 ' 
"  '  It  was  not  hurt  at  all ;  you  know  X.  has  a  harelip.' 
"  Mr.  A.  has  no  explanation  to  offer :  these  are  the  facts." 
[Mr.  A.  was  under  the  impression  that  the  coincidence  was  precise. 
But    the   time   of   the    vision   was   about   7  p.m.  ;    and  we  learn    from 
the  wife  of  the  head-master,  who  was  present,  that  the  accident  occurred 
before  luncheon  ;  therefore,  if  telepathic,  the  case  was  one  of  the  deferred 
class.     This  lady  remembers  that  some  of  the  party  were  afraid  that  the 
boy  had  cut  his  face,  till  the  fact  of  the  harelip  was  recalled.     If  we 
suppose  the  agent  to  have  been  Mrs.  A.,  then  the  impression  of  the  scene 
(as  in  the  somewhat  similar  dream-case,  No.    101)  would   seem  to  have 
been  transferred,    so  to    speak,    ready-made — and   to   have  received  no 
development  from  the  percipient.] 

The  following  case,  though  undoubtedly  sensory,  seems  still  to 
belong  to  a  somewhat  indescribable  stage  of  visualisation.  If 
interpreted  as  telepathic,  it  is  further  of  interest  as  illustrating  that 
rarer  type  where  the  phantasm  is  not  merely  representative  of  the 
agent,  but  visibly  reproduces  some  actual  percept  or  idea  which  is 
prominently  present  at  the  time  to  the  agent's  consciousness  (see 
Chap.  XII.,  beginning  of  §  5).  The  account  is  from  Mr.  F.  Gottschalk, 
of  20,  Adamson  Eoad,  Belsize  Park,  N.W.,  and  is  dated  Feb.  12, 1886. 

(220)  Mr.  Gottschalk  begins  by  describing  a  friendship  which  he 
formed  with  Mr.  Courtenay  Thorpe,  at  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Sylvain  Mayer, 
on  the  evening  of  February  20th,  1885.  On  February  24th,  being  anxious 
to  hear  a  particular  recitation  which  Mr.  Thorpe  was  shortly  going  to  give, 
Mr.  Gottschalk  wrote  to  him,  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  to  ask  what  the 
hour  of  the  recitation  was  to  be.  "  In  the  evening  I  was  going  out  to 
see  some  friends,  when  on  the  road  there  seemed  suddenly  to  develop 
itself  before  me  a  disc  of  light,  which  appeared  to  be  on  a  different  plane  to 
everything  else  in  view.     It  was  not  possible  for  me  to  fix  the  distance  at 

32  FURTHER  VISUAL   CASES  [chap. 

which  it  seemed  to  be  from  me.^  Examining  the  illumined  space,  I  found 
that  two  hands  were  visible.  They  were  engaged  in  drawing  a  letter  from 
an  envelope  which  I  instinctively  felt  to  be  mine  and,  in  consequence, 
thought  immediately  that  the  hands  were  those  of  Mr.  Thorpe.  I  had  not 
previously  been  thinking  of  him,  but  at  the  moment  the  conviction  came  to 
me  with  such  intensity  that  it  was  irresistible.  Not  being  in  any  way 
awe-struck  by  the  extraordinary  nature  and  novelty  of  this  incident,  but 
in  a  perfectly  calm  frame  of  mind,  I  examined  the  picture,  and  found  that 
the  hands  were  very  white,  and  bared  up  to  some  distance  above  the  wrist. 
Each  forearm  terminated  in  a  ruffle  ;  beyond  that  nothing  was  to  be  seen. 
The  vision  lasted  about  a  minute.  After  its  disappearance  I  determined 
to  find  out  what  connection  it  may  have  had  with  Mr.  Thorpe's  actual 
pursuit  at  the  moment,  and  went  to  the  nearest  lamp-post  and  noted  the 
time. 

"  By  the  first  post  the  next  morning,  I  received  an  answer  from  Mr. 
Thorpe,  which  began  in  the  following  way :  '  Tell  me,  pray  tell  me,  why 
did  I,  when  I  saw  your  letter  in  the  rack  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  know 
that  it  was  from  you  ? '  [We  have  seen  this  letter,  which  is  dated  "  Tues- 
day night  "  ;  and  February  24th,  1885,  fell  on  a  Tuesday.]  Mr.  Thorpe 
had  no  expectation  of  receiving  a  letter  from  me,  nor  had  he  ever  seen  my 
writing.  Even  had  he  seen  it,  his  knowledge  of  it  would  not  affect  the 
issue  of  the  question,  as  he  assured  me  that  the  impression  arrived  the 
moment  he  saw  there  was  a  letter  under  the  'T  clip,' before  any  writing 
was  visible.  [Mr.  Gottschalk  explains  that  from  the  construction  of  the 
rack,  which  he  has  examined,  the  address  on  the  envelope  would  be  invisible.] 

"  On  the  evening  of  February  27th,  by  arrangement,  I  again  met  him 
at  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Mayer,  and  there  put  questions  to  him  with  a  view  to 
eliciting  some  explanation.  As  near  as  possible,  I  give  them  as  they  were 
put  at  the  time,  and  add  the  answers.  It  is  necessary  for  me  here  to 
state  that  he  and  the  Doctor  were  in  complete  ignorance  of  what 
had  happened  to  me.  Having  first  impressed  upon  him  the  necessity 
of  answering  in  a  categorical  manner  and  with  the  greatest  possible 
accuracy,  I  commenced  : — 

"'When  did  you  get  my  Tuesday's  letter?'  'At  7  in  the  evening, 
when  I  arrived  at  the  theatre.'  '  Then  what  happened  ? '  '  I  read  it,  but, 
being  very  late,  in  such  a  hurry  that  when  I  had  finished  I  was  as  ignorant 
of  its  contents  as  if  I  had  never  seen  it.'  '  Then  ? '  'I  dressed,  went  on 
the  stage,  played  my  part,  and  came  off.'  '  What  was  the  time  then  ? ' 
'  About  20  minutes  past  8.'  '  What  happened  then  ? '  'I  talked  for  a 
time  with  some  of  the  company  in  my  dressing-room.'  '  For  how  long  ? ' 
'  Twenty  minutes.'  '  What  did  you  then  do  ? '  '  They  having  left  me,  my 
first  thought  was  to  find  your  letter.  I  looked  everywhere  for  it,  in  vain. 
I  turned  out  the  pockets  of  my  ordinary  clothes,  and  searched  among  the 
many  things  that  encumbered  my  dressing-table.  I  was  annoyed  at  not 
finding  it  immediately,  especially  as  I  was  anxious  to  know  what  it  was 

^  (7f.  a  remark  in  M.  Marillier's  account  of  his  interesting  subjective  experiences, 
referred  to  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  .521 : — "  Je  ne  pourrais  indiquer  ni  la  place  de  I'image  que  j'ai 
objectivee,  ni  la  distance  k  laquelle  elle  se  trouve."  The  indescribableness  of  a  certain  sort 
of  extemalisation  is  well  brought  out  in  the  same  writer's  description  of  his  vision  of  parts 
of  his  body  which  could  never  actually  be  seen  by  him — e.g.,  the  back  of  his  head. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  33 

about.  Strangely  enough  I  discovered  it  eventually  in  the  coat  which  I 
had  just  worn  in  the  piece  "  School  for  Scandal."  I  immediately  read  it 
again,  was  delighted  to  receive  it,  and  decided  to  answer  at  once.'  '  Now 
be  very  exact.  What  was  the  time  when  you  read  it  on  the  second 
occasion  ? '     '  As  neai'ly  as  I  can  say  10  minutes  to  9.' 

"  Thereupon  I  drew  from  my  pocket  a  little  pocket-diary  in  which  I 
had  noted  the  time  of  my  vision,  and  asked  Dr.  Mayer  to  read  what  was 
written  under  the  date  24th  February. 

"  '  Eight  minutes  to  9.' 

[Mr.  Gottschalk  has  kindly  allowed  us  to  inspect  his  diary,  which 
confirms  all  the  dates  given.] 

"  Having  established  in  this  way,  without  any  assistance,  the  coin- 
cidence of  time  between  his  actually  opening  the  envelope  and  my 
seeing  him  do  so,  I  was  satisfied  as  to  the  principal  part,  and 
proceeded  to  analyse  the  incident  in  detail.  The  whiteness  of  the  hands 
was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  actors  invariably  whiten  their  hands 
when  playing  a  part  like  the  one  Mr.  Thorpe  was  engaged  in — '  Snake '  in 
the  '  School  for  Scandal.'  The  ruffles  also  formed  part  of  the  dress  in  this 
piece.  They  were  attached  to  the  short  sleeves  of  the  shirt  which  Mr. 
Thorpe  was  actually  wearing  when  he  opened  my  letter. 

"  This  is  the  first  hallucination  I  ever  had.  I  have  had  one  since  of  a 
similar  nature,  which  I  will  recount  separately. 

"  Ferdinand  Gottschalk." 

Dr.  Mayer,  of  42,  Somerset  Street,  Portman  Square,  W.,  corroborates 
as  follows  : — 

"  March  1,  1886. 

"  I  well  remember  having  read  something  [i.e.,  in  Mr.  Gottschalk's 
diary] — the  exact  words  memory  will  not  allow  me  to  give — which  tallied 
almost  exactly  with  the  story  told  by  Courtenay  Thorpe ;  and  can  bear 
positive  testimony  of  the  above  conversation  having  taken  place. 

"  Sylvain  Mayer." 

[We  cannot  lay  any  stress  on  Mr.  Thorpe's  impression  as  to  the  letter 
and  its  writer,  since  that  may  easily  have  been  accidental.  But  it  is  a 
point  to  be  noticed  that  he  read  the  letter  with  very  decided  pleasure,  after 
a  considerable  hunt  for  it — in  other  words,  that  the  reading  of  the  letter 
stood  out  rather  distinctly  from  the  general  run  of  such  experiences. 
Though  the  incident  is  trivial,  the  close  correspondence  of  time  and  detail 
is  strongly  suggestive  of  telepathic  clairvoyance.  In  the  second  case 
mentioned,  an  illuminated  disc  was  again  seen,  which  "  seemed  not  to 
belong  to  the  surroundings  "  ;  but  the  details  were  not  quite  as  distinctive 
as  in  the  above  instance.] 

The  fragmentary  nature  of  the  hallucination  in  this  case  has 
parallels,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  purely  subjective  class.^  The  "  disc 
of  light  "  is  also  to  be  noticed.    (See  Chap.  XII.,  §  7,  and  compare  the 

1  Vol.  i.  p.  504.  The  case  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  referred  to  below  (p.  38, 
note),  included  visions  of  parts  of  figures,  faces,  half -faces,  and  limbs.  There  are  many 
degrees  of  incompleteness.  Thus,  one  of  my  correspondents,  when  out  of  doors,  was 
startled  by  the  sight  of  a  man  whose  bearded  face  was  clearly  distinguished,  but  whose 
form  stopped  short  at  the  knees ;  another,  on  waking,  saw  "  a  shadow  "  bending  over  her, 
but  with  a  face  that  was  distinct.     A  very  interesting  case  is  that  of  the  quarter-length  Mr. 

VOL.    II.  D 

34  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"  bright  oval"  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  503,  the  "large  flickering  oval,"  p.  176,  and 
the  face  "  in  the  centre  of  a  bright,  opaque,  white  mass,"  in  case  184. 
The  exact  description — a  "  disc  of  light  " — recurs  in  the  dream-case 
No.  464.) 

In  the  next  stage  of  visualisation  the  percipient  sees  a  face  or 
figure  projected  or  depicted,  as  it  were,  on  some  convenient  surface — 
the  image  being  thus  truly  externalised,  but  in  an  unreal  and  unsub- 
stantial fashion,  and  in  a  bizarre  relation  to  the  real  objects  among 
which  it  appears.  In  this  respect  it  might  be  compared  to  the 
"  after-image  "  of  the  sun,  or  of  some  object  that  has  been  intently- 
scrutinised  through  a  microscope,  which  we  involuntarily  import  into 
our  views  of  the  surrounding  scene.  The  following  example  is  taken 
from  the  Memoirs  of  Georgiana,  Lady  Chatterton,  by  E.  H.  Dering 
(1878),  pp.  100-102.  It  exemplifies  again  the  peculiarity  observed 
in  the  last  case — the  blood  being  a  feature  in  the  vision  which  we  maj^ 
confidently  refer  to  the  agent's  mind.     Lady  Chatterton  narrates  : — 

(221)  "My  mother  [thewife  of  the  Rev.  Tremonger  Lascelles,  Prebendary 
of  Winchester,]  had  not  been  very  well,  but  there  was  nothing  alarming 
in  her  state.  I  was  suffering  from  a  bad  cold,  and  went  early  to  bed 
one  night,  after  leaving  her  in  the  drawing-room  in  excellent  spirits,  and 
tolerably  well.  I  slept  unusually  well,  and  when  I  awoke,  the  moon  was 
shining  through  the  old  casement  brightly  into  the  room.  The  white 
curtains  of  my  bed  were  drawn  to  protect  me  from  the  draught  that 
came  through  the  large  window  ;  and  on  this  curtain,  as  if  depicted  there, 
I  saw  the  figure  of  my  mother,  the  face  deadly  pale,  with  blood  ^  flowing 
on  the  bed-clothes.  For  a  moment  I  lay  horror-stricken  and  unable  to 
move  or  cry  out,  till,  thinking  it  might  be  a  dream  or  a  delusion,  I  raised 
myself  up  in  bed,  and  touched  the  curtain.  Still  the  appearance  re- 
mained (although  the  curtain  on  which  it  was  depicted  moved  to  and  fro 
when  I  touched  it)  as  if  reflected  by  a  magic-lantern.  In  great  terror  I 
got  up,  and  throwing  on  a  cloak,  1  rushed  off  through  some  rooms  and  a 
long  passage  to  my  mother's  room.  To  my  surprise,  I  saw  from  the 
further  end  of  the  passage  that  her  door  was  open,  and  a  strong  light 
coming  from  it  across  the  passage.  As  she  invariably  locked  her  door 
when  she  went  to  bed,  my  fears  were  increased  by  the  sight,  and  1  ran  on 
more  quickly  still,  and  entered  her  room.  There  she  lay,  just  as  I  had 
seen  her  on  the  curtain,  pale  as  death,  and  the  sheet  covered  with  blood, 
and  two  doctors  standing  by  the  bedside.  She  saw  me  at  once  and 
seemed  delighted  to  see  me,  though  too  weak  to  speak  or  hold  out  her 
hand.  '  She  has  been  very  ill,'  said  the  doctor,  '  but  she  would  not  allow 
you  to  be  called,  lest  your  cold  should  be  made  worse.  But  I  trust  all 
danger  is  over  now.     .     .     .     The  sight  of  you  has  decidedly  done  her 

Gabbage,  cited  by  M.  Ribot,  Maladies  de  la  PersonnaliU,  p.  Ill ;  with  which  compare 
case  301  below.  For  further  telepathic  examples,  see  cases  161,  240,  350  (in  "Additions 
and  Corrections  "),  553,  572. 

1  Compare  the  dream-cases  Nos.  432,  463  466,  467. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  35 

much  good.'  So  she  had  been  in  danger,  and  would  not  disturb  me  !  Oh  ! 
how  thankful  I  felt  to  the  vision  or  fancy,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been." 

Mrs.  Ferrers,  of  Baddesley  Clinton,  Knowle,  a  niece  of  Lady 
Chatterton's,  wrote  to  us  on  October  24th,  1883,  "  This  account  is  taken 
from  a  diary  of  my  aunt's."     She  adds  later  : — 

"  I  have  often  and  often  heard  my  aunt  relate  that  vision,  but  it  was 
not,  so  far  as  I  know,  recorded  in  any  contemporary  diary. 

"  Lady  C.  related  the  story  to  Lockhart  and  his  daughter  about  1843, 
and  then  wrote  it  down  in  her  diary.  The  entry  is  not  dated  ;  the  date 
before  it  is  May,  1843,  that  which  follows,  1842,  but  it  was  evidently 
written  down  between  1839  and  1848.  The  book  is  very  badly  arranged 
as  to  chronology.  I  can't  fix  the  date  of  Lady  C.'s  mother's  death  from 
it  except  that  it  was  prior  to  1836.  "  R.  H.  Ferrers." 

Here  the  picture,  though  not  producing  the  impression  of  a  solid 
and  independent  object,  was  clearly  no  mere  illusion,  no  mere 
momentary  translation  of  the  folds  or  pattern  of  the  drapery  into  a 
human  face  ;  it  was  accurate  and  persistent  enough  to  resist  a  touch 
which  shook  the  curtain  on  which  it  was  shown.  It  is  a  point  of 
interest  that  (besides  a  second  veridical  case  given  in  Chap.  XII.  §  7,) 
Lady  Chatterton  mentions  having  experienced  another  hallucination 
which,  like  the  one  just  quoted,  appeared  on  a  flat  surface}  On 
the  theory  of  telepathic  phantasms  explained  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  5,  it  is 
of  course  quite  natural  that  a  veridical  and  a  non-veridical  vision, 
or  that  several  veridical  visions,  occurring  to  the  same  person,  should 
present  this  amount  of  likeness,  as,  e.g.,  in  Mr.  Gottschalk's  experience. 
But  the  point  is  one  that  we  can  rarely  observe,  as  few  of  our  telepathic 
percipients  have  had  any  second  hallucination  of  the  senses  at  all. 

But  yet  further  stages  remain,  on  the  path  to  the  final  one  of  natural 
solid-looking  externality.  In  the  following  case  the  image  appeared 
with  somewhat  more  of  apparent  relief  than  in  Lady  Chatterton's, 
but  certainly  not  yet  as  co-ordinate  in  any  natural  fashion  with  the 
real  objects  in  view.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Richard  Searle, 
barrister,  of  Home  Lodge,  Heme  Hill,  who  tells  us  that  he  has  had 

no  other  experience  of  a  hallucination. 

"November  2nd,  1883. 
(222)  "One  afternoon,  a  few  years  ago,  I  was  sitting  in  my  chambers  in 
the  Temple,  working  at  some  papers.  My  desk  is  between  the  fireplace  and 
one  of  the  windows,  the  window  being  two  or  three  yards  on  the  left  side 
of  my  chair,  and  looking  out  into  the  Temple.  Suddenly  I  became  aware 
that  I  was  looking  at  the  bottom  window-pane,  which  was  about  on  a  level 

1  She  records — apparently  in  her  journal — that,  when  sleeping  as  a  child  in  a 
"haunted  room,"  she  woke  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  saw  a  brilliant  light  on  the 
wall,  and  figures  of  men  passing  over  it,  as  in  a  panorama,  fighting.  She  inferred  from 
the  words  and  gestures  of  her  nurse,  who  was  apparently  sitting  up  in  her  sleep  with 
fixed  and  open  eyes,  that  she  saw  the  same  scene  ;  and  the  nurse  may  possibly  have  been 
the  "agent "  of  the  child's  impression  (see  Chap,  xviii.  §  5). 

VOL.    II.  T>    2 

36  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

with  my  eyes,  and  thei'e  I  saw  the  figure  of  the  head  and  face  of  my  wife, 
in  a  reclining  position,  with  the  eyes  closed  and  the  face  quite  white  and 
bloodless,  as  if  she  were  dead. 

"  I  pulled  myself  together,  and  got  up  and  looked  out  of  the  window, 
where  I  saw  nothing  but  the  houses  opposite,  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  I  had  been  drowsy  and  had  fallen  asleep,  and,  after  taking  a  few 
turns  about  the  room  to  rouse  myself,  I  sat  down  again  to  my  work  and 
thought  no  more  of  the  matter. 

"  I  went  home  at  my  usual  time  that  evening,  and  whilst  my  wife  and 
I  were  at  dinner,  she  told  me  that  she  had  lunched  with  a  friend  who  lived 
in  Gloucester  Gardens,  and  that  she  had  taken  with  her  a  little  child,  one 
of  her  nieces,  who  was  staying  with  us  ;  but  during  lunch,  or  just  after  it, 
the  child  had  a  fall  and  slightly  cut  her  face  so  that  the  blood  came.  After 
telling  the  story,  my  wife  added  that  she  was  so  alarmed  when  she  saw  the 
blood  on  the  child's  face  that  she  had  fainted.  What  I  had  seen  in  the 
window  then  occurred  to  my  mind,  and  I  asked  her  what  time  it  was 
when  this  happened.  She  said,  as  far  as  she  remembered,  it  must  have 
been  a  few  minutes  after  2  o'clock.  This  was  the  time,  as  nearly  as  I  could 
calculate,  not  having  looked  at  my  watch,  when  I  saw  the  figure  in  the 
window-pane. 

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  this  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have 
known  my  wife  to  have  had  a  fainting-fit.  She  was  in  bad  health  at  the 
time,  and  I  did  not  mention  to  her  what  I  had  seen  until  a  few  days  after- 
wards, when  she  had  become  stronger.  I  mentioned  the  occurrence  to 
several  of  my  friends  at  the  time.  a  t>     g  " 

Mr.  Paul  Pierrard,  of  27,  Gloucester  Gardens,  W.,  writes  as  follows  : — 

"  4th  December,  1883. 

"  It  may  be  interesting  for  special  observers  to  have  a  record  of  an 
extraordinary  occurrence  which  happened  about  four  years  ago  at  my  resi- 
dence, 27,  Gloucester  Gardens,  W. 

"  At  an  afternoon  party  of  ladies  and  children,  among  whom  were  Mrs. 
Searle,  of  Home  Lodge,  Heme  Hill,  and  her  little  niece,  Louise,  there 
was  a  rather  noisy,  bustling,  and  amusing  game  round  a  table,  when  little 
Louise  fell  from  her  chair  and  hurt  herself  slightly.  The  fear  of  a  grave 
accident  caused  Mrs.  Searle  to  be  very  excited,  and  she  fainted. 

"  The  day  after,  we  met  Mr.  Searle,  who  stated  that  in  the  afternoon  of 
the  preceding  day  he  had  been  reading  important  cases  in  his  chambers, 
No.  6,  Pump  Court,  Temple,  when  a  peculiar  feeling  overcame  him,  and 
he  distinctly  saw,  as  it  wei-e  in  a  looking-glass,  the  very  image  of  his 
wife  leaning  back  in  a  swoon,  which  seemed  very  strange  at  the  moment. 

"  By  coinparing  the  time,  it  was  found  that  this  extraordinary  vision 
was  produced  at  the  very  same  instant  as  the  related  incident. 

"  We  often  spoke  of  the  case  together,  and  could  not  find  any  explana- 
tion to  completely  satisfy  our  minds  ;  but  we  registered  this  rare  fact  for 
which  a  name  is  wanted.  '  u  Paul  Pierrard.' 

Here  there  was  more  than  the  mere  representation  of  the  agent; 
she  was  represented  apparently  in  the  aspect  which  she  actually 
wore,  but  in  which  the  percipient  had  never  seen  her,  and  in  which 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  37 

she  would  hardly  be  consciously  picturing  herself.  We  are  scarcely 
driven,  however,  in  this  case,  to  the  difficult  conception  of  "  telepathic 
clairvoyance "  set  forth  in  Chapter  XII.,  §  8  ;  for  it  is  possible  to 
suppose  that  the  idea  of  fainting,  impressed  on  Mr.  Searle's  mind, 
worked  itself  out  into  perception  in  an  appropriate  fashion. 

The  stage  of  visualisation  in  the  next  case  is  particularly  inter- 
esting. The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Taunton,  of  Brook  Vale,  Witton, 
Birmingham. 

"January  15th,  1884. 

(223)  "  On  Thursday  evening,  14th  November,  1867,  I  was  sitting  in 
the  Birmingham  Town  Hall  with  my  husband  at  a  concert,  when 
there  came  over  me  the  icy  chill  which  usually  accompanies  these 
occurrences.!  Almost  immediately,  I  saw  with  perfect  distinctness, 
between  myself  and  the  orchestra,  my  uncle,  Mr.  W.,  lying  in  bed 
with  an  appealing  look  on  his  face,  like  one  dying.  I  had  not  heard 
anything  of  him  for  several  months,  and  had  no  reason  to  think  he  was 
ill.  The  appearance  was  not  transparent  or  filmy,  but  perfectly  solid- 
looking;  and  yet  I  could  somehow  see  the  orchestra,  not  through,  hut 
behind  it.  I  did  not  try  turning  my  eyes  to  see  whether  the  figure 
moved  with  them,  but  looked  at  it  with  a  fascinated  expression  that 
made  my  husband  ask  if  I  was  ill.  I  asked  him  not  to  speak  to  me  for  a 
minute  or  two  ;  the  vision  gradually  disappeared,  and  I  told  my  husband, 
after  the  concert  was  over,  what  I  had  seen.  A  letter  came  shortly  after 
telling  of  my  uncle's  death.  He  died  at  exactly  the  time  when  I  saw  the 
vision.  "  E.  P.  Taunton." 

The  signature  of  Mrs.  Taunton's  husband  is  also  appended. 

"Rich.  H.  Taunton." 

We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Belfast  News-Letter  that  Mr.  W. 
died  on  November  14th,  1867. 

The  phantasm  here  was  perfectly  external,  and  is  described  as 
"  perfectly  solid-looking  "  ;  yet  it  certainly  did  not  hold  to  the  real 
objects  around  the  same  relation  as  a  figure  of  flesh  and  blood  would 
have  held ;  it  was  in  a  peculiar  way  transparent.  This  feature  is 
noticeable,  as  it  is  one  which  occasionally  occurs  also  in  hallu- 
cinations of  the  purely  subjective  class.^  It  may  thus  be  taken  as  one 
of  the  numerous  minor  indications  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of 
telepathic  phantasms  (see  Chapter  XII.,  §  10). 

1  This  refers  to  a  few  other  experiences  of  a  dififerent  character,  one  of  which,  how- 
ever, involved  a  hallucination  of  sight.  The  cold  sensation  described  was  a  feature  in 
cases  28  and  149  ;  and  appears  again  in  case  286,  where  the  percipient  describes  a  sensa- 
tion as  of  "cold  water  poured  on  the  nape  of  the  neck";  in  case  302,  where  what  is 
described  is  a  sense  of  physical  chill,  mthout  any  flutter  of  the  nerves  ;  and  in  cases  313 
and  352.  Compare  also  cases  211  and  263,  where  however,  (as  perhaps  in  some  of  the 
other  instances)  the  feelings  may  not  have  been  due  to  anything  more  specific  than 
momentary  shock  or  alarm. 

2  Of  many  subjective  hallucinations,  it  has  been  specially  noticed  that  they  hid  what- 

38  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

I  2.  In  the  remaining  cases  the  illusion  seems  to  have  been  practi- 
cally complete.  They  constitute  what  may  be  called  the  normal  type 
of  these  abnormal  phenomena.  The  hallucination  goes  through  no 
gradual  process  of  formation,  and  is  externalised  as  fully  and 
naturally  as  a  real  object ;  the  agent  contributes  to  it  little,  if  any,  of 
the  actual  detail  of  his  condition ;  the  percipient  contributes  to  it 
no  special  imagery  or  setting  of  his  own. 

The  following  narrative  is  from  M.  Gaston  Foumier,  of  21,  Rue  de 
Berlin,  Paris,  an  intimate  friend  of  our  esteemed  collaborator,  M.  Ch. 
Richet.     He  has  antedated  the  occurrence  by  about  18  months. 

"  16,  Octobre,  1885. 

(224)  "  Le  21  fevrier,  1879,  j'etaisin-\dte  a  diner  chez  mes  amis,   M.  et 

Mme.  B .     En  arrivant    dans    le    salon,    je   constate  I'absence   d'un 

commensal  ordinaire  de  la  maison,  M.  d'E ,  que  je    recontrais  presque 

toujours  a  leur  table.     J'en  fais  la  remarque,  et  Mme.  B me    repond 

que  d'E ,  employe  dans  une  importante  maison  de  banque,   etait    sans 

doute  fort  occupe  en  ce  moment,   car   on  ne   I'avait  pas  vu  depuis  deux 

jours.    A  partir  de  ce  moment,  il  nefut  plus  plus  question  de  d'E .    Le 

repas    s'acheve  fort  gaiement,  et  sans  que  Mme.  B donne  la  moindre 

marque  visible  de  preoccupation.     Pendant  le  diner,  nous  avions  forme   le 

projet  d'aller  achever  notre   soiree  au  theatre.     Au  dessert  Mme.  B 

se    leve  pour  aller    s'habiller   dans    sa    chambre,     dont    la   porte,    restee 

entr'ouverte,  donne  dans  la  salle-a-manger.     B et  moi    etions  restee  a 

table,  fumant  notre  cigare,  quand,  apres  quelques  minutes  a  peine,  nous 
entendons    un    cri  terrible.     Croyant  a  un  accident,  nous  nous  precipitons 

dans  la  chambre,  et  nous  trouvons  Mme.  B assise,  prete  a  se  trouver 

mal.  Nous  nous  empressons  autour  d'elle  ;  elle  se  remet  peu  a  peu,  et 
nous  fait  alors  le  recit  suivant. 

"  '  Apres  vous  avoir  quittes,  je  m'  habillais  pour  sortir,  et  j'etais  en  train 

ever  was  behind  the  place  which  they  appeared  to  occupy ;  and  the  rule  seems  to  be- 
that  when  the  percept  is  completely  externalised,  it  is  solid-looking.  But  exceptions  are 
not  infrequent.  Whitish  transparent  figures  were  a  feature  in  a  pathological  case  first 
published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  and  Miscellany  (Edinburgh),  No  vi.,  p.  290,  &c., 
and  described  in  the  well-known  article  on  "  Spectral  Illusions  "  in  Chambers^  Miscellany. 
Wundt  fO/j.  cit..  Vol.  ii.,  p.  357,)  records  the  experience  of  an  overseer  of  forests,  who 
saw  heaps  of  wood  all  round  him  in  his  house,  but  also  saw  the  furniture  and  carpet 
just  as  usual.  {Cf.  case  193.)  Miss  Morse,  of  Vermont,  a  careful  observer,  who  has  had 
hallucinations  at  rare  intervals  during  a  good  many  years,  tells  me,  that  at  first  "they 
seemed  to  be  pictured  just  W2'i/i.m  instead  of  before  my  eyes."  Lately,  however,  "they 
have  iisually  been  proj  ected  into  space ;  but  however  real  the  apparitions  at  first 
appear,  a  close  inspection  reveals  that  they  have  no  solidity — that  objects  can  be 
seen  through  them."  Another  of  my  informants,  who  on  waking  had  a  hallucination 
of  a  tall  female  figure,  noticed  that  he  could  see  a  towel  through  her  ;  and  similarly  in 
one  of  my  cases  of  persistent  dream-images.  Professor  Goodwin  reports  that  with  him 
they  ' '  retain  an  appearance  of  solidity  for  some  seconds  after  waking,  the  furniture  of  the 
room  being  distinctly  recognised  through  these  figures,  like  a  dissolving  view."  Another 
correspondent  describes  such  images  as  seen  "  as  it  were  with  one  eye  asleep,  the  other 
awake."  In  one  oiV&tevson'H  cases  {Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  for  Jan., 
1843),  the  phantasm  appeared  as  though  seen  through  gauze.  I  may  also  refer  to  the 
telepathic  phantasms  which  gave  the  impression  of  being  formed  from  mist  (Chaja  xii., 
§  3,  cases  315,  518,  and  Mrs.  Deane's  experience,  p.  237).  I  have  mentioned  that 
the  disaippearance  is  occasionally  through  a  stage  of  increased  tenuity  and  trans- 
l^arency. 

XIV.]  OCCTJRRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  39 

de  nouer  les  brides  demon  chapeau  devant  ma  glace,  quand  tout-a-coup  j'ai 

vu  dans  cette  glace  d'E entrer  par  la  porte.^    II  avait  son  chapeau  sur 

la  tete  ;  il  etait  pale  et  triste  ;  sans  me  retourner  je  lui  adresse  la  parole, 

"  Tiens,  d'E ,  vous  voila  ;  asseyez-vous  done  ";  et  comme  il  ne  repondait 

pas,  je  me  suis  alors  retourne  et  je  n'ai  plus  rien  vu  ;  prise  alors  de  peur, 
j'ai  pousse  le  cri  que  vous  avez  entendu.' 

"  B ,  pour  rassurer  sa  femme,   se  met  a  la    plaisanter,   traitant 

I'apparition  d'hallucination  nerveuse,  et  lui  disant  que  d'E— —  serait  trfes 
flatty  d'apprendre  a  quel  point  il  occupait  sa  pensee  ;  puis,   comme  Mme. 

B restait  toute  tremblante,  pour  couper  court  a  son  emotion,  nous  lui 

proposons  de  partir  tout  de  suite,  alldguant  que  nous  alliens  manquer  le 

lever  du  rideau.     '  Je  n'ai  pas  pense  un  seul  instant  a  d'E ,'  nous  dit 

Mme.  B ,  '  depuis  que  M.  F— —  m'a  demande  la  cause  de  son  absence. 

Je  ne  suis  pas  nerveuse,  et  je  n'ai  jamais  eu  d'hallucination ;  je  vous 
assure  qu'il  y  la  quelque  chose  d'extraordinaire,  et  quant  a  moi,  je  ne 

sortirai  pas  avant  d'avoir  des  nouvelles  de  d'  E .     Je  vous  supplie 

d'aller  chez  lui,  c'est  le  seul  moyen  de  me  rassurer.'     Je  conseille  a  B 

de  c^der  au  ddsir  de  sa  femme,  et  nous  partons  tous  les  deux  chez  d'E , 

qui  demeurait  a  tres  peu  de  distance.  Tout  en  marchant  nous  plaisantions 
beaucoup  sur  les  frayeurs  de  Mme.  B . 

"  En  arrivant  chez  d'  E ,  nous  demandons  au  concierge,  '  D'  E- 

est-il  chez  lui'  ?     '  Oui,   messieurs,   il  n'est  pas  descendu  de  la  journee.' 

D'  E habitait  un  petit   appartement  de  gargon  ;  il  n'avait  pas  de 

domestiques.  Nous  montons  chez  lui,  et  nous  sonnons  a  plusieurs  reprises 
sans  avoir  de  reponse.     Nous  sonnons  plus  fort,  puis  nous  frappons  a  tour 

de  bras,  sans  plus  de  succes.     B ,  emotionne  malgr^  lui,  me  dit,  '  C'est 

absurde,  le  concierge  se  sera  trompe ;  il  est  sorti ;  descendons.'     Mais  le 

concierge  nous  affirme  que  d'E n'est  pas  sorti,  qu'il  en  est  absolument 

sur.  Veritablement  efFray^s,  nous  remontons  avec  lui,  et  nous  tentons 
de  nouveau  de  nous  faire  ouvrir ;  puis  n'  entendant  rien  bouger  dans 
I'appartement,  nous   envoyons  chercher  un  serrurier.    On  force  la  porte,  et 

nous  trouvons  le  corps  de  d'E ,   encore  chaud,  couche  sur  son  lit,   et 

troue  de  deux  coups  de  revolver. 

"  Le  medecin,  que  nous  faisons  venir  aussitot,  constate  que  d'E 

avait  d'abord  tente  de  se  suicider  en  avalant  un  flacon  de  laudanum,  et 
qu'  ensuite,  trouvant  sans  doute  que  le  poison  n'  agissait  pas  assez  vite,  il 
s'etait  tire  deux  coups  de  revolver  a  la  place  du  cceur.  D'apres  la  con- 
station  medicale,  la  mort  remontait  a  une  heure  environ.  Sans  que 
je   puisse   preciser   I'heure   exacte,     c'etait     cependant    une    coincidence 

presqu'  absolue  avec  la  soi-disant  hallucination  de  Mme.   B .     Sur  la 

cheminee  il  y  avait  une  lettre  de  d'E ,  annongant  a  M.  et  Mme.  B 

sa  resolution,  lettre  particulierement  affectueuse  pour  Mme.  B . 

"  Gaston  Fournier." 

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Myers,  M.  Fournier  expressed  himself  un- 
certain as  to  the  correctness  of  his  date.     We  have  procured  a   copy  of 

the  Act  de  Deces,  which  records  that  the  date  of  d'E 's  death  was 

October  7,  1880  ;  also  that  it  took  place  at   10  a.m.     If  this  was  so,  it 

1  The  vision  in  the  glass  is,  of  course,  itself  the  hallucination  in  this  case  (c/.  Vol.  i., 
p.  444,  note),  and  does  not  imply  either  actual  reflection,  or  even  a  corresponding  phantasm 
to  be  seen  in  the  room,  had  Mme.  B.  turned  her  head.  That  such  a  phantasm  might  have 
appeared  is,  however,  shown  by  the  case  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  469,  note. 

40  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

would  still  be  quite  possible  that  the  body,  which  was  clothed,  should  be 
found  warm  in  the  evening.  Probably  the  hour  could  not  be  stated  with 
anything  like  precision  ;  and  it  is  as  likely  that  the  official  record  fixed  it 
too  early  as  that  M.  Fournier's  medical  authority  (supposing  him  to  be 
correctly  quoted)  fixed  it  too  late.  But  we  clearly  cannot  assume  the 
coincidence  to  have  been  nearly  as  exact  as  M.  Fournier  imagined. 

Mme.  B.  is  dead.  M.  B.  is  unfortunately  in  South  America ;  and 
though  we  hope  to  obtain  his  account  of  the  occurrence,  it  has  not  arrived 
in  time  for  insertion. 

Mrs.  Leonard  Thrupp,  of  67,  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  W., 
narrates:—  "November,  1883. 

(225)  "  In  the  month  of  October,  1850,  I  was  staying  in  the  house  of 
Mr.  D.,  an  East  Indian  merchant,  No.  1,  South  wick  Crescent,  Hyde  Park. 

"  One  evening,  a  Mr.  B.,  with  three  daughters,  came  to  dine — the 
youngest  a  blooming  rosy  girl  of  17.  Mr.  B.  had  lately  bought  a  house 
in  Devonshire,  which  was  being  added  to  and  furnished.  He  made  our 
host  promise  to  go  down  to  the  house-warming  at  Christmas. 

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards,  that  gentleman  was  out  one  night,  and  his 
sister,  Mrs.  R.,  and  I  sat  by  the  fire  in  a  large  double  drawing-room.  She 
was  knitting,  and  from  her  position  could  see  into  the  smaller  room  which 
was  not  lighted.  I  had  my  back  to  that  room,  and  was  reading  aloud  one 
of  Charles  Dickens'  serial  stories.  All  of  a  sudden  she  dropped  her  work, 
exclaiming  faintly,  '  Good  God  ! '  '  What  is  the  matter  ? '  I  cried.  She 
pointed  into  the  semi-darkness,  and  whispered  (as  if  awe-struck),  '  There's 
Louisa  B.'  I  rose,  looked,  but  saw  nothing.  She  said,  '  Are  you  afraid  to 
go  in  ? '  '  Not  at  all,'  I  replied,  and  went,  and  passed  my  arm  round  to 
prove  it  was  mere  fancy  on  her  part.  However,  the  result  showed  that 
was  youthful  presumption  on  my  part. 

"  The  next  morning,  Mr.  D.  heard  the  story  from  his  sister  in  her  own 
apartment,  where  she  breakfasted.  He  said  to  me  in  the  breakfast-room, 
'  Did  not  you  see  anything  last  night.  Miss  Hill  1 '  '  Nothing  whatever,'  I 
replied.  '  Well,'  said  he,  '  I  suppose  you  think  us  Scotch  very  superstitious, 
but  an  aunt  of  ours  and  two  of  my  sisters  have  the  gift  of  second -sight.' 

"  That  day  passed,  but  the  following  day  at  noon,  Mr.  D.  met  me  at 
the  bottom  of  the  stairs  with  an  open  letter  and  said,  '  That  was  no  fancy 
of  Mrs.  R.'s  ;  poor  Louisa  B.  died  at  9  o'clock  that  evening,  of  brain  fever, 
after  measles.'  "  Anne  Elizabeth  Theupp." 

Since  giving  this  account,  Mrs.  Thrupp  has  referred  to  old  letters,  and 
has  come  to  the  opinion  that  the  date  must  have  been  towards  the  end  of 
1847.  We  find,  however,  from  the  obituary  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine 
that  a  death,  which  is  almost  certainly  that  of  the  Miss  Louisa  B.  of  the 
narrative,  took  place  on  July  8,  1847.  This  suggests  that  the  detail  of 
sitting  hy  the  fire  is  inaccurate — the  temperature  at  9  p.m.  on  that 
day,  as  we  learn  from  the  Greenwich  Observatory,  having  been  60°  ; 
but  Mrs.  Thrupp  is  quite  certain  that  her  memory  is  right  on 
this  point.  She  further  tells  us  that  there  were  reasons  why  Miss 
B.  should  have  wished  to  see  Mr.  D.,  who  was  an  old  friend  of  the 
family,  but  that  she  knew  little  of  Mrs.  R.  Mrs  R.  has  been  dead 
some  years ;  and  Mrs.  Durward,   a  lady  who  was  her   companion  at  the 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  41 

time,  and  who — as  Mrs.  Thrupp  recollects — assisted  Mrs.  R.  to  bed, 
remembers  no  more  of  the  matter  than  that  Mrs.  R.  was  excited.  She 
mentions,  however,  that  Mrs.  R.  was  "  subject  to  a  kind  of  seizure,"  in 
which  she  would  become  quite  rigid,  and  point  with  her  finger  to  where 
she  imagined  her  husband  to  be,  exclaiming,  "  There  he  is."  These  fits 
occurred  perhaps  half  a  dozen  times  in  a  year,  and  were  brought  on  by 
any  news  of  him  that  distressed  her.  Mrs.  Durward  never  knew  her  to 
have  apparitions  of  anyone  except  her  husband. 

This  case  is  an  example  of  an  appearance  to  a  person  only 
slightly  connected  with  the  agent ;  and  it  cannot  but  suggest  the 
question,  would  Mr.  D.  have  seen  the  figure  had  he  been  present  ? 
I  shall  recur  to  the  point  in  connection  with  "collective  "  hallucinations 
(Chap.  XVIII., §  7).  As  to  Mrs.  R.'s  pathological  visions,  I  may  point 
out  that  the  extent  to  which  they  weaken  the  evidence  for  telepathy 
afforded  by  the  present  incident  may  easily  be  exaggerated.  People 
seem  sometimes  to  regard  any  real  or  supposed  tendency  to  subjective 
hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  percipient  as  at  once  fatal  to  an 
alleged  telepathic  case.  Now  let  us  grant  for  the  moment  that  Mrs. 
E.'s  visions  of  her  husband  prove  a  tendency  to  similar  subjective 
visions  of  other  persons  known  to  her ;  and  let  us  make  the  extreme 
supposition  that,  unknown  to  her  intimate  attendant  who  never  knew 
her  to  have  any  such  experience,  she  actually  had  50  in  the  course 
of  her  adult  life — or  on  an  average  one  in  every  292  days,  if  we 
reckon  her  adult  life  as  40  years.  Then  the  probability  of  her  having 
a  vision  of  the  sort  on  the  particular  day  on  which  Miss  B.  died  would 
be  2¥2.  But  the  probability  that  that  particular  vision  would  repre- 
sent Miss  B.,  with  whom  she  had  only  a  slight  acquaintance,  would 
clearly  be  very  small ;  let  us  be  liberal,  and  call  it  to.  Thus  the 
probability  of  her  hitting  off  the  above  coincidence  by  accident  would 
be  at  most  nho,  even  if  we  took  only  the  identity  of  day  into 
account ;  and  very  much  less  if  we  relied  on  the  alleged  identity 
of  hour.  It  would  surely  be  irrational  to  exclude  from  the  cumu- 
lative telepathic  evidence  a  case  where  the  probability  of  accidental 
occurrence  remains  as  minute  as  this. 

The  next  case  is  from  General  H.,  who,  unfortunately,  will  not 
permit  the  publication  of  his  name.  The  account  was  procured 
through  the  kindness  of  Miss  A.  A.  Leith,  of  8,  Dorset  Square,  N.W. 

"November  11th,  1884. 

(226)  "In  1856  I  was  engaged  on  duty  at  a  place  called  Roha,  some  40 
miles  south  of  Bombay,  and  moving  about  in  the  districts  (as  it  is 
termed  in  India).  My  only  shelter  was  a  tent,  in  which  I  lived  for 
several  months  in  the  year.     My  parents,  and  only  sister,  about   22   years 

42  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

of  age,  were  living  at  K.,  from  which  place  letters  used  to  take  a  week 
reaching  me.  My  sister  and  I  were  regular  correspondents,  and  the  post 
generally  arrived  about  6  a.m.,  as  I  was  starting  to  my  work.  It  was  on 
the  18th  April  of  that  year  (a  day  never  to  be  forgotten)  that  I  received 
a  letter  from  my  mother,  stating  that  my  sister  was  not  feeling  well,  but 
hoped  to  write  to  me  the  next  day.  There  was  nothing  in  the  letter  to 
make  me  feel  particularly  anxious.  After  my  usual  out-door  work,  I 
returned  to  my  tent,  and  in  due  course  set  to  my  ordinary  daily  work. 
At  2  o'clock  my  clerk  was  with  me,  reading  some  native  documents  that 
required  my  attention,  and  I  was  in  no  way  thinking  of  my  sister,  when 
all  of  a  sudden  I  was  startled  by  seeing  my  sister  (as  it  appeared)  walk 
in  front  of  me  from  one  door  of  the  tent  to  the  other,  dressed  in  her  night- 
dress. ^  The  apparition  had  such  an  effect  upon  me  that  I  felt  persuaded 
that  my  sister  had  died  at  that  time.  I  wrote  at  once  to  my  father, 
stating  what  I  had  seen,  and  in  due  time  I  also  heard  from  him  that 
my  sister  had  died  at  that  time.  ct  j    q    jj  " 

An  obituary  notice  in  AllerHs  Indian  Mail  shows  that  General  H.'s 
sister  died  on  April  18th,  1856. 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  General  H.  writes  : 

"  By  the  context  of  the  narrative  you  will  see  it  was  2  p.m.,  broad 
daylight.     My  vision  corresponded  with  the  exact  time  of  death. 

"  I  have  never  seen  any  other  apparition. 

"  You  must  excuse  my  sanctioning  my  name  being  appended  to  the 
account,  though  I  am  as  certain  of  it  as  I  am  of  my  own  existence." 

[General  H.  further  informs  us  that  his  parents  are  dead,  and  that 
there  is  no  friend  living  who  may  have  seen  his  letter.] 

The  next  case — a  recent  one — is  of  a  very  unusual  type  as 
regards  the  effect  on  the  percipient,  and,  perhaps,  on  that  very 
account  suggests  the  telepathic  explanation  rather  more  strongly 
than  the  facts  warrant.  But  as  regards  the  facts  themselves,  there 
can  be  little  doubt.  The  evidence,  though  it  does  not  come  from  the 
percipient,  is  of  the  sort  which  is  as  good  as  first-hand ;  and  this  is 
the  more  fortunate,  in  that,  as  it  happens,  there  never  was  a  moment 
at  which  the  first-hand  evidence  could  have  been  given.  The  account 
is  in  the  words  of  Mr,  H.  King,  of  the  Koyal  Military  College,  York 

Town,  Famborough,  Hants. 

"March,  1885. 
(227)  "  On  Thursday  night,  October  30th  [1884],  H.  M.  and  I  went  to 
dine  at  Broadmoor.  We  stayed  till  10  p.m.  or  so,  and  on  leaving  the  house 
were  talking  of  different  things,  M.  being  quite  as  usual ;  when,  after 
five  minutes'  walk,  M  suddenly  stopped,  and  said,  '  Look,  look  !  oh, 
look  ! '  We  thouglit  nothing  of  it  at  first,  but  he  still  kept  pointing 
with  his  finger  at  some  imaginary  thing  in  the  darkness.  The  spot  we 
were  in  was  very  dark,  with  a  wood  on  our  right  and  a  field  on  our  left, 

1  Tor  this  feature,  compare  the  dream-case,  No.  118. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  43 

separated  from  us  by  a  railing.  Thinking  M.  saw  somebody  hiding 
behind  a  bush  I  went  forward,  but  saw  nothing.  M.  now,  still  saying 
'  Look  at  her,  look  at  her,'  fell  back  against  the  railing  and  lay  motion- 
less with  his  back  against  it.  We  ran  to  him,  asking  him  what  was  the 
matter,  but  he  only  moaned.  After  a  while  he  seemed  better.  We 
wanted  him  to  come  on,  but  he  said,  '  Where  is  my  stick  1 ' — which  he  had 
dropped.  '  Oh,  never  mind  your  stick,'  I  said,  for  I  was  afraid  of  not 
being  at  the  college  before  the  shutting  of  the  doors  ;  but  he  would  look 
for  his  stick,  which  he  found  by  lighting  a  match.  We  walked  on 
together,  M.,  notwithstanding  all  my  efforts  to  get  him  into  conversation, 
not  saying  a  word.  After  walking  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  he 
suddenly  said,  '  Where  were  they  carrying  her  to  ?  I  tell  you  they  were 
carrying  her  ;  didn't  you  see  them  carrying  her  ? '  I  tried  to  quiet  him, 
but  he  kept  on  saying,  '  I  tell  you  they  were  carrying  her.'  In  a  short 
time  he  was  pacified  and  walked  quietly  on  for  half  a  mile  or  so,  when  he 
said,  looking  round  in  surprise,  '  Hullo  !  we  must  have  come  a  short  cut. 
I  know  this  house.'  I  said  we  hadn't ;  but  he  said,  '  We  must  have  run 
then.  It  seems  only  a  minute  ago  since  we  left  the  house.'  He  several 
times  expressed  his  surprise  at  the  quickness  we  had  done  the  last  half- 
mile  in.     He  was  all  right  from  this  to  the  college. 

"  On  Sunday  morning  he  told  me  that  something  very  bad  happened  on 
Thursday  night.  An  old  lady  who  was  very  fond  of  him,  but  whom  he  hadn't 
seen  for  a  long  time,  had  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease.  She  had  been  out 
somewhere  and  had  come  home,  when,  as  she  was  receiving  some  friends,  she 
fell  dead,  and,  to  use  his  words,  she  was  carried  out.  I  immediately  asked 
him  at  what  hour  did  she  die  ?  He  said  at  between  10  and  11.  (It  was 
a  little  after  10  when  he  saw  his  vision.)  I  could  not  get  the  exact  hour 
of  the  lady's  death,  as  he  didn't  like  the  subject.  When  he  told  me  this, 
he  knew  nothing  of  what  occurred  on  the  walk  home.  When  he  was 
told  of  it,  he  didn't  remember  a  thing  about  the  vision ;  but  said  if  he 
hadn't  known  that  he  hadn't  drunk  anything  (which  was  true),  he  would 
have  said  he  had  been  drunk.  He  seemed  to  have  been  in  a  sort  of  stupor 
all  the  time.  I  think  I  ought  to  mention  that  he  told  me  long  before 
this  that  he  had  seen  a  vision  of  a  girl  who  had  been  drowned. ^  This  is 
a  true  account  of  what  happened. 

(Signed)  "  H.  King  (the  writer  of  the  above). 

"A.  Hamilton-Jones." 

Mr.  H.  King  adds,  "  My  friend  [Mr.  Jones]  remembers  perfectly 
M.'s  not  being  surprised  at  the  news  [of  the  death],  and  his  saying  it 
seemed  to  have  happened  before." 

[Mr.  R.  A.  King,  of  36,  G-rove  Lane,  Denmark  Hill,  uncle  of  the 
narrator,  through  whose  kindness  we  obtained  this  account,  says  :  "  M. 
has  such  a  horror  of  the  whole  affair  that  my  nephew  does  not  let  me 
write  to  ask  him  about  the  old  lady's  death."  We  are  thus  unable  to 
verify  the  date  of  the  death  independently.  M.'s  name  is  known  to  me. 
He  has  left  the  Military  College.] 

The  next  case  is  from  the  Rev.  F.  Barker,  late  Rector  of  Cottenham, 
Cambridge. 

1  This  other  vision  followed  closely  on  an  accident  which  had  much  distressed  the 
percipient. 

44  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"July  2nd,  1884. 

(228)  "  At  about  11  o'clock  on  the  night  of  December  6th,  1873,  I  had 
just  got  into  bed,  and  had  certainly  not  fallen  asleep,  or  even  into  a  doze, 
when  I  suddenly  startled  my  wife  by  a  deep  groan,  and  when  she  asked  the 
reason,  I  said,  '  I  have  just  seen  my  aunt.  She  came  and  stood  beside  me, 
and  smiled  with  her  old  kind  smile,  and  disappeared.'  A  much-loved  aunt, 
my  mother's  sister,  was  at  that  time  in  Madeira,  for  her  health,  ac- 
companied by  my  cousin,  her  niece.  I  had  no  reason  to  think  that  she  was 
critically  ill  at  this  time,  but  the  impression  made  upon  me  was  so  great 
that  the  next  day  I  told  her  family  (my  mother  among  them)  what  I  had 
seen.  Within  a  week  afterwards  we  heard  that  she  had  died  on  that  very 
night,  and,  making  all  allowance  for  longitude,  at  about  that  very  time. 

"  When  my  cousin,  who  was  with  her  to  the  last,  heard  what  I  had 
seen,  she  said,  '  I  am  not  at  all  surprised,  for  she  was  calling  out  for  you 
all  the  time  she  was  dying.' 

"  This  is  the  only  time  I  have  experienced  anything  of  this  nature.  I 
think,  perhaps,  this  story  first-hand  may  interest  you.  I  can  only  say  that 
the  vivid  impression  I  received  that  night  has  never  left  me. 

"  Febdbeick  Barker." 

We  find  the  date  of  death  confirmed  in  the  Times  obituary. 

Mrs.  Barker's  account  is  as  follows  : — 

"  I  recollect  the  circumstances  well,  upon  which  my  husband  wrote  to 
you.  It  must  have  been  somewhere  about  11  o'clock.  He  was  not 
asleep  (for  he  had  only  just  spoken),  when  he  groaned  deeply.  I  asked 
what  was  the  matter,  and  he  said  his  aunt,  who  was  then  in  Madeira,  had 
appeared  to  him,  smiling  at  him  with  her  own  kind  smile,  and  then 
vanished.  He  said  she  had  '  something  black,  it  might  have  been  lace, 
thrown  over  her  head.'  The  next  day  he  told  many  relations  of  the 
occurrence,  and  it  turned  out  she  died  that  very  night.  Her  niece.  Miss 
Garnett,  told  me  she  was  not  at  all  astonished  that  he  should  have  seen 
her  aunt,  for  that  while  she  was  dying  she  was  calling  out  for  him.  He 
had  been  to  her  almost  like  a  son. 

"P.  S.  Barker." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barker  says,  "  My  recollection  is  of  some 
lace-like  head-gear,  as  of  a  black  lace  veil  thrown  round  the  head." 

The  following  statement  is  from  Miss  Garnett,  who  was  with  Mr. 
Barker's  aunt  at  the  time  of  her  death  : — 

"  Wy reside,  near  Lancaster. 

"October,  1885. 

"  I  beg  to  certify  that  I  was  with  my  aunt.  Miss ,  at  the  time 

of  her  death  in  Madeira,  December  6th,  1873.  On  hearing  that  my  cousin, 
the  Bev.  F.  Barker,  now  living  in  Stanley  Place,  Chester,  had  had  some 
kind  of  a  vision  of  my  aunt  at  a  time  almost  exactly  corresponding  with 
that  of  her  death,  I  told  my  uncle,  from  whom  I  heard  of  the  occurrence, 
that  I  was  not  surprised,  since  my  aunt  had  so  frequently  expressed  a 
wish  to  see  Mr.  Barker  during  the  last  few  days  of  her  life 

"  Louisa   Garnett." 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  45 

The  following  case  was  first  published  in  Burma,  Past  and 
Present,  by  Lieut.-Gen.  Albert  Fytche,  C.S.I,  Vol  I,  pp.  177-8. 

(229)  "A  remarkable  incident  occurred  to  me  at  Maulmain,  which  made 
a  deep  impression  upon  my  imagination.  I  saw  a  ghost^  with  my  own  eyes 
in  broad  daylight,  of  which  I  could  make  an  affidavit.  I  had  an  old 
schoolfellow,  who  was  afterwards  a  college  friend,  with  whom  I  had  lived 
in  the  closest  intimacy.  Years,  however,  passed  without  our  seeing  each 
other.  One  morning  I  had  just  got  out  of  bed,  and  was  dressing  myself, 
when  suddenly  my  old  friend  entered  the  room.  I  greeted  him  warmly ; 
told  him  to  call  for  a  cup  of  tea  in  the  verandah,  and  promised  to  be  with 
him  immediately.  I  dressed  myself  in  all  haste,  and  went  out  into  the 
verandah,  but  found  no  one  there.  I  could  not  believe  my  eyes.  I  called 
to  the  sentry  who  was  posted  at  the  front  of  the  house,  but  he  had  seen  no 
strange  gentleman  that  morning  ;  the  servants  also  declared  that  no  such 
person  had  entered  the  house.  I  was  certain  I  had  seen  my  friend.  I  was 
not  thinking  about  him  at  the  time,  yet  I  was  not  taken  by  surprise,  as 
steamers  and  other  vessels  were  frequently  arriving  at  Maulmain.  A  fort- 
night afterwards  news  arrived  that  he  had  died  600  miles  ofi',  about  the 
very  time  I  had  seen  him  at  Maulmain." 

General  Fytche  writes  to  Professor  Sidgwick  as  follows  : — 

"  Durling  Dean,  West  Clifi',  Bournemouth," 
"December  22nd,  1883." 

"  A  paper  containing  answers  to  your  list  of  questions  is  enclosed.  I 
don't  think  I  have  anything  further  to  add,  except  to  reiterate  my  convic- 
tion that  my  friend's  etcJw^ov  did  appear  to  me  as  stated.  My  friend's 
death  was  a  sudden  one  ;  I  had  never  heard  of  his  previous  illness,  nor 
had  I  been  thinking  about  him  in  any  way.  In  animistic  philosophy, 
savage  or  civilised,  I  believe  it  is  admitted  that  an  apparition  of  the  kind 
bears  the  likeness  of  its  fleshly  body. 

"  Answers  to  questions  as  to  the  apparition  at  Maulmain  : — 

(1)  "The  printed  narrative  was  written  from  memory.  I  kept  no 
diary  after  my  papers  were  burnt  at  Bassein  (see  p.  24  of  book).  There 
are  no  letters  extant  which  I  am  aware  of  which  were  written  at  the  time 
of  the  occurrence. 

(2)  "  The  news  of  my  friend's  death  was  conveyed  by  the  public  news- 
papers, which  arrived  at  Maulmain  by  the  mail  steamer  about  a  fortnight 
after  the  incident  in  question.  They  stated  that  the  death  of  my  friend 
occurred  in  the  early  morning  of  the  day  his  spirit  appeared  to  me. 

(3)  "  When  the  apparition  was  addressed  by  me,  it  did  not  respond  by 
word  or  sign,  at  least  so  far  as  I  observed.  I  was  not  thinking  of  an 
apparition.     I  took  it  for  my  friend  in  the  flesh. 

(4)  "The  event  occurred  some  26  years  ago,  and  the  persons  who 
resided  near  me  at  the  time,  and  whom  I  visited  on  the  morning  of  the 
occurrence,  are  dead.  The  year  following  I  visited  England,  and  mentioned 
the  circumstance  to  several  members  of  my  family,  and  amongst  others,  I 
think,  my  cousin,  Louis  Tennyson  d'Eyncourt,  one  of  the  London 
magistrates,  but  it  was  not  a  matter  that  I  ever  talked  much  about. 

(5)  "  I  have  had  no  similar  experience.     I  have  had  no  hallucination  of 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

46  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

sight  or  hearing,  and  have  always  been  considered  as  a  person  of  the 
strongest  nerve.  "  A.  Fytche  (General)." 

Mr.  d'Eyncourt  writes  from  31,  Cornwall  Gardens,  S.W.,  on  Dec.  21, 
1885  :— 

"  General  Fytche  paid  me  a  visit  at  Hadley  a  year  or  two^  before  he 
published  his  book — I  should  say  from  15  to  18  years  since,  and  told  me 
the  story  as  narrated  afterwards  in  his  book ;  and  it  made  a  great 
impression  on  me  and  my  family.  I  cannot  remember  what  year  he  told 
me,  but  certainly  not  25  years  since ;  perhaps  20  would  be  nearer  the 
mark." 

[General  Fytche  is  under  a  promise  not  to  disclose  his  friend's  name ; 
which  prevents  us  from  ascertaining  the  exact  date  of  the  incident.] 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  Evans,  of  Byron  Cottage,  Chalford, 
near  Stroud. 

"April  17th,  1884. 

(230)  "In  the  fall  of  1867,  I  took  a  trip  to  Canada;  and  one  evening, 
the  early  part  of  October,  the  same  year,  I  was  sitting  with  a  merchant  of 
Toronto,  in  the  dress-circle  of  the  theatre ;  and  during  the  evening  my 
attention  was  attracted  towards  a  portion  of  the  pit,  which  was,  through 
shadow,  slightly  obscured,  by  a  face  looking  up  at  me  in  an  intent,  weird, 
and  agonising  manner,  that  caused  a  feeling  of  awe  to  overpower  me,  as  I 
recognised  in  the  features  my  twin  brother,^  who  at  that  time  was  in 
China.  The  figure,  although  in  shadow,  appeared  lighted  up  super- 
naturally,  and  revealed  itself  plainly,  so  that  I  could  not  be  mistaken  about 
the  face.  I  instantly  exclaimed  to  my  friend,  '  Good  God  !  there  is  my 
brother,'  pointing  at  the  same  time  to  the  figure.  He  said,  'I  cannot  see 
anyone  looking  up  here.'  However,  I  was  so  excited  I  rushed  down  to 
the  pit  where  he  stood,  but  could  not  see  anyone  resembling  him  in 
features  whatever.  I  am  not  superstitious  or  a  Spiritualist,  but  could  not 
get  over  the  startling  circumstances  for  some  time. 

"  On  my  return  home  to  England,  shortly  afterwards,  much  to  my 
grief  and  sorrow,  I  found  my  brother  had  died  at  the  French  Hospital, 
Shanghai,  on  the  6th  October,  1867.  The  incident  in  the  theatre  flashed 
into  my  thoughts,  and  impressed  me  I  had  seen  his  apparition,  and  I  took 
the  trouble  to  ascertain  date  of  performance,  and  found  it  corresponded. 
I  could  not  be  mistaken,  as  it  occurred  the  first  week  I  was  in  Toronto, 
and  the  patronage  of  the  military  placed  the  performance  precisely  on  the 
6th  October,  1867. 

"  I  am  prepared  to  make  an  afiidavit  that  such  are  the  facts. 

"J.  Evans." 

We  find  from  a  certified  copy  of  the  Register  of  Deaths  kept  at  the 
British  Consulate,  at  Shanghai,  that  the  death  took  place  on  October  6th, 
1868  (not  1867),  at  the  General  Hospital. 

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Evans,  explaining  that  it  would  be  the  evening, 
(10.37  p.m.)  not  of  October  6th,  but  of  October  5th,  at  Toronto,  that  would 
correspond  with  October  6th,  midday,   at  Shanghai.     As  I  anticipated,  it 

1  The  interval  must  have  been  longer  than  this,  as  the  book  was  published  in  1878. 

2  Other  cases  where  the  agent  was  a  twin  brother  are  Nos.  76,  77,  78,  and  134. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  47 

turned  out  that  he  had  assumed  that  October  6th  in  one  place  would  be 
October  6th  in  another,  and  had  simply  asked  which  opera  was  performed 
on  October  6th.     He  says  : — 

"  I  wrote  to  my  friend  in  Toronto,  asking  him  if  the  '  Grand  Duchess  ' 
were  performed  on  October  6th,  and  he  replied  in  the  affirmative  ;  but  at 
the  same  time  it  was  performed  on  the  5th,  I  am  sure,  as  well  as  on  the 
■6th.     The  company  was  performing  opera  houffe  during  the  entire  week. 

"  I  have  never  had  any  hallucinations  before  or  since." 

We  have  procured  from  Toronto  a  copy  of  the  Daily  Globe,  which 
shows  that  the  "  Grand  Duchess  "  was  performed  on  both  nights. 

[Mr.  Evans  has  had  no  recent  communication  with  his  companion  of 
the  evening,  who  was  only  an  acquaintance ;  and  corroboration  cannot  be 
obtained.  The  uncertainty  as  to  the  day  of  the  apparition  seems  irre- 
movable. If  it  was  the  5th,  the  coincidence  may  have  been  quite  exact ; 
if  it  was  the  6th,  the  12  hours'  limit  must  have  been  exceeded,  unless  the 
death  took  place  in  the  hour  or  two  preceding  midnight.] 

Here  we  have  to  notice  once  more  the  luminous  appearance  of 
the  phantasm  (Chap.  XII.,  §  7). 

The  following  narrative  appeared  in  the  Daily  Telegraph,  in 
October,  1881.  Unfortunately  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  corro- 
boration or  further  details,  as  we  have  failed  to  discover  the  writer's 
present  address.      We  learn   from  the  War  Office  that  he  resigned 

his  militia  commission  in  August,  1880. 

"  West  Brompton. 

"October  25th,  1881. 
(231)  "  Sir, — Of  many  comrades  who  gave  up  their  lives  for  Queen  and 
country  in  Zululand  and  Natal,  for  none  have  I,  or  those  who  knew  him, 
felt  a  keener  pang  of  regret  than  for  Rudolph  Gough.  In  November,  1878, 
Gough,  having  retired  from  the  Coldstream  Guards,  proceeded  as  a 
volunteer  to  Natal,  where  on  arrival  he  was  given  a  company  in  Com- 
mandant Nettleton's  battalion  of  the  Natal  Native  Contingent,  with  which 
regiment  he  served  in  the  first  advance  into  Zululand.  The  Etshowe 
relief  column  commenced  its  advance  on  March  29th,  and  reached  the 
Inyone  River  on  the  evening  of  that  day.  To  all  our  astonishment,  Gough, 
who  had  risen  from  a  sick  bed  in  Durban,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant 
George  Davis  of  his  own  regiment,  arrived  in  camp  at  dusk,  having  ridden 
through  from  Durban,  a  distance  of  82  miles,  in  little  over  a  day.  Gough, 
who  had  suffered  badly  en  route,  was  again  severely  attacked  by  that 
curse  of  South  African  Armies — dysentery — and  was  ordered  to  one  of  the 
ambulances,  where  he  remained  until  the  morning  of  the  action  of  Gingih- 
lovo.  The  moment  the  alarm  sounded,  the  poor  fellow  staggered  out  and 
took  command  of  his  company,  and  afterwards  actually  led  his  men  over 
the  shelter  trench,  when  the  cheer  was  started  and  the  charge  sounded. 
The  excitement  and  exertion  proved  too  much  for  my  poor  friend's 
enfeebled  frame,  and  utter  collapse  followed. 

"  On  April  17th,  just  before  '  tattoo,'  I  was  sitting  in  the  gipsy-looking 
edifice  that  the  officers  of  the  King's  Royal  Rifle  Corps  had  rigged  up, 

48  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

which  we  dubbed  the  '  mess  house '  or  '  banqueting  hall,'  finishing  a 
letter  to  a  newspaper  for  which  I  acted  as  correspondent,  when  the 
brigade  bugler  rang  out  '  last  post.'  I  walked  to  the  door,  outside  of  which 
I  saw  standing  the  man  who,  two  days  ago,  I  had  been  told  was  dying  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Tugela.  I  could  not  describe  on  paper  the  extra- 
ordinary sensation  that  Gough's  unexpected  appearance  gave  me. 

"  Some  few  days  after  I  returned  to  Fort  Pearson  to  re-assume  com- 
mand of  the  Natal  Native  Pioneers.  After  reporting  my  arrival,  I  made 
my  way  to  the  post-oiiice,  where  I  was  much  shocked  at  being  told  of  my 
friend's  death.  The  postmaster  handed  me  a  telegram,  which  had  been 
suffered  to  remain  in  a  pigeon-hole  for  some  days,  instead  of  being  sent  on 
to  the  front.  It  was  from  the  civil  surgeon,  who  helped  to  soothe  the  last 
moments  of  my  friend,  and  ran  as  follows  :  '  Captain  the  Hon.  H.  E,. 
Gough  is  dying.  He  has  been  asking  for  you  all  day.  Come  down  here  if 
possible.'  On  subsequent  inquiries  at  the  hospital,  I  found  that  he  had 
died  at  exactly  the  hour  I  fancied  I  had  seen  him  outside  the  mess  house 
at  Gingihlovo.  Prior  to  the  occurrence  I  have  narrated,  I  never  had  the 
faintest  belief  in  the  actuality  of  supernatural  ^  phenomena  of  any  nature. 

"Stuart  Stephens. 
"  (Late  Lieutenant  4th  Battalion  Royal  Dublin  Pusiliers.)" 

Miss  I.  F.  Galwey  writes  to  us  from  5,  Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin : — 

"May  18th,  1885. 

"  I  met  two  of  young  Gough's  cousins  on  Saturday  ;  and  they  assure  me 
that  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Stephens  i?  a  perfectly  authentic  one, 
and  is  fully  believed  by  all  the  family  ;  but  they  know  nothing  of  Mr. 
Stephens,  except  that  he  was  a  comrade  of  poor  Rudolph's,  and  that  just 
before  his  death  he  had  expressed  an  earnest  desire  to  see  him." 

[The  London  Gazette  for  July  22nd,  1879,  gives  the  date  of  the  death 
of  Captain  Gough  as  April  19th.  It  seems  very  probable  that  the  "  17th  " 
in  Mr.  Stephens'  account  is  a  misprint.  For  if  he  inquired  at  the 
hospital  and  learnt  the  identity  of  hour,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  made  so 
grave  a  mistake  as  to  the  day.  But  from  the  South  African  Campaign  of 
1879,  by  J.  R.  Mackinnon,  we  learn  that  Captain  Gough  had  been 
desperately  ill  for  some  days  before  his  death  ;  so  that  even  if  the  vision 
did  precede  the  death  by  two  days,  it  might  still  be  connected  with  his 
condition.  It  is  clear,  too,  from  the  words  of  the  telegram  that  his 
thoughts  had  been  directed  to  the  percipient  for  some  little  time  before  his 
death.] 

It  might  perhaps  seem  that  this  case  ought  to  have  been  disallowed, 
on  the  principle  that,  when  the  percipient  is  in  anxiety  about  the 
person  whose  phantasm  appears,  there  is  an  appreciable  chance  that 
the  appearance  is  the  purely  subjective  creation  of  his  own  brain 
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  508-9).  But  it  would,  perhaps,  be  a  trifle  pedantic  to  apply 
this  principle  to  cases  which  occur  in  the  thick  of  a  war,  where  the 
idea  of  death  is  constant  and  familiar.      In  such  circumstances,  the 

1  I  must  once  again  disclaim  all  responsibility  for  this  and  similar  expressions  on  the 
part  of  informants. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  49 

mental  attitude  caused  by  the  knowledge  that  a  comrade  is  in  peril 
seems  scarcely  parallel  to  that  which  similar  knowledge  might  pro- 
duce among  those  who  are  sitting  brooding  at  home.  At  any  rate, 
if  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  absent  comrades  be  a  natural  and  known 
source  of  hallucinations  during  campaigns,  it  is  odd  that,  among  several 
hundreds  of  cases  of  subjective  hallucination,  I  find  no  second  instance 
of  the  phenomenon. 

The  following  account  is  from  a  lady,  Miss  H.,  whose  name  and 
address  maybe  given  to  private  inquirers,  and  who  would  gladly  have 
allowed  its  publication  had  friends  not  been  unwilling.  Having 
stated  that  on  Thursday,  November  16th,  1854,  about  10  o'clock  at 
night,  she  had  a  vision  of  an  intimate  friend,  who  died  that  evening 
at  7,  she  was  asked  to  furnish  particulars,  and  replied : — 

"November,  1885. 

(232)  "I  had  had  16  hours'  travelling  in  the  interior  of  a  diligence, 
crossing  the  Apennines  from  Bologna  to  Florence.  I  was  perfectly  well,  but 
unusually  tired.  I  was  in  the  Hotel  Europa,  in  Florence,  and  was  quite 
wide  awake,  not  having  had  the  necessary  moments  in  which  to  compose 
myself  to  sleep.  My  sister  had  just  fallen  asleep.  My  friend  stood  at  the 
side  of  the  bed  nearest  to  me,  near  the  foot,  and  looked  at  me  fixedly.  She 
was  in  white,  and  looked  exactly  as  she  did  in  life.  She  was  an  old  lady, 
and  had  been  almost  bedridden  for  long.  She  had  taken  very  keen 
interest  in  our  Italian  tour.  I  lost  my  presence  of  mind,  and  woke  my 
sister.  I  also  called  out  to  my  father,  who  was  in  the  adjoining  room,  not 
yet  asleep,  but  too  tired  to  do  more  than  answer,  though  he  remembered 
the  circumstance  of  my  calling  to  him  the  next  morning.  Directly  this 
alarm  was  shown,  the  vision  disappeared.  It  was  both  vivid,  and  produced 
a  supernatural  sensation  which  I  never  before  or  since  experienced  to 
anything  like  the  same  extent.  "  E.  H.  H." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on 
Thursday,  November  16th,  1854.  Inquiries  have  been  made  at  the  hotel 
in  Florence,  in  order  to  obtain  confirmation  of  the  date  of  Miss  H.'s 
stay  there  :  but  the  hotel  changed  hands  a  few  years  later,  and  the 
information  cannot  be  got. 

Miss  H.  has  experienced  only  one  other  hallucination,  and  that  was 
"  in  the  height  of  a  severe  illness,"  when  she  fancied  her  maid  was 
at  the  bedside.  In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  writes  that  the  sister  who 
was  with  her  cannot  recall  the  occurrence  ;  and  adds  : — 

"  The  fact  is  she  only  woke  for  an  instant,  and  as  she  is  9  years 
younger  than  myself,  and  I  saw  she  believed  I  had  only  been  dreaming 
this,  I  spared  her.  I  had  not  fallen  asleep.  I  did  not  argue  the  point 
with  her,  or  refer  to  it  again  for  some  long  time  after.  It  was  the 
same  with  my  father.  I  called  out  Mrs.  W.'s  name,  and  he  referred 
to  it  as  a  dream  in  the  morning.  But  I  confided  in  a  sister,  then 
recently  married  to  a  Norfolk  clergyman,  who  was  very  near  my  own  age. 
I  was  the  more  led  to  do  this  as  the  lady  who  stood  near  me  was  her 
husband's    mother.       The    account    goes    on    to  say  how    exceptionally 

VOL.    II.  E 

■.n  f^i 

50  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

interested  the  lady  had  been  in  the  route  and  experience  of  the  travellers; 
and  concludes  thus  :  "  In  those  days  such  things  were  subjects  of  ridicule 
and  unbelief  more  than  they  now  are,  and  I  am  surprised  how  lightly  I 
took  what  yet  I  felt  positive  was  no  dream." 

The  sister  to  whom  Miss  H.  mentioned  her  experience  writes  to  her  as 
follows,  on  December  4th,  1885  : — 

"  My  Dear  Elise, — I  fully  remember  your  naming  the  vision  of  Mrs. 
W.  which  you  had  on  the  very  evening  on  which  she  died.  We  compared 
notes  faithfully  at  the  time ;  and  it  was  most  remarkable  because  she 
had  not  been  visibly  worse,  and  died  at  the  last  suddenly.  She  had 
thought  a  great  deal  about  you  being  in  a  Roman  Catholic  country  at 
the  time  of  some  great  council,  and  had  named  in  two  or  three  letters  that 
she  should  be  glad  when  you  got  home ;  so  you  were  on  her  mind.  I 
believe  you  named  it  in  a  letter,  but  I  can't  find  it.  But  I  am  as  sure 
of  the  fact  of  your  telling  me  (on  your  return  home,  and  coming  here  on 
the  way)  all  particulars  as  if  it  was  yesterday — the  rooms  en  suite,  and 
our  father  hearing  you  call  out  to  Memie,  who  had  fallen  asleep  before 
you  ;  and  you  naming  '  Mrs.  W.'  to  father,  and  he,  supposing  it  was  a 
dream,  trying  to  soothe  you.  And  you,  though  feeling  sure  you  were 
awake,  yet  tried  to  think  it  was  a  sort  of  dream  '  as  when  one  awaketh.' 
The  first  news  you  received  from  England  was  the  account  of  the 
peaceful  and  rather  sudden  death  of  one  who  was  renowned  for  energy 
of  spirit  all  her  life,  and  who  was  full  of  imagination  and  great  love  for 
you.  This  is  my  statement.  The  dates  were  carefully  compared,  that  I 
am  sure  of.  My  husband  is  as  certain  as  I  am  of  all  I  say. — Your 
afi"ectionate  sister,  "M.  A.  W." 

The  next  case,  like  the  last,  seems  fairly  to  fall  among  waking 
rather  than  "  borderland "  impressions,  since  a  special  reason  is 
remembered  for  wakefulness.  It  is,  however,  still  more  remote,  and 
depends  on  a  single  memory.  The  Rev.  H.  E.  Noyes,  of  Christ 
Church  Vicarage,  Kingstown,  a  nephew  of  Mrs.  G.,  the  narrator, 
(formerly  of  the  Parsonage,  Kingstown,)  vouches  for  the  strength  of 
the  impression  made  on  her.  "  1883. 

(233)  "  On  February  26,  1850,  I  was  awake,  for  I  was  to  go  to  my 
sister-in-law,  at  Kingstown,  and  visiting  was  then  an  event  to  me.  About 
2  o'clock  in  the  morning  my  brother  walked  into  our  room  (my  sister's)  and 

stood  beside  my  bed.     I  called  to  her,  '  There  is .'  He  was  at  the  time 

quartered  at  Paisley,  and  a  mail  car  from  Belfast  passed,  about  that  hour, 
not  more  than  about  half  a  mile  from  our  village.  When  he  could  get  a 
short  leave,  he  liked  to  come  in  upon  us  and  give  us  a  delightful  surprise. 
I  even  recollect  its  crossing  my  mind  what  there  was  in  the  house  ready 
that  we  could  give  him  to  eat.  He  looked  down  most  lovingly  and  kindly, 
and  waved  his  hand  and  he  was  gone.  I  recollect  it  all  as  if  it  were  only  last 
night  it  all  occurred,  and  my  feeling  of  astonishment,  not  at  his  coming  in- 
to the  room  at  all,  but  at  where  he  could  have  gone.   At  that  hour  he  died." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  the  Army  List,  and  find 
from  a  newspaper  notice  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  morning, 
and  was  extremely  sudden. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  51 

The  next  account  was  given  to  us  by  Mrs.  Swithinbank,  of 
Ormleigh,  Mowbray  Road,  Upper  Norwood.  The  incident  occurred 
about  1867.  "  1882. 

(234)  "  When  my  son  H.  was  a  boy,  I  one  day  saw  him  off  to  school, 
watching  him  down  the  Grove,  and  then  went  into  the  library  to  sit,  a 
room  I  rarely  used  at  that  time  of  the  day.  Shortly  after,  he  appeared, 
walking  over  the  wall  opposite  the  window.  The  wall  was  about  13  feet 
distant  from  the  window  and  low,  so  that  when  my  son  stood  on  it  his 
face  was  on  a  level  with  mine,  and  close  to  me.  I  hastily  threw  up  the 
sash,  and  called  to  ask  why  he  had  returned  from  school,  and  why  he  was 
there  ;  he  did  not  answer,  but  looked  full  at  me  with  a  frightened  expres- 
sion, and  dropped  down  the  other  side  of  the  wall  and  disappeared.  Never 
doubting  but  that  it  was  some  boyish  trick,  I  called  a  servant  to  tell  him 
to  come  to  me,  but  not  a  trace  of  him  was  to  be  found,  though  there  was 
no  screen  or  place  of  concealment.     I  myself  searched  with  the  same  result. 

"  As  I  sat  still  wondering  where  and  how  he  had  so  suddenly  disappeared 
a  cab  drove  up  with  H.  in  an  almost  unconscious  state,  brought  home  by  a 
friend  and  schoolfellow,  who  said  that  during  a  dictation-lesson  he  had 
suddenly  fallen  backward  over  his  seat,  calling  out  in  a  shrill  voice, 
'  Mamma  will  know,'  and  became  insensible.  He  was  ill  that  day, 
prostrate  the  next ;  but  our  doctor  could  not  account  for  the  attack,  nor 
did  anything  follow  to  throw  any  light  on  his  appearance  to  me.  That  the 
time  of  his  attack  exactly  corresponded  with  that  at  which  I  saw  his  figure 
was  proved  both  by  his  master  and  class-mates." 

The  Rev.  H.  Swithinbank,  eldest  son  of  the  writer  of  the  above, 
explains  that  the  point  at  which  the  figure  was  seen  was  in  a  direct  line 
between  the  house  (situated  at  Summerhill  Terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tyne) 
and  the  school,  but  that  "  no  animal  but  a  bird  could  come  direct  that 
way,"  and  that  the  walking  distance  between  the  two  places  was  nearly  a 
mile.  He  describes  his  brother  as  of  a  nervous  temperament,  but  his 
mother  as  just  the  opposite,  a  calm  person,  who  has  never  in  her  life  had 
any  other  similar  experience. 

The  next  account  is  from  Colonel  Swiney,  of  the  Duke  of  Cornwall's 

Regiment.     Possibly,  in  this  as  in  some  other  cases,  publication  may 

lead  to  our  obtaining  corroborative  evidence  from  persons  to  whom  we 

have  as  yet  been  unable  to  apply  for  it. 

"  Richmond  Barracks,  Dublin,  July  14th,  1885. 

(235)  "  It  was  some  time  in  the  latter  end  of  September,  1864,  when 
quartered  at  Shorncliffe  Camp,  I  thought  I  saw  my  eldest  brother  (whom  at 
the  time  I  believed  to  be  in  India,  where  he  was  serving  in  the  Royal 
Engineers)  walking  towards  me,  and  before  I  could  recover  from  my 
astonishment,  the  figure  had  disappeared.  I  perfectly  well  remember 
mentioning  the  fact  to  some  of  my  brother  ofiicers,  and  saying  how 
curious  it  was,  but  never  thought  much  about  it  until  I  received  news  of 
his  death,  which  had  occurred  about  (as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  without 
having  made  any  note)  the  time  I  had  imagined  I  had  seen  him — viz., 
September  24th,  1864 — at  Nagpore,  East  Indies,  and  but  for  the  fact  of 
his  death,  I  should  never  probably  have  recalled  the  circumstance.     I  do 

VOL.    II.  E   2 

52  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

not  attach  much  importance  to  this ;  it  might  have  been  a  coincidence, 
remarkable  certainly,  but  nothing  more.  I  am  afraid  it  will  not  be  of 
much  use  to  you  in  your  inquiries,  as  half  its  value  is  gone  by  my  not 
being  able  to  bring  corroborative  evidence  to  prove  that  I  had  mentioned 
the  fact  prior  to  hearing  of  his  death,  although  in  my  own  mind  I  am 
perfectly  certain  I  did  so.  Richard  Edgcumbe  was  quartered  at  Shorn- 
cliffe  at  the  very  time  this  occurred.  a  g    q    S^iney." 

[It  was  from  Mr.  R.  Edgcumbe  that  we  first  heard  of  this  incident. 
He  did  not  himself  hear  of  it  until  some  years  after  its  occurrence.] 
In  answer  to  inquiries  Colonel  Swiney  adds  : — 

(1)  "Years  afterwards,  in  1871,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  I  wrote 
a  long  account  of  it  to  a  Yorkshire  gentleman  who  was  collecting  data  on 
the  subject  of  hallucination. 

(2)  "I  have  had  a  personal  interview  with  Colonel  Schwabe,  who  was 
a  subaltern  with  me  in  the  Carabineers,  and  he  cannot  recall  the  cir- 
cumstances at  all,  indeed  has  no  recollection  whatever  about  it.  This 
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  his  having  gone  abroad  very  shortly 
afterwards,  and  we  did  not  meet  for  some  months  after  I  had  heard  of 
my  brother's  death.  At  the  time  I  heard  of  his  death  I  was  stopping 
with  Charles  Gurney,  shooting,  near  Norwich,  some  time  the  latter  end 
of  October,  if  not  the  beginning  of  November.  When  I  received  the 
letter  I  knew  what  was  in  it ;  and  if  I  only  knew  Charles  Gurney's 
address,  I  should  like  to  have  asked  him  if  he  ever  remembers  the  morning 
I  received  the  bad  news  before  I  left  for  London,  saying  '  How  curious  ; 
I  thought  I  saw  him  coming  towards  me  at  ShornclifFe  a  few  weeks  ago.' 

(3)  "The  24th  of  September,  1864,  was  a  Sunday.  I  cannot  say 
whether  that  was  the  day  I  mentioned  it.  My  brother  died  some  time, 
as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  after  the  family  with  whom  he  was  stopping  had 
returned  from  church  ;  for  I  remember  the  letter  saying :  '  He  was  so 
much  better,  and  asleep,  that  we  thought  it  safe  to  leave  him  for  an  hour 
or  so.  On  our  return,'  it  went  on  to  say,  '  we  found  he  was  very 
feverish,  and  he  died  that  afternoon.'  Now  the  time  I  saw  the  hallucina- 
tion could  not  have  been  later  than  2  p.m.  Allowing  for  the  five  hours 
difierence  of  longitude,  that  would  be  about  9  a.m.,  and  would  not  tally." 

[Colonel  Swiney  seems  to  have  reckoned  the  difierence  the  wrong  way, 
At  any  moment  the  time  of  day  in  India  is  four  or  five  hours  later  than 
the  time  of  day  in  England ;  and  thus,  if  the  days  were  the  same,  the 
death  and  the  vision  may  have  coincided  exactly.] 

The  Army  List  for  December,  1864,  and  Allen's  Indian  Mail  for 
October  20th,  1864,  give  the  date  of  Lieut.  John  D.  Swiney's  death  as 
September  25th  ;  and  it  was  the  25th,  not  the  24th,  that  fell  on  a  Sunday. 
When  Colonel  Swiney  heard  of  the  death  he  was  clearly  under  the 
impression  that  his  experience  had  occurred  on  a  Sunday — which  is  a 
marked  day  ;  and  his  subsequent  mistake  as  to  the  day  of  the  month  seems 
therefore  unimportant. 

The  next  case  is  from  Miss  Bale,  of  Church  Farm,  Gorleston. 

"September  17th,  1885. 
(236)   "  In  the  June  of  1880, 1  went  to  a  situation  as  governess.     On  the 
first  day  of  my  going  there,  after  retiring  for  the  night,  I  heard  a  noise  which 

^^y-x-p^A.) 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  53 

was  like  the  ticking  of  a  watch.  I  took  no  particular  notice  of  it,  but  I 
noticed  that  every  time  I  was  alone  I  heard  it,  more  especially  at  night. 
I  even  went  so  far  as  to  search,  thinking  there  must  be  a  watch  concealed 
somewhere  in  the  room.  This  continued  until  I  grew  quite  accustomed  to 
it.  It  was  on  the  12th  of  July,  when  I  was  coming  from  the  dining-room 
with  a  tray  of  glasses  that  I  saw  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  dark  figure 
standing  just  outside  the  door,  with  outstretched  arms.  It  startled  me, 
and  when  I  turned  to  look  again  it  was  gone. 

"  On  the  23rd  September  I  received  news  that  my  brother  was 
drowned  on  the  12th  of  July.  I  heard  the  ticking  up  to  the  time  I  had 
the  letter,  but  never  once  afterwards. 

"F.  A.  Bale." 

Writing  again.  Miss  Bale  says  : — 

"  I  enclose  the  letter  informing  us  of  my  brother's  death,  also  one  from 
the  captain  of  the  ship,  for  your  perusal. 

"  I  made  no  entry  in  my  diary  of  the  apparition  I  saw  on  the  12th  of 
July,  but  I  distinctly  remember  the  time.  I  sat  down  a  little  while  to 
recover  my  fright,  and  then  I  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  20  minutes  past  6. 
I  enclose  the  address  of  a  friend  who  I  am  sure  remembers  it  as  well  as  I  do. 
You  will  see  by  enclosed  where  my  brother  was  when  he  met  with  his  death. 

"  The  apparition  did  remind  me  of  my  brother,  as  I  last  saw  him  in  a 
long  dark  ulster,  and  it  was  about  his  height,  but  that  was  all  I  could  dis- 
cover, for  when  I  looked  a  second  time  it  was  gone.  What  made  me 
mention  the  ticking  was  the  peculiarity  of  its  following  me  everywhere, 
providing  I  was  alone." 

The  enclosed  letter,  written  by  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Purey-Cust  on  board 
the  Ship  "  Melbourne,"  announced  that  Mr.  William  Bale's  death  occurred 
at  6  p.m.,  on  July  12th,  1880,  about  150  miles  south  of  Tristan  d'Acunha, 
longitude  12  deg.  30"  W.  Mr.  Purey-Cust  has  since  told  us  that  on  that 
day — and  on  that  day  only — the  position  of  the  ship  had  to  be  found  by  dead 
reckoning,  the  sun  not  being  visible.  The  error  in  time  arising  in  this  way 
could  not,  however,  have  amounted  to  more  than  a  minute  or  two,  and  Mr. 
Purey-Cust  gives  particulars  which  make  it  almost  impossible  that  he  can  be 
mistaken  in  stating  that  the  accident  occurred  at  6  p.m,  by  the  ship's  clock. 

Mrs.  Hart,  of  Baker  Street,  Gorleston,  writes  to  us  : — 

"  September  28th,  1885. 

"  On  the  night  of  the  12th  of  July,  1880,  Miss  Bale  came  to  my  house 
to  supper,  and  she  told  me  that  she  was  coming  from  the  drawing-room 
and  she  saw  a  dark  figure  standing  just  outside  the  door  ;  she  appeared 
very  nervous.  She  said  it  reminded  her  of  her  brother,  and  remarked  to 
me  then  that  she  knew  something  must  have  happened  to  him.  I  asked 
her  if  she  noticed  the  time  she  saw  it,  and  she  told  me  that  the  apparition 
had  startled  her  very  much,  and  she  had  sat  down  a  little  time  to  recover 
the  fright  it  gave  her,  and  then  she  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  6.20.  She 
had  previously  told  me  of  a  ticking  she  heard  everywhere  she  went,  so  long 
as  she  was  alone,  but  directly  anyone  joined  her  it  ceased ;  and  she  told 
me  she  heard  it  up  to  the  day  she  received  the  news  of  her  brother's  death, 
but  not  afterwards. 

"H.  Hart." 

Miss  Bale  adds  : — 

54  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASUS  [chap. 

"September  24th,  1885. 

"  There  was  one  incident  I  did  not  tell  you,  thinking  it  too  trivial,  as  I 
did  not  notice  the  date  or  hour,  but  I  know  it  was  shortly  before  I  heard 
the  news  of  my  brother's  death.  I  had  been  in  bed  a  short  time,  and  I 
heard  a  tremendous  crash  like  the  smashing  of  a  lot  of  china.  I  felt  too 
nervous  to  go  and  see  what  it  was,  but  nothing  was  broken  or  disturbed  in 
the  morning,  and  for  three  nights  in  succession  I  heard  the  same.  I  am  not 
inclined  to  think  that  it  was  in  any  way  corresponding  with  my  brother's 
death.  I  certainly  have  never  heard  imaginary  voices  nor  seen  imaginary 
figures  except  the  apparition  I  saw  the  day  my  brother  was  drowned." 

[There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  connecting  the  ticking  sound  with 
Mr.  Bale's  death,  any  more  than  the  crash  of  china ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  it  was  due  to  a  merely  physical  affection,  to  which  the  shock  of 
receiving  the  news  perhaps  put  an  end.  It  seemed  right,  however,  to 
mention  it ;  since,  if  it  was  a  hallucination,  it  would  tend  to  show  that 
Miss  Bale  was  for  some  time  in  a  condition  favourable  to  purely  subjective 
hallucinations — which  would  slightly  weaken  the  force  of  the  coincidence 
of  the  visual  hallucination  with  her  brother's  death.  It  will  be  noticed 
that,  allowing  for  longitude,  the  death  occurred — according  to  the  state- 
ments made — about  half-an-hour  after  the  apparition  But  as  the 
difference  is  so  small,  it  seems  more  probable  that  it  is  due  to  error  in 
Miss  Bale's  observation  or  memory,  or  in  the  time  of  her  clock,  than  that 
so  close  a  coincidence  was  purely  accidental.] 

The  next  few  cases,  though  depending  in  the  first  instance  on 

witnesses  in  a  humbler  station,  are,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  faithfully 

reported.     The  narrator  of  the  first  of  them  is  Ellen  M.  Greany,  a 

trusted  and  valued  servant  in  the  family  of  Miss  Porter,  at  16,  Russell 

Square,  W.C. 

"May  20th,  1884. 

(237)  "  I  sat  one  evening  reading,  when  on  looking  up  from  my  book,  I 
distinctly  saw  a  school-friend  of  mine,  to  whom  I  was  very  much  attached, 
standing  near  the  door.  I  was  about  to  exclaim  at  the  strangeness  of  her 
visit,  when,  to  my  horror,  there  were  no  signs  of  any  one  in  the  room  but 
my  mother.  I  related  what  I  had  seen  to  her,  knowing  she  could  not 
have  seen,  as  she  was  sitting  with  her  back  towards  the  door,  nor  did  she 
hear  anything  unusual,  and  was  greatly  amused  at  my  scare,  suggesting  I 
had  read  too  much  or  been  dreaming. 

"  A  day  or  so  after  this  strange  event,  I  had  news  to  say  my  friend  was 
no  more.  The  strange  part  was  I  did  not  even  know  she  was  ill,  much 
less  in  danger,  so  could  not  have  felt  anxious  at  the  time  on  her  account, 
but  may  have  been  thinking  of  her  ;  that  I  cannot  testify.  Her  illness 
was  short,  and  death  very  unexpected.  Her  mother  told  me  she  spoke  of 
me  not  long  before  she  died,  and  wondered  I  had  not  been  to  see  her, 
thinking,  of  course,  I  had  some  knowledge  of  her  illness,  which  was  not 
the  case.  It  may  be  as  well  to  mention  she  left  a  small  box  she  prized 
rather,  to  be  given  to  me  in  remembrance  of  her.  She  died  the  same 
evening  and  about  the  same  time  that  I  saw  her  vision,  which  was  the  end 
of  October,  1874.  a  Ellen  M.  Greany." 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  55 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Ellen  Greany  adds  that  this  hallucination  is 
the  only  one  she  has  ever  experienced.  She  tells  Miss  Porter  that  she 
went  to  see  her  dead  friend  before  the  funeral,  which  accords  with  her 
statement  that  she  heard  the  news  of  the  death  very  soon  after  it 
occurred ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  at  the  time  when  she 
heard  the  news,  she  was  able  correctly  to  identify  the  day  of  her  vision. 

Her  mother  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  Acton,  July,  1884. 
"  I  can  well  remember  the  instance  my  daughter  speaks  of.  I  know 
she  was  not  anxious  at  the  time,  not  knowing  her  friend  was  ill.  I  took 
no  notice  of  it  at  the  time,  as  I  do  not  believe  in  ghosts,  but  thought  it 
strange  the  next  day,  when  we  heard  she  was  dead,  and  died  about  the 
same  time  that  my  daughter  saw  her. 

"  Margaret  Greany." 

[I  have  seen  Ellen  Greany,  who  is  a  superior  and  intelligent  person. 
She  went  over  her  story  without  prompting,  giving  an  entirely  clear  and 
consistent  account,  and  standing  cross-examination  perfectly.  But  the 
favourable  effect  of  such  an  interview  on  one's  own  mind  cannot,  of  course, 
be  conveyed  to  others.] 

The  following  account  was  first  published  in  The  Englishman,  on 
May  13th,  1876. 

(238)  "  A  labourer  named  Duck,  employed  by  Mr.  Dixon,  of  Mildenhall 
Warren  Farm,  near  Marlborough,  was  in  charge  of  a  horse  and  water-cart 
on  the  farm,  when  the  animal  took  fright  and  knocked  him  down.  The 
wheel  went  over  his  chest,  and  he  died  shortly  afterwards.  Immediately 
after  the  accident,  Mr.  Dixon  despatched  a  woman  to  Ramsbury,  where 
Duck  lived,  to  make  known  the  fact  to  his  wife.  On  arriving  at  her  home 
the  messenger  found  her  out  gathering  wood,  but  shortly  after  a  girl,  who 
was  her  companion,  arrived,  and  without  being  told  of  what  had  occurred, 
volunteered  the  statement  that  Ria  (Mrs.  Duck)  was  unable  to  do  much 
that  morning,  that  she  had  been  very  much  frightened,  having  seen  her 
husband  in  the  wood.  Shortly  afterwards  Mrs.  Duck  returned  without 
any  wood,  and  being  informed  by  a  neighbour  that  a  woman  from 
Mildenhall  Woodlands  wished  to  see  her,  ejaculated  '  My  David's  dead 
then.'  Inquiry  has  since  been  made  by  Mr.  Dixon  of  the  woman,  and  she 
positively  asserts  that  she  saw  her  husband  in  the  wood,  and  said,  '  Hallo, 
David,  what  wind  blows  you  here  ? '  and  that  he  made  no  answer.  Mr. 
Dixon  inquired  what  time  this  occurred,  and  she  replied  about  10  o'clock, 
the  time  at  which  the  fatal  accident  occurred." 

On  the  appearance  of  this  account,  our  friend,  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival,  of 
36,  Bryanston  Street,  W.,  wrote  to  Mr.  Dixon  to  inquire  into  the  facts, 
and  received  from  him  the  following  confirmation  : — 

"May  25th,  1876. 

"As  soon  as  it  happened  (Duck's  death),  I  sent  one  of  my  female 
servants  to  inform  his  wife  of  the  sad  occurrence,  to  a  place  called 
Ramsbury,  about  four  miles  from  where  it  occurred.       But  when  she  got 

56  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

there,  his  wife  was  gone  to  get  wood  at  a  distant  wood,  the  woman  stopping 
for  her  return  at  an  adjoining  cottage.  But  Maria  returned  without  any 
wood,  saying  she  had  seen  her  husband,  and  asked  him  how  he  came  there — 
telling  the  woman  that  she  knew  her  business,  that  she  was  come  to  inform 
her  of  her  husband's  death,  and  that  she  had  seen  him  as  plain  as  ever  she 
did  in  her  life,  and  said  to  him,  'Hallo,  David,  what  wind  blew  you 
here  1 '  but  as  she  saw  him  no  more,  she  became  much  frightened,  and  left 
the  wood." 

"June  1st,  1876. 
"  The  woman  I  sent  told  me,  when  she  got  to  Ramsbury  to  Duck's 
house,  her  neighbour  told  her  that  she  was  gone  to  get  wood  and  her  (the 
neighbour's)  little  girl  was  gone  with  her.  The  girl  soon  returned  saying 
Maria  Duck  was  much  frightened  in  the  wood,  and  had  seen  her  husband 
and  spoken  to  him,  but  as  he  made  no  reply  she  became  faint,  and  told  the 
girl  to  go  home,  as  she  knew  something  had  happened  to  David.  That  was 
before  she  knew  the  woman  was  sent.  When  she  got  home  and  found  the 
woman  waiting  for  her  return  she  said  she  knew  her  errand,  and  asked 
her  if  her  husband  was  not  dead,  and  seemed  much  frightened,  the  woman 
telling  her  he  was  very  ill,  and  thought  he  would  not  be  living  to  see  her 
again.  When  she  got  to  Warren,  she  found  him  dead,  and  told  us  the 
time  she  saw  him,  which  was  exactly  the  time  he  lost  his  life ;  therefore  I 
think  the  public  is  bound  to  believe  it,  although  it  seems  to  us  quite  a 
mystery.  Duck's  wife  is  now  in  Hungerford  Union,  her  home  broken  up 
by  his  death.  The  woman  I  sent  is  Mary  Holick,  has  been  living  with  me 
some  time,  and  her  word  is  to  be  relied  on. 

"  Benjamin  Dixon." 

Mrs.  Duck  has  since  died ;  but  Mrs.  Holick  dictated  and  signed  the 
following  account  : — 

"January  26th,  1886. 

"  I  well  remember  about  poor  old  David  Duck.  I  am  never  likely  to 
forget  it.  The  cart-wheel  passed  over  his  chest  and  killed  him,  and  I 
was  sent  down  by  Mr.  Dixon  to  tell  his  wife  at  Ramsbury.  She  was  not 
at  home ;  she  was  out  gathering  wood  with  the  little  girl  of  a  neighbour  ; 
so  I  went  to  this  neighbour's  house  to  wait.  Presently  the  little  girl  came 
in,  and  said  that  Mrs.  Duck  was  in  a  great  way  because  she  had  seen  her 
husband  in  the  wood,  and  when  she  spoke  to  him  and  said,  'What  wind  blows 
you  here,  Davie  1 '  he  disappeared  away,  and  she  fell  back  on  the  bank 
half  fainting  with  fright ;  and  the  little  girl  ran  down  and  found  her  like 
it.  So  she  had  gathered  very  little  wood.  If  the  little  girl  had  not  told 
me  first,  I  never  could  have  really  believed  that  she  had  seen  him.  But 
when  she  came  back,  about  half-an-hour  after  the  little  girl  (who  had  come 
on  in  front,  full  of  what  Mrs.  Duck  had  seen),  it  was  all  true.  I  shall 
never  forget  her ;  she  came  in  with  her  hands  stretched  out,  and  said, 
looking  at  me,  '  She  has  come  to  tell  me  that  my  Davie  is  killed.  I  knew 
he  was  ;  I  have  seen  his  ghost.  I  didn't  need  anyone  to  tell  me.'  And 
then  she  told  us,  afterwards,  how  she  had  suddenly  seen  him  in  front  of 
her,  in  his  usual  clothes ;  and  how  she  spoke  to  him,  and  he  vanished. 
She  lived  about  half  a  mile  from  the  woman  I  was  waiting  with ;  and  we 
sent  another  woman  to  her  house  to  tell  her,  when  she  came  home,  that 
a  person  from  Mr.  Dixon's  wanted  to  see  her.     So   directly   she  told  her, 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  57 

she  said,  '  She  has  come  to  tell  me  my  poor  Davie  is  killed  ;  but  I  didn't 
want  anyone  to  tell  me,  for  I  know  ;  I  have  just  seen  his  ghost.'  And  the 
woman  said,  '  Don't  give  way  now,  but  come  with  me,  there's  a  good 
woman.'  And  they  came ;  and  I  shall  never  forget  her  as  she  came 
stumbling  up  the  steps,  and  looked  at  me  and  said,  '  For  God's  sake  tell 
me  ;  my  Davie  is  dead.'  She  had  seen  him  just  as  natural  as  life,  every 
bit ;  but  the  little  girl  never  saw  anything,  only  she  knew  Mrs.  Duck  had, 
when  she  helped  her  off  the  bank,  where  she  fell  when  he  disappeared. 
She  was  a  very  good  woman,  I  think,  and  her  husband  was  a  very  quiet 
man;  and  she  was  as  strong  as  any  man,  and  worked  hard  from  early 
morning." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  David  Duck  died  on 
March  31,  1874. 

[Mrs.  Holick's  account  fairly  comes  into  the  class  of  evidence  reckoned  :  ri^lt'Seut 
as  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148)  ;  as,  though  she  did  not  .;,  4,^4^,,^^ 
actually  receive  a  description  of  the  apparition  from  Mrs.  Duck's  own  lips 
before  Mrs.  Duck  heard  the  fatal  news,  she  saw  her  in  the  state  of 
agitation,  and  heard  her  express  the  conviction,  which  the  apparition  had 
produced.  Mrs.  Holick  is  quite  clear  that  she  herself  was  the  first  to 
communicate  the  news.] 

In  the  next  example  accident  has  made  the  evidence  for  the  facts 
very  fairly  strong ;  but  the  case  is  to  some  extent  weakened  by  the 
percipient's  knowledge  that  the  person  whose  phantasm  he  saw  was 
ill.     The  case  was  first  described  to  us  by  a  clergyman  as  follows  : — 

"March  5th,  1885. 

(239)  "Some  18  or  19  years  ago,  I  remember  calling  on  a  working  ^^  jjf" 
maltster,  whose  employer  was  living  at  Lincoln.  His  employer  was  ill  at  /  ^j/>  / 
the  time,  and  I  asked  the  man  if  he  had  heard  from  him  lately.  'No,'  he  '  %^* 
said,  '  but  I  am  afraid  he  is  dead.'  And  on  my  inquiring  why  he  thought  -^■x^'^'-'^- 
so,  he  replied  that  on  going  out  that  morning  early,  he  had  seen  his  em- 
ployer standing  on  the  top  of  the  steps  that  lead  up  to  the  kiln  door,  as  ;  c/U"^;;  #v 
plainly  as  he  ever  had  seen  him  in  his  life.  HA-w^/il!;:^ 

It    was    as    he    expected  :    the   first    news    that    came    reported   his     .^,y^,t„^^^^— 
employer's  death.  ' 

"I  have  no  doubt  the  man  I  speak  of  either  saw  this  appearance,  or      ' ''*'  'J' \ 
believed  he  saw  it."  i^j»  .'• 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  this  informant  says  : —  x  l  v .  t 

"March  12th,  1885.  ^ 

"  Since  receiving  your  letter,  I  have  had  the  curiosity  to  look  over  my 
old  diaries,  thinking  I  might  have  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  and 
under  the    date    of  Thursday,    the  22nd    of    October,   1863,  I    find  the 

Dead, 
following  : — '  Report  of  Mr.  W.'s  death.  M.  saw  his  "  wraith  "  on 

A 

Tuesday  morning  about  5  o'clock.' 

"  This  difiers  somewhat  from  what  I  told  you  in  my  last  letter,  for  I 
said  that  the  man  had  seen  the  appearance  that  same  morning  in  which  I 
spoke  with  him.     Here  it  seems  it  was  two  days  before.     But  still  he  had 

58  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

told  me  before  it  was  known  for  a  certainty  that  Mr.  W.  was  dead.  For 
you  observe  the  word  '  dead '  put  in  over  the  y^.  This  I  know  from  my 
own  habit  was  put  in  afterwards.  There  is  no  communication  between 
this  place  and  Lincoln,  except  on  the  market  day,  Friday.  At  that  time 
of  year,  moreover,  the  carriers  who  go  to  Lincoln  would  not  get  back 
before  night,  and  consequently  I  should  most  probably  not  have  learned 
the  certainty  of  the  report  until  some  time  on  Saturday.  Then,  instead  of 
making  a  new  note  of  it,  I  simply  put  in  the  word  '  dead  '  to  show  that 
the  report  was  true  when  I  first  heard  it.  Moreover,  I  used  the  Scotch 
word  '  wraith  '  instead  of  '  ghost '  or  '  spirit,'  as  I  had  an  idea  that  the 
former  word  was  applied  to  appearances  before  death. 

"  I  observe  that  the  man  said  '  about  5  o'clock.'  Of  course,  this  would 
be  a  vague  expression  for  any  time  up  to  5.30,  or  thereabouts,  when  the 
morning  would  not  be  very  clear  perhaps,  but  sufficiently  so  to  enable  one  to 
see  an  object  some  10  or  12  yards  oflf,and  I  am  not  sure  it  was  quite  so  much. 
"  I  cannot  say  that  Mr.  W.  was  dead  at  the  time  M.  saw  the  appear- 
ance, but  he  was  certainly  dead  at  the  time  he  told  me  of  it,  otherwise  I 
should  not  have  inserted  the  word  '  dead '  where  I  did. 

I  may  add  that  Mr.  W.  had  formerly  lived  in  this  village,  and  I  had 
known  him  well.  He  had  gone  to  live  in  Lincoln  only  a  short  time  before 
his  death.  His  malt  kiln  was  his  only  means  of  providing  for  his  wife  and 
family — five  or  six  young  children — and  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
coming  over  to  see  how  things  went  on,  twice  a  week.  There  is  nothing 
more  natural  than  that  his  thoughts  (and  they  must  have  been  very 
anxious  thoughts)  should  have  been  fixed  on  that  one  place." 

The  following  is  the  percipient's  own  account  : — 

"Ridley's  Yard,  North  Gate,  Newark,  Notts.,  March  16th,  1885. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  asking  me  to  forward  you  what  I  said 
about  my  dear  Mr.  Wright,  for  he  was  a  very  good  master.  I  said  I  saw 
him  standing  on  the  steps,  with  one  hand  on  the  handrail ;  my  light  went 
out,  and  I  saw  no  more,  and  he  died,  and  I  hope  he  is  at  rest.  That  was 
at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  before  he  departed  from  us.   u  j_  Meerill." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Merrill  adds,  on  April  6,  1885  : — 
"  I  am  very  sorry  to  let  you  know  that  I  do  not  remember  the  date 
that  dear  Mr.  Wright  died,  but  I  think  it  was  the  latter  end  of 
1863.  I  looked  my  old  books  over,  but,  with  the  trade  being  carried  on 
in  the  same  way,  I  have  nothing  to  go  by.  I  saw  him  as  plain  as  in  the 
middle  of  the  day,  for  he  stood  just  the  same  as  he  did  when  he  came  at 
noon,  looking  on  to  the  house  for  me  to  go  to  him.  I  never  saw  anything 
before,  to  my  mind."  [The  last  sentence  is  in  answer  to  the  question 
whether  the  above  was  his  only  experience  of  a  hallucination.] 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Wright  died  on 
October  22,  1863,  of  "  gastric  fever."  The  apparition  therefore  took  place 
two  days  before  the  death,  but  no  doubt  at  a  time  of  critical  illness.  In 
conversation,  Mr.  Merrill's  wife  stated  that  she  remembered  laughing  at 
her  husband's  account  of  his  strange  experience  when  he  returned  home. 
Neither  of  them  seems  to  have  then  connected  the  apparition  with  the  idea 
of  death. 

The  following  case  was  written  down  by  our  valued  helper,  Miss 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  59 

Porter,  from  the  account  of  Mrs.  Banister,  of  Eversley,  mother  of  the 

percipient,  Mrs.  Ellis,  of  Portesbery  Poad,  Camberley,  who  has  signed 

it  as  correct. 

"August  5th. 

(240)  "  In  September,  1878,  I,  then  residing  in  York  Town,  Surrey, 
three  times  during  the  day  distinctly  saw  the  face  of  an  old  friend,  Mr. 
James  Stephenson,  who  I  afterwards  heard  died  that  day  in  Eversley,  five 
miles  ofi*.  I  saw  it  first  about  half -past  10  in  the  morning  ;  the  last  time 
it  was  nearly  6  o'clock.     I  knew  him  to  be  ill. 

(Signed)  "  Mary  Ellis." 

A  memorial  card  shows  that  Mr.  Stephenson  died  on  Sept.  19,  1878. 

Mr.  Stephenson  had  not  been  on  friendly  terms  with  Mrs.  Banister  or 
her  daughter  ;  but  Mrs.  Banister,  by  his  desire,  went  to  see  him  just  before 
his  death. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Ellis  says ; — 

"  I  told  my  husband,  and  a  young  man,  whose  name  is  Swiney,  at  the 
tea-table  the  same  afternoon,  and  after  leaving  the  table  to  go  into  another 
room  I  saw  it  again — which  was  the  last  time.  I  did  not  hear  of  Mr. 
Stephenson's  death  until  the  next  day,  nor  did  I  know  that  he  was  so 
near  death.  My  husband  remembers  it  well,  but  the  children  were  then 
too  young  to  notice  such  a  thing.  I  have  never  seen  anything  like  it 
before  or  since,  and  I  hope  I  never  shall  again. 

"Mary  Ellis." 

Mr.  Ellis  writes  : — 

"  I  quite  well  remember  my  wife  speaking  of  the  figure  that  she  had 
seen  during  the  day.     The  next  day  we  heard  of  Mr.  Stephenson's  death. 

"E.  J.  Ellis." 

Mr.  Herbert  Swiney,  writing  on  September  29th,  1885,  from  Tregar- 
then  House,  Romford  Road,  Forest  Gate,  says  that  he  only  faintly 
recollects  the  matter. 

If  correctly  reported,  this  case  presents  two  of  the  rarer  features 
which  are  common  to  telepathic  and  to  purely  subjective  hallucina- 
tions ;  the  fragmentary  nature  of  the  percept — a  face  only, — and  the 
repetition  after  an  interval  of  some  hours.^ 

The  next  case  must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  non-recognition,  as  the 

resemblance  between  the  phantasm  and  the  person  who  died  was 

not  remarked  until  the  fact  of  death  was  known.     The  narrator,  Mr. 

S.  J.  Masters,  of  87,  Clifford  Crescent,  Southampton,  will  hardly  be 

accused  of  excessive  sentimentality. 

"December  14th,  1882. 

(241)  "  Last  Easter  Sunday,  I  was  retiring  to  bed,  just  after  11  o'clock, 
and  had  stepped  off  the  stairs  on  the  landing  that  led  to  my  room  (my 
parents'  bedroom  door  being  in  front  of  me,  about  10  or  12ft.,  and  my  door 

1  As  to  the  first  point  see  above,  p.  33,  note  ;  as  to  the  second,  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  445,  an 
below  p.  237,  note. 

60  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

being  about  2£t.  to  the  right,  so  that  I  had  to  pass  it  to  get  to  my  room). 
I  saw  their  bedroom  door  was  open,  and  I  was  rivetted  to  the  spot  by 
seeing  standing  in  the  room  doorway  in  front  of  me,  a  figure  of  a  female  ; 
although  I  could  not  distinguish  the  dress,  I  could  plainly  see  the  features, 
and  especially  the  eyes.  I  must  have  stood  there  at  least  20  seconds,  for 
my  mother,  hearing  me  stop  suddenly  before  reaching  my  room,  at  last 
opened  the  door  (below)  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  I  then  came 
downstairs  and  stopped  with  them  till  we  all  retired  together.  The  figure 
collapsed  when  my  mother  called  upstairs,  and  the  light  I  held  in  my  hand 
shone  through  the  doorway  to  the  opposite  wall,  which  had  been  obscured 
by  the  figure,  as  if  it  had  had  a  tangible  body. 

"  It  was  not  till  the  following  Wednesday  that  my  mother,  on  reading 
the  mid-weekly  local  paper,  saw  the  death  of  a  young  lady  with  whom  I 
had  once  kept  company  for  a  short  time.  On  inquiry,  I  found  she  died 
about  the  same  time  as  I  saw  the  apparition.  I  feel  convinced  it  was  her, 
for  the  eyes  had  the  same  expression,  although  I  could  not  recognise  her 
at  the  time ;  not  having  seen  the  girl  for  quite  six  months,  I  had  almost 
forgotten  her  existence.  She  died  in  decline,  which  accounts  for  her  not 
being  about  the  town  before  her  death. 

"S.  J.  Mastees." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
March  5,  1882.  This  was  a  Sunday,  but  not  Easter  Sunday.  The 
mention  of  the  Wednesday  paper  seems  also  to  be  a  mistake ;  as  the  death 
does  not  appear  in  the  Wednesday  issue  of  either  of  the  two  bi-weekly 
Southampton  papers,  though  it  appears  in  the  Saturday  issue  of  one  of 
them,  on  March  11th.  These  mistakes  are  not  important.  For  even  apart 
from  Mr.  Masters'  observation  of  the  coincidence  at  the  time,  Easter 
Sunday  seems  a  very  unlikely  day  to  have  been  named,  if  the  experience 
had  really  fallen  on  a  week-day ;  and  if  it  fell  on  a  Sunday,  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  it  fell  on  the  Sunday  before  the  announcement  of  the 
death — i.e.,  on  the  day  of  the  death. 

The  narrator's  mother  corroborates  as  follows : — 

"  I  remember,  perfectly  well,  the  circumstance,  and  the  efiect  it  pro- 
duced on  my  son  at  the  time.  He  is  not  of  a  nervous  disposition,  nor 
a  believer  in  anything  at  all  approaching  Spiritualism,  as  we  all  belong 
to  the  Church.  His  father  and  I  thought  it  might  betoken  the  death 
of  some  near  friend  or  relative,  having  heard  of  such  things,  but  never 
had  seen  so  direct  an  appearance  ourselves. 

"  Elizabeth  Masters." 

[Mr.  Masters  has  reason  to  think  that  the  young  lady's  attachment 
to  him  had  continued.  He  reports  that  on  more  exact  inquiry,  he 
finds  the  death  to  have  occurred  within  a  quarter-of-an-hour  of  the 
apparition — probably  after  rather  than  before  it.  Asked  if  he  had  ever 
experienced  any  other  hallucinations,  he  replied  in  the   negative.] 

The  next  case  is  one  of  the  most  singular  in  our  collection.  It  is 
from  Mrs.  Gierke,  of  Clifton  Lodge,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Norwood, 
S.E. 

XIV.]  OCCUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  61 

"October  30th,  1885. 

(242)  "  In  the  month  of  August,  1864,  about  3  or  4  o'clock  in  the  after-  ^h 
noon,  I  was  sitting  reading  in  the  verandah  of  our  house  in  Barbadoes. 
My  black  nurse  was  driving  my  little  girl,  about  18  months  or  so  old,  in 
her  perambulator  in  the  garden.  I  got  up  after  some  time  to  go  into  the 
house,  not  having  noticed  anything  at  all — when  this  black  woman  said  to 
me,  '  Missis,  who  was  that  gentleman  that  was  talking  to  you  just  now  %  ' 
'There  was  no  one  talking  to  me,'  I  said.  '  Oh,  yes,  dere  was.  Missis — a 
very  pale  gentleman,  very  tall,  and  he  talked  to  you,  and  you  was  very 
rude,  for  you  never  answered  him.'  I  repeated  there  was  no  one,  and  got 
rather  cross  with  the  woman,  and  she  begged  me  to  write  down  the  day, 
for  she  knew  she  had  seen  someone.  I  did,  and  in  a  few  days  I  heard  of 
the  death  of  my  brother  in  Tobago.  Now,  the  curious  part  is  this,  that  / 
did  not  see  him,  but  she — a  stranger  to  him — did  ;  and  she  said  that  he 
seemed  very  anxious  for  me  to  notice  him. 

"  May  Clerke." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Clerke  says  : — 

"  (1)  The  day  of  death  was  the  same,  for  I  wrote  it  down.  I  think  it 
was  the  3rd  of  August,  but  I  know  it  was  the  same. 

"  (2)  The  description,  *  very  tall  and  pale,'  was  accurate. 

"  (3)  I  had  no  idea  that  he  was  ill.     He  was  only  a  few  days  ill. 

"  (4)  The  woman  had  never  seen  him.  She  had  been  with  me  for 
about  18  months,  and  I  considered  her  truthful.  She  had  no  object  in 
telling  me." 

In  conversation,  I  learned  that  Mrs.  Clerke  had  immediately  mentioned 
what  the  servant  said,  and  the  fact  that  she  had  written  down  the  date,  to 
her  husband,  Colonel  Clerke,  who  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  I  well  remember  that  on  the  day  on  which  Mr.  John  Beresford,  my 
wife's  brother,  died  in  Tobago — after  a  short  illness  of  which  we  were  not 
aware — our  black  nurse  declared  she  saw,  at  as  nearly  as  possible  the  time 
of  his  death,  a  gentleman,  exactly  answering  to  Mr.  Beresford's  descrip- 
tion, leaning  over  the  back  of  Mrs.  Clerke's  easy-chair  in  the  open 
verandah.     The  figure  was  not  seen  by  any  one  else. 

"  Shadwbll  H.  Clerke." 

We    find    it    stated    in  Burke's   Peerage  that  Mr.  J.  H.  de  la  Poer 
Beresford,  Secretary  for  the  Island  of  Tobago,  died  on  August  3,  1863  ■ 
(not  1864). 

If  this  incident  is  to  be  interpreted  telepathically,  it  is  scarcely- 
possible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Clerke's  own  presence  did  not  play  a  part 
in  the  phenomenon.  The  case  would  then  be  comparable  to  some  of  / 
the  "  collective "  cases  (to  be  cited  in  Chap.  XVIII.),  where  one 
of  the  percipients  is  a  stranger  to  the  agent ;  the  difference  being 
that  here  the  person  who  should  (so  to  speak)  have  been  the  principal 
percipient  was  as  unconscious  of  the  impression  which  she  received 

62  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

as  we  have  found  the  percipient  to  be  in  some  of  the  experimental 
cases.^  Another  instance  of  the  same  kind  is  No.  355  (p.  256,  and 
see  p.  267). 

§  3.  I  will  now  give  a  group  of  cases  in  respect  of  which  the 
hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity  has  to  be  taken  into  account.  The 
apparition  in  all  of  them  was  seen  out-of-doors,  and  in  several  of  them 
in  the  street — which  is  the  place  where  such  mistakes  are  most  liable 
to  occur.  Now,  with  respect  to  mistakes  of  identity,  made  at  the 
time  when  the  person  who  seems  to  be  seen  is  really  dying  at  a 
distance,  one  general  remark  has  to  be  made — namely,  that  cases  in 
which  they  have  occurred  are  not  thereby  at  once  put  out  of  court, 
for  the  purpose  of  my  argument.  For  if  telepathic  hallucinations 
are  facts  in  nature,  the  possibility  of  telepathic  illusions  cannot 
reasonably  be  excluded.     Illusions,  as  I  have  remarked,  (Yol.  I.,  p.  460,) 

1  As  one  more  example  of  the  psychological  identity  _  of  hallucinations  and  dreams 
(Chap,  xii.,  §  5),  I  may  quote  an  account  of  a  dream  which  is  an  exact  parallel  to  the  above 
waking  case. 

In  the  last  week  of  February,  1885,  Miss  Harris,  of  9,  Queen  Square,  Bloomsbury, 
W.C,  wrote  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"  On  Thursday  night,  the  19th  of  February,  1885,  I  dreamed  the  following  dream.  A 
servant,  a  Lincolnshire  woman,  has  lived  in  our  house  for  two  years  ;  and  of  her,  whom  I 
never  see  in  the  day,  I  dreamt,  as  portentously  as  if  her  troubles  were  my  own.  There  is 
nothing  remarkable  in  this  young  woman's  character  or  experience.  She  is  but  an  ordinary 
rather  rough  specimen  of  a  village  girl,  quiet  and  respectable. 

"  In  my  dream  a  long  country  lane  was  before  me  ;  in  this  I  walked  with  the  Lincoln- 
shire cook,  without  speaking  ;  yet  I  knew  that  my  companion  was  going  with  me  as  a  sort  of 
escort  to  some  errand  of  my  own.  Then  a  face  appeared  over  the  hedge,  a  solemn,  silent 
face,  exactly  resembling  that  of  the  one  who  noiselessly  moved  beside  me ;  the  sternest 
suffering  was  impressed  upon  the  plain  hard-lined  countenance.  From  beside  me  the 
country  servant  instantly  departed  to  follow  the  warning  voiceless  form  through  the 
hedge,  into  a  little  house.  Only  a  long  minute  passed,  and  the  servant  rushed  from  the 
hedge,  absolutely  wringing  her  hands,  crouching  to  the  ground  in  dumb  agony.  '  'Tis  my 
sister  called  me,  she  beckoned  me  in  ;  but  she  will  not  speak  :  she  will  not  have  me  with 
her.'  As  she  spoke  the  vision  returned.  It  looked  over  the  low  hedge,  with  the  same 
indescribable  expression  of  sadness  unspeakable — of  a  terrible  woe  impossible  of  utterance. 
It  flung  back  its  sleeve,  and  lifting  one  arm,  pointed  to  a  single  white  spot  in  the  centre  of 
a  finger.  And  as  suddenly  as  I  had  fallen  on  this  dream,  so  suddenly  I  awoke.  I  tried 
to  cast  off  the  shadow  the  dream  had  cast  on  me.  But  the  same  evening  came  the  news 
that  the  country  cook's  sister  was  very  ill,  and  had  prematurely  been  confined  with  a 
child  born  dead. 

"Emily  Makion  Haekis. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Harris  adds  : — 

"  Certainly  I  repeated  my  dream  even  before  I  left  my  room.  I  asked  the  housemaid 
whether  she  knew  of  any  reason  her  fellow-servant  might  have  to  fear,  or  to  hear  bad 
news.  She  said,  'No,' and  after  that  I  told  my  sister.  Nothing  was  said  about  the 
dream  during  Friday.  On  Saturday  morning,  when  I  returiied  from  a  class — having 
dismissed  the  occurrence  from  my  mind  for  the  time — my  sister  immediately  told  me  that 
the  coincidence  of  dream  and  fact  were  marvellously  similar.  The  poor  woman  whom  I 
saw  with  such  dumb  appeal  on  her  countenance,  was  alone,  unable  to  speak,  meeting  her 
trouble  alone,  her  husband,  who  is  a  policeman,  being  on  night  duty.  She  thought  it  was 
impossible  to  be  heard,  till  she  found  a  stick  of  his,  and  contrived  to  knock  on  the  floor. " 

Miss  Harris's  sister  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  March  16th,  1885. 

"  It  was  directly  I  came  out  of  my  room,  before  I  went  down  stairs,  that  ray  sister 
told  me  the  dream  she  wrote  to  you  about,  and  which  she  had  dreamed  between  night  and 

morning.  tt    tt  .> 

'  Clara  de  H.  Harris. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  63 

are  merely  the  sprinkling  of  fragments  of  genuine  hallucination  on  a 
background  of  true  perception ;  and  it  is  surely  not  more  difficult  to 
suppose  that  a  mind  which  is  telepathically  affected  can  project  its 
sensory  delusion  on  some  real  figure  which  bears  a  general  resem- 
blance to  the  agent,  than  that  it  can  project  it  in  vacancy.  But  of 
course  the  coincidence  with  A's  death  of  an  illusion  in  which  the 
perceiver  mistook  B  for  A  would  have  far  less  force  as  evidence  for 
telepathy  than  the  coincidence  with  A's  death  of  a  hallucination 
representing  him,  simply  because  purely  subjective  mistakes  as  to 
identity  are  far  commoner  things  than  purely  subjective  hallucina- 
tions. To  find  the  probability  that  a  person  will  by  accident  make 
a  particular  mistake  of  identity  on  a  particular  day  of  his  life,  we 
must  multiply  the  fraction  ,,^ber  of  dlys  of  ms  me  ^1  ^^e  number  of 
similar  mistakes,  in  similar  circumstances  of  light,  distance,  &c,, 
that  he  makes  altogether;  and  we  must  divide  the  result  by  the 
number  of  acquaintances  any  one  of  whom,  if  chance  alone  acted,  is 
as  likely  as  the  one  who  died  on  the  particular  day  to  be  the  one 
wrongly  identified  on  that  day.  This  process  may  reduce  the  proba- 
bility of  a  telepathic  explanation  of  the  coincidence  from  odds  of 
millions  to  1  (as  found  in  the  case  of  hallucinations,  pp.  18-20)  to 
odds  of  thousands  to  1  ;  but  in  a  cumulative  argument,  odds  of 
that  magnitude  are  clearly  not  to  be  neglected.  However,  with 
regard  to  the  following  specimens,  or  most  of  them,  such  considera- 
tions are  hardly  needed.  They  seem  pretty  certainly  to  be  cases  of 
hallucination,  and  stand,  for  instance,  on  different  ground  from  the 
incidents  mentioned  above  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  123-4),  where  the  hypothesis 
of  mistaken  identity  seemed  fairly  plausible. 

The  first  account  is  from  the  Chevalier  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  of  the 
Palazzo  Fenzi,  Florence,  a  corresponding  member  of  the  S.P.R.  The 
peculiar  melancholy  described  as  preceding  the  vision  may  possibly 
exemplify  the  gradual  emergence  of  telepathic  impressions  into 
consciousness,  which  was  exemplified  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3. 

"November  13th,  1883. 
(243)  "Some  months  before  his  demise,  my  brother  (Senator  Carlo 
Fenzi)  one  day,  as  we  were  driving  to  town  together  from  our  villa  of  St. 
Andrea,  told  me  that  if  he  should  be  summoned  first,  he  would  endeavour 
to  prove  to  me  that  life  continued  beyond  the  chasm  of  the  grave,  and  that 
I  was  to  promise  him  the  same  in  case  I  went  first;  ^hut,''  said  he,  'I 
am  sure  to  go  first,  and,  mind  you,  I  feel  quite  sure  that  before  the  year 
is  out — nay,  in  three  months — I  shall  be  no  more.'  This  was  said  in  June 
and  he  died  on  the  2nd  of  September,  the  same  year,  1881. 

64  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"  Now,  on  that  fatal  morning  (the  2nd  of  September),  I  was  some  70 
miles  away  from  Florence,  namely,  at  Fortullino,  a  villa  of  ours  on  a  rock 
on  the  sea,  10  miles  south-east  of  Leghorn.  Well,  at  about  half -past  10  in 
the  morning,  I  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  deep  melancholy — -a,  thing 
very  unusual  with  me,  who  enjoy  great  serenity  of  mind.  I  had, 
however,  no  reason  for  being  alarmed  about  my  brother,  who  was  then 
in  Florence — as,  although  he  had  not  been  very  well,  the  latest  news 
of  him  was  very  good,  as  my  nephew  had  written  to  say,  '  Uncle  is  doing 
very  comfortably,  and  it  cannot  even  he  said  that  he  has  really  been  ill ' — so 
that  I  could  not  account  for  this  sudden  gloomy  impression ;  yet  the  tears 
stood  in  my  eyes,  and  in  order  not  to  burst  out  crying  like  a  baby  before 
our  family  party,  I  rushed  out  of  the  house  without  my  hat  on,  although  it 
was  blowing  a  hurricane,  and  the  rain  fell  in  torrents,  accompanied  by 
permanent  flashes  of  lightning,  and  the  loud  and  unceasing  roar  of  the 
sea  and  of  thunder. 

"  I  ran  and  ran,  and  only  stopped  when  I  had  reached  the  end 
of  a  spacious  lawn,  from  whence  are  seen,  close  on  the  other  side  of 
a  small  stream  (the  Fortulla),  the  huge  stones  or  rocks  heaped  on  one 
another,  and  stretching  for  a  good  half  mile  along  the  sea  coast.  I 
there  gazed  to  try  and  see  a  youth,  a  cousin  of  mine,  who,  having  been 
born  among  the  Zulus,  retained  enough  of  love  for  savage  life  to  have 
yielded  to  the  wish  of  going  out  in  that  terrible  weather,  'to  enjoy,'  he 
said,  '  the  fury  of  the  elements.'  Judge  of  my  surprise  and  astonishment 
when,  instead  of  Giovanni  (such  is  my  cousin's  name),  I  saw  my  brother, 
with  a  top  hat  and  his  big  white  moustachios,  stepping  leisurely  along 
from  one  rock  to  another,  as  if  the  weather  were  fair  and  calm  !  I  could 
not  believe  my  eyes  ;  and  yet,  there^he  was — he,  unmistakeably  !  I  thought 
of  rushing  back  to  the  house  to  call  every  one  out  to  give  him  a  hearty 
welcome,  but  then  preferred  waiting  for  him,  and  meanwhile  waved  my 
hand  to  him  and  called  out  his  name  as  loud  as  I  possibly  could,  although 
with  the  awful  noise  of  wind,  and  sea,  and  thunder  combined,  nothing 
could  naturally  be  heard.  He  meanwhile  continued  to  advance,  until, 
having  reached  a  rock  larger  than  the  rest,  he  slipped  behind  it.  The 
distance  between  myself  and  the  rock  was,  as  nearly  as  I  can  judge,  not 
more  than  60  paces.  I  waited  for  him  to  reappear  on  the  other  side — but 
to  no  purpose,  and  I  only  saw  Giovanni,  who  was  just  then  emerging  from 
a  wood,  and  stepping  on  to  the  rocks.  Giovanni,  tall  and  slight,  with  a 
broad-brimmed  hat  and  dark  beard,  was  altogether  a  very  difi'erent  type, 
and  I  thought  that  my  having  seen  Charles,  my  brother,  must  have  been 
a  freak  of  my  sense  of  vision,  and  felt  rather  annoyed,  and  almost  blushed 
at  the  idea  that  I  could  have  been  so  deceived  by  a  sort  of  phantom  of  my 
own  fancy ;  yet  could  not  help  telling  Giovanni,  '  There  must  be  some 
family  likeness,  for  I  must  positively  have  taken  you  for  Charles,  although 
I  cannot  make  out  how  you  could  have  gone  from  behind  the  huge  rock 
into  the  wood  without  my  seeing  you  cross  over.'  '  /  never  was  behind  the 
roch^  he  said,  '■for  when  you  saw  me,  I  had  but  just  put  my  foot  on  the 
rocks. ^ 

"Meanwhile  we  went  home,  put  on  fresh  clothes,  and  then  joined  the  rest 
to  breakfast.  My  melancholy  had  left  me,  and  I  conversed  merrily  with 
all  the  young  people.  After  breakfast  a  telegram  came,  telling  me  and  my 
daughter  Christina  to  hasten  home,  as  Carlo  had  suddenly  been  taken  very 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  65 

ill.  We  made  preparations  to  at  once  depart,  and  meanwhile  another 
telegram  came,  urging  us  to  make  all  possible  haste,  as  the  illness  was 
making  rapid  strides,  but  although  we  caught  the  nearest  train,  we  only 
arrived  in  Florence  at  night ;  where  we  found,  to  our  horror,  that  my 
brother  had  died  just  at  the  time  when  in  the  morning  I  had  seen  him  on 
the  rocks,  when,  feeling  that  his  moments  were  numbered,  he  had  been 
continually  asking  for  me,  regretting  not  to  see  me  appear. 

"  In  kissing  his  cold  forehead  with  intense  sorrow,  as  we  had  lived 
together,  and  loved  one  another  during  our  whole  lives,  I  thought,  '  Poor, 
dear  Charlie  ;  he  kept  his  word  I '  "  Sebastiano  Fenzi." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Chevalier  Fenzi  tells  us  that  his  "eyesight  is 
excellent,  especially  at  moderate  distances."  He  has  had  one  other 
experience  of  visual  hallucination — representing  an  unrecognised  figure — 
which  was  probably  subjective. 

The  "  Giovanni  "  of  the  narrative  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"Athens,  (English  address,  131,  Tavistock  Street,  Bedford). 

"  May  3rd,  1884. 

"  My  cousin,  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  of  Florence,  has  sent  me  your  letter  of 
13th  March  last,  with  a  request  that  I  would  give  you  my  recollections  of 
the  strange  circumstance  attending  the  death  of  his  brother,  Carlo  Fenzi, 
in  September,  1881,  a  circumstance  which  made  (and  has  left)  a  deep 
impression  on  my  mind.  I  will  endeavour  to  recall  the  whole  circumstance. 
Nearly  three  years,  it  is  true,  have  since  passed,  but  my  recollection  of 
the  event,  on  account  of  its  strangeness,  remains  clear. 

"Passing  through  Italy  in  the  autumn  of  1881,  I  profited  by  the 
occasion  to  visit  my  relatives.  At  Milan  I  learnt  that  the  major  portion 
were  at  Fortullino,  my  cousin's  seaside  villa.  Thither  I  accordingly 
went,  arriving  the  last  days  of  August.  Fortullino  is  a  charming  villa, 
situated  on  the  top  of  a  clifi"  on  the  sea,  and  surrounded  by  deep  growths 
of  trees  and  shrubs.  The  weather,  during  the  beginning  of  my  stay, 
was  very  bad,  rain,  thunder,  strong  winds,  and  heavy  sea.  I  remember 
that  on  the  morning  of  my  cousin's  death — none  then  dreamed  the  end 
was  near — indulging  in  a  favourite  weakness  (?). — I  started  ofi"  alone  for 
an  escapade  along  the  shore.  Descending  by  the  hillside  to  the  beach,  I 
passed  on,  leaping  from  boulder  to  boulder,  climbing  over,  or  passing 
round  them  when  too  huge,  past  a  bend,  which  hid  me  from  a  view  of 
the  villa,  for  some  distance  along  the  shore. 

"  Returning  for  breakfast,  I  found  the  rain  (driven  into  my  face  by 
the  wind)  blinding,  and,  fearing  an  accident,  entered  the  wood.  The 
undergrowth  of  the  shrubs,  and  the  wet  state  of  the  ground,  urged  me  to 
try  the  open  again.  This  I  did,  emerging  just  inside  the  bend,  in  full 
sight  of  the  house.  To  my  surprise  I  saw  my  cousin  standing  on  the  edge 
of  the  cliff.  When  I  approached  him  he  remarked  that  there  must  be  a 
strange  family  likeness,  as  he  had  mistaken  me  for  his  brother  Carlo, 
being  on  the  rocks,  but  wondered  how  I  had  managed  to  enter  the  wood 
unseen  by  him,  and  then  suddenly  leave  it  again.  I  replied  that  he  had 
not  seen  me  on  the  rocks  before  leaving  the  wood  (for  I  was  out  of  sight). 
The  matter  shortly  afterwards  dropped.  Scarcely  was  breakfast  over  than 
a  wire  arrived,  summoning  him  and  his  daughter  Christina  to  Florence, — 
Carlo  was  very  ill.     They  left  at  once,  I  staying,  at  their  request,  with 

VOL.    II.  ^ 

66  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

the  younger  members  at  Fortullino.  Our  next  news  was  that  Carlo  Fenzi 
had  died — about  the  very  time  that  Sebastiano  had  fancied  to  have 
mistaken  me  for  his  brother.  u  j^^j^  Douglas  de  Eenzi." 

i-v*^  [Even  apart  from  the  evidence  that  "Giovanni"  was  not  in  sight 
when  the  figure  was  seen,  it  would  be  difficult  to  regard  this  as  a  case  of  mis- 
taken identity.     For  Chevalier  Fenzi,  being  specially  on  the  look  out  for 

at.  "  Giovanni,"  would  be  specially  unlikely  to  mistake  him  for  someone  else.] 

Here  we  encounter  a  feature  of  which  there  are  altogether  nine 
examples  in  the  present  collection^ — a  previous  compact  between  the 
parties  that  the  one  who  died  first  should  endeavour  to  make  the  other 
sensible  of  his  presence.  Considering  what  an  extremely  small 
number  of  persons  make  such  a  compact,  compared  with  those  who 
do  not,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  its  existence  has 
a  certain  efficacy.  The  cause  of  this  might  be  sought  in  some 
quickening  of  the  agent's  thought,  in  relation  to  the  percipient,  as  the 
time  for  fulfilment  approached.  But  considering  how  often  spontaneous 
telepathy  acts  without  any  conscious  set  of  the  distant  mind  towards 
the  person  impressed,  it  is  safer  to  refer  the  phenomenon  to  the 
same  sort  of  blind  movements  as  seem  sometimes,  at  supreme  crises,  to 
■evoke  a  response  out  of  memories  and  affinities  that  have  long  lapsed 
from  consciousness  (see  Chap.  XII.,  §  9)  ;  on  which  view,  the  efficacy 
of  the  compact  may  quite  as  readily  be  conceived  to  depend  on  its 
latent  place  in  the  percipient's  mind  as  in  the  agent's. 

In  the  next  case — from  Major  Owen,  of  4,  Grove  Road,  East- 
bourne— the  tie  between  the  two  parties  was,  we  learn,  one  rather  of 

blood  than  of  affection. 

"November  17th,  1883. 

(244)  "  In  the  year  1870,  I  went  one  morning  from  my  then  home,  in 
Clifton,  to  order  various  eatables  for  the  day.  On  my  way,  I  saw  coming 
towards  me,  on  the  same  side  of  the  street,  J.  E.  H.,  a  male  cousin.  To 
avoid  meeting  him,  I  went  across  to  the  other  side,  and  walked  into  a 
fishmonger's  shop,  and  watched  him  pass  on.  I  remained  in  the  same 
place,  looking  into  the  street,  and  I  saw  him  (or  it)  pass  back  again.  I 
felt  so  annoyed  at  the  idea  of  J.  E.  H.  being  in  Clifton  that  I  hurried 
home  to  tell  my  wife  that  I  had  seen  J.  E.  H.,  and  that  he  was  evidently 
making  inquiries  as  to  our  residence,  and  would  certainly  be  here  directly. 
I  stayed  at  home  all  that  morning,  but  J.  E.  H.  never  appeared. 

"  The  next  day,  or  day  after,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  son  of  J.  E.  H., 
telling  me  his  father  had  died  the  very  day  I  had  seen  the  apparition. 

"  H.  M.  Arthur  Owen." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Owen  says  : — 

1  See  cases  146,  165,  169,  194,  355,  514,  526,  537  ;  also  Mr.  Cooper's  "  ambiguous  "  case, 
Vol.  i.,  p.  507.  In  case  210  there  had  been  a  request,  but  not  a  compact ;  and  in  case  197 
a  promise  on  the  side  of  the  person  who  died. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  67 

"  I  have  ascertained  from  the  widow  of  J.  E.  H.  that  he  died  Tuesday, 
November  2nd,  1869,  not  as  I  wrote  to  you,  1870,  between  2  and  3  p.m. 
I  saw,  as  I  believe  to  this  moment,  J.  E.  H.  certainly  before  noon  on  that 
day.  My  wife  can  testify  to  the  fact  of  my  having  seen  J.  E.  H.  before 
I  heard  of  his  death,  as  I  went  back  to  my  house  to  tell  her  J.  E.  H.  was 
in  Clifton,  and  she  must  expect  to  see  him  any  moment." 

Mrs.  Owen  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"I  perfectly  recognise  the  circumstance  detailed  to  you  by  my  husband 
of  his  having,  as  he  thought,  seen  J.  E.  H.  walking  in  the  streets  of 
Clifton  ;  indeed,  he  came  home  on  purpose  to  prepare  me  for  his  coming 
to  our  house,  and  the  whole  day  we  were  expecting  he  would  appear. 

"  M.  Owen." 

[Major  Owen  has  had  no  other  hallucination,  and  his  sight  is  excellent. 
In  conversation,  Mrs.  Owen  described  J.  E.  H.'s  figure  to  Mr.  Podmore  as 
unmistakeable ;  very  tall  and  thin,  with  small  black  eyes  and  a  very  small 
head.] 

The  next  case  is  from  the  Rev.    W.  E.    Dutton,   of  Lothersdale 

Rectory,  Cononley,  Leeds.     It  will  be  seen  that  the  impression  may 

possibly  have  been  reciprocal. 

"  January,  30th,  1885. 
(245)  "  I  am  not  quite  clear  as  to  the  exact  date,  but  about  the  middle  of 
June,  in  the  year  1863,  I  was  walking  up  the  High  Street  of  Hudders- 
field,  in  broad  daylight,  when  I  saw  approaching  me,  at  a  distance  of  a  few 
yards,  a  dear  friend  who  I  had  every  reason  to  believe  was  lying 
dangerously  ill  at  his  home  in  Staffordshire.  A  few  days  before,  I  had 
heard  this  from  his  friends.  As  the  figure  drew  nearer,  I  had  every 
opportunity  of  observing  it ;  and,  although  it  flashed  across  my  mind  that 
his  recovery  had  been  sudden,  I  never  thought  of  doubting  that  it  was 
really  my  friend.  As  we  met  he  looked  into  my  eyes  with  a  sad  longing 
expression,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  never  appeared  to  notice  my  out- 
stretched hand,  or  respond  to  my  greeting,  but  quietly  passed  on.  I  was 
so  taken  by  surprise  as  to  be  unable  to  speak  or  move  for  a  few  seconds, 
and  could  never  be  quite  certain  whether  there  was  uttered  by  him  any 
audible  sound,  but  a  clear  impression  was  left  on  my  mind,  '  I  have  wanted 
to  see  you  so  much,  and  you  would  not  come.'  Recovering  from  my 
astonishment,  I  turned  to  look  after  the  retreating  figure,  but  it  was  gone. 
My  first  impulse  was  to  go  to  the  station  and  wire  a  message ;  my  next, 
which  was  acted  upon,  was  to  start  off  immediately  to  see  whether  my 
friend  was  really  alive  or  dead,  scarcely  doubting  that  the  latter  was  the 
case.  When  I  arrived  next  day  I  found  him  living,  but  in  a  state  of  semi- 
consciousness. He  had  been  repeatedly  asking  for  me,  his  mind  apparently 
dwelling  on  the  thought  that  I  would  not  come  to  see  him.  As  far  as  I 
could  make  out,  at  the  time  I  saw  him  on  the  previous  day  he  was 
apparently  sleeping.  He  told  me  afterwards  that  he  fancied  he  saw  me, 
but  had  no  clear  idea  how  or  where.  I  have  no  means  of  accounting  for 
the  apparition,  which  was  that  of  my  friend  clothed,  and  not  as  he  must 
have  been  at  the  time.^  My  mind  was  at  the  moment  fully  occupied  with 
other  matters,  and  I  was  not  thinking  of  him. 

1  On  the  view  of  telepathic  hallucinations  which  has  been  here  advanced,  this  point 
of  course  presents  no  difficulty ;  see  Chap.  xii.  §§  5  and  6. 

VOL.    II.  F    2 

68  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"  I  may  add  that  he  rallied  afterwards,  and  lived  for  several  montlis. 
At  the  time  of  his  death  I  was  far  from  home,  but  there  was  no  repetition 
of  the  mysterious  experience.  "  W.  E.  Dutton." 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  his  only  experience  of  a 
hallucination  of  the  senses,  Mr.  Dutton  replies  : — 

"  I  have  never  had,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  any  other  experience  of 
the  nature  described  in  my  narrative,  and  do  not  think  I  am  a  subject  for 
such  impressions.  This  makes  the  solitary  experience  all  the  more 
mysterious  to  me." 

Asked  as  to  his  eyesight,  he  adds  : — "  I  am  not  and  never  have  been 
shortsighted,  but  just  the  contrary.  Nor  do  I  remember  to  have  made  a 
mistake  of  identity  except  on  one  occasion,  and  that  in  the  case  of  a 
person  I  had  seen  only  once." 

[Here  the  behaviour  of  the  phantasm  is  very  unlike  that  of  a  stranger 
who  found  himself  mistaken  for  someone  else.  The  case  is  of  course 
weakened  by  Mr.  Dutton's  knowledge  of  his  friend's  serious  illness,  which 
makes  it  more  likely  than  it  would  otherwise  be  that  the  hallucination  was 
purely  subjective  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509).  But  the  fact  of  his  friend's  mind 
having  been  distinctly  occupied  with  him  (possibly  even  telepathically 
clairvoyant  of  him)  is  a  point  on  the  other  side.] 

Mr.  Arthur  Ireland,  of  the  School  House,  South  Witham,  near 
Grantham,  wrote  to  us  on  January  5, 1884  : — 

(296)  "About  14  years  ago,  about  3  o'clock  one  summer's  afternoon,  I 
was  passing  in  front  of  Trinity  Church,  Upper  King  Street,  Leicester,  when 
I  saw  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  a  very  old  playmate,  whom,  having 
left  the  town  to  learn  some  business,  I  had  for  some  time  lost  sight  of.  I 
thought  it  odd  he  took  no  notice  of  me ;  and  while  following  him  with  my 
eyes,  deliberating  whether  I  should  accost  him  or  not,  I  called  after  him 
by  name,  and  was  somewhat  surprised  at  not  being  able  to  follow  him  any 
further,  or  to  say  into  which  house  he  had  gone,  for  I  felt  persuaded  he 
had  gone  into  one.  The  next  week  I  was  informed  of  his  somewhat 
sudden  death  at  Burton-on-Trent,  at  about  the  time  I  felt  certain  he  was 
passing  in  front  of  me.  What  struck  me  most  at  the  time  was  that  he 
should  take  no  notice  of  me,  and  that  he  should  go  along  so  noiselessly^  and 
disappear  so  suddenly,  but  that  it  was  E.  P.  I  had  seen  I  never  for  one 
moment  doubted.  I  have  always  looked  upon  this  as  a  hallucination,  but 
why  it  should  have  occurred  at  that  particular  time,  and  to  me,  I  could 
never  make  out.  "  Arthur  Ireland." 

To  inquiries,  Mr.  Ireland  replies : — 

(1)  "I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion  had  any  hallucination  of  the 
senses  at  all. 

(2)  "  I  mentioned  the  incident  of  having  met  E.  P.  to  my  mother,  and 
remarked  on  the  seeming  slight  of  his  not  acknowledging  me.  Of  course, 
when  the  news  of  his  death  came,   mother  remarked  that  I  was  mistaken, 

1  This  feature  recurs  in  Dr.  Leslie's  narrative,  p.  252.  Visual  hallucinations,  as  we 
have  seen,  often  involve  further  the  sounds  that  a  real  person  would  have  made  ;  but  the 
absence  of  this  complete  development  (c/.  case  252)  is  only  on  a  par  vs^ith  the  common 
occurrence  of  hallucinations  of  voices  close  at  hand,  where  no  visible  phantasm  appears. 

XIV.]  OCCUBRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  69 

and  although  not  feeling  convinced,  I  had  to  assent  to  such  a  seemingly- 
apparent  truism.  My  mother  has  since  died,  or  we  might  have  had  this 
added  testimony. 

(3)  "  I  am  thankful  to  say  that  my  eyesight  is  good,  and  I  remember 
no  instance  of  mistaking  one  person  for  another.  Of  course  I  could  not 
swear  that  there  was  no  mistake  ;  but  I  do  assert  that  I,  without  knowing 
he  had  left  the  town,  and  with  nothing  to  make  me  think  of  him,  was 
suddenly  certain  that  E.  P.  was  coming  towards  me  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  street ;  that  I  watched  him  attentively  for  any  sign  of  recognition ; 
that  I  called  after  him,  and  could  never  explain  his  disappearance,  or 
account  for  the  unnatural  noiselessness  of  his  movements  or  the  suddenness 
of  his  appearance. 

"  I  conclude  by  assuring  you  that  so  far  I  have  been  of  a  very  realistic 
turn  of  mind,  and  am  not  aware  that  I  am  in  the  least  superstitious  or 
even  imaginative.  That  which  I  have  written  is  the  truth,  according  to 
my  experience,  placed  at  your  disposal  to  help,  if  of  any  service,  in  the 
unravelling  of  that  for  which  at  present  there  seems  no  adequate 
explanation." 

Mr.  Ireland  was  in  doubt  as  to  the  exact  date.  We  learn  through  a 
sister  of  Mr.  E.  P.'s — -and  have  confirmed  her  statement  by  the  Register- 
that  the  death  occurred  on  January  9th,  1869.  Mr.  Ireland  was  therefore 
mistaken  in  referring  it  to  the  summer.  But  he  is  quite  certain  that  he 
"  received  the  information  of  it  within  a  week  after  it  took  place,"  and 
remarked  to  his  mother  on  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence. 

[Here  the  words  "  without  knowing  he  had  left  the  town  "  somewhat 
weaken  the  case.  But  the  mode  of  appearance  and  disappearance  strongly 
suggests  that  the  figure  seen  was  not  a  stranger  mistaken  for  E.  P.  but  a 
hallucination ;  and  if  so,  there  is  the  strongest  probability  that  it  was 
telepathic] 

The  next  case  is  taken  from  a  book  called  John  Leifchild,  D.D., 
his  Public  Ministry ;  founded  upon  an  Autobiography,  by  J.  R. 
Leifchild,  his  son  (published  by  Jackson,  Walford  and  Hodder,  1863). 
The  account  is  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Leifchild  himself,  not  of  his  son. 

(247)  "I  give  an  account  of  an  occurrence  which  soon  after  befell  my 
aunt,  for  the  truth  of  which,  as  an  event,  I  can  vouch,  but  of  which  I  can 
ofier  no  solution.  She  was  standing  in  a  little  shop  fronting  the  street  while 
a  customer  was  being  served.  On  a  sudden,  her  absent  son  passed  in  the 
street  before  her,  and,  as  he  passed,  gave  her  a  look  of  recognition,  which 
so  surprised  and  overjoyed  her  that,  forgetting  everything  else,  she  rushed 
into  the  street  after  him.  When  there,  she  could  not  see  him,  and 
concluded  that  he  was  gone  to  the  alley,  which  led  to  the  abbey,  and  meant  to 
hide  himself  away.  We  went,  as  soon  as  we  could  assemble,  in  search  of 
him,  but  could  not  discover  any  trace  of  the  son.  My  aunt  then  concluded 
that  she  had  seen  his  spirit,  and  fell  seriously  ill.  I  noticed  the  circum- 
stances in  writing  at  the  time,  and  pondered  over  them. 

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards  my  father  came  to  see  us,  and  my  aunt  truly 
divined  his  errand.  He  had  received  a  letter  from  the  captain  of  the 
ship  in  which  her  son  was  sailing,  stating  that  the  unfortunate  lad  had 
fallen   from   the   mast,  and   fractured   his    skull.       While    lying  on   his 

70  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

death-bed  he  directed  the  captain  to  write  to  my  father,  whose  address  he 
named.  The  dates  of  this  misfortune  and  the  hallucination  corresponded 
precisely." 

[This  certainly  cannot  be  proved  not  to  have  been  a  case  of  mistaken 
identity ;  for  the  "  look  of  recognition  "  cannot  be  pressed,  that  being  just 
the  sort  of  detail  that  might  creep  in  afterwards,  and  the  evidence  for  it 
being  second-hand.  At  the  same  time,  the  sense  of  reality  seems  to 
have  been  of  a  kind  which  excluded  this  hypothesis  in  the  percipient's 
mind  :  people  do  not  as  a  rule  "fall  seriously  ill"  as  a  consequence  of 
mistaking  one  person  for  another  in  the  street.] 

The  next  case  was  thus  narrated  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  in  an  article 
on  "  Apparitions,"  Encyclopcedia  Britannica,  Vol.  II.,  p.  207. 

(248)  "  The  writer  once  met,  as  he  believed,  a  well-known  and  learned 
member  of  an  English  University  [Professor  Conington],  who  was  really 
dying  at  a  place  more  than  100  miles  distant  from  that  in  which  he  was 
seen.  Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  writer  did  not 
mistake  some  other  individual  for  the  extremely  noticeable  person  whom 
he  seemed  to  see,  the  coincidence  between  the  subjective  impression  and 
the  death  of  the  learned  professor  is,  to  say  the  least,  curious." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lang  wrote,  on  January  30th,  1886  : — 

"  Savile  Club. 

"^  It  was  when  I  was  living  in  St.  Giles  that  I  saw  the  real  or  sham 
J.  C.  I  was  under  the  lamp  in  Oriel  Lane,  about  9  at  night,  in  winter, 
and  I  certainly  had  a  very  good  view  of  him.  I  believe  this  to  have  been 
on  a  Thursday,  but  it  may  have  been  a  Friday.  I  think  it  was  on  the 
Saturday  that  Scott  Holland  did  not  come  to  a  breakfast  party,  and  sent 
a  note  that  Conington  was  dangerously  ill.  I  said,  '  He  can't  have  been 
very  ill  on  Thursday  (or  yesterday,  I  can't  be  sure  which),  for  I  met  him 
near  Corpus.' 

"  I  am  constantly  failing  to  recognise  people.  Conington,  however,  was 
not  easily  mistaken,  and  I  know  no  one  in  Oxford  who  was  at  all  like  him. 
Whoever  he  was,  he  was  in  cap  and  gown.  u  j^    Lang." 

Mr.  Lang  tells  us  that  he  has  never  had  a  hallucination  on  any  other 
occasion. 

The  notice  of  the  death  in  the  Times  shows  that  it  took  place  on 
Saturday,  October  23,  1869  ;  but  information  received  from  Canon  Scott 
Holland,  who  heard  from  Professor  Conington  four  times  in  the  course  of 
the  week,  leaves  no  doubt  that  he  knew  himself  to  be  dying  on  the 
Thursday  night.  The  experience  narrated  therefore  coincided  with  a 
time  of  critical  illness,  though  not  with  the  death. 

[This  is,  no  doubt,  an  experience  which  might  have  been  without 
difficulty  accounted  for  as  a  mistake  of  identity,  had  the  person  who  seemed 
to  be  seen  been  in  a  noi-nial  state  at  the  time.  But  in  any  such  case  the 
coincidence  is  an  inexpugnable  fact  or  factor,  the  probability  of  which,  as 
the  result  of  accident,  cannot  reasonably  be  estimated  save  in  relation  to 
numbers  of  similar  and  more  striking  examples ;  and  its  force,  as  I 
pointed  out  above  (pp.  62-3),  is  by  no  means  entirely  dependent  on  the 
supposition  that  the  experience  was  a  hallucination  and  not  an  illusion.] 

i 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  71 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  T.  H.  Carr,  of  1,  The  Terrace,  Carlton 

Hill,  Woodhouse  Lane,  Leeds. 

"February  18th,  1886. 

(249)  "  I  cannot  make  you  fully  understand  the  case  unless  you  are 
acquainted  "a^ith  the  Friends'  Meeting  House  premises.  In  passing  through 
the  front  gate,  the  Meeting  House  is  on  the  left,  and  my  house,  the  first 
of  5  terrace  houses,  up  a  few  steps  on  the  right  hand ;  but  they  stand 
back  a  few  feet  at  the  end  of  a  high  wall.  And  on  account  of  the  height 
of  this  wall  we  could  only  just  see  the  top  part  of  the  head  and  hat  of  any 
gentleman  coming. 

"  It  was  when  I  was  standing  at  my  front  window  on  Christmas  Day, 
1884,  that  I  saw  the  head  of  a  gentleman  walking  up  the  yard  which  I 
thought  was  Daniel  Pickard  coming  up,  but  on  getting  nearer  I  saw 
that  the  hair  was  whiter  than  Daniel's  ;  and  on  looking  again,  I  thought 
it  was  the  head  and  hat  of  Mr.  X.  But  to  see  him  right,  I  thought  he 
would  think  me  rude  to  be  standing  close  to  the  window  and  watching  him 
turn  the  corner,  so  I  walked  backwards  a  couple  of  paces,  expecting  to  see 
him  pass  close  to  the  terrace.  But,  to  my  surprise,  he  vanished  in  a 
moment,  and  I  saw  no  more.  I  was  struck  with  the  affair,  and  took  out 
my  watch,  and  it  was  just  4  o'clock. 

"  A  couple  of  hours  after,  B.  Geddard,  the  caretaker,  came  down  the 
yard,  and  said,  '  Hast  thou  heard  that  Mr.  X.  is  dead  1 '  I  said,  '  No  ; 
when  has  he  died  ? '     He  replied,  '  To-day  at  4  o'clock.' 

"Thomas  H.  Carr." 

We  find  from  a  newspaper  obituary  that  Mr.  X.  died  on  December 
25th,  1884,  after  an  illness  of  less  than  a  week. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Carr  adds  that  for  distant  objects  his  eye- 
sight is  excellent ;  that  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion  experienced 
any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses  ;  and  that,  though  he  knew  Mr.  X.  to 
be  ill,  he  had  no  idea  that  the  illness  was  serious. 

It  was  impossible  to  judge  of  this  case  without  an  actual  observation 
on  the  spot.  Mr.  Carr's  house  stands  in  an  enclosure  which  is  divided 
from  the  street  by  open  railings  ;  and  nobody  would  be  walking  along  the 
line  which  the  figure  appeared  to  be  taking,  unless  he  were  coming  to  the 
small  row  of  houses  of  which  Mr.  Carr's  is  the  first — in  which  case  his 
whole  figure  would  be  visible  in  a  very  few  seconds  after  the  upper 
part  of  it  carne  into  view.  To  disappear  as  it  did,  the  figure  would  have 
had  to  retire  by  the  way  that  it  came,  hut  closer  to  the  wall.  Mr.  Carr 
was  perfectly  familiar  with  the  aspect  of  Mr.  X.,  who  used  frequently  to 
come  to  see  him,  and  whose  head  and  tall  hat  were  quite  suflicient  to 
distinguish  him  from  other  people  known  to  enter  this  private  enclosure. 
The  broad  brim  of  the  hat  was  peculiar  ;  and  Mr.  X.  also  walked  with  a 
peculiar  droop  of  the  head  Moreover,  the  fact  that  at  the  first  moment  Mr. 
Carr  took  the  person  he  saw  for  some  one  else,  and  then  corrected  his  judg- 
ment, shows  at  any  rate  that  his  recognition  of  Mr.  X.  was  not  that  of  a 
mere  hasty  glance.  He  was  extremely  startled  by  the  sudden  disappear- 
ance of  his  friend,  and  at  once  hurried  out  to  see  what  could  have  become 
of  him,  but  no  one  the  least  resembling  him  was  in  view.  The  incident 
perplexed  and  disturbed  him  at  the  moment  far  more  than  the  words  "  I 
was  struck  with  the  afiair  "  might  seem  to  imply. 

72  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

The  final  case  of  this  group  (procured  for  us  by  the  Rev.  J.  A. 
Macdonald,  of  Rhyl,)  is  from  Mr.  Schofield,  of  350,  Belgrade  Terrace, 
Manchester,  a  manufacturing  chemist,  and  an  office-bearer  in  the 
Collyhurst  Wesleyan  Church. 

(250)  "  About  the  year  1857,  while  I  was  apprenticed  at  Bacup,  I  came 
:»*''-*'  \  home  to  Newchurch,  in  Rossendale,  one  Wednesday  evening.  On  arriving  at 
.„.  ,  ■  the  gate  of  the  garden  fronting  my  father's  house,  I  saw  Martha  Mills,  a 
young  woman  with  whom  we  were  well  acquainted,  at  the  gate  as  if  coming 
from  the  house.  I  spoke  to  her,  but  she  made  no  answer,  and  I  passed  on 
into  the  house.  When  I  got  into  the  house  I  remarked  to  my  mother 
that  I  had  met  Martha  Mills  at  the  gate,  and  that  she  did  not  answer 
me  when  I  spoke  to  her.  My  mother  [since  dead]  said,  '  You  could  not 
have  seen  her,  for  she  is  either  dead  or  dying.'  I  had  not  heard  of  her 
illness  ;  but  she  died  about  the  same  time  that  I  had  seen  her. 

"Richard  Schofield." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Schofield  tells  us  that  he  has  never  had 

any  other  visual  hallucination.     He  adds  : — 

^ti  Ji  i^».       "  It  was  in  the  winter,  and  the  light  would  not  be  sufficient  to  enable 

L,vM^.  me  to  distinguish  a  living  person  at  the  distance  at  which  Martha  Mills 

'  appeared  to  me ;  yet  I  saw  her  very  distinctly,    and  at  the  time  had  no 

doubt  that  it  was  she.     I  was  not  astonished  at  the  time  at   the  vividness 

with  which  I  had  seen  her  features ;  for  I  did  not  until  afterwards  reflect 

upon  the  distance  of  the  street  lamp,  and  general  darkness  of  the  night." 

The  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  Mr.  Schofield's  recollection  that  the 
occurrence  fell  on  a  Wednesday,  and  in  the  winter,  but  shows  that  it  is 
rather  more  remote  than  he  supposed — the  date  of  Martha  Mills's  death 
being  December  15,  1852.  The  coincidence  of  time  between  the  vision 
and  the  death  was,  as  far  as  he  can  remember,  exact.  Martha  Mills  was 
just  a  neighbour,  who  would  be  in  and  out  at  the  Schofields'  without 
ceremony. 

Here  Mr.  Schofield  asserts  that  he  saw  the  face  distinctly ;  but 
afterwards  adds  that  the  light  was  insufficient  to  admit  of  such 
distinct  perception,  had  the  figure  been  a  real  person.  Now,  taken 
together,  these  statements  might  seem  to  tell  in  favour  of  the  abnormal 
— the  hallucinatory — nature  of  the  vision  :  ^  at  the  same  time  it  would 
be  an  equally  reasonable  inference  that  perhaps  he  did  not  really  see 
the  face  as  distinctly  as  he  afterwards  supposed.     When  persons  whom 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  462,  note,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  7.  A  case  of  subjective  hallucination  exjDe- 
riencedbythe  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham  further  illustrates  the  point.  He  distinctly  saw  in  church 
the  figure  of  a  parishioner  of  marked  appearance,  who,  it  turned  out,  had  not  been  there,  and 
whose  place  had  not  been  occupied  by  anyone  else.  "  When  I  became  convinced  it  was  a 
hallucination,  it  then  occurred  to  me  that  the  clearness  with  which  I  had  noted  the 
eyes  and  the  careworn  look  proved  it ;  for  my  eyesight  is  now  unable  to  distinguish 
such  details  of  features  at  the  distance  of  the  pew  in  question."  It  is  interesting  in  this 
connection  to  remark  that  Mr.  Newnham,  for  the  larger  part  of  his  life,  enjoyed  particularly 
good  sight ;  while  another  corresijondent,  who  occasionally  sees  subjective  phantoms, 
and  who  has  been  short-sighted  from  birth,  says,  "I  experience  the  same  difficulty 
in  discerning  the  unreal  that  I  do  when  viewing  real  objects  ;  unless  the  persons  come 
near,  I  cannot  clearly  distinguish  their  features." 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  73 

one  knows  are  seen  in  places  where  it  is  very  natural  that  they  should 
be,  one  often  accepts  a  very  slight  and  general  glance  as  a  sufficient 
ground  of  recognition;  and  it  is  easy  afterwards  to  mistake  the 
inference  that  one  drew  from  this  glance  for  actual  ocular  observation. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Schofield  spoke  to  the  figure,  and  it  did 
not  answer  him  ;  which  would  at  any  rate  be  unlikely  conduct  on  the 
part  of  a  real  person. 

§  4.  The  next  type  that  presents  itself  is  different  from  any  that 
has  yet  been  mentioned.  We  have  encountered  several  cases,  which 
there  seemed  strong  grounds  for  considering  telepathic,  where 
the  phantasmal  form  was  not  recognised ;  and  we  have  seen  that 
on  the  theory  that  the  telepathic  impulse  may  take  place  on  various 
levels,  or  even  below  any  level,  of  consciousness,  and  maybe  projected 
into  sensory  form  by  the  percipient  with  various  degrees  of  distinct- 
ness, this  lack  of  recognition  is  not  surprising.  But  all  the  visual 
cases  so  far  examined  have  presented  a  human  appearance :  the 
hallucination  has  been  developed  at  any  rate  up  to  that  point.  It 
will  be  remembered,  however,  that  there  have  been  instances  where  the 
human  appearances  developed  out  of  something  of  a  formless  kind, 
which  gradually  assumed  outline  and  detail  (Chap.  XII.,  §  3) ;  and  this 
might  naturally  lead  us  to  expect  that  other  cases  might  occur  of  a 
more  rudimentary  type — hallucinations,  as  we  might  say,  of  arrested 
development,  and  not  suggestive  or  but  faintly  suggestive  of  any 
human  likeness.  Instances  of  the  undeveloped  type  are  met  with 
among  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  ;  but  they 
are  very  rare  in  comparison  with  the  hallucinations  which  represent  a 
definite  figure  ;  ^  it  need  not,  therefore,  surprise  us  to  find  that  the 
analogous  group,  which  there  are  grounds  for  regarding  as  very  pos- 
sibly telepathic,  is  a  small  one.  Physiologically,  we  might  com- 
pare these  undeveloped    flashes  of  hallucination  to  a  motor  effect 

1  In  my  collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  only  visual 
examples  that  I  find  of  a  quite  rudimentary  type  are  a  star,  and  two  or  three  appear- 
ances of  shapeless  cloudy  masses  ;  to  which  I  might  add  a  few  of  the  "  collective  "  cases  m 
Chap,  xviii.,  §  5.  But  since  this  chapter  was  written,  M.  Marillier's  paper,  above  cited, 
has  supplied  me  vidth  a  case  eminently  in  point.  After  describing  some  most  distinct  and 
complete  hallucinations  from  which  he  suffered  at  one  period  of  his  life,  he  continues  :— 
"  Depuis  lors,  je  n'ai  plus  eu  d'hallucinations  trfes  nettes  ;  parfois  encore  je  vols  des  lueurs, 
j'entends  des  craquements,  des  bruissements,  je  sens  en  moice  sentiment  d'attenteanxieuse 
qui  precfede  d'ordinaire  I'apparition  d'une  hallucination  ;  mais  rien  ne  paralt  :  Thallucma- 
tion  est  r^duite  avant  meme  qu'elle  ait  eu  le  temps  de  se  produire."  This  seems  exactly  to 
illustrate  "arrested  development."  See  also  case  311  below,  where  a  hallucination  of 
light  develops  into  a  human  form  ;  a  converse  case,  No.  553,  where  a  developed  halluci- 
nation passes  into  a  mere  impression  of  light ;  case  332  where  it  seems  probable  that  what 
appeared  to  one  percipient  as  a  complete  and  recognised  figure  appeared  to  another  as  a 
formless  luminous  cloud  ;  and  case  346  where  what  appeared  to  one  percipient  as  a  com- 
plete figure,  which  touched  him,  appeared  to  another  as  a  misty  shadow. 

74  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

which,  instead  of  taking  the  complex  form  of  automatic  writing,  is 
limited  to  a  single  start  or  twitch.  The  experiments  in  Chap.  II., 
§13,  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  sequel  of  a  telepathic  impulse 
might  be  a  single  tremor  or  vibration,  sent  down  to  the  motor  centre 
from  the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain  ;  just  so  may  we  suppose  the 
speech-centre  to  have  been  stimulated  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  K.'s  cry 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  398) ;  and  in  the  rudimentary  hallucinations  the  stimula- 
tion of  the  sensory  centre  may  be  conceived  as  of  the  same  simple  and 
explosive  sort. 

The  following  case  stands  in  an  intermediate  position,  as  there 
was  a  suggestion,  but  not  exactly  a  representation,  of  human  form. 
The  account  is  from  a  witness  whom  we  believe  to  have  stated  the 
facts  correctly.  She  is  the  wife  of  an  Inspector  on  the  G.N.  Railway, 
and  resides  at  4,  Taylor's  Cottages,  London  Road,  Nottingham. 

"April  23rd,  1883. 

(251)  "  We  received  a  letter  a  few  days  since,  asking  me  to  give  you 
the  account  of  our  dear  little  girl's  death,  which  took  place  on  the  17th  of 
May,  1879.  I  beg  to  state  it  is  as  fresh  on  my  mind  as  if  it  only 
occurred  a  few  days  ago.  The  morning  was  very  bright,  and  I  think 
the  sun  shone  more  bright  than  I  had  ever  seen  it  before.  The  child  was 
four  years  and  five  months  old,  and  a  very  fine  girl.  A  few  minutes  after 
1 1  she  came  running  into  the  kitchen  and  said  to  me,  '  Mother,  may  I 
go  and  play  ? '  I  said,  '  Yes.'  She  then  went  out.  Soon  after  I  spoke 
to  her,  I  went  and  fetched  a  pail  of  water  from  the  bedroom.  As  I  was 
walking  across  the  yard,  the  child  came  in  front  of  me  like  a  bright 
shadow,  1  and  I  stopped  quite  still  and  looked  at  her,  and  turned  my  head 
to  the  right,  and  saw  her  pass  away.  I  emptied  my  water,  and  was  coming 
in.  My  husband's  brother,  who  was  staying  with  us,  called  to  me,  and 
said,  '  JFanny  have  got  runned  over.'  I  then  came  through  the  house 
and  went  just  across  the  road,  and  found  her.  She  was  knocked  down 
by  the  horse's  feet,  and  the  wheel  of  a  baker's  cart  had  broken  the  brain 
at  the  back  of  her  neck.     She  only  breathed  a  few  minutes  in  my  arms. 

"  This  is  just  as  the  sad  accident  occurred.  I  have  been  looking  for 
the  piece  of  paper  with  it  in,  but  I  cannot  find  it.       "Anne  E.  Weight." 

The  accident  occurred  at  Derby.  The  Derby  and  Chesterfield  Rei^orter 
gives  a  full  account  of  it,  whicli  completely  corresponds  with  the  above. 

[In  a  conversation  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on  December  16th, 
1883,  Mrs.  Wright  explained  that  the  apparition  was  "like  a  flash  of 
lightning  in  the  form  of  a  child's  shadow."  It  could  not  have  been  a 
real  child  ;  it  was  "  not  the  least  like  one,"  nor  did  she  recognise  in 
it  the  image  of  any  particular  child  ;  but  it  gave  her  a  kind  of  shock 
and  made  her  think,  "  I  wonder  where  those  children  are."  It  lasted 
long  enough  for  her  to  gaze  steadily  at  it — "  about  half  a  minute  " — 
and    "  moved    away  to   the    right,    with  her  eyes  upon    it,"    and  so  dis- 

1  Cf.  Case  491,  where  a  "shadowy  light"  seems  to  have  developed  into  more  definite 
form. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  75 

appeared.  Not  more  than  a  quarter  or  three-quarters  of  a  minute 
passed  before  her  brother-in-law  called  to  her.  It  must  have  been  5  or  7 
minutes  since  the  child  had  gone  to  play,  when  the  accident  happened. 
Mrs.  Wright  afterwards  learnt  from  an  eye-witness  what  the  child 
had  been  doing  out  in  the  road  for  some  minutes  previously  to  the 
accident.  While  holding  the  dying  child  in  her  arms,  she  said  to  the 
people  standing  by,  "  This  is  her  death-blow.  I  saw  her  shadow  in  the 
yard."     She  has  had  no  hallucination  of  vision  on  any  other  occasion.] 

It  is  open  to  doubt,  of  course,  whether  the  experience  here  was  of  a 
sufficiently  marked  kind  to  have  remained  in  the  percipient's  mind, 
had  no  accident  occurred.  But  the  description  of  the  phantasm 
appears  at  any  rate  to  point  to  something  more  than  a  mere  illusion 
caused  by  the  sunlight ;  nor  is  it  of  a  sort  that  seems  specially  likely 
to  have  been  unconsciously  invented  or  exaggerated  after  the  event.    . 

The  next  two  cases  are  of  a  much  more  rudimentary  type.  The 
narrator  of  the  first  is  the  Rev.  James  Went,  M.A.,  of  Southlea, 
Knighton,  Leicester,  Headmaster  of  the  Leicester  Grammar  School. 

"  December  21st,  1885, 
(252)  "  In  the  year  1870, 1  held  an  assistant-mastership  in  a  large  gram- 
mar school  in  the  Midland  counties.  At  the  beginning  of  one  of  the  school 
terms  a  boy  had  come  to  the  town  to  reside  with  his  uncle,  for  the  sake  of 
attending  the  school.  He  was  a  quiet,  thoughtful-looking  boy,  and  he  and 
I  were,  I  think,  attracted  to  each  other.  A  short  time  after  he  had  come 
to  the  school,  he  was  taken  ill  during  school  hours.  Seeing  that  he  was  in 
pain  I  suggested  that  he  should  go  home,  and  he  did  so.  He  was  absent 
for  perhaps  three  or  four  days,  and,  I  think,  meantime  I  made  inquiries  of 
his  cousin,  who  also  attended  the  school,  and  got  the  impression  that  he 
was  not  seriously  ill.  At  all  events,  I  had  no  idea  that  he  was  in  any 
danger,  nor,  indeed,  as  I  ascertained  afterwards,  had  his  friends.  One 
evening  I  was  sitting  in  my  drawing-room  reading,  my  wife  being  in  the 
dining  room  behind,  when  I  became  aware  of  a  vague  presence  within  a  few 
feet  of  me.  It  assumed  no  shape,  and  was  nothing  more  than  an  indefin- 
able dark  appearance  as  of  massed  and  disordered  drapery,  though  there 
was  no  rustling.  Slight  as  it  was,  however,  I  was  quite  conscious  of  it, 
and  I  can  recall  it  at  this  distance  of  time.  It  made  me  feel  a  little 
uncomfortable,  and  I  put  down  my  book  and  joined  my  wife  in  the  next 
room.  The  discomfort  passed  away  at  once,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  it. 
In  the  course  of  an  hour,  however,  I  received  a  note  which  informed  me 
that  my  pupil  had  died  at  about  the  same  time,  so  far  as  I  could  make 
out,  that  I  had  been  conscious  of  this  appearance.  I  was,  of  course,  at 
once  reminded  of  it,  and  took  some  little  trouble  to  ascertain  the  time. 
When  I  received  the  note  informing  me  of  his  death  I  mentioned  the 
incident  to  my  wife,  and  she  at  the  present  time  remembers  my  doing  so. 

"  I  give  the  narrative  for  what  it  is  worth.  It  is  very  vague,  but  I 
have  endeavoured  not  to  overstate  the  incident.  "  James  Went." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Went  says  : — "  I  have  never  on  any  other 
occasion  had  any  hallucination  of  the  senses." 

76  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

Mrs.  Went  writes  as  follows  on  Dec.  29,  1885  : — 

"  I  remember  well  my  husband  mentioning  to  me,  directly  after  he 
heard  of  the  boy's  death,  a  queer  sensation  that  he  had  experienced  an 
hour  previously  that  evening,  and  his  belief  that  he  had  seen  something 
which  he  could  not  describe.  "  Feances  J.  Went." 

The  stage  of  development  here  seems  just  on  a  par  with  that  out 
of  which  the  appearances  in  cases  193,  194,  and  315  took  definite  shape. 

The  next  case  is  from  the  late  Rev.  Stephen  H.  Saxby,  of  Mount 
Elton,  Clevedon,  who  was  present  when  the  incident  occurred. 

"  1883. 

(253)  "About  the  year  1841,  I  was  in  a  room  with  my  father  in  our 
house  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  when  he  exclaimed,  '  Good  God,  what  is  thaf?' 
starting  up  as  he  spoke,  and  apparently  looking  at  something.  He  then 
turned  to  me  and  said  that  he  had  seen  a  ball  of  light  pass  through  the 
room,  and  added,  '  Depend  upon  it.  Nurse  Simonds  is  dead.'  This  was  an 
old  servant  in  London,  to  whom  he  had  been  sending  money,  in  illness. 
In  course  of  post  came  information  that  she  passed  away  at  the  very  time 
in  question.  "  S.  H.  S." 

[The  exact  date  of  death  cannot  be  traced,  the  name  being  a  common  one.] 

It  is  superfluous  to  remark  that  such  an  incident  as  this  would 
deserve  no  attention  if  it  stood  alone  ;  for  therein  it  only  resembles 
almost  any  example  of  coincidence  that  can  be  adduced.  But  in  the 
case  of  the  rudimentary  visual  phantasmfs,  the  evidential  weakness 
extends  to  the  whole  class,  which  is  far  too  small  to  carry  any 
conviction,  or  to  be  even  worth  presenting  on  its  own  account ;  and 
to  many,  I  am  aware,  the  very  mention  of  it  will  seem  rather  to 
weaken  than  to  strengthen  my  argument.  But  it  is  only,  I  think, 
the  vague  habit  of  conceiving  death-apparitions  as  objective  presences 
instead  of  as  hallucinations,  that  makes  a  "  ball  of  light  "  appear  so 
much  more  bizarre  and  improbable  a  manifestation  than  the 
semblance  of  the  distant  person's  form.  If  the  percipient  has  never 
on  any  other  occasion  had  an  experience  of  the  kind,  it  seems 
unreasonable  to  leave  the  fact  of  the  coincidence  out  of  account, 
merely  because  the  hallucination  is  of  a  rare  type ;  and  seeing  that 
this  small  rudimentary  class  is  backed  by  the  far  larger  and 
more  convincing  class  of  recognised  phantasms,  we  may  admit  the 
presumption  thus  raised  that  the  smaller  group,  like  the  larger,  is 
telepathic,  while  still  admitting  that  the  smaller  group  adds  no  ap- 
preciable weight  of  its  own  to  the  cumulative  proof  of  telepathy. 
The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  rudimentary  auditory  cases,  some  of 
which  will  be  given  in  the  next  chapter — though  to  these  the  con- 
ception of  arrested  development  is  less  applicable. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT  11 

§  5.  The  types  that  next  claim  notice  are  peculiar  in  that  they 
involve  no  coincidence  with  any  ostensibly  abnormal  condition  of  the 
agent.  Evidence  that  certain  hallucinations  are  telepathic,  and  not 
purely  subjective,  in  origin  may  be  afforded  by  coincidences  of  a 
different  sort.  Thus,  a  person  may  have  a  hallucination  representing 
a  friend  in  some  costume  in  which  he  has  never  seen  him  or  imagined 
him,  but  which  proves  to  have  been  actually  worn  by  him  at  the  time. 
Or  again,  several  persons,  at  different  times,  may  have  had  a 
hallucination  representing  the  same  person,  though  that  person 
was  apparently  experiencing  nothing  unusual  on  any  of  the  occasions 
when  his  form  was  thus  seen.  Clearly  it  would  be  difficult  to  regard 
a  repetition  of  this  sort  as  accidental.  It  being  comparatively  a  rare 
event  for  a  sane  and  healthy  person  to  see  the  form  of  an  absent 
person  at  all,  that  two  or  more  sane  and  healthy  persons  at  different 
times  should  see  the  form  of  the  same  absent  person,  is,  on  the  theory 
of  chances,  so  unlikely  as  to  suggest  a  specific  faculty  on  the  absent 
person's  part  for  promulgating  telepathic  impulses. 

This  latter  type  is  important  from  its  bearing  on  the  question 
whether  the  peculiarity  of  organisation  which  conduces  to  telepathic 
transferences  belongs  rather  to  the  percipient  or  to  the  agent,  or  (as 
experiment  would  lead  us  to  suppose)  in  some  measure  to  both.  To 
decide  this  question  we  should  naturally  ask  which  happens  the  more 
frequently — that  the  same  percipient,  or  that  the  same  agent,  is  con- 
cerned in  several  telepathic  incidents.  Now  of  repetitions  to  the  same 
percipient  we  have  several  examples  ;^  but  that  the  same  agent  should 
figure  repeatedly  is  made  unlikely  by  the  very  nature  of  the  ordinary 
type  of  case,  which  implies  (over  and  above  any  natural  peculiarity  of 
organisation)  an  exceptional  crisis — indeed,  more  often  than  not  the 
crisis  of  death,  through  which  no  one  can  pass  more  than  once.  The 
only  chance  for  a  dying  agent  to  show  a  special  faculty  for  originating 
telepathic  impressions  is  by  impressing  several  persons ;  and  cases 
of  simultaneous  or  collective  percipience,  which  may  possibly  be  so 

1  The  evidence  for  one  instance  may  of  course  be  better  than  for  another  or  others 
which  may  have  fallen  to  the  experience  of  the  same  percipient ;  but  the  following  cases 
seem  at  any  rate  worth  considering  in  respect  of  this  feature  of  repetition  :— Nos.  21,  38, 
56,  and  184  ;  41  and  477  ;  44  and  116  ;  53,  with  the  preceding  incidents  ;  69  ;  73  and  103  ; 
74  and  423  ;  77  and  263 ;  80  and  201 ;  86,  479  and  480  ;  111,  161  and  464 ;  126  and  201 ; 
129,  164  and  551 :  136  and  137  ;  140  and  642 ;  167  and  315 ;  191  and  280 ;  198  and  274  ; 
279  ;  311,  367  and  693  ;  370  and  665 ;  408,  553,  554  and  650 ;  411  and  463  ;  502 ;  513  ;  514 
and  515 ;  559  and  560 ;  the  case  on  p.  355 ;  and  perhaps  Nos.  99,  392,  619,  625,  692.  See 
also  the  account  which  Thomas  Wright,  of  Birkenshaw  (the  champion  of  the  Wesleyans 
in  the  North  of  England),  gives  of  his  aunt's  experiences  (Autobiography  pp.  5-7).  Mrs. 
Newnham  affords  another  instance,  but  with  her  the  agent  has  always  been  her  husband 
(Vol  i.,  pp.  63-70,  and  cases  18  and  35).  Compare  in  this  respect  cases  90  and  700 ;  and 
also  case  55. 

u 

78  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

explicable,  will  be  considered  later  (in  Chap.  XVIII.).  Meanwhile  the 
cases  where  telepathic  impressions  seem  now  and  again  to  be  throwTi 
off  at  haphazard,  and  independently  of  death  or  any  other  crisis,  are 
theoretically  of  at  least  equal  interest.  For  they  tend  to  confirm  what 
experiment  would  lead  us  to  suppose,  that  agency  as  well  as 
percipience  depends  on  specific  conditions  as  yet  unknown  ;  and  this 
dependence  on  peculiarity  of  constitution  in  two  people  would  go  far  to 
account  for  an  otherwise  puzzling  fact — the  rarity,  in  comparison  with 
the  number  of  deaths  and  crises  that  take  place,  of  spontaneous 
telepathic  incidents  connected  with  them. 

Of  the  class  of  repeated  hallucinations  representing  the  same 
person,  we  have  about  five  presentable  records.^  Most  of  the  inci- 
dents therein  described  seem  to  illustrate  what  may  be  called  purely 
casual  agency ;  but  in  a  few  of  them  the  agent's  state  was  more  or 
less  abnormal — which  is  so  far  of  course  in  favour  of  a  telepathic 
explanation  of  the  phenomena.  The  first  account  is  from  Mrs. 
Hawkins,  of  Beyton  Rectory,  Bury  St.  Edmunds. 

"  March  25th,  1885. 
B   /  (254)   "  I  send  you  my  cousins'  accounts  of  my  apparition. 

"  I  have  also  sent  you  the  account  of  my  next  appearance,  which 
unfortunately  cannot  now  be  related  by  the  eye-witness. 

"  Again,  a  third  time  one  of  my  little  sisters  reported  that  she  had  seen 
me  on  the  stairs,  when  I  was  seven  miles  off — but  she  might  so  easily  have 
been  mistaken  that  I  have  never  put  any  faith  in  that  appearance.  Then 
I  was  about  20. 

"  For  many  years  after  that  these  appearances  seem  to  have  entirely 
ceased,  but  in  the  autumn  of  1877  I  was  seen  in  this  house  by  my 
eldest  son,  then  aged  27,  who  may,  I  hope,  give  you  his  own  account 
of  it.  "  Lucy  Hawkins." 

Mrs.  Hawkins  prefaces  her  cousins'  accounts  thus  : — 

"  The  event  described  in  the  enclosed  accounts  took  place  at  Cherington, 
near  Shipston-on-Stour,  in  Warwickshire,  the  residence  of  my  uncle,  Mr. 
William  Dickins,  who  was  for  many  years  chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions  in 

1 1  am  excluding  from  the  list  a  case  received  from  Miss  E.  D.  Jackson,  of  Strangeways, 
Manchester,  where  she  and  her  hostess,  on  separate  occasions,  saw  the  figure  of  a  maid- 
servant who  was  not  really  present ;  partly  because  the  experiences  both  took  place  when 
the  percipient  was  in  bed  in  the  morning,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  a  condition  favour- 
able to  purely  subjective  hallucinations  ;  partly  because  the  sight  of  a  person  who  is  daily 
before  the  eyes  is  a  common  form  for  such  hallucinations  to  take.     (See  Vol.  i.,  p.  505.) 

None  of  the  hitherto  published  cases  of  the  repeated  appearance  of  the  same  person's 
"double"  rest  on  good  traceable  authority.  The  case  of  Mdlle.  Sag4e,  published  in  Mr. 
Dale  Owen's  Footfalls  (p.  348),  in  1863,  was  withdrawn  in  a  later  edition,  as  second-hand 
and  not  well  substantiated.  Some  instances  are  recorded  in  connection  with  witchcraft — 
e.g.,  in  Mather's  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  (Boston,  1693),  pp.  106-112  ;  but  here 
tiie'idea  of  the  person  whose  form  appeared  was  present  as  a  permanent  source  of  appre- 
hension in  the  minds  of  all  the  percipients. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  79 

the  county.  The  ladies  who  saw  the  appearance  are  two  of  his  daughters, 
one  of  them  a  little  older  than  myself,  the  other  3  or  4  years  younger. 
I  was  then  just  17. 

"  The  only  mistake  that  I  can  discover  in  either  of  the  accounts  is  that 
Mrs.  Malcolm  says  I  had  been  hiding  with  her  '  brother,'  whereas  I  had 
really  been  all  the  time  with  her  sister,  Miss  Lucy  Dickins — a  fact  of  no 
importance  except  that  she  (Miss  D.)  might  (if  necessary)  bear  witness 
that  I  had  really  been  with  her  all  the  time  in  the  washhouse,  and  so  could 
not  have  been  near  where  I  was  seen. 

"  I  remember  we  were  all  somewhat  awed  by  what  had  happened, 
and  that  it  broke  up  our  game.  I  myself  quite  thought  it  was  a 
warning  of  speedy  death ;  but  as  I  was  not  a  nervous  or  excitable  girl, 
it  did  not  make  me  anxious  or  unhappy,  and  in  course  of  time  the 
impression  passed  oflF. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Hawkins  in  September,  1884,  Miss  Dickins  said  : — 

"  Georgie  [Mrs.  Malcolm]  is  coming  here  on  Friday,  and  1  propose  then 
to  show  her  your  letters,  and  Mr.  Gurney's,  and  that  we  should  each 
write  our  impressions  of  what  we  saw  independently,  and  see  how  far 
they  agree,  and  we  will  send  the  result  to  you.  It  is  all  very  fresh 
in  my  memory,  and  I  can  at  this  moment  conjure  you  up  in  my  mind's 
eye,  as  you  appeared  under  that  tree  and  disappeared  in  the  yard.  I  even 
recollect  distinctly  the  dress  you  wore,  a  sort  of  brown  and  white,  rather 
large  check,  such  as  was  in  fashion  then,  and  is  now,  but  was  in  abeyance 
in  the  intermediate  years." 

Shortly  afterwards  Miss  Dickins  wrote  : — 

"  Cherington,  Shipston-on-Stour. 

"September  29th,  1884. 

"  I  send  the  two  accounts  which  Georgie  and  I  wrote  about  your 
apparition.  We  wrote  them  independently,  and  so  I  think  they  are 
wonderfully  good  evidence,  as  they  tally  to  almost  every  particular,  except 
the  little  fact  that  I  thought  she  joined  me  in  searching  the  yard 
for  you,  and  she  thinks  not — but  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  main 
fact  of  the  story,  our  entire  belief  that  we  saw  you  in  the  body." 

"  In  the  autumn  of  1845,  we  were  a  large  party  of  young  ones  staying 
in  the  house,  and  on  one  occasion  were  playing  at  a  species  of  hide-and- 
seek,  in  which  we  were  allowed  to  move  from  one  hiding-place  to  another, 
until  caught  by  the  opposite  side.  At  the  back  of  the  house  there  was  a 
small  fold-yard  opening  on  one  side  into  the  orchard,  on  the  other  into  the 
stableyard,  and  there  were  other  buildings  to  the  left.  I  came  round  the 
corner  of  these  buildings,  and  saw  my  cousin  standing  under  some  trees 
about  20  yards  from  me,  and  I  distinctly  saw  her  face ;  my  sister,  who  at 
the  moment  appeared  on  the  other  side,  also  saw  her  and  shouted  to  me  to 
give  chase.  My  cousin  ran  between  us  in  the  direction  of  the  fold-yard, 
and  when  she  reached  the  door  we  were  both  close  behind  her  and  followed 
instantly,  but  she  had  entirely  disappeared,  though  scarcely  a  second  had 
elapsed.  We  looked  at  one  another  in  amazement,  and  searched  every 
corner  of  the  yard  in  vain ;  and  when  found  some  little  time  afterwards, 
she  assured  us  that  she  had  never  been  on  that  side  of  the  house  at  all,  or 
anywhere  near  the  spot,  but  had  remained  hidden  in  the  same  place  until 
discovered  by  one  of  the  enemy.  "  S.  F.  D." 

80  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"  I  well  remember  the  incident  of  your  '  fetch  '  appearing  to  us.  I 
believe  I  wrote  down  the  details  at  the  time,  but  do  not  know  what  has 
become  of  that  record,  so  must  trust  to  my  memory  to  recall  the  circum- 
stances, and  do  not  fear  its  [not]  being  faithful  though  nearly  40  years 
have  passed. 

"  We  were  playing  our  favourite  game  of  Golowain,  which  consisted  in 
dividing  into  sides  at  hide-and-seek,  the  party  hiding  having  the  privilege 
of  moving  on  from  place  to  place  until  they  reached  the  '  Home,'  unless 
meanwhile  caught  by  the  pursuing  party. 

"  As  I  stood  towards  the  end  of  the  game,  as  a  seeker,  in  the  orchard, 
I  saw  you,  who  belonged  to  the  opposite  party,  stealing  toward  me.  As 
your  dress  was  the  same  as  your  sister's,  and  there  was  the  possibility  of 
my  mistaking  you  for  her,  who  was  on  my  side,  I  shouted  her  name,  and 
she  answered  me  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  wood.  I  then  gave  chase, 
and  you  turned,  and  looked  at  me  laughing,  and  I  saw  your  face  distinctly. 
But  at  the  same  instant,  Nina,  also  my  friend,  but  your  enemy,  appeared 
round  some  corner,  and  being  still  nearer  to  you  than  I  was,  I  left  the 
glory  of  your  capture  to  her.  She  was  close  upon  you  as  you  fled  into  a 
cow-yard.  I  was  so  sure  your  fate  was  sealed  that  I  followed  more 
slowly,  and  hearing  the  bell  ring,  that,  according  to  the  rules  of  our  game, 
recalled  us  to  the  '  Home,'  I  went  on  there,  to  find  Nina  upbraiding  you 
for  having  so  mysteriously  escaped  her  in  this  cow-yard. 

"  In  astonishment  you  said  you  never  had  been  near  the  place.  Of 
course  I  supported  my  little  sister  in  her  assertion;  whilst  our  brother 
supported  you,  saying  he  had  been  hiding  with  you,  and  that,  being  tired, 
you  had  both  remained  hidden  in  one  place  until  the  bell  warned  you  that 
the  game  was  over — that  place  being  a  washhouse  in  a  distinct  part  of  the 
premises  from  the  cow  or  fold-yard,  into  which  we  believed  we  had  chased 
you. 

"G.  M.  (wee  Dickins)." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  both  Miss  Dickins  and  Mrs.  Malcolm  say  that 
they  have  never  had  any  other  experience  of  visual  hallucination. 

Mrs.  Hawkins  continues  : — 

"  The  second  appearance  of  my  '  double  '  was  in  the  spring  (February 
or  March)  of  1847,  at  Leigh  Rectory,  in  Essex,  my  father,  the  Rev.  Robert 
Eden  (now  Primus  of  Scotland),  being  rector  of  the  parish. 

"  The  person  who  saw  it  was  the  nurserymaid.  I  am  not  quite  sure  of 
her  name ;  but  if,  as  I  think,  she  was  a  certain  '  Caroline,'  she  has  been 
dead  many  years,  therefore  I  can  only  give  you  my  own  very  vivid  recol- 
lections of  her  story,  told  with  tears  of  agitation. 

"But  first  I  should  mention  that  I  had  the  mumps  at  that  time,  and 
was  going  about  with  my  head  tied  up,  and  the  only  other  person  in  the 
house  who  had  it  was  my  little  brother,  nearly  10  years  younger  than 
myself,  who  could  not  possibly  be  mistaken  for  me. 

"  On  the  first  floor  of  Leigh  Rectory  there  is  a  passage  which  runs  the 
length  of  the  house,  terminated  at  one  end  by  the  door  of  a  room  that  was 
then  the  nursery.  One  morning,  about  10.30,  '  Caroline  '  came  out  of  the 
nursery,  and,  walking  along  the  passage,  had  to  pass  a  doorway  opening  on 
to  the  stairs  which  led  down  into  the  front  hall.  As  she  passed,  she  glanced 
down,  and  saw  me  (conspicuous  by  the  white  handkerchief  round  my  head, 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  81 

and  facing  her)  come  out  of  the  drawing-room  door  and  walk  across  the 
corner  of  the  hall  to  the  library.  She  proceeded  along  the  passage,  and, 
coming  to  the  foot  of  the  attic  stairs,  met  our  maid,  who  said  to  her,  '  Do 
you  know  where  Miss  Eden  is  1  I  want  to  go  to  her  room.'  '  Oh  yes,' 
answered  Caroline,  '  I  just  saw  her  go  into  the  library.  So  they  came 
together  up  to  my  room,  which  was  one  of  the  attics,  and  found  me  sitting 
there,  where  I  had  been  for  at  least  half  an  hour,  writing  a  letter.  After 
a  moment's  pause  of  astonishment,  they  fled,  though  I  called  to  them  to 
come  in.  When  I  went  downstairs  a  few  minutes  afterwards,  and  reached 
the  passage,  I  saw  in  the  nursery  a  group  of  maids,  all  looking  so 
perturbed  that,  instead  of  proceeding  down  the  front  stairs,  I  went  on  to 
the  nursery  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  But  as  no  one  answered, 
and  I  saw  the  nurserymaid  was  crying,  I  thought  they  had  been  quarrel- 
ling, and  went  away,  quite  unconscious  that  it  was  on  my  account  they 
were  so  disturbed.  "  Lucy  Hawkins." 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Hawkins'  son  : — 

"June  20th,  1885. 

"In  the  autumn  of  1877,  I  was  living  at  my  father's  house,  Beyton 
Rectory,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.  The  household  consisted  of  my  father, 
mother,  three  sisters,  and  three  maid  servants.  One  moonlight  night  I 
was  sleeping  in  my  room,  and  had  been  asleep  some  hours,  when  I  was 
awakened  by  hearing  a  noise  close  to  my  head,  like  the  chinking  of  money. 
My  waking  idea,  therefore,  was  that  a  man  was  trying  to  take  my  money 
out  of  my  trousers  pocket,  which  lay  on  a  chair  close  to  the  head  of  my 
bed.  On  opening  my  eyes,  I  was  astonished  to  see  a  woman,  and  I  well 
remember  thinking  with  sorrow  that  it  must  be  one  of  our  servants  who 
was  trying  to  take  my  money.  I  mention  these  two  thoughts  to  show 
that  I  was  not  thinking  in  the  slightest  degree  of  my  mother.  When  my 
eyes  had  become  more  accustomed  to  the  light,  I  was  more  than  ever 
surprised  to  see  that  it  was  my  m,oiher}  dressed  in  a  peculiar  silver-grey 
dress,  which  she  had  originally  got  for  a  fancy  ball.  She  was  standing 
with  both  hands  stretched  out  in  front  of  her  as  if  feeling  her  way  ;  and 
in  that  manner  moved  slowly  away  from  me,  passing  in  front  of  the 
dressing-table,  which  stood  in  front  of  the  curtained  window,  through 
which  the  moon  threw  a  certain  amount  of  light.  Of  course,  my  idea  all 
this  time  was  that  she  was  walking  in  her  sleep.  On  getting  beyond  the 
table  she  was  lost  to  my  sight  in  the  darkness.  I  then  sat  up  in  bed, 
listening  ;  but  hearing  nothing,  and,  on  peering  through  the  darkness,  saw 
that  the  door,  which  was  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  to  get  to  which  she 
would  have  had  to  pass  in  front  of  the  light,  was  still  shut,  I  then 
jumped  out  of  bed,  struck  a  light,  and  instead  of  finding  my  mother  at  the 
far  end  of  the  room,  as  I  expected,  found  the  room  empty.  I  then  for 
the  first  time  supposed  that  it  was  an  'appearance,'  and  greatly  dreaded 
that  it  signified  her  death. 

"I  might  add  that  I  had,  at  that  time,  quite  forgotten  that  my 
mother  had  ever  appeared  to  any  one  before,  her  last  appearance  having 
been  about  the  year  1847,  three  years  before  I  was  born. 

"  Edward  Hawkins." 

^  This  is  an  excellent  instance  of  delayed  recognition  ;  cf.  case  249  above,  and  Chap, 
xii.,  §§  2  and  3. 

VOL.    II.  G 

82  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  E.  Hawkins  says  :  — "  I  can  assure  you  that 
neither  before  nor  since  that  time  have  I  ever  had  any  experience  of 
the  sort." 

The  second  account  is  from  the  Rev.  T.  L.  Williams,  Vicar  of 

Porthleven,  near  Helston. 

"August  1st,  1884. 

(255)  "  Some  years  ago  (I  cannot  give  you  any  date,  but  you  may  rely 
/f—^pn  the  facts),  on  one  occasion  when  I  was  absent  from  home,  my  wife  awoke 
one  morning,  and  to  her  surprise  and  alarm  saw  my  si'^w^ov  standing  by 
the  bedside  looking  at  her.  In  her  fright  she  covered  her  face  with  the 
bedclothes,  and  when  she  ventured  to  look  again  the  appearance  was  gone. 
On  another  occasion,  when  I  was  not  absent  from  home,  my  wife  went 
one  evening  to  week-day  evensong,  and  on  getting  to  the  churchyard  gate, 
which  is  about  40  yards  or  so  from  the  church  door,  she  saw  me,  as  she 
supposed,  coming  from  the  church  in  surplice  and  stole.  I  came  a  little 
way,  she  says,  and  turned  round  the  corner  of  the  building,  when  she  lost 
sight  of  me.  The  idea  suggested  to  her  mind  was  that  I  was  coming  out 
of  the  church  to  meet  a  funeral  at  the  gate.  I  was  at  the  time  in  church 
in  my  place  in  the  choir,  where  she  was  much  surprised  to  see  me  when 
she  entered  the  building.  I  have  often  endeavoured  to  shake  my  wife's 
belief  in  the  reality  of  her  having  seen  what  she  thinks  she  saw.  In  the 
former  case  I  have  told  her,  '  You  were  only  half  awake  and  perhaps 
dreaming.'  But  she  always  confidently  asserts  that  she  was  broad  awake, 
and  is  quite  certain  that  she  saw  me.  In  the  latter  case  she  is  equally 
confident. 

"My  daughter  also  has  often  told  me,  and  now  repeats  the  story, 
that  one  day,  when  living  at  home  before  her  marriage,  she  was  passing 
my  study  door  which  was  ajar,  and  looked  in  to  see  if  I  was  there. 
She  saw  me  sitting  in  my  chair,  and  as  she  caught  sight  of  me  I  stretched 
out  my  arms,  and  drew  my  hands  across  my  eyes,  a  familiar  gesture  of 
mine,  it  appears.  I  was  not  in  the  house  at  the  time,  but  out  in  the 
village.  This  happened  many  years  ago,  but  my  wife  remembers  that  my 
daughter  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  at  the  time. 

"  Now  nothing  whatever  occurred  at  or  about  the  times  of  these 
appearances  to  give  any  meaning  to  them.  I  was  not  ill,  nor  had  anything 
unusual  happened  to  me.  I  cannot  pretend  to  ofier  any  explanation,  but 
simply  state  the  facts  as  told  me  by  persons  on  whose  words  I  can  depend. 

"  There  is  one  other  thing  which  I  may  as  well  mention.  A  good 
many  years  ago  there  was  a  very  devout  young  woman  living  in  my  parish, 
who  used  to  spend  much  of  her  spare  time  in  church  in  meditation  and 
prayer.  She  used  to  assert  that  she  frequently  saw  me  standing  at  the 
altar,  when  I  was  certainly  not  there  in  the  body.  At  first  she  was 
alarmed,  but  after  seeing  the  appearance  again  and  again  she  ceased  to 
feel  anything  of  terror.     She  is  now  a  Sister  of  Mercy  at  Honolulu. 

"  Thomas  Lockyer  Williams." 

[The  circumstances,  and  the  frequency,  of  this  third  percipient's 
experiences  decidedly  favour  the  view  that  they  were  merely  subjective.] 

Mrs.  Williams  writes  : — 

"June  20th,  1885. 
"As  requested,  I  write  to  tell  you  what  I  saw  on  two  occasions.     I 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  83 

am  sorry  that  I  am  unable  to  give  you  the  dates,  even  approximately,  as 
many  years  have  passed  since  I  had  the  experiences  referred  to.  On  one 
occasion  my  husband  was  absent  in  Somersetshire,  and  on  waking  one 
morning  I  distinctly  saw  him  standing  by  my  bedside.  I  was  much 
alarmed,  and  instinctively  covered  my  face  with  the  bedclothes.  My 
friends  have  often  tried  to  persuade  me  that  I  was  not  broad  awake, 
but  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  was,  and  that  I  really  saw  my  husband's 
appearance. 

"  The  other  occasion  was  on  a  certain  evening  I  was  going  to  church, 
and  on  getting  to  the  churchyard  gate,  which  is  about  20  yards  from  the 
door  of  the  church,  I  saw  my  husband  come  out  of  the  church  in  his 
surplice,  walk  a  little  way  towards  me,  and  then  turn  off  round  the 
church.  I  thought  nothing  of  it  until  on  entering  the  church  I  was 
startled  at  seeing  him  in  his  place  in  the  choir,  about  to  conduct  the 
service.  It  was  then  broad  daylight,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  saw  the 
appearance.  Nothing  whatever  occurred  after  either  of  these  appearances, 
and,  of  course,  I  can  in  no  way  account  for  them. 

"  Emma  Williams." 

In  reply  to  the  qiiestion  whether  his  wife  or  daughter  had  ever 
experienced  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  Mr.  Williams  replies 
confidently  in  the  negative. 

The  following  account  is  from  Miss  Hopkinson,  of  37,  Woburn 

Place,  W.C.      It   will  be  seen  that  in  this  case  and  the  next,   the 

evidence  is  not  first-hand  from  any  of  the  percipients  ;  nor  are  the 

cases  strictly  covered  by  the  rule  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148)  which  admits  to  the 

body  of  this  work  the  evidence  of  persons  to  whom  the  percipient's 

experience  has  been  described  before  the  arrival  of  news  of  the  agent's 

exceptional  condition.^     But  that  there  was  here  no  such  exceptional 

condition  does   not  in    any  way  increase    the    probability  that    the 

narrator  has  imagined  that  she  was  informed  of  experiences  of  which 

in  fact  she  was  not  informed.     And  the  news  that  some  one    has 

had  a  waking  vision  of  oneself  being  calculated  to  make  rather  a 

special  impression  on   the  mind   and  memory,  the  agent  in  these 

instances  is  at  any  rate   in  a  different  position   from   an  ordinary 

second-hand  witness. 

"  February  20th,  1 886.        a'  ,  ^-^.^ 

(256)  "In  the  course  of  my  life  I  have  been  accused  four  times  of 
appearing  to  people  ;  neither  can  I  account  for  those  supposed  visits." 

Asked  to  give  details,  and  to  obtain  corroboration.  Miss  Hopkinson 
replied  : — 

"  It  would  be  really  quite  excusable  if  you  did  not  believe  one  word 
of  my  statements.  I  can  get  you  no  further  information  to  support 
them.     In  the  first  instance  of  my  supposed  appearance,  which  happened 

^  Miss  Hopkinson's  case,  however,  as  regards  one  incident  in  it — the  third — is  not  even 
an  apparent  exception  to  the  rule. 

VOL.    II.  G    2 

84  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

some  years  ago,  the  young  lady  died  very  shortly  afterwards.  Her 
parents,  too,  are  also  dead.  In  the  second,  I  gave  the  gentleman  on 
whom  I  called  to  understand  that  he  had  made  a  mistake — I  could  not 
ask  him  about  it  now.  In  the  third,  though  the  lady  only  a  day  or  two 
ago  repeated  to  me  her  original  account  of  my  visit  to  her,  she  totally 
declined  writing  it  out  for  me,  or  letting  me  use  her  name,  on  the  idea, 
which  I  find  very  common,  that  these  soi-t  of  things  are  irreligious.  The 
fourth  time  rather  differed  from  the  others ;  but  the  young  lady  in  that 
case  died  soon  after.  I  am  conscious  that  in  all  these  cases  I  was  thinking 
intensely  of  the  individuals." 

The  following  are  the  fuller  details  : — 

"  Case  1  occurred  many  years  ago.  A  young  lady,  sleeping  in  a  house 
next  door  to  the  one  I  was  in,  declared  that  I  visited  her  during  the  night 
when  she  was  lying  awake,  and  that  I  performed  some  slight  service  for 
her.  She  was  so  positive  in  her  statements  that  my  denial  was  not  be- 
lieved by  those  around  her.  I  was  perfectly  certain  I  had  never  left  my 
room,  nor  could  I  have  done  so  without  its  being  known.  I  will  not 
draw  on  my  memory  for  further  particulars  ;  I  might  be  wrong  after  so 
long  a  time. 

"  Case  2.  Seven  years  ago.  I  had  gone  into  the  City  (a  place  I 
always  avoid)  on  a  small  matter  of  business  connected  with  a  relative  of 
mine,  and  I  was  very  anxious  he  should  know  nothing  about  it ;  my 
thoughts  therefore  were  occupied  by  him.  I  was  almost  startled  from  my 
reverie  by  the  clock  of  Bow  Church  striking  3.  In  the  evening  I  saw  my 
relative,  and  the  first  thing  he  said  was,  '  L.,  where  did  you  go  to-day  ?  I 
saw  you  come  in  to  my  place,  but  you  passed  my  office  and  I  don't  know 
what  became  of  you.'  I  said,  'At  what  time  were  you  ridiculous  enough 
to  think  I  should  call  upon  you?'  'As  the  clock  struck  3,'  he  re- 
plied. I  turned  the  subject — nor  have  I  ever  reverted  to  it  since.  This 
gentleman  knew  my  dress  and  general  appearance  most  intimately.  Of 
course,  I  was  not  likely  to  visit  him  except  on  business,  and  by 
appointment. 

"  Case  3.  About  6  years  ago.  I  was  staying  in  a  country  town  100  miles 
from  London,  at  a  busy,  matter-of-fact  home,  with  bright  young  people. 
One  morning  I  came  down  to  breakfast  oppressed  with  a  sensation  I 
could  not  understand  nor  shake  off.  It  resolved  itself  towards  the  after- 
noon in  an  absorbing  thought  of  a  relative  in  London,  and  I  then  wrote 
to  ask  her  what  she  was  doing.  But  a  letter  from  her  crossed  mine,  to 
ask  me  the  same  question.  When  I  next  saw  her  she  told  me  what  only 
last  week  she  exactly  repeated  again  :  she  was  sitting  quietly  working, 
when  the  door  opened,  and  I  walked  in,  looking  as  usual ;  and  though  she 
believed  I  was  miles  away,  she  concluded  I  had  come  back,  and  did  not 
realise  to  the  contrary  till  I  turned  and  walked  out  of  the  room. 

"  Case  4.  Four  years  ago.  A  young  lady  asserted  I  stood  at  the 
bottom  of  her  bed  (she  was  not  well  at  the  time)  and  told  her  distinctly  to 
get  up  and  dress  herself,  and  that  I  thought  her  well  enough  to  do  so. 
She  obeyed.  I  told  her  she  was  quite  mistaken  ;  I  had  done  nothing  of 
the  sort.  She  evidently  thought  I  was  denying  the  fact  for  some  reason. 
I  was  about  20  minutes'  walk  from  this  young  lady's  room  at  the  time. 

t/V^ 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  85 

She  was  perfectly  clear  in  her  statement ;  and  I  would  not  argue  the 
point  with  her.     Her  illness  was  not  in  the  least  mental. 

"  Louisa  Hopkinson." 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Shute  Haye,  Walditch, 

Bridport. 

"  1883. 

(257)  "  On  three  occasions,  each  time  by  different  persons,  I  have  been 
seen  when  not  present  in  the  body.  The  first  instance  that  I  was  thus  seen 
was  by  my  sister-in-law,  who  was  sitting  up  with  me,  the  night  after  the 
birth  of  my  first  child.  She  looked  towards  the  bed  where  I  was  sleeping,  i^  y^^. 
and  distinctly  saw  me  and  my  double  ;  the  first  my  natural  body,  the  ^^  Z 
second  spiritualised  and  fainter ;  several  times  she  shut  her  eyes,  but  on 
opening  them  there  was  still  the  same  appearance,  and  the  vision  only 
faded  away  after  some  little  time.  She  thought  it  a  sign  of  my  death.  I 
did  not  hear  of  it  for  many  months. 

"  The  second  instance  was  by  my  niece  ;  she  was  staying  with  us  at 
Dorchester.  It  was  rather  early  on  a  spring  morning  ;  she  opened  her 
bedroom  door,  and  saw  me  ascending  the  flight  of  steps  opposite  her  room, 
fully  dressed  in  the  mourning  black  gown,  white  collar,  and  cap,  which  I 
was  then  wearing  for  my  mother-in-law.  She  did  not  speak,  but  saw  me, 
as  she  thought,  go  into  the  nursery.  At  breakfast  she  said  to  her  uncle, 
'  My  aunt  was  up  early  this  morning,  I  saw  her  go  into  the  nursery.' 
'  Oh  !  no,  Jane,'  my  husband  answered,  '  she  was  not  very  well,  and  is 
going  to  have  her  breakfast  before  coming  down.' 

"  The  third  instance  was  the  most  remarkable.  We  had  a  small  house 
at  Weymouth,  where  we  occasionally  went  for  the  sea.  A  Mrs.  Samways 
waited  on  us  when  there,  and  took  care  of  the  house  in  our  absence ; 
she  was  a  nice  quiet  woman,  thoroughly  trustworthy,  the  aunt  of  my 
dear  old  servant  Kitty  Balston,  then  living  with  us  at  Dorchester.  She 
had  written  to  her  aunt  the  day  before  the  vision  occurred,  telling  her  of 
the  birth  of  my  youngest  child,  and  that  I  was  going  on  well.  The  next 
night  Mrs.  Samways  went  to  a  meeting-house,  near  Clarence  Buildings ; 
she  was  a  Baptist.  Before  leaving,  she  locked  an  inner  door  leading  into 
a  small  courtyard  behind  the  house,  and  the  street-door  after  her,  carrying 
both  keys  in  her  pocket.  On  her  return,  unlocking  the  street-door,  she 
perceived  a  light  at  the  end  of  the  passage,  and  on  going  nearer  saw,  as 
she  thought,  the  yard-door  open.  The  light  showed  the  yard  and  every- 
thing in  it,  but  in  the  midst  she  clearly  recognised  me,  in  white  garments, 
looking  very  pale  and  worn.  She  was  terribly  frightened,  rushed  into  a 
neighbour's  house  (Captain  Court's),  and  dropped  in  the  passage.  After 
recovering.  Captain  Court  went  with  her  into  the  house,  which  was  exactly 
as  she  had  left  it,  and  the  yard-door  securely  locked.  I  was  taken  very 
faint  about  the  same  time,  and  lingered  for  many  weeks,  hovering  between 
life  and  death.  "^ 

1  Taken  in  connection  with  these  instances,  the  following  experience  of  Mrs.  Stone's 
own  is  of  considerable  interest.     (See  Vol.  i.,  p.  555,  note.) 

"When  about  9  or  10  years  old  I  was  sent  to  a  school  in  Dorchester  as  a  day  boarder  ; 
it  was  here  my  first  curious  experience  occurred  that  I  can  clearly  remember.  I  was  in  an 
upper  room  in  the  school,  standing  with  some  others,  in  a  class  opposite  our  teacher.  Miss 
Mary  Lock  ;  suddenly  I  found  myself  by  her  side,  and  looking  towards  the  class  saw 
myself  distinctly— a  slim,  pale  girl,  in  a  white  frock  and  pinafore.     I  felt  a  strong  anxiety 

86  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

Professor  Sidgwick  has  visited  Mrs.  Stone,  and  after  thoroughly 
questioning  her  on  her  narrative,  he  writes  (September  23rd,  1884)  : — 
"  She  certainly  understands  thoroughly  the  importance  of  accuracy.  She 
said  she  had  heard  of  her  apparition  direct  from  tlie  seers,  in  the  two  first 
cases  mentioned.  She  had  never  heard  of  her  sister-in-law  having  had  any 
other  hallucination  before  this  time  (1833)  or  afterwards,  until  very 
lately,  when  she  has  had  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person.  She  is  old,  and 
Mrs.  Stone  is  unwilling  to  trouble  her  on  the  matter.  Nor  does  she  think 
that  her  niece,  Jane  Studley  (who  is  dead),  ever  had  any  other  hallucina- 
tion. As  regards  the  third  instance,  Mrs.  Stone  only  heard  it  after  her 
recovery,  from  Kitty  Balston,  whose  account — as  repeated  by  Mrs. 
Stone — was  that  Mrs.  Stone  was  taken  ill  in  the  evening,  or  rather 
just  before  the  evening,  and  was  quite  unconscious  at  the  time  when  she 
was  seen  by  Mrs.  Samways." 

[In  the  last  of  Mrs.  Stone's  cases,  we  should  naturally  conclude  that 
the  appearance,  if  telepathic,  was  connected  with  her  illness  ;  but  the 
other  two  appearances  seem  to  have  been  purely  casual.  Possibly,  how- 
ever, the  first  may  have  been  due  to  her  sister-in-law's  failing  to  focus  the 
two  eyes  together,  which  is  a  common  infirmity  in  some  cases  of  debility  ; 
but  we  should  expect  a  person  who  sufi^ered  in  this  way  to  be  aware  that 
she  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  objects  double.] 

The  remaining  account  is  from  Mr.  Gorham  Blake,^  mining 
engineer,  now  residing  at  Loudsville,  White  Co.,  Georgia,  U.S.A., 
and  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  in  the  summer  of  1884.  Mr.  Blake 
begins  with  an  account  of  long-continued  success  in  alleviating  pain 
by  hypnotic  processes — a  success  which  he  attributes  in  great  measure 
to  abstinence  from  stimulants,  and  to  the  fact  that  his  profession  has 
necessitated  much  active  exercise  in  the  open  air.  He  then  narrates 
the  following  cases,  in  all  of  which  (except  the  first,  where  the  per- 
cipient's experience  was  not  sensory  in  character)  the  agency,  if 
such  it  was,  seems  to  have  been  purely  casual. 

(258)  "  In  1869,  I  crossed  the  great  Humboldt  (40  mile)  desert,  in  the 

State  of  Nevada,  for  the  sixth  time,  alone,  in  the  saddle  ;  by  an  accident 

my  horse,  a  wild  mustang,  escaped,  leaving  me  at  10  a.m.  on  foot  in  that 

x^ankle-deep  alkali  sand,  under  the  blazing  July  sun,  and  twenty  miles  from 

,^My^.    a  drop  of  water,  except  that  in  my  saddle-bags  on  my  horse.     Hours  were 

,.^,       spent   in  the    chase    for  my  horse.     Then   I   tried  to  shoot  him,  but  he 

■""^^         escaped,   leaving  me  exhausted,    sunstruck,   dizzy,   and  finally    helplessly 

dying    on    the    hot    shadeless   alkali,  about  noon.     I  passed  the  agony  of 

death  by  thirst,  heat,  and  exhaustion,  and  became  insensible.  It  was  rarely 

to  get  back,  as  it  were,  but  it  seemed  a  violent  and  painful  effort,  almost  struggle,  when 
accomplished.     I  was  much  frightened,  but  did  not  mention  it  till  many  years  after." 

I  may  mention  that  Mrs.  Stone's  daughter  has  had  a  similar  experience ;  so  that  here 
is  perhaps  another  example  of  hereditary  tendency. 

1  In  the  case  of  foreign  informants  whose  personal  acquaintance  we  have  been  unable 
to  make,  we  have  taken  pains  to  assure  ourselves  as  to  their  character  and  position .  I 
mention  this  because  the  absence  of  testimonials  has  led  some  jiersons  to  imagine  that  we 
accept  accounts  without  criticism  or  inquiry. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  87 

a  traveller  passed  that  way  in  that  season,  the  track  marked  only  by  the 
bones  of  dead  animals.  A  chance  traveller  came,  saw  my  horse,  and  found 
me  insensible,  laid  me  in  the  shade  of  his  waggon,  and  bathed  me  with 
water  and  vinegar  until  I  came  back  to  life.  He  lassoed  my  horse,  and 
at  sundown  I  mounted  and  rode  to  the  settlements.  Between  2.30  and  3 
o'clock  that  afternoon  one  of  my  sensitive  lady  friends  in  Boston,  Massa- 
chusetts (2,600  miles  distant),  while  talking  with  her  husband,  suddenly 
threw  up  her  hands  and  said,  '  Mr.  Blake  is  dead,'  and  could  not  be 
reconciled  to  the  contrary.  She  persuaded  her  husband  to  visit  my  father 
in  the  same  city,  and  learn  where  I  was,  &c.  Two  years  after  (in  1871) 
I  visited  the  friends,  and  was  immediately  asked,  '  Where  were  you  two 
years  ago,  the  last  week  in  July  % '  On  comparing  notes,  and  allowing  for 
the  difference  in  time,  we  concluded  that  at  the  time  I  became  insensible 
in  the  desert  my  lady  friend  received  the  intelligence.  I  know  I  thought 
of  the  lady  and  her  husband  while  lying  on  the  sand,  as  we  were  long  dear 
friends." 

The  percipient  in  this  case,  Mrs.  Copp,  and  her  husband,  are  dead. 
But  I  have  copied  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  (dated  Boston, 
Dec.  19,  1885)  written  to  Mr.  Gorham  Blake  by  Mrs.  Dresser,  who 
was  one  of  their  most  intimate  friends.  She  says  :  "It  is  written 
just  as  I  remember  Mrs.  Copp  and  the  Captain  telling  us  on  their  side." 
Mrs.  Dresser's  account  begins  by  describing  how  the  friendship  between 
the  Copps  and  Mr.  Blake  began,  through  the  latter's  care  of  Captain 
Oopp  in  a  dangerous  illness  on  board  ship. 

"  In  the  year  186 — [she  is  not  sure  of  the  date]  Mr.  B.  had  not  been  in 
Massachusetts  for  years.  One  day  Mrs.  C.  was  talking  cheerfully  with  her 
sister  about  trifling  matters,  and,  while  walking  across  the  room,  holding 
a  dish  with  both  hands,  suddenly  the  dish  and  contents  were  dropped  on 
the  floor,  and  at  the  same  instant  she  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  dear  !  B.  is  dead  ! ' 
Her  sister,  surprised,  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  1 '  The  answer  was,  '  I 
don't  know.'  But  again,  in  the  same  impulsive  way,  she  cried  out,  '  Oh, 
he  is  dead  ! '  She  could  give  no  reason  why  she  said  this,  only  that  she 
was  raade  to  do  it.  This  fact  impressed  her  so  sadly,  and  also  her 
husband  when  he  was  told  of  it,  although  it  was  inexplicable,  that  they 
agreed  to  write  down  the  date,  so  that  they  could  refer  to  it  should  occasion 
require.  A  month  afterwards.  Captain  C.  inquired  by  letter  of  Mr.  B.'s 
brother  what  news  had  been  received  from  California,  but  gave  no  reasons 
for  this  inquiry.  '  Yes,'  was  the  reply,  '  we  have  just  heard  from  there ; 
and  he  was  in  good  health.'  After  this  report  Captain  C.  and  wife  did  not 
trouble  themselves  about  the  above  incident. 

"  It  so  happened  that  in  that  same  autumn  Mr.  B.  visited 
Massachusetts ;  and  these  friends  were  among  the  first  seen.  After 
a  mutual  interchange  of  the  news  which  had  occurred,  Captain  C. 
happened  to  remember  that  curious  incident,  and  inquired  at  once,  '  B., 
what  were  you  doing  one  day  last  — —  ?  Were  you  sick  at  the 
time  1 '  B.  replied,  '  No,  I  was  well — nothing  was  the  matter  with  me.'  But 
after  further  inquiry  about  the  time,  Mrs.  C.  consulted  the  record  she  had 
made  of  the  exact  date  when  the  event  happened,  and  then  told  him  of  her 
peculiar  experience," — whereupon  Mr.  B.  narrated  his  adventure,  of  which 
Mrs.  Dresser's  version  agrees  with  his  own  description  above. 

88  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

[It  will  be  seen  that  the  discrepancies  between  the  two  accounts  are 
very  trifling.] 

Mr.  Blake  continues  : — 

"  In  the  year  1870  I  was  in  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  near  Boston, 
and  had  an  occasional  correspondence  with  Miss  S.,  an  American,  then 
residing  in  Europe.  I  received  a  letter  from  her,  dated  Miirzzuschlag, 
August  6th,  1870,  in  which  she  says  :  '  Yesterday  I  sat  alone  in  my  room, 
arranging  my  herbarium,  till  I  was  very  tired,  but  there  was  such  a 
fascination  in  the  work  that  I  did  not  seem  able  to  break  the  spell  and 
leave  it ;  but  of  a  sudden  someone  touched  my  shoulder  with  such  force 
that  I  immediately  turned.  You  were  as  plainly  to  be  seen  as  if  in  the 
body,  and  I  said^  "  Why,  Mr.  Blake,  are  you  really  here?  "  and  directed  by 
you  I  laid  aside  my  work,  and  went  to  the  woods.  I  do  not  know  that 
my  mind  was  upon  you  at  the  time.  I  tried  to  trace  the  influence  to  a 
concentration  of  thought  upon  you,  but  failed  to  do  it.  Whether  it  was 
your  letter,  your  spirit,  or  my  imagination,  certainly  it  was  a  reality  to  me.' 
I  wrote  for  more  particulars.  She  answered  :  '  Vienna,  Austria,  23rd 
October,  1870.  In  explanation  of  your  coming  to  me,  I  heard  your  voice, 
or  a  voice,  speak  my  name.  I  turned,  and  you  stood  near  me.  I  arose  as 
if  it  were  a  reality,  and  as  I  turned  again  you  were  gone  ;  and  yet  before 
I  did  that  it  seemed  many  minutes,  for  I  said,  "Is  it  you ? "  and  you 
replied,  "  Do  you  not  know  me  1 "  and  then  you  said,  "  I  have  come  because 
you  are  tired,  for  you  to  go  to  the  woods  and  rest  yourself,"  and,  as  I  told 
you,  I  obeyed  the  summons,  and  wished  that  I  could  have  a  tangible 
evidence  of  your  companionship.'  My  diary  does  not  record  any  dream 
or  thought  of  Miss  S.  on  August  5th,  1870.  I  was  at  home,  and  quiet, 
and  under  good  conditions  for  such  a  visit  as  that  described  by  Miss  S. 

"In  November,  1883,  being  in  New  York,  I  was  in  correspondence 
with  Mrs.  G.,  who  was  residing  in  San  Francisco.  A  letter  written  by 
her  in  November,  says  :  '  Last  evening,  I  saw  you  distinctly  standing  by 
my  side  ;  you  seemed  trying  to  speak,  but  did  not ;  you  made  passes  over 
me,  and  I  felt  your  influence  plainly  ;  you  were  here  several  minutes,  then 
disappeared.' 

"  In  another  letter  she  wrote  :  '  You  came  to  me  yesterday  afternoon, 
in  Market  Street,  at  the  corner  of  Stockton  Street,  you  crossed  the  street 
with  me.  I  turned  to  speak  with  you,  and  you  were  gone.  I  have  seen 
you  many  times  in  this  way.' 

"While  Mrs.  G.  has  been  sitting  in  a  room,  sewing  and  conversing,  I, 
being  in  a  room  40  feet  distant,  have  willed,  or  asked,  that  she  come  to 
me,  and  she  instantly  broke  off  the  conversation,  came  to  my  room, 
knocked,  and  on  my  asking  her  to  come  in  she  opened  the  door,  entered, 
and  seemed  a  little  confused,  and  said,  '  Well,  I  don't  know  what  I  came 
in  here  for.'     I  have  had  many  instances  of  this  kind." 

Mr.  Blake  has  forwarded  to  us  the  following  letter,  written  to  him  by 
the  Mrs.  G.  of  these  last  incidents.  It  will  be  seen  that  she  is  to  some 
extent  predisposed  to  hallucination,  which  of  course  weakens  these  items 
of  the  evidence, 

"  San  Francisco,  Cal. 

"  March  22nd,  1885. 

"  Dear  Sir, — You  ask  me  to  narrate  the  circumstances  under  which 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  89 

I  saw  you,  as  I  wrote  you  in  November,  1883.  At  that  time  I  was  in  my 
room  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  I  saw  you  distinctly  standing  by  my 
side.  It  was  about  1 1  o'clock  p.m.  You  seemed  trying  to  speak,  but  did 
not.  You  made  passes  over  me,  the  influence  of  which  I  plainly  felt. 
You  remained  several  minutes,  then  disappeared. 

"  Another  time  you  came  to  me  at  12  o'clock,  while  I  was  walking  on 
Market  Street,  near  the  corner  of  Stockton.  You  crossed  the  street  with 
me.  I  turned  to  speak  with  you,  but  you  had  disappeared.  I  have  seen 
you  several  times  that  way,  as  I  have  three  other  persons  whom  I  know  to 
be  alive  and  in  good  health. — Yours  truly,  "  Mary  A.  Gordon." 

Mr.  Blake  continues  : — 

"On  September  28th,  1870,  I  arrived  in  New  York  from  Boston 
about  7  o'clock  a.m.,  having  with  me  a  valise  and  umbrella.  I  went  to 
Dr.  P.'s  house  on  Fourth  Avenue,  rang  the  bell,  and  Dr.  P.  came  to  the 
door,  when  the  following  conversation  took  place  : — Blake  :  '  Good  morning. 
Can  you  accommodate  me  with  a  room  ? '  Dr.  P.  :  '  Yes,  but  why  didn't 
you  come  in  last  evening  V  B.  :  '  Because  I  was  in  Boston  last  evening.' 
P.  :  '  Why  you  called  here  last  evening  ! '  B.  :  '  That's  impossible,  for  I 
have  just  arrived  on  the  boat  this  morning.'  P.  ;  *  I  certainly  saw  you 
here  last  evening.  You  asked  for  a  room.  I  asked  you  to  walk  in  ;  you 
turned  and  went  away.  I  thought  it  strange,  and  that  you  must 
have  misunderstood  me.  I  think  my  wife  saw  you  too.'  Turning  to  his 
wife  :  '  Did  you  see  Mr.  B.  last  evening  1 '  Mrs.  P.  :  '  Yes,  he  was  stand- 
ing at  the  door  with  a  valise  in  one  hand  and  umbrella  in  the  other  ;  then 
turned  and  went  away.  I  saw  him  as  I  passed  through  the  hall.'  ^  B.  : 
'  It's  a  mistake,  or  my  double,  for  you  can  see  by  my  diary  that  I  was  in 
Boston  yesterday,  and  the  business  I  attended  to.' 

"  I  left  my  baggage  in  the  room  and  went  down  town,  returning  in 
the  evening.  Dr.  P.  called  me  into  the  parlour,  where  I  met  an 
acquaintance.  Dr.  C.  Dr.  P.  immediately  said,  '  Another  witness  on  our 
side.  Dr.  C.  saw  you  down  town  last  evening.'  '  Yes,'  said  Dr.  C,  '  I 
saw  you  walking  along  Broadway.  You  seemed  to  be  in  a  hurry,  and  I 
was  in  a  hurry  to  catch  the  ferry-boat ;  I  bowed  to  you,  and  you  returned 
it,  and  hurried  on.  You  had  a  valise  in  your  right  hand  and  umbrella  in 
your  left  hand,  and  had  on  a  high  silk  hat,  while  I  have  seen  you  before  in 
a  felt  hat,  low  crowned.'  We  all  concluded  it  was  my  double,  as  at  about 
the  hour  they  saw  me,  6  p.m.,  I  was  resting  quietly  aboard  the  boat  before 
she  left,  and  remembered  thinking  where  I  should  take  a  room  after 
getting  to  New  York  in  the  morning ;  but  I  did  not  remember  the 
particulars  related  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.,  or  Dr.  C.  I  think  I  fell  into  a 
doze,  or  short  sleep,  while  resting,  as  has  been  the  case  several  other  times 
when  my  double  has  been  seen  at  a  distance  from  where  my  body  was. 

"  GoRHAM  Blake." 

The  first-hand  testimony  of  the  percipients  is  of  course  much  needed, 
and  I  explained  to  Mr.  Gorham  Blake  the  importance  of  obtaining  it. 
He  has  made  efforts  to  do  so,  but  cannot  ascertain  the  present  addresses 
of  the  persons  concerned.     He  writes  • — 

1  It  will  be  observed  that  this  hallucination  (if  such  it  was,  and  not  a  mere  case  of 
mistaken  identity)  was  collective,  as  also  was  the  first  experience  described  in  case  254. 
The  discussion  of  this  feature  is  reserved  for  Chap,  xviii. 

90  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

"  I  enclose  the  only  two  papers  on  the  subject  that  I  can  now  find  ; 
one  from  Mrs.  Gordon  [quoted  above],  and  one  from  Mrs.  Gould,  that  I 
did  not  before  write  of.  In  connection  with  the  latter  I  will  say  that  I 
called  at  the  Light  for  Thinkers  office,  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and  saw  Mrs. 
Gould  for  the  first  time.  She  said  she  had  seen  my  face  before,  and  told 
me  as  related  in  enclosed  paper.  She  was  not  feeling  well,  and  I  held  her 
hands,  and  placed  mine  on  her  head  to  impart  magnetism,  and  relieved 
her.  I  saw  her  two  or  three  times  while  in  the  city,  and  received  the 
enclosed  from  her  after  my  return  home." 

The  enclosure  is  as  follows  : —  "April    1885 

"  One  day,  while  resting,  I  happened  to  glance  towards  a  window,  in 
the  fifth  story,  and,  just  outside,  beheld  the  spirit^  of  my  friend,  Mr.  Blake, 
who  seemed  unable  to  get  into  the  room  ;  but,  on  rising  and  throwing  up 
the  sash,  he  appeared  to  come  in  and  stand  by  my  chair,  make  passes  over 
me,  magnetising  me,  and  seeming  to  envelope  me  with  something,  just  as  a 
spider  does  a  fly  in  its  web.  Before  this,  in  fact  some  three  or  four  weeks 
before  I  had  ever  met  or  seen  him,  while  in  a  passive  mood,  I  saw  his 
head  clairvoyantly,  so  distinctly  that  when  he  came  to  my  office  for  the 
first  time  I  recognised  him  as  the  person.  And  although  he  was  at  these 
times  alive  and  well,  I  saw  and  recognised  his  presence  as  distinctly  as 
though  he  had  been  there  in  form.  u  q     j^   Gould  " 

[The  last  incident  cannot,  of  course,  carry  much  weight,  as  the  recog- 
nition was  a  completely  retrospective  act ;  and  as  regards  Mrs.  Gould's 
other  experience,  the  fact  that  Mr.  Blake  had  been  hypnotising  her  must 
perhaps  be  regarded  as  favouring  the  hypothesis  of  a  purely  subjective 
hallucination.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  sufficient  evidence 
that  hypnotic  treatment  induces  a  liability  to  hallucinations  representing 
the  hypnotiser,  unless  that  hallucination  has  been  specially  imposed  on 
the  "  subject's  mind — as  any  other  might  be — while  in  the  state  of  trance.] 

Another  foreign  example  is  omitted,  as  we  have  been  unable  to 
obtain  the  testimony  of  the  percipients.  It  is  clear  that  the  fact 
of  the  telepathic  transference  in  these  casual  cases  cannot  be  con- 
sidered to  be  proved  f  but  the  mention  of  the  type  here  may  serve  to 
elicit  further  instances. 

§  6.  Of  the  other  class  mentioned,  where  peculiarities  of  dress 
or  aspect  afford  the  only  presumption  that  a  hallucination  was  more 
than  purely  subjective — i.e.,  was  due  to  an  absent  agent  who,  never- 
theless, was  in  a  perfectly  normal  state  at  the  time — the  following 
examples  may  serve.^  The  first  is  from  Captain  A.  S.  Beaumont,  of 
1,  Crescent  Road,  South  Norwood  Park. 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

2  The  class,  it  may  be  remembered,  is  the  second  of  the  four  types  of  "  ambiguous 
cases  "  defined  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  505. 

3  As  regards  the  connection  of  these  appearances  with  the  agent's  sub-conscious  sense 
of  his  own  aspect,  I  need  not  repeat  the  remarks  already  made  (Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  in  respect 
of  the  far  stronger  group  where  there  were  similar  peculiarities  plus  some  exceptional 
condition  of  the  a^ent. 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  91 

"February  24th,  1885. 

(259)  "About  September,  1873,  when  my  father  was  living  at  57, 
Inverness  Terrace,  I  was  sitting  one  evening,  about  8.30  p.m.,  in  the  large 
dining-room.  At  the  table,  facing  me,  with  their  backs  to  the  door,  were 
seated  my  mother,  sister,  and  a  friend,  Mrs.  W.  Suddenly  1  seemed  to  see 
my  wife  bustling  in  through  the  door  of  the  back  dining-room,  which  was 
in  view  from  my  position.  She  was  in  a  mauve  dress.  I  got  up  to  meet 
her,  though  much  astonished,  as  I  believed  her  to  be  at  Tenby.  As  I 
rose,  my  mother  said,  '  Who  is  that  ? '  not  (I  think)  seeing  anyone  herself, 
but  seeing  that  I  did.  I  exclaimed,  '  Why,  it's  Carry,'  and  advanced  to 
meet  her.  As  I  advanced,  the  figure  disappeared.  ^  On  inquiry,  I  found 
that  my  wife  was  spending  that  evening  at  a  friend's  house,  in  a  mauve 
dress,  which  I  had  most  certainly  never  seen.  I  had  never  seen  her 
dressed  in  that  colour.  My  wife  recollected  that  at  that  time  she  was 
talking  with  some  friends  about  me,  much  regretting  my  absence,  as  there 
was  going  to  be  dancing,  and  I  had  promised  to  play  for  them.  I  had 
been  unexpectedly  detained  in  London.  u  Alex.  S.  Beaumont." 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  friend  who  was  present  : — 

"11,  Grosvenor  Street,  W. 

"March  5th,  18&5. 

"  As  far  as  I  can  recollect.  Captain  Beaumont  was  sitting  talking,  V^  »,^ 
when  he  looked  up,  and  gave  a  start.  His  mother  asked  him  what  was  ..,.^„:;XC.^ 
the  matter.  He  replied,  '  I  saw  my  wife  walk  across  the  end  of  the 
room,  but  that  is  nothing  ;  she  often  appears  to  people  ;  her  servants  have 
seen  her  several  times.'  The  room  we  were  in  was  a  double  dining-room, 
one  end  was  lit  with  gas,  and  the  other,  where  Mrs.  Beaumont  appeared, 
was  comparatively  dark.  Ko  one  else  saw  her  except  her  husband.  Mrs. 
Beaumont  was  at  the  time  in  Wales,  and  this  happened  in  Inverness 
Terrace,  Bayswater.  u  Florence  Whipham." 

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : — 

"  I  distinctly  remember  hearing  from  my  husband,  either  the  next 
day  or  the  second  day  after  his  experience  ;  and  in  his  letter  he  asked, 
'  What  were  you  doing  at  such  an  hour  on  such  a  night  % '  I  was  able  to 
recall  that  I  was  standing  in  a  group  of  friends,  and  that  we  were 
regretting  his  absence.  I  was  in  a  mauve  dress,  which  I  am  confident 
that  he  could  never  have  seen.^  u  q    Beaumont  " 

1  The  disappearance  of  the  figure  on  sudden  speech  or  movement  is  a  feature  which 
occurs  both  in  subjective  and  telepathic  phantasms,  and  there  could  not  well  be  a  clearer 
indication  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the  latter.  In  my  large  collection  of 
subjective  cases  I  have  only  three  or  four  distinct  instances,  e.g.,  the  first  narrative 
in  Chap,  xii.,  §  2  ;  but  then  it  is  only  in  a  few  cases  that  the  percipient,  by  speaking  or 
distinctly  moving,  has  afforded  the  condition.  The  point  was  one  of  those  observed  in 
Dr.  Jessopp's  well-known  case  (Athenceum  for  Jan.  10,  1880).  For  telepathic  examples, 
see  cases  26,  159,  163,  178,  192,  196,  201,  214,  241,  540. 

2  A  similar  case  is  described  by  Miss  E.  M.  Churchill,  of  9,  Eversley  Park,  Chester, 
who,  in  October,  1883,  when  at  lunch,  had  a  visual  hallucination  representing  an  absent 
sister. 

"  I  remember  remarking  at  the  time  that  I  thought  I  saw  my  sister  all  in  brown,  and 
that  she  had  nothing  of  that  colour  as  far  as  I  knew.  A  few  days  afterwards  I  received 
a  letter  from  another  sister,  in  which  she  mentioned  that  my  younger  sister  and  she  had 

92  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

Captain  Beaumont  adds  that  he  has  never  had  any  other 
hallucination  of  the  senses  except  on  the  occasion  next  described. 
This  other  case,  in  which  the  same  agent  and  percipient  were 
concerned,  and  a  third  case  appended  to  it  (in  which  the  sameness  of 
agent  and  difference  of  percipient  recall  the  repetitions  of  the 
preceding  section),  would  be  quite  without  evidential  value  if  they 
stood  alone  ;  but  they  are  of  interest  in  connection  with  the  fore- 
going stronger  example. 

"February  24tli,  1885. 

(260)  "In  1871  I  was  staying  at  Norton  House,  Tenby,  for  the  first 
time,  and  had  just  gone  to  bed,  and  was  wide  awake.  I  had  the  candle 
on  my  right  side,  and  was  reading.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed  and  to  the 
right  was  a  door,  which  was  locked,  and,  as  I  learnt  afterwards,  pasted  up 
on  the  other  side. 

"  Through  this  I  saw  the  figure  of  my  future  wife  (the  lady  of  the 
house)  enter,  draped  in  white  from  head  to  foot.  Oddly  enough,  I  was 
not  specially  startled.  My  idea  was  that  some  one  was  ill,  and  that  she 
had  come  to  get  something  out  of  the  room.  I  averted  my  head,  and 
when  I  looked  up  again  the  apparition  was  gone.  I  suppose  that  I  saw 
it  for  two  or  three  seconds.  c<  ^^Bx.  S.  Beaumont." 

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : — 

"February  24th,  1885. 

"In  1872,  two  or  three  months  after  my  marriage.  Captain  Beaumont 
and  I  returned  from  London  to  Tenby.  I  went  up  into  my  dressing-room 
and  gave  the  keys  of  my  luggage  to  my  servant,  Ellen  Bassett.  I  was 
standing  before  the  looking-glass  with  my  back  turned  to  her,  and  I  heard 
her  utter  a  little  sharp  cry.  I  turned  round,  saying,  '  What's  the  matter  ? ' 
and  saw  her  with  my  nightcap  in  her  hand.  She  said,  '  O,  nothing, 
nothing,'  and  I  went  downstairs.  The  day  after,  my  husband  saw  her 
taking  off  the  paper  which  pasted  up  the  door  between  my  bedroom  and 

been  getting  new  winter  things,  and  were  dressed  in  brown  from  head  to  foot.  I  think  I 
was  quite  well  at  the  time,  but  my  sister  was  ill,  which  I  was  not  aware  of  for  some  weeks 
afterwards." 

Miss  Churchill  has  often  had  slight  momentary  hallucinations,  as  of  some  one  at  her 
side  ;  but  says  that  this  one  was  far  the  most  distinct  that  she  has  ever  experienced.  But 
brown  is,  of  course,  a  common  colour,  and  the  case  is  only  worth  quoting  in  connection 
with  the  one  in  the  text. 

The  following  is  a  dream-case  of  the  same  type,  which  has  been  narrated  to  Mr.  Myers 
by  both  the  persons  concerned.     The  narrator  is  Mrs.  W. 

"Mrs.  P.,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  W.,  was  staying  in  Devonshire,  and  one  night  had  a 
curious  dream  about  Mrs.  W.  She  dreamt  that  she  (Mrs.  P.)  came  into  the  drawing- 
room  in  Mrs.  W.'s  house  at  T.,  and  had  not  been  many  minutes  in  the  room,  before  Mrs. 
W.  came  in  in  a  loose,  red  dress,  looking  very  ill.  Mrs.  P.  said  to  her,  '  How  very  ill  you 
look  ! '  Mrs.  W.  then  answered  she  had  been  very  unwell,  but  was  then  rather  better. 
Mrs.  P.  thought  this  dream  odd,  and  mentioned  it  to  her  friends.  About  a  week  after, 
she  came  on  a  visit  to  Mrs.  W.,  and  while  she  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  mentioned 
the  dream,  and  pointing  to  a  rose-coloured  flower,  remarked  that  was  the  exact  shade  of 
the  dress  worn  in  the  dream.  After  comparing  notes  as  to  the  date,  they  found  that  on 
the  day  of  Mrs.  P.  's  dream  Mrs.  W.  had  been  very  unwell,  and  had  worn  a  dressing-gown 
of  the  exact  shade  almost  all  day.  The  chief  peculiarity  in  this  is,  that  Mrs.  P.  had 
never  seen  her  friend  in  any  colour,  Mrs.  W.  always  wearing  black,  so  if  she  had  thought 
of  Mrs.  W.  naturally  it  would  be  in  black, " 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  93 

the  dressing-room.  He  said,  '  What  are  you  doing  1 '  She  said  she  was 
opening  that  door.  He  said,  '  Why,  the  first  night  that  I  slept  in  this 
house,  I  saw  your  mistress  walk  through  that  door.'  (I  must  explain  that 
Captain  Beaumont  had  been  a  guest  in  this  house  on  a  good  many  occasions 
before  our  marriage.  On  the  occasion  mentioned,  he  had  imagined  that 
perhaps  someone  was  ill  in  the  house,  and  that  I  had  entered  his  room  to 
get  something,  thinking  him  sure  to  be  asleep.)  Then  the  maid  told  him 
that  she  had  seen  me  the  night  before  we  came  home — she  did  not  know 
exactly  what  day  we  were  coming,  and  had  been  sleeping  in  the  same  bed 
as  he  had  been  in  when  he  saw  me.  She  was  just  going  to  step  into  bed, 
when  she  saw  me  enter  '  through  the  door,'  ^  with  a  nightcap  on,  and  a 
candle  in  my  hand.  She  was  so  terrified  that  she  rushed  out  of  the  room 
by  the  other  door,  and  told  the  other  servants  she  was  sure  I  was  dead. 
They  comforted  her  as  well  as  they  could,  but  she  would  not  return  to  the 
room.  The  cause  of  her  crying  out,  when  I  heard  her  do  so,  was  that,  in 
unpacking,  she  recognised  the  identical  nightcap  that  the  apparition  had 
worn.  The  curious  point  is  that  the  nightcap  was  one  that  I  had  bought 
in  London,  and  had  not  mentioned  to  her,  and  was  perfectly  unlike  any 
that  I  had  ever  worn  before.  It  had  three  frills.  I  had  been  accustomed 
to  wear  nightcaps  of  coloured  muslin  without  frills. 

"The  same  servant,  some  months  after  the  nightcap  incident,  went 
into  the  kitchen  and  said  to  the  other  servants,  '  We  shall  have  news  of 
missus  to-day  ;  I've  just  seen  her  standing  in  the  dining-room  door  ;  she 
had  on  a  black  velvet  bonnet  and  black  cloak.'  (W^e  had  been  in  London 
some  weeks.)  This  occurred  about  9  o'clock  a.m.  About  10.30  she 
received  a  telegram  from  us  to  say  we  should  be  home  that  evening  ;  the 
telegram  was  sent  from  Paddington  Station  as  we  waited  for  our  train. 
The  bonnet  and  cloak  had  been  bought  in  town  without  her  knowledge. 

"  The  maid  was  with  me  for  years,  and  was  certainly  not  nervous  or 
hysterical.     I  have  now  parted  with  her  for  some  years. 

"C.  Beaumont." 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Murray  Gladstone,  of  Shedfield  Cottage, 

Botley,  Hants. 

"January  18th,  1886. 

(261)  "I  went  on  Saturday  afternoon  [last]  to  see  an  old  man  and 
woman  named  Bedford,  who  live  in  a  cottage  about  half  a  mile  from  our 
house.  Mrs.  Bedford  was  ill  in  bed,  and  I  went  upstairs  to  see  her.  I  sat 
down  by  the  bedstead,  and  talked  to  her  for  a  few  minutes.  Whilst  I  was 
there,  the  thought  struck  me  that  the  light  from  the  window,  which  was  oppo- 
site the  foot  of  the  bed,  was  too  strong  for  the  invalid ;  and  I  determined, 
without  saying  a  word  about  it  to  either  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Bedford,  to  give  her 
a  curtain.  This  (Monday)  afternoon  I  again  went  to  see  the  old  couple  ; 
but  this  time  I  only  saw  Mr.  Bedford  in  the  room  downstairs.  And  after 
a  few  remarks  he  said,  '  My  wife  has  seen  you  yesterday  (Sunday)  morn- 
ing ;  she  turned  her  head  towards  the  side  of  the  bed  and  said,  "  Is  that 
her  1 "  (I  did  not  speak,  as  I  thought  she  was  dreaming.)  "  Yes,"  she  went 
on,  "  it  is  Mrs.  Gladstone,  and  she  is  holding  up  a  curtain  with  both  her 
hands  "  (imitating  the  posture),  "  but  she  says  it  is  not  long  enough.    Then 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  432,  note. 

C^ 

94  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap 

she  smiled  and  disappeared."  '  When  Mr.  Bedford  had  told  me  the  above, 
I  exclaimed,  '  That  is  just  what  I  did  yesterday  morning  whilst  I  was 
dressing.  I  went  to  a  cupboard  in  my  room,  and  took  out  a  piece  of 
serge,  which  I  thought  would  answer  the  purpose,  and  held  it  up  with 
both  hands  to  see  the  length,  and  said  to  myself,  "  It  is  not  long  enough.'" 
I  may  mention  that  I  had  only  once  before  been  to  visit  Mrs.  Bedford, 
about  a  year  ago,  before  I  went  on  Saturday ;  and,  of  course,  both  times 
wore  my  walking  dress.  But  when  seen  by  Mrs.  Bedford  in  this  vision, 
she  particularly  noticed  that  I  wore  no  bonnet,  which  must  have  been  the 
case,  as  this  occurred  before  9  o'clock.  u  Augusta  Gladstone  " 

Mrs.  Gladstone  adds  : — 

"  Mrs.  B.  described  me  as  being  in  white,  and  I  asked  her  what  I  had 
on  my  head.  She  said,  '  A  thing  like  this  ' — taking  hold  of  a  woollen  cap 
which  I  had  given  her.  It  was  the  fac-simile  of  one  which  I  must  have 
had  on  at  the  time  ;  and  they  were  not  common,  for  I  had  knitted  them 
of  wool  and  of  a  particular  shape." 

Mrs.  Bedford  has  had  one  other  hallucination,  when  she  saw  the 
figure  of  a  young  grandchild  standing  by  her  bedside.  This,  however, 
happened  at  night,  and  may  have  been  half  a  dream. 

When  Mrs.  Bedford  described  her  experience  to  the  present  writer, 
she  did  not  use  the  word  curtain,  and  she  did  not  recall  the  remark  about 
the  stuff  not  being  long  enough  ;  which  suggested  that  these  items  might 
have  crept  into  the  narrative  after  Mrs.  Gladstone's  side  of  the  affair  had 
been  related.  Mr.  Bedford  is,  however,  positive  that  they  formed  part  of 
what  his  wife  told  him  at  the  time,  and  before  he  saw  Mrs.  Gladstone ; 
and  Mrs.  Gladstone  is  equally  positive  that  they  were  included  in  his 
account  to  her,  and  also  that  she  has  herself  heard  of  them  from  Mrs. 
Bedford. 

The  next  example  is  from  Colonel  Bigge,  of  2,  Morpeth  Terrace, 
S.W.,  who  took  the  account  out  of  a  sealed  envelope,  in  my  presence, 
for  the  first  time  since  it  was  written  on  the  day  of  the  occurrence. 

(262)  "  An  account  of  a  circumstance  which  occurred  to  me  when 
quartered  at  Templemore,  Co.  Tipperary,  on  20  February,  1847. 

"This  afternoon,  about  3  o'clock  p.m.,  I  was  walking  from  my  quarters 
towards  the  mess-room  to  put  some  letters  into  the  letter-box,  when  I 
distinctly  saw  Lieut. -Colonel  Reed,  70th  Regiment,  walking  from  the 
corner  of  the  range  of  buildings  occupied  by  the  officers  towards  the  mess- 
room  door  ;  and  I  saw  him  go  into  the  passage.  He  was  dressed  in  a 
brown  shooting  jacket,  with  grey  summer  regulation  tweed  trousers,  and 
had  a  fishing  rod  and  a  landing-net  in  his  hand.  Although  at  the  time  I 
saw  him  he  was  about  15  or  20  yards  from  me,  and  although  anxious  to 
speak  to  him  at  the  moment,  I  did  not  do  so,  but  followed  him  into  the 
passage  and  turned  into  the  ante-room  on  the  left-hand  side,  where  I 
expected  to  find  him.  On  opening  the  door,  to  my  great  surprise,  he  was 
not  there ;  the  only  person  in  the  room  was  Quartermaster  Nolan,  70th 
Regiment,  and  I  immediately  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  the  colonel,  and 
he  replied  he  had  not ;  upon  which  I  said,  '  I  suppose  he  has  gone 
upstairs,'  and  I  immediately  left  the  room.     Thinking  he  might  have  gone 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  95 

upstairs  to  one  of  the  officer's  rooms,  I  listened  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs 
and  then  went  up  to  the  first  landing  place  ;  but  not  hearing  anything  I 
went  downstairs  again  and  tried  to  open  the  bedroom  door,  which  is 
opposite  to  the  ante-room,  thinking  he  might  have  gone  there  ;  but  I  found 
the  door  locked,  as  it  usually  is  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  I  was  very 
much  surprised  at  not  finding  the  colonel,  and  I  walked  into  the  barrack- 
yard  and  joined  Lieutenant  Caulfield,  66th  Regiment,  who  was  walking 
there  ;  and  I  told  the  story  to  him,  and  particularly  described  the  dress  in 
which  I  had  seen  the  colonel.  We  walked  up  and  down  the  barrack -yard 
talking  about  it  for  about  10  minutes,  when,  to  my  great  surprise,  never 
having  kept  my  eye  from  the  door  leading  to  the  mess-room  (there  is  only 
one  outlet  from  it),  I  saw  the  colonel  walk  into  the  barracks  through  the 
gate — which  is  in  the  opposite  direction — accompanied  by  Ensign  Willing- 
ton,  70th  Regiment,  in  precisely  the  same  dress  in  which  I  had  seen  him, 
and  with  a  fishing-rod  and  a  landing-net  in  his  hand.  Lieutenant  Caul- 
field  and  I  immediately  walked  to  them,  and  we  were  joined  by  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Goldie,  66th  Regiment,  and  Captain  Hartford,  and  I  asked  Colonel 
Reed  if  he  had  not  gone  into  the  mess-room  about  10  minutes  before.  He 
replied  that  he  certainly  had  not,  for  that  he  had  been  out  fishing  for 
more  than  two  hours  at  some  ponds  about  a  mile  from  the  barracks,  and 
that  he  had  not  been  near  the  mess-room  at  all  since  the  morning. 

"  At  the  time  I  saw  Colonel  Reed  going  into  the  mess-room,  I  was  not 
aware  that  he  had  gone  out  fishing — a  very  unusual  thing  to  do  at  this 
time  of  the  year  ;  neither  had  I  seen  him  before  in  the  dress  I  have 
described  during  that  day.  I  had  seen  him  in  uniform  in  the  morning  at 
parade,  but  not  afterwards  at  all  until  3  o'clock — having  been  engaged  in 
my  room  writing  letters,  and  upon  other  business.  My  eyesight  being 
very  good,  and  the  colonel's  figure  and  general  appearance  somewhat 
remarkable,  it  is  morally  impossible  that  I  could  have  mistaken  any  other 
person  in  the  world  for  him.  That  I  did  see  him  I  shall  continue  to  believe 
until  the  last  day  of  my  existence. 

"  William  Matthew  Bigge, 

"  Major,  70th  Regiment." 

On  July  17th,  1885,  after  Colonel  Bigge  had  described  the  occurrence, 
but  before  the  account  was  taken  from  the  envelope  and  read,  he  was  good 
enough  to  dictate  the  following  remarks  to  me  : — 

"  When  Colonel  R.  got  ofi'  the  car  about  a  couple  of  hours  afterwards, 
Colonel  Goldie  and  other  officers  said  to  me,  '  Why  that's  the  very  dress 
you  described.'  They  had  not  known  where  he  was  or  how  he  was 
engaged.  The  month,  February,  was  a  most  unlikely  one  to  be  fishing  in. 
Colonel  Reed  was  much  alarmed  when  told  what  I  had  seen. 

"The  quartermaster,  sitting  at  the  window,  would  have  been  bound  to 
see  a  real  figure  ;  he  denied  having  seen  anything. 

"  I  have  never  had  the  slightest  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any 
other  occasion." 

[It  will  be  seen  that  these  recent  remarks  exhibit  two  slips  of  memory. 
It  is  quite  unimportant  whether  Colonel  Reed  was  seen  walking  in  at  the 
gate  or  getting  off  a  car.  But  in  making  the  interval  between  the  vision  and 
the  return  two  hours  instead  of  ten  minutes,  the  later  account  unduly 
diminishes  the  force  of  the  case.     If  there  is  any  justification  at  all  for  the 

96  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

provisional  hypothesis  that  the  sense  of  impending  arrival  is  a  condition 
favourable  for  the  emission  of  a  telepathic  influence,  it  is  of  importance 
that,  at  the  time  when  the  phantasmal  form  was  seen.  Colonel  Reed  was 
not  busy  with  his  fishing,  but  was  rapidly  approaching  his  destination ; 
for  thus  the  incident,  at  any  rate,  gets  the  benefit  of  analogy  with  other 
cases.  This  illustrates  what  was  said  above  (Vol.  I.,  p.  131),  that  where 
memory  errs,  it  is  not  always  in  the  direction  of  exaggeration.] 

I  7.  The  last  case  quoted  might  equally  well  serve  as  an  example 
of  the  next  and  concluding  group,  the  peculiarity  of  which  is  that  the 
real  person  whom  the  phantasm  represents  is — unknown  to  the  per- 
cipient— actually  approaching.  When  these  "  arrival  cases  "  were 
referred  to  above  (Vol.  I.,  p.  517),  it  was  noted  that  the  mere 
sense  of  returning  home  cannot  be  held  to  constitute  an  abnormality 
in  the  least  degree  parallel  to  death,  or  the  other  recognised  condi- 
tions of  spontaneous  telepathy ;  and  our  first-hand  specimens  are  in 
themselves  too  few  for  complete  assurance  that  we  have  in  them  a 
genuine  t3rpe  of  transfer.  At  the  same  time  they  find  a  parallel 
in  the  i-jTipressioTi-cases  quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  252-4 ;  and  taken  in 
connection  with  the  two  preceding  groups,  they  at  any  rate  increase 
the  probability  that  impressions  from  a  normal  agent  may  be 
occasionally  capable  of  acting  as  the  germ  of  a  telepathic  phantasm. 

The  first  example  is  from  Mr.  James  Carroll,  who  gave  the  account 

quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  281.     The  agent  was  the  same  twin-brother  who 

was  concerned  in  that  former  case. 

"September,  1884. 

(263)  "  In  the  autumn  of  1877,  while  at  Sholebrook  Lodge,  Towcester, 
Northamptonshire,  one  night,  at  a  little  after  10  o'clock,  I  remember  I 
was  about  to  move  a  lamp  in  my  room  to  a  position  where  I  usually  sat 
a  little  while  before  retiring  to  bed,  when  I  suddenly  saw  a  vision  of  my 
brother.  It  seemed  to  affect  me  like  a  mild  shock  of  electricity.  It 
surprised  me  so  that  I  hesitated  to  carry  out  what  I  had  intended,  my  eyes 
remaining  fixed  on  the  apparition  of  my  brother.  It  gradually  disap- 
peared, leaving  me  wondering  what  it  meant.  I  am  positive  no  light 
or  reflection  deceived  me.  I  had  not  been  sleeping  or  rubbing  my  eyes. 
I  was  again  in  the  act  of  moving  my  lamp  when  I  heard  taps  along 
the  window.  I  looked  towards  it — the  window  was  on  the  ground-floor — 
and  heard  a  voice,  my  brother's,  say,  '  It's  I ;  don't  be  frightened.'  I  let 
him  in ;  he  remarked,  '  How  cool  you  are ;  I  thought  I  should  have 
frightened  you.' 

"  The  fact  was,  that  the  distinct  vision  of  my  brother  had  quite 
prepared  me  for  his  call.  He  found  the  window  by  accident,  as  he  had 
never  been  to  the  house  before ;  to  use  his  own  words,  '  I  thought  it  was 
your  window,  and  that  I  should  find  you.'  He  had  unexpectedly  left 
London  to  pay  me  a  visit,  and  when  near  the  house  lost  his  way,  and  had 
found  his  way  in  the  dark  to  the  back  of  the  place." 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  97 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Carroll  says  : — 

"You  are  quite  right  in  supposing  the  hallucination  of  my  brother  to 
be  the  only  instance  in  my  experience." 

In  another  letter,  Mr.  Carroll  says  : — 

"As  to  the  apparition  of  my  brother  in  Northamptonshire,  at  a  place 
and  window  where  he  had  never  before  been, — I  think  I  said  the  room 
was  very  light  indeed,  the  night  very  dark.  Even  had  I  looked  out  of  the 
window  I  could  not  have  seen  him.  With  my  head  turned  from  the 
window,  I  distinctly  saw  his  face.  I  was  affected  and  surprised.  It 
seemed  like  a  slight  shock  of  electricity.  I  had  not  recovered  from  the 
effects  when  the  second  surprise  came,  the  reality — my  brother.  I  did  not 
mention  the  subject  to  him  then,  being  rather  flattered  at  his  astonishment 
at  my  cool  demeanour.  The  coolness  was  caused  by  the  apparition  first  of 
him.  The  window  my  brother  came  to  was  at  the  back  of  the  house.  He 
found  my  window  out  only  by  accident,  or,  as  he  said,  he  thought  it  was 
my  window." 

[Mr.  Carroll  is  a  clear-headed  and  careful  witness.  He  is  quite 
positive  as  to  this  being  his  only  experience  of  a  hallucination.  In  con- 
versation, he  stated  that  there  were  no  mirrors  in  the  room,  and  that  the 
figure  was  seen  not  in  the  direction  of  the  window.  He  thinks  that  the 
interval  between  the  hallucination  and  his  brother's  appearance  was  about 
a  minute.] 

Here  the  gradual  disappearance,  if  correctly  remembered,  is 
interesting  as  a  feature  which  is  occasionally  met  with  in  purely 
subjective  hallucinations  (Chap.  XII.,  §§  2  and  10).^ 

The  next  example  is  a  "  collective "  case,^  but  had  better  be 
quoted  in  the  present  connection.  The  narrator  is  the  late  Rev.  W. 
Mountford,  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  a  minister  and  author  of  repute.  ^^  v.^1  *•<  ^ 

(264)  "  One  day,  some  15  years  ago,  I  went  from  the  place  of  my  abode 
to  see  some  friends  who  resided  in  the  fen  districts  of  Norfolk.  They  were  ■  -  f-  " 
persons  whom  I  knew,  not  merely  well,  but  intimately.  They  were  two 
brothers  who  had  married  two  sisters.  Their  houses  were  a  mile  and  a 
quarter  apart,  but  standing  on  the  same  road,  and  with  only  two  or  three 
other  habitations  intervening.  The  road  was  a  straight,  bare,  open  road,  like 
what  is  so  often  to  be  seen  in  the  fens,  and  used  chiefly  and  almost 
exclusively  by  the  occupants  of  the  few  farms  alongside  of  it.  The  house 
at  which  I  was  visiting  stood  about  10  yards  from  the  edge  of  the  road. 
The  day  was  fine  and  clear — a  day  in  March.  About  4  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  I  stood  at  the  window,  and  looking  up  the  road  I  said,  '  Here 
is  your  brother  coming.'  My  host  advanced  to  the  window  and  said,  '  Oh 
yes,  here  he  is ;  and  see,  Robert  has  got  Dobbin  out  at  last.'  Dobbin  was 
a  horse  which,  on  account  of  some  accident,  had  not  been  used  for  some 
weeks.     The  lady  also  looked  out  at  the  window,  and  said  to  me,   '  And  I 

1  Compare  cases  185, 194,  207,  263,  311,  315,  331,  350,  488,  503,  514,  544,  553,  567,  672, 
673  ;  also  cases  189  and  328,  and  the  account  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  454,  note,  where  the  expression 
"  melted  away  "  is  used. 

2  Compare  the  carriage  cases  described  in  Chap,  xviii.,  §  5. 

VOL.    II.  H 

98  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap. 

am  so  glad,  too,   that  my  sister  is  with  him.     They  will  be  delighted  to 
find  you  here.' 

"  I  recognised  distinctly  the  vehicle  in  which  they  rode  as  being  an 
open  one,  also  the  lady  and  the  gentleman,  and  both  their  dress,  and 
their  attitudes. 

"  Our  friends  passed  at  a  gentle  pace  along  the  front  of  the  window,  and 
then  turning  with  the  road  round  the  corner  of  the  house,  they  could  not 
longer  be  seen.  After  a  minute  my  host  went  to  the  door  and  exclaimed, 
'  Why,  what  can  be  the  matter  ?  They  have  gone  on  without  calling,  a 
thing  they  never  did  in  their  lives  before.     What  can  be  the  matter  1 ' 

"  Five  minutes  afterwards,  while  we  were  seated  by  the  fireside,  the 
parlour  door  opened,  and  there  entered  a  lady  of  about  25  years  of  age ; 
she  was  in  robust  health  and  in  full  possession  of  all  her  senses,  and  she 
was  possessed,  besides,  of  a  strong  common-sense.  She  was  pale  and 
much  excited,  and  the  moment  she  opened  the  door  she  exclaimed,  '  Oh, 
aunt,  I  have  had  such  a  fright.  Father  and  mother  have  passed  me  on 
the  road  without  speaking.  I  looked  up  at  them  as  they  passed  by,  but 
they  looked  straight  on  and  never  stopped  nor  said  a  word.  A  quarter  of 
an  hour  before,  when  I  started  to  walk  here,  they  were  sitting  by  the  fire  ; 
and  now,  what  can  be  the  matter  *?  They  never  turned  nor  spoke,  and 
yet  I  am  certain  that  they  must  have  seen  me.' 

"  Ten  minutes  after  the  arrival  of  this  lady,  I,  looking  through  the 
window  up  the  road,  said,  '  But  see,  here  they  are,  coming  down  the  road 
again.' 

"  My  host  said,  '  No,  that  is  impossible,  because  there  is  no  path  by 
which  they  could  get  on  to  this  road,  so  as  to  be  coming  down  it  again. 
But  sure  enough,  here  they  are,  and  with  the  same  horse  !  How  in  the 
world  have  they  got  here  % ' 

"  We  all  stood  at  the  window,  and  saw  pass  before  us  precisely  the 
same  appearance  which  we  had  seen  before — lady  and  gentleman,  and 
horse  and  carriage.  My  host  ran  to  the  door  and  exclaimed,  '  How  did 
you  get  here  ?  How  did  you  get  on  to  the  road  to  be  coming  down  here 
again  now  1 ' 

"  '  I  get  on  the  road  1  What  do  you  mean  1  I  have  just  come  straight 
from  home.' 

"  '  And  did  you  not  come  down  the  road  and  pass  the  house,  less  than 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  ago  1 ' 

"  '  No,'  said  the  lady  and  gentleman  both.  '  This  is  the  first  time  that 
we  have  come  down  the  road  to-day.' 

" '  Certainly '  we  all  said,  '  you  passed  these  windows  less  than  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  ago.  And,  besides,  here  is  Mary,  who  was  on  the  road 
and  saw  you.' 

"  '  Nonsense,'  was  the  answer.  '  We  are  straight  from  home,  as  you  may 
be  very  sure.  For  how  could  you  have  seen  us  pass  by  before,  when  you 
did  see  us  coming  down  now  1 ' 

"  'Then  you  mean  to  say  that  really  you  did  not  pass  by  here  10  or  15 
minutes  ago  1 ' 

"  '  Certainly  ;  for  at  that  time,  probably,  we  were  just  coming  out  of 
the  yard  and  starting  to  come  here.' 

"  We  all  of  us  remained  much  amazed  at  this  incident.  There  were 
four  of  us  who  had  seen  this  appearance,  and  seen  it  under  such  circum- 

XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT,  99 

stances  as  apparently  precluded  any  possibility  of  our  having  mistaken 
some  casual  passengers  for  our  intimate  friends.  We  were  quite  satisfied 
that  we  had  really  not  seen  our  bodily  friends  pass  down  the  road,  that 
first  time  when  we  thought  that  we  saw  them.  As  for  myself,  I  was  sure 
that  it  was  not  they  ;  and  yet  hardly  could  I  help  feeling  that  it  could 
have  been  no  persons  else. 

"  There  is  an  old  saying  about  keeping  a  thing  10  years,  and  then 
finding  a  use  for  it.  This  curious  experience  of  mine  is  as  vivid  in  my 
mind  as  though  it  were  of  yesterday.  Is  it  of  use  as  illustrating 
mistakes  as  to  identity,  or  is  it  rather  a  singular  instance  of  what  is  called 
second-sight  ? 

This  account  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  August, 
1860.     On  our  writing  to  Mr.  Mountford  on  the  subject  he  replied  : — 

"  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  U.S.A. 
"8th  August,  1884. 

"The  narrative  of  which  you  have  sent  me  a  copy  was  written  by 
myself,  as  you  had  rightly  supposed.  It  was  carefully  prepared,  and  I 
believe  it  to  be  as  exactly  true  as  any  report  ever  made  by  phonograph  or 
photograph. 

"  At  the  time  when  the  occurrence  happened,  I  was  simply  amazed  at 
it,  and  I  felt  but  just  simply  as  some  untaught  ploughman  might  have  felt 
in  the  open  field,  if  an  aerolite  had  fallen  at  his  feet,  hot  from  the  skies. 

"The  persons  besides  myself,  of  whom  I  wrote  in  that  account,  were 
all  of  the  family  name  of  Coe,  and  were  all  of  Islington,  near  King's  Lynn ; 
and  they  were  all  living  at  the  time  when  I  wrote  about  them,  but  they 
have  all  been  carried  away. 

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  Mrs.   Robert   Coe  said    that  she   and   her  i 
husband  knew  of  their  daughter's  having  started  to  see  her  aunt,  but  that 
they    had    had    no   intention   of    following   her   till    Mr.    Robert    Coe, ' 
suddenly  starting  from  his  chair  by  the  fireside,  exclaimed  '  Let  us  go  to 
Clement's.' " 

[It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  this  experience  was  not  recorded  in 
writing  at  the  moment,  and  signed  by  all  the  persons  concerned.  At  the 
same  time  the  hypothesis  that  it  was  a  mere  mistake  or  illusion  is  strongly 
discountenanced  by  the  persistence  of  the  contrary  impression  in  a  sound 
and  rationally  sceptical  mind.  For  the  natural  tendency  of  such  a  mind 
is  undeniably  to  be  less  certain  of  the  reality  of  abnormal  facts  after  a  long 
interval  than  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence.  ^J 

It  will  be  convenient  to  complete  the  account  of  this  "  arrival  " 
type  by  citing  at  once  a  couple  of  auditory  cases,  which  belong 
by  rights  to  the  next  chapter.  The  following  account  is  from  Mr. 
J.  Stevenson,  of  28,  Prospect  Street,  Gateshead. 

1  It  is  interesting,  for  instance,  to  find  an  able  observer,  M.  Marillier,  candidly 
admitting  that,  but  for  written  notes  and  other  indisputable  evidence,  he  could  easily 
come  to  believe  that  his  own  very  vivid  subjective  hallucinations  of  some  years  ago  were  a 
disease  of  memory,  and  were  never  really  experienced  (JRevue  Philosophique  for  February, 
1886,  p.  206). 

VOL.    II.  H    2 

100  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES.  [chap. 

"  April  20th,  1885. 

(265)  "During  the  months  of  May  and  June,  1881,  my  brother  was 
staying  with  us.  He  went  out  one  Sunday  night  between  5  and  6  o'clock.  He 
did  not  say  what  time  he  would  return,  but  his  time  was  generally  about 
10  p.m.  About  7  o'clock,  while  I  was  reading  by  the  window,  and  Mrs. 
Stevenson  by  the  fire,  all  being  quiet,  I  heard  a  voice  say  '  David  is 
coming.'  I  instantly  turned  to  Mrs.  S.,  asking  what  she  said.  She  said, 
'I  have  not  spoken  a  word.'  I  told  her  that  I  heard  someone  say  that 
'  David  is  coming.'  I  then  thought  I  had  imagined  it,  but,  lo  and  behold  ! 
in  less  than  3  minutes,  in  he  comes,  quite  unexpected.  I  was  surprised, 
but  did  not  mention  anything  to  him  about  it.  The  position  of  the  house 
prevented  us  from  seeing  him  until  just  about  to  enter  the  house.  He  was 
in  good  health,  as  we  all  were  at  the  time.  This  is  a  candid  statement  of 
the  facts, 

"  Jos.  Stevenson." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Stevenson  adds  : — 

"  This  was  the  sole  experience  I  have  had  of  the  kind.  I  have  never 
experienced  any  hallucination." 

Mrs.  Stevenson  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  In  reference  to  my  husband's  letter  of  April  20th,  I  have  pleasure  in 
testifying  to  the  accuracy  of  his  account,  and  of  his  drawing  my  attention 
to  the  fact  at  the  time  mentioned. 

"Serena  Stevenson." 

The  remaining  auditory  specimen  (266)  is  from  Mrs.  Robinson, 
residing  at  The  Warren,  Caversham,  Reading,  who  has  never  experi- 
enced a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  Some  14  years  ago,  she 
tells  us,  she  was  sitting  at  needlework  in  the  evening,  when  she  heard 
the  voice  of  her  son,  Stansford  Robinson — who  was  supposed  to  be 
abroad,  but  had  not  been  heard  of  for  some  time — calling,  "  Nar, 
Nar,  Nar,"  the  pet  name  of  an  old  family  nurse.  The  triple  call  was 
twice  repeated.  Mrs.  Robinson  opened  the  door,  fully  expecting  to 
find  her  son  in  the  hall,  but  no  one  was  there.  The  son  "  returned 
unexpectedly  next  day,  very  ill,  and  died  soon  after."  ^ 

1  It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  point  out  the  wide  difference  between  such  hallucina- 
tions of  voices  and  one  of  the  alleged  phenomena  sonaetimes  included  under  the  general 
name  of  "second-sight" — to  wit,  notice  given  of  the  approach  of  travellers,  some  time 
before  their  actual  arrival,  by  a  sound  of  horses'  feet  outside  the  house.  _  (See,  e.g., 
Jjescription  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  by  George  Waldron,  1744,  p.  75.)  It  is  obvious  (1)  how 
easily  an  auditory  impression  of  that  sort  may  be  a  mere  illusion — just  as  the  swirling  of 
leaves  is  probably  accountable  for  many  of  the  tales  of  phantom  carriages  driving  up  to 
the  door  ;  and  (2)  how  certain  it  is  that,  among  a  population  holding  such  a  belief,  the 
occasional  coincidence,  when  the  suggestive  sound  was  heard  and  the  guest  arrived,  would 
be  noted  as  a  marvel,  and  the  sounds  which  no  arrival  followed  would  find  no  place  in  the 
reckoning.  It  would  not  occur  to  a  Manx  peasant  to  make  capital  out  of  even  the 
failures — as  I  have  actually  seen  done — by  calling  them  "  inverted  coincidences  "  ! 

XV.] 

CHAPTER  XV. 

FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE 
PERCIPIENT. 

§  1.  In  examining  cases  of  auditory  phantasms  which  have  strikingly- 
corresponded  with  real  events,  we  have  two  main  points  to  look  to. 
First,  there  is  the  phantasm  regarded  merely  as  a  sensory 
phenomenon,  on  a  par  with  the  visual  phantasms.  This,  of  course, 
is  the  sound  in  itself ;  which  is  occasionally  of  an  inarticulate  sort, 
a  simple  noise  ;  but  which  in  the  large  majority  of  instances  repre- 
sents the  tone  of  a  human  voice — the  voice,  like  the  visual  phantasm, 
being  either  recognised  or  unrecognised.  But,  secondly,  when  the 
phantasm  is  a  voice,  there  is  a  further  element,  which  has  as  a  rule 
no  analogue  in  the  visual  class — namely,  what  the  voice  says ;  and 
this  is  likely  to  afford  us  some  clue  as  to  whether  a  complete  and 
definite  idea  has  been  telepathically  conveyed  from  the  agent 
or  merely  an  impulse  or  germ  which  the  percipient  has  developed  in 
his  own  way.  We  find  that  the  auditory  cases,  like  the  visual, 
present  various  stages  of  apparent  externalisation  ;^  but  the  discrimina- 
tions here  are  less  marked — it  being  more  difficult  in  the  case  of 
sounds  than  of  sights  to  decide,  in  recalling  them,  how  far  the 
impression  seemed  inward,  and  how  far  outward ;  while  even  if  the 
special  stage  be  clear  in  the  percipient's  mind,  it  is  not  easy  to  find 
words  to  describe  it. 

I  will  begin  with  recognised  voices ;  and  will  first  quote  a 
few  cases  where  the  analogy  to  experimental  thought-transference 
is  strongest,  inasmuch  as  what  the  percipient  heard  seems  to  have 
represented  the  actual  sensation  of  the  agent,^  the  very  words  which 
he  was  hearing  while  he  uttered  them — in  one  instance,  however,  so 
dulled  as  to  be  indistinguishable  as  words.     The  following  account 

1  See  the  account  of  some  of  these  stages  as  exemplified  in  purely  subjective  hallucina- 
tions, Vol.  i.,  pp.  480-2. 

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  536,  note. 

102  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

is  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Walditch,  Bridport,   the  narrator  of  case  257, 

above. 

-'^-■'  "January  29th,  1883. 

(S57)  "  On  the  1 3th  of  January,  1882,  my  eldest  son,  who  had  been 
paying  us  a  visit,  left  by  a  morning  train  for  his  home ;  but  I  did  not 
know  the  exact  time  at  which  he  would  reach  his  destination.  In  the 
afternoon  of  that  day,  my  daughter  having  gone  to  the  neighbouring 
town  (Bridport),  I  was  sitting  at  work  by  a  window  of  which  the  upper 
ventilator  was  open.  Suddenly  I  heard  my  son's  voice  distinctly ;  I  could 
not  mistake  it ;  he  was  speaking  eagerly,  and  as  if  bothered ;  the  voice 
seemed  wafted  to  me  by  an  air  current,  but  I  could  not  distinguish  words. 
I  was  startled,  but  not  very  much  frightened  ;  the  voice  did  not  seem  to 
indicate  accident  or  calamity.  I  looked  at  my  watch,  which  pointed  to 
three  minutes  past  3.  In  perhaps  a  few  seconds,  his  voice  began  again, 
but  soon  became  faint,  and  died  away  in  the  distance.  When  my  daughter 
came  in,  I  told  her,  and  mentioned  the  hour ;  she  said  that  was  just  the 
time  my  son  expected  to  arrive,  if  the  train  was  punctual.  I  also 
mentioned  it  to  my  son  who  is  living  with  me.  The  next  morning  I  was 
very  thankful  to  get  a  post-card  from  my  eldest  son  :  '  Arrived  all  right, 
train  very  punctual,  just  three  minutes  past  3  ;  but  to  my  annoyance,  I 
found  no  carriage  waiting  for  me,  or  my  luggage,  only  Frank  on  his 
bicycle.  He  explained  that  they  had  made  a  mistake  by  looking  at  the 
station  clock  (which  was  an  hour  too  slow),  and  had  driven  away  again.' 
I  wrote  the  whole  account  to  my  son,  but  he  is  rather  sceptical  on  these 
subjects ;  he  could  not  but  own  it  was  a  strange  coincidence,  but  asked, 
'  Why,  mother,  didn't  you  hear  Frank's  voice  too  ? ' 

"Lucia  C.  Stone." 

Miss  Edith  Stone  has  confirmed  verbally  what  is  recorded  of  her  in 
the  above  account.  Another  son,  Mr.  Walter  Stone,  also  recollects  having 
been  told  of  the  incident. 

On  February  16th,  1885,  Mrs.  Stone  wrote  as  follows  : — 
"  A  few  days  since,  I  came  upon  my  son's  letter,  written  rather  more 
than  a  week  after  the  occurrence.  The  post-card  mentioned  was  lost,  and 
it  was  by  chance  this  letter  turned  up.  I  enclose  the  first  page  for  what 
it  is  worth,  very  trivial  save  for  the  impression  it  made  on  me.  I  am 
more  than  ever  convinced  of  the  value  of  verifying  matters  of  this  kind." 

The  first  page  of  the  son's  letter  ran  as  follows  : — 

"Eton,  January  22nd,  1882. 

"  Dearest  Mother, — If  you  heard  my  voice  it  must  have  been  when 
I  was  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  carriage,  and  expressing  loudly  my 
surprise  at  its  not  having  arrived  at  the  station  to  meet  me.  I  think  I 
told  you  that  Frank  was  there,  on  his  bicycle,  and  we  both  jabbered 
considerably.     You  ought  to  have  heard  him  too." 

[Mrs.  Stone  has  had  no  other  hallucination  of  a  recognised  voice,  except 
on  one  occasion,  20  years  ago,  soon  after  a  bereavement  (see  Yol.  I., 
pp.  510-2).  More  than  five  years  ago,  she  had  on  several  evenings  the 
impression  of  hearing  voices  in  the  room  below  her  own.  This  slight 
7  ^  predisposition  to  auditory  hallucination  would  hardly  affect  the  case  ;  but 
the  coincidence  is  of  course  rendered  less  striking  by  the  reflection  that 

-4^ 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  103 

Mr.  Stone  may  have  spoken  "  eagerly  and  as  if  bothered  "  on  a  good  many 
other  occasions.] 

The  next  case  is  more  complete,  inasmuch  as  the  actual  word  used 
by  the  agent  was  distinguished  by  the  percipient.  The  account  is 
from  Mr.  E,.  Fryer,  of  Bath,  brother  of  our  valued  friend  and  helper, 
the  Eev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Clerkenwell,  who  tells  us  that  he  "  distinctly 
remembers  being  told  of  the  occurrence  within  a  few  weeks  of  its 
happening."  He  explains  that  "  Rod  "  was  the  name  by  which  his 
brother,  the  percipient,  was  called  in  the  family.  p 

"January,  1883.  ,,^.<^'  ' 

(268)  "A  strange  experience  occurred  in  the  autumn  of  the  year '-^^''  ^^ 
1879.  A  brother  of  mine  had  been  from  home  for  3  or  4  days,  when,  one  d^'^'^  "' 
afternoon,  at  half-past  5  (as  nearly  as  possible),  I  was  astonished  to  hear 
my  name  called  out  very  distinctly.  I  so  clearly  recognised  my  brother's  ..c'f^ 
voice  that  I  looked  all  over  the  house  for  him  ;  but  not  finding  him,  and 
indeed  knowing  that  he  must  be  distant  some  40  miles,  I  ended  by 
attributing  the  incident  to  a  fancied  delusion,  and  thought  no  more  about 
the  matter.  On  my  brother's  arrival  home,  however,  on  the  sixth  day,  he 
remarked  amongst  other  things  that  he  had  narrowly  escaped  an  ugly 
accident.  It  appeared  that,  whilst  getting  out  from  a  railway  carriage, 
he  missed  his  footing,  and  fell  along  the  platform  ;  by  putting  out  his 
hands  quickly  he  broke  the  fall,  and  only  sufiered  a  severe  shaking, 
'  Curiously  enough,'  he  said,  '  when  I  found  myself  falling  I  called  out 
your  name.'  This  did  not  strike  me  for  a  moment,  but  on  my  asking  him 
during  what  part  of  the  day  this  happened,  he  gave  me  the  time,  which  I 
found  corresponded  exactly  with  the  moment  I  heard  myself  called." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  R.  Fryer  adds  : — 

"  I  do  not  remember  ever  having  a  similar  experience  to  the  one 
narrated  to  you ;  nor  should  I  care  to,  as  the  sensation,  together  with  the 
suspense  as  to  the  why  and  wherefore  of  the  event,  is  the  reverse  of  pleasant." 

In  conversation,  he  has  explained  that  he  had  frequently  expostulated 
with  his  brother  on  the  latter's  habit  of  alighting  from  trains  in  motion ; 
and  the  automatic  utterance  of  his  name,  on  this  occasion,  might  thus  be 
accounted  for  by  association. 

The  agent's  account  of  the  matter  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Newbridge  Road,  Bath. 

"November  16th,  1885. 

"In  the  year  1879,  I  was  travelling,  and  in  the  course  of  my  journey 
I  had  to  stop  at  Gloucester.  In  getting  out  of  the  train,  I  fell,  and  was 
assisted  to  rise  by  one  of  the  railway  officials.  He  asked  if  I  was  hurt, 
and  asked  if  I  had  anyone  travelling  with  me.  I  replied  '  No '  to  both 
questions,  and  inquired  why  he  asked.  He  replied,  '  Because  you  called 
out  "  Rod."  '     I  distinctly  recollect  making  use  of  the  word  Rod. 

"  On  arriving  home,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  I  related  the  circum- 
stance, and  my  brother  inquired  the  time  and  date.  He  then  told  me 
he  had  heard  me  call  at  that  particular  time.  He  was  so  sure  of  its 
being  my  voice  that  he  made  inquiries  as  to  whether  I  was  about  or  not. 

"John  T.  Fryer." 

104  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

Curiously  similar  is  the  next  case,  sent  to  us  by  Miss  Frome,  of 
Ewell,  Surrey,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  friend,  a  doctor  by  profession 
whose  experience  is  narrated.  She  thoroughly  relies  on  his  word,  and 
has  communicated  his  name.  He  himself  dislikes  the  subject,  and 
has  no  belief  that  such  coincidences  can  be  anything  but  accidental. 

"April  14th,  1884. 

(269)  "In  February,  1862,  an  undergraduate  of  one  of  our  northern 
universities  was,  and  had  been  for  some  time,  reading  hard  for  the 
approaching  examination  for  the  degree  which  he  was  desirous  of 
acquiring.  His  brother,  an  officer  in  the  merchant  service,  was  at  sea, 
and  at  this  time  in  a  ship  not  far  from  the  coast  of  the  East  Indies. 

"  One  evening,  about  7  p.m.,  the  former  was  at  work  in  his  own  rooms, 
in  company  with  a  friend,  also  studying  with  the  same  object,  when  he 
suddenly  heard  his  Christian  name,  shortened  as  was  the  custom  in  his  own 
family  circle,  of  which  there  were  none  (or  even  of  intimate  friends)  in  the 
city  he  was  then  inhabiting.  He  heard  himself  called  sharply  and  clearly, 
and,  astonished  rather,  looked  up  from  his  books  and  asked  his  friend  if 
he  spoke,  who  answered  in  the  negative,  evidently  surprised.  Again,  in 
an  instant,  he  heard  the  sound  again,  and  turned  to  his  friend,  saying, 
'  Don't  be  foolish  ;  what  is  it  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  I  said  nothing.'  He  then 
asked,  '  Did  you  not  hear  anything  ^  My  name  called  1 '  '  No,  I  heard 
nothing,'  was  the  answer. 

"  Almost  as  these  brief  words  were  passing  between  the  two  men,  he 
of  whom  this  story  is  related  heard  again,  once,  twice,  quickly  repeated, 
his  name,  clearly  and  distinctly,  and  then  he  seemed  to  recognise  it  as  like 
his  brother's  voice.  He  could  not  understand  it,  and,  feeling  rather 
mystified  and  put  out,  thought  he  would  stop  work  and  rest,  so  telling  his 
friend  he  would  do  no  more  that  night,  went  off  to  the  theatre.  On  his 
return,  sitting  over  the  fire,  he  thought  the  matter  over,  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that,  being  out  of  health  to  some  extent,  the  mental  fatigue  he 
was  going  through  had  upset  his  brain  functions  a  little ;  so  he  put  the 
subject  from  him,  simply  making  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  and  thought  no 
more  of  it. 

"  Some  months  later,  about  the  end  of  June,  he  was  in  London  to  meet 
his  brother,  who  was  returning  from  sea.  On  the  evening  of  the  arrival 
of  the  latter,  the  two  brothers  were  talking  together,  the  younger  describing 
his  voyage  and  the  various  incidents  that  had  happened,  and  suddenly  said, 
'  By  the  way,  I  was  very  nearly  not  coming  home  any  more  ;  I  had  a  very 
narrow  squeak  of  being  drowned.  I  fell  overboard  one  night  somewhere 
about  midnight,  and  I  thought  I  was  done  for,  but  after  a  while  I  was 
luckily  picked  up.  However,  it  was  a  close  shave,  and  I  did  not  expect  to  see 
you  again,  old  chap,  but  I  thought  of  you,  and  sung  out  and  called  at  you.' 

"  The  elder  brother,  recollecting  the  occurrence  to  himself  in  the 
northern  city,  asked  the  other  when  this  occurred,  and  heard  in  reply  that 
it  was  on  the  same  day  on  which  that  which  has  been  stated  happened  to 
him.  He  then  told  his  brother  his  story,  and,  comparing  the  two,  all 
points  agreed  except  the  hours,  about  7  o'clock  and  about  midnight — 
when  the  sailor  brother  quietly  pointed  out  that,  allowing  for  the 
difference  of  time  in  the  two  places,  the  actual  time  was  probably  the  same. 

XV.]  OC CUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  105 

"  They  talked  the  matter  over,  but  could  make  no  more  of  it.  Neither 
of  them  had  any  belief  in  supernatural  manifestations.  Nothing  of  the 
kind  ever  happened  to  them  again  in  after  life  in  any  degree.  The  younger 
brother  died  at  sea  a  few  years  ago." 

Here  we  have  once  more  the  feature  of  repetition  after  a  short 
interval,  which  seems,  by  the  way,  to  be  decidedly  commoner  in  audi- 
tory hallucinations  of  the  telepathic  than  of  the  purely  subjective 
class.^  Another  fact  to  be  noticed  is  that  the  voice  was  not  heard  by 
the  percipient's  companion — this  being  a  point  in  which  the  hallucina- 
tory character  of  telepathic  affections  of  the  senses  often  appears 
(Chap.  XII.,  §  10).2 

In  the  following  case,  it  is  alleged  that  the  actual  words  heard 

were  used  by  the  agent.     The  narrative  is  from  an  English  physician 

residing  in  a  foreign  town,  who  wishes  his  name  suppressed,  fearing 

professional  prejudice.  ^ 

"  October  22nd,  1883.        i^o'^^^^ 

(270)  "  Years  ago  there  were  two  girls,  half  Italian  half  English,  here,      ^*^ 
one  with  a  very  fine  voice.     The  poor  girl  from  over-straining  got  spitting 

of  blood.  I  attended  her.  One  morning  she  begged  me  to  see  her  sister, 
who  was  crying  her  heart  out,  as  she  expressed  it,  hysterics,  &c.,  &c., 
owing  to  an  absurd  dream,  she  said.  I  went  into  her  sister's  room,  and 
found  her  as  described ;  she  then  told  me  it  was  not  a  dream,  but  that 
she  was  broad  awake,  and  heard  her  sister's  voice  from  the  garden — 
'Georgie,  Georgie,  I  must  see  you  before  I  die.'  By  dint  of  coaxing, 
bullying,  reasoning,  and  exhortation,  I  got  her  quieted  down,  and  nothing 
more  was  thought  of  it ;  but  at  the  time  required  to  hear  from  England, 
a  letter  came  announcing  her  sister's  death ;  and  further  inquiries 
elicited  that  it  occurred  exactly  at  the  time  she  heard  the  voice  (allow- 
ing for  distance),  and  that  the  last  words  she  uttered  were  those  heard 
from  the  garden." 

[In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  the  narrator  says  that  he  did  not  actually 
see  the  letter  which  conveyed  the  intelligence  of  the  sister's  death ;  the 
exactitude  of  the  coincidence  rests  therefore  on  second-hand  evidence.  He 
was,  however,  in  daily  communication  with  the  family.] 

In  the  next  case,  the  words  heard  were  vividly  imagined  by  the 
agent,  and  may  very  probably  have  been  uttered,  or  half-uttered. 
The  account  is  from  Mr.  J.  Pike,  of  122,  Stockwell  Park  Road,  S.W.  , 

"October,  1883.  ^.  •' 

(271)  "Travelling  some  years  since  from  Carlisle  to  Highbury,  by  the  ^  *'  .  ^ 
night  mail  train,  and,  finding  myself  alone  in   my  compartment,  I  lay  at  ^^' 
full  length  on  the  seat  with  a  view  to  sleep,  having  previously  requested  the 

1  Compare  cases  154,  266,  278,  285,  287,  341,  342,  508,  674,  676,  679 ;  and  see  Chap, 
xii.,  §  10. 

2  See,  e.g.,  cases  28,  34,  189,  206,  212,  242,  265,  271,  274,  307,  329,  337,  347,  355,  491, 
517,  522,  534,  561,  567,  607,  609,  610,  618,  620,  633,  634, 'C38.  Cases  552  (see  "  Additions  and 
Corrections, "  under  heading  p.  511),  and  685  should  perhaps  be  added.  In  cases  666  and 
684,  the  experience  was  unshared  by  one  of  the  persons  present. 

106  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

guard  to  wake  me  at  the  Camden  Town  Station.  I  soon  fell  into  a  deep 
sleep,  one  of  those  profound  slumbers  the  awakening  from  which  is  almost 
painful.  Roused  suddenly  by  the  guard  waking  me  (somewhat  roughly 
and  impatiently,  because  the  train  was  behind  its  time),  I  found  that  I  had 
been  dreaming  (what  proved  indeed  to  be  the  case)  that  it  was  morning ; 
that  I  was  at  home,  in  my  bedroom,  in  the  act  of  dressing,  and  at  the 
moment  of  awakening  had  been  on  the  landing  and  twice  called  the 
servant  by  her  name,  '  Sarah,'  and  asked  her  to  bring  me  some  hot  water. 

"  On  actually  arriving  at  home,  I  learnt  that  at  the  time  when  I  had 
been  thus  dreaming  that  I  was  calling  to  the  servant,  she  had  heard  her 
name  called  by  me  twice,  distinctly  ;  that — forgetting  for  the  moment  that 
I  was  not  in  the  house — she,  hastily  discontinuing  the  breakfast  prepara- 
tions, ran  upstairs,  and  afterwards  came  down  again  '  as  white  as  a  ghost ' 
— according  to  the  description  given  to  me  by  the  children  who,  with 
astonishment,  witnessed  her  proceedings,  and  not  having  themselves  heard 
the  call,  naturally  wondered  what  it  all  meant.  Sarah  subsequently 
informed  me  that  the  '  fright '  she  experienced  on  realising  the  fact  that  I 
was  not  there  had  made  her  '  quite  ill.'  " 

Mr.  Pike's  daughter  gave  the  following  corroboration  on  Oct.  30,  1883  : — 

"  I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  of  our  servant  being  frightened  by 
hearing  my  father's  voice  calling  from  upstairs,  at  a  time  when  we  knew 
he  could  not  be  anywhere  near  our  home.  The  servant  took  a  poker  in 
her  hand  and  went  upstairs,  thinking  there  must  be  some  man  there  who 
had  imitated  my  father's  voice.  ISTothing,  however,  was  discovered  to 
explain  the  mystery  until  my  father's  arrival  at  home,  when  he  told  us 
that  at  the  time  the  call  was  heard  he  had  been  dreaming  that  he  was  at 
home  and  calling  for  hot  water.  u  Alma  M.  Pike." 

[The  genuineness  of  this  case  does  not,  of  course,  depend  on  the 
servant's  evidence,  but  on  the  testimony  of  Miss  Pike  that  the  servant 
mentioned  her  experience  before  Mr.  Pike's  arrival.  I  have  stated  above 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  514)  that  my  collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations 
includes  several  instances  where  a  servant  has  seemed  to  hear  her  mistress 
calling  her — a  fact  which  of  course  goes  to  weaken  the  force  of  the 
described  coincidence.  But  the  superior  vividness  of  the  impression  in  the 
present  instance  seems  proved  by  the  emotion  and  alarm  which  followed  it, 
and  which  had  no  sort  of  parallel  in  the  purely  subjective  cases  referred  to.] 

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  condition  of  the  agent  was  not  one  of 
distress  or  crisis,  but  simply  that  of  vivid  dream  ;  and  the  case  is  in 
this  way  exceptional.  Affections  of  a  waking  percipient  by  a 
dreaming  agent— or  at  any  rate  cases  which  could  be  used  as 
evidence  for  such  affections — seem  a  rarer  tjrpe  than  that  of  simul- 
taneous and  correspondent  dreaming,  illustrated  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.,  314-8, 
and  in  Chap.  III.  of  the  Supplement ;  but  cases  94  and  96  were  very 
probably  examples  of  it.  In  the  present  instance,  it  should  be 
noted  that  the  part  of  the  dream  which  apparently  affected  the 
percipient  took  place  in  the  very  shock  of  waking  ;  and  such  a  shock, 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  107 

though  not  critical  or  exactly  painful,  clearly  involves  a  far  wider  and 

more  sudden  change  of  psychical  condition  than  often  occurs  to  us 

during  waking  life. 

In  the  next  case  it  is  very  possible  that  the  agent  actually  used 

the  words  heard,  but  proof  of  this  fact  is  unattainable.    If  he  did  not, 

we  must  suppose  some  idea  of  his  distress  to  have  been  objectified 

by  the  percipient  in  the  "  agonised  tone."     The  account  is  from  Mr. 

Lister  Ives,  master  at  the  Grammar  School,  Stockport. 

"1883. 

(272)  "  About  midday  of  the  24th  July,  1875,  I  was  in  the  baths  at 
Llandudno,  when  I  suddenly  and  distinctly  heard  my  boy's  voice  calling 
loudly  and  in  an  agonised  tone.  So  assured  was  I  o£  it  being  his  voice, 
that  I  hastily  got  out  of  the  bath  and  looked  out  of  the  nearest  window, 
thinking  he  must  be  on  the  rocks  beneath — the  bath-house  stands  on  a 
rock,  though  since  then  much  has  been  cut  away — though  I  believed  him 
at  the  time  to  be,  as  indeed  he  was,  at  the  other  side  of  the  Orme's  Head, 
three  or  four  miles  away.  The  boy  was  killed  at  that  very  time  by  a  fall 
from  the  rocks." 

We  find  from  a  report  of  the  accident  in  the  Stockport  Advertiser  that 
the  date  was  the  26th  (not  the  24th)  of  July.  The  boy  had  joined  his 
parents  on  the  24th,  which  may  perhaps  account  for  the  mistake. 

Mrs.  Ives  says  : — 

'''■  Until  late  at  night,  when  the  boy  did  not  return,    my   husband  had 
thought  no  more  of  the  circumstance.     When  the  boy  could  not  be  found 
he  exclaimed,  '  We  shall  never  see  him   alive  again,'  for  he   remembered 
the  sound  of  the  voice ;  but  it  was  not  until  some  time  afterwards  that  he  * 
told  me  that  he  felt  assured  he  had  heard  the  last  cry,  not  a  supernatural ' 
warning,    but   a    cry   for   help   when   none    could    reach    him.     I    madel 
memoranda  of  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  unhappy  afiair, 
and  of  that  [i.e.,  the  voice]  among  the  rest.     With  regard  to  the  distance 
which  the  sound  came,  I  can  scarcely  give  absolute  information.     The 
headland  is  of  peculiar  form  ;  but  according  to  local  maps,  if  they  are  to  .,'^,  ff^  Jcji 
be    relied  upon,  if    it  were  possible    to  take    a  direct    line  through  the    v  ^^^^J^ 
mountain  from  the  Crab  Rocks,  where  my  boy  was  found,  to  the  baths  ^ 

where  Mr.  Ives  was,  it  would  measure  something  over  3,000  yards  ;  round 
by  the  path,  as  it  then  was,  about  3  miles  ;  over  the  summit,  I  cannot  tell 
how  far." 

Mr.  C.  Kroll  Laporte,  of  Birkdale,  Southport,  says : — 

"  Mr.  Ives  told  me  all  this  [i.e.,  the  incident  of  the  voice]  the  day  after 
the  funeral,  and  I  noted  it  down." 

[Our  colleague,  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  has  had  an  interview  with  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Ives.  Mr.  Ives  has  had  no  other  hallucinations.  The  time  of 
the  boy's  death  was  estimated  only.  He  was  expected  back  to  dinner  at 
1  p.m.,  and  it  was  between  12  and  1  p.m.  that  Mr.  Ives  was  bathing 
and  heard  the  cry.  The  words  he  heard  were,  '  Papa  !  mamma  ! '  in  an 
agonised  tone.  The  boy  was  18  years  of  age.  He  appeared  to  have 
fallen  on  the  rocks  face  downwards,  from  a  height  of  about  80  feet.     The 

108  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

cliff  at  the  spot  begins  at  the  summit  with  a  sloping  bank  of  grass,  "which 
suddenly,  however,  is  followed  by  an  almost  sheer  precipice,  not  seen  from 
the  top  of  the  bank.] 

§  2.  We  come  now  to  cases  where  the  name  heard  was  probably 
not  actually  spoken.  The  fact  that  the  impression  so  often  takes  the 
form  of  a  call  of  the  percipient's  name  might  be  connected  with  the 
fact  that  this  is  also  the  commonest  form  of  purely  subjective 
auditory  hallucination ;  and  might  be  taken  as  a  fresh  indication — 
parallel  to  the  indications  which  have  been  noted  in  the  visual  class — 
that  the  telepathic  phantasm,  as  a  sensory  phenomenon,  truly  belongs 
to  the  class  of  hallucinations.  But  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  this 
form  of  communication  that  it  should  strongly  suggest — what  in  the 
following  instance  is  positively  affirmed — a  certain  occupation  of  the 
agent's  thoughts  with  the  percipient.  We  have  often  independent 
reason  to  suppose  a  similar  condition  in  the  visual  cases  ;  but  there 
is  seldom  anything  in  the  visual  phantasm  of  the  agent  to  make  it 
apparent. 

The  first  case  is  from  Mr.  G.  A.  Witt,  of  Fontenay  House,  Grove 
Park,  Denmark  Hill,  S.E. 

"September  26th,  1885. 

(273)  "When  I  left  Bombay,  on  March  1st,  1876,  by  ss.  'Persia,'  for 
Naples,  an  elder  brother  of  mine  was  living  in  Germany,  and  in  very  bad 
health,  though  I  did  not,  at  the  time,  anticipate  his  early  death.  When 
in  the  Red  Sea  one  day,  sitting  on  deck  and  reading  the  Saturday  Review, 
with  other  passengers — and  I  think  Mrs.  Fagan  also — sitting  near  me  and 
reading,  I  fancied  I  heard  my  brother's  voice  calling  me  by  my  Christian 
name.  It  seemed  so  distinctly  his  voice,  and  T  thought  I  heard  my  name 
so  clearly  called,  that  it  quite  startled  me,  and  made  such  an  impression 
on  me  that  I  mentioned  it  to  some  of  my  fellow  passengers,  and  at  their 
suggestion  took  note  of  the  hour  and  day  it  occurred. 

"On  arriving  at  Naples,  some  12  or  14  days  later,  I  found  a  letter 
there  from  my  mother,  bearing  the  same  date  as  the  one  I  had  put  down 
in  the  Red  Sea,  in  which  she  told  me  that  she  was  sitting  writing  by  my 
brother's  deathbed,  &c.,  adding  in  a  postscript  the  same  day  that  he  had 
just  passed  away. 

"  I  never  ascertained  whether  the  hour  I  had  put  down  was  the  same 
in  which  my  poor  brother  had  died,  and  now  really  all  I  remember  is  what 
I  have  just  stated.  <(  q.    ^    Witt  " 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr   Witt  says  : — 

"  I  was,  at  the  time,  not  at  all  anxious  about  my  brother  ;  and  the 
'  voice '  at  the  time  impressed  me  as  very  strange,  as  I  really  had  not 
thought  of  him  for  some  time.  My  brother  died  in  Kiel,  Holstein.  The 
date  was  the  13th  of  March,  1876.  This  was  the  date  of  my  brother's 
death  ;  and  I  remember  that  that  was  what  caused  me  to  mention  the 
matter    again  to    those  whom  I  had  told  on  board  the  steamer  that  I 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  109 

thought  I  had  heard  my  brother's  voice.  I  must  repeat,  however,  that 
what  I  am  stating  now  is  from  memory  only,  and  the  '  note '  I  had 
made  of  the  occurrence  at  the  time  no  longer  exists. 

"  It  is  also  the  only  time  that,  as  far  as  I  remember,  anything  of  the 
kind  has  happened  to  me."  [This  is  in  answer  to  the  question  whether 
he  had  experienced  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.] 

Mrs.  Fagan,  of  26,  Manchester  Square,  W.,  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"August  28th,  1885. 

"  On  board  ship,  coming  from  India,  one  morning  I  passed  Mr.  Witt, 
who  was  reading  on  deck.  He  stopped  me  and  said  that  a  strange  thing 
had  happened  to  him,  and  on  my  asking  what  it  was,  said  that  he  had  heard 
his  brother's  voice  calling  him,  '  Gustave,'  more  than  once  (three  times,  I 
think,  but  am  not  sure).  He  added  that  he  had  heard,  before  leaving 
Bombay,  that  his  brother  was  very  seriously  ill,i  and  thinking  that  perhaps 
he  was  then  dying,  or  just  dead,  he  made  a  note  of  the  date.  I  asked  him 
to  let  me  know  afterwards  if  the  brother  really  died  about  that  time,  and 
he  said  he  would  do  so. 

"  On  meeting  him  in  London  afterwards,  I  inquired  if  his  conjecture  had 
proved  correct,  and  he  said  it  had.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  time  when 
Mr.  Witt  heard  the  voice  coincided  exactly  with  the  brother's  death,  as 
the  difference  in  the  local  time  made  it  difficult  to  decide  that  point 
without  calculation ;  and  I  did  not  hear  that  any  calculation  was  made. 
But  the  two  events  occurred  at  about  the  same  time.  Mr.  Witt  offers 
no  explanation  or  opinion  on  the  matter,  only  saying  that  it  was  very 
strange." 

We  have  procured,  through  the  Biirgermeister  of  Kiel,  an  official 
certificate  of  the  death  of  Mr.  John  T.  Witt,  which  shows  that  it 
occurred  on  March  13,  1876,  at  9.30  p.m.  Supposing  therefore  that  Mr. 
G.  A.  Witt's  experience  was  immediately  mentioned  by  him,  and  that 
Mrs.  Fagan  is  right  in  her  recollection  that  this  was  in  the  morning,  it 
must  have  preceded  the  death  by  a  good  many  hours.  If  either  of  these 
suppositions  is  incorrect,  the  coincidence  may  have  been  closer. 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Stella,  of  Chieri,  Italy,  who  was 

the  percipient  in  the  visual  case,  No.  198. 

"December  29th,  1883. 

(274)  "  On  the  22nd  of  May,  1882,  I  was  sitting  in  my  room  working 
with  other  members  of  my  family,  and  we  were  talking  of  household  matters, 
when  suddenly  I  heard  the  voice  of  my  eldest  son  calling  repeatedly 
'  Mamma.'  I  threw  down  my  work  exclaiming,  '  There  is  Nino,'  and  went 
downstairs,  to  the  astonishment  of  every  one.  Now  my  son  was  at  that 
time  in  London,  and  had  only  left  home  about  a  fortnight  before,  for  a  two 
months'  tour,  so  naturally  we  were  all  surprised  to  think  he  had  arrived 
so  suddenly.  On  reaching  the  hall,  no  one  was  there,  and  they  all  laughed 
at  my  imagination.  But  I  certainly  heard  him  call,  not  only  once,  but 
three  or  four  times,  impatiently.  I  learnt,  a  few  days  afterwards,  that  on 
that  day  he  had  been  taken  ill  in  London  at  the  house  of  some  friends,  and 

1  This  of  course  was  true,  in  a  sense  ;  but,  in  view  of  the  possible  suggestion  that  the 
hallucination  was  due  to  mere  anxiety,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  Mr.  Witt  had  re- 
garded his  brother  as  a  chronic  invalid,  and  expressly  affirms  that,  so  far  from  being 
anxious  about  him,  he  had  not  even  thought  of  him  for  some  time. 

19 

110  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

that  he  had  frequently  expressed  a  wish  that  I  should  come  and  nurse  him, 
as  not  speaking  English  he  could  not  make  himself  understood." 

Mrs.  Stella  tells  us,  on  inquiry,  that  this  is  her  only  experience  of  an 
auditory  hallucination. 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  a  lady  who  was  present  at  the 
time  : — 

"Breslau,  February  18th,  1884. 

"  Mrs.  Stella  asked  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  an  episode  which 
occurred  in  my  presence,  while  on  a  visit  to  her  two  years  ago  ;  and  the 
following  are  the  facts  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember  them.  We  were 
sitting  working  together,  when  Mrs.  Stella  said  she  heard  the  voice  of  her 
son,  who  was  absent  in  England  at  the  time,  calling  her.  This  caused  us 
some  surprise,  as  he  was  not  expected  home,  nor  had  we  heard  any  sounds 
of  an  arrival. 

"  On  going  downstairs  to  meet  him,  we  found  no  one,  which  astonished 
us,  as  Mrs.  Stella  had  been  so  positive  that  she  had  heard  him  call.  We 
afterwards  heard  that  on  that  day  he  had  been  taken  ill  in  London.  I 
may  here  remark  that  young  Mr.  Stella  is  very  much  attached  to  his 
mamma,  and  especially  dependent  upon  her  in  sickness. 

"  Clara  Schmidt." 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  W.  T.  Bray,  of  Schekoldin's  Paper  Mill, 
Yimishma,  Government  of  Kostroma,  Russia. 

«  June  14th  (O.S.),  1885. 

(275)  "  I  was  employed  as  assistant  engineer  on  the  Moscow-Kursk 
Railway,  and  one  day  was  standing  in  the  erecting  shop.  There  were  14 
engines  under  repair,  and  4  tenders,  and  amidst  all  the  attendant  noise 
of  such  work  of  fitters  and  boilermakers,  I  heard  a  voice  quite  close  to  me 
call  twice,  '  Will,  Will  ! '  The  voice  resembled  my  father's  (he  was  the 
only  person  who  called  me  '  Will '),  and  in  a  tone  he  used  when  he  wished 
to  particularly  draw  my  attention  to  anything.  When  I  went  home  I 
remarked  to  my  wife  I  was  afraid,  if  ever  I  heard  from  poor  father  again, 
or  from  any  one  about  him,  [there  had  been  a  certain  breach  of  inter- 
course,] it  would  be  bad  news,  for  I  distinctly  heard  him  call  me  twice. 
About  three  weeks  afterwards,  I  had  a  letter  from  a  sister,  stating  he  had 
died,  and  when  ;  and  his  last  words  were,  '  Good-bye,  Will !  good-bye,  Will ! ' 
Upon  comparing  thedate  and  time,  he  died  about  the  time  I  heard  the  voice." 

Mr.  Bray  adds,  in  a  letter  dated  August  21st  (O.S.),  1885  :  — 

"  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  get  a  few  lines  likely  to  confirm  my  statement 
to  you  ;  the  circumstance  occurred  so  long  ago.  I  remember  mentioning  it 
to  my  wife  at  the  time,  but  she  cannot  distinctly  remember  it,  and  I 
mentioned  it  to  no  one  but  her,  and  then  only  at  the  time.  I  remembered 
the  work  I  was  looking  after  at  the  time,  and  upon  hearing  of  my  father's 
death  I  traced  the  time  by  the  factory  books ;  and  as  no  one  either  here  or 
in  England  ever  called  me  '  Will '  but  he,  I  always  feel  quite  satisfied  in 
my  own  mind  that  I  heard  his  voice,  especially  as  I  was  told  in  the  letter 
announcing  his  death  his  last  words  were,  '  Good-bye,  Will  !  good-bye, 
Will ! '  "  W.  Thos.  Bray." 

In  answer  to  a  question  whether  he  had  ever  had  any  other  auditory 

^- 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  Ill 

hallucination,  Mr.  Bray  replies,  "  Such  a  thing  never  occurred  to  me  before, 
neither  has  anything  occurred  since."  He  adds  that  his  father  died  on 
March  22,  1873  ;  and  we  have  confirmed  this  date  by  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

We  first  heard  of  this  case  from  Mr.  Bray's  son,  who  said  that  he  was 
himself  told  of  his  father's  experience  at  the  time,  and  that  at  his  suggestion 
a  note  of  the  day  and  hour  was  made.  But  his  account  presents  so  many 
differences  from  the  first-hand  one  that  his  memory  on  this  point  cannot 
be  relied  on. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  D.  J.  Hutchins,  of  173,  Severn  Road, 

Cardiff. 

"December  17th,  1883.     ^,-.     ^^ 

(276)  "  My  father  died  suddenly,  about  48  miles  away  from  where  my  (^y^^ 
mother  resided.  I  had  to  acquaint  her  of  the  melancholy  fact.  A  railway 
journey,  and  then  a  drive  of  12  miles  would  take  me  to  her  abode.  I 
should  arrive  about  6  a.m.  on  a  dark  November  morning.  Secretly 
perplexed  how  I  should  break  the  news,  I  was  relieved  and  surprised  to 
see,  as  I  neared  the  house,  smoke  issuing  from  parlour  and  kitchen 
chimneys.  On  arriving  at  the  gate,  and  before  time  was  given  me  to 
jump  out  of  the  trap,  mother  was  at  the  door  and  said,  '  Daniel,  your 
father  is  dead.'  I  asked,  '  How  do  you  know  ? '  She  replied,  '  He  came 
and  called  for  me  last  night  about  9  o'clock,  and  then  vanished.  I  have 
not  been  to  bed  since.'  Sorrow,  combined  with  a  strange  feeling  that 
somehow  or  other  she  might  have  been  the  means  of  hastening  his  death, 
caused  her  to  die  suddenly  a  short  time  afterwards.  She  was  an  intensely 
religious  woman,  without  superstition.  I  well  remember  the  anger  she 
always  displayed  when  she  heard  that  her  children  had  been  listeners  to 
the  usual  fireside  talk  about  ghosts  and  presentiments. 

"  D.  J.  Hutchins." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hutchins  adds  : — 

"February  15th,  1886. 

"  With  reference  to  the  time  of  the  death  of  my  father,  it  was  on  the 
21st  November,  1855.  He  was  found  dead  in  the  fields  between  Llantris- 
sant  Station  and  Lanclay  House,  Llantrissant,  where  he  had  for  many 
years  resided  as  house-steward  to  Lady  Mary  Cole.  [In  conversation  Mr. 
Hutchins  has  explained  that  his  father  was  last  seen  alive,  walking  from 
the  station,  and  apparently  in  perfect  health,  about  6  p.m.,  and  that  his 
body  was  found  soon  after  9  o'clock  the  same  evening.]  My  mother  was 
in  our  cottage — Rose  Cottage — near  Penrice  Castle,  where  we  usually 
resided  during  summer.  She  was  preparing  to  leave  just  preparatory  to 
closing  the  place  for  the  winter.  My  father  left  her  on  the  morning  of  the 
day  of  his  death,  [having  been  requested  to  superintend  some  work  at  a 
distance]. 

"  At  the  time  when  I  wrote  to  you,  the  circumstances  were  more  vivid 
in  my  memory  than  at  present ;  consequently  I  cannot  actually  say  whether 
my  mother  said,  'Your  father  appeared  to  me,'  in  connection  with  his 
voice.  But  this  I  distinctly  remember  :  my  mother  said,  '  I  heard  your 
father  call  me  by  my  name,  "  Mary,  Mary,"  and  then  I  went  to  the  door  ; 
and  I  have  not  been  in  bed  since.'  "  In  conversation,  however,  it  appeared 
that  Mr.  Hutchins  is  morally  certain  that  the  experience  was  visual  as 
well  as  auditory. 

112  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

In  a  later  letter,  Mr.  Hutchins  expressed  some  doubt  as  to  the  year  of 
the  occurrence ;  and  we  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death 
took  place  on  November  21st,  1853,  not  1855. 

The  next  case  is  from  Miss  Burrows,   residing   at  Hollar d  Hall, 

Stretford  Eoad,  Manchester. 

"  December,  1884. 
(277)  "  I  can  furnish  you  with  an  instance  of  my  name  being  called 
by  my  mother,  who  was  18  miles  off,  and  dying  at  the  time.  I  was  not 
aware  she  was  ill,  nor  was  I  thinking  about  her  at  the  time,  No  one  here 
knew  my  name,  and  it  was  her  voice  calling,  as  I  was  always  addressed  at 
home,  '  Lizzie.'     I  can  give  you  more  exact  information  if  you  require  it. 

Later,  Miss  Burrows  writes  : — 

"March  18th,  1885. 

"In  regard  to  the  voice  which  I  heard  call  my  name  on  the  19th 
February,  1882,  I  recognised  it  instantly  as  being  that  of  my  mother.  It 
was  very  loud,  sharp,  and  impetuous,  as  if  frightened  at  something  Our 
house  is  detached,  very  quiet,  and  the  only  inmates  of  the  house  beside 
myself  were  two  gentlemen,  aged  respectively  58  and  37,  and  a  widowed 
daughter-in-law  [of  the  elder  gentleman]  who  had  lived  with  them  five 
years ;  and  not  one  of  them  knew  my  Christian  name.  I  was  thunder- 
struck, and  ran  out  of  my  room  to  see  if  I  could  account  for  the  voice.  / 
told  the  lady  the  same  morning. 

"  I  never  saw  anything  I  thought  supernatural,  and  only  once  before  had 
anything  like  a  similar  hallucination.  [This  other  experience  took  place 
1 2  years  previously,  when  Miss  Burrows  and  her  mother  heard  some  sounds 
which  seemed  to  them  unaccountable.]  My  father  and  mother  were 
not  superstitious  people,  and  a  healthier  family  could  not  possibly  be  than 
ours." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Burrows  adds  : — 

"  I  heard  the  voice  call  my  name  on  the  Sunday  morning  at  8.  My 
mother  was  dying,  and  quite  unconscious,  from  the  Saturday  night  (the 
night  before)  until  the  Monday  at  8  a.m.,  when  she  died." 

We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Bury  Guardian  that  Mrs. 
Burrows  died  on  Monday,  February  20,  1882. 

Mrs.  Griffiths,  of  31,  Rosaville  Road,  Fulham  Road,  S.W.,  confirms  as 
foUows:—  "March  25th. 

"  I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  to  corroborate  the  statement  made  by  Miss 
Burrows,  about  hearing  herself  called  by  name  at  the  time  of  her  mother's 
death.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  date,  but  it  was  a  Sunday  morning 
in  February,  1882,  and  when  I  came  down  to  breakfast  she  told  me  about 
it,  and  said  that  a  voice  called  '  Lizzy '  distinctly,  and  it  sounded  just  like 
her  mother's.  The  next  morning  she  had  the  news  of  her  mother's 
death ;  and  she  had  not  any  idea  that  she  was  ill  before,  so  that  it 
could  not  have  been  fancy. 

"  H.  Griffiths." 

It  will  be  seen  that  Miss  Burrows  gives  February  19th  as  the  date 
of  her  experience,  and  Mrs.  Griffiths  mentions  independently  tiiat  the  day 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  113 

was  a  Sunday  in  February.  The  19th  of  February,  1882,  fell  on  a 
Sunday.  There  having  been  an  interval  of  24  hours  between  the 
percipient's  experience  and  the  death,  the  case  could  not  be  included 
in  the  group  which  I  used  in  the  statistical  argument  above,  Chap. 
XIII.,  §  6.1 

We  owe  the  next  case  to  Mrs.  Passingham,  of  Milton,  Cambridge. 
The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Walsh,  a  sick-nurse  whom  Mrs.  Passingham 
knew  well,  and  of  whom  she  says  : — 

(278)  "  The  fact  of  her  having  quarrelled  with  her  favourite  sister,  and 
her  dying  without  a  reconciliation,  affects  her  deeply,  and  she  had  tears  in 
her  eyes  as  she  told  me  the  story.  She  declares  she  was  not  asleep,  and  it 
was  not  a  dream ;  she  had  only  just  put  out  the  light  and  had  not  got  into 
bed." 

Mrs.  Walsh  writes  to  us  on  May  6th,  1884  : — 

"  107,  Queen's  Crescent,  Haverstock  Hill. 
"On  October  24th,  1877,  I  was  in  London,  and  after  preparing  to 
go  to  bed,  I  had  just  extinguished  the  light,  when  I  heard  the  voice  of  my 
sister,  who  was  then  in  Wolverhampton,  call  me  by  my  name,  '  Joanna.' 
I  instantly  answered,  '  Yes,  Polly.'  The  voice  was  low,  almost  a  whisper, 
but  perfectly  clear,  and  I  was  so  sure  that  she  spoke  that  I  turned  to  the 
part  of  the  room  from  which  the  voice  came.  Again  I  heard  the  voice, 
and  after  that,  once  more,  making  three  times  in  all. 

"  When  I  realised  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  my  sister,  I  felt — not 
exactly  frightened — but  awed,  and  I  could  not  sleep  till  near  morning  for 
thinking  of  it.  The  next  day,  I  heard  from  my  family  that  they  had  had 
a  telegram  to  say  that  she  was  dangerously  ill,  and  some  one  was  to  go  to 
her.  Another  sister  went  and  found  her  dead ;  and  the  time  of  her  death 
agreed  exactly  with  the  time  when  I  heard  the  voice.  She  died  very 
suddenly  of  mortification,  and  I  had  not  the  least  idea  she  was  ill ;  also, 
we  had  become  estranged  from  each  other,  although  we  were  exceedingly 
fond  of  each  other,  and  I  think  that  is  the  reason  she  spoke  to  me. 

"Joanna  Walsh." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  at 
Wolverhampton  on  the  23rd  October,  1877,  and  not  the  24th.  The  24th 
was  probably  impressed  on  Mrs.  Walsh's  memory,  as  being  the  day  when 
the  alarming  news  reached  her. 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Walsh  adds  : — 

"  In  answer  to  your  first  question  I  must  tell  you  that  at  the  time  of 
my  sister's  death  I  was  with  almost  entire  strangers,  and  therefore  do  not 
think  I  mentioned  what  I  had  heard  to  anyone  until  after  I  had  a  letter 
saying  she  was  ill,  and  almost  directly  afterwards  a  telegram  saying  she 
was  dead.  To  explain  clearly,  when  I  had  the  letter  saying  she  was  ill,  I 
mentioned  it  to  my  sister  who  brought  the  letter ;  then  when  I  had  the 
telegram  to  say  she  was  dead,  I  found  that  the  time  corresponded  exactly 
with  the  time  I  heard  her  voice. 

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  that  I  ever  had.  [This  is  in 
answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  hallucination 
of  the  senses.] 

VOL.    II.  I 

114  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

"  I  didn't  for  one  moment  doubt  whose  voice  it  was,  as  I  immediately 
answered  by  name." 

§  3.  I  may  make  the  transition  from  the  recognised  to  the  un- 
recognised auditory  phantasms  by  an  account  of  several  experiences, 
occurring  to  the  same  percipient,  in  one  of  which  the  voice  was 
recognised,  but  not  in  the  others.  The  witness  is  Mrs.  Wight,  of 
12,  Sinclair  Koad,  West  Kensington. 

(279)  "  On  five  occasions  in  my  life  I  have  heard  my  Christian  name 
uttered  in  a  peremptory  manner,  as  if  by  some  one  who  was  in  need  of  my 
aid ;  and  after  each  occasion  I  have  learnt  that  a  relation  had  died  at  a 
time  closely  corresponding  to  the  call.  I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion 
had  any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses  whatever. 

"  The  first  two  occasions  of  my  hearing  the  call  corresponded  with  the 
deaths  of  two  aunts,  who  had  brought  me  up  in  my  childhood,  when  my 
parents  were  in  India.  In  these  cases  I  cannot  say  whether  the  call  was 
on  the  very  day  of  the  death  or  not ;  it  was  certainly  within  a  very  few 
days. 

"  The  next  and  most  striking  occasion  was  at  the  time  of  the  death  of 
my  mother,  which  took  place  in  India,  on  November  8th,  1864.  I  was 
living  at  the  time  with  a  cousin,  Mrs.  Harnett,  and  her  husband,  at  St. 
John's  Wood.  I  was  sitting  one  morning  in  a  room  with  Mr.  Harnett, 
when  we  both  distinctly  heard  a  voice  utter  my  name  as  it  seemed  from 
outside  the  room.  I  at  once  went  to  look,  but  it  proved  that  no  inmate 
of  the  house  had  called  me.  Indeed,  there  was  no  one  except  my  cousin 
who  would  have  used  my  Christian  name ;  and  all  our  search  and  efibrts 
to  solve  the  mystery  were  unavailing.  As  Mr.  Harnett  had  heard  of  the 
similar  occurrence  on  the  death  of  my  aunts,  he  made  a  note  in  writing  of 
the  date.  In  about  three  weeks,  we  received  the  news  of  my  mother's 
death  in  India,  after  a  week's  illness  ;  and  I  had  Mr.  Harnett's  assurance, 
as  well  as  my  own  memory,  that  the  date  of  death  corresponded  with  the 
day  of  the  call. 

"  The  next  occasion  was  at  Brighton  ;  and  this  was  the  only  time  when 
the  voice  was  recognised.  As  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  I  heard  the  voice 
of  Admiral  Wight,  my  father-in-law,  who  had  died  before  my  mother, 
calling  me  as  he  frequently  had  done  in  life.  In  a  day  or  so,  his  widow 
wrote  and  told  me  of  the  death  of  his  son,  my  husband's  half-brother.  I 
had  known  that  he  was  very  ill,  but  was  not  in  immediate  anxiety  about 
him. 

"  The  fifth  occasion  was  in  June,  1876,  and  was  immediately  followed 
by  the  news  of  the  death  of  an  infant  niece,  aged  9  months,  whom  also  I 
had  known  to  be  ailing.  In  these  last  two  cases,  again,  I  cannot  be  sure 
whether  the  days  of  the  call  and  of  the  death  corresponded ;  if  not,  they 
most  certainly  very  nearly  did.  u  Sarah  Wight." 

[The  above  account  was  written  out  by  me,  January  31st,  1884,  imme- 
diately after  a  long  interview  with  Mrs.  Wight,  in  which  every  detail  was 
gone  over  again  and  again.  I  sent  the  account  to  Mrs.  Wight,  who  made 
a  few  trifling  additions,  and  signed  it.] 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  115 

Mrs.  Wight  adds  : — "  Mrs.  Harnett  is  in  delicate  health,  and  I  should 
not  like  to  trouble  her.  When  I  spoke  to  her  about  it,  she  remembered 
the  incident." 

The  strength  of  this  narrative,  of  course,  lies  in  the  third  case, 
where  the  correspondence  of  day  was  made  out  to  be  exact.      The  ciw  wi^^ 
hypothesis  that  the  call  on  this  occasion  was  a  real  call  outside  the 
house,  though  repudiated  by  Mrs.  Wight,  cannot  be  so  confidently 
rejected  by  those  who  realise  the  difficulty  of  localising  sounds  with 
precision.     Still,  the  fact  of  her  having  on  other  occasions  experienced 
impressions  of  exactly  this  form — the    commonest    of  all    forms    of 
sensory  hallucination — distinctly  supports   the  view  that  the  experi-  ''-^  *^  "^ 
ence  was  hallucinatory ;  and  if  so,  the  coincidence  of  day  is  a  strong  -'/^  '-*«^'^ 
point  in  favour  of  the  telepathic  explanation.     I  will  not  pause  here  '     -y""**^ 
on  the  fact  that  in  this  instance  there  was  a  second  percipient,  as  d^o  v»-<^-'«-  < 
that  topic  will  be  fully  discussed   in   the    chapter   on   "  Collective  sfenii^---^ 
Cases."  f '■"^^  . 

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Goodyear,  now  of  Avoca  Villa,  Park 
Road,  Bevois  Hill,  Southampton,  who  refers  in  it  to  a  visual  case 
quoted  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3. 

"February  9th,  1884.  i.^^ 

(280)   "  I  am  very  fond  of  shooting,  and  one  evening  I  had  gone  out  rs  yK 

with  my  bag  and  gun.  I  was  crossing  some  open  meadows,  when  suddenly  f^" 
a  fearfully  shrill  cry  of  '  Tom  '  rang  in  my  ears.  I  instantly  answered 
loudly,  '  Yes,  yes,'  turning  sharply  round  to  see  who  was  in  pain,  but  there 
was  no  one  near,  and  again  the  scream  rang  out  terribly  loud.  I  answered 
again,  '  Yes,  yes,'  and  then  I  heard  no  more.  I  retraced  my  steps,  for  I 
was  quite  unstrung ;  but  later  on,  when  it  was  dark,  I  went  over  to  see 
the  keeper  in  whose  woods  I  was  going  to  shoot,  and  told  him  what  had 
happened.  He  said,  '  Bad  news,'  and  he  was  right ;  for  next  morning 
summoned  me  to  join  my  bereaved  sweetheart,  who  at  that  very  time, 
certainly  to  within  a  very  few  minutes,  lost  her  father.  I  knew  her  father 
was  ill,  had  been  for  some  18  months,  but  was  not  thinking  about  them 
at  the  time.  I  do  not  know  whether  these  cases  are  particularly  striking, 
or  whether  there  are  heaps  of  similar  ones,  but  they  are  just  what 
happened,  and  will  for  ever  live  fresh  in  my  memory. 

"  T.  W.  Goodyear." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
March  7,  1876,  after  a  2  years'  illness. 

Asked  if  this  is  the  only  auditory  hallucination  that  he  can  recall, 
Mr.  Goodyear  replies  in  the  affirmative. 

Asked  whether  the  lady  really  uttered  his  name  at  the  time,  he 
replies,  "  My  wife  does  not  think  she  uttered  my  name  aloud,  though  for 
several  reasons  she  was  thinking  intensely  of  me."  He  has  told  me  in 
confidence  special  circumstances  which  caused  the  mind  of  the  dying  man 

VOL.  II.  I    2 

116  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

to  be  much  occupied  with  him,  and  which  caused  the  mind  of  his  fiancee 
to  be  directed  towards  him  with  a  special  longing  for  his  presence. 

The  following  account  was  received  in  October,  1884,  from  Mrs. 
Wilkie,  who  prefers  that  her  address  should  not  be  published. 

(281)  "  In  September,  1875,  I  was  in  Callander,  in  lodgings  with  my 
sister  and  other  friends.  On  the  night  of  the  8th  I  had  gone  to  bed,  but 
had  only  lately  put  out  the  light,  and  was  quite  wide  awake  ;  when  I  heard 
from  apparently  just  behind  the  curtain,  at  the  side  of  the  bed,  the  words 
'Oh!  Eliza,'  (my  name)  in  a  mournful  tone.  I  was  so  much  impressed  by 
the  occurrence  that  I  noted  down  the  date  next  morning,  and  told  my 
sister  of  what  I  had  heard.  As  time  passed  on,  and  I  heard  from  all  my 
own  people  and  heard  of  nothing  having  happened  to  any  of  them,  I  quite 
forgot  the  circumstance. 

"  Several  months  after,  I  heard  of  the  death  by  drowning,  in  the  Fiji 
Islands,  of  a  gentleman,  a  distant  cousin  of  mine,  whom  I  had  known  very 
well.  His  relations  did  not  know  on  which  day  his  death  took  place, 
but  it  was  between  the  7th  and  9  th  of  September,  as  they  got  a  letter 
from  him  begun  on  the  7th,  and  his  partner,  who  was  away  from  the 
place,  came  home  on  the  9th,  and  found  him  drowned.  He  had  gone  out 
bathing,  it  was  supposed,  and  taken  cramp. 

"E.  K.  Wilkie." 

We  find  a  notice  in  the  Edinburgh  Courant  which  states  that  the 
death  occui-red  "early  in  September,  1875." 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  the  only  hallucination  of 
the  senses  that  she  has  ever  had,  Mrs.  Wilkie  replies,  "Yes,  the  only  one." 
She  believes  that  the  diary  in  which  her  experience  was  at  once  noted 
may  still  be  in  existence,  but  has  searched  for  it  in  vain.  Should  she 
ever  find  it,  she  has  promised  to  show  me  the  entry. 

Mrs.  Wilkie's  sister,  Mrs.  Rowe,  writes  to  us  on  December  1,  1884  : — ■ 

"South  Ste.  Marie,  Mich.,  U.S.A. 

"In the  year  1875,  the  month  of  September,  I  was  staying  at  Callander 
with  my  sister,  Mrs.  Wilkie.  I  remember  her  telling  me  one  morning  of 
having  heard  her  name  spoken  the  night  before,  from  behind  the  curtain 
at  the  head  of  her  bed,  these  words  :  '  Oh !  Eliza ' ;  and  this  occurred 
hefore  she  heard  of  the  death  of  her  friend.  n  J)oea  H   Rowe  " 

The  narrator  of  the  next  case  is  Mrs.  Wyld,  of  59,  Devonshire  Road, 

Birkenhead, 

"May  10th,  1885. 

(282)  "  I  would  very  gladly  write  the  short  statement  you  ask  for, 
but  though  to  my  own  mind  it  is  pretty  cone  usive,  still  I  feel  that  to 
outsiders  it  is  wanting  in  two  important  details  :  (1)  I  mentioned  the 
fact  of  hearing  the  voice  to  no  one  at  the  time  [but  see  below],  and  (2) 
I  could  not  tell  whose  voice  it  was. 

"  It  was  on  Thursday  evening,  January  10th,  1884,  that  I  was  sitting 
alone  in  the  house  reading,  and  it  seemed  strange,  and  still  not  strange,  to 
hear  my  name  called  with  a  sort  of  eager  entreaty. 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  117 

"  Shortly  after,  the  others  came  in.  I  was  leaving  for  Ellesmere  next 
day,  and  in  the  bustle  of  departure  I  thought  no  more  of  the  circum- 
stance. It  was  only  when  coming  down  to  breakfast  on  the  Saturday 
morning  and  finding  the  letter  telling  of  E.'s  death,  that  I  instantly 
recalled  the  circumstances,  and  saw  that  the  time  and  day  corresponded 
with  when  they  knew  she  must  have  slipped  out,  and  down  to  the  river. 

"  I  wonder  I  did  not  associate  it  with  her,  for  she  had  written  me 
some  very  pitiable  letters  beforehand.  I  had  not  the  least  idea  her  mind 
was  affected.  We  were  school-fellows  together  for  nearly  three  years  and 
great  friends.  "  Mary  Wtld." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Wyld  adds  : — 

"  I  never  have  had  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  at  any  other  time. 
It  was  about  8  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  fancy,  when  I  heard  the  voice. 
She  was  not  found  till  2  o'clock  the  next  morning  when  the  tide  turned  on 
the  river ;  she  then  had  been  dead  several  hours,  having  slipped  out,  I 
fancy,  between  7  and  9  the  previous  evening." 

We  have  verified  the  date  given,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  death, 
in  two  local  newspapers.  It  appears  that  though  the  body  was  not 
recovered  till  early  next  morning,  it  was  seen,  and  the  shawl  that  was 
round  it  was  even  seized  and  drawn  into  a  boat,  at  10  p.m. 

Mrs.  Wyld  afterwards  found  that  she  had  mentioned  her  experience 
at  the  time  to  her  mother,  who  writes  to  us  on  March  19,  1886  : — 

"  Mrs.  Wyld  was  staying  with  me  in  Scarborough,  when  she  heard  the 
voice  in  which  you  are  interested.  She  was  alone  in  the  house  (excepting 
servants),  and  when  I  returned,  an  hour  after,  she  related  what  had  seemed 
to  her  peculiar.  The  date  I  do  not  now  remember ;  but  Mrs.  Wyld  left 
Scarborough  the  next  day ;  and  in  two  or  three  days  after,  she  wrote  to 
tell  me  of  the  sad  event  having  taken  place  that  evening. 

"M.  Balgaenie." 

[The  non-recognition  here  rather  tends  to  strengthen  the  case,  by 
increasing  the  improbability  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to  anxiety 
about  the  absent  friend.] 

The  following  case  is  from  Miss  Harriss,  of  25,  Shepherd's  Bush 

Koad,  W. 

"January  25th,  1884. 

(283)  "  Exactly  the  hour  in  the  afternoon  that  my  mother  died,  being 
out  for  a  long  walk  in  the  country  with  a  companion,  and  having  parted 
from  her  to  pick  wild  flowers,  I  heard  myself  distinctly  called  several  times. 
With  a  feeling  as  if  some  ill  were  approaching,  I  looked  at  my  watch 
instinctively,  and  found  it  half-past  4.  I  cannot  tell  why  I  did  so,  for  I 
was  then  only  a  school-girl,  and  calling  to  my  companion  I  found  she  had 
not  addressed  me.     I  dreamed  of  my  mother's  death  the  same  night. 

"A.  Harriss." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Harriss  adds  : — 

"  My  mother  died  on  25th  September,  1875.  She  was  in  better  health 
than  I  had  seen  her  for  years  when  I  left  her  about  six  weeks  before,  which 
was  the  reason  of  my  doing  so.  She  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease.  I 
had  heard  from  her  only  two  days  before,  in  good  health  and  spirits.     The 

118  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

hour  of  death  was  stated  in  the  letter  and  telegram  ;  I  think  I  have  both 
still. 

"  I  never  had  another  auditory  hallucination.  I  never  had  another 
dream  of  death  besides  that  about  my  mother ;  it  was  very  vivid  and 
distressing.     I  saw  her  dying." 

The  following  is  an  extract,  copied  by  the  present  writer,  from  a  letter 
written  to  Miss  Harriss  by  her  father,  and  dated  September  25,  1875  : — 

"  Ashfield. 
"  My  Dear  Annie, — You  will    be    much    surprised  that   your   dear 
mamma  passed  away  this  afternoon  about  3.45,  so  gently  that  we  could 
not  believe  that  she  was  really  gone.     .     .     I   think  she  was  not  quite 
conscious  at  the  time. — Your  affectionate  father,       "J.  H.  Harriss." 

The  friend  who  was  with  Miss  Harriss  at  the  time  writes  to  us  on 
July  12,  1884,  from  58,  Cornwall  Gardens,  S.W.  :— 

"  The  following  is  an  answer  to  your  inquiries  regarding  my  recollection 
of  a  certain  incident  relating  to  the  death  of  Miss  Harriss'  mother.  I 
remember  her  coming  down  one  morning  much  disturbed  at  a  very  vivid 
dream  she  had  during  the  night,  in  which  she  saw  her  mother  lying  dead. 
About  an  hour  after  she  told  us,  the  post  came  in,  bringing  Miss  Harriss 
the  news  of  her  mother's  death.  The  previous  day  Miss  Harriss  had  been 
in  the  woods  with  me,  and  came  and  asked  me  why  I  called  her,  and  what 
was  the  matter.  On  finding  I  had  not,  she  told  me  she  had  been  quite  sure 
some  one  was  calling  her,  and  wanted  her.  I  believe  afterwards  we  were 
struck  at  the  curious  coincidence  of  her  mother  being  taken  ill  that  after- 
noon, and  being  actually  dead  about  the  time  of  her  dream. 

"  Edith  Darwin." 

[In  conversation.  Miss  Harriss  assured  me  again  that  she  is  positive 
that  the  hour  at  which  she  heard  the  voice  was  the  hour  of  her  mother's 
death.  If  her  recollection  of  the  time  which  she  noted  by  her  watch  is 
correct,  this  is  an  instance  of  exaggeration  of  correctness,  as  there  was 
an  interval  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour.] 

Here  we  can  hardly  attribute  the  dream  to  any  excitement  caused 
by  the  previous  hallucination,  since  that  does  not  appear  to  have 
suggested  her  mother  to  Miss  Harriss.  If  we  regard  both  incidents 
as  telepathic,  and  as  due  to  a  common  cause,  the  case  would  be  an 
interesting  instance  of  "  deferred  impression " — the  dim  impulse 
which  immediately  after  the  death  emerged  as  an  unrecognised 
phantasm,  developing  into  more  definitely  "  veridical  "  shape  in  sleep. 

§  4.  And  now  we  come  to  cases  where  the  auditory  impression 
was  of  a  complete  sentence,  conveying  either  a  piece  of  information 
or  a  direction.  The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Killick, 
of  Great  Smeaton  Rectory,  Northallerton,  and  is  quoted  from  an 
undated  letter  to  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Davies,  of  Chelsea,  who  tells  me,  on 
November  25th,   1885,  that  it  must  have  been   received   "  ten   or 

XV.]  OC CUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  119 

twelve  years  ago."  Mr.  Killick  sent  us  on  April  23rd,  1884,  an 
almost  precisely  similar  account.  We  have  not  been  able  to  obtain 
direct  confirmation  from  his  wife,  who  is  an  invalid  ;  but  he  tells  us 
that  her  memory  confirms  his  own.  The  incident  happened,  however, 
rather  more  than  80  years  ago. 

(284)  "  A  very  much  loved  little  daughter  (now  married)  was  with  my 
family  at  our  vicarage  in  Wiltshire,  and  I  was  in  Paris.  One  Sunday  after- 
noon, I  was  sitting  in  the  courtyard  of  our  hotel,  taking  coffee,  when  a 
sudden  thought  shot  into  my  mind,  '  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  water.'  [In 
the  later  account  the  parallel  clause  is — "when  all  at  once  I  seemed  to 
hear  a  voice  say,  ^  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  pond.'"]  I  should  tell  you  that 
we  had  large  grounds,  and  a  fine  piece  of  artificial  water,  with  a  grass  walk 
all  round,  and  a  waterfall  and  cave,  &c. — a  favourite  part.  [In  the  later 
account,  Mr.  Killick  adds  that  this  pond  "  was  my  horror  for  the  children. 
They  were  never  allowed  to  go  near  it,  except  with  one  of  the  family."] 
I  tried  to  banish  the  thought,  but  in  vain.  I  went  out  into  the  city  and 
walked  for  hours,  trying  to  obliterate  the  impression  in  every  possible 
way,  but  in  vain.  I  walked  till  I  was  too  tired  to  walk  any  longer, 
and  returned  and  went  to  bed,  but  not  to  sleep.  I  went  next  day  to 
the  Post-office,  hoping  for  letters;  but  there  were  none.  I  could  not 
stay  in  Paris,  so  I  went  to  the  Ambassador's  and  got  a  passport  for 
Brussels. 

"  In  the  course  of  time  I  had  letters  saying  all  were  well ;  and  I 
finished  my  journey,  and  never  spoke  of  my  '  foolish  nervousness ' — as  I 
admitted  it  to  be. 

"  Some  months  afterwards  I  was  at  a  dinner  party,  and  the  hostess 
said,  '  What  did  you  say  about  Etta,  when  you  heard  1' 

"  '  Heard  what  1 '  I  said. 

"  *  Oh  ! '  said  the  lady,  '  have  I  let  out  a  secret  1 ' 

"  I  said,  '  I  don't  leave  till  I  learn ! ' 

"  She  said,  '  Don't  get  me  into  trouble,  but  I  mean  about  her  falling 
into  the  pond.' 

"  '  What  pond  1 ' 

" '  Your  pond.' 

"  '  When  1 ' 

«  '  While  you  were  abroad.' 

"  I  was  about  leaving,  so  I  said  very  little  more,  but  hastened  home. 
I  sought  our  governess,  and  inquired  what  it  all  meant. 

"  She  said,  '  Oh,  how  cruel  to  tell  you,  now  it's  all  over  !  Well,  one 
Sunday  afternoon  we  were  walking  by  the  pond,  and  Theodore  said, 
"  Etta,  it's  so  funny  to  walk  with  your  eyes  shut "  ;  so  she  tried,  and 
fell  into  the  water.  I  heard  a  scream,  and  looked  round  and  saw 
Etta's  head  come  up,  and  I  ran  and  seized  her  and  pulled  her  out. 
Oh,  it  was  so  dreadful !     And  then  I  carried  her  up  to  her  mamma,  and 

she  was  put  to  bed,  and  soon  got  all  right.'  ^. ,     i  _ 

"  1  inquired  the  day  ;  it  was  the  ver]/  Sunday  that  I  was  in  Paris,  and  cKur^   f] 

had  this  dreadful  conviction.  h^)       ii 

"  I  asked  the  hour.      About  4  o'clock  !     The  very  time,  also,  that  the  i,Jt..M^ 

unwelcome  thought  plunged  into  my  mind.  Lf^* 

120  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

"  I  said,  '  Then  it  was  revealed  to  me  in  Paris  the  instant  it  happened ' ; 
and,  for  the  first  time,  I  told  her  of  my  sad  experience  in  Paris  on  that 
Sunday  afternoon.  "  R.  Henry  Killick." 

Mr.  Killick  writes  us  on  May  6th,  1884  : — 

"  As  to  your  queries  :  you  ask  was  the  impression  unique  in  my  expe- 
rience. I  think  it  was.  I  cannot  remember  anything  like  it.  You  ask, 
was  the  pond  a  source  of  danger,  &c.  The  children  were  never  allowed  to 
go  near  it  without  grown-up  people  being  with  them ;  it  was  prohibited  ; 
and  it  was  quite  away  from  their  part  of  the  grounds.  We  were  so  strict 
!  and  careful  that  the  accident  seemed  an  impossibility.  We  had  never  had 
\  any  alarm  on  the  subject. 

"  At  that  time  I  had  ten  children  at  home  ;  and  yet  it  was  the  special 
one  that  had  the  accident  who  was  present  to  my  mind  at  that  moment. 
The  voice  seemed  to  say,  '  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  pond.'  " 

The  two  expressions  "  A  sudden  thought  shot  into  my  mind,"  and 
"  I  seemed  to  hear  a  voice  say,"  are  perfectly  compatible,  as  expressing 
a  hallucination  only  slightly  externalised  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  480-1)  ;  but  such 
descriptions  might,  no  doubt,  apply  equally  to  something  too  inward 
to  be  called  hallucination  at  all  ;  and  in  fact  a  parallel  but  less 
distinct  case  (No.  80)  has  been  classed  among  emotional  and  not 
sensory  impressions.  In  other  respects,  the  present  narrative  reminds 
us  of  Mr.  Jukes's  case  (Vol.  I.,  p.  407),  and  of  Mr.  Everitt's  case 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  409).  The  sense  of  a  third  personality — a  messenger — 
implied  in  the  form  of  the  message,  may  be  interpreted  as  the 
subjective  contribution  of  the  percipient ;  who  projects  his  impression 
in  the  fashion  in  which  it  would  most  naturally  strike  his  senses,  if  it 
really  came  to  him  in  a  normal  way  from  without. 

A  still  more  remarkable  case  has  been  supplied  to  us  by  Dr. 
Nicolas,  Count  Gon^mys,  of  Corfu,  a  member  of  our  Society,  from 
whose  long  paper,  which  was  in  French,  the  following  account  is 
abstracted.     The  first  person  is  retained  for  the  sake  of  clearness. 

"February,  1885. 

(285)  "In  the  year  1869,  I  was  Officer  of  Health  in  the  Hellenic  army. 

By  command   of  the  War   Office,  I  was  attached  to  the  garrison  of  the 

Island  of  Zante.      As  I  was  approaching  the  island  in  a  steamboat,  to 

take    up  my  new  position,  and  at  about   two  hours'    distance    from  the 

shore,  I  heard  a  sudden  inward  voice   say  to  me,  over  and  over  again,  in 

Italian,  '  Go  to   Volterra.'     I   was  made  almost  dizzy  by  the  frequency 

with  which  this  phrase  was  repeated.     Although  in  perfectly  good  health 

/    at  the  time,  I    became    seriously  alarmed    at    what    I  considered  as  an 

"^  auditory    hallucination.     I    had    no    association  with    the    name    of   M. 

Yolterra,  a  gentleman  of  Zante  with  whom  I  was  not  even  acquainted, 

although  I  had  once  seen  him,   10  years  before.     I    tried  the    effect  of 

^    stopping  my  ears,  and  of  trying  to  distract  myself  by  conversation  with 

XV.]  OCCUBRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  121 

the  bystanders ;  but  all  was  useless,  and  I  continued  to  hear  the  voice 
in  the  same  way.  At  last  we  reached  land ;  I  proceeded  to  the  hotel 
and  busied  myself  with  my  trunks ;  but  the  voice  continued  to  harass 
me.  After  a  time  a  servant  came,  and  announced  to  me  that  a  gentleman 
was  at  the  door  who  wished  to  speak  with  me  at  once.  '  Who  is  the 
gentleman?'  I  asked.  '  M.  Volterra,'  was  the  reply.  And  M.  Volterra 
entered,  weeping  violently  in  uncontrollable  distress,  and  imploring 
me  to  follow  him  at  once,  and  see  his  son,  who  was  in  a  dangerous 
condition. 

"I  found  a  young  man  in  a  state  of  maniacal  frenzy,  naked,  in  an 
empty  room,  and  despaired  of  by  all  the  doctors  of  Zante  for  the  last ' 
five  years.  His  aspect  was  hideous,  and  rendered  the  more  distressing  by  ' 
constantly-recurring  choreic  spasms,  accompanied  by  hissings,  bowlings, 
barkings,  and  other  animal  noises.  Sometimes  he  crawled  on  his  belly 
like  a  serpent ;  sometimes  he  fell  into  an  ecstatic  condition  on  his  knees ; 
sometimes  he  talked  and  quarrelled  with  imaginary  interlocutors.  The 
violent  crises  were  often  followed  by  periods  of  profound  syncope.  When 
I  opened  the  door  of  his  room  he  darted  upon  me  furiously,  but  I  stood 
my  ground  and  seized  him  by  the  arm,  looking  him  fixedly  in  the  face. 
In  a  few  moments  his  gaze  fell ;  he  trembled  all  over,  and  fell  on  the  floor 
with  his  eyes  shut.  I  made  mesmeric  passes  over  him,  and  in  half  an 
hour  he  had  fallen  into  the  somnambulic  state.  The  cure  lasted  two 
months  and  a  half,  during  which  many  interesting  phenomena  were 
observed.  Since  its  completion,  the  patient  has  had  no  return  of  his  [(uiZ^K 
malady."  iKjUl^ 

A  letter  written    to    Count  Gonemys  by  M.  Volterra,    dated  Zante,      '      '     * 
7th  (19th)  June,  1885,  contains  the  most   complete  corroboration  of  the 
above  statement  in  all  that  concerns  the  Volterra  family.     The  letter  con- 
cludes as  follows  : — 

"Before    your    arrival   at    Zante    I    had    no    acquaintance    with  you 
whatever,  although  I  have  been  many  years  at  Corfu  as  Deputy  to  the  fJ 
Legislative  Assembly  ;  nor  had  we  ever  spoken  together,  nor  had  I  ever  '  ■ 
said  a  word  to  you  about  my  son.     As  I  before  said,  we  had  never  thought 
of  you,  nor  desired  your  assistance,  until  I  called  on  you  on  your  arrival  as 
officer  of  health,  and  begged  you  to  save  my  son. 

"  We  owe  his  life  first  to  you  and  then  to  mesmerism. 
"  I  hold  it  my  duty  to  declare  to  you  my  sincere  gratitude,  and  to 
subscribe  myself  affectionately  and  sincerely  yours,  j/jM-t*^ 

"  Demetrio  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri.         ^  c*«i 

(Additional  signatures)  "  Laura  Volterra  "  [M.  Volterra's  wife].  ^        ^^^^ 

"  DiONisio  D.  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri."      vH'<«^ 

"  O  flepaTTsvOstc  Av«?a(7toc  'BoXreppoc."  (Anastasio      M-  ^*y* 

Volterra,  the  cured  patient). 
"  C.  Vassopoulos  (come  testimonio)  " 
"  Demetrio,  Comte  Guerino  (confermo)." 
"  Lorenzo  T.  Mercati." 

The  form  of  the  monition  here,  as  the  form  of  the  statement  in 
the  former    cases,    I   should   attribute    to    the   percipient's    shaping  i 
imagination.     The  narrative,  however,  will  be  seen  to  present    one  i 

122  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

peculiarity  which  we  have  encountered  in  no  other  instance  ;  ^  at  the 
time  that  the  impression  was  received,  the  agent  and  the  percipient 
were  personally  unknown  to  one  another.  Still,  if  my  surraise  be 
allowable  as  to  the  conditions  by  which  a  line  of  telepathic  com- 
munication may  be  established  between  persons  unconnected  by 
blood  or  affection,  we  might  certainly  find  a  likely  condition  in 
such  an  attitude  as  that  of  the  supposed  agent  in  this  case.  We 
cannot  reasonably  suppose  that  any  casual  stranger  had  as  good 
a  chance  of  being  telepathically  impressed  by  M.  Volterra  as  the 
person  who — though  his  name  and  personality  may  have  had  no 
place  in  M.  Volterra's  mind — was  yet,  by  virtue  of  his  special  know- 
ledge and  of  his  actual  approach,  more  nearly  connected  than  any 
one  else  with  the  engrossing  subject  of  his  thoughts. 

The  following  example,  from  a  clergyman  who  unfortunately 
withholds  his  name  from  publication,  is  very  similar,  the  inward 
nature  of  the  sound  being  again  noticeable.  But  here  the  agent  and 
percipient  were  friends. 

(286)  "In  March,  187 — ,  I  went  to  the  curacy  of  A.,  and  had  been,  as 
well  as  I  remember,  about  a  month  there,  when  the  following  happened.  I 
am  a  native  of  a  town  in  the  North  of  England,  and  in  my  childhood  had 
a  friend  of  my  own  age  whom  I  will  call  C.  Our  friendship  lasted  till  man- 
hood, though  our  circumstances  and  walks  of  life  were  very  different ;  and  I 
had  always  a  great  deal  of  influence  over  him,  insomuch  that  he  would  allow 
himself  to  be  restrained  by  me  when  he  would  not  by  others.  He  became, 
towards  his  20th  year  or  so,  rather  addicted  to  drink,  but  I  always  had  the 
same  friendship  for  him,  and  would  have  done  anything  to  serve  or  help 
him. 

"In  187 —  his  family  were  living  at  X.  (near  Z.),  and  as  all  my 
other  old  friends  had  long  left  the  neighbourhood  of  Z.,  my  native  town,  I 
always  used  to  go  to  them  whenever  I  visited  that  part,  as  I  was  and  am 
still  on  sufficiently  friendly  terms  with  them  to  go  at  any  time  without 
notice.  On  the  day  in  question  I  had  been  visiting  some  of  the  parish- 
ioners, and  having  made  an  end  of  this,  came  to  a  cross-road  of  two  of  the 
lanes  near  the  church  ;  and  not  only  was  I  not  thinking  of  my  friend,  whom 
I  had  not  heard  of  for  some  years,  but  I  distinctly  remember  what  I  was 
thinking  of,  which  was  whether  to  go  home  to  my  lodgings  for  my  tea, 
turning  to  the  left,  or  whether  to  trespass  on  the  hospitality  of  a  lady  who 
lived  to  the  right  of  the  crossing.  "When  thus  standing  in  doubt,  a  kind  of 
shudder  passed  through  me,  accompanied  by  a  most  extraordinary  feeling, 
which  I  can  only  compare  to  that  of  a  jug  of  cold  water  poured  on  the  nape  of 
the  neck,  and  running  down  the  spine;  ^  and  as  this  passed  off,  though  I  can- 
not say  I  heard  a  voice,  I  was  distinctly  conscious  of  the  words,  '  Go  to  Z. 
by  this  evening's  train,'  being  said  in  my  ear.      There  was  no  one  at  the 

1  A  possible  exception  is  case  30,  Vol.  i.,  pp.  214-8. 
2  Cf.  case  223,  p.  37,  and  the  note  thereon. 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  123 

time  within  100  yards  of  me.  I  was  not  very  flush  of  money  just  then, 
and  could  not  well  afford  the  expense,  besides  not  wishing  to  absent  myself 
from  duty  so  soon  after  taking  it  up.  But  it  seemed  so  distinct  that  I 
almost  made  up  my  mind  to  obey  it ;  but  on  announcing  the  fact  to  my  land- 
lady, to  whom,  of  course,  I  could  not  tell  my  true  reason,  she  remonstrated 
so  earnestly  that,  coupling  this  with  the  affairs  of  my  duty,  &c.,  I  did 
conclude  to  disregard  it.  I  could  not,  however,  settle  to  anything,  read, 
write,  or  sit  in  comfort,  till  the  time  was  elapsed  when  I  could  have  caught 
the  train,  when  the  uneasy,  restless  feeling  gradually  went  off,  and  in  a 
few  hours  I  was  ready  to  laugh  at  myself. 

"  Three  or  four  days  after,  I  received  the  sad  news  that  my  friend  had 
on  that  day  gone  down  home  from  London,  had  been  taken  ill,  and  two 
days  afterwards  had,  in  a  fit  of  temporary  insanity,  put  an  end  to  his 
life.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  had  I  obeyed  the  intimation 
I  might  have  saved  his  life  ;  for  I  must  have  gone  to  their  house,  no 
other  in  the  neighbourhood  being  available  ;  and  had  I  found  him  in  the 
condition  in  which  he  was,  you  may  be  very  sure  he  would  never  have  got 
out  of  arm's  length  of  me  until  all  danger  was  over.  I  have  ever  since 
reproached  myself  with  it,  and  have  made  up  my  mind  that  should  I  ever 
have  such  another  experience  I  will  do  what  is  directed,  seem  it  never  so 
absurd  or  difficult." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  adds : — 

"  I  was  in  health  just  as  usual,  no  better  and  no  worse.  I  had  good 
health  all  the  time  I  was  at  A.,  and  in  particular  I  never  have  suffered 
from  indigestion  since  I  was  a  child.  I  have  never  at  any  other  time 
had  such  a  physical  sensation,  or  such  a  sensation  of  a  voice ;  and  nothing 
has  ever  happened  to  me  which  would  lead  at  all  satisfactorily  to  the 
conclusion  that  any  abnormal  phenomena  were  present." 

The  narrator  has  privately  told  us  the  year  of  the  occurrence,  and 
the  place  where  the  suicide  took  place ;  and  we  have  verified  these  details 
in  the  Register  of  Deaths.  The  event  took  place  later  in  the  year  than  he 
imagined — in  November.  In  conversation,  he  has  explained  that  "  Go  to  Z  " 
practically  meant  the  same  for  him  as  "  Go  to  these  friends,"  as  he  would  be 
quite  certain  to  stay  with  them.  Their  place  of  business  was  still  at  Z. 
At  the  time  of  his  experience,  his  friend  was  in  a  very  critical  condition. 

The  next  case  is  worth  quoting  as  parallel  to  the  two  last,  though 
it  has  less  evidential  force ;  for,  at  this  distance  of  time,  we  cannot 
make  sure  that  something  had  not  occurred  during  the  preceding 
days,  that  might  have  half  unconsciously  suggested  to  the  percipient 
the  need  which  he  was  so  strangely  impelled  to  relieve.  The  account 
is  from  Dr.  Joseph  Smith,  for  many  years  leading  medical  practitioner 
in  Warrington,  and  a  class-leader  in  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church. 

"  November  24th,  1884. 

(287)  "  When  I  lived  at  Penketh,  about  40  years  ago,  I  was  sitting  one 

evening  reading,  and  a  voice  came  to  me,  saying,  '  Send  a  loaf  to  James 

Gandy's.'     Still  I  continued   reading,  and  the   voice  came  to  me  again, 

'  Send  a  loaf  to  James  Gandy's.'     Still  I  continued  reading,  when  a  third 

124  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

time  the  voice  came  to  me  with  greater  emphasis,  '  Send  a  loaf  to  James 
Gandy's ' ;  and  this  time  it  was  accompanied  by  an  almost  irresistible 
impulse  to  get  up.  I  obeyed  this  impulse,  and  went  into  the  village, 
bought  a  large  loaf,  and  seeing  a  lad  at  the  shop  door,  I  asked  him  if  he 
knew  James  Gandy's.  He  said  he  did ;  so  I  gave  him  a  trifle  and  asked 
him  to  take  the  loaf  there,  and  to  say  a  gentleman  had  sent  it.  Mrs. 
Gandy  was  a  member  of  my  class,  and  I  went  down  the  next  morning  to 
see  what  had  come  of  it,  when  she  told  me  that  a  strange  thing  had 
happened  to  her  last  night.  She  said  she  wanted  to  put  the  children  to 
bed,  and  they  began  to  cry  for  food,  and  she  had  not  any  to  give  them  ; 
for  her  husband  had  been  for  four  or  five  days  out  of  work.  She  then 
went  to  prayer,  to  ask  God  to  send  them  something ;  soon  after  which  a 
lad  came  to  the  door  with  a  loaf,  which  he  said  a  gentleman  gave  him  to 
bring  to  her.  I  calculated,  upon  inquiry  made  of  her,  that  her  prayer  and 
the  voice  which  I  heard  exactly  coincided  in  point  of  time. 

"  Joseph  Smith,  M.D." 

§5.1  will  now  give  one  case  where  the  sound  heard,  though  vocal, 

was  not  articulate.^     The  seemingly  direct  reproduction  of  the  actual 

sound  which  the  agent  was  making  (and  therefore  hearing)  at  the 

time  recalls  the  first  cases  of  this  chapter  ;  but  in  the  present  instance 

there  was  no  recognition,  which  is  of  course  an  evidential  defect.    The 

case  is  one  where  jpros  and  cons  have  to  be  carefully  balanced ;  it 

has  been  admitted  as  the  experience  of  a  matter-of-fact  man,  but 

1  would  certainly  have  been  rejected  had  it  been  that  of  a  nervous  or 

^  imaginative  woman.     The  narrator  is  Mrs.  B.,  who  contributed  also 

■  case  192,  (to  which  she  refers  in  the  first  line,)  and  whose  name  may 

be  given  to  anyone  interested  in  the  subject. 

"December,  1884. 

(288)  "  Some  six  years  after  the  above  occurrence,  in  the  September 
of  1870,  my  husband  was  at  D.  Hall  for  his  holiday.  His  parents  were 
then  living  at  Dieppe.  He  was  roused  one  night  by  a  peculiar  moaning,  as 
if  some  person  or  animal  was  in  pain.  He  got  up  and  went  through  the 
house  and  out  into  the  gardens  and  shrubberies,  but  could  see  nothing. 
He  heard  the  same  noise  at  intervals  all  that  day,  but  could  not  find  out 
the  cause.  He  returned  to  London  next  day,  to  find  a  telegram  summon- 
ing him  to  Dieppe,  as  his  mother  was  dying.  When  he  got  into  the  house 
at  Dieppe,  the  first  sound  he  heard  was  a  repetition  of  the  same  noise  that 
he  heard  at  D.  Hall,  and  he  found  it  was  his  mother  who  was  making  it, 
and  he  learned  she  had  been  doing  so  for  two  days.  She  died  a  few  hours 
after  he  arrived.  We  had  no  knowledge  of  Mrs.  B.'s  illness  at  the  time 
my  husband  heard  the  noise. 

"  My  husband's  parents  had  been  obliged  to  leave  D.  Hall  under 
painful  circumstances,  and  possibly  the  thoughts  of  her  loved  home  may 
have  been  paramount  with  Mrs.  B.,  or  it  may  have  been  that  they  flew  to 

1  The  strongest  example  in  our  collection  that  can  be  thus  described  is  the  scream 
case,  No.  34,  to  which  some  "borderland"  parallels  are  given  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  403-5.  As 
possibly  a  direct  reproduction  of  the  agent's  sensation,  the  present  experience  might  be 
compared  to  cases  151  and  342. 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  125 

my  husband,  who  was  her  youngest  son.  At  any  rate,  my  husband  always 
held  that  it  was  his  mother's  moaning  he  heard  at  D.  Hall  though  she  was 
in  France.  She  was  speechless  when  he  reached  her,  so  no  solution  could 
be  arrived  at.  "  E.  A.  B. 

We  find  from    a   newspaper    obituary   that  the  death  took  place  at 
Dieppe,  on  September  12,  1870. 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : — 

"  My  late  husband  was  alone,  at  his  old  home  in  Norfolk,  when  he 
heard  the  moaning  I  told  you  of.  He  was  shortly  after  (the  same  after- 
noon, I  think)  telegraphed  for  to  go  to  Dieppe  to  see  his  mother.  He 
was  quite  unaware,  till  he  got  the  telegram,  that  she  was  ill.  He  returned 
to  Selhurst,  where  we  were  living,  and  where  I  was,  on  his  way  to  Dieppe, 
and  then  told  me  about  this  noise.  On  his  return  from  Dieppe,  after  his 
mother's  death,  he  said,  '  You  remember  my  telling  you  of  the  moaning  I 
heard  at  D.  The  first  sound  I  heard  in  the  house  at  Dieppe  was  the  same, 
and  it  was  my  mother  making  it.'  He  further  added  that  he  was  told  she 
had  made  it  for  a  day  or  two.  I  am  perfectly  clear  about  his  hearing  it 
first  at  night  in  the  house,  and  on  the  following  morning  in  the  shrub- 
beries, which  were  a  little  distance  from  the  house.  I  never  heard  either 
my  husband  or  his  father  speak  of  ever  hearing  sounds,  or  seeing  anything 
before  or  after  the  occurrences  I  have  mentioned  [^.e.,  this  case  and  case 
1921.  They  were  both  matter-of-fact  men,  and  very  free  from  superstitious 
ideas.  I  was  a  young  woman  at  the  time  these  things  took  place  (I  am 
only  41  now),  so  my  memory  of  them  is  very  clear  and  good.  Six  weeks 
or  two  months  after  my  husband  heard  these  sounds,  we  were  together  at 
D.,  and  he  showed  me  the  spot  in  the  shrubbery  where  the  sound  had  been 
loudest." 

[If  the  percipient's  experience  had  been  confined  to  the  moaning  heard 
in  the  night,  the  incident  would  not  have  been  worth  attending  to,  for 
reasons  to  be  immediately  adduced.  But  the  continuance  of  the  sound 
during  the  day,  and  out  of  doors,  makes  a  decided  diflference.] 

I  6.  We  now  come  to  a  few  specimens  of  the  non-vocal  sound- 
phantasms — the  mere  noises  or  shocks — which  are  the  parallel  among 
auditory  hallucinations  to  the  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations  which 
were  considered  in  the  last  chapter.  But  the  auditory  cases  need  a  far 
more  jealous  scrutiny,  before  we  are  justified  in  regarding  them  as  even 
probably  telepathic  in  origin.  Odd  noises,  especially  at  night,  are  very 
common  phenomena  ;  and  though  the  particular  cause  of  them  is 
often  hard  to  detect,  the  physical  conditions  of  our  indoor  life  are 
prolific  of  possible  causes-  Most  of  us  are  in  constant  proximity  to 
wind  that  may  blow  through  crevices,  and  rattle  or  flap  or  dislodge 
loose  parts  of  our  windows  and  walls  and  chimneys  ;  and  to  water  in 
pipes  or  cisterns  that  may  leak,  or  burst,  or  may  contain  bubbling  air; 
and  to  slates  that  may  fall ;  and  to  wooden  furniture  and  floors 
that  may  crack  and  creak.  And  if  any  one  should  say  that  he  has 
heard  a  noise  which,  from  its  nature  or  its  position,  could  not  be 

126  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

accounted  for  by  any  such  ascertainable  cause,  he  might  be  reminded 
that  sounds  are  the  hardest  things  in  the  world  to  localise  ;  and  that  no 
one  who  has  not  given  special  attention  to  the  subject  can  realise  how 
easy  it  is  to  mistake  the  source  and  character  of  an  auditory  impres- 
sion.^ Thus,  while  it  is  impossible  to  contend  that  the  "  ball  of  light  " 
which  appeared  to  Mr.  Saxby  was  a  real  ball,  and  impossible  therefore 
to  deny  that  the  coincidence  of  the  hallucination  with  the  death  of 
some  one  to  whom  he  was  attached  was  an  odd  circumstance,  it  is 
quite  possible  to  contend  that  some  unaccountable  crash  which  some- 
one has  heard  was  not  a  hallucination  at  all,  but  a  real  objective  sound ; 
d,nd  the  coincidence  of  such  a  crash  with  the  death  of  a  near  relative 
is  the  less  odd  in  proportion  as  unaccountable  crashes  are  common 
occurrences.  Still,  unaccountable  noises  are  not  of  such  daily  and 
hourly  occurrence  but  that  a  sufficiently  large  and  well-established 
group  of  the  coincidences  in   question  might  be  taken  as  possible 

1  I  may  mention,  as  a  marked  instance  of  this,  a  personal  experience  which  I  have 
again  and  again  repeated.  The  dripping  of  a  small  fountain,  heard  from  some  yards  ofif, 
produces  on  my  ears  the  precise  effect  of  a  heavy  waggon  which  is  being  slowly  dragged 
up  a  gravelly  road  at  a  considerable  distance. 

The  following  is  probably  a  case  of  mistaken  localisation.  The  account  is  from  the 
Rev.  Edward  Bonus,  of  the  Rectory,  Hulcot,  Aylesbury. 

"July,  1882. 

■'  The  house  is  the  Rectory  of in  the  county  of  Wilts.     Of  the  two  clergymen 

concerned,  one  is  now  dead  ;  the  other  has  read  through  and  signed  this  account,  certify- 
ing its  accuracy.     This  matter  happened  about  20  years  ago. 

"One  day,  a  friend  of  the  then  rector  came  on  a  visit  for  a  few  days,  and  rode  on 
horseback.  It  was  winter  time.  He  put  his  horse  into  his  friend's  stables,  and  the  two 
clergymen  spent  the  evening  together.  They  went  to  bed  as  usual  about  11.  During  the 
night  the  friend  heard  the  steps  of  a  horse  very  distinctly  on  the  stairs  ;  was  not 
frightened,  but  greatly  surprised.  He  at  once  got  up,  lighted  his  candle,  and  went  down- 
stairs, but  could  see  nothing,  and  now  was  frightened.  He  returned  to  bed,  and  shortly 
again  heard  the  same  noise  ;  again  he  got  up,  this  time  too  frightened  to  go  downstairs, 
but  went  to  his  friend's  room.  He  was  asleep,  so  he  roused  him,  and  told  him  what  he 
had  heard;  they  then  remained  together,  leaving  the  light.  Very  soon  they  both  heard 
the  noise  in  the  most  certain  and  distinct  manner ;  so  they  both  dressed  and  searched  the 
house — could  see  or  find  nothing ;  they  then  went  to  the  stables,  and  to  their  sorrow  the 
horse  was  dead. 

"  They  both  believed  the  spirit  of  the  horse  had  entered  the  house.  The  horse  died 
of  heart  disease  ;  it  was  afterwards  examined.  Never  again,  as  far  as  I  have  ever  heard, 
was  the  same  man  visited  by  any  kind  of  noise. 

"  I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  two  clergymen,  and  have  heard  them  tell  the 
story  very  many  times. 

"Edward  Bonus." 

"  This  account  is  correct. — H.  S.  L." 

What  one  may  surmise  to  have  happened  is  that  the  friends  heard  a  sound  resembling 
heavy  steps,  and  inferred  that  it  was  on  the  stairs.  We  learn,  on  inquiry,  that  "  a  horse 
kicking  in  the  stables  could  be  distinctly  heard  in  the  house  "  ;  which  suggests  the  true 
nature  of  the  particular  horse's  "agency  "  in  the  matter. 

In  Morrison's  Reminiscences  of  Sir  W.  Scott  there  is  an  account  of  the  strange  sounds 
—like  the  drawing  of  heavy  boards  along  the  new  part  of  the  house— which  woke  Scott 
and  his  wife  on  the  night  of  the  death  of  their  friend,  Mr.  Bullock,  who  had  lately  been 
assisting  them  in  the  work  of  building  and  improving.  The  coincidence  made  a  great 
impression  on  Scott,  which,  however,  we  cannot  hold  to  have  been  justified.  For  Lock- 
hart's  Life  contains  a  letter  of  Scott's,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  same  sound  had  been 
heard  on  the  preceding  night,  when,  though  "awaked  by  a  violent  noise,"  be  only 
"fancied  something  had  fallen,  and  thought  no  more  about  it." 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  127 

indications  of  telepathic  action,  especially  as  we  have  the  analogy 
of  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations  to  point  to.^  Moreover,  there  is 
no  doubt  that  surprising  noises  and  crashes,  though  often  due  to 
undiscovered  external  causes,  are  also  a  form  of  purely  subjective 
hallucination^ — which  makes  it  at  least  probable,  if  telepathy  be  a 
reality,  that  they  will  also  be  a  form  of  telepathic  hallucination. 

The  kinds  of  non- vocal  impression  which  are  least  likely  to  be  due 
to  a  real  but  undiscoverable  cause  in  the  vicinity  are  those  which  are 
distinctly  musical — the  sound  being  produced  not  in  the  gliding 
random  fashion  of  an  ^olian  harp,  but  in  a  series  of  well-defined 
tones.  Some  examples  of  literal  music  will  be  given  in  Chap.  XVIII. 
But  I  will  give  here  an  example  where  the  sound  heard  was  of  the 
ringing  of  bells,  which  is  a  known  form  of  hallucination.^  The 
narrator  is  a  gentleman  who  does  not  wish  his  name  and  address  to  be 
published,  though  he  has  no  objection  to  their   being   communicated 

privately. 

"May  28th,  1885. 

(289)  "  In  1862,  I  sailed  to  Bombay  in  one  of  Dunbar's  old  frigate.-built 
ships.  I  was  depressed  the  whole  voyage  with  an  undefined  presentiment 
of  'bad  news  from  home.'  At  Bombay  I  used  to  get  my  messmates  to  go 
ashore  for  letters  (a  great  privilege),  even  when  it  was  my  turn  to  do  so  ; 
my  nervousness  was  so  great.  However,  we  sailed  for  home,  and  reached 
and  left  St.  Helena,  and  no  black  letter  was  delivered  to  me. 

"  Two  days  after  leaving  St.  Helena  I  was  up  aloft  doing  some  trifling 
sailor's  work  with  the  fourth  officer,  on  the  mizen  topsail  or  top  gallant 
yard,  when  I  heard  a  bell  begin  to  toll.  I  said  to  him,  '  Do  you  hear  that 
bell  tolling '? '  '  No,'  he  said,  '  I  hear  nothing.'  However,  my  agitation 
was  so  great  that  I  went  down  and  examined  both  our  bells ;  and  placed 
my  arm  near  them,  to  see  if  they  were  vibrating  or  if  any  chance  rope 
was  swinging  loose  and  striking  them.  However,  while  doing  this,  I  still 
heard  the  boom  of  the  tolling  bell,  and  it  seemed  far  away.  I  then, 
when  I  had  satisfied  myself  that  the  sound  was  not  attributable  to  either 
of  our  ship's  bells,  went  up  aloft  and  scanned  the  horizon  in  search  of 
a  sail,  but  saw  none.  I  then  said  to  my  messmates,  '  That's  my  "  black 
letter."     I  knew  I  should  have  bad  news  this  voyage.' 

1  A  combination  of  rudimentary  visual  with  rudimentary  auditory  hallucinations  is 
recorded  by  Madame  G-uyon  [La  Viede  Madame  Guyon,  ecrite  par  elle-meme,  Paris,  1791, 
Vol.  iii.,  p.  170) — in  a  case,  however,  which  cannot  be  presented  as  telepathic,  inasmuch 
as  Madame  G-uyon  was  expecting  the  death  of  the  friend  which  coincided  with  the 
hallucination.  The  sight  was  a  glimmer  in  the  room,  which  caused  some  little  gilt  nails 
near  the  bed  to  glow  :  the  sound  was  a  crash  as  if  all  the  window-panes  in  the  house  had 
fallen. 

2  See  the  statistics  given  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  503. 

3  For  instance,  no  one  is  likely  to  explain  as  a  misinterpretation  of  real  sounds  the 
case  given  by  Mr.  Kinglake  in  Eotlien,  p.  239.  In  the  midst  of  the  desert  he  heard  peal- 
ing for  ten  minutes,  as  it  appeared  to  him,  the  familiar  bells  of  his  native  village.  I  have 
received  a  very  similar  example  from  a  lady  who  heard  bells  when  leading  a  very  solitary 
life  in  a  remote  part  of  India — which  is  one  of  the  7  cases  mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  503. 
A  second  apparently  telepathic  case  is  No.  344. 

128  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

"  At  Falmouth  we  called  for  orders  ;  and  there  I  found  that  a  lady  who 
filled  the  place  of  elder  sister  to  me  (my  aunt  by  marriage),  and  to  whose 
younger  sister  I  am  married  now,  had  been  suddenly  carried  off  by  illness 
— at  that  time,  as  near  as  we  could  calculate,  allowing  for  the  different 
longitude.  She  was  young  (29),  lovely,  and  most  winning  in  her 
manners.  I,  boy-like,  adored  her,  and  she  used  to  say  that  I  was  her  young 
sailor  lover ;  as  my  uncle,  a  captain  in  the  Navy,  was  her  old  sailor 
lover. 

"  I  am  40  years  old  now,  and  have  been  through  dangers  of  all  sorts, 
in  imminent  danger  of  death  many  times,  but  I  have  never  had  a  pre- 
sentiment since.  After  nearly  25  years  I  can  still  remember  the  boom, 
boom,  of  that  old  bell  in  the  Manx  churchyard,  which  I  heard  in  latitude  14 
S.,  or  thereabouts." 

Asked  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  a  hallucination  on  any  other 
occasion,  the  narrator  replied  : — 

"  I  have  never  suffered  from  any  hallucinations.  I  have  led  an  active 
life,  including  much  loneliness,  being  for  weeks  together  in  the  jungles 
shooting  and  surveying  alone,  save  for  native  servants,  and  far  from  white 
men,  and  during  all  that  time  my  brain  never  played  me  any  tricks." 
Later,  he  wrote  : — "  I  have  not  been  a  dreamer,  fool,  or  a  mystic,  but  a 
hard-working,  clear-headed  man  of  business.  I  tell  you  all  this,  not  in  a 
boasting  spirit,  but  simply  to  prove,  so  far  as  possible,  that  I  am  not  a 
likely  subject  for  '  illusions  '  or  '  hallucinations.'  You  must  remember  that 
this  occurred  when  I  was  a  careless  youngster  of  17,  on  my  first  voyage  to 
sea.  I  could  not  account  for  it  then  ;  nor  can  I  now.  The  impression  is 
as  vivid  as  ever." 

Asked  whether  any  bells  would  have  been  ringing  at  the  time  of  the 
lady's  death,  he  says  : — 

"  Yes.  Malen  Church  bell  would  have  been  tolling  in  Castletown  at 
that  time,  for  the  passing  hell  or  for  the  funeral.  I  never  asked  whether 
the  passing  hell  was  rung,  but  it  is  a  common  habit  in  the  Isle  of  Man  to 
toll  the  church  bell  immediately  after  the  decease  of  any  one  of  some 
social  importance.  I  feel  sure  it  was  done  in  this  case  ;  we  were  so  well 
known  there.  I  mean  it  is  done  for  the  gentry,  and  such  of  the  farmers. 
and  shopkeeping  class  who  care  to  pay  for  it. 

"  I  may  add  that  the  lady  who  died  was  inexpressibly  dear  to  me,  being 
more  like  a  sister  than  an  aunt." 

The  name  of  the  lady  was  given  to  us  in  confidence,  and  also  the  date 
of  her  death  ;  and  we  have  verified  this  date  by  reference  to  an  Isle  of 
Man  newspaper.  The  day  proved  to  be  a  Sunday.  This  was  pointed  out 
to  our  informant,  in  case  he  might  be  able  to  recall  anything  which  would 
point  to  a  Sunday  as  the  day  of  his  experience.     He  replied : — 

"  I  cannot  well  remember  the  day,  but  I  think  that,  from  what  I  do 
remember,  it  was  a  Sunday.  I  was  probably  stowing  the  mizen  top- 
gallant sail,  or  doing  some  necessary  work  up  aloft ;  but  I  remember  that 
when  I  went  down  to  look  at  the  bells  the  ship  was  still,  and  I  don't 
remember  any  work  going  on.     I  am,  however,  not  certain  on  this  matter. "^ 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  129 

If  this  case  was  telepathic,  it  must  remain  doubtful  whether  the 
form  of  the  impression  represented  the  last  sensations  or  ideas  of 
the  dying  person,  or  was  a  piece  of  death-imagery  supplied  by  the 
percipient,  as  illustrated  in  several  of  the  visual  cases  of  Chap.  XII. 
The  preceding  distress  and  nervousness  were  probably  subjective,  but 
can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  hallucination. 

When  we  pass  from  musical  impressions  to  noise  proper,  the 
degree  of  oddness  and  unaccountableness  in  a  sound  is  a  point  which 
it  is  very  hard  to  judge  of  from  description.  The  reader  may  form 
his  own  opinion  of  the  following  account,  received  from  Mrs.  Samuda, 
of  Shipton  Court,  Chipping  Norton.  I  do  not  number  it  as  an 
evidential  case. 

"  If  the  details  of  what  occurred  to  me  (and  which  I  believe  to  have 
been  purely  accidental)  can  be  of  any  service  to  your  Society,  I  will  with 
pleasure  describe  them ;  but  in  doing  so  I  must  beg  that  you  will 
thoroughly  understand  that  I  do  not  in  the  least  believe  in  any  of  these 
coincidences,  and  at  the  time  was  much  amused  when  I  was  told  that 
the  sounds  I  heard  were  death- warnings.  On  the  5th  of  October,  1878, 
about  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  was  suddenly  aroused  by  three  distinct 
loud  knocks  exactly  over  the  head  of  my  bed.  At  the  time  I  was  ill, 
and  the  nurse  was  sleeping  in  my  room.  She  also  distinctly  heard  the 
sounds.  The  first  thing  the  next  morning,  I  received  a  telegram  to  say 
my  grandfather,  Sir  Francis  Grant,  P.R.A.,  had  died  suddenly  the  night 
before  at  8  o'clock.  When  I  told  the  nurse  of  the  telegram,  she  instantly 
said  the  three  knocks  I  had  heard  were  a  death  warning. 

"On  the  20th  March,  1879,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  mother,  saying 
that  my  brother,  Rupert  Markham,  had  been  ill,  but  was  now  going  on  quite 
well  again,  and  that  I  need  not  be  the  least  anxious.  On  the  morning  of 
the  21st,  about  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  distinctly  heard  the  same 
three  knocks  ;  my  husband  also  heard  them.  At  10  o'clock  that  morning 
I  received  a  telegram  desiring  me  to  come  immediately,  as  my  brother 
was  dying.  When  I  arrived  at  Melton  Mowbray,  9.30  p.m.,  my  brother 
was  just  dead. 

"About  the  2nd  of  May,  1879,  at  6  o'clock  in  the  morning,  my  hus- 
band and  I  both  heard  the  same  three  knocks,  and  were  so  much  impressed 
at  this  occurring  for  a  third  time  that  he  instantly  made  a  note  of  it. 
At  that  time  my  eldest  brother  had  just  started  for  Zululand,  so  we  much 
feared  something  might  have  happened  to  him.  For  three  weeks  after  this 
we  heard  nothing,  then  a  letter  came  saying  my  brother  was  dangerously 
ill,  but  shortly  afterwards  we  heard  by  telegram  that  he  was  perfectly 
well  again.  I  tell  you  this  third  instance  to  show  you  that  there  cannot 
possibly  be  anything  but  a  mere  chance  in  these  accidents  being  repeated." 

[The  coincidence  in  the  first  case  was  probably  closer  than  is  repre- 
sented ;  for  all  the  newspaper  accounts  give  the  date  of  Sir  F.  Grant's  death 
as  Saturday,  October  5th  ;  the  Times  and  the  Leicester  Chronicle  say  "Satur- 
day morning"  ;  and  the  Daily  Telegraph  says,  "  early  on  Saturday  morning." 

The  Leicester  Chronicle  confirms  the  date  of  death  in  the  second  case.] 
VOL.    II.  K 

130  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap. 

Mrs.  Samuda  does  not  say  whether  she  herself  regards  the 
knocks  as  hallucinations,  or  as  objectively  caused.  If  they  were  the 
former,  then  the  question  of  "  belief  in  these  coincidences  "—i.e.,  the 
question  whether  they  are  due  to  accident,  or  to  telepathy — must  (as 
we  have  seen)  be  judged  by  the  application  of  the  doctrine  of 
chances  on  a  basis  of  very  wide  statistics ;  and  certainly  will  not  be 
decided  in  favour  of  accident  by  the  fact  that  the  percipient  has 
observed  a  coincidence  in  two  cases  and  not  in  a  third.  But  the  coin- 
cidence with  the  death  was  not  very  close  in  the  second  case,  and 
possibly  not  in  the  first ;  and  real  sounds  due  to  some  defect  in 
the  house  or  furniture  may  have  happened  to  be  a  little  louder 
than  usual  on  these  occasions,  and  perhaps  afterwards  became 
exaggerated  in  memory.  The  fact  that  the  experience  was  in  each 
case  shared  by  a  second  person  is  strongly  (though,  as  we  shall  see 
later,  not  decisively)  in  favour  of  this  view. 

The  following  case  has  more  weight.  The  account  was  written 
down  on  June  2nd,  1876,  by  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  from  the 
dictation  of  the  percipient,  the  late  Miss  Vaughan,  of  6,  Chester 
Place,  Regent's  Park,  N.W. 

(290)  "  In  the  autumn  of  1856,  Mrs.  D.  was  lying  dangerously  ill, 
near  Windsor ;  when  I  received  a  letter  on  Friday  from  her  daughter,  who 
had  been  invited  to  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Cox  with  Miss  Alderson,  telling 
me  that  as  their  mother  was  rather  better,  they  thought  they  might  come 
up  to  the  marriage  on  Tuesday  if  I  could  give  them  a  bed.  On 
the  Saturday  night  I  went  to  bed  at  my  usual  hour,  12  o'clock,  but 
did  not  go  to  sleep  for  some  time ;  when  I  was  suddenly  startled  by 
three  sets  of  three  extraordinary  loud  knocks,  like  strokes  of  a  hammer  on 
an  empty  box,  at  my  bed  head,  followed  immediately  by  a  long  loud 
cry  of  a  woman's  voice,  which  seemed  to  die  away  in  the  distance.  I 
called  my  maid  instantly,  and  begged  her  to  look  out  of  the  window,  and 
see  if  there  was  anyone  in  the  street.  She  opened  the  shutters,  threw 
up  the  window,  and  said  there  was  no  one ;  that  I  must  have  been 
dreaming ;  it  was  quite  late.  I  said  '  No,  it  had  not  yet  struck  1,'  and 
sent  her  to  look  at  the  clock  ;  she  returned,  and  said  it  wanted  10  minutes 
to  1.  I  said  the  noise  must  have  come  from  the  room  adjoining  mine, 
in  the  next  house.  She  said  the  house  was  empty ;  but  this  I  could  not 
believe,  so  I  sent  her  early  on  Sunday  morning  to  see.  She  came  back, 
saying  the  windows  were  all  shut,  and  she  had  knocked  for  some  time  in 
vain.  On  the  following  morning  I  sent  her  to  the  person  in  Albany  Street 
who  had  charge  of  the  house,  thinking  somebody  must  have  slept  in  it  on 
Saturday  night.  The  person  in  charge  said  this  could  not  be  the  case, 
as  she  had  the  key  ;  but  she  went  to  look,  and  came  to  tell  me  that  no  one 
could  possibly  have  got  in. 

"  In  a  very  few  hours  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  one  of  the 
Miss    D.'s,    to    tell   me  that   their   mother    became    suddenly   worse    on 

XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  131 

Saturday  morning,  and  had  died  in  the  course  of  the  night.  Some  time 
subsequently,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  nurse,  and  she  told  me 
that  Mrs.  D.  had  exactly  died  at  a  quarter  before  1  on  Sunday  morning, 
uttering  a  loud  cry  at  the  moment  of  her  death.  She  had  just  been  giving 
her  a  cup  of  beef  tea,  and  had  replaced  it  on  the  mantelpiece,  where  there 
was  a  clock,  on  which  she  observed  the  hour.  I  had  thought  that  the 
whole  must  have  proceeded  from  the  next  house. 

"  Mrs.  D.  had  been  a  very  intimate  friend  of  mine  ;  I  know  I  was 
much  in  her  thoughts,  and  a  few  days  before  her  death  she  had  said  she 
hoped,  now  she  was  a  little  better,  to  be  well  enough  to  see  me." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  D.'s  death  took  place 
on  a  Sunday — October  26th,  1856. 

In  November,  1876,  Mr.  H.  Wedgwood  read  the  account  of  Miss 
Vaughan's  vision  to  Miss  E.  T.,  a  common  friend  of  Miss  Vaughan's  and 
Mrs.  D.'s,  whom  Mr.  Wedgwood  has  known  all  his  life.  She  was  staying 
with  her  sister  at  Hastings  at  the  time  of  the  incident,  and  received  a 
letter  from  Miss  Yaughan  telling  them  of  Mrs.  D.'s  death,  and  of  her 
having  come  to  her.  Miss  T.  was  greatly  interested  in  this  intelligence, 
and  hurried  up  to  London,  where  she  heard  from  Miss  Yaughan  the  story 
exactly  as  narrated  by  Mr.  Wedgwood,  down  to  the  news  of  Mrs.  D.'s 
death ;  but  Miss  Yaughan  had  not  then  seen  the  nurse,  and  was  con- 
sequently ignorant  of  the  precise  agreement  in  time  between  the  fact  of 
her  outcry  at  the  moment  of  death  and  Miss  Yaughan's  hearing  the 
scream.  Two  or  three  months  after,  Miss  Yaughan  told  her  what  she  had 
heard  from  the  nurse. 

Miss  T.  has  seen  this  statement,  and  appends  the  words  :  "  Quite 
correct.— E.  H.  T.     November  5th,  1883." 

Mrs.  Yaughan,  of  the  Deanery,  LlandafF,  writing  on  June  10,  1886, 
sends  us  an  account  of  the  occurrence  which  differs  from  Miss  Yaughan's 
only  in  one  or  two  trifling  details,  and  adds  :  "  Miss  Yaughan  often  spoke 
of  it  to  us." 

The  fact  of  the  scream,  though  it  seems  to  have  corresponded  with 
an  actual  cry  of  the  supposed  agent,  could  not  be  pressed ;  as  such 
sounds  are  not  uncommon  in  London  streets  at  night,  and  the  loud- 
ness and  apparent  closeness  of  the  cry  may  have  been  exaggerated. 
But  the  knocks  in  this  case,  if  correctly  described,  seem  less  easy 
to  explain,  except  as  hallucination ;  and  the  hallucination  (if  the 
present  class  be  admitted  at  all)  would  have  a  'prima  facie  claim  to 
he  considered  telepathic — the  tie  of  affection  between  the  two  parties 
being  a  strong  one,  and  the  coincidence  extremely  close.  Technically, 
the  incident  ought  perhaps  to  be  classed  among  "  borderland  "  cases  ; 
hut  this  particular  form  of  hallucination  does  not  seem  to  be  specially 
connected  with  the  moments  that  immediately  precede  or  follow 
sleep ;  and  the  percipient  must  apparently  have  been  wide  awake 
before  the  sounds  ceased.  A  few  more  examples  of  the  non-vocal  sort 
will  be  found  among  the  "  collective  "  cases  in  Chap.  XYIII. ;  others, 

VOL.    II.  K    2 

132  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES.  [chap. 

in  view  of  the  evidential  weakness  of  the  class,  are  relegated  to  the 

Supplement. 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  of  a  phantasm  which, 

though  located  in  the  ear,  perhaps  rather  concerned  the  sense  of  touch 

than  that  of  hearing.     If  it  was  telepathic,  it  is  a  remarkably  clear 

instance  of  the  direct  reproduction  of  the  agent's  sensation  in  the 

percipient's  consciousness.^     The  account  is  from  Mrs.  Arthur  Severn, 

of  Brantwood,  Coniston. 

"1883. 

(291)  "Years  ago,  in  Scotland,  at  my  own  home,  I  was  in  the  drawing- 
room  with  my  mother  and  aunt ;  the  latter  was  busy  writing  at  a  table  in  the 
middle  of  the  room,  facing  my  mother,  who  was  on  a  sofa  sewing,  while  I 
was  quietly  amusing  myself  in  my  own  way.  It  was  all  very  quiet,  when 
suddenly  I  was  much  startled  by  my  mother,  who  gave  a  scream  and  threw 
herself  back  on  the  sofa,  putting  both  her  hands  up  to  cover  her  ears, 
saying,  '  Oh,  there's  water  rushing  fast  into  my  ears,  and  I'm  sure  either  my 
brother,  or  son  James,  must  be  drowning,  or  both  of  them  ! '  My  aunt 
Margaret  jumped  up,  and  was  rather  angry  and  said,  '  Catherine,  I  never 
heard  such  nonsense,  how  can  you  be  so  foolish  ! '  My  aunt  seemed  vexed 
and  ashamed  it  should  happen  before  me,  for  I  was  very  frightened,  and 
remember  it  all  so  vividly.  My  poor  mother  cried,  saying,  '  Oh,  I  know 
it's  true,  or  why  would  this  water  keep  rushing  into  my  ears  ? ' 

"  Alas  !  it  proved  too  true,  for  very  soon  I  could  see  people  running  very 
hard  towards  the  bathing-place,  and  I  remember  the  shudder  that  then  ran 
through  me,  and  the  hope  that  my  mother  would  not  look  out  of  any  of 
the  windows.  Soon  my  uncle  came  hurrying  to  the  house  very  white  and 
distressed ;  all  he  could  say  was,  '  hot  blankets  ! '  but  it  was  too  late — 
poor  James  was  drowned.  He  was  21  years  old,  and  my  mother's  eldest 
child.     Both  the  other  witnesses  of  this  scene  are  dead. 

"  Joan  R.  Severn." 

[The  narrator's  brother,  James  Agnew,  was  drowned  while  bathing  in 
the  river  Bladnoch.  The  date,  as  we  find  from  a  copy  of  an  inscription  in 
Wigtown  churchyard,  was  June  8,  1853.] 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  narrator  here  was  herself  the  percipient 
in  the  still  more  remarkable  case  of  apparently  direct  transference, 
quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  188.^ 

1  Other  drowning  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  if  correctly  described,  afford  an  equally- 
clear  illustration  of  the  percipient's  independent  investiture  of  the  idea  transferred,  the 
impression  being  of  the  dripping  of  water — a  sound  which  would  be  neither  in  the  agent's 
ears  nor  in  his  thoughts.  See,  e.g.,  cases  513  (1)  and  528  ;  and  compare  the  account  of  the 
Breton  tradition  in  the  Dictionnaire  Historique  et  Geographique  de  la  Province  de  Bretagne, 
by  J.  B.  Ogde  (Edition  of  1845),  Vol.  i.,  p.  374. 

2  Other  possible  instances  of  hereditary  or  family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influence 
are  cases  14  and  15  ;  the  cases  mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  424,  note  ;  cases  310,  497,  and 
617  ;  cases  413,  111,  161,  464 ;  cases  232  and  561 ;  cases  450  and  462 ;  cases  421  and  503 ; 
cases  422  and  .586;  cases  496  and  532;  case  562;  and  several  of  the  collective  cases  in 
Chap,  xviii.,  §§  2  and  6,  and  in  the  Supplement,  Chap.  ix.  I  may  add  that  my  collection 
of  casual  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  includes  4  cases  where  a  parent  and  child 
have  been  affected  at  different  times.  In  one  of  these  cases  (received  from  Mrs.  Freese, 
of  Granite  Lodge,  Chislehurst)  the  son's  vision  nearly  reproduced  the  one  w-hichhis  mother 
had  experienced  years  before.  Another  instance  of  hereditary  susceptibility  to  halluci- 
nations is  mentioned  by  Abercrombie  ;  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  Ixxxii. 

XVI.] 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE 
PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES. 

§  1.  In  the  chapter  on  "  borderland  "  cases,  and  again  in  Chapter  XII., 
when  illustrating  the  development  of  hallucinations  by  the  per- 
cipient's own  imagination  under  the  stimulus  of  a  telepathic  impulse, 
I  quoted  several  instances  in  which  two  of  his  senses  played  a  part — 
as  where  an  impression  of  sound  preceded  and  led  up  to  the  visible 
phantasm.  And  I  have  mentioned  (pp.  23-4)  that  the  proportion 
of  the  telepathic  cases  in  which  the  experience  assumes  such  a 
complex  or  multiple  form  seems  decidedly  larger  than  obtains  among 
the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  The  present  chapter 
will  contain  those  remaining  telepathic  instances  which  belong  to 
seasons  of  complete  waking  consciousness.  In  some  of  these,  as  it 
happens,  the  sense  of  touch  is  involved;  and  I  may  take  the  oppor- 
tunity of  saying  a  necessary  word  or  two  on  affections  of  that  sense. 
Among  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  those  of  touch 
seem  to  be  rarer  even  than  those  of  sight,  and  much  rarer  than 
those  of  hearing.  My  large  collection  includes  only  68  examples  (a 
few  being  cases  of  repeated  experiences),  of  which  43  were  of  touch 
only,  8  were  associated  with  a  visual  hallucination,  13  with  an  auditory 
hallucination,  while  4  concerned  all  three  senses.  The  canvassed  group 
of  5705  persons  (pp.  7,  8)  yielded  only  23  distinct  experiences  of 
the  sort ;  and  of  these  23,  one  occurred  to  a  person  who  was  out  of 
health,  one  in  association  with  a  visual,  and  two  in  association  with 
an  auditory  hallucination.  Moreover,  in  many  of  the  cases  where  touch 
alone  has  been  concerned,  it  is  easy  to  suppose  that  the  sensation 
was  caused  by  an  involuntary  muscular  twitch — an  instance  is  even 
on  record  where  a  hallucination  of  sight  and  sound  took  its  origin  in  an 
objective  sensation,  caused  by  the  momentary  cramp  of  a  muscle^ — 

1  Paterson's  paper  in  the  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  for  Jan.,  1843. 

134  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

so  that  the  number  of  genuine  tactile  hallucinations  would  be  even 
smaller  than  appears.  It  will  not  surprise  us,  then,  to  find  that 
telepathic  affections  of  this  sense — or  what  might  reasonably  be 
adduced  as  such — are  also  rare.  A  couple  of  cases  have  been  already 
quoted ;  in  neither  of  which  did  the  touch  suggest  any  human  con- 
tact, while  each  included  a  peculiarity  beyond  the  mere  touch — the 
first  that  of  pain  (Vol.  I.,  p.  188),  and  the  second  probably  that  of 
sound  (p.  132,  above).  We  have,  however,  a  few  cases  where  the 
mere  touch  is  alleged  to  have  been  more  or  less  distinctive,^  of  which 
I  will  quote  here  one  specimen.  Mr.  J.  C.  Harris,  of  Wellington, 
New   Zealand,  proprietor  of   the   New    Zealand    Times  and   New 

Zealand  Mail,  writes  :— 

"July  6th,  1885. 

(292)  "My  wife  had  an  uncle,  a  sea  captain,  who  was  very  fond 
of  her  as  a  child,  and  often,  when  at  home  at  London,  used  to  take 
her  on  his  knee  and  stroke  down  her  long  thick  hair.  She,  with 
her  parents,  went  from  London  to  Sydney,  and  her  uncle  pursued  his 
avocation  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Some  3  or  4  years  afterwards,  she 
was  upstairs,  dressing  for  dinner,  and  had  her  hair  loose  upon  her 
shoulders ;  suddenly  she  felt  a  hand  placed  on  the  top  of  her  head,  and 
brought  down  smartly  along  her  hair  on  to  her  shoulders.  Startled,  she 
turned  round  and  exclaimed,  '  Why,  mother,  how  could  you  frighten  me 
so  1 '  for  she  assumed  her  mother  had  played  a  little  joke  on  her.  There 
was  no  one  there  however.  When  she  related  the  circumstance  at  the 
dinner-table,  a  superstitious^  friend  present  advised  them  to  make  a  note 
of  the  day  and  date.  This  was  done.  In  due  course  came  the  news  of 
the  death  of  her  uncle,  William,  on  that  day — allowing  for  difference  of 
longitude  at  about  the  time  she  felt  the  hand  on  her  head. 

"J.  Chantrey  Harris." 

The  following  is  Mrs.  Harris's  own  account  of  her  experience  : — 

"  Hill  Street,  Wellington,  New  Zealand. 

"December  5th,  1885. 

"  I  regret  extremely  that,  anxious  as  we  are  to  assist,  in  however 
small  a  degree,  the  cause  of  science,  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  give  con- 
firmatory evidence  of  my  own  little  experience.  Of  the  friends  who  were 
associated  with  me  at  the  time,  but  one  is  living,  and  she  lives  away  in 
Queensland.  The  notes  were  not  considered  of  sufficient  consequence  to 
be  kept ;  and  neither  mourning  card  nor  obituary  notice  are  available. 
Consequently  my  account  cannot,  as  I  quite  understand,  have  much  value, 
uncorroborated  as  it  is.  However,  as  a  matter  of  courtesy,  I  will  make 
my  statement,  feeling  well  assured  that  you  will  accept  it  as  authentic. 

1  In  11  out  of  the  43  cases  just  mentioned,  the  touch  is  alleged  to  have  been  recognised, 
and  in  7  of  these  the  person  whose  presence  was  suggested  was  dead.  There  is  no  difficulty 
in  regarding  such  cases  as  "  after-images  "  ;  but  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  512,  note. 

2  We  are  bound  to  accept  Mr.  Harris's  description  ;  and  can  only  wish  that  supersti- 
tion oftener  took  the  form,  as  here,  of  prompting  the  only  scientific  course. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.     135 

"  The  occurrence  happened  so  long  ago  that,  while  the  incident  is  fresh 
enough  to  my  memory,  the  precise  date  (never  carefully  noted)  has  ^..4^1 
escaped  it.  The  year  was  1860,  the  month  April.  I  was  a  young  girl, 
standing  before  the  dressing-table  in  my  bedroom,  arranging  some  detail 
of  my  toilet.  It  was  about  6  p.m.,  at  that  time  of  year,  twilight,  when 
suddenly  a  hand  was  placed  upon  my  head,  passed  down  my  hair,  and  fell 
heavily  on  my  left  shoulder.  Startled  at  the  unexpected  touch,  I  turned 
quickly  to  remonstrate  with  my  mother  for  entering  so  quietly,  when,  to 
my  surprise,  I  found  no  one  there.  On  the  instant  my  mind  flew  to 
England,  whither  my  father  had  gone  the  preceding  January,  and  I 
thought  '  something  has  happened,'  though  what  I  could  not  define. 

"  I  went  downstairs,  and  related  my  fright  to  the  family.  In  the 
course  of  the  evening,  Mrs.  and  Miss  W.  came  in,  and,  on  commenting 
upon  my  paleness,  were  told  about  the  matter.  Mrs.  W.  immediately  said, 
'  Put  down  the  date,  and  see  what  comes  of  it.'  This  was  done  ;  and  the 
incident  soon  ceased  to  trouble  us,  though  the  family  awaited  with  some 
anxiety  my  father's  first  letter  from  home.  It  came  in  due  time,  and  told 
how,  when  he  reached  England,  he  found  his  brother  Henry  seriously  ill — 
dying,  in  fact.  As  a  child  I  had  been  his  little  favourite,  and  in  death 
my  name  was  the  last  word  he  uttered. 

"  Upon  comparing  dates,  and  allowing  for  difierence  in  longitude,  we 
found  that  the  time  of  my  uncle's  death  coincided  exactly  with  that  of 
my  strange  experience.  I  recollected,  too,  that  it  was  a  familiar  habit 
of  my  uncle  to  stroke  my  hair  with  a  caressing  touch.  My  mother,  who 
resides  with  me,  is  the  only  person  who  can  confirm  the  story,  and  she 
appends  her  signature  to  this,  in  confirmation  thereof. 

"Elizabeth  Harris." 
(Attesting  signature)     "  Elizabeth  Bradford." 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  ever  had  a  hallucination  of 
the  senses  on  any  other  occasion,  Mrs.  Harris  replies  : —  ' 

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  in  my  life." 

We  find  from  the  Thame  Gazette  and  the  Oxford  Chronicle  that  Mrs. 
Harris's  uncle  died  on  May  12,  (not  in  April,)  1860,  aged  51. 

[The  coincidence  here  seems  to  have  been  very  close,  if  we  can  trust 
Mrs.  Harris's  memory  that  a  written  note  of  the  date  of  her  impression 
was  compared  with  the  date  of  the  death.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  she 
did  not  at  the  time  associate  her  experience  with  her  uncle's  former  mode 
of  touching  her.] 

But  the  more  conclusive  cases  of  recognition  are  naturally  those 

where  a  second  sense  has  been  concerned  ;  the  element  of  touch  being 

then  a  natural  enough  feature  in   a  highly  developed  phantasmal 

impression.     In  the  following  case  the  second  sense  involved  is  that 

of  hearing.     The  account  is  in  the  words  of  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Shute  Haye, 

Walditch,  Bridport ;  it  is  attested,  as  will  be  seen,  by  the  percipient. 

(293)  "A  well-known  inhabitant  of  Walditch,  a  little  village  near 
Bridport,  Dorset,  died  suddenly  last  May,  1881.  We  were  all  very  sorry,  and 
felt  much  for  those  she  had  left.  She  was  an  honest,  industrious  woman, 
a  good,  affectionate  wife  and  mother.     She  had  been  somewhat  ailing  for 

^.c^    «->'«'- 

136  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

some  time  past,  but  there  was  no  special  cause  for  alarm,  and  my  daughter 
saw  her  engaged  (she  was  a  washerwoman)  in  her  usual  occupation  the 
day  before  her  death.  From  her  husband  I  heard  the  following  narrative 
of  facts,  which  he  received  from  his  son,  when  the  latter  came  down  to  his 
mother's  funeral : — 

"  '  My  wife  latterly  was  uneasy  about  one  of  her  sons,  Joseph  G-undry, 
who  is  a  pointsman  on  the  Midland  Railway,  and  had  risen  to  an  office  of 
much  responsibility.  Not  hearing  from  him  for  some  time,  she  feared  that 
he  had  fallen  ill,  and  did  not  like  to  write  till  there  should  be  no  longer 
any  cause  for  alarm.  There  was,  in  fact,  such  a  press  of  business  that  he 
could  not  find  time  to  write.  On  the  night,  or  rather  morning,  of  his 
mother's  death,  he  had  the  night-duties,  and,  there  being  no  train  about, 
he  sat  down  for  a  short  time,  leaning  his  arms  on  a  table.  He  was  not 
asleep  and  had  hardly  settled  himself,  when  a  hand  was  placed  on  his 
shoulder,  and  a  voice  said  distinctly  :  '  Joe,  your  mother  wants  you.'  As 
far  as  we  can  ascertain  this  was  about  the  time  that  his  mother  passed 
away.  He  did  not  recognise  the  voice,  and  saw  no  one.  As  there  is  no 
post  from  Bridport  that  could  reach  him  under  two  days,  his  father  tele- 
graphed. When  the  telegram  was  brought  to  him,  he  said,  "  I  know  what 
it  is,  my  mother  is  dead."  '  " 

The  percipient  writes  : — 

"  Hay  Street,  Sawley,  Derby. 

"February  16th,  1883. 
"  I  have  perused  the  attached,  [i.e.,  the  above  account]  and  find  it  to  be 
substantially  correct.     I  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  report  as  printed,  and 
I  am  prepared  to  bear  it  out.  "  Joseph  Gundry." 

Mr.  Gundry  further  informs  us  that  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion 
experienced  any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses. 

In  the  next  example  the  sense  of  sound  is  again  concerned.  The 
case  might  be  added  to  those  quoted  in  Chapter  XII.,  §  3,  of  the 
gradual  development  of  telepathic  hallucinations,  leading  finally  to 
recognition.  The  narrator  is  the  Eev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  late  Vicar 
of  Maker,  Devonport,  already  so  often  mentioned. 

(294)  "In  July,  1867, 1  was  living  at  Bournemouth,  and  was  temporarily 
acting  as  chaplain  to  the  Sanatorium  there.  A  very  sad  case  came  in 
unexpectedly  of  a  young  man  in  the  last  stage  of  consumption.  He  was 
so  ill  that  we  could  not  take  him  into  the  institution,  but  accommodated 
him  in  lodgings.  I  visited  him  for  some  time,  as  his  clergyman.  Then  the 
chaplain  returned  home ;  and  I  myself  left  for  my  holiday.  I  did  not 
expect  to  see  the  young  man  again  ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  on  my  return 
home,  on  September  21st,  I  found  he  was  still  alive  ;  and  the  doctors  said 
he  might  yet  live  some  weeks. 

"  On  Sunday,  September  29th,  I  had  been  reading  prayers  at  the 
chapel  in  the  Sanatorium,  and  the  chaplain  preached  at  the  evening 
service.  It  was  near  the  end  of  the  sermon,  and  about  8  o'clock,  not 
later,  but  I  cannot  tell  to  five  minutes.  I  suddenly  felt  a  firm,  but 
gentle  touch  on  my  right  shoulder.     So  impressed  was  I  with  the  instinct 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.     137 

that  this  indicated  the  presence  of  some  unseen  being,  that  I  at  once 
asked  '  Is  it  S.? '  (the  Christian  name  of  a  pupil  of  mine,  who  died  in 
1860).  The  answer  came  back  at  once,  in  the  clear  tones  of  the  inner 
voice,^  '  No,  it's  William.'     I  have  no  recollection  of  anything  more. 

"  After  service  was  over,  I  inquired  about  my  young  friend,  and  was 
told  that  the  matron  had  been  sent  for  to  him,  as  he  was  suddenly  taken 
much  worse.  Next  morning  I  heard  that  he  died  about  8.10.  It  was, 
therefore,  about  10  minutes  before  his  actual  death  that  I  experienced  the 
communication.  I  may  add  that  I  had  not  been  thinking  specially 
about  him,  that  I  had  not  visited  him,  or  received  any  message  from 
him  since  my  return,  and  that  I  had  no  reason  whatever  to  expect  his 
speedy  decease. 

"P.  H.  Newnham." 

An  obituary  notice  in  the  Lyniington  and  Isle  of  Wight  Chronicle 
confirms  the  fact  that  William  Bryer  died  on  September  29,  1867. 

Mrs.  Newnham  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  I  perfectly  remember  my  husband  telling  me,  on  his  return  home 
from  the  service  at  the  Sanatorium  Chapel,  of  the  touch  and  voice,  and 
saying  he  felt  sure  William  was  dead.  He  did  not  hear  of  his  death  till 
the  next  morning.  '' M.  Newnham." 

[Mr.  Newnham  seems  to  have  a  slight  predisposition  to  subjective  iUi*^  ^ 
auditory  phantasms,  but  has  never  experienced  a  similar  vivid  hallucina-  ,,^(.£1:^ 
tion  of  touch.]  .i-«*it.*^*6 

This  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  subjective  experience  due  to  W**^  U- 
anxiety.  Mr.  Newnham  had,  no  doubt,  a  certain  emotional  interest  cv^-Vu 
in  the  young  man  who  died,  and  was  aware  of  his  critical  condition.  ^ 
But  if  his  hallucination  had  been  a  purely  subjective  one,  caused  by 
the  latent  emotional  idea,  one  would  certainly  have  expected  that  it 
would  have  taken  a  form  suggestive  of  William  ;  whereas  Mr. 
Newnham  actually  connected  it  at  first  with  a  different  person.  So 
that  the  non-recognition  in  this  case  tends  to  increase  the  probability 
of  the  telepathic  explanation  (c/.  case  282  above). 

In  the  next  case,  the  second  sense  involved  is  that  of  sight.  The 
narrator  is  Mrs.  Randolph  Lichfield,  of  Cross  Deeps,  Twickenham. 
Her  husband  was  precluded  from  attesting  the  account  in  writing,  by 
a  painful  affection  of  the  hand. 

"  1883. 

(295)  "  I  was  sitting  in  my  room  one  night,  before  I  was  married,  close 
before  a  toilet-table,  on  which  the  book  I  was  reading  rested ;  the  table 
fitted  into  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  the  wide  glass  on  it  reached  nearly 
to  the  ceiling,  so  that  any  one  in  the  room  could  be  seen  full  length.  The 
book  I  was  reading  was  not  at  all  calculated  to  affect  my  nerves,  or  excite 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  480-1. 

« t-* 

138  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING  [chap. 

my  imagination  in  any  way.  I  was  perfectly  well,  in  good  spirits,  and 
nothing  had  occurred  since  receiving  my  morning's  letters,  to  remind  me  of 
the  person  concerned  in  the  strange  experience  you  have  asked  me  to  relate. 

"My  eyes  were  fixed  on  my  book,  when  suddenly  \feU}  but  did  not 
see,  some  one  come  into  my  room.  I  looked  straight  before  me  into  the 
glass  to  see  who  it  was,  but  no  one  was  visible.  I  naturally  thought  that 
my  visitor,  seeing  me  deep  in  my  book,  had  gone  out  again,  when,  to  my 
astonishment,  I  felt  a  kiss  on  my  forehead — a  lingering,  loving  pressure. 
I  looked  up,  without  the  least  sensation  of  fear,  and  saw  my  lover  standing 
behind  my  chair,  stooping  as  if  to  kiss  me  again.  His  face  was  very  white 
and  inexpressibly  sad.  As  I  rose  from  my  chair  in  great  surprise,  before 
I  could  speak,  he  had  gone,  how  I  do  not  know ;  I  only  know  that,  one 
moment  I  saw  him,  saw  distinctly  every  feature  of  his  face,  saw  the  tall 
figure  and  broad  shoulders  as  clearly  as  I  ever  saw  them  in  my  life,  and 
the  next  moment  there  was  no  sign  of  him.  For  the  first  minute  I  felt 
nothing  but  surprise ;  perplexity  expresses  better  what  I  mean ;  fear,  or 
the  idea  I  had  seen  a  spirit,  never  entered  my  mind  ;  the  next  sensation 
was  that  there  must  be  something  the  matter  with  my  brain,  and  a  feeling 
of  thankfulness  that  it  had  not  conjured  up  some  terrific  vision,  instead  of 
an  agreeable  one.  I  remember  praying  that  I  might  not  fancy  anything 
that  would  frighten  me. 

"  The  next  day,  to  my  great  surprise,  there  was  not  my  usual  morning's 
letter  from  him  ;  four  posts  came  in  and  no  letter  ;  all  the  next  day,  no 
letter.  I  naturally  objected  to  the  novel  feeling  of  finding  myself 
neglected,  but  should  not  have  thought  of  letting  theneglector  know  it,  so 
would  not  write  to  inquire  the  cause  of  his  silence.  On  the  third  night 
— still  no  letter  all  day — as  T  was  going  upstairs  to  bed,  thinking  of 
something  totally  unconnected  with  R.,  as  I  put  my  foot  on  the  top  stair, 
I  felt,  suddenly,  but  most  intensely,  that  he  was  in  my  room,  and  that  I 
could  see  him  just  as  I  had  done  before.  For  the  first  time  came  the  fear 
that  something  had  happened  to  him.  I  knew  well  how  intense  his  desire 
to  see  me  would  be,  and  thought — '  Could  it  have  been  really  that  I  saw 
him  the  other  night  ? ' 

"  I  went  straight  to  my  room,  convinced  I  should  see  him  ;  there  was 
nothing  to  be  seen.  I  sat  down  and  waited,  and  the  sensation  that  he  was 
there,  and  striving  to  speak  to  me,  and  to  make  me  see  him,  became 
stronger  and  stronger.  I  waited  till  I  became  so  sleepy  I  could  not  sit 
up  any  longer,  and  went  to  bed  and  to  sleep.  By  the  first  morning's  post 
I  wrote  and  told  him  I  feared  he  must  be  ill,  as  I  had  not  had  a  letter  for 
three  days.  I  said  not  one  word  of  what  I  have  told  you  in  this.  Two 
mornings  after,  I  had  a  few  lines,  shockingly  written,  to  tell  me  he  had 
hurt  his  hand  out  hunting,  and  could  not  hold  a  pen  till  that  day,  but  was 
in  '  no  danger.'  It  was  not  till  a  few  days  after,  when  he  could  write 
distinctly,  that  I  knew  the  whole  truth. 

"  This  is  it.  He  had  been  riding  an  Irish  hunter,  a  splendid  horse 
across  country,  but  a  most  vicious  creature.  This  horse  was  so  used  to 
getting  rid  of  any  one  he  found  on  his  back,  if  he  objected  to  their 
presence  there,  and  had  such  a  variety   of  methods  of  doing  so,  throwing 

1  If,  as  is  probable,  this  feeling  was  due  to  a  faint  auditory  hallucination  (Vol.  i.,  p. 
528,  second  note),  the  case  would  be  one  of  the  rare  instances  of  hallucination  of  three 
senses.    Compare  Nos.  185,  306,  313,  504,  .513  (1),  569. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     139 

grooms,  huntsmen,  any  one,  when  the  fit  seized  him,  and  when  he  found 
no  amount  of  rearing,  kicking,  no  bolting,  and  stopping  suddenly,  no 
'buck-jumping '  would  unseat  najjiance,  and  that  he  had  at  last  found  his 
master,  he  became  desperate.  He  stood  still  for  an  instant,  then  rushed 
across  the  road  backwards,  reared  perfectly  straight,  and  pressed  his  rider's 
back  against  the  wall.  The  crush  and  pain  were  so  intense,  R.  thought  it 
must  be  death,  and  remembered  saying,  as  he  lost  consciousness,  '  May, 
my  little  May  !  don't  let  me  die  without  seeing  her  again.'  It  was  that 
night  he  had  bent  over  and  kissed  me.  He  turned  out  not  to  be  really 
injured,  though,  of  course,  in  frightful  pain,  and  his  hand  could  not 
possibly  hold  a  pen.  The  night  I  felt  so  suddenly  and  so  certainly  that  I 
should  see  him,  and,  when  I  did  not,  felt  so  thoroughly  he  was  there  and 
trying  to  let  me  know  it,  he  was  at  the  time  worrying  himself  about  not 
writing  to  me,  and  wishing  intensely  that  I  might  feel  there  was  some 
reason  for  his  silence. 

"  I  told  my  mother  [since  deceased]  all,  just  as  I  have  told  you,  and 
she  advised  me  to  say  nothing  about  his  supposed  visit  to  me  till  he  was 
quite  strong  and  well  again,  and  I  could  do  so  personally.  When  he  came 
to  see  me  afterwards,  I  made  him  tell  the  whole  of  his  account  before  I 
mentioned  one  word  of  my  strange  experience  of  those  two  nights. 

"  1  have  just  read  this  over  to  him,  and  he  vouches  for  my  having 
exactly  described  his  share  of  this  strange  experience." 

§  2.  The  remaining  cases  involve  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing. 

The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Haydn,  LL.D.,  Rector  of 

Nantenan,  Co.  Limerick,  and  was  first  communicated  by  him  to  the 

Oxford  Phasmatological  Society. 

"  Nantenan  Glebe,  Askeaton. 

"June  18th,  1883. 

(296)  "  I  beg  to  submit  to  your  Society  the  following  brief  narrative, 
extracted  from  my  diary. 

"  Nine  miles  from  my  residence,  in  the  town  of  Adare,  Co.  Limerick, 
lived  a  gentleman,  named  Phillips,  and  his  wife.  They  were  on  terms  of 
unusually  close  and  affectionate  intercourse  with  myself  and  my  family; 
they  frequently  driving  over  to  spend  the  day  here,  and  we  as  frequently 
returning  the  visit. 

"On  Thursday,  October  16th,  1879,  the  accouchement  of  Mrs.  Phillips 
took  place ;  it  had  been  anticipated  with  some  anxiety  by  her  medical 
attendant ;  but  we  were  gratified  to  learn  by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Phillips 
that  the  event  had  passed  without  evil  consequences,  and  that  his  wife 
was  rapidly  recovering. 

"Matters  were  in  this  condition  when,  at  10  o'clock  on  the  night  of 
the  ensuing  Wednesday,  October  22nd,  I  went  to  bed  as  usual.  I  slept  in 
a  little  bedstead  in  an  angle  of  my  study  downstairs  ;  all  the  members  of 
the  household  sleeping  in  the  upper  story.  I  had  seen  the  doors  fastened, 
and  the  children  and  servants  were  all  in  bed.  As  is  my  custom,  I  was 
reading  in  bed,  when,  in  the  midst  of  the  hitherto  unbroken  silence,  I 
heard  quick,  light  footsteps,  evidently  those  of  a  female,  proceeding  along 
the  hall,  as  if  entering  from  the  front  door,  and  then  traversing  the 
passage  that  leads  to  my  study  door. 

140  TACTILE  GASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

.  ,.^*r  ««  Arrived  immediately  outside,  they  seemed  to  me  to  resemble  those  of 
U^<  a  person  in  the  dark,  vaguely  trying  to  find  where  the  door  was.  Under 
the  full  impression  that  my  wife  had  come  downstairs,  I  called  her  name 
loudly,  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  While  I  spoke,  the  noise  ceased, 
but  it  recommenced  immediately  ;  and  while  I  stared  at  the  door,  I  both 
heard  and  saw  the  handle  turned  halfway  round,  ^  and  then  let  go,  as  if 
the  person  entering  had  changed  her  mind.  Surprised  and  alarmed,  I 
sprang  up  with  the  lamp  in  my  hand  and  opened  the  door.  All  was 
perfectly  still  and  silent  without.  None  of  the  household  had  stirred,  nor 
was  any  door  opened  that  had  been  closed. 

"  I  returned  to  bed,  and  some  few  minutes  after  I  heard  the  clock 
strike  11.  No  further  disturbance  occurred.  :7^A'is  happened,  observe,  on 
Wednesday  night,  October  22nd,  at  a  little  before  11  o'clock. 

"  On  Friday  morning  I  got  a  letter  from  Canon  O'Brien,  the  rector  of 
Adare,  to  say  that  Mrs.  Phillips  had  died  on  Thursday  morning.  I 
immediately  set  out  to  Adare  to  see  my  bereaved  friend,  and  found  him 
almost  beside  himself  with  grief.  Mrs.  Phillips,  while  in  other  respects 
advancing  to  convalescence,  had  suddenly  been  seized  with  scarlatina, 
which  had  proved  fatal.  Thinking  it  might  ease  my  poor  friend  to  tell  me 
the  sad  details,  I  encouraged  him  to  speak  on  the  subject.  He  complained, 
as  one  of  his  bitterest  griefs,  that  for  the  last  night  of  her  life  his  wife  was 
delirious,  and  did  not  know  him  or  her  mother,  who  was  present.  '  She 
sank  gradually  on  Wednesday,'  he  said,  '  and  lost  her  senses  on  that 
night — raving  about  persons  and  places  that  had  been  familiar  to  her, 
and  evidently  fancying  herself  actually  present  in  distant  spots.  You  were 
one  of  the  first-mentioned  ;  she  imagined  that  she  was  in  your  house 
speaking  to  you.  I  quietly  asked  whether  he  happened  to  have  any  idea 
as  to  what  hour  this  was  at,  when  he  answered,  '  A  few  minutes  before  11, 
as  I  distinctly  remember  looking  at  my  watch.' 

"Thus,  at  the  very  time  that  I,  nine  miles  away,  heard  the  un- 
accountable noises,  my  dying  friend  was  speaking  and  acting  as  if  she 
were  in  my  presence.  It  seems  impossible  not  to  connect  the  circumstances. 

"John  Armoue  Haydn." 

In  answer  to  our  inquiry  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  any  other 
hallucination,  Mr.  Haydn  replies,  "My  senses  have  never  on  any  occasion 
played  me  false."     He  further  explains  : — 

"The  facts  of  the  narrative  and  its  dates  are  extracted  from  the 
diary,  but  not  the  actual  language.  Those  facts  were  written  by  me  in 
my  diary  immediately  after  their  occurrence ;  my  custom,  as  a  general 
rule,  being  to  record  the  events  of  any  given  day  on  the  following  morning. 
The  actual  extracts  I  can  give,  if  required,  and  should  be  happy  to  do  so. 
The  story,  as  told  in  the  printed  slip  [i.e.,  the  above  account],  is  accurate  in 
all  particulars,  and  most  utterly  reliable.  I  may  add,  and  deeply  regret  to 
do  so,  that  poor  Phillips  himself  has  since  died." 

The  following  are  the  verbatim  extracts  from  the  diary  : — 

"  Thursday,  October  16th,  1879.  Birth  Phillips.  On  the  16th  inst.,  the 
wife  of  John  D.  Phillips,  S.  I.  Adare,  Royal  Irish  Constabulary,  of  a  son." 

"Thursday,  October  23rd,  1879.  A  most  singular  thing  occurred 
last  night.     Just  after  going  to  bed,  while  I  was  reading,  I  heard  steps 

1  See  p.  612  note,  and  compare  cases  696  and  698. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.    141 

outside  my  door  and  in  the  passage,  as  of  a  female  walking  aimlessly. 
Thinking  it  might  be  Louey,  I  called,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Imme- 
diately after  the  sounds  ceased,  the  clock  struck  11." 

"Friday,  October  24th,  1879.  Letter  from  Lucius  O'Brien,  to  say — 
and  it  was  appalling  news — that  Mrs.  Phillips  is  dead !  She  died 
yesterday  morning,  of  fever  and  scarlatina.  I  at  once  determined  on 
going  over  to  Adare,  although  the  roads  were  knee-deep  and  the  day 
savagely  showery.  I  can  never  forget  the  agony  of  poor  Phillips. 
He  told  me  that  she  was  getting  rapidly  worse  all  day  on  Wednesday, 
and  that  at  about  half -past  \Q  on  Wednesday  night  she  became  delirious, 
and  raved  of  places  where  she  had  been." 

The  Limerick  Daily  Chronicle  confirms  Oct.  23,  1879,  as  the  date  of 
death. 

The  hallucination  here,  if  telepathic,  well  illustrates  the  manner 
in  which  the  impression  received  may  be  developed  by  the  percipient 
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40).  The  dying  woman's  thoughts,  in  turning  to  her 
friend,  would  naturally  be  of  seeing  him  and  speaking  to  him,  not  of  an 
ineffectual  attempt  to  enter  his  room.  But  the  impression  which  the 
brain  externalised  seems  to  have  got  no  further  than  the  suggestion 
of  a  strange  and  unexpected  visit. 

The  next  account  is  from  Miss  Paget,  of  130,  Fulham  Road,  S.W. 
It  will  be  seen  that  the  words  which  the  percipient  heard  may  not 
unnaturally  be  referred  to  the  sudden  idea  in  the  agent's  mind  that 
his  unforeseen  accident  would  probably  get  him  into  a  scrape. 

"July  17th,  1885. 
(297)  "  The  following  is  the  exact  account  of  the  curious  appearance  to 
me  of  my  brother.  It  was  either  in  1874  or  1875.  My  brother  was  third 
mate  on  board  one  of  Wigram's  large  ships.  I  knew  he  was  somewhere  on 
the  coast  of  Australia,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  my  having  been  think- 
ing of  him  in  any  special  way  ;  though  as  he  was  my  only  brother,  and  we 
were  great  friends,  there  was  a  very  close  bond  always  between  us.  My 
father  was  living  in  the  country,  and  one  evening  I  went  into  the  kitchen 
by  myself,  soon  after  10,  to  get  some  hot  water  from  the  boiler.  There 
was  a  large  Duplex  lamp  in  the  kitchen,  so  it  was  quite  light ;  the 
servants  had  gone  to  bed,  and  I  was  to  turn  out  the  lamp.  As  I  was 
drawing  the  water,  I  looked  up,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  saw  my  brother 
coming  towards  me  from  the  outside  door  of  the  kitchen.  I  did  not 
see  the  door  open,  as  it  was  in  a  deep  recess,  and  he  was  crossing 
the  kitchen.  The  table  was  between  us,  and  he  sat  down  on  the 
corner  of  the  table  furthest  away  from  me.  I  noticed  he  was  in 
his  sailor  uniform  with  a  monkey  jacket  on,  and  the  wet  was 
shining  on  his  jacket  and  cap.i  I  exclaimed,  '  Miles  !  Where  have  you 
come  from  1 '  He  answered  in  his  natural  voice,  though  very  quickly, 
'  For  Grod's  sake,  don't  say  I'm  here.'  This  was  all  over  in  a  few 
seconds  and  as  I  jumped  towards  him   he  was  gone.     I  was   very  much 

1  Compare  cases  513,  520,  535,  537. 

142  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

frightened,  for  I  had  really  thought  it  was  my  brother  himself ;  and  it 
was  only  when  he  vanished  that  I  realised  it  was  only  an  appearance.  I 
went  up  to  my  room  and  wrote  down  the  date  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  which 
I  put  away  in  my  writing-table,  and  did  not  mention  the  circumstance  to 
any  one. 

"  About  three  months  afterwards  my  brother  came  home,  and  the 
night  of  his  arrival  I  sat  with  him  in  the  kitchen,  while  he  smoked.  I 
asked  him  in  a  casual  manner  if  he  had  had  any  adventures,  and  he  said, 
'  I  was  nearly  drowned  at  Melbourne.'  He  then  told  me  he  was 
ashore  without  leave,  and  on  returning  to  the  ship,  after  midnight,  he 
slipped  oflE"  the  gangway  between  the  side  of  the  ship  and  the  dock.  There 
was  very  little  space,  and  if  he  had  not  been  hauled  up  at  once,  he  must 
have  been  drowned.  He  remembered  thinking  he  was  drowning,  and 
then  became  unconscious.  ^  His  absence  without  leave  was  not  found  out, 
so  he  escaped  the  punishment  he  expected.  I  then  told  him  of  how  he  had 
appeared  to  me,  and  I  asked  him  the  date.  He  was  able  to  fix  it  exactly, 
as  the  ship  sailed  from  Melbourne  the  same  morning,  which  was  the 
reason  of  his  fear  of  being  punished,  as  all  hands  were  due  to  be  on 
board  the  evening  before.  The  date  was  the  same  as  the  date  of  his 
appearance  to  me,  but  the  hours  did  not  agree,  as  I  saw  him  soon  after  10 
p.m.,  and  his  accident  was  after  midnight.  He  had  no  recollection  of 
thinking  specially  of  me  at  the  time,  but  he  was  much  struck  by  the 
coincidence,  and  often  referred  to  it.  He  did  not  like  it,  and  often 
when  he  went  away  said,  '  Well,  I  hope  I  shan't  go  dodging  about  as  I 
did  that  time.' 

"  I  was  about  22  at  the  time,  and  he  was  20.  I  was  always  rather 
afraid  I  might  see  him  or  others  after  this,  but  I  have  never,  before 
or  since,  had  any  hallucination  of  the  sense  of  sight.  My  brother  died 
abroad  three  years  ago,  and  I  had  no  warning  then,  nor  do  I  imagine  I 
shall  ever  see  anything  again.  I  am  never  on  the  look  out  for  things  of 
that  kind,  but  if  I  ever  saw  anything  again  I  would  make  a  note  of  it. 
I  destroyed  the  note  I  made  of  the  date  as  soon  as  I  had  verified  it,  not 
thinking  it  could  interest  or  concern  anyone  else.  a  g,uTH  Paget  " 

[I  received  a  third-hand  account  of  this  incident  two  years  before  the 
above  was  written,  and  this  older  account  completely  agreed  with  the 
present  more  recent  one ;  which  shows,  at  any  rate,  that  the  inci- 
dents stand  out  with  distinctness  in  Miss  Paget's  memory.  In 
conversation,  Miss  Paget  told  me  that  at  the  moment  when  she  mistook 
the  apparition  for  her  brother  himself,  she  accounted  for  the  wetness, 
which  she  so  distinctly  remarked,  by  supposing  that  he  had  got  wet 
through  with  rain.  She  is  quite  sure  that  the  coincidence  of  night 
was  clearly  made  out,  when  she  and  her  brother  talked  the  matter 
over — which  of  course  makes  her  statement  as  to  the  coincidence  of  date 
technically  incorrect,  as  the  accident  occurred  after  midnight.  If  longitude 
be  allowed  for,  the  impression  must  have  followed  the  accident  by  about 
10  hours.] 

The  next  case  is  from  Marian  Hughes,  confidential  maid  and 
secretary  to  Miss  Julia  Wedgwood,  of  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W. 

1  See  p.  26. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     143 

"December,  188:^. 

(298)  "  In  the  winter  of  1878,  my  sister,  Mrs.  Barnes,  was  much  pressed 
to  marry  a  man  named  Benson,  who  was  much  attached  to  her ;  and  not 
succeeding  in  his  suit,  he  told  her  if  she  would  not  marry  him,  he  would 
take  employment  in  India.     He  obtained  a  situation  to  go  out  to  Madras. 

"  One  Saturday  night,  about  9  o'clock,  I,  in  the  following  spring,  went  to 
see  my  sister  ;  she  was  much  agitated,  and  told  me  that,  just  before  I  came 
in,  she  had  been  on  her  knees  scrubbing  the  floor  of  a  room  on  the  ground 
floor  (with  a  window  that  anyone  could  stand  at  and  look  in),  when  she 
heard  herself  called  twice,  '  Annie,  Annie,'  and  looking  up  at  the  window, 
she  saw  what  looked  to  her  like  the  face  of  the  friend  who  had  wanted  to 
marry  her.  She  at  once  got  up  and  rushed  out,  but  finding  no  one  there 
became  convinced  she  had  seen  an  apparition  announcing  the  death  of  her 
friend.  On  the  following  Monday,  she  sent  to  the  firm  in  the  City  with 
which  he  was  connected,  and  was  informed  that  he  had  been  ill,  but  was 
better  when  last  heard  of.  Shortly  afterwards,  knowing  Mr.  H.  Wedg- 
wood's interest  in  this  kind  of  story,  I  informed  him  of  the  occurrence, 
before  it  was  known  how  it  fared  with  my  sister's  friend  in  India. 

"  My  sister,  some  weeks  afterwards,  told  me  that  she  had  learnt  from 
his  employers  in  the  City  that  he  had  died  on  the  evening  of  the  day  she 
had  seen  the  apparition  in  London.  "  Marian  Hughes." 

The  Registrar  of  the  Diocese  of  Madras  writes  to  us  that  he  can  find 
no  record  of  Benson's  burial ;  and  an  exhaustive  search  in  the  records  of 
the  India  Oflice  has  been  equally  unsuccessful.  We  learn,  howevei',  from 
the  India  Ofi&ce  that  the  returns  do  not  profess  to  be  absolutely  complete. 

Writing  on  the  case  on  March  4, 1883,  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  says : — 

"  The  story  was  told  me  by  Marian  Hughes,  my  daughter's  confidential 
maid  and  attached  friend,  whose  truthfulness  may  be  entirely  relied  on. 
I  wanted  to  hear  it  from  her  sister  herself,  but  found  that  she  considered  it 
too  solemn  a  subject  to  speak  about.  I  was  told  of  the  apparition  of  the 
friend  in  India  shortly  after  it  occurred,  and  requested  Marian  to  inform 
me  as  soon  as  they  had  news  of  the  result."     He  adds : — 

"  My  note  of  the  case  [i.e.,  the  original  note  made  when  he  first  heard 
Marian  Hughes'  account]  was  dated  May  16th,  1878.  I  say,  'One  Satur- 
day evening  about  six  weeks  ago,'  &c.  On  July  19th,  in  an  article,  I  say, 
'  By  the  end  of  June  it  was  known  that  Annie's  friend  had  died 
suddenly  on  the  evening  of  Saturday,  30th  March,  the  day  noted  by 
Annie  as  the  day  of  the  apparition.'  " 

[Mrs.  Barnes  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination  on  one  other  occasion, 
when  she  heard  herself  called  by  the  voice  of  her  husband,  who,  it 
turned  out,  had  died  at  a  distance  two  days  before.] 

It  is  rare  for  nautical  stories  to  reach  the  level  of  evidence.  The 
following,  however,  is  a  case  where  the  testimony  seems  hardly  to 
leave  room  for  a  doubt  that  a  hallucination  of  a  particular  kind  was 
experienced  at  a  particular  crisis  ;  and  the  question  of  its  interpretation 
is  a  matter  not  of  nautical  but  of  scientific  judgment.  The  statement 
(which  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritualist)  was  drawn  up  sixteen 

144  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

days  after  the  incident  occurred,  through  the  prompt  energy  of  Mr.  W. 
H.  Harrison,  and  on  the  suggestion  of  the  late  Mr.  Cromwell  F.  Yarley, 
r  F.R.S.,  who  had  questioned  Captain  Blacklock  on  the  subject. 

y\  y         (299)  "  The  steamship  '  Robert  Lowe '  returned  to  the  Thames  on  Tues- 

^  -    day,  October  1 1  th,  1 870,  from  St.  Pierre,  Newfoundland,  where  she  had  been 

'^  \      repairing  one  of  the  French  Atlantic  Telegraph  Company's   cables.     An 

^        engineer  on  board,  Mr.  W.  H.  Pearce,  of   37,  Augusta  Street,  East  India 

Road,   Poplar,   was  taken  ill  with  the  typhus  fever,   and  on  the  4th  of 

October  last  he  died.      One  of  his  mates,  Mr.  D.  Brown,  of   1,  Edward 

Street,  Hudson's  Road,  Canning  Town,  Plaistow,  a  strong,  healthy  man, 

a  stoker,  not  likely  to  be  led  astray  by  imagination,  attended  him  till  the 

day  before  he  died.     [Brown,  it  appears,  bore  the  best  of  characters,  and 

had  a  strong  friendship  for  Pearce.]     On  the  afternoon  before  his  death, 

at  3  o'clock,  in  broad  daylight,   Brown  was  attending  the  sick  man,  who 

wanted  to  get  out  of  bed,  but  his  companion  prevented  him.     And  this  is 

what  the  witness  says  he  saw : — 

"  '  I  was  standing  on  one  side  of  the  bunk,  and  while  trying  to  pre- 
vent Pearce  from  rising,  I  saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  bunk,  the  wife, 
two  children,  and  the  mother  of  the  dying  man,  all  of  whom  I  knew 
very  well,  and  they  are  all  still  living.  They  appeared  to  be  very  sorrow- 
ful, but  in  all  other  respects  were  the  same  as  ordinary  human  beings.  I 
could  not  see  through  them  ;  they  were  not  at  all  transparent.  They  had 
on  their  ordinary  clothes,  and,  perhaps,  looked  rather  paler  than  usual. 
The  mother  said  to  me  in  a  clearly  audible  voice,  "  He  will  be  buried  on 
Thursday,  at  12  o'clock,  in  about  fourteeen  hundred  fathoms  of  water." 
They  all  then  vanished  instantly,  and  I  saw  them  no  more.  Pearce  did 
not  see  them,  as  he  was  delirious,  and  had  been  so  for  two  days  previously. 
I  ran  out  of  the  berth  in  a  state  of  great  excitement,  and  did  not  enter  it 
again  while  he  was  alive.  He  died  on  Tuesday,  not  Thursday,  and  was 
buried  at  4  o'clock,  not  12.^  It  was  a  sudden  surprise  to  me  to  see  the 
apparitions.  I  expected  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  when  I  saw  them  I 
was  perfectly  cool  and  collected.  I  had  never  before  seen  anything  of 
the  kind  in  my  life,  and  my  health  is,  and  always  has  been,  good.  About 
five  minutes  afterwards  I  told  Captain  Blacklock  I  would  stop  with  the 
sick  man  no  longer,  but  would  not  tell  him  why,  thinking  that  if  I  did, 
nobody  else  would  take  my  place.  About  an  hour  later,  I  told  Captain 
Blacklock  and  Mr.  Dunbar,  the  chief  engineer,  whose  address  is  Old 
Mill,  near  Port  William,  Wigtownshire,  Scotland.' 

"  The  other  sailors  on  board  say  that  they  saw  that  Mr.  Brown  was 
greatly  agitated  from  some  cause,  and  they  gradually  drew  this  narrative 
out  of  him."     Captain  Blacklock  says: — 

"  Brown  came  down  into  the  cabin,  looking  very  pale  and  frightened, 
and  declared  in  a  strong  and  decided  way  that  he  would  not  attend  the 
sick  man  any  more  on  any  conditions — not  for  a  thousand  pounds.     I  told 

1  This  markedly  illustrates  the  absence,  from  first-hand  and  immediate  accounts,  of 
the  spurious  marvels  which  have  done  so  much  to  mask  the  facts  of  telepathy.  It  would 
be  a  tolerably  safe  prophecy  that  in  any  third-hand  version  of  this  occurrence  the  great 
point  would  be  that  the  death  and  burial  took  place  on  the  (^ay  and  at  the  hour  predicted. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  FEBCIPIENT'S  SENSES     145 

him  that  he  ought  to  attend  a  sick  and  dying  comrade,  especially  as  a 
storm  was  raging,  and  he  needed  kind  and  considerate  help,  such  as  any 
of  us  might  need  one  day.  I  pressed  him  all  the  more,  as  I  wanted  a 
strong  steady  man  to  attend  the  delirious  invalid  ;  besides,  it  being  bad 
weather,  the  other  men  were  fagged  and  over-worked.  Brown  would  not 
go  back,  and  he  left  the  cabin,  as  I  think,  crying,  so  I  sent  him  out  a 
glass  of  brandy.  Shortly  after  that,  I  heard  he  was  very  ill,  and  that  his 
mates  had  some  trouble  in  soothing  and  calming  him. 

"  We  the  undersigned,  officials  on  board  the  '  Robert  Lowe,'  declare  the 
above  statements  to  be  true,  so  far  as  each  of  the  circumstances  came 
under  our  personal  notice,  but  we  none  of  us  commit  ourselves  to  any 
opinion  as  to  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon.  We  give  the  statement 
simply  because  we  have  been  requested  to  do  so,  rumours  of  the  occurrence 
having  gone  abroad  and  caused  inquiries  to  be  made. 

(Signed)     "J.  Blacklock,  Commander." 

"  Andrew  Dunbar,  First  Engineer. 

(Signatures  of  six  other  members  of  the  crew.) 

"Witness,  W.  H.  Harrison. 

"  October  20th,  1870." 

[Captain  Blacklock  is  dead.  The  "  Robert  Lowe  "  was  lost  in  1872, 
and  only  one  or  two  of  the  crew  escaped.  The  account  included  a  descrip- 
tion of  some  distressing  experiences  of  Mrs.  Pearce's,  which  had  occurred 
in  London  during  the  few  days  before  her  husband's  death,  and  filled  her 
with  anxiety  on  his  account ;  but  this  anxiety  cannot  be  safely  assumed 
to  have  been  in  any  way  a  condition  of  Brown's  experience.] 

It  cannot,  of  course,  be  proved  that  this  was  not  a  case  of 
purely  subjective  hallucination,  as  Brown  knew  the  Pearce  family  by 
sight.  But  the  vision,  both  in  its  character  and  its  effects,  was  un- 
like any  of  those  which  were  treated  above  (Vol.  I.,  Chap.  XI.)  as  due 
to  expectancy  or  anxiety.  And  we  at  any  rate  have  the  coincidence 
that  a  healthy  man  experienced  the  one  hallucination  of  his  life — and 
an  extremely  vivid  and  highly-developed  specimen — in  broad  daylight, 
at  a  time  when  the  friend  in  whose  beclouded  mind  the  very  scene 
evoked  may  well  have  been  dominant,  was  dying  in  close  proximity  to 
him.^ 

The  following  is  another  nautical  case,  as  to  which  it  is  not  easy 
to  form  an  opinion.  The  points  against  it  are  that  it  is  from  an 
uneducated  witness ;  and  that  it  contains  an  account  of  an  experience 
which  in  one  respect — the  length  of  its  duration — has  scarcely  a 
parallel,  as  far  as  I  know,  among  hallucinations  of  sane  and  healthy 
persons.^     Nevertheless,  unless  the  account  is  an  absolute  fabrication, 

i_Asregards  the  supposition  that  the  agent  was  the  sick  man  himself,  c/.  case  30, 
Vol.  i.,  pp.  214-6.  As  to  the  appearance  of  more  figures  than  one,  see  the  remarks  on 
case  202. 

^  See  however  cases  590  and  621. 

VOL.    II.  L 

146  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

which  seems  very  unlikely,  the  reasonable  conclusion,  I  think, 
would  be  that  a  telepathic  hallucination  was  produced,  though  its 
details  may  have  been  exaggerated.  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  of  3,  Bouverie 
Square,  Folkestone,  wrote,  on  October  21st,  1882  : — 

(300)  "  Some  time  ago,  my  son  told  me  that  a  friend  of  his,  a  rough  and 
simple-minded  fellow,  had  returned  from  Shields,  and  told  him  a  curious 
tale.  The  man  is  a  sailor,  and  had  served  with  his  father  ever  since  he 
was  a  boy,  in  a  collier  which  trades  between  this  port  and  the  North.  The 
youth,  having  become  very  proficient  in  his  calling,  went  on  his  voyages, 
leaving  his  father,  now  an  elderly  man,  at  home.  During  a  stormy  voyage, 
and  not  far  ofi"  the  Humber,  the  young  sailor  saw  his  father,  whom  he  had 
left  in  excellent  health,  pacing  the  deck,  and  calling  out  several  times,  as 
he  was  wont  to  do,  '  Mind  your  helm,  Joe  ! '  The  young  man  wished  to 
speak  to  his  father,  but  could  not ;  some  occult  power  prevented  him.  At 
the  end  of  the  voyage  a  letter  awaited  the  young  sailor,  announcing  the 
death  of  the  father  at  the  precise  time  when  he  appeared  to  his  son  ;  but 
please  to  remark  (a  matter  of  some  importance,  I  think,)  that  the  appari- 
tion remained  on  deck  some  three  hours,  until  the  vessel  got  to  Grimsby. 
[This  differs  from  the  first-hand  account.] 

"  I  disbelieved  my  son's  story,  and  requested  him  to  ask  his  friend  to 
come  and  take  tea  with  me,  that  I  might  hear  the  account  from  his  own 
mouth.  He  came.  The  simplicity  of  his  manner,  his  plain,  open-hearted 
account,  and  I  may  even  say  his  stupidity,  manifested  in  his  peculiar 
diction,  imparted  an  impress  to  his  tale." 

At  our  request  Mr.  Lyons  interrogated  Edward  Sings  more  formally, 
the  next  time  that  the  latter  visited  Folkestone.  The  following  is  Sings' 
own  account : — 

"  Folkestone. 

"December  29th,  1882. 

"  I  left  my  father  last  about  six  years  ago,  on  a  Good  Friday.  He  was 
in  good  healtla  when  I  left  him.  We  were  in  a  gale  of  wind,  and  we  were 
running  in  the  Humber ;  we  carried  the  main  gaff"  away ;  I  was  at  the 
wheel  steering  her  in.  He  came  to  me  3  or  4  times,  tapped  me  on  the 
shoulder,  and  told  me  to  mind  the  helm,  and  I  told  the  captain  my  father 
was  drowned,  or  something  happened  to  him.  After  we  got  in,  when  it 
was  my  watch,  he  was  walking  to  and  fro  with  me,  and  I  went  down  below 
and  told  my  mate  I  could  not  stop  up,  and  I  did  not  like  to.  My  mate 
took  my  watch.  I  never  could  speak  to  my  father,  for  something  kept  me 
from  doing  so.  I  heard  of  my  father's  death  a  week  afterwards.  No  one 
else  saw  my  father's  spirit.^  My  father  stopped  on  deck  with  me  an  hour, 
and  as  I  could  not  stand  it  any  longer  I  went  below,  and  my  mate  took 
my  place.  We  cast  both  anchors,  and  were  towed  into  Grimsby.  My 
mother  and  sister  were  at  my  father's  death-bed,  and  they  told  me  that 
my  father  asked  several  times  whether  I  was  in  the  harbour. 

"  I  certify  this  to  be  a  true  account.  "  Edwaed  Sings." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  E.  Sings'  father  died  on 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     147 

April  7,   1877,   aged   53.     Good  Friday  fell  on  March   30;  and  this,  it 
will  be  seen,  corresponds  very  well  with  the  above  statement. 

Mr.  Lyons  has  kindly  visited  Sings'  mother  and  sister,  at  67,  Tontine 
Street,  Folkestone,  and  received  a  similar  account  from  them. 

The  next  case  is  from  a  lady  whose  name  may  be  given  privately. 

She  herself  would   have  been  perfectly  willing    that    it    should    be 

published,  because  the  incident  "  is  as  natural  and  real  to  me  as  any 

other  event  in  my  life  " ;  but  she  thinks  that  the  publication  might 

give  annoyance  to  some  of  her  relatives.  c„>-vc'^'"^^ 

"C Rectory.  ^"^"^ 

"  May  23rd,  1884. 
(301)  "  In  June,  1878,  when  nursing  a  brother  who  was  ill,  I  woke  up 
suddenly  about  2  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  24th,  calling  him,  and 
feeling  strongly  that  he  wanted  me.  I  jumped  up  and  went  to  the 
table,  intending  to  get  his  medicine,  as  I  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  by 
day,  but  the  touch  of  the  table  brought  me  to  my  senses,  and  I  went 
back  to  bed,  thinking  it  was  merely  fancy.  I  was  17  then,  quite  strong 
and  well,  and  had  never  been  conscious  of  any  such  impression  before. 
My  sister,  who  slept  in  a  room  opening  off  mine,  heard  me  call  my 
brother's  name,  and  came  in  to  see  what  I  was  doing,  and  stayed  with  me 
for  some  time. 

"  On  asking  my  brother  the  next  morning  what  sort  of  night  he  had 
had,  he  said,  '  Very  wakeful  at  first,  but  after  you  came  in  at  2  o'clock  I 
went  to  sleep  all  right.'  I  said  nothing  to  him  of  my  experience  at  that 
hour,  but  told  him  I  had  never  been  in  his  room  all  night.  He  answered, 
'  Of  course  you  were ;  you  came  in  and  gave  me  my  drops,  and  settled  my 
pillows,  and  then  I  got  up  and  did  what  you  told  me,'  which  was  opening 
the  window.  I  assured  him  I  had  done  nothing  of  the  kind,  when  he  said 
quite  impatiently,  '  I  couldn't  have  imagined  it  unless  you  had ;  but  you 
mustn't  do  it  again  or  you  will  catch  cold,  running  about  the  house  at 
night.' 

"  I  said  no  more  about  it  for  fear  of  alarming  him,  and  I  never  told 
anyone  of  it,  lest  they  should  think  the  nursing  was  making  me  ill,  but 
I  was  quite  strong  and  well  at  the  time.  I  put  it  down  in  my  note-book 
that  day,  and  a  year  later  I  have  another  reference  there  to  this  same 
event. 

"  Two  months  later,  in  August,  1878,  I  was  in  Hampshire,  my  brother 
in  Sussex.  I  knew  he  was  dying,  but  had  no  reason  for  thinking  him  in 
any  more  immediate  danger  on  that  day.  About  9  o'clock,  during  break- 
fast, a  sudden  feeling  of  great  depression  came  over  me,  which  increased 
and  I  could  not  shake  it  off  all  the  morning,  though  I  did  not  particularly 
connect  it  with  my  brother.  One  of  my  sisters  noticed  it,  and  asked  if  I 
felt  ill.  Later  on,  a  telegram  came  to  say  that  my  brother  had  died  quite 
suddenly,  a  few  minutes  past  9  o'clock.  I  only  mention  this  because  it 
was  the  only  other  occasion  on  which  I  ever  remember  being  conscious  of 
such  a  sensation. 

"K.  A.  O." 

[This  last  coincidence  may  easily,  of  course,  have  been  accidental.] 

VOL.  II.  1-2 

148  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

Miss  0.  adds  : — 

"  My  sister  is  away  from  home,  so  I  wrote  to  her  without  giving  any 
reason  for  wanting  her  evidence,  and  tried  to  say  nothing  that  would 
recall  this  occurrence  to  her  mind.  I  simply  asked  her,  '  Do  you  re- 
member your  coming  into  my  room  one  night  during  H.'s  illness  1  If 
you  do,  I  want  a  written  statement  of  what  you  remember.' 

"  I  enclose  her  reply.  She  mentions  that  1  called  his  name,  and  that 
she  found  me  crying,  which  was  true,  as  the  impression  that  he  wanted 
me  was  so  strongly  upon  me,  and  yet  I  believed  it  to  be  fancy.  She 
knows  that  I  never  left  my  room,  otherwise  I  might  have  thought  that 
I  had  really  gone  down  the  passage  to  my  brother's  room,  which  was  at 
the  other  end,  but  I  never  walked  in  my  sleep  in  my  life. 

"  My  brother  was  so  positive  about  it  that  I  felt  certain  he  believed  I 
had  actually  done  what  I  had  tried  to  do  in  my  own  room.  It  seemed 
perfectly  natural  to  me,  but  I  said  nothing  to  my  people,  for  fear  they 
should  think  the  strain  of  nursing  would  make  me  ill. 

"These  are  the  references  in  my  note-book:  On  June  25th,  1878, 
among  other  things  about  my  brother,  '  He  said  that  in  the  night  he 
woke  up,  firmly  persuaded  that  I  had  been  in  his  room,  and  was  talking 
to  him,  and  he  got  up  at  once,  and  did  exactly  as  I  told  him.'  On 
June  24th,  1879:  'It  was  this  night  last  year  that  I  woke  up  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  calling  H.,  and  then  E.  came  in.  And  the  next 
morning  he  told  me  that  just  at  that  moment  he  thought  I  came  into  his 
room,  and  he  got  up  to  do  as  I  told  him.' 

"I  can't  account  for  his  thinking  I  told  him  to  open  the  window, 
unless  from  the  fact  that  I  got  up  and  went  over  to  the  window  in  my 
room  where  the  table  was. 

"  My  brother  was  several  years  older  than  myself,  and  I  was  extremely 
attached  to  him  ;  he  was  accustomed  to  my  doing  this  sort  of  thing  for 
him  by  day. 

"This  happened  at  Salehurst  Vicarage,  in  Sussex,  two  months  before 
my  father  came  here.  I  never  spoke  of  it  to  them  until  this  week,  when 
I  told  my  brothers  and  sisters." 

The  following  is  the  enclosure  mentioned  : — 

"May  21st,  1884. 

"  I  remember  well  the  event  you  allude  to,  of  how  you  awoke  one 
night,  calling  for  Herbert,  and  I  went  into  your  room,  found  you  crying, 
and  tried  to  comfort  you.     I  have  often  thought  of  it  since. 

"Emily  C.  O." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  K.  A.  O.  says  : — 

"You  ask  if  this  experience  was  unique  in  my  brother's  case,  and  I 
believe  it  to  be  so.  He  would  have  treated  anything  of  the  kind  merely 
as  a  joke,  and  the  idea  that  such  a  thing  as  thought-transference  was 
possible  would  never  have  crossed  his  mind.  Nothing  that  I  had  done 
before  could  have  made  him  expect  me  at  night,  for  I  had  never  done 
any  night  nursing,  and  he  himself  scolded  me  for  what  he  imagined  the 
imprudence  of  my  proceeding.  If  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  going  to  his 
room,  then  I  should  have  gone  at  once  when  I  felt  he  wanted  me,  but  as  I 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.    149 

had  never  done  so,  I  was  afraid  of  alarming  him  by  going  in  at  night.     I 
have  never  had  any  similar  experience." 

This  case  resembles  No.  271  above,  in  the  point  that  the  "  agency" 
was  apparently  exercised  at  the  moment  of  startled  waking  from 
sleep ;  but  considering  the  circumstances,  the  present  coincidence 
could  more  easily  than  the  other  be  regarded  as  accidental.  Had  the 
brother's  experience  been  a  dream,  or  even  a  vision  between  sleeping 
and  waking,  we  should  feel  that  to  be  the  reasonable  view.  There  is 
one  feature  in  the  account,  no  doubt,  which  looks  very  like  dreaming 
— the  brother's  remark,  "  You  gave  me  my  drops."  But  it  will  be 
observed  that  this  is  not  mentioned  in  the  entry  in  the  note-book  ; 
it  seems  therefore  very  probable  that  it  was  an  unconscious  addition 
on  Miss  O.'s  part.  On  the  other  side  we  have  her  brother's  recorded 
testimony  that  the  phantasmal  visit  took  place  at  a  time  when 
he  was  "  very  wakeful " ;  and  it  would  be  at  least  noteworthy 
that  he  should  have  had  what  we  are  led  to  suppose  was  the  one 
w^aking  hallucination  of  his  life,  at  the  very  time  that  his  sister  was  ?  ^ 
also  experiencing  a  unique  and  closely  corresponding  impression. 

§  3.  The  next  case  is  of  a  rarer  type  ;  as,  though  the  senses  of  sight 
and  hearing  were  both  affected,  the  two  impressions  were  not 
combined  in  the  same  incident,  but  were  separated  by  several  hours 
interval.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Garling,  of  12,  Westbourne 
Gardens,  Folkestone,  a  witness  as  free  from  credulity  and  superstitious 
fancies  as  can  well  be  imagined. 

"February,  1883.       //^'^"'^ 

(302)  "  One  Thursday  evening,  about  the  middle  of  August  in  1849,  I  -'<-  •'^ 
went,  as  I  often  did,  to  pass  the  evening  with  the  Rev. — Harrison  and  his 
family,  with  whom  I  had  for  many  years  lived  on  terms  of  the  closest 
intimacy.  The  weather  being  very  fine,  we  made  up  a  party  with  the 
neighbours,  and  went  to  the  Surrey  Zoological  Gardens,  and  spent  the 
evening  there.  I  note  this  particularly,  because  it  proves  that  he  and  his 
family  were  in  good  health  incontestably  on  that  day,  and  that  no 
suspicion  of  what  was  to  follow  so  soon  existed  with  anyone.  The  next 
day  I  went  down  on  a  visit  to  some  relatives  in  Hertfordshire,  who  lived 
at  a  house  called  Flamstead  Lodge,  about  26  miles  from  London,  on  the 
high  road.  We  usually  dined  at  2  o'clock,  and  on  Monday  afternoon 
following,  after  their  early  dinner,  I  left  the  ladies  in  the  drawing-room, 
and  sauntered  through  the  paddock  down  to  the  high  road.  You  will 
note  the  time  was  in  the  middle  of  a  sunny  August  day,  in  a  wide,  public, 
commonplace  high  road,  not  a  hundred  yards  from  a  roadside  public-house — 
I  myself  in  a  perfectly  cheerful,  healthy  frame  of  mind — no  surroundings 
of  any  kind  to  excite  the  imagination,  some  country  people  not  far  off, 

150  ,  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap. 

indeed,  at  the  time  I  speak  of.  Suddenly  a  '  phantom  '  stood  before  me,  so 
close  that  had  it  been  a  human  being  it  must  have  touched  me  ;  blotting 
out  for  a  moment  the  landscape  and  surrounding  objects  ;  itself  indistinct 
in  outline,  but  with  lips  that  seemed  to  move  and  murmur  something, 
and  with  eyes  fearfully  distinct  that  fixed  and  followed  and  glared  into 
mine,  with  a  look  so  intense  and  deeply  earnest  that  I  fairly  recoiled  from 
the  spot  and  started  backwards.  I  said  to  myself  instinctively  and 
probably  uttered  it  aloud,  '  Good  God,  it  is  Harrison  ! '  though  not  think- 
ing of  him  or  having  reason  to  think  of  him  in  the  remotest  degree  at  the 
■cnonient.  In  probably  a  few  seconds,  which  seemed  to  me  far  longer,  it 
/■anished,  leaving  me  rooted  to  the  spot  for  a  few  moments,  and  sensible 
of  the  reality  of  the  vision  by  the  curious  physical  effect  it  left  upon  me. 
This  was  as  if  the  blood  was  like  ice  in  my  veins  •}  no  flutter  of  the 
nerves,  but  a  deadly  chill  feeling  that  lasted  more  or  less  for  nearly  an 
hour,  and  only  gradually  wore  off  as  the  circulation  returned.  I  have 
never  felt  any  similar  sensation  before  or  since.  I  said  nothing  to  the 
ladies  when  I  returned,  as  I  should  have  frightened  them  out  of  their  wits, 
and  the  impression  made  upon  me  gradually  became  fainter  as  the  day 
wore  out. 

"  I  have  said  that  the  house  was  near  the  high  road ;  it  stood  in  its 
own  grounds  by  the  side  of  a  country  lane  leading  up  to  the  village,  200  or 
300  yards  or  more  from  any  other  habitation,  with  a  seven-foot  iron 
railing  in  front  to  keep  out  tramps  ;  gates  always  locked  at  night ;  about 
30  feet  of  hard  gravel  and  paved  pathway  from  front  door  to  lane.  A 
beautiful  quiet  summer  evening  followed.  Placed  as  the  house  was,  with 
hard  gravel  and  high  iron  palisade  and  paving,  no  one  could  have 
approached  the  house  in  the  deep  silence  of  that  summer  evening  without 
being  heard  a  long  way  off.  There  was,  moreover,  a  large  dog  in  a  kennel, 
placed  so  as  to  command  the  front  entrance,  especially  to  warn  off 
intruders  ;  and  a  little  terrier  inside  that  barked  at  everybody  and  at 
every  noise.  We  were  just  retiring  to  bed,  and  were  sitting  in  the 
drawing-room,  which  was  on  the  ground  floor,  close  by  the  front  door,  the 
terrier  within.  The  servants  had  already  gone  to  bed  in  a  room  quite  at 
the  back,  60  feet  away.  They,  when  they  came  down,  told  us  they  were 
asleep,  and  were  roused  by  the  noise.  Suddenly  there  came  to  the  front 
door  a  noise  so  loud  and  continuous  (the  door  seeming  to  shake  in  the 
frame  and  to  vibrate  under  some  tremendous  blows),  that  we  started  to 
our  feet  in  amazement,  and  the  servants  came  in  a  moment  after,  half- 
dressed,  running  downstairs  from  their  room  at  the  back  to  know  what  it 
was.  We  went  at  once  to  the  door,  but  could  neither  hear  nor  see 
anything  or  anybody.  And  the  dogs  gave  no  tongue  whatever.  The 
terrier,  contrary  to  its  nature,  slunk  shivering  under  the  sofa,  and  would 
not  stop  even  at  the  door,  and  nothing  could  induce  him  to  go  into  the 
darkness.  There  was  no  knocker  on  the  door,  nothing  to  fall  down,  and 
no  possibility  of  anyone  approaching  or  leaving  the  house,  so  situated,  in 
that  profound  silence,  wii-hout  discovery.  They  were  all  horribly 
frightened,  and  I  found  it  very  diflicult  to  get  them  to  go  to  bed,  but  I 
was  myself  in  so  unimpressionable  a  frame  of  mind  that  I  did  not  at  the 
time  connect  it  with  the  '  phantom '  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  still  went  to 

1  See  p.  37,  note. 

XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.    151 

bed  myself,  pondering  upon  it  and  seeking  some  obvious  explanation  to 
satisfy  the  members  of  the  household,  but  without  success. 

"I  stopped  there  till  Wednesday  morning,  having  no  suspicion  of  what 
had  happened  in  my  absence.  On  that  morning  I  returned  to  town  to  my 
chambers,  then  at  No.  11,  King's  Road,  Grays  Inn.  My  clerk  met  me 
at  the  door  with,  '  Sir,  a  gentleman  has  been  here  two  or  three  times  ;  is 
most  anxious  to  see  you ;  says  he  must  see  you  immediately ;  he  is  gone 
out  for  a  few  minutes  to  get  a  biscuit,  and  he  will  be  back  directly.'  In 
a  few  minutes  the  gentleman  returned,  and  I  recognised  at  once  a  Mr. 
Chadwick,  also  an  intimate  friend  of  Harrison  and  his  family.  He  then 
told  me,  to  my  amazement,  '  There  has  been  a  fearful  visitation  of  cholera 
in  the  Wandsworth  Road,'  meaning  at  Mr.  Harrison's ;  '  all  are  gone.' 
Mrs.  Rosco  was  attacked  on  Friday,  and  died  ;  her  maid  the  same  evening, 
and  died.  Mrs.  Harrison  was  attacked  on  Saturday  morning,  and  died 
that  evening.  The  housemaid  died  on  Sunday.  The  cook  also  was  taken 
ill,  was  carried  away,  and  escaped  very  narrowly.  Poor  Harrison  was 
attacked  himself  on  Sunday  night,  was  fearfully  ill  all  Monday  and 
yesterday,  and  has  been  taken  away  from  the  Pest-house  in  the  Wands- 
worth Road  to  Jack  Straw's  Castle  at  Hampstead,  to  get  into  a  better 
air  ;  he  was  begging  and  praying  for  the  people  about  him,  all  Monday 
and  yesterday,  to  send  for  you,  but  nobody  knew  where  you  were  gone  to. 
You  must  take  a  cab  at  once  and  come  with  me,  or  you  will  not  see  him 
alive.'  I  went  with  Chadwick  at  once,  but  he  was  dead  before  I  reached 
the  place. 

"  H.  B.  Gaeling." 

The  obituary  in  the  Watchman,  for  August  15th,  1849,  shows  that  Mrs. 
Rosco  died  from  cholera  on  August  4th,  Mrs.  Harrison  on  August  8th, 
and  the  Rev.  T.  Harrison  on  Thursday  (not  Wednesday),  the  9th,  at 
Hampstead. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Garling  says  : — 

"  The  ladies  were  old,  and  have  been  dead  some  25  years.  Of  the 
servants  at  the  house  all  trace  has  been  lost." 

Mr.  Garling  added  a  few  details  in  conversation  with  the  present 
writer.  The  figure  met  him  on  the  high  road,  so  close  to  his  face  that  he 
hardly  observed  anything  in  detail  except  the  face.  He  has  had  one  other 
hallucination,  when  he  seemed  to  see  the  figure  of  a  friend  at  the  foot  of 
his  bed.  But  the  friend  was  one  whose  funeral  he  had  just  been  attending, 
and  who,  moreover,  had  been  accustomed,  in  life,  to  sit  where  the  figure 
was  seen  ;  and  Mr.  Garling  himself  was  going  to  sleep  at  the  time.  The 
experience,  therefore,  cannot  be  argued  to  show  any  special  proclivity  to 
subjective  hallucination. 

The  auditory  experience  here  is  a  good  specimen  of  what  I  have  L^j-"-''^"^'*^^ 
called  the  rudiTnentarv  type — a  class  of  which  the  inconclusiveness  ^  ''^"^  ^****^ 
has  been  sufficiently  dwelt  on.     But  clearly  the  presumption  that  the     ■ 
sound  was  telepathic  in  origin  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  of  the  visual   '''*^ 
experience  which  preceded  it.     Telepathy  having  (as  we  may  reason- 

152         CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  SENSE.      [chap. 

ably  suppose)  produced  the  first  phenomenon,  it  is  not  unreasonable 
to  credit  it  with  the  second ;  especially  since  the  second,  though 
it  affected  so  many  persons,  seems  in  itself  particularly  hard  to  account 
for  by  any  objective  cause  in  the  vicinity.  It  may  appear,  no  doubt, 
extremely  strange  that  the  conditions  which  first  flashed  an  impression 
to  the  one  person  directly  interested  should  afterwards  involve  the 
whole  household  in  a  psychic  storm  ;  but  this  topic  belongs  to  the 
concluding  chapter,  on  "  Collective  Cases." 

XVII.] 

CHAPTER  XYII. 

RECIPROCAL  CASES. 

§  1.  We  have  now  to  consider  a  quite  new  type  of  telepathic  action. 
In  the  classes  which  have  so  far  been  passed  in  review,  whether 
experimental  or  spontaneous,  the  parts  of  the  agent  and  the  per- 
cipient have  been  well  defined,  and  the  current  of  influence  has  set 
from  the  one  to  the  other  in  an  unmistakeable  fashion.  But  in  several 
cases,  it  may  be  remembered,  (especially  Nos.  35  and  94,)  we  have  had 
indications  that  the  influence  might  be  a  reciprocal  one — that  each 
of  the  parties  might  receive  a  telepathic  impulse  from  the  other,  and 
so  each  be  at  once  agent  and  percipient.  The  cases  referred  to 
were  doubtful,  because  the  experience  at  one  end  of  the  line  was  a 
dream  ;  and  dreams  having  an  almost  limitless  scope,  it  was  conceivable 
enough  that  that  of  Mr.  Newnham,  for  instance,  though  it  curiously 
corresponded  with  his  fiancees  actions  and  surroundings  at  the  time, 
did  so  by  accident ;  and  that  therefore  his  mental  condition,  while  it 
afi'ected  her,  was  not  affected  by  her.  But  had  he  had  a  waking  vision 
of  her,  as  she  had  of  him,  we  should  have  considered  it  probable  that 
the  influence  was  mutual ;  since  if  two  rare  or  unique  events,  which 
present  so  obvious  a  'prima  facie  connection  as  A's  vision  of  B  and 
B's  vision  of  A,  fall  at  the  same  time,  we  cannot  readily  assume  the 
coincidence  to  be  accidental.  And  if  there  are  further  and  more 
distinct  grounds  for  attributing  B's  vision  to  telepathy — say  because 
A  is  dying  at  the  time — it  will  be  only  reasonable  to  regard  A's 
vision  as  part  of  the  same  complex  phenomenon,  rather  than  to 
suppose  that  A  has  an  accidental  vision  at  the  same  time  as  B  has  a 
telepathic  one.  But  of  course  the  proof  of  a  reciprocal  influence 
would  be  stronger  still  if,  at  the  tite  time  of  B's  impression  of  A,  A 
expressed  in  words  some  piece  of  knowledge  as  to  B's  condition  which 
could  not  have  been  acquired  in  a  normal  manner.  We  thus  see  that 
a  group  of  cases  which  have  all   the  same  claim  to  be  considered 

/ 

154  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

telepathic,  may  have  different  claims,  ranging  from  the  very  doubtful 
to  the  very  conclusive,  to  be  considered  reciprocally  telepathic.^ 

I  will  begin  with  a  couple  of  the  more  doubtful  cases.  The 
following  account  was  received  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  G.  J. 
Romanes,  F.R.S.,  who  is  well  acquainted  with  the  narrator. 

y 

"March  18th,  1883. 

(303)  "  On  the  night  of  the  26th  of  October,  1872,  I  suddenly  felt  very 
unwell,  and  went  to  bed  about  half-past  9,  an  hour  earlier  than  usual,  and 
fell  asleep  almost  immediately,  when  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream,  which 
impressed  me  greatly ;  so  much  so,  that  I  remarked  to  my  wife,  on 
waking,  that  I  feared  we  should  shortly  receive  bad  news.  I  imagined 
I  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  near  a  table,  reading,  when  an 
old  lady  suddenly  appeared  seated  on  the  opposite  side,  close  to  the 
table.  She  neither  spoke  nor  moved  much,  but  gazed  very  intently  on 
me,  and  I  on  her,  for  at  least  20  minutes.  I  was  much  struck  by  her 
appearance,  she  having  white  hair,  very  dark  eyebrows,  and  penetrating 
eyes.  I  did  not  recognise  her  at  all,  but  thought  she  was  a  stranger.  My 
attention  was  then  directed  to  the  door,  which  opened,  and  my  aunt 
entering  and  seeing  me  and  the  old  lady  staring  at  each  other  in  this 
extraordinary  way,  with  much  surprise  and  in  a  tone  of  reproach 
exclaimed,  '  John  !  don't  you  know  who  this  is  ? '  and  without  giving  me 
time  to  reply  said,  '  Why,  this  is  your  grandmother,'  whereupon  my 
ghostly  visitor  suddenly  rose  from  her  chair,  embraced  me,  and  vanished. 

1  The  numerous  cases  where  two  friends  in  different  places  prove  to  have  been  each 
exceptionally  engrossed  with  the  idea  of  the  other  at  the  same  moment,  must  not  be  put 
forward  as  instances  of  telepathic,  much  less  of  reciprocal,  action  ;  for  we  may  always 
suppose  that  the  impressions  only  appeared  to  have  been  exceptionally  vivid  after 
the  fact  of  the  coincidence  had  given  them  a  certain  exceptional  interest.  The  undue 
importance  often  attached  to  such  incidents  is  to  be  regretted,  since  it  confuses  the  subject, 
and  to  some  extent  excuses  a  similar  confusion  on  the  part  of  opponents — as,  e.g.,  when  an 
eminent  man  of  science  thinks  telepathy  sufficiently  refuted  by  this  very  consideration, 
that  by  accident  friends  sometimes  think  of  one  another,  and  even  write  to  one  another, 
simultaneously  (Z'ewtec/ie  jBu»rfsc/i«M  for  Jan.,  1886,  p.  45).  Nor  will  it  suffice  for  the 
exceptional  character  of  one  of  the  impressions  to  be  established  beyond  doubt.  Tor 
example.  Miss  Edith  Taylor,  of  9,  Endsleigh  Gardens,  N.W.,  tells  us  of  the  following 
experience  of  herself  and  a  friend. 

"June  25th,  1884. 

"  I  was  living  at  the  time  in  Germany,  and  my  friend  in  Holland.  She  had  been 
visiting  at  the  house  where  I  was  staying,  but  had  returned  home  some  weeks  before 
the  '  illusion  '  occurred.  One  evening  in  the  autumn  of  1880,  I  was  walking  alone  in  the 
garden,  trying  to  learn  some  German  poetry,  and  not  succeeding  very  well,  when  I  heard 
some  one  step  on  to  the  gravel  walk  behind  me.  I  then  felt  the  touch  of  a  hand  on  my 
arm,  and  my  friend's  voice  said  pretty  distinctly,  '  Edith,  Edith.'  I  turned  round  very 
quickly,  and  I  believe  I  said,  '  Why,  what  is  it  ? '  I  certainly  expected  to  find  some  one 
behind  me,  and  had  a  sort  of  wild  idea  that  it  must  be  my  friend,  from  the  curious  way  in 
which  my  name  was  spoken,  the  foreign  accent  in  the  word.  Seeing  nobody  I  was  fright- 
ened, and  went  in.  In  answer  to  the  letter  in  which  I  told  her  what  had  jjassed,  my 
friend  wrote  back  that  it  was  curious  that  I  should  have  fancied  her  so  near  me  just  then. 
She  had  been  reading  Italian,  which  we  had  studied  together  for  a  while,  and  had  very 
much  wished  to  speak  to  me  about  some  passage  that  had  struck  her  in  the  lesson.  My 
friend  had  not  heard  or  imagined  that  she  heard  me,  but  she  said  she  felt  as  if  the  air 
were  full  of  me." 

Miss  Taylor's  hallucination  was  quite  unique  in  her  life ;  but  we  cannot  tell  that  her 
friend's  thoughts  were  not  pretty  constantly  directed  to  her  at  this  period  ;  and  there  is, 
therefore,  no  reason  why  the  coincidence,  such  as  it  was,  should  not  have  been  a  pure 
accident. 

xvil]  reciprocal  CASES.  155 

At  that  moment  I  awoke.  Such  was  the  impression  it  made  on  my  mind, 
that  I  got  my  note-book  and  made  a  note  of  this  strange  dream,  believing 
that  it  foreboded  bad  tidings.  However,  several  days  passed  without 
bringing  any  dreaded  intelligence,  when  one  night  I  received  a  letter  from 
my  father,  announcing  the  rather  sudden  death  of  my  grandmother,  which 
took  place  on  the  very  night  and  hour  of  my  dream,  half -past  10. 

"  About  four  months  after  her  death,  I  went  to  the  Isle  of  Wight, 
where  she  lived,  to  get  information  from  my  relatives  as  to  what  my 
grandmother  was  really  like.  My  aunt  and  cousin  described  her  in  every 
particular,  and  their  descriptions  of  her  coincided  most  marvellously  with 
the  figure  and  face  that  appeared  to  me,  the  white  hair  and  dark  eyebrows 
being  a  peculiarity  in  her.  This  I  particularly  observed  in  my  dream.  I 
learnt,  too,  that  she  was  extremely  fussy  in  the  arrangement  of  her  cap, 
always  being  anxious  that  no  part,  even  the  strings,  should  be  out  of  place, 
and  curious  to  relate,  I  noticed  in  my  dream  that  she  was  nervously 
touching  her  cap  strings,  now  and  again,  for  fear  they  should  be  out  of 
place.  My  cousin,  who  was  with  her  when  she  died,  told  me  that  my 
grandmother  had  been  delirious  for  some  time  previous  to  her  departure  ; 
and  for  a  moment,  when  in  that  state,  she  suddenly  put  her  arms  round 
my  cousin's  neck,  and  on  opening  her  eyes  and  regaining  consciousness,  she 
said  with  a  look  of  surprise,  '  Oh,  Polly,  is  it  you  1  I  thought  it  was  some 
body  else.'  This  seems  to  me  very  curious,  as  it  was  just  what  she  did 
before  she  vanished  from  me  in  the  drawing-room.  T  must  add  that  I  had 
not  seen  my  grandparent  for  at  least  14  years,  and  the  last  time  I  saw  her 
she  had  dark  hair,  bnt  this  had  gradually  changed  to  white,  leaving  her 
eyebrows  dark,  and  I  am  positive  that  nobody  ever  mentioned  this 
peculiarity  to  me."  ^  "  J.  H.  W." 

Mrs.  W.  says  : — 

"  July  1st,  1885. 

"  I  quite  remember  my  husband  telling  me,  on  my  going  to  my  room  on 
the  evening  of  the  26th  October,  of  a  remarkable  dream  he  had  just 
had,  and  also  his  making  an  entry  in  the  pocket  book  on  the  following 
morning. 

"  F.  W." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Jane  W.  died  at  the  age 
of  72,  on  Oct.  26,  1870  [see  below],  at  Brixton,  Isle  of  Wight. 

Mr.  Podmore  says  : — 

"I  called  on  Mr.  J.  H.  W.  to-day  (July  4th,  1884),  and  heard  the 
account  from  him  viva  voce.  His  cousin's  corroboration,  for  a  reason  which  K  .  (^  . 
he  explained  to  me,  cannot  be  obtained.  But  he  explained  to  me  that 
he  went  to  see  his  cousin  within  three  months  of  the  death,  and  received 
full  particulars  of  the  death-scene  from  her  then.  I  asked  him  if  he  stood 
by  the  phrase  '  at  least  20  minutes,'  pointing  out  that  it  was  difficult  to 
attach  any  precise  meaning  to  these  words ;  if  they  were  a  correct  descrip- 
tion of  his  impressions,  a  grotesque  incident  must  have  been  interpolated 

1  In  respect  of  this  last  feature,  the  case  may  be  classed  with  those  of  Chap,  xii.,  §  8. 
The  nervous  fidgeting  with  the  cap-strings  may  possibly  be  regarded  as  a  distinctive 
habit,  sufficiently  deeply  organised  to  be  a  feature  in  the  person's  latent  representation  of 
her  own  physique.     See  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  the  section  referred  to. 

156  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

in  the  midst  of  an  otherwise  realistic  dream.  He  maintains  that  the  words 
are  correct ;  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  and  the  old  lady  sat  staring  at  each 
other  across  the  table  for  a  very  long  time.  Mr.  W.  told  me  that  he 
dreams  very  little ;  and  that  he  has  never  had  another  dream  which  he 
thought  worth  noting.     He  has  never  dreamt  of  death." 

After  a  second  call,  Mr.  Podmore  writes  : — 

"  I  received  an  account  from  Mrs.  W.  of  her  husband's  dream,  as  she 
remembered  to  have  heard  it  within  an  hour  of  its  occurrence  and  sub- 
sequently, which  tallied  precisely  with  the  account  here  given.  I  saw  also 
the  note  made  on  the  following  morning.  It  occurs  at  the  head  of  the 
first  page  of  a  small  pocket  sketch-book,  the  rest  of  the  page  being 
occupied  with  pen  or  pencil  memoranda  of  accounts,  &c.  The  entry  is 
'Odd  dream,  night  of  October  26th,  1870.'  The  last  numeral,  which 
is  very  indistinct,  is  apparently  0.  Mr.  W.,  in  writing  his  original 
account  in  March,  1883,  had  referred  to  this  note  and  read  the  final 
numeral  as  2.  Hence  the  discrepancy.  He  has  no  other  memorandum  of 
the  death. 

"  I  pressed  him  as  far  as  I  could,  but  he  still  declines  to  give  his  name, 
fearing  that  he  might  acquire  the  reputation  of  being  '  ghostly '  and 
fanciful,  and  thus  injure  his  professional  prospects." 

Clearly  the  dream  here  is  far  less  likely  to  have  been  accidental 
than  Mr.  Newnham's.  But  the  inference  from  the  dying  woman's 
^^^^  words,  that  she  may  have  been  in  some  way  affected  with  a  sense 
y^,^  ■  of  her  grandson's  presence,  is,  of  course  not  one  that  can  be  pressed. 
And  the  same  remark  applies  to  several  cases  where  A,  who  is  in  the 
crisis  of  illness,  professes  actually  to  have  seen,  as  though  by  some 
clairvoyant  flash,  an  absent  relative,  B,  who  turns  out  to  have  had 
at  the  same  time  a  telepathic  impression  of  A ;  for  unless  special 
details  of  B's  aspect  or  surroundings  are  described,  A's  alleged  per- 
ception of  him  may  always  be  supposed  to  have  been  a  mere 
subjective  dream  or  vision,  and  the  percipience  is  not  demonstrably 
reciprocal.  -^ 

The  next  example — from  Mr.  J.  T.  Milward  Pierce,  of  Bow  Ranche, 
Knox  County,  Nebraska,  U.S.A., — stands  somewhat  apart. 

^„.  "  Frettons,  Danbury,  Chelmsford. 

Hi.t»^f  ,  "January  5th,  1885. 

^^  (304)  "  I  live  in  Nebraska,  U.S.,  where  I  have  a  cattle  ranche,  &c. 

".  ^ '       I  am  engaged  to  be  married  to  a  young  lady  living  in  Yankton,  Dakota, 
25  miles  north. 

"About  the  end  of  October,  1884,  while  trying  to  catch  a  horse,  I 
was  kicked  in  the  face,  and  only  escaped  being  brained  by  an  inch  or  two; 

1  For  instances  of  the  sort,  see  cases  245  and  354 ;  also  612,  and  Mrs.  Fox's  account, 
given  in  a  note  to  that  case. 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES,  157 

as  it  was  I  'had  two  teeth  split  and  a  severe  rap  on  the  chest.  There  were 
several  men  standing  near.  I  did  not  faint,  nor  was  I  insensible  for  a 
moment,  as  I  had  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  the  next  kick.  There  was  a 
moment's  pause  hefore  anyone  spoke.  I  was  standing  leaning  against 
the  stable  wall,  when  I  saw  on  my  left,  apparently  quite  close,  the  young- 
lady  I  have  mentioned.  She  looked  pale.  I  did  not  notice  what  she  wore  ; 
but  I  distinctly  noticed  her  eyes,  which  appeared  troubled  and  anxious. 
There  was  not  merely  a  face,  but  the  whole  form,  looking  perfectly  ma- 
terial and  natural.  At  that  moment  my  bailiff  asked  me  if  I  was  hurt.  1 
turned  my  head  to  answer  him,  and  when  I  looked  again  she  had  gone.  I 
was  not  much  hurt  by  the  horse ;  my  mind  was  perfectly  clear,  for 
directly  afterwards  I  went  to  my  office  and  drew  the  plans  and  prepared 
specifications  for  a  new  house,  a  work  which  requires  a  clear  and 
concentrated  mind. 

"  I  was  so  haunted  by  the  appearance  that  next  morning  I  started  for 
Yankton.  The  first  words  the  young  lady  said  when  I  met  her  were, 
'  Why,  I  expected  you  all  yesterday  afternoon.  I  thought  I  saw  you 
looking  so  pale,  and  your  face  all  bleeding.'  (I  may  say  the  injuries  had 
made  no  visible  scars.)  I  was  very  much  struck  by  this  and  asked  her 
when  this  was.  She  said,  '  Immediately  after  lunch.'  It  was  just  after 
my  lunch  that  the  accident  occurred.  I  took  the  particulars  down  at  the 
time.  I  may  say  that  before  I  went  into  Yankton,  I  was  afraid  that 
something  had  happened  to  the  young  lady.  I  shall  be  happy  to  send  you 
any  further  particulars  you  may  desire. 

"  Jno.  T.  Milwaed  Pierce." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Pierce  says  : — 

"  I  think  the  vision  lasted  as  long  as  a  quarter  of  a  minute."  He 
has  had  no  other  visual  hallucination,  except  that  once,  when  lying  shot 
through  the  jaw  by  an  Indian,  he  thought  he  saw  an  Indian  standing  over 
him,  and  infers  that  it  was  not  a  real  one,  or  he  would  have  been  scalped. 

Mr.  Pierce  wrote  on  May  27th,  1885  :— 

"  I  sent  your  letter  to  the  lady,  but  did  not  get  an  answer  before 
leaving  England,  and  upon  arriving  here  found  her  very  ill,  and  it  is 
only  recently  I  have  been  able  to  get  the  information  you  wished  for. 
She  now  wishes  me  to  say  that  she  recollects  the  afternoon  in  question, 
and  remembers  expecting  me,  and  being  afraid  something  had  happened, 
though  it  was  not  my  usual  day  for  coming ;  but  although  at  the  time  she 
told  me  that  she  saw  me  with  a  face  bleeding,  she  does  not  now  appear 
to  recollect  this,  and  I  have  not  suggested  it,  not  wishing  to  prompt  her  in 
any  way." 

In  another  letter  of  July  13th,  1885,  Mr.  Pierce  says: — 

"  I  am  sorry  I  can  do  no  better  for  you  than  the  enclosed  letter.  The 
fact  seems  to  be  that  events  of  absorbing  interest,  and  illness,  appear  to 
have  driven  nearly  all  remembrance  of  the  incident  from  Miss  MacGregor's 
mind,  attachiiig  no  particular  importance  to  it  at  first.  I  have  prompted 
her  memory,  but  she  only  says,  no  doubt  I  am  right,  but  that  she  can't 
now  recollect  it." 

.C 

158  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

The  letter  enclosed  from  Miss  Macgregor  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Yankton,  D.T. 

"July  ISth,  1885. 

"  I  have  read  the  letter  you  sent  to  Mr  Pierce.  I  am  afraid  I  cannot 
now  recall  the  time  you  mention  clearly  enough  to  give  you  any  distinct 
recollection. 

"  I  remember  feeling  sure  some  accident  had  happened,  but  I  told  Mr. 
Pierce  at  the  time  everything  unusual  I  felt,  and  events  that  have  since 
occurred  have,  I  am  afraid,  completely  efiaced  all  clear  recollections  of 
the  facts.  "  Annie  MacGregor." 

Knowing  Mr.  Pierce,  I  have  no  doubt  that  his  recollection  of  what 
Miss  MacGregor  told  him  at  the  time  is  substantially  accurate, 
and  if  so,  it  would  be  natural  to  interpret  her  experience  as  telepathic. 
But  his  vision  may  have  been  purely  subjective.  I  am  not  aware,  it 
is  true,  of  any  precisely  parallel  case,  unless  indeed  it  be  Mr.  Pierce's 
other  experience,  with  the  Indian.  In  my  collection  of  purely 
subjective  cases,  I  have  one  from  a  lady  who  was  troubled  by 
hallucinations  for  some  time  after  a  concussion  of  the  brain ;  but 
the  blow  which  Mr.  Pierce  received  was  a  comparatively  slight  one. 
Still,  seeing  that  on  the  one  hand  his  faculties  may  have  been 
momentarily  disordered  by  it,  and  that  on  the  other  the  person  whose 
form  he  saw  was  in  a  completely  normal  state  at  the  time,  it  is  safer 
not  to  lay  stress  on  the  reciprocal  aspect  of  the  case. 

I  2.  The  remaining  cases  are,  I  think,  less  doubtful.  The  follow- 
ing account  is  extracted  from  the  evidence  given  by  the  late  Mr. 
Cromwell  F.  Varley,  F.RS.,  before  a  Committee  of  the  Dialectical 
Society,  on  May  25,  1869  {Report,  p.  161.  Another  case  of  Mr. 
Yarley's  will  be  found  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  288). 

(305)  "  In  a  second  case  my  sister-in-law  had  heart  disease.  Mrs.  Yarley 
and  I  went  into  the  country  to  see  her,  as  we  feared,  for  the  last  time.  I  had 
a  nightmare  and  could  not  move  a  muscle,  While  in  this  state,  I  saw  the 
spirit^  of  my  sister-in-law  in  the  room.  I  knew  that  she  was  confined  to 
her  bedroom.  She  said,  '  If  you  do  not  move  you  will  die  ' ;  but  I  could 
not  move,  and  she  said,  '  If  you  submit  yourself  to  me,  I  will  frighten  you, 
and  you  will  then  be  able  to  move.'  At  first  I  objected,  wishing  to 
ascertain  more  about  her  spirit-presence.  When  at  last  I  consented,  my 
heart  had  ceased  beating.  I  think  at  first  her  efibrts  to  terrify  me 
did  not  succeed,  but  when  she  suddenly  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Cromwell  !  I  am 
dyino-,'  that  frightened  me  exceedingly,  and  threw  me  out  of  the  torpid 
state,  and  I  awoke  in  the  ordinary  way.  My  shouting  had  aroused  Mrs. 
Varley ;  we  examined  the  door,  and  it  was  still  locked  and  bolted,  and  I 
told  my  wife  what  had  happened,  having  noted  the  hour,  3.45  a.m.,  and 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL   CASES.  159 

cautioned  her  not  to  mention  the  matter  to  anybody,  but  to  hear  what  was 
her  sister's  version,  if  she  alluded  to  the  subject.  In  the  morning  she  told 
us  that  she  had  passed  a  dreadful  night ;  that  she  had  been  in  our  room, 
and  greatly  troubled  on  my  account,  and  that  I  had  been  nearly  dying.  It 
was  between  3.30  and  4  a.m.  when  she  saw  I  was  in  danger.  She  only 
succeeded  in  arousing  me  by  exclaiming,  '  Oh,  Cromwell  !  I  am  dying.' 
I  appeared  to  her  to  be  in  a  state  which  otherwise  would  have  ended 
fatally." 

Even  this  incident  might  possibly  be  explained  (like  case  94)  as 
an  instance  of  simultaneous  dreams  ^ — an  independent  and  original 
nightmare  of  one  of  the  two  parties  concerned  inducing  that  of  the 
other,  without  being  reciprocally  influenced  by  it.  The  next  case, 
if  correctly  recorded,  could  not  be  so  regarded.  The  account  is 
contained  in  a  letter  from  Mr.  T.  W.  Smith,  late  of  Leslie  Lodge, 
Ealing,  to  the  Psychological  Society,  dated  February  26th,  1876,  and 
kindly  lent  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  K.  Munton,  who  was  secretary  of  that 
Society.  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  known  to  Prof.  Barrett,  left  Ealing 
early  in  1877,  and  his  present  address  cannot  be  ascertained. 

(306)  "  I  found  the  lady  who  is  now  my  wife  at  a  large  public  institution 
to  which  I  was  appointed  headmaster,  in  1872.  On  leaving  her  situation, 
I  induced  her,  for  certain  reasons,  to  conceal  the  fact  of  our  intended 
marriage  from  those  of  her  friends  whom  she  had  left  behind  at  the 
school,  and  the  only  way  to  do  this  was  not  to  write  to  any  of  them. 

"  Some  six  months  after  our  marriage,  I  was  reading  in  bed,  according 
to  a  habit  of  mine,  my  wife  asleep  at  my  side,  when  she  awoke  suddenly, 

sat  up,  and  exclaimed,  in  very  earnest  tones,  '  Oh,  I  have  been  to .' 

I,  of  course,  treated  what  she  forthwith  began  to  relate  to  me  as  a  more 
than  usually  vivid  dream,  and  the  next  day  ceased  to  think  of  it.  She, 
however,  recurred  to  her  dream  from  time  to  time,  and  I  remember  the 
circumstantial  way  in  which  she  dwelt  upon  each  point  of  it,  especially  a 
peculiar  expression  which  I  did  not  forget,  though  I  made  no  written  note 
of  it  at  the  time.  Three  months  later  my  wife  went  to  visit  her  mother, 
and  found  there  a  letter  from   one  of  her  friends,  urgently  entreating 

some  one  to  write  and  say  whether  Miss (my  wife)  was  alive  or  dead. 

I  was  induced  to  go  and  see  the  writer,  and  then  ascertained  the  cause  of 
her  hastily-written  and  strangely-worded  epistle.     The  two  occurrences  on 
the  same  day — as  well  as  I  could  fix  the  date,  for  neither  of  us  were  quite  ' 
certain  as  to  that  essential  particular — present  a  coincidence  which  I  have  ' 
never  been  able  satisfactorily  to  explain  on  any  hypothesis  consistent  with 
what  is  at  present  known  of  nature's  laws. 

"  My  wife  dreamt  that  she  was  in  a  well-remembered  room,  at  the  base  \ 
of  the  building,  in   company  with  four  females — two  of  whom   were  old 
friends  and  two  strangers  to  her.     They  were  talking  and  laughing  and 
preparing  to  retire  to  their  several  sleeping  apartments.     She  saw  one  of 
them  turn  off  the  gas.     She  followed  them  upstairs,  entered  with  two  of 

1  See  Vol.  i. ,  pp.  314-20,  and  the  opening  cases  in  Chap,  iii.  of  the  Supplement. 

160  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

them  into  a  bedroom,  saw  '  Bessie  '  place  some  things  in  a  box,  undress, 
and  get  into  bed  ;  then  she  went  to  her,  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  said, 
'  Bessie,  let  us  be  friends.'     So  much  for  the  dream. 

"  The  writer  of  the  letter  gave  me  this  account  of  what  had  occasioned 
her  writing  ;  and  I  need  scarcely  say  that  I  did  not  first  mention  what  my 
wife  had  dreamt,  for  in  that  case  it  might  be  supposed  that  I  had  myself 
assisted  in  suggesting  the  remarkable  expression,  which,  in  my  opinion, 
removes  the  occurrence  from  the  category  of  'remarkable  coincidences.' 
She  and  her  friend,  '  Bessie,'  had  gone  to  bed  one  Sunday  night,  when  an 
alarming  cry  from  the  latter  brought  the  other  to  her  bedside  :  '  I  have 
just  seen '  (my  wife) ;   '  she  touched  me  and  said,  "  Let  us  be  friends."  ' 

"  The  next  day,  on  discussing  the  matter,  though  some  of  them  thought 
that  Bessie  had  been  dreaming,  and  imagined  what  she  declared  she  saw, 
others  thought  it  a  '  sign  '  that  my  wife  was  dead.  And  the  one  who  was 
the  best  scribe  amongst  them  undertook  to  write  to  the  only  address  they 
possessed,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  truth.  The  letter  had  not  been 
forwarded  to  us  because  my  wife  had,  it  seems,  told  her  mother  my  wish 
that  no  communication  with  her  former  friends  should  take  place. 

"  The  odd  thing  about  the  dream  is  that  my  wife  had  always  been  on 
good  terms  with  '  Bessie,'  and  was  so  on  parting  with  her. 

"In  the  foregoing  account  of  the  dream,  and  what  I  may  call  its 
complement,  I  omit  many  minor  points,  such  as  the  fact  that  two  new 
comers  had  taken  the  place  of  two  former  friends  of  my  wife ;  that  the 
effect  on  both  my  wife  and  Bessie  was  beyond  what  any  ordinary  dream 
would  have  produced ;  and  that  the  two  females,  whom  my  wife  in  her 
dream  saw  enter  the  bedroom,  did  really  occupy  the  same  room." 

[It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  had  no  opportunity  of  ex- 
amining the  letter  ;  ^  but  the  correspondence  of  the  two  experiences  would 
hardly  have  impressed  Mr.  Smith  as  it  did,  if  it  had  not  included  a  very 
striking  detail.] 

1  The  importance,  in  these  apparently  reciprocal  cases,  of  obtaining  independent  evi- 
dence from  both  sides,  is  well  shown  in  the  following  example,  A  lady  of  good  sense, 
occupying  a  responsible  position— whose  name  is  suppressed  not  by  her  wish,  but  because 
our  view  of  the  case  differs  considerably  from  hers— wrote  to  us  on  November  29,  1884  :— 

"In  the  summer  of  1864,  I  had  cause  for  grave  anxiety  concerning  the  moral  condi- 
tion of  a  very  dear  friend.  I  knew  that  W.  had  formed  a  connection  which,  if  persisted 
in,  would  lead  to  his  ruin,  present  and  eternal.  On  the  30th  of  August,  1864,  I  retired  to 
rest  about  half-past  10.  As  the  clock  struck  11  my  husband  was  alarmed  by  my  violent 
sobbing,  which  caused  me  to  awake,  on  which  I  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  husband  !  it  is  all  over 
with  poor  W.  I  have  seen  him,  in  my  dream,  brought  under  great  temptation  by  the 
wicked  words  of  that  woman.  In  a  passion  of  tears  I  implored  him  to  have  mercy  on 
himself.  At  first  he  seemed  to  hesitate,  then,  at  a  sign  from  her,  he  motioned  me  angrily 
away,  saying,  "  I  will  have  none  of  your  restrictions.  I  have  been  held  back  by  them  too 
long  already."     With  these  bitter  words  I  awoke,  to  find  myself  bathed  in  tears.' 

"  For  three  days  this  vision  haunted  me  with  a  tenacity  I  could  not  shake  off.  Judge 
then  my  surprise  at  receiving  the  following  narrative  from  W,  :— 

"  '  On  the  night  of  August  20th,  while  sitting  smoking  my  cigar  (after  10  p.m.),  the 
last  person  on  earth  I  wished  to  see  was  announced.  She  came  forward  to  me  with  words 
of  bitter  reproach,  followed  by  tender  persuasion,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  door  of  my 
dining-room  again  opened,  and  you  appeared,  in  a  long  white  gown,  your  hair  floating 
over  your  shoulders.  With  a  wild  burst  of  weeping  you  implored  me  not  to  listen  to 
another  word  she  uttered,  and  when  I  angrily  replied,  "  I  will  have  none  of  your  restric- 
tions," with  a  look  of  anguish  unutterable  you  slowly  faded  from  my  sight.  Not  so  the 
impression  produced  on  my  mind.  I  felt  God  had  sent  you  as  my  guardia,n  angel,  and, 
like  one  of  old,  I  was  not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision.     I  was  saved  in  a  moment 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES,  161 

The  evidential  weakness  of  this  narrative  is,  of  course,  the  doubt 
as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  Supposing  the  two  experiences 
to  have  fallen  on  the  same  night,  we  can  hardly  help  connecting 
"  Bessie's  "  impression  (which  seems  to  have  been  a  hallucination  and 
not  a  dream)  with  Mrs.  Smith's  remarkable  vision ;  which  latter  is 
again,  apparently,  an  instance  of  thought-transference  of  that  extreme 
form  which  I  have  described  as  telepathic  clairvoyance.^ 

That  this  last  word  is  the  appropriate  one  for  describing  (it  is  far 
enough  of  course  from  explaining)  the  process  appears  from  other 
examples ;  and  a  glance  at  the  condition  of  these  reciprocal  cases 
will  show  that  it  would  naturally  be  so.  There  is,  as  a  rule,  no  difficulty 
in  deciding  to  which  of  the  two  persons  concerned  the  origin  of  the 
complex  phenomenon  should  be  traced ;  since  one  of  the  two  is 
in  a  more  or  less  abnormal  condition,  as  compared  to  the  other.  In 
Mrs.  Smith's  case,  the  abnormality  (outwardly  at  any  rate)  was  nothing 
beyond  sleep  ;  but  in  other  examples  it  is  far  more  pronounced.  If, 
then,  it  is  A  who  is  in  the  abnormal  state — dying,  or  whatever  it  may 
be — we  attribute  B's  vision  of  him  to  that  state.  But  we  cannot 
inversely  attribute  A's  vision  of  B  to  B's  state,  if  B's  state  is 
completely  normal.     It  may,  no  doubt,  be  said  that  B's  state  ceases 

of  supreme  danger,  and  desire  to  give  God  the  glory  for  so  evident  an  interposition  on 
my  behalf. ' 

"I  did  not  keep  the  letter,  but  am  absolutely  positive  of  its  date  and  its  corroboration 
of  the  remarkable  vision. 

"E.  A.  A." 

Mrs.  A.  's  husband  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"January  29th,  1885. 

"  I  can  distinctly  recollect  the  night  on  vi^hich  my  wife  had  the  remarkable  dream 
referred  to,  the  particulars  of  which  she  related  to  me  directly  she  awoke.  She  was 
greatly  excited  and  much  troubled,  and  repeated  several  times,  '  I  hope  nothing  has 
happened  to  W.  G.' 

"  A  day  or  two  afterwards — it  may  have  been  the  second  or  third  day ;  of  this  I  am 
uncertain — she  received  a  letter  from  our  friend,  which  I  saw  and  read,  and  which  con- 
firmed in  an  extraordinary  manner  the  connection  with  her  dream.  Mrs.  A.,  I  think, 
has  already  told  you  the  particulars,  which  I  need  not  enter  into  further. 

"J.  A." 

Now  though  this  account  was  undoubtedly  given  in  good  faith,  it  contains  some  very 
suspicious  points.  The  conversational  style  of  interview  between  the  gentleman  (whose 
previous  excited  state  naturally  marks  him  as  the  "agent")  and  the  apparition,  finds 
hardly  any  parallel  in  our  first-hand  records  ;  and  it  is  rendered  doubly  strange  by  his 
accepting  his  friend's  intrusion — at  that  hour  and  in  that  guise — as  a  quite  natural  inci- 
dent. We  might  surmise  that  possibly  something  of  a  telepathic  nature  took  place  ;  but 
that  it  was  exactly,  or  even  approximately,  what  is  reported  could  not  be  assumed  without 
independent  corroboration.  I  therefore  „wrote  to  the  gentleman  concerned,  and  asked 
him  whether  he  remembered  having  ever  seen  the  phantasmal  figure  of  a  friend,  whose 
visit  was  apparently  intended  to  warn  him  at  a  critical  juncture.  He  replied:  "l 
remember  the  circumstance  you  refer  to  distinctly  ; "  adding  that  he  was  at  the  time  over- 
wrought in  body  and  mind.  But  on  my  asking  him  whether  any  one  else  was  present  at 
the  time,  and  what  were  the  words  spoken,  he  replied,  "  There  was  no  one  present,  nor 
any  words  spoken,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  ;  had  there  been,  I  don't  think  I  should 
have  forgotten."  Clearly  a  case  where  there  is  this  amount  of  discrepancy  between  the 
two  principal  witnesses  cannot  be  quoted  as  evidence. 

1  Compare  Mr.  Moule's  case.  Vol.  i.,  p.  110,  note. 

VOL.  II.  M 

162  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

to  be  normal  at  the  moment  when  A  affects  him  ;  and  that  possibly 
the  power  to  react  telepathically  on  the  impression  is  started  by  the 
mere  fact  of  receiving  it.  But  the  more  natural  account  of  the 
matter  would  surely  trace  A's  impression,  no  less  than  B's,  to  the 
peculiarity  of  A's  state — by  supposing  either  that  A's  power  to  act 
abnormally  in  a  certain  direction  has  involved  an  abnormal  extension 
of  his  own  susceptibility  in  the  same  direction ;  or  else  that  some 
independently-caused  extension  of  his  own  susceptibility  has  involved 
the  power  to  act  abnormally.^  In  either  case,  his  reception  of  the 
impression  would  be  active  rather  than  passive ;  of  the  sort  that  partly 
seems  (as  I  tried  to  express  it  before)  like  the  momentary  using  of 
B's  faculties — although  B's  state  is  not  now,  as  in  the  former 
clairvoyant  pictures  and  dreams,^  supplying  any  exceptional  tele- 
pathic stimulus.  Still,  though  A's  percipience  may  not  be  conditioned 
by  B's  state,  it  must,  I  conceive,  be  conditioned  by  B's  existence  and 
relation  to  A ;  and  the  distinction  again  stands  clear  between 
telepathic  clairvoyance,  and  that  alleged  independent  clairvoyance 
where  what  is  discerned  cannot  be  traced  in  any  natural  way  to  the 
contents  of  any  other  human  mind. 

The  next  example  is  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Parker,  of  60,  Elm  Park 
Gardens,  S.W.,  who  wrote  to  us  on  May  24th,  1883  : — 

(307)  "  The  following  experience  happened  in  the  month  of  November, 
1877,  in  Regency  Square,  Brighton.  My  husband  [since  deceased]  was 
undergoing  a  course  of  magnetism  from  Mr.  L.,  an  American.  The 
treatment  consisted  of  rubbing  by  mesmeric  passes  down  the  back  and 
arms  and  legs,  but  in  all  this  there  was  no  intention  of  putting  my  husband 
to  sleep.  The  passes  were  intended  to  give  strength.  Mr.  L.  called 
himself,  I  believe,  a  professional  mesmerist,  but  at  the  time  we  employed 
him  he  was  not  practising  as  such.     He  had  come  to  Brighton  for  rest. 

"  After  the  treatment  my  husband  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting,  for  some 
hours,  in  his  wheel-chair,  at  the  top  of  the  Square  garden,  and  on  the   day 

1  This  latter  hypothesis  seems  specially  applicable  to  cases  where  A's  condition  has 
"been  one  of  mere  sleep  or  trance,  and  not  abnormal  in  any  more  serious  way.  For,  con- 
sidering that  nearly  all  the  evidence  that  exists  for  the  reality  of  clairvoyance  goes 
furtlier  to  show  that  sleep  and  trance  are  the  conditions  most  favourable  to  it,  we  should 
certainly  rather  conceive  that  what  enables  A  to  affect  B  is  the  clairvoyant  perception 
itself  of  B  or  B's  surroundings,  than  that  this  perception  is  a  secondary  result,  dependent 
on  the  fact  that  A  has  impressed  B  by  dint  merely  of  being  asleep  or  entranced.  Case 
271,  above,  may  possibly  be  an  instance  of  what  is  meant.  We  should  naturally  expect  that 
where  the  conditions  are  much  the  same  on  both  sides,  A's  and  B's  parts  in  the 
phenomenon  might  be  exactly  equal  and  parallel — each  being  perceived  by  the  other  in  the 
other's  own  environment ;  and  case  644  seems  to  be  an  example  of  this. 

1  may  note  here  that  the  evidence  for  a  heightening  of  telepathic  susceptibility  at  the 
time  of  death,  and  in  seasons  of  illness,  is  not  confined  to  the  class  of  cases  now  in 
question.  See  for  instance  cases  126,  147,  167,  303,  308,  311,  416  ;  and  the  opening 
cases  of  Chap.  ii.  of  the  Supplement,  which  are  of  the  more  ordinary  thought-transference 
type. 

2  Vol.  i.,  pp.  258-67,  338-40,  and  868-88. 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  163 

of  which  I  am  writing  he  had  expressed  a  wish  to  stay  out  rather  later 
than  usual.  I  went  into  the  house  for  luncheon,  leaving  him  alone,  but 
on  looking  out  of  the  window  a  little  later,  at  2  o'clock,  I  saw  a  man 
standing  in  front  of  his  chair,  and  apparently  talking  to  him.  I  wondered 
who  it  was,  and  concluded  it  must  be  a  stranger,  as  I  did  not  recognise  the 
figure,  or  the  wide-awake  hat  and  rather  oddly-cut  Inverness  cape  which 
he  wore.  However,  as  it  very  often  happened  that  strangers  did  stop  and 
speak  to  him,  I  was  not  surprised.  I  turned  away  my  eyes  for  a  moment, 
and  when  I  again  looked  up  the  garden,  the  man  had  disappeared.  I  could 
not  see  him  leaving  the  garden  by  any  of  the  numerous  gates,  and  remarked 
to  myself  how  very  quickly  he  must  have  walked  to  be  so  soon  out  of  sight. 
B-egency  Square  does  not  possess  a  tree  and  scarcely  a  shrub,  so  that  there 
was  nothing  to  impede  my  view. 

•''  When  my  husband  came  in  a  little  later,  I  said  to  him,  carelessly, 
'  Oh,  who  was  that  talking  to  you  in  the  square  just  now  ? ' 

"  He  replied,  '  No  one  has  spoken  to  me  since  you  left.  No  one  has 
even  passed  near  me.' 

" '  But  I  saw  a  man  standing  in  front  of  you  and — as  I  thought — 
talking  to  you  about  a  quarter-of-an-hour  ago.  His  dress  was  so  odd,  I 
couldn't  at  all  tell  who  it  could  be.' 

"  At  this  my  husband  laughed,  saying,  '  I  should  think  not,  for  there 
was  no  one  to  recognise.  I  assure  you  not  a  soul  has  been  near  me  since 
you  left.' 

"  '  Have  you  been  asleep  ? '  I  asked,  though  I  did  not  think  it  very 
likely.  He  assured  me  he  had  not.  So  the  subject  dropped  ;  still  in  my 
own  mind  I  knew  I  had  seen  the  mysterious  figure. 

"  Two  days  afterwards,  Mr.  L.,  after  giving  my  husband  his  treatment, 
came,  as  was  his  usual  habit,  to  speak  to  me  before  leaving  the  house. 
After  a  few  words  and  directions,  he  said,  '  It  is  a  very  odd  thing,  but  the 
same  experience  has  happened  to  me  twice  since  I  have  attended  your 
husband,  that,  when  in  quite  another  place,  I  have  suddenly  felt  as 
if  I  were  standing  by  his  side,  either  in  your  drawing-room  or  out  there  in 
the  garden.' 

"  I  looked  at  him,  and  for  the  first  time  noticed  his  overcoat  which  he 
had  put  on  before  coming  into  the  room,  and  the  wide-awake  in  his  hand. 
It  struck  me  that  these  articles  were  very  similar  to  those  worn  by  the 
figure  I  had  seen,  and  that  in  every  way  Mr.  L.  resembled  this  same 
figure.  I  asked  him  when,  and  at  what  time,  he  had  had  the  last 
experience  spoken  of?  'The  day  before  yesterday,' was  the  reply.  'I 
had  just  finished  an  early  dinner,  and  was  sitting  in  front  of  the  fire 
with  a  newspaper.  It  was  about  2  o'clock ;  I  remember  the  time 
perfectly.  Suddenly  I  felt  I  was  no  longer  there,  but  standing  near 
your  husband  in  the  Square  garden.' 

"  I  then  told  him  of  the  figure  I  had  seen  at  the  same  time  and  place, 
and  how  I  now  recognised  it  to  be  his.  Afterwards  I  asked  my  husband 
if  he  had  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  Mr.  L.,  but  he  had  not  done  so, 
and  had  indeed  forgotten  all  about  it.  My  husband  was  the  only  person 
to  whom  I  had  mentioned  the  fact  of  my  vision.  It  could  not  by  any 
possibility  have  got  round  to  Mr.  L.  c«  Augusta  Parker." 

[In  answer  to  the  inquiry  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  halluci- 
VOL.    II.  M   2 

cXo 

164  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

nation  of  the  senses,  Mrs.  Parker  replied  that  she  had  had  one  other.  It 
seems  likely,  however,  that  this  was  merely  a  case  of  mistaken  identity, 
the  figure  being  seen  at  the  end  of  a  long  hotel-passage  ;  and  this  was  her 
own  impression  at  the  time.] 

This  case  again  seems  difficult  to  explain  except  on  the  reciprocal 
theory.  It  is  true  that  there  is  not  the  same  proof  in  the  case  of  Mr, 
L.  as  in  that  of  Mrs.  Smith  above,  that  the  scene  which  he  saw  was 
transferred,  and  not  spontaneously  pictured ;  for  the  place  was 
familiar  to  him,  and  no  unusual  details  are  mentioned.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  his  experience  seems  to  have  been  quite  unlike  an 
ordinary  dream ;  its  very  unusualness  is  what  allows  us  to  connect  it 
with  Mrs.  Parker's  simultaneous  and  unique  vision ;  and  if  we  may 
regard  it  as  having  been  conditioned  by  the  presence  in  the  per- 
ceived scene  of  his  patient,  Mr.  Parker — who  forms,  so  to  speak,  the 
pivot  of  the  case — the  fact  that  Mr.  Parker  himself  was  not  con- 
sciously affected  can  still  be  accounted  for  on  the  analogy  of  such 
instances  as  Nos.  242  and  355.^ 

The  next  case  was  one  of  collective  percipience  ;  but  its  best 
place  is  in  the  present,  chapter.  The  full  names  of  the  persons  con- 
cerned may  be  mentioned,  but  not  printed.     Mrs.   S.,  one  of  the 

percipients,  writes : — 

"April,  1883. 

(308)  "A  and  B^  are  two  villages  in  Norfolk,  distant  about  five  miles 
from  each  other.  At  the  time  of  the  occurrence  about  to  be  related,  the 
clergymen  of  these  parishes  both  bore  the  same  name,  though  there  was  no 
relationship  between  them  ;  at  the  same  time  there  was  a  great  friendship 
between  the  two  families.  On  the  20th  February,  1870,  a  daughter, 
Constance,  about  14  years  old,  of  the  clergyman  of  A,  was  staying  with 
the  other  family — a  daughter,  Margaret,  in  that  family,  being  her  great 
friend.  Edward  W.,  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rector  of  A,  was  at  that  time 
lying  dangerously  ill  at  home  with  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  and  was 
frequently  delirious.  On  the  day  mentioned,  at  about  noon,  Margaret  and 
Constance  were  in  the  garden  of  B  Rectory,  running  down  a  path  which 
was  separated  by  a  hedge  from  an  orchard  adjoining ;  they  distinctly  heard 
themselves  called  twice,  apparently  from  the  orchard,  thus  :  '  Connie, 
Margaret — Connie,  Margaret.'  They  stopped,  but  could  see  no  one,  and 
so  went  to  the  house,  a  distance  of  about  40  yards,  concluding  that  one  of 
Margaret's  brothers  had  called  them  from  there.  But  to  their  surprise  they 

1  I  should  further  conjecture  one  of  the  conditions  of  Mrs.  Parker's  percipience  to 
have  been  the  fact  that  she  was  actually  contemplating  the  scene  in  which  Mr.  S.  seemed 
to  find  himself  (see  pp.  267-9). 

2  These  letters  are  substituted  for  those  actually  given  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  The 
names  of  the  villages  were  not  suppressed  in  the  accounts  that  follow  ;  but  as  they  were 
suppressed  in  this  first  one,  it  has  been  thought  right  to  suppress  them  throughout. 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  165 

found  that  this  was  not  the  case;  and  Mrs.  W.,  Margaret's  mother,  assured 
the  girls  no  one  had  called  them  from  the  house,  and  they  therefore  con- 
cluded they  must  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing  they  had  heard  their 
names  repeated.  This  appeared  to  be  the  only  explanation  of  the  matter, 
and  nothing  more  was  thought  of  it. 

"That  evening  Constance  returned  to  her  home  at  A.  On  the  follow- 
ing day,  Mrs.  W.  drove  over  to  inquire  for  the  sick  boy  Edward.  In  the 
course  of  conversation,  his  mother  said  that  the  day  before  he  had  been 
delirious,  and  had  spoken  of  Constance  and  Margaret,  that  he  had  called 
to  them  in  his  delirium,  and  had  then  said,  '  Now  I  see  them  running 
along  the  hedge,  but  directly  I  call  them  they  run  towards  the  house.' 
Mrs.  W.,  of  B,  at  once  called  to  mind  the  mystery  of  the  previous  day, 
and  asked,  '  Do  you  know  at  what  time  that  happened  ? '  Edward's  mother 
replied  that  it  was  at  a  few  minutes  past  12,  for  she  had  just  given  the 
invalid  his  medicine,  12  being  his  hour  for  taking  it.  So  these  words 
were  spoken  by  Edward  at  the  same  time  at  which  the  two  girls  had  heard 
themselves  called,  and  thus  only  could  the  voice  from  the  orchard  be 
accounted  for. 

"M.  K.   S." 

(The  "Margaret  "  of  the  narrative.) 

The  following  statement  is  from  Mrs.  R.,  the  "  Constance "  of  the 
narrative. 

"Sept.  1884. 

"  Margaret  and  I  were  walking  in  some  fields  at  B.,  away  from  the 
road,  but  not  very  far  from  the  house.     Here  I  heard  a  voice  call  '  Connie 
and  Margaret '  clearly  and  distinctly.     I  should  not  have  identified  it  with 
Ted's  voice  \i.e.,   her  brother's  at  A.],  for  we  thought  it  was  one  of  the  B 
brothers  at  the  time,  till  we  found  no  one  had  called  us.     I  remember  that 
it  was  before  early  dinner,  and  that  I  was  expecting  to  be  fetched  home  that 
same  morning,  because  of  Ted's  illness  ;  and  that  Mrs.  W.  thought  of  ask- 
ing mother  if  Ted  had   mentioned  our  names  in  any  way,  before  she  told 
her  of  what  had  passed  at  B.     I  ought  to  add  that  an  explanation  of  the  * 
story  might  be  found  in  the  conduct  of  some  B  plough-boy,  playing  a  trick  ' 
upon  us.     The  situation  was  such  that  he  might  easily  have  kept  out  of  '■. 
sight  behind  a  hedge.  jj  p    -p,    -o  „ 

Mr.  Podmore  says  : — 

"  November  26th,  1883. 

"  I  saw  Mrs.  R.  yesterday.  She  told  me  that  they  recognised  the 
voice  vaguely  as  a  well-known  one  at  the  time.  She  thinks  that  the 
coincidence  in  time  was  quite  exact,  because  Mrs.  W.  of  B  made  a 
note  of  the  circumstance  immediately.  Her  brother^an  old  school-fellow 
of  mine — cannot  recollect  the  incident  at  all." 

[If  a  written  note  was  made,  the  girls'  experience  must  have  seemed 
odder  than  the  "nothing  more  was  thought  of  it "  in  Mrs.  S.'s  account 
would  imply.] 

Mrs.  W.  of  A  'says  : — 

"  My  son  was  about  17  years  old.  He  had  had  fever  and  infiamma- 
tion,  and  was  weakened  by  illness.  It  was  about  12  o'clock.  I  was 
sitting  with  him,  after  his  washing  and  dressing,  and  he  seemed  quiet  and 

166  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap. 

sleepy,  but  not  asleep.  He  suddenly  sprang  forward,  pointed  his  finger, 
with  arms  outstretched,  and  called  out  in  a  voice  the  loudness  of  which 
astonished  me,  '  Connie  and  Margaret ! '  with  a  stress  on  each  name,  '  near 
the  hedge,'  looked  wildly  at  them,  and  then  sank  down,  tired.  I 
thought  it  odd  at  the  time,  but,  considering  it  a  sort  of  dream,  did  not 
allude  to  it.  The  next  day,  Mrs.  W.  called  with  Connie  and  Margaret, 
and  said  the  girls  had  heard  their  names  called ;  had  run  home ;  were 
walking  by  a  hedge  in  their  field,  had  found  no  one  had  called  them 
from  B  Rectory.  The  voice  sounded  familiar,  but  as  far  as  I  can 
remember — my  daughter  will  say — it  was  not  distinctly  thought  to  be 
Edward's.  I  at  once  told  my  story,  as  it  was  too  striking  not  to  be 
named.  They  said  it  was  about  12  o'clock.  Though  he  was  constantly 
delirious  in  the  evening,  when  the  pulse  rose,  he  was  never  so  in  the  middle 
of  the  day,  and  there  was  no  appearance  of  his  being  so  at  the  time  this 
occurred. 

"M.  A.  W." 
Mrs.  W.  of  B  says  :— 

"August,  1884. 

"  Connie  was  staying  with  us  on  account  of  the  illness  of  her  brother 
Edward,  and  had — with  Margaret — been  reading  with  me  one  morning. 
At  about  11.30  they  went  into  the  garden  to  play  (they  were  girls  of 
about  1.3  and  14),  and  in  half  an  hour  came  up  to  the  window  to  know 
what  I  wanted.  I  said  'Nothing,'  and  that  I  had  not  called  them, 
though  they  had  heard  both  their  names  called  repeatedly,  I  asked  them 
where  they  were  when  they  heard  it,  and  they  said  in  the  next  walk — - 
which,  you  will  remember,  is  formed  on  one  side  by  the  orchard  hedge. 
Margaret  said  directly,  '  There,  Connie ;  I  said  it  was  not  mother's,  but  a 
boy's  voice.'  Then  I  turned  to  look  at  the  clock — for  we  had  some  boys 
as  pupils  then — and  I  said,  '  It  would  not  be  one  of  the  boys,  for  they  are 
not  out  of   the  study  ;  it  is  now  12  o'clock,  and  I  hear  them  coming  out.' 

"  I  was  to  take  Connie  home  that  afternoon,  ^  and,  on  arriving,  of  course 
my  first  question  was,  '  How  was  Edward  V  Mrs.  W.  told  me  that  he  had 
not  been  so  well,  and  had  been  very  delirious.  She  said  that  morning  he 
had  been  calling,  '  Margaret  !  Connie  !  Margaret  !  Connie  !  Oh,  they  are 
running  by  a  hedge,  and  worCt  listen  to  me.'  I  did  not  say  what  had 
happened  at  home,  but  asked  if  she  knew  at  what  time  this  had  so 
distressed  him.  She  said  'Yes;'  for  she  had  looked  at  the  clock,  hoping 
it  was  nearly  time  to  give  him  his  medicine,  which  always  quieted  him,  and 
was  thankful  to  find  it  was  just  12  o'clock." 

Here  we  seem  to  have,  on  the  part  of  the  two  girls,  a  telepathic 
hallucination,  reproducing  the  exact  words  that  were  in  the  mouth 
and  ear  of  the  sick  boy ;  and,  on  his  part,  a  vision  reflected  from 
their  minds,  and  once  more  illustrating  how  what  might  be  described 
as  clairvoyance  may  be  a  true  variety  of  thought-transference.  The 
suggestion    at  the  end  of  Mrs.    E,.'s    account   must   not    be   over- 

1  The  other  accounts  make  it  probable  that  it  was  not  till  next  day  that  Mrs.  W.  of 
B  went  to  A. 

XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  167 

looked;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  know  of  precedents  for  hidden 
plough-boys  calling  out  the  Christian  names  of  clergymen's  daughters 
and  their  friends.  Nor  do  I  quite  see  how  such  a  freak  could  merit 
the  designation  of  a  "  trick  "  ;  it  would  surely  be  a  mere  piece  of 
aimless  and  pointless  rudeness — unless,  indeed  the  plough-boy  was 
enjoying  a  telepathic  chuckle  at  the  idea  that  his  cry  might  be 
confounded  with  another,  which  was  being  simultaneously  uttered 
five  miles  off. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  number  of  these  reciprocal  cases  (even 
with  the  addition  of  those  in  the  Supplement)  is  small — so  small  that 
the  genuineness  of  the  type  might  fairly  enough  be  called  in  question. 
There  is  some  danger  that  our  view  of  the  rarer  telepathic  phenomena 
may  be  unduly  affected  by  the  sense  of  certainty  that  gradually  and 
reasonably  forms  with  regard  to  the  broad  fact  of  telepathy  itself 
The  argument  for  the  reality  of  telepathy,  we  must  remember, 
depends  on  a  mass  of  narratives  so  large  as  to  make  a  universal  error 
in  the  essential  point  of  all  or  nearly  all  of  them  exceedingly 
improbable  ;  and  is  not  available  in  respect  of  peculiar  features,  which 
are  present  in  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  alleged  cases.  For 
these,  the  various  possibilities  of  error  so  fully  discussed  in  the  general 
sketch  of  the  evidence  (Vol.  I.,  Chap.  IV.)  may  seem  quite  sufficient 
to  account ;  and  the  greater  the  theoretic  interest  of  the  peculiarities, 
the  more  jealously  must  their  evidential  claims  be  scrutinised.  As  to 
reciprocality,  the  reader  will  form  his  own  opinion.  That  the 
examples  should  be  few,  as  compared  with  those  of  the  simpler 
telepathic  types,  cannot  at  this  stage  of  our  inquiry  seem  unnatural. 
For  if,  amid  all  the  apparent  opportunities  that  human  lives  present, 
the  unkiiown  and  probably  transient  conditions  of  telepathic  perci- 
pience  and  of  telepathic  agency  only  occasionally  chance  to  coincide, 
so  as  to  produce  a  telepathic  phenomenon  at  all  (pp.  77-8) ;  and  if,  of 
the  two,  the  conditions  of  percipience  are  the  rarer,  as  experimental 
thought-transference  would  lead  us  to  suppose ;  then  the  complete 
conditions  of  a  reciprocal  case  must  be  rare  among  the  rare.  Still,  if 
they  have  occurred,  they  will  occur  again.  If  my  colleagues  and  I  are 
right  in  supposing  the  type  to  be  a  genuine  one,  we  ought  to  obtain, 
as  time  goes  on,  some  more  well-attested  specimens  of  it ;  and  to  this 
we  look  forward  with  considerable  confidence. 

[chap. 

CHAPTER    XVIII. 

COLLECTIVE    CASES. 

I  1.  The  telepathic  cases  quoted  in  the  foregoing  chapters  have  almost 
all  affected  a  single  percipient  only  ;  and  the  fact  that  sometimes  the 
percipient  was  in  company  at  the  time,  and  that  his  sensory 
experience  was  unshared  by  any  one  present/  has  confirmed  the  view 
(to  which  all  other  considerations  seemed  to  converge)  that  telepathic 
affections  of  the  senses  are  in  the  most  literal  sense  hallucinations. 
But  we  have  already  encountered  a  few  cases  where  the  senses  of 
more  than  one  percipient  have  been  affected  f  and  what  awaits  us  in 
the  present  chapter  is  the  discussion  and  complete  illustration  of  this 
perplexing  feature. 

Of  course  the  first  view  which  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  two 
or  more  people  have  seen  or  heard  the  same  thing  at  the  same 
time  is  that  the  sight  or  sound,  however  abnormal  and  unaccountable, 
was  due  to  some  objective  reality  within  the  range  of  their  sense- 
organs — in  other  words,  that  it  was  not  a  hallucination  at  all.^ 
Hence  those  apparently  telepathic  instances  where  a  sensory 
experience,  representative  of  some  absent  person,  has  been  shared  by 
more  than  one  percipient,  would  imply  the  immediate  presence  of 
some  sort  of  physical  wraith,  or  at  any  rate  of  an  objective  human 
presence. 

I  scarcely  know  how  far  the  idea  of  a  literal  wraith  is  seriously 
entertained  by  any  educated  person  in  the  present  day.  Gaseous 
and  vaporous  ghosts  are,  I  imagine,  quite  at  a  discount ;  but  the 
word  "  ether "  seems    sometimes  to  be  used  as  a  way  out   of  the 

1  See  the  list  of  cases  given  m  p.  105,  second  note. 

2  Nos.  14,  36,  169,  254  (first  incident),  258,  264,  279,  302  (second  incident),  308 ;  case 
166  is  a  possible  instance.     See  also  the  dream-cases  127  and  144 . 

<*  It  was  in  this  occasional  feature  of  collective  percipience  that  Falck,  in  1692,  found 
the  strongest  argument  for  the  production  of  hallucinations  by  an  external  and  daemonic 
power.  See  p.  72  of  his  able  and  elaborate  dissertation  against  Hobbes  and  Spinoza,  in 
De  Ucmonologid  recentiorum  Autorum. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  169 

difficulty.  For  many  ears  the  word  has,  no  doubt,  a  convenient 
vagueness ;  but,  in  fact,  we  know  of  no  mode  by  which  ether  can 
affect  the  retina,  except  through  waves  started  by  luminous  sub- 
stances of  known  type.  And  even  if  etherial  ghosts  could  be  seen, 
the  auditory  phenomena  would  remain  a  hopeless  obstacle  to  a 
satisfactory  physical  explanation  of  them.  For  even  the  assumption 
of  some  tenuous  and  elusive  form  of  matter,  which  somehow  hangs 
about  in  relation  to  the  mysterious  ether,  seems  less  desperate 
than  the  assumption  that  such  a  tenuous  presence  could  move  the 
air  in  the  infinitely  complex  vibration-patterns  which  correspond 
to  speech  or  music — that  is  to  say,  could  produce  at  will  an  effect 
of  inconceivable  difficulty  and  complexity  on  certain  gross  elements 
of  the  known  material  world. 

As  to  the  notion  of  an  objective  presence  which  may  affect  the 
perceptive  faculty  of  several  persons  without  producing  changes  in 
the  external  world,  one  sort  of  case  is  conceivable  which  would  no 
doubt  favour  it — e.g.,  if  two  persons,  situated  at  some  distance  from 
one  another,  saw  the  appearance  in  the  respective  relations  of  dis- 
tance and  posture  which  a  real  object  of  the  same  kind  would  bear 
to  them — one  of  them,  it  might  be,  seeing  a  full  face,  and  the  other 
a  profile.  But  I  know  of  no  examples  of  this  sort.  And  as  a  mere 
theory,  the  notion  in  question  may  be  left  with  a  single  general 
comment ;  for  though  our  path  skirts,  it  had  better  not  enter,  the 
metaphysical  labyrinth  suggested  by  the  words  "  objective  reality." 
Let  it  be  conceded  then  that,  where  there  is  a  consensus  of  percep- 
tion, it  becomes  a  nice  question  for  Idealism  to  determine  how 
far,  or  in  what  sense,  the  percept  lacks  an  objective  basis.  To  put  an 
extreme  case — suppose  all  the  seeing  world,  save  one  individual,  had 
a  visual  percept,  the  object  of  which  nevertheless  eluded  all  physical 
tests  :  would  the  solitary  individual  be  justified  in  saying  that  all 
the  others  were  victims  of  a  subjective  delusion  ?  and  if  he  said  so, 
would  they  agree  with  him  ?  But  then  in  this  case,  or  in  a  less 
extreme  one  of  the  same  kind,  we  might  at  any  rate  ask  one  of  the 
perceivers  to  tell  us  what  meaning  he  can  attach  to  the  objectivity 
of  his  percept,  beyond  that  it  has  its  existence  in  other  minds  besides 
his  own.  If  he  fails  to  supply  us  with  any  further  meaning,  on 
him  surely  lies  the  onus  of  proving  that  the  conditions  of  the 
percept  lie  outside  the  perceiving  minds  ;  and  if  no  proof  be  forth- 
coming, I  then  see  no  definite  way  of  distinguishing  this  "  objective  " 
view  of  "  collective  hallucinations  "   from  the  view  to  be  considered 

170  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

immediately,  which  regards  the  community  of  percipience  as  a  form 
of  thought-transference.^ 

"  But  " — some  objectors  may  say — "the  question  has  been  begged 
by  assuming  that  the  collective  percept  eludes  physical  tests.  True, 
apparitions  have  not  yet  been  subjected  to  spectroscopic  analysis,  nor 
have  phantasmal  remarks  been  recorded  by  the  phonograph  ;  but 
suppose  that  the  form  of  a  dying  person  not  only  appears,  but  opens 
the  door  or  the  window,  and  the  door  or  the  window  remains  open, 
thus  affording  to  the  muscles  of  the  servant  who  closes  it  a  test  of  a 
physical  change  in  the  external  world — what  account  is  to  be  given 
of  this  ?  "  Now  clearly  such  phenomena,  even  if  established,  would 
afford  no  convincing  analogy  by  which  to  judge  of  cases  where  no 
similar  physical  tests  are  included.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no 
records  of  the  sort  that  we  have  met  with  have  reached  the  evi- 
dential standard  which  would  entitle  them  to  a  place  in  this  book 
(see  Vol.  I.,  p.  165) ;  and  until  they  are  established  by  irrefragable 
evidence,  there  is  another  analogy  which  has  in  every  way  a  prior 
claim — namely,  the  facts  of  telepathy  as  so  far  set  forth.  Cannot 
our  further  facts  be  explained  without  going  beyond  the  purely 
psychical  transference  for  which  we  believe  that  we  have  ample 
evidence  ? 

Let  us  see  in  what  ways  a  theory  of  purely  psychical  impres- 
sions could  cover  the  phenomena  of  collective  hallucination.  Two 
possible  views  of  what  may  happen  present  themselves.  The  first  of 
these  would  apply  only  to  veridical  cases — cases  which  are  "telepathic" 
in  the  literal  sense.  On  this  view  the  simultaneous  experiences  would 
be  traced  to  a  cause  external  to  the  percipients  ;  but  this  cause  would 
not  be  a  real  object  within  the  range  of  the  percipients'  senses,  but  a 
real  condition  of  an  absent  person.  A,  who  is  passing  through  some 
crisis  at  a  distance,  produces  a  simultaneous  telepathic  impression  on 
the  minds  of  B  and  of  C,  who  happen  to  be  together;  both  B  and  C 
project  this  impression  as  a  hallucination  of  the  senses,  in  the  way 
that  has  been  so  fully  considered  ;  and  the  hallucinations  more  or  less 
nearly  resemble  each  other. 

The  second  view  would  apply  equally  to  the  cases  which  are,  and 
to  those  which  are  not,  telepathic,  in  this  literal  sense  of  relating  to  a 

1  A  j3st/cfeica^  condition  outside  the  perceiving  minds  might,  no  doubt,  be  found  in 
"  disembodied  intelligence ."  For  the  present,  it  is  enough  to  remark  that  this  change 
of  "  agency  "  to  some  further  mind  would  leave  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon  unchanged. 
Experience  thus  caused  may  be  called  objective,  if  we  will,  but  it  is  still  thought- 
transference  ;  just  as  in  Berkeley's  view  the  whole  objective  universe  was  only  thought- 
transference  in  excelsis. 

xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  171 

distant  agent.  The  view  is  that  the  hallucination  of  one  percipient, 
however  caused,  begets  that  of  the  other,  by  a  process  of  thought- 
transference  ;  the  hallucination  is  in  itself,  so  to  speak,  infectious.  B 
and  C  are  together,  and  B  has  a  hallucination — it  may  be  veridical  and 
due  to  a  telepathic  impression  from  the  distant  A,  or  it  may  be  non- 
veridical  and  due  to  a  spontaneous  pathological  disturbance  of  B's 
own  brain ;  and  this  experience  of  B's  is  then  communicated  to  C, 
whose  brain  follows  suit  and  projects  a  kindred  image.  The  process 
in  fact  would  strongly  recall  those  cases  of  simultaneous  dreaming 
where  one  dream  may  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  other.^  It 
would  be  a  fresh  example  of  the  psychological  identity  between  the 
sleeping  and  the  waking  hallucinations  on  which  so  much  stress  has 
already  been  laid. 

Such  are  the  two  possible  views ;  and  we  have  now  to  decide  how 
far  either,  or  both,  may  be  reasonably  entertained.  I  may  state  at 
once  that  in  my  opinion  the  best  solution  that  the  problem  at  present 
admits  of  involves  a  certain  combination  of  the  two  (see  §  7  below) ; 
but  I  shall  consult  clearness  by  first  considering  each  of  them 
separately. 

§  2.  First,  then,  as  regards  the  theory  of  the  simultaneous  origi- 
nation of  two  or  more  hallucinations  by  a  distant  agent — we 
certainly  know  of  no  reason  why  a  state  of  the  agent  which  is 
telepathically  effective  at  all,  should  be  bound  to  confine  its  effects 
to  a  single  percipient.  That  it  generally  does  so  confine  them, 
may  be  easily  explained  by  supposing  a  special  susceptibility  on  the 
percipient's  part,  or  a  special  rapport  between  him  and  the  agent ; 
but  that  occasionally  the  impression  should  extend  to  others, 
who  Jiave  also  been  sympathetically  related  to  the  agent,  may 
seem  no  very  astounding  fact.  Now  if  the  impression  were  a 
merely  inward  experience,  an  impression  of  a  merely  ideal  or 
emotional  kind,  and  did  not  give  rise  to  actual  hallucination, 
this  account  of  the  matter  might  be  plausible  enough  :  it  would 
apply  for  instance  to  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson's  case,  Vol.  I.,  p.  99.  But  it 
will  be  remembered  that  we  have  seen  reason  to  regard  the 
hallucination  as  distinctively  the  percipient's  work — as  something 
projected  by  him  under  a  telepathic  stimulus  ;  and  we  have  found  these 
sensory  projections  to  take  various  forms  according  to  the  projector's 
idiosyncrasies.     We    have    found,   moreover,    that    the    time    during 

1  Vol.  i.,  pp.  314-20,  and  the  opening  cases  in  Chap.  iii.  of  the  Supplement. 

172  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

which  such  hallucinations  may  take  place  extends  over  several  hours 
— that  we  cannot  name  an  exact  moment  at  which  the  telepathic 
message  will  reach  consciousness,  or  externalise  itself  to  the  sense.  It 
becomes,  then,  extremely  improbable  that  two  or  more  persons  should 
independently  invest  their  respective  telepathic  impressions,  at  the 
same  moment,  with  the  sarfie  sensory  form ;  that  they  should  all  at 
once  see  the  same  figure,  or  hear  the  same  sound,  in  apparently  the 
same  place.  We  should  expect  to  find  one  of  them  embodying  it  in 
sound,  and  another,  perhaps  half  an  hour  later,  in  visible  shape  ;  or 
one  of  them  embodying  it  in  sound  or  shape,  and  another  only 
conscious  of  it  as  an  inward  idea ;  and  so  on.  And  for  divergences 
of  this  sort,  the  evidence,  though  it  exists,  is  small  in  amount. 

But  this  is  not  all.  On  the  theory  that  joint  telepathic  hallucina- 
tions are  all  exclusively  and  directly  due  to  a  distant  agent,  there  is 
one  thing  that  we  should  not  expect  to  happen,  and  one  thing  that 
we  should  expect  to  happen.  (1)  We  should  not  expect  the  group  of 
percipients  to  include  anyone  who  was  a  stranger  to  the  agent ;  or 
who  was  not  personally  in  such  relations  with  the  agent  as  would 
have  rendered  it  natural  for  him,  had  he  chanced  to  be  alone  at  the 
time,  to  suffer  the  same  telepathic  experience.  Nevertheless,  cases 
exist  where  such  an  outside  person  has  shared  in  the  perception. 
And  (2)  we  should  expect  that  in  a  fair  proportion  of  cases  two  or  more 
percipients  would  share  the  perception,  though  they  were  not  in  each 
other's  company  at  the  time.  For  on  the  theory  that  is  being 
considered,  there  would  be  no  virtue  in  the  mere  local  proximity  of 
the  percipients  to  one  another ;  the  agent  is  supposed  to  affect  them 
by  dint  of  his  respective  relations  to  each  of  them,  which  have 
nothing  to  do  with  their  being  together  or  apart.  Now,  in  point  of 
fact,  we  have  a  group  of  cases  where  the  persons  jointly  affected  have 
been  apart,  but  they  are  disproportionately  rare  in  comparison  with 
the  experiences  shared  by  percipients  who  have  been  together ; 
and  in  several  of  them,  moreover,  B  and  C,  the  two  percipients,  were 
near  each  other,  and  had  been  to  some  extent  sharing  the  same  life — 
conditions  which  may  have  had  their  share  in  the  effect  (see 
pp.  266-8).  However,  the  existence  of  this  type  might  no  doubt 
be  regarded  as  an  argument  for  the  occasional  production  ah  extra 
of  several  similar  and  simultaneous  hallucinations  ;  and  our  few 
specimens  may  conveniently  be  cited  at  once. 

I  have  already  given  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  362-3)  a  case  where  two  vivid 
dreams  of  a  quite  unexpected  death  were  dreamt  by  persons  who 

xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  173 

were  in  the  same  house,  but  not  in  the  same  room.  The  following 
is  a  somewhat  similar  instance,  but  only  one  of  the  experiences  was  a 
dream.  Mrs.  Bettany,  of  2,  Eckington  Villas,  Ashbourne  Grove, 
Dulwich  (the  narrator  of  case  20,)  writes  : — 

"June,  1885. 

(309)  "  On  the  evening  o£,  I  think,  March  23rd,  1883,  I  was  seized 
with  an  unaccountable  anxiety  about  a  neighbour,  whose  name  I  just 
knew,  but  with  whom  I  was  not  on  visiting  terms.  She  was  a  lady  who 
appeared  to  be  in  very  good  health.  I  tried  to  shake  off  the  feeling,  but 
I  could  not,  and  after  a  sleepless  night,  in  which  I  constantly  thought 
of  her  as  dying,  I  decided  to  send  a  servant  to  the  house  to  ask  if  all 
were  well.     The  answer  I  received  was,  '  Mrs.  J.  died  last  night.' 

"  Her  daughter  afterwards  told  me  that  the  mother  had  startled  her 
by  saying,  '  Mrs.  Bettany  knows  I  shall  die.' 

"  I  had  never  felt  an  interest  in  the  lady  before  that  memorable 
night.  After  the  death,  the  family  left  the  neighbourhood,  and  I  have 
not  seen  any  of  them  since. 

"  JeANIE    G WYNNE    BeTTANY." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  J.  died  on   March  23, 

1883. 

The  following  is  the  evidence  of  the  servant  who  was  sent  to 
inquire  : — 

"January,  1886. 

"  I  remember  Mrs.  Bettany  sending  me  to  inquire  if  all  were  well  at 
Mrs.  J.'s.  The  answer  they  gave  me  was  that  Mrs.  J.  was  dead.  Mrs. 
Bettany  sent  me  to  inquire,  because  she  had  a  presentiment  that  Mrs.  J. 
was  dead  or  dying." 

Mrs.  Bettany  adds  : — 

"  My  cook,  to  whom  I  had  not  mentioned  my  presentiment,  remarked 
to  me  on  the  same  morning :  'I  have  had  such  a  horrible  dream  about 
Mrs.  J.,  I  think  she  must  be  going  to  die.'  She  distinctly  remembers  that 
some  one  (she  does  not  know  who,  and  I  think  never  did)  told  her  in  her 
dream  that  Mrs.  J.  was  dead." 

The  following  is  the  first-hand  evidence  to  the  dream  : — 

"January  11th,  1886. 

"  I  remember  that  some  one  in  my  dream  said  '  Mrs,  J.  is  dead.'  I  do 
not  remember  the  rest  of  the  dream,  but  I  know  it  was  horrible.  I 
told  Mrs.  Bettany  at  the  time,  and  she  then  told  me  about  her  presentiment 
about  Mrs.  J.  "  M.  Went." 

[M.  Went  has  occasionally  dreamt  of  the  deaths  of  people  she  knows, 
without  any  correspondence.] 

This  case  would  seem  to  have  been  in  some  way  "reciprocal"; 
and  it  is  unfortunate  that  we  cannot  obtain  further  details  of  the 
dying  woman's  impression. 

174  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

The  next  is  a  waking  and  sensory  example  of  the  same  kind.     It 

was  first  obtained  in  writing  from  Mrs.   Fagan,  of   Bovey  Tracey^ 

Newton   Abbot,   the   mother   of  one   of  the   percipients ;   and   her 

account  exemplifies  the  inaccuracies  which  second-hand  evidence  may 

sometimes  introduce,  without  really  affecting  the  case  in  any  vital 

point. 

"  1883. 

(310)  "While  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  [Mrs.  Fagan's  son],  then 
Chaplain  of  Sealkote,  India,  was  dressing  for  dinner  on  Christmas  Day 
evening,  1876,  his  cousin,  Christopher  ^  Fagan,  being  similarly  employed 
in  an  adjacent  room,  both  heard  the  name  'Fagan  '  called.  The  Rev.  C. 
C.  T.  Fagan,  though  thinking  it  strange  his  cousin  should  thus  address  him, 
yet  knowing  no  one  else  was  in  the  house,  went  to  him  asking  what  he 
wanted,  why  he  had  not  called  him  'Charlie  '  as  usual,  and  remarking 
that  the  voice  was  like  that  of  Captain  Clayton,  a  cavalry  officer,  who  had 
been  under  his  pastoral  charge,  but  was  then  at  a  distant  station.  His 
cousin  replied  that  he  too  had  heard  the  voice,  and  probably  it  was  that 
of  Major  Collis,  whom  they  were  expecting  to  dinner.  Upon  this  they 
adjourned  to  the  drawing-room,  where  they  found  the  Major,  but  as  he 
had  only  just  come  in,  he  had  neither  called  nor  heard  the  voice. 

"  While  telling  him  of  what  had  occurred,  they  all  three  heard  the  same 
voice  repeat  the  same  name,  and  Major  Collis  remarked,  '  It  is  like 
Clayton's  voice.' 

"  The  next  morning  a  telegram  was  received  to  the  effect  that  Captain 
Clayton  died  at  that  hour  from  an  accident  received  while  playing  at  polo." 

Major  Collis  told  our  friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Clerkenwell, 
that  Mr.  Fagan  and  his  cousin  were  standing  in  the  doorway  of  the  drawing- 
room  talking,  when  they  heard  the  call,  "  Fagan."  He  himself  was 
dressing  in  his  room,  and  they  called  out  to  him  to  know  what  he  wanted  ; 
but  he  had  not  spoken,  nor  had  he  heard  the  call.  Whilst  they  were  talking 
together,  the  voice  came  a  second  time,  and  all  three  heard  it. 

On  being  applied  to  with  regard  to  the  discrepancy  between  these  two 
accounts,  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  writes  : — 

"  Sitapur,  August  25th,  1883. 

"  So  far  as  my  memory  serves,  the  statement  of  Major  Collis  is 
correct  as  to  the  curious  coincidence  of  which  he  has  told  you.  He  was 
certainly  staying  in  my  house  at  the  time,  and  was  not  a  guest  merely 
havited  to  dinner — as  my  cousin  was.  I  cannot  now  say  who  suggested 
the  voice  sounded  like  that  of  Captain  Clayton.  "  C.  C  T  Fagan  " 

Mr.  Fagan  says,  however,  in  another  letter :  "I  am  under  the 
impression  that  my  cousin  did  not  hear  the  voice."  He  adds  :  "  At  or 
about  the  time  in  question,  and  on  more  occasions  than  one,  I  have 
imagined  that  I  heard  people  calling  me,  but,  I  may  add,  this  experience 
is  now  seldom  or  ever  happening  to  me." 

1  By  a  slip,  Mrs.  Fagan  has  called  her  nephew  by  her  son's  name — Christopher,  instead 
of  George. 

xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  175 

Major  Collis  writes  to  us  on  August  2,  1884  : — 

"  3,  Barton  Terrace,  Dawlish. 

"  In  reply  to  the  questions  you  ask,  I  have  never  had  experience  of 
any  other  auditory  hallucination  :  neither  have  I  ever  had  any  hallucina- 
tions of  the  senses  whatever.  "  G.  Collis." 

Mr.  Fagan's  cousin.  Lieutenant  G.  Forbes  Fagan,  of  the  10th  Lancers, 
writes  to  us  : — 

"  Simla,  July  31st,  1885. 

"  I  remember  that  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  on  which  Captain 
Clayton  met  his  death,  I  was  in  the  Rev.  C.  Fagan's  house  at  Sealkote  ; 
and  he  said  he  had  heard  his  mother's  voice  calling  to  him,  and  that 
something  was  sure  to  happen.  I  heard  no  voice  myself.  When  news 
arrived  of  Captain  Clayton's  death,  my  cousin  said  the  voice  must  have 
had  some  connection  with  it.  "  G.  F.  Fagan." 

In  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Fagan,  Prof  essor  Sidgwick  learnt  that  Captain 
Clayton  was  intimate  with  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan,  and  also  knew  Major 
Collis. 

The  Calcutta  Englishman  of  December  28th,  contains  a  telegram  of 
December  26th  :  "  Last  evening  Captain  Clayton,  extra  aide-de-camp  to 
the  Viceroy,  was  thrown  while  playing  polo,  and  died  during  tlie  night." 

In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  the  hour  of  the  accident,  Major  Lord 
William  Beresford  writes  to  us  : — 

"As  well  as  I  remember,  it  was  6.15  in  the  evening  of  Christmas 
Day,  1876,  and  he  died  in  my  arms  exactly  as  the  clock  struck  12.  He 
never  spoke  after  he  fell." 

[The  somewhat  ragged  form  in  which  this  evidence  is  presented  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  and  Major  Collis  are  understood  to 
dislike  the  subject,  and  that  we  have  scrupled  to  press  them.  But  it  seems 
quite  certain  that  at  a  time  closely  corresponding  to  that  of  the  accident,  two 
percipients,  one  of  whom  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  heard  a 
voice  which  belonged  to  no  one  in  their  vicinity.  As  to  the  immediate 
connection  of  the  voice  with  Captain  Clayton,  the  evidence  is  not  so  clear  ; 
but  as  regards  Lieut.  Fagan's  recollections,  we  cannot  but  remark  the 
extreme  unlikelihood  that  the  two  hearers  should  imagine  Mrs.  Fagan's 
voice  as  calling  her  son  by  his  surname ;  and  also  the  unlikelihood  that, 
if  it  was  her  voice  that  her  son  recognised,  he  should  have  altered  this 
interesting  point  in  the  account  which  he  gave  her.  The  case  is,  of 
course,  to  some  extent  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan 
has  had  other  auditory  hallucinations.  It  is  worth  adding,  however,  i 
that  one  of  these  experiences,  when  he  heard  his  mother's  voice  urgently 
calling  him,  proved  to  have  coincided  with  a  very  sudden  and  exceptional 
longing  for  his  presence  on  her  part  (Supplement^  Chap.  YL,  §  1)  ;  and 
it  may  possibly  have  been  the  mention  of  this  fact  that  caused  a  confusion 
in  Lieut.  Fagan's  memory,  and  led  him  to  associate  Mrs.  Fagan  with  the 
present  experience.] 

The  following  case  is  part  of  a  record  of  some  singular  hypnotic 
experiences,    of  which    some    further    specimens   will    be   given   in 

176  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

Chap.  I.,  I  3,  of  the  Supplement.     Mrs.  John  Evens,  of  Oldbank, 

Enniskillen,  narrates  as  follows  : — 

"  December  4th,  1885. 

(311)  "  With  regard  to  the  apparition  or  optical  illusion,  I  have  a  perfect 
and  clear  remembrance.  It  occurred  after  the  experience  related  [i.e., 
after  a  cataleptic  fit  produced  under  hypnotic  influence].  The  operator 
had  left  me  with  an  earnest  request  to  my  husband  to  send  for,  or 
fetch  him,  should  anything  seem  to  require  it. 

"  I  was  wide  awake,  and  enjoying  the  freedom  from  pain ;  my  room 
being  carefully  darkened.  The  operator  had,  while  with  me,  been 
seated  on  a  chair  midway  between  my  bed  and  a  chest  of  drawers — about 
three  feet  from  each.  I  was  thinking  very  gratefully  of  the  rehef  I  had 
experienced,  when  I  noticed  a  blueish-white  light  round  the  chair.  It 
seemed  to  be  flickering  and  darting  in  a  large  oval,  but  gradually  con- 
centrated on  a  figure  seated  on  the  chair.  ^  The  appearance  did  not 
startle  me  in  the  least ;  my  first  thought  was,  '  It  is  Mr.  T.,  a  young 
officer  with  whom  we  were  very  intimate,  and  who  had  been  in  the 
house  that  evening.  But  the  expression  of  the  mouth  struck  me  then, 
and  I  thought  '  Can  it  be  Mr.  D.  1 ' — a  dear  friend  who  had  died  some 
Httle  time  before.  All  this  time  the  face  seemed  to  be  changing,  and,  as 
it  were,  settling.  Suddenly  it  flashed  into  my  mind  '  It  is  Mr.  B.'  (the 
father  of  the  operator).  I  did  not  know  this  gentleman  at  all,  except 
from  having  seen  his  photograph,  but  had  no  doubt  on  the  subject. 
(Curiously  enough  his  mouth  and  that  of  Mr.  D.'s  were  singularly  alike 
in  expression.)  The  figure  sat  in  a  kind  of  dim  halo.  I  felt  no  sur- 
prise ;  nor  did  I  speak  to  it,  but  thought,  '  Oh,  you  have  come  to  find 
P.  (the  son)  ;  he  has  been  here  all  the  evening,  but  has  gone  home  now.' 
As  I  thought  this  the  halo  gradually  diffused  itself,  as  it  had  before 
become  concentrated,  and  the  figure  vanished.  Besides  the  distinctness  of 
feature,  a  movement,  of  crossing  and  uncrossing  the  knees  two  or  three 
times,  struck  me. 

"  That  same  night,  and  it  must  have  been  nearly  at  the  same  time, 
the  friend  who  had  magnetised  me  was  awoke  by  hearing  his  name 
called  twice.  His  impression  was  that  I  needed  his  aid,  and  he  was 
prepared  to  come  (he  was  living  a  mile  off),  if  he  heard  the  call  repeated. 
But  it  was  not.  The  next  day,  when  I  saw  him,  without  telling  him 
any  of  this,  I  asked,  '  Has  your  father  any  noticeable  habit  or  trick  of 
movement?'  At  first  he  said  'No,'  and  then,  'unless  you  would 
describe  as  such  a  way  he  has  of  frequently  crossing  and  uncrossing  his 
knees.     He  has  varicose  veins,  and  is  restless  at  times  ! ' 

"  This  was  the  whole  matter.  The  father,  who  dislikes  such  subjects, 
would  never  say  whether  he  had  dreamed  or  been  thinking  intently  of 
his  son ;  but  probably  it  was  so.  "  Agnes  Evens." 

In  a  letter  dated  18th  December,  1885,  Mrs.  Evens  writes  that  she 
thinks  the  occurrence  took  place  in  September  or  October,  1881.  She 
has  never  experienced  any  other  visual  hallucination. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : — 

1  As  to  the  oval,  see  the  remarks  on  case  220 ;  as  to  the  gradual  appearance  and 
gradual  disappearance,  see  Chap,  xii.,  §§  2  and  3,  also  above,  p.  73,  note,  and  p.  97 ;  and 
compare  case  315  below. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  177 

(1)  "  I  cannot  be  sure  as  to  the  time  at  which  I  saw  the  appearance, 
but,  putting  circumstances  together,  I  should  think  between  12  and  1 
o'clock — nearer  the  latter  hour. 

(2)  "lam  perfectly  certain  that  I  uttered  no  sound ;  the  phantom's 
disappearance  seemed  to  answer  to  the  thought  that  passed  through  my 
mind,  '  You  want  Preston ;  he  has  been  here  all  the  evening,  but  went 
back  to  Fort  Tourgis  some  time  since.' 

(3)  "  I  had  not  any  wish  for  his  presence.  I  was  lying  in  quiet 
enjoyment  of  the  relief  from  agonising  pain  and  quivering  nerves,  in 
which  condition  one  has  no  active  line  of  thought.  I  very  likely 
thought  about  him,  with  a  lazy  kind  of  gratitude  to  him  as  the  author  of 
the  relief  I  was  experiencing." 

Captain  Battersby,  R.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  of  Ordnance  House,  Enniskillen, 
son-in-law  of  Mrs.  Evens,  writes  : — 

"December  21st,  1885. 

"  I  had  mesmerised  Mrs.  E.  for  several  months,  for  severe  neuralgia, 
with  the  view  of  affording  her  natural  sleep.  One  night  she  had  been 
in  the  mesmeric  trance,  and  had  been  awoke  by  me,  and  I  had  returned 
to  barracks — situated  about  half-a-mile  from  her  house — leaving  her  in 
her  room.  I  went  to  bed,  and  to  sleep,  and  was  awakened  with  a  start 
by  hearing  my  name  called  very  distinctly.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and 
looked  for  the  caller,  but  saw  no  one.  It  was  too  dark  to  look  at  my 
watch,  so  that  I  cannot  say  what  the  time  may  have  been.  It  oc- 
curred to  me  at  the  time  that  Mrs.  E.  might  want  me  for  something. 
I  did  not  recognise  the  voice,  and  indeed  had  no  chance  of  doing  so, 
as  it  did  not  call  again.  In  the  morning  I  went  to  see  Mrs.  E.,  in 
order  to  find  out  whether  she  had  had  any  unusual  experience.  She 
asked  me  if  anything  had  happened  to  me  the  night  before.  I  said 
'  Yes,'  and  asked  her  why  she  put  the  question.  She  said,  '  Has  your 
father  a  habit  of  moving  one  leg  over  the  other,  now  and  then,  in  a 
restless  way  1 '  This  was  the  case.  She  then  said,  about  1  a.m.  she  had 
been  roused  from  sleep,  and  saw  a  phosphorescent  appearance  on  the 
chair  near  her  bed,  which  resolved  itself  into  a  human  figure,  recognised 
by  her  as  my  father  from  a  photograph  in  my  possession.  It  did  not 
speak,  but  seemed  to  ask  her  mentally  '  Where  is  Preston  ? '  To  which 
she  responded,  also  mentally,  '  He  was  here,  but  is  gone  home  ' ;  whereon 
the  figure  disappeared.  I  was  somewhat  alarmed  at  the  occurrence,  and 
wrote  to  ask  if  my  father  was  well.  He  was  so  ;  and  did  not  remember 
having  any  dream  of  me  on  that  night.  Mrs.  E.  particularly  remarked 
his  habit  of  crossing  first  one  leg  and  then  the  other,  of  which  I  had  not 
previously  told  her. 

"  T.  Peeston  Battersby." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Captain  Battersby  says  : — 

"  I  beg  to  say  that  at  no  time,  except  on  the  occasion  referred  to  by 
me  in  my  previous  letter,  have  I  woke  from  sleep  with  the  impression  of 
having  been  called  In  fact  this  was  the  only  occasion  in  my  life  in  which 
I  heard  or  saw  anything  unusual." 

The  "  collective  "  character  of  these  two  experiences  is  clearly 
very  doubtful ;  they  may  not  have  been  due  to  any  agency  on  the 

VOL     II.  N 

178  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

part  of  Captain  Battersby's  father,  or  connected  with  each  other.  But 
considering  that  the  accidental  coincidence  of  the  two  unique  ex- 
periences would  be  most  improbable,  and  that  a  hypnotic  rapport 
probably  existed  between  Captain  Battersby  and  his  patient,  it  is  a 
reasonable  supposition  that  his  mind  was  either  the  source  or  the 
channel  of  a  telepathic  communication  to  hers. 

The  next  case  was  received  from  Mrs.  Poison,  of  4,  Nouvelle  Route 

de  Yillefranche,  Nice. 

"January,  1884. 

(3 1 2)  "  Some  years  since,  when  living  at  Woolstone  Lodge,  Woolstone, 
Berks,  of  which  parish  and  church,  &c.,  &c.,  my  husband  was  clerk  in 
Holy  Orders,  I  left  the  fireside  family  party  one  evening  after  tea,  to  see 
if  our  German  bonne  could  manage  a  little  wild  Cornish  girl  to  prepare 
her  school-room  for  the  morning.  As  I  reached  the  top  of  the  stairs  a 
lady  passed  me  who  had  some  time  left  us.  She  was  in  black  silk  with  a 
muslin  '  cloud  '  over  her  head  and  shoulders,  but  her  silk  rustled.  I  could 
just  have  a  glance  only  of  her  face.  She  glided  fast  and  noiselessly  (but 
for  the  silk)  past  me,  and  was  lost  down  two  steps  at  the  end  of  a  long 
passage  that  led  only  into  my  private  boudoir,  and  had  no  other  exit.  I 
had  barely  exclaimed  '  Oh,  Caroline,'  when  I  felt  she  was  a  something  un- 
natural, and  rushed  down  to  the  drawing-room  again,  and  sinking  on  my 
knees  by  my  husband's  side,  fainted,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  I  was 
restored  to  myself  again.  The  next  morning,  I  saw  they  rather  joked  me 
at  first ;  but  it  afterwards  came  out  that  the  little  nursery  girl,  while 
cleaning  her  grate,  had  been  so  frightened  by  the  same  appearance,  '  a  lady 
sitting  near  her,  in  black,  with  white  all  over  her  head  and  shoulders,  and 
her  hands  crossed  on  her  bosom,'  that  nothing  would  induce  her  to  go 
into  the  room  again  ;  and  they  had  been  afraid  to  tell  me  over  night  of 
this  confirmation  of  the  appearance,  thinking  it  would  shake  my  nerves 
still  more  than  it  had  done. 

"  As  chance  would  have  it,  many  of  our  neighbours  called  on  us  the 
next  morning — Mr.  Tufnell,  of  Uffington,  near  Faringdon,  Archdeacon 
Berens,  Mr.  Atkins,  and  others.  All  seemed  most  interested,  and  Mr. 
Tufnell  would  not  be  content  without  noting  down  particulars  in  his  own 
pocket-book,  and  making  me  promise  to  write  for  inquiries  that  very  night, 
for  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Henry  Gibbs.  She  had  been  staying  with  us  some 
time  previously  for  a  few  days,  and  I  had  a  letter  half  written  to  her  in 
the  paper  case. 

"  I  wrote  immediately  to  my  uncle  (the  Rev.  C.  Crawley,  of  Hartpury, 
near  Gloucester,)  and  aunt,  and  recounted  all  that  had  happened.  By 
return  of  post,  '  Caroline  is  very  ill  at  Belmont '  (their  family  place 
then),  '  and  not  expected  to  live ' ;  and  die  she  did  on  the  very  day  or 
evening  she  paid  me  that  visit.  The  shock  had  been  over-much  for  a  not 
very  strong  person,  and  I  was  one  of  the  very  few  members  of  the 
Crawley  or  Gibbs  family  who  could  not  follow  the  funeral. 

"  Georgiana  Polson." 

[The  three  gentlemen  whom  Mrs.  Poison  mentions  as  having  been 
immediately  informed  of  her  experience,  have  since  died.     If  the  narrative 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.        •  179 

should  happen  to  meet  the  eye  of  any  near  relative  of  the  late  Rev.  G, 
Tufnell,  it  might  perhaps  be  possible  to  find  out  whether  the  entry  in  the 
pocket-book  is  still  existing.  According  to  the  account,  it  would  appear 
that  the  Rev.  C.  Crawley  had  not  heard  of  the  death  on  the  second 
morning  after  its  occurrence.  This  may  seem  a  little  unlikely  (as  he  was 
a  relative  living  at  no  very  great  distance),  but  is  still  quite  possible.] 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Poison  adds  : — 

"  I  have  never  before  or  since  suffered  from  any  experience  of  the 
kind  [i.e.,  had  any  visual  hallucination]. 

"  I  cannot  give  you  the  date,  it  was  so  long  ago.  Still,  the  past  days 
are  often  present  with  me,  and  the  scenes  of  that  night  are  as  fresh  in 
remembrance  as  if  all  had  occurred  yesterday. 

"I  have  no  idea  whatever  what  became  of  the  Cornish  nursery  girl. 

"  I  wrote  to  my  aunt  and  uncle,  near  Gloucester,  to  tell  them  of  what 
had  occurred.  They  replied  they  had  heard  Mrs.  Gibbs  (Caroline)  was 
very  ill,  and  the  next  communication  informed  us  of  her  departure  ;  but  I 
do  not  remember  whether  it  took  place  earlier  in  the  afternoon  or  later  at 
night  than  when  I  saw  her." 

The  following  is  from  the  lady  who  was  with  Mrs.  Poison  as  governess 
at  the  time  : — 

"  Clarence  Yilla,  Church  Road,  Watford. 

"January  11th,   1884. 

"  I  do  not  in  the  least  object  to  let  you  know  what  I  remember  of 
the  incident  you  mention.  Many  years  ago  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Poison,  with 
the  children  and  myself,  were  sitting  one  evening  in  the  drawing-room  at 
Woolstone.  In  the  middle  of  the  evening  Mrs.  Poison  left  the  room,  but 
soon  returned  ;  remaining  silent,  I  looked  up,  and  saw  her  drop  down  on 
the  rug  fainting.  When  she  recovered,  she  told  us  she  had  seen  Mrs. 
Gibbs  on  before  her  in  the  long  passage. 

"  I  recollect  hearing  that  the  little  Cornish  girl  said  she  had  seen  that 
same  apparition  while  cleaning  her  grate.  As  to  the  date  of  the  incident 
I  can  only  say  that,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  it  happened  before  the 
year  1851.  "  H.  L.Mackenzie." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  Mrs.  Gibbs  died  on  February 
16,  1850. 

In  the  next  case  one  of  the  experiences  was  emotional,  not  sensory, 
but  was  apparently  of  a  very  marked  sort.  The  account  is  from  an 
intelligent  informant,  who  has  been  for  many  years  in  the  service  of 
a  family  kDown  to  the  present  writer.  Neither  the  witness  nor  (he 
believes)  his  mother  ever  had  any  other  experience  of  the  sort.  His 
mother  has  been  dead  for  some  years. 

"  9,  Blandford  Place,  Clarence  Gate,  Regent's  Park. 

"October  21st,  1882. 

(313)  "In  the  winter  1850-51,  I,    Charles    Matthews,  was   living   as 
butler,   25   years  of  age,  with  General  Morse  at  Troston  Hall,  near  Bury 
St.  Edmunds.  My  mother,  Mary  Ann  Matthews,  was  in  the  same  establish- 
ment as  cook  and  housekeeper,  a  very  upright  and  conscientious   woman, 
VOL.   II.  N   2 

180  •    COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

and  "was  much  liked  by  all  the  servants  excepting  the  ladies'  maid,  whose 
name  was  Susan,  but  her  family-name  I  have  forgotten.  This  Susan 
rendered  herself  disliked  by  all  in  consequence  of  her  tale-bearing  and 
mischief -making  propensities,  but  she  stood  in  some  awe  of  my  mother, 
whose  firmness  of  character  kept  her  in  check  to  a  great  extent. 

"  Susan  fell  ill  of  jaundice,  for  which  she  was  medically  treated  for 
some  months  at  Troston  Hall,  but  ultimately  was  removed  to  Bury  St. 
Edmunds  Hospital,  and  placed  in  the  servants'  ward,  at  General  Morse's 
expense,  where  she  died  about  a  week  after  admission.  He  used  to  send 
a  woman  from  the  village  to  the  hospital,  seven  miles  distant,  to  make 
inquiries,  on  such  days  as  the  carriage  did  not  go  to  Bury  St.  Edmunds ; 
and  on  a  certain  Saturday  the  woman  went,  but  did  not  return  until  the 
Sunday  evening,  when  she  said  she  had  found  Susan  unconscious  on  her 
arrival,  and  as  death  was  evidently  approaching,  she  was  permitted  to 
remain  in  the  ward  until  the  end. 

"  During  this  Saturday  night  the  following  mystery  occurred,  which 
has  ever  since  been  a  puzzle  to  myself.  Being  asleep,  I  was  awakened 
with  or  by  a  sudden  feeling  of  terror.  I  stared  through  the  darkness  of 
my  bedroom,  but  could  not  see  anything,  but  felt  overcome  by  an  un- 
natural horror  or  dread,  and  covered  myself  with  the  bed-clothes, 
regularly  scared.  My  room  door  was  in  a  narrow  passage  leading  to  my 
mother's  room,  and  anyone  passing  would  almost  touch  my  door.  I  pa,ssed 
the  remaining  portion  of  the  night  in  restlessness.  In  the  morning  I  met 
my  mother  on  coming  downstairs,  and  observed  that  she  looked  ill  and 
pale,  and  most  unusually  depressed.  I  asked  '  What's  the  matter  ?  '  She 
replied,  '  Nothing ;  don't  ask  me.'  An  hour  or  two  passed,  and  I  still  saw 
that  something  was  amiss,  and  I  felt  determined  to  know  the  cause,  and 
my  mother  seemed  equally  bent  on  not  satisfying  me.  At  last  I  said, 
'  Has  it  anything  to  do  with  Susan  ?  '  She  burst  into  tears  and  said, 
'  "What  makes  you  ask  that  question  ? '  I  then  told  her  of  my  scare 
during  the  night,  and  she  then  related  to  me  the  following  ^strange 
story ' : — 

"  '  I  was  awakened  by  the  opening  of  my  bedroom  door,  and  saw,  to 
my  horror,  Susan  enter  in  her  night-dress.  She  came  straight  towards  my 
bed,  turned  down  the  clothes,  and  laid  herself  beside  me,  and  I  felt  a  cold 
chill  all  down  my  side  where  she  seemed  to  touch  me.^  I  suppose  I  fainted, 
as  I  lost  all  recollection  for  some  time,  and  when  I  came  to  myself  the 
apparition  had  gone — but  of  one  thing  I  am  sure,  and  that  is  that  it  was 
not  a  dreamt 

"We  heard  by  the  village  woman  on  her  return  the  Sunday  evening, 
that  Susan  died  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  that  previous  to 
becoming  unconscious  her  whole  talk  was  about  'returning  to  Troston 
Hall.'  We  had  had  no  apprehension  whatever  of  the  death.  We  thought 
she  had  gone  to  the  hospital,  not  because  she  was  in  danger,  but  for  the 
sake  of  special  treatment. 

"  This  is  a  simple  relation  of  facts,  so  far  as  I  can  state  them.  I 
myself  was  not  a  superstitious  or  simple  fellow,  at  the  time,  having  seen 
a  good  deal  of  the  world  ;  but  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  satisfy  my 
own  mind  as  to  the  why  or  wherefore  of  the  occurrence." 

1  Among  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane — alike  of  the  purely  subjective  and  of 
the  telepathic  class— affections  of  three  senses  are  extremely  rare  (p.  25,  note). 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  181 

Mr.  Matthews  tells  me  that  he  has  never  had  any  similar  sensation ; 
and  he  believes  that  the  hallucination  was  unique  in  the  experience  of 
his  mother,  who  died  some  years  ago. 

In  the  remaining  cases  the  percipients  were  much  more  widely 

separated ;  but  unfortunately  the  evidence  as  to  identity  of  time  is 

very  far  from  complete.     The  following  account  is  from    Mrs.  Coote, 

of  28,  Duke  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W. 

"July  29th,  1885. 

(314)  "  On  Easter  Wednesday,  1872,  my  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  W.,  sailed 
with  her  husband  and  three  young  children  from  Liverpool  in  the  steamer, 
'  Sarmatian,'  for  Boston,  U.S.,  where  they  arrived  in  due  course  and 
settled.  In  the  following  November  she  was  seized  with,  and  died  from, 
suppressed  small-pox,  at  that  time  raging  in  Boston.  About  the  end  of 
November,  or  the  beginning  of  December  in  the  same  year,  I  was  dis- 
turbed one  morning  before  it  was  light,  as  near  as  may  be  between  5  and 
6  a.m.,  by  the  appearance  of  a  tall  figure,  in  a  long  night-dress,  bending 
over  the  bed.  I  distinctly  recognised  this  figure  to  be  no  other  than  my 
sister-in-law,  Mrs.  W.,  who,  as  I  felt,  distinctly  touched  me.  My  husband, 
who  was  beside  me  asleep  at  the  time,  neither  saw  nor  felt  anything. 

"  This  appearance  was  also  made  to  an  aged  aunt,  residing  at  this  time 
at  Theydon  Bois,  near  Epping,  Essex.  She  is  now  alive,  aged  over  80 
years,  and  residing  at  Hextable,  near  Dartford,  in  Kent.  She  is  still  in 
full  possession  of  all  her  faculties.  She  told  my  husband  as  recently  as 
the  4th  inst.,  that  the  appearance  came  to  her  in  the  form  of  a  bright 
light  from  a  dark  corner  of  her  bedroom  in  the  early  morning.  It  was 
so  distinct  that  she  not  only  recognised  her  niece,  Mrs.  W.,  but  she 
actually  noticed  the  needlework  on  her  long  night-dress  !  This  appearance 
was  also  made  to  my  husband's  half-sister,  at  that  time  unmarried,  and 
residing  at  Stanhope  Gardens.  The  last  named  was  the  first  to  receive 
the  announcement  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  W.,  in  a  letter  from  the  widower 
dated  December  (day  omitted),  1872,  from  156,  Eighth  Street,  South 
Boston,  still  preserved.  The  death  was  announced,  among  other  papers 
(as  my  husband  has  recently  learned),  in  the  Boston  Herald.  A  com- 
parison of  dates,  as  far  as  they  could  be  made  in  two  of  the  cases,  served 
to  show  the  appearance  occurred  after  the  same  manner,  and  about  the 
same  time,  i.e.,  at  the  time  of,  or  shortly  after,  the  death  of  the  deceased. 
Neither  myself  nor  the  aged  Mrs.  B.,  nor  my  husband's  half-sister,  have 
experienced  any  appearance  of  the  kind  before  or  since.  It  is  only 
recently,  when  my  husband  applied  to  his  half-sister  to  hunt  up  the 
Boston  letter,  that  we  learnt  for  the  first  time  of  this  third  appearance." 

Mr.  Coote  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"  That  Mrs.  Coote's  '  vision  '  occurred  within  a  week  of  the  death  of 
Mrs.  W.,  in  Boston,  U.S.,  is  undoubted  ;  and  without  any  efibrt  to  make 
our  memories  more  precise,  I  may  add,  that  from  the  first  I  have  always 
thought  that  the  most  marked  feature  in  the  case  was  (judging,  of  course, 
from  an  opinion  formed  at  the  time  when  the  circumstances  were  fresh  in 
my  memory)  that  it  occurred  within  the  24  hours  after  death.  I  am 
afraid  after  this  lapse  of  time  that  nothing  conclusive  can  be  arrived  at  as 
to  '  times '    in  the    other  two  cases,  beyond  the  general  idea  that  still 

182  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

obtains  in  the  minds  of  both  the  aged  Mrs.  B.    and  Mrs. ,  that  the 

visions  occurred  about  the  same  time  as  that  of  Mrs.  Coote,  and  after  the 
same  manner.  Mrs.  Coote  desires  me  to  add  that  to  this  hour  she  has 
never  exchanged  ideas  upon  this  vision,  even  with  the  aged  Mrs.  B., 
which  precludes  all  possibility  of  collusion  in  the  matter. 

"  C.  H.  Coote." 
[It  is  not  possible  to  obtain  a  first-hand  account  of  the  vision  from 
Mr.  Coote's  half-sister  at  present.] 

The  final  example  of  this  type  is  from  Mr.  de  Guerin,  of  98,  Sand- 
gate  Road,  Folkestone,  who  has  had  another  apparently  telepathic 
experience  (Vol.  I.,  p.  424).     He  has  had  no  subjective  hallucinations. 

"  1883. 

(315)  "The  first  instance  occurred  when  I  was  in  Shanghai.  It  was  the 
month  of  May,  1854.  The  night  was  very  warm,  and  I  was  in  bed,  lying 
on  my  back,  wide  awake,  contemplating  the  dangers  by  which  we  were 
then  surrounded,  from  a  threatened  attack  by  the  Chinese.  I  gradually 
became  aware  there  was  something  in  the  room ;  it  appeared  like  a  thin 
white  fog,  a  misty  vapour,^  hanging  about  the  foot  of  the  bed.  Fancying 
it  was  merely  the  efiect  of  a  moonbeam,  I  took  but  little  notice,  but 
after  a  few  moments  I  plainly  distinguished  a  figure  which  I  recognised 
as  that  of  my  sister  Fanny.  At  first  the  expression  of  her  face  was  sad, 
but  it  changed  to  a  sweet  smile,  and  she  bent  her  head  towards  me  as  if 
she  recognised  me.  I  was  too  much  fascinated  with  the  appearance  to 
speak,  although  it  did  not  cause  me  the  slightest  fear.  The  vision  seemed 
to  disappear  gradually  in  the  same  manner  as  it  came.  We  afterwards 
learned  that  on  the  same  day  my  sister  died — almost  suddenly.  I 
immediately  wrote  a  full  description  of  what  I  had  seen  to  my  sister, 
Mrs.  Elmslie  (the  wife  of  the  Consul  at  Canton),  but  before  it  reached 
her,  I  had  received  a  letter  from  her,  giving  me  an  almost  similar 
description  of  what  she  had  seen  the  same  night,  adding,  '  I  am  sure  dear 
Fanny  is  gone.' 

"  When  I  promised  that  I  would  send  you  these  particulars  I  at  once 
wrote  to  my  sister,  Mrs.  Elmslie,  and  she  replies,  '  I  do  not  think  I  was 
awake  when  Fanny  appeared  to  me,  but  I  immediately  awoke  and  saw 
her  as  you  describe.  I  stretched  out  my  arms  to  her  and  cried  '  Fanny  ! 
Fanny  ! '  She  smiled  upon  me,  as  if  sorry  to  leave,  then  suddenly 
disappeared.' 

"  When  this  occurred  we  [i.e.,  Mr.  de  Guerin  and  Mrs.  Elmslie]  were 
upwards  of  1,000  miles  apart,  and  neither  of  us  had  a  thought  of  her  being 
seriously,  much  less  dangerously  ill.  Before  her  death  she  had  spoken  of 
us  both  to  those  around  her  bedside.  She  died  in  Jersey,  on  the  30th 
May,  1854,  between  10  and  11   at  night." 

The  Jersey  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  the  date  given. 

Mr.  de  Guerin  kindly  applied  to  Mrs.  Elmslie  for  a  further  account. 
In  her  reply,  she  rightly  remarks  that  at  such  a  distance  of  time  memory 
of  details  is  unreliable,  and  is  not  sure  "  whether  that  which  took  place 
was  in  the  nature  of  a  dream  or  of  a    vision."     She  desires,    therefore, 

1  Cf.  cases  193,  194,  311,  332. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  183 

that  her  full  description  of  what  she  saw  shall  not  be  published  ;  but  says 
that  the  face  was  unmistakeable.     She  adds  : — 

"  I  really  forget  whether  it  appeared  immediately  at  the  time  of  our 
dear  sister's  death;  but  I  know  my  impression  at  the  time  was  that  it  fore- 
shadowed   such  an  event,  the  news  of  which  in  due  course  came  by  mail." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  de  Guerin  told  me  that  the  figure  appeared  self- 
luminous  (see  Chap.  XII.,  §  7).  He  is  certain  that  his  own  and  Mrs. 
Elmslie's  visions  were  on  the  same  night,  and  that  his  own  was  about 
11  o'clock.  He  cannot  be  certain  whether  the  death  took  place  at  11  o'clock 
p.m.,  of  the  previous  day,  in  which  case  it  must  have  preceded  the  visions 
by  some  twelve  hours  ;  or  1 1  o'clock  p.m.  of  the  same  day,  in  which 
case  it  must  have  followed  the  visions  by  about  twelve  hours.  Mr.  de 
Guerin  further  told  me  that,  though  in  a  decline,  his  sister  had  been 
very  decidedly  better  of  late,  and  he  was  in  no  sort  of  anxiety  about 
her.  The  last  account  had  been  that  she  was  gaining  strength  and  flesh. 
The  death  was  extraordinarily  sudden. 

§  3.  I  turn  now  to  the  second  of  the  two  theories  above 
propounded — the  theory  that  one  percipient  catches  the  hallucination 
from  another  by  a  process  of  thought-transference.  This  is  certainly 
the  explanation  that  would  suggest  itself  in  telepathic  cases  where 
one  of  the  percipients  has  previously  had  no  relations,  or  only  slight 
relations,  with  the  distant  agent.  But  clearly  the  most  conclusive 
evidence  for  the  theory  of  infection  would  be  derived  from  cases 
involving  no  distant  "  agent  "  at  all ;  cases  which  in  their  inception 
are  pathologic,  not  telepathic — purely  subjective  delusions  on  the  part 
of  some  one  present — but  which  proceed  to  communicate  themselves 
to  some  other  person  or  persons.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  this  self-pro- 
pagation is  an  occasional  property  of  hallucinations  as  such,  there  will 
be  no  difficulty  in  extending  the  same  explanation  to  cases  where  the 
hallucination  is  in  its  inception  due  to  a  distant  agent.  If  B's  purely 
subjective  hallucination  may  affect  C,  it  is  only  what  we  should 
a  'priori  expect  that  B's  telepathic  hallucination  might  affect  C  :  such 
communicability  would  merely  be  one  more  of  those  points  of  resem- 
blance, which  we  have  already  seen  to  be  so  numerous,  between  the 
purely  subjective  and  telepathic  classes.  And  as  collective  hallucina- 
tions even  of  subjective  or  non- veridical  origin  {i.e.,  not  due  to  the 
critical  situation  of  some  distant  agent)  would  constitute  in  them- 
selves a  form  of  thought-transference,  no  excuse  is  needed  for 
examining  them  here  at  some  length. 

What  evidence,  then,  do  we  find  that  hallucinations  of  the 
senses,  as  such,  may  be  infectious  ?  It  must  be  allowed  at  starting 
that  no  property  of  the  sort  has  ever  been  attributed  to  them  by 

184  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

psychologists  of  repute  •}  the  doctrine  would  be  as  new  to  science  as 
every  other  variety  of  telepathic  affection.  This,  however,  is  easily 
accounted  for.  We  have  already  seen  that  psychologists  have 
never  made  hallucinations,  or  at  any  rate  transient  hallucinations 
of  the  sane,  the  subject  of  careful  collection  and  tabulation;  and 
it  is  among  the  sane  rather  than  the  insane^  that  we  should  expect 
any  phenomenon  of  thought-transference  to  present  itself.  It  is 
therefore  not  surprising  that  the  rare  and  sporadic  evidence  for 
collective  hallucinations  should  have  escaped  notice.  But  if,  on  the 
one  hand,  collective  hallucinations  have  not  been  recognised  by  science, 
on  the  other  hand  phenomena  have  sometimes  been  described  by  that 
title  which  have  no  sort  of  claim  to  it.  It  is  here  that  the  real 
importance  of  distinguishing  illusions  from  hallucinations  lies ; 
and  I  cannot  well  proceed  without  first  making  this  distinction  plain. 
Illusion  consists  either  in  perceiving  a  totally  wrong  object  in 
place  of  the  right  one,  as  when  Don  Quixote's  imagination  trans- 
formed the  windmills  into  giants ;  or  in  investing  the  right  object 
with  wrong  attributes,  as  when  the  stone  lion  on  Northumberland 
House  was  seen  to  wag  its  tail.^  Either  sort  of  illusion  may 
easily  be  collective.  The  error  is  not  in  the  actual  sensory 
impression,  which  is  given  by  the  real  object  and  is  common  to  all 
present,  but  in  the  subsequent  act  of  judgment  by  which  the  nature 
of  the  object  is  determined  ;  and  in  this  act  of  judgment  one 
person  has  every  opportunity  of  being  influenced  by  another.  In  the 
attitude  of  trying  to  imagine  what  further  attributes  will  fit  in 
naturally  with  those  which  the  senses  perceive,  and  will  with  them 
compose  some  known  object,  the  mind  is  almost  at  the  mercy  of 
external  suggestion.  We  see  this  constantly  exemplified  in  cases 
where  a  group  of  people  are  puzzling  as  to  the  nature  of  some  barely 
visible  object,  or  of  some  imperfectly  heard  sound :  as  soon  as  some- 
one expresses  an  opinion,  someone  else  is  pretty  sure  to  endorse  it, 
and  to  see  or  hear  the  thing  in  the  suggested  sense,  though  on  nearer 
approach  this  may  prove  to  have  been  incorrect.     Even  in  cases 

1  This  was  written  before  the  appearance  of  Dr.  E.  von  Hartmann's  tract  on  Spiritism, 
(lately  translated  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey),  in  which  he  treats  the  apparitions  seen  at  seances 
as  collective  hallucinations  ;  but  he  regards  the  influence  exercised  on  the  sitters  by  the 
medium  as  to  some  extent  exceptional  in  kind. 

-  As  an  instance  of  the  insusceptibility  of  the  insane  to  abnormal  influences,  it  is 
worth  noting  that  they  are  peculiarly  difficult  to  hypnotise.  On  the  other  hand,  I  ought 
to  state  that  the  2nd  chapter  of  the  Supplement  contains  two  cases  of  what  looks  like 
telepathic  affection  of  a  person  of  more  or  less  unsoTind  mind. 

•*  I  have  never  discovered  on  what  authority  this  anecdote  rests ;  but  such  an  illusion 
is,  I  believe,  quite  possible. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  185 

where  we  feel  as  if  we  were  right  beyond  the  possibility  of  mistake, 
it  often  needs  an  effort  to  realise  how  little  is  given  us,  and  how 
much  we  ourselves  supply.  A  few  slight  sensory  signs  will  introduce 
to  the  mind  a  whole  array  of  attributes  that  have  been  associated 
with  them  on  other  occasions ;  the  whole  is  then  taken  to  be  a  single 
and  immediate  perception  of  the  object ;  and  since  the  actual  sensory 
signs  may  be  common  to  several  different  groups  of  attributes — i.e., 
to  several  different  objects — it  may  easily  happen  that  they  suggest 
some  group  which  is  not  the  object  actually  present.  For  instance, 
the  slight  sensory  signs  which  Scott  would  normally  have  interpreted 
as  the  folds  of  coats  and  plaids  hanging  in  a  dimly-lit  hall,  were 
interpreted  by  him,  at  a  moment  when  the  idea  of  Byron  was 
running  strongly  in  his  head,  as  the  figure  of  the  deceased  poet.^ 
Here  the  idea  which  happened  to  be  dominant  at  the  moment  was 
what  determined  the  false  judgment ;  and  such  a  dominant  idea  may, 
of  course,  often  operate  upon  many  minds  at  once ;  as  when,  in  a 
conflagration  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  a  sympathetic  crowd  watched  the 
struggles  of  an  agonised  chimpanzee — alias  a  piece  of  tattered 
blind — in  the  roof;  or  when  a  horrified  crew  recognised  in  a  piece  of  old 
wreck,  which  was  floating  on  the  waves,  the  form  and  peculiar  limping 
gait  of  a  drowned  comrade.^  The  case  of  the  proverbial  crowd  and 
the  stone  lion's  tail  is  somewhat  different ;  for  there  the  object  was 
clearly  seen,  and  recognised  for  what  it  was.  But  we  are  all  of  us 
well  exercised  in  imagining  familiar  objects  as  moving  in  position 
and  changing  in  coatour ;  and  the  power  of  evoking  mental  pictures 
is  often,  I  think,  strong  enough  to  enable  us  slightly  to  modify  our 
visual  impressions ;  while  such  devices  as  half-closing  our  eyes,  or 
shutting  them  alternately  in  quick  succession,  or  moving  or  inclining 

1  An  interesting  case  was  given  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Pollock,  in  the  Christmas  number, 
for  1884,  of  the  Illustrated  Sporting  and  Dramatic  Neivs,  under  the  title  "The  Ghost  at  the 
Lyceum."  Mr.  Pollock  has  assured  me  that  the  description  is  "an  absolute  record  of  fact, 
without  a  word  of  garnish  "  ;  and  his  recollection  of  the  incident,  and  of  the  bewilderment 
that  it  caused,  was  quite  confirmed  by  his  companion's  account,  as  reported  to  me  indepen- 
dently by  a  common  friend.  Seated  in  a  box  at  the  theatre,  Mr.  Pollock  and  a  friend  saw, 
during  several  hours  (with  intermissions  when  the  lights  were  turned  up),  the  vivid 
appearance  of  a  decapitated  head,  with  a  fine  profile  and  a  grey  Vandyke  beard,  resting  on 
the  lap  of  a  lady  in  the  stalls.  At  the  time,  they  rejected  the  idea  that  this  could  have  been 
an  optical  effect  due  to  the  folds  of  the  lady's  garments — as  they  noticed  that  she  moved 
more  than  once  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  while  the  face  remained  the  same.  Mr.  Pollock 
seems  to  have  been  unaware  that,  as  a  possible  example  of  collective  hallucination,  the  vision 
had  a  very  high  scientific  interest ;  or  he  would  scarcely,  even  for  "  sporting  and  dramatic" 
purposes,  have  taken  refuge  in  so  meaningless  a  designation  as  "  ghost."  It  may  be,  how- 
ever, that  the  case  was  after  aU  one  not  of  hallucination,  but  only  of  illusion.  It  is  at 
any  rate  impossible,  from  the  record,  to  be  quite  sure  that  adequate  means  were  taken  to 
exclude  this  hypothesis,  which,  as  Mr.  Pollock  has  recently  informed  me,  is  the  one  that 
he  is  now  inclined  to  adopt. 

-  Dr.  Hack  Tuke,  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body.  2nd  Edition,  p.  59  ;  Wundt, 
Op.  cit.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  358.  .... 

186  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

the  head,  will  increase  the  illusion.  It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  a 
strong  effort  to  see  a  thing  in  a  way  in  which  others  are  professing  to 
see  it,  should,  for  a  brief  period,  introduce  illusory  elements  into  what 
seems  to  be  a  clear  and  complete  view  of  the  object. 

These  considerations  will  certainly  suffice  to  explain  the  majority 
of  the  collective  apparitions  on  record.  The  visions  seen  during 
battles,  such  as  are  especially  frequent  in  the  history  of  the  Crusades 
—either  signs  in  the  heavens  or  phantom  champions — may  easily 
have  had  some  objective  basis.  The  streak  of  cloud,  which  at  one 
moment  may  be  "  very  like  a  whale,"  might  at  another  be  equally 
like  a  fiery  sword  ;  real  horsemen  might  be  unrecognised,  and  the  first 
breath  of  rumour  that  they  were  supernatural  assistants  would  be 
caught  up  with  avidity.^  More  deceptive  cases  however  occur, 
which  are  not  illusions,  but  yet  have  as  little  claim  as  the  preceding 
to  be  called  collective  hallucinations,  if  that  word  be  (as  throughout 
this  treatise  it  is)  confined  to  the  strict  sensory  meaning.  Nothing, 
for  instance,  could  better  illustrate  what  collective  hallucinations 
are  not,  than  two  cases  which  Dr.  Brierre  de  Boismont^  has  adduced 
to  illustrate  what  they  are.  A  battalion  of  infantry,  after  a  40 
miles'  march  under  a  June  sun,  was  quartered  for  the  night  in  a 
dismal  building  which  had  the  reputation  of  being  haunted.  The 
surgeon  of  the  regiment  describes  how,  about  midnight,  these  soldiers 
rushed  out  of  their  quarters  with  wild  cries,  and  declared  that  the 
devil  had  entered  their  chamber  "  in  the  form  of  a  large  black  dog 
with  curly  hair,  who  had  bounded  upon  them,  ran  over  their  chests 
with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  disappeared  on  the  side  opposite 
to   the  one  at  which  he  had  entered."      Now — on  the  supposition 

1  The  reader  will  recall  the  phantom  battle  in  the  sky,  described  by  Motley  f' T/ie 
Mise  of  the  Butch  EepuUic,  pp.  559-60),  as  to  which  the  depositions  of  five  witnesses  were 
taken  on  oath.  The  collective  vision  of  an  army  marching  on  terra  firma,  described 
by  the  Diike  of  Argyll  in  Good  Words  for  January,  1875,  would  be  less  easy  to  account 
for  as  an  illusion  :  but  the  record  is  second-hand,  and  was  not  written  dovm  tiU  more  than 
50  years  after  the  incident  is  alleged  to  have  occurred.  Phantom  champions  are  not  yet 
extinct.  Mr.  J.  T.  Milward  Pierce,  of  Bow  Ranche,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.,  has  told  me 
of  a  quite  recent  case,  narrated  to  him  by  one  of  the  witnesses — where  the  form  of  a 
defunct  Indian  Chief,  "  Brown  Bear,"  led  his  tribe  in  a  battle  against  theDacotahs.  Mr. 
Pierce  has  since  sent  me  a  first-hand  account  of  the  incident  from  another  professed 
witness. 

A  recent  case  of  a  more  ordinary  type  is  the  following,  from  Mrs.  Lane,  of  49,  Redcliffe 
Square,  S.W.  When  at  school,  she  was  sleeping  in  the  bed  of  a  Miss  Winch,  who  had  been 
sent  home  ill ;  and  waking  up,  she  was  much  alarmed  to  see  this  girl  standing  at  the  foot  of 
the  bed.  She  addressed  the  figure,  which  nodded  slowly.  She  then  roused  her  companions, 
"and  they  all  said  they  saw  Miss  Winch,  too."  The  girls  did  not  know,  what  was  learnt 
next  day,  that  Miss  Winch  was  dying  ;  but  even  supposing  the  first  percipient's  vision  to 
have  been  telepathic,  her  terrified  words,  and  the  dim  light,  would  probably  be  quite 
sufficient  to  convert  a  bed-hanging  or  a  curtain  into  the  suggested  form  for  her  com- 
panions' eyes. 

2  Des  Hallucinations  (Paris,  1862),  pp.  280,  396. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  187 

that  no  real  dog  or  cat  had  a  share  in  shaping  the  idea — what  can  be 
more  likely  than  that  the  general  nervousness  took  sudden  form  from 
one  man's  sudden  cry,  on  waking  from  a  nightmare  ?  There  is 
not  the  slightest  proof  that  all  present  simultaneously  saw  the  dog, 
and  followed  his  movements.  I  have  already  drawn  attention 
to  the  ease  with  which  uneducated  persons  may  slip  into  believing 
that  they  have  seen  what  they  have  only  heard  of;  and  under 
excitement  this  is,  of  course,  doubly  easy.  One  man  may  have 
believed  that  he  saw ;  the  rest  may  merely  have  believed  they  had 
seen.  De  Boismont's  second  case  is  that  of  Dr.  Pordage's  disciples  in 
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  who  saw  "  the  powers  of  hell 
pass  in  review  before  them,  seated  in  chariots,  surrounded  by  dark 
clouds,  and  drawn  by  lions,  bears,  dragons,  and  tigers.  These  were 
followed  by  inferior  spirits,  who  were  provided  with  the  ears  of  a  cat 
or  a  griffin,  and  with  deformed  and  distorted  limbs."  But  here  the 
fact  that  "  it  made  no  difference  whether  their  eyes  were  open  or 
shut "  renders  it  doubtful  how  far  the  impression  was  really  more 
than  a  vivid  inward  picture ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  contradict,  and 
everything  to  suggest,  the  notion  that  one  person  described  his 
impressions  in  language  which  would  easily  conjure  up  the  general 
scene  in  kindred  and  excited  minds. 

But  apart  from  such  spurious  types,  cases  undoubtedly  remain 
of  really  externalised  collective  hallucination,  which  are  still  perfectly 
explicable  without  resorting  to  thought-transference.  The  history 
of  religious  epidemics  supplies  instances  where  a  whole  group  of 
persons  have  professed  to  behold  some  exciting  or  adorable  object,  and 
probably  actually  projected  its  image  into  space  as  part  of  the 
surrounding  world ;  but  where,  without  proof  (which  has  never  been 
presented)  that  what  was  seen  was  independently  observed  and 
described,  it  would  be  rash  to  suppose  any  other  cause  for  the 
similarity  of  the  individual  experiences  than  a  previous  common  j 
idea  and  common  expectancy.^  Nor  is  even  expectancy  a  necessary 
condition ;  there  are  cases  where  the  suggestion  of  the  moment  seems 
sufficient.  The  most  marked  of  these  are  hypnotic  hallucinations  : 
it  is  as  easy  for  a  mesmerist  to  persuade  a  group  of  good  "  subjects  " 
that  they  all  see  a  particular  phantasmal  object,  as  to  persuade  one  of 
them  that  he  sees  it.     And  I  think  it  must  be  admitted  as  possible 

1  A  probable  example  is  the  recent  remarkable  delusion  at  Corano— starting  from  a 
peasant  girl's  alleged  vision  of  the  Virgin— in  which  a  crowd  of  children  and  many  adults 
shared.     It  is  described  in  the  Times  for  July  31,  1885. 

188  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

that  mere  verbal  suggestion  may  act  similarly  on  certain  minds  at 
certain  times,  without  the  preliminary  of  any  definite  hypnotic  pro- 
cess. I  say  at  certain  times  advisedly ;  for  all  clear  evidence  of  the 
sort  seems  to  connect  the  phenomenon  with  circumstances  of  rather 
special  absorption  or  excitement,  sometimes  even  with  a  state  of 
semi-trance.^  I  do  not  know  of  any  instance  where  the  sane  and 
healthy  A,  simply  by  saying  at  a  casual  moment  to  the  sane  and 
healthy  B,  "There  is  such  and  such  an  object "  (not  really  present, 
and  not  capable  of  being  imposed  as  an  illusion  on  some  object  really 
present),  has  at  once  caused  the  object  to  be  conjured  up  in  space 
before  B's  eyes.  In  the  most  extreme  case  that  has  come  to  my 
knowledge,  where  something  like  this  has  proved  possible,  very 
strong  insistance  and  repetition  on  A's  part,  of  the  sort  that  a 
mesmerist  employs  when  seeking  to  dominate  a  "subject's" 
mind,  are  needed  before  the  impression  develops  into  sensory 
form.  In  cases,  therefore,  where  A  has  himself  had  a  hallucina- 
tion of  which  he  has  spoken  at  the  moment,  and  B  has  shared 
it,  it  is  too  much  to  assume  at  once  that  B's  experience  must  have 
been  exclusively  due  to  the  verbal  suggestion ;  for  if  A's  mere 
suggestion  can  produce  such  an  effect  on  B  at  that  particular  moment, 
why  not  at  other  moments  when  he  suggests  the  imaginary  object 
without  having  himself  seen  it  ?  None  the  less,  of  course,  ought  the 
/flUv-  hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion  to  be  most  carefully  considered,  in 
relation  to  the  special  circumstances  of  each  case,  before  any  other 
hypothesis  is  even  provisionally  admitted. 

I  have,  perhaps,  said  enough  to  define  the  phenomena  which  are 
really  of  interest  for  us  here.     Fairly  to  allow  of  explanation  by 

^  If  (as  intelligent  English  eye-witnesses  believe,)  a  semi-hypnotic  condition,  due  to 
abnormally  concentrated  attention,  is  in  great  part  answerable  for  the  extraordinary 
illusions  of  Indian  jugglery,  the  same  condition  might  naturally  be  looked  for  in  cases  of 
collective  hallucination.  Very  suggestive  in  this  respect  is  the  following  record,  by 
Professor  Sidgwick,  of  a  scene  described  to  him  by  Mazzini  : — 

"In  or  near  some  Italian  town,  Mazzini  saw  a  group  of  people  standing,  apparently 
gazing  upwards  into  the  sky.  Going  up  to  it,  he  asked  one  of  the  gazers  what  he  was 
looking  at.  '  The  cross — do  you  not  see? '  was  the  answer  ;  and  the  man  pointed  to  the 
place  where  the  cross  was  supposed  to  be.  Mazzini,  however,  could  discern  no  vestige  of 
anything  cruciform  in  the  sky  ;  and,  much  wondering,  went  up  to  another  gazer,  put  a 
similar  question,  and  received  a  similar  answer.  It  was  evident  that  the  whole  crowd  had 
persuaded  itself  that  it  was  contemplating  a  marvellous  cross.  '  So,'  said  Mazzini,  '  I  was 
turning  away,  when  my  eye  caught  the  countenance  of  a  gazer  who  looked  somewhat 
more  intelligent  than  the  rest,  and  also,  I  thought,  had  a  faint  air  of  perplexity  and  doubt 
in  his  gaze.  I  went  up  to  him,  and  asked  what  he  was  looking  at.  "  The  cross,"  he  said, 
"there."  I  took  hold  of  his  arm,  gave  him  a  slight  shake,  and  said,  "There  is  not  any 
cross  at  all."  A  sort  of  change  came  over  his  countenance,  as  though  he  was  waking 
up  from  a  kind  of  dream  ;  and  he  responded,  "  No,  as  you  say,  there  is  no  cross  at  all. 
So  we  two  walked  away,  and  left  the  crowd  to  their  cross. '  It  is  nearly  20  years  since  I 
heard  this  story  ;  but  it  made  a  considerable  impression  on  me,  both  from  the  manner  in 
which  Mazzini  told  it,  and  from  its  importance  in  relation  to  the  evidence  for  '  spiritual- 
istic '  f)henomena." 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  189 

thought-transference,  a  collective  case  must  present  evident  marks 
(1)  of  being  a  hallucination  and  not  a  mere  illusion ;  (2)  of  having 
occurred,  so  to  speak,  in  an  isolated  way,  and  not  under  the  dominance 
of  any  special  prepossession  ;  and  (3)  of  having  been  independently 
projected  by  the  several  percipients,  and  not  merely  conjured  up  by 
one  on  the  suggestion  of  another.  It  is  naturally  not  always  easy 
to  ascertain  how  far  these  conditions  are  met.  In  judging  of  the 
auditory  cases,  especially,  great  caution  is  necessary ;  for,  as  we  have 
seen  above  (pp.  125-6),  there  is  scarcely  any  sort  of  mere  noise  which 
may  not  have  some  undiscoverable  external  origin  in  the  house  or  the 
neighbourhood.  Intelligent  speech,  on  the  other  hand,  and  certain 
musical  sounds,  such  as  bell-sounds  or  distinct  melodic  sequences,  if 
externally  caused,  imply  conditions  the  presence  or  absence  of  which 
it  is  usually  possible  to  ascertain.  So  again  in  the  visual  cases,  the 
fact  of  dim  or  uncertain  light  may  favour  the  hypothesis  of  illusion  ; 
but  where  the  light  is  good,  the  presence  or  absence  of  an  adequate 
external  cause  in  the  vicinity  can  often  be  determined  with  all  but 
complete  certainty.^     One  point  of  uncertainty  often  remains,  owing 

^  I  am  including  only  cases  of  hallucinations  which  have  occurred  to  more  than  one 
percipient  simultaneously,  or  very  nearly  so.  The  extremely  perplexing  cases,  few,  but  well 
attested,  where  the  same  phantasm  has  been  independently  described  by  different 
persons  who  have  at  different  times  encountered  it  in  the  same  locality,  may  possibly 
be  also  connected  with  the  infectious  character  of  hallucinations ;  for  we  cannot  pro- 
nounce it  to  be  indispensable  that  the  infectious  influence  should  act  at  the  moment. 
A  certain  amount  of  evidence  for  this  explanation  is  afforded  by  cases  where  the  ex- 
perience (not  apparently  due  to  suggestion  or  illusion)  has  sometimes  occurred  to 
one  person  alone,  and  at  other  times  to  several  together.  But  the  hypothesis, 
as  thus  extended,  becomes  doubtful  and  difficult,  and  is,  moreover,  only  one  out 
of  several  hypotheses,  all  about  equally  doubtful  and  difficult,  that  may  be 
suggested.  (See  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick's  paper  "  On  the  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society, 
for  Phantasms  of  the  'Dea.d,^^  m.  the  Proceedings  of  the  S. P. R.,  Vol.iii.,  especially  pp.  146-8.) 

Clearly  no  such  explanation  is  needed  for  the  general  run  of  traditional  appearances — 
the  white  ladies,  headless  horses,  and  phantom  dogs,  which  are  the  most  widely-spread 
forms  ;  or  the  phantasms  which  are  more  or  less  indigenous  to  a  particular  district,  like  the 
"  corpse-candles  "  of  some  Welsh  counties,  and  the  figures  in  shrouds  of  the  Western 
Scottish  islands.  To  account  for  these,  we  need  not  go  beyond  the  latent  idea  in  the 
percipient's  own  mind.  But  it  seems  occasionally  to  happen  that  the  percipient  of  a 
traditional  phantasm  is  a  person  not  previously  acquainted  with  the  tradition.  Thus  Mr. 
Lowell  tells  me  that  he  once  saw  the  appearance  of  the  "  Witch-farm, "  on  the  Massa- 
chusetts coast,  though  unaware  of  the  local  legend  concerning  it,  at  the  very  place  to 
which  he  found  afterwards  that  the  legend  assigned  it ;  and  in  Dyer's  English  Folk-Lore, 
p,  208,  a  case  is  reported  where  a  phantasm,  coinciding  with  and  possibly  originating  in 
a  death,  took  a  form  that  exactly  accorded  with  the  ideas  of  death-apparitions  current 
in  the  place,  though  the  percipient  was  a  transient  sojourner  whom  no  rumour  of  those 
ideas  had  reached. 

Another  type  (recorded  by  Aubrey,  Martin,  Dalyell,  Napier,  Gregor,  and  other 
writers  on  "second-sight,"  and  possibly  genuine),  which  seems  to  strain  the  hypothesis  of 
infection  somewhat  less,  is  that  where  physical  contact  with  the  percipient  of  an  abnormal 
sight  or  sound  has  enabled^a  second  person  to  share  it.  Our  own  collection  contains  a  couple 
of  modern  instances — one  first-hand  from  Mrs.  Taunton,  of  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near 
Birmingham, the  other  from  two  daughters  and  ason-in-law  of  the  late  Mr. and  Mrs. George 
Whittaker,of  the  Bowdlands,01itheroe,  the  first-hand  witnesses.  Such  a  phenomenon  might 
at  least  be  compared  with  the  favouring  effect  of  contact  in  certain  "thought-reading" 
results,  which  (by  rare  exception  among  results  where  contact  is  a  condition)  seem  not  to 
be  explicable  as  "muscle-reading." 

190  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

to  the  way  in  which  the  evidence  reaches  us :  we  cannot  be  sure  how 
far  the  mere  verbal  description  of  one  percipient,  after  the  occur- 
rence, may  not  have  caused  another  to  fill  in  or  modify  his  own 
recollection  with  details  which  he  did  not  himself  observe.  But  if 
both  clearly  shared  in  the  experience,  it  is  not  important  that  their 
percepts  may  not  have  been  so  precisely  similar  as  is  sometimes 
alleged.  So  far,  indeed,  from  telling  against  the  theory  of  mental 
transfer,  such  want  of  identity  is  rather  what  we  might  have  expected, 
both  from  the  numerous  approximate  successes  in  experimental 
thought-transference — e.g.,  in  reproducing  drawings— and  from  the 
evidence  that  a  telepathic  impression  is  liable  to  be  reacted  on  in 
various  ways  by  the  person  whom  it  affects. 

§  4.  I  fear  to  weary  the  reader  by  yet  further  explanations  and 
distinctions  before  examples  are  given.  But  difficulty  of  exposition 
and  risk  of  misapprehension  alike  culminate  in  this  final  chapter ; 
and  the  patience  which  has  been  able  to  accompany  me  thus  far  must 
be  so  considerable  that  I  venture  to  make  one  more  demand  on  it. 

I  have  propounded  the  question,  what  evidence  do  we  find  that 
purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  senses  may  be  infectious  ?  and 
I  have  implied  that  I  am  able  to  produce  some  evidence  of  the  sort. 
And,  in  fact,  I  am  about  to  cite  examples  which  I  think  that 
the  majority  of  my  readers — or  of  such  of  them  at  any  rate  as 
accept  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  facts — will  regard  as  going  some 
way  to  establish  the  point.  But  there  are  those,  I  am  aware,  in  whose 
minds  some  of  my  instances  will  produce  a  doubt  whether  the 
experiences  were  really  subjective — whether  they  may  not  have  had 
some  unknown  origin  external  to  any  of  the  perceiving  minds ;  and  I 
admit,  though  the  doubt  weakens  my  argument,  that  it  is  one  which 
I  in  some  measure  share.  To  explain  this,  I  must  recur  to  a  point 
that  was  very  briefly  touched  on  in  Chap.  XI.  (Vol  I.,  p.  512,  note). 
It  may  be  remembered  that  the  question  there  arose  whether  post- 
inortem  appearances  of  persons  some  time  deceased  were  necessarily 
subjective  hallucinations,  or  whether  they  might  not  be  amenable  to  a 
telepathic  explanation  ;  and  I  observed  that,  while  telepathy — being 
a  psychical  and  not  a  physical  conception — was  quite  able  to 
embrace  these  phenomena  as  possibly  due  to  the  action  of  human 
minds  continuing  after  bodily  death,  yet  the  evidence  for  them  (of  a 
sort  that  would  preclude  their  being  regarded  as  purely  subjective 
experiences)  was  scanty  and  inconclusive ;  and  I  dismissed  the  topic 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  191 

as  not  germane  to  an  inquiry  concerning  telepathic  transferences 
between  the  minds  of  living  persons.  But  the  topic  which  was 
rightly  thus  dismissed  when  we  were  considering  affections  of  a  single 
percipient,  forces  itself  on  us  again  when  we  encounter  cases  of 
joint  percipience.  For  suppose  that  the  object  which  B  and  C  both 
simultaneously  behold  is  the  form  of  the  deceased  A.  Then,  if  (1) 
the  idea  of  B's  and  C's  affection  by  the  still  continuing  mind  of  A  be 
rejected — as  it  would  be  by  disbelievers  in  survival  after  physical 
death — yet  B's  and  C's  simultaneous  affection  remains  a  fact  which 
demands  recognition  in  this  book ;  because,  if  A  does  not  affect  them, 
then  one  of  them  must  affect  the  other,  i.e.,  the  case  is  one  of 
transference  between  the  minds  of  living  persons.  And  if  (2)  the 
idea  of  A's  continuing  power  to  affect  B  or  C  be  admitted  as  tenable, 
but  the  joint  affection  of  B  and  C  by  A  be  regarded  as  improbable, 
(owing  to  the  difficulties  already  pointed  out  of  conceiving  the  projec- 
tion, under  a  telepathic  impulse,  of  exactly  simultaneous  and 
corresponding  hallucinations)  yet  again  a  fact  remains  which  demands 
recognition  in  this  book  ;  because,  if  A  affects  B  and  not  C,  then  C's 
vision  of  A  must  be  obtained  from  B,  and  the  case  is  again  one  of 
transference  between  the  minds  of  living  persons. 

The  reader  will  now,  perhaps,  divine  why  I  hesitate  to  apply  the  '^^^U 
words  "  purely  subjective  "  to  some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  cases  in  the 
group  that  awaits  us.  Though  no  absent  living  person  was  concerned 
in  them  as  agent,  I  think  it  would  be  rash  and  unscientific  to  prejudge 
the  question  (deliberately  left  open  in  Chap.  XL)  whether  they  had 
an  origin  in  psychical  conditions  which  have  survived  the  change  of 
death.  I  have  shown  that  alike  on  either  of  the  above  hypotheses —  i  u^  /- 
alike,  whether  the  dead  (1)  have  not,  or  (2)  have,  minds  which  can 
influence  the  living — cases  of  collective  percipience  suggestive  of 
the  dead  fall  within  the  legitimate  scope  of  the  present  inquiry ;  but 
I  am  anxious  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  dogmatic  decision  between 
(1)  and  (2).  I  am  about  equally  dissatisfied  with  the  arguments 
adduced  for  the  former,  and  with  the  evidence  adduced  for  the  latter. 
But  in  my  view  the  cases,  whatever  else  they  involve,  at  any  rate 
involve  an  element  of  quite  mundane  thought-transference  between 
the  minds  of  the  living  persons  concerned;  and  I  must  beg  the  reader 
to  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  simply  as  probable  or  possible  cases  of 
thought-transference,  and  not  as  manifestations  from  the  dead,  that 
those  of  them  which  may  seem  to  have  reference  to  the  dead  are  here 
adduced.     If  the  senses  of  B  and  C  are  similarly  and  simultaneously 

192  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

affected  without  the  presence  of  any  material  cause,  then  alike  whether 
there  is  or  is  not  a  real  immaterial  cause  outside  their  two  selves,  I 
believe  that  the  joint  phenomenon  still  depends  (partly,  if  there  is 
such  a  cause,  wholly,  if  there  is  not)  on  psychical  communication 
between  their  two  minds.  As  to  the  point  that  is  left  in  abeyance — 
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  the  said  cause — all  varieties  of 
opinion  will  be  allowed  for  by  defining  the  group,  not  positively,  as 
cases  of  "  purely  subjective  "  origin,  but  negatively,  as  cases  which  do 
not  apparently  originate  in  the  condition  of  any  absent  living  person. 

I  5.  I  will  begin  with  visual  examples.  The  following  is  a 
collective  hallucination  of  what  I  have  called  a  rudimentary  type,  as 
not  suggesting  any  special  form  or  human  presence ;  but  it  is  a 
remarkably  prolonged  and  elaborate  specimen  of  the  sort.^  The 
narrator  is  Mrs.  Ward,  of  Glen  Aray  Lodge,  Windsor. 

1  Another  striking  rudimentary  hallucination,  of  the  cloud  type,  in  which  two  persons 
(out  of  the  four  who  were  present)  shared,  is  described  in  Notes  and  Queries  for  September 
8th  and  22nd,  and  November  10th,  1860,  and  for  January  5th,  1861.  The  narrator  is  Mr. 
E.  L.  Swift,  who  was  Keeper  of  the  Jewels  in  the  Tower  at  the  time  when  the  event 
occurred,  in  the  Jewel  House.  An  incorrect  version  was  given,  without  authority,  in 
Gregory's  Animal  Magnetism. 

In  Vol.  i.,  p.  483, 1  drew  attention  to  a  particular  kind  of  impression,  which,  without 

actually   developing  into   a   sensory   form,    yet   strongly   suggests    a  particular  person's 

presence.     It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  such  an  impression — which  seems   a  sort  of 

potential  hallucination — may  be  collective.     Mrs.  Easton,  of  14,  The  Crescent,  Taunton, 

writes,  in  January,  1884  : — 

i^^'^'t^'^'  "I  have  been,  on  one  occasion,  impressed  with  the  certainty  that  a  sort  of — so  to 

y^^^TlJ^  speak — invisible  presence  was  in  the  room,  and  my  sister,  who  was  in  the  same  room,  told 

f^  me  some  hours  after,  that  she  had  the  same  impression  at  that  particular  moment,  I  not 

having  spoken  of  the  matter  to  her.     This  took  place  about  two  or  three  days  after  the 

death  of  a  near  relative." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Easton  adds  : — 

"  In  answer  to  the  first  question  as  to  whether  we  ever  had  such  an  impression  at  any 
other  time,  for  myself  I  can  answer  'No,'  decidedly,  and  my  sister  cannot  remember 
anything  of  the  kind. 

"  The  second  question  was,  did  we  connect  the  impression  with  our  deceased  relation 
at  the  time?  For  myself,  I  can  answer,  'Yes' ;  my  sister  has  described  her  thoughts  at  that 
praticular  moment  in  the  enclosed  letter. 
■       ^  "  The  third  question,  '  Was  there  a  strong  bond  of  affection  ? '    Yes. 

St/iu"  "Fourth   question,    'Can   we  be  sure  that  the  impression   in   each   mind    exactly 

corresponded  in  time  ? '     I  am  quite  certain  that,  whatever  produced  this  unusual  f eehng, 
we  both  experienced  it  at  the  same  moment,  although  perhaps  in  a  different  way,  being  so 
unlike  in  temperament ;  I  remember  looking  at  my  watch  on  awakening,  to  know  the  time. 
"Fifth  question,    'How  long   did   the   impression   last?'      For   some   seconds;  the 
impression  on  my  mind  was  that  some  unusual  presence,  something  not  material,  was  near." 
The  enclosure,  from  Mrs.  Welch,  of  5,  Colleton  Crescent,  Exeter,  was  as  follows  : — 
"  In  August  last,  I  was  sleeping  in  the  room  with  my  sister.     I  think  it  was  the  third 
night  after  our  father's  death,  and  he  was  lying  in  a  room  below.     I  was  aroused  out  of 
my  sleep  with  a  feeling  as  if  some  person  had  entered  the  room,  and  come  as  far  as  the 
foot  of  the  bed  when  I  awoke. 

"  I  am  particularly  nervous  at  all  times,  of  course  after  the  recent  event  more  so  than 
usual ;  yet  when  I  awoke,  I  did  not  feel  the  slightest  fear,  and  only  wished  I  could  see  the 
time,  as  I  instantly  thought  I  should  hear  of  something  having  happened  at  that  moment 
— the  more  so  as  our  step-mother,  we  knew,  was  in  a  veiy  precarious  state. 

"My  sister  awoke  at  the  same  time,  and  on  my  telling  her  of  my  sensations  she  told 
me  she  had  felt  the  same,  although  she  is  not  in  the  least  of  a  nervous  temperament." 

In  reply  to  a  question  whether  such  an  impression  was  unique  in  her  experience,  Mrs. 

Welch  says : —  .  -         <> 

"  T  never  experienced  the  same  feelings  before,  that  I  can  recollect."  c^r  i-^--^-'-^-^—  ■ 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  193 

(316)  "  In  May,  1851,  I  and  my  husband,  the  late  E.  M.  Ward,  R.A.,    /      , ,    ^  ^ 
had  a  curious  experience  which  we  were  at  a  loss  to  account  for,  though  it     ,    /'/    .^^^ 
became  a  subject  of  frequent  conversation,  and   every  effort  was  made  to      ' ; 
find  for  it  a  fitting  and  rational  explanation. 

"  We  were  living  at  No.  33,  Harewood  Square.  It  was  in  the  month  ^'^''^* 
of  May,  and  my  husband  and  I  had  been  to  a  quiet  gathering  of  friends  in 
the  neighbourhood ;  we  returned  about  1 2  o'clock,  letting  ourselves  in,  for 
the  servants  were  in  bed,  and  went  straight  to  our  bedroom.  Having 
passed  such  a  quiet,  unexciting  evening,  there  was  nothing  much  to  talk 
about,  and  my  husband  was  quickly  in  bed  and  asleep.  I  very  soon 
followed  him,  and  was  just  getting  into  bed,  having  put  out  my  candle, 
with  my  face  towards  the  door,  when,  much  to  my  surprise,  I  saw,  as 
though  suspended  a  little  distance  from  the  top  of  the  door,  a  strange, 
flickering  flame  ;  it  was  about  six  inches  high,  and  four  inches  across  the 
widest  part,  pear-shaped,  and  of  a  blueish  lilac  tint.  I  was  considerably 
startled  and  must  have  been  much  agitated,  for  my  husband  (as  he 
informed  me  afterwards)  was  roused  by  the  sound  of  my  fast  beating 
heart.  In  reply  to  his  inquiries,  I  drew  his  attention  to  the  strange  flame 
which  I  still  saw  suspended  from  the  door  frame,  and  whilst  we  were 
both  wonderingly  speculating  as  to  what  it  could  be,  it  was  joined  by 
another  flame,  similar  in  every  respect,  but  smaller.  Greater  still  was  our 
surprise  when  we  observed  these  two  mysterious  little  lights  slowly 
advancing,  side  by  side,  towards  us ;  they  came  right  on  to  our  bed,  and 
then,  determined  to  analyse  their  nature,  we  both  sat  up,  and  my  husband 
grasped  them  with  his  hands,  rubbing  them  and  endeavouring  to  rid  us  of 
their  society.  But,  to  our  astonishment,  this  treatment  had  no  more  efiect 
upon  them  than  to  break  them  into  small  luminous  grains,  which  ran  all 
over  the  bed- covering  like  quicksilver.  Gradually,  however,  this  bright 
inundation  began  to  fade,  and,  as  we  still  continued  our  efforts  to 
extinguish  it,  it  disappeared. 

"  Such  is  the  account  of  the  occurrence.  That  it  actually  did  occur  to 
us  we  never  entertained  the  slightest  doubt.  I  was  certainly  wide  awake 
at  the  time,  and  my  mind  was  troubled  in  no  way,  and  I  was  in  good 
health — otherwise  there  might  be  some  ground  for  the  belief  that  the  ap- 
pearance was  the  hallucination  of  a  disordered  mind,  or  of  an  over-wrought 
brain.  My  husband,  too,  was  undoubtedly  wide  awake,  and  retained  a 
perfect  recollection  of  all  the  details  of  the  vision  the  next  day.  We 
discussed  it,  and  tried  to  fathom  its  meaning,  over  and  over  again,  but 
could  never  arrive  at  any  conclusion  about  it  at  all — except  that  as  it  did 
not  act  as  a  forewarning  to  any  coming  event,  did  not  correspond  to  any 
important  event,  and  did  not  appear  to  serve  any  purpose  at  all,  its 
appearance  was  utterly  meaningless. 

"  Henrietta  Mary  Ada  Ward." 

In  a  later  letter,  Mrs.  Ward  adds  : — 

"  As  the  lights  were  coming  to  the  bed,  there  were  two  streaks  of 
moonlight  on  the  counterpane,  which  could  not  come  from  any  window,  as 
the  room  was  darkened.  They  also  when  touched,  with  the  two  lamps, 
merged  into  a  mass  of  diamonds." 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Ward  told  us  that  she  had  never  experienced  any 
other  hallucination  of  the  senses 

VOL,    II.  O 

194  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

We  have  several  other  examples  of  collective  hallucinations  of 
light.  In  one  (described  to  us  by  Mrs.  G.  T.  Haly,  of  122,  Coningham 
Eoad,  Shepherd's  Bush,  W.,  as  having  occurred  a  few  days  after  her 
husband's  death,  and  assumed  by  her  to  be  connected  with  him),  a 
flame  as  of  a  candle,  but  bluer,  passed  and  repassed  the  bed  on  which 
the  two  percipients  were  lying,  at  about  18  inches  height  from  the 
floor.  In  another,  a  luminous  ball  was  seen  in  a  corner  of  the  room. 
A  fourth  very  remarkable  instance,  of  the  brilliant  illumination  and 
then  sudden  darkening  of  an  empty  room,  is  described  to  us  by  the 
Rev.  Edward  Ram,  of  Norwich,  as  a  personal  experience  of  himself  and 
his  wife — but  this  was  in  a  house  where  other  unaccountable  phen- 
omena have  been  observed ;  as  was  also  the  case  in  a  fifth  instance, 
where  a  light  is  described  by  one  percipient,  Mrs.  W.  B.  Richmond, 
as  a  glow  over  the  whole  room,  out  of  which  (according  to  her 
recollection)  two  bright  little  balls  of  light  seemed  to  flash  out ;  and 
by  the  other  (her  mother)  as  "  flickering  about "  specially  in  a  par- 
ticular part  of  the  room.  In  none  of  these  cases  does  it  seem  possible 
that  the  light  was  in  any  way  cast  or  reflected  iato  the  room  from 
outside.^ 

Coming  to  instances  of  a  more  developed  type,  we  have  a  con- 
siderable group  of  cases  as  to  which  it  might  be  a  possible — though 
I  think  a  rather  desperate — assumption  that  what  was  seen  was  a 
real  object,  most  strangely  misinterpreted,  or  else  appearing  in  most 
improbable  circumstances ;  and  which  I  do  not  therefore  number  as 
evidential  items.  Specially  baffling  are  some  of  the  cases  where  a 
carriage,  as  well  as  human  beings,  has  appeared.  For  instance,  Major 
W.,  resident  near  Conon  Bridge,  Ross-shire,  writes : — 

"  February  9th,  1882. 

"  It  was  the  month  of  August ;  rather  a  dark  night  and  very  still ; 
the  hour,  midnight ;  when  before  retiring  for  the  night  I  went,  as  is  often 
my  custom,  to  the  front  door  to  look  at  the  weather.  When  standing  for  a 
moment  on  the  step,  I  saw,  coming  round  a  turn  in  the  drive,  a  large  close 
carriage  and  pair  of  horses,  with  two  men  on  the  box.  It  passed  the  front 
of  the  house,  and  was  going  at  a  rapid  rate  towards  a  path  which  leads  to 
a  stream,  running,  at  that  point,  between  rather  steep  banks.  There 
is  no  carriage-road  on  that  side  of  the  house,  and  I  shouted  to  the 
driver  to  stop,   as,  if  he  went  on,  he  must  undoubtedly   come  to  grief. 

1  In  the  last  case,  the  second  percipient  suggests  the  lantern  of  thieves  trying  to  rob 
the  pigeon-house.  But  in  the  first  place,  the  pigeon-house  was  not  robbed,  and  no  vestige 
of  thieves  was  found  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  the  light  would  have  had  to  penetrate  a 
very  dark  green  blind,  and  thieves  are  not  wont  to  require  for  their  work  an  advertisement 
of  such  preternatural  brilliancy. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  195 

The  carriage  stopped  abruptly  when  it  canie  to  the  running  water, 
turned,  and,  in  doing  so,  drove  over  the  lawn.  I  got  up  to  it ;  and  by  this 
time  my  son  had  joined  me  with  a  lantern.  Neither  of  the  men  on  the  box 
had  spoken,  and  there  was  no  sound  from  the  inside  of  the  carriage. 
My  son  looked  in,  and  all  he  could  discern  was  a  stiff-looking  figure  sitting 
up  in  a  corner,  and  draped,  apparently,  from  head  to  foot  in  white. 
The  absolute  silence  of  the  men  outside  was  mysterious,  and  the  white  figure 
inside,  apparently  of  a  female,  not  being  alarmed  or  showing  any  signs 
of  life,  was  strange.  Men,  carriage,  and  horses  were  unknown  to  me, 
although  I  know  the  country  so  well.  The  carriage  continued  its  way 
across  the  lawn,  turning  up  a  road  which  led  past  the  stables,  and  so 
into  the  drive  again  and  away.  We  could  see  no  traces  of  it  the  next 
morning — no  marks  of  wheels  or  horse's  feet  on  the  soft  grass  or  gravel 
road ;  and  we  never  again  heard  of  the  carriage  or  its  occupant,  though  I 
caused  careful  inquiries  to  be  made  the  following  day.  I  may  mention 
that  my  wife  and  daughter  also  saw  the  carriage,  being  attracted  to  the 
window  by  my  shout.     This  happened  on  the  23rd  of  August,  1878." 

After  a  visit  to  the  house  in  September,  1884,  Mr.  Podmore  wrote  : — 
"  Major  W.,  on  whom  I  called  to-day,  is  practically  satisfied  that  what 
he  and  his  family  saw  was  not  a  real  carriage.  He  showed  me  the  whole 
scene  of  its  appearance.  The  spot  where  the  carriage  appeared  to  turn 
barely  leaves  sufficient  room  for  the  passage  of  an  ordinary  carriage,  and 
that  a  carriage  should  turn  round  there  seems  almost  impossible.  The 
carriage  went  for  some  distance  across  the  lawn — a  mossy  and  rather  damp 
piece  of  grass — and  stopped  in  front  of  the  house  for  more  than  a  minute, 
the  while  Major  W.  spoke  to  the  man,  but  without  receiving  any  reply. 
His  wife,  whom  I  also  saw,  was  attracted  to  the  window  by  the  sound  of 
the  wheels,  in  the  first  instance,  on  the  gravel.  Major  W.  made  many 
inquiries  among  his  neighbours,  but  could  not  find  that  anyone  had  seen 
the  carriage  at  all.  The  house  is  situated  on  a  peninsula  stretching  between 
the  Cromarty  and  Moray  Firths,  and  some  3  miles  from  the  neck  of  the 
peninsula.  The  locality  is  very  lonely,  there  being  no  villages  or  hamlets, 
and  but  few  private  residences  of  any  kind ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine 
the  errand  which  could  bring  a  strange  carriage  into  such  a  country  at  the 
dead  of  night.  Major  W.  has  had  one  other  purely  subjective  hallucina- 
tion." 

In  another  of  the  carriage-cases,  the  hallucination  was  of  a  more 
iDizarre  sort,  the  coachman  and  footman  on  the  box  having  black  faces, 
and  the  four  ladies  inside  being  dressed  completely  in  black.  The 
vehicle  passed  the  window  without  producing  any  sound  on  the 
gravel.  In  a  third  case  (quoted  above,  pp.  97-9),  one  of  the  percipients 
was  altogether  apart  from  the  three  others — they  seeing  the 
phantasmal  carriage  pass  the  window,  and  she  meeting  it  some  way 
down  the  road.  In  a  fourth  case,  our  informant — Mr.  Paul  Bird,  of 
39,  Strand,  Calcutta — followed  a  phantom  gharrie  for  100  yards, 
into  the  very  portico  of  Hastings  House  at  Alipore,  while  the  same 
vehicle  was  watched  in  its  approach  by  his  wife  from  a  window.     But 

VOL.    II.  O    2 

196  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

more  of  a  puzzle  even  than  the  carriage-cases  is  a  narrative  received 
from  two  daughters  of  a  well-known  clergyman — neither  romantic  nor 
superstitious  witnesses — who  describe  a  vast  swarm  of  soundless 
phantasmal  shapes,  dressed  in  old-fashioned  garments,  most  of  them 
dwarfish,  and  two  with  sparks  round  their  faces,  by  which  they  and  a 
maid  were  once  accompanied  for  about  200  yards  in  a  lane  near  Oxford. 
"  One  might  imagine  it  to  be  a  kind  of  mirage  ;  only  the  whole 
appearance  [owing  to  the  dresses]  was  so  unlike  what  one  would  have 
seen  in  any  town  at  the  time  we  saw  it."^  If  this  must  be  regarded 
as  illusion,  because  it  occurred  in  misty  moonlight,  yet  an  identity 
of  impression  is  described  which  still  suggests  mental  infection : — 
"  If  one  saw  a  man,  all  saw  a  man  ;  if  one  saw  a  woman,  all  saw  a 
woman ;  and  so  on." 

I  pass  by,  however,  as  necessarily  inconclusive,  the  greater 
number  of  our  instances  of  collective  impression  where  the  appearance 
was  seen  out  of  doors  in  imperfect  light — though  there  is  not  one 
of  them  which  would  not  be  decidedly  more  remarkable,  as  a 
specimen  of  joint  illusion,  than  any  that  I  have  found  recorded  in 
print.^  The  following  daylight  example  is  from  the  Misses  Mont- 
gomery, of  Beaulieu,  Drogheda. 

"March  2nd,  1884. 

(317)  "About  the  year  1875, 1  and  my  sister  (we  were  about  13  years 
old  then)  were  driving  home  in  the  tax-cart  one  summer  afternoon  about  4 

1  This  case,  which  in  brief  abstract  may  sound  like  a  frightened  girl's  story,  will 
not,  I  think,  produce  that  impression  in  the  complete  account,  which  may  be  found  in 
the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  77. 

2  The  following  case,  remote  but  first-hand,  is  made  interesting  by  the  fact  that  one 
of  the  persons  present  did  not  share  the  experience.  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Walditch,  Bridport, 
tells  us  that  one  beautiful  summer  evening,  after  sunset  but  while  it  was  still  quite  light, 
she  was  driving  home  with  a  cousin  and  a  friend — "  three  more  merry  girls  could  hardly 
be  met  with  " — and  a  man-servant. 

"  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  on  the  right-hand  side,  walking,  or  rather,  gliding,  at  the 
head  of  the  horse.  My  first  idea  was  that  he  meant  to  stop  us,  but  he  made  no  effort  of 
the  kind,  but  kept  on  at  the  same  pace  as  the  horse,  neither  faster  nor  slower.  At  first  I 
thought  him  of  great  height,  but  afterwards  remarked  that  he  was  gliding  some  distance 
(at  least  a  foot)  above  the  ground.  Mary  was  sitting  by  me.  I  pointed  out  in  a  low 
voice  the  figure,  but  she  did  not  see  it,  and  could  not  at  any  time  during  its  appearance. 
Emily  was  sitting  by  the  man-servant  on  the  front  seat ;  she  heard  what  I  said,  turned 
round,  and  speaking  softly,  'I  see  the  man  you  mention  distinctly.'  Then  the  man- 
servant said,  in  an  awful,  frightened  voice,  '  For  God's  sake,  ladies,  don't  say  anything  ! 
please  keep  quiet  ! '  or  words  to  that  effect.  I  had  heard  that  horses  and  other  animals 
feel  the  presence  of  the  supernatural ;  in  this  instance  there  was  no  starting  or  bolting, 
the  creature  went  on  at  an  even  pace,  almost  giving  the  idea  of  being  controlled  by  the 
figure.  The  face  was  turned  away,  but  the  shape  of  a  man  in  dark  clothing  waa  clearly 
defined .  My  cousin  and  the  man-servant  saw  it  distinctly,  but  my  friend  was  unable  to 
do  so,  though  the  figure  stood  out  plainly  against  the  evening  light ;  she  was  so  placed 
that  she  ought  to  have  seen  it  particularly  well.  At  the  entrance  of  the  village  of 
Charminster  it  vanished,  and  we  saw  it  no  more.     I  never  heard  the  road  was  haunted." 

This  may  jjerhaps  have  been  an  oj^tical  effect  due  to  the  horse's  breath  ;  but  many 
breathing  horses  are  out  on  summer  evenings,  and  I  should  be  glad  to  know  of  a  similar 
effect  in  other  instances.  It  is  at  any  rate  odd  that  it  should  have  been  interpreted 
in  the  same  way  by  several  observers. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  197 

o'clock,  when  there  suddenly  appeared,  floating  over  the  hedge,  a  female  (^^i-''>-  '. 
figure  moving  noiselessly  across  the  road ;  the  figure  was  in  white,  and 
the  body  in  a  slanting  position,  some  10  feet  above  the  ground.  The 
horse  suddenly  stopped  and  shook  with  fright,  so  much  so  that  we  could 
not  get  it  on.  I  called  out  to  my  sister  :  '  Did  you  see  that  ? '  and  she 
said  she  had,  and  so  did  the  boy  Caffrey,  who  was  in  the  cart.  The  figure 
went  over  the  hedge,  on  the  other  side  of  the  road,  and  passed  over  a  field, 
till  we  lost  sight  of  it  in  a  plantation  beyond.  Altogether,  1  suppose,  we 
watched  it  for  a  couple  of  minutes.  It  never  touched  the  ground  at  all, 
but  floated  calmly  along.  On  reaching  home  we  told  our  mother  of  what 
we  had  seen,  and  we  were  perfectly  certain  it  was  not  a  mere  delusion  or 
illusion,  nor  an  owl,  or  anything  of  the  kind. 

"  I  have  never  seen  anything  like  this  nor  any  apparition  before  or 
since.  We  were  all  in  good  health  at  the  time,  and  no  one  had  suggested 
any  grounds  for  the  apparition  beforehand  ;  but  we  afterwards  heard  that 
the  road  was  supposed  to  be  haunted,  and  a  figure  had  been  seen  by  some 
of  the  country  folks. 

"Violet  Montgomery. 
"  Sidney  Montgomery." 
Professor  Barrett,  who  knows  the  witnesses,  adds  that  Mrs.    Mont- 
gomery remembers  the  incident  well,  and  the  terror  her  children  were  in 
They  both  agreed  as  to  the  reality  of  the  figure.     Cafirey   has  gone  to 
America,  and  been  lost  sight  of. 

No  one  probably  will  suppose  that  the  witnesses  here  have 
agreed  to  repeat,  for  our  benefit,  a  romance  which  they  fabricated  for 
their  mother's  at  the  time ;  and  however  much  allowance  be  made 
for  childish  terror  or  exaggeration,  the  community  of  experience  in 
broad  daylight  seems  to  exceed  what  can  be  attributed  to  verbal 
suggestions,  passed  from  one  to  another,  a  propos  of  a  fleece  of  cloud  , 
or  an  owl.  We  have  a  very  similar  instance  from  Mr.  W.  S.  Soutar, 
solicitor,  of  Blairgowrie,  N.B. — who  records  that  he  and  his  brother, 
as  young  boys,  at  play  behind  their  father's  house,  in  the  gloaming  ot  // 
a  summer  "evening,  "  both  saw  an  apparition  in  the  shape  of  a  female 
figure,  plainly  dressed,  with  a  striped  apron  over  the  face,  and  which 
glided,  without  any  apparent  movement  of  the  feet,  from  the  road 
till  about  half-way  between  it  and  the  hedge  surrounding  a  shrubbery 
near  the  house,  when  the  figure  suddenly  disappeared.  There  was  no 
cover  near,  behind  which  the  person  (if  in  the  body)  could  hide,  the 
spot  where  it  disappeared  being  bare  and  open."  This  case,  however, 
is  remote,  and  the  second  witness  is  dead.  A  much  more  striking 
example  (brought  to  our  notice  by  Mr.  A.  Farquharson,  of  North 
Bradley,  Trowbridge,  Wilts)  is  one  where  the  senses  of  two  adults — 
a  gentleman-farmer,  described  as  a  hard-headed  unromantic  business- 
man and  his  wife — were  similarly  deluded  in  an  exposed  space  and  in 

198  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

broad  daylight ;  but  the  timidity  of  the  witnesses  precludes  me  from 
giving  details. 

To  come,  however,  to  indoor  cases,  of  a  less  dubious  type.  As  a 
rule,  the  figure  seen  (just  as  in  purely  subjective  cases  occurring  to  a 
single  percipient)  is  unrecognised.  The  following  account,  though 
remote,  is  first-hand,  and  at  any  rate  deserves  quotation.  It  occurs 
in  Letters  of  Philip,  2nd  Earl  of  Chesterfield  (1829),  p.  11.  The 
incident  was  recorded  by  Lord  Chesterfield  in  ah  MS.  volume  con- 
taining his  letters  and  "notes  for  my  remembrance  of  things  and 
accidents,  as  they  yearly  happen  to  me." 

(318)  "A  very  odd  accident  this  year  [1652]  befell  mee,  for  being 
come  about  a  law  sute  to  London  .  .  I,  waking  in  the  mornmg  about 
8  o'clock,  .  .  .  plainly  saw,  within  a  yard  of  my  bedside,  a  thing  all 
white  like  a  stand^  sheet,  with  a  knot  atop  of  it,  about  4  or  5  foot  high, 
w^  I  considered  a  good  while,  and  did  rayse  myself  up  in  my  bed  to 
view  the  better.  At  last  I  thrust  out  both  my  hands  to  catch  hold  of  it, 
but,  in  a  moment,  like  a  shadow,   it  slid    to  the  feet   of  the  bed,   out  of 

w'^  I,   leaps    after  it,   c"^  see  it  no  more Doubting  least 

something  might  have  happened  to  my  wife,  I  rid  home  that  day  to  Pet- 
worth  in  Sussex,  where  I  had  left  her  with  her  father,  the  Earl  of  North- 
umberland, and  as  I  was  going  upstairs  to  her  chamber,  I  met  one  of  my 
footmen,  who  told  me  that  he  was  comming  to  me  with  a  packet  of  letters, 
the  w^  I  having  taken  from  him  went  to  my  wife,  who  I  found  in  good 
health,  being  .  .  .  with  Lady  Essex,  her  sister,  and  another  gentle- 
woman, one  Mrs.  Ramsey  .  .  .  They  all  asked  me  what  made  me  to 
come  home  so  much  sooner  than  I  intended.  Whereupon  I  told  them 
what  had  happened  to  me  that  morn^;  which  they  all  wondering  at 
desired  me  to  open  and  read  the  letter  that  I  had  taken  from  the  foot- 
man, which  I  immediately  did,  and  read  my  wife's  letter  to  mee  aloud, 
wherein  she  desired  my  speedy  return^  as  fear^  that  some  ill  w"^  happen 
to  mee,  because  that  morning  shee  had  seen  a  thing  all  in  white,  with  a 
black  face,  standing  by  her  bedside.  ...  By  examining  all  particulars 
we  found  that  the  same  day,  the  same  hour,  and  (as  near  as  can  be  com- 
puted) the  same  minute,  all  that  had  happened  to  me  had  befallen  her, 
being  fortie  miles  asunder.  The  Lady  Essex  and  Mrs.  Ramsey  were 
witnesses  to  both  our  relations."  ^ 

1  In  another  case  where  a  phantasm,  again  of  a  very  unusual  aspect,  was  simultaneously 
perceived  by  two  persons  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  we  have  the  special  reason  for 
supposing  it  to  have  been  purely  subjective  in  origin,  that  both  percipients  were  some- 
what liable  to  subjective  visual  hallucinations  ;  but  though  it  comes  to  us  on  good  authority, 
it  is  third-hand,  and  cannot  receive  an  evidential  number.  Dr.  T.  King  Chambers, 
r.R.C.P.,  of  Shrubs  Hill  House,  Sunningdale,  writes  : — 

"  December  26th,  1885. 

"  My  uncle  by  marriage,  Colonel  Macdonald,  was  subject  to  frequent  hallucinations, 
when  sitting  up  late  reading,  and  working  at  some  improvements  in  fortification  and 
Semaphore  telegraphy,  which  he  thought  would  be  of  value.  The  hallucinations  were 
wholly  visual,  I  understood,  not  aural ;  though  he  used  to  be  heard  hailing  them,  and 
what  he  called  '  conversing  ' ;  yet  the  conversation  was  in  his  usual  style  of  pure  mono- 
logue. He  was  always  quite  sane — as  have  been  all  his  children  and  grandchildren.  His 
son,  Charles,  was  a  civilian  in  the  E.I.C.  Service,  and,  whilst  a  student  at  Haileybury 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  199 

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  two  percipients  were  widely  separated, 
which  excludes  the  idea  of  joint  illusion  or  of  verbal  suggestion  ; 
and  the  case  forms  a  parallel,  among  sensory  phantasms,  to  that 
given  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  240,  where  the  common  experience  was  of  an  ideal 
and  emotional  kind. 

In  the  next  example  the  percipients,  though  near  together,  were 
not  actually  in  one  another's  company.  The  case  is  of  special  interest, 
inasmuch  as  the  two  percepts  were  slightly  different, — the  figure 
being  seen  by  one  observer  with  a  hat  on,  and  by  the  other  without, 
and  the  difference  corresponding  with  the  associations  natural  to  each 
in  their  respective  positions.  A  clergyman  writing  to  us  from 
Lincoln,  on  April  29th,  1885,  describes  an  afternoon  call  of  the 
preceding  January. 

(319)  "I  was  ushered  into  the  drawing-room,  and  was  asked  to  take 
a  low  arm-chair  in  the  middle  of  the  room  ;  but  I  preferred  sitting  on  a 
couch  drawn  up  at  right  angles  to  the  side  of  the  fireplace,  where  I  could 
command  a  view,  through  the  window,  of  the  garden.  Facing  me,  with 
her  back  to  this  window,  sat  one  lady ;  to  my  left,  seated  not  far  from  the 
arm-chair  mentioned,  was  another  lady,  fronting  the  hearth.  While  we 
sat  chatting  upon  the  subject  of  my  visit,  an  old  man,  of  somewhat  sad 
appearance,  dressed  in  a  dark  blue  over-coat — somewhat  shabby — and 
with  a  flat-topped  felt  hat,  and  remarkable  for  a  white  beard,  passed  the 
window ;  and  immediately  after  the  front  door  bell  rang.  The  lady  of  the 
house  was  expecting  a  visit  from  some  lady  friend,   and  remarked    '  This 

must  be .'     I  said,  '  No,  it's  an  old  man  with  a    white  beard.'     At 

which  both  ladies  present  expressed  surprise,  and  began  wondering  who  it 
could  be.  Just  then  the  door  of  the  room  opened,  and  in  walked  a  well- 
known  local  practitioner.  As  soon  as  he  had  shaken  hands  all  round,  the 
lady  of  the  house  said,  '  But  where  is  the  old  man  with  the  white  beard  ? ' 
To  which  the  doctor  replied,  '  Yes  ;  where  is  he  ? ' 

"  Our  friend,  the  doctor,  had  happened  to  be  passing  the  gate  a  short 
time  before,  and  had,  without  premeditation  as  he  says,  suddenly  turned 
in,  struck  with  the  idea  of  paying  an  afternoon  call.  He  came  up  the  walk 
towards  the  hall  door,  and,  in  passing  the  window  mentioned,  looked  into  the 

College,  was  a  constant  visitor  at  our  house  in  Keppel  Street,  and  also  in  Essex.  He  was 
the  only  one  of  the  family  who  inherited  his  father's  peculiarity,  which  they  both 
considered  to  be  an  hereditary  racial  disease,  or  rather  mental  malformation,  of  no 
practical  importance  for  good  or  harm,  when  once  so  understood  by  the  afflicted  person . 

"  Shortly  before  my  cousin  went  to  India  [where  he  was  killed  in  a  mutiny]  when  I 
was  quite  a  child,  he  slept  a  night  at  my  father's  in  Keppel  Street ;  and  while  going  to 
bed  he  saw  a  man  Avith  a  face  he  did  not  recognise,  dressed  in  an  old-fashioned  Spanish 
costume.  He  was  not  alarmed,  or  particularly  interested  ;  but  as  a  matter  of  chit-chat, 
mentioned  it  in  a  letter  to  his  father  at  Exeter,  who  answered  by  return  of  post  that,  at 
the  same  time,  he  had  seen  an  exactly  similar  figure,  in  the  same  strange  dress .  I  was  too 
young  at  the  time  to  be  safely  told  ghost-stories  ;  but  my  father  and  mother  often  detailed 
the  circumstances  as  a  singular  instance  of  coincidence.  I  should  explain  it  by  the  fact 
that  both  my  uncle  and  cousin  were  at  home  in  Devon,  and  fond  of  history.  Both  would 
be  likely  to  have  a  store  of  half  remembered  dates  relating  to  the  defeat  of  the  Arniada 
and  Spanish  affairs,  and  the  day  may  have  suggested  the  forgotten  date,  and  clothed  it  in 
appropriate  costume.  "T.  K.  Chambees." 

200  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

room  where  we  were  sitting,  and  saw,  seated  in  the  low  arm-chair,  an  old  man 
exactly  answering  to  the  description  of  the  old  man  I  had  seen  passing 
the  window  (doubtless  when  the  doctor  passed),  with  this  exception,  that 
the  person  he  saw  had,  of  course,  no  hat  on.  The  doctor  was  surprised  not 
to  find  the  old  gentleman  in  the  room  ;  hence  his  strange  reply  to  the  lady's 
question. 

"  Now  observe  :  /  saw  the  old  man  exactly  at  the  time  the  doctor  was 
passing  the  window.  I  did  not  see  the  doctor,  whom  I  know  well,  who  is 
much  shorter  than  the  figure  I  saw,  and  who  wore  a  brown  top-coat,  a  silk 
hat,  and  no  beard.  And  the  doctor  saw  the  figure  in  the  room,  sitting 
down  and  without  a  hat. 

"  I  am  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  subject  to  similar  hallucinations,  if  the 
afiair  may  be  rightly  so-called." 

Dr.  Cant  writes  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"  Silver  Street,  Lincoln. 

"May  7th,  1885. 

"  I  have  seen  Mr. [the  clergyman],  and  quite  agree  with  all  he 

said.  The  old  man  was  sitting  down  in  the  room,  and  I  felt  certain  of  his 
presence,  and  was  greatly  astonished  not  to  find  him  in  the  room.  The 
reports  we  have  given  are  absolutely  true,  without  any  doubts  in  either  of 
our  minds.  u  -yy-    ip    Cant." 

Dr.  Cant  was  asked  whether  he  had  ever  had  any  other  hallucinations  ; 
and  also  whether  he  would  have  been  certain  to  see  any  real  person 
occupying  the  position  where  the  clergyman  saw  the  figure.  He  replied  : — 

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  these  phenomena  are  quite  new  to  me,  and 
I  never  remember  having  one  of  the  sort  before.     It  was  quite  im2J0Ssible 

for  the  figure  that  Mr.  saw  to  have  been  there,  as  I  must  have  seen 

it  when  passing,  and  he  only  saw  one  figure,  and  did  not  see  me  at  all." 

The  next  two  cases  resemble  the  last,  in  the  point  that  the 
two  percipients  do  not  seem  to  have  seen  exactly  the  same  thing. 
Surgeon-Major  Samuel  Smith,  of  Wyndham  House,  E^ngsdown 
Parade,  Bristol,  sent  the  following  account  to  the  Western  Daily 
Press  (Nov.  30,  1881),  and  has  since  confirmed  it  to  us. 

(320)  "  I  solemnly  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the  statement  made.  I  will 
add  that  I  have  been,  although  not  a  professed  teetotaller,  a  total  abstainer 
from  stimulants  for  the  past  10  years,  and  that  I  am  not  a  believer  in 
Spiritualism  as  it  exists  in  the  present  day. 

"  About  20  minutes  past  1 1  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  20th  of  April 
last,  I  was  engaged  with  my  wife's  mother  in  playing  a  selection  from 
'  La  Figlia  del  Reggimento '  for  the  flute  and  piano.  We  were  seated 
in  the  drawing-room,  which  was  brilliantly  lighted  by  three  large  gas- 
lights burning  in  globes  which  hung  from  the  centre  of  the  ceiling,  the 
only  other  occupants  of  the  room  being  my  wife,  who  had  fallen  asleep 
upon  the  couch,  and  the  baby  asleep  in  the  cradle.  My  wife's  brother, 
who  had  been  with  us,  left  the  room  at  11  o'clock,  and  retired  to  rest. 
The  room  itself  is  spacious,  lofty,  and  parallelogram-shaped,  the  piano 
occupying  a  position  immediately  opposite  to  the  only  door  of  entrance  in 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  201 

the  middle  of  the  corresponding  long  side,  so  that  in  playing  we  sat  with 
our  backs  to  the  door,  which  was  closed. 

"  I  was  thoroughly  intent  upon  the  music,  which  was  new  to  me,  and 
difficult  to  read,  so  far  as  the  flute  was  concerned,  owing  to  the  small  size  of 
the  notes  ;  when  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  performance,  a  strange  feeling 
of  mingled  awe  and  fear  came  over  me,  and  I  distinctly  felt  the  approach 
of  someone,  or  rather  of  something,  coming  behind  me,  and  this  although 
I  was  so  engrossed  with  playing  ;  and  in  my  mind  I  seemed  to  perceive 
the  shape.  As  it  approached  nearer,  I  turned  my  head  to  the  right,  and 
distinctly  perceived  a  shade  of  a  greyish  colour  standing  by  me  upon  my 
right  hand,  a  little  in  advance  of  me.  I  did  not  see  the  whole  figure,  but 
what  I  saw  was  part  of  a  shadowy  face,  the  outline  of  the  forehead,  nose, 
mouth,  chin,  and  a  part  of  the  neck  being  visible.  Strange  to  say,  I 
do  not  remember  seeing  the  eye,  but  the  figure  appeared  to  have  a  top  hat 
upon  its  head.  As  I  gazed  upon  it,  it  vanished,  and  with  it  the  feelings, 
to  a  great  extent,  to  which  it  gave  rise.  Of  the  mingled  feelings  which  its 
presence  raised  in  my  mind,  I  should  say  that  awe  predominated. 

"  I  did  not  cease  playing,  and  subsequently  played  other  pieces  by  the 
old  masters,  sang  some  songs,  and  finally  went  to  bed,  and  slept  well.  Nor 
did  I  mention  the  matter  to  my  wife's  mother  that  night,  either  at  the 
time  of  the  occurrence,  or  before  retiring  to  rest.  Now,  however,  comes 
the  most  remarkable  part  of  the  matter.  At  or  about  11,30  a.m.  on  the 
following  day,  my  wife's  mother  came  into  the  private  room,  and  suddenly 
said,  '  Did  you  see  something  when  you  turned  your  head  last  night,  when 
you  were  playing  ? '  I  did  not  immediately  reply,  but  the  strange  event  of 
the  preceding  night  flashed  across  my  mind  instantly.  I  was,  indeed,  too 
greatly  surprised  to  reply  at  once,  for  I  did  not  believe  at  the  time  that 
she  had  noticed  the  action  upon  my  part ;  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  I 
had  not  mentioned  the  matter  to  her,  or  even  hinted  at  it. 

"  '  Why  do  you  ask  ? '  I  replied. 

"  '  Because  I  thought  you  did.' 

"  '  Did  you  see  anything'? '  I  asked. 

"  '  Yes,  I  believed  that  someone  had  come  into  the  room,  as  I  felt  that 
someone  had  come  in.' 

"  '  Did  you  think  it  was  a  man  or  a  woman  1 ' 

'"I  felt  that  it  was  a  man,  and  at  first  believed  it  to  be  James'  (my 
wife's  brother),  '  who  had  come  down,  and  I  wondered  how  he  could  come 
in  without  my  hearing  him.' 

"  '  Did  you  see  anything  ? '  I  asked. 

"  '  Yes,  I  saw  the  back  and  shoulders  of  the  form  of  a  man  ;  it  passed 
across  like  a  shadow  behind  you,  stood  to  your  right  hand,  and  then 
disappeared.     I  was  not  alarmed,  but  surprised. 

"So  ends  the  narrative.  In  no  way  can  I  explain  the  cause,  or 
sequence  of  events.     As  they  occurred,  so  I  present  them." 

Surgeon-Major  Smith  (January  15th,  1886),  in  sending  his  mother-in- 
law's  confirmation,  adds  : — 

"  In  speaking  of  the  matter  to-day  she  said  she  felt  the  presence  of  the 
visitor  in  her  mind  before  she  saw  it ;  and  this  is  my  experience  of  it.  I 
felt  its  presence  before  I  saw  it."^ 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  483,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  2. 

202  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  [chap. 

"  Wyndham  House,  Kingsdown,  Bristol, 

"January  15th,  1886. 

"  Agreeably  to  the  request  of  Mr.  Gurney,  I  write,  but  have  nothing 
to  add  to  the  statement  of  my  experience  of  the  strange  visitation 
described  in  the  Western  Daily  Press  in  November,  1881  ;  the  facts  being 
as  therein  stated.  "  Hannah  Robinson." 

Mr.  Smith  has  repeated  the  account  to  me  on  the  spot ;  and  it  then 
became  evident  that  Mrs.  Robinson,  turning  her  head  the  instant  after  he 
did  the  same,  would  have  seen  any  flesh-and-blood  figure  rather  miorefull- 
face  than  he  did ;  instead  of  which  she  saw  the  hack.  The  extremely 
distinct  and  startling  character  of  the  experience  came  out  more  impres- 
sively in  conversation  than  in  the  written  account.  Neither  percipient 
can  recall  having  had  anything  like  a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion. 

The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  D.  W.  G.  Gwynne,  M.D., 
Neuaddvach,  Pontardulais,  South  Wales.     He  first  describes  how   he 

took  up  his  abode   at  P House,  near   Taunton,  in  1853,  and 

how  both  he  and  his  wife  were  made    uncomfortable    by  auditory 
experiences  to  which  they  could  find  no  clue.     He  proceeds  : — 

fi  iiz^  (321)"I  now  come  to  the  mutual  experience  of  something  that  is  as  fresh 

^^.-z  in  its  impression  as  if  it  were  the  occurrence  of  yesterday.  During  the 
^1-..  night  I  became  aware  of  a  draped  figure  passing  across  the  foot  of  the  bed 
-«t4  t^  towards  the  fire-place.  I  had  the  impression  that  the  arm  was  raised, 
^Z^'"' "'"pointing  with  the  hand  towards  the  mantel-piece,  on  which  a  night-light 
^•"■'  was  burning.  Mrs.  Gwynne  at  this  moment  seized  my  arm,  and  the  light 
***  \,,w  '^<^*^  extingttished.     Notwithstanding,  I  distinctly  saw  the  figure  returning 

the  door  locked,  as  usual,   that    I  was  painfully  impressed.     I  need  hardly 

J  say  that  Mrs.  Gwynne  was  in  a  very  nervous  state.     She  asked    me   what 

^v  I  had  seen,  and    I    told  her.     She  had  seen    the    same  figure,  but  her 

.         impression  was  that  the  figure  placed  its  hand  over  the  night-light  and 

extinguished  it. 

"  The  night-light  in  question  was  relit  and  placed  in  a  toilette  basin, 
and  burned  naturally.  I  tried  to  convince  myself  that  it  might  have  been 
a  gust  of  wind  down  the  chimney  that  put  the  light  out ;  but  that  will  not 
account  for  the  spectral  appearance,  which  remains  a  mystery. 

"  D,  W.  G.  Gwynne." 
Mrs.  Gwynne  writes,  on  April  15,  1884  : — 

"  In  addition  to  my  husband's  statement,  which  I  read,  I  can  only  say 
that  the  account  he  has  given  you  accords  with  my  remembrance  of  the 
'  unearthly  vision,'  but  I  distinctly  saw  the  hand  of  the  phantom  placed 
over  the  night-light,  which  was  at  once  extinguished.  I  tried  to  cling  to 
Dr.  Gwynne,  but  he  leapt  out  of  bed  with  a  view,  as  he  afterwards  said,  of 
intercepting  some  supposed  intruder.  The  door  was  locked  as  usual,  and 
was  so  when  he  tried  it.  He  lit  a  candle  at  once,  and  looked  under  the 
bed,  and  into  a  closet,  but  saw  nothing.     The  night-light  was   also  relit, 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  203 

which  was  placed  on  the  wash-stand,  and  together  with  the  candle, 
remained  burning  all  night.  I  must  observe  that  I  had  never  taken  to  use 
night-lights  before  we  lived  there,  and  only  did  so  when  I  had  been  so 
often  disturbed  and  alarmed  by  sighs  and  heavy  breathing  close  to  my  side 
of  the  bed.  Dr.  Gwynne,  on  the  appearance  of  the  phantom,  in  order  to 
calm  my  agitated  state,  tried  to  reason  with  me,  and  to  persuade  me  that 
it  might  have  been  the  effects  of  the  moonlight  and  clouds  passing  over  the 
openings  of  the  shutter,  and  possibly  that  a  gust  of  wind  might  have 
extinguished  the  light,  but  I  knew  differently.  When  we  had  both  been 
awakened  at  the  same  moment  apparently,  and  together  saw  that  unpleasant 
figure,  tall  and  as  it  were  draped  like  a  nun,  deliberately  walk  up  to  the 
mantel-piece  and  put  out  the  light  with  the  right  hand,  there  could  be  no 
mistake  about  it ;  and  I  distinctly  heard  the  rustling  sound  of  garments  as 
the  figure  turned  and  left  through  the  door,  after  my  husband's  attempt  to 
stop  it  with  his  open  arms.  The  moonlight  was  very  clear  and  the  white 
dimity  curtains  only  partly  closed.  "Mary  Gwynne." 

[As  telling  against  the  purely  subjective  origin  of  this  experience,  I 
ought  to  mention  that  there  was  distinct  evidence  of  others'  having 
observed  unaccountable  phenomena  in  the  house,  though  this  was  not 
known  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Gwynne  till  after  their  own  observation.  They 
soon  afterwards  gave  up  the  house.] 

In  the  next  case  the  difference  is  still  more  marked,  the  percept 
being  visual  to  one  person  and  auditory  to  the  other ;  while  at  the 
same  time  something  of  the  same  idea  seems  to  have  been  suggested 
to  both.  For  the  purpose  in  view,  the  case  (in  spite  of  certain  dis- 
crepancies in  the  two  accounts)  is,  perhaps,  stronger  than  it  looks. 
For  the  fact  that  the  visual  and  the  auditory  experience  were  both 
unshared,  is  a  decided  indication  that  they  were  neither  of  them  due 
to  a  real  external  cause  ;  and  if  they  were  hallucinations,  then  (since 
no  words  passed  till  after  both  had  been  experienced)  it  seems  at  any 
rate  very  possible  that  one  of  them  produced  the  other  by  thought- 
transference.     Lady  C.  writes,  on  Oct.  13,  1884  : — 

(322)  "In  October,  1879,  I  was  staying  at  Bishopthorpe,  near  York, 
with  the  Archbishop  of  York.  I  was  sleeping  with  Miss  Z.  T.,  when  I 
suddenly  saw  a  white  figure  fly  through  the  room  from  the  door  to  the 
window.  It  was  only  a  shadowy  form,  and  passed  in  a  moment.  I  felt 
utterly  terrified  and  called  out  at  once,  '  Did  you  see  that  V  and  at  the 
same  moment  Miss  Z,  T.  exclaimed,  '  Did  you  hear  that  ? '  Then  I  said, 
instantly,  '  I  saw  an  angel  fly  through  the  room,'  and  she  said,  *  I  heard  an 
angel  singing.' 

"  We  were  both  very  much  frightened  for  a  little  while,  but  said 
nothing  about  it  to  any  one.  "  K.  C." 

Miss  T.  writes  : — 

"December  19th,  1884. 

"  Late  one  night,  about  October  17th,  1879,  Lady  C.  (then  Lady  K.  L.). 

.Jl/*-^ 

204  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

•-^  f^"    and  I  were  preparing  to  go  to  sleep,  after  talking  some  time,  when  I  heard 

]f/^  >        something  like  very  faint  music,  and  seemed  to  feel  what  people  call  '  a 

1^..      presence.'    I  put  out  my  hand  and  touched  Lady  C,  saying,  '  Did  you  hear 

^  o        that  % '     She    said,  '  Oh,  don't  !     Just  now  I  saw  something  going  across 

the  room  ! '     We  were  both  a  good  deal  frightened,  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep 

as  soon  as  we  could.     But  I  remember  asking  Lady  C.  exactly  what  she 

had  seen,  and  she  said,  '  A  sort  of  white  shadow,  like  a  spirit.'    The  above 

occurred  at  Bishopthorpe,  York.  "  Z.  J.  T." 

In  the  next  two  examples  (in  which  the  figure  was  unrecognised) 
no  difference  seems  to  have  been  noted  in  the  impressions  of  the  two 
percipients.  Mr.  Bettany,  of  2,  Eckington  Villas,  Ashbourne  Grove, 
Dulwich,  S.E.,  writes  : — 

"]Srovember,  1884. 

(323)  "  One  night,  early  this  year,  I  became  conscious  of  a  figure  in 
my  bedroom.  It  was  a  crouching  figure  of  a  woman,  enveloped  in  a  black 
cloak  and  hood.  My  impression  was  that  the  woman  was  old,  but  I  did 
not  see  a  face.  This  figure  slowly  and  stealthily  advanced  from  the  bed- 
room door  to  a  wardrobe  on  the  same  side  of  the  room.  It  then  suddenly 
and  entirely  disappeared,  and,  from  the  sudden  shock,  I  gave  a  sharp  loud 
cry.  I  never  saw  such  an  appearance  before  or  since.  I  consider  myself 
unusually  unlikely  to  see  apparitions.  This  figure  and  cii'cumstance  were 
like  no  dream,  but  were  to  me  real  and  evident,  and  there  appeared  to  be 
no  transition  between  waking  and  sleeping.  I  was  convinced  that  what  I 
saw  was  a  waking  sight.  I  have  no  idea  whom  the  figure  represented.  I 
had  then  occupied  this  house  nearly  three  years,  and  I  know  nothing  of 
former  occupants. 

"No  light  was  carried  nor  was  any  light  burning  in  the  room.  The 
figure  was  visible  and  the  wardrobe  was  visible ;  but  when  the  figure 
disappeared  darkness  was  complete. ^     The  door  was  found  locked. 

"  G.  T.  Bettany." 

Mrs.  Bettany  (the  narrator  of  cases  20  and  309)  writes  : — 

^^^l^iu,  "  On  the  night  referred  to,  I  woke  suddenly,  I  know  not  from  what 
x,^^,j^^  •  cause.  My  husband  was  leaning  on  his  elbow,  looking  intently  at  a  strange 
iZt^i  woman  whom  I  saw  crouching  by  the  wardrobe.  I  believed  it  to  be  a  real 
^'  ^  person.  It,  however,  suddenly  disappeared.  My  husband  then  gave  a  cry 
as  he  describes.  He  then  told  me  what  he  had  seen.  I  tried  the  door  and 
found  it  locked. 

"  The  thought  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  may  have  seen  this  by  sympa- 
thetic transference  from  my  husband  ;  but,  against  this,  I  am  much  more 
likely  to  see  something  of  this  kind  than  he. 

"  Without  having  mentioned  this  apparition  to  my  servants,  the  nurse- 
maid told  me,  next  day,  that  Muriel  (a  child  of  three  years)  had  woke 
her  in  the  night,  saying,  without  any  fear  in  her  voice,  '  Clara,  Clara, 
there  is  an  old  woman  in  the  room.'  The  nurse  herself  saw  nothing.  I 
may  add  that  my  cook  has  on  several  occasions  asked  me  if  I  had  entered 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  205 

her  room  during  the  night,  on  occasions  when  I  had  certainly  not  done  so. 
She  appeared  much  mystified  on  learning  this. 

"  Jeanie  Gwynne  Bettany." 

The  narrator  of  the  next  experience  requests  that  her  name  may 

not  appear. 

"  February  17th,  1884.         s)  ^  •  *V 

(324)   "  Shortly  after  my  marriage,  about  the  year  1847, 1  went  to  stay     j^.<^/L 
at  my  father's  house.     I  had  at  that  time  two  sisters  at  home,  unmarried.    ^  ,,..;  •■-i 
The  elder  of  the  two  was  nearly  two  years  younger  than  myself,  and  would    i, ,;  , 
therefore  be  about  22  years  of  age  at  the  time  I  speak  of.     The  other 
sister  was  much  younger  than  us  both,  and  at  this  time  was  about  14  years 
old.     My  two  sisters  slept  together  in  a  room  adjoining  mine. 

"  One  morning,  on  my  going  down  to  breakfast,  my  elder  sister  said  to 
me,  '  Sarah,  such  a  strange  thing  happened  in  the  night.  I  was  sleeping 
outside  (the  other  side  of  the  bed  was  against  the  wall),  and  I  was  awoke 
by  a  feeling  of  oppression  at  my  chest,  as  though  there  was  a  weight  there, 
and  I  could  not  breathe.  On  opening  my  eyes  I  was  startled  to  see  a  veiled 
figure  bending  over  me.  While  I  looked,  I  felt  Anna's  arm  come  round 
me.  After  what  seemed  to  me  a  few  minutes  the  form  disappeared. 
Then  Anna  whispered,  'Oh  Lizzie,  I  thought  it  was  going  to  take  you  away.'  " 

"  This  was  my  sister's  account.  I  took  an  opportunity,  when  my 
younger  sister  and  T  were  alone,  to  ask  her  what  that  was  that  she  and 
Lizzie  had  seen.  She  said  she  was  awoke  by  a  feeling  of  oppression,  as 
though  she  could  not  breathe,  and  on  opening  her  eyes,  in  the  dim  light  of 
the  room  (the  blind  was  down,  but  there  was  a  gas  lamp  in  front  of  the 
house,  which  gave  some  light  to  the  room),  she  saw  a  veiled  figure  bending 
over  Lizzie,  and  she  put  her  arm  round  her,  as  she  thought  it  had  come  to 
take  her  away. 

"  My  father  and  his  family  shortly  after  moved  into  another  house,  my 
sisters  still  occupying  a  room  together.  They  assured  me  that  once  in  this 
other  house  they  were  visited  by  the  same  appearance^  but  this  time  it  was 
over  Anna.     She  only  lived  a  short  time  after,  dying  at  sixteen  and  a-half . 

"  On  sending  this  account  to  my  sister,  in  case  I  might,  through  lapse 
of  time,  have  altered  the  matter,  she  assures  me  that  it  is  substantially 
cornet,  and  adds  that  the  form  was  grey,  darker  and  thicker  in  the  middle  ; 
she  also  adds  that  the  feeling  of  horror  was  intense.  "L.  S.  B." 

[Unfortunately  the  sister's  letter  was  destroyed.] 

The  following  case  is  a  very  singular  one.  The  phenomenon  of 
mutual  hypnotisation  (or  rather  of  hypnotisation  of  one  person  through 
the  process  of  hypnotising  another)  is  one  of  which  we  have  other 
examples.  But  I  have  met  with  no  other  instance  of  genuine  transfer 
of  a  hallucination  between  two  hypnotised  persons;  and,  if  this 
instance  is  a  genuine  one,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that 
it  depended  on  the  peculiar  condition  established — the  two  not  being 
"  subjects"  influenced  in  common  by  a  third  person,  but  the  originator 
of  the  hallucination,  whichever  of  the  two  it  was,  having  exerted  an 

206  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

active  influence  on  the  other,  and  presumably  established  the  sort  of 
rapport  which  is  so  common  a  feature  of  hypnotism.  It  could  of  course 
only  be  by  the  rarest  accident  that  an  operator  who  had  established 
such  a  rai^port  should  then  and  there  become  the  victim  of  a  sensory 
hallucination,  which  would  thus  have  a  chance  of  being  transferred  ; 
and  the  accident  in  this  case  was  the  fact  that  the  operator  herself 
fell  into  an  abnormal  condition.  I  do  not  number  the  narrative,  as  it 
is  impossible  to  be  quite  certain  that  some  unconscious  look  or  gesture 
on  the  part  of  one  percipient  did  not  evoke  the  image  in  the  other's 
mind  ;  for  though  the  hypnotic  state  in  itself  has  no  special  tendency 
to  promote  hallucinations,  except  such  as  are  suggested  and  impressed 
in  the  plainest  manner,  in  the  present  instance  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  certain  amount  of  expectancy,  which  probably  facilitated  the 
affection  in  both  the  persons  concerned.  The  case  was  received  from 
Miss  Becket,  of  Hotel  Vendome,  Boston,  U.S.A.,  an  Associate  of  the 
S.P.R.,  who  wrote  on  January  25,  1886. 

Miss  Becket  begins  by  describing  how  on  one  occasion  she  attempted 
to  hypnotise  a  friend  who  was  standing  two  or  three  yards  from  her.  She 
made  slow  downward  passes  till  her  friend  "  shivered  with  cold."  She 
then  reversed  the  passes,  but  soon  herself  became  rigid,  with  outstretched 
arms.  "  Both  the  lady  and  myself  turned  our  heads,  and  seemed  to 
follow  with  our  eyes  the  movements  of  some  invisible  body  around  the 
room.  We  seemed  to  see  the  same  horrible  something  in  the  same  part  of 
the  room,  for  our  faces  had  an  expression  of  unutterable  horror.  Some- 
times we  looked  behind  this  one  object,  as  at  something  following  its 
progress  round  the  room,  but  our  eyes  instantly  returned  to  the  greater 
attraction,  and  at  last  our  faces  seemed  so  frozen  in  an  agony  of  fear  that 
the  gentleman  sprang  towards  his  wife,  and  dragged  her  to  a  seat,  and  used 
oreat  physical  force  before  he  could  rouse  her  from  the  terrible  spell.  I 
seemed  to  be  in  part  liberated  with  her,  but  it  was  a  long  time  before  we 
were  really  free  from  the  strange  influence  we  had  fallen  under. 

"  When  we  could  talk,  we  found  that  we  had  each  seen  the  same  vision, 
in  every  detail  alike.  I  have  always  had  a  strong  faith  in  religion.  My 
friends  were  too  philosophical  to  admit  dogmas  into  their  minds.  But  the 
one  horrible  central  figure  in  our  visions,  it  seems,  must  have  originated  in 
my  brain,  from  its  resemblance  to  my  idea  of  a  personal  devil.  At  all 
events,  we  both  saw,  suddenly  take  form  out  of  empty  space,  the  giant 
fio-ure  of  a  man.  His  face  expressed  fiendish  cruelty  and  wickedness,  and 
we  felt  ourselves  in  part  in  his  power,  and  knew  that  he  was  exulting  in 
this  power.  He  seemed  to  be  followed  by  a  great  many  pigmy  figures, 
that  danced  about  the  room  and  made  ugly  faces  at  us,  but  dared  not  do 
more  in  the  presence  of  this  master  spirit.  It  was  when  the  supernatural 
malignancy  of  this  frightful  creature  had  almost  overpowered  us  with  fear 
and  horror,  that  our  faces  expressed  such  torture  as  to  cause  the  gentleman 
to  interfere,  and  try  to  rouse  us  from  the  spell. 

"  As  I  have  said,  it  was  entirely  out  of  our  plan  that  /  should  share  in 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  207 

the  vision.  I  had  counted  on  watching  the  effects  of  my  passes  on  my 
friend  ;  and  the  shock  of  this  unwelcome  surprise  put  an  end  to  any 
further  experiments  in  future.  a  m^m^  j.  q,  Becket." 

The  following  is  an  independent  and  very  different  description,  from 
Mrs.  Frederic  D.  Williams,  the  lady  who  shared  in  the  experience  : — 

"  35^^^  Rue  de  Fleurus,  Paris. 

"March  24th,  1886. 
She  first  narrates  how  Miss  Becket  and  she  used  to  try  on  each  other, 
standing  some  distance  apart,  the  effect  of  "  magnetic  passes,"  and  how 
she  herself  used  to  feel  a  hot  current  of  air,  and  Miss  Becket  a  cool  one  ;^ 
and  continues  : — "  I  cannot  remember  who  [^.e.,  which  of  us]  acted  as 
magnetiser  on  the  particular  occasion  to  which  Miss  Becket  alludes  :  the 
chief  feature  of  it  I,  however,  do  recollect.  This  was  seeing  a  strange 
something — an  appearance  of  a  shadowy,  transparent  film,  or  veil,  or  sheet 
of  thinnest  vapour,^  float  slowly  upward  between  Miss  Becket  and  myself, 
but  (as  it  appeared  to  me)  nearer  her.  Any  possible  doubt,  if  not  of  the 
object  itself,  at  least  of  our  perception  of  something  unusual,  should  be 
disproved  by  the  fact  of  our  exclaiming  simultaneously,  '  Did  you  see 
that ! ' — or  words  to  that  effect.  I  hesitate  to  say  anything  of  the  truth 
of  which  I  am  not  absolutely  sure ;  but  I  have  an  impression  amounting 
to  certainty  that  it  was  upon  the  reverse  passes  being  made  that  the  above 
incident  happened.      [This  detail  agrees  with  Miss  Becket's  statement.] 

"  L.  L.  W." 

On  receiving  this  account,  I  told  Mrs.  Williams  what  Miss  Becket's 
version  was,  and  also  asked  whether  Mr.  Williams  remembered  the  incident. 
She  replied  that  Mr.  Williams  could  corroborate  her  statement  as  being 
the  same  that  she  made  to  him  at  the  time,  but  does  not  remember  having  U 
been  present,  though  he  admits  that  he  may  have  been.  She  remembers 
that  her  experience  differed  from  Miss  Becket's  in  not  being  alarming,  and 
that  Miss  Becket  described  hers  as  "  infernal."  What  she  saw  had  the  same 
sort  of  shape  as  a  veil  falling  around  a  human  form,  and  changed  like  a 
cloud  while  being  watched.  She  concludes  : — "  I  had  forgotten  that  Miss 
Becket  became  rigid,  but  now  remember  the  circumstance,  and  this  fact, 
that  I  was  very  much  alarmed,  not  at  what  I  saw  (although  it  is  quite 
true  we  opened  our  eyes  very  wide  at  that),  but  at  the  state  into  which 
Miss  Becket  was  thrown,  and  also  at  the  possibility  of  having  done  her 
some  serious  harm  through  my  inexperience  in  such  matters  ;  which  would 
seem  to  decide,  at  least  in  my  own  mind,  a  point  on  which  Miss  Becket 
and  I  seem  to  be  at  variance,  namely,  that  it  was  I  who  was  '  magnetis- 
ing,' and  not  she.  I  do  not  know,  however,  that  this  is  of  any  importance." 

[Memory  is  clearly  more  likely  to  have  erred  as  to   the  resemblance 
than  as  to  the  difference  of  the  two  visions.     But  even  if  we  only  had  Mrs. 
Williams's  account,  some  germ  of  thought-transference  would  be  strongly  ^  ^ 
suggested  by  the  sudden  and  simultaneous  occurrence  of  two  such  singular 
experiences.]  ^^  ^^  ^ 

^  From  this  it  would  appear  that  Miss  Becket  confounded  her  friend's  temperature-  ' .      ^.  i^tV* 
sensations  with  her  own.     It  seems  to  be  an  accident  whether  such  subjective  impressions     "'''■' 
take  the  form  of  heat  or  cold.  l^C^  > 

J  This  rudimentary  sort  of  appearance,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  well  established  form  of 
subjective  hallucination  (see,  e.g.,  p.  73,  note). 

208  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  chap. 

I  now   come    to    cases  where   the  figure   was  recognised.     The 

following  transitional  instance,  of  semi-recognition,  is  from  Captain 

Cecil  Norton,  late  of  the  5th  Lancers,  who  tells  us  that  he  has  had 

no  other  hallucination  of  the  senses. 

"  5,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W. 

"  December  20th,  1885. 

(325)  "  About  Christmastime  1875  or  1876,  being  officer  on  duty,  I  was 
seated  at  the  mess  table  of  the  5th  Lancers,  in  the  West  Cavalry  Barracks, 
at  Aldershot.  There  were  10  or  12  other  officers  present,  and  amongst 
them  Mr.  John  Atkinson  (now  of  Erchfont  Manor,  near  Devizes,  Wilts), 
the  Surgeon-Major  of  the  regiment,  who  sat  on  my  right,  but  at  the  end 
of  the  table  furthest  from  me  and  next  to  Mr.  Russell.  [Captain  Norton 
was  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  table  and  directly  facing  the  window.]  At 
about  8,45  p.m.  Atkinson  suddenly  glared  at  the  window  to  his  right, 
thereby  attracting  the  notice  of  Russell,  who,  seizing  his  arm,  said,  '  Good 
gracious.  Doctor,  what's  the  matter  with  you  1 '  This  caused  me  to  look  in 
the  direction  in  which  I  saw  Atkinson  looking,  viz.,  at  the  window 
opposite,  and  I  there  saw  (for  the  curtains  were  looped  up,  although  the 
room  was  lighted  by  a  powerful  central  gas  light  in  the  roof  and  by 
candles  on  the  table)  a  young  woman,  in  what  appeared  a  soiled  or 
somewhat  worn  bridal  dress,  walk  or  glide  slowly  past  the  window  from 
east  to  west.  She  was  about  at  the  centre  of  the  window  when  I  observed 
her,  and  outside  the  window.  No  person  could  have  actually  been  in  the 
position  where  she  appeared,  as  the  window  in  question  is  about  30  feet 
above  the  ground. 

"  The  nearest  buildings  to  the  window  referred  to  are  the  Infantry 
Barracks  opposite,  about  300  yards  distant.  Behind  where  I  sat  is  a  con- 
servatory, which  was  examined  by  me,  as  well  as  the  front  window, 
immediately  after  the  occurrence.  There  was  no  person  in  the  conserva- 
tory. [It  was  unused  in  the  winter.]  The  nearest  buildings  to  it  are 
the  officers'  stables,  over  which  are  the  staff  sergeants'  quarters,  about  50 
yards  distant. 

"  The  occurrence  made  little  if  any  impression  upon  me,  though  it 
impressed  others  who  were  in  the  room.  All  present  had  been  drinking 
very  little  wine ;  and  the  dinner  had  been  very  quiet. 

"  It  has  just  occurred  to  me  that  I  may  be  wrong  as  to  the  time  of 
year  and  that  the  occurrence  may  have  taken  place  about  15th  October  or 
about  15th  March.  u  Qg^iL  Norton." 

Mr.  Atkinson  writes  : — 

"  Erchfont  Manor,  Devizes. 

"August  31st,  1885. 

"  The  appearance  of  a  woman  which  I  saw  pass  the  mess-room  window 
at  Aldershot  seemed  to  be  outside,  and  it  passed  from  east  to  west.  The 
mess-room  is  on  the  first  floor,  so  the  woman  would  have  been  walking  in 
the  air.  There  has  been  a  very  nice  story  made  out  of  it — like  most  other 
ghost-stories,  founded  on  an  optical  illusion." 

[Captain  Norton's  vivd  voce  account  made  it  tolerably  clear,  in  my 
opinion,    that   the    case    was    one    of   hallucination,    not    illusion.      He 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  209 

further  mentions  that  both  Mr.  Atkinson  and  he  were  "satisfied  that  the 
face  and  form  of  the  woman  seen  were  familiar,"  though  they  could  not  at  the 
moment  identify  the  person.  Captain  Norton  afterwards  felt  sure  that 
the  likeness  was  to  a  photograph  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  in 
the  room  of  the  veterinary  surgeon  of  the  regiment,  representing  the 
surgeon's  deceased  wife  in  bridal  dress.  Oddly  enough,  this  man  was  at 
the  time,  unknown  to  his  friends,  actually  dying  or  within  a  day  or  two  of 
death,  in  the  same  building.  But  Mr,  Atkinson  recalls  nothing  about  the 
photograph  ;  and  the  coincidence  is  not  one  to  which  we  can  attach  weight.] 

The  next  instance  must  be  reckoned  as  "  ambiguous  "  in  origin  ;  as, 
though  the  person  whose  form  was  seen  was  in  an  abnormal  state,  this 
had  been  to  some  extent  chronic,  and  no  reason  is  known  why  he  should 
have  exercised  a  telepathic  agency  on  the  day  in  question  more  than 
on  any  other.     The  narrator  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  printed. 

"October  28th,  1885. 

(326)  "  In  the  month  of  November,  1843,  myself,  my  eldest  sister,  and 
the  man-servant  were  driving  home  from  a  small  town  to  our  parsonage  in 
the  country.  The  time  might  be  about  half  past  4  or  5  p.m.  As  we  came 
slowly  up  the  hill  by  the  churchyard  wall,  we  saw  a  gentleman  in  walking- 
costume  going  into  the  vestry  door.  We  both  exclaimed,  '  That's  papa,' 
and  the  man  George  said  at  the  same  moment,  'Why  there's  the  master.' 
My  father  was  then  ill,  and  away  from  home  many  miles  away.  He  died 
the  following  January  23rd,  1844.  He  wore  a  particular  long  cloak  which 
I  should  have  recognised  anywhere,  and  which  he  had  many  years,  and 
wore  as  a  loose  wrap.  [What  is  meant  clearly  is  that  the  cloak  in  which 
the  figure  appeared  to  be  dressed  exactly  resembled  that  of  the  narrator's 
father.]  He  looked  exactly  like  himself,  and  was  going  in  by  the  small 
vestry  door  he  used  to  enter  the  church  by  when  going  to  take  duty.  I  do 
not  think  he  looked  at  us,  but  seemed  intent  on  entering  the  church,  and 
disappeared  inside.  We  were  all  much  frightened,  and  searched  round 
the  house  and  church  but  could  see  no  one,  and  no  one  had  been  seen 
about.  I  recollect  the  occurrence  as  if  it  had  been  yesterday,  and,  as  I  write, 
see  all  distinctly  in  my  mind's  eye. 

"  The  man-servant  is  dead  ;  my  sister  begs  to  corroborate  my  account. 

"S.  R." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  R.  says  : — 

"  My  sister  has  always,  when  I  have  talked  of  the  vision,  said  she  saw 
it  so  likewise,  and  she  reiterated  that  only  last  summer,  but  she  is  not 
equal  to  write  about  it.  I  quite  see  the  weak  point,  if  the  church  was  not 
searched  inside.  I  can't  say  it  tvas,  nor  can  I  say  it  was  not.  Old  George, 
the  man,  was  most  fond  of  his  master,  and  may  have  gone  into  the  church; 
but  I  can't  say.  I  only  know  we  were  all  so  terribly  frightened.  The 
vision  was  sudden,  so  true  to  life,  and  even  to  the  particular  long  cloak, 
all  gathered  in  to  a  collar  clasped  at  the  throat.  I  ought  to  have  said  that 
the  figure  seemed  in  the  act  of  going  in  by  the  vestry  door  :  we  did  not  see 
him  enter,  as  we  drove  on  in  great  fright  to  the  house.  My  father  was 
then  under  medical  treatment  at  Northampton." 

Mrs.  R.  gives  details,  showing  the  absolute  impossibility  that  her  father 

VOL.    II.  P 

210  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

could  really  have  "  left  Northampton,  being  a  dying  man,  so  to  speak, 
when  admitted,"  and  come  to  the  spot  where  he  was  seen,  unknown  to  all 
his  friends.  "  Then,  again,"  she  adds,  "  the  church  was  always  kept  locked, 
the  keys  at  the  parsonage,  supposing  for  a  moment  that  we  saw  a  living 
figure.  I  recollect  that  inquiry  was  made  of  the  villagers  as  to  any  strange 
gentleman  having  been  seen  about,  and  the  answer  was  '  No.' " 

Asked  whether  she  or  her  sister  have  ever  had  a  hallucination  of  the 
senses  on  any  other  occasion,  Mrs.  R.  says,  "  I  can  emphatically  answer 
'No,'  for  both  of  us."  Her  sister  was  about  19  at  the  time,  and  she 
herself  11 — -"a  fresh  young  child  with  perfect  nerves." 

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Moberley,  of  Tynwald,  Hythe. 

"May  9th,  1884. 
Jj.fi*^-^ '  (327)  "  The  case  of  hallucination  shared  by  myself  and  a  friend  was 
rather  odd.  We  were  both  convinced  we  saw  one  afternoon  a  friend  pass 
before  the  window  in  which  we  stood,  and  enter  the  garden.  We  both  bowed 
to  him,  and  believed  he  returned  the  greeting.  He  was  in  sight  for  some  short 
time  ;  quite  long  enough  to  allow  of  a  distinct  recognition,  and  the  road 
along  which  he  passed  was  near  to  the  window  at  which  we  stood.  A  quiet 
country  road,  we  knew  every  passer-by  by  sight  and  name,  and  our  friend 
was  a  remarkable  man  in  some  ways,  not  one  to  be  easily  confounded  with 
other  people — a  short,  brisk,  alert,  foreign-looking  man,  with  jet  black 
hair  and  white  whiskers,  a  decidedly  un-English  overcoat,  and  a  salute 
peculiar  to  himself,  a  wave  of  the  hat  and  a  low  bow,  with  which  he  never 
failed  to  greet  us.  We  waited  to  hear  him  announced  in  vain.  On  her 
way  home  my  friend  met  his  son,  who  was  exti-emely  perplexed  at  hearing 
that  his  father  had  been  to  our  house.  He  had  been  intending  to  come, 
but  finding  that  he  should  be  engaged  had  sent  his  son  instead.  Of  course 
when  we  all  met,  the  mystery  was  exhaustively  discvissed,  and  dismissed  as 
a  mystery.  "  Fras.  Moberley." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Moberley  says  that  the  date  was  1863; 
that  she  was  1 9,  and  in  good  health ;  and  that  she  has  never  had  any 
other  hallucination.  The  lady  who  shared  the  experience  with  her  declines 
to  answer  any  questions,  saying  that  "it  is  a  question  of  principle." 
Mrs.  Moberley  adds,  "  She  has  not  forgotten  the  circumstance  :  she  would 
have  been  only  too  glad  to  say  so." 

Bearing  in  mind  the  "  arrival "  cases  of  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7,  we 
cannot  here  assume  it  as  quite  certain  that  the  direction  of  the  absent 
person's  thoughts  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  appearance;  but  if  to 
this  extent  "  ambiguous,"  the  case  seems  at  any  rate  one  of  collective 
\M"^  •  hallucination.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  next  example — from 
Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  of  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St.  Heliers,  Jersey. 

"1882. 
(328)   "  Another  odd  appearance  ^  was  that  of   my  elder  daughter,  a 
bright  lively  girl  of   fifteen.       I  had  placed  her  at  a  finishing  school  in 

1  Some  apparently  veridical  cases  from  the  same  informant  will  be  found  below— 
Nos.  408,  553,  554,  650. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  211 

Edinburgh,  and  returned  to  my  cottage,  in  M.  Next  morning  at  break- 
fast, I  suddenly  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  saw  her  quite  distinctly 
coming  in  at  the  garden  gate,  in  pork-pie  hat,  grey  dress  looped  up  over  a 
red  petticoat,  just  as  she  had  been  the  day  before.  Not  a  word  said  I,  but 
M.,  my  second  daughter  [since  deceased],  exclaimed  joyously  and  wonder- 
ingly,  '  There  is  B  !  '  For  the  few  seconds  the  vision  lasted,  I  saw  her,  as 
if  stooping  to  undo  the  latch  of  the  gate.  Afterwards  she  told  me  how 
unhappy  she  had  been  for  the  first  day  in  school,  and  what  an  intense 
longing  had  seized  her  to  return  to  us.  No  doubt  both  her  sister  and 
myself  were  thinking  of  her,  at  the  same  time." 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  can  be  quite  certain  that  the 
figure  seen  was  not  that  of  a  stranger  bearing  some  resemblance  to  her 
daughter,  Mrs.  Hunter  replies  : — 

"  Your  supposition  amuses  me.  The  figure  melted  away,  in  the  act  of 
seemingly  stooping  to  undo  the  latch  of  our  little  gate.  It  was  a  bright 
autumn  morning.  We  were  seated  at  breakfast,  the  table  close  to  a  bow- 
window,  overlooking  a  strip  of  garden,  belonging  to  a  cottage  at  Melrose  : 
the  gate  being  a  low  wooden  gate,  and  no  house  near.  It  was  my 
daughter's  face,  figure,  and  dress,  just  as  she  had  appeared  the  day 
before,  when  I  took  her  to  school  at  Edinburgh.  My  daughter  was 
distinguished-looking,  and  no  one  in  that  neighbourhood  could  at  all  be 
mistaken  for  her.  Our  sight  was  quite  good,  and  neither  short-sighted. 
In  short,  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  some  mysterious  way  her  longing  and 
our  thinking  [of  her]  brought  about  this  appearance.  Another  explana- 
tion might  be  that  our  imaginations  might  at  the  same  moment  have  called 
up  the  figure." 

[The  facts  that  the  phantasm  presented  exactly  the  aspect  of  the  real 
figure  so  recently  seen,  and  that  Mrs.  Hunter's  thoughts  were  much 
occupied  with  her  absent  daughter,  and  further  that  she  had  previously 
had  a  subjective  "  after-image  "  of  this  very  daughter  (Chap.  XII.,  §  4), 
decidedly  favour  the  supposition  that  her  experience  on  this  occasion  was 
also  of  that  character.  And  if  so,  the  case  seems  clearly  to  be  one  where  h-  <^  ■ 
a  purely  subjective  hallucination  has  been  transferred.]     "  ■<  y^c-Ti 

In  the  next  example,  the  apparition  seems  more  definitely 
independent  of  any  conscious  mental  action  on  the  part  of  the  absent 
person;  for  it  would  be  hard  to  attribute  a  special  telepathic  influence 
to  some  casual  image  of  his  usual  resort  that  may  have  flitted  across 
his  mind,  at  the  same  time  that  his  form  appeared.  The  two 
percipients  were  at  the  time  secretaries  to  societies  of  which  the 
ofiices  were  in  the  same  building.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  R.  Mouat, 
of  60,  Huntingdon  Street,  Barnsbury,  N.  His  account,  which 
was  written  down  soon  after  the  occurrence,  has  been  slightly 
condensed. 

(329)   "On    Thursday,  the  5th  of  September,  1867,  about  the  hour  of    ^^  ^  • 
10.45  a.m.,  on  entering  my  office,  I  found  my  clerk  in  conversation  with  the 
porter,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  H.  standing  at  the  clerk's  back.      I  was  just  on 
the  point  of  asking  Mr.  H.  what  had  brought  him  in  so  early  (he  worked 

VOL.    II.  P    2 

212  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

in  the  same  room  as  myself,  but  was  not  in  the  habit  of  coming  till  about 
mid-day)  when  my  clerk  began  questioning  me  about  a  telegram  which  had 
missed  me.  The  conversation  lasted  some  minutes,  and  in  the  midst  of  it 
the  porter  gave  me  a  letter  which  explained  by  whom  the  telegram  had 
been  sent.  During  this  scene  Mr.  R.,  from  an  office  upstairs,  came  in  and 
listened  to  what  was  going  on.  On  opening  the  letter,  I  immediately 
made  known  its  purport,  and  looked  Mr.  H.  full  in  the  face  as  I  spoke.  I 
was  much  struck  by  the  melancholy  look  he  had,  and  observed  that  he  was 
without  his  neck-tie.  At  this  juncture  Mr.  E,.  and  the  porter  left  the  room. 
I  spoke  to  Mr.  H.,  saying,  '  Well,  what's  the  matter  with  you  ?  You  look 
so  sour.'  He  made  no  answer,  but  continued  looking  fixedly  at  me.  I  took 
up  an  enclosure  which  had  accompanied  the  letter  and  read  it  through,  still 
seeing  Mr.  H.  standing  opposite  to  me  at  the  corner  of  the  table.  As  I 
laid  the  papers  down,  my  clerk  said,'  Here,  sir,  is  a  letter  come  from  Mr.  H.' 
No  sooner  had  he  pronounced  the  name  than  Mr.  H.  disappeared  in  a 
second.  I  was  for  a  time  quite  dumbfounded,  which  astonished  my  clerk, 
who  (it  now  turned  out)  had  not  seen  Mr.  H.,  and  absolutely  denied  that 
he  had  been  in  the  ofiice  that  morning.  The  purport  of  the  letter  from 
Mr.  H.,  which  my  clerk  gave  me,  and  which  had  been  written  on  the 
previous  day,  was  that,  feeling  unwell,  he  should  not  come  to  the  office 
that  Thursday,  but  requested  me  to  forward  his  letters  to  him  at  his  house. 
"  The  next  day  (Friday),  about  noon,  Mr.  H.  entered  the  office ;  and 
when  I  asked  him  where  he  was  on  the  Thursday  about  10.45,  he  replied 
that  he  had  just  finished  breakfast,  was  in  the  company  of  his  wife,  and  had 
never  left  his  house  during  the  day.  I  felt  shy  of  mentioning  the  subject 
to  Mr.  R.,  but  on  the  Monday  following  I  could  not  refrain  from  asking 
him  if  he  remembered  looking  in  on  Thursday  morning.  '  Perfectly,'  he 
replied  ;  '  you  were  having  a  long  confab  with  your  clerk  about  a  telegram, 
which  you  subsequently  discovered  came  from  Mr.  C  On  my  asking  him 
if  he  remembered  who  were  present,  he  answered,  '  The  clerk,  the  porter, 
you  and  H.'  On  my  asking  him  further,  he  said,  'He  was  standing  at 
the  corner  of  the  table,  opposite  you.  I  addressed  him,  but  he  made  no 
reply,  only  took  up  a  book  and  began  reading.  I  could  not  help  looking 
at  him,  as  the  first  thing  that  struck  me  was  his  being  at  the  office  so  early, 
and  the  next  his  melancholy  look,  so  difierent  from  his  usual  manner ;  but 
that  I  attributed  to  his  being  annoyed  about  the  discussion  going  on.  I 
left  him  standing  in  the  same  position  when  I  went  out,  followed  by  the 
porter.'  On  my  making  known  to  Mr.  R.  that  Mr.  H.  was  14  miles  off  the 
whole  of  that  day  he  grew  quite  indignant  at  my  doubting  the  evidence 
of  his  eyesight,  and  insisted  on  the  porter  being  called  up  and  interrogated. 
The  porter  however,  like  the  clerk,  had  not  seen  the  figure." 

Mr.  R.  has  supplied  independent  and  precise  corroboration  of  these 
facts,  so  far  as  he  was  a  party  to  them — the  one  insignificant  difference 
being  that  he  says  he  did  not  sjoeak  to  Mr.  H.,  but  "  gesticulated  in  fun  to 
him,  pointing  to  Mr.  M.  and  the  clerk,  who  were  having  an  altercation 
about  a  telegram  ;  but  my  fun  did  not  seem  at  all  catching,  Mr.  H. 
apparently  not  being  inclined,  as  he  often  was,  to  make  fun  out  of 
surrounding  circumstances."  He  adds  that  he  has  never  experienced  any 
other  hallucination  of  the  senses ;  and  Mr.  Mouat  made  a  similar  state- 
ment vivd  voce  to  the  present  writer. 

-^  ;-C-<fc'>^'- 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  213 

Cases  of  this  type  naturally  suggest  the  question  whether  they 
may  not  be  parallel  to  those  cases  of  casual  agency  (Chap.  XIV.,  §  5), 
where  the  same  person  has  on  several  occasions,  unconnected  with  any 
crisis,  been  the  source  of  hallucination,  now  to  one  friend  now  to 
another.  But  even  supposing  such  an  impression  as  the  above,  of  an 
absent  person  who  is  in  a  normal  state,  to  be  telepathic  and  not  purely 
subjective  in  its  inception,  no  one  on  reflection  will  maintain  that  by 
pure  accident  two  percipients  were  casually  affected  in  this  extremely 
rare  way  at  the  same  'moment.  And  if  not,  then  something  took  place 
between  them ;  which — if  what  one  saw  was  not  suggested  to  the 
other  by  verbal  or  physical  signs — must  be  of  the  nature  of  thought- 
transference. 

The  next  narrative  is  from  Mr.  James  Cowley,  who  wrote  from 
32,  Langton  Street,  Cathay,  Bristol,  on  Jan.  7,  1884: — 

(330)  "  My  eldest  son  is  a  twin.  The  night  after  his  dear  mother  was 
laid  in  the  grave  at  the  Highgate  Cemetery  (1845)  I  had  him  in  bed  with 
me.  (I  was  then  residing  at  39,  Charlotte  Terrace,  Islington.)  Something 
causing  me  to  start  from  my  sleep,  I  saw,  with  all  the  distinctness  possible 
to  visual  power,  my  dearest  angel  receding,  in  a  bent  position,  as  if  she  had 
been  blessing  one  or  both  of  us,  with  a  kiss.  At  the  same  instant  the 
child,  only  two  years  and  five  months  old,  exclaimed,  '  There's  mother  ! ' 
You  will  hardly  wonder  that,  after  the  night  had  passed  away,  I  was 
perplexed  to  know  whether  I  had  only  dreamt  it,  or  whether  it  was  real. 
But  the  reference  made  to  the  matter  by  my  dear  little  motherless  one,  the 
moment  he  awoke,  removed  all  possibility  of  doubt." 

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Charles  A.  W.  Lett,  of  the  Military 

and  Royal  Naval  Club,  Albemarle  Street,  W. 

"December  3rd,  1885.       ^-A,--' 

(331)  "On  the  5th  April,  1873,  my  wife's  father.  Captain  Towns,  /IJUm**^ 
died  at  his  residence,  Cranbrook,  Rose  Bay,  near  Sydney,  N.  S.  Wales.  7."i^f  r^  /« 
About  6  weeks  after  his  death,  my  wife  had  occasion,  one  evening  about  ,"/ 

9  o'clock,  to  go  to  one  of  the  bedrooms  in  the  house.     She  was  accompanied  /7 

by  a  young  lady,  Miss  Berthon,  and  as  they  entered  the  room— the  gas  ifU*4^*r, 
was  burning  all  the  time — they  were  amazed  to  see,  reflected  as  it  were  *'^j^  ^^ 
on  the  polished  surface  of  the  wardrobe,  the  image  of  Captain  Towns.     It  -^ 

was  barely  half  figure,^  the  head,  shoulders,  and  part  of  the  arms  only 
showing — in  fact,  it  was  like  an  ordinary  medallion  portrait,  but  life-size. 
The  face  appeared  wan  and  pale,  as  it  did  before  his  death ;  and  he  wore 
a  kind  of  grey  flannel  jacket,  in  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  sleep. 
Surprised  and  half  alarmed  at  what  they  saw,  their  first  idea  was  that  a 
portrait  had  been  hung  in  the  room,  and  that  what  they  saw  was  its  refiec- 
tion — but  there  was  no  picture  of  the  kind. 

"  Whilst  they  were  looking  and  wondering,  my  wife's  sister.  Miss 
Towns,  came  into  the  room,  and  before  either  of  the  others  had 
time    to  speak    she    exclaimed,   '  Good    gracious  !       Do  you    see   papa  ? ' 

^  See  p.  33.  note. 

214  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

One  of  the  housemaids  happened  to  be  passing  down  stairs  at  the 
moment,  and  she  was  called  in,  and  asked  if  she  saw  anything,  and  her  reply 
was,  '  Oh,  miss  !  the  master.'  Graham — Captain  Towns'  old  body  servant 
— was  then  sent  for,  and  he  also  immediately  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Lord  save  us  ! 
Mrs.  Lett,  it's  the  Captain  ! '  The  butler  was  called,  and  then  Mrs.  Crane, 
my  wife's  nurse,  and  they  both  said  what  they  saw.  Finally,  Mrs.  Towns 
was  sent  for,  and,  seeing  the  apparition,  she  advanced  towards  it  with  her 
arm  extended  as  if  to  touch  it,  and  as  she  passed  her  hand  over  the  panel 
of  the  wardrobe  the  figure  gradually  faded  away,  and  never  again  appeared, 
though  the  room  was  regularly  occupied  for  a  long  time  after. 

"  These  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case,  and  they  admit  of  no  doubt ; 
no  kind  of  intimation  was  given  to  any  of  the  witnesses ;  the  same 
question  was  put  to  each  one  as  they  came  into  the  room,  and  the  reply 
was  given  without  hesitation  by  each.  It  was  by  the  merest  accident 
that  I  did  not  see  the  apparition.  I  was  in  the  house  at  the  time,  but 
did  not  hear  when  I  was  called.  "  C.  A.   W.  Lett." 

"  We,  the  undersigned,  having  read  the  above  statement,  certify  that 
it  is  strictly  accurate,  as  we  both  were  witnesses  of  the  apparition. 

"  Sara  Lett. 
"  SiBBiE  Smyth  [nee  Towns)." 

Mrs.  Lett  assures  me  that  neither  she  nor  her  sister  ever  experienced 
a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.  She  is  positive 
that  the  recognition  of  the  appearance  on  the  part  of  each  of  the  later 
witnesses  was  independent,  and  not  due  to  any  suggestion  from  the 
persons  already  in  the  room. 

[We  hope  in  time  to  receive  the  corroboration  of  Miss  Berthon,  and 
of  Mrs.  Crane,  Mrs.   Lett's  nurse,] 

These  last  are  cases  where  the  distinction  to  which  I  have  called 
attention  (pp.  190-2)  must  be  specially  borne  in  mind.  My  central 
object  being  to  prove  that  ideas  may  be  transferred  from  mind  to 
mind  without  words  or  physical  signs,  I  am  presenting  certain 
collective  sensory  experiences  which  I  think  may  constitute  one  type 
of  such  transference.  Now  believers  in  communications  with  the 
departed  will  probably  need  so  little  convincing  as  to  the  general 
theory  of  the  far  less  startling  transferences  between  living  persons, 
that  on  them  I  am  not  concerned  to  press  the  evidence  of  this  particular 
type.  But  of  the  rest  of  my  readers  I  would  ask — supposing  the  above 
and  similar  occurrences  to  be  truly  described — on  what  hypothesis, 
other  than  that  of  the  transferability  of  hallucinations  as  such,  they 
would  explain  them. 

I  pass  by  some  other  examples  of  the  same  kind  ;  as  no  insistance 
on  my  point  of  view  in  quoting  them  would  prevent  my  seeming  to 
some  to  be  explaining  away  veritable  manifestations  as  subjective 
delusions,  and  to  others  to  be  introducing  "  ghosts  "  by  a  side-wind. 
But  I  give  the  following  as  a  further  interesting  case  of  impressions 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  215 

which,  though  probably  simultaneous,  were  not  similar.  The 
narrative  was  originally  printed  in  July,  1883,  in  an  account  of  the 
Orphanage  where  it  occurred,  entitled  The  Orphanage  and  Home, 
Aberlour,  Graigellachie,  &c.  (pp.  44-5).  The  narrator  throughout 
is  the  Rev.  C.  Jupp,  Warden  of  the  Orphanage. 

(332)  "In  1875,  a  man  died  leaving  a  widow  and  six  orphan  children. 
The  3  eldest  were  admitted  into  the  Orphanage.  Three  years  afterwards 
the  widow  died,  and  friends  succeeded  in  getting  funds  to  send  the  rest 
here,  the  youngest  being  about  4  years  of  age.  [Late  one  evening,  about 
6  months  after  the  admission  of  the  younger  children,  some  visitors  arrived 
unexpectedly  ;  and]  the  Warden  agreed  to  take  a  bed  in  the  little  ones' 
dormitory,  which  contained  10  beds,  9  occupied. 

"  In  the  morning,  at  breakfast,  the  Warden  made  the  following 
statement: — 'As  near  as  I  can  tell  I  fell  asleep  about  11  o'clock,  and 
slept  very  soundly  for  some  time.  I  suddenly  woke  without  any  apparent 
reason,  and  felt  an  impulse  to  turn  round,  my  face  being  towards  the 
wall,  from  the  children.  Before  turning,  I  looked  up  and  saw  a  soft 
light  in  the  room.  The  gas  was  burning  low  in  the  hall,  and  the 
dormitory  door  being  open,  I  thought  it  probable  that  the  light  came 
from  that  source.  It  was  soon  evident,  however,  that  such  was  not 
the  case.  I  turned  round,  and  then  a  wonderful  vision  met  my  gaze. 
Over  the  second  bed  from  mine,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  room, 
there  was  floating  a  small  cloud  of  light,  forming  a  halo  of  the  bright- 
ness of  the  moon  on  an  ordinary  moonlight  night. 

"  '  I  sat  upright  in  bed,  looking  at  this  strange  appearance,  took  up 
my  watch  and  found  the  hands  pointing  to  5  minutes  to  1.  Every- 
thing was  quiet,  and  all  the  children  sleeping  soundly.  In  the  bed, 
over  which  the  light  seemed  to  float,  slept  the  youngest  of  the  6  children 
mentioned  above. 

"  '  I  asked  myself,  "  Am  I  dreaming  ? "  No  !  I  was  wide  awake.  I  was 
seized  with  a  strong  impulse  to  rise  and  touch  the  substance,  or  whatever 
it  might  be  (for  it  was  about  5  feet  high),  and  was  getting  up  when  some- 
thing seemed  to  hold  me  back.  I  am  certain  I  heard  nothing,  yet  I  felt 
and  perfectly  understood  the  words — "  No,  lie  down,  it  won't  hurt  you."  I 
at  once  did  what  I  felt  I  was  told  to  do.  I  fell  asleep  shortly  afterwards 
and  rose  at  half -past  5,  that  being  my  usual  time. 

" '  At  6  o'clock  I  began  dressing  the  children,  beginning  at  the  bed 
furthest  from  the  one  in  which  I  slept.  Presently  I  came  to  the  bed  over 
which  I  had  seen  the  light  hovering.  I  took  the  little  boy  out,  placed  him 
on  my  knee,  and  put  on  some  of  his  clothes.  The  child  had  been  talking 
with  the  others  ;  suddenly  he  was  silent.  And  then,  looking  me  hard  in 
the  face  with  an  extraordinary  expression,  he  said,  "Oh,  Mr.  Jupp,  my 
mother  came  to  me  last  night.  Did  you  see  her  ?  "  For  a  moment  I  could 
not  answer  the  child.  I  then  thought  it  better  to  pass  it  ofi",  and  said, 
"  Come,  we  must  make  haste,  or  we  shall  be  late  for  breakfast." ' 

"  The  child  never  afterwards  referred  to  the  matter,  we  are  told,  nor 
has  it  since  ever  been  mentioned  to  him.  The  Warden  says  it  is  a  mystery 
to  him ;  he  simply  states  the  fact  and  there  leaves  the  matter,  being 
perfectly  satisfied  that  he  was  mistaken  in  no  one  particular." 

216  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  Rev.  C.  Jupp  writes  to  us  : — 

"  The  Orphanage  and  Convalescent  Home,  Aberlour,  Craigellachie. 

"November  13th,  1883. 

"  I  fear  anything  the  little  boy  might  now  say  would  be  unreliable,  or 
I  would  at  once  question  him.  Although  the  matter  was  fully  discussed 
at  the  time,  it  was  never  mentioned  in  the  hearing  of  the  child ;  and  yet, 
when  at  the  request  of  friends,  the  account  was  published  in  our  little 
magazine,  and  the  child  read  it,  his  countenance  changed,  and  looking  up, 
he  said,  '  Mr.  Jupp,  that  is  me.'  1  said,  'Yes,  that  is  what  we  saw.'  He 
said,  '  Yes,'  and  then  seemed  to  fall  into  deep  thought,  evidently  with 
pleasant  remembrances,  for  he  smiled  so  sweetly  to  himself,  and  seemed  to 
forget  I  was  present. 

"  I  much  regret  now  that  I  did  not  learn  something  from  the  child  at 
the  time.  "  Chas.  Jupp." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jupp  says  that  he  has  never  had  any 
other  hallucination  of  the  senses ;  and  adds,  "  My  wife  was  the  only 
person  of  adult  age  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  at  the  time. 
Shortly  after,  I  mentioned  it  to  our  Bishop  and  Primus." 

Mrs.  Jupp  writes,  from  the  Orphanage,  on  June  23,  1886  : — 

"  This  is  to  certify  that  the  account  of  the  light  seen  by  the  Warden 
of  this  establishment  is  correct,  and  was  mentioned  to  me  at  the  time  " — 
i.e.,  next  morning. 

It  is  possible  that  the  child's  experience  here  was  a  dream  ;  if  so, 
the  case  might  be  taken  as  a  link  between  the  two  classes  of 
phenomena — collective  hallucinations  and  simultaneous  dreams — 
which  I  have  referred  to  as  so  closely  related  (p.  171).-^ 

I  will  give  one  more  "  recognised "  case,  which  presents  the 
curious   feature   that  the  figure  seen  was  that  of  one  of  the   per- 

1  In  the  Life  and  Con-espondence  of  Charles  Matheivs,  by  Mrs.  Mathews,  pjp.  94,  95, 
a  case  is  recorded  which  again  illustrates  this  relation.  One  night,  when  Mr.  and 
the  future  Mrs.  Mathews  were  intimate  acquaintances,  but  without  any  intention 
of  marrying,  and  when  they  were  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  they  had  a  precisely 
similar  vision,  which  so  violently  affected  both  of  them  that  they  fell  out  of  their 
respective  beds,  and  were  found  on  their  respective  floors ;  Mr.  Mathews  was  so  much 
affected  as  to  be  extremely  ill  for  a  day  afterwards.  The  experiences  were  independently 
described  long  before  they  were  compared.  The  joint  vision  was  one  of  which  the 
substance  might  have  been  easily  suggested  to  either  of  the  parties  by  a  recent  incident ; 
it  was  in  fact  the  apparition  of  Mr.  Mathews'  former  wife,  who,  before  her  death,  had 
tried  to  make  them  promise  to  marry  one  another ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  it 
was  by  accident  that  experiences  so  unique  as  those  described  corrresponded  and 
coincided.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  incident  was  telepathic,  and  one  experience  was  the 
cause  or  the  condition  of  the  other,  it  is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  visions  in  fact  much 
more  resembled  waking  hallucinations  than  genuine  dreams  ;  for  Mrs.  Mathews  especially 
records  that  both  she  and  Mr.  Mathews  had  been  unable  to  sleep  through  restlessness. 

The  following  case  is  interesting  enough  to  deserve  quotation,  though  not  ostensibly 
"collective, "  and  possibly  no  more  than  a  single  subjective  hallucination.  We  received 
it  from  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bellamy,  of  Publow  Vicarage,  Bristol,  in  February,  1886  ;  but 
the  particulars  were  first  published  in  1878. 

'•When  a  girl  at  school  my  wife  made  an  agreement  with  a  fellow  pupil,  Miss 
W.,  that  the  one  of  them  who  died  first  should,  if  Divinely  permitted,  appear  after  her 
decease  to  the  survivor.  In  1874  my  wife,  who  had  not  seen  or  heard  anything  of  her 
former  school-friend  for  some  years,  casually  heard  of  her  death.  The  news  reminded 
her  of  her  former  agreement,  and  then,  becoming  nervous,  she  told  me  of  it.  I  knew  of 
my  wife's  compact,  but  I  had  never  seen  a  photograph  of  her  friend,  or  heard  any 
description  of  her.  [Mr.  Bellamy  told  the  present  writer,  in  conversation,  that  his  mind 
had  not  been  in  the  least  dwelling  on  the  compact.] 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  217 

cipients.  I  have  spoken  before  (Chap.  XII.,  §  8,  first  note)  of  a  form 
of  hallucination,  as  I  hold  it,  which  consists  in  seeming  to  see  oneself 
as  a  person  outside  one  ;  and  I  have  also  pointed  out  (p.  85,  note)  that 
one  of  our  informants  who  has  had  an  experience  of  the  sort  is  also 
one  of  the  few  persons  who  have  given  us  evidence  of  what  I  have 
called  casual  agency,  exercised  in  the  midst  of  quite  ordinary  life. 
Now  the  fact  that  a  person  who  has,  so  to  speak,  casually  impressed 
herself,  has  at  other  times  casually  impressed  others,  is  in  itself  of 
great  interest  ;  but  it  leads  us  on  to  the  following  still  more  interest- 
ing case,  where  the  "  double  "  was  seen  by  its  original  and  by  others 
at  the  same  time.  The  account  is  from  Mrs.  Hall,  of  The  Yews, 
Gretton,  near  Kettering,  and  was  received  in  December,  1883.  -•• 

(3.33)  "In   the  autumn  of  1863,  I  was  living  with  my  husband  and  ^"^J^ 
first  baby,   a   child    of  8  months,  in  a  lone  house,  called  Sibberton,  near 
Wansford,  Northamptonshire,  which  in  by-gone  days  had  been   a  church. 
As  the  weather  became   more  wintry,  a  married   cousin  and  her  husband 

"A  night  or  two  afterwards  as  I  was  sleeping  with  my  wife,  a  fire  brightly  burning  in  *<-c 
the  room  and  a  candle  alight,  I  suddenly  awoke,  and  saw  a  lady  sitting  by  the  side  of  the 
bed  where  my  wife  was  sleeping  soundly.  At  once  I  sat  up  in  the  bed,  and  gazed  so 
intently  that  even  now  I  can  recall  her  form  and  features.  Had  I  the  jDencil  and  the  brush 
of  a  Millais,  I  could  transfer  to  canvas  an  exact  likeness  of  the  ghostly  visitant.  I 
remember  that  I  was  much  struck,  as  I  looked  intently  at  her,  with  the  careful  arrange- 
ment of  her  coiffure,  every  single  hair  being  most  carefully  brushed  down.  How  long  I 
sat  and  gazed  I  cannot  say,  but  directly  the  apparition  ceased  to  be,  I  got  out  of  bed  to 
see  if  any  of  my  wife's  garments  had  by  any  means  optically  deluded  me.  I  found 
nothing  in  the  line  of  vision  but  a  bare  wall.  Hallucination  on  my  part  I  rejected  as  out 
of  the  question,  and  I  doubted  not  that  I  had  really  seen  an  apparition.  Returning  to 
bed,  I  lay  till  my  wife  some  hours  after  awoke  and  then  I  gave  her  an  account  of  her 
friend's  appearance.  I  described  her  colour,  form,  &c.,  all  of  which  exactly  tallied  with 
my  wife's  recollection  of  Miss  W.  Finally  I  asked,  '  But  was  there  any  special  point  to 
strike  one  in  her  appearance  ?'  '  Yes, '  my  wife  promptly  replied  ;  '  we  girls  used  to  tease 
her  at  school  for  devoting  so  much  time  to  the  arrangement  of  her  hair.'  This  was  the 
very  thing  which  I  have  said  so  much  struck  me.    Such  are  the  simple  facts. 

"I  will  only  add  that  till  1874  I  had  never  seen  an  apparition,  and  that  I  have  not 
seen  one  since.  "  Arthur  Bellamy." 

We  have  also  seen  an  account  written  by  Mrs.  Bellamy  in  May,  1879,  which  entirely 
agrees  with  the  above,  except  that  she  "  thinks  it  was  a  fortnight  after  the  death  "  that 
the  vision  occurred,  and  that  the  light  was  "the  dim  light  of  a  night-lamp."  She 
says,  "  The  description  accorded  in  all  points  with  my  deceased  friend."  In  conversation 
Mr.  Bellamy  described  the  form  as  seen  in  a  very  clear  light  (see  Vol  i.,  pp.  550-1) ;  and 
this  may  account  for  his  idea  that  the  room  itself  was  lighted  by  fire  and  candle. 

This  experience,  as  I  have  said,  may  have  been  purely  subjective  ;  and  identification 
of  a  person's  appearance  by  mere  description  is  generally  to  be  regarded  with  great  doubt. 
But  in  view  of  the  circumstances,  and  especially  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Bellamy  has  never 
had  any  other  hallucination,  two  alternative  hypotheses  seem  at  least  worth  suggesting. 
(1)  Believers  in  telepathic  phantasms  may  suspect  Mr.  Bellamy's  experience  to  have  been 
conditioned  by  his  wife's  state  of  mind — possibly  even  by  a  dream,  forgotten  on  waking, 
in  which  her  friend  figured.  (2)  Believers  in  the  possibility  of  post-mortem  communica- 
tions, if  they  believe  that  this  was  one  of  them,  might  further  suppose  that  Mr.  Bellamy's 
experience  depended  on  a  psychical  influence  exercised  in  the  first  instance  on  Mrs. 
Bellamy,  though  acting  below  the  level  of  her  normal  consciousness — which  would  make 
the  case  parallel  to  Nos.  242  and  355.  To  me,  I  confess,  this  appears  a  more  reasonable 
supposition  than  that  a  direct  influence  (so  to  speak)  missed  its  mark,  and  was  exercised 
on  Mr.  Bellamy  by  a  stranger  who  cared  nothing  about  him. 

I  may  mention  that  we  have  another  first-hand  case  of  just  the  same  type,  where  the 
percipient  was  unaware  of  any  compact,  and  was  quite  unoccupied  with  the  thought  of 
the  dead  person.  She  was,  however,  a  young  child  at  the  time,  and  I  therefore  do  not 
quote  the  account. 

218  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

came  on  a  visit.  One  night,  when  we  were  having  supper,  an  apparition 
stood  at  the  end  of  the  sideboard.  We  four  sat  at  the  dining-table  ;  and  yet, 
with  great  inconsistency,  /  stood  as  this  ghostly  visitor  again,  in  a  spotted, 
light  muslin  summer  dress,  and  without  any  terrible  peculiarities  of  air 
or  manner.  We  all  four  saw  it,  my  husband  having  attracted  our 
attention  to  it,  saying,  '  It  is  Sarah,'  in  a  tone  of  recognition,  meaning 
me.  It  at  once  disappeared.  None  of  us  felt  any  fear,  it  seemed  too 
natural  and  familiar. 

"  The  apparition  seemed  utterly  apart  from  myself  and  my  feelings,  as 
a  picture  or  statue.  My  three  relatives,  who,  with  me,  saw  the 
apparition,  are  all  dead ;  they  died  in  about  the  years  1868-69. 

"Sarah  Jane  Hall." 

The  dress  in  which  the  figure  appeared  was  not  like  any  that  Mrs.  Hall 

had  at  the  time,  though  she  wore  one  like  it  nearly  two  years  afterwards. 

1      Mrs.  Hall  has  had  other  visual  hallucinations,  which  were  all  connected 

with  ill-health  or  nervous  shock  ;  one  which  occurred  a  few  months  before 

that  here  described  had  represented  herself  as  if  "  laid  out." 

I  now  pass  to  auditory  cases,  I  have  spoken  of  the  caution 
which  these  require ;  ^  but  the  following  instances  must,  I  think, 
have  been  more  than  mere  misinterpretations  of  real  sounds. 

The  first  account  is  from  a  lady  of  unimpeachable  veracity ;  and 
the  account,  though  written  in  the  third  person,  is  first-hand. 

"  November,  1884. 
\j}^  (334)   "  Some  20  years  ago,  Miss  G.  [the  narrator]  was  recovering  from 

/        a  severe  illness,  and  it  was   of  the  utmost  importance  for  her  to  have  a 

1  Even  the  sound  of  the  human  voice — though  ordinarily  so  distinctive — may  be 
illusory.  For  example,  we  should  hardly,  I  think,  be  justified  in  regarding  the  two 
following  cases  as  other  than  joint  illusions,  due  to  some  undiscovered  source  of  sound  in 
the  house.     Mr.  Gascoigne  Bevan,  of  the  Bank  House,  Sudbury,  wr-ites,  in  1884 : — 

"  Some  few  years  ago  and  since,  I  have  been  living  in  this  house,  and  manager  of  the 
bank.  I  returned  home  one  evening  in  the  summer  time  with  a  friend.  On  entering  by 
the  garden  door,  we  were  both  greeted  with  the  sounds  of  children's  laughter,  peal  after 
peal,  all  over  the  house.  '  Why, '  says  my  friend,  '  I  did  not  know  you  had  children  in 
the  house,  or  I  would  not  have  come.'  I  don't  know  why  I  answered,  but  I  did  so: 
'Hush,  don't  say  anything  ;  you  will  frighten  Mrs.  Springett,  my  housekeeper.'  Iran 
all  over  the  house,  looking  in  all  the  rooms,  in  vain,  for  an  explanation.  I  knoio  there  was 
no  one  in  the  house  except  Mrs.  Springett,  her  old  husband  and  an  under  servant." 

[Mr.  Bevan  believes  that  the  friend  who  shared  this  experience  has  recently  died  in 
Africa.] 

Miss  Twynam,  of  1,  Waterloo  Place,  Southampton,  writes,  on  Nov.  12,  1885 : — 

"I  had  myself  repeatedly  heard  the  voice  calling  my  name,  'Ellen,'  at  various 
intervals,  extending  over  some  months,  and  had  mentioned  the  fact  to  the  different 
members  of  the  family,  but  never  to  my  knowledge  in  the  presence  of  the  servants.  I 
have  always  been  laughed  at,  and  told  it  was  only  my  fancy,  and  no  one  then  had  heard 
it  but  myself.  On  one  occasion,  I  and  my  sister  were  in  the  drawing-room,  and  my 
mother  and  aunt,  who  were  both  invalids,  were  in  their  respective  bedrooms  upstairs,  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  house  ;,  while  my  brother  was  in  another  sitting-room  downstairs,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  hall :  and  the  servants  were  both  in  the  kitchen,  which  was  an 
underground  one.  I  and  my  sister  heard  the  voice  distinctly  call  '  Ellen,  Ellen  ! ' — a 
clear,  high,  refined  woman's  voice,  but  with  something  strange  and  unusual  about  it. 
My  sister  at  once  noticed  it,  turning  to  me  and  saying,  '  There,  I  have  heard  it  myself 
this  time. '  I  still,  however,  thought  it  might  really  be  someone,  so  went  to  my  mother, 
asking  whether  she  had  called.  She  said,  'No,' but  she  had  heard  someone  calling  me, 
and  thought  it  was  my  aunt.  I  went  to  her,  and  she  said  exactly  the  same,  only  thought 
it  was  my  mother.     I  then  went  to  my  brother.     He  said,  '  No  ; '  but  had  heard  someone 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  219 

good  night,  in  order  to  wind  her  up  for  a  journey  to  Edinburgh  next  day.  '*^^ 
All  the  house  was  sent  to  bed  early,  and  the  utmost  quiet  enjoined  upon 
everybody.  A  devoted  friend,  whose  name  was  Louisa,  went  to  bed  with 
her,  in  order  to  be  close  at  hand  if  anything  should  be  wanted.  About  an 
hour  after  she  had  lain  down  she  was  startled  by  a  loud  outcry,  '  Louie, 
Louie  ! '  as  if  someone  was  in  urgent  want  of  assistance.  Miss  G-.  thought 
that  probably  someone  had  slipped  and  was  hanging  over  the  banisters ; 
she  anxiously  turned  to  her  friend  trying  to  rouse  her.  Her  friend  made 
no  offer  to  rise,  but  said,  in  a  very  marked  way,  '  Did  you  hear  that 
voice  ?  It  was  my  mother ;  I  hear  it  constantly.'  Next  morning  every 
inquiry  was  made  ;  but  no  call  whatever  had  been  made." 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  the  hearing  of  the  name,  in  the  tones 
of  a  familiar  voice,  is  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  recurrent  forms 
of  subjective  hallucination  ;  but  whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  origin 
of  the  friend's  impression,  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  it  was 
through  her  that  it  was  communicated  to  Miss  G.   ^.U^ aJ(.^'^^'^^  ^  r^f' 

The  next  example  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  George  Saxon,  of  Park- 
lands,  Bruton,  Somersetshire,  who  completely  confirms  the  narrative 
as  far  as  he  was  concerned.     The  following  is  his  wife's  account : — - 

"February  26th,  1885. 
(335)  "On  first  coming  to  this  house  to   reside,  in   September,  1879, 
myself  and  two  servants  were  in  the  kitchen    talking  one    evening   at 
about  10.30  ;  and  we  all  three  distinctly  heard  a  voice  coming  from  the         ,_ 
next  room,   or  the  passage  that   leads   from    the  kitchen  to  this  room,  n^^^''^ 
saying  three  times,  '  Are  you  coming  ? '  On  the  first  occasion  I  answered     ?*'>•<.■«. 
and  said,    '  I  am  coming,  dear,'  thinking  it  was  my  husband  calling,  whom 
I  supposed  to  be  in  the  next  room.     The  voice  again  said  the   second 
time,  '  Are  you  coming  1 '  and  one  of   the  servants  said,    '  You  had  better 
go  ;  master  is  calling.'     The  voice  again  said  the  third  time,    '  Are  you 

call  quite  plainly.  I  then  went  dowzi  to  the  servants,  and  asked  whether  they  had  heard 
anyone  calling.  They  said,  '  Yes  ;'  they  thought  it  was  mistress.  But  there  was  nothing 
about  them  to  lead  me  to  think  they  were  playing  any  trick,  and  they  had  never  any  idea 
that  I  had  heard  this  voice  before.  The  voice  sounded  to  me  as  though  it  were  above  me, 
and  yet  very  close  to  me,  and  it  gave  me  a  strange  uncomfortable  feeling.  I  do  not  think 
it  was  the  servants,  as  they  answered  so  naturally,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  it  was  their 
mistress  who  had  called.  Our  house  stood  in  a  garden  near  the  village,  but  I  am  sure  it 
was  no  one  from  outside,  as  the  voice  was  so  decidedly  in  the  house,  and  apparently  close 
to  us.  "  Ellen  B.  Twtnam." 

Miss  Twynam's  sister  says  : — 

"I  perfectly  remember  the  occurrence  alluded  to  by  my  sister.  I  distinctly  heard 
the  voice  calling  her  name,  and  noticed  at  the  time  that  it  was  very  clear,  and  resembled 
a  woman's  voice,  but  with  a  strangely  unnatural  sound  which  attracted  my  attention. 
I  remember  turning  to  her  and  saying,  '  I  have  heard  it  for  myself  this  time,'  as  she  had 
mentioned  the  fact  of  repeatedly  hearing  her  name  called,  but  I  had  never  heard  it, 
though  other  people  had  done  so  before ;  but  on  this  occasion  everybody  in  the  house 
heard  it  at  the  same  time,  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  voice  came  from  no  one  in 
the  house.  "Maeia  Twynam." 

I  have  carefully  questioned  these  informants,  and  believe  that  the  account  is  accurate. 
But  it  seems  possible  to  suppose  that  some  peculiar  sound  in  the  house  was  interpreted 
in  the  way  which  Miss  E.  B.  Twynam's  description  of  her  own  experience  had 
suggested. 

It  is  curious  that  we  have  another  case  w^here  an  unaccountable  sound,  heard  several 
times  by  two  persons  in  the  same  house,  was  the  call  "Ellen,  Ellen,"  which  was  the  name 
of  one  of  them.  Perhaps  there  is  something  in  the  sound  which  renders  it  easily  simulated. 

220  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

coming  1 '  I  then  went  through  the  passage  before  mentioned,  to  the 
next  room,  where  I  thought  to  find  my  husband,  there  being  no  one  else 
in  the  house  except  three  children,  who  were  upstairs  fast  asleep.  On 
going  through  the  passage  into  the  next  room,  I  found  no  one  there, 
and  no  light,  it  being  quite  dark.  I  then  returned  to  the  kitchen  and 
obtained  a  light,  and  went  through  the  said  room  into  the  room  beyond, 
where  I  found  my  husband,  who  was  busy  writing  letters,  and  he  had  not 
called  or  spoken.  This  room  he  was  in  had  the  door  shut.  "We  all  thought 
it  very  strange,  and  went  up  to  see  the  children,  who  were  all  fast 
asleep.  One  of  the  servants  before  mentioned,  I  should  say,  had  left 
my  service  and  had  only  come  down  by  train  (10  miles)  for  the  day, 
and  was  to  return  [arriving  home  at  8  p.m.]  by  the  last  train,  which  she 
missed  and  had  to  stay  the  night.  She  had  a  daughter-in-law  expecting 
to  be  confined,  to  whom  she  was  going  back.  She  was  an  elderly  person, 
had  lost  a  son  not  long  before,  and  used  to  see  at  times  '  ghosts,'  or  what 
appeared  human  beings,  but  disappeared  suddenly  and  mysteriously. 

"  Caroline  Augusta  Saxon." 

Mr.  Saxon  adds  :  — 

"  The  house  is  quite  an  isolated  one,  standing  in  gardens  away  from  a 
road,  and  about  half-a-mile  from  the  town.  The  doors  and  windows  were 
closed.  The  voice  was  evidently  within  the  house  ;  and  could  not  have 
come  from  anyone  in  the  house.  Our  children's  ages  were  respectively 
9  years,  7  years,  5  years  and  7  months.  We  were  sure  they  were  all 
asleep  at  the  time,  as  we  went  up  at  once  to  see.  I  asked  them  the  next 
day ;  besides,  it  was  not  the  voice  of  the  children,  but  seemed  a  low 
plaintive  voice.  Notwithstanding,  my  wife  and  the  two  servants  thought 
it  must  have  been  myself  calling  from  the  next  room,  I  being  the  only 
other  being  about." 

I  have  examined  the  localities,  and  saw  how  natural  it  was  that  Mrs. 
Saxon  should  imagine  her  husband  to  be  calling  from  the  nearer  room.  She 
describes  the  voice  as  very  distinct  and  startling.  She  has  occasionally 
had  the  hallucination  of  hearing  her  own  name  called,  when  overtired  ; 
but  never  of  anything  else. 

Here,  as  m  the  last  example,  we  have  to  note  a  slight  tendency 
to  subjective  hallucination,  which  in  the  servant's  case  may  have  been 
intensified  by  recent  trouble;  and,  without  absolutely  excluding 
the  hypothesis  of  telepathic  influence  from  her  daughter-in-law,^  I 
still  think  it  more  probable  that  a  purely  subjective  hallucination 
on  her  part,  easily  referable  to  her  anxiety  about  her  daughter-in- 
law's  condition,  was  psychically  transferred  to  her  two  companions. 

The  next  example  is  from  the  Eev.  W.  Rajrmond,  Rector  of  Bally- 
heigue,  Co.  Kerry.  I  need  not  repeat  with  regard  to  it  the 
comments  made  on  cases  330  and  331.  Whatever  view  be  taken  as 
to  the  origin  of  the  sound,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  it  was  by 
accident  that  the  two  identical  impressions  so  exactly  coincided, 

1  The  repetition  of  the  experience  somewhat  favours  this  hypothesis  (see  p.  105). 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  221 

"  December  18th,  1884. 

(336)  "  About  30  years  ago,  Miss  Mildred  Nash,  my  mother's  aunt,  died  |! 
in  my  mother's  house,  at  the  advanced  age  of  82  years.  She  had  been  blind 
for  some  years,  and  an  orphan  cousin  of  mine  had  been  much  in  attendance 
on  her.  My  aunt  lived  and  died  in  a  room  on  the  ground  floor  in  the  front 
of  our  house,  which  was  situated  in  a  retired  street  of  Tralee.  A  few  days 
after  her  death,  my  cousin  and  I  were  sitting,  on  a  summer  evening,  at  the 
window  of  the  room  over  the  room  in  which  my  aunt  had  died.  I  heard 
distinctly  the  words  '  Rosy,  Rosy  '  (my  cousin's  name),  apparently  from  the 
room  beneath,  and  in  my  aunt's  voice  ;  then  I  heard  my  cousin  answer 
to  the  call ;  she  also  heard  the  voice.  I,  struck  with  the  strangeness  of  the 
circumstance,  at  once  threw  up  the  window  to  see  if  it  were  a  voice  from 
the  street,  but  there  was  no  one  visible,  and  there  could  be  no  one  there 
without  being  seen.  I  then  searched  the  house  all  around,  but  there  was 
nobody  near  except  ourselves — my  cousin  and  myself.  The  tale  ends  there ; 
nothing  afterwards  happened  in  connection  ; — merely  the  unaccountable 
fact  that  two  persons  did  independently  hear  such  a  voice  as  I  have 
mentioned.     I  heard  both  the  name  called  and  the  answer. 

"  Wm.  Raymond." 

Writing  on  January  9th,  1885,  Mr.  Raymond  says  : — 

"  I  send  you,  as  soon  as  I  was  able  to  get  it,  the  enclosed  statement  in 
corroboration,  sent  me  by  my  cousin.  She  mentioned  an  item  that  helped 
to  fix  the  facts  in  her  memory  (and  which  shows  the  superstition  of  the 
people  here),  that  her  neighbours  all  said  she  should  not  have  answered, 
but,  as  she  says,  no  harm  came  of  it.  This  was  my  only  experience  of 
auditory  hallucination." 

The  enclosed  statement  was  as  follows  : — 

"Tralee,  January  8th,  1885. 

"  My  cousin.  Rev.  William  Raymond,  has  asked  me  if  I  remember 
about  the  voice  we  heard  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  old  Miss  Nash,  his 
aunt.  I  do  remember  that  a  few  days  after  her  death  he  and  I  were 
sitting,  one  summer  evening,  in  the  room  over  the  room  where  she  died, 
that  I  heard  my  name  called,  apparently  from  that  room  and  in  her  voice, 
and  that  I  answered  the  call,  and  that  we  searched  and  could  find  no  one 
about  who  could  have  spoken.  "  Rose  Raymond." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry.  Miss  Raymond  states  that  this  is  her  sole 
experience  of  an  auditory  hallucination. 

It  remains  to  illustrate  the  musical  type  of  collective  hallucina- 
tion. The  following  account  is  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sewell,  of  Eden 
Villas,  Albert  Park,  Didsbury.  The  latter  (writing  on  March  25th, 
1885)  tells  us  that  in  the  spring  of  1863,  a  little  girl  of  theirs,  called 
Lilly,  was  ill.  ',^«^■»^♦■ 

(337)  "  My  husband  came  home  about  3  o'clock,  and,  to  please  Lilly, 

said  he  would  have  his  dinner  in  the  bedroom  with  her.  I  sat  beside  the  bed    ^^        . ' 
with  one  of  Lilly's  hands  in  mine,  my  husband  was  eating  his  dinner,  and    '^**'^^/ 
one  little  boy  was  talking  to  Lilly,  and   all  were  quietly  trying  to  amuse 
the  patient,  when  our  attention  was  roused  by  sounds  of  the  music  of  an 
-^olian  harp,  which  pi-oceeded  from  a  corner  cupboard  in  one  corner  of 

222  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

the  room.  All  was  hushed,  and  I  said,  'Lilly,  do  you  hear  that  pretty 
music  1 '  and  she  said,  '  No,'  at  which  I  was  much  surprised,  for  she  was  a 
great  lover  of  music.  The  sounds  increased  until  the  room  was  full  of 
melody,  when  it  gradually  and  slowly  seemed  to  pass  down  the  stairs  and 
ceased.  The  servant,  who  was  occupied  in  the  kitchen,  two  stories  below, 
heard  the  sounds,  and  our  eldest  daughter,  who  was  going  into  the  larder, 
stopped  in  the  passage  to  listen  and  wonder  where  the  music  came  from, 
and  the  servant  called  to  her,  '  Do  you  hear  that  music  1 '  It  was  then  a 
few  moments  past  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 

"  The  next  day  (Sunday)  my  old  nurse  and  aunt  came  up  to  see  how 
Lilly  was,  and  were,  with  my  husband,  all  in  the  room  with  the  child. 
I  had  gone  down  into  the  kitchen  to  prepare  some  little  dainty  milk-food 
for  her,  when  the  same  sounds  of  ^olian  music  were  heard  by  all  three 
in  the  room,  and  I  heard  the  same  in  the  kitchen.  Monday  passed,  but 
we  had  no  repetition.  On  Tuesday,  at  the  same  hour,  we  [i.e.,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Sewell]  once  more  heard  the  same  wailing  ^olian  music  from  the 
same  part  of  the  room ;  again  it  increased  in  volume,  until  the  room  was 
full  of  wailing  melody ;  and  again  did  the  sounds  appear  to  pass  through 
the  door,  down  the  stairs,  and  out  at  the  front  door.  Now,  this  music 
was  heard  three  different  days,  at  the  same  time  each  day,  and  not  only  by 
those  in  the  room  with  the  child,  but  by  myself,  my  daughter,  and  the 
servant,  two  flights  of  stairs  below  the  room  the  child  was  in ;  and  on 
the  second  day  by  my  aunt  and  nurse  and  the  children,  who  were  in  the 
dining-room. 

"  One  circumstance,  I  think,  was  very  remarkable  :  the  child  herself, 
who  had  a  perfect  passion  for  music,  never  heard  a  sound.  There  cannot 
be  any  mistake  in  the  sounds,  for  no  instrument  played  by  human  hands 
can  make  the  same  sounds  as  the  wailing  ^olian  harp.  We  had  lived  in 
the  same  bouse  6  years,  and  remained  in  it  12  years  more,  and  we  never 
heard  similar  music  either  before  or  after.  "  Sarah  A.  Sewell." 

Mr.  Sewell  says  :-  "April,  1885. 

"  The  only  confirmation  which  is  now  available  is  that  of  myself.  I 
can  speak  with  all  sincerity.  I  heard  the  sweet  music  identically  with 
my  wife.  The  music  was  heard  on  Saturday,  2nd  of  May,  a  little  before 
4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  also  on  the  next  day  at  about  the  same  time, 
and  also  on  the  following  Tuesday  at  about  the  same  hour.  Those  who 
heard  the  music  were  my  wife,  myself,  my  wife's  aunt,  the  nurse,  our  son 
E/ichard,  aged  7  ;  our  son  Thomas,  aged  9  (the  last  four  all  dead),  our 
eldest  daughter,  aged  11,  and  our  servant,  who  shortly  left  us  and  went 
to  Ireland  to  her  husband,  who  was  a  soldier,  and  was  soon  lost  sight  of. 
Our  eldest  daughter  is  now  in  New  York,  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  that 
she  will  rem.ember  the  circumstance.  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  the  music 
heard  was  not  produced  by  someone  at  a  distance,  for  our  house  was  then 
situated  in  a  long  garden,  some  50  yards  distant  from  the  public  road,  and 
the  adjoining  house  to  ours  was  unoccupied  at  the  time.  The  sound  was 
not  a  muffled  sound  at  all,  but  the  soft,  wild  notes  of  an  ^olian  harp,  which 
rose  and  fell  distinctly,  and  increased  gradually,  until  the  room  was  full 
of  sound,  as  loud  as  the  full  swell  of  an  organ,  and  it  rolled  slowly  down 
the  stairs,  dying  softly  on  the  ear  in  weird  cadences.  I  am  certain  it  was 
not  produced  by  human  fingers.  "  Mathew  Sewell." 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  223 

I  have  copied  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Sewell 
by  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Lee,  and  dated  July  20th,  1885. 

"  Williams  Bridge,  New  York. 
"  I  do  distinctly  remember  hearing  the  music  before    Lilly's  death, 
and  also  remember  the  impression  it  made  on  us  children  at  the  time,  the 
feeling  of  terror  and  fear  we  had,  at  not  understanding   where  the  music 
came  from  and  what  kind  of  music  it  was." 

[A  personal  interview  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sewell  has  made  evident  to 
me  how  uniquely  impressive  to  them  this  incident  was.  The  music  ap- 
peared to  issue  from  a  particular  corner  of  the  room,  which  was  not  one 
formed  by  external  walls ;  and  the  nature  of  the  sound  makes  it  hard  to 
explain  as  an  objective  efiect,  due  to  air  or  water ;  while  the  fact  that 
one  person  present,  with  sensitive  ears,  did  not  share  the  experience  seems 
almost  fatal  to  such  an  explanation.  The  sound  lasted  on  each  occasion 
not  more  than  half  a  minute.  The  little  girl  died  on  the  Tuesday  evening,  j 
If  the  hallucination  be  connected  with  her  abnormal  condition,  the  incident 
(like  case  335  above)  would  belong  to  the  succeeding  section.] 

A  further  example  of  the  musical  class,  with  even  more  complete 
attestation,  has  on  account  of  its  length  been  placed  in  the 
Supplement  (p.  639) :  the  following  shorter  specimen  may  be  given 
here.  The  late  Mrs.  Yates,  of  54,  Columbia  Square,  E.,  wrote  in  1884: — ■ 

(338)  "In  1870  I  lost  a  dearly  loved  daughter,  21  years  old  ;  she  died  h*^L^ 
at  noonday,  of  aneurism.  At  night,  my  only  other  daughter  was  with  me, 
when  all  at  once  we  both  assumed  a  listening  attitude,  and  we  both  heard 
the  sweetest  of  spiritual  music,  although  it  seemed  so  remote,  my  ears  were 
hurt  listening  so  intently.  Till  some  hours  after,  my  dear  girl  and  I  were 
afraid  to  inquire  of  each  other  had  we  heard  it,  for  fear  we  were  deluded,  but 
we  found  both  had  been  so  privileged  and  blessed." 

To  our  request  for  Mr.  Yates's  testimony,  Mrs.  Yates  replied  : — ■ 

"  Mr.  Yates  perfectly  well  remembers  how  myself  and  the  daughter 
who  is  now  living  were  affected  by  hearing  music  that  night,  such  as 
mortals  never  sang ;  but  I  have  to  write  for  him,  he  being  troubled  by  inca- 
pacity of  his  right  hand."  (Signed  as  correct)   "  George  Yates." 

The  daughter  wrote  as  follows,  on  Oct.  9,  1884  : — 

"31,  St.  John's  Street  Road,  Clerkenwell,  E.G. 

"  I  can  speak  with  certainty  respecting  the  beautiful  music  my  dear 
mother  and  I  heard  on  the  26th  November,  1870.  I  shall  never  forget  it; 
we  were  both  afraid  to  speak,  it  was  so  exquisite.  "  A.  Beilby." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Beilby  adds  : — 

"  We  were  living  at  3,  Henry  Street,  Pentonville.  The  two  windows 
in  the  room  were  shut  tight  and  fastened ;  and  as  near  as  I  can  remember, 
it  must  have  been  between  2  and  3  in  the  morning.  The  music  lasted 
several  minutes."  She  further  says  that,  when  the  sounds  began,  her 
mother  exclaimed,  "Anne,  do  you  hear  that  ?  " — so  that  her  niother's  state- 
ment is  not  quite  exact ;  but  she  confirms  the  fact  that  some  hours  passed 
before  they  ventured  to  describe  their  impressions  to  one  another. 

224  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

The  foregoing  instances  may  perhaps  suffice  to  show  that  a  purely 
psychical  account  of  these  joint  experiences — as  due  either  partly  or 
wholly  to  a  thought-transference  between  the  percipients — ^is  at  all 
events  possible  ;  and  that  acceptance  of  the  phenomena  as  genuine,  i.e., 
as  percepts  truly  described,  does  not  imply  any  materiahstic  theory  of 
phantasmal  beings  who  travel  about  through  space  (sometimes  in 
their  carriages)  on  their  own  account.  And  possibly  a  certain  number 
of  my  readers  may  further  agree  with  me  in  supposing  some,  at  any 
rate,  of  these  cases  to  have  been  in  their  inception  purely  subjective, 
and  will  not  feel  the  need  of  invoking  for  them  an  unknown  or 
'post-mortem  "agency,"  however  little  disposed  to  rule  the  possibility 
of  such  agency  out  of  court.  I  cannot,  indeed,  deny  a  certain 
force  to  an  objection  which  Mr.  Myers  urges,^  that  we  know  of 
no  instances  where  a  hallucination  which  can  be  connected  with 
insanity  or  other  distinctly  morbid  conditions  in  the  person  im- 
pressed, and  which  is  thus  quite  clearly  proved  to  be  purely 
subjective,  has  become  collective  in  the  way  supposed.  But  then 
neither  do  we  know  of  instances  where  a  person  in  one  of  these 
morbid  conditions  has  exercised  any  other  form  of  telepathic  in- 
fluence. We  have  no  instances  of  telepathic  impressions  of  the 
deaths  of  dying  lunatics.  The  ultimate  conditions  of  telepathic 
agency  are  as  little  known  to  us  as  the  ultimate  conditions  of  telepathic 
percipience  ;  and  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  such  as  those  of 
the  preceding  examples,  differ  so  greatly  in  their  nature  and  ostensible 
conditions  from  the  types  of  hallucination  to  which  Mr.  Myers  points 
as  never  transferred,  that  it  seems  rash  to  assume  that  they  may  not 
differ  also  in  the  particular  point  of  transferability.  At  any  rate, 
whatever  the  difficulties  of  that  view,  it  is  one  that  may  be 
provisionally  entertained  by  those  who  see  equal  difficulties  in  any 
other  ;  and  whatever  my  own  surmises  as  to  future  discovery  may  be, 
in  the  present  state  of  the  evidence  I  feel  as  much  bound  here  to 
press  the  theory  of  thought-transference,  before  admitting  causes  of 
an  obscurer  kind,  as  in  a  former  chapter  to  press  the  theory  of 
unconscious  physical  indications  before  admitting  the  reality  of 
thought-transference. 

The  degree  in  which  the  infectious  character  may  exist  is  very  hard 
indeed  to  determine ;  for  the  majority  of  hallucinations  (purely  sub- 
jective and  telepathic  alike)  occur  to  persons  who  are  alone — silence 
and  recueillement  being  apparently  favourable  conditions;    and  we 

1  See  pp.  280-2. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  225. 

have  no  means  of  knowing  how  many  of  these  hallucinations  might 
have  been  shared  by  some  one  else,  if  some  one  else  had  happened  to 
be  present  at  the  time.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that,  taking  the 
whole  class  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  cases  where  the 
experience  has  been  shared  by  a  second  person  appear  to  be  more 
numerous  than  those  where  a  second  person  has  been  present,  awake, 
and  rightly  situated,  and  has  not  shared  the  experience.  Nor,  again, 
can  I  at  all  adequately  explain  why  these  phenomena  should  be  a  form 
of  mental  impression  specially  liable  to  spread  to  neighbouring  minds. 
That  those  of  them  which  are  telepathically  produced  in  the  first 
instance  should  have  a  tendency  to  spread  in  this  way  may  appear, 
perhaps,  less  remarkable,  if  we  remember  that  a  telepathic  impulse,  as 
such,  seems  sometimes  to  have  very  distinct  and  peculiar  physiological 
effects ;  witness  Mrs.  Newnham's  exhaustion  (Vol.  I.,  p.  64)  in  experi- 
ments where  the  ideas  conveyed  were  in  themselves  of  a  quite 
unexciting  sort.  But  as  regards  the  transference  in  purely  subjective 
cases,  all  I  can  suggest  is  that  sensory  hallucinations,  and  especially  the 
occasional  hallucinations  of  sane  and  healthy  people,  are  to  begin  with 
and  in  themselves  very  peculiar  things  ;  and  that  a  fresh  peculiarity, 
meeting  us  in  something  that  we  do  not  completely  see  round 
or  understand,  is  less  staggering  than  if  it  met  us  in  something 
of  which  we  have  held  our  knowledge  to  be  complete.  At  any 
rate  the  fact,  if  admitted,  that  purely  subjective  hallucinations  may 
spontaneously  become  collective,  greatly  simplifies  the  consideration 
of  the  collective  cases  whose  origin  is  traceable  to  an  external  "  agent." 
The  appearance  of  an  absent  person's  figure  to  several  spectators  at 
once  has  had  in  it  something  specially  startling ;  and  when 
associated  with  the  idea  of  death,  it  has  almost  inevitably  sug- 
gested a  material  or  "  etherial "  spirit — an  independent  travel- 
ling ghost.  But  as  soon  as  the  experience  is  analysed,  it  is  found 
to  involve  nothing  new  or  antagonistic  to  scientific  conceptions. 
In  being  connected  with  the  absent  person,  it  is  merely  on  a  par  with 
other  specimens  of  telepathy — e.g.,  many  of  those  cited  in  the 
preceding  chapters  :  in  being  collective,  it  is  merely  on  a  par  with 
other  specimens  of  hallucination — e.g.,  some  of  those  already  cited  in 
this  chapter.  Still,  though  a  telepathic  impulse  from  an  absent 
person  may  not  be  an  essential  condition,  it  may  be,  and  I  believe  is, 
an  exceptionally  favourable  condition,  for  a  collective  hallucination. 
And  I  now  proceed  to  the  final  group  of  examples,  of  which  that 
condition  is  the  distinguishing  mark. 

VOL.    II.  Q 

226  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

§  6.  I  will  begin  the  list  with  the  auditory  class.     The  following 

account  is    from  Mr.  J.  Wood  Beilby,  of  Redbank  Cottage,  Elgin 

Road,  Beechworth,  Victoria. 

"October  17th,  1883. 

(339)  "  A  young  lady,  a  friend  of  my  wife's,  staying  with  us  in  the  bush, 
had  gone  some  hours,  on  horseback,  to  our  post-town — some  eight  miles  dis- 
tant— when  my  wife  and  I  in  the  house,  a  servant-man  and  woman  and  my 
adopted  son,  a  youth,  in  an  outside  kitchen,  heard  this  young  lady  scream, 
and  call  out,  '  Oh,  Johnnie  !  Johnnie  ! ' — that  being  my  boy's  name,  he 
being  a  usual  attendant  to  the  fair  equestrian.  All  simultaneously  rushed 
out ;  but  nothing  further  could  be  heard  or  seen  of  the  exclaimant  for 
nearly  an  hour,  when  she  arrived,  and  informed  us  that  at  a  spot  between 
four  and  five  miles  distant  she  had  to  open  a  gate.  Trying  to  do  this 
without  dismounting,  she  leaned  over  it  from  her  side-saddle  to  undo  a 
sort  of  hasp.  Her  horse  took  fright  at  something  and  bounded  aside, 
leaving  her,  happily,  detached  from  him,  hanging  over  the  gate.  She  said 
she  shrieked  for  help,  and  fancied  '  Johnnie '  was  behind,  but  got  extri- 
cated— I  forget  how — and  her  horse  caught.  She  remounted,  and  came 
on  to  us  without  injury  but  the  fright.  It  was  absolutely  impossible  her 
natural  voice  could  have  been  heard  over  a  forest  country  intervening  for 
even  one-third  of  the  distance.  The  strange  thing  to  me  is  that  others,  not 
so  specially  gifted  with  magnetic  impressions  as  I  am,  should  have 
simultaneously  and  distinctly  heard  the  ejaculation.  All  instantly  acted 
a  reply,  going  out  of  the  several  houses  which  they  were  in  at  the  time, 
and  making  for  an  entrance  gate,  expecting  to  find  the  lady  in  some 
difiiculty  close  at  hand ;  and  all  were  astonished  that  she  was  not  even 
in  view  upon  an  extensive  plain,  skirted  by  the  forest-land  she  had 
to  traverse.  "  J.  Wood  Beilby." 

Mrs.  Beilby  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  I  perfectly  recollect  the  voice  being  heard,  as  narrated  above  by  my 
husband.     I  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  the  narration. 

"  Catherine  W.  Beilby." 

In  another  account,  written  on  January  28fch,  1886,  and  signed  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beilby,  it  is  more  clearly  brought  out  that  the  young  lady. 
Miss  Snell,  actually  called  out  the  name,  "  Johnnie,  Johnnie."  The  only 
point  of  difference  between  the  two  accounts  is  that  the  second,  instead  of 
saying  that  all  four  persons  rushed  out  simultaneously,  states  that  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Beilby  went  out  and  called  to  the  servants  that  Miss  Snell  had 
returned,  and  that  "  they  said  they  heard  her  call,  and  immediately  went 
to  the  gate  of  entrance  to  the  homestead,"  but  found  no  one  there. 

Mr.  Beilby  further  adds  : — 

"  The  homestead  is  isolated  from  any  other  residence,  some  3  miles ; 
and  no  one  was  about  at  the  time,  except  the  servants  and  the  employers 
in  separate  but  closely  adjacent  buildings."  He  implies  that  he  has  had  no 
other  auditory  hallucination. 

The  next  account,  which  was  first  received  by  the  Rev.  W. 
Stainton  Moses  from  an  intimate  friend  of  the  agent's,  was  revised 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  227 

by  his  parents,  the  percipients,  who  have  since  again  read  it  over  and 

pronounced  it  correct. 

"1881. 

(340)  "  About  two  years  ago  W.  L.  left  England  for  America.  IS^ine 
months  since,  he  married,  and  hoped  to  bring  his  wife  home  to  see  his 
mother,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached.  On  February  4th,  however, 
he  was  taken  with  sudden  illness,  which  terminated  fatally  on  the  12th, 
about  8  p.m.  On  that  night,  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after  the 
parents  of  W.  L.  had  retired  to  rest  in  England,  the  mother  heard  the 
clear  voice  of  her  son  speaking.  Her  husband  who  also  heard  it,  asked 
his  wife  if  it  was  she  who  was  speaking.  Neither  of  them  had  been  asleep, 
and  she  replied,  '  No  !  Keep  quiet ! '  The  voice  continued,  '  As  I  cannot 
come  to  England,  mother,  I  have  come  now  to  see  you.'  At  this  time 
both  parents  believed  their  son  to  be  in  perfect  health  in  America,  and 
were  daily  expecting  a  letter  to  announce  his  return  home.  A  note  was 
made  of  this  very  startling  occurrence  ;  and  when  a  fortnight  since  news  of 
the  son's  death  arrived,  it  was  found  to  correspond  with  the  date  on  which 
the  spirit-voice  ^  had  announced  his  presence  in  England.  The  widow  said 
that  the  preparations  for  departure  had  nearly  been  completed,  and  that 
her  husband  showed  much  anxiety  to  get  to  England  and  see  his  inother.^^ 

[Unfortunately  the  percipients  in  this  case  dislike  the  subject,  and  it 
has  been  thought  better  not  to  press  them  with  further  inquiries.  Other- 
wise we  should  of  course  have  ascertained  whether  or  not  they  had  ever 
had  other  hallucinations.] 

The  next  account  is  from  Commander  T.  W.  Aylesbury  (late  of 

the  Indian  Navy),  of  Sutton,  Surrey.     The  case,  at  first  sight,  may 

seem  as  if  it  belonged   to   the  reciprocal  class  ;  but  Commander 

Aylesbury's  vision  did   not   include   enough   detail  to  justify  us  in 

regarding  it  as  other  than  subjective,  the  scene  being  apparently  such 

as  he  might  naturally  have  conjured  up. 

"December,  1882. 

(341)  "The  writer,  when  13  years  of  age,  was  capsized  in  a  boat,  when 
landing  on  the  Island  of  Bally,  east  of  Java,  and  was  nearly  drowned. 
On  coming  to  the  surface,  after  being  repeatedly  submerged,  the  boy  called 
his  mother.  This  amused  the  boat's  crew,  who  spoke  of  it  afterwards,  and 
jeered  him  a  good  deal  about  it.  Months  after,  on  arrival  in  England,  the 
boy  went  to  his  home,  and  while  telling  his  mother  of  his  narrow  escape, 
he  said,  '  While  I  was  under  water,  I  saw  you  all  sitting  in  this  room  ;  you 
were  working  something  white.  I  saw  you  all — mother,  Emily,  Eliza,  and 
Ellen.'  His  mother  at  once  said,  '  Why  yes,  and  I  heard  you  cry  out  for 
me,  and  I  sent  Emily  to  look  out  of  the  window,  for  I  remarked  that 
something  had  happened  to  that  poor  boy.'  The  time,  owing  to  the 
diiference  of  E.  longitude,  corresponded  with  the  time  when  the  voice  was 
heard." 

Commander  Aylesbury  adds  in  another  letter  : — 

"  I  saw  their  features  (my  mother's  and  sisters'),  the  room   and  the 

See  p.  48,  note. 
VOL.    II.  Q    2 

228  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

furniture,  particularly  the  old-fashioned  Venetian  blinds.  My  eldest  sister 
was  seated  next  to  my  mother." 

Asked  as  to  the  time  of  the  accident,  Commander  Aylesbury  says  : — 

"  I  think  the  time  must  have  been  very  early  in  the  morning. 
I  remember  a  boat  capsized  the  day  before,  and  washed  up.  The  mate  said 
we  would  go  and  bring  her  off  in  the  morning,  but  the  exact  time  I  cannot 
remember.  It  was  a  terrible  position,  and  the  surf  was  awful.  We  were 
knocked  end  over  end,  and  it  was  the  most  narrow  escape  I  ever  had — and 
I  have  had  many ;  but  this  one  was  so  impressed  on  my  mind  with  the 
circumstances — the  remarks  and  jeers  of  the  men, —  '  Boy,  what  was  you 
calling  for  your  mother  for'?  Do  you  think  she  could  pull  you  out  of 
Davey  Jones'  locker,'  &c.,  with  other  language  I  cannot  use." 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  written  to  Commander 
Aylesbury  by  one  of  his  sisters,  and  forwarded  to  us,  in  1883  : — 

"  I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  you  mention  in  your  letter  (the 
voice  calling  '  Mother '  )  ;  it  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind,  I  shall 
never  forget  it.  We  were  sitting  quietly  at  work  one  evening ;  it  was 
about  9  o'clock.  I  think  it  must  have  been  late  in  the  summer  as  we  had 
left  the  street  door  open.  We  first  heard  a  faint  cry  of  '  Mother';  we  all 
looked  up,  and  said  to  one  another,  '  Did  you  hear  that  ?  Someone  cried 
out  "  Mother." '  We  had  scarcely  finished  speaking,  when  the  voice  again 
called,  '  Mother '  twice  in  quick  succession,  the  last  cry  a  frightened, 
agonising  cry.  We  all  started  up,  and  mother  said  to  me,  '  Go  to  the  door 
and  see  what  is  the  matter.'  I  ran  directly  into  the  street  and  stood  some 
few  minutes,  but  all  was  silent  and  not  a  person  to  be  seen  ;  it  was  a  lovely 
evening,  not  a  breath  of  air.  Mother  was  sadly  upset  about  it.  I 
remember  she  paced  the  room,  and  feared  that  something  had  happened 
to  you.  She  wrote  down  the  date  the  next  day,  and  when  you  came  home 
and  told  us  how  near  you  had  been  drowned,  and  the  time  of  day,  father 
said  it  would  be  about  the  time  9  o'clock  would  be  with  us.  I  know  the 
date  and  the  time  corresponded." 

[The  difierence  of  time  at  the  two  places  is  a  little  more  than 
7  hours  ;  consequently  9  in  the  evening  in  England  would  correspond 
with  "  very  early  in  the  morning  "  of  the  next  day  at  the  scene  of  the 
accident.  But  the  incident  happened  too  long  ago  for  memory  to  be 
trusted  as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.] 

In  the  next  case,  though  the  sound  heard  was  apparently  vocal, 
it  was  not  articulate ;  and  it  can  scarcely  be  pronounced  impossible 
that  such  an  effect  might  be  produced  by  bubbling  air,  or  some  other 
local  cause.  The  coincidence,  however,  appears  to  have  been  very 
close,  though  perhaps  not  so  absolutely  precise  as  is  alleged ;  and  the 
form  of  impression  is  not  without  analogy  (see  e.g.,  case  288  above). 
The  account  is  signed  by  one  of  the  percipients,  but  is  in  the  words  of 
her  son,  Mr.  W.  R.  Weyer,  of  7,  Willis  Street,  St.  Paul's,  Norwich. 

"June,  1883. 
(342)   "  At  the  time  that  this  occurrence  took  place,  my  mother's  brother 

xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  229 

was  lying  in  a  dangerous  condition,  suffering  from  a  complication  of 
disorders,  together  with  an  old  wound  received  in  the  Crimea  some  time 
previous ;  consequently  at  that  time  my  parents'  minds  were  in  a  great  state 
of  anxiety.  It  was  on  the  night  of  July  6th,  1865  ;  my  parents  were  retir-  V 
ing  to  rest  at  a  somewhat  late  hour,  when  they  were  both  suddenly  startled  -h 
by  a  sound  of  three  distinct  sobs  as  (according  to  my  mother's  experience) 
of  a  person  dying.  My  father  immediately  arose,  procured  a  light,  and  a 
thorough  search  was  made,  but  with  no  success.  On  again  retiring,  the 
sobs  were  again  repeated,  this  time  in  a  perfectly  clear  and  distinct 
manner.^  My  mother  then  noted  the  time,  which  was  then  10.50  p.m., 
remarking  at  the  same  time  that  we  should  hear  bad  news.  After  making 
another  search  they  again  retired  to  rest,  the  sobs  being  heard  no  more. 

"  On  the  next  day  my  mother  received  a  letter  bearing  the  Chatham 
post-mark,  stating  that  her  brother,  David  Mackenzie  Annison,  had  died  at 
Chatham  Hospital  on  the  night  of  July  the  5th,  at  10.50,  being  the  exact 
time  that  the  sobs  were  heard  by  my  parents. 

"William  E,obt.  Wbyer." 
[Signed  as  correct  by  Mrs.  Weyer,  the  surviving  witness] 

"Maria  E.  Wbyer." 

Mr.  Weyer,  the  father,  died  a  year  after  the  occurrence.  In  answer 
to  inquiries,  Mr.  W.  R.  Weyer  adds  : — 

"  My  parents  informed  my  cousin  and  aunt  (who  is  now  deceased)  of 
the  circumstance,  before  she  received  the  letter;  and  my  aunt,  who  is  just 
dead,  remembered  the  circumstance  quite  well.  My  grandmother  often 
used  to  mention  it.  I  have  appealed  to  my  cousin  to  write  her  recollection 
of  the  incident,  but  I  cannot  at  present  persuade  her  to  do  so." 

In  conversation  Mrs.  Weyer  stated  that  there  were  no  water-pipes 
near  the  room,  and  that  the  sound  seemed  startlingly  near — close  to  the 
head  of  the  bed.  She  is  not  at  all  predisposed  to  alarms  or  fancies,  and 
has  never  had  any  other  hallucination — unless  we  are  to  reckon  as  such  a 
startling  sound  of  knocks  which  others  also  heard,  and  for  which  no 
external  cause  could  be  discovered.  The  idea  which  she  expressed  that 
the  sounds  in  the  present  case  were  premonitory  of  bad  news,  since  it  was 
not  founded  on  any  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  evidence  for  telepathic 
occurrences  as  facts  in  Nature,  indicates,  no  doubt,  an  uncritical  acceptance 
of  marvels.  But  the  only  question  for  us  is  how  far  such  a  habit  of  mind  , 
may  have  affected  the  evidence  to  the  facts  ;  and  my  strong  impression  is  , 
that  it  has  not  appreciably  affected  it.  We  may  regard  it  as  probable, 
however,  that  the  sobs  were  not  described  as  like  those  "  of  a  person 
dying "  until  after  the  fact  of  the  death  was  realised. 

The  following  is  the  result  of  an  independent  inquiry  as  to  the  time  of 
death. 

1  As  regards  the  repetition,  see  p.  105.  As  to  the  three  sobs,  in  examining  a  large 
mass  of  evidence  respecting  abnormal  phenomena  (and  especially  second-hand  accounts), 
one  finds  this  number  recurring  with  somewhat  noticeable  frequency — which  at  any  rate 
suggests  unconscious  modification  of  the  facts.  Nor  need  we  assume  any  specially 
superstitious  habit  of  mind  on  the  part  of  the  witness,  to  find  it  natural  that,  at  the 
points  where  memory  is  hazy,  slight  resulting  errors  should  take  lines  which  are  (so 
to  speak)  marked  out  for  them  by  literary  or  religious  associations. 

230  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

"  Melville  Hospital,  Chatham. 
"July  18th,  1885. 

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  asking  to  be  informed  of  the  exact  hour  of  the 
death  of  David  Mackenzie  Annison,  I  beg  to  state  that  there  was  a  David 
Annison,  chief  stoker,  aged  38,  admitted  into  this  hospital  26th  June, 
1865,  from  H.M.S.  '  Cumberland.'  He  was  suffering  from  chronic  liver 
disease  and  jaundice.  He  died  at  11.35  p.m.,  on  the  5th  July,  1865,  and 
his  friends  took  his  body  away  to  Sheerness. 

"  In  case  of  a  death  in  this  establishment,  the  body  is  seen  by  the 
medical  ofl&cer  on  duty,  who  Aimse//' notifies  on  the  man's  ticket  the  hour 
and  minute  of  his  decease.  It  was  from  this  document  I  gathered  the 
information  you  required.  u  Belgrave  Ninnis,  M.D. 

"(Deputy  Inspector-General.)" 

With  respect  to  this  point,  Mr.  Weyer  writes,  on  August  7th,  1885  : — 

"  In  reference  to  the  mistake  regarding  the  time,  I  have  consulted  my 
mother  upon  that  point,  and  she  asserts  that  she  might  possibly  be 
mistaken,  but  of  this  fact  she  is  most  positive,  viz.,  that  the  time  she  noted 
on  that  night  exactly  corresponded  with  the  time  given  in  the  message  which 
arrived  next  day  ;  this,  she  says,  there  is  no  mistake  about.  My  mother 
felt  almost  certain  that  the  time  was  10.50,  but  as  it  occurred  so  long  ago 
she  is  not  likely  to  have  it  on  record  ;  therefore  she  thinks  that  the  medical 
official  report  would  be  the  most  reliable." 

The  percipients  here  are  described  as  having  been  in  great  anxiety. 
We  have  seen  grounds  for  rejecting  from  the  telepathic  evidence 
instances  where  this  condition  has  existed  on  the  part  of  a  single 
percipient  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  508-9) ;  but  where  two  are  affected  the  case  is 
different.  For,  even  if  the  experience  of  one  was  purely  subjective 
in  origin,  it  would  be  extravagant  to  suppose  that  of  the  other  to  have 
taken  place  by  accident  at  the  same  moment ;  so  that  there  would  at 
least  have  been  a  "  psychical "  phenomenon — a  transferred  hallucina- 
tion. But  in  the  present  instance  there  is  some  reason  for  going 
beyond  this,  and  supposing  a  telepathic  origin  to  the  experience. 
For  the  sort  of  sound  heard  is  scarcely  a  likely  one  for  anxiety  to 
suggest;  and,  moreover, in  no  case  could  the  hypothesis  of  a  joint 
rapport  of  the  agent  with  two  percipients  seem  more  in  place  than 
where  the  two  are  his  near  relatives,  whose  minds  are  already  similarly 
and  fully  occupied  with  him. 

I  will  add  a  couple  of  specimens  of  the  non- vocal  type.  In  the 
first,  the  hallucination  presents  a  curiously  close  connection  with  the 
probable  idea  of  the  agent  at  the  moment.     The  account  is  from  Mrs. 

Paget,  of  Famham,  Surrey. 

"June  5th,  1884. 
(343)   "  A  man-servant,  who  had  lived  with  us  from  a  child,  and  who 
was  a  real  friend,  fell  into  a  consumption,  and  thinking  that  the  climate 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  231 

of  Ventnor  might  prolong  his  life  for  some  months,  we  sent  him  to  St. 
Catharine's  Home  in  September,  1880.  On  the  8th  of  October,  I  received 
a  letter  from  the  Sister-in-charge,  saying  that  Arthur  Dunn  was  decidedly- 
worse,  but  that  the  doctor  thought  there  was  no  immediate  danger,  and 
therefore  she  did  not  think  I  need  go  to  Ventnor  at  once.  I  therefore 
wrote  to  say  I  would  be  there  on  the  following  Monday,  when  I  hoped  to 
be  able  to  stay  with  him  to  the  last.  That  morning  I  said  to  my  girls, 
'  I  really  must  remember  to  speak  to  the  new  servant  about  putting  out 
the  gas  upstairs  at  half -past  10,  for  since  poor  Arthur  left  us,  it  has  not 
been  put  out  punctually,  and  even  some  nights  the  burner  close  to  my 
bedroom  and  my  eldest  girl's  dressing-room  has  been  alight  all  night.' 

"  That  same  evening  was  very  warm,  and  my  daughter  and  myself  both 
left  our  doors  open,  in  order  to  be  able  to  talk  after  we  went  upstairs  (the 
gas-burner  being  close  to  our  rooms).  Whilst  we  were  both  saying  our 
prayers,  the  clock  struck  half-past  10,  and  at  that  moment  we  heard  a 
man's  heavy  step  along  the  passage,  which  stopped  at  the  gas-burner,  and 
then  we  heard  the  footsteps  retiring.  Almost  at  the  same  moment  my 
daughter  and  myself  came  to  our  respective  doors  and  exclaimed,  '  Why, 
the  man  did  not  put  out  the  gas  after  all.  How  like  his  step  sounded  to 
poor  Arthur's  heavy  tread.' 

"  The  next  morning  I  received  a  telegram  from  the  Sister-in-charge  at 
St.  Catharine's  Home,  saying,  '  All  was  over  last  night.'  I  went  down  to 
Yentnor  at  once  to  make  arrangements,  and  in  telling  Sister  Mary  Martha 
how  I  grieved  that  I  had  not  started  for  Yentnor  before,  she  remarked, 
'We  did  not  think  there  was  immediate  danger,  and  his  mind  was 
wandering  so  much  that  day  that  he  was  hardly  conscious.  It  was  curious 
to  see  what  form  his  wandering  took,  for,  after  he  had  been  very  silent 
for  some  hours,  the  clock  struck  half -past  10,  when  he  raised  himself  in 
bed  and  said  distinctly,  *  The  clock  has  struck,  I  must  go  and  put  out  the 
gas,'  and  fell  back  and  died  immediately. 

"  I  ought  to  mention  that  punctuality  had  been  a  perfect  mania  with 
him.  He  was  never,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  three  minutes  late  for  any- 
thing he  was  ordered  to  do,  and  he  was  most  devotedly  attached  to  us  and 
our  home.  "  Frances  Paget." 

Miss  Paget  (now  Mrs.  P.  Hanham)  wrote  as  follows,  on  June  11, 1884: — ■ 

"  I  can  only  most  emphatically  confirm  my  mother's  statement.  I 
distinctly  heard  the  '  footsteps '  as  described  by  her,  and  it  happened  at 
half-past  10  at  night,  the  exact  time,  as  we  heard  afterwards,  that  our 
poor  man-servant  died.  I  may  mention  that  I  questioned  our  new  man- 
servant in  the  morning  as  to  whether  he  had  not  been  upstairs  on  the 
previous  night ;  but  it  turned  out  that  he  had  forgotten  the  orders  given 
him  to  turn  out  the  gas,  and  had  not  been  upstairs.  The  footsteps,  as  I 
remarked  at  the  time,  were  exactly  similar  to  those  of  poor  Arthur  Dunn, 
and  you  may  judge  of  my  surprise  when,  on  my  mother's  return  from  the 
funeral,  she  told  us  about  her  conversation  with  the  Sister,  who  was  with 
him  at  the  last,  and  his  last  words  having  been,  '  The  clock  has  struck,  I 
must  go  and  put  out  the  gas.' 

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  : — 

(1)  "The  occurrence  happened  here,  and  it  was  on  October  8th,  1880, 
as  I  have  since  found  on  referring  to  a  diary. 

232  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

(2)  "  Neither  my  mother  nor  myself  ever  remember  to  have  had  any 
hallucinations  of  any  sort,  before  or  since.  "  Gertrude  F.  Paget." 

[The  diary,  which  I  have  seen,  gives  the  date  of  the  death  only.  Miss 
Paget's  meaning  was  that  this  was  fixed  on  their  minds  next  day  as 
having  happened  on  October  8th,  on  which  day — as  they  could  not  then 
be  mistaken  in  recollecting — the  sounds  had  been  heard.] 

To  a  suggestion  that  the  steps  might  have  been  those  of  a  heavy-footed 
housemaid,  Mrs.  Paget  replied  : — 

"  I  can  positively  affirm  that  the  housemaid  did  not  come  upstairs  on 
the  night  of  my  servant's  death  ;  for  that  point  was  inquired  into  at  the 
time." 

The  Sister-in-charge  at  St.  Catharine's  Home,  Yentnor,  writes  as 
follows,  on  March  6,  1885  :— 

"Arthur  Dunn  died  at  10.30  p.m.  on  the  8th  of  October,  1880.  I 
was  with  him  when  he  died ;  he  was  only  with  us  eight  days. 

"Matilda  S.  S.  S.  M." 

Mrs.  Paget's  account  having  been  sent  to  Sister  Matilda,  she  replied  as 
follows,  on  March  9,   1885  :— 

"  Arthur  John  Dunn  was  only  here  eight  days  before  his  death.  I 
nursed  him,  and  was  with  him  when  he  died  on  October  8th.  I  do  not 
recollect  what  Mrs.  Paget  says  at  all ;  all  I  can  remember  was  that  he 
was  in  bed  three  days  ;  his  breathing  was  very  laboured ;  he  had  a  weak 
heart ;  he  was  not  unconscious  at  all ;  he  was  a  very  silent  man,  and 
seldom  spoke,  except  to  answer  any  question  asked.  Just  before  he  died 
he  asked  me  the  time  ;  it  was  half -past  10  ;  his  words  were  :  '  What  is  the 
time  V  I  do  not  think  he  spoke  after.  There  was  nothing  about  the  gas. 
He  could  not  hear  any  clock  strike,  for  there  is  not  one  in  the  ward  or 
near  it.  Sister  Mary  Martha  was  in  charge  of  the  house  at  the  time,  and 
I  had  the  nursing  of  the  men." 

Sister  Mary  Martha  writes  from  St.  Margaret's,  East  Grinstead,  on 
March  17,  1885  :— 

"  I  regret  that  I  am  quite  unable  to  recall  any  particulars  of  Arthur 
Dunn's  death.  I  remember  the  young  man  perfectly  well ;  he  was  at  the 
Home  only  about  eight  days,  and  died  almost  suddenly.  He  suffered  from 
heart  disease  as  well  as  consumption.  He  was  a  very  nice  fellow,  and  we 
all  liked  him  much.  Mrs.  Paget,  I  remember,  spoke  in  the  highest  terms 
of  him.  My  impression  is  that  his  end  was  very  sudden — too  much  so  for 
any  last  words.  u  Sister  Mary  Martha." 

[It  will  be  observed  that  there  are  two  discrepancies  between  Mrs. 
Paget's  and  the  Sisters'  account.  The  point  as  to  the  way  in  which  the 
man  ascertained  the  time — whether  by  hearing  the  clock  strike  or  by  in 
quiry  of  the  Sister — is  not  in  itself  important :  the  point  about  his 
mention  of  the  gas,  though  not  vital,  has  more  importance.  I  have 
thoroughly  talked  over  the  matter  with  Mrs.  Paget  and  her  daughter. 
Mrs.  Paget  is  quite  clear  in  her  recollection  of  Sister  Mary  Martha's 
statement ;  but  she  does  not  recollect  having  heard  or  realised  who  it  was  to 
whom  the  man  made  the  remark.  The  daughter  is  equally  clear  about  her 
mother's  mention  of  this  detail  at  the  time.     Had  there  been  a   consider- 

xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  233 

able  interval  between  Mrs.  Paget's  conversation  with  the  Sister  and  her 
narration  of  it  to  someone  else,  it  would  not  be  hard  to  suppose  that  the 
incident  of  the  man's  asking  the  hour,  combined  with  her  own  and  her 
daughter's  experience  at  that  exact  time,  had  gradually  led  to  her 
imagining  the  crowning  detail  of  his  mentioning  the  gas ;  but  that  this 
detail,  if  it  was  not  reported  to  her,  should  have  got  immediately  im-  ^  . 
pressed  upon  her  mind  as  though  it  had  been  reported,  seems  decidedly  ' ; 
less  likely  than  that  it  has  slipped  from  the  memory  of  the  Sisters,  for 
whom  it  would  have  no  special  interest,  since  Mrs.  Paget  did  not  tell  them 
what  had  occurred  at  home.  And  there  is  a  further  point  which  tells,  I 
think,  decidedly  in  favour  of  this  view.  On  the  supposition  that  the  man 
made  the  remark  about  the  gas,  it  is  very  easy  to  see  how  Mrs.  Paget 
may  have  made  the  mistake  about  his  hearing  the  clock  strike ;  for  the 
remark  would  become  the  fact  of  interest,  and  the  manner  in  which  the 
man  ascertained  the  time  would  retain  no  significance.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  only  thing  reported  to  Mrs.  Paget  had  been  that  the  man  asked 
and  was  told  what  the  time  was,  that  would  have  served  completely  to 
stamp  the  coincidence,  and  to  suggest  the  direction  of  the  man's  thoughts, 
and  would  thus  have  given  a  quite  sufficient  impressiveness  and  complete- 
ness to  the  story.  Briefly,  the  introduction  of  the  clock,  on  the  first 
hypothesis,  seems  more  easily  comprehensible  than  the  introduction  of  the 
gas,  on  the  second. 

Mrs.  Paget  showed  me   the   scene   of  the  incident.     The  gas  burner 
is  at  the  end    of    a  long  passage,  just  outside  her    and    her    daughter's 
rooms.     The  house  is  a  very  quiet  one,  standing  in    grounds    far    back 
from    the  road ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine    any  sort    of    real    sound 
that  could  possibly  have  been  mistaken  for    heavy  steps   twice   traversing 
the  length  of  the  passage,  the  doors  of  both  hearers  (it  will  be  remembered) 
being  open.     Mrs.  Paget  says,  moreover,  that  Arthur   Dunn's  tread  was 
decidedly  peculiar.     That  the  steps  were  not  those  of   the  man-servant  for  ij^^a^ 
the  time  being  was  practically  proved  (apart  from  his  own  assertion  next     «^  ^ 
day)  by  the  fact  that  the  gas   was  not  turned   ofi";  for   he  could    have   no    j^,*^^^^ 
possible  duty  in  that  corner  of  the  house  at  night,   except  to  turn  it  off* ;    «.  ^ 
and  there  was  no  other  man  in  the  house.     Mrs.  Paget  and  her  daughter     7*^  ^. 
both  confirmed  the  statement  that  they  have  had  no  other  hallucinations.    ■^'"A'' 
They  are  far  from  being    credulous  or  superstitious    witnesses ;  but  the 
strangeness  of  this  incident  made  an  extremely  strong  impression  upon 
them.] 

In  the  next  case  the  coincidence  seems  again  to  have  been  close  %  Uff  i. 
to  within  a  very  few  minutes  ;  but  the  form  which  the  hallucination  fr^^^ 
(if  it  was  one)  took  had  no  special  connection  with  anything  that  we 
can  conceive  to  have  been  present  to  the  agent's  mind.  Bells  are, 
however,  a  not  uncommon  form  of  purely  subjective  impression.^  And 
if  the  principle  of  telepathic  hallucinations  be  granted,  one  would 
naturally  expect  that  the  rudimentary  specimens  of  that  class — 
specimens  which  do  not  suggest  any  conscious  idea  of  the  agent,  but 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  503,  and  above,  p.  127,  note. 

234  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

are  projected,  as  it  were,  blindly  under  the  telepathic  impulse — should 
follow  the  ordinary  lines  of  hallucinations  in  general.  The  account  is 
from  the  Misses  Lafone,  of  Hanworth  Park,  Feltham. 

"January,   1884. 

(344)  "  My  sister  and  I  were  both  much  astonished  at  hearing  our  church 
'  bell  ring  in  a  loud  and  hurried  manner,  at  a  few  minutes  before  7.30,  one 
evening,  when  we  knew  no  service  was  to  take  place.  Our  church  is 
within  5  minutes'  walk  across  fields,  and  all  the  neighbouring  churches  a 
jnile  or  more  ofi".  We  talked  together  of  the  occurrence,  and  mentioned  it 
at  dinner,  but  did  not  connect  it  with  anyone  in  particular.  The  next  day 
we  heard  an  aunt  had  died  at  7.20  the  evening  before,  but  did  not  connect 
I  the  two  facts  until  a  few  days  afterwards,  when  we  made  inquiries,  and 
found  no  one  had  been  in  the  church  at  the  time  we  imagined  the  bell  to 
be  ringing.  This  took  place  19th  September,  1883.  No  one  else  in  the 
house  heard  the  bell." 

The  Times  obituary  confirms  Sept.  19,  1883,  as  the  date  of  death. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Lafone  adds  : — 

"  There  was  no  particular  bond  of  sympathy  betwqen  my  aunt  and  my 
sister  and  myself,  although  we  knew  her  very  well.  We  were  aware  she 
was  seriously  ill,  but  being  very  much  occupied  with  another  subject 
the  evening  she  died,  had  hardly  thought  of  her  at  all.  We  are  not 
conscious  of  ever  before  experiencing  '  auditory  hallucinations.' 

"Mary  E.  Lafone." 
"March  18th,  1884. 

"  My  sister's  account  of  the  bells  we  heard  is  perfectly  correct.  We 
were  dressing  for  dinner  at  7.30,  in  difierent  rooms,  when  I  was  attracted 
by  the  sound  of  the  bells,  as  I  supposed  from  our  church,  ringing  in  a  most 
eccentric  way,  and  having  called  to  my  sister  found  that  she  heard  them 
too.  We  discussed  the  possibility  of  someone  being  shut  in,  as  there  was 
no  service,  and  the  sounds  were  too  irregular  and  too  quick  to  be  tolling  for 
a  death.  We  mentioned  the  subject  downstairs,  and  then  forgot  it,  until 
having  heard  the  following  day  that  our  aunt  had  died  at  7.20,  just  at  the 
time  we  were  listening  to  the  bells.  We  made  inquiries  as  to  whether 
anyone  had  been  in  the  church  at  the  time,  but  could  not  find  that  anyone 
had,  or  that  the  bells  were  heard  by  anyone  besides  ourselves. 

"Jenny  Lafone." 

[I  have  been  to  Hanworth,  and  realised  the  relation  of  the  house  to  the 
village  church,  and  also  to  Feltham  Church.  There  seems  to  be  no 
possibility  whatever  that  the  sound  heard  could  have  proceeded  from  the 
latter,  or  any  more  distant  edifice.  Feltham  Church  lies  more  than 
a  mile  to  the  back  of  the  house  ;  the  intervening  space  is  thickly  clothed 
with  trees  ;  and  the  Misses  Lafone's  windows  look  out  in  the  directly 
opposite  direction.  Miss  Lafone  does  not  recall  that  she  has  ever  so  much 
as  heard  the  Feltham  bell,  even  faintly ;  whereas  the  sounds  on  this 
occasion  appeared  louder  even  than  those  which  the  neighbouring  church- 
bell  usually  produced.  It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  this  neighbouring 
bell  should  have  been  rung  at  this  time  (on  a  week-day  evening  when  there 
is  never  any  service),   and   in  this  eccentric  way ;  and  it  is  even  more 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  235 

unlikely  that,  if  so  rung,  it  should  have  been  unobserved  by  others.  The 
result  of  my  visit  is  that  I  find  it  all  but  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  case 
"was  one  of  collective  hallucination — whether  connected  with  the  death  of 
the  aunt  or  not  is  of  course  a  different  question.] 

I  now  come  to  cases  where  the  sense  of  sight  was  involved.  And 
I  may  begin  with  a  few  specimens  where  the  experiences  of  the 
several  percipients  were  either  not  exactly  simultaneous  or  not 
exactly  similar,  and  where,  therefore,  the  theory  that  they  were 
severally  derived  from  the  agent  receives  some  slight  support.  (Com- 
pare in  this  respect  the  auditory  case,  No.  36.) 

In  the  following  example  the  experience  of  the  second  percipient 

included   an   auditory  as   well  as    a    visual    impression,    and   was, 

moreover,  separated  by  an    interval   of    3  hours   from  that  of  the 

first.     The  narrator   is   Mrs.    Cox,   who   wrote   from  Summer  Hill, 

Queenstown,  Ireland. 

"December  26th,  1883.  ♦< 

(345)  "  On  the  night  of  the  21st  August,  1869,  between  the  hours  of  ,, 
8  and  9  o'clock,  I  was  sitting  in  my  bedroom  in  my  mother's  house  at 
Devonport,  my  nephew,  a  boy  aged  seven  years,  being  in  bed  in  the  next 
room,  when  I  was  startled  by  his  suddenly  running  into  my  room,  and 
exclaiming  in  a  frightened  tone,  '  Oh,  auntie,  I  have  just  seen  my  father 
walking  around  my  bed.'  I  replied,  '  Nonsense,  you  must  have  been 
dreaming.'  He  said,  '  ISTo,  I  have  not,'  and  refused  to  return  to  the  room. 
Finding  that  I  was  unable  to  persuade  him  to  go  back,  I  put  him  in  my 
own  bed.  Between  10  and  111  myself  retired  to  rest.  I  think  about 
an  hour  afterwards,  on  looking  towards  the  fireplace,  I  distinctly  saw,  to  i" 
my  astonishment,  the  form  of  my  brother  seated  in  a  chair,  and  what 
particularly  struck  me  was  the  deathly  pallor  of  his  face.  (My  nephew 
was  at  this  time  fast  asleep.)  I  was  so  frightened,  knowing  that  at  this 
time  my  brother  was  in  Hong  Kong,  China,  that  I  put  my  head  under  the 
bed  clothes.  Soon  after  this  I  plainly  heard  his  voice  calling  me  by 
name  ;  my  name  was  repeated  three  times.  The  next  time  I  looked,  he 
was  gone.  The  following  morning  I  told  my  mother  and  sister  what  had 
occurred,  and  said  I  should  raake  a  note  of  it,  which  I  did.  The  next 
mail  from  China  brought  us  the  sad  intelligence  of  my  brother's  death, 
which  took  place  on  the  21st  August,  1869,  in  the  Harbour  of  Hong 
Kong,  suddenly,  [of  heat-apoplexy].  :"  Minnie  Cox." 

We  have  received  from  the  Admiralty  an  official  confirmation  of  the 
date  of  the  death. 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,   Mr.   Cox  (at  present  Secretary  to  the 
Naval  Commander-in-Chief  at  Devonport)  wrote  : — 

"February  21st,  1884. 
"  As  my  wife  is  too  unwell  to  reply  to  your  letter  she  has  asked  me  to 
state  with  reference  to  your  question  on  the  subject  of  the  appearance  of 
her  brother  to  her,  that : — 

"  As  she  has  no  note  now  in  her  possession,   and  as  her  mother  is 

236  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

dead,  she  cannot  be  positive  as  to  the  hour  at  which  her  brother  died. 
The  circumstance  happened  about  15  years  ago — both  the  persons  she 
mentioned  it  to  are  dead.  All  that  she  can  now  state  positively  is  that 
she  now  believes  it  must  have  been  after  midnight  when  she  saw  the  ap- 
pearance, but  at  the  same  time  she  is  quite  certain  that  her  little  nephew 
came  into  her  room  before  midnight.  She  is  sure  that  afterwards,  when 
the  news  came  from  China,  the  time  corresponded,  but  has  nothing  to 
prove  it.  I  fear  that  she  has  not  sufficient  evidence,  or  in  fact  any 
evidence  now  ;  but  it  is  an  old  story  she  has  often  told  me,  and  I  have  not 
the  slightest  doubt  that  she  did  see  the  appearance.  "  James  Cox." 

In  conversation  Mrs.  Cox  told  me  that  she  was  quite  certain  of  having 
put  down  the  date,  and  compared  it  with  the  date  in  the  letter.  She  has 
never  had  the  slightest  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  The  child 
was  not  in  the  least  given  to  frights,  and  had  no  dread  of  the  dark. 

[If  the  time  either  of  Mrs.  Cox's  or  of  her  nephew's  impression 
coincided  with  that  of  the  death,  the  first  date  in  the  account  is  of  course 
given  wrongly,  as  9  p.m.  in  England  would  correspond  with  about  5  a.m. 
of  the  next  day  at  Hong  Kong.  If  the  first  date  is  right,  then  the  per- 
cipients' experiences  must  have  followed  the  death  by  some  hours.  It 
might  be  suggested  that  Mrs.  Cox's  experience  was  due  to  suggestion 
from  her  nephew.  But  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  a  person  who  has  no 
tendency  to  hallucinations  should  evolve  one  from  what  she  took  to  be  the 
dream  of  a  frightened  child.] 

In  the  next  case,  the  difference  between  the  several  impressions 
was  perhaps  rather  one  of  degree  than  of  kind.  The  account  is  from 
Mr.  T.  N.  Deane,  of  University  Club,  3,  Upper  Merrion  Street, 
Dublin,  and  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  the  E,ev.  J.  N. 

Hoare,  now  vicar  of  Keswick. 

"  1882. 
(346)  "  In  the  year  1851,  on  the  4th  of  June,  I  was  in  a  large  bedroom 
of  a  country  house  in  the  County  Cork.  The  wiadows  of  the  room  faced  the 
River  Lee  ;  both  were  open.  The  air  was  sultry  and  still ;  all  the  inmates 
of  the  house  were  out,  with  the  exception  of  my  wife  and  an  intimate 
friend  (now  dead),  who  were  with  me  in  the  room.  We  sat  on  three  chairs 
near  one  of  the  open  windows,  and  talked  on  ordinary  subjects.  The 
old-fashioned  four-post  bed  occupied  the  side  of  the  room  to  my  right,  and 
the  only  door  (which  was  open)  was  on  my  left.  We  sat  into  the  twilight, 
but  there  was  still  sufficient  light  to  recognise  each  other,  and  see  objects 
pretty  clearly.  A  figure  approached  me  from  the  side  of  the  room  occupied 
by  the  large  bed,  and  apparently  from  the  side  of  it,  moved  directly 
towards  me,  and  placed  its  hand  on  my  shoulder.  It  was  a  female  figure, 
but  I  could  not  recognise  the  features.  I  followed  it  to  the  lobby,  but  did 
not  see  it  again.  I  returned  to  my  companions,  and  asked  them  had  they 
seen  it.  They  replied  in  the  affirmative.  I  said,  '  If  ever  there  was  a 
ghost,  that  was  one.'  That  evening  my  mother  was  seized  with  fatal  illness. 
Next  morning  I  got  a  telegram  stating  that  she  was  in  extremis,  and  for 
hours  before  was  asking  for  me  to  be  sent  for.  On  receipt  of  the  telegram 
I  started  for  Dublin,  and  was  just  in  time  to  see  my  mother  before  her 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  237 

death.     The  first  person  I  met  was  Mr.  Hoare's  father  [deceased],  to  whom 
I  said,  '  My  mother  will  die  !  I  saw  her  last  night.'     "  Thos.  N.  Dbane." 

We  find  from  the  obituary  in  the  Freeman's  Journal  that  Lady  Deane 
died  on  June  5,  1851,  at  Dublin. 

Mrs.  Deane  writes  on  March  7,  1883  : — 

"  I  must  say  I  felt  the  presence  more  than  saw  it,  and  it  certainly  came 
up  to  where  we  (three  friends)  were  sitting,  All  saw  it  or  felt  it ;  in  fact, 
it  was  both,  for  I  could  describe  it  as  a  misty  shadow  passing  through  the 
chamber,  and  went  out  silently.  Of  course  we  did  not  turn  round  until 
we  all  three  said,  '  Was  not  there  some  one  near  the  chair  who  is  gone 
from  the  room  1 '  Then  one  of  our  number  got  up  and  inquired  had  any 
one  been  in,  and  all  were  absent  from  where  we  were — some  downstairs  in 
other  sitting-rooms  reading,  others  in  the  garden,  and  the  servants  at  tea 
in  their  kitchen  ;  then  it  appeared  doubly  odd,  and  it  seized  hold  of  one's 
mind  there  had  been  an  apparition  or  vision.  We  had  been  talking  of  the  1 1 
lady  at  the  time  she  appeared  to  us.  "  Henrietta  Deane." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Deane  says,   "  Neither  my  wife  nor  I  ever 
saw  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  since." 

Here  the  vaguer  form  of  Mrs.  Deane's  impression,  as  compared 
to  that  of  her  husband,  seems  a  good  example  of  rudimentary  or 
arrested  development  (see  p.  73,  note). 

The  following  case  is  one  that  would  not  have  been  included 
here,  but  for  the  favourable  opinion  which  our  colleague,  Mr.  Richard 
Hodgson,  formed  of  the  principal  witness.  The  account  was  written 
down  by  Miss  Atkinson,  of  Park  Head,  Jesmond  Dene,  Newcastle-on- 
Tjrne,  and  is  signed  by  Mrs.  Reed,  of  7,  Miller's  Lane,  Byker  Hill,  New- 
castle-on-Tyne,  the  younger  of  the  two  percipients ;  the  other  is  dead. 

"July,  1884. 

(347)  "  It  was  at  Christmas  time.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Adams  and  their 
daughter  Annie  had  been  spending  the  evening  with  some  friends,  not  far 
from  home.  Annie  (a  girl  of  12  at  the  time),  along  with  another  girl,  was  j|. 
sent  home  to  fetch  something  that  had  been  forgotten.  On  entering  the 
kitchen,  Annie  said  to  the  other  girl,  '  See,  there's  a  man  sitting  by  the 
fireside.'  The  other  girl  said  there  was  nobody  there.  The  two  went  up- 
stairs to  get  what  they  had  been  sent  for,  when  Annie  said  '  There's  the 
man  again.' i  The  other  girl  persisted  that  there  was  nobody  there. 
Having  got  what  was  wanted,  they  returned  to  the  friend's  house.  On 
coming  home  late  at  night,  Mrs.  Adams  said  to  her  husband — '  There's  my 
brother  standing  beside  that  house  ;  don't  you  see  him,  all  in  white  1 ' 
Mr.  Adams  did  not  see  him.  A  day  or  two  afterwards  she  received  a 
letter  to  say  that  her  brother  was  killed  down  the  pit,  the  night  and  the 
hour  corresponding  with  the  time  that  Annie  saw  the  man  (as  she  said) 

1  For  the  feature  of  repetition  in  visual  hallucinations,  see  cases  159,  160,  184,  213, 
240,  503,  519,  540.  In  Vol.  i.,  p.  414,  second  note,  I  mentioned  an  example  in  my  collec- 
tion of  subjective  cases,  for  which  I  am  now  allowed  to  name  Mr.  J.  Champ,  of  High 
Street,  Chelmsford,  as  my  authority.  What  he  saw  (after  a  fatiguing  march)  was  a  gro- 
tesque, parti-coloured  figure,  about  as  wide  as  high,  which  appeared  on  the  wall  of  the 
room,  disappeared,  and  re-appeared  after  an  interval  of  a  few  minutes. 

238  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

sitting  by  her  mother's  hearth.  Annie  had  never  seen  her  uncle,  as  she 
had  always  travelled  from  place  to  place  with  the  regiment,  and  had  never 
been  taken  to  the  colliery  village  where  her  mother's  family  lived. 

"  This  is  a  correct  statement.  "Annie  Reed." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  Reed's  uncle  was 
crushed  by  a  fall  of  stone  in  the  Washington  coal  mine  on  December  29, 
1862  ;  which  confirms  the  first  words  of  the  account. 

Miss  Atkinson  tells  us  that  Mrs.  Adams,  unlike  her  husband,  was  of  a 
superstitious  turn  of  mind.     She  adds  on  July  31,  1884  ; — 

"  I  have  been  to  see  Mrs.  Reed,  but  cannot  say  I  have  gained  much 
information.  She  says  that  the  figure  she  saw  upstairs  was  the  same  as 
she  had  seen  sitting  by  the  fireside  downstairs.  She  cannot  give  any 
definite  information  about  the  girl  who  was  with  her,  except  that  her  name 
was  Sophie  Arnup,  and  that  she  belonged  to  Norwich,  where  the  incident 
occurred.  Mrs.  Reed  does  not  know  whether  she  is  living  or  dead,  or 
whether  married.  Mrs.  Reed  cannot  remember  that  there  were  any 
differences  noted  when  she  and  her  mother  talked  about  what  they  had 
seen.  She  mentioned  about  the  man  in  white  sitting  by  the  fireside,  as 
soon  as  she  reached  the  friend's  house  where  her  mother  was,  and  before 
her  mother  returned.  She  cannot  remember  any  details  about  face  or 
dress,  except  that  the  dress  was  white  ;  she  was  too  frightened  to  observe 
carefully,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  she  is  too  truthful  to  set  her  imagination 
to  work,  and  fancy  she  remembers  what  she  does  not.  This  is  the  only 
hallucination  that  she  ever  had.  "  E.   E.   Atkinson." 

Mr.  Hodgson  writes  in  September,  1884  : — 

"I  have  talked  with  Mr.  Adams  [now  resident  at  144,  High  Street, 
Jarrow-on-Tyne],  who  told  me  the  story  as  given  above.  The  pit  where 
the  brother  was  killed  was  in  the  Durham  district ;  the  figure  was  seen 
at  Norwich.  I  have  also  seen  Mrs.  Reed,  who  first  saw  the  figure,  and 
who  also  told  the  story  as  given  above.  She  impressed  me  as  being 
exceptionally  truthful." 

[We  might  conceive  that  Mrs.  Adams'  hallucination  was  due  to 
apprehensions  caused  by  her  daughter's  account.  But  it  will  be  observed 
that  there  had  been  nothing  in  the  daughter's  account  to  suggest  Mrs. 
Adams'  brother ;  the  point  therefore  that  Mrs.  Adams  mentioned  her 
brother  (which  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt)  is  important.  And  even  if  we 
suppose  that  she  was  given  to  apprehensions  about  this  relative,  which  may 
have  taken  a  superstitious  colour,  this  would  not  explain  the  other  hal- 
lucination, unique  in  her  daughter's  experience,  occurring  on  the  same 
evening.  That  the  impressions  were  hallucinations  and  not  illusions,  is 
strongly  indicated  by  the  fact  that  neither  of  them  was  shared  by  a 
second  person  whose  attention  was  drawn  to  the  appearance  (p.  105, 
second  note).] 

In  the  remaining  visual  cases,  the  impression  seems  to  have  been 
distinct  and  identical  to  all  the  percipients.  I  will  begin  with  a  case 
where  it  is  a  question  whether  a  distant  agent  was  or  was  not  the 
source  of  the  phenomenon  ;  but  where  the  flashing  of  the  hallucina- 
tion from  one  of  the  percipients  to  the  other  seems  specially  well 

L 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  239 

illustrated,  since  the  figure  which  appeared  was  one  which  the 
second  percipient  had  never  seen  in  the  flesh.  The  account  is  first- 
hand, though  written  in  the  third  person.  It  is  from  Mrs.  Elgee, 
of  18,  Woburn  Road,  Bedford. 

"March  1st,  1885. 

(348)  "In  the  month  of  November,  1864,  being  detained  in  Cairo,  on 
my  way  out  to  India,  the  following  curious  circumstance  occurred  to  me  :- 

"  Owing  to  an  unusual  influx  of  travellers,  I,  with  the  young  lady  under  ■!^'- 
my  charge  (whom  we  will  call  D.)  and  some  other  passengers  of  the  outward-  ^^  *""  ^j 
bound  mail  to  India,  had  to  take  up  our  abode  in  a  somewhat  unfrequented  "^^^ 
hotel.  The  room  shared  by  Miss  D.  and  myself  was  large,  lofty,  and  ^'S  ■yt-''^ 
gloomy ;  the  furniture  of  the  scantiest,  consisting  of  two  small  beds, 
placed  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  room  and  not  touching  the  walls  at 
all,  two  or  three  rush-bottomed  chairs,  a  veiy  small  washing-stand,  and  a 
large  old-fashioned  sofa  of  the  settee-sort,  which  was  placed  against  one- 
half  of  the  large  folding-doors  which  gave  entrance  to  the  room.  This 
settee  was  far  too  heavy  to  be  removed,  unless  by  two  or  three  people. 
The  other  half  of  the  door  was  used  for  entrance,  and  faced  the  two  beds. 
Eeeling  rather  desolate  and  strange,  and  Miss  D.  being  a  nervous  person, 
I  locked  the  door,  and,  taking  out  the  key,  put  it  under  my  pillow  ;  but 
on  Miss  D.  remarking  that  there  might  be  a  duplicate  which  could  open 
the  door  from  outside,  I  put  a  chair  against  the  door,  with  my  travelling- 
bag  on  it,  so  arranged  that,  on  any  pressure  outside,  one  or  both  must  fall 
on  the  bare  floor,  and  make  noise  enough  to  rouse  me.  We  then 
proceeded  to  retire  to  bed,  the  one  I  had  chosen  being  near  the  only 
window  in  the  room,  which  opened  with  two  glazed  doors,  almost  to  the 
floor.  These  doors,  on  account  of  the  heat,  I  left  open,  first  assuring 
myself  that  no  communication  from  the  outside  could  be  obtained.  The 
window  led  on  to  a  small  balcony,  which  was  isolated,  and  was  three 
stories  above  the  ground. 

"  I  suddenly  woke  from  a  sound  sleep  with  the  impression  that 
somebody  had  called  me,  and,  sitting  up  in  bed,  to  my  unbounded 
astonishment,  by  the  clear  light  of  early  dawn  coming  in  through  the 
large  window  before-mentioned,  I  beheld  the  figure  of  an  old  and  very 
valued  friend  whom  I  knew  to  be  in  England.  He  appeared  as  if  most 
eager  to  speak  to  me,  and  I  addressed  him  with,  '  Good  gracious  !  how 
did  you  come  here? '  So  clear  was  the  figure,  that  I  noted  every  detail 
of  his  dress,  even  to  three  onyx  shirt  studs  which  he  always  wore.  He 
seemed  to  come  a  step  nearer  to  me,  when  he  suddenly  pointed  across  the 
room,  and  on  my  looking  round,  I  saw  Miss  D.  sitting  up  in  her  bed, 
gazing  at  the  figure  with  every  expression  of  terror.  On  looking  back, 
my  friend  seemed  to  shake  his  head,  and  retreated  step  by  step,  slowly, 
till  he  seemed  to  sink  through  that  portion  of  the  door  where  the  settee 
stood.  I  never  knew  what  happened  to  me  after  this  ;  but  my  next 
remembrance  is  of  bright  sunshine  pouring  through  the  window.  Gradually 
the  remembrance  of  what  had  happened  came  back  to  me,  and  the  question 
arose  in  my  mind,  had  I  been  dreaming,  or  had  I  seen  a  visitant  from 
another  world  1 — the  bodily  presence  of  my  friend  being  utterly  impossible. 

240  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

Remembering  that  Miss  D.  had  seemed  aware  of  the  figure  as  well  as 
myself,  I  determined  to  allow  the  test  of  my  dream  or  vision  to  be 
whatever  she  said  to  me  upon  the  subject,  I  intending  to  say  nothing  to 
her  unless  she  spoke  to  me.  As  she  seemed  still  asleep,  I  got  out  of  bed, 
examined  the  door  carefully,  and  found  the  chair  and  my  bag  untouched, 
and  the  key  under  my  pillow ;  the  settee  had  not  been  touched,  nor  had 
that  portion  of  the  door  against  which  it  was  placed  any  appearance  of 
being  opened  for  years. 

"  Presently,  on  Miss  D.  waking  up,  she  looked  about  the  room,  and, 
noticing  the  chair  and  bag,  made  some  remark  as  to  their  not  having 
been  much  use.  I  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  1 '  and  then  she  said, 
'  Why,  that  man  who  was  in  the  room  this  morning  must  have  got 
in  somehow.'  She  then  proceeded  to  describe  to  me  exactly  what  I 
myself  had  seen.  Without  giving  any  satisfactory  answer  as  to  what  I 
had  seen,  I  made  her  rather  angry  by  affecting  to  treat  the  matter  as  a 
fancy  on  her  part,  and  showed  her  the  key  still  under  my  pillow,  and  the 
chair  and  bag  untouched.  I  then  asked  her,  if  she  was  so  sure  that  she 
had  seen  somebody  in  the  room,  did  not  she  know  who  it  was  ?  '  No,' 
said  she,  '  I  have  never  seen  him  before,  nor  anyone  like  him.'  I  said, 
'  Have  you  ever  seen  a  photograph  of  him  1 '  She  said,  '  No.'  This  lady 
never  was  told  what  1  saw,  and  yet  described  exactly  to  a  third  person 
what  we  both  had  seen. 

"Of  course,  I  was  under  the  impression  my  friend  was  dead.  Such, 
however,  was  not  the  case ;  and  I  met  him  some  four  years  later, 
when,  without  telling  him  anything  of  my  experience  in  Cairo,  I  asked 
him,  in  a  joking  way,  could  he  remember  what  he  was  doing  on  a 
certain  night  in  November,  1864.  '  Well,'  he  said,  '  you  require  me  to 
have  a  good  memory ; '  but  after  a  little  reflection  he  replied,  '  Why  that 
was  the  time  I  was  so  harassed  with  trying  to  decide  for  or  against  the 
appointment  which  was  ofiered  me,  and  I  so  much  wished  you  could  have 
been  with  me  to  talk  the  matter  over.  I  sat  over  the  fire  quite  late, 
trying  to  think  what  you  would  have  advised  me  to  do.'  A  little  cross- 
questioning  and  comparing  of  dates  brought  out  the  curious  fact  that, 
allowing  for  the  difierence  of  time  between  England  and  Cairo,  his 
meditations  over  the  fire  and  my  experience  were  simultaneous.  Having 
told  him  the  circumstances  above  narrated,  I  asked  him  had  he  been  aware 
of  any  peculiar  or  unusual  sensation.  He  said  none,  only  that  he  had 
wanted  to  see  me  very  much. 

"  E.  H.  Elgee." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Elgee  says  : — 

"  I  fear  it  is  quite  impossible  to  get  any  information  from  Miss  D. 
She  married  soon  after  we  reached  India,  and  I  never  met  her  since,  nor 
do  I  know  where  she  is,  if  alive.  I  quite  understand  the  value  of  her 
corroboration;  and  at  the  time  she  told  the  whole  circumstance  to  a  fellow- 
traveller,  who  repeated  it  to  me,  and  her  story  and  mine  agreed  in  every 
particular,  save  that  to  her  the  visitant  was  a  complete  stranger  ;  and  her 
tale  was  quite  unbiassed  by  mine,  as  I  always  treated  hers  as  a  fancy,  and 
never  acknowledged  I  had  been  aware  of  anything  unusual  having  taken 
place  in  our  room  at  Cairo.  I  never  have  seen,  or  fancied  I  saw,  any  one 
before  or  since. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  241 

"  My  visitant,  also,  is  dead,  or  he  would,  I  know,  have  added  his 
testimony,  small  as  it  was,  to  mine.  He  was  a  very  calm,  quiet,  clever, 
scientific  man,  not  given  to  vain  fancies  on  any  subject,  and  certainly  was 
not  aware  of  any  desire  of  appearing  to  me." 

[This  seems  at  any  rate  an  interesting  example  of  collective  hallucina- 
tion ;  though  as  regards  its  supposed  origination  in  the  thoughts  of  Mrs. 
Elgee's  friend  in  England,  one  may  doubt  whether,  after  a  lapse  of  4  years, 
complete  certainty  as  to  the  identity  of  dates  was  attainable.  If  there 
has  been  an  error  on  this  point,  the  case  would  properly  belong  to  the 
preceding  section.] 

The  next  account  (which  has  been  very  slightly  condensed)  was 
written  down  for  us,  in  1883,  by  the  late  Miss  Katherine  M.  Weld, 
one  of  the  two  percipients,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  James  Britten,  of 
Isleworth.  It  proves  to  be  identical  with  a  former  account,  as  to 
which  Miss  Weld  wrote  to  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward,  of  Sherborne  House, 
Basingstoke,  on  May  19,  1883,  as  follows : — 

"The  account  was  written  about  15  years  ago;  it  was  an  account 
which  appeared  in  a  book  and  in  the  newspapers  at  that  time,  and  which 
I,  at  the  request  of  friends,  revised  and  corrected.  I  believe  every  word 
of  the  account  to  be  perfectly  true,  as  such  things  become  impressed  on 
one's  mind ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  account 
was  not  written  at  the  time,  but  many  years  afterwards.  Therefore  I  can 
only  say  that  as  far  as  I  remember  every  detail  is  exact." 

"  The  Lodge,  Lymington. 

(349)  "  Philip  Weld  was  the  youngest  son  of  Mr.  James  Weld,  of 
Archers  Lodge,  near  Southampton,  and  a  nephew  of  the  late  Cardinal  Weld. 
He  was  sent  by  his  father,  in  1842,  to  St.  Edmund's  College,  near  Ware,  in 
Hertfordshire,  for  his  education.  He  was  a  well  conducted,  amiable  boy, 
and  much  beloved  by  his  masters  and  fellow-students.  In  the  afternoon  of 
April  16th,  1845,  Philip,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  masters  and  some  of 
his  companions,  went  to  boat  on  the  river,  which  was  a  sport  he  enjoyed 
much.  When  one  of  the  masters  remarked  that  it  was  time  to  return  to 
the  college,  Philip  begged  to  have  one  row  more ;  the  master  consented 
and  they  rowed  to  the  accustomed  turning  point.  On  arriving  there,  in 
turning  the  boat,  Philip  accidentally  fell  out  into  a  very  deep  part  of  the 
river,  and,  notwithstanding  every  effort  that  was  made  to  save  him,  was 
drowned. 

"  His  corpse  was  brought  back  to  the  college,  and  the  Very  Rev.  Dr. 
Cox  (the  president)  was  immensely  shocked  and  grieved.  He  made  up 
his  mind  to  go  himself  to  Mr.  Weld,  at  Southampton.  He  set  off  the 
same  afternoon,  and  passing  through  London,  reached  Southampton  the 
next  day,  and  drove  from  thence  to  Archers  Lodge,  the  residence  of  Mr. 
Weld ;  but  before  entering  the  grounds  he  saw  Mr.  Weld  at  a  short 
distance  from  his  gate,  walking  towards  the  town.  Dr.  Cox  immediately 
stopped  the  carriage,  alighted,  and  was  about  to  address  Mr.  Weld,  when 
he  prevented  him  by  saying  : — 

" '  You   need   not  say  one   word,    for   I   know  that   Philip   is  dead. 

VOL.    II.  K 

242  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

Yesterday  afternoon  I  was  walking  with  my  daughter,  Katherine,  and  we 
suddenly  saw  him.  He  was  standing  on  the  path,  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  turnpike  road,  between  two  persons,  one  of  whom  was  a  youth  dressed 
in  a  black  robe.  My  daughter  was  the  first  to  perceive  them  and 
exclaimed,  "  Oh,  papa  !  did  you  ever  see  anything  so  like  Philip  as  that  is  ? " 
"  Like  him,"  I  answered,  "  why  it  is  he."  Strange  to  say,  my  daughter 
'  thought  nothing  of  the  circumstance,  beyond  that  we  had  seen  an  extra- 
ordinary likeness  of  her  brother.  We  walked  on  towards  these  three 
figures.  Philip  was  looking,  with  a  smiling,  happy  expression  of  counte- 
n\  .  .  nance,  at  the  young  man  in  a  black  robe,  who  was  shorter  than 
ti  h^  ^  ^himself.  Suddenly  they  all  seemed  to  me  to  have  vanished  ;  I  saw  nothing 
lA.  f/*"''^  'but  a  countryman,  whom  I  had  before  seen  through  the  three  figures, 
which  gave  me  the  impression  that  they  were  spirits.  I,  however,  said 
nothing  to  anyone,  as  I  was  fearful  of  alarming  my  wife.  I  looked 
out  anxiously  for  the  post  the  following  morning.  To  my  delight,  no  letter 
came.  I  forgot  that  letters  from  Ware  came  in  the  afternoon,  and  my 
fears  were  quieted,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  extraordinary  circum- 
stance until  I  saw  you  in  the  carriage  outside  my  gate.  Then  everything 
returned  to  my  mind,  and  I  could  not  feel  a  doubt  that  you  came  to  tell 
me  of  the  death  of  my  dear  boy.' 

"  The  reader  may  imagine  how  inexpressibly  astonished  Dr.  Cox  was 
at  these  words.  He  asked  Mr.  Weld  if  he  had  ever  before  seen  the  young 
man  in  the  black  robe,  at  whom  Philip  was  looking  with  such  a  happy 
smile.  Mr.  Weld  answered  that  he  had  never  before  seen  him,  but 
that  his  countenance  was  so  indelibly  impressed  on  his  mind  that  he 
was  certain  he  should  know  him  at  once  anywhere.  Dr.  Cox  then 
related  to  the  afflicted  father  all  the  circumstances  of  his  son's  death, 
which  had  taken  place  at  the  very  hour  in  which  he  appeared  to  his  father 
and  sister.  Mr.  Weld  went  to  the  funeral  of  his  son,  and  as  he  left  the 
church,  after  the  sad  ceremony,  looked  round  to  see  if  any  of  the  religious 
at  all  resembled  the  young  man  he  had  seen  with  Philip,  but  he  could  not 
trace  the  slightest  likeness  in  any  of  them.  About  four  months  after,  he 
and  his  family  paid  a  visit  to  his  brother,  Mr.  George  Weld,  at  Seagram 
Hall,  in  Lancashire.  One  day  he  walked  with  his  daughter  Katherine  to 
the  neighbouring  village  of  Chipping,  and  after  attending  a  service  at  the 
church  called  on  the  priest.  It  was  a  little  time  before  the  rev.  father 
was  at  leisure  to  come  to  them,  and  they  amused  themselves  meantime  by 
examining  the  prints  hanging  on  the  walls  of  the  room.  Suddenly  Mr. 
Weld  stopped  before  a  picture  which  had  no  name,  that  you  could  see, 
written  under  it  (as  the  frame  covered  the  bottom),  and  exclaimed  '  That  is 
the  person  whom  I  saw  with  Philip  ;  I  do  not  know  whose  likeness  this  print 
is,  but  I  am  certain  that  it  was  that  person  whom  I  saw  with  Philip.' 
The  priest  entered  the  room  a  few  moments  afterwards,  and  was  im- 
mediately questioned  by  Mr.  Weld  concerning  the  print.  He  answered 
that  it  was  a  print  of  St.  Stanislaus  Kostka,  and  supposed  to  be  a  very 
good  likeness  of  the  young  saint. 

*'  Mr.  Weld  was  much  moved  at  hearing  this ;  for  St.  Stanislaus  was  a 
Jesuit,  who  died  when  quite  young,  and  Mr.  Weld's  father  having  been  a 
great  benefactor  to  that  Order,  his  family  were  supposed  to  be  under  the 
particular  protection  of  the  Jesuit  saints  ;  also,  Philip  had  been  led  of  late, 
by    various    circumstances,  to    a    particular  devotion    to    St.  Stanislaus. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  243 

Moreover,  St.  Stanislaus  is  supposed  to  be  the  special  advocate  of  drowned 
men,  as  is  mentioned  in  his  life.  The  rev.  father  instantly  presented  the 
picture  to  Mr.  Weld,  who,  of  course,  received  it  with  the  greatest 
veneration,  and  kept  it  until  his  death.  His  wife  valued  it  equally,  and 
at  her  death  it  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  daughter  [the  narrator], 
who  saw  the  apparition  at  the  same  time  he  did,  and  it  is  now  in  her 
possession." 

In  answer  to  some  questions  put  by  Mr.  Ward,  Miss  Weld  wrote  on 
June  20th,  1883  :— 

"  I  will  repeat  the  questions  you  ask,  to  make  the  answers  more  clear. 

"'Did  you  as  well  as  your  father,  think  the  disappearance  strange?' — 
No  ;  I  thought  no  more  about  it.  i 

'"Did  your  father,  before  Dr.  Cox  spoke  to  him,  look  upon  the 
apparition  as  significant  of  some  mishap  to  his  son  V — Yes  ;  he  thought 
much  about  it,  and  was  very  anxious  for  the  arrival  of  the  letters  the  next 
morning ;  but  he  did  not  speak  of  the  matter  until  afterwards.  He  had 
frightened  my  mother  so  much  on  a  former  occasion  that  he  had  promised 
never  to  speak  of  such  things  again." 

Miss  Weld  adds  in  another  letter  : — 

"  When  I  saw  Philip,  I  thought  no  more  of  it  than  one  does  in  seeing 
a  great  and  unexpected  likeness  in  a  stranger  to  some  absent  friend.  The 
matter  passed  out  of  my  mind  so  completely  that  I  never  felt  a  sensation  of 
uneasiness.  I  did  not  remember  the  circumstance  until  the  arrival  of 
Dr.  Cox,  and  the  announcement  of  my  brother's  death.  I  saw  that  two 
persons  were  walking  with  the  young  lad  who  so  closely  resembled  my 
brother.  He  looked  happy  and  smiling  ;  but  I  neither  remarked  their 
countenance  nor  dress ;  consequently  I  did  not  recognise  the  print  in  the 
parlour  of  the  priest." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  this  was  her  only  experience  of 
a  sensory  hallucination.  Miss  Weld  adds  :  "I  never  before  or  since  the 
event  have  seen  anything  from  the  other  world.  "^ 

The  apparition  of  St.  Stanislaus  is  quite  consistent  with  the  tele- 
pathic hypothesis,  since  we  can  conceive  that  the  idea  of  his  favourite 
saint  may  have  been  actually  present  to  the  mind  of  the  drowning 
boy ;  but  we  have  no  explanation  of  the  third  phantasmal  figure. 
This,  from  its   irrelevance,  is  an  unlikely  feature  to  have  crept  into 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

The  following  version  of  the  same  incident,  which  we  have  received  from  a  Fellow 
of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  is  useful  as  illustrating  the  slight  inaccuracies  which 
may  creep  into  a  narrative,  without  the  least  affecting  the  essential  point  : — 

"I  was  mentioning  this  \i.e.,  a  similar  case]  to  Baron  French,  or  rather  we  were  talk- 
ing over  the  incidents  connected  with  it,  when  he  told  me  of  a  strange  occurrence  which 
happened  at  the  school  where  he  was,  near  Ware,  in  England,  a  Catholic  college, — presi- 
dent, a  Dr.  Cox.  There  was  a  boy  there  of  the  name  of  Weld,  a  very  well-known  Catholic 
family.  This  boy  was  accidentally  drowned.  The  father  and  mother  were  at  the  time  at 
Southampton,  and  on  the  day  in  question  were  walking  on  the  quay  near  the  shipping. 
They  suddenly  saw  the  said  boy  approaching,  and  hurried  to  meet  him,  but  immediately 
he  appeared  to  fade  away,  so  that  they  could  see  the  masts  of  the  ships,  and  through  what 
had  seemed  to  be  his  body.  The  next  day,  or  the  day  following,  Dr.  Cox  called  on  them, 
when  Mr.  Weld  said,  '  I  know  why  you  are  here,  it  is  to  tell  me  that  my  son  is  dead.  I 
saw  him  yesterday,  and  knew  then  that  he  had  departed.'  " 

VOL.    II.  R    2 

244  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

the  memory,  if  not  really  observed  ;  but  it  also  makes  the  hypothesis 
of  mistaken  identity  less  improbable  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  As 
against  that  hypothesis  we  have  the  fact  that  the  figures  were  seen  in 
daylight,  only  a  few  yards  off;  that  their  disappearance  seems  to 
have  been  strangely  sudden  ;  and  that,  if  the  narrator's  memory  may 
be  trusted  as  to  Mr.  Weld's  spontaneous  recognition  of  the  picture, 
the  mistake  on  his  part  would  have  been  a  double  one.  Moreover 
it  must  be  observed  that  even  if  the  case  was  one  of  mistaken 
identity — of  illusion  and  not  hallucination — the  coincidence  remains 
to  be  accounted  for.  If  we  suppose — as  according  to  the  account  I 
think  we  may — that  the  eyes  of  the  two  percipients  were  indepen- 
dently deluded,  and  that  Mr.  Weld's  delusion  was  not  merely 
conjured  up  by  his  daughter's  remark,  we  cannot  ignore  the 
improbability  of  two  persons  making  a  mistake  of  the  sort  on  the 
very  afternoon  that  the  relative  whom  they  seem  to  see  is  drowned. 
How  prodigious  this  improbability  is  may  be  realised  from  a  simple 
computation.  Let  us  suppose — surely  a  liberal  estimate — that  it  is 
a  common  thing,  which  one  may  suppose  to  have  happened  to  each  of 
.  the  percipients,  to  make  in  the  course  of  life  50  equally  remarkable 
mistakes  of  identity,  in  an  equally  good  light  and  when  equally 
near  to  the  figure  observed ;  and  also  that  the  probability  that  one 
particular  relative  of  most  familiar  aspect  will  be  the  subject  of  the 
Y^'  mistake  on  any  one  of  these  occasions  amounts  to  ^ — which  is 
/'  again  an  extravagant  allowance.  Let  us  further  suppose  that  the 
adult  life  of  each  percipient  amounted  to  35  years,  or  12,775  days. 
Then,  for  each  percipient,  the  probability  of  making  one  of  the 
mistakes  of  identity  on  the  particular  day  that  the  subject  of  the 
mistake  dies  is  -^o^f^ ;  and  the  probability  of  the  supposed  combi- 
nation of  coincident  mistakes  is  sAo^ .  In  other  words,  the  odds 
against  the  occurrence  by  accident  of  the  incident  above  related  are 
more  than  26  millions  to  1.  If,  therefore,  the  experiences  were 
illusions,  they  may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  been  telepathic 
illusions  (see  pp.  62-3.) 

We  owe  the  next  account  in  the  first  instance  to  Mrs.  Willink,  of 
Lindale  Parsonage,  Grange-over-Sands.  The  three  first-hand  witnesses 
all  appear  to  be  persons  of  good  sense  and  of  some  education.  Mrs. 
Willink  writes,  on  Sept.  9,  1884  : — 

(350)  "  One  night  (Friday)  my  nurse,  Jane,  came  to  tell  me  that  they 
had  been  startled  by  seeing  a  ghastly  face  at  the  kitchen  window.  The 
servants  had  been  annoyed  for  some  time  previously  by  some  young  men 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  245 

coming  to  the  kitchen  window,  and  making  a  noise  on  the  glass,  and 
trying  to  look  in.  The  flower  bed  under  the  window  had  been  freshly  dug 
up  and  tidied,  and  they  were  hoping  the  visits  had  ceased.  The  dog, 
whose  kennel  was  close  to  the  window,  and  who  had  been  put  on  a  long 
chain  to  keep  away  these  visitors,  began  to  how],  and  Helen  (now  Mrs. 
Robinson),  who  was  sitting  so  as  to  see  through  the  edge  of  the  blind, 
looked  up,  and  seeing  a  ghastly  face,  which  she  recognised  as  Mrs. 
Robinson's,  told  the  others,  who  got  up  and  drew  the  blind  on  one  side, 
and  so  saw  the  face  distinctly.  Their  account  was  that  it  gradually  faded 
away  below  the  bottom  of  the  window.  Jane  and  Aggie  then  went  to  the 
door,  but  though  the  dog  continued  howling  (as  he  always  does  when  a 
death  in  the  village  takes  place),  they  could  see  nothing. 

"  I  doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  statement  that  the  apparition  looked  at 
Helen  rather  than  at  the  others  ;  she  sat  where  she  could  see  through  the 
space  between  the  blind  and  the  edge  of  the  window,  so  naturally  saw  it  first. 
Jane  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Robinson,  but  some  time  after,  on  looking  through 
a  photograph-book  in  the  village,  she  recognised  the  face,  and  was  then 
told  to  whom  it  belonged.  When  she  told  me  on  the  Friday  evening  of 
what  they  had  seen,  I  rather  pooh-poohed  the  story,  as  I  found  that  the ' 
dog's  howling  was  beginning  to  make  them  always  nervous  ;  and  it  was  not  ' 
until  after  service  on  Sunday  that  I  was  told  how  Mrs.  Robinson  had  been 
persuaded  to  go  to  Leeds  to  the  hospital  there,  and  to  undergo  an  opera- 
tion, under  which  she  died  on  Friday  afternoon,  I  think,  between  2  and  3. 
The  appearance  would  be  between  8  and  9.  Mrs.  Robinson  had  been 
servant  to  the  clergyman  here  before  she  married  ;  she  had  been  away 
from  the  village  some  time  before  her  death ;  was  always  an  invalid,  but 
none  of  us  knew  of  her  being  more  ill  than  usual. 

"Margaret  Willink." 

We  learn  from  the  clerk  at  Finsthwaite,  where  Mrs.  Robinson  was 
buried,  that  she  died  at  the  Leeds  Infirmary  on  March  25th,  1882,  and 
a  neighbour  thinks  that  the  hour  was  between  8  and  9  in  the  morning. 
Friday  was  the  24th,  not  the  25th ;  and  the  coincidence  was  thus  not  so 
close  as  Mrs.  Willink  supposes ;  but  the  interval  probably  did  not  exceed 
12  hours. 

Mary  Jane  Farrand  says  : — 

"  It  was  a  Friday  evening,  of  the  exact  time  I  am  not  sure,  but  it  was 
between  half-past  8  and  9  o'clock.  The  other  two  maids,  with  myself, 
were  sitting  at  supper  in  the  kitchen,  close  to  the  window,  when  we  all 
became  conscious  of  being  watched  by  a  woman  from  the  outside,  whom 
the  other  two  immediately  recognised  as  a  person  whom  they  both  knew 
as  Mrs.  Robinson.  Before  her  marriage,  she  lived  at  the  parsonage  for 
some  time  as  housemaid.  She  looked  intently  upon  each  one,  and  then 
turned  her  face  quite  to  the  cook,  looking  slightly  reproachful,  then 
pleadingly.  They  asked  one  of  the  other  where  she  could  be  staying,  and 
they  said  it  was  strange  for  her  to  be  out  (as  it  rained  heavily)  without 
her  bonnet.  One  was  just  about  to  go  and  ask  her  in,  when  we  saw  a 
great  change  come  over  the  face,  and  it  looked  like  that  of  a  corpse,  then 
disappeared  altogether.  I  never  saw  the  person  previously,  or  remember 
ever  hearing  of  her,  however  indirectly.  The  following  Sunday  morning  I 
heard  that  she  was  dead  from  Mrs.  Willink.     The  cook,  whom  we  called 

246  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

Nell,  was  married  to  John  Robinson  about  two  years  afterwards.  As  we 
sat  at  the  table  I  had  such  an  impression  of  the  face,  eyes,  and  front  of  the 
hair  as  to  be  able  to  recognise  the  photograph  a  few  months  afterwards, 
without  the  least  trouble,  or  being  told.  "  Mary  Jane  Farrand." 

A.  Nicholson  (now  Mrs.  Capstick,  of  Silverdale,  Carnforth,)  writes  to 
Mary  Jane  Farrand,  on  September  4th,  1884  : — 

"  Woodwell. 

"  In  answer  to  your  letter  about  the  face  at  the  window,  I  cannot 
remember  much  about  it,  except  that  we  were  sitting  at  supper,  and  Nell 
happened  to  look  up  at  the  window,  and  said  some  one  was  looking  in,  then 
told  us  to  come  and  look.  It  was  like  the  face  of  a  skeleton,  and  we 
looked,  and  it  was  a  very  thin  face,  with  large  staring  eyes.  We  still 
thought  it  was  some  one  till  you  and  I  went  to  the  door,  but  could  see 
nothing.  Nell  was  in  the  kitchen,  and  it  never  moved,  but  was  still  there 
when  we  got  back.  It  seemed  to  gradually  fade  out  of  sight.  I  don't 
remember  who  passed  the  remark  that  it  was  like  Mrs.  Robinson. 

"  A.  NicHOLSOisr." 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Capstick  stated  that  she  has  never  had  any  other 
experience  of  a  hallucination. 

Mrs.  Willink  writes,  on  September  18th,  1884  : — 

"  In  answer  to  your  question  as  to  when  the  servants  told  me  it  was 
Mrs.  Robinson's  face  they  saw,  as  far  as  I  recollect  it  was  that  same 
evening.  Helen  knew  (as  we  all  did)  that  Mrs.  Robinson  was  ill,  and  had 
been  so  for  years  with  an  internal  complaint,  from  which  she  never  could 
recover  ;  but  she  did  not  know  that  she  was  any  worse  than  she  had  been 
before  she  left  the  village  some  months  before. 

"  They  went  out  next  morning  to  look  for  footmarks  on  the  flower  bed, 
which  would  have  been  disturbed  by  any  one  standing  at  the  window,  but 
there  were  no  traces  of  any." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mary  Jane  Farrand  writes,  on  September 
24th,  1884:— 

"  When  I  recognised  Mrs.  Robinson's  photograph  I  was  staying  at 
Arnside  with  Mrs.  Willink's  children,  and  went  to  visit  a  person  who  had 
lived  near  Lindale  and  had  not  long  been  married,  and  she  it  was  who  when 
showing  me  the  different  things  in  her  house,  quite  by  chance  took  up  her 
album,  and  showed  me  the  photos  of  her  friends,  amongst  them  Mrs.  Robin- 
son. I  cannot  quite  remember  whether  or  not  I  told  her  that  I  recognised 
the  face ;  for  it  seems  so  long  ago  to  remember  each  fact,  and  I  should  not 
like  to  assert  what  I  did  not  feel  confident  about,  but  you  certainly  may 
write  to  her  to  ask  her. 

"  Never  before  had  I  seen  anything  of  the  kind,  although  I  had  heard 
of  similar  events,  but  was  greatly  wanting  in  faith  with  regard  to  such 
things  happening,  and  thought  it  but  a  fancy  in  others,  until  I  saw  Mrs. 
Robinson  [i.e.,  the  photograph]." 

She  mentions,  however,  that  she  has  had  two  subjective  hallucinations, 
which  fell  within  a  few  days  of  one  another — one  representing  Mrs.  Willink, 
and  the  other  a  fellow-servant. 

Mrs.  Jackson  Thompson,  of  Ashmeadow  Lodge,  Arnside,  Grange-over- 
Sands,  writes,  in  February,  1886  : — 

XVIII.]     .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  247 

"  The  only  remark  I  remember  Mary  Jane  Farrand  making  on  the 
late  Mrs.  John  Robinson's  photograph  was  that  it  resembled  the  face 
which  appeared  at  the  Lindale  Parsonage  kitchen  window. 

"  Charlotte  Thompson." 

[The  evidence  of  "  ISTell "  (now  Mrs.  Robinson),  the  third  witness,  will 
be  found  in  the  "  Additions  and  Corrections "  at  the  beginning  of  this 
volume.] 

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Bennett,  of  Edward  Street,  Stone. 

"March,  1882. 

(351)  "My  daughter,  Annie,  and  I  had  been  drinking  tea  with  the  late 
Mrs.  Smith  and  Miss  Moore,  and  talking  about  their  brother  Preston  being 
very  ill  and  not  expected  to  recover,  and  were  returning  home  in  the 
evening,  when  between  the  little  wicket  which  opens  out  of  the  Vicarage 
field  and  Mrs.  Newbold's  house  we  met  the  identical  man  in  face,  form,  and 
figure,  dressed  as  he  was  always  wont ;  slouched  hat,  old  frock  coat,  open 
in  front,  knee-breeches  and  gaiters,  with  a  long  stick.  He  passed  so  near 
us  that  we  shrank  aside  to  make  way  for  him.  As  soon  as  we  got  to  Mrs. 
Newbold's  she  exclaimed,  '  So  Preston  Moore  is  dead  ! '  when  we  both 
answered  in  a  breath,  '  Oh,  no,  we  have  just  seen  him  ! ' 

"We  found,  in  fact,  that  he  had  died  about  half  an  hour  before  he 
appeared  to  us.  "J.  Bennett." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bennett  adds,  on  Dec.  19,  1883  : — 

"  We  cannot  call  to  mind  anyone  at  all  resembling  the  individual  in 
question ;  his  appearance,  dress  and  gait  were  utterly  unlike  anyone  else 
residing  in  or  about  the  neighbourhood." 

We  learn  from  the  Rev.  A.  J.  Wright,  Vicar  of  Stone,  that  the  death 
occurred  on  April  13th,  1860. 

The  Rev.  Samuel  Plant  writes  to  us  from  Weston  Vicarage,  Stafibrd  : — 

"July  8th,  1885. 

"  I  know  very  well  the  lady  who,  with  her  daughter,  saw  the 
apparition  of  Moore  on  the  day  of  his  death,  and  I  have  every  reason  to 
believe  that  she  would  not  deviate  from  the  truth  in  any  respect.  I  have 
several  times  heard  her  account  of  it." 

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes,  on  December  17,  1883  : — 

"  This  afternoon  Professor  Sidgwick  and  I  called  on  Mrs.  Bennett.  She 
told  us  the  story  as  in  her  letter,  and  her  daughter,  afterwards  called  in, 
confirmed  it.  They  do  not  remember  when  it  happened,  probably  12  or 
more  years  ago.  She  remembers  distinctly,  and  so  does  her  daughter,  that 
it  was  in  the  summer,  and  that  it  was  light  enough  to  see  things  quite  dis- 
tinctly— though  they  are  not  sure  of  the  hour.'  They  had  been  having  tea 
with  Mrs.  Smith  (Preston  Moore's  sister,  a  farmer's  widow,  retired  and 
with  means),  and  were  on  their  way  to  call  on  Mrs.  Newbold,  now  dead. 
About  3  yards  from  Mrs.  Newbold's  gate  they  saw  Preston  Moore 
coming  towards  them ;  they  came  round  a  slight  bend  in  the  road,  and  saw 
him  first  (Mrs.  Bennett  said),  about  the  distance  across  Edward  Street 
from  them.     He  and  they  were  both  walking  on  the  road  close  to  the 

1  This  statement  is  not  incompatible  with  the  fact  that  the  season  was  really  the 
middle  of  April ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  the  "  12  or  more  years  "  are  really  more  than  23. 

248  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

causeway,  and  they  got  on  to  the  causeway  and  let  him  pass.  He  did  not 
greet  them  in  any  way,  but  though  he  did  generally  touch  his  hat,  and 
say  '  Good-day,'  he  did  not  then.  His  not  doing  so  did  not  seem  to  them 
odd ;  the  only  thing  that  did  was  that  a  man  who  they  had  just  heard 
was  not  expected  to  recover  should  be  out  at  all.  Mrs.  Bennett  has  often 
wondered  since  that  she  did  not  turn  her  head  to  look  after  him,  but  she 
did  not ;  and  they  do  not  remember  saying  anything  to  each  other  about 
him,  during  the  few  seconds  that  elapsed  before  they  got  to  Mrs.  New- 
bold's  door.  It  was  a  natural  enough  place  to  meet  him.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  they  both  saw  him,  and  that  neither  doubted  at  the  time  that 
what  they  saw  was  Preston  Moore  in  the  flesh.  They  say  he  was  a 
peculiar-looking  man — very  plain,  and  with  an  eye  chronically  inflamed ; 
wore  habitually  a  white  hat  on  one  side  of  his  head,  a  loose  shabby  long 
coat,  open  down  the  front,  and  carried  a  long,  hooked,  heavy  stick ;  and 
all  these  marks  they  seem  to  recognise  him  by.  They  took  no  particular 
interest  in  him,  just  knew  him.  There  was  something  forbidding  about 
him,  and  he  was  very  odd  ;  in  fact  I  suppose  mad  at  times.  The  people 
called  him  '  moonstruck  ; '  his  sister.  Miss  Moore,  was  odd  too.  He  seems 
to  have  had  a  sort  of  interest  in  Mrs.  Bennett,  for  once  he  brought  her 
pansies,  stolen  from  a  neighbouring  gentleman's  garden,  and  another  time 
cauliflowers — equally  illegitimately  acquired.  But  he  used  to  take  stolen 
gifts  to  others  in  the  same  way.  Both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Bennett  disclaim 
being  superstitious  or  nervous,  and  neither  has  had  any  other  visual  hallu- 
cination. Mrs.  Bennett  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination  of  music,  and 
also  what  may  have  been  a  hallucination  of  raps  and  noises." 

[In  this  case,   we   certainly   cannot  suppose  that  a  purely  subjective 

hallucination   was    independently    and    simultaneously    caused   in    both 

percipients  by  their  previous  talk  about  the  man,  in  whom  they  were  not 

specially  interested.     The  alternative  is,  therefore,  between  telepathy  and 

mistaken  identity.     It  was  remarked  in  a  former  case  that  recollections  as 

to  details  of  appearance  are  often  untrustworthy,  as  it  is  easy   to  imagine 

that  one  has  distinctly  seen  some  familiar  figure,  when  in  reality  one  has 

assumed  its  presence  on  the  strength   of  the  slightest   and  most  general 

glance.     But  this  criticism  scarcely  applies  here.     Preston  Moore  was  the 

Y><  t'^     last  person  whom  the  percipients  would  at  that  moment  have  expected  to 

U.  .^«f'^*meet  out  of  doors ;  and  they  were,  therefore,  very  unlikely  to  assume  that 

( the  figure  was  he,  without  looking  at  him  attentively.] 

The  following  case  is  from  Mr.    S.   S.  Falkinburg,  of  Uniontown, 

Ky.,  U.S.A.,  decorator  and  house  painter. 

"Sept.  12th,  1884. 

(352)  "  The  following  circumstance  is  impressed  upon  my  mind  in  a 
manner  which  will  preclude  its  ever  being  forgotten  by  me  or  the  members 
of  my  family  interested.  My  little  son,  Arthur,  who  was  then  five  years 
old,  and  the  pet  of  his  grandpapa,  was  playing  on  the  floor,  when  I  entered 
the  house  a  quarter  to  7  o'clock,  Friday  evening,  July  11th,  1879.  I  was 
very  tired,  having  been  receiving  and  paying  for  staves  all  day,  and  it 
being  an  exceedingly  sultry  evening,  I  lay  down  by  Artie  on  the  carpet, 
and  entered  into  conversation  with  my  wife — not,  however,  in  regard  to 
my  parents.  Artie,  as  usually  was  the  case,  came  and  lay  down  with  his 
little  head  upon  my  left  arm,  when  all  at   once  he   exclaimed,  '  Papa  ! 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  249 

papa  !  Grandpa  ! '  I  cast  my  eyes  towards  the  ceiling,  or  opened  my  eyes, 
I  am  not  sure  which,  when,  between  me  and  the  joists  (it  was  an  old- 
fashioned  log-cabin),  I  saw  the  face  of  my  father  as  plainly  as  ever  I 
saw  him  in  my  life.^  He  appeared  to  me  to  be  very  pale,  and  looked  sad, 
as  I  had  seen  him  upon  my  last  visit  to  him  three  months  previous.  I 
immediately  spoke  to  my  wife,  who  was  sitting  within  a  few  feet  of  me, 
and  said,  '  Clara,  there  is  something  wrong  at  home ;  father  is  either  dead 
or  very  sick.'  She  tried  to  persuade  me  that  it  was  my  imagination,  but 
I  could  not  help  feeling  that  something  was  wrong.  Being  very  tired,  we 
soon  after  retired,  and  about  10  o'clock  Artie  woke  me  up  repeating, 
'  Papa,  grandpa  is  here.'  I  looked,  and  believe,  if  I  remember  right, 
got  up,  at  any  rate  to  get  the  child  warm,  as  he  complained  of  coldness,  ^ 
and  it  was  very  sultry  weather.  Next  morning  I  expressed  my  determina- 
tion to  go  at  once  to  Indianapolis.  My  wife  made  light  of  it  and  over- 
persuaded  me,  and  I  did  not  go  until  Monday  morning,  and  upon  arriving 
at  home  (my  father's),  I  found  that  he  had  been  buried  the  day  before, 
Sunday,  July  13th. 

"  Now  comes  the  mysterious  part  to  me.  After  I  had  told  my  mother 
and  brother  of  my  vision,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been,  they  told  me  the 
following  : — 

"  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  July,  the  day  of  his  death,  he  arose 
early  and  expressed  himself  as  feeling  unusually  well,  and  ate  a  hearty 
breakfast.  He  took  the  Bible  (he  was  a  Methodist  minister),  and  went 
and  remained  until  near  noon.  He  ate  a  hearty  dinner,  and  went  to  the 
front  gate,  and,  looking  up  and  down  the  street,  remarked  that  he  could 
not,  or  at  least  would  not  be  disappointed,  some  one  was  surely  coming. 
During  the  afternoon  and  evening  he  seemed  restless,  and  went  to  the 
gate,  looking  down  street,  frequently.  At  last,  about  time  for  supper,  he 
mentioned  my  name,  and  expressed  his  conviction  that  Grod,  in  His  own 
good  time,  would  answer  his  prayers  in  my  behalf,  I  being  at  that  time 
very  wild.  Mother  going  into  the  kitchen  to  prepare  supper,  he  fol- 
lowed her  and  continued  talking  to  her  about  myself  and  family,  and 
especially  Arthur,  my  son.  Supper  being  over,  he  moved  his  chair  near 
the  door,  and  was  conversing  about  me  at  the  time  he  died.  The  last 
words  were  about  me,  and  were  spoken,  by  mother's  clock,  14  minutes  of 
7.     He  did  not  fall,  but  just  quit  talking  and  was  dead. 

"  In  answer  to  my  inquiries,  my  son  Arthur  says  he  remembers  the 
circumstances,  and  the  impression  he  received  upon  that  occasion  is 
ineffaceable.  "  Samuel  S.  Falkinburg." 

We  have  procured  a  certificate  of  death  from  the  Indianapolis  Board 
of  Health,  which  confirms  the  date  given. 

Mrs.  Falkinburg  writes  to  us,  on  Sept.  12,  1884  : — 

"In  answer  to  your  request,  I  will  say  that  I  cheerfully  give  my 
recollection  of  the  circumstance  to  which  you  refer. 

"  We  were  living  in  Brown  County,  Indiana,  50  miles  south  of 
Indianapolis,  in  the  summer  of  1879.  My  husband  (Mr.  S.  S.  Falkinburg) 
was  in  the  employ  of  one  John  Ayers,  buying  staves. 

1  For  phantasms  seen  in  positions  which  would  in  reality  be  impossible  compare 
cases  203,  204,  and  205. 

2  See  p.  37,  note. 

250  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

'On  the  evening  of  July  11th,  about  6.30  o'clock,  he  came  into  the 
room  where  I  was  sitting,  and  lay  down  on  the  carpet  with  my  little  boy 
Arthur,  complaining  of  being  very  tired  and  warm.  Entering  into 
conversation  on  some  unimportant  matter,  Arthur  went  to  him  and  lay 
down  by  his  side.  In  a  few  moments  my  notice  was  attracted  by  hearing 
Arthur  exclaim  :  '  Oh,  papa,  grandpa,  grandpa,  papa,'  at  the  same  time 
pointing  with  his  little  hand  toward  the  ceiling.  I  looked  in  the  direction 
he  was  pointing,  but  saw  nothing.  My  husband,  however,  said  :  '  Clara, 
there  is  something  wrong  at  home  ;  father  is  either  dead  or  very  sick.'  I 
tried  to  laugh  him  out  of  what  I  thought  an  idle  fancy ;  but  he  insisted 
that  he  saw  the  face  of  his  father  looking  at  him  from  near  the  ceiling, 
and  Arthur  said,  '  Grandpa  was  come,  for  he  saw  him.'  That  night  we 
were  awakened  by  Artie  again  calling  his  papa  to  see  '  grandpa.' 

"  A  short  time  after  my  husband  started  (Monday)  to  go  to  Indiana- 
polis, I  received  a  letter  calling  him  to  the  burial  of  his  father ;  and  some 
time  after,  in  conversation  with  his  mother,  it  transpired  that  the  time  he 
and  Artie  saw  the  vision  was  within  two  or  three  minutes  of  the  time 
his  father  died.  "  Clara  T.  Falkinburg." 

Asked  whether  this  was  his  sole  experience  of  a  visual  hallucination, 
Mr.  Falkinburg  replied  that  it  was.  Occasionally,  however,  since  that 
time,  he  has  had  auditory  impressions  suggestive  of  his  father's  presence. 

Here  it  may  perhaps  be  suggested  that  Mr.  Falkinburg's  hallu- 
cination was  due  to  the  child's  remark.  But  I  know  of  no  evidence 
to  support  such  a  hypothesis.  Where  sensory  hallucinations  have 
been  traceable  to  verbal  suggestion,  as  I  have  already  mentioned, 
(p.  188),  there  has  either  been  a  previous  abnormal  dominance  of 
one  person  by  another,  or  the  effect  has  been  worked  up  among  a 
considerable  number  of  people,  in  an  atmosphere  of  emotion  and 
excitement.  Till  evidence  is  brought,  we  must,  I  think,  decline  to 
credit  the  words  of  a  child  of  five  with  such  magic  sway  over  its 
father's  mind  as  is  exercised  by  a  practised  mesmerist  over  the 
"  subject "  whose  will  he  has  annulled,  or  as  causes  the  visions  of  a 
hysterical  fanatic  to  spread  to  her  like-minded  companions. 

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Fairman,  of  43,  Clifton  Hill,  N.W.  She 
has  given  us  in  confidence  the  names  of  the  persons  concerned,  who 
are  all  dead.  The  first  account  sent  to  us  was  written  on  December  29, 
1884  ;  but  I  quote  the  following  slightly  fuller  one,  which  was  sent 
after  a  search  had  been  made  for  the  letter  therein  mentioned.  The 
sentence  between  brackets  is  taken  from  the  former  account. 

"December  4th,  1885. 

(.353)  "  I  much  regret  that  the  search  I  have  made  through  my  sister's 

letters  has  proved  useless.     You  see,  the  letter  relating  to  the  circumstance 

was  addressed  to  my  mother,  and  has   been   destroyed  long  ago.     In  that 

letter,  my  sister  related  the  circumstance  of  both  herself  and  her  husband 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  251 

seeing  what  he  imagined,  to  be  his  brother — ^the  exact  likeness  to  him 
being  apparent — passing  the  breakfast-room  .window ;  so  much  so  that  he 
spontaneously  jumped  up  to  go  to  the  hall  to  meet  him,  but  on  arriving 
did  not  see  him.  (They  were  at  the  time — as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  in 
1844 — living  in  the  Highlands,  and  he  had  parted  from  his  brother,  who 
was  living  in  Nottinghamshire,  on  very  unfriendly  terms.)  After  a  fruitless 
search  in  the  grounds,  he  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  post-bag,  which 
contained  a  letter  requesting  him  to  start  at  once  :  his  brother,  whom  he 
had  not  seen  for  15  years,  being  in  a  dying  state.  He  did  so  ;  and  found 
on  arrival  that  he  died  at  the  exact  time  he  had  seen  him  pass  the  window. 

It  was  on  his  immediate  departure  that  Mrs. wrote  home  to  us,  and 

before  she  had  received  tidings  from  her  husband  of  his  brother's  death. 
He  repeated  this  statement  to  me  some  few  years  after,  and  said  how 
convinced  he  was  at  the  time  that  his  brother  had  arrived,  and  how  kind, 
he  considered  it  that  he  should  make  the  first  advances  towards  a 
reconciliation.  "  Catherine  A.  Fairman." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
May  2,  1841,  the  cause  being  "efiusion  on  the  brain." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  she  is  certain  that  her  sister  saw  the 
figure,  Mrs.  Fairman  replies  : — 

"  I  feel  sure  that  my  sister  saw  a  figure  pass  the  window  at  the  same 
time  as  her  husband  did  ;  bnt  as  she  had.  never  seen  her  brother-in-law, 
she  could  not  say,  '  There's  Edward.'  I  remember  perfectly  her  letter  at 
the  time  mentioning  that  she  saw  a  someone  go  by." 

[In  conversation,  Mrs.  Fairman  told  me  that  she  saw,  immediately  on 
its  arrival,  the  account  written  to  her  mother  by  her  sister  on  the  day  of 
the  occurrence ;  and  if  this  was  so,  her  evidence  is  that  of  a  person 
who  was  made  aware  of  the  percipient's  experience  before  the  event  with 
which  it  corresponded  was  known  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).  But  after  an  interval 
of  more  than  40  years,  no  memory  can  be  trusted  as  to  details  of  this  sort. 
ISTor,  taking  the  evidence  as  it  stands,  can  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken 
identity  be  absolutely  excluded.  Still  a  mistake  of  the  kind  is  far  more 
unlikely  in  a  country  place — where  the  aspect  of  persons  who  come  to  the 
house  is  usually  familiar,  and  where  the  sudden  disappearance  of  an 
approaching  visitor  would  be  very  unlikely — than  in  a  crowded  street. 
See  also  above,  pp.  62-3.] 

The  next  account  is  from  the  late  Surgeon-Major  Armand  Leslie, 
and  was  first  published  in  the  Daily  Telegraph.  That  newspaper, 
during  the  autumn  of  1881,  contained  a  good  deal  of  correspondence 
of  this  sort ;  and  Dr.  Leslie  was  one  of  the  few  contributors  who 
had  the  good  sense  and  courage  to  sign  his  name,  and  thus  to  make 
his  record  available  as  evidence.  We  have  ascertained  from  four 
different  sources  that  he  used  to  live  at  5,  Tavistock  Place,  W.C.  He 
afterwards  served  through  the  Russo-Turkish  war  with  the  Turkish 
army ;  was  one  of  the  twelve  doctors  sent  out  to  Egypt  at  the  time 
of  the  cholera ;  was  chief  of  the  medical  department  of  Baker's  staff ; 

252  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Teb.  Unfortunately,  we  failed  to 
identify  him  till  too  late,  and  I  can  only  quote  the  account  as  originally 
given.  Confirmation  might  perhaps  be  obtained  from  his  family,  but 
our  efforts  to  trace  them  have  been,  so  far,  unavailing.  Not  having 
communicated  with  the  narrator,  we  cannot  vouch  for  the  hona  fides 
of  the  account,  the  very  startling  incidents  of  which,  and  especially 
the  detail  of  the  goloshes,  are  suggestive  of  a  hoax  ;  and  I  therefore 
do  not  give  the  case  an  evidential  number.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
seems  unlikely  that  a  medical  man  of  repute,  even  if  he  took  the  trouble 
to  invent  such  a  story,  would  allow  his  name  to  appear  as  the  authority 
for  it  in  a  prominent  newspaper.  If  the  story  was  invented,  its  final 
sentence,  which  introduces  the  writer's  true  place  of  residence,  is  a 
clever  touch  of  realism,  and  the  point  made  at  the  end  of  the  second 
paragraph  is  a  master-stroke. 

"October,  1881. 

"  In  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  of  '78,  between  half-past  3  and  4  in 
the  morning,  I  was  leisurely  walking  home  from  the  house  of  a  sick  friend. 
A  middle-aged  woman,  apparently  a  nurse,  was  slowly  following,  going  in 
the  same  direction.  We  crossed  Tavistock  Square  together,  and  emerged 
simultaneously  into  Tavistock  Place.  The  streets  and  square  were  deserted, 
the  morning  bright  and  calm,  my  health  excellent,  nor  did  I  suffer  from 
anxiety  or  fatigue. 

"  The  following  scene  was  now  enacted  :  A  man  suddenly  appeared, 
striding  up  Tavistock  Place,  coming  towards  me,  and  going  in  a  direction 
opposite  to  mine.  When  first  seen,  he  was  standing  exactly  in  front  of  my 
own  door.  Young,  and  ghastly  pale,  he  was  dressed  in  evening  clothes, 
evidently  made  by  a  foreign  tailor.  Tall  and  slim,  he  walked  with  long 
measured  strides,  noiselessly,  without  a  sound^ — a  tall  white  hat,  covered 
thickly  with  black  crape,  and  an  eye-glass,  completed  the  costume  of  this 
strange  form.  The  moonbeams,  ^  falling  on  the  corpse-like  features,  revealed 
a  face  well  known  to  me — that  of  a  friend  and  relative.  The  sole  and  only 
other  person  in  the  street,  beyond  myself  and  this  being,  was  the  woman 
already  alluded  to.  She  stopped  abruptly,  as  if  spellbound,  then  rushing 
towards  the  man,  she  gazed  intently  and  with  horror  unmistakeable  on  his 
face,  which  was  now  upturned  towards  the  heavens,  and  smiling  ghastly. 
She  indulged  in  her  strange  contemplation  but  during  very  few  seconds, 
and  with  extraordinary  and  unexpected  speed  for  her  age  and  weight,  she 
ran  away  with  a  terrific  shriek  and  yells.  This  woman  never  have  I  seen 
or  heard  of  since,  and  but  for  her  presence  I  could  have  explained  the 
incident — called  it,  say,  subjection  of  the  mental  powers  to  the  domination 
of  physical  reflex  action — and  the  man's  presence  would  have  been  termed 
a  false  impression  on  the  retina. 

"  A  week  after   the   above  event,    news    of    this  very  friend's  death 

1  As  regards  this  point,  see  p.  68,  note. 

2  The  "  moonbeams  "  and  the  "  morning  bright  and  cahn  "  do  not  go  well  together; 
and  I  certainly  shall  not  argue  that  a  hoaxer  would  have  been  careful  to  avoid  the 
discrepancy. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  253 

reached  me.  It  had  occurred  on  the  morning  in  question.  From  the  family 
I  ascertained  that,  according  to  the  rites  of  the  Greek  Church,  and  to  the 
custom  of  the  country  he  had  resided  in,  he  was  buried  in  his  evening 
clothes,  made  abroad  by  a  foreign  tailor,  and,  strange  to  say,  he  wore 
goloshes  or  indiarubber  shoes  over  his  boots,  according  also  to  the  custom 
of  the  country  he  died  in  ;  these  deaden  completely  the  sound  of  the 
heaviest  footstep.  I  never  had  seen  my  friend  wear  an  eye-glass.  He  did 
so,  however,  whilst  abroad,  and  began  the  practice  some  months  before  his 
death.  When  in  England  he  lived  in  Tavistock  Place,  and  occupied  my 
rooms  during  my  absence.  "  Armand  Leslie." 

[Supposing  this  to  be  a  genuine  case,  it  is  still  highly  probable  that 
some  of  the  detail  of  the  apparition  was  read  back  into  it,  after  the  real 
facts  were  known.] 

The  lady  who  sends  us  the  following  narrative  occupies  a  position 
of  great  responsibility,  and  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  pub-  ^^ 

lished  ;  but  it  may  be  given  to  inquirers.  j/o  ^^ 

"1883.  t. 

(354)   "  When  I  was  eight  months  old,  my  mother's  younger  sister,  Mercy       '^  - 
Cox,    came  to  reside  with  us,  and  to  take   charge  of  me.     My   father's  ^ 

position  at  the  Belgian  Court,  as  portrait  painter,  obliged  him  to  be  much  5^"^ 
abroad,  and  I  was  left  almost  wholly  to  the  care  of  my  very  beautiful  aunt. 
The  affection  that  subsisted  between  us  amounted  almost  to  idolatry,  and 
my  poor  mother  wept  many  bitter  tears  when  she  came  home,  to  see  how 
little  I  cared  for  anyone  else.  My  aunt  took  cold,  and  for  three  years 
lingered  in  decline.  I  was  a  quick  child,  and  could  read  well  and  even 
play  prettily,  so  that  I  was  her  constant  companion  day  and  night.  Our 
doctor,  Mr.  Field,  of  the  Charter  House,  greatly  disapproved  of  this  close 
contact,  and  urged  my  parents  to  send  me  quite  away.  This  was  a 
difficult  feat  to  accomplish,  the  bare  mention  of  the  thing  throwing  my 
aunt  into  faintings.  At  last  Mr.  Cumberland  (the  theatrical  publisher) 
suggested  that  I  should  join  his  two  daughters,  Caroline,  aged  16,  and 
Lavinia,  younger,  at  Mrs.  Hewetson's,  the  widow  of  a  clergyman  resident  at 
Stourpaine,  in  Dorsetshire,  who  only  took  four  young  ladies.  This  was 
represented  to  my  aunt  as  something  so  wonderfully  nice  and  advantageous 
to  me,  that  she  consented  to  part  with  me.  My  portrait  was  painted,  and 
placed  by  her  bed,  and  I  remember  how  constantly  she  talked  to  me  about 
our  separation.  She  knew  she  should  be  dead  before  the  year  of  my 
absence  would  be  ended.  She  talked  to  me  of  this,  and  of  how  soon  I 
should  forget  her;  but  she  vehemently  protested  that  she  would  come  to 
me  there.  Sometimes  it  was  to  be  as  an  applewoman  for  me  to  buy  fruit 
of,  sometimes  as  a  maid  wanting  a  place,  always  she  would  know  me,  but 
I  should  not  know  her,  till  I  cried  and  implored  to  know  her. 

"  I  was  but  nine  when  they  sent  me  away,  and  coach  travelling  was  very  // 
slow  in  those  days.  Letters,  too,  were  dear,  and  I  very  rarely  had  one. 
My  parents  had  sickness  and  troubles,  and  they  believed  the  reports  that 
I  was  well  and  happy,  but  I  was  a  very  miserable,  illtreated  little  girl. 
One  morning,  at  break  of  day — it  was  New  Year's  Day — I  was  sleeping 
beside  Lavinia.  We  two  shared  one  little  white  tester  bed,  with  curtains, 
while  Caroline — upon  whom  I  looked   with  awe,  she  being  16,  slept  in 

254  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

another  similar  bed  at  the  other  end  of  a  long  narrow  room,  the  beds 
being  placed  so  that  the  feet  faced  each  other,  and  two  white  curtains  hung 
down  at  the  sides  of  the  head.  This  New  Year's  morning,  I  was  roughly- 
waked  by  Lavinia  shaking  me  and  exclaiming,  '  Oh  look  there !  there's 
your  aunt  in  bed  with  Caroline.'  Seeing  two  persons  asleep  in  the  bed,  I 
jumped  out,  and  ran  to  the  right  side  of  it.  There  lay  my  aunt,  a  little  on 
her  right  side,  fast  asleep,  with  her  mouth  a  little  open.  I  recognised  her 
worked  night-gown  and  cap.  I  stood  bewildered,  with  a  childish  sort  of 
wonder  as  to  when  she  could  have  come  ;  it  must  have  been  after  I  went 
to  bed  at  night.  Lavinia's  cries  awakened  Caroline,  who  as  soon  as  she 
could  understand,  caught  the  curtains  on  each  side  and  pulled  them 
together  over  her.  I  tore  them  open,  but  only  Caroline  lay  there,  almost 
fainting  from  fright.  This  lady.  Miss  Cumberland,  afterwards  became  Mrs. 
Part,  wife  of  a  celebrated  doctor  at  Camden  Terrace,  [and  now  deceased.] 

"  I  never  talked  of  what  had  occurred,  but  one  day,  after  I  had  long 
returned  home,  I  said  to  my  mother,  '  Do  you  know,  mamma,  I  saw  auntie 
when  I  was  at  school  % '  This  led  to  an  explanation,  but  my  mother, 
instead  of  commenting  upon  it,  went  and  fetched  her  mother,  saying  to 
her,  '  Listen  to  what  this  child  says.'  Young  as  I  was,  I  saw  they  were 
greatly  shocked,  but  they  would  tell  me  nothing  except  that  when  I  was 
older  I  should  know  all.  The  day  came  when  I  learned  that  my  dear 
aunt  suffered  dreadfully  from  the  noise  of  St.  Bride's  bells,  ringing  in  the 
New  Year.  My  father  tried  to  get  them  stopped,  but  could  not.  Towards 
morning  she  became  insensible ;  my  mother  and  grandmother  seated  on 
either  side  of  her,  and  holding  her  hands,  she  awoke  and  said  to  my 
mother,  'Now  I  shall  die  happy,  Anna,  I  have  seen  my  dear  child.' 
They  were  her  last  words.  "  D.  E.  W." 

No  general  register  of  deaths  was  kept  at  the  time  of  the  incident 
here  related  ;  and  we  have  exhausted  every  means  to  discover  a  notice 
of  the  death,  without  success.  But  we  have  procured  a  certificate  of 
Mercy  Cox's  burial,  which  took  place  on  January  11,  1829.  This  is  quite 
compatible  with  the  statement  that  the  death  was  on  January  1  (though 
such  an  interval,  even  in  winter,  is  no  doubt  unusual),  as  the  lady  was 
buried  in  a  family  vault,  and  probably  a  lead  coffin  had  to  be  made. 
January  1  would  be,  at  the  very  least,  a  day  of  very  critical  illness.  As 
to  the  date  of  the  apparition,  the  marked  character  of  New  Year's 
Day  decidedly  favours  the  probability  that  Miss  "W.'s  memory  is  correct. 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  W.  says  : — 

"I  was  born  in  1819.  The  death  of  my  aunt  took  place  in  1829. 
Though  to  my  most  intimate  friends — as  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  the  late 
Earl  and  Countesses  (2)  of  Dunraven,i  I  have  often  mentioned  the 
event,  (and  to  Judge  Halliburton,)  I  think  I  never  wrote  it  fully  except 
for  Lord  Dunraven  and  his  mother,  in  1850,  who  were  very  desirous  to 
publish  it,  but  I  declined.  I  think  that  a  great  reason  I  have  always  had 
for  not  talking  of  it  was  the  awe  with  which  it  inspired  my  mother,  and 
her  strict  commands  that  '  I  should  not  mention  it  to  anybody.'  Then, 
too,  I  went  to  school  and  lost  sight  of  Lavinia  Cumberland,  and  I  shrank 
from  the  comments  of  strangers." 

1  The  present  Lord  Dunraven  tells  us  that  he  does  not  remember  to  have  heard  his 
father  mention  the  circumstance. 

XVIII  ]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  255 

In  conversation  Miss  W.  added  that  she  had  never  experienced  any 
other  hallucination ;  also  that  the  Cumberland  girls  had  visited  her  home, 
and  seen  her  aunt — which  accounts  for  Lavinia's  recognition  of  the  figure. 

[We  learn,  through  a  relative  of  Miss  Lavinia  Cumberland  (now  Mrs. 
Monarch,  of  16,  Regent's  Park  Road,  N.W.),  that  she  herself  does  not 
recall  the  incident ;  but  that  she  remembers  several  times  hearing  her 
sister,  Mrs.  Part,  speak  of  a  "  ghost  case  "  in  which  they  had  both  been 
somehow  concerned.] 

a. 

This  case,  depending  on  the  narrator's  memoryat  31  of  what  occurred 
when  she  was  under  10,  is  not,  of  course,  a  strong  one  evidentially. 
But  the  very  fact  that  the  experience  recorded  is  of  so  striking  a 
kind  makes  it  more  probable  that  it  was  remembered  than  that  it 
was  unconsciously  invented.  The  very  odd  detail  of  Lavinia's 
being  the  first  to  see  the  figure  seems  peculiarly  unlikely  to  have 
been  wrongly  imagined  afterwards ;  for  it  is  a  feature  that  would 
have  had  no  natural  part  in  any  sentimental  idea  of  the  child's  about 
her  aunt's  visiting  her,  and  could  only  tend  to  detract  in  her  mind 
from  the  emotional  significance  of  the  visit.  We  have,  moreover,  the 
tolerably  complete  assurance  that  the  incident  deeply  impressed  our 
informant's  mother  at  the  time  ;  for  this  attitude  of  a  third  person, 
and  the  injunction  of  silence  to  which  it  led,  are  even  more  unlikely  f^^ 
than  the  original  experience  to  have  been  the  product  of  the  child's 
fancy.  It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  the  second  hallucina- 
tion may  have  been  due  to  Lavinia's  verbal  suggestion ;  and  that 
the  minute  details  of  the  appearance  (which  could  hardly  have 
been  so  suggested)  may  have  been  subsequently  imagined.  It  is 
possible,  therefore,  that  the  case,  though  telepathic,  may  not  have 
been  truly  collective.  It  cannot  with  any  certainty  be  reckoned 
as  reciprocal,  as  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  aunt's  "  seeing  of  her 
dear  child "  was  more  than  a  dream  or  a  subjective  impression 
(see  p.  156). 

In  Dr.  Leslie's  case  (supposing  the  account  to  be  substantially  true)  ;,',  .< 
one  of  the  percipients  was  presumably  a  total  stranger  to  the  agent. 
In  No.  354,  the  one  of  the  two  persons  present  who  was  least 
intimately  connected  with  the  agent  was  the  first  to  see  the 
phantasm ;  but  equally  in  this  as  in  the  former  case,  I  should  regard 
her  experience  as  dependent  on  the  presence  of  the  more  nearly 
connected  person  (see  §  7  below).  In  the  next  example  there  is  a 
yet  further  step  ;  and  of  the  two  persons  present,  one  of  whom  was  son, 
and  the  other  a  stranger,  to  the  agent,  the  stranger  alone  saw  the 

256  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

phantasm,  though  both  seem  to  have  shared  in  a  singular  auditory 
experience  which  they  connected  with  it.  The  incident  thus  closely 
resembles  that  described  in  case  242,  where  the  phantasm  appeared 
not  to  the  dying  man's  sister,  but  to  a  servant  who  was  with  her.  The 
narrative  was  copied  by  the  present  writer  from  a  note-book  of  the 
Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  formerly  of  Manchester,  and  now  of  Rhyl. 

(355)  "On  August  13tli,  1879,  I  sailed  to  Hamburg  with  Captain 
1  Ayre,  of  the  ss.  '  Berlin,'  of  Goole,  who  related  to  me  that,  about  25  years 
before,  he  was  staying  with  a  friend  named  Hunt,  at  a  small  farmhouse  at 
Arming  Grange,  about  21  miles  from  Goole.  On  a  summer  evening,  about  9 
o'clock,  Captain  Ayre  and  his  companion  went  to  their  bedroom,  when  they 
both  heard  a  noise  at  the  side  of  the  house,  and  both  went  to  the  window  to 
see  what  was  the  matter.  The  captain  distinctly  saw  a  man  walking  outside, 
but  Hunt  could  see  nothing  there,  though  he  had  heard  the  tramp  of  feet 
as  well  as  the  captain.  Being  astonished  that  Hunt  could  not  see  the  man, 
Captain  Ayre  proceeded  to  describe  him.  He  was  a  man  of  short  stature, 
with  a  stoop,  and  wore  knee  breeches,  a  red-fronted  waistcoat  with  sleeves, 
and  a  little  black  hat.  Hunt  instantly  identified  the  description  as 
answering  exactly  to  his  own  father.  Captain  Ayre  assured  me  he  had 
never  seen  Hunt's  father.  After  this  the  men  went  to  bed,  and  both  now 
heard  a  noise  as  if  the  end  of  the  bedstead  had  been  wrenched,  which 
continued  until  about  midnight,  when  Hunt's  brother  arrived  on  horseback 
from  Gilberdyke  with  the  news  of  their  father's  death,  which  occurred 
about  three  hours  earlier  that  evening.    The  noises  then  ceased." 

Mr.  Macdonald  adds  : — 

"  This  was  taken  down  by  me  in  pencil  from  Captain  Ay  re's  own  lips, 
and  transcribed  when  I  returned  from  the  voyage.  The  pencil  account 
was  read  over  to  Captain  Ayre,  and  pronounced  by  him  to  be  perfectly 
correct.  I  cross-examined  him  carefully  on  every  point.  He  specially 
described  the  lonely  position  of  the  house,  and  the  unlikelihood  of  any 
stranger  moving  about  in  the  vicinity  or  creating  a  disturbance  in  the 
bedroom.  "James  Alex.  Macdonald." 

This  account  was  sent  to  Captain  Ayre,  who  replied  : — 

"  SS.  '  Dresden,'  Goole. 

"November  4th,  1884. 
"  I  have  carefully  read  over  the  narrative,  as  given  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Macdonald  ;  but  it  is  so  accurate  in  every  detail  that  I  fail  to  be  able  to 
add  anything  thereto.  "  Chas.  Ayre." 

[Our  efforts  to  trace  Mr.  Hunt  have  been  unsuccessful.  Captain  Ayre 
has  not  heard  of  him  for  some  time.] 

In  the  next  case  the  agent  was  not  dying,  but  was  in  a  somewhat 
alarming  fainting-fit.  We  have  had  several  other  similar  cases  {e.g., 
Nos.  20  and  110)  ;  they  recall  what  was  said  above  (p.  26)  as  to  the 
number  of  the  death-cases  where  the  mode  of  death  has  been  drowning. 
The  narrator  is  Mr.  H.  G.  Barwell,  of  33,  Surrey  Street,  Norwich. 

xviil]  collective  CASES.  257 

"1883. 

(356)  "  During  the  last  week  of  July,  1882,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "W.  and  family  ' 
had  settled  themselves  comfortably  in  a  house  they  had  hired  at  the  Lizard, 
Cornwall;  and  a  few  days  later  Mr.  Cox,  an  amateur  artist  from  Liverpool, 
joined  them.  Mr.  Barwell  arranged  to  meet  Mr.  Earle,  an  artist  residing 
in  London  (both  of  whose  names  are  appended),  on  Monday,  7th  August, 
1882,  dine  with  him  and  together  take  the  night  mail  at  Paddington, 
booking  for  Penryn,  Cornwall,  the  station  from  whence  conveyances  take 
passengers  to  Helston,  and  thence  to  the  Lizard,  whither  they  were  going 
to  join  Mr.  W.  and  family,  as  on  many  former  occasions. 

"  Barwell  and  Earle  therefore  started  according  to  arrangement  by  the 
8.10  p.m.  mail  train  from  Paddington,  on  the  evening  of  Bank  Holiday, 
Monday,  7th  August,  1882.  They  travelled  all  night;  the  train  on 
arrival  at  Penryn  was  a  little  more  than  15  minutes  late,  reaching  there 
on  Tuesday  morning,  8th  August,  1882,  at  7.23  a.m.  No  other  passengers 
alighted  there  from  that  train.  They  had  some  difl&culty  in  getting  a 
porter  to  convey  their  luggage  to  the  omnibus  standing  at  the  station,  the 
driver  of  which  announced  that  if  they  could  not  come  at  once,  he  must 
start  without  them.  Passengers  were  nothing  to  him,  he  had  to  take 
charge  of  and  deliver  the  mail  bags  at  various  villages  on  his  route.  They 
roused  up  the  porter  and  insisted  on  his  attention  ;  in  the  meantime  their 
train  had  departed  and  another  train,  from  Falmouth  to  London,  ran  into 
the  station  (due  7.24  a.m.)  Their  luggage  was  being  placed  on  the 
omnibus;  Earle  had  already  climbed  to  his  seat  next  the  driver,  and 
Barwell,  having  now  seen  all  their  luggage  safely  deposited  on  the  vehicle, 
was  climbing  up  next  him,  when  Earle  exclaimed  :  '  Why,  look  there  ! ' 
And  on  Barwell  looking  up,  he  saw  in  the  train,  just  leaving  the 
station  for  London,  their  friend  W.  from  the  Lizard,  waving  his  hand  to 
them  while  eagerly  stretching  his  head  out  of  the  window  to  ascertain, 
apparently,  if  they  had  arrived.  They  both  cordially  returned  the  salute 
and  the  train  disappeared  round  a  curve,  W.  still  looking  out  of  the  window 
waving  his  hand. 

"  The  two  friends  now  made  various  conjectures  as  to  the  why  and 
wherefore  of  W.'s  departure  on  the  very  morning  of  their  arrival ;  they 
considered  it  very  disappointing  that  he  should  thus  be  obliged  to  leave,  on 
the  day  our  friendly  party  was  about  to  be  reunited.  Earle  was  greatly 
depressed  about  it,  and  wished  to  leave  all  further  discussion  on  the  subject 
until  they  should  ascertain  from  Mrs.  W.  the  cause  for  his  leaving  the 
Lizard  just  before  their  arrival.  Amongst  the  surmises  which  they  made 
for  W.  being  in  the  train  which  came  from  Falmouth,  and  not  from  the 
Lizard  where  he  was  staying,  was  this  ;  that  he  had  probably  received  at 
the  Lizard,  on  Monday,  the  7th  August,  a  telegram  requiring  his  immediate 
attendance  in  London  or  elsewhere,  and  that  to  prevent  a  very  early  start 
by  trap  on  Tuesday  morning  from  the  Lizard  to  catch  the  7.30  a.m.  train 
to  London  at  Penryn,  he  had  made  use  of  a  return  Bank  Holiday  excur- 
sion steamer  from  Falmouth  to  the  Lizard  ;  sleeping  at  Falmouth,  and 
starting  by  train  from  there  at  7.15  a.m.  for  London,  namely,  the  train 
they  saw  him  in. 

"  They  arrived  in  due  course  at  Helston,  had  breakfast,  and  sauntered 
about  the  old  town  tiL  the  next  coach  started  for  the  Lizard  at  1 1  o'clock 
a.m.     On  nearing  the  Lizard,  they  were  anxiously  on  the  look-out  for  the 

VOL.  II.  S 

258  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

children  of  Mrs.  W.,  to  receive  their  usual  hearty  and  sincere  welcome  on 
arrival  of  the  coach,  and  to  learn  from  them  where  their  respective  domiciles 
in  the  village  had  been  chosen.  The  coach  arrived,  but  none  of  the  W. 
family  were  to  be  seen. 

"  The  luggage  was  taken  off  the  coach  and  left  on  the  village  green  in 
front  of  the  hotel,  till  information  could  be  obtained  as  to  where  rooms  had 
been  engaged.  The  two  friends  strolled  away,  but  soon  met  W.'stwo  boys, 
who  on  being  asked  why  their  father  had  gone  away,  seemed  somewhat 
surprised  at  the  question,  and  replied  that  their  father  was  lying  ill  at  his 
lodgings,  and  that  their  mother  was  also  at  home  and  very  anxious  about 
him.  The  boys  accompanied  Earle  and  Barwell  to  their  father's  house  in 
the  village,  when  Mrs.  W.  came  out  and  greeted  them  cordially,  telling 
them  briefly  that  Mr.  W.  had  had  a  serious  fainting  fit  that  morning,  and 
that  she  was  watching  him  with  considerable  anxiety. 

"  Mr.  Cox  now  came  in  from  his  morning's  work,  and  after  the 
exchange  of  salutations  with  Earle  and  Barwell,  related  to  them  the 
following  details  of  Mr.  W.'s  fainting  fit :  That  he,  Mr.  W.,  and  his  two 
boys  started  from  the  Lizard  village  to  Housel  Cove  to  bathe,  at  7  o'clock 
that  morning,  a  distance  a  little  over  half  a  mile.  When  W.  came  out  of 
the  sea,  and  was  leaning  against  a  rock,  in  a  sitting  posture,  he  fainted 
quite  away.  Cox  was  dreadfully  shocked  and  alarmed,  for  at  one  time  he 
could  discover  no  action  of  the  heart,  and  he  feared  he  might  be  dead  or 
dying.  He  used  all  the  means  he  could  think  of,  and  placed  W.  in  a  more 
recumbent  position,  which  seemed  a  more  favourable  one,  for  pulsation 
was  then  discernible,  and  W.  partially  recovered,  but  was  too  weak  to 
move  for  a  long  time.  Mrs.  W  was  fetched,  and  then  breakfast  was  taken 
down  to  the  Cove,  and  when  vitality  and  strength  had  sufficiently  returned 
to  enable  W.  to  climb  the  steep  ascent  with  assistance,  they  started  home. 

"  The  fainting  of  W.  occurred  at  7.30  a.m.  at  Housel  Cove,  the  Lizard, 
at  the  precise  time  when  Earle  and  Barwell  saw  W.  waving  his  hand  to 
them  from  the  train  at  Penryn. 

"  The  question  has  been  put  to  Mr.  W.  whether  he  thought  of  or  saw 
Earle  or  Barwell,  either  just  before  or  during  his  seizure,  but  he  remembers 
nothing  of  the  kind. 

r  "Charles    Eaele,  9,    Duke    street,    Portland  Place, 
^^  /^.^      IN     J  London. 

\    &       )     I   "  H.  G.  Barwell,  Surrey  Street,  Norwich. 

y  "  Charles  H.  Cox,  Shrewsbury  Road,  N.,  Birkenhead." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barwell  says,  "  Both  Earle  and  I  have 
very  good  sight.  My  impression  is  that  the  person  I  saw  looking  from  the 
traiji  window  wore  a  soft,  flexible,  round  hat."  He  can  recall  no  other 
experience  of  hallucination,  except  one  which  occurred  many  years  ago,  at 
a  time  when  he  was  not  yet  fully  recovered  from  a  severe  fever. 

Mr.  Cox  writes,  on  January  2nd,  1885  : — 

"  I  was  at  the  Lizard,  in  Cornwall,  when  my  friends,  Earle  and 
Barwell,  saw  (as  they  believed)  the  '  double '  of  my  friend  W.,  whom,  at 
the  time,  1  was  instrumental  in  bringing  round  after  his  attack  of  illness. 
My  part  in  the  affair  was  simply  resuscitating  Mr.  W.  from  a  very  serious 
condition.  "  C.  H.  Cox." 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  259 

[Here,  again,  mistaken  identity  must  be  recognised  as  a  possibility ; 
but  there  are  several  points  which  combine  to  make  it  improbable.  The 
fact  which  the  appearance  forced  on  the  minds  of  the  two  friends — namely, 
W.'s  departure — was  so  little  in  accordance  with  their  expectations  that  it 
distinctly  surprised  them ;  they  were  thus  in  a  wholly  different  attitude 
from  that  (say)  of  awaiting  a  friend's  arrival,  when  the  senses  are  on  the 
alert  for  anything  at  all  resembling  him.  Again,  the  figure  seen  seems  to 
have  given  unmistakeable  signs  of  friendly  recognition  ;  so  that  we  should 
not  only  have  to  suppose  that  the  percipients  mistook  someone  for  their 
friend,  but  that  they  mistook  for  him  someone  who  was  known  to  them,  or 
at  any  rate  to  one  of  them — clearly  a  much  more  unlikely  occurrence.  It 
will  be  observed,  moreover,  that  the  difficulties  of  assuming  a  mistake  as  to 
identity  are  immensely  increased  where  two  persons  with  good  sight  would 
have  had  to  share  in  it  (see  p.  244).  Still,  it  is  conceivable — though 
scarcely  compatible  with  the  account — that  the  first  sign  of  recognition 
was  given  by  Mr.  Earle ;  and  that  a  stranger,  seeing  this  sign,  returned  it, 
either  in  joke,  or  imagining  that  the  giver  of  it  must  be  some  one  that  he 
had  known  and  ought  to  recognise.] 

I  will  conclude  with  a  case  which  is  probably  the  best-known 
specimen  of  the  sort  on  record,  and  on  that  very  account  may 
naturally  be  mistrusted,  as  having  "  won  its  way  to  the  mythical." 
The  following  presentation  of  it  is,  however,  very  much  more 
complete  than  any  that  has  yet  been  published,  and  is  of  a  better 
quality  than  is  often  procurable  for  so  remote  an  incident.  It  is  true 
that,  of  the  two  percipients,  we  have  the  evidence  of  one  only  at 
second-hand,  and  of  the  other  at  third-hand ;  but  we  have  the  first- 
hand evidence  of  a  person  who  was  informed  of  their  experience 
immediately  on  its  occurrence,  and  long  before  the  news  of  the  agent's 
death  arrived. 

(357)  The  following  memorandum  made  by  General  Birch  Reynardson, 
of  the  account  given  him  by  one  of  the  percipients,  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr. 
Wm.  Wynyard,  of  Northend  House,  Hursley,  Winchester.  He  believed 
the  original  document  to  be  in  the  library  of  Mr.  Chas.  Reynardson,  of 
Holywell  Hall,  Stamford,  who,  however,  has  looked  for  it  without  success. 
A  copy^  was  made  on  June  20,  1864,  by  Mr.  Wynyard's  father,  General 
E.  B.  Wynyard  (a  brother  of  George  Wynyard,  the  co-percipient,)  who 
says  that  the  writer  of  the  memorandum  put  it  on  paper  as  soon  as  he  had 
an  opportunity  after  the  conversation  recorded  therein.  General  E.  B. 
Wynyard  has  headed  the  paper  : — 

"  Memorandum  of  a  conversation  between  the  late  General  Birch 
Reynardson,  and  Colonel,  afterwards  Sir  John,  Sherbrooke." 

"  In  the  month  of  November,  Sir  John  Sherbrooke  and  General  Wyn- 

1  This  copy  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  to  Colonel  F,  Clinton,  of  Clinton  Ashley,  Lyming- 
ton,  Hants.  We  have  not  actually  inspected  it ;  but  Colonel  Clinton's  daughter  transcribed 
it  for  General  E.  B.  Wynyard's  son,  Mr.  W.  W.  Wynyard,  who  kindly  sent  us  the  book 
in  which  he  in  turn  had  copied  it.  It  is  curious  that  General  E.  B.  Wynyard  seems  never 
to  have  heard  the  narrative  first-hand  from  his  brother. 

VOL.    II.  s    2 

260  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

yard^  were  sitting  before  dinner  (between  5  and  6  o'clock)  in  their  barrack- 
room  at  Sydney  Cove,  in  America.  It  was  duskish,  and  a  candle  placed  on 
the  table  at  a  little  distance.  A  figure,  dressed  in  plain  clothes  and  a  good 
round  hat  ^  on,  passed  gently  between  the  above  people  and  the  fire. 
While  passing.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  exclaimed,  '  God  bless  my  soul,  who's 
that  ? '  Almost  at  the  same  moment  Colonel  W.  said,  '  That's  my  brother, 
John  Wynyard,^  and  I  am  quite  certain  he  is  dead.'  Colonel  W.  was 
much  agitated,  and  cried  and  sobbed  a  great  deal.  Sir  John  said,  '  The 
fellow  has  got  a  devilish  good  hat,  I  wish  I  had  it.'  *  They  immediately 
got  up  (Sir  John  was  on  crutches,  having  broken  his  leg),  took  a  candle, 
and  went  into  the  bedroom,  into  which  the  figure  had  entered  :  they 
searched  the  bed  and  every  corner  of  the  room  to  no  effect ;  the  windows 
were  fastened  up  with  mortar.  Mr.  Stuart,  the  paymaster  of  the  regiment, 
noted  the  circumstance  at  the  time.  Sir  John  told  me  that  Colonel  W, 
for  two  or  three  days  was  a  good  deal  distressed  and  uneasy,  but  remained 
most  perfectly  convinced  of  the  death  of  his  brother. 

"  They  received  no  communication  from  England  for  about  five  months, 
when  a  letter  from  Mr.  Rush,^  the  surgeon,  announced  the  death  of  John 
Wynyard  at  the  moment,  as  near  as  could  be  ascertained,  when  the  figure 
appeared.  In  addition  to  this  extraordinary  circumstance.  Sir  John  told 
me  that  two  and  a-half  years  afterwards  he  was  walking  with  Lilly  "Wyn- 
yard ^  in  London,  and  seeing  somebody  on  the  other  side  of  the  way,  he 
recognised,  he  thought,  the  person  who  had  appeared  to  him  and  Colonel 
Wynyard  in  America.  Lilly  Wynyard  said  that  the  person  he  pointed 
out  was  a  Mr.  Eyre  ;'^  that  he  had  always  been  considered  so  like  John 
Wynyard  that  they  were  frequently  mistaken  for  each  other ;  and  that 
money  had  actually  been  paid  to  this  Mr.  Eyre  in  mistake." 

The  following  account  appeared  in  Notes  and  Queries  for  July  2nd, 
1859,  in  a  letter  signed  "Eric." 

"On  the  23rd  of  October,  1823,  a  party  of  distinguished  hig-wigs  were 
dining  with  the  late  Chief  Justice  Sewell,  at  his  house  on  the  esplanade  in 
Quebec,  when  the  story  in  question  became  a  subject  of  conversation. 
Among  the  guests  was  Sir  John  Harvey,  Adjutant-General  of  the  forces 
in  Canada,  who  stated  that  there  was  then  in  the  garrison  an  officer  who 
knew  all  the  circumstances,  and  who,  probably,  would  not  object  to  answer 
a  few  queries  about  them.  Sir  John  immediately  wrote  five  queries, 
leaving  a  space  opposite  to  each  one  for  an  answer,  and  sent  them  to 
Colonel  Gore,  who,  if  my  memory  serves  me  rightly,  was  at  the  head  of 

1  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  Colonel  W.  and  Colonel  S.,  then  serving  in  the  23rd 
[?  33rd]  Regiment  as  Captains.  (?)  Oct.  15th,  1785."  We  learn  from  General  Edward 
Wynyard,  another  son  of  General  E.  B.  Wynyard,  that  George  Wynyard  died  in  1809,  as 
Lieut-Colonel. 

2  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  article  of  apparel  may  be  the  progenitor  of  the  very 
suspicious  hat  of  the  Warren  Hastings  legend,  criticised  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  152.  The  two 
narratives  have  been  probably  often  told  in  juxtaposition. 

3  General  Edward  Wynyard  tells  us  that  John  Wynyard  was  a  subaltern  in  the  3rd 
Guards. 

^  Note  by  the  Rev.  J.  Birch  Reynardson,  son  of  the  writer  of  the  memorandum,  and 
brother-in-law  of  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  He  told  my  father  that  he  made  this  remark,  as 
hats  were  not  to  begot  there,  and  theirs  were  worn  out." 

^  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.     "  Surgeon  of  the  Coldstream  Guards." 

8  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  L.  W.  was  brother  of  Colonel  W.,  and  died  in  the 
West  Indies,  Adjutant  of  the  20th  Regiment." 

T  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.     "(?)  Hay." 

xviil]  collective  CASES.  261 

either  the  Ordnance  or  the  Royal  Engineer  department.  The  following  is 
a  copy  of  both  the  queries  and  the  answers,  which  were  returned  to  Sir 
John  before  he  and  the  other  guests  had  left  the  Chief  Justice's  house  : — 

'"My  dear  Gore, 

"  '  Do  me  the  favour  to  answer  the  following  : — 

'  Queries. 

"  '  1.  Was  you  with  the  33rd  Regiment  when  Captains  Wynyard  and 
Sherbrooke  believed  that  they  saw  the  apparition  of  the  brother  of  the 
former  officer  pass  through  the  room  in  which  they  were  sitting  ? 

"  '  2.  Was  you  not  one  of  the  first  persons  who  entered  the  room,  and 
assisted  in  the  search  for  the  ghost  1 

'"3.  Was  you  not  the  person  who  made  a  memorandum  in  writing  of 
the  circumstances,  by  which  the  singular  fact  of  the  death  of  Wynyard's 
brother,  at  or  about  the  time  when  the  apparition  was  seen,  was 
established  1 

"  '  4.  With  the  exception  of  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke,  do  you  not  consider  your- 
self almost  the  only  surviving  evidence  of  this  extraordinary  occurrence  ? 

"  '  5.  When,  where,  and  in  what  kind  of  building  did  it  take  place  ? 

,,  ,  rri        1  •  '  (Signed)    J.  Harvey. 

"  '  ihursday  morning,  ^    °       ' 

"  '  23rd  October,  1823.' 

'  Answers. 

"  '  1.  Yes,  I  was.  It  occurred  at  Sydney,  in  the  Island  of  Cape  Breton, 
in  the  latter  end  of  1785  or  6,  between  8  and  9  in  the  evening.  We  were 
then  blocked  up  by  the  ice,  and  had  no  communication  with  any  other  part 
of  the  world.  '  R.G. 

"  '  2.  Yes.  The  ghost  passed  them  as  they  were  sitting  before  the  fire 
at  cofiee,  and  went  into  G.  Wynyard's  bed-closet,  the  window  of  which 
was  putted  (sic)  down.^  '  R.G. 

" '  3.  I  did  not  make  the  memorandum  in  writing  myself,  but  I 
suggested  it  the  next  day  to  Sherbrooke,  and  he  made  the  memorandum. 
I  remembered  the  date,  and  on  the  6th  June  our  first  letters  from  England 
brought  the  account  of  John  Wynyard's  death  on  the  very  night  they  saw 
his  apparition.  '  R.G. 

" '  4.  I  believe  all  are  dead,  except  Colonel  Yorke,  who  then  com- 
manded the  regiment,  and  is  Deputy-Lieutenant  of  the  Tower, — and  I 
believe  Jones  Pan  ton,  then  an  ensign  in  the  regiment.  '  R.G. 

"  '  5.  It  was  in  the  new  barracks  at  Sydney,  built  the  preceding 
summer,  one  of  the  first  erections  in  the  settlement. 

'  (Signed)  Ralph  Gore. 

"  '  Sherbrooke  had  never  seen  John  Wynyard  alive ;  but  soon  after 
returning  to  England,  the  following  year,  when  walking  in  Bond  Street 
with  Wm.  Wynyard,  late  D.  A.  General,  and  just  after  telling  him  the 
story  of  the  ghost,  [he]  exclaimed  "My  God/"  and  pointed  out  a  person — - 
a  gentleman — as  [being]  exactly  like  the  apparition  in  person  and  dress. 
This  gentleman  was  so  like  J.  Wynyard  as  often  to  be  spoken  to  for  him, 
and  afiected  to  dress  like  him.     I  think  his  name  was  Hayman. 

"  '  I  have  heard  Wm.  Wynyard  mention  the  above  circumstance,  and 
declare  that  he  then  believed  the  story  of  the  ghost.     '  (Signed)       R.G.' 

"  The  above  is  taken  from  a  copy  made  from  the  original  queries  and 

1  "  Query,  puttied  down,  to  exclude  the  cold  ?  " 

262  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

answers,  and  given  to  me,  only  a  few  weeks  after  the  date  affixed  to  the 
queries ;  and  to  it  is  added,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  copyist,  the 
following  : — 

"  '  A  true  copy  from  the  original.  The  queries  are  written  in  black  ink 
in  the  handwriting  of  Sir  John  Harvey,  Deputy  Adjutant-General  of 
British  America,  and  signed  by  him  ;  the  answers  are  in  red  ink,  written 
and  signed  by  Colonel  Gore.  The  original  paper  belongs  to  Chief  Justice 
Sewell.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  was  lately  Governor-General  of  Lower  Canada.^ 
It  is  said  that  Sir  John  Sherbrooke  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  subject 
spoken  of.' 

"The  copyist  was  a  near  relative  of  the  Chief  Justice,  and  died  in 
1832.     He  was  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends." 

[There  is  a  discrepancy  between  Colonel  Gore's  and  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's 
accounts,  as  to  which  of  the  Wynyard  brothers  accompanied  Sir  J.  Sher- 
brooke in  Bond  Street.  The  detail  as  to  the  Bond  Street  incident  following 
immediately  on  a  narration  of  the  story  looks  like  an  unfortunate  addition, 
the  only  effect  of  which  is  to  inspire  distrust,  probably  quite  undeserved,  of 
the  rest  of  the  statement.] 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  gentleman  who  sent  this  account 
to  Notes  and  Queries  did  not  sign  his  name.  It  is,  however,  highly 
improbable  that  Colonel  Gore's  statements  are  forgeries ;  and  we  are 
justified,  I  think,  in  regarding  them  as  genuine  by  the  following  account, 
received  from  a  niece  of  his.  Miss  Langmead,  of  Belmont,  Torre,  Torquay. 

"  September  3rd,  1883. 

"  Colonel  Gore,  of  the  33rd,  married  my  mother's  sister,  and  he 
narrated  the  story  to  my  mother  and  to  my  elder  sister  himself,  most 
emphatically.  I  have  heard  it  from  them  both,  over  and  over  again,  and 
my  sister  wrote  the  account  some  years  ago.  She  heard  Colonel  Gore  tell 
it  more  than  once,  and  always  with  strong  feeling,  which  impressed  every 
word  on  her  memory.  I  have  not  got  her  paper  now,  but  I  knew  it 
perfectly  by  heart.  I  have  often  heard  my  sister  say  that  no  one  who 
heard  Colonel  Gore  tell  the  story  could  doubt  the  powerful  impression 
made  on  him  at  any  rate. 

"  There  were  other  little  particulars,  such  as  the  impossibility  of  hiding 
in  the  barrack  rooms,  which  were  two  above  and  two  below,  and  so 
slightly  built  that  every  sound  was  heard,  but  I  have  not  enlarged  more 
than  I  could  help.  The  story  has  been  printed  with  variations  in  many 
books  of  collected  ghost^stories,  but  not  always  correctly.  It  is  usually 
said  that  it  was  a  twin  brother  who  was  met  in  Bond  Street,  but  that  was 
not  the  case. 

"  It  was  in  the  time  of  the  American  war,  and  some  of  our  troops  were 
in  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Breton.  The  weather  was  very  severe  and  the 
harbour  frozen  over.  The  ships  expected  from  England  had  not  arrived, 
and  the  supplies  had  run  short,  especially  the  allowance  of  wine.  Four 
officers,  afterwards  entitled  General  [mistake  for  Colonel]  Wynyard,  Sir 
John  Sherbrooke,  Sir  Hildebrand  Oakes,  and  Colonel  Gore,  of  the  23rd 
[?  33rd]  Regiment,  were  in  barracks  at  the  top  of  a  steep  ascent,  guarded 
by  a  sentry  below.  They  had  dined  together  and  then  separated,  two  of 
them  being  engaged  upstairs  in  looking  over  maps  and  plans  of  the  seat 

1  "  From  July,  1816,  to  July,  1818." 

XVIII.]  .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  363 

of  war.     The  other  two,  General  Wynyard  and  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke,  remained 
in  the  inner  room. 

"  Suddenly  an  exclamation  from  General  Wynyard  startled  the  two 
above,  who  ran  downstairs,  expecting  that  the  ice  had  broken  and  the 
looked-for  ships  arrived.  They  found  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  alone,  standing 
amazed,  and  in  answer  to  their  eager  inquiry  as  to  what  had  happened,  he 
said  that  a  gentleman,  a  stranger  to  him,  had  come  in  at  the  door,  looked 
fixedly  at  General  W.,  and  passed  into  the  inner  room.  General  W.  exclaimd 
aloud,  '  Good  God,  my  brother  Jack ! '  and  followed  him  into  the  bed- 
room, from  which  there  was  no  outlet.  He  presently  returned,  much 
agitated,  having  found  no  one.  Colonel  Gore  took  out  his  watch  and 
marked  the  time,  while  another  of  the  party  ran  down  to  the  sentinel,  who 
declared  no  person  had  passed.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  described  the  figure  as 
dressed  in  a  hunting  costume,  such  as  he  had  never  seen,  with  a  hunting- 
whip  in  his  hand.  Days  went  on,  the  ice  broke  up,  news  came  from 
England  to  General  W.  of  his  brother's  death,  who  was  killed  in  the 
hunting-field  at  the  very  time  in  which  the  figure  appeared  in  the  barrack- 
room.  Papers  also  came  out,  containing  the  fashions,  one  being  the 
hunting  suit  with  a  particularly  shaped  boot,  such  as  the  figure  had  worn. 
After  the  peace,  and  the  troops  had  returned  to  England,  Sir  John  Sher- 
brooke was  walking  through  Bond  Street  with  Colonel  Gore,  when  he 
stopped  and  said,  pointing  to  a  man  who  was  coming  towards  him,  '  There 
is  the  figure  I  saw  at  Cape  Breton.'  Colonel  Gore  replied,  '  That  man  was 
called  Jack  Wynyard's  double,  he  was  so  very  like  him.' 

"  Before  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's  death,  long  afterwards,  he  was  asked  by  a 
friend  what  he  then  thought  of  the  apparition  at  Cape  Breton.  He  replied 
that  he  could  not  explain  it,  but  that  every  detail  was  true. 

"  M.  E.  L." 

[Here  the  hunting-dress,  and  the  corresponding  detail  about  the 
hunting-field,  may  almost  certainly  be  referred  to  a  transformative  process 
in  Colonel  Gore's  mind.  The  peculiar  boot  may  probably  be  a  degenerate 
representative  of  the  spruce  hat  in  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's  account.  It  would 
further  be  a  very  natural  mistake  on  the  part  of  Colonel  Gore's  niece  to 
imagine  that  he  was  Sherbrooke's  companion  in  the  walk  in  Bond  Street.] 

Next  come  two  items  of  evidence,  for  which  George  Wynyard,  the  co- 
percipient,  was  the  original  authority. 

General  Edward  Wynyard,  of  5,  Portman  Street,  W.,  writing  to  us  on 
April  7,  1885,  tells  us  that  the  incident  was  narrated  to  him  by  his  aunt, 
Mrs.  Wright,  who  "  had  often  heard  the  story  "  from  her  brother,  George 
Wynyard.  He  observes  that  her  narrative  corresponded  in  nearly  every 
particular  with  the  account  given  in  Chamnbers'  Book  of  Days,  Vol.  II., 
p.  448.  The  said  account  (the  authority  for  which  is  not  given,  save  in  so 
far  that  a  relative  of  George  Wynyard  had  pronounced  it  substantially 
true,)  agrees  in  the  essential  points  with  Colonel  Gore's  -^  but  differs  in 
stating  that  the  subsequent  recognition  took  place  when  Sherbrooke  was 

1  Miss  Browne  wrote  to  us  on  Jan.  18,  1884,  from  Farnham  Castle,  Surrey,  to  the 
effect  that  she  too  had  heard  the  incident  described  by  Mrs.  Wright,  and  also  by  "  General 
Sir  George  Nugent,  who  was  in  the  garrison  at  the  time  "  ;  and  that  the  details  were  very 
similar  to  those  in  Miss  Langmead's  account. 

264  .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

■walking  with  two  gentlemen,  in  Piccadilly,  and  that  he  actually  accosted 
the  gentleman,  who  told  him  that  he  was  Wynyard's  twin-hr other.  These 
are  precisely  the  sort  of  inaccuracies  most  likely  to  creep  into  a  story  in 
its  passage  from  mouth  to  mouth. 

The  Rev.  O.  H.  Gary,  of  Tresham  Vicarage,  Chudleigh,  wrote  to  our 
friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  on  April  3,  1882  :— 

"  The  story,  as  my  mother,  who  heard  it  from  Wynyard  himself,  used 
to  tell  it,  was  as  follows  : — General  Sherbrooke  and  Mr.  (or  General) 
Wynyard  were  sitting  together  in  a  hut  in  Canada  (or  Nova  Scotia  or 
elsewhere  in  North  America)  when  a  figure  entered  the  tent  and  passed 
through  into  an  inner  apartment,  whence  there  was  no  means  of  exit  except 
where  they  were  sitting.  Wynyard  recognised  the  figure  as  that  of  his 
brother,  but  thought  someone  was  playing  practical  jokes,  as  he  knew 
his  brother  to  be  in  England  at  the  time.  On  searching  the  inner  room 
the  figure  was  found  to  have  disappeared. 

"  They  had  both  seen  the  figure.  The  brother  died  at  that  time.  Some 
years  afterwards,  the  same  two  officers  were  walking  together  in  London, 
when  Sherbrooke  saw  a  man  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street,  and  said, 
'  Look,  there  is  the  man  that  we  saw  in  the  tent.'  Wynyard  replied,  '  No, 
that  is  not  my  brother,  but  he  is  so  like  him  that  my  brother  was  once 
arrested  for  debt  in  mistake  for  him.'  " 

[Here  again  we  have  characteristic  illustrations  of  the  way  in  which 
narratives  become  modified  in  transmission.  "The  same  two  ofiicers"is 
of  course  neater  and  easier  to  remember  than  "  one  of  the  same  officers 
and  a  brother  of  the  other  "  ;  and  the  "  arrest  for  debt  "  seems  to  be  an 
oddly  inverted  reminiscence  of  the  detail  mentioned  by  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke, 
that  "  money  had  been  paid  to  one  in  mistake  "  for  the  other.] 

In  conclusion,  the  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  of 
October  20,  1881:— 

"  Sir, — In  reference  to  the  circumstances  related  as  occurring  in  Sir 
John  Sherbrooke's  tent,  in  North  America,  permit  me  to  add  that  I  heard 
an  exactly  similar  account  of  it  in  Dublin  about  the  year  1837,  by 
General  D'Aguilar,  then  on  the  stafi",  and  who,  I  think,  had  been  one  of 
the  occupants  of  the  tent.^  Colonel  '  Wynyard's  '  name,  who  was  on  the 
Dublin  stafi"  at  the  time,  was  also  mentioned. — Yours  truly, 

"  G.  Ceichton,  M.D." 

I  7.  The  cases  of  the  preceding  section,  and  of  §  2,  though  not 
evidentially  among  the  strongest  in  our  collection,  are  sufficient,  I 
think,  to  establish  a  strong  presumption  for  the  genuineness  of  this 
collective  type  of  telepathic  hallucination.  But  the  establishment  of 
facts,  in  "  psychical  "  as  in  other  departments  of  Nature,  may  far  out- 
strip our  power  of  satisfactorily  accounting  for  them  ;  and  such 
account  as  I  can  render  of  these  phenomena  is  here  put  forward  rather 
as  a  suggestion  or  adumbration  than  as  a  final  view. 

1  This  does  not  appear  in  any  other  account.  Complete  information  as  to  various 
details  could  only  be  obtained  by  a  search  in  the  archives  of  the  War  Office.  It  is  hoped 
that  in  course  of  time  this  search  may  be  authorised. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  265 

To  begin  with,  it  would,  I  think,  be  irrational  not  to  recognise  a 
special  significance  in  the  fact  that  in  all  the  cases  of  §  6,  and  most 
of  those  of  §  5,  the  several  percipients  were  together :  to  that  extent, 
at  all  events,  conditions  of  place  seem  to  enter  vitally  into  the  pheno- 
mena. But  there  is  nothing  in  this  that  need  drive  us  for  a  moment  off 
idealistic  or  "  psychical  "  ground.  I  have  spoken  often,  throughout  the 
book,  of  a  rapport  between  the  parties  concerned  in  a  psychical  trans- 
ference— meaning  by  the  word  simply  some  pre-existing  psychical 
approximation  which  conditions  the  transference.  The  rapport  has 
usually  been  that  of  kinship  or  affection.  But  I  regard  these 
collective  cases  as  strongly  indicative  of  a  rapport  of  a  different  sort 
— consisting  not  in  old-established  sympathy,  but  in  similarity  of 
immediate  mental  occupation.  I  suspect  that  such  a  rapport  might 
be  induced  by  a  common  environment — by  partnership  in  that 
particular  piece  of  the  "  life  of  relation  "  within  which  the  hallucina- 
tion happens  to  fall.  That  is  to  say,  I  should  regard  the  fact  that 
B's  hallucination  spreads  to  C,  when  B  and  C  are  in  the  same  place, 
as  possibly  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  a  very  important  part  of  the 
contents  of  B's  and  C's  minds  is — and  has  been  for  some  hours, 
minutes,  or  moments  preceding — identical.  The  local  condition  would 
be,  not  any  physical  presence  or  centre  of  influence  in  the  circle  of 
space  outside  them,  but  the  community  of  scene,  and  of  other 
objective  impressions,  in  the  two  parallel  currents  of  ideas  which  are 
their  real  two  existences.^  It  must  be  remembered  that  we  have  no 
d  priori  means  of  knowing  what  the  mental  conditions  that  favour 
telepathy  are  likely  to  be.  And  I  venture  to  think  that  if,  by  some 
process  of  psychical  chemistry,  the  elements  and  affinities  of  different 
minds  at  particular  moments  could  be  analysed  and  estimated,  mere 
community  of  scene  and  of  immediate  sensory  impression  might  count 
for  more — might  prove,  that  is,  to  involve  a  larger  amount  of  real 
correspondence  or  identity — than  the  external  and  accidental 
character  of  such  passing  experience  might  have  led  us  to  expect. 

But  this  idea,  if  tenable,  seems  capable  of  being  extended.  If 
community  of  environment  opens  a  channel  of  supersensuous  com- 
munication between  B  and  C,  we  come  to  conceive  a  greater  fluidity 
(so  to  speak)  in   the    directions  of  telepathic  transference  than  the 

1  A  similar  explanation  may  be  suggested  for  the  fact  that  thought-transference 
experiments  rarely  succeed  when  agent  and  percipient  are  so  far  withdrawn  from^  one 
another  as  to  have  quite  different  environments.  This  fact  would  otherwise  seem 
explicable  only  by  some  hypothesis  of  "  brain- waves  "  diminishing  in  strength  with  the 
increase  of  the  distance  between  the  parties — a  hypothesis  which  has  the  disadvantage  of 
being  quite  inapplicable  to  many  of  the  facts  of  spontaneous  telepathy  (Vol.  i.,  p.  112). 

266  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

more  usual  cases  of  a  distant  agent  and  a  single  percipient  could 
reveal.  And  this  brings  me  to  what  I  suspect  to  be  a  more  correct 
account  of  the  collective  telepathic  cases  that  have  been  passed  in 
review. 

In  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,  I  consulted  clearness  by  keeping 
separate  the  hypothesis  (1)  of  joint  and  independent  affection  of  B  and 
C  by  A,  and  the  hypothesis  (2)  of  C's  affection  by  B  who  alone  is 
directly  affected  by  A.  Now  looking  back  at  these  hypotheses  in  the 
light  of  the  evidence,  the  objections  (see  §  2)  to  the  assumption  of 
independent  psychical  affection  of  B  and  C  by  A  come  back  on  us 
with  only  increased  force.  As  long  as  telepathic  hallucinations  are 
rare,  and  lead  by  their  rarity  to  the  conclusion  that  they  generally 
require  not  only  an  abnormal  condition  of  the  agent,  but  specific 
susceptibility  in  the  percipient,  nothing  can  make  it  seem  otherwise 
than  astonishing  that  two  closely  similar  specimens  of  them,  in  con- 
nection with  the  same  agent,  should  independently  concern  two 
percipients  at  the  same  moment.  One  might  admit  such  an 
astonishing  coincidence  once  or  twice — I  have  suggested  its  applica- 
tion to  a  few  cases  in  §  2  above  ;  ^  but  it  seems  impossible  to  lay  it 
down  as  a  principle  of  explanation,  by  which  any  number  of 
collective  hallucinations  may  be  accounted  for.  No  view  which 
shrinks  from  assuming  a  local  and  physical  presence  of  A,  and  at 
the  same  time  rejects  every  sort  of  direct  transference  between  B  and 
C,  can  avoid  this  difficulty ;  and  the  consideration  seems  to  me  of 
such  weight  as  to  exclude  hypothesis  (1)  in  the  form  stated.  I  feel 
absolutely  driven  to  suppose  that  where  C's  experience  resembles  B's, 
it  is  in  some  direct  way  connected  with  B's  ;  this  is  the  only  alter- 
native that  I  can  see  to  admitting  a  physical  basis  to  the  percept. 
But  this  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  adoption  of  hypothesis  (2)  in 
its  crudest  and  most  obvious  form ;  the  "  direct  way "  need  not,  I 
conceive,  be  a  transfer  between  B  and  C  wholly  unconnected  with  A 
— a  transfer,  that  is  to  say,  which  must  have  equally  taken  place  had 
B's  hallucination  been  purely  subjective.  Though  the  evidence  in 
§  5  above  inclines  me  strongly  to  the  opinion  that  sensory  hallucina- 
tions, as  such,  are  transferable  things,  I  do  not  believe  this  to  be  the 
complete  explanation  of  the  later  telepathic  cases.  And  I  now 
venture  to  suggest  that  with  slight  modification  the  two  hypotheses 
— of  joint  affection  by  A,  and  of  direct  transference  between  B  and  C 

1  In  all  of  these,  however,  where  the  two  percipients  were  near  together  and  had  been 
sharing  the  same  life,  I  think  it  probable  that  the  experiences  were  not  truly  independent. 

xviil]  collective  CASES.  267 

— may  be  amalgamated  ;  and  that  the  amalgamation  is  really  more 
probable  than  either  hypothesis  in  its  isolated  form. 

Where  A,  the  distant  agent,  is  in  rapport  both  with  B  and  C, 
it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  B  and  C  are  jointly  and  independently 
impressed  by  A,  though  the  particular  form — the  hallucination — in 
which  they  simultaneously  embody  their  impression  is  still  an  effect 
of  B's  mind  on  C's,  or  of  C's  on  B's.  The  joint  impression  from  A 
may  be  conceived  as  having  in  itself  a  tendency  to  facilitate  this 
farther  effect — that  is  to  say,  psychical  communication  between  B  and 
C  may  find  a  readier  and  wider  channel  at  the  exceptional  moments 
when  they  are  attuned  by  a  common  telepathic  influence  than,  e.g., 
when  one  of  them  is  staring  at  a  card  and  the  other  is  endeavouring 
to  guess  it.  But  even  for  these  cases,  I  think  it  so  dangerous, 
in  view  of  the  apparent  rarity  of  "  psychical "  affections,  to  assume 
any  sort  of  independent  psychical  affection  of  different  minds  at 
the  same  moment,  that  I  should  prefer  to  regard  A's  influence  on 
C  as  derived  through  B.  And  this  certainly  commends  itself  as  the 
process  where  C  is  a  stranger  to  A,  or  not  a  person  whom  it  would 
have  seemed  natural  that  A's  vicissitudes  should  in  any  way  affect.^ 
In  such  cases  I  conceive  that,  while  C's  experience  depends  on  B's 
presence  or  existence,  and  even  probably  on  the  form  of  B's  experience 
when  the  two  are  similar,  yet  A's  influence  may  really  and  truly 
extend  to  C ;  that  in  fact  there  is  a  rapport  between  A  and  C, 
established  ad  hoc  by  the  rapport  of  both  of  them  with  B.  B  would 
be  thus  not  the  instigator,  or  not  solely  the  instigator,  but  the  channel, 
of  C's  percipience — the  assumption  being  that  a  mind  in  which  B 
holds  a  prominent  place,  such  as  C's,  may  be  abnormally  susceptible 
to  an  influence  which  abnormally  impresses  B.  Especially  would  this 
conception  relieve  the  difiiculty  of  such  extreme  cases  as  Nos.  242  and 
355,  above  ;  where  B's  part  in  the  occurrence  was  to  all  appearance 
suppressed,  and  C,  a  stranger  to  A,  was  the  sole  percipient.^  We  can 
scarcely  doubt  that  the  presence  of  B,  the  near  relative  of  the  supposed 
agent,  was  a  condition  of  C's  percipience  ;  while  at  the  same  time  it 
seems  absurd  to  suppose  that  B  infects  C  with  a  sensory  hallucination 
which  he  himself  does  not  experience.  We  seem  driven,  then,  to 
regard  B  as  a  mere  channel  of  influence  ;  and  that  is  a  part  which 
there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  to  be  played  unconsciously.     For 

1  E.g.,  cases  169,  264,  279,  339,  348,  350,  353,  354,  357. 

2  See  also  case  307,  where  A's  bond,  such  as  it  was,  was  with  B  and  not  with  O ;  and 
compare  case  311. 

268  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap. 

the  better  established  facts  of  telepathy  have  familiarised  us  with 
both  unconscious  reception  and  unconscious  propagation  of  telepathic 
impulses ;  and  however  unexpected,  it  is  at  least  quite  conceivable 
that  the  two  events  should  take  place  as  part  of  a  single  process — 
which  is  all  that  the  transmission  of  an  impulse  from  A  to  C  through 
the  unwitting  B  implies. 

The  above  view,  of  rapport  through  community  of  mental  occupa- 
tion, may  likewise  afford  some  explanation  of  the  otherwise  puzzling 
cases  where  the  telepathic  influence  exercised  by  A  seems  itself  to 
have  depended  rather  on  local  than  on  personal  reasons  ;  as  in  case  29 
in  Chap.  Y.,  where  the  agent's  form  was  seen  by  a  person  only 
slightly  connected  with  her,  in  a  spot  in  which  she  was  known 
to  have  been  considerably  interested ;  ^  or  in  cases  where  the 
actual  percipient  had  little  or  no  connection  with  the  agent,  but  was 
situated  in  a  place  where  the  agent  might  naturally  conceive  some 
other  and  nearly-connected  person  to  be  ;  ^  or  in  cases  where  a  dying 
person's  form  is  alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  strangers  in  that  person's 
old  homef  or  in  a  converse  case  in  Chap.  III.  of  the  Supplement, 
§  3 — Miss  G.'s  veridical  dream  of  the  death  of  a  comparative  stranger 
in  her  own  old  home.  It  is  not  necessary  that  two  persons 
should  know  one  another,  for  certain  daily  scenes  and  local  impressions 
to  be  deeply  stamped  in  common  on  their  two  minds ;  and  in  this 
way  locality  might  constitute  an  ideal  bond  between  A  and  B  who 
are  apart,  as  we  conceived  that  it  might  do  between  B  and  C  who  are 
together. 

An  even  further  extension  could  be  given  to  this  idea,  if  we  admit 
the  supposition  that  A's  own  susceptibility  may  be  quickened,  in  the 
way  that  was  so  strongly  suggested  by  some  of  the  reciprocal  cases  in 
the  preceding  chapter.  I  there  pointed  out  (pp.  161-2  and  164)  the 
indications  afforded  of  a  special  sort  of  clairvoyance  ;  telepathic,  in  the 
sense  that  it  depends  on  B's  living  presence  in  the  scene  which  A 
perceives  ;  but  independent  in  the  sense  that  B  and  his  surroundings 
are  perceived  while  B's  own  state  is  not  critical  but  normal — the 
abnormality  of  state  being  confined  to  A,  whose  extension  of  faculty 
in  trance  or  at  death  makes  him  percipient  of  B,  as  well  as  the  agent 
of  B's  percipience.  A  view  akin  to  this  has  been  developed  by  Mr. 
Myers,  in  the  Note  that  follows  a  few  pages  further  on ;  and  the 

1  It  is  probable  that  a  local  explanation  would  apply  to  cases  239,  248,  313,  343,  350, 
589. 

2  E.g.,  Nos.  192,  225,  660,  as  well  as  No.  242  just  mentioned ;  and  compare  No.  307. 
*  E.g.,  case  666. 

XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  269 

temptation  to  apply  it  to  the  collective  cases  is  considerable,  since  it 
enables  us  to  conceive  the  scene,  and  the  sense  of  being  present  there, 
as  common  to  the  minds  of  A,  B,  and  C  alike ;  and  so  far  as  such 
community  is  a  favourable  condition  for  telepathic  affection,  it  would 
explain  A's  power  to  affect  the  other  two.^  To  some  joint  hallucina- 
tions, however,  {e.g.,  cases  327,  328,  329,  and  perhaps  348,  where  A, 
the  original  of  the  phantasm,  has  been  in  a  normal  waking  state  at 
the  time,  such  an  explanation  seems  quite  irrelevant ;  and  its  admis- 
sibility elsewhere  must,  I  think,  depend  on  our  obtaining  more  proof 
than  we  yet  have  of  A's  reciprocal  percipience,  in  collective  cases 
which  are  clearly  due  to  his  agency.  The  reciprocal  type  having 
seemed,  on  the  evidence,  to  be  a  rare  if  not  a  doubtful  one,  we  ought 
to  be  doubly  cautious  of  making  it  the  ground  of  explanation  for 
further  and  more  perplexing  phenomena. 

1  I  do  not  think — herein  differing  from  Mr.  Myers — that  the  mere  fact  of  A's  clair- 
voyant perception  of  the  scene,  even  if  established,  would  account  for  the  similarity  and 
simultaneity  of  the  two  resulting  affections,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  dispense  with  the 
hypothesis  of  a  direct  dependence  of  one  of  them  on  the  other.  Strong  evidence  seems 
needed,  before  we  can  assume  the  particular  mental  events  involved  in  A's  clairvoyant 
perception  to  be  more  calculated  than  any  other  abnormal  events  of  his  experience — such 
as  simply  dying  in  his  bed  at  home — to  impose  a  particular  hallucination  on  several  minds 
at  once.  However  much  his  clairvoyant  perception  of  B  and  C  and  their  surroundings 
may  be  supposed  to  facilitate  his  impressing  them,  why  should  the  two  independent 
impressions,  which  according  to  telepathic  analogy  might  take  many  different  forms,  be 
projected  by  B  and  C  in  the  same  form  ? 

While  therefore  I  can  accept,  for  certain  cases  at  any  rate,  Mr.  Myers'  description  of 
the  appearance  of  A  to  B  as  proximately  dependent  on  A's  "perception  of  his  own 
presence"  in,  or  his  "psychical  translation"  to,  the  scene  where  his  phantasm  is 
observed — for  this  is  practically  identical  with  the  suggestion  made  above  (p.  162)  that  an 
"extension  of  A's  susceptibility  in  a  certain  direction  has  involved  the  power  to  act 
abnormally  in  the  same  direction  " — I  cannot  go  on  to  admit  that  it  is  "  a  subsidiary 
question,"  depending  on  varying  degrees  of  susceptibility  to  telepathic  impressions, 
whether  the  phantasm  is  seen  by  B  only,  or  by  a  whole  group  of  persons.  To  do  this 
would  seem  to  me  to  be  transferring  to  the  terms  "perception  of  presence  "  and  "  psychical 
translation  "  some  of  the  connotation  of  physical  presence  and  translation. 

Mr.  Myers  would  obviate  this  objection  by  the  further  supposition  that  the  aspect  of 
A  which  B  and  C  perceive  is  derived  in  detail  from  his  mind  and  not  theirs — which  would 
no  doubt  be  a  convenient  way  of  accounting  for  the  similarity  of  their  hallucinations.  But 
in  the  first  place,  I  fail  to  see  any  ground  for  connecting  this  suijjjosition  (as  Mr.  Myers 
connects  it)  with  the  previous  hypothesis  of  A's  clairvoyant  presence  at  the  place  where  B 
and  C  are.  The  supposed  derivation  would  clearly  have  to  be  from  an  unconscious  or 
sub-conscious  iiart  of  A's  mind ;  for  there  is  no  more  reason  for  supposing  his  conscious 
thoughts  to  be  concentrated  on  his  own  aspect  when  he  is  clairvoyantly  perceiving  a 
scene,  than  when  he  is  consciously  lying  in  bed  and  perceiving  his  normal  surroundings  in 
a  normal  way.  And  so  far  as  any  conscious  occupation  of  the  mind  may  be  supposed 
to  throw  into  abeyance  any  assumed  mental  activities  of  a  more  latent  kind,  one  would 
expect  that  A's  interest  in  the  friend  or  friends  whom  he  is  psychically  visiting  would  be 
specially  calculated  to  thrust  into  the  background  his  sub-conscious  sense  of  his  own 
aspect ;  so  that  the  difficulties  (Chap,  iii.,  §  9,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  which  in  any  case  are 
involved  in  the  hypothesis  that  A's  mind  transfers  to  B  the  detailed  image  of  his  aspect, 
are  rather  increased  than  relieved  by  supposing  him  clairvoyant  at  the  time. 

And,  in  the  second  place,  this  hypothesis  of  detailed  derivation  from  the  agent's 
mind,  as  applied  to  collective  cases,  seems  to  me  in  itself  open  to  grave  doubt.  We  have 
encountered,  no  doubt,  an  important  group  of  cases  (Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  in  which  certain 
details  of  a  phantasmal  appearance  did  seem  to  be  literally  derived  from  the  agent's 
mind,  and  not  simply  projected  by  the  percipient  from  his  own  resources.  But  those 
who  admit  the  psychological  continuity  of  dreams  and  hallucinations  on  which  I  have 
laid   so  much  stress,    and   who  have  marked  at  every   stage  the  ways  in    which    the 

270  COLLECTIVE  CASES. 

And  indeed  any  conjectural  explanations  of  these  more  outlying 
telepathic  phenomena  have,  I  am  well  aware,  an  air  of  rashness  and 
unsoundness.  This  may  very  likely  be  due  to  their  being  really 
rash  and  unsound ;  but  it  may  also  possibly  be  due  to  the  fact  that 
our  view  of  the  field  before  us  is  still  very  partial  and  dim.  The  duty 
of  caution  in  all  evidential  matters  does  not  exclude  the  duty  of 
keeping  the  mind  open  to  new  conceptions  on  this  threshold  of  new 
knowledge,  and  not  allowing  any  h3rpothesis  that  has  provisionally 
commended  itself  to  become  a  rigid  barrier,  within  which  further 
facts  must  be  forced  or  else  disallowed.  And  if  our  central  thesis 
stands — if  "  psychical  "  transferences  from  mind  to  mind  be  admitted 
as  in  rerum  naturd — the  rashness,  I  think,  would  be  in  attempting 
to  set  a  limit  to  the  possible  implications  of  this  admission.  Its 
tendency,  at  any  rate,  is  to  give  a  tangible  meaning  to  that  solidarity 
of  life  which  Idealism  proclaims  ;  to  lead  us  to  regard  individual 
minds,  not  as  isolated  units,  but  as  all  in  potential  unity — as  entering 
into  a  scheme  whose  relation  to  the  telergic  influence  somewhat 
resembles  that  of  the  physical  world  to  electricity.  And  in  such  a 
scheme  we  need  not  be  surprised  if  the  manifestations  of  action  and 
affinity  between  the  parts  are  as  sudden  and  shifting,  and  to  the 
superficial  view  as  isolated,  as  in  the  physical  world  those  of  electrical 
relations  between  different  pieces  of  matter.  But  a  far  larger  basis  of 
well-attested  cases  is,  no  doubt,  needed  before  reflections  of  this  sort 
can  be  profitably  pursued ;  ^nd  I  will  not  further  run  the  risk  of 
inverting  the  relation  of  speculation  to  evidence  which  it  has  been 
throughout  my  endeavour  to  maintain. 

percipient's  mind  seems  independently  to  react  upon  and  develop  the  telepathic  impres- 
sion, may  incline  to  regard  these  literal  representations  as  the  exception  rather  than  the 
rule  ;  and  may  hesitate  to  extend  the  hypothesis  of  visual  images  transferred  (so  to  speak) 
in  a  full-fledged  condition,  to  cases  where  the  percept  included  nothing  that  the  percipient's 
memory  or  imagination  might  not  well  have  supplied.  Moreover,  in  some  of  the  collective 
cases  themselves,  the  evidence  of  dissimilarity  in  the  percepts  seem  sufficient  to  show  that 
the  percipient  minds  were  no  mere  tabulce  rasoe  for  a  foreign  image.  But  a  much  more  im- 
portant observation  with  respect  to  the  "  collective  "  evidence  here  presented  is  this — that 
(putting  aside  the  second-hand  record,  No.  670,  where  the  description  of  details  cannot 
be  safely  relied  on)  in  not  a  single  case  have  any  such  special  features  of  dress  or  aspect 
as  must  perforce  be  derived  from  the  mind  of  the  distant  A  been  simiiltaneously  perceived 
by  B  and  G.  It  is  only  in  case  653,  and  in  the  dubious  narrative  quoted  on  p.  252,  that 
such  features  are  alleged  to  have  been  perceived  even  by  B  ;  and  there  is  no  proof  what- 
ever that  C  on  those  occasions  was  aware  of  them.  This,  in  my  view,  is  just  what  was  to 
be  expected.  For  if  it  is  indicated,  as  the  general  result  of  the  telepathic  evidence,  that 
the  most  dominant  form  of  agency  and  the  most  definite  and  detailed  form  of  transfer  are 
extreme  rather  than  normal  forms,  it  would  scarcely  be  conceivable  that  in  case  after  case 
a  double  exhibition  of  them  should  occur,  and  A's  sub-conscious  sense  of  his  own  aspect,  by 
two  independent  manifestations,  be  reflected  in  a  faithful  picture  of  him  before  the  eyes 
of  two  persons  at  once. 

CONCLUSION. 

§  1.  In  bringing  to  a  close  the  principal  division  of  this  work — the 
presentation  of  the  case  for  spontaneous  telepathy  as  supported  by 
a  considerable  body  of  first-hand  records — it  will  scarcely,  I  think,  be 
necessary  to  attempt  anything  like  a  summary  of  the  foregoing 
chapters.  It  is  indeed  impossible  effectively  to  summarise  facts  the 
whole  force  of  which  lies  in  their  cumulation.  One  point  only  I 
would  once  again  emphasise — the  one  with  which  I  started — to  wit, 
that  radical  connection  between  experimental  and  spontaneous 
telepathy,  the  importance  of  which  in  my  own  view  I  may  best 
express  by  saying  that  I  am  unable  even  to  guess  what  effect  the 
body  of  testimony  to  the  latter  class  of  cases  would  have  on  me,  were 
I  not  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  former.  This  being  understood,  so 
far  as  the  evidential  position  of  the  subject  admits  of  a  brief  connected 
statement,  I  have  endeavoured  to  state  it  in  the  closing  pages  of  the 
fourth  chapter.  Neither  there  nor  subsequently  have  I  extenuated  the 
evidential  shortcomings  of  many  of  the  spontaneous  cases  ;  but  for  the 
evidence  taken  as  a  whole,  it  may  be  claimed  that  it  resembles  not  so 
much  a  shifting  shadow,  which  may  be  left  to  individual  taste  or 
temperament  to  interpret,  as  a  solid  mass  seen  in  twilight,  which  it 
may  be  easy  indeed  to  avoid  stumbling  over,  but  only  by  resolutely 
walking  away  from  it.  The  temptation  to  walk  away  from  it — to 
dismiss  it  with  a  hasty  glance— will  be  very  strong.  The  matter 
presented  is  from  a  literary  point  of  view  monotonously  dull,  from  a 
scientific  point  of  view  confusingly  inexact :  the  study  of  it  in  detail 
is  hard  work,  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  work  which  affords  none  of 
the  stimulus  of  high  intellectual  activity.  Yet  it  is  only  by  detailed 
study  that  my  colleagues  and  I  have  arrived  at  our  own  view ;  and  so 
far  are  we  from  putting  ourselves  into  antagonism  to  the  sceptical 
attitude  of  Science,  that  we  should  regard  any  conclusion  formed 
without  such  study  as  premature.     On  this  still  dubious  territory,  a 

272  CONCLUSION, 

number  of  direct  and  independent  attestations,  which  would  be  utterly- 
superfluous  elsewhere,  will  be — or  ought  to  be — demanded  ;  and 
others  will  need,  as  we  have  done,  to  have  the  true  nature  and  amount 
of  the  evidence  far  more  distinctly  brought  home  to  them  than  is 
necessary  in  realms  already  mastered  by  specialists  to  whose  dicta 
they  may  defer. 

But  in  point  of  fact,  the  dulness  of  the  work  in  detail  scarcely 
needs  apology ;  for  it  would  never  be  specially  remarked  except  in 
connection  with  that  totally  unscientific  view  on  which  I  commented 
at  the  very  opening  of  the  treatise.  The  whole  subject  of  psychical 
influences  has  been  mixed  up  in  the  public  mind  with  ideas  of  the 
supernatural  or  uncanny— with  nervous  thrills  and  spurious  excite- 
ments. When  such  associations  are  carefully  excluded,  the  details  of 
the  inquiry  cannot  be  expected  to  have  more,  and  may  perhaps  have 
not  much  less,  attraction  than  those  of  the  recognised  physical 
sciences.  And  so  far  as  the  unexciting  character  of  the  present 
collection — poor  in  thrills,  but  tolerably  rich  in  verified  dates 
— tends  to  make  this  sober  view  prevail,  it  will  be  a  direct 
advantage.  For,  exactly  like  the  physical  sciences,  the  research 
has  to  go  on,  methodically,  not  sensationally  ;  and  it  has  only  just 
begun  to  be  methodised.  The  present  instalment  of  facts,  though 
probably  solid  enough  to  surfeit  those  who  are  not  troubled  by 
d  priori  difficulties,  and  to  repel  the  mere  seeker  after  marvels, 
cannot  be  expected  to  convince  every  reasonable  searcher  after 
truth ;  and  no  one  (as  I  have  remarked  before)  can  fix  the  precise 
amount  of  testimony  which  a  candid  mind  is  bound  to  regard  as 
adequate.  And  we  accept  this  view  of  the  position  rather  as  an 
incentive  than  as  a  discouragement.  For  we  are  fortified  by  the 
belief  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  necessary  material,  as  the  combined 
effort  to  render  it  available,  that  has  hitherto  been  lacking.  Even  the 
record  now  presented,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  is  drawn  from  the  com- 
paratively small  number  of  persons  who  have  heard  of  our  existence, 
and  much  of  it  from  the  limited  circle  of  our  own  acquaintance.  We 
are  justified,  therefore,  in  regarding  the  area  hitherto  explored  as  but  a 
comer  of  a  very  much  larger  field,  which  may  be  gradually  swept ; 
and  the  very  flaws  in  the  present  collection  will  have  had  their  use,  if 
they  direct  attention  to  the  true  standard  of  evidential  requirements, 
and  if  through  them  future  telepathic  incidents  stand  a  better  chance 
of  being  caught  at  the  critical  moment,  while  the  opportunities  for 
investigation  are  complete. 

conclusion:  273 

§  2,  The  commoner  difficulties  which  hamper  progress  may,  more- 
over, be  expected  largely  to  disappear,  as  time  goes  on.  As  the  idea  of 
Telepathy  becomes  understood,  the  difference  will  be  more  and  more 
realised  between  facts  which  make  for  it  and  facts  which  do  not ; 
aid  towards  the  establishment  of  some  strong  item  of  proof  will  not 
so  often  be  refused  on  the  ground  that  no  proof  is  needed — that  every- 
body has  had  presentiments  fulfilled,  or  has  occasionally  guessed  what 
his  friend  was  thinking  of ;  and  efforts  will  be  more  profitably  directed 
through  the  mere  existence  of  a  scheme  into  which  the  results  may  fall. 
And  further,  a  rational  public  spirit  in  the  matter  may  be  trusted  to 
develop.  The  reluctance  to  give  any  prominence  to  what  are  often 
legitimately  regarded  as  very  private  experiences  will  gradually  give 
way,  when  it  is  recognised  that  the  significance  of  each  item  of 
evidence,  even  as  matter  for  private  contemplation,  depends  on  the 
combination  of  many  items ;  and  among  those  who  take  this  wider 
view,  fewer  will  shrink  from  the  direct  attestation  which  alone  can 
ensure  the  result  that  they  profess  to  desire,  and  which  they  would 
readily  give  to  any  other  sort  of  fact  in  heaven  or  earth  that  they  truly 
believed  in.  As  for  the  merely  negative  difficulties — the  general 
grounds  of  objection  to  our  work — we  see  them  already  diminishing 
from  the  mere  spirit  of  the  age.  The  set  of  that  spirit  is  very  observably 
towards  a  wider  tolerance — a  distrust  of  finalities  and  restrictions, 
by  whatever  party  imposed,  and  a  faith  in  free  inquiry,  wherever  it 
may  lead.  Men  are  already  ceasing  to  argue  that  the  alleged  facts 
did  not  happen  because  they  could  not  happen ;  or  that  telepathy 
is  perhaps  not  true,  and,  therefore,  if  true,  is  not  important ;  or 
that  the  recognised  paths  of  labour,  along  which  steady  progress  is 
being  made  and  may  still  be  made  to  an  unpredictable  extent,  are 
so  various  and  abundant  that  it  is  mere  trifling  to  desert  them  for  a 
dubious  track,  where  progress,  even  could  it  be  supposed  possible, 
would  still  be  a  useless  anachronism. 

§  3.  But  though  "psychical  research"  is  certain  in  time  to  surmount 
ridicule  and  prejudice,  and  to  clear  for  itself  a  firm  path  between  easy 
credulity  on  the  one  side  and  easy  incredulity  on  the  other,  the  rate  of 
its  advance  must  depend  on  the  amount  of  sym.pathy  and  support  that 
it  can  command  from  the  general  mass  of  educated  men  and  women.  In 
no  department  should  the  democratic  spirit  of  modern  science  find  so 
free  a  scope:  it  is  for  the  public  here  to  be,  not — as  in  anthropological 
researches — the  passive  material  of  investigation,  but  the  active  partici- 

VOL.    II.  T 

274  CONCLUSION. 

pators  in  it.  We  acknowledge  with  warm  gratitude  the  amount  of 
patient  assistance  that  we  have  received — how  patient  and  forbearing  in 
many  instances,  none  can  judge  who  have  not  tried,  as  private 
individuals,  to  conduct  a  system  of  strict  cross-examination  on  a  wide 
scale.  But  unless  this  assistance  is  largely  supplemented,  our  under- 
taking can  scarcely  hold  its  ground.  Its  interest  must  not  for  a  moment 
be  supposed  to  be  of  the  merely  curious  sort,  sufficiently  illustrated  in  a 
loose  batch  of  more  or  less  surprising  facts  ;  indeed,  so  far  as  the  facts 
excite  surprise,  it  is  a  proof  that  the  work  is  only  beginning.  If  the 
natural  system  includes  telepathy.  Nature  has  certainly  not  exhausted 
herself  in  our  few  hundreds  of  instances  :  that  these  facts  should  be 
genuine  would  be  almost  inconceivable  if  she  had  not  plenty  more 
like  them  in  reserve.  And  here  is  the  practically  interesting  point  ; 
for,  till  the  general  fact  is  universally  admitted,  the  several  items  of 
proof  must  ever  tend  to  lose  their  effect  as  they  recede  further  into  the 
past.  This  peculiarity  of  the  subject  cannot  be  gainsaid,  and  must  be 
boldly  faced.  For  aught  I  can  tell,  the  hundreds  of  instances  may 
have  to  be  made  thousands.  If  the  phenomena  cannot  be  com- 
manded at  will,  the  stricter  must  be  the  search  for  them  :  if  they  are 
exceptionally  transient  and  elusive,  all  the  greater  is  the  importance 
of  strong  contemporary  evidence.  The  experimental  work  needs  to 
be,  and  easily  might  be,  enormously  extended  :  for  many  a  year  to 
come  the  spontaneous  phenomena  must  be  as  diligently  watched  for 
and  recorded  as  if  each  case  stood  alone  in  its  generation.  And 
whatever  the  defects  of  the  present  attempt,  so  far  as  it  supplies  an 
impulse  or  lends  an  aid  in  either  of  these  directions,  it  will  not 
have  failed  in  its  object. 

*jf*  I  should  be  glad  to  extend  my  statistics  of  sensory  hallucinations  in 
general,  by  canvassing  another  known  number  of  persons  taken  at  random.  (See 
Chap.  XIII.)  Readers  who  may  feel  disposed  to  help  me  in  this  matter,  and 
who  will  write  to  14,  Dean's  Yard,  S.W.,  will  receive  the  necessary  forms  and 
instructions.  But  apart  from  a  special  census,  I  should  be  grateful  for  accounts 
of  such  phenomena  from  any  persons  who  have  themselves  had  experience  of 
them.  The  assurance  that  they  are  not  things  to  be  troubled  about,  and  are 
compatible  with  perfect  bodily  and  mental  health,  may  perhaps  remove  any  dis- 
inclination that  might  be  felt  to  recording  instances.  The  names  of  informants 
will,  of  course,  be  held  private. 

VOL.     II.  T    2 

NOTE,   BY  MR.  MYERS,  ON  A   SUGGESTED   MODE 
OF  PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION. 

§  1.  It  is  with  some  hesitation  that  I  lay  before  the  public  the 
speculations  contained  in  the  following  essay.  They  may  seem,  I  fear, 
both  over-bold  and  over-complex  ;  and  even  the  reader  who  follows  them 
with  a  provisional  adhesion  will  find  that  if  he  gains  in  width,  he  will  lose 
in  clearness  of  vision ;  while  the  conception  of  telepathy  as  a  relatively- 
simple  mode  of  colligating  certain  obscure  phenomena  will  give  place  to  a 
view  in  which  the  old  problems  loom  larger  than  ever,  though,  perhaps, 
with  some  inter-relations  made  manifest  which  have  not  hitherto  been 
observed. 

But  in  reply  to  the  objection  of  rashness  I  must  ask  my  readers  to 
distinguish  between  results  unanimously  arrived  at,  on  the  strength  of 
definite  experiment  and  explicit  testimony,  by  a  group  of  painstaking 
persons,  and  the  speculations  of  one  of  their  number,  to  which  the  rest 
stand  uncommitted,  and  which  he  ofiers  tentatively,  as  the  mere  prelimi- 
naries of  what  may  in  time  become  a  surer  view.  And  to  the  objection 
of  complexity  I  answer  that  my  hypothesis  is  free  at  least  from  the  one 
unpardonable  sin  of  hypotheses  :  it  is  not  certainly  unverifiable, — at  least 
it  may  prompt  experiment  and  direct  observation. 

I  shall  assume  in  the  following  pages  that  the  reader  has  already 
mastered  the  general  drift  and  purport  of  these  volumes.  And,  perhaps, 
I  can  best  introduce  my  own  view  by  dwelling  first  on  a  difficulty  in  our 
recorded  evidence  which  drove  my  own  mind  to  seek  for  some  wider 
solution. 

§  2.  The  reader,  then,  is  aware  that  veridical  phantasms— sounds  or 
sights,  that  is  to  say,  coincident  with  some  death  or  crisis — hcve  been 
treated  in  this  work  on  the  analogy  of  experimental  thought-transference, 
as  probably  being  in  efiect  the  externalisation  of  a  telepathic  impression, — 
the  hallucinatory  forms  in  which  a  feeling  or  idea  transferred  from  the  mind 
of  a  distant  person  embodies  itself  to  the  percipient's  senses.  In  dealing 
with  the  simpler  forms  of  phantasmal  sight,  sound,  or  other  impression, 
this  analogy  seemed  to  hold  good ;  and  we   found,    moreover,  enough    of 

278  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

parallelism  between  telepathic  hallucinations  and  the  apparently  casual 
and  meaningless  hallucinations  of  sane  persons  to  suggest  that  telepathic 
phantasms  were  at  least  shaped  by  the  percipient's  mind,  in  the  same 
manner  as  those  delusive  phantasms  which  the  mind  not  only  shapes,  but 
presumably  originates  altogether. 

All  this,  however,  referred  to  phantasms  perceived  by  one  person  only. 
On  such  a  theory  one  would  hardly  expect  that  a  phantasm  would  ever  be 
perceptible  to  several  persons  at  once ;  but  rather  that  strangers  in  the 
company  of  the  percipient  would  neither  hear  nor  see  anything, — would 
not  be  involved,  at  any  rate,  by  mere  local  proximity  in  that  message 
between  according  minds. 

It  was  plain,  however,  that  this  question  could  not  be  answered 
d,  priori.  It  needed  what  had  not  hitherto  been  forthcoming,  namely,  a 
collection  of  observed  instances  large  enough  to  allow  of  a  tolerably  wide 
induction.  And  the  collection  offered  in  these  volumes — though  it  might 
with  advantage  be  tenfold  larger — does  in  fact  offer  some  interesting 
statistical  results  which  bear  on  this  problem. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  great  majority  of  phantasms 
occur  to  a  percipient  who  is  alone.  And  this  fact  accords  well  with  our 
view  that  the  subsidence  of  ordinary  stimuli  facilitates  the  development  of 
the  telepathic  impression. 

But  when  we  come  to  the  small  residue  of  cases  where  several  persons 
have  been  together  when  the  phantasm  occurred,  we  find  a  result  equally 
unexpected  and  perplexing.  For  it  will  be  found  that  in  nearly  two  cases 
out  of  three  the  phantasm  is  perceived  by  all  or  most  of  the  persons  so 
situated  that  they  would  have  perceived  it  had  it  been  an  objective  reality. 
In  about  one  case  out  of  three  it  is  perceived  by  one  only  of  the  persons 
present.  And,  as  a  further  complication,  when  perceived  by  more  persons 
than  one,  it  is  sometimes  perceived  more  fully  by  some  than  by  others  ; — 
both  heard  and  seen,  perhaps,  by  one,  and  only  heard  by  another. 

§3.  Now  this  result  seems  at  first  sight  equally  inconsistent  with 
the  theory  of  the  telepathic  impulse  as  generating  these  hallucinations, 
and  with  the  crude  popular  credence  which  attributes  to  "  ghosts  "  some 
sort  of  tenuous  materiality.  For  in  the  one  case  we  might  expect  that  the 
phantasm  would  rarely  be  perceptible  to  more  than  one  person ;  in  the 
other  case  that  it  would  always  be  perceptible  to  all  the  persons  present. 
The  popular  view — to  take  that  first — lies  so  far  outside  the  pale 
of  any  recognised  scientific  conceptions  that  strong  evidence  indeed 
would  be  needed  to  reconcile  us  to  it.  We  are  sometimes  asked  to 
believe  that  this  body  of  ours — with  its  digestive  system,  &c.,  and  all 
its    traces    of     physical    evolution — is    interpenetrated    with    a    "  meta- 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  279 

organism  "  of  identical  shape  and  structure,  and  capable  sometimes  of 
detaching  itself  from  the  solid  flesh  and  producing  measurable  efiects  on 
the  material  world.  Now  that  material  eifects  should  be  produced  by 
something  which  (like  our  own  will),  is  only  cognisable  by  us  on  its 
psychical  side  is  not  in  itself  an  absurd  supposition,  though  we  have  little 
evidence  which  goes  to  support  it.  But  this  hypothesis  of  a  connate 
molecular  "  meta-organism  "  is  at  once  grotesque  and  entirely  insufficient. 
For  it  is  precisely  against  this  form  of  the  ghost-hypothesis  that  the 
difficulty  as  to  the  ghosts  of  clothes  has  overwhelming  weight.  The  appari- 
tion that  stands  before  us,  on  this  theory,  is  an  objective  thing  ;  it  has 
grown  with  our  friend's  growth,  it  is  organic  with  his  deathless  vitality. 
Are,  then,  his  dead  habiliments  alive  also  in  the  spirit  1  or  how  has  the 
meta-organism  accreted  to  itself  a  meta-coat  and  meta-trousers  ? 

§  4.  But  if  we  thus  rule  out  of  court  the  crudest  explanation  of  a 
collectively-witnessed  apparition,  our  next  attempt  must  plainly  be  to 
explain  it  on  the  lines  of  telepathy,  by  extending  in  some  way  our 
hypothesis  of  a  phantasmogenetic  impulse  conveyed  directly  from  mind  to 
mind.  Now  if  A's  phantom  is  witnessed  by  B  and  0  together — and 
witnessed,  as  we  are  assuming  throughout,  without  intimation  thereof 
from  one  to  the  other  by  look  or  word — then  it  might  seem  simplest  to 
assume  that  a  separate  telepathic  impression  passed  from  A  to  B,  and  from 
A  to  C,  and  was  externalised  by  each  of  the  percipients  as  a  phantom  of 
his  own  shaping.  It  has  been  shown,  however,  in  Chap.  XVIII.,  that 
the  recorded  cases  will  not  always  admit  of  this  hypothesis.  C  is  some- 
times a  stranger  to  A,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  suppose  that,  had  it 
not  been  for  B's  presence,  he  would  have  witnessed  the  phantom  at  all. 
In  this  difficulty,  Mr.  Gurney  inclines  to  the  view  that  in  such  a  case 
the  telepathic  impression  is  primarily  communicated  from  A  to  B,  and 
gives  rise  to  a  hallucination  in  B's  mind  ;  and  that  this  hallucination  is 
then  telepathically  communicated  from  B  to  the  other  person  or  persons 
present.  And  this  explanation,  if  we  can  accept  it,  seems  to  have  the 
advantage  of  introducing  as  little  as  possible  of  fresh  hypothesis  into  the 
psychic  field. 

§  5.  I  do  not,  however,  think  that  the  evidence  warrants  us  in  pushing 
our  theory  quite  so  far  in  this  direction.  I  do  not  feel  justified  in  assuming 
that  a  mere  hallucination — telepathically  originated  in  the  mind  of  B,  the 
primary  percipient — will  be  thus  readily  communicable,  by  a  fresh  tele- 
pathic transfer,  to  the  minds  of  other  persons  in  local  proximity.  Hallu- 
cinations, however  caused,  are  in  themselves  a  tolerably  distinct  class  of 
phenomena ;  and,  since  we  know  of  several  kinds  that  are  not  telepathic 

280  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

in  origin,  we  shall  do  well  to  inquire  whether  these  have  shown  themselves 
communicable  from  the  hallucine  to  his  neighbours,  without  speech  or 
suggestion  of  any  kind.  And  it  so  happens  that  a  good  deal  of  competent 
observation  has  already  been  directed  to  this  point.  Folie  a  deux — -the 
communicability  of  insane  delusions  ^ — has  been  for  the  last  quarter  of  a 
century  a  favourite  topic  of  medical  discussion.^  Now  in  order  that  folie 
a  deux  should  present  a  true  parallel  to  the  suggested  infectiousness  of 
telepathic  hallucinations,  which  we  are  here  discussing,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  find  cases  where  some  vision  or  voice  had  been 
propagated  from  one  mind  to  another  without  any  verbal  suggestion 
whatever.  No  such  case,  so  far  as  I  can  find,  is  anywhere  recorded  ;  and 
no  such  case  is  reported  to  me  by  medical  friends.  ^  The  nearest  case  is 
that  of  the  Lochin  family  (see  the  first  note  below),  but  there  the  attack 
of  hallucinations  was  plainly  of  toxic  origin,  and  though  it  ran  much  the 
same  course  with  each  of  the  poisoned  persons,  there  is  even  here  no  proof 
that  any  one  of  them  caught  a  definite  hallucination  from  his  neighbour's 
mind. 

§  6.  It  may,  however,  be  suggested  that  medical  writers,  not  being 
alive  to  the  possibility  of  an  unsuggested,  or  telepathic,  infection,  may 
have  neglected  to  observe  it,  and  that  therefore  some  part  of  the  infection 
for  which  they  assume  speech  as  of  course  the  medium  may  in  reality  have 
taken  place  without  speech,  by  telepathic  transfer.  To  meet  this 
point,  let  us  consider  what  are  the  habitual  conditions  of  the  contagion 
du  delire,^  as  the  French  somewhat  loosely  term  it. 

According  to  Lasegue  and  Falret  (with  whom  the  other  authorities 
virtually  concur),  the  person  thus  infected  (if  not  already  a  lunatic)  must 
be  inferior  in  intelligence  to  the  original  lunatic,  must  generally  be  a 
woman  or  a  child,  and  must  live  long  with  the  lunatic,  apart  from  external 
influences.     Moreover,  the  character  of  the  delusion  must  itself  be  more  or 

1  Besides  some  references  given  by  Mr.  Gurney,  Vol.  i.,  p.  458,  see  Brunet  (Ann.  Med.- 
Psych.,  1875,  Vol.  xiv.,  pp.  337-357),  and  the  specially  interesting  case  of  the  Lochin  family 
(Ann.  Med.-Psych.,  1882,  Vol.  ii.),  reported  by  Dr.  Reverchon;  " Les  uns  voient  des  fantomes, 
des  chats  noirs  et  blancs,  des  serpents;  Us  les  montrent  aux  autrcs  effares."  See  also  Dr. Savage's 
"  Cases  of  Contagiousness  of  Delusions  "  (Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1880-1,  Vol.  xxvi., 
p.  563),  and  Dr.  Kiernam  (Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease,  October,  1880),  for  the 
communication  of  ideas  of  grandeur  in  asylums.  I  omit  many  minor  references.  In  Dr. 
Jaccoud's  Diet,  encycl.  des  sciences  mSdioales  the  reader  is  significantly  referred  from  Folie 
a  deux  to  Persecutions — the  character  of  the  great  majority  of  these  cases  being  thus 
indicated.  On  the  v^hole,  Lasfegue  and  Falret's  essay  (CEuvres  de  Lasegue,  Vol.  i.,  p.  732) 
summarises  the  subject  very  completely.  The  latest  work,  Chpolianski's  Analogies  entre 
la  folie  a  deux  et  la  suicide  a  deux,  (Paris,  1885,)  accords  vi'ith  what  has  been  here  said. 

2  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson  has  kindly  made  inquiry  for  me  from  some  specialist 
friends  ;  and  neither  he  nor  they  are  cognisant  of  any  such  case.  Nor  are  the  authorities 
at  Bethlem  ;  as,  indeed.  Dr.  Savage's  essay^  above  referred  to,  plainly  indicates. 

3  The  word  contagion  reminds  us  of  the  old  stories  of  second-sight,  communicable  by 
the  touch  of  the  seer  (see  p.  189,  note). 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  281 

less  reasonable  ;  it  must  rest  on  real  facts  in  the  past,  or  intelligible  fears 
or  hopes  for  the  future.  The  idea  that  a  legacy  has  accrued,  the  idea  that 
neighbours  are  malignant,  is  gradually  instilled  into  a  sane  mind  by  the 
constant  repetition  of  an  untrue,  but  not  conspicuously-absurd  assertion. 
But  even  where  this  delusion  includes  some  sensory  elements,  I  can  find, 
as  I  have  already  said,  no  evidence  that  any  hallucinatory  sight  or  sound 
has  ever  been  described  independently  by  two  persons  as  occurring  at 
the  same  moment.  If,  then,  with  all  the  predisposition  that  close  relation- 
ship can  give,  with  all  the  dominance  of  the  hallucination  in  the  affected 
mind,  not  even  one  other  person  seems  ever  to  be  telepathically 
impressed  thereby,  we  may  hesitate  to  assume  that  a  veridical  hallucina- 
tion should  be  capable  of  telepathic  transference  to  several  bystanders. 

Neither  in  duration  nor  in  apparent  intensity  can  the  veridical 
hallucination  claim  to  equal  some  of  the  morbid  varieties.  There  are 
instances  where  the  same  illusory  figure  has  persisted  for  months  or  years. 
Take,  for  instance,  "Mr.  G-abbage  "—the persistent  visionary  tyrant  of  an 
unhappy  American  gentleman,  who  was,  at  any  rate  at  first,  in  a  state  of 
undoubted  sanity. ^  Constantly  though  he  appeared,  distinctly  though  he 
spoke,  "  Mr.  Gabbage "  was  never  seen  or  heard  by  anyone  save  the 
original  sufferer. 

Again,  it  is  probable  that  no  other  hallucinations  can  rival  in  sheer 
intensity  those  which  sometimes  accompany  the  onset  of  an  epileptiform 
attack.  When  the  patient  rushes  furious  through  the  room,  which  he  sees 
full  of  flames,  striking  at  the  imaginary  demons  who  bar  his  passage,  then 
surely,  if  ever,  the  phantasies  of  the  tumultuous  brain  might  be  expected 
to  imprint  themselves  on  the  bystander.  But  although  the  shock  of 
witnessing  an  epileptic  fit  will  sometimes  bring  on  a  similar  fit  in  patients 
thereto  disposed,  there  is,  I  believe,  no  evidence  whatever  that  the  specific 
hallucination  of  the  first  sufierer  ever  communicates  itself  either  to  stable 
or  to  unstable  brains. 

Once  more ;  there  is  a  species  of  hallucination  somewhat  akin  to 
telepathic  hallucinations — nay,  which  is  itself  sometimes  induced  tele- 
pathically. I  mean  the  hallucinations  generated  by  the  mesmeriser  in  the 
mind  of  his  subject.  Popular  credence,  as  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  else- 
where shown, 2  has  much  exaggerated  the  mesmerist's  power  of  influencing 
his  subject  without  verbal  suggestion.  But  in  a  few  cases — Mr.  H.  S. 
Thompson's  and  Dr.  Pierre  Janet's,^  for  instance — an  eff'ect  seems  to  have 

1  Sec  M.  Ribot's  comments  on  this  case  of  M.  Ball's,  Maladies  de  la  Personnalite, 
p.  111. 

2  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  416. 

3  See  the  Additional  Chapter  at  the  end  of  this  volume.  In  the  strange  and  remote 
case  of  Councillor  Wesermann  (Vol.  i.,  p.  102)  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  distant  "wilier" 
was  thinking  at  the  time  of  both  the  persons  to  whom  the  phantasm  of  his  creating  appeared. 

282  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

been  produced  on  a  subject  at  a  distance  without  previous  suggestion ;  an 
action  prompted  or  a  hallucination  provoked.  Now,  in  no  one  instance 
does  it  appear  that  the  effect  thus  telepathically  produced  has  extended 
itself  from  the  immediate  subject  to  any  other  person. 

§  7.  The  analogies  of  morbid  and  of  mesmeric  hallucination  are,  then,  as 
it  seems,  decidedly  against  its  communicability.  But  these  analogies  are  not 
in  themselves  conclusive.  Apart  from  the  distinctively  morbid  hallucina- 
tions of  madness  or  epilepsy — on  which  physicians  have  almost  exclusively 
dwelt — there  are  occasional  cases  of  isolated  hallucinations  occurring  in 
the  experience  of  sane  and  healthy  persons.  It  may  be  said  that  these 
afford  a  closer  parallel  to  our  telepathic  hallucinations.  If  it  can  be 
shown  that  these  are  communicable,  there  will  be  some  presumption  that 
our  veridical  phantoms  may  be  propagated  by  psychical  infection  too. 

Now,  Mr.  Gurney  has  made  a  collection,  far  larger  than  had  been 
previously  attempted,  of  these  casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  His 
collection  of  nearly  600  cases  of  this  kind  (exclusive,  of  course,  of  the 
telepathic  evidence  in  this  book),  when  analysed  with  care,  affords  a 
basis  of  induction  on  which  a  few  broad  conclusions,  at  least,  may  safely 
be  founded.  All,  however,  that  I  mean  to  do  here  is  to  take  one  obvious 
empirical  division.  Some  of  these  casual  hallucinations  resemble  veridical 
hallucinations  and  some  do  not.  In  this  latter  class  are  included  a 
number  of  purely  fantastic  or  truncated  visions  of  human  or  animal  forms 
or  faces,  and  visions  of  inanimate  objects,  patterns,  &c.  In  the  former 
class  come  visions  of  persons  known  or  unknown,  voices,  lights,  &c. 

Now  it  appears  that  the  great  majority  of  these  casual  hallucinations 
are  witnessed  by  one  person  only,  other  persons,  if  present,  perceiving 
nothing.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  several  persons  have  shared  the 
impression,  and  some  of  these  cases  Mr.  Gurney  has  set  forth  in 
Chap.   XVIII.     What  lessons  do  they  teach  ? 

The  most  important  characteristic  that  I  see  in  them  is  this.  They 
all  of  them  belong  to  that  class  of  casual  hallucinations  which  at  any  rate 
resemble  the  telepathic  cases.  There  are  no  collective  hallucinations  of 
truncated  forms,  of  definite  inanimate  objects,  or  of  patterns.  They 
all  represent  persons  known  or  unknown,  lights,  or  voices. 

I  will  defer  for  the  moment  the  consideration  of  some  of  these  figures 
or  voices  which  are  referred  to  dead  persons.  Taking  those  only  which 
are  conceivably,  though  not  provably,  referable  to  persons  living  or  in  the 
act  of  death,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  have  here  just  that  kind  of  fringe  of 
ambiguous  cases  which  we  should  expect  to  find  surrounding  the  cases 
where  some  distant  agency  is  more  clearly  proved. 

For  if  such  a  phenomenon  as  telepathy,  such  a   cause  or  agency  as 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  283 

telergy,  exists  at  all,  we  may  surely  suppose  that  it  exists  in  many  forms, 
and  manifests  itself  in  many  operations,  of  which  we  have  not  at  present 
any  inkling  whatever.  While  we  may  be  able  to  reach  a  substantial 
agreement  as  to  what  phenomena  may  be  regarded  as  almost  certainly  due 
to  telepathy,  we  have  no  means  at  present  of  deciding  positively  what 
phenomena  are  not  so  due. 

This,  therefore,  is  a  case  where  the  evidential  and  the  theoretical 
treatment  of  our  subject  cannot  be  made  precisely  to  coincide.  Mr. 
Gurney's  primary  object  has  been,  and  rightly,  to  treat  the  evidential  case 
for  telepathy  with  scrupulous  fairness,  to  allow  to  chance-coincidence  or  to 
mere  subjective  hallucination  every  incident  which  cannot  establish  a 
strong  claim  to  a  supernormal  character.  So  long  as  we  are  arguing  the 
question  whether  telepathy  exists  or  no,  this  rigid  method  is  plainly 
needful.  We  must  rest  our  argument  on  instances  for  which,  taken 
cumulatively,  any  explanation  except  telepathy  is  conspicuously 
improbable. 

But  supposing  the  evidential  point  established,  and  that  it  is  now  not 
the  mere  existence,  but  the  nature  and  limits,  of  telepathy  which  we  are 
seeking  to  determine,  we  shall  need  to  scrutinize  our  narratives  in  a  some- 
what different  way.  We  shall  have  to  consider  not  only  whether  there  is 
overwhelmivg  probability  that  any  given  case  is  telepathic,  but  also  whether 
there  is  sufficient  probability  to  oblige  us  to  keep  that  explanation  in  view, 
and  to  refrain  from  using  the  case  in  support  of  other  theories.  Thus  (to 
make  my  meaning  clearer  by  an  analogy)  if  it  were  our  business  to  prove 
the  existence  of  volcanic  islets,  we  should  not  be  entitled  to  base  that  proof 
on  such  doubtful  instances  as  the  much-debated  islets  of  St.  Paul.  But, 
the  existence  of  volcanic  islets  once  established,  we  must  not  hastily 
exclude  this  dubious  case  from  our  category,  or  we  may  find  that  we  are 
committing  ourselves  to  a  far  more  questionable  theory^ — that  of  a  lost 
Atlantis.  ISTow  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney  as  probably  mere  subjective 
hallucinations  shared  by  several  persons  are  assuredly  not  cases  from  which 
any  argument  for  the  operation  of  distant  agency  could  be  drawn.  But 
if  such  agency  be  once  admitted  as  a  vera  causa,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  safer 
to  ascribe  these  cases  to  its  untraced  and,  so  to  say,  casual  operation,  than 
to  support  by  them  a  theory  of  collective  hallucination  which  may  easily 
be — and  in  other  hands  has  been — pushed  to  a  point  at  which  it  comes 
into  real  collision  with  ordinary  experience,  and  needlessly  confuses  the 
canons  of  testimony. 

We  must  remember  that  these  phantasms  do  not  occur  to  please  us,  or 
to  satisfy  our  expectations,  but  rather  (so  far  as  we  can  tell)  in  accordance 
with  some  law  affecting  the  psychical  energies  of  the  dying  person.  We 
need  not,  therefore,  assume  that  our  phantasmal  visitors   will  always  be 

284  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

familiar  or  interesting  figures.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that  persons  may 
appear  to  us  whom  we  have  wholly  forgotten  ;  and  in  fact  in  some  of  the 
cases  in  this  book  the  identification  of  the  figure  has  only  followed  upon 
subsequent  information  and  reflection.  Again,  if,  as  certain  cases  seem  to 
indicate,  locality  goes  for  a  great  deal  in  attracting  or  manifesting  the 
phantasm,  then  figures  may  appear  to  us  which  we  have,  never  seen,  but 
which  represent  some  dying  person  who  is  attached  to  the  house  in  which 
we  live.  And  suggestions  such  as  these,  though  at  present  merely  specula- 
tive, seem  to  me  to  form  an  explanation  of  Mr.  Gurney's  cases  less  violent 
than  that  which  calls  on  us  to  suppose  that  a  mere  casual  subjective 
hallucination  has  a  self-propagating  power  which  hallucinations  of  an 
intenser  and  more  lasting  order  do  not  appear  to  possess. 

§  8.  Another  class  of  cases  which  Mr.  Gurney  has  advanced  as  illustrat- 
ing the  transferability  of  hallucinations  consists  of  the  occurrence  to  two 
or  more  persons  of  phantasms  ostensibly  connecting  themselves  with  some 
person  who  is  actually  dead.  I  do  not  wish  here  to  give  any  positive 
opinion  as  to  the  origin  of  such  appearances.  The  question  of  phantasms 
of  the  dead  introduces  a  whole  series  of  evidential  and  metaphysical 
difiiculties  with  which  I  am  not  here  prepared  to  deal.  But  since  we  have 
expressly  excluded  such  problems  from  the  scope  of  this  work,  have 
expressly  stated  that  our  evidence  is  at  present  insufiicient  to  guide  us  to  a 
distinct  opinion  thereon,  I  cannot  admit  that  any  selection  from  these 
narratives  can  at  present  add  force  to  the  contention  that  purely  illusory 
hallucinations,  corresponding  in  no  way  to  any  reality  outside  the  primary 
percipient,  are  readily  communicable  to  the  other  persons  present. 

Since,  then,  an  inquiry  so  widely-reaching  as  Mr.  Gurney's  collection 
of  hallucinations  has  failed,  in  my  view,  to  produce  any  clear  cases  of  the 
communicability  of  illusory  (or  falsidical )  hallucinations  with  which  to 
supply  the  absence  of  any  evidence  thereof  in  previous  records,  I  am 
driven  to  doubt  whether  such  communicability  can  be  safely  assumed  as  a 
probable  explanation  of  our  cases  where  a  veridical  phantasm  has  been 
seen  or  heard  by  several  persons  at  the  same  time. 

§  9.  And  having  thus  criticised  my  colleague's  suggestions,  I  feel  bound 
to  produce  a  theory  of  my  own,  which,  though  confessedly  unproven,  may 
have  the  advantage  of  directing  attention  towards  what  seems  to  me  the 
nodus  of  our  present  inquiry,  and  of  suggesting  experiments  which  may 
help  us  to  a  truer  solution.  I  begin  by  following  a  clue  which  suggests 
itself  at  a  very  early  stage  of  the  experimental  investigation. 

Take  the  simplest  possible  case  of  thought-transference.  A  thinks  of 
the  word  "  cat  "  and  B  divines  it.     Now,  here  our  habit  is  to  call  A  the 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  285 

agent  and  B  the  percipient ;  terras  which  are  practically  the  simplest,  but 
which  may  have  seemed  to  imply  that  all  the  activity  involved  in  the 
phenomenon  lay  in  A's  tension  of  thought  in  keeping  "  cat "  before  his 
mind,  and  that  B's  role  was  a  mere  passive  waiting  for  the  telepathic 
impulse  which  carries  the  word  or  idea  from  A's  mind  into  his  own.  And 
as  we  extend  our  series  from  the  trivial  experimental  instances  to  the 
massive  spontaneous  instances  of  telepathy,  we  find  the  exhibition  of 
energy  on  the  agent's  part — the  receptive  tranquillity  on  the  percipient's 
part — becoming  more  and  more  conspicuous.  When  A,  for  example,  is 
dying  in  battle,  and  B  is  asleep  and  dreams  that  he  sees  A  dying,  the 
psychical  activity  of  the  one,  the  psychical  passivity  of  the  other,  seem  to 
reach  their  maximum. 

Let  us  try,  however,  to  look  a  little  deeper  beneath  the  surface. 
When  A  thinks  of  cat  and  B  guesses  the  word  "  out  of  A's  mind,"  with- 
out the  help  of  speech  or  gesture,  then  B,  whether  passive  or  not,  is  at 
any  rate  playing  the  part  which  requires  the  rarer  qualifications.  In  a 
sense,  no  doubt,  he  is  merely  perceiving,  but  I  need  not  say  that  percep- 
tion itself  is  a  form  of  activity.  If  we  perceive  more  things  than  an 
oyster  perceives,  it  is  not  because  we  are  more  passive  than  the  oyster,  but 
more  active ;  because  activities  of  our  ancestors'  and  our  own  have 
developed  in  us  eyes  which  now  discern  distant  objects  with  an  efibrt  so 
slight  that  we  are  scarcely  aware  of  it.  Similarly  with  the  telepathic 
experiment.  When  B  discerns  the  word  cat,  which  most  of  us,  with  only 
his  opportunities,  could  not  discern  by  any  amount  of  waiting  and 
passivity,  we  must  surely  conclude  that  B  is  exercising  some  kind  of 
capacity  which  we  cannot  exercise.  This  power,  plainly,  is  not  of  what 
we  term  a  voluntary  kind  ;  it  is  not  guided  by  B's  normal  or  primary 
stream  of  consciousness.  But  (as  I  have  tried  elsewhere  to  show)  there 
is  reason  to  suppose  that  our  normal  consciousness  represents  no  more 
than  a  slice  of  our  whole  being.  We  all  know  that  there  exist  sztft-conscious 
and  unconscious  operations  of  many  kinds ;  both  organic,  as  secretion, 
circulation,  &c.,  which  are  in  a  sense  below  the  operations  to  which  our 
minds  attend ;  and  also  mental,  as  the  recall  of  names,  the  development 
of  ideas,  &c.,  which  are  on  much  the  same  level  as  the  operations  to  which 
our  minds  attend,  but  which  for  various  reasons  remain  in  the  background 
of  our  mental  prospect.  Well,  besides  these  sub-conscious  and  unconscious 
operations,  I  believe  that  super-conscious  operations  also  are  going  on  within 
us  ;  operations,  that  is  to  say,  which  transcend  the  limitations  of  ordinary 
faculties  of  cognition,  and  which  yet  remain — not  below  the  threshold — but 
rather  above  the  upper  horizon  of  consciousness,  and  illumine  our  normal 
experience  only  in  transient  and  clouded  gleams. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  marshal  the   arguments  which   support  this 

286  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

thesis.  But  the  thesis  itself  seems  almost  implied  in  the  very  conception 
of  thought-transference.  For  in  thought-transference  we  have  two 
psychical  phenomena,  connected  by  an  unknown  chain  of  causation,  which 
is  certainly  supernormal  in  character,  and  which  contains  at  least  some 
unconscious  links. 

§  10.  Let  us,  then,  pursue  this  notion  of  some  supernormal  activity  on 
the  percipient's  part.  Let  us  treat  it  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  treated 
the  notion  of  the  supernormal  activity  of  the  agent.  We  have  credited 
the  agent.  A,  in  the  "  cat  "  experiment,  with  a  certain  power  of  impressing 
his  thought  on  other  minds.  And  we  have  proceeded  to  inquire  how  far 
— in  voluntary  experiment  or  in  spontaneous  emergence — this  power  can 
be  found  to  go, — how  complex  the  transmitted  image  may  be.  So 
far  as  voluntary  experiment  went,  the  answer  has  been  somewhat 
doubtful,  for  self-transmissive  projections  of  a  hallucinatory  image  of 
oneself — such  as  those  recorded  in  Vol.  I.,  Chap.  III. — have  always, 
as  it  would  seem,  taken  place  during  the  agent's  trance  or  slumber. 
The  spontaneous  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  very  numerous ; 
cases,  that  is  to  say,  where  A,  undergoing  some  shock  or  crisis,  acts 
psychically  in  such  a  manner  as  to  impress  his  presence  on  the  minds 
of  distant  men. 

Let  us,  then,  ask  similar  questions  with  regard  to  the  supernormal 
activity  of  the  percipient.  We  have  seen  him  thus  far  divining  a  word 
on  which  the  agent's  thought  was  concentrated,  guessing  a  card  on  which 
the  agent's  eyes  were  fixed.  Are  there  cases,  experimental  or  spontaneous, 
where  we  find  him  doing  more  than  this  1  sharing  not  a  single  idea  only 
but  a  whole  complex  of  ideas  and  perceptions  in  another  man's  mind  1  or 
supernormally  recognising  an  object  on  which  no  "  agent's "  eyes  are 
lookincf  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  would  involve  the  whole  evidence 
for  induced  or  spontaneous  clairvoyance.  For  the  word  clairvoyance  may 
be  used  to  indicate  many  forms  of  supersensory  perception ;  of  which  one 
is  what  we  may  call  telepathic  clairvoyance,  where  the  clairvoyant  seems 
to  be  seeing  with  the  eyes,  perceiving  with  the  senses,  recalling  with  the 
memory,  of  another  person ;  and  another  is  what  we  may  call  independent 
clairvoyance,  where  the  clairvoyant  seems  to  visit  scenes,  or  to  discern 
objects,  without  needing  that  those  scenes  or  objects  should  form  part  of 
the  perception  or  memory  of  any  known  mind. 

The  topic  of  clairvoyance,  though  unavoidable  in  the  present  discus- 
sion, is  open  to  serious  objections  from  which  telepathy,  in  our  view,  is  free. 
For  we  have  not  ourselves  succeeded  in  making  any  experiments  which 
corroborate  that  induction  of  clairvoyance  in  sensitive  subjects  which 
many   writers    have  alleged.     And  the  light  which   our  new  knowledge 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  287 

of  telepathy  throws  on  that  testimony  must  doubtless  modify  it  greatly — ■ 
must  reduce  the  scattered  testimony  which  exists  for  independent  clair- 
voyance to  a  bulk  much  smaller  than  its  advocates  have  claimed.  But, 
nevertheless,  speaking  not  for  my  colleagues  but  for  myself,  I  do  consider 
the  evidence  for  clairvoyance,  both  telepathic  and  independent,  both 
induced  and  spontaneous,  to  be  adequate  to  justify  belief ;  ^  and,  holding 
this  view,  I  feel  bound  to  take  clairvoyance  into  account  in  any  theoretic 
discussion  of  supernormal  phenomena. 

§  11.  And  if  we  thus  take  into  account  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance, 
we  find  a  stream  of  new  light  let  in  on  our  conception  of  the  modus 
operandi  of  telepathic  perception.  For  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  clair- 
voyant power  that  it  is  generally  exercised  when  the  normal  powers  of 
sensory  percipience  are  in  abeyance,  during  natural  somnambulism,  during 
morbid  conditions  of  trance,  or  during  the  sleep- waking  state  induced  by 
mesmeric  passes.  It  seems  as  though  this  supersensory  faculty  assumed 
activity  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  the  activities  of  common  life. 

Nor  is  this  the  only  instructive  analogy  which  the  records  of  clairvoy- 
ance suggest.  The  mesmeric  process,  which  appears  to  be  the  most  effective 
way  of  inducing  the  clairvoyant  state,  does  not  consist  of  a  mere  inhibition 
of  ordinary  psychical  activities.  Whatever  may  be  its  true  nature,  it  in- 
volves, at  any  rate,  a  rapport  between  the  operator  and  the  subject,  a 
specialised  relation  between  two  minds,  which  sometimes  seems  to  serve  as 
the  starting-point  for  a  supernormal  percipience  on  the  part  of  the 
mesmerised  subject  which  presently  transcends  the  scope  or  content  of  the 
interrogator's  mind  altogether. 

Let  us  return,  then,  to  the  consideration  of  our  veridical  hallucinations, 
bearing  in  mind  these  two  peculiarities  of  clairvoyant  perception ;  its 
exercise  in  apparently  inverse  ratio  to  the  activity  of  normal  faculties,  and 
its  capacity  for  being  stimulated  or  evoked  by  some  kind  of  psychical 
influence  directed  towards  the  clairvoyant  subject  from  another  mind. 

§  12.  And  we  shall,  perhaps,first  observe  how  much  of  illumination  is  thus 
cast  upon  a  large  and  perplexing  class  of  telepathic  dreams,  those,  namely, 
in  which  B  is  made  aware  of  A's  state,  not  as  if  by  an  entry  of  A's 
phantom  into  his  bedchamber,  but  as  if  by  an  excursion  of  his  own  into 
the  room  where  A  is  actually  dying. 

Dreams,  as  Mr.  Gurney  has  amply  explained,  form  only  a  very  sub- 
sidiary part  of  the  evidential  case  which  we  put   forward.     Taken   alone, 

1  In  the  present  state  of  the  subject,  I  hold  that  a  writer  avowing  such  beHef  is 
bound  to  show  cause  for  his  apparent  credulity  ;  and  this  I  shall  hope  to  do  on  the 
earliest  practicable  occasion. 

288  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

they  could  hardly  prove  telepathy  ;  rather  they  are  themselves  shown  to 
be  telepathic  by  the  analogies  of  the  more  cogent  evidence  drawn  from 
waking  hours.  But  though  evidentially  a  minor  branch  of  our  subject, 
they  are,  nevertheless,  among  th.e  most  instructive  of  psychical  phenomena. 
They  show  us  phantasms  in  the  making  ;  they  initiate  us  into  sub-conscious 
processes  of  which  waking  hallucinations  are,  as  it  were,  the  final  output  or 
manufactured  result. 

But  when  we  come  to  scrutinize  the  details  of  veridical  dreams  we. find 
that  amongst  many  where  fantastic  elements  are  commingled  with  the 
true,  as  though  a  central  conception  were  embodying  itself  in  the  imagery 
which  it  found  readiest  to  hand,  there  are  some  dreams  where  the  scene 
seems  to  be  described  without  such  admixture,  and  much  as  it  might  have 
appeared  to  a  real  spectator. 

Dr.  A.  K.  Young's  dream  (case  142)  is  closely  analogous  to  a  case  of 
so-called  "  travelling  clairvoyance."  Locality,  personages,  and  actions 
seem  to  have  been  completely  realised,  and  the  violent  blows  delivered  by 
Dr.  Young  as  he  lay  asleep  in  bed  are  the  precise  parallel  of  the  shivering, 
sweating,  &c.,  frequently  recorded  of  clairvoyants  who  are  witnessing 
distant  scenes  of  heat  or  cold.  Noteworthy  in  the  same  sense  is  Mrs. 
Green's  dream  (case  138),  where  it  seems  as  though  the  link  of  kinship, 
though  without  personal  acquaintance,  had  directed  the  sleeper's 
clairvoyant  vision  to  the  scene  of  sudden  death.  In  these  cases  it 
seems  to  me  that  to  talk  of  the  drowning  women  as  the  agents  who  afiected 
Mrs.  Green,  the  wounded  tenant  as  the  agent  who  afiected  Dr.  A.  K. 
Young,  tends  to  obscure  the  real  nature  of  the  occurrence ;  the  deeper 
view  being  that  the  so-called  percipient  was  in  fact  the  agent  or  active 
personage,  too  ;  and  that  the  concurrent  crisis  of  danger  or  death  did  but 
determine  the  direction,  or  the  remembrance,  of  activities  which  the 
sleeper's  unconscious  self  was  exercising  in  the  abeyance  of  waking 
function. 

And  if  we  follow  up  this  hint,  we  shall  note  that  in  most  cases  where 
even  a  waking  percipient  is  conscious  of  a  distant  scene,  the  sensation  is 
accompanied  by  something  like  a  momentary  abstractedness,  or  even 
actual  somnolence.'  In  Canon  Warburton's  case  (No.  108)  the  sudden  percep- 
tion of  a  distant  crisis,  apparently  occurring  at  that  moment,  wakes  the 
sleeper  from  his  doze  And  if  the  various  expressions  used  by  the  percipients 
of  these  clairvoyantly  witnessed  scenes,  whether  we  have  classed  them  as 
awake  or  asleep  at  the  time,  be  compared  together,  we  shall  find  that  they 
agree  in  describing  the  experience  as  something  unlike  either  dream- 
presence  or  waking  presence  in  the  suddenly-revealed  locality,  as  giving  a 

1  See,  for  instance,  eases  24,  63,  109. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  289 

sense  of  a  translation  of  the  centre  of  consciousness,  of  a  psychical 
excursion  into  a  definite  region  of  space. 

Such  expressions  need  imply  nothing  more  than  the  manner  in  which 
this  sudden  extension  of  the  psychical  purview  represents  itself  in  the 
forms  of  ordinary  thought.  But  they  may  aid  in  putting  us  on  the  track 
of  a  question  which  is,  in  my  view,  of  profound  importance.  Is  there 
evidence  of  any  percipience  on  the  part  of  others  which  corresponds  to 
the  clairvoyant's  own  sense  of  presence  and  action  in  the  scene  which  is 
common  to  his  mind  and  theirs  ?  Readers  of  Chap.  XVII.  will  have 
perceived  that  there  is  such  evidence  ;  and  although  the  cases  there  given 
are  not  numerous,  there  are  reasons  (as  I  hope  presently  to  show)  why 
but  a  very  small  fraction  of  such  experiences  is  ever  likely  to  come  to  our 
knowledge. 

Meantime,  we  must  observe  that  in  these  reciprocal  cases  the  condi- 
tion and  sensations  of  the  percipient,  who  thus  becomes  an  agent  also — the 
clairvoyant  who  is  himself  discerned  as  a  phantom  in  the  scene  where  he 
conceives  himself  to  be — are  precisely  similar  to  the  condition  and  sensa- 
tions of  the  clairvoyant  whose  vision  affects  no  second  person.  Our  agent, 
too,  is  in  a  fit  of  abstraction,  or  dreaming,  or  plunged  in  stupor  as  death 
draws  nigh,  when  he  produces  on  others  the  impression  correlative  to  the 
impression  which  is  being  produced  on  himself. 

§  13.  Correspondently  with  clairvoyant  perception  there  may  he  phantas- 
mogenetic  efficacy  : — this,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  sound  induction  from  our 
recorded  cases,  and  an  induction  which,  if  thoroughly  grasped,  will  modify 
profoundly  our  comprehension  and  classification  of  the  evidence  before  us. 
For,  speaking  broadly,  our  "phantasms  of  the  living"  will  consequently 
tend  to  arrange  themselves  into  two  main  classes,  classes  which  are  them- 
selves linked  in  more  ways  than  one ;  namely,  the  class  in  which  the 
phantasm  may  be  considered  as  the  emergence  or  externalisation,  in  and  by 
the  percipient's  mind,  of  an  impression  transmitted  from  a  distant  agent, 
and  the  class  in  which  the  phantasm  may  be  considered  as  corresponding  to 
the  conception  in  the  mind  of  a  clairvoyant  percipient, — who  is  thus  also  an 
agent, — of  his  own  presence  and  action  in  a  scene  which  he  shares  with  the 
persons  who  are  corporeally  present  therein. 

§  14.  And  thus  we  have  reached  a  point  at  which  what  seemed  the 
unique  difficulty  involved  in  collective  hallucinations  is  not  indeed 
explained,  but  is  seen  as  merely  a  special  case  which  we  can  subsume  under 
a  higher  generalisation.  What  I  mean  is  this ;  that  if  the  appearance,  say, 
of  Mr.  Newnham  to  Mrs.  Newnham  (case  35)  or  of  Mrs.  Smith  to  her  friend 
(case  306)  is  held  proximately  to  depend  on  their  own  perception  of  their 
VOL.    II.  u 

290  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

own  presence  in  the  scene  where  their  phantasm  is  observed,  it  becomes 
then  a  subsidiary  question  whether  only  one,  or  some,  or  the  whole  group 
of  the  persons  of  whose  consciousness  that  scene  forms  a  part,  perceive 
such  phantasm  or  no.  And  this  subsidiary  question,  again,  resolves  itself 
into  a  special  case  of  the  larger  question  which  meets  us  throughout  the 
whole  inquiry, — the  question  as  to  the  causes  of  varying  idiosyncratic 
receptiveness  of  phantasmal  impressions.  There  will  be  no  need  to 
assume,  as  Mr.  Gumey  is  inclined  to  do,  a  direct  infection  of  hallucination 
from  one  primary  percipient  to  neighbouring  minds.  Still  less  shall  we 
need  to  explain  such  cases  as  Nos.  242  and  355  by  the  strange  hypothesis 
that  an  idea,  partly  or  altogether  latent  and  undeveloped  in  the  mind 
of  the  primary  percipient,  did  nevertheless  propagate  itself  from 
thence  and  emerge  into  full  externalisation  for  a  person  to  whom  the 
distant  agent  was  wholly  unknown.  For  we  shall  be  able  to  conceive  it  as 
possible  that  all  the  persons  in  the  room  may  be  equally  favourably 
situated  for  the  discernment  of  that  phantasmal  correlate  which  repre- 
sents or  accompanies,  in  some  way  unknown  to  us,  the  clairvoyant 
percipience  of  the  distant  and  dying  man. 

§  15.  At  the  cost  of  some  cumbrousness  of  language,  I  have  been 
careful  to  express  my  hypothesis  in  exclusively  psychical — as  opposed  to 
physical — terms.  I  desire  that  the  reader  should  clearly  distinguish  it  from 
any  view  which  implies  a  material  or  objective  presence,  of  however 
tenuous  a  kind.  I  shall  not,  indeed,  commit  myself  to  the  assertion  that 
any  such  presence  is  impossible;  or  that  there  may  not  be  some  intermediate 
view  between  what  seems  to  me  the  gross  conception  of  a  molecular  meta- 
organism,  already  alluded  to,  and  the  purely  psychical  agency  which  is 
all  that  I  postulate  here.  The  line  between  the  "material"  and  the 
"  immaterial,"  as  these  words  are  commonly  used,  means  little  more  than 
the  line  between  the  phenomena  which  our  senses  or  our  instruments  can 
detect  or  register,  and  the  phenomena  which  they  can  not.  And  the  whole 
problem  of  the  relation  of  the  psychical  to  the  physical — of  thought 
and  will  to  space  and  matter — is  forced  upon  our  attention  with  startling 
vividness  from  the  very  beginning  of  this  inquiry.  At  every  step  we 
find  that  familiar  speculative  difficulties  assume  a  new  reality ;  and  that 
dilemmas  which  the  metaphysician  can  evade,  and  the  physicist  ignore, 
present  to  the  psychical  researcher  an  imperative  choice  of  one  or  the 
other  horn. 

In  the  present  discussion,  however,  such  difficulties  can  still  be 
postponed.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  pointing  out  that  since  some  even  of 
the  phantasms  which  are  perceived  by  more  than  one  person  escape  the 
perception  of  one  or  more  of  the  bystanders,  they  cannot  be  objective  in 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  291 

any  ordinary  sense.  And  while  they  are  regarded  as  entirely  psychical 
incidents,  the  differentia  of  the  view  here  advanced  is  still,  I  think, 
sufficiently  plain.  I  treat  the  respective  hallucinations  of  each  member 
of  the  affected  group  as  each  and  all  directly  generated  by  a  conception  in 
a  distant  mind — a  conception  which  presents  itself  to  that  mind  as 
though  its  centre  of  activity  were  translated  to  the  scene  where  the  group 
are  sitting,  and  which  presents  itself  to  each  member  of  that  group  as 
though  their  hallucinations  did  not  come  to  them  incoherently  or 
independently,  but  were  diffused  from  a  "  radiant  point,"  or  phantasmo- 
genetic  focus,  corresponding  with  that  region  of  space  where  the 
distant  agent  conceives  himself  to  be  exercising  his  supernormal 
perception. 

§46.  This  view  is  at  any  rate  definite  enough  to  suggest  certain 
experiments  which  might  test  its  probability  in  comparison  with  the  view 
which  assumes  one  primary  percipient  and  a  transference  of  hallucination, 
as  though  by  a  second  telepathic  process,  from  that  primary  percipient 
to  his  neighbours  in  space. 

The  most  important  experiment  would  be  one  which  there  is 
perhaps  small  chance  of  making  ;  for  it  depends  on  the  coolness  and 
preparedness  of  several  persons  collectively  witnessing  a  veridical 
hallucination.  It  might,  for  instance,  have  been  carried  out  by  Mrs. 
Elgee  and  Miss  D.  in  the  case  (No.  348)  which  Mr.  Gumey  cites  as  one 
where  "the  flashing  of  the  hallucination  from  one  of  the  percipients 
to  the  other  seems  specially  well  illustrated,  since  the  figure  which 
appeared  was  one  which  the  second  percipient  had  never  seen  in  the 
flesh."  In  that  case  we  have  no  independent  account  from  Miss  D., 
and  the  details  are  insufficient  to  show  the  relation  between  the 
hallucinations  of  the  two  persons.  But  let  us  assume,  for  the  sake  of 
argument,  that  a  similar  incident  occurs  to  persons  prepared  to  analyse 
it ;  that  A's  phantom  appears  to  B,  who  knows  him,  and  also  to  0,  who 
is  in  the  room  with  B,  but  never  saw  A. 

I  will  arrange  an  account  of  the  imaginary  scene  in  two  ways  ;  flrst, 
so  as  to  illustrate  Mr.  Gurney's  "  flashing  of  the  hallucination  from  one  of 
the  percipients  to  the  other  "  ;  and,  secondly,  so  as  to  illustrate  my  own 
view  of  the  diffusion  of  the  hallucination  to  both  minds  similarly,  in  a 
manner  conditioned  by  the  agent's  conception  of  himself  as  present  in  a 
scene  in  which  the  two  percipients  are  sitting. 

(1)  B  sees  the  figure  first,  and  thus  develops  the  hallucinatory  figure  of 

A,  clothing  it  with  the  dress  in  which  he  has  most  frequently  seen  A.     C 

discerns  the  figure  after  B  has  done  so,  and  either  more  vaguely  or  in  the  same 

garb  in  which  B  discerns  it,   or  with  peculiarities  which  may  be  traced  to 

VOL.    II.  U   2 

292  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

O's  own  mind ;  at  any  rate,  not  inti^oducing  true  points  of  resemblance 
to  A,  which  have  not  been  observed  by  B.  Moreover,  if  B's  hallucination 
represents  A  as  facing  him,  C's  hallucination  takes  a  similar  attitude, 
although  C  may  be  so  placed  with  reference  to  the  figure  that,  had  it  been 
A  in  proprid  persond,  G  would  have  seen,  not  A's  full  face,  but  his 
profile  or  back.  There  is  no  distinct  agreement  between  B  and  0  as  to 
the  point  of  space  which  the  phantom  seemed  to  occupy,  or  as  to  its 
successive  movements,  or  the  time  and  mode  of  its  disappearance.  Such 
details  as  these,  if  occurring  in  the  manner  here  suggested,  would  favour 
the  supposition  that  C's  hallucination  was  not  the  result  of  any  direct 
transfer  from  A,  but  rather  of  a  transfer  from  B  of  the  hallucination 
to  which  B's   mind  had  given  shape. 

(2)  'Now  let  us  suppose  that  these  little  incidents  occur  in  just  the 
opposite  manner.  C  perceives  the  phantom  before  B  does,  and  perceives  it 
with  characteristic  details  of  garb  and  appearance,  some  of  which  B  fails  to 
note.  Moreover,  when  B  and  C  are  so  placed  that  0  would  see  the 
phantom's  back,  and  B  the  phantom's  face,  were  the  phantom  a  real  person 
in  the  place  where  B  sees  it,  then  they  do  see  difierent  aspects  of  the 
phantom  accordingly.  And  they  agree  as  to  every  detail  of  its  garb,  so 
far  as  observed,  and  as  to  its  apparent  position  in  space,  its  movements, 
and  the  mode  of  its  disappearance.  If  the  details  of  the  hallucination  were 
found  to  follow  this  type,  there  would  seem  to  be  strong  reason  for  suppos- 
ing that  the  impression  on  C  's  mind  was  not  (so  to  say)  reflected  from 
B's,  but  that  both  alike  corresponded  to  a  more  or  less  detailed,  definite, 
and  persistent  conception  on  A's  own  part  of  his  presence  and  action  in 
the  scene  where  his  friend  and  the  stranger  were  sitting.  In  that  case 
the  manner  or  distinctness  with  which  the  phantom  was  discerned  by  B 
and  C  respectively  would  depend  on  their  relative  power  of  supernormal 
percipience, — their  psychical  permeability, — though  it  will  still  be  presum- 
able that  B's  previous  rapport  with  A,  which  has  probably  determined  the 
direction  which  A's  clairvoyant  perception  has  taken,  may  also  predispose 
or  enable  B  to  discern  the  phantom  on  some  occasions  when  C  cannot 
do  so.  On  the  other  hand,  if  C's  power  of  supernormal  percipience  greatly 
exceed  B's,  0  may  discern  the  phantom,  though  of  a  stranger,  when  B  fails 
to  discern  it,  though  of  a  friend,  as  in  cases  242  and  355,  above 
mentioned. 

§  17.  The  occasions  on  which  such  observations  as  these  are  possible 
are  likely  to  be  almost  as  rare  as  ecliiDses.  But,  in  the  meantime,  we  may, 
at  any  rate,  practise  (so  to  say)  with  smoked  glass.  We  have  now  the 
means  of  actually  producing  hallucinations  at  will  in  certain  subjects  by 
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  a  careful  arrargement  of  conditions  may  throw 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  293 

light  on  the  modes  of  communicability  of  hallucination  from  one  mind  to 
another. 

I  will  take  first  the  simplest  case,  and  will  suppose  that  I  am  communi- 
cating a  hallucination  to  several  hypnotised  subjects  by  direct  suggestion. 
I  say  to  the  first :  "  There  is  a  playbill  on  the  wall ;  write  down  the 
name  of  the  play  advertised,  but  do  not  show  it  to  anyone."  He  sees  the 
imaginary  playbill  at  my  suggestion,  and  his  own  mind  supplies  the  title 
of  the  play — say  Hamlet.  I  simultaneously,  or  just  afterwards,  make  the 
same  suggestion  to  other  subjects.  Now  if  all  of  them  see  Hamlet 
advertised,  the  special  form  in  which  the  first  subject  shaped  his  hallu- 
cination has  probably  influenced  the  rest.  Even  if  they  see  Othello, 
Macbeth,  &c.,  there  has  perhaps  been  a  communication  of  the  idea  of 
Shakespeare.  But  if  they  see  Our  Boys,  The  Private  Secretary,  &c.,  then 
the  specific  form  which  the  first  subject's  hallucination  assumed  has  not 
exercised  a  shaping  power  over  the  impulses  to  hallucination  which  I  have 
communicated  to  the  other  subjects. 

Again,  take  a  case  of  deferred  hallucination,  as  when  Professor  Beaunis 
of  Nancy  told  Mdlle.  A.,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  that  she  would  see 
him  call  on  her  on  January  1st  at  10  a.m.  Let  a  similar  anticipatory  idea 
be  again  impressed  on  Mdlle.  A,  and  let  it  be  provided  that  other  persons, 
known  to  be  susceptible,  shall  be  in  Mdlle.  A's  company  when  the  hallu- 
cination falls  due.  It  can  then  be  seen  whether  they  "  catch  it  from  her," 
so  to  say,  by  telepathic  infection.  Or  if  they  fail  to  do  so,  the  trans- 
ference might  be  facilitated  as  follows.  Mdlle.  A  might  be  led  to  expect 
Professor  Beaunis'  visit  in  a  special  dress,  carefully  impressed  on  her.  The 
others  might  simply  be  told  that  the  Professor  would  call  at  the  hour 
determined.  It  might  then  be  seen  whether  the  hallucination  which 
had  been  suggested  to  them  in  a  comparatively  vague  form  were 
rendered  definite  by  infection  from  Mdlle.  A's  clearer  perception  of  the 
phantasmal  visitant,  so  that  all  alike  saw  him  in  the  dress  announced 
to  Mdlle.  A. 

The  subjects  on  whom  such  experiments  as  these  can  be  attempted 
with  success  are  at  present  few  in  number,  and  almost  exclusively  French. 
But  the  methodical  zeal  with  which  a  group  of  French  physicians  are  now 
pursuing  this  form  of  research  renders  it  likely  that  fresh  light  will  soon 
be  shed  on  the  genesis  and  development  of  hallucinatory  percepts.  Such 
theorising,  therefore,  as  I  am  here  attempting  need  not  be  premature,  if 
it  serves  to  suggest  experiment,  and  to  guide  observation. 

§  18.  But  those  who  have  followed  me  thus  far  will  find  that  a  further 
reflection  is  here  naturally  suggested.  If  in  cases  of  collective  hallucination 
we  have  seen  reason  to  conjecture  that  there  has  been,  not  a  mere  series  of 

294  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

telepathic  transferences  of  impression,  but  a  presentation  as  a  quasi- 
percept  to  several  minds  of  a  distant  agent's  conception  of  himself  as 
present  among  them  by  a  kind  of  psychical  translation,  then  we  can 
hardly  suppose  that  this  explanation  is  applicable  to  collective  cases  alone. 
The  accident  that  some  indifferent  person  shared  with  the  primary  friend 
the  perception  of  the  phantasm  may  enlighten  us  as  to  the  mode  in  which 
that  phantasm  was  generated,  but  cannot  have  itself  determined  that  mode. 
Can  we  decide,  then,  for  which  of  the  apparitions  seen  by  one  person 
only  our  newly-suggested  method  of  origination  may  most  plausibly  be 
invoked  ? 

Much,  I  think,  might  be  learnt  from  reviewing  the  whole  series  of  our 
phantasms,  while  keeping  in  view  the  analogy  of  the  alleged  cases  of 
experimental  clairvoyance  in  the  same  way  as  the  analogy  of  experimental 
telepathy  has  been  kept  in  view  in  the  preceding  chapters.  But  such  a 
task  must  be  postponed  till  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance  itself  shall  have 
been  subjected  to  a  searching  analysis.  All  that  I  can  attempt  here  is 
to  draw  attention  to  two  problems,  already  repeatedly  touched  on  by  Mr. 
Gurney,  but  capable  of  being  discussed  with  profit  from  several  points  of 
view.  I  speak  of  the  apparent  garb  and  symbolism  of  phantasms,  and  of 
their  attraction  to  special  localities. 

§  19.  The  question  of  the  clothes  of  ghosts — or  the  ghosts  of  clothes — 
is  one  which  presents  the  relation  between  the  material  and  the  immaterial 
under  a  specially  grotesque  aspect.  Theories  which  attribute  any  kind  of 
materiality  to  the  "White  Lady  "  or  "  Grey  Lady  "  herself,  are  apt  to  get 
inextricably  entangled  in  her  shadowy  muslin.  And  apart  from  any  definite 
theorising,  the  frock-coat  or  the  flowered  dressing-gown  of  the  "  spiritual 
visitant,"  has  seemed  to  many  minds  to  destroy  his  dignity  and  interest — 
to  be  painfully  incongruous  with  pure  existences  and  a  noumenal  world. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  need  hardly,  at  this  point,  explain  that  on  the  hy- 
pothesis advanced  in  this  book,  this  very  mundaneness  of  the  apparition 
is  precisely  what  was  to  be  expected.  For  veridical  hallucinations — like 
morbid  hallucinations,  though  in  a  different  sense — are  the  outcome  of 
human  minds  ;  the  form  in  which  my  friend's  phantasm  presents  itself 
to  me  has  been  stamped  thereon  either  by  my  friend's  mind  or  my  own. 
And  it  therefore  would  be  strange  if  I  phantasmally  saw  the  dying 
man  unclothed, — as  I  have  never  seen  him  in  life ;  if  he,  in  his  last 
moments,  pictured  himself  as  he  has  never  hitherto  pictured  himself  in 
colloquy  with  his  friends. 

But  granting  the  almost  unavoidable  supposition  that  the  phantom  will 
appear  clothed — and  clothed  in  some  such  way  as  either  agent's  or  perci- 
pient's mind  can  suggest — questions  remain  which  are  among  the   most 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  295 

important  and  the  most  difficult  with  which  we  have  to  deal.  The  clothes 
of  apparitions  are  like  the  cartouches  of  Egyptian  kings — they  are  hiero- 
glyphs, in  part  seemingly  arbitrary,  in  part  obviously  symbolical,  which 
we  must  compare  and  decipher  before  we  can  arrange  our  processional 
figures  by  date  and  dynasty.  For  the  most  part  these  phantoms  remain  but 
for  a  moment,  and  are  gone  without  speech  or  action  before  their  astonished 
spectator  has  recovered  from  the  shock  of  their  approach.  Sometimes 
their  faces  present  some  change  or  particularity,  as  of  hair  or  beard,  of 
pallor  or  injury,  which  in  some  degree  identifies  the  moment  of  time, 
past  or  present,  which  that  phantasmal  visage  tends  to  reproduce.  But 
often  such  traces  fail  us.  The  witness  gazes,  not  on  some  scarred  and 
mangled  form — Priamiden  laniatum  corpore  toto — but  on  the  unchanged 
aspect  of  a  familiar  friend.  For  most  observers  such  recognition  is  enough, 
as  it  is  enough  for  the  devout  worshipper  to  recognise  in  a  picture  the 
Madonna's  face.  Too  soon  the  vision  disappears — iterum  crudelia  retro 
Fata  vacant — and  what  is  left  is  the  shock  of  loss,  the  memory  of  consola- 
tion. It  is  from  no  want  of  sympathy  with  those  primary  emotions  that 
we  must  urge  on  the  readers  of  this  book  the  imperative  need,  should 
occasion  be  ofiered  to  them,  of  a  minuter  and  calmer  observation.  Every 
detail  of  the  phantasmal  appearance  has  some  meaning  •  and  the  points 
which  the  spectator  accepts  as  subordinate  and  unimpressive  may  contain 
clues  sought  elsewhere  in  vain.  Thus — to  come  at  once  to  my  present  pur- 
pose— it  is  usual  for  a  witness  to  say  "he  appeared  to  me  in  the  dress  he 
habitually  wore,  and  in  which  I  knew  him."  In  one  sense  these  two 
clauses  mean  the  same  thing.  But  which  of  them  is  the  really  efiective 
one  ?  If  A's  phantom  wears  a  black  coat,  is  that  because  A  wore  a  black 
coat,  or  because  B  was  accustomed  to  see  him  in  one  ?  If  A  had  taken 
to  wearing  a  brown  coat  since  B  saw  him  in  the  flesh,  would  A's  phantom 
wear  to  B's  eyes  a  black  coat  or  a  brown  ?  Or  would  the  dress  which  A 
actually  wore  at  the  moment  of  death  dominate,  as  it  were,  and  supplant 
phantasmally  the  costumes  of  his  ordinary  days  ? 

Those  who  have  followed  the  cases  cited  in  this  book,  and  Mr.  Gurney's 
comments  thereon,  will  know  that  the  answer  to  these  questions  is  neither 
uniform  nor  clear.  It  is  seldom  that  we  can  trust  the  percipient's  memory 
of  the  details  of  his  vision,  and  even  when  these  details  have  been  carefully 
noted  their  lesson  is  not  easy  to  decipher. 

We  have,  of  course,  as  a  starting  point,  the  known  fact  that  a  man 
may  have  a  purely  subjective  hallucination,  and  may  clothe  it  in  almost 
any  fashion, — introducing  items  of  dress  which  have  never  been 
consciously  familiar  to  his  mind.  We  may  naturally  begin,  then^  by 
assuming  that,  unless  evidence  to  the  contrary  be  forthcoming,  it  is  from 
the  percipient's  mind  that  the  dress  or  other  imagery  of  the  phantom  is 

296  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

drawn.     Let  us  see  whether  there  are  any  cases  where  this  seems  clearly 
indicated  by  the  particulars  of  the  dress  itself. 

Suppose  that  the  dying  A  appears  to  B,  habited  in  hat  and  coat, 
though  in  point  of  fact  he  is  in  bed  at  the  time.  Must  we  not  here  say 
that  B's  mind  has  furnished  the  setting  of  the  figure,  and  that  nothing 
beyond  the  mere  impression  of  a  personality  comes  from  A  himself? 

No ;  this  deduction  would  be  insecure.  For  it  assumes  that  if  the 
agent  projects  a  developed  phantom  of  himself, — a  conception  of  himself, 
that  is  to  say,  which  B's  mind  externalises  as  a  phantom, — he  will 
necessarily  project  it  as  though  clad  in  the  garments  which  he  is  wearing 
at  the  time.  But  we  have  no  grounds  for  assuming  this.  Just  as  B  may 
imagine  A  as  wearing  a  familiar  greatcoat,  so  may  A  imagine  himself  as 
wearing  that  coat,  whatever  be  his  actual  dress  at  the  time. 

Suppose  that  we  dream  of  calling  on  a  friend.  In  most  cases  we 
dream  of  ourselves  as  in  ordinary  walking  attire.  It  is  only  rarely  that 
we  dream  of  entering  a  drawing-room  in  tiefem  neglige,  as  the  Germans 
put  it, — an  obscure  sense  of  one's  actual  condition  entering,  with 
disastrous  incoherence,  into  the  feebly  co-ordinated  story  of  one's 
dream. 

Now,  if  we  are  comparing  these  veridical  hallucinations  to 
objectified  dreams,  we  must  at  least  allow  for  the  chance  of  the  dream 
being  the  agent's  own ;  we  must  not  assume  that  it  is  always— so  to  say — 
dreamt  for  him  by  the  person  to  whom  he  appears.  Whatever  the  agent's 
actual  dress  at  the  time,  all  the  cases  where  he  appears  merely  in  his 
usual  costume  must  be  set  aside  as  neutral.  We  cannot  press  them  to 
prove  the  origin  of  the  figure  in  either  the  one  or  the  other  mind. 

Is  there,  then,  any  feature  to  which  we  can  point  as  undoubtedly  due 
to  the  workings  of  the  percipient's  mind  ?  anything  in  the  associations  of 
the  dress  ?  or  in  the  special  symbolism  of  the  apparition  ?  It  is  plain  that 
associations  attaching  to  A's  dress  must  be  common  to  A  as  well  as  to  B. 
Suppose  that  B  saw  the  dying  A  habited  in  a  coat  which  A  wore  at  B's 
wedding,  or  at  some  other  epochal  moment  in  B's  life.  It  must  still  be 
remembered  that  that  same  moment  was  epochal  to  A  also,  in  so  far  as  his 
relation  to  B  was  concerned,  and  that  its  conscious  or  unconscious  memory 
may  influence  A's  conception  of  himself  as  bidding  B  a  last  farewell. 
Similarly,  a  man  who  recalls  his  acts  of  homage  to  Royalty  vaguely  feels 
himself  in  Court  dress  ;  a  man  who  imagines  himself  talking  to  a  hunting 
acquaintance  has  a  slight  sense — what  is  called  a  "  phantom  "  sense — of 
being  on  horseback. 

And  this  ambiguity,  I  think,  attaches  to  the  few  cases  in  which,  as 
Mr.  Grurney  urges,  the  "  ghosts  of  old  clothes,"  in  which  the  phantom 
appears,  indicate  the  percipient's  memory  as  the  source  of  that  investiture. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  297 

In  Colonel  and  Mrs.  BoUand's  case  (201),  a  scrutiny  of  the  dates  and  facts 
given  will  show  that  we  have  no  reason  to  regard  Ramsay's  clothes  as  old, — 
as  otherwise  than  still  the  suit  in  which  he  would  be  likely  to  imagine 
himself  as  calling  on  a  former  mistress.  In  case  200,  a  brother  delirious 
in  Australia,  and  fancying  himself  at  home,  appears  to  his  sister 
on  the  lawn,  "  dressed  as  he  usually  was  when  he  came  home  from 
London,  not  as  he  was  when  he  left  home,  nor  as  he  could  be  in  Australia, 
nor  as  I  had  ever  seen  him  when  walking  in  the  garden."  Surely  all  that 
this  dress  implied  was  the  idea  of  a  traveller's  home-coming,  which  was  at 
any  rate  the  dominant  one  in  the  brother's  ravings.  Had  it  been  his 
wonted  garden  costume,  tlien  to  my  mind  the  dress,  though  still 
ambiguous,  would  have  looked  more  probably  referable  to  the  sister's 
shaping  imagination. 

In  a  third  and  fourth  case,  (No.  202,  and  p.  546,  second  note,)  there 
is  an  admixture  of  unexplained  grotesqueness,  (the  lady  in  a  carriage,  the 
boy  "  enclosed,  as  it  were,  in  a  dark  cellar "),  which  seems  to  remove 
these  eases  into  the  category  next  to  be  considered,  namely,  where  the 
phantasmal  figure  is  accompanied  by  symbolism,,  whose  origin  we  have  to 
ascribe  to  one  or  the  other  mind.  Such  symbolism,  as  Mr.  Gurney  has 
pointed  out,  is  usually  referable  to  some  "mental  habit  or  tradition," 
which  is  probably  common  to  both  the  minds  concerned.  One  can,  of 
course,  imagine  a  case  where  the  symbolism  should  be  such  as  the 
percipient's  mind  alone  would  be  likely  to  think  of ;  as  if,  for  instance,  the 
"  thousands  of  angels  as  tight  as  they  could  be  packed,"  which  (in  case 
207)  are  seen  surrounding  a  departed  Christian  friend,  had  formed  the 
symbolic  escort  of  a  pronounced  Agnostic. 

§  20.  But  in  default  of  such  narratives  as  this,  the  cases  where  the  in- 
fluence of  the  percipient's  idiosyncrasy  seems  most  marked  are  those  where 
the  same  percipient  has  a  recurrent  symbolical  dream,  coincident  on  each 
occasion  with  a  death  or  other  marked  occurrence.  We  have  a  few  such 
cases,  but  in  the  most  remarkable  of  them  (No.  131)  the  form  of  the  dream 
is  not  exactly  idiosyncratic,  but  rather  takes  on  a  form  with  which  students 
of  folk-lore  are  already  familiar.  The  traditions  of  folk-lore,  it  may 
be  remarked,  form  a  kind  of  endemic  symbolism,  in  which  both  morbid  and 
veridical  hallucinations  tend  to  clothe  themselves.  In  some  cases  we  have 
found  a  community  of  Celtic  fishermen,  or  the  like,  so  deeply  impregnated 
with  traditions  of  this  kind  that  we  cannot  accept  their  accounts  of  corpse- 
candles,  &c.,  though  supported  by  apparent  coincidences  of  fact,  as  of  real 
evidential  value.  We  are  obliged,  that  is  to  say,  to  treat  such  a  community 
as  subject  to  casual  hallucinations,  which  detract  from  the  importance  of 
such  coincidences  with  objective  fact  as  do  from  time  to  time  occur.     It  is 

298  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

only  in  some  of  the  remoter  regions  of  Wales  and  Scotland  that  we  have 
found  superstitions  of  this  sort  active  and  definite.  But  the  tendency  to  the 
recurrence  of  some  special  symbolism — symbolism  of  which  the  percipient 
may  never  remember  to  have  heard — among  the  dreams  of  educated 
persons,  reminds  us  sometimes  of  the  sporadic  endemicity  of  certain 
traditions  of  folk-lore,  of  which  this  very  tendency  may  be  itself  the 
proximate  cause. 

In  our  present  collection,  however,  we  have  included  very  little  of  such 
symbolism,  and  to  what  there  is  we  can  assign  no  certain  origin  in  agent's 
or  percipient's  mind. 

§  21.  On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  that  we  have  few  indications  in  the 
dress  or  other  surroundings  of  fully-developed  veridical  phantoms  which 
point  conclusively  to  an  origin  in  the  percipient's  mind.  Are  there  instances, 
on  the  other  hand,  which  yield  the  reverse  indication  1  that  is,  where  the 
dress  or  imagery  seems  manifestly  traceable  to  the  mind  of  the  agent 
himself  ? 

Such  indication  may  conceivably  be  given  in  two  main  ways.  The 
agent's  dress  or  aspect  at  the  moment  may  be  phantasmally  repro- 
duced ;  or  there  may  be  symbolism,  not  vague  or  traditional  in  character, 
but  plainly  adapted  to  communicate  some  information  known  to  the  agent 
alone. 

Of  the  first  of  these  classes  the  reader  will  have  observed  a  good  many 
examples.  There  are,  first  of  all,  the  phantoms  in  night-dress.  In  one  or 
two  cases  {e.g.,  No.  563,)  these  are  apparitions  of  persons  whom  the 
percipient  knows  to  be  dying,  and  the  white  dress  might,  therefore,  be 
suggested  by  the  percipient's  mind.  But  in  other  cases  (see  especially  No. 
214)  there  is  no  expectation  of  the  agent's  death,  and  the  dress  astonishes 
the  percipient  by  its  incongruity. 

Still  more  remarkable  are  the  cases  where  the  dying  man  appears  in  a 
dress  which  he  is  actually  wearing  at  the  moment,  although  it  is  not  such 
as  is  usually  associated  with  death-beds.  The  case  of  Dr.  Bowstead  (No. 
212),  commented  on  by  Mr.  Gurney,  may  serve  as  a  type  of  this  class.  In 
such  a  case  as  that  (to  anyone  who  believes  that  more  than  mere  chance  is 
involved),  it  must  surely  seem  more  probable  that  the  dress  of  the  phantom 
was  the  creation  of  the  dying  man's  mind  rather  than  of  the  mind  of  the 
boy  to  whom  that  phantom  appeared.  And  it  is  observable  that  while 
such  evidence  as  points  to  the  percipient's  part  in  shaping  these  figures  is 
indirect  and  inferential,  the  evidence  which  points  to  their  full-blown 
projection  from  the  agent's  mind  is  often  as  direct  and  unmistakeable  as 
any  evidence  on  such  a  point  can  be  expected  to  be. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  299 

§  22.  Next  as  regards  the  symbolism  which  accompanies  the  figure. 
The  commonest  case  of  symbolism — if  such  it  is  to  be  called — consists  in 
the  wet  clothes  of  the  apparition  of  a  drowned  man.  There  is  possibly 
something  in  death  by  asphyxiation  which  (as  it  seems  to  revive  past 
memories  with  unusual  vividness)  predisposes  also  to  telepathic  action. 
At  any  rate,  we  have  a  good  many  of  such  cases,  and  there  seems  almost 
always  to  be  some  specific  indication  of  the  manner  of  death,  "  Dripping 
with  water,"  "his  hair  wet,"  "pale,  sad,  and  wet,"  "looking  half- 
drowned,"  such  are  the  phrases  which  recur.  The  distinctive  mark  here 
is  very  simple — it  may  be  said  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  translation  into 
visibility  of  the  idea  "  He  is  drowning."  We  might,  therefore,  suppose 
that  it  had  perhaps  originated  in  the  percipient's  mind.  But  this  view  is 
rendered  less  plausible  by  the  cases  where  the  apparition  presents  more 
detailed  marks  of  accident,  change,  or  disease,  as  the  wound  on  the  chest 
in  case  210,  the  trembling  and  pallor  in  case  527,  the  grey  hair  in  case  194, 
and  the  complex  and  partly  symbolical  aspect  of  the  phantom  in  case  25. 
It  is  worth  remarking  that  "  IST.  J.  S.  "  (case  28),  who  looked  carefully  at 
the  details  of  his  apparition,  is  of  opinion  that  the  walking-stick  which  his 
friend  held  (but  which  "  N.  J.  S."  never  remembered  to  have  seen  him 
using)  was  symbolical,  and  meant  to  imply  departure  and  a  farewell.  The 
case  (No.  514)  of  the  lady  seen  with  a  lock  of  hair  cut  off  and  a  "  peculiar 
light  upon  her,"  presents  a  somewhat  similar  mixture  of  true  reproduction 
and  symbolism  ;  and  the  extraordinary  narrative  of  Sengireef  (No.  449), 
which  throughout  resembles  an  extravagant  dream,  shows  that  the 
phantom  presented  some  details  (of  beard,  &c.)  which  were  true  and 
unknown  to  the  percipient.  My  view  in  that  instance  is  that  the  dream 
in  reality  was  not  Madame  Aksakoff's,  but  Sengireef 's  ;  that  its  insane 
strangeness  was  the  reflection  of  the  confused  clairvoyance  of  a  delirious 
monomaniac.  With  this  last  case  I  should  compare  No.  349  :  the  diff"erence 
being  that  here,  instead  of  the  sombre  wildness  of  the  fanatic,  we  have  the 
devout  aspiration  of  the  Catholic  boy.  I  should  explain,  that  is  to  say,  the 
figure  of  St.  Stanislaus  as  the  reflected  embodiment  of  a  dying  dream. 

I  have  said  enough,  perhaps,  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own 
judgment  on  this  point  from  the  cases  recorded  in  these  volumes.  On  the 
one  hand,  if  he  accepts  our  general  argument  as  to  the  connection  of  purely 
subjective  and  veridical  hallucinations,  he  will  recognise  that  there  is  a 
certain  a  priori  likelihood  that  the  details  of  the  hallucination  will  be 
found  to  emanate  from  the  loercipient' s  mind.  And  he  may  be  disposed 
to  follow  Mr.  Gurney  in  classing  dubious  cases  by  this  presumption ;  in 
ranking  as  exceptional  the  narratives  where  the  details  seem  plainly 
derived  from  the  mind  of  the  agent.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  views  the 
cases  which  I  have  mentioned  (and  many  others  which  resemble  them)  in 

300  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

the  light  in  which  I  have  tried  to  place  them,  he  may  recognise  that  when 
the  apparition  does  present  any  distinct  details,  these  are  almost  always 
such  as  the  agent's  mind  might  most  naturally  have  supplied ;  and  that 
this  fact  suggests  a  doubt  as  to  whether  there  may  not  be  something 
more  than  a  simple  telepathic  impulse  involved ; — whether  the  obscurer 
agency  of  clairvoyance  must  not  here  be  invoked ; — an  analogy 
suggesting  that  certain  modes  of  supernormal  percipience  and  self- 
realisation  in  a  distant  scene  may  produce  upon  the  persons  placed  in  that 
scene  an  impression  as  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  clairvoyant  among  them, 
in  a  manner  corresponding  to  his  own  momentary  conception  of  himself, 

§  23.  Connected,  in  a  certain  way,  with  the  symbolism  of  which  we 
have  been  speaking,  is  another  point  of  interest  in  these  phantasmal 
appearances.  I  mean  the  difficulty  which  is  sometimes  felt  in  recognising 
them. 

To  begin  with,  it  is  no  doubt  possible  to  suppose  that  the  percipient's 
mind  builds  up  the  hallucination,  so  to  say,  from  some  unconscious 
stratum,  so  that  the  conscious  self  does  not  at  the  first  moment  understand 
the  figure  presented.  This  would  be  a  form  of  gradual  development  of 
the  quasi-percept  which  could  be  paralleled  both  from  ordinary  dreams  and 
from  automatic  writing.  I  cannot,  indeed,  find  that  purely  subjective 
hallucinations  ever  develop  themselves  in  this  way.  Yet  I  should  myself 
see  no  real  difficulty  in  applying  this  explanation  even  to  cases  where  the 
recognition  wholly  fails  at  the  time,  and  is  only  effected  afterwards  by 
conscious  reflection.  Such  a  case  would  resemble  the  anagrams  which  an 
automatic  writer  will  sometimes  commit  to  paper,  i  without  understanding 
at  the  time  what  are  the  words  which  his  unconscious  self  has  thus 
concealed  in  a  meaningless  group  of  letters. 

But,  nevertheless,  some  of  the  recorded  particulars  seem  to  point  to  the 
simpler  explanation — namely,  that  the  phantom's  details  were  developed 
independently  of  the  percipient's  mind,  and  that  the  figure  merely  failed 
in  making  itself  known  to  him.  Sometimes,  for  example,  the  percipient 
looks  attentively  at  the  figure,  but  mistakes  it  for  some  one  who 
resembles  the  person  whom  the  figure  is  afterwards  found  to  represent.^ 
Sometimes  the  phantom  which  the  percipient  fails  to  recognise  represents 
a  person  whom  he  might  equally  have  failed  to  recognise  in  the  flesh.  ^ 
Sometimes  a  call  is  re2oeated,  as  if  in  insistant  appeal.*  And  there  are 
a  few  cases, — we  could  not  expect  many, — where  a  percipient  has  seen  a 
figure  wholly  unknown  to  him,  but  which  he  has  afterwards  been  able  to 
identify  by  circumstantial  evidence.     Such  are  cases  544  and  215.    Under 

1  See  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  226,  &c.  2  gge  cases  170  and  171. 

3  See  cases  189  and  241.  ^  gee  especially  case  508. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  301 

this  category,   too,   comes  the  singular  apparition   detailed    in    case   30, 
whatever  explanation  we  may  prefer  to  give  to  it. 

Cases  like  these  incline  me  to  think  that  we  are  still  in  danger  of  an 
old  error  in  a  modified  form, — the  error  of  attributing  too  much 
importance  to  the  person  who  sees  the  phantom,  because  his  account  of 
the  matter  is  the  only  one  which  we  can  get.  We  are,  indeed,  no  longer 
aflTected  by  the  crude  emotional  form  of  this  mistake, — as  when  the 
percipient  considers  the  apparition  to  be  a  breach  of  natural  laws 
permitted  expressly  in  favour  of  himself.  But  our  own  conception  of  the 
apparition  as  the  result  of  a  telepathic  transference  of  impression  from 
the  one  to  the  other  mind  is  apt,  I  think,  to  obscure  the  possibility  of 
generative  causes  quite  apart  from  any  pre-existing  rapport  between  the 
two  persons. 

§  24.  Thus,  to  proceed  to  the  next  point  which  I  had  selected  for 
notice,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  attraction  which  determines  the  phantasmal 
presence  is  sometimes  local  rather  than  personal.  This  apparent  in- 
fluence of  a  certain  locality  may  be  observed  in  several  different  stages. 
In  some  cases  the  phantasmal  visitor  appears  to  an  acquaintance  with 
whom  he  has  some  slight  link,  and  who  is  also  in  a  spot  to  which  the 
dying  man  is  attached.  Here  the  telepathic  impulse  may  have  been 
facilitated  by  the  familiar  locality.  But  in  a  few  cases,  as  already 
mentioned,  the  dying  man  appears  to  persons  with  whom  he  is  in  no  way 
acquainted.  And  I  believe  that  in  every  clear  instance  of  this  kind  there 
has  been  a  local  attraction,  a  reason  which  draws  the  dying  person  to  that 
house  or  field,  irrespective  of  the  living  persons  who  may  be  there  at  the 
moment. 

Case  666  is  a  good  example  of  what  I  mean.i  But  at  the  same  time  it 
warns  me  to  press  my  argument  no  further.  For  just  as  in  certain  dreams, 
already  mentioned,  we  discerned  the  point  of  contact  between  thought- 
transference  and  clairvoyance,  so  in  this  appearance,  (as  it  may  seem  to 
have  been,)  of  a  dying  person  to  the  casual  inhabitants  of  her  former  home 
we  have  the  point  of  contact  between  the  topic  of  this  work  and  the 
evidence  which  bears  on  the  haunting  of  particular  spots.  To  the  clair- 
voyance, when  thus  confronted  with  it,  I  felt  able  to  express  a  distinct 
adhesion.     But  as  to  the  haunting  I  have  no  equally  clear  opinion. 

Now  it  is  probable  that  what  appears  to  us  as  local  attraction  may 
sometimes  be  a  mere  phase  of  psychical  rapport.      To  explain  my  meaning, 

1  See  also  case  29,  where  the  phantom  would  appear  to  have  been  more  probably- 
interested  in  a  tomb  round  which  the  dying  person's  eccentric  thoughts  had  so  often 
revolved,  than  in  the  ex-gardener  who  chanced  to  pass  through  the  familiar  church- 
yard ;  and  case  211,  where  the  dying  man  seems  to  have  been  wishing  to  see  Mr.  L.,  in 
whose  drawin-groom  the  phantom  appeared,  not  Miss  L.,  who  chanced  to  be  present 
there.     Case  192  is  similar. 

302  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

let  us  assume  that  all  minds  whatsoever  are  telepathically  connected,m  such 
a  manner  that  the  existence  of  any  given  conception  in  any  mind  throws 
that  mind  into  connection  with  every  other  mind  in  which  that  conception 
exists  at  the  moment.  Let  us  further  suppose  that  at  the  hour  of  death 
this  faint  potential  rapport  is  quickened  in  the  same  way  as  the  more 
permanent  and  individual  forms  of  rapport  with  which  we  have  mainly 
had  to  deal.  Then  when  a  man  dies  et  dulcis  moriens  reminiscitur  Argos, 
this  remembrance  of  his  early  home  may  bring  him  into  telepathic  relation 
with  the  stranger  now  living  there,  and  that  stranger  may  discern  the 
dying  man's  phantom  merely  because  the  two  minds  are  simultaneously 
occupied  with  an  identical  conception. 

This  view,  which  is  practically  held  by  Mr.  Gurney,  seems  to  me  to 
express  what  is  probably  some  part  of  the  truth.  I  conceive  that,  if 
telepathy  be  a  fact,  something  of  diffused  telepathic  percolation  is  pro- 
bably always  taking  place.  This  at  least  is  what  the  analogy  of  the 
limitless  and  continuous  action  of  physical  forces  would  suggest.  If  I  lift 
my  little  finger  I  affect,  like  Zeno's  sage,  the  whole  universe  by  my  act. 
I  apply  a  vis  a  tergo  to  atoms  which,  for  aught  I  know,  may  send  my  push 
rolling  on  to  the  Pleiades.  Or  again,  the  heat,  part  of  which  I  can  by  an 
effort  concentrate  on  an  apple  in  my  hand,  is  in  fact  radiating  continuously 
from  all  my  organism,  and  fastest  in  the  direction  of  readiest  conduction. 
And  similarly  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  same  telergy 
which  is  directed  in  a  moment  of  crisis  towards  a  man's  dearest  friend,  may 
be  radiating  from  him  always  towards  all  other  minds,  and  chiefly  towards 
the  minds  which  have  most  in  common  with  his  own. 

Yet  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  not  enough  wholly  to  explain  our  cases 
of  local  attraction.  Before  we  can  assume  that  any  perceptible  telepathic 
impact  can  follow  the  lines  of  so  transitory  and  contingent  a  rapport  as 
that  implied,  for  instance,  by  Mr.  Bard's  presence  in  Hinxton  Churchyard, 
in  case  29,  we  ought,  I  think,  to  have  some  case  where  a  phantom 
has  appeared  to  B  without  previous  acquaintance,  on  the  ground 
of  some  community  of  ideas  and  interest  between  the  two,  unconnected 
with  any  special  locality.  Now,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  not,  among  our 
cases  recognised  as  telepathic,  a  single  incident  of  this  kind. 

§  25.  Here,  then,  we  are  again  met  by  this  perplexing  problem  of  the 
relation  of  psychical  operations  to  space ;  and  although,  as  already  said, 
I  shall  avoid  any  attempt  at  its  discussion  in  this  work,  the  reader  will 
probably  recognise  that  some  such  hypothesis  as  that  of  an  independent 
clairvoyant  perception  of  the  dying  man's,  reflected  in  a  correspondingly- 
localised  hallucination  for  other  minds,  is  strongly  suggested  by  such 
narratives  as  these. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  303 

There  is,  however,  an  obvious  difficulty  in  this  view  which  must  be 
discussed  before  we  go  further.  I  have  spoken  repeatedly  of  acts  of 
clairvoyant  percipience  on  the  dying  man's  part,  corresponding  to  the 
location  and  movement  of  the  apparition  which  the  distant  friend  discerns. 
But  where  is  the  evidence  of  this  clairvoyant  percipience  1  Ought  we  not 
to  have  the  dying  man's  testimony  that  he  saw  his  friend  as  well  as  the 
friend's  testimony  that  he  saw  the  dying  man  1  Ought  not  the  mass  of 
our  cases,  in  this  view,  to  be  reciprocal  ?  and  is  not  that  type,  in  fact,  of 
very  rare  occurrence  in  our  collection  ? 

The  difficulty  seems  formidable  ;  but  there  is,  I  think,  a  sufficient  and 
an  instructive  reply.  To  put  it  in  a  sentence,  the  recollection  of  an  act 
of  clairvoyance  is  itself  an  occurrence  as  rare  as  is  the  perception  of  an 
apparition ;  it  involves  the  same  difficult  translation  of  a  quasi-percept 
from  the  supernormal  to  the  normal  consciousness.  The  very  act  of 
claii'voyance  presupposes  a  psychical  condition  as  far  removed  as  may  be 
from  the  stream  of  every-day  sensation.  The  clairvoyance  alleged  to  have 
been  induced  by  direct  experiment,  as  by  mesmeric  passes  and  the  like 
seems  hardly  ever  to  have  been  remembered  by  the  subject  on  wakino-. 
So  also  the  clairvoyance,  on  a  smaller  scale  and  more  resembling 
hypersesthesia,  which  has  shown  itself  in  certain  cases  of  spontaneous 
somnambulism,  seems  rarely  to  persist  into  the  normal  memory.  And 
speaking  generally,  all  supernormal  operation  (so  far  as  we  can  at  present 
tell)  tends  to  form  a  secondary  memory  of  its  own,  alternating  with,  or 
apart  from,  the  memory  of  common  life. 

In  order,  then,  that  a  "  reciprocal "  case  may  occur — a  case  in  which 
A  remembers  to  have  had  a  clairvoyant  perception  of  B  and  B's  environ- 
ment, while  B  also  has  perceived  A's  phantasm  at  approximately  the  same 
time — two  chances  have  to  concur,  two  difficulties  to  be  surmounted, — the 
difficulty  on  A's  part  of  recollecting  his  clairvoyant  percipience,  and  the 
difficulty  on  B's  part  of  externalising  into  memorable  distinctness  the 
corresponding  impression  conveyed  to  him.  And  we  may  expect  that  it 
will  be  hard  to  get  a  complete  or  stable  account  of  so  hazardous  a 
transmission  as  this, — a  kind  of  signalling  between  boats  one  of  which 
expects  no  signal,  and  which  come  in  sight  of  each  other  only  when 
they  both  chance  to  be  riding  for  a  moment  on  the  crest  of  a  wave. 

§  26.  Nay,  more ;  in  most  cases  the  signalling  boat  can  only  produce  a 
momentary  flash,  and  sinks  to  the  bottom  directly  after.  In  other  words, 
the  agent  dies ;  and  if  indeed  he  has  enjoyed  a  clairvoyant  percipience 
of  B  (who  saw  his  phantom),  he  at  any  rate  cannot  return  and  tell  us. 
The  great  bulk  of  what  might  have  been  evidence  to  the  reciprocality  of 
supernormal  percipience  is  thus  destroyed  at  a  blow. 

304  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

Not  even  here,  however,  need  we  abandon  all  hope  of  getting  at  some 
fragments  of  evidence.  The  last  words,  the  last  gestures  of  dying  men, 
which  have  been  noted  so  eagerly  by  many  a  religious,  and  many  a  self- 
seeking  bystander,  may  have  for  us  an  interest  unconnected  either  with 
their  form  of  creed  or  with  their  testamentary  dispositions.  Nothing, 
perhaps,  has  been  so  little  looked  for  at  death-beds  as  the  special  indica- 
tions which  we  desire, — indications  not  of  a  first  perception  of  another 
world,  but  of  a  last  of  this.  Yet  there  are  scattered  tokens  of  some  such 
supernormal  percipience  on  the  part  of  dying  men,  which  carry  us  from 
mere  vague  expressions  to  distinct  statements  as  to  the  distant  person  who 
has  been  clairvoyantly  seen.  Thus  in  case  309  the  dying  woman's  state- 
ment is  merely  to  be  noted  in  connection  with  others  of  more  weight. 
Case  296  must  either  be  dismissed  as  a  mere  coincidence,  of  a  very 
extraordinary  kind,  or  accepted  as  an  almost  typical  instance  of  what 
might,  on  my  hypothesis,  be  expected  to  occur.  Case  303  points  in  the 
same  direction.  Case  683,  though  well  attested,  is  one  whose  bizarrerie  may 
disincline  the  reader  to  attach  to  it  the  weight  which  I  think  that  it  ought 
to  carry.  On  looking  closer  the  reader  will  see  that  there  are  other  features 
in  that  account  besides  mere  grotesqueness ;  features  which  are  very 
unlikely  to  depend  upon  any  failure,  or  any  embellishment,  of  memory. 
And  if,  as  I  am  disposed  to  believe,  what  is  there  implied  did  actually 
occur,  few  words  of  men  momentarily  recalled  from  death  have  had  a 
stranger  significance. 

Then  we  come  to  cases  where  there  is  a  distinct  statement  of  the 
dying  person's.  In  this  connection,  case  354  seems  to  me  important.  It 
is  remote,  no  doubt ;  but  Miss  W.  has  herself  told  me,  with  an  earnestness 
that  I  cannot  doubt,  that  it  was,  in  a  sense,  the  turning  incident  of  her 
life,  having  excited  a  very  marked  influence  on  her  character.  Then  there 
is  case  612,  and  the  parallel  example  given  in  the  note  on  that  case. 
Now  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  impossible  that  any  one  of  these  cases  may 
have  been  merely  subjective  on  the  one  part,  though  veridical  on  the 
other  3  so  that  Miss  Ws.  dying  aunt,  for  instance,  only  fancied  that  she 
saw  her  niece,  while  the  niece  did  actually  behold  a  phantom  of  her  aunt 
at  a  corresponding  time.  But  I  doubt  whether  many  minds  will  rest  at 
this  point  precisely.  Those  who  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  one  experi- 
ence will  probably  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  other;  remembering  that 
a  dying  person's  object  is  not  to  collect  evidence,  and  that  it  must  be  a 
mere  chance  whether  he  mentions  any  incident  which  can  vouch  to  others 
for  the  genuineness  of  his  clairvoyant  perception. 

I  will  conclude  this  section  with  a  narrative  whose  accuracy  there  is 
no  reason  to  doubt,  though,  on  the  other  hand,  it  contains  no  complete  proof 
of  anything  beyond  a  mere  subjective  hallucination.     It  finds  therefore,  no 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  305 

place  in  our  array  of  evidence ;  but  it  will  have  an  intei'est  to  those  who 
have  followed  the  present  argument,  as  illustrating  an  occurrence  which, 
in  my  view,  must  probably  often  take  place,  though  it  can  seldom  leave 
any  record  behind  it.  For  here  we  have  an  account  of  that  side  only  of 
the  reciprocal  incident  which  is  usually  lost  to  human  knowledge 
altogether ; — I  mean  of  the  supernormal  percipience  of  a  man  in  the  very 
article  of  death  ;  while  there  is  no  record  of  any  corresponding  sound  or 
vision  as  experienced  by  those  to  whom  he  seemed  to  pay  his  visit  of 
farewell. 

Dr.  Ormsby  writes  as  follows  from  Murphysborough,  Illinois. 

"April  22nd,  1884. 

"I  received  my  degree  from  Rush  Medical  College,  Chicago,  111., 
at  the  close  of  the  session  1857-8,  and  having  said  so  much  will  pro- 
ceed to  give  you  as  clear  and  complete  a  statement  of  the  occurrence  to 
which  you  allude  as  I  can.  Early  in  February,  1862,  the  18th  Regiment 
Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  of  which  I  was  Assistant-Surgeon,  was 
ordered  from  Cairo  to  join  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Henry.  The  surgeon 
went  with  the  regiment,  and  left  me  with  the  sick  in  the  Regimental 
Hospital — about  30 — among  whom  was  Albert  Adams,  sergeant-major 
of  the  regiment.  He  was  an  intelligent  and  estimable  young  man,  who 
had  recently  been  in  attendance,  and  I  think  graduated  at  a  Literary 
College.  I  had  removed  young  Adams  from  the  hospital  proper 
to  a  room  in  a  private  house — one  that  had  been  quite  large — 
but  a  smaller  room  had  been  partitioned  off  at  one  end  with  a 
board  partition,  which  was,  I  think,  canvassed  and  papered ;  and  in 
the  smaller  room  so  partitioned  off  was  my  wife,  who  is  now,  besides 
myself,  the  only  person  who  heard  the  speaking  whose  whereabouts 
I  know.  Seeing  the  young  man  would  die,  I  had  telegraphed,  and 
his  father  came  at  4  or  5  p.m.  During  all  the  afternoon  he  could 
only  speak  in  whispers,  and  at  11  p.m.  he  to  all  appearance  died. 
I  was  standing  beside  his  father  by  the  bed,  and  when  we  thought 
him  dead  the  old  man  put  forth  his  hand  and  closed  the  mouth  of 
the  corpse  (?),  and  I,  thinking  he  might  faint  in  the  keenness  of  his 
grief,  said  'Don't  do  that!  perhaps  he  will  breathe  again,'  and  im- 
mediately led  him  to  a  chair  in  the  back  part  of  the  room,  and  returned, 
intending  to  bind  up  the  fallen  jaw  and  close  the  eyes  myself.  As  I 
reached  the  bedside  the  supposed  dead  man  looked  suddenly  up  in  my  face 
and  said,  '  Doctor,  what  day  of  the  month  is  it  1 '  I  told  him  the  day  of 
the  month,  and  he  answered,  '  That  is  the  day  I  died.'  His  father  had 
sprung  to  the  bedside,  and  turning  his  eyes  on  him,  he  said,  '  Father,  our 
boys  have  taken  Fort  Henry,  and  Charlie  '  (his  brother)  *  isn't  hurt.  I've 
seen  mother  and  the  children,  and  they  are  well.'     He  then  gave  quite 

VOL.    II.  X 

306  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

comprehensive  directions  regarding  his  funeral,  speaking  of  the  corpse  as 
''  my  body,'  and  occupying,  I  should  think,  as  much  as  five  minutes.  He 
then  turned  towards  me,  and  again  said,  '  Doctor,  what  day  of  the  month 
is  it  ? '  and  when  I  answered  him  as  before,  he  again  repeated,  '  That's 
the  day  I  died,'  and  instantly  was  dead.  His  tones  were  quite  full  and 
distinct,  and  so  loud  as  to  be  readily  heard  in  the  adjoining  room,  and 
were  so  heard  by  Mrs.  Ormsby.  Now,  this  is  very  remarkable,  but 
perhaps  little  more  so  than  the  fact  (which  is  true)  that  I  have  forgotten 
the  day  of  the  month  on  which  it  occurred. 

(Signed)  "  O.  B.  Ormsby,  M.D." 

In  reply  to  some  questions  referring  to   a  briefer  account  first  given. 
Dr.  Ormsby  writes  on  December  28th,  1883  : — • 

"  The  fort  was  taken  and  the  brother  uninjured,  as  I  learned  when  a 
few  days  afterward  I  went  forward  to  the  regiment.  I  never  learned 
whether  or  not  that  which  was  said  of  the  family  was  correct.  The  name 
of  the  soldier  was  Albert  Adams,  a  young  man  of  unexceptionable  moral 
character  and  good  education.  He  was  then  sergeant-major  of  his 
regiment.  I  understand  that  his  father  has  been  dead  several  years.  I 
do  not  now  recollect  what  other  parties  were  present  in  the  room  besides 
myself  and  the  young  man's  father,  though  there  were  several,  but  as  we 
were  almost  strangers  to  each  other,  and  soon  separated,  I  could  not  expect 
to  be  able  to  trace  them.  The  young  man  occupied  a  room,  not  in  the 
hospital  proper,  which  was  crowded,  but  in  a  private  dwelling  where  he 
could  have  the  entire  room.  The  next  room,  communicating  with  this  by 
a  door,  I  occupied  as  a  sleeping  room,  and  my  wife,  who  was  then  on  a 
visit,  was  in  that  room,  with  the  door  closed.  I  have  just  asked  her 
whether  she  heard  the  words  of  the  dying  soldier,  and  she  answers  that 
she  did,  informing  me  that  the  partition  between  the  rooms  was  of  boards, 
papered,  and  that  young  Adams,  instead  of  saying  '  Our  forces,'  &c.,  said 
'  Our  boys.'     I  learned  nothing  of  any  wraith  or  appearance  to  anyone. 

(Signed)  "  O.  B.  Ormsby,  M.D." 

§  27.  But  apart  from  these  cases  where  the  evidence  is  barred  by  death, 
there  are  many  others,  as  I  have  already  implied,  where  the  agent- 
percipient — the  man  whose  clairvoyant  perception  has  given  rise  to  a 
corresponding  hallucination  in  other  minds — seems  to  be  unable  to  recount 
his  side  of  the  experience  simply  because  in  his  normal  state  he  has  for- 
gotten it.  In  our  rare  narratives  of  a  voluntary  self -projection,  this 
seems  to  have  been  the  case  on  each  occasion.  The  friend  of  the  Rev.  W. 
S.  Moses,  who  appeared  to  him,  (case  13,)  had  no  recollection  of  the  fact, 
but  an  unaccustomed  headache  may  have  been  a  trace  of  some  forgotten 
psychical  efibrt.      In   Mr.    S.   H.  B.'s  cases   (Nos.   14,   15,  and   16,)  the 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  307 

projection  of  the  phantom  was  unremembered,  and  could  only  be  effected 
during  slumber,  or  if  it  was  attempted  during  waking  hours,  the 
concentration  of  mind  which  was  needed  seemed  to  induce  slumber.  ^ 

§  28.  Passing  from  these  voluntary  cases  to  the  spontaneous  cases,  I 
would  ask  the  reader's  attention,  for  instance,  to  case  100.  From  an 
evidential  point  of  view,  I  agree  with  Mr.  Gurney  that,  while  regarding 
the  case  as  a  well-marked  dream  of  telepathic  origin,  we  cannot  press  the 
details — the  memory  of  the  hotel-passages  and  of  Lieutenant  O.'s  bed- 
chamber. What  entitles  the  narrative  to  a  place  in  this  book  is  the 
striking  time-coincidence — not  the  details,  which  might  have  been  "  read 
back "  into  the  half-recollected  vision.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the 
incident  were  telepathic  at  all,  there  must  have  been  some  modus  operandi  ; 
Mr.  AUbree's  dream  must  have  had  some  sort  of  content ;  Lieutenant 
O.'s  psychical  appeal  must  have  taken  effect  in  some  particular  way.  And 
if  any  hypothesis  at  all  is  to  be  formed  on  the  matter,  are  not  the  recorded 
facts  best  met  by  the  hypothesis  that  Lieutenant  O.'s  crisis  evoked  a 
clairvoyant  percipience  in  Mr.  Allbree  just  as  the  mesmeriser  is  said  to 
evoke  it  in  the  sleep-waking  subject  1  and  that  Mr.  Allbree  seemed  to  him- 
self to  pass  through  the  surroundings  and  into  the  presence  of  his  friend  1 
and  that  on  waking  the  memory  of  all  this  was  gone  from  him,  though  it 
was  afterwards  revived  by  the  bodily  sight  of  the  scene  which  he  had 
already  supernormally  discerned  ? 

Let  us  see,  however,  what  kind  of  probability  is  given  to  this  view  by 
the  records  of  cases  where  something  of  the  invaded  scene  has  remained 
in  the  recollection  of  the  invader.  I  am  forced,  for  clearness'  sake,  to  use 
this  new  metaphorical  term,  since  the  words  agent  and  percipient  are  no 
longer  sufficiently  distinctive,  the  agent  in  these  cases  being,  in  my  view, 
the  primary  percipient  also.  The  metaphor  of  invasion  may  be  justified 
by  the  fact  that  in  these  reciprocal  cases  A  and  B  always  agree  as  to  the 
scene  where  the  apparition  occurred.  It  is  never  (with  one  or  two 
dubious  exceptions)  the  case  that  A  thinks  that  he  discerned  B  in  B's 
house,  while  B  thinks  that  he,  on  his  part,  was  transported  to  A's  house 
and  saw  A  there.  On  the  contrary,  if  A  fixes  the  scene  as  in  B's  house, 
there  does  B  fix  it  too,  a  fact  which  is  just  what  the  present  hypothesis 
would  lead  us  to  expect.  This  apparent  localisation  in  one  or  the  other 
entourage  is  all  that  my  metaphor  of  invasion  is  here  intended  to  suggest. 

Let  us  briefly  consider  the  amount  of  subsequent  memory  shown  in 
a  few  instances  by  a  waking,  a  sleejnng,  and  an  entranced  invader. 

§  29.  First,  as  regards  the  cases  of  invasion  by  a  waking  agent.     These, 

1  See  case  215  (Vol.  i.,  p.  567),  where  Mrs.  W.'s  "trance-state  "  was  semi-voluntary. 
VOL.    II.  X    2 

308  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

in  my  view,  are  likely  to  be  scanty  and  incomplete.  I  conceive  that  it  is 
seldom  that  the  sense  of  transference  to  a  distant  locality  can  be  strong- 
enough  in  waking  life  to  give  rise  to  the  correspondent  impression  in  other 
minds.  And  in  this  group  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  find  the  confused 
or  inchoate  reciprocity — if  such  indeed  it  were — of  case  304.  But  we 
have  also  case  307,  where  Mr.  L.  seems  to  have  fallen  into  a  deep  reverie 
resembling  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s  (Nos.  14,  15,  and  16),  though  in  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s 
case  the  reverie  passed  on  into  sleep.  Case  617,  again,  perhaps  supplies  a 
kind  of  faint  or  transitional  instance,  which  may  indicate  the  way  in 
which  the  occupation  of  two  persons  with  the  idea  of  each  other  may  pass 
into  something  like  a  reciprocal  hallucination. 

Here  too,  if  anywhere,  must  be  placed  the  anomalous  case  No.  642 — • 
recalling,  on  the  one  hand,  the  most  recent  experiments  of  the  communica- 
tion of  hallucinations  to  hypnotised  subjects  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  old 
accounts  of  so-called  "  obsession." 

§  30.  More  numerous  are  the  cases  where  a  sleeping  person's  clair- 
voyant vision  of  a  distant  scene  has  evoked  a  corresponding  impression  of 
his  own  presence  in  the  minds  of  persons  situated  in  that  scene,  and  has 
also  persisted  into  his  own  waking  memory.  Two  striking  cases  have 
been  quoted,  Nos.  35  and  306.  In  these  cases  not  only  is  the  dream  (so 
to  say)  acted  out,  but  the  clairvoyant  retains  a  memory  of  actual  circum- 
stances, of  the  true  positions  and  actions  of  the  persons  clairvoyantly 
discerned.  In  some  other  cases, — -Nos.  94  and  301, — the  incidents,  as 
recollected  on  both  sides,  are  dreamlike,  but  the  locality  of  the  visionary 
incident  is  agreed  on  by  both  persons  concerned.  We  seem,  therefore,  to 
have  here  another  transitional  case,  a  transition  between  mere  simultaneous 
dreams  and  the  kind  of  clairvoyant  invasion  with  which  I  am  now  concerned. 
Again,  case  271,  which  touches  the  very  nadir  of  triviality,  seems  to  me 
on  that  account  all  the  more  instructive.  I  cannot  think  that  a  mere 
dream  on  Mr.  Pike's  part  that  he  was  calling  for  hot  water, — a  condition  as 
far  removed  from  "  death  or  crisis  "  as  can  well  be  conceived, — would  so 
strongly  have  afliected  the  servant  in  his  distant  home.  I  conceive  that  the 
efficacy  of  the  dream  depended  on  his  conception  of  himself  as  actually 
standing  at  his  bedroom  door ;  so  that  this,  too,  was  a  case  of  clairvoyant 
invasion,  though  the  scene  invaded  was  so  commonplace  that  it  left  with 
the  dreamer  no  memory  of  anything  otherwise  unknown.  And  this 
example,  in  its  turn,  may  throw  light  on  some  less-developed  clairvoyant 
dreams, — as  for  instance  case  412, — where  the  dreamer's  invasion  was  not 
manifested  by  any  phantasmal  sight  or  sound,  though  the  trivial  scene  was 
recollected  on  awakening 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  309 

§  31.  Still  more  propitious,  in  my  view,  to  this  mode  of  psychical 
interaction  is  a  state  of  trance,  or  even  of  delirium,  on  the  part  of  the 
percipient-agent,  though  here  the  profoundly  abnormal  state  must  usually 
preclude  all  recollection.  Specially  instructive  in  this  connection  is 
case  308,  where  the  boy  whose  call  was  heard  in  the  place  where  he 
feverishly  conceived  himself  to  be, — or  at  least  in  the  field  of  his 
clairvoyant  perception, — was  afterwards  entirely  oblivious  of  that 
momentary  rajjport  with  his  distant  sister  and  friend.  It  is  observable 
that  the  evidential  value  of  this  case  depends  on  the  accident  that  a 
watcher  was  present  with  the  boy,  and  noted  the  almost  automatic 
exclamation  which  his  sudden  vision  evoked.  Had  there  been  no  one 
thus  present  with  him,  the  call  of  "  Connie  !  Margaret !  "  would  have 
ranked  as  a  well-marked  collective  hallucination  of  a  purely  subjective 
kind.  To  this  class  also  belong  Mr.  Cromwell  Varley's  singular  narratives 
(Nos.  84  and  305),  which  again,  bring  us  round  to  the  cases  where  the  clair- 
voyant invasion  is  apparently  facilitated  by  the  hour  of  dissolution  itself. 

Lastly,  while  these  pages  are  passing  through  the  press,  we  have 
received  a  striking  case  where  memory  of  what  was  perceived  in  the 
hypnotic  trance  persisted  into  normal  consciousness  ; — namely,  Mr.  Cleave's 
narrative  (case  685,  in  the  Additional  Chapter)  of  his  attempts  first  to 
see,  and  then  to  be  seen  by  a  distant  friend.  The  sequence  of  incidents 
is  curiously  concordant  with  the  theory  which  has  been  expressed  above. 
First,  the  steady  gaze  of  the  friend  who  operated  threw  Mr.  Cleave  into 
unconsciousness.  Then  a  new  consciousness  showed  him  the  face  of  the 
distant  lady,  "  which  gradually  became  plainer  and  plainer  until  I  seemed 
to  be  in  another  room  altogether,  and  could  detail  minutely  all  the  sur- 
roundings." 

This  process  was  several  times  repeated  :  and  he  at  last  succeeded,  (as 
he,  at  least,  conceives  the  occurrence,)  "in  making  himself  seen  by  "  the 
lady  in  question.  Twice  she  saw  him  ;  and  on  the  second  occasion,  at  least, 
he  perceived  that  she  saw  him,  and  noted  where  she  was,  and  in  what 
company.!  Now  there  will  probably  be  some  readers  who,  even  after  all 
the  evidence  which  these  volumes  contain,  will  set  aside  Mr.  Cleave's 
narrative  as  merely  incredible.  But  among  those  who  are  by  this  time 
prepared  to  accept  it  as  an  honest  and  careful  record  of  fact  and  impres- 
sion, few,  I  think,  will  argue  that  Mr.  Cleave's  own  impressions  were 
purely  subjective,  though  the  lady's  were  veridical ; — that  she  genuinely 
saw  his  phantasm  in  the  place  from  which  he  imagined  himself  to  be  look- 
ing at  her,  while  yet  this  imagination  of  his  was  merely  fanciful,  and  his 
supposed  perception  of  her  amid  her  actual  surroundings  of  the  moment,  a 

1  The  boy  who  was  with  her  seems  to  have  seen  nothing ;  but  this  fact  is  quite  con- 
sistent with  my  view.     (See  p.  290.) 

310        NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

mere  chance  coincidence.  Rather  they  will  hold  that  he  saw  her  before 
she  saw  him ;  that  it  was  because  his  centre  of  observation  was  in  some 
sense  transferred  to  the  Wandsworth  dining-room  that  she  saw  his  phantasm 
standing  in  that  dining-room  ; — that,  in  short,  as  I  have  already  expressed 
it,  "  correspondently  with  clairvoyant  perception  there  was  phantas- 
mogenetic  efficacy." 

§  32.  I  do  not  propose  to  enter  here  into  a  detailed  criticism  of  the 
mass  of  narratives  which  this  book  contains.  Many  of  them,  I  think, 
need,  for  the  purpose  of  any  instructive  analysis,  an  experience  of 
these  phenomena  far  wider  than  we  as  yet  possess.  But  I  have 
said,  perhaps,  enough  to  enable  the  reader  to  detect  for  himself, 
in  many  other  cases,  indications  of  some  such  clairvoyant  invasion 
as  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe.  The  cases  which  I  have  selected 
for  notice  have  some  of  them  been  of  strange  and  aberrant  types ; 
but  I  wished  to  show  that  the  scheme  of  psychical  interaction  here 
suggested  does  at  any  rate  offer  an  appropriate  niche  to  nearly  every  well- 
attested  phenomenon  which  our  collection  includes.  It  may  at  least  be 
useful  to  have,  as  it  were,  a  Linncean  system  under  which  all  our  cases 
can  be  conveniently  docketed,  even  though  we  may  as  yet  be  far  enough 
from  discerning  their  "  natural  order  "  or  truest  affinity. 

For  clearness'  sake,  1  will  briefly  trace  the  steps  by  which,  as  I 
conceive  the  matter,  our  veridical  phantasms  gradually  approach  that 
reciprocal  character  which  forms  their  complete  or  ultimate  form. 

First  come  the  numerous  cases  which  are  too  faintly  defined  for 
specification — cases  where  the  impression  transferred  retains  a  frankly 
psychical  character,  where  neither  is  a  distant  scene  supernormally 
discerned,  nor  does  anyone  amid  his  ordinary  surroundings  discern  a 
phantasmal  visitant.  There  is  here  no  illusion  of  space-relations, — 
merely  an  emotional  or  ideational  affection  of  the  percipient's  con- 
sciousness. In  most  of  these  cases  all  that  we  can  say  is  that 
some  telepathic  action  has  taken  place.  And  the  terms  agent  and 
percipient  serve  to  express  all  that  we  know  of  the  process ;  namely,  that 
on  one  side  there  is  either  death,  or  some  crisis,  or  at  least  some  concentra- 
tion of  thought ;  while  on  the  other  side  something  is  felt  or  perceived 
which  corresponds  in  some  way  with  the  agent's  unusual  agitation. 

But  now  let  us  go  on  to  cases  which  have  reached  a  further  stage  of 
development.  After  passing  through  certain  intermediate  stages, — visions 
in  the  mind's  eye,  ifec, — we  arrive  at  cases  where  a  spatial  element  is 
apparently  introduced ;  that  is  to  say,  the  phenomenon,  whatever  it  is, 
bears  reference  to  a  special  scene  ;  and  when  this  scene  is  well-defined,  and 
the  two  or  more  persons  concerned  retain  a  memory  of  the  incident,  it 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  311 

is  found  that  they  all  agree  as  to  what  the  scene  was.  It  is  rarely,  how- 
ever, that  a  reciprocity  of  impression  can  be  satisfactorily  attested  ;  one 
or  the  other  side  of  that  phenomenon  is  usually  aborted  or  absent.  And 
according  as  the  one  or  the  other  side  emerges  into  normal  consciousness 
we  regard  the  incident  as  belonging  to  one  of  two  main  classes ;  it  may 
be  a  perception  of  the  scene  by  a  distant  person,  or  it  may  be  the  perception 
of  a  distant  person  as  forming  a  part  of  that  scene. 

And  as  the  terms  agent  and  percipient  now  become  inadequate, 
I  am  forced  to  use  an  avowed  metaphor,  and  to  speak  of  the  person  who 
discerns  the  distant  scene  as  the  clairvoyant  invader,  whose  figure  is  some- 
times discerned  in  the  invaded  scene.  Now  the  clairvoyant  invader  must 
be  regarded  as  primarily  a  percipient ;  for  his  first  function,  so  to  say,  is  to 
discern  the  distant  scene.  But  this  discernment  of  his  may  fail  to  subsist 
into  his  waking  or  normal  memory,  or  instant  death  may  intercept  his 
recital  thereof,  so  that  there  may  be  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  was 
clairvoyant  at  all.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  since  his  clairvoyant  percep- 
tion is  sometimes  accompanied  with  a  corresponding  phantasmogenetic 
efficacy, — since  his  supernormal  invasion  of  the  scene  may  generate  in  the 
denizens  of  that  scene  a  hallucinatory  perception  of  a  supernormal  in- 
vader,— we  have  cases  in  which  this  invader,  (though  on  my  theory  primarily 
a  percipient,)  appears  in  our  evidence  purely  as  an  agent :  so  that  A  dies 
and  A's  phantom  appears  to  B,  and  A  is  set  down  simply  as  an  agent, 
and  B  is  set  down  as  the  only  percipient  concerned.  But  in  such  cases  I 
hold  that  A  is  quite  as  truly  a  percipient  as  B  is ;  but  that  the  shifting 
of  the  threshold  of  consciousness  which  accompanied  his  perception, — 
whether  that  shift  were  from  waking  to  sleep -waking  or  from  life  to 
death, — prevents  him,  even  if  his  consciousness  is  shifted  back  again,  from 
recalling  or  recording  that  perception  as  a  link  in  his  chain  of  normal 
memories. 

§  33.  Now  let  us  turn  our  attention  for  a  moment  to  the  other  person 
concerned  in  the  phenomenon  ;  to  the  denizen,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  invaded 
scene.  He  is  (it  is  plain)  frequently  a  percipient ;  unless  he  perceived  the 
phantasmal  invader  we  should  often  be  ignorant  that  any  invasion  had 
taken  place.  But  is  he  ever  to  be  considered  as  an  agent  too  ?  Yes,  I 
hold  that  in  certain  cases  he  is  an  agent  in  somewhat  the  same  sense  as  a 
mesmerist  is  an  agent  when  he  induces  clairvoyance  in  a  subject.  In  that 
case  I  hold  that  a  certain  influence  (I  know  not  what)  from  the  mesmerist 
evokes  or  disengages  in  the  subject  a  pre-existent  but  non-manifest  capacity 
of  supernormal  percipience,  which  first  places  that  subject  in  rapport  with 
the  ideas  or  sensations  of  the  mesmerist  himself  (as  in  experiments  of  our 
own,  and  other  cases,  to  be  found  especially  in  Supplement,  Chap.  I.),  but 

312  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF 

which  ultimately,  in  some  few  well-attested  cases,  does  actually  extend 
tlie  subject's  percipience  beyond  the  range  either  of  his  own  or  of  his 
mesmeriser's  normal  powers  of  sense.  And  somewhat  similarly,  1  hold 
that  if  a  man  is  dying  or  deeply  agitated,  and  his  friend,  gifted  with  much 
latent  capacity  of  supernormal  percipience,  is  asleep  at  a  distance,  then 
some  influence  from  the  dying  man  may  evoke  or  direct  that  percipience 
in  the  friend,  so  that  he  becomes  cognisant  first,  perhaps,  of  the  deathbed 
scene  as  realised  by  the  dying  man  himself,  but  ultimately  of  that  scene 
as  it  might  be  realised  by  an  independent  entrant,  including  casual  denizens 
unnoticed  by  the  dying  man,  but  who  may  perhaps,  on  their  part,  discern 
the  friend's  phantasmal  invasion,  and  thus  be  percipients  without  being- 
agents  (as  in  case  30) ;  while  perhaps  the  dying  man,  who  is  in  reality  the 
determining  cause  of  that  phantasmal  invasion,  may  attain  to  no  per- 
ception of  it  whatever. 

§  34.  "  But,"  someone  will  say,  "  are  you  not  here  introducing  a  cross- 
division  1  You  have  spoken  hitherto  of  A  as  enabled  by  his  own  death 
to  make  a  clairvoyant  invasion  of  the  scene  where  B  sits  in  a  normal 
condition.  You  now  speak  of  A  as  enabled  by  B's  death  to  make  a 
similar  invasion  of  the  scene  where  B  lies  dying.  You  are  thus 
classing  the  dying  man  alternately  as  the  invader  and  as  the  invaded ; 
and  yet  surely  he  who  is  undergoing  this  profoundest  of  all  crises  ought 
always  to  be  ranged  on  the  same  side  in  whatsoever  psychical  interaction 
you  are  assuming ;  there  cannot  be  other  psychical  conditions  more  marked 
and  determinant  than  his."  I  have  led  up  to  a  statement  of  this  difiiculty 
because  I  believe  that  the  answer,  if  we  ever  attain  to  more  than 
a  glimpse  of  it,  will  involve  that  true  principle  of  classification  which  we 
are  still  seeking.  And  as  a  hint  towards  such  reply  I  will  repeat  what 
has  been  already  suggested,  namely,  that  the  right  way  of  regarding  these 
startling  incidents  is  not  as  isolated  psychical  operations,  but  rather  as 
emergent  manifestations  of  psychical  operations  which  are  continuous, 
though  latent ;  and  which  belong,  not  so  much  to  the  self  of  which  we 
are  habitually  conscious,  as  to  a  hidden  chain  of  mentation,  which, 
for  aught  we  know,  may  comprise  a  continuity  of  supernormal  per- 
cipience or  activity.  When  therefore,  B  is  dying  and  A  has  a  clairvoyant 
dream,  as  of  presence  at  the  deathbed,  the  relation  between  B  and  A  with 
which  we  have  to  deal  is  not  the  mere  external  relation  between  agony  on 
the  one  side  and  repose  on  the  other.  It  is  a  relation  between  that 
specific  supernormal  activity  which  accompanies  death  and  that  specific 
supernormal  activity  which  accompanies  slumber.  And  though  the  death 
is  still  the  prime  factor  in  the  resultant  interactions,  we  cannot  say 
a  priori  what  the  scene  of  interaction  in  any  given  case  will  be ; — whether 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  313 

there  will  be  an  invasion  by  the  dying  man  of  the  sleeper's  chamber,  or  by 
the  sleeper  of  the  dying  man's. 

I  will  illustrate  my  meaning  by  a  modification  of  an  analogy  which  I 
have  elsewhere  employed.  I  compare  our  conscious  existence  to  a  barge 
floating  down  the  Arve,  where  it  flows  side  by  side,  but  as  yet  unmingled 
with  the  Rhone ;  the  water  round  our  keel  is  habitually  turbid  and 
opaque,  but  occasionally  an  inequality  of  river-bed,  a  clash  of  currents, 
swings  us  for  a  moment  into  the  more  pellucid  Rhone.  The  Rhone — our 
unconscious  self — flows  on  as  continuously  as  the  Arve,  but  the  barge  enters 
it  only  by  moments,  and  those  moments  may  be  determined  by  changes  in 
the  Rhone's  bed  as  well  as  in  the  Arve's.  For  the  most  part,  the  reef 
which  raises  breakers  in  the  one  stream  will  raise  them  in  the  other  also ; 
and  imminent  death,  for  instance,  may  jerk  us  into  clairvoyance  by  a 
shock  communicated  at  once  to  our  conscious  and  to  our  unconscious 
being.  But  there  may  also  be  crises  which  involve  not  so  much  a  con- 
fusion of  the  normal  life  as  an  expansion  or  liberation  of  the  supernormal; 
and  when  we  become  clairvoyant  in  deep  sleep  or  the  mesmeric  trance 
this  is  because  the  turbid  waters  are  running  in  a  narrower  channel,  and 
the  barge  sways  into  the  broadening  current  of  the  pellucid  stream. 
Again,  there  may  be  crises  which  are  merely  dissociative  or  disintegrant ; 
where  the  barge  poises  on  the  very  boundary  line  between  the  two  currents, 
and  both  streams  of  personality  are  manifested  at  once.  It  is  thus  that 
I  explain  Mrs.  Newnham's  case  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  63-9),  where  the  intelligence 
which  wrote  the  replies  to  unseen  questions  would  seem  to  have  consisted 
of  an  unconscious  current  of  Mrs.  Newnham's  own  existence,  exercising 
supernormal  percipience,  but  dreamlike  and  incomplete  in  co-ordinating 
power.  And  with  Mrs.  JSTewnham's  case  I  should  compare  certain  cases 
which  bear,  indeed,  no  plain  resemblance  thereto,  and  which  Mr.  Gurney 
has  treated  as  almost  obviously  morbid  and  delusive, — cases  wherw  the 
"  double  "  of  a  living  person  has  been  seen  together  with  that  person  him- 
self. Take  the  most  bizarre  of  these  cases,  that  of  Mrs.  Hall,  (No.  333,) 
where,  as  a  lady  sits  at  table  with  three  friends,  her  phantom  semblance  is 
seen  by  herself  and  by  all  present,  standing  at  the  end  of  the  sideboard. 
Now  the  analogy  between  Mrs.  Newnham  and  Mrs.  Hall  seems  to  me  to  be 
this  ;  that  in  the  compound  personality  of  each  of  them  the  "  critical 
point "  of  dissociation  was  reached  (so  to  say)  at  a  very  low  temperature.^ 
In  Mrs.  Newnham's  case,  her  unconscious  self  exercised  supernormal  per- 
cipience, and  manifested  itself  by  controlling  her  motor  system,  while  her 
conscious  self  maintained  its  ordinary  way.  In  Mrs.  Hall's  case,  her  un- 
conscious self,  assuming  a  too  facile  independence,  and  possibly  exercising  a 

1  I  should  explain  in  the  same  way  cases  327,  328,  329,  348.  Note  that  the  girl  seen 
in  case  329  had  previously  been  phantasmally  seen,  (like  Mrs.  Stone,)  in  the  same 
apparently  casual  way. 

314  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF' 

supernormal  percipience,  manifested  itself  by  its  phantasmogenetic  efficacy- 
while  her  conscious  self  was  unaware  of  any  inward  excitement  or  "shearing 
stress."  I  venture,  however,  to  surmise  that  had  Mrs.  Hall  been  thrown 
into  a  mesmeric  trance  directly  after  her  "  double  "  had  shown  itself,  she 
might  have  remembered  contemplating  the  room  as  though  from  the 
position  which  the  "  double  "  appeared  to  occupy. 

§  35.  There  is  thus  a  point  of  view  from  which  these  "  apparitions  of  the 
double"  represent  the  most  developed  type  to  which  our  veridical 
phantasms  can  attain.  But  in  the  process  of  development  their  veridicality, 
so  to  say,  has  become  a  quite  subsidiary  thing.  Mrs.  Stone's  double  ^  was, 
I  believe,  veridical,  in  the  sense  that  it  announced  the  fact  of  an  exception- 
ally easy  dissociation  between  the  currents  of  her  being.  But  this  was  not 
a  fact  of  evidential  value — it  was  not  supported,  as  our  cases  in  general 
are,  by  any  coincidence  with  an  external  and  objective  incident. 

Our  preferable  type,  therefore,  of  a  fully-developed  veridical  hallucina- 
tion,— the  "perfect  flower"  to  which  we  may,for  clearness'  sake, suppose  that 
so  many  rudimentary  or  partially-aborted  psychical  efflorescences  are  tend- 
ing to  conform  themselves, — will  be  a  complete  case  of  reciprocal  percipience, 
where  the  dying  A  clairvoyantly  perceives  B  in  B's  entourage,  and  narrates 
that  experience,  while  at  the  same  time  B  discerns  A's  phantasmal  figure 
in  a  place  corresponding  to  that  from  which  A  conceives  himself  to  be 
exercising  his  supernormal  vision.  In  such  a  type  as  this,  I  conceive, 
the  phenomena  which  we  investigate  separately  under  the  titles  of  thought- 
transference,  clairvoyance,  apparitions,  mix  and  meet ;  and  though  their 
very  juxtaposition  suggests  fresh  difficulties,  these,  as  I  claim,  are  not  im- 
ported by  any  theorising  of  mine,  but  are  inherent  in  all  attempts  to  corre- 
late tilings  psychical  with  physical  things.  As  regards  the  relation  of  this 
clairvoyant  perception,  this  phantasmogenetic  energy,  to  space  and  matter, 
the  theory  here  advanced  leaves  us  entirely  uncommitted.  This  book,  indeed, 
contains  no  evidence  of  any  real  or  registrable  action  of  psychical  energy 
on  molecular  matter ;  and  much  evidence  that  an  apparent  action  on 
matter  may  turn  out  to  be  of  a  quite  hallucinatory  kind.  And  as  regards 
sjjace  we  are  left  equally  at  liberty  to  suppose  that  the  psychical  energy 
here  attributed  to  our  own  being,  or  to  a  part  of  our  own  being,  operates 
in  ordinary  three-dimensional  space,  or  in  four-dimensional  space  (if  that 
exists),  or  that  it  does  not  really  operate  in  space  at  all,  though  its 
effects  be  necessarily  apprehended  as  in  space  by  the  normal  consciousness. 

§  36.  Such  emphatic  expressions  of  ignorance  as  these  must  go  hand  in 

1  See  p.  85.  Observe  that  in  one  of  Mrs.  Stone's  cases  her  consciousness  seemed 
for  the  moment  to  become  external  to  her  ordinary  self, — the  barge,  floating  on  the 
dividing  line  between  the  two  currents,  swayed  momentarily  into  the  Rhone. 

PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.     "  315 

hand  with  any  attempt  at  positive  theorising.  Our  endeavour  must  be  to 
give  to  our  strange  and  scattered  phenomena  enough  of  coherence  and 
co-ordination  to  enable  the  reader's  mind  to  grasp  them  and  work 
upon  them,  while  we  expi'essly  avoid  any  such  self-committal  to  any  one 
hypothesis  as  may  constrain  rather  than  guide  inquiry.  In  so  new  a 
subject,  if  the  need  of  this  resolute  open-mindedness  be  recognised  from 
the  first,  there  should  be  little  difficulty  in  maintaining  it.  The  mere 
popular  prepossessions  which  encumber  the  outset  of  our  inquiry  may 
readily  be  swept  aside  ;  and  we  must  then  watch  that  no  dogmatic 
statement,  unprovable  by  the  evidence,  be  raised  into  authority  in  their 
room.  Thus  the  writers  who  speak  of  a  "  force  neurique  rayonnante,"  of 
"  brain- waves,"  of  '''  ondulationnisme,"  of  a  "  mentiferous  ether,"  as  if  these 
were  more  than  purely  metaphorical  expressions,  seem  to  me  to  be  falling 
into  the  same  error  which  has  encumbered  hypnotic  experiment  with  the 
question-begging  terms  of  "  animal  magnetism  "  and  "  electro-biology." 
Let  us  use  every  analogy  which  helps  us,  but  let  us  recognise  that  nothing 
has  been  discovered  which  shows  that  thought-transference  has  anything 
to  do  with  ether  or  with  vibrations.  Everything  in  the  universe  may  be 
reducible  to  vibrations,  for  aught  we  know ;  but  until  some  definite 
experiment,  as  of  reflection,  interference,  or  the  like,  can  be  brought 
forward  to  connect  telepathy  with  ether-waves,  it  is  surely  safer  to  avoid 
using  that  analogy  in  a  way  which  suggests  that  it  has  a  prior  right  over 
many  others  which  might  be  proposed. 

For  our  own  part,  though  obliged  by  the  very  structure  of  language  to 
make  frequent  use  of  terms  which  are  primarily  of  physical  import,  we 
have  kept  as  much  as  possible  to  the  simplest,  and  have  spoken  of  the 
telepathic  impulse  or  impact  for  sheer  lack  of  expressions  more  abstract 
still.  We  have  varied  the  metaphor  by  suggesting  that  the  brief  energy 
of  the  psychical  element  in  man  which  seems  to  accompany  physical  dis- 
solution recalled  the  momentary  energy  of  combination  possessed,  say,  by 
"nascent  hydrogen,"  hydrogen  just  released  from  union  with  some  pther 
element.  Electrical  action,  too — itself  so  unexplained — -has  furnished  us 
with  several  parallels,  and  Mr.  Gurney  (p.  270)  has  especially  pointed  to 
its  latent  pervasiveness,  its  seemingly  accidental  manifestations. 

And  yet  again,  the  views  suggested  in  this  paper  lead  us  on  to  a 
novel  range  of  analogy.  The  conception  of  a  percipient  reciprocity,  the 
hints  which  have  seemed  to  come  to  us  of  the  perpetual  but  unmanifested 
operation  of  an  unconscious  element  in  our  own  being ; — these  notions  lift 
us  above  the  conception  of  mere  mechanical  interforces,  and  suggest 
a  more  vital  communication.  In  the  relation  of  the  cell  to  the  complex 
organism, — in  the  relation  of  the  diffused  and  multiplex  "colonial  con- 
sciousness "  of  the  sponge  or  the  hydrozoon  to  the  concentrated  conscious- 

316  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE,  ETC. 

ness  of  man  ; — here,  it  may  be,  are  analogies  which  have  a  psychical 
counterpart  behind  the  scenes  of  sense.  When  from  these  dim  and 
incoordinated  beginnings  the  individuation  of  the  human  animal  has 
risen  complete  ;  when  the  hierarchy  of  his  nervous  centres  has  led  up  to 
highest  centres  which  represent  and  govern  his  entire  organism  at 
once ; — then  we  are  accustomed  to  start,  as  it  were,  afresh,  and 
to  conceive  his  hardly-won  unity  as  an  elemental  unit  in  a  larger 
integration.  We  speak  of  him  as  a  (Siov  irokiriKov,  as  a  "  member 
of  the  body  politic,"  as  a  component  item  in  that  Leviathan  whose 
monstrous  semblance,  in  Hobbes'  frontispiece,  is  packed  together  from 
a  myi-iad  visages  of  men.  But  the  growth  of  the  social  organism  is 
rather  a  psychical  than  a  physical  thing.  It  may  take  outward  form  in 
railway  or  telegraph,  but  its  vitality  lies  in  the  inter-connection  of  cognate 
minds,  in  the  differentiations  and  integrations  of  the  thought  and  emotion 
of  speaking  men.  A  common  interest,  a  common  passion,  is  the  vein  or 
nerve  which  interlinks  and  modifies  the  monotonous  isolation  of  individual 
lives.  Is  it  not,  then,  conceivable  that  in  these  direct  telepathic  trans- 
ferences between  mind  and  mind — these  associations  which  seem  to  effect 
themselves  beyond  our  threshold  of  consciousness,  and  only  to  startle  us  by 
their  occasional  intrusion  into  the  field  of  sense — we  may  be  gaining  a  first 
glimpse  of  a  process  of  psychical  evolution,  as  true  and  actual  as  any  in 
the  physical  world  ?  of  some  incipient  organic  solidarity  between  the 
psychical  units  which  we  call  man  and  man  1  Perhaps  beneath  the  body 
politic  a  soul  politic  is  integrating  itself  unseen  ;— 

totamque  infusa  per  artus 
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet. 

Let  this  analogy  take  its  place  with  the  rest.  It  is  too  soon,  indeed,  to 
detect  the  law  of  these  operations,  but  not  too  soon  to  affirm  confi- 
dently tliat  these  operations  obey  their  certain  law ;  it  is  too  soon  to 
discern  in  this  inextricabilis  error  the  path  by  which  Evolution  seeks  its 
goal,  but  not  too  soon  to  be  assured  that  it  is  the  principle  of  Evolution 
itself  which,  like  Daedalus,  cceca  regens  filo  vestigia,  will  in  its  own  time 
unlock  the  labyrinth  which  its  own  magic  force  has  made ;  will  conduct 
us  from  physical  to  psychical,  perhaps  from  terrene  to  transcendent  things. 

F.  W.  H.  M. 

SUPPLEMENT. 

*^*  The  Supplement  does  not  include  the  Additional  Chapter 
at  the  end  of  the  volume,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  belonging 
to  the  main  body  of  the  work. 

SUPPLEMENT. 

INTRODUCTION. 

§  1.  The  supplementary  evidence  now  to  be  presented,  like  the 
larger  body  of  the  work,  consists  of  two  parts,  pertaining  respectively 
to  experimental  and  to  spontaneous  telepathy. 

The  experimental  cases,  which  will  be  given  in  the  first  chapter,, 
are  all  connected  with  a  more  or  less  abnormal  state  of  the  per- 
cipient ;  and  they  belong  for  the  most  part  to  the  transitional  class,^ 
where  the  mind  of  the  agent  is  fixed  on  the  sensation  or  idea  which 
he  desires  to  transfer,  but  the  percipient  is  not  aware  that  any 
experiment  is  being  tried.  Some  of  the  cases  are  even  spontaneous, 
in  so  far  as  the  agent  himself  was  not  at  the  moment  concentrating 
his  attention  on  the  effect  to  be  produced  ;  but  they  are  experimental 
in  the  sense  that  they  have  belonged  to  a  course  of  hypnotic  treat- 
ment, deliberately  pursued  during  a  considerable  period. 

The  subsequent  chapters  will  be  devoted  to  spontaneous  phe- 
nomena, belonging  to  the  various  groups  which  have  been  already 
passed  in  review.  And  in  relation  to  this  branch  of  the  subject,  I 
must  ask  the  reader  throughout  to  bear  in  mind  what  the  Supplement 
professes,  or  rather  what  it  does  not  profess,  to  be, 

§  2.  It  does  not  constitute  a  case  on  which  we  should  have  felt 
that  the  reality  of  telepathy  could  be  safely  based. 

It  includes,  in  the  first  place,  a  large  number  of  first-hand 
narratives  where,  for  various  reasons,  the  chance  of  error  in  some  vital 
point  seems  less  improbable  than  in  those  hitherto  quoted.  A 
detailed  preliminary  survey  of  these  various  reasons  is  scarcely 
necessary ;  the  reader  of  the  4th  chapter  of  the  preceding  volume  will 
readily  picture  them,  and  they  will  be  abundantly  noted  in  connection 
with  the   testimony  to  which  they  apply.      The  chief    points  are 

^  To  such  cases  I  have  attached  numbers,  they  being  parallel  to  the  cases  in 
Vol.  i.,  Chap,  iii.,  where  the  numbering  of  examples  began.  The  cases  where  the  perci- 
pient was  (certainly  or  possibly)  aware  of  being  the  subject  of  an  experiment,  are  given 
without  numbers — not  as  an  indication  of  evidential  inferiority,  but  because  of  practical 
difficulties,  a  whole  series  of  experiments  having  often  been  made  on  a  single  occasion. 

VOL.    II.  Y 

322  SUPPLEMENT. 

naturally  those  which  introduce  a  doubt  as  to  the  closeness  of  the 
alleged  coincidence,  or  as  to  the  unique  or  highly  exceptional 
character  of  the  percipient's  impression. 

In  the  second  place,  a  large  number  of  the  included  narratives  are 
second-hand.     They  are  of  a  good  type,  no  doubt ;  being  received  not 
from  persons  who  have   only  casually  heard  the   first-hand  account 
without  any  opportunities  of  judging  of  its  correctness,   but  from 
persons   for  the  most  part    intimately  connected  with  the   original 
witness,  and  well  assured  at  any  rate  of  his  conviction  as  to  the  truth 
of  what  he  told,  and  of  the  impression  which  the  experience  had  made 
on  him.^     Of  the  majority  of  these  narratives,  we  think  that  the  fair 
conclusion  would  be  that,  though  possibly  or  probably  inaccurate  in 
minor  points,  they  faithfully  present  the  essential  point  which  bears 
on  the  telepathic  theory.     But  I  cannot  make  the  justice  of  this  view 
evident ;  no  such  defence  of  it  can  be  given  as  was  attempted  in 
Chapter  IV.  of  the  first  volume,  in  respect  of  the  first-hand  testimony. 
It  is  an  instinct,  rather  than  a  logically-grounded  opinion — and  is,  in 
fact,  the  slowly-formed  result  of  a  very  large  amount  of  labour  in  the 
sifting  and  comparing  of  records,  and  in  the  examination  of  witnesses. 
But  though  the  view  cannot  be  proved  correct,  I  may  remind  the 
reader  that  we  who   hold  it  have  had  exceptional  opportunities  of 
appreciating  to  the  full  the  dangers  which  truth  runs  in  passing  from 
mouth  to  mouth  ;  that  we  believe  we  do  appreciate  those  dangers  to 
the  full ;  and  that  signs  of  this  have  not  been  lacking  in  the  course  of 
the  work.     And  it  may,  I  think,  be  taken  as  a  further  sign  of  such 
appreciation  that  we  feel  ourselves  unable  to  regard  the  immense 
number  of  bond  fide  records  that  remain  to  be  presented,  as  amount- 
ing to  any  sort  of  independent  proof  of  our  case. 

§  3.  But  in  saying  that  our  case  could  not  be  properly  regarded 
as  'proved  by  the  Supplement  alone,  I  am  far  from  saying  that  it  is 
not  supported.  If  the  existence  of  spontaneous  telepathy  were  a 
certainty,  many  of  the  experiences  which  follow  might  almost  certainly 
be  referred  to  it ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  existence  of  spontaneous 
telepathy  is  probable,  may  they  with  probability  be  referred  to  it. 
The  bond  fide  evidence  for  them  exists,  and  has  to  be  accounted  for ; 
and  to  us  it  seems  just  of  the  sort  that  we  should  expect  to  find,  and 
exhibits  just  the  sort  of  shortcomings  that  we  should  expect  to  find,  on 
the  hypothesis  that  telepathy  is  really  a  fact  in  Nature.     This  state- 

1  As  an  illustration  of  the  difference,  see  Colonel  V.'s  case  below,  Chap,  v.,  §  3,  and 
the  note  thereon. 

INTRODUCTION.  323 

ment  will  of  course  not  have  any  weight  with  those  who  differ  from 
us,  on  a  priori  grounds,  from  the  very  outset.     Such  persons  may, 
and  indeed  almost  must,  affirm  that  the  far  stronger  body  of  evidence 
which  has  been  already  passed  in  review  is  just  what  they  would 
expect  to  find,  on  the  hypothesis  that  telepathy  is  not  a  fact  in 
Nature.     Their  position  here  would  perhaps  be  stronger  if  they  had 
actually  made  this  affirmation  before  the  body  of  evidence  was  there. 
It  at  any  rate  does  not  seem  certain  that  those  who  have  dogmatically 
asserted  that  there  are  no  sober  first-hand  accounts  of,  e.^.,  apparitions 
at  death  from  educated  and  unhysterical  witnesses — or  that  there  are 
not  more  than  the  very  few  which  the  doctrine  of  chances  will  at  once 
account  for — would  have  been  ready,  when  our  inquiry  was  taken 
up,  to  contradict  themselves  by  predicting  that  many  scores  of  such 
accounts  could  be  had  for  the  asking.     But  however  that  may  be, 
my  remarks  are  addressed  only  to  those  who  would  admit  that  the 
evidence  already  presented  constitutes  at  least  a  solid  argument  for 
the  reality  of  spontaneous  telepathy.    And  these  persons  will  probably 
agree,  if  a  considerable  number  of  cases  are  so  attested  that  the 
rejection  of  the  telepathic  explanation  of  them  would  involve  great 
improbabilities,  that  then  (1)  it  is  natural  that  a  considerable  number 
of  cases  should  also  be  so  attested  that  the  rejection  of  the  telepathic 
explanation    of  them   would    involve    less,   but    still    considerable, 
improbabilities;  (2)  the  more  completely  evidenced  cases  establish 
a  presumption  that  some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  less  completely  evi- 
denced  cases   are   genuine ;  and  (3)  the  general   objection   to   the 
reality  of  the  class  of  phenomena,  as  out  of  relation  to  the  general 
experience  of  mankind,  is  legitimately  diminished   by  taking  into 
account  all  the  cases  which,  if  the  cause  that  we  suggest  be  a  reality, 
would  more  reasonably  be  referred  to  it  than  to  any  other  cause. 
These  last  words  of  course   involve   the  whole  judgment  of  what 
follows ;  and  I  hope  that,  on  the  whole,  they  will  seem  defensible. 
In  this,  that,  or  the  other  case,  a  mistake  may  be  easily  imaginable. 
But  here,  as  before,  it  may  be  represented  that  the   argument  is 
cumulative  ;  that  the  body  of  narratives,  as  it  stands,  is  harmonious 
and  sober  in    character ;  that  they   introduce  none   of  the  obvious 
marvels  which  popular  superstition  is  so  ready  to  supply  (Vol.  I., 
p.  165) ;  that  they  never  pass  the  line  up  to  which  the  more  com- 
pletely evidenced  cases  have  carried  us ; — and  that  such  are  not  the 
natural  results  of  unconscious  invention  or  exaggeration,  playing  at 
random  over  hundreds  of  disconnected  instances. 

VOL.    II.  Y   2 

[chap. 

CHAPTER  I. 

FUKTHER  EXAMPLES  OF  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE,  PRINCIPALLY 
IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES. 

§  1.  This  chapter  will  contain  some  specimens  of  the  older  observa- 
tions in  "thought-transference"  referred  to  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  12  ;  and 
also  a  few  more  recent  instances. 

I  will  take  first  the  most  rudimentary  transferences — those  of 
tastes  and  pains. 

Mr.  Esdaile,  for  many  years  Presidency  Surgeon  in  Calcutta^ 
whose  observations  on  hypnotic  phenomena  now  form  an  accepted 
part  of  physiological  science,  gives  the  following  case  of  transference 
of  taste  between  himself  and  a  patient  whom  he  had  mesmerised 
(Practical  MesTnerism,  p.  125).  The  subject  was  a  young  Hindoo, 
Baboo  Mohun  Mittre,  who  had  been  operated  upon  painlessly  whilst 
in  the  mesmeric  trance. 

"  One  day  that  the  Baboo  came  to  the  hospital  to  pay  his  respects, 
after  getting  well,  I  took  him  into  a  side  room,  and  mesmerising  him  till 
he  could  not  open  his  eyes,  I  went  out  and  desired  my  assistant  surgeon 
to  procure  me  some  salt,  a  slice  of  lime,  a  piece  of  gentian,  and  some 
brandy,  and  to  give  them  to  me  in  any  order  he  pleased,  when  I  opened 
my  mouth.  We  returned,  and  blindfolding  Lallee  Mohun,  I  took  hold  of 
both  his  hands  :  and,  opening  my  mouth,  had  a  slice  of  half-rotten  lime 
put  into  it  by  my  assistant.  Having  chewed  it,  I  asked,  '  Do  you  taste 
anything  ? '  '  Yes,  I  taste  a  nasty  old  lime ' :  and  he  made  wry  faces  in 
correspondence.  He  was  equally  correct  with  all  the  other  substances, 
calling  the  gentian  by  its  native  name,  cheretta  ;  and  when  I  tasted  the 
brandy,  he  said  it  was  Shrdh  (the  general  name  for  wine  and  spirits). 
Being  asked  what  kind,  he  said,  '  What  I  used  to  drink — brandy.'  For  I 
am  happy  to  say  he  is  cured  of  his  drunken  habits  (formerly  drinking 
two  bottles  of  brandy  a  day)  as  well  as  of  his  disease." 

The  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend,  in  his  Facts  in  Mesmerism,  gives 
several  examples.  (See  especially  pp.  68,  72,  76,  122,  150,  151,  184.) 
The  following   experiments  were  made  on  a  servant  of  his  own,  in. 

I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      325 

whom  he  had  produced  the  trance- condition  ;  but  it  cannot  be  held 
impossible,  from  his  description,  that  the  results  should  have  been  due 
to  an  acute  sense  of  smell,  combined  with  a  certain  amount  of  luck. 

"  Wine,  water,  and  coffee  were  handed  to  me  successively,  in  such  a  way 
as  to  prevent  the  patient  from  perceiving,  by  any  usual  means,  what  the 
liquors  were.  He,  however,  correctly  named  them  in  order.  The  order 
was  then  changed,  and  the  results  of  the  experiments  were  the  same. 
Flowers  were  given  me  to  smell.  I  was  holding  the  patient  by  one  hand  at 
the  time,  but  turning  altogether  away  from  him  to  a  table,  over  which  I 
bent,  so  as  to  interpose  myself  between  him  and  anything  that  might  be 
handed  to  me.  He,  however,  when  I  smelt  of  the  flowers,  imitated  the 
action,  and  on  my  asking  him  what  he  perceived,  replied  without  hesita- 
tion, '  Flowers.'  Upon  this,  one  of  the  party  silently  changed  the  flowers 
for  a  bottle  of  eau  de  Cologne,  when  he  observed,  '  That  is  not  the  same 
smell ;  it  is  eau  de  Cologne.'  With  the  manner  of  conducting  this 
experiment  and  its  results,  all  who  were  present  declared  themselves 
perfectly  satisfied." 

"  Three  of  my  sleep-wakers,"  Mr.  Townshend  says  in  another 
place,  "  could  in  no  way  distinguish  substances  when  placed  in  their 
own  mouths,  nor  discriminate  between  a  piece  of  apple  and  a  piece 
of  cheese ;  but  the  moment  that  I  was  eating,  they,  seeming  to  eat 
also,  could  tell  me  what  I  had  in  my  mouth." 

The  next  case  is  also  one  of  Mr.  Townshend's. 

(358)  "  Did  any  one  strike  or  hurt  me  in  any  part  of  the  body  when 
Anna  M.  was  in  sleep-waking,  she  immediately  carried  her  hand  to  a 
corresponding  part  of  her  own  person.  Then  she  would  rub  her  own 
shoulder  when  mine  was  smarting  with  a  blow,  manifesting  that  the 
actual  nerves  of  that  part  were,  pro  tempore,  restored  to  their  functions. 
Once  an  incredulous  person  came  near  me  unawares,  and  trod  upon  my 
foot,  which  was  quite  hidden  under  a  chair.  The  sleep-waker  instantly 
darted  down  her  hand  and  rubbed  her  own  foot  with  an  expression  of 
pain.  Again,  if  my  hair  was  pulled  from  behind,  Anna  directly  raised 
her  hand  to  the  back  of  her  head.  A  pin  thrust  into  my  hand  elicited 
an  equal  demonstration  of  sympathy." 

Stimulated  by  Mr.  Townshend's  experiments,  the  Rev.  A.  Gilmour, 
of  Greenock,  made  some  experiments  on  one  of  his  servants.  He 
described  the  results  in  a  letter  to  Professor  Gregory  (quoted  in 
AniTnal  Magnetiswi,  p.  211),  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs : — 

"  I  could  throw  her  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  40  seconds.  She  is  able 
to  tell  what  I  taste,  such  as  soda,  salt,  sugar,  milk,  water,  tfec,  though  not 
in  the  same  room  with  me.  When  my  foot  is  pricked,  or  my  hair  pulled, 
or  any  part  of  my  person  pinched,  she  feels  it,  and  describes  it  unerringly." 

Professor  Gregory  himself  says  (Ani'nial  Magnetism,  p.  23) : — 
"  I  have  seen  and  tested  the  fact  of   community  of  sensation  in  so 
many  cases  that  I  regard  it  as  firmly  established.     No  one  who  has  had 

326  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

opportunities  of  observing  this  beautiful  phenomenon  can  long  hesitate  as 
to  its  entire  truth — such  is  the  expression  of  genuine  sensation  in  the  face 
and  gesture,  besides  the  distinct  statements  made  by  the  sleeper." 

I  need  hardly  say  that  a  single  carefully  recorded  experiment  would 
be  worth  more  than  any  number  of  such  general  assertions  as  this. 

The   following   account  is  given  by  Dr.  Elliotson  in  the  Zoist, 

Vol.  v.,  pp.  242-5. 

(359)  "  I  requested  my  butler  to  enclose,  in  five  difierent  packets  of 
blotting-paper,  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,  ginger,  and  pepper.  These  were 
wrapped  in  one  common  cover  when  given  to  me,  and  I  handed  them 
over  to  Mr.  Scarlett,  the  eldest  son  of  Lord  Abinger,  who  gave  me  one 
packet  after  another,  any  that  he  chose,  as  each  was  done  with  by  me. 
The  Archbishop  of  Dublin  and  several  clergymen  and  other  friends  were 
present. 

"  When  I  put  each  into  my  mouth,  I  was  ignorant  of  its  contents,  and 

learnt  its  nature  as  the  paper  became  moistened  and  gave  way.     The  first 

was  salt,  and  I  stood  with  it  in  my  mouth  at  Mrs.  Snewing's  side,  and 

rather  behind   her,  saying  nothing.       Before  a  minute  had  elapsed   she 

moved  her  lips,  made  a  face,  and  said,  '  Oh,  that's  nasty  enough.'     '  What 

do  you  mean  ? '     '  Why  you've  put  salt  into  my  mouth,  you  needn't  have 

done    that.'      I    removed   the   packet  of   salt,   and   took  another,  which 

proved  to  be  cinnamon.     Presently  she  said,  '  Well  that  is  odd ;  I  never 

heard  of  such  a  thing ;    to  put  such  things  together  into  one's  mouth  ! ' 

'  Why  what  do  you  mean  ? '     '  Why  now  you've  given  me  something  nice 

and  warm,  very  pleasant,  but  you've  mixed  salt  with  it.'     The  impression 

of  the  salt  thus  still  remained.     '  What  is  it  ? '    'I  don't  know  the  name  of 

it,  but  it's  very  nice  ;  it's  what  we  put  into  puddings ;  brown,  and  in  sticks.' 

She  puzzled  a  long  while  and  then  on  my  asking  if  it  was  cinnamon,  '  Yes, 

that's  it,'  she  replied,  '  How  odd  that  I  shouldn't  recollect  the  name.'     I 

then  removed  it,  and  took  into  my  mouth  another  packet,  which  proved 

to  be  sugar,  and  I  observed  that  Mr.  Scarlett  very  properly  peeped  into  it, 

before  he  gave  it  to  me.     After  a  minute  or  two  she  began,  '  Oh,  that's 

very  sweet ;   I  like  that  ;  it's  sugar.'     I  removed  it  from  my  mouth  and 

took  another  packet,  which  proved  to  be  ginger.     After  a  minute  or  two 

she  exclaimed,  '  Well,  this  is  the  funniest  thing  I  ever  heard  of,  to  mix 

salt,  and  cinnamon,  and  sugar,  and  now  to  give  me  something  else  hot.' 

'  What  is  it  ? '     'I  don't  know ;  but  this  is  very  hot  too.     It  sets  all  my 

mouth    on   fire.'     In    fact    I    felt  my  mouth   burning  hot.     After  some 

difficulty,  for  she  was  puzzled  between  these  conflicting  impressions,  she 

said  it  must  be  ginger,  and  went  on  complaining  of  the  heat  of  the  mouth, 

I  took  a  glass  of  cold  water,  and  she  instantly  said,  smiling,  '  That  isn't 

hot,  that's  nice  and  cool,  it  makes  my  mouth  quite  comfortable.'     '  What 

is  it  ? '     '  Why  it's  water  ;  what  else  can  it  be  ? '     The  last  packet  was 

now  put  into  my  mouth,  and  proved  to  be  pepper.     She  cried  out,  '  Why 

you're  putting  hot  things  again  into  my  mouth.     It  gets  down  my  throat, 

and  up  my  nose ;    it's  burning  me,'  and  she  soon  declared  it  was  pepper. 

I  could  scarcely  endure  it,  and  took  a  draught  of  water.    She  was  instantly 

relieved,  and  said,  '  How  cool  and  nice  that  is.'      She  could  not  have  seen 

what  I  was  doing  had  her  eyes  been  open. 

I.]        THOUGHT-TBANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     327 

"  A  gentleman  now  came  beside  me  and  pricked  one  of  my  fingers  with 
a  pin.  She  took  no  notice  of  it  at  first,  but,  after  a  few  minutes,  slowly 
began  to  rub  the  fingers  of  her  corresponding  hand,  and  at  last  rubbed 
one  only,  that  corresponding  with  my  finger  which  had  been  pricked,  and 
complained  that  someone  had  pricked  it.  The  back  of  one  of  my  hands 
was  now  pricked.  She  made  no  remark  but  remained  in  quiet  sleep. 
The  pricking  was  at  length  repeated  at  the  same  spot,  and  pretty  sharply, 
in  silence.  Still  she  made  no  remark.  We  gave  it  up,  and  my  other 
hand  was  pricked  in  silence.  After  a  little  time  she  began  to  rub  her 
hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine  which  was  the  first  pricked,  and 
complained  of  its  having  been  pricked  at  the  very  same  spot  as  mine. 
Gradually  she  ceased  to  complain,  and  was  still  again.  After  the  lapse 
of  another  minute  or  two,  all  the  party  observing  silence,  she  complained 
that  the  other  hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine  last  pricked,  was 
pricked,  and  wondered  that  any  person  should  do  so.  This  is  a  most 
remarkable  circumstance ;  perfectly  corresponding  to  the  phenomena  of 
sympathetic  movement  in  the  Okeys,  which  often  came  out  so  long 
after  the  movement  of  the  operator  had  been  made.  Indeed,  after  he, 
in  despair  of  any  effect,  had  made  another  motion  for  them  to  imitate, 
and  when  he  was  expecting  the  latter,  the  first  would  take  place.^  It 
shows  how  easily  persons  ignorant  of  the  subject  and  unqualified  to  make 
experiments  may  come  to  false  conclusions,  and  set  themselves  up  as  the 
discoverers  of  failures  and  imposition.  In  my  patients  the  movement 
given  for  sympathy  and  not  productive  of  apparent  efiect  has  often  come 
out  again  in  a  subsequent  sleep-waking,  the  impression  remaining  uncon- 
sciously in  the  brain.  The  heat  and  taste  of  the  pepper  still  remained  in 
Mrs.  Snewing's  mouth,  and  she  went  on  good-naturedly,  as  always,  com- 
plaining of  it.  While  she  was  complaining,  I  suddenly  awoke  her,  and 
asked  what  she  tasted  and  whether  her  mouth  was  hot.  She  looked  sur- 
prised, and  said  she  '  tasted  nothing '  and  her  '  mouth  was  not  hot ' ;  and 
she  smiled  at  the  question. 

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards,  I  repeated  these  experiments  with  all  the 
same  precautions,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson  and  Mr. 
Chandler,  who  are  very  accurate  observers,  Mrs.  Thompson  and  a  few  other 
friends.  I  stood  quite  behind  her  large  high-backed  leather  chair.  Mr. 
Chandler  gave  me  the  packets  at  his  own  pleasure,  and,  on  tasting  each,  I 
wrote  on  a  slip  of  paper  what  I  tasted,  and  held  up  the  slip  at  a  distance 
behind  her,  that  all  might  judge  of  her  accuracy  and  my  truth.  These  were 
the  same  articles  as  in  the  former  experiments  ;  but,  as  they  were  on  both 
occasions  taken  at  random,  the  order,  of  course,  turned  out  to  be  difierent. 
In  addition,  Mr.  Chandler  gave  me  a  piece  of  dried  orange-peel  from  his 
pocket ;  and  I  tasted  water  and  wine.  She  named  each  article  with  per- 
fect accuracy,  and  readily  ;  remarking  that  it  was  very  strange  she  once 
could  not  recollect  the  name  of  cinnamon.  Indeed,  on  the  first  occasion, 
she  described  the  taste  and  the  external  character  and  uses  of  the  various 
articles  with  perfect  accuracy,  but  hesitated  in  giving  the  names  of  the 
cinnamon  and  ginger  and  pepper;  a  fact  showing  that  the  sleepi- 
ness   extended   a   little   more   over  the  mental  powers  than  one  might 

1  Compare  Vol.  i.,  p.  56.  I  may  once  more  remind  the  reader  of  the  interest  of  such 
facts,  in  connection  with  the  "  deferred  impressions  "  of  spontaneous  telepathy. 

328  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

imagine.  In  a  note  sent  me  lately  by  Mr.  Thompson  are  the  following 
remarks  : — 

" '  The  patient's  lips  moved,  and  in  a  very  short  time  after  you  had 
detected  its  nature,  she  appeared  to  taste  it  as  well  as  yourself  ;  and  when 
it  was  anything  disagreeable,  begged  you  would  not  put  the  nasty  stuff  into 
her  mouth  in  this  way.  She  told,  without  the  slightest  mistake,  every- 
thing you  tasted  :  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,  pepper,  ginger,  orange-peel,  wine, 
and  some  others.  Not  a  word  was  spoken  by  any  of  the  party  to  each 
other,  and  the  only  question  that  was  asked  the  patient  was,  what  she  had 
in  her  mouth  that  she  complained  of.  After  the  spices,  when  you  drank 
water,  she  seemed  to  enjoy  it  much,  saying  it  cooled  her  mouth  ;  but  at 
other  times  as  you  drank  it  very  freely,  she  requested  that  you  would  not 
give  her  any  more  water  for  that  so  much  water  was  disagreeable  to  her. 
There  were  present,  Mr.  Chandler,  Lord  Adare,  Baron  Osten,  a  friend  of 
his,  whose  name  I  do  not  know,  myself,  and  my  wife.  "We  were  all 
perfectly  satisfied  with  the  entire  success  of  the  experiments.' 

"  I  then  smelt  eau  de  Cologne,  without  any  noise.  She  presently  said, 
*  How  nice  ;  what  a  nice  thing  you've  given  me  to  smell.'  But  she  could 
not  tell  what  it  was ;  when  I  mentioned  its  name,  she  recognised  it.  I  did 
the  same  with  water.  She  made  no  remark.  I  asked  her  if  she  smelt 
anything.  She  replied,  '  No,  I  don't  smell  anything;  what  should  I  smell?' 

"  I  put  snuff  to  my  nostrils ;  she  almost  immediately  complained  of 
snuff  being  given  to  her. 

The  next  account  was  sent  to  us  by  the  late  Professor  J,  Smith, 

of  the  University  of  Sydney. 

"September  3rd,  1884. 

(360)  "  The  experiments  [in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.]  on  transfer- 
ence of  tastes  brought  to  my  mind  a  very  interesting  case  which  occurred 
to  me  more  than  40  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  medical  student.  I  have  never 
seen  a  similar  case  in  print,  and  therefore  I  am  tempted  to  relate  it, 
although  possibly  it  may  be  quite  familiar  to  you.  When  my  attention 
was  first  drawn  to  mesmerism,  I  got  hold  of  an  errand  boy,  12  or  13  years 
old,  who  turned  out  a  most  sensitive  '  subject.'  Among  many  other  things 
that  I  tried  upon  him,  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  was  the  transference 
of  taste.  The  boy  could  describe  the  taste  of  anything  I  put  into  my 
mouth,  although  no  sound  was  uttered  to  guide  him,  and  I  myself  did 
not  know  what  the  substances  were  until  I  put  them  into  my  mouth.  I 
stood  behind  the  boy's  chair,  holding  one  of  his  hands  in  mine,  and  put 
my  other  hand  behind  me  for  the  different  articles,  which  were  supplied  to 
me  successively  by  a  druggist,  in  the  back  room  of  whose  shop  we  happened 
to  be. 

"  One  of  the  things  he  gave  me  was  a  glass  of  whisky,  and  a  mouthful 
of  this  strong  spirit  taken  unexpectedly  gave  me  a  choking  sensation. 
The  boy  writhed  on  his  chair,  and  gasped  for  breath.  Becoming  alarmed 
I  asked  my  friend  to  run  for  a  glass  of  water,  intending  to  give  it  to  the 
boy.  On  receiving  it,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  best  way  of  relieving  the 
boy  would  be  to  drink  the  water  myself.  I  did  so,  at  the  same  time 
watching  his  throat.  Being  a  medical  student,  I  knew  something  of  the 
mechanism  of  deglutition,  and  was  aware  that  the  act  of  swallowing, 
shown  externally  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the    '  pomum  Adami,'  cannot  be 

I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      329 

performed  without  something  to  swallow,  and  that  a  person  cannot  repeat 
the  act  voluntarily  more  than  once,  or  at  the  most  twice  consecutively, 
unless  something  is  put  into  the  mouth.  I  therefore  watched  the  boy's 
throat  while  I  drank  the  water.  His  '  pomum  Adami '  moved  up  and 
down  regularly  with  mine,  and  he  was  immediately  relieved.^ 

"J.  Smith." 

The  next  extract  is  from  Animal  Magnetism,  (1866,)  by  Edwin 
Lee,  M.D.,  p.  127. 

(361)  "  On  one  occasion  I  tested  the  community  of  feeling  upon  the 
celebrated  somnambulist  Alexis,  who  had  not  been  previously  subjected  to 
a  trial  of  this  kind.  His  magnetiser,  M.  Marcillet,  being  behind,  and 
quite  out  of  sight  of  Alexis,  whose  eyes,  moreover,  were  bandaged,  I 
suddenly  pricked  his  left  elbow,  upon  which  Alexis  put  his  hand  to  his 
left  elbow  complaining  of  pain  there.  I  then  pinched  the  magnetiser's 
right  little  finger,  and  Alexis  felt  his  right  little  finger  pinched.  There 
could  be  no  collusion  or  mistake  here,  as  neither  of  them  knew  of  my 
intention,  which  indeed  was  unpremeditated  on  my  part,  the  thought 
arising  in  my  mind  at  the  time." 

The  following  case  is  of  a  different  character,  but  may  be  inserted 
in  connection  with  the  last,  as  it  concerns  the  same  percipient,  and 
was  also  observed  by  Dr.  E.  Lee.  It  serves  to  show  how  much  which 
has  been  represented  as  independent  clairvoyance  may  really  be 
explained  by  thought-transference. 

Miss  Curtis  writes  from  15,  Parade  Villas,  Heme  Bay,  Kent: — 

"November  12th,  1886. 

"  About  the  year  1847  or  1848,  the  Dr.  Lee  who  wrote  a  book  on  the 
German  Baths,  made  an  arrangement  with  Alexis  Didier,  a  clairvoyant 
at  Paris,  and  M.  Marcillet,  his  mesmeriser,  to  come  to  Brighton.  There 
was  to  be  no  public  exhibition,  but  only  seances  at  private  houses,  and 
about  12  persons  to  be  present,  and  each  to  have  an  opportunity  of  trying 
Alexis  in  the  manner  he  or  she  wished. 

"  I  was  at  Brighton  at  the  time,  and  before  going  to  see  Alexis,  wrote 
his  name  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and  doubled  it  three  or  four  times,  and  then 
put  it  in  a  box  that  had  held  steel  pens,  and  tied  it  up.  When  my  turn 
came,  I  gave  the  box  to  Alexis,  and  he  began  reading  the  letters  on  the 
outside.  I  told  him  there  was  a  paper  inside  I  wanted  him  to  read,  and 
Dr.  Lee  asked  me  to  give  my  hand  to  Alexis,  and  think  of  the  words. 
Alexis  then  said,  '  The  first  letter  is  A.  the  second,  L.'  I  answered  '  Yes' ; 
and  he  turned  the  box,  and  wrote  Alexis  Didier  on  the  back.  Before  I 
saw  him  the  second  time,  I  took  a  small  smelling  bottle  out  of  its  leather 
case,  put  two  seals  inside — one  seal  was  in  the  form  of  a  basket.  I  gave 
the  case  to  Alexis,  and  asked  him  how  many  things  were  inside,  and  he 
said  two,  and  they  were  seals  ;  he  took  a  pencil  and  paper  and  drew  them; 
they  were  then  taken  out,  and  the  drawings  exactly  resembled  them. 
Some  one  asked  if  Alexis  could  read  what  was  on  one  of  the  seals ;  he 
said  he  could  not,  because  it  was  written  backwards.     Dr.  Lee  asked  me 

1  An  apparent  instance  of  telepathic  imitation  of  a  less  abnormal  sort  is  recorded  in 
Townshend's  Mesmerism  Proved  True,  p.  65. 

330  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

to  give  my  hand;  I  thought  of  the  word,  and  Alexis  directly  said, 
'  Croyez,'  which  was  correct.  [This,  however,  is  no  test ;  as  we  find  on 
inquiry,  that  Alexis  had  taken  the  seals  into  his  hand,  and  had  had  an 
opportunity  of  reading  the  word.]  I  then  asked  him  two  or  three 
questions  about  the  persons  who  had  given  me  the  seals,  and  he  made  a 
mistake,  and  said  the  lady  who  had  given  me  one  was  in  England,  whereas 
she  was  in  Africa.  Alexis  was  unequal,  some  days  telling  almost  every- 
thing, and  other  days  failing  in  several  things.  The  notes  Dr.  Lee  made 
were  printed,  and  I  had  a  copy,  but  gave  it  away.     "  Selina  Curtis." 

[The  first  of  these  results  is  rendered  inconclusive  by  the  fact  of  the 
contact.  Still  it  is  unlikely  that  Miss  Curtis  unconsciously  drew  on 
Alexis'  hand  forms  sufficiently  distinctive  to  be  recognised  as  A  L.  The 
rest  of  the  name  may,  of  course,  have  been  a  guess  on  his  part — though 
(as  Miss  Curtis  reminds  me)  he  was  not  often  called  by  the  double  name 
which  she  wrote.  Dr.  Lee  mentions  this  first  experiment,  without  details, 
in  his  book,  but  not  the  second.] 

Corresponding  to  the  cases  where  the  hypnotic  "  subject "  has 
shown  sensibility  to  the  hypnotiser's  pain,  instances  are  recorded 
where  the  hypnotiser  has  become  sensitive  to  the  "  subject's  "  pain. 
In  Lausanne's  book,  Des  Principes  et  des  Precedes  du  Magnetisme 
Animal  (Paris,  1819),  the  following  paragraphs  occur  : — 

"  Les  personnes  sensibles  et  bien  en  rapport  ressentent-elles,  comme  je 
I'ai  dit,  une  grande  partie  des  effets  que  produit  le  travail  de  la  nature 
renforcee  de  son  action.  C'est  ainsi  que  je  ressens  interieurement  des 
pesanteurs  de  tete,  des  tiraillemens,  des  douleurs  a  I'estomac,  au  foie,  a  la 
rate,  aux  reins,  a  la  tete,  et  dans  toutes  les  parties  de  mon  corps 
correspondantes  aux  parties  qui  travaillent  dans  le  corps  de  la  personne 
que  je  magnetise.  Mes  sensations  ne  sont  jamais  aussi  vives  que  celles  du 
malade,  mais  quelquefois  elles  le  sont  assez  pour  m'§tre  incommodes.  II 
y  a  des  jours  oil  ma  sensibilite  est  telle,  que  des  mouvemens  fugitifs  et 
legers  dans  la  personne  malade  me  deviennent  distincts.  11  se  presente 
dans  ces  sensations  quelques  phenomenes  sur  lesquels  je  vais  exposer  mes 
conjectures. 

"  Lorsque  je  suis  pres  et  vis-a-vis  le  malade,  je  sens  la  reaction  de  son 
travail  dans  la  partie  opposee  ;  de  sorte  qu'une  douleur  au  foie  se  fait  sentir 
a  ma  rate  ou  dans  les  parties  adjacentes,  et  celle  de  la  rate  se  fait  sentir 
a  mon  foie.  Une  douleur  ou  un  tiraillement  a  Fepaule  ou  a  la  jambe  droite 
m'est  sensible  a  I'epaule  ou  a  la  jambe  gauche.  Les  reins  font  le  meme 
efiet.  Observez  que  je  ne  parle  que  de  parties  opposdes  les  unes  aux 
autres,  comme  les  tempes,  les  yeux,  les  oreilles,  &c.  Lorsque  toute  la  tete 
est  affectde,  la  mienne  s'en  ressent,  et  I'estomac  repond  a  mon  estomac. 
Les  memes  efiets  ont  lieu  lorsque  je  suis  proche  du  malade,  et  assis  a  son 
cot^.  J'ai  ete  quelquefois  obligt^  de  changer  de  place  a  I'orchestre  de  nos 
spectacles,  parce  que  je  me  trouvais  incommode  d'un  mal  de  tete,  de  foie, 
ou  de  rate  d'un  de  mes  voisins.  Ces  sensations  desagrdables  se  dissipaient 
par  I'eloignement  et  par  la  distraction. 

"J'ai  remarque  que  je  ne  recevais  de  ces  impressions  distinctes  que  de  la 
part  des  personnes  dont  je  m'occupais,  soit  par  la  conversation,  soit  par 
d'autres  rapports.    II  ne  faut  pas  croire  que  dans  de  pareilles  circonstances 

I.]         THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     331 

un  mal  leger  ou  une  douleur  passagere  puisse  porter  des  impressions 
sensibles ;  elles  ne  le  deviennent  que  lorsque  le  mal  est  considerable.  Je 
ne  me  suis  aperQu  de  ces  effets  que  depuis  que  je  magnetise,  apparemment 
parceque  je  suis  habitue  a  porter  mon  attention  sur  mes  sensations  internes. 

"  II  m'est  arrive  tres-souvent  de  m'occuper  fortement  de  quelques 
personnes  avec  lesquelles  j'avais  de  grands  rapports.  Ma  pensee  se 
dirigeant  vers  les  principales  parties  de  leur  corps,  leur  reaction  me  faisait 
sentir  trfes-distinctement  dans  les  parties  correspondantes  du  mien,  les 
differentes  sensations  que  ces  personnes  ^prouveraient  dans  ce  moment. 
Faits  tres-certains  pour  moi,  et  pour  les  personnes  a  qui  je  I'ecrivais,  en 
leur  detaillant  les  sensations  qu'elles  avaient  eprouvees,  les  places  et 
I'heure  precise.  Ce  que  je  viens  de  rapporter  m'a  prouve  que  la  pensee 
produisait  une  action  tres-vive,  dont  la  reaction  portait  sur  nos  sens  des 
impressions  tres-distinctes. 

"  Je  ne  parle  point  icide  plusieurs  personnes  que  j'ai  mises  en  somnam- 
bulisme,  ou  que  j'ai  tirees  de  cet  etat  a  un  eloignement  assez  grand." 

Such  general  descriptions  are  very  far  from  convincing ;  ^  and 
Lausanne  gives  the  details  of  only  one  success,  which,  though  certainly 
striking,  may  have  been  accidental.  I  may  add,  for  comparison,  a 
statement  made  to  me  by  an  amateur  hypnotist,  Mr.  J.  H.  Fash,  in 
whose  good  faith  I  have  every  confidence,  but  who  has  again  failed 
to  make  the  detailed  notes  without  which  such  observations,  in  what- 
ever quantity  accumulated,  will  never  make  a  chapter  of  science.  It 
is  possible  that  the  mention  of  the  type  here  may  serve  to  elicit 

further  instances. 

"  9,  Commerce  Street,  Glasgow. 

"July  28th,  1885. 
"  Instead  of  impressing  my  '  subjects '  they  seem  to  impress  me ;  and 
should  they  chance  to  have  any  soreness  or  pain  in  any  part  of  the  body, 
I  feel  it  in  a  corresponding  part  of  mine  as  soon  as  I  have  commenced 
mesmerising  them  ;  and  it  sometimes  remains  with  me  for  a  considerable 
time  after.  In  this  way  I  am  often  able  to  discern  aches  or  pains  in 
various  persons,  who  have  afterwards  stated  that  they  felt  relieved.  Just 
this  moment  as  I  write,  I  am  suffering  from  a  severe  soreness  in  the  region 
of  the  spleen,  and  a  feeling  as  of  dyspepsia  or  indigestion  at  the  stomach, 
and  on  making  remarks  to  the  sensitive  a  few  minutes  since  that  I  felt 
this,  he  replied,  '  I  felt  that  way  before  you  mesmerised  me  but  I  am  all 
right  now.' " 

§  2.  The  following  examples  of  the  silent  power  of  the  will  in 

producing  the  hypnotic  condition,  or  in  evoking  particular  actions  on 

1  The  author  of  Reflexions  Impartiales  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  (1784)  says  that  he 
witnessed  similar  phenomena  several  times  at  Lyons:  "Les  differentes  somnambules 
qui  ont  servi  aux  experiences  sont  des  fiUes  du  peuple.  On  leur  a  pr^sent^,  des  sujets 
malades  qui  leur  etaient  inconnus.  Elles  ont  indiqu^  avec  la  plus  grande  exactitude  les 
maux  dont  elles  Etaient  affect^s  :  je  les  ai  vues  ressentir  vivement  les  maux  de  ceux  qu'elles 
magnetisaient,  et  les  manif ester  en  portant  les  mains  sur  elles  aux  memes  parties." 
Bertrand  remarks  on  the  similarity  of  Carr^  de  Montgeron's  account  of  the  St.  M^dard 
"  convulsionnaires."  But  the  lack  of  detail  and  corroboration  must  of  course  prevent  such 
evidence  from  having  any  independent  weight. 

332  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

the  part  of  hypnotised  persons,  are  analogous  to  those  recorded  in 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  88-94.  The  first  account  is  taken  from  the  Traite  du 
Somnambulisme,  (Paris,  1823,  pp.  246-7)  of  Dr.  Alexandre  Bertrand, 
a  physician  of  repute,  whose  works  give  the  impression  of  having 
been  written  in  a  spirit  of  rational  scepticism. 

"  J'avais  coutume  de  faire  sortir  une  malade  du  somnambulisme  en  lui 
faisant  de  legeres  frictions  sur  les  bras  ;  et  cette  manoeuvre,  qui  ne  I'eveil- 
lait  pas  daus  le  courant  de  la  seance,  ne  manquait  jamais  de  produire  cet 
effet  a  la  fin,  quand  j'avais  riutention  de  la  faire  sortir  du  sommeil.  Un 
jour  je  fis,  a  la  fin  de  la  seance,  mes  frictions  accoutumees,  en  lui  disant, 
'  Aliens,  allons,  ^veillez-vous ' — et  pendant  ce  temps  j'avais  la  ferme  volonte 
de  ne  pas  I'eveiller.  La  malade  parut  d'abord  visiblement  trouble,  puis 
tout-a-coup  son  visage  rougit  beaucoup,  ses  traits  s'altererent,  et  elle  eut 
quelques  mouvements  convulsifs,  sans  sortir  pourtant  de  I'etat  de  somnam- 
bulisme. J'employai  alors  toute  ma  volonte  a  la  calmer ;  et  quand  je  la 
vis  enfin  rede  venue  tranquille,  '  Qu'avez  vous  done,'  lui  dis-je,  '  qui  vous 
a  fait  avoir  des  convulsions  ? '  '  Comment,'  me  repondit-elle,  '  vous  me 
dites  de  7n'eveiller,  et  vous  ne  voulez  pas  que  je  ru'eveille.'  " 

Bertrand,  whose  treatment  of  the  subject  is  thoroughly  cautious 
and  sensible,  records  (p.  280),  a  more  ordinary  case  of  thought- 
transference,  in  which  the  "subject"  and  the  agent  were  both  known 
to  him,  on  the  authority  of  the  latter,  who  had  his  complete  con- 
fidence ;  but  he  declines  to  commit  himself  to  results  which  he  had 
witnessed  without  having  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  persons 
concerned. 

The  next  case  was  reported  by  Mr,  Charles  Richet  to  the  Soci^td 
de  Psychologic  Physiologique,  and  appeared  in  the  Revue  Philo- 
sophique  for  February,  1886,  p.  199. 

(362)  M.  Richet  begins  by  saying  that,  in  spite  of  repeated  trials,  he 
has  only  on  one  occasion  obtained  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  induction  of 
hypnotic  trance  at  a  distance.  This  was  in  1873,  when  he  was  "  interne  " 
at  the  Beaujon  Hospital.  The  "subject"  was  a  woman  whom  he  had 
frequently  hypnotised. 

"  D'abord  je  I'endormais  par  des  passes  ;  puis,  plus  tard,  en  lui  touchant 
la  main ;  puis  enfin,  simplement,  en  entrant  dans  la  salle. 

"  Le  matin,  quand  j'entrais  dans  la  salle  avec  mon  chef  de  service,  M.  le 
professeur  Le  Fort,  je  la  voyais  aussitot,  dans  le  fond  de  la  salle  ou  elle 
etait,  s'endormir.  Mais,  comme  je  ne  voulais  pas  qu'elle  fut  dans  cet  etat 
au  moment  oil  M.  Le  Fort  serait  a  cote  d'elle  je  faisais  tout  mes  efforts 
pour  la  reveiller  mentalement ;  et,  de  fait,  elle  se  reveillait  toujours 
quelques  instants  avant  que  M.  Le  Fort  arrivat  au  lit  No.  11. 

"  S'agissait-il  rdellement  d'un  acte  de  volonte  de  ma  part,  soit  pour  la 
reveiller,  soit  pour  I'endormir ;  ou  bien  s'endormait-elle  et  se  rdveillait- 
elle  spontan^ment?  C'est  la  un  point  que  je  n'ai  jamais  pu  bien  etablir. 
Et  si,  comme  je  vais  le  raconter,  I'exp^rience  n'avait  pas  et^  fait  d'une 
autre  maniere,  ce  sommeil  et  ce  reveil  ne  prouveraient  absolument  rien. 

I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.       333 

"  Un  jour,  etant  avec  mes  collegues,  a  la  salle  de  garde,  a  dejeuner — 
notre  confrere  M.  Landouzy,  alors  interne  comme  moi  a  I'hopital  Beaujon, 
^tait  present — j'assurai  que  je  pouvais  endorinir  cette  malade  a  distance, 
et  que  je  la  ferais  venir,  a  la  salle  de  garde  ou  nous  etions,  rien  que  par  un 
acte  de  ma  volonte.  Mais  au  bout  de  dix  minutes  personne  n'etant  venu, 
I'experience  fut  consideree  comme  ayant  echoue. 

"  En  realite  Texperience  n'avait  pas  echoue  ;  car  quelque  temps  apres, 
on  vint  me  prevenir  que  la  malade  se  promenait  dans  les  couloirs,  endormie, 
cherchant  a  me  parler  et  ne  me  trouvant  pas  ;  et,  en  effet,  il  en  etait  ainsi, 
sans  que  je  puisse  de  sa  part  obtenir  d'autre  reponse  pour  expliquer  son 
sommeil  et  cette  promenade  vagabonde,  sinon  qu'elle  desirait  me  parler. 

"  Une  autre  fois,  j'ai  repete  cette  experience  en  la  variant  de  la  maniere 
suivante.  Je  priai  deux  de  mes  collegues  de  se  rendre  dans  la  salle,  sous 
le  pretexte  d'examiner  une  malade  quelconque  ;  en  realite  afin  d'observer 
comment  se  comporterait  le  No.  11,  que  j'aurais,  a  ce  moment,  I'intention 
d'endormir.  Quelque  temps  apres  ils  vinrent  me  dire  que  I'experience 
avait  echoue.  Oependant,  cette  fois  encore,  elle  avait  reussi.  Car  on 
s'etait  trompe  en  designant  a  la  place  du  No.  11  la  malade  voisine,  qui 
naturellement  etait  restee  parfaitement  eveillee,  tandis  que  le  No.  11 
s'etait  effectivement  endormie. 

"  J'aurais  du  sans  doute  repeter  et  varier  avec  plus  de  precision  cette 
experience  interessante  ;  mais  en  pareille  matiere  on  ne  fait  pas  tout  ce 
qu'on  desire  faire,  et  ceux-la  seuls  qui  ont  expdrimente  peuvent  savoir 
quelles  difficultes  de  toute  sortes,  morales  et  autres,  empechent  la 
poursuite  methodique  de  I'experimentation. 

"  Quelques  semaines  apres,  la  malade  retourna  dans  son  pays,  a 
Beziers,  je  crois,  et  je  n'ai  plus  entendu  parler  d'elle.        <c  Qjj   Richet  " 

The  next  example,  from  Professer  Beaunis,  of  Nancy,  is  published 
in  the  same  number  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  p.  204.  The 
concluding  sentences  of  his  account,  as  the  admission  of  a  physiologist 
of  high  repute,  are  of  good  omen  for  the  future  of  our  subject  in 
France.  The  experiment  was  made  in  conjunction  with  our  friend, 
Dr.  Liebeault. 

(363)  "  Le  sujet  est  un  jeune  homme,  tres  bon  somnambule,  bien 
portant,  un  peu  timide.  II  accompagnait  chez  M.  Liebeault  sa  cousine, 
tres  bonne  somnambule  aussi,  et  qui  est  traitee  par  I'hypnotisme  pour  des 
accidents  nerveux. 

"  M.  Liebeault  endort  le  sujet  et  lui  dit  pendant  son  sommeil  :  '  A 
votre  reveil  vous  executerez  I'acte  qui  vous  sera  ordonne  mentalement  par 
les  personnes  presentes.'  J'ecris  alors  au  crayon  sur  un  papier  ces  mots  : 
'  Embrasser  sa  cousine.'  Ces  mots  ecrits,  je  montre  le  papier  au  Dr. 
Liebeault  et  aux  quelques  personnes  pre'sentes,  en  leur  recommandant  de  le 
lire  des  yeux  seulement,  et  sans  prononcer  meme  des  levres  une  seule  des 
paroles  qui  s'y  trouve,  et  j'ajoute  :  '  A  son  reveil,  vous  penserez  fortement 
a  I'acte  qu'il  doit  executer,  sans  rien  dire  et  sans  faire  aucun  signe  qui 
puisse  le  mettre  sur  la  voie.'  On  reveille  alors  le  sujet  et  nous  attendons 
tous  le  resultat  de  I'experience.  Peu  apres  son  reveil,  nous  le  voyons  rire 
et  se  cacher  la  figure  dans  ses  mains,  et  ce  manege  continue  quelque  temps 

334  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

sans  autre  resultat.  Je  lui  demande  alors  :  '  Qu'avez-vous  1 '  '  Rien.'  '  A 
quoi  pensez  vous  ? '  Pas  de  reponse.  'Vous  savez,'  lui  dis-je,  'que  vous 
devez  faire  quelque  chose  a  quoi  nous  pensions.  Si  vous  ne  voulez  pas  le 
faire,  dites-nous  au  moins  a  quoi  vous  pensez.'  '  Non.'  Alors  je  lui  dis  : 
'  Si  vous  ne  voulez  pas  le  dire  tout  haut,  dites-le-moi  bas  a  I'oreille,'  et  je 
m'approche  de  lui.  '  A  embrasser  ma  cousine,'  me  dit-il.  Une  fois  le 
premier  pas  fait,  le  reste  de  la  suggestion  mentale  s'accomplit  de  bonne  grace. 
"  Y  a-t-il  eu  simple  coincidence  ?  Ce  serait  bien  ^tonnant.  A-t-il  pu, 
pendant  son  sommeil,  reconnaltre  le  sens  des  paroles  que  j'dcrivais  a  la 
facon  dont  je  les  ecrivais  sur  le  papier,  ou  a-t-il  pu  les  voir'?  C'est  bien 
peu  supposable.  Enfin  je  suis  sur  qu'aucune  des  personnes  presentes  n'a 
pu  le  mettre  d'une  fagon  quelconque  sur  la  voie  de  Facte  qu'il  devait 
accomplir.  II  y  a  la  evidemment  quelque  chose  qui  bouleverse  toutes  les 
idees  regues  sur  les  fonctions  du  cerveau,  et  pour  ma  part,  jusqu'  a  ces 
derniers  temps,  j'etais  parfaitement  incr^dule  sur  les  faits  de  ce  genre. 
Aujourd'hui  j 'arrive  a  cette  conviction  qu'il  ne  faut  pas  les  repousser,  les 
cas  de  reussite,  quoique  rares,  etant  trop  nombreux  pour  etre  un  simple 
effet  de  hasard.  "  jj_  Beaunis." 

§  3.  To  pass  now  to  transferences  of  ideas  unconnected  with 
movement  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  94-6),  the  next  two  incidents  are  again  reported 
by  a  French  physician  of  high  standing — not,  however,  as  personal 
observations,  but  apparently  as  attested  by  another  medical  man. 
They  occur  in  Dr.  Macario's  work,  Du  Som'meil,  des  Reves,  et  du 
Somnambulisme  (Lyons,  1857),  pp.  185-6. 

(364  and  365)  "  Un  soir  le  docteur  Gromier,  apres  avoir  endormi  par  la 
magnetisation  une  femme  hysterique,  demanda  au  mari  de  cette  femme  la 
permission  de  faire  une  experience,  et  voici  ce  qui  se  passa.  Sans  mot  dire,  il 
la  conduisit  en  pleine  mer,  mentalement,  bien  entendu;  la  malade  fut  tran- 
quille  tant  que  le  calme  dura  sur  les  eaux  ;  mais  bientot  le  magnetiseur 
souleva  dans  sa  pensee  une  efFroyable  tempete,  et  la  malade  se  mit  aussitot 
a  pousser  des  cris  pergants,  et  a  se  cramponner  aux  objets  environnants ; 
sa  voix,  ses  larmes,  I'expression  de  sa  physionomie  indiquaient  une  frayeur 
terrible.  Alors  il  ramena  successivement,  et  toujours  par  la  pensee,  les 
vagues  dans  les  limites  raisonnables.  EUes  cesserent  d'agiter  le  navire,  et 
suivant  le  progres  de  leur  abaissement,  le  calme  rentra  dans  I'esprit  de  la 
somnambule,  quoiqu'  elle  conservat  encore  une  respiration  haletante  et  un 
tremblement  nerveux  dans  tons  ses  membres.  '  Ne  me  ramenez  jamais  en 
mer,'  s'ecria-t-elle  un  instant  apres,  avec  transport;  'j'ai  trop  peur,  et  ce 
miserable  de  capitaine  qui  ne  voulait  pas  nous  laisser  monter  sur  le  pont !' 
'Cette  exclamation  nous  bouleversa  d'autant  plus,'  dit  M.  Gromier,  '  que  je 
n'avais  pas  prononc^  une  seule  parole  qui  put  lui  indiquer  la  nature  de 
I'exp^rience  que  j 'avals  I'intention  de  faire.' 

"  Une  autre  fois,  cette  meme  malade  etait  en  proie  a  un  profond  deses- 
poir.  Voici  ce  que  son  medecin,  le  docteur  Gromier,  imagina  pour  ranimer 
son  courage.  Elle  dormait  d'un  sommeil  magn^tique.  Poux^quoi,  lui  dit-il 
mentalement,  perdre  ainsi  I'esperance  ?  Vous  etes  pieuse,  la  sainte  Vierge 
viendra  a  votre  secours,  et  vous  guerirez,  soyez-en-sure.  Puis  il  decouvrit, 
par  sa  pensee,  le  toit  de  la  maison ;  dans  les  angles  il  groupa  des  images 

I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      335 

portant  des  cherubins,  et  au  milieu  il  fit  descendre  dans  un  globe  de 
lumiere  la  sainte  Vierge,  dans  toute  la  splendeur  de  sa  magnificence.  La 
somnambule  tomba  aussitot  dans  le  ravissement,  dans  I'extase,  se  prosterna 
a  terre,  et  s'ecria  dans  le  plus  grand  transport,  '  Ah !  mon  Dieu,  depuis 
si  longtemps  que  je  prie  la  Vierge  Marie,  voila  la  premiere  fois  qu'elle 
vient  a  mon  secours. '  " 

[If  correctly  reported,  these  results  seem  to  go  beyond  what  can  reason- 
ably be  attributed  to  unconscious  physical  indications  on  the  experimenter's 
part.] 

Quite  parallel  to  such  cases  as  these  is  the  form  of  experimental 
telepathy  for  which  there  is  perhaps  most  evidence  in  the  older 
records — though  it  is  one  which  we  have  never  personally  encountered 
— that  where  some  place  or  scene,  familiar  to  someone  present,  has 
been  accurately  described  by  a  hypnotised  "  subject  "  who  had  no 
previous  knowledge  of  it.  The  phenomenon  has  been  almost  always 
set  down  to  independent  clairvoyance — an  explanation  for  which 
there  has,  in  most  cases,  been  little  or  no  warrant.  A  single  instance 
must  suffice,  and  I  select  one  from  the  late  Sergeant  Cox's  Mechanisrn 
of  Man  (Vol  II.,  p.  220). 

"  One  instance,  within  my  personal  experience,  will  suffice  to  give  the 
reader  a  clear  conception  of  the  character  of  this  very  curious  psychological 
phenomenon.  The  somnambule  was  a  little  girl,  aged  only  1 0  years.  She 
was  invited  to  go  (mentally)  with  me  to  Somersetshire.  She  described 
accurately  my  father's  house  there — the  verandah  and  the  glass  doors 
opening  to  the  garden.  Asked  if  she  could  see  anything  in  the  room  1 
'  Oh,  yes  ! '  she  said,  '  such  a  funny  chair,  it  rolls  about.'  (It  was  an 
American  rocking-chair.)  '  Anything  more  ? '  '  Yes — pictures.'  '  Tell 
me  what  they  are  about.'  '  One  is  a  house  pulled  to  pieces.'  (There  was 
a  drawing  on  the  wall  of  the  ruins  of  an  abbey.)  'Any  more?'  '  Yes  ; 
the  sky  is  on  fire  ;  horses  are  jumping  about.'  (It  was  a  large  painting  of 
a  storm,  and  horses  struck  by  lightning.)  '  Anything  more  ? '  'A  river 
runs  by  the  side  of  the  house.'  (Right.)  I  should  state  that  the  child 
had  never  been  out  of  London. 

"  A  friend  who  was  present  accidentally,  then  asked  to  be  allowed  to 
question  her.  He  was  placed  en  rapport  with  her  simply  by  my 
removing  my  hand  and  giving  her  hand  to  him.  Re-establishment 
of  this  relationship  was  essential  to  the  production  of  the  phenomena.^ 
As  I  had  never  seen  my  friend's  house,  I  cannot  vouch  for  her 
accuracy  with  him  as  with  myself;  but  I  had  his  assurance  that  it 
was  equally  correct.  I  should  state  that  neither  of  us  gave  the  child 
the  slightest  intimation  by  word  or  look ;  indeed,  we  did  nothing  but 
put  questions.  My  friend's  house  was  at  Dover.  She  described  some 
of  the  way  down — such  as  the  tunnel  and  the  cliffs.  '  Now,'  she  said, 
'  I  see  a  row  of  houses,  and  such  a  lot  of  steps  to  get  to  them.'     '  Go  with 

1  In  such  a  case  as  this,  contact  cannot  be  held  to  give  an  opportunity  for  information 
by  unconscious  physical  signs.  Whether  the  effect  that  it  has  consists  in  more  tlian 
symbolising  to  the  "subject"  a  condition  of  confidence  and  rapport,  is  a  doubtful  and 
interesting  question. 

336     .  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

me  up  the  steps  of  the  third  house.'  '  Yes.'  '  Now  we  go  in  ;  what  do 
you  see  there  ? '  '  Something  like  a  monkey  and  some  horns.'  (Right.) 
'  Now  go  into  the  room  on  the  left.'  '  Yes  ;  such  a  lot  of  books  about ; 
there  is  a  horrid  thing  on  the  chimney-piece.'  (It  was  a  skull.)  '  There's 
a  portrait  of  a  gentleman's  head  over  it.'  (It  was  a  portrait.)  '  Now 
we  will  go  upstairs.'  What  a  beautiful  room,  and  oh !  what  a  beautiful 
lady.'  '  What  is  she  doing  ] '  '  Oh,  no ;  it's  a  picture,  I  mean,  with 
such  a  beautiful  dress,  and  she  has  a  hat  on ;  how  funny.'  (It  was  the 
full  length  portrait  of  a  lady  in  a  riding-habit.)  She  stated  much  besides, 
which  my  friend  stated  to  be  correct.  Then  she  added,  '  There's  a  young 
lady  with  long  yellow  curls  looking  out  of  window.'  He  whispered  to  me, 
'  She  is  wrong  there.  I  have  a  niece  with  such  hair,  but  she  is  from 
home.  She  reads  the  picture  in  my  mind.'  My  friend  returned  to 
Dover  the  next  day,  and  the  following  post  brought  me  a  letter  stating 
that  he  was  surprised  to  find  that  his  niece  had  returned  unexpectedly, 
and  was  in  the  drawing-room  as  described,  but  she  believes  she  was  not 
at  the  window." 

I  will  now  give  a  case — rather  remote  in  time,  but  resting  on  the 
first-hand  testimony  of  living  witnesses — which  is  remarkable  for  the 
long  continuance  of  the  telepathic  susceptibility.  The  narrator  is 
Mrs.  Pinhey,  of  18,  Bassett  Road,  Ladbroke  Grove  Road,  W.  ;  her 
record,  written  out  for  us  in  1883,  is  at  any  rate  given  under  a  strong 
sense  of  responsibility. 

(366)  "  I  have  been  asked  to  write  down  what  I  can  remember  of  a 
very  curious  experience  in  mesmeric  or  animal  magnetism,  which  I  under- 
took and  carried  on  for  many  months,  more  than  30  years  ago. 

"  The  difficulty  of  doing  this  accurately  after  so  great  a  lapse  of  time  is, 
I  am  aware,  very  great ;  and  unfortunately,  the  diary  which  I  kept  for  the 
greater  part  of  the  time  is  of  the  most  meagre  description,  and  can  scarcely 
be  said  to  do  more  than  record  the  fact  of  the  seances  having  been  carried 
on  daily  with  little  intermission  from  the  beginning  of  March,  1850,  all 
through  the  summer  of  that  year,  until  the  end  of  October,  when  I  left 
home  for  several  weeks.  On  my  return  they  were  recommenced,  and  it 
was  during  that  winter  that  the  most  remarkable  thought-reading  pheno- 
mena occurred  ;  but  I  seem,  meanwhile,  to  have  discontinued  my  diary 
altogether,  so  that,  though  the  main  facts  are  so  impressed  on  my  memory 
that  I  cannot  forget  them,  I  feel  the  necessity  for  extreme  caution  in  re- 
lating them,  having  nothing  but  my  memory  on  which  to  depend — not 
even  the  occasional  hints  which,  in  the  diary  of  the  previous  summer,  have 
helped  to  bring  back  some  circumstances  to  my  mind,  to  fix  the  dates  of 
others,  and  to  show  the  general  rate  of  progress  in  the  experiments,  which 
I  had  imagined  to  be  much  less  gradual  than  it  really  was. 

[The  writer  then  describes  how,  having  in  1849  heard  a  lecture  on 
mesmerism  as  applied  to  disease,  she  resolved  to  try  to  influence  a  relative 
of  her  own,  who  was  suffering  from  epilepsy.  She  failed  and  was  consider- 
ably discouraged  ;  but  determined  to  make  one  more  attempt  with  another 
"  subject."] 

"  Miss  M.  N.  was  a  parishioner  of  my  father's.     She  and  her  sister  lived 

l]        thought-transference  in  hypnotic  cases.      337 

together  on  very  small  means,  their  circumstances  having  been  much 
reduced  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  their  parents,  and  M.  was  dreadfully 
afflicted  with  a  chronic  kind  of  St.  Vitus'  dance,  besides  other  ailments. 
I  visited  her  frequently,  and  as  I  looked  on  at  her  never-ceasing  movement, 
her  mouth  and  eyes  twitching  and  her  whole  body  jerking  up  and  down 
from  morning  till  night,  to  such  an  extent  that  she  could  not  even  feed 
herself,  it  occurred  to  me  that  hers  was  a  fitting  subject  for  mesmerism. 
What  a  boon  would  an  hour  or  two  of  perfect  rest  be  to  such  a  person  ! 
At  any  rate,  I  would  talk  to  her  about  it,  and  make  my  next  attempt  on 
her,  if  she  would  consent  to  my  doing  so. 

"  She  had  become  very  fond  of  me  during  our  intercourse,  and  I  had  no 
difficulty  in  persuading  her  to  allow  me  to  do  anything  I  liked  to  her  •  but 
some  of  her  friends  objected  at  first,  having  a  sort  of  idea  that  mesmerism 
was  a  '  black  art,'  and  not  to  be  meddled  with.  My  father's  opinion, 
however,  as  clergyman  of  the  parish,  and  my  own  reputation  as  the  clergy- 
man's daughter,  prevailed  so  far  that  I  was  allowed  to  proceed  without 
active  opposition. 

"  At  this  time  I  had  no  expectation  of  any  marvellous  results.  I  did 
hope  that  I  might  succeed  in  quieting  her  nerves  and  muscles,  and  giving 
rest,  if  not  sleep,  for  a  few  hours  every  day,  and  that  this  rest  might  have 
a  beneficial  efiect  upon  my  patient's  health.  But  though  I  expected 
nothing,  I  was  prepared  for  anything,  i.e.,  I  was  fully  impressed  with  the 
necessity  of  keeping  my  own  nerves  quiet  and  unmoved  under  any  circum- 
stances. I  rather  dreaded  than  hoped  that  things  might  happen  to 
'  astonish  me ' ;  but,  if  they  did,  I  was  prepared  to  look  at  them  with 
as  much  calmness  and  philosophy  as  I  could  command. 

"  I  think  it  was  on  the  second  occasion,  that,  viz.,  of  March  5th,  noted 
in  my  journal,  that  I  succeeded  in  inducing  the  mesmeric  sleep,  a  state  at 
that  time  of  perfect  repose,  not  unlike  natural  sleep — except  that  the 
muscles  remained  rigid  enough  to  keep  iny  patient  sitting  upright  leaning 
back  in  the  chair.  She  showed  no  disposition  to  lie  down.  In  this 
condition  I  left  her,  at  first  with  directions  to  her  sister  not  to  touch  or 
disturb  her  until  she  awoke  of  herself,  which  she  did  in  about  an  hour. 
As  time  went  on,  however,  and  the  mesmeric  influence  gained  greater 
power  over  her,  I  found  it  better  to  stay  with  her  for  an  hour  or  two,  and 
wake  her  before  I  left.  Otherwise  she  seemed  never  to  awake  quite 
perfectly,  but  remained  for  some  hours  in  a  dreamy  state  after  the  actual 
sleep  had  left  her. 

"  I  cannot  recollect,  however,  exactly  the  time  when  this  change  was 
made,  but  it  must  have  been  very  early  in  the  course  of  the  stances,  because 
on  the  13th,  after  a  week  in  which  I  had  visited  her  every  day,  I  find,  in 
additit)n  to  the  usual  entry,  '  Mesmerised  M.  N.,'  the  word  '  Discoveries,' 
and  that  my  mother  was  present,  so  that  I  must  then  have  remained  with 
her  during  the  sleep. 

"The  'Discoveries'  and  'New  Discoveries'  entered  on  the  14th, 
referred  to  phenomena  which,  happening  to  myself  in  this  way,  with  every 
possible  guarantee  for  their  perfect  truth  and  reality,  necessarily  made  a 
great  impression  on  all  our  minds.  They  were,  it  is  true,  only  the  intro- 
duction to  a  series  of  much  greater  wonders,  but,  being  the  first,  they 
surprised  and  startled  us  almost  more  than  those  which  came  after. 

"  The  first  unusual  appearance  that  presented   itself  was  a   sort   of 

VOL.  II.  z 

338  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

magnetic  attraction  towards  myself.  I  noticed  that  whenever  I  moved 
about  the  room  to  fetch  a  book  or  my  knitting,  or  perhaps  to  eat  some 
biscuits  or  sandwiches  (for  I  often  took  my  luncheon  with  me  to  save 
time),  her  face  turned  towards  me.  I  tried,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  get 
quite  behind  the  chair  on  which  she  sat,  with  her  eyes  closed  and  quite 
still  up  to  this  time ;  but  she  shuffled  about  in  her  seat  and  made  every 
effort  to  turn  round  so  as  to  face  me.  Presently  her  arm  stretched  itself 
out  with  a  mechanical  kind  of  motion  and  pointed  at  me  wherever  I  moved. 
About  this  time,  too,  she  began  to  talk. 

"  Her  voice  and  manner  of  speaking  when  asleep  were  much  more 
animated  and  decided  than  when  awake.  Instead  of  a  poor,  weak,  invalid 
kind  of  creature,  she  became  quite  a  clever,  animated  talker.  Instead  of 
the  humility  and  self-depreciation  of  her  waking  hours,  she  appeared  quite 
pleased  with  herself  and  confident  in  her  own  opinions.  It  was  very 
curious  to  watch  her,  with  her  eyes  always  shut,  and  her  forehead  rather 
pressed  forward,  as  if  that  were  the  seat  and  medium  of  both  sight  and 
understanding.  Sometimes  she  nipped  her  brows  and  a  puzzled  look  came 
over  her  face,  and  then  a  bright  smile  seemed  to  show  that  all  was  clear 
again.  But  this  is  rather  anticipating,  for  at  first  she  spoke  little  and 
rather  hesitatingly,  except  in  answer  to  questions  which  I  soon  began  to 
put  to  her. 

"  '  Why  do  you  point  at  me,  Mary  1 ' 

"  Mary  :  '  O,  I  don't  know,  but  I  feel  as  if  I  wanted — wanted  to  get 
near  you.  It  is  very  funny,  such  a  funny  feeling.  I  can't  help  it.  Now, 
you  are  not  angry,  are  you  ? ' 

"  The  last  sentence  she  very  often  used  with  a  deprecating  air  and  voice. 

"  Meanwhile  the  attraction  became  stronger  every  day  till  it  caused  her 
to  stand  upright  and  walk  after  me ;  a  thing  she  could  not  do  when  awake, 
and  had  not  done  for  many  months  or  even  years. 

"All  this,  of  course,  interested  me  extremely,  and  my  mother  and 
father  occasionally  went  with  me  to  see  the  marvels  I  reported,  and  satisfy 
themselves  of  their  reality.  I  thought,  however,  that  all  this  walking 
about  and  general  excitement  might  not  be  so  good  for  my  patient  as  a 
quieter  rest  would  be.  Besides,  the  clinging  to  me  was  rather  troublesome 
and  difficult  to  arrange  for;  so  when  her  attentions  in  this  way  became  too 
pressing,  I  told  her  rather  peremptorily  to  go  back  to  her  chair  and 
sit  down,  which,  with  some  difficulty  and  exertion,  she  at  last  managed  to 
do — sighing  a  little  and  begging  me  not  to  be  angry  with  her,  as  she 
would  do  always  what  I  wished  if  she  possibly  could,  but  it  was  very 
hard,  &c. 

"  After  that  I  found  that  she  would  always  obey  any  command  I  gave 
her ;  and  though  I  never  tried  her  to  that  extent,  I  believe  she  would 
have  hopped  on  one  leg  if  I  had  ordered  her  to  do  so. 

"  By  degrees,  as  time  went  on,  I  noticed  that  the  attraction  became 
fainter.  I  cannot  now  remember  how  much  time  elapsed  before  a  new 
phase  of  the  mesmeric  state  began  to  show  itself.  I  notice  that  on  the 
30th  March  my  father  went  with  me  'to  see  the  wonders  I  reported,' 
and  on  the  7th  April  the  seance  is  marked  as  'very  successful,'  but  I 
think  that  both  these  entries  must  refer  to  the  first  phase,  viz.,  the 
attraction  already  described. 

I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      339 

"  It  was,  however,  about  this  time  or  a  little  later  that,  after  a  few 
quiet  uneventful  clays,  as  I  was  sitting  at  work  or  reading  in  the  same  room 
with  her,  I  observed  that  any  little  movement  of  my  hands  or  feet  was 
being  repeated  in  a  mechanical  kind  of  way  by  my  patient.  As  I  worked, 
her  right  hand  went  up  and  down  as  if  using  her  needle.  If  I  moved  my 
finger  or  thumb,  hers  moved  too.  If  I  lifted  my  hand  to  my  face  hers 
attempted  immediately  to  follow  the  motion  ;  and  she  then  began  also  to 
associate  herself  with  me  in  her  speech — '  This  work  tires  us  very  much, 
doesn't  it,  dear  1 ' — or  if  I  wagged  my  finger  experimentally  and  well  out  of 
her  sight  (supposing  she  could  see),  she  would  say,  '  Well !  I  don't  know 
why  we  should  make  this  poor  finger  work  so  hard,  wag,  wag,  it  is  quite 
laughable.' 

"  This  sort  of  thing,  which  I  shall  call  '  sympathy,'  went  on  for  some 
time,  increasing  in  intensity  as  the  '  attraction  '  had  done,  and  then  slowly 
dying  out  as  before,  till  it  gave  place  to  new  and  still  more  wonderful 
phenomena.  That  is  to  say,  the  mere  outward  mechanical  expression  of 
sympathy  wore  out ;  but  all  the  succeeding  phenomena  may  be  classed 
under  the  same  head.  The  influence  only  went  deeper  and  afiected  by 
degrees  more  important  organs,  the  senses,  and  finally  the  brain  itself. 

"  It  was  some  time  in  that  summer  that  I  was  sitting  or  standing  near 
the  window  of  her  room,  eating  the  cake  or  sandwich  or  whatever  my 
lunch  consisted  of  that  day.  '  M.'  was  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  but  had 
been  less  interesting  than  usual  for  some  days.  I  was  not  watching  her 
particularly,  when  rather  a  curious  sound  attracted  my  attention.  I 
looked  at  her,  and  saw  that  she  was  apparently  eating  something  very  nice, 
munching  away  and  enjoying  the  taste  extremely. 

"  '  What  have  you  got  there,  Mary  1 '  I  said. 

'"  Oh  !  Why  of  course  you  know.  We — we  are  eating  our  lunch,  and 
it  is  very  nice.     We  have  got  some  cake  to-day,  and  it  is  very  good.' 

"  '  That  is  right ;  then  we  will  have  some  more.'  So  saying,  I  went  to 
the  little  corner  cupboard  where  I  always  deposited  my  luncheon  and 
took,  not  cake  this  time,  but  a  piece  of  dry  bread. 

"  '  Well,  yes,  bread  is  very  good,  but  it  is  not  so  nice  as  the  cake.  We 
must  not  be  discontented ;  but  there  is  plenty  more  cake — why  don't  we 
eat  it  1  Ah,  I  know,'  with  a  laugh  of  triumph,  '  you  think  I  can't  taste  it, 
but  that  is  nonsense.  Of  course  we  eat  together,'  and  so  on.  I  tried  her 
in  all  kinds  of  ways,  tasted  salt  and  then  sugar,  then  pepper,  and  did  my 
best  to  puzzle  her,  but  she  never  hesitated  or  made  a  mistake. 

"  I  find  in  my  journal  various  entries  during  the  summer,  showing  the 
names  of  several  persons  who  witnessed  the  facts  I  am  relating.  Amongst 
them,  on  May  21st,  is  that  of  Dr.  H.,  a  local  celebrity,  who  lived  next 
door  to  us,  and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  my  father's.  He  had  formerly, 
at  the  request  of  the  latter,  seen  '  M.  N.'  more  than  once,  and  now,  on  the 
20th,  he  had  been  brought  by  my  father  to  visit  her  again,  and  had  con- 
fessed, though  much  prejudiced  against  mesmerism,  that  her  health  was 
certainly  improved. 

"  The  next  day,  however,  when  he  came  on  purpose  to  see  the  wonders 
my  father  had  described  to  him,  the  seance  was  a  failure.  The  sleep  took 
place  as  usual,  but  the  patient  remained  apparently  dumb.  Whether  the 
fact  of  his  incredulity  had,  or  could  have  any  direct  efiect  upon  the 
patient,  I  cannot,  with  my  limited  experience,  decide ;  but  I  am  inclined 
VOL.    II.  z    2 

340  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

to  suspect  that  the  failure  was  clue  to  my  nerves  being  upset  by  the  know- 
ledge that  the  doctor  had  come  on  purpose  to  criticise.  I  know  that  I 
was  extremely  anxious  that  he  should  see  the  things  which  I  saw  day 
after  day,  and  be  convinced  that  at  any  rate  I  and  my  whole  family  were 
not  the  credulous  fools  he  secretly  suspected  us  of  being,  but  that 
appearances,  at  any  rate,  justified  our  belief.  This  anxiety,  and  the 
nervousness  produced  by  it,  were,  I  believe,  the  sole  cause  of  failure. 

"  JSTo  one  (except  perhaps  my  mother,  who  went  very  often)  ever  saw 
my  patient  at  her  best ;  the  same  cause  operating,  only  in  a  less  degree, 
whenever  the  seance  was  in  any  way  made  a  medium  of  sight-seeing.  And 
this  leads  me  to  remark  that  when  these  results  are  produced  by  trickery, 
or  mechanism,  they  can  be  repeated  any  number  of  times  with  perfect 
precision  and  regularity ;  but  when  they  come  to  us  as  the  effect  of 
experiments  having  to  do  with  unknown  or  unexplained  forces,  we  must 
expect  to  be  often  baffled,  not  knowing  fully  the  conditions  under  which 
those  forces  act. 

"  With  occasional  interruptions,  varying  from  a  day  or  two  to  a  week 
or  two,  the  seances  were  continued  daily  all  through  the  summer,  and 
were  witnessed  by  several  persons  at  different  times,  besides  the  members 
of  my  own  family.  I  find  the  names  of  seven  people,  many  of  whom  are 
still  living,  who  were  present — some  of  them  more  than  once — either  in 
that  summer  or  the  winter  following. 

"  I  cannot  now  remember  whether  any  real  '  thought-reading '  had 
begun  before  I  left  home  for  several  weeks  on  October  24th.  That  it  did 
so  very  shortly  after  my  return  is  certain,  from  the  following  circum- 
stances, which,  though  of  a  private  nature,  must  be  mentioned  in  order  to 
make  the  rest  of  my  story  intelligible. 

"  It  was  during  this  absence  that  I  became  engaged  to  be  married  to 
a  gentleman  belonging  to  the  Indian  Civil  Service.  Circumstances  made 
it  expedient  at  the  time  to  keep  the  matter  quiet,  and  it  was  known  only 
to  my  parents  and  immediate  relations.  The  gentleman  had  gone  to 
India  immediately  after  our  engagement,  and  I  returned  home  to  my 
usual  occupations  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  No  one  in  the  town 
knew  anything  about  it  then,  or  till  some  weeks  afterwards,  yet  I  had  no 
sooner  magnetised  my  patient  than  she  began  talking  as  if  all  the  facts 
were  perfectly  familiar  to  her.  '  India  is  a  long  way  ofi",  isn't  it,  dear  ? 
I  wish  we  could  be  nearer  home,  but,  of  course,  if  he  is  there  we  must 
go  too.'  In  fact  for  months  she  could  talk  of  little  else  when  mesmerised, 
and  knew  my  husband's  name,  age,  and  appearance,  but  was  as  ignorant 
as  the  rest  of  the  world  when  in  her  natural  state. 

"  Gradually  this  knowledge  of  all  that  I  knew  became  more  and  more 
complete,  and,  accustomed  as  I  was  by  this  time  to  such  marvels,  she 
sometimes  fairly  astonished  me.  One  day  she  suddenly  burst  out  laugh- 
ing. '  Oh,  what  a  hurry  we  were  in,  how  we  did  fly  down  the  stairs  ! '  I 
looked  up,  '  What  are  you  talking  about  1  When  do  you  mean  "^ '  '  Why, 
you  know,  this  morning,  and  dear  papa  was  waiting ;  he  doesn't  like  us 
to  be  late  for  prayers.  But  we  only  just  wanted  to  finish  that  sentence.' 
My  curiosity  was  thoroughly  aroused  now,  and  I  inquired,  'What 
sentence  1 '  '  Why,  the  German  book — Schiller,  wasn't  it  ■? '  It  was  per- 
fectly true,  though  the  fact  had  made  but  a  slight  impression  iipon  me, 
and  I  had  certainly  not  thought  of  it  again  until  thus  reminded  of  it, 

I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      341 

that  I  had  been  reading  German  upstairs  that  morning  until  the  prayer 
bell  rang,  and  then,  lingering  for  a  moment  to  finish  a  sentence,  I  had 
rushed  hastily  downstairs  to  avoid  being  late. 

"This  and  other  phenomena  of  the  same  kind  puzzled  me  a  great 
deal ;  not  the  fact  of  her  knowing  what  I  knew,  for  with  that  idea  I 
was  by  this  time  familiar ;  but  the  thing  which  I  could  not  understand 
was  her  brain  being  acted  upon  by  such  apparently  trifling  occurrences. 
I  could  perceive  that  things  which  had  greatly  impressed  my  brain  might 
be  repeated  in  hers,  as  the  deflections  of  one  needle  are  repeated  by 
another  at  the  opposite  pole  of  the  electric  current.  When  I  asked  her  a 
question,  my  brain  probably  gave  the  answer  which  hers  repeated,  but 
why  did  she  spontaneously  drag  up  little  things  which  I  had  forgotten  ? 
Sometimes  she  even  introduced  little  conversations  between  my  father 
and  mother  which  had  taken  place  in  my  presence.  '  Dear  mamma  was 
vexed,'  she  began  one  day,  and  then  came  particulars  of  some  little 
argument  between  my  father  and  mother,  which  I  had  heard  at  the  time 
but  had  never  thought  of  again,  and  certainly  never  repeated.^  I  have 
often  thought  over  this  difiiculty  since,  but  cannot  in  the  least  explain  it 
except  upon  the  supposition  that  certain  things  do  impress  our  brains 
more  strongly  than  others,  although  we  may  be  unconscious  of  the  fact. 
It  is  a  line  of  inquiry  which  I  should  think  might  be  worth  pursuing  in 
the  interests  of  physical  science,  if  any  physician  of  note  could  so  far  shake 
ofi"  all  prejudice  as  to  make  experiments  for  himself. 

"  I  have  only  a  few  more  wonders  to  relate,  and  they  are  all  of  the 
same  kind.  One  day,  during  the  winter,  I  was  sitting  by  the  fire  opposite 
to  my  patient,  and,  to  pass  the  time,  instead  of  working  on  this  occasion, 
I  had  a  book.  I  have  forgotten  what  it  was  except  that  it  was  a  novel, 
one  of  Dickens'  I  think.  Suddenly  she  began  to  laugh.  I  looked  up, 
and  saw  her  with  her  eyes  shut  as  usual,  but  her  head  mo^ving  as  if 
reading  with  her  forehead,  and  her  mouth  smiling.  '  What  are  you 
laughing  af?'  'Why  at  the  story,  of  course.'  'What  story?'  And  she 
told  me  what  I  was  reading  about,  making  her  comments  on  the 
characters,  and  expressing  her  amusement  at  some  passages,  and  her  sorrow 
at  anything  pathetic  which  I  came  to  in  the  course  of  my  reading.  ^  I 
asked  her  the  page  and  she  told  me.  I  asked  her  whereabouts  in  the 
page  certain  passages  were,  and  she  told  me  that  also.  I  tried  her  with 
written  letters  and  figures,  and  put  her  power  to  all  kinds  of  tests,  and  the 
result  always  was  that  she  knew  what  I  knew  but  nothing  beyond.  She 
was  never  what  is  popularly  known  as  '  clairvoyante.' 

"  I  mention  this  particularly,  because  it  was  a  point  which  I  took 
great  pains  to  ascertain ;  and  several  times  when  I  asked  her  questions 
about  people  and  things  at  a  distance,  her  answers  were  so  decided,  and 
her  knowledge  apparently  so  minute  and  circumstantial  that  I  was  very 
nearly  deceived  into  believing  it  to  be  true.  But  on  every  occasion  of  the 
sort,  I  found,  on  inquiry,  that  truth  and  fiction  were  mixed  up  together. 
Everything  which  I   knew  myself  was  true.      But   the  particular  facts 

1  This  phenomenon  is  equally  interesting  whether  it  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  an 
impression  deferred  for  some  time  before  emerging  into  the  percipient's  consciousness, 
or  as  an  impression  derived  at  the  moment  from  an  unconscious  or  sub-conscious  stratum 
of  the  agent's  mind. 

2  Gf.  cases  149  and  407. 

342  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

■which  were  happening  at  the  moment,  and  which  she  described  as  if  she 
saw  them,  were  purely  imaginary. 

"  One  remarkable  instance  in  illustration  of  this  I  will  relate.  It 
happened  during  the  summer,  or  early  spring,  of  1851.  My  married  sister, 
with  her  husband  and  children,  were  expected  at  a  vicarage  9  or  10  miles 
ofij  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  father.  I  knew  this,  and  was,  therefore,  not 
surprised  when  she  began  to  talk  about  it.  Here,  I  thought,  is  a  good 
opportunity  to  test  her  clairvoyance,  so  I  said,  '  Oh,  yes,  we  knew  they 
were  to  come  to-day,  but  have  they  arrived  1  Look  and  tell  me  % '  After  a 
short  pause  she  began  in  rather  an  excited  way,  '  Yes,  yes,  I  see  them  all 
just  getting  out  of  the  carriage.'     '  Whom  do  you  see  1 '  I  asked.      'I  see 

Mr. and  Mrs. and  the  nurse,  and  so  many  children.     They  are 

going  into  the  house,  into  the  drawing-room  on  the  left  of  the  hall.'  She 
then  described  the  vicarage,  the  drive  up  to  it,  and  many  other  particulars 
with  what  I  knew  to  be  perfect  accuracy,  and  her  whole  story  was  so 
likely,  so  much  what  I  expected  to  happen,  that  I  was  quite  prepared  to 
have  the  whole  confirmed  on  inquiry.  But  it  was  not  so.  In  the  first 
place,  the  train  had  been  late,  and  the  party  did  not  arrive  until  an  hour 
or  two  later ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  my  brother-in-law  was  detained  at 
his  own  vicarage,  many  miles  away,  and  never  arrived  at  all  at  that  time. 

"  On  another  occasion,  some  information  she  gave  me  about  Mr. , 

in  India,  though  very  likely  and  plausible,  turned  out  to  be  incorrect. 

"  Her  thought-reading  was  always  perfect,  but  the  clairvoyance  always 
failed  when  accurately  tested;  and  though  I  know  how  fallacious  an 
opinion  based  on  one  experiment  must  often  be,  and  also  that  there  is 
plenty  of  good  evidence  for  the  truth  of  clairvoyance,  I  have  sometimes 
speculated  whether,  if  any  apparent  case  of  clairvoyance  were  accurately 
inquired  into,  it  would  not  often  be  found  to  have  its  origin  in  '  thought- 
reading.'     [See  above,  pp.  329  and  335.] 

"  Towards  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1851,  I  gave  up  magnetising  '  M.' 
as  a  regular  thing.  Her  health  was  much  improved,  and  she  lived  for 
many  years  afterwards,  only  occasionally  troubled  with  the  St.  Vitus' 
dance,  at  which  times  my  mother  or  one  of  my  sisters  took  my  place,  and 
generally  succeeded  in  quieting  her. 

"  It  was  rather  a  trouble  to  me  that  after  the  first  few  weeks  I  scarcely 
saw  '  M. '  in  her  natural  state.  She  was  so  sensitive  to  my  presence  that 
before  I  entered  her  room  she  was  already  half  gone,  and  it  was  only  at 
the  end  of  each  seance,  when,  with  much  difficulty,  by  means  of  upward 
passes,  fanning,  and  other  expedients  I  had  succeeded  in  waking  her,  that 
I  could  communicate  with  her  real  self.  I  hoped  that  my  long  absence  in 
India,  eight  years,  would  have  worn  out  this  influence  ;  but  when  at  last 
I  returned  home  and  went  to  see  her,  I  found  her  already  lapsing  into  the 
trance,  and  had  great  difiiculty  in  keeping  her  out  of  it  during  my  visit.  I 
believe  that  a  more  experienced  and  skilful  operator  could  have  prevented 
this  in  the  beginning,  and  throughout  the  course  it  was  always  a  subject  of 
regret  to  me.  "  M.  A.  P." 

Two  other  witnesses  of  this  percipient's  powers  have  supplied  the 
following  testimony.     Mrs.  D'Oyly  writes  on  Nov.  24,  1885  : — 

"  24,  Westbourne  Terrace,  W. 
"  Dear    Sir, — My  sister,   Mrs.   Pinhey,    has  to-day  forwarded  me  a 

I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     343 

letter  of  yours  of  July  SOtli.  I  had  not  seen  her  article  [i.e.,  the  account 
just  quoted],  nor  did  I  know  till  to-day  that  she  had  written  one.  It  is 
difficult  to  know  what  corroborative  evidence  is  required,  but  my  own 
personal  experience  with  Mary  ISTaylor,  my  sister's  patient,  is  curious  and 
interesting,  and  I  fancy  almost  identically  the  same  as  my  sister's.  On 
Mrs.  Pinhey  leaving  England,  I  took  up  the  case  just  where  she  left  it. 
In  every  respect  the  same  phenomena  occurred  with  me  as  a  mesmeriser  as 
when  my  sister  operated.  My  patient  knew  the  contents  of  my  letters,  every 
thought  of  my  mind  ;  she  would  discuss  the  theatre,  or  the  ball,  or  party, 
or  church  I  might  have  been  at  since  I  had  last  visited  her,  and  talked  it 
all  over  as  if  she  had  been  present ;  but  sometimes,  if  a  third  person 
happened  to  be  present,  I  would  be  a  little  nervous  lest  something  should 
come  out  which  I  did  not  wish  mentioned,  but  my  inward  fear  would 
immediately  make  her  cautious,  and  she  would  say,  '  Oh,  we  must  not  talk 
about  such-and-such  things  to-day,  must  we?'  Sometimes  during  the 
seance  she  would  complain  of  hunger.  I  would  go  to  the  cupboard,  turn  my 
back  to  prevent  her  seeing,  and  taste  different  things ;  she  could  always 
tell  what  particular  thing  I  was  eating,  liked  and  disliked  what  /  liked 
and  disliked,  and  when  I  had  had  enough  her  appetite  was  satisfied.  Mrs. 
Pinhey  was  totally  unprepared  for  everything  that  happened,  and  each 
new  phenomenon  astonished  her  quite  as  much  as  it  did  outsiders. 

"  Her  '  clairvoyance '  was  limited  to  this  :  that  she  knew  any  and 
every  thing  her  mesmeriser  knew,  but  no  more.  For  instance,  we  would 
ask  her  for  particulars  of  an  absent  sailor  brother ;  her  answer  would  be 
vague  and  '  guessing,'  and  always  turned  out  to  be  merely  the  reflections 
of  our  own  minds. 

"  As  Mrs.  Pinhey  and  I  have  had  no  communication  on  this  topic,  I 
hope  my  observations  may  be  considered  '  corroborative  evidence.' — Believe 
me,  yours  faithfully,  "  Emma  S.  D'Oyly." 

Mrs.  Ogle  writes  on  the  same  date  : — 

"  Sedgeford  Yicarage,  King's  Lynn. 

"  Sir, — I  have  been  asked  by  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Pinhey,  if  I  remember 
seeing  a  girl,  Mary  Naylor  (at  Bury  St.  Edmunds),  who  was  very  ill  of  St. 
Yitus'  Dance,  and  whom  she  mesmerised  daily.  As  this  was  more  than 
30  years  ago,  I  cannot  recollect  all  I  saw  and  heard ;  but  one  fact 
was  deeply  impressed  on  my  mind,  and  I  have  often  mentioned  it  since. 
Mrs.  Pinhey  had  that  morning  received  a  letter  from  India,  and  after  she 
had  sent  M.  Naylor  ofi"  to  sleep,  she  held  it  up,  without  unfolding  it,  and 
made  the  girl  tell  her  who  and  where  it  came  from  and  certain  par- 
ticulars mentioned  in  the  letter,  known  only  to  herself.  This  M.  Naylor 
did  with  great  reluctance,  as  she  was  overpowered  with  sleep,  and  begged 
to  be  let  alone,  and  it  required  great  firmness  on  Mrs.  Pinhey's  part  to 
make  the  girl  answer  her  questions.  Mrs.  Pinhey  knew  that  I  did  not  be- 
lieve in  mesmerism,  and  she  was  anxious  that  I  should  see  the  power  she 
had  over  M.  Naylor.  "  I  am,  Sir,  faithfully  yours, 

"  Henrietta  A.  Ogle." 

The  following  passages,  bearing  on  telepathy,  are  extracted  from 
some  "  Notes  on  Mesmerism,"  kept  at  intervals  during  the  last  few 
years,  concurrently  with    the  experiments    which    they   record,  by 

344  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Captain  Battersby,  E,.A.,  F.RA.S.,  of  Ordnance  House,  Enniskillen. 
Both  he  and  his  mother-in-law,  the  percipient,  Mrs.  John  Evens,  of 
Old  Bank,  Enniskillen,  have  been  mentioned  before  (case  311).  The 
immediate  object  of  the  hypnotic  treatment  was  simply  the  relief  of 
pain.  The  extracts  comprise  phenomena  of  various  sorts.  To  some 
of  them  the  initials  of  independent  observers  were  appended — to  para- 
graphs A,  B,  and  C,  those  of  Miss  J.  A.  Evens,  Miss  M.  L.  Evens, 
and  Mrs.  Battersby,  and  to  paragraph  D  those  of  Mrs.  Battersby 
— with  the  remark  :  "  We  certify  that  we  were  eye-witnesses  of  the 
occurrences  to  which  our  initials  are  appended,  and  that  they  are 
correctly  described." 

(367)  "To  a  question  asked  in  a  foreign  language,  the  patient  usually 
replied  in  the  same,  provided  that  I  could  myself  have  done  so.  Asking 
her,  however,  a  question  in  German,  the  answer  to  which  I  could  not  my- 
self have  translated  into  that  language,  she  (though  herself  a  good  German 
scholar)  answered  only — '  Your  mouth  is  shut.'  Asked  the  same  question 
when  awake,  she  could  answer  in  the  language  at  once. 

(A)  "  As  a  rule  she  would,  when  asleep,  translate  short  sentences  of 
Greek,  Latin,  or  Irish,  all  quite  unknown  tongues  to  her,  provided  I  knew 
the  translation,  but  not  otherwise.  Now  and  then,  however,  this  experi- 
ment failed. 

"  She  could  generally  tell  the  time  by  a  watch  placed  in  her  hand,  the 
name  of  a  book,  the  original  of  a  photograph,  &c.,  provided  all  these  were 
known  to  me. " 

[After  describing  an  unusual  trance  which  he  observed  in  Mrs.  Evens 
at  the  time  of  a  distant  thunder-storm,  the  narrator  goes  on  : — ] 

"  The  electrical  fluid  in  the  air  seemed  to  have  excited  Mrs.  E.  to  a 
very  high  state  of  thought-reading,  as  she  now  began,  for  the  first  and 
only  time  I  observed  such  a  phenomenon,  to  speak  of  her  own  accord, 
unquestioned,  and  to  follow  the  course  of  my  thoughts  aloud  now  and 
then. 

(B)  "  During  the  trance  there  was  apparently  transference  of  sensa- 
tion, as  a  hair  tickling  my  forehead,  a  handkerchief  dipped  in  eau-de- 
Cologne  and  applied  to  my  face,  &c.,  &c.,  all  produced  in  her  the  correspond- 
ing sensations.  She  could  also  taste  what  I  was  eating  or  drinking.  On 
one  occasion  strong  smelling-salts  applied  to  her  nose  produced  no  effect, 
but  when  applied  to  mine  she  started  at  once. 

"  On  one  or  two  occasions  I  mesmerised  her  from  a  distance,  when 
in  my  quarters,  half-a-mile  off.  On  such  occasions  she  was  able  to  tell  what 
I  had  been  doing,  and  would  generally  go  to  sleep.  The  sensation  she 
described  was  that  of  a  hand  pressed  on  her  forehead.  Though  able 
thus  to  send  her  to  sleep,  I  was  unable  to  keep  her  so,  as  she  would  waken 
again  the  moment  }ny  attention  wavered.  The  means  used  were  stretching 
out  my  hand  towards  her  house,  and  bringing  my  will  sharply  to  bear, 
just  as  described  in  Robert  Browning's  fine  poem  on  '  Mesmerism.' 

(C)  "After  an  absence  of  about  9  weeks  I  was  curious  to  see  whether 

I.]         THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      345 

the  force  still  existed  unaltered,  and  accordingly  tried  the  experiment, 
when  Mrs.  E.  was  playing  a  duet  on  the  piano,  with  her  back  towards  me, 
of  willing  her  strongly  to  sleep.  Almost  at  once  she  began  to  play  false 
notes,  and  soon  gave  up  playing,  saying  she  felt  tired  and  the  piece  was  a 
sleepy  one.  I  then  ceased  my  influence,  as  I  did  not  wish  her  to  fall 
asleep. 

(D)  "  I  established  the  fact  that  Mrs.  E.  could  be  mesmerised  by  me 
without  her  knowledge,  and  awoke  again  so  that  she  would  have  no  idea 
that  she  had  been  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  but  would  merely  think  that  she 
had  dozed  for  awhile.  The  incapability  of  rising  by  herself,  however,  which 
was  always  present  after  the  sleep,  would  soon  inform  her  of  the  truth. 

"  When  partially  awakened  by  the  above  means  [reverse  passes],  how- 
ever, the  operation  could  be  completed  by  a  mere  effort  of  will  on  my  part, 
and  this  whether  I  was  in  the  same  room  or  no,  Mrs.  E.  being  at  once 
conscious  of  this  exertion  of  will." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Captain  Battersby  says  : — 

"January  20th,  1886. 

"  On  various  occasions,  separated  sometimes  by  months  from  each 
other,  I  tried  to  mesmerise  Mrs.  E.  from  a  distance ;  and  in  a  large 
percentage  of  the  cases  she  inquired  of  me,  when  she  next  saw  or  wrote  to 
me,  whether  I  had  not  done  so  at  such  and  such  a  day  or  hour. 
At  any  time  when  in  the  trance,  the  act  of  looking  at  Mrs.  E.,  or  willing 
her  to  open  her  eyes,  will  cause  her  to  do  so." 

In  a  later  letter  he  adds  : — 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  can  give  you  no  corroborative  evidence  of  the 
mesmerism  from  a  distance,  as  it  was  not  often  tried  by  me  (for  fear  of 
causing  Mrs.  E.  annoyance) ;  and  I  do  not  think  anyone  was  present  with 
her  on  the  occasions.  She  certainly  was  able  to  tell  when  I  had  been 
attempting  to  mesmerise  her ;  but  beyond  that  I  cannot  personally 
speak." 

To  these  hypnotic  cases,  I  will  add  a  couple  of  instances  of 
thought-transference  where  disease  seems  to  have  produced  an 
equally  abnormal  condition  in  the  percipient.  The  following  account 
is  extracted  from  a  very  remarkable  record  in  Petetin's  ElectriciU 
Animale  (Paris,  1808).  Dr.  P^tetin  had  been  for  some  time  attending 
a  lady  who  suffered  (among  other  things)  from  attacks  of  catalepsy. 
He  says  (pp.  55-7)  : — 

"  Je  m'annon9ai,  comme  j'avais  coutume  de  le  faire,  en  lui  parlant  sur 
le  bout  des  doigts.  Elle  me  repondit,  '  Vous  etes  paresseux  ce  matin,  M. 
le  Docteur.'  '  Cela  est  vrai,  madame  ;  si  vous  en  saviez  la  cause,  vous  ne 
me  feriez  pas  ce  reproche.'  '  Eh  !  je  la  vois  ;  vous  avez  la  migraine  depuis 
quatre  heures,  elle  ne  cessera  qu'a  six,  et  vous  avez  raison  de  ne  rien  faire 
pour  cette  maladie,  que  toutes  les  puissances  humaines  ne  peuvent 
empecher  d'avoir  son  cours.'  '  Depuis  quand  etes- vous  devenu  medecin  ? ' 
'  Depuis  que  j'ai  les  yeux  d' Argus.'     '  Pourriez-vous  me  dire  de  quel   cot^ 

346  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

est  ma  douleur  ? '  '  Sur  I'oeil  droit,  la  tempe  et  les  dents  ;  je  vous  previens 
qu'elle  passera  a  I'oeil  gauche,  que  vous  souffrirez  beaucoup  entre  trois 
et  quatre  heures,  et  qu'a  six  vous  aurez  la  tete  parfaitement  libre.'  '  Si 
vous  voulez  que  je  vous  croie,  il  faut  que  vous  me  disiez  ce  que  je  tiens 
dans  la  main.'  Je  I'appuyai  aussitot  sur  son  estomac,  et  la  maladie,  sans 
hesiter,  me  repondit,  '  Je  vols  a  travers  votre  main  une  medaille  antique.' 
J'ouvre  la  main  tout  interdit ;  la  belle-sceur  jeta  les  yeux  sur  la  mddaille, 
palit  et  se  trouva  mal.  Revenue  a  elle-meme,  elle  renferma  dans  une 
bonbonniere  brune  et  a  demi  transparente  un  chiffon  de  papier,  me  donna 
la  boite  derriere  le  fauteuil  de  sa  sceur ;  je  I'enveloppai  de  ma  main,  et  la 
presentai  a  I'estomac  de  la  cataleptique,  sans  lui  parler.  '  Je  vois  dans 
votre  main  une  boite,  et  dans  cette  boite  une  lettre  a  mon  adresse.'  La 
belle-soeur,  epouvantee,  tremblait  sur  ses  jambes  ;  je  me  hatai  d'ouvrir  la 
boite ;  j'en  tirai  une  lettre  pliee  en  quatre,  a  I'adresse  de  la  malade,  et 
timbree  de  Geneve. 

"  L'etonnement  ou  me  jeta  cette  decouverte  suspendit  quelques 
instans  ma  douleur,  et  m'ota  toute  reflexion.  Je  trouvai  le  tremble- 
ment  de  la  belle-soeur  tres-naturel ;  elle  aurait  pu  se  trouver  plus  mal, 
que  je  n'  aurais  pas  songe  a  lui  donner  le  moindre  secours,  et  je  restai 
stupefait  plus  d'un  quart  d'heure.  En  revenant  a  moi,  je  demandai  a  la 
belle-sceur,  comment  elle  s'etait  procure  la  lettre  qu'elle  avait  renfermee 
dans  la  bonbonniere  ?  Elle  me  repondit  que  cette  lettre  s'etait  trouvee 
dans  la  livre  qu'elle  lisait,  en  attendant  ma  visite  ;  qu'elle  I'avait  pris  dans 
la  bibliotheque  de  la  malade,  et  qu'en  I'ouvrant  elle  etait  tombee  a  ses 
pieds  ;  qu'elle  I'avait  relevee  et  mise  dans  sa  poche  pour  la  lui  rendre,  aussitot 
qu'elle  serait  eveill^e.  Je  pris  le  livre  et  I'examinai,  comme  si  j'eusse  du  y 
trouver  I'empreinte  de  la  lettre,  tant  ce  nouveau  prodige  me  paraissait 
incroyable ;  mais  me  convenait-il  bien  d'en  douter,  d'apres  ma  propre 
experience  ?  Etait-ce  un  autre  qui  avait  mis  dans  ma  main  la  mddaille 
antique  dont  j'etais  muni,  avec  le  dessein  de  profiter  de  la  premiere 
occasion  pour  la  placer  sur  I'estomac  de  la  malade,  et  voir  si  elle  la 
signalerait,  comme  d'autres  objets  que  je  lui  avals  present^s?" 

In  the  evening.  Dr.  Petetin  revisited  his  patient.  He  continues 
(pp.  62-5) :- 

(368)  "  Avant  de  sortir,  je  plagai,  a  tout  evenement,  une  petite  lettre 
sur  le  haut  de  ma  poi trine  ;  je  m'enveloppai  de  mon  manteau,  et  n'arrivai 
qu'  a  six  heures  et  demie. 

"  Au  coup  de  sept  heures,  la  malade,  tres-attentive,  anim^e  par  sa 
gaiety  naturelle,  eprouva  deux  secousses  dans  les  bras  ;  et  dans  ce  court 
espace  de  temps,  ses  yeux  se  fermerent,  sa  physionomie  exprima  l'etonne- 
ment, ses  couleurs  disparurent,  et  la  catalepsie  la  transforma  en  statue  qui 
ecoute. 

"  J'avangai  mon  fauteuil  pour  etre  plus  pres  de  la  malade.  Sa  tete, 
toujours  tournee  du  meme  c6te,  ne  m'offrait  que  son  profil ;  je  developpai 
mon  manteau,  pour  mettre  le  haut  de  mon  corps  a  decouvert.  '  Eh ! 
depuis  quand,  M.  le  Docteur,  la  mode  est-elle  venue  de  porter  ses  lettres 
sur  la  poitrine  ? '  J'alongeai  le  bras  pour  atteindre  du  bout  du  doigt  le 
creux  de  I'estomac  de  ma  cataleptique  ;  et  en  reunissant  les  doigiis  de  mon 
autre  main,  je  lui  repondis  a  voix  ordinaire,  '  Madame,  vous  pourriez  vous 
tromper.'     '  Non,  je  suis  sure  de  ce  que  je  vois.     Vous  avez  sur  la  poitrine 

I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.       347 

une  lettre  qui  n'est  pas  plus  grande  que  cela — qu'on  Fapplique  alamesure.' 
En  proferant  ces  paroles,  elle  donna  une  autre  position  a  sa  tete,  qu'elle 
dirigea  de  mon  cot^  ;  elle  avan9a  les  deux  bras,  alongea  I'index  de  la  main 
gauche,  et  avec  celui  de  la  droite  qu'elle  posa  dessus,  determina  dans  la  plus 
grande  precision  la  place  qu'elle  devait  occuper.  Tous  les  regards  tom- 
berent  sur  moi.  J'^cartai  me  veste,  on  vit  la  lettre ;  I'ami  s'en  empara 
pour  I'appliquer  sur  le  doigt  qui  I'attendait ;  elle  ne  I'eut  pas  plutot  touclie, 
que  la  malade  ajouta,  '  Si  je  n^etais  pas  discrete,  je  pourrais  en  dire  le 
Gontenu  ;  mais  pour  prouver  que  je  Vai  hien  lue,  il  n^y  a  que  deux  lignes  et 
demie,  tres-ininutees.'  Apres  avoir  obtenu  la  permission  de  I'ouvrir, 
chacun  vit  que  le  billet  ne  renfermait  que  deux  lignes  et  demie,  dont  les 
caracteres  ^taient  menus.  L'ami  passant  tout-a-coup  du  plus  haut  degre 
d'etonnement  a  celui  de  la  plus  grande  defiance,  tira  de  sa  poclie  une 
bourse,  la  mit  sur  ma  poitrine,  croisa  ma  veste,  et  me  poussa  du  cote  de  la 
malade.  '  M.  le  Docteur,  ne  vous  genez  pas  ;  vous  avez,  dans  ce  monient, 
SUA'  la  poitrine,  lafiloche  de  M.  B.  ;  il  y  a  tant  de  louis  d'un  cote  et  d^ argent 
hlanc  de  V autre ;  mais  que  personne  ne  se  derange,  je  vais  dire  ce  que 
chacun  a  de  j^lus  remarquahle  dans  ses  poches.^  "    She  fulfilled  this  promise. 

Many  other  incidents  are  recorded  in  this  case.  Pdtdtin  himself 
regards  them  all  as  clairvoyant  in  character ;  but  the  hypothesis 
of  thought-transference  was  never  excluded  by  the  conditions  (see 
pp.  329,  335,  342). 

The  final  instance  is  another  extract  from  the  Mechanism  of  Man 
(Vol.  II.,  pp.  175-7).  This  case,  like  the  two  last  quoted,  was 
observed  during  a  considerable  period.     Serjeant  Cox  says  : — 

(369)  "  The  patient  was  my  sister,  a  girl  of  15,  of  hysterical  tempera- 
ment and  somewhat  deficient  in  intelligence.  I  was  6  years  her  senior.  I 
had  then  no  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism,  beyond  the  uses 
made  of  it  by  the  novelist  and  the  dramatist.  I  had  never  even  heard  of 
mesmerism.     I  was,  therefore,  a  perfectly  unprejudiced  witness. 

[The  writer  then  describes  cataleptic  fits,  from  which  his  sister 
sufiered,  and  which  used  to  pass  ofi",  leaving  her  in  a  semi-conscious,  trance- 
like state.] 

"  If,  as  she  lay  upon  the  sofa,  her  eyes  firmly  closed,  I  opened  a  book 
having  pictures  in  it,  and  sat  behind  her  in  a  position  where  it  was 
physically  impossible  that  she  could  see  what  I  was  doing,  and  I  looked  at 
one  of  the  pictures,  she  forthwith  exhibited,  in  pantomimic  action,  the 
posture  of  each  person  there  depicted.  It  was  perfectly  manifest  that  she 
had  the  image  of  the  engraving  impressed  upon  her  mind,  as  distinctly  as 
if  it  had  been  conveyed  to  it  by  the  sense  of  sight.  Nor  is  it  to  be 
explained  by  the  suggestion  that  the  engravings  were  familiar  to  her,  and 
that  she  guessed  upon  which  of  them  I  was  looking ;  for  it  was  the  same 
with  books  and  pictures  purposely  tried  which  she  had  never  seen.  But 
whether  that  impression  was  obtained  through  my  mind,  in  which  the 
image  also  was,  or  that  her  mind  perceived  the  picture  itself  directly, 
although  out  of  the  range  of  vision,  is  the  problem  to  be  solved.  If  the 
servant  who  attended  her,  obedient  to  her  signalled  desire,  went  to  her 

348  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

bedroom  on  the  floor  above  the  room  in  which  she  was  lying  entranced,  she 
expressed  the  most  obvious  signs  of  annoyance  if  the  servant  above  touched 
the  wrong  thing,  and  of  satisfaction  when  she  touched  the  right  one, 
precisely  as  if  the  search  had  been  made  in  the  same  room  and  she  saw 
what  was  going  on.  The  experiment  was  purposely  tried  many  times, 
with  various  tests,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  fact  upon  any  member  of 
the  family  who  witnessed  it. 

"  It  should  be  stated  that  when  a  part  of  the  picture  was  covered,  so 
that  I  could  see  but  a  part,  her  perceptions  were  limited  to  the  part  seen 
by  me.  I  was,  indeed,  unable  to  trace  any  power  of  perception  of  any- 
thing not  seen  by  the  person  with  whom  her  mind  was  at  the  time 
associated.  She  perceived  behind  her  so  much  of  the  picture  as  was  seen 
by  me  and  impressed  on  my  mind.  She  perceived  the  objects  seen  and 
touched  by  her  servant  upstairs  and  so  impressed  upon  her  mind. 

"  These  phenomena  continued  for  nearly  2  years,  so  that  there  was 
ample  opportunity  for  observing  them.  Imposture  was  out  of  the  question. 
Delusion  was  impossible.  The  occurrence  was  in  a  private  family,  and 
witnessed  by  none  but  themselves  and  the  attendant  physician,  whose 
sagacious  explanation  of  it  I  have  narrated."  [The  explanation  referred 
to  was  that  it  was  a  case  of  hysteria  "and  in  hysteria  people  can  do 
anything."] 

II.] 

CHAPTEE  II. 

IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES. 

§  1.  The  present  chapter  will  contain  instances  parallel  to  those 
given  in  Chapters  VI.  and  VII.  of  Vol.  I.,  arranged  as  far  as  possible 
in  the  same  order.  These  accounts,  and  the  dream-cases  of  the 
succeeding  chapter,  belong  (as  pointed  out  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  234)  to  the 
weakest  evidential  classes ;  and  I  should  have  been  glad  to  present 
them  in  a  more  condensed  shape.  But  I  found  on  making  the 
attempt,  that  such  force  as  they  possess,  and — what  it  is  equally  a 
duty  to  bring  out — their  evidential  defects,  were  apt  to  disappear 
when  their  form  was  altered. 

I  will  begin  with  cases  where  the  transference  of  an  idea  seems 
to  have  been  of  a  tolerably  definite  and  literal  kind. 

The  first  five  cases  (taken  in  connection  with  others)^  form  a 
group  which  strongly  suggests  that  a  fugitive  faculty  of  percipience 
may  be  developed  by  an  abnormal  condition  of  mind  and  body. 

(370)  From  Mrs.  Mainwaring,  Knowles,  Ardingly,  Hayward's  Heath. 

"March  14th,  1885. 

"  During  the  Mutiny,  I  was  staying  with  a  friend,  dreadfully  ill — too 
ill  to  be  told  what  was  going  on.  A  baby  was  born,  and  a  day  or  two 
after,  my  friend's  wife,  sitting  on  my  bed,  received  a  letter.  I  said, 
'  You  need  not  read  it,  I  know  every  word,'  and  I  told  her.  It  was  to  say 
she  must  not  drive  that  afternoon  to  the  Fort  as  usual,  for  some  men  were 
going  to  be  hanged  on  the  road.  1  had  not  heard  a  word  of  the  discovery 
of  the  plot,  or  of  the  plot,  or  of  what  was  to  be  ;  but  I  said  every  word 
in  the  letter,  and  I  remember  my  friend's  face  of  astonishment,  as  she 
said,  '  Why,  how  did  you  know  it  ? '     It  didn't  seem  at  all  odd  to  me. 

"  E.  L.  Mainwaring." 

Subsequently  Mrs.  Mainwaring  wrote  : — 

"June  18th,  1885. 

"  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  wrote  to  my  old  friend,  but  I 
have  not  had  a  line  in  reply.  I  do  not  know  what  can  have  become  of 
her,  as  it  would  have  been  very  little  trouble  to  say  if  she  recollected  the 

1  See  the  list  in  p.  162,  first  note,  as  well  as  the  cases  of  the  preceding  chapter. 

350  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

facts  I  told  you  of.     I  do  not  like  to  write  again,  and  I  am  sorry,  there- 
fore, I  cannot  add  her  testipaony." 

[In  cases  belonging  to  a  weak  class — •i.e.,  a  class  where  the  experience 
of  the  percipient  is  not  of  a  sujQ&ciently  strongly-marked  type  to  make  it 
violently  improbable  that  it  would  be  afterwards  imagined  or  modified  in 
memory — absence  of  corroboration  is  of  course  a  doubly  important  defect. 
This  remark  applies  to  a  good  many  of  the  examples  that  follow.] 

In  the  following  case,  again,  the  percipient  was  in  a  state  of 
serious  illness, 

(371)  From  Mr.  E.  Chapman,   (wood-carver)  Windsor  Hall,    Brighton. 

"1884. 

"My  father,  when  a  young  man,  entered  the  service  of  Sir  Charles 
Dymoke;  estate,  Scrivelsby  Hall,  Lincolnshire.  He  rose  rapidly  to 
become  almost  constant  companion."  Mr.  Chapman  then  describes  how 
his  father  on  one  occasion  saved  the  coachman  of  Sir  C.  Dymoke  from 
very  serious  danger  and  disgrace,  for  which  the  coachman  said  that  "  he 
would  thank  him  with  his  dying  breath." 

"Many  years  after  this  happened,  my  father  was  lying  very  ill;  so 
much  so  he  could  not  help  himself  in  any  way.  My  mother  had  just  made 
him  as  comfortable  as  possible,  (he  was  perfectly  helpless,)  and  she  had 
gone  downstairs  to  attend  to  her  household  affairs,  when  she  heard  a 
loud  knocking,  and  going  upstairs,  found  my  father  sitting  bolt  upright 
in  bed.  On  asking  him  how  he  came  in  that  position,  he  exclaimed, 
'  O  mother,'  (they  always  called  each  other  mother  and  father),  '  what  is 
the  time  1 '  (being  told),  '  What  is  it  to-day  1 '  (Thursday),  '  And  the  day  of 
the  month  ?     Now  write  it  all  down  at  once.' 

"  Being  asked  why  he  wished  it  to  be  written,  he  answered  '  So-and-so,' 
naming  the  aforesaid  coachman,  '  is  dead.'  '  How  do  you  know  that, 
father  1 '  '  Don't  ask  me.  You  will  have  a  letter  in  two  or  three  days.' 
On  the  third  day  from  that  time  the  letter  came  announcing  the  death  of 
the  said  coachman,  somewhere  in  Norfolk — so  that  he  and  my  father  must 
have  been  50  miles  apart  at  the  time.  My  father,  on  sinking  down  to  his 
former  helpless  condition,  exclaimed,  '  O  how  cold  it  was.'  We  never  could 
get  a  further  explanation  from  him,  but  for  a  long  time  after,  when 
anyone  offered  to  shake  hands  with  him  in  their  shirt-sleeves,  or  had  a 
light  coat  on,  he  would  shudder  and  sometimes  say,  '  How  cold.' 

"  Edward  Chapman." 

[The  last  words  suggest  some  sort  of  sensory  impression  made  on  the 
percipient ;  but  the  evidence  for  this  is  insufiicient.] 

In  the  next  example  the  percipient  was  not  only  ill,  but  closely- 
approaching  death. 

(372)  From  the  Metnoi/rs  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Buckminster,  D.D.,  and 
of  his  son,  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Buckminster,  by  Eliza  Buckminster  Lee,  Dr. 
Buckminster's  daughter,  (Boston,  U.S.A.,  1851),  pp.  464  and  476-7.  Both 
father  and  son  were  noted  preachers.  The  "Mrs.  Buckminster  "  mentioned 
was  the  father's  third  wife. 

"  On  Tuesday  evening,  June  9th,  he  (the  son)  expired 

When   his    [Dr.    Buckminster's]   wife    entered    his   [Dr.    Buckminster's] 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  GASES.  351 

chamber  the  next  morning  he  said  to  her,  with  perfect  composure,  '  My 
son  Joseph  is  dead.'  Mrs.  Buck  minster,  supposing  that  he  had  slept  and 
dreamed  that  his  son  was  dead,  although  no  news  of  his  illness  had 
reached  him,  assured  him  that  it  was  a  dream.  '  No,'  he  replied,  '  I  have 
not  slept  nor  dreamed  ;  he  is  dead  ! '  This  incident  is  related  as  received 
from  the  lips  of  her  to  whom  the  words  were  spoken,  and  there  can  be  no 
shadow  of  doubt  of  their  truth." 

The  particulars  of  dates,  &c.,  are  as  follows  : — 

Dr.  Joseph  Buckminster  was  living  at  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire, 
where  he  had  been  for  many  years  pastor  of  a  church.  On  the  1st  or 
2nd  of  June,  1812,  he  left  Portsmouth  intending  to  travel  for  his  health. 
He  reached  Peedsborough,  a  little  village,  on  the  9th  of  June,  and  died  there 
the  following  morning.  The  Rev.  J.  S.  Buckminster  (the  son)  was  living 
at  Boston  in  delicate  health.  He  was  taken  suddenly  ill  on  June  3,  and 
died  on  June  9th,  24  hours  before  the  death  of  his  father.  Dr.  Buckminster 
must  have  been  aware  of  his  son's  delicate  state  of  health,  but  no  one  seems 
to  have  expected  his  death  to  occur  when  it  did.  There  is  no  mention  of 
letters  being  sent  to  warn  Dr.  Buckminster,  nor  do  the  family  seem  to  have 
been  aware  of  the  son's  illness  until  after  the  father's  death.  Indeed  Dr. 
Buckminster  had  intended  to  visit  his  son  and  daughter  at  Boston,  on  his 
return  from  the  expedition  which  was  cut  short  by  his  own  death. 

The  next  example  exhibits  the  faculty  in  a  less  fugitive  form,  and 
in  connection  with  more  chronic  disease. 

(373)  From  the  Zoist,  Vol.  V.,  p.  311. 

Dr.  EUiotson  writes  : — "The  following  particulars  were  sent  to  me  by 
a  medical  gentleman,  who  has  already  contributed  with  his  name  to  the 
Zoist,  but  begs  his  name  not  to  be  disclosed  on  the  present  occasion, 
though  I  am  at  liberty  to  mention  it  to  any  person  privately. 

"  John  Elliotson." 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  some  personal  analogous  experience.  It  is  nearly 
nine  years  since  I  took  the  immediate  charge  of  a  gentleman  of  deranged 
intellect,  with  whom  I  reside  in  intimate  association  as  friend.  I  have 
often,  particularly  in  the  earlier  years  of  my  charge,  been  thoroughly 
puzzled  to  account  for  his  knowledge  of  circumstances,  perhaps  mere 
trifles,  with  which  we  did  not  wish  him  to  become  acquainted.  I  did  not 
deem  them  worthy  of  note  at  the  time,  that  is,  I  did  not  make  any 
memorandum  of  them,  and  would  not  now  like  to  trust  to  my  memory  as 
to  the  particulars,  nor  would  they  be  clearly  apprehended  without  entering 
into  tedious  prosy  details.  Suffice  it  that  long  before  I  read  the  Zoist,  I 
had  expressed  to  the  able  medical  gentleman  who  regularly  visits  us  an 
opinion  that  '  our  friend  seemed  to  know  things  as  if  a  spiritual  intelli- 
gence was  at  his  elbow  and  whispered  in  his  ear ' ;  '  formerly  they  would 
have  said  he  had  a  familiar  spirit ' ;  '  know,  he  certainly  does,  but  how  I 
can't  make  out ' ;  and  such  like  remarks,  showing  my  impression  at  the 
time. 

"  Our  patient's  mental  condition  has  greatly  improved,  and  I  do  not 
now  often  observe  these  curious  perceptions,  or  they  are  not  so  singular  or 

352  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

strongly  marked  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  their  being  matters  of 
accidental  coincidence. 

"  About  three  years  since,  for  a  few  evenings,  this  perceptive  power 
was  wonderfully  acute ;  he  was  in  an  argumentative  and  quarrelsome 
humour  at  the  time.  We  sat  together  by  the  fireside,  while  our  tea  was 
infusing,  seemingly  both  engaged  in  thought,  when  my  friend  exclaimed, 
'  I  don't  think  that,  sir ;  I  don't  think  that.     1  don't  believe  it.     I  say  I 

don't  believe  it.'     I  replied  quietly,  '  Don't  believe  what,  Mr. ?     I 

have  not  spoken  ;  what  do  you  allude  to  ? '  He  immediately,  without 
noticing  my  remark  that  I  had  not  spoken,  referred  to  the  precise  subject 
of  which  I  had  just  been  thinking,  and  began  to  contradict  me  respecting 
it.  Had  this  occurred  but  once,  it  might  be  said  I  was  '  unconsciously 
thinking  aloud,'  but  several  similar  manifestations  of  perceptive  power 
took  place  about  this  time  ;  and,  as  I  was  on  my  guard,  I  can  certainly 
state,  with  as  firm  a  conviction  of  the  truth  of  my  averment  as  any  one 
who  confides  in  his  senses  and  memory  can  feel,  that  I  did  not  speak  my 
thoughts,  but  that  there  was  a  clairvoyant  perception  of  them,  or  percep- 
tion in  some  unaccountable  manner. 

"  Another  instance  is  well-marked,  and  caused  us  much  interest  and 
wonder  at  the  time.     Four-and-a-half  years  since,  it  became  necessary  that 

M ,  our  house-steward  and  butler,  should  be  discharged.     As  he  was 

an  old  family  servant,  and  his  dismissal  might  irritate  our  patient,  it  was 
deemed  advisable  that  we  should  pay  a  visit  to  the  seaside  for  a  month,  and 
his  removal  be  efiected  during  our  absence.  Without  tedious  explanation 
I  cannot  convey  the  grounds  of  my  conviction,  but  surely  convinced  am  I 
that  our  poor  friend  neither  did  nor  could  know  anything  of  the  contem- 
plated change,  until  the  day  preceding  that  of  our  return  home.     He  was 

then  informed  by  letter  that   M had,  for  certain  reasons,  been  sent 

away,   and  a  very  comfortable,   respectable  elderly  person,   Mrs.  T , 

installed  in  his  place.  .  .  .  Next  morning  we  started  for  home,  a 
distance  of  60  miles.     Whilst  the  horses  were  being  changed   for  the  last 

stage,     ...     I   explained  that   Mrs.  T would  take  care  to  make 

us  comfortable  ;  that  she  was  a  very  respectable  person  ;  that  we  would  not 
consider  her  a  common  servant,  but  call  her  our  lady  housekeeper,  &c.,  &c., 
in  the  same  strain,  trying  to  impress  that  she  was  a  very  superior  person 
to  the  one  she  had  succeeded.  As  I  finished,  we  started.  My  friend  threw 
himself  back  in  the  carriage,   and  did  not  speak  for  8  or  10  minutes, 

and  then  said,  'I  don't  see  that,  Mr. '  (addressing  me),  '  I  don't  see 

that ;  I  don't  believe  it.     M kept  a  grocer's   shop '  (Mrs.  T kept 

a  grocer's  shop  before  she  came)  '  before  he  came ;  one  grocer  is  as  good  as 
another  ;  both  shopkeepers  ;  no  difierence  in  respectability,  I  think.'  This 
was  strictly  true  ;  and  the  inquiries  which  I  made  to  discover  how  our 
friend  knew  it  only  tended  to  puzzle  me,  as  the  attendants,  whose  casual 
remarks  might  have  been  overheard,  declared  that  they  did  not  know  Mrs. 

-  T was  a  grocer  until  I  named  it ;  and  other  sources  of  information 

there  were  not."^ 

1  While  this  chapter  is  passmg  through  the  press,  I  have  received,  from  Mr.  W.  H. 
Dayman,  of  E,edbridge,  Southampton,  an  account  of  Mrs.  Occomore,  a  bed-ridden  old  woman 
in  his  village,  blind  and  a  little  deaf,  and  living  a  completely  isolated  life,  who  seems  some- 
times to  have  an  abnormal  intuition  of  what  is  passing  in  other  minds.  From  among  other 
less  distinct  instances,  I  select  the  two  following.  I  should  premise  that  Mrs.  Occomore, 
her  daughter,  Mrs.  Tutcher,  and  a  grand-daughter,  are  the  only  occupants  of  the  house. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  353 

If  the  following  case  is  accurately  reported,  the  percipient  must 
again  have  been  in  a  very  abnormal  condition  ;  as  people  do  not 
usually  commit  suicide  because  their  fathers  die.  It  is  probable  that, 
though  both  deaths  occurred,  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence  may 
have  been  exaggerated ;  and  the  scene  on  ship-board  has  very  likely 
become,  in  recollection  and  transmission,  more  picturesque  and 
dramatic  than  it  reall}^  was. 

(374)  From  Mr.  Nicholas  Heald,  Bowdon-by-Altrincham,  Cheshire. 

"July  7th,  1884. 

"  The  late  John  Gisborne  [the  narrator's  brother-in-law],  who  was  an 
officer  in  the  naval  service  of  the  old  East  India  Company,  often  during 
his  life  told  the  following  incident  : — 

"  One  Saturday  evening,  when  it  was  the  sailors'  custom,  among  other 
toasts,  always  to  give  '  Sweethearts  and  Wives,'  followed  by  others,  and 
when  the  ship  *was  thousands  of  miles  distant  from  England,  one  of  his 
brother  officers  who  was  silent,  gloomy,  and  depressed,  was  urged  to  give 
his  toast,  but  made  no  reply.  At  length,  after  constant  pressure,  he  stood 
up  and  said,  looking  sternly  around  on  his  merry  companions,  '  Well,  fill 
your  glasses,'  and  followed  this  up  by  saying,  '  I  give  you  the  memory  of 
my  dead  father.'  Shocked  at  this,  his  brother  officers  hesitated,  when  he 
again  sternly  repeated,  '  I  give  you  the  memory  of  my  dead  father.'  He 
then  left  the  table,  went  upon  deck  and  was  seen  no  more,  having,  it  is 
supposed,  thrown  himself  overboard. 

"On  the  ship's  arrival  in  the  Thames,  Gisborne,  after  reporting  himself 
at  the  India  House,  went  to  the  house  of  the  young  man's  father,  some 
short  distance  in  the  suburbs,  to  communicate  to  the  family  his  death. 
He  asked  to  see  the  father,  and  on  the  servant  saying  he  was  dead,  found, 
in  answer  to  his  inquiries,  that  he  died  the  very  same  day  that  his  son 
drowned  himself.  "  Nicholas  Heald." 

Mr.  Gisborne's  daughter  (Loventor  House,  Berry  Pomeroy,  Totnes) 
writes  : — 

"  I  recollect  very  well,  and  have  often  repeated  it  to  others,  what  dear 
papa  related,  which  was  that  at  the  mess  table  the  officer  suddenly  drank 
to  his  just  deceased  father's  memory,  and  immediately  left  and  threw  him- 
self overboard,  and  on  arrival  in  England,  papa  found  the  date  and  hour 
exactly  corresponded  with  the  father's  death.  I  don't  know  the  ship  or 
officer's  name." 

(1)  "  On  the  22nd  March,  Mrs.  F.,  who  had  been  some  time  undecided  as  to  giving 
notice  to  leave  the  house  they  all  live  in,  vi'hich  she  rents,  finally  decided  to  do  so,  and 
sent  Mrs.  T.  [her  daughter]  to  Winchester  to  give  notice  to  the  proper  authorities.  On 
that  day  Mrs.  O.,  who  of  course  knew  nothing  about  it,  began  declaring  that  they 
were  all  going  to  leave  the  house  and  that  she  must  be  packing  up  her  things.  So  the 
whole  of  the  day  she  was  busy  with  her  hands  fumbling  about  the  bed-clothes,  fancying 
she  was  packing  things.     For  two  days  she  kept  on  like  this. 

(2)  "  On  March  26th,  Mrs.  F.  went  out  into  her  yard  to  clean  up  some  straw  which 
was  littered  about  there.  She  was  called  off  her  work  to  attend  to  her  mother  (Mrs.  O. ). 
Upon  getting  into  her  room,  Mrs.  O.  at  once  began  telling  her  to  sweep  up  the  straw 
which  she  declared  was  strewn  all  over  the  room,  and  no  assurances  to  the  contrary  would 
convince  her  that  there  was  no  straw  there,  till  finally,  to  satisfy  her,  Mrs.  F.  got  the 
broom  and  pretended  to  sweep  it  up. 

VOL.    II.  2    A 

354  •  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Mr.  Grisborne's  widow  says  that  she  thinks  the  young  officer's  name  was 
Hunter. 

[Such  an  incident  as  the  suicide  would  probably  be  recorded  in  the  log, 
and  a  laborious  search  has  therefore  been  made  at  the  India  Office,  in  order 
to  ascertain  the  name  of  the  ship  ;  but  without  success.] 

(375)  From  Miss  Butler,  Priestown,  Co.  Meath. 

December  18th,  1885. 

Miss  Butler  begins  by  describing  her  unusually  strong  friendship  with 
a  Madame  H.,  head  of  a  finishing  establishment  for  young  ladies  at  F.,  in 
Germany,  with  whom  she  lived  for  some  time.  Mrs.  H.  having  gone  to 
Paris  for  a  few  weeks,  to  engage  a  French  governess.  Miss  Butler  spent 
this  period  at  her  own  home,  and  the  greater  part  of  it  in  bed,  as  she  was 
still  suffering  from  the  effects  of  an  illness.  Here  she  had  a  vivid  sense 
of  accompanying  Madame  H.  on  her  search  through  the  different  convents 
of  Paris.  She  finally  insisted  on  returning  to  F.,  being  sure  that  Madame 
H.  would  be  back  before  the  appointed  time,  which  proved  to  be  the  case. 

"  I  told  her  how  I  had  followed  all  her  movements ;  I  described  the 
different  convents  ;  described  the  room  in  the  Sacre  Cceur,  I  think  it  was,  in 
which  she  saw  the  young  woman  she  actually  engaged ;  described  the  Mother 
Superior ;  told  her  the  young  lady's  name,  Mdlle.  F.,  which  of  course 
I  had  never  heard,  and  told  her  the  terms  on  which  she  had  engaged 
her.  She  was  astonished.  There  was  a  kind  of  superior  housekeeper,  a 
Frau  M.,  who  was  much  in  Madame's  confidence ;  she  was  present  while  I 
told  my  tale  and  Madame  said  it  was  all  true.  I  told  her  I  remembered 
many  other  things,  the  particulars  of  which  have  escaped  my  memory,  as 
they  had  no  interest  for  me  save  as  they  concerned  my  Madame.  Amongst 
others,  I  described  her  meeting  with  a  French  gentleman  who  used  to  visit 
her  at  F.,  and  mentioned  the  subject  of  conversation.  Mademoiselle  came 
over  with  her ;  she  made  me  describe  to  her  the  room  at  the  convent,  the 
conversation,  &c.,  and  the  poor  girl  said  she  was  frightened  of  me,  she  was 
sure  1  was  not  all  right,  and  I  don't  think  she  ever  got  over  the  feeling  of 
constraint,  shall  I  call  it,  to  the  end  of  our  connection. 

"Isabella  Butler." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Butler  writes  : — 

"  It  must  have  been  in  the  year  1849  or  1850.  I  have  never  had  any 
further  experience — at  least  nothing  of  the  same  kind  that  I  could  detail 
in  as  circumstantial  a  manner."  She  has  long  lost  sight  of  Madame  H.  ; 
and  Mdlle.  F.  and  Frau  M.  are  dead. 

In  the  next  few  cases  the  percipient  was  apparently  in  a 
perfectly  normal  state. 

(376)  The  following  incident  is  recorded  in  All  the  Year  Round  for  May 
6,  1859,  by  a  physician  who  does  not  give  his  name,  but  who  says  that  it  was 
described  to  him  as  a  personal  experience  by  Prof.  Wilson,  of  Edinburgh. 
The  physician  himself  writes  sensibly,  and  much  of  his  paper  is  devoted  to 
explaining  the  purely  subjective  nature  of  many  of  the  hallucinations 
which  have  been  marvelled  at  as  "  apparitions." 

Prof.  Wilson  (as  reported)  begins  by  describing  a  picnic  party,  to 
which  he  went  with  some  friends  in  Ireland  : — 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  355 

"The  thick  of  the  dinner  being  over,  we  strolled  out,  or  lolled,  in  that 
pleasant  prolongation  of  a  repast,  which  is  the  best  part  of  a  thing  of  that 
sort ;  but  as  we  knew  that,  according  to  the  programme,  our  time  was 
limited,  on  account  of  some  other  spots  which  we  had  yet  to  visit,  I  was 
deputed  to  see,  by  a  reference  to  my  watch,  that  we  did  not  overstay  the 
hour.  Accordingly,  I  had  placed  my  watch — a  fine  old  silver  warming- 
pan,  the  paternal  gift — on  a  low  fragment  of  ruin  that  was  just  opposite  to 
me,  and  in  the  intervals  of  conversation  I  looked  at  it,  though  indeed  not 
quite  so  often  as  at  the  face  of  Mary  M.  Suddenly — I  perfectly  remem- 
ber the  hands  were  pointing  to  twenty  minutes  past  two  in  the  sunshine — 
the  watch  arrested  miy  gaze,  while  a  remarkable  feeling  passed  over  me. 
I  said  to  myself,  but  to  this  hour  I  know  not  why,  '  At  this  exact  time  my 
brother  R.  is  dying  in  India.'  The  sensation  came  and  went  with  the 
rapidity  of  those  unaccountable  impressions 

'  Which  make  the  present,  while  the  flash  doth  last, 
Seem  but  the  semblance  of  an  unknown  past. ' 

Yet,  so  much  was  I  struck  with  the  incident,  that  taking  out  my  pocket- 
book,  saying  nothing,  however,  to  anybody  as  to  why  I  did  so,  I  noted 
down  the  day  and  hour  of  this  strange  visitation  of  thought.  I  did  not 
exactly  place  confidence  in  the  prevision,  yet  I  could  not  shake  off  an 
unpleasant  feeling  about  it.  At  length  the  incident  became  merged  in  the 
frequent  repetition  to  myself  that  it  was  '  all  fudge,'  and  I  might  call  it 
forgotten  (there  was  plenty  of  time  for  this,  for  it  was  not  in  the  days  of 
steam),  when  a  letter  from  India  brought  our  family  the  startling  intelli- 
gence that  my  brother  had  actually  died  there  on  the  very  day  when  I  had 
made  the  entry  in  my  pocket-book,  and  at  an  hour  which,  by  allowance 
for  latitude  [no  dou,bt  a  slip  of  the  writer's  own],  corresponded  exactly  with 
that  marked  by  my  watch  when  I  had  my  eyes  on  it.  Our  correspondent 
also  informed  us  that  ray  brother  had,  in  his  last  moments,  mentioned  me."^ 

1  The  following  narrative  is  very  similar,  and  in  detail  also  closely  resembles  case  72.  I 
do  not  give  it  an  evidential  number,  as  it  is  not  certain  that  the  witness  was  cognisant  of 
the  percipient's  impression  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived.  Mrs.  Harper,  of 
Gotham,  Bristol,  narrates  : —  "1884. 

"  My  father-in-law,  Mr.  A.  Harper,  told  me  that  at  one  time  of  his  life  he  was  in  the 
Spanish  wool  trade,  and  that  it  necessitated  one  of  the  partners  residing  in  Spain,  and  in 
consequence  his  cousin,  Mr.  James  B.,  went  to  Spain.  Before  leaving  Bristol  he  became 
engaged  to  a  Miss  B.  Some  time  after  his  departure,  Miss  B.  was  at  a  large  party,  seated 
at  the  piano,  when  she  suddenly  withdrew  her  hands,  sobbing  hysterically,  saying, 
'  James  B.  is  dead  ;  James  B.  is  dead. '  She  could  not  explain  how  she  knew  it,  but  had 
a  most  convincing  consciousness  that  it  was  so,  and  he  really  had  died  in  Spain  at  the 
time  of  Miss  B.'s  distress.  "S.  J.  Harper." 

Mrs.  Hellier,  of  Headingly  College,  Leeds,  writes  on  April  7,  1885  : — 

"  My  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Harper,  of  Bristol,  has  forwarded  to  me  your  letter  of  the 
4th,  asking  for  further  information  regarding  an  incident  related  to  her  by  my  late  father, 
Mr.  A.  Harper.  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  inform  you  on  the  point  you  name,  viz.,  my 
father  being  present  when  it  occurred.  The  probability  is  that  he  was  not,  but  that  he 
heard  it  next  day  from  those  who  were.  He  was  then  in  the  employ  of  his  uncle,  Mr.  B. 
(a  Spanish  wool  merchant),  and  consequently  in  daily  intercourse  wdth  him  and  his  other 
sons,  all  of  whom  are  dead. 

"  I  well  remember  hearing  my  father  and  mother  talk  of  the  incident  in  question,  but 
being  a  mere  child  at  the  time  (7  or  8  years  of  age)  did  not  take  much  interest  in  the 
conversation.  "Jane  E.  Hellier." 

I  will  add  a  parallel  case  in  which  the  incidents  are  so  simple  that  even  a  third-hand 
account  is  of  some  evidential  force. 

Mrs.  Michael  Smith,  of  27,  Perham  Road,  S.  W.,  narrates  :—  "  June,  1884. 

"  My  grandfather,  Mr.  John  Syme,  of  Ryedale,  Dumfriesshire,  the  friend  and  patron 
VOL.    II.  2   A    2 

356  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(377)  From  Mrs.  Gierke,  Clifton  Lodge,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Nor- 
wood, S.E.,  the  narrator  of  case  242.  u  ]S[ovember  18th,  1885. 

"My  two  boys  returned  to  school  on  the  18th  September.  They 
intended  to  try  the  route  via  Swindon  and  Andover,  on  account  of  the 
trains  being  more  convenient,  instead  of  going  by  Paddington. 

"  They  left  home  about  3  o'clock,  and  I  heard  no  more  about  them 
until  the  Monday  following,  but  I  was  very  uneasy  all  the  evening,  and 
about  9.30  I  remarked  to  my  daughter,  'I  am  perfectly  convinced  that 
those  boys  have  never  got  to  Marlborough  ;  I  am  quite  sure  they  are 
walking  about  the  roads  this  minute.'  She  said,  '  What  nonsense  !  of 
course  they  are  all  right.  Gus '  (the  youngest),  '  is  so  sensible,  he  never 
would  make  a  mistake.'  I  said,  '  I  don't  know,  but  I  feel  quite  sure  they 
have  missed  one  train  after  another,  and  have  never  got  there.'  On  the 
Monday  following  I  heard  from  them.  They  had  missed  the  train  at 
Waterloo,  had  then  gone  to  Paddington,  missed  the  special  there,  and  had 
gone  by  a  later,  which,  by  a  curious  combination  of  circumstances,  had 
landed  them  at  Woodhorough.  They  got  out,  mistaking  it  in  the  dark  for 
Marlborough,  and  only  found  out  their  mistake  too  late,  and  had  walked 
11  miles  on  a  road  unknown  to  them,  and  got  to  their  school  at  1  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  They  managed  to  scale  the  walls,  and  found  a  class-room 
open,  where  they  got  what  sleep  they  could — very  little,    u  ^   Clerke." 

Miss  Clerke  corroborates  as  follows  : —         "November  30th   1885. 

"  I  remember  distinctly,  when  my  brothers  returned  to  school,  that  my 
mother  remarked  several  times  to  me  that  she  felt  quite  sure  that  they 
were  walking  about  the  roads  somewhere.  We  found  out  afterwards  that 
it  was  just  as  my  mother  said,  and,  at  the  time  she  spoke,  they  actually 
were  walking  to  Marlborough.  a  jj_  y.  B.  Cleeke." 

[In  describing  the  incident  to  me,  Mrs.  Clerke,  who  is  the  reverse 
of  a  nervous  or  fanciful  person,  especially  dwelt  on  her  impression  that 
her  sons  were  wandering  on  roads.  This  particular  idea  seems  a  far  less 
likely  one  to  have  been  purely  subjectively  caused,  through  maternal 
apprehension,  than  that  of  some  calamity,  such  as  a  railway  accident. 
It  was  also  a  very  unlikely  thing  to  occur  in  reality.  At  the  same  time, 
it  may  be  conceived  that  the  mention  of  the  projected  novel  route  had  led 
to  some  passing  remark — such  as,  "  Don't  blunder  about  your  trains,  or 
you'll  have  to  walk,"  and  that  the  odd  impression  had  its  origin  in  this 
forgotten  suggestion.] 

(378)  Mr.  J.  W.  Stillman,  the  well-known  American  writer,  gives  the 

of  Burns,  was  a  remarkable  man.  Two  of  his  sons  were  abroad,  one  in  the  army  in  India, 
one  commanding  a  sliip  of  his  own  in  the  merchant  navy,  at  the  West  Indies.  One  day 
my  grandfather  entered  the  room  where  my  aunt,  his  only  daughter,  was  sitting,  and  said 
to  her,  '  Harriet,  your  brother  John  is  dead.'  Afterwards  it  was  proved  that  he  had  died 
on  that  day  in  India.  My  aunt  noted  the  day,  and  six  months  later  came  the  news  of  his 
death.  Another  time  he  came  to  his  daughter,  and,  in  exactly  the  same  way ,^  stood  m  the 
doorway,  delivered  his  speech,  and  went  away— '  Harriet,  Richard  is  dead,'— and  subse- 
sequently  word  came  that  he  had  died  on  that  day. 

"This  was  told  to  me  by  an  uncle,  since  dead.  I  have  no  means  of  corroborating 
this,  though  I  know  it  to  be  literally  true,  as  my  grandfather  died  more  than  50  years  ago, 
and  was  then  past  70.  I  never  saw  him.  He  was  with  Burns,  crossing  a  moor  m  a 
thunderstorm,  when  Burns  was  inspired  by  '  Scots  wha  hae. '  "  o     •  i 

The  Harriet  of  the  narrative  (Mrs.  Smith's  aunt)  is  also  dead.  Mrs.  Smith  never 
heard  how  the  warning  was  given  ;  she  believes  that  her  grandfather  never  told  anyone. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  357 

following  account  of  his  experiences  in  connection  with  two  friends.  Of 
the  first  he  says  : — 

"  She  had  never  been  subject  to  visions  or  hallucinations,  had  no 
tendency  to  hysteria,  and  was  gifted  with  great  common-sense  in  practical 
matters.  She  was  the  wife  of  a  physician,  and  mother  of  several 
children.  But  she  had  a  psychological  power  which  is  in  my  experience 
unique,  and  between  herself  and  any  very  intimate  friend  there  was  a 
mental  sympathy  almost  amounting  on  her  part  to  clairvoyance.  Between 
her  and  myself  there  was  especially  a  sympathy  so  distinct  that  I  could 
generally,  by  excluding  physical  objects  of  attention,  perceive  her  mental, 
sometimes  physical,  condition,  and  she  on  her  part  had  generally  a  pre- 
sentiment of  my  visits. 

"  She  passed  a  great  deal  of  her  time  at  the  house  of  a  married 
daughter  in  Brooklyn,  my  residence  being  in  New  York.  On  one  occasion, 
while  staying  at  her  daughter's,  she  was  visited  by  what  the  Germans  call 
the  Doppel-gdnger  of  myself.  Entering  the  room  where  she  sat  sewing 
at  a  window,  looking  out  on  the  street,  at  an  hour  in  the  afternoon  when 
she  had  no  reason  to  expect  a  visit,  she  remarked  at  once,  '  I  knew  you 
were  coming  for  I  saw  you  pass  the  window  10  minutes  ago.  You  were 
looking  just  as  you  now  look,  and  dressed  in  precisely  the  same  manner. 
I  waited  for  you  to  ring  the  bell,  and  when  after  some  time  no  ring  came, 
I  said  to  myself  "  Stillman  is  coming." '  I  had  not  previously  passed  the 
house,  but  came  straight  from  the  ferry,  and  when  I  came  in  sight,  came 
from  the  same  direction  as  the  Doppel-gdnger,  between  which  and  myself, 
she  said,  there  was  no  visible  difference.  [This,  however,  may  have  been 
a  case  of  mistaken  identity.] 

"  If  she  ever  desired  to  see  me  urgently,  I  felt  the  impression  of  her 
mind  so  strongly  that  I  invariably,  when  not  urgently  occupied,  went  to 
her  at  once.  Some  years  after  I  knew  her,  she  went  to  California,  in  the 
hope  of  throwing  ofi"  the  pulmonary  disease  of  which  she  died,  and  during 
her  absence  we  corresponded  regularly.  One  day,  during  the  voyage,  I 
had  a  sudden  and  vivid  impression  that  she  was  dying,  and  noted  it  in 
my  diary.  The  impression  passed  away,  however,  and  was  not  renewed. 
On  getting  the  letter  which  announced  her  safe  arrival  I  found  recorded 
that,  on  the  day  I  had  noted  in  my  diary,  she  had  been  completely  over- 
come by  the  intense  heat,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  steamer's  fortunate 
arrival  the  same  day  at  Acapulco,  where  ice  and  lemon  were  instantly 
procured  from  the  shore,  in  her  own  opinion  and  that  of  the  surgeon  she 
would  probably  have  died  that  day. 

"  One  day,  while  working  quietly  in  my  studio  at  New  York,  not  know- 
ing where  she  was,  nor  having  had  any  recent  communication  from  her,  I 
had  stiddenly  a  vivid  perception  that  she  wanted  the  help  of  Sara  [her 
daughter].  I  crossed  the  ferry  at  once  to  Brooklyn,  took  a  carriage  and 
drove  to  her  daughter's  house,  saying  to  her  that  her  mother  wanted  her,  saw 
her  in  the  carriage,  and  on  her  way,  and  then  went  back  to  my  studio. 
The  next  day  I  learned  that  [Mrs.  M.  had  been  suddenly  forced  to  partici- 
pate in  a  most  distressing  and  agitating]  scene,  during  which  her  daughter 
arrived,  finding  her  mother  completely  prostrated  and  fainting,  and  carried 
her  off  to  her  own  house. 

"  One  of  the  most  intimate  mutual  friends  of  Mrs.  M.  and  myself  was  a 
Mrs.  B.,  wife  of  a  well-known  American  sculptor.     Between  Mrs.  B.  and 

358  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

myself  there  was  a  mental  sympathy,  even  stronger  than  that  with 
Mrs.  M.,  though  difi'erent  in  kind.  Like  Mrs.  M.,  she  was  much  my 
senior,  and  like  her,  too,  was  a  victim  to  an  over-developed  nervous 
system,  though  rarely  ill — of  uncommon  intellectual  gifts,  and  the  friend 
of  many  of  the  best  minds  of  that  day  in  America.  But,  like  Socrates, 
she  heard  a  voice  which  warned,  counselled,  and  answered  her  at  all 
times,  and  whose  admonitions  neither  she  nor  her  husband  ever  hesi- 
tated to  obey.  She  had  Zschokke's  gift  ^  of  seeing  events  in  the  past  life 
of  people  with  whom  she  was  en  rapport,  and  I  remember  W.  C.  Bryant 
saying  one  day  that  she  had  told  him  of  events  of  the  gravest  importance 
in  his  life,  known  to  no  one  then  living  but  himself.  In  her  normal  con- 
dition she  read  the  thoughts  of  any  one  with  whom  she  was  intimate,  and 
answered  mental  questions,  or  described  mental  conditions  with  no  hesita- 
tion, and  the  greatest  fulness  and  clearness.  Her  gifts  were  carefully 
limited  in  their  manifestation,  or  as  subjects  of  conversation,  to  her  circle 
of  intimate  friends,  with  occasional  admission  of  one  of  their  friends  with 
a  genuine  interest  in  this  class  of  mental  phenomena ;  nor  should  I  now 
make  them  the  subject  of  any  relation,  but  that  she  is  dead.  There  are 
still  many  of  her  circle  living  who  can  attest  the  truth  of  what  I  say  ;  but 
she  would  never  submit  to  any  examination  by  sceptical  inquirers,  and 
never  made  any  attempt  to  induce  belief  in  her  powers,  of  which,  no  more, 
did  she  attempt  explanation.  Her  '  occult '  powers  varied  greatly,  and 
sometimes  seemed  entirely  suspended,  as  well  as  affected  by  the  influence 
of  people  around  her.  Between  her  and  myself  there  was  always  a 
complete  confidence,  and  I  found  it  quite  impossible  to  think  in  her 
presence  and  keep  my  thoughts  from  her ;  and  her  feeling  for  me  was  that 
of  an  elder  sister,  so  that  I  willingly  submitted  my  mind  to  her  scrutiny ; 
nor  did  I  ever  find  her  perceptions  unfounded,  although,  in  some  cases,  it 
was  several  years  before  I  found  out  the  basis  of  her  impressions. 

"W.  J.  Stillman." 

(379)  From  a  lady  who  desires  that  names  may  not  be  mentioned, 
owing  to  the  painful  nature  of  one  of  the  facts  recorded. 

"Sept.  1st,  1886. 

"  In  the  spring  of  this  year,  while  my  mother  was  suffering  from  a 
serious  illness,  a  gentleman  in  the  neighbourhood  committed  suicide  by 
shooting  himself  in  the  mouth,  between  4  and  5  in  the  morning,  dying 
about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the 
occurrence,  [while  the  narrator  was  nursing  her,]  she  mentioned  him 
several  times,  saying  he  '  kept  flitting  about  her  room  and  did  so  bother 
her,  she  wished  he  would  go.'  After  this  she  addressed  the  supposed 
intruder,  saying,  '  Go  !  I  wish  you  would  go.  Why  do  you  come  here  ?  I 
don't  want  you.'  He  was  a  man  with  whom  she  was  on  terms  of  civility, 
but  had  never  cordially  liked,  as  she  considered  he  had  done  her  an 
injury.      This  led  her  to    add,  '  I  forgive  you,   I  hope  God  will.      Go  ! ' 

[This  incident  alone  could  have   no  weight,  as  in   her  illness    Mrs.  

had  seemed  to  see  other  absent  persons  in  her  room.]  She  did  not  allude 
to  him  again,  and  was  not  quite  so  restless.  The  doctor  called  at  half- 
past  10  ;  and  when  I  went  back  to  her  room  after  he  had  gone,  I  found  her 
in  a  very   excited  condition.      She   said,   '  Dr.    S.  has  made  me  feel  so 

1  For  Zschokke's  description  of  his  gift,  see  Eine  Selbstschau,  (Aarau,  1843)  pp.  227-9. 

11.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  359 

strange — I  never  had  such  peculiar  sensations  before  ;  I  wish  he  had  never 
come.^  My  head  is  so  bad,  I  don't  know  how  it  is,  perhaps  I  shall  be  able 
to  explain  it  all  to  you  when  I  am  well.' 

"  She  was  very  restless  all  the  morning.  At  1  o'clock  my  sister  came 
to  relieve  me,  and  tried  to  fan  her  to  sleep.  Her  efforts  were  unavailing, 
and  at  last  my  mother  seized  her  hands,  saying,  '  It  is  of  no  use,  you  cannot 
send  me  to  sleep  while  my  head  is  so  queer.'  '  How  queer  V  'I  don't 
know,  but  ever  since  Dr.  S.  came  and  sat  by  me,  I  have  felt  so  strange. 
When  he  took  my  hand,  there  was  a  shot,  a  pistol  went  off,  and  then  all 
was  confusion.^  But  I  do  not  see  the  blood  ;  was  there  any  blood  ? '  After 
which  she  added,  '  I  dare  say  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  more  about  it  when 
my  head  is  better  ;  I  cannot  explain  how  I  feel  now,  I  have  never  been 
like  this  before — it  is  my  brain.'  Later  on  in  the  afternoon,  she  mentioned 
a  friend,  saying,  '  Poor  T.  has  to  be  shot  in  the  back  so  often  before  I  can 
be  well.  I  am  very  sorry ;  it  is  a  shame  to  shoot  a  nice  fellow  like  him, 
but  they  say  "  Shoot  him,  shoot  him."  '  And  again,  complaining  of  her 
head,  she  said,  '  What  is  all  this  murdering  %  I  have  never  been  amongst 
shooting  and  murdering,  have  I  ?  There  is  a  pistol — it  went  off  first  when 
Dr.  S  came,  and  it  has  been  going  on  through  my  head  ever  since,  and  the 
bed  is  covered  with  them.'  She  continued  in  this  excited  state  all  the 
afternoon,  and  could  not  be  persuaded  to  sleep.  My  sister  went  to  the 
doctor,  and  he  sent  something  which  soothed  her  a  little  ;  but  she  did  not 
seem  to  be  really  herself  again  until  the  next  morning. 

"  We  heard  from  the  doctor  that  he  had  been  to  the  house  where  the 
suicide  had  been  committed,  before  calling  to  see  my  mother,  and  that  he 
had  held  the  pistol  in  the  same  hand  with  which  he  touched  her.  She  was 
not  told  of  the  gentleman's  death  until  3  weeks  afterwards ;  but  she  fre- 
quently alluded  to  Mr. [the  deceased]  and  his  family — which  appeared 

strange,  as  they  were  persons  with  whom  she  held  very  little  intercourse. 
She  once  remarked  that  they  had  quite  haunted  her  ever  since  that  day 
she  was  so  ill  and  heard  the  pistols.  Her  friend  T.,  whom  she  had 
imagined  to  be  shot,  had  heard  early  of  the  suicide,  and  been  engaged  in 
communicating  the  fact  to  relatives  of  the  deceased  gentleman." 

Dr.  S.  confirmed  these  facts  to  me,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned.     Mrs. 

had  never  had  any  connection  with  pistols  or  shooting.     The  suicide 

was  known  of  in  the  house  before  the   doctor's  visit ;  but  it  was  clear  to 

me  from  Miss 's  viva  voce  description  that  no  remarks  on  the  subject 

could  have  penetrated  to  Mrs. 's  ears  ;  and,  moreover,  she  was  quite 

enough  herself  to  understand  the  news,  and  comment  on  it,  had  it  come  to 
her  knowledge  in  a  normal  way. 

(380)  From  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bryce,  The  Manse,  Moffat.  To  my  great 
disappointment,  I  am  obliged  to  give  a  second-hand  version  of  this  case. 

1  His  visits,  as  I  learnt  both  from  himself  and  from  the  narrator,  had  always,  except 
on  this  occasion,  been  grateful  and  soothing  to  the  patient ;  and  he  had  regarded  her  as 
convalescent. 

2  An  account  of  this  occurrence,  which  was  sent  without  authority  to  a  London  news- 
paper, affords  a  good  instance  of  the  way  in  which  a  story  may  get  rounded  off  and 
beautified  in  transmission.  After  exclaiming  that  a  gun  had  gone  off,  the  lady  is  made  to 
look  wildly  round,  and  to  cry  "  Oh,  I  see  Mr.  B.  floating  about  the  room," — the  vision  of 
the  deceased  being  thus  brought  into  connection  with  the  sound  of  the  shot,  through  the 
juxtaposition  of  events  which  were  separated  by  several  hours  ;  and  the  fact  of  the  other 
visual  hallucinations  being  of  course  omitted. 

360  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

On  Oct.  1,  1886,  Mr.  Bryce  gave  me  viva  voce  a  detailed  account,  which 
I  omitted  to  commit  at  once  to  paper,  relying  on  his  promise  to  write  it 
out  and  send  it  to  me  immediately.  Not  ha-\dng  received  it  (Oct.  12), 
I  am  reduced  to  giving  my  present  recollections,  the  accuracy  of  which, 
however,  so  far  as  they  go,  I  think  I  can  guarantee. 

Some  years  ago,  when  Mr.  Bryce  was  a  student  at  Edinburgh  Univer- 
sity, he  was  called  away  for  a  time  to  attend  an  elder  brother  who 
was  much  attached  to  him,  and  who  was  seriously  ill.  His  brother's 
health  seemed  to  be  improving ;  and  there  being  no  immediate  anxiety, 
Mr.  Bryce  left  him  (I  think  at  Lockerbie)  in  order  to  take  part  in  an 
evening  debate  at  Edinburgh.  He  was  delivering  the  speech  which  he 
had  prepared,  and  was  completely  intent  on  the  matter  in  hand,  when  he 
was  suddenly  arrested  by  what,  from  his  description,  I  should  judge  to 
have  been  an  extremely  vivid  "mind's  eye"  vision,  bordering  on  halluci- 
nation, and  representing  his  brother.  The  room  and  everything  in  it 
seemed  blotted  out,  and  the  single  image  of  his  brother  seemed  to  absorb 
his  whole  consciousness.  He  says  that  he  has  never  had  such  an 
experience,  or  anything  in  the  least  resembling  it,  on  any  other  occasion. 
I  do  not  recollect  how  far  his  peculiar  condition  excited  the  attention  of 
his  companions  •  but  he  himself  felt  at  once  convinced  that  his  brother 
had  died,  noted  the  time,  and,  when  he  returned  to  his  lodgings,  mentioned 
his  conviction  to  the  housekeeper,  Mrs.  Fenton.  (He  promised  to  trace 
out  Mrs.  Fenton,  who,  he  is  certain,  would  corroborate  him  on  this  point.) 
His  brother  died,  as  he  learnt  next  day,  at  the  exact  time — he  believes  to 
the  very  minute — of  his  own  experience. 

[Mr.  Bryce  is  sure  that  he  was  not  appreciably  anxious  about  his 
brother's  condition,  and  he  was  certainly  not  thinking  of  him  at  the 
moment.  Still,  as  he  had  just  left  him,  after  being  constantly  with  him 
for  some  time,  and  with  a  mind  influenced  perhaps  more  than  he  himself 
knew  by  his  recent  cares  and  duties,  it  would  be  difficult  to  argue 
that  his  experience  was  telepathic,  rather  than  purely  subjective,  but  for 
the  alleged  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  And  we  may  fairly  suppose, 
I  think,  that  the  coincidence  was  at  any  rate  a  very  close  one  ;  since  Mr. 
Bryce  was  not  led  to  consider  the  time  of  his  experience  by  learning  the 
fact  of  the  death,  but  noted  the  time  of  his  experience  under  a  con- 
viction that  the  death  had  at  that  moment  taken  place,  and  was  specially 
interested  in  finding  out,  next  day,  whether  his  conviction  had  been 
justified.] 

(381)  From  Miss  Caulfield,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  N.W. 

"December  8th,  1883. 

"  Many  years  ago,  when  staying  with  my  father  at  Beckford  House, 
Bath,  I  awoke  one  morning  painfully  impressed  by  the  idea  that  some- 
thing was  amiss  at  my  sister's  (in  Ireland) ;  could  not  guess  what  it  was 
— whether  illness,  danger,  or  accident.  So  being  exceedingly  uneasy,  and 
convinced  that  something  had  happened,  I  wrote  at  once  to  inquire  whether 
all  were  well.  A  letter  from  her  crossed  mine,  telling  me  that  she  had 
had  a  great  alarm,  and  had  been  in  danger  on  that  night ;  for  that  a  beam 
of  wood — connected  with  the  nursery  fireplace  and  the  floor — had  become 
ignited,  and  unknown  to  anyone  had  been  smouldering  for  some  hours  ; 
and  had  it  proceeded  any  further  unseen,  they  might  not  have  been  able  to 
save  the   house,  nor  perhaps   even  themselves.     The  house  being  in  the 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  361 

country,  at  a  considerable  distance  from  any  other  dwelling,  a  fire,  at  night 
more  especially,  would  have  proved  calamitous  in  the  extreme. 

"  Sophia  F.  A.  Caulpield." 

After  writing  to  her  sister  on  the  subject.  Miss  Caulfield  adds  : — 

"  My  sister  remembers  the  incident,  but  has  only  a  faint  recollection  of 
my  letter  having  crossed  hers." 

[Asked  if  this  was  a  unique  experience,  or  whether  she  had  had  similar 
impressions  which  had  not  corresponded  with  reality,  Miss  C.  replied  that 
she  had  had  only  one  similar  experience,  and  that  there  her  impression  was 
correct.  (This  other  experience  was  a  presentiment,  and  has  no  relation 
to  the  above.)  And  though  impressions  of  the  sort  which  are  not  stamped 
by  a  coincidence  may  easily  fade  from  the  memory,  it  may  be  assumed 
that  a  person  who  remembers  none  has  not  experienced  many  so  strong  as 
to  have  prompted  her  to  write  a  letter.] 

The  following  are  instances  where  the  impression  seems  to  have 
been  of  a  decidedly  pictorial  kind,  as  in  the  scene-cases  at  the  close 
of  Chap.  yi.  in  the  preceding  volume.  The  account  is  unfortunately 
anonymous,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  its  hona  fides. 
The  mental  condition  of  the  percipient  recalls  case  373. 

(382  and  383)  From  the  Zoist,  Vol.  V.,  p.  30,  sent  by  Mr.  Clark, 
Surgeon,  of  York  Place,  Kingsland  Road,  E.,  who  had  received  it  from 
a  lady  of  his  acquaintance.  "  July  Hth    1846. 

"In  the  years  1841-2,  my  dear  respected  father  was  frequently 
attacked  with  mental  derangement,  originating  greatly,  I  believe,  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  unfortunate  circumstances  in  which  I,  his  beloved 
daughter,  was  placed,  owing  to  the  sudden  death  of  my  husband. 

"  The  various  scenes  of  mental  delusion  I  was  called  to  witness  are 
not  uncommon  to  gentlemen  of  your  profession ;  I  therefore  pass  them 
over  simply  to  relate  his  strange  knowledge  of  events. 

"  My  attention  was  first  excited  by  the  following  incident.  So  soon 
as  the  meat  for  dinner  was  brought  from  the  butcher's,  of  which  he  could 
have  no  possible  knowledge,  being  confined  to  his  bed,  and  out  of  reach  of 
either  seeing  or  hearing,  he  exclaimed  (pointing  to  the  floor  underneath, 
which  was  the  room  it  was  in),  '  What  a  nice  rump-steak  ;  I  will  have 
some.'  Struck  with  his  manner,  and  also  knowing  that  it  was  not  our  in- 
tended dinner,  I  replied,  '  No,  father,  there  is  no  rump-steak ;  we  are  going 
to  have  mutton-chops  ' ;  he  went  into  a  great  passion,  declared  that  there 
was  rump-steak,  that  he  could  see  it,  and  described  the  dish.  I  went 
downstairs,  and  to  my  utter  astonishment  beheld  it  as  he  related. 

"  In  the  morning,  without  making  known  my  intention,  I  took  a 
basket  and  went  into  the  garden,  to  cut  some  cabbages  and  gather  straw- 
berries. The  garden  being  at  the  side  of  the  house,  where  there  was  no 
window  to  look  into  it,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  see  me  by  ordinary 
vision.  However,  he  turned  to  my  sister,  saying,  'That  basket  into  which 
Betsey  is  putting  the  cabbages  and  strawberries  had  better  be  moved 
out  of  the  sun,  or  the  fruit  will  be  spoiled ;  tell  her  she  is  not  gathering 
strawberries  from  the  best  bed,  she  had  better  go  to  the  other.'  When  I 
was  told  of  it,  I  was  completely  puzzled.  During  the  time  of  my  visit, 
wherever  I  went,  whatever  I  did  or  thought  of,  was  open  to  his  view. 

362  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  My  sister  afterwards  informed  me  that  his  medical  attendant  lent 
her  some  books  for  her  perusal.  One  morning  my  father  said  to  her, 
'  The  doctor  sends  his  respects,  and  will  be  obliged  for  the  books.'  Sup- 
posing some  message  had  been  sent,  my  sister  replied,  '  Very  well.'  In 
the  course  of  a  short  time  after,  the  doctor's  boy  arrived  with  his  master's 
respects  and  request  for  the  books.  On  inquiry,  she  found  no  previous 
message  had  been  sent,  nor  inquiry  made  for  them.  We  have  both  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  he  must  mentally  have  travelled  to  the  doctor's  and 
heard  the  message ;  I  should  think  the  distance  three-quarters  of  a  mile. 

"  Another  time  he  said  to  my  sister,  '  There  is  a  handsome  young  man 
and  an  old  woman,  coming  by  the  coach  this  afternoon  to  see  me.'  Sure 
enough,  to  her  surprise,  when  the  coach  arrived,  it  brought  my  brother 
and  a  nurse  for  my  father.  No  one  had  any  knowledge  of  my  brother's 
coming,  or  of  his  bringing  a  nurse  with  him.  The  distance  from  whence 
they  came  was  1 1  miles.  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  circum- 
stance that  here  he  did  not  recognise  the  parties,  though  both  were  well- 
known  to  him ;  calling  my  brother  a  young  man  and  the  nurse  an  old 
woman,  instead  of  mentioning  their  names. 

"When  in  his  senses,  he  knew  nothing  of  what  had  transpired,  and 
had  no  recollection  of  my  coming  to  see  him.  He  wasted  away  to  a  skeleton 
and  died,  midsummer,  1842,  in  the  64th  year  of  his  age.  He  never,  until 
the  time  stated,  had  any  mental  derangement,  though  he  certainly  was 
for  years  very  nervous.  At  the  time,  I  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,  so 
cannot  give  his  development.  I  know  he  was  a  talented  and  very 
active  man,  a  kind  and  affectionate  father. 

"  My  second  case,  that  of  my  eldest  sister,  though  in  priority  of  time 
before  my  father,  is  yet  not  so  interesting.  She  was  in  a  bad  state  of 
health  some  years — I  suppose  what  might  be  called  nervous.  The  circum- 
stances I  am  about  to  relate  occurred  during  a  severe  illness,  in  which 
mental  derangement  took  place.  At  one  time  she  would  take  no  food, 
at  another  eat  most  voraciously.  One  day  we  had  ribs  of  beef  for  dinner. 
How  it  came  to  her  knowledge,  I  could  never  ascertain,  but  so  it  did, 
and  she  insisted  on  having  some  for  her  dinner.  I  gave  her  some ;  she 
wanted  more.  Fearing  to  make  her  worse  I  would  not  give  it  her ;  she 
declared  she  should  have  it,  but  soon  after  went  to  sleep.  I  went  quietly 
downstairs,  took  the  meat  out  of  the  kitchen,  carried  it  down  through  the 
beer-cellar  into  the  wine-cellar,  covered  it  over  with  a  tub,  put  a  weight  on 
it,  went  up  and  found  her  just  as  I  left  her.  During  the  night, 
through  fatigue,  I  fell  asleep,  and  was  awakend  by  her  calling  to  me. 
What  was  my  astonishment  when  I  beheld  her  sitting  in  bed  with  a 
slice  of  this  l3eef  cut  the  whole  length  of  the  ribs,  devouring  it  like  a 
savage.  I  asked  her  how  she  obtained  it,  and  she  positively  declared  that 
she  fetched  it  herself  while  I  slept ;  that  while  lying  in  bed  she  saw  me 
go  down,  take  the  meat,  and  she  described  every  particular.  I  believe 
she  never  left  her  bed  when  I  hid  it ;  and  had  she,  there  were  three  doors 
which  I  closed  after  me,  and  I  must  have  seen  her.  When  she  recovered 
she  knew  nothing  about  it,  but  on  a  relapse  told  me  all  the  circumstances 
again,  laughing  heartily  at  the  trick  she  had  played  on  me." 

Here,  again,  it  will  be  seen,  the  clairvoyance  recorded  does  not 
pass  beyond  the  telepathic  type  where  what  is  perceived  is  within 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  363 

the  view  or  knowledge  of  persons  connected  with  the  percipient.^ 
(Vol.  I,  pp.  266,  378-9.) 

§  2.  The  next  two  examples  are  parallel  to  the  arrival  cases  in 
Chap.  VI.  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  252-4). 

(384)  From  Mrs.  Gibbes,  Alverton  House,  Croydon  Road,  S.E. 

"  September,  1884. 

"  My  son  was  in  Mexico  and  I  had  no  reason  to  expect  his  return.  He 
had  been  absent  for  four  years. 

"In  December,  1883,  an  impression  came  upon  me  that  he  would  be 
soon  home,  and  I  could  not  get  rid  of  it.  My  daughters  laughed  at  me, 
but  my  feeling  of  it  grew  so  strong  that  I  determined  to  prepare  a  room 
for  him.  I  began  quietly  one  evening,  and  got  up  early  next  morning  to 
clean  out  a  study  for  him  myself,  not  letting  the  others  know  that  I  was 
doing  it.  Whilst  I  was  on  the  step,  dusting  the  birdcases,  a  telegram 
arrived  to  say  he  would  be  home  in  the  evening. 

"He  had  had  an  attack  of  yellow  fever,  and  had  come  by  sea  to  New 
York.  His  uncle  persuaded  him  not  to  telegraph  from  there,  but  to  come 
as  a  surprise. 

"  I  have  had  impressions  of  misfortunes,  and  have  noted  down  the 
dates,  but  nothing  has  happened.  "  Kate  Gibbes." 

Mr.  Gibbes  writes  : — 

"  I  find  the  statements  correct  as  far  as  my  memory  is  concerned. 

"  W.  R.  Gibbes  (M.R.C.S.E.,  &c.) " 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Gibbes  stated  that  her  son's  letters  had  con- 
tained no  hint  of  his  return,  which  would  not  have  occurred  but  for  his 
attack  of  yellow  fever.  Her  daughters  bore  witness  to  her  state  of  excited 
expectation. 

[Here  the  impression  at  any  rate  produced  a  definite  act  of  a  very 
unlikely  kind.  The  final  sentence  in  Mrs.  Gibbes's  account  of  course 
detracts  somewhat  from  the  force  of  the  coincidence  ;  but,  though  I  am 
bound  to  print  that  sentence,  she  herself  (in  August,  1886)  doubts  its 
correctness,  and  cannot  recall  to  what  it  referred.] 

1  The  same  remark  applies  to  an  interesting  case  in  tlie  Correspondence  de  Mme.  la 
Duchesse  d'Orleans  (Paris,  1857),  Vol,  i.,  pp.  112-3,  to  which  our  attention  was  called  by 
M.  GuiUaume  Guizot.  ^  « Versailles,  2  mars,  1709. 

"II  y  a  dix  ans  qu'un  gentilhomme  frangais,  qui  a  ^t^  page  du  mar^chal  d'Humiferes, 
et  qui  a  epous^  une  de  mes  dam.es  d'atour,  amena  avec  lui  un  sauvage  [du  Canada] 
en  France.  Un  jour  qu'on  ^tait  k  table,  le  sauvage  se  mit  k  pleurer  et  h  faire  des 
grimaces.  Longueil  (ainsi  s'appelait  le  gentilhomme)  lui  demanda  ce  qu'il  avait,  et  s'il 
souffrait.  Le  sauvage  ne  iit  que  pleurer  plus  amferement.  Longueil  insistant  vivement, 
le  sauvage  lui  dit  :  '  Ne  me  force  pas  h,  le  dire,  car  c'est  toi  que  cela  concerne,  et  non  pas 
moi.'  _  Presse  plus  que  jamais,  il  finit  par  dire  :  '  J'ai  vu  par  la  fenetre  que  ton  frere  ^tait 
assassin^  en  tel  endroit  du  Canada'  par  telle  personne  qu'il  lui  nomma.  Longueil  se  mit 
k  rire,  et  lui  dit :  '  Tu  es  devenu  f ou. '  Le  sauvage  r^pondit :  '  Je  ne  suis  point  du  tout 
fou;  mets  par  ecrit  ce  que  je  t'annonce,  et  tu  verras  si  je  me  trompe.'  Longueil  ecrivit, 
et  six  mqis  aprfes,  quand  les  navires  du  Canada  arrivferent,  il  apprit  que  la  mort  de  son 
frfere  ^tait  arrivee  au  moment  exact  et  h.  I'endroit  oti  le  sauvage  I'avait  vu  en  I'air  psiv  la 
fenetre.     C'est  une  histoire  trfes  vraie." 

We  cannot  be  sure  that  this  incident  was  told  to  the  Duchess  d'Orl^ans  by  any  one 
who  was  cognisant  of  the  experience  before  the  news  which  confirmed  it  arrived.  But 
supposing  the  report  to  be  substantially  correct,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  percipient 
was  acquainted  with  the  man  whose  death  he  seemed  to  behold ;  though  it  is  still  probable 
that  the  presence  with  him  at  the  time  of  that  man's  brother  was  to  some  extent  a 
condition  of  the  percipience,  as  in  cases  242  and  355  above.  I  have  drawn  attention 
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  156-7)  to  the  suspicious  exactitude  of  coincidence  which  characterises 
second  and  third-hand  narratives  of  this  type. 

364  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  next  narrative,  though  worth  quoting,  can  hardly  receive  an 
evidential  number ;  for  its  incidents  could  only  be  attributed  to 
thought-transference  by  assuming — what  is  not  proved — that  the 
visits  were  already  intended,  at  the  time  that  the  impressions  were 
felt ;  and,  moreover,  in  the  absence  of  an  accurate  written  record, 
every  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  liability  in  such  matters  to 
note  successes  and  not  failures. 

From  Mr.  Robert  Gribson,  Mulgrave  Cottage,  Limerick. 

"January  18th,  1884. 

"  Scores  of  times,  when  I  would  be  going  down  to  my  office,  after 
breakfast,  my  wife  [who  was  in  delicate  health,  and  is  since  deceased] 
would  say  to  me,  '  Miss  So-and-so  or  Mrs.  So-and-so  will  be  here  to-day ; 
don't  let  them  come  up  to  the  house ;  say  I  am  not  able  to  see  them ' ;  or 
'  So-and-so  will  be  here  to-day,  let  them  come  in.' 

"I  used  to  laugh,  and  say,  'Humbug,  how  do  you  know  they  are 
coming  ! '  and  she  would  reply,  '  I  feel  that  they  are,  and  be  sure  you  leave 
word  with  some  of  the  men  if  you  are  going  out.' 

"  With  only  one  exception  was  she  ever  wrong,  to  my  memory ;  that 
was  one  Friday.  She  said,  '  The  Miss  Mercers  are  coming  to-day.'  I 
happened  to  be  in  my  office  the  whole  day ;  and  they  did  not  come ;  so 
at  length  I  laughed,  and  said,  '  Well,  my  love,  you  were  wrong,  the  Miss 
Mercers  did  not  come.'  She  asked  me,  '  Are  you  sure  % '  '  Quite,'  I 
replied,  '  I  never  left  the  place  all  day.'  '  Well,'  she  said,  '  I  am  positive 
they  were  coming.'  Of  course  I  laughed  at  her,  and  told  her  it  was  stupid 
to  be  positive  about  what  was  not  so. 

"  You  may  guess  my  surprise  if  you  can,  when  on  the  next  Sunday, 
coming  out  of  church.  Miss  Mercer  came  up  to  me,  and  said,  '  Please  tell 
Mrs.  Gibson  that  Nan '  (her  sister)  '  and  I  were  coming  to  see  her  on 
Friday,  when  Nan  remembered  a  book  she  had  promised  to  take  Mrs, 
Gibson  and  ran  back  for  it,  leaving  me  walking  up  and  down  the  street. 
I  waited  fully  20  minutes,  and  then  went  in  and  found  Miss  Nan  sitting 
by  the  fire,  cloakless  and  hatless,  with  a  book  in  her  hand.  She  could  not 
find  the  book  she  was  looking  for,  and  after  looking  for  it  for  ever  so  long, 
thought  I  had  gone  on,  and  that  there  would  be  no  chance  of  overtakmg 
me,  so  took  off  her  hat  and  cloak,  and  sat  down  to  read.' " 

To  these  I  may  add  two  more  cases  in  which  the  chief  feature 
is  a  sense  of  someone's  proximity,  but  in  which  the  fact  of  that 
proximity  was  already  known  to  a  third  person,  who  may  have  been 
the  agent. 

(385)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  W.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be 
published.  u  1884. 

"In  the  autumn  of  1860,  I  was  staying  in  London  with  my  husband 
[since  deceased]  for  a  short  time,  and  one  Saturday  evening  was  alone  in 
my  bedroom  dressing  to  go  to  the  opera,  when  suddenly  something  seemed 
to  say  to  me,  '  Shut  and  lock  your  door,  there  is  a  madman  in  the  house.' 
So  strong  was    this    impression    that  I  searclied  all   over  the  room  and 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  365 

locked  the  door.  I  dressed  hurriedly,  rushed  downstairs,  and  told  my 
husband,  who  was  very  much  amused,  and  laughed  at  me  !  The  next  even- 
ing (Sunday)  we  sent  the  servant  on  a  little  errand  for  us ;  she  was  about 
an  hour  away.  When  she  came  in,  she  said  she  was  very  sorry  she  had 
been  so  long,  but  she  had  to  wait  for  the  mistress's  return,  who  had  been 
taking  her  husband  back  to  the  lunatic  asylum,  for  when  he  was  not 
violent  she  had  him  home  from  Saturday  until  Sunday  night. 

"  My  husband  was  very  much  startled,  and  we  left  the  next  day." 

Mr.  Podmore  says  : — 

"  In  conversation,  Mrs.  W.  explained  that  she  had  imagined  her  land- 
lady to  be  a  widow,  and  had  not  had  the  least  suspicion  of  the  true  state 
of  the  case.  She  told  me  that  she  has  on  one  or  two  other  occasions  had 
strong  impressions  of  this  kind,  but  never  so  marked  as  in  this  instance. 
She  had  no  recollection  of  any  impression  of  the  kind  which  had  not  'come 
true.' " 

(386)  From  Mr.  James  Cowley,  who  wrote  from  32,  Langton  Street, 
Cathay,  Bristol.  "January  8th,  1884. 

"  Some  two  years  ago,  in  the  Hereford  Cathedral,  at  an  evening- 
service,  I  became  oppressed  with  the  feeling  that  a  certain  person  (I  must 
'  withhold  the  name),  whose  contact  would  have  been  most  painful  to  me, 
must  necessarily  have  been  near  me.  I  had  not  seen  that  person  for  5 
years.  More  than  once  I  turned  my  head  to  take  a  look  round.  But  there 
was  no  sign  of  him.  Next  morning  I  learned  that  he  had  been  in  Here- 
ford on  the  day  before  (Saturday),  and  that  a  person  sitting  next  to  me,  in 
the  cathedral,  on  my  left-hand,  had  been  for  some  hours  in  his  company." 

Asked  if  he  mentioned  the  incident  at  the  time,  and  if  he  could  refer 
me  to  the  person  who  was  sitting  near  him,  Mr.  Cowley  replies  that : 

"  The  Hereford  Cathedral  affair  did  not  (from  the  nature  of  the  cir- 
cumstances rendering  the  sensation  so  distressing)  admit  of  my  referring 
to  it.  It  was  only  when  asked  by  a  tradesman,  brother-in-law  of  the 
person  whose  fancied  proximity  distressed  me,  '  Did  you  see  So-and-so  on 
Saturday  1 '  that  to  him  alone  I  mentioned  the  occurrence." 

§  3.  I  will  insert  next  a  curious  little  group  of  cases  in  which  it 
is  difficult  or  impossible  to  assign  the  impression  to  the  "agency  "  of 
any  particular  person,  and  which  recall  the  Greek  notion  of  <fn[>-ri — 
the  rumour  which  spreads  from  some  unknown  source,  and  far 
outstrips  all  known  means  of  transport.^     The  type  is  one  where  the 

1  Something  of  this  sort  has  been  occasionally  observed  in  outbreaks  of  religious 
hysteria.  For  example,  the  Rev.  P.  Barrow  Matthews,  rector  of  San  Salvador,  writes  as 
follows  of  a  recent  case  in  the  Bahamas  : — 

"  When  the  girls  came  to  [after  their  fits],  they  gave  very  detailed  accounts  of  the 
visions  they  had  seen.  A  great  deal  of  these  visions  was,  of  course,  nonsense,  but  one 
thing  was  remarkable — they  spoke  of  people  doing  things  many  miles  away  from  the  place. 
Upon  inquiry  it  was  found  in  some  cases  that  what  they  had  seen  corresponded  exactly 
Avith  the  events.  One  most  remarkable  feature  in  this  outbreak  was  that  it  was  not  con- 
fined to  one  spot.  Almost  simultaneously  in  every  settlement  on  the  island  (the  island  is 
42  miles  long  and  12  broad  in  places)  similar  outbreaks  occurred.  G-irls  living  at  distances 
of  5  or  10  miles  from  the  scene  of  the  '  shouting  meetings, '  as  they  were  called,  would  be 
seized.  Being  seized  by  a  kind  of  frenzy,  they  would  run,  as  if  by  inspiration,  to  the 
spot  where  the  rest  were  assembled,  no  matter  how  far. " 

366  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

scope  of  accident  is  so  hard  to  estimate,  and  which  is  so  distinct  from 
that  of  the  remainder  of  our  telepathic  evidence,  that  I  quote  most  of 
the  accounts  without  evidential  numbers.  They  may  possibly  serve 
to  elicit  further  instances. 

Mr.  E..  Stuart  Poole  writes  from  the  British  Museum  on  Aug.  1, 1884  : — 

"  My  recollection  of  the  story  of  my  brother's  impression  of  the  Duke 
of  Cambridge's  death  was  this.  He  was  sitting  with  one  or  more  of  his 
relations  one  evening,  and  suddenly  took  out  his  watch,  and  said,  '  Note 
the  time,  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  is  dead.'  The  time  proved  to  be  correct. 
My  brother  had  no  acquaintance  with  the  Duke,  and  no  reason  for  any 
interest  in  him.  He  was  a  very  clear-headed  official  man,  without  what 
is  called  superstition.  "  Reginald  Stuart  Poole." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Poole  writes  :  — 

"I  do  not  recollect  being  present  when  my  brother  had  the  monition, 
but  my  recollection  is  that  he  told  me  himself,  or  that  it  was  told  me  by 
someone  present.     It  made  a  strong  impression  on  me  at  the  time." 

We  find  from  the  Times  that  the  late  Duke  of  Cambridge  died,  some- 
what suddenly,  at  9.40  p.m.,  on  July  9th,  1850;  but  bulletins  as  to  his 
health  had  been  published  in  the  last  week  of  June,  and  on  the  day  before 
his  death. 

Though  the  case  is  undoubtedly  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the 
person  who  died  was  old,  and  in  failing  health,  such  a  coincidence — 
when  backed  by  others  of  the  same  type — seems  to  claim  attention  ; 
at  any  rate  till  one  hears  of  a  good  many  cases  where  similarly  posi- 
tive statements  have  been  made  by  clear-headed  practical  men,  as  to 
similar  matters  of  which  they  could  know  nothing  by  normal  means, 
and  have  proved  incorrect.  Yet  to  suppose  a  direct  telepathic  transfer 
from  the  dying  man  to  a  total  stranger  would  seem  extravagant ;  and 
hardly  less  extravagant  may  seem  the  only  alternative  that  it  is  easy 
to  imagine — namely,  that  the  "  agency "  was  of  a  collective  kind, 
and  consisted  in  a  certain  shock  of  interest  in  the  minds  of  a  con- 
siderable number  of  persons  who  had  already  heard  the  news, 

I  give  three  more  examples — of  which  two  are  properly  "  border- 
land "  cases,  but  are  best  presented  in  this  connection.  It  is  a 
rather  quaint  accident  that  the  honour  of  occasioning  such  psychical 
storms  should  (so  far  as  these  instances  go)  seem  reserved  for  persons 
of  ducal  or  imperial  rank. 

Mr.  Gervase  Marson,  of  Birk  Crag,  Higher  Broughton,  Manchester, 
writes,  on  Dec.  6,  1883  : — 

"  On  the  morning  of  December  6th,  1879,  I  suddenly  awoke,  and  sat 
up  in  the  bed,  as  if  startled.  To  my  great  surprise  I  found  myself  utter- 
ing the  words,  '  Portland,  Portland.'     The  next  day  I  read  in  the  papers 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  367 

of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  which  I  believe  took  place  about 
the  time  when  I  was  involuntarily  uttering  his  name. 

"  I  cannot  account  for  this  experience  at  all.  No  conversation 
respecting  the  Duke  of  Portland  had  taken  place  the  evening  previously  ; 
I  did  not  know  he  was  ill ;  never  saw  him  in  my  life  ;  had  never  been  at 
any  of  his  residences  ;  and,  in  fact,  neither  knew  nor  cared  anything 
about  him.  1  was  not  dreaming  just  before  I  awoke,  but  believe  I  was 
sleeping,  as  is  ray  wont,  quite  soundly.  "  G.  Marson." 

[The  Daily  Telegraph  of  Dec.  8,  1879,  states  that  the  late  Duke  of 
Portland  died  at  5  a.ra.  on  Saturday,  Dec.  6.] 

Mr.  G.  W.  Waddington,  of  26,  Bagdale,  Whitby,  Yorkshire,  writes,  on 
Aug.  5,  1884  :— 

"  When  a  passenger  on  board  the  '  Satellite  '  in  the  Pacific,  on  a  voyage 
from  San  Francisco  to  Callao,  Peru,  I  was  awoke  about  4  a.m.  of  the  14th 
of  September,  1852,  by  the  noise  of  one  who  jumped  on  deck  and  called 
out  at  the  cabin  door,  'The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  dead.'  The  occurrence 
was  the  subject  of  conversation  at  breakfast,  and  being  noted,  it  was 
inquired  if  such  an  event  had  taken  place  from  the  captain  of  the  port, 
before  any  communication  took  place  with  any  other  person  coming  on 
board.  I  had  seen  the  Duke  but  once,  and  that  on  the  occasion  of  an 
inspection  of  troops  before  the  Horse  Guards,  on  the  Queen's  anniversary 
coronation  day  of  June  28th,  1842.  "  G.  W.  Waddington." 

Mr.  Waddington  admits  that  the  noise  of  the  jumping  may  have  been 
a  real  sound,  but  says,  as  regards  the  voice,  "  I  do  not  think  anyone  on 
board  could  have  invented  any  such  means  of  trying  one's  credulity." 

[The  Duke  of  Wellington  died  on  September  14th,  1852,  at  3.15  p.m. 
Consequently,  if  the  hour  of  the  experience  is  correctly  remembered,  it 
preceded  the  death  by  at  least  3  hours,  and  probably  by  more.] 

Madame  NovikofF  writes,  on  Aug.  7,  1884  : — 

"  A  friend  of  mine,  whose  accuracy  seems  to  me  undeniable,  gave  me 
the  following  account : — 

"  On  the  night  when  the  late  Empress  Maria  Alexandrovna  died,  my 
friend  awoke  her  husband,  exclaiming,  '  The  Empress  is  dead.'  It  was  not 
a  dream,  but  a  spontaneous  impression.  She  added  that  she  had  had 
several  experiences  of  a  similar  kind.  Her  husband  disliking  this  subject 
I  do  not  wish  to  apply  to  her  on  the  matter.  "  O.   K." 

[We  find  from  the  Times  that  the  Empress  died  at  8  a.m.,  on  June  3, 
1880.     She  had  been  known  for  some  months  to  be  in  a  critical  state.] 

Comparable  with  these  cases^  are  the  two  following,  which,  if  more 

1  The  following  narrative  is  too  amusing  not  to  be  quoted.  It  is  from  A  Memoir  of 
G.  Mayne  Young,  tvith  Extracts  from  his  Son's  Journal,  by  the  Rev.  Julian  C.  Young, 
pp.  337-340.  After  describing  his  liability,  when  over-fatigued,  to  persistent  inward 
impressions  of  words,  amounting  perhaps  to  a  low  stage  of  auditory  hallucination,  Mr. 
Young  continues : — 

' '  On  waking  on  Monday  night  last,  I  was  possessed,  as  it  were,  by  four  mystic 
words,  each  of  one  syllable,  conveying  no  more  idea  to  my  mind  than  if  they  were 
gibberish,  and  yet  delivered  with  as  much  solemnity  of  tone,  deliberation  of  manner,  and 
pertinacity  of  sequence,  as  if  they  were  meant  to  convey  to  me  some  momentous  intima- 
tion.    They  were  all  the   more  exciting   that  they  were   unintelligible,  and  apparently 

368  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

than  accidental  coincidences,  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact 
that  the  idea  was  "  in  the  air."  The  hypothesis  is  here,  perhaps,  a 
little  less  difficult,  as  the  original  impression  was  of  a  sort  which 
affected  numbers  vividly  and  simultaneously. 

(387)  From  Mr.  J.  A.  Edmonds,  16,  Waterloo  Road  South, 
Wolverhampton.  "1883. 

"  At  a  period  during  the  formation  of  the  Thames  Tunnel,  the  date  of 
which  I  cannot  recall  without  reference  to  the  daily  papers,  my  brother, 
Cyrus  Read  Edmonds,  was  head-master  of  the  Leicestershire  Proprietary 
Grammar  School,  at  Leicester,  and  lived  almost  close  to  the  school 
buildings. 

"  On  one  occasion,  when  he  was  in  bed,  his  wife  was  awoke  (I  think,  at 
somewhere  about  5  or  6  ^  in  the  morning)  by  a  loud  exclamation  of  terror 
from  my  brother.  She  inquired  the  cause,  and  he,  in  a  state  of  horror,  said 
that  he  had  seen  the  Thames  Tunnel  break  through,  that  the  workmen 
rushed  to  the  staircases  or  ladders,  the  means  of  exit,  but  one  poor  fellow 
(less  active  than  the  others  who  escaped)  was  overtaken  by  the  rush  of 
water  and  perished.  My  brother  was  in  a  state  of  tremor  and  distress, 
such  as  a  humane  man  might  be  supposed  to  sujQfer  as  a  witness  of  such  a 
scene.  He  begged  his  wife  not  to  sleep,  but  to  converse  until  it  should  be 
time  to  rise.  She  urged  that  it  was  but  a  dream,  and  that  the  effect  would 
pass  off  if  he  could  get  a  little  sleep.  '  A  dream,'  he  said,  'it  is  no  dream. 
I  distinctly  saw  all  that  I  have  described.' 

"  On  the  day  in  the  early  morning  of  which  this  vision  occurred,  my 

could  not  serve  any  ostensible  purpose.  I  could  not  exclude  them  by  putting  cotton  wool 
in  my  ears,  for  they  came  from  within  and  not  from  without.  To  try  to  supplant  them  by 
encouraging  a  fresh  train  of  ideas  was  hopeless:  my  will  and  my  reason  were  alike 
subservient  to  some  irresistible  occult  force.  The  words  which  beset  me  were  'dowd,' 
'swell,'  'pull,'  'court,'  and  they  were  separated  as  I  have  written  them  into  mono- 
syllables, and' were  repeated  with  an  incisive  distinctness  and  monotonous  precision  which 
was  quite  maddening.  I  sat  up  in  my  bed  and  struck  a  light  to  make  sure  that  I  was 
awake  and  not  dreaming.  All  the  while  were  reiterated,  as  if  in  a  circle,  the  same 
wild  words  :  'Dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court.'  I  lay  down  again  and  put  out  my  candle, 
'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court.'  I  turned  on  my  left  side,  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,' 
'court.''  I  turned  on  my  right,  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'i^ull,'  'court.'  I  endeavoured  as  a 
means' of  dispersing  these  evil  spirits— for  they  began  to  assume  the  importance  of  spirits 
in  my  heated  brain — to  count  sheep  over  a  stile,  but  still  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court,' 
rang  in  my  ears  and  reverberated  through  my  mind." 

After  many  vain  efforts,  Mr.  Young  at  last  fell  asleep.  He  mentioned  his  experience 
next  day  to  his  father  and  to  some  friends,  the  Misses  Smith.  On  the  following 
Thursday,  he  says  :— 

"I  walked  into  Folthorp's  Library  to  read  the  papers;  and,  as  usual,  ran  my  eye 
down  the  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  in  the  Times.  As  I  came  to  the  obituary  the 
following  notice  caught  my  sight  :— 

'"On  Tuesday  night,  November  11th,  John  E.  Dowdswell,  of  Pull  Court,  Tewkes- 
bury.' \W&  have  verified  this  notice  in  the  Times  for  November  13th,  1851.  The  name 
is  Dowdeswell.]  So  that  probably,  on  the  self-same  night,  at  the  very  time  when  this 
gentleman's  name  and  residence  were  so  unaccountably  and  painfully  present  to  my 
mind  he  was  actually  dying."  [This  last  expression  is  misleading,  as  the  death  did  not 
take  place  till  the  following  night.] 

Mr.  Myers  says  : — 

"  I  have  siDoken  to  the  Misses  Smith  as  to  this  occurrence,  which  they  distinctly 
remember.  They  were  slightly  acquainted  with  Mr.  Dowdeswell,  but  Mr.  Young  was  a 
stranger  to  him  entirely." 

1  I  don't  assert  this. — J.  A.  E. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  369 

brother  and  his  wife  were  engaged  to  a  dinner-party  at  the  house  of  a 
gentleman,  whose  name,  I.  believe,  was  Whetstone.  Before  they  left  the 
drawing-room  for  the  dining-room,  his  host  said  to  my  brother,  '  Have 
you  heard  the  sad  news  from  London  ? '  He  said,  '  No,  what  is  it  ? '  He 
replied,  '  The  Thames  Tunnel  has  broken  in.  All  the  people  in  the  works 
escaped,  except  one  poor  fellow  who  was  overwhelmed.'  ^  My  brother 
thought  that  his  wife  might  have  told  their  host,  and  that  they  would 
rally  him  out  of  his  depression.  But  on  looking  at  her,  the  look  of 
astonishment  quite  precluded  this  notion.  He  asked  his  host  if  he  were 
joking,  at  which  he  was  much  surprised,  and  asked  how  a  joke  could 
possibly  be  elicited  from  such  an  occurrence. 

"  My  brother  then  said,  '  I  saw  it  happen,  just  as  you  have  related  it,  so 
my  wife  will  assure  you,  and  I  am  yet  suffering  from  the  exhaustion  and 
depression  produced.'     He  then  told  the  company  what  I  have  related  above. 

"  I  heard  the  whole  relation  both  from  him  [by  letter  at  the  time,  and 
viva  voce  some  weeks  afterwards]  and  his  wife  [both  now  dead],  and  many 
of  our  friends  were  acquainted  with  the  history. 

"J.  Augustus  Edmonds." 
The  construction  of  the  Thames  Tunnel  lasted  from  1825  to  1843. 
During  this  period  there  were  five  irruptions  of  the  water  of  more  or  less 
importance.  The  fourth  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  one  man  was 
drowned.  The  Times  of  ISTov.  4th,  1837,  records  that  at  a  few  minutes 
before  4  o'clock  on  that  morning,  a  sudden  irruption  of  the  river  took  place 
and  filled  the  tunnel.  J.  Francis,  engineer  on  duty  at  the  time  of  the  acci- 
dent, stated  that,  on  discovering  the  water  was  beginning  to  overflow  he 
"  immediately  gave  the  alarm  for  all  hands  to  run,  and  from  that  time 
the  filling  of  the  tunnel  occupied  less  than  five  minutes.  We  then  ran 
with  all  speed  to  the  shaft."  The  water  lulled  slightly,  and  he  in  company 
with  two  other  men  "  went  down  the  archway  about  200  feet,  and  saw  the 
water  rolling  up  the  roadway  with  a  terrific  appearance.  We  then  ran  to 
the  staircase,  and  finally  ascended  to  the  top  of  the  shaft.  The  water 
arrived  a  few  seconds  after  us.  I  then  had  all  the  names  called  over,  and 
found  only  one  missing.  Garland,  an  old  man,  a  miner." 

(388)  From  a  book  called  Pith  (Triibner  and  Co.,  1881),  by  Newton 
Crosland,  pp.  63-4. 

"In  October,  1857,  about  1  o'clock  in  the  day,  I  was  going  from  my 
office  to  sign  an  export  bond  at  the  Custom  House,  Lower  Thames  Street, 
a  distance  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  I  was  in  my  usual  satisfactory 
state  of  health  ;  my  mind  was  occupied  with  merely  common-place  ideas  ; 
the  traffic  in  the  streets  was  going  on  with  ordinary  monotonous  activity, 
and  nothing  was  apparent  there  to  wake  in  me  the  slightest  trepidation, 
when,  just  as  I  was  crossing  Great  Tower  Street,  I  was  seized  with  an  un- 
accountable panic.  I  conceived  a  dread  that  I  might  be  attacked  by  a 
tiger,  and  the  idea  of  this  horrible  fate  so  haunted  me  that  I  absolutely 
began  running  in  hot  haste,  and  I  did  not  stop  until  I  found  myself  safe 
inside  the  walls  of  the  Custom  House.  Anything  more  contemptibly 
absurd  than  this  apparently  caiiseless  fear  could  scarcely  be  imagined — a 

1  We  have  ascertained  from  the  Post  Office  that  at  that  time  the  London  mail-coach 
would  reach  Leicester  about  6  p.m.  ;  so  that  the  report  may  easily  have  arrived  before 
dinner-time. 

VOL.    II.  2    B 

370  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

merchant  in  the  streets  of  London  in  danger  of  a  wild  beast !  The  possi- 
bility of  such  a  disaster  seemed  to  me  to  be  so  ridiculous,  the  moment  I 
thought  about  it,  that  I  laughed  at  myself  for  allowing  so  foolish  and  morbid 
a  fancy  to  take  possession  of  my  mind,  and  I  really  considered  that  I  must 
be  fast  becoming  stupidly  nervous.  The  feeling  of  apprehension  soon, 
however,  passed  away,  and  wonder  at  my  own  weakness  became  predomi- 
nant. The  next  morning  I  took  up  the  Times  newspaper,  when  to  my 
utter  astonishment,  I  read  that  at  precisely  the  same  time  when  I  felt  the 
crazy  fear,  a  tiger  had  actually  escaped  from  its  cage  while  it  was  being 
conveyed  from  the  London  Docks,  seriously  injured  two  children,  and  had, 
to  the  terror  of  every  observer,  ferociously  misconducted  himself  in  the 
public  street  of  Wapping — about  a  mile,  as  the  crow  flies,  from  the  spot 
where  I  was  passing." 

The  following  passage  occurs  in  the  Times  on  Oct.  27,  1857  : — 
"  Frightful  Occurrence. — Yesterday    afternoon,    about    1     o'clock,  as 
a    cattle    van    was    conveying  from   London   Docks   a   Bengal  tiger,  the 
door  gave  way  and  the  animal  bounded  into  the  road,  encountered  a  little 
boy,  spi'ang  upon  him,  lacerating  him  in  a  frightful  manner,"  &c. 

A  subsequent  report,  October  30th,  states  that  two  boys  were  injured. 

Mr.  Crosland  writes  to  us,  on  June  7,  1884 : — 

"42,  Crutched  Friars,  London. 

"  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  help  you  much  in  your  attempt  to  strengthen 
my  evidence  respecting  '  the  tiger  story.'  When  on  my  way  to  the  Custom 
House  I  felt  the  dread  of  a  tiger  in  the  streets,  which  impelled  me  to  run 
to  a  refuge.  I  was  not  so  much  disturbed  as  to  exhibit  any  signs  of  alarm. 
After  I  reached  the  Custom  House,  I  soon  recovered  my  composure,  and 
thought  my  fear  was  so  causeless  and  silly  that  I  did  not  mention  the  cir- 
cumstance to  anyone.  I  considered  that  to  do  so  would  be  to  make  myself 
a,ppear  ridiculous.  "  Newton  Crosland." 

In  another  letter  he  says,  "  I  am  quite  certain  that  my  sensations  were 
felt  at  the  precise  tim,e  when  the  incident  occurred  at  Wapping." 

I  4.  We  come  now  to  a  group  where  the  impression,  though 
indefinite  in  character,  recalling  the  purely  emotional  cases  of 
Vol.  1.,  Chap.  VII,,  had  reference  to  a  particular  individual  known 
to  the  percipient,  as  in  case  86. 

(389)  From  a  clergyman,  who  desires  that  his  name  may  not  be 
published.     He  writes  as  follows  to  his  daughter  : —  a  1882. 

"When  your  brother  E.  was  at  Winchester  College  (about  1856  or 
1857),  on  going  to  bed  one  Saturday  night,  I  could  not  sleep.  When  your 
miother  came  into  the  room,  she  found  me  restless  and  uneasy.  I  told  her 
that  a  strong  impression  had  seized  me  that  something  had  happened  to 
your  brother.  The  next  day,  your  mother,  on  writing  to  E.,  asked  me  if 
I  had  any  message  for  him,  when  I  replied  :  '  Tell  him  I  particularly  want 
to  know  if  anything  happened  to  him  yesterday.'  Your  mother  laughed, 
and  made  the  remark  that  I  should  be  frightened  if  a  letter  in  Dr. 
Moberly's  handwriting  reached  us  on  Monday.  I  replied,  '  I  should  be 
afraid  to  open  it.'     On  the  Monday  morning  a  letter  did  come  from  Dr. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  371 

Moberly,  to  tell  me  that  E.  had  met  with  an  accident,  that  one  of  his 
schoolfellows  had  thrown  a  piecs  of  cheese  at  him  which  had  struck  one  of 
his  eyes  ;  and  that  the  medical  man,  Mr.  Wickham,  thought  I  had  better 
come  down  immediately  and  take  your  brother  to  a  London  oculist." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  writes  to  us,  on  March  13,  1885 : — 

"  The  impression,  with  regard  to  my  son,  was  on  a  Saturday.  The 
accident  had  occurred  on  the  Thursday  previously,  but  Dr.  Moberly  did 
not  write  to  inform  me  of  it  till  Saturday,  when  the  Winchester  medical 
man  had  ordered  that  a  London  oculist  should  be  consulted. 

"I  cannot  call  to  mind  any  occasion  on  which  I  received  a  like 
impression  which  was  not  verified.  There  is  one  which  occurred  in  former 
years,  which  I  call  to  mind.  When  at  school  and  saying  my  prayers  one 
evening,  I  was  impressed  with  the  idea  that  my  eldest  brother  was  dying, 
and  this  was  the  case,  as  I  was  informed  the  day  following.  I  did  not 
know  at  the  time  that  he  was  ill." 

[The  first  of  these  cases  could  hardly  have  been  presented  alone,  owing  to 
the  lack  of  precision  in  the  coincidence.  But  its  interest  is  increased  by  the 
occurrence  of  the  other  more  precise  experience  to  the  same  person.] 

(390)  From  Mrs.  Brandon,  resident  in  Canada,  who  wrote  from  Farm- 
hill,  Donegal,  Ireland.  "January,  1884. 

"  The  steamship  '  Canadian,'  in  which  Mr.  Brandon  was  sailing  to 
England,  was  shipwrecked  in  the  Atlantic,  east  of  the  straits  of  Belleisle, 
on  the  4th  of  June,  1861.  She  foundered  in  the  ice,  and  38  lives  were  lost. 
In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  Mr.  James  Patton,  a  merchant  in  Montreal 
(where  we  were  then  living),  was  teaching  Mr.  Brandon's  Tuesday 
evening  class  in  Great  St.  James'  Street  Methodist  Church,  I  being  present 
at  the  time.  Mr.  Patton  said,  '  This  day  my  mind  was  urgently  impressed 
with  the  necessity  to  pray  for  Mr.  Brandon — so  much  so,  particularly  at 
the  hour  of  noon,  that  I  had  to  leave  oflT  writing  about  my  business  in  my 
ofiice,  and  retire  to  a  private  place,  and  pour  out  my  soul  in  prayer  to  God 
for  Mr.  Brandon.'  We  could  not  understand  at  the  time  the  meaning  of 
the  mysterious  circumstance  ;  but  10  days  afterwards  we  understood  it  all. 
At  the  very  hour  when  Mr.  Patton  was  engaged  in  prayer  for  Mr.  Brandon, 
he  (Mr.  B.)  was  standing  on  the  wreck  of  a  sinking  ship,  and  was 
miraculously  saved  from  a  watery  grave." 

[Mr.  Brandon  has  sent  us  an  account  of  the  foundering  of  the  ship, 
and  the  loss  of  38  men.     Mr.  Patton  is  deceased.] 

(391)  From  a  letter  entitled  "  Brain  Waves — a  Theory,"  written  by 
Mr.  James  Knowles,  which  appeared  in  the  Spectator,  30th  January,  1869. 

"  Mr.  Woolner,  the  sculptor,  tells  me  the  following  story  of  two  young 
men — one  of  them  a  personal  friend  of  his  own  now  living.  These  two 
men  lived  for  very  long  as  great  friends,  but  ultimately  quarrelled,  shortly 
before  the  departure  of  one  of  them  for  New  Zealand.  The  emigrant  had 
been  absent  for  many  years,  and  his  friend  at  home  (Mr.  Woolner's 
informant)  never  having  kept  up  correspondence  with  him,  naturally  almost 
lost  the  habit  of  thinking  of  him  or  his  affairs.  One  day,  however,  as  he 
sat  in  his  rooms  in  a  street  near  Oxford  Street,  the  thought  of  his  friend 
came  suddenly  upon  him,  accompanied  by  a  most  restless  and  undefinable 
discomfort.  He  could  by  no  means  account  for  it,  but,  finding  the  feeling 
VOL.    II.  2    B   2 

372  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

grew  more  and  more  oppressive,  tried  to  throw  it  off  by  change  of  occupa- 
tion. Still  the  discomfort  grew,  until  it  amounted  to  a  sort  of  strange 
horror.  He  thought  he  must  be  sickening  for  a  bad  illness,  and  at  leng-th, 
being  unable  to  do  anything  else,  went  out  of  doors  and  walked  up  and 
down  the  busiest  streets,  hoping  by  the  sight  and  sound  of  multitudes  of 
men  and  ordinary  things  to  dissipate  his  strange  misery.  Not,  however, 
until  he  had  wandered  to  and  fro  in  the  most  wretched  state  of  feeling  for 
more  than  two  hours,  utterly  unable  to  shake  off  a  sort  of  vague  conscious- 
ness of  his  friend,  did  the  impression  leave  him,  and  his  usual  frame  of 
mind  return.  So  greatly  was  he  struck  and  puzzled  by  all  this,  that  he 
wrote  down  the  precise  date  of  the  day  and  hour  of  the  occurrence,  fully 
expecting  to  have  news  shortly  of  or  from  his  friend.  And,  surely,  when 
the  next  mail  or  the  next  but  one  arrived,  there  came  the  horrible  news 
that  at  that  very  day  and  hour  (allowance  being  made  for  latitude  and 
longitude)  his  friend  had  been  made  a  prisoner  by  the  natives  of  New 
Zealand,  and  put  to  a  slow  death  with  the  most  frightful  tortures." 

Mr.  Woolner,  in  writing  to  us  in  August,  1883,  after  making  some 
trifling  corrections,  says  : — 

"  Mr.  Knowles  has  told  the  story  accurately;  and  having  told  him  only 
once,  I  am  surprised  that  he  should  have  been  so  faithful  in  his  narrative. 
I  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  the  person  for  many  years,  and  know  not  the 
least  where  to  find  him.     I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  help  you  any  further." 

The  name  of  the  man  who  was  killed  was  Cooke,  or  Cook.  Mr. 
Woolner  has  given  us  the  name  of  his  informant,  but  desires  that  it  may 
not  be  published.  We  have  tried  to  trace  him  without  success.  Mr. 
Woolner  says  :  "I  believe  he  was  perfectly  sincere  when  he  told  me  the 
story  in  or  about  1850  "  ;  and  adds  that  the  incident  occurred  some  time 
between  1842  and  1846. 

Of  the  three  hupressions  in  the  following  account  two  were  con- 
nected at  the  moment  with  a  particular  individual.  The  three, 
though  each  alone  might  easily  have  been  accidental,  are  worth 
presenting  as  having  occurred  in  the  experience  of  a  single  person  ; 
and  they  find  their  most  convenient  place  here,  though  two  of  them 
seem  to  have  been  of  the  "  borderland "  class.  In  the  second  case, 
the  narrator's  experience  followed  the  death  (she  thinks)  by  perhaps 
a  day  or  two  ;  nor  can  she  be  certain  that  the  coincidence  in  the  first 
case  was  closer  than  this,  though  it  may  have  been  closer. 

(392)  Miss  Loveday,  of  Arlescote,  Banbury,  enclosed  to  us,  on 
February  14,  1884,  the  following  letter  from  her  sister,  who  desires  that 
her  own  name  should  not  be  published.  In  conversation  she  described 
herself  as  a  matter-of-fact  person  ;  and  she  is  certain  that  she  has  never  on 
other  occasions  had  impressions  at  all  resembling  those  described. 

"  I  have  had  three  different  intimations  of  death — ^on  Uncle  William's 
death,  on  Henry  H.'s  [a  brother-in-law's]  death,  and  on  B.'s.  The  two 
first  were  more  sensations  than  anything  else.  It  is  a  thing  hardly  to  be 
described.  It  is  like  nothing  else.  Not  alarming ;  rather  like  one's  idea 
of  the  severance  of  nerves  ;  of  something  cut  off,  that  is,  and  lost  to  your- 

11.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  373 

self,  of  a  want,  a  something  gone  from  you.  On  the  occasion  of  Henry's 
death,  I  did  not  know  who  was  gone.  I  was  away  in  Germany ;  but  I 
awoke  with  the  sensation,  and  I  told  my  children,  '  I  have  had  that  feeling 
that  I  have  had  before  on  the  loss  of  a  relation.  I  do  not  know  who  is 
gone  ;  but  someone  seems  gone  ;  perhaps  it  is  Aunt  Edward.'  Then  in  a 
day  or  so  came  the  news  of  Henry's  death.  [The  narrator  was  warmly 
attached  to  both  her  uncle  and  her  brother-in-law.] 

"  The  last  occasion  {i.e.,  of  B.'s  death)  it  was  the  most  distinct  of  all. 
[Miss  Loveday  says,  "  B.  was  an  old  servant  of  our  family,  who  was  very  dear 
to  us  all."]  It  was  in  1880,  in  the  autumn.  I  was  in  Germany.  I  had  gone 
to  lie  down  after  the  early  dinner  on  Sunday,  to  rest  before  the  long  walk 
to  church  ;  and  I  fell  asleep.  I  had  the  most  calm  and  delightful  awaking 
— no  actual  words,  but  a  happy  feeling  that  B.  was  passing  away  to 
Heaven  peacefully,  and  that  I  was  intended  to  know  it.  If  I  put  into 
words  what  my  impression  was,  it  was  this — '  As  if  some  spirit  had  gently 
touched  me  and  said,  "  B.  is  passing  away,  rise  up  and  pray."  '  I  at  once 
rose  up  and  went  into  the  next  room,  and  told  my  boys  '  I  have  had  an  inti- 
mation that  B.  is  dying  ;  remember  it.  I  shall  hear.'  I  then  went  back  to 
my  bedside  to  kneel  in  prayer.  The  happiness  and  peace  of  the  few 
minutes  was  intense.  I  had  longed  to  see  him  once  again  before  he  died, 
and  had  feared  I  should  not  be  in  England  in  time,  though  I  was  going  in 
a  few  days,  as  I  knew  his  end  was  near ;  but  being  led  to  know  the  day 
and  hour  was  to  me  like  a  leave-taking  and  a  good-bye  from  himself,  and 
I  felt  it  was  permitted  to  assure  and  comfort  me.  Two  or  three  days  later 
I  heard  it  was  that  very  day  he  died ;  and  when  I  got  to  England  and  saw 
his  wife.  Oath,  I  found  it  was  the  same  time,  allowing  for  my  being  nearly 
40  minutes  to  the  eastward  on  the  globe.  The  two  first  intimations, 
though  not  alarming,  were  not  of  the  comforting,  reassuring,  and  happy 
feeling  of  the  last." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  B.  died  on  October  10,  1880, 
The  two  previous  deaths  took  place  on  April  2,  1875,  and  January  21,  1878, 
respectively. 

One  of  the  narrator's  sons  writes  on  Jan.  28,  1886  : — 

"I  distinctly  remember  that  one  afternoon  (I  think  Wednesday), 
about  two  weeks  before  we  came  away  from  Germany,  mother  was  lying 
down,  and  suddenly  she  said  to  me  that  she  felt  as  if  a  friend,  someone 
whom  she  had  known  for  a  very  long  time,  was  at  that  moment  dying. 
She  did  not  think  it  was  a  relation,  because  the  feeling  was  not  the  same 
as  when  Uncle  Henry  died.  She  thought  it  was  very  probably  B.,  but  did 
not  say  that  she  felt  as  if  it  was  of  necessity  B.  who  was  dying.  I  did 
not  feel  surprised,  because  almost  exactly  the  same  had  happened  when 
Uncle  Henry  died,  and  yet  I  felt  equally  sure  that  it  was  correct. 

"  About  three  days  afterwards  we  got  a  letter  to  say  that  B.  had 
died  on  the  very  afternoon  in  question,  at  about  the  same  time  as  events 
above  recorded,  i.e.,  at  about  3.30  p.m.,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect." 

The  other  son  writes  from  Cambridge,  on  Jan.  26,  1886  : — 

"  I  shall  be  happy  to  testify  to  the  fact  of  my  mother  having 
mentioned  to  me  that  she  had  a  presentiment  that  '  B.'  was  passing  away 
and  that  thi-s  was  anterior  to  any  communication  even  of  an  illness." 

[The  force  of  the  last  coincidence  is  of  course  greatly  diminished  by  the 
fact  of  the  percipient's  having  known  that  B.'s  "  end  was  near."     The 

374  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

narrator  thinks  that  she  was  aware  of  her  uncle's  being  rather  seriously 
ill ;  but  she  had  no  similar  knowledge  in  the  case  of  her  brother-in-law, 
whose  death  was  quite  unexpected.] 

(393)  E.  M.  Arndt,  a  well-known  writer  on  political  and  social 
questions,  in  his  Schriften  fur  and  an  seine  Liehen  Deutschen  (Leipzig, 
1845),  Yol.  III.,  pp.  523-4,  records  two  telepathic  experiences  of  the 
emotional  sort  which  befell  the  same  person. 

The  first  occurred  when  Arndt  was  under  the  tuition  (apparently)  of 
Dr.  Masius,  at  Barth.  One  of  his  fellow-pupils,  while  at  play,  had  broken 
an  arm.  Just  as  a  messenger  was  starting  to  convey  the  news  to  the 
boy's  mother,  who  lived  at  some  miles'  distance,  she  herself  rushed  in,  ex- 
claiming, "My  son,  my  son !  What  accident  has  befallen  him'?"  From  Arndt's 
description,  it  seems  certain  that  he  was  himself  present  on  the  occasion. 

The  same  lady,  Arndt  continues  (but  without  naming  his  authority), 
was  one  day  calling  at  a  neighbour's  house,  when  suddenly  she  started  up 
and  called  for  her  carriage,  under  an  impulse  of  uncontrollable  appre- 
hension, and  found,  on  arriving  at  her  home,  that  an  accident  had 
occurred  by  which  her  youngest  child  had  been  scalded  to  death. 

§  5.  This  last  incident  leads  us  on  to  the  next  group,  where 
the  emotional  impression  was  not  connected,  when  felt,  with  the 
person  to  whom  (if  telepathic)  it  was  due.  The  following  case 
exhibits  the  element  of  actual  physical  discomfort  on  the  percipient's 
part,  as  in  Nos.  22,  70,  and  76,  and  notably  in  391  above. 

(394)  From  Mr.  Frederick  H.  Poole,  Sneyd  Park,  Durdham  Down, 
^ris^ol.  "June  10th,  1884. 

"  Upwards  of  40  years  ago,  when  I  was  about  12  years  of  age,  I  was 
visiting  at  my  uncle's  vicarage  in  Gloucestershire.  I  had  been  there  for 
a  month  previously,  and  was  one  afternoon  sketching  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, in  good  health  and  sjairits,  when  suddenly  I  became  very  depressed 
and  ill,  which  induced  me  to  return  to  the  house.  I  told  my  uncle  my 
symptoms,  and  expressed  my  belief  that  I  should  die,^  and  asked  his  per- 
mission for  me  to  return  home  that  afternoon,  for  I  should  like  to  bid 
farewell  to  all  at  home,  especially  to  my  mother,  to  whom  I  was  very 
devotedly  attached.  Nothing  he  said  in  reply  would  pacify  me,  until  he 
promised  I  might  return  on  the  morrow  if  I  felt  no  better.  After  a 
restless  night,  I  felt  worn  and  weary — as  one  would  naturally  feel  after 
unusual  excitement — but  my  intense  longing  to  return  home  had  subsided, 
and  I  consented  to  remain.  By  that  afternoon's  post  a  letter  reached  my  uncle 
from  my  home,  announcing  the  death  of  my  mother  on  the  previous  afternoon. 

"  Having  given  above  the  unvarnished  fact,  I  am  disposed  to  leave  the 
subject  without  comment. 

"  I  will  only  add  that  I  had  no  knowledge  of  my  mother's  illness  at 
the  date  of  aforesaid  '  incident.'  We  heard  a  few  days  previously  that  she 
was  progressing  favourably  after  her  recent  confinement. 

"  Frederick  H.  Poole." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Poole  says  : — 

1  Precisely  this  experience  is  recorded  in  cases  22  and  76. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  375 

"  I  never  had,  excepting  on  the  occasion  named  in  my  last  letter,  the 
unaccountable  sort  of  depression  mentioned  therein." 

(395)  From  Mrs.  Herbert  Davy,  of  Burdon  Place,  Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
the  narrator  of  the  more  definite  case  No.  45.  a  December   1883 

"  It  was  in  August,  a  few  years  ago — my  husband  was  at  the  moors. 
I  drove  to  a  nursery  garden  to  procure  some  flowers.  I  waited  outside  the 
gate  under  the  shelter  of  some  trees,  sending  the  groom  in  for  the  flowers. 

"It  was  one  of  the  hottest  afternoons  I  ever  experienced.  My  ponies, 
usually  restive,  stood  perfectly  still.  Before  I  had  waited  there  many 
minutes,  an  unaccountable  feeling  took  possession  of  me  as  though  I  fore- 
saw and  recognised  the  shadow  of  a  coming  sorrow.  I  immediately 
associated  it  with  my  husband — that  some  accident  had  befallen  him. 
With  this  miserable  apprehension  upon  me,  I  got  through  the  rest  of  the 
day  and  evening  as  best  I  could,  but  weighed  down  by  the  shadow,  though 
I  spoke  of  it  that  night  to  no  one. 

"  ISTothing  had  happened  to  my  husband.  But  a  little  child — a  relation, 
who  had  lived  with  us  and  been  almost  as  our  own — had  died  that  day 
rather  suddenly  in  Kent,  where  she  was  then  visiting  her  parents.  I  had 
thought  a  good  deal  of  little  Ada,  as  I  sat  waiting  in  the  phaeton  that 
summer  afternoon — had  pictured  her  reaching  out  her  hands  to  me  ;  but 
the  great  apprehension  I  felt  was  for  my  husband,  not  for  the  child." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  child  died  on  Aug.  14, 1875. 

A  friend  who  was  with  Mrs.  Davy  writes  : — 

"Newcastle,  January  5th,  1884. 

"  I  was  driving  with  Mrs.  Davy  on  the  day  she  had  the  strange  pre- 
sentiment, while  waiting  outside  the  nursery  gardens.  She  spoke  of  it  at 
the  time,  and  was  quite  depressed  and  unlike  herself.  Mr.  Davy  being  from 
home,  she  feared  something  had  happened  to  him.  "Amy  Grace." 

After  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Davy  on  April  15th,  1884,  Professor 
Sidgwick  writes  : — 

"  She  affirmed  unhesitatingly  that  the  feeling  was  a  sudden  unique 
shock  of  sadness,  quite  unlike  any  depression  of  spirits  which  she  had  ever 
felt  at  any  other  time — she  had  had  experiences  of  such  depressions.  The 
girl,  Ada,  was  likely  to  be  thinking  of  her." 

(396)  From  Mr.  S.  N.  Wilkinson,  J.P.,  Apsley  Cottage,  Stockport. 

"  1884. 
"  I  was  at  Blackpool  in  the  March  of  1881,  and  about  tea  time  I  felt 
a  strong  conviction  of  some  unknown  evil  which  made  me  perfectly  rest- 
less. Next  morning,  a  letter  came  from  the  manager  of  my  works  in 
Stockport,  reporting  that  the  day  before  he  had  to  stop  the  mill  in 
consequence  of  the  breaking  down  of  the  main  driving  wheel.  My  niece 
remarked  that  this  was  an  explanation  of  my  restlessness,  but  I  was  not 
satisfied  with  the  explanation,  and  said  to  her,  '  That  is  not  it,  it  is  some- 
thing worse.'  On  arriving  at  home,  the  day  following,  I  found  two  tele- 
grams, one  announcing  the  death  of  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends,  the 
other  inviting  me  to  the  funeral.  He  died  at  Aberdeen.  At  the  time  of 
my  uneasiness  I  was  not  aware  of  his  illness.  I  attended  his  funeral 
there.  This  was  not  the  only  case  in  which  I  had  presentiments,  but  it 
is  the  most  remarkable  that  I  have  experienced.     "  S.  N.  Wilkinson." 

376  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

We  asked  Mr.  Wilkinson  if  he  would  procure  for  us  his  niece's 
corroboration  ;  but  he  said  that  he  did  not  feel  disposed  to  take  any 
further  trouble  in  the  matter.  In  conversation  he  described  the  impression 
as  quite  unique  in  its  strength,  preventing  him  from  settling  to  anything ; 
and  he  entirely  disclaimed  any  tendency  to  nervousness  or  unaccountable 
fancies. 

§  6.  I  turn  now  to  the  production  of  motor  effects — sometimes 
of  a  blind  sort,  sometimes  under  a  sense  of  being  wanted — which 
must  be  understood  in  the  sense  explained  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  292. 

(397)  From  Mr.  F.  Morgan,  of  Nugent  Hill,  Bristol. 

"  July  11th,  1883. 

"  On  Monday,  February  14th,  1853,  I  was  listening  to  a  lecture  by 
the  late  Geo.  Dawson,  of  Birmingham,  in  the  Broadmead  Rooms  in 
Bristol.  I  frequently  spent  my  evenings  at  lectures,  concerts,  &c.,  and 
often  took  a  little  walk  afterwards  on  my  way  home.  I  had  lived  nearly 
all  my  life  (27  years)  at  home  with  my  mother,  whom  I  strongly  resemble  in 
face  and  in  many  characteristics.     We  were  much  attached  to  each  other. 

"  I  was  thoroughly  interested  in  the  lecture,  and  had  so  little  intention 
of  leaving  before  its  conclusion,  that  I  remember  noticing  a  friend  among  the 
audience,  and  making  up  my  mind  for  a  walk  with  him  on  my  way  home. 

"  The  lecture  must  have  been  more  than  half  through — I  was  not 
tired,  and  had  no  reason  to  move — when  I  noticed,  at  the  side  of  the 
platform  farthest  from  the  back  entrance  to  the  hall,  a  door  which  I  had 
never  seen  before,  flush  with  the  panels,  and  it  suddenly  became  the  most 
natural  thing  that  I  should  walk  half  the  length  of  the  room,  and  away 
from  the  main  entrance,  in  order  to  see  if  this  door  would  open.  I  turned 
the  handle,  passed  through,  closed  the  door  gently  behind  me,  and  found 
myself  in  the  dark  among  the  wooden  supports  of  the  platform. 

"  I  clambered  along  towards  a  glimmer  of  light  at  the  other  end, 
passed  round  a  side  passage,  crossed  the  end  of  the  hall  to  the  main 
entrance,  without  any  thought  of  the  lecture  which  was  still  going  on, 
and  walked  home  quietly,  without  excitement  or  '  impression '  of  any  kind, 
and   quite  unconscious,  till  long  after,  that  I  had  done  anything  unusual. 

"  On  opening  my  door  with  a  latch-key,  I  smelt  fire,  and  found  my 
mother  in  great  alarm.  She  had  also  noticed  the  strong  burning  smell, 
had  been  over  the  house  with  her  servant,  and  was  longing  for  my 
return.  On  going  upstairs,  I  saw  flames  issuing  from  a  back  window  of  the 
next  house,  immediately  gave  the  alarm,  removed  my  mother  to  a  safe 
distance,  and  then  had  two  or  three  hours'  struggle  with  the  flames.  The 
adjoining  house  was  destroyed,  but  mine  only  slightly  damaged. 

"  The  point  which  has  seemed  to  me  most  striking,  whenever  I  have 
recalled  this  occurrence,  is  the  entire  absence  of  any  presentiment  or 
impression  on  my  mind.  I  should  probably  have  shaken  ofi"  anything  of 
the  kind  had  I  been  aware  of  it,  and  refused  obedience.  Neither  was 
there  on  my  mother's  part  any  intentional  exertion  of  her  will  upon  me, 
only  a  strong  wish  for  my  presence,  which  must  have  begun  about  the 
time  I  left  my  seat.  "  Fredk.  Morgan." 

Mr.  Morgan  adds,  in  reply  to  our  regular  inquiry,  that  he  has  never 
done  anything  similar  to  what  is   here  described  on  any  other  occasion. 

II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  377 

He  also  sends  a  plan  of  the  lecture-room,  which  shows  that  he  walked 
in  a  dark  passage  round  nearly  three  sides  of  the  hall.  "  But  going 
home,"  he  adds,  "  was  not  in  my  thoughts  when  I  moved."  He  told  his 
mother  of  his  experience  next  day. 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  the  fire  in  the  B7'istol  Times.  The 
account  there  given  states  that  Mr.  Morgan's  house,  though  only  slightly 
damaged,  was  "  in  great  danger,  and  only  escaped  destruction  by  the  in- 
tervention of  strong  party-walls." 

(398)  The  following  passage,  in  the  original,  is  a  continuation  of  that 
quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  274,  from  Der  Sogenannte  Lehens-Magnetismus  oder 
Hyjynotismus,  by  Dr.  E.  L.  Fischer,  of  Wiirzburg,  a  book  the  reverse  of 
credulous  in  its  general  tone. 

"  I  had  accepted  an  invitation  to  a  jubilee,  and  went  to  the  place  in 
the  afternoon.  I  had  not  been  .at  table  more  than  an  hour,  when  I  was 
seized  with  a  peculiar  feeling  that  I  must  leave — that  someone  was 
waiting  for  me.  I  had  no  more  peace  ;  I  was  expecting  every  moment 
to  be  summoned  away.  I  remained  half-an-hour  under  the  continuous 
pressure  of  the  feeling  that  someone  was  most  strongly  desiring  my 
presence.  Then  I  got  up  and  went  home  to  bed,  in  the  confident 
expectation  of  being  called  ofi"  to  someone  at  a  distance  in  the  course  of 
the  night.  It  was  quite  impossible  to  go  to  sleep,  for  every  two  minutes 
1  was  raising  my  head,  to  listen  whether  there  was  not  a  pull  at  the  house- 
bell.  In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  there  was  really  a  ring.  I  sprang  out  of 
bed  with  one  bound,  and  was  told  that  I  must  come  to  a  sick  woman  at  a 
village  about  a  couple  of  miles  off.  On  my  arrival  I  found  the  patient  in 
a  piteous  condition.  She  could  neither  speak  nor  move  her  limbs,  though 
still  able  to  see,  hear,  and  feel.  I  did  all  I  could,  and  departed,  with  the 
promise  to  come  again  later.  On  the  second  occasion,  I  found  her  much 
better,  and  she  now  told  me  how  earnestly  she  had  been  longing  for  me  to 
come  on  the  previous  afternoon  and  evening.  Her  husband  had  not  re- 
turned home  till  late  in  the  evening,  and  had  then  lost  no  time  in  sending 
for  me.     So  the  matter  was  explained. 

"  These  two  incidents  \i.  e.,  this  and  the  one  already  quoted]  prove  to 
my  satisfaction  that  there  are  such  things  as  sympathetic  divinations 
(Ahnungen) ;  and  I  could  supply  other  instances,  though  of  a  less  striking 
character,  from  my  own  experience,  besides  similar  experiences  which 
have  been  reported  to  me  by  my  friends." 

[I  have  sufficiently  expressed  dissent  from  Dr.  Fischer's  view  that 
telepathy  can  be  demonstrated  from  a  few  instances.] 

(399)  From  Mr.  William  Blakeway  (a  bricklayer),  of  New  Ross, 
Rowley  Regis,  near  Dudley.  a  igg^ 

"  I  was  in  my  usual  place  at  chapel  on  the  Sunday  afternoon,  in  May, 
1876,  when  all  at  once  I  thought  I  must  go  home.  Seemingly  against  my 
wish,  I  took  my  hat.  When  reaching  the  chapel  gates,  I  felt  an  impulse 
that  I  must  hasten  home  as  quick  as  possible,  and  I  ran  with  all  my  might 
without  stopping  to  take  breath.  Meeting  a  friend,  who  asked  why  I 
hurried  so,  I  passed  him  almost  without  notice.  When  I  reached  home 
I  found  the  house  full  of  smoke,  and  my  little  boy,  3  years  old,  all  on  fire, 
alone  in  the  house.  I  at  once  tore  the  burning  clothes  from  off  him,  and 
was  just  in  time  to  save  his  life.     It  has  always  been  a  mystery  to  me,  as 

378  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

no  person  whispered  a  word  to  me,  and  no  one  knew  anything  about  the 
fire  till  after  I  made  the  alarm  at  home,  which  was  more  than  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  from  the  chapel.     This  is  a  true  statement. 

"  William  Blakeway." 

Mr.  0.  Smith,  of  12,  Short  Street,  Black  Heath,  near  Dudley,  writes  : — 

"  I  beg  to  say  I  heard  of  the  incident  from  Mr.  Blakeway  himself  in  a 
few  days  after  the  occurrence,  and  never  forgot  it,  as  I  thought  it  very 
remarkable.  "  C.  Smith." 

Mr.  Blakeway  went  through  the  account  to  me  viva  voce  in  such  a  way 
that  I  could  not  doubt  the  vividness  of  the  experience  ;  he  has  never  had 
any  other  at  all  resembling  it.  The  friend  whom  he  hurried  by  was  one 
to  whom  he  invariably  talked  for  some  minutes  when  he  met  him.  He 
tliinks  that  he  probably  took  about  a  minute  and  a  half  in  getting  home, 
and  that  his  first  impression  may  quite  have  coincided  with  the  accident 
to  the  child,  who  was  alone  in  the  house  and  caught  fire  in  reaching  for 
something. 

(400)  From  Herr  Heinrich  von  Struve,  procured  through  the  kindness 
of  Mr.  J.  B.  Johnston,  M.A.,  of  17,  Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh.  The 
original  was  in  German.  u  25,  Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh. 

"July  10th,  1885. 

"  It  was  in  the  night  between  the  9th  and  10th  of  November,  1835, 
that  I  felt  a  sudden  and  peculiar  yearning,  which  laid  hold  of  me  with 
great  intensity,  for  my  dear  mother,  who  lived  in  Carlsruhe,  in  the 
Grand  Duchy  of  Baden.  I  myself  was  living  with  my  elder  brother  in 
Poland,  and  intended  to  pass  the  winter  with  him.  This  yearning  affected 
me  so  strongly  that  I  resolved  to  move  to  Carlsruhe  without  delay,  which 
I  explained  to  my  brother  at  breakfast,  after  I  had  informed  him  of  my 
sudden  feeling.  It  was  no  small  and  insignificant  journey  in  those  days  and 
at  that  advanced  season  of  the  year.  Carlsruhe  was  over  130  German  miles 
from  where  I  was  living.  I  passed  [on  horseback]  through  the  province 
of  Posen,  through  Silesia,  Saxony,  and,  after  crossing  the  Erz  Mountains 
and  Thuringia  in  deep  snow,  through  Bavaria.  At  Jena,  where  an  aunt 
lived  who  had  always  been  in  the  most  intimate  relations  with  my  mother, 
I  intended  to  rest  for  a  few  days.  But  as  she  told  me  that  she  had 
received  very  sad  news  from  Carlsruhe,  according  to  which  her  dear  friend 
had  been  attacked  by  nervous  fever  and  given  up  by  the  doctors,  I  could 
not  rest,  and  in  the  greatest  consternation  and  anxiety  recommenced  my 
journey,  and  reached  Carlsruhe  on  the  4th  of  December. 

"  With  sinking  heart  I  betook  myself  first  to  my  brother,  who  was 
attached  to  the  Russian  Embassy  at  the  Court  of  Baden,  and  rushed  up 
the  steps,  where  my  brother  received  me  with  great  astonishment.  On  my 
eager  inquiry  after  my  mother's  health,  he  told  me  that  the  danger  had 
passed  oflP,  and  that  she  was  recovering.  Then  I  hurried  swiftly  to  my 
mother's  house,  where  my  sisters  lived  with  hei',  and  they  confirmed  the 
happy  news.  As  I  then  learnt  from  my  eldest  sister,  the  chief  crisis  of 
the  illness  occurred  on  the  night  between  the  9th  and  10th  of  November, 
when  my  beloved  mother,  in  her  delirium,  continually  spoke  with  intense 
love   and  care  for  her  youngest  son,  called  me  and  longed  for  me. 

"  H.  VON  Struve." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Herr  von  Struve  says,   "  I  have  never  on  any 

II.]  IDEAL,   EMOTIONAL,   AND  MOTOR   CASES.  379 

other  occasion  experienced  an  affection  of  the  same  sort,  and  naturally 
therefore  have  never  had  occasion  to  take    action  on  one." 

[This  case  is  very  remote  ;  but  the  narrator  is  not  likely  to  be  wrong 
in  remembering  that  he  undertook  a  long  and  arduous  journey  in  conse- 
quence of  his  impression.] 

I  will  conclude  with  the  only  pendant  that  we  have  to  M. 
Li^beault's  remarkable  case  at  the  end  of  Chap.  VII.  in  the  preceding 
volume.  But  a  second-hand  account  of  so  exceptional  an  occurrence, 
received  from  a  person  who  himself  only  heard  of  it  some  years  after 
it  took  place,  cannot  of  course  carry  much  weight,  at  any  rate  as  far 
as  details  are  concerned. 

(401)  From  Mr.  S.  Jennings,  of  Westbury  House,  Denmark  Hill,  S.E. 

"  March  24th,  1885. 

"  In  reply  to  your  note,  the  occurrence  [which  is  narrated  below]  was 
related  to  me  by  Mr.  Nelson  himself,  since  dead.  He  told  me,  as  nearly  as 
I  can  remember,  in  the  year  1868,  but  the  event  itself  must  have  taken 
place  four  or  five  years  before. 

"  At  the  time  he  told  me  he  was  frequently  in  the  habit  of  thus 
writing  under  some  external  influences,  some  of  which  he  describes  as 
agreeable,  and  others  very  much  the  reverse.  He  showed  me  a  book 
in  which  these  writings  were  made,  and  I  was  much  surprised  at  the 
singular  differences  in  the  apparently  various  handwritings. 

"  I  never  had  any  reason  to  do  otherwise  than  believe  what  he  said, 
particularly  as  he  was  always  very  reticent  on  the  subject,  which  he 
said  concerned  nobody  but  himself.  "  Samuel  Jennings." 

The  following  is  from  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  Jennings  to  Professor 
Barrett,  on  September  26th,  1882.  After  describing  Mr.  Nelson's 
automatic  writing,  and  his  inability  to  get  rid  of  the  consciousness  of  some 
external  presence  or  influence  "  without  providing  writing  materials,"  the 
account  continues  : — 

"On  one  occasion  this  feeling  seized  him  in  the  train  when  travelling 
from  Raneegunge  to  Calcutta,  and  he  tore  a  leaf  out  of  a  book,  and  laid 
it  on  the  seat  of  the  carriage,  his  hand  grasping  a  pencil  resting  upon 
it.  Ordinarily,  to  write  under  such  conditions  would  be  impossible  in 
a  train  rushing  along  ;  the  motion  would  efiectually  prevent  it.  Never- 
theless, a  long  communication  was  made  purporting  to  be  from  his 
daughter,  who  was  at  school  in  England.  It  contained  a  simple  account 
of  her  illness  and  death,  described  the  circumstances  under  which  it 
occurred,  and  the  persons  who  were  present,  adding  that  she  wished  to 
say  good-bye  to  her  father  before  leaving.  This  threw  Mr.  N.  into  a 
state  of  great  excitement,  for  he  did  not  even  know  of  his  daughter's 
illness.  He  went  home  and  said  he  was  very  uneasy  about  Bessie  in 
England.  Finally,  he  gave  this  note  to  his  married  daughter,  Mrs.  R., 
to  keep  till  they  could  hear  by  the  ordinary  post.  The  child  had  in 
reality  died  that  very  day,  and  under  the  very  circumstances  thus 
mysteriously  communicated  to  Mr.  N.  I  have  subsequently  received 
some  corroborative  evidence  regarding  this  young  lady's  death  from  an 
entire  stranger  to  the  family." 

[chap. 

CHAPTER   III. 

DREAMS. 

§  1.  The  cases  to  be  now  presented  are  supplementary  to  those  of 
Vol.  I.,  Chap.  VIII.;  and  will  be  arranged,  as  far  as  possible,  in  similar 
groups. 

The  first  group  is  that  of  simultaneous  dreams  which  correspond 
in  content. 

(402)  From  Mr.  A.  A.  Watts,  19,  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  S.W. 

"  1883. 
"When  I  was  a  young  child,  about  the  year  1830,  my  father  had  been 
called  out  of  town  by  business  ;  and  my  mother  took  me  into  her  room  to 
sleep.  She  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  or  early  morning,  out  of  a 
dream  in  which  it  had  appeared  to  her  that  the  servant  was  attempting  to 
murder  her  with  a  knife.  I  had  awakened  at  the  same  time,  and  was 
sobbing  in  my  crib  by  her  bedside.  Upon  her  inquiring  what  was  amiss 
with  me,  I  replied  that  I  had  dreamt  that  John  was  murdering  her  with  a 
knife.  She  always  affirmed  that,  to  the  best  of  her  knowledge,  I  had  at 
that  time  never  heard  the  word  murder.  She  rang  up  the  servants  ;  and 
wrote  immediately  to  her  husband,  who  returned  to  town  at  once,  and 
discharged  the  man  without  more  ado.  My  mother  had  had  no  previous 
antipathy  to  the  man,  rather  the  contrary,  for  he  was  a  very  clever  and 
handy  servant,  and  had  been  a  sailor.  We  had  never  heard  then  nor  did 
we  hear  subsequently  anything  to  his  disadvantage." 

[This  evidence  cannot  rank  as  better  than  second-hand.] 

(403)  The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Nation  for  November  26th, 
1885  :— 

"  Sir, — I  have  been  much  interested  in  the  cases  of  telepathy  reported 
in  the  Nation,  and  give  the  following,  which  happened  here  last  week. 
Mrs.  P.  dreamed  her  watch  was  broken,  and  was  greatly  afflicted  to  see  it 
all  in  pieces,  and  in  her  distress  awoke.  Feeling  very  ill,  she  awakened 
her  husband  to  go  for  a  physician.  His  first  words  on  awaking  were, 
'  Who  broke  your  watch  1 ' 

"  M.  E.  W. 

"Dover,  N.  H.,  November  16th,  1885." 

III.]  DREAMS.  381 

The  writer  of  this  letter,  Dr.  Mary  E.  "Webb,  was  applied  to  for  details, 
and  wrote  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"  37,  Trowbridge  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A. 

"February  3rd,  1886. 

"  Near  midnight,  Mrs.  Flynn  dreamed  her  watch  was  broken.  She 
saw  the  crystal  and  all  the  works  crushed  to  fragments.  She  awoke  in 
some  pain,  and  aroused  her  husband  from  a  sound  sleep,  and  his  first 
words,  according  to  her  report,  were,  '  Who  broke  your  watch  ?  How  did 
your  watch  get  broken  ? '  &c.  Then  she  told  me  she  laughed  in  spite  of 
the  pain,  and  told  him  that  was  just  what  she  had  dreamed  before  the  pain 
had  awakened  her  ;  then  they  found  their  dreams  coincided  exactly  as  to 
the  manner  in  which  the  watch  was  broken ;  and  that  the  watch  was  got 
and  examined,  to  make  sure  it  was  not  as  they  had  dreamed. 

"  This  they  related  to  me  the  same  night,  as  something  worth  the 
telling.  They  thought  it  singular  and  interesting.  I  asked  them  what 
they  had  said  about  the  watch  before  going  to  bed,  and  they  said 
'  Nothing  ' ;  that  they  had  not  thought  of  it  at  all. 

"  Mary  E.  Webb." 

In  the  next  three  cases,  the  telepathic  influence  of  a  distant  agent 
seems  to  be  involved,  and  may  have  acted  independently  on  the 
dreamers  (c/.  case  127,  and  see  Chap.  XII.,  §  2) ;  or  one  dreamer, 
so  influenced,  may  have  infected  the  others. 

(404)  From  the  Rev.  P.  T.  Drayton,  Undercliff,  Portishead. 

"January,  1884. 

"  When  a  child  in  the  West  Indies,  there  was  an  old  African  woman 
who  had  great  attractions  for  me.  She  was  full  of  ghost  stories,  and, 
though  a  Christian,  had  not,  I  fear,  discarded  obeah  ideas  altogether. 
Sometimes  she  would  come  in  to  show  us  how  she  would  look  dressed 
in  her  grave  clothes,  which  she  kept  by  her,  and  we  would  make  merry 
over  it.  Well !  several  years  afterwards  I  saw  in  my  dreams  her  figure 
by  my  bedside  in  full  grave-costume ;  it  was  very  vivid,  and  I  awoke  with 
a  determination  that  I  would  eat  no  more  late  suppers. 

"  At  breakfast,  next  morning,  my  sister  told  us  that  she  had  had  much 
the  same  dream,  but  as  she  had  never  seen  the  old  woman  masquerading 
in  her  shroud,  as  I  had,  it  made  more  impression.  Some  time  afterwards 
we  had  a  letter  from  W.  I.  mentioning  the  old  woman's  death  on  the  day 
on  which  these  dreams  occurred. 

"  This  occurred  some  45  years  ago,  and  I  cannot  be  responsible  for  its 
strict  accuracy. 

"  P.  T.  Drayton." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Drayton  says  : — 

"  Taking  your  queries  seriatim  I  would  reply,  first,  that  my  sister  has 
been  dead  over  30  years.  Second,  that  my  sister  and  self  had  the  dream  on 
the  same  night,  without  having  been  either  talking  or  thinking  of  the  old 
woman.  Third,  that  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  the  tidings  of  the  old 
woman's  death  arrived  shortly  after." 

382  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

A  lady,  a  connection  of  Mr.  Drayton's,  through  whom  we  procured 
this  narrative,  says,  "  All  the  family  knew  of  these  dreams." 

(405)  From  Fynes  Moryson's  Itinerary  (London,  1617),  Part  I., 
Chap.  II.,  p.  19. 

"  I  may  la^vfully  swear  that  which  my  kinsmen  have  heard  witnessed 
by  my  brother  Henry  whilst  he  lived,  that  in  my  youth  at  Cambridge  I 
had  the  like  dreame  of  my  mother's  death,  where,  my  brother  Henry  lying 
with  me,  early  in  the  morning  I  dreamed  that  my  mother  passed  by  with 
sad  countenance,  and  told  me  that  she  could  not  come  to  my  commence- 
ment ;  I  being  within  five  months  to  proceed  Master  of  Arts,  and  she 
having  promised  at  that  time  to  come  to  Cambridge  :  and  when  I  related 
this  dreame  to  my  brother,  both  of  us  awaking  together  in  a  sweat,  he 
protested  to  me  that  he  had  dreamed  the  very  same,  and  when  he  had  not 
the  least  knowledge  of  our  mother's  sicknesse,  neither  in  our  youthfull 
afiections  were  in  any  affected  by  the  strangeness  of  this  dreame,  yet  the 
next  carrier  brought  us  word  of  our  mother's  death." 

(406)  From  Mr.  Swithinbank,  Ormleigh,  Mowbray  Road,  Upper 
Norwood,  S.E. 

"May  26th,  1883. 

"  During  the  Peninsular  War,  my  father  and  his  two  brothers,  William 
and  John,  were  quartered  at  Dover.  They  were  natives  of  Bradford,  and 
had  there  living  their  father,  mother,  and  the  rest  of  their  family.  On 
one  special  night  my  father  had  a  dream  that  his  mother  was  dead ;  the 
dream  was  most  vivid,  and  in  his  waking  moments  the  dream  kept  con- 
tinually recurring  to  him,  and  he  could  not  shake  ofi"  the  impression  of 
sadness  it  brought  upon  him.  The  other  brothers  each  slept  at  different 
parts  of  the  garrison,  and  they  only  met  each  other  on  parade.  The 
morning  following  the  dream,  and  after  the  parade  was  over,  my  father 
ran  hurriedly  on  to  meet  his  brothers,  and  as  he  approached  them  they 
each  appeared  as  anxious  to  meet  him  as  he  was  to  meet  them ;  in  a  tone 
of  breathless  anxiety  my  father  said,  '  Oh,  William,  I  have  had  a  queer 
dream.'  '  So  have  I,'  replied  his  brother,  when,  to  the  astonishment  of 
both,  the  other  brother,  John,  said,  '  I  have  had  a  queer  dream,  as  well.  I 
dreamt  that  my  mother  was  dead.'  '  So  did  I,'  said  each  of  the  other 
brothers.  It  was  true  that  each  brother  dreamt  during  the  same  night 
that  their  mother  was  dead ;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  in  the  course  of  a 
few  days  (for  the  posts  then  were  seldom  for  such  long  distances)  they 
heard  from  home  that  during  the  night  of  their  dream  their  mother,  who 
had  had  no  previous  illness  of  which  her  sons  knew  anything,  had  quietly 
passed  away.  u  George  Edwin  Swithinbank." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Swithinbank  adds  : — 
"  I  heard  it  over  and   over  again  from  my  father  and  the  two  brothers 
concerned." 

A  sister  of  Mr.  Swithinbank's  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  Farnley,  near  Leeds. 

"  October  20th,  1883. 
"  I  fully  confirm  this  statement,  as  the  only  surviving  daughter  of  the 

III.]  DREAMS.  383 

younger  of  the  three  brothers.  The  last  time  I  saw  my  uncle  William, 
shortly  before  my  father's  death,  he  specially  named  the  circumstance  to 
me,  and  I  had  heard  it  from  my  early  infancy  repeatedly  from  the  lips  of 
my  father  and  his  other  brothers. 

"  R.  M.  Hudson,  {nee  Swithinbank)." 

§  2.  Next  comes  a  group  in  which  some  thought  on  the  part  of  a 
waking  agent  seems  to  have  been  represented  in  the  dream. 

The  following  case  strongly  recalls  No,  149,  where  the  percipient 
seemed  to  catch  the  idea  of  a  scene  about  which  the  agent  was 
silently  reading. 

(407)  From  Miss  Julia  Wedgwood,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W. 

"March,  1886. 

"  My  dream  was  that  I  was  hurrying  along  the  street  somehow  in 
company  with  a  little  girl  of  about  10,  who  was  telling  me  of  her  life  in 
Florence,  where  she  had  been  brought  up.  I  was  listening  to  her  with 
great  interest,  and  I  remember  in  my  dream  being  surprised  that  I  could 
feel  interest  in  the  conversation  of  a  child  of  that  age.  One  odd  thing 
was  that  she  was  telling  me  about  building,  and  that  we  wandered  into 
some  grand  new  structure,  where  I  had  never  been  before. 

"  In  the  morning  I  took  up  the  novel  Marian  had  been  reading  before 
she  went  to  bed,  sitting  close  to  me.  I  will  copy  the  passages  which  made 
me  feel  that  her  interest  in  the  book  must  somehow  have  been  transferred 
to  my  mind.  My  building  was  not  a  cathedral,  and  what  the  child  said 
about  building  had  the  absurdity  of  a  dream,  so  my  dream  was  not  exact. 
The  little  girl  in  the  novel  has  been  brought  up  in  Florence. 

"  Julia  Wedgwood." 

The  extracts,  from  a  novel  called  Clarissa's  Tangled  Web,  are  as 
follows : — 

"Thus  wandering,  she  passed  to  the  east  end  of  the  north  aisle,  much 
secluded  from  view  by  the  back  of  the  great  organ  and  the  pulpit,  and  so 
alone  had  she  felt  that  she  started  when  she  saw  a  little  girl  seated  on  a 
stone  step,  the  first  of  three  leading  up  to  an  old  oaken  door  filling 
a  low  narrow  doorway  in  the  wall.  .  .  .  She  noticed  too  that  the 
little  girl  looked  towards  her,  and  closed  her  book,  and  now  appeared 
rather  to  invite  than  to  deprecate  conversation.  So  she  drew  nearer,  and 
said  in  the  peculiarly  pleasant  voice  which  generally  prepossessed  strangers, 
and  not  seldom  drew  forth  unexpected  confidences,  '  You  enjoy,  my  dear, 
being  in  this  cathedral  ? '  Irene  rose.  '  Yes,  ma'am,'  she  said,  '  I  do.  I  have 
seen  many  much  finer  cathedrals  and  churches  [having  been  brought  up 
in  Florence],  but  this  is  a  good  building  in  many  respects,  and  I  do  like 
being  here  very  much.' 

"  Mrs.  Weatherill  felt  rather  amused  by  the  air  of  experienced  judg- 
ment and  critical  discernment  assumed  by  this  very  young  connoisseur ; 
but  she  said  pleasantly,  '  You  know  the  building  much  more  familiarly  than 
I  do,  I  have  no  doubt.'  '  I  have  read  about  it,  ma'am,  and  have  observed 
for  myself,'  Irene  said,  quite  willing  to  impart  information  and  give  her 
own  impressions.     '  You  see  the  vaulting  of  the  roof,  how  it  is  filled  in 

384  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

and  held  up  by  those  arches,  so  many  intersections  and  changing  lines — 
that  is  quite  a  unique  arrangement,  but  /  think  it  is  beautiful !  And  then, 
ma'am,  .  .  .  you  see  that  the  height  of  the  vaulting  in  the  two  side 
aisles  and  the  middle  aisle  is  exactly  the  same,"  &c. 

In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Wedgwood  says  : — 

"T  n.m   nni+,p>  snrp.  thai-,  IVTarian   TTno'VifiS  rAn.rl   r\r\\ 

"  I  am  quite  sure  that  Marian  Hughes  read  not  a  word  aloud,  and  did 
not  mention  to  me  any  of  the  circumstances  which  reproduced  themselves 
with  the  grotesque  triviality  of  such  things  in  my  dream,  and  that  I  did 
not  know  anything  of  the  contents  of  the  book. 

"  It  was  one  of  a  number  sent  me  to  review  (I  leave  it  with  you,  with 
the  relevant  passages  marked),  and  Marian  being  very  unwell,  I  advised 
her  to  look  through  the  heap  instead  of  doing  anything  else.  She  sat  by 
me  all  the  evening  reading  this  novel.  I  was  busy  with  something  else, 
and  we  hardly  exchanged  a  word.  We  went  to  bed  at  the  same  time, 
and  I  had  a  vivid  dream  of  meeting  two  children  in  the  street  (there  is 
only  one  in  the  book),  and  getting  into  a  conversation  with  the  girl  about 
building.  The  only  sentence  which  remains  with  me  is  the  absurd  one, 
'  What !  don't  you  know  that  all  the  heart  of  oak  used  in  England  comes 
from  Florence  ? '  where  she  told  me  she  had  lived  all  her  life.  I  had  a 
vivid  sense  in  my  dream  of  the  intelligence  and  rare  knowledge  of  the 
little  girl,  and  when  I  opened  the  book  at  p.  38  it  came  to  me  with  an 
almost  startling  sense  of  familiarity.  I  think  I  mentioned  that  I  was 
wandering  with  my  little  girl  in  a  curious  new  building,  and  noticed  the 
ceiling,  but  it  was  not  a  cathedral,  so  that  again  was  only  partly  like,  but 
it  was,  I  remember,  a  curiously  low  roof.  There  was  a  sense  of  rather 
dramatic  interest  in  the  little  girl  which  the  story  reproduces,  and  which 
is  very  rare  in  dreams,  but  I  can  remember  no  words  to  help  it  out.  I 
think  the  child  was  10,  but  the  sense  of  premature  cleverness  and  of 
surprise  at  myself  in  being  interested  in  a  child's  talk  about  buildings  is 
what  remains  with  me." 

Miss  Wedgwood  adds  : — 

"  The  dream  corresponded  with  her  [Marian's]  inaccurate  recollection 
of  the  fiction  more  than  with  the  fi.ction  itself.  She  fancied  that  the 
incident  was  supposed  to  occur  as  in  my  dream — a  grown  person  walking 
with  a  little  girl  in  the  street.  It  is  one  of  several  faint  coincidences  of 
the  same  kind,  but  most  are  so  uninteresting  that  we  forget  them. 

"  Another  little  case  of  thought-reading  between  us  may  have  interest 
for  you.  I  should  premise  that  M.  H.  is  my  most  intimate  friend  as  well 
as  my  maid — copies  all  my  writings  for  me,  and  shares  all  my  interests. 

"  In  the  year  1 880,  I  was  troubled  by  some  circumstances  which  I 
carefully  concealed  from  her.  I  thought  that  some  actions  of  mine  might 
have  caused  annoyance  to  a  friend  long  dead,  if  he  had  been  still  among 
us,  and  the  doubt  stirred  up  much  speculation  in  my  mind  as  to  the 
possible  feeling  in  those  who  are  gone.  On  the  morning  after  I  had  been 
dwelling  on  this  (which  I  did  with  a  sense  of  vivid  anxiety),  M.  H.  said 
to  me,  '  Oh,  I  had  such  a  strange  dream  last  night.  I  thought  I  saw 
Mr.  A.  come  alive  in  his  picture  in  the  wall,  and  stand  out  of  the  picture, 
and  look  down  with  sorrow  and  grief,  as  if  he  were  much  hurt ! '  I  felt 
she  had   exactly  read  my   anxious  feelings,  all  sign  of  which  had  been 

III.]  DREAMS.  385 

carefully  concealed  fram  her.     She  had  never  seen  the  picture  which  was 
very  familiar  to  me." 

(408)  From  Mrs.  Hunter,  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St.  Helier's,  Jersey. 

"January  8th,  1884. 

"  The  following  happened  in  India  some  13  years  ago.  My  second 
daughter  had  been  with  me,  while  I  was  preparing  for  bed  one  night.  Our 
talk  was  merry,  and  only  gossip.  At  last  she  left  me  for  her  own  room. 
In  the  middle  of  the  night  I  awoke  in  an  agony  of  grief,  and  sat  up  in  bed, 
sobbing  and  trembling.  In  vain  I  reasoned  and  tried  to  believe  '  it  was 
only  a  dream.'  For  a  time  I  could  not ;  it  was  so  real.  My  dream  was 
that  a  cobra  di  capello  had  bitten  my  daughter,  and  she  raised  a  blanched, 
pinched  face  to  mine,  and  said,  '  Must  I  die,  mamma  % '  and  I  had  replied, 
in  agony,  '  You  must,  darling.' 

"  Next  morning,  my  dream  hardly  remembered,  I  was  dressing,  when 
she,  as  usual,  came  to  me.  Her  first  words  were,  '  Oh,  mamma,  I  had 
such  a  horrid  feeling  last  night  while  I  was  undressing.  I  felt  sure  there 
was  a  snake  in  my  room,  and  had  such  a  hunt  before  I  got  into  bed  ; 
indeed,  I  feel  sure  the  wretch  is  there  still,  and  I  have  ordered  the  hammal 
(male  housemaid)  to  turn  my  bathroom  upside  down.  It  was  a  horrid 
feeling.' 

"  No  snake  was  ever  seen  in  her  room. 

"  Even  in  those  days,  before  one  had  heard  of  thought-transference,  I 
explained  it  to  myself  in  some  such  way,  viz.,  that  her  waking  terror  had 
communicated  itself  to  me  in  sleep,  and  caused  my  dream. 

"H.  E.  Hunter." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hunter  adds  : — 

"  No,  we  never  had  dreams  nor  apprehensions,  nor  talks  about  snakes. 
At  hill  stations,  where  they  may  be  seen,  we  have,  of  course,  talked  of 
them  (glad  to  have  any  subject  for  talk  !),  but  at  the  time  of  my  dream  we 
were  living  in  a  large  house  close  to  the  sea,  and  where  snakes  were  almost 
unknown.  As  to  the  seeming  discrepancy  in  time,  it  can  be  removed  in 
this  way.  /  got  into  bed  directly  she  left  me,  and  in  India,  when  in 
health,  I  generally  went  to  sleep  at  once.  She  was  given  to  sit  up  reading, 
and  it  was  while  undressing  the  panic  began  ;  then  followed  the  hunt,  and 
we  may  feel  sure  that  even  after  she  got  into  bed  sleep  might  not  come  all 
at  once.  M-j  feeling  when  I  awoke  was  as  if  it  were  the  middle  of  the 
night,  but  it  might  really  have  been  only  an  hour-  or  two.  I  never  looked 
at  the  time." 

[We  of  course  cannot  assume  that  the  coincidence  was  exact.] 

(409)  From  Mrs.  Sibley,  6,  Radipole  Road,  Fulham,  S.W. 

"January  26th,  1884. 
"The  following  occurred  about  May,  1859.  I  believed  my  son  to  be 
away  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  I  had  no  reason  to  believe  he  would  come 
home  for  a  year  or  two,  when  one  night  I  dreamt  that  I  had  a  letter,  and 
all  that  was  written  on  it  and  inside  it  was  '  Woolwich,'  '  Woolwich,' 
'  Woolwich.'  I  awoke  with  the  belief  that  I  must  be  going  to  hear  from 
him  ;  it  was  then  about  6.30.  I  could  not  sleep  any  more,  and  when  I 
heard  the  postman's  knock  at  the  door,  I  sent  immediately  for  the  letters. 
Only  one  was  brought  to  me,  and  that  had  for  its  postmark  '  Woolwich 
VOL.  II.  2  c 

386  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Dockyard,'  and  it  was  from  my  son,  telling  me  of  the  safe  arrival,  the 
night  before,  of  the  ship  he  was  on.  My  son  was  in  the  navy,  and  I  am 
perfectly  certain  that  the  idea  of  his  speedy  return  had  never  crossed  my 
mind  ;  for  aught  I  knew  he  might  be  several  years  away.  This  dream  is 
unique  in  my  experience,  in  the  strength  of  the  conviction  it  produced  that 
it  must  correspond  with  reality. 

"  I  mentioned  this  dream  immediately  on  waking  to  a  daughter  (since 
deceased),  who  was  sleeping  with  me.  u  Katherine  Sibley." 

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  wife  of  the  present  writer,  a 
younger  daughter  of  Mrs.  Sibley's  : — 

"26,  Montpelier  Square,  S.W. 

"Jan.  26,  1884. 

"  I  remember  the  news  of  this  incident  spreading  through  the  house 
before  breakfast,  and  our  rushing  to  my  mother's  room— when  we  were 
shown  the  letter,  and  told  the  dream. 

"Kate  S.  Gurney." 

(410)  From  Mr.  E.  C.  Trevilian,  3,  Petersham  Terrace,  S.W. 

"February  2nd,  1884. 

"The  following  occurrence  took  place  some  12  or  14  years  ago.  I 
was  unmarried,  and  my  house  in  Somerset  had  no  establishment  in  it — 
merely  an  old  housekeeper  and  a  maid-servant.  I  lived  more  than  half 
the  year  in  chambers  in  London,  and  when  I  went  alone  down  to  the 
country,  I  never  gave  notice  of  my  coming. 

"  On  the  day  in  question  I  walked  up  from  the  station,  leaving  my 
luggage  to  follow,  and  rang — as  usual — at  the  side  door.  The  maid- 
servant unlocked  and  opened  it,  paused  a  moment  while  a  look  of  terror 
came  over  her  face,  and  fled  in  much  confusion.  I  walked  in  slowly,  and 
instead  of  turning  towards  my  study,  marched  straight  to  the  servants' 
hall.  The  old  housekeeper  was  by  the  fire,  and  as  I  approached  her, 
walking  up  one  side  of  the  long  table,  she  rushed  down  the  other,  and  out 
of  the  room.  I  retreated  to  my  study,  and  in  about  half  an  hour  rang 
the  bell.  The  old  woman  was  still  a  little  shaky,  but  was  able  to  explain 
that  the  two  had  so  entirely  made  up  their  minds  that  I  was  dead,  that  on 
my  appearance  just  now  they  had  taken  me  for  my  ghost.  The  maid- 
servant had  dreamed,  some  10  days  before,  that  I  was  out  shooting,  that 
my  gun  had  burst,  and  that  I  had  been  killed  on  the  spot.  They  had 
mentioned  this  to  several  people — among  them  to  the  clergyman  and  to 
my  agent — but  without  producing  much  effect.  The  girl  had  been  so 
positive,  that  she,  the  old  woman,  had  come  to  feel  equally  sure  of  my 
death. 

"  Now  on  the  day  of  the  dream  it  is  a  fact  that  my  gun  had  hurst — 
that  is,  it  had  gone  in  two  at  the  breach,  and  no  harm  had  been  done.  It 
was  at  a  country  house  in  Oxfordshire,  and  I  was  using  sawdust  powder, 
then  a  new  invention,  and  several  accidents  had  occurred  with  it  about 
that  time,  and  some  had  been  mentioned  in  the  newspapers.  This,  how- 
ever, I  well  recollect.  My  host  and  I,  then  and  there,  standing  among  the 
beaters,  decided  that  the  accident  should  not  be  mentioned,  and  we  looked 
regularly  and  found  no  notice  of  it  in  the  local   or   London  papers ;  nor 

III.]  DREAMS.  387 

could  I  find  out  that  any  mention  of  it  had  been  seen  in  any  of  the 
Somerset  local  papers,  though  it  was  chiefly  by  inquiry  and  not  by  myself 
examining  the  files  that  I  went  to  work. 

"  I  have  quite  lost  sight  of  the  servant-maid — the  old  woman  was  still 
in  existence  in  the  neighbourhood  some  months  ago. 

"  E.  C.  Treviliaj^." 

(411)  From  Miss  Augusta  Gould  (now  Mrs.  Temple,  and  resident  in 
India). 

"Sunny bank,  Ealing  Dean,  W. 

"December  19th,  1883. 

"  When  my  brother  was  in  Glasgow,  I  told  his  son  I  had  had  a  curious 
dream  of  an  unwieldy  chair  coming  to  me  as  a  present  from  his 
father.  As  I  was  only  residing  in  his  house,  I  had  no  idea  or  need  of 
receiving  a  chair. 

"The  next  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  him,  saying  he  had  bought 
me  such  a  curious  American  revolving  chair,  which  was  unwieldy  when  it 
came,  the  heavy  pedestal  and  legs  giving  us  difficulty  in  moving  it  from 
one  place  to  another. 

"  I  have  had  other  curious  unexpected  events  occur  after  dreams 
foreshadowing  them,  but  will  not  burden  you  with  more  particulars. 
Surely  the  afikir  of  the  chair  was  a  curious  case  of  rapport  between  my 
brother's  spirit  and  mine.  As  he  never  retired  to  rest  till  very  late,  and 
then  was  sleepless,  he  might  have  been  thinking  of  his  present  to  me  when 
I  was  dreaming  of  it.  ««  Augusta  Gould." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Gould  added  : — 

"  I  send  my  nephew's  corroboration  of  the  dream  as  to  the  chair.  I 
may  mention  that  my  nephew  is  26  years  old  and  clear  in  memory  usually, 
but  he  forgets  that  my  brother  was  in  Glasgow  at  the  time.  As  to  one 
of  your  questions,  I  dream  always  in  sleep,  either  by  day  or  night.  When- 
ever I  wake  a  dream  is  broken  into ;  so  I  often  dj:-eam  things  which  do 
not  come  to  pass,  though  often  a  foreshadowing  of  events  does  come  to  be 
realised." 

The  following  is  from  a  postcard  written  to  Miss  Gould  by  her 
nephew,  from  6,  Ellison  Place,  ISTewcastle-on-Tyne,  and  forwarded  to  us  : — 

"January  2,  1884. 

"  I  remember  perfectly  about  the  chair ;  it  was  one  time  when  my 
father  was  south  that  you  had  the  dream,  and  when  he  came  back  he 
brought  the  chair  with  him.  I  have  told  several  people  about  the  circum- 
stance.— Alex.  G." 

Where  the  subject  of  the  dream  is  as  odd  and  unlikely  as  in  this 
case  and  the  next,  its  triviality  can  scarcely  be  held  to  diminish  the 
force  of  the  coincidence. 

(412)  Erom  a  letter  written  on  June  27,  1875,  by  Mr.  J.  L.  O'Sullivan, 
then  United  States  Minister  at  Lisbon,  to  the  late  Serjeant  Cox,  as 
President  of  the  Psychological  Society,  and  handed  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  K. 
Munton,  who  was  Secretary  of  that  Society. 

Mr.  O'Sullivan  was  engaged  to  dine,  one  evening  in  1858,  with  his 
VOL.  II.  2  0  2 

388  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

British  colleague,  Mr.  (now  Sir  Henry)  Howard.  By  an  accident,  he  was 
obliged  to  present  himself  in  a  pair  of  wet,  muddy,  and  broken  boots,  which 
he  sedulously  kept  concealed  during  the  evening,  taking  care  to  arrive  after 
the  dinner  had  begun,  and  to  play  cards  afterwards,  instead  of  resorting 
to  the  drawing-room. 

"The  next  morning  I  went  as  usual  to  the  bedside  of  my  invalid 
mother,  who  for  years  had  not  been  able  even  to  turn  over  in  bed.  After 
a  little  while  she  said,  '  My  son,  I  had  such  a  queer  dream  about  you 
last  night.  I  saw  you  at  Mrs.  Howard's  party,  and  you  were  in  such  a 
comical  but  annojdng  predicament.  I  thought  you  had  on  a  pair  of  wet 
and  muddy  and  broken  hoots,  and  you  were  keeping  your  feet  hidden  under 
the  table.'    And  she  laughed  over  the  recollection  of  such  an  absurd  dream. 

"  I  ascertained  that  my  servant  had  not  become  afterwards  conscious 
of  his  omission,  and  that  no  human  being  under  my  roof  knew  that  night 
of  what  had  indeed  been  my  queer  predicament." 

(413)  From  Mrs.  Barr,  Apsley  Town,  East  Grinstead. 

"Dec.  11,  1883. 

"  When  in  England  some  years  ago,  I  had  a  very  bad  cough,  for  which 
a  blister  was  ordered  by  my  medical  man,  but  being  improperly  applied  it 
left  a  very  ugly  mark,  like  the  print  of  a  horse's  shoe.  I  was  then  prepar- 
ing to  rejoin  my  husband  [the  late  General  Barr]  in  India,  and  carefully 
avoided  mentioning  the  circumstance  to  him. 

"  On  my  way  out  to  Bombay  I  was  taken  seriously  ill,  and  was  so 
weak  on  my  arrival  that  I  had  to  be  carried  on  shore.  As  our  own  house 
was  some  miles  from  the  place  of  landing  we  rested  half  way  at  my  father- 
in-law's  house.  Whilst  there  my  husband's  mother  said  to  him,  '  Does 
Lizzie  look  at  all  as  you  saw  her  in  your  dream  % '  Upon  which  my  husband 
turned  to  me  and  said,  '  I  had  such  a  horrid  dream  about  you  the  other 
night.  I  saw  you  looking  pale  and  ill,  as  you  do  now,  but  you  had  a 
dreadful  mark  like  a  horse  shoe  upon  your  chest.'  Being  ill,  I  had  landed 
in  a  white  muslin  dressing-gown,  and  I  slightly  parted  it  in  front  and 
showed  him  the  mark.  He  was  much  astonished  and  said,  '  How  did  you 
get  that  1     It  is  exactly  the  mark  I  saw  in  my  dream.' 

"  Elizabeth  H.  A.  Bare." 

(414)  From  a  narrator,  Mr.  B.,  whose  name  and  address  (though  he 
made  no  stipulation  on  the  subject)  it  seems  right  to  suppress. 

"January  16th,  1885. 
"In  March,  1880,  our  servant  A.  had  been  with  us  a  few  months, 
was  well  recommended  by  people  we  knew,  and  for  the  time  she  had 
been  with  us  proved  trustworthy,  and  as  good  as  we  could  expect  a 
servant  to  be.  The  dream  Mrs.  B.  had  respecting  her  happened  in  the 
early  morning.  She  dreamt  that  the  maid  came  into  the  dining-room,  sat 
down  by  her  (a  strange  proceeding),  and  said  she  had  something  on  her 
mind  to  tell  her  mistress.  It  was  that  she  had  a  boy  of  three  years  old, 
whose  name  was  Bertie.  When  Mrs.  B.  got  up,  which  she  did  after 
breakfasting  in  bed  as  usual,  she  went  out  into  the  orchard  where  A. 
was  hanging  the  clothes.  Mrs.  B.  told  her  her  dream,  and  A.  made  no 
reply,  but  looked  very  pale  and  peculiar.  Mrs.  B.  left  her  under  the 
impression  that  she  had  offended   her.     Some  time  after,  Mrs.  B.  found 

iii.J  DREAMS.  389 

A.  in  the  kitchen,  crying  bitterly.  On  inquiring  what  was  the  matter, 
whether  she  was  offended,  she  replied,  '  Oh,  no  !  ma'am,  your  dream  is  quite 
true  in  all  respects,  even  the  name.' 

"  It  seems  that  A.  had  had  it  on  her  mind  to  tell  Mrs.  B.  about 
this  child  from  the  first,  and  her  mother  had  pressed  her  to  tell  Mrs.  B. 
about  it.  Mrs.  B.  says  she  had  not  the  least  suspicion  of  this  matter, 
not  even  after  the  dream. 

"  The  servant  A.  and  her  mistress  had  a  great  liking  for  each  other, 
more  than  is  usual  with  servant  and  mistress,  and  A.  had  never  been  so 
happy  in  a  situation  before. 

"  A.'s  age  at  the  time  was  23  years. 
IP  "  [A  year  subsequently,]  when  in  London,  visiting  her  relatives,  Mrs. 

B.  dreamed  that  her  servant,  A.,  whom  she  had  left  at  home,  was  in 
dreadfiil  trouble — could  see  her  in  tears  ;  all  night  Mrs.  B.  was  continually 
dreaming  of  her.  Next  morning  Mrs.  B.  determined  upon  returning  home, 
although  it  was  arranged  for  a  longer  stay.  On  her  arrival,  A.  opened  the 
door,  and  at  once  burst  into  a  paroxysm  of  grief,  saying  that  '  Bertie  was 
dying,'  that  she  had  been  praying  for  him  and  for  Mrs.  B.'s  return,  and 
crying  all  the  previous  night,  and  wished  to  go  to  him  at  once.  (It  should 
have  been  mentioned  that  the  child,  Bertie,  was  living  with  A.'s  mother.) 

"  Mrs.  B.  is  not  remarkable  for  many  dreams." 

Mrs.  B.  writes  : — 

"  I  certify  that  the  foregoing  statement  is  quite  correct. 

"  Ellen  B." 

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  the  first  dream,  Mr.  B.  says  that  his  wife 
did  not  mention  it  to  him  till  some  time  afterwards,  but  then  could  refrain 
no  longer.  In  conversation  Mrs.  B.  told  me  that  she  was  quite  confident 
that  the  detail  of  the  name  occurred  in  the  dream,  and  was  not  subse- 
quently read  back  into  it ;  and  also  that  she  had  had  no  idea  whatever  of 
A.'s  history.     The  dreams  were  exceptionally  vivid  in  detail. 

(415)  From  Miss  A.  J.  Middleton,  20,  Stanley  Gardens,  Kensington 
Park  Road,  W. 

"  1884. 

"  Some  years  ago,  I  was  staying  with  friends,  and  came  down  one  day, 
saying  I  had  had  such  a  dreadful  dream,  that  my  youngest  brother  was 
drowned ;  the  impression  was  so  vivid  I  could  not  forget  it.  When  the 
second  post  letters  came,  at  about  2.30,  I  heard  that  a  man  who  was  boat- 
ing with  this  brother  had  slipped  getting  into  the  boat,  and  was  drowned, 
and  my  brother  was  in  great  distress  about  it ;  the  man  I  never  saw,  and 
did  not  know  his  name.  When  I  read  the  letter,  my  friends  said,  '  How 
odd  that  you  should  have  dreamed  your  brother  was  drowned ;  we  should 
have  said  you  had  made  it  up  had  you  not  told  us  first.' 

"  A.  J.  Middleton." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Middleton  adds  : — 

"  I  send  you  the  card  to-day  I  received  from  my  friend  confirming  my 
first  dream.  I  fancy  I  stayed  with  them  about  a  week.  This  is  the  only 
occasion  on  which  I  have  had  a  very  distressing  dream  of  death  which 
left  a  vivid  and  lasting  impression." 

The  card  is  as  follows  : — 

390  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap, 

"  Kirkbright  Yicarage. 

"  March,   1884. 
"  Yes,  I  quite  well  remember  your  telling  us  about  your  dream,  and 
your  hearing  the  news  the  next  morning.     Thanks  to  our  visitors'  list  I  can 
tell  you  the  date  of  your  coming  to  us,  January  21st,   1881. 

"M.  CoPE."i 

The  dream  in  this  case,  if  telepathic,  was  probably  due  to  the  idea 
in  the  brother's  mind.  The  next  case  might  be  explained  in  a  similar 
way,  by  reference  to  what  was  filling  the  minds  of  those  who 
surrounded  the  percipient  ;  but  it  might  also  be  regarded  as  a  case 
of  direct  impression  from  the  drowning  man ;  and  the  mis-recognition 
would  then  be  very  similar  to  what  has  been  observed  in  other 
examples  (Nos.  170,  171,  249,  and  cf.  455  below).  The  case  may 
further  illustrate  that  development  of  the  percipient  faculty  in 
illness,  which  was  noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter  (p.  349). 

(416)  From  Miss  Copeman,  St.  Stephen's  House,  Norwich. 

"  March  2nd,   1884. 

"  My  mother  nursed  my  grandmother  all  through  her  last  illness,  and 
a  few  days  before  she  died  they  received  the  intelligence  of  the  sudden 
death  by  drowning  of  the  eldest  son  of  the  family.  It  was  not 
referred  to  in  the  presence  of  my  grandmother,  but  that  day  or  the 
next,  awaking  from  a  sleep,  she  said,  '  I  have  just  seen  John  in  the 
water  ;  has  anything  happened  to  him  1 '  Joseph  was  the  name  of  the  one 
drowned,  and  they  were  able  to  say  that  John.,  another  son,  was  quite 
well,  and  she  was  quieted.  It  was  thought  she  meant  Joseph  at  the  time, 
but  in  her  feebleness  did  not  remember  the  right  name.  She  died  a  day 
or  two  after. 

"  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  repeat  this,  as  a  remarkable  coinci- 
dence not  to  be  explained." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Copeman  writes  : — 

"  May  13th,  1884. 

"  I  fear  I  cannot  give  all  the  particulars  you  msh  to  have  ;  the  coinci- 
dence is  one  not  easy  to  relate  clearly,  for  no  one  is  living  now  who 
remembers  anything  definite  about  it.  I  only  know  of  it  as  I  heard 
it  from  my  own  mother's  lips,  and  it  is  3  years  since  her  death. 
I  have  ascertained  from  another  member  of  my  family  that  the  two 
deaths  occurred  in  the  year  1844,  with  an  interval  of  about  a  week 
between  them.  My  grandmother's  name  was  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Buck, 
of  East  Dereham,  Norfolk. 

"  My  father  and  sister  confirm  my  statement,  as  they,  too,  have  more 
than  once  heard  my  mother  speak  of  it.  "Lucy  A  Copeman  " 

1  We  have  received  a  parallel  case  to  this  from  Miss  M.  J.  Potter,  of  42,  Northumber- 
land Avenue,  Kingstown,  who  tells  us  that  in  1860  she  dreamt  very  vividly  that  a  cousin 
was  drowned  in  a  deep  pond,  on  the  night  after  the  drowning  in  a  mill-pond  of  another 
cousin  who  was  living  in  the  same  house  as  the  one  dreamt  of.  The  news  of  the  accident 
arrived  before  Miss  Potter  left  her  room  next  morning,  and  before  she  had  an  opportunity 
of  mentioning  her  dream. 

III.]  DREAMS.  391 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Joseph  Buck  was 
drowned  at  Sproughton  on  the  9th  of  August,  1844,  and  that  his  mother 
died  on  the  17th. 

[In  cases  like  this  it  is  impossible  to  be  absolutely  certain  that  the 
news  did  not  become  known  to  the  sick  person  through  a  whisper,  or  a 
reference  made  to  it  when  she  was  supposed  to  be  asleep,  which  may  have 
acted  as  the  nucleus  of  a  dream.] 

It  occasionally  happens  that  a  mene  seems  to  have  been  telepathi- 
cally  represented  at  a  time  when  it  was  not  occupying  the  agent's 
senses,  though  it  may  have  been  consciously  occupying  his  mind  (c/. 
Miss  Wilkinson's  case  below,  Chap.  IV.,  §  2). 

(417)  From  the  Rev.  W.  Champneys,  Haslingden  Vicarage,  Man- 
chester. ^ 

"September  3rd,  1884. 

"  The  incident  to  which  I  imagine  you  allude  happened  to  my  father, 
the  late  Dean  of  Lichfield.     I  have  often  heard  him  tell  the  story. 

"  One  of  his  brothers  was  secretary  of  the  Church  Pastoral  Aid  Society, 
and  in  that  capacity  was  often  travelling  about  the  country,  preaching 
sermons  and  attending  meetings.  He  was  in  precarious  health,  having 
once  had  rheumatic  fever,  which  had  left  behind  it  heart-complaint.  One 
night  my  father  dreamed  that  he  was  walking  through  the  street  of  a 
village  where  he  had  never  been  before.  The  whole  scene  was  entirely 
new,  and  impressed  itself  strongly  on  his  memory.  Coming  to  the  village 
inn,  he  walked  up  to  the  door  to  inquire  after  his  brother,  who  had  started 
off  on  one  of  his  journeys  a  few  days  before,  in  his  usual  health.  The  land- 
lady, of  whom  he  made  the  inquiry,  returned  an  evasive  answer,  and  then 
he  asked  if  his  brother's  wife  was  there  :  to  which  she  replied,  '  Not  his 
wife^  sir,  but  his  widow : '  and  with  the  shock  of  these  words  he  awoke. 

"  As  soon  as  a  message  could  reach  him  the  next  day  (it  was  before  the 
days  of  telegraphs),  he  heard  that  his  brother  had  been  taken  ill  on  his 
journey  the  day  before ;  that  trying  to  reach  the  town,  where  he  was  ex- 
pected, they  had  been  obliged  to  put  up  at  a  village  inn  on  the  way,  and 
that  there,  after  a  very  short  illness,  he  had  died ;  and  when  my  father  went 
to  the  place  that  day,  which  was  one  he  had  never  been  to  before,  or  even 
heard  of,  the  whole  scene  was  exactly  the  same  that  had  been  before  him 
in  his  dream — street,  houses,  country,  everything  was  the  same,  and  at  the 
very  inn  where  he  dreamed  he  had  inquired  for  his  brother,  he  found  his 
brother's  body  lying.  u  Weldon  Champneys." 

Through  the  kindness  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Church  Pastoral  Aid 
Society,  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain  that  the  death  of  the  Rev.  E.  T. 
Champneys  occurred  on  June  16,  1845,  at  Caxton. 

[The  essential  point  of  such  a  narrative  as  this  is  of  course  inde- 
pendent of  the  alleged  correspondence  of  detail,  which  is  likely  to  seem 
in  memory  more  exact  than  it  really  was.] 

1  A  not  quite  correct  version  of  this  narrative,  without  names,  is  given  by  the  Rev.  J. 
S.  Pollock.  Incumbent  of  St.  Alban  the  Martyr,  Birmingham,  in  Bead  and  Gone,  p.  30. 

392  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  next  case  may  possibly  be  of  the  same  kind;  but  we  have  no 
proof  that  the  scene  was  more  than  an  imaginary  setting  supplied  by 
the  dreamer  (as  in  several  of  the  cases  in  |  4  below).  The  percipient 
did  not  himself  believe  that  he  had  been  asleep ;  but  without  external 
evidence  that  he  was  awake,  we  can  hardly  regard  otherwise  than  as 
a  dream  an  experience  in  which  he  appears  to  himself  to  be  acting  a 
part,  during  a  time  much  longer  than  the  actual  duration  of  the 
impression. 

(418)  From  Mr.  Adrian  Stokes,  M.R.C.S.,  16,  Howell  Road,  St. 
Davids,  Exeter.  The  account  was  originally  published  in  the  Spiritual 
Magazine^  in  December,  1867. 

"  My  uncle,  the  late  Adrian  Stokes,  Esq.,  of  Thornbury,  near  Bristol, 
was  living  at  his  villa  in  that  little  town,  in  the  year  1842,  and  on  the 
evening  of  a  certain  day  in  November  had  retired  to  bed,  in  his  usual 
health,  at  his  customary  hour.  Contrary  to  his  habit,  however,  he  could 
not  sleep,  but  lay  awake  counting  the  hours  until  3  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
when  suddenly  he  found  himself  in  a  country  whose  features  were  quite 
strange  to  him.  He  became  aware  that  he  was  in  the  Neilgherrie  hill 
country  of  India,  where  his  brother  Sam  was  on  invalid  furlough.  It 
appeared  to  him  that  he  remained  three  months  there  with  Sam,  that  he 
attended  him  during  his  illness,  and  that  finally  Sam  died,  when  the  vision 
faded,  and  he  found  himself  again  in  his  bed.^  He  was  now  satisfied 
that  this  vision  had  revealed  a  certainty  to  him,  turned  round  and  fell 
asleep,  and  in  the  morning  he  told  my  aunt  all  about  it.  He  has  mentioned 
this  matter  to  me  several  times,  and  always  expressed  his  belief  that  he 
was  broad  awake  while  he  saw  the  vision,  which  he  thought  must  have 
passed  with  the  rapidity  of  '  thought,'  and  was  quite  sure  it  was  no 
dream. 

"  In  due  course  my  uncle  received  from  his  brother's  agents  at  Madras 
a  letter  containing  information  of  Sam's  death  at  such  and  such  a  place 
in  the  Neilgherrie  Hills,  at  the  precise  day  and  hour  that  my  uncle  saw 
the  vision  in  his  bed  at  Thornbury.  '  It  was  no  news  to  me,'  said  my  uncle 
to  me  when  telling  me  of  the  circumstance  ;  '  I  knew  poor  Sam  was  gone 
several  months  before.' 

"  Adrian  Stokes," 

We  find  from  the  Indian  Service  Register  that  the  death  took  place 
on   November  12th,   1843  (not  1842),  at  Ootacamund. 

In  answer  to  a  question,  Mr.  Stokes  tells  us  that  he  was  not  told  of 
this  vision  till  several  years  after  its  occurrence. 

The  following  example  might  be  referred  to  the  same  type,  if  we 

1  We  have  a  similar  case — first-hand,  but  remote  and  from  an  uneducated  witness — 
where  the  dreamer  saw  her  brother,  a  carpenter's  mate,  fall  from  a  yard  and  break  his 
leg,  and  then  nursed  him  till  his  death.  She  says  that  she  marked  the  day,  as  it  happened 
to  be  his  birthday,  and  afterwards  learnt  from  one  of  his  shipmates  that  he  had  died  on 
the  date  of  her  dream,  having  broken  his  leg  by  a  fall  three  days  previously. 

III.]  DREAMS.  393 

could  be  quite  sure  that  the  details  following  the  accident  really 
figured  in  the  dream  ;  but  they  may  easily  have  been  "  read  back  " 
into  it ;   and  the  case  is  again  second-hand  and  remote. 

(419)  From  Mr.  A.  W.  Orr,  Kingston  Road,    Didsbury,  near  Man- 

"January  2nd,   1885. 

"  Some  40  years  ago,  my  father  was  house-surgeon  at  the  City  o£ 
Dublin  Hospital,  and  one  day  a  young  man,  a  sailor,  was  brought  in  who 
had  fallen  from  one  of  the  yards  of  the  vessel  on  which  he  served.  He 
was  badly  injured,  and  in  about  three  days  he  died.  Late  in  the  afternoon 
of  the  day  on  which  the  man  died,  an  old  woman,  very  poor  and  fagged, 
came  up  to  the  hospital  and  asked  to  see  the  surgeon.  My  father  saw  her, 
and  inquired  what  he  could  do  for  her  ;  when  she  inquired  whether  a 
young  sailor  had  been  brought  to  that  institution,  and  if  so,  could  she  see 
him  1  My  father  told  her  of  the  man  above  mentioned,  and  that  he  had 
died  that  morning. 

"  It  turned  out  that  the  old  woman  was  the  young  man's  mother, 
that  she  lived  in  the  Co.  Carlow,  and  that  three  nights  previously  she 
had  dreamt  that  her  son  had  fallen  from  the  rigging  of  the  vessel,  and  had 
been  taken  to  an  hospital.  So  vivid  was  the  dream  that  she  could  not 
rest  till  she  got  to  Dublin  (where  she  had  never  been  before),  and  the 
moment  she  saw  the  hospital,  she  recognised  it  as  the  building  she  had 
seen  in  her  dream.  Her  dream  was  only  too  true,  for  she  found  that  her 
son  had  died  from  the  eflfects  of  injuries  occasioned  by  a  fall  just  as 
appeared  in  her  dream. 

"  The  old  woman  had  walked  a  distance  of  over  60  miles,  and  entered 
the  city  by  the  road  which  passed  the  front  of  the  hospital. 

"  A.  W.  Orr." 

In  a  second  letter  Mr.  Orr  says  : — 

"  You  may  rely  upon  the  facts  being  as  I  have  stated  them,  as  I  have 
frequently  spoken  to  my  father  on  the  subject,  the  case  being  of  such  a 
very  remarkable  character." 

§  3.  These  last  cases  form  a  transition  to  the  next  class,  which  is 
distinguished  by  the  direct  correspondence  of  the  dream  with  a  real 
event  that  befell  the  agent  ;  but  many  of  the  dreams  may  still,  as 
before,  be  regarded  as  literal  representations  of  the  agent's  thought. 
The  prominent  event,  as  usual,  is  death. 

(420)  The  Rev.  W.  B.  B.  having  communicated  to  me  the  fact 
that  some  time  ago,  he  had  had  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream — which 
haunted  him  for  a  portion  of  two  days — of  the  death  of  an  acquaintance, 
and  that  the  death  had  happened  coincidently  with  the  dream,  the 
usual  questions  were  asked.     He  replied  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Vicarage,  . 

"December  9th,  1884. 
"  In  reference  to  the  subject  of  your  note,  I  am  able  to  say  that  I  had 

394  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

no  means  of  knowing  that  the  lady  in  question  was  ailing  or  even  in 
delicate  health.  She  was  the  wife  of  a  cousin  from  whom  or  of  whom  I 
do  not  think  I  had  heard  for  some  months.  I  have  so  much  to  do  in  my 
parish  that  I  have  little  time  for  correspondence,  but  in  consequence  of 
what  I  dreamed  I  at  once  wrote  to  the  son  of  the  lady  referred  to,  having 
previously,  on  awaking,  mentioned    the    matter  to    my  own    wife.     My 

remark  to  her  was,  '  We  shall  hear  some  bad  news,  I  fear,   from  E, ' 

(the  residence  of  my  cousin),  and  I  then  repeated  the  dream.  Within 
another  post  I  heard  that  Mrs.  B.  had  died  on  that  night."  [The  narrator 
goes  on  to  say  that  a  very  near  relative  of  his  had  three  times  had  exactly 
similar  intimations.     See  p.   132,  note.] 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on 
Sept.  2,  1866. 

The  following  is  the  corroboration  of  the  narrator's  wife  : — 

"December  11th,   1884. 

"  Mrs.  B.  has  much  pleasure  in  confirming  the  statement  made  by  her 
husband  as  to  his  having  communicated  to  her  the  substance  of  his  dream 
boding  something  very  serious  to  his  cousin's  family.  We  had  had  no 
intimation  of  the  illness.  The  family  lives  in  Ireland,  and  the  news  of 
the  death  did  not  reach  us  until  two  days  after." 

[The  slight  discrepancy  as  to  when  the  news  arrived  does  not  seem 
important.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  dream  was  impressive  enough  to 
cause  a  busy  man  to  write  a  letter.] 

(421)  From  Miss  C.  D.  Garnett,  Furze  Hill  Lodge,  Brighton. 

"December  18th,  1883. 

"  On  the  13th  of  February,  1883,  when  at  Biarritz,  I  dreamt  that  a 
relative,  whom  we  had  left  in  perfect  health  in  England,  and  between 
whom  and  myself  there  was  a  strong  afiinity,  was  dying,  and  that  we  had 
to  leave  Biarritz  sooner  than  we  intended.  The  dream  haunted  me 
throughout  the  following  morning,  and  in  the  evening  we  received  a  tele- 
gram summoning  us  home  at  once.  She  died  as  we  reached  England.  I 
may  mention  that  this  event  was  entirely  unlooked  for. 

"C.  D.  Garnett." 

We  find  from  the  Liverpool  Daily  Post  that  the  death  occurred  on 
Feb.  15,  1883. 

Miss  Garnett  adds  :— 

"March  3rd,  1885. 

"  In  reply  to  your  questions  respecting  the  dream  I  had  at  Biarritz  : 
1 .  What  was  the  state  of  the  dying  person  at  the  time  of  the  dream? — She 
was  unconscious.^  2.  What  was  the  character  of  the  dream  1 — I  dreamt 
that  we  were  summoned  home  suddenly  (we  had  then  been  a  week  in 
Biarritz,  and  intended  remaining  two  months),  that  we  received  a  telegram 
announcing  the  sad  state  of  my  relative ;  and  the  dream  was  all  concerning 
her — and  a  very  troublesome  one.  Jt  wasn't  an  ordinary  dream.  I  felt 
greatly  disturbed  throughout  the  day  following,  and  in  the  evening,  about 
dinner  time,  the  telegram  came." 

1  See  Chap,  v.,  §  10,  and  Vol.  i.,  p.  563,  note. 

III.]  DREAMS.  395 

Miss  M.  Garnett  writes,  on  December  30,  1883  : — 

"  I  understand  from  my  sister  that  you  desire  a  corroboration  of  her 
remarkable  dream  at  Biarritz.  She  mentioned  it  to  me  the  following 
morning.     She  was  much  attached  to  the  relative  dreamt  of. 

"  MiLLiCENT  Garnett." 

(422)  From  Colonel  V.,  who  says  that  the  case  "  was  written  from 
memory,  and  dates  in  my  diary." 

"  March  11th,  1886. 

"On  Sunday  night,  25th  May,  1884,  I  had  a  most  extraordinary 
dream.  I  dreamt  that  my  son  A.,  a  young  officer  in  a  regiment  at 
Gibraltar,  was  lying  very  ill  there  with  fever,  and  was  calling  out  to  me, 
'  Father,  father,  come  over  and  let  me  see  you  or  my  mother.'  The  next 
morning  I  went  to  see  the  Rev.  G.,  the  well-known  coach,  living  near  me. 
On  entering  his  room,  he  exclaimed, '  Do  you  believe  in  "  dream-waves"  ?' 
I  replied,  No,  I  did  not.  He  remarked  that  just  as  I  was  entering  the 
room,  ne  was  on  the  point  of  sitting  down  before  his  desk  and  commencing 
a  letter  to  me,  asking  me  to  come  over  and  see  him.  I  then  said,  '  I  had  a 
curious  dream  last  night.  I  saw  before  me  my  son  A.  down  with  fever  at 
Gibraltar,  imploring  me  to  come  over  and  see  him.'  As  I  had  that  morning 
a  letter  from  him,  written  in  good  spirits,  I  thought  it  curious,  and  gave 
the  dream  no  further  thought. 

"  On  Tuesday,  the  27th  May,  I  went  to  Ramsgate  with  my  second  son, 
for  change.  On  the  29th  May,  one  of  my  family  here  wired  to  me  to 
return  home,  as  news  had  arrived  from  Gibraltar  that  my  son  A.  was  very 
ill  with  Rock  fever.  I  returned  in  a  few  hours.  I  read  over  my  letters 
from  Gibraltar.  It  appears  that  on  the  17th  May  my  son  fell  ill,  and  was 
placed  on  the  sick  list.  The  attack  turned  out  to  be  Rock  fever.  He 
gradually  got  worse ;  on  the  24th  he  was  delirious,  and  on  the  25th  his 
brother  officers  had  to  get  a  nurse,  Mrs.  S.,  to  take  charge  of  the  patient. 
On  the  23rd  a  second  doctor  was  called  in  consultation.  So  bad  was  the 
news  that  I  received  from  Gibraltar  by  letter  and  telegrams,  that  I  left 
London  on  the  4th  June,  and  reached  it  on  the  9th.  I  found  the 
patient  doing  well,  but  very  weak.  I  had  to  remain  there  till  the 
3rd  July,  the  attack  of  fever  continuing,  and  we  both  returned  home  on 
the  8th  July. 

"  I  mentioned  to  the  nurse  my  curious  dream  of  the  25th  May.  She 
said  she  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  patient  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day. 
He  was  very  delirious  all  that  night,  and  was  constantly  calling  out,  '  Oh, 
mother,  mother,  do  come  over  to  see  me ' ;  and  as  he  probably  remembered 
how  delicate  she  was,  and  that  she  could  not  take  a  sea  voyage  across  the 
Bay  of  Biscay,  he  also  called  out,  '  Father,  father,  come  and  comfort  me, 
and  let  me  see  you  again.' 

"  It  was  months  after  our  return  home  before  the  fever  left  him,  and 
he  did  not  quite  get  rid  of  it  till  November,  1884." 

In  conversation.  Colonel  V.  informed  me  that  he  dreams  very  little, 
and  scarcely  ever  has  distressing  dreams  ;  and  that,  quite  apart  from  the 
confirmation,  this  dream  would  have  been  very  exceptional  in  its  character. 
Mrs.  S.,  who  was  an  excellent  nurse,  and  whom  he  regards  as  entirely 
trustworthy,  has  left  Gibraltar,  and  gone,  he  thinks,  to  Morocco. 

396  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  Rev.  H.  P.  Gurney,  to  whom  Colonel  V.  described  his  dream  next 
morning,  writes  from  2,  Powis  Square,  W.,  on  March  22,  1886  : — 

"I  do  not  remember  any  particulars  of  Colonel  V.'s  dream.  It 
occurred  nearly  two  years  ago,  and  at  a  time  when  I  am  particularly  busy. 
I  only  recollect  that  he  told  me  that  he  had  had  a  curious  dream  about  his 
son  at  Gibraltar,  who  is  one  of  our  former  pupils.  I  cannot  recall  any 
particulars,  but  I  think  that  his  son  called  to  him  to  come  and  visit  him. 
I  know  that  he  afterwards  found  out  that  he  was  seriously  ill  with  fever, 
and  had  to  go  out  to  bring  him  home. 

"  H.  P.  Gurney." 

Mrs.  Thrupp,  of  67,  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  W.,  writing  to  us  on 
April  2nd,  1886,  says  that  she  called  at  Colonel  V.'s  house  when  he  was 
on  the  point  of  starting  for  Gibraltar  to  see  his  son,  and  that  he  then  told 
her  "  all  about  his  dream." 

(423)  From  Mrs.  S.  (the  narrator  of  case  74),  who  is  willing  that  her 
name  should  be  given  to  any  one  genuinely  interested  in  this  case. 

"  October  27th,  1885. 

"  In  1871,  I  was  staying  at  Diisseldorf  with  my  daughter,  who  had 
just  been  to  an  eminent  doctor  in  Bonn  ta  have  an  operation  performed  on 
the  throat.  My  mother-in-law  was  also  in  Bonn,  and,  after  the  operation, 
had  run  after  the  cab  containing  my  daughter  and  myself,  and  had  given 
the  former  (who  was  a  child  at  the  time)  a  ten-thaler  note,  as  a  reward  for 
the  brave  manner  in  which  she  had  submitted  to  the  operation.  She  was 
in  excellent  spirits,  and  laughed  and  joked  with  us  before  parting.  A  day 
or  two  afterwards  I  awoke,  and  said  to  my  daughter,  who  slept  in  the  same 

room,    '  O  M ,  I   have   had  such  a  dreadful  dream.     I  dreamt  your 

grandmother  was  dead.'  The  terror  caused  by  the  dream  was  so  great  that 
I  felt  compelled  to  wake  my  daughter,  though  I  knew  that  in  her  con- 
dition this  was  most  unwise,  as  she  was  still  suffering  from  the  effects 
of  the  operation.  I  felt  I  must  tell  someone.  My  daughter  said  it  was 
'  only  a  dream,'  and  told  me  to  go  to  sleep.  I  asked  how  her  throat  was, 
and  she  said  it  was  better.  I  pulled  out  my  watch  from  under  the  pillow, 
and  found  it  was  between  3  and  4  a.m. 

"  The  following  morning,  at  10  o'clock,  I  received  a  telegram,  telling 
me  to  meet  my  mother-in-law's  sister  at  Cologne  Station.  I  did  so,  and 
they  broke  to  me  the  news  of  my  mother-in-law's  death,  which  had  taken 
place  the  previous  night.  I  had  been  in  no  sort  of  anxiety  about  her, 
and  I  was  only  told  afterwards  that  she  had  been  suffering  for  many 
years  from  some  internal  complaint,  for  which  she  had  been  operated  on 
on  the  day  following  that  on  which  I  last  saw  her.  I  was  totally  ignorant 
that  this  was  going  to  be  done. 

"  This  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  remember  having  had  a  vivid 
and  distressing  dream  of  death.  ^^  lyr   o  » 

[Mrs.  S.'s  daughter  "  thinks  her  testimony  would  be  of  little  use,  as  she 
was  quite  young  at  the  time,  and  her  memory  is  not  quite  clear  on  several 
points."] 

(424)  A  lady  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  published, 
having  been  asked  (by  Miss  Bryce,  of  35,  Bryanston  Square,  W.)  whether 

III.]  DREAMS.  397 

since  January   1st,  1874,   she  had  had  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream  of 
the  death  of  some  person  known  to  her,  answered  : —  ^j  -^gg^ 

"Yes,  on  August  13th,  1877.  I  was  27,  and  in  excellent  health,  as 
I  was  on  my  way  home  from  a  month's  stay  in  Switzerland.  The  impres- 
sion lasted  for  some  hours  after  I  rose.  In  the  night  it  was  so  distressing 
as  to  wake  me.  The  person  of  whose  death  I  dreamt  was  my  oldest  and 
dearly-beloved  brother,  a  young  man  of  26.  He  died  at  Blackheath  just 
at  the  same  time,  i.e.,  between  12  and  3  in  the  early  morning.  I  had 
heard  the  day  before  that  he  was  unwell,  but  no  fatal  consequences  were 
thought  of." 

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  our  informant  writes  on  May  17,  1884  : — . 

"My  brother  was  a  young  man  of  fine  physical  frame,  in  vigorous 
health,  going  daily  to  the  City  from  his  home  with  my  parents  at  Black- 
heath.  He  had,  however,  a  constitutional  weakness  in  the  '  hsemorrhagic 
diathesis,'  which  was  not  appreciated  by  me  as  in  the  least  likely  to 
shorten  his  life. 

"  At  the  time  in  question  he  had  taken  a  fortnight's  holiday  at 
Maidenhead,  chiefly  spent  in  rowing,  at  which  he  was  an  adept.  After 
his  return  he  fainted,  one  morning,  and  a  bruise  was  found  on  his  left 
shoulder.  The  letter  that  I  received  told  me  of  this,  adding  that  the 
doctor  had  seen  him,  that  some  anxiety  had  been  excited,  but  that  he  was 
better. 

"  Had  there  been  any  apprehension  of  fatal  consequences,  or  even  of  a 
serious  illness,  I  should  have  left  Boulogne  on  the  day  I  received  the  news 
(Sunday).  But  I  remained  there  with  my  husband,  and,  as  I  said,  in  the 
night  between  Sunday  and  Monday,  I  had  the  terrible  impression — the 
chill  horror  of  which  I  cannot  forget. 

"  On  reaching  London  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day  (Monday),  I 
learnt  that  he  had  died  suddenly  at  the  time  of  my  distress ;  the  cause 
being  internal  haemorrhage  from  the  lacerated  muscle.  He  had  never  had 
internal  haemorrhage  before.  He  had  only  been  unwell  three  or  four  days." 

We  have  verified  the  date  of  the  death  in  the  Times  obituary. 

[Mrs.  W.'s  husband  prefers  not  to  state  positively  whether  it  was 
after  or  before  the  news  of  the  death  that  he  first  heard  of  the  dream. 
On  the  supposition  that  latent  anxiety  may  possibly  have  been  the 
source  of  the  dream,  the  case  is  excluded  from  the  group  used  in  the 
calculation  in  Yol.  I.,  Chap.  YIII.,  §  4.] 

(425)  From  Mr.  T.  J.  Norris,  Dalkey,  Ireland.  The  account  was 
written  many  years  ago. 

"  In  the  year  1839,  Mrs.  Norris,  of  Mohill,  Co.  Leitrim,  accompanied 
by  her  two  daughters  (now  Mrs.  West,  the  Asylum,  Omagh,  and  Mrs. 
Crofton,  Portnashangan  Rectory,  Mullingar)  and  by  Mrs.  Draper  (now 
Mrs.  Simonet,  St.  Helier's,  Jersey),i  went  to  Lausanne  for  the  benefit 
of  the  health  of  one  of  her  girls,  and  remained  there  for  a  couple  of 
years.  Mr.  Norris  being  an  extensive  land  agent,  could  not  remain  with 
them,  but  paid  them  a  visit  each  summer.  While  there  in  1840,  and  just 
before  the  day  fixed  for  his  return  home,  Mrs.  Draper,  at  breakfast,   in- 

1  Since  deceased. 

398  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

formed  all  present  that  a  Mrs.  Wilson,  of  St.  Heller's,  a  friend  of  them 
all,  had  died  the  evening  before,  at  such  an  hour  and  under  such-and-such 
circumstances,  and  asked  Mr.  Norris  to  write  to  Jersey  about  it.  He  first 
entered  all  the  circumstances  minutely  in  his  pocket-book,  and  then  wrote 
over  as  requested,  desiring  the  answer  to  be  directed  to  him  in  Mohill,  to 
which  he  was  about  to  return.  I,  his  only  son,  was  with  him  one  day, 
when  the  post  came  in,  bringing  him  a  letter  from  Jersey.  He  opened 
and  read  it,  and  then  gave  me  his  keys  and  desired  me  to  bring  him  down 
his  pocket-book,  to  open  it  at  a  certain  date,  and  see  how  far  his  memo- 
randum agreed  with  the  information  contained  in  the  letter.  In  substance 
they  were  identical,  except  that  it  ajypeared  that  Mrs.  Wilson  did  not  die 
until  more  than  half-an-hour  after  her  appearance  to  Mrs.  Draper.  I 
suggested  that  this  could  be  accounted  for  by  the  difference  of  longitude, 
and  on  calculating  this  it  just  made  up  for  the  seeming  discrepancy. 

"Thomas  J.  Norris." 

Mrs.  West,  of  Sion  Cottage,  Sion  Mills,  Co.  Tyrone,  writes  : — 

"  December  7th,  1882. 

"I  am  not  sure  whether  it  was  a  dreain  or  that  Mrs.  Draper  thought 
she  saw  Mrs.  Wilson  ;  but  if  the  former,  Mrs.  Draper  must  have  awoke 
at  once,  as  I  know  she  looked  at  her  watch  and  remarked  the  hour,  and 
afterwards,  when  she  heard  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  death,  she  inquired  par- 
ticularly at  what  hour  she  died.  We  at  first  thought  the  time  was 
different,  till  we  calculated  the  difference  of  Lausanne  and  Jersey  time. 

"A.  M.  West." 

Mr.  Norris  has  given  us  his  reasons  for  fixing  the  year  as  1840;  but 
we  cannot  find  the  death  in  the  Jersey  Register  for  that  year.  Registra- 
tion had  been  then  only  recently  introduced,  and  had  perhaps  not  become 
universal. 

[This  case  is  very  remote ;  but  the  incident  which  Mr.  Norris  relates 
was  such  as  would  be  likely  to  impress  the  facts  on  his  memory,  at  any 
rate  to  a  greater  extent  than  if  he  had  merely  been  told  the  story.] 

(426)  From  Miss  Churchill,  9,  Eversley  Park,  Chester. 

"August  13th,  1884. 

[A  few  words  are  added  from  a  second  account  written  on  November 
18th,  1885.] 

"About  the  month  of  August,  1877,  I  dreamt  most  vividly  of  the 
death  of  a  gentleman,  a  friend  of  the  family,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for 
some  years.  I  fancy  I  saw  him  in  the  dream,  but  cannot  distinctly 
remember.  I  had  not  heard  of  his  illness,  or  anything  of  him  at  the  time 
of  my  dream.  But  the  next  day  I  heard  of  his  death  having  taken  place ; 
I  do  not  remember  the  hour,  but  as  far  as  I  can  say  I  believe  he  must  have 
been  dead  at  the  time  of  my  dream,  or  dying. 

"  I  cannot  positively  say  whether  I  mentioned  my  dream  before  hearing 
of  his  death  ;  I  think  I  did.  "  Emily  Churchill." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry.  Miss  Churchill  replies  : — 

"I  do  not  remember  (with  this  exception)  dreaming  vividly  of  a 
death,  and  believe  the  one  referred  to  to  be  the  only  one. 

One  of  Miss  Churchill's  sisters  says  : — 

"  I  can  perfectly  well  remember  hearing  the  dream  before  we  heard  of 

III.]  DREAMS.  399 

the  death.  As  he  was  a  strong  man,  and  as  far  as  we  knew  in  excellent 
health,  we .  did  not  for  a  moment  suppose  it  was  true.  If  I  remember 
rightly,  he  was  only  ill  three  or  four  hours." 

Another  sister  writes : —  ,,  .  .    too^ 

"August,  1884. 

"It  is  so  long  ago  that  we  have  rather  forgotten.  My  own  impression 
was  that  Emily  told  us  her  dream  at  breakfast,  and  that  we  heard  of  the 
death  in  the  evening, — that  the  gentleman  concerned  had  died  the  day 
before.  I  know  I  was  much  impressed  at  the  time,  but  I  couldn't  declare 
that  she  told  us  in  the  morning.  I  know  directly  Lizzie  told  us  of  the 
death  (she  had  not  been  at  home  in  the  morning)  Emily  exclaimed  to  her, 
'  I  dreamt  last  night  that  he  was  dead.'  " 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on 
July  19th,  1877. 

In  conversation,  Miss  Churchill  mentioned — as  showing  how  sudden 
the  death  was — that  the  daughters  of  the  gentleman  who  died  had  just 
gone  on  a  visit,  and  had  to  be  telegraphed  for.  The  two  families  lived 
in  the  same  town  ;  but  the  interest  of  the  Misses  Churchill  was  in  the 
daughters ;  they  rarely  saw  the  father,  and  had  not  seen  him  for  a  con- 
siderable time  before  his  death. 

The  following  is  a  similar  case,  where  the  death  of  a  person  not 
closely  connected  with  the  dreamer  was  dreamt  of  vividly,  but  not  in 
a  specially  pictorial  way. 

(427)  From  Miss  C,  whose  mother  sent  us  the  main  facts  of  the 
case  in  1883,  and  who  herself  wrote  a  fuller  account  on  January  12,  1886. 

In  November,  1880,  Miss  G.,  the  daughter  of  a  country  rector, 
was  staying  in  her  father's  former  parish  in  London.  The  vicar  of 
this  parish  had  exchanged  livings  with  her  father,  and  was  thus 
associated  in  her  mind  with  both  her  homes,  though  she  only  knew  him 
slightly.  One  Saturday  night  she  dreamt  that  he  was  dead.  There  was  an 
odd  confusion  in  the  dream,  as  her  father's  death  was  also  suggested.  She 
felt  it  was  something  to  do  with  both  parishes.  On  entering  the  break- 
fast-room, she  learnt  from  the  friend  with  whom  she  was  staying  that 
the  vicar  had  died  in  the  night.  She  had  heard  some  days  before  that 
he  had  a  cold  ;  but,  as  she  remarks,  "  colds  in  November  are  anything 
but  uncommon,"  and  she  had  thought  no  more  about  it.  "He had  said, 
the  Thursday  before,  that  he  was  feeling  so  much  better  that  he  hoped  to 
be  able  to  take  his  Sunday  duty ;  but  on  the  Saturday  he  had  grown 
suddenly  worse,  and  died  that  evening."  Miss  G.  does  not  remember  to 
have  dreamt  of  death  on  any  other  occasion. 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on 
November  13,  1880. 

The  friend  with  whom  Miss  G.  was  staying  writes  to  her  (in  February, 
1886),  "  I  am  afraid  I  do  not  remember  about  your  dream  at  the  time  it 
happened  ;  but  I  quite  well  remember  your  telling  me  some  time  after- 
wards you  had  dreamed  a  dream  which  I  ought  to  have  remembered." 
Miss  G.  is  confident  that  she  mentioned  the  dream  before  sitting  down  to 
breakfast. 

400  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(428)  From  a  most  trusted  and  valued  servant  of  the  present  writer's 
— now  Mrs.  Humphry,  residing  at  Hiley  Lodge,  Kensal  Green — who  wrote, 
in  the  week  following  the  dream  : — 

"  On  Tuesday  night  [March  24th,  1885],  or  rather  Wednesday  morning, 
I  dreamt  that  Fenning,  a  milkman  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  John  Jarvis  [of 
Dale  Hill  Farm,  Ticehurst],  formerly  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Thos.  Jarvis, 
my  late  master,  said  to  me,  '  He's  gone  at  last.'  I  said,  '  Who  ? '  He  said, 
'  Why,  Mr.  John  Jarvis  is  dead.'  On  Wednesday  morning,  when  I  saw 
my  fellow-servant.  Rose,  I  told  her  my  dream."  [This  was  confirmed  in 
writing,  at  the  same  time  as  the  account  was  written,  by  Rose  Wade.] 

On  March  30th,  the  news  of  the  death  arrived,  and  Mrs. 
Humphry  at  once  mentioned  the  coincidence  to  her  mistress.  She  was 
told  to  ask  the  day  and  hour  of  his  death,  and  the  following  is  a  copy  of 
her  brother's  reply  : — 

"  Piatt  Cottage,  Ticehurst. 

"March  31st,  1885. 

"  Just  a  line  to  let  you  know  that  Mr.  Jarvis  passed  away  on  the 
25th — that  was  last  Wednesday  morning  as  near  as  I  can  tell  you 
at  2  o'clock.  "William  Vidler." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  by  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

Mrs.  Humphry  told  the  present  writer  that  the  dream  was  quite 
unique  in  her  experience,  for  its  vividness  and  the  distress  that  it  caused 
her. 

(429)  From  Fynes  Moryson's  Itinerary.     (See  above,  p.  382.) 

"  Whilst  I  lived  at  Prage,  and  one  night  had  sat  up  very  late  drinking 
at  a  feast,  early  in  the  morning,  the  sunne  beams  glancing  on  my  face  as 
I  lay  in  bed,  I  dreamed  that  a  shadow  passing  by  told  me  that  my  father 
was  dead  ;  at  which  awaking  all  in  a  sweat,  and  afifected  with  this  dreame, 
I  rose  and  wrote  the  day,  the  houre,  and  all  things  connected  therewith 
in  a  paper  booke,  which  Booke  with  many  other  things  I  put  into  a 
pouch,  and  sent  it  from  Prage  to  Stode,  thence  to  be  convoyed  into  Eng- 
land. And  now  being  at  Nurnberg,  a  merchant  of  a  noble  family,  well 
acquainted  with  me  and  my  friends,  arrived  there,  who  told  me  that  my 
father  died  some  two  months  past.  I  list  not  write  any  lies,  but  that 
which  I  write  is  as  true  as  strange.  When  I  returned  into  England  some 
four  years  after,  I  would  not  open  the  pouch  I  sent  from  Prage,  nor  looke 
in  the  paper  booke  in  which  I  had  written  this  dreame,  till  I  had  called 
my  sisters  and  some  friends  to  be  witnesses,  when  my  selfe  and  they 
were  astonished  to  see  my  written  dreame  answer  the  very  day  of  my 
father's  death." 

(430)  From  the  Rev.  F.  R.  Harbaugh  (Pastor  of  Presbyterian 
Church),  Red  Bank,  Monmouth  County,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A. 

"February  7th,  1884. 
"  In  the  afternoon  of  January  29th,  1881,  between  the  hours  of  2  and 
4  o'clock,  while  asleep  (in  ordinary  good  health),  and  with  no  conscious  or 
immediate  procuring  cause  for  the  same,  I  had  a  '  dream '  charged  with 
every  element  of  the  horrible  and  distressing.  I  awoke  greatly  confused 
in  mind,  but  with  these  very  distinct  impressions  : — first,  that  some  tragedy 

III.]  DREAMS.  401 

had  occurred ;  and  second,  that  some  relative  was  implicated  in  it.  The 
dream,  for  the  while,  very  greatly  affected  me,  so  much  so  as  to  seriously 
disqualify  me  for  my  Sabbath  services  the  day  following. 

"  Within  a  few  days  after  this  dream  I  received  a  letter  from  my 
father,  which  began  something  like  this  : — 

"  '  You  will  be  shocked  to  hear  that  your  cousin ,  on  last , 

(the  same  day  on  which  I  had  my  dream),  '  took  the  life  of  his  wife  and 
babe,  and  then  killed  himself.' 

"  It  is  not  necessary  to  give  the  details  of  the  crime.  My  reply  to  my 
father's  letter  contained  the  following  : — 

"  '  Shocked  I  certainly  was  by  the  intelligence  in  your  last  letter,  but 

hardly  surprised  ;  for  ever  since  last afternoon  I  have  been  oppressed, 

because  of  a  dream,  with  an  impression  that  something  of  the  kind  had 
occurred.' 

"  From  his  letter  in  reply,  I  found  that  my  dream  was  coincident  (how 
exactly  I  do  not  remember)  with  the  tragedy.  "With  regard  to  the  person 
who  committed  the  crime,  I  had  neither  seen  him  nor  had  any  communica- 
tion with  him,  nor,  indeed,  any  information  about  him,  since  we  separated, 
in  our  early  boyhood.  No  acquaintance  of  mine  of  so  long  a  time  could 
have  been  more  absent  from  my  mind  than  he.  Nothing  proximate  to  the 
tragedy  had  transpired  to  recall  or  suggest  him.  I  have  never  been  able 
to  detect  what  it  was,  or  might  be,  that  brought  him  to  my  knowledge. 
The  absence  of  anxiety,  or  anything  like  it,  may  be  seen  in  my  almost  utter 
forgetfulness  of  him.  Indeed,  for  20  years  I  did  not  know  whether  he  was 
living  or  dead." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Harbaugh  says  : —  ' 

"  Horrifying  dreams  are  exceedingly  rare  with  me.  The  doubt  on  my 
mind  as  to  the  coincidence  of  time  (as  I  now  recall  the  occurrence)  is  as  to 
the  hour.  The  day  of  the  tragedy  and  of  my  dream  were  the  same."  He 
adds  : — 

"  A  clergyman  residing  in  the  place  where  the  crime  was  committed 
writes,  '  I  am  going  to  see  the  man  who  was  the  first  in  the  house  after  the 
deed  was  done,  and  ask  him  for  the  exact  hour.'  Later  he  writes,  '  I 
find  it  was  on  Saturday  evening,  January  29th,  at  just  about  7.30  p.m. 
The  town  marshal  fixes  the  time  at  the  same  hour.'  My  recollection  of 
the  day  of  the  week  and  the  time  of  the  day  on  which  I  had  the  dream  is 
very  distinct — as  well  as  the  recollection  of  the  letter  I  received  from  my 
father,  telling  me  of  it,  and  of  my  reply." 

[If  this  case  was  telepathic,  the  idea  of  the  deed  must  have  been 
present  to  the  perpetrator's  mind  4  hours  before  it  was  acted  on — which 
seems  a  reasonable  supposition.  The  telepathic  explanation  is  of  course 
rendered  less  probable  by  the  absence  of  intimacy  or  affection  between 
the  parties  ;  but  we  have  had  indications  that  mere  kinship  may  supply 
the  adequate  condition  (see,  e.g.,  case  244).] 

§  4.  Coming  now  to  the  class  of  more  distinctly  pictorial 
dreams,  corresponding  with  some  critical  situation  of  the  agent,  but 
not  a  mere  reflection  of  his  conscious  thought,  I  will  begin  with  cases 
where  what  is  seen  is  a  tolerably  simple  embodiment  of  the  idea 

VOL.    II.  2    D 

402  SUPPLEAfENT.  [chap. 

supposed  to  have  been  transferred,  and  then  pass  on  to  cases  where  the 
dreamer  invests  the  idea  with  fresh  elements  and  imagery  of  his  own. 
The  following  four  cases  are  of  the  simplest  possible  type.  The 
first  of  them  resembles  the  last  quoted,  in  the  fact  that  there  was 
no  bond  of  friendship  between  agent  and  percipient ;  but  the 
proximity  to  the  latter  of  a  third  person — her  father — who  was 
connected  both  with  her  and  with  the  agent,  suggests  that  though  the 
impression  did  not  affect  his  consciousness,  it  still  reached  her  in 
some  sense  through  him  (p.  267). 

(431)  From  Mr.  Gr.  J.  Davis,  St.  Chloe  Endowed  School,  Amberley, 
near  Stroud.     (The  account  is  slightly  condensed.) 

After  mentioning  that  about  1848,  he  had  served  under  a  certain 
clergyman,  Mr.  S.,  Mr.  Davis  continues  : — 

"About  1860,  I  married  my  present  wife,  and  she  did  not,  nor  my 
children,  know  anything  of  Mr.  S.,  and,  consequently,  took  little  interest 
in  hearing  about  him.  We  seldom  or  never  spoke  about  him,  except 
perhaps  when  a  letter  came  from  him,  and  I  might  mention  the  fact. 

"  One  Saturday  morning,  as  I  was  reading  the  Standard  after  break- 
fast, my  daughter,  aged  about  1 9,  suddenly  broke  the  silence  thus  : — 

"  '  Papa,  have  you  heard  from  Mr.  S.  lately  "? ' 

"  '  No,  I  have  not,'  I  replied  ;  '  in  fact,  it  is  my  turn  to  write.  He  wrote 
about  three  months  ago ;  but  I  have  not  written  since.   "Why  do  you  ask  1 ' 

"  '  Because  I  dreamt  about  him  last  night.  I  dreamt  he  had  lost  the 
use  of  his  side '  (here  she  made  a  motion  with  her  hand  down  her  side)  ; 
'  paralysed,  don't  you  call  it  1 ' 

"  She  spoke  very  earnestly,  I  noticed ;  but  I  merely  replied,  '  How 
strange,'  and  went  on  reading  my  Standard.  This  was  on  Saturday 
morning,  you  will  observe. 

"  Well,  the  next  day  was  Sunday,  and  we  always  made  it  a  point  to 
call  at  the  post-office  for  our  letters  on   Sundays.     We  did  so  on  this 

Sunday.     Among  them  was  a  C newspaper,     I  noticed  the  address 

was  not  in  Mr.  S.'s  handwriting ;  this  moved  my  curiosity,  and  there 
being  no  folk  about,  I  opened  the  paper,  and  what  was  my  surprise  to  find 
a  paragraph  marked,  announcing,  '  That  their  respected  neighbour,  the 
Rev.  E.  H.  S.,  had  been  seized  with  paralysis.'  Certain  persons  were 
with  him — doctors,  &c., — and  they  hoped  he  would  get  better,  &c.,  &c. 
Of  course,  I  was  very  much  surprised,  and  when  we  got  home,  I  said, 
'  Sissy,  do  you  remember  anything  more  about  your  dream  1 '  (after  read- 
ing the  paragraph,  and  saying  how  strange  it  was,  &C.) 

"  '  No,'  she  said,  '  but  the  dream  made  such  an  impression  upon  my 
mind  that  I  lay  awake  thinking  about  it,  and  wondering  how  I  knew  he 
was  paralysed,  for  he  didn't  tell  me,  and  I  saw  no  one  else  but  himself 
lying  ill  in  bed.' 

"  This  is  all  literally  true.  "Gboege  Jesson  Davis." 

In  reply  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Davis  wrote  that  the  date  of  Mr.  S.'s 
seizure  was  Nov.  8,  1878.  We  have  verified  the  occurrence  and 
the  date  in  the  local  newspaper  of  Nov.  16.  It  would  appear,  therefore, 
that  the  dream  must  have  been  on  the  night  of  Nov.  15 — i.e.,  a  week  after 

III.]  DREAMS.  403 

the  actual  seizure — though  while  its  effects  were  continuing.  This 
extension  of  time  of  course  extends  the  scope  for  accidental  coincidence, 
and  so  far  weakens  the  case ;  on  the  other  hand  there  is  the  strong  point 
of  a  double  correspondence,  the  right  person  being  associated  with  the 
right  complaint,  though  neither  one  nor  the  other  had  been  in  the  least 
degree  occupying  the  dreamer's  waking  thoughts.  Mr.  S.  never  recovered 
from  the  attack,  and  died  some  months  afterwards. 

In  conversation  Mr.  Davis  stated  that  his  daughter  was  not  in  the 
habit  of  having  vivid  dreams,  and  that  her  mention  of  this  one  was 
exceptional ;  and  that  by  temperament  she  is  the  very  reverse  of  gushing 
or  visionary. 

(432)  From  Mrs.  Jennings  Bramly,  Strathmore,  Killiney. 

"  February  3rd,   1886. 

"  I  am  happy  to  give  you  an  exact  account  of  the  dream  which  I  had 
about  my  brother.  Professor  of  Greek  in  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  I  cannot 
fix  the  exact  time ;  it  was  probably  two  and  a-half  or  three  and  a-half 
years  ago.  It  was  simply  a  vivid  dream  ;  I  by  no  means  saw  an  exact  enact- 
ment of  what  was  going  on.  I  dreamed  (being  at  home  in  my  own  house 
in  Killiney,  my  brother  being  in  his,  in  Dublin)  that  I  saw  my  brother 
covered  with  blood,  and  that  I  threw  my  arms  round  him  and  implored 
him  not  to  die,  and  that  Ifelt  the  blood  touch  me,  and  saw  it  drip  on  me. 
I  awoke  in  great  distress,  and  remained  awake  lest  I  should  dream  it 
again.  In  the  morning  I  told  my  husband  I  had  had  a  fearful  dream.  I 
did  not  in  the  least  think  it  was  true,  but  it  was  very  real,  and  it  frightened 
me.  In  spite  of  daylight,  and  companions  around  me,  I  still  felt  a  vague 
uneasiness,  and  in  order  to  dispel  the  feeling  by  seeing  my  brother  in 
perfect  health  (as  I  quite  expected  I  should),  I  went  into  Dublin  by  train, 
and  to  his  rooms  in  College  to  see  him.  I  found  him  sitting  by  the  fire,  and 
I  asked  him  if  he  would  come  to  us  next  day  and  play  tennis.  He  replied, 
'  that  he  should  not  be  able  to  play  tennis  for  many  a  day,'  and  then  told 
me  '  he  had  had  an  accident  the  evening  before ;  he  was  in  the  garden 
with  his  children,  and  one  of  them  had  got  up  on  the  roof  of  a  small  tool- 
house,  which  had  a  glass  window  in  the  roof ;  the  child  was  frightened,  and 
my  brother  went  up  the  ladder  to  lift  him  down ;  he  put  one  foot  on  the 
window  and  reached  forward  for  the  child,  when  the  glass  broke  and  my 
brother's  leg  went  through,  cutting  a  vein  in  the  leg ;  it  bled  -profusely  for 
a  couple  of  hours  before  a  doctor  could  be  found  to  bandage  it  up.  This 
accident  took  place  early  in  the  evening  ;  I,  probably,  was  not  in  bed  until 
after  the  bleeding  had  been  stopped. 

"  My  brother  noticed  how  white  I  had  become  while  he  was  telling  me 
of  his  accident.  I  told  him  my  dream,  and  he  agreed  with  me  in  thinking 
it  a  very  remarkable  coincidence.  He  evidently  had  not  thought  of  me  the 
previous  night,  or  he  would  have  said  so.  My  attachment  for  him  is,  I 
believe,  unusually  strong,  and  my  sympathy  in  all  his  pursuits  extreme. 
It  is  right  to  mention  that  in  1879  he  had  had  a  much  more  serious 
accident,  about  which  I  had  no  dream.       "  M.  Geealdine  J.  Bramly." 

Mr.  Bramly  writes  on  Feb.  3,  1886  : — 

"  I  recollect  my  wife  telling  me  her  dream,  as  above  narrated,  on  the 
following  morning.     She  has  a  very  accurate  memory. 

Professor  Tyrrell  writes,  on  Feb.  5,  1886  :—         "  ^-  ^-  Bbamly." 

VOL.    II.  2    D    2 

404  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  I  remember  the  incident  communicated  to  you  by  my  sister,  Mrs. 
Bramly.  The  details  are  accurate.  She  told  me  of  her  dream  when  she 
called  on  me  in  College  the  following  morning."     Later  he  adds  : — 

"  I  should  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  I  look  on  the  dream  and  the 
accident  as  mere  coincidence.^  The  accident  was  slight,  but  there  was 
considerable  effusion  of  blood.  ««  !{,,  Y.  Tyreell."     ' 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bramly  says  : 

"  I  am  a  very  restless,  uneasy  sleeper,  and  every  night  dream  the 
wildest  dreams  possible.  I  have  never,  however,  except  in  this  instance, 
dreamed  of  any  accident  to  anyone,  or  of  the  death  of  anyone." 

(433)  From  Mr.  Durell,  Wrenthorpe,  The  Thicket,  Southsea. 

"April  1,  1886. 

"  On  the  night  of  the  4th  May,  1863,  when  I  was  in  Australia,^  I 
dreamed  that  a  postman  handed  me  a  letter  with  a  deep  black  border. 
The  purport  of  the  letter  was  to  announce  the  death  of  an  uncle  in 
England,  and  that  he  had  left  me  some  property  which  would  necessitate 
my  immediate  return  to  England. 

"  When  I  awoke,  the  dream  still  haunted  me,  and  I  made  a  note  of  it, 
and  mentioned  it  to  several  of  my  friends,  feeling  sure  I  should  hear  of  my 
uncle's  death. 

"  I  could  not  do  so  by  the  next  mail,  but  the  one  after  that  brought 
me  the  intelligence  of  his  death  on  the  4th  of  May,  the  day  of  my  dream, 
and  he  had  left  me  property  which  required  my  return  to  England. 

"I  had  no  idea  of  my  uncle's  illness,  and  still  less  that  he  was  going  to 
leave  me  any  property.  "  F.  T.  D.  Durell." 

The  Times  obituary  confirms  May  4,  1863,  as  the  date  of  death. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Durell  writes  : 

(1)  "I  do  not  recollect  ever  having  had  a  dream  about  death, 
certainly  none  that  ever  impressed  me  as  this  did ;  and  I  am  not  in  the 
habit  of  having  distressing  dreams. 

(2)  "I  did  make  a  note  at  the  time  of  my  dream ;  unfortunately  the 
diary  I  had  of  that  year,  1863,  I  lost. 

(3)  "  The  two  friends  who  were  with  me  at  the  time  of  the  dream, 
and  to  whom  I  mentioned  it,  are  both  dead." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Durell  distinctly  confirmed  the  fact  that  the 
date  in  the  letter  was  compared  with  that  in  his  diary,  and  found  to  be 
the  same  ;  he  does  not  know  what  was  the  hour  of  death.  He  is  not,  and 
was  not,  at  all  in  the  habit  of  having  vivid  dreams  :  this  one  made  an 
extraordinarily  strong  impression  on  him  before  the  receipt  of  the  news. 
Mrs.  Durell  well  remembers  hearing  the  account  very  soon  after  Mr. 
Durell's  return  to  England. 

(434)  From  a  gentleman,  resident  at  Widnes,  who  prefers  that  his  full 
name  should  not  be  published.     The  account  is  dated  Dec.  12,  1882.  ■■':'■-' 

"I  was  about  14  years  old,  and  at  school  at  Southport,  a  town  about 
30  miles  from  my  house.  One  night  I  dreamed  in  a  most  vivid  manner 
that  I  saw  my  mother  dead.     Next  morning  I  was  oppressed  with  the  firm 

^  Professor  Tyrrell  clearly  means  accidental  coincidence.  A  similar  remark  might  be 
made,  as  I  have  again  and  again  pointed  out,  about  almost  every  isolated  case ;  yet  no 
one,  on  reflection,  will  maintain  that  the  cases  to  which  it  would  apply  have  therefore  no 
legitimate  place  in  a  cumulative  argument. 

in.]  DREAMS.  405 

conviction  that  my  mother  had  died,  and  though  we  happened  to  have  a 
half  holiday  that  morning,  I  could  not  throw  off  the  feeling.  While  we 
were  playing  some  game  in  our  cricket  field,  a  messenger  came  to  say  that 
my  master  wanted  to  see  me  at  once.  I  felt  that  I  knew  what  he  had  to 
say,  and  I  suppose  that  my  face  must  have  shown  some  signs  of  my 
trouble,  as,  before  telling  me  that  my  mother  had  died  during  the 
previous  night,  he  asked  me  some  kindly  questions  as  to  whether  I 
felt  ill.  I  have  never  had  any  similar  kind  of  dream  since  (indeed, 
I  very  rarely  dream),  but  I  can  never  forget  the  impression  made  on 
me  by  this  dream.  "  H.  W.  D." 

[The  memory  of  the  subsequent  incidents  in  this  case  to  some  extent 
confirms  the  coincidence.  In  conversation,  I  found  the  narrator  very  far 
from  disposed  to  attach  significance  to  an  isolated  case  of  the  sort,  though 
the  impression  made  upon  him  was  very  strong.] 

In  the  following  case,  though  remote  in  date,  there  is  no  reason 
to  doubt  that  the  facts  are  correctly  recorded.  It  is  at  any  rate  a 
point  in  favour  of  that  view — and  one  rarely  met  with  in  second-hand 
narratives  of  the  sort — that  the  degree  of  closeness  in  the  coincidence 
is  left  uncertain. 

(435)  From  Mrs.  A.  L.  Udny,  61,  Westbourne  Park  Villas,  W. 

"My  father-in-law,  G-eorge  Udny,  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service,  at  one 
time  Member  of  Council  there,  and  a  great  friend  of  Lord  Wellesley  when 
he  was  Governor-G-eneral,  was  a  man  of  deep  religious  feeling  and  high 
honour,  but  I  imagine  not  the  least  disposed  to  believe  in  any  superstitions 
or  marvels  ;  so  I  think  his  narrative  may  be  depended  on,  and  this  was  his 
account. 

"  He  was  residing  at  Maldah,  in  India,  in  1794,^  and  his  only  brother, 
Robert,  to  whom  he  was  much  attached,  was  living  in  Calcutta,  with  his 
wife  Anne.  Mr.  Udny  dreamed  one  night  that  he  saw  his  brother  and  his 
wife  struggling  in  the  water,  which  distressing  dream  awoke  him.  He  was 
about  200  miles  from  Calcutta,  and  very  shortly  received  by  dak-post  a 
letter  informing  him  that  his  brother  and  his  wife  had  been  drowned  in 
the  Hooghly  shortly  before,  I  do  not  know  exactly  how  long.  Robert  and 
Anne  Udny  had  been  to  pay  a  visit  at  Howrah  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Hooghly,  and  not  returning  at  night  to  their  own  house,  the  servants  had 
supposed  that  they  had  been  induced  to  stay  all  night,  and  it  was  only  the 
next  day  found  that  they  had  left  their  friends  and  had  embarked  in  a 
Boleah  (a  large  river  pleasure  boat),  to  return — which  had  got  foul  of,  and 
been  overturned  by,  the  cable  of  a  vessel  lying  at  anchor  in  the  river,  and 
the  current  had  carried  away  their  bodies  some  distance  down  the  stream, 
where  they  were  found  locked  in  each  other's  arms." 

In  a  letter  which  accompanied  the  account,  dated  25th  July,  1883,  Mrs. 
Udny  writes  : — 

"  I  had  always  heard  that  the  dream  was  three  times  repeated,  ^  but 
the  story  as  I  have  it,  written  down  from  my  husband's  dictation,^  is  as 

1  From  The  Life  and  Times  of  Carey,  Marshman,  and  Ward,  the  Serampore  Missionaries, 
we  have  been  able  to  fix  the  incident  as  in  January  or  February,  1794. 

2  As  regards  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  number  three  in  narratives  of  this  sort, 
see  p.  229,  note. 

3  The  account  was  only  in  part  dictated,  but  was  throughout  revised  by  Mr.  Udny, 
on  April  27, 1861. 

406  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap, 

above ;  and  I  believe  he  was  afraid  to  add  more  particulars,  as  he  was  a 
most  exact  man,  and  would  rather  understate  than  exaggerate,  even 
undesignedly,  any  story." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Udny  adds  that  her  husband  was  not 
born  till  1802,  and  therefore  cannot  have  heard  of  this  incident  till  a 
good  many  years  after  its  occurrence;  "but  his  father  lived  till  1830,  and 
it  must  have  been  often  talked  of  after  my  husband  had  grown  up." 

In  the  next  case,  it  seems  possible  that  the  dreamer  was 
impressed  by  some  one  known  to  her  on  board  the  ship  (she  knew 
Captain  King,  the  commander),  and  that  she  embodied  the  idea  of 
wreck  in  a  simple  manner. 

(436)  From  Mr.  E.  Gardner  Colton,  Southampton  Buildings,  W.C. 

"July  31st,  1883. 

"  Some  years  ago  we  were  living  in  Derby  Lane,  Stoney croft,  Liver- 
pool. I  remember  one  morning,  early,  a  Mrs.  Tate,  a  friend  of  my  mother's 
(and  who  lived  at  Iquique,  Peru,  but  was  stopping  with  her  father  in 
England),  came  to  our  house  and  informed  us  she  had  had  a  very  strange 
dream  that  morning  early,  in  which  she  saw  the  steamer  '  Santiago,'  of 
the  Pacific  Company,  strike  on  a  rock  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  through 
which  she  [Mrs.  Tate]  had  many  times  passed,  and  founder. 

"  Now,  the  extraordinary  news  came  several  weeks  later  that  the 
steamer  had  that  night  or  time  run  on  that  very  rock. 

"I  well  remember  Mrs.  Tate's  vivid  description  of  it. 

"  E.  Gardner  Colton." 

We  have  written  to  Mrs.  Tate,  at  Iquique,  but  have  received  no  reply. 

Mr.  Colton's  mother  writes,  from  61,  Park  Street,  Southend-on-Sea : — • 

"  I  remember  this  also,  and  it  is  quite  correct.  And  Mrs.  Tate  was 
so  strongly  impressed  by  the  dream  that  she  noted  the  time  by  her  watch, 
and,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  it  agreed  with  the  time." 

We  learn  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Pacific  Steam  Navigation  Company 
that  the  "  Santiago "  was  lost  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan  on  25th 
January,  1869. 

[The  Times  of  March  19th,  1869,  says  that  the  ship  "struck  on  a 
sunken  reef,  not  shown  in  the  charts."  This  shows  that  the  accuracy  of 
the  dream  has  been  to  some  extent  exaggerated.  We  have  no  reason  to 
doubt  its  exceptional  vividness ;  but  the  case  is  clearly  not  one  that  would 
deserve  attention,  so  long  as  the  reality  of  telepathy  was  doubtful.] 

In  the  next  case,  which  is  recent  and  corroborated,  the  death- 
scene  is  still  just  such  as  the  dreamer  might  most  naturally  conjure  up. 

(437)  Letter  to  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  now  of  Rhyl,  from  Mrs. 
Harrison,  of  Park  View,  Queen's  Park,  Manchester. 

"September  2nd,  1885. 
"  I  had  a  dear  uncle,  John  Moore,  St.  John's,  Isle  of  Man.  I  knew 
he  had  failed  in  health  and  strength  during  the  winter  of  1883  and  1884, 
but  was  not  aware  that  he  was  really  ill,  or  worse,  so  had  not  been 
thinking  of  him  more  than  usual,  nor  anticipating  a  change  ;  on  the 
contrary,  I  was  rather  sanguine  that,  with  the  return  of  spring,  his  strength 

III.]  DREAMS.  407 

would  revive,  knowing  that  he  had  only  two  years  before  recovered  from 
a  severe  illness,  his  constitution  being  so  excellent,  though  he  was  85 
years  old  when  he  was  taken  away.  But  on  the  night  of  March  1st, 
or  very  early  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd,  1884  (I  did  not  ascertain  the 
time,  but  I  had  retired  to  rest  very  late  and  seemed  to  have  slept  two  or 
three  hours),  I  awoke  crying,  and  with  the  agitating  scenes  of  my  dream 
clear  before  me.  It  was  that  I  stood  in  the  bedroom  of  my  uncle,  that  he 
lay  there  dying,  his  remaining  family  near  him,  I  just  a  short  distance 
from  the  bed,  looking  on.  When  I  joined  my  husband  and  daughter  at 
the  fireside,  on  coming  downstairs  in  the  morning,  I  told  them  my  dream, 
and  then  thought  no  more  about  it  till  two  days  later,  4th  March,  when 
a  letter  arrived,  saying  that  my  uncle  had  passed  away  at  2  o'clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  2nd.  "  R.  J.  Harrison." 

Mrs.  Harrison  can  recall  no  other  dream  of  death. 

We  find  from  the  Isle  of  Man  Register  that  the  date  of  the  death  was 
March  2,  1884. 

Mr.  Harrison  corroborates  as  follows  : —       "September  2nd   1885 

"  I  distinctly  remember  my  wife  telling  me  the  above  dream  on  the 
Sunday  morning,  2nd  March,  1884,  and  it  has  often  been  spoken  of  in  the 
family  since.  The  letter  acquainting  us  of  Mr.  Moore's  death  arrived 
at  Manchester,  from  the  Isle  of  Man,  two  days  after,  viz.,  Tuesday, 
4th  March,  1884.  "J.  P.  Harrison." 

[In  conversation  I  learnt  that  Mr.  Moore's  son  and  daughter,  who 
appeared  in  the  dream,  were  the  relatives  likely  to  be  present  ;  so  that 
point  goes  for  nothing.  But  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  exceptional 
character  of  the  dream.  On  account  of  the  age  and  infirmity  of  the  person 
who  died,  this  instance  has  not  been  included  in  the  special  group,  used  in 
the  calculation  in  Vol.  I.,  Chap  VIII.,  §  4.] 

In  the  next  two  cases,  again,  the  death  is  represented  in  a 
completely  natural  way. 

(438)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Denroche,  of  1,  Berkeley  Villas,  Pittville, 
Cheltenham,  who  said  that  she  had  "  never  had  any  distressing  or  remark- 
able dream  save  this  one."  "February  23rd    1885. 

"  On  the  Easter  morning  [1843],  about  6  o'clock,  I  dreamt  that  I  was 
looking  out  of  my  bedroom  window,  and  that  I  saw  Mr.  R.  walking  up  the 
avenue,  and  that,  knowing  him  to  be  in  Australia,  I  felt  so  surprised  and 
pleased  that  I  ran  down  to  meet  him  at  the  glass  portico.  When  I  put 
out  my  hand,  I  said,  '  Oh,  how  glad  I  am  to  see  you  again.'  He  looked  so 
sad  and  said,  '  You  will  not  be  glad,  as  I  bring  you  sad  news.  Your 
brother  Stephen  is  dead.'  I  awoke  at  the  moment,  and  it  seemed  as 
though  the  words  were  sounding  in  my  ears.  When  the  servant  came  to 
assist  me  to  dress,  I  told  her  my  dream,  and  to  comfort  me  she  said  that 
dreams  always  went  by  contraries,  '  and  that  he  was  most  likely  being 
married,'  but  said  I  must  not  tell  this  dream  to  my  mother  or  to  any  one 
who  might  do  so,  as  my  brother  writing  so  seldom  always  made  her  so 
anxious  and  unhappy  ;  and  so  acting  upon  her  advice,  I  did  not  speak  of 
it,  but  the  thought  of  it  constantly  recurred  during  the  four  months  that 
intervened  between  the  Easter  and  a  visit  to  Bangor,  in  Wales,  where  a 
letter  from  Mr.  R.,  dated  Easter  Sunday,  was  forwarded  to  me.     He  wrote 

408  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

to  me  for  the  reason  that  he  thought  I  could  more  gently  break  the  sad  news 
to  my  dear  mother,  and  his  letter  commenced  almost  with  the  same  words 
that  I  had  heard  in  the  dream.  He  told  how  that,  a  fortnight  before  his 
death,  my  brother  had  reached  his  house  sadly  out  of  health,  and  worn  with 
the  toilsome  journey.  At  once  he  became  too  ill  to  write,  and  continued 
so  till  he  died  on  Easter  Sunday  morning.         "  Olivia  A.  Denrochb." 

[The  death  must  have  preceded  the  dream  by  a  good  many  hours. 
The  case  is  remote ;  but  the  fact  that  Easter  Sunday  is  so  marked  a  day 
makes  it  fairly  probable  that  the  coincidence  was  rightly  remembered. 
Australian  newspapers  have  been  searched,  as  well  as  the  most  likely 
English  obituaries,  for  a  notice  of  the  death,  but  without  success,] 

(439  and  440)  From  La  Chance  et  la  Destinee  (1876),  by  Foissac,  p.  599. 
Recit  de  M.  Longet,  membre  de  I'lnstitut,  professeur  de  physiologie  a  la 
Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris. 

"  Notre  savant  confrere  (M.  Jules  Cloquet,  membre  de  I'lnstitut,  profes- 
seur de  Clinique  Chirurgicale)  nous  a  raconte  que  sortant  fort  avant  dans 
la  nuit  d'une  soirde  chez  M.  Chomel,  et  s'etant  endormi,  il  vit  en  songe  un 
fant6me  qui  lui  repr^sentait  son  f rere  Hippolyte.  II  portait  sur  son  dos  una 
grande  liane  de  papiers  qu'il  jeta  au  milieu  de  la  chambre,  en  lui  disant, 
'  Maintenant  je  n'ai  2^lus  besoin  de  rien,'  et  il  disparut.  A  son  reveil  M. 
Cloquet  raconta  ce  songe  aux  personnes  de  son  entourage  sans  en  etre 
autrement  impressionne.  II  se  rendit  a  I'hopital,  fit  sa  leQon  de  clinique 
comme  a  I'ordinaire,  puis  M.  Giron  de  Busarainque  lui  dit,  en  lui  prenant 
le  bras  :  '  Ton  frere  Hippolyte  est  malade.'  '  AUons  le  voir,'  repondit 
M.  Cloquet.  Chemin  faisant,  M.  Giron  de  Busarainque  lui  apprit 
qu'Hippolyte  Cloquet  ^tait  mort  dans  la  nuit  d'une  attaque  d'apoplexie. 

"  Le  songe  qui  me  concerne  est  plus  explicite  encore.  Lorsque  j'etais 
^tudiant  en  medecine,  et  interne  de  Dupuytren,  je  revai  que  je  voyais  mon 
pere  atteint  d'une  maladie  qui  le  conduisait  au  tombeau.  Je  m'eveillai 
dans  un  grand  trouble  que  je  cherchais  a  dominer  en  me  disant  que  j 'avals 
quittd  mon  pere  le  dimanche  d'auparavant  en  parfaite  santd ;  nous  dtions 
au  mercredi.  Je  me  representai  que  c'^tait  une  grande  faiblesse  de 
m'inquieter  d'un  songe,  et  je  resolus  de  n'en  tenir  aucun  compte.  Mais 
I'image  de  mon  pere  mourant  etait  sans  cesse  presente  a  ma  pensee,  et 
pour  echapper  a  cette  obsession,  quoique  honteux  de  ma  faiblesse,  je 
partis  pour  St.  Germain,  ou  je  trouvai  mon  pere  atteint  d'une  fluxion  de 
poitrine  qui  I'enleva  en  cinq  jours." 

[This  second  case  would  more  properly  belong  to  the  preceding 
section.] 

Similarly  in  the  next  case,  the  agent's  actual  thought  may  have 
been  the  nucleus  of  a  dream  to  which  the  dreamer  supplied  a 
setting. 

(441)  From  Mr.  Alexander  G.  Sparrow,  Derwent  Square,  Liverpool. 

"  1882. 

"  About  23  years  ago,  my  youngest  sister  was  visiting  my  then 
bachelor  quarters ;  there  was  then  residing  in  Liverpool  an  old  friend  of 
mine,  D.  L.,  a  bachelor  past  40,  and  who  was  considered  by  his  friends 
most  unlikely  to  marry.  One  morning  at  breakfast  I  related  to  my  sister 
a  very  vivid  dream.     I  was  in  the  Old  Exchange  room ;  not  being  the 

III.]  '  DREAMS.  409 

'Change  time,  it  was  nearly  empty.  I  was  leaning  against  a  sort  of 
counter  under  the  clock.  D.  L.  was  sauntering  up  the  middle  of  the  long 
narrow  room  ;  and  when  he  caught  sight  of  me  he  quickened  his  step,  and 
smiling  put  out  his  hand,  saying,  '  Sparrow,  congratulate  me ;  I  am 
engaged  to  be  married,  and  am  as  spooney  as  I  was  at  one-and-twenty.' 
I  did  offer  him  my  congratulations,  and  asked  who  the  lady  was,  to  which 
he  replied,  '  She  is  an  Irish  girl ;  I  met  her  at  Kingstown  Regatta.' 

"My  eldest  sister  was,  at  that  time,  living  with  her  husband  in  Ireland. 
When  I  returned  from  business  that  evening,  my  sister  said,  '  Your  dream 
has  come  true,  even  the  very  words.'  She  put  a  letter  from  my  eldest  sister 
into  my  hand,  and  I  read,  '  Tell  Alick  his  friend  D.  L.  is  engaged  to  one 
of  the  daughters  of  our  rector.     He  met  her  at  Kingstown  Regatta.' 

"  Alex.  G.  Spareow." 

The  sister  to  whom  the  dream  was  told  vaguely  remembers  the  main 
fact  of  the  occurrence. 

[In  conversation,  Mr.  Sparrow  told  Mr.  Myers  that  he  did  not  know 
his  friend  to  be  in  Ireland,  though  he  may  have  noticed  that  he  was  not 
on  'Change  as  usual ;  that  there  was  nothing  to  connect  his  friend  with 
Kingstown  Regatta;  that  he  had  thought  him  a  "  regular  old  bachelor  "  ; 
and  that  the  words  used  in  the  letter  were  the  exact  words  used  in  his 
dream.  But  after  so  long  an  interval  of  time,  memory  cannot  be  implicitly 
trusted  for  such  details.] 

The  next  dream  presents  an  interesting  mixture  of  right  and 
wrong  detail.  If  telepathic,  and  not  accidental,  it  probably  fell  on 
the  night  following  the  event,  and  would  then  seem  more  naturally 
referable  to  the  agent's  subsequent  picturing  of  the  scene  than  to  an 
immediate  "  clairvoyant  "  impression  whose  development  had  been 
deferred.  The  dream,  as  so  often  in  these  coincident  cases,  produced 
a  quite  exceptional  impression  of  reality. 

(442)  From  Mrs.  Saxby,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon. 

"January  31st,  1883. 

Mrs.  Saxby  begins  by  saying  that  her  husband  was  on  the  Continent 
at  the  outbreak  of  the  Franco-German  war,  and  that  in  one  of  her  letters 
to  him  she  copied  out  the  famous  "  draft  treaty." 

"  One  night,  not  long  after  this,  I  saw  in  a  kind  of  dream  that  my 
husband  was  walking  on  a  high  road,  under  the  shade  of  broad  spreading 
trees.  I  was  charmed  with  the  brilliancy  of  the  green  of  their  translucent 
leaves,  through  which  the  sunlight  streamed  overhead. 

"  I  noticed  that  a  country  cart  with  three  men  in  it  passed  him,  and 
that  one  of  the  men  had  remarkably  bushy  black  whiskers.  They  were  all 
dressed  in  blouses,  and  had  a  very  peculiar  kind  of  cap  on  their  heads. 
These  caps  had  peaks  to  them.  Presently  the  cart  halted,  and  the  men  had 
some  communication  with  my  husband,  in  which  the  man  with  the  black 
whiskers  took  a  prominent  part.  I  noticed  that  the  men  got  out  and  in 
of  the  cart,  and  stood  up  and  spoke  for  some  time.  There  was  evidently 
something  going  on,  and  it  ended  in  one  of  the  men  going  one  way,  on 
foot,  while  the  other  men  jogged  away  in  the  cart  in  the  contrary  direction, 
and  all,  including  my  husband,  passed  away. 

410  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  I  cannot  state  why  I  knew  that  this  was  one  of  my  mysterious  kind 
of  dreams,  but  I  did,  and  I  felt  sure  that  something  had  happened  to  my 
husband ;  so  I  sat  down  and  wrote  to  him  directly,  telling  him  my  dream, 
and  describing  the  scene  and  the  circumstances  that  occurred  in  it, 
describing  also  the  men  and  the  cart  as  exactly  as  I  could.  I  even  etched 
with  my  pen  a  picture  of  the  man  with  the  black  whiskers,  and  I  asked 
my  husband  what  kind  of  trees  they  were  with  the  very  bright  translucent 
leaves,  and  what  had  happened  to  him  under  them.  On  August  2nd,  1870, 
dating  from  Luxembourg,  my  husband  wrote  to  me  : — 

"  '  My  Dearest  Effie, — 1  write  a  line  from  this  station,  while  waiting 
for  the  train,  to  say  that  all  is  right. 

"  '  This  will  be  posted  somewhere  on  the  way  up  the  line,  and  will  very 
likely  not  get  to  you  much  before  I  am  coming  in  sight  of  England,  only 
it  is  better  you  should  hear  from  me  before  any  chance  story  appears  in 
the  papers  (should  it  so  appear)  of  my  having  been  taken  prisoner  by  the 
Prussians  yesterday  (August  1st). 

"  '  I  was  simply  at  Wasserbillig,  the  pretty  frontier  station  of  the 
Luxembourg  Duchy,  and  instead  of  roasting  on  the  bridge  over  the  little 
stream  which  here  joins  the  Moselle,  and  marks  the  Prussian  boundary,  I 
strolled  leisurely  along  in  the  deep  shade  of  the  walnut-trees  by  the 
river-bank,  intending  to  turn  back  as  soon  as  I  should  see  the  Prussian 
sentries. 

"  '  I  had  not  gone  far  before  I  met  a  cart,  with  four  sturdy  peasants  in 
blouses.  As  soon  as  they  had  passed  me,  they  stopped  the  cart.  One  of 
them  sprang  out  to  cut  off  my  retreat,  and  the  rest  took  me  prisoner. 
They  were  soldiers  in  disguise,  all  signs  of  douanes  or  frontier-guard 
having  been  done  away  in  order  to  entrap  spies,  the  patrols  going  about  in 
blouses,  with  revolvers  underneath,  and  short  swords  tucked  away  in 
their  trousers,   I  think. 

"  'They  took  me  to  Izel,  near  Treves,  the  nearest  outpost,  first  possess- 
ing themselves  of  all  letters  and  papers  out  of  my  pouch,  and  the  having 
upon  me  a  MS.  draft  of  the  proposed  treaty  for  the  French  acquisition  of 
Belgium,  written  in  French,  while  I  asserted  myself  to  be  an  Englishman, 
made  a  fine  point  against  me. 

"  '  The  Major  in  command  of  the  post  was,  luckily,  a  gentleman, 
though  very  strict  in  his  examination,  and  the  thing  ended  in  my  being 
released,  and  sent  back  to  the  Duchy  under  guard,  but  I  was  within  an 
ace  of  being  sent  into  the  interior,  to  headquarters,  for  adjudication  as 
a  spy. 

"  '  You  did  not  imagine  what  your  diligence  was  putting  in  pickle  for 
me,  in  copying  the  treaty,  did  you  ?  Good-bye. — Ever  your  afiectionate 
husband,  "  '  S.  H.  S  ' 

"  After  this  my  husband  told  me  that  the  sergeant  who  took  him 
prisoner  had  bushy  black  whiskers,  and  answered  to  the  description  I  had 
given  of  one  of  the  men  whom  I  saw  in  the  cart.  He  also  told  me  that 
the  soldiers,  disguised  as  peasants,  did  not  wear  the  caps  with  peaks, 
which  I  had  drawn  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  I  had  drawn  the  common  foraging 
cap  of  the  Prussian  soldier,  I  not  knowing  what  those  soldiers  wore. 

"  He  also  told  me  that  when  I  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  draft  treaty  it 
had  not  appeared  in  any  of  the  Belgian  papers. 

III.]  BBEAMS.  411 

"  If  I  recollect  right,  our  letters  crossed  in  reaching  us. 

"  J.  E.  Saxby." 

Writing  on  March  25,  1886,  Mrs.  Saxby  adds  :— 

"  The  only  hitch  about  it  is  that  according  to  my  calculations  I  saw  the 
whole  thing  happen  before  it  did  happen,  but  I  cannot  help  guessing  that, 
because  of  the  uncertainty  of  letters  at  the  time  of  the  war,  I  made  a 
mistake  as  to  dates.  All  I  am  quite  sure  there  could  be  no  mistake 
about  is,  that  my  husband's  letter  about  the  event  and  mine  telling 
him  what  I  had  seen,  crossed  on  the  road.  I  have  got  his  letter  to  me, 
and  he  brought  home  mine  to  him  with  the  picture  on  it;  but  he 
subsequently  burnt  it,  so  my  date  was  lost." 

In  the  next  case,  a  feature  is  introduced  into  the  dream  which 
happened  to  be  impossible,  but  was  in  no  way  fantastic  or  symbolic. 

(443)  From  Mr.  J.  D.  Best,  70,  Meldon  Street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

"December  23rd,  1885. 

"  The  experience  that  you  refer  to  took  place  just  four  years  ago.  My 
age  was  almost  1 9,  and  at  the  time  I  was  in  perfect  health  mentally,  though 
physically  rather  fagged.  The  particulars,  as  far  as  I  remember  them, 
were  as  follows  : — 

"  I  had  spent  the  evening  of  December  5th  in  close  study  at  Greek 
grammar.  About  11  o'clock  I  stopped,  and  sat  down  by  the  fire  to  read 
Manon  Lescaut.  Some  time  afterwards  I  fell  asleep,  and  it  was  then  that 
the  idea  of  my  grandmother's  illness  or  death  (I  am  uncertain  which)  first 
came  to  me.  On  wakening,  about  12.30, 1  found  my  dictionary  under  the 
bars,  and  my  anxiety  for  that  made  me,  for  the  moment,  forget  my  dream. 
Carelessly  leaving  the  gas  burning,  I  went  to  bed  ;  and  all  I  remember  is 
that  every  particular  of  the  room  which  I  saw  was  strongly  impressed 
upon  me ;  that  the  old  lady  was  breathing  very  heavily  ;  and,  strangest  of 
all,  my  mother,  who  was  and  is  in  Australia,  seemed  in  the  room.  She,  as 
I  thought,  turned  to  me,  saying,  '  I  fear,  Duncan,  she  is  dying ! '  How 
long  it  was  before  I  wakened  I  cannot  say  ;  but  every  fact  was  strangely 
distinct,  for  I  seem  to  remember  even  the  ticking  of  the  clock.  The  gas 
being  quite  bright  when  I  awoke,  I  rose  to  extinguish  it,  and  quite 
accidentally  noticed  the  time. 

"  On  receiving  the  intimation  of  her  death,  on  the  morning  of  December 
7th  (Wednesday),  the  time,  I  noticed  after  my  surprise  had  passed  away, 
was  between  4  and  5  a.m.  On  further  inquiry,  my  aunt  said  that  it  was 
between  half-past  4  and  5  o'clock.  The  time  I  had  noticed  was  5.30.  I 
did  not  know  that  my  relative  was  ill  until  I  heard  the  news  of  her  death. 
She  was  no  great  friend  to  me,  and  consequently  I  rarely  troubled  her,  or 
thought  of  her.  I  had  received  a  letter  a  week  before,  saying  that  she 
was  not  very  well ;  but  as  she  was  a  woman  of  about  76  years,  I  took  but 
little  notice  of  this,  and  had  thought  no  more  about  it. 

"  You  ask  if  I  have  ever  had  other  dreams  of  death,  which  did  not 
correspond  with  the  reality.     I  think  I  can  honestly  answer  '  No.' 

"  John  D.  Best." 

[Mr.  Best  has  gone  to  Australia,  which  prevents  us  for  the  time  from 
obtaining  further  details.] 

412  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  next  case  introduces  a  distinctly  bizarre  element — the 
percipient's  imagination  reacting  in  a  typically  dreamlike  fashion 
on  the  telepathic  impression. 

(444)  From  Miss  Hutchinson,  3,  Bagdale,  Whitby. 

"December  6th,  1885. 

"On  the  morning  of  the  15th  February,  1864 — the  day  after  Valen- 
tine's Day,  which  impressed  it  on  my  mind — my  father  told  me  he  had  had 
that  night  a  most  painful  and  vivid  dream,  begging  me  not  to  mention  it 
to  our  mother.  The  dream  was  this.  Our  dear  E.  clinging  to  him  wet 
and  naked,  and  begg-ing  him  to  save  him,  for  he  was  drowning  ;  but  the 
form  was  not  that  of  a  man  of  22,  but  what  he  was  as  a  baby. 

"  Early  in  March  we  received  the  sad  intelligence  that  E.  was  drowned 
off  the  Cape,  on  the  14th  February,  through  the  swamping  of  a  boat.  He 
and  one  of  his  brother  officers  were  caught  in  a  squall  when  returning  to 
H.M.S.  '  Tartar,'  after  a  few  hours  leave.     These  are  the  plain  facts. 

"  Elizabeth  L.  Hutchinson." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Hutchinson  adds  : — 

"Both  my  father  and  mother  are  dead,  and  i/* my  father  made  any 
note  of  the  dream  at  the  time,  it  has  been  destroyed.  It  was  natural  for 
him  to  tell  me,  being  the  eldest  in  the  family,  six  years  older  than  my 
naval  brother.  It  was  on  the  morning  of  the  \bth  that  he  told  me  of  his 
dream.  A  fortnight  later,  the  Cape  mail  brought  the  sad  news.  An 
apparently  foolish  and  trivial  thing  impressed  the  date  on  my  memory  at 
the  time  that  it  was  told  me,  the  day  after  Valentine's  Day." 

We  find  from  the  Admiralty  that  Lieut.  A.  E.  Hutchinson's  death 
occurred  on  Feb.  14,  1865  ;  and  Miss  Hutchinson  has  kindly  sent  us  a 
photograph  of  a  tablet,  erected  to  his  memory,  which  records  that  he  was 
drowned  in  Simon's  Bay  on  the  night  of  that  day,  by  the  swamping  of  a 
boat.  The  difference  of  time  between  England  and  the  Cape  is  not  much 
over  an  hour. 

In  the  following  case  the  brightness  of  the  figure,  and  its  gesture, 
were  imagery  sufficiently  appropriate  to  the  circumstances.  We 
should  hardly  be  justified  in  treating  the  experience  as  other  than  a 
dream ;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  form  of  the  vision — a  single 
figure  appearing  in  the  room  where  the  percipient  knows  himself  to 
be — is  very  unlike  ordinary  dreaming  (see  cases  527  and  545). 

(445)  From  the  Rev.  John  Mathwin,  Vicar  of  West  Pelton,  Co. 
Durham.  "December  19th,  1884. 

"  Forty  years  ago,  or  thereabouts,  when  I  was  about  20  years  of  age, 
a  lady  friend  of  mine,  a  distant  relative  by  marriage — age  between  40  and 
,50 — had  for  some  time  been  in  a  delicate  state  of  health,  though  not 
confined  to  the  house.  We  frequently  had  quiet  conversations  together 
on  religious  matters.  Neither  of  us  was  of  an  excitable  turn  of  mind. 
As  well  as  I  can  now  recollect,  I  last  saw  my  friend  ahve  about  a  fort- 
niirht  before  her  death.     She  did  not  seem  at  that  time  to  be  worse  than 

III.]  DREAMS.  413 

usual,  and  apparently  might  have  lived  at  any  rate  for  a  few  years. 
However,  one  night  when  I  was  in  bed — say  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing— I  had  what  I  may  call  a  vision.  A  figure  appeared  before  me  neatly 
draped,  and  a  certain  brightness  about  it  seemed  to  awake  me.  I  at  once 
felt  conscious  that  someone  was  near  me  who  wished  to  make  a  communi- 
cation to  me.  I  soon  recognised  the  face  of  my  invalid  friend.  She 
seemed  to  wish  to  give  me  tune  to  collect  myself — evidently  intimating 
that  there  was  no  cause  why  I  should  be  afraid.  As  a  matter  of  fact  I 
had  no  fear  at  all.  My  then  feelings  may  perhaps  be  best  described  as 
partaking  both  of  wonder  (or  expectation)  and  pleasure.  When,  ap- 
parently, the  figure  had  convinced  herself  that  I  recognised  her,  and  that 
I  had  satisfied  myself  that  I  was  under  no  delusion,  she  seemed  to  beckon 
me  cheeringly  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  her  right  hand,  and  to  say  to 
me,  '  It's  all  right ;  come  on.'  She  then  vanished,  and  I  neither  saw  nor 
heard  anything  more. 

"  Though  there  was  no  injunction  given  to  me  not  to  tell  what  I  had 
seen,  I  yet  felt  that  the  communication  was  of  too  solemn  a  nature  to 
allow  me  at  once  to  talk  of  it  openly.  But  I  said  to  my  brother  at 
breakfast,  about  8  o'clock  that  morning,  that  I  had  dreamt  in  the  night 
that  Mrs.  So-and-so  was  dead,  and  it  turned  out,  as  we  heard  about 
10  o'clock,  that  our  friend  had  died  during  the  night.  For  some  years  I 
never  mentioned  this  experience  to  anyone,  but  afterwards  I  felt  no 
hesitation  in  talking  about  it  to  intimate  friends." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Math  win  writes  on  Feb.  17th,  1885  : — 

"  To  my  brother  I  spoke  of  what  I  call  the  vision  as  if  it  had  been 
a  dream ;  but  this  was  because  I  did  not  wish  to  draw  his  attention 
very  specially  to  it,  although  I  felt  constrained  to  mention  it  to  him  in 
some  way. 

"  He  tells  me  now  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  my  having  spoken  to 
him  about  it,  as  I  did  at  breakfast,  on  the  morning  of  the  death,  but 
before  we  knew  of  the  death  having  taken  place.  I  am  not,  however, 
surprised  that  my  brother  should  not  now  recollect  the  remark  I  made  to 
him  at  that  time. 

"  I  never  had  any  similar  experience  before,  neither  have  I  had  since. 
I  had  no  reason  to  expect  any  communication  of  the  kind  at  any  time. 

"  John  Mathwin." 

[In  an  uncorroborated  case  of  so  remote  a  date,  it  is  of  course  im- 
possible to  be  certain  that  the  coincidence  was  as  exact  as  in  memory  it 
appears  to  have  been.] 

The  next  case  is  very  similar,  though  it  was  possibly  not  the 
dying  person  who  was  the  agent. 

(446)  From  Mrs.  Penny,  The  Cottage,  CuUompton. 

"November  30th,  1882. 

"One  day  I  slept  late,  having  a  bad  headache,  and  dreamed  that  I  was 
in  a  wonderfully  beautiful  garden,  and  while  I  walked  along  its  alleys  a 
friend  of  one  of  my  sisters,  F.  H.,  came  smiling  towards  me,  dressed  in 
white,  and  looking  radiant  with  joy.     She  said,  '  I  am  here  now,'  and  it  is 

414  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

always  so  lovely.'  On  waking,  I  found  breakfast  and  letters  brought  up, 
and  one  open  on  my  pillow  to  my  sister  from  the  sister  of  F.  H.,  telling 
her  that  she  had  died  after  a  very  short  illness. 

"Now,  as  this  poor  F.  H.,  who  seldom  had  a  day's  happiness,  was  to 
me  only  an  acquaintance,  I  conclude  that  the  aura  of  her  sister  conveyed 
to  my  higher  consciousness  the  fact  of  which  she  was  full,  and  in  the 
momentary  duration  of  a  dream  this  fact  got  translated  into  the  adjacent 
ideas  of  life  in  Paradise. 

"  Yery  likely  the  consciousness  of  my  two  sisters  did  affect  my 
dreaming  brain  by  some  wave  of  new  and  energetic  impulse ;  but  I 
know  there  had  been  no  possibility  of  talking  in  my  room  that  morning. 
Though  it  all  happened  years  ago,  I  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  my 
memory.  I  cannot  be  sure  whether  it  was  in  1852  or  a  year  or  two 
later.  "A.  J.  Penny." 

We  find  from  a  notice  in  the  Gentleman^s  Magazine  that  F,  H.  died 
on  June  6,  1852. 

(447)  From  a  German  nurse  who  has  been  for  22  years  in  the  service 
of  Mrs.  Balgarnie,  of  9,  Filey  Road,  Scarborough. 

"July  9th,  1885. 

"  In  February,  1871,  I  dreamed  one  night  that  I  received  a  letter,  on 
the  envelope  of  which  was  written  in  my  father's  handwriting,  '  0  Death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  ' 

"  Next  morning  I  went  in  great  trouble  to  my  mistress,  saying  I  felt 
perfectly  sure  my  father  must  be  dead,  and  related  my  dream.  This 
fact  was  immediately  written  down,  but  the  paper  cannot  now  be  found. 
Three  days  after  the  news  came  that  my  father  had  died  that  Sunday 
night,  quite  suddenly.  During  the  day  of  the  night  on  which  he  died  he 
had  evidently  wished  to  tell  me  something,  for  he  twice  said,  '  Tell  Marie, 
tell  Marie  !'  He  soon  became  unconscious,  and  died  in  his  sleep.  I  had 
not  seen  him  for  eight  years,  and  though  I  knew  he  was  not  well,  I  had  no 
idea  that  death  was  expected.  My  father  lived  and  died  in  Germany, 
while  I  was,  and  am,  in  England.  "  Marie  Lautier." 

Miss  Balgarnie,  writing  on  December  11th,  1884,  gave  us  a  precisely 
similar  account,  saying,  "  the  date  and  circumstances  were  put  down  by 
us  immediately  "  on  the  narration  of  the  dream. 

Mrs.  Balgarnie  writes  on  July  28,  1885  : — 

In  answer  to  yours,  I  can  only  say  that  the  nurse  told  me  her  dream, 
on  my  entering  the  nursery  one  morning,  adding,  '  I  am  sure  my  father  is 
dead.'  And  so  it  proved ;  in  three  days  the  letter  announced  the  fact,  and 
that  he  died  with  her  name  on  his  lips. 

"  I  do  not  think  I  can  give  you  any  more  particulars.  I  can't  find  the 
memorandum  of  the  incident.  "  M.  Balgarnie." 

[The  narrator's  father,  it  appears,  had  been  ill  for  3  or  4  months ;  and 
she  states  that,  though  she  had  not  heard  of  his  being  worse,  her  thoughts 
had  been  a  good  deal  occupied  with  him.  Mrs.  Balgarnie,  however,  thinks 
that  she  now  rather  exaggerates  the  extent  to  which  this  was  the  case, 
from  an  objection  to  having  her  experience  regarded  as  of  any  special 
interest.] 

III.]  DREAMS.  415 

In  the  next  case,  the  imagery  is  again  distinctly  suggestive  of 
death,  and  fantastically  represents  the  popular  conception  of  "  spirit " 
as  a  tenuous  form  of  matter,  but  has  no  emotional  character. 

(448)  From  Mr.  W.  Brooks,  Brooksby  House,  87,  Petherton  Road 
Highbury  New  Park,  N.  u  j^^y  27th,  1885. 

"On  the  15th  November,  1875,  at  5,  Wallace  Road,  N.,  at  7.45  a.m., 
or  thereabouts,  I  saw  my  late  brother  as  a  spirit,  but  when  I  spoke  to 
'him,'  he  gradually  disappeared.     I  then  woke  up. 

"  On  arriving  at  Hastings  the  following  morning,  I  learnt  from  my 
sister  that  the  above  was  the  time  my  brother  died  there.  This  was  the 
only  time  I  ever  saw  him  in  the  form  of  a  '  ghost.'    a  ^    jj_  Brooks." 

"We  find  the  date  and  place  of   death  confirmed  in  the  Times  obituary. 

The  following  is  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  dream  : — 

"  The  '  appearance '  was :  There  was  a  long  room  or  gallery,  and 
several  of  my  friends  there,  including  my  brother.  He  was  like  '  Pepper's 
Grhost '  as  regards  substance,  or  rather  want  of  substance.  None  of  the 
other  friends  had  a  hazy  appearance.  They  were  in  ordinary  attire,  as  I 
should  see  them  in  a  room.  My  brother  was  the  only  '  ghostly '  figure. 
He  advanced  gradually  towards  me,  which  made  me  feel  a  little  nervous, 
and  looked  kindly  at  me.  I  advanced  a  little  and  said,  'James,  why  do 
you  not  speak  % '  which  utterance  seemed  to  make  him  recede.  He  retired 
a  little  down  the  room,  and  gradually  became  more  indistinct,  and  disap- 
peared. None  of  the  friends  seemed  to  take  any  decided  notice,  and  did 
not  speak.  I  then  woke.  My  forcing  or  insisting  upon  a  reply  seemed  to 
be  the  cause  of  my  waking,  and  I  had  to  look  round  to  gather  myself 
together  and  ascertain  that  I  was  in  bed  when  I  so  awoke. 

"  I  do  not  think  I  can  afford  any  corroboration.  On  the  afternoon  of 
the  same  day,  I  mentioned  the  matter  to  my  aunt  and  her  husband.  She 
is  now  dead,  and  I  do  not  think  my  uncle  would  recollect  the  account.  I 
did  not  make  much  of  it,  as  1  was  a  disbeliever  in  ghosts.  I  dared  not 
mention  the  occurrence  to  my  mother,  as  she  would  have  grieved  all  day 
about  my  brother  if  I  had. 

"  I  have  never  had  any  other  similar  instance.  I  have  had  relations 
die,  but  have  been  near  them  at  the  time  of  death,     u  -^    jj    Brooks  " 

In  later  letters  Mr.  Brooks  writes  : — 

"  I  have  communicated  with  my  uncle  as  I  promised,  but  he  does  not 
recollect  any  of  the  circumstances. 

"  In  reply  to  your  further  queries  : — 

1.  "The  dream  did  not  make  Sb  particularly  unpleasant  impression  ;  it 
was  certainly  unpleasant  and  unusual,  and  on  waking  I  felt  nervous,  but 
the  occurrence  faded  from  my  memory  slowly,  so  far  as  the  sharp  impres- 
sion was  concerned,  All  day  Sunday,  however,  I  was  wondering  how  my 
brother  was,  and  when  I  saw  my  sister  on  the  Monday  I  thought  of  the 
strange  coincidence. 

2.  "  My  sister  recollects  when  she  informed  me  (of  the  '  time '  of  the 
death)  on  the  Monday  that  I  remarked,  '  How  strange  !  that  is  the  time  I 
saw  James  at  my  bedside.' 

416  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

3.  "  I  had  no  reason  to  expect  my  brother's  death  at  the  time  it  did 
take  place,  except  an  expectation  that  one's  worst  fears  might  at  any  time 
be  realised  in  a  case  where  consumption  had  taken  hold." 

The  following  is  from  Mr.  Brooks'  sister,  Mrs.  Plaistowe  : — 

"  Brooksby  House,  August  4th,  1885. 

"  In  answer  to  your  letter,  I  have  to  state  that  my  brother  William, 
on  his  arriving  at  Hastings  in  November,  1875,  and  being  informed  by  me 
of  the  hour  of  my  late  brother  James's  death  (viz.,  a  quarter  to  8  a.m.), 
said  that  it  exactly  coincided  with  the  time  that  he,  my  brother  William, 
saw  James  in  a  spirit  or  vision.  [In  conversation,  Mrs.  Plaistowe  stated 
that  Mr.  Brooks  came  down  on  the  Monday  afternoon,  and,  on  hearing 
the  hour  of  his  brother's  death,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  dream  was 
exactly  coincident.] 

"  I  may  remark  that  the  death  was  unexpected  by  the  members  of 
the  family,  as  James  was  away  from  home  with  me  at  Hastings ;  and 
although  he  had  been  suffering  from  consumption  for  three  or  four  years, 
no  intimation  of  his  becoming  worse  had  been  received  by  any  one  in 
the  family,  so  that  my  brother's  statement  to  you  is  corroborated  by  me. 

"M.  Plaistowe." 

On  examination  it  turned  out  that  Mr.  Brooks'  strong  impression  is 
that  his  dream  occurred  on  a  Sunday  morning — in  which  case  it  preceded 
the  death  by  some  24  hours,  though  of  course  falling  at  a  time  of  critical 
illness.  This  view  accords  with  his  recollection  of  mentioning  the  dream 
to  his  uncle  and  aunt  in  the  afternoon ;  but  is  opposed  to  his  recollection 
(which  Mrs.  Plaistowe  supports)  of  noticing  at  the  time  that  the 
coincidence  was  exact.  There  being  a  doubt  on  the  matter,  the  case 
must  not  be  included  in  the  special  group  of  death-dreams  dealt  with 
in  Vol.  I.,  p.  307. 

(449)  The  journal  Psychische  Studien  (Leipzig)  for  March,  1874, 
contains  a  long  and  interesting  account,  written  down  for  the  late 
Professor  Perty,  of  Berne,  by  the  wife  of  the  Russian  Imperial  Councillor, 
M.  Alex.  Aksakof,  who  says  that  he  has  frequently  heard  all  the 
particulars. 

Madame  Aksakof  was  19  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and 
says  that  she  "had  no  ideas  about  Spiritualism,  and  no  tendency  to 
enthusiasm  or  mysticism."  The  principal  incidents  were  that  Madame 
Aksakof's  brother-in-law,  Dr.  A.  F.  Sengireef,  from  whom  she  had  parted 
about  half  a  year  previously  with  some  coldness,  appeared  to  her,  on  the 
night  of  May  12th,  1855,  in  what  seems  to  have  been  a  very  prolonged 
and  feverish  vision,  in  which  she  must  have  been  partially  awake,  as  in 
the  course  of  it  she  heard  the  clock  strike  3,  and  her  child  and  its  nurse 
move.  The  figure  in  the  vision  held  his  cold  hand  on  her  mouth,  and 
repeatedly  bade  her  kiss  it ;  and  then,  after  spreading  out  a  roll  of 
parchment  beside  her,  recited  a  prayer  in  front  of  a  crucifix,  and  finally 
disappeared,  to  the  sound  of  sacred  music  and  in  a  blaze  of  light.  She 
noticed  his  "long  black  hair  hanging  down  on  his  shoulders,  and  a  large 
round  beard  such  as  I  had  never  seen  him  wear.  The  day  after  this 
terrible  event,"  she  continues,  "we  received  the  news  of  the  illness  of  my 
brother-in-law,  Sengireef,  and  about  a  fortnight  later,  tidings  of  his  death, 

HI.]  DREAMS.  417 

which  took  place  in  that  night  of  the  12th-13th  of  May,  about  5  o'clock 
in  the  morning.  The  following  is  noteworthy.  When  my  sister-in-law, 
a  few  weeks  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  came  to  live  with  us  at 
Romanoff-Borissogiiebsk,  she  mentioned  incidentally  to  a  lady  in  my 
presence  that  her  late  husband  had  been  buried  with  long  hair  hanging 
down  to  his  shoulders,  and  with  a  large  curious-looking  beard  which  had 
grown  during  his  illness." 

M.  Aksakof  suggests  that  the  parchment  in  the  vision  may  have 
represented  a  "  sin-remission  chart "  which  it  is  a  Russian  custom  to  place 
in  coffins. 

I  will  now  give  a  group  of  cases  where  death  is  symbolised  in 
some  more  mundane  and  gloomy  manner. 

(450)  From  a  lady  whose  name  I  am  at  liberty  to  mention,  but  not  to 
print. 

"March  5th,  1885. 

"  Two  friends  of  ours,  Mr.  X.  [name  given  in  confidence]  and  Mr.  Y., 
lived  together  till  the  marriage  of  Mr.  X.,  and  were,  therefore,  intimately 
associated  in  our  minds. 

"  It  happened  that  though  Mrs.  X.  and  I  had  exchanged  cards  we  had 
not  met,  and  I  merely  knew  her  by  sight  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Y.  also 
married.  But  as  I  had  found  Mrs.  Y.  at  home,  I  was  slightly  acquainted 
with  her. 

"  It  was  a  few  months  after  Mr.  Y.'s  marriage,  on  the  night  of 
May  14th,  1879,  when  my  dream  occurred.  I  was  staying  at  Bristol 
at  the  time.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  making  my  first  call  on  Mrs.  Y., 
and  that  she  proceeded  to  show  me  her  trousseau — a  thing  that  would 
never  have  occurred  to  her  in  actual  life,  or  to  any  but  very  intimate 
friends.  A  variety  of  dresses  were  displayed,  and  as  I  was  looking  at  a 
black-net  evening  dress,  with  crimson  trimmings,  thinking  it  was  very  like 
one  of  my  own,  a  sudden  transformation  took  place.  Mrs.  Y.  had  changed 
into  Mrs.  X.,  and  the  dress  was  a  widow's  dress  complete.  I  woke  very 
strongly  impressed  with  the  dream,  and  mentioned  it  to  my  father  the  next 
morning.  It  haunted  me  till,  on  May  15th  or  16th,  I  saw  the  Times 
announcement  of  Mr.  X.'s  death. 

"  Afterwards  I  learnt  that,  on  the  afternoon  preceding  my  dream, 
Mr.  X.  had  returned  home,  apparently  in  his  usual  good  health,  only 
rather  tired,  but  within-half-an-hour  had  died  of  quite  unsuspected  heart 
disease. 

"  My  father  was  ill  at  the  time  of  my  dream,  and  does  not  remember 
the  circumstance.  But  my  sister  remembers  it  clearly,  and  testifies  to  the 
fact  [by  her  initials].  "  A    E.  R. 

"J.T.  R." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  of  May  16,  1879,  that  the  death 
took  place  on  May  14. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  R.  says  : — 

"  My  sister  was  not  with  me,  so  I  could  not  speak  about  it  to  her.  I  can- 
not find  any  of  my  letters  written  after  May  14th,  so  do  not  know  if  I  wrote 

VOL.    11.  2    B 

418  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

to  her  on  the  15th  or  not.  But  she  came  to  me  (as  my  father  was  taken 
seriously  ill  about  that  date)  and  heard  of  the  dream  and  of  the  death 
at  the  time  [■i.e.,  she  heard  of  the  dream  at  the  same  time  as  she  heard  of 
the  death].  I  am  quite  certain  that  the  dream  was  on  the  night  of  the  day 
of  death,  May  14th." 

Fortunately  Miss  R.  has  been  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of  a  letter  (post 
mark,  Bristol,  May  17,  1879),  which  she  wrote  to  a  friend  3  days  after 
her  dream  ;  in  which  the  following  words  occur  : — 

"  Poor  Mr.  X.  died  on  Wednesday  ;  I  do  not  know  of  what. 

"  On  Wednesday  night  [May  14th]  (having  heard  nothing  of  them,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  X.,  for  months,  since  I  saw  them  looking  well  and  happy 
together),  I  dreamed  Mrs.  X.  was  showing  me  her  trousseau,  and  that  she 
called  special  attention  to  an  elaborately  made  shroud.  She  said  that 
Scotch  people  always  considered  these  the  most  necessary  part  of  a 
trousseau.  The  one  I  saw  was  her  husband's ;  hers  changed  to  simply  a 
black  dress,  as  I  looked  at  it.  It  was  a  very  vivid  dream  and  impressed 
me.     Last  night  we  saw  the  death  in  the  Times,  May  14th." 

Referring  to  the  account  above  quoted,  Miss  R.  adds  : — 
"  I  do  not  know  why  I  should  have  forgotten  about  the  shroud ;  this 
must  have  been    one  of  the  many  dresses  I   saw  before  the  change  took 
place.     My  friend  did  not  know  the  Y.'s,  and  did  not  know  Mr.   X., 
so  that  I  left  out  any  superfluous  matter." 

(451)  From  a  niece  of  the  late  Rev.  G.  L.  Foote,  Rector  of  Christ's 
Church,  Roxbury,  Litchfield  Co.,  Conn.,  U.S.A.  <«18ft4. 

"  In  1848,  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote  drove  with  his  family  to  Windham, 
Greene  Co.,  N.Y.,  to  visit  Mrs.  Foote's  mother.  At  this  time,  his 
youngest  brother,  Henry,  afterwards  Dr.  H.  H.  Foote,  of  Newtown,  Fair- 
field Co.,  Ct.,  was  studying  medicine  in  Durham,  about  10  miles  from 
Windham,  and  living  with  an  aunt  who  resided  there.  Mr.  Foote,  with 
his  family,  arrived  in  Windham  on  Friday,  and  it  was  his  intention  to  start 
on  his  return  to  Roxbury  on  Monday,  deferring  his  visit  to  his  brother 
and  aunt  until  his  return  for  his  family  a  few  weeks  later.  On  Friday 
night  he  dreamed  that  he  was  taking  the  body  of  his  brother  home  to 
Newtown  in  a  metallic  coffin,  and  that  he  had  died  of  small-pox.  He 
thought  not  enough  of  the  dream  the  next  day  to  speak  of  it,  but  on 
Saturday  night  he  dreamed  the  same  dream  in  every  particular  twice,  ^  and 
it  so  impressed  him  that  he  was  unable  to  keep  it  out  of  his  mind. 

"  The  clergyman  of  the  place  desired  him  to  preach  for  him  on  Sunday, 
and  he  consented ;  but  during  the  whole  of  the  service  and  the  sermon,  the 
recollection  of  the  dream  continually  intruded  itself  upon  his  thoughts. 
After  service  he  told  his  brother-in-law,  O.  S.  Tuttle,  now  of  Minneapolis, 
Minn.,  that  it  was  impressed  upon  his  mind  that  something  was  wrong  at 
Durham,  and  he  wished  he  would  harness  his  horse  and  drive  him  over 
there.  He  accordingly  did  so,  and  as  they  drove  up  in  front  of  the  house 
of  his  aunt,  she  came  out  upon  the  porch,  and  holding  up  her  hands, 
exclaimed,    '  George    Foote  !    What   has    sent   you  here  ?      I    have   just 

1  As  to  the  repetition,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  357,  445,  and  c/.  case  213,  and  cases  457 
and  484  below. 

III.]  DREAMS.  419 

persuaded  Henry  to  let  me  write  to  ask  you  to  come  and  take  care  of  him  ; 
he  is  sick  with  small-pox.'  Although  she  had  had  the  disease  and  conse- 
quently was  not  afraid  of  it,  she  knew  she  could  not  alone  take  care  of  him, 
and  that  of  all  the  relatives  George  was  the  only  one  who  could  with 
perfect  safety  attend  him,  as,  while  in  Trinity  College,  Hartford,  he  had 
varioloid,  in  consequence  of  taking  care  of  a  room-mate  who  had  the  same 
disease.  Mr.  Tuttle  returned  to  Windham,  leaving  Mr.  Foote  to  nurse 
his  brother  through  the  sickness,  which  was  so  terrible  that  very  few  have 
ever  been  so  low  and  have  been  raised  again  to  health  and  strength. 

"  Mr.  Foote  used  often  to  say  that,  if  anyone  had  been  nursing  his 
brother  who  had  no  special  interest  in  him,  he  had  no  doubt  he  would  have 
been  buried  ;  for  at  three  different  times  he  himself  thought  the  last  breath 
had  been  drawn,  but  he  persevered  in  the  use  of  restoratives,  and  by  the 
most  assiduous  care  helped  fan  to  a  flame  the  apparently  dying  spark." 

Mr.  H.  L.  Foote,  son  of  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote  in  the  narrative, 
writes  : — 

"  The  above  account  is  given  by  the  niece  of  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote, 
and  is  substantially  the  same  that  I  have  heard  spoken  of  by  the  members 
of  my  family." 

The  Rev.  R.  Whittingham,  of  Pikesville,  Maryland,  U.S.A.,  a  Corre- 
sponding Member  of  the  S.P.R.,  writes  on  September  9,  1884  : — 

"  Several  years  ago  I  heard  the  Rev.  Mr.  G.  L.  Foote  allude  to  this 
dream  as  having  saved  his  brother's  life,  according  to  his  belief.  He  was 
ignorant  of  any  existence  of  small-pox  [at  this  place]  as  it  had  not  been 
prevalent ;  nor  did  it  become  epidemic,  although  there  were  three  or  four 
other  cases  at  the  time."  [This  last  point  is  from  a  reply  of  the  Rev.  G, 
L.  Foote  himself  to  an  inquiry  which  had  been  specially  addressed  to  him 
on  the  subject.] 

(452)  From  Miss  Tracy,  Mawson  Road,  St.  Barnabas,  Cambridge  (now 
Mrs.  William  Tracy).  ,<  December,  1885. 

"  My  mother  died  on  the  11th  of  February,  1882,  about  8.30  p.m.,  on 
a  Saturday,  at  Beccles,  Suffolk.  At  that  time,  my  youngest  brother,  who 
is  blind,  was  (and  is  still)  at  the  Blind  College,  Worcester.  On  the 
evening  above  mentioned,  he  went  to  bed  as  usual,  and,  I  believe,  to 
sleep.  Rather  later  in  the  evening,  one  of  the  masters  went  into  the  room 
where  my  brother  was,  to  see  if  all  was  right.  When  there,  he  heard  one 
of  the  boys  crying,  and  found  it  was  my  brother,  who  said  his  mother  had 
come  to  him  to  say  good-bye,  as  she  was  going  away,  &c.  It  was  some 
time  before  he  coulcl  be  quieted.  He  did  not  hear  of  his  mother's  death 
until  the  Monday  following.     He  was  at  the  time  9  years  old. 

"  This  is  as  nearly  as  possible  what  I  was  told  nearly  four  years  ago. 
If  the  master  who  heard  him  was  found  out,  he  would  be  able  to  give  it 
more  correctly.  "  E.  M.  Tracy." 

In  conversation  with  a  friend  of  ours,  who  made  inquiries  on  our 
behalf,  Miss  Tracy  said  that  her  mother  had  died  very  suddenly.  She 
had  complained  of  a  slight  headache  about  5  o'clock,  and  died  between  8 
and  8.30.  She  was  unconscious  for  some  time  before  she  died  ;  therefore 
it  would  have  been  impossible  to  tell  the  exact  moment  of  her  death ; 
VOL.  II.  2    E    2 

420  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

and  in  the  consternation  of  the  moment  they  did  not  look  at  the  time. 
The  boy  said  that  he  had  seen  his  mother  (it  appears  that  he  always  speaks 
of  seeing  people,  though  quite  blind)  ;  that  he  had  tried  to  hold  her,  but 
that  she  had  slipped  away  from  him.  He  did  not  refer  to  the  vision  the 
next  morning,  nor  has  he  ever  alluded  to  it  since ;  and  they  do  not  wish 
him  to  be  reminded  of  the  circumstance." 

The  Times  obituary  confirms  the  date  given,  and  the  fact  that  the 
death  was  sudden. 

The  following  letter  is  from  the  Rev.  S.  G.  Forster,  Head-Master  of 
the  Blind  College,  Worcester.  ,  December  17th,  1885. 

"  The  facts  of  the  boy  Tracy's  dream,  as  elicited  from  himself,  are  that 
he  dreamed  on  the  Saturday  night,  during  the  night  (and  did  not  wake  up 
till  7  a.m.  next  morning),  that  his  mother  was  dead,  and  was  being  buried 
in  part  of  our  old  place  called  The  Swings.  His  mother,  as  I  understand 
(but  Miss  Tracy  could  clear  this  up),  died  at  8  p.m.  on  Saturday  night. 
Tracy  would  go  to  bed  at  9  or  9.15,  an  hour  or  so  after  the  occurrence. 
Owing  to  the  surprise  and  trouble  at  home,  we  did  not  hear  of  it  by  letter 
till  the  Monday  after.  "  S.  Gl.  Forstee." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Forster  writes  on  January  5,  1886  : — 
"  I  do  not  remember  who  the  particular  person  was  to  whom  he  told 
his  dream,  but  I  can  distinctly  state  we  all  knew  of  it,  and  that  the  dream 
was  described  before  the  fact  was  known." 

Mr.  Forster  subsequently  ascertained  that  the  dream  was  first  related, 
not  to  a  master,  but  to  Mr.  L.  G.  Sandford,  one  of  his  pupils,  who  has 
written  to  us  as  follows  : — 

"  Icomb  Rectory,  Stow-on-the-Wold. 

"  February  12th,  1886. 
"  I  regret  that,  at  this  distance,  I  cannot  give  you  dates.  As  far  as  my 
recollections  go,  Tracy  told  me  of  his  dream  on  the  morning  following  the 
night  on  which  he  had  it.  It  was  simply  that  his  mother  had  died. 
Beyond  this,  it  was  mixed  up  with  all  the  inconsistencies  and  absurdities 
common  to  dreams,  and  which  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  mention, 
unless  you  particularly  wish  to  hear  them.  The  news  of  his  mother's 
death  reached  him  on  the  day  after  he  told  me  of  his  dream,  her  death 
having  happened  on  the  same  clay — that  is,  the  day  on  which  he  told  me. 
I  believe  she  died  late  in  the  afternoon,  but  of  this  I  am  not  sure. 

«  L.  G.  Sandford." 
(453)  From  a  lady  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  appear. 

"  My  father  was  one  of  a  family  of  21  children,  between  many  of 
whom  naturally  little  or  no  communication  was  kept  up  in  after  years. 
Among  them  was  an  uncle  living  at  Blackheath,  whose  wife  I  had  never 
seen,  and  all  I  knew  of  her  was  that  she  was  sufiering  from  a  mortal 
disease,  but  of  her  prospects  of  a  more  or  less  prolonged  life  I  had  heard 
nothing,  nor  had  my  thoughts  been  in  any  way  turned  towards  her — when 
one  Sunday  night,  while  I  was  on  a  visit  to  an  aunt  in  Hampshire,  I 
dreamt  that  I  had  a  letter  from  my  aunt  at  Blackheath,  urgently  pressing 
me  to  come  and  see  her.  Accordingly  in  my  dream  I  set  out,  and 
travelling  all  night,  arrived  at  Blackheath  on  Monday  morning.     I  was 

III.]  DREAMS,  421 

shown  up  to  my  aunt's  room,  who  lamented  to  me  that  she  had  been  so 
much  estranged  from  our  branch  of  the  family,  and  after  talking  for  a 
while,  she  looked  at  her  watch  and  said,  'It  is  a  quarter  past  8,  now  you 
must  go ' ;  telling  me  to  go  down  to  the  others.  I  had  great  difficulty  in 
finding  my  way  in  an  unknown  house,  and  was  a  long  time  about  it,  but 
at  last,  when  I  saw  by  my  watch  that  it  was  a  quarter  to  9,  I  reached 
the  dining-room,  and  found  there  a  number  of  my  relations  in  mourning, 
who  explained  it  by  saying  that  my  aunt  was  dead. 

"  In  the  morning  I  had  a  very  vivid  impression  of  my  dream,  which 
I  told  to  my  relations  with  whom  I  was  staying ;  and  I  had  so  strong  a 
feeling  of  the  reality  of  the  intimation,  that  I  wrote  privately  to  my 
dressmaker  to  countermand  a  pink  silk  dress  that  I  had  ordered.  The 
next  day,  when  a  mourning  letter  arrived,  I  said,  '  Now  you  will  see  that 
Aunt  Eliza  is  dead.'  And  so  it  proved  to  be  the  case,  my  aunt  having 
died  at  8.30  on  Monday  morning,  midway  between  the  time  at  which  she 
had  told  me  in  my  dream  that  I  must  go,  and  the  time  I  reached  the 
dining-room  where  her  relations  told  me  that  she  was  dead.  It  will  be 
observed  that  my  dream  was  several  hours  before  the  actual  death." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on 
February  2,  1869,  which  was  a  Monday. 

[The  countermanding  of  the  pink  dress  may  certainly  be  taken  as  a 
sign  that  the  dream  produced  an  exceptional  impression.  The  narrator  is 
out  of  England,  ancl  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  the  corroboration  of 
her  relatives.] 

(454)  From  Mr.  Richard  Mountjoy  Gardiner  (Solicitor),  8,  Bath 
Terrace,  Blyth,  and  13,  Groat  Market,  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

"  February  6th,  1884. 

"In  1875  I  was  in  a  sailing  ship  bound  for  Australia.  Amongst  the 
officers  on  board  was  one  of  my  dearest  friends ;  he  was  third  mate, 
and  had  to  keep  watch  from  8  to  12  on  the  forecastle.  I  invariably 
made  it  a  rule  to  stay  with  him  during  his  watch.  One  night,  after  his 
duty  was  over,  instead  of  staying  for  an  hour  and  smoking  a  pipe  as  was 
his  general  custom,  he  '  turned  in.'  I  remained  smoking  and  talking  to 
the  sailors.  About  1.15  my  friend  came  up  to  me  in  a  very  excited 
manner  and  said,  '  I  am  sure  that  the  Major  '  (who  was  his  father)  '  is  dead, 
as  I  dreamt  I  saw  him  put  in  his  coffin.'  I  tried  to  calm  him  as  much  as 
I  could,  and  told  him  it  was  nonsense.  However,  he  would  not  go  back 
to  his  cabin  that  night,  so  we  remained  on  deck  until  morning.  With 
the  return  of  daylight  he  recovered  his  spirits,  and  felt  inclined  to  laugh 
at  his  dream.  In  the  evening  he  kept  watch  as  usual,  but  again  turned 
in  a  few  minutes  past  12.  I  remained  on  deck;  about  1.10  he  came 
rushing  up  and  said  he  knew  his  father  was  dead  as  he  had  seen  the  coffin 
put  into  the  hearse,  and  had  followed  it  to  Kensal  Green  Cemetery,  and 
had  seen  it  lowered  into  the  grave.  I  took  him  into  my  cabin  and  made 
him  sleep  in  my  bunk.  He  was  very  quiet  for  a  few  days  after,  and  could 
not  bear  to  have  the  subject  mentioned.  However,  he  shortly  recovered 
his  usual  good  spirits.  [On  their  arrival  at  Melbourne,  a  letter  conveying 
the  news  of  his  father's  death  was  found  there.]  After  a  few  weeks  he 
was  able  to  calmly  talk  the  matter  over,  and  on  our  consulting  our  diaries, 
we  found  that  his  father  had  died  on  the  same  night  as  his  first  dream,  and 

422  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

was  buried  on  the  second.  On  our  return  to  England,  we  ascertained 
(after  calculating  the  difference  of  time)  that  his  father  died  and  was 
buried  at  the  exact  tiine  that  he  dreamed  it.  The  most  curious  thing  was 
that  he  died  at  an  hotel  in  Harley  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  London,  of 
dropsy,  and  the  proprietress — for  the  convenience  of  her  visitors — 
requested  that  he  might  be  buried  the  day  after  he  died,  which  was  done. 
There  are  others  besides  myself  who  can  vouch  that  the  whole  of  what  I 
have  written  is  true. 

"Another  curious  fact  about  my  friend's  dream  was  that  he  dreamed 
his  father  was  buried  at  Kensal  Green,  which  was  the  fact,  though  his 
family  vault  is  at  Brompton  Cemetery,  but  for  some  reason  there  was  not 
time  to  go  through  the  necessary  formalities  to  have  it  opened. 

"  Richard  Mountjoy  Gardiner." 

[We  hope  in  time  to  receive  an  account  of  this  incident  from  the 
dreamer  himself,  Mr.  C,  who  is  now  on  distant  service.  Inquiries  have 
been  made  at  every  lodging-house  and  private  hotel  in  Harley  Street,  but 
most  of  them  have  changed  hands  since  1875,  and  we  could  obtain  no 
record  of  the  death.  There  is  probably  some  mistake  as  to  the  Kensal  Green 
Cemetery;  for  we  find  that  no  Major  G.  was  buried  there  in  1875. 
But  apart  from  this,  it  is  difiicult  to  see  how  the  statement  as  to  the 
second  dream  can  possibly  be  correct.  For  since  the  letter  had 
time  to  outstrip  Mr.  Gardiner's  ship,  that  ship  must  have  been  quite  6 
weeks'  sail  from  Australia  at  the  time  of  death,  and  probably  not  far 
east  of  long.  0°.  To  have  exactly  coincided,  therefore,  with  the  second 
dream,  the  funeral  would  have  had  to  take  place  at  midnight.  It  will  be 
observed  that  the  second  dream,  while  difficult  to  account  for  by  telepathy, 
would  be  a  very  natural  sequel  to  the  first.     Cf.  case  468  below.] 

(455)  From  Mr.  G.  H.  F.  Prynne,  10,  Torrington  Square,  W.C,  who 
wrote  the  following  letter  to  his  mother,  from  Australia,  in  the  autumn 
of  1874:— 

"I  was  extremely  sorry  to  hear  [in  a  letter  from  his  mother]  of  the 
sad  death  of  poor  Miss  E.  I  remember  her  very  well,  and  have  her  name 
in  my  diary  for  1871  mentioned  several  times,  and  it  is  a  most  extra- 
ordinary thing  that  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  April  (or  8th),  I  am 
not  quite  certain  which,  I  had  an  extraordinary  dream. 

"  I  dreamt  I  was  walking  along  some  road  with  dear  Ted,  and  that  I 
met  two  people,  carrying  a  box.  We  both  asked  to  see  the  contents.  These 
gloomy  personages  stood  still,  put  the  box  on  the  road,  and  then  ran  off". 
I  came  and  opened  the  box,  which  I  had  no  sooner  done  than  a  dead  hand 
of  a  corpse  fell  on  to  mine.  I  can  well  remember  the  feeling  of  horror 
that  came  over  me,  and  I  ran  back,  saying  I  would  not  examine  the  box 
further.  The  face  seemed  to  me  like  that  of  Edith  L.  Eddie  said  he 
would  see  who  it  was,  and  on  returning  I  found  it  to  be  the  corpse  of 
some  well-known  person,  which  in  the  latter  part  of  the  dream  I  recognised 
to  be  that  of  Miss  E.  i 

"  The  dream  seemed  so  much  out  of  the  ordinary  that  I  told  it  fully 
to  H.  and  two  other  friends  at  breakfast,  and  also  to  the  W.'s  two  days 
afterwards." 

1  As  regards  the  particular  form  of  delayed  recognition,  this  case  resembles  No.  249 
and  once  more  exemplifies  the  parallelism  of  dreams  and  waking  hallucinations. 

III.]  DREAMS.  423 

Colonel  B.,  father  of  the  Miss  E.  referred  to,  writes  that  Mr.  Prynne 
had  met  his  daughter  a  few  times,  in  1871,  when  she  was  about 
14|-  years  old;  and  that  she  died  on  April  8th,  1874.  From  the  Times 
obituary,  we  find  that  she  died  in  the  morning  of  that  day.  Thus  whether 
the  dream  in  Australia  was  on  the  night  of  the  7th  or  of  the  8th,  it  may 
very  well  have  been  within  12  hours  of  the  death. 

[Mr.  Prynne  has  tried  to  procure  corroborative  testimony  to  his 
immediate  mention  of  the  dream  ;  but  his  friends  have  moved,  and  he  has 
not  yet  succeeded.  He  is  certain  that  his  dream  was  on  one  of  the  nights 
mentioned,  though  he  does  not  now  recall  what  enabled  him  to  fix  it  so 
accurately  some  months  afterwards.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  doubt 
which  he  felt  between  two  nights  is  a  strong  indication  that  he  had  some 
independent  means  of  narrowing  down  the  time  to  that  extent.  He  believes 
that  he  mentioned  his  dream  in  a  letter  to  his  mother  at  the  time,  before 
hearing  of  the  death ;  but  no  such  letter  can  now  be  found.] 

(456)  From  Mrs.  Mogridge,  of  137,  Cowbridge  Road,  Canton,  Cardiff. 

"January  3rd,  1884. 

"  My  little  girl,  aged  7,  came  into  my  room  on  the  morning  of  the  25th 
of  December,  1882.  She  said,  '  Oh,  mamma,  I  have  had  such  a  dream  :  I 
saw  baby  Harris  in  a  little  box  on  the  table  downstairs,  and  her  hands 
were  crossed ;  and  she  looked  so  white.'  [Mr.  Mogridge  tells  us  that 
the  Harrises  were  acquaintances  in  a  distant  part  of  the  town.]  I  am 
certain  she  had  not  seen  the  child,  nor  had  she  heard  us  speak  of  it  or  the 
family,  and  I  do  not  think  she  had  seen  it  more  than  once  during  the  four 
months  of  its  life. 

"  On  the  evening  of  the  25th  or  26th,  my  daughter,  aged  17,  told  me 
of  the  death  of  the  child,  which  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  24th.  And 
a  day  or  two  after,  the  mother  took  my  little  girl  into  her  house,  and 
showed  her  the  child  in  the  cofiin  on  the  table  (where  it  had  been  placed 
for  the  convenience  of  the  inquest),  exactly  as  she  had  described  it  to  me 
in  her  dream.  c.j^  j^  Mogeidge." 

The  death  was  caused  suddenly  by  an  accident ;  and  the  Register  of 
Deaths  confirms  the  date  given. 

[We  should  not  be  disposed  to  lay  stress  on  the  correspondence  here, 
beyond  the  simple  coincidence  of  the  death.  The  details  were  not  written 
down,  and  may  have  crept  in  afterwards ;  and  in  any  case  the  cofiin,  as  we 
have  found,  is  a  very  common  dream-symbol.  The  case  is  one  of  those  where 
personal  knowledge  of  the  witness  has  been  a  specially  important  element 
in  our  judgment.] 

(457)  From  a  lady  whose  friends  would  prefer  that  her  name  should 
not  appear.  u  1334. 

"I  had  a  dear  friend  at  Ilfracombe — the  wife  of  the  incumbent,  the 
Rev.  W.  M.  We  did  not  correspond  much,  and  I  had  not  seen  her  for 
some  months.  I  went  down  to  Plymouth,  and  the  first  night,  as  the 
rooms  we  took  were  not  quite  ready  for  us,  my  friend.  Miss  P.,  slept  with 
me.     I  awoke  frightened  and  sad,  having  dreamt  thus  : — 

"  I  sat  in  a  wide  hall  in  some  unknown  house.  Mrs.  M.  entered  and 
walked  slowly  towards  me  dressed  in  white,  with  a  long  dark  cloak  over 

424  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

her  snowy  robes.  As  she  neared  me  she  uncovered  her  arm,  and  I  saw- 
that  she  was  carrying  a  little  dead  baby.  As  I  looked  at  her,  I  felt  that 
she  was  mad,  and  yet  dead,  too  !  Mr.  M.  followed  her,  and  signed  to  me 
that  her  mind  was  gone.  It  was  her  pallor  that  made  me  feel  she  was  a 
spirit ;  the  expression  in  her  eyes  told  me  she  was  insane,  or  delirious. 
Mrs.  M.,  after  showing  me  the  dead  child,  turned  silently  away  and  went 
up  a  staircase  on  to  the  roof,  which  was  a  flat  roof.  Mr.  M.  and  I 
followed  her.  She  dug  with  her  hands  at  this  roof,  and  earth  seemed  to 
come  up.  She  buried  the  baby  in  this  earth,  then  lying  down  upon  this 
strange  grave  she  sank  through  it,  and  disappeared  from  sight.  I  awoke, 
and  woke  Miss  P.,  and  related  my  dream.  She  soothed  my  alarm,  and, 
being  very  tired,  I  fell  asleep.  The  dream  was  repeated,  and  before 
morning  I  had  dreamt  it  three  times,  ^  and  knew,  instinctively,  it  was  in 
some  way  true. 

"  Throughout  the  day  I  was  restless  and  unhappy.  The  next  morning 
a  deeply-edged  letter  came,  and  as  I  saw  the  black-rimmed  envelope 
I  cried  out,  '  Oh,  my  dream,  my  dream !  Mrs.  M.  is  dead  ! '  And  so 
it  was.  She  had  been  prematurely  confined  of  a  dead  child  ;  had  delirium 
and  fever,  and  died  unconscious,  or  rather,  insane,  on  the  night  of  my 
dream." 

We  find  from  a  notice  in  the  Western  Times  that  the  death  occurred 
on  Nov.  13,  1862. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : — 

"  My  friend  Miss  P.,  who  was  with  me  that  night,  I  have  lost  sight 
of  for  years.  Yes,  I  often  dream,  but  I  have  not  realised  a  death  in 
an  illustrated  form  except  that  once." 

[One  rather  distrusts  this  amount  of  detail,  remembered  after  a  lapse 
of  a  good  many  years ;  but  some  kind  of  death-imagery  was  probably  a 
feature  in  the  dream.] 

(458)  Prom  Mrs.  Williams,  1,  Wilmington  Place,  Clerkenwell,  W.C. 
A  shorter  account  was  given  in  writing  to  our  friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T. 
Fryer,  in  February,  1883,  immediately  after  the  receipt  of  news  of  the 

^®^*^-  "January  1st,  1886. 

"I  had  an  uncle,  father's  brother,  living  in  Birmingham.  On  the  night 
of  the  21st  December,  1882,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  him  standing  by  my 
bedside.  I  saw  him  quite  plainly,  and  he  said,  '  If  you  wish  to  see  me,  you 
must  come  at  once.'  Afterwards  I  saw  him  in  a  cart,  laid  in  a  coffin.  I 
woke  my  husband  and  told  him  about  it — said  that  I  felt  sure  something 
had  happened.  He  said  it  was  only  fancy,  and  told  me  to  go  to  sleep.  In 
the  morning  we  talked  about  it  again.  The  22nd  December  was  the  anni- 
versary of  our  wedding,  and  that  fixed  the  date  of  the  dream  in  our  minds. 
We  heard  nothing  about  the  death  until  February  9th,  1883,  when,  in 
answer  to  a  letter  from  my  husband,  the  enclosed  card  and  letter  came 
from  my  aunt  in  Birmingham.  The  impression  on  my  mind  was  certainly 
that  something  had  happened  to  my  uncle.  The  dream  must  have  been 
within  a  few  hours,  as  he  died  at  5  a.m.  22nd  December,  and  it  was  in  the 
night  of  the  21st-22nd  that  I  had  the  dream  and  woke  my  husband." 

1  See  p.  418,  note ;  also  p.  229,  note,  as  to  the  number  three. 

III.]  DREAMS.  425 

The  following  is  an  extract,  copied  by  the  present  writer,  from  the 
letter  written  to  Mrs.  Williams  by  her  aunt  : — 

"February  8th,  1883. 

"  I  have  lost  my  poor  brother.  He  went  to  bed  on  the  20th  December ; 
on  the  2 1  st  I  found  him,  at  9  o'clock  in  the  morning,  in  a  fit.  I  sent  [for] 
a  doctor.  He  never  spoke,  and  died  the  next  morning  at  5  o'clock — on 
the  22nd.     Poor  fellow  !     Now  I  am  left  without  anyone." 

The  enclosed  mourning-card  contains  these  words  : — "  In  afiectionate 
remembrance  of  David  Gillan,  who  departed  this  life  December  22nd,  1882, 
aged  64  years.     Interred  at  Witton  Cemetery,  December  28th." 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Williams  told  me  that  she  did  not  remember 
having  dreamt  of  death,  or  of  her  uncle,  on  any  other  occasion.  Her 
husband  stated  to  me  that  his  wife  woke  him  immediately  after  her  dream, 
and  that  she  told  him  the  details  of  it  next  morning,  and  that  they  noted 
the  date  as  being  the  anniversary  of  their  wedding.  I  asked  to  see  their 
marriage-certificate,  and  found  that  it  was  for  Dec.  22,  1872.  Mrs. 
Williams  was  not  aware  of  anything  being  amiss  with  her  uncle,  nor 
had  she  for  a  long  time  previously  heard  of  his  being  ill  in  any  way  at 
all.     His  death  was  sudden. 

The  next  case  is,  of  all  the  dreams  included  in  this  book,  the  one 
least  easy  to  harmonise  with  the  view  of  telepathy  that  the  great 
bulk  of  our  evidence  supports,  owing  to  the  absence  of  any  perceptible 
link  between  agent  and  percipient.  If  we  could  suppose  that  we  had 
lighted  on  the  one  death-dream  (of  those  occurring  during  the  last 
12  years,  within  our  circle  of  inquiry)  which  by  the  doctrine  of 
chances  might  probably  have  coincided  with  reality  hy  accident 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  306),  this  would  be  the  one  to  select.  But  though  the 
ty^e  is  abnormal  we  should  not  be  justified  in  suppressing  examples 
of  it  on  that  account ;  and  the  "  borderland  "  cases,  Nos.  490  and  506, 
of  the  next  chapter,  might  be  adduced  as  somewhat  similar.^ 

(459)  From  Miss  E.  F.  How,  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  E. 

"April,  1884. 

"  Date  of  dream,  night  between  June  20th  and  21st,  1883.  Age  28. 
Health  perfect.  [The  form  of  these  sentences  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  information  was  filled  in  on  a  census-form  (Yol.  I.,  p.  304).] 
The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  I  described  the  details  to  my  mother  ; 
it  was  of  a  child  being  buried  alive  by  two  men  servants.  I  asked 
its  name,  and  was  told  it  was  a  Fitzgerald,  infant  son  of  the  Knight 
of  Kerry.  The  impression  was  most  distressing,  and  remained  all  day,  and 
returned  in  a  less  degree  whenever  anything  recalled  the  dream.      At  the 

1  Mrs.  Alfred  Wedgwood,  of  20,  Shornclifle  Road,  Folkestone,  dreamt  that  she  heard 
of  the  deaths  of  Mr.  Hayward  and  M.  Rouher  the  night  before  she  saw  the  announcement 
of  them.  The  names  were  in  the  papers  of  the  day  before  she  had  her  dream,  but  she  is 
confident  that  she  had  not  seen  them.  If  telepathic  impressions,  caught  from  an  idea 
which  is  abroad,  are  possible  (p.  365),  this  might  be  a  specimen.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
may  only  illustrate  the  indefinite  scope  for  accident  that  dreams  afford. 

426  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

time  I  knew  absolutely  nothing  about  the  Knight  of  Kerry  :  I  did  not 
even  know  whether  he  was  a  married  man. 

"  On  June  25th,  I  saw  in  the  paper  an  announcement  of  the  death  of 
the  only  child  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry,  on  June  21st.  [We  have  verified 
the  date  in  the  Times  and  in  Burke's  Peerage.^  This  at  once  recalled  the 
dream,  which  I  had  entirely  forgotten. 

"  I  accounted  for  this  coincidence  by  imagining  my  eye  had  uncon- 
sciously fallen  upon  some  paragraph  mentioning  the  illness  of  the  child, 
but  I  am  told  there  never  was  any  announcement  of  the  kind. 

"  All  the  details  of  the  dream  were  wrong.  "  E.  F.  How." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  How  adds  : — 

"  The  whole  of  the  dream,  with  many  details  now  faded  from  my 
memory,  was  told  to  my  mother  on  the  morning  of  June  21st.  She 
laughed  at  the  dream,  but  on  June  26th  she  greeted  me  with  :  '  I  have 
seen  in  a  paper  that  the  Knight  of  Kerry  did  lose  a  child  the  night^  of  your 
dream  ;  you  must  have  seen  that  it  was  ill.'  I  had  then  also  seen  the 
announcement  in  the  paper. 

"  This  winter  I  met  some  friends  of  the  present  Knight  of  Kerry,  and 
from  them  heard  that  there  had  been  no  notice  in  the  paper  excepting  of 
the  birth  of  the  child." 

Asked  whether  she  had  previously  known  that  the  family  name  of  the 
Knight  of  Kerry  was  Fitzgerald,  Miss  How  replies  that  she  had,  having 
once  met  a  member  of  the  family  abroad. 

The  following  is  from  Mrs.  How  : — 

"  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  London,  E. 

"April  25th,  1884. 

"On  the  morning  of  June  21st,  1883,  my  daughter  related  to  me,  in 
detail,  a  vivid  dream  she  had  the  night  before. 

"  I  remember  perfectly  that  when  she  came  down  in  the  morning  she 
said  she  dreamt  that  the  infant  son  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry,  a  little  Fitz- 
gerald, was  being  buried  alive ;  that  she  struggled  to  save  it,  but  felt  no 
surprise  at  the  people  trying  to  bury  it  alive.  A  few  days  afterwards  I 
saw  the  death  of  a  young  son  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry  in  the  paper,  the 
date  being  June  21st.  "  Frances  A.  How." 

[The  accuracy  of  Mrs.  How's  recollection  is  shown  by  her  further 
mention  of  some  details  of  the  dream,  which  Miss  How  had  previously 
communicated  to  us,  but  had  not  in  any  way  recalled  to  her  mother's 
memory.] 

In  connection  with  death-imagery  of  a  gloomy  kind,  I  may  remind 
the  reader  of  the  passage  in  Guerzoni's  Garibaldi  (Florence,  1882, 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  398-9),  in  which  Garibaldi  describes  his  dream  of  a  funeral 
procession,  of  a  corpse  with  his  mother's  face  laid  down  beside  him, 
and  of  his  impression  of  an  ice-cold  hand,  remaining  even  after  he 
was  awake.  "  On  that  day,"  he  continues,  "  and  in  that  hour,  I  lost 
my  parent,  the  best  of  mothers."     The  dream  occurred  on  March  19, 

1  We  cannot  discover  that  it  was  mentioned  in  the  papers  that  the  death  took  place 
in  the  night. 

in.]  DREAMS.  427 

1852,  when  Garibaldi  was  on  a  voyage  to  China  ;  and  there  is  nothing 
to  suggest  that  he  knew  his  mother's  death  to  be  impending. 

I  will  conclude  the  list  of  symbolic  dreams  with  the  example 
mentioned  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  368,  where  a  particular  dream,  not  in  itself 
suggestive  of  death,  has  on  a  noticeable  number  of  occasions  more  or 
less  nearly  coincided  with  deaths  affecting  the  dreamer.  I  need  not 
repeat  the  remarks  already  made  as  to  the  total  inconclusiveness  of 
most  alleged  specimens  of  this  class,  and  the  proneness  of  mankind 
in  general  to  remark  and  record  the  few  hits,  and  not  the  thousands 
of  misses. 

(460)  From  Mrs.  Burton,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury, 

"  February,  1883. 

"  I  am  a  healthy  woman,  in  a  responsible  position,  neither  dyspeptic, 
hysterical,  nor  morbid,  and  my  mind  is  chiefly  occupied  with  matters  of 
business.     I  am  41  years  of  age,  and  a  grandmother. 

"  Ever  since  I  was  21,  the  following  dream  has  occurred  with  certain 
varieties : — In  my  sleep  I  see  suddenly,  by  a  brilliant  light,  a  naked 
infant,  either  lying  in  or  falling  into  a  bath.  Sometimes  I  see  a  person 
standing  by  the  bath  whom  I  recognise,  which  gives  me  a  clue  on  waking, 
by  which  I  know  in  what  family  the  death  is  likely  to  take  place  ;  at  other 
times  I  only  see  the  infant  and  the  bath  ;  then  I  know  I  shall  hear  of  a 
death  within  12  hours,  and  I  suffer  anxious  suspense  until  I  hear  the  news. 

"  I  should  weary  you  if  I  related  all  the  strange  fulfilments  of  this 
dream,  but  am  willing  to  send  you  a  few  instances  with  dates,  &c.,  if  you 
wish  it. 

(1)  "  On  the  night  of  the  29th  of  January,  1873,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw 
a  baby  in  a  bath.  When  the  postbag  came  in  the  morning,  I  said  to  my 
husband,  '  Please  don't  open  it  yet,  I  am  sure  there  will  be  news  of  a 
death  in  it,  but  I  can't  tell  whose  ;  none  of  our  friends  are  ill,  and  the 
dream  was  so  vague.'  He  laughed,  and  proceeded  to  open  the  bag  ;  it 
contained  a  letter  from  the  Rev.  S.  A.,  announcing  the  death  of  his  only  boy. 
[Here  the  dreamer  had  no  knowledge  of  the  illness  of  the  person  who  died.] 

(2)  "  On  the  night  of  April  24th,  1877,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  an  infant 
in  a  bath.  On  the  25th,  I  heard  that  my  cousin,  B.  C,  had  died  on  the 
24th.  [Here  the  dreamer  had  no  knowledge  of  the  illness  of  the  person 
who  died.] 

(3)  "  On  June  11th,  1877,  while  asleep  in  a  chair,  I  dreamt  that  I 
saw  my  husband's  aunt,  Mrs.  B.,  looking  at  an  infant  in  a  bath  ;  she  was 
dressed  in  white,  with  a  strong  light  round  her.  She  died  in  the  evening 
of  that  day.    [Here  the  dreamer  knew  of  the  illness  of  the  person  who  died.] 

(4)  "  Before  my  husband's  death  on  November  17th,  1880,  I  had  my 
warning  dream.  I  seemed  to  stand  in  deep  mourning  watching  an  infant 
in  a  bath.  [Here  the  dream  preceded  the  death  by  more  than  a  day. 
The  husband  had  been  long  ill,  but  his  immediate  death  was  not  expected.] 

"  C.  S.  Burton." 

We  find  the  above  dates  of  death  in  cases  1,  3,  and  4,  confirmed  by 
the  Times  obituary,  and  that  in  case  2  by  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

428  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

[Mrs.  B.  has  kept  a  diary  of  her  dreams,  which  shows  that  she  has 
had  several  dreams  of  accidents  which  have  never  taken  place.  She 
thought  that  she  had  never  had  the  dream  of  a  baby  in  a  bath  without 
receiving  news — usually  within  1 2  hours  or  thereabouts,  and  never  later 
than  2  days  after — of  the  death  of  a  relative,  friend,  or  at  least  acquaint- 
ance or  servant  ;  but  on  more  minute  inquiry,  it  proved  that  in  one  case 
there  had  been  an  interval  of  as  many  as  11  days.  She  promised  to  keep 
in  future  a  more  carefully  written  record  ;  but  writing  in  March,  1886,  she 
says  that  she  now  seldom  dreams,  and  seems  to  be  losing  her  sensitiveness. 
She  has  no  idea  why  the  telepathic  impressions  of  death  (if  such  they  could 
be  considered)  should  associate  themselves  in  her  mind  with  these  particular 
images.] 

§  5.  I  now  come  to  the  large  class  of  "  clairvoyant  "  dreams — this 
word  being  used  in  the  restricted  sense  explained  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  368-9. 
The  perception  still  varies  greatly  both  in  clearness  and  amount,  and 
often  foreign  elements  are  introduced  ;  so  that  this  class  differs  rather 
in  degree  than  in  kind  from  the  last.  The  cases  are  so  numerous  that  I 
must  present  some  of  them  in  an  abridged  form  ;  but  I  shall  suppress 
no  item  which  could  be  regarded  as  a  weak  point  in  the  evidence. 

I  will  first  give  a  case  which,  though  second-hand,  rests  on  the 
authority  of  two  persons  to  whom  the  dream  was  narrated  before 
the  reality  was  known.  The  whole  labour  bestowed  on  the  present 
work  would  be  amply  repaid  if  by  its  means  half-a-dozen  such 
incidents,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  left  to  float,  like  this  one, 
on  the  uncertain  tide  of  human  memory,  obtained  immediately  and 
for  ever  the  security  of  a  written  record. 

(461)  From  the  Bishop  of  Bedford,  who,  in  January,  1883,  corrected  for 
us  the  account  that  appeared  in  the  Spectator  for  Sept.  9,  1882,  after  com- 
paring it  with  the  written  record.  The  account  was  written  down,  he 
says,  "not  less  than  from  20  to  25  years  after  the  occurrence,  probably  a 
few  years  later  still.  I  asked  my  father  and  aunt  to  verify  and  correct 
my  account,  which  they  did." 

"  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  E. 

"  January,  1883. 
"  When  my  father,  Mr.  W.  Wybergh  How,  was  a  young  man,  he  left 
his  home,  which  was  at  Isell,  near  Cockermouth,  to  settle  in  Shrewsbury 
as  a  solicitor.  In  the  year  1819  he  revisited  Cumberland,  staying  of 
course  with  his  father,  the  Vicar  of  Isell.  He  and  his  sister.  Miss  Christian 
How,  who  was  to  return  with  him  to  Shrewsbury,  had  arranged  to  leave 
on  a  certain  Monday,  and  to  spend  that  night  with  a  former  governess, 
who  was  married  to  a  Mr.  Forrest,  and  lived  at  Everton.  On  the  Sunday, 
after  church,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wybergh,  my  father's  uncle  and  aunt,  who 
lived  at  Isell  Hall,  told  them  they  had  invited  a  party  of  young  people 
for  the  Monday  night,  and  would  not  hear  of  their  leaving  that  day. 
They  were  persuaded  to  stay,  and  wrote  to  Mrs.  Forrest,  although  fearing 

III.]  DREAMS.  429 

there  was  no  post  which  would  reach  her  sooner  than  they  themselves 
would  on  Tuesday  night.  The  party  was  a  very  merry  one,  a  large 
number  of  their  old  friends  being  there.  The  only  fact  I  need  name  at 
present  is  that  a  Miss  Harriet  Fenton,  a  young  lady  who  had  lately  lost 
her  brother  and  was  in  deep  mourning,  sat  most  of  the  evening  alone  upon 
a  sofa,  not  joining  in  the  amusements  of  the  rest. 

"  My  father  and  his  sister  reached  Everton  by  the  coach  on  Tuesday 
night ;  and  when  they  explained  the  reason  of  their  delay  Mrs.  Forrest  told 
them,  when  the  coach  had  come  in  the  night  before  without  them,  she  had 
gone  to  bed,  and  had  dreamed  it  was  a  party  for  which  they  had  stayed,  and 
that  she  had  dreamt  of  being  there.  A  little  later,  while  they  were  at 
supper,  she  said  she  must  tell  them  her  dream,  as  it  was  so  wonderfully 
vivid  ;  and  first  of  all,  she  told  them  who  were  there.  As  she  had  been 
governess  at  the  vicarage,  and  knew  all  the  neighbours,  this  excited  little 
surprise.  She  then,  however,  went  on  to  describe  the  most  minute  cir- 
cumstances of  the  evening,  saying  she  had  seen  some  of  them  dressed  up 
in  fancy  dresses  and  dancing  about  in  them ;  that  they  had  got  a  dirty 
round  table,  which  she  had  never  seen  before,  into  the  drawing-room,  and 
were  eating  something  out  of  a  bowl  upon  it  (they  had  a  syllabub,  and 
someone  saying  it  must  be  eaten  from  a  round  table,  one  was  sent  for  from 
the  kitchen)  ;  that  old  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wybergh  and  old  Mr.  and  Mrs.  How, 
who  were  playing  at  Boston  in  the  inner  drawing-room,  came  in  and  asked 
what  they  were  doing,  finding  fault  with  them  for  having  brought  in  the 
dirty  kitchen  table  ;  that  the  old  people  were  not  allowed  to  come  to  the 
round  table,  but  were  told  they  might  taste  what  was  in  the  bowl ;  with 
other  minute  details.  Mrs.  Forrest  had  told  her  husband  the  dream  early 
in  the  morning  in  bed,  and  had  afterwards  told  her  children,  one  of  whom 
corrected  her  in  her  narrative,  saying,  '  Oh,  mamma,  you  told  us  so-and-so 
this  morning,'  the  correction  being  the  true  version  of  what  had  occurred. 
My  father  and  his  sister  were  very  greatly  startled  and  astounded  as  Mrs. 
Forrest  went  on,  but  were  still  more  so  when  she  ended  by  saying,  '  And 
I  was  sitting  all  the  evening  on  the  sofa,  by  the  side  of  a  young  widow 
lady  ! '  This  was  the  only  mistake  ;  but  years  afterwards  I  met  this  lady 
(then  Miss  Fenton),  and  we  spoke  of  this  wonderful  dream ;  and  she  told 
me  it  was  not  so  very  far  from  being  all  true,  for  she  was  at  the  time 
engaged  to  be  married,  and  did  marry  very  shortly,  and  her  husband  died 
on  their  way  out  to  India  directly  afterwards. 

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  the  letter  written  to  Mrs.  Forrest  arrived  the 
morning  after,  i.e.,  on  the  "Wednesday.  The  narrative  was  (with  the  one 
singular  exception  mentioned)  a  perfectly  accurate  account  of  all  that  took 
place  to  the  minutest  details,  and  the  dream  appears  to  have  been  dreamt 
at  Everton  at  the  very  time  of  the  occurrence  of  the  events  at  Isell.  My 
father  and  my  aunt,  before  their  death,  verified  and  vouched  for  the  above 

^*<^^y-  "  W.  Walsham  Bedfoed, 

"  Bishop  Suffragan  for  East  London." 

(462)  From  Mr.  J.  Ridley,  19,  Belsize  Park,  N.W.,  who  tells  us  that 
he  has  had  no  other  impressive  dream  of  death. 

"  March  5th,  1885. 

"  Whilst  staying  at  Mrs.  M.'s  in  June,  1867,  on  the  night  either  of 
June  3rd  or  4th,  I  had  a  vivid  dream  that  I  saw  an  old  friend  [name 

430  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

given  in  confidence]  lying  dead  with  a  wound  in  his  head — noting  the 
colour  of  his  hair  and  other  particulars.  I  told  Mrs.  M.  of  this  dream, 
and  later  in  the  day  we  heard  that  the  friend  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  had 
actually  been  killed  by  a  blow  on  the  head,  in  a  fall  from  a  conveyance, 
on  the  night  before  the  dream.  The  wound  was  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  head  from  that  seen  in  my  dream. 

"  The  scene  of  the  accident  was  some  miles  from  the  house  where  I 
was  staying.  "  J.  R." 

Mrs.  Mawson,  of  Ashfield,  G-ateshead,  with  whom  Mr.  Ridley  was 
staying  at  the  time  of  the  dream,  was  asked  by  Mr.  Ridley's  daughter, 
at  our  request,  if  she  remembered  anything  of  the  dream.  She  replied  on 
March  3rd,   1885  :— 

"  I  remember  very  distinctly  Mr.  Ridley  telling  me  his  dream,  and 
how  strongly  it  impressed  me  at  the  time.  I  remember  that  your  papa 
had  the  dream,  and  spoke  of  it  before  the  news  of  J.  M.'s  death  reached 
him,  but  I  cannot  call  to  mind  exactly  what  was  the  cause  of  death — in 
the  dream,  I  mean ;  but  I  think  your  papa  thought  he  saw  him  injured  by 
a  fall  from  his  horse  or  conveyance.  I  think  he  told  me  that  he  saw  him 
lying  on  the  ground  injured,  and  his  wife  mourning  and  weeping  over 
him,  but  I  cannot  be  certain  of  the  exact  particulars,  only  I  know  that 
the  dream  was  singularly  like  what  in  reality  took  place  on  the  very 
same  night.  '  "  E.  M." 

Miss  C,  a  resident  in  the  village  where  J.  M.  lived,  was  asked  if  she 
could  discover  the  exact  date  of  J.  M.'s  death.     She  replied  : — 

"  West  Boldon. 

"  March  4th,   1885. 

"  To-day  I  saw  E.  M.  (now  Mrs.  H.,  the  daughter  of  J.  M.).  Her 
father  died  on  June  4th,  1867.  On  the  morning  of  that  day,  as  Mrs. 
M.  M.  was  on  her  way  to  Hylton,  she  found  him  lying  insensible  at  a 
turn  of  the  road.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  driving  furiously.  It  was  sup- 
posed that  in  the  dark  he  had  not  managed  the  corner,  and  so  was  thrown 
out.     He  never  recovered  consciousness.  "  A.  C." 

[If  Mr.  Ridley's  dream  was  on  the  night  of  the  3rd,  it  must  have  been 
within  a  few  hours  of  the  accident ;  if  it  was  on  the  night  of  the  4th,  it 
may  still  have  been  within  12  hours  of  the  death.] 

(463)  From  Miss  Augusta  Gould  (now  Mrs.  Temple),  the  narrator 
of  case  441,  above.  "December  19th,  1883. 

"  When  a  child,  I  dreamed  of  places  I  was  not  likely  to  see,  and 
when  by  chance  I  did  see  them  they  were  exactly  as  my  dream  foretold.  ^ 

"  A  curious  dream  happened  one  night,  I  believe  in  the  spring  of  1880. 
I  saw  the  bedroom  of  an  old  lady  friend,  with  blood  ^  all  about  the  floor  and 
the  window  broken.  I  told  my  brother  I  was  afraid  there  might  be 
murder  for  the  sake  of  money.  He  laughed  at  my  fears,  but  the  next 
Sunday,  on  his   return  from   taking  service   at  Lord  H.'s  private  chapel, 

1  This  experience  has  pretty  often  been  described  ;  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  attach 
any  importance  to  it,  unless  the  dream  had  been  written  down  or  described  in  detail 
before  the  reality  was  seen. 

2  Compare  cases  135,  221,  432,  466,  467. 

III.]  DREAMS  431 

near  the  home  of  the  lady,  he  informed  me  of  a  great  alarm  her  friends 
had  had.  They  found  her  insensible  in  bed,  one  day,  covered  with  blood, 
as  was  the  floor  of  the  room,  and  the  window  broken.  Afterwards,  she 
related  that  she  had  awaked  in  the  night,  finding  her  face  and  chest 
streamed  over  with  blood,  and  a  suffocation  oppressing  her ;  had  got  out 
and  tried  to  open  the  window,  but  being  faint  and  unsteady  had  run  her 
hand  through  the  small  panes,  then  turned  and  fainted  before  she  could 
get  into  bed  again,  and  after  doing  so  knew  nothing  more.  I  may  add 
that  the  doctor  said  this  serious  attack  had  saved  her  from  apoplexy." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Gould  wrote: — 

"January  3rd,  1884. 

"  I  cannot  remember  if  the  accident  to  the  old  lady  was  on  the  same 
night  as  my  dream  of  it ;  but  certainly  the  dream  was  two  or  three  nights 
before  I  heard  of  the  accident. 

"  My  brother,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  dream  beforehand  [■i.e.,  before 
the  news  of  the  event],  died  in  1881." 

(464)  From  Miss  Barr,  Apsley  Town,  East  Grinstead,  the  narrator  of 
case  111.  "April,  1884. 

"When  I  was  in  Singhur,  in  186-,  I  had  a  very  strange  dream.  I 
saw,  as  in  a  small  disc  of  lighti — something  like  a  magic-lantern  picture, 
only  in  small — the  following  scene  : — The  inside  of  a  small  hill  tent, 
lighted  (from  above,  apparently — the  whole  scene  was  in  vivid  light)  on 
the  floor,  close  beside  a  dhurrie  (a  small  Indian  carpet),  and,  between  that 
and  the  door,  a  very  large  black  scorpion,  and  entering  by  the  door  the 
figure  of  a  man,  an  intimate  friend,  now  dead.  The  vision  was  apparently 
of  but  momentary  duration,  and  disappeared  before  I  could  see  more.  I 
made  a  note  of  the  fact,  with  the  date,  in  my  diary.  On  the  return  of  this 
friend,  a  few  weeks  afterwards,  from  his  hunting  expedition,  he  volunteered 
the  information  that  they  had  been  much  pestered  by  insects  of  all  kinds, 
and  added  that  one  night  he  had  gone  into  his  tent  and  found  there  '  a 
whopping  big  black  scorpion.'  The  hlack  scorpion  is  not  quite  so  common 
as  the  ordinary  or  pink  scorpion. 

"  I  asked  him  what  that  night  was,  and  he  told  me.  I  remember  that 
he  fixed  the  exact  date,  either  from  having  made  a  note  of  it,  or  from  some 
other  incident  having  occurred  on  that  same  day.  I  never  told  him  of  my 
dream." 

[Miss  Barr  stated  in  conversation  that  she  and  her  sisters  had  satisfied 
themselves  at  the  time  that  the  days  corresponded.] 

(465)  From  Mr.  J.  W.  Beilby,  of  Beechworth,  Victoria  (mentioned 
above,  p.  226),  son  of  Dr.  Wm.  Beilby,  well  known  in  Edinburgh  forty 
years  ago.  The  account  was  first  printed  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light, 
Melbourne,  August,  1879. 

"In  1849,  I  was  on  a  certain  night  sleeping  at  an  inn  in  the  Portland 
district,  being  there  mustering  stray  cattle  to  deliver,  with  miy  station 
sold,  when  intending  to  return  to  Scotland.  I  dreamt  I  was,  with  other 
members  of  my  family,  at  my  father's  death-bed  in  Edinburgh.  Every- 
thing said  and  done  was  vividly  represented,  but  I  wondered  that  my 
father  was  not  in  his  usual  bedroom.     Several  months  afterwards  news  of 

1  Cf.  case  220,  and  the  remark  which  follows  it. 

432  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

my  father's  death,  on  that  very  night,  reached  me ;  but  it  was  not  until  a 
sister  arrived  in  the  colony,  later,  that  every  minute  particular  was 
corroborated,  and  I  learned  the  reason  for  his  occupying  the  bed  I  saw 
him  die  in,  in  his  dressing-room.^ " 

Mr.  Beilby  tells  us  that  he  seemed,  as  if  in  a  vision,  one  of  those  around 
his  father's  bed;  and  that  the  night  was  May  30th.  We  find,  however,  from 
the  Edinburgh  Courant  that  Dr.  Beilby  died  on  June  7,  1849. 

[Such  an  error  of  date  is  not  important,  in  a  case  where  the  narrator 
has  no  sejmrate  recollection  of  the  date  of  his  own  experience.  But  at 
this  distance  of  time  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  degree  of 
coincidence  was  accurately  ascertained,  or  that  it  has  not  become  more 
exact  in  memory.  To  our  request  for  corroboration,  Mr.  Beilby  replies  : — - 
"  My  sister  is  too  remote  to  refer  to  as  to  facts  stated  in  my  last  letter." 
This  is  not  the  only  instance  in  which  the  idea  of  writing  a  letter  to  a 
distant  country  has  seemed  to  paralyse  an  informant's  power  of  assistance.] 

(466)  From  Mr.  B.  Lomax,  Curator  of  the  Brighton  Free  Library  and 
Museum.  "January,  1883. 

"  In  1860,  I  took  my  newly  married  wife  to  live  on  the  Fryer's  Creek 
Diggings.  Her  mother,  Mrs.  F.,  lived  in  Melbourne,  so  that  mother  and 
daughter  were  73  miles  apart.  After  a  few  weeks,  having  to  attend  at 
the  Survey  Department,  I  returned  alone  to  Melbourne,  intending  to  pass 
a  week  at  my  father-in-law's  house.  On  the  third  day,  Mrs.  F.  (who,  by 
the  way,  was  a  cousin  of  the  late  John  Oxenford)  came  to  me  in  tears, 
and  entreated  me  to  return,  as  she  had  last  night  dreamed  that  she  had 
seen  her  daughter  covered  with  blood,  and  led  to  bed  by  two  women. 
Moved  by  her  anxiety,  I  returned  that  night,  and  found  the  fact  as  she 
had  stated.  A  sudden  fright,  caused  by  the  violent  entry  of  a  drunken 
woman,  had  brought  on  a  miscarriage,  and  she  had  been  assisted  and 
tenderly  nursed  by  two  neighbours.  «  Benjamin  Lomax." 

With  this  dream  may  be  compared  the  following  hypnotic  vision. 

(467)  From  Beitrdge  zu  den  durch  Animalischen  Magnetismus  zeither 
bewirkten  Erscheinungen,  by  W.  Arndt  (Leipzig,  (1818),  pp.  76-9, 
Arndt  held  a  post  to  the  name  of  which  the  nearest  English  equivalent 
is  Secretaryship  to  the  Royal  Prussian  Superior  County  Court.  The 
percipient  was  a  Madame  S.,  19  years  of  age,  who  had  been  suffering 
from  hysterical  attacks,  and  was  hypnotised  by  Arndt  during  a  period  of 
some  months,  in  1812. 

"  During  a  magnetic  stance,  the  sleeping  patient,  who  had  just  before 
been  quite  gay,  all  at  once  began,  without  any  perceptible  cause,  to  utter 
lamentations,  to  wring  her  hands,  and  to  weep.  When  I  asked  her  the 
reason,  she  said,  <  Ah,  God  !  Ah,  God  !  my  father  ;  my  good  father  !  he  is 
dying.'     '  How  do  you  know  that  ? '     '  Ah,   God  !  don't  I  see  it !    he  is 

1  We  have  a  very  similar  case  from  Mr.  Alex.  B.  Burton,  of  4,  Baronsfield  Road,  St. 
Margaret's,  Twickenham,  who,  on  January  7th,  1880,  dreamt  very  vividly  of  his  father's 
death  as  taking  place  in  a  room  quite  different  from  that  which  he  believed  him  to  be 
occupying  at  the  exact  hour.  He  got  out  of  bed,  and  marked  the  time  by  his  watch  as 
a  little  past  4.30.  The  facts  and  the  time  of  the  death  exactly  corresponded ;  and  Mr. 
Burton's  mother  testifies  that  the  dream  was  described  to  her  before  she  mentioned  the 
actual  change  of  room.  The  death  of  the  father  was,  however,  known  to  be  imminent ; 
and  the  case  is  therefore  not  numbered  as  evidential. 

III.]  DREAMS.  433 

losing  a  terrible  amount  of  blood  !  Ah,  he  is  dying,  dying ! '  After 
trying  in  vain  to  pacify  her  and  rid  her  of  this  fancy,  I  woke  her.  She 
opened  her  eyes  with  the  brightest  smile,  and  all  gloomy  thoughts  had 
vanished.  To  divert  her  still  more,  I  conversed  with  her  on  various 
subjects  •  then,  as  I  had  broken  into  her  sleep,  I  hypnotised  her  again. 
Before  long  the  disquieting  picture  again  appeared  to  her.  To  put  an  end 
to  her  grief,  I  again  woke  her.  Her  joyous  look  on  waking  showed  that 
she  was  quite  unaware  of  what  she  had  just  been  describing." 

On  her  being  put  to  sleep  a  third  time,  the  vision  was  repeated,  and 
her  lamentations  were  heart-rending ;  but  this  time  she  was  allowed  to 
sleep,  and  she  gradually  became  more  composed.  She  woke  at  last  with 
the  exclamation,  "  Alas !  "  For  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  she  was  very 
melancholy,  without  being  able  to  say  why ;  and  neither  Arndt  nor  her 
husband  (the  only  two  persons  who  had  been  present)  revealed  to  her 
what  had  passed.     Next  day  she  had  recovered  her  spirits. 

Her  father  was  at  the  time  70  German  miles  away.  His  last  letters 
had  assured  her  that  he  was  well ;  nor  had  she  the  slightest  cause  for 
anxiety  on  his  account.  But  some  weeks  later  Arndt  found  her  much 
cast  down  ;  and  on  inquiring  the  cause,  was  told  that  at  about  3  p.m.  on 
the  day  of  her  strange  experience  (which  Arndt  says  that  he  had  noted), 
her  father  had  slipped  while  descending  into  the  cellar,  and  the  cellar  door 
had  fallen  on  his  breast,  which  caused  violent  hsemorrhage,  and  very  nearly 
cost  him  his  life.  "  So  the  fact  which  could  not  by  any  possibility  have 
been  suspected,  actually  happened,  at  the  very  hour  at  which  the  patient 
at  a  distance  perceived  it." 

(468)  From  the  Rev.  F.  Teasdale  Reed  (Unitarian  Minister),  Cole- 
hill,  Tamworth.  "October,  1884. 

"  I  had  an  uncle  who,  after  spending  33  years  on  board  ship,  left  the 
sea,  got  married,  and  settled  down  near  London.  His  only  son.  Jack, 
and  myself  were  constant  playmates,  and  for  a  short  time  school-fellows 
also.  [Jack  ran  away  to  sea.]  Months  passed  by  and  no  news  came.  At 
length — perhaps  it  was  12  or  18  months  afterwards — my  thoughts  were 
again  directed  to  my  missing  cousin.     It  was  in  this  way, 

"  One  Sunday  morning,  my  father  invited  me  to  go  with  him  to  see  my 
uncle  and  aunt.  On  the  road  he  told  me  that  during  the  night  he  had  had 
a  most  remarkable  dream,  and  he  wished  to  test  it  as  far  as  he  could,  for 
he  was  strongly  persuaded  that  it  would  be  fulfilled.  At  the  same  time  he 
urged  me  to  notice  the  date,  and  preserve  in  my  memory  the  details  as  far 
as  possible.  I  may  just  say,  in  parenthesis,  that  we  continued  our  journey, 
paid  the  visit,  but  found  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  my  cousin.  The 
dream,  so  far  as  I  can  recollect  it  at  this  distance  of  time,  was  somewhat 
as  follows : — The  scene  is  in  a  foreign  port  (guessed  at  the  time  to  be 
Spanish).  On  board  a  British  man-of-war  that  is  anchored  there  a  young 
man  (my  cousin  Jack)  is  giving  instructions  to  some  men  at  work  in  the 
rigging.  He  is  apparently  dissatisfied  with  what  they  are  doing,  for  he 
hurries  up,  makes  some  slight  alteration,  and  then  descends.  A  rung  of 
the  rope  ladder  gives  way  as  his  foot  touches  it,  he  falls  backward,  head 
first,  and  dies  instantly.  The  surgeon  hurries  to  the  spot,  examines  the 
body,  but  leaves  it,  as  he  can  do  nothing  there.  Then  arrangements  are 
made  for  the  burial.     The  coffin  is  taken  on  shore,  some  of  the  officers  and 

VOL,    II,  2   P 

434  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

men  accompany  it,  and  it  is  solemnly  lowered  into  the  grave.     There  the 
dream  ended. 

"  Some  time  after,  my  father  (he  had  already  ascertained  the  time  it 
"would  take  for  a  letter  to  come  from  the  Spanish  coast  to  England)  asked 
me  one  morning  if  I  still  remembered  his  strange  dream.  He  then  made 
me  repeat  it  to  him.  After  that  he  said  :  '  Well,  if  there  is  anything  in  it 
your  uncle  will  have  heard  something  about  it  by  this  time,  let  us  go 
and  see  him.'  When  we  reached  the  house  we  could  see  at  a  glance 
that  something  had  happened.  My  father  at  once  asked  if  there  was 
any  news  yet  of  Jack.  Yes,  that  morning's  post  had  brought  a  large 
envelope  bearing  the  Lisbon  post-mark.  It  was  written  by  one  of  the 
officers  of  a  man-of-war  that  was  then  anchored  at  Lisbon,  and  its 
purpose  was  to  make  known  the  death  of  my  cousin.  After  a  very  kind 
and  favourable  notice  of  Jack's  general  conduct  and  abilities,  it  gave 
full  details  of  his  death  and  burial.  Those  details  tallied  exactly  with 
the  details  given  in  my  father's  dream,  and  it  occurred  the  very  date 
of  the  dream.  I  was  perfectly  amazed.  I  inspected  the  letter  and  could 
not  see  any  point  in  which  there  was  the  slightest  contradiction  or  even 
divergence.     Of  course  my  uncle  was  then  informed  of  the  dream. 

"  F.  T.  R." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Reed  adds  on  October  28,  1884 : — 

"  I  can  quite  understand  your  desire  to  verify,  as  far  as  possible,  every 
statement  made,  but  unfortunately  I  shall  not  be  able  to  furnish  much 
corroboration.  I  have  just  a  little ;  what  there  is  I  will  place  before 
you.  I  found  the  enclosed  '  inspector's  certificate.'  I  see  it  corrects  my 
story  in  one  point,  and  confirms  it  in  another.  I  said  that  the  event 
happened  about  32  years  ago  ;  this  document  is  dated  1847,  i.e.,  37  years 
ago.  At  the  time  of  writing  the  paper  I  did  not  sufficiently  think  over 
the  question  of  time.  I  would  add  that  the  family  consisted  of  my  uncle, 
aunt — who  are  both  dead — my  cousin  John  (of  whom  I  have  written),  and 
his  sister,  who  is  still  alive  in  Australia.  She  may  be  able  to  furnish 
more  particulars.  [We  have  written  several  letters  to  this  lady,  which  have 
not  been  answered.]  However  weak  it  may  be  in  collateral  evidence,  I  am 
positive  as  to  the  fact  of  the  dream,  and  that  I  have  fairly  represented 
it  in  its  essential  points." 

The  inspector's  certificate  shows  that  John  Tabner,  seaman,  died  at  sea, 
on  board  H.M.S.  "  Canopus,"  on  the  24th  of  April,  1847.  In  the  Navy 
List  for  June,  1847,  we  find  the  ship  reported  as  "  off  the  coast  of 
Portugal." 

[In  the  absence  of  an  independent  account  of  the  details  of  the 
death,  and  of  written  notes  of  the  dream,  we  cannot  assume  that  the 
coincidence  of  detail  was  so  close  as  seems  to  be  remembered.  Clearly 
there  would  be  a  difficulty  in  explaining  the  closing  scene  of  the  dream 
as  telepathically  produced,  though  the  dream  may  naturally  enough  have 
taken  that  course.  Mr.  Reed  mentioned  in  conversation  that  there  had 
been  a  very  strong  bond  of  afiection  between  his  father  and  Jack.  He 
was  himself  1 1  years  old  at  the  time.] 

(469)  From  Mr.  W.  Noble,  J.P.,  Forest  Lodge,  Maresfield,  Uckfield. 

"  September  8th,  1882. 

"  The  Baroness  van    Lynden  (my  mother-in-law)    had   a    maid   who 

in.]  DREAMS.  435 

subsequently  lived  with  Mrs.  Noble  and  myself  as  housekeeper,  and  died 
in  this  house  after  35  years'  consecutive  service  in  the  family;  her  name 
was  Elizabeth  Gowling,  and  she  came  of  a  most  respectable  stock  of  the 
farming  class  from  Appleby,  in  Westmoreland.  She  left  Westmoreland 
when  she  was  young,  and  had  not  been  near  it  for  a  good  many  years, 
when  the  very  curious  event  occurred  which  I  am  about  to  relate. 

"  I  must  say  here,  that  when  living  in  Appleby,  Gowling  had  known  a 
woman,  by  sight,  whose  name,  I  regret  to  say,  I  have  forgotten,  but  who 
lived  in  a  suburb  called  Bongate.  They  had  in  no  sense  ever  been  friends, 
nor  had  any  communication  passed  between  them,  or  any  mention  of  the 
woman's  name  ever  been  made  to  Gowling  by  any  one,  after  she  left  her 
native  county. 

"Well,  one  morning  she  came  down,  as  usual,  to  dress  her  mistress, 
and,  in  obviously  a  very  nervous  and  excited  state,  told  her  that  she  had 
just  had  such  a  terrible  dream  that  she  could  not  get  it  out  of  her  mind. 
She  had,  she  said,  dreamed  that  this  Bongate  woman  had  gone  to  a  drawer, 
taken  out  a  piece  of  rope,  proceeded  to  an  outhouse,  and  hanged  herself, 
and  that  her  daughter  had  come  into  the  outhouse  and  cut  her  mother 
down.  My  mother-in-law,  of  course,  pooh-pooh'd  the  whole  affair,  told 
Gowling  not  to  be  silly,  that  dreams  were  all  nonsense,  &c.,  &c.  But  a 
week  or  two  afterwards  Gowling  received  a  local  newspaper  from  some  one 
of  her  Westmoreland  friends,  which  contained,  inter  alia,  an  account  of  an 
inquest  on  this  very  woman  ;  who,  on  the  night  in  which  the  dream 
happened,  had  proceeded  to  an  outhouse  and  hanged  herself,  and  had  been 
cut  down  by  her  daughter.  «  William  Noble." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Noble  says  : — 

"  It  was  some  considerable  time  after  it  happened  that  I  first  heard  of 
it ;  but  I  have  done  so,  without  the  smallest  variation,  repeatedly,  both 
from  my  mother-in-law  and  from  Gowling  herself." 

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Podmore,  Mrs.  Noble  gave  an  account  which 
precisely  corresponded  with  her  husband's,  and  stated  that  she  herself — 
then  a  young  girl — had  heard  Gowling  describe  the  dream  on  the  morning 
after  its  occurrence. 

From  the  Coroner  of  the  district,  who  has  kindly  made  inquiries,  we 
have  learnt  the  name  of  the  woman  who  committed  suicide,  and  the  fact 
that  the  occurrence  took  place  about  40  years  ago ;  but  his  and  our 
endeavours  to  trace  the  exact  date  have  failed. 

(470)   From  Mr.  Henry  Maitland,  Balmungo,  St.  Andrews. 

"December  28,  1885. 

"  On  the  16th  of  August,  1820 — it  was  the  anniversary  of  his  wedding 
- — my  father  took  my  mother  and  eldest  sister  to  dine  and  spend  the  night 
at  the  country  house  of  an  uncle  a  few  miles  off.  I  can  see  the  trio  now, 
through  the  long  vista  of  years,  starting  for  Lathrisk  on  the  Irish  car,  my 
father  in  high  spirits,  and  seemingly  in  perfect  health. 

"  That  night,  my  two  sisters,  who  were  left  at  home,  one  20  and  the 
other  21  years  of  age,  slept  together;  and  early  next  morning  the  younger 
one  awakened  her  companion,  to  tell  her  she  had  had  a  strange,  unhappy 
dream.  She  dreamed  she  was  at  Lathrisk  with  her  father  and  mother ; 
the  family  party  were  at  dinner,  and  all  went  well  till  the  servants  had 
VOL.    II.  2    F    2 

436  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

cleared  the  table  and  withdrawn.  My  father,  she  said,  then  suddenly  rose 
and  walked  to  the  window,  which  he  opened  as  if  for  air.  She,  in  her 
dream,  went  round  and  set  a  chair  for  him,  putting  her  arm  round  his 
shoulders  to  support  him  in  what  seemed  a  sudden  faintness.  My  uncle 
then  came  and  supported  my  father,  and  the  doctor  soon  arrived ;  but 
before  then  my  father  had  breathed  his  last.  Dreams,  however  impressive 
to  the  dreamer,  do  not  sound  equally  so  in  other  ears,  and  this  one  was  no 
exception  to  the  rule ;  the  elder  sister  made  no  account  of  it,  and  no  more 
was  said  on  the  subject. 

"  A  few  hours  later,  a  messenger  from  Lathrisk  brought  the  sad  news 
of  my  father's  death,  and  the  whole  details  of  the  closing  scene  were 
strictly  and  literally  identical  with  those  of  the  dream,  excepting  only 
that  my  eldest  sister,  who  went  with  her  parents,  was  the  actor,  in  place  of 
the  dreamer,  who  remained  at  home. 

"  My  father  was  in  his  50th  year,  full  of  health  five  minutes  before  he 
died ;  and  the  mental  condition  of  the  family  was  that  of  joy  and  hope- 
fulness." 

We  find  from  the  Edinburgh  C  our  ant  that  Mr.  Maitland's  father  died 
on  August  25th  (not  16th),  1820.  Mr.  Maitland  explains  that  he  knew  his 
father's  wedding  day  to  have  been  August  16,  from  an  entry  in  a  family 
Bible,  and  that  he  was  either  told  that  the  day  of  the  death  was  the  same, 
or  has  himself,  in  memory,  modified  close  proximity  into  identity. 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  he  adds,  on  Jan.  3,  1886  : — 

"  I  am  the  sole  survivor  of  my  family.  I  was  not  told  of  the  dream  at 
the  time  ;  my  age  (7  years)  precluded  this.  Let  me  give  you  the  assurance 
that  both  sisters  concerned  were  women  in  whom,  perhaps  above  most 
persons,  the  precious  quality  of  conscientiousness  formed  the  basis  of 
character.  In  50  years'  close  relationship  to  them,  I  never  heard  them 
speak  of  a  dream  but  the  one  in  question ;  and  I  don't  believe  either  of 
them  was,  either  literally  or  metaphorically,  a  '  dreamer.' 

"  Henry  Maitland." 

In  conversation  Mrs.  Maitland  told  me  that  she  also  had  heard  the 
incident  described  by  the  dreamer,  her  sister-in-law. 

[It  is  needless  to  observe  that  no  amount  of  scrupulousness  on  the 
part  of  a  witness  can  sufficiently  guarantee  unwritten  recollections  of  a 
long-past  incident,  involving  some  amount  of  detail.  But  the  quality  of 
the  evidence  in  this  case  is  at  any  rate  good  second-hand ;  and  one  can 
hardly  doubt  that  a  coincidence  of  a  striking  kind  occurred.] 

(471)  From  Mrs.  Sykes,  who  at  the  time  to  which  the  narrative  refers, 
was  residing  with  her  brother-in-law,  the  late  Dr.  Symonds,  of  Clifton 
Hill  House,  Clifton,  Bristol.  "  1883. 

"  On  the  6th  of  November,  1854,  I  want  to  see  a  poor  woman  named 
Scott,  living  in  St.  Michael's  parish,  Bristol.  She  had  a  son  in  the  army, 
and  his  regiment  was  serving  in  the  Crimea.  As  soon  as  she  saw  me,  she 
said,  '  I  know  my  dear  boy  is  dead.'  On  my  asking  what  made  her  think 
so,  she  said,  '  Yesterday  morning  I  saw  him  quite  plainly.  He  and  others 
were  fighting  and  I  saw  him  fall ;  the  men  seemed  in  disorder  and  were 
all  in  their  shirt-sleeves.  I  saw  Willie  as  plainly  as  I  see  you  now.'  I 
tried  to  comfort  her,  saying  how  improbable  it  was  they  should  be  fighting 

III.]  DREAMS.  437 

in  their  shirt-sleeves.  '  It  is  true,'  she  said.  '  I  know  he  is  gone,  and  I 
shall  always  know  the  day  and  time,  Sunday  morning,  November  5th,  for 
I  awoke  from  the  sight  of  this  battle  as  the  8  o'clock  bells  rang  out  from 
St.  Michael's  Church.' 

"  Quite  late  that  day  (the  6th)  we  heard  of  the  battle  of  Inkermann 
and  that  the  soldiers  were  surprised  early  on  the  5th,  and  had  not  time  to 
dress  entirely,  but  fought  in  their  shirt-sleeves.  Young  Scott's  regiment 
was  there  (I  forget  which).  This  poor  woman  never  heard  of  her  son's 
death  till  some  time  afterwards,  when  the  list  of  killed  came  out ;  but 
so  convinced  was  she  of  the  fact  that  she  wrote  his  name  and  the  date 
of  his  death  on  a  tracing  (life  size)  of  her  soldier  son,  that  she  and  her 
other  son  had  drawn  on  the  wall,  before  he  went  to  the  Crimea.  This 
rude  drawing  I  saw."  ^  "  M.  A.  Sykes." 

[The  Christian  name  William  is  probably  incorrect ;  among  the  non- 
commissioned officers  and  privates  mentioned  by  the  London  Gazette 
in  the  list  of  Inkermann  casualties,  as  killed  in  the  battle  or  dying 
of  wounds  very  shortly  afterwards,  are  three  Scotts — John,  Henry,  and 
Peter.  The  detail  of  the  shirt-sleeves  cannot  be  pressed ;  but  the  sense 
of  reality  must  have  been  strong,  to  prompt  the  writing  of  the  name  and 
date.] 

(472)  From  Miss  Weale,  Nepaul,  Croft  Road,  Torquay. 

"January  26th,  1884. 

"  My  mother  was  tired,  and  went  to  lie  down,  and  fell  asleep  and 
dreamt  that  her  younger  half-brother,  Godin  Ellis,  had  died  in  India, 
and  she  heard  in  her  dream  hurried  remarks  about  it,  and  heard  some 
one  speak  the  name  of  the  officer  standing  by.  She  awoke  with  such  a 
deep  sense  of  its  reality  that,  when  my  father  came  up  to  dress  for 
dinner,  she  proceeded  to  ask  him  to  kneel  down  and  say  the  prayers  from 
the  Burial   Service,  for  that  Godin  was  dead.     She  proceeded  to  tell  him 

1  In  connection  with  this  case,  I  may  quote  a  narrative  which  I  refrained  from  giving  as 
evidence  in  the  last  chapter,  on  account  of  the  pre-occupation  of  the  percipient's  mind  with 
her  absent  son.  It  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  a  Cambridge  friend,  Mrs.  B., 
whose  sister,  Mrs.  G-.,  is  the  narrator. 

"  The  following  narrative  was  told  to  me  by  my  aunt,  Mrs.  B.  ;  the  son  to  whom  it 
relates  is  F.  G.  B.  (68th  Regiment),  who  fell  at  Inkermann  on  Sunday,  November  5th, 
1854.  The  narrative  was  told  to  me  on  Sunday  afternoon,  September  2nd,  1883,  and 
written  down  at  the  time.  She  had  told  me  substantially  the  same  narrative  many  years 
before,  though  she  did  not  like  talking  of  it.  My  son,  who  was  also  present  when  the 
story  was  told,  read  over  my  account,  and  pronounced  it  correct.  I  do  not  believe  that  my 
aunt  ever  experienced  any  similar  impression.  I  have  known  her  intimately  all  my  life,  and 
stayed  with  her  for  months  together,  and  never  heard  her  mention  anything  of  the  kind. 
She  had  always  prayed  that  she  might  know  at  the  moment  if  he  were  kUled  or 
badly  wounded.  The  5th  November  was  a  Sunday.  She  was  at  E-uscombe  Church,  and 
early  in  the  service  (while  kneeling  in  the  Confession)  she  had  a  sudden  sensation ;  she 
saw  nothing,  but  felt  sure  something  was  by  her,  and  that  it  was  her  son.  Her  husband 
asked  her  what  was  the  matter,  but  she  kept  up,  and  did  not  leave  the  church.  On 
returning  home,  she  said  she  was  sure  they  would  hear  bad  news.  When  the  news  did 
arrive,  some  days  later,  they  found  he  was  shot  at  the  very  hour  when  she  felt  his  presence 
in  Ruscombe  Church." 

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  on  September  5th,  1883  : — 

"Mrs.  B.,  who  knew  her  aunt  well,  has  just  told  me  that  she  never  heard  of  her 
having  any  similar  impression." 

It  is  probable,  from  Kinglake's  and  Russell's  accounts,  that  Lieutenant  B.  was  killed 
in  the  morning  ;  but  at  what  hour  is  not  known.  For  the  form  of  the  experience,  compare 
the  subjective  impressions  described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  483.  The  case  is  eminently  one  where, 
after  the  receipt  of  the  news,  the  impression  would  be  likely  to  assume  in  memory  a 
definiteness  and  uniqueness  that  did  not  really  belong  to  it. 

438  SUPPLEMENT,  [chap. 

the  name  o£  the  place,  and  the  hour,  and  the  name  of  an  officer  standing 
by.  She  insisted  on  my  father  writing  down  the  particulars,  and  he,  to 
quiet  her,  complied,  and  also  joined  her  in  saying  the  prayers ;  but  he 
would  not  allow  her  to  go  into  mourning,  and  disbelieved  that  it  would  be 
found  correct,  because  Godin  had  not  intended  going  into  the  Madras 
Presidency. 

"  In  due  course  of  time  the  news  came,  and  full  written  particulars 
from  the  officer  whose  name  she  had  heard ;  and  it  had  happened  at  the 
hour  and  day  (allowing  for  reckoning),  and  in  the  little  place,  and  as  she 
described  it — an  accident  with  a  gun.  He  had  only  known  the  officer  for 
a  few  days,  and  the  name  was  one  unknown  to  my  parents.  My  mother 
had  been  certain  her  dream  was,  as  she  termed  it,  a  vision  of  the  true. 
She  was  a  very  healthy,  sensible,  calm-minded  woman. 

"  C  J.   DORATEA  WeALE." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Weale  wrote  : — 

"  My  mother  scarcely  ever  had  a  dream.  The  dream  took  place  as  far 
back  as  in  1837,  I  think,  but  that  very  day  she  told  us.  All  were  told  in 
the  house,  and  she  was  vexed  because  my  father  would  not  let  her  go  into 
mourning.  The  relatives  who  know,  with  me,  of  my  mother's  true  dream 
are  foreigners,  and  scattered  about  the  world,  and  I  rarely  write  to  them. 
But  it  was  all  written  down,  and  given  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Neale  at  the 
time." 

[Here,  again,  the  occurrence  is  far  too  remote  for  certainty  as  to  the 
details  of  the  dream.  But  some  of  the  collateral  incidents,  e.g.,  about  the 
mourning,  are  such  as  would  be  likely  to  impress  themselves  on  the 
daughter's  mind.  We  have  done  our  utmost  to  trace  the  exact  date  of  the 
death,  but  without  success.] 

(473)  From  a  lady  who  scruples  for  the  present  to  allow  the  publica- 
tion of  her  name,  as  a  near  relative  has  an  abhorrence  of  the  subject. 

"May  26th,  1884. 

"  I  cannot  fix  the  date — it  may  have  been  about  18  years  after  my 
mother's  marriage — one  morning  at  breakfast  my  mother  told  us  she  had 
had  a  very  strange  dream.  She  had  dreamed  of  Mrs.  W.,  [a  lady  whose 
house  had  been  a  home  to  her  in  youth,  but  whom  she  had  not  heard  of 
for  years,]  and  Mrs.  W.  wanted  to  kiss  her.  My  mother  did  her  utmost  to 
prevent  it,  using  all  her  force  to  push  Mrs.  W.  away,  and  the  strangest 
thing  of  all  was  that  she  saw  the  inside  of  Mrs.  W.'s  throat,  and  saw  it 
most  distinctly,  and  it  was  as  black  as  coal.  That  was  the  entire  dream. 
About  a  week  or  10  days  after  the  dream  (I  cannot  be  sure  of  the 
interval),  a  mutual  friend  sent  us  news  of  Mrs.  W.'s  serious  illness,  told  us 
that  she  was  confined  to  bed,  and  sufiering  from  a  very  uncommon  disease 
which  had  attacked  her  throat.  After  hearing  this  report  there  were  many 
talks  of  Mrs.  W.,  but  no  way  of  gaining  further  information  about  her  was 
found. 

"  After  another  short  interval,  my  mother  told  us  she  had  dreamed 
again.  Mrs.  W.  was  dead,  everything  about  her  was  white,  and  there  was 
an  immense  amount  of  the  colour  somehow,  but  she  was  not  in  her 
own  room,  neither  did  my  mother  recognise  the  room  she  was  in  as  like 
any  of  the  bedrooms  in  the  house.      In  two  days  the  post  brought  us  an 

III.]  DREAMS.  439 

intimation  of  Mrs.  W.'s  death,  which  had  happened  during  the  night,  on 
the  precise  date  of  my  mother's  dream. 

"  About  three  months  afterwards,  we  had  a  visit  from  a  niece  of  Mrs. 
W.,  a  lady  who  had  nursed  her  aunt  during  her  last  illness,  and  who  called 
to  deliver  a  message  sent  to  my  mother  from  her  friend  before  her  death. 
My  mother  told  this  lady  of  her  two  dreams,  when  the  following  explana- 
tions were  given  us  : — Mrs.  W.'s  illness  was  entirely  in  her  throat,  and  its 
most  distressing  symptom  was  an  extreme  difficulty  of  breathing,  necessi- 
tating having  both  windows  and  door  continually  wide  open,  as  the  only 
means  of  alleviation,  the  weather  at  the  time  being  bitterly  cold.  Immedi- 
ately after  Mrs.  W.'s  death,  a  daughter-in-law,  a  somewhat  eccentric 
person,  arranged  all  details  herself.  For  some  unexplained  reason  she 
caused  the  body  to  be  moved  immediately  to  a  parlour  downstairs.  The 
table  in  the  room  was  covered  with  a  white  linen  tablecloth,  and  the  body 
draped  in  white  placed  on  it ;  a  sofa  in  the  room  was  covered  with  a  white 
sheet,  and  every  chair,  and  also  every  picture  in  the  room  was  treated  in 
a  similar  manner.  My  mother  said,  '  I  know  the  room — that  was  the 
room  I  saw  in  my  dream.'  " 

[This  incident  happened  about  30  years  ago,  but  the  narrator  has  a 
very  clear  recollection  of  it.  She  says  that  her  mother  dreamt  a  good 
deal,  and  that  many  other  singular  coincidences  had  been  noticed,  but  that 
most  of  them  were  of  a  more  trivial  nature.  Of  course  the  second 
dream  can  only  be  explained  telepathically  by  supposing  (in  accordance 
with  Chap.  XVIII.,  §  7)  that  a  common  interest  in  the  dead  woman 
established  a  line  of  communication  between  persons  who  were  strangers  to 
one  another ;  and  it  is  not  an  example  on  which  we  should  be  disposed  to 
lay  any  stress.  The  first  experience  is  more  striking,  as  the  detail  about 
the  throat  (both  in  the  dream  and  in  the  reality)  would  be  likely  to  be 
remembered,  and  not  likely  to  be  unconsciously  imagined.] 

(474)  From  Des  Hallucinations,  by  Dr.  Brierre  de  Boismont  (Paris, 
1862),  pp.  285-6.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  he  received  the  account  from 
the  dreamer  herself,  as  otherwise  his  prefatory  remark  would  have  no 
force  ;  and  in  an  English  translation  of  another  edition  of  the  work,  the 
narrative  is  followed  by  the  words,  "  This  statement  was  made  to  us  by 
the  lady  herself,  in  whom  we  place  the  most  perfect  confidence." 

"  Le  fait  suivant  est  un  de  ceux  qui  nous  ont  le  plus  frapp^  parceque 
la  dame  de  qui  nous  le  tenons  etait  un  de  ces  esprits  senses  et  respectables 
dont  les  paroles  meritent  toute  confiance. 

"Mile.  R.,  douee  d'un  excellent  jugement,  religieuse  sans  bigoterie, 
habitait,  avant  d'etre  marine,  la  maison  de  son  oncle,  Desessants,  medecin 
celebre,  membre  de  I'lnstitut.  Elle  dtait  alors  separee  de  sa  mere,  atteinte, 
en  province,  d'une  maladie  assez  grave.  Une  nuit,  cette  jeune  personne 
reva  qu'elle  I'apercevait  devant  elle,  pale,  defiguree,  prete  a  rendre  le 
dernier  soupir,  et  temoignant  surtout  un  vif  chagrin  de  ne  pas  etre  entouree 
de  ses  enfants,  dont  I'un,  cure  d'une  des  paroisses  de  Paris,  avait  emigre  en 
Espagne,  et  dont  I'autre  etait  a  Paris.  Bientot  elle  I'entendit  I'appeler 
plusieurs  f ois  par  son  nom  de  bapteme ;  elle  vit,  dans  son  reve,  les 
personnes  qui  entouraient  sa  mere,  s'imaginant  qu'elle  demandait  sa  petite- 
fille,  portant  le  meme  nom,  aller  la  chercher  dans  la  piece  voisine ;  un 
signe  de  la  malade  leur  apprit  que  ce  n' etait  point  elle,  mais  sa  fiUe  qui 

440  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

habitait  Paris,  qu'elle  desirait  voir.  Sa  figure  exprimait  la  douleur  qu'elle 
eprouvait  de  son  absence ;  tout-a-coup  ses  traits  se  decomposerent,  se 
couvrirent  de  la  paleur  de  la  mort,  elle  retomba  sans  vie  sur  son  lit. 

"  Le  lendemain  Mile.  R.  parut  fort  triste  devant  Desessants,  qui  la 
pria  de  lui  faire  connaitre  la  cause  de  son  chagrin ;  elle  lui  raconta  dans 
tous  ses  details  le  songe  qui  I'avait  si  fortement  tourmentee.  Desessants, 
la  trouvant  dans  cette  disposition  d'esprit,  la  pressa  contre  son  coeur  en 
lui  avouant  que  la  nouvelle  n'etait  que  trop  vraie,  que  sa  mere  venait  de 
mourir ;  il  n'entra  point  dans  d'autres  explications. 

"Plusieurs  mois  apres.  Mile.  R.  profitant  de  I'absence  de  son  oncle 
pour  mettre  en  ordre  ses  papiers  auxquels  il  n'aimait  pas  qu'on  touchat, 
trouva  une  lettre  qui  avait  ete  jetee  dans  un  coin.  Quelle  ne  fut  pas  sa 
surprise  en  y  lisant  toutes  les  particularites  de  son  reve  que  Desessants 
avait  passees  sous  silence,  ne  voulant  pas  produire  une  emotion  trop  forte 
sur  un  esprit  deja  si  vivement  impressionne." 

(475)  From  Mrs.  Hebert,  16,  Monmouth  Road,  Bayswater,  W. 

"December  26th,  1883. 

"  I  shall  relate  to  you  a  dream  which  happened  to  me  several  years 
ago.  I  was  then  in  Germany  at  Mayence,  learning  German  in  a  school, 
where  I  was  employed  as  a  teacher  of  the  French  language. 

"  One  night  I  went  to  bed,  very  tired  but  without  any  particular 
anxiety.  I  fell  into  a  heavy  slumber  and  dreamt  of  my  mother.  She  was 
in  bed,  lying  ill,  and  thin  ;  her  hands,  almost  transparent,  were  stretched 
convulsively  as  if  seeking  for  some  object,  whilst  she  moaned  most 
piteously  in  calling  me  by  my  name.  In  fact,  she  looked  as  if  she  were 
dying.  I  recognised  perfectly  her  bedroom,  the  furniture,  &c.  ;  it  was 
dimly  lighted  by  a  candle,  and  close  to  the  head  of  the  bed,  in  a  green 
arm-chair,  slept  an  old  woman.  I  knew  her  also  as  a  charwoman,  who,  as 
it  seemed,  was  acting  as  nurse.  My  mother  in  her  desperate  motions 
succeeded  in  touching  the  shoulder  of  the  old  woman,  who  awoke  with  a 
start,  and  asked  her  crossly  what  she  wanted. 

"  'My  scissors,'  said  my  mother  in  a  feeble  voice. 

'"What  for  r 

"  'To  cut  some  of  my  hair.  You  shall  give  it  to  my  daughter  in 
remembrance  of  me.' 

"  '  She  does  not  want  it,  go  to  sleep,'  answered  the  old  woman,  angry 
at  being  disturbed.  She  pushed  back  my  mother  on  the  pillow  and  went 
to  sleep  again,  without  noticing  her  agony,  her  prayer,  to  have  some  of 
her  hair  cut.  I  could  hear  distinctly  the  voice  of  my  mother  becoming 
weaker  and  weaker,  but  always  plaintive,  and  supplicating  the  old  woman 
for  her  scissors.  At  last  I  heard  nothing.  I  awoke  in  a  frightful  agitation ; 
it  was  2  o'clock  after  midnight.  I  told  my  dream  to  some  people.  They 
advised  me  not  to  think  of  it,  as  they  said  that  dreams  generally  go  by 
contraries.  But  a  few  days  after,  I  received  the  news  of  my  mother's 
death  ;  it  had  happened  just  at  the  time  of  my  dream. 

"  Louise  Hebeet." 

Mrs.  Hubert  returned  to  France  in  a  few  weeks,  and,  on  seeing  the 
nurse,  reproached  her  with  her  conduct,  and  was  convinced  by  her  manner 
that  the  charge  was  true ;  but  there  was  no  further  evidence.     In  con- 

III.]  •  DREAMS.  441 

versation,  she  told  me  that  she  had  no  idea  of  her  mother  being  ill ; 
that  the  dream  was  quite  unique  in  her  experience  ;  and  that  the  effect 
on  her  was  so  strong  that  the  persons  she  was  living  with  had  great 
difficulty  in  persuading  her  not  to  start  home  at  once.  The  incident 
happened  more  than  20  years  ago,  and  she  has  lost  connection  with  her 
native  place  in  Lorraine. 

[The  case  is  first-hand,  from  a  witness  who,  I  am  sure,  desires  to  be 
accurate  ;  but  again  the  remoteness  of  date  and  lack  of  corroboration  are 
most  serious  defects,  and  the  correctness  of  the  details  in  the  dream  is 
mere  conjecture.] 

(476)  From  Mrs.  Drummond  Smithers,  Bridge  House,  Crookham, 
Farnham,  Hants. 

"  November  22nd,  1884. 

"  My  father  [Mr.  Thomas  Pickerden]  was  an  architect  and  builder, 
which  obliged  him  to  be  about  very  early  of  mornings;  and  on  Monday, 
the  19th  January,  1857,  at  7  a.m.,  whilst  on  his  way  to  see  some  of  his 
men,  he  fell,  in  a  fit  of  some  kind.  That  same  morning  I  perfectly  well 
remember  not  falling  asleep  until  after  2  a.m.,  having  counted  the  clock 
up  till  that  hour,  and  wondering  why  I  could  not  sleep,  as  I  always  slept 
well  at  that  time.  As  we  breakfasted  at  10  a.m.  in  those  days,  we  were 
not  early  risers,  so  probably  it  might  have  been  8  or  9  o'clock  before  I 
woke.  I  cannot  make  a  nearer  statement,  as  I  am  not  positive  as  to  the 
time  ;  but  my  dream  was  between  the  hours  mentioned.  It  was  that  my 
father  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill  in  the  streets  of  Hastings,  that  he  was 
put  into  a  fly  by  two  men,  and  taken  home — when  I  woke.  The  dream 
seemed  to  impress  me  very  much.  I  tried  not  to  think  seriously  of  it ; 
having  dressed  and  breakfasted,  still  the  dream  haunted  me.  I  could  not 
shake  it  off.  When  I  spoke  to  my  sisters-in-law,  with  whom  I  was  stay- 
ing (my  then  husband  was  their  brother),  they  advised  me  to  tell  him, 
which  I  did,  and  he  at  once  granted  my  request  of  going  on  to  Hastings. 
He  left  me  at  Etchingham  Station,  and  going  direct  to  our  home.  Hawk- 
hurst,  he  found  a  telegram  there  to  the  effect  that  my  father  was  ill,  and 
that  I  was  to  go  at  once.  I  had  by  this  time  reached  Hastings  and 
found  my  dream  verified. 

"  The  event  occurring  so  many  years  back,  not  one  witness  is  living. 

"Annie  Smithers." 

In  the  same  letter  Mrs.  Smithers  says,  "  The  dream  preceded  my 
father's  sudden  illness  some  few  hours  ;  "  but  the  account  shows  that  there 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  this. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : — 

"29th  December,  1884. 

"  In  my  dream  I  did  not  actually  see  my  father  fall,  but  was  at  the 
spot  just  as  the  fly  was  going  off,  and  saw  distinctly  there  were  two  persons 
inside  the  fly,  but  the  back  of  one  man  who  was  holding  my  father  pre- 
vented my  recognising  him ;  the  man  on  the  box  I  distinctly  saw,  and 
knew  him  as  a  flyman  of  Hastings,  and  he  was  the  man  who  drove  my 
father  on  that  fatal  morning — for  so  it  proved,  as  he  never  rallied  from 
that  illness,  never  was  out  of  his  bed  more  than  to  have  it  made  a  few 
times.     He  died  5th  March,  1857.     I  never  knew  him  to  have  an  illness 

442  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

previous  to  that,  nor  fit  of  any  kind ;  he  always  appeared  a  healthy  strong 
man.  I  am  generally  so  free  from  dreaming  that  this  one  made  a  great 
impression  upon  me  at  the  time." 

The  Hastings  News  confirms  March  5,  1857,  as  the  date  of  the  death. 

[This  case  again  is  remote  in  date  and  uncorroborated;  but  the 
narrator  is  not  likely  to  be  wrong  as  to  the  fact  of  her  taking  a  journey 
on  the  strength  of  her  dream,  and  finding  it  confirmed.] 

(477)  From  Miss  Morse,  Northfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.,  who  was  the 
percipient  in  case  41. 

"May,  1884. 

"  Often  impressions  of  persons  and  places  have  come  to  me  while 
asleep,  or  when  I  seemeo^  to  be  dreaming.  For  example:  When  our  civil 
war  was  in  progress  I  corresponded  with  several  soldiers.  One  of  my 
correspondents  was  Captain  Fischer,  a  Dane,  who  had  formerly  been  a 
sailor,  and  roamed  the  world  over.  While  the  army  of  the  Potomac  was 
lying  idle,  I  dreamed  of  a  strange  place.  The  moon  shone  brightly  on 
newly-made  streets,  dotted  with  small  white  houses,  arranged  to  impart  on 
the  whole  scene  a  picturesque  daintiness.  One  of  the  little  dwellings 
especially  won  my  attention.  I  stopped  before  it,  exclaiming,  '  How 
beautiful !  I  never  saw  anything  like  it.  I  wonder  what  it  can  be.'  A 
voice,  which  I  did  not  recognise,  replied,  'It  is  a  Grecian  temple.'  '  Am 
I,  then,  in  Greece  1 '  '  No,  this  is  an  imitation  of  such  temples  as  one 
sees  in  Greece.'  I  awoke,  and  in  a  moment  the  clock  struck  12.  I  could 
not  rid  myself  of  the  feeling  that  I  had  been  to  a  new  place,  and  seen 
something  real. 

"  A  few  days  after,  a  letter  came  from  Captain  Fischer,  in  which  he 
minutely  described  the  place  I  saw  in  my  dream,  explaining  that  the 
soldiers,  to  pass  the  time,  had  laid  out  streets  and  avenues,  and  by  many 
ingenious  devices  had  contrived  to  make  their  tents  resemble  houses.  His 
own  tent,  which  was  much  admired,  he  had  converted  into  quite  a  clever 
model  of  a  Greek  temple,  &c.  Near  the  close  he  alluded  to  the  brilliant 
moonlight,  and  added  :  '  It  is  near  midnight,  and  my  men  are  asleep  all 
around  me.'  Comparing  dates,  I  found  I  dreamed  of  the  scene  while  his 
pen  was  describing  it." 

In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Morse  says  : — 

"  The  date  of  the  dream  was  firmly  fixed  in  my  mind,  because  it  came 
the  one  night  that  I  passed  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Paine's  father.  I  well 
remember  telling  Mrs.  Paine  the  dream  in  the  morning.  When  I  saw  her 
again  I  told  her  of  Captain  Fischer's  letter,  which  was  received  after  I 
returned  to  W.  H.  Junction.  Had  the  dream  occurred  at  home  I  could 
not  have  been  so  sure  of  the  time." 

Mrs.  Paine,  Northfield,  Vermont,  writes  as  follows  : — 

"May  24th,  1884. 

"  My  testimony  in  regard  to  Miss  Morse's  dream  in  connection  with 
Captain  Fischer,  whom  I  know  well,  is  a  mere  mite.  I  well  recollect  her 
telling  me  the  dream,  which  occurred  while  she  was  on  a  visit  at  my 
father's,  but  whether  she  related  it  to  me  the  next  morning  or  later,  I 
cannot  remember.     She  says  she  told  me  the  dream  at  the  time,  and  its 

III.  DREAMS.  443 

singular  verification  afterwards,  as  she  did  not  receive  the  letter  from 
Captain  Fischer  until  after  she  returned  to  her  home  at  White  River 
Junction — but  so  many  years  have  elapsed  that  they  are  inseparably 
connected  in  my  mind.  I  only  remember  it  in  connection  with  the  letter, 
although  I  presume  she  is  correct. 

"  Lucia  A.  Paine." 

(478)  From  Mr.  Latimer  H.  Saunders,  St.  Helens,  near  Hyde,  who 
was  concerned  in  case  44. 

"April  26th,  1884. 

"  While  at  school,  I  had  a  remarkably  vivid  dream  of  a  fire,  in  which 
it  appeared  my  father's  offices  were  destroyed,  entailing  upon  him  heavy 
loss.  So  realistic  did  it  seem  to  me  that  I  related  it  to  one  of  my  school- 
fellows (George  A.)  before  rising.  [This  gentleman,  however,  cannot 
recall  the  circumstance.]  He  told  me  in  his  quaint  way  that  I  was  very 
fooKsh  to  repeat  a  dream  before  getting  up  unless  I  wished  it  to  come 
true ;  at  which  superstitious  fancy  I  laughed,  and  told  him  there  was  no 
fear  of  such  happening  in  this  case,  as  the  fire  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  was 
not  at  my  father's  offices,  16,  Mincing  Lane,  to  which  I  had  been  in  the 
holidays,  but  at  Messrs.  Bailey  and  Co.'s  offices,  a  large  block  of  buildings, 
No.  1,  Mincing  Lane  Buildings,  situate  some  distance  away,  and  the  only 
thing  connecting  them  with  my  father  was  that  in  my  dream  I  saw  his 
name-plate  on  the  entrance  instead  of  theirs.  A  few  days  after,  I  heard 
from  my  mother  that  my  father's  offices  had  been  burnt  to  the  ground, 
and  that  unfortunately  he  was  not  insured,  having  only  just  removed  into 
new  offices.  I  afterwards  learnt  that  it  was  the  block  of  buildings  I  had 
seen  in  my  dream  that  was  burnt  down  on  the  same  night ;  and  stranger 
still,  that  my  father  had  taken  the  very  offices  occupied  by  the  firm  I 
mentioned,  the  only  knowledge  of  whom  that  I  could  have  had  was  from 
seeing  their  name  on  the  building,  in  passing  to  my  father's  offices  when 
I  visited  the  City.  u  Latimee  H.  Saunders." 

Mr.  Saunders's  father  says,  "  The  date  [of  the  fire]  was,  I  think, 
November,  or  early  in  December,  1862."  We  find  from  the  Times  that 
the  fire  took  place  on  Dec.  9,  1862,  breaking  out  shortly  after  midnight,  in 
Mincing  Lane  Chambers,  and  thence  extending  to  other  buildings. 

[Mr.  Saunders  tells  me  that  one  of  his  brothers  (Mr.  Harris  Saunders, 
of  Leacroft  House,  Staines)  was,  he  believes,  at  the  fire — which  would  be 
in  favour  of  the  telepathic  explanation  ;  but  Mr.  H.  Saunders  declines  to 
tell  us  whether  he  actually  was  present.  The  case  is  too  remote  for  any 
certainty  as  to  the  exact  correspondence  of  date  and  detail.] 

(479  and  480)  Mr.  Rowland  Rowlands,  of  Bryncethin,  Bridgend,  has 
given  us  the  following  dream-cases  out  of  many  impressions  which  he 
believes  to  have  been  veridical.  (See  also  Yol.  I.,  pp.  252,  291.)  He 
was  until  recently  manager  of  the  Pen-y-graig  Collieries. 

"July  2nd,  1884. 

"About    23    years   ago,  when    I  was   taking  a  little  rest,  about  40 

or  50  miles  distance  from  Pen-y-graig,  I   saw  a  man  named  Edwin  Gay 

falling  down  from  a  slope  on  the  surface  to  an  old  pit,  which  was  covered 

with  old  timber  and  full  of  water.      But  the  timber  protected   him.     I 

444  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

instantly  wrote  a  letter  to  caution  them  to  take  care,  but  when  the  letter 
reached,  it  was  too  late,  because  the  man  had  fallen,  very  likely  at  the  very 
moment  I  saw  him  going.  I  met  Mr.  Gay  [within]  the  last  fortnight,  and 
went  over  the  facts  with  him. 

"  On  one  occasion,  about  1868,  when  at  the  Pen-y-graig  Collieries,  I 
had  come  from  the  works  to  my  house,  about  dinner-time,  1  p.m.,  and 
having  been  up  all  night  had  got  into  bed — when,  just  as  I  was  dropping 
off  to  sleep,  and  still  between  sleeping  and  waking,  I  saw  the  roof  of  the 
stall  belonging  to  a  man  named  William  Thomas  moving,  and  the  timbers 
which  supported  it  bending  and  breaking.  I  got  up  at  once  and  ran  off 
to  the  colliery,  just  in  time  to  meet  William  Thomas  coming  out  of  the 
works,  the  roof  of  his  stall  having  fallen  in,  just  as  I  had  seen  it.  My 
vision  must  have  taken  place  at  the  very  moment  of  the  accident.  William 
Thomas  is  now  dead. 

"  On  another  occasion,  when  in  bed,  between  1  and  2  a.m.,  I  dreamed 
that  I  saw  the  colliers,  who  should  have  stayed  in  the  works  until  5  a.m., 
putting  away  their  tools  and  making  ready  to  go.  I  hurried  on  my 
clothes,  told  my  wife  what  I  had  dreamed,  and  ran  off  to  the  works.  I 
found  that  the  men  were  just  about  to  leave,  but  had  hurried  back  on 
seeing  the  approach  of  my  light.  They  wondered  much  how  I  had  dis- 
covered the  trick  which  they  had  intended  to  play." 

[This  last  case  may  probably  have  been  due  to  some  latent  idea  in 
the  dreamer's  mind.] 

I  append  some  specimens  of  a  rather  numerous  class  in  which 
letters  are  alleged  to  have  been  perceived  shortly  before  their 
arrival.  The  following  are  instances  which  there  is  no  difficulty  in 
accounting  for  telepathically.  (See  also  cases  409,  433,  447,  above ; 
and  cases  136,  137.) 

(481)  From  Mr.  Conquest,  Mead  House,  Biggleswade. 

"December,  1884. 

"  It  was,  I  think,  in  October,  1869,  that  I  dreamed  that  I  received  a 
letter  from  an  old  friend.  Rev.  S.  H.  Ireson,  then  a  curate  of  St.  Thomas' 
Church,  Liverpool,  and  residing  in  Birkenhead,  from  whom  I  had  not  heard 
for  12  months  or  more.  His  handwriting  was  very  distinct,  and  it 
stood  out  very  clearly  before  me,  as  I  read  that  his  wife  had  presented  him 
with  another  little  daughter.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  page,  I  tried 
to  turn  over  the  leaf,  but  could  not,  and  the  effort  awoke  me.  The  vivid- 
ness of  the  dream  was  such  that  on  coming  down  to  breakfast  in  the 
morning,  I  said  to  my  sister  (now  Mrs.  Daniel,  of  The  Elms,  Biggleswade), 
'  I  expect  to  hear  from  Ireson  this  morning,  for  I  dreamed  last  night  that 
I  received  one  announcing  the  birth  of  a  daughter.'  In  a  few  minutes 
the  postman  came,  but  there  was  no  letter  from  Ireson,  It  came,  how- 
ever, the  following  day,  and  the  first  page  seemed  to  be  identical  with  the 
one  I  had  read  in  my  dream.  Towards  the  end  of  December,  in  the  same 
year,  I  think,  I  visited  Ireson  at  Birkenhead,  and,  one  day,  happening  to 
mention  the  above  circumstance  to  him,  he  said,  '  I  distinctly  remember 
writing  you  that  letter — it  was  between  1  and  2  (or  2  and  3)  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  and  after  I  had  written  the  first  page,   I  went  to  bed  and 

in.]  DREAMS.  445 

finished  the  letter  next  day.'  Ireson  afterwards  became  Vicar  of  Barnolds- 
wick,  and  died  a  few  years  ago.  u  ^u^t,.  W.  Conquest." 

Mrs.  Daniel  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Elms,  Biggleswade. 

"December  17th,  1884. 
"  I   perfectly    recollect    Mr.   F.  Conquest    telling  me  of    his  dream, 
respecting  the  birth  of  Mr.  Ireson's  daughter,  previous  to  our  receiving 
information  of  the  event,  and  have  pleasure  in  adding  my  testimony  in 
confirmation  of  it.  "  T.  F.  Daniel." 

Mr.  Conquest  has  antedated  his  experience  by  some  months,  as  we 
find  from  the  Register  of  Births  that  his  friend's  daughter  was  born  on 
July  9,  1870.  In  conversation  he  informed  me  that  he  had  had  no  idea 
of  the  impending  event ;  and  also  that  he  does  not  dream  much.  Mrs. 
Daniel  described  to  me  the  place  where  she  and  her  brother  were  standing 
when  he  told  her  of  the  dream,  and  the  arrival  of  the  post  immediately 
afterwards. 

(482)  From  Mrs.  Paramore,  43,  Shaftesbury  Road,  W. 

"March,  1884. 

"  On  the  night  of  the  21st  March,  1871,  I  woke  from  some  distressing 
dream,  sobbing.  My  husband  [since  deceased]  inquired  what  was  the 
matter.  I  told  him  I  had  had  such  a  dreadful  dream,  something  about  my 
Aunt  Baker,  but  I  could  not  remember  any  particulars.  Towards  morn- 
ing, I  think  about  5  o'clock,  I  woke  up  again  in  great  distress  from  a 
similar,  though  more  vivid,  dream — -something  still  connected  with  my 
Aunt  Baker  ;  but  I  told  my  husband  I  had  received  two  letters,  black- 
bordered.  When  I  got  up,  I  felt  unusually  depressed,  and  kept  saying  to 
my  husband  I  could  not  shake  ofi"  a  dreadful  feeling  of  wretchedness ;  as  I 
was  nearly  always  in  excellent  spirits,  he  was  surprised,  but  our  astonish- 
ment was  inexpressible  when  the  post  brought  me  two  black-edged  letters, 
both  in  the  handwriting  of  my  Uncle  Hubert  Hutchings,  my  Aunt 
Baker's  brother.  The  envelopes  were  numbered  1  and  2 — the  latter  I 
have  found  with  the  letters  amongst  my  papers.  No.  1  contained  the 
intelligence  of  my  aunt's  illness,  of  which  until  then  I  was  unaware.  The 
other  one,  written  shortly  after,  told  me  of  her  death.  My  husband  and 
myself  were  greatly  impressed  with  this  extraordinary  circumstance — for 
I  never  attached  the  slightest  importance  to  dreams ;  but  this  was  un- 
deniably a  mysterious  coincidence." 

Mrs.  Paramore  sent  the  two  letters — ^concerning  respectively  the  ill- 
ness and  death — for  our  inspection.  Both  were  dated  the  same  day,  21st 
March,  1871,  and  the  black-edged  cover  in  which  one  of  them  was  enclosed 
bore  a  dated  stamp-impression  of  that  day. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Paramore  writes  on  March  23,  1884  : — 
"  I  do  not  at  this  distant  date  actually  remember  as  to  whether  the  two 
letters  were  black-bordered  or  not,  but  I  distinctly  dreamt  they  had 
reference  to  my  aunt,  whose  illness  and  death  were  announced  the  follow- 
ing morning  in  the  two  letters  I  sent  you.  Whilst  dressing,  I  frequently 
remarked  (before  the  post  came  in)  to  my  husband  how  wretched  I  felt 
about  my  dream,  and  that  it  was  something  about  my  Aunt  Baker.     I  do 

446  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

not  remember  any  other  very   distressing  dreams  that  have  or  have  not 
come  true.  "Leonoea  E.  Paramoee." 

In  conversation  Mrs.  Paramore  dwelt  on  the  quite  unique  feeling  of 
distress  which  followed  the  dream.  As  to  the  particular  feature  of  repeti- 
tion, see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  357-8,  and  below  pp.  700-1. 

(483)  From  Mr.  E.  W.  Phibbs,  84,  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol. 

"February  10th,  1885. 

"  In  1856,  living  in  Manchester,  where  I  carried  on  the  business  of  silk 
and  cotton  manufacturer,  I  dreamed  one  night  I  saw  a  sheet  of  paper  with 
a  written  order  upon  it,  unimportant  in  itself,  from  a  house  which  was  in 
the  daily  habit  of  sending  me  orders— A.  and  S.  Henry  and  Co.  As  I 
saw  it,  it  looked  like  a  sheet  of  wet  paper  without  any  surroundings, 
covered  with  writing.  When  I  got  to  my  place  of  business,  about  half- 
past  9,  my  partner,  who  was  always  there  before  me,  remarked  that  he 
had  a  curious  (from  its  insignificance)  order  from  A.  and  S.  Henry  and 
Co.  I  said,  '  Before  showing  it  me,  give  me  a  sheet  of  paper,'  on  which  I 
wrote  out  a  part  of  the  order — the  upper  portion — and  remarked,  '  I  can't 
repeat  what  is  below,  because  it  is  smeared  in  the  copying-press.'  He 
looked  at  me  very  much  surprised,  and  produced  the  original,  showing  that 
it  was  identical  with  my  description. 

"  Thinking  over  the  matter  for  some  weeks,  a  difficulty  presented  itself 
in  the  thought  that,  at  the  moment  when  I  dreamed  I  saw  it,  the  order 
would  be  folded  in  an  envelope,  and  not  be  an  open  sheet.  Also,  why 
should  the  sheet  appear  wet  ?  At  last  I  questioned  the  writer  of  the  order, 
without  giving  him  any  reasons,  and  on  asking  him  to  describe  the  daily 
procedure  of  the  business  of  writing  such  orders  out,  he  answered  that, 
when  he  had  written  a  number  of  such  orders  the  last  thing  at  night,  he  gave 
them  to  the  copying  clerk,  who  was  in  the  unusual  practice  of  leaving  all 
these  orders  in  the  copying-book  in  the  press  all  night.  The  first  thing  the 
following  morning,  these  would  be  put  in  envelopes  and  distributed  through 
the  town.     This  at  once  explains  the  open  and  damp  sheet  of  my  dream. 

"  The  order  began  in  the  ordinary  form — '  Order  for  (500)  pieces,'  &c. 
The  words  written  down  (before  seeing  the  actual  order)  contained  all 
that  was  extraordinary  in  it.  The  smeared  portion  only  contained  further 
particulars.  "  E.  W.  Phibbs." 

Mr.  Phibbs'  partner  is  dead.  But  Mr.  Phibbs  has  forwarded  to  us  a 
letter,  written  to  him  on  Feb.  18,  1886,  by  Mr.  Fitzgerald,  of  34,  Marble 
Street,  Manchester,  who  heard  of  the  occurrence  at  the  time,  completely 
confirming  the  above  account ;  and  Mr.  J.  Lang  writes,  from  the  Man- 
chester Examiner  and  Times  office,  to  the  same  efiect. 

In  August,  1883,  Mr.  Phibbs  had  another  curious  dream,  of  seeing  his 
dog,  who  was  not  with  him  where  he  was  staying,  dying  under  a  wall ; 
and  Mrs.  Phibbs  confirms  the  fact  that  this  dream  was  narrated  to  her 
immediately.  It  turned  out  that  the  event  had  taken  place,  and  that  the 
dog  was  buried,  by  persons  who  were  in  some  degree  responsible  for 
the  accident  that  led  to  its  death,  at  (apparently)  the  hour  of  the  dream. 
But  the  dog  was  fond  of  climbing,  and  the  case  can  hardly  be  numbered 
as  evidential. 

I  may  conclude,  in  this  connection,  with  the  following  complicated 

III.]  DREAMS.  447 

case,  the  value  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  estimate,  but  which  at 
least  has  a  decided  suggestion  of  genuine  telepathy  for  anyone  who 
believes  in  the  reality  of  that  influence. 

(484)  From  a  lady  who  thinks  that  to  allow  the  publication  of  her 
name  would  involve  a  breach  of  confidence.  She  is  a  scrupulously  con- 
scientious witness.  .^^. 

"1884. 

"I  make  the  following  story  as  short  as  possible,  suppressing  many 
details,  and,  of  course,  entirely  changing  the  names  of  those  concerned. 
Miss  Black,  with  whom  I  have  been  most  intimate  for  many  years,  became 
much  interested  in  a  Mrs.  Gray.  Although  Miss  Black  and  I  are  so  in 
sympathy  that  I  may  call  our  interests  mutual,  I,  from  the  first,  took  an 
unaccountable  dislike  to  this  particular  friendship ;  so  much  so  that, 
although  I  was  always  told  when  the  friends  met,  no  personal  details  were 
ever  told  me.     I  never  heard  Mrs.  Gray  or  her  husband  described ;    I 

never  saw  her  writing.    I  believed  her  name  to  be ,  which  is  that  of 

her  daughter. 

"At  the  end  of  nearly  three  years  I  received  an  anonymous  letter, 
written  in  a  hand  evidently  meant  to  be  disguised,  asking  me  to  give  the 
writer  some  particulars  of  the  disposal  of  Miss  Black's  property.  The 
reply  was  to  be  addressed  to  certain  initials  at  a  Post-office.  I  did 
not  reply.     A  short  time  a^fter,  I  dreamt  that  I  stood  looking  over  the 

shoulder  of  a  lady  writing  a  letter,  and  that  she  signed  herself  ' 

Gray.'  The  room  door  opened  and  a  tall  old  man  came  in,  and  the  writer 
hastily  put  the  letter  away.  Two  days  after,  I  received  a  second  anony- 
mous letter  of  the  same  purport,  which  I  did  not  answer.  I  dreamt  the 
same  thing  again.  Soon  after  (I  forget  how  many  days),  a  third  letter 
reached  me,  begging  that  I  would  never  let  Miss  Black  know  what  had 
passed.  I  then  wrote,  saying  the  letters  were  destroyed,  and  that  from 
me  Miss  B.  would  never  hear  of  the  matter.  A  month  or  two  after  this, 
while  staying  at  my  home,  Miss  B.  and  I  were  at  church.  An  old  man 
sat  near  us  who  struck  me  as  extremely  like  the  figure  I  had  seen  in  my 
dreams.  Miss  B.  whispered,  '  That  is  so  like  Major  Gray.'  This  impressed 
me  very  much,  and  I   afterwards  found  out  that  Mrs.  Gray's  name  is 

,  not  ,  as  I  had  supposed  ;  also  that  she    has    a  great  quantity 

of  almost  white  hair,  which  I  have  omitted  to  say  was  the  only  thing 
I  very  distinctly  saw  about  my  dream-lady,  as  her  face  was  hidden  from  me. 

"  In  the  course  of  her  visit.  Miss  Black  said,  '  It  seems  to  me  your 
dislike  to  Mrs.  Gray  has  taken  a  more  definite  form ;  you  know  something 
about  her.'  I  denied  the  knowledge,  all  being  surmise,  and  I  being  most 
anxious  that  Miss  B.  should  not  be  wounded  by  the  feeling  that  anyone 
was  speculating  on  what  would  happen  in  the  event  of  her  death,  specially 
as  she  is  in  delicate  health.  The  subject  was  then  dropped  between  us ; 
but  when,  on  a  visit  to  her,  we  had  been  sitting  alone  and  silent  for  some 
time,  her  hand  being  on  my  shoulder,  she  exclaimed,  suddenly,  '  It  is 
something  about  my  will  that  makes  you  dislike  Mrs.  G.  so  much.'  In 
point  of  fact,  I  had  at  the  time  been  thinking  over  the  whole  matter.  I 
then  told  her  all,  and  it  is  now  a  matter  of  great  regret  I  did  not  at  once 
send  Miss  B.  the  letters,  as  things  then  might  have  been  cleared  up.  It 
has  been  a  cause  of  distress  to  Miss  B.  and  myself,  as  it  has  made  a  breach 

448  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

in  her  friendship  with  Mrs.  Gray,  who  denies  all  knowledge  of  the  letters, 
but  refuses  to  meet  me  and  discuss  the  affair.  I  need  trouble  you  no 
further,  nothing  more  of  interest,  from  a  psychological  point,  having 
occurred." 

Referring  to  the  above  account,  "  Miss  Black  "  writes,  on  October  5, 
1886  : — "  I  can  corroborate  the  facts  therein  contained." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : — 

1.  "After  receiving  the  first  anonymous  letter  I  did  suspect  its  author 
to  be  Mrs.  Gray.  Before  this  I  never  had  the  least  suspicion  that  her 
interest  in  Miss  Black  was  a  mercenary  one,  and  I  have  been  at  a  loss  to 
account  for  feeling  so  assured  she  was  the  writer,  without  there  being  any 
evidence  to  favour  the  idea. 

2.  "  I  am  quite  sure  I  recognised  the  old  man  in  church  as  being  like 
the  man  in  my  dream  before  Miss  B.  spoke  of  the  resemblance  to  Major  Gray. 

3.  "  I  am  quite  sure  I  never  saw  Major  G.,  and  I  have  not  the  shghtest 
remembrance  of  having  heard  any  description  of  him. 

4.  "Previous  to  Miss  Black  'reading'  what  certainly  were  my  thoughts 
about  Mrs.  Gray,  we  had  made  some  very  small  experiments  in  thought- 
transference,  with,  however,  too  slight  results  to  submit  to  the  S.P.R.  In 
these  experiments  I  was  the  percipient ;  my  '  willing '  had  no  effect  what- 
ever on  Miss  Black.  We  discontinued  our  experimenting  as  I  found  it 
exhausting.  I  think  it  is  clear  that  a  'sympathetic  rapport'  exists 
between  us,  as  once  it  was  '  borne  in  upon  me '  with  inexpressible  power 
that  she  was  in  some  distress.  The  impression  seized  me  suddenly  at  a 
certain  hour,  and  no  effort  would  dispel  it.  The  news  reached  me  next  day 
that  Miss  B.'s  sister  had  been  taken  worse  at  the  time,  and  was  dying. 
She  had  been  ill,  but  not  seriously  so,  and  the  last  account  I  had  received 
was  very  good.  When  we  are  together  we  have  often  answered  unexpressed 
thoughts. 

5.  "I  am  very  sorry  I  made  no  notes  whatever  of  the  incident,  never 
having  been  in  the  habit  of  keeping  a  diary,  and  I  cannot  be  at  all  accurate 
as  to  dates.  [The  narrator  has  however  told  us  privately  what  were  the 
months  in  which  the  various  incidents  occurred.  The  first  was  less  than  4 
years  ago.] 

6.  "I  do  not  remember  ever  having  dreamt  more  than  once  \i.e.,  having 
had  repeated  i]  a  dream  in  which  any  one  besides  myself  has  appeared. 

"  Not  having  any  idea  that  Mrs.  Gray's  name  is ,  in  fact  being 

impressed  with  the  idea  that  it  was ,  does  it  not  strike  you  as  a  very 

curious  coincidence  that  I  should  have  dreamt  that  I  saw  the  true  signa- 
ture ?  The  real  name  [communicated  in  confidence]  is  a  rather  uncommon 
one.     I  have  never  known  more  than  one  person  bearing  the  same. 

"  I  quite  forgot  to  say  that  Miss  Black  writes  that  she  does  not 
remember  her  hand  being  on  my  shoulder,  but  that  I  was  sitting  so  near 
as  to  touch  her ;  my  own  impression  still  is  that  it  was  so." 

In  conversation  the  narrator  told  Mr.  Podmore  that,  when  she  told  the 
whole  story  to  Miss  Black,  the  latter  brought  down  a  bundle  containing 
many  letters  from  various  persons,  and  that  she  (the  narrator)  without 
difficulty  picked  out  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Gray's,  from  the  resemblance  of  the 
writing  to  that  seen  in  the  dream. 

1  See  p.  418,  note. 

IV,] 

CHAPTER    IV. 

"  BORDERLAND  "     CASES. 

I  1,  The  most  convenient  mode  of  arranging  the  cases  in  the  present 
chapter  will  be,  not  by  the  character  of  the  experience  narrated — 
visual,  auditory,  and  so  on — for  it  happens  that  a  large  majority  are 
visual ;  ^  but  by  the  character  of  the  evidence — first-hand  or  second- 
hand, recent  or  remote. 

I  will  begin  with  some  cases,  first-hand  or  on  a  par  with  first-hand 
(Vol.  I,,  p.  148),  to  which  the  chief  objection,  from  an  evidential  point 
of  view,  is  their  remoteness  of  date. 

(485)  From  the  late  Mr.  Robert  Henry  Dix,  63,  Lanark  Villas,  Maida 
Vale,  London,  W.  u  February  2nd,  1884. 

"In  1836,  when  a  very  young  man,  I  had  become  engaged  to  a 
young  lady ;  but  I  decided  to  leave  England  and  try  my  fortune  elsewhere, 
and  wait  until  I  should  be  able  to  establish  myself,  and  could  then  send 
for  my  intended  and  be  united.  Of  course  we  were  to  keep  up  a  regular 
correspondence. 

"I  left  England  and  went  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  I  had  some 
friends,  and  very  soon  after  my  arrival  there  I  got  an  appointment  on 
an  estate  in  the  South  of  Russia,  belonging  to  a  rich  and  influential 
nobleman.  In  the  course  of  a  year  I  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  very 
good  position,  and  could  fairly  hope  to  be  enabled  to  marry  in  the  course 
of  the  next  spring.  In  the  meantime,  the  correspondence  with  my  in- 
tended continued  very  regularly.  All  at  once  it  ceased,  and  for  some  time 
I  had  received  no  letters  from  her.  I  wrote  to  one  of  her  family,  and 
was  informed  that  my  intended  was  taken  seriously  ill,  and  had  gone  to 
Jersey  to  some  friends  there,  hoping  that  the  sea  air  and  change  of 
climate  might  be  beneficial  to  her.  This  naturally  unsettled  me  very 
much,  and  I  became  depressed  and  low-spirited  in  consequence.  One  day 
I  remember  I  was  particularly  so.  I  had  been  very  much  occupied  during 
the  day,  and  towards  the  evening  threw  myself  on  the  sofa  in  my  sitting- 
room,  and  dropped  ofi"  to  sleep.  It  might  have  been  an  hour  or  so  that  I 
had  been  asleep,  when,  suddenly  awaking,  I  observed  at  the  foot  of  the 

1  The  cases  which  were  exclusively  auditory  are  Nos.  496,  497,  506,  507  538 ;  and 
an  auditory  impression  was  a  prominent  element  in  cases  489,  495,  498,  508,  509,  513,  519, 
520,  522,  526,  527,  528,  539,  540,  547. 

VOL.    II.  2    G 

450  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

couch  a  sort  of  bluish  vapour,^  which  seemed  to  fill  up  the  end  of  the 
room,  and  what  seemed  to  me  a  shadowy  form  appeared  to  come  out  of  it, 
which  gradually  took  the  form  of  a  female ;  the  features  bore  the  exact 
likeness  of  my  intended.  I  was  now  fully  awake.  I  raised  myself  on 
the  sofa,  and  exclaimed,  '  Louisa,  is  that  really  you  ?  What  has 
happened  1 '  I  received  no  answer,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the  apparition 
was  gone,  and  seemed  to  melt  away  into  the  vapour,  which  also  dis- 
appeared. I  still  supposed  that  I  had  been  dreaming,  but  I  could  not 
shake  off  the  impression  this  apparition  had  made  upon  me. 

"  I  wrote  to  my  friends  in  England,  saying  that  I  feared  my  intended 
was  dying  or  dead.  I  received  in  answer  that  my  fears  were  too  well 
founded,  and  that  the  poor  girl  had  died  of  inflammation  of  the  brain,  on 
the  same  day,  and  about  the  same  time,  as  I  mentioned  having  seen  the 
apparition.  "  R-  H.  D." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Dix  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  he  could 
not  give  the  precise  date  of  the  apparition ;  it  occurred  some  time  in  the 
autumn  of  1837,  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  when  it  was  dusk,  but  not  yet 
fully  dark.  He  made  no  written  memorandum  of  the  occurrence,  but  told 
one  or  two  friends  in  Russia  on  the  following  day.  When  he  received  the 
letter  announcing  the  death,  he  noted  that  it  took  place  on  the  same  day 
as  the  vision,  but  he  never  learned  whether  the  hour  exactly  corresponded, 
only  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  afternoon. 

All  those  who  could  give  corroborative  evidence  in  this  case  are 
either  dead  or  dispersed,  so  that  they  cannot  be  traced.  ISTone  of  the 
letters  are  preserved,  and  no  one  is  Living  of  Mr.  Dix's  own  relations  who 
could  attest  the  receipt  of  his  letters. 

Mr.  Dix  was  certain  that  he  had  never  had  any  other  experience  of 
hallucination.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  noted  that  he  was  at  the 
time  in  a  state  of  distinct  anxiety  respecting  his  fiancee. 

We  have  more  to  rely  on  here  than  the  mere  recollection  of  the 
experience ;  this  receives,  so  to  speak,  a  -point  d'appiii  in  the 
recollection  that  a  letter  was  written  in  consequence.  Similarly,  in 
the  next  two  cases,  and  in  others  that  follow,  we  have  the  recollection 
that  the  phantasm  was  immediately  described  and  commented  on. 
In  respect  of  many  of  these  borderland  visions,  I  may  remind  the 
reader  that  the  percipient's  certainty  of  having  been  completely  awake 
at  the  time,  though  not  conclusive  as  to  the  fact,  is  in  itself  quite 
sufficient  to  distinguish  the  experience  from  an  ordinary  dream. 

(486)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Lever,  of  Culcheth  Hall,  Bowdon,  wife  of  Mr. 
Ellis  Lever,  well  known  in  Manchester. 

"May  14th,  1884. 

"  When  at  Ashton-under-Lyne,  in  my  father's  house,  and  being  about 
14  years  of  age,  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed,  and  my  sister,  Anne,  sleeping 
by  my  side.  It  was  nearing  the  dawn  at  morning,  when  I  saw  my  cousin, 
Mary  Tinker,   come  to  my  bedside,   and  she  laid  one  hand  on  the  pillow 

1  Compare  cases  193  and  194,  and  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  note. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  451 

near  my  sister's  head,  while  her  eyes  were  uplifted,  as  if  in  prayer.  (My 
cousin  Mary  was  particularly  attached  to  my  sister  Anne.)  She  was  in  her 
nightdress,  which  was  frilled  down  the  front,  and  a  nightcap,  also  frilled  ; 
and  I  saw  her  dark-brown  eyes  as  distinctly  as  possible.  I  was  so  afraid 
that  I  shrank  under  the  clothes ;  but  then,  reflecting  that  I  had  done 
nothing  to  grieve  her,  and  no  reason  to  be  afraid,  I  resolved  to  speak  to 
her.  But  on  removing  the  clothes,  she  was  gone,  and  not  knowing  where 
she  could  have  gone  to,  I  concluded  that  it  must  have  been  her  spirit.^  At 
breakfast,  the  same  morning,  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen  to  my  father 
and  brothers,  and  to  my  sister  Anne.  They  said  I  must  have  been 
dreaming,  but  I  was  quite  awake,  and  assured  them  that  this  was  the  case. 

"  The  next  day  a  letter  came  stating  that  my  cousin  Mary  had  died, 
and  it  was  ascertained  that  her  death  occurred  at  the  very  time  at  which  I 
had  seen  her  apparition.  This  coincidence  convinced  the  members  of  my 
family  that  I  had  seen  my  cousin,  as  I  assured  them  I  had. 

"  Catherine  Lever." 

Mrs.  Lever's  daughter  writes,  from  Cambridge  House,  Monmouth  : — 

"June  4th,  1884. 

"  I  am  staying  with  my  mother's  sister  [Anne],  who  distinctly 
remembers  about  her  cousin  Mary.  "Ada  Lever." 

Mrs.  Lever,  herself,  however,  says,  "  My  sister  only  just  remembers 
my  mentioning  Cousin  Mary,  and  she  cannot  give  me  the  date." 

(487)  From  a  lady,  Mrs,  H.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not 
be  published.  u  ig83 

"  When  I  was  a  child  of  11  years  of  age,  a  very  singular  thing 
happened  to  me,  which  is  well-known  to  my  family,  and  impressed  itself  so 
vividly  on  my  memory  that  I  can  still,  though  now  a  grandmother,  recall 
every  circumstance. 

"  One  night  I  awoke  in  a  great  state  of  fright,  thinking  someone  had 
touched  me.  I  saw  distinctly,  standing  by  my  bedside,  my  brother,  but  I 
was  terrified  to  see  that  he  looked  very  terribly  strange  and  altered,  as  it 
struck  me,  like  a  dead  person,  though  at  that  time  I  had  never  seen 
anyone  dead.  I  was  also  very  astonished  at  seeing  that  he  seemed 
dripping  wet,  his  clothes  wet  and  stained,  his  hair  dripping,  and  he  stood 
with  his  eyes  fixed  on  me.  In  my  terror  I  called  out  '  Alick  ! '  (his  name), 
when  the  figure  immediately  vanished.^  I  jumped  out  of  bed,  running 
through  the  door,  which  was  always  left  open,  into  the  next  room,  my 
governess's,  telling  her  of  what  I  had  seen,  and  in  my  alarm,  getting  into 
her  bed,  where  I  remained  that  night.  She  tried  to  laugh  away  my  fears, 
saying  I  must  have  eaten  something  that  had  disagreed  with  me,  and  that 
what  had  passed  was  a  nightmare,  and  forbidding  me  to  mention  it  to  my 
grandmother,  under  whose  care  I  was  living,  she  being  an  old  Scotch  lady, 
and  superstitious,  and  that  it  might  upset  her.  Nothing,  therefore,  regard- 
ing the  circumstance  was  in  any  way  placed  on  record. 

"  About  three  months  afterwards,  as  I  was  reading  aloud  to  my 
governess  in  the  same  sitting-room  with  my  grandmother,  the  Indian  post 
arrived.     She  made  the  remark,   '  How  singular  !   No  letters,  only  a  news- 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

2  As  to  the  sudden  disappearance  on  speech,  compare  case  540,  and  see  p.  91,  note. 

VOL.    II,  2    G    2 

452  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

paper,'  which  she  began  reading.  After  a  little  while  she  dropped  the 
paper  with  the  exclamation,  '  Oh,  my  God  ! '  My  governess  ran  to  her, 
and  presently  read  my  brother's  death  by  drowning  in  a  quicksand  in  the 
River  Sone,  near  Sonepore,  in  Bengal.  He  was  marching  with  his  regiment ; 
they  were  encamped  on  one  side  of  the  river  bank,  another  regiment  on 
the  opposite  side.  This  regiment,  in  which  my  brother  had  a  young  friend, 
had  asked  him  to  early  breakfast,  about  5  or  6  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  and 
the  native  who  was  showing  him  the  way  across  afterwards  deposed  he 
heard  a  struggling  all  of  a  sudden,  looked  back,  and  saw  my  brother  and 
his  pony  floundering  in  the  quicksand,  with  which  the  river  is  full,  and  of 
which  it  is  supposed  the  coolie  had  forgotten  to  warn  him.  Instead  of 
throwing  my  brother  a  rope  or  stick  to  catch  hold  of,  the  man,  in  a  great 
state  of  fright,  ran  back  to  the  camp  to  give  the  news ;  but  by  the  time 
help  arrived  it  was  too  late,  and  my  brother  was  quite  dead  when  the  body 
was  recovered.^  This  happened  March  21st,  1845.  In  Bengal  by  that 
month  the  sun  is  well  risen  by  5  o'clock,  or  at  all  events  quite  broad  light, 
and  being  in  advance  of  us  some  six  hours,  the  time  at  which  he  was 
drowned  would  tally  with  my  seeing  him  during  the  night  at  home. 

"  M.  C.  H." 

From  the  only  public  notice  of  the  death  that  we  have  been  able  to 
discover — a  letter  quoted  by  Allen' s  Indian  Mail  ivovn  th.Q  Bengal  Hurkaru 
of  March  4,  1845 — it  appears  that  Mrs.  H.'s  brother  was  drowned  in 
the  Sone  when  returning  one  morning  to  his  regiment,  having  spent  the 
night  with  another  regiment  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  that  he 
was  buried  on  Feb.  23.  It  is  thus  likely  enough  that  the  accident  occurred 
on  Feb.  21.     The  March  21,  in  Mrs.  H.'s  account,  cannot  be  correct. 

Mrs.  H.  adds  the  following  incident,  which  is  perhaps  worth  giving 
in  connection  with  the  former  one ;  but  it  is  possible  that  the  daughter 
who  was  in  the  same  room  with  her  called  out  in  her  sleep. 

"  My  eldest  daughter  had  come  out  to  us  to  Calcutta,  and  she  happened 
for  the  time  to  be  sleeping  in  my  bedroom.  Early  one  morning,  December, 
1870,  a  few  days  after  her  arrival,  I  woke  suddenly,  hearing  her,  as  I 
thought,  calling  out,  '  Mamma,  mamma,'  in  a  very  strained  sort  of  voice, 
but,  to  my  surprise,  found  she  was  sound  asleep.  About  24  days  after- 
wards, we  got  the  news  that  my  second  daughter,  a  girl  just  14,  then  at 
Dover  w;ith  a  relative,  had  scarlet  fever  very  badly,  and  in  the  delirium 
attending  kept  only  calling  out,  '  Mamma,  mamma.'  She  recovered ;  so 
this  shows,  as  so  many  cases  of  the  same  kind  do,  that  it  is  not  only  at  the 
moment  of  the  spirit's  departure  these  manifestations  occur  ;  but  I  think 
they  only  do  so  in  cases  where  either  very  strong  attachment  exists,  or  to 
people  whose  temperament  is  of  the  rather  nervously  sensitive  breed,  and 
I  am  so  in  many  ways  ;  for  instance,  I  have  the  most  extraordinarily  keen 
hearing." 

The  narrator  states  that  she  has  never  experienced  any  hallucination 
of  a  purely  subjective  kind. 

(488)  From  Mr.  William  Garlick,  F.R.C.S.,  33,  Great  James  Street, 
Bloomsbury,  W.C. 

"Between  6  and  7  in  the  morning  of  August  29,  1832,  when  lying  in 

1  This  chapter  and  the  next  contain  a  good  many  cases  where  the  death  of  the  agent 
was  by  drowning.     See  p.  26. 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  463 

bed,  half  asleep  and  half  awake,  I  was  suddenly  startled  by  perceiving  the 
form  of  my  brother  George,  then  absent  from  home,  standing  beside  me. 
The  room  was  quite  light,  and  my  recognition  of  the  figure  was  complete 
and  clear.  He  looked  at  me,  and  then  seemed  to  fade  slowly  away.^  My 
brother,  who  had  a  specially  warm  affection  for  me,  was  at  that  time  a 
sailor  on  board  the  merchant  ship,  '  Eliza,'  bound  for  the  East  Indies.  I 
had  no  reason  to  suppose  anything  was  wrong  with  him,  nor  was  he 
specially  in  my  thoughts.  The  vision,  for  I  felt  certain  that  I  was  awake 
and  not  dreaming,  made  a  very  strong  and  painful  impression  upon  me, 
so  much  so  that  the  family  where  I  was  staying  asked  the  cause  of  my 
troubled  looks.  I  told  them  what  I  had  seen,  and  at  my  hostess's  (after- 
wards my  mother-in-law)  request  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence. 

"  Months  afterwards  we  received  the  intelligence  that  my  brother 
had  died  at  Baroda,  of  dysentery.  The  date  and  hour  ^  of  his  death,  as 
nearly  as  could  be  calculated,  coincided  exactly  with  that  of  his  appear- 
ance to  me  at  Stroud  (Gloucester).  I  am  of  a  calm  and  unimaginative 
temperament,  and  have  never  had  any  similar  experience  before  or  since. 
The  coincidence  was  well-known  to  various  members  of  my  family,  but 
I  do  not  now  remember  that  I  mentioned  the  matter  to  anyone  else  at 
the  time.  "  Wm.  Garlick." 

Mrs.  Garlick  writes,  on  Nov.  18,  1884  : — 

"  I  was  present  at  the  breakfast  table  on  the  29th  August,  1832,  when 
my  mother,  Mrs.  Humpage,  questioned  Mr.  Garlick  on  the  cause  of  his 
unusual  gloom  and  quietness.  He  then  told  us  that  he  had  seen  his 
brother — who  was  at  that  time  at  sea — in  his  bedroom  an  hour  or  two 
before.  My  mother  answered,  '  You  will  be  sure  to  hear  something,  so 
note  the  date.' 

"  Some  months  afterwards  I  remember  that  a  letter  came  for  Mr. 
Garlick,  forwarded  from  his  mother,  announcing  the  death  of  this  brother 
on  that  day,  the  29th  August.  I  heard  of  this,  of  course,  as  soon  as  the 
letter  was  received.  "  L.  Garlick." 

Mr.  Garlick  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination.  In  conversation, 
he  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  the  figure  remained  in  his  sight, 
apparently,  for  about  10  minutes;  but  the  length  of  time,  in  such  circum- 
stances, is  apt  to  be  greatly  exaggerated.  He  has  a  very  vivid  recollection 
of  the  features,  but  cannot  recall  the  dress.  He  infers  from  this  that  the 
dress  was  that  which  his  brother  usually  wore,  as  he  would  certainly  have 
noticed  and  remembered  any  unusual  detail  in  the  costume.  He  was  about 
18  years  old  at  the  time.  The  "  note  "  referred  to  was  a  mental  note  only, 
but  he  is  confident  of  the  accuracy  of  his  memory.  He  showed  Mr.  Pod- 
more  the  entry  of  the  death,  with  the  date,  in  his  family  Bible. 

We  have  not  been  able  to  verify  the  date  of  death,  as  it  has  been 
impossible  to  trace  the  "  Eliza." 

(489)  From  Mrs.  Nind,  Midleton  House,  Westcombe  Park,  Blackheath. 

"May  14th,  1883. 
"  On  a  Good  Friday  morning,  many  years  ago,  I  had  been  awake  early, 

1  See  p.  97,  first  note. 

2  This  word,  as  Mr.  Garlick  has  subsequently  explained,  is  a  slip.  The  hour  of  death 
was  not  mentioned  in  the  letter  which  conveyed  the  news  ;  so  that  no  calculation  could 
establish  a  precise  coincidence. 

454  SUPPLEMENT.      .  [chap. 

and  finding  it  too  soon  to  get  up,  was  lying  in  bed,  not  asleep,  when  a 
figure  stood  by  my  bedside,  in  fact,  my  father-in-law,  an  old  captain  in 
the  Royal  Navy  ;  he  spoke  to  me  a  few  words  ^  and  disappeared.  I  was  so 
startled  that  I  called  my  husband  (since  dead),  who  was  asleep,  and  told 
him  what  was  said.  I  immediately  got  up  and  told  my  mother  and  sister 
[since  deceased],  who  chanced  to  be  staying  with  us.  Now,  what  makes 
this  story  seem  strange  was  that  my  father-in-law  had  died  the  night 
before,  suddenly.  We  did  not  get  the  news  before  the  afternoon  of 
Good  Friday,  as  he  was  residing  at  Bridgnorth,  in  Shropshire,  16  miles 
from  a  railway.  I  saw  him  in  the  early  morning,  I  count  about  8  hours 
after  his  death.  The  case  was  no  dream ;  and  the  fact  of  my  having 
mentioned  it  before  I  heard  of  the  death  of  my  dear  father-in-law  made  a 
strong  impression  on  all  the  family." 

Asked  if  this  was  her  sole  experience  of  a  hallucination  of  the  senses, 
Mrs.  Nind  replied  in  the  afiirmative. 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Commander  Philip  Nind 
died  of  heart  disease  on  March  25,  1853 — which  was  Good  Friday,  not 
the  day  before  it.  Probably  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  morning, 
and  the  coincidence  was  closer  than  Mrs.  Nind  supposed. 

(490)  From  Mr.  Harold  Lafone,  Hanworth  Park,  Middlesex,  a  cousin 

of  the  percipient.  Lady  C g,  who  endorses  the  account. 

"  1884. 

"  About    the  year    1849,  an  apparition  was   seen  by  Lady   C g, 

then  Miss  Gale,  under  the  following  circumstances  : — 

"  She  was  living  at  the  time  in  her  father's  house  at  Grately,  in 
Hampshire.  One  night,  on  awaking  suddenly  from  sleep,  she  saw  the 
figure  of  a  young  man,  apparently  attired  in  his  night  shirt,  standing  at 
the  foot  of  her  bed.  She  was  naturally  much  surprised,  and  inquired  who 
he  was,  and  what  he  wanted  ?     He  replied  that  he  was  the  ghost  of  John 

Dowling,  and  Lady  C g  states  that,  as  he  spoke,  she  distinctly  saw  the 

initials  J.  D.  marked  on  the  edge  of  his  nightgown.  At  this  distance  of 
time  she  will  not  venture  to  give  the  exact  words  of  the  conversation 
between  them,  nor  to  describe  the  exact  appearance  of  the  figure  or  its 
manner  of  departure.  It  disappeared,  however,  immediately  after  reveal- 
ing its  name. 

"  She  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  family  at  breakfast  the  next 
morning,  but  was  inclined  to  regard  it  merely  as  a  strange  and  very  vivid 
dream,  until,  on  driving  the  same  afternoon  to  the  neighbouring  town  of 
Andover,  she  heard  there  for  the  first  time  that  Mr.  John  Dowling,  a 
young  solicitor  of  the  town,  had  died  on  the  previous  night,  as  far  as  she 
could  judge  about  the  time  when  the  apparition  was    seen  by  herself. 

Lady    C g  knew  Mr.   John   Dowling  by   name  and    sight,   and  had 

recognised  the  likeness  of  the  apparition  to  him,  but  she  had  never 
met  or  exchanged  a  word  with  him,  nor  had  she  the  faintest  idea  that  he 
was  ill." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  some 
years  earlier  than  Lady  C g  supposed,  on  Nov.  3,  1845. 

1  The  words  were,  "  Aggy,  there  will  be  a  child  in  the  family  before  this  day  12 
months."  This  event  actually  happened,  rather  unexpectedly  ;  but  the  idea  of  it  may 
probably  have  been  latent  in  the  mind  either  of  Mrs,  Nind  herself  or  of  her  father-in-law. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  455 

[I  have  seen  a  letter,  dated  Dec.  19th,  1873,  from  Lady  C.  to  Mr.  H. 
Lafone,  in  which  she  says  that  her  husband  objects  to  her  signing  the 
account.  She  says,  "It  is  all  true  as  far  as  I  can  remember  at  this 
remote  period,"  but  adds  that  she  has  a  certain  dread  and  dislike  of  the 
subject.] 

(491)  The  following  two  letters  were  written  by  the  late  Mrs.  Clarke, 
wife  of  the  late  Mr.  Thomas  Clarke,  of  Bishopton  Close,  Ripon,  to  her 
stepson,  Mr.  William  Fowler  Stephenson.  He  gave  them  to  his  cousin, 
the  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler,  of  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham,  who  handed 
them  on  to  us.  u  October  1 7th,  1 872. 

"  On  the  morning  of  my  father's  death,  between  4  and  5  o'clock,  I  saw 
a  sort  of  shadowy  light  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  half  arose  to  look  at  it. 
I  distinctly  saw  my  father's  face,  smiling  at  me.^  I  drew  the  curtains 
apart,  and  still  saw  him  looking  fijsedly  at  me.  I  awoke  the  girl  who  was 
sleeping  with  me,  and  asked  her  to  draw  up  the  window  blind.  I  then 
asked  her  if  she  saw  anything.  She  said,  '  Nothing.  It  is  too  dark.'  I 
fancy  I  saw  the  vision  for  fully  five  minutes,  and  then  all  was  dark  again.  ^ 
The  face  was  bound  under  the  chin,  as  usual  in  death,  and  the  cloth  seemed 
stained,  but  not  so  deep  as  iron-mould  quite.  On  looking  at  my  father's 
corpse,  after  returning  to  Hull,  I  told  an  old  friend,  who  was  with  me, 
that  it  was  just  so  he  looked  at  me,  except  that  the  cloth  was  discoloured. 
She  at  once  said  :  '  Then  he  did  come  to  you,  that's  certain,  for  the  cloth 
was  stained,  and  I  changed  it  after  daylight.'  It  was  within  a  few  minutes 
of  his  death  that  I  saw  him,  and  he  was  asking  God  to  bless  me.  He  was 
asking  for  me  continually.  "  M.  C." 

In  reply  to  a  request  of  Mr.  Stephenson's  for  more  particular  informa- 
tion on  certain  points,  Mrs.  Clarke  wrote  : — 

"October  19th,  1872. 

"  I  had  been  in  Harrogate  for  some  weeks,  and  was  confined  to  my 
room  from  a  feverish  cold  ^  which  caused  restless  nights.  It  was  thought 
necessary  for  one  of  the  maids  to  sleep  with  me,  so  I  asked  her  to  draw  up 
the  blinds.  This  was  a  little  after  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  11th  of 
November,  1846.  On  that  same  day,  about  9  o'clock,  by  post,  I  received 
the  enclosed  letter,  being  the  first  intimation  I  had  of  my  father's  illness. 
He  was  taken  ill  on  the  Sunday ;  they  wrote  to  me  on  the  Monday,  and 
he  died  on  Tuesday  morning.  I  was  then  23  years  of  age.  My  sister, 
Christiana,  and  a  woman-servant  attended  to  my  father.  A  faithful  old 
friend,  Mrs.  Dible,  came  as  soon  as  possible  to  do  what  was  necessary  on 
such  occasions,  and  it  was  to  her  that  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen.  She 
explained  that,  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  they  had  used  what  had 
been  the  bottom  of  an  old  blind,  which,  as  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  she 
saw  was  stained,  and  changed  it  herself.  I  can  never  explain  what  I  felt 
on  that  day,  if  it  can  be  called  feeling.  They  said  I  was  like  marble  to 
look  at,  and  like  ice  to  touch." 

The  letter  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Clarke,  announcing  the  illness  of  her 
father,  was  enclosed.     Two  persons  had  written  to  her  on  the  same  sheet — 

1  Cf.  case  315,  where  an  appearance  of  bright  vapour  preceded  the  more  definite 
impression.     The  expression  "  shadowy  light  "  recalls  the  "  bright  shadow  "  of  case  251. 

2  See  p.  459,  note. 

3  See  p.  162,  first  note. 

456  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Mr.  Jubb,  a  friend  of  the  family,  and  her  brother,  Mr.  J.  Rollit,  a  solici- 
tor in  Hull.     Mr.  Jubb's  letter  runs  : — 

"  Hull,  November  10th,  1846. 

"  My  Dear  Matilda, — If  you  wish  to  see  your  dear  father  alive,  you 
must  come  immediately  you  receive  this  ;  he  is  not  likely  to  survive  long. 
— Yours  truly,  "  Wm.  Jubb." 

We  find  from  the  Hull  Advertiser  that  the  death  took  place  on 
Nov.  11,  1846,  as  Mrs.  Clarke  asserts.  She  made  a  mistake  (of  no  im- 
portance) as  to  the  days  of  the  week.  The  11th  was  a  Wednesday,  and 
the  letter  to  her  was  written  on  Tuesday. 

(492)  From  Mrs.  George  G-rant  Gordon,  Milton  of  Kikaroch,   Nairn, 

^•^-^  "  April  17,  1886. 

"  I  am  most  happy  to  accede  to  your  request,  and  send  you  an  account 
of  what  I  experienced  at  the  time  of  my  father's  [Colonel  Sibbald's]  death. 

I  remember  it  as  clearly  as  if  it  happened  only  yesterday.  It  was  early 
on  the  morning  of  the  31st  May,  1857,  while  I  was  lying  perfectly  awake 
in  bed,  that  I  saw  my  father  suddenly  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  I 
recognised  him  immediately  from  his  likenesses.  [He  had  been  for  years 
in  India.]  He  was  dressed  in  regimentals,  stanching  a  wound  in  his 
breast  with  a  pocket-handkerchief.  Two  other  of&cers  in  regimentals 
were  beside  him,  whom  I  did  not  recognise.^  I  did  not  reveal  this  vision, 
or  whatever  it  can  be  called,  for  some  time  to  the  friends  who  had  charge 
of  me  [Dr.  and  Mrs.  McBeth],  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at  [for]  what  they 
always  termed  my  '  fancies ' ;  but  when  they  did  hear  of  it,  they  noted  it 
down. 

"  For  3  months  we  received  no  news  from  India,  owing  to  the  dis- 
turbed state  of  the  country ;  but  when  the  letters  did  arrive,  the  news 
tallied  exactly  with  what  I  had  seen.  It  was  on  that  very  day  my  father 
had  been  shot  twice,  on  his  way  to  the  parade-ground.  On  being  missed, 
two  officers  went  in  search  for  him,  and  found  him  lying  wounded. 

"  E.  T.  Gordon." 

Colonel  and  Brigadier  Hugh  Sibbald,  C.B.,  was  almost  the  first  victim 
of  the  Indian  Mutiny  ;  and  at  the  date  of  his  death  there  had  been  not  the 
slightest  anxiety  on  his  account  in  England.  We  find  from  Allen's  Indian 
Mail  that  the  rising  at  Bareilly,  where  he  was  in  command,  took  place  at 

II  a.m.  on  May  31,  1857,  and  that  he  was  shot  in  the  chest  by  one  of  his 
orderlies,  while  riding  to  the  parade-ground,  and  shortly  afterwards 
dropped  dead  from  his  horse.  Allowing  for  longitude,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  coincidence  was  probably  extremely  close. 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  ever  had  a  hallucination  of 
the  senses  on  any  other  occasion,  and  to  other  inquiries,  Mrs.  Gordon 
writes : — 

"  I  cannot  remember  having  actually  seen  anything  else,  though  I 
have  always  had  strange  presentiments.  The  friends  who  had  charge  of 
me  in  those  days  are  both  dead,  and  they  are  about  the  only  persons  I 

1  This  case  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  who  gave  a 
fairly  correct,  though  fourth-hand,  version  of  it  in  his  article  on  "Apparitions,"  in  the 
Encycloxxedia  Brittanica. 

^  As  to  the  appearance  of  more  than  one  figure,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  545-6. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND''  GASES.  457 

can  remember  who  could  have  known  of  the  vision  before  the  sad 
news  arrived.  I  was  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  date  ;  as  the  previoios  day 
I  had  been  to  a  pic-nic ;  and  that  date  they  all  remembered  being  the 
30th  of  May  [a  Saturday].  It  was  the  following  morning  I  saw  my 
father.  The  first  news  of  the  Mutiny  that  reached  us  must  have  been 
much  later.  I  had  no  reason  whatever  to  feel  the  least  anxious  about  my 
father." 

We  have  received  an  account  which  substantially  agrees  with  the  above 
(but  omits  the  detail  of  the  two  other  officers),  from  Miss  Lang,  of  Hugh- 
enden  Cottage,  High  Wycombe,  Bucks,  to  whom  the  occurrence  was 
described  in  1868,  by  an  aunt  of  Mrs.  Gordon  and  sister  of  Colonel  Sibbald. 

We  cannot  assume  here  that  the  experience  was  in  any  degree  a 
clairvoyant  vision  of  the  scene,  or  that  the  two  strangers  who  appeared 
were  anything  more  than  a  subjective  addition  of  the  percipient's. 
For  there  is  nothing  in  the  contemporary  account  to  suggest  that 
Colonel  Sibbald  was  not  riding  alone  ;  and  if  he  dropped  from  his 
horse,  as  described,  he  must  have  been  lying  dead,  not  merely 
wounded,  when  others  approached. 

(493)  From  Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  14,  Windsor  Terrace,  Kingstown,  Ireland. 

"January  22nd,  1884. 

"  More  than  25  years  have  elapsed  since  the  memorable  event 
occurred,  which  stands  out  as  a  landmark  in  my  memory.  My  husband, 
David  Fitzgerald,  and  myself  were  later  than  usual  in  retiring  to  rest  on 
the  night  in  question.  After  leaving  my  dressing-room,  in  getting  into 
bed,  I  found  my  husband  firm  asleep,  so  crept  in  quietly.  It  was  then 
near  12  o'clock.  I  did  not  sleep  for  some  time.  Between  that  and  3 
o'clock  my  husband  awoke  me,  saying,  '  Sarah,  stop  Fred,  don't  let  him 
go.'  I  immediately  got  up,  went  round  to  the  door  of  the  dressing-room 
to  close  it,  as  I  firmly  believed  there  was  someone  in  the  room,  but  found 
it  closed.  On  lighting  the  candles,  my  husband  was  sitting  up  in  the  bed 
greatly  disturbed,  saying,  '  Did  you  not  see  Fred  1 '  In  order  to  make 
light  of  the  matter  I  said  '  It  was  only  a  dream.'  He  looked  at  me,  not 
as  if  he  were  convinced  with  what  I  said.  Next  day  I  drove  to  town,  to 
know  what  time  Fred  last  wrote  to  his  brother,  never  saying  a  word  of 
what  had  occurred  the  night  before.  Time  passed  ;  on  the  arrival  of  the 
news  of  the  death  of  poor  Fred  I  was  so  thrown  off  my  usual  discretion 
that  I  exclaimed  to  his  brother  William,  '  Oh,  I  know  when  he  died,  for 
he  was  with  his  father  that  night.'  "S.  M.  Fitzgerald." 

Mrs.  McKern,  of  53,  George  Street,  Limerick,  writes  as  follows : — 

"January,  1884. 

"  About  25  years  ago,  David  Fitzgerald,  Land  Agent,  of  Limerick  (my 
grandfather),  at  that  time  between  65  and  70  years  of  age,  was  residing 
at  Richmond,  his  private  dwelling,  about  half-a-mile  outside  the  city. 
The  other  occupants  of  the  house  were  his  second  wife,  Sarah  Fitzgerald, 
and    his    step  daughter,    Mary  Hunt.^     He  had,  besides,  many  sons  and 

1  Since  married  to  a  Mr.  French,  R.M. ;  but  we  learn  from  Mr.  McKern  that  she  was 
away  at  school  at  the  time. 

458  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

daughters,  the  youngest  of  the  former  having  gone  to  Australia.  One 
night  (hour  not  known  to  narrator)  he  was  awakened  from  sleep  by  the 
howling  in  front  of  the  house  of  a  favourite  dog — spaniel  or  retriever — of 
the  absent  son,  Frederick.  (Note,  in  Ireland,  the  howling  of  a  dog  is 
looked  upon  as  a  sure  sign  of  death  in  the  immediate  locality.)  He  awoke 
his  sleeping  partner,  and  said,  '  I  am  sure  there  is  something  wrong  with 
Freddy  ;  do  you  not  hear  the  way  the  dog  is  howling  ? '  She  endeavoured 
to  soothe  the  old  man,  and  went  to  sleep  again,  when  she  was  again  awoke 
by  him  in  a  sudden,  not  to  say  violent,  manner.  He  was  in  a  highly 
excited  state,  exclaiming,  '  I  saw  Freddy  !  I  saw  Freddy  !  He  stood  at 
the  bottom  of  the  bed,  with  the  curtains  drawn  aside,  and  looked  at  me.' 
The  next  morning  a  note  was  made  of  the  occurrence,  and  the  following 
mail  from  Australia  brought  news  of  the  lad's  death,  which  the  narrator 
believes  to  have  corresponded  with  the  father's  vision. 

"S.  E.  McKeen." 
In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  McKern  adds  : — 

"  I  could  not  possibly  recollect  from  whom  I  first  heard  of  the 
occurrence,  as  I  was  very  young  at  the  time ;  but  I  have  often  heard  it 
spoken  of  by  different  members  of  the  family.  I  do  not  remember  having 
had  any  conversation  on  the  subject  with  Mrs.  Fitzgerald." 

[The  incident  of  the  dog's  howling  seems  not  unlikely  to  have  been 
imported  into  the  story ;  and  it  will  be  observed  that  neither  it,  nor  the 
dramatic  repetition  of  the  experience,  occurs  in  the  more  authentic 
account.  We  do  not  know  that  the  coincidence  of  day  was  anything 
more   than  a  conjecture.] 

(494)  From  Mr.  H.  Atkins,  Office-keeper  at  the  Royal  Marine  Office, 
40,  Spring  Gardens,  S.W.  (originally  published,  with  a  nom  de  plume,  in 
the  Daily  Telegraph,  for  October  20,  1881). 

"  In  the  year  1849,  I  was  serving  in  H.M.S.  '  Geyser,'  on  the  east  coast 
of  Africa,  and  in  company  with  H.M.S.  '  Brilliant,'  anchored  in  Tamatave 
Roads,  Madagascar.  The  following  facts  I  can  vouch  for.  Some  of  our 
officers  were  dining  on  board  the  '  Brilliant.'  A  boat's  crew  were  ordered 
to  be  ready  at  six  bells  (11  p.m.)  to  fetch  them  on  board.  The  lights  were 
out  on  the  lower  deck,  and  everything  quiet.  A  messmate  (T.  Parker)  and 
I,  belonging  to  the  boat,  were  sitting  in  the  mess,  abreast  of  the  cook's 
galley,  and  opposite  each  other,  he  with  his  arms  on  the  table,  and  face 
resting  on  them,  and,  as  I  thought,  fast  asleep — when  all  at  once  he 
jumped  to  his  feet,  declaring  that  he  saw  his  mother  cross  the  deck  in 
front  of  the  galley,  and  was  very  much  excited.  I  pointed  out  to  him 
that  it  was  quite  impossible,  as  his  face  was  towards  the  table,  at  the  same 
time  laughing  heartily  at  him  for  being  so  foolish.  Our  schoolmaster,  Mr. 
T.  Salsbury,  was  lying  awake  in  his  hammock  close  by,  and  in  the  morning 
he  made  a  note  of  the  circumstances,  putting  down  time  and  date.  On 
our  arrival  at  the  Isle  of  France,  some  time  after,  Parker  received  a  letter 
from  home,  stating  that  his  mother  died  that  very  night.  I  am  no  believer 
in  ghosts,  but  think  this  a  very  remarkable  coincidence." 

Mr.  Atkins,  from  whom  we  first  heard  on  February  12th,  1884,  has 
added  the  following  additional  information  : — 

"It  is  quite  possible  that  Parker  may  have  raised  his  head  from  the 

IV.]  '^  BORDERLAND"  CASES.  459 

table,  in  which  case  he  would  have  a  clear  view  of  the  spot  over  which  the 
apparition  was  said  to  walk.  It  was  very  dark,  and  a  real  person  walking 
in  the  same  place  would  have  been  unrecognisable.  ^  There  was  not  the 
slightest  doubt,  apparently,  in  Parker's  mind  ;  for  he  did  not  examine  the 
figure,  but  called  instantly  that  he  saw  his  mother,  and  then  commenced 
sobbing  and  crying.  These  sounds  drew  the  attention  of  Mr.  Salsbury, 
the  schoolmaster,  and  caused  him  to  note  the  time  of  the  circumstance. 
For  the  three  or  four  months  that  elapsed  before  the  Isle  of  France  was 
reached,  Parker  '  moped  about,'  and  would  not  be  cheered.  In  comparing 
the  date  of  the  death  with  that  of  the  apparition,  allowance  was  made  for 
the  difference  in  time,  and  the  two  events  were  found  to  exactly  corre- 
spond by  the  schoolmaster." 

[It  would  be  a  quite  impossible  task,  Mr.  Atkins  says,  to  hunt  up  any 
of  his  old  shipmates,  but  if  he  should  meet  with  anyone  who  can  corrobo- 
rate his  account,  he  has  promised  to  communicate  with  us.  The  school- 
master and  Parker  are  dead.] 

(495)  From  Mr.  George  Waddington,  of  26,  Bagdale,  Whitby,  men- 
tioned above  (p.  366). 

"Passing  the  night  at  an  inn  in  Nevada  City,  California,  I  dreamt,  or 
awoke,  by  the  door  of  room  where  I  was  sleeping  being  opened,  and  the 
figure  of  my  great-aunt,  Mrs.  Beaumont,  of  Wetherby,  Yorkshire,  observed 
standing  in  what  was  her  usual  dress,  as  worn  in  1842,  and  heard  to  say, 
'  George,  George.'  A  note  was  made  at  the  time,  the  date  being  the  28th 
July,  1851.     She  died  early  that  morning. 

"  She  had  the  night  before  been  the  subject  of  my  thought,  on  travelling 
late  in  the  dense  darkness  of  the  forest.  "  G.  W.  Waddington." 

We  find  the  date  of  death  confirmed  by  the  Leeds  Mercury. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Waddington  says  that  he  had  last  seen  his 
aunt  in  February,  1842  ;  and  that  the  dress  of  the  apparition  was  "out- 
door walking  costume,  the  bonnet  being  a  prominent  part  of  it."  He 
adds  : — "  The  note  was  made  on  the  back  of  a  letter,  and  used  for  reference 
when  the  news  arrived ;  but  this  was  not  kept." 

The  letter  announcing  the  death  is  missing ;  but  at  our  request 
Mr.  Waddington  applied  to  his  mother,  and  she  informed  him  that 
she  arrived  at  Wetherby,  in  response  to  a  summons,  at  2  p.m.  on 
July  28th,  and  found  that  Mrs.  Beaumont  had  died  at  noon,  which 
would  be  4  a.m.  in  California.  Mr.  Waddington's  experience  took  place, 
he  tells  us,  "  about  dawn  " ;  and  the  coincidence  was  thus  probably  very 
close,  though  he  himself,  through  not  allowing  for  longitude,  had  imagined 
that  there  was  an  interval  of  about  8  hours.  He  adds  that  the  halluci- 
nation is  unique  in  his  experience. 

[This  is  a  case  in  which  it  seems  probable  that  the  percipient  projected 
the  image  in  the  dress  which  had  remained  associated  in  his  mind  with 
the  original.     See  Yol.  I.,  p.  546.] 

(496)  From  the  late  Mr,  G.  Wadsworth,  Aston,  Birmingham. 

"October  21st,  1882. 

"  About  30  years  since,  I  became  acquainted  with  a  young  lady  residing 

1 1  have  mentioned  (Vol.  i.,  p.  551)  that  visual  phantasms  of  both  the  subjective  and 
the  telepathic  class  are  often  more  clearly  seen  than  a  real  figure  could  have  been  in  the 
same  circumstances.     Compare  case  250,  and  the  note  thereon  (p.  72). 

460  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

at  Shrewsbury.  This  friendship  continued  for  many  years,  although  for 
a  long  time  we  saw  each  other  but  rarely,  her  health  gradually  failing. 
One  morning  early  I  was  startled  by  hearing  the  stairfoot  door  open,  and 
Maria  called  me  distinctly  twice,  '  George,  George  ! '  So  plain  was  this 
that  I  at  once  answered,  '  Yes,  Maria,  what  is  it  ? '  and  went  down  to  the 
sitting-room  to  her,  only  to  find  the  whole  a  dream  or  an  illusion.  Next 
day  I  received  a  letter  informing  me  of  her  death  that  morning. 

"  G.  Wadsworth." 
[Mr.  Wadsworth's  death,  which  took  place  soon  after  this  account  was 
written,  has  prevented  us  from  obtaining  further  information.] 

(497)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton  Abbot.       «<  1882 
"Early   in   the  year  1857 — I  think  in  the  month  of  April — I  was 

awakened  one  morning  by  my  sister  (whom  I  supposed  to  be  some 
hundreds  of  miles  away)  sorrowfully  saying,  '  Oh,  Sally,  Sally  ! '  Thinking 
she  must  have  arrived  unexpectedly  by  dak,  and  had  met  with  some  great 
trouble  on  her  journey,  I  turned  and  spoke  to  her,  but  she  was  gone. 
Rousing  my  husband,  I  asked  him  to  go  and  see  what  was  the  matter,  but 
she  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  That  morning,  at  that  hour,  my  sister 
received  the  news  of  the  sudden  death  of  her  eldest  boy  at  school,  and  she 
wrote  and  told  me  that  her  first  words  were,  '  Oh  !  Sally,  Sally,  wishing 
you  were  here !  '  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having  heard  the  voice  of 
any  other  one,  not  actually  present — certainly  never  before  this. 

"Sarah  H.  Fagan." 
We  find  from  a  notice  in  Allen's  Indian  Mail  that  the  death  occurred 
on  April  18,  1857.     The  sister's  letter  is  unfortunately  lost ;  and  she  can- 
not trust  her  memory  sufiiciently  to  corroborate  the  account. 

The  next  case  is  an  interesting  example  of  death-imagery, 
occurring  in  what  is  represented  as  a  waking  experience  (Vol.  I., 
pp.  539,  547 ;  and  compare  case  404). 

(498)  From  Mrs.  Chermside,  Regia  House,  Teignmouth. 

"  August,  1884. 

"  E.  B.  was  engaged  to  be  married  to  H.  A.  D.  He  was  a  surgeon  in 
the  army.  Want  of  means  on  both  sides  delayed  the  marriage,  and  he 
suddenly  came  to  her  one  day  to  say  '  good-bye,'  as  he  was  ordered  to  take 
troops  to  Canada.  He  sailed,  and  she  heard  of  his  safe  arrival.  He  spoke 
of  his  return  in  the  following  spring.  One  night,  being  28th  December, 
she  saw  him  enter  her  room  about  midnight.  A  light  seemed  to  shine 
about  him;i  but  he  was  clothed  completely  in  grave  clothes.  She  sat 
up  in  bed  and  said,  'Oh !  H.,  why  are  you  so  strangely  dressed  ? '  He  said, 
'Do  not  laugh;  this  is  my  new  uniform.' ^     He  then  departed  as  he  came. 

"  She  lay  trembling  all  night,  and  weeping  sadly.  Next  morning  she 
refrained  from  telling  her  family,  as  they  were  opposed  to  her  marriage ; 
she,  however,  unburdened  herself  to  me.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  it  was 
only  a  silly  dream ;  however,  the  idea  that  her  lover  was  dead  was  most 
firmly  fixed  in  her  mind.     A  month  after,   she  received  the  news  of  his 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1. 

2  Compare  cases  547,  568,  639,  654.  The  complex  form  of  hallucination  in  which 
there  is  an  interchange  of  remarks  with  the  phantasmal  figure  occurs  equally  in  purely 
subjective  cases.     See  Vol.  i.,  p.  476,  and  compare  p.  588  below. 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND''  CASES.  461 

death  on  that  very  night,  and  that  the  last  word  he  uttered  was  her  name. 
The  whole  thing  took  such  possession  of  her  that  she  slowly  faded  away, 
and  died  about  two  years  afterwards." 

The  following  addition  is  from  the  notes  taken  by  Professor  Sidgwick 
during  two  interviews  with  Mrs.  Chermside  in  September,  1884  : — 

The  occurrence  was  in  the  winter  of  1845.  It  was  on  the  next 
morning  that  E.  B.  told  Mrs.  Chermside  of  the  appearance.  She  (E.  B.) 
was  quite  sure  that  it  was  not  a  dream  ;  and  had  no  doubt  that  her  fiance 
was  dead.  She  heard  the  details  of  his  death  within  a  month  or  so — as 
soon  as  letters  then  came  from  Canada — from  one  of  his  brother  officers, 
and  also  from  his  sisters  ;  and  then  wrote  to  tell  Mrs.  Chermside  that  he 
had  died  the  night  that  she  saw  the  apparition. 

[We  have  exhausted  every  means  open  to  us  to  discover  an  official  or 
newspaper  record  of  the  death  in  this  case.  We  do  not  know  how  to 
explain  this  failure ;  as  Mrs.  Chermside  is  certain  that  she  has  given 
us  Mr.  D.'s  name  correctly,  and  she  can  hardly  have  been  mistaken 
as  to  his  profession.  Possibly  he  had  not  an  official  connection  with 
the  army.] 

§  2.  The  next  group  of  cases  are  more  recent ;  but  some  of  them 
lack  corroboration ;  and  some  are  weakened,  as  evidence  for  telepathy, 
by  the  fact  that  the  percipient  was  in  more  or  less  anxiety  as  to  the 
condition  of  the  absent  person,  or  by  an  absence  of  definiteness  in  the 
coincidence. 

(499)  From  the  Rev.  W.  B.  Lindesay,  LL.D.,  The  Abbey,  Tipperary. 

"  August  30th,  1884. 

"In  1877  I  was  living  in  Dublin,  and  very  anxious  about  my  father, 
who  was  dangerously  ill  with  congested  lungs,  in  Wales. 

"  Awaking  suddenly  one  night  I  distinctly  saw  him  sitting  on  a  chair 
near  me,  with  his  face  covered  by  his  hands.  When  I  jumped  out  of 
bed  he  vanished.  So  startled  was  I  that,  next  day,  I  crossed  to  Wales, 
and  found  that  he  had  been  delirious  for  two  days. 

"  When  I  entered  his  room  he  at  once  said  he  had  gone  the  day  before 
to  tell  me  where  he  had  left  a  top-coat  that  I  knew  he  had  lost  some 
time  previous  to  his  illness.  I  went  to  the  house  he  named  in  Dublin, 
and  found  the  coat  there.  "  W.  B.  Lindesay." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lindesay  says  : — 

"  So  far  as  I  can  remember,  my  father  was  still  delii'ious  at  the  time 
he  said  he  had  gone  to  see  me. 

"  I  told  no  one  of  the  experience  at  the  time,  for  I  was  living  by 
myself.  I  have  never,  that  I  can  recollect,  had  any  other  experience  of 
the  kind,  and  am  not  subject  to  any  '  hallucination  of  the  senses.' 

"  I  am  bound  in  fairness  to  tell  you  that  I  am  an  entire  disbeliever  in 
the  supernaturalness  of  such  experiences.  This  infidelity  may  be  due  to 
my  never  having  heard  of  any  such  experiences  which  could  not  be 
explained  on  the  coincidence  principle." 

[Mr.  Lindesay  is  of  course  right  in  his  disbelief  of  the  "  super- 
naturalness"    of    such  phenomena;  but  it  has  not  struck  him  that  the 

462  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

alternative  to  supposing  them  supernatural  is  not  necessarily  to  suppose 
them  accidental.  His  concluding  comment  reproduces  the  remarks  of  Lord 
Brougham,  as  to  which  see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  396-7.  I  need  hardly  point  out  again 
that  every  isolated  case  of  coincidence  might  be  accidental,  and  that  the 
argument  for  telepathy  is  essentially  cumulative.  This  case  may  perhaps 
have  been  reciprocal ;  but  we  clearly  have  no  proof  that  the  father's  expe- 
rience was  anything  more  than  a  purely  subjective  impression  or  dream.] 

(500)  From  a  lady  occupying  a  responsible  position,  which  obliges  her, 
out  of  regard  to  others,  to  withhold  her  name  from  publication.  Her 
viva  voce  account,  given  to  me  in  the  room  where  the  experience  occurred, 
made  it  almost  certain  that  she  was  in  a  state  of  normal  wakefulness  at 
the  time  ;  still,  as  she  had  been  in  bed  for  some  little  time,  I  have  placed 
the  case  in  this  chapter  rather  than  the  next.  '<  ]yfay  2nd,  1886. 

"On  the  night  of  the  18th  December,  1872,  I  had  retired  to  bed  about 
11  o'clock.  The  bed,  I  may  mention,  is  so  placed  that  any  person  entering 
the  room,  must  pass  quite  round  it  before  reaching  the  side  on  which  I  lay. 
I  had  perhaps  been  in  bed  20  minutes,  and  had  been  thinking  over  the 
events  of  the  evening,  a  pupils'  concert,  when  suddenly  I  saw  my  husband 
by  the  door  ;  he  moved  swiftly  round  the  bed  till  he  came  close  to  me, 
when  he  as  suddenly  disappeared.  So  astonished  was  T,  that  involuntarily 
I  called  him  by  name.  The  gas  was  alight,  as  usual,  in  the  room  ;  and  as 
I  knew  that  I  had  not  been  asleep,  and  had  not  heard  a  sound  to  alarm 
me,  I  had  not  a  doubt,  any  more  than  I  have  at  this  moment,  that  the 
vision  was  that  of  my  absent  husband.  On  the  30th  December  of  the 
same  year,  I  received  a  letter  by  the  Australian  mail,  from  a  gentleman, 
telling  me  that  my  husband  had  met  with  a  serious  accident,  and  on  the 
4th  of  March  in  the  following  year,  I  had  a  letter  from  the  same  friend, 
informing  me  of  his  death,  and  stating  that  it  took  place  on  the  18th 
December,   1872. 

"  I  had  spoken  of  the  incident  of  the  night  of  the  18th  to  my  children 
as  a  dream,  but  to  two  ladies  I  related  the  fact  as  it  occurred  ;  it  was  then 
a  week  afterwards,  ^  and  when  they  knew  that  my  husband  was  dead,  each 
lady,  though  neither  knew  the  other,  reminded  me  of  the  incident,  and 
told  me  the  relation  of  it  had  strangely  impressed  her." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  the  obituary  of  the  Daily 
Telegraph. 

In  conversation,  the  narrator  informed  me  that  she  has  never  had  any 
other  visual  hallucination.  She  described  her  experience  to  her  children, 
at  breakfast  next  morning,  as  a  dream,  in  order  not  to  alarm  them.  She 
herself  felt  no  alarm  or  apprehension  whatever.  Of  the  two  friends  whom 
she  mentions,  one  has  recently  died,  and  she  has  lost  sight  of  the  other. 
Her  husband  had  been  an  invalid  for  years,  and  as  far  as  she  knew  was  as 
well  as  usual. 

The  narrator's  daughter  writes,  on  May  13,  1886  : — 

"  I  have  searched  everywhere  I  can  think  of,  but  without  success,  in 
finding  the  programme  of  the  Pupils'  Concert ;  but  my  sister  and  self  both 
agreed  as  to  being  .swre  the  day  was  Dec.  18,  1872,  and  we  believe  it  fell  on 
a  Wednesday.     [Dec.  18  was  a  Wednesday.]     We  also  remember  perfectly 

1  This  refers  to  the  mention  of  the  matter  to  the  second  friend  ;  to  the  other  the  expe- 
rience was  described  (the  narrator  informs  me)  on  the  day  following  its  occurrence. 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  463 

our  mother  relating  the  next  day  what  she  called  a  strange  dream  she  had 
had  the  night  previously  ;  and  have  frequently  since  heard  her  speak  of 
the  same  as  a  vision." 

[The  Australian  letter,  which  the  narrator  has  preserved,  states  that 
the  hour  of  the  death  was  about  4.30  p.m.,  which  would  correspond  with 
about  6.30  a.m.  in  England.  If,  therefore,  the  vision  occurred  on  the 
night  of  that  day,  it  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12  hours.  But  the 
narrator  (without  my  having  suggested  this  point)  wrote,  on  May  14,  1886, 
to  say  that  a  daughter,  who  slept  with  her  on  the  night  of  the  vision,  re- 
minds her  that  on  concert  nights  they  always  sat  up  late,  and  that  pro- 
bably they  did  not  go  upstairs  till  nearly  2.  Now  this  fact  would  very 
probably  be  in  the  percipient's  memory  at  the  time  that  the  news  of  the 
death  arrived,  and  its  connection  with  the  vision  was  surmised ;  and  as 
she  is  very  positive  that  the  dates  coincided,  it  seems  at  any  rate  possible 
that  the  concert  was,  after  all,  on  the  17th,  and  that  her  vision  took  place 
at  2.30  a.m.  on  the  18th.  As  against  this  hypothesis,  however,  I  should 
mention  a  recollection  which  she  has  that,  when  talking  over  the  matter 
with  one  of  the  friends  mentioned,  she  remarked  on  an  apparent  dis- 
crepancy of  hours,  and  the  friend  (she  believes)  pointed  out  that,  longi- 
tude being  allowed  for,  the  hours  agreed  ;  which  is  just  what  would  seem 
to  be  the  case  if  the  vision  was  at  2.30  a.m.  on  the  19th,  and  the  10  hours' 
difference  of  time  was  reckoned  (as  so  often  happens)  the  wrong  way.  It 
is  worth  noting  that  even  supposing  our  arbitrary  1 2  hours'  limit  to  have 
been  exceeded,  the  vision  still  fell  at  what  was  probably  the  first  season  of 
silence  and  recueillement  that  had  presented  itself  since  the  hour  when  the 
death  occurred.     See  Yol.  I.,  pp.  201,  329.] 

(501)  From  the  Rev.  H.  N.  B.  and  his  sister-in-law.  Miss  Fagg.  The 
percipient,  Mrs.  B.,  is  out  of  health,  and  must  not  be  troubled  for  an 
account.     The  following  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  B.  to  his  daughter : — 

"December  5th,  1883. 

"  I  was  at  Langtoft,  but  E.  (i.e.,  Mrs.  B.)  and  Miss  Fagg  had  returned 
with  Ernie  to  Deal,  as  he  was  ordered  to  go  to  the  sea.  There  were  two  rooms 
at  Deal  intercommunicating,  the  inner  being  only  approached  through  the 
first  room.  In  the  inner  room  the  nurse  (Alice)  and  the  baby  were  sleep- 
ing ;  in  the  outer  one,  E.j  Miss  Fagg  was  sleeping  downstairs.  The  bed 
was  curtained.  In  the  night  E.  was  awoke  by,  as  she  thought,  the  nurse 
standing  by  her  bed.  Half  asleep,  without  moving,  she  said,  '  What  is  it, 
Alice  1 '  but  there  was  no  answer.  She  said  again,  '  What  is  it  1  is  there 
anything  the  matter  with  baby  *? '  Still  there  was  no  answer.  She  then 
roused  herself,  and  saying  sharply,  '  Why  do  you  not  speak,  Alice  ? '  she 
put  back  the'  curtain,  and  saw  your  aunt  standing  there.  She  was 
so  terrified  that  she  jumped  out  of  bed  and  ran  straight  down,  as  she 
was,  to  Nelly  [Miss  Fagg].  The  next  day  I,  at  Langtoft,  had  a  letter 
saying  your  aunt  had  died  very  unexpectedly,  at  Broxbourne.  We  did 
not  know  she  was  seriously  ill,  as  she  had  gone  to  Broxbourne  on  a  visit. 
I  could  not  identify  the  time ;  but,  as  far  as  I  could  make  out,  the  (sup- 
posed) appearance  took  place  some  hours  after  your  aunt's  death." 

Miss  Fagg  writes,  from  Ripple  Rectory,  Deal,  on  Aug.  28,  1884  : — 

"  One  night,  about  2  o'clock,  I  believe,  my  sister,  Mrs.  B.,  came  into 
my  room  saying  she  had  seen  Miss  Grace  B.,  and  she  was  sure  something 

464  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

had  happened.  She  told  me  she  saw  someone  in  her  room,  and  thought  it 
was  the  nurse  come  about  the  baby.  The  figure  was  turned  towards  the 
window  where  the  food  was  kept ;  and  had  on  a  grey  waterproof  like  the 
nurse.  My  sister  spoke  to  the  figure,  and  said,  '  Why  are  you  getting  the 
food  so  soon  1  '  My  sister  was  not  then  frightened,  as  she  quite  thought 
it  was  the  nurse.  But  the  figure  then  turned  round,  and  it  was  the  face 
of  Miss  Grace  B.,  looking  full  at  my  sister,  but  a  dead  face,  with  a  some- 
thing white  round  the  head,  but  curls  just  like  Miss  Grace  B.  used  to  wear. 
My  sister  after  that  came  down  to  me,  and  I  went  into  her  room,  but 
nothing  more  was  seen.  After  that  we  heard  that  Miss  Grace  B.  was 
dead.  "Ellen  E.  Fagg." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Fagg  adds  : — 

"The  date  of  Miss  Grace  B.'s  death  was  August  3rd,  1868;  the  time, 
I  think,  between  5  to  6  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  1  fancy  she  must  have, 
as  it  seemed,  appeared  to  my  sister  the  same  night  after  she  was  dead. 
We  knew  Miss  Grace  B.  was  ailing ;  she  was,  in  fact,  on  a  visit  at  the 
time  of  her  death  ;  but  there  was  no  thought  of  her  dying.  My  sister  had 
had  no  communication  with  her  previously.  I  am  nearly  sure  that  Miss  B. 
must  have  appeared  to  my  sister  the  same  night  that  she  died. 

"  My  sister  always  has  seemed  to  know  things  difierent  to  other  people. 
She  seems  to  know  when  any  one  has  died  in  any  room.  She  seems 
either  to  feel,  hear,  or  see  the  people.  On  one  occasion  we  lived  in  an  old 
house  in  Eastry,  near  here,  and  she  saw,  as  it  seemed,  an  old  woman 
looking  at  her.  The  next  morning  when  she  described  it  to  our  cook 
who  had  been  taking  care  of  the  house  before  we  went  into  it,  she  said, 
'  Yes,  that  old  woman  once  lived  here.'  "  [This,  of  course,  may  have  been 
a  purely  subjective  hallucination.] 

P.S.  by  the  Bev.  H.  N.  B. — "There  is  no  doubt  that  the  appearance 
(so-called)  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  day  on  the  afternoon  of  which 
Miss  G.  B.  died." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  the  death  by  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

[This  is  apparently  a  case  of  delayed  recognition,  similar  to  those  given 
in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3.] 

The  next  account  belongs  to  the  interesting  class  which  suggests 
a  peculiar  susceptibility  in  certain  persons  to  spontaneous  telepathic 
impressions.  (See  p.  77,  and  cases  513,  514,  515,  below.)  One  of  the 
three  experiences  recorded  was  a  dream,  but  I  give  it  here  in  order 
not  to  break  up  the  series. 

(502)  From  Mrs.  W.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  published. 

"Oxford,  1884. 

(A)  "In  1874  I  was  in  England,  ill  in  bed  ;  and  I  distinctly  saw  my 
dear  mother,  who  was  at  that  time  at  Nice,  come  up  to  the  foot  of  my  bed, 
and  look  earnestly  and  sorrowfully  at  me ;  it  was  broad  daylight,  and  I 
noticed  the  shawl  she  wore,  one  I  had  not  seen  her  wear  for  many  years.i 
I  started  up,  and  she  was  gone.^  I  then  knew  that  her  last  illness  must 
have  come,  though  I  was  kept  in  ignorance  of  it,  as  I  was  so  dangerously 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  540. 

2  See  p.  91,  second  note. 

IV.]  '' BORDERLAND"  CASES.  465 

ill  myself.  I  wrote  to  her,  and  her  answer  told  me  what  I  dreaded  was 
true.  I  was  allowed  to  recover  sufficiently  to  go  out  to  Nice,  and  be  with 
her  to  the  end.  Also,  I  ought  to  say,  that  the  morning  her  dear  image 
appeared  to  me,  a  doctor  arrived  from  London  whom  she  had  sent  to  me  by 
telegraphing  to  him  from  Nice,  and  this  doctor  was  the  means  of  saving  my 
life,  as  I  was  at  that  time  so  ill  that  he  said  I  could  not  have  lived  more 
than  four  hours  longer. 

(B)  "When  I  was  in  the  South  of  France,  in  1878,  I  had  a  dream 
that  a  sister,  who  is  especially  dear  to  me,  was  in  a  carriage  accident,  and 
in  my  dream  I  saw  her  killed,  but  on  reaching  her  I  found  her  unhurt  and 
as  she  smiled  at  me  I  dreamed  I  was  dying  of  the  agony  of  mind  I  had 
gone  through.  I  never  can  forget  the  dream,  the  suffering  was  so  intense. 
I  awoke  with  pain  in  my  heart  and  faintness,  and  woke  my  husband  and 
told  him.  (I  think  my  cries  in  my  sleep  awoke  him.)  I  wrote  to  my 
sister,  and  when  her  answer  arrived  she  gave  me  in  it  the  account  of  the 
danger  she  had  passed  through. 

(C)  "  One  night  I  was  awakened  out  of  my  sound  sleep  by  a  voice 
close  to  my  ear,  saying,  '  Rise,  you  have  no  time  to  lose,'  and  words  to 
the  effect  that  the  child  ^  of  this  very  dear  sister  was  dying,  and  that  she 
needed  my  prayers.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  words,  but  I  felt  it  was 
conveyed  to  me  that  /  had  to  help  her  with  all  the  earnestness  I  could, 
and  there  was  an  awe  about  it  I  cannot  describe.  Afterwards  I  found 
that  at  this  very  time  on  that  night  her  most  beloved  child  had  passed 
through  the  crisis  in  diphtheria. 

"  Nothing  of  importance  ever  happened  to  any  one  very  dear  to  me 
without  my  feeling  it,  though  I  may  be  far  from  them.        "  C.  M.  W." 

Replying  to  our  inquiries,  Mrs.  W.'s  daughter,  Miss  E.  M.  W.,  writes 
(on  Jan.  23,  1885),  in  reference  to  (A),  that  her  mother  "  does  not  know 
anything  about  the  shawl  forming  part  of  my  grandmother's  dress  at  the 
time  she  saw  the  apparition."  She  has  had  no  other  hallucinations  ;  and 
she  had  no  reason  to  suspect  her  mother's  illness.  Miss  W.'s  own 
testimony  is  as  follows  : — 

"I  clearly  remember,  in  1874,  my  mother  in  her  dangerous  illness 
seeing  my  dear  grandmother  come  up  to  the  foot  of  the  bed.  My  mother 
has  often  told  me  since  that  her  mother  was  wearing  a  certain  crimson 
shawl  she  was  very  fond  of,  that  her  spectacles  had  dropped,  and  she 
looked  over  them  at  my  mother,  with  sad  inquiring  eyes.  My  mother 
gazed  at  her  for  a  minute,  and  then  cried  out  when  the  apparition 
vanished  ;  and  when  the  nurse  came  in,  having  heard  her  cry,  my  mother 
insisted  on  being  told  the  truth  about  her  mother ;  for  she  said  she  knew 
that  she  had  come  to  tell  her  she  was  dying,  which  was  indeed  the  fact, 
though  she  lived  long  enough  to  enable  my  mother  to  see  her  before  she 
died." 

In  reference  to  (B)  and  (C),  Mrs.  W.'s  sister  writes  : — 

"  On  one  occasion  I  received  an  anxious  letter  from  my  sister  inquir- 
ing if  anything  had  happened  to  me,  as  she  had  dreamed  of  a  serious 
carriage-accident  in  which  I  was  in  danger.  This  letter  was  received  by 
me  before  I  had  informed  her  of  the  danger  in  which  I  had  been  placed, 

1  This  slightly  differs  from  the  version  given  at  the  top  of  the  next  page,  where 
there  is  no  mention  of  the  special  person  who  was  in  need. 

VOL.    II.  2   H 

466  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

and  the  serious  consequences  which  }nercifully  were  averted  by  the  presence 
of  mind  of  my  coachman. 

"  On  another  occasion  my  sister  was  awakened  by  a  voice  which  said 
distinctly,  '  Rise  at  once.  You  have  no  time  to  lose.  One  you  love  is  in 
sore  need.'  She  did  rise  from  her  bed  to  pray  for  me,  and  afterwards 
knew  that  my  child  had  passed  through  the  crisis  of  diphtheria  at  that 
very  time,  and  that  her  life  was  in  imminent  danger.  "  Bessie  S." 

Miss  E.  M.  W.  writes  :— 

"  I  perfectly  remember  both  these  dreams  of  my  mother's,  as  she 
related  them  to  me  before  receiving  the  answers  to  her  letters  to  my  aunt." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : — 

"January  23rd,  1885. 

"Mother  is  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  of  accidents,  and  as  far  as  she 
can  remember  it  was  the  only  time  she  has  ever  dreamt  of  an  accident. 
The  carriage  did  not  upset.  The  facts  are  as  follows : — My  aunt  has  a 
very  light  cab  built  by  my  uncle  especially  for  her,  and  on  one  occasion  my 
aunt  was  driving  along  a  narrow  road,  when  her  coachman  whipped  up 
the  horses,  and  began  driving  at  a  furious  pace.  My  aunt,  alarmed,  looked 
through  the  little  window  at  the  back  of  the  carriage,  and  saw  a  great 
dray  with  a  runaway  horse  tearing  after  the  carriage.  Just  as  it  must 
have  run  into  it  and  smashed  it,  the  coachman  turned  the  cab  into  an 
opening  in  the  road.  It  was  the  only  place  in  the  road  where  the  cab 
could  have  stopped,  and  it  was  the  coachman's  only  hope  to  reach  it,  and 
the  dray  rushed  by,  leaving  the  cab  unharmed.  It  did  a  great  deal  of 
damage,  and  the  driver  was  killed.  You  see  mother  did  not  dream  exactly 
the  facts  of  the  case,  but  only  that  my  aunt  was  nearly  killed  by  a 
carriage  accident. 

"  As  to  the  '  other  intimations  of  danger,'  &c.,  they  are  this,  that 
whenever  anything  happens  to  those  dear  to  her  she  always  knows  there  is 
something  happening.  For  instance,  I  was  laid  up  with  a  very  bad  cough 
and  cold  when  away  from  her  last  year,  and  she  wrote  me  an  anxious 
letter,  saying,  she  knew  I  was  ill,  for  she  had  an  idea  I  had  inflammation 
of  the  lungs.  Last  month  I  was  suffering  dreadfully  from  toothache,  and 
determined  I  would  go  and  have  two  teeth  out  without  saying  anything  to 
mother,  for  fear  of  worrying  her  ;  she  thought  I  was  going  for  a  walk,  but 
all  the  time  I  was  gone  she  was  so  unhappy  about  me,  and  S.  told  me 
when  I  had  come  back  that  mother  had  cried  and  been  wretched  all  the 
time.  You  see  the  things  are  not  big  enough  to  attract  much  attention, 
but  we  in  the  house  know  them  to  be  true." 

[It  is  not  quite  clear  how  far  the  vision  (A)  coincided  with  a  sudden 
and  marked  change  in  the  state  of  the  agent.  Also  it  is  possible  that  the 
doctor's  visit,  or  the  expectation  of  it,  may  have  called  up  her  mother's 
image  to  Mrs.  W.'s  mind,  and  that  her  illness  may  have  rendered  her 
specially  liable  to  hallucination.  It  would  remain  noteworthy  (unless 
there  was  special  reason  to  fear  the  attack  of  fatal  illness)  that  the 
apparition  produced  a  true  conviction  in  Mrs.  W.'s  mind  as  to  what  was 
occurring  to  her  mother. 

As  to  (B),  we  have  no  evidence  that  the  dream  took  place  on  the 
night  of  the  day  on  which  the  accident  occurred  ;  but  to  anyone 
who  accepts  the   general    fact   of    telepathic    communication,    it  will    at 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  467 

least  seem  reasonable  to  surmise  that  the  coincidence  was  not  a  merely 
accidental  one.  The  impression  of  the  child's  illness  (C)  is,  however, 
more  important,  both  because  it  was  more  than  a  dream,  and  because 
the  time-coincidence  seems  in  tliis  case  to  have  been  ascertained  to  be 
exact. 

With  regard  to  the  less  definite  impressions  it  would  be  difficult  to 
assign  them  an  evidential  value  without  constant  and  careful  notes, 
because  of  the  double  indefiniteness — the  difficulty  (1)  of  deciding  what 
events  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  affiard  a  prima  facie  presumption 
that  the  coincident  experiences  are  telepathically  connected  with  them, 
and  (2)  of  distinguishing  clearly  a  peculiar  feeling  that  something  is 
happening  from  vague  anxiety  about  absent  friends.  ^  If  persons  who 
show  signs  of  this  susceptibility  would  continuously,  for  some  little  time 
make  a  note  in  writing,  with  as  much  detail  as  possible,  whenever  a 
feeling  of  this  kind  occurred,  and  afterwards  record  the  confirmation  or 
absence  of  confirmation,  interesting  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  subject.] 

(503)  Obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Miss  0.  D.  Garnett,  of  Furze 
Hill  Lodge,  Brighton,  from  a  cousin,  Mrs.  D.,  who  prefers  that  her  own 
name  should  not  be  printed.     Miss  Garnett  says  : — 

"  I  may  safely  say  she  never  before  or  since  had  such  a  vision.  She  is 
thoroughly  practical  and  unimaginative,  not  in  the  least  excitable,  and  I 
remember  well  how  puzzled  slie  was  for  a  long  time  after.  When  she  came 
to  me  some  time  after,  she  was  full  of  it,  and  described  it  to  me  most 
graphically.  She  is  almost  like  a  sister  to  us,  and  I  think  discussed  this 
affair  more  with  us  than  with  her  own  people.  Her  sister  thought  she 
was  dreaming,  but  her  father  was  rather  astonished  when  she  told  him  of 
the  "vision  the  next  morning." 

"September  15th,  1885. 

"  Some  few  years  ago  the  occurrence  took  place  which  I  am  about  to 
relate.  I  was  lying  awake  one  night,  my  thoughts  fixed  on  no  particular 
subject,  when  before  me  seemed  to  rise  the  vision  of  the  interior  of  a 
cathedral ;  the  details  which  marked  it  from  an  ordinary  church  being 
clearly  defined.  In  the  open  space  before  the  chancel  lay  a  coffin  enveloped 
in  its  heavy  black  pall.  After  a  few  moments  (as  it  seemed  to  me)  it  faded 
gradually  away.^  I  sat  up  and  roused '  myself,  as  the  whole  scene  was  so 
real  and  strange,  and  I  was  convinced  I  had  not  been  asleep.  I  had  not 
lain  down  long  before  the  same  scene  again  repeated  itself  upon  my  brain, 
in  every  detail  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  before.^  The  repetition  of  the  vision 
(for  such  I  firmly  believed  it  was)  filled  me  with  presentiments  of  trouble, 
and  rousing  my  sister,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  I  told  her  what 
I  had  seen  ;  but  as  was  natural,  she  concluded  I  had  been  dreaming.  Next 
morning  at  breakfast  I  related  what  had  occurred,  and  it  was  remarked  that 
we  knew  no  one  in  England  whose  funeral  service  would  be  likely  to  take 
place  in  a  cathedral.  Shortly  after,  we  received  news  by  telegram  of  the 
sudden  death  of  my  brother  in  the  West  Indies,  and  the  day  coincided 
with  that  on  which  I  had  seen  the  vision  as  related.     When  the  letters 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  270,  505  ;  and  above,  pp.  26-7. 

2  See  p.  97,  first  note. 

3  See  p.  237,  note. 

VOL.    II.  2   H    2 

468  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

containing  all  details  arrived,  we  learnt  that  he  was  buried  the  same  day 
that  he  died,  in  the  evening,  the  funeral  service  taking  place  in  the  Colonial 
Cathedral.  Allowing  for  the  difference  in  time,  it  appears  to  have  been  as 
near  as  possible  the  same  time  as  I  in  England  saw  the  whole  scene 
represented,  the  remembrance  of  which  has  remained  indelibly  printed  on 

my  memory. 

J.  D. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  D.  says  : — 

"  The  date  of  my  brother's  death  was  February  21st,  and  as  far  as  I  can 
remember  I  had  the  dream  that  evening,  but  it  is  so  long  since  that  as 
regards  dates  I  do  not  like  to  be  too  certain.  As  regards  the  leng-th  of 
time  between  the  death  and  funeral,  it  was,  I  believe,  only  a  few  hours, 
certainly  less  than  12.  The  news  of  his  death  reached  us  by  telegram  on 
February  28th,  about  a  week  later.  I  have  never  had  anything  in  the 
way  of  a  vision  either  before  or  since.  I  enclose  the  few  lines  from  my 
sister  on  the  subject,  after  having  told  her  that  I  had  written  you  an 
account."     The  sister's  words  are  : — 

"I  corroborate  the  statement  of  my  sister's  dream  of  February,  1879, 
which  she  narrated  to  me  the  morning  after  it  occurred.       a  g_  q." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  at  George 
Town,  Demerara,  on  February  21st,  1879. 

[Without  more  details  as  to  the  supposed  resemblance  between  the  place 
seen  in  the  vision  and  the  real  place  of  the  funeral,  no  stress  ought,  I 
think,  to  be  laid  on  this  point ;  which  is  one,  it  will  be  seen,  that  telepathy 
could  not  satisfactorily  account  for.] 

(504)  Received  on  Oct.  28,  1884,  from  a  gentleman  occupying  a  high 
public  position,  who  does  not  wish  to  give  his  name  or  to  procure  other 
attestations.  He  writes,  it  will  be  seen,  in  the  third  person.  French  is 
not  his  native  language. 

The  account  begins  with  an   experience  which  M.  had  during 

his  father's  last  illness,  while  taking  a  brief  sleep,  after  long  nursing. 

"Pendant  le  plus  fort  de  son  sommeil,  M. se  sentit  comme  tres 

fortement  secoue  et  appele  par  son  nom.  II  se  rdveilla  en  sursaut,  tout 
efi'raye,  sauta  de  son  lit,  se  dirigeant  vers  la  porte,  ayant  devant  lui  comme 
une  ombre,  qui  disparu  des  qu'il  fut  dans  I'entree.  II  traversa  le  grand 
salon,  et  tout  I'appartement  attenant.  Arrive  a  la  chambre  de  son  pere,  il 
trouva  la  garde-malade  debout  sur  le  seuil  de  la  porte,  lui  barrant  le 
passage.     Son  pere  venait  d'expirer  au  moment  meme. 

"  L'impression  de  ce  re  veil  est  reste  tellement  vive  dans  I'esprit  de 

M. qu'il  n'en  a  jamais  parle  sans  aj outer,   '  Ce  n'etait  certainement 

pas  la  rdaHt^,  mais  pour  sur  c'etait  plus  qu'un  reve.'  " 

This    case  alone  could    not    have  found  a  place  in  our    evidence,  as 

M.  was  aware  of   his  father's  critical  condition,  and  was  in  a  highly 

anxious  and  overstrained  state.     But  he  continues  : — 

"  Quatre  ans  plus  tard,  en  Tannine  1849,  M.  habitait  Constanti- 
nople ;  il  etait  proscrit  et  I'entree  de  son  pays  lui  etait  interdite.  Sa  mere, 
qui  ^tait  a  Bucarest,  s' etait  decidee  d'aller  s'etablir  auprfes  de  lui  ;  elle 
n'attendait  plus  que  I'ouverture  de  la  navigation  du  Danube,  qui  a  lieu 
gdndralement  vers  le  mois  de  Mars.     Elle  avait  deja  annonc^  a   son  fils  le 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND"   CASES.  469 

nom  du  bateau  de  la  Compagnie  du  Loyd  Autrichien  ser  lequel  elle  devait 
s'embarquer  a  Galatz,  et  le  8  Avril  elle  devait  arriver  a  Constantinople. 
Ces  bateaux  arrivaient  toujours  dans  la  Corne-d'or  les  mardis,  vers  les  six 
heures  du  matin. 

"  Le  7  Avril  M.  passa  la  soiree  avec  deux  de  ses   amis  et  parents, 

et  Ton  decida  que  le  lendemain  les  deux  amis  viendraient  le  chercher 
pour  aller  tous  les  trois  recevoir  la  dame  a  bord.  Les  deux  amis  arriverent 

le  matin   a  I'heure  convenue  chez  M. .  Grand   fut  leur  ^tonnement 

lorsque  celui-ci  leur  dit  qu'il  etait  inutile  d'aller  au  bateau,  parceque  sa 
mere  venait  de  mourir.  Ses  amis  crurent  d'abord  qu'il  avait  regu  des 
nouvelles,  mais  ayant  reflechi  qu'il  n'y  avait  pas  pu  avoir  eu  des  lettres 
depuis  une  semaine,  car  il  n'y  avait  eu  depuis  aucun  arrivage — a  cette 
^poque  le  tdlegraphe  etait  chose  completement  inconnue  dans  ces  parages — - 
ils  furent  inquiets  sur  I'etat  de  I'esprit  de  leur  ami,  qui  persistait  a  leur 
dire  avec  la  plus  grande  assurance  que  sa  mere  etait  morte  dans  la  nuit 

meme.     M. venait  d'avoir,    apres  s'etre    endormi,    le  meme    reveil, 

precisement  avec  les  memes  circonstances,  que  dans  la  nuit  du  26  au  27 
Novembre,  1844,  lors  de  la  mort  de  son  pere. 

"  Le  bateau  suivant,  arrivd  le  15  Avril,  apportait  des  lettres  annon9ant 

que  la  mere  de  M.  avait  succomb^  dans  la  nuit  du  7  au  8  Avril  a  la 

suite  d'un  acc^s  de  fievre  bilieuse,  apres  une  courte  maladie  de  deux  jours." 

The  narrator  stated  in  conversation  that  he  had  never  had  any  sub- 
jective experience  of  the  sort. 

[The  particular  form  of  the  second  experience  may  perhaps  have  been 
due  to  the  effect  of  the  former  one  on  M. 's  mind.] 

(505)  From  Miss  Henrietta  Wilkinson,  Enniscorthy,  Ireland. 

"January,  1884. 

"  I  live  in  Ireland,  my  nephew  in  London.  At  the  end  of  October  or 
beginning  of  November,  1881,  when  he  was  8  years  old,  he  went  one  day 
with  his  mother  and  sister  to  Kensington  Gardens.  While  playing  there 
he  had  a  severe  fall  on  his  back ;  his  mother  had  to  call  a  cab  and  take 
him  home,  then  send  for  the  doctor.  He  was  very  ill  for  three  or  four 
days,  lying  in  a  dark  room  and  kept  perfectly  quiet.  The  accident 
happened  on  a  Saturday,  I  think.  On  the  Sunday  his  mother  wrote  to 
tell  me  of  it,  which  letter  I  received  on  Tu,  sday.  On  the  Monday  night 
I  was  in  bed,  dropping  off  to  sleep,  when  I  opened  my  eyes  with  a  start, 
and  saw,  quite  distinctly,  a  London  street,  leading  from  Kensington 
Gardens  to  my  nephew's  home.  All  the  people,  cabs,  and  horses  were 
running  very  fast  in  one  direction,  towards  my  sister's  house.  Amongst 
them  were  my  sister  and  her  two  children,  also  running.  They  stopped 
a  cab,  got  in,  and  arrived  at  their  own  house.  I  saw  no  more  but 
exclaimed  '  Maurice  is  hurt  ! '  why,  I  do  not  know,  as  my  nephew 
looked  all  right  in  the  street.  It  all  seemed  to  come  from  outside 
myself.  I  thought  it  very  strange,  and  told  it  to  my  family  next  morning, 
before  my  sister's  letter  arrived.  I  am  not  perfectly  sure  of  the  day  of 
the  week,  but  know  it  was  the  day  after  the  accident  my  sister  wrote,  and 
that  it  was  the  night  of  the  day  after  she  wrote  that  I  saw  what  I  tell  you. 

"  I  think  it  was  my  nephew's  thoughts  of  me  that  gave  me  the  vision, 
I  being  the  person  he  would  think  of,  next  to  his  father  and  mother. 

"  Henrietta  Wilkinson." 

470  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Asked  whether  she  had  ever,  on  any  other  occasion,  had  a  dream  of 
death  or  accident  which  had  impressed  her,  she  says  : — "  No,  I  remember 
none.  It  was  quite  unique.  But  why  call  it  a  dream  when  I  was  wide 
awake  1  Had  it  been  a  dream  I  don't  think  it  would  have  made  the  same 
impression  on  me." 

Miss  Wilkinson's  sister  writes  on  Jan.  8,  1884,  from  Castle  Hill, 
Enniscorthy : — 

"  I  distinctly  remember  my  sister  relating  to  us  (myself  and  another 
sister)  her  vision  or  dream  before  she  got  any  letter.  It  made  a  great 
impression  on  her,  and  she  told  us  with  surprise  and  a  little  alarm.  She 
told  us  on  Tuesday  morning,  and  the  letter  telling  of  the  accident  arrived 
soon  after.  "  Martha  Wilkinson." 

The  interval  between  the  accident  and  Miss  Wilkinson's  ex- 
perience is  too  long  for  the  case  to  be  treated  as  one  of  deferred  de- 
velopment (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  511);  but  the  vision,  which  seems  clearly  to 
have  been  of  a  very  unusual  kind,  may  conceivably  have  been  due  to 
a  half  delirious  recrudescence  of  the  agitated  scene  in  the  mind  of  the 
little  invalid.  The  confused  and  inaccurate  character  of  the  vision 
might  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  in  this  way ;  but  might  also  be 
construed  as  the  transforming  and  dream-like  investiture  which  tele- 
pathic percipients  have  so  often  seemed  to  supply. 

The  next  case  is  a  singular  one,  as,  supposing  it  to  have  been  tele- 
pathic, there  was  no  personal  bond  between  the  agent  and  percipient. 
In  this  respect  it  recalls  cases  459  and  490  ;  but  in  the  present  case 
there  was  local  proximity  between  the  parties. 

(506)  From  a  lady  whose  family  object  to  the  publication  of  her  name. 

"May  24th,  1884. 

"  Somewhere  about  three  years  ago,  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance,  I 
was  suddenly  awoke  in  the  night  by  hearing  what  seemed  to  me  a  voice 
saying,  '  You  had  better  get  up,  someone  is  dying.'  I  went  to  my  father's 
door,  but  finding  all  right,  returned  to  bed,  but  could  not  sleep  again  all 
the  rest  of  the  night.  The  next  day  one  of  my  servants  told  me  the 
gentleman  next  door  had  died  in  the  night.  I  was  not  aware  he  was  likely 
to  die,  indeed  I  knew  nothing  of  him,  and  he  never  entered  my  thoughts. 
He  had  been  delicate  or  an  invalid  ever  since  we  had  lived  here.  I  did 
not  mention  this  dream  at  the  time,  not  supposing  it  would  interest  my 
father.     I  have  always  been  a  great  dreamer." 

We  fijad  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
March  19th,  1881,  at  the  house  next  Miss  L.'s. 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  L.  writes  on  June  28,  1884  : — 
"  I  have  heard,  or  seem  to  have  heard,  voices  at  other  times,  both 
by  day  and  night,  and  I  think  they  have  invariably  had  some  meaning, 
except  in  cases  where  I  have  accounted  for  them  in  consequence  of  my 
sufiering  from  overstrained  nerves  or  illness.  I  do  not  remember  ever 
being  awoke  by  a  voice  in  this  way  at  any  other  time,  though  I  have  some- 

IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  471 

times  awoke  suddenly  thinking  someone  called  me  by  name.     This  is  the 
only  case  I  have  experienced  of  being  awakened  by  a  remarhr 

[In  an  interview  with  Miss  L.,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  that  she  had  fixed 
the  time  of  her  impression  by  hearing  the  clock  strike  3  soon  afterwards. 
The  servant,  from  whom  Miss  L.  heard  of  the  death  next  morning,  thinks 
she  was  told  by  a  servant  next  door  that  it  took  place  at  4  a.m.,  and  is 
certain  it  was  "  in  the  morning."  After  hearing  of  the  death.  Miss  L. 
wrote  and  told  her  sister  of  her  experience  ;  the  sister  confirmed  this.  The 
wall  between  the  two  houses  is  too  thick  to  permit  the  sound  of  conversa- 
tion to  pass.] 

(507)  From  Mr.  Francis  A.  Suttaby,  2,  Amen  Corner,  E.G.,  and  48, 
Redclifi'e  Square,  S.W.  u  March  3rd,  1884. 

'•'■En  route  home,  in  July  last,  when  about  in  mid- Atlantic,  on  a  certain 
evening  I  retired  in  due  course  to  rest,  and  in  my  sleep  was  suddenly 
disturbed  by  a  voice  (impetuous)  calling  aloud,  '  Frank  !  Frank  ! '  (I  was 
alone,  as  I  had  a  berth  entirely  to  myself.)  So  suddenly  did  I  spring  up 
out  of  my  heavy  sleep,  that  I  nearly  knocked  my  head  against  the  berth 
that  was  over  mine.  I  replied,  '  Yes,  yes,  what  ? '  No  answer  coming, 
I  spoke  again,  hastily,  '  I  am  here — what's  the  matter  % — who  called  % ' 
No  answer  being  vouchsafed,  and  supposing  there  was  some  mistake  on 
my  part,  as  poor  little  disturbed  Samuel  might  have  done,  I  addressed 
myself  aloud,  'Francis  Arthur,  go  to  sleep — some  mistake.'  Of  course, 
the  next  morning,  at  the  breakfast  table — the  captain  had  invited  me 
to  his  table — I  made  much  amusement  for  him  and  the  ladies  and  a 
certain  Major  Jones,  of  Kingston,  Ontario.  I  must  admit  Major  Jones 
seemed  more  concerned  than  I  allowed  myself  to  be.  In  fact,  I  tried  to 
put  away  the  thought,  and  made  light  of  it.  Within  an  hour  of  my 
reaching  my  dear  old  uncle's  house  at  Putney  (my  wife  and  family  being 
then  in  France),  my  aunt  informed  me  of  the  sudden  death  of  my  cousin 
Nora  [Mrs.  R.],  which  was  most  touching  to  me ;  and  when  I  ascertained 
the  day  the  poor  soul  died,  '  Why,'  I  said,  '  that's  the  very  morning  I  was 
disturbed  in  my  sleep,'  telling  her  what  I  have  already  described  to  you. 
Subsequently,  I  gathered  the  hour  my  cousin  died,  and  that  the  strange 
cry  of  '  Frank,  Frank,'  as  for  help,  which  startled  me  out  of  my  sleep,  was 
at  the  very  hour  when  Nora  was  really,  but  apparently  unconsciously, 
passing  from  this  lower  world  ;  for  the  difference  in  time  between  here  and 
where  I  was  would  bring  the  hour  of  her  flight  and  evident  call  to  one  and 
the  same. 

"  Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  feature  connected  with  the  voice  is, 
that  not  till  I  saw  her  brother  Ernest,  in  Torquay,  did  anyone  think  to  ask 
me,  as  he  did,  '  But  whose  voice  do  you  suppose  it  was  1 '  Immediately  it 
dawned  on  me,  '  Why,  your  sister's — Nora's,  without  a  doubt.'  Then  he 
asked.  Why  1  thought  it  was  her  voice  1  '  Because  I  can  now  distinguish 
it  as  her  voice.  It  was  hastily  spoken,  impetuous,  as  you  know  she  could 
be.'  "Eras.  A.  Suttaby." 

Mr.  Suttaby  fixed  the  date  of  the  voice  by  its  occurring  in  the  night 
(or  very  early  morning),  after  the  onli/  storm  which  they  had  on  the 
voyage,  this  storm  being  noted  in  his  diary.  He  kindly  sent  us  an  extract 
from  the  diary,  which  showed  that  the  weather  from  July  4,  when  the 
"  Bothnia  "  left  New  York,  to  July  8  was  fine.  The  extracts  for  the  next 
3  days  are  as  follow  :  — 

472  SUPPLEMENT.  .  [chap. 

"  9th. — Fine,  but  rough.  Ended  with  a  storm,  and  retired  early, 
whilst  I  could  stand. 

"  10th. — Fine  and  bright  all  day,  but  very  stormy.  Remained  in  bed 
all  day. 

"  11th. — In  my  seat  at  breakfast.     Pleasant  day,  and  played  'shuiB.es.'" 

Mr.  Suttaby  continues  : — 

"The  memorial-card  of  my  cousin  states  that  she  died  suddenly  July 
10th.  I  cannot  now  be  certain  as  to  when  I  heard  my  name  called — 
whether  on  morning  of  10th  or  11th.  All  I  know  is  that  when  informed 
of  the  death  of  my  cousin,  each  day  then  being  fresh  in  my  memory,  I 
fixed  it  as  an  unquestionable  fact,  not  supposing  I  should  ever  be  questioned 
again  as  to  details,  and  having  no  reasons,  no  motives  whatsoever,  for 
fixing  the  cry  of  '  Frank,  Frank '  to  the  day  of  my  cousin's  death. 

"  What  I  stated  did  occur,  and  no  one's  voice  but  that  of  Nora 
resembled  the  twice-repeated  impetuous  cry." 

We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Scotsman  that  Mrs.  R.  died  suddenly 
on  July  10,  1883.  She  had  no  relatives  with  her  when  she  died.  In 
conversation  with  the  present  writer,  Mr.  Suttaby  mentioned  that  he  was 
the  person  who,  from  circumstances,  had  had  most  to  do  with  her  and  her 
afiairs  of  late  years,  and  he  thus  regards  it  as  natural  that  her  thoughts 
should  have  turned  specially  to  him.     Her  death  was  very  sudden. 

Mr.  Suttaby  tells  us  that  he  has  on  one  other  occasion  experienced  a 
hallucination,  which  again  consisted  in  hearing  his  name  called  ;  but  as 
this  took  place  at  a  large  railway  station,  it  was  possibly  a  real  call.  With 
regard  to  the  present  case  he  says  : — - 

"  I  do  not  admit  what  I  heard  was  hallucination.  I  was  fast  asleep 
in  my  bed,  and  I  was  suddenly  awaked  ;  I  sat  up  quickly,  and  said,  '  Yes, 
yes  !  I  am  here.  What '?  —  Who  called  ? ' — or  words  to  that  eft'ect.  I 
never  lost  the  firm  conviction  that  I  was  really  called — that  a  real  voice, 
as  if  needing  my  protection  and  assistance,  called  to  me." 

We  have  ascertained  from  Capt.  McKay  that  he  does  not  (in  April, 
1886)  recall  Mr.  Suttaby's  mention  of  the  incident.  Major  Jones  writes, 
on  April  6,  1886,  from  the  Army  and  Navy  Club,  S.W.  : — 

"  I  cannot  tell  you  more  than  the  fact  that  one  day  Mr.  Suttaby  stated 
he  had  awoke  in  the  night  hearing  a  child  call,  and  that  he  thought  it 
must  be  a  niece  (I  think)  who  had  died."  This  last  detail  cannot  weigh 
against  Mr.  Suttaby's  distinct  recollection  that  the  voice  at  the  time  was 
not  distinctly  associated  with  his  cousin. 

[Whether  the  experience  was  on  the  10th  or  11th,  it  is  possible, 
though  not  certain,  that  it  fell  within  12  hours  of  the  death.] 

(508)  From  Mrs.  Hancock,  Penarth  Lodge,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol,  a 
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends. 

"April  14th,  1884. 

"  In  my  Northern-Irish  home,,  I  received  a  letter  on  the  7th  November, 
1865,  from  my  brother  in  Warwickshire,  saying  that  my  mother  was  ill, 
and  he  wished  I  would  go  and  see  her.  I  started  the  same  evening  by 
Belfast  and  Fleetwood.  I  had  been  several  hours  in  my  berth,  on  the 
Irish  Channel,  and  was  half  asleep,  when  I  was  startled  by  feeling  a  hand 
grasp  my  shoulder  and  a  voice  say,  in  a  loud  whisper,    '  Come  quickly.'     I 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  473 

rose  up  and  sat  looking  round  the  cabin,  but  could  see  no  one.  I  called 
to  the  stewardess,  but  she  was  fast  asleep,  and  so  were  all  the  other  ladies. 
I  again  lay  down,  but  not  to  sleep,  and  in  a  very  short  time,  not  20 
minutes  afterwards,  the  same  pressure  was  put  on  my  shoulder  and  the 
same  words  were  distinctly  uttered  close  to  my  ear,  '  Come  quickly.'  ^  I 
again  called  loudly  to  the  stewardess  and  told  her  to  light  the  lamp,  for  I 
was  sure  some  one  must  have  been  standing  by  me.  She  declared  that  no 
one  had  been  in  the  cabin,  and  all  around  was  so  still  and  quiet.  I 
reached  the  station  at  half -past  12  at  noon,  when  my  brother  met  me.  He 
said,  'All  is  over,  my  mother  passed  away  at  4  this  morning.' 

"  I  ought  to  have  stated  that  when  I  called  to  the  stewardess  and 
made  her  light  the  lamp,  immediately  after  I  heard  the  voice  and  felt  the 
hand  on  my  shoulder  the  second  time,  I  then  asked  her  to  tell  me 
what  o'clock  it  was,  and  she  said,  '  Four  o'clock.'  I  looked  at  my  own 
watch  and  it  was  the  same.  I  being  an  only  daughter  and  my  mother 
having  been  a  widow  the  last  five  years  of  her  life,  she  was  much  wrapped 
up  in  me  and  in  my  children,  and  the  tie  between  us  was  of  no  ordinary 
kind.  I  have  always  looked  upon  this  as  a  direct  voice  from  herself,  just 
as  she  was  dying  and  passing  into  the  spiritual  world. 

"Lucy  Hancock." 

We  find  from  the  Coventry  Herald  that  the  death  took  place  on  Nov. 
9,  1865.  Mrs.  Hancock  can  hardly  be  mistaken  as  to  having  heard  the 
news  from  her  brother  on  her  arrival,  i.e.,  on  the  day  following  that  on 
which  she  started.  We  may  conclude  therefore  that  the  7th  in  the  first 
line  of  her  account  is  a  mistake  for  8th. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hancock  adds  ; — 

"  In  reply  to  your  question,  whether  I  have  at  any  other  time,  besides 
the  one  described,  '  had  an  experience  of  the  kind,  i.e.,  fancied  I  heard  or 
felt  a  human  presence  when  no  one  was  present,'  I  have  to  say  that  I 
never  did. 

"  My  brother  has  just  been  here,  and  says  he  recollects  saying  to  me 
'  all  was  over  at  4  o'clock  this  morning,'  on  the  day  he  met  me  at  the 
station,  November  9th,  1865  ;  but  he  does  not  recollect  the  particulars  of 
what  happened  to  me  on  board  the  steamer.  He  has  at  any  rate  a  very 
bad  memory,  whereas  I  have  the  reputation  of  having  an  unusually  good 
one ;  and  to  my  mind  that  pressure  on  my  arm,  twice,  and  the  words 
'  Come  quickly  '  are  as  vivid  now  as  if  all  had  happened  last  week,  instead 
of  19  years  ago." 

[The  weak  point  in  this  case  is  of  course  the  state  of  anxiety  which 
preceded  the  experience ;  the  strong  point,  if  correctly  remembered,  is  the 
exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  Mrs.  Hancock  had  no  previous  belief  in 
anything  like  telepathy,  and  takes  no  special  interest  in  the  subject.] 

(509)  From  Mrs.  Sprague,  Sunnyside,  275,  Coldharbour  Lane,  Brixton, 
S.W.,  who  says  that  "the  particulars  are  plain  unvarnished  truth." 

"Aug.  25th,  1886. 

[The  narrator's  mother,  Mrs.  Green,  to  whom  she  was  deeply  attached, 
had  promised  that,  if  she  died  when  they  were  apart,  she  would  let  her 
daughter  "  know  that  she  was   quitting  this  world."  ^      Soon  after  Mrs. 

1  As  to  repetition  after  a  short  interval,  see  p.  105,  first  note. 

2  See  p.  66,  note. 

474  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Sprague's  marriage,  her  mother  went  to  keep  house  for  a  son,  at  Major's 
Creek,  Braidwood,  N.S.  Wales,  and  the  two  had  not  met  for  12  years.  In 
the  summer  of  1868,  Mrs.  Sprague,  who  had  been  in  New  Zealand,  was  on 
her  way  to  pay  her  mother  a  visit.]  "  She  was  expecting  me ;  and  the 
last  letter  was  cheerful  and  happy,  intensely  expectant  of  my  visit ;  also 
she  was,  she  said,  quite  well. 

"On  Sunday  night,  the  14th  of  June,  1868,  I  retired  to  bed  about 
11.30,  and  slept  soundly  until  3  o'clock,  when  I  suddenly  woke  hearing  my 
mother's  voice.  She  stood  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  She  said,  '  Oh,  come  !  I 
want  you  !  '  The  moon  was  at  the  full ;  and  the  room  as  light  as  day.  I 
threw  myself  out  of  bed  instantly.  She  was  gone.  I  then  realised  how 
far  away  she  was  :  and  a  strange  supernatural  feeling,  a  feeling  impossible 
to  describe,  took  possession  of  me :  like  lightning  the  compact  made  in 
England  many  years  before  returned  to  my  mind,  and  I  knew  with 
certainty  that  she  was  dying.  I  looked  at  my  watch  ;  it  was  3  o'clock.  I 
lay  awake  till  the  morning  dawned,  and  at  12  o'clock  that  day  I  had  a 
telegram  from  my  brother,  asking  me  to  come  on  quickly  as  she  had  had  a 
fit  [late  on  the  Saturday  night]  and  could  not  live.  This  was  Monday.  I 
could  not  leave  Melbourne  till  the  following  Thursday,  there  being  only 
steamers  twice  a  week,  so  on  the  Wednesday  [corrected  in  conversation 
to  Thursday]  I  received  another  telegram  saying  she  was  dead.  Her 
body  was  kept  for  10  days  that  I  might  attend  the  funeral,  which  I  did, 
travelling  post  all  the  time. 

"  On  questioning  the  nurse  who  attended  her,  she  said,  '  Your  mother 
ceased  to  breathe  on  Wednesday,  June  17th,  but  the  last  sign  of  life  she 
gave  was  on  the  Sunday  night,  or  morning,  when  at  about  3  o'clock, 
appearing  still  insensible,  she  rose  up  and  attempted  to  stand,  but  fell 
heavily  forward.  With  assistance  I  replaced  her  in  the  bed,  and  she 
remained  motionless  till  she  ceased  to  breathe.'  This  was  the  exact 
moment  that  her  spirit  appeared  and  called  me."^ 

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Sprague  stated  that  not  only  her  child,  but  also  her 
landlady,  Mrs.  Bellman,  was  sleeping  with  her  on  the  night  of  the  vision. 
We  are  endeavouring  to  trace  Mrs.  Bellman.  The  brother  and  the  nurse 
are  dead.  Miss  Alice  Sprague  stated  independently  that  she  distinctly 
remembers  being  woke  by  her  mother's  exclamation ;  and  she  also  remem- 
bers Mrs.  Bellman's  remonstrating  with  Mrs.  Sprague  for  disturbing  her  ; 
but  Miss  Sprague  has  no  recollection  of  being  told  at  the  time  what  her 
mother  had  seen. 

Mrs.  Sprague  has  had  only  one  other  hallucination  in  her  life,  which 
followed  the  above  by  nearly  7  years  :  it  was  again  of  the  "  borderland  " 
type,  and  represented  her  deceased  mother. 

[The  fact  that  the  percipient's  mind  had  no  doubt  been  considerably 
occupied  with  the  thought  of  her  approaching  meeting  with  her  mother, 
somewhat  weakens  the  case ;  but  I  know  of  no  other  instance  where 
the  idea  of  a  happy  meeting  has  originated  so  abnormal  an  experience.] 

§  3.  The  next  little  group  are  first-hand  cases  which  have  already 
been  published. 

(510)  From  the  Memoir  of  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Power-le-Poer  Trench, 
last  Archbishop  of  Tuam    (1845),    by  the    Rev.   J.   D'Arcy    Sirr,    D.D., 

^  See  p.  48,  note. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND''  GASES.  475 

pp.  762-3.  The  account  is  part  of  a  letter  written  by  the  Rev.  Samuel 
Medlicott,  from  Pau.  Our  attention  was  called  to  it  by  the  Rev.  Canon 
Eyre,  of  Bray,  a  very  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Medlicott,  who  adds  that  Mr 
Medlicott  had  been  enabled  to  go  to  Pau  for  his  health  through  the  kind- 
ness of  the  Archbishop  of  Tuam. 

"An  interesting  circumstance  connected  with  the  death  of  the  dear 
servant  of  God,  our  late  venerated  and  truly  beloved  Archbishop,  I  will 
simply  relate  as  follows.  I  was  at  my  brother's  house  in  Wiltshire, 
whither  I  made  my  first  move  in  search  of  health  early  in  March  last  year. 
There  at  a  very  early  hour  on  Monday,  (I  think  4  o'clock,)  the  dear  Arch- 
bishop (I  shall  never  forget  his  sweet  face),  though  pale  as  death,  stood  at 
the  foot  of  my  bed  and  said,  '  I  am  tired  of,  and  I  will  leave  (or  I  have  left) 
Tuam,  and  will  never  return  there.'  This  greatly  distressed  me,  and  of 
course  roused  me.  I  thought  I  had,  as  it  were,  seen  a  vision,  and  men- 
tioned what  I  did  hear  to  Mrs.  Medlicott  as  soon  as  she  awoke.  But  how 
was  I  disturbed  !  how  painfully  cut  down,  when,  in  due  course  of  time, 
the  heartrending  tidings  reached  me  that  on  that  very  day,  and  at  that 
very  hour,  his  Grace  had  departed  this  life." 

We  find  from  the  Memoir  that  the  Archbishop  died  at  Tuam,  of 
typhoid  fever,  on  March  26,  1839,  at  3.10  a.m. ;  the  coincidence  was 
therefore  probably  close  to  within  an  hour. 

(511)  TvshQ.&l-AtedivoTo. Schriften  fiir  und  an  seine  Liehen  Deutschen,  by 
E.  M.  Arndt  (Leipzig,  1845),  Vol.  III.,  pp.  524-5.     (See  case  467.) 

Arndt  describes  how,  in  the  winter  of  1811,  when  staying  in  a  friend's 
house,  he  was  sitting  up  working  one  night,  after  a  fatiguing  day,  and  was 
half  asleep  in  his  chair — "  when  lo  !  my  dear  old  Aunt  Sophia,  my  second 
mother,  stood  before  me  with  a  kind  smile,  holding  on  each  arm  a  little 
boy.  They  were  children  whom  I  dearly  loved.  She  held  them  out  to 
me  with  a  gesture  which  seemed  to  say  '  Take  the  children  to  your  care.'  " 
The  next  day  at  noon,  while  Arndt  was  sitting  talking  with  his  friends, 
"  the  carriage  of  my  brother  William  drove  up  with  a  letter,  saying, 
'  Brother,  come  back  at  once  in  the  carriage ;  we  must  cross  the  water 
to  Buchholz  to-morrow,  and  bury  our  dear  old  Aunt  Sophia,  who  died  last 
night.' " 

(512)  From  Works  of  the  Rev.  John  Wesley.  A.M.  (Edition  of  1856), 
Vol.  II..  pp.  350-1.  The  account,  on  the  face  of  it,  is  in  the  words  of  the 
percipient ;  but  we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  of  this. 

The  passage  is  from  Wesley's  Journal  for  Thursday,  June  3rd,  1756. 

"  I  received  a  remarkable  letter  from  a  clergyman  with  whom  I  had 
been  a  day  or  two  before  ;  part  of  it  ran  thus  :  '  I  had  the  following  accovmt 
from  the  gentlewoman  herself,  a  person  of  piety  and  veracity.  She  is  now 
the  wife  of  Mr.  J.  B.,  silversmith  in  Cork.' 

"  '  "  About  30  years  ago,  I  was  addressed,  by  way  of  marriage,  by  Mr. 
Richard  Mercier,  then  a  volunteer  in  the  army.  The  young  gentleman 
was  quartered  at  that  time  in  Charleville,  where  my  father  lived,  who 
approved  of  his  addresses,  and  directed  me  to  look  upon  him  as  my  future 
husband.  When  the  regiment  left  the  town,  he  promised  to  return  in  two 
months  and  marry  me.  From  Charleville  he  went  to  Dublin,  thence  to 
his  father's,  and  from  thence  to  England ;  where,  his  father  having  bought 
him  a  cornetcy  of  horse,   he  purchased  many  ornaments  for  the  wedding, 

476  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

and  returning  to  Ireland,  let  us  know  that  he  would  be  at  our  house  in 
Charleville  in  a  few  days.  On  this  the  family  was  busied  to  prepare  for 
his  reception,  and  the  ensuing  marriage,  when,  one  night,  my  sister  Mary 
and  I  being  asleep  in  our  bed,  I  was  awaked  by  the  sudden  opening  of  the 
side  curtains,  and  starting  up,  saw  Mr.  Mercier  standing  by  the  bedside. 
He  was  wrapped  up  in  a  loose  sheet,  and  had  a  napkin,  folded  like  a 
nightcap,  on  his  head.  He  looked  at  me  very  earnestly,  and  lifting  up  the 
napkin,  which  much  shaded  his  face,  showed  me  the  left  side  of  his  head, 
all  bloody,  and  covered  with  his  brains  ;  ^  the  room,  meantime,  was  quite 
light.2  My  terror  was  excessive,  which  was  increased  by  his  stooping  over 
the  bed,  and  embracing  me  in  his  arms.  My  cries  alarmed  the  whole 
family,  who  came  crowding  into  the  room.  Upon  their  entrance,  he 
gently  withdrew  his  arms  and  ascended,  as  it  were,  through  the  ceiling.^  I 
continued  for  some  time  in  strong  fits.  When  I  could  speak  I  told  them 
what  I  had  seen. 

"  '  "  One  of  them  a  day  or  two  after,  going  to  the  postman  for  letters, 
found  him  reading  the  newspapers,  in  which  was  an  account  that  Cornet 
Mercier,  going  into  Christ  Church  belfry,  in  Dublin,  just  after  the  bells 
had  been  ringing,  and  standing  under  the  bells,  one  of  them,  which  was 
turned  bottom  upwards,  suddenly  turned  again,  struck  one  side  of  his 
head,  and  killed  him  on  the  spot.  On  further  inquiry,  he  found  he  was 
struck  on  the  left  side  of  his  head." ' " 

[The  death  of  Mr.  Mercier  does  not  appear  in  the  Dublin  Gazette,  which 
is  the  only  Dublin  paper  of  that  date  that  we  can  obtain ;  and  we  know 
of  no  other  publication  where  it  would  be  likely  to  be  mentioned.] 

The  remarkable  narrative  of  Elizabeth  Hobson,  of  Sunderland, 
given  by  Wesley  in  his  diary,  under  date  May  25,  1768,  is  too  long 
to  quote  in  full.  It  is  complicated  by  matter  which  does  not  belong 
to  the  subject  of  this  book,  and  by  much  that  looks  like  subjective 
hallucination.  But  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  cases  were  given  in 
good  faith  by  a  witness  of  good  character.  The  apparently  telepathic 
incidents  (which  I  include  under  a  single  evidential  number),  taken 
down  by  Wesley  from  E.  Hobson's  lips,  are  as  follows  : — 

(513)  (1)  "John  Simpson,  one  of  our  neighbours,  a  man  that  truly 
feared  God,  and  one  with  whom  I  was  particularly  acquainted,  went  to  sea, 
as  usual.  He  sailed  out  on  a  Tuesday,  The  Friday  night  following, 
between  11  and  12  o'clock,  I  heard  someone  walking  in  my  room,  and 
every  step  sounded  as  if  it  were  stepping  in  water.  He  then  came  to  the 
bedside  in  his  sea-jacket,  all  wet,  and  stretched  his  hand  over  me.  Three 
drops  of  water  fell  on  my  head,  and  felt  as  cold  as  ice.  I  strove  to  wake 
his  wife — who  lay  with  me ;  but  I  could  not  any  more  than  if  she  were 
dead.     Afterwards  I  heard  that  he  was  cast  away  that  night. 

(2)  "  A  little  before  Michaelmas,  1763,  my  brother  George,  who  was  a 
good  young  man,  went  to   sea.     The  day  after  Michaelmas  Day,   about 

1  These  details  of  the  vision  are,  no  doubt,  difficiolt  to  account  for  telepathically.  It 
is  possible  that  they  were  "  read  back  "  after  the  reality  was  known  (see  the  remarks  on 
case  25,  Vol.  i.,  p.  206)  ;  but  compare  cases  130  and  134. 

2  See  the  two  following  pages,  and  Vol.  i.,  pp.  437,  550-1. 

3  Compare  cases  203,  204,  205. 

IV.]  '^ BORDERLAND''    CASES'.  477 

midnight,  I  saw  him  standing  by  my  bedside,  surrounded  with  a  glorious 
light,  1  and  looking  earnestly  at  me.  He  was  wet  all  over.  That  night 
the  ship  in  which  he  sailed  split  upon  a  rock,  and  all  the  crew  were 
drowned. 

(3)  "On  April  9th,  1767,  about  midnight  I  was  lying  awake,  and  I 
saw  my  brother  John  standing  by  my  bedside.  Just  at  that  time  he  died 
in  Jamaica. 

(4)  "On  Friday,  July  3rd,  [1  1767),  I  was  sitting  at  dinner,  when  I 
thought  I  heard  someone  coming  along  the  passage.  I  looked  about,  and 
saw  my  aunt,  Margaret  Scot,  of  Newcastle,  standing  at  my  back.  On 
Saturday,  I  had  a  letter  informing  me  that  she  died  on  that  day. 

(5)  "When  I  was  about  16,  my  uncle  fell  ill,  and  grew  worse  and 
worse  for  three  months.  One  day,  having  been  sent  out  on  an  errand,  I 
was  coming  home  through  a  lane  when  I  saw  him  in  the  field  coming 
swiftly  towards  me.  I  ran  to  meet  him,  but  he  was  gone.  When  I  came 
home,  I  found  him  calling  for  me.  As  soon  as  I  came  to  his  bedside,  he 
clasped  his  arms  round  my  neck,  and  bursting  into  tears,  .  .  .  kept 
his  hold  till  he  sunk  down  and  died  ;  and  even  then  they  could  hardly 
unclasp  his  fingers.  I  would  fain  have  died  with  him,  and  wished  to  be 
buried  with  him,  dead  or  alive." 

§  4.  The  remaining  cases  are  second-hand.  I  will  first  give  a 
considerable  group  where  the  narrators  are  very  near  relatives  of  the 
first-hand  witnesses,  and  have  no  sort  of  doubt  that  what  is  recorded 
is  the  genuine  experience  of  their  respective  informants. 

(514  and  515)  From  Lieut.-Colonel  Fane  Sewell,  care  of  Messrs.  H.  S. 
King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.         "Wolfelee,  Hawick,  N.B. 

"August  4th,  1885. 

"  My  mother  and  Anne  Hervey  were  schoolfellows  together  at  a 
Madame  Audibert's,  in  Kensington,  and  they  were  bosom  friends  ;  and,  as 
was  not  unusual  in  those  days  with  young  girls,  they  exchanged  rings,  with 
the  promise  that  whichever  of  the  two  died  first  she  was  to  send  back  to 
the  other  her  ring.^ 

"  During  the  following  holidays,  for  which  my  mother  went  to  her 
home,  North  Berwick,  Anne  Hervey  remaining  at  Madame  Audibert's  in 
Kensington,  the  following  incident  occurred  : — 

"  My  mother  suddenly  awoke  in  the  night,  to  find  Anne  Hervey 
standing  by  her  bedside,  holding  out  the  ring  she  had  given  her.  The 
apparition  lasted  a  few  seconds,  and  then  faded  away.  My  mother  was 
much  frightened,  and  in  the  morning  told  her  mother  what  had  happened 
to  her  in  the  night,  adding  that  she  was  quite  convinced  Anne  Hervey 
was  dead,  although  she  had  left  her  perfectly  well  a  fortnight  before  at 
Madame  Audibert's. 

"  The  event  proved  my  mother  to  be  right,  for  in  course  of  post  (not 
so  rapid  as  in  these  days)  a  letter  reached  her  from  Madame  Audibert 
telling  her  of  Anne  Hervey's  death  from  scarlet  fever,  and  enclosing 
the  ring  which  she  said  Anne  Hervey  had  begged,  on  her  deathbed, 
might  be  sent  to  my  mother. 

1  Compare  the  last  case  and  case  205. 

2  As  to  compacts  of  this  sort,  see  p.  66. 

478  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  The  above  is  exactly  as  I  have  received  it  from  my  mother's  lips. 
The  ring  referred  to  was  in  my  own  possession  for  many  years. 

"My  mother,  when  at  Bangalore,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember 
about  the  year  1845,  was  one  night  awakened  by  the  feeling  of  something 
unusual  happening,  and  saw  as  she  thought  a  very  favourite  sister  of 
my  father's,  my  Aunt  Fanny  (Mrs.  John  Hamilton  Gray),  standing  in 
her  night-dress  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  with  her  hair  falling  loosely 
round  her.  There  was  a  peculiar  light  upon  her,  though  no  light  of  any 
kind  in  the  room.^  Another  peculiarity  about  my  aunt  that  my  mother 
noticed  was,  that  a  large  lock  of  my  aunt's  hair  had  been  cut  straight 
off  close  to  the  temple.^  The  apparition  appeared  to  gaze  steadily  at 
my  mother  for  some  little  time,  and  then  gradually  disappeared. 

"My  mother,  to  whom  such  appearances  were  not  altogether  unknown, 
felt  so  convinced  something  serious  had  happened  to  my  Aunt  Fanny, 
that,  fearing  a  shock  to  my  father,  she  took  measures  to  intercept  the 
letters  to  my  father  which  she  was  satisfied  must  bring  him  sad  news 
of  some  sort  relating  to  my  aunt.  The  event  proved  her  right,  for  in 
due  course  of  post  from  home  came  the  letter  bearing  intelligence  of  my 
aunt's  unexpected  death  at  sea  (Mrs.  Gray  was  journeying  from  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  England  when  she  died),  on  the  night  above 
mentioned,  and  in  the  letter  was  enclosed  a  large  lock  of  my  Aunt  Fanny's 
hair  which  had  been  cut  ofi"  to  send  to  my  father. 

"  I  was  a  child  of  5  or  6  years  of  age  when  the  above  took  place,  and 
I  remember  the  circumstance  distinctly,  though  not  the  particulars,  which 
are,  however,  exactly  as  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  relate  them  to 
different  people.  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  relate  both  these 
experiences,  as  nearly  as  my  memory  will  serve  me,  in  the  exact  words  I 
have  used.  "  Fane  Sewell." 

In  a  later  letter  Colonel  Sewell  says  that  he  has  failed  to  get  the  exact 
dates,  and  adds  : — 

"  In  writing  out  the  two  accounts  I  sent  you,  I  purposely  excluded 
from  the  second  anything  of  my  own  personal  recollections  of  the  occur- 
rence, which  took  place  at  Bangalore,  that  you  might  have  the  story 
exactly  as  related  to  me  by  my  mother. 

"Let  me  reply  to  your  questions  as  given. 

"  (1)  '  Did  my  mother  always  speak  of  the  incidents  as  waking  experi- 
ences, not  mere  dreams "? ' 

"  My  mother  never  spoke  of  either  but  as  '  waking  experiences.'  She 
was  very  distinct  upon  that  point.  She  was  quite  sure  of  having  been,  in 
both  cases,  wide  awake  when  she  saw  what  she  described. 

"  (2)  '  Was  I  old  enough  to  recollect  whether  I  heard  of  the  second 
experience  before  the  news  of  death  arrived  1 ' 

"  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  (for  the  scenes  made  a  great  impression 
upon  me)  of  the  news  of  my  Aunt  Fanny's  death  being  taken  and  broken 
to  my  father  by  my  mother ;  his  great  grief ;  and  of  my  mother's  anxiety 
before  and  about  the  coming  of  the  letters,  and  of  her  depression  (she  was 
naturally  of  a  bright,  cheerful  disposition)  before  the  letters  came,  which  I 
could  not  at  the  time  understand,  but  which  I  have  since  felt  was  due  to 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1. 

2  Compare  cases  194,  449,  and  see  Vol.  i,,  p.  555, 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  479 

her  anticipation  of  coming  sorrow.  I  was  seldom  away  from  either  my 
father's  or  mother's  side  in  those  days,  and  must  have  been  about  5  years 
old,  and  could  well  recollect  things  of  a  striking  character  which  took 
place  then.  My  earliest  recollection  is  of  the  death  of  my  eldest,  and, 
then,  only  sister,  which  took  place  when  I  was  a  child  of  between  2  and  3 
years  of  age.  Of  this  I  can  of  course  only  dimly  remember  the  circum- 
stances, and  merely  mention  it  here  to  show  that  I  was  very  impressionable 
as  a  child,  and  began  to  remember  much  earlier  than  the  date  of  my  Aunt 
Fanny's  death.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind,  therefore,  of  the 
phenomenon  having  occurred  to  my  mother  as  described  by  her. 

"  (3)  '  (a)  Am  I  aware  as  to  whether  my  mother  was  in  the  habit  of 
having  similar  visitations  or  visions  which  did  not  correspond  with  any- 
thing 1  or  (6),  of  her  being  subject  to  hallucinations  ? ' 

"  (a)  I  am  not  aware  of  any  such.  I  do  know,  however,  of  one  occur- 
rence which  took  place  in  February  or  March,  1857,  whilst  I  was  staying, 
en  route  to  India,   with  my  father  and  mother  at  Pisa. 

"  I  remember  my  mother  came  down  to  breakfast  one  morning  greatly 
agitated,  and  told  us  (my  father  and  me)  that  she  had  been  awakened 
during  the  night  by  something  uniisual  occurring,  and  saw  distinctly  a 
curious  flame-like  light^  at  the  end  of  her  bed,  which  took  no  definite  shape 
but  faded  away  and  left  the  room  again  dark.  She  said  she  was  quite 
sure  that  something  had  happened  to  a  near  relative  who  was  then  in 
London.  My  father  tried  to  reassure  my  mother,  but  she  was  not  to  be 
dissuaded  from  her  presentiment  of  evil.  A  few  days  afterwards 
we  received  letters  from  England  informing  us  that  the  relative  in 
question  had  had  a  sudden  and  dangerous  illness — in  fact,  a  dangerous 
miscarriage — on  the  night  in  question. 

"  (6)  I  never  heard  of  any  other  case  of  vision,  or  otherwise,  occurring 
to  my  mother,  nor  am  I  aware  of  my  mother  having  been  subject  in  any 
way  to  hallucinations  of  the  senses. 

"  The  occurrences  I  have  mentioned  were  wide  apart  as  regards  time. 
The  first  when  my  mother  was  a  girl  about  16  or  17 ;  next,  as  a 
woman  of  about  33  ;  and  last  when  she  was  47  years  of  age."^ 

Before  this  account  was  received,  the  second  of  the  two  incidents  had 
been  described  to  us  by  a  clergyman,  distantly  connected  with  Lady 
Sewell,  who  had  heard  her  narrate  it,  and  had  himself  seen  the  lock  of 
hair.  Though  correct  as  to  the  main  fact,  his  version,  when  compared 
with  the  above,  illustrates  the  difference  which  intimate  connection  with 
the  original  witness  makes  in  the  value  of  second-hand  testimony  (see  pp. 
322  and  539,  note).  The  figure  is  represented  as  having  appeared  "in  her 
shroud,  dripping  wet,  and  with  her  black  hair  cut  quite  short  "  ;  and  "  on 
allowing  for  difierence  of  longitude,  it  was  found  that  the  hour  of  the 
vision  corresponded  with  the  hour  of  the  death."  Colonel  Fane  Sewell's 
account,  it  will  be  observed,  merely  states  that  the  night  corresponded. 

(516)  From  the  Rev.  H.  C.  D.  Chandler,  Waterbeach  Vicarage, 
Cambridge.  His  sister,  whose  experience  is  recorded,  is  out  of  health, 
and  he  would  prefer  not  to  have  her  troubled  for  a  first-hand  account. 

1  Compare  cases  253  and  553,    and  see  pp.  193-4. 

2  With  respect  to  the  occurrence  of  several  telepathic  experiences  to  the  same 
percipient — exemplified  in  E.  Hobson's  and  Colonel  Fane  Sewell's  cases — see  p.  22,  note, 
and  p.  77. 

480  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  1883. 

"  The  following  occurred  about  5  o'clock  a.m.,  on  October  28th,  1853. 
My  sister,  then  Eliza  Chandler,  was  visiting  friends  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Killarney,  County  Kerry,  Ireland.  Her  mind  was  quite  composed,  and 
her  health  perfectly  good.  She  was  surrounded  by  kind  friends  and  was 
of  a  gay  and  bright  disposition,  not  in  the  least  inclined  to  morbidness. 
She  had  known  that  her  mother  was  in  declining  health  generally. 

"  She  retired  to  rest  on  the  Thursday  evening  as  usual.  About  5 
o'clock  on  Friday  morning  she  awoke  suddenly,  and  as  it  seemed  without 
cause,  when  she  immediately  became  conscious  of  her  mother's  form  at  the 
foot  of  her  bed.  She  sat  up  and  gazed  intently.  She  describes  her 
mother's  form  as  though  she  had  risen  from  her  couch,  and  the  face  was 
fixed  with  an  earnest  and  loving  gaze  upon  her  child.  The  length  of  time 
the  form  remained  I  do  not  remember,  or  whether  that  time  was 
mentioned  I  do  not  remember.  My  sister  could  not  rest,  but  rose 
and  dressed,  greatly  agitated.  She  at  once  wrote  to  inquire  if  all  was 
well,  and  begging  to  hear  from  us. 

"  At  the  hour  above  named,  I  was  watching  by  my  mother's  bedside 
[at  Bristol],  she  having  been  seized  with  hernia  during  a  severe  fit  of 
coughing.  My  mother  had  sunk  rapidly,  and  a  letter  of  mine,  stating  the 
nature  of  the  illness  and  its  probable  issue,  had  crossed  my  sister's  letter 
to  me.  At  the  hour  of  5  o'clock,  I  was  struck  with  the  change  of  my 
mother's  appearance,  and  ran  to  call  a  sister,  who  was  sleeping  near.  On 
applying  a  glass  to  the  mouth,  we  found  that  the  breathing  had  ceased, 
and  our  mother  was  gone  to  her  rest.  The  same  morning  I  wrote  to 
Ireland  telling  the  sad  news,  receiving  the  next  day  my  sister's  letter  telling 
of  the  strange  apparition  she  had  seen. 

"  My  sister  is  married  and  settled  in  Australia  ;  but  she  could  add 
but  little  more  to  the  above  account,  for  each  particular  was  written 
indelibly  on  my  memory.  "  H.  C.  D.  Chandleb." 

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  whether  he  was  certain  that  the 
apparition  had  preceded  the  arrival  of  his  letter  announcing  his  mother's 
critical  condition,  he  replied  : — 

"  Our  letters  crossed — mine  containing  the  details  of  my  mother's  last 
days,  and  my  sister's  telling  the  story  of  the  apparition.  Her  letter  must 
have  been  written — as  far  as  we  could  calculate,  I  remember — the  morning- 
after  my  mother's  death,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  the  apparition." 

The  Bristol  Times  confirms  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Chandler  died  on  Friday, 
Oct.  28,  1853. 

(517)  From  Lady  Miles,  Leigh  Court,  Bristol. 

"August  1st,  1885. 

"  My  mother.  Lady  Roche  (wife  of  the  late  Sir  David  Roche,  of  Carap 
Croom,  County  of  Limerick,  Ireland)  was  very  much  beloved  by  her  cousin, 
the  [Right]  Hon.  John  Vandeleur,  and  at  the  moment  of  his  death  he 
came  to  say  good-bye  to  her.  She  woke  from  sleep  at  4  a.m.,  and  saw  him, 
wrapped  up  in  something  black,  standing  near  the  lower  curtain  of  her 
bed.  She  woke  her  husband,  and  said,  '  Why,  there  is  the  Hon.  John  at 
the  bottom  of  the  bed  ! '  Sir  David  told  her  she  was  dreaming,  and  to  rub 
her  eyes  ;  but,  as  she  still  afiirmed  it,  he  got  up  and  pulled  the  curtain 
away,  lit  the  candles,  and  stood  where  she  said  the  appearance  was.     She 

IV.]  ''  BORDERLAND"    CASES.  481 

said,  '  I  see  him  now,  standing  next  you,  waving  his  hand  in  farewell  to 
me.'  He  faded  away,  and  disappeared.  It  was  afterwards  known  that 
this  gentlemen  died  50  miles  off,  of  a  paralytic  seizure. 

"  A  brother  of  this  lady,  Mr.  George  Vandeleur,  of  Ballynamona, 
Co.  Clare,  also  saw  his  servant  at  the  moment  of  his  death.  The  man  was 
sent  to  Limerick  on  an  errand,  got  drunk,  and  fell  off  a  cart,  the  wheel  of 
which  passed  over  his  throat. 

"  These  two  cases  are  quite  authentic,  and  known  to  many  people. 

"  F.  E.  Miles." 

We  find  the  date  of  Mr.  J.  Vandeleur's  death  given  in  Saunders' 
Newsletter  as  November  9,  1828. 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Lady  Miles  says  : — 

"  With  regard  to  my  mother  seeing  the  Hon.  John  Yandeleur.  She 
saw  him  a  few  minutes  after  his  death.  She  was  living  at  a  house  in 
Limerick,  and  he  died  at  Kilrush.  I  heard  the  account  from  my  father 
and  mother  dozens  of  times  when  a  girl.  My  mother  was  not  an 
imaginative  woman,  or  inventive.  She  died  in  1841.  I  have  been  living 
over  30  years  in  England,  and  have  a  good  deal  lost  sight  of  anyone  who 
could  authenticate  all  this,  though  everyone  knew  about  it  at  the  time. 

"  My  uncle  who  saw  his  servant  is  dead.  It  happened  at  Carap, 
Oo.  Limerick,  about  the  year  1836." 

In  conversation.  Lady  Miles  told  me  that  her  uncle  was  dressing  in  the 
morning,  when,  looking  round,  he  saw  the  figure  of  his  servant,  with  blood 
about  it,  and  addressed  it,  thinking  it  was  the  man  himself.  She  was  in  the 
house  at  the  time,  and  later  she  heard  the  account  from  her  uncle's  own  lips. 

(518)  From  Mme.  Vavin,  nee  Girard,  a  relative  of  our  friend,  M.  Ch, 
Richet,  who  copied  the  account  from  a  letter  addressed  to  himself. 

"  1885. 

"  Ma  mere,  etant  veuve,  avait  ete  tres  aimee  et  demandee  en  mariage 
par  un  jeune  professeur  de  Caen.  Ayant  quitte  la  ville  et  epouse  M. 
Caillaux,  elle  avait  cesse  toute  relation  avec  M.  Roger,  et  n'en  entendit 
plus  parler  depuis  trois  ou  quatre  ans.  Une  nuit,  ^tant  absolument 
dveillde,  elle  vit  une  forme  blanchatre,  comme  une  vapeur,^  se  pencher  trois^ 
fois  sur  son  lit,  comme  pour  lui  dire  adieu.  Elle  eut  alors,  sans  pouvoir 
s'en  rendre  bien  compte,  le  sentiment  que  c'etait  M.  Roger  qui  lui  disait 
adieu.  Tres  emue,  elle  ne  parla  de  la  chose  a  personne  ;  mais,  une 
huitaine  de  jours  apres,  elle  apprit  la  mort  de  M.  Roger,  mort  survenue  la 
nuit  m^me  ou  elle  avait  eu  cette  apparition.     Elle  ne  le  savait  pas  malade." 

Mme.  Vavin  adds  the  following  experience  of  her  own  : — 

"  Pour  moi,  mes  souvenirs  sont  plus  vagues,  ^tant  plus  lointains. 
Mon  pere  est  mort  a  pen  pres  subitement.  Je  I'avais  quitte  la  veille,  au  soir, 
gai  et  bien  portant.  Dans  la  nuit  une  voix,  comme  un  soufile,  et  pour 
ainsi  dire  sans  parole,  ^  me  fit  comprendre  que  mon  pere  etait  mort  Le 
lendemain,  lorsque  on  entra  dans  ma  chambre,  je  me  jetai  en  pleurant  dans 
les  bras  de  ma  bonne  en  lui  disant,  '  Je  sais  que  papa  est  mort.'  Je 
n'avais  vu  ni  forme,  ni  apparition  d'aucune  sorte.     J'avais  neuf  ans. 

"  Marguerite  Vavin." 

^  See  case  193,  and  the  first  note  thereto.  ^  gee  p.  229,  note. 

^  This  was  probably  an  instance  of  the  inward  and  soundless  form  of  hallucination 
described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  480. 

VOL.  II.  2    I 

482  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(519)  From  Miss  Osborne,  10a,  Cunningham  Place,  N.W.    u  1883. 

"  This  story  I  have  heard  my  mother  relate,  but  as  she  and  my  aunt 
(to  whom  this  incident  occurred)  are  both  dead,  I  can  only  tell  it  as  I 
remember  it.  I  was  a  child  when  it  happened.  My  aunt,  Mrs.  Fairman, 
was  living  in  Portugal,  and  had  not  been  in  London  for  some  years.  Her 
half-sister  (with  whom  she  had  no  especial  sympathy)  married  a  Mr. 
Moore,  whom  Mrs.  Fairman  had  never  seen.  About  a  year  after  that 
marriage,  Mrs.  Fairman  was  making  arrangements  to  give  a  party.  One 
night  she  awoke,  and  saw  her  sister  sitting  by  her  bedside,  and  a  gentle- 
man standing  by  her.^  She  heard  her  sister  say,  'I  shall  die,  I  shall  die  !  ' 
She  woke  her  husband,  and  told  him  what  she  had  seen.  He,  angry  at 
being  disturbed,  said  it  was  all  nonsense.  At  last  she  slept,  but  woke  again, 
seeing  the  same  thing.  ^  She  again  woke  her  husband,  who  used  stronger 
language  than  before.  So  impressed  was  Mrs.  Fairman  with  the  feeling  she 
should  hear  of  the  death  of  her  sister,  that  she  ordered  all  arrangements 
for  the  proposed  party  to  be  stopped;  and  in  the  time  a  letter  could  reach 
her,  one  came  to  say  Mrs.  Moore  had  died  at  the  time  she  had  seen  her. 

"  I  think  it  was  about  two  years  after  this,  Mrs.  Fairman  returned  to 
England.  She  had  never  seen  any  portrait  of  Mr.  Moore,  who  was  a 
very  ordinary  person,  with  no  marked  characteristics.  She  was  walking 
with  my  mother  in  Oxford  Street,  when  she  suddenly  said,  '  Mary,  that  is 
the  man  I  saw  with  Julia  at  my  bedside.'     It  was  really  Mr.  Moore." 

[The  final  incident  here  recalls  the  conclusion  of  the  Wynyard  case 
(No.  357),  where  there  is  some  doubt  what  the  exact  facts  were ;  but  the 
point  is  not  one  likely  to  have  crept  into  either  narrative  without  some 
foundation.  The  fact  that  Miss  Osborne's  mother  was  a  witness  of  the 
recognition  makes  the  account  a  second-hand  (not  a  third-hand)  one,  as 
far  as  that  item  is  concerned.] 

(520)  From  a  lady,  known  to  the  present  writer,  who  prefers  that  her 
own  name  should  not  be  printed.  The  evidence  is  on  a  par  with  second- 
hand (Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note).  "Aug.  25th,  1886. 

"  My  father  was  a  marine  officer  on  board  his  Majesty's  ship . 

Crossing  the  Atlantic,  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  the  medical  gentleman 
told  him  that  his  mother  had  appeared  to  him  and  distinctly  said, 
*  Andrew,  Andrew,  mend  your  ways,  or  you  will  never  be  where  I  am.' 
Sir  James  Malcolm  [the  narrator's  father]  advised  him  to  write  down  the 
date  and  hour,  which  Dr.  Douglas  ^  did,  and  afterwards  wrote  that  his 
mother  had  died  the  day  and  hour  precisely  as  she  appeared  to  him.  I 
have  often  heard  my  father  mention  the  circumstance." 

Another  daughter  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm's  writes  (Sept.  23,  1886),  "I 
have  often  heard  the  story  of  Dr.  Campbell's  vision — it  was  not  a 
dream — told  to  Sir  J.  in  the  morning,  who  advised  him  to  note  it  down." 
She  thinks  that  the  incident  took  place  in  the  West  Indies,  in  1806  or 
not  long  after,  and  gives  the  name  of  the  ship  as  the  "  Canopus."  We  have 
ascertained  from  the  Record  Office  that  the  "  Canopus  "  was  in  the  West 

1  As  to  the  appearance  of  the  second  figure,  compare  case  511  above,  and  see  Vol.  i., 
pp.  545-6. 

2  Compare  case  503,  and  see  p.  237,  note. 

3  The  name  seems  to  have  been  Campbell.  The  mistake  is  due  to  the  fact  that  Sir 
J.  Malcolm  had  another  medical  friend,  named  Douglas,  to  whom  this  incident  was  knowm. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"    CASES.  483 

Indies  at  that  time,  but  that  no  doctor  of  the  name  of  Campbell  was 
officially  attached  to  her  during  the  years  1806-12. 

[We  may  charitably  hope  that  the  words  heard  were  a  contribution  of 
the  percipient's  own  mind,  and  merely  betokened  a  wholesome  sense  of 
parental  superiority.  I  have  drawn  attention  to  the  suspicious  exactitude 
of  the  coincidence  in  many  of  the  second-hand  cases.] 

From  Mr.  Edward  Butler,  7,  Park  Square,  Leeds.  I  do  not  number 
the  case,  as  the  evidence  is  possibly  third-hand.  "  June  21st,  1884. 

"  The  enclosed  account  of  my  brother's  apparition  has  been  read  by  my 
cousin  Fanny,  a  lady  of  singular  accuracy  of  mind  and  entire  trust- 
worthiness, who  was  one  of  the  first  (if  not  the  first)  to  hear  the  tale,  from 
my  mother  herself,  I  think.  It  exactly  agrees  with  her  recollection,  and 
may,  I  fully  believe,  be  relied  on  as  accurate. 

"  In  the  year  1857,  my  brother  was  in  the  Civil  Service  of  India,  and 
was  stationed  in  Bengal  as  a  judge  or  magistrate  and  collector.  For 
anything  we  knew  he  was  perfectly  well,  and  had  very  good  prospects  in 
his  profession.  One  morning  early — it  was  the  height  of  summer — my 
mother  was  lying  awake,  and  it  was  clear  dawn.  She  saw  my  brother  stand 
at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  There  was  nothing  noticeable  in  his  dress.  His 
face  wore  an  exceedingly  tranquil  and  pleasant  expression,  and  my  mother 
felt  no  fear.  I  do  not  know  how  long  the  vision  lasted.  When  it  dis- 
appeared my  mother  woke  my  father,  and  said,  'I  have  seen  Wells.'  They 
made  a  note  of  the  day  and  hour.  There  was  no  Indian  telegraph  in  those 
days,  and  some  weeks  elapsed  before  they  received  from  an  official  source 
in  India  news  of  my  brother's  sudden  death,  which  must  have  taken  place 
just  about  the  time  of  the  apparition.  My  brother's  appearance  was 
always  regarded  by  my  mother  as  a  merciful  and  kindly  thing.  It  pre- 
pared her  for  the  news,  and  broke  the  shock. 

"  I  think  my  mother  was  by  organisation  open  to  delicate  impulses  or 
impacts  from  subtle  exterior  agencies,  if  such  there  be ;  for  I  remember 
her  telling  me,  amongst  other  things  now  forgotten,  that  once  she  had  an 
unaccountable  conviction  that  she  ought  to  go  and  see  an  old  schoolfellow, 
who  had  been  long  separated  from  her,  and  whose  very  name,  indeed,  she 
had  almost  ceased  to  recall.  She  subsequently  heard  that  this  old  school- 
fellow had  died  about  that  time,  and  on  her  deathbed  had  said,  '  Oh,  I  wish 

I  could  see  Anne ,'  naming  my  mother's  maiden  name. 

"  Edwaed  Butler." 

We  find  from  the  East  India  Service  Register  and  from  Allen^s  Indian 
Mail,  that  Mr.  Wells  Butler  died  on  June  20,  1859  (not  1857)— which 
accords  with  the  above  statement  that  the  time  was  "  the  height  of  summer." 

Miss  Frances  Butler,  of  11,  Gloucester  Road,  Teignmouth,  on  being 
asked  whether  she  heard  the  account  from  the  percipient's,  Mrs.  H.  Butler's, 
own  lips,  replied  (on  April  19,  1886)  that  she  could  not  recollect  whether 
she  heard  it  from  Mrs.  H.  Butler  or  from  her  own  mother,  Mrs.  H. 
Butler's  sister.  A  sister  of  Mr.  Butler's  tells  Professor  Barrett  that  she 
remembers  being  told  of  this  incident  shortly  after  it  took  place.  Mr.  Butler 
regrets  not  having  questioned  his  mother  on  the  subject,  but  he  feared  to 
make  her  uncomfortable. 

(521)  From  Mr.  David  Crombie,  2,  Breakspear  Road,  St.  John's,  S.E. 
VOL.   IL  2   I   2 

484  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  1884. 

"  My  eldest  brother,  John,  left  home  when  I  was  very  young,  to  become 
an  apprentice  to  Captain  Wallace,  trading  to  the  East  Indies.  [He  had 
been  away  for  about  three  years,  but  was  returning,  and  was  daily  expected, 
when]  my  mother  had  a  vision  in  which  she  saw  him,  wearing  a  most  careworn 
and  anxious  look,  enter  the  bedroom,  and  so  distinct  was  the  vision  that 
she  awoke  my  father,  who  was  sleeping  at  her  side,  exclaiming,  '  John,' 
(my  father's  name),  '  there's  Johnnie.'  He  immediately  sat  up,  and 
subsequently  got  out  of  bed,  and  went  out  on  to  the  landing  to  see  if  his 
boy  had  really  arrived  ;  finding  all  quiet,  and  having  gone  downstairs  to 
see  if  the  front  door  were  fastened,  he  returned  to  bed,  not  over  well 
pleased  at  having  been  sent  on  this  wild-goose-chase. 

"  Next  night,  about  the  same  time,  my  mother  declared  she  again  saw 
Johnnie,  looking  so  flushed  and  ill,  and  again  called  my  father's  attention 
to  the  apparition,  which,  however,  he  did  not  see,^  and  on  this  occasion  he 
did  not  leave  his  bed.  On  the  third  night  she  again  saw  the  apparition, 
this  time  as  white  as  a  sheet ;  it  smiled  and  passed  away. 
My  father  saw  what  a  deep  impression  these  visions  had  made  on  her 
mind  ;  and,  without  her  knowing  it,  he  made  an  entry  in  cypher  on  the  fly- 
leaf of  the  old  folio  family  Bible,  to  see  if  it  were  possible  that  his  death 
could  have  been  foretold  in  this  extraordinary  way. 

"  The  visions  had  indeed  made  an  indelible  and  sorrowful  impression  on 
my  mother's  mind,  and,  as  the  saying  goes,  she  was  full  of  it ;  and  to  her 
immediate  and  most  intimate  friends  she  had  related  all  the  circumstances, 
and  her  own  fears  in  connection  with  them.  Of  those  to  whom  she  had 
communicated  the  facts  were  Mrs.  and  Miss  Wallace,  mother  and  sister 
respectively  of  the  captain  with  whom  my  brother  sailed  ;  Misses  Jarvis, 
two  maiden  aunts ;  Miss  Bartlett  and  Mrs.  Lowe,  widow  of  a  sea-captain. 

"  As  time  wore  on  the  vessel  at  length  arrived,  and  shortly  thereafter 
a  letter  was  delivered  with  a  black  seal,  announcing  my  brother's  illness 
and  death,  which,  on  reference  to  the  memorandum,  occurred  at  the  very 
time  the  dreams  were  dreamed.  The  captain,  in  writing,  gave  an  extract 
from  the  entry  in  the  log.  Then  my  father,  who  had  no  faith  in  dreams, 
for  the  first  time  in  his  life  was  compelled  to  admit  that  in  this  case  there 
seemed  to  be  good  grounds  for  believing  in  them. 

"  On  the  morning  following  the  announcement  of  my  brother's  death, 
I  was  requested  to  deliver  a  number  of  notes  with  intimation  of  his  death 
to  many  of  our  personal  friends  ;  amongst  them  were  those  whose  names  I 
have  given  above.  On  my  return  home,  I  was  naturally  asked  what  they 
had  said  after  reading  the  notes.  Mrs.  Wallace  said,  '  Dear  me,  then 
Elfie's '  (my  mother's  name)  '  dream  has  come  true.'  A  similar  remark 
was  made  by  her  aunts,  the  Misses  Jarvis.  Mrs.  Lowe  sent  condolences, 
and  said  my  mother's  fears  had  been  too  well  founded. 

"  As  I  did  not  understand  what  they  referred  to  I  asked  what  they 
meant,  and  for  the  first  time  I  learned  all  the  particulars  ;  and  although  I 
could  only  have  been  between  6  and  7  years  old,  [55  years  ago]  the 
facts  left  an  impression  on  my  mind  that  time  has  not  effaced.  Of 
course,  the  story  was  often  repeated  in  my  presence  afterwards,  thereby 
keeping  it  fresh  in  my  memory,  and  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the 
details  so  far  as   came  under  my  personal  knowledge.  "  D.  C." 

^  See  p.  105,  second  note. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  485 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Crombie  says  : — 

"  The  parties  named  are  dead  from  25  to  40  years  ago.  My  brother 
died  of  scarlet  fever,  which  ran  its  course  with  remarkable  swiftness. 
The  death  occurred  on  the  day  my  mother  had  the  third  dream." 

[In  conversation  on  July  28th,  1884,  Mr.  Crombie  told  me  that  he 
remembers  seeing  the  entry  in  the  Bible,  after  the  news  arrived, 
and  that  it  was  pointed  to  as  proof  of  the  correspondence  of  dates.  He 
describes  his  mother  as  the  very  opposite  of  a  visionary.  The  visions  were 
naturally  enough  regarded  as  dreams  by  the  persons  to  whom  they  were 
told  ;  but  Mr.  Crombie  is  convinced  that  his  mother  was  awake,  and  points 
to  his  father's  conduct,  on  being  woke,  as  evidence  of  this.  I  must  point 
out  that  a  repetition  of  the  sort  here  described,  on  three  successive  nights, 
has  not  been  alleged  in  any  of  our  first-hand  telepathic  cases  ;  ^  and  it  is 
the  kind  of  detail  that  may  very  naturally  have  got  imported  into  the 
narrative  (see  p.  229,  note;  but  see  also  p.  237,  note).  But  it  is  not,  of 
course,  vital  to  the  evidence.] 

(522)  From  Miss  J.  Connolly,  of  21,  Wickham  Road,  New  Cross, 
S.E.,  head-mistress  of  a  high  school  for  girls.  u  ^pj-ij  4^}^   1885 

"  One  Christmas  my  father  was  invited  to  spend  his  college  vacation 
with  a  very  dear  and  valued  friend,  a  Mrs.  Brown.  However,  as  he  was 
also  invited  by  my  grandfather,  he  preferred  to  accept  that  invitation, 
glad  of  the  opportunity  of  meeting  my  mother.  The  house  was  a  large 
one,  and  full  of  Christmas  guests.  One  night  there  was  a  dinner-party  of 
friends  from  the  neighbourhood.  After  dinner  such  a  storm  arose  that  my 
grandmother  found  herself  obliged  to  provide  everyone  with  beds  for  the 
night.  .  .  .  My  grandmother,  to  arrange  for  her  unexpected  company, 
gave  up  the  young  men's  bedrooms  to  the  ladies,  and  turned  the  library 
into  a  sort  of  barrack  room  for  the  night. 

"At  3  o'clock,  my  Uncle  William  spoke  to  my  father,  who  was  sleeping 
near  him,  and  said,  '  James,  who  are  you  talking  to  ;  what  are  you  saying  ? ' 
My  father  raised  himself  up,  looked  at  his  watch,  and  replied,  'I 
have  seen  a  vision.  Mrs.  Brown  has  been  standing  at  my  feet,  and  she 
said,  "  Good-bye,  James !  I  wished  greatly  to  see  you,  to  say  good-bye 
to  you  before  I  left  this  world,  and  I  have  now  come  to  you.  Serve  God 
and  be  a  good  man,  and  He  will  prosper  and  bless  you.  I  have  loved 
you  so  dearly  from  the  time  you  were  a  boy,  that  I  had  to  say  good-bye. 
But  let  us  meet  again."     She  waved  her  hand  and  disappeared.' 

"  Both  the  young  men  were  much  impressed,  and  in  the  morning  my 
father  told  my  grandmother  of  the  dream  or  vision.  She  advised  him  to 
write  an  ordinary  letter,  just  inquiring  about  Mrs.  Brown  and  her 
daughters.     Letters  then  cost  tenpence,   and  were  not  written  on  slight 

1  Since  this  was  written,  however,  I  have  received  an  account  from  Mrs.  Perryn,  of 
27,  Adrian  Square,  Westgate-on-Sea,  in  which  she  states  that,  when  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  November,  1863,  she  dreamt  with  unusual  vividness,  on  three  successive  nights,  that  a 
fire  broke  out  in  the  cellar  of  her  brother's  house,  and  that  he  was  wrapped  in  flames — the 
fact  being  that  on  the  first  of  the  three  nights  he  was  fearfully  injured  by  an  explosion  of 
some  chemicals  with  which  he  was  experimenting  in  his  cellar.  Mrs.  Perryn  did  not  know 
that  he  experimented  with  chemicals  ;  can  recall  no  other  instance  of  dreams  repeated  on 
successive  nights  ;  is  not  in  the  habit  of  having  distressing  dreams  ;  and  described  the 
accident  in  writing  to  her  sisters  "  exactly  as  it  happened,"  before  hearing  the  news.  But 
a  dream-experience  is,  as  we  have  seen,  indefinitely  weaker  evidence  than  an  analogous 
case  of  the  "borderland "  or  the  waking  class. 

486  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

occasions.  My  father  did  write,  but  a  letter  crossed  his,  saying  that  at  3 
o'clock  on  the  very  night  of  his  dream,  Mrs.  Brown  had  died,  and  her 
last  conscious  words  were  regrets  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  see  him 
to  say  good-bye. 

"  My  father  never  much  liked  telling  this  story.  He  firmly  believed 
he  had  seen  a  vision.  I  have  heard  it  from  his  lips,  and  I  have  seen  the 
two  letters  which  crossed  each  other  in  the  post.  My  father  was  the 
Rev.  James  Campbell  Connolly,  Chaplain  of  Woolwich  Dockyard." 

In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Connolly  writes,  on  April  9,  1885  : — 

(1)  "  The  two  letters  that  crossed  in  the  post  were  among  my  mother's 
papers,  and  I  have  failed  to  find  them.  She  died  when  I  was  quite  a 
child,  and  I  heard  her  tell  the  story  and  show  the  letters,  not  thinking  that 
I  was  listening.  My  dear  father  died  just  two  years  ago,  in  the  full 
possession  of  his  faculties,  and  I  heard  it  twice  from  his  own  lips. 

(2)  "  The  date  is  difiicult.  My  father  married  in  1840,  and  I  should 
say,  judging  from  his  ordination,  &c.,  that  it  must  have  been  between 
1830  and  1835.  Mrs.  Brown's  daughters  are  both  dead — Mrs.  Daly,  who 
married  the  last  Warden  of  Galway,  and  Mrs.  Foley.  Both  these  ladies 
told  me  the  story.     They  were  present  at  their  mother's  deathbed. 

(3)  "  I  am  certain  my  father  described  the  apparition  as  speaking 
directly  to  him." 

[In  no  first-hand  case  has  the  sensory  impression  included  so  long  a 
remark  as  that  here  recorded.  If  accurately  remembered,  it  probably 
indicates  that  the  percipient  was  more  asleep  than  awake ;  but  his  experi- 
ence must  apparently  have  been  very  unlike  an  ordinary  dream.] 

(523)  From  Mrs.  B.,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  whose  full  name  we 
are  at  liberty  to  mention,  but  not  to  print.  u  October  30th   1884 

"When  I  was  about  16  years  old,  my  father  came  down  to  breakfast 
one  morning,   and,  after  saying  he  had  been  awake  a  long  time,  he  said, 

'  and  about  5  or  6  '  (I  forget  the  exact  time)    '  I  saw  old  Mr.  ;  he 

came  and  stood  by  the  bed  a  minute  or  two,  and  then  went.'  In  the 
course  of  the  day  we  heard  of  the  death  of  this  old  gentleman,  of  whose 
illness  we  had  previously  known,  but  whose  death  we  had  not  anticipated, 
as  it  was  not  thought  his  complaint  was  one  likely  to  cause  death.  On 
inquiry,  we  learnt  that  he  had  died  at  the  hour  that  my  father  had  said 
he  had  had  a  visit  from  him. 

"  My  father  was  a  merry,  strong-minded  man,  with  a  scientific  turn  of 
mind  and  a  great  scorn  of  superstition.  He  is,  alas  !  now  dead  some  years, 
and  I  don't  think  we  any  of  us  thought  more  of  the  circumstance  than  that 
it  was  odd,  but  I  remembered  it." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  died  on  January 

10th,  1866,  aged  58,  the  cause  of  death  being  a  contused  wound  on  the 
skin,  which  brought  on  erysipelas. 

(524)  From  Mrs.  Field,  16,  Clifton  Road,  Brighton.  Her  mother 
being  old,  we  did  not  press  for  a  first-hand  account.  "June   1884 

"In  the  year  1840,  my  grandfather,  Sir  L.  S.,  was  appointed  Gover- 
nor of  the  Island  of  Mauritius ;  and  my  mother  went  to  see  him  and  take 
leave  of  him.     My  grandfather  was  getting  old,  and  my  mother  was  in  a 

IV.]  "BOBDEBLAND"   CASES.  487 

very  delicate  and  precarious   state  of  health,  so  the  probabilities  were 
strong  that  she  would  never  see  her  father  again,  and  so  it  turned  out. 

"  My  mother  [who  was  living  at  Cheltenham]  had  been  sitting  up  late 
one  night,  writing  her  Indian  letters,  intently  finishing  one  to  her  husband, 
which  for  some  reason  she  had  rather  delayed  finishing,  and  which,  as 
next  day  was  mail-day,  must  be  finished  that  night.  It  was  winter  time, 
and  the  fire  was  burning  quite  brightly  in  the  grate  for  some  little  time 
after  my  mother  went  to  bed,  which,  on  account  of  her  Indian  letter,  she 
had  not  been  able  to  do  till  past  12  o'clock.  She  was  lying  broad  awake, 
and  the  room  was  lighted  quite  well  by  the  firelight.  She  had  not  been 
thinking  of  anything  but  her  Indian  letter,  and  she  could  not  have  had  the 
least  notion  or  fear  her  father  was  dead,  as  he  had  died  suddenly,  after  a 
kind  of  seizure,  from  which  he  only  recovered  to  speak  a  few  articulate 
words — but  the  fact  that  he  had  been  ill  never  reached  England  until  the 
public  official  news  arrived  giving  the  news  of  his  death,  together  with  the 
usual  private  letters  giving  all  the  details.  My  mother  was  wide  awake. 
The  bed — an  old-fashioned  fourpost — faced  the  fireplace,  and  on  the  side 
next  the  window  the  curtains  were  closely  drawn.  Suddenly  my  mother 
saw  a  very  tall  figure  of  a  man  (my  grandfather  was  unusually  tall)  pass  the 
foot  of  her  bed  slowly.  She  called  out,  '  Who's  there  ? '  in  great  fright,  and 
as  she  called  a  hand  opened  the  curtains  on  the  side  where  they  closed,  and 
the  same  figure  was  there.  My  mother  sprang  out  of  bed  and  ran  into  the 
next  room,  where  the  dear  old  '  C  [a  head-nurse]  slept  with  my  two  little 
sisters,  almost  babies.  One  of  these  little  sisters  had  given  the  old  faith- 
ful servant  the  name  of  '  Tootoo.'  My  mother  rushed  into  the  babies' 
room  calling  out,  'Tootoo,  there's  a  man  in  my  room,  please  get  up  and  call 
the  servants.     There  are  robbers  in  the  house.' 

"  After  going  back  with  her  mistress,  and  putting  her  to  bed,  the  nurse 
got  a  scrap  of  paper,  and  wrote  down  the  hour  and  minute  my  mother  had 
rushed  into  the  night-nursery — she,  '  Tootoo,'  feeling  some  bad  news  was 
coming,  and  that  my  mother  had  seen  no  living  man.  The  very  next 
Mauritius  mails  brought  the  public  papers,  stating  that  at  such  a  time, 
giving  the  minutes  even,  the  guns  from  the  fort  gave  notice  to  the  Island 
that  the  Governor's  late  illness  had  ended  fatally.  It  appeared  that  his  last 
words  had  been  of  his  daughter.  The  time  noted  down  by  '  Tootoo  '  and 
the  official  announcement  of  his  death  exactly  agreed. 

"  Charlotte  E.  Field." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Field  says  : — 

"1.  I  have  often  heard  my  mother's  experience  from  her  own  lips;  but 
I  was  only  a  child  at  the  time,  and  she  went  back  to  India  about  three 
years  after,  to  rejoin  my  father,  who  was  a  Bombay  Civilian,  and  I  did  not 
hear  her  speak  of  this  experience  of  hers  till  she  came  home  again.  This 
would  be  in  all  quite  10  years  after  my  grandfather's  death,  but  '  Tootoo  ' 
used  often  to  talk  to  me  about  it,  when  she  was  with  us,  as  I  have  men- 
tioned in  the  account  I  sent  you.  I  never  saw  the  entry  of  date.  '  Tootoo  ' 
used  often  to  say  to  me  it  was  a  pity  perhaps  she  had  not  kept  it.  She 
did  keep  it  for  some  little  while,  but  in  moving  house  she  lost  it.  It  was 
just  hastily  pencilled  down  on  a  morsel  of  paper. 

"2.  The  difference  of  longitude  was  carefully  accounted  for.  My 
mother's  'apparition,'  or  whatever  it  was,  came  to  her  between  12  and  1 
at  night — nearer  1  than  12. 

488  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  3.  No,  I  have  never  heard  that  my  mother  ever  saw  any  other  vision. 
She  is,  I  should  say,  not  an  imaginative  person,  and,  besides,  as  she  had  no 
idea  her  father  was  even  ill,  she  could  not  have  imagined  she  saw  him,  and 
no  one  ever  mentioned  to  her  the  fact  of  '  Tootoo's  '  entry  of  date  till  the 
official  date  came  home  in  the  public  papers  ;  and  then  my  mother  remarked 
to  'Tootoo,'  who  often  told  me  what  she  had  said,  'Oh,  then,  'Tootoo,'  that 
must  have  been  my  father  I  saw  that  night  I  was  so  frightened — not  a 
robber  as  I  thought.'  My  mother  has  often  told  us  she  had  made  this 
remark  to  '  Tootoo.'  " 

The  Army  List  confirms  the  date  of  Sir  L.  S.'s  appointment,  and  gives 
January  2nd,  1842,  as  the  date  of  his  death.  The  Mauritius  Register  and 
the  Times  add  that  he  died  suddenly. 

(525)  Mr.  Thomas  Young,  of  Elsinore  House,  Robert  Road,  Hands- 
worth,  Birmingham,  sent  us  an  account  of  the  following  incident,  as 
"often  related"  to  him  by  his  mother  (resident  at  71,  Highbury  Hill,  N.). 
We  asked  him  to  apply  to  her  for  a  first-hand  account,  which  she  gave 
in  the  following  letter  to  him,  and  afterwards  viva  voce  to  the  present 
writer.  Her  version,  which  was  given  independently,  corresponds  exactly 
with  his ;  which  is  some  proof  that  the  facts  have  not  been  distorted,  in 
recent  years  at  any  rate,  through  lapse  of  memory. 

"January  10th,  1885. 

"  My  Dear  Son, — You  ask  me  to  relate  Aunt  Lucy's  dream  %  it  was 
not  a  dream,  but  a  reality.  You  must  know  that  Uncle  Bennet  was  a 
small  farmer,  with  a  large  family  of  12  children,  consequently  some  had  to 
go  away  from  home.  They  lived  in  a  small  village,  Trelyon,  near  St. 
Ives,  Cornwall.  Now,  what  I  am  going  to  relate  is  about  their  daughter 
Betsy,  who  had  taken  a  situation — I  think  at  St.  Ives.  One  morning 
aunt  woke  up  and  saw,  standing  by  her  bedside,  this  daughter,  with  her 
hair  streaming  all  over  her  face,  dripping  wet,  and  she,  poor  thing,  look- 
ing half  drowned.  Aunt  said,  '  Betsy,  where  have  you  come  from  ? '  The 
weather  being  frightfully  bad,  she  thought  she  had  walked  home  through 
the  wet.  She  told  her  to  go  and  dry  herself,  but  she  vanished  away. 
Poor  aunt  was  dreadfully  alarmed.  They  sent  to  her  place,  and  it  appears 
she  would  go  to  Plymouth,  and  went  in  a  little  saiKng-vessel,  and  that 
very  morning  the  vessel  was  lost  and  all  hands  perished.  Now,  my  dear 
son,  I  can  vouch  for  every  word  being  true,  for  aunt  was  a  true  Christian 
woman.  I  was  a  girl  when  she  told  me  the  unhappy  incident,  but  it 
always  made  a  most  vivid  impression  on  me. — Believe  me,  dear  son,  your 
loving  mother,  "C.Young." 

In  conversation  Mrs.  Young  mentioned  that  she  heard  of  this  inci- 
dent within  a  day  or  two  of  its  occurrence,  and  that  from  her  aunt's 
manner  it  made  a  very  strong  impression  on  her.  She  was  about  14  at 
the  time,  which  would  make  the  date  about  1825.  Her  aunt  was  a  busy, 
practical  woman,  with  no  turn  and  no  time  for  fancies.  The  cause  of  the 
girl's  sudden  departure,  Mrs.  Young  thinks,  was  not  known.  We  have 
endeavoured  to  find  a  record  of  the  accident,  but  have  failed,  not  knowing 
the  name  of  the  vessel. 

(526)  From  Miss  Caulfield,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  N.W.  Her  father 
was  Commander  Edwin  T.  Caulfield,  of  Raheendufie,  Queen's  Co.,  and  of 
Beckford  House,  Bath. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"    CASES.  489 

"December  8th,  1883. 

"When  my  father  was  at  sea  in  H.M.S.  '  Lavinia,'  he  was  very 
intimate  with  two  midshipmen,  John  Frederick  J.,  and  T.  [The  full 
names  were  given  in  confidence.]  They  had  as  yet  formed  but  few 
opinions  as  to  the  truth  of  Divine  Revelation ;  although  all  more  or  less 
religiously  disposed,  and  anxious  to  learn.  The  fact  of  there  being  a 
future  state,  and  that  one  of  probation  or  retribution,  was  more  especially 
under  discussion  between  them.  To  solve  this  mystery  for  the  survivors, 
they  pledged  themselves  to  one  another,  that  were  it  permitted  to  give  an 
intimation  of  the  reality  of  an  existence  after  death,  the  man  that  died 
first  should  show  himself  to  the  others.^ 

"  My  father  was  taken  prisoner,  and  was  by  great  interest  placed  on 
his  parole,  during  two  years  in  France  ;  and  one  night, — whether  waking 
or  sleeping,  he  said  he  could  not  tell — he  saw  T.  appear.  At  once  he 
realised  the  fact  that  he  was  dead,  and  that  he  had  come  to  redeem  his 
promise.  He  asked  him  whether  he  was  happy  ;  to  which  the  apparition 
replied  by  slowly  swaying  his  head  to  and  fro,  with  a  sad  expression,  and 
a  sound  as  of  the  clanking  of  chains  accompanied  the  gesture.  He  then 
vanished.  How  soon  afterwards  my  father  received  news  of  his  friend,  I 
am  unable  to  say ;  but  he  was  informed  of  his  having  been  killed  on  board 
ship  by  the  fall  of  a  '  block '  from  the  rigging  (I  think  during  action), 
which  caused  instantaneous  death. 

"  John  Frederick  J.  had  passed  his  examination,  and  was  a 
lieutenant  at  the  time  of  his  death.  My  father  was  again  in  bed — 
whether  awake,  in  a  trance,  or  sleeping,  he  could  not  say ;  he  believed  he 
was  dreaming,  but  it  seemed  like  being  awake.  His  friend  and  shipmate 
J.  appeared  to  him.  At  once  recognising  the  fulfilment  of  the  agree- 
ment made  between  them,  he  knew  that  he  was  dead ;  and  asked  him  the 
same  question  as  he  did  his  friend  T. ;  to  which  an  exactly  similar 
reply  was  made,  i.e.,  by  the  slow  swaying  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  the 
sound  as  of  the  clanking  of  chains.  In  due  time  my  father  was  apprised  of 
the  death  of  this  friend  also  ;  who  had  had  his  arm  and  shoulder  blade  torn 
away  by  a  cannon  ball,  at  the  storming  of  Algiers.  My  sister  and  I  both 
perfectly  recollect  hearing  this  story  from  our  father  on  several  occasions. 

"  S.  F.  A.  C." 

Miss  Caulfield's  sister  also  signs  her  initials,  "  L.  L.  A." 

From  an  examination  of  the  ship's  books  of  H.M.S.  "  Lavinia,"  at  the 
Record  Office,  we  find  that  "  T."  joined  that  vessel  in  the  same  year  as 
Miss  Caulfield's  father,  1806,  and  that  he  was  killed  by  the  fall  of  a  top- 
rail  on  July  14,  1808.  "J."  has  also  been  traced  on  the  books  of  the 
"  Lavinia,"  and  seems  to  have  left  that  ship  in  1810.  We  have  received 
from  the  Record  Office  a  certificate  to  the  efiect  that  he  was  dangerously 
wounded  in  the  attack  on  Algiers  on  Aug.  27,  1816,  and  that  his  "  left 
arm  was  removed  at  the  shoulder-joint."  We  find  from  the  Gentleman^ s 
Magazine  that  his  death  followed  on  Oct.  3. 

If  the  clanking  of  chains  ^  really  formed  a  feature  in  both  these 

1  As  to  compacts  of  this  sort,  see  p.  66.  On  the  telepathic  theory,  the  apparent  fulfil- 
ment of  the  compact  is  of  course  due  to  a  telepathic  impulse  transmitted  before,  not  after, 
death. 

2 1  must  point  out  that  this  sound,  being  a  common  feature  in  ghostly  legends,  is  one 
not  unlikely  to  get  imported  into  a  second-hand  version  even  of  a  genuine  telepathic  case 
See  the  remark  on  the  prevalence  of  the  number  three,  p.  229,  note. 

490  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

experiences,  it  seems  an  excellent  instance  of  the  percipient's  investi- 
ture of  the  telepathic  impression  with  his  own  dream-imagery 
(YoLL,  p.  539). 

The  next  case  ought  perhaps  to  be  classed  as  a  dream.  But  the 
sense  of  someone's  entrance  into  the  room,  and  presence  by  the  bed 
which  the  perceiver  is  conscious  of  actually  occupying,  is  very 
characteristic  of  a  semi- waking  state,  and  is  not,  I  think,  a  common 
feature  in  dreams  which  are  afterwards  distinctly  recognised  as  such. 

(527)  From  the  Rev.  S.  W.  Hanks  (District  Secretary  of  the  American 
Seamen's  Friend  Society,  and  well  known  to  Professor  William  James,  of 
Harvard,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  S.P.R.). 

"  Congregational  House,  Boston. 

"April  25th,  1884. 

"  Two  of  my  three  brothers  were  sailors.  The  eldest  (D wight)  went  to 
sea  when  he  was  1 1  years  old,  and  was  at  sea  most  of  the  time  until  his 
death,  at  the  age  of  25  years.  On  one  of  his  voyages  he  was  wrecked,  and 
remained  on  the  wreck  nine  days  without  food  or  drink.  After  this  my 
mother  never  saw  him,  though  by  a  letter  from  him  to  my  other  brother 
she  had  heard  the  particulars  about  the  wreck,  from  which  he  was  taken 
off  by  a  passing  vessel.  On  the  night  of  December  5th,  1829,  my  mother 
dreamed  that  he  was  dead.  When  she  arose  in  the  morning  she  was 
much  affected,  and  during  the  day  she  was  weeping  nearly  all  the  time. 
When  asked  what  made  her  think  that  Dwight  was  dead,  she  said  that 
in  the  night  he  came  into  her  room,  trembhng,  and  looking  very  pale, 
and  said,  '  Mother.''  She  said,  '  Dwight,  what  is  the  matter  "?  I  will  get  up, 
and  do  you  come  and  lie  down  upon  my  bed.'  He  rephed,  '  No,  mother,' 
and  walked  out  of  the  room.  From  that  time  she  always  spoke  of  his 
death  with  the  utmost  confidence. 

"In  July,  1830,  my  other  sailor  brother  was  in  New  York,  where  he 
was  met  by  a  stranger  who  asked  him  if  he  knew  a  sailor  of  the  name  of 
Dwight  Hanhs .?  He  replied,  '  I  have  a  brother  of  that  name  from  whom 
I  have  not  heard  for  a  long  time.'  The  stranger  then  said  to  him  that  a 
man  by  the  name  of  Dwight  Hanks,  about  25  years  old,  a  little  shorter 
than  himself,  and  a  little  lame  from  having  broken  one  of  his  legs  when  he 
was  a  boy,  as  he  said,  was  killed  on  board  the  barque,  '  Four  Sons,'  of  a  fall 
from  aloft  during  a  storm,  on  the  night  of  December  5th,  1829.  'The 
vessel  is  now  in  port,  and  if  you  will  go  with  me  on  board  I  will  tell  you 
just  where  he  fell.  We  buried  him  at  sea,  and  his  chest  is  on  board  the 
vessel.'  My  brother  went  on  board  and  found  the  statement  of  the 
stranger  corroborated.  When  my  mother  heard  of  it  she  said,  '  This  is  no 
news  to  me.  I  have  never  had  a  moment's  doubt  about  Dwight's  death 
since  the  time  of  my  dream.' 

"  These  facts  are  well  remembered  by  myself  and  my  sister,  now  80 
years  old.  "  S.  W.  Hanks." 

Mr.  Hanks  writes  to  us  on  March  27th,  1885  : — 

"  I  inquired  of  my  sister  if  any  memorandum  of  the  date  of  my 
mothers's  dream  was  made  at  the   time.     She  informs    me  that  none  has 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  491 

been  preserved.  She  informs  me  that  a  cousin  of  ours  was  visiting  the 
family  at  the  time,  who  said  of  the  dream  :  '  This  is  so  remarkable  that  I 
will  make  a  memorandum  of  it.'  He  did  so.  He  is  now  dead,  and  the 
memorandum  is  lost.  My  sister  is  very  confident  about  the  date,  as  she 
has  letters  which  she  thinks  fix  it.  She  is  now  in  such  a  state  of  health 
that  she  cannot  attend  to  the  matter.  /  did  not  keep  the  date,  but 
distinctly  remember  theyac^." 

(528)  From  Mrs.  Monteith  Brown,  Oak  Cottage,  Hythe. 

"  1884. 

"  The  following  is  an  account  told  me  by  my  aunt,  then  Mary  Noble, 
of  the  appearance  of  her  brother,  Edward  Meadows  Noble,  at  the  time  of 
his  death.  It  took  place  in  the  night,  and  she  was  awoke  by  the 
sound  of  water  dripping,  ^  and  saw,  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  her  fourth 
brother,  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy,  and  then  serving  in  China.  She  sprang 
up  exclaiming,  '  Ned,  what  are  you  doing  here  1 '  when  the  figure  vanished. 
In  due  course  of  time,  the  news  came  of  his  having  been  drowned  ofi" 
Amoy,  in  China,  about  the  time  of  the  appearance. 

"  E.  Adela  Beown." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Brown  adds  : — 

"  I  heard  the  story  direct  from  my  aunt,  who  is  since  dead.  On  referring 
to  a  naval  biography,  I  find  the  date  of  my  uncle's  death  was  January  22nd, 
1843."     This  date  is  confirmed  by  the  United  Service   Magazine. 

[This  is  perhaps  a  case  of  hereditary  susceptibility  (see  p.  137,  note)  ;' 
for  Mrs.  Brown  tells  us  that  her  grandfather,  Admiral  Noble,  when 
flag-lieutenant  to  Lord  Nelson,  had  a  vision,  coinciding  with  death,  of  his 
cousin,  Jefiery  Wheelock,  who  was  serving  with  the  Duke  of  York  in 
1794.     But  this  is  only  family  tradition.] 

(529)  From  Mrs.  Martin,  housekeeper  to  Miss  Anna  Swanwick,  23, 
Cumberland  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.,  who  considers  that  her 
memory  is  accurate  and  trustworthy,  in  spite  of  advanced  age. 

"  January,  1884. 

"When  I  was  about  seven  years  old  [about  1807],  my  cousin,  Joseph 
Newton,  a  youth  of  about  17  years  of  age,  whose  mother  and  stepfather 
occupied  a  farm  near  Ha  warden,  and  were  tenants  of  Sir  Stephen  Glynn, 
came  to  visit  my  mother  in  Liverpool.  He  was  so  delighted  with  the 
shipping  that  he  left  the  farm  and  entered  the  establishment  of  a  shipwright. 
About  two  years  later,  his  mother,  who  rarely  left  home,  presented  herself 
at  my  mother's  house  and  said,  '  I  shall  never  again  see  Joseph.  As  I 
lay  awake  last  night,  he  appeared  to  me  naked  and  dripping  with  water. 
I  know  that  he  is  drowned.'  This  proved  to  be  the  case.  He  had  gone 
with  a  companion  to  bathe  in  the  Mersey,  and  had  been  carried  away  by 
the  current.  Seven  or  eight  days  afterwards  his  body  was  seen  floating 
in  the  water,  and  was  picked  up  by  a  packet. 

"  I  remember  my  aunt's  visit,  and  I  remember  attending  my  cousin's 
funeral.  I  cannot  say  that  I  actually  heard  my  aunt  relate  her  dream, 
but  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  tell  the  story.  My  mother  and  aunt 
are  both  dead.  I  never  heard  that  my  aunt  had  any  similar  dream  at 
any  other  time.  "  Susan  Maetin." 

1  Compare  the  next  case,  and  cases  513,  535,  537  ;  and  see  p.  26. 

492  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Mrs.  Martin  further  states  that  this  was  the  only  occasion  on  which 
her  aunt  visited  Liverpool. 

It  has  been  impossible  to  trace  the  date  of  this  death,  as  it  occurred 
before  the  days  of  registration. 

[If  the  narrator  has  really  a  recollection  of  her  aunt's  visit,  which  both 
preceded  the  news  of  the  death  and  was  a  consequence  of  the  vision,  her 
evidence  is  not  very  far  from  being  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).] 

(530)  From  Miss  Jameson,  6,  Leamington  Villas,  Acton.  She  is  the 
youngest  daughter  referred  to  in  the  narrative,  being  at  the  time  (1839) 
10  years  of  age.     Her  father  was  residing  in  Norfolk. 

"  April  30th,  1884. 

"  On  a  bright  moonlight  night  in  January,  1839,  an  elderly  gentleman 
was  lying  dangerously  ill.  He  was  being  carefully  watched  that  night  by 
a  daughter.  During  the  hours  of  from  1 2  midnight  to  2  o'clock,  so  peculiar 
were  his  symptoms,  the  daughter  thought  her  father  dying  or  dead,  and 
yet  there  seemed  anguish.  In  the  morning,  about  10  o'clock,  the  gentle- 
man came  downstairs.  His  youngest  daughter  was  frightened  to  see  her 
father  so  altered,  and  well  remembers  his  resting  his  elbow  upon  the 
mantelpiece,  with  his  forehead  on  his  hand,  and  also  saying,  '  May  my 
Lord  and  Almighty  Father  in  His  Infinite  mercy  grant  that  I  never  may 
pass  through  another  such  night.' 

"  On  the  same  evening  in  Boulogne,  the  eldest  son  of  the  above  thought 
he  would  go  home  early  that  night ;  bright  and  moonlight  ;  retired  to  rest 
(but  not  to  sleep)  shortly  after  12  ;  the  room  quite  light.  Not  feehng 
sleepy,  he  half  reclined,  resting  his  head  upon  one  hand.  Presently  he 
saw  his  bedroom  door  gently  open.  He  roused  himself  to  look  and  see 
who  could  be  coming  so  quietly  into  his  bedroom,  when  he  saw  his  father 
in  his  night-dress,  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  which  he  distinctly  recognised, 
bound  round  his  head.  His  father  came  to  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  stood 
and  gazed  at  his  son,  who  steadily  looked  at  him,  pained  to  see  his  father 
looking  so  ill.  The  father  quietly  withdrew,  the  door  closed,  the  son 
jumped  out  of  bed,  and  dressed  himself  quickly,  walked  about  the  streets 
of  Boulogne  with  the  watchman,  to  whom  he  related  occurrence,  at  6  a.m.  re- 
turned home,  and  wrote  immediately  to  his  sisters  to  inquire  how  his  father 
and  all  at  home  were.  The  letter  caused  great  surprise,  as  it  was  an  unusual 
one.  Some  months  after,  he  came  home  upon  a  visit,  when  he  alluded  to 
letter,  related  above  incident,  and  said  '  Wait  one  minute.  Just  recollect 
which  silk  handkerchief  father  had  round  his  head.  I  will  tell  you  which 
I  saw,  and  then  you  will  see  if  I  am  right.'  And  he  was  right.  My 
father  was  never  told  of  it.     My  brother  died  over  10  years  since." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Jameson  wrote  : — 

"  The  handkerchief  which  was  round  my  father's  head  was,  as  well  as 
I  can  describe  it,  of  an  undecided  pattern — colours  blended — scarcely  a 
scroll,  and  yet  a  scroll  pattern  is  the  best  name  I  can  give  ;  an  Indian 
style  ;  a  border  round,  with  the  colours  less  mixed  ;  red  and  yellow,  but 
not  glaring  ;  it  had  been  given  him  at  High  "Wycombe.  No  two  handker- 
chiefs the  same  pattern.  I  remember  two  others  very  well  ;  both  larger 
in  size  ;  one  used  to  be  called  brindled ;  no  decided  pattern,  but  the  colours 
woven  in  ;  a  lady  would  understand  by  my  saying  something  of  a  Paisley 

IV.]  '' BORDERLAND"    CASES.  493 

shawl  pattern ;  perhaps  you  will  understand  me  better  if  I  say  the  colours 
were  so  mixed  as  to  somewhat  resemble  the  tapestry  curtains  of  the 
present  day — where  there  is  not  a  decided  pattern. 

"E.  M.  Jameson." 

In  conversation  Miss  Jameson  told  me  that  she  distinctly  remembers 
the  arrival  of  this  letter,  and  the  sensation  it  caused.  It  was  the  fact  of 
its  arrival  that  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  family  the  coincidence  of  the 
father's  distress  and  the  brother's  anxiety.  Miss  Jameson  gave  a  vivid 
description  of  her  father's  aspect  and  words. 

Miss  Jameson  has  forwarded  to  us  the  following  letter  from  her  sister, 
Mrs.  Large.  ,,  Grange  Cottage,  Taplow. 

"November  15th,  1884. 

"  In  answer  to  your  request  about  dear  father  and  William,  it  was 
this,  as  near  as  I  can  remember.  One  night  William  woke  up,  whether 
from  any  noise  or  influence  I  do  not  know,  and  saw  a  figure  at  the  foot  of 
his  bed,  like  father,  with  a  countenance  of  extreme  misery.  He  was 
frightened,  and  covered  himself  up  with  bedclothes  till  daylight ;  whether 
he  slept  or  not  I  know  not.  Upon  comparing  notes  when  he  wrote  to 
know  how  we  all  were,  it  seems  that  night  was  the  one  father  suffered  so 
intensely  with  the  abscess,  and  thought  he  should  not  live.  I  remember 
when  he  came  down  in  the  morning  how  haggard  he  looked  ;  he  quite  up- 
set us.  But  he  roused  no  one  in  the  night — why  I  do  not  know.  From 
a  remark  he  made,  he  was  thinking  of  William  during  the  night.  That  is 
all  I  know.  u  ^    Large." 

Miss  Jameson  adds  : — 

"  I  think  my  own  version  is  correct,  for  I  am  singularly  correct  in  all 
things  bearing  upon  events  of  my  childhood.  I  was  10,  my  sister  18.  I 
think  the  impression  made  upon  my  mind  was  more  unmixed,  as  my 
brother  was  anything  but  timid ;  the  covering  himself  up,  I  think,  is  mixed 
with  another  matter.  "  E.  M.  J." 

(531)  From  Mrs.  Harvey,   1,  Rochester  Road,  Camden  Road,  N.W. 

"February  26th,  1884. 

"  On  February  8th,  1882,  my  eldest  brother  died  at  Croydon,  at  a 
quarter  past  6  in  the  morning.  About  6  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  received 
notice  of  his  death.  I  wrote  that  same  evening  to  my  aunt  and  uncle,  at 
Billericay,  in  Essex.  My  letter  was  received  by  them  the  next  day.  In 
the  following  July,  I  visited  my  aunt,  and  on  speaking  of  my  brother's 
death  she  said  : — 

"  '  On  the  morning  before  I  received  your  letter  I  was  lying  awake, 
when  I  distinctly  saw  the  form  of  a  tall  man  appear  at  my  bedside,  and 
slightly  bend  over  it.'  I  said,  '  Did  you  really  ? '  She  said,  '  That  I 
certainly  did,  and  I  awoke  your  uncle,  and  told  him  ;  I  could  not  discern 
features,  but  I  saw  the  form  of  a  man  as  plain  as  could  be.  I  did  not 
know  what  to  think  it  meant.'  My  aunt  had  not  heard  of  his  illness,  for 
it  was  not  made  known  to  even  his  wife  that  it  was  so  serious ;  his  death 
was  therefore  unexpected.  "  M.  Harvey." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  and  place  of  death  by  the  Register  of 
Deaths. 

494  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

We  are  requested  not  to  publish  the  aunt's  name.  Mrs.  Harvey,  at 
my  request,  wrote  to  ask  her  some  questions,  and  I  have  seen  the  reply, 
in  which  Mrs.  Harvey's  uncle,  speaking  of  his  wife,  says,  "  All  she  can  say 
is  that  it  was  so  "  ;  but  he  expresses  the  strongest  dread  and  dislike  of  the 
whole  subject. 

(532)  Prom  the  late  Mr.  G.  Wadsworth,  the  narrator  of  case  496  above.i 

"  October  21st,  1882. 

"In  1837  my  uncle  was  living  in  Birmingham.  My  father,  then 
living  in  Jersey,  one  morning  got  up  in  great  perturbation,  having  seen 
his  brother  dying,  and  said  to  my  mother  that  he  must  go  at  once  to 
Birmingham.  Communication  was  at  that  time  not  very  convenient,  and, 
moreover,  expensive,  so  that  my  mother  naturally  dissuaded  a  journey 
upon  such  an  extraordinary  assumption ;  but  so  convinced  was  my  father 
of  the  force  of  his  vision,  that  he  packed  up  his  portmanteau  ready  for  the 
summons  which  he  felt  certain  to  receive ;  and  when  a  few  days  after  he 
got  a  letter  from  me,  and  a  parcel  from  the  executor  notifying  the  death, 
he  at  once  started  by  return  steamer. 

"  My  uncle  at  the  time,  and  for  some  short  time  previously,  was 
known  to  be  ailing — not  what  could  be  called  really  dangerously.  The 
cause  of  his  death  occurred  after  I  left  him  in  the  evening,  and  before  my 
calling  in  the  morning,  so  that  he  may  be  said  to  have  died  suddenly,  so 
far  as  was  known  in  Jersey." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place,  very 
suddenly,  on  July  29,  1837. 

[Here  again  it  is  possible  that  the  experience  was  a  dream  ;  but  the 
impression  made  by  it  seems  to  have  been  of  a  very  unusual  kind.] 

(533)  From  Mrs.  Harnett,  a  near  relative  of  our  friend.  Miss  Porter, 
who  thinks  that  her  memory  may  be  fully  trusted ;  but  the  case  is  very 
remote.  «  HoUybank,  Kenley,  Surrey. 

"December,  1884. 

"  Having  been  requested  to  write  down  the  particulars  of  an  event 
which  occurred  in  the  lives  of  my  parents,  I  do  so. 

"In  1820,  my  father  and  mother,  both  being  under  50  years  of  age, 
and  in  perfect  health,  were  staying  in  Liverpool  (their  residence  being  at 
Whitehaven,  in  Cumberland),  names,  Joseph  and  Ann  Mondel. 

"  One  night,  the  latter,  sleeping  peacefully,  was  awoke  by  the  former 
calling  out : — 

"  '  Ann,  I  feel  sure  Anthony  Mathers  is  dead.' 

"  '  What  makes  you  think  so  *? ' 

"  '  He  has  just  been  at  the  bedside,  and  laid  an  icy -cold  hand  on  my 
cheek.' 

"  '  You  must  have  been  dreaming.' 

"  '  Oh,  but  my  cheek  is  still  cold.' 

"  The  old  and  much-esteemed  friend  was,  at  the  time,  sojourning  in 
one  of  the  West  Indian  islands.  The  season  was  known  to  be  more  than 
usually  sickly,  so  the  thought  of  his  danger  might  have  engendered  morbid 

1  These  two  cases  perhaps  afford  an  example  of  family  susceptibility  (p.  132,  note). 

IV.]  '^  BORDERLAND''  CASES.  495 

feelings.  My  father,  as  well  as  my  mother,  was  content  to  rest  in  that 
hope,  during  the  weeks  that  must  elapse  ere  the  news  of  that  night's 
occurrences  in  Jamaica  could  reach  England.  News  did  arrive,  and 
stated  that  on  the  night  referred  to  Mr.  Mathers  succumbed  to  a  sudden 
and  most  severe  attack  of  yellow  or  other  West  Indian  fever. 

"  As  a  child  I  first  heard  the  tale,  but  often  in  my  presence  was  it 
repeated  or  referred  to,  later  in  life,  without  any  change  or  amplification 
of  detail.  "  Janet  Harnett." 

[We  have  failed  to  trace  the  exact  date  of  the  death.] 

(534)  From  Miss  Crommelin,  1,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Victoria  Street, 
S.W.  u  ^prii^  1883. 

"  My  brother,  when  at  school,  having  gone  to  bed  one  summer's  night  in 

a  dormitory  with  several  other  boys,   heard  young  C ,  who  slept  next 

to  him,  call  out,  '  Crommelin  !  Look,  there  is  my  sister  standing  at  the 
foot  of  my  bed — see  ! '  My  brother  saw  nothing,  though  he  sat  up.^  It  was 
after  nine,  but  still  light,  if  I  remember  rightly.  Young  C still  per- 
sisted he  had  seen  her,  in  white.  Next  day  came  a  telegram  :  the  child  in 
question  had  died  of  heart  disease,  whilst  saying  her  prayers  at  that  very 
hour — she  had  presumably  also  been  wearing  her  white  night-gown.  As 
my  brother  is  now  dead,  and  as  we  have  no  knowledge  of  the  schoolfellow 
in  question,  this  cannot  be  more  fully  authenticated. 

"May  Crommelin." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  that  the  boy's  name  was  Close, 
but  Miss  Crommelin  does  not  know  to  what  family  of  Closes  he  belonged. 
The  incident  took  place  in  1858,  or  about  that  date,  when  her  brother 
was  12  years  old,  and  she  a  little  younger.  She  heard  of  it  from  her 
brother  soon  after  the  event. 

(535)  From  Mr.  Arthur  Bedford,  Ant's  Hill,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears, 
S.  Wales.  This  account  might  have  been  included  with  the  first-hand 
evidence,  but  is  placed  here  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  the  last. 

"March  10th,  1884. 
"  At  a  large  public  school,  one  winter's  morning,  about  dawn,  all  in  our 
dormitory  were  roused  up  by  a  fearful  cry  from  one  of  my  schoolfellows, 
who  declared  that  his  father,  dressed  in  a  pea  coat,  with  high  boots  on,  had 
appeared  at  his  bedside,  dripping  wet.  Some  days  afterwards  an  account 
of  the  foundering  of  the  vessel  he  commanded  in  Yarmouth  Roads  reached 
him,  and,  as  well  as  could  be  ascertained,  the  time  of  the  loss  of  the  vessel 
corresponded  with  the  appearance  of  this  double  of  my  schoolfellow's 
father  at  his  bedside.  The  body  was  recovered  and  found  to  be  dressed  as 
described.  I  would  like  to  give  name  and  other  circumstances,  but  the 
widow  of  my  schoolfellow  is  alive,  and  I  do  not  know  her  present  residence, 
to  ask  permission  for  disclosing  it.  "  Arthur  Bedford." 

(536)  From  Mrs.  Gardiner,  30,  Skene  Street,  Macdufi",  N.B.,  who 
heard  of  the  incident  from  her  sister  soon  after  its  occurrence.  The 
account  was  written  in  1883.  After  narrating  that  about  40  years  before, 
when  her  father  was  tenant  of  Mill  of  Boyndie,  a  large  farm  about  two 
miles  west  of  Banfi",  three  men  who  had  left  his  service  one  morning  got 

1  See  p.  105,  second  note. 

496  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

drunk,  pushed  out  to  sea  in  a  boat,  and  were  drowned,  Mrs.  G-ardiner 
continues  : — 

"  In  the  meantime  nothing  whatever  of  the  movements  of  these  men 
was  known  at  the  Mill  of  Boyndie  ;  but  all  the  household  retired  to  rest 
at  the  usual  hour.  My  sister,  as  was  her  custom,  locked  all  the  doors, 
and  placed  the  keys  on  a  table  beside  her  bed.  She  was  awakened  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  by  one  of  the  domestics  coming  to  her,  and  asking  for 
the  key  of  the  kitchen  door,  as  two  of  the  three  lads  who  had  left  in  the 
morning  had  just  looked  in  at  her  bedroom  window,  as  if  they  were  in 
want  of  something.  She  said  she  had  asked  them  what  they  required, 
but  they  had  returned  no  answer,  and  having  slowly  moved  down,  left  the 
back  of  the  house,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  third  one.  [The  premises 
were  searched  without  result.]  A  messenger  arrived  early  next  morning, 
saying  that  the  three  young  men  had  been  drowned.  My  sister  is  now 
dead,  but  I  am  certain,  if  she  had  been  alive,  she  would  have  corroborated 
the  whole  of  the  foregoing  statement." 

[The  evidence  here  of  course  depends,  not  on  the  mere  tale  of  a 
frightened  servant,  but  on  the  assurance  of  Mrs.  Gardiner's  sister  that  the 
fright  related  to  the  apparition  of  certain  persons  whose  death  was  not 
known  of  till  next  day.  A  mistake  of  identity  seems  improbable ;  as 
though  a  servant,  startled  from  sleep  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  would  be 
likely  enough  to  mistake  friends  seeking  admittance  for  tramps  or  burglars, 
she  would  not  be  likely  to  mistake  tramps  or  burglars  for  friends.  It 
must  be  observed,  however,  that  a  joint  apparition  of  three  persons  who  were 
all  dying  at  the  same  time  is  not  a  type  of  which  we  have  any  first-hand 
specimens ;  and  though  such  an  event  would  quite  admit  of  a  telepathic 
explanation,  it  suggests  a  certain  infusion  of  the  mythical  element. 
Clearly,  a  genuine  telepathic  incident  may  be  unconsciously  exaggerated 
and  improved,  just  as  much  as  a  spurious  one.] 

§  5.  The  remaining  second-hand  cases  are  from  narrators  who  were 
not  relatives  of  the  original  witnesses,  but  for  the  most  part  were 
thoroughly  intimate  with  them.  None  of  the  cases  are  the  mere 
recitals  of  stories  casually  picked  up  without  any  warranty  as  to 
their  bona  jides} 

(537)  Mr.  Colchester,  of  Bushey  Heath,  Herts,  sends  us  the  following  case 
from  a  MS.  work  entitled  Reminiscences  of  the  Bermudas,  written  by  his 
late  father,  who  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  narrated  was  assistant- 
surgeon  in  the  Royal  Artillery.     The  names  of  the  two  officers.  Lieutenants 

1  At  the  same  time,  these  are  specially  the  cases  in  respect  of  which  the  drawbacks 
to  transmitted  evidence,  which  were  described  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  149-57,  must  be  carefully  borne 
in  mind.  For  example,  the  narrator  of  the  last  case  described  to  us  how  a  friend  of 
hers,  the  late  Dr.  Smith,  of  Banff,  when  a  medical  student,  woke  and  "distinctly 
saw 'a  brother,"  who,  it  proved,  died  at  the  time.  But  we  afterwards  obtained 
an  accoimt  from  Mrs.  Findlater,  of  Dufftown,  N.B.,  a  daughter  of  the  percipient,  in 
which  it  was  stated  that  he  always  expressly  denied  having  seen  any  apparition,  or 
recognisable  form.  He  was  only  conscious  of  his  bed-curtains  shaking,  and  of  a 
shadow  passing  before  him.  The  point  remains  that  a  strong  impression  of  his  brother's 
death  was  conveyed  to  him  (though  the  death  was  quite  unexpected),  and  that  he  rose 
and  marked  the  time  in  vvTiting,  and  next  day  mentioned  his  experience  to  a  friend, 
Mr.  Falconer.  Still  the  case,  already  second-hand  and  remote,  is  so  much  weakened  by 
the  correction  that  we  do  not  include  it  in  our  evidence. 

IV.]  '^ BORDERLAND"  CASES.  497 

Creagh  and  Liston,  were  given  in  initial  in  the  MS.  The  author  heard 
of  the  occurrence  from  Lieutenant  Creagh  (whom  he  describes  as  "a 
highly  honourable  man  "),  and  made  a  written  note  of  it,  some  months,  or 
perhaps  a  year,  after  it  happened.     The  account  is  somewhat  abridged. 

"  The  passage  from  Bermuda  to  Halifax  is  in  certain  seasons  hazardous, 
and  in  1830  a  transport,  containing  over  200  men,  foundered  at  sea 
between  these  two  ports.  Two  officers  of  the  regiment  to  which  the 
detachment  had  belonged  had,  in  a  half -jesting  way,  made  a  sort  of  promise 
that  whoever  died  first  should  come  back  if  he  could,  and  let  the  other 
know  whether  there  was  another  world.^  This  conversation  was  heard  by 
the  narrator,  as  it  took  place  in  his  presence,  perhaps  a  year  before  the 
events  happened,  though  not  remembered  till  afterwards.  Liston  embarked 
in  charge  of  the  detachment,  and  had  been  gone  about  a  fortnight,  when 
Creagh,  who  had  one  night  left  the  mess  early  and  had  retired  to  bed,  and 
was  beginning  to  close  his  eyes,  saw  his  door  open  and  Liston  enter. 
Forgetting  his  absence,  and  thinking  he  had  come  to  pull  him  out  of  bed 
(for  practical  joking  was  then  more  common   in  the  army  than  it  is  now), 

he  cried,  '  No,  no  ;  d n  it,  Liston,  don't,  old  fellow  !      I'm  tired  !     Be 

off ! '  But  the  vision  came  nearer  the  bed  foot,  and  Creagh  then  saw  that 
Liston  looked  as  if  very  ill  (for  it  was  bright  moonlight),  and  that  his  hair 
seemed  wet,  and  hung  down  over  his  face  like  a  drowned  man's.  The 
apparition  moved  its  head  mournfully  ;  and  when  Creagh  in  surprise  sat 
up,  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  looked  again,  it  was  gone.  Still  Creagh  avers 
that  all  this  time  he  had  no  idea  of  its  being  a  spectre,  and  believing  that 
he  had  seen  Liston  himself,  he  went  to  sleep.  In  the  morning  he  related 
the  occurrence,  when  he  recollected,  but  not  till  then,  Liston's  absence  on 
duty  from  the  island.  He  asserts  he  had  not  lately  been  thinking  of 
Liston  ;  neither  had  the  vessel  been  away  long  enough,  nor  had  bad 
weather  occurred  to  cause  fears  for  her  loss  to  be  entertained.  That  he 
was  wide  awake,  or  at  least  not  dreaming,  is  shown  by  his  sitting  up  and 
addressing  the  apparition." 

We  find  from  the  Army  List  that  Lieut.  Liston  was  "  lost  on  passage 
home  from  Bermuda,  on  board  the  brig  '  Bulow,'  April,  1831,"  not  1830. 

[It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  vision  occurred  at  the  hour,  or 
even  on  the  day,  that  the  transport  foundered.] 

(538)  From  Miss  Ann  Hunt  (a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends), 
9,  Brunswick  Square,  Bristol. 

"May  15th,  1884. 

"At  the  time  of  Joan  Pince's  death,  her  son  was  in  the  employ  of 
Philip  D.  Tuckett,  of  Frenchay.  I  well  remember  hearing  this  son,  John 
Pince,  relate  how  he  had  been  aroused  by  the  sound  of  his  mother's  voice, 
calling  him  by  name.  It  was  early  in  the  morning,  but  so  strong  was  his 
impression  that  his  mother's  decease  was  thus  notified  to  him,  that  he  got 
up  and  went  into  his  employer's  room,  saying  that  his  mother  was  dead,  and 
that  he  must  go  at  once  to  her  home.  At  first  endeavours  were  used  to 
dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  but  finding  how  strong  an  impression  had 
been  made  on  his  mind,  P.  D.  Tuckett  kindly  acceded,  and  John  Pince 
set  off"  for  his  mother's  residence,  which  was,  I  believe,  in  Devonshire. 
On  arriving,  he  found  the  event  had  taken  place  as  he  apprehended.     I 

1  See  p.  66,  and  p.  489,  first  note. 
VOL.    II.  2    K 

498  -  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

hoped  to  procure  a  written  account  of  this  circumstance,  as  a  grand- 
daughter of  his,  now  living  in  Bristol,  thought  she  had  it  in  the  hand- 
writing of  her  mother,  who  is  lately  deceased.  She  has  been  unable  to 
find  it,  but  fully  confirmed  the  particulars  I  have  given. 

"  John  Pince  died  in  1854,  aged  87  years ;  and  it  may  have  been  7,  or 
possibly  10,  years  before  that  I  heard  him  relate  the  occurrence" — at 
which  time,  as  Miss  Hunt  has  stated  in  conversation,  he  was  in  complete 
vigour,  with  senses  unimpaired,  and  an  excellent  memory. 

The  following  account  of  the  same  incident  is  from  Miss  Bowden,  a 
cousin  of  Miss  Hunt's. 

"  One  night  in  March,  1793,  my  grandfather,  John  Pince,  was  awoke 
by  a  voice,  which  he  believed  to  be  his  mother's,  calling  him  by  name, 
'  John,  John  ! '  He  was  so  impressed  by  the  feeling  that  his  mother,  Joan 
Pince,  whom  he  dearly  loved,  was  ill  or  dying,  that  he  immediately  arose 
and  went  to  the  Friend  with  whom  he  lived,  and  told  him  he  must  at  once 
set  out  for  home,  stating  his  reason  for  doing  so.  On  reaching  Newton 
Bushel,  he  found  that  his  mother  had  departed  this  life  after  a  few  hours' 
illness,  at  the  time  which  he  had  heard  her  call. 

"  These  few  particulars  are  all  I  know  about  the  occurrence,  but  I 
believe  them  to  be  correct,  having  heard  them  from  my  mother  and  aunt, 
daughters  of  John  Pince.  «« E.  Bowden." 

Miss  Bowden  has  in  her  possession  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Tuckett  by  a 
friend  of  Joan  Pince's,  describing  her  short  illness,  and  requesting  that 
her  son's  mind  may  be  prepared  for  the  intelligence  of  her  death.  It  is 
thus  evident  that  he  was  not  aware  of  her  danger. 

(539)  From  the  Rev.  Chas.  C.  Starbuck,  M.  A.,  Andover,  Mass.,  U.S.A., 
who  wrote  in  January,  1884.  The  account  was  communicated  to  him 
by  the  late  Hon.  Richard  Hill,  of  Jamaica,  a  Privy  Councillor  of  the 
island,  the  most  eminent  naturalist  of  the  West  Indies.  Mr.  Starbuck 
mentions  Mr.  Hill's  having  quoted  to  him,  with  just  gratification,  a 
sentence  from  a  letter  which  he  had  received  from  Charles  Darwin — "  you 
are  an  observer  after  my  own  heart." 

"  When  Mr.  Hill  was  yet  young,  he  began  to  work  against  African 
slavery,  the  curse  of  his  native  West  Indies.  Among  others  he  visited  the 
Duke  of  Kent,  in  the  hope  of  securing  his  influence ;  and  I  may  remark 
that  he  lived  to  receive  from  the  Duke's  daughter,  as  his  sovereign,  the 
Companionship  of  the  Bath,  as  a  token  of  appreciation  of  his  many  and 
signal  services  both  to  science  and  humanity. 

"  Being  a  Jamaican  born,  and  of  mixed  blood  besides,  he  soon  found 
that  it  would  be  as  much  as  his  life  was  worth  to  return  to  his  native 
island.  For  a  number  of  years  he  was  an  exile.  White  Englishmen, 
however,  though  zealous  abolitionists,  though  liable  to  much  persecution, 
and  sometimes  in  considerable  danger,  could  manage  somewhat  better  to 
keep  their  hold  in  the  island.  There  was  one  friend  and  colleague  of  Hill, 
an  Englishman,  I  believe,  named  Lundy,i  who  was  working  in  Jamaica, 
when  his  friend  started  from  England  in  a  sailing  vessel  for   St.   Thomas, 

1  I  may  remark  that,  as  it  is  easier  to  be  sure  of  facts  than  names,  I  give  the  latter 
only  as  they  lie  in  my  memory. — C.  C.  S. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  499 

intending  to  proceed  to  Hayti.  Hill  and  the  captain  occupied  the  main 
cabin  together,  having  their  state-rooms  on  each  side  of  it.  One  evening 
when  the  vessel  was  about  in  the  latitude  of  the  Azores,  the  captain  and 
he  were  both  in  their  state-rooms,  while  a  large  globe-lamp,  swinging  over 
the  table,  partially  lighted  each.  Hill  was  lying  still  awake,  when  he 
heard  a  step  in  the  cabin,  which,  he  told  us,  he  recognised  the  instant  he 
heard  it.  It  passed  through  the  cabin,  and  his  friend  Lundy  appearing  in 
the  door  of  his  state-room,  came  up  to  the  berth,  and  leaning  on  it,  said  : 
'  Well,  Hill,  I  have  served  the  cause  as  long  as  I  could  be  useful ;  and 
now  it  has  pleased  God  to  take  me.'  He  remarked  that  the  words  sank 
ineffaceably  into  his  mind,  and  the  more  so  as  they  afforded  so  pleasing  an 
evidence  of  Lundy's  readiness  to  go.  The  next  morning  the  captain  said 
to  him  :  '  Why,  Hill,  you  look  as  if  you  had  had  a  day's  hard  raking.' 
But  his  passenger  kept  his  counsel. 

"  Just  as  they  landed  at  St.  Thomas,  a  vessel  came  in  from  Kingston, 
and  a  young  friend  of  Hill's  sprang  ashore.  Saluting  him,  Hill  said  : 
'  I  need  not  ask  how  Lundy  is,  for  I  know  he  is  dead.'  '  Why,'  exclaimed 
his  friend,  in  astonishment,  '  how  could  you  know  that  ?  I  had  but  time  to 
see  the  funeral  company  into  the  church,  and  as  the  wind  was  fair,  I  was 
obliged  to  hasten  off  to  the  vessel  without  going  in.'  '  No  matter  how  I 
know  it,'  replied  Hill,  '  you  see  I  know  it.'  They  soon  parted,  and  Hill, 
having  completed  his  visit  to  Hayti,  returned  to  England. 

"  Some  two  years  later,  Mr.  Hill  met  in  England  a  gentleman  who  first 
had  been  a  missionary  in  Jamaica,  and  subsequently  in  Africa.  They  fell 
into  talk  about  Lundy,  and  this  gentleman  remarked,  '  I  was  with  Lundy 
when  he  died ;  and  I  remember  that  his  last  words  were  :  "  The  only  wish 
I  have  left  is,  that  I  might  be  permitted  to  see  Hill  once  more,  and  say  to 
him — '  Well,  Hill,  I  have  served  the  cause  as  long  as  I  could  be  useful ; 
and  now  it  has  pleased  God  to  take  me.'  "  '  ^  It  seems  that  his  wish  was 
granted,  and  that  he  was  permitted  to  go  to  Heaven  by  way  of  the  Azores." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Starbuck  writes  to  us  : — 

"  Feb.  22,   1884. 

"  The  narratives  [this  and  another]  are  throughout  communications 
made  to  me  directly  by  Mr.  Hill.  And  I  saw  him  so  frequently  and  so 
familiarly  during  my  10  years'  stay  in  Jamaica  that  they  may  be  relied  on 
as  thoroughly  accurate  reports.  a  Chaeles  C.  Starbuck, 

"  Ten  years  missionary  in  Jamaica  in  connection 
with  the  American  Missionary  Association." 

(540)  From  Mr.  F.  J.  Jones,  Civil  Engineer,  Heath  Bank,  Mossley 
Road,  Ashton-under-Lyne.  "March    1884. 

"  The  following  story  was  told  me  by  an  old  friend  [name  given],  to 
whom  it  happened  when  an  undergraduate  of  Peterhouse  College,  Cam- 
bridge.    I  will  try  and  put  it  in  his  own  words  as  nearly  as  possible. 

"  '  I  had  arranged  to  stay  up  part  of  the  long  vacation  to  grind  in 
quiet,  and  to  make  the  best  of  lost  time. 

"  'The  event  occurred  on  a  Tuesday,  in  1843,  and  I  well  remember 

1  It  will  be  observed  that  the  evidence  for  this  remark  of  the  dying  man  is  third- 
hand  ;  arid  the  exact  correspondence  of  part  of  it  with  what  Mr.  Hill  heard  is  the  sort  of 
point  which  is  very  likely  to  creep  into  a  story  of  this  class  as  it  passes  from  mouth  to 
moi^th. 

VOL.    II.  2    K    2 

500  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

feeling  very  lonely  and  wretclied.,  for  the  weather  was  miserably  wet,  and 
all  friends  had  gone  down  the  day  before.  My  greatest  chum,  a  man 
named  Bohun,  I  had  seen  off  by  the  London  coach,  on  his  way  to  Dover, 
from  whence  he  was  to  cross  the  Channel,  to  visit  the  friends  of  the  girl 
to  whom  he  was  engaged.  When  saying  good-bye,  I  little  thought  we 
should  never  meet  again,  at  all  events  in  the  flesh.  The  first  24  hours  of 
my  solitude  passed  well  enough,  for  I  had  a  lot  of  lost  time  to  make  up. 
The  evenings,  however,  hung  very  heavily  on  my  hands. 

"  '  On  the  second  (Tuesday)  evening,  I  turned  in  about  10  o'clock, 
meaning  to  get  up  early  to  work  the  next  morning.  Instead  of  undress- 
ing, I  threw  myself  down  on  my  bed  in  my  clothes,  and  soon  fell  asleep. 
How  long  it  lasted  I  don't  know,  but  before  very  long  I  woke  with  a 
sudden  sense  of  chilliness,^  and  was  startled  to  hear  a  sort  of  choking  sound 
at  my  back.  Turning  round  quickly,  I  was  surprised  to  see,  by  the  light 
of  the  reading  lamp,  my  friend  Bohun,  half  sitting  up  in  my  arm-chair 
beside  the  bed,  and  apparently  gasping  for  breath.  For  a  few  seconds  I 
looked  at  him  in  bewilderment,  and  then  called  him  by  name.  In  an 
instant  the  chair  was  vacant,  and  jumping  off  the  bed  I  found  the  door 
locked,  and  the  oak  sported,  as  I  left  them. 

"  '  Thinking  it  only  a  dream,  though  even  then  I  must  confess  I  was 
considerably  startled  by  the  vividness  of  it  all,  I  undressed  and  got  into 
bed,  dozing  ofi"  again  in  a  few  minutes.  My  sleep  cannot,  however,  have 
been  of  long  duration,  and  a  second  time  I  woke  with  the  same  curious 
sensation,  and  again  saw  Bohun  gasping  in  the  chair  beside  my  bed.^ 
Moving  cautiously  to  that  side  of  the  bed,  I  made  a  sudden  dash — at 
nothing  :  for  a  second  time  he  was  gone. 

"  '  Now  thoroughly  awake,  and,  I  must  confess,  not  liking  it  all,  I 
left  my  room,  and  calling  the  porter,  we  went  through  the  empty  place, 
only  to  find  everything  right  and  secure.  The  man  seemed  to  think  I  had 
been  taking  rather  more  than  perhaps  was  wise,  and,  much  to  my  disgust, 
hinted  it  rather  plainly ;  so  in  him  I  found  only  a  Job's  comforter.  Being 
unable  to  sleep  any  more  that  night,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  read  for  the 
remaining  hours  before  daylight. 

"  '  The  next  day  nothing  transpired,  and  I  began  to  feel  I  had  rather 
made  a  fool  of  myself,  and  did  not  at  all  relish  the  porter's  inquiries  after 
my  health.  Wednesday  passed,  and  a  lot  of  reading  was  accomplished, 
and  on  Thursday  I  walked  out  a  short  distance  to  meet  the  London  coach, 
which  brought  my  weekly  papers.  After  a  short  chat  the  driver  suddenly 
said  "  Have  you  heard,  sir,  of  poor  Mr.  Bohun's  sad  death  1  As  he  was 
going  on  board  the  packet  at  Dover  he  slipped  on  the  gangway,  falling  into 
the  water,  and  was  never  seen  again." 

"  '  The  shock  to  me  was  so  great  that  for  several  weeks  I  was  laid  up 
in  my  room,  and  in  my  delirium  I  was  afterwards  told  I  was  always  raving 
about  my  poor  friend  and  his  mysterious  visit  to  my  rooms.' 

"  F.  J.  J." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jones  says  : — 

"  My  friend  about  whom  you  ask  has  been  dead  now  about  nine  years. 
He  first  told  us  the  story  in  the  year  1867,    and  has  since  often  alluded 

1  See  p.  37,  first  note. 

2  Compare  cases  503  and  519,  and  see  p.  237,  note. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  501 

to  it."  In  conversation  I  learnt  that  this  friend  was  Mr.  Jones's  tutor, 
living  in  the  same  house,  for  several  years,  and  was  most  deeply  respected 
by  him.  We  have  ascertained  that  he  was  at  Peterhouse  in  1843  ;  but  the 
name  Bohun  does  not  appear  in  the  Cambridge  Calendar  of  that  date,  and 
is  probably  a  mistake.  We  have  not  been  able  to  discover  any  public 
notice  of  the  accident,  and  the  death  was  probably  not  registered. 

[It  ought  to  be  observed  that  the  percipient  was  probably  falling  ill 
at  the  time  of  his  vision ;  and  that  in  his  subsequent  delirium  the  order 
of  events  may  have  become  confused.  Still,  it  seems  unlikely  that  his 
recollection  of  the  anxiety  that  succeeded  the  vision  and  preceded  the 
arrival  of  the  news  is  a  piece  of  pure  imagination.] 

(541)  Erom  Mr.  George  M.  Barker,  Brynderw,  Dolgelly. 

"July,  1884. 

"  Travelling  by  train  from  London  to  Brighton  in  company  with  my 
tutor,  we  sat  opposite  an  elderly  lady,  who  seemed  to  doze.  About  half- 
way, she  awoke  with  a  cry,  and  was  much  agitated.  My  tutor  soothed  her, 
and  asked  her  what  was  the  matter.  She  stated  that  she  had  seen  her  son 
(who  was  in  the  navy)  drowning  before  her  eyes,  and  that  it  was  so 
horribly  real,  even  to  the  minutest  detail  of  dress,  &c.,  that  she  could  not 
believe  that  she  was  travelling  in  a  railway  carriage.  She  vowed  that  she 
had  not  been  to  sleep.  My  tutor,  with  her  permission,  called  upon  her 
next  day,  and  an  acquaintance  struck  up,  which  lasted  for  some  time. 
About  a  fortnight  after  the  scene  in  the  carriage,  news  duly  arrived  of  the 
death  of  the  son  at  sea,  while  rowing  from  the  ship  to  the  shore.  This 
event  occui'red  in  the  year  1870  or  1871. 

"  George  M.  Barker." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barker  says  : — 

"  I  am  unable  to  furnish  you  with  the  address  of  my  old  tutor.  His 
name  was  Alfred  Downes,  64,  Upper  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton,  but  I 
have  heard  recently  that  he  has  left  Brighton.  The  name  of  the  old  lady 
I  heard  mentioned  by  my  tutor  years  ago,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of 
what  it  was,  or  where,  exactly,  she  lived.  The  bald  facts  are,  therefore, 
all  that  I  can  give  you.  To  me,  at  the  time,  this  event  was  of  consider- 
able interest.  I  may  mention  that  I  am  a  thorough  disbeliever  in  every- 
thing unnatural  and  ghostly. 

"  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  time  was  exactly  the  same,  and  for  this 
reason  :  my  tutor  and  I  were  travelling  by  a  very  fast  train  between 
London  and  Brighton,  the  total  journey  only  occupying  Ihr.  lOmin.  ;  we 
were  just  passing,  or  had  just  passed  (I  really  forget  which)  Redhill 
Station,  which  is  about  half  way,  so  that  we  could  easily  fix  the  time.  My 
tutor,  seeing  the  condition  of  the  poor  lady,  asked,  and  was  allowed,  to 
call  upon  her  to  inquire  after  her  state,  and  it  was  during  one  of  these  calls 
that  the  news  was  confirmed.  The  time  of  the  upset  of  the  boat  was,  allow- 
ing for  the  change  between  the  two  distances,  as  nearly  corresponding  as 
possible." 

We  cannot  trace  Mr.  Downes ;  the  postmaster  at  Brighton  has  no 
later  address  than  that  given. 

(542)  From  Mr.  S.  Alfred  Steinthal,  The  Lunes,  Nelson  Street, 
Manchester. 

502  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"March  21st,  1884. 

"  A  lady  of  my  acquaintance,  Mrs.  Ashton,  now  deceased,  the  wife  of 
Mr.  Alderman  Ashton,  of  this  city,  had  a  son  who  was  the  Unitarian 
minister  at  Glossop,  in  Derbyshire.  One  night  she  distinctly  saw  her  son 
in  his  night-dress  in  her  room  (she  lived  then  at  Cheetham  Hill,  Man- 
chester), and  woke  her  husband,  telling  him  what  had  occurred.  Neither 
she  nor  her  husband  knew  of  anything  being  wrong  with  their  son,  but 
next  morning  they  were  informed  that  he  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill, 
and  had  died  at  the  time  when  Mrs.  Ashton  saw  the  appearance  she 
described.     Neither  Mr.  Ashton  nor  Mrs.  Ashton  were  Spiritualists. 

"S.  Alfred  Steinthal." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Steinthal  adds  : —      u  _^pril  1st   1884. 

"  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ashton  are  now  deceased.  I  heard  the  story,  a 
short  time  after  the  death,  from  Mrs.  Ashton.  It  was  told  me  in  the 
presence  of  her  husband,  who  confirmed  the  part  of  the  story  that  she  had 
awakened  him,  and  had  told  him  of  the  appearance  she  had  seen.  Mr. 
Ashton  died  about  seven  years  ago,  but  I  cannot  give  you  the  exact  date. 
I  am  sorry  I  cannot  be  more  definite." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  Rev.  Frederick  Ashton 
died  at  Glossop  on  April  15,  1878. 

(543)  From  the  late  Mr.  Myddleton,  Leasingham  Hall,  Sleaford. 

"September  1st,  1884. 

"Mrs.  Onslow  was  suddenly  awakened  one  night  by  her  son,  who  was 
in  the  Royal  Marines,  and  afloat  on  board  a  man-of-war.  She  awoke 
suddenly  and  saw  her  son  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.     She  exclaimed 

to   her   husband,    '  Oh !  Onslow,   here  is   '   (the  son's  name)    '  come 

back.'  Onslow  awoke,  but  the  son  (or  vision)  had  disappeared.  They 
noted  the  exact  hour,  &c.,  and  when  time  allowed  them  to  hear  from  him 
(his  ship  was  off  Madeira  or  St.  Helena)  a  letter  arrived  saying  he  was 
dead,  and  had  died  at  the  very  time  he  had  appeared  to  his  mother. 

"  This  is  to  certify  that  the  above  is  a  perfectly  correct  account,  as  I 
have  heard  Mrs.  Onslow  often  relate;  but  alas!  both  she  and  her  husband 
have  long  been  dead,  and  I  cannot  ask  for  a  written  confirmation. 

"  Rd.  Wharton  Myddleton." 

(544)  From  Mrs.  Bryant,  Ladymeade,  Tyndall's  Park,  Bristol.  The 
evidence  is  of  the  sort  which  may  be  regarded  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  148) ;  but  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain  that  the  figure  seen 
represented  the  supposed  agent.  a  iggl. 

"  One  morning  one  of  the  upper  servants  came  to  my  father.  Captain 
Beadon,  R.N.,  and  in  my  presence  said  that  she  felt  sure  he  would  soon 
hear  of  a  death  in  the  family,  for  in  the  night  she  awoke  to  find  an  old 
lady  standing  by  her  bedside,  and  gazing  steadfastly  at  her.  She  was 
dressed  in  her  shroud,  and  Stapleton  (the  maid)  especially  noticed  the  fine 
old  lace  on  her  cap.  My  father  laughed  at  her,  and  jokingly  asked  a 
description  of  her  features,  which  Stapleton  gave.  I  said,  '  That  is  so  like 
Aunt  F.'  (Stapleton  had  never  seen  Mrs.  F.)  The  maid  said  at  first  she 
was  frightened,  and  covered  her  head  with  the  bedclothes  ;  but  she  was  a 
religious  woman,  and  prayed  for  courage  to  ask  the  spirit  what  it  wanted. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  503 

On  looking  again,  she  found  the  old  lady  still  there.  Stapleton  spoke  to 
her,  and  gradually  and  slowly  the  figure  faded  away.  The  next  day's  post 
brought  news  of  the  death  of  my  father's  aunt,  Mrs.  F. 

In  May,  1884,  Mrs.  Bryant  writes  :—  "  <^eorgina  Bryant." 

"  I  have  sent  my  father  your  letter,  and  asked  him  to  write  out  the 
story,  and  see  if  I  have  remembered  it  correctly.  I  have  not  compared 
notes  with  him  in  any  way.  I  don't  think  it  is  worth  much  in  point  of 
evidence — however,  what  there  is  is  to  be  relied  on. 

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  : — 

"  (1)  The  date  would  be  nearly  40  years  ago. 

"  (2)  I  do  not  at  all  know  if  the  servant  is  living. 

"  (3)  I  do  not  know  if  she  had  ever  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before. 

"  (4)  She  said  :  'A  noble-looking  old  lady  with  her  night-dress  on  and 
beautiful  lace  on  her  cap.'  " 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  Franklin  died  on 
March  8,  1846. 

On  May  26th,  1884,  Captain  Beadon  wrote  to  Mrs.  Bryant  as 
loliows  :  u  Creechbarrow,  Taunton. 

"  Dear  Georgina, — When  we  lived  at  No.  8,  Pavilion  Place,  Battersea 
Fields,  Sarah  Stapleton,  who  lived  with  us  as  housemaid,  informed  your 
mother  and  me  that  an  old  lady  was  sitting  on  her  box  in  her  bedroom 
when  she  was  getting  out  of  bed  in  the  morning,  about  7  a.m. 

"  The  apparition  remained  some  time,  and  did  not  disappear  until  she 
addressed  it  in  the  name  of  the  '  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.'  She  said 
she  did  not  know  any  person  like  the  apparition,  but,  from  her  exact 
description  I  said  it  was  my  aunt,  Mrs.  F.,  whom  I  then  supposed  to  be 
living  at  No.  5,  Hammett  Street,  Taunton. 

"  The  next  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  my  cousin,  Robert  Beadon, 
stating  that  Mrs.  F.  had  died  about  the  time  of  Stapleton's  vision.  I  do 
not  remember  the  exact  date  of  Mrs.  F.'s  death.  Stapleton  was  a  very 
respectable,  steady  young  woman — a  Wesleyan.  Your  mother  often  said 
after,  she  was  the  best  servant  she  ever  had ;  she  married  a  young  artificer, 
then  employed  at  Woolwich  Dockyard,  in  1845  or  1846.  I  have  never 
heard  of,  or  from,  her  since. 

"  I  lived  some  two  years  with  my  aunt. — I  am,  your  afiectionate 
father,  "  George  Beadon." 

[If  the  death  was  on  the  night  preceding  the  apparition,  as  Captain 
Beadon  stated  in  conversation  that  he  believed  it  was,  the  news  probably 
arrived  not  by  the  "  next  post,"  but  (as  Mrs.  Bryant  says)  by  "next  day's 
post "  ;  but  Captain  Beadon  cannot  be  absolutely  certain  that  it  did  not 
occur  before  night  on  the  preceding  day.] 

As  to  the  next  case,  see  the  remark  which  prefaces  case  527  above. 
The  standing  "  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  " — it  will  have  been  observed — 
is  a  point  which  occurs  in  a  large  number  of  these  borderland  cases. 

(545)  From  Mrs.  Harper,  Cotham,  Bristol. 

"December,  1883. 
"  I  was  at  school  at  Miss  Smith's,  Portland  Street,  Kingstown,  with  the 

504  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

daughters  of  the  Hon.  James  P.,  of  Jamaica.  He  was  expected  home, 
and  a  house  in  Gotham  Park,  just  opposite  my  present  residence,  was  being 
prepared  for  him.  One  night,  Hannah  P.  woke  screaming,  saying  her 
father  was  dead.  Miss  Smith  asked  her  why  she  said  so,  and  she  stated 
that  her  father  had  come  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and  then  went 
and  looked  at  her  sister  Isabel  in  another  bed.  The  father  died  at  that 
time,  and  it  seems  he  had  a  presentiment  that  he  should  not  live  to  return, 
and  had  ordered  a  quantity  of  rum  to  be  put  on  board  to  preserve  his  body 
in  if  he  should  die  on  the  way." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Harper  adds  : — 

"  I  was  at  school  with  Hannah  P.,  but  not  at  the  time  the 
occurrence  took  place  to  which  you  allude,  so  of  course  was  not  in  the 
room.  I  heard  of  it  afterwards  from  a  young  lady  that  was  in  the  room, 
and  saw  her  distress  ;  she  was  a  proud  reserved  girl,  about  17,  and  very 
unlikely  to  make  a  display  of  feeling  unless  greatly  moved.  The  younger 
girl  sleeping  in  the  same  room  did  not  see  her  father,  although  Hannah 
said  that  he  went  from  her  to  look  at  Isabella.  I  cannot  say  how  long  it 
was  after  she  went  that  I  heard  of  it ;  it  might  have  been  a  year.  We  were 
not  allowed  to  speak  of  it  to  Hannah.  "  S.  J.  Harper." 

We  find  from  the  Gentleman' s  Magazine  that  the  death  occurred  on 
Sept.  4,  1825,  after  a  4  days'  illness. 

(546)  From  Mr.  E.  Keep,  who  first  wrote  from  abroad,  and  later  from 
25,  Phillimore  Gardens,  W.  We  owe  the  case  in  the  first  instance  to  the 
Oxford  Phasmatological  Society.  u  j^gQ 

"  Some  years  ago,  Mr.  Charles  F.  Smith,  a  gentleman  living  in 
Melbourne,  became  very  unwell,  and  was  recommended  to  go  on  a  sea 
voyage.  A  captain  of  a  merchant  vessel  going  to  Java  ofiered  him  a 
berth  upon  the  ship  on  very  moderate  terms  ;  but  Mr.  Smith's  finances 
being  at  a  very  low  ebb,  a  few  of  his  friends  clubbed  together  and 
presented  him  with  £100,  and  Mr.  Smith  started  on  his  voyage. 

"  One  of  the  friends  subscribing  to  the  fund  was  a  Mr.  Bowman,  a  very 
old  friend  of  Mr.  Smith,  and  some  time  after  Mr.  Smith's  departure,  Mr. 
Bowman  met  me  in  the  street,  and  said,  '  Oh,  Mr.  Keep,  I  saw  Charley 
Smith  either  last  night  or  the  night  before ;  he  appeared  at  the  foot  of  my 
bed  dressed  in  a  long  black  robe  ;  and  bursting  into  tears  vanished.'  I 
said,  '  Are  you  joking  1  One  reads  of  these  things  in  the  Night  Side  of 
Nature,  and  such  rubbish,  but  one  doesn't  expect  to  hear  of  them  in 
actual  life.'  '  Oh,'  said  Mr.  Bowman,  '  these  things  are  often  occurring  to 
me — you  will  find  Mr.  Smith  died  last  night.'  I  stepped  into  my  ofiice, 
and  made  a  note  of  the  conversation  and  date,  and  said  that  Mr.  Bowman 
was  not  certain  if  his  dream  were  last  night  or  the  night  before. 

"  In  about  a  month  the  steamship  '  Hero  '  arrived  at  Sydney  from  Java, 
and  reported  that  a  passenger,  Mr.  Charles  F.  Smith,  of  Melbourne,  had 
died  at  sea  on  one  of  the  dates  specified  by  Mr.  Bowman. 

"  Edward  Keep." 

At  our  request  Mr.  Keep  wrote  to  Melbourne,  to  get  confirmation  of 
this  narrative;  but  he  found  that  the  diary  in  which  he  noted  the  incident 
had  been  burnt,  and  his  friends  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Bowman,  He  adds 
that  he  thinks  the  occurrence  was  in  1869. 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  505 

We  have  received  the  following  letter  from  Messrs.  Gibbs,  Bright  and 
Co.,  of  Melbourne  :—  "April  28th,  1886. 

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  20th  Feb.,  we  have  interviewed  Capt. 
Logan,  who  was  commander  of  the  s.s.  '  Hero  '  at  the  time  of  the  death 
of  Mr.  C.  F.  Smith ;  and  he  advises  us  that,  as  well  as  he  can  remember, 
Mr.  Smith  died  on  the  day  after  leaving  Batavia,  in  Dec,  1886," — • 
apparently  a  slip  for  1868,  in  which  year,  as  we  have  ascertained 
by  a  search  in  Sydney  papers,  the  "Hero"  was  trading  from 
that  place. 

(547)  From  Mademoiselle  Glinka,  1,  Rue  Lincoln,  Champs  Elysees, 
Paris.  *  "1884. 

"  My  brother  had  the  habit,  when  he  went  to  Wiesbaden,  to  visit  an 
old  servant  maid,  who  had  been  for  15  years  in  our  family,  when  we  were 
children,  and  who  now  lives  on  a  pension.  She  is  very  much  attached  to 
our  family.  Lately  she  had  met  with  an  accident,  having  fallen  from  a 
staircase,  and  was  laid  up  in  her  bed  for  several  weeks,  with  compresses 
on  her  face.  She  knew  of  my  brother's  last  illness,  but  was  not  aware  of 
its  gravity. 

"  One  day,  when  lying  in  her  bed  in  a  half  doze,  she  saw  my  brother 
enter  her  room,  clad  in  his  grey  coat  as  usually.  Quite  confused  that 
he  should  see  her  in  that  state,  she  exclaimed,  '  Why,  Excellency,  I  am 
ashamed  that  you  have  come  into  my  room  to  find  me  here  in  my  bed.' 
He  answered,  '  Do  not  mind  it,  Bienchen '  (the  name  we  called  her  by), 
'  have  you  not  been  sitting  at  my  bedside  hundreds  of  times  when  I  was  a 
boy  1 '  She  begged  him  to  be  seated.^  Then  he  looked  at  her  with  a  long, 
fixed  gaze,  and  disappeared  at  the  door.  Frightened  and  amazed,  she 
rang  for  her  landlady,  and  asked  her  why  she  had  let  Mr.  G.  enter 
without  announcing  him.  The  woman  protested  that  nobody  could  have 
entered  without  her  knowledge,  as  she  had  been  on  the  ground  floor,  and 
that  she  had  not  seen  his  Excellency  or  anybody  else.  A  few  days  later 
she  heard  of  his  death.  But  the  day  and  hour  she  had  seen  him,  and 
talked  with  him,  my  brother  had  had  his  arm  amputated,  being 
chloroformed.  "  J.  G." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Mademoiselle  Glinka  adds  on  March  7th, 
1886:— 

"  Jacobina  Riekes  told  me  of  this  experience  within  a  week  after  its 
occurrence.  It  had  greatly  astonished  her,  as  she  had  never  had  any 
hallucination  in  her  life.  She  was  certainly  awake,  as  she  was  in  the  act 
of  altering  the  arrangement  of  some  compresses  on  her  face.  She  told  the 
landlady  of  her  experience  immediately  after  it  occurred  ;  but  I  did  not 
myself  speak  to  the  landlady  on  the  subject.  My  brother  died  two  days 
after  the  operation.  The  event  occurred  at  Easter,  1884.  My  brother 
was  in  Frankfort." 

This  case  is  the  only  one  in  our  collection  where  the  supposed 
agent  was  under  the  influence  of  an  anaesthetic ;  but  it  may  be 
compared  to  cases  where  the  condition  has  been  fainting  or  coma 
(see  Vol.  I,,  p.  563,  note). 

^  See  p.  460,  second  note. 

506  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  next  case  resembles  No.  505,  above,  in  representing  a  complete 
scene  which  seems  to  have  been  conveyed  to  the  percipient's  mind 
some  little  time  after  its  occurrence,  but  at  a  time  when  the  agent's 
thoughts  (certainly  in  this  case,  and  presumably  in  the  other)  were 
directed  to  the  percipient,  and  also  occupied  with  a  mental  renewal  of 
the  scene  itself.  In  the  present  case,  however,  the  interval  between 
the  enactment  of  the  scene  and  the  percipient's  experience  was 
probably  little,  if  at  all,  more  than  12  hours ;  and  it  would  be 
quite  possible  to  regard  the  case  as  one  of  deferred  development 
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  139,  511). 

(548)  Slightly  abridged  from  the  account  of  Miss  Millicent  A.  Page, 
sent  to  us  by  her  brother,  the  Rev.  A.  Shaw  Page,  Vicar  of  Selsley,  Stone- 
house,  Gloucestershire 

"  1  was  staying  with  my  mother's  cousin,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Broughton, 
wife  of  Mr.  Edward  Broughton,  Edinburgh,  and  daughter  of  the  late 
Colonel  Blanckley,  in  the  year  1844,  and  she  told  me  the  following 
strange  story  : — • 

"  She  awoke  one  night  and  aroused  her  husband,  telling  him  that 
something  dreadful  had  happened  in  France.  He  begged  her  to  go  to 
sleep  again  and  not  to  trouble  him.  She  assured  him  that  she  was  not 
asleep  when  she  saw  what  she  insisted  on  then  telling  him — what  she  saw 
in  fact.  First  a  carriage-accident,  which  she  did  not  actually  see,  but 
what  she  saw  was  the  result,  a  broken  carriage,  a  crowd  collected,  a  figure 
gently  raised  and  carried  into  the  nearest  house,  and  then  a  figure  lying 
on  a  bed,  which  she  then  recognised  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  Gradually 
friends  collecting  round  the  bed,  among  them  several  members  of  the 
French  Royal  family — the  Queen,  then  the  King — all  silently,  tearfully 
watching  the  evidently  dying  Duke.  One  man  (she  could  see  his  back,  but 
did  not  know  who  he  was)  was  a  doctor.  He  stood  bending  over  the 
Duke,  feeling  his  pulse,  his  watch  in  his  other  hand.  And  then  all  passed 
away  :  she  saw  no  more.  As  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  she  wrote  down  in 
her  journal  all  she  had  seen.  From  that  journal  she  read  this  to  me.  It 
was  before  the  days  of  electric  telegraph,  and  two  or  more  days  passed 
before  the  Times  announced  '  The  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.' 
[Visiting  Paris  a  short  time  afterwards,  she  saw  and  recognised  the  place 
of  the  accident,  and  received  the  explanation  of  her  impression.  The 
doctor  who  attended  the  dying  Duke  was  an  old  friend  of  hers  ;  and  as  he 
watched  by  the  bed,  his  mind  had  been  constantly  occupied  with  her  and 
her  family.  The  reason  of  this  was  an  extraordinary  likeness — a  likeness 
which  had  often  led  to  amusing  incidents — between  several  members  of  the 
Broughton  family  and  members  of  the  French  Royal  family  who  were 
present  in  the  room.]  '  I  spoke  of  you  and  yours  when  I  got  home,'  said 
the  doctor,  '  and  thought  of  you  many  times  that  evening.  The  likeness 
between  yourselves  and  the  Royal  family  was,  perhaps,  never  so  strong  as 
that  day  when  they  stood  there  in  their  sorrow,  all  so  natural ;  father, 
mother,  brothers,  sisters,  watching  the  dying  son  and  brother.  Here  was 
the  link  between  us,  you  see. 

)  >■> 

IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  507 

The  detailed  account  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  was  in  the 
Times  of  July  15,  1842.  The  carriage  accident  took  place  at  12.30  p.m., 
on  July  13.  The  Duke  was  carried  into  the  nearest  house,  and  attended 
by  Dr.  Bawnes  and  Dr.  Pasquier.  The  King,  Queen,  and  Due  d'Aumale 
arrived  at  the  spot  almost  immediately  ;  and  the  account  in  Galignani's 
Messenger  for  July  14  shows  that  other  members  of  the  Royal  family  and 
officials  of  distinction  were  present.  The  death  occurred  shortly  after 
3  p.m. 

[This  case  is  so  exceptional  in  character  as  to  excite  some  mistrust.  It 
seems  very  possible  that  the  scene  has  assumed  a  more  dramatic  complete- 
ness in  the  narrator's  memory  than  the  original  description  would  warrant ; 
but  if,  as  alleged,  the  record  was  immediately  made  in  the  percipient's 
diary,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  correspondence  was  of 
a  very  striking  kind.] 

(549)  In  Recollections,  Political,  dsc,  of  the  last  Half  Century  by  the 
Rev.  J.  Richardson,  LL.B.  (1856),  Yol.  I.,  pp.  65-8,  there  is  a  circum- 
stantial account  of  the  appearance  of  Mr.  John  Palmer  (an  actor,  who 
died  suddenly  on  the  stage  at  Liverpool,  on  the  2nd  August,  1798),  on  the 
night  of  his  death  to  a  person  in  London,  named  Tucker.  Tucker  was  a 
hall-porter,  and  habitually  slept  on  a  couch  in  the  hall  which  Mr.  Palmer 
passed  at  night,  when  he  let  himself  in  with  a  latch-key.  The  account  was 
given  by  Tucker  himself  to  Mr.  Richardson,  who,  though  a  gossiping  writer, 
does  not  seem  to  be  an  inaccurate  one. 

"  The  fact  of  his  absence  from  London  was  known  to  Tucker,  but  he 
was  not  aware  about  his  arrangement  for  his  return.  On  the  night  just 
mentioned.  Tucker  had  retired  at  an  earlier  hour  than  usual ;  but  the 
company  in  the  drawing-room  were  numerous,  and  the  sound  of  their 
merriment  prevented  him  from  falling  asleep  ;  he  was  in  a  state  of  morbid 
drowsiness,  produced  by  weariness,  but  continually  interrupted  by  noise. 
As  he  described  the  scene,  he  was  sitting  half  upright  in  his  bed,  when  he 
saw  the  figure  of  a  man  coming  from  a  passage  which  led  from  the  door  of 
the  house  to  the  hall.  The  figure  paused  in  its  transit  for  a  moment  at  the 
foot  of  the  couch,  and  looked  him  full  in  the  face ;  there  was  nothing- 
spectral  or  like  the  inhabitant  of  the  world  of  spirits  in  the  countenance 
or  the  outline  of  the  figure,  which  passed  on,  and  apparently  went  up  the 
staircase.  Tucker  felt  no  alarm  whatever  ;  he  recognised  in  the  figure  the 
features,  gait,  dress,  and  general  appearance  of  John  Palmer,  who  he 
supposed  had  returned  from  Liverpool,  and  having  the  entree  of  the  house, 
had,  as  usual,  availed  himself  of  his  latch-key.  .  .  .  Next  morning, 
in  the  course  of  some  casual  conversation,  he  informed  Mrs.  Vernon  that 
he  had  seen  Mr.  Palmer  pass  through  the  hall,  and  expressed  a  hope  that 
his  trip  to  Liverpool  had  agreed  with  his  health.  The  lady  stared  at  him 
incredulously,  said  he  must  have  been  dreaming,  or  drinking,  or  out  of  his 
senses,  as  no  Mr.  Palmer  had  joined  the  festivities  in  the  drawing-room. 
His  delusion,  if  delusion  it  were,  was  made  a  source  of  mirth  to  the  people 
who  called  in  the  course  of  the  day.  He  however  persisted  in  his  assertion 
of  having  seen  Mr.  Palmer,  and  on  the  arrival  of  the  post  from  Liverpool 
on  the  day  after  he  had  first  made  it,  laughter  was  turned  into  mourning, 
and  most  of  the  guests  were  inclined  to  think  there  was  more  in  it  than 
they  were  willing  to  confess." 

508  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  following  case  is  perhaps  worth  quoting,  as  parallel,  in  the  form 
of  the  impression,  to  Nos.  175,  176,  and  190 ;  but  it  cannot  receive 
an  evidential  number,  being  third-hand,  and  handed  down  by  persons 
not  likely  to  feel  any  special  sense  of  responsibility  with  respect  to  it. 

From  Letters  and  Journals  of  Lord  Byron,  with  Notices  of  his  Wife, 
by  Thomas  Moore  (1830),  Vol.  I.,  p.  193. 

"  Lord  Byron  used  sometimes  to  mention  a  strange  story,  which  the 
commander  of  the  packet,  Captain  Kidd,  related  to  him  on  the  passage  [to 
Lisbon,  in  1809].  This  officer  stated  that,  being  asleep  one  night  in  his 
berth,  he  was  awakened  by  the  pressure  of  something  heavy  on  his  limbs, 
and  there  being  a  faint  light  in  the  room,  could  see,  as  he  thought, 
distinctly,  the  figure  of  his  brother,  who  was  at  the  time  in  the  Naval 
Service  in  the  East  Indies,  dressed  in  his  uniform  and  stretched  across  the 
bed.  Concluding  it  to  be  an  illusion  of  the  senses,  he  shut  his  eyes  and 
made  an  effort  to  sleep.  But  still  the  pressure  continued,  and  still  as  often 
as  he  ventured  to  take  another  look  he  saw  the  figure  lying  across  him  in 
the  same  position.  To  add  to  the  wonder,  on  putting  his  hand  forth  to 
touch  this  form,  he  found  the  uniform  in  which  it  appeared  to  be  dressed 
dripping  wet.  On  the  entrance  of  one  of  his  brother  officers,  to  whom  he 
called  in  alarm,  the  apparition  vanished ;  but  in  a  few  months  afterwards 
he  received  the  startling  intelligence  that  on  that  night  his  brother  had 
been  drowned  in  the  Indian  Seas." 

[The  alleged  touching  of  the  clothes  and  feeling  them  to  be  wet  is  just 
one  of  those  details  which  are  met  with  in  traditional  narratives  of  the 
kind,  and  for  which  we  have  no  first-hand  evidence.] 

I  append  a  translation  of  a  narrative  which  occurs  in  a  Russian 
work,  "  Prostaia  Rietch  o  Moudrionnykh  Viestchakh,"  or  Simple  Dis- 
course on  DiffijCult  Subjects,  (Moscow,  1875),  by  the  late  Professor 
Pogodine,  of  Moscow,  a  well-known  historian.  It  is  given  as  from 
certain  "  memoirs  "  of  Kelsieff,  a  Russian  man  of  letters  ;  but  as  the 
exact  title  of  the  original  work  is  not  mentioned,  and  the  account  is 
professedly  abridgecl,  I  do  not  number  it  as  evidence. 

"  Many  years  ago  I  was  a  pupil  of  the  School  of  Commerce  (St. 
Petersburg),  and  lived  near  it.  My  father  with  my  mother  and  other 
children  lived  at  Yasilievney  Ostrov.  He  was  a  man  of  business,  and 
very  much  occupied,  and  his  visits  to  me  were  very  rare.  One  evening  I 
was  lying  on  my  bed,  reading  a  book.  Suddenly  my  door  opened,  and  I 
saw  my  father,  pale  and  triste,  enter  my  chamber,  and  approach  my  bed 
saying  to  me,  '  God  bless  you,  my  son  !  Don't  forget  this  ! '  And  by  the 
same  way  he  went  out.  I  was  not  in  the  least  surprised,  for  I  was  sure 
that  it  was  really  my  father  who  came  to  me.  In  a  short  time  I  locked 
the  door  and  went  to  bed.  Soon  I  heard  a  knock  at  my  door.  I  opened  it 
and  saw  my  father's  coachman  ;  he  told  me  that  my  father  had  expired 
about  an  hour  before.     It  was  at  the  time  when  I  saw  him  visit  me." 

v.] 

CHAPTER  V. 

VISUAL  CASES. 

§  1.  I  WILL  again  begin  with  evidence  which  is  first-hand  or  on  a  par 
with  first-hand.     The  following  is  a  group  of  death-cases. 

(550)  From  Mr.  Joseph  A.  Chamberlain,  High  Garrett,  Braintree, 
Essex. 

"December,  1884. 

"  About  12  or  14  years  ago,  a  little  scholar  in  my  school,  named  James 
Harrington,  was  very  ill  with  diphtheria.  I  had  been  to  a  village  about  three 
miles  off,  to  give  a  lesson  on  the  pianoforte,  and  was  returning  on  a  dark 
night,  about  7  o'clock.  I  was  walking  in  a  narrow  footpath  between  two 
hedges,  and  on  coming  to  a  stile,  I  saw  a  luminous  figure  float  over  the 
stile,!  meeting  me,  and  gradually  disappear  at  my  left  hand.  I  started,  and 
said  to  myself,  'That's  Jimmie,'  then  stamped  my  foot  on  the  ground  and 
said,  '  How  foolish  I  am  to-night.'  I  reached  home  about  7.30  to  attend 
to  my  evening  school,  and  judge  of  my  surprise,  on  entering  the  school,  the 
caretaker  met  me  at  the  door,  saying,  'Jimmie  is  dead.'  'When?'  I  said. 
He  answered,   '  About  half-an-hour  ago.' " 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  rather 
longer  ago  than  Mr.  Chamberlain  imagined — on  Oct.  28,  1867. 

In  answer  to  questions,  Mr.  Chamberlain  says  : — 

"(1)  The  vision  in  a  general  way  resembled  James,  especially  as  to 
size.  The  features  were  not  clearly  defined,  but  more  like  a  magic-lantern 
view  not  properly  focussed. 

"  (2)  I  knew  that  he  was  ill,  but  not  that  he  was  likely  to  die. 

"  (3)  I  was  attached  to  him,  but  I  cannot  say  I  was  particularly 
anxious  about  him.  As  far  as  I  remember,  I  went  to  the  house  every 
evening,  as  his  father  and  mother  kept  the  coffee-room  of  which  I  had  the 
superintendence  ;  so  my  mind  was  occupied  with  his  condition  ;  but  he  was 
not  in  my  thoughts  before  I  saw  the  luminous  figure. 

"  (4)  I  did  mention  it  to  our  minister,  the  Rev.  A.  Macdougall,  but  I 
cannot  say  whether  it  [i.e.,  the  mention]  was  at  the  time  or  near  the  time 
— certainly  not  on  the  same  evening.  The  fact  is,  I  was  rather  afraid  of 
being  laughed  at. 

"  I  only  wish  I  had  been  more  careful  in  recording  the  facts.     I  shall 

1  As  regards  the  movement,  compare  cases  203,  204,  512  ;  as  regards  the  luminosity, 
see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1. 

510  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

never  forget  the  shock  I  received  on  entering  my  evening  school  half-an- 
hour  afterwards,  and  learning  from  the  caretaker  that  James  had  died 
about  half-an-hour  before." 

Mr.  Chamberlain  mentions  that  he  has  had  one  other  visual  hallucina- 
tion in  his  life  ;  but  this  was  much  less  distinct,  and  occurred  at  a  time 
when  he  was  "  unstrung  by  constant  nursing  and  watching." 

[Here  the  coincidence  seems  to  have  been  very  exact ;  but  we  cannot 
with  certainty  exclude  the  supposition  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to 
the  observer's  anxiety  as  to  his  pupil's  condition.] 

(551)  From  the  Rev.  C.  C.  Wambey,  now  of  Paragon,  Wilton  Road, 
Salisbury,  the  narrator  of  case  129. 

"April,  1884. 

"  My  father,  who  was  an  Indian  officer,  retired  from  the  service  at  an 
early  age,  owing  to  partial  loss  of  sight,  which  eventuated  in  total 
blindness.  He  was  somewhat  eccentric.  Among  other  things,  he  was 
in  the  habit  of  frequently  sitting  up  all  night,  retiring  to  bed  when  the 
servants  came  down  in  the  morning. 

"  We,  that  is  my  father,  mother,  and  their  six  children,  were  living  at 
Crossway  Green,  in  the  parish  of  H.,  12  miles  from  the  city  of  W.  One 
morning, — how  well  I  remember  it !  I  was  but  a  young  child  then, — a 
neighbouring  farmer  called  at  our  house,  and  requested  to  see  Mrs.  W. 
immediately.  He  was  shown  into  the  drawing-room  and,  when  my 
mother  joined  him,  he  mysteriously  closed  the  door,  and  in  an  excited 
manner  asked  if  it  were  all  well  with  the  '  Captain.'  My  mother  replied 
that  he  was  quite  well  when  her  eldest  son,  who  had  been  reading  the 
newspaper  to  him  in  his  room,  left  him  about  half-an-hour  ago.  The 
farmer  shook  his  head  incredulously,  and  took  his  departure.  Shortly 
after  this,  one  of  the  servants  having  been  guilty  of  misconduct,  my 
mother,  taking  me  with  her,  went  to  my  father's  room  to  acquaint  him 
with  the  matter.     As  soon  as  she  had  opened  the  door,  she   started  back 

in  horror,  saying  to  me,   '  My ,  here  is  your  father.'     Stretched  on  the 

floor,  his  head  against  the  bedstead,  there  he  lay,  dead  ! 

"  He  was  evidently  in  the  act  of  preparing  to  dress  (for  a  stocking 
was  firmly  grasped  in  his  hand),  when  he  was  seized  with  a  fit  of 
apoplexy,  death  apparently  having  been  instantaneous. 

"  After  the  funeral,  the  farmer  disclosed  to  my  mother  this  start- 
ling event,  which  from  motives  of  delicacy,  he  forbore  to  mention  to  her 
sooner  : — 

"  On  the  morning  of  his  visit,  he  and  his  carter  were  with  a  waggon 
and  team  of  horses  crossing  the  common.  Suddenly  my  father,  his  hand 
pointing  to  our  house,  appeared  in  front  of  the  horses  (which  commenced 
snorting  and  plunging  furiously),  and  as  suddenly  disappeared.  When 
the  horses  had  been  calmed,  the  farmer,  leaving  them  in  charge  of  the 
carter,  hastened  to  our  house,  and,  as  already  related,  requested  to  see  my 
mother  instantly. 

"  Cornelius  C.  Wambey." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wambey  says  : — 

"  My  father's  death  occurred  when  I  was  in  my  seventh  year.  It  was 
the  subject  of  conversation  between  my  mother  and  myself  from  time  to 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  511 

time  till  her  death  in  1866,  so  that  the  apparition  was  no  mere  dream  of 
childhood. 

"  I  saw  the  farmer  come  into  the  house,  and  am  under  the  impression 
that  I  was  present  at  the  interview  between  my  mother  and  him,  but 
am  uncertain  on  this  point.  However,  my  mother  forthwith  mentioned 
to  the  elder  children  the  purport  of  the  farmer's  visit ;  but  at  the  time  she 
did  not  attach  importance  to  it,  as  my  father  was  in  his  usual  health 
when  my  eldest  brother  left  him,  about  half-an-hour  previously. 

"  All  my  brothers  and  sisters  are  dead,  except  one  sister  whom  I  have 
not  seen,  and  from  whom  I  have  not  heard,  for  a  long  time." 

[Though  the  percipient  here  did  not  actually  describe  his  experience 
before  he  heard  of  the  death,  Mr.  Wambey's  remembrance  of  his  strange 
visit  assimilates  the  case  to  those  reckoned  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand. 
(Vol.  I.,  p.  148).  In  conversation  he  mentioned  his  very  strong  impression 
that  he  was  himself  in  the  room  during  this  visit.] 

(552)  From  Mrs.  Rooke,  Rawdon  College,  near  Leeds. 

On  September  28,  1884,  Mrs.  Rooke  wrote  that,  "About  October, 
1882,  at  9  p.m.,"  she  had  had  "a  visual  impression  of  an  intimate  friend 
who  was  dead,  though  at  the  time  the  fact  was  unknown  to  me." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : — • 

"  Our  dear  friend  had  only  died  within  a  very  short  time  of  my  seeing 
him.  He  was  in  Australia,  and  we  heard  of  his  death  a  few  days  over 
six  weeks  after  I  saw  him.  He  went  there  for  his  health,  but  the  last 
news  we  had  of  him  was  so  good  that  we  were  not  at  all  anxious .  I  was 
sorry  afterwards  that  I  had  not  kept  a  note  of  the  exact  day,  but  I  had 
always  so  scoffed  at  ghost  tales  and  such  like  things,  that  I  was  most  un- 
willing to  believe  I  had  seen  him.  The  gas  was  full  on  at  the  time  ;  there 
was  no  light  about  the  figure ;  he  was  as  natural  as  in  life,  but  as  I  came 
near  to  him  vanished.  I  was  going  down  a  corridor,  and  the  vision  was 
certainly  'external  and  palpable.'  I  should  think  I  saw  him  for  half  a 
minute  quite,  and  expected  him  to  come  forward  and  speak.  He  was  very 
much  attached  to  us,  as  we  were  to  him.  u  Amelia  M.  Rooke  " 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Rooke  adds  : — 

"  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  did  not  mention  the  subject  of  the  apparition 
to  any  one  at  the  time  I  saw  it ;  indeed,  not  till  many  months  ^  after  our 
friend's  death.  There  is  nothing  at  all  inconsistent  with  the  supposition 
that  the  time  of  the  '  vision '  corresponded  with  the  time  of  death.  I 
always  thought  it  probably  did  so.  The  dress  was  a  suit  and  cap  I  knew 
well,i  but  he  died  in  bed.     I  have  never  had  a  hallucination." 

[Here  the  coincidence  is  of  course  doubtful.  It  would  remain  a 
remarkable  one,  even  if  the  interval  exceeded  the  1 2  hours'  limit  laid  down 
for  the  cases  in  this  book.] 

(553  and  554)  From  Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St. 
Helier's,  Jersey,  who  sent  us  the  accounts  in  1882. 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  540. 

2  This  seems  to  be  a  mistake  :  see  the  "Additions  and  Corrections  "  at  the  beginning 
of  the  volume. 

512  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Mrs.  Hunter  had  had  a  friend  from  whom  she  had  parted  in  coldness, 
and  whom  she  had  not  since  seen  or  corresponded  with.  "  Poor  Z."  (the 
real  name  was  privately  given)  "  was  very  far  from  my  thoughts,  when 
one  night,  in  the  winter  of  1862  or  spring  of  1863,  I  had  just  got  into 
bed.  The  fire  burned  brightly,  and  there  was  my  usual  night  light.  I 
was  placing  my  head  on  the  pillows,  when  I  beheld,  close  to  the  side  of 
the  bed,  and  on  a  level  with  it,  Z.'s  head,  and  the  same  wistful  look  on 
his  face  which  it  had  worn  when  we  had  parted  years  before.  Starting 
up,  I  cried  out,  "What  do  you  want*?"  I  did  not  fear;  anger  was 
my  feeling.  Slowly  it  retreated,  and  just  as  it  disappeared  in  the  shadow 
of  the  wall,  a  bright  spark  of  light  shone  for  a  few  seconds,  and  slowly 
expired.^ 

"A  few  days  after,  my  sister  wrote,  'You  will  have  heard  of  poor  Z.'s 
death  on  his  way  to  the  South  of  France.'  I  had  heard  nothing  about 
him  for  years.  Special  reasons  prevented  my  inquiring  particularly  into 
the  precise  moment  of  his  death.  Strange  to  say  my  bedfellow  was  his 
great  pet  among  my  children  ;  she,  however,  slept  through  this  strange 
interview." 

We  find  from  the  Medical  Register  and  the  Scotsman  that  "  Z."  died 
at  Hyeres,  on  Nov.  17,  1862. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hunter  adds  : — 

"  At  Melrose,  where  I  was  a  stranger,  I  could  not  have  mentioned  such 
a  thing ;  but  my  sister  paid  me  a  visit  about  Easter,  and  I  told  her.  No 
doubt  she  will  confirm  ;  but  I  would  rather  not  recall  the  event." 

"  A  daughter  of  mine  in  India  was  expecting  her  confinement  to  happen 
at  the  end  of  November,  1872.  I  was  not  anxious  about  her ;  indeed 
other  important  family  events  were  occupying  all  my  thoughts.  On  the 
23rd  of  October,  at  noon,  I  was  alone.  All  at  once,  a  cold  shivering  feel- 
ing came  over  me,  and  I  turned  suddenly,  and  beheld  a  slight  bending 
figure,  standing  near  the  closed  door,  covered  over  with  a  loose  glistening 
robe  or  sheet  of  an  ash  grey  colour.  It  looked  such  a  sad  little  drooping 
figure,  and  the  attitude  and  outline  were  strangely  familiar  to  me ;  yet  I 
never  thought  of  her  in  connection  with  it.  On  the  1 9th  November  we 
had  the  startling  news  that  she  had  died  (eight  days  after  giving  birth  to 
a  son)  on  the  23rd  of  October,  at  5  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  It  was  not 
for  some  days  after  that  I  thought  of  what  I  had  seen  in  London  at  that 
hour  on  that  day  ;  I  have  never  since  for  a  moment  doubted  that  it  was 
she.  I  was  in  London,  and  she  in  India  ;  our  noon  was  the  afternoon  there, 
and  her  appearance  must  have  been  at  the  moment  of  dissolution." 

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  Allen's  Indian  Mail. 

[In  both  cases  the  degree  of  exactitude  in  the  coincidence  must  be 
regarded  as  uncertain,  in  the  absence  of  proof  that  the  date  of  the  vision 
was  accurately  noted  at  the  time.  Mrs.  Hunter  has  had  at  least  one,  and 
possibly  a  second,  purely  subjective  hallucination  of  vision  (Yol\  I.,  p.  535, 
and  p.  211,  above).] 

1  As  regards  the  truncated  appearance — a  head  only — see  p.  33,  note,  and  compare  case 
.572  below.  As  regards  the  light,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  .550-1,  and  p.  479  above ;  and  as  regards 
the  gradual  disapijearance,  see  p.  97,  second  note. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  513 

(555)  From  Mrs.  Perryn,  27,  Adrian  Square,  Westgate-on-Sea. 

"April  1st,  1885. 
"In  1870  my  mother  was  dangerously  ill,  but  just  before  her  death 
seemed  to  be  rallying.  I  was  aware  of  the  improvement.  One  evening, 
on  retiring  to  bed,  about  10  o'clock,  I  was  astonished  to  see  the  figure  of 
my  mother  just  beside  my  bedroom  door.  I  immediately  told  my  husband 
about  it,  and  he  made  a  note  of  the  date  (September  22nd).  My  mother 
died  in  Canada  early  on  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  September.  The  figure 
looked  as  though  enveloped  in  a  faint  smoke.  ^  It  was  not  recognisable 
in  feature ;  but  I  immediately  identified  it  as  the  appearance  of  my 
mother.  The  attire  was  the  same  in  which  I  had  last  seen  her  several 
years  before.2  up    ^    Pbeeyn." 

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  hallu- 
cination of  the  senses,  Mrs.  Perryn  replies,  "  This  experience  is  quite  unique 
in  my  life."    She  adds,  "  I  have  looked  for  the  note  but  cannot  find  it." 

Mr.  Perryn  writes  : — • 

"  At  this  length  of  time  I  cannot  feel  justified  in  corroborating  the 
above  circumstance.  I  cannot  find  any  note  of  the  event,  though  I  think 
one  was  made.  u  j^  g.  Perryn." 

(556)  From  Mrs.  Richards,  Spring  Wood,  Godalming. 

"  July  3rd,  1883. 

"  About  the  year  1834  or  1835,  I  was  in  a  boarding  school  at  Cadogan 
Place,  Chelsea,  kept  by  ladies  named  Horn,  where,  amongst  other  pupils, 
there  were  two  sisters  with  whom  I  was  very  intimate.  These  girls  came 
from  a  distance,  their  home  being  in  the  North  of  England,  I  believe ; 
and  travelling  then  being  very  difierent  to  what  it  is  in  these  days  of  rail- 
ways, they  did  not  always  go  home  for  their  holidays,  and  consequently 
were  not  impressed  by  the  critical  state  of  their  mother's  health. 

"  We  slept  in  a  large  dormitory  in  which  were  several  beds,  the  two 
sisters  occupying  a  double  bed.  On  a  certain  night,  most  of  the  girls 
were  asleep,  and  myself  in  the  next  bed  to  one  of  the  sisters,  who  was 
already  in  bed,  and,  like  myself,  anxious  to  be  quiet  and  allowed  to  go  to 
sleep  ;  but  we  were  hindered  by  the  frolicksomeness  of  the  younger  sister, 
who  sat  outside  the  bed  and  facing  the  door  at  the  end  of  the  room,  which, 
I  remember,  was  not  quite  dark,  either  owing  to  moonlight  or  the  time  of 
year.  As  the  elder  sister  was  urging  her  to  be  quiet  and  to  get  into  bed, 
the  younger  one  suddenly  exclaimed,  and  putting  her  hands  over  her  face, 
seemed  greatly  agitated.  As  there  seemed  no  cause  for  this  sudden  excite- 
ment, we,  thinking  it  was  only  another  form  of  her  nonsense,  and  fearing 
the  noise  would  bring  up  the  governess,  who  also  slept  in  the  room, 
scolded  her  well,  upon  which  she  got  into  bed.  Turning  again  to  look 
towards  the  door,  she  uttered  another  cry,  directing  her  sister's  attention 
to  the  door  ;  but  she  saw  nothing,  ^  and  still  thought  the  younger  one  was 
joking.  But  the  latter  buried  her  head  under  the  clothes,  and  I,  being 
very  tired,  went  to  sleep  and  thought  no  more  about  this  disturbance. 

1  Cf.  case  210,  where  the  lEigure  was  "  surrounded  by  a  light  sort  of  phosphorescen. 
mist ;  "  arid  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  first  note. 

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  546. 

3  See  p.  105,  second  note. 

VOL.    II.  '  2    L 

514  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  Next  morning  no  notice  was  taken  of  it,  and  no  impression  seems  to 
have  been  made  on  my  mind  or  that  of  the  other  girls  ;  probably,  as  I 
now  think,  owing  to  our  being  accustomed  to  the  volatile  disposition  of 
the  younger  sister.  However,  about  two  days  afterwards,  the  sisters  were 
summoned  into  the  room  of  the  ladies  of  the  school  to  receive  letters. 
Shortly  after,  I  was  sent  for,  and  found  them  in  floods  of  tears,  having 
just  heard  the  news  of  their  mother's  death.  Being  their  chief  friend,  I 
was  excused  from  lessons  that  I  might  be  with  them,  and  try  to  console 
them.  As  we  were  approaching  our  room,  the  younger  sister  stopped  us 
suddenly,  and  grasping  my  arm  with  violence,  she  said,  '  Oh,  do  you  re- 
member the  other  night  when  I  was  frightened  %  I  believe  it  was  dear 
mamma  that  I  saw.  Let  us  go  back  and  ask  more  about  it,'  or  words  to 
that  effect.  We  went  back  to  Miss  Horn's  apartment,  and  on  referring 
to  the  letter,  we  found  that  their  mother  had  died,  as  nearly  as  we  could 
calculate,  at  the  same  hour  that  the  incident  in  the  dormitory  occurred. 

"This  is  what  the  girl  said  she  saw:  A  tall,  slight  figure  in  white, 
resembling  her  mother,  as  she  now  thought,  though  she  did  not  recognise 
features,  who,  with  outstretched  arms,  seemed  to  beckon  to  her. 

"  Talking  it  over  on  the  same  day,  she  remarked,  '  Ah,  I  think  I  see 
now  why  dear  mamma  appeared  to  me.  She  had  often  reproved  me  for 
my  giddiness,  and  as  she  was  dying,  she  wished  to  give  me  one  more  look 
and  reproof.  1  will  try  and  be  very  different.  I  shall  never  forget  her 
warning,'  &c.  She  appeared  deeply  impressed,  but  as  the  sisters  and  I 
were  soon  parted,  and  did  not  correspond,  I  lost  sight  of  them. 

"  This  is  a  true  account,  and  I  believe  clearly  remembered  by  me, 
though  so  many  years  ago.  Neither  I  nor  the  sister  saw  the  appearance, 
but  witnessed  the  effect  on  the  girl  who  did  see  it,  both  being  quite  awake." 

We  find  from  Boyle's  Court  Guide  that  Mrs.  and  the  Misses  Horn 
lived  at  41,  Cadogan  Place,  Chelsea,  from  1836-8.  Mrs.  Richards  has 
therefore  antedated  the  incident  by  a  year  or  two. 

[The  case  is  remote ;  but  when  the  central  fact,  narrated  by  an  eye- 
vntness  of  the  scene,  is  so  precisely  like  that  of  numbers  of  more  recent 
and  corroborated  cases,  the  hypothesis  that  it  has  been  unconsciously 
invented  does  not  seem  specially  probable.] 

(557)  The  narrator  of  the  next  case  objects  to  publicity,   and  takes 

no  interest  in  the  subject.  ^.^  ,       /,,,     mrv^ 

"^  "November  6th,  1884. 

"When  I  was  about  10  or  12  years  old,  I  was  sitting  one  evening, 
towards  dusk,  at  the  piano  practising,  when  I  saw  an  old  lady,  the  grand- 
mother of  one  of  my  schoolfellows,  enter  the  room.  I  was  in  the  habit  of 
seeing  her  frequently,  and  recognised  her  perfectly.  She  was  very  old, 
and  to  the  best  of  my  belief  had  never  entered  our  house  at  all,  so  that  I 
was  greatly  surprised  to  see  her.  I  heard  the  next  day  she  had  died  on 
the  evening  I  saw  her.     I  never  had  any  other  hallucination. 

"  Mary  C." 

In  conversation.  Miss  C.  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  she  did  not 
actually  see  the  figure  enter  the  room.  She  looked  up  suddenly,  and 
found  it  standing  by  her  side.  The  figure  was  in  ordinary  indoor  dress, 
with,  as  she  particularly  noticed,  a  large  white  cap,  of  muslin  and  lace, 
such  as  the  old  lady  usually  wore.     The  figure  vanished  suddenly  as  she 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  515 

looked  at  it.  The  room,  though  dusk,  was  not  dark,  and  she  was  able 
distinctly  to  recognise  the  features. 

She  cannot  be  certain  whether  she  told  anyone  of  what  she  had  seen. 
She  probably  told  the  friend  (the  granddaughter  of  the  lady  who  died) 
from  whom  she  heard  the  news  of  the  death  next  day.  The  time  of  the 
death  she  does  not  remember. 

She  knew  the  old  lady  well,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  running  in  to 
see  her  nearly  every  day.  But  at  this  distance  of  time  she  cannot  recol- 
lect whether  the  death  was  regarded  as  imminent. 

She  has  lost  sight  of  her  friend,  and  can  get  no  further  particulars. 
The  incident  occurred  about  1852;  but  the  name  of  the  lady  who  died 
being  a  very  common  one,  our  efforts  to  obtain  the  exact  date  have  failed. 

The  next  case  seems  to  illustrate  the  heightening  of  the  per- 
cipient's susceptibility  at  the  approach  of  death.  It  is,  of  course, 
very  rarely  that  there  is  a  chance  for  this  to  be  observed ;  as  it  can 
only  comparatively  rarely  happen  that  death  (or  some  event  of  critical 
interest)  happens  to  A's  friend  or  relative  at  a  distance,  at  the  par- 
ticular time  that  A  is  dying.      But  I  may  refer  to  cases  372  and  416. 

(558)  From  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  formerly  of  Manchester,  and 
now  of  Rhyl.  The  evidence  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  first-hand  from 
the  percipient's  daughter. 

"September,  1878. 

"  During  the  last  illness  of  Mr.  William  Jackson,  of  Otley,  who  for  50 
years  had  been  a  consistent  member  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church, 
the  little  son  of  his  daughter  sickened  and  died.  Wishing  not  unneces- 
sarily to  disquiet  the  good  man,  this  sad  event  was  withheld  from  him.  He 
was  full  of  holy  joy,  and  recognised  the  presence  in  his  chamber  of  a 
number  of  his  relatives  who  had  departed  this  life  in  the  triumph  of  faith. 
He  pointed  them  out  in  succession — this  is  so-and-so,  and  there  such 
another.  In  the  course  of  this  proceeding  he  suddenly  started  with  sur- 
prise, for  he  discovered  his  grandson  also  among  the  heavenly  company. 
Then  turning  to  his  daughter,  he  said,  '  Well,  never  mind,  he  is  all  right.' 

"  His  daughter,  Miss  Jane  Jackson,  certifies  this.  She  says,  '  It  is 
perfectly  true  ;  I  was  in  the  room  with  my  lamented  father  at  the  time.' " 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Macdonald  writes  : — 

"  As  to  the  case  of  William  Jackson,  his  daughter  did  endorse  it  to  me 
as  noted  in  the  quotation  marks,  but  I  destroyed  her  letter,  never  dream- 
ing of  a  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  I  do  not  know  now  where  to 
find  her.  The  family  evidently  knew  that  the  grandson  had  died,  but  kept 
that  knowledge  from  the  dying  man.  The  information  I  received  from  the 
wife  of  Mr.  Town  Councillor  Myers,  of  Hull."  Miss  Jackson  is  since 
deceased.     We  learn  that  Mr.  Jackson  died  on  Jan.  12,  1876. 

[The  central  incident  in  a  case  of  this  type  seems  reasonably  explicable 
by  thought-transference  from  one  of  the  bystanders  (cf.  case  379) — though 
many  would  of  course  be  unwilling  to  regard  the  vision  of  the  other  relatives  ■ 
as  purely  subjective.  I  have  referred  more  than  once  to  the  difiiculty  of 
making  quite  sure  that  a  piece  of  important  news,  which  is  abroad  in  a 
household,  has  not  reached  ears  for  which  it  was  not  intended.] 

VOL.    II.  2   L   2 

516  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(559  and  560)  From  Mr.  Hickman  Heather,  Postmaster  of  Retford. 
The  evidence  in  the  first  case  is  second-hand,  but  in  the  second  is  on  a  par 
with  first-hand  (Vol.  L,  p.  148).  ,,  February  18th,  1885. 

"  In  my  early  boyhood  I  have  frequently  heard  the  following  story 
from  both  my  parents.  I  may  preface  the  story  by  saying  that,  in  1835, 
my  father,  Thomas  Heather,  was  a  miller,  occupying  a  windmill  in  West- 
thorpe  Fields,  in  the  parish  of  Southwell,  his  house  being  at  Westthorpe, 
about  one  mile  distant  from  the  mill.  My  grandfather,  John  Heather, 
occupied  a  farm  under  the  late  Sir  Richard  Sutton,  at  Goverton,  in  the 
parish  of  Bleasby,  about  3  miles  distant.  My  father,  who  had  been  work- 
ing his  mill  until  past  midnight,  locked  up  his  mill  and  went  home.  On 
his  way  the  apparition  of  his  mother  crossed  his  path,  and  was  so  clearly 
seen  that  he  marked  the  dress,  one  which  had  been  commonly  worn,  and 
on  his  arrival  at  home  he  at  once  reported  the  circumstance  to  [his  wife] 
my  mother,  saying  that  '  he  had  never  seen  his  mother  more  plainly  in  his 
life.'  Early  next  morning,  a  man  rode  in  with  the  sad  news  that  my 
grandmother  had  been  found  dead  in  her  bed. 

"  A  second  case  occurred  under  my  own  notice,  although  the  apparition 
was  not  seen  by  me.  In  the  year  1854,  my  father,  who  then  lived  at 
Goverton,  Bleasby,  was  building  a  house  and  a  yard  for  pigs.  The  build- 
ing and  the  yard  were  on  a  slope.  My  father  was  standing  at  the  lower 
end  with  his  arms  resting  upon  the  wall ;  the  entrance  to  the  house  from 
the  yard  was  directly  opposite,  and  was  open,  the  door  not  having  been 
hung.  I  was  in  the  farmyard  at  some  little  distance,  but  having  a  clear 
full  view  of  my  father  and  the  building,  when  I  was  startled  by  my  father 
exclaiming,  '  Jack,  just  see  what  your  Uncle  Ned  is  doing  in  the  pigsty.' 
I  at  once  went,  although  I  knew  it  to  be  impossible  that  my  Uncle  Ned 
could  be  there,  he  being  seriously  ill  at  the  time.  Having  searched  the 
place,  my  father  told  me  that  he  had  distinctly  seen  my  uncle  cross  the 
doorway,  and  would  scarcely  believe  that  he  was  not  to  be  found  inside. 
In  about  a  couple  of  hours,  a  messenger  brought  the  tidings  that  my 
uncle  had  died. 

"  I  beg  to  add  that  in  the  case  of  my  grandmother  there  was  no 
previous  illness,  she  having  gone  to  bed  in  apparently  perfect  health. 

"John  Hickman  Heather." 

We  have  procured  a  copy  of  an  inscription  of  a  tombstone  at  Bleasby, 
which  confirms  the  fact  that  Mrs.  John  Heather  died  in  1835  (May  2). 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Edward  Heather  died 
on  Nov.  28,  1853,  not  1854. 

Mr.  Heather's  wife  writes  on  May  22,  1886,  to  confirm  these  accounts, 
which  she  herself  "  heard  from  the  lips  of  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thomas 
Heather." 

The  narrator  of  the  following  cases  is  the  brother  of  the  narrator 
of  No.  232  ;  it  is  possible  therefore  to  suppose  some  degree  of  family- 
susceptibility  (p.  132,  note).  The  first  case  may  have  been  an  illusion, 
and  I  give  it  no  separate  evidential  number. 

(561)  From  the  Rev.  H.  A.  H.,  The  Vicarage . 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  517 

"  December  19th,  1885. 

"  The  following  occurrences  took  place  three  years  ago,  and  had 
reference  to  parishioners  here  who  were  much  on  my  mind,  and  whom  I 
was  visiting  in  their  last  illnesses. 

"  One  was  a  farmer's  wife  who  was  much  afraid  of  giving  me  trouble. 
I  had  given  her  the  Holy  Communion  during  the  afternoon,  and  when  I 
left,  promised  to  come  again  next  day.  She  said  she  should  be  very  glad 
to  see  me,  but  did  not  like  to  be  such  a  trouble,  as  it  was  some  distance 
and  I  was  going  every  day.  I  said  it  was  no  trouble,  but  the  reason  why 
I  was  here,  and  I  should  be  sure  to  come. 

"  That  evening  I  had  a  mission  service,  2  miles  away,  in  quite  another 
direction.  Mrs.  H.  was  with  me.  We  were  walking  home  together,  and 
had  joked  about  not  meeting  anyone  on  the  road.  I  said,  '  You  see  if  you 
had  been  alone,  you  would  actually  have  met  no  one  to  alarm  you.'  It 
was  rather  dark,  but  you  could  see  a  form  15  or  20  yards  away.  We 
walked  on,  talking  about  various  things,  and  then  I  saw  someone  coming. 
I  said  '  Here  we  meet  someone  at  last.'  She  said,  '  I  don't  see  anyone.' 
'  There,'  I  said  ;  '  look,  there  comes  an  old  woman,  and  she  is  twisting  her 
shawl  round  her  neck.'  My  wife,  however,  could  see  nothing,^  but  I 
thought  to  myself  she  will  see  her  plainly  enough  directly.  However,  it 
melted  away.  There  was  no  one.  I  said,  '  It  is  very  odd ;  I  certainly  did 
see  an  old  woman.  Let  us  go  into  C.'s  house'  (the  village  carpenter's)  '  and 
see  if  there  is  anyone  dead.'  We  went  in,  and  he  said,  '  I  have  just  got 
orders  to  make  a  coffin.'  I  looked  at  Mrs.  H.  and  said,  '  Indeed,  who  is  it 
for?'  He  said,  'For Mrs.  B.,'  naming  the  farmer's  wife  I  had  seen  that 
very  afternoon.  I  said,  '  There  must  be  some  mistake.  I  only  left  her  at 
4  o'clock,  and  there  were  no  signs  of  immediate  death.'  '  No,'  he  said,  '  it 
is  so.'  I  went  next  day,  and  found  she  had  died  from  a  sudden  stoppage 
of  the  heart,  about  half-past  8,  and  that  almost  the  last  words  were,  '  I  am 
sorry  to  give  Mr.  H.  the  trouble  of  coming  again  to-morrow.' 

"  The  other  occasion  was  about  two  or  three  months  afterwards.  A 
very  respectable  young  farmer  broke  a  bloodvessel  on  the  brain,  and  I 
visited  him  some  three  or  four  times.  The  last  time  he  was  quite 
unconscious,  and  evidently  could  not  live  long.  He  was  very  anxious  to 
see  me  as  much  as  possible  before  becoming  unconscious,  often  saying, 
'  Send  for  the  vicar.'  On  the  morning  that  he  died,  I  was  awoke  by  what 
I  thought  was  Mrs.  H.  in  her  white  dressing-gown.  We  were  sleeping,  for 
some  reason,  in  separate  rooms  that  night.  I  was  very  sleepy  when  awoke, 
and  said,  '  Is  it  time  to  get  up  ?  I  must  have  another  10  minutes,'  and 
fell  asleep  again.  I  did  not  look  at  the  face  of  the  form,  being  very  sleepy 
and  feeling  sure  it  was  Mrs.  H.  However,  by-and-bye,  Mrs.  H.  did  come 
in,  and  said,  '  Young  R.  is  dead  ;  the  girl  who  brings  the  milk  brought 
word.'  I  said,  'Is  it  very  long  since  jom first  woke  me?'  Then  she 
assured  me  it  was  the  first  time  she  had  been  in  the  room.  He  had  died 
about  5  that  very  morning,  just  as  I  fancied  I  had  been  called  by  Mrs.  H. 
My  regret  is,  I  did  not  look  at  the  face,  but,  being  tired  and  sleepy  I  only 
saw  the  figure  up  to  the  waist,  and  went  ofi"  to  sleep  with  it  standing  there, 
never  imagining  it  was  not  my  wife.  This  is  my  last  hallucination.  I 
have  visited  scores  of  deathbeds  since,  but  have  had  no  further  visions. 

^  See  p.  105,  second  note. 

518  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  I  may  add  I  am  in  no  way  nervous,  but  a  strong,  middle-aged  man, 
in  excellent  health,  and  very  temperate  in  eating  as  well  as  drinking.  I 
don't  quite  know  how  to  account  for  these  things,  except  that  both  these 
people  were  much  in  my  mind,  and  both  of  them  people  for  whom  I  had 
much  respect  and  sympathy.  "  H.  A.  H." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  H.  mentioned  that  he  has  had  two  experiences  of 
apparently  subjective  visual  hallucination  ;  but  these  both  occurred  when 
he  was  a  boy.     He  adds  in  subsequent  letters  : — 

"  I  may  add,  as  regards  the  first  of  the  two  curious  visions,  that  I  was 
very  constantly  walking  that  road  at  that  hour,  as  I  had  a  weekly  service  ; 
but  that  was  the  only  occasion  my  eyes  misled  me.  When  I  first  saw  the 
figure,  it  appeared  to  be  crossing  the  road,  but  in  our  direction,  like  a  person 
changing  from  the  footpath  to  the  middle  of  the  road.  It  was,  of  course, 
somewhat  shadowy,  as  a  person  is  in  the  dusk.  Still,  it  had  the  look  of  an 
old  woman  ;  I  could  distinguish  the  sex.  The  road  is  a  country  one,  but  on 
nearing  the  village  there  are  some  lamp-posts,  but  we  were  some  distance 
from  them.  It  was  a  cloudy  and  rather  windy  night,  and  there  were,  of 
course,  shadows  from  clouds  and  trees  cast  about ;  it  was  not  deej>  dark, 
but  more  than  dusk.  I  am  so  accustomed  to  these  walks  that  it  would  be 
difficult  for  any  natural  object  to  have  caused  such  an  illusion.  I  was  quite 
sure  that  an  old  woman  was  there,  in  the  middle  of  the  road — so  sure  that 
I  did  not  keep  my  eye  upon  her,  and  as  we  came  up  she  was  gone.  Mrs.  H. 
has  ordinary  eyesight,  much  like  my  own,  neither  remarkable  for  great 
acuteness  of  vision  nor  the  reverse. 

"  I  may  add,  too,  regarding  the  second  case,  that  I  was  fully  awake, 
though  heavy  with  sleep,  and  did  not  dream  Mrs.  H.  awoke  me.  I  am 
personally  convinced  of  this,  for  I  wondered,  as  I  went  ofi"  to  sleep  again, 
that  Mrs.  H.  did  not  go,  and  thought  she  would  tell  me  in  another  minute 
or  two  that  I  really  must  get  up.  I  fell  asleep  with  the  sensation  of  her 
presence  after  my  eyes  were  closed  again." 

Mrs.  H.  writes  :—  a  December  23rd,  1885. 

"  As  you  wish  to  have  some  corroboration  of  two  curious  statements 
of  facts  made  to  you  by  my  husband,  I  write  a  few  lines  to  tell  you  my 
remembrance  of  the  occasions.  We  were  walking  home  from  a  week-night 
service,  from  a  hamlet  some  distance  from  here,  when  I  remarked  I  would 
not  walk  here  alone  for  anything.  Mr.  H.  said,  '  It  is  curious  we  have 
never  met  anyone.'  Not  long  afterwards,  as  we  were  nearing  the  village, 
he  said,  '  Well,  here  comes  someone  at  last ;  who  is  it  ? '  I  said,  '  I  don't 
see  anyone.'  He  said,  '  Oh  you  must,  by  the  lamp-post '  [there  is  a 
discrepancy  here  from  Mr.  H.'s  account]  ;  '  she  is  putting  a  shawl  over 
her  head,  and  coming  to  meet  us.  Do  you  know  her  % '  I  said,  '  Certainly 
not,  for  there  isn't  anyone.'  He  said,  '  Anyhow  she  is  coming  quickly 
towards  us;  then  you  must  see.'  In  another  minute  we  were  both  sure 
it  must  have  been  some  appearance,  and  went  into  the  carpenter's  close  by 
to  see  if  we  could  hear  anything,  and  his  first  words  were,  '  Well,  sir,  I 
have  orders  for  a  coffin  for  Mrs.  B.'  We  both  said,  '  Impossible  !  she 
seemed  nicely  this  afternoon.'  I  know  she  was  anxious  to  spare  my 
husband  any  trouble,  as  it  was  a  long  walk,  and  we  naturally  connected  it 
with  this. 

"  As  regards  the  young  farmer,  he  had  been  much  on  our  minds,  as  it 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  519 

was  a  distressing  case  in  many  ways.  Word  was  brought  early  in  the 
morning  that  he  was  dead ;  but  owing  to  one  of  the  children  not  being 
well,  and  having  to  be  in  my  room,  Mr.  H.  was  in  an  adjoining  one,  and 
I  would  not  disturb  him  until  later.  When  I  went  in  I  said,  '  Well,  poor 
J.  R.  is  gone.'  He  said,  '  I  knew  he  would  be  ;  but  why  didn't  you  tell 
me  when  you  came  in  before  1 '  I  said,  '  I  have  not  been  in  before.'  He 
said,  '  Yes,  when  you  came  in  to  wake  me,  and  I  begged  for  at  all  events 
10  minutes  more.'  He  then  told  me  what  he  had  said  to  me — as  he 
thought,  and  he  was  surprised  I  did  not  answer.  It  must  be  three  or  four 
years  ago,  but  I  remember  these  facts  distinctly.  "  E.  H." 

[Neither  of  these  cases  would  be  very  striking  alone,  but  they  are  of 
interest  as  occurring  to  the  same  percipient.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt 
that  the  experience  in  the  second  instance  was  a  hallucination,  not  an 
illusion ;  and  the  same  account  of  the  first  experience  is  rendered  to  some 
extent  probable  by  the  fact  that  Mrs.  H.  did  not  share  it,  though  any 
moving  object  should  have  been  as  visible  to  her  as  her  husband.  And  if 
the  experiences  were  hallucinations,  the  improbability  that  Mr.  H.  should 
subjectively  evolve  the  only  two  hallucinations  of  his  adult  life  at  those  par- 
ticular moments  remains  enormous,  however  much  allowance  be  made  for 
the  fact  that  he  was  aware  that  his  two  parishioners  were  in  a  dying  state.] 

In  the  following  case  the  percipient  was  a  young  child.  It  is  a 
phantasmal  case  which  may  be  compared  to  the  merely  impressional 
cases,  Nos.  47  and  48,  and  the  dream-case,  No.  456.  See  also  cases 
345,  352,  607,  634,  652. 

(562)  From  Mrs.   Skyring,  Admiralty  Offices,  Spring  Gardens,  S.W. 
The   account    was    procured    for  us    by  Mr.    A.  W.    Lafone,    M.P.,    o 
Hatton,  Bedfont.  ,j^^^^  jgg3 

"In  or  about  the  year  1832,  my  husband,  Captain  Skyring,  R.IST., 
left  England  on  a  surveying  expedition  in  command  of  H.M.S.  '  Etna' ; 
our  little  son,  Willie,  was  about  2  years  old  at  the  tune  of  his  departure. 
The  child  was  very  fond  of  carrying  about  a  miniature  portrait  of  his 
father,  and  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1833,  the  child  being  about  3  years 
old,  he  was  playing  in  a  curtained  recess  in  the  nursery  when  I  heard  him 
call  out  in  an  excited  tone  '  Papa,  papa,  come  to  me.'  On  my  questioning 
him  he  declared  he  had  seen  his  father,  and  was  so  agitated  that  I  was 
afraid  to  allude  to  the  subject  again.  Shortly  afterwards  I  received  news 
from  the  Admiralty  that  Captain  Skyring  had  been  murdered  by  the 
natives  at  Cape  Roxo  on  the  day  in  question.  My  son,  who  is  now  dead, 
lived  to  be  a  man,  but  had  no  recollection  of  this  episode. 

"I  may  add  that  Captain  Skyring,  when  lieutenant  of  H.M.S. 
'  Beagle,'  related  that  his  mother  appeared  to  him  as  he  was  lying  in  his 
cot,  and  that  he  entered  the  occurrence  in  his  log-book  at  the  time  ;  and 
discovered,  on  his  return  to  England,  that  she  had  died  on  the  date  of  the 
apparition.  "S.  L.  Skyring." 

[This  case  is  again  very  remote  ;  it  is,  moreover,  impossible  to  be  sure 
that  independent  note  was  taken  of  the  date  of  the  cry.  But  the  incident 
of  the  child's  agitation  is  not  likely  to  have  been  unconsciously  imagined 

520  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

and  the  coincidence  must  have  been,  at  any  rate,  close  enough  to  excite 
remark.  The  last  paragraph  in  the  account  once  more  suggests  that  the 
capacity  of  percipience  was  hereditary ;  but  the  detail  as  to  the  log-book  is 
not  one  that  can  be  relied  on  (Vol.  I.,  p.  161,  note).] 

(563)  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  took  down  the  following  deposition, 
in  September,  1876,  from  Jane  Barford,  the  confidential  servant  (since 
deceased)  of  a  friend.  Miss  Stephen. 

"My  father  died  the  11th  January,  1848.  My  mother  had  sent  me 
away  to  an  aunt,  who  lived  about  two  miles  off,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the 
way  while  my  father  was  so  ill.  On  the  morning  of  his  death  I  was 
called  at  6  o'clock,  intending,  as  usual,  to  help  my  cousins  in  the  dairy. 
About  a  quarter  before  7,  I  was  going  downstairs  with  my  candle  in  my 
hand,  when  I  met  my  father  in  his  night-shirt  coming  up.  He  put  out 
his  hand,  as  if  to  take  the  candlestick,  which  I  dropped  in  my  fright,  and 
was  left  alone  in  the  dark.  I  knew  it  could  not  be  my  living  father,  and 
was  convinced  that  he  was  dead,  and  had  come  to  bid  me  good-bye.  I 
told  my  cousins  what  had  happened,  and  said  that  I  must  immediately  go 
home.  They  tried  to  persuade  me  to  stay  till  after  breakfast,  saying  it 
was  only  my  fancy,  but  I  set  off  at  once,  and  on  my  way  I  met  my  aunt, 
who  had  been  sitting  up  with  my  father,  and  was  coming  back  to  tell  me 
of  his  death,  which  had  taken  place  just  at  a  quarter  before  7. 

"  Jane  Barford." 

[The  cousins  cannot  now  be  traced  ;  and  as  Miss  Stephen  has  no  clue 
to  Jane  Barford's  family,  the  date  of  the  death  cannot  be  independently 
verified.  The  case  is  one  which  could  have  had  little  force,  since  the 
percipient  had  no  doubt  been  in  anxiety  about  her  father  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509), 
but  for  the  extreme  closeness  of  the  alleged  concidence.] 

(564)  From  Mrs.  Poulter,  wife  of  a  retired  Baptist  minister  at  Leeds. 

"1883. 

"  When  I  was  a  young  woman,  I  lived  for  some  time  at  Sevenoaks,  and 
attended  a  Wesleyan  class  conducted  by  an  elderly  lady  to  whom  I  became 
warmly  attached.  After  that  (in  1835)  I  went  to  live  at  Bourne,  in 
Lincolnshire,  and  one  day,  while  sitting  in  my  front  room,  I  was  startled 
at  seeing  my  dear  old  friend  from  Sevenoaks  pass  the  window,  and  go 
towards  the  front  door.  I  hastened  to  receive  her,  but  on  opening  the 
front  door  there  was  no  one  to  be  seen  in  the  whole  length  of  the  quiet 
street.     I  afterwards  learnt  that  at  that  hour  my  friend  died." 

Mrs.  Boulter's  son-in-law,  Mr.  J.  L.  Cherry,  of  Rowley  Park,  Stafford, 
writes  to  Professor  Barrett : — "  It  is  some  20  years  since  Mrs.  Poulter 
first  told  me  the  story,  and  since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  she  has 
certified  to  the  accuracy  of  the  draft  which  I  submitted  to  her." 

[The  account  is  very  incomplete ;  but  Mrs.  Poulter  is  old,  and  must 
not  be  troubled  further.] 

(565)  From  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  3,  Bouverie  Square,  Folkestone. 

"  October  8th,  1883. 
"In  1854  we  resided  in  Hanau.    We  kept  two  servants.     One  winter's 

v.]  VISUAL  CASUS.  621 

evening,  just  before  going  to  bed,  Gretchen  came  pouncing  into  the 
dining-room  where  we  were  sitting,  in  great  excitement,  declaring  that 
her  father,  whom  she  had  left  in  good  health  at  Gelhihausen,  had  just 
appeared  to  her  with  such  dejection  in  his  countenance  that  she  must  go  to 
him  that  moment ;  and  off  she  started  in  the  snow,  and  reached  Gelln- 
hausen  in  time  to  close  her  parent's  breaking  eyes.  I  cannot  procure 
further  evidence." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lyons  says  : — 

"  It  made  a  deep  impression  on  me,  and  is  now  quite  fresh  on  my 
mind.  I  certainly  was  in  the  room,  and  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in 
my  mind." 

(566)  From  Mrs.  Morris,  Pentrabach,  Trecastle,  Breconshire. 

"  September  l7th,  1884. 

"  Early  in  1881,  I  had  just  returned  from  a  drive  with  my  aunt,  whom 
I  had  seen  off  by  train  to  what  we  felt  sure  was  the  death-bed  of  a  little 
cousin.  It  must  have  been  about  6  in  the  evening.  I  was  standing  at 
my  dressing-table  taking  off  my  hat,  when  I  heard  someone  try  my^  door. 
I  crossed  the  room  and  opened  the  door  at  once  and  saw,  standing  in  the 
doorway,  the  figure  of  little  G.,  looking  very,  very  white,  and  dressed  in 
a  white  night-dress.  What  struck  me  most  was  that  his  hands  were  crossed, 
and  in  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  were  two  lilies  and  a  leaf.  The  face 
smiled  at  me  ;  and,  as  I  stood  looking,  the  figure  disappeared. 

"  The  following  day  I  went  up  to  join  my  aunt,  and  heard  that  G.  had 
died  about  4  o'clock  the  afternoon  before,  and  that  she  had  seen  him  soon 
after  her  arrival.  I  immediately  asked  if  he  had  lilies  of  the  valley  in  his 
hand,  and  she  said,  '  Yes.'  I  then  described  his  figure,  as  I  had  seen  it, 
and  she  said  it  was  precisely  as  he  looked  and  was  lying  at  the  time  ;  that 
his  sister  had  bought  him,  at  a  florist's,  the  lilies,  and  sent  them  up  to  him  ; 
that  he  had  been  delighted  with  them,  and  had  held  them  until  he  died  ; 
and  that  they  were  now  in  his  hand. 

"  Of  course,  my  mind  was  full  of  him,  and  wondering  whether  my  aunt 
would  find  him  alive,  &c.  But  if  that  would  have  made  me  imagine  I  saw 
him,  why  should  it  have  caused  me  to  imagine  lilies  of  the  valley  in  depth 
of  winter  (it  was  the  time  of  the  deep  snow),  and  of  which  I  had  not 
heard  1  "  Mary  Ethel  Morris." 

We  find  from  two  obituary  notices  that  the  child  died  on  Jan.  26,  1881, 
aged  7  years. 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Morris  writes,  on  October  22,  1884  : — 

"  I  will  write  to  my  aunt  and  ask  her  to  confirm  my  account  of  my 
little  cousin's  appearance,  as  I  feel  sure  she  will  not  hesitate  to  do  so. 

"  I  did  distinctly  see  lilies  of  the  valley  in  the  child's  hand." 

Mrs.  Morris's  aunt  writes,  in  a  portion  of  a  letter  enclosed  to  us  on 
Nov.  7,   1884  :— 

"  As  regards  poor  little  G.,  I  quite  remember  your  saying  that  you 
saw  him  outside  your  door,  and  I  do  remember  something  about  your 
saying  you  saw  him  with  the  lilies.  I  have  an  idea  you  said  so,  but  it  was 
such  a  sad  thing  altogether  that  things  are  misty,    u  ]\^ary  Selwood." 

Mrs.  Morris  adds,  on  Jan.  26,   1886  : — 

522  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  As  far  as  I  can  recollect  I  did  not  mention  my  seeing  my  cousin  at 
the  time.  I  was  alone  in  the  house  with  two  very  nervous  servants, 
so  that  I  hardly  think  it  likely  I  should  speak  to  them  about  anything 
'  ghostly.'  But  I  told  my  aunt,  describing  the  child's  appearance,  before 
she  had  told  me  any  particulars  of  the  death,  the  flowers,  &c." 

Mrs.  Morris  has  had  two  other  hallucinations  representing  a  figure, 
which  in  both  instances  was  unrecognised  ;  one  of  these  occurred  at  the 
moment  of  waking ;  the  second  may  have  been  due  to  nervousness  or 
expectancy,  as  another  member  of  the  household  had  been  similarly 
affected  just  before.  But  Mrs.  Morris  is  certainly  not  of  a  nervous 
or  fanciful  temperament. 

[It  is  no  doubt  possible  that  the  hallucination  in  this  case  was  purely 
subjective,  and  connected  with  anxiety  on  the  child's  account ;  but  it  is 
difiicult  to  believe  that  the  correspondence  of  the  lilies  was  accidental. 
Mrs.  Morris  is  certain  that  there  was  no  association  in  her  mind  between 
the  child  and  this  particular  flower  ;  and  the  idea  of  getting  the  lilies  for 
him  had  been  a  sudden  one.] 

(567)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Amos,  Hythe.  "October    1884 

"  I  was  living  at  Faversham  at  the  time  when  my  mother  was  taken 
ill,  who  lived  at  Hythe,  Kent.  I  went  to  see  her  on  a  Friday  and  returned 
home  on  Tuesday.  On  Thursday  I  retired  to  rest  at  about  10  o'clock, 
when,  on  looking  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  I  saw  my  mother  standing  dressed 
in  white  ;  her  features  were  very  distinct.  I  spoke  to  my  husband  and 
asked  him  to  look  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  as  mother  stood  looking  at  me. 
He  said,  '  I  don't  see  her  ;  can  you  see  her  now  1 '  ^  My  reply  was,  '  Yes.' 
After  that  she  vanished  slowly  away.  My  husband  said  it  was  very  odd, 
and  at  breakfast  he  asked  me  if  I  was  afraid  to  be  alone.  My  reply  was, 
I  would  rather  be  by  myself.  The  next  day  we  had  a  letter  to  say  my 
dear  mother  was  at  rest.  I  can  still  see  her  as  plain  as  at  that  time.  The 
date  was  November,  1846.  I  have  never  had  another  vision  but  this 
one.  u  Sar;^h  Amos." 

We  find  from  the  obituaries  in  two  Dover  papers  that  Mrs.  Amos' 
mother,  Mrs.  Wiles,  died  on  ISTov.  21,   1846. 

Our  friend.  Miss  Porter,  who  knew  and  questioned  Mrs.  Amos,  says  : — 

"  I  am  quite  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  her  statement.  In  describing 
the  apparition  to  me,  she  told  me  that  the  room  was  quite  dark,  but  that 
there  seemed  to  be  a  sort  of  cloud  of  light  behind  the  figure  which  enabled 
her  to  see  it  distinctly.^  She  was  very  particular  in  telling  me  that  it 
remained  all  the  time  she  was  talking  to  her  husband,  and  that  she  looked 
at  it  fixedly  the  whole  time.  She  thinks  that  it  must  have  remained 
several  minutes." 

[The  percipient's  previous  state  of  anxiety  has  again  to  be  noted,  as 
possibly  the  cause  of  the  hallucination.] 

(568)  Quoted  "  from  the  Memoirs  of  F.  Th.  Engelhardt"  in  the  work 
of  Professor  Pogodine,  of  Moscow,  Simple  Discourse  on  Difficult  Subjects, 

1  See  p.  105,  second  note. 

2  See  p.  459,  note,  and  compare  case  210. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  523 

mentioned  on  p.  508.  We  have  been  unable  to  procure  the  original 
Memoirs  ;  and  Mr.  T.  Bruhns,  of  Simferopol,  a  Corresponding  Member  of 
the  S.P.R.,  who  has  translated  the  passage,  has  been  equally  unsuccessful. 
"  In  1858,  I  lived  in  Moscow,  and  was  ordered  to  go  for  some  time  to 
Arkhangelsk.  On  February  (5th-17th,)  before  leaving,  I  wrote  a  con- 
gratulatory letter  to  my  mother  in  Petersburg,  who  was  about  to  celebrate 
(on  February  8th-20th)  the  80th  anniversary  of  her  birthday.  I  congratu- 
lated my  dear  mother,  and  entreated  her  to  bless  me  for  my  long  journey. 
Without  her  blessing  I  feared  that  my  journey  would  be  unhappy.  I  sent 
my  letter  and  departed.  Up  to  laroslavsk  the  road  was  tolerably  good. 
In  this  town  I  spent  a  day.  But  from  laroslavsk  to  Vologda  the  road 
became  so  terribly  bad  that  I  was  obliged  to  stop  at  one  station,  to  rest  till 
the  morning.  Having  taken  out  my  pelisse,  I  lay  dressed  on  the  sofa.  I 
don't  belong  to  that  happy  class  of  men  who  fall  asleep  as  soon  as  they  lie 
down.  I  took  a  book  and  tried  to  read,  but  my  fatigue  was  so  great  that 
I  could  not  read.  I  rose  from  the  sofa  and  extinguished  the  candle, 
thinking  that  in  darkness  I  should  fall  asleep  more  quickly.  Scarcely  had  I 
again  reached  my  bed  when  I  saw,  to  my  great  astonishment,  my  mother 
with  her  sister,  who  had  died  in  1846,^  standing  a  few  feet  from  me. 
Vividly  impressed  by  this  extraordinary  vision,  I  looked,  motionless,  at 
these  dear  ones.  My  mother  was  standing  before  me  as  though  alive,  and 
she  blessed  me  with  a  sign  of  the  cross.  But  her  sister,  though  perfectly 
recognisable,  had,  so  to  speak,  a  more  light,  ethereal  aspect.  I  took  the 
matches  and  lighted  the  candle — but  the  apparitions  had  already  faded 
away.  This  incident  took  place  in  the  night  of  12th-24th,  13th-25th 
February,  1 858,  between  2  and  3  o'clock  in  the  morning.  About  a  week  after 
my  arrival  at  Arkhangelsk,  I  was  informed  by  my  brother-in-law  that  my 
mother  expired  in  the  night  of  12th-13th  February." 

I  2.  In  the  next  group  of  cases,  first-hand  or  on  a  par  with  first- 
hand, the  conditioning  event  or  state  on  the  agent's  side  was  some- 
thing other  than  death,  though  in  two  of  them  death  was  rapidly- 
approaching. 

(569)  From  Mr.  Algernon  Joy,   20,  Wilton  Place,  S.W. 

"August  16th,  1883. 

"  About  1862,  I  was  walking  in  a  country  lane  near  Cardiff  by  myself, 
when  I  was  overtaken  by  two  young  colliers,  who  suddenly  attacked  me. 
One  of  them  gave  me  a  violent  blow  on  the  eye,  which  knocked  me  down,  half 
stunned.  I  distinctly  remembered  afterwards  all  that  I  had  been  thinking 
about,  both  immediately  prior  to  the  attack,  and  for  some  time  after  it. 
Up  to  the  moment  of  the  attack,  and  for  some  time  previously, 
I  was  absorbed  in  a  calculation,  connected  with  the  Penarth  Docks,  then 
in  construction,  on  which  I  was  employed.  My  train  of  thought  was 
interrupted  for  a  moment  by  the  sound  of  footsteps  behind  me.  I  looked 
back,  and  saw  the  two  young  men,  but  thought  no  more  of  them,  and  im- 
mediately returned  to  my  calculations.  On  receiving  the  blow,  I  began 
speculating  on  their  object,  what  they  were  going  to  do  next,  how  I  could 
best  defend  myself,  or  escape  from  them  ;  and  when  they  ran  away,  and  I 

1  As  to  the  appearance  of  a  second  figure,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  545-6. 

524  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

had  picked  myself  up,  I  thought  of  trying  to  identify  them,  and  of 
denouncing  them  at  the  police-station,  to  which  I  proceeded,  after  follow- 
ing them  till  I  lost  sight  of  them.  In  short  I  am  positive  that  for  about 
half  an  hour  preAdous  to  the  attack,  and  for  an  hour  or  two  after  it,  there 
was  no  connection  whatever,  direct  or  indirect,  between  my  thoughts  and 
a  person  at  that  moment  in  London,  and  whom  I  will  call  '  A.'  Two  days 
afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  '  A,'  written  on  the  day  after  the 
assault,  asking  me  what  I  had  been  doing  and  thinking  about  at  half-past 
4  p.m.,  on  the  day  previous  to  that  on  which  he  was  writing.  He  con- 
tinued :  '  I  had  just  passed  your  club,  and  was  thinking  of  you,  when  I 
recognised  your  footstep  behind  me.  You  laid  your  hand  heavily  on  my 
shoulder.  I  turned,  and  saw  you  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  saw  you  in  my  life. 
You  looked  distressed,  and,  in  answer  to  my  greeting  and  inquiry,  "  What's 
the  matter  1 "  you  said,  "  Go  home,  old  fellow,  I've  been  hurt.  You  wiU 
get  a  letter  from  me  in  the  morning  telling  you  all  about  it."  You  then 
vanished  instantaneously.' 

"  The  assault  took  place  as  near  half -past  4  as  possible,  certainly 
between  4.15  and  4.45.  I  wrote  an  account  of  it  to  '  A  '  on  the  following 
day,  so  that  our  letters  crossed,  he  receiving  mine,  not  the  next  morning, 
as  my  double  had  promised,  but  on  the  succeeding  one,  at  about  the  same 
time  as  I  received  his.  '  A '  solemnly  assured  me  that  he  knew  no  one  in 
or  near  Cardiff,  and  that  my  account  was  the  only  one  that  he  received  of 
the  incident.  From  my  intimate  personal  knowledge  of  him,  I  am  certain 
that  he  is  incapable  of  uttering  an  untruth.  But  there  are  reasons  why  I 
cannot  give  his  name,  even    in    confidence.^ 

"  Algernon  Joy." 

[Mr.  Joy  having  received  an  account  of  the  phantasm  written  before 
the  news  of  his  accident  reached  the  percipient,  his  evidence  is  on  a  par 
with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).] 

(570)  From  Mrs.  McMuUin,  formerly  Miss  HammiU  (now  in  India). 

"  9,  South  wick  Place,  Hyde  Park,  W. 

"  1883. 
"  Many  years  ago  an  old  nurse,  Mary  Vivian,  who  was  living  with  us, 
thought  she  saw  one  of  the  De  Lancys,  whom  she  had  lived  with,  walk 
through  our  nursery.  She  was  so  certain  she  had  seen  him  that  she  was 
quite  overcome,  and  said  she  was  sure  some  harm  had  befallen  him.  Some 
time  after,  she  heard  that  on  his  way  to  the  Crimea  (I  think,  but  am  not 
quite  sure  when  it  was,)  this  young  De  Lancy  had  jumped  overboard  to 
save  the  life  of  a  soldier  who  had  fallen  overboard,  and  had  been  nearly 
drowned,  the  very  same  evening  she  thought  she  saw  him  in  our  nursery ; 
and  he  told  her  he  had  thought  of  his  old  nurse  when  he  was  in  the  water." 

Mrs.  McMuUin  adds,    "  I  know  it  was  told  me  at  the  time." 
Lady  Bates,  of  2,  Sussex  Place,  Hyde  Park,  writes  : — 

"  March  14th,  1885. 
"  Twenty-eight  years  ago  an  elderly  woman,  named  Vivian,  lived   as 
nurse  in  the  service  of  Mr.   Hammill,   police  magistrate,    at   34,   Sussex 
Gardens,   Hyde   Park.     She  had  previously  been  for  many  years  in  the 

1  These  reasons  have  been  privately  communicated. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  525 

family  of  Colonel  De  Lancy,  one  of  whose  sons  in  May,  1857,  was  on  his 
voyage  to  India  with  his  regiment,  the  22nd.  One  evening,  towards  the 
end  of  that  month,  Yivian  told  Miss  Constance  Hammill  (then  about  18) 
that  when  sitting  in  the  nursery,  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  she  had  seen 
Oliver  De  Lancy  enter  and  pass  through  the  room,  and  that  she  felt  sure 
that  some  misfortune  had  happened  to  him.  I  heard  of  the  occurrence 
the  next  day,  and  well  remember,  even  at  this  distance  of  time,  the  words 
in  which  it  was  related  to  me  : — '  Yivian  has  seen  a  ghost  in  the  nursery, 
and  it  has  made  her  so  ill  that  she  is  not  able  to  do  her  work  and  has  gone 
to  bed.'  Some  weeks  after,  Mr.  Priaulx,  young  De  Lancy's  uncle,  called 
to  tell  Yivian  that  a  letter  had  been  received  from  him,  in  which  he  said 
that  he  had  nearly  lost  his  life  in  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  rescue  a 
private  soldier  of  the  22nd,  who  had  fallen  overboard  between  Gibraltar 
and  Malta,  adding  : — '  When  I  was  in  the  water  I  thought  of  old  Yivian.' 
He  gave  no  date,  but  Mr.  Priaulx,  at  Yivian's  request,  inquired  at  the 
War  Office,  and  found  that  the  man  had  been  drowned  on  the  27th  of 
May — the  day  on  which,  according  to  a  note  made  at  the  time,  she  had 
seen  the  apparition. 

"  Captain  De  Lancy  and  Yivian  have  been  long  dead ;  and  Miss 
Constance  Hammill  is  married  now  in  India  ;  but  I  have  written  down 
the  story  exactly  as  I  remember  to  have  heard  it.  ^'■M..  M.  Bates." 

The  following  notice  is  from  Hart's  Army  List  for  1865  : — 

"  Captain  Oliver  De  Lancy  received  the  medal  of  the  Royal  Humane 
Society  for  gallant  conduct  in  endeavouring  to  save  the  life  of  Private 
Dempsey,  of  the  22nd  Regiment,  who  fell  overboard  between  Gibraltar  and 
Malta,  on  the  night  of  May  27th,  1857." 

Miss  Ewart,  of  3,  Morpeth  Terrace,  Yictoria  Street,  tells  us  that  when 
Lady  Bates  related  this  incident  to  her,  near  the  time  when  it  occurred, 
she  mentioned  that  Yivian  had  gone  to  make  inquiries  of  Mr.  Priaulx  the 
day  after  her  vision,  having  received  special  permission  from  Mrs.  Ham- 
mill to  do  so.  But  Lady  Bates,  though  she  says  this  may  probably  have 
been  so,  does  not  now  remember  it. 

Dr.  Scott,  late  headmaster  of  Westminster  School,  who  heard  of  the 
incident  soon  after  its  occurrence,  has  given  us  an  independent  and 
substantially  concordant  account  of  it. 

(571)  From  Mr.  H.  Wooderson,  2,  Little  Queen's  Road,  Teddington. 

"1881. 

"  Like  the  rest  of  my  brothers  and  sisters,  I  have  always  had  the 
capacity  of  seeing  spirits  in  a  clairvoyant  way.^  When  I  was  a  youth  of 
14,  I  ran  away  from  Hampton  Court,  where  my  parents  lived,  and  I  went 
into  service  as  under-gardener  with  Captain  Emmett,  Ditton  House,  the 
next  estate  to  Lord  St.  Leonards',  at  Long  Ditton  on  the  othei'  side  of 
the  river.  One  night,  about  1857,  when  it  was  my  turn  to  look  after  the 
fires  in  the  hot^house,  just  as  I  was  going  down  into  the  stoke-hole,  I  saw 
my  mother  standing  on  the  top  of  the  stoke-hole  in  her  night-dress,  and 

1  Mr.  Wooderson  explains  these  "spirits"  to  be  hallucinations  representing  living 
persons,  which  he  has  regarded  as  premonitory  of  their  actual  approach.  His  wife  confirms 
the  fact  that  his  prognostications  of  this  kind  have  often  been  fulfilled  ;  but  no  accurate 
record  has  been  kept. 

526  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

her  head  bound  up  as  in  a  turban,  as  if  she  was  ill,  which  much  frightened 
me  ;  and  on  joining  the  foreman  of  the  houses,  a  Scotchman,  he  said,  '  You 
look  frightened.'  I  told  him  I  had  seen  my  mother ;  he  remarked  that  I 
had  seen  her  wraith,  and  ought  to  go  home,  to  which  I  agreed.  It  was 
then  about  half -past  1  o'clock.  We  used  the  Captain's  boat  that  was  in 
the  boathouse  to  set  me  over  the  river,  and  I  ran  home.  I  arrived  at 
home  at  2  o'clock,  and  found  my  mother  lying  in  bed  just  as  I  had  seen 
her  in  my  vision.  She  said,  '  I  knew  I  should  bring  you.'  She  recovered 
from  her  illness. 

"  Some  time  after  this,  I  was  employed  as  guard  on  the  G.  E.  Railway, 
and  I  and  my  mate,  who  worked  the  down  train  while  I  took  the  up  train, 
shared  the  same  lodgings  at  Selby  Street,  Waterloo  Town,  Bethnal  Green. 
We  used  to  cross  each  other  at  Bishop's  Stortford,  where  we  would 
exchange  a  few  words.  One  night  I  felt  very  heavy  as  if  some  misfortune 
was  about  to  happen  to  my  family.  I  spoke  to  my  companion  when  I  met 
him  at  Bishop's  Stortford,  and  said  I  was  sure  that  something  was  wrong 
with  my  mother.  My  companion  made  light  of  it,  and  said  I  should  be  all 
right  when  I  went  to  work.  The  impression,  however,  remained  with  me, 
and  when  I  saw  my  companion  at  night  he  told  me  there  was  a  telegram 
waiting  at  home  for  me  from  Hampton  Court.  The  telegram  was  to  warn 
me  that  if  I  wished  to  see  my  mother  alive,  I  must  set  off  at  once.  I 
started  as  soon  as  I  could,  after  showing  the  railway  authorities  the 
telegram,  and  taking  the  first  train  to  Hampton  Court,  I  arrived  about 
12  o'clock,  and  found  my  mother  awaking  from  half-an-hour's  sleep,  which 
she  had  had  after  long  wakefulness  from  fever.  When  she  saw  me  she  said, 
'  I  could  not  depart  till  I  had  seen  you,  but  now  it  is  all  right.'  She  then 
lay  down  and  passed  away  during  the  day  without  any  trouble.  This  was 
in  the  summer  of  1866.  "  H.  Wooderson." 

We  find  from  a  newspaper  obituary  that  Mrs.  Wooderson  died  on 
Aug.  20,  1868  (not  1866). 

[As  Mr.  Wooderson  recollects  the  turban  as  the  special  feature  in  his 
vision  which  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  illness,  it  is  not  so  easy  as  it 
would  otherwise  be  to  suppose  that  he  wrongly  read  back  the  turban  into 
the  vision  after  he  had  seen  it  in  reality  ;  and  the  case  may  be  compared 
to  those  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  8,  where  some  real  feature  of  the  agent's  aspect 
seems  to  be  conveyed.  The  case,  however,  besides  lacking  corroboration, 
is  of  course  much  weakened,  from  an  evidential  point  of  view,  by  its 
opening  sentence.] 

(572)  From  a  lady  who  has  a  dread  of  publicity. 

"September,   1884. 

"In  1857,  during  church  service,  I  had  an  impression  of  something 
being  close  to  my  face.  I  opened  my  eyes,  and  saw  distinctly  the  face  of 
a  friend.^  It  appeared  quite  solid,  and  I  could  recognise  all  the  markings 
in  the  face.  Being  startled,  I  closed  my  eyes,  when  it  was  no  longer 
visible  ;  on  re-opening  them  it  was  still  present.  I  cannot  now  remember 
whether  the  news  of  my  friend's  death  reached  us  that  evening,  or  early 
the  following  morning.  He  died  during  the  day  (Sunday)  on  which  I 
had  the  vision  ;  but  I  never  heard  the  exact  hour.  "  H.   C." 

1  Compare  case  553,  and  see  p.  33,  note. 

v.]  VISUAL    CASES.  527 

On  being  interrogated  by  our  friend,  Miss  Porter,  of  16,  Russell 
Square,  Miss  C.  added  that  when  she  was  first  aware  of  something  being 
near  her  and  opened  her  eyes,  the  vision  was  within  an  inch  or  two  of 
her  face,  too  close  for  recognition  till  she  drew  back  a  little.^  It  seemed 
to  remain  stationary.  She  cannot  say  how  long  it  remained,  but  described 
how  a  feeling  of  horror  came  over  her  that  it  would  always  be  there  be- 
fore her  eyes.  It  was  also  long  enough  for  her  to  make  up  her  mind 
that  her  friend  was  dead,  and  she  was  not  at  all  surprised  when  the 
news  came.  It  disappeared  suddenly — did  not  fade,  but  was  there  one 
moment  and  gone  the  next. 

On  inquiry.  Miss  C.  told  the  present  writer  that  she  knew  her  friend 
to  be  ill,  but  was  in  no  apprehension  of  his  death.  She  preferred  not  to 
give  his  name,  but  undertook  herself  to  ascertain  from  the  Times  obituary 
whether  she  was  right  in  her  recollection  that  he  died  on  a  Sunday.  The 
result  showed  that  she  was  not,  and  that  he  died  on  a  Wednesday.  ^  He 
had  however  been  very  ill,  and  delirious,  for  3  or  4  days  previously  ;  and 
as  she  has  never  had  a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion,  a  remarkable 
coincidence  remains. 

(573)  From  Mrs.  Beaumont,  1,  Crescent  Road,  S.  Norwood. 

"  February  24th,  1885. 

"  One  day  in  the  '40s,  when  I  was  living  in  the  Rectory  at  Marlborough, 
my  father's  house,  my  mother  and  sister  had  gone  out,  and  I  was  lying 
on  a  sofa  in  the  drawing-room;  at  about  3  p.m.  I  was  reading  a  book,  when 
the  light  seemed  to  be  slightly  darkened,  and  looking  up  I  saw,  leaning  in 
at  the  window  farthest  from  me,  about  three  feet  from  the  ground,  and 
beckoning,  a  gentleman  whom  I  had  only  seen  once,  about  a  fortnight  or 
three  weeks  previously.  Supposing  that  my  father  wanted  me  to  sign  my 
name  (as  a  witness  to  a  lease,  or  something  of  that  kind),  I  got  up,  went 
out  of  the  window  (which  led  down  into  the  garden),  and  passed  along  in 
front  of  the  house,  and  up  six  steps  into  my  father's  study,  which  was 
empty.  I  then  went  into  the  yard  and  garden,  but  found  nobody ;  so  I 
returned  to  my  sofa  and  my  books.  When  father  came  in,  two  hours 
afterwards,  I  said,  'Why  did  you  send  Mr.  H.  to  call  me,  and  then  go 
away  *? '  My  father  replied,  '  What  are  you  talking  about  1  H.  is  down 
in  Wales.'  Nothing  more  was  said.  I  did  not  like  to  dwell  on  the  subject 
to  either  of  my  parents,  and  I  did  not  mention  the  occurrence  to  any  one 
for  several  years.  About  a  fortnight  afterwards,  I  was  told  by  my  mother 
that  Mr.  H.  had  written,  proposing  for  my  hand  (some  property  of  his 
adjoined  some  property  of  my  father's  in  Wales).  I  cannot  fix  exactly  how 
close  the  coincidence  was  ;  but  my  strong  impression  is  that  the  letter  was 
received  within  24  hours  of  my  experience.  Before  I  was  told  of  the 
contents  of  the  letter,  I  remember  that  I  found  the  blue  envelope  of  Mr. 
H.'s  letter  (with  T.  H.  on  the  corner,  and  with  the  coat-of-arms  on  his 
seal,  and  with  the  postmark  Llandilo)  on  the  floor  in  my  father's  study. 
When  the  news  was  told  me,  I  seemed  to  receive  some  explanation  of  my 
vision. 

1  See  Vol.  L,  p.  522,  note. 

2  As  regards  the  liability  to  exaggerate  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence,  see  Vol.  i., 
pp.  140-6,  and  the  examples  given  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  Ixxv-vii. 

528  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  I  have  never  had  any  hallucination  or  vision  at  any  other  time,  except 
when  I  saw  the  '  little  brown  lady  '  at  Kintbury.i  "  C.  Beaumont." 

[Here  we  have  the  points  that  the  hallucinatory  vision  of  a  recognised 
figure  was  unique  in  the  percipient's  experience ;  and  that  the  supposed 
agent's  thoughts  must  have  been  much  occupied  with  her  at  the  time.  But 
we  have  no  proof  that,  on  his  side,  the  particular  time  at  which  the  phan- 
tasm was  seen  stood  out  in  any  way  from  the  hours  and  days  that  preceded 
and  followed  it ;  and  the  coincidence  therefore  lacks  precision.] 

(574)  From  Mr.  J.  H.  Jevons,  182,  Elm  Grove,  Brighton. 

"  August,  1884. 

"  Whilst  I  was  dressing,  the  other  morning,  the  form  of  a  friend 
passed  amongst  some  trees  opposite  to  my  house,  and  so  little  doubt  had  I 
as  to  the  form  being  his,  as  he  looked  up  to  my  window,  that  I  waved  my 
hand  to  him  to  'go  on'  up  the  road  where  we  frequently  walked.  I  followed 
in  a  minute  or  two,  but  only  to  find  that  I  could  not  find  him,  high  or  low, 
up  or  down  that  road,  or  along  any  of  three  others.  At  length  I  went 
along  an  accustomed  road,  to  a  point  in  the  town  where  we  not  infrequently 
met,  or  separated,  as  the  case  might  be.  But  non  est  inventus.  Subse- 
quently I  called  at  his  house,  and  found  him  very  ill  indeed,  as  he  still 
remains." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jevons  says  : — 

"  September  8th,  1884. 

"I  think  that  in  cases  of  this  sort  one  cannot  be  too  careful  as  to  identity, 
because  I  know  practically  how  apt  the  imagination  is  to  outrun  the 
judgment.  But  of  this  particular  instance  under  notice,  the  most  I  can 
say  is,  that  if  it  was  one  of  self-deception  or  mere  subjectiveness,  I 
was  most  completely  deceived  indeed.  Certainly  I  had  reason  to  expect 
my  friend,  as  he  came  past  my  place  nearly  every  morning  at  about 
1 1  o'clock,  looked  up  at  my  window,  and  when  I  saw  him,  I  waved  my  hand 
in  the  direction  in  which  I  implied  I  would  follow  him.  As  I  did  so  on 
the  morning  to  which  I  am  referring,  I  saw  him  and  nodded  to  him  two  or 
three  times,  never  for  an  instant  doubting  that  the  figure  was  his.  I  saw, 
through  the  leaves  and  branches  of  the  trees,  on  the  walk  opposite  to  my 
house,  his  white  hat,  silver-rimmed  spectacles  and  dark  grey  beard,  as  well 
as  his  peculiar  contour  and  gait.  He  is  72  years  of  age,  tall,  slow  of  move- 
ment, and  not  very  quick  of  sight ;  and  as  he  appeared  at  first  to  hesitate, 
I  waved  my  hand  again,  when  he  indicated,  by  his  head,  in  his  usual  way, 
that  he  understood  me,  and  then  he  walked  on.  I  was  but  a  few  minutes 
in  my  effort  to  join  him  ;  and  it  was  when  I  found  I  could  not  see  him,  or 
anybody  like  him,  in  any  direction,  that  I  was  struck  with  the  remark- 
ableness  of  the  occurrence,  and  I  stood  fairly  puzzled,  as  I  must  have 
shown,  for  I  noticed  a  passer-by  looking  at  me  in  a  sort  of  wondering  way. 

"  The  illness  was  quite  sudden,  and  neither  my  friend  nor  myself  had 
any  reason,  prior  to  his  seizure,  to  suppose  that  we  should  not  meet,  as 
customary,  on  the  morning  mentioned.  The  case  has  been  my  only  experi- 
ence of  a  visual  hallucination,  with  the  exception  of  one  (of  a  difierent 
character)  I  had  in  my  very  youthful  days.  "  John  H.  Jevons." 

1  This  was  an  apparition  frequently  seen  by  the  residents  in  a  particular  house. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASUS.  529 

[It  is  against  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity,  that  Mr.  Jevons 
remembers  that  the  figure  seemed  distinctly  to  recognise  his  greeting. 
Still  it  may  have  been  a  hallucination  due  to  expectancy.  See  Yol.  I., 
p.  516.] 

(575)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  W.,  who  desires  that  her  name  and  address 
may  not  be  published,  as  she  has  a  near  relation  who  would  much  object 
to  their  appearance.  u  February  20th,  1885. 

"  When  a  resident  near  Portsmouth,  during  a  visit  made  by  my  late 
mother  to  London  in  the  summer  of  1858,  the  year  preceding  her  death, 
I  distinctly  saw  her  walking  in  the  back  garden  at  noon-day.  I  was  not 
at  the  time  thinking  of  her,  but  happening  to  look  from  my  chamber 
window,  I  beheld  this  figure,  which,  but  for  my  parent's  absence  from 
home,  I  should  have  supposed  her  veritable  self.  This  incident  led  me  to 
conjecture  something  was  amiss  ;  and  this  idea  was  confirmed  when  the 
next  morning's  post  brought  me  information  that  my  mother  had  sustained 
a  severe  fall,  and  was  so  badly  hurt  that  at  first  fatal  results  was  feared  ; 
and  at  the  moment  I  fancied  I  saw  her,  her  thoughts  were  bent  on 
telegraphing  for  me  to  go  to  her." 

The  following  incident  is  perhaps  worth  quoting,  as  having  occurred  to 
the  same  person  : — 

"  A  few  years  prior  to  this,  when  a  girl  of  16,  an  engagement  was 
formed  between  myself  and  a  young  naval  officer,  about  to  sail  for  the 
African  coast.  He  had  promised  my  mother  and  self  that  he  would  write 
us  from  Ascension.  It  chanced,  some  time  after  his  departure,  I  accom- 
panied a  friend  in  a  long  country  walk,  when  all  at  once  a  strange  feeling 
possessed  me  that  this  young  officer  was  near.  I  seemed  to  feel  the 
clasp  of  his  hand  upon  my  wrist,  yet  I  saw  nothing,  I  had  only /elf  a 
presence.  My  companion  asked  why  I  looked  so  pale.  I  made  an  evasive 
reply,  and  on  returning  home  told  my  mother  that  '  Tom  was  dead  ! '  She 
tried  to  laugh  away  my  fancy ;  nevertheless,  she  noted  the  date  of  the 
occurrence ;  and  when  a  brother  of  my  own,  then  homeward  bound  from 
the  coast  of  Africa,  arrived,  the  first  words  he  spoke,  after  an  exchange  of 
greetings,  were,  '  Oh,  that  poor  fellow  you  sent  letters  by  for  me  is  dead  ! 
He  died  three  days'  sail  from  Ascension,  and  is  buried  on  the  island.' 

"  M.  W." 

We  learn  from  Mrs.  W.  that  she  has  not  had  any  hallucinations  which 
there  is  reason  to  regard  as  merely  subjective.     She  adds  : — 

"  I  cannot,  owing  to  the  many  years  that  have  passed  since  the 
occurrences  mentioned,  furnish  any  dates ;  my  mother  calculated  that 
the  singular  impression  I  received  was  as  near  as  possible  to  the  time  of 
our  young  friend's  death.  My  brother  who  brought  the  tidings  has  been 
deceased  several  years." 

(576)  Obtained  through  Mrs.  Pears,  of  Walton,  Clevedon.  The  narrative 
was  written  down  from  the  dictation  of  Mrs.  C. — a  relative  of  Mrs.  Pears, 
a  daughter  of  the  well-known  Mrs.  Fry,  and  a  member  of  the  Society  of 
Friends — who  will  not  allow  her  name  to  be  published,  and  entirely  declines 
to  be  further  questioned  on  the  subject.  u  ]\/[arch  10th   1884 

"  On  14th  November,  1837,  or  about  that  time,  Mrs.  C.  was  lyipg  on  a 

VOL.    II.  2    M 

530  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

sofa  in  her  drawing-room,  reading  attentively  ;  the  sofa  was  facing  the 
light.  Suddenly  lifting  her  eyes  from  the  book,  she  saw  distinctly,  standing 
at  the  foot  of  the  sofa,  the  figure  of  a  person  whom  Mrs.  C.  knew  by 
sight,  though  she  was  not  personally  acquainted  with  him.  She  observed 
how  the  figure  was  dressed,  and  even  counted  the  buttons  on  his  great- 
coat ;  five  were  visible  above  the  rather  high  end  of  the  sofa.  The  figure 
was  opaque  ;  Mrs.  C.  noticed  that  she  could  not  see  the  piano  through  it. 
After  a  few  seconds,  the  figure  disappeared   as  suddenly  as  it  had  come. 

"  A  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards,  Mrs.  C.  received  a  visit  from  one 
of  the  clergymen  of  the  town,  who  came  to  tell  her  of  the  death,  by 
drowning  at  sea,  of  the  person  whose  apparition  she  had  just  seen.  The 
clergyman  had  left  the  widow's  house  to  come  straight  to  Mrs.  C,  and 
at  the  moment  the  apparition  was  present  with  Mrs.  C,  had  been  listening 
to  the  widow's  request  that  he  would  enlist  her  sympathy  on  behalf  of 
herself  and  her  children." 

[The  remoteness  of  the  case  is  again  a  serious  weakness  ;  and  the  coin- 
cidence is  of  a  very  singular  type.  At  the  same  time  the  fact  of  the 
news  following  immediately  on  the  apparition  is  a  striking  one,  hardly 
likely  to  have  been  unconsciously  imported  into  the  narrative.] 

The  two  following  cases  seem  to  fall  into  the  class  illustrated  in 
Chap.  XIV.,  §  7,  where  persons  are  phantasmally  seen  or  heard  very 
soon  before  their  actual  appearance  in  the  flesh.  I  have  explained 
(p.  96)  that  it  is  to  some  extent  uncertain  whether  this  is  a  genuine 
telepathic  type ;  but  the  examples  are  worth  recording  ;  and  doubly 
so  where  the  time-coincidence  is  fortified  (as  here  and  in  case  262) 
by  the  further  point  that  odd  or  unfamiliar  details  of  appearance  are 
alleged  to  have  been  noted,  and  have  proved  to  correspond  with 
reality. 

(577)  From  Dr.  Campbell  Morfit,  1  32,  Alexandra  Road,  N.W. 

Writing  on  July  4th,  1885,  Dr.  Morfit  first  describes  a  couple  of 
business  visits  which  he  received  at  New  York,  in  the  year  1859  or 
thereabouts,  from  a  gentleman  named  Metarko,  who  then  departed  to  his 
home  in  the  West. 

"  For  a  time  that  disappearance  took  him  entirely  out  of  my  world  ; 
but  one  evening,  nearly  two  years  subsequently,  I  had  been  passing  an 
hour  or  two  at  a  friend's,  listening  to  some  fine  music.  On  my  return, 
in  good  health  and  spirits,  I  felt  unusually  wide  awake,  as  recurs  to  mind 
even  at  this  moment,  and  in  fact  quite  free  from  any  susceptibility  to 
hallucination.  Nevertheless,  scarcely  had  I  got  into  bed  than  there,  at 
the  side,  stood  Metarko,  looking  as  when  he  last  was  with  me,  but  having 
two  new  features,  one  a  kind  of  excrescence  on  the  cheek,  and  the  other 
a  necktie  of  striking  pattern.  At  first  this  sudden  presence  amused  me 
as  a  freak  of  the  imagination,  but  became  an  annoyance  when  it  would 
not  leave  on  my  trying  to  dismiss  it.  The  good  part  done  him  forbade 
the  idea  that  he  had  come  to  haunt  me  reproachfully,  yet  I  was  somewhat 
disquieted  ;  and  as  my  brother  slept  in  a  distant  room  upon  the  same  floor, 
I  called  to  him  through  the  open  doors  of  the  intermediate  sitting-room, 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  531 

without  receiving  any  answer.  The  apparition  persisted,  and  I  turned 
ray  face  from  it  to  the  wall,  by  way  of  exorcism ;  and  a  few  minutes 
later,  seemingly,  though  actually  perhaps  only  seconds,  found  that  it  had 
vanished. 

"  Seeking  an  explanation  of  the  occurrence  by  reflecting  upon  it,  I 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Metarko  had  died  that  night  at  his  distant 
home,  and  the  apparition  was  a  psychological  incident  to  announce  the 
fact  to  me,  though  for  what  reason  was  beyond  my  imagination.  The 
circumstance,  however,  so  absorbed  my  thoughts  all  the  next  day,  that 
when  evening  set  in,  I  felt  the  need  of  diverting  influences,  and  went 
out  visiting.  On  re-entering,  about  bedtime,  I  was  greeted  by  my  house- 
keeper with  the  information  that  a  stranger  gentleman  had  called  in  my 
absence,  to  request  that  I  would  allow  him  a  consultation  at  9  o'clock  the 
following  morning.  His  name,  she  said,  was  on  the  slate,  and  there  I 
found  it — - — to  be  that  of  Metarko  ! — in  his  own  unmistakeable  hand- 
writing. This  fact,  astounding  for  the  moment,  recalled,  vividly,  the 
apparition  of  the  previous  evening,  so  as  to  render  me  impatient  for  the 
actual  interview ;  and  when,  at  the  appointed  hour  next  day,  he  came  in 
the  flesh,  profound  was  my  astonishment  to  find  him  then  exactly  as  he 
appeared  in  the  vision  34  hours  previously. 

"  After  listening  to  the  statement  of  his  case,  I  asked  him  to  call 
again  in  the  evening.  He  agreed  to  this  arrangement,  and  left,  but  did 
not  return  as  promised ;  and  from  that  moment  to  the  present  I  have  never 
seen  or  heard  of  him.       Heralded  by  a  spectre  like  itself,  he  departed. 

"The  incident  noted  was  the  only  one  of  a  'psychical'  character 
that  ever  occurred  to  me. 

"  My  brother  being  an  unimpressionable  man,  and  not  sharing  my 
interest  in  the  matter,  has  forgotten,  most  probably,  all  that  I  may  have 
told  him  about  it  at  the  time.  But  my  housekeeper,  a  woman  of  con- 
siderable intelligence  and  sympathetic  nature,  might  remember.  She  was 
even  then,  however,  20  years  my  senior,  and  if  not  now  dead  is  a  very  old 
woman,  whose  whereabouts  has  dropped  out  of  my  knowledge,  and  it 
would  be  difiicult  to  find  her  at  present.  «  Campbell  Morfit." 

(578)  From  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Pigott-Carleton,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchfield, 
Hants.  The  percipient.  Lord  Dorchester,  is  deceased ;  but  we  have  his 
daughter's  evidence  to  the  fact  that  the  anxiety  which  his  experience 
produced  was   obvious  before  he  heard  what  her  experience  had  been. 

"July  5th,  1883. 

"Early  in  September,  1872,  I  was  with  my  father  and  husband  at  the 
former's  shooting  lodge  in  Co.  Tyrone.  An  old  friend,  Captain  M.,  was 
also  staying  there,  and  one  afternoon  it  was  arranged  that  I  should 
accompany  this  gentleman  and  a  keeper  on  a  fishing  expedition.  My 
husband  had  some  engagement,  but  my  father  walked  a  short  way  with 
us.  He  never  cared  to  have  me  long  away  from  him,  and,  upon  turning 
back,  remarked,  as  he  left  me,  '  Don't  get  too  far  from  home.' 

"It  was  a  brilliantly  fine  day;  I  had  a  book  with  me,  and  often  sat 
down  to  read  while  the  others  fished.  We  were  about  four  miles  down  the 
river,  when,  chancing  to  look  up  from  my  novel,  I  perceived  a  heavy  cloud 
rising  into  sight  above  the  mountains  opposite.  I  saw  we  were  '  in  for  '  a 
drenching,  thought  how  it  would  fidget  my   father,  and  wished  myself  at 

VOL.  IL  2  M  2 

532  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

home  with  all  my  heart.  In  a  few  minutes  the  storm  burst  upon  us. 
Shelter  there  was  next  to  none,  and  as  soon  as  the  deluge  had  somewhat 
abated,  we  made  for  the  lodge,  looking  as  though  we  had  all  been  barely- 
rescued  from  a  watery  grave.  When  nearly  home,  we  were  met  by  my 
father,  my  husband,  and  several  men  employed  about  the  place.  It  seemed 
to  me  singular,  not  to  say  absurd,  that  my  father  should  have  turned  him- 
self and  party  out  in  such  weather.  Still  more  to  my  surprise,  my  father 
evidently  could  not  get  over  his  disturbance,  spoke  little  that  evening,  and 
went  off  to  bed  earlier  than  usual. 

"  The  next  day  he  told  me  that  some  little  time  after  his  return  from 
the  river,  he  sat  down  to  read,  with  his  back  to  the  (western)  window  ; 
that  suddenly  a  shadow  fell  across  the  -page  ;  that,  turning  his  head,  he  saw 
me  standing  at  the  half  open  window,  my  arms  resting  upon  the  push-down 
sash  ;  that  he  said,  '  Hallo  !  Back  already  ! '  that  I  made  no  reply,  but 
apparently  stepped  down  off  the  low  outer  window  sill  and  disappeared  ; 
that  he  put  a  mark  in  his  book,  got  up,  and  looked  ovit  of  the  window  ; 
that,  not  seeing  me,  he  first  went  to  the  servants  and  asked  if  I  had  come 
in  at  the  back  door  ;  and  then  went  out  on  to  the  Kttle  terrace  before  the 
lodge  and  looked  around  for  me  ;  that  he  suddenly  caught  sight  of  the 
coming  storm-cloud  ;  that  his  bewilderment  changed  to  uneasiness,  and 
that  my  husband  just  then  coming  in  they  speedily  started  in  search. 

"  Henrietta  Pigott-Oableton." 

[This  may,  of  course,  have  been  a  purely  subjective  experience  ;  but  it 
cannot  well  be  attributed  to  any  special  expectation  in  the  percipient's 
mind  ;  and  its  coincidence  with  his  daughter's  thought  of  him,  and  desire 
to  be  at  home,  is  at  any  rate  striking.  If  the  detail  of  the  shadow  on  the 
page  is  correctly  reported,  the  case  well  exemplifies  the  development  of 
a  phantasm  in  two  stages  (Vol.  I.,  p.  520).] 

§.  3.  A  large  group  of  second-hand  cases  remains.  For  convenience, 
I  will  again  divide  them  into  accounts  received  from  near  relatives 
of  the  percipients,  and  from  others. 

(579)  From  Mr.  J.  N.  Maskelyne,  originally  printed  as  part  of  a 
letter  in  the  Daily  Telegraph. 

"  Egyptian  Hall. 

"October  21st,  1881. 

"  Sir, — Having  for  many  years  been  recognised  by  the  public  as  an 
anti-Spiritualist  and  exposer  of  the  frauds  practised  by  spirit  media,  it 
may  surprise  some  of  your  readers  to  learn  that  I  am  a  believer  in  appari- 
tions. Several  similar  occurrences  to  those  described  by  many  of  your 
correspondents  have  taken  place  in  my  own  family,  and  in  the  families  of 
near  friends  and  relatives.  The  most  remarkable  one  happened  to  my 
wife's  mother  some  years  ago.  Late  one  evening,  whilst  sitting  alone 
busily  occupied  with  her  needle,  a  strange  sensation  came  over  her,  and 
upon  looking  up  she  distinctly  saw  her  aged  mother  standing  at  the  end 
of  the  room.  She  rubbed  her  weary  eyes  and  looked  again,  but  the 
spectre  had  vanished.  She  concluded  it  was  imagination,  and  retired  to 
rest,  thinking  nothing  more  of  the  vision,  until  the  next  day  brought  the 

v.]         ^  VISUAL  CASES.  533 

news  that  her  mother,  at  about  the  same  time  the  apparition  had  appeared, 

had  fallen  down  in  a  fit  and  expired.  ,,  -r         ^.-r  -.^  „ 

^  "  John  Nevil  Maskelyne. 

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  Mr.  Maskelyne  writes  that  he  regrets  not 
to  be  able  to  get  this  case  from  his  wife's  mother  in  her  own  words.  "  She 
was  a  little  vexed  with  me,"  he  says,  "  for  giving  publicity  to  the  circum- 
stance.     I  have  written  it  exactly  as  I  have  often  heard  her  relate  it." 

(580)  From  a  gentleman  who  prefers  that  his  name  should  not  appear. 

"October  31st,  1884. 

"  An  occurrence  which  happened  to  my  father,  and  which  I  have 
several  times  heard  him  mention  circumstantially,  was  as  follows  : — 

"  My  father.  Lieutenant  W.  C.  B.,  was  in  command  of  a  gunbrig 
stationed  to  keep  off  slavers  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  in  1834.  In  the 
October  of  that  year,  he  was  alone  in  his  cabin  when  he  noted  distinctly, 
as  he  thought,  my  mother  appear  to  him.  He  noted  down  the  circum- 
stance in  his  logbook,^  giving  time  and  date  ;  but  the  effect  on  his  mind 
was  so  great  that  on  his  return  to  England  at  the  close  of  the  year  from 
ill-health,  he  called  for  a  file  of  the  Times  directly  he  landed  in  Portsmouth, 
and  looked  to  the  month  in  question,  and  there  found  that  my  mother  had 
died  that  very  night  that  the  appearance  came  to  him,  but  which  he  had 
no  means  of  learning  earlier,  owing  to  the  difiiculty  of  communication  by 
letter  in  those  days." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  our  informant's  mother  died  on 
October  11,  1834. 

(581)  From  Mr.  E.  Stephenson,  School  House,  Market  Weighton, 
Yorkshire.  His  mother's  signature,  attached  since  the  account  was  placed 
in  its  present  position,  makes  it  really  first-hand. 

"November  25th,  1884. 

"  I  am  master  of  the  boys'  school  and  organist  of  the  parish  church  at 
Weighton.  My  mother's  maiden  name  was  Jane  Cooling.  Several  years 
ago  (about  10  or  12)  she  told  me  a  remarkable  story  which  sank  deeply 
into  my  mind.  I  got  her  to  tell  me  the  whole  of  her  story  again,  and  it 
was  exactly  the  same  as  that  she  had  told  years  before.  I  cross-questioned 
her,  but  always  got  the  same  answers.  My  mother  is  65  years  of  age. 
Her  mind  is  quite  clear  and  her  memory  very  good.  The  affair  happened 
when  she  was  about  16  or  17  years  old,  and  she  maintains  that  even 
yet  she  can  see  (in  imagination)  her  brother  as  fairly  as  she  saw  him 
then. 

"  The  following  is  the  story,  which  I  have  recently  taken  down  care- 
fully from  her  own  lips.  Having  subjected  my  mother  to  some  very  close 
questioning,  I  feel  sure  that  you  may  depend  upon  the  statements  being 
trustworthy. 

"  Henry  Cooling,  the  brother  of  Jane  Cooling,  was  a  sailor,  and  had 
gone  on  a  long  voyage.  Jane  was  living  in  Hull  in  the  house  of  Mr. 
Kitching,  Mytongate.  There  was  a  large  cupboard  in  the  house,  which 
was  on  a  kind  of  landing,  approached  by  two  or  three  steps.  Just  as  she 
was  about  to  go  up  to  it,  she  saw  distinctly,  about  5  p.m.,  her  brother 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  161,  note. 

534  SUPPLEMENT.  '  [chap. 

Henry  standing  in  front  of  the  door.  His  eyes  were  fixed  on  her  for  a 
short  time,  and  then  he  disappeared  towards  the  left.  He  was  dressed  in 
his  seaman's  drawers  and  shirt.  The  strings  of  his  drawers  were  loose ;  his 
feet  were  bare  ;  his  hair  was  untidy ;  and  his  whole  appearance  was  like 
that  of  one  roused  suddenly  from  sleep. 

"  After  the  vision  had  vanished,  as  soon  as  she  recovered  herself,  she 
went  home  to  her  father,  and  told  him  what  she  had  seen.  He  said  it  was 
all  nonsense,  and  told  her  to  take  no  notice  of  it.  However,  some  days 
later,  a  letter  came  from  the  captain  of  the  ship,  stating  that  Henry 
Cooling  had  been  washed  overboard  during  a  gale  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay, 
just  as  he  was  called  on  deck  to  assist  in  working  the  ship,  and  the  time 
he  gave  as  about  the  time  of  the  accident  corresponded  approximately  to 
that  at  which  my  mother  saw  the  vision. 

"  Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  found  the  exact  date  of  my 
uncle's  death — March  27th,  1836.  My  mother  would,  therefore,  be  17 
within  a  few  days.  u  ^    g_" 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Stephenson  writes,  on  Dec.  2,  1884  : — 

"  I  remember  my  mother  telling  us  the  story  several  years  ago,  while 
her  father  was  living  in  our  house,  and  I  have  no  recollection  of  anything 
but  his  fullest  assent  to  what  she  told.  You  will  remember  that  in  my 
previous  letter,  I  stated  that  she  told  her  father  what  she  had  seen,  several 
days  before  they  knew  what  had  happened.  I  could  almost  swear  that  I 
have  heard  him  affirm,  but  will  not  do  so  as  I  do  not  exactly  recollect  the 
occasion,  and  do  not  wish  to  give  you  anything  but  the  purest  evidence  in 
such  a  matter. 

"  My  mother  confidently  affirms  that  she  saw  the  vision  at  that  hour, 
5  p.m.,  and,  as  far  as  she  can  remember,  the  letter  from  the  captain  of  the 
vessel  several  days  afterwards  confirmed  her  statement  as  to  the  time,  and 
the  being  called  from  his  berth.     We  cannot  find  the  captain's  letter. 

"  My  mother  has  not,  when  completely  awake,  had  any  other  appari- 
tion or  hallucination,  except  the  one  furnished  you."  [The  words  "  when 
completely  awake  "  simply  reproduce  the  form  in  which  the  question  was 
asked.]  u  (Signed  as  correct)     Jane  Stephenson." 

(582)  From  Mrs.  Ricardo,  8,  Chesham  Street,  S.W. 

"April  6th,  1885. 

"  I  can  only  recollect  the  story  rather  imperfectly,  though  I  have  often 
heard  my  father,  the  late  Colonel  Campbell,  of  Skipness,  tell  it. 

"  On  a  fine  summer's  evening,  between  8  and  9  o'clock  (still  quite  light 
in  the  Highlands),  about  40  years  ago  or  more,  my  father  was  walking  to 
the  old  ruined  castle  of  Skipness,  which  was  a  short  distance  from  the 
more  modern  house.  He  had  fitted  up  a  turning  lathe  and  workshop  in 
one  of  the  old  rooms,  and  was  going  to  fetch  some  tool  which  he  had  for- 
gotten in  the  day.  As  he  approached  the  gate  of  the  courtyard  he  saw 
two  of  the  fishermen  (brothers),  Walter  and  John  Cook,  leaning  against 
the  wall  rather  stiffly.  Being  in  a  hurry  he  merely  nodded,  said  something 
about  its  being  a  fine  evening  and  went  on.  He  was  surprised  that  they 
did  not  answer  him,  which  was  very  unlike  their  usual  custom,  but  being 
in  a  hurry  did  not  think  much  of  it,  and  when  he  returned,  they  were  gone. 
That  night  a  sudden  gale  sprang  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night.     Next 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  535 

morning,  when  my  father  went  out  to  see  what  damage  had  been  done,  he 
met  some  fishermen  carrying  up  a  dead  body  from  the  beach.  He  inquired, 
'  Who  is  it  ? '  They  said,  '  Walter  Cook,  and  they  are  just  bringing  his 
brother  John's  body  too.  Their  boat  capsized  when  they  were  out  with 
the  herring  fleet  last  night,  and  they  were  both  drowned.'  My  father  said, 
'  It  can't  be,  they  never  went  to  the  fishing,  for  I  saw  them  and  spoke  to 
them  between  8  and  9  last  night.  '  '  Impossible,  laird  !  for  they  both  sailed 
with  the  rest  of  the  fleet  between  3  and  4  in  the  afternoon,  and  never 
returned.'  My  father  never  believed  in  second-sight  or  wraiths,  but  said 
this  completely  puzzled  him.  It  must  have  been  second-sight,  as  the  men 
were  not  yet  dead  when  he  saw  them,i  though  it  was  absolutely  impossible 
that  they  could  have  been  on  land  at  the  time.  This,  as  far  as  I 
can  remember,  is  the  story,  but  I  cannot  be  quite  exact  as  to  date  and 
hours,  "Annette  Ricardo." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Ricardo  writes  ; — 

1.  "  Colonel  Campbell  never  had  any  other  experiences  of  the  kind, 
and  always  laughed  at  any  superstitions  or  fancies  of  the  kind. 

2.  "  His  sight  was  remarkably  keen  and  long  ;  a  splendid  shot,  &c. 
[He  was  known  as  a  spirited  writer  on  Indian  field  sports.] 

3.  "  He  was  always  quite  certain  that  the  men  were  the  Cooks,  and 
recognised  and  spoke  to  them  by  name. 

4.  "  It  was  well  known  that  the  Cooks  went  with  the  rest  between 
3  and  4  o'clock  ;  every  boat  is  seen  and  recognised  as  it  leaves  the  bay, 
and  they  could  not  possibly  return  without  its  being  also  known. 

5.  "  The  place  was  not  a  usual  one  for  the  fishermen  to  lounge,  being  the 
walls  of  our  old  castle,  in  the  grounds,  and  the  men's  attitude  was  so  stifi" 
that  Colonel  Campbell  imagined  they  had  been  drinking. 

"  I  have  just  been  talking  to  an  elder  relation  of  the  family,  who  had 
heard  my  father  tell  the  story,  and  he  corroborates  these  facts,  only  not 

1  If  the  men  were  in  a  perfectly  normal  state  when  the  phantasms  were  seen,  the 
incident  could  not  be  properly  included  among  the  telepathic  cases  in  this  book  (Vol.  i., 
p.  140).  But  the  evidence  is  quite  uncertain  as  to  hours ;  and  there  seems  at  any  rate  an 
appreciable  probability  that  the  deaths  coincided  with  or  preceded  Colonel  Campbell's 
experience. 

This  suggests  a  more  general  remark.  In  Vol.  i.,  p.  122,  when  contrasting  telepathy 
with  various  beliefs  which  have  been,  or  still  are,  popular  superstitions,  I  included  among 
these  the  belief  in  the  prophetic  gift  of  "second-sight."  But  a  careful  study  of  the 
recorded  cases  will  show  that  the  p)rophetic  character  which  popularly  attached  to  them 
was  not  infrequently  a  pure  assumption.  The  time  of  the  occurrence  of  distant  events 
was  apt  to  be  confused  with  the  time  of  hearing  of  them  ;  and  visions  and  impressions  are 
described  as  having  preceded,  and  been  fulfilled  by,  events  which,  for  aught  that 
appears,  they  may  have  coincided  with  or  shortly  followed.  (See,  e.g.,  the  narratives 
given  in  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  by  Walter  G-regor, 
p.  205  ;  in  Howells'  Cambrian  Svperstitions,  p.  57  ;  and  in  the  Treatise  on  Second  Sight,  by 
Theophilus  Insulanus  (1763),  p.  60  ;  and  see  also  p.  59.)  In  days  when  no  distinct  con- 
ception of  psychical  transference  had  been  formed,  and  when  supersensuous  influences 
were  regarded  as  necessarily  supernatural,  it  is  not  surprising  that  effects  p)roduced 
backivards,  so  to  speak,  by  events  still  to  come,  should  have  been  as  readily  accepted  as 
the  coincidental  impressions  of  what  we  should  now  call  spontaneous  telepathy :  _  if 
the  prophetic  idea  seemed  the  more  marvellous,  that  would  only  be  an  inducement  to  give 
it  the  most  extensive  application.  Not  that  I  would  attempt  to  save  the  credit  of  these 
cases  by  representing  any  of  them  as  conclusively  telepathic ;  as  a  rule,  the  reports  on 
which  they  rest  have  had  too  many  chances  of  being  distorted  and  exaggerated  to  serve 
any  evidential  purpose  whatever.  But  it  is  of  interest  to  note  here  (as  before  in  some  of 
the  alleged  incidents  connected  with  witchcraft,  Vol.  i.,  p.  119)  that  the  residue  of  fact 
which  might  remain,  after  exaggeration,  baseless  assumption,  and  wrong  inference  had 
been  allowed  for,  is  such  as  the  telepathic  explanation  would  go  far  to  cover. 

536  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

quite  sure  whether  the  fleet  went  at  3  or  4,  and  thinks  the  apparition  was 
seen  about  9  in  the  evening. 

"  My  brother-in-law  (Captain  Macneal,  of  Ugadale,  Losset  Park, 
Campbeltown,  Argyllshire)  encloses  his  statement.  There  are  many  others 
who  have  heard  the  story  from  Colonel  Campbell.  I  do  not  know  if  the 
accident  was  seen  to  happen,  or  if  only  the  boat  and  dead  bodies  were 
found.  I  have  always  believed  that  the  accident  occurred  between  1 2  and 
1,  or  1   and  2  in  the  morning." 

Captain  Macneal  writes,  on  April  18,   1885  : — 

"  I  have  heard  Colonel  Campbell  frequently  relate  the  story  regarding 
the  Channel  fishermen,  just  as  his  daughter  has  related  it  to  you. 

"H.  Macneal." 

[We  have  received  two  other  independent  accounts  of  this  occurrence 
from  persons  who  had  heard  Colonel  Campbell  narrate  it.  These  agree 
with  the  above  in  the  fundamental  point  of  the  apparition  of  the  fishermen 
occurring  at  or  near  the  time  of  their  death  ;  but  one  of  them  difiers  in 
a  good  many  details,  and  adds  an  incident  which,  from  the  fact  that  we 
have  never  met  with  it  in  first-hand  narratives,  we  should  judge  to 
be  improbable — namely,  that  the  apparition  was  seen  again  at  the  same 
spot  after  a  considerable  interval — when  Colonel  Campbell  was  returning 
home.  If  this  really  occurred,  it  would  suggest  that  either  the  real  men 
were  seen,  (which  however  is  impossible,  if  the  hours  are  correctly 
stated  by  Mrs.  Ricardo,)  or  that  a  real  object  was  mistaken  for  them. 
The  phantasmal  representation  of  several  dying  persons  is  unexampled 
in  our  first-hand  evidence  ;  but  see  case  536.  As  might  be  expected, 
it  is  a  feature  that  is  met  with  in  the  more  legendary  records  ;  see,  e.g., 
Sacheverell's  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  (1702),  p.  14.] 

(583)  From  Dr.  Frank  Comer,   79,  Queen's  Gate,  South  Kensington, 

^•W-  "October  5th,  1885. 

"In  the  year  1820  or  1821,  my  grandfather,  Geo.  Miller,  M.D.,  who 
was  a  physician  practising  in  Newry,  Ireland,  emigrated  with  his  family 
to  Canada  and  settled  in  the  town  of  Niagara,  Upper  Canada.  On  their 
way  to  Niagara  from  Quebec,  having  reached  the  town  of  Prescott,  which 
is  above  all  the  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence  River,  they  then  embarked  on 
a  sailing  vessel  commanded  by  a  Captain  Patterson.  As  the  voyage  from 
Prescott  to  Niagara  in  those  days  would  probably  occupy  about  a  week, 
the  passengers  would  undoubtedly  become  pretty  well  acquainted  with  the 
captain  of  the  little  vessel.  About  6  or  8  weeks  after  the  arrival  of  my 
grandfather  and  his  family  in  Niagara,  my  grandmother  (who,  by  the  way, 
was  a  lady  of  more  than  ordinary  sound  practical  common-sense,  and  not 
at  all  visionary)  was  walking  in  an  orchard  at  the  back  of  her  house,  about 
3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  Captain  Patterson  passed  close  by  her 
and  looked  straight  in  her  face.  At  first  she  was  dumbfounded,  not 
having  heard  his  footsteps,  but  recovering  from  her  surprise  she  extended 
her  hand  to  shake  hands  with  him  ;  but  he  merely  smiled  and  passed  out  of 
sight  behind  a  small  out-building. 

"  Upon  my  grandfather's  return  home,  my  grandmother  told  him  of  the 
occurrence,  but  he  smiled  and  said  she  must  have  been  dreaming,  as 
Captain  Patterson  and  his  vessel  were  then  at  the  other  end  of  the  Lake 
(Ontario)  ;  but  she  insisted  that  she  was  wide  awake,  that  it  was  a  clear 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  537 

bright  afternoon,  and  that  she  certainly  had  seen  him  or  his  apparition. 
A  few  days  later  the  vessel  arrived  in  Niagara,  and  the  mate  who  was  in 
charge  reported  that  the  Captain  (Patterson)  had  been  washed  overboard 
during  a  gale  at  the  lower  end  of  the  Lake.  Upon  inquiry  it  turned  out 
that  it  was  the  same  day,  and  (as  nearly  as  could  be  judged)  the  very  same 
hour,  that  grandmother  Miller  had  seen  his  apparition  in  the  garden.  My 
mother,  Mrs.  J.  F.  R.  Comer,  was  a  girl  of  10  or  11  years  at  the  time, 
and  remembers  her  mother  and  others  talking  about  the  occurrence  at  the 
time  and  afterwards,  and  she  herself  still  remembers  Captain  Patterson. 
She  is  now  in  her  76th  year,  and  is  again  living  in  Niagara,  Ontario, 
Canada.  "Frank  Comer." 

Dr.  Comer  sent  us  the  original  of  the  following  extract  from  a  letter 
written  by  his  mother  : — 

"  In  one  of  my  letters  I  gave  Frank  an  account  of  the  drowning 
of  Captain  Patterson,  on  his  second  voyage  up  from  Prescott,  in  a  storm, 
and  of  my  mother  seeing  him  pass  near  the  black  cherry-tree.  It  was 
written  on  a  separate  sheet  of  paper.  Did  you  not  get  it  ?  I  mean  the 
second  voyage  after  he  brought  my  father's  family  from  Prescott  to 
Niagara." 

(584)  From  Mr.  T.  L.  Moore,  6,  Downshire  Hill,  Hampstead. 

"  September,  1884. 

"  My  father,  Major-General  George  Frederick  Moore,  whose  death  took 
place  on  the  8th  of  this  month,  has  frequently  related  to  me  and  to  others 
the  following  incident.  When  in  India,  in  the  year  1848,  very  shortly 
before  the  siege  of  Mooltan,  he  occupied  a  bungalow  at  some  place  in  that 
neighbourhood  (the  name  of  which  I  cannot  give  with  certainty),  and  had 
a  household  consisting  of  the  usual  number  of  native  servants.  Among 
these  was  a  woman  who  was  a  laundress,  and  part  of  whose  weekly  duty 
was  to  bring  my  father's  clean  linen  to  the  bungalow,  and  deposit  it  in 
his  bedroom  for  use. 

"  This  woman  met  with  an  accident,  which  ended  in  tetanus.  One 
day,  it  being  fully  light,  my  father  was  lying  on  a  sofa  in  his  sitting- 
room,  the  woman  being  somewhere  in  the  compound,  and  in  extremis,  as 
he  knew,  from  lockjaw.  The  door  was  open,  and,  as  he  lay  on  the  sofa,  he 
could  see  down  a  passage,  which  ended  in  another  door  (also  open),  leading 
to  the  compound.  This  latter  was  the  main  entrance  to  the  bungalow, 
and  anyone  coming  up  the  passage  would  go  either  into  the  sitting-room, 
or,  turning  at  right  angles,  down  another  passage  which  led  to  the  bed- 
room and  adjoining  bathroom.  While  lying  on  the  sofa,  in  full  view  of 
the  entrance-passage,  my  father  was  astonished  to  see  his  laundress  enter 
from  the  compound,  pass  up  the  passage,  carrying,  as  was  her  custom,  his 
clean  linen.  ^  Upon  reaching  the  sitting-room  door  she  turned  down  the 
corridor,  leading,  as  before  explained,  to  the  bedroom.  He  immediately 
rose  and  followed  her,  knowing  that  she  must  be  in  either  the  bed  or  the 
bath  room,  from  which  there  was  no  exit  save  by  the  way  she  had  come, 
but  no  one  was  to  be  seen.  Much  perplexed,  he  repaired  to  the  compound 
and  found  her  lying  dead,  having  at  that  moment  expired.  My  father 
described  her  appearance  as  perfectly  definite  in  every  way,  wearing  the 
same  clothes  and  bangle  ornaments  which  she  used  to  do  when  alive  ;  and 

1  As  to  the  projection  of  the  hallucinatory  figure  with  familiar  dress  or  appurtenances, 
see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  539-40. 

538  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

her  apparition  was  so  palpable  that  it  was  the  knowledge  of  her  impending 
death  which  caused  him  to  follow  her  into  the  bedroom  and  bathroom. 

"  That  this  appearance  was  not  that  of  any  living  person  is  proved  by 
the  fact  of  there  being  no  exit  from  these  two  rooms  save  by  the  passage 
down  which  the  apparition  walked.  "  Temple  L.  Mooke." 

Mr.  Arthur  G.  Hill,  of  47,  Belsize  Avenue,  Hampstead,  writes  : — 

"  September,  1884. 

"  The  late  General  Moore  narrated  the  above  account  to  me  in  the 
presence  of  his  son  a  few  weeks  ago,  very  shortly  before  his  death,  and 
had  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  reality  of  the  '  wraith.'  He  had  intended 
to  dictate  an  account,  at  my  request,  specially  for  the  S.P.R.  He  was 
the  most  unimaginative  and  strong-minded  man  imaginable." 

[Mr.  Hill  mentions  that  this  was  not  General  Moore's  solitary  experi- 
ence of  hallucination,  as  he  had  once  seen  the  figure  of  his  brother,  two 
days  after  his  brother's  death.] 

(585)  From  Mr.  H.,  a  journalist,  who  desires  that  names  may  not  be 
published.  The  account  has  been  submitted  to  the  first-hand  witness,  who 
is  perfectly  willing  that  it  should  appear,  and  may  be  taken  to  admit  its 
correctness.  u  November  1 2th,  1 883. 

"  Many  years  ago,  my  father  had  an  intimate  and  dear  friend,  a  doctor, 
who  had  to  pass  every  winter  in  Madeira.  One  night  my  father  was  going 
to  his  rooms,  in  the  Strand,  when,  on  the  stairs,  coming  down,  he  met,  as 
he  thought,  poor  Dr.  G.  So  vivid  was  the  illusion,  that  he  held  out  his 
hand,  and,  I  believe,  spoke.  Of  that  I  am  not  certain.  The  ghost,  or 
whatever  it  might  have  been,  looked  at  my  father,  and  passed  down  the 
stairs.  Some  little  time  afterwards,  my  father  received  news  of  his  friend's 
death.  It  happened,  I  believe,  on  the  very  day  my  father  met  with  his 
little  adventure.     This  is  the  story  as  I  have  heard  my  parent  tell  it. 

"  Visitations  or  warnings  of  this  kind  are  common  enough,  and  I 
remember  perfectly  well  that  the  afiair,  hallucination  or  not,  impressed 
my  father  very  much — not  that  he  is  by  any  means  a  superstitious  man." 

[The  percipient  cannot  remember  the  precise  date  of  the  occurrence, 
which  took  place  more  than  30  years  ago.] 

(586)  From  Colonel  Y.,  who  writes,  in  a  letter  dated  March  11,  1886, 
"  The  account  was  written  by  me  from  a  statement  made  to  me  by  my 
father,  the  late  Capt.  J.  H.  Y.,  in  1864.  The  words  are  my  father's,  and 
I  wrote  them  as  he  related  them  to  me."  Names  were  given  in  confidence. 

"  One  of  my  [-i.e.,  Colonel  Y.'s,  not  his  father's]  grand-aunts  was  Mrs. 
F.,  married  to  an  ofiicer,  Major  or  Colonel  F.,  of  the  Dragoons,  serving  in 
George  III.'s  time  in  America.  He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga. 
My  aunt  lived  at  the  time  in  Portland  Place,  W.,  and  was  entertaining  a 
large  party  one  evening.  Suddenly  they  remarked  she  seemed  to  be  in  great 
pain  and  agony,  exclaiming  quite  aloud  to  her  guests,  '  Oh,  do  go  home.  I 
have  seen  a  most  fearful  sight,  and  am  compelled  to  break  up  the  party.' 
Some  of  her  most  intimate  friends  asked  her  what  she  had  seen.  She 
replied  that  she  was  certain  '  her  husband  F.  had  been  killed  in  a  battle, 
and  that  she  most  distinctly  saw  his  body  being  carried  to  the  rear  by  his 
soldiers.'  She  remained  in  great  anxiety  for  weeks,  when  the  sad  news 
confirming  her  vision  arrived  from  America,  and  that  at  the  hour  she 
made  the   exclamation  to  her  guests,  her  husband,  F.,  of  the   Dragoons 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  539 

(allowing  for  clifFerence  of  longitude),  was  killed  in  an  attack  made  on  the 
enemy  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga." 

Colonel  Y.  adds,  "An  aunt  now  deceased,  told  me  she  was,  when  a  girl, 
present  at  the  time  when  [her  aunt]  Mrs.  F.  called  out  '  that  F.  had  been 
shot,  and  that  she  saw  his  body  being  carried  off  the  field  of  battle.' " 

We  find  from  Burgoyne's  Campaign,  by  Charles  ISTeilson  (Albany, 
1844),  that  Brigadier-General  F.  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga, 
at  2  p.m.  on  Oct.  7,  1777,  but  did  not  die  till  8  a.m.  on  Oct.  8.  From 
Letters  and  Memoirs  relating  to  the  American  War  of  Independence,  by 
Madame  Riedesel  (Translation,  New  York,  1827),  we  learn  that  he  was 
carried  to  Madame  Riedesel's  hut  at  about  3  p.m.,  which  would  correspond 
with  about  8  p.m.  in  London ;  and  that  during  the  afternoon,  while  he 
was  lying  mortally  wounded,  he  frequently  uttered  his  wife's  name.^ 

[We  have  no  means  of  judging  whether  the  vision  of  the  soldiers  carry- 
ing the  body  was  of  the  clairvoyant  type,  or  whether  the  scene  was  merely  a 
setting  supjDlied  by  the  percipient's  own  mind.  Nor  can  we  judge  how  far 
the  experience  was  an  externahsed  hallucination.  (See  Yol.  I.,  p.  545,  note.)] 

(587)  From  Mrs.  Hackett,  10,  Steele's  Road,  Haverstock  Hill,   N.W. 

"September  26th,  1883. 

"  The  incident  which  I  have  often  heard  my  father  [James  Dawson] 
speak  about  was  that  one  of  the  men  on  board  my  grandfather's  ship  was 
ill,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  eat  anything.  He  said  if  he  could  have  a 
piece  of  game-pie,  he  thought  he  could  eat  that.  When  grandfather  got 
home  (the  ship  was  then  in  dock  in  London),  he  found  a  hamper  had 
arrived  from  Yorkshire  and  in  it  was  a  game-pie.  My  father  at  once 
begged  to  take  a  piece  to  the  man.  He  had  it  tied  up  in  a  cloth,  to  be 
able  to  hold  it  more  securely  in  going  up  the  side  of  the  ship.  When 
nearly  at  the  top  of  the  ladder,  he  said  he  distinctly  saw  his  sister  dressed 
in  white.  It  so  unnerved  him  that  he  dropped  the  pie  into  the  water. 
His  sister  was  living  in  Yorkshire,  near  Flamborough  Head.  As  soon  as  a 
letter  could  be  had  in  those  days,  they  heard  this  sister  [Jane  Foster]  died 
at  that  time,  and  he  was  the  person  she  spoke  of  last.  I  never  heard  my  father 
say  he  had  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  afterwards. 

"C.  J.  Hackett." 

1 1  append  the  following  version  of  the  same  incident  (received  from  a  lady  of  sense 
and  great  practical  ability),  as  illustrating  what  I  have  before  emphasised  (Vol.  i.,  p.  149) — 
the  difference  in  evidential  value  between  a  record  given  by  a  person  nearly  connected  with 
the  original  witness,  and  having  command  of  the  circumstances,  and  a  story  casually 
picked  up  from  an  acquaintance.  The  essential  point  of  a  telepathic  vision  remains  ;  but 
almost  every  detail  is  altered  ;  and,  as  so  frequently  happens  in  such  cases,  the  chain  of 
evidence  is  shortened,  and  the  narrator's  informant  is  represented  as  the  person  to  whom 
the  experience  occurred.     She  was  really  the  "  aunt  now  deceased  "  of  Colonel  V. 

"  March  14,  1884.  _ 

"  Mrs.  v.,  whose  husband  was  in  the  Artillery  in  India,  told  me  the  following 
occurred  to  herself.  The  story  is  well  known  in  her  family.  She  has  been  dead  some 
years,  and  it  occurred  when  she  was  comparatively  a  young  woman.  I  heard  it  from  her 
23  years  ago  last  Christmas,  at  Southampton.  One  evening,  sitting  in  her  drawing-room, 
she  saw  distinctly  a  military  funeral  procession  pass  at  the  further  end  of  the  room.  The 
coffin  borne  on  a  gun-carriage ;  the  men  with  arms  reversed.  Directly  it  passed  away,  she 
noted  the  circumstance,  writing  it  down,  and  passed  some  months  in  the  greatest  anxiety. 
It  was  before  the  days  of  overland  route.  She  heard  of  her  husband's  death,  which  had 
occurred  that  day,  and  allowing  for  the  difference  of  time,  the  funeral  had  taken  place  at 
the  moment  she  had  seen  the  vision,  death  and  burial  following  each  other  within  a  few 
hours  in  India."  The  "arms  reversed,"  the  "overland  route,"  and  the  remark  about 
"  death  and  burial,"  show  that  a  report  is  not  more  likely  to  be  accurate  for  being  circum- 
stantial. 

540  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

[No  one,  perhaps,  will  imagine  that  a  fictitious  narrative  would  take 
such  a  form  as  this — the  apparition  coming  in  as  a  mere  episode  in  the 
pie's  history.  But  the  incident  is  remote,  having  occurred,  Mrs.  Hackett 
thinks,  before  1830.  She  last  heard  the  account  from  her  father  about 
1850.  She  told  Mr.  Podmore  on  April  18,  1886,  that  a  surviving  aunt  of 
hers  remembers  hearing  the  account  from  Mr.  Dawson,  but  is  too  old  to 
be  applied  to  for  dates,  &c.] 

(588)  From  Mr.  J.  H.  Redfern,  20,  Great  Ancoats  Street,  Manchester, 
the  narrator  of  case  214.  ^^ ,  009 

"  The  following  narrative  I  give  you  as  I  have  had  it  often  from  the 
lips  of  my  wife.  The  circumstance  took  place  a  number  of  years  ago. 
She  repeated  it  often.  I  have  ridiculed  it,  made  fun  of  it,  &c.  It  had 
no  efiect  upon  her.  She  was  a  quiet,  thoughtful,  upright  woman  ;  and 
so  far  as  the  thing  appeared  to  her,  all  who  knew  her  would  be  satisfied 
as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  statement  as  given  by  her.  She  was  a  native  of 
Worksop,  Notts.  A  Mr.  Drobble,  an  old  friend  of  her  father's,  residing 
not  far  away,  was  fond  of  her  even  as  a  child,  and  as  she  grew  up,  petted 
and  made  much  of  her ;  this  continued,  and  she  always  regarded  him  as 
an  intimate  and  dear  friend.  In  winter,  or  at  any  time  going  from  home, 
he  wore  an  old-fashioned  great-coat  of  drab  cloth.  I  mention  this  as  it 
was  of  peculiar  make,  and  the  only  one  of  the  kind  about  that  part  of  the 
country.  [She  left  home,  and  was  staying  at  Stockport.]  In  that  town,  in 
a  street  called  Underbank,  is  an  old-fashioned  mansion  with  a  large  court- 
yard in  the  front.  It  was  (and  is  now)  a  branch  of  the  Manchester  and 
Liverpool  District  Bank.  Being  one  day  about  noon  there,  and  chancing 
to  look  through  a  window  into  the  street,  she  saw  on  the  footpath 
opposite  the  bank,  and  looking  up  at  the  building,  Mr.  Drobble.  He  had 
on  his  drab  overcoat,  and  appeared  as  if  he  was  upon  the  point  of  coming 
through  the  gateway  into  the  courtyard.  She  saw  him  (she  said)  face  to 
face.  She  instantly  stepped  out  of  the  bank,  across  the  courtyard — 
expecting  to  meet  him — into  the  street.  He  had  disappeared.  On  each 
side  of  the  bank  were  shops.  She  fancied  that  he  must  have  gone  into 
some  of  them.  She  followed,  as  she  thought,  but  could  see  nothing  of 
him.  She  felt  much  disappointed ;  but  gradually  the  thing  was  in  a  great 
measure  forgotten. 

"  Fifteen  or  eighteen  months  after,  she  went  home  to  Worksop.  After 
some  days,  incidentally  she  asked  her  mother  how  Mr.  Drobble  was.  Her 
mother  stared  at  her  at  first,  and  then  asked  her  what  ever  she  was  talk- 
ing about  %  Mr.  Drobble  had  been  dead  for  more  than  1 2  months.  My 
wife,  in  her  turn,  protested  that  she  saw  him,  face  to  face,  in  broad  day- 
light ;  that  it  was  impossible  that  she  could  be  mistaken  in  the  matter  ; 
and  to  this  she  adhered  to  her  dying  day. 

"  Upon  further  inquiry  it  appeared  that  Mr.  Drobble  had  died  at 
about  the  time  of  the  day  when  she  believed  that  she  saw  him,  and  so  near 
as  they  could  get  at  it,  on  the  same  day ;  and  that  he  had  been  confined 
to  bed  for  something  like  9  or  10  months  previous  to  his  death. 

"  It  appeared  also  that  they  had  never  sent  word  of  his  death,  and 
she  had  never  learned  it  until  in  the  way,  and  at  the  time,  here  told." 

Mrs,  Hannah  Lees,  of  Clifton  Crescent,  Rotherham,  writes  to  us  : — 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  541 

"I  can  confirm  the  truth  o£  Mr.  Drobble's  death  when  sister  Redfern 
was  away.  I  was  with  her  at  home,  when,  as  described  by  Mr.  Redfern, 
she  asked  about  him,  and  only  then  learned  of  his  death.  Nothing  could 
shake  her  belief  in  the  fact  of  her  having  seen  him  at  the  time,  and  in  the 
manner  described." 

[Mr.  Redfern  assures  us  that  he  had  not  exchanged  a  word  on  the 
subject  with  Mrs.  Lees  for  years,  and  that  her  testimony  has  been  given 
without  his  having  in  any  way  refreshed  her  memory.  But  the  degree  of 
closeness  in  the  coincidence  is  uncertain ;  and  the  case  may  possibly  have 
been  one  of  mistaken  identity.] 

The  next  case  is  perhaps  an  example  of  the  rare  type  where  the 
operative  idea  in  the  agent's  mind  was  of  the  place  in  which  (rather 
than  of  the  person  by  whom)  the  phantasm  is  seen.    (Vol.  I.,  p.  268.) 

(589)  From  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Grignon,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Kent. 

"  24th  October,  1882. 

"  The  date  was  between  1820  and  1830.  My  father  made  a  journey 
from  Montego  Bay  to  Spanish  Town,  to  attend  the  session  of  the  '  House 
of  Assembly '  of  Jamaica,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  passed  a  night 
en  route  at  the  house  of  a  friend  whose  name  I  cannot  now  remember. 
The  family  consisted  of  his  friend,  his  friend's  wife,  and  the  wife's  sister,  a 
Miss  R.  (we  will  call  her  so ;  I  know  the  name  but  have  perhaps  no  right 
to  give  it).  This  young  lady  was  out  of  health,  and  in  a  very  depressed 
state.  After  dinner  the  ladies  left  the  room,  and  my  father  shortly  after 
strolled  out  of  doors  in  the  very  brief  twilight  of  a  tropical  day.  To  his 
surprise  he  saw  Miss  R.  going  along  a  path  from  the  house  towards  a 
clump  of  trees  not  far  from  it ;  he  was  not  very  near  her,  but  called  out  to 
her.  She  proceeded  on  her  way  without  taking  any  notice  of  him  ; 
supposing  that  she  wished  to  be  alone,  he  turned  off  in  another  direction, 
and  shortly  after  returned  to  the  house.  On  entering  the  drawing-room 
he  found  his  friend  and  his  wife  there,  and  Miss  R.  also  there,  reclining 
on  a  sofa.  When  he  came  in  she  rose  and  left  the  room.  He  said  to 
his  friend's  wife,  '  Do  you  think  it  safe  for  your  sister  to  go  out  of 
doors  so  late,  with  a  heavy  dew  falling  ?  I  met  her  outside  a  few  minutes 
ago.'  '  You  must  be  mistaken ;  she  came  in  here  with  me  from  the 
dining-room,  lay  down  on  the  sofa,  and  I  am  quite  certain,  did  not  leave 
it  till  just  now  on  your  entrance.  I  have  been  here  the  whole  time.' 
They  were  all  puzzled  by  his  certainty  that  he  had  seen  Miss  R.,  and 
some  time  having  passed  without  her  returning  to  the  room,  she  was 
looked  for  and  not  found  in  the  house.  On  further  search  outside,  she 
was  found  dead,  having  hanged  herself  on  one  of  the  trees  in  the  clump 
towards  which  my  father  had  seen  her,  or  the  appearance  of  her, 
moving. 

"  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  servants  about  the  place  were  all 
negroes  or  brown  people.  Had  such  a  thing  happened  in  England  it  might 
be  thought  that  some  female  servant,  sufliciently  like  Miss  R.  in  figure  to 
be  taken  for  her  at  a  little  distance,  had  been  seen.  There  this  could  not 
have  been.     Probably  the  poor  girl   was,    while    reclining  on   the   sofa. 

542  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

thinking,  with  an  intentness  which  the  sane  mind  cannot  easily  conceive, 
of  her  purpose  of  suicide  and  the  place  she  had  chosen  for  it.  Could  this 
have  had  the  eifect  of  visibly  projecting  the  appearance  of  her  form 
towards  the  place? 

"W.  S.  Grignon." 

[In  spite  of  the  special  reason  suggested  for  rejecting  the  hypothesis 
of  mistaken  identity,  we  can  scarcely  feel,  in  so  remote  a  case,  that  we 
realise  the  circumstances  with  sufficient  completeness  to  justify  confidence 
on  that  point.  If  the  vision  was  not  flesh  and  blood,  it  is  certainly 
difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  it  was  of  telepathic  origin.] 

(590)  From  a  teacher  in  the  Gymnasium  of  Tver,  Russia,  whose  name 
we  are  asked  not  to  print.  The  first-hand  account  was  sent  by  Mr. 
Yladislavlefi",  of  Tver,  to  Mr.  Bruhns,  who  translated  it  for  us. 

"  1883. 

The  narrator  begins  by  saying  that  about  1856,  when  a  boy  of  12,  he 
was  a  collegian  of  the  first  Moscow  Gymnasium,  and  that  his  parents  lived 
about  250  miles  from  Moscow.  "  One  morning  in  the  beginning  of  April,  I 
went  as  usual  to  the  Arkhangelsk  Cathedral  in  the  Kremlin.  The  liturgy 
had  already  commenced.  The  church  was,  as  usual,  full  of  worshippers.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  liturgy  I  accidentally  turned  my  head,  and  to  my 
greatest  surprise  saw  in  the  crowd  of  worshippers  my  mother,  praying,  and 
with  her  eyes  directed  to  the  holy  images,  like  other  worshippers  round  her. 
She  was  dressed  in  her  usual  dress.  My  astonishment  was  very  great,  for 
I  knew  very  well  that  my  parents  were  then  at  home.  I  spent  the  whole 
liturgy  in  looking  at  her,  and  in  thinking  of  the  incident.  Meanwhile  the 
liturgy  had  come  to  an  end,  and  the  worshippers  began  to  kiss  the  cross. 
Among  others,  my  mother  approached  the  priest.  Fearing  to  lose  sight  of 
her,  I  went  through  the  crowd  of  worshippers  which  surrounded  the  priest 
with  the  cross,  and  when  she,  after  having  kissed  the  cross,  went  to  the 
door,  I  went  after  her.  She  went  out  of  the  door,  advanced  some  feet,  and 
then  stopped  at  the  corner,  formed  by  the  wall  of  the  cathedral  itself  and 
the  wall  of  the  altar,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  her  face  turned  towards 
the  crowd  which  was  passing  by  her.  Going  after  the  worshippers,  I 
approached  her.  I  saw  her  looking  at  me  and  weeping,  her  tears  flowing 
down  her  cheeks.  I  stopped  momentarily,  but  the  crowd  continued  to  pass 
by  us,  and  I  all  at  once  understood  that  I  saw  before  me  something 
extraordinary — something  that  was  visible  to  me  alone.  An  inexpressible 
terror  seized  me,  and  I  cannot  remember  how  I  reached  our  lodging.  But 
I  told  nobody  of  the  incident. 

"  The  summer  came.  We  went  home  to  our  parents.  When  we 
arrived,  we  heard  of  our  mother's  death  :  she  died  precisely  at  the 
beginning  of  April.  Our  father  did  not  inform  us  about  this  death  fearing 
the  sorrowful  news  might  disturb  our  May  examinations  in  the  University 
and  in  the  Gymnasium." 

[If  this  report  is  accurate,  the  case  does  not  look  like  one  of  mistaken 
identity.  But  the  extraordinarily  prolonged  character  of  the  apparition 
suggests  exaggeration  (compare  case  300)  ;  and  the  more  so  when  the  youth 
of  the  percipient  is  remembered.] 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  543 

§  4.  The  cases  in  this  section  are  narrated  by  persons  not  closely 
related  to  the  respective  percipients. 

(591)  From  Dr.  de  Wolf,  Providence,  R.I., — a  letter  to  Professor 
Barrett.  "August  28th,  1884. 

"  I  have  been  for  many  years  a  practitioner  of  medicine  in  this  city ; 
my  birthplace  was  the  town  of  Bristol,  some  15  miles  distant,  where  I 
resided  for  more  than  30  years,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  that  time  was 
a  next-door  neighbour  of  Right  Rev.  A.  Y.  Eriswold,  Bishop  of  the 
Eastern  Diocese  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  and  who  died  some 
40  years  ago.  He  was,  as  all  Churchmen  in  this  country  know,  greatly 
esteemed  for  his  talents  and  piety. 

"  For  what  follows  the  Bishop  himself  was  my  informant.  He  told  it 
to  others,  and  I  heard  it  frequently  spoken  of  by  different  members  of 
the  family. 

"  One  afternoon,  while  standing  at  his  desk  writing  in  his  study,  a 
door  opened^  from  an  adjoining  room,  and  Mr.  Collins,  his  son-in-law, 
entered,  and  passed  slowly  through  the  room  and  out  of  another  door  ; 
the  Bishop  said  he  had  not  been  thinking  or  talking  of  Mr.  Collins,  and 
had  not  heard  from  him  for  some  time.  He  knew  that  he  could  not  be 
within  a  thousand  miles  of  him,  and  yet  he  had  distinctly  seen  him  pass 
through  the  room.  This  of  itself  was  a  very  remarkable  occurrence,  but 
what  follows  renders  it  still  more  so. 

"  When  the  mail  from  Charleston  arrived  some  3  or  4  days  after 
(there  were  no  telegraphs  or  railroads  at  that  time),  a  letter  was  received 
announcing  the  death  of  Mr.  Collins,  on  the  very  day  and  hour  when  the 
Bishop  saw  him  apparently  pass  through  his  study. 

"  The  good  Bishop  (who  was  no  believer  in  ghosts,  necromancy,  or 
anything  of  the  sort)  said  it  was  a  most  remarkable  and  singular  circum- 
stance, the  coincidence  rendering  it  still  more  remarkable,  and  he  could 
not  account  for  it,  but  supposed  it  must  be  some  sort  of  a  hallucination ; 
for,  as  he  was  standing  at  a  high  desk,  he  could  hardly  have  been 
dreaming.  "John  J.  de  Wolf,  M.D." 

Dr.  de  Wolf  has  kindly  inspected  the  tombstone  of  Mr.  Collins,  which 
shows  that  he  died  on  July  4th,  1807.  Dr.  de  Wolf  has  also  endeavoured  to 
find  some  other  person  who  has  heard  the  account  direct  from  the  Bishop  ; 
but  in  this  he  has  failed.  The  Bishop's  grandchildren  have  all  heard  of 
the  occurrence,  but  not  at  first  hand.  One  of  them  told  Dr.  de  Wolf  that 
the  Bishop  himself  was  disposed  to  say  very  little  about  it. 

(592)  Copy  of  part  of  a  letter  from  Miss  M.  A.  Ewart,  of  3,  Morpeth 
Terrace,  Victoria  Street,  S.W.,  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  dated  April  4,  1886. 

"  I  waited  to  write  until  I  had  seen  Mr.  Henry  Clarke,  who  was 
brother-in-law  to  Mr.  Guthrie,  Vicar  of  Calne,  in  Wilts,  who  told  me  at 
dinner  at  Bo  wood,  about  1860,  of  the  apparition  of  Lord  Kerry,  as  I 
described  it  to  you.  Mr.  Clarke  had  no  recollection  of  having  heard  Mr. 
Guthrie  tell  the  story,  and  did  not  know  it  ;  but  he  said  that  Mr.  Guthrie 
was  greatly  attached  to  Lord  Kerry,  who  was  his    pupil,    and  that  Lady 

1  Compare  cases  530  and  537.  This  form  of  hallucination  is  met  with  also  in  purely 
subjective  cases. 

544  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Lansdowne  was  always  very  grateful  to  Mr.  Guthrie  for  the  influence  he 
had  over  her  son.  Lord  Kerry  died  in  1836.  Mr.  Clarke  could  not  say 
that  he  died   at  Bowood. 

"  It  was  in  the  beech  avenue,  approaching  the  house  at  Bowood,  that 
Mr.  Guthrie  told  me  he  met  Lord  Kerry,  when  he  was  going  to  the  house 
to  see  him,  knowing  him  to  be  unwell  and  shut  up.  When  he  reached  the 
house,  the  servant  told  him  that  Lord  Kerry  had  died  a  few  minutes 
before,  and,  as  Mr.  Guthrie  believed,  at  the  moment  he  had  met  him, 
walking  briskly,  and  surprising  him  so  much  that  he  did  not  attempt  to 
stop  him.  Lord  and  Lady  Kerry  lived  in  a  house  I  know  well,  close  to 
Bowood  (where  Mr.  Clarke's  sister,  Mrs.  Warren,  now  lives),  but  Mr. 
Clarke  says  that  they  may  have  been  at  Bowood  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
Mr.  Clarke  was  then  in  China.     I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  tell  you  more. 

«  M.  A.  EWART." 

[This  narrative  belongs,  no  doubt,  to  a  type  which  as  a  rule  is  untrust- 
worthy— having  been  told  to  our  informant  by  an  acquaintance,  not  a 
relative  or  intimate  friend,  and  on  one  occasion  only.  But  the  facts,  it 
will  be  seen,  are  of  the  very  simplest  kind,  and  are  presented  without  any 
attempt  at  ornament  or  detail ;  and  Miss  Ewart's  acquaintance  with  the 
locality  would  naturally  tend  to  fix  the  simple  lines  of  the  picture  in  her 
mind.] 

(593)  From  Mr.  P.  H.  Berthon,  F.R.G.S.,  20,  Margaret  Street,  W. 
The  narrative  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  in  1875. 

"  Some  years  ago,  when  residing  at  Walthamstow,  in  Essex,  my  wife 
and  self  became  intimate  with  a  lady  and  gentleman  who  had  become 
temporarily  our  near  neighbours.  On  one  occasion,  when  they  were  dining 
with  us  quite  ew/amiZ^e,  my  friend  and  I,  on  repairing  to  the  drawing- 
room,  not  long  after  the  ladies  had  left  us,  were  surprised  to  find  that  his 
wife  had  been  suddenly  taken  with  a  kind  of  fainting  fit,  and  had  been 
obliged  to  return  home  accompanied  by  one  of  our  female  servants.  My 
wife,  as  a  matter  of  course,  went  the  next  day  to  inquire  after  her  friend, 
who  then  told  her  that  the  cause  of  her  sudden  indisposition  had  been 
the  appearance,  as  if  in  her  actual  person  standing  before  her,  of  one  of 
her  two  sisters,  who  were  then  residing  with  their  mother  at  Beyrout,  in 
Syria,  which  had  greatly  alarmed  her.  Communication  by  telegraph  had 
not  then  been  established,  and  by  post  it  was  much  slower  than  at 
present.  Many  days  had  therefore  elapsed  before  the  lady  received  letters 
from  Beyrout,  but  on  their  arrival  they  conveyed  the  intelligence  that 
her  sister  had  died  on  the  day  and,  allowing  for  the  difierence  in  the 
time,  at  about  the  hour  of  her  appearance  to  our  friend." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Berthon  told  the  present  writer  that  the  lady, 
Mrs.  de  Salom^,  was  playing  the  piano  when  she  saw  her  sister's  figure 
at  her  side.  Mr.  Berthon  did  not  hear  of  the  incident  from  Mrs.  de 
Salome  herself,  but  was  at  once  told  of  it  by  his  wife,  and  was  also  told  at 
once  of  the  arrival  oi  the  news.  He  frequently  saw  Mrs.  de  Salom^  during 
the  interval.  He  says  also  that  his  daughter,  who  was  12-  at  the  time, 
distinctly  remembers  hearing  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time.  Mrs.  de 
Salome  died  soon  after  the  occurrence,  which  took  place  in  the  autumn 
of  1853.     Mrs.  Berthon  is  also  deceased. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  545 

(594)  From  Dr.  H.  T.  Berry,  29,  Pembridge  Crescent,  Bayswater. 

"  December  29th,  1884. 

"  Although  living  now  at  Bayswater,  I  have  been  in  practice  in  the 
North  of  London  for  nearly  40  years.  The  following  account  I  can  vouch 
for  in  every  particular,  but  remember  I  draw  no  inference  from  it. 

"  Some  five  or  six  years  since,  I  was  attending  Mrs.  A.,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Gray's  Inn  Road.  The  lady  became  so  ill  that  she  sent  for 
her  mother,  residing  nearly  one  hundred  miles  from  town,  to  nurse  her.  Some 
eight  or  ten  days  after,  I  made  my  usual  morning  call,  and  found  Mrs.  A. 
improving,  and  her  mother  quite  well.  About  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon 
of  the  same  day,  I  was  hastily  summoned  to  Mrs.  A.'s  house.  When  I 
arrived,  Mrs.  A.  was  no  worse,  but  her  mother  had  suddenly  dropped  down 
dead  in  a  fit.  I  telegraphed  to  the  husband  [Mrs.  A.'s  father]  to  come  to 
town  directly,  not  telling  him  of  his  wife's  death,  fearing  to  alarm  him  too 
suddenly.  When  the  husband  came  up  (he  was  a  very  intelligent  man, 
about  70)  he  told  me  he  was  not  surprised  to  find  his  wife  dead  when  he 
arrived  in  town.  For,  about  the  time  of  her  death,  he  was  returning  to  his 
home,  through  a  field,  when  he  distinctly  saw  his  wife  cross  the  field  a  few 
yards  from  him.  As  he  went  home  he  called  at  a  friend's  house,  and  said, 
'  I  am  sure  my  wife  is  dead.  When  I  reached  home  I  found  the  telegram 
asking  me  to  come  up  directly  ;  but  I  felt  certain  my  poor  wife  was  dead.' 
As  I  said  in  my  note,  I  make  no  theory  to  explain  the  above.  The  facts  I 
know  of  my  own  personal  knowledge. 

"  H.  T.  Berey." 

In  a  subsequent  letter.  Dr.  Berry  says,  "  The  old  man  told  me  him- 
self, within  24  hours  of  the  vision.  I  don't  think  he  is  living  now." 
He  adds  that  the  incident  occurred  in  the  summer  of  1880  ;  and  that 
he  attended  the  inquest. 

He  has  given  us,  in  confidence,  the  name  and  address  of  his  patient, 
but  does  not  allow  us  to  apply  to  her.  As  he  does  not  remember  her 
mother's  name,  we  have  had  some  diificulty  in  obtaining  confirmation  of 
his  account.  We  applied  to  the  coroner  of  the  district,  who  found  no 
inquest  recorded  in  his  books  ;  but  he  kindly  inquired  of  a  grandson  of 
the  deceased  lady,  from  whom  he  learnt  that  she  had  died  in  the  summer 
of  1880,  and  that  there  was  no  formal  inquest.  No  doubt  (as  the 
coroner  suggests)  Dr.  Berry  used  the  word  "  inquest "  for  the  informal 
consultation  at  which  he  assigned  the  cause  of  death. 

(595)  From  Miss  Eliza  Mortlock,  Tivoli  Lodge,  Clevedon,  who  does  not 
remember  when  it  was  that  the  account  was  written. 

"  At  Wiesbaden  we  were  acquainted  with  a  clever  good  man.  Professor 
Ebenau,  whose  old  sister  kept  his  house,  &c.  He  told  us  he  had  a  friend 
residing  40  or  50  miles  off" — likewise  a  professor — who  was  very  poor,  and 
had  a  large  family.  On  hearing  that  the  wife  was  dying,  Mr.  E.  went  to 
see  them,  and  brought  back  their  eldest  boy,  for  whom  a  little  bed  was  put 
up  in  Mr.  E.'s  room. 

"  One  morning,  about  10  days  after,  Mr.  E.  called  and  asked  me,  '  Do 
you  believe  that  at  the  moment  of  death,  you  may  appear  to  one  whom 
you  love  ? '  I  replied,  '  Yes,  I  do.'  '  Well,'  he  said,  '  we  shall  see.  I 
have  noted  the  day  and  the  hour  ;  for  last  night  after  I  went  up  to  bed,  the 

VOL.    II.  2  N 

546  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

child  said  sweetly  (in  German),  "  Yes,  dear  mamma,  I  see  you."  To  which 
I  replied,  "  No,  dear  boy,  it  is  I,  I  am  come  to  bed."  "  No,  he  said,  "  it  is 
dear  mamma,  she  is  standing  there  smiling  at  me,"  pointing  to  the  side  of 
the  bed.'  On  his  next  visit,  Mr.  Ebenau  told  us  that  he  had  received  a 
letter  saying  that  at  that  time,  and  on  that  evening,  the  wife  had  breathed 

^^^  l^s*-  "  Eliza  Moetlock." 

[This  event  happened  in  the  spring  of  1854,  and  Miss  Mortlock  has 
lost  sight  of  Professor  Ebenau  ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  she  herself  was 
informed  of  the  vision  before  the  death  was  known.  The  boy  seems  to  have 
been  sufficiently  awake  at  any  rate  to  understand  and  reply  to  Professor 
Ebenau's  remark,  and  Miss  Mortlock  is  sure  that  the  Professor  believed 
him  to  have  been  awake.  But  he  may  have  been  in  a  state  favourable  to 
subjective  hallucination,  from  knowledge  of  his  mother's  critical  condition.] 

(596)  From  Mr.  Wicks  (a  Temperance  Missionary),  87,  Southfields, 
Leicester. 

"July,   1884. 

"  In  Devonport,  in  the  year  1884,  I  was  acquainted  with  a  Mrs. 
Flaherty,  an  Irish  widow,  who  occupied  two  rooms  in  a  house  which 
accommodated  several  poor  families.  She  had  three  sons,  the  eldest  of 
whom.  Garland,  a  lad  of  about  17,  who  was  steward  on  board  one  of  Her 
Majesty's  ships,  was  her  main  support.  This  lad  had  been  ashore  on  leave, 
and  had  bade  his  mother  farewell  to  return  to  his  duty.  She,  soon  after 
parting  with  him,  set  about  cleaning  the  doorway  of  the  house.  Looking 
up  from  this  occupation,  she  saw  him  returning  up  the  street,  and  she 
exclaimed,  '  Why,  goodness  !  he  has  lost  the  boat.  Whatever  will  he  do  ? ' 
She  rose  up  and  surveyed  him  as  he  approached  her,  identifying  his  face, 
hair,  figure,  gait,  dress,  and  even  the  bundle  of  clothes  he  had  carried 
away.  She  called  out  to  him,  but  he  made  no  answer,  walked  past  her 
into  the  house,  and  went  up  into  her  rooms.  She  followed,  but  finding 
nobody  there,  she  called  out  chidingly,  '  Garland,  don't  play  with  me.  Tell 
me,  why  haven't  you  gone  aboard  ? '  Her  excitement  brought  in  her 
neighbours,  who  asked  what  was  the  matter ;  to  which  inquiry  she 
responded,  '  Indeed,  I  don't  know.  By  the  Holy  Mother,  I  never  saw 
Garland  in  my  life  if  I  didn't  see  him  just  now  come  in  at  the  door  and  go 
upstairs  before  me.'  '  Are  you  sure,  now,  he  is  not  hiding  in  some  of  your 
rooms  1 '  They  soon  satisfied  themselves  by  search  that  this  was  not  the 
case,  and  told  Mrs.  Flaherty  she  must  have  been  mistaken.  To  this  she 
answered  positively,  '  Don't  I  know  my  own  boy — my  own  Garland  ?  bless 
him  !  and  didn't  I  see  him  come  up  the  street,  and  come  into  this  house  ■? 
Yes,  and  up  over  the  stairs  :  and  didn't  he  pass  me  without  speaking  ?  the 
likes  of  which  he  never  did  before  at  all,  at  all.  Something  must  be  the 
matter  with  him.' 

"  In  this  she  was  right.  It  turned  out  that  in  trying  to  get  from  the  boat 
on  to  the  ladder  lying  over  the  ship's  side  he  missed  his  foothold,  fell  into 
the  sea,  and  was  drowned.  This  happened  at  the  very  time  his  mother 
saw  his  apparition. 

"  I  had  this  story,  as  it  is  here  given,  from  Mrs.  Flaherty's  own  lips,  and 
have  frequently  since  heard  it  from  her  second  son,  John  Garland  Flaherty, 
who  was  my  companion  for  over  10  years. 

"  William  Wicks." 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  547 

(597)  From  the  late  Miss  Elizabeth  Jacob,  who  wrote  clown  the 
account,  some  years  ago,  for  Mrs.  Saxby,  of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.  The 
elate  of  the  incident  is  now  irrecoverable;  Mrs.  Saxby,  writing  on 
March  11,  1886,  says  that  she  thinks  it  "must  have  occurred  full  20 
years  ago." 

The  narrative  begins  by  describing  how  one  John  Miller,  an  old  blind 
man  whom  Miss  Jacob  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  E-ussell,  used  to  visit  in 
London,  died  unexpectedly  at  a  time  when  his  son-in-law  was  seeking 
employment  in  the  country.  "  The  second  night  after  the  death,  Mrs. 
Miller  and  her  daughter  had  gone  to  bed,  but  they  were  unable  to  sleep 
for  thinking  of  him,  when,  to  use  her  own  words,  '  I  heard  something 
strike  against  the  window,  ma'am,  and  I  started  up  and  found  that  it  was 
someone  throwing  up  stones  against  it.  So  I  jumps  up,  throws  my  flannel 
petticoat  over  my  shoulders,  and  opens  the  window.  "  Who's  there  '?"  says 
I.  "It  is  I,  mother,"  says  Jem,  "come  home."  "Oh,  Jem,"  says  I,  "father's 
dead."  Says  he,  "  I  knowed  it,  and  that's  why  I  come  home."  So,  ma'am 
I  was  struck  all  of  a  heap,  as  you  may  guess,  and  I  whipped  on  my  clothes 
and  let  Jem  in,  and  then  he  told  us  all  how  it  was.'  He  had  been  in 
Buckinghamshire,  towards  Oxford,  and  he  was  walking  by  a  ploughed  field 
in  a  country  place,  when,  looking  up,  he  saw  his  father  [in-law]  coming 
towards  him.  He  was  quite  sure  it  was  his  father  [in-law].  He  felt  startled, 
but  was  just  going  up  to  speak  to  him  when  he  passed  away  over  the 
ploughed  field  without  turning,  or  speaking,  or  looking  at  him.  Jem  felt 
so  awe  struck  that  he  could  neither  move  nor  do  anything,  but  he  thought 
directly  that  it  was  a  sign  that  something  was  wrong,  so  he  turned  and 
walked  back  to  London  as  soon  as  he  could,  and  very  footsore  and  tired 
he  was  when  he  arrived." 

Mrs.  Saxby  tells  us  that  Miss  Jacob  heard  old  Mrs.  Miller  relate  this 
incident  a  few  days  after  Jem's  return  ;  and  adds,  "  They  found  that  it 
was  exactly  at  the  same  hour  that  the  old  man  died,  that  his  son-in-law 
saw  him  glide  past  him  in  the  ploughed  field." 

[This  case  depends  on  the  evidence  of  respectable,  though  uneducated, 
witnesses  ;  and  the  fact  of  the  son-in-law's  return,  and  the  reason  he  alleged 
for  it,  are  not  matters  on  which  memory  would  become  untrustworthy  in  a 
few  days.  At  the  same  time,  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence  may  easily 
have  been  exaggerated.  As  Mrs.  Miller  was  cognisant  of  Jem's  unexpected 
return  before  he  heard  of  the  death,  and  must  have  heard  of  the  vision 
that  caused  his  return  in  almost  the  same  breath  as  he  heard  of  the  death, 
her  evidence  may  perhaps  be  reckoned  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I., 
p.  148).] 

(598)  The  late  General  Campbell,  of  Gwalior  House,  Southgate,  in- 
formed us  that  a  relative  of  his.  Major  Hasell,  had  seen  the  apparition  of 
a  brother  at  the  time  of  the  latter's  death,  and  that  the  only  authority  whom 
he  was  at  liberty  to  quote  was  a  common  relative  of  his  own  and  of  Major 
Hasell's — General  Orchard.  At  our  request  he  wrote  to  General  Orchard, 
who  replied  as  follows  : — 

"  Woodville  Gardens,  Barnes,  S.W.,  Surrey. 

"May  17th,  1884. 
^        "The  event  took  place   during  June,  1849  (the  precise  date  I  cannot 
say)  ;  it  took  place  on  his  voyage  home,  on  medical  leave.     Hasell  (48th 
VOL.  II.  2  N  2 

548  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Ben.  IST.I.)  told  me  it  was  in  the  Red  Sea  that  his  brother  died,  on  the  way 
to  Suez.  Hasell  further  stated  that  on  seeing  his  brother's  apparition 
he  looked  at  his  watch,  and  noted  down  the  date  and  time  his  brother 
appeared  to  him,  and  by  his  calculations  it  was  exactly  the  time  intimated 
as  to  his  demise,  which  he  afterwards  received.  The  name  of  the  ship  I  do 
not  know  ;  however,  that  can  be  easily  ascertained  from  the  India  Office, 
as  well  as  the  actual  date  and  where  he  died.  The  particulars  that  I  have 
not  been  able  to  give  have  quite  escaped  my  memory,  although  at  the  time 
they  must  have  been  mentioned  to  me. 

"  Hasell  was  in  India  with  his  regiment,  and  his  brother  going  to 
England  on  medical  leave  at  that  time.  u  j   -yy^  Orchard." 

General  Orchard  writes  to  us  on  May  24,  1884  : — 

"  I  cannot  bring  to  mind  when  Major  Hasell  told  me  of  the  occurrence. 

"  The  apparition  appeared  in  the  afternoon,  but  the  hour  has  escaped 
my  memory.  It  showed  itself  to  Major  Hasell,  and  he  told  me  it  was 
visible  for  a  second  or  two,  and  then  faded  away.  He  made  the  calcula- 
tion as  to  the  time,  which  agreed  with  that  of  his  brother's  death." 

General  Campbell  says  that  Major  Hasell  struck  him  "  as  being  a 
very  straightforward,  practical  sort  of  man." 

We  learn  from  the  India  Office  that  Captain  William  Lowther  Hasell, 
attached  to  the  44th  Bengal  Native  Infantry,  died  at  Cairo,  on  his  way 
home,  on  the  13th  June,  1849.  The  vessel  in  which  he  embarked  from 
India  was  the  P.  and  O.  steamship    "  Oriental,"  Captain  Powell. 

(599)  The  following  narrative,  received  from  an  intimate  friend  of 
Mr.  Myers  and  the  present  writer,  is  third-hand,  and  is  admitted  only  by 
special  exception  (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note). 

"  1883. 

"  My  grandfather.  Sir  J.  Y.,  was  drowned  by  the  upsetting  of  a  boat 
in  the  Solent,  in  or  about  the  year  1830. 

"  On  the  day  of  his  death  Miss  Manningham,  a  great  friend  and  con- 
nection of  his,  was  at  one  of  the  Ancient  Concerts  in  Hanover  Square- 
Rooms.  During  the  performance  she  fainted  away,  and  when  she  came  to,, 
declared  that  she  had  seen  a  corpse  lying  at  her  feet,  and  though  the  face 
was  turned  away,  she  knew  the  figure  to  be  that  of  my  grandfather. 
Communication  in  those  days  was  not  of  course  as  easy  as  now,  and  her 
fears  were  not  verified  till  some  days  after  the  event.  ^  Such  is  the  family 
story,  which  I  heard  often  from  my  father,  and  had  verified  by  my  mother 
when  last  I  saw  her." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  the  narrator  adds,  "  I  have  always  under- 
stood that  my  father  heard  it  from  Miss  Manningham  ;  my  mother  heard 
it  from  my  father." 

The  following  account  of  the  same  incident  occurs  in  A  Portion  of  the 
Journcd  ke-pt  hy  T.  Raikes,  Esq.,  from  1831  to  1847,  Vol.  I.,  p.  131  : — 

"Wednesday,  26th,  December,  1832.^ — Captain recounted  a  curious 

anecdote  that  happened  in  his  own  family.  He  told  it  in  the  following 
words  : — It  is  now  about   15   months  ago  that  Miss  M.,  a  connection  of 

1  The  journey  from  Southampton  to  London  only  took  one  day  at  that  time ;  but 
Miss  Manningham  may  not  have  been  immediately  informed  of  the  news. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  549 

my  family,  went  with  a  party  of  friends  to  a  concert  at  the  Argyll  Rooms. 
She  appeared  there  to  be  suddenly  seized  with  indisposition,  and  though 
she  persisted  for  some  time  to  struggle  against  what  seemed  a  violent 
nervous  affection,  it  became  at  last  so  oppressive  that  they  were  obliged 
to  send  for  their  carriage  and  conduct  her  home.  She  was  for  a  long  while 
unwilling  to  say  what  was  the  cause  of  her  indisposition ;  but  on  being 
more  earnestly  questioned,  she  at  length  confessed  that  she  had, 
immediately  on  arriving  at  the  concert-room,  been  terrified  by  a  horrible 
vision  which  unceasingly  presented  itself  to  her  sight.  It  seemed  to  her 
as  though  a  naked  corpse  was  lying  on  the  floor  at  her  feet ;  the  features 
of  the  face  were  partly  covered  by  a  cloth  mantle,  but  enough  was 
apparent  to  convince  her  that  the  body  was  that  of  Sir  J.  Y.  Every 
effort  was  made  by  her  friends  at  the  time  to  tranquillise  her  mind  by 
representing  the  folly  of  allowing  such  delusions  to  prey  upon  her  spirits, 
and  she  thus  retired  to  bed  ;  but  on  the  following  day  the  family  received 
the  tidings  of  Sir  J.  Y.  having  been  drowned  in  Southampton  River  that 
very  night  by  the  oversetting  of  his  boat,  and  the  body  was  afterwards 
found  entangled  in  a  hoat-cloak.  Here  is  an  authentic  case  of  second-sight, 
and  of  very  recent  date." 

We  find  fi-om  the  Hampshire  Telegraph  that  the  fatal  accident  occurred 
at  about  4  p.m.,  on  May  5,  1831. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  accounts  present  a  discrepancy  in  the  name 
of  the  building  where  the  vision  was  seen — the  "  Argyll  Rooms," 
according  to  the  older  version,  the  "  Hanover  Square  Rooms  "  according 
to  the  later.  We  find  from  the  advertisements  of  the  Morning  Post  that 
"  the  celebrated  Russian  Band  "  was  that  week  giving  daily  concerts,  at 
3  p.m.,  at  the  Argyll  Rooms;  and  from  Crickley's  Picture  of  London  (1831), 
p.  93,  we  learn  that  "the  Argyll  Rooms,  Regent  Street,  burnt  down  in  the 
early  part  of  last  year,  have  been  again  restored  to  their  former  splendour. 
They  are  devoted  to  concerts,  balls,  and  exhibitions,  and  are  much 
frequented  by  persons  of  rank  and  fashion."  It  is  therefore  probable  that 
Miss  Manningham  was  present  at  the  afternoon  concert  at  these  Rooms. 
The  Hanover  Square  Rooms  were  also  used  for  concerts  at  that  time  ;  and 
as  the  title  "  Argyll  Rooms  "  has  long  ceased  to  suggest  a  high-class 
concert-hall,  one  easily  sees  how  it  may  have  been  unconsciously  replaced 
in  the  mind  of  our  friend's  parents  by  the  more  apparently  suitable 
appellation. 

The  newspaper-account  shows  that  the  bodies  of  Sir  J.  Y.,  and  of  two 
friends  who  were  drowned  with  him,  were  "  completely  enveloped  in  their 
cloaks  and  greatcoats  " ;  and  therefore  the  detail  of  the  boat-cloak  in  the 
vision,  if  correct,  is  interesting ;  but  as  we  do  not  know  at  what  hand  the 
older  account  is  given,  it  is  impossible  to  rely  on  such  a  point. 

(600)  From  Mr.  James  Cox,  (mentioned  above,  p.  235). 

"  Admiralty  House,  Queenstown. 

"March  18th,  1884. 
"When  I  was  serving  in  China  in  1860,  during  the  war,  a  military 
officer,  who  was  serving  there  at  the  same  time,  while  crossing  Talienwhau 
Bay,  was  capsized  and  drowned.  One  of  his  brother  officers  informed 
me  that  at  the  time  of  the  accident  he  distinctly  saw  his  apparition  while 
riding  across  the  country. 

550  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  I  cannot  now  remember  the  names  of  these  officers,  as  this  happened 
more  than  20  years  ago.  "  James  Cox." 

In  reply  to  the  question  whether  he  heard  of  the  event  immediately 
after  its  occurrence,  Mr.  Cox  says  : —  "March  25th   1884. 

"  The  fact  of  the  officer  in  question  having  been  capsized  and  drowned 
was  known  to  us  all,  I  think,  on  the  day  the  sad  event  happened  ;  as  the 
fleet  was  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Talienwhau,  and  the  troops  were 
encamped  on  the  shores  of  the  Bay,  so  that  the  army  and  navy  were  in 
constant  communication.  But  the  next  day,  I  believe,  while  I  was 
returning  from  the  camp,  where  I  had  been  on  a  visit,  the  military  officer 
who  had  seen  the  apparition  spoke  to  me  of  it." 

We  find  from  Mr.  R.  Swinhoe's  A  Narrative  of  the  North  China 
Campaign  in  1860,  that  the  officer  who  was  drowned,  as  described,  was 
Lieutenant  H.  L.  G.  Gordon,  of  the  Madras  Engineers.  His  death  took 
place  on  July  11th,  1860. 

Sir  Peter  Lumsden,  K.C.B.,  who  was  in  the  boat  with  Gordon,  and 
Colonel  W.  H.  Edgcome,  R.E.,  who  was  in  the  Madras  Engineers  in  China 
at  the  time,  tell  us  that  they  never  heard  of  the  apparition. 

[Mr.  Cox  is  a  careful  informant ;  and  the  fact  that  he  was  on  the  spot, 
and  heard  of  the  incident  immediately  on  its  occurrence,  seems  to  justify 
an  exception  to  the  rule  of  not  admitting  accounts  from  persons  who  had 
only  a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  original  witness.] 

(601)  Mr.  F.  L.  Brine,  Finsbury  Distillery,  E.C.,  sent  us  a  letter  from 
his  sister,  Mrs.  F.,  containing  the  following  passage  : — 

"February  29th,  1884. 
"  I  remember,  as  if  it  were  only  yesterday,  staying  at  the  Miltons.  It 
was  Mr.  Milton's  custom  to  go  into  the  cellar,  to  turn  the  gas  off  at  the 
meter.  When  he  came  up  he  was  looking  unusually  pale,  and  he  said, 
'  Where  is  the  scoundrel  ? '  Of  course  it  frightened  us,  as  we  thought  he 
meant  a  burglar ;  and  he  would  not  believe,  for  some  time,  that  his  son, 
Harry,  was  not  having  a  game  with  him  ;  as  he  saw  him  quite  plainly  in 
the  cellar.  A  few  weeks  after,  they  had  a  letter  from  the  captain  of  the 
ship,  to  say  he  died  in  Hobart  Town  Hospital,  on  the  very  night  he 
appeared  to  his  father.  "  g.  f." 

[Mrs.  F.  dislikes  the  subject,  and  we  can  obtain  no  further  details  from 
her.  We  have  written  to  Hobart  Town,  to  obtain  a  certificate  of  the 
death,  but  have  not  received  it  in  time  for  insertion  here.] 

(602)  From  an  article  in  Church  Bells  for  March  20th,  1885,  by  the 
Rev.  J.  Foxley,  Yicar  of  Market  Weighton,  Yorkshire. 

"  There  is  now  living  in  the  parish  where  we  write — she  was  at  church 
last  Sunday — a  widow  now  in  her  78th  year,  but  in  full  possession  of  all 
her  faculties,  who  has  more  than  once  told  us,  with  all  the  fulness 
of  detail,  and  subject  to  all  the  cross-questioning  which  we  could  devise, 
how  she  was  at  service  some  miles  from  home  during  her  father's  last 
illness,  and  that  one  Thursday  she  felt  unable  to  go  on  with  her  work,  and 
after  a  while,  about  1  o'clock,  saw  a  vision  of  her  father  ;  that  it  turned 
out  afterwards  that  her  father  died  at  that  very  time,  and  that  just  before 
his  death  he  had  been  speaking  of  her ;  that  a  letter  sent  to  inform  her 
of  his  being  worse  failed  to  reach  her  ;  and  that  though  she  knew  he  was 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  551 

ill,  she  was  not  aware  that  he  was  in  immediate  danger ;  but  that  she  was 
so  impressed  with  her  vision  that  she  set  off  home  the  Saturday  following, 
and  learnt^  on  the  way  that  her  father  was  dead,  and  that  his  funeral  was 
to  take  place  that  very  day,  so  that  she  arrived  only  just  in  time.  We 
have  verified  one  subordinate  part  of  the  above  narrative ;  for  by 
reference  to  the  parish  register  we  find  that  the  burial  took  place  on  the 
31st  of  May,  1823  ;  and  as  the  Sunday  letter  for  that  year  was  E,  which  is 
the  letter  for  the  1st  of  June,  the  burial  turns  out  to  have  been,  as  stated, 
on  a  Saturday.  Our  informant  was  then,  as  shown  by  the  register  of  her 
baptism,  25  years  old." 

In  sending  the  above,  Mr.  Foxley  writes,  October  24th,  1884  : — 
"  The  enclosed  cutting  from  Clnirch  Bells  has  the  advantage  of  having 
been  read  over  to  Mrs.  Pollard,  and  accepted  by  her  as  a  faithful  state- 
ment of  what  occurred  to  her.  She  was  buried  here,  February  14th,  1884. 
She  could  read  well.  The  '  1  o'clock  '  mentioned  was  in  the  day-trme.  I 
recollect  her  mentioning  dinner-tune.  The  place  was  some  out-building, 
I  think  a  summer-house,  but  of  that  I  am  not  certain.  She  always 
told  the  story  under  the  impression  that  she  was  wide  awake." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Foxley  adds  : — 

"  I  cannot  recollect  whether  she  said  she  mentioned  the  apparition  to 
anyone  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived.  But  she  told  me  that  the 
apparition  was  one  cause,  if  not  the  cause,  of  her  asking  leave  to  go  home 
to  see  her  father.     I  cannot  say  in  whose  service  she  was. 

"  All  I  can  add  is,  that  I  cross-questioned  Mrs.  Pollard  repeatedly,  in 
every  way  I  could  think  of,  and  that  I  could  not  shake  her  story.  But 
then  she  may  have  told  it  so  many  times  that  it  had  become  truth  to  her, 
like  George  the  Fourth's  presence  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo." 

[Here  the  impression  seems  !o  have  been  so  vivid  as  to  prompt  a  very 
decided  line  of  action.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  percipient  was  probably 
in  anxiety  as  to  her  father's  condition,  which  diminishes  the  improbability 
that  her  hallucination  was  purely  subjective.] 

(603)  From  Mr.  Norris,  (Barrister),  Dalkey,  Ireland.  The  account 
was  written  down  before  1868  :  we  received  it  in  1882. 

"In  or  about  1850,  and  for  some  years  previous  and  subsequent,  there 
lived  at  Hampton  Court,  near  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man,  a  gentleman  named 
Abbott  with  a  family,  consisting  of  Mrs.  Abbott,  five  daughters,  and  one 
son.  Mr.  Abbott  being  fond  of  the  sea,  kept  a  small  yacht,  but  particu- 
larly desired  his  son  never  to  go  out  in  it  without  his  permission.  About 
the  time  above  mentioned,  while  he  was  himself  absent  in  Dublin,  his  son  ob- 
tained his  mother's  permission,  and  with  two  young  companions  crossed  the 
Channel  to  Kirkcudbright  on  the  opposite  Scottisla  shore.  On  Mr.  Abbott's 
return,  he  was  annoyed  to  find  the  boys  had  gone  out  without  taking  a 
sailor  with  them,  and  this  annoyance  was  not  lessened  by  the  receipt  of  a 
letter  saying  they  could  not  return  until  they  received  a  remittance.  Mr. 
Abbott  at  once  went  into  Douglas,  a  distance  of  four  or  five  miles,  and 
posted  a  letter  to  his  son  with  the  necessary  enclosure.  He  had  scarcely 
done  so  when,  turning  round,  he  saw  his  son  at  the  opposite  side  of  the 

1  At  a  wayside  inn,  now  a  cottage,  at  Arras,  on  the  Beverley-road,  about  three  miles 
from  Market  Weighton,  but  in  the  parish. — J.  F. 

552  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

narrow  street,  looking  at  him  with  a  very  sorrowful  expression.  Just  at  that 
moment  he  was  too  much  annoyed  to  speak  to  him,  so  he  went  home  and 
told  Mrs.  Abbott  that  he  had  had  all  his  trouble  for  nothing  as  John  was 
in  Douglas.  He  added  that  he  was  too  much  annoyed  to  take  any  notice 
of  him,  but  he  supposed  he  would  be  in  for  dinner.  In  vain  they  waited. 
At  the  very  time,  his  father  (from  whose  lips  I  had  the  story)  saw  him  in 
Douglas  he  was  drowned  in  Kirkcudbright  Bay  by  the  upsetting  of  his 
boat.  This  was  about  noon  or  a  little  earlier.  I  know  not  whether  Mr. 
Abbott  be  now  alive,  nor  can  I  give  the  address  of  any  of  his  family ;  but 
he  told  me  the  story  as  I  have  stated  it,  with  his  own  lips. 

"Thomas   J.  Norms." 

Mrs.  Tandy,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Norris,  writes  to  us  from  1,  Tempe 
Terrace,  Dalkey,  Ireland,  that  she  was  14  at  the  time  of  this  occurrence, 
and  perfectly  remembers  hearing  Mr.  Abbott's  account  of  it.  She  then 
narrates  it  just  as  it  is  given  above. 

[We  have  failed  to  find  any  newspaper-account  of  this  accident ;  and 
the  death  was  not  registered — registration  in  those  days  not  being  com- 
pulsory. But  we  learn  from  the  collector  of  H.M.  Customs  at  Douglas, 
and  from  the  sexton  at  Kirkcudbright,  that  several  residents  at  these 
places  remember  the  event.] 

(604)  From  the  Rev.  R.  L.  Loughborough,  Pirton  Vicarage,  Hitchin. 

"January  25th,  1884. 

"  I  was  visiting  a  poor  woman,  Mrs.  Abbiss,  far  gone  in  consumption, 
and  wishing  to  draw  her  thoughts  to  the  certainty  of  approaching  death, 
I  asked  her  certain  questions  about  her  relations  and  her  mother.  I  had 
no  sooner  named  her  mother  than  she  exclaimed,  '  Ah,  sir,  there  was  a 
strange  thing  happened  at  the  time  of  mother's  death ;  but  I'm  thinking 
you  would  hardly  believe  me  if  I  were  to  tell  it  ye.'  'I  do  not  know,'  I 
said,  '  I  hear  of  too  many  strange  things  to  be  much  surprised  at  what 
you  could  tell  me,  or  to  doubt  the  truth  of  what  you  may  say.'  'Well, 
sir,  the  truth  of  it  was  this.  I  was  but  a  girl  at  the  time,  and  mother 
being  very  ill,  suffering  from  the  same  complaint  as  mine,  we  had  a 
woman  to  help  me.  Mother  kept  her  bed.  And  one  morning  when  we 
had  made  her  comfortable  and  given  her  her  breakfast,  we  thought  she 
seemed  a  little  better,  and  came  down  stairs  to  have  our  breakfast ;  but, 
sir,  we  hadn't  sat  very  long  before  the  door  opened,  and  in  came  father 
looking  all  skeered  like,  and  sat  himself  down  in  that  very  chair  where 
you  are  now  sitting.  "  Oh,  father,"  I  said,  "  how  jom  fritted  me,  what's 
the  matter?"  "How's  mother?"  he  said.  "Why,  we  gave  her  her 
breakfast,  and  she  seemed  quite  comfortable  like  when  we  left  her  not 
many  minutes  since."  "  Then  run  and  see  how  she  is  now."  I  went  up, 
and  would  you  believe  it,  sir,  we  found  mother  was  dead  1  When  I  asked 
father  what  made  him  come  up  in  that  frightened  way,  he  said,   "  Why,  I 

was  hoeing  in  Mr.  W.'s  field,  and  just  as   S clock  was  striking  9,   I 

see  your  mother  standing  at  the  end  of  my  hoe.  I  was  struck  all  of  a 
heap  like,  and  threw  down  my  hoe,  and  ran  home  as  fast  as  I  could."  ' 

"  The  father's  name  was  John  Wilson.  You  may  place  the  fullest 
reliance  on  the  narrative,  as  my  impression  is  still  most  vivid  as  to  the 
whole  circumstance  of  the  relation.  The  poor  woman  was  well  known  to  me 
from  my  frequent  visits.     She  was  too  simple-minded  to  romance  upon 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  553 

the  matter,  and  there  was  a  sort  of  dramatic  earnestness  in  her  manner  as 
she  told  me,  which  convinced  me  that  she  realised  again  the  strange  look 
of  her  father  when  he  returned  to  inquire  about  his  wife. 

"  R.  Lindsay  Loughborough." 

Mr.  Loughborough  has  ascertained  from  the  Register  that  Mrs.  Wil- 
son died  in  January,  1850,  aged  41  ;  her  husband  in  January,  1853, 
aged  48  ;  and  Mrs.  Abbiss  in  September,  1856,  aged  32.  He  thinks  it 
most  probable  that  Mrs.  Abbiss  gave  him  the  account  in  the  early  summer 
of  1856.  She  must  have  been  at  least  25  (though  she  says  "  but  a  girl  ") 
at  the  time  of  the  incident. 

[The  evidence  is  of  the  same  class  as  in  case  597,  Mrs.  Abbiss  having 
been  a  witness  of  the  unusual  demeanour  of  her  father,  due  to  the 
vision — though  she  did  not  actually  hear  the  vision  described — before  the 
fact  of  the  death  was  known  to  him.] 

(605)  From  Mrs.  Laurie,  Fiesole,  Bathwick  Hill,  Bath.  We  owe  this 
case,  in  the  first  instance,  to  Mr.  G.  J.  Romanes,  F.R.S.,  who  sent  us  a 
letter  containing  an  account  which  Mrs.  Laurie  had  dictated  in  June, 
1883  ;  but  the  following  account,  dictated  in  1885  to  Mr.  L.  G.  Fry,  of 
Goldney  House,  Clifton,  is  a  little  fuller. 

"  General  Kennett  was  travelling  home  to  his  wife,  who  was  staying 
in  some  part  of  India,  from  Bombay,  and  was  intending  to  break  the 
journey  for  a  week  at  my  husband's  (Mr.  Laurie)  house  at  Baroda.  He 
declined  to  sleep  in  the  house,  saying  that  he  would  have  his  tent  pitched 
near,  and  preferred  it,  as  cooler.  Next  morning,  however,  he  came  in  in  a 
very  agitated  state,  saying  that  he  hoped  we  would  excuse  him,  and  that 
he  had  ordered  his  tent  to  be  struck,  as  he  intended  to  resume  his  journey 
immediately  When  we  asked  what  was  the  matter,  he  replied  that  his 
wife  had  appeared  to  him,  saying  that  if  he  did  not  return  home  im- 
mediately he  would  never  see  her  alive.  I  suggested  that  it  was  a 
dream,  but  he  said  '  No,'  he  had  really  seen  her.  My  husband  said  '  Well, 
General,  I  am  sorry  you're  going,  I  hope  you'll  find  her  quite  well.' 
General  Kennett  started  immediately,  and  on  arriving  home  he  wrote  to 
us  stating  that  she  was  dead,  and  that  he  found  her  in  the  dress  in  which 
he  had  seen  her  in  his  tent  She  died  a  few  minutes  before  his  arrival,  and 
therefore  four  or  five  days  after  the  vision — as  he  had  a  long  distance  to 
travel.  When  he  had  left  his  wife,  she  appeared  in  good  health,  and  he 
had  no  message  to  say  she  was  ill.  The  fact  that  he  found  her  dressed 
would  seem  to  suggest  that  she  died  very  suddenly. 

"  Caroline  Emma  Laurie." 

General  Kennett  and  Mr.  Laurie  are  both  deceased. 

[This  is,  of  course,  a  very  inconclusive  case ;  for  the  dress  may  probably 
have  been  a  familiar  one ;  and  if  the  death  was  so  sudden  that  no 
premonitory  symptoms  had  been  felt  four  or  five  days  before,  there 
would  be  no  strong  reason  for  regarding  the  vision  as  telepathic  rather 
than  as  a  purely  subjective  hallucination.  But  the  death  was  not  by  an 
accident— it  at  any  rate  took  place  from  some  morbid  physical  cause ; 
and  it'  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  approach  of  death  from  such  a 
cause  may  conceivably  be  discerned  in  a  way  which  is  out  of  the  range 
of  consciousness  as  we  understand  it.     (See  Vol.  I.,  p.  231.)  ] 

554  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(606)  The  following  letter  was  published  in  the  Banner  of  Light  of 
January,  1878.  We  wrote  to  make  inquiries  of  the  writer,  Mr.  Alwis, 
but  have  since  been  informed  by  the  Colonial  Office  that  he  died  in  1878. 

"Colombo,  Ceylon. 
"It  was  a  fine,  clear  evening,  many  years  ago,  a  day  after  I  had 
gone  to  Negombo,  to  act  for  Mr.  John  Selby  as  District  Judge  of  that 
place,  that  I  joined  that  gentleman  at  a  game  of  cricket.  We  finished 
our  game,  and  were,  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  coming  to  the  Govern- 
ment House,  where  we  all  lived,  when  Mr.  Selby,  who  was  behind  us, 
came  rushing  past  us,  and  beckoned  me  to  come  fast.  He  was  rather 
excited,  and  desired  me  to  be  good  enough  to  consult  my  watch  and  tell 
him  the  time.  I  did  so.  He  then  sat  down  at  my  writing-table,  took  a 
sheet  of  note-paper,  and  wrote  down,  'My  wife  died  IS  minutes  to  6  o'clock ' 
(month,  (fee,  which  I  forget).  This  slip  of  paper  he  put  into  an  envelope, 
sealed  it,  and  got  me  and  another  gentleman  then  present  to  put  our 
signatures  to  the  fact  therein  stated.  We  did  so.  And  he  then  explained 
to  us  that  his  wife,  who  had  been  long  ill  in  England,  had  appeared  to 
him  at  the  time  above  indicated,  under  the  shadow  of  the  big  banian,  and 
that  he  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  she  had  died  at  that  hour,  and 
that  it  was  her  spirit  ^  which  he  had  seen.  In  consequence  of  this  per- 
suasion, Mr.  Selby,  who  was  to  leave  Ceylon  in  a  few  days  for  England, 
postponed  his  trip  for  a  short  time.  And  when  the  mail  had  arrived,  a 
month  or  more  after  the  date  above  given,  he  showed  me  his  private 
letters,  and  they  fully  confirmed  the  prediction  of  his  wife's  death,  within 
a  few  hours,  as  I  remember,  of  the  time  he  stated  he  had  seen  his  wife 
under  the  tree.  u  j^j^j^s  Alwis." 

Mr.  S.  C.  Obeyesekere  writes  to  us  from  Colombo,  on  July  18,  1885: — 

"  You  are  correctly  informed  as  to  my  being  a  son-in-law  of  the  late 
Hon.  James  Alwis.  On  inquiry  from  Mrs.  Alwis  and  several  of  his 
friends,  I  learn  that  the  extract  from  the  report  appearing  in  the  Banner 
of  Light  forwarded  to  me  is  substantially  correct,  and  accords  with  their 
recollection  of  Mr.  Alwis'  account  to  them  of  the  incident  referred  to  in  it. 

"  Both  Mr.  John  Selby  and  his  brother,  Henry  Collingwood,  who  was 
Queen's  Advocate  of  Ceylon,  are  dead,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  there 
are  any  relations  of  theirs  in  the  Island,  except  a  son-in-law  of  Thos.  H. 
C.  Selby — Mr.  Frank  Byrde,  of  Avissawelle.  Mrs.  Selby  [i.e.,  Mrs.  H.  C. 
Selby].  I  believe,  is  still  alive  at  Bath,  in  England,  and  you  might  get  some 
information  from  her  about  what  you  refer  to.  The  other  gentleman 
who,  with  Mr.  Alwis,  witnessed  Mr.  Selby's  memoranda,  I  am  informed, 
was  a  Mr.  Macartney,  of  the  Police,  who  is  also  dead. 

"  Mr.  Alwis  acted  for  Mr.  Selby  as  District  Judge  of  Negombo  from 
13th  April  to  24th  May,  1863.  [We  have  received  confirmation  of  this 
fact  from  the  Colonial  Office.] 

"  I  have  not  succeeded  in  tracing  out  any  written  memoranda  of  the 
event  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Alwis  ;  if  I  do  succeed  in  tracing  them  out,  I 
shall  with  pleasure  forward  you  their  copy.  <<  g    q    Obeyesekbee." 

^  As  regards  this  word,  which  occurs  again  in  the  introductory  paragraph  to  the  fol- 
lowing case,  see  p.  48,  note. 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  555 

Mrs.  H.  C.  Selby  writes  to  us,  from  2,  Yale  Yiew,  London  Road,  Bath, 
on  May  28,  1886  :— 

"  We  have  heard  of  the  circumstances  to  which  you  refer,  with  regard 
to  Mr.  John  Selby  ;  but  not  having  seen  him  when  he  was  in  England, 
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  we  are  unable  to  give  you  any  information." 

Mr.  Frank  Byrde  has  kindly  written  to  us,  saying  that  the  account  given 
"  substantially  agrees  "  with  what  he  had  heard  before,  but  that  he  has  no 
written  record  of  the  incident.  He  has  also  given  us  the  means  of  tracing- 
Mrs.  John  Selby's  death,  which  took  place,  as  the  Register  shows,  on 
May  14,  1864.  The  month,  it  will  be  seen,  agrees  with  the  above  evidence ; 
but  the  year  there  given  is  1863.  The  mistake,  if  it  be  one,  probably 
occurs  in  some  record  to  which  Mr.  Obeyesekere  and  the  officials  of  the 
Colonial  Office  both  had  access  ;  but  possibly  Mr.  Alwis  acted  as  sub- 
stitute for  Mr.  J.  Selby  more  than  once. 

(607)  The  following  case  was  reported  by  the  late  Serjeant  Cox  to  the 
Psychological  Society,  in  February,  1879,  on  the  authority  of  Surgeon 
Harris,  of  the  Royal  Artillery ;  who,  with  two  of  his  daughters  (one  of 
whom  became  Serjeant  Cox's  wife),  was  a  witness  of  the  occurrence. 
The  narrative  has  been  already  published  in  a  book  called  Spirits  before  our 
Eyes,  by  W.  H.   Harrison,  pp.  64-5. 

"  A  party  of  children,  sons  and  daughters  of  the  officers  of  Artillery 
stationed  at  Woolwich,  were  playing  in  the  garden.  Suddenly  a  little 
girl  screamed,  and  stood  staring  with  an  aspect  of  terror  at  a  willow  tree 
there.  Her  companions  gathered  round,  asking  what  ailed  her.  '  Oh  ! ' 
she  said,  '  there — there.  Don't  you  see.  There's  papa  lying  on  the  ground, 
and  the  blood  running  from  a  big  wound.'  All  assured  her  that  they  could 
see  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  she  persisted,  describing  the  wound  and  the 
position  of  the  body,  still  expressing  her  surprise  that  they  did  not  see 
what  she  saw  so  plainly.  Two  of  her  companions  were  daughters  of  my 
informant  (one  of  the  surgeons  of  the  regiment),  whose  house  adjoined  the 
garden.  They  called  their  father,  who  at  once  came  to  the  spot.  He 
found  the  child  in  a  state  of  extreme  terror  and  agony,  took  her  into  his 
house,  assuring  her  that  it  was  only  a  '  fancy,'  and  having  given  her  resto- 
ratives, sent  her  home.  The  incident  was  treated  by  all  as  what  the  doctor 
had  called  it,  and  no  more  was  thought  of  it.  News  from  India,  where 
the  child's  father  was  stationed,  was  in  those  days  slow  in  coming.  But 
the  arrival  of  the  mail  in  due  course  brought  the  information  that  the 
father  of  the  child  had  been  killed  by  a  shot,  and  died  under  a  tree. 
Making  allowance  for  difference  in  the  counting  of  time,  it  was  found  to 
have  been  about  the  moment  when  the  daughter  had  the  vision  at 
Woolwich." 

[If  here,  as  in  so  many  other  of  the  second-hand  cases,  the  details 
and  the  alleged  accuracy  of  the  coincidence  must  be  doubted,  the  main 
fact  of  a  striking  coincidence  of  the  sort  alleged  may  still  be  reasonably 
accepted  as  probable.] 

I  have  more  than  once  spoken  of  nautical  evidence  as  likely  to 
be  coloured  by  superstition,  or  modified  and  exaggerated  in  the  way 
natural  to  oft-repeated  "  yarns."  But  it  may  be  reasonably  supposed 
that  the  first-hand  witnesses  in  the  two  following  cases  really  had 

556  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

some  such  experience  as  is  described,  and  that  the  coincidence  was 
not  a  pure  invention. 

(608  and  609)  From  Mr.  William  Dunlop,  Engineer,  care  of  Messrs. 
Windsor,   Redlock,  and  Co.,  Bangkok,  Siam. 

"Feb.  17th,  1883. 

"  A  relation  of  mine,  named  Richard  Jones,  was  apprentice  pilot  in  the 
Mersey.  One  day  he  boarded  an  inward  bound  vessel,  and  took  charge. 
The  captain  of  the  vessel  was  sick,  and  the  mate  had  command ;  he  seemed 
to  be  very  low-spirited,  and  would  hardly  answer  my  cousin  when  he  spoke 
to  him.  They  walked  the  deck  in  silence  for  a  long  time,  when  at  last  the 
mate  suddenly  asked  my  cousin  what  sort  of  weather  they  had  had  about 
the  coast  for  the  last  month  or  so.  My  cousin  said  the  weather  had 
been  very  bad.  The  mate  then  asked  if  my  cousin  knew  anything  about  a 
certain  brig ;  he  answered  that  he  did,  but  that  he  wished  to  know  why 
the  question  was  put.  The  mate  then  said  :  '  My  brother  was  captain  of 
that  vessel,  and  I'm  uneasy  about  him,  because,  as  we  were  coming  down 
the  Mediterranean  this  trip,  I  saw  my  brother  aboard  of  this  craft.  At 
8  bells  (noon)  I  went  below  to  dinner ;  when  I  came  on  deck  again  I  took 
a  look  up  to  windward  to  see  what  the  weather  was  like,  and,  standing 
close  against  the  bulwarks  I  saw  my  brother.  I  went  over  to  him,  but  as 
I  got  close  to  him  he  disappeared.  I  turned  round  and  saw  him  on  the 
other  side  of  the  deck  ;  I  went  towards  him  with  my  arms  stretched  out ; 
when  I  got  near  him  I  made  a  sudden  clasp  at  him,  but  he  disappeared 
again.'  My  cousin  asked  the  mate  to  give  him  the  date  of  this  appearance  ; 
the  mate  did  so,  and  my  cousin  answered,  '  On  that  day,  and  as  near  as  I 
can  judge,  at  the  same  hour,  your  brother's  brig  was  lost  with  all  hands.'  " 

[We  discovered  a  recent  address  of  Mr.  (now  Captain)  Richard  Jones ; 
but  he  had  left,  and  we  have  been  unable  to  trace  him.] 

"From  the  7th  of  October,  1867,  till  the  14th  April,  1871,  I  was 
shipmate  with  Mr.  F.  L.  Murphy,  aboard  the  ss.  '  Riga,'  of  Leith,  of 
which  vessel  he  was  second  oificer.  Mr.  Murphy,  in  spite  of  his  name,  was 
an  Englishman  ;  he  belonged  to  the  middle  class,  was  very  well  educated, 
but  very  superstitious.  Never  mind  that,  he  was  as  truthful  as  man  could 
be,  hated  lies  and  liars,  and  no  man  could  be  braver.  His  death  showed 
what  manner  of  man  he  was,  for  when  the  ss.  '  Hong  Kong  '  was  lost  in 
the  Red  Sea  about  8  years  ago,  he  gave  his  place  in  the  boat  to 
another  man  and  stayed  on  the  wreck,  well  knowing  that  it  was  death 
to  do  so.  The  other  man  had  a  family.  Murphy  had  none,  so  he  sacrificed 
himself. 

"I  think  it  was  somewhere  about  the  year  1863,  that  Murphy  was 
before  the  mast  on  board  the  '  Sultana '  of  South  Shields,  on  the  run  home 
from  Bombay  to  England.  Ofi'  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  they  were  running 
with  dirty  weather,  and  towards  nightfall  it  looked  very  nasty,  so  the 
captain  determined  to  heave  to.  At  8  bells  it  was  all  hands  to  close 
reef  the  main  topsail.  Now  when  a  man  is  bearing  a  hand  to  reef  a  main 
topsail,  with  something  like  a  gale  of  wind  blowing,  he  has  not  much 
chance  to  fall  a-dreaming.  If  you  have  been  to  sea  you  know  what  it  is ; 
if  you  have  not,  just  fancy  yourself  some  70  or  80  feet  up  in  the  air,  swung 
from  port  to  starboard,  from  starboard  to  port  like  a  stone  in  a  sling,  with 

v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  557 

the  great  sail  slatting  and  thundering  below  you.  Well,  Murphy  was  aloft 
fisting  the  sail,  when  he  happened  to  look  forward,  and  saw  someone  on 
the  fore  topsail  yard.  He  shouted  to  the  man  next  him,  '  Who's  that  on 
the  fore  topsail  yard  % '  His  mate  gave  a  look  forward  and  answered, 
'  Why,  there's  no  one  there,  we're  all  on  the  yard  here.'  Murphy  looked 
along  the  main  topsail  yard  and  counted  the  hands ;  sure  enough  they 
were  all  there.  He  looked  forward  again,  and  saw  that  the  man  on  the 
fore  topsail  yard  was  his  cousin  Stevens,  who  was  in  England  at  the  time. 
When  the  ship  was  brought  to  the  wind.  Murphy,  before  turning  in, 
entered  in  his  private  log  the  date  and  hour  of  the  apparition. 

"  On  arriving  in  England  he  found  that  his  cousin  had  died  on  the 
same  day  he  appeared  aboard  the  '  Sultana,'  but  between  the  hour  of  his 
death  and  the  hour  of  the  apparition,  there  was  a  difference  for  which  the 
longitude  did  not  account." 

[The  last  sentence  may  be  taken  as  in  some  measure  an  indication  of 
accuracy  in  the  narrative.] 

(610)  From  Mr.  Francis  Dart  Fenton,  formerly  in  the  native  depart- 
ment of  the  Government,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.  He  gave  the  account 
in  writing  to  his  friend.  Captain  J.  H.  Crosse,  of  Monkstown,  Cork,  from 
whom  we  received  it.  In  1852,  when  the  incident  occurred,  Mr. 
Fenton  was  "  engaged  in  forming  a  settlement  on  the  banks  of  the 
Waikato." 

"March  25th,  1860. 

"  Two  sawyers,  Frank  Philps  and  Jack  Mulholland,  were  engaged 
cutting  timber  for  the  Rev.  R.  Maunsell,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Awaroa 
creek,  a  very  lonely  place,  a  vast  swamp,  no  people  within  miles  of  them. 
As  usual  they  had  a  Maori  with  them  to  assist  in  felling  trees.  He  came 
from  Tihorewam,  a  village  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  about  6  miles  off. 
As  Frank  and  the  native  were  cross-cutting  a  tree,  the  native  stopped 
suddenly  and  said,  '  What  are  you  come  for  % '  looking  in  the  direction  of 
Frank.  Frank  replied,  '  What  do  you  mean  *? '  He  said,  '  I  am  not  speaking 
to  you  5  I  am  speaking  to  my  brother.'  Frank  said,  '  Where  is  he  ? '  The 
native  replied,  '  Behind  you.  What  do  you  want  1 '  (to  the  other  Maori). 
Frank  looked  round  and  saw  nobody  ;  the  native  no  longer  saw  anyone, 
but  laid  down  the  saw  and  said,  '  I  shall  go  across  the  river  ;  my  brother 
is  dead.'  Frank  laughed  at  him  and  reminded  him  that  he  had  left  him 
quite  well  on  Sunday  (five  days  before),  and  there  had  been  no  communi- 
cation since.  The  Maori  spoke  no  more,  but  got  into  his  canoe  and  pulled 
across.  When  he  arrived  at  the  landing-place,  he  met  people  coming  to 
fetch  him.     His  brother  had  just  died  ;  I  knew  him  well." 

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  his  authority  for  this  narrative,  Mr. 
Fenton  writes  to  us  : 

"December  18th,  1883. 
"  I  knew  all  the  parties  concerned  well,  and  it  is  quite  true,  valeat 
quantum,  as  the  lawyers  say.     Incidents  of  this  sort  are  not  infrequent 
among  the  Maoris. 

"F.  D.  Fenton, 

"  Late  Chief  Judge,  Native  Law  Court  of  New  Zealand." 
This    case,    if"   faithfully    reported,  is     an    interesting    example, 

558  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

vouched  for  by  an  educated  European,  of  telepathy  occurring  among 
an  uncivilised  people. 

§  5.  I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  three  cases,  which  are 
respectively  one,  two,  and  three  centuries  old,  but  of  which  the  first 
and  second,  at  any  rate,  may  fairly  receive  an  evidential  number. 

(611)  From  the  Life  of  Mrs.  Mary  Fletcher,  by  Henry  Moore  (1818), 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  208-209 — an  extract  from  Mrs.  Fletcher's  diary. 

"  October,  1784. — As  I  was  retired  this  morning  at  my  10  o'clock 
hour,  I  was  called  down  to  Mary  G.  She  gave  me  a  strange  account 
which  I  shall  insert  as  she  related  it : — A  short  time  ago,  she  said,  she 
was  one  day  going  out  to  work  in  the  fields,  but  thought  she  would  first 
go  upstairs  to  prayer.  While  on  her  knees,  praising  God  for  the  care  He 
had  taken  of  her  children,  she  was  amazed  to  see  her  eldest  son,  about  21 
years  of  age,  standing  before  her  !  She  started  up — but  thought,  '  Maybe 
it  is  the  enemy  to  affright  me  from  prayer.'  Casting  her  eyes  up  again  to 
the  same  spot,  she  still  saw  him  there  ;  on  which  she  ran  down  into  the 
kitchen,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Still,  wherever  she  looked, 
she  saw  him  standing  before  her,  pale,  and  as  if  covered  with  dirt.  Con- 
cluding from  this  that  he  was  killed,  she  ran  to  her  mother,  who,  on 
hearing  the  account,  went  directly  to  the  pit,  determined  to  have  him  home 
if  alive.  On  her  drawing  near  the  pit,  she  heard  a  great  tumult ;  for  the 
earth  had  fallen  in  on  him  and  two  other  men,  and  the  people  were 
striving  to  dig  them  out.  At  length  he  was  got  up  alive  and  well,  and 
came  home  to  his  mother  pale  and  dirty,  just  as  she  had  seen  him  !  She 
then  fell  on  her  knees,  and  began  praising  that  God  who  hears  and 
answers  prayer." 

(612)  From  The  World  of  Spirits,  by  R.  Baxter  (1691),  pp.  147-151. 
Abridgment  of  a  letter  to  Baxter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Tilson,  Minister  of 
Ay les worth,  in  Kent.^ 

"July  6th,  1691. 

"  Mary,  the  wife  of  John  Goffe,  of  Rochester,  being  afflicted  with  a  long 
illness,  removed  to  her  father's  house  at  West  Mulling,  which  was  about  9 
miles  distant  from  her  own;  there  she  died,  June  4th,  1691. 

"  The  day  before  her  departure  she  grew  impatiently  desirous  to  see 
her  two  children,  whom  she  had  left  at  home,  to  the  care  of  a  nurse.  She 
prayed  her  husband  to  hire  a  horse,  for  she  must  go  home  to  die  with  her 
children. 

"  Between  1  and  2  o'clock  in  the  morning  she  fell  into  a  trance.  One 
widow  Turner,  who  watched  with  her  that  night,  says  that  her  eyes  were 
open  and  fixed,  and  her  jaw  fallen ;  she  put  her  hand  on  her  mouth  and 
nostrils,  but  coukl  perceive  no  breath  ;  she  thought  her  to  be  in  a  fit,  and 
doubted  whether  she  was  alive  or  dead.  The  next  day  this  dying  woman 
told  her  mother  that  she  had  been  at  home  with  her  children.     '  That  is 

'  -:^  This  letter,  which  must  be  presumed  to  be  correctly  quoted,  cannot  be  impugned 
on  the  ground  of  Baxter's  own  credulity  and  prejudice  in  respect  of  many  of  the  matters 
dealt  with  in  his  book  ;  as  to  which  see  Hutchinson's  excellent  remarks,  historical  Essay 
concerning  Witchcraft  (London,  1720),  pp.  79-101. 

v.]  VISUAL  GASES.  559 

impossible,'  said  the  mother,  '  for  you  have  been  here  in  bed  all  the  while.' 
'  Yes,'  replied  the  other,  '  but  I  was  with  them  last  night  while  I  was 
asleep.' 

"  The  nurse  at  Rochester,  widow  Alexander  by  name,  affirms  and  says 
she  will  take  her  oath  of  it,  before  a  magistrate,  and  receive  the  sacrament 
upon  it,  that  a  little  before  2  o'clock  that  morning  she  saw  the  likeness  of 
the  said  Mary  Goffe  come  out  of  the  next  chamber  (where  the  elder  child  lay 
in  a  bed  by  itself,  the  door  being  left  open),  and  stood  by  her  bedside  for 
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  the  younger  child  was  there  lying  by  her  ;  her 
eyes  moved,  and  her  mouth  went,  but  she  said  nothing.  The  nurse,  more- 
over, says  that  she  was  perfectly  awake ;  it  was  then  daylight,  being  one 
of  the  longest  days  in  the  year.  She  sat  up  in  her  bed,  and  looked 
steadfastly  upon  the  apparition ;  at  that  time  she  heard  the  bridge  clock 
strike  2,  and  a  while  after  said,  '  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  what  art  thou  ? '  Thereupon  the  appearance  removed  and 
went  away  ;  she  slipped  on  her  clothes  and  followed,  but  what  became 
of  it  she  cannot  tell.  Then,  and  not  before,  she  began  to  be  grievously 
affrighted,  and  went  out  of  doors,  and  walked  upon  the  wharf  (the  house 
is  just  by  the  river-side)  for  some  hours,  only  going  in  now  and  then  to 
look  at  the  children.  At  5  o'clock  she  went  to  a  neighbour's  and  knocked 
at  the  door,  but  they  would  not  rise ;  at  6  she  went  again,  then  they  rose 
and  let  her  in.  She  related  to  them  all  that  had  passed ;  they  would 
persuade  her  she  was  mistaken,  or  dreamt ;  but  she  confidently  affirmed, 
'  If  ever  I  saw  her  in  all  my  life,  I  saw  her  this  night.' 

"  One  of  those  to  whom  she  made  the  relation  (Mary,  the  wife  of  J. 
Sweet)  had  a  messenger  who  came  from  Mulling  that  forenoon,  to  let  her 
know  her  neighbour  Goffe  was  dying,  and  desired  to  speak  with  her  ;  she 
went  over  the  same  day,  and  found  her  just  departing.  The  mother, 
amongst  other  discourses,  related  to  her  how  much  her  daughter  had 
longed  to  see  her  children,  and  said  she  had  seen  them.  This  brought  to 
Mrs.  Sweet's  mind  what  the  nurse  had  told  her  that  morning ;  for,  till 
then,  she  had  not  thought  fit  to  mention  it,  but  disguised  it  rather,  as  the 
woman's  disturbed  imagination. 

"  The  substance  of  this  I  had  related  to  me  by  John  Carpenter,  the 
father  of  the  deceased,  the  next  day  after  the  burial — July  2.  I  fully 
discoursed  the  matter  with  the  nurse  and  two  neighbours,  to  whose  house 
she  went  that  morning. 

"  Two  days  after,  I  had  it  from  the  mother,  the  minister  that  was  with 
her  in  the  evening,  and  the  woman  who  sat  up  with  her  last  that  night. 
They  all  agree  in  the  same  story,  and  every  one  helps  to  strengthen  the 
other's  testimony. 

"  They  all  appear  to  be  sober,  intelligent  persons,  far  enough  off  from 
designing  to  impose  a  cheat  upon  the  world,  or  to  manage  a  lie  ;  and  what 
temptation  they  should  lie  under  for  so  doing  I  cannot  conceive. 

"Thomas  Tilson." 

[This  case  may  possibly  have  been  reciprocal ;  but  proof  is  lacking  that 
the  dying  woman's  sense  of  having  seen  her  children  was  anything  but 
purely  subjective.^     See  p.  1  56.] 

1  Mr.  Tilson's  case  finds  a  curiously  close  parallel  in  the  following  narrative,  abridged 
from  the  words  of  the  late  Mrs.  Charles  Fox,  of  Trebah,  Falmouth,  (a  lady  well  known 
to  Mr.  Myers,)  who  had  heard  the  account  from  one  of  the  percipients.     The  Fox  family 

560  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

Theodore  A.  D'Aubigne,  in  his  Histoire  Universelle  (1616-20),  Vol.  II., 
p.  143,  relates  the  following  incident,  as  told  to  him  privately  by  the  King 
of  Navarre. 

"  Le  Roi  estant  en  Avignon,  le  23  Decembre,  1574,  y  mourut  Charles, 
Cardinal  de  Lorraine.  .  .  .  J'afferme  sur  la  parole  du  Roi  le  second 
prodige  [the  first  was  a  violent  storm].  .  .  .  c'est  que  la  Roine 
[Catherine  di  Medici]  s'estait  mise  au  lit  de  meilleure  heure  que  de  cous- 
tume,  aiant  a  son  coucher  entr'  autres  personnes  de  marque  le  Roi  de 
Navarre,  I'Archevesque  de  Lyon,  les  Dames  de  Rets,  de  Lignerolles  et  de 
Saunes,  deux  desquelles  ont  confirm^  ce  discours ;  comme  elle  estait  pressee 
de  donner  le  bon  soir,  elle  se  jetta  d'un  tressaut  sur  son  chenet,  met  les 
mains  audevant  de  son  visage,  et  avec  un  cri  violent  appella  a  son  secours 
ceux  qui  I'assistoient,  leur  voulant  monstrer  au  pied  du  lit  le  Cardinal,  qui 
lui  tendoit  la  main,  elle  s'escriant  plusieurs  fois,  '  Monsieur  le  Cardinal,  je 
n'ai  que  faire  avec  vous ' ;  le  Roi  de  Navarre  envoie  au  mesme  temps  un  de 
ses  gentils  hommes  au  logis  du  Cardinal,  qui  rapporta  comment  il  avoit 
expir^  au  mesme  point." 

[The  Queen  was  probably  aware  that  the  Cardinal's  death,  of  which 
she  had  been  very  desirous,  was  imminent.] 

was  one  in  which  such  a  tradition  as  this  would  be  likely  to  be  soberly  preserved  ;  but  the 
youth  of  the  original  witness,  and  the  loss  of  the  contemporary  records,  make  it  impossible 
to  reckon  the  case  as  evidence. 

"  In  1739  Mrs.  Birkbeck,  wife  of  William  Birkbeck,  banker,  of  Settle,  and  a  member 
of  the  Society  of  Friends,  was  taken  ill  and  died  at  Cockermouth,  while  returning  from  a 
journey  to  Scotland,  which  she  had  undertaken  alone — her  husband  and  three  children, 
aged  seven,  five,  and  four  years  respectively,  remaining  at  Settle.  The  friends  at  whose 
house  the  death  occurred  made  notes  of  every  circumstance  attending  Mrs.  Birkbeck's  last 
hours,  so  that  the  accuracy  of  the  several  statements  as  to  time  as  well  as  place  was  beyond 
the  doubtfulness  of  man's  memory,  or  of  any  even  unconscious  attempt  to  bring  them  into 
agreement  with  each  other. 

"  One  morning,  between  7  and  8  o'clock,  the  relation  to  whom  the  care  of  the  children 
of  Settle  had  been  entrusted,  and  who  kept  a  minute  journal  of  all  that  concerned  them, 
went  into  their  bedroom  as  usual,  and  found  them  all  sitting  up  in  their  beds  in  great 
excitement  and  delight.  '  Mamma  has  been  here  ! '  they  cried,  and  the  little  one  said, 
'  She  called,  "  Come  Esther  !  "  '  Nothing  could  make  them  doubt  the  fact,  and  it  was 
carefully  noted  down,  to  entertain  the  mother  on  her  return  home.  That  same  morning, 
as  their  mother  lay  on  her  dying  bed  at  Cockermouth,  she  said,  '  I  should  be  ready  to  go 
if  I  could  but  see  my  children.'  She  then  closed  her  eyes,  to  reopen  them,  as  they  thought, 
no  more.  But  after  10  minutes  of  perfect  stillness  she  looked  up  brightly  and  said,  '  I  am 
ready  now  ;  I  have  been  with  my  children  ' ;  and  then  at  once  peacefully  passed  away. 
When  the  notes  taken  at  the  two  places  were  compared,  the  day,  hour,  and  minutes  were 
the  same. 

"  One  of  the  three  children  was  my  grandmother,  nee  Sarah  Birkbeck,  afterwards  the 
wife  of  Dr.  Fell,  of  Ulverston.  From  her  lips  I  heard  the  above  almost  literally  as  I 
have  repeated  it.  The  eldest  was  Morris  Birkbeck,  afterwards  of  Guildford.  Both  these 
lived  to  old  age,  and  retained  to  the  last  so  solemn  and  reverential  a  remembrance  of  the 
circumstance  that  they  rarely  would  speak  of  it.  Esther,  the  youngest,  died  soon  after. 
Her  brother  and  sister  heard  the  child  say  that  her  mother  called  her,  but  could  not  speak 
with  any  certainty  of  having  themselves  heard  the  words,  nor  were  sensible  of  more  than 
their  mother's  standing  there  and  looking  on  them." 

VI.] 

CHAPTER   VI. 

AUDITOKY  AND  TACTILE  CASES. 

§  1.  Most  of  the  following  cases  are  on  jfirst-hand  testimony ; 
but  some  of  them  are  remote  in  date  ;  in  some  a  certain  amount 
of  anxiety  may  have  predisposed  the  percipient  to  hallucination ; 
and  in  others  the  degree  of  exactitude  in  the  coincidence  is  not 
certainly  established.  I  will  give  first  a  group  where  the  impression 
was  of  distinct  words. 

(613)  From  Mr.  M.  P.  Stephenson,  8,  Southfield  Road,  Gotham, 
Bristol. 

"January  31st,  1884. 

"  On  or  about  the  11th  November,  1882,  I  was  awakened  by  two  or 
three  knocks  at  my  bedroom  door,i  and  a  voice  called,  '  Pa  !  pa !  '  I 
called  out,  '  Who's  there  1 '  but  no  answer  came.  (I  was  sleeping  alone, 
as  my  wife  was  ill,  and  slept  in  an  adjoining  room  with  a  daughter.)  At 
breakfast  I  inquired  if  either  of  them  had  called  me ;  they  had  not  done 
so.  '  Then,'  said  I  '  someone  else  did,  and  I  fear  we  shall  have  bad  news 
from  New  Zealand,'  where  our  two  sons  were  living. 

"  I  awaited  anxiously  the  arrival  of  the  next  mail,  which  came  in  the 
middle  of  December,  and  then  we  had  what  I  believed  to  be  the  solving 
of  the  mystery.  Our  eldest  son,  on  the  21st  October,  1882,  was  going  to 
see  his  son  at  Pahnerston,  a  town  some  60  or  70  miles  from  Dunedin,  and 
midway  the  train  got  off  the  line  ;  some  carriages  were  smashed.  He  was 
severely  shaken,  but  felt  nothing  seriously  the  matter  until  two  days  after 
the  mishap,  on  his  return  home.  He  was  taken  with  cold  shivering,  and 
the  doctors  said  they  were  afraid  of  erysipelas  and  blood-poisoning  setting 
in.  Such  was  the  account  of  the  case  in  our  first  letter.  We  looked 
with  great  concern  for  the  next  mail  which  was  due  on  the  2nd  January, 
1883,  although  in  my  own  mind  I  seemed  sure  he  was  dead;  and  on 
Christmas  Day  I  said  to  a  friend,  who  dined  with  us,  that  I  believed  he 
had  been  in  his  grave  six  weeks,  which  was  the  fact.  The  news  came  that 
our  son  died  on  the  11th  of  November  and  was  buried  on  the  14th. 

"  M.  P.  Stephenson." 

1  Where  the  rousing  from  sleep  is  as  sudden  as  this,  an  impression  which  follows  it 
may  perhaps  fairly  be  reckoned  a  waking  experience. 

VOL.    II.  2    o 

562  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Bristol  Mercury  and  Daily  Post  that 
Mr.  Stephenson's  son  died  in  New  Zealand  on  November  11,  1882. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Stephenson  adds  : — 

"  I  have  been  very  sorry  that  I  did  not  make  a  note  of  the  exact  time 
of  the  voice  and  raps  at  my  bedroom  door.  I  have  been  trying  to 
calculate  it  exactly,  but  my  experience  of  memory  is  that  in  old  age  we 
can  recollect  things  that  occurred  50  or  60  years  ago  more  distinctly  than 
events  which  happened  two  or  three  months  back.  My  firm  impression  is 
that  what  I  heard  was  about  6  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  11th 
November,  and  his  death  took  place  at  11  or  12  o'clock  on  the  11th,  New 
Zealand  time.  I  have  searched  for  the  letter  which  stated  the  time,  but 
have  not  been  able  to  find  it." 

[If  Mr.  Stephen-son  is  right  as  to  the  day  of  his  experience,  and  as  to 
the  hour  of  the  death,  the  sounds  followed  the  death  by  5  or  6  hours.  In 
an  interview  with  Mr.  Podmore,  he  stated  that  both  his  wife  and  daughter 
clearly  remember  the  incident ;  but  on  religious  grounds  they  decline  to 
give  written  testimony.] 

(614)  From  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roberts,  of  New  Berlin,  Chenango  Co.,  New 
York.  "  March,  1884. 

"  During  the  Civil  War  in  America  a  young  man  of  the  name  of 
George  Roberts  enlisted  on  the  Union  side.  He  was  with  those  troops 
when  Port  Hudson,  Louisiana,  was  attacked,  and  in  an  assault  made  upon 
that  place  on  Sunday,  June  14th,  1863,  he  was  killed.  He  fell  about  10 
o'clock  that  morning. 

"  His  parents,  living  in  Chenango  Co.,  State  of  New  York,  knew  that 
he  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Port  Hudson,  and  that  there  might  be  a 
battle  some  time,  but  nothing  more. 

"  On  Sunday,  June  14th,  1863,  Mrs.  Roberts  was  getting  ready  for 
church,  and  the  first  bell  that  rings  a  quarter  before  10  had  just  ceased, 
when  Mrs.  R.  heard  George's  voice  calling  to  her,  '  Mother !  Mother !  ' 
It  was  perfectly  distinct  and  clear,  as  though  in  the  room.  The  fright 
and  conviction  of  her  son's  death  afiected  her  so  much  that  she 
became  ill. 

"  Shortly  after  this,  came  the  news  of  the  death  of  George  before  Port 
Hudson,  at  the  very  hour  that  his  mother  heard  his  voice  in  her  room 
calling  her. 

"These  statements  are  correct,  as  they  occurred,  June  14th,  1863. 

"Jonathan  Roberts. 
"  Martha  Roberts." 

The  Rev.  R.  Whittingham,  of  Pikesville,  Maryland,  a  Corresponding 
Member  of  the  S.P.R.,  who  procured  this  narrative  for  us,  vouches  for 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roberts  as  "  extremely  respectable,  worthy,  well-to-do 
people  "  ;  and  says  : — 

"  I  know  Mr.  Roberts  said  that  his  son  was  shot  just  at  10  o'clock ; 
for  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  having  a  strange  feeling  of  someone  being  behind 
hira  in  the  church  tower  as  he  was  ringing  the  first  bell  at,  or  for,  10 
o'clock,  and  he  said  that  was  the  hour  that  George  was  shot.     This  being 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AFD  TACTILE  CASES.  563 

only  a  feeling,  or  impression,  on  his  part,  I  did  not  think  it  worth  mention- 
ing, as  it  could  be  easily  imagined  afterward ;  but  it  fixed  the  time  of 
George's  death  on  my  memory.  That  was  the  solitary  instance  of  halluci- 
nation that  they  have  ever  experienced.  They  are  by  no  means  imagi- 
native or  credulous  in  temperament  or  habit." 

[If  the  coincidence  here  was  as  close  as  is  alleged,  the  case  is  of  some 
weight,  even  though  the  mother's  mind  may  have  been  to  some  extent  pre- 
occupied with  the  thought  of  her  son.] 

(615)  Extract  from  a  paragraph  in  the  Times  of  Sept.  11,  1876,  which 
recorded  the  funeral,  at  Aleppo,  of  Mr.  George  Smith,  the  eminent 
Assyriologist. 

"  A  most  striking  coincidence  may  here  be  mentioned  without  com- 
ment. A  young  German  Assyriologist  of  the  highest  promise.  Dr. 
Friedrich  Delitzsch,  is  now,  for  the  second  time,  in  this  country,  having 
been  sent,  as  on  his  former  visit,  by  the  King  of  Saxony  to  study  the 
arrow-headed  inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum.  During  his  former  stay 
here  last  year,  which  was  noticed  at  the  time  in  our  columns,  Dr.  Delitzsch 
and  Mr.  George  Smith  naturally  became  fast  friends,  and  the  Leipzig 
savant  and  his  brother  Hermann  were  chosen  by  Mr.  Smith  to  introduce  to 
German  readers  his  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,  which  has  accordingly 
just  been  published  at  Leipzig  under  their  joint  editorship. 

"  On  the  19th  ult.,  the  day  of  Mr.  George  Smith's  death.  Dr.  Delitzsch 
was  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  Mr.  William  St.  Chad  Boscawen,  who  is 
also  a  rising  Assyriologist.  Mr.  Boscawen  resides  in  Kentish  Town,  and 
in  passing  the  end  of  Crogsland  Road,  in  which  Mr.  George  Smith  lived, 
and  within  about  a  stone's  throw  of  the  house,  his  German  friend  said  he 
suddenly  heard  a  most  piercing  cry,  which  thrilled  him  to  the  marrow, 
'  Herr  Dr.  Delitzsch.'  The  time — for  as  soon  as  he  got  over  the  shock  he 
looked  at  his  watch— was  between  6.45  and  7  p.m.,  and  Mr.  Parsons  gives 
the  hour  of  Mr.  Smith's  death  at  6  p.m.  Dr.  Delitzsch,  who  strongly  dis- 
avows any  superstitious  leanings,  was  ashamed  to  mention  the  circumstance 
to  Mr.  Boscawen  on  reaching  that  gentleman's  house,  although  on  his  return 
home  he  owns  that  his  nervous  apprehensions  of  some  mournful  event 
in  his  own  family  found  relief  in  tears,  and  that  he  recorded  all  the  facts 
in  his  note-book  that  same  night.  Dr.  Delitzsch  told  the  story  at  our 
informant's  breakfast-table,  with  all  the  circumstances  mentioned  above, 
including  the  hour  at  which  he  heard  the  shrill  cry.  He  distinctly  denied 
having  been  thinking  of  Mr.  George  Smith  at  the  time." 

In  January,  1885,  (having  failed  to  elicit  from  Herr  Delitzsch  any 
reply  to  several  previous  applications,)  we  sent  him  a  copy  of  this  extract, 
telling  him  that  we  proposed  to  state,  in  reprinting  it,  that  it  had  been 
first  forwarded  to  him,  with  a  request  that  he  would  contradict  it  if  it  did 
not  truthfully  represent  the  facts.  No  reply  has  been  received  ;  and 
Mr.  Gortz,  of  the  British  Museum,  tells  us  that  Herr  Delitzsch  expressed 
to  him  a  reluctance  to  write  on  the  subject.  We  may  presume,  how- 
ever, that,  had  the  statement  been  substantially  inaccurate,  he  would  have 
said  so. 

[If  the  hours  are  correctly  given,  the  cry  was  heard  about  3|  hours 
after  the  death.]  l'^^^;-  'v:;,P;J^_^ 

VOL.  II.  2  o  2 

664  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(616)  From  Miss  Bushell,  Hythe,  Kent.  u  X885. 

"On  the  evening  of  Feb.  18,  1863,  I  distinctly  heard  myself  called, 
and  recognised  the  voice  as  that  of  Dr.  Harding,  a  retired  physician,  who 
lived  in  the  same  town  [Ramsgate,  and  in  the  next  street].  The  voice 
seemed  to  come  from  the  staircase.  I  was  walking  along  a  passage,  and 
turned  towards  the  stairs,  so  real  did  it  appear ;  though  I  could  hardly 
imagine  Dr.  Harding  to  be  in  the  house.  I  knew  him  slightly.  He  was  a 
kind,  friendly  man,  and  he  always  spoke  to  me  if  we  met  in  the  streets, 
addressing  me  as  '  Bushell ' — which  is  the  name  I  heard  that  evening.  The 
next  day,  I  heard  that  Dr.  Harding  had  died  the  preceding  afternoon  or 
evening.  I  cannot  fix  the  precise  hour.  Though  out  of  health,  he  was 
not  confined  to  the  house,  and  I  had  met  him  out  of  doors  about  three  days 
before  the  occurrence,  so  that  I  was  not  by  any  means  expecting  his  death. 

"This  is  the  only  hallucination  of  the  senses  that  I  have  ever  ex- 
perienced. "  Matilda  Bushell." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Dr.  Harding  died  (aged  50) 
on  Feb.  20,  1863.  Miss  Bushell  is  certain  (and  this  is  a  point  which 
would  be  likely  to  be  rightly  observed  at  the  time)  that  her  experience  was 
on  the  evening  before  the  morning  on  which  she  heard  of  the  death — that 
no  longer  interval  elapsed  ;  and  she  has  no  separate  recollection  of  the  date 
of  her  experience.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  "  18th"  in  the  first 
line  of  the  account  is  wrong,  and  that  the  coincidence  was  a  close  one. 
Not,  however,  so  close  as  was  at  first  represented  ;  for  Miss  Bushell's  later 
impression  is  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning — 
i.e.,  some  hours  after  her  evening  experience  of  (presumably)  Feb.  19.  In 
answer  to  an  inquiry,  she  says  that  she  did  not  mention  what  she  had  heard 
to  anyone  before  the  death  was  known. 

(617)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Elfanwalt,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton   Abbot. 

"1883. 

"  I  was  residing  in  England,  while  my  son  [who  was  one  of  the 
percipients  in  case  310]  was  a  chaplain  in  India.  I  one  day  experienced 
a  prayerful  and  earnest  desire,  in  going  up  to  the  altar  one  Easter  Day,  that 
somehow,  I  knew  not  how,  my  son  might  be  permitted  to  communicate 
me ;  and  as  I  received  without  raising  my  eyes  to  the  celebrant,  I  felt 
my  desire  granted.  In  due  course  of  post,  my  son  asked  me  if  I  could 
explain  what  had  occurred  to  him  at  about  the  time  when  he  knew  I  must 
have  been  making  my  Easter  Communion.  While  preparing  for  the 
evening  service,  and  not  thinking  of  me  or  home,  he  heard  me  call  him  by 
name,  not  as  though  in  any  distress,  but  with  a  tone  of  great  urgency. 
Instantly  remembering  how  I  was  then  occupied,  he  was  with  me  in  spirit, 
and,  though  unconsciously,  was  permitted  to  satisfy  my  longing.  After 
this,  though  he  knew  there  was  no  one  in  the  house,  he  made  diligent 
search  to  prove  to  others  that  it  was  no  delusion.  The  fact  that  Cardinal 
Borromeo,  while  preaching  elsewhere,  had  communicated  the  dying  Pope 
was  not  known  to  me  for  many  years  after." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mrs.  Fagan  says  that  she  made  her  Easter 
Communion  between  noon  and  1  p.m.;  which  would  synchronise  with  6-7 
p.m.  in  the  place  where  her  son  was.     The  year,  she  thinks,  was  1874. 

[This  clearly  must  not  be  reckoned  as  a  reciprocal  case,  since  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  Mrs.  Fagan's  own  impression  to  have  been  anything 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  565 

but  subjective.  That  impression  is,  however,  of  importance,  as  indicating 
the  intensity  of  her  feeling  at  the  moment.  Her  son  has  occasionally  had 
subjective  auditory  hallucinations,  but  not  sufficiently  often  to  diminish 
appreciably  the  force  (such  as  it  is)  of  the  present  coincidence.  The  case 
is  of  course  not  one  on  which  much  stress  can  be  laid.] 

In  the  following  example,  the  fact  of  non-recognition  tells  against 
the  supposition  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to  anxiety.  As  for  the 
sense  oi  feeling  someone's  presence,  I  have  already  pointed  out  that 
a  faint  auditory  impression  is  sufficient  to  account  for  it  ;^  and  even 
the  "  feeling  someone  stooping  over  "  (which  occurs  again  in  the  next 
case)  need  not  imply  any  distinct  hallucination  of  touch. 

(618)  From  Miss  Summerbell,  140,  Kensington  Park  Road,  W.  (men- 
tioned in  Yol.  I.,  p.  507).  As  the  more  distinct  part  of  the  impression 
seems  to  have  been  received  after  she  had  not  only  been  woke,  but  had 
herself  uttered  a  couple  of  sentences,  the  case  may  be  fairly  reckoned  in 
the  waking  class.  "1882. 

"  A  lady,  to  whom  I  was  much  attached,  and  who  had  had  partial  care 
of  me  during  some  part  of  my  early  youth,  had  for  some  years  suffered 
from  a  complaint  which  at  last  necessitated  a  surgical  operation.  This 
operation  was  performed  early  in  August,  1877,  by  Dr.  Spencer  Wells ; 
my  friend  was  in  a  house,  chosen  by  Dr.  Wells  for  the  purpose,  in  Seymour 
Street.  The  operation  was  successful,  and  we  had  the  assurance  of  Dr. 
Wells,  and  of  the  other  doctor  who  attended  her,  that  she  was  doing  well. 
I  was  staying  with  her  nephew,  at  Weybridge,  at  the  time.  Every  day 
we  heard  better  accounts  of  the  patient.  On  Saturday  evening,  Mr.  T., 
with  whom  I  was  staying,  received  a  letter  saying  that  his  aunt  was  out 
of  danger,  and  appointing  the  following  Tuesday  for  him  and  me  to  go  and 
see  her. 

"  We  went  to  bed  in  excellent  spirits,  and  I  slept  at  once.  I  was 
awakened,  in  the  dim  dawn,  by  feeling  someone  stooping  over  me. 
Thinking  it  was  Mrs.  T.  who  had  come  into  the  room  for  some  purpose,  I 
said,  aloud,  '  Is  that  you,  Annie  1 '  I  received  no  answer,  but  I  felt, 
though  I  could  not  see,  someone  close  to  me.  I  spoke  again,  and  I 
distinctly  heard  a  voice  whisper,  '  Soon  will  you  and  I  be  lying.  Each 
within  our  narrow  bed.'  I  was  terrified.  I  looked  at  my  watch  to  see  if 
it  was  nearly  time  for  people  to  be  moving  about.  It  was  4  o'clock.  I 
could  not  sleep.  I  felt  horrified  and  miserable,  but  oddly,  I  never  thought 
of  my  friend.  When  I  went  down  in  the  morning,  my  friends  remarked 
that  I  was  silent  and  dull.  I  said  I  was  sure  something  was  going  to  take 
place,  and  at  length  I  told  them  what  had  happened.  Of  course  they 
laughed.  I  went  to  church  with  Mr.  T.,  and  the  first  hymn  sung  was  the 
one  I  had  fancied  I  heard  in  the  night,  beginning  '  Days  and  moments 
quickly  flying.'  This  made  me  more  depressed,  but  I  still  did  not  think 
of  my  friend. 

"  On  Monday  we  went  on  the  river  in  a  small  boat,  and  I  told  Mr. 
T.    I    knew  we  should  be  drowned    because  of  my    presentiment.      We 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  528  second  note ;  and  compare  case  172. 

566  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

however,  arrived  safe  at  home  at  7  p.m.,  when  Mr.  T.  found  a  letter, 
saying  that  at  10  on  Saturday  night,  his  aunt  had  suddenly  exhibited 
bad  symptoms,  and  that  she  died  at  4  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning. 

"L.    D     SUMMERBELL." 

[The  Times  obituary  records  that  the  death  took  place,  in  Somerset 
Street  (not  Seymour  Street),  on  Aug.  4,  1877.  This  was  a  Saturday,  not 
a  Sunday ;  therefore,  if  Miss  Summerbell  is  correct  as  to  the  hour  of  her 
impression,  the  coincidence  was  less  close  than  she  represents,  as  the  death 
must  have  taken  place  before  midnight. 

We  cannot  obtain  Mr.  T.'s  corroboration,  as  he  died  in  the  year 
following  the  occurrence.] 

The  next  two  records  seem  to  illustrate  the  occurrence  of  several 
similar  telepathic  experiences  to  the  same  percipient  (compare 
No.  279).  The  cases  not  being  strong  ones,  I  have  included  each 
set  under  a  single  evidential  number. 

(619)  From  Mrs.  E.  M.  Maunsell,  Ballywilliam,  Rathkeale,  Ireland, 
who  says  of  herself,  "  I  am  neither  nervous  nor  superstitious,  but  a  very 
matter-of-fact  person."  "  October  27th,  1884. 

"  My  eldest  sister  was  paying  us  a  visit,  when  she  was  taken  ill  with 
internal  cramp  ;  she  called  to  me  in  a  peculiar  choking  voice ;  we  used 
remedies,  and  she  soon  recovered.  About  a  year  afterwards,  she  was 
staying  with  another  sister,  when  one  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  distinct 
impression  of  my  sister  stooping  over  me,  and  calling  '  Eliza  '  in  the  same 
choking  voice.  I  sleep  very  soundly,  but  I  started  up  wide  awake,  and 
again  the  voice  seemed  to  call  me  from  the  open  window,  faint  and  choking, 
'  Eliza.'  I  am  a  rather  stoical  person  in  times  of  danger  or  fright,  so  I 
merely  said  to  myself  '  Isabella  is  ill,'  and  was  soon  again  fast  asleep. 
The  next  time  I  saw  my  sister,  she  told  me  that  the  very  night  I  had 
heard  her  call,  and  nearly  to  the  hour,  (for  I  had  heard  the  clock  strike 
12)  she  had  been  taken  ill,  and  had  been  only  able  to  stagger  out  of  bed 
to  call  for  help.  This  was  my  first  experience  of  this  kind,  that  I  can 
remember ;  I  was  then  a  young  girl.  I  was  not  particularly  attached  to 
my  sister,  for  she  had  married  young  and  left  home  ;  but  she  always  looked 
up  to  me  and  considered  me  a  great  authority  on  most  points. 

"  The  second  instance  also  concerned  my  eldest  sister.  My  father,  at 
the  time  of  which  I  write,  was  living  in  Limerick,  as  did  also  my  sister. 
One  evening  about  8,  I  left  the  room  to  make  the  tea  ;  passing  the  foot  of 
the  staircase,  I  heard  my  sister's  voice,  hushed  and  distinct,  call  '  Eliza.'  I 
listened,  but  the  call  was  not  repeated.  I  thought  at  once,  '  Isabella  is  ill, 
and  will  send  for  me.'  I  hurried,  and  prepared  tea,  and  I  well  remember 
taking  a  second  slice  of  bread,  for,  I  thought,  I  may  be  up  with  her  all 
night.  Less  than  half  an  hour  after  a  note  was  brought  my  father,  I 
watched  him,  and  when  he  had  read  it  asked,  '  Is  Isabella  ill  ■? '  '  Yes,' 
my  father  replied,  '  she  is  very  ill,  and  is  calling  for  you.'  My  father,  who 
was  a  doctor,  accompanied  me  to  her  house ;  we  doctored  her,  and  she 
recovered  after  an  illness  of  four  or  five  days. 

"  My  father  is  long  dead  ;  so  is  my  eldest  sister.  The  events  occurred 
over  20  years  ago,  many  years  before  my  marriage." 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  567 

On  Dec.  19,  1885,  Mrs.  Maunsell  wrote  :— 

"  On  another  occasion,  when  living  with  my  father  and  mother,  I 
heard  my  mother  call  me  ;  I  found  her  ghastly  pale,  and  very  ill ;  but  she 
assured  me  she  had  not  called  me ;  as  indeed,  she  was  too  faint  to  raise 
her  voice.  On  another  occasion,  my  brother-in-law,  who  had  gone  to 
London,  and  was  very  ill,  though  it  was  kept  a  secret,  had  returned  on  his 
way  home,  as  far  as  Dublin.  I  was  not  thinking  at  all  about  him  ;  but, 
one  day  in  this  house,  I  was  walking  from  the  office  to  the  back  door  of 
the  dining-room  (mid-day),  when  I  heard  him  call  loudly  his  wife's  name, 
'  Martha.'  I  wrote  at  once  to  her  (she  had  not  accompanied  him)  to  make 
inquiries.  She  had  received  a  letter  that  morning,  [to  the  effect  that]  he 
would  return  next  evening,  Saturday,  and  was  quite  strong  after  his  trip. 
The  following  Tuesday  I  received  a  letter  from  my  cousin  saying  that  Mr, 
Caswell  [the  brother-in-law]  was  found  dead  in  his  armchair,  partly 
dressed,  at  his  lodgings  in  Dublin,  on  Sunday  morning.  I  had  not  known 
he  was  ill  at  all.  "  Eliza  Maunsell." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mrs.  Maunsell  states  positively  that  she  has 
never  had  any  hallucination  of  the  sort  except  on  these  four  occasions,  (and 
possibly  one  other,  when  what  she  heard  may  have  been  a  real  call).  She 
adds : — 

"  I  regret  extremely  that  I  can  procure  for  you  no  corroborative 
evidence  about  my  brother-in-law.  My  sister  is  far  too  nervous  a  person 
for  me  to  have  told  her  at  the  time.  The  event  [i.e.,  the  death]  occurred 
on  the  9th  of  August,  1874." 

[We  have  verified  this  date  in  the  FreemarCs  Journal,  which  describes 
the  death  as  having  been  rather  sudden.  Mrs.  Maunsell  heard  the  voice 
3  or  4  days  before ;  and  though  her  brother-in-law  was  probably  at  that 
time  in  a  somewhat  abnormal  state,  the  accuracy  of  coincidence  which 
(if  correctly  remembered)  would  justify  us  in  regarding  the  former 
experiences  as  very  probably  telepathic,  is  lacking  to  this  one.] 

(620)  From  Mr.  J.  Augustus  Edmonds,  16,  Waterloo  Road  South, 
Wolverhampton.  The  evidence  is  third-hand,  and  is  admitted  by  special 
exception  (Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note).  Mr.  Edmonds  received  the  account  of 
the  second  of  the  two  incidents  narrated  from  both  his  father  and  brother. 

1883. 

Mr.  Edmonds  j&rst  describes  a  very  serious  illness  which  attacked  his 
father  (the  Rev.  T.  0.  Edmonds,  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church,  St. 
Andrew's  Street,  Cambridge,)  in  the  year  1831.  During  the  illness  a 
letter  was  received  from  a  friend  of  his  father's,  the  Rev.  Josiah  Wilkinson, 
of  Saffron  Walden,  Essex. 

"  It  was  to  this  effect.  I  don't  vouch  for  the  perfect  verbal  accuracy. 
It  was  addressed  to  my  mother. 

"  '  I  have  been  made  aware  ^  of  the  alarming  illness  of  your  dear 
husband,  but  I  have  the  happiness  to  assure  you  that  his  sickness  is  not 
unto  death.'     The  note  concluded  with  a  message  of  love,  when  my  father 

1  Mr.  Edmonds  does  not  know  whether  Mr.  Wilkinson  had  heard  of  the  illness  in 
any  normal  way,  or  whether  the  first  intimation  of  this  fact,  as  well  as  the  assurance  of 
recovery,  was  communicated  in  the  abnormal  manner  afterwards  described.  The 
assurance  of  recovery  may  easily,  of  course,  have  been  subjectively  imagined,  and  in  no 
way  concerns  us  here. 

568  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

should  be  able  to  receive  it,  and  of  sympathy  to  herself.  This  note  arrived 
when  my  father  was  to  all  appearances  as  near  his  end  as  at  any  period  of 
his  illness. 

"  When  my  father  was  able  to  see  a  few  friends,  Mr.  Wilkinson  came 
over  and  urged  him,  as  soon  as  he  was  permitted  to  move,  to  come  with 
my  brother  Cyrus,  his  second  son,  and  visit  him,  which  they  did.  These 
three  being  alone,  my  father  mentioned  this  note  and  said  it  very  much 
surprised  him,  on  account  of  the  singularly  confident  manner  in  which  his 
recovery  was  spoken  of.  To  which  Mr.  Wilkinson  replied  that  in  several 
instances  he  had  been  told  by  an  audible  voice  of  some  fact  specially 
concerning  his  interests  or  welfare,  a  voice  which  none  but  himself  heard, 
and  there  was  no  visible  presence.  These  intimations,  he  said,  had  always 
been  made  to  him  during  his  family  worship,  and  (I  believe  I  am  right  in 
saying)  that  they  had  never  been  mentioned  out  of  his  own  family.  He 
said,  however,  '  I  will  relate  one  such  case. 

"  '  I  was  kneeling  at  prayer  one  morning  with  my  family,  when  a  voice 
said,  "  Your  brother  is  dead."^  I  had  but  one  brother,  to  whom  I  was  greatly 
attached,  who  lived  at  the  West  End  of  London.  The  shock  was  so  great 
that  I  sank  on  the  floor  in  a  swoon.  On  recovery  I  desired  my  wife  to  put 
the  needful  things  into  my  portmanteau,  and  send  to  stop  the  Cambridge 
coach  to  London,  a  short  distance  from  the  house,  telling  her  that  my 
brother  was  dead,  and  that  I  must  go  to  London.  On  arrival  I  drove  to 
the  house,  found  the  blinds  closely  drawn,  and  on  coming  to  the  door  the 
servant  expressed  great  relief  at  seeing  me,  saying  that  his  master  had 
died  suddenly  in  the  night  and  his  mistress  was  in  a  most  sad  condition. 

"  'Now,'  Mr.  Wilkinson  said,  '  on  the  morning  on  which  I  wrote  that 
note  to  your  wife,  at  morning  prayer  with  the  family,  a  voice  said,  "  Your 
dearest  friend  is  very  ill,  but  his  sickness  is  not  unto  death."  I  heard  no 
more,  but  as  soon  as  our  worship  was  concluded  I  wrote  that  note.' 

"J.  A.  Edmonds." 

§  2.  In  the  next  two  cases,  the  impression,  if  really  a  hallucina- 
tion, seems  to  have  represented  a  sound  which  was  actually  in  the 
agent's  ears  at  the  time. 

(621)  From  Mrs.  Malcolm,  Wribbenhall,  Bewdley,  (mentioned  above, 
p.  79).  "August  5th,  1885. 

"During  the  commencement  of  the  year  1849  (I  being  then  a  young 
girl),  I  had  a  tedious  illness.  On  one  occasion,  to  relieve  a  congested  lung, 
I  had  a  blister  applied,  and,  in  consequence,  was  prevented  on  that  night 
from  obtaining  sleep.  One  of  my  brothers  was  with  the  army  in  the 
Punjaub  at  that  time,  and  my  thoughts  were  constantly  with  him,  and 
doubtless  I  followed  the  events  of  the  war  with  intense  interest.  On  the 
night  in  question,  being,  as  I  have  said,  wide  awake,  I  was  astonished  by 
hearing  the  report  of  big  guns.  I  raised  myself  in  bed  with  some  difficulty, 
and  then  continued  to  hear  the  distant  firing  of  cannon,  sometimes  nearer, 
sometimes  remote.  At  length  the  guns  ceased,  but  were  succeeded  by  a 
sharp  and  rapid  discharge  of  musketry.  The  sounds  lasted  altogether 
about  four  hours.  My  great  anxiety  was  that  some  one  should  hear  these 
strange  sounds  of  battle  as  well  as  myself  ;  but  I  was  forbidden  at  the  time 

1  Compare  cases  153  and  284. 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  569 

to  leave  my  room,  and  hearing  my  father  coughing  in  his  bedroom  opposite, 
I  pacified  myself  with  the  assurance  that  he  must  be  awake  and  would 
hear  what  I  heard.  Great  was  my  mortification  in  the  morning  to  find 
that  neither  he  nor  my  mother  were  aware  of  anything  unusual  having 
occurred  in  the  night  past.  Then  my  old  friend  the  doctor  came  in, 
inquiring  laughingly  whether  I  was  growing  fanciful  (having  been  told  my 
story).  I  also  laughed  and  replied,  '  You  shall  know  if  my  battle  is  mere 
fancy  when  the  next  news  comes  from  the  seat  of  war  in  India.' 

"  Whether  this  was  my  first  connecting  of  the  sounds  I  had  listened  to 
with  an  Indian  battle,  or  whether  I  had  done  so  during  the  continuance 
of  those  sounds,  is  a  point  I  am  not  now  clear  upon.  But  although  the 
doctor,  when  out  of  my  hearing,  desired  that  I  might  not  again  be  left 
alone  at  night,  it  is  observable  that  neither  then  nor  at  any  later  time  was 
I  rendered  the  least  nervous  by  my  strange  experience,  nor  did  I  appre- 
hend evil  to  the  brother  engaged  in  the  campaign.  In  due  time,  tidings  of 
the  severe  battle  at  Goojerat  reached  us — the  day  on  which  it  was  fought, 
and  hours,  allowing  for  difierence  of  time,  exactly  coinciding  with  the  date 
of  my  prophetic  ^  battle.  My  brother  was  in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  but 
escaped  unhurt.  "  G-eorgina  Malcolm." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Malcolm  says  : — 

"I  send  you  a  written  testimony  from  one  of  my  sisters,  as  to  my 
having  spoken  of  hearing  the  battle  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence.  The 
hours  during  which  the  sounds  continued  were  from  1  to  5  o'clock  a.m.  in 
the  morning  as  far  as  my  recollection  serves.  At  the  time  of  the  occurrence 
I  was  living  in  ray  father's  house  in  a  very  remote  part  of  Warwickshire. 
The  nearest  soldiers'  quarters  to  us  would  be  at  Coventry  or  Birmingham, 
at  a  distance  of  between  30  and  40  miles." 

The  sister's  corroboration,  dated  October  9,  1885,  is  as  follows  : — 

"  I  remember  the  incident  about  the  battle  of  Goojerat.  You  were  ill 
at  the  time,  and  in  the  morning  you  told  us  you  felt  as  if  you  had  been  in 
a  battle,  as  you  had  heard  continual  firing  and  report  of  cannon  for  a  long 
time.     I  cannot  say  what  time  of  the  night  it  was  when  you  heard  it. 

"  I  think  you  made  a  note  of  it,  and  we  heard  afterwards  from  Frank 
that  the  battle  began  on  the  following  morning.  a  Lu^y  Dickins  " 

From  the  London  Gazette  for  April  19th,  1849,  it  appears  that  the 
battle,  which  took  place  on  Feb.  21,  lasted  from  8.30  until  midday,  after 
which  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  commenced,  lasting  until  dusk.  8.30  a.m. 
at  Goojerat  would  correspond  to  about  3.30  a.m.  in  England. 

Mrs.  Malcolm  nas  experienced  no  other  auditory  hallucination,  except 
that  twice,  when  overstrained  by  nursing  a  relative  in  a  fatal  illness,  she 
had  the  impression  of  hearing  her  name  called. 

[The  fact  that  the  sounds  were  not  heard  by  others,  though  at  least 
one  other  person  seems  to  have  been  awake  at  the  time,  is  rather  a  strong- 
proof  that  the  experience  was  a  hallucination ;  and  if  so,  there  is  at  least 
an  appreciable  chance  that  it  was  telepathic.  I  have  mentioned  a  case  of 
subjective  hallucination  of  the  same  character  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  494,  second 
note.  The  long  duration  of  the  impression  is,  owing  to  its  "rudimentary" 
character,  less  remarkable  than  that  alleged  in  cases  300  and  590.] 

1  As  to  the  tendency  to  regard  impressions  corresponding  with  unknown  reality  as 
prophetic,  see  p.  535,  note. 

570  SUPPLEMENT. 

CHAP. 

(622)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  M.,  whose  name  and  address  it  seems  right 
to  suppress,  though  she  made  no  stipulation  on  the  subject.  The  account 
was  received  in  August,  1884. 

Mrs.  M.  describes  how,  in  July,  1874,  while  spending  her  holiday  hap- 
pily in  the  vale  of  Leven,  and  in  perfect  health,  she  "  was  awakened  sud- 
denly with  a  cry  of  distress  ringing  in  my  ears,  and  it  was  twice  repeated 
after  I  became  wide  awake.  The  last  time  it  seemed  partly  suppressed 
and  further  away.  It  seemed  very  near  at  first,  and  I  recognised  the 
voice  as  poor  little  Tom's.  [Tom  was  a  child  between  2  and  3  years  of 
age,  one  of  several  of  whom  she  had  been  in  charge,  and  whom  she  had 
known  to  be  considerably  ill-used  by  the  lady  who  was  acting  as  his 
guardian.]  I  sprang  out  of  bed  and  looked  out.  It  was  a  lovely  still 
night,  not  a  movement  nor  a  sound  disturbed  the  air,  and  it  was  so  light 
that  I  could  see  the  time  on  a  small  silver  watch  which  was  lying  on  the 
table.     It  was  12.45." 

The  efiect  on  Mrs.  M.  was  so  great  that  she  mentioned  the  experience 
next  morning  to  the  aunt  with  whom  she  was  staying,  and  resolved 
to  return  at  once  to  the  scene  of  her  duties,  but  was  prevented  by  a 
telegram  giving  her  other  instructions.  When  she  did  return,  she  learnt 
from  the  servants  that,  on  the  Sunday  night  when  she  had  heard  the  cries, 
Tom's  guardian  had  had  him  in  her  room  all  night ;  and  that  they  "  heard 
cries  and  moans  until  they  fell  asleep,  and  at  midnight  were  awakened  by 
three  successive  cries  that  rang  through  the  house — the  last  a  suppressed 
echo  of  the  others."  Next  morning  the  servants  found  marks  of  cruel  ill- 
usage  on  the  child,  which  Mrs.  M.  found  still  very  apparent. 

[We  have  not  received  the  aunt's  corroboration,  though  Mrs.  M. 
promised  to  try  to  obtain  it  for  us.  The  correspondence  of  the  three  cries 
is  a  detail  not  unlikely  to  have  been  subsequently  imagined.  See  p.  229, 
note.] 

§  8.  The   following  is   a   group  of  non-vocal  cases,  of  an  entirely 
rudimentary  type  (see  above,  pp.  125-82). 

(623)  From  a  gentleman  who  does  not  feel  justified  in  allowing  his 
brother's,  the  agent's,  name  to  appear,  and  is  therefore  obliged  to  with- 
hold his  own  from  publication.  The  percipient  has  died  since  1883,  when 
the  account  was  written. 

In  the  autumn  of  1874,  the  narrator's  brother,  W.  M.,  a  resident  in 
Edinburgh,  was  staying,  with  a  sister,  some  18  miles  from  that  place. 
"  He  had  been  subject,  at  irregular  intervals,  to  attacks  of  illness  of  a 
severe  character,  but,  at  this  date,  was  in  fair  health,  and  attending  to 
business. 

"  Two  or  three  days  after  his  arrival  at  our  sister's  house  he  was  quite 
unexpectedly  seized,  late  one  evening,  with  serious  illness,  hematemesis 
supervened,  and  within  two  or  three  hours  from  the  first  seizure  he  was  a 
corpse.  The  late  hour,  and  distance  from  the  railway  station,  prevented 
any  communication  during  the  night  with  our  household  in  Edinburgh. 

"Between  11  and  12  o'clock  that  night,  my  mother,  aged  then  72,  but 
active  and  vigorous  in  body  and  mind,  as  indeed  she  is  still,  was  alone  in 
her  bedroom  and  in  the  act  of  undressing.  She  occupied  this  room  alone, 
and  it  was  the  only  sleeping  apartment  on  the  dining-room  flat  which  wa 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  571 

in  use  that  night,  the  only  other  bedroom  there  being  the  adjoining  room, 
then  untenanted,  owing  to  my  own  absence  in  the  North.  My  father, 
eldest  brother,  and  sister-in-law  occupied  rooms  on  the  flat  above.  The 
servants'  accommodation  was  in  the  under  or  sunk  flat  beneath,  shut  off 
from  the  upper  by  a  swing  door  at  the  foot  of  a  flight  of  steps.  A  small 
dog,  the  only  other  inmate  of  the  house,  slept  that  night,  and  indeed 
always,  in  the  kitchen.  My  mother  was  in  her  usual  good  health,  her 
faculties  perfectly  preserved,  and  her  mind  untroubled  with  any  apprehen- 
sions of  evil  tidings.  She  had  read,  as  usual,  a  portion  of  her  Bible,  and 
was  in  the  act  of  undressing,  when  she  was  suddenly  startled  by  a  most 
extraordinary  noise  at  the  door  of  her  room,  which  opened  directly  into 
the  inner  lobby.  It  was  as  if  made  by  a  person  standing  directly  outside 
and  close  to  the  door,  but  it  was  utterly  unlike  any  ordinary  summons  or 
alarm.  In  her  own  words,  it  was  like  nothing  so  much  as  the  noise  of 
someone  hastily  and  imperiously  lashing  the  door  with  a  heavy  riding  whip, 
demanding  admittance.  It  was  loud,  and  repeated  three  or  four  times, 
as  if  insisting  on  attention,  with  brief  intervals  between.     Then  it  ceased. 

"  My  mother,  though  possessed  of  considerable  coolness,  was  startled  ; 
but  with  a  resolution  which  many  might  envy,  she  proceeded  to  light  a 
candle,  knowing  the  hall  lights  were  extinguished,  the  whole  of  the 
inmates  having  before  retired  for  the  night,  and  went  to  the  door.  '  I 
knew,'  she  said,  '  that  it  was  no  one  in  the  house  seeking  admission.  8uch 
an  imperative  summons  would  never  have  been  made  at  my  door.'  On 
opening  it,  nothing  was  visible,  the  various  doors  opening  on  the  lobby 
were  closed,  and  the  fastenings  of  the  front  door  undisturbed.  Much 
surprised,  though  retaining  self-possession,  my  mother  debated  with  herself 
as  to  rousing  the  other  members  of  the  family,  but  ultimately  resolved  not 
to  do  so  unless  the  sound  was  repeated,  which  it  was  not.  It  was  about 
midnight,  but  my  mother  did  not  note  the  precise  hour  and  minute.  Early 
next  forenoon,  my  father  and  sister-in-law  having  left,  the  news  came 
that  my  brother  had  expired  at  midnight,  18  miles  off  by  road  from 
Edinburgh. 

"  It  may  be  noted  that  nothing  in  or  near  the  door  could  possibly  have 
occasioned  the  noise  in  question,  the  material  being  old,  well-seasoned 
timber,  not  liable  to  warp  or  crack.  It  afterwards  appeared  that  the  noise 
in  question  had  not  been  heard  by  anyone  in  the  house  save  by  my  mother, 
which  no  one  will  wonder  at  who  knows  how  perfectly  '  deafened '  old- 
fashioned  stone  houses  in  Edinburgh  invariably  are. 

"  Speaking  for  my  own  part,  I  would  not  have  placed  so  much  reliance 
on  the  narrative  which  I  have  from  my  mother's  own  lips,  had  it  come 
from  any  other  person  in  the  house.  The  others  might  have  been 
imaginative  or  nervous,  or  wise  after  the  event,  or  possibly  wholly 
mistaken.  But  with  my  mother's  clear  and  balanced  judgment,  little 
affected  by  matters  which  powerfully  sway  others,  I  have  no  room  for 
hesitation  whatsoever.  I  believe,  as  firmly  as  I  believe  in  the  fact  of  my 
own  existence,  that  the  circumstances  happened  exactly  as  she  narrated 
them." 

[The  entry  in  the  Register  of  Deaths,  which  is  probably  correct,  shows 
that  the  death  occurred  on  September  2,  1875  (not  1874),  at  4.50  a.m.,  not 
at  midnight.  The  coincidence  was  therefore  not  so  exact  as  the  narrator 
imagined.     Still,  if  the  mother's  experience  was  a  hallucination — and  it 

572  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

certainly  does  not  seem  easy  to  explain  it  otherwise — the  identity  of  night 
makes  the  case  a  striking  sample  of  its  kind.] 

(624)  From  Mrs.  Callin,  of  whom  her  mistress,  Miss  Rosenberg,  of 
Gabarrie  Yilla,  Sarsfield  Road,  Balham,  says  : — 

"  I  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  and  trustworthiness  of  Mrs.  Callin, 
the  narrator  of  the  incident  described." 

"December,  1882. 

"  Mr.  J.,  employed  as  agent  by  my  mistress^  Miss  C,  resident  in  the 
Royal  Avenue,  Chelsea,  had  long  suffered  severely  from  asthma,  and  on 
Miss  C.  going  to  see  him  one  day,  when  he  had  been  unable  to  go  out  for 
many  weeks,  some  time  in  November,  1879,  he  remarked  he  should  go  to 
see  her  on  her  birthday  (having  always  done  so  for  many  years),  if  he  had 
to  take  a  cab  for  it ;  his  wife  rejoined,  '  I  do  not  think  you  will,'  meaning 
his  state  of  health  would  not  allow  him  to  do  so,  and  he  replied  to  her, 
'  Yes,  I  will: 

"  Miss  C.  retired  to  bed  as  usual  on  the  night  of  December  7th.  I 
slept  in  the  same  room,  which  was  the  front  one  on  the  first  floor,  with 
folding  doors  into  the  small  dressing-room  behind,  no  other  person  being 
in  the  house.  In  the  early  morning  of  next  day  (8th,  and  her  birthday) 
Miss  C.  was  awoke  by  a  loud  knock  at  the  folding-door,  and,  listening,  it 
was  repeated  :  she  then  called  me,  but  before  she  could  rouse  me,  heard 
it  again,  the  third  time.^  I  then  got  up,  and  looked  outside  both  the 
doors  with  a  light,  and  could  see  no  one ;  I  also  looked  at  the  time,  which 
was  a  quarter  past  ybwr.  We  then  both  went  to  sleep  again,  I  thinking 
my  mistress  had  dreamt  this,  but  she  always  persisted  she  heard  the 
knocks  distinctly. 

"  After  breakfast  we  heard  that  Mr.  J.  had  died  at  four  that  morn- 
ing, and  Miss  C.  said  to  me  that  he  came  to  tell  her,  having  so  certainly 
promised  to  go  to  her  on  that  day. 

"  Miss  C.  died  the  following  March,  aged  94,  but  having  all  her 
faculties  clear  to  the  last,  and  often  alluding  to  Mr.  J.'s  visit  on  her 
birthday.  His  age  was  about  60  only,  and  he  had  frequently  said  he 
should  die  before  her,  and  she  used  to  reply  '  Don't  wait  for  me  out  of 
politeness,'  being  always  ready  with  a  joke.  "  M.  Callin." 

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  Mr.  J.  died  on  December  8,  1879. 

[It  may  be  conceived  that  Mr.  J.'s  previous  promise  of  a  visit  on  that 
day  worked  itself  out  in  the  percipient's  mind,  when  the  day  arrived,  in  the 
form  of  a  hallucination  ;  but  such  accurately-timed  development  is,  as  far 
as  I  know,  quite  unexampled,  except  in  some  rare  hypnotic  cases  of 
commands  and  promises  a  longue  echeance.^ 

The  following  experiences — if  hallucinations,  and  not  due  to  some 
undiscovered  physical  cause — are  of  interest  as  having  taken  precisely 
the  same  form.^  It  is  one  that  is  likely  to  raise  a  smile  ;  but 
I  must  repeat  that  it  is  quite  open  to  hallucinations  of  the  senses  to 
take  peculiar  forms,  and  that  there  is  no  reason  why  telepathic  speci- 
mens should  have  an  immunity  in  this  respect  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  503,  547). 
Moreover,  the  particular  form  here  described  may  without  improba- 
1  See  p.  229,  note.     2  gee  p.  35. 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  573 

bility  be  traced  to  early  associations  in  the  percipient's  mind.  The 
grounds  for  doubting  the  telepathic  origin  of  the  impressions  are,  not 
their  oddness  or  triviality,  but  (1)  the  fact  that  they  did  not  in  any  way 
suggest  the  supposed  agent,  Avhich  always  greatly  diminishes  the 
force  of  the  time-coincidence  ;  and  (2)  in  one  case  the  lack  of  precision 
in  the  time-coincidence  itself  The  narrator,  Miss  H.,  is,  in  her  own 
words,  "  of  a  matter-of-fact  disposition,  and  not  a  believer  in  things 
out  of  the  way,"  and  she  attaches  no  importance  whatever  to  these 
incidents.  She  withholds  her  name  from  publication  out  of  defer- 
ence to  what  she  thinks  would  be  the  vdshes  of  her  relatives, 

"N Yicarage,  October  26th,  1884. 

(625)  "A  few  years  ago  [in  1874]  I  was  staying  with  some  relatives 
at  Folkestone,  who  had  taken  a  house  there  for  a  few  weeks  and  had 
occupied  it  all  the  previous  summer.  We  were  a  merry  party,  with  young 
people  and  children.  I  slept  in  a  large  room  on  the  first  floor.  I  was 
awakened  one  night  by  the  sound  of  many  mice  pattering  over  the  floor  ; 
they  appeared  to  be  running  swiftly  and  then  out  at  the  door.  Much 
astonished,  I  looked  around  to  see  where  they  could  have  come  from,  but 
no  trace  appeared.  In  the  morning  I  inquired  of  the  nurse,  who  came  to 
call  me,  if  she  had  heard  anything,  '  No,'  was  the  reply.  I  foolishly  said, 
'  Well,  I  do  not  mind  mice,  but  in  our  family  the  sound  of  them  means 
death  or  ill  luck.'  I  complained  to  the  landlady,  who  said  '  she  had  never 
seen  a  mouse  in  her  house  ' ;  she  sent  in  a  new  trap,  but  nothing  more  was 
heard  of  the  intruders.  Three  or  four  days  after  this,  came  the  sad  news 
of  the  death  of  a  very  dear  relative  from  an  accident,  whilst  abroad. 
The  event  happened  a  few  minutes  before  the  noise  of  the  mice  had 
disturbed  me. 

"  In  December,  three  years  after  this,  I  was  at  St.  Leonards-on-Sea, 
with  a  relative  who  had  been  seriously  ill,  and  on  the  night  of  the  31st 
December  I  sat  up  in  my  own  room  at  the  top  of  the  house,  to  see  the  old 
year  out  and  the  new  one  in.  I  have  referred  to  a  diary  kept  by  my  sister, 
and  I  find  I  had  spent  a  most  quiet  day.  I  was  in  good  spirits,  for  my 
invalid  was  much  better,  the  fire  in  the  room  was  bright,  and  I  certainly 
was  not  thinking  of  mice  ;  but  just  before  1 2  o'clock  came  the  sound  of 
many  mice  sweeping  over  the  floor.  I  heard  it  distinctly  and  with  some 
trepidation,  but  no  one  dear  to  me  was  ill.  I  noted  down  the  fact,  and, 
having  relatives  abroad,  awaited  with  some  impatience  the  colonial  mail. 
I  received  the  following  notetfrom  my  brother  : — 

" '  Dear  L., — I  write  to  tell  you  a  piece  of  sad  news.  Whilst  you 
were  probably  welcoming  the  new  year,  a  few  minutes  before  it  arrived  I 
went  down  my  garden,  to  receive  the  corpse  of  my  eldest  son ;  he  had 
broken  his  neck  by  a  fall  from  his  horse  three  hours  before.' 

"  I  had  been  in  the  house  where  this  occurred  several  times  before, 
and  have  stayed  there  several  times  since,  but  I  have  never  seen  or  heard 
real  mice  there. 

"  I  may  add  that  my  mother  regarded  the  sound  of  mice  as  an  omen 
of  disaster,  but  she  never  would  tell  me  why,  looking  upon  it  probably  as 
a  superstition  she  wished  her  children  to  be  free  from." 

574  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

In  answer  to  a  request  for  her  sister's  corroboration,  Miss  H.  replies  : — 

"  I  regret  to  say  that  on  religious  grounds  Mrs.  L.  will  not  write  a 
confirmatory  note ;  of  course  she  says  she  perfectly  remembers  the  circum- 
stances, and  that  a  mouse-trap  was  immediately  purchased  for  my  room. 
That's  practical." 

In  conversation,  Miss  H.  informed  me  that  she  has  had  no  other 
hallucination,  unless  hearing  some  unaccountable  knocks  on  one  occasion, 
when  others  heard  them,  be  so  counted.  On  the  first  occasion,  in  a 
lodging,  the  boards  were  bare  to  a  great  extent.  The  second  time  the  room 
was  carpeted.  The  noise  was  loud  as  well  as  distinct.  Miss  H.  has  since 
heard  real  mice,  and  was  glad  to  identify  the  sound  again.  Her  mother's 
superstition  as  to  mice  foreboding  trouble  had  been  constantly  brought 
before  her  mind,  during  her  mother's  life  :  it  was  much  on  her  mother's 
brain,  so  to  speak. 

The  Army  List  shows  that  the  death  in  the  first  case  took  place  on 
July  22,  1874. 

We  find  the  accident  in  the  second  case  described  in  a  local  paper  for 
January  3,  1877,  as  having  taken  place  on  December  31 ;  and  the  death 
is  reported  as  having  taken  place  "  about  midnight " — i.e.,  allowing 
for  longitude,  nearly  12  hours  before  Miss  H.'s  impression.  Without- 
extenuating  this  element  of  weakness  in  the  case,  I  may  remind  the 
reader  how  frequently  the  emergence  of  telepathic  percipience  seems  to 
be  deferred  until  a  season  of  solitary  recueillement  (Vol.  I.,  p.   201). 

I  4.  The  following  are  tactile  cases, 

(626)  From  Mr.  W.  B.  Clegram,  Saul  Lodge,  Stonehouse,  Gloucester- 
shire. "January  15th,  1884. 

"  I  well  remember  a  singular  circumstance  I  have  often  heard  my 
father  (one  of  the  early  civil  engineers  of  this  country)  relate,  which 
occurred  to  himself.  He  was  a  man  of  very  strong  mind,  and  more  free 
from  fancies  and  superstitions  than  most  people.  At  the  time  of  the 
occurrence  he  was  about  30  years  of  age. 

"  He  was  in  the  habit  of  lying  with  his  right  hand  extended  out  of  bed, 
and  one  morning,  about  5  o'clock,  when  wide  awake,  he  felt  a  firm  hand 
grasp  his,  so  much  like  the  grasp  of  his  father's  hand  that  he  immediately 
told  my  mother  'that  his  father  had  taken  his  hand  as  he  usually  did 
when  saying  "  good-bye." '  His  father  died  at  that  time  that  morning, 
somewhat  suddenly.  My  father  did  not  know  he  was  ill.  His  father 
died  near  Sunderland ;  my  father  at  that  time  was  living  in  Sussex. 

"W.  B.  Clegram." 

Mr.  Clegram  mentioned  in  conversation  that  his  grandfather  had  a 
particularly  firm  and  strong  clasp  of  the  hand,  which  was  also  a  charac- 
teristic of  his  father,  the  percipient.  The  latter  was  a  strong,  practical 
man,  as  far  removed  as  possible  from  superstition.  The  incident  made  a 
deep  and  lasting  impression  upon  him. 

(627)  From  Lady  Belcher,  25,  Cumberland  Terrace,  Regent's  Park, 
N.W.  "April,  1884. 

"  During  the  great  French  war,  when  Napoleon  I.  was  overrunning 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  575 

Holland,  and  after  the  unfortunate  Walcheren  expedition,  our  fleet  was 
ordered  to  the  Scheldt,  I  believe  in  the  severe  winter  of  1813.  The 
sailo  rs  and  marines  from  the  various  ships  were  landed  in  parties  to  man 
and  defend  the  dykes.  So  severe  was  the  cold  that  long  wooden  sheds 
were  erected,  and  large  fires  kept  up  for  the  watch  parties.  All  the 
officers  in  turn  landed  to  keep  the  men  to  their  posts. 

"  On  one  night  when  my  father.  Captain  Peter  Heywood,  landed  with 
his  men  from  the  '  Montague,'  the  line  of  battle  ship  he  commanded,  and 
the  watch  had  been  set,  the  officers  stretched  themselves  down  on  some 
mattresses,  the  first  lieutenant  near  him,  then  the  Master  of  Marines.  All 
was  quiet,  when  the  last  mentioned  officer  cried  out  that  some  one  had 
laid  a  cold  hand  on  his  cheek !  Silence  was  ordered.  Again  in  a  few 
minutes  he  made  the  same  complaint  and  challenged  the  lieutenant,  who 
peremptorily  ordered  silence.  A  third  time  he  made  the  same  outcry, 
jumped  up  and  rushed  from  the  spot  in  terror.  The  whole  party  were 
thoroughly  roused,  and  my  father  considered  the  circumstance  so 
peculiar  that  he  noted  it  with  the  date  and  the  precise  hour  at  which  it 
had  occurred. 

'*  Weeks  after,  when  the  despatches  and  letters  arrived  from  England, 
the  Master  of  Marines  received  the  news  of  his  father's  death  and  the 
hour  of  his  departure,  which  tallied  exactly  with  the  note  which  Captain 
Heywood  had  made.  Up  to  the  period  of  my  dear  father's  death  I  have 
heard  him  mention  the  fact,  but  never  reasoned  on  it.  He  possessed  a 
calm  judgment  and  a  very  religious  mind.  u  Dj^jja  Belcher  " 

We  learn  from  the  Admiralty  that  Captain  Peter  Heywood  was  in 
command  of  the  "Montague"  from  July,  1813,  to  March,  1814  ;  also  that 
there  is  no  such  officer  as  "  Master  of  Marines,"  but  that  the  Masters  (now 
styled  Stafi'-Commissioners  or  Navigating  Lieutenants)  were  George  Dunn 
and  J.  Sanford. 

[This  case  is  very  remote ;  and  even  if  correct  in  the  central  fact, 
cannot  be  relied  on  in  details — e.g.,  as  to  the  absolute  exactitude  of  the 
coincidence,  and  as  to  the  three  occurrences  of  the  sensation,  the  favourite 
legendary  number  (p.  229,  note).] 

(628)  From  Mrs.  Spenser,  36,  Portland  Street,  Southport,  a  member 
of  the  Society  of  Friends.  September  1st,  1871. 

"  I  formerly  had  two  aunts.  One,  my  aunt  De  Mierre,  residing  at 
Putney,  had  been  confined  three  weeks.  My  aunt,  Mrs.  Williams  [who 
lived  in  London],  being  an  invalid,  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  a  warm  bath 
at  night.  When  her  maid  had  placed  her  in  it,  she  retired,  until  the  time 
appointed  for  leaving  her  had  expired ;  but  one  night,  soon  after  she  had 
left,  she  was  much  alarmed  by  sounds  of  great  distress  from  her  mistress, 
which  led  her  hastily  to  ring  for  assistance  and  summon  her  master,  for 
her  mistress's  weeping  and  agitation  were  uncontrollable.  As  soon  as  her 
husband  entered  the  room,  Mrs.  Williams  exclaimed,  '  Susan  is  dead.  She 
has  been  to  take  leave  of  me.  Her  kiss  was  like  a  waft  of  cold  air  upon 
my  cheek.'  Her  husband  did  his  best  to  allay  her  agitation,  telling  her 
she  had  fallen  asleep  in  the  bath  and  dreamt  it.  He  also  told  her  that  he 
had,  that  afternoon,  seen  one  of  her  brothers  who  had  told  him  that  her 
sister  was  so  remarkably  well  that  her  husband  was  going  to  the  play  that 

576  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

night,  with  other  members  of  her  family.     But  nothing  soothed  her  until 
he  promised  to  send  to  Putney  the  next  morning  to  inquire. 

"  The  groom  received  orders  to  leave  by  6  o'clock,  so  as  to  bring  the 
answer  back  by  8  o'clock.  When  the  groom  arrived  at  the  house  the 
servant  said,  '  My  mistress  is  dead.  She  was  taken  suddenly  ill  while 
sitting  up,  and  was  dead  before  my  master  got  home.  She  died  at  half- 
past  10  o'clock' — the  exact  time  that  her  sister  was  thrown  into  such 
distress  by  her  appearing  to  take  leave  of  her.  I  remember  the  occurrence 
well.  "Lucy  Spenser." 

Mrs.  Spenser  writes  on  March  18,  1886  :  "  I  think  my  aunt  died  about 
1804.  I  am  the  only  one  living  who  heard  the  fact  related  at  the  time; 
and  often,  in  after  years,  without  any  variation."  And  later,  "  I  remember 
with  unclouded  clearness  the  particulars  respecting  my  aunt's  death — the 
first  in  the  family  that  I  knew  of  and  cared  about.  It  was  a  great  event 
in  the  family,  and  the  impression  made  on  my  mind  was  indelible."  We 
have  failed  to  discover  the  exact  date  of  the  death  :  Mrs.  de  Mierre  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  buried  at  Putney.  In  conversation  Mrs.  Spenser 
stated  that  she  thinks  that  there  was  an  appearance,  as  well  as  the  sensa- 
tion of  the  kiss. 

[The  narrator,  who  wrote  the  above  15  years  ago,  shows  even  now  no 
sign  of  impaired  memory  ;  but  the  case  is  again  far  too  remote  for  details 
to  be  trusted.] 

(629)  From  the  Rev.  George  Brett,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare, 
who  heard  the  account  from  the  percipient,  a  very  near  relative  of  his  own. 

"January  26th,  1885. 

"  About  40  or  45  years  ago,  a  Miss  Sophia  Wallace  was  engaged  to  a 
Mr.  Wilson.  They  were  much  attached  to  each  other,  and  he  seems  to 
have  been  a  man  whose  mental  constitution  was  of  a  kind  to  make  him 
capable  of  exerting  a  very  real  influence  upon  those  among  whom  he  was 
known.  He  died  of  consumption  before  the  time  proposed  for  their 
marriage ;  naturally,  his  fiancee  was  very  anxious,  and  much  saddened 
when  it  became  evident  that  he  would  not  live.  On  the  evening  of  his 
death  she  was  passing  along  a  darkened  passage  in  a  house  where  she  was 
staying,  not  more  than  2  or  3  miles  (perhaps  less  than  2)  from  the 
house  of  Mr.  Wilson,  when  she  felt  a  cold  hand  clasp  hers.  Upon 
comparison  of  time  afterwards,  she  found  this  had  occurred  at  the  time  of 
Mr.  Wilson's  death.  "  Geo.  Brett." 

[The  anxiety  here,  of  course,  allows  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  ex- 
perience was  purely  subjective  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509).] 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  which  suggests  the  same 
sympathy  of  physical  condition  as  we  have  encountered  in  certain 
hypnotic  cases  (see  above,  pp.  330-1),  where  the  transference  is  from  the 
"  subject "  to  the  operator.  The  exceptional  rapport  (established 
or  increased  by  a  course  of  hypnotism)  which  existed  between  the 
two  persons  concerned  has  been  mentioned  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  316,  and 
must  be  borne   in  mind  in  the  judging  of  the  present  incident, 

(630)  From  Mr.  F.  Corder,  46,  Charlwood  Street,  S.W. 

VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  577 

"December,  1882. 

"On  July  8,  1882,  my  wife  went  to  London  to  have  an  operation 
(which  we  both  believed  to  be  a  slight  one)  performed  on  her  eyes  by  the 
late  Mr.  Oritchett.  The  appointment  was  for  1.30  ;  and,  knowing  from 
long  previous  experience  the  close  sympathy  of  our  minds,  about  that  time 
I,  at  Brighton,  got  rather  fidgety,  and  was  much  relieved — and  perhaps  a 
little  surprised  and  disappointed — at  not  feeling  any  decided  sensation 
which  I  could  construe  as  sympathetic.  Taking  it  therefore  for  granted 
that  all  was  well,  I  went  out  at  2.45  to  conduct  my  concert  at  the 
Aquarium,  expecting  to  find  there  a  telegram,  as  had  been  arranged,  to 
say  that  all  was  well.  On  my  way  I  stopped,  as  usual,  to  compare  my 
watch  with  the  big  clock  outside  Lawsons'  the  clockmakers.  At  that 
instant  I  felt  my  eyes  flooded  with  water,  just  as  when  a  chill  wind  gives 
one  a  sudden  cold  in  the  eyes,  though  it  was  a  hot,  still  summer's  day. 
The  afiection  was  so  unusual  and  startling  that  my  attention  could  not 
but  be  strongly  directed  to  it ;  yet,  the  time  being  then  1 1  minutes  to 
3,  I  was  sure  it  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  my  wife's  operation,  and, 
as  it  continued  for  some  little  time,  thought  I  must  have  taken  cold. 
However,  it  passed  off,  and  the  concert  immediately  afterwards  put  it  out 
of  my  mind. 

"  At  4.0  I  received  a  telegram  from  my  wife  '  All  well  over.  A  great 
success,'  and  this  quite  took  away  all  anxiety.  But  on  going  to  town  in 
the  evening,  I  found  her  in  a  terrible  state  of  nervous  prostration ;  and  it 
appeared  that  the  operation,  though  marvellously  successful,  had  been  of 
a  very  severe  character.  Quite  accidentally  it  came  out  that  it  was  not 
till  2.30  that  Mrs.  Corder  entered  the  operating-room,  and  that  the 
operation  commenced,  after  the  due  administration  of  an  anaesthetic,  at 
about  10  minutes  to  3,  as  near  as  we  could  calculate. 

"F.    CORDEE." 

[If  telepathy  is  a  reality,  there  seems  at  any  rate  a  fair  probability 
that  this  incident  was  telepathic.  But  it  is  no  doubt  possible  to  suppose 
that  the  occupation  of  Mr.  Corder's  thoughts  with  his  wife's  condition  had 
induced  a  sympathetic  liability  to  the  peculiar  affection  recorded,  and  that 
the  reason  why  it  came  to  a  head  at  that  particular  time  was  simply  the 
change  of  physical  condition  involved  in  going  out  into  the  open  air.  It 
will  be  observed,  however,  that  the  day  was  hot,  which  rather  tells  against 
this  hypothesis.] 

VOL.    II.  2    p 

CHAP, 

CHAPTER  VII. 

CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES. 

This  chapter   contains  some   further   cases  in  which   the  senses  of 
sight  and  hearing  were  both  affected. 

(631)  From  the  Story  of  my  Life,  by  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor, 
Vol.  II.,  pp.  32-33. 

"  This  determination  [to  live  unmarried]  was  the  result  of  a  very 
curious  and  strange  incident  that  befell  me  during  one  of  my  marches  to 
Hyderabad.  I  have  never  forgotten  it,  and  it  returns  to  this  day  to  my 
memory  with  a  strangely  vivid  effect  that  I  can  neither  repel  nor  explain. 
I  purposely  withhold  the  date  of  the  year.  In  my  very  early  life,  I  had 
been  deeply  and  devotedly  attached  to  one  in  England,  and  only 
relinquished  the  hope  of  some  day  winning  her  when  the  terrible  order 
came  out  that  no  furlough  to  Europe  would  be  granted.  One  evening  I 
was  at  the  village  of  Dewas  Kudea,  after  a  very  long  afternoon  and 
evening  march  from  Muktul,  and  I  lay  down  very  weary  ;  but  the  barking 
of  village  dogs,  and  the  baying  of  jackals,  and  over-fatigue  and  heat, 
prevented  sleep,  and  I  was  wide  awake  and  restless.  Suddenly,  for  my 
tent  door  was  wide  open,  I  saw  the  face  and  figure  so  familiar  to  me,  but 
looking  older,  and  with  a  sad  and  troubled  expression ;  the  dress  was 
white,  and  seemed  covered  with  a  profusion  of  lace,  and  glistened  in  the 
bright  moonlight.  The  arms  were  stretched  out,  and  a  low  plaintive  cry 
of  '  Do  not  let  me  go  ;  do  not  let  me  go  ! '  reached  me.  I  sprang  forward, 
but  the  figure  receded,  growing  fainter  and  fainter  till  I  could  see  it  no 
longer,  but  the  low  sad  tones  still  sounded.  I  had  run  barefooted  across 
the  open  space,  where  my  tents  were  pitched,  very  much  to  the  astonish- 
ment of  the  sentry  on  guard,  but  I  returned  to  my  tent  without  speaking 
to  him. 

"  I  wrote  to  my  father,  I  wished  to  know  whether  there  was  any  hope 
for  me.  He  wrote  back  to  me  these  words  :  '  Too  late,  my  dear  son — on 
the  very  day  of  the  vision  you  describe  to  me,  A.  was  married.' " 

Miss  Meadows  Taylor,  the  editor  of  the  book  from  which  this  passage 
is  quoted,  writes  to  us  : — 

"  6,  Phillimore  Terrace,  Kensington,  W. 

"December  5th,  1883. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  vision  mentioned  in 

VII.]      CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      579 

my  father's,  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor's,  '  Life.'  I  have  heard  him  mention 
it  very  often,  and  he  always  related  the  incident  precisely  in  the  same 
manner,  and  exactly  as  it  is  in  the  book.  I  can  throw  no  further  light 
upon  it ;  nor  can  I  add  any  further  particulars.  The  lady  is  dead,  and  I 
am  not  aware  that  she  ever  knew  of  the  circumstance. 

"  Alice  Meadows  Taylor." 

[We  have  discovered  a  certain  amount  of  inaccuracy  in  another  narrative 
told  in  the  same  book;  otherwise  the  present  one  would  not  have  been 
relegated  to  the  Supplement.  Miss  Meadows  Taylor's  remarks  show,  how- 
ever, that  the  experience  was  distinctly  imprinted  on  her  father's  memory. 
The  detail  as  to  the  lace,  it  will  be  observed,  is  of  a  sort  very  likely  to  have 
been  "  read  back  "  into  the  vision  after  the  news  arrived  which  would  seem 
to  make  it  appropriate.] 

(632)  From  the  Rev.  J.  Hotham  (Congregational  Minister),  Port  Elliot, 
South  Australia,  who  told  us  (in  1884)  that  the  account  was  given  to  him 
by  some  friends,  Mrs.  Leaworthy  and  her  daughters,  and  was  written  out 
by  him  the  same  evening  "  in  nearly  the  same  language  in  which  it  was 
given,  and  submitted  to  Mrs.  Leaworthy,  who  corrected  it."  It  may  there- 
foi-e  be  taken  as  her  account.  Mr.  Hotham  has  since  died,  and  his  son 
says  that  no  more  information  can  be  obtained. 

The  account  first  describes  the  rescue,  in  1841,  of  the  crew  of  the 
French  ship,  "  L'Orient,"  oif  the  coast  of  Devon,  mainly  by  the  exertions 
of  Mr.  Leaworthy. 

"  The  captain,  during  his  stay  in  the  neighbourhood,  was  a  constant 
visitor  at  our  house,  and  became  quite  a  favourite.  After  he  had  recovered 
from  his  cold  and  wetting,  he  told  us  that  he  was  sure  something  serious 
had  happened  at  home.  When  asked  why  he  thought  so,  he  said  that 
just  before  the  storm  came  on,  he- had  seen  his  wife  standing  close  beside 
him,  and  that  she  had  said  :  '  Do  not  grieve  for  me.'  Well,  we  all  tried 
to  put  this  melancholy  idea  out  of  his  head.  We  told  him  he  was  low- 
spirited  at  the  loss  of  his  ship,  and  that  nothing  but  imagination  had 
made  him  fancy  this  thing. 

"  Of  course  the  captain  wrote  directly  home,  giving  an  account  of  the 
loss  of  his  ship  and  cargo,  and  anxiously  awaited  a  reply.  He  was 
detained  some  weeks  among  us,  and  during  that  time  we  became  very 
intimate.  In  due  time  he  received  a  letter  informing  him  that  his  wife 
had  been  confined,  and  mother  and  child  were  both  doing  well.  We  then 
joked  him  about  his  fears,  and  congratulated  him  upon  the  good  news  he 
had  received.  During  the  weeks  he  further  remained  with  us,  we  set  to 
and  made  up  a  box  of  presents — small  things,  »fec.,  for  the  baby.  After 
completing  all  his  arrangements,  he  bid  us  good-bye,  and  started  for  home. 
A  letter  from  him,  however,  informed  us  that  the  presentiment  was  too 
truly  fulfilled.  His  wife  died  on  that  night ;  but  when  his  friends 
received  his  letter  mournfully  detailing  the  loss  of  his  vessel,  they  were 
afraid  to  send  him  word  about  the  loss  of  his  wife,  and  so  replied  as  we 
have  said." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hotham  added : — 

"  Mrs.  Leaworthy,  senior,  has  recently  died.  Her  daughters  are  still 
living — one,  Mrs.  Lindsay,  only  a  short  distance  from  me  ;  and  the  other, 

VOL.  II.  2  p  2 

580  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

who  married  Mr.  John  Hindmarsh,  only  son  of  our  first  Colonial  Governor, 
has  removed  to  New  Zealand. 

"In  answer  to  your  questions — (1)  The  account  was  given  me  at  the 
house  of  Mr.  Jno.  Hindmarsh,  near  Port  Elliot,  South  Australia.  (2) 
Yes.  By  '  died  on  that  night '  I  mean  on  the  night  he  saw  the  apparition 
— the  night  the  storm  began.  "  Jno.  Hotham." 

(633)  From  the  late  General  Craigie,  who  told  us  (March  11,  1883) 

that  he  had  heard  the  facts  from  Colonel  and  Mrs. ,  the  parents  of  the 

percipient. 

General    Craigie   began    by    describing    how,     in     1868,     he    became 

acquainted  with  Colonel and  his  family,  resident  at  Mussoorie,  and 

at  their  house  saw  a  good  deal  of  some  relatives  of  his  own,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  B. 

"The  year  1868  had  come  to  a  close.  With  the  termination  of  the 
season,  of  course  all  European  visitors  had  returned  to  their  homes  in  the 
plains.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  relief,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to 
Cawnpore,  and  from  that  time  I  lost  sight  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.,  whom 
I  left  behind  at  Meerut.  I  cannot,  without  referring  to  friends  at  a 
distance,  give  the  dates  of  what  follows  ;  but  I  believe  that  it  was  in 
the  beginning  of  1869  that  society  was  shocked  by  hearing  that  Mr.  B. 
had  [in  consequence  of  domestic  unhappiness  due  to  his  own  conduct]  shot 
himself.     He  shot  himself  at  Meerut,  at  about  8  o'clock  in  the  evening. 

"  On  that  night  Colonel 's  wife  and  daughter  were  together  in  a 

bedroom  at  10  p.m.  The  former  had  already  got  into  bed  ;  the  latter 
was  brushing  out  her  hair  by  her  cheval-glass,  and  in  her  night  attire. 
Suddenly  the  girl  exclaimed  :  '  Oh,  mamma,  there's  Mr.  B  ! '  '  "Where  1 ' 
cried  the  scandalised  mother,  clutching  and  pulling  up  the  bed-clothes.  ^ 
'  There,  mamma  !  Do  you  not  see  him  1  There — he  says  :  "  Good-bye, 
Sissy — good-bye  !  "  There,  now  he's  going — now  he's  gone  ! '  An  immediate 
alarm  was  given  ;  the  room,  the  house,  the  garden  were  carefully  searched, 
without  obtaining  any  satisfactory   clue  to  so  extraordinary  a   scene  in 

a  lady's    bedchamber.     Colonel closely    questioned    the    girl,    who 

not  only  positively  adhered  to  her  previous  declarations,  but  now  detailed 
the  clothes  worn  by  Mr.  B.  as  he  appeared  to  her. 

"  Two  days  afterwards,  the  post,  and  newspapers,  brought  to  Mussoorie 
the  news  of  the  suicide  of  Mr.  B.  Colonel and  his  wife  did  not  com- 
municate the  fact  to  their  daughter  for  some  days,  as  they  thought 
that  since  the  night  when  she  seemed  to  have  seen  Mr.  B.  she  had  been 
strangely  depressed.  When  the  fact  was  gently  broken  to  her,  it  had  such 
an  efiect  that  never  from  that  day  was  any  allusion  ever  made  to  the 
occurrence.                                                           "  H.  C.  Craigie, 

"  Major-General." 

We  find  from  the  East  India  Company's  Register  that  Lieut.  B.'s 
death  took  place  on  Nov.  6,  1868,  at  Meerut. 

[Colonel is  dead.     We  have  applied  to  his  widow  for  her  recol- 

1  This  is  almost  certainly  an  illustration  of  that  unfortunate  tendency  to  give 
spurious  vividness  to  a  scene,  by  virhich  second-hand  evidence  is  so  apt  to  be  disfigured. 
But  it  is  often  rather  in  adding  details  than  in  altering  essential  points  that  this 
dramatising  tendency  finds  its  chance ;  and  thus  the  distrust  which  it  excites,  though 
legitimate,  may  easily  extend  too  far. 

VII.]      C^^^.S'  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      581 

lections  of  the  incident,  but  have  not  as  yet  received  a  reply.     We  have 
ascertained  that  Colonel was  on  furlough  in  1868.] 

(634)  Dr.  Spencer  T.  Hall,  a  well-known  writer  on  forestry,  &c.,  in 
his  Days  in  Derbyshire  (1863),  pp.  85-6,  relates  as  follows  : — 

"  Philip  and  his  first  wife,  Martha,  who  was  a  cousin  of  mine,  having 
no  children  of  their  own,  adopted  the  little  daughter  of  a  young  woman, 
who  went  to  live  at  Derby.  The  child  called  them  father  and  mother  as 
soon  as  she  could  speak,  not  remembering  her  own  parents,  not  even  her 
mother.  While  yet  very  young,  she  one  day  began  to  cry  out  that  there 
was  a  young  woman  looking  at  her,  and  wanting  to  come  to  her,  and, 
according  to  her  description  of  the  person,  it  must  have  been  her  mother. 
As  no  one  else  saw  the  apparition,  and  the  child  continued  for  more  than 
half  an  hour  to  be  very  excited,  Philip  took  her  out  of  the  house  to  that  of 
a  neighbour ;  but  the  apparition  kept  them  company,  talking  by  the  way. 
They  then  went  to  another  house,  where  it  accompanied  them  still,  and 
seemed  as  though  it  wanted  to  embrace  the  child  :  but  at  last  vanished  in 
the  direction  of  Derby — as  the  little  girl,  now  a  young  woman,  describes  it 
— in  a  flash  of  fire. 

"  Derby  is  about  14  miles  distant  from  Holloway,  and  as  in  that  day 
there  was  neither  railway  nor  telegraph,  communication  between  them 
was  much  slower  than  at  present.  As  soon,  however,  as  it  was  possible 
for  intelligence  to  come,  the  news  arrived  that  the  poor  child's  mother  had 
been  burnt  to  death ;  that  it  happened  about  the  time  when  it  saw  her 
apparition ;  and,  in  short,  that  she  was  sorrowing  and  crying  to  be  taken 
to  the  child  during  the  whole  of  the  time  between  being  burnt  and  her 
expiration. 

"  This  is  no  '  idle  ghost  story,'  but  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  to  which 
not  only  Philip,  but  all  his  old  neighbours  can  testify  ;  and  the  young 
woman  has  not  only  related  it  more  than  once  to  me,  but  she  told  it  in 
the  same  artless  and  earnest  manner  to  my  friend,  the  late  Dr.  Samuel 
Brown,  of  Edinburgh,  who  once  called  at  the  cottage  with  me,  repeating  it 
still  more  clearly  to  Messrs.  Fowler  and  Wells,  on  our  recent  visit." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  (since  deceased)  wrote  to  us  : — 
"  1,  Leopold  Grove,  Blackpool. 

"  November  14th,  1884. 

"It  is  now  a  generation  since  I  resided  in  Derby,  and  most  of  those 
known  to  me  there  are  now  dead  or  the  addresses  forgotten.  Philip 
Spencer,  my  cousin,  died  long  ago,  and  his  second  wife  too.  I  have 
forgotten  the  young  woman's  name,  but  she  may  be  married,  or  have  left 
the  neighbourhood.  My  poor  dear  friend.  Dr.  Samuel  Brown,  is  dead. 
If  anybody  is  living  at  Holloway  likely  to  remember  all  the  particulars  of 
the  case  you  mention,  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Sarah  Buckle,  may,  but  I  cannot 
tell.  [We  wrote ;  but  the  lady  appears  to  have  left  the  place,  and  our 
letter  was  returned.]  You  may,  however,  refer  to  me  as  to  the  accuracy 
of  the  narrative  in  my  book.  Anything  more  carefully  or  clearly  attested 
than  what  is  written  I  never  heard,  and  I  could  have  had  no  motive  for 
inaccuracy.  u  Spencer  T.  Hall." 

[One  may  surmise  that  this  was  very  possibly  a  case  of  telepathic 
hallucination,  without  placing  reliance  on  the  details.] 

582  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

(635)  From  Mrs.  Walsh,  of  The  Priory,  Lincoln.  The  percipient  re- 
fuses a  first-hand  and  signed  account;  she  has  risen  in  life,  and  is  very- 
sensitive  as  to  anything  which  may  recall  her  former  dependent  position. 
The  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  who  procured  the  narrative  for  us,  tells  us  that  he 
first  heard  it  in  the  lifetime  of  Mr.  Walsh,  who  "  was  by  no  means  a 
credulous  man,  but  a  man  of  the  world." 

"  February  18th,  1884. 

"  Some  time  in  the  year  1862  (I  think)  I  was  living  with  my  husband 
and  family  of  little  children,  accompanied  by  our  English  nurse,  in  apart- 
ments in  the  city  of  Brussels.  The  house  we  occupied  was  a  large  one, 
and  we  rented  the  drawing-room  and  the  floor  above.  The  ground  floor 
was  occupied  by  the  owner  of  the  house,  a  Belgian,  and  his  wife  and  little 
children.  We  had  no  intercourse  with  this  family ;  we  had  our  own 
kitchen  on  the  drawing-room  floor,  and  the  upper  floor  consisted  of  nursery, 
with  nursery  bedroom  opening  from  it.  We  had  a  Flemish  general  ser- 
vant, who  went  home  about  9  every  night.  Our  English  nurse  was  a 
very  clever  girl,  about  22  or  23  years  of  age.  She  read  a  good  deal, 
and  taught  herself  French.  She  was  very  matter-of-fact,  and  handy  and 
useful  in  every  way.  She  had  been  with  me  5  or  6  years.  Her  parents 
were  labouring  people  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  and  by  reading 
and  culture  she  had  raised  herself  a  good  deal  out  of  their  sphere.  We 
had  been  about  12  months  away  from  England,  when  the  circumstance 
I  write  of  happened.  M.'s  mother,  after  having  a  large  family — the 
youngest  being  about  9  or  10 — did  not  tell  M.,  nor  did  any  of  the  family, 
that  she  was  again  expecting  an  addition.  The  wife  of  our  landlord  had 
been  confined  two  days,  so  was  in  her  own  room,  on  the  ground  floor  of 
the  house  we  lived  in. 

"One  night  my  husband  and  myself  had  been  out  to  dinner.  On 
returning,  a  little  after  10  o'clock,  my  husband  was  amazed  to  find  our 
apartments  in  darkness,  and  he  ran  up  to  the  nursery  floor  to  complain  to 
M.  of  her  inattention ;  as  the  other  servant  had  gone  home  it  was  her 
place  to  light  our  room.  My  husband  found  the  nursery  lighted,  but 
empty,  and  going  towards  the  children's  room  he  met  M.  coming  out.  She 
began,  '  Oh  !  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you ;  I  have  been  so  frightened  that  I 
was  obliged  to  sit  on  Willie's  bed  till  you  carae  in.'  I  was  in  the  room  by 
this  time,  and  inquiring  into  the  cause  of  fear.  M.  said,  'After  I  put  the 
children  to  bed  I  sat  down  in  the  nursery  to  my  work,  when  I  heard  some- 
one coming  up  the  stairs.  I  went  to  the  door,  and  on  the  first  landing  by 
your  room,  I  saw,  as  I  thought,  Madame  N.  carrying  something  heavy. 
I  felt  that  she  ought  not  to  be  out  of  her  bed,  and  I  called  to  her  in 
French  :  "  Je  viendrai  vous  aider,"  running  down  the  stairs  to  where  I 
supposed  she  was.  When  I  got  there  it  gave  me  a  queer  sensation  to  find 
no  one.  However,  I  said  to  myself,  it  was  a  shadow,  and  made  myself  go 
back  to  my  work.  I  had  scarcely  seated  myself  when  a  voice  called  : 
"  May,  May,  May  "  (the  name  my  children  called  her).  I  got  up,  went  to 
the  door,  and  seeing  someone,  ran  halfway  down  the  stairs  to  meet  the 
woman,  when  a  terrible  dread  came  upon  me,  and  I  rushed  back  to  the 
nursery  and  sat  on  one  of  the  little  beds,  feeling  that  being  with  even  a 
sleeping  child  was  better  than  being  alone.'  My  husband  laughed  at  her, 
told  her  the  vin  ordinaire  was  too  strong  ;  that  she  had  been  dreaming, 
&c.     We  none  of  us  thought  much   of  it,  till  the  first  post  from  England 

VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.       583 

brought  M.  a  letter  to  say  her  mother  had  been  confined,  and  she  and  the 
child  had  died  within  an  hour  after.  Then  we  all  felt  convinced  that  M.'s 
mother  had  been  able  to  come  and  see  her  daughter.^ 

"  Harriet  Walsh." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Walsh  says  : — 

"  At  the  time,  I  am  sure  she  did  not  connect  the  appearance  with  her 
own  mother,  nor  did  she  recognise  the  voice.  All  she  told  us  was  that 
she  thought  it  was  Madame  Nyo.  May's  mother  was  very  much  the  same 
sort  of  person  in  appearance  as  Madame  Nyo,^  without  there  being  any 
likeness  ;  they  were  about  the  same  age,  figure,  and  position  in  life.  We 
only  connected  May's  story  with  her  night  of  terror,  when  she  received  the 
news  from  England." 

[We  cannot  now  ascertain  the  exact  times  of  the  apparition  and  of 
the  death  ;  but  they  probably  occurred  within  a  few  hours  of  each  other. 
If,  as  seems  nearly  certain,  the  call  of  the  Christian  name,  as  well  as  the 
visual  experience,  was  a  hallucination,  that  point  is  decidedly  in  favour  of 
the  telepathic  explanation  of  the  case.] 

(636)  From  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  3,  Bouverie  Square,  Folkestone. 

"  1882. 
"  Madame  Laramea  Esperon,  of  Nantes,  since  dead,  told  me  the 
following  some  16  or  1 7  years  ago.  She  had  an  only  son,  fond  of  fishing, 
which  recreation  he  indulged  in  during  the  forenoon,  and  had  been  for 
some  years  most  punctual  to  be  home  for  dinner  at  12  o'clock.  One  day 
he  did  not  make  his  appearance  at  the  usual  hour.  His  mother  opened 
the  window  to  look  out  for  him,  when  she  heard  him  call  her  several  times, 
and  on  turning  round  she  saw  her  son  coming  through  the  wall,  and 
making  his  exit  through  the  opposite  wall.^  An  hour  or  so  afterwards,  a 
message  was  brought  to  her,  that  her  son  fell  over  the  pier  an  hour  ago, 
and  was  drowned.  Madame  Esperon  was  a  most  worthy  woman,  and  told 
me  her  story  bathed  in  tears.  A  mother  weeping  for  her  only  son  tells 
no  lies." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lyons  adds  : — 

"  Madame  Esperon  was  in  mourning  for  her  son  when  she  told  me  the 
sad  story.  I  was  very  intimate  with  her,  and  my  daughter,  who  went 
with  me  to  Nantes,  was  a  frequent  visitor  at  her  house." 

(637)  From  Mr.  John  Williams,  99,  Wellington  Road,  Dudley. 

"April  7,  1884. 
"On  December  3rd,  1849,  my  mother  died,  between  the  hours  of 
9  and  10  p.m.  Her  sister,  living  from  3  to  4  miles  away,  saw  her  on  the 
top  of  the  staircase,  she  having  just  gone  to  bed,  at  the  same  time  that 
mother  expired.  Such  was  the  effect,  that  she  sent  a  messenger  next 
morning  to  see  if  her  sister  was  really  dead." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Williams  states  that  his  mother  died  at 
The  Hays,  Old  Swinford,  Worcestershire.     His  aunt  (Sarah  Piper,  formerly 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

2  As  to  the  mis-recognition,  compare  cases  170,  171,  and  676. 

3  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  432  (note)  and  573. 

584  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

of  JSTetherton,  Dudley)  is  now  deceased.  He  heard  of  her  experience 
from  his  sister,  Mrs.  Raybould,  of  Stourbridge  (aged  14  at  the  time),  who, 
he  says,  "  well  remembers  aunt  coming  in  the  afternoon,  after  the  return 
of  the  messenger,  and  telling  father  and  her  as  to  seeing  her  sister  at  the 
top  of  the  staircase.  I  was  not  at  home  when  she  (aunt)  called,  so  I  heard  it 
from  my  sister,  or  father,  when  I  got  home  the  same  evening  of  aunt's 
visit.  My  sister  well  remembers  what  her  aunt  said,  and  to-day 
(February  16,  1886)  she  told  me  that  aunt  said,  mother  called  her  by 
name  (Sarah)  3  times  -^  so  she  not  only  saw,  but  heard  her. 

"J.  W." 

The  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  Dec.  3,  1849,  as  the  date. 

Mrs.  Raybould  writes,  on  April  7,  1886  : — 

"  I  remember  well  the  night  of  December  3,  1849,  it  being  the  night 
of  my  dear  mother's  death,  which  happened  about  9.40  p.m.  On  the 
following  day  my  aunt,  mother's  sister,  Sarah  Piper,  came  to  our  house  in 
the  afternoon,  and  said  she  knew  that  my  mother  was  dead,  for  she  saw 
her  at  the  top  of  the  stairs  in  her  bedroom,  and  heard  her  call  '  Sarah,' 
3  times.  This,  from  the  time  she  stated  as  having  seen  and  heard  her,  was 
as  near  the  time  mother  died  as  possible. 

"Maey  Raybould." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Williams  says  that  his  aunt  knew 
nothing  of  her  sister's  illness — puerperal  fever  after  a  premature  confine- 
ment— "  so  could  not  be  expecting  her  death." 

(638)  From  Mrs.  Say  Thomson,  47,  Albany  Villas,  Brighton.^ 

"February,  1886. 

"  I  will  relate  the  incident  that  occurred  to  my  late  husband,  Colonel 
Thomson,  as  I  was  with  him  at  Brussels  at  the  time.  Colonel  Thomson 
was  with  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  at  Brussels,  and  his  brother,  the  Count 
de  Flandres — and,  I  believe,  very  few  others  in  the  room.  He  was  writing 
down  instructions  from  the  king  about  the  volunteers  that  Lord  Heaton 
and  he  had  brought  over.  Someone  leant  over  him,  and  said,  'Your 
brother  wants  you ' ;  he  answered,  '  Tell  him  I  am  now  engaged  with  the 
king,  and  impossible  to  leave  him  ;  but  ask  him  to  wait.'  Being  very 
much  engaged  writing  down  the  king's  directions,  he  said  he  half  looked 
round,  and  saw  a  man  in  his  volunteer  uniform ;  he  hardly  gave  him  a 
glance,  but  said  he  would  come  as  soon  as  he  could.  Directly  he  was 
disengaged,  he  went  into  the  ante-room,  and  asked  the  many  he  knew 
there  if  they  had  heard  anyone  asking  for  him,  as  he  heard  his  brother  had 
arrived  in  Brussels.  Of  course  all  questions  were  asked,  privately,  and  on 
parade,  but  all  wearing  his  uniform  denied  having  called  him.  More- 
over, the  two  sentries  who  were  on  guard,  outside  the  room  the  king 
was  in,  said  it  was  impossible  that  any  volunteer  had  passed  in  without 
their  knowledge.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  he  heard  of  his  brother's 
death. 

"  I   cannot  tell  you   day  and  date  of  Mr.   John  Sinclair  Thomson's 

1  See  p.  229,  note. 

2  A  very  incorrect  version  of  this  occurrence  was  given  in  No.  13  of  "  Volunteering, 
Past  and  Present,"  by  "  Ancient,"  in  the  Volunteer  Service  Review,  July  1st,  1882. 

VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      585 

death,  but  I  have  no  doubt  my  sister-in-law  can  supply  you  with  correct 
information  on  that  point.  Colonel  Thomson  was  commanding  the  Tower 
Hamlets  Rifle  Brigade,  consisting  of  three  corps  ;  but  at  Brussels  Lord 
Heaton  and  he  took  over,  I  think,  at  least  800  volunteers  to  Belgium. 
Colonel  Thomson  died  the  next  year,  June  8th,  1870.  He  was  at  Brussels 
in  August  or  September  the  year  before.  I  never  heard  of  my  husband 
seeing  or  hearing  anything  supernatural  ^  before. 

"  W.  S.  Thomson." 
In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Thomson  writes  on  March  7th,  1886  : — 
"  The  hour  my  husband  heard  the  voice,  telling  him  his  brother  waited 
for  him,  was  noon.  The  news  of  his  brother's  death  did  not  come  until 
the  next  day.  But  whether  the  hours  of  hearing  the  voice  and  the  death 
occurred  at  the  same  time  I  am  unable  to  say.  We  hardly  ever  spoke  of 
it,  as  it  was  not  a  subject  Colonel  Thomson  cared  to  discuss." 

We  learn  from  Miss  Kate  Thomson,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  John  S. 
Thomson,  that  her  father  died  at  about  8  p.m.,  on  Saturday,  Sept.  11th, 
1869,  at  Aitechuan  House,  Ardrishaig,  Argyleshire ;  and  we  have 
verified  the  date  by  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Scotsman. 

Mr.  Podmore  writes,  February  9th,  1886  : — 

"  I  called  on  Mrs.  John  Sinclair  Thomson,  of  18,  Gloucester  Walk, 
Campden  Hill,  W.,  on  the  9th  February,  and  heard  the  narrative,  as  here 
given,  from  her.  Her  husband's  death  was  quite  unexpected, — the  illness 
being  only  a  sudden  attack  of  gout ;  and  she  thinks  it  is  certain  that 
Colonel  Thomson  did  not  even  know  that  his  brother  was  ill.  She  herself 
did  not  see  Colonel  Thomson  in  the  interval  before  his  own  death  in  the 
following  June  ;  but  shortly  after  that  event  she  heard,  for  the  first  time, 
of  the  above  occurrence  from  a  Dr.  Walker,  of  Peterborough,  who  had 
received  an  account  of  it  from  Colonel  Thomson  himself.  She  has  sub- 
sequently heard  the  full  details  from  Mrs.  Say  Thomson." 

[If  the  letter  announcing  the  death  really  arrived  at  Brussels,  from 
Scotland,  on  the  day  following  Colonel  Thomson's  experience,  the  death 
must  clearly  have  preceded  that  experience  by  more  than  12  hours.  But 
Mrs.  Thomson  admits  that  she  has  no  distinct  recollection  of  the  interval 
that  elapsed  before  the  arrival  of  the  letter,  and  indeed  spoke  of  it,  in  the 
first  letter  in  which  she  mentioned  the  occurrence  to  us,  as  "  a  few  days  "  ; 
and  though  her  son,  Mr.  J.  F.  Alison  Thomson,  of  Croxton  Lodge, 
Clarendon  Street,  Leamington,  mentions  having  heard  from  his  father 
that  the  letter  arrived  "on  the  following  morning  after  the  warning,"  he 
adds  a  sentence  showing  that  he  conceives  this  to  be  tantamount  to  saying 
that  the  days  of  the  death  and  of  his  father's  experience  were  the  same  ; 
and  his  evidence,  therefore,  cannot  be  held  to  decide  the  point.] 

(639)  From  Mr.  Williams,  Summerfield,  Rhyl. 

"November  23,  1885. 

"  About  46  years  ago  my  father  went  to  a  place  near  XJtica,  in  America, 
leaving  my  mother  with  myself,  then  six  years  of  age,  a  younger  brother, 
and  a  baby   sister  at  home  at  Bontuchel,  in  North  Wales.     In  his  corre- 

1  See  p.  48,  note. 

586  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap- 

spondence  with  my  mother  he  described  the  country  to  which  he  had  gone, 
and  intimated  his  purpose  to  return  home  and  sell  his  property  at  Bontu- 
chel,  and  take  us  all  out  to  live  there.  We  all  slept  in  a  two-bedded  room, 
with  windows  facing  each  other.  My  brother  and  I  were  together  in  one 
of  the  beds,  asleep,  before  my  mother  came  to  bed  with  the  baby.  After 
putting  the  lights  out  she  heard  a  noise  resembling  the  flapping  of  a  bird's 
wing  against  the  windows.  It  was  a  moonlight  night.  She  got  up  and 
looked  out  of  the  window,  but  seeing  nothing  returned  to  bed.  Immediately 
after  this  she  saw  my  father  standing  in  the  room,  dressed  in  his  usual 
clothes,  and  looking  at  her  and  at  the  child  lying  beside  her.  As  soon  as 
she  caught  his  eye  he  turned  his  back  upon  them,  and  looked  at  us  as  we 
lay  in  the  other  bed.  My  mother  called  him  by  his  name,  and  got  out  of 
bed  to  go  to  him,  fully  believing  that  it  was  he,  but  he  instantly  vanished. 
So  terrified  was  she  now  that  she  left  the  house  the  next  day,  and  went  to 
her  parents,  who  lived  at  Ruthin,  taking  us  with  her.  About  six  weeks 
after  this  removal,  a  letter  came  sealed  with  black,  written  by  a  friend  of 
my  father's,  detailing  the  circumstances  of  his  illness,  of  his  death  and 
burial,  and  specifying  the  time  of  his  demise.  My  mother  had  carefully 
recorded  the  time  of  her  vision,  and  now  found  that,  allowing  for  difference 
of  longitude,  it  corresponded  exactly  to  that  of  his  death.  I  remember  my 
mother's  sudden  removal  from  Bontuchel  to  Ruthin,  and  heard  her 
repeatedly  relate  the  particulars  here  given.  I  cannot  say  that  I  heard 
her  relate  the  particulars  before  she  received  the  letter ;  but  I  remember 
distinctly  that  she  said  she  gave  them  to  her  parents,  at  the  time  of  her 
removal,  as  the  reason  why  she  came  to  them  so  suddenly.  My  brother  and 
sister,  still  living,  can  corroborate  this  testimony. 

"  W.  Williams." 
[The  brother's  and  sister's  corroboration  has  not  been  received  in  time 
for  insertion.] 

The  following  is  the  only  instance  known  to  me  in  which 
telepathy  seems  actually  to  have  aided  the  course  of  the  law.  The 
story  is  remote,  but  we  have  the  contemporary  evidence  ;  and  there 
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  a  coincidence  of  the  kind  alleged  took 
place. 

(640)  The  Buckingham,  Bedford,  and  Hertford  Chronicle  for  Nov.  1, 
1828,  states  that  on  Saturday,  Oct.  25,  1828,  William  Edden,  market 
gardener  (called  Noble  Edden),  was  found  dead  on  the  road  between 
Aylesbury  and  Thame,  with  several  ribs  broken.  He  was  discovered  by 
Mr.  Taylor,  miller,  who  was  returning  from  Aylesbury,  and  gave  the  alarm. 
At  the  adjourned  inquest,  on  Nov.  5,  a  verdict  of  murder  was  returned 
against  some  person  unknown. 

The  Buckingham  Gazette  of  August  22,  1829,  gives  an  account  of  the 
apprehension  of  a  man  named  Sewell,  who  had  stated  in  a  letter  to  his 
father  that  he  knew  who  had  killed  Edden.  He  accused  a  man  named 
Tyler,  and  both  were  tried  at  the  Aylesbury  Petty  Sessions,  August  22, 
before  Lord  Nugent,  Sir  J.  D.  King,  R.  Browne,  Esq.,  and  others.  On 
the  first  day  of  the  examination,  Mrs.  Edden,  wife  of  the  murdered  man, 
gave  the  following  evidence  : — "  After  my  husband's  corpse  was  brought 
home,  I  sent  to  Tyler,  for  some  reasons  I  had,  to  come  and  see  the  corpse. 

VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.       587 

I  sent  for  him  five  or  six  times.  I  had  some  particular  reason  for  sending 
for  him  which  I  never  did  divulge.  ...  I  will  tell  my  reasons  if  you 
gentlemen  ask  me,  in  the  face  of  Tyler,  even  if  my  life  should  be  in  danger 
for  it.  When  I  was  ironing  a  shirt,  on  the  Saturday  night  my  husband 
was  murdered,  something  came  over  me — something  rushed  over  me — and 
I  thought  my  husband  came  by  me.  I  looked  up,  and  I  thought  I  heard 
the  voice  of  my  husband  come  from  near  my  mahogany  table,  as  I  turned 
from  my  ironing.  I  ran  out  and  said,  '  Oh,  dear  God  !  my  husband  is 
murdered,  and  his  ribs  are  broken.'  I  told  this  to  several  of  my  neigh- 
bours. Mrs.  Chester  was  the  first  to  whom  I  told  it.  I  mentioned  it  also 
at  the  Saracen's  Head." 

Sir  J.  D.  King  :  "  Have  you  any  objection  to  say  why  you  thought 
your  husband  had  been  mui"dered  '?  "  "  No  !  I  thought  I  saw  my  husband's 
apparition  and  the  man  that  had  done  it,  and  that  man  was  Tyler,  and 
that  was  the  reason  I  sent  for  him.  .  .  .  When  my  neighbours  asked 
me  what  was  the  matter  when  I  ran  out,  I  told  them  that  I  had  seen  my 
husband's  apparition.  .  .  .  When  I  mentioned  it  to  Mrs.  Chester  I 
said  :  '  My  husband  is  murdered,  and  his  ribs  are  broken  ;  I  have  seen  him 
by  the  mahogany  table.'  I  did  not  tell  her  who  did  it.  Mrs.  Chester 
answered,  I  was  always  frightened,  since  my  husband  had  been  stopped 
on  the  road.  [The  deceased  Edden  had  once  before  been  waylaid,  but  was 
then  too  powerful  for  his  assailants.]  In  consequence  of  what  I  saw,  I 
went  in  search  of  my  husband,  until  I  was  taken  so  ill  I  could  go  no 
further." 

Lord  Nugent  :  "  What  made  you  think  your  husband's  ribs  were 
broken  ?"  "  He  held  up  his  hand  like  this  "  (holds  up  her  arm),  "  and  I 
saw  a  hammer,  or  something  like  a  hammer,  and  it  came  into  my  mind 
that  his  ribs  were  broken." 

Sewell  stated  that  the  murder  was  accomplished  by  means  of  a  hammer. 
The  examination  was  continued  on  August  31  and  September  13;  and 
finally  both  prisoners  were  discharged  for  want  of  sufficient  evidence. 
Sewell  declared  that  he  had  only  been  a  looker-on,  and  his  accusations 
against  Tyler  were  so  full  of  prevarications  that  they  were  not  held 
sufficient  to  incriminate  him.  The  inquiry  was  again  resumed  on  February 
11,  1830,  and  Sewell,  Tyler,  and  a  man  named  Gardner  were  committed 
for  trial. 

The  trial  (see  Buckingham  Gazette,  March  13,  1830,)  took  place  at  the 
Buckingham  Lent  Assizes,  March  5,  1830,  before  Mr.  Baron  Yaughan, 
and  a  Grand  Jury  ;  but  in  the  report  of  Mrs.  Edden's  evidence,  no  mention 
is  made  of  the  vision. 

Sewell  and  Tyler  were  found  guilty,  and  were  executed,  protesting  their 
innocence,  on  March  8,  1830. 

Miss  Browne,  writing  to  us  from  Farnham  Castle,  in  January,  1884, 
gives  an  account  of  the  vision  which  substantially  accords  with  that  here 
recorded,  adding : — 

"  The  wife  persisted  in  her  account  of  the  vision  ;  consequently,  the 
accused  was  taken  up,  and,  with  some  circumstantial  evidence  in  addition 
to  the  woman's  story,  committed  for  trial  by  two  magistrates,  my  father 
Colonel  Robert  Browne,  and  the  Rev.  Charles  Ackfield.  The  murderer 
was  tried  and  convicted  at  the  Assizes,  and  hanged  at  Aylesbury. 

588  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  It  may  be  added  that  Colonel  Browne  was  remarkably  free  from 
superstition,  and  was  a  thorough  disbeliever  in  '  ghost  stories/  He  came 
home,  and  said,  laughing,  '  We  have  had  a  ghost  called  in,  in  court  to-day. 
We  shall  see  how  the  story  is  confirmed  ! '  " 

The  following  narrative  may  be  compared  to  the  arrival  examples 
in  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7.  But  if  we  found  a  difficulty,  in  any  case,  in 
regarding  the  mere  fact  of  impending  arrival  as  the  occasioning  con- 
dition of  a  telepathic  transference  (p.  96),  the  difficulty  is  intensi- 
fied when  the  arrival  is  of  someone  with  whom  the  percipient  is 
in  daily  association,  and  who  has  only  been  away  an  hour  or  two 
on  ordinary  business.  I  think,  therefore,  that  the  chance  that  the 
experience  here  described  was  purely  subjective  is  too  appreciable 
to  allow  the  account  to  be  numbered  as  evidence. 

A  letter  written  to  the  Spectator  'by  the  late  Rev.  W.  L.  Clay,  of 
Rainhill  Vicarage,  under  date  Feb.  9,  1869. 

"  On  a  Sunday  afternoon,  about  30  years  ago  (the  precise  date  I  cannot 
recollect),  my  mother  and  eldest  sister,  then  about  8  years  old,  were 
sitting  together  in  the  dining-room.  No  one  else  was  in  the  house  except 
a  younger  child  and  his  nurse,  and  another  servant ;  all  the  rest  of  the 
family  were  ...  at  church,  and  my  father,  John  Clay,  of  Preston, 
was  at  the  gaol.  He  was  due  home  in  about  half  an-hour,  it  then  being 
nearly  4  o'clock.  The  afternoon  was  very  wet,  but  very  still,  the  rain 
pouring  in  torrents,  but  with  an  even,  steady  downpour.  While  sitting 
thus  my  mother  heard  footsteps  approach,  and  presently  some  one  opened 
and  passed  through  the  yard-door.  (This  yard-door  faced  on  the  road. 
The  nearest  house  was  full  500  yards  distant,  and  any  one 
going  to  the  front  door  would  have  to  pass  this  yard-door,  the  dining- 
room  windows,  another  window,  and  then  turn  round  the  corner  of  the 
house,  through  a  gate  in  the  garden.)  She  was  a  good  deal  startled,  more 
especially  as  this  door,  according  to  domestic  regulations,  ought  to  have 
been  locked.  She  roused  herself  to  listen  with  all  her  might,  and  heard 
distinctly — all  the  more  distinctly  as  the  house  was  so  quiet — the  person 
who  had  opened  the  yard-door  enter  the  house  by  the  back  door,  traverse 
a  passage  in  the  basement  storey,  open  the  door  at  the  foot  of  the  back 
stairs,  mount  the  back  stairs,  and  enter  the  front  hall.  But  by  this 
time  she  was  completely  reassured,  for  she  had  recognised  my  father's 
footsteps.  He  put  his  umbrella  into  the  stand,  with  a  rattling  noise,  took 
off  his  top-coat  and  shook  it,  and  then  came  through  the  inner  hall  into 
the  dining-room.  The  hall-door  and  dining-room  door  were  both  ajar,  so 
she  easily  heard  all  this.  He  went  up  to  the  fire,  and  resting  his  elbow  on 
the  mantel-piece,  and  one  foot  on  the  fender,  stood  there  for  a  few 
moments  drying  himself.  At  length  she  said,  '  You  must  be  very  wet ; 
had  you  not  better  go  and  change  your  clothes  at  once  ? '  '  Yes,'  he  re- 
plied, '  I  think  I  had  better  do  so,'i  and  so  he  turned,  left  the  room,  and 
went  upstairs  to  his  dressing-room. 

"  As  he  did  not  come  down    again  for    more  than    half -an-hour,  my 

^  See  p.  460,  second  note. 

VII.]    GASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND   HEARING.     589 

mother  followed  him  to  see  what  was  the  cause  of  his  delay.  To  her 
astonishment,  she  found  his  room  empty,  and  no  sign  of  his  having  been 
there.  She  searched  all  through  the  rooms  on  the  same  landing,  but 
could  not  find  him,  and  at  length  came  down  puzzled  and  frightened ;  but 
trying  to  calm  herself  with  the  supposition  that,  although  she  had  not 
noticed  his  departure,  he  must  have  left  the  house  again  for  some  purpose 
or  other.  But  while  she  sat  there,  still  flurried  and  uneasy,  she  heard 
again  the  same  footsteps  approaching,  the  same  opening  of  the  yard-door, 
the  same  entrance  by  the  back  door,  the  same  traversing  of  the  passage 
downstairs,  and  mounting  by  the  back  stairs  into  the  hall,  the  same 
putting  down  of  the  umbrella,  and  shaking  of  the  coat,  and  then  my 
father  came  into  the  room,  walked  up  to  the  fire,  and  placed  his  elbow 
on  the  mantel-piece,  and  foot  on  the  fender,  just  as  he  had  done  before. 
'  Why,  where  have  you  been  ? '  exclaimed  my  mother,  as  soon  as  she  could 
speak  after  the  first  gasp  of  amazement.  '  Been  ? '  he  said,  turning 
round  and  noticing  for  the  first  time  her  excitement  and  distress,  '  I  have 
been  to  the  gaol  as  usual.'  '  Oh  !  you  know  that's  not  what  I  mean.  I 
mean  where  have  you  been  since  you  came  in  by  the  back  door  just  as 
you  have  done  just  now,  rather  more  than  half-an-hour  ago  ? '  'I  don't 
understand  you  at  all ;  I  have  come  straight  from  the  gaol  and  have  never 
been  in  the  house  since  I  left  this  morning.'  '  Oh,  it's  too  bad  playing 
jokes  like  this  to  frighten  me,  when  you  know  I  am  not  well.'  (My 
mother  was  in  delicate  health  at  the  time.)  And  then,  in  answer  to  his 
amazed  questions,  she  poured  out  the  story  I  have  told  you. 

"  I  believe  the  incident  happened  exactly  as  I  have  narrated.  I  have 
heard  my  father  tell  the  story  repeatedly,  and  he  was  singularly  accurate 
and  truthful.  My  mother's  account,  too,  tallies  precisely  with  his.  My 
sister  cannot  now,  I  think,  distinguish  between  what  she  recollects 
and  what  she  has  so  often  heard  related.  But  my  father  at  the  time 
questioned  her  as  to  what  she  had  heard  and  seen,  and  her  account 
was  that  '  I  saw  mamma  get  up  suddenly,  and  go  into  papa's  dressing-room, 
and  then  she  went  into  all  the  rooms  upstairs  as  if  she  was  looking  for 
something,  and  then  she  came  down  and  looked  as  if  something  was  the 
matter,  but  she  wouldn't  answer  me  when  I  asked  her  what  it  was.' 

"  When  my  mother  told  her  story  my  father  instantly  recollected  that 
as  he  left  the  gaol  the  thought  occurred  to  him,  when  he  saw  how  heavy 
the  rain  was,  that  if  he  found  the  yard-door  unlocked  he  would  go  in  that 
way — a  thing  that  he  very  seldom  did — to  avoid  going  round  the  corner  to 
the  front  door,  and  the  thought  having  once  occurred  he  mentally 
rehearsed  the  circumstances  of  his  entrance — doing  in  spirit  precisely  what 
he  afterwards  did  in  the  body.  The  distance  from  the  gaol  to  our  house 
at  East  Cliff"  was  rather  more  than  two  miles,  and  .  .  .  this  corresponds 
with  my  mother's  '  rather  more  than  half-an-hour.' 

"W.  L.  Clay." 

Mrs.  Clay,  widow  of  the  Rev.  W.  L.  Clay,  and  a  friend  of  Professo 
Barrett's,  writes  on  24th  September,  1883  : — 

"  I  have  more  than  once  heard  the  story  related  and  discussed  in  my 
mother-in-law's  presence  by  her  husband.  There  is  no  doubt  she  firmly 
believed  in  the  vision.  My  impression  is  that  he  thought  it  had  been 
a  very  vivid  dream.  u  -^    j    Clay  " 

CHAP. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

RECIPROCAL  CASES. 

The  following  specimens,  or  possible  specimens,  of  this  rare  type 
seem  worth  presenting,  though  for  the  most  part  far  from  complete 
from  an  evidential  point  of  view. 

(641)  From  a  clergyman  in  Yorkshire,  who  desires  that  his  name  may 
not  be  published. 

"January,  1885. 

"  The  following  experience  took  place  nearly  25  years  ago,  but  there 
is  no  doubt  of  its  correctness  in  every  detail.  I  became  acquainted  with 
a  young  lady  in  London,  who,  I  may  say  without  vanity,  fell  violently  in 
love  with  me.  There  was  a  strange  fascination  about  her  which  attracted 
me  to  her,  but,  although  very  young,  I  was  far  from  reciprocating  her 
affection.  By  degrees  I  discovered  that  she  had  the  power  of  influencing 
me  when  I  was  away  from  her,  making  me  seem  to  realise  her  presence 
about  me  when  I  knew  that  she  was  some  distance  away ;  and  then  that 
she  was  able,  when  I  saw  her,  to  tell  me  where  I  had  been  and  what  I 
had  been  doing  at  certain  times.  At  first  I  thought  that  this  was  merely 
the  result  of  accident — that  some  one  had  seen  me  and  reported  to  her — 
until  one  day  she  told  me  that  at  a  certain  hour  of  the  day  I  had  been 
in  a  drawing-room,  which  she  described,  when  I  knew  there  had  been 
no  chance  of  collusion,  and  that  no  one  could  have  told  her  of  my  visit 
to  the  house. 

"  She  then  told  me  that  when  she  began  intently  to  fix  her  mind  on 
me,  she  seemed  to  be  able  to  see  me  and  all  my  surroundings.^  At  first 
she  fancied  it  was  only  imagination,  until  she  saw  by  my  manner  that 
what  she  described  had  really  taken  place.  I  had  several  opportunities 
afterwards  of  testing  this  power,  and  found  she  was  correct  in  every 
instance. 

"  I  need  scarcely  say  that  when  I  had  satisfied  myself  of  this,  I  kept 
out  of  the  way  of  such  a  dangerous  acquaintance.  We  did  not  meet 
for  about  10  years,  and  had  drifted  so  widely  apart  as  to  lose  sight  of 
each  other.  One  day  I  was  walking  with  my  wife  on  the  West  Cliff  at 
Ramsgate,  when  a  strange  feeling  of  oppression  came  over  me,  and  I  was 
compelled  to  sit  down.  A  few  minutes  afterwards  my  old  acquaintance 
stood  before  me,  introducing  me  to  her  husband  and  asking  to  be  intro- 
duced to  my  wife. 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  268. 

VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  591 

"  We  met  several  times  while  they  stayed  at  Ramsgate,  and  I  learned 
that  she  had  been  married  for  some  years,  and  had  several  children  ;  but 
I  have  seen  nothing  of  them  since,  and  have  no  wish,  even  if  I  had  the 
opportunity,  of  renewing  the  acquaintance.  No  reference  whatever  was 
made  to  the  past,  and  I  did  not  learn  whether  she  had  still  the  strange 
power  she  formerly  possessed." 

This  may  probably  have  been  a  reciprocal  case,  though  we  cannot 
now  ascertain  whether  the  impressions  which  suggested  to  each  .of 
the  two  parties  the  other's  presence  were  simultaneous.  The  only 
other  case  in  our  collection  where  a  prolonged  course  of  reciprocal 
action  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  is  the  following. 

(642)  From  Miss  L.  A.  W.  (the  narrator  of  case  140),  whose  only 
reason  for  withholding  her  name  from  publication  is  that  she  is  sure  that 
her  family  would  object  to  its  appearance. 

She  begins  by  saying  that  when  she  was  19  or  20,  she  had  a  spell  of 
indifferent  health,  caused,  it  was  thought,  by  over-study.  During  this 
time,  from  March  in  one  year  till  June  in  the  next,  she  was  much  troubled 
at  intervals  by  singular  dreams,  which  she  recorded  in  a  note-book,  and 
also  described  to  one  of  her  sisters.  The  main  feature  in  these  dreams 
was  the  appearance  of  a  particidar  person.  "  I  was  not  in  love,  nor  indeed 
had  I  been ;  and  certainly  no  feeling  but  that  of  a  mysterious  repugnance 
(and  at  the  same  time  an  inability  to  avoid  or  escape  from  the 
influence  of  the  person  of  whom  I  dreamt)  actuated  me.  He  was 
someone  I  had  never  in  all  my  life  wittingly  seen,  though  I  had  reason  to 
think  afterwards  that  he  had  seen  me  at  a  Birmingham  musical  festival. 
On  that  occasion  I  had  apparently  fainted,  and  it  was  attributed  to  the 
heat  and  the  excitement  of  the  music.  I  hardly  knew  if  it  were  or  not. 
I  only  knew  I  felt  all  my  pulses  stop,  and  a  burning  and  singing  in  my 
head,  and  that  I  was  perfectly  conscious  of  those  around  me,  but  unable  to 
speak  and  tell  them  so.  To  return  to  my  dreams.  I  always  knew  as  I  slept 
when  the  influence  was  coming  over  me,  and  often  in  my  dream  I  com- 
menced it  by  thinking,  '  Here  it  is,  or  here  he  comes  again.'  They  were 
not  always  disagreeable  dreams  in  themselves,  but  the  fascination  was 
always  dreadful  to  me,  and  a  kind  of  struggle  between  two  natures  within 
me  seemed  to  drag  my  powers  of  mind  and  body  two  ways.  I  used  to 
.awake  as  cold  as  a  stone  in  the  hottest  nights,  my  head  having  the  queer 
feeling  of  a  hot  iron  pressing  somewhere  in  its  inside.  I  would  shiver  and 
my  teeth  chatter  with  a  terror  which  seemed  unreasonable,  for  there  was, 
even  in  the  subjects  of  my  dreams,  seldom  anything  wicked  or  terrifying." 

The  dreams  ceased  after  a  course  of  medical  treatment.  In  the  next 
year  but  one  Miss  W.  was  visiting  in  Liverpool.  "  I  had  enjoyed  two  or 
three  good  dances,  and  was  sitting  out  one,  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  when 
not  suddenly,  but  by  degrees,  I  felt  myself  turning  cold  and  stony,  and  the 
peculiar  burning  in  my  head.  If  I  could  have  spoken  I  would  have  said, 
'  My  dreams  !  my  dreams  !  '  but  I  only  shivered,  which  attracted  the 
notice  of  my  companion,  who  exclaimed,  '  You  are  ill,  my  dear.  Come  for 
some  wine,  or  hot  coffee.'  I  rose,  knowing  what  I  was  going  to  see,  and 
as  I  turned,  I  looked  straight  into  the  eyes  of  the  fac-simile  of  the  being 

592  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

who  had  been  present  to  my  sleeping  thoughts  for  so  long,  and  the  next 
moment  he  stepped  forward  from  the  pillar  against  which  he  was  leaning 
behind  the  lace  curtain,  and  shook  hands  with  my  companion.  He 
accompanied  us  to  the  refreshment  room,  attended  to  my  wants,  and  was 
introduced  to  me.  I  declined  dancing,  but  could  not  avoid  conversation. 
His  first  remark  was,  '  We  are  not  strangers  to  each  other.  Where  have 
we  met  ? '  I  fear  I  shall  scarcely  be  believed  when  I  say,  that  (setting 
my  teeth,  and  nerving  myself  to  meet  what  I  felt  would  conquer  me,  if  I 
once  submitted  in  even  the  slightest  degree)  I  answered  that  I  never 
remembered  meeting  him  before,  and  to  all  his  questionings  returned  the 
most  reserved  answers.  He  seemed  much  annoyed  and  puzzled,  but  on 
that  occasion  did  not  mention  dreams. 

"  I  took  an  opportunity  of  asking  my  sister  if  she  remembered  my 
description  of  the  man  of  my  dreams,  and  upon  her  answering  '  Yes,' 
asked  her  to  look  round  the  rooms  and  see  if  any  one  there  resembled  him, 
and  half-an-hour  later  she  came  up,  saying,  '  There  is  the  man,  he  has. 
even  the  mole  on  the  left  side  of  his  mouth.' " 

Miss  W.  subsequently  met  this  gentleman  at  almost  every  party  she 
went  to.  "  He  was  sometimes  so  gloomy  and  fierce  at  my  determined 
avoidance  of  any  but  the  most  ordinary  conversation,  that  I  felt  quite  a. 
terror  of  meeting  him.  He  frequently  asked  if  I  believed  in  dreams  ;  if  I 
could  relate  any  to  him  ;  if  I  had  never  seen  him  before ;  and  would  say, 
after  my  persistent  avoidance  of  the  subject,  '  I  can  do  nothing,  so  long 
as  you  will  not  trust  me. '  " 

Miss  W.  says  that  she  has  several  pages,  in  her  note-book,  of  entries  of 
dreams  in  which  she  seemed  to  be  accompanying  her  visitor  in  a  flight, 
through  the  world. 

"  When  conversing  with  him  in  the  flesh,  he  asked  me  if  I  had  '  ever 
travelled.'  I  said  '  No.'  He  showed  surprise,  and  began  to  dilate  on  the 
wonders  of  such  and  such  a  place  or  scene,  all  of  which  I  felt  sure  I  had. 
seen  with  him,  and  entered  in  my  note-book.  It  was  deeply  interesting, 
and  I  was  totally  absorbed  in  his  recitals,  time  after  time,  when  he- 
abruptly  stopped,  saying,  '  But  have  you  never  had  scenes  such  as  these 
before  you  ? '  and  I  replied,  '  Yes,  in  my  dreams  I  have.'  Such,  or  similar 
remarks,  I  know  I  have  noted  down,  and  his  eagerness  to  make  me  admit, 
similar  experiences  was  at  times  almost  fierce.  I  had  a  great  longing  at 
times  to  tell  him  everything,  but  an  innate  sense  that  by  so  doing  I  should, 
be  as  completely  his  slave  and  tool  as  I  had  been  in  dreams,  always 
stopped  me." 

The  efibrt  of  these  conversations  was  so  exhausting  to  Miss  W.  that, 
she  wrote  home  to  get  herself  recalled — a  fact  which  her  strange  acquaint- 
ance seems  to  have  intuitively  divined,  and  for  which  he  bitterly 
reproached  her.  She  has  never  seen  him  since.  She  says,  in  answer  to- 
inquiries  : — "  You  are  right  in  your  conjecture  that  he  inferred  [  ?  implied] 
he  had  seen  me  in  dreams.  He  often  talked  as  if  he  were  perfectly  aware 
that  I  knew  it,  but  that  I  would  not  go  beyond  a  certain  limit  in 
admitting  anything."  She  adds  that  her  sister  remembers  all  the  circum- 
stances— the  dreams,  their  frequency,  and  the  correct  description  of  the' 
man  subsequently  met ;  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  procure  the  sister's 
written  confirmation.  Miss  W.  says  that  she  cannot  spare  the  time  to. 
make  extracts  from  her  diary  for  publication. 

VIII.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES.  593 

[I£  the  details  here  are  quite  accurate,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  explain 
the  case  telepathically.  But  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  the  dream- 
figure  assumed  the  distinctness  which  made  it  seem  the  counterpart  of  the 
real  figure,  only  after  the  real  one  was  seen  ;  and  that  Miss  W.  herself  led 
the  conversations  in  the  directions  where  they  seemed  to  confirm  her 
dream-experiences.  Without  an  independent  account  from  the  gentleman 
himself,  the  interpretation  of  the  case  must  remain  dubious  ;  and  as  Miss 
W.  is  unwilling  to  mention  his  name,  no  more  can  be  done.  Should  the 
account  ever  meet  his  eye,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  communicate 
with  us.] 

In  the  next  case  it  is  impossible  to  tell  how  closely  the  two 
experiences  coincided. 

(643)  From  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W. 

"  February  10th,  1886. 

"  I  send  you  a  well-authenticated  dream  of  my  daughter-in-law,  Mrs. 
Alfred  Wedgwood,  with  the  vouchers.  You  will  see  that  she  told  it 
immediately  after  the  occurrence  to  Mrs.  K.,  and  to  me  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, on  her  return  to  Queen  Anne  Street.  I  have  a  strong  recollection 
that  it  was  on  that  occasion  that  she  explained  her  noticing  the  ring,  by 
saying  that  in  her  dream  the  stranger  leant  his  hand  on  the  bedside  as  he 
stooped  over  her.  She  expressed  great  confidence  that  she  should  know  him 
again  if  ever  she  saw  him,  and  I  told  her  to  let  me  know  if  ever  she  did. 
However,  she  never  mentioned  to  me  the  fact  of  her  having  fallen  in  with 
him  that  autumn,  and  she  only  mentioned  it  incidentally,  when  she  was 
with  me  last  Christmas,  as  a  matter  well-known  to  me. 

"  If  I  had  known  it  at  the  time,  we  might  perhaps  have  been  able  to 
ascertain  how  far  the  dreams  were  synchronous.  It  is  not  likely  that  they 
were  absolutely  so,  as  hers  was  in  the  afternoon. 

"  H.  Wedgwood." 

"  In  June,  '84,  I  went  to  Folkestone  to  look  out  for  a  house,  and  slept 
for  a  night  or  two  at  the  West  Cliff  Hotel.  The  second  day  I  was  there, 
being  a  good  deal  tired,  I  went  up  in  the  afternoon  to  my  room,  locked 
the  door  and  fell  asleep  upon  my  bed,  having  undressed  myself  and  merely 
covered  myself  with  the  sheet,  it  being  a  warm  day.  After  a  while,  I  was 
startled  out  of  sleep  by  dreaming  in  a  very  lively  way  that  a  gentle- 
man, whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  was  stooping  over  me.  He  was 
dressed  in  a  dark  grey  tweed  suit ;  he  wore  on  his  little  finger  a  cornelian 
ring,  and  a  small  cameo  pin  which  was  a  veiled  figure.  I  observed  that  one 
of  his  eyes  drooped  a  little.  There  were  a  number  of  Zulus  standing 
behind  him.  When  he  bent  down  towards  me  he  put  out  his  hand  and 
said,  '  Poor  thing,  you  seem  tired.' 

"  The  impression  was  so  vivid  that  I  jumped  ofi"  the  bed  to  see  whether 
the  door  could  have  come  open,  but  I  found  that  it  was  locked  as  I  had  left  it. 
I  got  up  and  dressed,  and  went  to  tea  with  Mrs.  K.;  I  told  her  my  dream, 
saying  I  was  sure  I  should  recognise  the  man  if  ever  I  saw  him.  Having 
found  a  suitable  house,  I  returned  to  my  father-in-law's  in  Queen  Anne 
Street,  and  told  him  my  dream,  as  I  had  done  to  Mrs.  K.     In  the  middle 

VOL.  II.  2    Q 

594  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

of  August  we  moved  to  Folkestone,  and  not  many  weeks  afterwards,  as  I 
was  going  down  the  Military  Hill  leading  from  the  camp  to  Sandgate,  I 
met  the  gentleman  whom  I  had  seen  in  my  dream,  wearing  the  same 
clothes.  He  stopped,  and  looked  at  me,  and  said,  '  I  think  we  must  have 
met  before.'  I  said,  '  Yes  ' ;  then  introduced  myself,  and  told  him  of  my 
dream.  He  wore  the  same  pin,  but  not  the  ring.  I  called  his  attention 
to  it.  He  said  he  had  not  worn  the  cornelian  ring  for  some  years,  as 
he  preferred  his  brother's,  but  that  he  had  been  looking  at  his  old  ring. 
He  had  dreamt  of  seeing  me  lying  down  in  a  white  gown.  The  day  he  met 
me,  I  had  on  a  white  dress.  He  also  told  me  he  had  been  at  the  Cape,  and 
once  belonged  to  the  Mounted  Rifles  when  first  established. 

"  M.  R.  Wedgwood." 

"  I  believe  I  did  not  hear  of  my  wife's  dream  until  after  she  had  met 
with  the  gentleman  she  had  seen  in  her  dream.  Very  soon  after  that 
meeting  I  was  told  the  story.  u  ^  j^  Wedgwood." 

Thinking  it  possible  that  Major  M.  had  unconsciously  noticed  Mrs.  A. 
Wedgwood's  appearance  during  the  days  when  she  was  in  Folkestone  in 
June,  I  asked  her  how  she  was  dressed  during  that  short  stay.  She 
replied  : — 

"  At  the  time  I  was  down  here  for  the  two  days,  I  wore  a  black  silk 
gown,  as  I  well  remember  my  friend  Mrs.  K.  admiring  it  when  I  went 
and  drank  tea  with  her.     I  told  her  of  my  dream  at  the  same  time." 

Mrs.  K.  writes  : — 

"December  28th,  1885. 

"  I  remember  quite  well  the  circumstance  you  allude  to.  Mrs.  Alfred 
Wedgwood  told  me  about  it  the  same  evening,  when  she  was  sitting  with 
me  at  Meadowbank,  but  I  think  she  said  she  saw  this  vision  of  a  man 
looking  at  her,  not  in  a  dream,  but  on  suddenly  awaking  from  sleep,  and 
that  he  vanished  as  she  looked  at  him.  She  told  me  that  she  particularly 
noticed  a  stud  or  breast-pin  he  was  wearing,  and  that  during  the  short 
time  the  figure  was  visible  she  saw  other  figures  in  the  background,  like 
Zulus  with  their  spears  passing  behind  him.  This,  at  the  time,  made  us 
wonder  if  the  room  at  the  West  CliflT  Hotel  she  was  then  using  had  been 
at  any  time  occupied  by  someone  who  had  died  in  the  Zulu  War.  Some- 
time after  this,  Mrs.  Alfred  told  me  she  had  seen  an  officer  at  Shornclifie 
who  resembled  the  man  of  her  vision,  and  that  he  was  wearing  a  pin 
just  like  the  one  she  had  observed,  and  she  wondered  who  he  was. 
I  do  not  remember  that  after  this  we  ever  spoke  of  the  matter  again ;  and 
I  never  heard  that  she  had  afterwards  met  him  to  speak  to,  or  that  he  had 
told  her  that  he  had  had  a  corresponding  vision  or  dream  of  her. 

"  M.  A.  K." 

The  following  account  is  from  Major  F,  F.  M.  : — 

"February,  1886. 

"  As  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  some  time  in  June,  1884,^  I  met  Mrs. 
Wedgwood  coming  down  the  Military  Road  from  Shornclifie  Camp.    I  had 

1  Mr.  Wedgwood  says,  "  It  must  have  been  in  August  or  September. 

VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  595 

a  confused  idea  that  I  had  met  the  lady  before,  and  therefore  turned  to 
look  at  her.  Mrs.  Wedgwood  asked  me  some  question,  and  inti-oduced 
herself,  when,  in  conversation,  I  remarked  that  some  time  previously  I  had 
dreamed  I  had  seen  her,  and  that  she  was  dressed  in  a  white  gown. 

"  Mrs.  Wedgwood  replied  that  she  also  had  dreamed  she  had  seen  my- 
self, and  described  the  dress  I  wore,  and  also  a  scarf-pin  and  ring  that  I 
possess.  The  latter  she  could  not  possibly  have  seen,  as  I  had  not  worn  it 
for  some  years,  and  consequently  it  was  locked  up  in  a  secret  drawer  in  my 
chest.  The  accurate  description  of  the  ring  and  pin  seemed  to  me  to  be 
very  remarkable.  '<  p'.  jf.  ]\/[." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Major  M.  writes,  on  Feb.  18,  1886  :-^ 

(1)  "I  feel  sure  I  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Alfred  Wedgwood  before  I 
met  her  coming  from  Shorncliffe  Camp,  after  the  dream  you  refer  to, 
and  I  had  no  reason  for  connecting  the  dream  with  her  [i.e.,  at  the  time 
that  it  was  dreamt]. 

(2)  "  I  do  not  think  my  dream  was  sufficiently  vivid  to  enable  me  to 
recognise  the  features  of  the  lady. 

(3)  "  The  dream  occurred,  I  believe,  in  the  second  week  in  June,  1884. 
"  I  may  say  that  I  did  not  look  upon  my  dream  as  at  all  peculiar,  and 

should  have  thought  no  more  of  the  circumstance  had  not  Mrs.  Wedgwood 
informed  me  of  her  dream,  which  I  thought  very  remarkable,  inasmuch 
as  she  described  accurately  some  articles  of  jewellery  belonging  to  me,  which 
she  could  not  possibly  have  previously  seen." 

He  adds  that  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  was  correct  in  saying  that  he  had 
served  for  many  years  in  South  Africa  ;  but  that  he  had  not  recently 
returned  from  that  country. 

Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedg^wood  writes  on  Feb.  2,  1886  : — 

"  Major  M.  says  that  when  he  saw  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  in  her  white 
gown,  he  instantly  recognised  her  by  her  figure.  The  date  of  her  dream  was 
the  13th  June,  which  she  fixes  by  something  about  a  photograph." 

[It  is  iiTQpossible  here  to  be  sure  that  Major  M.'s  sense  of  having  seen 
Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  before  he  met  her  was  really  due  to  his  dream.  But 
if  the  case  is  not  reciprocal,  it  is  at  any  rate  strongly  suggestive  of 
telepathic  clairvoyance  on  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood's  part.] 

The  next  example  may,  no  doubt,  have  been  an  accidental  coinci- 
dence ;  but  both  experiences  seem  .to  have  been  of  an  unusual  kind, 
unlike  ordinary  dreams.  If  telepathic  in  character,  the  case  may 
not  improbably  have  been  reciprocal,  without — it  will  be  observed — 
suggesting  anything  of  the  nature  of  clairvoyance.  Each  percipient 
has  the  impression  of  the  other  as  present  in  the  percipient's  own 
environment. 

(644)  From  Mrs.  White,  10,  Hope  Terrace,  Walham  Green,  S.W. 

"  1883. 
"  On  one  occasion  my  husband  [since  deceased — for  many  years    con- 
VOL.    II.  2    Q    2 

596  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

ductor  of  the  Bcdlymena  Observer]  complained  of  a  slight  indisposition  ; 
but  being  very  averse  always  to  the  attendance  of  a  doctor,  he  desired 
me  to  see  that  some  cooling  drink  was  left  in  his  bedroom,  and  that  we 
should  all  retire  as  usual.  I  occupied  a  room  on  the  floor  above  him,  and 
after  seeing  that  everything  necessary  was  left  on  his  dressing-table,  and 
everything  comfortable  and  as  he  wished,  I,  at  his  urgent  request,  went  to 
bed,  and  being  particularly  fatigued  fell  into  a  deep  sleep ;  in  which  state  I 
became  acutely  conscious  of  the  condition  I  had  left  my  husband  in,  and 
mindful  of  my  own  secret  resolve  to  visit  him  during  the  night  and  see  if 
he  had  taken  his  drink  or  if  he  slept,  &c.,  though  I  had  studiously  avoided 
telling  him  so,  lest  he  should  think  I  was  making  a  fuss.  I  was  quite 
conscious  *of  all  this  in  that  peculiar  way  we  see  and  know  during  sleep. 
I  also  seemed  to  know  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  and  I  longed  to  burst  my 
bonds  and  carry  out  my  intention.  Simultaneously  with  this  wish,  I  now 
became  aware  of  my  husband's  presence  at  the  door  of  my  room,  then  of 
his  presence  filling  the  chamber  and  slowly  and  solemnly  crossing  to  the 
bed  where  I  lay.  In  that  flash  of  conscious  thought  which  made  me 
aware  of  this,  I  thought  he  must  be  very  ill  and  come  to  reprove  me  for 
this  torpor  of  sleep  that  still  so  enchained  me  that  I  couldn't  speak  to  him, 
though  longing  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  to  do  so.  This  all,  swift  as 
thought,  passed  while  he  seemed  to  bend  over  me  as  if'  to  find  did  I  sleep  ; 
then  with  the  same  slow,  solemn  presence  filling  the  room,  again  he  passed 
away.  Then,  with  one  shrill  cry,  I  burst  the  sufibcating  bonds  that  held 
me,  and  my  maid,  who  slept  in  the  next  room,  was  beside  me  at  once. 
She  asked,  was  I  frightened  1  I  said  not  at  all,  but  to  follow  me  to  her 
master's  room  ;  that  I  had  intended  seeing  to  him  through  the  night,  but 
had  fallen  fast  asleep    and  neglected  to  do  so. 

"When  I  cautiously  entered  his  room,  the  maid  behind  me,  I  found 
him  awake  and  a  keen,  almost  reproachful  look  on  his  face.  I  dismissed 
the  maid,  and  then  explained  what  a  heavy  sleep  I  had  just  awoke  from, 
which  had  prevented  me  coming  sooner,  &c.  '  Will  you  tell  me,'  he  now 
inquired,  '  what  object  you  have  in  trying  to  conceal  from  me  that  you 
were  here  a  few  moments  ago '? '  I  then  fell  on  my  knees,  and  assured  him 
that  I  had  not  risen  from  my  bed  until  this  present  moment,  and  that  it 
was  owing  to  a  strange,  silent,  and  secret  visit  from  him  that  so  disturbed 
and  alarmed  me,  that  I  was  there  now.  '  Ah,'  he  said,  '  something  like 
this  happened  to  me  before,  but  this  is  the  most  remarkable  experience  of 
all — because  happening  to  each  of  us  at  the  same  time.'  He  then  narrated 
how,  a  few  minutes  before,  I  had  stolen,  as  it  were,  up  to  his  side,  arranged 
the  clothes,  kissed  him  on  brow  and  cheek,  and  then  glided  away  ;  that 
my  visit  had  a  soothing  efi'ect,  and  that  he  was  consequently  irritated  at 
my  appearing  to    forget  it,  when  I  came  the  second  time." 

[In  conversation,  Mrs.  White  particularly  described  to  me  the  sense  of 
entrance  and  of  the  movement  of  the  presence.  There  was  light  enough  for 
her  to  have  seen  any  visible  figure,  but  she  saw  nothing.  She  also  described 
the  effect  upon  herself,  before  she  reached  his  room,  as  very  overpowering, 
depriving  her  of  the  power  of  speech.  Her  viva  voce  account  agreed  in 
every  detail  with  the  above  account  which  had  been  written  about  a  year 
previously  ;  and  she  gave  me  an  impression  of  accuracy.  As  an  instance 
of  her  unwillingness  to  believe  marvels,  she  told  me  how  incredulous  she 

VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  597 

had  been  as  to  the  genuineness  of  experiments  in  hypnotism  which  her 
husband  used  sometimes  to  carry  out.] 

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  two  cases  which,  as  reported, 
seem  to  have  been  collective  as  well  as  reciprocal. 

(645)  From  Mrs.  T.,  who  does  not  wish  her  name  to  be  published. 
The  account  was  written  in  January,  1879. 

"  I  have  myself  had  an  exceedingly  interesting  experience  of  the 
apparition  of  the  living,  viz.,  my  own  appearance  at  the  supposed  death- 
bed of  my  sister,  when  we  were  3,000  miles  apart.  She  was  attended  on 
this  particular  night  by  another  sister,  who  distinctly  saw  me  go  into  the 
room,  and  lean  over  my  darling  young  sister.  The  latter  was  too  ill  to 
speak,  but  she  whispered,  '  Mary  is  here ;  now  I  am  happy.'  I  ought  to 
mention  that  my  elder  sister  is  not  given  to  vision,  and  is,  indeed,  a  very 
practical,  matter-of-fact  person  ;  but  she  has  always  declared  that  she  saw 
me  from  my  knees  up,  ^  and  that  the  very  dress  was  plain  to  her,  too. 

"  At  this  time  I  was  just  recovering  from  my  confinement  with  my  son, 
who  is  nearly  17.  He  was  between  four  and  five  weeks  old,  when,  one 
night,  I  fell  asleep  thinking  how  much  I  should  like  to  see  this  sister.  I 
knew  of  her  illness,  and  that  she  was  not  likely  to  recover,  and  of  her 
intense  desire  to  see  me.  Between  us  the  most  tender  attachment  had 
always  existed,  and  it  was  thought  that  her  illness  was  much  increased 
through  her  grief  at  our  separation. 

"  On  the  night  referred  to,  I  had  a  most  vivid  dream  of  seeing  her,  in 
a  bed  not  in  her  own  room,  and  of  seeing  my  other  sister  in  attendance. 
I  leaned  over  her  and  said,  as  I  thought,  '  Emma,  you  will  recover.'  I 
told  my  husband  that  I  had  been  home  when  I  woke,  and  my  impression 
that  she  would  recover.  This  dream  comforted  me  very  much,  and  from 
this  night  there  was  a  change  for  the  better  in  my  sister,  and  she  gradually 
recovered  from  what  was  supposed  to  be  an  incurable  illness.  When  we 
came  to  compare  dates,  we  found  that  my  dream,  and  my  appearance  to 
my  two  sisters,  occurred  at  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  time.  I  was  so 
life-like  to  my  younger  sister  that  she  thought  I  had  really  arrived  on  a 
visit ;  but,  as  I  said  before,  to  my  eldest  sister  I  was  shadowy  below  my 
knees,  but  perfectly  natural  in  appearance.  She  afterwards  remembered 
that  I  did  not  notice  her  as  I  passed  into  the  inner  room,  although  in  my 
dream  I  saw  her,  nor  did  I  seem  to  see  anything  but  the  one  object  of  my 
love." 

Mrs.  T.  wrote  to  us,  on  Oct.  3,  1883  :— 

"  Neither  of  my  sisters  wrote  me,  but  a  member  of  the  family  to  whom 
the  occurrence  was  told  on  the  following  morning.  Unfortunately  I  have 
not  kept  this  letter,  and  cannot  date  the  time,  except  from  my  son's  birth, 
which  took  place  on  the  4th  March,  1862.  I  changed  my  bed,  still 
keeping  the  same  room,  when  he  was  a  month  old,  and  it  was  within  a 
night  or  two  of  making  this  change  that  I  had  my  dream.  When  the 
letter  came,  which  was  like  a  repetition  of  my  dream,  I  went  back  in  my 
mind  to  the  time  (not  more  than  three  weeks  before),  and  was  myself 
satisfied  that  the  times  were  coincident.     It  was  nearly  10  years  after, 

^  See  p.  33,  note. 

598  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

before  I  had  an  opportunity  of  talking  with  my  sister  of  the  occurrence, 
which  was  only  one  of  several  very  startling  things  connected  with  my 
younger  sister's  illness,  and  I  found  we  agreed  in  all  substantial  things.  I 
found  them  both  disinclined  to  talk  of  what  had  happened  during  Emma's 
illness,  and,  indeed,  their  memory  of  all  the  circumstances  of  my  manifes- 
tation was  less  clear  than  mine." 

Mrs.  T.  is  unable  to  communicate  with  her  family  respecting  this  case, 
as  they  all  have  an  extreme  dislike  to  the  subject.  In  conversation,  she 
explained  that  she  had  left  America  about  nine  months  at  the  time  of  this 
vision,  and  that  her  sister  recognised  her  as  wearing  a  print  dress  of  a  very 
decided  blue,  which  she  had  left  behind  her  in  America. 

She  has  further  answered  the  following  questions  : — 

Did  Mrs.  T.  dream  of  herself  as  in  the  blue  dress  ? 

"  I  cannot  now  remember.  My  impression  is  that  I  did  not  recollect 
my  dress  on  waking." 

Had  the  sisters  ever  seen  the  blue  dress  1 

"  Yes.  I  had  worn  the  dress  in  the  morning  during  the  previous  early 
summer  time."  ^ 

Was  the  invalid  sister  really  in  a  room  not  her  own .?  And  if  so  was  its 
arrangement,  "  inner  room,"  &c.,  really  represented  in  the  dream  ? 

"  My  sister  was  not  in  her  own  room,  but  in  a  room  on  the  ground  floor 
(an  inner  room),  exactly  as  I  had  seen  her  in  my  dream."  ^ 

Had  Mrs.  T.  ever  seen  the  room  before  ? 

"  Yes." 

Mr.  T.  cannot  remember  any  of  his  wife's  experiences  in  detail ;  he 

"  I  am  unable  to  recall  the  particular  circumstance  to  which  you  refer. 
This  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  for  several  years  previous  to,  and  since, 
the  date  referred  to,  my  wife  has  related  to  me  numerous  remarkable 
incidents  in  her  experiences,  together  with  their  subsequent  verification. 

"  W.  T." 

[It  is  unfortunate  that  the  evidence  here  is  second-hand  from  the  side 
on  which  the  more  striking  experience  occurred.  If  that  experience  is 
correctly  recorded,  the  fact  that  two  percipients  shared  in  it  is  a  strong 
indication  that  it  was  telepathically  produced.  The  proof  of  the 
reciprocality  of  the  case  depends  greatly  on  the  detail  in  the  dream  as  to 
the  changed  room,  on  which  it  is  impossible  entirely  to  rely,  in  the  absence 
of  a  written  note  made  before  the  actual  fact  was  known.] 

(646)  From   Mr.   J.    Cotter  Morison,    30,    Fitzjohn's  Avenue,    JST.W. 

"June  18th,  1883. 

"  My  mother  and  grandmother  were  together  in  the  dining-room  of 
their  house  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  occupied  on  some  domestic  matter  which 
made  the  exclusion  of  chance  visitors  desirable.  A  sudden  knock  at  the 
door  caused  my  grandmother  to  hasten   to  it  with  a  view  to  taking  the 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  540-6,  and  569-70.  The  dress,  it  will  be  seen,  was  one  which  the 
sisters  in  America  would  be  specially  likely  to  associate  with  Mrs.  T.  's  aspect,  since  she 
had  worn  it  a  good  deal  when  she  was  last  with  them ;  while  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  it  had  any  prominence  in  her  memory. 

2  Compare  case  465, 

viii.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES.  599 

stranger  into  the  drawing-room.  The  knock  was  heard  by  both  mother 
and  daughter.  On  opening  the  door  with  the  least  loss  of  time  possible, 
my  grandmother  was  surprised  to  find  not  only  no  one  there  but  no  one 
even  in  the  long  corridor  which  led  to  the  dining-room.  My  mother  dis- 
tinctly remembered  the  look  of  astonishment  in  her  mother's  face  as  she 
returned  from  the  door.  Nothing  more  was  said  on  the  subject,  but  in  a 
short  time  afterwards  a  letter  was  received  from  London  from  my  grand- 
mother's sister,  or  rather  her  family,  saying  that  she  (the  sister)  had  been 
most  seriously  ill,  at  death's  door  indeed,  but  was  now  a  little  better,  and 
wished  my  grandmother  to  come  and  see  her.  The  latter  went  up  to  town 
and  found  her  sister  still  very  ill,  but  slowly  recovering.  After  the 
mutual  endearments  natural  to  such  an  occasion,  my  grandmother  said  : — 

"  Do  you  know,  such  a  strange  thing  occurred,  exactly  at  the  time,  it 
seems,  when  you  were  supposed  to  be  dead  or  dying.' 

"  '  I  know  what  you  are  going  to  say,'  said  the  other.  '  When  I  was 
in  the  trance  which  was  mistaken  for  death,  I  thought  I  went  to  your 
house  in  the  Isle  of  "Wight  and  knocked  at  your  dining-room  door.  You 
opened  it  instantly  and  looked  much  affrighted  at  not  seeing  me  or  any 
one,  though  I  saw  you.' 

"  The  singular  point  in  the  story  is  the  anticipation  by  the  one  sister  of 
what  the  other  sister  was  going  to  say. 

"  No  theory  or  inference  was  ever  deduced  by  my  relations  from  the 
circumstance,  and  it  was  only  mentioned  as  an  odd  coincidence  by  them 
and  their  friends,  who,  as  well  as  my  mother,  have  often  told  me  the  story. 

"  Jas.  Cotter  Morison." 

Mr.  Morison  writes  of  his  grandmother  : — 

"She was  a  person  of  a  strong  understanding,  as  I  have  often  heard 
from  people  who  knew  her  personally.  She  had  an  aversion  to  what  she 
called  superstition,  belief  in  ghosts,  &c. ;  so  the  facts  of  the  story  were 
unwelcome  to  her  rather  than  otherwise." 

Though  the  sound  here  seems  to  have  corresponded  with  a 
distinct  impression  of  the  agent's,  there  is  no  conclusive  jproof  of 
reciprocality,  as  her  sense  of  visiting  her  relatives'  house  may  have 
been  purely  subjective.  At  the  same  time,  the  idea  of  knocking  at  a 
door  and  having  it  opened,  yet  being  oneself  invisible  to  the  person 
who  opens  it,  appears  so  unlikely  a  one  to  occur  even  to  a  dreaming 
mind,  that  the  hypothesis  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  on  the  agent's 
part  seems  (as  the  facts  stand)  eminently  defensible.  It  must  be 
noted,  however,  that  the  description  of  this  side  of  the  occurrence 
comes  to  us  at  third  hand. 

CHAP. 

CHAPTER    IX. 

COLLECTIVE  CASES. 

§  1.  Of  the  collective  cases  which  remain  to  be  presented,  the  large 
majority,  like  the  cases  in  Chap.  XVIII.  above,  are  waking  aflFections 
of  sight  and  hearing.  I  will  begin,  however,  with  three  outlying 
instances,  of  which  the  first  had  no  sensory  element  at  all,  the  second 
is  a  dream-case,  and  the  third  concerned  the  sense  of  touch  only. 
They  agree  in  the  fact  that  the  two  percipients  were  not  in  each 
other's  company  at  the  time  of  the  experience  (see  Chap.  XVIII.,  §  2). 

(647)  From  Mr.  Charles  Ede,  Wonersh  Lodge,  Guildford,  a  medical 
man,  to  whom  the  incident  was  related  by  both  the  percipients.  The 
account  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  on  Aug.  29,  1877. 

"  Lady  G.  and  her  sister  had  been  spending  the  evening  with  their 
mother,  who  was  in  her  usual  health  and  spirits  when  they  left  her.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night  the  sister  awoke  in  a  fright,  and  said  to  her 
husband,  '  I  must  go  to  my  mother  at  once  ;  do  order  the  carriage.  I  am 
sure  she  is  taken  ill.'  The  husband,  after  trying  in  vain  to  convince  hia 
wife  that  it  was  only  a  fancy,  ordered  the  carriage.  As  she  was  approach- 
ing her  mother's  house,  where  two  roads  meet,  she  saw  Lady  G.'s  carriage. 
When  they  met,  each  asked  the  other  why  she  was  there.  The  same 
reply  was  made  by  both.  '  I  could  not  sleep,  feeling  sure  my  mother  was 
ill,  and  so  I  came  to  see.'  As  they  came  in  sight  of  the  house,  they  saw 
their  mother's  confidential  maid  at  the  door,  who  told  them,  when  they 
arrived,  that  their  mother  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill,  and  was  dying,  and 
had  expressed  an  earnest  wish  to  see  her  daughters. 

"  The  foregoing  incident  was  told  me  as  a  simple  narrative  of  what 
happened,  both  by  Lady  G.  and  her  sister.  The  mother  was  a  lady  of 
strong  will,  and  always  had  great  influence  over  her  daughters. 

"  Charles  Ede." 

Writing  on  June  25,  1884,  Mr.  Ede  says,  "Both  Lady  G.  and  her 
sister  are  dead,  although  at  the  time  of  my  writing  the  account  the  former 
was  living."  He  cannot  fix  the  date  of  the  occurrence.  He  communicated 
the  names  in  confidence. 

(648)  From  Mr.  R.  S.  Pengelly,  33,  Ingestre  Road,  Stafi'ord,  who 
first  published  the  narrative  in  a  magazine.  On  Feb.  26,  1884,  he 
wrote    to    us   to   confirm    it,   and  to  supply  the  names  of    the    parties. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  601 

Mr.  Pengelly  narrates  that,  some  time  in  the  years  1863-1866,  his 
father,  then  unmarried,  went  on  a  voyage  to  Colombo  as  mate  of  the 
'  Adela,'  belonging  to  Messrs.  Cobbold  and  Co.,  of  Ipswich.  Some  weeks 
after  his  departure,  his  fiancee,  Anne  Symons,  who  had  been  looking  out 
for  a  letter  from  him,  had  a  vivid  dream  of  an  Eastern  seaport.  Lying  to 
the  left  of  the  picture  she  was  startled  to  see  a  vessel,  which  she  instantly 
recognised  as  the  '  Adela,'  of  which  her  father  was  captain,  and  which  she 
knew  well.  There  on  deck  were  several  Orientals,  lightly  clad,  at  work, 
and  by  their  side  was  James  Pengelly.  Suddenly  she  saw  him  walk  a  step 
forward,  and  the  next  moment  he  was  struggling  in  the  waters.  She  was 
in  agony,  but  strange  to  say,  the  excitement  did  not  at  once  awake  her, 
and  she  saw  him  throw  up  his  hands  and  sink,  and  he  appeared  no  more. 
At  this  point  she  awoke,  deeply  impressed  with  the  realistic  nature  of  her 
vision.  Strange  to  relate,  however,  the  next  night  she  went  through  the 
same  series  of  mental  tortures,  her  lover  fell,  struggled  wildly,  but  was 
drowned.  When  she  arose  that  morning,  she  confided  her  dreams,  and  the 
anxieties  they  had  aroused  in  her  breast,  to  her  aunt. 

"  Several  days  later,  Anne  received  a  letter  from  her  lover's  mother, 
who,  it  happened,  was  also  her  aunt,  and  who,  with  her  husband,  lived 
about  130  miles  away,  in  another  part  of  the  country.  The  letter,  to  her 
intense  surprise,  asked  whether  any  news  had  been  received  of  the  arrival 
of  the  '  Adela  '  at  Colombo,  the  writer  giving  as  a  reason  for  her  solicitude 
for  her  son  a  dream  which  she  had  had  a  few  days  before  (giving  the  date). 
She  also  had  dreamed  on  two  consecutive  nights  that  she  had  seen  her  son 
fall  overboard  and  rise  no  more,  and  so  powerfully  had  she  been  affected 
by  the  visions  that  after  the  repetition  she  had  the  next  morning  written 
the  letter  received.  The  days  upon  which  Mrs.  Pengelly  had  dreamt  of 
her  son's  death  were  the  very  ones  upon  which  Anne  herself  had  been  so 
agitated.  They  could  only  wait  and  pray,  and  after  some  weeks  their 
anxiety  was  relieved,  and  their  prayers  rewarded,  by  the  receipt  of  a  letter 
from  James,  announcing  his  arrival  at  Colombo  a  few  days  before  the  date 
of  the  letter,  after  a  long  and  tempestuous  passage.  He  went  on  to  tell, 
to  Anne's  great  astonishment,  how  narrow  an  escape  he  had  recently  had 
from  drowning.  'The  day  after  our  arrival,'  he  wrote,  '  I  was  standing  on 
a  plank  from  the  hatchway  to  the  bulwarks,  watching  the  coolies  discharg- 
ing her.  While  so  standing  I  almost  unconsciously  stepped  forward,  and 
the  plank,  one  end  of  which  was  resting  on  the  bulwarks,  at  once  tipped 
up,  and  I  was  in  the  water.  Being  unable  to  swim,  my  danger  was  great, 
and  I  had  sunk  once  before  the  boatswain  with  a  boathook  caught  me,  and 
held  me  up  till  they  brought  the  boat  around.'  Most  wonderful  to  relate, 
a  comparison  of  dates  showed  Anne  that  it  was  on  the  very  day  of  her 
first  dream  that  her  lover's  life  was  so  nearly  lost,  and  his  mother  was  no 
less  surprised  than  Anne.  However,  '  all's  well  that  ends  well.'  James 
came  home,  and  he  and  his  cousin  were  married." 

Mrs.  Pengelly,  the  mother  of  James  Pengelly,  writes  : — 
"10,  Gloucester  Place,  Littlehampton. 

"April  19th,  1886. 
"  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  date  of  the   dream 
only  that,  as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  it  was  in  or  near  1864.     My  son  was 

602  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

then  mate  in  the  '  Adela,'  the  ship  of  his  uncle,  whose  daughter  he  after- 
wards married.  She  dreamt,  one  night,  that  her  cousin  was  climbing 
from  a  boat  into  the  ship,  when  he  slipped  his  foot  and  fell  in  under  the 
ship ;  when  they  took  him  up,  he  was  nearly  dead.  She  wrote  to  tell  me 
her  dream,  and  by  that  I  found  she  had  dreamt  the  same  dream  the  same 
night  as  I  had.  When  my  son  came  home,  upon  questioning  him,  I  found 
that  he  had  fallen  into  the  water  at  Colombo,  and,  as  near  as  he  could  tell, 
the  same  day  as  I  dreamt  he  did.  My  daughter-in-law,  I  am  sorry  to  say, 
is  now  dead ;  if  she  were  living  she  would  be  able  to  tell  you  more  particulars. 

"E.  Pengelly." 

[Mr.  Pengelly  justly  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  dream  due  to 
apprehensions  of  danger  and  disaster  would  not  be  very  likely  to  take  the 
form  of  "drowning  in  a  quiet  harbour  "  ;  but  the  amount  of  detail  in  his 
narrative  is  more  than  can  be  safely  relied  on,  in  the  absence  of  written 
notes.  It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Pengelly  senior's  account  of  her  daughter- 
in-law's  dream  does  not  exactly  agree  with  Mr.  Pengelly's.  Mr.  Pengelly 
kindly  tried  to  obtain  for  us  an  account  of  the  accident  from  his  father, 
but  found  that  "he,  a  plain  sea-captain,  had  little  recollection  of  what 
happened  20  years  ago,  during  his  absence."] 

(649)  From  the  papers  of  the  late  Psychological  Society.  The  original 
document  is  in  the  handwriting  of  the  late  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.  No  names 
are  given,  and  the  MS.  bears  no  date. 

"  The  following  remarkable  case  is  taken  from  the  lips  of  the  parties 
to  whom  it  occurred,  and  for  whose  veracity  I  can  vouch. 

"J.  P.,  wife  of  Colonel  P.,  says :  'In  July,  1871,  I  was  at  Weymouth, 
sleeping  with  my  daughter.  I  was  wakened  in  the  night  by  a  cold  kiss 
upon  my  lips.  I  concluded  that  my  daughter  had  kissed  me,  and  wondered 
much  why  her  lips  were  so  corpse-like.  I  fell  asleep  again,  and  on  the 
following  morning,  on  awaking,  I  asked  my  daughter  why  she  had  kissed 
me,  and  what  made  her  lips  so  cold.  She  said  that  she  had  not  done  so. 
Soon  after  this  conversation  a  messenger  arrived  to  say  that  my  mother, 
who  was  in  another  house  in  Weymouth,  was  very  ill,  and  requested  my 
immediate  attendance.  I  had  left  her  on  the  previous  evening  in  perfect 
health,  so  that  I  had  no  sense  of  alarm  for  her  to  account  for  a  mental 
impression.     I  found  her  seriously  ill,  and  she  died  in  three  weeks. 

"  '  Two  days  before  her  death,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  sister,  Mrs. 
C,  who  was  on  a  voyage  to  America,  written  from  the  ship,  then  off 
Halifax,  dated  the  day  after  the  night  on  which  I  had  felt  the  cold  kiss, 
in  which  she  said,  "  I  am  sure  there  is  something  wrong  with  mother ;  she 
is  either  dead  or  ill ;  for  last  night  I  felt  a  cold  kiss  on  my  lips,  as  I  lay  in 
my  berth."  As  far  as  we  could  afterwards  trace,  this  had  occurred  to  both 
of  us  almost  at  the  same  moment.  My  mother  and  sister  had  been  ex- 
tremely attached.     They  were  then  parted  for  the  first  time.' 

"This  narrative  of  Mrs.  P.  was  confirmed  to  me  by  her  daughter,  who 
was  sleeping  with  her  on  the  night  in  question,  to  whom  she  had  made  the 
inquiry  why  she  had  kissed  her,  and  what  had  made  her  lips  so  cold. 

"Edw.  W.  Cox." 

[If  this  record  is  accurate,  and  the  coincidence  was  more  than  a  very 
curious  accident,  there  still  would  be  a  doubt  as  to  the  agency.  It  seems 
so    improbable    that    hallucinations,    originating    in  a  telepathic  impulse 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  603 

from  the  mother,  should  independently  take  the  same  very  rare  form  in 
each  daughter's  experience,  that  I  should  certainly  prefer  to  suppose  one 
of  these  experiences  to  have  been  in  some  measure  the  source  of  the  other. 
It  is  eminently  a  case  where  it  is  difficult  to  derive  the  form  of  the  impres- 
sion from  the  original  agent's  (the  mother's)  mind,  as  even  if  she  thought 
of  kissing  her  daughters,  she  would  not  think  of  the  kisses  as  cold  or 
corpse-like.     See  Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40.] 

§  2.  To  pass  now  to  the  visual  examples — I  will  first  cite  cases 
where  there  is  ground  for  supposing  the  hallucination,  in  its  inception, 
to  have  been  more  than  subjective,  and  due  to  the  unusual  condition 
of  an  absent  person.  And  in  accordance  with  the  order  adopted 
before,  in  Chap.  XVIII.,  I  will  begin  with  the  few  remaining  cases 
where  the  percipients  were  not  in  each  other's  company  at  the  time 
of  their  experience. 

(650)  From  Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  the  narrator  of  cases  553  and  554. 

"1882. 
Mrs.  Hunter's  husband  had  had  a  Scotch  wet-nurse  of  the  old- 
fashioned  sort,  more  devoted  to  him  than  even  to  her  own  children.  Soon 
after  her  marriage,  Mrs.  Hunter  made  acquaintance  with  this  nurse,  Mrs. 
Macfarlane,  who  paid  her  several  visits  during  Mr.  Hunter's  absence  in 
India.  In  June,  1857,  Mrs.  Hunter,  who  was  travelling  to  a  health- 
resort,  confided  to  Mrs.  Macfarlane's  keeping  a  box  of  valuables.  One 
evening  in  the  following  August,  Mrs.  Hunter  was  entertaining  some 
friends  ;  but  having  occasion  to  return  to  the  dining-room  for  a  moment, 
she  passed  the  open  door  of  her  bedroom,  and  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to 
look  in  ;  and  there  on  the  bed  was  a  large  coffin,  ^  and  sitting  at  the  foot  of 
it  was  a  tall  old  woman  steadfastly  regarding  it.  "Returning  to  my 
friends,  I  announced  the  vision,  which  was  received  with  shouts  of  laughter, 
in  which,  after  a  time,  I  joined.  However,  I  had  seen  what  I  have  de- 
scribed, and,  moreover,  could  have  told  the  very  dress  the  old  woman  wore. 
"When  my  friends  left,  and  I  had  paid  my  usual  last  visit  to  the 
nursery,  my  nurse  looked  odd  and  distraite,  and  to  my  astonishment 
followed  me  on  to  the  landing.  '  O  ma'am,'  she  began,  '  I  feel  so  queer, 
such  a  strange  thing  happened.  At  7  o'clock  I  went  to  the  kitchen  for 
hot  water,  and  when  I  came  out  I  saw  a  tall  old  woman  coming  down- 
stairs, and  I  stopped  to  let  her  pass,  but,  ma'am,  there  was  something 
strange  about  her,  so  I  turned  to  look  after  her.  The  hall  door  was  wide 
open,  and  she  was  making  for  it,  when  in  a  moment  she  melted  away.  I 
can  swear  I  saw  her,  and  can  tell  you  her  very  dress,  a  big,  black  poke 
bonnet  and  a  checked  black-and-white  shawl.'  "  This  description  of  the 
dress  exactly  corresponded  with  what  Mrs.  Hunter  had  herself  seen. 

Mrs.  Hunter  laughed  the  matter  off,  and  did  not  even  think  of 
connecting  her  own  vision  with  the  nurse's.  About  half  an  hour  after- 
wards, when  in  bed,  she  heard  a  piercing  scream  from  her  little  daughter, 
aged  5,  followed  by  loud,  frightened  tones,  and  she  then  heard  the  nurse 

1  As  usual,  the  form  of  the  hallucination  can  be  paralleled  in  the  purely  subjective 
class  ;  see  Vol.  i. ,  p.  503. 

604  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

soothing  the  child,  "  Next  morning  little  E.  was  full  o£  her  wrongs. 
She  said  that  '  a  naughty  old  woman  was  sitting  at  the  table  and  staring 
at  her,  and  that  made  her  scream.'  Nurse  told  me  that  she  found  the 
child  wide  awake,  sitting  up  in  bed,  pointing  to  the  table,  and  crying  out, 
'  Go  away,  go  away,  naughty  old  woman ! '  There  was  no  one  there. 
Nurse  had  been  in  bed  some  time,  and  the  door  was  locked. 

"  My  child's  Adsion  I  treated  as  I  did  her  nurse's,  and  dosed  both. 
However,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Mac- 
farlane's  son,  announcing  her  death,  and  telling  me  how  her  last  hours 
were  disturbed  by  anxiety  for  my  husband  and  his  family.  My  nurse,  on 
being  told  the  news,  exclaimed,  '  Good  Lord,  it  was  her  I  saw  that  night, 
and  her  very  dress  ! '  I  never  ascertained  the  exact  hour  of  her  death. 
My  letter  of  inquiry  and  condolence  was  never  answered,  though  my  box 
was  duly  sent  to  me." 

Mrs.  Hunter  writes  to  us  that,  after  reading  this  account  in  the 
Fortnightly  Review  (where  it  was  first  published),  the  "  little  E."  of  the 
story  wrote  to  her,  "  I  well  remember  my  part  of  that  story."  Mrs. 
Hunter  adds,  "  I  can  truly  say  that  she  had  never  been  spoken  to  about  it 
all  these,  years." 

We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Glasgow  Herald  that  Mrs.  Macfarlane 
died  on  August  31,  1857. 

(651)  From  the  late  Mr.  B.  Coleman,  who  wrote  as  follows  to  the 
Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine : — 

"  48,  Pembridge  Villas,  Bayswater. 

"January  14th,  1861. 

"I  was  recently  staying  at  the  Victoria  Hotel,  Southport,  kept  by 
Mr.  Salthouse,  an  old  and  respectable  inhabitant  of  that  town.  [I  learnt 
that]  Mr.  Salthouse  was  a  firm  believer  in  apparitions,  founded  on  an 
incident  which  occurred  in  his  own  family.  I  accordingly  asked  Mr. 
Salthouse  to  tell  me  the  particulars,  and  he  related  the  following  story  : — 

"  '  Some  years  ago  my  eldest  son,  Thomas,  shipped  as  a  sailor  on  a 
voyage  to  India.  After  he  had  been  absent  a  month  or  two,  I  was  sur- 
prised one  summer  morning  to  see  him  standing  by  my  bedside  in  his 
sailor's  dress.  I  extended  my  hand  to  greet  him,  and  inquired  the  cause 
of  his  unexpected  return.  The  figure  remained  for  an  instant  mute  and 
immoveable,  and  vanished  from  my  sight. 

"  '  Excited  and  perplexed  by  this  unlooked-for  incident,  I  rose  and 
prepared  to  make  my  usual  visit  to  my  farm,  which  is  two  miles  distant 
from  Southport,  reasoning  myself  into  the  belief  that  I  had  been  under  a 
delusion.  On  reaching  the  farm  my  servant,  William  Ball,  who  still 
resides  there,  asked  me  if  Master  Tom  had  returned  home.  I  said,  "  No ; 
why  do  you  ask  ? "  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  certainly  saw  him  cross  the 
farmyard  early  this  morning.  I  ran  to  open  the  gate  and  could  not  see 
where  he  had  gone,  but  I  am  as  sure  as  I  live  that  I  saw  him  in  his 
sailor's  dress."  This  statement  corroborating  my  own  experience  of  the 
morning,  I  made  sure  that  some  disaster  had  befallen  my  son,  and  in  due 
time  this  proved  to  be  the  case.  He  had  died  that  very  day  and  hour,  of 
dysentery,  on  board  ship,  before  reaching  Bombay.' 

"  Benjamin  Coleman." 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  606 

A  son  of  Mr.  Salthouse,  to  whom  we  sent  the  account,  writes  to  us 
as  follows  :—  «  91^  Railway  Street,  Southport. 

"June  12th,  1884. 

"  From  what  I  can  remember  I  believe  the  account  is  correct.  I 
showed  this  paper  to  my  brother-in-law,  and  he  told  me  that  my  father 
always  said  so.  ^  I  have  heard  Ball  [now  deceased]  tell  the  tale  many 
times.  "John  Salthouse." 

Later,  Mr.  Salthouse  writes  to  us  that  he  finds  that  Mr.  Thomas  Salt- 
house's  ship  left  Liverpool  on  June  3,  1846,  and  that  he  was  taken  ill 
between  Bombay  and  Hong  Kong,  on  Nov.  23.  We  learn  from  the 
General  Register  of  Shipping  and  Seamen  that  he  served  as  third  mate  on 
the  ship  "  Inglewood,"  of  Liverpool,  from  June  3  to  Dec.  13,  1846,  on 
which  latter  date  he  died  at  sea.  The  words  "  summer  morning "  and 
"  before  reaching  Bombay  "  in  the  above  account  are  therefore  incorrect. 

The  following  case  is  a  sort  of  comedy  of  errors.  Only  two  of  the 
four  hallucinations  which  it  includes  represented  the  absent  agent ; 
as  to  the  two  which  did  not,  I  shall  hazard  no  further  supposition 
than  that  their  coincidence  with  the  others  was  not  accidental. 

(652)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton  Abbot,  the  narrator 
of  case  617.  "1883 

"  Captain  Robert  Fagan,  late  of  the  Bengal  Artillery,  while  in  charge 
of  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Lahore,  was  in  the  district  on  the  river  collecting 
boats.  One  morning,  during  his  absence  from  home,  his  eldest  boy,  of 
about  6  years  old,  seeing  his  mother  just  dressed  for  breakfast  in  a 
coloured  muslin,  begged  her  to  take  it  off  and  put  on  a  black  dress,  saying, 
'  Because  papa  is  dead.'  The  mother,  after  diverting  his  thoughts  for  a 
short  time,  said,  '  Shall  I  put  on  a  black  dress  now,  Charlie  1 '  '  Oh,  no,' 
he  answered,  '  papa  is  not  dead  now,'  and  ran  away. 

"  On  leaving  her  room,  she  was  met  by  the  head  nurse,  a  Scotch- 
woman, with  the  inquiry  if  she  had  heard  from  the  master  that  morning. 
When  told  his  usual  letter  had  not  come,  she  said,  '  Something  very  un- 
canny has  happened  to  him,  for  looking  out  of  the  window  just  now,  I  saw 
Annie,  the  under-nurse,  and  the  gardener  go  up  to  master's  favourite  rose- 
tree  and  gather  a  flower,  and  before  she  could  have  got  in  from  the  garden, 
I  found  her  in  the  night  nursery,  which  she  had  never  left,  finishing 
bathing  the  children.' 

"Not  thinking  much  of  this,  Mrs.  Fagan  passed  on  to  the  breakfast- 
room,  where  she  expected  to  find  her  visitors.  Captain  and  Mrs.  Reveley. 
Not  doing  so,  she  went  to  Mrs.  R.'s  room,  whom  she  found  still  at  her 
toilet,  for  which  unpunctuality  Mrs.  R.  apologised,  saying  she  had  had  a 
dreadful  fright,  having  seen  Mrs.  Fagan  standing  in  front  of  the  chest  of 
drawers,  who,  when  asked  how  she  had  come  unobserved  into  the  room, 
turned  round  and  then  deliberately  vanished  through  the  chest  of  drawers 
and  the  door  behind  it.^ 

1  The  form  of  expression  here  would  convey  the  idea  that  Mr.  J.  Salthouse  had  not 
himself  heard  of  the  incident  from  his  father.  But  in  conversation  I  learnt  from  him  that 
he  had  heard  his  father  mention  it  several  times,  in  a  manner  vs^hich  showed  him  to  have 
been  much  impressed  by  it. 

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  432,  note.     The  present  case  is  not  one  of  those  there  referred  to. 

606  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

"  This  third  strange  remark  led  Mrs.  Fagan  to  relate  all  three  at  the 
breakfast-table  to  Captain  Reveley.  She  could  not  help  observing  how 
unlike  his  usual  manner  was  his  brusqueness  in  cutting  short  the  conver- 
sation, as  soon  as  he  had  heard  all  particulars.  Five  days  passed  without 
any  information — private  or  ofl&cial — from  Captain  Fagan ;  but  at  the  end 
of  that  time  he  arrived  home  looking  ill,  and  saying  that,  on  the  morning 
of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  he  was  with  difficulty  resuscitated  from 
drowning,  the  boat  in  which  he  was  having  capsized.  This  was  naturally 
taken  as  the  solution  of  the  mystery.  Captain  Reveley,  turning  to  Mrs. 
Fagan,  said,  '  I  must  apologise  for  my  brusqueness  of  manner  that  morn- 
ing, but  I  feared  to  alarm  you  by  seeming  to  attach  any  importance 
to  what  had  happened,  and  lest  I  should  be  induced  to  tell  you  of  the 
greater  fright  I  had  myself  had  than  any  of  you.  For,  Fagan,'  addressing 
the  Captain,  '  as  I  passed  from  your  office,  where  I  had  been  reading  with 
the  Moonshee,  and  going  through  the  drawing-room,  I  distinctly  saw  you 
sitting  in  your  usual  chair.'  " 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Fagan  adds  : — 

"As  to  the  story  of  those  who  saw  my  husband  and  me  and  had 
impressions  that  he  was  in  danger,  it  is  now  so  long  ago  that  my  son 
could  hardly  remember  it.  Captain  Reveley,  of  the  Bengal  Infantry,  who 
saw  him,  his  wife,  who  saw  me,  and  the  two  women,  the  Scotchwoman,  by 
name  Ann  Kenny,  and  the  Irishwoman,  by  name  Annie  Robertson,  both 
then  wives  of  privates  in  the  Bengal  Artillery,  I  fear,  could  hardly  be 
traced  as  witnesses ;  but  I  give  you  their  names. 

"It  occurred  at  Anarkullie,  Lahore,  Punjaub,  about  the  year  1850." 
In  conversation  v^dth  Mrs.  Fagan,  Professor  Sidgwick  learnt  that  Mrs. 
Reveley  did  not  connect  the  apparition  of  Mrs.  Fagan  with  Captain  Fagan. 
Mrs.  Reveley,  who  is  now  living  near  Montreal,  has  been  lately  applied  to 
for  an  independent  account ;  but  no  answer  has  been  received  up  to  the 
time  of  going  to  press. 

(653)  From  Mrs.  Heckford,  6,  The  Crescent,  Minories,  E. 

"1884. 

"  When  I  was  a  child  6  years  old,  my  mother  died  after  a  short  illness, 
in  Germany,  and  one  of  her  two  unmarried  sisters  came  from  Ireland  to 
take  charge  of  my  two  elder  sisters  and  of  me,  leaving  my  other  aunt  in 
the  country  house  which  had  for  years  been  their  home.  Within  a 
few  days  of  a  year  from  the  death  of  my  mother,  my  eldest  sister,  a  re- 
markably healthy  child,  died  of  scarlatina,  also  in  Germany.  When  I 
was  a  girl  in  my  teens,  my  surviving  sister  and  I  were  one  day  talking 
about  apparitions,  in  the  spirit  of  absolute  disbelief  in  such  appearances 
which  had  been  carefully  fostered  by  those  who  educated  us,  including 
my  aunt ;  when,  somewhat  to  my  astonishment,  she  recounted  to  us  the 
following  story. 

"  One  night,  she  said,  about  the  time  of  my  mother's  death,  she  had 
retired  to  rest,  but  was  not  asleep,  when  suddenly  she  saw  the  figure  of 
my  mother,  attired  in  her  usual  white  dressing-gown,  sitting  at  the  foot 
of  her  bed  and  gazing  steadfastly  at  her.  My  aunt  said  that  she  was 
aware  that,  owing  to  the  fact  of  my  mother  being  delicate,  and  no  letter 
having  arrived  very  lately  from  Germany,  she  was  anxious  about  her,  and 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  607 

that  hence,  on  seeing  the  figure,  she  decided  that  it  was  the  result  of 
some  mental  disorder,  and  resolutely  closed  her  eyes  so  as  to  avoid  any 
further  delusion.  After  keeping  them  shut  for  some  time,  she  re-opened 
them,  and  found  that  the  figure  had  disappeared.  She  said  that  having  a 
horror  of  encouraging  superstitious  fancies,  she  took  no  note  of  the  day 
or  hour,  and  having  resolved  not  to  tell  the  sister  who  then  lived  with 
her,  so  as  not  to  excite  or  frighten  her,  had  never  broken  her  resolution. 
She  admitted,  however,  that  when  she  heard  of  my  mother's  death  a 
short  time  after,  it  struck  her  that  the  coincidence  was  remarkable. 

-  "  Many  years  after  this  conversation,  when  my  aunt  had  passed  away, 
and  we  two  girls  were  living  with  her  sister,  the  conversation  turned  upon 
'  ghosts.'  The  company  consisted  of  my  Aunt  S.,  her  adopted  daughter 
(a  cousin  of  ours),  and  myself.  After  remarking  that  she  did  not  believe 
in  ghosts,  my  Aunt  S.  told  us  she  would  recount  to  us  a  very  remarkable 
experience  she  had  once  had.  She  said  that  one  night,  about  the  time  of 
my  mother's  death,  she  had  retired  to  rest,  but  was  not  asleep,  when 
suddenly  she  saw  my  mother,  in  her  usual  white  dressing-gown,  sitting  at 
the  foot  of  her  bed ;  that  she  said  to  the  figure,  '  Oh,  M.,  how  are  you  1 ' 
(or  words  to  that  effect)  and  that  the  figure  replied,  '  Quite  well,  but  I 
shall  come  back  for  Jane.'i  The  figure  then  disappeared.  My  Aunt  S. 
said  that  she  resolved  not  to  tell  her  sister,  for  fear  of  exciting  her,  and 
that  she  had  taken  no  note  of  the  day  or  hour,  not  wishing  to  encourage 
a  superstitious  feeling ;  but  that  on  hearing  of  my  mother's  death,  she  had 
been  struck  by  the  strangeness  of  the  coincidence.  Even  then,  she  said, 
the  words  regarding  my  sister  Jane  appeared  unmeaning,  but  were  start- 
lingly  explained  when  the  child  soon  followed  her  mother. 

"  My  Aunt  S.  never  recounted  this  experience  to  her  sister,  who  thus 
passed  away  in  ignorance  of  the  phenomenon  of  a  double  apparition. 
Years  passed  without  any  allusion  to  these  singular  recitals  between  my 
sister,  my  cousin,  and  myself;  we  were  thoroughly  incredulous  of  the 
possibility  of  '  ghosts '  in  general  when  we  heard  them,  and  Spiritualism 
was  to  us,  for  long  afterwards,  a  subject  merely  for  mirth  ;  neither  does 
either  my  sister  or  my  cousin  profess  a  belief  in  Spiritualism  now ;  yet 
they  are  both  ready  to  attest  the  truth  of  my  version  of  a  story,  the 
principal  witnesses  to  the  veracity  of  which  have  passed  beyond  the  reach 
of  inquiry. 

"  Saeah  Heckford. 

"  A.  GoPF  [her  sister,  of  22,  Palace  Road,  Upper  Norwood]. 

"  S.  C.  Eland  [her  cousin]." 
Mrs.  Goff  tells  us  that  the  occurrence  took  place  at  Christmas,  1845. 
Her  impression  had  been  that  the  words  heard  were  in  answer  to  a  direct 
question  of  her  aunt  about  the  children. 

§  3.  In  the  following  far  larger  group  the  percipients  were 
together. 

(654)  From  Professor  J.  E.  Carpenter,  Leathes  House,  Fitzjohn's 
Avenue,  IST.W.,  an  Associate  of  the  S. P.E,.  "April  6th   1884. 

"I  do  not  know  that  my  story  is  likely  to  be  very  satisfactory  to  you 

1  As  to  the  interchange  of  remarks,  see  p.  460,  second  note. 

608  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

because  I  am  unable  to  give  precise  dates,  and  have  no  means  of  access  to 
any  memorandum  made  at  the  time.  It  is  possible  that  an  account  which 
I  wrote  soon  after  the  occurrence  may  be  preserved  [see  below],  and  if  you 
should  desire  further  particulars  I  may  be  able  to  procure  them  for  you. 

"  The  manifestation  took  place  in  the  early  summer  of  1868  or  1869, 
but  I  cannot  now  recall  which.  I  lived  then  in  lodgings  in  Clifton.  The 
mistress  of  the  house  was  a  nervous,  highly  excitable  woman,  lame,  having 
one  leg  shorter  than  the  other.  One  morning,  after  breakfast,  she  ap- 
peared much  excited,  and  then  informed  me  that  the  evening  before  she 
had  seen  a  ghost.  The  circumstances,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  were  these. 
Miss  Reed  (the  landlady)  was  standing  about  7.30  in  the  kitchen  (lighted 
by  a  mndow  opening  into  a  small  area),  in  front  of  the  kitchen  fire.  The 
maidservant  was  standing  at  the  table  with  her  back  to  the  window, 
peeling  some  onions  for  my  fellow-lodger's  supper.  Suddenly,  Miss 
Reed  said  to  the  girl,  'Oh,  Eliza,  what's  that?  The  girl  replied, 
'  Please'm,  I  saw  a  man  go  round  the  table  and  out  through  the  door.' 
Just  then  the  street-door  bell  rang.  The  kitchen  door  was  closed,  and  had 
not  been  opened.  The  girl's  statement  expressed  exactly  what  Miss  Reed 
herself  had  seen.  When  the  bell  rang  the  girl  exclaimed,  '  Please,  miss, 
I'm  so  frightened,  I  daren't  go  upstairs.'  The  landlady  went  up,  and 
on  coming  down  again  questioned  the  girl  about  the  figure.  They  had 
both  seen  only  the  upper  part,  above  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  it  was 
naked.  I  asked  Miss  Reed  if  it  resembled  anyone  she  knew.  '  I 
should  have  said  it  was  like  my  uncle,'  she  answered,  '  but  he  is  a  very 
stout  man,  and  this  was  very  thin.'  She  then  detailed  to  me  another 
curious  incident  in  her  own  life,  of  which  I  have  now  forgotten  the 
particulars  ;  but  I  got  the  impression  that  she  was  too  excited  to  give 
me  precise  facts  about  remote  events,  though  her  story  about  the  night 
before  was  quite  coherent  and  distinct. 

"The  sequel  was  curious.  Either  that  day,  or  very  shortly  after- 
wards, she  was  telegraphed  for  to  go  to  her  uncle,  who  was  dangerously 
ill  and  had  been  repeatedly  calling  for  her.  At  the  time  of  the  mani- 
festation she  had  no  idea  that  he  was  in  any  but  his  usual  health. 
He  lived,  I  think,  at  Berkeley,  in  Gloucestershire.  She  went  imme- 
diately, and  on  her  return  a  few  days  after  told  me  what  a  shock  she  had 
felt,  on  going  into  the  sick  room,  at  seeing  her  uncle  reduced  to  the 
attenuated  form  of  the  man  who  had  presented  himself  in  the  kitchen.  ^ 

"  I  have  been  sorry  since  that  I  did  not  separately  question  the  servant, 
but  I  had  reason  to  think  her  so  little  sensible  that  it  did  not  seem  worth 
while.  It  was  only  after  Miss  Reed's  return  from  her  uncle's  sick  bed 
that  the  incident  seemed  to  have  any  importance. 

"J.  EsTLiN  Carpenter." 

In  a  subsequent  letter.  Professor  Carpenter  says  : — 

"  Unfortunately  no  letter  can  be  found  with  any  account  of  the  actual 
incident.  All  that  has  been  discovered  I  have  transcribed  on  the  opposite 
page.  The  details  I  had  quite  forgotten.  The  passage  does  not  say  that 
Miss  Reed  went  to  her  uncle's  house,  but  I  feel  sure  that  she  was  sum- 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  554-6. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  609 

moned  thither ;  indeed,  the  particulars  here  recorded  could  hardly  have 
been  learned  by  her  anywhere  else.  I  fear  this  is  a  lame  and  impotent 
conclusion. 

[Copy.] 

"  '  Clifton,  March  12th,  1869. 
"  '  I  send  you  the  sequel  of  my  ghost  story — if  it  is  to  be 
considered  as  a  sequel  at  all.  I  don't  know  whether  I  told  you  that  I 
asked  Miss  R.  if  her  ghostly  visitor  resembled  anyone  she  knew,  and  she 
said  the  only  one  she  could  think  of  whom  he  was  like  was  her  uncle,  but 
he  was  stout  and  the  appearance  was  thin.  At  the  end  of  last  week  she 
heard,  unexpectedly,  that  her  uncle  a  few  weeks  before  had  been  taken 
seriously  ill,  that  he  had  been  exceedingly  reduced,  and  that  he  was  then 
lying  at  death's  door.  (To-day  I  hear  that  he  is  dead.)  Further,  some 
small  property  that  he  had  he  had  formerly  left  to  Miss  Reed.  Some 
little  while  ago,  however,  an  aunt  of  Miss  R.'s  came  to  "  take  care  of  him," 
and  induced  him  to  alter  his  will  in  her  favour,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  life 
interest  was  concerned.  When  he  fell  ill,  he  became  much  agitated  at  the 
injustice  he  thought  he  had  done  Miss  R.,  and  expressed  himself  with 
strong  self-accusation,  though,  like  many  weak  people,  he  put  off  a  second 
alteration  from  day  to  day.  Whether  one  of  these  fits  of  distress  took 
place  at  the  time  of  the  so-called  appearance,  and  there  was  really,  any 
connection  between  them,  cannot  now  be  traced,  and  the  story  must  be 
left  with  its  possibilities  unsolved.' 

"P.S. — Miss  Reed  gave  up  her  house  some  10  years  ago  or  more.  She 
was  afterwards  reduced  to  considerable  distress  by  sickness,  &c.  I  have 
certainly  heard  nothing  of  her  for  8  years,  and  have  quite  lost  all  trace  of 
her." 

(655)  From  Mrs.  Mainwaring,  of  Knowles,  Ardingly,  Hayward's 
Heath,  (the  narrator  of  case  370,)  who  sent  us  a  less  detailed  account  in 
August,  1884.  "March  14th,  1885. 

"  My  aunt,  Margaret  Saulez,  and  my  mother,  then  Mary  Saulez,  slept 
together ;  and  the  rules  of  the  house  were  strict.  One  most  forbidden 
thing  was  noise  in  bedrooms,  or  talking  after  going  to  bed.  But  the  two 
young  girls  one  night  went  on  chattering  and  laughing  after  they  were  in 
bed,  and  suddenly  the  door  opened  and  my  grandmother  came  in.  She 
just  came  and  looked  at  them  sorrowfully,  as  if  she  was  vexed,  and  without 
speaking  left  the  room.  I  do  not  remember,  at  this  moment,  whether  they 
spoke  to  her  then ;  however,  they  felt  so  grieved  at  her  look  and  silence 
that  they  both  jumped  out  of  bed  and  followed  her  quickly  to  her  door, 
but  found  it  locked,  and  she  would  not  answer — as  they  thought — when 
they  begged  her  to  forgive  them.  My  grandfather  woke,  and  found  her 
by  his  side  in  a  deep  swoon.i  They  sent  for  the  doctor,  and  he  said  that 
he  was  only  just  in  time  to  save  her  life,  as  she  had  evidently  been  in  that 
state  some  time  ;  and  a  few  hours  after  a  child  was  born. 

"  This  is  the  story  familiar  to  me  from  my  mother's  lips  since  my  child- 
hood, and  I  am  as  sure  of  its  truth  as  one  can  be  of  anything  one  does  not 
know  oneself.     The  elder  sister,  my  aunt,  died  soon  after. 

"E.  L.  Mainwaring." 

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  230-1  and  563,  note. 
VOL.   II.  2   E 

610  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

[Special  circumstances,  which  Mrs.  Main  waring  has  explained  to  us, 
prevent  our  applying  to  her  mother  for  a  first-hand  account.] 

(656)  Received  through  the  kindness  of  the  Rev.  Prebendary  Sadler, 
Rector  of  Honiton.  The  ladies  concerned  in  the  case  were  his  great-aunt 
and  her  daughter  (who  died  in  April,  1885).     Writing  in  1883,  Mr.  Sadler 

says,  "  I  took  the  story  from  Miss  F n's  own  lips,  questioning  her  closely 

upon  it.  She  is  as  clear  and  fresh  in  mind  as  myself.  She  has  a  very 
accurate  and  retentive  memory.  I  cannot  say  when  I  first  heard  the 
account — very  many  years  ago."  In  April,  1884,  he  added  that  the 
account  was  taken  down  in  writing  "  several  years  since." 

"In  the  year  1819,  Mrs.  S r  and  [her  daughter]  MissF n  were 

going  into  Leeds,    down  St.   Peter's   Hill,   when  Mrs.    S r  suddenly 

stopped,   and  pointed   out  to  Miss  F n  a  man  on  horseback,  riding 

quickly,  a  little  way  before  them,  up  the  hill.  She  exclaimed,  '  There  is 
Jonah  S.  !  How  strange  he  looks  !  He  looks  like  a  corpse.  Ah,  to  think 
of  his  riding  out  now,  when  we  heard  yesterday  that  he  was  dying  of 
fever  !  '  The  man  then  passed  them  on  horseback  without  noticing  them, 
though  he  was  well  acquainted  with  them.  They  stood  still,  and  looked 
at  him  as  he  passed.  His  eyes  looked  fixed,  as  if,  though  open,  they  were 
not  looking  at  anything.  He  was  riding  quickly.  They  followed  him 
with  their  eyes,  till  they  lost  him  at  the  turn  of  the  hill  some  little  way 
behind   them.     He   had   on  a   light-coloured    drab   greatcoat,    which   he 

usually  wore.     Miss  F n  thinks  that  he  had  no  hat  on,  but  is  not 

perfectly  sure  about  that.  They  did  not  see  him  till  he  was  nearly  up  to 
them. 

"  They  went  into  the  town  to  Mr.   S r's  warehouse.     Mr.   S r 

met  them   at   the  door,  and  before  they  could  say  anything  to  him,  said, 

'  I  have  just  heard  that  Jonah  S.  died  at  2  o'clock  to-day.'     Mrs.   S r 

looked  at  her  watch,  and  calculated  that  it  was  just  at  that  time  they  saw 
him  pass." 

We  requested  the  parish  clerk  at  Leeds  to  search  for  the  date  of  the 
death ;  he  wrote  back  implying  that  he  had  done  so,  but  refused  to  send 
the  result  except  in  combination  with  other  information,  ofiered  on  terms 
which,  though  not  unreasonable  from  his  point  of  view,  we  could  not  accept. 

[The  case  is  too  remote  for  reliance  to  be  placed  on  details ;  but  the 
fact  (if  correctly  remembered)  that  the  ladies  were  astonished  at  seeing 
this  particular  person  out  riding,  tells  against  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken 
identity,  in  So  far  as  it  implies  that  they  gave  him  more  than  a  hasty 
glance.] 

(657)  From  Mr.  Leonard  E.  Thomas,  Derrie  Downs,  St.  Mary  Cray. 

"December  17th,  1883. 

"  A  landlady  of  mine,  Mrs.  R.,  with  whom  I  lived  for  years,  and  who 
was  one  of  the  kindest  of  women — a  thoroughly  God-fearing  woman,  who, 
I  firmly  believe,  would  scorn  to  invent  or  concoct  any  tale — related  to  me, 
among  other  very  peculiar  experiences,  the  following  : — 

"  She  was  a  little  girl  of  about  1 1  years,  when  her  grandfather,  who 
lived  a  few  streets  away  from  them,  was  taken  ill  (I  believe  she  said  with 
scarlet  fever),  and  she  was  not  allowed  to  go  near  the  house.  One  after- 
noon her  grandfather  (who  was  very  fond  of  the  child)  wished  to  see  her 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  611 

very  much,  and  she  was  taken  to  him.  That  night  she  was  lying  by  her 
mother's  side  in  bed,  and  the  door  stood  ajar  with  a  light  on  the  landing. 
She  was  lying  awake,  when  she  heard  the  pat,  pat,  peculiar  to  a  naked 
foot,  ascending  the  stairs.  The  form  of  her  grandfather  entered  the  room, 
advanced  to  the  bed,  drew  the  curtain,  and  looked  at  them,  and  was  gone. 
She  was  trembling  violently,  and  clung  to  her  mother,"  who  had  seen  it 
too,  and  who  said,  '  Hush,  child !  it  is  only  your  grandfather.'  Her 
mother  then  got  up  and  struck  a  light,  and  dressed,  saying,  '  I  fear  some- 
thing must  have  happened  to  your  grandfather ;  I  had  better  go  round 
and  see.'  But  the  child  begged  her  not  to,  as  she  would  be  frightened  to 
death.  They  waited,  and  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards  a 
messenger  came  round  to  bear  the  news  of  her  grandfather's  death,  which 
had  taken  place  at  that  precise  time." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Thomas  adds  : — 

"  I  found  out  the  present  address  of  Mrs.  R.,  and  wrote  to  her,  asking 
her  to  be  good  enough  to  write  me  out  an  account  of  what  she  had  once 
related  to  me,  at  the  same  time  stating  for  what  purpose  I  wished  it.  I 
extract  from  her  reply  that  part  of  it  which  refers  to  the  subject,  and 
which  runs  as  follows  : — 

"  '  I  do  not  care  in  any  way  to  enter  into  such  matters.  What  I  told 
you,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  is  true,  but  undoubtedly  the  impression 
then  made  has  been  deepened  by  hearing  mother  speak  of  it ;  and  I  always 
think  such  things  that  we  cannot  account  for  in  any  way  or  understand 
are  best  let  alone.'  " 

[Details  again  cannot  be  relied  on,  the  narrator  having  been  so  young 
at  the  time.  But  the  fact  of  the  mother's  subsequent  references  to  the 
incident  favours  the  supposition  that  she  herself  shared  the  experience, 
and  that  it  was  not  a  mere  frightened  dream  of  the  child's.] 

(658)  From  Mrs.  Spenser  (mentioned  above,  p.  575).  The  account 
was  copied  for  us  by  Mrs.  Saxby,  of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon,  from  a 
private  letter.  a  97^  Railway  Street,  Southport. 

"September  1st,  1871. 

"  My  sister  Elizabeth  had  a  young  friend  staying  with  her,  who  shared 
the  same  bed.  They  had  ceased  chatting,  and  were  preparing  for  sleep, 
when  Elizabeth  touched  Henriette,  saying,  '  Look  at  that  beautiful  light !  ' 
Henriette  exclaimed,  '  Very  beautiful,  but  what  is  it  ? '  Elizabeth  re- 
plied, '  Oh,  it  is  little  Mary  Stanger  !  How  exquisitely  beautiful.  She  is 
floating  away,'  and  the  vision  passed. 

"  Early  the  next  morning,  she  sent  to  Mr.  Stanger's  house,  and  learnt 
that  the  dear  child  had  died  at  the  exact  time  she  had  seen  the  vision, 
about  11  o'clock  the  previous  night. 

"  The  appearance  was  of  the  perfect  child,  enveloped  in  a  soft  cloud  of 
the  faintest  bluish  light  •}  so  clear,  and  emitting  or  reflecting  a  light  which 
illuminated  the  whole  exquisitely  beautiful  little  vision ;  but  Elizabeth 
did  not  seem  to  know  whether  the  light  originated  in  the  cloud  or  in  the 
lovely  little  figure.     Henriette  saw  the  light  clearly,  as  well  as  Elizabeth. 

"  Lucy  Spenser." 

1  Compare  eases  210,  311,  315,  and  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  first  note. 
VOL.    IL  2    R    2 

612  ■       SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

An  inscription  on  a  tombstone  at  Keswick  shows  that  Mary  Stanger 
died  on  May  24,  1829,  aged  3  years  and  8  months. 

Mrs.  Saxby  tells  us  that  the  two  percipients  were  the  most  intimate 
friends  of  the  child's  mother.  The  child  was  a  cousin  of  the  lady — Mrs. 
Browne,  of  Tallantire  Hall,  near  Cockermouth — to  whom  Mrs.  Spenser's 
letter  was  written.  In  conversation  with  Mrs.  Spenser,  I  learnt  that  she 
herself  heard  of  the  vision  on  the  morning  after  its  occurrence  ;  also  that 
the  child  had  been  playing  about  the  day  before,  and  that  its  death  was 
due  to  loss  of  blood  after  an  incision  necessitated  by  a  sudden  attack  of  croup. 

[We  might  suppose  Henriette's  experience  to  have  been  due  simply  to 
Elizabeth's  suggestion — which  may  have  been  the  reason  why  Henriette 
saw  the  light  and  not  the  figure.  But  if  she  really  "saw  the  light  clearly," 
we  should  thus  be  crediting  verbal  suggestion  with  a  larger  power  of 
evoking  sensory  hallucination  in  non-hypnotised  persons  than  the  evidence 
on  the  subject  seems  at  all  to  warrant  (see  p.  188,  and  Vol.  I.,  pp.  512-3).] 

(659)  From  the  Theory  of  Pneumatology,  by  Dr.  Johann  H.  Jung 
Stilling  (translated  by  S.  Jackson,  1851),  pp.  271-272.  Stilling  knew  the 
family  of  the  narrator  well,  and  vouches  in  strong  terms  for  their  truth- 
fulness and  probity. 

"  My  brother  J.  H.  C.  was  placed  by  a  certain  reigning  prince  as 
doctor  of  medicine  in  A.,  and,  on  account  of  his  peculiar  abilities,  the  title 
of  Aulic  Councillor  was  conferred  on  him.  He  resided  there  about  four 
years,  towards  the  close  of  which  he  resolved,  at  the  request  of  my  late 
father,  to  return  to  H.  .  .  .  We  ardently  looked  for  his  arrival.  .  .  . 
I  dreamt  one  night  that  I  saw  my  brother  on  horseback,  who  said  to  me 
that  he  was  on  a  journey  ;  he  would  therefore  give  me  several  commis- 
sions to  my  parents.  I  observed  that  his  expression  of  countenance 
appeared  very  strange,  and  asked  him  why  he  looked  so  blue-black  in  his 
face  ?  on  which  he  made  answer  that  it  was  occasioned  by  the  new  cloak 
he  had  put  on,  which  was  dyed  with  indigo.  On  this  he  reached  me  his 
hand,  but  whilst  giving  him  mine,  his  horse  began  to  plunge,  which 
terrified  me,  and  I  awoke.  Not  long  after  awaking,  the  door  of  my  room 
opened,  someone  came  to  my  bedside,  and  drew  aside  the  curtains,  when  I 
perceived  the  natural  figure  of  my  brother  in  his  night-gown.  After 
standing  there  a  few  minutes,  he  went  to  the  table,  took  up  the  snuffers, 
and  let  them  fall,  and  then  shut  the  room  door  again. ^  Fear,  apprehension, 
and  terror  overpowered  me  to  such  a  degree  that  I  could  not  stay  in  bed 
any  longer.  I  begged  my  eldest  sister,  who  also  witnessed  this  scene,  to 
accompany  me  to  my  parents.  On  entering  the  chamber  of  the  latter,  my 
father  was  astonished,  and  asked  me  the  reason  of  my  nocturnal  coming. 
I  besought  him  to  spare  me  the  answer  till  the  morrow,  and  only  permit 
me  to  pass  the  night  in  his  room,  to  which  he  assented. 

"As  soon  as  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  I  was  called  upon  by  my  parents 
to  relate  what  had  happened,  which  my  eldest  sister  confirmed.  The 
circumstance  seemed  so  remarkable  to  my  father  that  he  noted  down  the 
night  and  the  hour.  About  three  weeks  afterwards  my  father  received 
the  melancholy  intelligence  of  my  brother's  decease;  when  it  appeared 

1  There  is,  of  course,  no  reason  to  suppose  the  impression  that  the  door  and  the 
snuffers  were  moved  to  have  been  anything  but  part  of  the  hallucination.  Cf.  cases  659, 
670,  676,  696,  698. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  613 

that  he  had  died  the  same  night,  and  the  same  hour,  of  an  epidemic 
disorder,  in  which  he  had  been  suffocated,  and  his  face  had  become  quite 
black.  In  the  last  days  of  his  illness  he  had  spoken  continually  of  his 
family,  and  had  wished  for  nothing  more  ardently  than  to  be  able  to  speak 
once  more  with  me." 

[If  the  singular  blue-black  appearance  of  the  face  was  really  a  feature 
of  the  dream,  and  was  not  "  read  back  "  into  it  after  the  truth  was  known, 
the  details  about  the  dyed  cloak  well  illustrate  the  subjective  and  falla- 
cious embodiment  which  a  percipient  may  supply  to  a  telepathic  impres- 
sion. Another  instance  of  a  waking  hallucination  following  at  some 
interval  after  a  dream  is  case  701.] 

(660)  From  Mr.  Alfred  W.  Hobson,  who  sent  the  account  from  Cam- 
bridge, under  date  March  22,  1864,  to  the  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Maga- 
zine. Dr.  Parkinson,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  told  us  that  he 
remembered  Mr.  Hobson,  a  graduate  of  that  College,  as  a  sensible  man. 
The  incident  was  related,  in  Mr.  Hobson's  presence,  to  the  late  Dr.  Elliot- 
son,  by  Mr.  Joseph  C.  Robertson,  Editor  of  the  Mechanics^  Magazine,  who 
died,  we  find,  in  1852.     We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  his  family. 

"The  two  brothers  [i.e.,  Mr.  Robertson  and  a  brother],  both  very 
young  at  the  time — I  forget  their  exact  ages — were  in  bed  together  at 
their  father's  house,  when  they  both  saw  the  apparition  of  a  lady  to  whom 
their  father  (a  widower)  was  engaged  to  be  married.  She  died  suddenly 
that  same  night.  The  father  was  away  from  home,  and  not  with  the  boys. 
In  this  case  it  seems  as  if  the  dying  lady  had  been  desirous  of  appearing 
to  the  father,  and  had  come  to  his  usual  dwelling  in  the  expectation  of 
seeing  him  ;  but  was  disappointed,  finding  only  his  sons  instead.^ 

"It  so  happened  that  Mr.  Robertson  himself  died  a  few  months  after 
the  above  dialogue,  and  the  brother  referred  to  in  it  was  with  me  in  the 
same  mourning  coach  at  the  funeral,  and  confirmed  the  story  as  told  by 
his  deceased  brother.  The  elder  brother  was,  I  believe,  more  alarmed  at 
the  apparition  than  the  younger." 

(661)  From  a  relative  of  our  energetic  friend  and  helper,  Miss  Frances 
M.  Peard,  of  Torquay,  who  procured  us  the  account.  She  says  that  the 
narrator  (whose  name  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  publish)  "  is  a  remarkably 
shrewd,  sensible  person."  "  1883. 

"In  the  decade  of  184 — ,  one  of  Her  Majesty's  Regiments  was  lying 
in  a  small  town,  well  up  in  Upper  Canada  then,  now  Ontario.  An 
ofl&cer  in  that  regiment,  a  captain,  had  from  the  first  shown  a  great  regard 
for  me,  and  had  always  been  very  devoted  in  his  attentions  ;  but  though  I 
liked  him  much,  I  could  not  say  that  I  would  accept  him.  In  the  spring 
of  184 — ,  April,  there  were  steeplechases  got  up  by  the  garrison.     Captain 

,  who  was  a  splendid  horseman  in  every  way,  entered  his  horse.     I 

must  mention  that  three  or  four  years  before,  he  had  met  with  an  accident 
whilst  riding    a    race,  and    winning.     A    man    rode    across    the    course. 

Captain  with    his  horse    ran    against    him,  was  thrown,   his  horse 

injured,  and  his  own  leg  broken,  which  caused  him  to  have  a  limp  or  halt 
in  his  walk ;  but  it  did  not  prevent  him  being  a  beautiful  waltzer,  and  a 
perfect  rider.  He  and  I  rode  together  continually,  and  he  made  me  the 
good  horsewoman  I  was. 

1  See  p.  268. 

614  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

The  day  before    the  steeplechases    above   mentioned,  Captain 

again  spoke  to  me  about  my  coldness,  and  told  me  he  put  his  fate  on  this 
race.  If  he  won,  would  I  say  '  yes  ' ;  and  if  I  decided  thus,  would  I  give 
him  a  rose  I  had  been  nursing  for  this  occasion  ?  I  had  not  answered 
then ;  but  if  I  wore  my  rose,  and  afterwards  gave  it  to  him  whether  he 
won  the  race  or  not,  it  would  be  a  reply  to  him.  Well,  I  wore  my  rose. 
The  day  was  lovely.  He  won  his  race  and  rose  and  my  acceptance ;  for  I 
was  one  of  a  large  family  of  daughters  and  my  father  not  young,  and  I 
really  liked  no  one  better.     Of  course  he  was  delighted.     My  mother  gave 

a  dance  that  evening  to  all  our  world.     Captain engaged  me  for  the 

first  three  waltzes,  in  fact  for  several  dances,  and  he  was  to  be  there  early. 
The  dance  began,  and  the  dances,  but  my  partner  did  not  appear.  I  began 
to  feel  annoyed ;  and  several  of  his  brother  ofiicers  looked  at  each  other 
smiling  and  began  making  jokes,  &c.  I  said  to  mamma,  '  How  odd  it  is  ; 
he  has  never  done  such  a  thing  before,'  when  I  saw  him  walk  into  the 
drawing-room,  which  was  the  ball-room,  in  his  shell-jacket.  The  other 
officers  were  in  full  dress  as  usual  for  balls,  but  he  appeared  in  his  usual 
shell-jacket,  mess-dress,  with  my  rose  in  his  buttonhole.  He  walked  across 
the  room.  I  looking  at  him,  he  gave  me  a  serious,  earnest,  yet  devoted 
and  constant  regard.  He  walked  across  the  room  in  front  of  me,  went 
towards  the  window,  and  turned  and  went  back  out  of  the  door,  always 
the  limp,  and  the  earnest  steady  regard.  A  waltz  then  began.  I  waited 
for  him ;  he  never  came.  Mamma  said,  '  How  strange.'  I  went  to  the 
other  rooms.  No  partner  there ;  he  was  not  to  be  seen  anywhere.  One 
or  two  others  saw.  Colonel  W.,  Colonel  T.,i  and  one  or  two  of  his  brother 
officers.  It  spoiled  my  evening.  Somehow  I  cared  not  to  dance,  and  felt 
low  and  depressed  and  hurt. 

"  Next  morning,  whilst  we  were  at  breakfast,  papa  came  rushing  in, 
looking  anxious  and  alarmed.  He  turned  to  me  and  said,  '  S.,  did  you  not 
say  Captain — ■ —  was  here  last  night  1  You  saw  him.'  Mamma  and  I 
both  said,  '  Yes,  certainly.  He  came  into  the  drawing-room,  walked  across 
to  the  window,  his  usual  limp,  and  gave  me  such  a  serious  look.'  We 
sprang  up  and  said,  '  Why  do  you  ask  ? '  I  knew  something  had  happened. 
Papa  said,  '  He  has  not  been  in  barracks  all  night.     He  rode  out  towards 

B bridge  to  a  farm  about  5  p.m.    His  horse  came  back  about  12  p.m., 

saddle  soaked,  and  horse  terrified.'  Of  course  the  whole  garrison  turned 
out,  and  a  general  search  was  made.  He  was  not  found  until  the  second 
day,  in  the  river.  The  flap  of  an  overcoat  showed  where  the  body  was. 
He  had  put  on  his  shell-jacket  before  starting,  intending  to  return  late  for 
mess.  My  rose  was  still  in  his  buttonhole,  and  it  was  buried  with  him. 
He  came  home,  or  intended  doing  so,  by  a  deep  ford,  but  the  river  had 
risen  suddenly,  as  it  sometimes  did.  He  was  very  late,  and  he  tried  no 
doubt  to  swim  the  river,  but  did  not  succeed.  It  was  supposed  the  horse 
became  frightened  and  knocked  him  on  the  forehead,  as  there  was  a  mark. 
His  watch  had  stopped  at  about  10.15  p.m.  Our  parties  began  always 
at  9  p.m.,  and  closed  at  1.30  a.m.  He  came,  I  seriously  believe,  to  keep 
his  engagement  to  me,  and  to  have  his  last  long  look  of  one  he  so  loved ; 
for  he  did  so  far  more  than  I  deserved. 

^  These  gentlemen  are  now  dead.  Their  names  were  communicated  to  us,  and  we 
have  traced  them  in  the  Army  List.  The  former  was  Deputy- Adjutant  General  in 
Canada  from  1843  onwards. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  615 

"  This  is,  I  am  glad  to  say,  the  only  ghostly  adventure  I  have  ever  had. 
I  am  most  matter-of-fact,  and  by  no  means  subject  to  hallucinations  of  any 
kind.  On  the  contrary,  I  do  not  easily  believe  anything.  That  was  the 
only  time  in  all  my  life  that  I  ever  had  such  a  vision ;  and  nothing  on 
earth  will  ever  make  me  believe  that  his  spirit  ^  did  not  come  to  see  me 
that  evening  and  to  keep  his  engagement  with  me — the  peculiar  limp,  the 
sad  expression  he  rather  had  at  all  times,  and  the  little  crimson  monthly  rose. 

"  My  sister  A.  remembers  it.  My  mother  always  said  how  odd  and 
unaccountable  it  was.  Colonel  T.,  who  is  dead,  never  got  over  it.  It  gave 
him  a  shudder  even  to  speak  of  it.  '  Bedad !  I  don't  like  ghosts ! '  he  often 
said." 

We  have  obtained  from  the  Chief  Librarian  of  the  Toronto  Public 
Library  a  certified  extract  from  the  Toronto  Examiner  oi  May  26,  1841, 
giving  an  account  of  Lieut,  (not  Capt.)^  W.'s  death  which  differs  from  the 
above  in  stating  that  his  horse  and  dog  returned  to  a  farm-house  near  the 
river  "  about  20  minutes  after  "  5  o'clock,  when  he  had  been  last  seen, 
and  "  were  brought  into  the  town  next  day."  He  must  therefore  have 
been  drowned  soon  after  5.  The  detail  about  his  watch  stopping  at  10.15 
is  thus  probably  incorrect,  and  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  has  been 

(662)  From  an  informant  who  desires  that  her  name  may  be  sup- 
pressed, on  account  of  the  painful  nature  of  the  main  incident.  She  is  a 
very  reasonable  and  respectable  woman,  who  expresses  a  strong  contempt 
for  superstition,  and  is  very  sensible  of  the  exaggeration  and  delusion 
which  enter  into  the  vulgar  iDeliefs  in  "  supernatural  "  occurrences. 

"  1883. 

"  When  I  was  a  young  girl,  I  resided  with  my  father,  mother,  sister 
(named  Ellen),  and  brother,  at  Clapham.  My  sister  was  in  love  with  a 
man,  but  my  father  and  mother  disapproved  of  the  attachment,  and  sent 
her  to  a  friend  in  Brighton,  to  be  out  of  the  way.  One  evening  during 
her  absence,  between  6  and  7  o'clock,  my  mother  and  brother  were  talking 
in  the  garden,  at  the  back  of  the  house.  There  was  a  wall  at  the  bottom 
of  the  garden,  and  a  gate,  leading  into  a  large  enclosed  space  used  for 
drilling,  &c. ;  this  enclosure  was  locked  in  the  evening,  and  was  certainly 
locked  at  the  time  in  question.  It  was  dusk,  but  not  dark.  My  brother 
John  (a  very  active  boy,  but  who  happened  to  have  just  sprained  his 
ankle)  looked  over  the  wall,  and  suddenly  exclaimed,  '  Mother,  there's 
Ellen  !  '  My  mother  looked,  saw,  and  recognised  the  figure  of  my  sister, 
and  said,  '  John,  go  quick,  and  tell  her  to  come  in.  Don't  say  anything 
to  your  father.'  John  replied,  '  I  can't  because  of  my  foot ;  call  Mary.' 
Mother  then  called  me,  and  whispered,  '  There's  Ellen ;  go  and  tell  her  to 
come  in  ;  her  father  shall  not  know  anything  about  her  coming  back.' 
My  mother's  idea  was  to  get  her  quietly  into  the  house,  and  send  her 
away  again  next  day.  I  at  once  went  through  the  garden-gate,  and  gave 
her  the  message.  I  particularly  noticed  her  dress,  a  dark  blue  pelisse, 
buttoned,  and  the  ribbon  on  her  bonnet.  A  path  led  through  the  enclosure 
to  the  outside  gate,  and  she  kept  receding  from  me  along  this  path,  while 

^  See  p.  48,  note. 

2  The  Chief  Librarian  writes  (Aug.  26,  1886),  "  Captain  is  so  common  an  appellation 
in  the  country  parts  that  the  officer  would  most  likely  be  addressed  and  known  as  such 
among  the  ordinary  people." 

616  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

I  followed  more  and  more  quickly,  my  mother  and  John  watching  us. 
There  was  a  deep  dip  in  the  path,  and  here  I  overtook  her  and  tried  to 
catch  hold  of  her,  but  seemed  to  catch  nothing.  She  still  receded,  and  at 
last  stood  by  the  watch-box,  close  to  the  gate ;  and  here  I  repeated  the 
message  to  her,  but  as  she  made  no  answer,  I  went  back.^  My  mother 
said,  '  Why,  where's  Ellen  1 '  I  said,  '  I  left  her  by  the  gate.'  My 
mother  replied,  'But  you  caught  hold  of  her.'  'Yes,'  I  said,  'but  I  did 
not  seem  to  feel  anything  in  my  hand.' 

"  My  mother  turned  very  pale,  and  went  into  the  house  and  told  my 
father,  and  both  of  them  felt  a  conviction  that  some  calamity  had 
happened.  The  next  day  the  news  came  that  my  sister  had  thrown 
herself  into  the  sea  and  been  drowned  a  little  before  7  o'clock  on  the 
preceding  evening.  This  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have  ever  seen 
an  apparition." 

[This  is  a  case  where  it  is  specially  important  to  distinguish  the 
central  fact  of  a  coincidence,  which  may  be  regarded  as  probably  tele- 
pathic, from  the  details  which  may  have  been  subsequently  imagined  or 
exaggerated.  Even  if  the  report  is  substantially  correct,  we  have  no  proof 
that  the  hallucination  was  spontaneously  collective  ;  in  the  uncertain  light, 
it  may  possibly  have  been  produced  in  the  second  and  third  percipients  by 
the  suggestion  of  the  first.] 

(663)  From  Mr.  C.  Colchester,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts. 

"1882. 

"  Forty-two  or  three  years  ago,  my  father  was  with  a  detachment  of  his 
regiment,  the  Royal  Artillery,  stationed  at  Montreal,  Canada.  He  had 
left  his  mother  some  months  before  in  England,  in  an  indifferent  state  of 
health.  One  evening  he  was  sitting  at  his  desk,  writing  to  her,  when  my 
mother,  looking  up  from  her  work,  was  startled  to  see  his  mother  looking 
over  his  shoulder,  seemingly  intent  on  the  letter.  My  mother  gave  a  cry 
of  alarm,  and  on  my  father  turning  round  the  apparition  vanished.^  On 
the  same  evening  I  and  my  brother  (aged  about  6  and  5  years)  were  in 
bed,  watching  the  bright  moonlight,  when  suddenly  we  saw  a  figure,  a 
lady  with  her  hands  folded  on  her  breast — neither  looking  to  right  nor 
left,  but  with  her  eyes  cast  down  in  meditation,  the  head  slightly  bent 
forward — walking  slowly  between  the  bed  and  the  window,  backwards  and 
forwards.  She  wore  a  cap  with  a  frill  tied  under  her  chin,  and  a  dressing- 
gown  of  the  appearance  of  white  flannel,  her  white  hair  being  neatly 
arranged.  She  continued  to  walk,  it  seemed  to  me,  fully  5  minutes,  and 
then  was  gone.  We  did  not  cry  out,  and  were  not  even  alarmed,  but 
after  her  disappearance  we  said  to  each  other,  '  What  a  nice  kind  lady  ! ' 
and  then  went  to  sleep." 

The  children  mentioned  what  they  had  seen  to  their  mother  next 
morning,  but  were  told  not  to  talk  about  it.  The  news  of  their  grand- 
mother's death  on  that  same  evening  arrived  a  few  weeks  afterwards. 

"  I  may    add,"  Mr.    Colchester    concludes,   "  that    neither    I  nor  my 

^  This  long  pursuit  of  the  phantasmal  figure  has  occasional  parallels  in  cases  of  purely 
subjective  hallucination.     See,  e.g.,  Vol.  i.,  p.  499,  note  ;  and  compare  the  case  on  p.  630. 

2  Seep.  91,  second  note.  Mr.  Colchester  believes,  however,  that  his  father  saw  the 
apparition. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  617 

brother  had  ever  seen  our  grandmother  until  that  evening,  nor  knew  of 
what  my  mother  had  seen  till  years  after.  The  apparition  I  saw  is  as 
palpably  before  me  now  as  it  was  40  years  since." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on 
March  31,   1840. 

[Mr.  Colchester  tells  us,  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  believes 
his  own  remembrance  to  have  been  unbroken,  that  "the  occurrence  was 
not  wholly  or  even  partially  revived  by  my  mother  "  ;  and  that  the  vision 
is  unique  in  his  experience.  But  his  extreme  youth  at  the  time  makes 
his  first-hand  recollection  extremely  doubtful.  This  objection  does  not 
apply  to  his  evidence  as  to  his  parents'  share  in  the  afiair.  If  the  facts 
are  correctly  reported,  this  case  belongs  to  the  former  group,  of  cases  where 
the  percipients  were  apart,  as  much  as  to  the  present  one.] 

(664)  From  Mr.  E.  Butler,  7,  Park  Square,  Leeds. 

"October,  1884. 

"  During  my  clerkship  I  resided  in  lodgings,  with  a  kind-hearted 
Christian  woman  of  great  simplicity  of  character  and  reliable  veracity.  I 
heard  from  her  this  story. 

"  Her  brother  was  engaged  in  the  wine  trade,  and  spent  a  great  part 
of  his  time  in  Portugal  and  Spain.  His  two  children  were  left  in  Leeds. 
I  am  not  sure  whether  their  mother  was  living,  but  they  were  frequently, 
if  not  altogether,  at  their  aunt's.  One  day  the  two  children  were  in  the 
back  sitting-room  along  with  their  aunt,  and  one  or  two  besides  (I  believe 
their  cousins).  It  is  the  room  I  very  shortly  afterwards  lived  in.  The 
children  simultaneously  cried  out,  '  Oh !  there's  papa !  gone  upstairs.' 
They  were  laughed  at,  and  chidden,  but  persisted,  and  the  search  had  to 
be  made.  Nothing  was  discovered.  It  was  afterwards  found  by  the  testi- 
mony of  the  papa  himself,  that  exactly  at  that  time  when  the  children  saw 
him  he  had  fallen  into  the  Douro,  and  was  in  that  stage  of  singular 
experience  before  death  by  drowning  when  '  all  the  life  seems  mapped  out 
before  the  spirit,'  and  the  soul  is  just  on  the  point  of  parting  from  the 
body.  I  do  not  recollect  whether  he  said  that  he  had  specially  thought  of 
his  children  in  that  supreme  moment.  Insensibility  followed  ;  but  he  was 
rescued,  not  too  late  for  restoration.  a  Edward  Butler  " 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Butler  says  : — 

"  With  regard  to  your  inquiry,  I  fear  I  should  have  some  difficulty 
now  in  getting  any  corroboration  of  my  communication  respecting  my  old 
landlady,  though  my  own  remembrance  of  her  communication  is  too  vivid 
to  admit  of  the  possibility  of  mistake.  It  was  told  me  in  the  room,  my 
own  room,  where  it  occurred,  with  finger  pointing  to  the  passage  and 
staircase.  Her  name  was  Mrs.  Booth  ;  the  house,  No.  7,  Grove  Terrace, 
Leeds  :  the  absentee  in  Spain,  her  own  brother,  William  Wild ;  of  the 
children,  his  daughters,  every  one  I  believe  is  dead.  The  daughters  left 
Leeds  many  years  ago,  and  I  believe  I  am  right  that  they  are  neither  of 
them  living." 

(665)  From  Mr.  Beresford  Christmas,  Carrara,  Italy. 

"November  30th,  1885. 
"  My  father,  George  Beresford  Christmas,  was  a  cavalry  officer  in  the 
Danish  service  ;  his  elder  and  only  brother,   John   Christmas,  an  admiral 

618  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

in  the  same  service.  The  latter's  only  son,  Walter  Christmas,  was,  and 
is  still  for  aught  I  know  to  the  contrary,  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the 
bed-chamber  to  the  King  of  Denmark.  The  circumstance  I  am  about  to 
relate  took  place  before  my  father's  marriage,  when  he  was  yet  a  young 
man  and  living  with  my  grandfather  in  Copenhagen — it  must  have  been 
somewhere  about  1825.  Admiral  C.  had  sailed  for  St.  Thomas,  and  my 
father  accompanied  him,  leaving  my  grandfather  in  his  usual  health  in 
Denmark.  The  two  brothers  occupied  the  same  cabin,  across  wliich,  for 
the  sake  of  coolness  on  entering  the  tropics,  a  couple  of  cots  had  been 
slung  parallel  to  each  other.  They  were  within  a  few  days'  sail  of  the 
island ;  the  sea  calm,  the  sky  clear,  and,  on  the  night  in  question,  a  bright 
moonlight  pouring  in  through  the  widely-opened  cabin  windows,  lighting 
up  all  within  with  almost  the  distinctness  of  daylight.  Both  brothers  must 
have  been  awaked  suddenly  and  simultaneously — by  what,  they  never 
knew — by  some  irresistible  and  unknown  power — waked  to  see  standing 
between  their  cots  the  figure  of  their  father.  Both  gazed  in  mute  amaze- 
ment :  there  it  stood,  motionless  for  a  moment,  which  seemed  a  century  ; 
then  it  raised  one  hand  and  pointed  to  its  own  eyes.  They  were  closed. 
My  father  started  up  in  bed,  and  as  he  did  so  the  form  vanished.  So 
much  was  my  uncle  impressed  with  the  fact  that  he  at  once  entered  it, 
with  date  and  moment  of  appearance,  in  the  log-book ;  while  naturally  the 
circumstance  became  the  all-absorbing  topic  of  conversation  and  specula- 
tion to  all  on  board. 

"  When  later  letters  reached  them  in  the  West  Indies,  the  hour  and 
minute,  allowing  of  course  for  difference  of  time,  were  found  to  coincide 
exactly  with  those  in  which  my  grandfather  had  died. 

"  In  due  time  the  circumstance  was  known  to  all  Copenhagen. 
Neither  my  uncle  nor  father  ever  liked  to  speak  about  it.  I  have  had  the 
fact  from  the  lips  of  both.  Both  firmly  believed  in  the  reality  of  the 
vision,  and  neither  of  them  was  the  man  to  give  heed  or  credence  to  an 
idle  delusion.  I  remember  both,  in  answer  to  a  question  of  mine,  declaring 
to  having  felt  no  fear,  or  even  awe  :  sudden  wonder  and  an  unaccountable 
chill,  as  of  an  icy  atmosphere,  ^  was  the  predominating  impression.  It  was 
only  when  the  figure  pointed  to  its  own  closed  eyes,  that  a  dumb  dread  of 
impending  bereavement  awoke.  My  father,  as  also  my  uncle,  used  to 
affirm  that  neither  on  the  evening  in  question  nor  upon  any  of  the 
previous  days  had  their  father  been  particularly  the  subject  of  either  their 
conversation  or  thoughts.  There  was  no  preparation,  so  to  say,  on  their 
part  for  the  apparition ;  at  the  same  instant  both  were  suddenly  awoke 
from  sleep  by  some  mysterious  and  irresistible  will,  when  both  beheld  the 
identical  form  standing  within  arm's  length  of  them. 

"  I  have  no  doubt,  if  you  have  among  your  correspondents  or  members 
anyone  in  Copenhagen  willing  to  take  the  trouble,  you  might  be  able  to 
get  at  the  entry  made  in  the  log-book. ^  My  uncle  was  on  active  service 
till  his  death  almost,  which  took  place  only  a  few  years  ago,  and  there 
could  be  no  difficulty  in  tracing  back  the  vessels  he  commanded. 

"  Beresford  Christmas." 

1  See  p.  37,  note. 

2  Unfortunately  we  have  no  Danish  members.  I  have  mentioned  (in  Vol.  i.,  p.  161) 
the  great  tendency  of  log-hooks  to  creep  unauthorised  into  second-hand  narratives  of  this 
sort  ;  but  the  essential  trustworthiness  of  the  account  does  not,  of  course,  depend  on  that 
detail. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  619 

The  next  case,  if  telepathically  originated,  is  an  interesting  in- 
stance of  the  appearance  of  a  phantasm  to  certain  percipients  on  local, 
not  personal,  grounds  (p.  268). 

(666)  From  Miss  Edith  Farquharson,  sent  to  us  by  her  relative,  Mrs. 
Murray  Aynsley,  of  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford. 

"June,  1885. 

"In  the  year  1868,  No.  9,  Drummond  Place,  Edinburgh,  was  in  the 
occupation  of  Mr.  Farquharson,  formerly  a  Judge  of  the  High  Court  in 
Jamaica.  On  the  night  of  Good  Friday  in  that  year,  two  of  his 
daughters.  Miss  Edith  Farquharson,  her  sister  Marianne  [now  Mrs.  Henry 
Murray],  and  a  little  cousin,  Agnes  Spalding,  aged  6  years,  were  sleeping 
in  a  room  at  the  top  of  the  house.  About  11.45  p.m.,  the  two  sisters  were 
awakened  by  hearing  loud  screams  from  the  child,  who  was  sleeping  on  a 
mattress  placed  on  the  iloor  beside  their  bed.  The  mattress  was  against 
the  door  leading  into  a  dressing-room ;  this  door  was  locked  and  sealed 
with  white  tapes  and  black  wax ;  it  had  been  thus  closed  by  a  member  of 
the  family  to  whom  the  house  belonged  before  Mr.  Farquharson  entered 
upon  his  tenancy.  The  death  of  the  head  of  the  family,  and  the  delicacy 
of  health  of  one  of  the  daughters,  had  caused  them  to  wish  to  leave  Edin- 
burgh, and  spend  the  winter  in  Torquay. 

"  On  hearing  the  child's  screams  of  terror,  Miss  M.  F.  touched  her 
sister  and  said,  '  Do  you  hear  the  child  screaming  1 '  Miss  E.  F.  replied 
that  she  did,  and  turned  her  head  round  to  listen  better.  When  the 
child  was  asked  what  she  was  screaming  about,  she  said,  'I  am  wide  awake, 
and  I  have  seen  a  figure  which  was  leaning  over  me,'  and  when  further 
questioned  where  the  figure  went  to,  said,  '  Round  the  side  of  your  bed.' 

"  Miss  E.  F.,  when  she  turned  round,  saw  a  figure  slide  from  near  the 
child's  bed  and  pass  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  whereon  she  and  her  sister 
were.  (At  the  first  moment  she  thought  it  was  a  thief.)  The  latter,  on 
hearing  her  say  in  French  '■  II  y  a  quelqu'un,^  was  so  terrified  that  she  hid 
her  head  under  the  bedclothes. 

"Miss  E.  F.  describes  the  figure  as  being  dressed  in  a  rough  brown 
shawl  held  tightly  round  the  bust,  a  wide  brimmed  hat,  and  a  veil.  Wlien 
the  child  was  questioned  afterwards  she  gave  the  same  account  of  the 
costume. 

"  Miss  E.  F.  says  that  after  passing  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  with  a 
noiseless  gliding  motion,  the  figure  disappeared  into  the  darkness. 

"  Except  the  door  which  was  locked  and  sealed,  the  only  door  of  exit 
to  the  room  was  one  which  was  quite  close  to  the  bed  ;  at  right  angles 
with  the  door  and  with  the  head  of  the  bed  was  a  large  hanging  cupboard. 

"  Both  the  ladies  got  up  instantly.  They  found  the  door  of  their  room 
closed,  as  they  had  left  it.  Their  brother's  room  was  next  to  theirs  ;  they 
knocked  at  his  door  to  rouse  him,  at  the  same  time  keeping  a  sharp  look- 
out on  the  door  of  their  own  room  to  see  that  no  one  escaped.  The  whole 
party  then  made  a  thorough  search  in  the  room  and  cupboard,  found 
nothing  disturbed,  and  once  more  retired  to  rest.  The  next  morning  the 
page-boy  said  that  he  had  been  unable  to  sleep  all  night  on  account  of  the 
sounds  he  heard  of  someone  scratching  at  his  window.  He  declared  that 
he  had  shied  all  his  boots  and  everything  he  could  lay  hold  of  in  the 
direction  whence  the  noise  came,  but  without  effect.     He  could  stand  it 

620  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

no  longer,  and  went  to  the  room  where  some  of  the  women-servants  slept, 
begging  to  be  let  in.  They  had  heard  nothing,  however,  though  they,  like 
himself,  slept  in  the  basement  of  the  house. 

"  The  whole  family  were  hardly  assembled  on  the  Saturday  morning, 
when  the  son-in-law  of  the  late  owner  of  the  house  arrived,  and  asked  to 
see  Mr.  Farquharson.  He  wished  particularly  to  know  exactly  what  day 
this  gentleman  and  his  family  intended  leaving  the  house,  (their  term 
would  expire  the  following  week,)  for  he  had  just  received  a  telegram  in- 
forming him  that  his  sister-in-law  had  died  that  night,  and  they  were 
anxious  to  bring  her  body  there  immediately  for  burial." 

(With  respect  to  this  last  paragraph,  the  narrator's  father  writes  : — 

"  The  above  is  a  correct  statement  of  the  occurrence. 

"C.  M.  Faequhaeson.") 

Miss  Farquharson  continues  : — 

"  The  possible  solution  of  what  we  presume  to  have  been  an  apparition 
of  this  lady  is,  that  the  bedroom  occupied  by  the  Misses  Farquharson  being 
the  one  she  habitually  used,  in  her  dying  moments  she  desired  to  visit  it 
once  more,  or  else  that  there  was  something  in  the  dressing-room  which 
she  particularly  wished  for.  "  Edith  A.  Faequhaeson." 

The  following  independent  account  is  from  Mrs.  Murray  : — 

"  Cobo,  Guernsey. 

"June  24th,  1885. 

"Our  home  was  in  Perthshire ;  but  in  the  winter  of  1868  my  father 
took  a  house  for  four  months  in  Drummond  Place,  No.  8,  p  9]  in  Edin- 
burgh, in  order  to  give  us  a  change.  The  house  belonged  to  General 
Stewart,  who  had  a  delicate  daughter,  and  he  let  it,  to  take  the  daughter 
to  Torquay  for  the  winter.  We  did  not  know  the  Stewarts,  so  our 
imagination  could  not  have  assisted  in  any  way  to  account  for  the 
curious  apparition  that  was  seen.  I  myself  did  not  see  it,i  but  I  was  in 
the  room  with  my  sister  and  little  cousin,  who  both  did.  My  belief  is  that 
Providence  prevented  my  seeing  it,  as  I  am  of  a  very  nervous  tempera- 
ment, and  it  might  have  had  a  very  bad  effect  on  me  if  I  had.  Well,  the 
apparition  took  place  on  Good  Friday  night,  at  about  12  o'clock.  This 
little  cousin,  who  was  only  about  6  years  old,  had  come  into  town  from  the 
country,  and  as  our  house  was  very  full  she  had  a  shake-down  beside  our 
bed  on  my  side.  I  was  the  first  to  be  awakened  by  hearing  her  calling  out 
in  a  frightened  way.  So  I  said,  '  What  is  the  matter,  Addie  1 '  '  Oh,'  she 
said,  '  Cousin  Marianne,  I  am  so  frightened.  A  figure  has  been  leaning 
over  me,  and  whenever  I  put  out  my  hands  to  push  it  off  it  leant  back  on 
your  bed  ! '  At  this  I  was  alarmed  and  awoke  my  sister,  who  lifted  her 
head  from  her  pillow  and  looked  up,  when  she  saw  a  figure  gliding  across 
the  foot  of  our  bed  wrapped  in  a  shawl,  with  a  hat  and  veil  on.  She 
whispered  to  me  in  French  '■  II  y  a  quelqu'un,''  thinking  it  was  a  thief, 
whereat  we  both  jumped  out  of  bed  together  and  went  to  the  next  room 
to  get  our  brother.  Captain  Farquharson.  His  bedroom  door  had  a  shaky 
lock  which  made  a  noise,  so  he  had  barricaded  it  with  a  portmanteau. 
While  he  was  coming  to  our  help,  we  kept  our  eyes  fixed  on  our  door  in 
case  anyone  should  have  escaped,  but  we  saw  nothing,  and  after  our  all 

1  Compare  case  684,  and  see  p.  105,  second  note. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  621 

searching  every  corner  of  the  bedroom  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  no 
one  had  been  there,  for  everything  was  intact.  We  then  questioned  little 
Addie  as  to  what  she  had  seen  and  what  the  figure  was  like.  She  described 
it  as  that  of  a  lady  with  a  shawl  on  and  a  hat,  and  a  veil  over  her  face, 
and  said  that  as  I  spoke  she  had  gone  across  the  foot  of  the  bed  in  the 
same  direction  that  my  sister  had  seen  her  go.  This  child,  I  must  tell  you, 
had  been  most  carefully  brought  up  by  her  mother,  and  was  not  allowed  to 
read  even  fairy  tales  for  fear  of  having  foolish  ideas  in  her  head,  which 
makes  the  thing  more  remarkable,  for  she  had  certainly  never  heard  of  a 
ghost.  I  don't  know  even  now  whether  she  knows  anything  about  it,  for 
we  had  to  pretend  that  it  must  have  been  my  eldest  sister  who  had  come 
in  to  play  us  a  trick,  for  fear  of  frightening  her. 

"  Then  the  next  morning  we  were  relating  our  adventures,  when  a  ring 
came  to  the  door,  and  the  servant  said  a  gentleman  wanted  to  speak  to 
my  father.  This  gentleman  was  a  Mr.  Findlay,  who  had  married  a  Miss 
Stewart.  He  came  to  ask  when  we  were  to  leave,  for  he  knew  it  was  about 
the  time,  as  he  had  received  a  telegram  that  morning  to  say  that  Miss 
Stewart  had  died  in  Torquay  during  the  night,  and  they  wanted  to  bring 
her  body  to  Edinburgh.  We  heard  afterwards  from  friends  of  the 
Stewarts  that  the  bedroom  we  had  had  been  hers.  I  forgot  to  mention 
that  the  child's  bed  lay  across  the  door  of  a  small  room  which  had  been 
locked  up  by  the  Stewarts,  and  they  had  put  tapes  across  and  sealed  them 
with  black  wax. 

"  We  have  none  of  us  ever  had  any  hallucinations  either  before  or  after 
this  strange  affair.  u  Marianne  Mubray." 

We  find  from  the  Scotsman  and  the  Edinburgh  Courant  that  Miss 
Stewart  died  on  April  11,  1868,  the  day  following  Good  Friday.  If  the 
death  took  place  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  after  midnight,  "  during  the 
night "  would  of  course  be  the  natural  expression. 

Mrs.  Brietzcke,  of  72,  Sterndale  Road,  W.,  after  reading  this  account 
in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  wrote  to  us  as  follows,  on  Sept.  29,  1885  : — 

"  I  was  very  intimate  with  two  Misses  Myers  ;  and  within  a  day  or 
two  of  their  cousins',  the  Misses  Farquharson,  having  the  experience 
related,  they  (the  Misses  Myers)  told  me  the  affair,  just  as  related  in  the 
Journal ;  and  they  also,  I  understood,  had  seen  Boyd  (2,  York  Place, 
Edinburgh),  the  house-agent,  and  heard  that  the  description  of  the  lady 
in  the  large  hat  and  veil  was  exactly  like  the  lady  to  whom  the  house 
belonged.  The  Misses  Myers  were  much  impressed.  The  elder  is  dead  ; 
the  other  married  a  Mr.  Dunlop,  and  went  to  India  ;  I  have  lost  sight  of 
lier.  "  H.  K.  Brietzcke." 

Mrs.  Murray  confirms  the  fact  that  her  cousins,  the  Misses  Myers, 
were  informed  of  the  vision  very  soon  after  its  occurrence,  and  adds  : — 
"  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Boyd  ;  he  may  have  heard 
it  from  someone  else,  for  it  caused  quite  a  sensation  in  Edinburgh.  I  have 
no  reason  to  believe  that  the  dress  of  the  figure  was  in  any  way  character- 
istic of  Miss  Stewart."  ^ 

1  A  narrative  somewhat  resembling  this  was  given  in  Tinsley's  Magazine  for  December, 
1873,  in  connection  with  a  family  named  Fitzgerald,  alleged  to  have  resided  at  Ballyreina, 
in  Ireland.  We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  the  virriter  of  this  paper,  or  to  discover  any 
place  called  Ballyreina.  There  is  a  village  in  Ireland  called  Ballyraine ;  but  we  cannot 
find  that  any  family  of  the  name  of  Fitzgerald  has  been  connected  with  it. 

622  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

[The  resemblance  of  the  figure  seen  to  the  lady  who  died  is  entirely 
problematic.  It  might  almost  have  been  foretold  as  certain  that  the 
resemblance  would  form  a  prominent  item  in  any  third-hand  version  of 
the  occurrence.] 

(667)  From  the  Methodist  Magazine  for  March,  1819,  p.  208, — a  letter 
to  the  Editor.  "  Rochester,  February  4th,  1818. 

"Sir, — At  the  Sheffield  Conference  of  1817,  when  examining  the 
young  men  in  the  public  congregation,  I  was  greatly  surprised  by  the 
extraordinary  declaration  of  one  of  the  preachers.  The  efiect  his  narrative 
produced  upon  the  audience  induced  me  to  request  him  to  commit  to  paper 
what  he  had  so  distinctly  detailed.  As  it  contains  a  well-authenticated 
account  of  what  infidelity  has  afiected  to  deny,  and  many  well-informed 
Christians  receive  with  suspicion  and  doubt,  your  insertion  of  his  letter  to 
me  will  at  least  afibrd  some  further  eAddence  on  a  question  which  is  of 
such  high  interest  and  importance  to  the  world.  "  j.  Gaulter." 

"  Sheffield. 

"  8th  August,  1817. 

"  Mr.  President, — Hon.  Sir, — According  to  your  desire  I  take  up  my 
pen,  to  give  you  the  particulars  of  a  solemn  fact,  which  was  the  first  grand 
means  of  leading  my  mind  seriously  to  think  of  those  solemn  realities — 
death,  judgment,  and  eternity. 

I  j  "A  sister  being  married  to  a  gentleman  in  the  army,  we  received 
intelligence  that  the  regiment  to  which  he  belonged  had  orders  for  one  of 
the  Spanish  Isles  (Minorca).  One  night  (16  years  back)  about  10  o'clock, 
as  his  wife,  his  child,  an  elder  sister,  and  myself  (a  boy  of  nine  years)  were 
sitting  in  a  back  room,  the  shutters  were  closed,  bolted,  and  barred,  the 
yard-door  locked,  when  suddenly  a  light  shone  through  the  window,  the 
shutters,  the  bars,  illumined  the  room  we  sat  in.^  We  looked — started — 
and  beheld  the  spirit  '^  of  a  raurdered  brother  ;  his  eye  was  fixed  on  his  wife 
and  child  alternately ;  he  waved  his  hand,  smiled,  continued  about  half  a 
minute,  then  vanished  from  our  sight.  The  moment  before  the  spirit 
disappeared,  my  sister  cried,  '  He's  dead  ;  he's  dead ' ;  and  fainted  away. 
Her  little  boy  ran  to  his  father's  spirit,  and  wept  because  it  would  not 
stay.  A  short  time  after  this,  we  received  a  letter  from  the  colonel  of 
the  regiment  sealed  with  black  (the  dark  emblem  of  mortality),  bearing 
the  doleful  but  expected  news,  that  on  such  a  night  (the  same  on  which 
we  saw  his  spirit)  my  brother-in-law  was  found  weltering  in  his  blood  (in 
returning  from  the  mess-room)  ;  the  spark  of  life  was  not  quite  out.  The 
last  wish  he  was  heard  to  breathe  was  to  see  his  wife  and  child ;  it  was 
granted  him  in  a  certain  sense,  for  the  very  hour  he  died  in  the  Island  of 
Minorca,  that  same  hour  (according  to  the  very  little  difference  of  clocks) 
his  spirit  appeared  to  his  wife,  his  child,  an  elder  sister,  and  myself,  in 
Doncaster.     ...  "I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently, 

"  Thos.  Savage." 

1  This  case  should  be  added  to  the  list  given  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  551,  second  note,  of 
examples  where  the  phantasm  has  included  a  marked  appearance  of  luminosity. 

2  See  p.  48,  note. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  623 

"  P.S. — My  sister,  from  the  night  she  saw  the  spirit  of  her  husband, 
mov/rned  him  as  dead,  nor  could  my  father  prevent  it  by  any  argument. 
He  endeavoured  to  persuade  us  we  were  all  deceived,  yet  he  acknowledged 
the  testimony  which  the  child  gave  staggered  him  ;  but  when  the  letter 
arrived  from  the  colonel  of  the  regiment,  with  the  awful  tidings,  he  was 
struck  dumb.  My  two  sisters  are  yet  living  and  can  testify  to  the  truth 
of  this  account,  and  at  least  one  hundred  persons  beside  our  own  family 
can  prove  our  mentioning  the  hour  the  spirit  appeared,  several  weeks  before 
we  received  the  melancholy  letter,  and  that  the  letter  mentioned  the  hour 
and  night  he  died  as  the  same  in  which  we  beheld  his  spirit.      "  T.  S." 

Mr.  Savage  wrote  a  precisely  concordant  account  ^  (of  which  we  have 
a  copy)  for  the  Rev.  R.  Filter,  whose  daughter  writes  as  follows  on  the 
subject  to  our  friend,  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald  : — 

"  Doncaster. 

"December  17th,  1885. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Macdonald, — My  father,  the  Rev.  R.  Filter,  heard  Mr. 
Savage  relate  a  curious  fact  at  the  Conference  when  he  was  received  into 
'  full  connexion.'  Mr.  Savage  said  that  as  a  youth  he  had  been  sceptically 
inclined,  ^  but  that  the  circumstance  related  had  led  to  his  conversion. 
My  father  was  so  much  interested  that  he  requested  Mr.  Savage  to  write 
down  the  narrative  for  him.  He  did  so.  The  paper  which  you  have 
accurately  copied  was  the  result ;  it  was  carefully  preserved,  and  fell  into 
my  hands  at  my  father's  death. 

"  The  Rev.  H.  Hastling,  who  lived  in  Doncaster  50  years  ago,  remem- 
bers the  tale  very  well.  His  recollection  agrees  exactly  with  the  narrative 
you  have  copied.  The  sister's  husband  was  supposed  to  have  been  mur- 
dered in  mistake  for  somebody  else,  or  else  by  someone  who  had  a  grudge 
against  him.  Mr.  Hastling  says  the  scene  was  a  house  in  St.  George's 
Gate,  pulled  down  a  few  years  ago. 

"  Yours  very  truly,  "J.   M.  Filter." 

§  4,  In  the  following  group  of  cases,  it  is  more  doubtful  whether 
the  experience  recorded  should  be  ascribed  to  the  agency  of  the 
person  whom  the  phantasm  represented.  If  not,  they  are  simply 
examples  of  transferred  hallucinations  of  subjective  origin,  and  as 
such  their  position  in  this  book  has  been  sufficiently  explained  (pp. 
183,  189-92).  The  first  three  examples  are  (except  in  the  fact  of 
being  collective)  parallel  to  the  "  arrival  cases  "  of  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7. 

(668)  From  The  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  for  April,  1880,  p.  151. 
The  editor  writes,  on  Feb.  12,  1880  :— 

"  We  have  received  the  following  letter  from  a  physician,  narrating 
two   psychological  experiences,  in  one  of  which  another  element  enters, 

1  This  account  adds  the  detail  that  the  name  of  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  was  Heb- 
born.  We  cannot  verify  this  detail  without  a  more  extensive  search  than  the  War  Office 
authorities  will  permit.  The  English  withdrew  from  Minorca  in  1802,  having  been  in 
occupation  there  for  a  few  years.     This  agrees  with  Mr.  Savage's  statement. 

2  As  Mr.  Savage  was  only  9  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  he  probably  did  not  use 
exactly  this  phrase. 

624  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

namely,  an  external  event  coincident  with  the  subjective  impression. 
Had  our  correspondent  been  expected  by  his  family  at  the  time,  the 
explanation  of  '  expectant  attention '  in  an  abnormal  condition  of  the 
nervous  system  might  have  sufficed,  if  it  be  admitted  that  two  persons 
can,  through  this  cause,  have  optical  illusions  at  the  same  moment. 
"Whether  in  such  cases  mere  coincidence  is  a  sufficient  solution,  or  whether 
the  two  circumstances  stand  in  any  causal  relation,  must  be  decided  by 
such  an  accumulation  of  evidence  as  would  render  the  first  hypothesis 
untenable."  "February  12th,  1880. 

"  My  dear  Dr.  Tuke, — Although  the  following  circumstance  is  not 
exactly  similar  in  kind  to  that  related  by  Dr.  Jessopp,  you  may  like  to 
make  use  of  it.  At  any  rate,  it  is  at  your  service,  and  you  may  rely 
upon  its  being  quite  accurate.  One  day,  some  years  ago,  two  of  my 
female  relations  were  looking  out  of  a  window  in  Greenwich  just  opposite 
the  hospital,  and  both  saw,  or  thought  they  saw,  me  pass  and  look  in. 
One  of  them  ran  immediately  to  the  door,  but  to  her  astonishment  could 
see  no  one  either  up  or  down  the  street.  At  this  time  I  was  not 
expected,  being,  as  all  my  family  supposed,  in  Paris.  But  within  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  I  arrived  at  Greenwich.  When  I  did  enter,  I  was 
called  to  account  for  the  practical  joke  I  was  supposed  to  have  played 
upon  my  relations,  by  peeping  in  at  the  window  and  then  concealing 
myself,  and  it  was  with  some  difficulty  I  convinced  them  that  I  had  come 
straight  to  the  house. 

"  Some  years  after  this,  my  wife  and  daughter  (not  the  relations 
referred  to  previously)  were  sitting  in  the  dining-room,  when  they  both 
saw  an  old  lady  enter  at  the  gate,  and  walk  up  the  steps  leading  to  the 
front  door  of  the  house.  My  wife  said  to  her  daughter,  '  What  can  bring 
old  Mrs.  C.  out  in  such  a  flood  of  rain?  Run  and  open  the  door,  that 
she  may  not  have  to  wait  for  the  servant  to  answer  the  bell.'  On  opening 
the  door,  there  was  no  one  there,  nor  in  the  garden.  Some  other  curious 
things  of  the  same  character  have  occurred  ;  but  as  the  illusion  afiected 
only  a  single  person,  I  refrain  from  mentioning  them,  as  they  might  arise 
from  the  physical  condition  of  the  parties  concerned,  which  could  hardly, 
I  think,  be  the  case  with  the  others. — Very  sincerely  yours, 

"M.  D." 

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Dr.  Hack  Tuke  writes  to  us  : — 

"  Lyndon  Lodge,  Hanwell,  W. 

"January  29th,  1885. 

" '  M.  D.'  died  some  while  ago.  His  name  was  Dr.  Boase,  long  re- 
spected as  a  physician  at  Falmouth.  He  retired  to  Plymouth,  where  he 
took  an  active  part  in  the  Irvingite  Church  to  which  he  belonged. 

"  He  was  altogether  reliable,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  cor- 
rectness of  the  facts  narrated.  ««  j)_  jj_  Tuke." 

[These  incidents,  if  correctly  recorded,  do  not  look  like  mistakes  of 
identity.  If  (as  may  be  guessed  from  "  M.D.'s "  final  sentence)  either 
of  the  percipients  in  the  second  case  had  on  other  occasions  experienced 
purely  subjective  hallucinations,  the  fact  would  be  of  interest  as  favouring 
the  view  that  the  vision  of  Mrs.  C.  originated  subjectively  in  one  of  the 
two  minds.] 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  625 

(669)  From  Mrs.  Sturge,  2,  Midland  Road,  Gloucester. 

"  Nov.  26,  1884. 

"  When  residing  in  Montserrat,  West  Indies,  in  or  about  the  year 
1858,  I  was  on  a  visit  to  some  friends  in  the  principal  town  of  Antigua. 
One  evening  Mr.  George  Habershon,  a  gentleman  who  boarded  with  the 
family,  but  lodged  in  another  part  of  the  town,  remained  rather  late  ; 
Mrs.  Burns,  the  lady  of  the  house,  retired,  leaving  her  daughters,  to 
one  of  whom  Mr.  Habershon  was  engaged,  and  a  young  lady  named 
Minnie  Anderson,  and  myself  downstairs.  The  evening  was  a  beautiful 
moonlight  one.  As  soon  as  Mr.  Habershon  left,  a  servant  passed  through 
the  room  in  which  we  were  sitting  and  fastened  the  outer  door,  leading 
from  the  verandah  into  the  street,  passing  into  the  house  after  he  had 
done  so.  Soon  after  Minnie  uttered  an  exclamation.  I  looked  up  and  saw 
Mr.  H.,  or  what  appeared  to  be  him,  entering  the  room  from  the 
verandah,  and  I  said,  '  Mr.  Habershon  ! '  Minnie  said,  '  Yes.'  None  of  the 
others  in  the  room  saw  him.  The  apparition  disappeared  almost  immedi- 
ately. We  were  somewhat  startled  at  his  unexpected  reappearance,  and 
searched  about  and  looked  down  the  road  (it  was  bright  moonlight,  as 
mentioned  before),  but  could  see  no  one,  nor  could  we  understand  how  he 
could  have  got  in,  as  the  outer  door  was  locked. 

"  When  our  hostess  heard  of  the  matter  in  the  morning  she  was  much 
annoyed,  and  on  Mr.  Habershon's  arrival  to  breakfast,  she  spoke  to  him 
about  having  come  back,  frightening  the  girls.  He  declared  he  had  not 
done  so,  but  said  that  on  his  way  home  he  had  thought  of  returning  to 
ask  for  a  piece  of  meat  for  the  dogs,  a  thing  which  he  had  done  more  than 
once  before,  and  that  he  stood  in  the  road  considering  whether  or  no  he 
should  do  so,  deciding  in  the  negative  because  he  thought  we  should  laugh 
at  him,  as  he  often  did  come  back.  I  suppose  he  appeared  to  Minnie  and 
myself  at  the  time  he  was  considering  whether  or  no  he  should  return. 

"  I  regret  to  say  most  of  those  who  were  present  in  that  room,  as 
well  as  Mr.  Habershon,  are  now  no  more,  but  I  believe  I  have  correctly 
narrated  the  facts.  The  only  survivor  is  now  the  wife  of  Justice  Semper, 
a  judge  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Leeward  Isles.  I  may  add  that 
Mr.  Habershon  was  a  much  esteemed  young  Englishman,  whose  veracity 
could  be  entirely  depended  upon.  "Annie  Sturge." 

Mrs.  Semper  sends  us  the  following  independent  account,  from  which 
it  appears  that  she  was  not  herself  present  at  the  time. 

"  St.  Kitts. 

"  20th  April,  1886. 

"  The  incident  to  which  you  refer  took  place  in  the  house  of  my  father, 
Mr.  Burns.  I  was  not  present,  but  the  strange  tale  was  told  to  me,  and 
I  am  very  pleased  to  tell  you  all  I  know  about  it,  in  accordance  with 
your  request.  The  facts,  as  well  as  I  can  call  them  to  mind,  are  these. 
Mr.  George  Habershon  spent  the  evening  with  my  family.  On  his  leaving, 
all  the  members  of  it  retired  to  rest  with  the  exception  of  my  sister  (since 
dead)  and  her  friend  Mrs.  Sturge  ;  the  two  girls  remained  in  the  drawing- 
room,  which  was  still  brightly  lighted.  To  their  surprise  they  became 
aware  that  Mr.  Habershon  had  come  back,  and  was  standing  at  one  of 
the  entrance  doors,  gazing  at  them.  They  pretended  not  to  see  him  ;  but 
on  his  keeping  his  statue-like  position,  they  got  so  curious  to  know  why 
VOL.    II.  2   s 

626  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

he  had  returned  that  one  of  them  asked  what  he  wanted.  They  received  no 
reply,  and  on  advancing  to  where  he  stood,  he  disappeared.  Imagining 
he  was  playing  them  a  trick,  they  searched  about  the  verandah  ;  they 
then  watched  the  street  up  which  he  had  to  go  to  get  to  his  lodgings — and 
it  being  a  bright,  moonlight  night,  every  object  would  be  seen  distinctly. 
He,  however,  was  not  there. 

"  Next  day,  on  their  asking  Mr.  Habershon  how  he  managed  to  elude 
them,  he  professed  perfect  ignorance  of  what  they  were  talking  about. 
Later  on,  my  mother,  who  thought  he  had  mystified  the  girls  enough, 
privately  asked  him  to  set  the  matter  at  rest  by  explaining  it.  Mr. 
Habershon  assured  her  that  he  had  not  come  back.  He  said  he  had  had 
a  strong  and  almost  irresistible  wish  to  do  so,  that  he  had  turned  and 
walked  a  few  steps,  and  then,  thinking  by  that  time  the  door  would  be 
shut,  he  retraced  his  steps  and  went  home.  Mr  Habershon's  denial  could 
not  be  doubted  by  any  one  who  knew  him. 

"  I  may  as  well  mention  that  Mr.  Habershon  was  engaged  to  be 
married  to  my  sister,  and  the  reason  he  wished  to  return  to  the  house  was 
that  he  had  not  quite  understood  something  she  wished  done. 

"  Minnie  Semper  \nee  Burns]." 

[It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Semper  represents  her  sister,  and  not 
Minnie  Anderson,  as  the  second  percipient.'  After  a  conversation  with 
Mrs.  Sturge,  I  feel  no  doubt  that  her  version  is  the  correct  one.  The 
discrepancies  between  the  two  accounts  can  scarcely  be  held  to  afiect  the 
central  fact  described.] 

(670)  From  Dr.  Wyld,  41,  Courtfield  Road,  S.W. 

"December,  1882. 

"Miss  L.  and  her  mother  were  for  15  years  my  most  intimate 
friends ;  they  were  ladies  of  the  highest  intelligence,  and  perfectly 
truthful,  and  their  story  was  confirmed  by  one  of  the  servants ;  the  other 
servant  I  could  not  trace. 

"Miss  L.,  some  years  before  I  made  her  acquaintance,  occupied 
much  of  her  time  in  visiting  the  poor.  One  day,  as  she  walked  home- 
wards, she  felt  cold  and  tired,  and  longed  to  be  at  home,  warming  herself 
at  the  kitchen  fire.  At  or  about  the  minute  corresponding  to  this  wish, 
the  two  servants  being  in  the  kitchen,  the  door-handle  was  seen  to  turn, 
the  door  opened,^  and  in  walked  Miss  L.,  and  going  up  to  the  fire  she 
held  out  her  hands  and  warmed  herself,  and  the  servants  saw  she  had  a 
pair  of  green  kid  gloves  on  her  hands.  She  suddenly  disappeared  before 
their  eyes,  and  the  two  servants  in  great  alarm  went  upstairs  aod  told 
the  mother  what  they  had  seen,  including  the  green  kid  gloves.  The 
mother  feared  something  was  wrong,  but  she  attempted  to  quiet  the 
servants  by  reminding  them  that  Miss  L.  always  wore  black  and  never 
green  gloves,  and  that  therefore  the  '  ghost '  could  not  have  been  that 
of  her  daughter. 

"  In  about  half-an-hour  the  veritable  Miss  L.  entered  the  house,  and 
going  into  the  kitchen  warmed  herself  by  the  fire  ;  and  she  had  on  a  pair 
of  green  kid  gloves  which  she  had  bought  on  her  way  home,  not  being  able 
to  get  a  suitable  black  pair.  uq._  "Wyld   M.D." 

The  Hev.  W.  Stainton  Moses  writes  : — 

^  See  p.  612,  note. 

ix.j  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  627 

"  21,  Birchington  Road,  KW.,  January  31st,  1883. 

"  I  have  heard  the  story  of  Miss  L.  from  her  mother.  It  is,  as 
far  as  my  memory  serves,  recounted  here  with  perfect  accuracy.  Both  the 
ladies  mentioned  were  intimately  known  to  me,  and  entirely  to  be  trusted. 

"  W.  Stainton  Moses." 

[This  case,  it  will  be  seen,  does  not  depend  on  the  testimony  of  the 
servants,  but  on  that  of  Mrs.  L.,  whose  character  for  truthfulness  is  vouched 
for  by  two  gentlemen  who  knew  her  intimately.  The  point  as  to  the  longing 
to  be  "  warming  herself  at  the  kitchen  iire  "  is,  however,  one  very  likely  to 
have  been  imagined  or  exaggerated  ;  even  supposing  that  it  was  genuinely 
remembered,  the  "  minute  corresponding  "  to  it  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
afterwards  ascertainable,  though  very  likely  indeed  to  be  inferred  as  that 
of  the  apparition  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  green  gloves 
were  mentioned  before  the  reality  of  their  existence  was  known ;  so  that 
Miss  L.'s  agency  cannot  be  confidently  assumed.] 

The  next  two  cases  resemble  Nos.  328  and  329,  the  state  of  the 
person  whose  phantasm  appeared  presenting  nothing  which  could 
be  supposed  to  be  a  distinctive  condition  of  telepathic  agency. 

(671)  From  Dr.  Buchanan  (late  H.E.I. C.S.  Bengal  Establishment),  12^ 
Rutland  Square,  Edinburgh.  All  the  percipients  are  dead,  except  one, 
who  is  inaccessible.  Among  them  were  Dr.  Buchanan's  late  wife,  and 
her  parents. 

"The  following  circumstance  took  place  at  a  villa  about  one  and  a-half 
miles  from  Glasgow,  and  was  told  me  by  my  wife.  Of  its  truth  I  am  as 
certain  as  if  I  had  been  a  witness.  The  house  had  a  lawn  in  front,  of 
about  three  or  four  acres  in  extent,  with  a  lodge  at  the  gate  very  distinctly 
seen  from  the  house,  which  was  about  80  yards  distant.  Two  of  the 
family  were  going  to  visit  a  friend  seven  miles  distant,  and  on  the  previous 
day  it  had  been  arranged  to  take  a  lady,  Miss  W.,  with  them,  who  was  to 
be  in  waiting  at  a  place  about  a  mile  distant.  Three  of  the  family  and  a 
lady  visitor  were  standing  at  one  of  the  dining-room  windows  waiting  for 
the  carriage,  when  they,  including  my  wife,  saw  Miss  W.  open  the  gate  at 
the  lodge.  The  wind  had  disarranged  the  front  of  a  pelisse  which  she 
wore,  which  they  distinctly  saw  her  adjust.  She  wore  a  light  grey- 
coloured  beaver  hat,  and  had  a  handkerchief  at  her  mouth ;  it  was 
supposed  that  she  was  suffering  from  toothache,  to  which  she  was  subject. 
She  entered  the  lodge,  to  the  surprise  of  her  friends,  and  as  she  did  not 
leave  it,  a  servant  was  sent  to  ask  her  to  join  the  family ;  but  she  was 
informed  that  Miss  W.  had  not  been  there,  and  it  was  afterwards 
ascertained  that  no  one,  except  the  woman's  husband,  had  been  in  the 
lodge  that  morning. 

"The  carriage  arrived  at  the  house  about  10  a.m.,  and  Miss  W.  was 
found  at  the  place  agreed  upon  in  the  dress  in  which  she  appeared  at  the 
lodge,  and  sufiering  from  toothache.  As  she  was  a  nervous  person,  nothing 
was  said  to  her  of  her  appearance  at  the  gate.  She  died  nine  years 
afterwards.  "Wm.  M.  Buchanan,  M.D." 

Dr.  Buchanan  wrote,  on  30th  Oct.,  1883,  to  say  that  he  had  just  been 
staying  with  relatives  of  his  late  wife,  who  had  often  heard  the  story 
from  her,  and  confirmed  it  in  every  detail,  except  that  it  was  a  ^vhite 
VOL.  II.  2  s  2 

628  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

beaver  hat.  He  adds  that  "  those  who  witnessed  the  fact  are  quite  matter- 
of-fact  people,  not  in  the  slightest  degree  excitable,  and  most  certainly 
not  nervous." 

[The  fact  of  the  figure's  seeming  to  enter  the  lodge,  as  to  which  Dr. 
Buchanan  is  quite  positive,  favours  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination,  as 
against  that  of  mistaken  identity.] 

(672)  From  Mrs.  Bevan,  Plumpton  House,  Bury  St.  Edmunds. 

"  1884. 

"In  the  month  of  July,  1855,  I  was  spending  a  week  with  my 
brother,  the  Rector  of  Chedburgh,  and  his  sweet  young  wife,  when  one 
evening,  after  the  children  had  gone  to  bed,  and  we  were  all  three  sitting 
together,  my  brother  said,  '  Cecilia  and  I  have  often  wanted  to  ask  you 
whether  you  were  thinking  of  us  in  any  special  way  on  the  15th  of  last 
November  '? ' 

"  After  a  few  minutes'  consideration,  I  could  only  say  that  I  remem- 
bered nothing  of  the  sort,  as  there  was  no  special  cause  for  it  at  that  time, 
and  begged  to  know  why  they  asked. 

"  My  brother  then  said  that  on  the  morning  of  that  day,  which  of 
course  they  specially  noted,  he  awoke  while  the  night-light  was  still 
burning,  between  6  and  7  o'clock,  and  opening  his  eyes,  he  distinctly  saw 
me  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  on  his  wife's  side  of  it.  After 
watching  me  for  a  short  time  with  some  wonder,  but  with  no  sensation  of 
fear,  he  reached  out  his  hand  and  touched  his  wife,  saying,  '  Cecilia,  are 
you  awake?'  'Yes,  I  have  been  awake  some  minutes.'  'Do  you  see 
anything  ?  '  '  Yes,  I  see  Sarah  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.'  '  How 
very  strange  ! '  and  while  they  spoke  to  each  other,  the  furniture  of  the 
room  was  seen  through  my  figure,  which  soon  entirely  disappeared.^ 

"  We  were  at  the  time  living  only  14  miles  ofi*,  and  I  was  in  a  delicate 
state  of  health.  They  came  down  to  breakfast  quite  expecting  that  the 
post  would  bring  some  bad  news  of  me,  and  all  day  looked  for  a 
messenger  from  Sudbury,  and  made  an  early  reason  for  driving  over,  to 
find  all  as  usual.  Thinking  that  such  a  strange  circumstance  might  make 
me  nervous,  they  kept  it  to  themselves  until  time  had  proved  that,  what- 
ever it  was,  no  harm  had  come  to  me.  They  asked  each  other  whether  it 
could  possibly  have  been  our  mother  who  was  then  living  near  Norwich, 
and  who  died  there  in  February,  1855,  but  they  were  quite  agreed  that  it 
was  no  one  but  me.  I  certainly  knew  nothing  about  it,  either  at  the 
time  or  afterwards  ;  nor  did  it  make  me  feel  the  least  nervous. 

"  My  dear  brother  and  his  wife  also  are  passed  to  the  other  world ; 
she  in  1862,  he  in  1864.  "  Sarah    Bevan." 

[I  have  pointed  out,  on  p.  83,  that  a  person  whose  phantasm  has  ap- 
peared to  others,  and  who  has  been  informed  of  the  fact,  is  in  rather  a 
difierent  position  from  an  ordinary  second-hand  witness.] 

In  the  next  two  cases  the  originating  agency  of  an  absent   living 

person  seems   out    of  the    question ;  and  for   the    first    of  them,  at 

any  rate,  there  would,  in  my  view,  be  no   difficulty  in    supposing    a 

purely  subjective  origin  in    one    mind,  (perhaps    that    of  the    dying 

woman,)  and  a  transference  thence  to  the  other. 

1  See  p.  38,  note,  and  p.  97,  first  note. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  629 

(673)  From  Miss  J.  E.  Walker,  48,  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol. 
She  heard  the  account  from  a  cousin,  of  whom  she  writes,  on  Feb.  6,  1883 : — 

"  Cousin  Emmeline  was  old  Squire  Bingley's  youngest  daughter ;  she 
was  sincere  and  fearlessly  true,  but  she  had  no  poetic  and  scarcely  any 
imaginative  faculty.  I  should  have  cited  her  as  a  good  specimen  any- 
where of  the  matter-of-fact  and  common-place  woman,  which  perhaps 
gives  a  somewhat  additional  weight  to  her  narrative  which  she  confided 
to  me  many  years  ago.  She  died  about  6  years  since."  Later  Miss 
Walker  adds: — "The  event  narrated  took  place  when  she  was 
about  20,  and  must  have  happened  in  (I  think)  1844  or  1845.  She 
told  me  her  story  very  simply  and  vivd  voce.  She  also  told  it  separately 
to  my  elder  sister  in  precisely  the  same  terms.  It  was  /  who  threw  it, 
for  brevity's  sake,  into  the  narrative  form  "  [and  into  the  first  person]. 

"  My  father  and  mother  had  many  children ;  most  of  us  died  in 
infancy ;  Susanna  survived,  and  Charlotte  and  myself.  Father's  was  an 
entailed  estate,  and  the  deaths  of  two  sons,  William,  who  died  in  boyhood, 
and  John,  who  died  in  infancy,  had  been  the  great  disappointment  of  his 
life.  Susanna  remembered  both  the  boys,  but  William  was  born  and  died 
long  before  my  time,  and  John  died  at  about  two  years  old,  when  I  was  the 
baby.  Of  William  there  was  no  likeness,  but  you  know  John's  picture 
well,  a  well-painted  full-length  oil  picture  representing  a  toddling  babe  in 
white  frock  and  blue  shoes,  one  of  my  father's  prize  greyhounds  crouching 
beside  him,  and  an  orange  rolling  at  his  feet. 

"  I  was  grown  up,  about  20,  Susanna  was  40,  and  Charlotte  about  30 
years  old.  Father  was  declining,  and  we  lived  together,  contented  and 
united,  in  a  pleasant  house  on  the  borders  of  Harrogate  Common.  On 
the  day  about  which  I  am  writing,  Charlotte  was  unwell ;  she  had  com- 
plained of  a  chill,  and  the  doctor  recommended  her  to  keep  in  bed.  She 
was  sleeping  quietly  that  afternoon,  and  Susanna  sat  on  one  side  of  her 
bed  and  I  sat  on  the  other ;  the  afternoon  sun  was  waning,  and  it  began  to 
grow  dusky,  but  not  dark.  I  do  not  know  how  long  we  had  been  sitting 
there,  but  by  chance  I  raised  my  head  and  I  saw  a  golden  light  above 
Charlotte's  bed,  and  within  the  light  were  enfolded  two  cherubs'  faces 
gazing  intently  upon  her.  1  was  fascinated  and  did  not  stir,  neither  did 
the  vision  fade  for  a  little  while.  At  last  I  put  my  hand  across  the  bed 
to  Susanna,  and  I  only  said  this  word,  '  Susanna,  look  up  ! '  She  did  so, 
and  at  once  her  countenance  changed,  'Oh,  Emmeline,'  she  said,  'they  are 
William  and  John.'  Then  both  of  us  watched  on  till  all  faded  away  like 
a  washed-out  picture  ;  and  in  a  few  hours  Charlotte  died  of  sudden  inflam- 
mation." 

In  conversation,  Miss  Walker  told  me  that  she  is  certain  that  her 
cousin  drew  the  other  sister's  attention  to  the  vision  without  mentioning 
what  she  herself  saw  ;  also  that  she  was  singularly  precise  in  statement 
and  incapable  of  exaggeration. 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Miss  Charlotte  Bingley  died 
at  Harrogate,  on  June  8,  1843. 

The  next  account  is  one  of  the  puzzling  carriage-cases  mentioned 
on  p.  195.     Here  there  was  a  local  tradition  of  a  phantasm  carriage. 

630  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

due  to  sounds,  frequently  heard,  which  were  probably  not  hallucina- 
tions but  illusions ;  and  this  may  possibly  have  acted  as  a  favourable 
condition  to  a  visual  hallucination  of  the  sort  described ;  but  it  will 
not  in  the  least  account  for  the  correspondence  and  coincidence  of 
the  two  hallucinations,  which  yet  can  hardly  have  been  accidental. 
I  do  not  give  the  case  an  evidential  number,  because  the  written 
account  does  not  make  it  appear  as  impossible  as  to  the  witnesses 
on  the  spot  it  certainly  did  appear,  that  the  carriage  should  have 
been  a  real  one.     The  narrator  is  Mr.  Paul  Bird,  Strand,  Calcutta. 

"July  25tli,  1884. 
"  One  evening,  just  at  dusk,  I  was  returning  home  from  office  in  my 
buggy,  with  lamps  lighted.  It  was  dusk,  but  under  the  shadow  of  the 
trees  which  overhang  the  avenue  it  was  pretty  dark.  I  was  driving 
pretty  fast,  when  I  heard  what  appeared  to  be  a  runaway  gharrie  coming 
from  the  house  towards  me.  I  immediately  checked  my  horse  and  peered 
ahead  to  see  how  to  avoid  the  coming  danger,  but  as  the  noise  did  not 
appear  to  get  any  nearer,  I  cautiously  proceeded,  and  when  about  100 
yards  from  the  house,  distinctly  saw  the  reflection  of  my  lamps  on  the 
panels  of  a  carriage  in  front  of  me,  proceeding  the  same  way,  viz.,  to 
Hastings  House  [in  the  suburb  of  Alipore].  I  kept  my  eyes  on  the  panels, 
so  as  not  to  run  into  them.  The  gharrie  turned  to  the  left  to  go  under 
the  portico,  followed  by  me,'^  but  when  I  arrived  there,  there  was  no  gharrie; 
it  had  disappeared.  I  was  very  much  puzzled  at  this,  but  should  probably 
have  thought  nothing  more  about  it,  had-  not  my  wife,  who  was  watching 
for  my  arrival  from  an  upper  window,  asked  me  at  once,  '  What  gharrie 
was  that  just  ahead  of  you  ? '  This,  you  will  admit,  was  curious,  and  I 
oflfer  no  theory  about  it.  <t  Paul  Bird." 

Mrs.  Bird  writes,  on  July  26,  1884  : — 

"  I  cannot  add  anything  further  to  my  husband's  description  about  the 
gharrie  at  Hastings  House,  except  that  I  also  saw  the  outline  of  the 
gharrie  as  it  came  up  the  avenue  in  front  of  my  husband's  buggy,  with 
his  lamps  shining  on  it  so  as  to  define  the  outline  ;  and  I  was  at  a  window 
upstairs  watching  for  my  husband's  return,  so  that  we  saw  the  apparition 
from  totally  difierent  points  of  view,  and  without,  of  course,  holding  any 
communication.  I  suddenly  lost  sight  of  the  fictitious  gharrie,  and  did  not 
trace  it  right  up  to  the  portico.  It  turned  oif,  I  thought,  from  the  direct 
road  ;  certainly,  it  disappeared.  I  may  further  state  that  I  heard  no 
sound  of  a  second  vehicle,  but  only  that  made  by  my  husband's  horse  and 
buggy  ;  but  I  was  aware  of  his  checking  his  horse,  as  if  he  saw  something 
ahead,  and  this  action  of  his  may  have  been  the  cause  of  conjuring  up  in 
my  vision  the  supposed  gharrie.  We  have  always  spoken  very  sceptically 
of  this  circumstance,  although  feeling  in  our  inner  consciousness  that  there 
was  something  not  utterly  to  be  disregarded  in  the  occurrence. 

"Gertrude  Bird." 

1  See  p.  616,  first  note. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  631 

§  5.  The  remaining  cases  are  auditory.  In  the  following  group 
the  impression  was  of  a  recognised  voice. 

(674)  From  Mr.  C.  F.  H.  Froehnert,  (Bandmaster  of  the  Royal 
Marines,)  3,  Yictoria  Place,  Stonehouse,  Plymouth,  who  wrote  as  follows 
to  the  Daily  Telegraph,  on  October  15,  1881. 

"  SiR^ — Returning  from  India  in  1854,  I  resided  for  a  few  months  at 
Diisseldorf,  and  there  made  the  acquaintance  of  two  well-known  families — 
Haskal  and  Focke.  Mr.  Haskal,  a  gentleman  well  known  as  the  author 
of  several  works  on  Oriental  botany,  held  a  high  appointment  under 
the  Dutch  Government  in  Batavia;  and  his  family,  consisting  of  Mrs. 
Haskal,  several  daughters,  and  Miss  Focke  as  companion,  had  engaged 
passage  out  in  a  large  Dutch  vessel,  and  sailed  from  Amsterdam.  One 
evening,  soon  afterwards,  when  Mrsi  Focke,  with  the  rest  of  her  family, 
were  at  tea,  they  all  heard  a  loud  cry  of  '  Mother !  '  outside  the  window. 
They  all  recognised  at  once  the  voice  of  the  eldest  daughter,  Anna,  who 
had  sailed  with  the  Haskals.  They  rushed  to  the  window,  but  saw 
nothing.  Scarcely  had  they  taken  their  seats  again,  when  a  most 
agonising  shriek  was  heard,  and  twice  '  Mother,  mother,'  in  the  same 
voice.  A  few  days  later  a  report  came  that  a  large  Dutch  vessel  had 
been  wrecked.  I  had  left  for  England,  and  was  written  to  and  asked  to 
make  inquiries  at  Lloyd's  if  there  was  truth  in  this  report.  The  answer 
I  received  was  that  on  that  particular  evening  this  vessel  was  lost  with 
every  soul  on  board.— Yours  truly,  "  C.  F.  H.  Froehneet." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Froehnert  wrote  to  us,  on  June  11, 
1883  :— 

"The  Fockes  were  old  and .  well-known  residents  of  Diisseldorf  ;  but 
no  doubt  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Focke  are  dead  by  this  time ;  but  there  was 
another  daughter — sister  of  the  one  lost — but  I  dare  say  she  has  been 
married  long  since,  and  would  go  under  another  name.  Diisseldorf  being 
near  Holland,  the  news  of  a  large  Dutch  vessel  having  been  lost  soon 
reached  that  town,  especially  as  it  was  reported  that  among  the  effects 
washed  on  shore  many  things  were  recognised  as  having  belonged  to  the 
family,  Haskal,  such  as  some  valuable  pictures,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Mrs.  Ifjen,  a  friend  of  mine  and  the  Haskals,  wrote  to  me,^  telling 
me  of  the  hearing  of  the  voice  on  that  particular  evening,  and  of  the 
rumour  of  the  stranding  of  the  vessel,  requesting  me  to  ascertain  at 
Lloyd's  if  a  vessel  had  been  lost ;  the  answer  was  as  I  stated,  the  ship 
had  been  lost  that  very  night. 

"  Mrs.  Haskal  and  her  children  had  also  resided  at  Diisseldorf  until 
they  departed. 

"  At  the  time  when  this  happened  I  was  Bandmaster  of  the  2nd  Life 
Guards  at  London." 

Mr.  Froehnert  adds,  on  April  1,  1885  : — 

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  regarding  the  Focke  case  at  Diisseldorf,  I  am 
sorry  I  cannot  recollect  the  house  they  were  living  in  at  the  time  ;  it  is  so 
long  ago.  But  I  quite  remember  that  it  was  in  a  quiet  locality  ;  and  the 
voice  came  from  the  back  of  the  house,  which  in  most  German  houses  is 
called  '  Der  Hof ,'  and  which  is  usually  not  frequented  in  the  evening  by 

1  Unfortunately  this  letter  has  not  been  preserved. 

632  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

the    occupants  of  the  houses ;    the  voice    came    distinctly    through    the 
window,  which  was  open." 

In  the  next  case,  the  two  persons  affected  were  widely  separated, 
and  their  impressions  differed. 

(675)  From  Mr.  Thomas  Young,  Elsinore  House,  Robert  Road,  Hands- 
worth,  Birmingham.  u  gig^  December,  1884. 

"  One  evening— ten  years  ago  about — I  was  sitting  at  tea  with  my  wife 
and  children,  when  my  wife  suddenly  said,  '  What  a  noise  there  is 
upstairs,'  asking  me  if  I  heard  it.  I  said  '  No.'  She,  however,  insisted 
that  there  was,  and  insisted  upon  going  upstairs  to  investigate.  She  could 
hear  the  windows  rattled  as  if  by  the  wind.  I  accompanied  her  upstairs, 
and  as  she  went  she  suddenly  felt  a  wind  rush  by  her.  I  felt  no  rush  of 
wind,  nor  were  the  windows  rattling.  The  night  was  calm.  After 
investigating  the  room  from  whence  the  wind  was  supposed  to  proceed, 
and  finding  nothing  out  of  the  common,  we  returned  to  the  parlour,  my 
wife  much  agitated,  and  I  was  also  agitated.  When  next  she  heard  from 
home,  it  was  a  letter  conveying  the  sad  intelligence  of  her  father's  death  by 
drowning,  which  took  place  about  the  time  she  felt  the  physical  influence. 
But  what  is  still  more  strange,  her  brother,  who  was  captain  of  a  small 
vessel,  and  at  sea  on  the  same  evening  of  his  poor  father's  death,  heard 
his  name  called.  He  was  in  the  cabin  at  the  time.  He  immediately  went 
on  deck,  asking  who  called.  '  No  one,'  was  the  reply.  He  went  into  his 
cabin,  and  again  he  heard  his  name,  and  again  he  went  on  deck,  thinking 
a  trick  was  being  played.  Once  more  all  denied  having  called  him.  He 
thereupon  re-entered  his  cabin,  only  to  hear  his  name  called  again,  and  on 
demanding  sternly  who  called,  and  receiving  the  same  answer,  '  No  one,' 
he  said  he  felt  very  queer. i  u  Thomas  Young." 

[Mrs.  Young's  experience  could  not  be  presented  as  telepathic  evidence 
on  its  own  account,  the  impression  having  been  so  vague.  But  she  is 
not  a  nervous  or  fanciful  person,  and  is  certain  that  she  has  never  had  any 
similar  experience — while  the  fact  that  her  husband  did  not  hear  or  feel 
what  she  heard  and  felt  decidedly  supports  the  view  that  the  experience 
was  hallucination ;  and  if  so,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  it  fell  on  the 
night  which  was  marked  not  only  by  her  father's  death,  but  by  her 
brother's  far  more  distinct  hallucination  of  the  recognised  voice.] 

Captain  Adams  writes: — 

"  62,  Commercial  Road,  Newport,  Monmouthshire. 

"November  13th,  1885. 

"  In  answer  to  your  letter  in  reference  to  my  father's  death,  I  will 
endeavour  in  a  few  lines  to  give  you  the  information  you  want. 

"As  the  ship  was  lying  in  the  port  of  St.  Malo,  in  France,  on  the 
15th  December,  1871,  I  was  lying  in  my  berth  at  4  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon.  I  heard  a  voice.  I  knew  the  voice  at  once  to  be  my  father's, 
calling  '  Jim,  Jim,  Jim.'  It  was  not  a  dream,  for  I  was  awake  and 
getting  up.     I  asked  the  men  on  board  whether  they  heard  anyone  calling. 

1  Here  again  we  have  an  account  of  three  separate  calls — the  favourite  legendary 
number  (p.  229,  note).  In  the  first-hand  version  which  follows,  it  will  be  seen  that  there 
is  no  mention  of  any  repetition  of  the  call,  though  it  is  represented  as  having  consisted  of 
three  utterances  of  the  name. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  633 

They  said,  '  No.'  I  said  to  them,  '  My  father  is  dead.'  When  I  arrived 
at  Jersey  (Island),  my  wife  said  to  me,  '  There  is  bad  news  for  you.'  I 
said,  'Yes,  I  know  ;  my  father  is  dead.'  This  was  about  nine  days  after 
my  father  was  lost  in  Burnham  (Essex).  When  I  read  the  news  of  his 
death,  [I  found  that]  it  was  at  the  same  hour  I  heard  his  voice. 

"  James  Adams." 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  this  was  his  sole  experience  of 
a  hallucination.  Captain  Adams  adds  : — 

"  You  wish  to  know  whether  it  is  the  only  time  I  have  heard  anything 
of  the  kind.     Yes,  it  is  the  only  time." 

Mrs.  Adams  writes  for  her  husband,  on  January  19th,   1886  : — 

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  November  17th,  in  which  you  ask  a  few 
more  questions  : 

"  First.- — -You  ask  my  husband  whether  he  made  a  note  of  it.  He 
did  not  ;  but  he  always  remembered  the  date,  for  he  has  a  very  good 
memory. 

"  Secondly. — It  is  impossible  to  find  any  of  the  men  who  were  with 
him  at  the  time.  Some  are  dead.  The  others,  I  do  not  know  where  they  are. 

"  S.  E.  Adams." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  father  of  Mrs.  Young 
and  Captain  Adams  was  drowned  in  the  River  Crouch  on  Dec.  15,  1871. 

In  the  next  case,  the  agency  is  doubtful,  as,  though  a  near  relative 
of  one  of  the  percipients  died  at  the  time,  the  voice  heard  was  taken 
to  be  that  of  his  brother.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  two  men's 
voices  resembled  one  another's  :  compare  the  cases  of  mis-recogni- 
tion, Nos.  170  and  171.  The  account  is  first-hand  ;  but  we  do  not 
know  how  long  a  period  had  elapsed  after  the  occurrence,  before  it 
was  recorded  in  writing. 

(676)  From  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1752,  Yol.  XXII., pp.  173-4. 
The  editor  states  the  writer  (who  signs  himself  "A.  B.")  to  be  "  a  man  of 
great  veracity,"  and  the  communication  to  be  "  a  piece  of  his  own  private 
history." 

"On  the  23rd  August,  1736,  at  noon,  standing  at  the  shop  door  with 
my  mistress  and  maid-servant  and  Mr.  Bloxham,  then  rider  to  Mr.  Oakes 
and  Co.  (who  now  lives  and  follows  the  haberdashery  trade  in  Cateaton 
Street),  we  were  choosing  figured  ribbons  and  other  millinery  goods,  when 
I  heard  my  father's  voice  call  '  Charles,'  very  audibly.  As  accustomed,  I 
answered,  '  Coming,  sir.'  Being  intent  on  viewing  the  patterns,  I  stayed 
about  four  minutes,  when  I  heard  a  voice  a  second  time  call  '  Charles.' 
The  maid  heard  it  then  as  well  as  myself,  and  answered,  '  He  is  coming, 
Mr.  W — m — n.'  But  the  pattern  book  not  being  gone  through  with,  I 
was  impatient  to  see  the  end,  and  being  also  unwilling  to  detain  the  gentle- 
man, I  still  tarried.  Then  I  saw  the  door  open,i  heard  my  father  call  a 
third  time,  in  a  strong,  emphatic,  angry  tone,  and  shutting  the  door  I  heard 

1  Compare  cases  659  and  670.  I  have  mentioned  that  this  form  of  hallucination  is  one 
that  occurs  also  in  purely  subjective  cases. 

634  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

its  sound.  Both  my  mistress  and  the  maid  heard  this  last  call,  on  which 
she  pushed  me  out  of  the  shop  with,  '  Sirrah,  get  you  gone,  your  father  is 
quite  angry  at  your  stay.'  I  ran  over,  lifted  up  the  latch,  but  found  the 
gate  locked.  Then  going  in  at  the  back  gate  saw  my  mother-in-law  in  the 
yard.  .  .  .  I  immediately  went  in,  when  I  found  no  father  nor  any 
appearance  of  dinner.     Returning,  I  inquired  of  her  for  my  father ;  she 

said  he  was  not  come  home,  nor  would  dine  at  home  that  day 

I  then  went  back  to  the  company,  whose  consternation  was  as  great  as  my 

own Whether  all  this  was  the  force  of  imagination  I  cannot 

say,  I  believe  it  may.  I  will  not  argue  to  the  contrary,  though  two  senses 
of  two  persons  besides  myself  could  not,  probably,  be  so  liable  to  deception. 
My  mind  and  disposition  from  that  hour  received  a  new  turn.  I  became 
another  creature     .... 

"It  is  very  remarkable  that  I  had  an  only  uncle  (who  was  gunner 
of  the  '  Biddeford,'  then  stationed  at  Leith),  that  died  there  that  same 
day  and  about  the  same  hour." 

"We  learn  from  the  Admiralty  that  H.M.S.  "  Biddeford  "  was  at  Leith 
Road  on  August  23,   1736. 

The  following  case  is  an  exact  parallel  to  No.  336,  and  should  be 
read  in  connection  with  the  remarks  on  pp.  190-2. 

(677)  From  Mr.  Emmerson,  Cullercoats,  near  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

"January  9th,   1885. 

"  In  the  summer  of  1849,  I  was  sitting  in  my  studio  painting,  about 
noon,  three  days  after  my  mother  was  buried.  (In  this  locality  people 
were  dying  by  hundreds  of  cholera — of  which  she  died.)  I  distinctly 
heard  her  call  my  name,  '  Harry,'  in  a  very  loud  voice,  which  made  me 
start  to  my  feet.  My  father,  who  was  in  another  room,  rushed  into  my 
studio,  terrified,  and  asked  me  if  I  had  heard  my  mother  calling  me.  My 
mother,  who  was  deaf,  had  a  very  shrill  voice,  that  there  was  no 
mistaking  it. 

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  that  I  have  ever  met  with, 
but  which  made  a  lasting  impression  on  my  mind. 

"  H.  H.  Emmerson." 

Mr.  Emmerson's  father  is  dead.  Mrs.  Emmerson  writes  to  us  on 
January  21st,   1886  : — 

"  I  wish  to  write  a  few  lines  to  inform  you  that  I  frequently  heard  my 
husband  and  his  father  talking  about  both  of  them  hearing  the  mother 
calling  him  by  name.  They  were  both  Tuost  positive  about  it ;  and  it  left 
quite  an  impression  upon  their  minds.  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this 
statement.  u  Mart  Emmerson." 

In  conversation,  I  learnt  from  Mr.  Emmerson  that  he  and  his  father 
were  the  only  persons  in  the  house  at  the  time  that  the  voice  was  heard  ; 
he  had  no  sisters  living  at  home,  and  the  household  had  been  disorganised 
owing  to  the  cholera.  Mr.  Emmerson  is  very  far  from  inclined  to  believe 
in  marvels,  and  the  above  has  simply  remained  in  his  mind  as  a  unique 
and  inexplicable  fact,  which  at  the  time  was  evidently  of  the  most  startling 
kind.  The  conditions  were  of  course  favourable  to  subjective  hallucina- 
tion ;  but,  equally  of  course,  this  will  not  explain  the  double  experience. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE    CASES.  635 

§  6.  In  the  next  and  final  group,  no  articulate  sounds  were  heard ; 
and  in  most  of  the  cases  the  impression  was  of  a  mere  noise. 

The  following  two  cases  are  too  remote  for  details  to  be  relied 
on  ;  and  the  nature  of  the  sounds  may  very  likely  have  become 
more  precise  in  recollection  after  the  coincident  facts  were  known. 
Still  it  may  be  surmised  that  the  experiences  described  were,  at  any 
rate,  collective  hallucinations. 

(678)  From  Mr.  M.  P.  Stephenson,  the  narrator  of  case  613. 
"  8,  Southfield  Road,  Gotham,  Bristol. 

"January  31st,  1884. 

"  The  case  I  am  going  to  relate  happened  more  than  50  years  ago. 
Myself  and  wife  had  been  to  her  brother's  to  see  their  little  daughter,  aged 
about  two  years,  wlio  was  thought  to  be  dying.  It  was  evident  when  we 
saw  her  that  she  could  not  last  long.  We  left  about  10  o'clock  at  night, 
and  retired  to  bed,  and  settled  quietly  to  go  to  sleep.  But  before  we  could 
do  so  we  heard  a  startling  scream — a  sort  of  death-scream  i — on  the  pillow 
between  us.  We  each  thought  the  other  was  taken  ill,  and  turned  in 
alarm,  and  found  that  the  noise  was  not  aroused  by  either  of  us.  I  turned 
the  matter  off  as  best  I  could,  not  to  alarm  my  wife.  In  the  morning  she 
said  to  me,  '  That  was  a  curious  noise  we  heard  last  night  ;  what  could  it 
have  been  ? '  I  said,  '  Little  Mary  died  last  night  at  that  time,  and  that 
was  the  noise  she  made  before  she  died,'  which  proved  to  be  the  fact.  I 
imitated  the  noise  the  same  evening,  and  the  child's  mother  exclaimed, 
'  How  strange !  that  was  the  exact  scream  made  by  my  child  before  she  died.' 

"  These  things,  when  they  occur,  take  a  deep  hold  on  us,  and  although 
it  happened  more  than  52  years  ago,  we  both  of  us  remember  it  as  freshly 
as  if  it  were  but  a  year  ago." 

In  answer  to  inquiry,  Mr.  Stephenson  adds  : — 

"  The  death-cry  of  the  child  was  heard  by  us  at  the  precise  time  of  her 
death,  and  the  mother  (who  has  been  dead  more  than  30  years)  recognised 
the  cry  I  imitated  as  the  last  cry  of  her  dear  child." 

To  a  request  for  his  wife's  written  corroboration,  Mr.  Stephenson 
replies  : — 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  comply  with  your  request.  My  dear  wife 
is  a  confirmed  invalid  and  cannot  be  persuaded  to  do  what  you  wish.  You 
are  not  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  the  truth  of  what  I  related 
to  you." 

(679)  From  the  mother  of  a  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge, 
who  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  published.  ft  1884. 

"  On  the  15th  of  May,  1829,  my  mother,  myself,  and  a  servant  were  in 
the  hall,  when  we  heard  a  loud  groan.  We  were  somewhat  startled,  and 
a  short  time  after  we  heard  the  groan  repeated,  but  louder.  We  then 
looked  about  the  garden  and  in  the  street,  but  could  see  nothing.  We  had 
just  returned  to  the  house,  when  a  third  time  ^  the  groan  was  repeated,  but 
still  louder.     We  were  much  startled,  and  again  looked  about  to  find  the 

1  It  is  very  doubtful,  of  course,  whether  this  particular  description  woidd  have  been 
given  but  for  the  fact  of  the  death,  which  was  afterwards  ascertained. 

2  See  p.  229,  note. 

636  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap, 

cause,  but  to  no  purpose.  Shortly  after,  my  brother  came  in,  in  breath- 
less haste,  to  tell  his  mother  that  his  grandfather  was  thrown  from  his 
horse,  and  nearly  killed.     The  dear  old  man  died  the  same  night." 

We  find  from  a  copy  of  a  tombstone  in  Loughton  churchyard,  that  the 
death  occurred  on  May  16th  (not  15th),  1829.  The  parish-clerk  tells  us 
that  the  accident  took  place  about  100  yards  from  his  house. 

(680)  From  Mr.  Charles  H.  Kallensee,  Croan  House,  Sladesbridge, 
Cornwall. 

"  December  30th,  1882. 

"  In  the  year  1841,  an  elder  brother  of  mine  died,  at  Princess  Street, 
Devonport.  When  I  returned  from  school  on  the  day  of  his  death,  I  was 
told  to  go  to  his  room,  as  he  had  inquired  for  me.  On  entering  the  room, 
I  found  a  great  change  in  him  since  the  morning,  and  I,  who  had  never 
seen  death,  yet  knew  that  he  was  dying.  In  the  room  were  my  father  and 
mother  ;  my  father  standing  at  the  side  of  my  brother's  bed,  while  my  dear 
mother  sat  weeping  near  the  foot.     I  took  a  seat  near  my  mother's  side. 

"  It  might  have  been  an  hour  or  more  that  we  remained  thus,  listening 
to  the  breathing  of  my  brother,  expecting  each  breath  to  be  the  last.  I 
remember  it  was  a  beautiful  afternoon,  and  the  sun  shone  into  the  room 
and  across  my  brother's  bed.  Suddenly  there  were  three  violent  blows  or 
concussions,  so  violent  that  I  felt  the  room  shake.  My  mother  sprang  to 
her  feet,  and  with  excitement  exclaimed,  '  There  it  is  again ' ;  at  the  same 
time  I  saw  my  father  stooping  down  and  turning  back  the  carpet  that 
went  round  the  bed.  My  own  feeling  was  one  of  wonder  and  curiosity, 
and  on  looking  at  my  brother,  I  saw  he  was  dead.  My  father's  stooping 
down  and  examining  the  carpet  was  explained  by  him,  after  he  had  felt  the 
third  blow  strike  him  at  the  bottom  of  his  foot ;  while  my  mother's  excla- 
mation, '  There  it  is  again,'  was  because  she  had  heard  similar  manifesta- 
tions at  the  death  of  other  members  of  her  family.  I  know  nothing  of 
Spiritualism  per  se ;  I  never  attended  any  meeting  or  seances  on  the 
subject,  therefore  cannot  say  whether  the  knocking  I  heard  was  of  that 
character ;  but  of  this  I  am  quite  certain,  that  no  known  power  produced 
the  noise.  "  Charles  H.  Kallensee." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on 
October  21,  1841. 

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  hallucina- 
tions of  the  senses  on  other  occasions,  Mr.  Kallensee  replied  : — 

"  I  have  not  met  with  any  similar  manifestations.  I  can  scarcely  call 
it  a  '  knocking,'  as  it  seemed  to  fill, and  even  shake,  the  room.  The  sound  was 
as  of  a  stick  being  broken,  but  much  louder,and  powerful.  My  father  felt  the 
last  blow  at  the  bottom  of  his  foot,  and  almost  the  first  thing  I  remember, 
after  my  wonder  had  passed,  was  seeing  him  stooping  down  and  examining 
the  carpet  under  his  feet.  My  mother  told  us  children  afterwards,  on 
several  occasions,  that  she  had  heard  similar  noises  at  the  death  of 
her  father  and  brother.  My  mother  was  an  educated  woman,  and  far 
from  superstitious  ;  and  yet  she  could  not  but  believe  in  this." 

(681)  From  Mr.  H.  C.  Hurry,  C.E.,  60,  Lawford  Road,  Kentish 
Town,  N.W. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  637 

"January  4th,  1884. 
"  Many  years  ago  I  lodged  with  an  old  lady,  her  son  and  daughter,  of 
the  name  of  Spencer,  in  Manchester.  In  conversation  they  frequently 
told  me  that  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  any  member  of  their  family, 
one  or  more  of  them  invariably  had  some  monition  of  it.  This  I  treated 
with  a  considerable  amount  of  scepticism.  One  morning  they  received 
a  letter  from  Ormskirk,  near  Liverpool,  informing  them  that  the  young 
people's  aunt  was  very  ill.  The  son  at  once  went  off  to  see  her.  That 
night  I  had  gone  upstairs  to  bed,  my  room  being  up  one  flight,  and 
immediately  opposite  to  the  front  door  ;  whilst  I  was  undressing  I  heard 
a  very  loud  knock,  as  though  given  with  the  hand,  not  the  knocker. 
Miss  Spencer  immediately  came  out  of  the  sitting-room,  and  called,  saying, 
'  Mr.  Hurry,  did  you  knock  down  ? '  I  answered,  '  No,  it  was  at  the  hall- 
door.'  She  went  and  opened  it,  and  at  once  said,  on  finding  no  one  there, 
'  Good  God  !  my  aunt's  dead.'  Without  saying  anything  to  them,  I  wrote 
down  the  exact  time,  about  11  p.m.,  so  far  as  I  can  remember.  By  the 
first  post  possible,  they  received  a  letter  from  young  Spencer,  informing 
them  the  aunt  had  died  exactly  at  the  time  I  had  noted,  allowing  for  the 
difference  of  mean-time,  by  which  watches  were  then  regulated.  I  should 
add  that  I  was  in  no  way  related  to  the  Spencers." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hurry  says  : — 

"  I  do  not  know  of  any  of  the  Spencer  family  ;  the  old  lady,  her  son  and 
daughter,  I  mentioned,  having  long  been  dead.  The  circumstance  I  named 
occurred  in  the  year  1841,  but  as  I  was  a  party  to  it  I  consider  my  evidence 
first-hand.  You  next  ask  me  whether  I  have  had  '  any  auditory 
hallucinations.'     I  cannot  remember  any  but  the  one  I  give  you." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  a  Mrs.  Spencer,  who  is  pro- 
bably the  person  mentioned  in  this  case,  died  at  Ormskirk  in  1841. 

[This  case  could,  of  course,  have  no  claim  at  all  to  attention,  but  for 
its  analogy  to  others,  as  there  is  no  sufficient  proof  that  the  sound  was  not 
a  real  knock.  If  it  was  a  hallucination,  Mr.  Hurry's  share  in  the 
experience  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  the  subjective  effect  of  strain  and 
anxiety.] 

(682)  From  Mr.  W.  Hillstead,  a  teacher  of  music,  who,  at  the  time 
when  he  gave  us  the  account,  in  1884,  was  acting  as  care-taker  in  a  large 
house  at  Cambridge. 

"  In  October,  1848,  I  was  sitting  with  my  mother  in  8,  Suffolk  Place, 
Pall  Mall  East.  The  house  was  empty  except  for  ourselves.  The  room 
was  mainly  lighted  by  a  large  skylight.  The  house  was  quite  quiet.  It 
was  rather  dark  on  an  October  day.  Suddenly  we  were  both  startled  by  a 
terrifying  noise,  as  if  a  cartload  of  gravel  had  been  shot  down  from  a 
height  on  to  the  skylight.  I  jumped  up  in  startled  alarm,  thinking  that 
the  skylight  was,  of  course,  smashed  to  pieces  by  the  stones  which  I  had 
actually  heard  falling  on  it.  There  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  anything 
unusual.  My  mother,  who  had  had  many  warnings  of  different  kinds,  was 
less  alarmed.  She  took  for  granted  that  someone  was  dead,  but  we  could 
neither  of  us  think  who  it  could  be,  as  we  knew  of  no  one  who  was  ill. 

"  Some  days  afterwards,  a  cousin  of  mine  called,  and  told  us  that  his 

638  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

brother  Richard  was  dead.  "We  asked  when  he  died,  and  found  that  it  was 
at  dusk  on  the  very  afternoon  on  which  we  heard  the  crash.  My  mother 
had  been  very  fond  of  the  young  man,  and  so  was  I.  Of  late  he  had  gone 
wrong,  and  we  had  seen  less  of  him.  "  William  Hillstead." 

[Unfortunately  the  information  necessary  to  enable  us  to  verify  the 
death  was  not  asked  for  at  the  time  ;  nor  was  an  address  obtained  to  which 
we  might  subsequently  write.  The  narrative  was  certainly  given  in  good 
faith ;  but  its  only  force,  again,  depends  on  its  analogy  to  other  cases.] 

As  regards  the  curious  form  of  the  impression  in  the  following 
case,  see  the  remarks  on  case  625,  pp.  572-3. 

(683)  From  Mrs.  Windridge,  Sutton  Villa,  99,  Albert  Road,  Dalston,  E. 

"November  9th,  1882. 

"In  or  about  the  year  1861,  I,  being  weary  and  worn,  first  through 
the  long  illness  and  then  the  depression  and  inertness  of  my  husband, 
complained  to  a  lady  friend,  Mrs.  H.,  whose  husband  had  frequently 
remonstrated  with  mine  for  what  appeared  to  be  his  laziness.  My  friend, 
having  a  strong  sympathy  for  me,  urged  her  husband  to  obtain  a  situation 
for  him.  He  said,  '  I  will  kill  him  for  her  ' ;  and  procured  my  husband 
work  which  he  believed  would  place  his  life  in  danger. 

"  Three  years  after,  Mr.  H.  lay  dangerously  ill ;  at  his  request  I  had 
gone  over  to  see  him,  and  found  him  in  a  most  excited  state ;  he  entreated 
me  to  use  all  my  influence  to  induce  my  husband  to  leave  the  situation  he 
had  procured,  as  he  feared  it  would  ultimately  cause  his  death. 

"  Some  weeks  afterwards  my  husband  and  I  were  awoke  by  the  noise, 
apparently,  of  someone  endeavouring  to  open  our  bedroom  door.  The 
noise  was  quite  loud,  as  if  the  intruder  could  not  open  it  readily,  and  did 
not  care  who  heard  him.  My  husband  listened  for  a  while,  and  then 
opened  the  door  with  a  light  in  his  hand.  There  was  nothing  there,  but 
immediately  there  was  the  sound  of  a  large  dog  entering,  and  scratching 
on  the  floor  at  his  feet.  My  husband  searched  the  house,  but  we  could 
find  nothing.  It  was  just  2  a.m.  A  day  or  two  afterwards  I  heard  of 
his  death  that  night.  The  widow,  whom  I  went  to  see,  told  me  that,  in 
her  own  words,  he  '  died  twice.'  When,  as  they  thought,  already  dead, — 
they  began  to  lay  him  out, — he  opened  his  eyes,  and  muttered  something 
about  '  Windridge.'  '  What  time  was  this  ? '  I  asked.   '  Just  2  a.m.,'  she  said. 

"E.  Windridge." 

Mr.  Windridge  corroborates  as  follows  : — 

"  One  night,  having  retired  in  the  ordinary  way,  we  were  aroused  by 
a  shaking  and  scratching  at  the  bedroom  door,  so  distinct  and  impressive 
that  we  began  to  be  alarmed,  and  I  arose,  and  striking  a  light,  went  to 
the  door,  and  opened  it.  With  an  exclamation  I  started  back.  Something 
touched  my  feet.  Something  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  be  grovelling  at  my 
feet,  but  I  could  see  nothing.  I  then  searched  the  house  and  found  all 
undisturbed,  as  we  left  it.  I  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  2  o'clock.  I  could 
not  sleep  any  more  that  night. 

"  The  next  day  I  heard  that  a  man,  who  had  expressed  to  my  wife  that 
he  would  do  a  great  wrong  to  me,  had  died.  I  informed  my  wife,  and  she 
said  she  would    visit  the  widow.     She  went,  and  Mrs.  H.,  in  relating  the 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  639 

incidents  most  remarkable  in  her  husband's  death,  informed  her  that  he 
had  died,  as  it  were,  twice ;  for  after  he  was  pronounced  dead,  and  the 
nurse  was  laying  him  out,  he  seemed  to  return  to  life,  and  murmured  the 
name  '  Windridge.'  Life  was  not  extinct  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after 
this.  Mrs.  H.  informed  my  wife  that  her  husband  died  at  2  o'clock,  the 
time  I  looked  at  my  watch.  a  -q  Windridge." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on 
September  14,  1863. 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Windridge  informed  Mr.  Podmore  that  he  had 
never  experienced  any  other  hallucination.  Mrs.  Windridge  has  experi- 
enced one  other,  which  was  of  a  singular  kind,  and  is  described  in  the 
Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  89. 

Mr.  Windridge  could  not  clearly  remember  having  been  touched,  as  he 
puts  it  in  his  letter  ;  he  can  only  be  sure  that  he  had  the  impression  of 
something  grovelling  at  his  feet.  That  impression  may,  however,  have 
been  conveyed  by  sound  only.  Mrs.  Windridge  states  that  he  told  her  at 
the  time  that  he  had  been  touched. 

The  following  is  a  further  specimen  of  the  musical  class,^  parallel 
to  No.  388.  With  respect  to  its  place  in  the  present  collection,  I 
must  again  refer  to  pp.  190-2, 

(684)  A  gentleman  who  is  a  master  at  Eton  College  wrote  to  us,  on 
Feb.  3,  1884  :— 

"  I  enclose  a  copy  of  a  memorandum  made  a  few  days  after  the  event 
referred  to.  My  memorandum  has  been  copied  for  me  by  Miss  H.,  whose 
name  occurs  in  it.  She  is  my  matron  ;  a  sensible,  middle-aged,  active,  and 
experienced  woman.  None  of  the  people  concerned  were  young,  flighty,  or 
fanciful.  I  have  the  doctor's  letter  ;  his  name  is  G-.,  and  he  still  resides 
here.  Miss  H.  only  wishes  to  add  that  it  must  have  occurred  from  20 
minutes  to  perhaps  30  after  dissolution,  and  she  says  that  she  has  never 
heard  anything  like  the  extreme  sweetness  of  the  sound. 

"H.  E.L." 

The  memorandum  is  as  follows  : — 

"  Eton  College. 

"August  6th,  1881. 

"  I  wish  to  write  down,  before  there  is  time  for  confusion,  the  follow- 
ing fact,  occurring  on  Thursday  morning,  July  28,  1881,  when  my  dear 
mother  died,  whom  G-od  rest !  After  all  was  over.  Miss  E.  I.,  Eliza  W., 
Dr.  Gr.,   and  myself  being  in  the  room,  Miss  I.  heard  a  sound  of  '  very 

1  In  a  case  which  E.  M.  Arndt  (Schriften  fiir  und  an  seine  Lichen  Deutschen,  1845, 
Vol.  iii.,  pp.  525-6)  records,  with  names  and  details,  on  the  first-hand  authority  of  a  family 
whom  he  highly  esteemed,  the  music  of  a  guitar  was  heard,  first  by  two  daughters  of  the 
house,  and  then  by  their  father  and  a  large  group  of  persons,  at  the  time  of  the  death  in 
battle  of  an  officer  who  had  been  staying  with  the  family  a  little  time  before,  and  had 
delighted  them  by  his  performances  on  that  instrument.  But  there  is  no  sufficient  state- 
ment of  the  grounds  on  which  the  hearers  were  convinced  (as  they  undoubtedly  were) 
that  the  sounds  were  not  due  to  any  objective  cause  in  the  vicinity.  The  house  was 
searched  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  inquiries  in  the  environs. 

640  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap. 

low,  soft  music,  exceedingly  sweet,  as  if  of  three  girls'  voices,  passing 
by  the  house.'  She  described  further  the  sound  as  if  girls  were  going 
home  singing,  only  strangely  low  and  sweet ;  it  seemed  to  come  from  the 
street,  past  the  house  towards  the  College  buildings  (the  road  ends 
there  in  a  cul-de-sac),  and  so  passed  away.  She  looked  to  call  my 
attention,  and  thought  I  perceived  it.  She  noticed  that  the  doctor 
heard  it,  and  that  he  went  to  the  window  to  look  out.  The  window 
faces  S.E.  Eliza  W.  being  in  the  room  at  the  same  time  heard  a  sound 
of  very  low,  sweet  singing.  She  recognised  the  tune  and  words  of  the 
hymn.  '  The  strife  is  o'er,  the  battle  done.'  Miss  I.  recognised  no  tune, 
but  felt  'that  the  music  sounded,  as  it  were,  familiar.'  As  a  very 
accomplished  musician,  especially  remarkable  for  her  quick  memory  of 
music,  had  words  or  air  been  those  of  a  well-known  hymn,  she  would 
almost  certainly  have  remembered  it.  These  two  spoke  to  each  other 
when  alone  about  what  they  had  heard.  Miss  I.  gives  the  time  at  about 
10  minutes  after  my  dear  mother  expired.  They  were  then  unaware  of 
this  additional  circumstance.  Miss  H.  had  left  the  room,  and  had  sum- 
moned Charlotte  C,  with  whom  she  had  procured  something  required  for 
laying  out  the  body.  As  the  two  returned  upstairs  they  heard  a  sound  of 
music,  and  both  stopped.  Charlotte  said  to  Miss  H.,  '  What  is  this  1 ' 
After  a  pause  she  said,  '  It  must  be  Miss  I.  singing  to  comfort  master.' 
They  afterwards  entered  the  room,  of  which  the  door  had  been  shut  all 
along.  Charlotte  further  described  the  sound  as  very  sweet  and  low, 
seeming  to  pass  by  them.  She  felt  as.  if,  had  she  only  been  able  to  listen, 
she  could  have  distinguished  the  words.  It  did  not  occur  to  her  that  her 
description  was  most  incongruous  ;  she  could  not  listen  attentively,  but 
felt  '  as  if  rapture  were  all  around  her.'  It  was  not  until  afterwards,  when 
she  mentioned  to  Eliza  having  heard  Miss  I.  singing,  and  how  strangely  it 
sounded,  that  they  found  that  each  had  heard  the  sound.  Miss  H. 
described  the  sound  as  very  peculiar  and  sweet,  seeming  to  pass  by  them 
and  pass  away,  as  they  both  stopped  on  the  stairs.  All  the  staircase 
windows  give  north-west.  I  heard  nothing,  ^  and  I  should  have  given  no 
weight  to  a  sound  heard  or  described  by  these  women  in  the  room  after 
communicating  with  each  other,  or  by  these  women  out  of  the  room 
respectively;  but  the  coincidence  of  each  party  hearing  it  separately  and 
independently  without  previous  communication,  as  well  as  the  matter-of- 
fact  explanation  suggested  for  it  by  one  of  them  seeming  to  imply  that 
their  thoughts  were  not  dwelling  on  the  supernatural,  added  so  much  weight 
to  this  account  that  I  wrote  to  the  doctor,  who  answers  : — '  I  quite 
remember  hearing  the  singing  you  mention  ;  it  was  so  peculiar  that  I 
went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  but  although  quite  light  I  could  see  no 
one,  and  cannot  therefore  account  for  it.'  The  time  must  have  been  about 
2  a.m.  on  July  28th,  1881." 

Miss  I.  writes  : — 

"13,  Park  Street,  Windsor. 

"  February  22nd,  1884. 
"  I  will  copy  the  memorandum  which  I  made  in  my  diary  just  after  the 
death  of  my  dear  friend  and  connection,  Mrs.  L. 

1  Comijare  case  666,  and  see  p.  105,  second  note. 

IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  641 

"July  28th,  1881. 

"  Just  after  dear  Mrs.  L.'s  death  between  2  and  3  a.m.,  I  heard 
a  most  sweet  and  singular  strain  of  singing  outside  the  windows  ;  it  died 
away  after  passing  the  house.  All  in  the  room  heard  it,  and  the  medical 
attendant,  who  was  still  with  us,  went  to  the  window  as  I  did,  and  looked 
out,  but  there  was  nobody.  It  was  a  bright  and  beautiful  night.  It  was 
as  if  several  voices  were  singing  in  perfect  unison  a  most  sweet  melody, 
which  died  away  in  the  distance.  Two  persons  had  gone  from  the  room 
to  fetch  something,  and  were  coming  upstairs  at  the  hach  of  the  house,  and 
heard  the  singing  and  stopped,  saying,  '  What  is  that  singing  ? '  They 
could  not  naturally  have  heard  any  sound  outside  the  windows  in  the 
front  of  the  house  from  where  they  were.  I  cannot  think  that  any 
explanation  can  be  given  to  this — as  I  think — supernatural  singing  ;  but 
it  would  be  very  interesting  to  me  to  know  what  is  said  by  those  who 
have  made  such  matters  a  subject  of  study. 

"B.  I." 

Dr.  G.  writes  in  1884  :— 

"Eton,  Windsor. 

"  I  remember  the  circumstance  perfectly.  Poor  Mrs.  L.  died  on 
July  28th,  1881.  I  was  sent  for  at  about  midnight,  and  remained  until 
her  death  at  about  2.30  a.m.  As  there  was  no  qualified  nurse  present,  I 
remained  and  assisted  the  friends  to  '  lay  out '  the  body.  Four  or  five  of 
us  assisted,  and  at  my  request  the  matron  of  Mr.  L.'s  house  and  a  servant 
went  to  the  kitchen  department  to  find  a  shutter  or  flat  board  upon  which 
to  place  the  body.  Soon  after  their  departure,  and  whilst  we  were  waiting 
for  their  return,  we  distinctly  heard  a  few  bars  of  lovely  music — not  unlike 
that  from  an  ^olian  harp — which  seemed  to  fill  the  air  for  a  few  seconds. 
I  went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  thinking  there  must  be  someone 
outside,  but  could  see  no  one,  although  it  was  quite  light  and  clear. 
Strangely  enough,  those  who  went  to  the  kitchen  heard  the  same  sounds 
as  they  were  coming  upstairs,  quite  at  the  other  side  of  the  door.  These 
are  the  facts,  and  I  think  it  right  to  tell  you  that  I  have  not  the  slightest 
belief  in  the  supernatural,  Spiritualism,  &c.,  &c. 

«  J.  W.  G." 

[The  fact  that  Mr.  L.  did  not  share  the  experience  is  strong  evidence 
that  the  sounds  were  not  objectively  caused  by  persons  singing  outside  the 
house  ;  and  this  is  further  confirmed  by  the  slight  difference  which  there 
appears  to  have  been  between  the  impressions  received.] 

END    OP    THE    SUPPLEMENT. 

VOL.    II.  2  T 

ADDITIONAL    CHAPTER 

OF    CASES   RECEIVED    TOO    LATE    FOR    INSERTION    IN    THEIR 

PROPER  PLACES. 

I  1.  The  printing  and  revision  of  these  volumes  have  occupied  a 
considerable  time ;  and  meanwhile  several  items  of  evidence  have 
been  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  the  chapters  to  which  they 
properly  belong.  They  fall  under  the  three  classes,  already  distin- 
guished, of  experimental,  transitional,  and  spontaneous  cases.  I 
will  begin  with  some  cases  of  the  first  class,  which  sufficiently  show 
that  the  experiments  described  at  the  opening  of  the  treatise  admit 
of  being  repeated  and  varied  with  success. 

The  following  results  were  sent  to  us  at  the  close  of  last  year,  by 
Herr  Max  Dessoir,  of  27,  Kothener-Strasse,  Berlin.  He  has  devoted 
a  good  deal  of  time  to  experimenting  with  a  few  friends,  he  himself 
almost  always  acting  as  percipient.  He  began  with  trials  of  the 
"willing-game"  type,  and  soon  convinced  himself  that  slight  muscular 
hints  were  the  full  and  sufficient  explanation  of  all  the  ordinary 
"  thought-reading  "  exhibitions.  He  then  introduced  forms  of  experi- 
ment which  offered  no  opportunity  for  unconscious  guidance  on  the 
agent's  part — such  as  the  guessing  of  numbers,  words,  and  cards, 
without  any  contact  between  agent  and  percipient.  These  trials, 
though  the  amount  of  success  was  above  what  could  with  probability 
be  ascribed  to  chance,  were  not  numerous  enough  to  justify  any 
definite  conclusion.  But  a  series  of  trials  in  the  reproduction  of 
diagrams  affords  an  interesting  parallel  to  those  described  in  Vol.  I., 
pp.  37-51.  The  agent  was  in  some  cases  Herr  E,  Weiss,  of 
28,  Wilhelm-Strasse,  Berlin  (a  fellow-student  with  Herr  Dessoir  at  the 
Berlin  University);  in  others  Herr  H.  Biltz,  of  14,  Schelling-Strasse, 
Berlin ;  and  in  one  case  (No.  7)  Herr  W.  Sachse,  of  2,  Kirchbach- 
Strasse,  Berlin.  (Herr  Weiss  and  Herr  Biltz  are  known  to  us,  through 
correspondence,  independently  of  these  experiments.)  All  three 
gentlemen  have  sent  us  certificates  of  the  accuracy  of  the  record  of 
the  experiments  in  which  they  were  respectively  concerned. 

ADDITIONAL  CHAPTER.  643 

Herr  Dessoir  thus  describes  the  conditions  of  the  trials : — 

"  While  the  agent  drew  the  original,  I  was  almost  always  out  of  the 
room,  to  avoid  being  influenced  by  the  sound  of  the  drawing.  When  the 
agent  called  out  '  Ready,'  I  came  in,  with  eyes  closely  bandaged — the 
bandage  being  made  to  cover  the  ears,  so  as  to  shut  out  casual  sounds.  I 
set  myself  at  the  table,  and  in  many  instances  placed  my  hands  on  the 
table,  and  the  agent  placed  his  hands  on  mine  :  the  hands  lay  quite  still  on 
one  another.!  When  an  image  presented  itself  in  my  mind,  the  hands 
were  removed,  the  original  drawing  [on  which  the  agent  bad  been  fixing 
his  eyes]  was  turned  over,  or  covered  with  a  book,  and  I  took  ofi"  the 
bandage  and  drew  my  figure.  Many  of  the  experiments  were  made 
without  contact,  even  though  no  note  to  that  effect  was  made." 

As  regards  the  cases  where  there  were  two  or  three  attempts  at 
reproduction,  Herr  Dessoir  says,  that  after  he  had  had  a  clear  image  in 
his  mind,  and  had  removed  the  bandage,  the  image  would  sometimes 
lose  its  clearness,  and  that  he  was  sensible  that  the  figures  which  he 
produced  did  not  correspond  with  it,  and  so  tried  again.  Still,  as  no 
doubt  the  agent  would  have  told  him  if  the  earlier  attempt  had  been 
successful,  and  he  would  not  then  have  made  another,  every  incorrect 
attempt  must  count  as  simply  a  failure. 

The  following  woodcuts,  which  have  been  very  carefully  copied 
from  the  original  sheets,  include  all  the  trials  in  which  Herr  Dessoir 
was  himself  the  percipient,  with  the  exception  of  two,  (one,  to  the 
eye,  a  success,  and  the  other  a  failure,)  omitted  on  account  of  some 
uncertainty  as  to  the  conditions.  Nos.  iii.,  vi.,  and  x.,  in  which  Herr 
H.  Biltz  was  the  percipient,  must  be  set  against  three  complete 
failures  on  his  part.  The  series  given  contains  a  considerable  pro- 
portion of  failure ;  but  if  the  reader  will  draw  19  figures  of  about 
an  equal  degree  of  complexity,  and  get  a  friend  to  do  the  same,  and 
will  then  compare  each  figure  of  one  series  with  the  corresponding 
one  of  the  other,  he  will  realise  the  improbability  of  obtaining  by 
mere  chance,  in  so  short  a  set,  9  resemblances  as  close  as  those  in 
Nos.  i.,  iv.,  vi.,  vii,,  xi.,  xiii.,  xv.,  xvii.  and  xviii.,  below. 

^  It  is  important  to  observe  the  fundamental  difference  between  contact  which 
continues  while  the  writing  or  dratuing  is  going  on  (as  in  the  writing  of  the  figures  of  bank- 
notes, which  is  a  favourite  trick  in  the  public  "thought-reading"  exhibitions),  where 
what  the  performer  receives  from  the  innocent  "  wilier  "  is  delicate  muscular  guidance 
from  moment  to  moment ;  and  contact  which  ceases  before  the  attempt  at  reproduction 
commences,  and  which  could  only  betray  the  required  figure  if  the  hand  of  the  agent  (which 
seems  both  to  himself  and  to  the  percipient  to  be  perfectly  still)  were  moved  on  that  of 
the  percipient  in  such  a  way  as  to  draio  the  required  shape.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that 
certain  figures  may  be  thus  indicated  without  the  agent's  consciousness  ;  but  it  seems  to 
me  unlikely  that  they  could  be  unconsciously  perceived — at  any  rate  by  an  observer  who, 
like  Herr  Dessoir,  has  devoted  special  pains  to  analysing  his  impressions  and  discovering 
their  source. 

VOL.  II.  2  T  2 

644 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Oeiginal. 

Reproduction. 

Agent :  H.  B. 

II. 

Rep.  2. 

Oeig. 

Rep.  1. 

Agent :  H.  B. 

III. 

Rep. 

Oeig. 

Agent's  name  omitted. 

It  appears  here  that  the  agent's 
image  included  an  impression  of  the 
left  part  of  the  frame.     M.  D. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER   PLACES. 

645 

IV. 

Oeig 

Rbp. 

Agent :  H.  B. 

Okig. 

Agent :  H.  B. 

Hep.  1. 

Rep.  2.  Rep.  4. 

Rep.  3. 

N 

646 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Agent :  M.  D. 

VII. 

Obig 

Rep,  1. 

Rep.  2. 

< 

While  the  second  reproduction  was  proceeding, 
an  interruption  occurred  which  prevented  its 
completion. 

Agent:   W.  S. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES. 

647 

Rep.  1. 

Agent :  H.  B. 
Rep.  2.  Rep.  3. 

Rep.  4. 

\ 

Y 

A 

IX. 

Oeig. 

Rep.  1.  Rep.  2. 

Rep.  3. 

The  percipient  said,  "  It  looks  like  a  window." 

Agent :  H.  B. 

Oeig. 

Rep.  3. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

rsT7i 

\iii 

Agent :  M.  D 

648 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR   INSERTION 

XI. 

Oeig. 

Agent :  H.  B. 

Rep.  2. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  3. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES. 

649 

Agent :  H.  B. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

XIII. 

Oeig. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

Agent :  E.  W. 

The  percipient  said,  "  It  looks  like  a  window." 

650 

GASES   TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

Orig. 

Aeent :  E.  W. 

XIV. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

Rep.  3. 

n 

A 

Obig. 

Agent :  E.  W. 

Oeig, 

XV. 

Rep.  2. 

Rep.  3, 

The  arst  attempt  at  reproduction  appears  to  have 
been  a  failure. 

XVI. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2.  Rep.  3. 

L 

Agent :  E.  W. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES. 

661 

Obig. 

Rep.  2. 

Agent:  E.  W. 

Obig. 

Rep.  2. 

<a> 

Agent :  E.  W, 

The  percipient  said,  "I  see  two  bright  triangles,  but 
I  cannot  tell  exactly  how  the  second  is  situated." 

Obig. 

XIX. 
Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

Rep.  3. 

Agent :  E.  W. 

The  following  shorter  record  is  taken  from  the  monthly  journal 
Sphinx  (Leipzig),  for  June,  1886,  and  we  have  not  seen  the  original 
diagrams.  The  experiments  were  made  at  the  house  of  Baron  Dr.  von 
Ravensburg,  whose  wife  was  the  percipient.  Herr  Max  Dessoir  drew 
the  originals  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  out  of  the  Baroness  von 
Ravensburg's  sight,  and  taking  care  that  his  pencil  should  move 
noiselessly.  He  and  the  Baron  then  concentrated  their  attention  on 
the  figure,  which  the  Baroness,  sitting  at  another  table,  endeavoured 
to  reproduce,  after  a  time  varying  fi:om  20  to  45  seconds.  (The  Baron 
did  not  take  part  in  the  first  experiment,  which,  it  will  be  seen,  was  a 
failure.) 

652 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

II. 

Orig. 

Rep.  1. 

Rep.  2. 

III. 

Oris. 

Rep. 

The  correction  was  made  by    the 

percipient  before  the  original  was 

shown  to  her. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES. 
Oeig.  IV.  Rep. 

653 

Rep. 

Oeig. 

The  percipient  said,  "  It  is  a  circle  outside,  and  there  is  something  else  inside  it ;  " 
then,  after  a  pause,  "  A  triangle."  She  then  drew  the  reproduction,  and  added  that  the 
circle  was  an  imperfect  one. 

With  respect  to  these  experiments,  the  Baron  and  Baroness  von 
Ravensburg  have  sent  a  note  of  corroboration,  of  which  the  following  is 
a  translation : — 

"18,  Zietenstrasse,  Berlin,  W. 

"July  9,  1886. 
"We   certify  that  the  report  of   our  sitting  for  a  trial  of  thought- 
transference,  which  appeared  in  the  sixth  number  of  Sphinx,  is  throughout 
in  correspondence  with  the  facts,  and  has  been  drawn  up  with  complete 
accuracy.  "  Feeiherr  Goeler  von  Ravensburg. 

"Elizabeth,  Freiprau  Goeler  von  Ravensburg." 

The  following  is  a  set  of  400  trials,  made  in  batches  of  40  or  50 
at  a  time,  in  June,  1886,  by  the  Misses  Wingfield,  whose  former 
experiments  have  been  described  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  34.  The  ninety  num- 
bers which  contain  two  digits  were  inscribed  on  ninety  slips  of  paper, 
and  placed  in  a  bowl.  Miss  M.  Wingfield,  sitting  six  feet  behind  the 
percipient,  drew  a  slip  at  random,  and  fixed  her  attention  on  the  num- 
ber which  it  bore ;  Miss  K.  Wingfield  made  a  guess  at  the  number, 
and  the  real  number  and  the  guess  made  were  at  once  recorded  in  the 
Table.  The  slip  of  paper  was  then  replaced,  the  contents  of  the  bowl 
shufiled,  and  another  draw  made  at  hap-hazard.  The  most  probable 
number  of   right  guesses  for  accident  to  bring  about  in  the  400 

654 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

trials  was  4.  The  actual  number  of  completely  right  guesses  was 
27;  in  21  other  cases  the  two  right  digits  were  given  in  reverse  order: 
and  in  162  others,  one  of  the  digits  was  given  rightly  in  its  right 
place.  The  probability  which  this  result  affords  for  a  cause  other  than 
chance  is  represented  by  47  nines  and  a  5  following  a  decimal  point ; 
i.e.,  the  odds  are  nearly  two  hundred  thousand  million  trillions  of 
trillions  to  1.  It  would  be  a  very  inadequate  statement  of  the  case 
to  say  that,  if  the  waking  hours  of  the  whole  population  of  the 
world  were  for  the  future  continuously  devoted  to  making  similar 
trials,  life  on  this  planet  would  come  to  an  end  without  such  an  amount 
of  success,  or  anything  like  it,  having  been  accidentally  obtained. 

K. 
M. 

82 

39 

go 
41 

6/ 

60 

4^ 

2\ 

84 
65 

23 
33 

52 
28 

72 

27 

81 
56 

48 
23 

J6 
14 

2n 

31 

48 
71 

64 

n 

25 

49 
39 

94 
86 

18 
17 

71 
29 

S2 

S6 

K. 

M. 

45 
45 

30 
67 

55 
88 

J4 
^4 

21 

91 

77 
S3 

91 

21 

14 

12 

60 
51 

48 
28 

17 
S5 

29 
67 

34 
77 

S7 
21 

65  90 

2S     90 

30 
3? 

77 
65 

42 
82 

50 
67 

25 
97 

K. 
M. 

97 

55 

49 
82 

(>3 
76 

52 
25 

14 
40 

39 
59 

21 

8\ 

12 

16 

42 
27 

39 

49 

28 
82 

II 

88 

24 
24 

41 
il 

64 
S5 

10 
16 

7^ 
g8 

32 

72 

74 
44 

K. 
M. 

89 

99 

33 
75 

24 
23 

42 

55 

80 
67 

73 
80 

17 
19 

35 
35 

19 
17 

56 
S3 

65 
65 

48 
78 

34 
22 

91 
15 

44 
66 

32 

3S 

79 
^9 

40 

64 

S3 
23 

36 
31 

K. 
M. 

69 

55 

45 
76 

36 
63 

SO 

56 

21 

Si 

42 
41 

13 
64 

51 
71 

65 
18 

65 
56 

J6 
21 

68 
28 

51 
S3 

45 
79 

34 
51 

65 

68 

JO 

20 

n 

45 

32 
27 

43 
63 

K. 
M. 

45  \  4^ 
69  1^8 

^3 
47 

36 
33 

IJ 
15 

go 

21 

40    48 

60    46 

72\59 
53\29 

72 

32 

30 
6g 

75 
SS 

21 

44 

80179 
8o!j9 

30 
12 

53 
41 

60 
36 

79 
29 

K. 
M. 

57 
42 

28 
/8 

76 

42 
27 

19 
15 

48 

37 
23 

7^ 

12 

6j 

64 

98 
89 

46 
14 

51 
51 

41 
20 

39 
66 

80 

39 
29 

19 
91 

24 
46 

32 

30 

87 
86 

K. 
M. 

71 

23 

98 
98 

46 
4^ 

33 
33 

60 
70 

4S  ^I5 
97\5o 

49 
32 

64 
46 

90 
9/ 

72 
3S 

T-4 
12 

24 
27 

93 

S3 

65 
65 

II 

47 

8g 
52 

70 

68 

49 
59 

84 
J? 

K. 
M. 

8/ 

86 

70 
79 

80 
42 

97 
63 

99 
91 

o7 

Si 

41 

41 

4S 

ss 

77 
31 

^4 
8g 

24 
23 

3S 
55 

91 

49 

18 
18 

75 
65 

So\77 
93^  14 

60 
62 

46 
76 

3S 
59 

K. 

M. 

JO 

80 

27 
67 

79 
84 

13 
13 

62 
26 

73 
88 

40 
91 

JI 

51 

70 

80 

43 
37 

64 
14 

go 
29 

81 
18 

61 
61 

go 
79 

21 
42 

^3 
5S 

40 
g8 

17 

15 

J6 

66 

K. 
M. 

99 
97 

35 

65 

75 
21 

A2 

40 

24 
62 

35 
19 

74 
35 

14 
26 

85 

99 
go 

71 
86 

49 
42 

81 
18 

86 
79 

44 
62 

36 
37 

68 
16 

24 
S5 

49 
23 

62 

67 

K. 
M. 

36 
28 

44 
44 

36 
56 

49 
91 

IS 

12 

n 
65 

24 
29 

18 
31 

5^ 

S2 

36 
78 

81 
8j 

40 
60 

80 
49 

92 

32 

49 
50 

24 
29 

li 

IS 

56 
56 

40 
20 

71 
18 

K. 
M. 

45 
12 

80 
86 

13 
92 

13 
43 

26 
2J 

88 
/8 

84 
66 

92 
29 

49 
41 

60 
3S 

70 
70 

32 
62 

44    19 
24    85 

3S 
^5 

40 
68 

21 

91 

JO 

50 

99 
32 

4^ 
68 

K. 
M. 

30 
71 

98 
89 

65 
26 

34 
14 

33 
33 

16 

87 

48 
42 

3S 
65 

59 
II 

86 
S3 

17  64 
19  51 

86 
68 

37 
39 

18 

53 

80 
80 

71 
97 

23 

44 

23 

15 

S3 
63 

K. 
M. 

8z 
Z2 

97 
97 

18 
85 

36 
60 

12 
ll 

3S 
55 

93 

78 

42 
91 

84 
14 

25 
32 

71 
17 

37 
49 

72 

14 

19 
71 

42 

43 

84 
85 

36 
93 

71    2S 

44    23 

67 
67 

K. 
M. 

41 
36 

7J- 
3S 

42 
26 

17 
11 

43 
94 

i8 
ij 

60 
48 

70 
40 

36 

25 

77 
43 

g8 
86 

40 
13 

86 
86 

31 
40 

27 
50 

91 
35 

48 
47 

64 
26 

64 
59 

28 
48 

K. 
M. 

33 
3^ 

37 
32 

41 
14 

68 
67 

46 
17 

49 
36 

28 

48 

16  56 

24   57 

39 
42 

66 
67 

48 
70 

19 

S5 

V 

10 

25 
19 

71 
40 

66 
60 

60 

67 

76 
49 

92 
82 

K. 
M. 

^3 
33 

A8 
4^ 

94\32 
70  '43 

28 
6g 

44 
32 

67 
76 

41 
41 

30 

80 

24 

n 

36 
41 

37 
6? 

98 
99 

73 
37 

41 
41 

37 
56 

^9 

69 

44 
70 

81 
32 

80 
88 

K. 
M. 

40    14 
68    7/ 

36 
32 

go 
71 

SO 
S3 

46 
40 

80 
20 

48 
57 

3S 
14 

6j 

55 

23 
28 

37 
37 

49 
5S 

45 
21 

i8 

15 

73 
80 

82 
67 

^3 
23 

61 
70 

48 
49 

K. 
M. 

28 
29 

i8 
19 

go 
42 

3l\15 
67  •  la 

34 
34 

72 
35 

86 
41 

12 

10 

19 
68 

53 

43 

70  16 
50  19 

SS 
S7 

g6 
3S 

43 
g6 

lo   54 
'jg    60 

62 
73 

^4 
18 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  655 

The  next  account  is  from  the  Rev.  Canon  Lefroy,  Incumbent  of  St 

Andrew's,  Liverpool.  The  percipient,  Miss ,  is  known  to  Mr.  Myers 

and  the  present  writer.  Her  bona  fides  is  above  suspicion;  but  her 
state  of  health  has  unfortunately  prevented  further  experimentation. 

"1885. 

"Early  in  September,  1884,  in  Zermatt,  I  was,  through  the  kindness 

■of  Miss  ,  permitted  to  have  an  opportunity  of  testing,  by  personal 

observation,  experience,  and  evidence,  the  reality  or  otherwise  of  what  is, 
I  believe,  called  telepathy.  I  am  bound  to  say  that  when  I  was  informed, 
and  most  kindly  informed,  of  what  was  proposed  to  be  done,  the  innate 
scepticism  of  my  nature  rose  to  its  highest. 

"  I  was  informed  that  the  eyes  of  Miss would  be  tightly  bandaged, 

and  I  saw  them  bandaged  ;  that  in  this  darkened  state,  mental  or  ocular 
perception — probably  the  latter  ^ — would,  nevertheless,  enable  her  to  read 
any  word  written  by  me  on  a  slip  of  paper.  There  might  be  mistake  ;  there 
might  be  literal  transposition  [?  transposition  of  letters]  ;  there  might  be 
-delay ;  but,  speaking  broadly,  I  was  assured  that  the  word  could  be 
discerned.  We  sat  at  opposite  sides  of  the  table.  I  was  desired  to  hold 
the  lady's  hand.  I  did  so,  and  while  so  doing  1  exerted  my  will  to  the 
utmost,  and  to  the  intent  that,  if  possible,  the  conflict  of  wills  should 
result  in  favour  of  my  scepticism.  I  must,  with  shame  and  humiliation, 
.confess  that  my  incredulity  and  volitional  resistance  did  not  hesitate  to 
select  a  word  which  my  gifted  antagonist  probably  never  heard  of  ;  and 
accordingly  I  defiantly,  confidently,  and  I  will  add,  mercilessly,  wrote  the 
name  of  Terence's  old  play — Heautontimoruvienos.  The  completion  of  my 
word  was  followed  by  a  prolonged  pause.  I  felt  as  if  breathing  was  an 
intrusion,  and  not  a  sound  was  heard.  At  last  the  blinded,  and  I  thought 
the  wearied,  or  at  least  strained,  interpreter  said,  'What  a  long  word ! ' 
Then  a  pause.  Then  as  follows  :  'Why — two,  four,  six,  eight — there  are 
.eighteen  letters  in  that  word ! ' 

"  Unconsciously  my  resisting  power  became  less  than  it  was,  and  it 
■decreased  from  the  moment  Miss said,  'What  a  long  word  ! '  Never- 
theless, the  long  pause  seemed  to  give  me  a  chance,  and  again  I  gathered 
up  my  mind  to  resolve  that  detection  should  be  arrested.  But  very  soon 
this  purpose  was  foiled  ;  the  lady  calmly  said,  '  That  word  has  two  m's  to 
it ;  it  begins  with  an  h  ;  and  I  never  saw  that  word  before.'  I  felt  very 
guilty  as  I  observed  what  I  thought  were  signs  of  fatigue,  and  then 
(declared  the  word  was  unusual — ill-known,  and  asked  that  the  bandage 
might  be  removed. 

"  In  a  few  moments  I  was  allowed  to  try  with  simpler  words.  Again 
the  bandage  was  applied,  the  word  was  written,  and  our  hands  were 
clasped.  I  wrote  the  word  ink.  In  about  one  minute  the  word  was  read, 
-thus,  'k,  n,  i  ;  your  word  is  inh.' 

"Again  I  was  most  kindly  allowed  to  try  another  word.  I  wrote 
,toy.     In  a  minute  the  word  was  read  thus,   '  y,  o,  t ;  your  word  is   toy.''^ 

^  See  p.  48,  note. 

2  The  following  note,  by  Mr.  Myers,  of  a  trial  made  in  1884,  with  the  same  percipient, 
lexhibits  the  same  curious  reversal  of  letters  ;  which  mi^ht  be  compared  with  the  production 
of  anagrams,  and  of  independent  and  phonetic  spelling,  in  automatic  writing  (Vol.  i., 
]pp.  76'8,  and  below,  p.  665).    "  I  asked  Miss to  try  some  experiments  in  thought-trans- 

656        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

The  experience  then  closed,  so  far  as  this  species  of  discovery  was 
concerned.  "William  Lefroy,  M.A." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Canon  Lefroy  writes,  on  June  17,  1886  : — 

"  Abercromby  Square,  Liverpool. 

"  I    believe  I  wrote   the  letters  under    the  cover  of    my  left    hand. 

Miss could  not  possibly  descry  them.     My  own  inflexible  scepticism 

respecting  her  power  provided,  I  can  assure  you,  a  ready  safeguard  against 
anything  she  might  have  been  disposed  to  do  under  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances of  the  experiment.  I  am,  to  this  hour,  a  most  unwilling  believer 
in  her  possession  of  some  force  which  revealed  what  she  could  not  see,  and 
which  disclosed  what  I  resolved  should  be  impenetrable." 

Miss  Hamilton,  of  47,  Albert  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  W.,  a 
Member  of  the  S.P.R.,' sends  (in  June,  1886,)  the  following  record  of 
an  impromptu  trial,  of  the  sort  which  we  wish  we  could  persuade 
more  people  to  make.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  contact,  though  better 
avoided,  can  scarcely  be  held  to  afford  the  opportunity  for  unconscious 
physical  hints.  One  reservation  unfortunately  must  be  made :  the 
record  was  not  drawn  up  in  writing  at  the  time.  But  Miss  Hamilton 
tells  us  that  the  details  were  then  and  there  carefully  gone  over,  with  a 
view  to  the  present  report ;  and  we  have  several  memories  to  rely  on. 

"  Experiment  between  Miss  Leila  Melvill  [now  Mrs.  Lewis  Hamilton] 
and  Mr.  Lewis  Hamilton,  September,  1885. 

"  Miss  L.  M.,  eyes  lightly  bandaged  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  was 
'  willed '  by  Mr.  Hamilton.  He  placed  his  hands  on  her  forehead,  and 
willed  intently  that  she  should  read  the  [printed]  words,  A  Sermon,  at 
which  he  gazed  steadily  all  the  time  he  willed.  She  said,  slowly,  A ;  then 
spelled  the  first  few  letters  of  '  Sermon,'  and  then  said  the  whole  word. 

"The  same  evening  she  read  in  the  same  manner  these  words, 
County  Families.  Later  on,  in  November,  the  same  experiment  was 
tried,  and  she  read  the  unusual  words,  Chatto  and  Windus.  Each  experi- 
ment took  about  three  minutes.      Amongst  the  witnesses  present  were  : — 

"Mary  C.  D.  Hamilton. 
"  A.  Melvill  [sister  of  the  percipient]. 
"  LiLLiAS  Hamilton." 

The  agent  and  percipient  also  sign  the  account. 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hamilton  writes,  on  June  25,  1886  : — 
"Lansdowne,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Norwood. 

(1)  "Had  the  subject's  eyes  been  unbandaged,  she  could  have  un- 
doubtedly seen  the  words  ;  but  not  only  were  they  tightly  bandaged,  but 
my  fingers  were  placed  on  her  closed  eyelids,  so  that  she  could  not  even 

f  erence  with  her  sister.  She  soon  told  me  that  the  experiments  had  succeeded,  but  with  this 
strange  peculiarity,  that,  when  the  sister  fixed  her  eyes  on  some  word,  Miss  K.  saw  its 
letters  appear  in  her  field  of  mental  vision  in  reverse  order.  Miss  K.  was,  unfortunately, 
very  liable  to  headache,  which  these  experiments  quickly  induced,  and  I  was  only  allowed 
one  short  series  of  trials.  I  placed  the  word  NET  behind  her,  and  looked  fixedly  at  the 
letters.  She  said  that  she  saw  successively  the  letters  T,  E,  N.  I  next  chose  SEA,  and 
she  saw  A,  E,  S.  I  chose  a  third  word,  but  she  saw  no  mental  image,  and  headache 
stopped  the  experiments." 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  657 

have  opened  them,  had  there  been  no  bandage.  On  one  occasion  the 
words  she  read  were  held  above  the  subject's  head,  so  that  she  could  not 
in  any  case  have  seen.  [Miss  Hamilton  independently  confirms  this.]  I 
may  say,  however,  that  in  no  single  case  was  there  any  possibility  of  her 
having  seen  the  words.  The  words,  and  book,  or  pamphlet,  from  which 
they  were  read,  were  chosen  after  her  eyes  were  bandaged,  and  out  of 
her  sight,  and  they  were  not  whispered  from  one  witness  to  the  other,  but 
shown  round. 

(2)  "  In  no  instance  did  she  fail  with  me,  but  when  Mr.  Hope  tried 
her  one  evening,  she  failed,  and  on  another  occasion  (one)  she  said  almost 
at  once  she  could  not  do  it  that  evening.  The  experiment  was  tried  a 
good  many  times,  and  except  for  the  above,  always  succeeded. 

(3)  "  For  about  six  months  we  did  not  try  again,  and  on  the  two 
occasions  we  have  tried  lately,  she  has  said  she  could  not  do  it.  We, 
however,  do  intend  to  try  again.  »  Lewis  Hamilton." 

The  following  records  of  experiments  have  been  sent  to  us  by  our 
friend  Dr.  Liebeault,  of  Nancy,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the 
S.P.R. 

"  Oompte-rendu  des  experiences  de  transmission  de  pensees,  faites  le  10 
Decembre,  1885,  de  3  heures  a  4  heures  et  demie  du  soir,  chez  M.  le  Dr. 
Liebeault,  en  presence  de  M.  le  Dr.  Liebeault,  de  Madame  S.,  et  de  M.  le 
Dr.  Brullard.  Operateur,  M.  le  Professeur  Li^geois ;  sujet,  Mile.  M., 
20  ans. 

"1.  Mile.  M.,  tres  intelligente  et  impressionable,  est  habitude  a  etre 
endormie  et  entre  tres  vite  en  etat  de  somnambulisme,  pendant  lequel  elle 
est  en  rapport  avec  tous  les  assistants. 

"  M.  le  Professeur  Liegeois  la  met  en  ^tat  de  somnambulisme 
hypnotique,  et  lui  suggere  de  n'etre  en  rapport  qu'avec  lui  seul ;  il  lui 
donne  du  papier  et  un  crayon,  et  lui  commande  de  faire  la  meme  chose  que 
lui.  Alors  il  se  rend  a  une  table  voisine  et  dessine  un  triangle  sur  un 
registre,  dont  la  couverture  relevee  forme  un  ^cran  entre  lui  et  le  sujet, 
et  intercepte  toute  communication  visuelle.  Aussit6t  Mile.  M.  ecrit  de  son 
c6te,  '  Les  grands  hommes.'     Le  r^sultat  est  done  nul. 

"2.  En  second  lieu  M.  Liegeois  dit  au  sujet,  toujours  en  somnambulisme, 
'  Je  dessine  un  objet,'  et  dans  les  memes  conditions  que  precedemment,  il 
dessine  une  carafe.  Le  sujet  dit  aussitot,  '  C'est  un  vase,'  et  elle  dessine 
un  vase  de  forme  carree.  '  Ce  n'est  pas  cela,'  dit  M.  Liegeois.  Alors 
Mile.  M.  dessine  un  objet  de  meme  forme  que  la  carafe,  mais  difibrme,  vu 
qu'ayant  les  yeux  fermes  elle  pla9ait  ses  traits  au  juger.  Le  resultat  est 
done  exact. ^ 

"  3.  En  troisieme  lieu,  '  Je  dessine  quelque  chose,'  dit  M.  Liegeois, 
et  il  figure  un  bonhomme.  Le  sujet,  dans  le  meme  etat  passif,  dit 
successivement,  '  C'est  un  dessin  d'ornement,'  et  elle  commence  a  tracer 
quelques  traits ;  puis  sur  une  reponse  negative,  '  On  croirait  une 
boussole — un  arbre — une  maison.'  Resultat  nul.  A  ce  moment  M. 
Liegeois  reveille  Mile.  M.  avec  la  suggestion  de  tres  bien  voir  a  son  reveil 

1  The  drawings  have  been  sent  to  us,  and  entirely  accord  with  Dr.  Li^beault's 
description. 

VOL.    II. 

2    U 

658  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

le  dernier  objet  dessine,  et  des  ce  moment  elle  est  en  communication  avec 
les  assistants.  '  Je  ne  sais  pas,'  dit  Mile.  M.,  et  aprfes  quelques  minutes, 
'  C'est  une  tete,'  que  sur  demande  elle  figure  de  profil.  Alors  on  lui  dit 
que  c'etait  un  bonhomme.  'Eh  bien ! '  repondelle,  'ma  premiere  im- 
pression a  etd  de  faire  un  bonhomme,  mais  j'ai  craint  que  Ton  ne  se 
moquat  de  moi.' 

"4.  Mile.  M.  restant  r^veillde,  M.  Li^geois  retourne  a  sa  table  et 
dessine  une  table  carree  vue  en  perspective,  avec  un  tiroir  et  son  bouton ; 
puis,  apres  avoir  montre  silencieusement  son  dessin  a  chaque  assistant  en 
particulier,  il  place  ses  deux  mains  sur  la  tete  du  sujet  et  lui  dit, 
'  Maintenant  vous  allez  deviner  ce  que  je  viens  de  faire.'  Apres  moins 
de  deux  minutes  de  reflexion,  '  C'est  une  table,'  dit-elle ;  '  elle  est  ronde 
— pas  tout-a-fait.'  Sur  demande  de  la  dessiner,  elle  dessine  peu-a-peu  une 
table  exactement  semblable  et  dans  la  meme  position,  avec  le  tiroir  et  son 
bouton.     Resultat  exact. 

"  5.  Mile.  M.,  qui,  conime  aucun  assistant,  n'a  vu  le  dessin,  est  en 
rapport  avec  M.  Liegeois  seul.  M.  Liegeois  dessine  un  cube.  Mile.  M.  dit 
spontanement,  '  C'est  une  lampe.'  M.  Liegeois  lui  met  les  mains 
sur  la  tete.  '  C'est  une  chaise,'  dit-elle.  M.  Liegeois  lui  fixe  les  yeux  sur 
les  siens  et  lui  tient  la  main.  'Je  ne  sais  pas.'  Alors  le  dessin  est 
montre  aux  assistants.  '  C'est  un  chapeau,'  dit-elle.  Mile.  M.  est  mise 
de  nouveau  en  somnambulisme.  '  Je  veux  que  vous  voyiez  le  dessin,'  dit 
M.  Liegeois.  '  C'est  un  petit  bureau.'  '  ISTon.'  '  Oh,  il  y  a  des  carres — 
oui,'  et  elle  dessine  deux  carres,  I'un  audessous  de  1' autre.  '  Oe  n'est 
pas  cela,'  et  comme  elle  ne  trouve  pas,  apres  quelques  minutes,  '  Quel 
est  I'objet  ou  il  y  a  des  carres  r  '  Je  ne  sais  pas.'  '  C'est  un  cube. '  'Ah, 
c'est  vrai ;  je  voulais  le  faire.'  Pendant  I'experience,  M.  le  Dr.  Liebeault 
avait  ajoute  des  points  figurant  un  de.     Done  resultat  mediocre. 

"  6.  Mile.  M.,  etant  toujours  en  etat  de  sommeil  hypnotique,  M. 
Liegeois  dessine  une  croix.  'II  y  a  un  carre,'  dit  Mile.  M.  (C'etait  vrai ; 
la  croix  etait  dessinee  dans  un  carre.)  'Mais  qu'y  a-t-il  dedans?' 
demande  M.  Liegeois.  '  C'est  un  verre — non — une  etoile — non — un 
triangle.  Cependant  il  y  a  trois  traits.'  Enfin  elle  figure  successivement 
un  angle,  puis  une  croix  de  S.  Andre,  quand  on  lui  eut  dit  de  laisser 
aller  son  crayon  sans  s'en  occuper.     Resultat  a  peu  pres  nul. 

"7.  M.  Liegeois  ecrit  le  mot  manage.  Mile.  M.  ecrit  de  suite, 
'  Monsieur.'  Puis  elle  dit,  '  Carafe — non — tableau — non.'  '  Quelle  est  la 
lettre  ? '  '  C'est  un  <!— non,  c'est  un  m.'  Puis,  apres  quelques  minutes  de 
reflexion,  '  II  y  a  dans  le  mot  un — i — un  a  apres  I'm — un  g — un  autre 
a — un  e — il  y  a  six  lettres — non — sept.'  Quand  elle  eut  trouve  toutes  les 
lettres  et  leur  places,  ma  iage,  elle  ne  put  d^couvrir  la  lettre  r.  Ce  n'est 
qu'apres  plusieurs  minutes  qu'on  lui  dit  d'essayer  les  combinaisons  avec 
les  diflferens  consonnes,  et  enfin  elle  ^crit  mariage.     Resultat  mediocre." 

"  Proces- verbal  relatant  trois  faits  dtonnants  de  suggestion  mentale, 
obtenus  par  MM.  Liebeault  et  De  Guaita,  au  domicile  du  Dr.  Liebeault  (4, 
rue  Belle  vue,  Nancy),  le  9  Janvier,  1886. 

"Nous  soussignes  Liebeault  (Ambroise),  docteur  en  medecine,  et  De 
Guaita  (Stanislas),  horame  de  lettres,  tous  deux  demeurant  actuellement  a 
Nancy,  attestons  et  certifions  avoir  obtenus  les  resultats  suivants. 

"  1.  Mile.  Louise  L.,  endormie  du   sommeil  magnetique,  fut  informee 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  659 

qu'elle  allait  avoir  a  repondre  a  une  question  qui  lui  serait  faite  mentale- 
ment  sans  I'intervention  d'aucune  parole  ni  d'aucun  signe.  Le  Dr. 
Liebeault,  la  main  appuyee  au  front  du  sujet,  se  recueillit  un  instant, 
concentrant  sa  propre  attention  sur  la  demande,  Quand  serez-vous  guerie  ? 
qu'il  avait  la  volonte  de  faire.  Les  levres  de  la  somnambule  remuerent 
soudain  :  '  Bientot,'  raurmura-t-elle  distinctement.  On  Tin  vita  alors  a 
rep^ter  devant  toutes  les  personnes  presentes,  la  question  qu'elle  avait 
intuitivement  pergue.  Elle  la  redit  dans  les  termes  memes,  ou  elle  avait 
ete  formulae  dans  I'esprit  de  I'experimentateur.  Oette  premiere  experience, 
entreprise  par  le  Dr.  Liebeault,  a  I'instigation  de  M.  de  Guaita,  reussit 
done  pleinement.  Une  seconde  epreuve  donna  des  resultats  moins 
rigoureux  mais  plus  curieux  peut-etre  encore,  ainsi  qu'on  va  voir. 

"  2.  M.  de  Gruaita,  s'etant  mis  en  rapport  avec  la  magnetisde,  lui  posa 
mentalement  une  autre  question,  Reviendrez-vous  la  semaine  prochaine  ?  ^ 
'  Peut-etre,'  fut  la  reponse  du  sujet ;  mais  invite  a  communiquer  aux 
personnes  presentes  la  question  mentale,  elle  repondit,  '  Yous  m'avez 
demande  si  vous  reviendrez  la  semaine  prochaine.'  Oette  confusion,  portant 
sur  un  mot  de  la  phrase,  est  tres  significative.  On  dirait  que  la  jeune  fiUe 
a  '  bronche '  en  lisant  dans  le  cerveau  du  magnetiseur, 

"  3.  Le  Dr.  Liebeault,  afin  qu'aucune  phrase  indicative  ne  fut 
prononcee,  meme  a  voix  basse,  ecrivit  sur  un  billet,  '  Mademoiselle,  en  se 
reveillant,  verra  son  chapeau  noir  transforme  en  chapeau  rouge.'  Le  billet 
fut  passe  d'avance  a  tous  les  temoins,  puis  MM.  Liebeault  et  de  Guaita 
poserent,  en  silence,  leur  main  sur  le  front  du  sujet,  en  formulant  mentale- 
ment la  phrase  con  venue.  Alors  la  jeune  fille,  instruite  qu'elle  verrait  dans 
la  piece  quelque  chose  d'insolite,  fut  reveill^e.  Sans  une  hesitation 
elle  fixa  aussitot  son  chapeau,  et,  avec  un  grand  eclat  de  rire,  se  recria, 
'  Ce  n'etait  pas  son  chapeau ;  elle  n'en  voulait  pas.  II  avait  bien  la 
meme  forme  ;  mais  cette  plaisanterie  avait  assez  dur^  ;  il  fallait  lui  rendre 
son  bien.'  '  Mais  enfin,  qu'y  voyez-vous  de  change  1 '  '  Vous  savez  de 
reste.  Vous  avez  des  yeux  comme  moi.'  '  Mais  encore  1 '  On  dut  insister 
tres  longtemps  pour  qu'elle  consentit  a  dire  en  quoi  son  chapeau  etait 
change  ;  on  voulait  se  moquer  d'elle.  Pressee  de  questions  elle  dit  enfin, 
'  Vous  voyez  bien  qu'il  est  tout  rouge.'  Comme  elle  refusait  de  la  reprendre, 
force  fut  de  mettre  fin  a  son  hallucination,  en  lui  aflirmant  qu'il  allait 
revenir  a  sa  couleur  premiere.  Le  docteur  souffla  sur  le  chapeau,  et, 
redevenu  le  sien  a  ses  yeux,  elle  consentit  a  le  reprendre.^ 

"  Tels  sont  les  resultats  que  nous  certifions  avoir  obtenus  de  concert. 
En  foi  de  quoi,  nous  avons  redige  le  present  proces-verbal. 

"Nancy,  ce  9  Janvier,  1886,  fait  en  double. 

"  A.  A.  Liebeault. 
"Stanislas  de  Guaita." 

"Nous  avons  dte,  une  fois,  tres  heureux  avec  une  jeune  fille  de  15  ans, 
Mile.  Camille  Simon,  et  cela  en  presence  de  M.  Brullard  et  de  quelques 
autres  personnes.^  Je  lui  ai  suggere  mentalement  qu'a  son  reveil  elle 
verrait  son  chapeau,  qui  est  brun,  transform^  en  chapeau  jaune  ;  puis  je 

1  The  questions  were  not  committed  to  paper  till  after  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting, 
which  is  unfortunate,  as  everything  depends  on  their  exact  wording. 

2  Et  la  somnambule,  immddiatement  aprfes,  ne  se  souvient  plus  de  son  hallucination. 

3  Moi  seul  ai  touch^  la  somnambule. — A.  A.  L. 

VOL.  II.  2  u  2 

660         GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

I'ai  mise  en  rapport  avec  tout  le  monde,  et  j'ai  fait  circuler,  sous  les  yeux 
de  chacun,  un  billet  indiquant  ma  suggestion,  avec  recommandation  de 
penser  comme  moi.  Mais,  par  une  distraction  dont  je  suis  coutumier,  je 
n'ai  plus  songe  a  la  fin  a  la  couleur  que  j 'avals  designee  ant^rieurement  par 
dcrit ;  j'ai  eu  I'idde  bien  arretee  qu'elle  verrait  son  chapeau  teint  en  rouge. 
Et,  en  la  reveillant,  je  lui  ai  affirm^  qu'elle  verrait  quelque  ciiose 
representant  notre  pensee  commune.  Cette  jeune  fille,  eveill^e,  n'a  plus 
reconnu  la  couleur  de  son  chapeau.  '  II  etait  brun,'  a-t-elle  dit.  Apres 
I'avoir  longtemps  considere,  elle  a  assure  que  r^ellement  il  n'avait  plus  le 
meme  aspect,  qu'elle  n'en  pouvait  pas  trop  en  definer  la  couleur,  mais  que 
toutefois  il  lui  paraissait  d'unjaMwe-roit^et^ire.  Alors  je  me  suis  souvenu 
de  ma  distraction.  Au  cas  present  les  temoins  avaient  pense  jaune  et  moi 
rouge  ;  par  suite,  I'objet  a  paru  jaune  et  rouge  a  la  somnambule  reveillde  ; 
ce  qui  est  la  preuve  qu'une  suggestion  mentale  peut  etre  I'echo  de  plusieurs 
cerveaux  pensants."  ^ 

The  following  experiment,  made  with  the  same  "  subject,"  and  sent 
to  us  by  Dr.  Liebeault  on  June  3,  1886,  is  an  interesting  example  of 
temporary  latency  of  the  telepathic  impression. 

"  J'avais,  a  cette  jeune  fille,  fait  suggerer  par  plusieurs  personnes,  et 
mentalement,  qu'apres  la  sortie  de  son  sommeil  elle  verrait  un  coq  noir 
se  promenant  sur  le  plancher  de  I'appartement.  Au  reveil  et  long- 
temps  apres  (a  peu  pres  une  demie  heure)  elle  ne  voit  absolument  rien, 
quoique  je  lui  eusse  annonce  qu'elle  devait  apercevoir  quelque  chose.  O'est 
alors  (au  bout  d'une  demie  heure)  que  cette  jeune  fille  etant  alle  au  jardin, 
et  ayant  considere  ma  petite  basse  cour,  par  hasard,  elle  revint  tout 
courant  nous  dire  :  '  Ah  !  je  sais  ce  que  je  devais  voir  ;  c'est  un  coq  noir. 
Cette  idee  m'est  venue  en  regardant  votre  coq.'  Mon  coq  est  moitie  d'un 
noir  verditre  sur  les  ailes,  la  queue,  et  le  ventre,  et  partout  ailleurs  il  est 
d'un  blanc  jaunatre.  Ainsi  voila  une  association  d'une  idee  se  transmettant 
de  la  vue  d'un  etre  reel,  a  une  idee  fictive  transmise  suggestivement  et 
mentalement  par  les  personnes  presentes." 

The  following  record  of  experiments  was  kindly  sent  to  us,  on 
April  27,  1886,  by  Dr.  Jules  Ochorowicz,  ex-Professor  Agrege  of  the 
University  of  Lemberg,  now  residing  at  24,  Boulevard  St.  Germain, 
Paris.'  It  is  to  be  wished  that  the  original  notes  had  included  a  very 
much  more  detailed  description  of  the  conditions ;  ^  but  as  corrobora- 
tive of  the  parallel  but  more  striking  results  recorded  in  Vol.  I., 
Chap.  IL,  the  present  set  deserves  attention. 

^  The  reader  may  recall  Prof.  Lodge's  experiment  as  to  the  combination  of  tele- 
pathically  transferred  impressions  from  two  different  agents  (Vol.  i.,  p.  50 ;  see  also 
p.  80).  Mr.  Myers  and  I  were  witnesses  of  a  similar  confluence  of  suggestions  verhally 
given  at  Dr.  Liebeault's  house,  on  Aug.  31,  1885.  Mr.  Myers  hypnotised  a  "subject," 
and  told  her  that  on  awaking  she  would  see  a  baby  on  his  knees.  I  told  her  that  she 
would  see  a  cat  there.  When  she  awoke  she  gazed  at  a  hat  which  was  on  Mr.  Myers' 
knee,  and  exclaimed,  "  C'est  ni  chat  ni  enfant!"  and  the  mixed  hallucination  inspired 
a  terror  and  disgust  which  lasted  for  three  or  four  minutes. 

"^  Possibly  Dr.  Ochorowicz  will  to  some  extent  repair  this  omission  in  his  forthcoming 
book,  Le  Frobleme  de  la  Suggestion  Mentale,  in  which  this  record  will  be  embodied. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  661 

The  first  experiments,  with  cards,  were  of  the  type  described  in 
Vol.  I.,  pp.  31-3;  but  though  the  success  obtained  told  slightly  in  favour 
of  a  cause  other  than  chance,  the  series  was  too  short  to  have  any 
independent  value.  The  complete  record  of  the  next  set  of  trials  is  as 
follows.  The  percipient  was  throughout  in  a  normal  waking  state. 
(Complete  successes  are  marked  *,  partial  successes  \,  first  guesses 
only  being  counted.) 

Madame  D.,  agee  70  ans,  forte,  robuste,  tres  intelligente.  Rheumatisme 
articulaire  chronique.  Experience  hypnotique ;  lourdeur,  paralysie, 
analgesie,  dans  le  doigt.  Deux  personnes  imaginent  un  objet,  Madame 
D.  le  devine.     Elle  ne  peut  pas  nous  voir. 

Premiere  Serie,  le  2  Avril,  1885. 

{a)  Une  Carte  de  Jeu. 

OBJET  PENSE.  OBJET  DEVINE. 

1.  Six  de  pique     "Sixnoir."f 

2.  Dix  de  pique "  Rouge  ;  un  roi ;  un  dix." 

3.  Valet  de  ccBur "  Rouge  ;t  un  roi ;  une  dame  ? " 

{b)  Une  Couleur. 

4.  Bleue         "  Bleue."* 

5.  Jaune        "  Jaune."* 

6.  Noire        "Noire."* 

(c)  Un  Objet  Quelconque. 

7.  Une  lampe  "  Un  iivre  ;  un  cigare  ;  un  papier." 

8.  Un  chapeau  de  sole,  noir        ...       "  Quel  que  chose  de  bleu  ;  chaise." 

9.  Un  fauteuil      "  Une    sucriere  j  une   armoire  ;    un 

meuble." 

10.  Lesel        "  Un  gout  de  sel."* 

{d)  Une  LEtTRE. 

11.  z         "i,  r,  s." 

Une  Personne  Connue. 

12.  Valentine "Valentine."* 

13.  M'^  0 "M^-  D.  ?  M^-  Z.  ?" 

Un  Portrait  de  la  Salle.^ 

14.  D'un  eveque     "  C'est  I'eveque."  * 

Un  Chippre. 

15.  8        "7,  5,  2,  8." 

1  It  ought  to  be  made  a  rule  that  the  object  chosen  is  not  anythmg  visible  in  the 
room ;  as  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  it  was  not  indicated  to  the  guesser  by  the  attitude 
or  glance  of  some  one  present.  It  ought  to  have  been  stated  in  many  cases  whether  the 
object  or  colour  was  looked  at,  or  merely  imagined,  by  the  agents. 

662        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Une  Impression, 
objet  pense.  objet  devine. 

16.  Gaie "Triste." 

Une  Figure  Quelconque. 

17.  Une  croix  noire        "  Un  arbre — branches  croisees." 

18.  Un  vieillard  a  longue  barbe    ...      "Un       homme,       barbu  ;      barbe 

blanche."* 

Une  Photographie  sur  Sept. 

19.  D'un  gar9on     "  Une  jeune  fiUe  ;  des  enfants." 

Un  Nom  Quelconque. 

20.  Marie        "Marie."* 

21.  Adam        "  Jean,  Gustave,  Charles." 

Un  Nombre  Quelconque. 

22.  Dix "  Six,  douze,  neuf,  dix." 

Un  Objet  Quelconque. 

23.  Un  livre  bleu,  satin "  Couleur  violette — rose." 

24.  Un    crayon  d'or    pose  sur   un 

fond  bleu "  Quelque  chose  de  noir  sur  du  bleu,  "f 

25.  As  de  pique  sur  un  fond  noir ...      "  Quelque  chose  de  noir — bleu  ;  une 

carte  ;  Fas  de  trefle." 

Un  Instrument. 

26.  Un  clairon       "Unviolon." 

Un  Chifpre. 

27.  3        "2,  5." 

Un  Objet  de  la  Salle. 

28.  Une  assiette  avec  un  image    ...       " L'assiette  avec  I'image."* 

Un  Got)^T. 

29.  Du  sel       "Aigre — amer." 

30.  Sucre         "Doux."t 

31.  Des  f  raises        "  D'une    pomme — du    raisin;     des 

f  raises." 

Deuxi^ime  S^rie,  le  2  Mai,  1885. 

Un  Objet  Quelconque. 

32.  Un  buste  de  M.  N.  "  Un  portrait — d'un   homme  ;t  un 

buste." 

33.  Un  eventail      "  Quelque  chose  de  rond." 

34.  Une  clef "  Quelque      chose    en     plomb — en 

bronze — en  fer." 

35.  Une  main  portant  une  bague...       "Quelque      chose    qui     brille — un 

diamant — une  bague." 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES. 

663 

"  Quelque  chose  d'  irregulier." 
"  Un  triangle — un  cercle." 

Un  GotTT. 

OBJET  PENSE.  OBJET  DEVINE. 

"Doux." 

Une  Forme. 

Un  carre 

Un  cercle 

Une  Lbttee. 
"  M."* 
"  D."* 
"J."* 

"  A,  X,  R,  B." 
"  W,  A— non,  c'est  un  0." 
"J"  (Continuez),   "Jan."* 

Troisi^me  Serie,  le  6  Mai,  1885. 
Le  sujet,  nous  tournant  le  dos,  tient  un  crayon  et  ecrit  ce  qui  lui 
vient  dans  la  pensde.  Nous  lui  touchons  le  dos  legerement  d'un  doigt, 
en  regardant  les  lettres  ecrites  par  nous.  Yingt-deux  experiences  ^  ont 
ete  faites  sans  etre  notees  exactement ;  c'etaient  pour  la  plupart  des 
echecs.     Suit  une  serie  de  succes  dtonnants. 

66.  Brabant    "Bra — "  (je  m'eflforce  mentalement 

a   aider    le  sujet,    sans    rien  dire) 
"bant."* 

36.  Acide 

37. 

38. 

39.  M 

40.  D 

41.  J 

42.  B 

43.  O 

44.  Jan 

67.  Paris "P 

68.  Telephone "T 

QuATRiBMB  Serie,  le  8  Mai,  1885, 
Une  Lettre. 

69.  Z       "L,  P,  K,T." 

.     .     Telephone."* 
(MtMEs  Conditions.) 

70. 

B       ... 

71. 

F       ... 

72. 

n 

73. 

P       ... 

74. 

Y      ... 

75. 

e 

76. 

Gustave 

77. 

Duch 

78. 

ba      ... 

79. 

N  0... 

80. 

44     ... 

81. 

2 

"  B."* 
"  S,  T.  F." 
«  M,  N." 
"  P,  Z,  A." 
"  V,  Y." 

"F,  T,  Gabriel." 
"  C,  0." 
"  B,  A."t 
"  F,  K,  O." 

Un  Nombre. 

.     ...      "6,8,12." 

.     ...      "7,5,9." 

(J'engage  men  aide  a  se  representer  la  forme  ecrite  et  non  les  sons 
des  nombres.) 

82.  3        "8,  3." 

83.  7       "7."* 

84.8        "  8— non,  0,  6,  9."t 

^  Dr.   Oehorowicz  speaks   of  22  experiments  between  44  and  66,  but  only  allows 
for  21. 

664 

CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Suivent   13  experiences  sur  les  formes  dessin^es,  phantastiques,  parnii 
lesquelles  cinq  seulement  presentaient  une  certaine  analogie. 

Une  Personne  Connue. 
objet  pense.  objet  devine. 

98.  Le  sujet  lui-meme    "  M.  0. — non,  c'est  moi." 

99.  M.  D. 

«  M.  D."* 

Un  Image  Quelconque. 
100.  Nous  nous  representons  la  lune      "  Je  vois  les  nuages,  qui  filent.   Une 
croissant — M^-    P.  (mon    aide)      lumiere.     C'est  la  lune."* 

sur   un  fond    de  nuages,    moi 

dans  un  ciel  bleu  fonce. 
The  following  is  a  tabular  view  of  the  results  of  this  series  : — 

1 

■ai 
11 

•31 

03 

s 

s 
V. 

I.  Visual — Diagrams,  with  contact         

II.   Imagined  objects,  various,  with  contact     ... 

without  contact 

III.  Imagined    numbers,     letters,     and     names, 

without  contact 

IV.  Visual  numbers    and    names    and    letters, 

with  contact 

V.  Abstract  ideas      

VI.  Tastes 

13 
3 

27 

12 

41 
1 
4 

0 

2 
8 

5 

6 

0 

0 
0 

4 

0 
2 

1 

13 

1 

15 

7 

33 
1 
3 

101 

21 

7 

73 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  majority  both  of  complete  and  partial 
successes  occur  in  the  first  44  trials,  in  which  there  was  no  contact. 

A  third  set  of  trials,  made  with  a  hj^notised  "  subject,"  gave  8 
complete  and  7  partial  successes,  and  II  failures.  But  here,  though 
contact  was  avoided,  the  form  of  experiment — involving  movement  of 
the  limbs,  and  sometimes  actual  movement  about  the  room, — is  open 
to  grave  objection ;  as  it  can  never  be  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of 
persons  not  present  that  guidance  of  some  sort  was  not  afforded  by 
unconscious  physical  signs. 

The  following  case  of  the  transference  of  a  name  is  recorded  by 
M.  Ch.  Richet.  It  is  one  of  the  sporadic  instances  which  occurred 
before  the  time  was  ripe  for  placing  telepathy  on  a  firm  evidential 
basis.  In  future,  we  may  hope  that  similar  casual  instances  will,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  be  recorded  at  the  moment,  (especially  by  medical 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  665 

and  scientific  observers,)  and  forwarded  to  our  London  headquarters, 
or  to  those  of  the  SocieU  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  in  Paris. 

"Octobre  30,  1885. 

"  Je  n'ai  obtenu  qu'une  seule  fois  dans  de  nombreuses  recherches  sur 
la  lucidite  des  personnes  mesmerisees,  un  resultat  satisfaisant.  C'est  pre- 
cisement  dans  une  de  mes  premieres  experiences,  et  elle  est  remarquable, 
car  je  ne  I'ai  jamais  pu  repeter,  meme  avec  une  approximation  moindre. 
Une  jeune  fiUe,  convalescente,  fut  mise  dans  le  sommeil  magn^tique,  en 
Novembre,  1872,  par  moi,  a  I'Hotel-Dieu.  Un  jour,  vers  4  heure  de  I'apres- 
midi,  j'amenai  avec  moi  un  jeune  etudiant  Americain  de  mes  amis,  M. 
Hearn.  M.  Hearn  n'avait  jamais  vu  cette  jeune  fille.  Lorsque  elle  fut 
endormie,  je  dis  a  mon  sujet  magnetique:  '  Oonnaissez-vous  le  nom  de  mon 
ami?'  ( J'etais  sur  de  ne  pas  avoir  prononce  son  nom.)  Elle  se  mit  k 
sourire.  'Non,' me  dit-elle.  Puis,  comme  j'insistais,  elle  ajouta  :  'Jene 
le  vois  pas.'  J'insiste  encore,  et  elle  me  dit  :  '  U  y  a  cinq  lettres.'  '  Eh 
bien  ! '  dis-je  alors,  '  quelle  est  la  premiere  lettre  1 '  Alors  elle,  a  voix 
tres  basse,  me  dit,  'H.'  '  Quelle  est  la  seconde  lettre  ? '  dis-je.  '  E.'  '  Et 
la  troisieme? '  '  Je  ne  la  vois  pas.'  Oomme  elle  cherchait  inutilement,  je 
dis,  '  Passons  a  la  quatrieme.'     '  R.'  '  Puis  la  cinquieme.'     'N.' 

"  J'ai  essay^  le  lendemain  d'autres  experiences  analogues  avec  le  meme 
sujet,  mais  sans  succes.  De  meme  plus  tard,  sans  succes,  avec  d'autres 
personnes. 

"  C'est  pour  cela  que  je  ne  I'avais  pas  publiee  ;  mais  maintenant  que  le 
fait  de  cette  thought-transference  semble  bien  prouv^,  je  me  crois  autoris^ 
a  le  donner;  car  il  rentre  dans  un  ensemble  de  faits  qui  paraissent 
demontr^s,  et  j'en  ai  etd  tellement  frappe  que  je  me  souviens  avec  une 
precision  absolue  de  toutes  les  circonstances  qui  Font  accompagne." 

The  next  case  is  from  Dr.  A.  M.  Chiltoff,  of  Kharkoff,  and  is 
parallel  to  those  described  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  82-3. 

"  University  of  Kharkoff. 

"  May,  1886. 
"On  Jan.  31,  1886,  in  Petersburg,  in  the  lodging  of  M.  Greshner,  I, 
in  3  minutes,  and  at  a  distance  of  4  feet,  plunged  into  sleep  M. 
Drobiazguin,  an  officer  of  the  Russian  navy.  The  experiment  was  made  in 
the  presence  of  M.  Toumas,  M.D.  (now  Professor  at  the  University  of 
Warsaw),  and  of  many  other  witnesses.  When  the  '  subject '  fell  asleep, 
one  of  the  witnesses  wrote  on  a  sheet  of  paper  the  (Russian)  word  '  Bog ' 
(God).  Then  I  took  this  sheet  of  paper  and  put  it  on  the  forehead  of  my 
'  subject.'  To  my  question  whether  he  can  read  the  word  written  on  the 
paper,  M.  Drobiazguin  gave  an  affirmative  answer,  and  then  proceeded  to 
pronounce  in  a  dead  voice  the  letters.  The  first  two  were  read  correctly, 
but  in  lieu  of  '  g '  he  said  '  tch.'  When  I  remarked  to  him  that  the  last 
letter  is  guessed  incorrectly,  he  immediately  said  the  true  letter.  In  my 
opinion  this  experiment  cannot  be  explained  by  '  mental  suggestion,'  for 
those  present  expected  that  the  '  subject '  would  pronounce  the  right  letter, 
'g,'  and  he  nevertheless  pronounced  'tch.'" 

[There  is  no  Russian  word  "  botch."  As  regards  peculiarities  of 
spelling,  see  Yol.  I.,  pp.  76-8.     The  independent  action  of  the  percipient's 

666  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

mind  which  such  peculiarities  indicate  affords,  according  to  the  reasoning 
in  this  book,  no  ground  at  all  for  doubting  that  the  idea  was  telepathi- 
cally  transferred  from  one  mind  to  the  other.] 

We  owe  the  following  accounts  of  some  experiments  in  hypnotic 
rapport  to  Mr.  C.  Kegan  Paul,  who  states  that  he  has  known  the 
phenomenon  of  "  community  of  taste  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  "  to  have 
occurred  several  times  in  the  case  of  this  "  subject."  Mr.  Paul  writes: — 

"May  27th,  1884. 

"I  lived  at  Great  Tew,  in  Oxfordshire,  from  March,  1851,  to  May, 
1852.  When  there,  the  following  circumstance  occurred,  but  I  am  not 
able  to  fix  the  month,  further  than  to  say  that  I  think  it  was  in  the  late 
summer  of  1851.     (No.     I  am  now  convinced  that  it  was  in  April,  1852.) 

"  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  frequently  Mr.  Walter  Francis 
Short,  then  an  undergraduate  scholar  of  New  College,  who  was,  without 
any  single  exception,  the  most  '  sensitive '  person  of  either  sex  I  have  ever 
known.  He  usually  became  what  is  called  clairvoyant,  but  this  always 
tired  him,  and  I  seldom  made  protracted  experiments  in  this  direction. 
On  several  occasions  I  found  that  a  community  of  taste  was  established 
between  us,  but  only  once  made  any  experiment  with  more  than  one 
substance,  such  as  a  biscuit,  or  glass  of  water. 

"  At  Great  Tew,  with  his  consent,  my  two  sisters  alone  being  present 
besides  ourselves,  I  carried  the  matter  further.  We  had  dined  in  my  only 
sitting-room,  and  the  dessert  was  still  on  the  table.  (I  think  I  am  right, 
though  my  sister  F.  doubts.)  I  put  Short  to  sleep  in  an  arm-chair,  which  I 
turned  with  its  back  to  the  table,  and  Short's  face  to  the  wall.  There 
was  no  mirror  in  the  room.  I  asked  Short,  taking  his  hand,  if  he  thought 
he  could  taste  what  I  took  in  my  mouth,  and  he  said  he  thought  that  he 
could.  I,  still  holding  his  hand,  shut  my  own  eyes,  and  my  sisters  put 
into  my  mouth  various  things  which  were  on  the  table.  I  remember  only 
raisins,  but  there  were  four  or  five  various  substances  tasted.  These  were 
all  quite  correctly  described,  except  that  I  think  there  was  an  uncertainty 
about  the  kind  of  wine.  Short,  however,  had  of  course  been  aware  of  what 
was  on  the  table,  but  he  could  not  know,  nor  did  I  know,  the  order  in 
which  I  was  to  be  fed  with  these  things. 

"  To  carry  the  experiment  further,  one  of  my  sisters  left  the  room, 
bringing  back  various  things  wholly  unknown  to  me,  which  she  ad- 
ministered to  me  having  my  eyes  shut.  I  remember  spices,  black  pepper, 
salt,  raw  rice,  and  finally  soap,  all  of  which  Short  recognised,  and  the  last 
of  which  he  rejected  with  a  splutter  of  great  disgust.  The  experiment 
only  ended  when  we  could  think  of  nothing  more  to  taste. 

"  I  had  at  that  time  already  left  Oxford ;  Short  did  so  soon  after,  and 
our  various  occupations  seldom  allowed  our  meeting.  His  conviction  of 
my  power  over  him  was  such  that  he  begged  that  I  would  never  attempt 
to  place  him  under  mesmeric  influence  when  I  was  at  a  distance  from  him, 
on  the  ground  that,  as  he  was  rowing  in  the  Oxford  boat,  I  might  do  so 
when  he  was  on  the  river.  I  had  once  afiected  him  at  a  distance,  under 
rather  singular  circumstances,  and  of  course  willingly  gave  the  promise. 

"  C.  Kegan  Paul. 

IN  THEIR  PBOPEB  PLACES.  667 

''  My  sister  F.  is  right  in  remarking  that  our  four  selves  were  the 
only  persons  in  the  house.  My  only  servant  was  a  woman  in  the  village, 
who  lived  close  by,  and  came  and  went  at  fixed  hours,  like  an  Oxford 
scout." 

This  account  was  sent  by  Mr.  Paul  to  his  sister,  Miss  Paul,  with  the 
following  letter  : — 

"  In  talking  with  my  friend  Henry  Sidgwick  over  my  experiments  in 
mesmerism  many  years  ago,  I  mentioned  one  with  Short  at  Tew,  when  you 
and  M.  were  present.  He  has  asked  me  to  write  it  down,  and  get  if 
possible  your  recollections  on  it. 

"  The  particular  experiment  was  one  in  which  Short,  being  in  the 
mesmeric  sleep,  was  able  to  taste  what  was  put  into  my  mouth.  If  you 
recollect  the  circumstance  at  all,  I  want  you,  before  reading  what  I  have 
said,  enclosed  in  another  envelope,  to  write  down  a  statement  of  what  you 
remember  as  much  in  detail  as  possible — time,  place,  persons  present, 
things  tasted,  &c. ;  then  to  read  my  narrative,  and  to  write  also  how  far 
your  recollection,  thus  refreshed,  tallies  with  mine,  and  preserve  both 
accounts,  even  if  you  find  them  contradictory  ;  then  to  send  my  account 
and  your  account  and  remarks  enclosed  to  M.,  together  with  this  note, 
asking  her  to  follow  exactly  the  same  plan,  and  return  my  statement, 
yours,  and  her  own  to  me,  together  with  this  note. 

"  I  should  like  you  also  to  say  that  you  have  observed  my  order  of 
proceeding  as  indicated  above.  ««  C  Kegan  Paul." 

Miss  Paul  replied  as  follows,  on  May  27  : — 

"  On  Thursday,  April  29th,  1852,  my  sister  and  I  went  to  stay  with 
my  brother  at  Great  Tew,  in  Oxfordshire,  and  Mr.  Short  joined  us  at 
Oxford,  and  went  with  us  to  Tew.  As  he  returned  to  Oxford  on  Saturday, 
May  1st,  the  mesmeric  experiments,  which  I  well  remember,  must  have 
been  on  Friday,  April  30th,  and  they  were  after  dinner  in  the  evening. 
My  brother  mesmerised  Mr.  Short,  and  when  he  was  quite  asleep  he  tried 
some  experiments. 

"  My  brother  drank  some  wine  (I  think  it  was  port),  and  we  saw  Mr. 
Short's  lips  and  throat  moving  as  if  he  was  swallowing  it,  and  on  my 
brother  asking  him  what  he  was  drinking,  he  at  once  said  what  it  was. 
The  wine  had  been  taken  from  a  cupboard  and  poured  out,  where,  even 
had  he  been  awake,  Mr.  Short  could  not  have  seen  what  it  was  before 
tasting  it." 

"  [I  think  my  own  account  is  the  more  correct. — C.  K.  P.]  " 

"  My  sister  then  got  some  black  pepper  from  the  kitchen  and  put  it  in 
my  brother's  hand,  and  on  his  putting  some  in  his  own  mouth,  Mr.  Short 
at  once  tasted  it,  and  on  my  brother  asking  him  what  he  had  in  his  mouth, 
he  said  it  was  very  hot  and  unpleasant,  but  was  not  quite  sure  what  it 
was.     My  brother  held  Mr.  Short's  hand  all  the  time. 

"  The  only  other  thing  I  remember  is  that  on  my  brother  removing  his 
hand  after,  and  substituting  my  sister's,  Mr.  Short  looked  as  if  in  pain,  and 
said  the  change  was  unpleasant. 

"  No  one  else  was  in  the  little  cottage  at  the  time. 

"F.  K.  Paul. 

668  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

"  P.S. — Since  writing  my  account  I  have  read  my  brother's,  and  think 
it  very  accurate,  as,  now  I  am  reminded  of  the  soap,  &c.,  I  can  faintly 
recollect  it,  but  not  clearly,  as  I  do  the  things  I  have  written  down. 

"  Also  I  think  the  dessert  had  been  put  away,  and  the  wine  taken  out 
again  on  purpose. 

"I  remember  the  date,  as  I  have  always  written  down  very  shortly  the 
events  of  each  day." 

Mr.  Paul's  other  sister,  Mrs.  P.,  writes,  on  May  29,  1884  :— 

"In  the  year  1852  or  1853,  I  believe  at  Bloxham  [certainly  Tew. — 
C.  K.  P.],  I  remember  my  brother  trying  experiments  on  a  friend,  Mr. 
Short,  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising.  One  evening,  I  saw  him 
mesmerise  Mr.  Short,  and  while  he  was  in  that  state  my  brother  asked  for 
a  glass  of  water  or  wine,  and  drank  it.  Mr.  Short  appeared  as  if  he  was 
drinking,  and  swallowed,  and  made  a  reply  when  asked  what  it  was ;  but 
the  experiment  I  remember  best  was,  after  my  getting  some  pepper,  and 
giving  it  to  my  brother,  he  put  some  into  his  mouth,  and  Mr.  Short 
looked  as  if  in  pain,  and  said,  '  Hot.'  Then  I  took  his  hand,  and  his  face 
changed,  and  I  think  he  said,  '  Nasty.'  I  know  he  seemed  to  dislike  the 
change  from  my  brother's  touch  ;  but  although  I  know  there  were  other 
experiments,  it  is  so  long  ago  that  I  cannot  quite  recall  them. 

"M.  E.  P. 

"  P.S. — Since  writing  the  above  I  have  read  my  brother's  narrative, 
which  is,  I  think,  substantially  correct." 

The  Rev.  W.  F.  Short  writes  to  Mr.  Podmore  : — 

"  The  Rectory,  Donhead  St.   Mary,  Salisbury. 

"June  12th,  1884. 

"Dear  Sir, — Stock  tells  me  you  would  like  my  account  of  some 
mesmeric  experiences  of  mine  at  Great  Tew  in  the  year  '52.  You  are  very 
welcome,  but  32  years  may  have  impaired  my  memory  for  the  details,  and 
I  should  like  Kegan  Paul  to  see  the  account  before  any  use  is  made  of  it. 

"I  had  come  up  to  New  College  by  accident  a  week  before  the  time, 
and  finding  college  empty  accepted  an  invitation  to  pay  Paul,  then  curate 
of  Great  Tew,  a  visit.  One  night,  I  think  the  Thursday  following,  he 
mesmerised  me,  and  made,  I  believe,  some  successful  experiments  in  the 
'  transference  of  taste  ' ;  but  of  these,  as  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  I  can  say 
nothing.  When  I  was  in  due  time  awakened,  he  said,  '  We  tried  to  get 
you  to  visit  New  College,  but  you  said  it  was  all  a  guess,  and  would  tell  us 
nothing.'  I  answered,  '  I  seem  to  have  dreamt  of  New  College  Junior 
Common-room,  and  to  have  seen  B.  and  G.  sitting  at  a  small  round  table 
drawn  near  the  fire,  with  the  lamp  on  the  large  table  near  them,  playing 
at  cards.'  It  was  agreed  that  I  should  test  the  truth  of  this  on  my  return 
to  Oxford  on  Friday  (one  day  before  men  in  general  came  up).  On  entering 
college  I  met  B.,  and  said,  'You  up?  Are  there  any  other  men  come?' 
'  Oh,  yes  ;  half-a-dozen.  G.  and  so-and-so,'  &c.  'Were  you  in  the  Common- 
room  last  night  at  10  (?)  ? '  'Yes.'  'Who  else  was  there?'  'Oh,  the 
whole  lot  of  us.  No,  by  10  everyone  was  gone  but  I  and  G.'  'Where 
were  you  sitting  ? '     '  At  a  small  table   close  to  the  fire,  it  was  so  cold.' 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  669 

'With  the  lamp  on  the  big  table  near  you?'  'Yes,  drawn  close  to  us.' 
'  Then  I  will  tell  you  what  you  were  doing.  You  were  playing  cards.'  'How 
odd  !  We  weren't  playing  cards,  but  Gr.  was  showing  me  tricks  on  the 
cards.' 

"  I  have  always  thought  this  a  thoroughly  good  case,  too  exact  to  be  a 
mere  coincidence,  and  I  think  tolerably  accurate  even  in  the  words  used, 
but  those  who  do  not,  like  myself,  believe  in  clairvoyance  ^  will  probably 
set  it  down  to  a  happy  guess. 

"  I  have  not  for  many  years  had  any  experience  of  mesmerism,  but 
after  this,  for  some  years,  I  saw  a  great  deal  of  it,  and  have  no  more  doubt 
of  its  reality,  even  in  its  higher  phases  of  inducing  clairvoyance,  &c.,  than 
I  have  of  my  own  existence. 

"  I  doubt  whether  B.  would  remember  this  (I  don't  think  G.  ever  heard 
of  it),  but  I  would  write  to  him  if  you  like  it,  only  I  am  rather  overworked 
just  now. — Believe  me,  yours  very  truly, 

"W.  F.  Short." 

Mr.  Short  writes,  on  Feb.  18,  1886  :— 

"  My  friend  B.  remembered  nothing  of  the  circumstances  (naturally 
enough),  though  I  feel  perfectly  sure  it  took  place." 

Mr.  C.  Kegan  Paul  writes,  on  June  16,  1884  : — 

"  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  do  not  remember  much  about  the  clairvoyance 
part  of  the  experiment  with  Walter  Short,  though  I  remember  the  com- 
munity of  taste  vividly,  and  have  described  it  to  Mr.  Sidgwick. 

"  Short  became  clairvoyant  on  several  occasions  under  my  mesmerism, 
but  I  do  not  recall  the  details  with  certainty.  On  the  evening  in  question 
I  only  remember  that  on  trying  some  experiments  Short  said  he  was  tired, 
and  wished  to  be  wakened.  I  do  not  remember  his  mentioning  his  '  dream  ' 
or  that  I  heard  afterwards  how  nearly  correct  it  had  been.  It  is  probable 
that  he  did  mention  the  dream,  but  that  I  paid  little  attention  to  it,  being 
full  of  the  first  experiment,  and  that  as  I  only  saw  him  occasionally,  and 
we  did  not  exchange  letters,  I  never  heard  the  verification." 

In  the  following  cases,  though  they  are  in  a  sense  experimental,  the 
experiment  was  not  directed  to  the  particular  result  obtained.  They 
are  parallel  to  those  recorded  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  78  and  84 ;  they  illustrate 
thought-transference  of  the  "  underground "  sort,  both  agent  and 
percipient  being  unconscious  of  the  idea  which  nevertheless  is  pretty 
clearly  shown  to  have  passed  from  one  mind  to  the  other  otherwise 
than  through  the  recognised  sensory  channels.  We  have  reason  to 
think  that  this  form  of  transference  is  not  extremely  uncommon  ;  and 
these  specimens  may  serve  to  elicit  further  records. 

Mrs.  Wingfield  (mother  of  the  ladies  mentioned  above,  p.  653) 
writes  as  follows  : — 

1  This  may  very  probably  have  been  a  case  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  (Vol.  i.,  pp.  368-9), 
conditioned  by  the  hypnotic  trance,  but  also  by  the  pre-existing  relation  between  Mr. 
Short  and  the  friends  whom  he  saw  (p.  162). 

670        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

"34,  Ennismore  Gardens,  S.W. 

"April  2nd,  1886. 

"On  the  evening  of  Jan.  13,  1886,  Mr.  Tatham  [of  2,  Cambridge 
Gate,  W.]  was  writing  automatically,  but  not  very  legibly.  He  wrote  a 
word  twice,  which  some  of  us  tried  to  read,  but  could  not.  He  said  he 
thought  it  was  Phoebe,  or  something  like  it.  Some  minutes  afterwards  Miss 
Wingfield,  who  was  sitting  at  the  other  side  of  the  room,  wrote  automati- 
cally, '  Who  is  G.  Norby  1 '  We  none  of  us  knew  this  name,  and  asked 
why  the  question  was  written.  We  were  told  '  because  he  wanted  to 
tell  something  about  an  accident,'  or  words  to  that  effect.  The  subject 
then  dropped,  and  the  writing  was  at  an  end. 

"  Some  half-hour  or  more  afterwards,  Mr.  M.  W.  took  up  Mr.  Tatham's 
paper  and  looked  at  it,  and  said,  '  Why  !  this  is  G.  Norby.'  And  when 
we  examined  the  letters  carefully  we  found  it  was  so.  Therefore  Mr. 
Tatham  and  Miss  W.  were  both  influenced  to  write  the  same  name 
independently  of  each  other,  ^  as  at  the  time  Miss  W.  wrote,  '  Who  is  G. 
Norby  ? '  she  had  not  seen  what  Mr.  Tatham  wrote,  and  we  none  of  us 
had  any  idea  of  such  a  name.  There  were  six  persons  present  beside  Mr. 
T.  and  Miss  W.,  none  of  whom  had  ever  heard  the  name. 

"  E.  A.  Wingfield, 
"Percy  Tatham." 

The  next  record  is  from  Miss  Birrell  and  Mrs.  Medley,  near, 
relatives  of  the  present  writer,  who  entertains  little  doubt  that  the 
facts,    though    somewhat    remote,    are    recorded    with    substantial 

accuracy. 

"  37,  Addison  Gardens,  North  Kensington,  W. 

"October,  1885. 
"I  was  playing  at  table-turning  in  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1863, 
with  a  party  of  six  or  seven.  At  last  the  table  rapped  a  name  we  none 
of  us  knew.  We  thought  there  was  a  mistake.  A  lady  in  the  room,  but 
not  at  the  table,  turned  round  and  identified  it  as  the  name  of  some  rela- 
tion— I  think  her  sister's  son.  We  asked  the  table  to  rap  three  times  if 
it  wished  her  to  come,  which  it  did.  She  came  and  put  her  hands  on  the 
table  but  no  distinct  message  followed.  The  name  was  new  to  me.  I 
said,  '  Was  there  really  such  a  person  ? '  The  lady,  who  was  a  good  deal 
distressed,  answered,  '  Oh  yes  ! '  and  mentioned  one  or  two  facts  about 
him,  turning  round  to  another  lady  of  her  own  age,  in  the  room  hut  not  at 
the  tahle^  for  further  confirmation.  She  did  this  as  we  were  too  young  to 
remember  the  dead  person. 

'^  Olive  Birrell." 

"  Walden  House,  All  Saints  Street,  Nottingham. 

"  October  30th,  1886. 

"  I  was  seated  with   a  party  of  six  or  eight  round   a  table  with   our 

hands  placed  upon  it,  and  it  rapped  in  reply  to  the  letters  of  the  alphabet. 

Several  names  were  spelt  out  and  various  broken  sentences.     The  table 

at   length    spelt    the  name    'William   Smallshaw.'     We  replied,    'There 

1  If  this  were  certainly  the  case,  the  incident  could  not  have  been  included  in  the 
present  work.  But  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  Miss  Wingfield's  production  of  the  name 
was  due  to  its  latent  existence  in  Mr.  Tatham's  mind. 

IN  THE  IB  PROPER  PLACES.  671 

never  was  such  a  person,'  and  one  gentleman  laughed  and  said,  'You  have 
made  a  mistake,  try  again.'  The  table  continued  to  rap  and  then  a  lady  in 
another  part  of  the  room,  away  from  our  party  altogether,  said  very 
nervously,  ^  I  had  a  brother,  William  Smallshaw.'  The  table  continued  to 
rap  and  we  asked  if  Miss  Smallshaw  should  join  us.  It  replied,  '  Fes,'  and 
she  came.     No  sentence  of  any  value  or  sense  was  made  out  after  this. 

"Emily  G.  Medley." 

Miss  Birrell  is  tolerably  confident  that  the  surname  was  not  Smallshaw, 
but  Lyon,  which  was  Miss  Smallshaw's  married  sister's  name. 

Mr.  Augustine  Birrell,  who  was  present,  says  that  the  expression  of 
Miss  Smallshaw's  face,  as  she  came  across  the  room,  is  fixed  in  his 
memory  ;  but  he  cannot  recall  what  followed,  when  she  put  her  hands  on 
the  table,  or  the  reason  of  her  being  summoned  to  the  table. 

[The  state  of  Miss  Smallshaw's  health  has  prevented  us  from  applying 
for  her  recollections.] 

§  2.  The  following  is  a  transitional  case,  akin  to  those  recorded 
in  Yol.  I,,  pp.  103-9 ;  but  it  differs  from  that  group  in  the  fact  that 
the  agent  remembers  his  own  direct  share  in  the  occurrence,  and 
appears  to  have  been  reciprocally  affected.  We  owe  the  case  to  Mr. 
H.  P.  Sparks  (of  Overbeck  Villa,  Woodstone,  near  Southampton,)  and 
Mr.  A.  H.  W.  Cleave  (of  28,  Vardens  Road,  New  Wandsworth,  S.W.,) 
who  at  the  time  were  fellow-students  of  naval  engineering  at  Ports- 
mouth. Personal  acquaintance  has  completely  confirmed  the 
impression  made  on  me  by  the  letters  of  these  gentlemen,  that 
they  had  observed  the  phenomena,  which  were  a  complete  surprise  to 
them,  with  intelligence  and  care.  They  were  unaware  of  the 
remarkable  interest  of  their  results ;  and  Mr.  Sparks  addressed  me 
in  the  first  instance,  not  so  much  to  supply  information  which,  for 
aught  he  knew,  might  be  of  a  common  enough  type,  as  to  ask  for 
advice  about  hypnotic  experimentation  in  general.  He  did  not  know 
to  what  address  to  write ;  but  acting  on  a  dim  recollection  of  a 
newspaper  notice  of  our  objects,  he  boldly  launched  a  letter  into 
space,  which  by  good  luck  reached  me  after  a  certain  amount  of 
peregrination.  His  account,  received  in  January,  1886,  is  as  follows  : — 

"  H.M.S.  '  Marlborough',  Portsmouth. 
(685)  "  For  the  last  year,  or  for  about  the  last  15  months,  I  have  been 
in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  a  fellow-student  of  mine.  The  way  1  did  it 
was  by  simply  looking  into  his  eyes  as  he  lay  in  an  easy  position  on  a  bed. 
This  produced  sleep.  After  a  few  times  I  found  that  this  sleep  was 
deepened  by  making  long  passes  after  the  patient  was  ofi".  ^     Then  comes 

1  In  conversation,  I  learnt  (as  I  expected)  that  during  the  trance  Mr.  Cleave  was  to 
a  considerable  degree  insensitive  to  pain,  and  that,  on  waking,  he  had  no  memory  of  any 
actions  that  he  had  been  made  to  perform,  or  of  what  had  passed  around  him. 

672  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

the  remarkable  part  of  this  sort  of  mesmerism.  [Mr.  Sparks  then 
describes  his  '  subject's  '  ability  to  see,  in  the  trance,  places  in  which  he 
was  interested,  if  he  resolved  to  see  them  before  he  was  hypnotised ;  but 
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  these  visions  were  anything  but  purely 
subjective.]  However,  it  has  been  during  the  last  week  or  so  I  have  been 
so  surprised  and  startled  by  an  extraordinary  affair.  Last  Friday 
evening  (January  15th,  1886)  he  expressed  his  wish  to  see  a  young  lady 
living  in  Wandsworth,  and  he  also  said  he  would  try  to  make  himself 
seen  by  her.  I  accordingly  mesmerised  him,  and  continued  the  long 
passes  for  about  20  minutes,  concentrating  my  will  on  his  idea.  When  he 
came  round  (I  brought  him  round  by  just  touching  his  hand  and  willing 
him,  after  1  hour  and  20  minutes'  trance)  he  said  he  had  seen  her  in  the 
dining-room,  and  that  after  a  time  she  grew  restless,  and  then  suddenly 
looked  straight  at  him  and  then  covered  her  eyes  with  her  hands.  Just 
after  this  he  came  round.  Last  Monday  evening  (January  18th,  1886)  we 
did  the  same  thing,  and  this  time  he  said  he  thought  he  had  frightened 
her,  as  after  she  had  looked  at  him  for  a  few  minutes  she  fell  back  in  her 
chair  in  a  sort  of  faint.  Her  little  brother  was  in  the  room  at  the  time.  Of 
course,  after  this  we  expected  a  letter  if  the  vision  was  real;  and  on  Wed- 
nesday morning  he  received  a  letter  from  this  young  lady  asking  whether 
anything  had  happened  to  him,  as  on  Friday  evening  she  was  startled  by 
seeing  him  standing  at  the  door  of  the  room.  After  a  minute  he  disappeared, 
and  she  thought  that  it  might  have  been  fancy;  but  on  the  Monday  evening 
she  was  still  more  startled  by  seeing  him  again,  and  this  time  much 
clearer,  and  it  so  frightened  her  that  she  nearly  fainted. 

"  This  account  I  send  you  is  perfectly  true,  I  will  vouch,  for  I  have  two 
independent  witnesses  who  were  in  the  dormitory  at  the  time  when  he 
was  mesmerised,  and  when  he  came  round.  My  patient's  name  is  Arthur 
H.  W.  Cleave,  and  his  age  is  18  years.  My  own  is  19  years.  A.  0. 
Darley  and  A.  S.  Thurgood,  fellow-students,  are  the  two  witnesses  I 
mentioned.  "H.  Percy  Sparks." 

Mr.  Cleave  writes,  on  March  15,  1886  : — 

"H.M.S.   'Marlborough,'  Portsmouth. 

"Sparks  and  myself  have,  for  the  past  18  months,  been  in  the  habit 
of  holding  mesmeric  seances  in  our  dormitories.  For  the  first  month  or 
two  we  got  no  very  satisfactory  results,  but  after  that  we  succeeded  in 
sending  one  another  to  sleep.  I  could  never  get  Sparks  further  than  the 
sleeping  state,  but  he  could  make  me  do  anything  he  liked  whilst  I  was 
under  the  influence ;  so  I  gave  up  trying  to  send  him  off,  and  all  our 
efforts  were  made  towards  my  being  mesmerised.  After  a  short  time  we 
got  on  so  well  that  Sparks  had  three  or  four  other  fellows  in  the  dormitory 
to  witness  what  I  did.  I  was  quite  insensible  to  all  pain,  as  the  fellows 
have  repeatedly  pinched  my  hands  and  legs  without  my  feeling  it.  About 
6  months  ago  I  tried  my  power  of  will  in  order,  while  under  the  influence, 
to  see  persons  to  whom  I  was  strongly  attached.  For  some  time  I  was 
entirely  unsuccessful,  although  I  once  thought  that  I  saw  my  brother  (who 
is  in  Australia),  but  had  no  opportunity  of  verifying  the  vision. 

"  A  short  time  ago,  I  tried  to  see  a  young  lady  whom  I  know  very 
well,  and  was   perfectly  surprised    at    my  success.     I    could    see   her  as 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  673 

plainly  as  I  can  see  now,  but  I  could  not  make  myself  seen  by  her, 
although  I  had  often  tried  to.  After  I  had  done  this  several  times,  I 
determined  to  try  and  make  myself  seen  by  her,  and  told  Sparks  of  my 
idea,  which  he  approved.  Well,  we  tried  this  for  five  nights  running 
without  any  more  success.  We  then  suspended  our  endeavours  for  a 
night  or  two,  as  I  was  rather  over-exerted  by  the  continued  efibrts  and 
got  severe  headaches.  We  then  tried  again  (on,  I  think  it  was,  a  Friday, 
but  am  not  certain),  and  were,  I  thought,  successful ;  but  as  the  young 
lady  did  not  write  to  me  about  it,  I  thought  I  must  have  been  mistaken,  so 
I  told  Sparks  that  we  had  better  give  up  trying.  But  he  begged  me  to 
try  once  more,  which  we  did  on  the  following  Monday,  when  we  were 
successful  to  such  an  extent  that  I  felt  rather  alarmed.  (I  must  tell  you 
that  I  am  in  the  habit  of  writing  to  the  young  lady  every  Sunday,  but  I  did 
not  write  that  week,  in  order  to  make  her  think  about  me.)  This  took 
place  between  9.30  p.m.  and  10  p.m.  Monday  night,  and  on  the  following 
Wednesday  morning  I  got  the  letter  which  I  have  enclosed.  I,  of  course, 
then  knew  I  had  been  successful.  I  went  home  about  a  fortnight  after 
this,  when  I  saw  the  young  lady,  who  seemed  very  frightened  in  spite  of 
my  explanations,  and  begged  me  never  to  try  it  again,  and  I  promised  her 
that  I  would  not. 

"  I  must  now  tell  you  our  method  of  mesmerism.  I  lay  on  my  bed, 
with  my  head  raised  on  two  pillows,  and  Sparks  sat  facing  me  about  three 
feet  olF  on  a  chair.  The  lights  were  made  low,  and  then  I  watched  his 
eyes  intently,  thinking  in  the  meantime  of  the  young  lady  whom  I  wanted 
to  see.  After  a  short  time  (about  7  minutes)  my  sense  of  hearing  left 
me,  and  I  could  see  nothing  but  two  eyes,  which  after  a  short  time 
disappeared,  and  I  then  became  senseless.  (When  we  first  experimented 
I  could  never  get  farther  than  this  state,  and  it  was  only  after  repeatedly 
trying  that  I  did  so.)  I  then  seemed  to  see  (indistinctly  at  first)  her  face, 
which  gradually  became  plainer  and  plainer  until  I  seemed  to  be  in  another 
room  altogether,  and  could  detail  minutely  all  the  surroundings.  I  told 
Sparks,  when  I  came  round,  what  I  saw,  who  was  with  the  young  lady, 
and  what  she  was  doing,  all  of  which  were  verified  in  her  letter. 

"A.  H.  W.  Cleave." 

The  two  witnesses  of  the  experiment  last  described  write  as  follows  : — 

"  I  have  seen  Mr.  Cleave's  account  of  his  mesmeric  experiment,  and 
can  fully  vouch  for  the  truth  thereof. 

"  A.  C.  Daeley." 

"  I  have  read  Mr.  Cleave's  statement,  and  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of 
it,  as  I  was  present  when  he  was  mesmerised  and  heard  his  statement 
after  he  revived. 

"A.  E.  S.  Thurgood." 

The  following  is  a  copy,  made  by  the  present  writer,  of  the  letter  in 
which  the  young  lady.  Miss  A. ,  described  her  side  of  the  afiair. 

The  envelope  bore  the  postmarks,  "Wandsworth,  Jan.  19,  1886," 
"Portsmouth,  Jan.  20,  1886,"  and  the  address,  "  Mr.  A.  H.  W.  Cleave, 
H.M.S.  '  Marlborough,'  Portsmouth." 

VOL    n.  2  X 

674        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

"  Wandsworth. 

"Tuesday  morning. 

"  Dear  Arthur, — Has  anything  happened  to  you  ?  Please  write  and 
let  me  know  at  once,  for  I  have  been  so  frightened. 

"  Last  Tuesday  evening,  I  was  sitting  in  the  dining  [room]  reading, 
when  I  happened  to  look  up,  and  could  have  declared  I  saw  you  standing 
at  the  door  looking  at  me.  I  put  my  handkerchief  to  my  eyes,  and  when 
I  looked  again,  you  were  gone.  I  thought  it  must  have  been  only  my 
fancy,  but  last  night  (Monday),  while  I  was  at  supper,  I  saw  you  again, 
just  as  before,  and  was  so  frightened  that  I  nearly  fainted.  Luckily  only 
my  brother  was  there,  or  it  would  have  attracted  attention.  Now  do 
write  at  once  and  tell  me  how  you  are.  I  really  cannot  write  any 
more  now." 

[Signature  of  Christian  name.] 

It  will  be  seen  that  Miss mentions  Tuesday  as  the  day  of 

her  first  hallucination ;  whereas  both  Mr.  Sparks  and  Mr.  Cleave 
mention  Friday  as  the  day  on  which  he  first  seemed  to  obtain  a 
vision  of  the  room  where  she  was ;  and  though,  in  a  letter  written  on 
March  21st,  Mr.  Cleave  expresses  uncertainty  on  this  point,  and 
inclines  to  the  view  that  his  first  vision  of  the  room  occurred  on  the 
Tuesday,  "  as  I  waited  for  a  day  or  two  to  see  if  I  should  get  a  letter 
before  I  tried  again  "  on  the  following  Monday,  it  is  impossible  to  set 
aside  the  earlier  statement.  But  in  conversation,  both  he  and  Mr. 
Sparks  expressed  their  decided  opinion — which  accords  with  what 
would  be  naturally  inferred  from  their  letters — that  Tuesday  must  at 
any  rate  have  fallen  within  the  five  days  running  on  which  trials 
were  made,  before  the  break ;  and  the  first  incident  therefore  gives 
valuable  confirmation  to  the  second.  Mr.  Cleave's  omission  to  write  as 

usual  to  Miss on  the  Sunday  was  perhaps  an  error  of  judgment ; 

as  it  leaves  it  open  to  the  objector  to  say  that  the  non-receipt  of  a 
letter  on  Monday  morning  so  wrought  on  her  mind  as  to  conjure  up  a 
spectral  illusion,  to  which  she  had  become  predisposed  by  her  experi- 
ence of  the  previous  week. 

Mr.  Cleave  explains  that  though  he  might  naturally  enough  have 

imagined  Miss  to   be   in   the   dining-room   at   that  hour,    it 

would  have  seemed  to  him  more  probable,  had  he  made  a  guess 
at  the  scene,  that  other  elder  members  of  the  family  should  also 
be  present,  than  that  she  should  have  been  alone  with  her  little 
brother — which  is  so  far  an  argument  for  supposing  his  vision 
to  have  been  of  the  telepathically  clairvoyant  sort,  and  not  a  mere 
subjective  picture.     But  the  nature  of  his  percipience  is,  of  course, 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  675 

a  separate  question  ;  -^  the  prime  fact  in  the  case  is  the  halhicination 

produced  by  his  agency.     Miss ,  it  will  be  seen,  was  so  seriously 

disturbed  by  what  occurred  that  she  has  requested  him  not  to  repeat 
the  experiment.  Her  feeling  is  natural  enough — it  is  just  one  of  the 
natural  conditions  that  "  psychical  research "  has  to  reckon  with. 
Every  department  in  the  exploration  of  Nature  has  difficulties  of  its 
own ;  and  it  would  be  strange  if  a  study  that  deals  with  living  human 
material  were  an  exception.  That  the  particular  form  of  obstacle 
here  again  encountered  (see  Vol  I.,  p.  109)  may  make  the  accumula- 
tion of  evidence  for  the  rarer  psychical  phenomena  a  slow  process  is 
probable  enough;  but  that  the  prolongation  of  our  search  should  have 
already  brought  us  a  single  fresh  instance  of  this  rarest  type  is  really  a 
fact  of  the  most  hopeful  significance,  and  one  which  would  alone  amply 
vindicate  the  plan  of  wide  and  public  inquiry  that  we  have  adopted. 

The  next  account  is  perhaps  even  more  remarkable,  as  the  agent 
was  in  a  normal  state.  We  owe  it  to  Mrs.  Russell,  of  Belgaum,  India, 
wife  of  Mr.  H.  R  Russell,  Educational    Inspector  in  the  Bombay 

Presidency. 

"June  8th,  1886. 
(686)  "  As  desired,  I  write  down  the  following  facts,  as  well  as  1  can  re- 
call them.  I  was  living  in  Scotland,  my  mother  and  sisters  in  Germany.  I 
lived  with  a  very  dear  friend  of  mine,  and  went  to  Germany  every  year  to 
see  my  people.  It  had  so  happened  that  I  could  not  go  home  as  usual  for 
two  years,  when  on  a  sudden  I  made  up  my  mind  to  go  and  see  my  family. 
They  knew  nothing  of  my  intention ;  I  had  never  gone  in  early  spring 
before  ;  and  1  had  no  time  to  let  them  know  by  letter  that  1  was  going  to 
set  off.  I  did  not  like  to  send  a  telegram,  for  fear  of  frightening  my  mother. 
The  thought  came  to  me  to  will  with  all  my  might  to  appear  to  one  of  my 
sisters,  never  mind  which  of  them,  in  order  to  give  them  a  warning  of  my 
coming.  I  only  thought  most  intensely  for  a  few  minutes  of  them,  wish- 
ing with  all  my  might  to  be  seen  by  one  of  them — half  present  myself,  in 
vision,  at  home.^  I  did  not  take  more  than  ten  minutes,  1  think.  I 
started  by  Leith  steamer  on  a  Saturday  night,  end  of  April,  1859.  I 
wished  to  appear  at  home  about  6  o'clock  p.m.  that  same  Saturday. 
I  arrived  at  home  about  6  o'clock  on  the  Tuesday  morning  following.  I 
entered  the  house  without  anyone  seeing  me,  the  hall  being  cleaned  and 
the  front  door  open.  I  walked  into  the  room.  One  of  my  sisters  stood 
with  her  back  to  the  door ;  she  turned  round  when  she  heard  the  door 
opening,  and,  on  seeing  me,  stared  at  me,  turning  deadly  pale  and  letting 
what  she  had  in  her  hand  fall.  1  had  been  silent.  Then  I  spoke,  and  said, 
'  It  is  I.  Why  do  you  look  so  frightened  ? '  when  she  answered,  '  I  thought 
I  saw  you  again  as  Stinchen '  (another  sister)  '  saw  you  on  Saturday.' 

1  If  the  case  was  truly  reciprocal,  it  seems  clearly  to  exemplify  the  connection  of  the 
power  to  act  telepathically  with  an  abnormal  extension  of  the  agent's  own  susceptibility. 
See  pp.  161-2  and  309-10. 

2  Note  by  Mr.  Russell : — "I.e.,  she  was  at  home,  and  saw  her  people,  in  thought." 

VOL.  II.  2x2 

676  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

"  "When  I  inquired,  she  told  me  that  on  the  Saturday  evening,  about 
6  o'clock,  ray  sister  saw  me  quite  clearly  entering  the  room  in  which  she 
was  by  one  door,  passing  through  it,  opening  the  door  of  another  room 
where  my  mother  was,  and  shutting  the  door  behind  me.  She  rushed  after 
what  she  thought  was  I,  calling  out  my  name,  and  was  quite  stupefied  when 
she  did  not  see  me  with  my  mother.  My  mother  could  not  understand  my 
sister's  excitement.  They  looked  everywhere  for  me,  but  of  course  did  not 
find  me.     My  mother  was  very  miserable  ;  she  thought  I  might  be  dying. 

"  My  sister  who  had  seen  me  {i.e.,  my  apparition)  was  out  that  morning 
when  I  arrived.  I  sat  down  on  the  stairs,  to  watch,  when  she  came  in,  the 
effect  of  my  real  appearance  on  her.  When  she  looked  up  and  saw  me, 
sitting  motionless,  she  called  out  my  name,  and  nearly  fainted.  My  sister 
has  never  seen  anything  unearthly  either  before  that  or  afterwards ;  and  I 
have  never  made  any  such  experiments  again — nor  will  I,  as  the  sister 
that  saw  me  first  when  I  really  came  home  had  a  very  severe  illness  after- 
wards, caused  by  the  shock  to  her  nerves.  "  J.  M.  Russell." 

Mrs.  Russell  wrote  to  ask  her  sister  (Fraulein  Hoist,  of  7,  Wohler's 
Allee,  Altona,  Holstein)  if  she  recollected  the  occurrence,  and  has  copied 
an  extract  from  her  sister's  reply,  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation : — 

"  Of  course  I  remember  the  matter  as  well  as  if  it  had  happened  to-day. 
Pray  don't  come  appearing  to  me  again  ! "  Fraulein  Hoist  declines, 
however,  to  give  an  independent  account,  on  the  ground  of  dislike  to 
the  subject. 

I  proceed  to  some  more  hypnotic  cases.  The  following  is  an  appa- 
rently genuine,  though  isolated,  case  of  the  telepathic  influence  of 
will  on  a  hypnotic  "  subject,"  who  however  was  at  the  time  in  a  normal 
state.  {Gf.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  89-94.)  The  further  experiment  with  the 
same  "subject"  recalls  the  cases  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  96,  and  above,  pp. 
334-6.      We  received  the  account  in  May,   1886,  from  Mr.  E.  M. 

Clissold,  of  3,  Oxford  Square,  W. 

"  United  University  Club, 

"  Pall  Mall  East,  S.W. 
c  (687)  "  In  the  year  1878  (I  believe),  there  was  a  carpenter  (Gannaway) 

''^  ^  employed  by  me  to  mend  a  gate  in  my  kitchen  garden,  when  a  friend  of 
mine  (Moens)  called  upon  me,  and  the  conversation  turning  on  mesmerism, 
he  asked  me  if  I  knew  anything  about  it  myself.  On  my  replying  in  the 
affirmative,  he  said,  '  Can  you  mesmerise  anyone  at  a  distance  ? '  I  said 
that  I  had  never  tried  to  do  so,  but  that  there  was  a  man  now  in  the 
garden  upon  whom  I  could  easily  operate,  and  that  I  would  try  the 
experiment  with  this  man,  if  he  (Moens)  would  tell  me  what  to  do.  He 
then  said,  '  Form  an  impression  of  the  man  whom  you  intend  mesmerising 
in  your  mind,  and  then  wish  him  strongly  to  come  to  you.'  I  very  much 
doubted  the  success  of  the  enterprise,  but  I  followed  out  the  suggestion  of 
my  friend,  and  1  was  extremely  astonished  to  hear  the  steps  of  the  man, whom 
I  wished  to  appear,  running  after  me;  he  came  right  up  to  me  and  asked  me 
what  1  wanted  with  him.  I  must  explain  that  my  friend  was  walking 
with  me  previously  in  the  garden,  and  that  we  had  seen  and  talked  to  the 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PEACES.  677 

man  whom  I  subsequently  mesmerised,  but  that  when  I  wished  him 
to  come  to  me  I  was  out  of  his  sight,  behind  the  garden  wall,  some  100 
yards  distant,  and  that  I  had  neither  by  conversation  nor  otherwise  led  him 
to  believe  that  I  proposed  to  mesmerise  him. 

"  My  friend  (Moens)  is  dead ;  the  man  Gannaway  I  have  not  heard 
of  for  more  than  seven  years ;  but  I  have  this  day  written  to  him,  and 
asked  him,  if  he  remembers  the  incident  alluded  to,  to  write  to  me,  and  in 
his  own  language  describe  the  scene.  I  may  tell  you  that  I  have  not 
supplied  him  with  any  of  the  above  details,  but  have  left  him  (if  he  can) 
to  tell  his  own  story. 

"E.  M.  Olissold." 

Mr.  Gannaway  writes  back,  in  a  letter  which  Mr.  Clissold  has 
forwarded  to  us,  that  he  remembers  being  often  mesmerised  by  Mr. 
Clissold,  and  he  recalls  some  incidents  of  his  experiences ;  but  he  does  not 
recollect  this  particular  occasion.  One  sentence  of  his  letter  is  as 
follows  : — "  I  remember,  in  the  dining-room,  when  you  made  me  think  the 
same  as  you  were  thinking  about,  and  I  told  you  what  you  were  thinking 
of."  Mr.  Olissold  explains  that  this  was  an  occasion  when  the  Hon. 
Auberon  Herbert  was  present,  and  he  thus  describes  it : — 

"June  1,  1886. 

"  Gannaway  was  mesmerised,  and  stood  in  one  corner  of  my  dining- 
room.  Herbert  sat  at  the  table,  and  wrote  on  a  paper  a  subject  on  which 
he  wished  me  to  think.  Gannaway  instantly  told  me,  when  I  asked  him, 
what  the  thought  was  about.     Herbert  wrote  ; — 

"  '  1.  I  see  a  house  in  flames. 

"  '  2.  I  see  a  woman  looking  out  of  a  window. 

"  '  3.  She  has  a  child  in  her  arms. 

"  '  4.   She  throws  it  out  of  the  window. 

"  '  5.  Is  it  hurt  ? '  &c.,  &c. 

"  Gannaway  became  much  excited,  as  he  appeared  to  witness  these 
scenes  acted  before  him.  I  am  conscious  that  if  there  had  been 
mala  fides  on  my  part,  there  was  nothing  in  the  experiment ;  but  it  was 
quite  honestly  conducted,  and  we  were  all  of  us  very  much  surprised  at 
the  wonderful  accuracy  with  which  Gannaway  interpreted  my  thoughts." 

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Auberon  Herbert,  asking  him  if  he  remembered 
participating  in  an  experiment  in  thought-transference,  made  with  Mr. 
Clissold's  "  subject,"  Gannaway,  in  which  the  ideas  transferred  related  to 
a  conflagration.     He  replied  : — 

"  Ashley  Arnewood  Farm,  Lymington. 

"June  22nd,  1886. 

"  My  recollection  is  as  follows ;  some  of  the  details  have  escaped  me. 
I  thought  of  a  house  on  fire.  Gannaway  (a  carpenter,  I  think),  on  my 
asking  him  what  I  saw,  answered  quite  rightly.  I  then  asked  him  again 
what  I  saw,  and  he  answered  quite  rightly,  '  Fire-engine  coming  up.' 
Then  the  conversation  went  on  (I  have  shortened  it).  I.  '  Ah  !  some- 
thing has  happened  !  what  is  it  ? '  G.  '  A  horse,  belonging  to  the  fire- 
engine,  has  fallen  down.'  (Quite  right.)  My  memory  is  quite  distinct  up 
to  this  point  as  to  the  questions  and  answers,  though  I  cannot  exactly 
remember  the  part  Gannaway    and    Mr.   Olissold    took  respectively.     I 

678        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

remember  very  distinctly  I  thought  of  and  asked  these  questions,  and  I 
believe  it  was  Gannaway  himself  who  answered  them  directly  to  me.  The 
next  point  was  that,  in  answer  to  what  I  saw,  he  said  they  were  throwing 
feather-beds  out  of  a  top-storey  window — this  also  was  perfectly  right — 
but  on  this  point  my  memory  is  not  so  clear  as  on  the  first  three  points. 
I  have  as  clear  and  positive  a  memory  as  a  man  could  have  about  the 
three  first  points,  (1)  fire,  (2)  fire-engine,  (3)  horse  falling  down.  They 
were  all  quite  fairly  asked,  and  quite  fairly  answered ;  and  I  believe  I 
might  add  to  them  the  fourth  point,  '  the  feather  bed,'  but  I  cannot  speak 
positively  on  this.  Then  comes  a  curious  point.  I  imagined  an  entirely 
difierent  scene — I  cannot  recall  it,  but  it  was  to  do  with  a  wood^ — and  his 
power  seemed  to  fail  entirely.  He  made  quite  wrong  answers.  I  have  no 
doubt  about  the  truthfulness  of  the  whole  proceedings.  One  night  I  had 
mesmerised  him,  and  told  him  he  was  in  a  boat,  and  attacked  by  a  shark. 
If  I  had  allowed  it,  he  would  have  almost  battered  himself  to  pieces  in 
striking  with  both  arms  upon  the  floor,  where  he  thought  the  shark  was.^ 
He  was  an  extraordinary  man.  It  was  enough,  when  you  knew  him,  to 
look  in  his  eyes  to  have  influence  over  him.  Kindly  tell  Mr.  Clissold  I 
most  fully  corroborate  his  statement  as  far  as  I  know  it. 

"  AuBERON  Herbert." 

Another  gentleman  who  was  present  on  this  occasion  was  Mr.  A.  T. 
T.  Peterson,  of  Arnewood  Towers,  Lymington,  who  believes  that  it  was 
he  who  drew  up  the  programme  of  the  experiment.  His  account  is  as 
follows  : — 

"June  24th,  1886. 

"I  drew  out  a  programme  in  writing  of  what  I  wished  the  operator 
to  think  without  speaking,  in  order  to  try  the  mere  power  of  the  operator 
over  the  patient.  On  this  occasion  Herbert  was  the  operator,  Gannaway 
the  patient.  Programme. — A  fire-engine  with  two  horses  galloping  on  a 
public  road.  One  of  the  horses  falls  down  ;  gets  up  again,  and  on  they  go. 
A  house  on  a  rising  ground  on  the  left  on  fire.  A  woman  in  her  night- 
dress, with  a  baby  in  her  arms,  imploring  for  help  from  the  first  floor. 
People  are  throwing  beds  out  of  some  of  the  windows  of  the  rooms, 
which  are  taken  to  opposite  where  the  lady  was.  The  child  is  thrown  out 
and  caught  all  right.     The  woman  jumps  out,  and  is  caught  and  saved. 

"  This  paper  I  handed  to  Herbert,  requesting  him  not  to  say  a  word, 
which  request  he  obeyed.  He  put  Gannaway  into  trance,  and  Gannaway 
acted  the  part  [of  spectator,  presumably,]  to  the  very  letter. 

"  A.  T.  T.  Peterson." 

[Mr.  Peterson  goes  on  to  describe  another  equally  successful  experi- 
ment where  the  picture  transferred  was  a  fishing-scene.  Possibly  this 
preceded  the  failure  which  Mr.  Herbert  mentions.] 

It  is  in  connection  with  hypnotism  that  the  most  striking 
telepathic  results  have  been  obtained,  in  the  recent  rapid  develop- 
ment of  "  psychical  research  "  among  French  men  of  science.     The 

1  It  is  of  course  important  to  distinguish  this  phenomenon  (which  is  of  a  very  ordinary 
type,  and  is  merely  of  interest  here  as  indicating  the  reality  of  the  hypnotic  state, )  from 
the  telepathic  result  before  described. 

IN-  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  679 

cases  here  given  were  reported  to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie 
Physiologique  towards  the  close  of  last  year,  and  were  published 
in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  February  and  for  April,  1886. 
The  observations  themselves,  and  the  circumstances  of  their 
publication,  mark  a  distinct  step  in  the  scientific  recognition  of 
telepathic  phenomena  on  the  Continent.  The  first  report — Note  sur 
quelques  Phenomenes  de  Somnambulisme — is  from  Professor  Pierre 
Janet,  of  Havre,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  S.P.P. 

(688)  "  Grace  a  I'obligeance  d'un  medecin  bien  connu  de  la  ville  du 
Havre,  M.  le  docteur  Gibert,  j'ai  pu  pendant  une  quinzaine  de  jours 
observer  certains  phenomenes  curieux  de  somnambulisme.     .     . 

"  Le  sujet  sur  lequel  ces  experiences  ont  ete  faites  est  une  brave  femme 
de  la  campagne,  que  nous  designerons  sous  le  nom  de  Mme.  B.  Elle  a 
toujours  eu,  autant  du  moins  que  Ton  pent  le  savoir,  une  tres  bonne  sante, 
et  en  particulier  elle  ne  presents  a  I'etat  normal  aucun  des  signes  de 
I'hysterie.  Elle  est  seulement  sujette  depuis  son  enfance  a  des  acces  de 
somnambulisme  naturel,  pendant  lesquels  elle  pent  parler  et  decrire  les 
singuli^res  hallucinations  qu'elle  parait  eprouver.  Son  caractere  pendant 
sa  vie  ordinaire  est  tres  honnete,  tres  simple  et  surtout  tres  timide ; 
quoique  son  intelligence  paraisse  fort  juste,  Mme.  B.  n'a  re^u  aucune 
instruction,  elle  ne  salt  pas  ecrire  et  epelle  k  peine  quelques  lettres. 
Plusieurs  medecins  ont  deja,  parait-il,  voulu  faire  sur  elle  quelques  experi- 
ences, mais  elle  a  toujours  refuse  leurs  propositions.  Ce  n'est  que  sur  la 
demande  de  M.  Gibert  qu'elle  a  consent!  a  venir  passer  quelques  jours  au 
Havre,  du  24  septembre  au  14  octobre  1885,  et  c'est  pendant  ce  court 
sejour  que  nous  avons  eu  I'occasion  de  I'observer. 

"  II  est  assez  facile  de  mettre  Mme.  B.  en  etat  de  somnambulisme  arti- 
ficiel ;  il  suffit  pour  cela  de  lui  tenir  la  main  en  la  serrant  legerement  pen- 
dant quelques  instants." 

The  usual  symptoms  of  deep  hypnotic  trance  presented  themselves, 
including  complete  insensibility  to  light,  sound,  and  pain. 

"  Neanmoins  il  est  un  genre  d'excitation  auquel  Mme.  B.  reste  sensible 
pendant  ce  sommeil.  Celui  qui  I'a  endormie,  et  celui-la  seul,  a  le  pouvoir 
de  provoquer  a  volonte  une  contracture  partielle  ou  generale.  II  suifit, 
par  exemple,  qu'il  place  un  doigt  dans  I'extension  forcee  pour  qu'il  reste 
raide  comme  un  morceau  de  bois,  et  une  personne  etrangere  ne  parvient 
pas  a  le  flechir.  Si  a  ce  moment  le  magnetiseur  touche  meme  legerement 
le  doigt  contracture,  il  s'assouplit  instantanement.  Pour  provoquer  la 
contracture  generale,  il  suffit  que  le  magnetiseur  place  sa  main  etendue  k 
une  petite  distance  au-devant  du  corps." 

Other  persons  could  not  produce  these  effects  in  the  slightest  degree ; 
and  in  several  other  ways  the  person  who  had  hypnotised  the  subject 
retained,  during  her  trance,  a  quite  peculiar  influence  over  her. 

After  about  10  minutes  of  deep  sleep,  Mme.  B.  would  wake  into  a 
somnambulic  state,  in  which  she  was  completely  sensible  to  impressions, 
and  could  answer  questions. 

680  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

"  Mais  le  caractere,  ainsi  qu'on  I'a  frequemment  remarque,  n'est  plus 
du  tout  le  meme  qu'a  I'etat  de  veille.  Au  lieu  d'etre  simple  et  timide, 
Mme.  B.  est  devenue  subitement  tres  hardie,  tres  vive,  pleine  de  caprices 
et  toute  disposee  a  se  moquer  de  tout  le  monde,  quelquefois  avec  esprit." 

From  this  stage  she  could  be  wakened  to  the  normal  state  by  the 
person  who  had  hypnotised  her,  but  hy  no  one  else  (see  "Vol.  I.,  p.  88, 
note);  if  not  wakened  she  soon  relapsed  again  into  the  state  of  deep  sleep. 

The  first  phenomena  suggestive  of  "  psychical  "  influence  presented 
themselves  in  the  process  of  hypnotisation. 

"  M.  Gibert  tenait  un  jour  la  main  de  Mme.  B.  pour  I'endormir ;  mais 
il  etait  visiblement  preoccupe  et  songeait  a  autre  chose  qu'a  ce  qu'il 
faisait :  le  sommeil  ne  se  produisit  pas  du  tout.  Cette  experience  repetee 
par  moi  de  diverses  manieres  nous  a  prouve  que  pour  endormir  Mme.  B. 
il  fallait  concentrer  fortement  sa  pensee  sur  I'ordre  du  sommeil  qu'on  lui 
donnait,  et  que  plus  la  pensee  de  I'operateur  etait  distraite,  plus  le 
sommeil  etait  difiicile  a  provoquer.  Cette  influence  de  la  pensee  de 
I'operateur,  quelque  extraordinaire  que  cela  paraisse,  est  ici  tout  k  fait 
preponderante,  a  un  tel  point  qu'elle  peut  remplacer  toutes  les  autres.  Si 
on  presse  la  main  de  Mme.  B.  sans  songer  a  I'endormir,  on  n'arrive  pas  a 
provoquer  le  sommeil ;  au  contraire,  si  Ton  songe  a  I'endormir  sans  lui 
presser  la  main,  on  y  reussit  parfaitement." 

Experiments  of  this  sort  were  often  repeated  ;  but  it  is  impossible,  as  M, 
Janet  fully  recognises,  absolutely  to  exclude  the  hypothesis  that  the 
hypnotisation  was  due  to  some  suggestion  of  the  purpose  in  view,  uncon- 
sciously conveyed  by  gesture,  or  attitude,  or  mere  silence  and  appearance 
of  expectation.  This  objection  would  not  apply  to  other  cases  in  which 
M.  Gibert,  without  warning,  and  at  a  moment  then  and  there  fixed  on  by 
M.  Janet  or  another  friend,  produced  a  distinct  effect  on  the  subject  from 
another  part  of  the  town — the  fact  being  immediately  verified  by  M. 
Janet ;  who  on  one  occasion  found  that  the  "  subject,"  on  feeling  the 
impulse  to  sleep,  had  only  prevented  herself  from  yielding  to  it  by  putting 
her  hands  in  cold  water  ;  and  on  two  others,  found  her  in  a  deep  trance 
from  which  only  M.  Gibert  could  wake  her.  On  the  last  of  these  occasions, 
M.  Gibert,  at  a  distance,  further  willed  three  times,  at  intervals  of  5 
minutes,  the  performance  of  certain  actions  during  the  trance,  which  the 
entranced  "  subject"  began  to  execute,  though  obviously  rebelling  against 
the  impulse,  and  ending  with  a  laugh,  "  Vous  ne  pouvez  pas  . 
si  peu,  si  peu  que  vous  soyez  distrait,  je  me  rattrape." 

"  Mais  les  suggestions  mentales,  car  ce  mot  me  parait  ici  bien  a  sa 
place,  peuvent  etre  faites  sur  Mme.  B.  d'une  autre  maniere  et  avoir  un 
tout  autre  succes.  On  reussit  peu,  comme  nous  I'avons  dit,  quand  on  lui 
commande  d'executer  I'ordre  immddiatement  pendant  le  sommeil ;  on 
reussit  beaucoup  mieux  quand  on  lui  commande  mentalement  une  action  a 
executer  plus  tard  quelque  temps  apres  le  reveil.  Le  8  octobre  M.  Gibert 
fit  une  suggestion  de  ce  genre  :  sans  prononcer  aucun  mot  il  approcha  son 
front  de  celui  de  Mme.  B.  pendant  le  sommeil  lethargique,  et  pendant 
quelques  instants  concentra  sa  pensee  sur  I'ordre  qu'il  lui  donnait. 
Mme.  B.  parut  ressentir  une  impression  penible  et  poussa  un  gemissement ; 
d'ailleurs  le  sommeil  ne  parut  pas  du  tout  §tre  derange.     M.  Gibert  ne  dit 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  681 

a  personne  I'ordre  qu'il  avait  donn^  et  se  contenta  de  I'ecrire  sur  un  papier 
qu'il  mit  sous  enveloppe.  Le  lendemain  je  revins  aupres  de  Mme.  B.  pour 
voir  I'effet  de  cette  suggestion  qui  devait  s'executer  entre  11  heures  et 
midi.  All  heures  1/2  cette  femme  manifeste  la  plus  grande  agitation, 
quitte  la  cuisine  ou  elle  etait,  et  va  dans  une  chambre  prendre  un  verre 
qu'elle  emporte ;  puis,  surmontant  sa  timidite,  se  decide  a  entrer  dans  le 
salon  ou  je  me  trouvais,  et  toute  emue  demande  si  on  ne  I'a  pas  appelee  ; 
sur  ma  reponse  negative  elle  sort  et  continue  plusieurs  fois  a  monter  de  la 
cuisine  au  salon  sans  rien  apporter  d'ailleurs.  Elle  ne  fit  rien  de  plus  ce 
jour-la,  car  bientot  elle  tomba  endormie  a  distance  par  M.  Gibert.  Yoici 
ce  qu'elle  raconta  pendant  son  sommeil :  '  Je  tremblais  quand  je  suis 
venue  vous  demander  si  on  m'avait  appelee — il  fallaitqueje  vienne — 
c'etait  pas  commode  de  venir  avec  ce  plateau — pourquoi  veut-on  me  faire 
porter  des  verres — qu'est-ce  que  j'allais  dire,  n'est-ce  pas — je  ne  veux  pas 
que  vous  fassiez  cela — ^il  fallait  bien  que  je  dise  quelque  chose  en  venant.' 
En  ouvrant  I'enveloppe,  je  vis  que  M.  Gibert  avait  commande  hier  a 
Mme.  B.  'd'ofirir  un  verre  d'eau  a  chacun  de  ces  messieurs.'  Ici  encore  il 
faut  reconnaitre  que  I'experience  n'avait  pas  entierement  reussi,  la  sugges- 
tion n'avait  pas  ete  executee ;  peut-on  nier  du  moins  qu'elle  n'ait  ete 
comprise  1 

"  Voici  maintenant  une  experience  plus  significative.  Le  10  octobre, 
nous  convenons,  M.  Gibert  et  moi,  de  faire  la  suggestion  suivante : 
'  Demain  a  midi  fermer  a  clef  les  portes  de  la  maison.'  J'inscrivis  la 
suggestion  sur  un  papier  que  je  gardais  sur  moi  et  que  je  ne  voulus 
communiquer  a  personne.  M.  Gibert  fit  la  suggestion  comme  precedem- 
ment  en  approchant  son  front  de  celui  de  Mme.  B.  Le  lendemain  quand 
j'arrivai  a  midi  moins  un  quart  je  trouvai  la  maison  barricad^e  et  la  porte 
fermee  a  clef.  Renseignements  pris,  c'etait  Mme.  B.  qui  venait  de  la 
fermer  ;  quand  je  lui  demandai  pourquoi  elle  avait  fait  cet  acte  singulier, 
elle  me  repondit :  '  Je  me  sentais  tres  fatiguee,  et  je  ne  voulais  pas  que 
vous  puissiez  entrer  pour  m'endormir.'  M.  Bernheim  et  M.  Richet  ont 
deja  parle  de  ces  personnes  qui  inventent  des  raisons  pour  s'expliquer  a 
elles-memes  un  acte  qu'elles  font  ne'cessairement  sous  I'influence  d'une 
suggestion.  Mme.  B.  etait  a  ce  moment  tres  agitee  ;  elle  continua  a  errer 
dans  le  jardin,  et  je  la  vis  cueillir  une  rose  et  aller  visiter  la  bolte  aux 
lettres  placee  pres  de  la  porte  d'entree.  Ces  actes  sont  sans  importance, 
mais  il  est  curieux  de  remarquer  que  c'etait  precisement  les  actes  que  nous 
avions  un  moment  songe  a  lui  commander  la  veille.  Nous  nous  etions 
decides  a  en  ordonner  un  autre,  celui  de  fermer  les  portes,  mais  la  pensee 
des  premiers  avait  sans  doute  occupe  I'esprit  de  M.  Gibert  pendant  qu'il 
commandait,  et  elle  avait  eu  aussi  son  influence. 

"  Voici  une  troisieme  experience  qui  ne  meriterait  pas  d'etre  racontee, 
car  elle  reussit  moins  bien  que  la  precedente,  mais  elle  est  interessante 
cependant,  car  elle  montre  combien  le  sujet  peut  resister  a  ces  suggestions 
mentales.  Le  13  octobre,  M.  Gibert  lui  ordonne  toujours  par  la  pensee 
d'ouvrir  un  parapluie  le  lendemain  a  midi  et  de  faire  deux  fois  le  tour  du 
jardin.  Le  lendemain  elle  fut  tres  agitde  a  midi,  fit  deux  fois  le  tour  du 
jardin,  mais  n'ouvrit  pas  de  parapluie.  Je  I'endormis  peu  de  temps  apres 
pour  calmer  une  agitation  qui  devenait  de  plus  en  plus  grande.  Ses 
premiers  mots  furent  ceux-ci :  '  Pourquoi  m'avez-vous  fait  marcher  tout 

682        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

autour  du  jardin — j'avais  I'air  bete — encore  s'il  avait  fait  le  temps  d'hier 
par  example — mais  aujourd'hui  j'aurais  ete  tout  a  fait  ridicule.'  Ce 
jour-la  il  faisait  fort  beau  et  la  veille  ii  pleuvait  beaucoup  :  elle  n'avait 
pas  voulu  ouvrir  un  parapluie  par  un  beau  temps  de  peur  de  paraitre 
ridicule.  La  suggestion  avait  au  moins  ete  comprise  si  elle  n'avait  pas  ete 
ex^cutee  entierement." 

In  April,  1886,  Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  had  the  opportunity 
of  witnessing  some  further  experiments  made  with  this  "  subject."  ^ 
The  times  at  which  the  trials  were  made  were  always  chosen  without 
premeditation.  It  is  true  that  Mme.  B.  had  come  to  Havre  for  a  few 
weeks  for  the  purpose  of  hypnotic  experiments,  and  may  therefore  have 
had  a  general  idea  that  attempts  to  influence  her  from  a  distance 
were  likely  to  be  made ;  but  the  closeness  of  the  coincidences,  coupled 
with  the  fact  that  she  is  not  liable  to  go  into  spontaneous  trances  at 
other  times,  makes  it  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  the 
results  were  due  to  accident. 

(1)  "  In  the  evening  of  April  22,  1886,"  says  Mr.  Myers,  "  we  dined  at 
M.  Gibert's,  and  in  the  evening  M.  Gibert  made  an  attempt  to  put 
Mme.  B.  to  sleep  at  a  distance  (from  his  house  in  the  Rue  Sery  to  the 
Pavilion,  Rue  de  la  Ferme),  and  to  bring  her  to  his  own  house  by  force  of 
will.  At  8.55  he  retired  to  his  study  ;  and  MM.  Ochorowicz,  Marillier, 
Janet,  and  A.  T.  Myers  went  to  the  Pavilion,  where  Mme.  B.  was  staying, 
and  waited  outside  in  the  street.  At  9.22  Dr.  Myers  observed  Mme.  B. 
coming  half-way  out  of  the  garden-gate,  and  again  retreating.  Those  who 
saw  her  more  closely  observed  that  she  was  plainly  in  the  somnambulic 
state,  and  was  wandering  about  and  muttering.  At  9.25  she  came 
out  (with  eyes  persistently  closed,  so  far  as  could  be  seen),  walked 
quickly  past  MM.  Janet  and  Marillier,  without  noticing  them,  and  made 
for  M.  Gibert's  house,  though  not  by  the  usual  or  shortest  route.  (It 
appeared  afterwards  that  the  honne  had  seen  her  go  into  the  salon  at  8.45, 
and  issue  thence  asleep  at  9.15  :  had  not  looked  in  between  those  times.) 
She  avoided  lamp-posts,  vehicles,  &c.,  but  crossed  and  re-crossed  the  street 
repeatedly.  No  one  went  in  front  of  her  or  spoke  to  her.  After  eight  or 
ten  minutes  she  grew  much  more  uncertain  in  gait,  and  paused  as  though 
she  would  fall.  Dr.  Myers  noted  the  moment  in  the  Rue  Paure ;  it 
was  9.35.  At  about  9.40  she  grew  bolder,  at  9.45  reached  the  street  in 
front  of  M.  Gibert's  house.  There  she  met  him,  but  did  not  notice  him, 
and  walked  into  his  house,  where  she  rushed  hurriedly  from  room  to  room 
on  the  ground-floor.  M.  Gibert  had  to  take  her  hand  before  she  recognised 
him.     She  then  grew  calm. 

"  M.  Gibert,  before  hearing  Dr.  Myers'  statement,  said  that  from  8.55 
to  9.20  he  thought  intently  about  her  ;  from  9.20  to  9.35  he  thought  more 
feebly;  at  9.35  he  gave  the  experiment  up,  and  began  to  play  billiards; 
but  in  a  few  minutes  began  to  will  her  again.  It  thus  appeared  that  his 
visit  to  the  billiard-room  had  coincided  with  her  hesitation  and  stumbling 

1  A  fuller  account  of  these  experiments  will  be  found  in  Part  X.  of  the  Proceedings 
of  the  S.P.R. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  683 

in  the  street.     She  may,  however,  have  hesitated  merely  because  she  was 
not  sure  of  the  way. 

(2)  "  On  April  23,  M.  Janet  lunched  in  our  company,  and  retired  to 
his  own  house  at  4.30  (a  time  chosen  by  lot)  to  try  to  put  her  to  sleep 
from  thence.  At  5.5  we  all  entered  the  salon  of  the  Pavilion,  and  found 
her  asleep  with  shut  eyes,  but  sewing  vigorously  (being  in  that  stage  in 
which  movements  once  suggested  are  automatically  continued).  Passing 
into  the  talkative  state,  she  said  to  M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  fait 
dormir  a  quatre  heures  et  demi.'  The  impression  as  to  the  hour  may  have 
been  a  suggestion  received  from  M.  Janet's  mind.  We  tried  to  make  her 
believe  that  it  was  M.  Gibert  who  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  but  she  main- 
tained that  she  had  felt  that  it  was  M.  Janet. 

(3)  "On  April  24  the  whole  party  chanced  to  meet  at  M.  Janet's 
house  at  3  p.m.,  and  he  then,  at  my  suggestion,  entered  his  study  to  will 
that  Mme.  B.  should  sleep.  We  waited  in  his  garden,  and  at  3.20  pro- 
ceeded together  to  the  Pavilion,  which  I  entered  first  at  3.30,  and  found 
Mme.  B.  profoundly  asleep  over  her  sewing,  having  ceased  to  sew. 
Becoming  talkative,  she  said  to  M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez 
commandee.'     She  said  that  she  fell  asleep  at  3.5  p.m." 

Writing  from  Havre  on  June  18,  1886,  M.  Janet  gives  the  following 
brief  summary  of  the  results  obtained  in  the  particular  experiment  of 
inducing  "  sommeil  a  distance,"  during  this  visit  of  Mme.  B.  to  Havre  : — 

"  ISTe  parlons  pas  des  suggestions  de  sommeil  faites  par  la  pensee  en  se 
tenant  devant  le  sujet,  ou  meme  dans  une  autre  piece  de  la  maison  ;  on 
n'est  jamais  assez  certain  que  le  sujet  ne  soit  pas  du  tout  prevenu.  II  ne 
s'agit  ici  que  des  experiences  tenfcees  de  loin,  de  chez  M.  Gibert  ou  de  chez 
moi,  c'est-a-dire,  a  500  metres  au  moins  du  pavilion  ou  se  trouvait  Mme. 
B.  Les  experiences  faites  dans  ces  conditions,  soit  par  M.  Gibert,  soit  par 
moi,  sont  aii  nombre  de  21  pendant  ce  second  sejour  de  Mme.  B.  au 
Havre.  Je  ne  compte  pas  un  essai  fait  au  milieu  de  la  nuit  dans  des 
conditions  deplorables.  Considerons  comme  echecs  toutes  les  experiences 
dans  lesquelles  le  sujet  n'a  pas  ete  trouve  endormi  quand  on  entrait  dans 
le  pavilion,  ou  meme  celles  dans  lesquelles  le  sujet  a  mis  plus  d'un 
quart  d'heure  a  s'endormir  apres  I'instant  de  la  suggestion  mentale. 
Le  nombre  de  ces  insucces  a  ete  de  6,  et  chacun  d'eux  peut  avoir  une  ex- 
plication precise.  II  reste  a  retenir  15  succes  precis  et  complets,  ou  15 
coincidences  extraordinaires,  suivant  que  I'on  voudra  les  comprendre  d'une 
maniere  ou  d'une  autre." 

The  next  record  is  from  M.  J.  Hericourt,  of  50,  Rue  de  Miromenil, 
Paris. 

(689)  "  L'observation  que  je  rapporte  ici  date  de  I'annee  1878,  epoque  a 
laquelle  je  I'ai  communiquee  a  mon  ami  M.  Charles  Richet,  qui  I'a  gardee 
fidelement  et  prudemment  dans  ses  cartons,  pour  des  raisons  faciles  a 
comprendre. 

"  II  s'agit  d'une  jeune  femme  de  vingt-quatre  ans,  d'origine  espagnole, 
veuve  et  mere  d'une  petite  fille  de  cinq  ans.  .  .  .  L'examen  le  plus 
minutieux  n'a  pu  faire  decouvrir  chez  elle  aucune  tare  hysterique, 
personnelle  ou  hereditaire." 

M.  Hericourt  easily  succeeded  in  hypnotising  Mme.  D.  on  the  first  trial. 

684  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

"  J'endormais  Mme.  D.  avec  une  facilite  chaque  jour  plus  grande.  En 
efFet,  apres  quinze  jours  environ  de  cet  entrainement  special,  je  n'avais 
plus  besoin  pour  obtenir  ce  resultat  ni  du  contact  ni  du  regard  :  il  me 
sufiisait  de  vouloir,  tout  en  m'abstenant  de  toute  espece  de  geste  qui  put 
traliir  mon  intention.  Etait-elle  en  conversation  animee  au  milieu  de 
plusieurs  personnes,  tandis  que  je  me  tenais  dans  quelque  coin  dans 
Tattitude  de  la  plus  complete  indifference,  que  je  la  voyais  bientot,  a  mon 
gre,  lutter  contre  le  sommeil  qui  I'envahissait,  et  le  subir  d^finitivement, 
ou  reprendre  le  cours  de  ses  idees,  selon  que  moi-meme  je  continuais  ou 
cessais  d'appliquer  ma  pensee  au  resultat  a  obtenir. 

"  Et  meme  je  pouvais  regarder  fixement  mon  sujet,  lui  serrer  les  pouces 
ou  les  poignets,  et  faire  toutes  les  passes  imaginables  des  magnetiseurs  de 
profession ;  si  ma  volonte  n'etait  pas  de  I'endormir,  il  restait  parfaitement 
^veille,  et  convaincu  de  mon  impuissance. 

"  Mais  bientot,  ce  ne  fut  plus  seulement  d'une  extremite  a  I'autre  d'une 
chambre  que  je  songeai  a  exercer  mon  action ;  d'une  piece  a  une  autre, 
d'une  maison  a  une  autre  maison,  situee  dans  une  rue  plus  ou  moins 
<^loignee,  le  meme  resultat  fut  encore  obtenu. 

"  Les  circonstances  dans  lesquelles  j'exergai  ainsi  pour  la  premiere  fois 
cette  action  a  longue  distance  meritent  d'etre  rapportees  avec  quelques 
details.  Etant  un  jour  dans  mon  cabinet  (j'habitais  alors  Perpignan), 
I'idee  me  vint  d'essayer  d'endormir  Mme.  D.,  que  j'avais  tout  lieu  de  croire 
chez  elle,  et  qui  habitait  dans  une  rue  distante  environ  de  300  metres  de 
la  mienne.  J'etais  d'ailleurs  Men  eloigne  de  croire  au  succes  d'une  pareille 
experience.  II  dtait  trois  heures  de  I'apres-midi,  je  me  mis  a  me  promener 
de  long  en  large,  en  pensant  tres  vivement  au  resultat  que  je  voulais 
obtenir ;  et  j'etais  absorbe  par  cet  exercice,  quand  on  vint  me  chercher 
pour  voir  des  malades.  Les  cas  etant  pressants,  j'oubliai  momentanement 
Mme.  D.  que  je  devais  d'ailleurs  rencontrer  vers  quatre  heures  et  demie 
sur  une  promenade  publique.  M'y  etant  rendu  a  cette  heure,  je  fus  tres 
etonne  de  ne  I'y  point  voir,  mais  je  pensai  qu'apres  tout,  mon  experience 
avait  bien  pu  reussir ;  aussi,  vers  cinq  heures,  pour  ne  rien  compromettre 
et  retablir  les  choses  en  leur  etat  normal,  dans  le  cas  ou  cet  etat  eut  et^ 
eifectivement  trouble,  par  acquit  de  conscience,  je  songeai  a  reveiller  mon 
sujet,  aussi  vigoureusement  que  tout  a  I'heure  j'avais  songe  a  I'endormir. 

"  Or,  ayant  eu  I'occasion  de  voir  Mme.  D.  dans  la  soiree,  voici  ce 
qu'elle  me  raconta,  d'une  maniere  absolument  spontanee,  et  sans  que  j'eusse 
fait  la  moindre  allusion  a  son  absence  de  la  promenade.  Vers  trois  heures, 
comme  elle  etait  dans  sa  chambre  a  coucher,  elle  avait  ete  prise  subitement 
d'une  envie  invincible  de  dormir  ;  ses  paupieres  se  faisaient  de  plomb,  et 
ses  jambes  se  d^robaient — jamais  elle  ne  dormait  dans  la  journee — au  point 
qu'elle  avait  eu  a  peine  la  force  de  passer  dans  son  salon,  pour  s'y  laisser 
tomber  sur  un  canape.  Sa  domestique  etant  alors  entree  pour  lui  parler, 
I'avait  trouvee,  comme  elle  le  lui  raconta  plus  tard,  pale,  la  peau  froide, 
sans  mouvement,  comme  morte,  selon  ses  expressions.  Justement  effray^e, 
elle  s'etait  mise  a  la  secouer  vigoureusement,  mais  sans  parvenir  cependant 
a  autre  chose  qu'a  lui  faire  ouvrir  les  yeux.  A  ce  moment,  Mme.  D.  me 
dit  qu'elle  n'avait  eu  conscience  que  d'eprouver  un  violent  mal  de  tete  qui, 
parait-il,  avait  disparu  subitement  vers  cinq  heures.  O'etait  pr^cisement 
le  moment  ou  j'avais  pense  a  la  reveiller. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  685 

"  Oe  recit  ay  ant  ete  spontane,  je  le  repete,  il  n'y  avait  plus  de  doute  a 
conserver  :  ma  tentative  avait  certainement  reussi.  Afin  de  pouvoir  la 
renouveler  dans  des  conditions  aussi  probantes  que  possible,  je  ne  mis  pas 
Mme.  D.  au  courant  de  ce  que  j 'avals  fait,  et  j'entrepris  toute  une  serie 
d'experiences  dont  je  rendis  temoins  nombre  de  personnes,  qui  voulurent 
bien  en  fixer  les  conditions  et  contrdler  les  resultats.  Parmi  ces 
personnes,  je  citerai  le  medecin-major  et  un  capitaine  du  bataillon  de 
chasseurs  dont  j'etais  alors  I'aide-major.  Toutes  ces  experiences  se 
ramenent  en  somme  au  type  suivant. 

"  Etant  dans  un  salon  avec  Mme.  D.,  je  lui  disais  que  j'allais  essayer 
de  I'endormir  d'une  piece  voisine,  les  portes  etant  fermees.  Je  passais 
alors  dans  cette  piece,  ou  je  restais  quelques  minutes  avec  la  pensee 
bien  nette  de  la  laisser  eveillee.  Quand  je  revenais,  je  trouvais  en 
efiet  Mme.  D.  dans  son  etat  normal,  et  se  moquant  de  mon  insucces.  Un 
instant  plus  tard,  ou  un  autre  jour,  je  passais  dans  la  meme  piece  voisine 
sous  un  pretexte  quelconque,  mais  cette  fois  avec  I'intention  bien  arretee 
de  produire  le  sommeil,  et  apres  une  minute  a  peine,  le  resultat  le  plus 
complet  etait  obtenu.  On  n'invoquera  ici  aucune  suggestion  autre  que  la 
suggestion  mentale,  puisque  V attention  expectante,  mise  en  jeu  dans  toute  sa 
force,  lors  de  I'experience  precedente,  avait  ete  absolument  sans  action. 
Les  conditions  de  ces  experiences,  qui  se  contr61ent  reciproquement,  sont 
d'une  simplicite  et  d'une  valeur  sur  lesquelles  j 'attire  I'attention,  parce 
qu'elles  constituent  une  sorte  de  schema  a  suivre  pour  la  demonstration. 

"  Mme.  D.  pretendait  que,  toutes  les  fois  que  je  pensais  a  elle,  elle 
ressentait  une  vive  douleur  dans  la  region  precordiale  ;  c'etait  d'ailleurs 
cette  meme  douleur  qu'elle  eprouvait  encore  quand  les  seances  de  somnam- 
bulisme  se  prolongeaient,  et  qui  me  determinait  a  y  mettre  fin.  De  fait, 
apres  convention  prealable,  si  je  voulais  que  Mme.  D.  descendit  de  chez 
elle,  je  n'avais  qu'a  m'arreter  dans  une  rue  voisine  de  la  sienne,  et  a  lui  en 
donner  I'ordre  mentalement.  Je  ne  tardais  pas  a  la  voir  arriver,  et 
toujours  elle  me  disait  que  sa  dotdeur  au  coeur  lui  avait  indique  ma 
presence." 

The  next  account,  from  Dr.  E.  Gley,  of  37,  Rue  Claude  Bernard, 
Paris,  records  some  observations  of  his  friend,  Dr.  Dusart,  (published 
in  the  Tribune  Medicate  in  May,  1875),  on  a  girl  of  14,  whom  he 
found  suffering  from  obstinate  hysterical  attacks,  and  for  whom  he 
easily  procured  sleep  by  a  simple  hypnotic  process. 

(690)  "  J'avais  observe  que,  quand,  en  faisant  des  passes,  je  me  laissais 
distraire  par  la  conversation  des  parents,  je  ne  parvenais  jamais  a 
produire  un  sommeil  suffisant,  meme  apres  un  long  espace  de  temps.  II 
fallait  done  faire  une  large  part  a  I'intervention  de  ma  volonte.  Mais 
celle-ci  suffirait-elle  sans  le  secours  d'aucune  manifestation  exterieure? 
Voila  ce  que  je  voulus  savoir. 

"  A  cet  efiet  j'arrive  un  jour  avant  I'heure  fixee  la  veille  pour  le 
reveil,  et,  sans  regarder  la  malade,  sans  faire  un  geste,  je  lui  donne 
mentalement  I'ordre  de  s'eveiller  :  je  suis  aussitdt  obei.  A  ma  volonte,  le 
delire  et  les  cris  eommencent.  Je  m'assieds  alors  devant  le  feu,  le  dos  au 
lit  de  la  malade,  laquclle  avait  la  face  tournee  vers  la  porte  de  la  chambre, 

686  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

je  cause  avec  les  personnes  presentes,  sans  paraitre  m'occuper  des  cris  de 
Mile.  J.,  puis,  a  un  moment  donne,  sans  que  personne  se  fut  apergu  de  ce 
qui  se  passait  en  moi,  je  donne  Yordre  mental  du  sommeil,  et  celui-ci  se 
produit.  Plus  de  cent  fois  I'experience  fut  faite  et  variee  de  diverses 
faQons  :  I'ordre  mental  ^tait  donne  sur  un  signe  que  me  faisait  le  Dr.  X., 
et  toujours  I'effet  se  produisait.  Un  jour,  j 'arrive  lorsque  la  malade  etait 
eveillee  et  en  plein  delire  ;  elle  continue,  malgre  ma  presence,  a  crier  et 
s'agiter,  je  m'assieds  et  j 'attends  que  le  Dr.  X.  me  donne  le  signal. 
Aussitdt  celui-ci  donne  et  I'ordre  mental  formule,  la  malade  se  tait  et 
s'endort.  'Yous  saviez  que  j'etais  la  depuis  quelque  temps?'  'Non, 
monsieur ;  je  ne  me  suis  apergue  de  votre  presence  qu'en  sentant  le 
sommeil  me  gagner ;  j'ai  eu  alors  conscience  que  vous  ^tiez  assis  devant 
le  feu.' 

"  Je  donnais  chaque  jour,  avant  de  partir,  I'ordre  de  dormir  jusqu' au 
lendemain  a  une  heure  determin^e.  tin  jour,  je  pars,  oubliant  cette 
precaution;  j'etais  a  700  metres  quand  je  m'en  apergus.  Ne  pouvant 
retourner  sur  mes  pas,  je  me  dis  que  peut-etre  mon  ordre  serait 
entendu,  malgre  la  distance,  puisque  a  1  ou  a  2  metres  un  ordre  mental 
etait  execute.  En  consequence,  je  formule  I'ordre  de  dormir  jusqu'au 
lendemain  8  heures,  et  je  poursuis  mon  chemin.  Le  lendemain,  j'arrive  a 
7  heures  et  demie  ;  la  malade  dormait.  '  Comment  se  fait-il  que  vous 
dormiez  encore?'  'Mais,  monsieur,  je  vous  obeis.'  'Vous  vous  trompez  ;  je 
suis  parti  sans  vous  donner  aucun  ordre.'  '  C'est  vrai  ;  mais  cinq  minutes 
apres,  je  vous  ai  parfaitement  entendu  me  dire  de  dormir  jusqu'a  8  heures. 
Or  il  n'est  pas  encore  8  heures.'  Oette  derniere  heure  etant  celle  que 
j'indiquais  ordinairement,  il  etait  possible  que  I'habitude  fut  la  cause  d'une 
illusion  et  qu'il  n'y  eut  ici  qu'une  simple  coincidence.  Pour  en  avoir  le 
coeur  net  et  ne  laisser  prise  a  aucun  doute,  je  commandai  a  la  malade  de 
dormir  jusqu'a  ce  qu'elle  regut  I'ordre  de  s'eveiller. 

"  Dans  la  journee,  ayant  trouvd  un  intervalle  libre,  je  resolus  de  com- 
pleter I'experience.  Je  pars  de  chez  moi  (7  kilometres  de  distance),  en 
donnant  I'ordre  du  reveil.  Je  constate  qu'il  est  2  heures.  J'arrive  et 
trouve  la  malade  eveillee  :  les  parents,  sur  ma  recommandation,  avaient 
note  I'heure  exacte  du  reveil.  C'etait  rigour eusement  celle  a  laquelle 
j 'avals  donn^  I'ordre.  Cette  experience,  plusieurs  fois  renouvelee,  a  des 
heures  difFe rentes,  eut  toujours  le  meme  resultat. 

"  Mais  voici  qui  paraitra  plus  concluant  encore. 

"  Le  1^^  Janvier,  je  suspendis  mes  visites  et  cessai  toute  relation  avec 
la  famille.  Je  n'en  avals  plus  entendu  parler,  lorsque  le  12,  faisant  des 
courses  dans  une  direction  opposee  et  me  trouvant  a  10  kilometres  de  la 
malade,  je  me  demandai  si,  malgre  la  distance,  la  cessation  de  tous 
rapports  et  I'intervention  d'une  tierce  personne  (le  pere  magn^tisant 
desormais  sa  fille),  il  me  serait  encore  possible  de  me  faire  obeir.  Je 
defends  a  la  malade  de  se  laisser  endormir ;  puis,  une  demi-heure  apres, 
reflechissant  que  si,  par  extraordinaire,  j'etais  obdi,  cela  pourrait  causer 
prejudice  a  cette  malheureuse  jeune  fille,  je  leve  la  defense  et  cesse 
d'y  penser. 

"  Je  fus  fort  surpris,  lorsque  le  lendemain,  a  6  heures  du  matin,  je 
vis  arriver  chez  moi  un  expres  portant  une  lettre  du  p^re  de  Mile.  J. 
Celui-ci    me   disait  que    la   veille,  12,    a  10   heures   du  matin,  il  n'etait 

IN  THEIR  PBOPER  PLACES.  687 

arrive  a  endormir  sa  fille  qu'apres  une  lutte  prolongee  et  tres  douloureuse. 
La  malade,  une  fois  endormie,  avait  declare  que,  si  elle  avait  resiste,  c'etait 
sur  mon  ordre,  et  qu'elle  ne  s'etait  endormie  que  quand  je  I'avais  permis. 

"Oes  declarations  avaient  ^te  faites  vis-a-vis  de  temoins  auxquels  le  pere 
avait  fait  signer  les  notes  qui  les  contenaient.     J'ai  conserve  cette  lettre, 

dont  M. me  confirma  plus  tard  le  contenu,  en  ajoutant  quelques  details 

circonstancies." 

I  3.     I  come  now  to  the  spontaneous  cases.     The  following  seems 

to  be  an  instance  of  casual  spontaneous  transference  of  an  idea ;  and 

strikingly  exemplifies  the  latency  of  the  impression,  and  its  emergence 

after  several  hours,  which  has  been  so  frequently  noted  in  the  course 

of  this  work.     Mrs.  Lethbridge,  of  Tregeare,  Launceston,  Cornwall, 

writes  : — 

"  Bella  Yista,  Corsier,  Yevey,  Switzerland. 

"  April  10th,  1886. 

(691)  "In  December,  1881,  my  husband  was  slowly  recovering  from  a 
severe  illness  :  and  one  afternoon,  about  5  o'clock,  I  went  into  his  study, 
where  he  had  gone  for  2  or  3  hours,  to  see  if  he  wanted  anything.  Find- 
ing him  asleep  in  his  armchair,  I  left  him,  and  having  some  village 
lending-library  books  to  sort,  I  went  into  the  small  room  where  they 
were  kept,  called  the  '  box-room '  (in  a  distant  part  of  the  house),  to  do  so. 
There,  to  my  surprise,  I  saw  our  gamekeeper's  dog,  Vic,  curled  up.  On 
seeing  me  she  rose,  wagged  her  tail,  turned  half  round  and  lay  down  again. 
This  dog  had  never  been  inside  the  house  before,  which  was  the  reason  of 
my  surprise  at  seeing  her  where  she  was.  However,  I  turned  her  out 
of  doors,  and  there  I  thought  the  matter  ended.  I  am  quite  sure  I  did  not 
mention  the  matter  to  my  husband. 

"  He  went  to  bed  very  early  that  evening,  and  had  a  most  restless 
night,  talking  a  great  deal  in  his  sleep.  While  fast  asleep  he  related  the 
whole  occurrence  of  '  Hawke's  dog,  Yic,'  actually  being  found  in  the 
box-room,  even  describing  the  animal's  behaviour,  rising,  turning  half 
round  and  lying  down  again.  Next  morning  I  asked  my  husband  if  he 
had  dreamt  1  '  No,  not  that  he  knew  of.'  If  he  had  not  dreamt  of  Vic  ? 
'  No,  why  of  Vic  1 '  Then  I  asked  him  if  by  any  chance  he  had  heard 
where  Vic  had  been  found  the  previous  evening  ?  '  No.  Where  ? '  And 
when  I  told  him,  he  was  extremely  astonished,  just  because  the  dog  had 
never  been  known  inside  the  house  before,  and  the  box-room  was  on  an 
upper  landing.  Subsequently  I  related  to  him  what  he  had  said  in  his 
sleep,  but  he  evidently  had  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  it. 

"MiLLICBNT     G.    LeTHBEIDGB." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Lethbridge  adds  : — 

"I  am  glad  my  account  interested  you,  and  regret  extremely  that  it 
cannot  be  corroborated,  for  I  ftdly  understand  the  necessity  in  investi- 
gations such  as  yours  to  obtain  perfectly  trustworthy  evidence,  and  free 
from  intentional  or  unintentional  exaggerations  or  inaccuracies.  My  dear 
husband  died  about  16  months  ago.  On  receiving  your  letter  I  tried  to 
find  out  whether  he  mentioned  the  occurrence  in  his  diary,  but  un- 
fortunately the  diary  of  that  year  (1881)  was  left  behind  in  England. 

688        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

"  From  mine,  which  I  succeeded  in  finding,  written  at  the  time,  I  copy 
out  the  following  brief  notice,  dated  Dec.  14th,  1881.  'Baron  talked  a 
great  deal  in  his  sleep  last  night,  and  curiously  enough  he  described  how 
the  terrier  was  found  curled  up  on  the  mat  in  the  box-room,  which 
actually  happened  yesterday,  probably  for  the  first  time  in  the  terrier's 
life,  for  I  was  so  amazed  at  finding  the  dog  in  so  unusual  a  place  that  I 
called  the  children  to  see  it.  But  the  strange  part  is  this.  Baron  was 
asleep  in  the  study  at  the  time,  and  no  one  had  told  him  of  the  occurrence. 
Of  this  I  am  quite  sure.^ 

"  I  mentioned  the  occurrence  to  several  people  at  the  time,  but  as  it 
happened  5  years  ago,  I  doubt  if  any  of  them  would  recall  it  quite 
accurately." 

[Mr.  Lethbridge's  complete  forgetfulness  is  clearly  a  strong  indication 
that  the  news  of  the  occurrence  had  not  reached  him  in  any  normal  way — 
e.g.,  by  overhearing  the  children  speaking  of  it.] 

The  following  experiences  belong  to  a  class  whose  force,  in  the 
cumulative  proof  of  telepathy,  is  comparatively  small — the  class  of 
mere  impressions,  without  any  sensory  affection;  but  they  are  in 
themselves  well-evidenced  cases,  the  records  of  the  impressions  having 
been  carefully  written  down  before  the  news  of  the  corresponding 
event  arrived.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  J.  C.  Grant,  of  98,  Cornwall 
Gardens,  S.W. ;  from  whose  very  full  journal  they  were  copied  by  the 
present  writer.  Mr.  Grant  desires  that  the  names  of  the  persons 
mentioned  shall  not  be  printed;  but  says  that  "the  fullest  information 
is  open  to  private  inquiry."  The  instance  which  was  second  in  date 
is  given  before  the  earlier  one,  as  being  more  complete,  and  is  the 
only  one  to  which  I  have  attached  an  evidential  number. 

(692)  Entry  in  diary  for  April  11,  1882. 

"  A  very  strange  thing  happened  to  me  last  night.  It  has  happened 
once  before.  After  being  asleep  some  little  time,  I  was  wakened  up,  quite 
quietly  and  with  no  dread  or  horror,  but  with  the  absolute  and  certain 
knowledge  that  there  was  a  '  presence  '  in  my  room.  I  looked  everywhere 
into  the  darkness,  implored  it  to  appear,  but  to  no  efiect ;  for  though  I  have 
the  gift  of  '  feeling,'  I  have  not  that  of  '  sight.'  I  felt  certain,  in  fact  was 
told  by  it,  that  it  was  to  do  with  Bruce  [Christian  name].  I  thought  it 
was  his  father — I  was  sure  it  was  :  I  thought  he  must  be  dead.  ^  All  this 
took  place  in  about  a  couple  of  minutes  or  so  ;  and  as  I  saw  I  could  see 
nothing,  I  got  up,  struck  a  match,  lighted  the  candle  at  my  bedside,  and 
looked  at  my  watch.  It  was  just  14  minutes  past  12  o'clock.  I  then  put 
out  the  candle  ;  but  all  feeling  of  the  presence  had  gone.  It  had  spoken 
as  only  a  spirit  2  can  speak,  and  then  had  passed  away.  I  did  not  get  to 
sleep  for  a  long  time,  and  was  very  unhappy  for  poor  Bruce.     ...     I 

1  Mr.  Grant  explains  this  sentence  as  follows  : — "I  knew  his  father  to  be  very 
seriously  ill,  which  no  doubt  was  the  reason  why  my  thoughts  took  this  direction." 

2  See  p.  48,  note. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  689 

have  been  quite  out  of  sorts  all  day  for  poor  old  Bruce,  to  whom  I  wrote 
this  morning.    Told  M.  and  R.  of  my  feeling  and  experiences  of  the  night." 

[The  entry  for  April  12  mentions  a  conversation  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M., 
in  which  Mr.  Grant  remembers  that  he  described  the  occurrence.] 

Entry  for  April  13. 

"  In  afternoon  went  over  to  my  aunt  M.'s,  had  a  long  talk  with  her, 
told  her  and  J.  and  others  all  about  my  presentiment.  I  have  not  heard 
from  poor  Bruce  yet." 

Entry  for  April  14. 

"  Up  early,  at  half -past  seven — expecting  a  letter.  The  letter  has 
come,  as  I  expected — deep  black  edge  ;  but  it  is  not  his  father,  but  his 
brother,  that  has  died,  poor  old  E.,  date  and  all,  on  Tuesday.  ...  I 
wrote  to  him  this  morning.  I  will  not  tell  him  of  my  strange  meeting  of 
Tuesday  morning  or  Monday  night.  .  .  .  Witnesses  to  this  strange 
pre-knowledge  of  mine  :  Mrs.  R.,  my  housekeeper  ;  Mrs.  C,  my  aunt  ;  J., 
my  cousin  (Captain  C.) ;  other  cousins,  Mrs.  M.  and  Mr.  M.,  Mr.  H.  R., 
and  Mme.  G.  So  you  see  ^  I  am  not  without  my  authorities,  besides  my 
written  journal." 

Entry  for  April  15. 

"  Wrote  a  long  letter  to  my  father,  giving  him  what  news  there  was, 
and  telling  him  about  my  queer  experience." 

The  following  is  a  copy,  made  by  the  present  writer,  of  a  letter  written 
to  Mr.  Grant  by  Mr.  M.,  on  June  3,  1886  :— 

"  We  distinctly  remember  your  telling  us  about  the  strange  circum- 
stance that  took  place  before  ^  the  death  of  one  of  your  friends.  The 
details  have  escaped  our  memory,  but  we  remember  that  it  was  a  case  of 
premonition,  which  was  afterwards  verified.  "  C  W.  M." 

The  date  of  death  appears  in  the  Times  obituary  as  April  10,  1882. 
This  was  Monday,  not  Tuesday ;  and  probably  Mr.  Grant  assumed  that 
the  day  on  which  his  friend  heard  of  the  death  was  the  day  of  the  death 
itself.  The  death,  which  took  place  in  China,  can  only  have  fallen  within 
12  hours  of  his  experience  if  it  occurred  in  the  few  hours  preceding 
midnight. 

Mr.  E.  T.  R.,  who  died,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Grant's,  but 
not  so  intimate  as  his  brother  Bruce. 

Entry  in  diary  for  Wednesday,  Dec.  10,  1879.  (Mr.  Grant  was  at 
the  time  in  Southern  India.) 

"  Yesterday  I  had  a  peculiar  sensation.  When  I  say  yesterday,  I 
mean  last  night.  ...  I  have  as  it  were  an  inner  eye  opened.  I  had 
a  sort  of  unconscious  feeling  that,  if  I  were  to  wish  it,  I  could  see  some 
strange  visitant  in  the  chamber  with  me — someone  disembodied.      [Here 

1  The  journal,  though  a  private  one,  is  in  many  parts  WTitten  as  if  addressed  to  an 
imaginary  reader. 

2  The  wording  of  this  letter,  and  Mr.  Grant's  expressions  above,  illustrate  what  I 
have  more  than  once  remarked  on — the  common  tendency  to  describe  what  are  really 
telepathic  impressions,  coinciding  with  or  closely  following  real  events,  as  prophetic  and 
premonitory.     See  p.  535,  note,  and  p.  569. 

VOL.    II,  2    Y 

690  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

follow  some  words  of  description  which,  though  general  and  not  distinctive, 
apply  perfectly  to  the  particular  person  who,  as  it  turned  out,  died  at 
the  time,  and  would  have  applied  equally  naturally  to  only  a  small 
group  of  persons.  Mr.  G-rant  has  what  appear  to  me  valid  reasons  for 
withholding  the  clause  from  publication.]  I  forced  the  idea  from  me,  and 
fell  into  a  troubled  sleep." 

Entry  for  Dec.  11. 

"  Went  in  afternoon  to  the  library  ;  thence  to  C.'s.  Hear  by  telegram, 
while  there,  of  the  death  of  my  uncle,  Mr.  C,  on  Tuesday.  Wonder  if 
that  had  anything  to  do  with  my  feelings  the  night  before  last." 

We  find  in  the  obituary  of  a  leading  newspaper  that  the  death  took 
place  on  Dec.  9,  1879. 

Mr.  Grant  states  that  he  had  had  no  idea  that  anything  was  the  matter 
with  his  uncle. 

I  have  studied  in  Mr.  Grant's  diary  the  full  record  of  a  third  case, 
Tvhich  was  even  more  remarkable  than  the  first,  as  it  included  the  peculi- 
arity that,  for  some  time  after  his  first  impression,  he  felt  forcibly  impelled 
to  draw  the  figure  of  the  person  who  died.  The  case  was  made  the  more 
striking  to  me  by  the  fact  that  Mr.  Grant  was  so  certain  that  the  death 
(the  time  of  which  he  had  only  very  vaguely  learnt)  must  have  coincided 
in  date  with  his  impression,  that  he  had  actually  not  taken  the  trouble  to 
verify  the  coincidence.  He  left  it  to  me  to  find  in  the  Times  obituary — as 
he  confidently  foretold  that  I  would — that  the  death  (which  was  quite  unex- 
pected) occurred,  thousands  of  miles  from  the  place  where  he  was,  on  the 
day  preceding  that  on  which  the  entry  in  his  diary,  relating  his  impression 
of  the  previous  night,  was  written.  The  impression  of  that  night  did  not, 
however,  bear  distinct  reference  to  the  particular  person  who  died,  but  was 
a  more  general  sense  of  calamity  in  the  family.  Certain  reasons  which 
at  present  make  it  desirable  not  to  publish  the  details  of  this  case  may  in 
time  cease  to  exist. 

Mr.  Grant  writes,  on  May  31,  1886  :— 

"  Except  on  these  three  occasions,  I  have  never,  to  the  best  of  my 
recollection,  had  any  feeling  in  the  least  resembling  those  described." 

To  pass  now  to  examples  where  the  senses  were  concerned — the 
following  is  an  auditory  death-case  of  the  ordinary  type.  The 
narrator  is  Mrs.  Evens,  mentioned  above  (pp.  176  and  344). 

(693)  In  1885,  Mrs.  Evens  filled  up  a  census-form  (p.  7)  with  the  in- 
formation that  about  September,  1858,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  night,  she 
experienced  an  auditory  hallucination  representing  the  voice  of  a  "  most 
intimate  and  deeply  attached  friend.  She  died  suddenly  that  night.  The 
lady  was  French.  We  had  been  very  intimate,  and  she  had  frequently 
mesmerised  me  for  neuralgia.  We  had  been  parted  for  more  than  a 
year — she  in  France  and  I  in  England.  I  had  been  to  sleep,  but  woke 
as  if  I  were  called.  I  sat  up,  saw  nothing,  but  heard  distinctly,  in  the 
well-known  and  beloved  voice,  '  Adieu,  ma  cherie '  (her  name  for  me). 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  691 

It  was  not  till  a  week  after  that  I  heard  of  her  sudden  and  quite  unex- 
pected death  (she  not  having  been  ill)  on  that  night.  At  the  time,  I  had 
no  feeling  of  surprise  or  fear.  I  may  mention  that  only  during  the  last 
year  I  heard,  in  an  indirect  manner,  that,  under  the  pressure  of  great 
horror,  she  was  supposed  to  have  committed  suicide." 

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Evens  writes  : — 

"  Oldbank,  Enniskillen. 

"December,  1885. 

"  I  was  staying  in  a  country  house,  but  not  with  (at  that  time)  very 
intimate  freinds,  and  1  cannot  feel  sure  that  I  mentioned  the  circumstance. 
I  shall  be  writing  to  one  of  them  soon,  and  will  ask  if  she  remembers  my 
speaking  of  it  at  all.  The  recollection,  except  as  to  precise  date,  is  as 
vivid  in  my  mind  as  ever — the  tone  of  the  voice,  as  of  one  not  stationary, 
but  leaving  the  room  by  the  door,i  which  was  on  the  left  side  and  near  the 
head  of  my  bed  ;  and  likewise  the  words,  distinctly  spoken.  I  left  France 
in  1857,  and  my  friend  died  in  1858.  It  was  the  year  before  my  marriage, 
and  I  was  then  a  girl  of  20.  I  had  no  terror,  or  even  surprise  ;  but 
equally  little  when  I  heard  of  her  sudden  death,  which  I  seemed  to  have 
foreknown.  As  to  the  hour,  I  gathered  that  it  must  have  been  tolerably 
simultaneous  with  the  death.  We  did  not  go  to  our  rooms  till  11  ever  in 
that  house.  I  had  the  sensation  of  being  awoke  out  of  my  first  sleep. 
My  friend  was  found  dead  and  cold  (in  her  house  in  Alsace)  between  4 
and  5  in  the  morning.  Having  led  a  wandering  life  since  my  marriage,  I 
have  kept  no  letters  of  so  long  ago.  The  circumstances  of  the  loss  of  my 
beloved  friend,  and  my  jirin  belief  in  her  desire  to  take  leave  of  me,  are 
both  indelibly  impressed  on  my  memory.  I  wish,  for  the  sake  of  science, 
my  details  were  more  satisfactory. 

"  I  was  a  parlour  boarder  from  '55  to  '57  (inclusive)  at  the  Chateau 
Giron,  then  a  large  and  well-known  school.  Mme.  H.  was  one  of  the 
principals  ;  the  friendship  between  us  was  of  a  very  close  and  unusual 
kind.  She  was  just  the  sort  of  woman  whose  '  will '  once  more  to  see  a 
dear  friend  would  triumph  over  almost  any  difficulties,  as  I  always 
believe  it  did.  a  Agnes  Evens." 

In  reply  to  further  inquiries,  Mrs.  Evens  adds  : — 

"  In  my  own  mind  I  always  associate  the  hearing  of  the  voice  with  a 
Sunday  night.  You  will  say  this  is  unreliable,  and  so  it  is,  but  I  find 
that  in  the  recollection  of  my  domestic  events,  births,  deaths,  &c.,  my 
recollection  of  the  day  of  the  week,  with  its  associations,  is  more  reliable 
than  that  of  the  date. 

"  As  to  any  other  [auditory]  hallucinations,  the  only  one  I  can  remember 
is  the  sound  of  music  unusual  in  character,  &c.,  but  it  took  place  when  I 
was  worn  out  with  nursing  and  grief,  and  I  have  always  assigned  it  to  an 
abnormal  condition  of  the  nervous  system,  associated  with  a  time  of 
such  sorrow  that  I  can  hardly  bear  to  go  back  upon  it. 

"  I  seemed  not  so  much  to  be  awoke  hy  the  voice  as  to  wake  to  hear 
it.  I  had  no  doubt  as  to  whose  it  was  ;  it  produced  the  effect  of  a  passing, 
not  stationary,  voice  ;  the  words,  distinctly  uttered,  were  '  adieu,  ma 
cherie.'     I  heard  yesterday  from  the   friend  with  whom  I  was  staying  at 

1  I  have  mentioned  (Vol.  i.,  p.  573)  how  frequently  visual  hallucinations,  alike  of  t 
subjective  and  the  telepathic  class,  present  this  feature  of  movement. 

VOL.  II.  2  V  2 

692        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERT lOF 

the  time.  She  says,  '  We  both'  (herself  and  sister)  '  well  remember  about 
your  friend  Mme  H.,  and  what  a  terrible  attack  of  neuralgia  you  had 
just  at  the  time  when  she  died.'  I  had  forgotten  this  latter  circumstance. 
It  would  account  in  some  measure  for  the  want  of  distinctness  in  my 
recollections." 

We  have  procured  from  the  Registrar  at  Rappoltsweiler  an  official 
certificate  of  the  death,  which  states  that  it  occurred  at  2  p.m.,  on  Sept.  5th, 
1858.  This  was  a  Sunday — which  confirms  Mrs.  Evens'  recollection.  The 
death  must  have  preceded  her  experience  by  at  least  10  hours. 

The  next  case,  also  auditory,  is  apparently  one  of  direct  repro- 
duction of  the  agent's  sensation.  (See  cases  267-270.)  It  is  from 
Mr.  J.  G,  F.  Russell,  of  Aden,  Aberdeenshire  (the  narrator  of 
case  196).  The  agent  was  a  near  relative  who  had  been  making  a 
long  stay  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Russell. 

"  32,  Upper  Brook   Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W. 

"December  18th,  1885. 

(694)  "  On  Wednesday,  December  2nd,  1885,  I  was  woke  up  at  night, 
between  12  p.m.  and  2  a.m.  (as  far  as  I  can  recollect),  by  hearing  myself 
distinctly  called  from  a  small  passage  outside  my  bedroom  door  ;  the  voice 
seemed  to  come  from  just  outside  the  door  itself.  I  got  up,  fearing  Mrs. 
Waller,  in  the  adjoining  room,  was  ill,  but,  as  the  calling  of  my  name  was 
no  longer  repeated,  I  did  not  then  disturb  her.  (There  is  no  door  of 
communication  between  the  rooms,  the  wall  is  solid,  and  a  gigantic 
wardrobe  is  against  it.)  Next  morning  I  asked  her  if  she  had  called  me 
during  the  night  ;  but  she  declared  she  had  slept  '  like  a  top,'  and  had 
never  thought  of  me  or  anyone  else.  I  did  not  mention  the  incident  to 
her  sister  (who  had  just  left  us  after  a  long  visit),  but  she  (Mrs.  Waller) 
did,  on  returning  to  the  country.  I  enclose  what  Miss  Young  wrote  to 
me,  solely  from  her  sister  mentioning  to  her  my  having  questioned  her. 
The  dates  correspond  exactly  ;  it  was  the  first  night  of  Mrs.  W^aller's  visit. 

"  J.  G.  F.  Russell." 

The  following  is  the  extract  from  Miss  Young's  letter  to  Mr.  Russell  : — 

"  I  will  tell  you  something  that  has  struck  me  rather.  The  two  nights 
my  sister  was  with  you  in  London  were  very  disturbed  nights  to  me ;  you 
were  continually  in  my  dreams,  and  one  of  those  nights  I  found  myself 
sitting  up  in  bed,  having  woke  myself  up  by  calling  you  loudly  by  name. 
When  she  came  back  she  told  me  you  had  asked  her  one  morning  whether 
she  had  called  you  in  the  night,  as  you  had  distinctly  heard  your  name. 
I  wish  I  could  remember  which  night  it  was.  I  have  an  impression  it  was 
the  first.  u  Blanche  Young." 

Mr.  Russell  (who  gave  me  the  account  viva  voce  on  December  16th, 
a  fortnight  after  the  occurrence,)  has  explained  that  the  wall  between  his 
room  and  the  next  is  so  thick  that  even  a  very  loud  cry  in  one  would  be 
almost  inaudible  in  the  other.  He  has  never  had  such  a  hallucination 
on  any  other  occasion. 

IF  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  693 

The  following  cases  are  visual.     The  first  is  from  Mr.  Teale,  of 

50,  Hawley  Road,  Kentish  Town,  N.W. 

"June,  1886. 

(695)  "  In  1884,  my  son  Walter  was  serving  in  the  3rd.  King's  Royal 
Rifles  Regiment,  in  the  Soudan.  The  last  we  had  heard  from  him  was  a 
letter  informing  us  that  he  was  about  to  return  to  England,  which  he 
expected  would  be  about  Christmas  time.  Things  were  in  this  position  on 
the  24th  October,  1884,  when  on  returning  home  in  the  evening,  I  said, 
(noticing  my  wife  looking  very  white,)  '  Whatever  is  the  matter  with 
you  1 '  and  she  said  she  had  seen  Walter,  and  he  had  stooped  down  to  kiss 
her,  but  owing  to  her  starting  he — like — was  gone,  so  she  did  not  receive 
the  kiss. 

"  After  that  we  had  a  letter  from  the  lady  nurse  at  Raraleh 
Hospital  to  say  that  the  poor  boy  had  a  third  relapse  of  enteric  fever ; 
they  thought  he  would  have  pulled  through,  but  he  had  been  taken,  and 
when  we  had  that  letter,  it  was  a  week  after  he  died.  But  the  date  when 
the  letter  was  written  corresponded  with  the  date  of  the  day  when  Walter 
appeared,  which  was  on  the  24th  October,  1884. 

[When  Mr.  Teale  used  these  words,  he  had  not  referred  to  the  letter, 
and  was  under  the  impression  that  it  had  been  written  on  the  very  day 
of  the  death,  which  (as  will  be  seen  below)  was  October  24.] 

"  My  son  Frederick,  Selina,  and  Nelly  were  in  the  room,  but  none  of 
them  saw  Walter ;  only  Fred  heard  his  mother  scream,  '  Oh  ! '  and  Fred 
asked  her  what  was  the  matter.  I  thought,  having  heard  many  tales  of 
this  kind,  I  would  set  it  down ;  so  I  put  the  date  on  a  slip  of  paper.  He 
was  in  his  regimentals,  and  she  thought  he  had  come  on  furlough  to  take 
her  by  surprise — knowing  the  back  way  ;  but  when  she  saw  he  was  gone, 
and  the  door  not  open,  she  got  dreadfully  frightened. 

"Feed.  J.  Teale." 

Mrs.  Teale  herself  died  in  April,  1886,  after  an  illness  due  in  great 
measure  to  the  shock  of  the  bereavement. 

Mr.  Teale  has  shown  me  the  letters  which  were  received  during  August, 
September  and  October,  1884,  respecting  his  son's  condition.  A  letter, 
dated  August  20,  which  the  son  dictated  and  signed,  states  that  he  is  in 
hospital,  down  with  enteric  fever.  The  next  letter,  dated  September  7, 
which  was  similarly  dictated  and  signed,  states  that  he  has  had  a  very 
serious  illness,  but  is  much  better,  and  hopes  soon  to  be  home.  The  next 
letter,  dated  October  12,  from  Sister  Thomas,  states  that  he  had  had  a 
bad  relapse  a  fortnight  previously,  but  "  is  getting  on  very  nicely  now." 
This  was  the  last  letter  received  before  October  24.  In  a  letter  dated 
October  52,  Lieutenant  W.  H.  Kennedy  states  that  the  death  had  taken 
place  on  the  preceding  day ;  and  in  a  letter  dated  October  28,  Sister 
Thomas  states  that  the  death  occurred  about  2  o'clock  p.m.,  on  Friday, 
October  24.  This  date  has  been  confirmed  to  us  by  an  ofiicial  communica- 
tion from  the  Depot  at  Winchester. 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Teale  explained  to  me  that  his  wife's  experience 
took  place  between  7  and  8  in  the  evening — which  would  be  between  7 
and  8  hours  after  the  death.  She  was  at  the  time  sitting  at  the  table, 
talking.     The  son  who  was  present  is  at  a  distance ;    but  Miss  Teale 

694         CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

showed  me  how  the  persons  in  the  room  were  placed,  and  described 
to  me  how  she  saw  her  mother  start,  and  heard  her  exclamation. 
Mr.  Teale  is  certain  that  his  wife  never  experienced  any  other  visual 
hallucination  ;  and  he  says  that  she  was  of  anything  but  a  brooding  tem- 
perament, and  was  not  at  the  time  anxious  about  her  son.  His  note  of 
the  date  of  the  vision  was  on  the  back  of  an  envelope,  which  he  carried 
in  his  pocket-book.  He  thought  that  this  envelope  was  lost ;  but  was 
kind  enough,  at  my  request,  to  make  a  search,  which  brought  it  to  light. 
The  envelope,  which  lies  before  me,  bears  his  address,  and  the  post-mark 
London,  N.,  Feb.  22,  84 ;  the  pencil  note  on  the  back  of  it  is  24-10-84. 

The    next    case   is    from    the    Erev.   R.    Markham    Hill,    of   St. 

Catherine's,  Lincoln. 

"June  17,   1886. 

(696)  "  On  the  evening  of  Easter  Sunday,  about  8  or  9  years  ago,  I 
think,  I  was  just  beginning  my  supper,  feeling  very  tired  after  the  day's 
work,  when  I  saw  the  door  opening  behind  me.^  I  was  sitting  with  my 
back  to  the  door,  but  could  just  see  it  over  my  shoulder.  I  may  also 
have  heard  the  opening,  but  cannot  speak  with  certainty  upon  this  point. 
I  turned  half  round,  and  just  had  time  to  see  the  figure  of  a  tall  man 
rushing  hastily  into  the  room,  as  if  to  attack  me.  I  sprang  up  at  once, 
turned  round,  and  threw  the  glass,  which  I  held  in  my  hand,  at  the  spot 
where  I  had  seen  the  figure,  which  had  disappeared  in  the  act  of  my 
rising.  The  disappearance  had,  however,  been  too  sudden  to  arrest  the 
act  of  throwing.  I  then  realised  that  I  had  seen  an  apparition,  and  I 
immediately  connected  it  with  one  of  my  uncles,  whom  I  knew  to  be 
seriously  ill.  Moreover,  the  figure  which  I  saw  resembled  my  uncle  in 
stature.  Mr.  Adcock  came  in,  and  found  me  quite  unnerved  by  the 
occurrence ;  and  to  him  I  related  the  circumstances.  I  don't  remember 
telling  him  that  I  connected  the  vision  with  my  uncle.  The  next  day  a 
telegram  came  announcing  my  uncle's  death  on  the  Sunday.  My  father 
was  summoned  to  my  uncle's  death-bed  unexpectedly,  on  the  Sunday 
evening  as  he  was  sitting  at  supper,  and  the  death  must  have  coincided  in 
time  with  what  I  saw.  u  ^    Maekham  Hill." 

The  E,ev.  H.  Adcock,  of  Lincoln,  writes: —  u  j^j^g  \Q     1886 

"  I  called  on  my  friend,  the  Rev.  Markham  Hill,  one  evening,  and 
found  him  apparently  in  an  exhausted  condition  in  an  arm-chair ;  he  told 
me,  before  I  could  ask  for  any  explanation,  that  he  had  just  seen  the  figure 
of  his  uncle  standing  opposite  to  him  against  the  wall,  behind  a  piano ;  that 
he  lifted  up  a  glass  from  the  table,  and  was  about  to  throw  it  at  him,  when 
the  figure  vanished.  He  said  he  felt  convinced  that  he  should  very  shortly 
hear  of  his  uncle's  death.  It  was  only  the  following  day,  or  the  day  after, 
that  he  showed  me  a  letter  received  that  morning  informing  him  that  his 
uncle  had  died  on  the  day  when  the  appearance  took  place." 

In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  from  Mr.  Hill  that  he  was  alone 
at  the  time.  He  has  had  no  other  visual  hallucination  in  his  life,  unless 
it  were  an  experience  which  impressed  him  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as 
this  one,  but  which  may  well  have  been  merely  a  case  of  mistaken  identity. 

^  See  p.  612,  note. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  695 

Mr.  Adcock  explained  that  the  above  incident  must  have  occurred 
about  12  years  ago.,  He  cannot  remember  whether  it  was  a  Sunday- 
evening. 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Hill's  uncle  died  on 
April  5,  1874,  which  was  Easter  Sunday. 

[It  would  be  diificult  to  account  for  the  hallucination  here  as  due  to 
anxiety  respecting  the  uncle's  condition.  If  a  person's  mind,  from  brooding 
over  the  condition  of  a  sick  relative,  is  led  to  evolve  a  phantasm  of  that 
relative,  we  should  certainly  expect  the  appearance  to  be  recognised  ;  and 
we  should  not  expect  its  character  to  be  at  once  unfamiliar  and  formidable. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  two  accounts  difier  as  to  whether  the  glass  was 
actually  thrown.] 

The  next  example  belongs  to  the  "  borderland"  class.  It  is  one  of 
the  cases  where  the  agent's  bond  of  connection  has  apparently  been 
with  someone  who  was  in  the  percipient's  company  at  the  time  of  the 
experience,  rather  than  with  the  actual  percipient.  {Cf.  Nos.  242  and 
355.)  The  narrator  desires  that  his  name  may  not  appear,  as  the 
family  of  the  agent,  whom  he  has  already  assisted  liberally,  might 
base  on  the  incident  described  a  sentimental  claim  to  further  favours. 

"June  12,  1886. 
(697)  "  There  can  be  no   doubt  whatever  that  there  is  some  trans- 
mission for  which  no  explanation  has  yet  been  given  by  the  savants. 

"  I  am  a  practical  business  man,  and  look  upon  all  theories  of 
Spiritualism,  tfec,  as  so  much  humbug  that  only  deludes  weak-minded 
people.  But  at  the  same  time,  I  recently  had  an  experience  of  a  most 
extraordinary  character,  which  I  should  scarcely  have  believed  if  related  to 
me  of  anyone  else,  and  the  plain  facts  of  which  I  will  give  as  they  actually 
occurred. 

"  I  had  in  my  employ  a  clerk  who  contracted  an  illness  which 
incapacitated  him  from  regular  attendance  at  his  duties.  He  was  absent 
about  six  months  in  1884,  and,  on  leaving  the  hospital,  as  I  found  that  he 
was  unable  to  resume  his  regular  work,  I  agreed  with  him  that  he  should 
come  to  the  office  whenever  he  felt  able  to  do  so,  and  that  I  would  pay 
him  for  the  work  so  done.  This  arrangement  continued  for  some  months  ; 
then,  at  the  beginning  of  April,  1885,  he  had  to  stay  away  altogether  for 
two  or  three  weeks.  He  seemed  in  fair  general  health,  but  he  was 
troubled  with  a  diseased  ankle-joint,  which  prevented  him  from  getting 
about.  I  was  in  no  anxiety  on  his  account,  however,  and  had  no 
apprehension  of  any  serious  illness.  My  wife,  who  knew  Mr.  Z.  from 
seeing  him  occasionally  at  my  private  house,  did  not  even  know  that  he 
was  absent  from  the  office  at  this  time. 

"  On  the  night  of  the  27th-28th  April,  I  was  wakened  by  my  wife 
calling  out  convulsively,  '  There  is  someone  looking  at  you.'  Though  by 
no  means  timid  as  a  rule — a  practical  woman,  not  subject  to  nervous 
fancies  of  any  kind — she  was  much  disturbed  and  terrified.  She  jumped 
out  of  bed,  and  turned  up  the  gas.  Finding  no  intruder  in  the  room,  and 
all  the  doors  locked,  she  got  back  into  bed ;  but  she  was  shivering  all  over. 

696         CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

and  it  was  some  time  before  I  succeeded,  in  quieting  her.  The  clock  in 
the  hall  struck  1  during  this  disturbance. 

"  In  the  morning  we  referred  to  the  incident,  and  I  told  my  wife  she 
must  have  been  suffering  from  nightmare. 

"  Later  on  that  day,  news  was  brought  to  my  office  that  poor  Z.  had 
passed  away  in  the  night.  When  I  got  home  in  the  evening,  my  wife  met 
me  as  usual  at  the  door,  and  I  said  to  her,  '  I  have  some  sad  news  to  tell 
you.'  Before  I  could  say  more  she  replied,  '  I  know  what  it  is  ;  poor  Z.  is 
dead.     It  was  his  face  which  I  saw  looking  at  you  last  night.' 

"  I  afterwards  learnt,  from  a  man  who  lodged  in  Mrs.  Z.'s  house,  that 
he  had  died  just  at  1  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  28th,  and  that  in  the 
delirium  which  preceded  his  death,  he  called  upon  me  to  look  after  his 
wife  and  children  when  he  was  gone." 

Mrs.  B.,  the  percipient,  writes  : — 

"  I  have  read  this  paper  through,  and  the  contents  correctly  describe 
what  transpired.  I  was  awake,  when  I  saw  the  face.  I  have  never 
experienced  any  similar  occurrence." 

[The  last  sentence  is  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had 
experienced  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.] 

We  have  verified  in  the  Times  obituary  the  fact  that  Z.  died  on 
April  28,  1885. 

Mr.  Podmore  has  examined  the  clerk  whom  Mr.  B.  despatched  to  make 
inquiries  of  the  widow  on  hearing  of  the  death, — i.e.,  on  the  afternoon  of 
April  28 — and  who  has  since  heard  Mrs.  B.  narrate  her  experience.  So 
far  as  he  could  recollect,  Mrs.  Z.  told  him  that  Z.  died  about  1.30  a.m., 
certainly  at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning.  He  did  not  remember  to  have 
heard  anything  about  the  dying  words,  &c. 

The  following  is  a  "  borderland  "  case  of  the  ordinary  type.  The 
percipient,  Emma  Burger,  has  been  for  6  years  in  the  service  of  our 
friend  and  colleague,  M.  Ch.  Richet,  and  has  his  most  complete  con- 
fidence.    Mr.  Richet  writes  : — 

"Mars,  1886. 

(698)  "Emma  Burger,  agee  de  24  ans,  nee  aMalsch,  pres  de  Radstadt, 
avait  ete  fiancee  a  Paris  avec  M.  Charles  Br.  Le  mariage  etait  convenu. 
Emma  B.  partit  le  1  aout  a  Usrel  (Correze),  chez  Madame  d'U.,  ou  elle 
etait  alors  en  service.  La  sante  de  M.  Charles  Br.  etait  bonne,  ou  du 
moins  il  avait  toutes  les  apparences  de  la  sant^.  En  tout  cas  le  mariage 
^tait  decide,  et  Emma  B.  n'avait  aucune  inquietude  sur  I'etat  de  la  sante 
de  son  fianc^. 

"  Quelques  jours  apres  son  arrivee  a  Usrel,  le  7  ou  8  aout,  Emma  B. 
regut  une  lettre  de  Charles,  lui  apprenant  que  pour  affaires  de  famille  il 
quittait  Paris,  et  allait  passer  quelques  jours  dans  les  Ardennes. 

"  Le  15  aout,  jour  de  la  fete  de  Sainte  Yierge,  Emma  B.,  quoique 
n'^tant  pas  devote,  se  sentit  prise  d'une  grande  tristesse  et  pleura  abon- 
damment  au  pelerinage  qui  avait  lieu  alors  a  Usrel. 

"  Le  soir  de  ce  meme  jour,  15  aout,  E.  couchait  comme  d'habitude 
dans  un  cabinet  de  toilette  contigu  a  la  chambre  de  Madame  d'U.  A 
cotd  de  son  lit  etait  la  petite  porte  d'un  escalier  de  service,  porte  masquee 
par  le  rideau  du  lit,  de  sorte  qu'une  personne  qui  etait  dans  de  lit  devait  se 

.  IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  697 

lever  et  ecarter  le  rideau  du  bas  du  lit  pour  voir  qui  entrait  par  I'escalier. 
"Voici  le  recit  que  m'a  fait  E. 

"  '  Vers  onze  heures  et  demie  du  soir  je  venais  de  me  mettre  au  lit ;  les 
domestiques  n'etaient  pas  encore  couches  tous,  parcequ'on  entendait  encore 
du  bruit  dans  la  maison.  Madame  d'U.  etait  couchee  dans  la  chambre 
voisine,  dont  la  porte  de  communication  etait  ouverte.  J'ai  alors  entendu 
un  leger  bruit,  comme  si  la  porte  du  petit  escalier  s'ouvrait.  Je  me  suis 
mise  a  genoux  sur  mon  lit  pour  soulever  le  rideau  et  prevenir  la  personne 
qui  entrait  que  Madame  d'lJ.  etant  couchee,  il  ne  fallait  pas  faire  de  bruit, 
ni  passer  par  sa  chambre.  C'est  alors  que  j'ai  apergu  distinctement  la 
personne  de  Charles  Br.  II  etait  debout,  son  chapeau  et  sa  canne  a  la 
main  droite,  de  la  main  gauche  tenant  la  porte  entr'ouverte,  et  restant 
dans  I'entrebaillement  de  la  porte.  II  avait  un  costume  de  voyage — son 
costume  habituel.  II  y  avait  une  veilleuse  dans  la  chambre,  mais  j'etais 
tellement  surprise  que  je  ne  me  suis  pas  demande  si  la  clart^  de  la  veilleuse 
suffisait  pour  expliquer  I'extreme  nettete  avec  laquelle  j'ai  apergu  tous  ses 
traits,  sa  physionomie,  et  le  detail  de  son  costume.  II  avait  une  figure 
souriante,  et  il  m'a  regardee  sans  rien  dire,  en  s'arretant  dans  la  porte. 
Alors  je  lui  ai  dit  avec  severite,  ne  pouvant,  quel  que  invraisemblable 
que  fut  son  arrivee  soudaine  a  Usrel,  pas  supposer  que  ce  ne  fut  pas 
Charles  Br.  lui-meme,  "  Mais  que  venez-vous  faire  ici  1  Madame  d'U.  est 
la.  Partez  !  partez  done  !  "  Puis,  comme  il  ne  disait  rien,  j'ai  repris  de 
nouveau,  "  Qu'est-ce  que  vous  me  voulez  ?  Partez,  partez  done  !  "  Alors  il 
m'a  repondu,  en  souriant  et  avec  une  grande  tranquillite,  "  Je  viens  vous 
faire  mes  adieux ;  je  pars  en  voyage.  Adieu  !  "  C'est  a  ce  moment  que 
Madame  d'U.,  qui  dtait  dans  la  chambre  voisine,  et  qui,  n'dtant  pas 
endormie  encore,  lisait  dans  son  lit,  m'ayant  entendu  parler  tout  haut,  me 
dit,  "  Mais  qu'avez-vous  done,  E.  ?  vous  revez  !  "  Mais  moi,  au  lieu  de  lui 
repondre,  croyant  toujours  que  Charles  Br.  etait  reellement  devant  moi,  je 
lui  dis,  et  cette  fois  a  voix  plus  basse,  "  Mais  partez  done,  partez  done."  Et 
alors  il  disparut,  non  pas  subitement  mais  comme  quelqu'un  qui  ferme  une 
porte  et  qui  s'en  va.^  C'est  alors  seulement  que,  sur  une  nouvelle  demande 
plus  pressante  de  Madame  d'U.,  je  lui  repondis,  "  Mais  oui,  madame, 
j'ai  eu  un  cauchemar." 

"  '  J'etais  parfaitement  eveillee,  puisque  je  ne  m'etais  pas  endormie,  et 
que  je  venais  a  peine  de  me  coucher.  Je  pensai  alors,  restant  encore 
quelque  temps  eveillee,  que  Charles  Br.  etait  venu  me  surprendre,  et  je  me 
mis  a  regretter  de  ne  pas  lui  avoir  demande  ou  il  allait  en  voyage.  Mais 
je  ne  m'en  preoccupai  pas  outre  mesure,  et  au  bout  d'un  certain  temps  je 
m'endormis  tres  tranquillement,  sans  supposer  le  moins  du  monde  qu'il  ne 
s'agissait  pas  de  la  presence  formelle,  en  chair  et  en  os,  de  Charles  Br.  a  la 
porte  de  ma  chambre. 

"  '  Le  lendemain  matin  je  fus  fort  etonnee  de  ne  pas  entendre  parler  de 
Charles  Br.  Je  crus  qu'on  jouait  avec  moi  une  sorte  de  comedie ;  enfin  je 
me  decidai  a  demander  si  on  n'avait  pas  fait  venir  quelqu'un  dans  ma 
chambre.  On  m'assura  que  non  ;  on  me  plaisanta  de  mes  reves,  et  je  fijiis 
par  croire  que  j'avais   rev^,   ou  plutot,  par  une  sorte  d'inconsequence,  je 

1  This  way  of  describing  the  sense  of  a  door  closing  is  of  interest,  suggesting  a  vaguer 
form  of  what  in  other  cases  has  appeared  as  a  distinct  part  of  the  hallucination.  See 
p.  612,  note ;  and  compare  case  696. 

698  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

n'arretai  pas  ma  pensee  sur  les  invraisemblances  accumulees  de  cette  visite. 
Je  saurai  bien  la  verite,  me  disais-je,  quand  il  ecrira. 

"  '  Le  lendemain,  18  aout,  vers  neu£  heures  du  matin,  je  regus  la  lettre 
suivante  : — 

'""Mademoiselle, — Monsieur  C.  vient  de  recevoir  par  depeche  tele- 
graphique  la  nouvelle  de  la  mort  de  M.  Charles  Br.  II  estmort  le  16  du 
courant.     Nous  nous  joignons  a  vous  pour  le  regretter. 

"  '  "  Perrin,  Concierge. 

"  '"  26,  Rue  Marignan,  Paris. 
'"  "le  18  aout."'i 

[M.  Richet  has  seen  and  transcribed  this  letter.] 

"'On  jugera  de  ma  stupeur  quand  je  regus  cette  lettre.  Depuis  j'ai 
appris  que  Charles  Br.  etait  mort  dans  la  nuit  du  15  au  16  aout,  d'une 
maladie  du  coeur  que  tout  le  monde  ignorait,  et  qui  ne  s'^tait  anterieure- 
ment  traduite  par  aucun  symptome.' " 

We  have  made  repeated  and  urgent  applications  to  the  Maire  of  the 
commune  where  the  death  occurred,  for  a  copy  of  the  Acte  de  Deces,  but 
have  received  no  reply. 

The  Vicomtesse  d'Ussel  wrote  to  us  on  April  1,  1886,  that  Emma 
Burger  was  in  her  service  in  the  summer  of  1875,  at  Correze,  and  slept  in 
a  room  adjoining  her  own ;  but  she  does  not  remember  hearing  of  the 
incident.  She  remembers  noticing,  however,  towards  the  end  of  the 
stay,  that  Emma  Burger  was  in  distress,  and  learning  afterwards  that  this 
was  due  to  the  death  of  some  one  about  whom  Emma  had  never  told  her. 

The  percipient  has  had  in  her  life  two  hallucinations  representing  a 
person  whom  she  knew  to  be  dead.  But  the  first  of  these  did  not  occur 
till  9  years  after  the  incident  above  described ;  and  they  can  scarcely 
therefore  be  regarded  as  diminishing  the  force  of  the  coincidence. 

The  following  is  a  copy  made  by  M.  Richet  of  a  letter  written  to 
Emma  Burger  by  a  friend,  Madame  Aurousseaux,  who  heard  from  her  of 
the  vision  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived. 

"  Vous  me  demandez  si  je  me  souviens  de  votre  reve.  Je  m'en  souviens 
comme  si  c'etait  d'aujourd'hui.  Je  me  rappelle  parfaitement  de  notre 
pelerinage  a  la  Vierge,  et  de  tout  ce  que  vous  m'avez  raconte  au  sujet  de 
votre  reve,  et  aussi  de  votre  fiance." 

On  May  13,  1886,  M.  Richet  writes  :— 

"  Pour  ce  qui  concerne  le  cas  de  Charles  Br.  je  puis  vous  donner 
d'interessants  details.  J'ai  pu  faire  venir  chez  moi  la  personne  qui  a  eu 
la  confidence  de  Emma  Burger  avant  que  la  mort  de  Charles  Br.  soit 
connue,  et  voici  ce  qu'elle  m'a  raconte.  'Le  15  aout,  jour  de  la  fete  de  la 
Vierge,  Emma  n'dtait  pas  comme  d'ordinaire.  Elle  etait  triste  et 
cherchait  a  s'egayer ;  elle  etait  a  peu  pres  comme  foUe  ce  jour-la.  Le  soir 
il  y  a  eu  un  grand  diner,  mais,  comme  Emma  etait  la  bonne  d'un  enfant, 
elle  a  dine  dans  la  chambre  de  I'enfant  avec  moi,  qui  etais  alors  nourrice. 
Puis,  vers  dix  heures  nous  nous  sommes  couchees,  chacune  dans  notre 
chambre,  mon  nourisson  dormant  avec  moi  dans  ma  chambre,  Emma 
couchant  seule  dans  une  petite  chambre  contigue  a  la  grande  chambre  de 
Madame   d'U.     Le   lendemain   matin,   elle  a  dit  a  Jeanne,  la  femme-de- 

^  II  y  a  une  erreur ;  c'est  le  17  aolit  que  la  lettre  a  ^t^  Verite. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  699 

chambre  de  la  Comtesse  d'U.,  "  Vous  m'avez  done  envoye  quelqu'un  cette 
nuit."  Jeanne  s'est  mise  a  rire,  et  alors  Emma  m'a  raconte  qu'elle  avait 
fait  un  reve  tres  heureux,  qu'elle  avait  vu  son  fiance  dans  sa  chambre,  puis 
quand  elle  s'est  reveille  qu'elle  s'est  sentie  tres  triste,  et  qu'elle  n'a  pu 
dormir  le  reste  de  la  nuit.  Alors  je  lui  ai  dit,  "  Taisez-vous  done,  vous 
etes  foUe,"  et  nous  nous  sommes  toutes  moquees  d'elle.  Mais  elle  dit, 
"  Je  suis  sur  que  c'est  lui  qui  est  venu,et  on  ne  m'otera  pas  de  I'idee  que  c'est 
vrai.  Vous  pouvez  vous  moquer  de  moi,  mais  je  crois  bien  que  c'est  vrai."  ' 
"  '  Jeanne  Aurousseaux,  a  Tragny,  Nievre.' 

"  P.S. — Je  viens  de  montrer  a  Emma  Burger  la  lettre  que  je  vous 
ecris,  car  j'ai  interroge  Aurousseaux  hors  la  presence  d'Emma.  Elle 
I'approuve  completement,  mais  dit  seulement  qu'au  lieu  de  se  croire 
heureuse  elle  etait  tres  ennuy^e,  sans  etre  inquiete,  et  que  e'etait  par  suite 
des  moqueries  dont  on  I'avait  assaillie  qu'elle  avait  repondu,  '  Eh  bien  oui  ! 
j'^tais  tres  contente  de  voir  mon  fiance.'  " 

The  following  is  a  collective  case.     It  will  be  seen  that  we  have 

no   proof  that  the  second  witness  independently  recognised  the  figure  ; 

at  the    same    time,  the   way   in  which  the   figure    disappeared,    if 

correctly    remembered,    tells    strongly    against    the    hypothesis    of 

mistaken  identity.     The  narrator  is  Mr.  Amos  Beardsley,  M.R.C.S.,  of 

Grange-over-Sands,   Lancashire.     He  had  sent  us  a  shorter  account 

in  1883. 

"June  28th,  1886. 

(699)  "From  1845  to  '50  I  lived  between  the  villages  of  H and 

L ,  in  Derbyshire.     The  landlord  of  the  chief  hotel  in  L had  a 

farm  just  opposite  my  house,  from  which  I  used  to  get  my  supplies  of 
milk  and  other  dairy  produce.  I  had  also  been  called  in  on  one  occasion 
to  attend  his  wife  in  illness.  One  evening,  probably  in  August  or 
September,  I  had  been  out  with  my  boy,  John  Howitt — a  connection  of 
the  poet,  William  Howitt — hunting  for  moths,  and  was  returning  home 
about  9  p.m.,  as  far  as  I  can  remember.  We  had  just  passed  a  railway 
cutting  which  crossed  the  road,  or  rather  which  was  intended  to  cross  the 
road;  for  the  cutting — 16  or  20  feet  deep — had  been  brought  within  a 
few  yards  of  the  roadway  on  either  side,  but  had  not  yet  been  carried 
through  it.  Just  after  passing  this  part  I  turned  round,  and  saw,  as  I 
thought,  E.,  the  owner  of  the  farm  referred  to,  crossing  the  road — having 
apparently  just  come  in  by  a  footpath  on  the  right — in  the  direction  of  a 
corresponding  footpath  a  little  lower  down  on  the  left.  I  had  noticed  that 
the  cutting  had  been  carried  right  through  the  footpath,  so  that  passengers 
would  have  to  make  a  detour,  and  thinking  that  E.  was  probably  not 
aware  of  this,  and  might  run  some  risk  of  falling  down  the  embankment, 
I  sent  the  lad  after  him,  to  warn  him  of  the  danger.  The  lad  ran  ofi"  at 
once  ;  the  distance  was  not  more  than  100  yards  or  so;  but  when  he  got 
to  the  stile,  the  man  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  He  could  not  have  got  clear 
away  in  that  short  interval ;  but  we  searched  the  cutting  to  see  if  he  had 
by  any  ill-chance  fallen  down  there.  There  was  nothing  to  be  seen  ;  and 
after  spending  about  half  an  hour  in  a  fruitless  search,  we  returned  home. 

700  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

Next  morning,  Howitt  came  to  me  with  a  scared  face  to  tell  me  that  E. 
had  fallen  down  dead  the  night  before,  about  9  p.m.,  just  after  he  had 
offered  to  make  a  blasphemous  wager. 

"  That  is  all  the  story.  I  could  not,  and  did  not,  for  a  moment  doubt 
my  recognition  of  E.'s  figure.  My  eyesight  is  good,  and  I  think  it  hardly 
possible  that  I  could  have  been  mistaken.  Why  the  apparition  should 
have  come  to  me  I  cannot  say,  unless,  perhaps,  the  dying  man's  thoughts 
turned  instinctively  towards  me  as  a  doctor.  I  have  never  had  any  hallu- 
cination of  the  senses, — unless  this  apparition  was  one." 

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  E.  was  found  dead  in  his 
bed,  from  heart-disease,  on  July  25,  1847.  Dr.  Beardsley  does  not  prof  ess 
to  have  gathered  the  circumstances  of  his  death  from  eye-witnesses  ;  and 
the  imagination  of  neighbours  would  be  likely  to  exaggerate  the  suddenness 
with  which  the  supposed  punishment  followed  on  the  transgression. 

Mr.  Podmore  has  questioned  Mr.  John  Howitt,  now  butler  at  the  Ship- 
Building  Yard  Board  Rooms,  Barrow.  He  has  no  real  independent  memory 
of  the  incident,  though  when  Mr.  Podmore  repeated  Dr.  Beardsley's 
account,  he  said,  "  Now  you  seem  to  bring  it  all  back  to  me."  He  was 
only  14  at  the  time. 

Dreams,  as  has  been  so  often  pointed  out,  being  a  specially  weak 
class  of  evidence,  it  was  not  my  intention  to  give  any  further 
specimens  in  this  chapter ;  but  at  the  last  moment  some  records  have 
been  received  which  claim  admittance.  The  force  of  cases  where  a 
dream  exactly  reproduces  the  thoughts  of  a  person  in  the  dreamer's 
vicinity  is  so  much  increased  by  their  multiplication  in  the  experience 
of  the  same  two  persons,  that  the  following  additional  instance,  from  the 
narrators  of  case  90,  needs  no  apology.  Mrs.  Fielding  writes : — 
"  Yarling^on  Rectory,  Bath,  19th  May,  1886. 
(700)  "  I  sleep  badly,  and  on  Monday  night  it  was  2  o'clock  when  I 
slept.  I  had,  for  half-an-hour  before  going  off,  fixed  my  mind  upon  every 
turn  and  corner  of  my  girlhood's  home  (where  I  have  not  been  for  above  20 
years)  in  Scotland.  My  father,  a  squire,  had  a  neighbour  squire,  called 
Harvey  Brown.  In  my  whiling  away  the  night,  I  dwelt  upon  him,  and  his 
house  and  family,  particularly.  My  husband  knew  him  only  by  name, 
but  of  course,  knew  my  home,  and  loves  it  as  much  as  I  do.  He  and  I 
awoke  at  6.  Before  a  word  of  any  kind  was  said,  he  said  to  me,  '  I  have 
had  such  a  strange  dream  about  Harvey  Brown,  and  been  at  the  old  home, 
wandering  about  it.'  What  made  it  seem  stranger  is  that  Harvey  Brown 
is  a  man  we  never  spoke  of  in  our  lives,  or  for  20  years  have  ever  thought 
of,  till  Monday  night  in  idleness  I  went  over  old  meetings  with  him  ;  and 
I  was  wide  awake  and  my  husband  asleep  ;  he  had  slept  heavily  all  the 
night  after  a  1 2  mile  walk ;  so  there  was  no  possibility  of  my  leading  his 
mind  near  Scotland,  in  any  conversation  even,  before  he  slept. 

"  Jean  Eleanora  Fielding. 
"J.  M.  Fielding." 

The  chief  interest  of  the  next  case  depends  on  the  repetition  of  the 
dream.  I  have  implied  (Vol.  I.,  p.  358,  note)  that  distinct  repetition  on 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  701 

several  successive  nights,  though  by  no  means  unexampled,  is  very 
decidedly  rare,  in  dreams  of  purely  subjective  origin  ;  and  the  repeti- 
tion in  a  case  of  telepathic  origin  may  fairly  be  taken  as  an  indication 
of  that  special  intensity  which  is  shown  also  in  other  ways — notably 
often  by  the  exceptional  sense  of  reality  surviving  into  waking  hours 
(see  case  482).  I  do  not,  however,  number  the  account,  as  the  close- 
ness of  the  coincidence  cannot  be  completely  determined.  The 
narrator  is  Dr.  Gibert,  the  leading  physician  at  Havre,  who  was 
concerned  in  case  688. 

"  Rue  Sery,  le  Havre. 

"  19  Mai,  1886. 

"La  scene  se  passait  en  1849,  au  printemps.  Un  vieillard  age  de 
84  ans,  du  nom  de  Borel,  grand-oncle  de  ma  mere,  demeurant  pres  Geneve, 
au  petit  Sacconex,  vint  un  samedi  dejeuner  a  la  maison.  Nous  demeurions 
a  la  Monnaie,  campagne  aux  portes  de  Geneve,  a  une  distance  de 
4  kilometres  de  la  demeure  du  vieillard.  II  etait  parfaitement  portant. 
Deux  jours  apres  sa  visite,  dans  la  nuit  de  dimanche  au  lundi,  a  deux 
heures  du  matin,  au  milieu  de  son  sommeil,  ma  mere  se  reveille  en  criant, 
'  L'oncle  est  mort ;  je  le  vois  a  terre,  les  bras  etendus  ! '  Mon  pere  chercha 
a  la  rassurer,  mais  la  nuit  fut  sans  sommeil. 

"  Le  lundi,  mon  pere  nous  raconta  le  reve  de  ma  mere,  et  nous  en 
rimes,  lui  disant  que  si  l'oncle  etait  mort  on  serait  venir  nous  prevenir. 
Dans  la  nuit  de  lundi  au  mardi,  a  la  meme  heure,  nouveau  reveil  de  ma 
mere,  qui  crie  de  meme,  '  L'oncle  est  mort ! '  Enfin,  dans  la  nuit  de  mardi 
au  mercredi,  meme  scene. 

"  Le  mercredi,  mon  pere,  qui  ^tait  juge  de  paix,  me  pria  de  I'accom- 
pagner  au  petit  Sacconex,  aiin  de  convaincre  ma  mere  que  son  reve,  repete 
trois  fois,  n'etait  qu'un  reve.  A  peine  arrive  a  la  demeure  de  nom  oncle, 
on  nous  dit  que  le  vieillard  n'avait  pas  paru  depuis  trois  jours.  La  petite 
maison  isolee  etait  close  de  toutes  parts.  Mon  pere  fit  sauter  un  volet,  et 
nous  vimes  dans  la  cuisine  le  vieillard  etendu.  Nous  penetrames  par 
I'ecurie,  et  j'allais  relever  le  malheureux,  qui  etait  mort,  la  tete  dans  le 
foyer,  face  contre  terre,  les  bras  Etendus,  quand  mon  pere  me  fit  remarquer 
que  le  crane  etait  fracasse.  II  avait  ete  assassine.  L'assassin  fut  pris, 
condamne  a  mort,  et  execute.  II  avoua  tout  apres  sa  condamnation.  II 
avait  tue  le  vieillard  le  dimanche,  entre  midi  et  une  heure.  Le  reve  de 
ma  mere  avait  done  eu  lieu  douze  ou  treize  heures  apres  le  crime. 

"  Dr.  Gibert." 

We  have  procured  from  the  Departement  de  Justice  et  Police,  at 
Geneva,  a  copy  of  the  Proces-verbal  made  by  the  ofiicial  who  inspected 
the  scene  of  the  crime  immediately  after  the  murder  was  discovered,  and 
who  received  on  the  spot  the  evidence  of  M.  Gibert  j>jere.  This  document 
completely  confirms  Dr.  Gibert's  account  of  the  murder,  and  of  the  dis- 
covery of  the  body  lying  face  downwards  on  the  hearth — the  arms 
however,  not  "  etendus,"  but  "raccourcis  sous  I'estomac  ";  but  it  shows 
that  his  recollection  is  not  correct  as  to  dates  and  days.  The  murder 
was  discovered  about  6  p.m.  on  Thursday,  November  9,  1848;  and  M. 
Gibert  pere  stated  that  he  had  made  the  visit  to  the  house,  which  led  to 

702        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION 

the  discovery,  on  hearing  that  his  uncle  had  not  been  seen  by  the  neigh- 
bours since  the  Tuesday  evening.  It  seems  probable  therefore  that  the 
murder  was  committed  on  the  Tuesday  night.  ^  It  may  fairly  be  supposed 
that  Dr.  Gibert  is  at  least  as  likely  to  be  right  in  his  statement  that  the 
dreams  fell  on  the  nights  immediately  preceding  the  discovery,  as  in  his 
statement  of  the  particular  days  of  the  week  on  which  they  fell — since  his 
recollection  of  the  days  of  the  week  is  connected  with  his  recollection, 
proved  incorrect,  as  to  the  day  on  which  the  murder  fell ;  and  this 
hypothesis  is  somewhat  favoured  by  his  recollection  that  there  was  an  in- 
terval of  more  than  a  day  between  the  last  visit  of  M.  Borel  to  the 
Giberts'  house  and  the  first  dream.  It  is  not  improbable,  therefore, 
that  one  of  the  dreams  very  closely  coincided  with  the  murder.  But 
after  this  dream  there  would  be  room  for  only  a  single  repetition — on 
the  Wednesday  night. 

The  next  two  cases  illustrate  the  point  so  often  emphasised — the 
psychological  identity  of  dreams  and  waking  phantasms — in  a  rare 
and  interesting  way ;  a  telepathic  impression  taking  effect  first 
as  a  dream,  and  afterwards  as  a  hallucination.  In  the  first  of  the 
two  cases  there  was  an  interval  of  a  good  many  hours  between  the 
two  experiences.^  In  the  second  case,  the  visual  hallucination  was 
apparently  a  prolongation  of  the  dream-image  into  waking  moments 
(see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  390-1) ;  but  the  waking  experience  included  a 
further  feature — a  hallucination  of  hearing. 

The  following  account  was  obtained  through    the    kindness    of 

Mrs.  Walwyn,  of  9,   Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol,  who  has  known  the 

narrator  from  a  boy. 

"February  24th,  1886. 

(701)  "'I  dreamed  that  Maggie,  my  sister-in-law,  had  been  taken 
seriously  ill.  The  next  evening,  when  I  went  into  the  dining-room  to  have 
my  usual  smoke  previous  to  going  to  bed,  just  after  I  entered  the  room, 
Maggie  suddenly  appeared,  dressed  in  white,  with  a  most  heavenly 
expression  on  her  face.  She  fixed  her  eyes  on  me,  walked  round  the 
room,  and  disappeared  through  the  door  which  leads  into  the  garden.  I 
felt  I  could  not  speak  ;  but  followed  her.  On  opening  the  door  and 
outside  shutter  nothing  was  to  be  seen.     I  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this. 

'"H.  E.  M.'" 

Mr.  M.'s  mother  writes  to  Mrs.  Walwyn  : — 

"  H.  and  his  wife  were  in  England  in  the  autumn,  and  returned  on  the 
9th  November.  They  had  been  visiting  the  parents  in  L. — General  and 
Mrs.  R.  They  left  the  next  younger  sister  apparently  in  her  usual  health. 
On  Friday,  the  20th,  she  was  at  the  theatre  with  friends.     At  1  a.m.  she 

1  If,  as  Dr.  Gibert  says,  the  murderer  made  a  full  confession,  it  is  probable  that  some 
record  of  the  hour  of  the  murder  exists.  But  we  cannot  obtain  any  information  as  to 
such  a  confession,  either  from  official  sources  or  from  the  leading  Geneva  newspaper  ;  and 
the  Secretary  of  the  Departement  de  Justice  tells  us  that  the  man  always  persisted  in  his 
denial,  and  that  the  hour  remained  doubtful.  He  adds,  "  On  a  suppost^  que  c'etaitle  soir." 

-  Compare  case  659  ;  and  also  case  283,  where  the  hallucination  preceded  the  dream. 
For  cases  where  a  hallucination  has  been  itself  repeated  after  an  interval,  see  p.  237,  note. 

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  703 

was  seized  with  violent  internal  pains  ;  these  continued  all  day,  but  no 
danger  was  apprehended  till  4.45  p.m.,  when  she  became  insensible,  and 
at  5.15  all  was  over.  The  cause  of  death,  'perforation  of  the  stomach.' 
On  the  Saturday  night  H.  dreamt  that  Maggie  had  been  taken  dangerously 
ill ;  the  next  evening  when  he  went  into  the  dining-room  as  usual  to 
have  his  smoke  previous  to  going  to  bed,  just  after  he  entered  the 
room  Maggie  suddenly  appeared  to  him.  [Mrs.  M.'s  description  of  the 
appearance  exactly  coincides  with  her  son's  account.] 

"  He  told  me  in  the  morning  what  had  happened.  I  tried  to  persuade 
him  it  was  only  an  optical  delusion,  but  he  knew  better.  Why  the 
apparition  should  have  come  to  H.  is  most  extraordinary,  for  he  was  not 
in  the  least  superstitious,  nervous,  or  fanciful.  The  only  way  we  can 
account  for  it  is  that  the  telegram  which  the  G-eneral  sent  off  on  Sunday 
never  reached  us,  and  it  was  actually  Wednesday,  the  day  of  the  funeral, 
before  we  heard  the  sad  news,  and  she  might  have  known  this  and  come 
to  tell  us  that  she  was  gone.  "  R.  L.  M." 

We  find  from  an  obituary  in  the  Leamington  News  that  Miss  R.  died 
on  21st  November,  1885,  and  that  she  "remained  perfectly  conscious 
until  5  o'clock,  when  she  suddenly  collapsed  and  died  in  a  quarter  of  an 
hour." 

The  final  case  is  from  Mr.  M.  S.  Griffin,  of  San  Remo,  Wey- 
mouth. 

"May,  1886. 

(702)  "  I  have  been  requested  to  give  an  account  of  an  odd  coincidence 
which  occurred  some  three  years  since.  (I  am  no  believer  in  spirits,  and 
believe  the  following  was  the  result  of  illness.)  I  was  in  the  tropics,  and,  at 
the  time  I  mention,  laid  up  with  fever,  when  one  night  I  had  a  dream  about 
an  old  lady  friend  of  mine.  I  woke  up  suddenly,  and  thought  I  saw  her 
at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  the  strange  part  was  I  thought  I  heard  her 
speak.  She  seemed  to  be  dressed  in  white.  I  told  this  to  a  friend,  who 
only  laughed  at  me  and  said  I  was  ill,  but  at  the  same  time,  he  put  down 
the  date  and  hour.  A  few  mails  after,  I  heard  of  the  old  lady's  death,  at 
the  same  date  and  hour.  I  have  no  belief  in  spirits  whatever,  but  this 
was  a  fact." 

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Griffin  supplied  the  following  fuller 
account. 

"June  15,  1886. 

"At  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  June,  1882,  I  had  been  in  Jamaica 
for  about  18  months.  I  had  been  ill  with  country  fever,  but  was 
convalescent,  though  still  very  weak.  I  was  sleeping  in  a  room  next  that 
of  a  friend,  with  the  door  open  between.  I  had  a  dream,  in  which  my 
mind  went  back  to  old  times  when  I  had  seen  much  of  the  lady 
I  mentioned;  and  then  I  became  aware  that  she  was  dead,  in 
a  room  which  seemed  to  be  near  me,  and  that  I  wanted  to  get  to  her  \ 
and  as  this  thought  flashed  across  me,  I  seemed  to  see  her.  Then  I  woke 
with  a  sudden  start,  and  distinctly  saw  her  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed, 
dressed  in  white,  and  with  the  hands  by  her  side.  The  face  was  extremely 
distinct,  and  quite  unmistakeable.  Had  a  real  person  been  standing  in 
that  place,  I  certainly  could  not  have  distinguished  the  features,  as  it  was 

704  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION 

a  dark  night.^  The  figure  plainly  pronounced  my  name,  '  Marcus,'  once, 
and  then  gradually  disappeared  as  I  watched  it.  It  remained  visible  a 
sufficient  number  of  seconds  for  me  to  be  keenly  aware  that  I  was  awake  ; 
I  felt  quite  clearly,  the  former  experience  was  a  dream,  then  I  woke,  and 
now  this  is  a  waking  reality.  After  the  disappearance,  I  called  out,  and 
my  friend  came  in.  I  described  the  whole  experience  to  him,  and  he 
was  sufficiently  impressed  with  it  to  notice  the  time — which  was  a  few 
minutes  past  midnight,  June  11th — and  to  note  the  occurrence  at  once  in  his 
diary.  The  next  morning  he  and  others  laughed  at  the  matter,  but  could 
not  but  be  impressed  by  its  reality  to  me. 

"About  three  weeks  afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  daughter  of 
my  friend,  informing  me  of  her  mother's  death  in  England,  on  June  11th, 
soon  after  5  a.m.  My  friend  and  I  calculated  the  difference  of  longitude, 
and  the  hours  corresponded  to  within  a  few  minutes.  I  had  no  idea  of 
the  lady's  being  ill,  and  had  neither  been  anxious  about  her  nor  thinking 
about  her.  In  conversation  with  the  family,  two  years  later,  they  told  me 
that  a  few  minutes  before  her  death  she  said,  '  Tell  Marcus  I  thought  of 
him.'  I  may  mention  that  this  lady  had,  three  years  before,  nursed  me 
through  a  dangerous  illness ;  and  I  had  a  warm  affection  for  her. 

"  I  do  not  recollect  on  any  other  occasion  in  my  life  experiencing 
the  continuation  of  a  dream-image  into  waking  moments ;  nor  have  I  ever 
had  a  hallucination  either  of  sight  or  hearing. 

"Marcus  Southwell  Griffin." 

Mr.  Griffin  kindly  allowed  me  to  copy  the  following  sentence  from  the 
letter  which  announced  the  death  : — 

"  Alphington. 

"June  17,  1882. 

"  Mother  died  on  St.  Barnabas'  Day  [i.e.,  June  11],  at  5.20,  and  was 
buried  on  the  Thursday  following,  June  15th,  1882." 

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  in  the  Register  of  Deaths. 

The  next  letter  that  Mr.  Griffin  received  made  it  quite  clear  that  the 
5.20  was  A.M. ;  and  in  conversation  with  the  family  since,  the  death  was 
described  to  him  as  having  taken  place  before  breakfast. 

[Mr.  Griffin  has  now  no  separate  recollection  of  the  date  of  his  vision. 
He  had  an  idea  that  the  death  had  been  on  June  1 5,  not  having  looked  for 
some  time  at  the  letter  in  which  it  was  announced,  where  it  will  be  seen 
that  June  15  (the  day  of  the  funeral)  is  the  only  day  of  the  month 
mentioned,  the  day  of  the  death  being  otherwise  described.  The 
"June  11  "  in  the  foregoing  account  was  added  after  he  had  referred  to 
this  letter.  But  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  he  is 
justified  in  his  conviction  that  his  vision  took  place  on  June  11.  He  can 
hardly  be  wrong  in  his  recollection  that  he  and  his  friend  made  a  careful 
computation  of  the  longitude,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  how  close  the 
coincidence  was ;  and  that  they  specially  noticed  a  slight  discrepancy. 
(The  difference  of  longitude  being  about  73|°,  the  time  of  the  death  would 
correspond  with  about  12.30  a.m.,  not  12.10  a.m. ;  so  that  if  the  two  times 
are  quite  accurately  given,  Mr.  Griffin's  experience  preceded  the  death  by 
about  20  minutes.)  Now  persons  who  took  this  amount  of  trouble  with  regard 

'  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  462  (note)  and  551 ;  and  compare  case  698,  above. 

IF  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  705 

to  the  hours,  may  fairly  be  assumed  not  to  have  made  a  gross  blunder 
as  to  the  identity  of  day ;  even  if  Mr.  Griffin  is  mistaken  (which 
there  is  no  reason  for  supposing)  in  his  recollection  that  the  means  for 
establishing  the  identity  of  day  were  there  in  black  and  white  before 
them.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  diary  has  been  preserved,  and  that 
the  evidence  will  in  time  be  completed  by  our  obtaining  the  entry. 
The  friend  who  made  it  is  at  present  in  America,  and  Mr.  Griffin  has 
written  to  him,  but  doubts  whether  the  last  address  given  will  now 
find  him.  He  is  sure,  he  thinks,  to  have  news  of  him  before  very  long.  I 
may  mention  that  Mr.  Griffin's  mother  told  me  that  her  son  gave  her  a  full 
description  of  the  occurrence  on  his  return  to  England,  not  very  long  after 
it  took  place.] 

I  naturally  cannot  convey  to  others  the  full  effect  of  Mr.  Griffin's 
viva  voce  description.  Though  he  had  not  attributed  any  scientific 
importance  to  the  incident,  he  impressed  on  me  that  his  own 
experience,  taken  alone,  and  quite  apart  from  the  facts  which 
he  learnt  afterwards,  was  to  him  absolutely  unique — by  far  the 
strangest  and  most  perplexing  thing  that  had  ever  happened  to  him. 
It  gave  him  precisely  the  same  vivid  feeling  of  astonishment  that  the 
sanest  of  my  readers  would  receive  if  they  looked  up  from  this  page, 
and  saw  a  friend  standing  palpably  before  them,  who  gazed  at  them, 
addressed  them,  and  then  vanished  into  air.  As  regards  the  coinci- 
dence, Mr.  Griffin  will  allow  me  to  add  that  the  view  expressed  in 
his  first  account — namely,  that  his  own  illness  was  a  sufficient 
explanation  of  his  experience,  and  that  the  coincidence  therefore  was 
accidental — is  not  that  which  he  now  holds.  I  pointed  out  to  him 
(as  so  often  in  the  course  of  these  pages)  that  the  theory  of  accident 
which  would  be  the  reasonable  one  if  the  particular  experience 
in  question  stood  alone  or  nearly  alone  in  our  generation,  becomes 
unreasonable  when  the  case  is  only  one  of  a  large  class ;  and  I  can 
only  hope  that  others  may  agree  with  him  in  finding  this  argument 
as  just  as  it  is  obvious. 

Here  I  must  stop.  Cases  continue  to  reach  us  which  may  claim  a 
place  in  a  future  collection ;  but  time  is  needed  for  inquiry  into  their 
details  ;  and  the  limits  of  space  proposed  for  the  present  work  have 
already  been  overpassed.  To  those  whom  it  may  have  interested,  its 
last  word  must  be  a  reminder  that  to  them  we  look  for  vigorous  aid 
in  the  accumulation  of  further  facts,  which  may  confirm  or  modify  our 
conclusions. 

VOL.   II.  2  z 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

IN  COLUMN  IV. 

Auditory. 

Dream. 

Emotional. 

Gustatory. 

Ideational. 

M 

= 

Motor. 

O 

— 

Olfactory, 

H 

= 

Sensation  of  pain 

&c. 

T 

=: 

Tactile. 

V 

= 

Visual. 

,UMI 

sT  V. 

w 

= 

Wife. 

m 

— 

Mother. 

d 

= 

Daughter. 

s 

= 

Sister. 

a 

= 

Aunt. 

n 

;= 

Niece. 

c 

=:: 

Cousin  (female). 

g 

= 

Grandmother  or 

Granddaughter. 

ST 

^ 

Strangers. 

H     =     Husband. 

F     =     Father. 

S      =     Son. 

B      =     Brother. 

U     =     Uncle. 

N     =     Nephew. 

C      =     Cousin  (male). 

G     =     Grandfather  or  Grandson. 

FR  =     Friends.  1 

AC  =    Acquaintances.! 

In  column  V.,  the  first  letter  indicates  the  percipient,  the  second  the  agent, 
indicating  females  are  in  small  type. 

The  large  majority  of  the  names,  of  which  only  the  initials  are  here  given,  appear  in 
full  at  the  pages  indicated. 

Letters 

NO. 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
I. 

88 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

NATURE  OF 
IMPRESSION 

RELATIONSHIP 
OP  P.  TO  A. 

1 

Blind  Man  —  Dr.  E 

Hypnotic 

sleep 

M 

AC 

2 

89 

Miss  C.  —  Rev.  J.  L.  S. 

aC 

3 

90 

Patient  —  Mr.  B. 

M 

aC 

4 

90 

Mr.  N.  D.  —  Mesmerist 

M 

AC 

5 

90 

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T. 

M 

f  R 

6 

91 

Miss  L.  F.  C.  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T. 

M 

cC 

7 

93 

Miss  V.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B. 

M 

f  R 

8 

94 

E.  C  — Rev.  L.  L. 

I 

aC 

9 

96 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  A.  S. 

lorV 

aC 

10 

98 

Friends  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T. 

S 

FFR 

11 

98 

Girl  —  Son  of  Rev.  L.  L. 

I 

aC 

12 

99 

Friends  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T. 

I 

FFR 

13 

103 

Rev.  W.  S.  M.  —  Friend 

VA 

Fr 

14 

104 

MissL.    S.  V.\         Mv    C!     TT     PI 

MissE.  C.V.j-^'^-^-^-^- 

V 

ffR 

15 

106 

Mrs.  L.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B 

VT 

aC 

16 

108 

Miss  V.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B. 

VT 

f  R 

17 

188 

Mrs.  A.  S.  —  Mr.  A.  S. 

S 

wH 

18 

190 

Mrs.  N.  —  Rev.  P.  H.  N. 

0 

wH 

19 

191 

Rev.  J.  D.  —  Miss  J.  W. 

I 

Fr 

20 

194 

Mrs.  B.  —  Mrs.  G. 

lorV 

d  m 

21 

196 

Mr.  K.  —  Mrs.  K. 

I 

Hw 

22 

197 

Miss  M.  —Mrs.  K. 

E 

c  e 

23 

199 

Mr.  F.  W.  —  Mr.  R.  W.  B. 

D 

BB 

24 

202 

Mrs.  W.  —  Sir  J.  C.       ... 

D 

dF 

]  It  has  not  been  possible  to  draw  the  line  between  acquaintance  and  friendship  with 
precision.  The  percipient  and  agent  have  been  classed  as  friends  in  cases  where  the 
account  indicates  some  strength  of  attachment  on  both  sides  or  on  one  side.  Where  there 
is  no  clear  sign  of  such  attachment,  the  more  general  designation  of  acquaintances  has 
been  adopted. 

VOL.  II.  '  2  z  2 

708 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

PAGE. 

NATUEE  OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
I. 

PERCIPIENT  AND    AGENT. 

IMPRESSION 

OP  P.  TO  A. 

25 

204 

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C 

V 

mS 

26 

207 

Mr.  G.  M.  —  Mr.  R.  K 

V 

CC 

27 

209 

Mr.  R.  R.  —  Mr.  X.      

lorV 

FR 

28 

210 

Mr.  N.  J.  S.  —  Mr.  F.  L 

V 

FR 

29 

212 

Mr.  A.  B.  —  Mrs.  F 

V 

Ac 

30 

214 

F.  R.  —  Mrs.  A.  (?)         

A  V 

st 

31 

216 

Capt.  J.  C.  —  Mr.  J 

V 

N  U 

32 

218 

Rev.  R.  B.  —  Mrs.  B 

V 

Sm 

33 

221 

MissS.  —Capt.  J.  B 

A 

f  R 

34 

222 

Mt.  A.  Z. —Mr.  S.  B 

A 

FR 

35 

225 

Mrs.  N.  —  Rev.  P.  H.  N 

AT.  D 

f  R 

36 

227 

Mr.    J.    D.\      ^      -g 

Miss  R.    S./      ^'^--^ 

A 

Ffr 

37 

234 

Col.  L.  A.  —  SirL.  G 

I 

FR 

38 

235 

Mr.  K.  —  HerrS 

I 

FR 

39 

236 

MissB.  — Mrs.  B 

I 

dm 

40 

236 

Count  G.  —Mr.  R.  B 

I 

ST 

41 

237 

Miss  C.  B.  M.  —  Jeweller        

E 

s  T 

42 

239 

Miss  C.  E.  S.  —  Mr.  W.  B.  S 

I 

sB  (?) 

43 

240 

|-}        Miss                    

/E 

s  s 

s  s 

44 

242 

Mrs  W  S'}  ~  ^^^^  ^-  ^-  ^^  ^^-  ^-  ^• 
Mrs.' H.' D.' —  Mr.  C ... 

I 

Ff  Rr 

45 

243 

I 

aC 

46 

244 

Miss  A.  S.  J.  -  Miss  M.  L.  J 

I 

s  s 

47 

245 

Mr.  M.       Miss  J           

I 

Cc 

48 

246 

Miss  A.  0.  —  Mr.  D.  A 

I 

cC 

49 

247 

Mrs.  A.  —  Rev.  A.  W.  A 

I  A 

wH 

50 

247 

BishopW.  —  Son 

I 

FS 

51 

249 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  T.  W.  S 

I 

wH 

52 

249 

Mme.  0.  —  Mons.  0 

I 

wH 

53 

251 

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  G 

lorV 

mS 

54 

253 

Miss  M.  E.  P.  —  Mr.  J 

I 

f  R 

55 

253 

Mr.  R.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C.             

I 

BB 

56 

255 

Mr.  J.  G.  K.  —Mother-in-law           

lorV 

Fr 

57 

256 

Miss  M.  E.  P.  —  Sister 

I 

s  s 

58 

257 

Mr.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.  or  Miss  H 

lorV 

S  m  or  B  s 

59 

258 

Miss  G.  —  Mr.  H.  G 

lorV 

sB 

60 

260 

Mrs.  J.  —  Mr.  W.  R 

lorV 

sB 

61 

261 

Mr.  J.  A.  W.  —  Mr.  T.  W.  or  Mr.  G.  W.    ... 

lor  V 

BB 

62 

262 

Mr.s.  L.  —  Mr.  A 

lorV 

f  R 

63 

263 

Mrs.  B.  —Friend           

lorV 

f  R 

64 

264 

Lady  L.  —  Sir  B.  L 

lorV 

wH 

65 

265 

Miss  L.  —  Mr. 

TorV 

fR 

66 

267 

"F.R.C.  P.  "  —  Landlord         

lorV 

AC 

67 

271 

Mr.  A.  C.  —Sister        

E 

Bs 

68 

271 

Hon.  Mrs.  P.  —  Sister 

{—  Brother^ 

E 

s  s 
fBB 

69 

272 

Mr.  J.  D.  H.  4  —  Uncle     \     

!  —  Mother  I 

E 

4NU 
tSm 

70 

273 

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  S.  R 

E 

wH 

71 

274 

Dr.  E.  L.  F.  —  Grandmother 

E 

Gg 

72 

275 

Mrs.  B.  —  Rev.  J.  J 

E 

dF 

73 

276 

Mr. Mrs. 

E 

Hw 

74 

277 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S 

E 

wH 

75 

278 

Dr.  J.  D.  —  Father        

ED 

SF 

76 

280 

Rev.  J.  M.  W.  —Twin  brother         

E 

BB 

77 

281 

Mr.  J.  C.  —  Twin  brother        

E 

BB 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

709 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
I. 

78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 

127 

128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 

283 

283 

284 

285 

286 

287 

288 

288 

291 

293 

314 

315 

315 

316 

316 

317 

318 

321 

322 

322 

324 

325 

327 

328 

329 

330 

331 

333 

335 

336 

338 

339 

339 

342 

342 

343 

345 

346 

347 

349 

350 

350 

352 

353 

355 

355 

357 

358 

359 

362 

363 
364 
365 
366 
366 
369 
370 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

Mr.  A.  J.  M.  —  Twin  brother ... 
Rev.  E.  D.  M.  —  Father 

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  C 

Mr.  A.  S.  —  Mrs.  S 

Mrs.  W.  —  Father  

Mr.  P. —Father 

Mrs.  v.— Mr.  V 

Major  K.  —  Father        

Mr.  R.  R.  —  Rev.  T.  H. 

MdUe.  B.  —  Mdlle.  M 

Mr.  E.  P.  T.  —  Mrs.  T. 
Rev.  J.  P.  H.  —  Mrs.  H. 
Mr.  J.  M.  F.  —Mrs.  F. 

Mr.  M.  —Mrs.  M 

Mr.  W.  —  Mrs.  W 

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  C 

Miss  C.  S.  B.  -  Miss  K.  E.     ... 

Mr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C 

Mr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C 

M.  H. -MissM.  M 

Mr.  D.  B.  W.  S.  —  Father       ... 
Mr.  T.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  W. 

Mr.  J.  A.  —Lieut.  O 

Mrs.  M.  —Mr.  M.  ?     

Mrs.  L.  —  Mr.  J.  C 

Coriolanus  —  Mr.  E.  C.  B. 
Miss  E.  J.  M.  —  Rev.  A.  B.  M. 

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  H.  H 

Mrs.  S.  —  Son      

Mr.  A.  A.  —  Son  

Rev.  Canon  W.  —  Mr.  A.  W. ... 

Mrs.  F.  —Mr.  F 

Mrs.  C.  L.  —Mother     

Miss  B.  —  Navvy  

Mr.  G.  G.  —  Mrs.  S 

Mrs.  G.— Son     

Rev.  W.  D.  W.  R.  —  W.  E.    ... 

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  C.  F 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  C.  R.  S. 

Herr  von  R.  —  Capt.  von  P.    . . . 

Miss  L.  K.  D.  —  Friend 

MissK.  G.  —Mr.  M 

Mrs.  J.  —  Mr.  G.  J.  H. 

Mr.  E.  J.  H.  —  Father 

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  F 

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  F.  E.  F 

Miss  C.  A.  —  Mr.  L.  (?) 

Mr.  J.  W.  —Mrs.  W 

Mrs.  H.  B.  —  Colonel  F. 

Mrs.  M.     ^       ,^       . 

MissV.      }-Mrs.A 

Brigade  Surgeon  W.  —  Mother 
Rev.  C.  C.  W.  —  Mr.  W. 

Mrs.  M.  —  Mr.  W 

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  M 

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  G 

Miss  R.  H.  B 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  H 

NATURE  OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

IMPRESSION 

OP  P.  TO  A. 

E 

BB 

M 

SF 

M 

wH 

M 

Hw 

M 

dF 

M 

SF 

M 

wH 

M 

SF 

M 

FR 

M 

f  r 

D 

H  w  or  w  H 

D 

Hw 

D 

H  w  or  w  H 

D 

Hw 

D 

Hw 

D 

wH 

D  (?) 

f  r 

D 

Hw 

D 

Hw 

D 

f  r 

D 

SF 

D 

Fr 

DI 

FR 

D 

wH(?) 

D 

fR 

D 

FR 

D 

cC 

D 

mS 

D 

mS 

D 

FS 

D 

BB 

D 

wH 

D 

d  m 

D 

f  R 

D 

Ac 

D 

mS 

D 

FR 

D 

niS 

D 

fr 

D 

AC 

D 

f  R 

D 

aC 

D 

f  R 

D 

SF 

D 

wH 

D 

mS 

D 

a  C 

D 

Sm 

D 

aC 

[1 

ffr 

D 

Sm 

D 

FR 

D 

sB 

D 

sT 

D 

aC 

D 

1 

D 

sB 

710 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

PAGE. 

NATURE  OF 

RELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
I. 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

IMPRESSION 

OF   P.    TO   A. 

135 

373 

MissP.  — Mr.  J.  T.  M.  P 

D 

sB 

136 

374 

Mrs.  M.  M. —Major  P.            

D 

fR 

137 

375 

Mrs.  M.  M.— Friend 

D 

f  r 

138 

375 

Mrs.  G.  — Miss  A 

D 

a  n 

139 

377 

MissS.  S.  P.  — W.  T 

D 

aC 

140 

378 

Miss  L.  A.  W.  —  Brother       

D 

sB 

141 

380 

Mrs.  H.  —  Sister-in-law           

D 

f  r 

142 

381 

Dr.  Y.  —  Tenants          

D 

AC 

143 

383 

Mrs.  M.  —  Dr.  H 

D 

nU 

144 

383 

S^A}-M— 

/AD 

FR 
sB 

145 

386 

Mrs.V.  S.  — Son           

D 

mS 

146 

395 

LordB.  —  G 

V 

FR 

147 

397 

Mrs.  K.  —  Mr.  E.  K 

M 

mS 

148 

399 

Dr.  E,. — Grandmother            

M 

Gg 

149 

400 

Mr.  W.  D.  —  MissD.             

D(?) 

Fd 

150 

403 

Lord  L.  —  Brother         

A 

BB 

151 

404 

Mrs.  P.  —  Brother         

A 

sB 

152 

406 

Mrs.  R.  —  Son 

A 

mS 

153 

407 

Rev.  A.  J.  —  Mrs.  M.  J 

A 

Fr 

154 

408 

MissT.  —  Mr.HS 

A 

f  R 

155 

409 

Mr.  E.  —  Mrs.  E 

A 

S  m 

156 

410 

Mr. —Father         

A 

SF 

157 

411 

Mr.  H.  C.  F.  —  Mrs.  F 

A 

Sm 

L58 

413 

Mrs.  S.  — E.M 

A 

fr 

159 

414 

Archdeacon  F.  —  Friend          

V 

FR 

160 

415 

Major  M.  —  Miss  S.  M.           

V 

Bs 

161 

416 

Miss  B.  —  Captain  C.  M 

V 

cC 

162 

416 

Mr.J.A.  S.— Dr.  M 

V 

AC 

163 

417 

Rev.W.  J.  B.  — Mr.  R.  D 

V 

FR 

164 

418 

Rev.C.  C.  W.  —Mr.  B 

V 

FR 

165 

419 

Mrs. CaptainP.           

V 

f  R 

166 

420 

mSI}- captain  W 

rDV 

wH 

sT 

167 

424 

Mr.  W.  de  G.  —  Mr.  H.  de  G 

V 

BB 

168 

425 

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  N 

V 

fR 

169 

427 

Miss  T.J.  C.\      ^„ 

Mr.  C.B.         /      ^^^^-              

sT 
FR 

170 

428 

Mrs.  S.  —  Aunt 

V 

n  a 

171 

429 

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  F 

V 

aN 

172 

430 

Mrs.  D.  —  Miss  G 

V 

fr 

173 

431 

Mrs.  B.  —  Captain  G 

V 

f  R 

174 

431 

MissC.  P.  —Major  G 

V 

aC 

175 

433 

Mr.  T.  R.  —  Mr.  J.  H.  H 

D  V 

FR 

176 

434 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W 

TV 

wH 

177 

435 

Mrs.  B.  —  Brother         

VT 

sB 

178 

436 

Miss  E.  A.  S.  —  Mr.  S 

VT 

dF 

179 

437 

Mr.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  B 

TV 

FR 

180 

439 

Mr.  G.  J.  C.  —  Mrs.  R 

T  V 

Na 

181 

440 

Mrs.  W.  —  F.  W 

T  A 

mS 

182 

441 

MissK.  J. —  Miss  B 

A  V 

fr 

183 

443 

Mrs.  R.  —  General  R 

VA 

wH 

184 

444 

Mr.  J.  G.  K.  -I.  K 

AV 

FS 

185 

445 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S.  P 

TVA 

sB 

186 

447 

Miss  B.  —  Grandfather            

VA 

gG 

187 

448 

MissH.  —  R 

VA 

f  r 

188 

449 

Mrs.  P.  —  M.  P 

VA 

mS 

189 

451 

Mrs.  W.— Mrs.  H 

AV 

fr 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES, 

711 

PAGE. 

NATURE    OP 

BELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
I. 

PEKCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

IMPEESSION 

OF  p.   TO  A. 

190 

453 

Mrs.  L.  — Mrs.  E 

A  V 

f  r 

191 

523 

Mr.  T.  W.  G.  —  Mrs. ... 

V 

Fr 

192 

524 

Mr.  B.  —  Mrs.  R 

V 

Ac 

193 

525 

Canon Mr.  

V 

FR 

194 

527 

Miss  R.  —  Captain  W. 

V 

f  R 

195 

528 

MissR.  —  Mrs.  M 

V 

gg 

196 

530 

Mr.  J.  G.  F.  R.       Mrs. 

V 

N  a 

197 

531 

Miss  B. -J.N.             

VA 

f  R 

198 

532 

Mrs.  S.       B                  

AV 

fR 

199 

534 

Mr.  B.  —  Friend            

AV 

Fr 

200 

540 

Miss  C.  —  Mr.  T.  C 

V 

sB 

201 

542 

Mrs.  B.  —  R 

V 

fR 

202 

544 

MissS.  —  Mrs.  A 

V 

fr 

203 

548 

Mrs.  A.  —  Mrs.  C 

V 

d  m 

204 

549 

Mrs.  C.  —  Mrs. 

V 

f  r 

205 

549 

LadyC.  —  Father  H 

V 

fR 

206 

551 

Colonel  J.  —  Miss  J 

V 

Bs 

207 

552 

Mrs.  L.  —  A.  C.             

AV 

fr 

208 

553 

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  E.  R 

A 

wH 

210^ 

556 

Captain  C.  —  Lieut.  0.  C. 

V 

BB 

211 

559 

Miss  L.  —  Great  Uncle 

V 

nU^ 

212 

560 

Dr.  B.  —  Mr.  J.  M 

V 

BB 

213 

561 

Mr.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  P 

V 

Ac 

214 

563 

Mrs.  J.— Mrs.  R 

V 

a  n 

215 

566 

Mr.  J.  R.  —  Mrs.  W 

V 

Fr 

216 

567 

Mrs.  P.  —  Brother         

V 

sB 

217 

568 

Mr.  T.  C.  —  Rev.  J.  C. 

V 

SF 

Vol. 

II. 

218 

30 

Mr.  H.  H.  H.  —  Great  Uncle            

lorV 

NU^ 

219 

31 

Mr.  A.  —Mrs.  A 

V 

Hw 

220 

31 

Mr.  F.  G.  —  Mr.  C.  T. 

V 

FR 

221 

34 

LadyC. —  Mrs.  L 

V 

d  m 

222 

35 

Mr.  R.  S.  —  Mrs.  S 

V 

Hw 

223 

37 

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  W 

V 

nU 

224 

38 

Mdme.  B.  —  Mons.  d'E. 

V 

fR 

225 

40 

Mrs.  R.  —Miss  L.  B 

V 

a  c 

226 

41 

General  H.  —  Miss  H 

V 

Bs 

227 

42 

M.  —  Friend        

V 

Fr 

228 

44 

Rev.  F.  B.  —  Aunt       

V 

Na 

229 

45 

General  F.  —  Friend      

V 

FR 

230 

46 

Mr.  J.  E.  —  Twin  brother 

V 

BB 

231 

47 

Mr.  S.  S.  —  Hon.  R.  G. 

V 

FR 

232 

49 

Miss  E.  H.  H.  —  Mrs.  W.       ... 

V 

f  r 

233 

50 

Mrs.  G.  —Brother         

V 

sB 

234 

51 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  H.  S 

V 

mS  . 

235 

51 

Col.  S.  —  Lieut.  J.  D.  S. 

V 

BB 

236 

52 

MissB.  —Mr.  W.  B 

V 

sB 

237 

54 

E.  M.  G.  —  Friend        

V 

fr 

238 

55 

Mrs.  D.  —  D.  D 

V 

wH 

239 

57 

J.  M.  —  Mr.  W 

V 

FR 

240 

59 

Mrs.  E.  -  Mr.  J.  S 

V 

f  R 

241 

59 

Mr.  S.  J.  M.  —  Friend 

V 

Fr 

1  The  number  209  has  been  accidentally  omitted. 
2  Great  Uncle, 

712 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

61 
63 
66 

67 
68 
69 

70 
71 

72 
74 
75 
76 

78 

80 

81 

f  82 

\  82 

[82 

83 

85 
85 
85 

f86 
88 

j  88 

j  89 

Uo 

91 
92 

93 
94 
96 

97 

100 
100 
102 
103 
104 
105 
105 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 

Mrs.  H. 

Nurse  — Mr.  J.  B. 
Chevalier  S.  F.  —  Mr.  C.  F. 
Major  O.  —  Mr.  J.  E.  H. 
Rev.  W.  E.  D.  —  Friend 
Mr.  A.  I.  —Mr.  E.  P.   ... 

Mrs. Son 

Mr.  A.  L.  —  Professor  C. 

Mr.  T.  H.  C.  —  Mr.  X.... 

Mr.  R.  S.  —  M.  M. 

Mrs.  W.  —  F.  W. 

Rev.  J.  W.  —  Pupil      ... 

Mr.  S.  M.  S.  —  Nurse  S. 

Miss  D.  \ 

Mrs.  M.  / 

Caroline  —  Mrs.  H. 

Mr.  E.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.      ... 

Mrs.  W.  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W. 

Miss  W.  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W. 

Parishioner  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W, 

Four  Friends  —  Miss  H. 

Sister-in-law  —  Mrs.  S. 
Miss  J.  S.  —  Mrs.  S.     ... 
Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  S. 
Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  B. 
MissS.  —  Mr.  B, 
Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  B. 

Sis.R}-^^-B-    - 

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  B. 
Capt.  B.  —  Mrs.  B. 
Capt.  B.  —  Mrs.  B. 

E.  B.  —  Mrs.  B 

Mrs.  B.  —  Mrs.  G. 

Col.  B.  —  Col.  R. 

J.  C.  —  Twin  Brother    ... 

Rev.  W.  M.  N 

Mr.  C.  I 

Mrs.  C.  (  ~ 

Miss  C.         J 

Mr.  J.  S.  —  Mr.  D.  S. 

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  S.  R. 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S. 

Mr.  R.  F.  —  Mr.  J.  T, 

Dr. Brother        

Miss  G Sister      

Servant  —  Mr.  J.  P 

Mr.  L.  T.  —  Son 

Mr.  G.  A.  W.  —  Brother         

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S 

Mr.  W.  T.  B.  —  Mr.  B 

Mrs.  H.  —Mr.  H 

Miss  B.  —Mrs.  B 

Mrs.  W.  —Sister  

Mrs.  W.  —  Mother,  and  (?)  other  relatives. 
Mr.  G.  —  Miss 

Mr.  R.  C.  or  Mrs.  R.  C. 

F. 

NATURE  OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

IMPRESSION 

OF  p.  TO  A. 

V 

sT 

E  V 

BB 

V 

CC 

V 

FR 

V 

FR 

V 

m  S 

V 

AC 

V 

FR 

V 

Ac 

V 

m  d 

V 

FR 

V 

Fr 

V 

c  c  c 

V 

a  c 

V 

Sm 

V 

wH 

V 

dF 

V 

f  R 

(^ 

a  c 

Jv 

Fr 

r 

fr 

(v 

a  c 

V 

f  r 

V 

n  a 

V 

f  r 

I 

f  R 

TVA 

f  R 

V 

f  R 

V 

FfR 

V 

f  R 

V 

Hw 

V 

Fr 

V 

ac 

V 

fr 

V 

FR 

V 

BB 

A 

BB 

A 

mS 

A 

mS 

A 

BB 

A 

BB 

A 

S  S 

A 

aC 

A 

FS 

A 

BB 

A 

mS 

A 

SF 

A 

wH 

A 

d  m 

A 

s  S 

A 

d  m 

A 

Fr 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

713 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
11. 

116 
116 
117 
119 
120 
122 
123 
124 
127 
130 
132 
134 
135 
136 
137 
139 
141 
143 
144 
146 
147 
149 

154 
156 
158 
159 
162 
164 

173 

174 

176 

178 

PEECIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

313 

179 

314 

181 

315 

182 

316 

193 

317 

196 

318 

198 

319 

199 

320 

200 

321 

202 

Mrs.  W.  —  Cousin 
Mrs.  W.  —  E.      ... 
Miss  H.  —  Mrs.  H. 
Rev.  R.  H.  K.  —  "Etta" 
Count  G.  —  Mr.  V. 

Rev. Friend 

Dr.  J.  S.  —  J.  G.  (?) 
Mr.  B.  —  Mrs.  B. 

Mr. Friend 

Miss  V.  —  Mrs.  D. 

Mrs. Mr.  J 

Mrs.  H.  —  Captain  W 

J.  G.  —  Mrs.  G. 
Rev.  P.  H.  N.  —  W.  B. 
Mrs.  R.  L.  —  Mr.  R.  L. 
Rev.  J.  A.  H.  —  Mrs.  P. 
Miss  P.  —  Mr.  M.  P.     ... 
Mrs.  B.  —  Friend 

D.  B.  —  W.  H.  P.  (?)    ... 

E.  S.  —Father 

Mr.  H.  O.  —  Miss  K.  A.  O. 

^^•H-BG.|_R,,.T.H. 
and  others  J 

Mr.  J.  H.  W.  —  Mrs.  W. 

Miss  M.  —  Mr.  J.  T.  M.  P. 

Miss Mr.  V. 

MissB Mrs.  S.     ... 

Mrs.  P.  —  Mr.  L. 

Mrs.  S.  \ 

Mrs.  R.j" 

Captain  B.  / 

Mrs.P.   |_Mrs.G 

Servant  ) 

Mrfk.  }-®^^^^ 

Mrs.  C.      ^ 

Mrs.  B.       V— Mrs.  W. 

Mrs. J 

Mr.  deG.\_jyr-  .  (. 
Mrs.  E.  /  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^• 
Mrs.  W.  \ 

Mr.  E.  M.  W.J 

Miss  V.  M. 

Miss  S.  M. 

C. 

Lord  C.  \ 

LadyC.J 

Rev. \ 

Dr.  C.       / 
Surgeon-Major  S.  \ 
Mrs.  R.  j" 

Rev.  D.  W.  G.\ 
Mrs.  G.  / 

Mr.  E.  W. 
J. 

NATURE   OF 

RELATIONSHIP 

IMPRESSION 

OP  P.  TO  A. 

A 

cC 

A 

fr 

AD 

d  m 

I  or  A 

Fd 

I  or  A 

S  T 

SI 

FR 

A 

AC 

A 

S  m 

E  A 

Fr 

A 

f  r 

S 

mS 

T 

nU 

T  A 

Sm 

T  A 

FR 

AT  V 

f  R 

A  V 

Fr 

VA 

sB 

AV 

f  R 

VA 

FR 

VA 

SF 

VA 

Bs 

rv,  A 

FR 

sssT 

D.  D  (?) 

Gg 

V.  (?V) 

fR 

D.  D 

f  R 

VT  A.  D 

fr 

V.  I 

aC 

{ij.IorV 

/s  B 
\f  R 

[l 

St 

st 

[i 

FR 

FR 

(1 

sT 

SF 

{^ 

f  r 

a  c 

r  E 

\AVT 

Ac 

f  r 

rv 

f  r 

1^ 

a  n 

Iv 

s  s 

\V(?D) 

Bs 

s  s 

{^ 

1 

fV 

1^ 

1 

Iv 

{^ 

1 

{^ 

? 

{IT 

? 

1^ 

•> 

\v 

714 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

322 
323 

334 
335 
336 

337 

338 

339 

340 

341 

342 

343 

344 
345 

346 
347 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
II. 

203 
204 

218 
219 
220 

221 

223 

226 

227 

227 

228 

230 

234 
235 

236 

237 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

324 

205 

325 

208 

326 

209 

327 

210 

328 

210 

329 

211 

330 

213 

331 

213 

332 

215 

333 

217 

Rev. 

(?) 

Lady  C.\ 
Miss  T.  / 
Mr.    B. 
Mrs.  B. 
Miss  B. 
Mrs.  B. 
Sister    /    " 
Capt.  N.  \ 
Mr.  J.  A./ 
Mrs.  R.     \ 
and  others/ 

Snf}-Mr.— (^) 

m£m.H.}    -MissH.  (?), 

Mr.-R    }    -Rev.Mr.H.a). 
Mr.  J.  C.  \ 

Son  /  '  • 

Mr.  L.  \ 
and  others  / 
Rev.  C.  J.  1 

ChUd         /  

Mrs.  H. 

Mr.  H. \  —  Mrs.  H.  (?) 

and  others 
Miss  G. 

Miss  L. /     

Mrs.  S.  \ 

Two  servants/     ■"         

Rev.  W.  R. ) 

MissR.        /       

Mr.  S.        1 

Mrs.  S.        y  

and  others  J 
MrsY.  \ 

Mrs.  B.  / 

Mr.  B.         ^ 

Mrs.  B.        V—  Miss  S. 

and  others  J 

Mr.  L.   ^       „.   T 

Mrs.  L.j-W-I^ 

Mrs   A  1 

TheMisses  AJ-  Commander  A. 

Mr;.W.}-D.M.A. 

Mrs.  P.    \       A    T) 

Miss  P.  J~^-  ^ 

Miss  L.        1        ■      , 
Miss  J.  L./-^^^t 

Child  — Mr.  

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  

Mr.  T.  D.  ^ 

Mrs.  T.  D,  [—  Mrs.  D. 

Friend        J 

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr. 

Mrs.  A. —  Mr. 

NATURE  OP 
IMPRESSION 

,A 
V 
V 
V 

sV(?) 

V 

{^ 
{^ 

{d(?) 

V 
V 
V 
A 

\A 

{i 

{i 

A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 

ii} 

m 

RELATIONSHIP 
OF  P.   TO   A. 

ddF 

AC 

ffR 

m  d 

s  s 

FFR 

FFFffr 

FS 
mS 
m  S 
sss  B 
FR 
sB 

ffR 

V 

SF 

VA 

sB 

VT 

Sm 

V 

fr 

V 

Fr 

V 

nU 

V 

sB 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

715 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
II. 

239 
241 

244 
247 
248 
250 
253 
256 
257 
259 

PEBCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

Mrs.  E.\_j^    

Mr.  W.         \ 

Miss  K.  W.  j 
M.  J.  F. 

P.  W. 

Kev,  F. 

and  2  others)"  ^^^-  ^' 

m£a.b.}-M'-P-M. 

A.  F.  \ 

Mr.  S.  S.  F./" 

Captain  A.  \  _  jyj-j.  jj 

Mr.  H. 
Mr.  B.\ 
Mr.  E.j 

Sir  J.  S.      \ 
Colonel  W.  J 

Mr.  W. 

Mr.  J.  W. 

NATURE  OF 
IMPRESSION 

rvD 
\v 

{I 

/AV 
I  A 

{^} 

RELATIONSHIP 
OF  P.  TO  A. 

f  R 
sT 

FS 
s  B 
st 
ffr 

a  a  C 

GG 

SF 
sT 
B  B 

n  a 
ac 

ST 

SF 

FFR 

ST 
BB 

CASES  IN  THE  SUPPLEMENT. 

NO. 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
11. 

PERCIPIENT   AND  AGENT. 

NATURE   OF 
IMPRESSION 

relationship 

OF   p.   TO  A. 

358 

325 

A.  M.  —  Rev.  C.  H.  T 

TS 

aC 

359 

326 

Mrs.  S.  —  Dr.  E 

GTO 

aC 

360 

328 

Boy  —  Professor  J.  S 

G 

AC 

361 

329 

A.  D.  —  Mons.  M 

S 

FR 

362 

332 

Patient  —  Mons.  C.  R.             

M 

aC 

363 

333 

Patient  —  Professor  B.              

I 

AC 

364 

334 

Patient  — Dr.  G 

IE 

aC 

365 

334 

Patient  — Dr.  G 

I 

aC 

366 

336 

Miss  M.  N.  —  Mrs.  P 

IGTE 

fr 

367 

344 

Mrs.  J.  E.  —  Captain  B 

ITOG 

fR 

368 

346 

Patient  — Dr.  P 

I 

f  R 

369 

347 

Miss  C.  —  Serjeant  C.  and  others      

I 

s  B,  &c. 

370 

349 

Mrs.  M.— Mrs. — - 

I 

fr 

371 

350 

Mr.  C. — Coachman      

I  (?) 

FR 

372 

350 

Rev.  J.  B.  —  Rev.  J.  S.  B 

I 

FS 

373 

351 

Mr.                Dr.                

I 

FR 

374 

353 

Mr.  H.— Father            

I 

S  F 

375 

354 

Miss  B. — Madame  H.            

I 

Fr 

376 

354 

Prof  essor  W.  —  Mr.  R.  W 

I 

BB 

577 

356 

Mrs.  C.  —  G.  C.  or  Brother    — 

I 

mS 

J78 

356 

Mr.  J.  W.  S.       Mrs.                

E 

Fr 

579 

358 

Mrs.                Dr.  S 

I 

f  R 

J80 

360 

Rev.  Mr.  B.  —  Brother            

lorV 

BB 

716 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

PAGE. 

NATURE     OF 

RELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
11. 

PEECIPIENT  AND    AGENT. 

IMPRESSION 

OF  P.   TO  A. 

381 

360 

Miss  C.  -  Mrs. 

E 

s  s 

382 

361 

Mr. Miss  E and  others     

F  d,  &c. 

383 

362 

Miss Miss  E 

s  s 

384 

363 

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  G 

mS 

385 

364 

Mrs.  W.  —  Insane  patient  (?) 

sT 

386 

364 

Mr.J.  C.        Mr.              

A  C 

387 

368 

Mr.  J.A.  E.  —  ?            

IE 

? 

388 

369 

Mr.  N.  C.  —  ?      

IE 

9 

389 

370 

Rev. Son            

E 

f's 

390 

371 

Mr.  J.  P.— Mr.  B 

I 

FR 

391 

371 

Mr.               Mr.  C 

E 

FR 

392 

372 

Mrs. —  Mr. and  others      

E 

n  U,  n  U, 
f  R 

393 

373 

Mrs. Sons          

E 

niS,  mS 

394 

374 

Mr.  F.  H.  P.  —Mrs.  P 

E 

Sm 

395 

374 

Mrs.  D  — Ada 

E 

fr 

396 

375 

Mr.  S.N.  W.       Mr.                  

E 

FR 

397 

376 

Mr.  F.  M.  —Mrs.  M 

M 

Sm 

398 

377 

Dr.  E.  L.  F.  —  Patient            

M 

Ac 

399 

377 

Mr.  W.  B.  —  Son          

M 

FS 

400 

378 

Herr  von  S.  —  Frau  von  S 

M 

Sm 

401 

379 

Mr.  N.— Miss  N 

M 

Fd 

402 

380 

Mr.  A.  A.  W.  —  Mrs.  W 

D 

Sm 

403 

380 

Mr.  F.  —  Mrs.  F 

D 

Hw 

404 

381 

Kev.  P.  T.  D.|      J. 

MissD.            j— degress       

{S} 

A  ac 

405 

382 

Mr.  F.  M.  I      ^      ^ 

Brother       /~  ^^^-  ^ 

Mr.  S.        1 

PI 

SSm 

406 

382 

Mr.  W.  S.  V— Mrs.  S 

Mr.  J.  S.  J 

fe 

SSSm 

407 

383 

Miss  J.  W.  —  M.  H 

D 

fr 

408 

385 

Mrs.  H.— Miss  H 

D 

m  d 

409 

385 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S 

D 

mS 

410 

386 

Servant  —  Mr.  E.  C.  T 

D 

aC 

411 

387 

Miss  A.  G.  —  Mr.  G 

D 

sB 

412 

387 

Mrs.  O'S.  —  Hon.  J.  L.  O'S 

D 

mS 

413 

388 

General  B.  —  Mrs.  B 

D 

Hw 

414 

388 

Mrs.  B.  —  Servant         

D 

fr 

415 

389 

Miss  A.  J.  M.  —  Mr.  M 

D 

sB 

416 

390 

Mrs.  B.  -  Mr.  J.  B 

D 

mS 

417 

391 

Dean  C.  -  Rev.  E.  T.  C 

D 

BB 

418 

392 

Mr.  A.  S.  —Mr.  S.  S 

D 

BB 

419 

393 

Mrs. Mr.  

D 

mS 

420 

393 

Rev.  W.  B.  B.  —  Mrs.  B 

D 

Fr 

421 

394 

Miss  C.  D.  G.  —  Mrs.  G 

D 

gg 

422 

395 

Colonel  V.  —  Mr.  A.  V 

D 

F  S 

423 

396 

Mrs.  S.  -  Frau  S 

D 

f  r 

424 

396 

Mrs.  W.  — Mr. 

D 

sB 

425 

397 

Mrs.  D.  —  Mrs  W 

D 

fr 

426 

398 

Miss  C.  —  Mr.  

D 

f  R 

427 

399 

Miss  G.  —  Rev. 

D 

aC 

428 

400 

Mrs.  H.  —Mr.  J.  J 

D 

aC 

429 

400 

Mr.  F.  M.  —  Mr.  M 

D 

SF 

430 

400 

Rev.  F.  R.  H.        Mr.               

D 

CO 

431 

402 

Miss  D.  -  Rev.  S 

D 

sT 

432 

403 

Mrs.  B  Professor  T 

D 

sB 

433 

404 

Mr.  F.  T.  D.  —  Mr. 

D 

NU 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

717 

PAGE. 

NATURE   OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
II. 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

IMPRESSION 

OP  P.  TO  A. 

434 

404 

Mr.  H.  W.  D.  -  Mrs.  D 

D      , 

Sm 

435 

405 

Mr.  G.  U.  —  Mr.  R.  U. 

D 

BB 

436 

406 

Mrs.  T.  —  ?          

D 

9 

437 

406 

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  M 

D 

n'u 

438 

407 

Mrs.  D.— Mr. 

D 

sB 

439 

408 

Mons.  J.  C.  —  Mens.  H.  C.     .. 

D 

BB 

440 

408 

Mons.  L. — Mons.  L 

D 

SF 

441 

408 

Mr.  A.  G.  S.  —  Mr.  D.  L. 

D 

FR 

442 

409 

Mrs.  S.  —  Rev.  S.  H.  S. 

D 

wH 

443 

411 

Mr.  J.  D.  B.       Mrs. 

D 

Gg 

444 

412 

Mr.  H.  -  Lieut.  A.  E.  H. 

D 

FS 

445 

412 

Rev.  J.  M.  —  Mrs. 

D(?) 

Fr 

446 

413 

Mrs.  P.  —  Miss 

D 

ss  ? 

447 

414 

Fraulein  M.  L.  —  Herr  L. 

D 

dF 

448 

415 

Mr.  W.  B.  —  Mr.  J.  B. 

D 

BB 

449 

416 

Mme.  A.  —  Dr.  A.  F.  S. 

D(?) 

fR 

450 

417 

Miss  A.  E.  R.  —  Mr.  X. 

D 

f  R 

451 

418 

Rev.  G.  L.  F.  —Dr.  H.  H.  F. 

D 

BB 

452 

419 

Mr.  T.  —  Mrs.  T 

D 

Sm 

453 

420 

Miss Mr. 

D 

nU 

454 

421 

Mr. Major 

D 

SF 

455 

422 

Mr.  G.  H.  F.  P.  —  Miss  E.  B. 

D 

Ac 

456 

423 

Miss  M.  —  K.  A.  H.  (?) 

D 

St 

457 

423 

Mrs. Mrs.  M 

D 

fr 

458 

424 

Mrs.  W.  —Mr.  W.  G 

D 

nU 

459 

425 

Miss  E.  F.  H.  —  (?)        

D 

? 

460 

427 

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  B.  C.  and  others 

D 

c  C,  f  R, 
f  r,  wH 

461 

428 

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  W.  H.  or  Miss  H. 

D 

f  R  or  f  r 

462 

429 

Mr.  J.  R.  —  Mr.  J.  M 

D 

FR 

463 

430 

Miss  A.  G.  —  Mrs. 

D 

f  r 

464 

431 

MissB.  —  Mr. 

D 

f  R 

465 

431 

Mr.  J.  W.  B.  —  Dr.  B 

D 

SF 

466 

432 

Mrs.  F.— Mrs.  L 

D 

m  d 

467 

432 

Mme.  S.  (hypnotised)  —  Father 

D 

dF 

468 

433 

Mr.  R.  —  J.  R.  T 

D 

UN 

469 

434 

E.G. —Woman 

D 

a  c 

470 

435 

Miss  M.  —Mr.  M 

D 

dF 

471 

436 

Mrs.  S.  —  W.  S.             

D 

mS 

472 

437 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  E 

D 

sB 

473 

438 

Mrs. Mrs.  W 

D 

f  r 

474 

439 

Mdlle.  R.  —Mme.  R 

D 

d  m 

475 

440 

Mrs.  H. — Mme. 

D 

d  m 

476 

441 

Mrs.  D.  S.  —  Mr.  T.  P 

D 

dF 

477 

442 

Miss  M.  —  Capt.  F 

D 

f  R 

478 

443 

Mr.  L.  H.  S.  —Mr.  H.  S.  (?)   .. 

D 

BB(?) 

479 

443 

Mr.  R.  R.  —  E.  G 

D 

AC 

480 

444 

Mr.  R.  R.  —  W.  T 

D 

AC 

481 

444 

Mr.  C.  —  Rev.  S.  H.  I 

D 

FR 

482 

445 

Mrs.  P.  —Mrs.  B 

D 

n  a 

483 

446 

Mr.  E.  W.  P.  —  Clerk  (?) 

D 

ST(?) 

484 

447 

Miss Mrs.  G^ 

D 

st 

485 

449 

Mr.  R.  H.  D.       Miss 

V 

Fr 

486 

450 

Mrs.  L.  —  M.  T 

V 

c  c 

487 

451 

Mrs.  H.— Mr.  A 

V 

sB 

488 

452 

Mr.  W.  G.  —  Mr.  G 

V 

BB 

489 

453 

Mrs.  N.  —  Capt.  N.        , 

VA 

fR 

490 

454  J 

Lady  C.  —  Mr.  J.  D 

VA 

sT 

718 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

PAGE. 

NO. 

Vol. 
II. 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AUENT. 

NATURE  OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

IMPRESSION 

OF  P.    TO  A. 

491 

455 

Mrs.  C— Mr.  R 

V 

dF 

492 

456 

Mrs.  G.  G.  —  Col.  S 

V 

dF 

493 

457 

Mr.  F.  —  Mr.  F.  F 

V 

FS 

494 

458 

T.  P.  -  Mrs.  P 

V 

Sm 

495 

459 

Mr.  G.  W.  —  Mrs.  B 

VA 

Nai 

496 

459 

Mr.  G.  W.  —  Miss  M. ... 

A 

Fr 

497 

460 

Mrs.  F.  —  Mrs. 

A 

s  s 

49S 

460 

Miss  E.  B.  —  Mr.  H.  A.  D.      ... 

VA 

f  R 

499 

461 

Rev.  W.  B.  L.  —  Mr.  L. 

V 

SF 

500 

462 

Mrs. Mr. 

V 

wH 

501 

463 

Mrs.  B.  —  Miss  G.  B 

V 

f  r 

502 

464 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mother  and  others... 

V,  D,  A 

d  m,  s  s,  s  s 

503 

467 

Mrs.  D.  —  Mr. 

V 

sB 

504 

468 

Mons.  M.  —  Mons.  M.,  Mme.  M. 

TAV 

SF,  Sm 

505 

469 

Miss  H.  W.  —  Maurice ... 

V 

aN 

506 

470 

MissL.  —  Mr. 

A 

sT 

507 

471 

Mr.  F.  A.  S.  —  Mrs.  R. 

A 

Cc 

508 

473 

Mrs.  H. — Mrs. 

T  A 

d  m 

509 

473 

Mrs.  S.— Mrs.  G 

A  V 

d  m 

510 

474 

Rev.  S.  M.  —  Archbishop  of  T. 

V  A 

FR 

511 

475 

Herr  A. — Frau 

V 

Na 

512 

475 

Mrs.  J.  B.  —  Mr.  R.  M. 

VT 

f  R 

513 

476 

E.  H.  —  J.  S.  and  others 

AVT,&c. 

/  f  R,  s  B, 

\s  B,  na,  n  U 

514 

477 

Mrs.  S.  —  Miss  A.  H 

V 

f  r 

515 

477 

Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  G 

V 

s  s 

516 

479 

Miss  E.  C.  —  Mrs.  C 

V 

d  m 

517 

480 

LadyR.  —Hon.  J.  V 

V 

cC 

518 

481 

Mme.  C.  —  Mons.  R 

Mme.  V.  —  Mons.  G 

VA 
A 

f  R 
dF 

519 

482 

Mrs.  F.  — Mrs.  M 

r 

VA 

s  s 

520 

482 

Dr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C 

VA 

Sm 

521 

483 

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C 

V 

mS 

522 

485 

Rev.  J.  C.  —Mrs.  B 

VA 

Fr 

523 

486 

Mr.  B.  —  Mr.  

V 

AC 

524 

486 

Miss  S.  —  Sir  L.  S 

V 

dF 

525 

488 

Mrs.  B.  —  Miss  B.  B 

V 

m  d 

526 

488 

Commander  C.  —  J.  F.  J. 
Commander  C.  —  T 

VA 
VA 

FR 
FR 

527 

490 

Mrs.  H.  —  D.  H 

V  A(?  D ) 

mS 

528 

491 

Miss  M.  N.  —  Lieut.  E.  M.  N. 

AV 

sB 

529 

491 

Mrs.  N.  — J.N 

V 

mS 

530 

492 

Mr.  W.J. —  Mr.  J 

V 

SF 

531 

493 

Mrs. Mr. 

V 

aN 

532 

494 

Mr.  W.  —  Mr.  W 

V 

BB 

533 

494 

Mr.  J.  M.  —  Mr.  A.  M 

VT 

FR 

534 

495 

Mr.  C  — Miss  C 

V 

Bs 

535 

495 

Mr. Father        

V 

SF 

536 

495 

Servant  —  Farm  Lads 

V 

aC 

537 

496 

Lieut.  C.  —  Lieut.  L 

V 

FR 

538 

497 

J.  P.  —Mrs.  P.  ...         : 

A 

S  m 

539 

498 

Hon.  R.  H.  —  Mr.  L 

A  V 

FR 

540 

499 

Mr. Mr.  B 

AV 

FR 

541 

501 

Mrs. Son 

lorV 

mS 

1  Great  Aunt. 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

719 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
II. 

502 
502 
502 
503 
504 
505 
506 
507 
509 
510 
511 
511 
512 
513 
513 
514 
515 
515 
516 
516 
517 
519 
520 
520 
520 
521 
522 
522 
523 
524 
/525 
1526 
526 
527 
528 
529 
529 
530 
531 
532 
533 
533 
534 
536 
537 
538 
538 
539 
540 
541 
542 
543 
543 
544 
545 
545 
546 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

Mrs.  A.  —  Rev.  F.  A.  ... 
Mrs.  O.  —  Mr.  0. 

S.  S.  —Mrs.  F 

Miss  H.  P.  —  Hon.  J.  P. 
Mr.  B.  —Mr.  C.  F.  S.  ... 
J.  R.  —  Mons.  G. 

Mrs.  B.  — Dr. 

T.  —  Mr.  J.  P 

Mr.  J.  A.  C.  —  J.  H.  ... 
Farmer  —  Capt.  W. 

Mrs.  R.— Mr. 

Mrs.  H.  —  Z.        

Mrs.  H.  —  Mrs. ... 

Mrs.  P.  —  Mother 

Miss Mrs. ... 

Miss  M.  C.  —  Mrs.  S.  ... 
Rev.  W.  J.  —  Daughter  (?) 
Mr.  T.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.  ... 
Mr.  T.  H.  —Mr.  E.  H.... 
Rev.  H.  A.  H.  —  Mrs.  B. 
Rev.  H.  A.  H.  —  Mr.  R. 
W.  S.  —  Capt.  S. 

J.  B.— Father     

Mrs.  P.  —Mrs. ... 

G.  — Father         

Mrs.  M.  —  G 

Mrs.  A.  —Mrs.  W. 
Mr.  V.  T.  E.  —Mrs.  E. 

.4. —  Mr.  A.  J 

M.  V.  —  Capt.  de  L.  ... 
Mr.  H.  W.  —Mrs.  W.  ... 
Mr.  H.  W.  —  Mrs.  W.  ... 

MissH.  C.  —Mr. ... 

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  H. 

Mr.  J.  H.  J.  —  Mr. 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mrs. ... 

Mrs.  C.  —Mrs. (?)... 

Dr.  C.  M.  —  Mr.  M.  ... 
LordD.  —Mrs.  P.  C.    ... 

Mrs. Mrs. ... 

Lieut.  W.  C.  B.  —  Mrs.  B. 
Miss  J.  C.  —  H.  C. 
Col.  C.  —  W.  C.  or  J.  C. 
Mrs.  M.  —  Capt.  P. 
General  M.  —  Laundress 
Mr.  H.  —  Dr.  G. 
Mrs.  F.  -General  F.    ... 
Mr.    J.  D.  —Mrs.  F.     ... 
Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  D. 
Mr.  G.— Miss  R. 

Mr. Mrs.  ... 

Bishop  E.  —  Mr.  C. 
Rev.  G.  —  Lord  K. 
Mrs.  deS.  —  Sister 

Mr. Mrs. — -     ... 

Child  — Frau  ■ 

Mrs.  W.  —  G.  W. 

NATURE  OF 

RELATIONSHIP 

IMPRESSION 

OF  p.   TO   A. 

V 

mS 

V 

mS 

V 

st 

V 

dF 

V 

FR 

VA 

f  R 

lor  V 

f  R 

V 

AC 

V 

FR 

V 

AC 

V 

f  R 

V 

f  R 

V 

m  d 

V 

d  m 

V 

d  m 

V 

a  c 

V 

Fd 

V 

Sm 

V 

BB 

V 

Fr 

V 

FR 

V 

SF 

V 

dF 

V 

fr 

V 

dF 

V 

cC 

V 

d  m 

V 

Sm 

AT  V 

FR 

V 

fR 

V 

Sm 

E 

Sm 

V 

f  R 

V 

aC 

V 

FR 

V 

d  m 

V 

a  c 

V 

AC 

V 

Fd 

V 

d  m 

V 

Sm 

V 

sB 

V 

AC 

V 

f  R 

V 

Ac 

V 

FR 

V 

wH 

V 

Bs 

V 

f  R 

V 

Ac 

V 

Sm 

V 

FR 

V 

FR 

V 

s  s 

V 

Hw 

V 

Sm 

V 

mS 

720 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES. 

597 
598 
599 
600 
601 
602 
603 
604 
605 
606 
607 
608 
609 
610 
611 
612 
613 
614 
615 
616 
617 
618 

619 

620 
621 
622 
623 
624 

625 

626 
627 
628 
629 
630 
631 
632 
633 
634 
635 
636 
637 
638 
639 
640 
641 
642 
643 
644 

645 
646 
647 
648 

PAGE, 

Vol. 
II. 

547 
547 
548 
549 
550 
550 
551 
552 
553 
553 
555 
556 
556 
557 
558 
558 
561 
562 
563 
564 
564 
565 

566 

567 
568 
570 
570 
572 
/573 
1573 
574 
574 
575 
576 
576 
578 
579 
580 
581 
582 
583 
583 
584 
585 
586 
590 
591 
593 
595 

597 
598 
600 
600 

PEKCIPIENT   AND    AGENT. 

J. J.  M.  

Major  H.  —  Capt.  H 

Miss  M.  —  Sir  J.  Y 

Officer  —  Lieut.  G 

Mr.  M.  —  H.  M 

Mrs.  P.  —Mr. 

Mr.  A.  —J.  A 

Mr.  J.  W.  —Mrs.  W 

General  K.  —  Mrs.  K 

Mr.  J.  S.  —  Mrs.  S 

Child  — Officer 

Mate  — Brother  ...         

Mr.  F.  L.  M.  —  Mr.  S 

Maori  —  Brother... 

Mrs.  G.— Son     

Mrs.  A.— Mrs.  G 

Mr.  M.  P.  S.  —  Mr.  S 

Mrs.  R.  —  G.  K 

Herr  D.  —  Mr.  G.  S 

MissB.  —  Dr.  H 

Rev.  C.  C.  F.  —  Mrs.  F. 
MissS.  —  Mrs. 

Mrs.  M.  —  Sister  and  mother  . . . 

Rev.  J.  W.  —  Rev.  T.  C.  E.    ... 

Mrs.  M.  —Mr.  

Mrs.  M.  —  Tom ■     

Mrs.  M.  —  W.  M 

MissC.  —  Mr.  J 

Miss  H. — Nephew        

Miss  H.  —  Nephew        

Mr.  C.  —  Mr.  C 

"Master  of  Marines  '"  —  Father 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mrs.  De  M 

MissS.  W.  —  Mr.  W 

Mr.  F.  C.  —  Mrs.  C 

Colonel  M.  T.  —  Miss  —      . . . 

Capt. Mme. 

Miss Lieut.  B 

Child  — Mother 

M. Mrs. 

Mme.  E.  —  Mons.  E 

MissS.  P.  —Mrs.  W 

Colonel  T.  —  Mr.  J.  T 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W 

Mrs.  E.  —  W.  E 

Miss Rev. ... 

Mr. Miss  L.  A.  W.       ... 

Mrs.  A.  W.  —  Major  F.  M.  M. 

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W 

Miss ) 

Miss  E. / 

Mrs.  M.  -1     ^j^^3_ 

—  Mrs.  T. 

NATURE     OF 
IMPKESSION 

Mrs. / 

Lady  G.  \ 

Sister      / 
Miss  S.~\ 
Mrs.  P./   "" 

Mr.  J.  P. 

V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
V 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 
A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

T 

T 
VT 

T 

S 
VA 
VA 

V  A 

V  A 
A  V 
A  V 
VA 
A  V 
A  V 
VA 

I  or  V.  I 

D.  D 

D.  D 

D.  VT 

/E 
IE 

RELATIONSHIP 
OF   P.   TO  A. 

FR 
BB 
f  R 

AC 
FS 
dF 
FS 
Hw 
Hw 
H  w 
dF 
BB 
C  C 
BB 
mS 
a  c 
FS 
mS 
FR 
aC 
Sm 
f  r 

ss,  ss,  dm 

FR 
s  B 
f  R 
mS 
f  R 
aN 
aN 
SF 
SF 
s  s 
f  R 
Hw 
Fr 
Hw 
f  R 
d  m 
d  m 
mS 
s  s 
BB 
wH 
wH 
f  R 
St 
sT 
wH 

s  s  s 

n  a 

s  s 

d  d  m 

cC 
mS 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED   CASES. 

721 

PAGE. 

Vol. 
II. 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

NATURE  OP 
IMPRESSION 

RELATIONSHIP 
OF  P.  TO  A. 

602 
603 
604 

605 

606 
607 
609 
610 
610 
611 
612 
613 

613 
615 

616 

617 
617 

619 

622 
623 

625 
626 
627 

Mrs. 

Mrs.  M. 

Mr.  T.  S. 

—  Capt.  F. 

Mrs. 

—  Mr. 

[  —  Mrs.  S. 
Mr.  J.  S.   . 

Mrs.  P.\ 

Mrs.  C.j 
Mrs.  H. 

Nurse 
Miss  E.  H. 
Mr.  S.  \ 
W.  B.  /  ~ 
C.  F.        ^ 
Nurse       I 
Mrs.  R.     ( 
Capt.  R.  j 
Miss  S.  — 
Miss  J.  — 
Miss  R.  \ 
Servant/ 
Miss  S. 
Miss  M.  S 
Mrs.  S.  \ 
Miss  F.J 
Mrs.  R. 
Mrs 
Miss  E. 
Miss  H, 
Herr  C. 
Fraulein  C.  / 
Mr.  R.  1 

Mr.  J.  C.  R.  J 

Miss ] 

Colonel  W.   [ 

and  others  J 
Mrs.  - 
Mary 
John  - 
Mr.  C 
Mrs.  C. 

and  2  Children 
Miss  W.      \ 
Miss  — W./~ 
Admiral  C.     \ 
Mr.  G.  B.  C.  / 
Miss  A.  S.^ 
Miss  E.  F.  V  — 
Page  J 

Mr.  T.  S.  ^ 
Mrs. 
Child 

Miss  S.      J 
Two  Ladies  i  —  Dr, 

£i:}-M-c. 
m£b:}-"'-g.h. 

2  servants  —  Miss  L. 
Mrs.  B.  and\ 
3  others    / 

-  a  lady 
Capt.  — 

—  Ellen 

Mrs.  C. 

Mr.  W. 
—Mr.  C. 

Miss  S. 

Mr. 

B. 

Miss  W. 

d  m 
d  m 
fr 
a  c 

a  c 
FS 
AC 
SF 
aC 
f  R 
FR 
s  s 
s  s 
aN 
sT 
d  m 
d  m 
aC 
aC 

dF(?) 

f  r 

fr 

BB 

sB 

Ac 

Ac 

f  R 

FR 
FFf  R 

m  d 

s  s 

Bb 

Sm 

f  r 
GGg 

ddF 

S  SF 

st 
st 
St 
FR 
wH 
SF 
f  R 

ff 

f  f  R 

a  a  c 

Ff  f  f  r 

1  Described  by  the  agent  as  "  relations  "  simply. 

3   A 

722 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED   CASES. 

PAGE. 

NATURE  OP 

RELATIONSHIP 

NO. 

Vol. 
II. 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

IMPRESSION 

OP  P.  TO  A. 

672 

628 

£.           }-Mrs.B.a)         ... 

{I 

Bs 

fr 

673 

629 

Miss  E.  B.  \       ^.      n   B   /,^ 

MissS.  B.  /-^^-^issu  b.{.)            

V 

s  s  s 

674 

631 

"^In/othersl-Mi-F 

/A 
lA 

m  d 

s  s 

675 

632 

^5t.l}-Mr.A 

/A  T 
I   A 

dF 

SF 

676 

633 

"A.  B."         \       ^ 
and  others  /       ^^^-              

{i 

NU 
s  s  T  (?) 

677 

634 

Mr.  H.  H.  E.  \       , 

Mr.  E.             J        

{i 

? 

678 

635 

Mr.  M.  P.  S.  \       pj  ., . 

Mrs.  S.            |-Uiild           

ii 

Fr 
a  n 

679 

635 

Mrs.  \  _  Mr 

and  others  / 

lA 

d  F,  g  G, 
a  C 

Mr.  C.  H.  K.^ 

f^ 

BB 

680 

636 

Mr.  K.              V  — Mr.  K 

1^ 

FS 

Mrs.  K.           J 

A 

mS 

681 

636 

K.°' =•}-«-■  s 

11 

St 
a  n 

682 

636 

MnW.H.|  _„,.«_ 

{i 

CC 

aN(?) 

683 

638 

Mrs.  W.  \       j^     jj 

\AT(?) 

f  R 
AC 

684 

639 

and  others  / 

lA 

Sm 
Fffffr 

CASES  IN  THE  ADDITIONAL  CHAPTER. 

685 
686 
687 

689 
690 

PAGE. 

Vol. 

671 
675 
676 
679 

683 

685 

691  687 
692 

693 

690 

694 

692 

695 

693 

696 

694 

697 

695 

698 

696 

699 

699 

700 

700 

701 

702 

702 

703 

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT. 

NATURE  OP 
IMPRESSION 

Miss Mr.  A.  H.  W.  C. 

Fraulein  H.  —  Mrs.  R.  ... 
G.  —  Mr.  E.  M.  C. 
Mme.  B.  —Mens.  G.     ... 

Mme.  D.  —  Mons.  J.  H. 

Mile.  J. 

Dr.  D. 

Mr.  L.  —Mrs.  L. 

Mr.  G.  —Mr.  E.  T.  R.... 

Mrs.  E.  —Mme.  H. 

Mr.  J.  G.  F.  R.  —  Miss  Y. 

Mrs.  T.  —Mr.  W.  T.    ... 

Rev.  R.  M.  H.  —  Uncle 

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  Z. 

E.  B.  —  C.  Br 

Dr.  A.  B.  \       T. 

J.  H.         j-^- 

Mr.  J.  M.  F.  —  Mrs.  F. 

Mr.  H.  E.  M.  —  Miss  R. 

Mr.  M.  S.  G.  —  Mrs. 

V.  V 

V 

M.  I 

Hypnotic 

sleep,  &c. 
Hypnotic 
sleep,  &c. 
Hypnotic 
sleep,  &c. 

I 

I 

A 

A 

V 
(A?)  V 

V 
V  A 

fV 

\v 

D 
D,  V 
D  V  A 

RELATIONSHIP 
OP  P.   TO  A. 

f  R 

s  s 
FR 

aC 

aC 

aC 
Hw 
FR 
f  r 
Fr 
mS 
NU 
a  C 
f  R 

AAC 

Hw 
Fr 
Fr 

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.  723 

An  analysis  of  the  above  table  shows  that  of  882  ^  percipients,  370, 
or  42  per  cent.,  were  males,  and  512,  or  58  per  cent.,  females.  Of  708^ 
agents,  448,  or  63*3  per  cent.,  were  males,  and  260,  or  36"7  per  cent., 
females.  The  preponderance  of  female  percipients  cannot  be  assumed  to 
indicate  any  superior  susceptibility  in  that  sex  to  telepathic  impressions 
(see  above,  p.  3,  last  sentence  of  first  note).  The  preponderance  of  male 
agents  is  probably  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  men  are  more 
liable  than  women  to  accidents  and  to  violent  deaths,  and  that  a  larger 
proportion  of  them  die  at  a  distance  from  their  nearest  relatives  and 
friends. 

Analysing  the  results  of  column  V,  we  find  that,  out  of  830  cases,  the 
agent  stood  to  the  percipient  in  the  relation  of 

Parent  or  child  in  193  cases,  or  23*3  per  cent. 

Brother  or  sister  „ 

122 

,    14-7 

Husband  or  wife  „ 

52 

,      6-3 

Cousin,  uncle,  &c. 

75 

,      9-0 

Friend                    ,, 

263 

,    31-7 

Acquaintance        ,, 

89 

,    10-7 

Stranger                 „ 

36 

,      4-3 

It  will  be  seen  that  only  in  47  per  cent,  of  the  cases  is  any  blood- 
relationship  known  to  have  existed  between  the  parties  ;  and  since  in 
many  cases  the  relatives  of  the  percipient  will  have  naturally  belonged 
also  to  the  circle  of  his  intimate  friends,  it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude 
that  consanguinity,  as  such,  has  little  if  any  predisposing  influence  in  the 
transmission  of  telepathic  impressions.  It  may  be  suggested  that  the 
comparative  infrequency  of  such  transmissions  between  husbands  and 
wives  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  commoner  for  married  persons 
than  for  blood-relations  to  be  together,  when  one  of  the  two  dies. 

It  is  noteworthy  that,  out  of  36  cases  in  which  the  agent  was  a 
stranger  to  the  percipient,  no  less  than  15  are  collective  cases  in  which  an 
intimate  friend  of  the  agent  was  one  of  the  co-percipients,  and  may  be 
held  to  have  constituted  the  link  between  the  agent  and  the  stranger 
percipient.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the  examples  that  have 
been  given  of  telepathic  afiection  by  strangers  show  somewhat  less 
than  the  true  proportion ;  as  there  may  be  cases  belonging  to  this 
category  which  for  evidential  purposes  must  be  dismissed,  the  fact  of 
coincidence,  which  alone  could  distinguish  them  from  purely  subjective 
hallucinations,  having  been  unsuspected  and  unknown. 

^  Where  the  same  person  has  been  concerned  on  more  than  one  occasion  as  percipient 
or  agent,  each  such  experience  has  been  reckoned  for  the  purpose  of  the  calculation  as  a 
distinct  case.  Cases  88  and  90  have  been  omitted  in  reckoning  the  percipients,  it  being 
doubtful  which  of  the  two  persons  concerned  was  the  percipient,  and  which  the  agent ; 
and  cases  44,  88^  90,  133,  264,  316-325,  330-338,  387,  388,  436,459,  461,668,  and 677  have  beeu 
omitted  in  reckoning  the  agents. 

3  A  2 

INDEX. 

IsT.B.  For  many  topics,  the  Synopsis  at  the  beginning  of  each  volume 
forms  (with  the  clue  which  the  titles  of  the  Chapters  ajfford)  a  ready  means 
of  reference  ;  and  these  are,  for  the  most  part,  not  included  in  the  present 
Index. 

The  page-numbers  of  the  second  volume  are  printed  in  italics. 

PAGE 

Abbrckombie,   Dr.,   Case  described  by,   of  hallucinations  voluntarily 

originated         ......  Ixxxi 

After-images  ......  489-91,  502,  505 

Agency,  telepathic,  Various  conditions  of,  in  spontaneous  cases  .  229 

Anonymous  testimony,  Worthlessness  of  ....       167-9 

Anxiety,  Effect  of,  m  producing  hallucinations    ....       506-9 

"  Arrival  Cases  "  .  .         251-4,517-8,   96-100,   36S-4,  530-2,  588-9,   623-7 

Auditory  hallucinations.  Different  proportion  of  to  visual,  in  the  purely 

subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  .         22-3 

- — ■ Numerical  estimate  relating  to,  in  the  two  classes  .  .         12-6 

of  an  internal  sort  .....     480-2,  119-20 

non-verbal  and  rudimentary  .     222-5,   403-5,  502-3,  125-32,   568-74 

due  to  anxiety        .......     509-10 

due  to  expectancy  ......  514 

Automatic  actions  telepathically  produced  (See  Unconscious  percipience) 

Awe,  Effect  of,  in  producing  hallucinations  ....       510-2 

Baillarger,  Dr.,  on  "  psycho-sensorial "  hallucinations  .  .       461-2 

Defects  of  his  view  ......       465-6 

Ball,  Prof.,  on  various  points  connected  with  hallucinations        467,  470,  479-80 

Case  recorded  by  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  476 

Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F. ,  Paper  of,  read  before  the  British  Association  in  1876      13 

Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  .  .  20-9,  59-61 

Bemheim,  Dr.,  Experiments  of,  in  hypnotic  hallucinations        .  469-70,  472 

Bell-sounds,  Hallucinations  of     .  .  .  .  502-3,  127-9,  233-5 

Binet,  A.,  on  certain  hypnotic  hallucinations      ....      468-70 
Binsfeld,  Tractainhs  de  Sortilegiis  .....  175,  183 

Blood,  a  prominent  feature  in  the  telepathic  percept   373,  34,  403,  430,  433,  481 
Bodin,  Demonomanie        .....    173,  177,  180,  182,  478 

726 

INDEX. 

PAGE 

Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers         .....     178,  180,  183 
Boismont,  Dr.    Brierre  de,  Spurious  cases  of  collective  hallucination 

recorded  by      .  .  .  .  .  .  .       186-7 

"  Borderland  "  hallucinations,  Various  sorts  of 

Importance  of  distinguishing  from  dreams 

Brewster's  view  of  visual  hallucinations 

Brougham,  Lord,  Remarks  of,  on  his  own  experience 

389-92 

393-7 

465 

396-7 

Cakdan,  De  Varietate  Berum       .  .  .  .  . 

Cards  and  other  objects,  Experimental  transferences  of  ideas  of 

Casaubon,  Meric,  Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity 
Casual  experiments 
Census  of  dreams  of  death 
of  sensory  hallucinations  . 

479,  555 
21-9,  31-5, 

37,  661-4 

184 

81-85,  655-7,  665 

.     303-10 

6-S4. 

pported  by  telepathic 

570-1 

Ixxiv-v 

198-9 

Centrifugal  origin  of  hallucinations,  strongly  su 

examples 
Cevennes,  Spurious  marvels  in  the 
Chambers,   Dr.   T.   King,   Case  of  simultaneous  hallucinations 

recorded  by 

Chance,  how  far  an  explanation  of  the  facts  adduced     (See  Probabilities) 
Charcot,  Dr.,  Form  of  unilateral  hallucination  recorded  by         .  .       471-2 

Children,  Percipience  of,  ("collective"  cases  not  included)  245,  246,  235,  2^8-9, 

423,  519,  555,  581 
Chntoff,  Dr.  A.  M. ,  Experiment  of,  in  thought-transference       .  .  665 

Clairvoyance  ......         266-7,  555-6,  286-7 

Difference  between  telepathic  and  independent    .  .  368-9,  669 

Telepathic,  in  reciprocal  cases        .  .  .  161-2,  289,  303-10 

Independent,  often  assumed  without  any  sufl&cient  warrant     329-30,  335 

Relation  of  to  collective  cases         ....         269,  289-90 

alleged  of  Swedenborg        ......      xlviii 

Cloudy  or  misty  appearance  of  visual  phantasms     521,  526,  527,  557,  xxii,  182, 

450,  481,  513 
Coincidences,  apt  to  be  regarded  as  either  accidental  or  supernatural  397,  4^1-^ 

significant  in  virtue  of  frequency,  not  of  oddness  .  .  2 

Tendency  to  exaggerate  the  closeness  of  .  .     Ixxv-vii,  144-5,  156-7 

Cold,  Sensation  of,  at  the  time  of  a  telepathic  affection  .  .      210,  527,  37, 

122,  150,  180,  249,  500 
Collectivity  of  percipience,  in  what  sense  a  proof  of  objectivity  in 

the  percept      .  .  .  .  .  .      168-70,  190-2 

Collusion,  Hypothesis  of,  in  experiments  in  thought-transference  .       18-20 
Necessity  of,  if  experiments  in  thought-transference  are  to  be 

explained  as  tricks       ......         22-3 

Community  of  sensation,  first  noticed  in  connection  with  the  hypnotic  state     11 

shown  in  experiments  in  the  transference  of  tastes  and  of  pains        51-8, 

324-31,  339,  344,  666-8 
Compact,  previous,  between  agent  and  percipient.  Possibly  effect  of  .  66 
Instances  of             .           •  .           •  .    395,  419,  427,   527,  63,  477,  489,  497 

INDEX.  ■    727 

PAGE 

Contact,  the  essential  condition  for  muscular  guidance,  all  possibility 

of  which  must  be  precluded  in  experiments  in  thought-transference         17-8 
Contact,  Alleged  effect  of,  in  certain  cases  of  hallucination         .  .  iS9,  S59 

Contemporary  evidence,  Importance  of   .  .  .  .  .    13,  21  Jf. 

Cotta,  T/ie  Infallible,  True  and  Assured  Witch  ....  120,  182 
Creery  family,  Esperiments  with  the       .....        20-31 

'Dagoi!!:et,  Dr.,  Les  Maladies  Mentales  ....  476,480,484 
D' Autun,  L' Incredulite  Scavante  .....  180,  184 

Dead,  Phantasms  of  the,  how  connected  with  the  present  inquiry        190-2,  214 

^ Evidence  for,  inconclusive       .  .  .  512 

Death-cases,  Large  proportion  of  ....  303,  25-6 

Deferment  or  latency  of  telepathic  impressions  .  56,  70-1,  201-2,  265,  519 

De  I'Ancre,  TaUeati  de  I'  Inconstance  des  mauvais  Anges  et  Demons  117,  173 
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicce  ....  179,  180,  181,  182 
Dessoir,  Max,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  .  .      642-58 

Development  of    hallucinations.    Gradual,  in    the    purely    subjective 

class     ........        520-2 

in  the  telepathic  class  .  .     522-34 

Diagrams,  Experiments  in  the  reproduction  of    .  .  .      35-51,  642-53 

Disappearance  of   visual  phantasms.   Gradual,   a  feature   common   to 

purely  subjective  and  to  telepathic  specimens  .  .    573,  97 

Instances  of  .    444,  446,  454,  521,  527,  552,  96,  176,  182, 

214,  ^46,  453,  467,  503,  512,  522,  628,  629 

Special  modes  of   ....  432,  559,  573,  239,  605 

on  sudden  speech  or  movement,  a  feature  common  to  purely 

subjective  and  to  telepathic  specimens  .  .  .    573,  91 

Instances  of  .     207,  414,  417,  436,  530,  542,  564,  60,  91, 

451,  461,  464,  491,  500,  616 

Door  opening  or  shutting.  Hallucination  of         .      214,  454,  532,  4^9,  492,  497, 
. -n,.  'g-i^oa  543,  612,  626,  633,  694,  697 

"  Double  Consciousness  "  ......        69-70 

Dreams,  Relation  of,  to  waking  hallucinations    .  .  296-7,  484-5,  539,  547 

Evidential  weakness  of,  as  a  class  ....        298-9 

of  death.  Census  and  computation  relating  to     .  .  .      303-10 

Dress  and  appurtenances  of  visual  phantasms     .  540-6,  669-70,  90-6,  294-7 

Drowning-cases,  Large  proportion  of        .  .  .  .  .  26 

Edgeworth,   F.  Y.,   his  remarks  on   the   application   of    the  theory 

of  probabilities  to  certain  experimental  results  .  .  26 

and  to  certain  spontaneous  results  ....  xxi 

Emotional  impressions,  Evidential  weakness  of,  as  a  class  .  .      269-70 

Error,  Possibility  and  effects  of,  in  observation  ....        123-5 

125-6 

126-9 

.      129-31 

.  12-3,  88 

.    19,  274 

in  spontaneous 

114-5 

in  inference 

in  narration 

in  memory 

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Importance  of  his  testimony 
Evidence,  experimental,  Necessity  of  accumulating 

Difference  in  the  nature  of,  in  experimental  and 

cases    . 

728  INDEX. 

PAGE 

Evidence,  for  telepathy,  contrasted  with  that  for  other  alleged  marvels  115-22 
for  phantasms  of  the  living,  contrasted  with  that  for 

phantasms  of  the  dead  .  .  .  Ixiii-iv,  121-2, 512 

Points  of,  required  in  a  typical  case  of  spontaneous  telepathy    .  131 

of  the  percipient  as  to  facts          .....  133-8 

as  to  dates            .....  140-6 

Description   of    the,    admitted  to  this  book  :    its   cumulative 

strength           .......  158-66 

its  deficiencies         ......  167-9 

Expectancy,  Effect  of,  in  producing  hallucinations  .  .  .        512-7 

Experimental  and  spontaneous  telepathy.  Connection  between  110-3,  171-2,  27 1 
Experiments  (See  under  various  headings — Community  of   sensation. 

Cards,  Diagrams,  &c.) 
Externalisation  of  hallucinations.  Various  degrees  in  the  .        480-3,  29-S8 

"Faces  in  the  dark"   ......     473,  479,  492 

Falck,  De  Doemonologid  recentiorum  Autorum     .  .  .  462,   168 

Fechner,  Experiment  of,  in  hallucination  of  colour         .  .  .        462-3 

1  ere.  Dr. ,  Experiments  of,  in  certain  cases  of  hypnotic  hallucination  .  468 

Folie  a  deux  .  ...  .  .  .  .  458,  S80 

Fragmentary  appearances  .  .  416,  504,  xxv,  33-4,  59,  512,  526 

Galton,  F.,  on  the  sympathy  of  twins  . 
Gifford,  G.,  Dialogue  concerning  Witches 
Discourse  of  Subtill  Practices 

279 
176 
179 
118,  174,  178-81,  184 
175,  179 

Glanvil,  Sadducismus  Triumphatus 
Godelmaiui,  Tractatus  de  Magiis 
Griesinger,  Die  Pathologic  und  Therapie  der  Psychischen  Kranhheiten    461,  467, 

477,  494 
Guthrie,  M.,  Experiments  organised  by  .  .  .  .        36-58 

Hallucinations  of  the  Senses 

— Census  of  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-24,  133-4 

Proportion   of    various  types  of,    in    the    subjective    and   the 

telepathic  classes         ......         22-5 

Psychological  identity  of  with  dreams     .  .      484-5,  539,  547,  702 

Resemblances  between  subjective  and  telepathic  specimens  of       496-500 

572-3,  xxii 

how  far  transferable  from  one  person  to  another  183,  224-5,  279-82 

Epidemic  ........  187 

Hypnotic  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        187-8 

Traditional  .......  189 

"  Particular,"  i.e., unshared  by  persons  present  with  the    perci- 
pient, frequent  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  .  573,  i  05 

Visual  instances  of    210,  218,  552,  560,  42,  43,  61,  163,  212,  237, 

256,  455,  484,  495,  513,  517,  522,  542,  555,  557 

Auditory  instances  of        .       223,  452,  100,  104,  106,  109,  222, 

485,  568,  569,  580,  581,  584 
Hartmann,  E.  von.,  on  Spi/ritism  .....  184 

INDEX.  729 

PAGE 

Hereditary  or  family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influence              .  573,  1S2 

Herschell,  Sir  J.  F.  W.,  Experience  of,  in  hallucinations             .  465,  472,  487 

Holland,  A  Treatise  against  Witchcraft      ....  175,  179 

Holland,  Sir  H. ,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by          .             .  479,481 

Hutchinson,  F.,  Historical  Essay  concerning  Witchcraft         174,  175,  176,  177, 

180,  184 

Hypnotic  effects.  Telepathic  production  of  .  88-91,  332-S,  3U,  676-87 

Hypnotism,  Importance  of,  in  psychical  inquiries  .  .  .    xlii-iii 

Ideas,    Experimental  transference   of,  involving  more 

than  a  single  image  or  word      .  .  .82,  94-5,  340-3,  345-8 

Illness,  Possible  effect  of,    in  heightening  telepathic  susceptibility         360,  397, 

424,  147,  162,  164,  176,  345-53,  358,  390,  464-5,515,  703 

Illusions,  Collective,  distinguished  from  hallucinations      .  .  .     184-6 

"Hypnagogic" 390,400-1,473-4 

Telepathic,  quite  conceivable  .....       6^-3 

Imagery  and  symbolism  of  telepathic  percepts        341-68,  539-54,  298-9,  412-27, 

'497,  612-3 

Inhibition  of  utterance  or  of  particular  movements  in  another  person, 

by  the  power  of  the  will  .  .  .  .  •    58-62 

Jolly,  Prof.  F.  ,  Experiments  of,  in  auditory  hallucinations       .  .    470-1 

Kahlbaxjm,    Types  of  hallucination  observed  by        472,   476,   490,   491,   495 
Kandinsky,  View  of,  on  hallucinations  .  .  .  .  ■       494 

Koppe,  on  auditory  hallucinations  .  .  467,  471,  475,  480,  495 

Kraepelin,  Ueber  Trugwahrnehmungen         ....  490,  495 

Krafft-Ebing,  Die  Sinnesdelirien       ....        467,  476,  487,  502 

Lang,  A. ,  on  popular  superstitions  ....  122,  550 

Lawson,  D.,   Tryals  of  the  New  England  Witches  .  .  477,  508 

Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  on  witchcraft       .....    177-9,183-5 
Liebeault,  Dr. ,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference     .  .  657-60 

Light  (See  Luminosity)        ....... 

Limitation,  Arbitrary,  of  the  interval  of  time  in  spontaneous  tele- 
pathic cases  to  12  hours  ....  139-40,  511 
Locality,  Occasional  influence  of  .  .  .  .  .  368,  301-2 
Loudun,  Hysterical  epidemic  at  .  .  .  .  •  •  119 
Lowell,  J.  RusseU,  Features  of  subjective  hallucination  described  by  .  xxii 
Luminosity,    a  frequent   feature  of    visual    hallucinations,   both  in  the 

subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class   ....  550-1 

Examples  of  417,  436,  437,  444,  550,  557,  561,  31,  46,  72,  76,  176, 

181,   182,   204,   215,   4I6,   455,   459,   460,  4'^5,  4'^^,  4'^8,  509,  512, 

522,   611,  622,  629,  703-4 

Lyall,  Sir  A.  C. ,  Asiatic  Studies       ......      183 

Mayo,  De,.,  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Superstitions  .  .  8 

McGraw,  Dr.,  Observations  of,  on  some  rare  features  in  the  "  willing- 
game  "     .  .  .  .  .  •  •  .15 

730 

INDEX. 

Mackenzie,  Sir  Gr. ,  Tlie,  Laws  and  Customs  of  Scotland 
Magnan,  Dr.,  Record  of  dramatic  hallucinations  by 
Malleus  Maleficarum  .... 

Marillier,  L.,  Record  of  subjective  hallucinations  by 
Marshall,  Prof.  A. ,  on  probabilities 
Mather,    Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World 
Maudsley,  Dr. ,  on  certain  alcoholic  hallucinations 
Maury,  Record  of  an  illusion  hypnagogique  by 
Mazzini,  Case  of  collective  hallucination  described  by 
Mesmerism,  Early  connection  of  thought-transference  with 

Erroneous  ideas  of  the  power  of 

(See  Hypnotic  effects) 
Mickle,  Dr.  W.  J. ,  on  the  cerebral  seat  of  hallucinations 
Misrecognition  on  the  percipient's  part    . 

PAGE 

.  177,  183 

.       477-8 

116,  118,  173 

521,  32,  73,  99 

181,  184,  477 
390 
390 
188 
11-3 
87,  92-3 

488-9 

.       428,  429,  390,  ^22-3, 
582-3,  633-4 
Mistakes    of  identity,  how   far   an   explanation   of    alleged  telepathic 

phantasms        ......  62-3,  243-4 

More,  Gr.,  A  True  Discourse  against  S.  Harsnet  .  .  .       119,  181,  182 

Motor-form  of  thought-transference.  Experiments  in  the  .         62-81,  89-94 

Movement,  a  frequent  feature  of  visual  phantasms,  both  of  the  purely 

subjective  and  of  the  telepathic  class  .  .  432,  573 

Musical  hallucinations       .....  503,  221-3,  639-41 

Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H.,  Record  of  experiments  by 

Subjective  hallucinations  described  by 

Nicolai's  hallucinations      .... 
Numbers,  Experimental  transference  of  ideas  of 

.       63-70 

475,  481,  492,  72 

458-9,  492 

25,  34,  653-4,  661-4 

OcHOROWicz,  Dr.  J.,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  . 

Pain,  Experimental  transferences  of  (See  Community  of  sensation) 

Spontaneous  transferences  of,  rare 

Parant,  Dr.  V.,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by 

Paterson,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by       . 

Paul,  C.  Kegan,  Experiments  of,  in  community  of  sensation,  &c. 

Percipience,  telepathic.  Various  types  of,  in  spontaneous  cases  . 

Physical  basis  for  telepathic  phenomena  very  hard  to  conceive 

660-4 

discomfort  on  the  percipient's  part 

Pick,  Dr.  A. ,  Records  of  hallucinations  by 

Pitcaim,  Criminal  Trials  of  Scotland        .  .  .  . 

Pollock,  W.  H. ,  Case  of  collective  illusion  recorded  by 

Porta,  J.    Baptista,  Magia  Naturalis       .  .  .  . 

Prediction,  Power  of,  how  far  a  test  of  scientific  achievement    . 

Presence,  Alleged  feeling  of,  actual  or  potential  hallucination    . 

Probabilities,     Theory     of,     applied     to     experiments     in 

thought-transference  .  .  .  26, 
applied  to  spontaneous  telepathic  occurrences 

.      189-90 
.  476,  490 
474,  38,  133 
666-9 
186-7 
111-13,  314-5 
197,  273,  280,  371,  374 
472,  487 
176,  177 
185 
lib 
1-4 
483-4,  528,  138 

31-5,  73-6,  653-4 
303-10,  12-21 

INDEX. 

731 

Psychical  aspect  of  telepathic   phenomena,  that  to  which  this    work 
is  confined       ....... 

Specialised  meaning  of  the  term  . 

Research,  its  peculiar  difficulties  and  obligations 

Society  for 
American  Society  for 

4-6,  130, 

6 

Psychologie  Physiologique,  Societe  de         . 

"  Psycho-sensorial "  hallucinations 

Common  misunderstanding  of  the  term 

113 
5 

167-9, 

-8,  273 

vii-x 

35,    51 

?-5,  679 

461-4 

479 

Rapp,  Die  Sexenprocesse  .  .  .  .  .  .  .176 

Eapport,  Different  sorts  of  .....  •        265-9 

Reciprocal  telepathic  affections    ......  227,  153 

often  assumed  on  quite  inadequate  grounds  .  .  15 4 

Apparent  rarity  of,  how  explicable     ,  .  .  167,  303 

Recognised    phantasms,    Different    proportion   of  to  unrecognised,  in 

the  purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class        .  ,  24-5 

Recognition,  Absence   of,  generally  but  not  always  an 

evidential  defect  .... 
of  a  phantasm  sometimes  delayed   . 

220,  117,  137,  565 

520-7,  71,  82,  464 

467 

552-3,  414 

Regis,  Dr. ,  on  unilateral  hallucinations   . 

Religious  investiture  of  telepathic  impressions 

Remarks,  Interchange  of,  with  hallucinatory  figure     476,  4^0,  505,  524,  584,  607 

Remy,  Doemonolatria        .....  175,  180,  181,  182 

Repeated  apparition  of  the  same  person  ....        77-90 

occurrence  of  a  telepathic  experience  to  the  same  person         .  196 

22,  77 
Repetition  of  telepathic  dreams  after  an  interval  .  .  .  367-8 
Instances  of            330,    340,    343,  357,  365,  4I8,  424,  447,  701 

of  telepathic  hallucinations  after  an  interval  .  .  414-5,  106 

Visual  instances  of  414,  415,  445,  59,  467,  482,  500 

Auditory  instances  of  409,  100,  113,  120,  123,  228,  229, 

473,  631,  633-4,  635 
Reuss,  La  Sorcellerie  au  16me  et  17 me  Siede 
Richet,  Dr.  C,  his  experiments  in  thought-transference 

L'Homme  et  V Intelligence 

Rink,  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo 
Rudimentary  hallucinations,  visual  . 

auditory 

Rumour,  Possible  telepathic  spread  of 

St.  Medard,  The  Cmivulsionnaires  of 
Scot,  R.,  The  Discovery  of  Witchcraft 
Second-hand  evidence,  Defects  and  errors  of 

Sort  of,  admitted  to  the  Supplement 

"  Second  sight,"  Remarks  on       , 

, 

176 

,  183 

31-3,  72-81,  664-5 

.  118, 

173, 

462 
550 

73-6 

125-32,  570-6,  635-9 

■ 

365 

120 

175 

Ixxvii,  148-57, 

496, 

539 

322 
535 

732 

INDEX. 

PAGE 

Sensation,  Community  of  (see  Community) 

Telepathic  production  of  by  will         .  .  .      97-109,  611-6 

Sensory  and  non-sensoiy  telepathic  effects  distinguished  .  .        186-7 

Sidgwick,  Prof.,  on  the  moral  factor  in  experiments        .  .  .        19-20 

Sikes,  Wirt,  British  Goblins  .....  Ixxx,  547 

Simon,  Dr.  Max,  on  a  peculiar  type  of  hallucination       ,  .  .  481 

Solidity,  apparent.  Presence  or  absence  of,  in  visual  hallucinations        .         37-8 
Spee,  Cautio  Crimincdis    .......  176 

Spina,  Quoestio  de  Strigibiis  .  .  .  .  .  174,  175 

Sully,  J. ,  on  a  particular  type  of  hallucination     ....  477 

Supernormal  and  supersensuous.  Meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  words     xlvi,  7 
Supplement,  Position  of  the,  in  the  evidential  case  for  .telepathy  .       321-3 

Tactile  cases,  hard  to  establish   ......  225 

hallucinations.  Rarity  of  .  .  .  .  .  .        133-4 

Taine,  his  special  use  of  the  word  hallucination  .  ...  459 

Tamburini,  on  the  physiology  of  hallucinations   ....  487 

Tartarotti,  Del  Gongresso  Nocturno  delle  Lamie    ....        175-6 
Taste,  Experimental  transferences  of  (see  Community  of  Sensation) 
Telepathy,    Two  distinct  branches  of — the  experimental   and    the 

spontaneous     .......  8-9 

Important    differences  between  them,  evidentially,  and 

theoretically    ......        110-3,  114-5 

171-2 

—  their  true  theoretic  connection 

-  Spontaneous,  two  great  divisions  of — the  sensory  and  the  noyi- 

sensory  class — which  are  further  subdivided   . 
-Relation  of,  to  religious  and  to  materialistic  conceptions 

186-7 
1-lvii 
xlvii 
14-5,  17 
10-1 
11,  63 

Theosophy,  so-called.  Exposure  of  ...  . 
"  Thought-reading, "  Spurious  exhibitions  of 
Thought-transference,  a  preferable  term  to  "  thought-reading" 
— —  a  less  wide  term  than  telepathy 

Conditions    of  satisfactory  experiments  in,  and 

importance  of  a  cumulative  proof  .  .  .  17-9,    85 

Three,  Prevalence  of  the  number,  in  accounts  of  abnormal  phenomena  229 

Transitional  cases,    (or   experiments  to   which   the   percipient  is 

not  knowingly  a  party) 
Importance  of 
Difficulty  of  obtaining  accounts  of 

Tuke,  Dr.  Hack,  Case  of  collective  illusion  recorded  by 

Tunes,  Possible  telepathic  transference  of 

Twins,  Telepathic  transferences  between 

Two   (or  more)  phantasmal   figures,    Proportion  of    appearances 

86, 110, 67i-S7 
171 
109,  675 
185 
.       233-4 
279-83,  370,  Jf6 
of, 

about   equal   in  hallucinations    of    the    purely    subjective 

and  of  the  telepathic  class       .  .  .  .  .  546 

.  Instances  of  .  '  450,  499,  529,  535,  544,  98,  lU,  456, 

469,  475,  482,  496,  506,  523,  534,  629 

Two  or  three  senses,  Different  proportion  of  hallucinations  affecting,  in 

the  purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class         .  .         23-4 

INDEX. 

733 

Unconscious  agency  in  experimental  cases 

percipience 

intelligence 

PAGE 

.  78-9,  84,  670-1 
62-81,  84,  293,  379,  670-1 
Ixii,  69-70,  230-1,  313-4 

Unconsciousness  of  the  agent,  Frequent,  at  the  time  when  a  spontaneous 

transference  takes  place        .  .  .  .  .  230-1 

Instances  of,  (swoon,  coma,  &c.)  .     194,  406,  435,  545,  548,  563, 

569,  lis,  394,  419,  517,    609 

Unrecognised  phantasms.  Different  proportion  of  to  recognised,  in  the 

purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  S4-6 

figures  218,  427,  452,  530,  xxi,  61,  236,  256,  468-9,  493,  502,  517, 

619,  694 

voices  uttering  words  227,  409,  553,  100,  114,  115,  116,  117,  119, 

120,  122,  123,  137,  164,  470,  473,  561,  563,  565,  568,  584,  692 

Visual  hallucinations.  Different  proportion  of  to  auditory,  in  the  purely 
subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class 

Numerical  estimate  relating  to,  in  the  two  classes 

due  to  anxiety     . 

due  to  awe 

due  to  expectancy 

— — Rudimentary 

Voisin,  Dr. ,  on  various  types  of  hallucination 

Wagstaffe,  Tlie  Questioyi  of  Witchcraft  debated 

Webster,  on  "  possession  " 

Wier,  De  Proestigiis  Dcemonum  . 

Will,  Relation  of,  to'  telepathic  experiments 

Experiments  in  the  sUent  exercise  of 

16-20 
506-9 
510-2 
512-4 

73-6,  192-4 
465,  473,  495 

.    183,  184 
182 

175,  179,  180,  181,  183 

92-3 

58-62,    89-91,  93-4,  676-7 

Effect  of,  in  the  production  of  the  hypnotic  state  88,  332-3,  679-87 

"Willing-game,"  Results  obtained  at  the,  due  to  the  interpretation 

of  slight  physical  signs  ....  14-5,   642 

Occasional  hints  of  some  further  cause  ....  15 

Witchcraft,  Lack  of  evidence  for  the  spurious  marvels  of        Ixxiii,  116-8,  172-7 

Mr.  Lecky's  treatment  of  ....  .  177-9 

Certain  genuine  phenomena  of,  how  explicable  .  .        179-83 

Words  and  names.  Experimental  transferences  of  .    23-5,  27-9,  64,  66,  69, 

74-9,  82-4,  655-7,    665 

Wundt,  on  "  psychical  energy "  .....  xli-ii 
on  hallucinations            ....    461,  474,  476,  487,  38 

PROCEEDINGS     OF 

THE    SOCIETY    FOR    PSYCHICAL    RESEARCH. 

The  price  of  each  volume  is  half-a-guinea ;  the  Parts  can  be  obtained  separately. 

VOLUME     I. 
Containing  Parts  I.— IV. 

Objects  of  the  Society. 

Address  by  the  President  at  the  first  General   Meeting. 

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Reading. 

Note  on  Thought-Reading.     By  Professor  Balfour  Stewart. 

Note  on  Thought-Reading.     By  Rev.  A.  M.  Creery. 

Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Thought-Reading.     By  PROFESSOR  W.  F.  Barrett. 

Address  by  the  President  at  the  second  General  Meeting. 

Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  (ivith  Illustrations). 

Preliminary  Report  of  the  ' '  Reichenbach  "  Committee. 

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  ' '  Haunted  Houses. " 

First  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee. 

On  "  Clairvoyance,"  by  G.  Wyld,  M.D.  (Abstract). 

Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  {vdth  Illustrations). 
First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism. 
First  Report  of  the  "  Reichenbach  "  Committee. 

On  Some  Phenomena  Associated    with    Abnormal     Conditions     of    Mind.       By 
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett. 

Address  by  the  President  at  the  fourth  General  Meeting. 

Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism. 

Record  of   Experiments  in    Thought-Transference   at   Liverpool.      By  MALCOLM 

Guthrie,  J. P.,  and  James  Birchall. 
Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Mesmerism. 
Note  on  Muscle-Reading.     By  the  Rev.  E.  H.  Sugden. 
Constitution  and  Rules  of  the  Society. 

VOLUME     II. 

Containing  Parts  V.— VII. 

Fourth  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference. 

Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism. 

An  Account  of   some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  {with  Illustrations). 

By  Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.  P. 
Second  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee. 

Note  on  the  Existence  of  a  "Magnetic  Sense."  By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett. 
The  Stages  of  Hypnotism.     By  Edmund  Gurney. 
Report  on  Wells  Sunk  at  Locking,  Somerset,   to  Test  the  Alleged  Power  of  the 

Divining  Rod.     By  Professor  W.  J.  Sollas,  M.A.,  D.Sc. 
The  Divining  Rod.     By  Edward  R.  Pease. 
Appendix  I.     Tabular  Abstract   of   Evidence  on  the  Divining  Rod,   collected  by 

Mr.  E.  Vaughan  Jenkins. 
Appendix  II.     Selected  Cases  from  the  same. 

Third  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee — ^A  Theory  of  Apparitions.  Part  I. 
Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Haunted  Houses,  &c. 
Opening  Address  at  the  eighth  General  Meeting.     By  the  President. 
Fourth  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee — A  Theory  of  Apparitions.  Part  II. 

Opening  Address    at   the   ninth    General    Meeting.     By  Professor   Balfour 

Stewart,  F.R.S. 
An  Account  of  some    Experiments    in    Thought-Transference.     By  Professor 

Oliver  J.  Lodge,  D.Sc. 
An  Account  of  some  Experiments  in  Mesmerism.     By  Edmund  Gurney. 
Diagrams  Illustrative  of  Thought-Transference. 

Automatic  Writing.  I.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 

Abstract  of  the  President's  Opening  Address  at  the  eleventh  General  Meeting. 

Account  and  Criticism  of  M.  Richet's  recent  Researches  in  Thought- 
Transference.  By  Edmund  Gurney.  With  a  Note  by  Professor  0.  J 
Lodge  and  Alfred  Lodge. 

The  Problems  of  Hypnotism.     By  Edmund  Gurney. 

VOLUME   III. 
Containing  Parts  VIII.  and  IX. 
Automatic  Writing.  II.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 
Opening  Address   at  the  thirteenth  General  Meeting.     By  PROFESSOR  BALFOUR 

Stewart,  F.R.S. 
Notes  on  the  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society,    for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead. 

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick. 
Hallucinations.    By  Edmund  Gurney. 
The   Calculus  of    Probabilities    applied  to  Psychical    Research. — I.     By    F.    Y. 

Edgeworth. 

Report  on  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy 

(1)  Statement  and  Conclusions  of  the  Committee. 

(2)  Account  of    Personal  Investigations    in    India,    and   Discussion   of  the 

Authorship  of  the    "Koot  Hoomi"   Letters  (with  Appendices).     By 
Richard  Hodgson. 

(3)  Report    of    Mr.     F.    G.    Netherclift     on    the    Blavatsky-Coulomb 

Correspondence. 

(4)  Note    on    Certain    Phenomena    not     dealt    with    in    Mr.     Hodgson's 

Account.     By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.- 

(5)  Details    of   the    Evidence    referred   to    on    page    207.     Contents  of  the 

Above  Report. 
Some  Higher  Aspects   of   Mesmerism.      By   Edmund   Gurney  and  Frederic 

W.  H.  Myers. 
Further    Report    on    Experiments    in    Thought-Transference    at    Liverpool.     By 

Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.  P. 
Local  Ansesthesia  induced  in  the  Normal  State  by  Mesmeric  Passes. 
Report  on  an  alleged  Physical  Phenomenon. 
Catalogue  of  the  Library  (Abridged). 

PART    X. 

Human  Personality  in  the  light  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion.    By  Frederic  W.  H. 

Myers. 
On  some  Physical  Phenomena   commonly  called  Spiritualistic,  witnessed  by  the 

Author.    By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett. 
Results  of    a    Personal     Investigation     into    the     "Physical    Phenomena"    of 

Spiritualism,     with    some    critical     remarks     on     the    Evidence    for  the 

genuineness  of  such  phenomena.     By  Mrs.  H.  SiDGWiCK. 
The  Possibilities  of  Mai -observation  in  relation  to  Evidence  for  the  phenomena 

of  Spiritualism.     By  Charles  C.  Massey. 
Note  on  Mr.  Massey's  Paper.    By  Professor  H.  Sidgwick. 
Experiments  in  Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transference.     By  MAX  Dessoir. 
On    Telepathic    Hypnotism,     and    its    relation     to     other    forms     of    Hypnotic 

Suggestion.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers. 
The  Calculus    of    Probabilities  applied  to   Psychical  Research. — II.     By  F.  Y. 

Edgeworth. 

mimi 

'mM 

^M^t: 

.ft 

mm^ 

■f^m^'^m: 

'''^iMB
