Tertium Quid (Edmund Gurney, 1887)
==================================
Edmund Gurney — Gurney's essays on hypnotism, hallucinations and telepathy — the SPR's theoretical foundation. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (in.ernet.dli.2015.93568) — Vol. I. Scan via Internet Archive (dli.bengal.10689.14746) — Vol. II.

TERTIUM QUID:

CHAPTERS ON VARIOUS DISPUTED QUESTIONS.

BY

EDMUND GURNEY,

LATB PSLLOW OF TRINITY COLLBGR, CAMS^IDCB.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON:

KBGAN PAUL, TRENCH, ft CO., i PATERNOSTER SQUARE.
1887.

(Tii r^its ijf tnmskiiut and ^rtfrtbKtitti m rtstmi.)

PREFACE.

Nearly the whole of the contents of these volumes
has appeared in well-known Reviews and Maga-
zines in the course of the last few years, and is
reprinted by the kind permission of the respective
publishers. ^

My title needs a word of apology. I had
purposed to call the book simply Contem^rarv
Essay s; but I was warned that such a name igrould
probably choke off even the small sale which was
the most that I could hope for. So an alternative
had to be devised ; and the subjects treated being
too various for any brief comprehensive descrip-
tion, the uniting idea had to be found, if at all, in
the method of treatmoit Now it happens that
most of the papers deal with matters of content-

VI

PREFACE

poraty controversy, as to which two antagonistic
opinions have been strongly entertained and en-
forced, each with distinct and direct reference to
the other. Thus, the Positivist view of life has
had to reckon almost exclusively with the view of
more or less orthodox Christianity; the aim of
‘Natural Religion’ has been simply to refute
and supplant Supematuralism ; those who doubt
whether life is ‘worth living’ have directed all
their weapons against the fallacious confidence of
the Materialistic school ; Vivisectionist and Anti-
vivisectionist have thrust and parried each as if
his only possible critic or accuser were the other ;
‘evidence in matters extraordinary,’ devoured or
rejected en bloc, has been used as the gauge alike
of popular credulity and of scientific arrogance.
Or to turn to aesthetic subjects, the most conspicu-
ous artistic creator of our time has been dther
wor^ipped as a prophet or decried as a charlatain ;
in Music, the issues between classical form and
romkntidsm,and between the absolute and the ex-
pressive; have been contested vdth none the less
eaitftetness and conviction for being totalfy un<^

PREFACE

vii

real ; and the same may be said of a good deal of
the chronic disputes as to the relative greatness of
poets, and the relative value of form and content,
sound and sense, in Poetry. In most of these ques-
tions I am conscious of ‘ a great deal to be said on
both sides,' and also of a strong aversion to sa}ring
it in the ways which have chiefly attracted the
public ear. In most of them the truer view seems
to me to depend on taking a standpoint, or in
recognising facts and principles, other than those
which partisans have usually rec<^nised or taken.
And this truer view, if such it be, is not one
that would extenuate differences, or induce lions
to lie down writh lambs, or generally tend to-
wards compromise in the ordinaiy sense ; its im-
mediate tendency, on the contrary, is rather to
make each of the duels triangular.. In short, it is
a tertium quid’, and my hope is that as such it
may commend itself to some who, from the very
fact of having felt at once or by turns sympathetic
and alien to each of the pronounced sides in
these controversies, have comparatively seldom
cared or dared to make thdr voice heard in them.

viii

PREFACE

As I privately know some such persons, I infer the
existence of many more ; and the very last thing
that I would lay claim to is a position of isolated
originality. If my fantastic title and my solemn
explanation of it seem to suggest so absurd a claim,
I will withdraw the explanation, leave the title to
stand not as the ' name of the book,’ but as ' what
the name of the book is called,’ and throw the
blame of it on the people who will not look at a
collection of plain unvarnished ‘ Essays.’

CONTENTS

OF

THE FIRST VOLUME.

PACK

The Human Ideal i

‘Natural Religion’ 49

The Controversy of Life 100

A Chapter in the Ethics of Pain . . . . 151

An Epilogue on Vivisection 204

The Nature of Evidence in Matters

extraordinary 227

I*

The Utilitarian ‘Ought’ 274

Monism 3 *^

THl£ HUMAN IDEAL.

Ko fact is more patent, no boast more common^
than that we live in an age of sympathy, oi
candour, of tolerance — an age when the desire to
persecute our opponents has been replaced by at
least an assumed desire to comprehend them, and
a disposition to welcome agreements rather than
to exaggerate differences. And on general and im*
personal grounds the boast is reasonable enough ;
on the view, at any rate, that Truth, and especially
the truth about the deeper concerns of life, is a
complex result to be approached by many methods,
or gradually hammered out of many,, brains, each
of which may advantageously seek to put itself at
tile point of view of the others. Many would, of
course, dispute this advantage, on the ground that
"truth which is really essential is not to be
hammered out in this promiscuous way, but on the
coatraiy has been flashed on us once for all, and
is merdy hidden by the dust of the hammeiing.

-.VOL* B

2

THE aUMAH IDEAL

But the former view is the one that daily gains
acceptance ; and according to it the genmU ad-
vantage of tolerance for Trudi’s sake is indisputable.

From the point of view of individual experi-
ence, however, the advantages are by no means so
unmixed. Not, of course, but that they exist, and
in a positive as well as a n^ative form. Not only
does every one, whatever his view of the deeper
bearings of this wide tolerance, count it a blessing
to be thankful for that he runs no risk of bodily
suffering, or even of social ostracism, for his
opinions ; but from the positive side, from the
point of view of actual intellectual enjoyment, the
prevailing controversial atmosphere has its bright
and bracing qualities. There is a very real plea-
sure in the constant supply of able discussion ^on
interesting topics, of polemics free from coarse-
ness and marked by mutual respect, which are a
peculiarity of these latter days. To those espe-
cially whose minds are cramped or but little exer-
cised by their ordinary pursuits, there is a sense
of healthy appetite in passing from Mr. Matthew
Arnold to Mr. Frederic Harrison, or from Professor
Huxley to Mr. Martineau, with the keen relish of
a new course. I am not for a moment su^es^kig
that pleasure is Ae chief thing to be derived fnm

THE HUMAN iUBAl

3

these writers. They write primarily for our edlfi-*
eatkm and instruction ; and that very many^
sidedness of Truth to which I have referred should
make us grateful that our instructors, if so diverse,
are at any rate so able. But for all that, the
perplexities and contradictions which ar6 thus
brought before us, and which, if they are there, we
have no resource but to face manfully and with the**
best guidance we can get, must for the time seem
not joyous but grievous, not an advantage but a
disadvantage. It is not in the existence and
recognition of these courteously argued pfoblems
that we reap, as individuals, the benefit of our
searching and sympathetic age. The only side on
which the conflict can yield us positive satisfaction
is side of recreation ; just as a man’s mind, in
following a powerful and well'Cxpressed demon-
stration of pessimism, might receive from it the
normal glow of heallby intellectual exercise.

Let us grant, then, to the glow of intelligent
and friendly controvert its fullest value. Let us
grant that there are seasons of elation and expan-
rion when we feel that the Universe just now is
realty very interesting, and tiiat we have all round
ns 'Sager and active minds who will leave us in no
lade d intdlectual pabulum. But such bits' of

4

THE HUMAN IDEAL

recreation, once a month or oftener, are after all
but a feeble set-ofT against the searchings, at other
seasons, of a pain which was far less prominent in
the days of simpler formulae, of cruder differences,
and of more pronounced strifes. I mean the sense
of alienation in sentiment and intuition, of forcible
rifting asunder in the deepest places of emotion, of
Ibose between whom countless other instincts and
sentiments form a most vital bond. This peculi-
arity seems inseparable from the overlapping and
interlacing circles of modem thought. As long as
(Mie man can feel that his aloofness from another
extends through pretty well the whole of his out-
look on life, or that a particular region of ideas is
of such unique import as to make differences there
an impassable barrier, the pain of the feeling will
sddom be of a very deep or personal sort. The
coarser or more robust natures may even find a
certain infusion of pleasure in the sense of definite
hostility, and of power to hold their own. Tenderer
spirits may mourn over what seems to them the
blindness and perversity of their fellows ; but with
them the sense of the benefits of their faith is
usually so predominant, that their grief lies rather
ki the thought of what others are losing or fore«>
going than in the special kind of internal conflict

THE HUMAN IDEAL

which I have here in ^ew. For this the condition
is that the distinct lines of difference shall have
become crossed by all manner of other lines of
speculative ^reement and of spiritual sympathy,
and that those manifold relations shall have been
set up which are both a cause and a result of a
liberal respect for individual opinion. The mind
then can no longer retain its simple and com-
paratively comfortable attitude of defiance, or
dislike, or indifference, or even of predominant
ardour for others' conversion. In proportion as
his outlook widens, the individual ceases to fee\
himself confronted with an external array of false
or alien views, in the very aversion to which he
may find a bond of attachment to his own Church
or party. The closer-knit solidarity of thought
and feeling translates the gaps and breaks and jars
from the outward to the inward arena. In opposing
his fellow, a man feels the wrench of all the living
ties which have come to make his fellow a part of
himself. And while the wider opening of the
mind to sympathy means also its wider exposure
to such wrenches, the healing circle of compUU
sympathy is narrowed by the very multiplication
of Us conditions In a word, the fuller existence
h^hich every man enjoys in the close fellowship of

6 THE HUMAN IDEAL

hi$ fellow-men reveals that constant charactoistic
of every advance of organic life — an increased sus-
ceptibility to pain.

I do not think there can be anything weakly
sentimental in the full recognition of this fact. A
man may take up his lot unrepiningly, and rec<^-
nise that’ though his work in the world is made
more difficult by the conditions of thought among
which it is cast, though life seems full of triviality or
full of perplexity according as he elects to ignore
or to probe its deeper mysteries, this does not
prevent the work itself from being quite sufficiently
dehnite, and having to be done. In the very fact,
moreover, of the multiplicity of his sympathies
with many who, if marked off by the cruder formu-
laries of past days, would be his foes, he may feet
such an assurance of progress as half compensates
for the obscurity of the goal. But all this is quite
compatible with a keen sense of the irony of
this modem existence — an irony which, if it has
its light and amusing side, goes too deep to be
gdnerally amusing. The conditions of amusement
hav^ indeed, receded in proportion as those of
irony have multiplied. Scepticism has come to be
as dieap as <wthodoxy, and of the old weapons the
sort are especially antiquated and rusty.

THE HUMAN mEAL

/

Desbuctive criticism has lost its youth and buoy-
ancy ; we are tired of having venerable fallacies
cleverly exposed ; for the inquirers of to-day, the
zest of eighteenth-century attack is as much gone
hy as the zest of fourteenth-century faith — the
spirit of renaissance as the spirit of dogma. And
at the very time when the minds which exercise
th^selves at all on the prpblems of life are
strenuously set on positive conceptions, or at any
rate are determining that the darker places and the
deeper issues shall be no longer ignored, and even
fiction has given us an ‘ Adam Bede ’ for a ' Can-
dide *— at this very time, I say, when the struggle
after Truth has become uncompromisingly grave
and searching, has it become the rule that specu-
lative differences are not to exercise any influence
on ordinary human relations. The idea of evolu-
tion, to take an instance, has done more indirectly
to sap rile foundations of dogma than all the direct
assaults put together. But while, oh the one hand,
it is preached with a fervency of tone in which
rii^ere certainly lurks no echo of Voltaire, on the
dther hand it is never allowed to ruflle the har-
mony of a social evening; and any divine who
nefiised to riie doctrine a social position ride hy
ride wi^ his own , would be thought wanting in

THE HUMAN IDEAL

?.

tact and savoir faire. The divine himself, again,
must account it a fact of deep importance that
his assailants, the prophets of the kingdom of Man,
are divided among themselves; so that, even in
req)ect of an historical problem, one of them bids
us venerate for ' their beauty, their passionate self-
devotion, their strength in obedience, fellowship,
disdpline,’ the centuries which another scouts
as belonging to ‘ the disease and delirium of the
Catholic episode ’ ; but he will not be gratified by
witnessing any breach in their mutual esteem. It
is from this joint growth, then, of earnestness and
tolerance that our present curious condition results.
The age which has, in truth, seen the very depths
stirred, the difficulties multiplied in all sorts of ways,
and the differences, like the sympathies, revealing
their real scope and complexity, has also in the
same proportion seen the surface of intellectual
life made smooth, the sects socially homogeneous
and the machinery of controversy easy.

And in this contrast the irony lies. There are
times when the mind awakes to a consciousness
of the rents underlying the widespread sympathies
and conventions of its daily environment with a
dhodc recallmg (save for its far greater power and
reality) the start of momentary fancy that one'soum

THB HUMAN IDEAL

9

soises ate perhaps not the same as one’s neighv
boars’ — ^that 1 call blue what you call red, or up
what you call down. The contact is so close, yet
the separation often so complete ; the r^gregate
life of outward concordance so little corresponds
to the whirlings and clashing^s of the individual
atoms. Nay (though this is an instance of the irony
at its lightest), the well-bred aspect of our leading
Reviews, the fair blue covers of Fraser^ and the
Nineteenth Century as they lie on our tables — so
unlike Middle-Age folios, so inviting to take up, so
easy to read, so convenient to talk about, binding
into the unity of an hour’s pleasant study divergen-
cies of view profound enough in other times to have
brought bodies as well as books to the flames — are
a fitting symbol of the way the fair outer crust of
urbane controversy, of manifold agreement and
harmonious social intercour^, seems often nowa-
■days to mock the straining reality of the forces
beneath, the parting and conflicting currents of
personal experience, and the alienating gulfs that
Acting but a completer sympathy could fill
An abstdute difference in respect of their most
■dierished ideals and intuitions is surely a far more

'Hie esceneat Megeifaie fa whidithit paper was oripiia% pub-

lUieA is flsfaitaiiat^ deffaict.

lO

THE HUMAN IDEAL

bewildering and incongruous fact as now presented
— e.g. between two friendly acquaintances at a
dinner>party, parallel in their business, in their
enjoyments, in all the visible aspects of life, and in
their view of the vast majcmty of its practical pro-
blems — than in former days between men who would
not have broken bread in each other’s houses and
whose mutual sympathies might have found their
fullest outlet in the use of physical methods for
each other’s conversion. What wonder if the sense
of this incongruity goes far to choke social expan-
sion, even in what up to a certain point or down to
a certain depth should be most congenial society ?
For that sense of established fellowship, of funda-
mental agreement, felt, however little publicly ex-
pressed, which quickens as nothing else can the
pulses of social intercourse, is as little realised now
in any casual assembly of educated persons as if
they were truly a society of Gallios ; or as if their
mutual qualifications stopped short at Aristotle’a
conditions of ideal friendship, best exemplified, ac-
cording to him, in a of ‘ two men of estty

fdeasantry.’

This incongruity between the cone and the sur-
face of life is naturally less prominent in ndiMia
of professed adherents of one or oriier of Ae- pee-

THE HUMAN IDEAl.

vailing forms of constructive belief ; partly because
ihcy have their own anchor and reAige, and partly
also because the authors they read and the company
th^ keep consist usually to a preponderating ex*
tent of their co*believers. But no thinkh^ person
in these da)^ can live so happily isolated in a
favourite region of ideas as not to have some experi-
ence of the distress I have described ; the modes
and directions in which it is felt varying as widely
as the mental and moral temperaments of those
who feel it And inasmuch as it. is just where
agreement is extensive that difference becomes
keenly felt, and the distress is thus a function at
once of agreements and differences, the extent of
the one is usually a very fair measure of the pain and
irritation of the other. Now the title of this paper
sof^ests the point in current speculation where to
many of us the feeling is at its maximum ; and
this, as I have argued, rather owing to than in spite
of the extent of our sympathy ‘with Positivist
criticism and doctrine. It happens, however, that
the religion of Humanity has been almost always
attacked from the standpoint of some set views
wlrich (as is allied) it would tend to supplant, and
«itii-.special reference to certain definite moral and
SBttiictic losses whidi its acc^tance would bring

THE HUMAN IDEAL

12

about It is on the things wMch would be takeu
away that the stress has been laid ; on the threat-
ened disappearance of the vital substance of
morality, as well as of the picturesque lights and
shades of life, with the withdrawal of supernatural
rel^ion. Not only have I no intention of adding
to the controversy, recently worn rather threadbare,
as to the relation between morality and superna-
tural beliefs, but it is the precise fact that that topic
can be altogether omitted, and the human position
altc^ether granted, in the remarks here to be made,
which gives them any interest they may possess.
For the attacks on the Human Ideal from outside
have really tended to conceal its vulnerability from
inside ; the ai|^ment from what it preludes has
swamped the ailment from what it twcludes.
The points which can be truly urged against the
conception from a basis of wide agreement with it,
are constantly confused and overladen by atgu-
moits belonging to one or other of the creeds, or
the sets of hopes and fears, against which the
udiole force of humanistic logic and eloquence
directs itself.

Yet the importance of separating the two sorts
of attack, and of giving weight even to an
i^ostic’s quamd with the new religion, may be

THE HUMAN IDEAL

*3

admitted bjr Christian and Humanist alike. The
former may surely own some advantage in an
argument based on premisses which the adversary
does, instead of those which he does not, accept.
The very ins^ihcance, in the orthodox believer’a
eyes, of any purely mundane attack on a mundane
s}rstem becomes itself significant, if it seems that a
breach can be made with such tenth-rate weapons.
And on the Positivist himself— and under this
more convenient term I may be allowed for pre-
sent purposes to include all those who find matter
for fervent exultation in the earthly fates of their
race — ^these mundane questions seem almost to
have a priority of claim, if only because of their
very definite and manageable limits. To explain
further ; the Positivist ideal is not a mere condi-
tion of intellect and character, of ideas and con-
duct ; it is a condition of life regarded vfith certain
feelers, which feelings are as essential a part of
it as its intellectual and moral characteristics.
If, then, those who share the ideas (up to the
at any rate, where ideas become indistin-
guidrable from feelings), and who r^ard the Posi-
tivisms h^est ideal of social and self-renoundng
omduct as not only the true Ideal but as an ideal
vdriehwill inall {HTobalrility^be actually approadied

14 THS HUMAN IDEAL

— if such persons, I say, differ utterly from die
Positivist in the feelings with which diey fiod
diemselves able to r^ard the result, it seems dear
that the whole ground of contention is altered and
simplified. For, in the first place, it is made
evident at what point the difference becomes one
of taste and temperament, unamenable to either
logic or eloquence. And, in the second place, a
pofectly new issue of fact starts into prominence ;
and what it becomes imperative for the Positivist
to prove is seen to be, not the practical or logical
failure of other religions, nor the possibility that
men may be brought on human grounds to con-
form to the highest standard of duty, but that his
own particular taste and temperament are likely
to be the prevailing ones of the future. For while
the fact that A or B has such and such instincts and
tastes cannot be affected byai^ument, the question
of the evidence on which A or B may expect others
in time to develop similar instincts and tastes is a
dioroughly debateable one.

This statement of the case will become mme
ihtdligible as soon as it is translated into par-
ticalar terms. And as a text is convenient in
sudi matters, I may refer for an authoritative
of die positivist ideal, one who cheridies

THE HUMAN IDEAL

IS

it, to the striking papens, mtitled ‘ Creeds Old and
New,' which Mr. Frederic Harrison contribute 4 hi
the aatumn of 1880 to the Nineteenth CenUtry, I
may ^rst, however, touch on a doubt which is
specially suggested by part of Mr. Harrison's dis-
cusrion, and which must often occur to those who
have no positive system to adhere to, still less to
present or expound, — whether, namely, they are
justified in speaking at all. It is not merely the
question whether views which tend to darken the
br^hter hopes of others have any right to expres-
sion, unless they can make good tlieir beneficial
tendenqr in some other direction. The doubt I
refer to is rather concerned with the whole position
of negative criticism in relation to progress and the
evolution of ideas.

Evolution is a subject which Mr. Harrison
speaks of more than once ; but at one time as if
it were something almost wholly outside the in-
stincts and activities of the immediate present ;
at another as if these were its most essential con-
stituents.' Or rather he has not explicitly brought

* He tat instance, that * it would be a shallow thon^t to
su pp ose tihat the sety act of evolution is the end towaids which it
is heediig ns ’ t wheieevolutioaisnsedasequivsdent to thepiesent
levoteUonaiy times which sie the precunois of a new birth. But
etaiAcre he mats evolutiaa as embrseiitg; the {whole oossidn

16

THE HUMAN IDEAL

out where his particular view of progress difFois
from evolution as ordinarily understood. He is
profoundly impressed with the present chaotic
condition of ideas and aims; he eloquently de-
plores the loss of order, harmony, devotion, self-
abasement; and the means by which he con*
ceives that an advance will be made out of this
disorganised and revolutionary epoch is by seek-
ing help from the past, by gathering up many lost
strands of habit and sentiment, by a synthesis of
elements which have hitherto flourished apart at
different places and in different ages. But all this,,
though it may very properly be called evolution, is
obviously not paralleled by anything in the linear
evolution of organic life. Mr. Harrison may be
quite right in complaining that men nowadays do-
not regard the whole sweep of hunuui progress
but only the next little bit of the curve ; yet the
very metaphor might have suggested that ac-
cording to the common idea of evolution, as a
simple line of successive events, this would be dl

process of human progress, future as well as past And* in this sense
he Biirdy cannot distinguish it from some other end outdde itsdf.
The process is itself the end, and the only end which, on his owia
view, can have any meaning ; being simply the fullest and worthiest
realisation of human life as it passes, not a heaven pat at the dose
of it

THE HUMAN ID^AL

tr

dot would be open to them. But though the
metaphor is thus inadequate, and the use of the
term in r^ard to human progress might have been
more clearly distinguished, the view itself seems
full of truth ; for ideas and habits do not die after
the fashion of ancestors, but may alwa}^ start into
new and fertilising life, and show themselves capable
of fresh combinations.

Still it must be evident that even in this ex>-
ceptional and complex sort of evolution, in which
many elements of the past, fallen out of sight for a
time, may begin again gradually to mingl^ the
present, and the people actually alive in i^.with all
their specialities of nature and circumstance, must
after all be the preponderating factor. They are
what have come to be, and they are most immedi*
ately the parents of what is going to be. However
complex be the eddies and refluent currents which
bewilder the present course of thought, it is still
duxKigh the brains and hearts of. the existing
generation that the great stream of human evolu-
tion has to flow. However true it is that * con-
sovatives and reformers alike chafe at the discord
of ideas whidi is ever hindering Truth,' their
diafling does not prevent the state of discord, with
thdr voices as part of it, from having been produced

VOL. L C

18

TI|E HUMAN IDEAL

in its place as a link in the inevitable sequence.
Even Mr. Harrison, who assigns to evolution, as
its fullest meaning, the complete history of man,
who is confident that through the interlude of
present struggle lies our ordained path to the con-
fines of a new construction, and who is capable of
so abstracting himself as to regard the whole pro-
cess from beginning to end as one vast necessary
curve, still shows at times his close and individual
membership in this limited inch of the curve by
joining in this chafing, which is one of its most
prominent characteristics. But from his wider
philosophic standpoint, gazing at the self-developed
sequence of part on part, each part consisting of
the units who live, think, and feel in it, he must
see that his opponents hold a parallel position
with himself in having been conditioned by the
p^t and contributing to condition the future ; that
the individual performers in this temporarily dis-
cordant human symphony are not responsible if
1h^ find their instruments not tuned to a common
pitch, nor bound to throw them away in conse-
quence; and that each of them as a unit may
suggest to him as a unit that after all it takes two
to make a discord.

And in several passages Mr. Harriscm seems

THE HUMAN IDEAL

19

fully to admit this fact He not only makes it
<me of the distinctive traits of the Human Syn>
thesis that it treats the present as a mere continu-
ation of the past and the future as the destined
product oi both, and scorns the idealists vdto talk
^ as if the present were a muddle hardly worthy of
attention,’ but he expressly says that the desired
unity can never come about * by each going his own
way without regard for his neighbour’s actions or his
neighbour’s opinions,’ and that the synthesis mil
have to be prepared ‘ by deliberate and conscious
agreement’ In a word, if the reorganisation of life
and thought is to be a natural and healthy growth,
that must necessarily include the unfettered play of
criticism, and the honest record even of damping
experiences. The evolution of ideas has again and
again proved itself too intricate an affair for a mono-
poly of its processes by positive and confident
thinkers to be sound, or even possible ; and even
those who hold that not to have optimist convictions
(m the chief concerns of man is a sign of disease may
comfort themselves with the reflection that the great
symptom of truly diseased thought is its sterility.

But though negative and somewhat cheerless
views may claim a heming on the general and
impersonal grpund that belong to a swarming

ea

20

THE aUBIAN IDEAL

process, too vast to be judged from any single
standpoint, the views themselves which I would in
this case urge are the very reverse of general and
impersonal. My precise complaint against the
Positivist picture is that it is so general — that it is
a picture of a huge pageant, a bird’s-eye view of
Humanity, suclr as a dweller here, proud of his
planet, might show off to a sympathetic visitant
from Mars ; and that when Mr. Harrison deals
with the view which an actual human tramper in
the pageant might take of himself and his fellows,
he always imagines him as able and willing at any
moment to take such leaps into the air as will
enable him too to obtain a bird’s-eye survey of the
whole pageant, and not as more likely to be occu-
pied with the fact that he himself is extremely
hungry and footsore, and that the backs of his
neighbours on each side are breaking.

Most people, I suppose, in watching the general
outward aspect of some well-organised community,
where all that meets the ^e is the inspiring sight
of mutual dependence and corporate life, must
have been struck at certain instants with a sort of
shock by the sudden realisation tha^ in another
aspect, each member is really for ever alone with
ius one self-inclosed life, with joys and griefs

THE HUMAN IDEAL

21

that are wholly incommunicable and unshareable.
Even in presence of sudi an accepted type of a
happy society as a school of healthy boys in recre-
ation-time, how startlingly will the sense recur of
what childhood’s pangs really were, how gnawing,
how hopeless, how carefully concealed — ^with a
wonder as to which, be it only one or two, of the
figures so similar to an outsider’s eye may be wear-
ing that cheerful outer seeming as a mask. Some
such revulsion of feeling, but with a far more
general application, one may experience, I think,
when, after admiring with Mr. Harrison the mani-
fold operations of this living machine of humanity,
its wonderful productions, its incomparable vigour,
its ever-increasing complexity, one recollects that
each individual wheel has a sentient life of its own,
and is perpetually racked and whirled in directions
which seem utterly irrelevant to the general ten-
denqr of the machine ; or, to change the metaphor,
when, after letting one’s eyes roam around the
vast array of peaks which represent the perma-
nent achievements of Humanity, and noting range
beyond range up and along which the myriad
tracks human progress can be traced, one takes
tile sudden step from the capital H to the capital
It and faces the fact that the daily life of tiiC

2i

THE HUMAN IDEAL

swanning multitudes of ‘ I ’s is cast in the vales and
crannies, a million for every peak, which lie shut
off from the broad prospect and from the exhilara*
ting air, cramped, and darl^ and often fever>stricken,
for all that a fine view may be had for the climbing.

Metaphors, however, are the most unconvincing
o( arguments. Let me explain, then, that the
darker and more unshareable side of individual ex>
perience is altogether omitted from Mr. Hmrison’s
picture. While he describes it as the business of
his creed to explain whatever belongs to man, and
from man’s point of view to supply a key to man’s
whole life, complete being, entire history — ^while he
expressly says, ‘ Leave any side of thought or life
wholly out of sight in your philosophy or your
religion, and they introduce conflict, and ultimately
confusion ’ — the words pain and gri^ are not once
to be found in his expositioiu In his philosophy
and religion the side of life which those words re-
present is left wholly out of sight ; it is as non-
existent, for aught the visitant from Mars would
discover from Mr. Harrison’s ‘ complete’ theory, in
die Europe of to-day as in Paradise before the Fall
Philosc^ies and religions which, while affecting
to deal with the highest, know nothii^ of many
the commonest and widest truths that concern man.

THE HUMAN IDEAL

are, in his own words, mere impostures. Is it, then,
not a common and wide truth that suffering exists^
that it has even been a question whether it be not
the predominant condition — at any rate, that many
do suffer terribly and hideously and in utterly un>
preventable ways, while to many more life is along
and weaty burden? One is ashamed of writing
down such platitudes ; but it is Mr. Harrison, not I,
who is responsible for them. If a ph}^iol(^ist lays
down that the food we swallow is the sole basis of
bodily existence, and forgets to include the air we
breathe, is his doctrine to be left to stand because
the correction is a platitude ? Yet such is exactly
the position of one who analyses life into duty and
pleasure, and forgets pain.

* But,’ Mr. Harrison may say, ' grantii^ my view
not to be exhaustive, how does that affect its truth
and value as far as it goes ? I do not profess to
explain the Universe : I expressly disavow interest
in the unknowable origin of things. I find pain
and evil : I am not responsible for them, and I do
not know, or even think I know, who is. They are
inentable conditions, of the complete removal of
which I indulge no Utopian hopes. How, then, can
thqr imply a flaw in an Ideal thus carefully and
soberty guarded ? ’ It is to this last question that

THE HUMAN IDEAL

I am about to attempt an answer ; again premisii^
&at the flaw is not i the Ideal itself, as seen by
Mr. Harrison’s eyes, but in the assumption that
persons of other constitution could ever r^ard it
with those feelings which he himself has specially
emphasised as essential to religion ; as to which
person^ therefore, he is bound to show cause why
they are likely to die off instead of (as will here be
argued) largely to increase in the future.

For the Positivist religion of the future is
nothing if not stirring to the imagination; it
is nothing if not satisfying to the emotions ; it is
nothing if not peace-giving, Mr. Harrison himself
has admirably expressed that happy mingling
contentment with ardour which he conceives as
belonging to the very essence of Religion. ‘To
have religion in any true sense,’ he says, ‘ is to have
peace.’ His conceptions involve a particular method
of regarding life quite as much as a particular
method of behaving in it With whatever unceasing
devotion a man may spend himself for his fellows,
he will still, unless he can And at least tolerable
ease under the weight of human fates, be an outcast
from Mr. Harrison’s religion. I am assumii^, be
it observed, that such devotion is possible; that
Mr. Harrison’s highest standard of eonductt and of

THB HUMAN IDEAL

if

die unselfish feelings which prompt the conduct,
might be reached on purdy human ^unds and
by the natural evolution of the human conscience.
Thoi^h recognising much force in the arguments
on the other side, and also deeming that it is im-
measurably harder to exemplify the thoroughly
altruistic ideal for a week than to lead a forlorn
hope (in the literal sense that far fewer men in the
world are at this moment capable of doing it), I still
cannot but see that the harder task is actually ac-
complished by individuals with no extra-mundane
motive; and, looking to the past growth of the
social sentiment, I can see nothing unreasonable in
expecting that the race as a whole might very
gradually approach the standard now reached by
individuals. Even on the view that human life
would be indefinitely darkened by the decay of
extra-mundane beliefs, it might still be urged that
the native nobleness of men often seems only to
require stress of circumstance to bring it out ; that
the devotion rises with Ae need, and the springs of
heroism gush from a source where despair cannot
reach to freeze them. But at any rate I am as-
suming here Mr. Harrison’s point of view in this
reflect I plant myself on his Pisgah ; but though
1 can perceive the land beyond to be a decided

26

THE HUMAN IDEAL

imparovement on the wilderness, there is still too
much gall and wormwood mingling with tiie milk
and honey for me to regard it with gladness, let
alone rapture.

' But surely,’ Mr. Harrison may say, * the milk
and honey latgely predominate. An enormous
amount of the suffering which comes from jarring
passions will, ex hypothesi, come to an end when
the social sentiment has truly prevailed. What
remains may easily be borne.’ This might be true
in the purely hj^othetical sense — that if the milk
and honey and the gall and wormwood could all
be mixed up tc^ether in a common vat, and a
certain amount of the compound doled out to each
person for his daily consumption, the sweet taste
might go far to swamp the bitter. But the fallacy
would be involved which seems to underlie eveiy
discussion as to whether good or evil prevails, or
will prevail, in the world — ^the assumption, namely,
that happiness and unhappiness, or pleasure and
pain, in dijferent individuals, must needs be com-
mensurable things. The untenability of this as-
sumption is shown instantly by imagining a case.
Every one of any moral soise would forego an
hour’^ or a day’s, or a year’s extreme happiness
to save some one else an hour’s, or a day’s, a year’s

THE HUMAN IDEAL

Vf

considerable misery ; and he would expect any
other person in his position to do the same. If»
then, such persons presented themselves one after
the other, there is no point at which any of them
could say, ‘ Stop ! There are now so many of us
whose happiness is at stake that the amount really
overweighs the sii^le person’s misery. Let us,
therefore, all be happy, and Aim miserable.’ For
each of them would feel in the case of each of the
others the necessary decisiveness of the instinct
which was decisive with himself; and the justice
of the matter is perfectly plain. For the single
person would have in view for others only the
scmu fate as for himself in claiming that they, for
the sake of saving him from misery, should accept
the temperate zone which stops short of very
marked happiness ; while they, in enjoying while
he was preventably suffering, would be permitting
an utterly unjustifiable difference. ..Nor need we
embarrass our supposition with the element of
deliberate selfishness. We need not suppose any
rdation between the parties themselves — ^between
the many who would enjoy and the one who
would suffer; but, putting ourselves as arbiters
out^e both enjoyment and suffering, if the one
were to be the price of the other, we feel we riiould

28

THE HUMAN IDEAL

«lect to prevent both instead of to permit both.
Nor .is there anything in duration to affect the
principle : supposed equal lengths, whether five
minutes or eternity, we should refuse to call into
existence the fuller happiness even of many, at the
expense of having also to call into existence the
positive misery of one. Precisely the same prin-
ciple is involved, it maybe observed, in the familiar
fact that we feel strong positive relief when uncon-
sciousness puts a temporary stop to the sentience
of a suffering person, and not a shade of positive
regret when unconsciousness similarly puts a stop
to the sentience of a thousand enjoying persons.

This reasoning is not in the least invalidated by
the fact that many a person is willing to suffer, or
actually suffers, for the sake of others ; for, in the
first place, suffering for the sake of others almost
'without exception means suffering to save or re-
lieve etheri' suffering, not suffering to raise others
above the temperate zone which they might other-
-wise occupy. And in the second place, if any one
did exemplify the exceptional case, and, finding
others cheerful, suffered torture to make them
ecstatic,* he would do so because he preferred it;

* Sudi a sacrifice, though it might be adtninble, weald not.
I imagine, have any moial validity. Not do I taink that it

THE HUMAN IDEAL

«9

and his voluntaiy choice would wholly alter the
conditions. The same person would be the first
to agree that, if it rested with him, as arbiter, to
decide whether misery was to be produced in one,
as the price of ecstasy in another or others, the
decision could admit of no doubt.

The true view here is apt to be obscured by
im<^ining both terms of the comparison as in-
cluded within the experiences of a single indi>
viduaL People feel that they are billing for them-
selves to entertain the bai^ain of so much pain
for so much pleasure. It is easy to reply that
the disi^reeables so chosen would never be very
acute — never too acute to be modified beyond
reckoning by the concurrent knowledge of the
pleasurable result ; or that, the choice being their
own, there could be no sense of soreness or wrong.

would be even possible for veiy long. Many, of course, may feel
that it would, and, if it depended on the choice of the present
moment, might commit themselves to it, even if told there were no
subsequent escape ; but given the power to revoke at any moment,
I believe that each in time wotdd necessarily and rightly make the
sign which should cause such conditions to cease. The contention
would be a perfectly simple otae of egoistic and altruistic impulses.
But there would be no cumulatwe force on the altruistic side ; the
happmess of the others would mean no more to the sufferer at the
end of five or five hundred years ; whereas the instinct to escape
Sttfierlag, when this exceeds a certain pitch of intensity, seems in*
edtably to tttciease.

30 THE HUMAN IDEAL

and so on. But there is no need of such argu-
ments. This mode of comparison becomes en-
tirely unavailable when the divergencies from the
middle zone belong to different individuals. In
such cases it is truly impossible to brii^ pleasure
and pain to a common measure, or weigh them in
a single balance, so as in any way to set the hap-
piness of the many (even if they be many) against
the unhappiness of the few (even if they be few).
And it is well worth noting that those whose cir-
cumstances bring them most into contact widi
suffering are those who feel this truth and all that
it involves most strongly.

But there is another reason why the mere fact
that in a tolerably remote future the proportion
of happiness to unhappiness is likely to chaise
largely for the better (though a fact doubtless to
be rejoiced over and as far as possible accele-
rated), is yet powerless to rouse any enthusiastic
sense of the absolute value of human life. The
future is no more real than the present and the
past Even the capital H loses its glamour if
‘the glorious destiny of Humanity' is merely
to mean the superior good-fortune of some dis-
tent generations, which vdll be no more living
bits ‘|>f Humanity dien than we are now. And

THE HUMAN IDEAL

3 *

indeed no one can be more emf^atic than Mr.
Harrison in asserting that the cour^ of humanity
is to be looked at as a wkde. His human syn*
thesis 'treats no part of the past as a blank* ; it
is 'a combining theory, applicable to the past
as mudb as to the future.’ Now the future of Hu-
manity on this planet, he allows, will ultimately
close ; before that time it will have contained a
certain number of individual lives precisely on a
par, unit for unit, with those which have existed
or do exist And if we imagine posterity taking
a comprehensive backward view over the whole
of Humanity, what a very false note in the full
harmony of their exultation would be the thought,
' How lucky for us to come at the end of the chain
when the worst part is over ! Others have suffered,
but that doesn’t matter to us. To many of our
ancestors their life was bitter, but fortunately they
had to live it, and consequently here are we mth
our life, which is sweet — Suave mart,' &c. Surely
a profound undercurrent of moumfulness would
attend those wide historical studies which by that
time are to have become so universal ; and his-
torical studies, however complete, can never of
course Sliest a milliontii part of the individual
bits of suffering in the world. At any rate, it is

3? THE HUMAN IDEAL

askii^ too much of us to ask us to foi^t our own
troubles in rapturous prospective sympathy with
those whose only attitude towards them is to be
gladness at having escaped them.

In fact, however, this last aigument is hardly
needed. There can be no such gap between
present and future conditions. Enough suffering
will always remain to make the question of the
desirability, on purely mundane grounds, of their
sojourn on earth a question which numbers will
answer, or will feel that others must answer, in the
native. To take only two of the sharper ills of
life: physical suffering, though we may hope it
will considerably diminish in extend will always
claim its tens of thousands of victims; bereavement
admits of no possible amelioration by diminution
either of its extent or of its bitterness.

The former of these evils, physical suffering, is
often treated with especial shallowness. To dwell
on its existence, to speak of it as an important
item of life, is regarded as useless and morbid, if
not as a sort of personal cowardice. There is really
fir more cowardice in seeking to banish the know*
ledge of it at times when we are not ourselves
enduring it ; and all the more so that its reality;
however huge a fact in the Universe, is to an alto*

THE HUMAN IDEAL

33

gether unparalleled degree dependent on the ino
dividual’s actual present contact vrith it for being
brought home to his mind. Even the most confi-
dent view of the desirability of mundane existence
may be considerably modified in the course of a
night’s neuralgia. And if no fact of psychology
is more certain or more remarkable than the power
of physical pain, when not actually being suffered,
to slip away from the imagination and the memory,
and if this is a piece of good fortune for the non-
suffering person, it should surely be in the same
proportion a most powerful incentive (and as much
so on philosophical as on benevolent grounds)
towards exerdsing the imc^nation on behalf of
others. When we forget pain, or underestimate it,
or talk about people ‘ getting used to it,’ we are
really so far losing sight of what the Universe,
which we wish to conceive adequately, really is.

The subject of bereavement hardly requires a
word : so palpable is the fact that every individual
must live in mqch closer relation to some few of
his fellows than to the rest of the world, and that
in these lives a large part of himself, of his duties
and opportunities no less than of his joys, is vitally
wrapt up ; so palpable is the satire of telling him
to forget the stunting and maiming of his own life

VOL. L D

34 the human ideal

in the feeling of belonging to a Humanity of in>
dividuals all subject to similar blows.

But if existence is bound to be to this extent
bad, it may be said, the moral surely is not use-
lessly to contemplate it, but to concentrate all our
efforts on making it as good as we can. Unques-
tionably ; but then it is just the contemplation of
it, the mode of regarding our life and our race
and ourselves, that makes so vital a part of Mr.
Harrison’s ideal. We suppose ourselves to have
^aken off, with him, the trammels of incompre-
hensible dogma and of effeminate culture-worship,
and to have launched ourselves into a world of
united and devoted activity. We have assumed,
with him, that such a world will be better than the
present. The difference is that in the midst of
what is to him a pleasing stream of harmony we
catch an alien and persistent note of discord. The
only question between us and him is whether a
life which will still be so very far from a scene of
peace and comfort to many of the individuab who
share it can be regarded with the contented rapture
which alone would constitute service to it rel^ous
in his sense. And if many of us feel that we could
never join in his mood without beii^ utterly false
to the facts around us, and which would still be

THE HUMAlf ]a>EAL

35

around us in his Ideal state, he must tell us why he
thinks that the population of the future will consist
of people like him rather than of people like us.

‘ Well,’ he may say, ‘ I think so because your
mood is one of mawkish and ineffective sentimen-
talism ; and mawkishness and sentimentalism have
a natural tendency to die out in fresh and stirring
air.’ This answer would doubtless commend itself
to those who shut their eyes to obvious facts, on
an instinct that to call in question the value of
existence in any way has a tendency to unfit them
for making it better. But it has no cogency, unless
an incompatibility can really be shown between
mawkishness like ours and those parts of the Ideal,
outside our own private feelings, which we have
agreed to accept as likely to be increasingly
realised ; namely, social sentiment and entire de-
votion to human service. Now not only, I think,
is the evidence from individuals the other way,
but a most important fact, not yet mentioned,
goes far to support the view that a deeper sense of
irremediable suffering will itself be a very notable
element in that increasing social sentiment

The fact I mean is simply the soothing and
healing power of fellow-suffering. Circumstances
come to every indmdual in which all that another

36

THE HUMAN IDEAL

can do for him is to grieve with him ; and whatever
the hidden process may be, such helpless fellow-
mourning is found to act often as an extraordinary
balm, when the conventional cheering platitudes
about ' all for the best ’ and ‘ pain a blessing in
disguise ’ would seem but an exasperating mockery.
If one of the most* inexplicable, this is certainly
one of the most undeniable of the phenomena of
s)mipathy. And if any one at any moment may
be stricken into the state where such balm
would be for him a matter of as urgent and de-
sperate demand as a loaf for a starving man, the
attitude of mind which keeps the possibilities in
view is surely not only the insurance against the
‘ pride of life ’ and the i^pts of self-centred exulta-
tion, not merely the debt of recollectedness offered
up hy the individual at the shrine of a possible
Nemesis ; but is also the helpful attitude, the
spiritual condition which most corresponds to
others' need. Nor would I coniine that need only
to the exceptional experiences when it finds most
urgent utterance : for one who is cheered by a
ch^ue from an insurance office, thousands are
cheered by the permanent sense that their goods
insured. And if the chance of tihese extreme
moments for ourselves is not a thing to be cem-

THE HUMAN IDEAL

37

stantly brooded over, the very best means to
prevent brooding is the latent feeling that the only
possible support is at hand ; that deep if not
prominent in the hearts of those around us lies the
sense of what life actually is to many, and might
become to any, of those who live it. Nor does the
cheerfulness which is as desirable a condition for
work as for play, and for others* sake as for one’s
own, in any way exclude a pervading sense of the
realities, into close and awful contact with which
we or those nearest us may at any moment be
summoned. Extension of this sense fix>m a nar>
rower to a wider circle naturally means great
diminution of its intensity ; it may thus be miti-
gated from an occasional torturing dread to a sober
and watchful consciousness ; but that it will in this
way be extended is a probability which cannot be
shut out from any theory of the growth of altruistic
sentiment, least of all from one whose watchword
is r^rd for the tvAo/e of human life. If suffering
is indeed to those wdio are enduring it the most
real of all realities, to refuse to dwell under the
shadow of that fact, merely because it is a shadow,
would ill acoml with the idea of the increasing
and dosety-knit unity of the social organism. And
at any sate by those who find health in the concen-

38 THS HUMAN IDEAL

tration of the mind on 'whatever belongs to man’’
the question must be faced whether to live so far
in the shade must not be a vital condition of
health ; and whether, on their own theoiy, a sensi-
bility whose veiy essence is sympathy can, for all
its mawkishness, be expected to die of inanition in
an increasingly sympathetic community.

Here, then, we reach the point whence the
individualistic attitude, that tendency to picture
and dwell on individual experiences which is as
ineradicable (where it exists) as any other primaiy
mental characteristic, reveals itself as a source of
far wider and more practical altruistic inspiration
than Mr. Harrison's bird’s-eye views of the human
pageant. If a day or a week of extreme pain and
trial concentrates into itself more actual life, more
waking reality, more of what makes one cry * This
is what it means to be a sentient creature,’ than
a month or a year of neutral or pleasurable exist-
ence in which no urgent demand rises to the lips
— ^if it is in relation to the hours of hungry craving,
of realised impotence, of mocking torture, not to
the normal months of humdrum contentment, that
a '.peace-giving religi<^ ’ must be tested — if many
of us can no more find satisfaction in a rdigion
vdiich is powerless to aid the individual on these

THE HUMAN IDEAL

39

individual occasions than in a dentist who confines
himself to explaining to us the use and develop-
ment of teeth — there is at any rate comfort in
the thought that those individual thirds in life
the realisation of which makes the panacea of the
big H seem a superficial mockery, will be truly
minimised for each in proportion as they are
truly realised by all.

I have not touched on the question how far,
even in the absence of the positive evils which life
in the future will inevitably comprise, that life
could stir the feelings which are necessary to the
new religion ; how far, even if an anodyne were dis-
covered for the deeper woes of body and mind, the
spectacle of Humanity would be a peculiarly trans-
porting one. Elimination of the sufferings of life
would at any rate mean elimination of its heroisms ;
so that between the two the Ideal gets into rather
a confusing state of oscillation. But there is one
massive element which would remain independently
of the acuter forms of suffering, and which, while
equally with them conspicuous by its absence from
Mr. Harrison’s picture, is almost equally fatal to it
— ^the dement of bciuUdermmU The Positivist
rel^on is *to exjdain man to himself.’ The
Positivist, then, is 'able to imagine that the time

40

TH£ HUMAN IDEAL

will come when a man will never, in sudden flashes,
see himself, and his brief hold on life, and his
relations to existence outside him, as an inscrutable
riddle ; a time when ' the abysmal deeps of per-
sonality’ will be wholly filled up; a time when
men will be insensible to the irony of affections
and devotions spreading and deepening up to the
blighting and clipping point ; of ’ Humanity over-
flowing the individual as the ocean does a cup,' till
the cup happens one day to turn upsioe down ; of
the voice of conscience speaking in tones whose
depth and urgency seem often a mockery of their
contents ; of the Goddess in whose path ’ flowers
laugh ’ and ' fragrance treads’ crushing worshippers
beneath her chariot-wheels ; of the sense of infinite
import in life, to be found (we are told) by each in
the mere multitude of lives stunted and limited
like his own. And, again, we may ask Mr.
Harrison to tell us why individuals of the future
will not be oppressed with these things, and
oppressed in such measure as to make his religious
ardour of acquiescence quite impossible to them,
in face of the fact that individuals of the presort,
whose views both of facts and .duties entirely concur
with his own, sw so oppressed. He cannot rqtre-
sent such feelings as inimical to human relations.

THB HUMAN IDEAL

41

So far from there being anything anti>social in
them, their natural and direct tendency is to drive
the individual into silencing, as far as may be, the
Importunate questions where his own voice echoes in
a lonely void, by opening wide every possible inlet
and outlet of sympathy. On what symptom, then,
would Mr. Harrison rest his prognosis ?

This, then, is the burden of my inquiry. As
r^ards the mere existence of the taste and tem-
perament which are so opposed to his own, Mr.
Harrison must, of course, admit it — and admit it,
moreover, in persons who recognise as fully as
himself that they are sons of Man and bound to
the service of Man. That there are many of these
who, looking into the future he draws, feel that
Man still means men, that the future cannot annul
the pas^ and that the future itself, as tested from
the standpoint of suffering individuals and those
who sympathise with them, is too perplexed and
'discordant an affair for exultation or even for
peace — this also he must admit He may regret
it ; but de gustibus non est disputandum. He may
fed that we cngfu to be less sensitive to the
diadows which do not seriously darken him ; but
would only mean that he thinks it would be
fOT' the geimral advantage if we had been con-

42 THE HUHAH ideal

stituted on his model One thing alone will avail
him*— to prove, namely, that his model is the one
which has a tendency to survival, and that our
particular constitution and tastes are doomed* Till
he can do this, we may certainly bring i^ainst
his Ideal the charge he truly brings ^;ainst
certain objects of reverence connected with older
creeds — that it is ‘ the outcome of one very special
type of spiritual nature.’ The onus probandi lies
with him ; for the light of ordinary reason would
certainly suggest that the recognition by each
individual of ineradicable pain and perplexity in
life, so far from being a mere morbid nursing of
his own troubles, is the very first condition of such
alertness of comprehension and sympathy as may
make him most serviceable to others ; so that tlie
exact progress whereby the world would be
brought into that condition of social feeling and
ac^on which is one part of Mr. Harrison’s vision
would be fatal to the imaginative joy and content-
ment necessary to constitute the condition in his
sense a religion.

Throughout this discussion, the experiences
described and the objectitms raised have been
sudi as are compatible with accepting the whole
of Mr. Harrison’s destructive criticism, and the

THE HUMAN IDEAL

45

various nations shared by him with the majority
of students of physical science; whose various
tastes and temperaments may .lead them to con-
clusions like mine, or to conclusions like his, or to
some 'human ideal' of their own, open to predsely
similar objections in proportion as they get jubilant
over it, and demand that others should do the same.
Before concluding, however, I should be glad for a
moment to transcend this negative basis, in order
to point out what seems to me another fallacy
in Mr. Harrison’s atgument ; again centering round
the word ‘religion,’ and again to be met by the
question on what grounds certain feelings, ex-
tremely common now though not shared by
Mr. Harrison, are likely to cease in the future.

He gets an easy advantage over the Theists,
and especially over the Neo- (or, as he wittily
calls them, the Nephelo-^ theists, by pointing out
that their creed of human duty is ' a perfectly
human creed, built up out of observations of
hum2m nature,’ ‘avowedly derived from rational
and earthly logic,’ and that, as the great business
of Religion is to show men their duty, and inspire
them urith a desire to do it, shadowy intuitions of
an external Power or of an extra-mundane exist-
ence are irrevelant to it ‘A grand Perhaps is not

44

THE HUMAN IDEAL

God ; to dogmatise about the Infinite, to guess, to
doubt, to fear, to hope there is a future life— that
is not to have a religion whereby to live and die ’ ;
it is a mere ‘bottom of 4 priori speculation,' to
which the truly rational and religious scheme of
duty has to be ‘ fitted on,’ a mere hypothesis with
which that scheme is ‘interwoven.’ That is to
say, religion is so defined that certain feelings lie
outside it, and thence it is tacitly inferred they
have no value or raison d'£tre. 1 see no good in
haggling about a word. If we had to choose
between the two things, to be inspired with a
desire to do one’s duty would be infinitely more
important thah an intuition of ‘ a grand Perhaps.’
Let. Mr. Harrison, if he will, reserve the term reli-
gious to the former — though by so doing he im-
plicitly denies that the excluded intuitions have
anything to do with inspiring others to do their
duty, in the face of their own direct testimony to
the contrary. But why are feelings to be scouted
because a scheme of duty cannot be lexically
deduced from them ? Can propositions be 'fitted
on ’ to radiance and fr«^rance ? Is a man’s work
* interwoven ’ with light and air ? To say that the
intuitions of an external Providence and a future
life have no value because they do not involve the

THE HUMAN IDEAL

45

facts and instincts of social duty, is like saying
that a prisoner's hope of early release has no
brightening influence on him because he can
pick as much oakum without it, I am, of course,
not denying that attempts have been made to
establish logical contact between these experiences
and the creed of duty which rests on a wide and
reasoned view of human action ; but for that very
reason is it important to observe how little the
joint existence of the two depends on such
attempts. Mr. Harrison has here treated his
opponents in a lump, and forced on them a view
whose crudity some of them have tiiemselves
exposed ; with an unintentional unfairness such as
makes him elsewhere sum up metaphysicians as a
class who ‘ languidly complain of utilitarian aims,
sordid indiflerence to abstract thought, to the flne
beauty of a meditative existence ’ ; and represent
men whose ideal of humanity is no less glowing
than his own as people who 'scom the noblest
emotions ’ and ' think all will be well if the work!
can only be converted to a thirst for science.’

And then comes the flnal question. Why is it
probable that the feelings and intuitions will vanish ?
Mr. Harrison fails to prove them valueless ; how
is he goii^ to prove them moribund He may

THE HUMAN IDEAL

46

call that ‘ nebulous ’ in which others find a strong
support ; but what we want to know is, why are
the nebulous persons to cease ? For the nebulosity
is clearly not the least of a kind which explana-
tions and arguments can touch. Mr. Harrison is
too candid to deny the existence of the feelings and
intuitions in those who perfectly realise the facts
and conditions of the material universe ; whose .
scientific vision is as clear, and their agnosticism
really as complete, as his own ; to whom the
‘supernatural’ (in the sense of interference with
uniform law) is as much a figment of the past as it
can possibly be to the most enlightened minds ten
thousand years hence. The fog, if it be one, is
absolutely different in kind from all the fogs which
Science has gradually dispelled. It depends not
on l(gic or discovery, but on temperament, how
far any one’s outlook on this mundane existence
will be coloured by the reflection that, if he lacks
assurance that this is not all, he equally lacks
assurance that it is. I am purposely still keeping
clear of all arguments drawn from moral and
religious grounds. I simply state, as a psycho-
lo^cal fact, that the sense of possibilities that can
never be disproved is capable of exerdsii^ a
pervading effect on the human mind which is

THE HUMAN IDEAL

47

absolutely irrelevant to any numerical estimate of
odds; and that human spirits, oppressed in the
manners described in this paper, find the sense of
these possibilities an ineradicable fact in their lives.
On paper, in a scheme of philosophy, the ' grand
Perhaps ’ may look as feeble as ' Humanity ' looks
imposing. But there is another arena. In the
hearts of countless individuals the former expands
into a pervading influence, where the latter shrinks
into a mere noun of multitude. To tell them that
^ nebular hypotheses ’ are * the religion of scholars,
and not of men and women with work to do,’ has
no force unless it can be proved that the work
remains undone ; that the hypotheses interfere
with the human creed and the ideal of self-
renouncing duty ; that they have some antisocial
tendency which contains the germ of their own
decay. No such proof has been given. As the
spread of science supplies no direct, so the spread
of social morality supplies no indirect, argument
for the probable cessation of an attitude of mind
which is equally compatible with both. Account
for it if you will ; call it a result of the environ-
ment — of the pressure of human fates on the in-
dmdual spirit. But even on that ground, to

48

THE HUMAN IDEAL

assert that, the environment and the individual
remaining essentially unchanged, an extremely
common efTect of one on the other will cease, is
mere prophecy — and 'among all forms of mistake,
prophecy is the most gratuitous.*

49

* NATURAL religion:^

It would be useless and impertinent to occupy
space with any detailed account of a work which
every possible reader of this Essay must have read ;
and almost equally so to lavish praise on the spirit
of peace and progress in which it is conceived, and
on the well-known style, at once so weighty and
so brilliant, in which it is executed. Its author’s
object is briefly this: putting ‘supernaturalism*
and dogma on one side, to show that the ' natural *
Universe of facts and feelings supplies, in actual
existence and operation, diverse elements of reli-
gion, which only need to be generally recognised
for what they are, and to be consdo’usly united, to
make up a Religion — something fully worthy of
that name, though in relation to the individual it
might also be called Culture, and in relation to the
world Civilisation. In dispersion, these diverse

^ tiahumt tUMgjittt. Bjr the Antbor of iSSMt#. London:
iSSflU

VOL. L E

' NATURAL RELIGION ’

SO

dements are comparatively weak ; they are mis-
understood, often held to be opposed to religion,
and even mischievously discordant among them-
selves ; one set of men neglects one of them, and
another another. Like the sticks of a faggot, they
will find their true strength in union ; and the
possibility of their union is that they do, as a
matter of fact, appeal to a common instinct and
excite a common feeling — that of devoted self-
forgetting admiration. This feeling, which is no
other than worship, is specifically religious ; and
when it has found its true and complete Object, it
will be a single Religion, embodied in a single
universal Church— * a great commanding union of
hearts and minds,’ the invigorating influence of
which will be felt in every department of life.

There can, of course, be no doubt as to what
the elements must be. The same threefold division
of the higher life has commended itself even to
those who differ completely in their point of view
with r^ard to it With Plotinus, the three consti-
tuents are roads for attaining that elevation of
mind in which the Infinite may be apprehended,
and which ' I myself,’ he says, ' have realised but
three times as 5ret, and Porphyry hitherto not
once.’ They are : that ' devotion to the One,’ to tiie

‘STATURAL RELIGION’

51

ordered unity of things, which is the mark of die
natural philosopher ; the love and moral purity of
devout and ardent souls ; and ‘ the love of beauty
which exalts the poet’ With Goethe, they are the
elements of Culture ; which he sums up as * Life
in the Whole, in the Good, in the Beautiful’ With
our author, as we have seen, they are the sufficient
elements of Religion ; not, as in the idea of Plotinus,
mere paths to an unknown god, but actual present
possession and worship ; and he discriminates them
as concerned with the eternal laws of the Universe,
with Humanity, and with Beauty, or more briefly
as Science, Morality, and Art

The argument by which this view is supported
is naturally aggressive as well as constructive ; and
on the aggressive side it seems unanswerable.
Parts of the same lesson have been taught in dif-
ferent though not less impressive ways hy Mr.
Matthew Arnold, Mr. Ruskin, and the Positivist
writers ; but it is here re-enforcefl with all the
weight of the author’s individuality. We can have
nothing but admiring assent for his exposure of
the pettiness and vulgarity of what he calls die
lower life; and of the incapacity of the existing
dogmatic nelsons to meet the needs of the higher
life tqr supjdying a ^nthesis which may embrace

tz

52 ‘NATURAL RELIGION'

all its dements in one ‘ great atmosphere of thought
and feeling.’ Nor can we differ as to the impor-
tance, for human welfare, of Science, Morality, and
Art — of a wider knowledge of Natural Laws, a
wider love of Humanity, and a wider appreciation
of Beauty. Our doubts begin when we turn to
the positive additions which the present view of
Natural Religion has made to the previous enlight-
ened conceptions on these subjects.

And to glance first at the elements separately :
the book gives the impression that its author has
been habitually in veiy much closer contact with
Morality, especially as studied in relation to his-
tory and politics, than with Science and Art. His
picture of the scientific man, perpetually wrapt in
contemplation of Law and Unity, is a very common
ideal with those who appreciate the vastness of the
leading scientific conceptions, and whose imagina-
tions are impressed by the miraculous command
of space and time which modem discovery has
brought, but who have never been lost in the
wilderness of laborious detail through which almost
every investigation has to pass. The sunlit peaks
ate often better seen from a distance than from the
myriad rough and tortuous paths by which thqr
are actually scaled. And in a vast amount of

' NATURAL RELIGION ’ 53

scientific work which is concerned with facts, there
is much that is positively alien to the contemplaJdon
of laws ; for the relation of facts to laws is peipetu-
ally not only obscure, but of a kind which could
not possibly come within the purview of Science.
Things simply are thus and thus in behaviour' or
topography; the manner of their having become
so has been, of course, in every stage a natural
process, as is the gradual accumulation of particu-
lar grains of sand in one particular heap ; but to
our eyes the greater part of natural process must
be a myriad-fold accident, which might have given
quite difierent results without any apparent viola-
tion of law. Even so large and interesting a law as
that of Natural Selection everywhere presupposes
individual variations which, for us, are strictly acci-
dental And as the course of differentiation is
followed, and the attention narrowed down from
the dominating laws of a multitude of species,
which are constant under a multitude of conditions,
to the uniformities prevailing among smaller and
smaller groups, the fiscts which, for aught we can
see, need not have been as thqr are occupy more
and more of the ground, and seem often as remote
firom deduction, and from any vitalisii^ conception
of law, as the streets and squares of a city which a

54 * NATURAL RELIGION ’

cabman haa to master. Even in the simpler r^on
of inorganic matter, each of the most familiar
chemical compounds has qualities which cannot
be accounted for, which could not have been pro*
phesied, and which can only be registered; and
this would remain equally the case if the wildest
dreams of the mechanical theory were realised.

But even apart from this, and supposing the peaks
to be always more or less in view, can their effect
upon us be reckoned on as an unchanging quantity ?
The conceptions which really open up new fields in
the physical universe, such as the Atomic Theory,
the Correlation of Forces, Evolution — conceptions
which have a very different effect on the imagina-
tion from the gradual filling up of these territories
with subordinate laws and facts — are necessarily
few and far between ; and in their merely scientific
aspect the mind adapts itself to them with really
terrible ease ; so that even the last and greatest of
them will probably be not much more exciting to
our grandchildren than Gravitation. And the very
search for larger and larger and more and more
uniting conceptions, which has an exciting character
of its own, is in some degree opposed to the excite-
ment of novelty i to find an3rthing in the future as
exdtii^ as the Correlation of Forces, we should have

* NATURAL RELIGION * 5 5

to find some force which could not be correlated—
which in the interests of unity would scarcely be
desirable. Supposing that the ‘ vast unity,’ which
our author himself admits to be * not yet discover-
able or nameable,’ is really the God whom we seek
to know, and supposing it were discovered and
named, so that (to take the simplest department
only) all known quantitative laws — those of the
velocity of falling bodies, of the diffusion of gases,
and a hundred others — could be embraced in a
single formula ; it seems certain that interest in
Nature would then and there begin to decline.
The forward path would be closed ; March and
pursuit would have lost their great incentive ; the
imagination, set in motion (as our author describes
it) by glimmering regularities and suggestive ana-
logies, would find its function gone ; and worship
of the hugeness of the conception would fade away
in an atmosphere of unaspiring familiarity.

Fortunately there seems at present no danger
of the various forward paths convefging on this
paralysing goal ; laws, like objects, stand side by
sid^ e^. those of ms^netic currents and those
of heredity^; and nothing like an all-embracing
unity presents itself. But then ia ceasing to strain
after the idea of unity we cease to find mere

'' natural religion*

56

rqguluity so very imposing. How is invariable*
ness of operation in Time a grander idea than
mere size or distance in Space ? — of which latter
one of the most imaginative as well as one of
the ablest of recent men of science, the late
Professor Clifford, declared his unmit^ted con*
tempt. He would certainly not have prostrated
himself before the geological millenniums and the
stellar distances to which our author oddly points
as bringing the greatness of God home to us by
the fact of its having been actually computed.
And a case like Clifford’s would almost alone
serve to show that, if there are occasions vriien
these conceptions overpower us with a primitive
unreasoning delight in which the utter relativeness
of vastness in Space and Time can be forgotten,
such experience is something to be just accepted
in thankfulness, not to be reproduced at will, or
pressed on others in the way of a truth or a duty ;
for the cold touch of reason may at any moment
make it look both illc^cal and vulgar.

Against such objections our author would
perhaps still urge the scientist’s actual devotion
to his employment Luckily for us mortals, such
devotion, in the sense of an ant-like impulse
towards the day’s work, and a certain solid con*

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

tentment in it, is far from rare. But ants must
not despise one another ; and while any busy man
may feel for vapid idlers the sort of contempt here
specially attributed to students of Nature, it must
surely be exaggeration, in these days of specialism
and division of labour, to describe the feeling of an
average man of science towards an average man of
business as ‘ the pity of an apostle for a heathen.'
Our author scornfully regrets that men who might
be scientific discoverers often ' end ignpminiously
in large practice at the bar.' It is, of course, a loss
to the world when rare talents are wasted on work
which does not demand them ; but that is not
now the question. What we are considering is
the worker’s normal attitude towards the object of
his study. And experience, I think, shows that
the sdentist's devotion to science is not nor.
mally devotion to an ‘infinite Unity' or a ‘beatific
vidon ’ : that in fact it partakes about as little of
the nature of worship, and about as much of the
nature of interested and healthy activity concen-
trated on successive, limited points, as the intelli*
gent lawyer’s devotion to that extremely unscien*
tific and unmnified object, the Common Law of
England.

Tins somewhat unreal treatment of the pursuit

58

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

and pursuers of scientific studies might more readily
pass muster as the outcome of the author’s
sanguine and powerful imagination, did it not
directly connect itself with deeper flaws in his
atgument. Thus he perpetually urges on us the
comparison of the scientific attitude towards Nature
and the old Hebrew attitude towards the Eternal.
But must not the religious sense of awe in the Jew
have had at least some reference to the conviction,
so strikingly and repeatedly expressed, that the
ways of its Object were not only higher than his
ways, but unsearchable, past finding out — a con-
viction which would scarcely enliven the occupa-
tion of the scientific investigator ? Again, a great
point' is made, in this comparison, of the fact tliat
knowledge of natural laws is the means of securing
the maximum of safety and well-being in life, so
that scientific men describe knowledge of Nature
as of no less paramount importance than Jewish
prophets described worship of God. But such
knowledge the author himself represents as directed
mainly to prevention and circumvention, and as
resulting in a ‘transaction with Nature,’ a ‘pro-
pitiation’ of a blind and inhuman Power, which
might crush us but for our cunning and pliability.
Surely, then, when one passes on from the special

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

S9

knowledge, and the knower’s application of i^ to
his general emotional attitude towards the Power
itself, we ^all hardly see there any veiy striking
parallelism with the Jew’s confident self-abandon-
ment to an initiating, disposing, and protecting
Providence. This further topic, however, of the
inhuman or anti-human aspect of Nature will
find a more convenient place in the sequel ; and
from Science we may now pass for a moment
to Art.

Here there is less to complain of, as far as the
description of the worshipping attitude is concerned.
In mere point of quotable authority, the gospel of
Beauty has great advantages ; Goethe and Schiller,
the very word ‘ Hellenism,’ are far stronger reeds
to lean on than any supposed declarations of sci-
entific agnostics and sceptics * that their pursuit
tends to worship.’ It is indeed beyond question
that the habit of enthusiastic admiration is a much
more real, natural, and necessary characteristic of
artistic than of scientific activity ; while for the
world at large the difference is even more marked.
For, in the first place, a veiy far larger amount of
direct labour is necessary for really intelligent
glimpses of the unities of Nature than for the true
enjoyment of some form of Art ; and, in the second

6o

‘NATURAL RELIGION

place, those persons are exceptional for whom,
through a natural bent of mind, the admiring awe,
say, in the conservation of energy can fill up and
transform as many moments of life as the admiring
delight in favourite poems, pictures, or melodies.
And this difference will only come out more
strongly, if it exists in spite of adverse conditions,
and if Art in our day is really handicapped (as our
author suggests) by having a less robust set of
professors, and so presenting less of ‘ healthy and
manly vigour,* than its rival Science, But if the
character claimed for Art is tolerably secure on its
own ground of Beauty, we cannot but feel a little
of the old unreality at the point where it is carried
beyond that ground, and made to help out Science
in the proof that Nature, with all its faults, can still
be worshipped for being awful and One. We are
told that, owing to the appearance of this feeling
in Art towards the end of the last century, artists
/or the first time ‘ b^an to feel that their pursuit
was no desultory amusement, but an elevating
worship.’ The clear sense of ‘ something priestly
and prophetic ' in the poetic mission is dated from
the of Goethe and Wordsworth, and has 'in-
creased the self-respect of artists ever since.’ This
is a puzding argument It cannot surely, mean

‘ NATURAL RELIGION ’ 6l

that this sense of a umty in Nature has a more
exaltin g influence than other, and especially
than supernatural, conceptions have had and can
have, where they did or do exist. 'Desultory
amusement’ would be an odd description of the
art of the Eumenides, the (Edipus Cobneus^ and
the Divina Comtnedia. Our author has himself
expressly shown how in ySschylus and Sophocles
‘religion and patriotism were undistinguishably
blended ’ ; he remarks on the Christian orthodoxy
of Michael Angelo, and Dante, and Milton, and
how .^chylus and Dante ‘ were greater than the
Sceptics’; he draws attention to the fact that
when the fervour of Pagan Religion, as such, be-
came impossible in Greece, 'the great imaginative
poets come no more.’ One cannot but reflect that
on his own theory there was a glorious opportunity
for them to reappear in the succeeding century,
when the scientiflc and unifying study of Nature
was receiving from Aristotle the ihost momentous
impulse it has ever known ; but let that pass. As
applied to our own century, the ai^ument, if it is
to do the work required of it without ignoring the
inspiration and dignity that poetry may draw from
supernatural conceptions, is bound to mean that
poets who have definitely turned their backs on

62

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

those conceptions, and so have foregone that special
insjuration and dignity, have been rediscovering
their inspiration and dignity in the apprehension of
Nature as a vast and single Power. Nothing less
than this will serve : for it is futile to suppose that
in a poetical mind where the supernatural concep-
tions exist, they can be shut off in a separate com-
partment, and a complete view of Nature be evolved
without them ; and the page in which our author is
reduced, by the exigencies of his argument, to elimi-
nate from Wordsworth’s view of the Universe the
Christian faith which in the same breath is described
as having ‘preserved him from pessimism,’ is perhaps
the only approach to a juggle in the book. But
when we look at the poets of exclusively ‘ natural ’
Nature, does the account at all hold ? Is it any awful
Unity that they reveal to us ? Is it not, on the
other hand, in the Pagan qualities of Nature, in her
beautiful and sensuous aspects, that Mr. Swinburne
and his fellows have sought and found their inspi-
ration ? Beyond Goethe, the most companionless
of great men, can our author point to a single
instance in support of his contention ? while even
in Goethe, the indifference to the moral principle,
to which he himself draws attention, is fatal to the
sense of Unity as he describes it

'NATURAL RELIGION* 6$

Further difficulties suggest themselves in re-
spect of the place that Art would hold in our
author’s ideal community; where 'every one would
have some object of habitual contemplation, which
would make life rich and bright to him, and of
which he would think and speak with ardour.* As
regards pictorial and plastic Art, its relation to the
religion of the future seems equally full of doubt
whether the religion be ' natural ’ or ' supernatural.’
It is hard to imagine an appropriate mytholc^,
and therefore a mode of concrete embodiment, for
the spiritual elements of such defecated 'super-
naturalism ’ as may reject the dogmas and miracles
of current religions ; while at the same time we
have no assurance that apart from such elements
the arts of visible representation can enjoy the
widest and deepest sort of popular life. And as
regards the place of the other art of representa-
tion, Poetry, in a community where Morality is
as natural and little noticed an element as the
air men breathe, there is a deeper and more dis-
turbing question. It may dispense with super-
naturalism : can it dispense with evil ? How far,
juc^[ing from experience, may not its scope and
suUimity be held to depend on the existence in
the world of a huge proportion of sin and suffering ?

64 'NATURAL REUGION’

life is to be indefinitely brightened ; but can a
great and various human literature dispense with
shadows as completely as Fra Angelico’s pictures
of angels ? Will Othellos be written when lagos
are impossible ? Will Satan be an epic hero when
he is impotent ? Does it not look as if the leveUing
up of life to conditions where mental and spiritual
conflicts will have largely ceased in attainment
and contentment, must level down a large propor-
tion of the great poetic heights ? So far from the
mark of this ideal community being, as our author
prophesies, that genius will be ' of ordinary occur-
rence ’ there, may not im^native genius lose its
material in the absence of contrasts, just as humour
would .in the absence of incongruities ? And may
not days of full contentment prove unfavourable
to moments of rapture ?

To pursue these questions would be here out of
place ; and I gladly turn to the third department
of life — that in which our author shows himself in
his full strength — ^the department of Morality> or
Religion on its social and political side. It is here
that his strong imaginative grasp of history, and ot
large aspects of human nature, gets its fair chance ;
and the defects in his aigument which may invali-
date his conclusions as to present and future posri*

* NATURAL REUGION ’ 6$

Ulities will still leave his work almost unassailable
on purely historical ground. What, for instance,
can be truer than his glance at the opposite errors
of Fatalism and Titanism, at the fate of the men
who underrate and of the men who overrate the
effective force of their own wills ? How striking
is his range of illustration ; e.g. where the quality
of determination to accept the truth of the Universe,
however disagreeable, is exemplified in the attitude
assumed towards the lying court-prophets, towards
Pharisaism, and towards the secularised Middle-
Age Church, by the Hebrew prophets, primitive
Christianity, and the Reformers ! What reality he
gives to the conception of Hebrew prophecy, not
only in its continuous grasp of social and political
phases, but in its limitations ; e.g. its failure to re-
cognise that even a prophet may be something else
besides true or false, namely, mistaken ; and its
denunciation of the worship of natural forms, ad-
dressed to a particular nation under particular con-
ditions, and therefore irrelevant to the truly religious
element in Greek nature-worship ! Even if we
demur to the summing-up of Jewish history as ‘the
dealh^ of a certain human group with Necessity,’
how inqMiessiye.teinains his picture of the Bible as
a 1(41610, as one book, treating of the chequered
VOL. 1. F

66

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

fates of a nationality which merges at last into a
world>relig^on ; as an ‘ Epic of Human Action ’
with a practical and temporal aim, exhibiting
through a history of centuries the fundamental
antithesis of inspiration and rules, of living and
dead Morality, and leaving it ‘ in the act of revolu-
tionising the world ’ ; but also as a fragment, pecu-
liarly likely to be misunderstood and abused by
literal and limited interpretations — so that the
attempt of the Puritans ‘ to rise once more to the
same general view of human affairs ’ fails, • because
they have no clue to the centuries immediately
behind them ’ 1 What width and clearness in his
views of the formation of theologies and religions ;
shown, e.g. in his passing description of the older
theologies as busjnng themselves quite as much
with laws as with causes, and drawing no sharp
line between natural and supernatural events, and
of the gradual change of method through which
Science assumed the domain of law, and Theolc^
of supposed suspensions of law ; and ^ain in his
account of the distinction between scientific and
imaginative knowledge, and of the unfortunate con-
sequences to Religion of the earlier predo m inance
of the latter ; and, above all, in his disentanglement
of the two conceptions mixed up in eveiy moral te>

' NATURAL RELIGION *

67

ligion — laws, indudit^ penalties, and the wordiip
of Man — specially illustrated in the rise of Catho-
lidsm, the * marrii^e between Rome and Jerusalem,'
and in the ' Christian legalism ’ which was bound to
supervene, where ' the free morality ’ had become
the religion of races only just ripe for the l^al
sts^e ! What novelty he can give even to trite
themes; e.g. in his notice of the inherent pug«
nacity and mutually destructive effects of partial
religions ; and in his admission that Religion, like
originality, is apt to be troublesome, and has been
at times more mischievous than the cynicism of
Secularity, while yet ' the life of the soul ’ is vindi-
cated in the ardour that characterises all religions,
not merely true religions ! And with what rapid
and pregnant touches he brings out order among
the crossing and confusing currents of the great
stream ; e.g. in his brilliantly-drawn-out comparison
of the higher Paganism, of primitive Christianity,
and of Science, to the three stages’ of childhood,
youth, and manhood, and especially his vindication,
as agmnst Schiller, of the faults of Christianity as
those of youth, not of old ^e ; in his contrast of
Paganism as it appeared in its decrepitude in tiie
<dder civilisations, and in its new birth as a correc-
tive of the Christian and monastic reaction ; in his

68

'NATURAL REUUION'

brief sketch of Religion as the great state-builder^
from Moses, through Mohammed, Gr^ory, the
Teutonic reformers, the pilgrim fathers, on to the
prophet of Utah ; and especially of the primarily
national and revolutionary character of Christianity,
of its compromise with Rome and the grandeur
of Latin Christianity — that Holy Roman Empire
which ' is to Rome what the Christian Church is to
Judaism, the resurrection of a fallen nationality in
an idealised shape’ — and then of the gradual
break-up of the consolidated world-church, and the
spasmodic efforts of national states, as in Scotland,
and even in the France of the Revolution, to pre-
serve the idea of a public religion 1 How trenchant,
again, are the criticisms in which his views of the
past are brought to bear on the present ; e.g. his
exposure of the vague and idle notion that there
might be a sort of return to classical Paganism, as
though it had been the invasion of a Semitic reli-
gion, and not the inevitable course of development,
vdiich put the old fascinations to Sight ; his demon-
stration of the fortuitous nature of any apparmit
alliance between the misnamed 'atheistic’ ten-
dencies of modem Science and the modem spirit
of Revolution ; his conception of the aspect that
our natimial faults may present, when magnified in

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

69

the total working of one nation on another, as of
England on India ; his exposure of the want of free
adaptation of means to ends in ecclesiastical politics,
seen in the fantastic revivals called reformations,
made by ‘ those who cannot see the end,’ and so
‘ fix their eyes, as the next best thing, on the be*
ginning’ ; his scorn of the hollow apology for private
sects of supernatural religionists in a secular state,
that they are a return to the conditions of primitive
Christianity — to the conditions of the Church which
‘defied and vanquished philosophy,’ while ‘its
modem imitation is retiring before it,’ and the
‘ private judgment which the apologists appeal to
is on all hands rejecting supematuralism ’ I How
impressive, too, if we can look at the words simply
as they would strike us in a book of history, is his
description of nationality as a sort of atmosphere
round individual members of a nation, which, when
any shock makes the individual conscious of it,
becomes religion — a thesis characteristically illus-
trated by the transfonnation of the Jewish nation-
ality into J udaism by the waters of Babylon, and by
the behaviour of the American in Europe preaching
America in season and out of season 1 And how
skilfttlly he uses the history of great institutions,
springing up for the most part in an unreasoning

70

'NATURAL RELIGION’

and haIf<<onsdous way, and flourishing without
fear of damage from antiquarian researches so long
as they have a visible and palpable use, to support
his conception of a Church, not as a society where
membership depends on opinions, but as a social
oiganism into which a man is born, able to be dis-
owned by him only when it refuses to make itself
coextensive with culture and civilisation 1 How
convincing, lastly, are the passages where he touches
on the absence of any Arm conception of the origin,
raison dtdre, and future of the State, and of any
such general view of human affairs as Hebrew
prophecy in an archaic manner supplied ; and
where he urges that history can only cease to be a
chartless sea, on which men take short aimless
voyages or from which they shrink back appalled,
by vindicating the interpretation of human society
not only as its proper business, but as a prime
part of religious teaching !

But this instinct for viewing things historically,
which lights up so many portions of the argument,
seems in some degree answerable for what I cannot
but think a grave weakness in the argument taken
as a whole. For, after all, the great problem which
our author is facing is' the problem of the present
and the future ; he himself emphasises this again

‘NATURAL RELIGION ’

7 *

and again. Our need, and his, is for a religion
which the most civilised men of this generation
may recognise as the common essence of views and
sentiments hitherto regarded as disparate or anta-
gonistic ; in order that, having recognised it, they
may promulgate it among their less enlightened
fellows. Either there is or there is not such a
religion, latent, or rather dispersed, in the actual
views and sentiments of existing men. If, as our
author holds, there is such a religion, which only
needs to be set free and consolidated, it must have
certain qualities in relation to the advanced class
of minds which arc to recognise and propagate it ;
and the meaning of its principal terms, such as
‘ God * and ‘ worship ’ and ‘ religion ’ itself, must be
a meaning which these advanced minds, here and
now, do or can naturally attach to them. Now,
that these same terms have borne other and lower
meanings in relation to less advanced minds may
be most interesting from the pointof view of his-
tory and development ; but unless we are careful
to distinguish our historical inquiry into what /tas
been from our examination of what is or can be —
to distinguish our survey of past religions from our
search after that particular thing which we can hold,
here and now, to deserve to be known and preached

‘NATURAL RELIGION*

as Religion — those other meanings which the term
has included will be apt to confuse the idea of this
new thing which we are to denote by it ; even as
in Ethics we are familiar with the confusion that
results from mixing up questions about the original
elements and historical formation of Conscience
with questions about its nature and authority as a
present fact. Now, in his account of Religion our
author seems unconsciously to take advantage of
ambiguities incident to this double way of regarding
the subject. Thus he points out that benevolence
has not always been thought one of the necessary
attributes of God ; therefore, he argues, benevo-
lence cannot be regarded as part of the necessary
connotation of the name God. Perfectly true;
historically, of course, it cannot be so regarded.
But this slips on into the conclusion that we, here
and now, can worship as God a scientific order of
things towards which, according to the author’s
own admission, our natural feelings maybe at thdr
best * fear and cold awe,’ and at their worst dread
and despair— a conclusion which no amount of
history can justify, simply because the point is one
on which we interrelate, not history, but the minds
and hearts of ourselves and our contemporaries.

‘But,* it may be said, 'though benevolence is

‘NATURAL REUOION’

73

not an attribute of impersonal Nature, it is an
attribute of Man in his moral aspect ; and Morality
is one of the essential factors of the new “ Natural
Religion.’” This, however, only brings out the
inherent flaw in our author’s composite definition
of Religion ; and the point demands particular
attention. It is on regarding the elements of
Religion as a whole that he specially insists : this
is the distinctive point in his view. ' Man,’ he says,
‘has still grand spiritual interests, which are all-
important to him, and which he partly feels to be
so ; only to his misfortune he has ceased to think
of them together in the whole which they consti-
tute.’ It IS to the breaking up and distribution of
its elements ‘ under other names or under no name ’
that he attributes the attenuation of the meaning
of Religion. But things which are confessedly
distinct can only be bound into a whole by some
principle of union, external or internal. The ortho-
dox view of God or Providence id* a real bond,
though an external one. He is regarded as a
\ common originator, the source of goodness and
1'^ beauty as well as the ordainer of laws ; and in his
case the disruptive shock, produced by the fact that
in thar operation the laws often show themselves
the reverse of good and beautiful, can always be

74

‘NATURAL REUGION’

parried for many minds by the doctrines of pro-
bation and future compensation. Usually the fact
that we, in our relative and conditioned lives and
enforced balance of pleasures and pains, often
declare that pleasure in the present ‘more than
counterbalances ’ pain in the past, is taken advan-
tage of, projected into the future, stripped of its
relative character, and made a justification for the
absolute sum-total of evil in the Universe. Even
those whose logic refuses thus to embrace creative
goodness and created evil under a single scheme,
may still find in the mere notion of Omnipotence
a bond for the discordant elements. For there is
nothing incompatible between power and caprice ;
and it is a coherent view that things which move
us to delight and admiration, and things which to
all eternity would seem to us ineffaceable blots on
creation, have both emanated from a source more
or less indifferent to our susceptibilities. But such
a bond is denied to the elements of our author’s
religion ; for the simple reason that one of these.
Beauty, is directly founded in man’s feelings and
in his inalienable susceptibilities to pleasure and
pain, and another. Moral Goodness, is indirectly so
founded, and that these are presented as ce-oraiaaie
with the third dement, the dominance of Immutd}le

* NATURAL RELIGION ' 75

Law. Here, then, the discrepancies between what
we approve and what we find in the world cannot
be subsumed under any community of origin, or
swallowed up in any uniting hypothesis. We can-
not appeal to Omnipotence. For however much we
acknowledge the overmastering force of natural
law, and our own practical submission to it, we
have admitted into our Religion, as co-ordinate
with the recognition of that objective law, the
recognition of something else which is not practical
and objective, but experiential and subjective,
namely, our own feelings of approbation and re-
pugnance, before which Omnipotence is powerless,
or rather is meaningless — a power that should
make us approve of uncompensated pain, of that
the essence of which is to be objected to, being
not so much an impossibility as a contradiction
in terms, and none the less so for being called
Omnipotence.

As long, then, as we reckon feelings, as
well as objective facts, among the elements of
which our Religion is to consist, we find for these
elements no inner bond capable of replacing the
external bond supra-human ordinance ; and the
discordance can escape notice only so long as we
take a resolutely one-sided view of Nature. The

76

* NATURAL RELIGION ’

Eternal and Immutable cannot be cut in two ; and
as soon as natural law, in the shape of a complete
set of facts,' is set side by side with the jo)dul
feelings that some of the facts inspire, and we are
told to worship the combination, the opposite sort
of facts insists on putting in its claim for recogni-
tion, and the combination falls to pieces. We may
pour our oil and vinegar into one vessel, but we
shall not, by so doing, conceal their antagonistic
nature, or come to regard them with a homogeneous
feeling. If they are to combine, it can only be in
the menstruum of a supernatural theolc^y.

And in the present instance the pouring them
into one vessel, be it observed, is a purely voluntary

* 1 may be told that it is not facts, but their abstract unity, that
we are to worship. But this position is one to which our author
does not keep at all consistently, and which, moreover, is only
plausible so long as it is vague. The inspiring unity must obviously
be a unity of Itm ; for no one could feel inspired by the bare idea
that a number of different things are included in a single sum-total
of things. But then, as we have seen, no such single unity of law
presents itself. And the more we concentrate ourselves on the
separate or subordinate laws, the more difficult is it to work up any
large emotion towards them in abstraction from their effects on
human senses or on human fates. Nor does this apply less, but
rather more, if we attempt to regard them under an aspect of unity
which our author often substitutes for that of regularity, ^at, namely,
of an external Power or Necessity. For since we interpret the notion
of Necessity from within outwards, it seems to cantain the relation
to ourselves at its very core ; so that any emotion connected with it
is peculiarly imable to leave that relation out of account

'NATURAL RELIGION*

17

act on our part ; they are not so given us. A con*
sideration on which our author more than once
dwells suggests the exact difference. He rightly
insists that among the contents of Nature we
must include Humanity itself, and the slow but
sure development of altruistic sentiment and social
order. These, then, may be rightly ranked under a
common name with things as different from them
in the sentiments they inspire as plague and earth-
quake, so long as the name employed has no re-
ference to the inspired sentiments. Such a com-
mon name is Nature : it is a uniting conception,
external to our sentiments, between things which
have, whether we love or hate them, the common
quality of occurring or appearing in obedience to
immutable laws quite independent of our individual
will. This unity is one in the making of which we
had no concern, and in which, therefore, things
towards which we entertain the most opposite feel-
ings may be forced upon us side by si<je. Religion,
on the other hand, only has value for us as a prin-
dple of unity produced in our own hearts, and
embracing things towards which, whether we regard
diem as attributes and actions of a single supreme
Person or as distinct phenomena, we experience a
common feeling of ardour and devotion. It was

78 ‘ NATURAL RELIGION ’

thus a true instinct which led Goethe, to whom our
author points as the great seer of the unity of things,
to preserve his conception from disint^rating
influence by steadily turning his back on ideas of
suffering and sacrifice. The worship of a unity of
facts, apart from a unity of feeling, has as truly the
note of superstition as to worship some single fact
or object, e.g. a reptile, that one dreads or dislikes ;
and to call it religious would be to fail in distin>
guishing Religion, as something to be acknowledged
here and now, from the historic religions in which
such superstitions have freely mingled.

If I seem to be pedantically pressing what
after all is only a verbal point, I might at least
reply that the importance I have attached to the
matter of definition in no way exceeds that at-
tached to it by our author himself. In his preface
he attributes much of the disastrous contention
which he deplores to the w'ant of a true definition
of Religion ; and it is by means of just definitions
that he hopes to show the fundamental agreement
between those who believe that they are hope-
lessly opposed. But if words are of importance
even here, where our author believes that this
fundamental agreement already exists, still more
must they be so where it as yet does not exwt ;

^ NATURAL RELIGION *

79

and the words used have a weighty bearing on the
actual props^tion in an ignorant or hostile world
of the truths on which he insists. We may admit
those truths to the full, and still inquire what sort
of difference in the practical acceptance of them
will result from their being preached as a religion.
Especially, how would such a mode of presenting
them be likely to affect the revolutionary part of
society, to whose enlightenment our author natu-
rally attaches the greatest importance ? Viewed
in this light, it seems to me that no more danger-
ous word than * Religion * could be selected, under
which to rank things as different as, on the one
hand, the glow of healthy pleasure from an unself-
ish action or from a work of art, and, on the other,
the fact (in our author’s own words) that ‘ if we
could measure all the misery there is in the world
we should be appalled beyond description/ The
realisation of this latter appalling fact, which is as
much an exemplification of natural l^w as that the
sun will rise to-morrow, may be quite as important
in the interests of mankind as access to the former
sources of pleasures ; but the attempt to bring
riiem all under one grand conception, and to cany
them all down in a lump by the impressive con-
notation of the word Religion, seems not only un-

8o

'NATURAL RELIGION’

reasonable but prqudicial. In the attempt to be
grand and impressive, our appeal will lose the
strength which would belong to it on the humbler
ground of literal truth. It is as though one should
try to get a child to swallow medicine by giving it
at meal-times and representing it as food ; which
would merely produce in him a distrust of food
in general, without making the medicine any the
more palatable.

And as regards this question of preaching
the godhead of Nature to the poor and needy,
we must remember that in proportion as the
conditions of a man’s life are hard and narrow,
is it impossible that he should take our author’s
all-round and impartial view of Nature. The view
from the Brocken at which Goethe gazed, the gorse
in bloom before which Linnsus knelt, are not for
all ; they would not be for all even could they be
physically presented at will Absorption in the
imposing and cosmical aspects of the Universe
presupposes some considerable degree of leisure
and comfort : the mind, like the body, needs room
to expand. We shall not reconcile men to the
rigour and narrowness of their lot by pointing to
the stars ; but by ^pealing to their sympadiy with
their kind, and by opening up for them an imagi-

'NATURAL RELIGION’ 8l

native interest in the future of this planet, through
indications that the conditions of life on it are
slowly improving. The religious imaginations of a
favoured few, soaring above mundane things, may
be able to find rest and support in the Cosmos ;
but if for the large majority of human toilers and
sufferers the shelter of this half-way house is bound
to fail, the religion that cannot reach Heaven
will find its account, like Antxus, in keeping to
the earth. And within this narrower circle the
distinction, for religious purposes, of the personal
centre from that which encompasses it becomes
still sharper ; for the terrestrial environment con-
tains plenty of what is far more alien to the idea
or possibility of worship than the unoffending
stars. It is only by distance that the hostile and
depressing side of Nature’s character vanishes.
Poets may praise the moon for her beauty, with-
out thought of her bleakness and sterility, and the
many will merely remain indifferent; but if the
earth and the life on it be so praised, the many
wUl rebel.

The lesson must, of course, be learnt, as our
author plainly sees. Of the texts which he su|[-
gests for the teachings of his ' free clergy,’ one of
the first is that the path of happiness for the indi-

VOL. 1. G

$2 ‘ IIATURAL RELIGION ’

vidual is and must continue a hard one, and that
it is not blocked by simply artificial barriers, or
able to be cleared by any sweeping change in die
present social fabric. This is a most important
thing to inculcate, and there is nothing to hinder
any one from setting to work at inculcating it ; but
it is a piece of hard and repulsive common-sense ;
it belongs to the laws of Nature, but not of Nature
as in any way worshipful Even a preacher who
took his texts from our author’s own pages might
find them somewhat less than inspiring. It may
be a consolatory, but it is hardly a religious, sugges-
tion that ‘ we become insensible to whatever evil
does not affect ourselves ’ ; nor would the apology
for life, that ‘ though the happiness in it is not great,
the variety is,’ be a hopeful theme to expound to a
congregation of factory-hands. The thought that
for very long to come many lots must perforce
remain hard and narrow, and that perhaps for ever
happiness in life will be to many but a transient
bloom, forces to the front an aspect of natural law
which it seems like mockery to dignify with any
sacred name. There is no dignity in privation
and suffering, regarded as mere pieces of unav<fid>
ahSe fact The Christian, in taking up his cross
daily, may find that he can thank God for the

‘NATtJRAL REUGION’ 83

cross as well as (or the strength to bear it. But he
is enabled to do this solely by that confidence
in the ultimate designs of Providence which the
hypothesis before us excludes ; his cross has
dignity and sacredness as part of the design of a
personal and moral Being. If the mere slave of
Destiny can ever be said to bless his cross, it
must be simply provisionally, as a means, a school
of discipline for learning endurance and so reducing
the burden of future crosses — i.e. for reducing
something which the very fact of his seeking to
learn so to reduce it shows that he regards as essen-
tially an evil. And the moral worth of his atti-
tude seems merely degraded and obscured, when
the ' natural ’ weight and hardness of the cross,
and the pitiless laws of weight and hardness,- just
because they are eternal and irreversible, are put
on a sort of equality of excellence with the human
qualities that resist their pressure ; and are even
combined with the very virtues whtch prevent the
spirit from bowing beneath them, into an object of
enthusiastic contemplation before which the spirit
is to bow.

But there is another and still more vital objec-
tion to this compound re%ion. Religion must be
yhr aU : it must be looked on by its members as

‘NATURAL RELIGION’

84

within the reach of all. A Utilitarian may find it
possible to hold that conscious existence is desir-
able on the whole, and that his principle is being
carried out in it, if only the number of lives in
which happiness preponderates exceeds those in
which the balance is irretrievably reversed ; * but
he will not go so far as to demand from one
of these hapless and uncompensated individuals
any attitude towards such conditions but one
of sick rebellion. Such an attitude will only
be regarded by him as part of that unfortu-
nate lot which, while regretting it, he holds to be
an inevitable item in conditions that are on the
whole desirable; and it will thus introduce no
fundamental discord into his view of the Universe.
But then he does not, or will not if he is wise, call
his view of the Universe a religion. The connota-
tion of that word seems alien to the very possibility
of such exclusiveness. It seems impossible for
any one who holds a body of beliefs and sentiments
in the manner for which our author contends — the
only manner, that is, which justifies the treatment
of them as a religion — consciously to admit that for
others a similar holding of them is absolutely out

‘ That this is not necessarily hit yiew I have argued in a later
Essay on TTu UiHUarian * Ought,*

' NATURAL RELIGION ’ 8$

of the question, and that consequently his ‘ religion *
is one in which these others are for ever precluded
from sharing. I am only vindicating for ‘ worship*
the unique and lofty sense which our author
throughout ascribes to it, when I say that a God
whom we cannot all worship is a God whom none
of us can worship. In the very act of admitting
that to some, through no fault of character or
perversity of judgment, he is, and must the
reverse of worshipful, his worshippers cease to
worship him. So fundamental is this catholicity
in the very notion of a lofty religion, that the
notion dissolves in the presence of even a single
case where the catholicity fails. Touched by the
mysterious implacable reality of a single life in
whose owner’s refu^ to worship we can see no
moral or intellectual flaw, the divinity to which our
souls have clung becomes a cloud.

It will be no valid answer to this to say that the
individual’s power of worship overflows the limits of
his individual lot — to point to instances showing that,
even in the absence of supernatural hope, incurable
personal ill does not necessarily produce a spirit of
rebellion, or a yearning for general annihilation. I
do not deny that tiie enlightened Sceptic no less
than the blind devotee may thus occasionally cast

86

‘ NATURAL REUGION ’

himself under the car of Ju^^maut, and that the
selfodevoting impulse of the human spirit may
make a car of Juggernaut even out of such an
abstraction as Destiny. Even so, it would be hard
to' prove that in his conviction of the inexorability
of that Destiny there lurked no shadow of doubt
as to whether his eyes were truly in sight of tiie
ultimate issues of things ; and such a doubt means
hope. But let that pass : grant that we approve
and admire such a spirit : what is it that we
admire ? It is surely the love for humanity, the
sympathy with others' welfare, which the sufferer
is able to oppose to his own fate ; and the religious
and worshipful character of such love and sympathy
I haVe not for a moment called in question. What
I question is the religious and worshipful cha-
racter of the fate itself The inhuman fate and the
human feelings, the very things which our imagin-
aiy humanitarian wins our admiration by opposing
one to the other, and which I r^ard as essentially
opposed, are the very things which our author
unites, under the theoretical title of divinity and
by tile practical claim for worship. If he ever gets
the humanitarian to profess agreement with him»
the spectacle may be sublime, but it vnll be neither
Ic^cal nor religious ; for, keeping steadily in view

‘NATURAL RELIGION’ 87

the pc«nt under discussion — ^which is the attitude
of the innocent sufferer towards nothing more nor
less than the laws by which he suffers — ^we might
fairly say that, so far as his attitude was not one of
aversion and even hatred, it partook rather of tlfe
nature of fanaticism than of religion. If we call
the spirit of wanton self-immolation 'religious ’ in
the Hindoo, it is with distinct reference to his want
of enlightenment, and solely by that relative and
historical use of the word to which I have already
adverted — a use quite out of place in the gospel of
the enlightened future.

The result of our author’s welding of non-per-
sonal law with personal virtue in his ' natural ’ object
of worship seems, in fact, simply to mar the trueand
beautiful aspect of that other great gospel of the
future which is in its way a ‘ natural religion ’ — the
‘ Religion of Humanity.’ Positivism, though it does
not profess to grapple with the mystery of evil, at
least does not bend the knee before the system of
natural law of which evil is a prominent feature :
indeed its most popular English exponent has
treated even the more majestic aspects of 'cosmic
onotion ’ with very scant ceremony. The conse-
quoice is that the religion of humanity i^ up to a
osrbun pcmt, one in which all may share ; it has

88

* NATURAL RELIGION ’

that essential note of a religion. Many may find
it inadequate ; but no one will be excluded from
it by discovering, in the deepest depths of his
personal experience, the incompatibility of the ele>
ments he is asked to unite. Whether the unique
religious sentiment on which the Positivist no less
than our author insists can permanently exist
towards a Being whose gifts to us, as individuals,
have come from no personal love and comprehen-
sion, and who, for all our service, is powerless to
help us in the direst straits of life, is a separate
question. But even those to whom the apparently
uncompensated evil in the world is too huge a fact
for a 'religion ’to pass by with regretful acqui-
escence, who find the mingled peace and ardour
which belong to true ' worship ’ impossible on such
terms, and who cannot recognise the living head of
a spiritual kingdom in an image wrought of even
the finest human material, merely because it is
bilker and grander than themselves, may still feel
that the dream of such a deity is an imposing one ;
and that the element which our author would con-
tribute to it is one rather of weakness and disunion
than of dignity and strength — not so much the
head of gold as the feet of clay.

The language 1 have used may seem to some

* NATUKAL RELIGION *

89

unduly pessimistic : at any rate, it may be said, if
some things cannot be remedied, the less they are
thought about the better. It would be easy to
reply that the very prominence which one is im>
pelled to give to these things may fairly be reckoned
among the practical ill-results to which a deifica-
tion of impersonal law leads. The one is the
natural answer to the other ; for if ever there is an
excuse for calling attention to Nature’s darker side,
it is surely when one is asked to worship her. But
in the present controversy no such excuse is needed :
the book before us contains passages which make
it impossible to doubt its author’s own intense
realisation of that darker side. In addition to
remarks already noticed, I may refer especially
to the place where he recognises how easily the
existence either of individuals or of whole com-
munities may sink below suicide-mark ; and to the
concluding pages in which he himself describes the
pessimistic position. This man sufficiently shows
'drat, whoever else may, he at any rate does not sit
light to the significance of irremediable evil, nor
escape the chili blight under which * others,* and so
the panacea of feelings and work for others, become
infected in our eyes with the paltriness and tran-
sience of our own personality ; while at the same

go ‘ NATURAL RELIGION ‘

time the spirit of courageous wisdom which breatlw»
through all his pages shows how little ground
honest clearness of vision on such matters need
afford to the usual chaig^es against pessimism.
But that he recognises the rock of offence only
makes it stranger that he should imagine himself
to have got round it. Ail this grief and pity at
things as they are, and desire to have them other*
wise, which are such real elements in his own mind»
have been kept in abeyance in the passives where
he insists on confronting now an ‘ atheistic ’ con-
ventionalism, and now a paralysing pessimism,
with the vigour and enthusiasm of worship — ^taking
no account of this tertium quid, this grief and pity,
which is neither of the opposed terms ; which is
entirely remote from the enthusiasm of worship,
and yet so little paralysing or conventional that it
may be the very life-blood of the enthusiasm of
duty.

An impression is in fact created by particular
phrases, as well as by the general treatment, in die
latter part of the book, that the writer's eminent
sanily has interfered with his keeping steadily in
view the depth and height of the meaning attached
hy him, in the first part, to the chid* terms of rdi-
gious phraseolc^. Nothing, for instance, could be

*KATURAL RELIGION’

9 *

more reasonable than to include, as a main sub-
ject of popular teaching, the demonstration that
'theinstittitions left us from the past are no more
diabolical than they are divine, being the fruit of
necessary development far more than of free-will
or calculation.’ Yet, so far as they are matters of
necessary development, these so-little divine insti-
tutions are parts of an order so divine that in the
earlier chapters we have been bidden to call it
God. Again, when insisting on the recognition of
that law of Nature which is independent of us, on
the acknowledgment that ’ the universe is greater
than ourselves, and that our wills are weak com-
pared with the law that governs it,’ he says that
the lesson ‘ought not to be mastered as a mere
depressing negation, but rather as a new religion *
— ^with perfect justice if 'religion’ could mean
merely the set of conceptions and emotions by
which our lives may be most wisely adjusted,
but surely not with justice if it is*to retain in
its connotation the habit of enthusiastic contem-
plation. ' Great ’ is a conveniently vague word ;
but worship is too peculiar and personal a feel-
ing to admit among its objects two standards of
greatness ; and to worship two masters is harder
even than to serve them. If we make the attempt,

92 ‘NATURAL RELIGION’

we find at once that either Nature or Morality must
be sacrificed ; for by the standard of the latter an
impersonal and unmoral Universe is not ‘greater
than ’ but less than ourselves. And again — strangest
instance of ail — in the very act of recognising the
sense of an unmoral Power outside us as one which
does, and well may, strike man with terror and
‘ eternally trouble his repose,’ the author thinks it
enough to add that the word ‘religion,’ in its
ordinary usage, is not taken to include this aspect,
and that such feelings belong rather to ‘ super-
stition.’ That is to say, this exponent of the
‘egregious mistake in nomenclature’ by which
* religion ’ has been wholly diverted from its proper
meaning, this champion of Religion as inclusive of
our whole feeling towards Nature, is found over-
leaping the radical objection to his own definition
on the crutch of that limited and perverted usage
which it is the aim of his whole treatise to supplant.

The so-called unity, which will survive the re-
cog^tion of the ‘natural’ God as the power of
corruption, reaction, and barbarism, no less than of
beauty and progress, may seem the stranger for the
doubt whether, even on our author’s own ground,
it was necessary. What drives him to conceive
the divine power, whether external or immanent,

' ' NATURAL RELIGION ’ 93

as nothing less than coextensive with Nature?
Is there no distinction between deadness and life ?
Is it only in metaphor that Evolution could be
described as not merely a gradual process but a
gradual victory ? Is the idea of a divided Nature,
and of a divine Being working itself clear from
stubborn elements of grossness and imperfection
by a process in which it is for us to share, too
absurd even to be mentioned ? Perhaps, however,
this spiritual development could have no interest
or meaning for those whose spirits are to have no
continuing share in it, so that any such transfigured
Manicheism is excluded from a purely mundane
religion. The same honest determination to keep
to the most rigidly mundane conceptions, to find
common religious ground for as many persons as
possible by ‘ taking the scientific view frankly at
its worst,’ must further, I suppose, be taken to
explain the exclusion from the ailment of hll
metaphysical along with all supernatural views.
‘ At its worst ’ may perhaps be intended to mean
' at its least philosophical,’ as well as ' at its least
enviously reli^ous ’ ; whence the conspicuous
absence of any hint that the ‘ what ’ or ‘ how ’ of
Nature has ever been a philosophical question, or
that any view of die external world other than the

94

‘ NATURAL RELIGION ’

crudest realism of ‘ common-sense ’ has ever been
put forward. Or is it possible that a suspicion,
inevitably suggested by the description of the
scientific position in the opening chapter of the
book, is really welUfounded ; and that the ‘ philo*
sophy ’ which would transcend the dualism of mind
and matter is to our author no less than to the
scientist as much an object of scorn as the pseudo-
learning which he brackets with it, the ‘ erudition ’
and * commentatorship ’ which create dogmas out of
the untested dicta of the past? In either case,
one cannot but remark- -that resolutely to ignore
the philosophical standpoint is scarcely the most
hopeful or legitimate way of lessening the gap
between the thinkers and the masses, which he
regards as so ominous a sign of our times.

And now, to pass to a final topic — one which
the concluding pages of the book make it impos-
sible to avoid — ^how do the peculiarities of the
author’s view of Natural Religion affect its relation,
which he so prominently suggests, to Supo--
naturalism? (I adopt this last unfortunate and
meaningless term, as I suppose he does, because
common usage supplies no other sii^le word for
the suggestion of supramundane existence and
hope.) First, then, must not the disint^^ting

< STATURAL RELIGION’

95

•effects of that jarring unmoral element which has
so long distressed us, be traced on from the Natural
into the Supernatural Religion? No scientific
mind can imagine the transition from the ‘natural’
to the ‘ supernatural ’ as a leap : it is only the self-
stultifying word ‘Supernatural’ itself which pre-
vents the proverb ‘ Natura non habet saltum ' from
being as applicable here as anywhere else. And it
would surely be meaningless to deny to the object
of our * natural ’ worship — to that which we are to
r^^rd here with all the sentiments of devotion and
faith that we can muster — a true kinship and con-
tinuation with that further something which is
introduced expressly to give their fullest scope and
satisfaction to those very sentiments. Hence a
teacher like Dr. Martineau, who is quite in agree-
ment with our author in regarding ‘Supematu-
ralism ’ not as the root but as the crown of moral
life, can bring in his supernatural religion as a
thoroughly invigorating and irradiating influence,
because as a necessary means for the further con-
tinuance and development of the moral nature, and
for the satisfaction of unsatisfied moral cravings.
With sudi a teacher, Supematuralism is imme-
•diately akin to the spiritual element, in life which
at once suggests and warrants it, and includes

96

‘NATURAL REUGION'

both tile explanation and the necessary issue of
that spiritual element But how different is the
case when an unmoral and unspiritual element has
been included in our ‘natural’ object of worship!
How can that element be reasonably got rid of?
If ‘ Existence ’ has any continuous relation to our-
selves, could it be reasonable to r^ard as less than
a necessary condition of existence that for which,
as a condition of our present existence, our very
widest powers of emotional realisation have been
demanded ? Here, then, no special alliance of the
spiritual with the ‘ supernatural ’ will be defensible.
The government of the departments of the Universe
which are beyond our knowledge may just as well
be unmoral as that system of ' natural law ’ which
we know. There will be no reason why a future life
should imply moral puriheation ; why satisfaction
should ever be given to our yearnings for a com-
pensating issue to Nature’s myriad injustices; or
why the llXi; of cramping conditions should not be
as immortal as the spirit which struggles to trans-
cend it On such terms, the intuition of the
‘supernatural’ had no business on our author’s
pages ; it perishes before it is conceived ; it is
irrelevant to the very needs which are supposed to
suggest it

‘NATURAL RELIGION'

9r

And lastly, suppose for a moment that he would
consent to drop the discordant impersonal element
in the ‘ whole ’ which he presents for our Worship.
Natural Religion would then seem divisible into
virtuous action, conquests over Nature in certain
directions, and a healthy exercise of the various
bodily and mental faculties, on the one hand ; and
on the other, manful endurance of the inevitable
tedium, ugliness, and evil of which a large part of
Nature consists. It becomes, then, most important
to realise what amount of difference will be made
by the addition to these elements of even a faint
intuition of a ‘supernatural’ Providence, and of
even a bare hope of a future life. It is a differ-
ence which our author, judged by some of his con-
cluding passives, cannot be accused of explicitly
minimising ; since he recognises as legitimate the
doubt whether ‘ the known and natural can suffice
for human life ’ — a doubt for which, as thus gene-
rally expressed, might be advantageously sub-
stituted the precise and scientific statement that
for some human lives it does and will, and for
others it does not and will not, .suffice ; and he
practically admits that for many Ic^cal minds
(does it need much reading between the lines to
add (or his own ?) the new element is the philo*

VOL. I. H

98 ‘NATURAL RELIGION*

sopher's stone which turns the dross of life to gold.
But surely when we look back over the treatise
from this final point, we cannot fail to see that
by implication the difference in question has been
minimised throughout, and that the pervading
contradiction of the book has been here again
exemplified ? How many men will find that they
can believe, or even half-believe, the one gospel, and
throw the whole strength of their preaching into
the other ? This question implies no denial that
^ Religion deals in the first instance with the known
and the natural/ and no assertion that mundane
morality is dependent on the survival of Super-
naturalism. We may go so far as to say that, were
there men who could find it possible and honest to
preach one gospel as a supplement to the other,
those scientists who should treat them as reactionary
opponents on a vital point, instead of as the more
advanced and sanguine wing of their own pro-
gressive party, would be guilty of very short-sighted
and unscientific conduct. But the question is just
of this possibility, — of the possibility of a common
attitude of enthusiasm towards things so different
as life with and life without the ‘supernatural*
element — ^towards two ‘ Eternals ’ one of which has
for its essence the Love and Righteousness that

* NATURAL RELIGION’

99

are expressly excluded from the other ; — ^whether
these things can ever to the same man seem so like
each other that he can pass from the one to the
other without any paralysing fall of temperature^
and regard and preach the mundane gospel with
the worshipful fervour that our author demands of
him. To pursue into detail the radical difference
of attitude which Supematuralism carries into
every comer of life, and so into every comer of
that with which in either case the preacher deals,
would carry us too far. It must suffice to suggest
that, as addressed to the majority of mankind, the
keynote of the one gospel is Resignation, and of
the other, Hope.

too

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE.

Amid the numerous theories of life which are now
attacked and defended with some of the highest
literary ability of the time, it might be amusing for
a totally disinterested spectator to watch the various
and shifting relations which the combatants bear
to one other. For the crossings of opinions and
sympathies in this free fight are of the most com-
plicated kind. A champion who, viewed from the
front, appears to be dealing an antagonist a terrific
blow, might be seen from behind to be patting him
gently on the back, while the antagonist himself is
possibly writhing more under the latter treatment
than the former. A combatant advances against
what looks like a compact band of adversaries,
and does not notice in his ardour that they are
really hacking fiercely at each other, and from time
to time casting friendly glances at him. The sides
seem curiously inconstant The orthodox believer
in revealed religion finds the ranks of Materialism

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

lOI

and Positivism arrayed against him, with Mr.
Huxley and Mr. Frederic Harrison, like the Great
Twin Brethren, scouring the field. But let definite
issues present themselves, and lo, the earnest Chris-
tian is first bewildered at finding the Positivist
leader on his right hand, as he maintains that in
Faith rather than in any secular knowledge lies the
true secret of life. But then comes the question of
personal continuance after death ; and when Mr.
Harrison suddenly faces about and pronounces the
desire for such a thing absurd, the Christian hears
a well-known voice emphatically denying the
absurdity, and, looking round, perceives at his left
the sympathetic countenance of Mr. Huxley.

To the eyes which actually survey it, however,
the scene is rather bewildering than amusing. For
as a matter of fact there are probably few disin-
terested spectators. Thousands, of course, go on
their daily round without knowing or caring about
the fray ; but of those who turn a glahce on it, most
are impelled by their v^ry natures to take more or
less of a side, and to single out this or that cham-
pion or band of champions as representative of their
cause. Many there are who see only the ensigns
their own party piercing the dust-clouds, and
though distracted and grieved by the din, never

102

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

truly set Hiemselves to appreciate the force of the
opposite positions, or doubt as to the ultimate*
victory. But others, with less of inward assurance,,
feel that uncertain and momentous issues are being
fought out with stronger and keener weapons than
they themselves can wield, and watch each stroke
as it is dealt with alternations of hope and dread.
And the existence of these straining and sympa>
thetic eyes is a most important element in the con-
troversy. For though in our day there is the utmost
toleration of opinion, and anyone who chooses may
run amuck on his own account, it is natural that
in dealing with matters of universal concern men
should measure success by the amount of sym-
pathy thaj: they can win. Thus the anomaly per-
petually presents itself of a dialectic demanding
an exceptionally clear and well-trained intellect
to follow and weigh it, addressed to the crowd in
the market-place; and of the employment in
brilliant and popular articles of terms which, from
their very commonness and apparent simplicity,
present every possible Ic^cal pitfall to the unskilful
and unwary. There can be no such thing here as
a technical battle of experts. The instincts and
destinies of the non-combatants are the very points
at issue ; hence the subtlest and most difEcult ideas.

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE lOJ

and arguments have .to be presmted in such form
dud lai^age that they shall appeal to the average
reasoning power of mankind, and win from them a
certain amount of assent and approval. And this
approval is won with only too obvious ease for
whatever line of opinion has the advantage of
some predisposing bias, in that large class of
minds which are fascinated and satisfied by just
skimming the surface of a stream of argument, and
reccgnising their hitherto disjointed opinions and
dim instincts as parts of an apparently solid and
systematic whole, seen under a striking light of
analogies, metaphors, and quotations.

Now this relation of the controversialists to the
public has one special effect on the controvetsy.
Every serious writer who treats of human exist-
ence holds more or le.ss consciously a brief for ib
Pure pessimism is a far rarer phenomenon in litera-
ture than it is in fact — for the simple reason that
to preach pessimism, without the power of widely
and successfully advocating suicide, is an anti-
human task from which a man must reasonably
^rink. Among a i)arty of philosophical experts
he might openly adopt such a course ; among the
masses of his fellow-men, never. The field is there-
fore left clear for those who think that something

104 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

at least can be said for the value of life — ^who offer
some of them new bread, some stale bread, some
even sour bread, but still always bread, not
atones.

It will be found that a claim to speak with
authority on the general problems of existence
{sufficient ability being presumed) usually rests on
one or other of two qualifications — study and
mastery either of the spiritual or of the physical phe-
nomena of life. But these two sorts of authority,
as soon as they are examined, reveal a startling
contrast. For those who treat of the spiritual side
speak from a standpoint of positive conclusions,
those who treat the physical side from a stand-
point of negative conclusions, in relation to the
deepest yearnings and the most instinctive aspira
tions of mankind. Only at special moments of
intellectual intoxication can Science be regarded
as in this relation other than inexorably restrictive.
Views as to the transcendent worth and ever-pro-
gressive evolution of the individual life — ^views of
some importance to individuals whose lives are in
question — ^have received so far not the very slightest
countenance from physics and biology ; nay, they
have been made gradually harder to entertain.
And till this is altered — ^till those views can be

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 105

based (as who can say they never will ?) on some
sort of objective evidence — scientific convictions
must differ absolutely from religious convictions, in
the response that they can evoke in human hearts
and imaginations. There is nothing, of course, to
hinder one and the same person having a foot in
either camp ; scientific research does not preclude
faith and hope in the alembic of which the elements
of necessity and death may yield a subtler es^nce
of freedom and life. But in the direction of their
proper activities the divei^ence of the spiritual and
the scientific leaders is complete.

The former class consists of those whose main
interest is an ideal state for men ; who confidently
believe that their ideal represents a reality partially
accomplished already, and destined finally to com-
plete fulfilment ; and in whose sight the Universe
is illumined by the light of their own conceptions.
These teachers may ignore the facts or deny the
deductions of Science, or may accept End appreciate
both ; but alike by instinct and on principle they
regard other interests as wholly subsidiary to the
promulgation of their own hopeful views. And
differing widely among themselves, their passion
for human welfare yet gives them all an intelligible
attitude towards the society to whom human

I06 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

welfare, at all events as represented to each in his
own perran, is of pressing concern.

The other class consists of those whose main
interest is in the actual rather than the ideal, and
whose instincts attract them irresistibly to the
pursuit of the truth that lies in tangible verifiable
fact These men may be hopeful and benevolent,
like the others ; but to be so is not a necessary
part of their natural activity ; for a scientific dis-
covery would none the less form an important item
of verifiabie truth if made by a selfish and de-
spondent investigator, or if fraught with terror and
misery to the human race. When, then, these
workers come across the fundamental questions of
life, they.jpay preach truth, indeed, as men of
science, but they can only preach peace on grounds
quite external to the verified facts of the physical
universe. And their social and benevolent instincts
may have a noteworthy bearing on their authqrita-
tive teachings. Discovery and proclamation of
trudi is the scientific man’s m/tier ; but if, to take
an extreme case, a scientific man discovered that
some natural and unpreventable cause would
destroy the world miserably three years hence,
benevolence would prompt him to conceal the truth
and spare his fellow-creatures the misery of helpless

THE CONTROfVERSY OF LIFE 10 /

anticipation. Such an imaginary case is sufficient
to show that the exposition of truA cannot betaken
as his unalterable aim and duty.

As it happens, no discoveries up to this time
have pointed to near and definite catastrophes on
a tremendous scale ; and in spite of the verdict
of futility which the physical reading of the Uni-
verse has seemed to justify on the revelations of
the past, the vastness and minuteness of the physi-
cal revelation itself have so impressed men’s minds
that it has been possible to surround the thing re-
vealed, blank staring inexorable. Fact, with a sort
of emotional halo. But it is important to notice
how far the social and benevolent instinct, which
in the case just supposed would have scaled the
scientific man’s lips, may now be colouring his
doctrine. Professor Tyndall, for example, is scien-
tifically convinced that the individual life ceases at
the death of the body. But he is not a mere scien-
tific machine, and cannot bring hiibself to say,
* There is a fact : make the best or the worst of it.’
He finds that the fact does not make him person-
ally unhappy, and he is irresistibly impelled to make
it palatable to others. He therefore not long ago
occupied a laig^e portion of the most widely diffused
scientific address of the year with an eloquent

I 08 THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE

attempt to give a positive value to what mankind
will persist in regarding as pure negation, and to
make people really enjoy by anticipation the ab-
sorption of themselves as a drop into the ocean, and
the loss of identity in the infinite. Now if Professor
Tyndall were as certain as our former imaginary
discoverer that the result of his tidings would be
universal grief and consternation, he would be in
no hurry to proclaim them ; but he not unnaturally
sees nothing to justify terror and aversion in what
he himself can regard unmoved. He would, how-
ever, probably have to admit that his*own con-
tentment with things as they are does not truly
depend on a perpetual sense of comfort, or oc-
casional thrills of rapture, at the notion of being
finally swallowed up, but on his view of the facts
of the present life ; and that this view in its turn
depends greatly on his special temperament and
circumstances Every person who could come to
him and say, ‘I have not your temperament; I
am not happy now, and I am all the worse for
knowing that my affections are to be snapped and
myself swallowed up,’ would be so far a proof
that Professor Tyndall had been impelled by the
benevolent instinct, supervening irrelevantly on
the apprehension of scientific facts, to direct the

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE 109

imaginations of his hearers to a min^~to a vision
the solacing and supporting power of which must
be pronounced phantasmal unless actually verified
in experience.

Science, then, cannot seriously or permanently
attempt to represent contemplation of the uniform-
ities of Nature as a daily feast, nor final extinction
as a rapturous future ; and the men who deal with
the unalterable objective facts of man*s history and
environment would be free to make the worst of

them, for aught that could be demanded by loyalty
to the pa.ssionless mistress whom they serve. In
making the best of them, the most they can say is
that they find nothing in the facts or in the de-
ductions drawn from them which has appalled
their own imaginations. What common ground,

then, do they find with the spiritual teachers
What claim do we see put forward for the value
and dignity of life by those who feel alike com-
pelled to reject the confident religious views and
hopes alike of Christians and Positivists, and no
less unreservedly to accept the conclusions of
Science, while unable to derive from these last
the slightest spiritual glow f — for there are many
such who both implicitly and explicitly disavow
pessimism, and would abstain from lifting the

no

THE CONTROVERSV OF LIFE

proverbial Unger, if the extinction of the race
depended on their will. They no doubt vary in
sensitiveness to die darker side of things; and
perhaps the saddest of them speak the least. But
they all have at their command an indefinite
stock of an ingredient by which the imagination
can turn the blackest tints grey — a general sense,
namely, of the sweetness of human ties and affec-
tions, and a belief in substantial satisfaction from
the realisation and performance of duty. Their
teaching, if sometimes vague in its terminology, is
clearly in the positive current ; and though their
voice may not sound exultant, it is free from
accents of despair.

In- this fundamental point, then, the assertion or
implication of some distinct value and dignity in
life, we find something common to all our practical
philosophers. Their philosophy, being based on
veiy different grounds,, is naturally negative and
destructive when they are attacking each other’s
grounds ; but they none of them rob the world
of anything without offering an equivalent which
seems to themselves to be of positive worth. There
is, however, another line open to tho.se who engage
in the controversy— namely, the purely negative
one ; the taking away without giving anything in

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE III

return ; the pointing out of alarming results sure
to follow from the adoption of certain views, and
from the walking in certain logical paths, but
without any attempt to indicate an escape from
them. This line, like the others, avoids a dis-
tinct avowal of pessimism, which at present, as
we saw, has no place open to it in general litera-
ture ; but so far as it wins acceptance, it may be
none the less disastrous. For it can clearly add
no force to any one of the rival positive views,
except in such minds as are content to waive the
intellectual basis of their beliefs, and to estimate
the convincingness of a creed by disagreeable
results connected vdth its opposite. Destructive
criticism of this kind stands on very different
ground from that which has attacked, and to
many minds destroyed, tlie dogmas and claims
of the various religious systems ; for that criticism
has been conducted on the view that the dogmas
and claims are cramping to the best activity, and
thus hurtful to the happiness, of mankind. But it
seems unjustifiable for any who do not themselves
perceive at least some truth and efficacy in these
systems to preach to those who are also unable
to accept them of the total absence of any work-
4tble alternative. To do this is in fact to do

II2

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

covertly what I have asserted never to' be done
openly — to preach a gospel of suicide.

This Serious charge seems to me to lie against
what has probably been the most widely read of
recent contributions to the Controversy of Life. In
raising the question, Is Life worth Living f Mr.
Mallock’s professed object was to take no side, but
to awaken others to a sense of the alarming issues
of certain opinions ; in other words, to awaken
those holders of the opinions who respected their
own reason to the certainty of a miserable and
inevitable doom for men. I do not know how far
in some later writings— e.g. in a paper on ‘ The
Future of Faith,’ in the Cmttemporary Review —
Mr. Mallock may have intended to redeem him-
self, by indicating that he knows of a haven
where he believes that refuge can and will be found.
But his earlier utterances have been read by many
who will never consider them in connection with
this other ; and as they are sufficiently typical of
much that one hears around one to afford con-
venient ground for discussing the points in question,
I propose to touch on a few of these, reserving my
most fundamental difference to the last.

Two preliminary considerations may be rapidljr

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE ri3

glanced at. Mr. Mallock’s object is to show first
that Morality, secondly that Happiness, depends
on Religion — \tdiich he defines as belief in a
personal God, and in personal immortality — and
would gradually disappear if these dogmas ceased
to be bdieved. He considers that people are
at present tolerant on the questions which divide
the intellectual world, through -not perceiving that
this is truly the issue. But now follows a most
puzzling statement. When the world, he says,
once realises this issue — that is, realises the joy>
lessness and dulness of the ‘ dereligionised ’ (more
truly dedogmatised) life which it is the object of
his papers tj depict — it may reverse in a moment
all its former judgments. ' It will at^ue back from
the practical conclusions to the theoretical pre-
misses ; and if it rejects the latter as repulsive, it
will wisely and inevitably condemn the former as
false.’ This prophecy seems a little bold ; as it is
in the certainty, not the pleasantness, qf facts that
premisses are apt to get verified, and many things
not commonly accounted agreeable — death, for
example — are recognised as uncomfortably certain.
But anyone who accepts the prophecy must sureljr
perceive that it constitutes a veritable safety-valve ;
andjt was unnecessary to write a book to prove
VOL. L . I

1 14 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

what a dismal fate awaits our race, if the mere
sight of that fate from near at hand, without even
a taste of its reality, will insure a rapid and com-
plete escape from it by reinstating the discarded
dogmas.

Once more, even looking at the future with Mr.
Mallock’s eyes, I do not know why it is bound to
be specially interesting or distressing to us. Grant-
ing the unpleasantness of the transition-stage, we
may at least spare ourselves concern in the remoter
fortunes of a set of beings in no true sense akin
to us ; for if mere ancestry constituted a kinship
with claims on our sympathetic interest, we might
equally well be deploring the savagery of our pro-
genitors in the past. Some of us think that we
are descended from apes, yet the connection does
not specially afflict us. Why, then, should a pro-
spective picture of distant relatives from whom
moral characteristics have disappeared appal our
minds more than the future existence of lions and
tigers ? The blow to the imagination in the implied
negations, in the forced abandonment of hopes that
we may have cherished, I can understand. But on
the positive side, Mr. Mallock seems to ground his
appeal to our emotions on an argument that proves
too much ; for with the death of conscience— and

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE II5

he actually appears to refer the vitality of tiiis
pervading principle of social evolution wholly to
the supernatural beliefs which he conceives to be
decaying — ^the very meaning of i^iritual kinship,
with its implied sympathies, would vanish.

To pass on, however, to the main current of his
argument : he begins by noticing the present atti-
tude of the atheistic teachers, their devotion to the
cause of morality, their belief in the solemn import-
ance of human life, and their ag^reement with reli-
gious teachers that,* lived in one way, it is a hateful
failure ; lived in another, it is a beautiful success.’
He argues that they are committed by this premiss
to the duty of showing that this transitory life,
which saints and sages have pronounced to be
wholly vanity, contains on its own account some-
thing of supreme value ; and this something, he
assumes, must be an ‘ end of action,’ such an end
being postulated by all moral systems, and must
be an attainable and describable happiness beside
which everything else will appear insignificant. He
then finds various difficulties in the facts that the
happiness actually offered is faultily indefinite, and
that morality, being merely a code of restraining
oplers, is incapable of being presented in such a

Il6 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE'

way as certainly to attract the hostile and indif-
ferent

Now if any atheistic teachers have really offered
to their disciples ‘supreme happiness’ in this life
through the exercise of virtue, we may agree with
Mr. Mallock that they have done a rash thing.
But we must observe that all that they are bound
to do is to point out some positive value attaching
to life ; something which raises it above zero, not
necessarily to boiling-point. I am not myself
aware of their having ever advanced the claim
imputed to them by Mr. Mallock, that they can
offer anything in this life as enjoyable as the future
life is expected to be by believers. But what
then ? They did not make the Universe. They
offer something to those who otherwise might have
nothing. We saw that people who have only
stones to give ought in charity to keep them to
themselves; but what is not stones need not
necessarily be plum-cake. And in Mr. Mallock’s
argument we surely come across an old friend in
the shape of an ambiguity in the word ‘end.’
Virtue is an end, not in the sense in which heaven
is an end, but in the sense in which health is an
end. It would be difficult to overestimate the
dq|tee in which health conduces to happiness ; and

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFB II7

no one would think that he had successfully im-
pugned its influence in that direction by ^Kndng
that it cannot be brought to a focus at any parti-
cular instant, that many of its rules are restrictive,
and that many people neglect it in spite of having
its advantages pointed out to them. The metaphor
of ‘ paths ’ is a dangerous one in this connection^
as it far more naturally su^ests an object to be
attained at the end of a journey than sights and
sounds to be enjoyed by the way. Yet the sights
and sounds are quite definite ; and in application
to ^nrtue and its effects, the word ‘indefinite’ can
only fairly mean, not that they have an ambiguous
nature, but that their realisation has not assignable
moments and limits. They are indefinite as the
air is indefinite, not from having obscure and unde-
termined qualities, but from being diffused in their
action through all our days and hours.

Such statements as that 'without religion there
can be no morality,’ and ' no power to enable us
to overcome temptation,’ have two possible mean-
ings. They might mean that no individual can be
moral without religion ; or they m^ht mean that
without the considerations which rel^on supplies
morality could never hope to become dominant in
the world at large. Now Mr. Mallock, having

Il8 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

defined religion by the acceptance of two dogmas,
cannot of course assert that there are no individuals
living at the present moment who, rejecting the
dogmas, are moral and do overcome temptation,
and would even profess in a general way to be
happy. This, however, according to him, gives no
assurance for the future. Such cases, he maintains,
are only possible through the survival in the system
of life up to the present time of the fine flavours
and supernatural tints of religion. With the dis-
appearance of these the substance will die out of
virtue, the zest out of vice, and in the prevailing
dulness no teacher will any longer have a legiti-
mate aim or standpoint. This view is at any rate
intelligible if it simply means that the atheistic
moralist at present finds life tolerable because he
experiences sympathy and reciprocity in the prac-
tice of virtue ; but that most of the people round
him sympathise and reciprocate as a result of their
st^iematural beliefs, and will cease to sympathise
and reciprocate if they lose those beliefs ; and that
his own morality ^d happiness will disappear in
CGtflsequence« Of the fate of his happiness in such
a case there seems no doubt ; for the happiness of
a virtuous person cannot but depend to a great
extent on a congenial moral atmosphere, on the

THB CONTROVERSY OF UFE tI9

views and sentiments existii^ around him and
bq^md his own control — so that a general de^
cay of virtue would leave him painfully isolated.
In considering whether his morality would suffer
equally, 1 must remark that I am desirous to keep
at present to Mr. Mallock’s own ground and to
accept his basis of conduct, which is au fond a self*
regarding one. I am ignoring, therefore, the possi*
bllity of a second and purely altruistic principle,
equally acknowledged as ultimate, which I hold to
be the basis of rational Utilitarianism. Is, then, a
morality based exclusively on enlightened self-
interest doomed to be swept away in any general
ebb of virtuous and ^mpathetic impulses ? Onlyi
surely, if the ebb^were strong and universal enoxigh
to drag down the very fabric of society — ^which is
neither the state of things that Mr. Mallock is
contemplating, nor, as I have said, one bound to
cause us any particular concern. Any lesser ebb,
when it had reached its lowest point; must neces-
sarily be succeeded by a flow. Short of a Uq>se
into savagery, the mere reciprocity of mechanical
services would always be giving opportunity for
the germ of soda! sentiment to fructify anew ; and
sodety being {neserved from dissolution only by
41 certmn amountof lepresdon of ^oistic instincts.

120

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

any individuals who realised more clearly than
those around them the advantages of subordinating
shortsighted selfishness to enlightened self-interest
would have a locus standi, and even a mission.
For implicitly society would be granting their prin-
ciple. Any one, in fact, udio took to heart Artemus
Ward’s maxim ‘ Scratch my back, and I will scratch
your back,’ would have his feet planted safe above
the ebb with which we are threatened, and could
reach out a hand to others. But these are dark
sa)rings to Mr. Mallock. * What,’ he asks, ’ is this
precious something’, this peculiar kind of happiness,
that we ought to live for ? What is it that we gain
by virtue and seriousness, and lose by vice and fri-
volity ? It must be something, and it must be some-
thing definite.’ Of course it is something definite,
though not the burst of ecstatic rapture which he
chooses to assume, for the purposes of his argu-
ment, that it is bound to be. Surely nothing but
the figment which Mr. Mallock forces on his oppo-
nents, that a very essential ingredient of human
happiness is a thing certain, even alone and unaided,
to ensure the ideal maximum of it, could have
blinded him to the obvious truth that the instincts
which are satisfied in a member of a society by
the exercise of social virtues are found to be those

THE CONmOVERST OF LIFE

I2I

the n^lect of whidi most severely piuUdies
itsdf.

The doctrine of the dependence of morality on
religion has, however, much greater plausibility, if
it means that the professors of morality may find
the attractiveness with which they can invest it an
insufficient bait to allure the eyes and Imagina-
tions of others. The analogy pf health is here
very pertinent. The same reservations have to be
made in advocating the laws of moral as of physical
health ; for both entail the avoidance of certain
indulgences, for the sake of a balance of advantage.
Nobody, however, can suppose morality to have
advanced to its present stage through advocacy.
It has won its way on its own merits, moulding
and purifying religious conceptions even where
seeming most to depend on them ; and the manner
of the development of society, on a basis of mutual
convenience and mutual obligations, has been so
widely recognised that Mr. Mallock* must excuse
oriiers for having thought its recognition mig^t be
taken for granted.

Mr. Mallock endeavours to suf^rt his view
of the shortcomii^s of atheistic morality by citing
passages from two authors whom he selects as ex-
ponents of it The quotation of George Eliofs

123

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

verses, ' O may I join the choit invisible 1 ’ seems
singularly out of place in his ai^m^nt She is
expressing a purely personal aspiration, as genuine
and appropriate in her as it would be exaggerated
and absurd in one of lesser mental and spiritual
stature. The doctrine that by altruistic aims and
-conduct it is possible to extract even from effort
and suffering a joy which at certain times is all*
sufficing, and at all times strengthening and sus-
taining, is indeed implied. But ' to make undying
music in the world,’ and to be to distant genera-
tions ‘ a cup of strength in some great agony,’ is
obviously an aspiration for an individual here and
there, not for the mass of mankind. It would be
as relevant gravely to accuse the poet who sighs
for a lodge in some vast wilderness!’ of not
presenting a definite attamable object to mankind,
on the ground that vast wildernesses are limited
in number, and a plurality of lodges in any one of
them would spoil its character as a wilderness.

Nor does the passage quoted from Mill, in
which he describes the failure at one time of aspra-
tions and labours for others to yield him personal
■contentment, do more than exemplify the fact —
whidi no one surely would dispute — that the re-
wards of altruism are not certain and unfailing at

THE CONTROVERSY OP LIFE I33

all seasons. Mill, however, points to considera*
tions in the light of whidi many have found
genuine relid* from the difficulty, but which Mr.
Mallock describes as a mere wr^gling out of it ;
to wit, that personal happiness is often best at-
tained by not making it the direct end ; that it is
more likely to come if we fix our minds on some
other object — the happiness of others, or the im-
provement of mankind, or some art or pursuit
followed as an ideal end in itself. Mr. Mallock
•objects that the arts and pursuits are only morally
justifiable as promoting happiness ; and that both
here, and in the recommendation to work directly
for the happiness of others rather than our own,
the term happiness is still left vague and undefined.
But again the argument is vitiated by the assump-
tion that happiness can be treated in the lump, like
a legacy of ten thousand pounds. Each normal
member of a society derives fragments of his well-
being from the pursuits and activities of scores of
others ; and he himself contributes, or should con-
tribute, by his pursuits and activities a fragment to
the well-being of at any rate a certain number of
others — ^half-a-dozen or a million as the case may
be. And for the better performance of each part
In the distribution of employment, it is fortunate

124 the controversy of ufe

that the constitution of men’s faculties enables an
enormous variety of kinds of useful and artistic
work to present themselves readily as ideal ends,
though at any moment the mind can transcend this
view, and justify them on the ground of their
adding to the world’s stock of happiness. ‘ What
sort of happiness shall I procure for others ? and
what sort of happiness will others procure for me ? ’
asks Mr. Mallock. Why, whatever you can do
best and they can do best. And over and above
the satisfaction in the performance of daily work,
the course of your and their pursuits and activities
may be indefinitely enriched and irradiated by the
daily facts of comradeship ; by the living in each
other’s lives and interests ; by the recognition, in
short, and cultivation of the social instincts which
are as real an element in civilised human nature
as they are an invaluable positive factor in human
welfare.

From this point of view, the idea that the hap-
piness or contentment of agnostics in the present
day depends generally on the survival of an un-
acknowledged flavour of supernatural beliefs, and
so afibrds no criterion for the future, must seem a
pure assumption. For if a man can point to a
substantive value in this life, based on facts of his

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

«s

own experience, it is absurd to say that he would
find no value if everybody else’s experience be>
eame the same: a number of positives cannot
make a n^ative. We may even retort on Mr.
Mallock that, in pointing his argument with the
fact that people to whom the dogmas have been
a fixed and inseparable mental factor have pro-
nounced strong opinions on the barrenness of this
life, he has really made them do the very thing
which he sajrs the unbelievers of the present day
have no right to do — pronounce, namely, on a state
of things which in their day could not possibly be
tested by evidence. The 'eager monk’ and the
' sated monarch ’ are perhaps hardly the people to
whom we should look for the soundest view, as
they may be supposed to have scarcely given un-
selfish activity a fair chance ; but the ' saints and
sages ’ who have decried the things of this life as
wholly contemptible have simply done what we
are all doing every day — failed to ^dissociate in
imagination things which have never been disso-
ciated in experience In their imaginations the
elimination of supernatural beliefs necessarily car-
ried widi it the elimination of the virtuous ele-
ment in life ; and with this elimination the truth
oS their view can hardly be questioned.

126 THE CONTROVERSY OF liFE

The same retort applies with still greater force-
to Mr. Mallock’s remarks on the 'supernatural
moral judgment ’ which he represents as crossing
the natural lines of happiness, and of which he
seeks to adduce evidence from the works of some
of the great dramatic poets. Here the ‘super-
natural ’ element in the judgment depends on only-
one of Mr. Mallock’s two cardinal dc^pmas, and on
that only in a very modified form — ^the sense of
duty, namely, to a higher Power (certainly not con-
ceived in the case of Antigone as a personal God).
The hope of personal happiness in another life does
not come in ; for contemplation of a future super-
natural reward, though it has doubtless been a
solace to ‘ saints and sages,’ has not been dwelt on
in literature as a motive of heroes. This being
admitted, Mr. Mallock seems committed to the
following dilemma. Either the courses of action
which Antigone and Isabella adopted were con-
sidered by the poets as conducive, and those which
Macbeth and Mai^et adopted as prejudicial, to
human welfare ; or they were not If they were
the desirability in any of the cases of one line of
conduct, and the undesirability of the other, can
only depend on the incomprehensible caprice of a
superior power, and are excluded from the jsphere

THE CONTROVERSY OF LITE 1%J

of morality by Mr. Mallock’s own carefully elabo>
rated definition of a moral act— to wit, that it is
directed to a good acknowle(!^d as good on its
own merits. If, on the other hand, the courses
were such as the poets and we ourselves should
«nsh to see respectively adopted and rejected (in
spite of individual suffering) with a view to the
maximum of human welfare — if we perceive in the
course we call right the subordination of the lesser
good to the greater, and in the course we call
wrong the subordination of the greater good to the
less — ^then all ground vanishes for assuming the
moral judgment in such cases to be essentially
supernatural. Mr. Mallock says he calls it super-
natural ‘because no interrogation of nature can
either support or verify it’ So far as interrogation
of nature, in the sense of examination of ascer-
tained facts in the natural development of human
life and history, does not verify it, I should prefer
to call it not supernatural but false. ^What is true
is that a member of a developed society, the heir
of innumerable social instincts, is often and in-
stinctively led to avoid a moral wrench and to
sacrifice ^oistic to altruistic impulses, convinced
by the mass of his experience that moi are gainers
by so dcung. When this very natural fact is

128

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE

explained by a ‘ supernatural blessmg ' attach!]^ to
the altruistic course, and a ‘ supernatural curse’ to
the egoistic, and when by this expedient religion,
in the shape of the ‘supernatural moral judgment,’
has been associated with all social emotions and
pleasures, there is, of course, no difficulty in paint*
ing life without it as dull and valueless.

Mr. Mallock’s own positive plea for the ‘ super-
natural moral judgment’ adds nothing to his main
thesis, since it merely assumes in another way that
no dissociation is possible between two things once
associated. He takes two characteristics from the
supernatural stage of the moral judgment — namely,
that it is absolute and imperious, applying the same
standard to all men ; and that it asserts between
right and wrong a difference not of d^ree but of
kind, as in asserting the value of purity to be in-
calculable ; and assuming that both these charac-
teristics are of invariable validity, he argues that
the moral jui^ment must be essentially super-
natural A Utilitarian of course escapes the con-
clusion by rejecting both assumptions — or rather 1^
rejecting the first and the false application of the
second. For truly the difference between right and
wroi^ is to every moral agent at every turn of his
life a difference not of d^^ but of kind, inasmuch

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 1 39

as his choice is so much to the good or so much to
the bad in relation to human welfare, and directly
promotes or hinders his own development as a
social being. But some particular action may of
course fall into opposite categories, according to
differences in the epoch and the environment and
in the individual's own nature.

Nor must we omit to note how disastrously a
view which ignores the development of morality
in connection with the development and welfare of
society reacts on the subjects of Mr. Mallock’s two
dogmas — on our view of the Creator, and of the
future life. Virtue having been made to consist
in mere obedience to external rules, its supernatural
inventor, who has no external rules to obey, is
necessarily non-virtuous. And even if he were
credited with a certain benevolence of nature, for
giving the creatures whom he has made a chance
of happiness through conformity to his rules, that
spiritual kinship with him which his l)uman chiU
dren have delighted to claim would be a figment ;
for benevolence, on Mr. Mallock’s purely self-re-
garding principles, is not a part of human nature
at all. Again, as r^ards a future life, the total
inadequacy of virtue to attract followers must have
a dama^ng effect on any importations brought

VOL. 1. K

130 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

in to supplement it ^from the supernatural order/
They are expressly brought in to attract— that is,
to do what virtue has so signally failed to do.
They must therefore be totally different from virtue
in kind, and benevolent and sympathetic activity
can have no place among them. Such a prospect
will hardly inflame the imaginations of those to
whom the face of virtue is still fair, in spite of their
being told that they have no right to gaze upon it.

So far we have been considering life almost
entirely in the gross. When, however, I turn to
individual lives, I am brought, by a totally differ-
ent path from Mr. Mallock's, to conclusions in
some respects resembling his. I conceive as a
true reality that which Mr. Mallock treats as a
dream, the possibility of a widely spread happiness,
of which morality is the main factor, as well as
the safeguard — a possibility to be more and more
realised in proportion as the social and humane
instincts develop ; so that, given adequate physical
conditions, including a good chance for all of en-
joying health and a fair share of the beauties of
nature and art (a state of things certainly far
enough out of sight), the life of man might on a
general view be pronounced distinctly good. But

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE I3I

there are and will be exceptions ; and my inability
to disregard these affects my whole view of the
controversy. The modus vivendi established be-
tween the egoistic and altruistic principles is not
secure against violent interruption ; and however
far social improvement may advance, exceptional
circumstances of physical and mental suffering
must inevitably occur, entailing on individuals who
feel their opportunities and affections bounded by
this life a hopeless existence permanently below
zero. It may not be possible to be habitually
happy without being virtuous ; but it is terribly
possible to be habitually virtuous without being
happy. Moreover, where the cause of the suffering is
the sundering of affections and sympathies, the pain
is keen in proportion to the strength of those very
elements in life which, in view of the general sum
of happiness, have proved themselves the best
worth emphasising and encouraging ; so that a
paralogism is presented whereby the 'individual's
life in a society seems self-stultified. And such
cases of permanent unhappiness are ultimate facts
on the wrong side. A view which may truly
assert the positive value of life in the aggregate,
must still be content to admit the anomalies of its
apportionment ; and even a hardy Positivist would

*32

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

possibly acknowledge that he himself might be
placed among the exceptions by a combination of
cancer with the loss of all his friends. While I am
I, my altruistic instincts can only be a part of me,
and cannot extort from me contentment that life
on the average is good, if mine is bad. Nor, even
if mine be not bad, is my moral reason satisfied by
contemplation of the happy average, as long as I
am aware of the existence of individual lives below
zero ; since I would not, if I could, create a million
happy lives at the expense of one hopelessly
unhappy one. We saw in a previous Essay that the
million happy people would be bound, each in turn,
to submit to extinction, if by that means the one un-
happy life could be extinguished. And though its
existence might be supposed to be concealed from
them, I cannot think away myself, the supposed
creator, with my knowledge that each of them, if
he knew the price of his own happiness, would be
morally bound to confront his own existence with '
the unhappy one and pronounce it a wrong ; and
that 1 therefore, who can so confront them, have
committed the wrong. This view might be de-
foided, I believe, even by a consistent Utilitarian,,
(m the ground that there are extremes at which
pain ceases to be a thing commensurable with

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 1 33

pleasure. But if not, then the consistency of the
Utilitarian faith has to give way to a still deeper
craving for Justice.*

These considerations form to me, I find, an in*
eradicable flaw in the testimony to the value of
life. That is, taking the facts as they are, if for the
■worst and most permanent suffering there were no
possible assuagement of hope, if I found in myself
and all around me an absolute conviction that the
individual existence ceased with the death of the
body, and that the present iniquitous distribution of
good and evil was therefore final, I should in con-
sistency desire the immediate extinction of the
race. And this brings me to my final difference
with Mr. Mallock.

I have spoken above of the bewildering aspect
which the Controversy of Life must bear to many
of those who watch it ; how they may agree with
a point here and a view there, may see true con-
clusions (as they believe) drawn from false pre-
misses, and true premisses leading to false conclu-
sions, till amid the confusion they may well doubt

' I have pointed out in the passage refened to how our natiiial
feelii^ of the essential incommensurability of pain on the one hand
with pleasure on the other is illustrated in the (act that we rejaief
sAen a suffering person obtains unconsciousness in sleep, while it
never occurs to ns to pity the temporary unconsciousness of a happy
jierson.

134 the controversy of life

whom to call friend and whom foe. Now to those
who are thus doubtfully watching, it may seem a
boon that some skilled person should come and ex-
pound the scene. .He might show how one party,
with ‘ Truth ’ on their banners, are making their
way to vantage-grounds the possession of which
would yield an outlook so barren and hideous that
they themselves would shrink back appalled ; and
how another, whose motto is ' the Eternal,’ are only
leading the course of the mil^e into devious chan-
nels by using the watchwords of their foes. But
with care the main objects and tendencies might
be disentangled, and might suggest the ultimate
coalescence of the multitude of parties into a few,
one or other of which must gain a victory of incal-
culable import, for weal or woe, to the destinies of
mankind. Such a simplification, I say, if it be at
all possible, may well seem desirable. But if it is
to do good instead of harm, it must be based on
thorough appreciation of the forces engaged ; so as
to eliminate false claims and unreal assumptions,
but not to leave out of account, or merge in other
lines of opinion, views which can be put in an irre-
ducible form, and have therefore their own distinct
hats standi.

This mistake seems to me to have been made.

THE CONTROVERSY OR LIFE 1 35

by Mr. Mallock in the very beginning and foun>
dation of his aigument. He divides schools of
thought into two grand classes, according as th^
dogmatically affirm or deny the existence of a per«
sonal Grod and the personal immortality of man.
The affirmation, as we have seen, he calls religion ;
the denial, atheism. He goes on to admit that be-
tween these polesof certainty there are all gradations
of doubt, but disregards these on the ground that
he is only dealing with the active results produced
by mental conditions, and that so far as certainty
either way can direct or stimulate action, doubt in
a like degree must paralyse and arrest it. ‘ The
philosophy of complete doubt,’ he continues,
• stands self-condemned and only exists as a dis-
ease, not to be propagated by any one in his
senses ; while if the doubt be not complete, if it
be not perfectly balanced in the centre, it must be
always tending to one pole or the other, and its
right name would be incomplete religion or incom-
plete atheism, neither of which stages is Anal ; and,
the incompleteness being in each case an imperfec-
tion, it must be got rid of before we can do any
justice to either side.’

The assumption here is surely obvious. The
‘ two poles * are treated as both positive ; denial of

136 THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE

the dogmas is treated as though it were a posi>
tive stimulus and support to action equally with
the affirmation of them. Now not one of those
who think the dogmas false or absurd ever treated
the mere rejection of them as something which of
itself supplies a positive guide and aim to life.
Certainty that way has no possible power in itself
'to direct and stimulate action.’ To make the
alternative just, the certainty of one positive sti-
mulus would have to be set against the certainty
of another, not the certainty that a particular in-
centive does exist against the certainty that it
does not. But if we cannot get incentives which
are adequate and certain, the next best thing is to
get incentives which are adequate but uncertain.
And if such new incentives as the deniers of the
d(^mas can offer seem, in any one’s imagination
or experience, inadequate, however certain, for such
an one the slightest diminution in certainty that
the old incentives are unreal is necessarily an
approach to the positive pole, and to that extent
an escape from paralysis. A digger is surely more
likely to work with interest and enjoyment if he
learns that there is a chance of finding gold, and
that his work in that case is conducing to the
welfare of himself and those dear to him, than if

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 1 37

he is convinced that there is no gold to be found,
and no chance of any further result from his labour
than the exercise, often painful, of his muscles,
with wages already proved insufficient for his
necessities.

We must avoid confusion between the effect
on us of doubts as to probability, in respect of
the existence or occurrence of something beyond
our own control, and the effect of doubts as to
etctian in the presence of two practicable alterna-
tives. In the latter case the alternatives are both
positive, in the sense that positive benefits are
hypothetically suggested by the adoption of either ;
and here it is certainly possible for doubt to be
* balanced in the centre ’ so truly that we do no-
thing. In the former case one of the alternatives
is positive and the other negative, the positive one
being admittedly good if believable ; and here the
certain acceptance of the negative hypothesis puts
us in the most paralysing of all conceivable posi-
tions, unless we have some other positive certainty
to fall back upon. A traveller who, having been
puzzled by arriving at the fork of two roads, could
not make up his mind to advance steadily along
either of them, but stood still or wasted his
strength in running to and fro across the fields be-

138 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

tween them, might be described as paralysed by
doubt ; but not so the traveller who, knowing one
of the roads to have no inn on it, walked by pre-
ference along the other, in the hope* though not
the certainty of finding one ; for in his mind the
very doubt would imply a positive chance. Again,
the assertion that the doubt, if not perfectly
balanced, must always be tending to one pole or
the other, seems to rest on the same misconception.
If the doubt is what to do, a preponderance of ad-
vantage on either side rapidly decides the question,
and we do not so much tend to one pole as go-
there; but if the doubt is what to believe, the
scales of probability may rest for an indefinite
time in any position, pending the discovery of
fresh evidence.

Here, then, is a case where simplification has
proved delusive. We are told that only two
parties are contending ; but a tertium quid, a defi-
nite position distinct from all other positions, has
been overlooked — that of those to whom their own
lives are painful and inexplicable enigmas except
on certain hypotheses, which seem possible but
not certain, and the evidence for or against which,
from the nature of the case, may never in this life
become stronger or clearer. To these the convert

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

139

sion of their doubt into a negative certainty would
clearly be the most disastrous of all contingencies.
Unless, then, it can be shown that the nature of
the human mind drives these persons one after an-
other to positive or negative certitude, their posi-
tion as doubters must be recognised as a substan-
tive one ; and an attempt to deal with the ‘ active
results ’ of various conditions of mind cannot fairly
ignore a condition which is compatible with the
most strenuous activity, and the positive value of
which may be estimated in the number of hearts
saved by it from despair.’

A distinction, however, must be drawn between
the two dogmas in question. The ideas of a per-
sonal God and of personal immortality, though
commonly associated both by believers and un-
believers, do not stand on the same footing. And
this is too crudely ignored in the atheistic view (as
stated by Mr. Mallock) that the notion of God is
unnecessary and that of a future life ridiculous^
Such a yiew may result from certain materialistic
assumptions, but certainly not from the individual’s

' Later on, Mr. Mallock himself, in his defence of the higher
pleasures^ argues that if we believed in nothing that could be
doubted we dtould believe only the immediate testimony of our
five senses. Though disputing the fact, I cannot but welcome the
inoonsistency.

r40

THE CONTROVERSY OF UFE

interrogation of his own conceptions. Let us
glance at each of the ideas in turn.

It cannot be denied that to those who have got
beyond anthropological notions, belief in a ‘ per-
sonal God ’ implies an act of faith in which the
mental faculties, logical and imaginative alike, are
quite at sea. Not that such terms as ‘ evolution ’ or ‘ a
stream of tendency ’ or ‘ a not-ourselves that makes
for righteousness,’ have any superiority in respect
of any positive light they cast on the Universe ;
for though they serve to generalise facts and
phenomena, they cannot transcend and explain
themselves. But they do not on the face of them
claim more than to symbolise facts ; whereas ‘ per-
sonal God’ asserts in the midst of the unknown
an element of the known, a ‘ person ’ being to us
quite a distinct and individual notion. And when
we try mentally to swell this notion so as to
embrace what is needed for its new application,
its characteristics fall away, and we are left with
-■-an empty word. Though in certain circumstances
jnd attitudes of mind we may find ourselves com-
/elled to feel our relation to some higher intelli-
gence as a relation between two persons, any
intellectual effort to substantiate such a relation
will only obscure it ; and there is a reasonable

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 14I

objection to using a term the reality of which
seems to vary with our own subjective states.
Another serious objection to the term is the
common association with it of the ideas of crea-
tion and omnipotence, with all the accompan)dng
tangle of contradictions in relation to the existence
of vice and pain. The association is doubtless
not necessary ; but it is what has given the notion
of the personality its wide and permanent popu-
larity. Though it is, of course, with God as an
omnipotent creator, not with God as a person, that
the moral contradictions are connected, men will
swallow these for the sake of sighting firm ground
(as they think) in their flounderings among the
origins of things ; while the alternative of a personal
but not omnipotent God, though avoiding moral
contradictions, does not relieve their straining
backward vision, or appeal to their imaginations.
The matter may be looked at in this light : if we
are content not to try to transcend the conceptions
of evolution, and, without explaining, merely assert
the gradual development of higher forms of phy-
sical and spiritual life, then imperfection and crass
{iXa) find a natural place in the scheme, and we are
not in any way bound to account for them. Now,,
putting aside other objections to the personifica-

142

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

tion of this tendency, we find nothing essentially
unreasonable in the substitution of a personal God
with limited power — that is, constrained to evolve
perfection gradually from independent and some-
what intractable elements.' But such an idea,
being only parallel point for point with that for
which it is substituted, and not getting farther
back, presents no superiority in the way of ex-
planation, and^so is, logically at least, unnecessary.
It leaves us still, as before, two things unaccounted

* In the Future of Faiths Mr. Mallock, in representing the argu-
ment against a personal God drawn by unbelievers from the exist-
ence of evil, makes them assume that he is omnipotefU or nothings
since no one would care * to be the prophet of a bad or feeble
deity. * Is, then, not being omnipotent necessarily the same thing as
being feeble ? If the facts of development and the progress of good
be absolutely denied, tlien doubtless the controlling agency, whether
conceived as personal or impersonal, maybe called bad and feeble ;
but if evolution has been progress, so that the tendency in things
when conceived as impersonal could not be fairly described as bad,
neither could a personal power when substituted for it. And we
find a similar misconception in Mr. Mallock’s own retort to the un-
believers, that the undisputed co-existence of good and r,nl presents
a contradiction as violent and insoluble as the co-existence of om
nipotent benevolence and evil, and presents ' the sight of supreme
strength being thwarted by what is noi supreme strength— the
eternal in the toils of the transitory.' This statement absolutely
ignores the hypothesis of development. Whether or not good is
» supreme * in the sense that finally evil will vanish, we need not
inquire ; but in so far as good gradually supplants evil, in so for
as life gradually rises to higher forms, is the change not good ?
And what contradiction is involved in its not fulfilling itself in a
moment ?

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 143

for, neither of which accounts for the other — ^we
simply have the existence of the Universe and
the existence of God, in place of the existence
of the Universe and the development of the
Universe. But it is precisely as an explanation that
a personal God is commonly postulated ; an4 this
«nd is thought to be attained when he is put be>
hind the Universe and made to. create it with all its
potentialities. To many this seems to simplify the
problem by reducing the things unaccounted for to
onOf namely, the existence of God ; but as long
as they assert his goodness, they can never escape
the time-honoured crux, that, while words have
a meaning, the being who created the Universe
must be responsible for its contents.

But if now we turn to the notion of personal
continuance after death, we are met by none of
these moral and metaphysical difficulties. The
notion is in itself perfectly imaginable. We have
never once during our lives been Conscious of the
material movements inside our skulls which ac-
company thought ; and it is as easy to picture the
continuance of our mental operations a hundred
years hence as to transport ourselves in imagina-
tion to some familiar scene, in doing which we

144 the controversy of life

forget all about our bodies and brains. Indeed^
the difficulty is the other way ; it is to realise the
existence of an association between two things —
our psychical life and its cerebral basis — ^which
never have been and never can be simultaneously
present in our consciousness. However essential
we may suppose the association to be, we can
easily picture the positive evidence which, conveyed
in the ordinary way to our intelligence through
our senses, would convince us of the possibility
of thought and volition apart from brain ; and our
power of doing this is quite irrespective of any
assurance we may feel that such evidence will
never present itself. The point is that the notion
is clear : the act of imagination by which I picture
future mental experience is no more hindered or
obscured by considerations about brain-substance,
than the act of imagination by which, sitting in
London, I enjoy the details of a view on the Lago
Maggiore is hindered or obscured by the physical
difficulties of instantly getting there. And where
a notion is clear, the external testimony which
would prove the imagined thing to exist is repre-
sentable to the" mind ; whereas in trying to repre-
sent to my mind what conclusive external testimony
to a personal God would be like, I find myself

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE 145

necessarily as lost as in trying to grasp intellectu-
ally some tangible meaning in the term.

This point seems fatally obscured by calling
consciousness ' a function of the organism/ as was
done by Mr. Huxley in a recent ' symposium ’ in the
Ninteeenth Century. All he meant was that thought
is in correlation vdth molecular facts ; but the word
function seems to imply that the relation is parallel
to that, e.g. which respiration bears to the lungs.
The difference between objective and subjective
phenomena in relation to the physical organs is
obvious. In the one case the idea of respiration
without respiratory organs is unthinkable and
absurd ; in the other case the association of
thought and brain is something which we readily
can, and commonly do, ignore in imagination,
though evidence may never have shown it as
annulled in reality. In the former case the two
notions present a Icgical connection of the simplest
possible kind, one being absolutely Involved in the
other ; between the two notions in the latter case
we have not the slightest right to assume any
sudi connection, or any relation of cause and effect.
In the latter case, therefore, evidence that the
association is essential, that the one {dienomenon
is impossible apart from the other, must be wholly

VOL. L L

146 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

unattainable. The most that can be .said is that in
our experience the two things have always gone
together. But the effect on us of n^ative evidence
of this kind clearly depends on whether or not, on
the hypothesis that the one phenomenon coM
exist apart from the other, means would be open
to it of making its existence known to us. Sup-
posing the presumption to be that, on the hypo-
thesis of its separate existence, it would still
naturally be in a condition to come under our
cognisance, the evidence against its separate exist-
ence, if it does not so come, is strong. But in the
ragp before us nothing could give us reason to
expect that personal consciousness, supposing it to
exist apart from sensible material structure, would
be able to afford sensible evidence of its presence
—nothing, that is, except its actually doing so.
If material phenomena implying the existence of
disembodied thought and volition actually came
into our experience, then the facts would have to
be admitted, and when reduced to general laws of
uniformity would appear neither more nor less in-
explicable and ultimate than the known relations
of thought and volition to physical facts. But if
no such evidence were ever produced, still the
notion of thought and volition existing outade us,

THE CONinOVERSY OF UFE

M7

without the power of affecting our sensibilities,
would be a perfectly natural one to us ; for our
notion of our own consciousness does not in the
least depend for its clearness on any im^ined
power of rendering its existence evident to others.'

Such views, even when admitted, are some*
times pronounced wholly unpractical and uninter-
esting. But if they, or even a dimly conceived
instinct of them, form a natural and prominent
factor in most of the minds which at all con-
sider the questions involved, they must continue
to have a very important bearing on human
life. My contention is that this is the case;
and that it is best to recognise a definite
psychological state, resulting from the conditions
that here a keenly felt desire is also one the reali-
sation of which the mind pictures with perfect
clearness, and with no more difficulty than it in-
curs in the commonest hourly acts of imagination ;
but the actual fhtstraticn of which *it cannot, from
the very nature of the case, represent to itself as
part of its own conscious experience. It is in this
way that the notion of personal continuance after

■ TU* hw been denied ; tee the Note at the end of the eon-
eluding bany in tUa vdnme. But even if it be the cose that con-
adonaneaa implies an otganiam, it of coo^ does not follow that
the otganiam need be of aaott petcqttible to our present aentet.

148 THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

death presents itself to many minds, quite inde>
pendently of revealed religion ; and the element of
possibility and reality refuses to be thought out of it.
It exists as a doubt, but a doubt presenting itself
to the majority in the positive form — not as ‘pro-
bably no ’ but as ‘possibly yes.’

And if the hope exists now, it is hard to see
why it should cease to exist in the future. Such
a cessation would involve either a change in the
scientific evidence, or a change in men’s mental
constitution. Now the scientific evidence, if it
changes at all, can only do so in the positive direc-
tion. What it needs for this is new facts ; and the
new facts which would prove the possible dissocia>
tion.of thought and volition from brain are, as I
have tried to show, easily presentable to the mind ;
while the negative evidence can never amount to
more than the absence of such facts — that is, can-
not be or become convincingly destructive. Nor
have we any reason to expect a wide change in
mental constitution and temperament Differences
in this respect will probably continue much as th^
are now ; and people do, no doubt, differ greatly
as to the effect on their imaginations of absence
of positive evidence. To the majority, however,,
the amount of solace which the idea of a chanco

THE CONTROVERSY OF LIF'E I49

<can give is out of all proportion to any scientific
ostimation of the greatness of the chance. Sup-
pose that, after condemnation to a long term of
captivity, a prisoner is told that there is one chance
in ten of his release at the end of a year: the
large majority of men, in such a case, would find
the burden of the year immensely lightened. Nor,
I believe, would the effect be diminished, but
rather enhanced, if the chance were indefinite and
not susceptible of a numerical statement And as
regards the question of a future life, the case is
further peculiar, in that there could never be an
awakening to disappointment ; for if the hope re-
presents no reality, the moment of its frustration is
also the moment of the dissolution of the indi-
vidual’s consciousness. Anyhow, the hope is un-
deniably entertained in the present day by many
who give their full weight to the materialistic
arguments ; whence we may fairly conclude that,
even if it remain a doubt, a la^e proportion
of mankind will, in the future as now, some habit-
ually and some under stress of emotion, find in it
comfort and support Nor can persons who do
not like the notion of a future life, or who
tinnk it absurd, complain if such divergence of
view is treated as nothing to the point by others

ISO THE CONTROVERSY OF LIFE

who find it a permanent and ineradicable element
in their minds.

If it be objected that the word ineradicable
begs the question, and that many equally deeply-
seated notions have given way before superior
enlightenment, the answer is that the advance of
knowledge and morality cannot be shown to have
decreased by one single iota man’s innate avidity
for happiness ; and that if the progress of ages
brings increase of happiness in this life, the avidity
for its continuance may be expected to grow, since
the greater are a man’s treasures the harder he
finds it to part with them. And even those who
most firmly reject the notion may surely be well
content that it is out of their power by conclusive
negative testimony to shut the loophole to others ;
seeing that they may be safely defied to imagine
any way in which the outlook through it can be
detrimental to the evolution of the most ideal
human life.

151

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF
PAIN.

4

The International Medical Congress of 1881 fanned
the fires of a controversy which, to do it justice,
has never of late years been anywhere near the
smouldering-point. The Vivisection Act of 1876,
which it was hoped would be a final settlement, has
been a mere incident in the fray. The one side
has continued to pour in its steady small-shot of
preachings and pamphlets, which the other has
met from time to time by a round of heavy artil-
lery, when some scientific anniversary or the unveil-
ing of a discoverer’s statue gave suitable vants^e-
ground ; while occasional skirmisheS in the general
press have shown that each has a considerable hold
on public opinion, and feels the duty of extending
it to the utmost It can be but seldom that a prac-
tical moral question, comprising so considerable a
class of actions, is riius in debate : amid all differ-
ences of ethical and religious standpoint, two edu-

152 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

cated persons of the same society might seek far for
circumstances of ordinary or professional life where
thqr would seriously differ, or at any rate where each
would be willing to advertise a serious difference,
as to right and wrong. That duty to animals should
form an exception in England at the present day
is due to a combination of two causes. First, the
very existence of any such duty is a quite modem
discovery : marks of affection to animals in the past,
in cases where the relation was agreeable to human
beings, avail little against the evidence of average
> public opinion which history and literature supply.
And then, side by side with this latest product of
civilisation, while it is still uncertain of its ground,
and rather an instinct than a principle, circum-
stances have chanced to arise of a nature to try it
to the utmost; I mean, of course, the enormous and
irKreasing development of scientific and medical
activity which has claimed live animals as its mate-
rial. A new and doubtfully formulated principle,
and a new and complicated extension of the need
for its application, have made their appearance
together. No wonder, then, that the issues of the
problem, while more or less acknowledged as moral
ones, should refuse to fit with immediate certainty
into any acknowledged moral scheme, and that the

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 1 53

powerful instincts concerned should be found hard
to reconcile ; no wonder either that the resulting
strife should present a peculiar bitterness and mis-
direction of attack, and a peculiar mixture on both
sides of good and bad arguments. My aim is to
do something towards disentangling the issues
from this unnecessary confusion. Not that 1 for
a moment hope to make all plain : the very clear-
ing away of untenable and inconsistent views will
bring out inherent difficulties in the main question
which have been much overlooked. But even this
will be an advantage ; since it is through regarding
the question itself as an easy instead of a hard one
that each side has regarded the position of the other
as simply and culpably perverse.

Before approaching the main issue, we may con-
veniently get rid of a few surrounding arguments
and assumptions whose chief result is to conceal it,
and to make either case, at any rate in the rhetoric
of the other, look as weak as its we&kest point. Of
these outposts two are of special importance — the
^relation of torture to killing, and the well-worn
theme of sport. On the former subject. Professor
Virchow made some typical remarks in his address
nt the International Medical Congress in the
aummerof 1881. Starting with the fact that killing

154 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

is the offence most severely punished bylaw, (which
he accounts for by the strange assumption that after
all other injuries the injured party can * once more
attain a full and complete enjoyment of life,’) he
thence infers that killing is the extremest injury that
one man can inflict on another ; from this very ques-
tionable inference he deduces witli much emphasis
the general law that ‘killing is more than torturing’ ;
and so arrives at the desired conclusion that it is
absurd to think more of the torture of animals than
of the painless killing of them, and that every
opponent of Vivisection is bound to be a v^etarian.
Because the highest legal penalty is reserved for
murderers, therefore the annullingof sensation, which
in the case of an animal is what is meant by pain-
less death, is more — i.e. is a thing to be more dreaded
by or for the animal — than the maximum of intoler-
able sensation, which is what is meant by torture.
What would be the natural idea of a cause which
needs such support? Examples and arguments
throng in refutation. Thus, to take an instance
where the object is identical in the ri\'o cases, is the
schoolboy who commits even so wanton an act as
shooting a seagull for his amusement regarded in
the same light as if he plucked it alive ? Or, again,
of persons not swayed by religious or altruistic

A CHAPTER IK THE ETHICS OF PAIN 155.

motives, would not many, perhaps most, preftn
painless death to torture ? And in the case of the
animal, while torture to it and to the man mean
precisely the same thing, is not every consideration
which in the case of the man weighs against death —
whether the break of vividly realised ties, or the
shrinking from a foreseen shock, or the dread of the
unknown — conspicuous by its absence ? But the
particular legal ailment admits of more direct
reply, resting as it does on total oblivion of the
difference between the man and the animal in
respect of the effects of killing. These, in the case
of an animal, are absolutely confined to the in-
dividual — with the gain very likely of painlessness
over the death which Nature would bring, and the
loss of a certain space of life which no one estimates
so highly but that he would prefer the animal to
forego it, if the alternative were to spend it in
suffering. So that here the comparison of killing
and torture is quite unencumbered ; it is simply
the cessation of sensations versus a hideous and
avoidable addition to them. But in the case of
a man, a member of a highly organised com-
munity, the effects of killing go far be}rond the in-
dividual, and far beymid the intention or desire of
the killer ; hence the complication of a l^al aspect

IS6 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

of the problem quite distinct from the moral one
with which Virchow has confounded it The point
can scarcely require illustration. Does not every
day bring before us cases in which we notice
with pain the disproportion between legal and
moral guilt ? Do we not extend to one who has
committed even murder in a fit of jealousy a sym-
pathy which deliberate cruelty would instantly
choke ? Is it not notorious that the object of laws is
to prevent actions harmful to society 7 And, to say
nothing about the value to society of the lives of
its members, is it not the case that while torture
of human beings is a deliberate process, connected
with no temptations of passion or interest, and
too difficult of performance without publicity and
resistance ever to affect the general security and
comfort, the taking of life is an offence often led
up to by the strongest temptations of passion or
interest, ordinarily the act of a moment against
which the victim is powerless to guard, and capable,
unless checked with the utmost rigour, of becoming
so frequent as seriously to affect the security and
comfort of the whole community ? Might not
Virchow’s politics have informed his science to
somewhat better purpose than this ?

Next, as to cruelty inflicted in sport, and in the

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 1 57

treatment of animals for various purposes of luxury
and convenience. This topic, if put forward by
Vivisectionists as a plea of extenuation, would
clearly be quite beside the mark ; for the question
whether their actions are right or wrong can have no
relation to the actions of quite independent sets of
people. Still more hopeless is the plea when used
with the implication that cruelty in other pursuits
may be right or defensible ; as when Virchow tries
to reduce the extreme Anti-vivisection case ad ah-
sitrdum (a thing so easy to do that it is really irri-
tating to see an able man completely fail in doing
it) by saying that at that rate those who ‘ make use
of torturing methods ’ in the training of dogs and
other domestic animals ‘ would easily be in danger,'
and calling this most desirable result ‘ a strange
conclusion.* When put forward to show the absur-
dity of attacking one evil while others much more
glaring are condoned, the ailment has doubt-
less more weight. But even here the other side
may fairly reply tha^ while recognising abuses all
round, they must concentrate their attack some-
where ; and that there is a reasonableness in be-
ginning with a compact class, of large recent
development, who are articulate, who work in
private, and who take a special departure on pbilo-

158 A CHAPTEft IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

sophical and praiseworthy motives, rather than
with a diffused body who make no professions, and
merely go on doing in the full light of public
opinion what their fathers have done before them
for centuries. When, however, we leave the question
as to the fittingness of the argument, and merely
look at the facts alleged, the physiologists certainly
seem in this country to have very much the best of
it : one wishes it could be otherwise, and that, of
the two, the suffering were the more prominent
on the side of the events which are infinitely the
less frequent. Taking the most severe of recent
experiments — ^those made on the biliary secretion
by means of fistulai — I certainly should not hesi-
tate to choose that amount of suffering for my last
hours rather than the night-long torment of many
a trapped rabbit or broken-legged bird. Nor can
the preliminary operation for such experiments,
even when performed (as surely it need not and
should not be) without an anaesthetic, equal in
pain that performed every year, as a matter of
course and without a thought of anaesthetics, on
thousands of lambs. As regards the greater length
to which the suffering extends when a process has
to be induced and watched, it must of course not
be ignored in the reckoning. But, as far as the

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 159

actual wound is concerned, all evidence goes to
show diat, after cessation of the wounding process,
an animal’s pain is extremely slight ; and for what
remains, the wretchedness of severe illness, not
only must evety one recognise its difference from
torture, but it is just that form of distress which
may reasonably be supposed to be much mitigated in
the case of animals. Superior intelligence has been
represented as an aid in surmounting physical dis-
tress, and when directed to religious or other objects
extraneous to the physical condition, it may, no
doubt, so act ; but when directed to the distress
itself^ as in case of severe distress it normally must
be, I should say just the reverse. The sense of
rebellion, the helpless beating about of the intellect,
the counting of time and vivid sense that the next
moment will be like the last, the demand ever
urgent and ever baffled to find a meaning for such
experience, more than all the sense of wrong that
comes from comparison, the conscieusness of self as
an exertion, of dueless isolation, of being marked
off from normal sentient life by an intolerable
something which none can share — all this points
to the close relation of suffering to intelligence;
and the consequent difference between man and
brute would presumably be at its maximum in

l60 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

cases of protracted suffering below the agony.point
where the intellect is too blinded to be active.

But if comparisons of pains are hard to test, not
so another favourite argument in which the respec-
tive mental attitudes of the sportsman and physio-
logist towards the sufferings they cause are com-
pared, much to the disadvantage of the latter.
Thus Mr. H. N. Oxenham, in a widely circulated
pamphlet, explains that in hunting ' no part of the
enjoyment is derived from the sufferings of the vic-
tim,’ whereas ‘ the whole interest and excitement
of a physiological experiment on a living animal,
both to operators and spectators, is necessarily de-
pendent on closely watching its contortions on the
rack.’ N ow in giving this an absolute contradiction
I would not be misunderstood. Sins have been
committed in the name of science incomparably
more atrocious than any committed in the name
of sport, whether we regard the degree of torture
inflicted, the absence of excuse in the way of igno-
rance, custom, or result, or the cold-blooded callous-
ness which has been able to remain for long hours
face to face with its victim. But as regards the
actual feeling of the operator towards the suffer-
ing, there is no evidence that even the most hard-
ened experts have gone beyond the point which

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN l6l

is practically universal with sportsmen — the point
of complete indifference. Even Magendie, in his
most inexcusable demonstrations, did not operate
to amuse himself with contortions, but to teach
his subject and gratify his vanity. The interest
of ‘contortions’ is, indeed, a singularly unfor-
tunate expression, contortions being precisely
that which operators have been most anxious to
avoid, and of which their avoidance by means of
curari has been most loudly condemned. But
apart from this, the distinction between desire to
arrive at a fact and enjoyment of a painful spec-
tacle which may accompany the arrival, is surely
palpable , and can Mr. Oxenham really pretend to
disbelieve in the very existence of the former, that
he asserts the whole interest to lie in the latter f
Such random hitting naturally weakens the force
of his blows on what is, happily, a dead horse in
this country — the use of painful operations in the
way of demonstration to classes. >.The late Pro-
fessor Rolleston spoke, 1 think, too sweepingly,
thor^h not too candidly, of a ‘ sleeping devil ’ in
every heart, to which such spectacles appeal.
What he considers tiie rule is, I should say, among
us the rare exception ; and it is at any rate note-
worthy in the case of surgical operations, presenting
VOL. I. M

1 62 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

<even though under anaesthetics) the exact spec-
tacle whose effect ‘ on the emotiono-motor nature
in us * he describes, how soon and how completely
interest of any morbid sort, such as is occasionally
displayed by curious outsiders, vanishes under the
influence of habit and attention. Still, a certain
sort of fascination is, I believe, compatible even
with the strongest repugnance ; and, in their loud
condemnation of the practice before the Royal
Commission, English physiologists set foreign
schools exactly the example one would have
expected of them. But to speak of this absorbed
fascination, as Mr. Oxenham docs, as the ^true
motive ’ for operations of research — operations for
the most part of a most busy, worrying, and arduous
kind — is to treat the genus physiologist not like what
some of its members have doubtless been, men im-
patient for distinction and callous as to the means,
but like idle and desperately naughty little boys,
with neither brains, objects, nor ambition.

The next of these outlying misapprehensions
is one for which each side is to some extent respon-
sible. For its expression we may again turn to
Virchow's fruitful address : — * What is opposed to
us is the indignant feeling of the proprietors of
horses, dogs, and cats, who are excited at the idea

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 163

that something similar may happen to their own
beloved animals as to those of the institutes of
learning ’ ; and having soothed this sense of alarmed
proprietorship by promising not to steal the pets
in question, he counts in return on unrestricted
disposition over the animals which are legally in
his possession. Such remarks suggest that the re-
peated appeals of his opponents to the horror of
ims^ning some domestic companion exposed to
torture have their weak side, in giving the impres-
sion of a sort of refined selfishness. It should be
possible to feel greater personal sympathy in one
case than in another, without losing sight of the
impersonal truth that in the world of consciousness
equal pains are of identical importance. A distinc-
tion drawn or implied, between the importance of
suffering to a rabbit and to a dog, on the ground
of the dog’s nearer relation to the inflicter of it, can
be easily wrested into supporting the dangerous
distinction between the whole brute creation and
man. But even were selfish affection rather than
pure humanity uppermost in his opponents’ minds,
Virchow’s sweeping claim to do what he will with
his own would remain equally untenable. Torture
of prisoners in ancient Cartilage, or of slaves not
long ago in America, might have been similarly

M 2

i 64 a chapter in the ethics of pain

justified ; and in gradual recognition of the claims
of the weak against the stroi^, law naturally,
though often tardily, follows in the footsteps of
ethics.

Two arguments of the prophetic sort perhaps
deserve a word in this list Virchow’s warning,
that at this rate his opponents will soon be pre-
venting the dissection of dead human bodies, has
its pendant in their apprehension that he and his
friends will soon be getting hold of living ones.
As regards the former charge, the connection of a
campaign whose sole watchword has been preven-
tion of suflering, with an attack on that from which
suffering is essentially excluded, is surely mere
petulance. To suppose that the common sense of
a whole community would tolerate the suppression
of the elementary lesson-book of every general
practitioner for an object for which no sane
member of the community (or at any rate no Anti-
vivisectionist, sane or insane) has expressed the
slightest desire, is to suppose that the world will
agree to go mad on a very simple question on the
ground that it is divided on a very difficult one.
As for the other prophecy of human vivisections,
and die pictures that have been drawn of a nation
debased by science in the course of two genera-

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 16$

tions to the level of the tyrants or tyrannical corpo-
rations of history, we admit at once crude expres-
^ns on the scientific side which, if pressed, would
admit of no logical barrier between man and brute.
But the question here is of what would be per-
mitted, not by individual logic, but by social senti-
ment. And in this, alike in its better and its worse
aspect, we find a sufficient barrier ; whether in the
ingrained instinct that men are, what animals are
not, members of an organism in which the treat-
ment of each is the concern of all ; or in the race-
or caste-selfishness, which has always been prone
in every society to make a marked distinction
between members and non-members — a distinction
easily abused, indeed, to the detriment of brutes,
but hardly now to be transcended to the detriment
of men.

The ground being so far cleared, we come to
the question of principles. How are we to define
the suffering that it is permissible to inflict ? Mo^
■of the formulae on the subject will fall under one
of two heads: (i) the general rule of the phy-
siolc^sts, which also obtained the adhesion of the
Bishop of Peterborot^h, that any suffering may
be inflicted on aidmals which is inflicted for a

l66 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

sufficient purpose, or whi<^ is necessary for a good
result; (2) the principle, ably supported by the
Spectator, that a man may not inflict on an animal
what he would not, mutatis mutandis, endure him-
self [nor permit another to inflict on one of his
own race] for the purpose in question.* The fatal
objection to the first of these rules is that it is
not a rule at all ; with an air of definition, it de-
fines nothing, the original question merely taking
another form — wHat is a ‘sufficient purpose

* It is easy to make this look absurd by neglecting the italicised
words. It means no such nonsense as that the experimenter should
be ready there and then, on any* one’s demanding it, to take the
place of the animal. The large majority of experiments terminate
in death, which docs exactly what pain does not do, and puts man
and brute into diilerent categories, since loss of the human worker
is not mere loss to an individual, nor even to his immediate circle,
but robbery and violence to society at large. If it l)e further per-
versely argued that animals would object, if they could, even to
being painlessly killed for food, we answer that the rule has no
sort of claim to application in a case where we, with our complete
intelligence, feel we are doing them no positive injury, but merely
shutting off from them, for the support of a richer existence in
another species, a tract of life which they have never, even in^
imagination, possessed. We might add that the particular animals
we kill for food would, in most cases, not have existed at all but
for that purpose ; and to deplore the subsequent non-enjoyment of
the actual animal whose death ministers to human life would be
precisely on a par with deploring the non-enjoyment of the non-
exigent animals which might have existed, instead of those now
used fox food, had man never dommated and moulded the brute
creation.

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 16/

-what measures the * good result ’ ? — ^whtch a hundred
people, cynical and humane, sensible and foolish,
will answer in a hundred different ways. The
second rule is also a subjective one, apd would
justify any one who felt conscious of exceptional
powers of self-devotion in inflicting exceptional
sufferings: many an inquisitor, as Bishop Magee
suggested, would have gone to the stake for his
faith. This rule, indeed, unlike the other, can
claim for its subjectivity true practical value, in
that it keeps in view the exact point which those
who want a rule are liable to forget — namely,
that the sole means to that conscientious esti-
mation of others’ suffering, which is a prime ele-
ment in the reckoning, lies in imagining it as one’s
own. The rule might further claim to have at any
rate a logical advantage over the other in the ease
with which it can be made objective, viz. by sub-
stituting for what the individual reckoner would
endure what the general moral sense of the commu-
nity would expect, or what the average moral mem
would endure. So modified, however, it betrays
its inadequacy in several ways.

First, it would mischievously and ill(^cally
confine permissible sacrifice of animals to near and
olmous ends. In cases of human choice there is

t68 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

an immense difference between near and remote
objects. If a person long ago has sacrificed himself
for distant or imperfectly realised results, we admire
him as a^ero, feeling that he did a difficult thing
through an act of imagination which dispensed
with the ordinary aids of contemporary appreciation.
Now in the very act of doing this we are implying
that we should iwt expect the average moral man
to do as he did, owing to the limits of average
imagination and the normal craving for the sup-
port of public opinion. And thus we should not
expect an average man, though quite capable of
personal sacrifice for a dear and immediate benefit
to others, to make himself a unit in experiments
for an imperfectly known result, in which his
personal sacrifice would have no tangible equi-
valent But then comes the point : in the case of
an animal there is no such distinction between an
immediate and a remote result of its suffering.
The animal is as unable to appreciate one as the
other ; and it seems unreasonable to refrain, in
deference to the imaginative limits of the average
from inflicting a certain amount of suffering
for the more distant good which we should be
willing to inflict for the nearer, when the recifuent
of the suffering has no imagination to be limited,

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 169

and is personally as unappreciative of one ^ood
as the other. And if we may thus inflict on
an animal for a less near and obvious (not less
real) good what many an ordinary man would
endure for a visible good to people he knows
and cares about, we certainly may inflict more
than the plain sense of the Spectator's rule would
include.

Then again, the computations of a human
being as to what he would endure for the benefit
of unknown members of his race could not but be
-confused by the sense of the far-reaching effects
inseparable from injury to a member of a closely
knit society. Where the suflfering and its con-
ditions are quite abnormal, as in mutilation, this
objection would apply even where submission was
voluntary — for society might, and perhaps ought to,
refuse such sacrifices ; but it applies more especially
to the question of permitting injury to another.
And here the Spectator's ruld* seems seriously
weakened by the clause in it which I have placed
in brackets. The protection by society of any one
of its members from tyrannous interference is
obviously in its own interest, and extends to in-
numerable acts whids no one would dream of
josenting for creatures outside the human com-

1/0 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

munity. The above clause would really make the
familiar ‘ scratching of a newt's tail ’ impermissible,
since even lesser human injuries than this are
punishable by law as assault There is yet one
more difficulty in taking what an average man
would endure as a test. The ‘ average man ’ himself
is a most uncertain factor. Not infrequently an
average man is forced into being what is called a
poltroon, or what is called a hero — that is, into
seeming c.xcepttonal one way or the other, though
to say that he is exceptional would be to contradict
the h3^othesis that he is average. I remember a
trial for arson in which a witness was hissed for
having failed to do, for the .sake of two children,
what she would have perished to a certainty in
doing, with an equal certainty of abundant posthu-
mous glory. All sorts of cases can be imagined
in which, till the alternative is actually there, it
would be hard for most of us to assert confidently
what we or what the average man would do ; and
every fortififcation of ourselves in the idea that we
or he would be heroic would alter the application of
the test in question.

It seems, then, that the second rule, however
important as a guide to individual reckoning, can-
not, any more than the first, lay claim to general

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 17 X

validity. And as regatds chances of mutual com*
prehension, this can scarcely be regretted ; for of
the two rules, taken as they stand, one would be uni-
versally repudiated on one side of the controversy,
and the other on the other. What the mediator
must seek is to detect under the war of words any
single principle which could be accepted by any
considerable number on both sides ; to inquire
whether each cause does not claim adherents who
at bottom arc much nearer to some of their foes
than to some of their friends. For then an immense
advance towards mutual comprehension would be
made by marking the positions held on either side
which are really incompatible with this common
principle, and agreeing to neglect them, both as
hopelessly irreconcilable, and as outside the central
ground to which public opinion may presumably
gravitate. That the main issue can be made to
this extent definite seems to me certain ; though
the principle .is often confusedly e^tpressed, or even
hidden under what looks like denials of it. It is
no more than a carrying-out of the central Utili-
tarian doctrine. A large amount of suffering in
the future course of life on this planet being un-
avoidable, the amount is to be made as small as
possible ; therefore, of any two alternative amounts.

172 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

the lesser is to be chosen. More fully, in measuring
d^prees of suffering and its undesirability, nothing
but that counts ; so, A and B being either classes
or individuals, if A’s exemption is to be preferred
to B’s, it is because A’s suffenng would be greater,
and so have a wider undesirable effect than B’s,
not because A is superior in strength or intelligence
to B. Deferring difficulties and uncertainties of
application, we proceed to inquire what opinions
on each side the general admission of this principle
will exclude.

To begin, then, with the Vivisectionists, it ex-
cludes all those who regard the mere acquisition of
knowledge, irrespective of any prospect or possi-
bility of practical application, as an end in itself
justifying the infliction of suffering. Such, for
instance, is the position of Professor Hermann, who
expressly repudiates any aim at utilisation, and
boasts that ‘science can afford to despise this
justification with which Vivisection has been de-
fended in England.’ This view, popular on tiie
continent generally, has not (as far as I am aware)
been anywhere endorsed by English physiologists,
■and certainly found no place in their evidence of
1875. It might be possible to produce a contrary
impression by detaching single sentences from

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 17J

their context ; but the most such cases really
amounted to is that the benefits experiment
cannot be expected to be always immediate or
direct; and most of the witnesses were quite
explicit in their statement of the practical justifi-
cation of their science. The presentation of science
per se — of a knowledge whose sole use would be
to titillate the brains of an infinitesimal fraction of
mankind — as not only a fetish with an inherent
mysterious claim on us for worship, but a Moloch
with a similar claim on us for victims, is simple
credulity and superstition. In no other depart-
ment of .science has even the lesser of these claims
been advanced. Even in respect of seemingly re-
mote branches of mathematics, the stock instance
of the conic sections is reverted to with pride, as
showing the ultimate utility of what at first sight
seemed unpractical ; and all the more concrete
sciences count it their great glory to bring Nature
more and more under the controf of man, so that
he may oppose her harmful tendencies and mould
her forces to his will. 'Knowledge is power’;
that is its claim to respect ; eliminate the power
conferred, imagine man to retain his intellectual
apprehension of facts and causes while remaining
a hand-tied victim of his environment, and he

174 A CHAPTER IN. THE ETHICS OF PAIN

would rather envy the brutes than hug himself for
his knowledge.

And there would seem to be a special per-
versity in investing experimental physiology, of
all sciences, with a majesty which may fold its
hands and do nothing for us. There is a great
deal of knowledge which, apart from palpable
benefits, can claim value as opening out juster
ideas of man’s relation to the universe of feelings
and forces around him, and so as having a chasten-
ing and disciplining influence on his outlook on
life. Such a claim would be widely made for the
doctrine of evolution, whose embryological and
other branches have not been in any way based on
suffering. But in its own special arena, physiolc^
seems to have more than attained this stage : the
future discovery of the minuter bodily processes
will interest the scientific mind, but not further
discipline or chasten the general mind. The
science of animal function, in health and disease,
is emphatically a science which lacks the ordinary
means of kindling the imagination : its beneficent
power is not only its glory, but to the world at
large its only glory. It is peculiarly unable to stir
' cosmic emotion ’ ; to claim, as most of the sciences
could claim, to have a distinct value in the de%ht

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 175

which its mere contemplation inspires. It can
never (and least of all as built on suffering) become
imaginatively stirring to the general public, after
the fashion of astronomy, or geology, or the wider
natural history of beasts and plants. Yielding to
none in wonderfulness, its facts are still for the
most part physically repulsive, and its conceptions
not of a kind which any but professed students
would be apt to dwell on : apart from questions of
health and sensation, arterial pressure and the
secretion of bile could never occupy a thousandth
part of the place in the emotional life of mankind
which is occupied by planets and tides, glaciers
and volcanoes, the nebular and the evolution hy-
potheses. On the other ‘hand, so far as it contri-
butes to mitigation of suffering, the unique nature
of its contribution more than redeems it in our
interest and gratitude ; for of all possible services,
the cure and prevention of ills which outweigh and
bar the enjoyment of all positive blessings seems
the first and most fundamental.

We often find reference to another class of
Vivisectionists, who hold that for his own species
man may purchase immunities from suffering at
the cost of a much larger amount to other
species. This principle would, of course, be ex-

176 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

eluded by our fundamental test ; but I have not
met with an explicit statement of it. Such a
statement as that we may freely ‘ sacrifice a heca-
tomb of animals to save the smallest pain in a
man/ quoted with horror in an abolitionist pam-
phlet, goes for nothing unless ' sacrifice ’ is defined :
a hecatomb of animals has been sacrificed to
save many an abolitionist lady the pain of not
wearing gloves. Whether practices go on, which
could only be defended on the above principle,
is of course another question ; but the actual
profession of it must, I think, be rare. For, in
the first place, physiologists expressly prophesy
a vast reduction of animal disease and suffering
through increasing knowledge ; and in the second
place, since discoveries once made remain, any
justification for expecting beneficial results at all
may multiply itself by the number of untold gene*
rations, in which the total benefit would reach
enormous dimensions. I therefore mention this
class chiefly because they make such a figure in
Anti-vivisectionist writings. Thus Dr. G. Mac-
donald, in one of his novels, founds an eloquent
sermon on such a tex^as ' Shall I quiet my heart
with the throbs of another heart? soothe my
nerves with the agonised tension of a system ^

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 17/

live a few days longer by a century of shrieking
deaths ?' — questions to which one can imagine but
one answer. Such rhetoric errs as much by de-
fect as by excess. The soothing of the author’s
nerves by the iconised tenrion of a system is a
boon that it is well he does not crave for, as no
physiologist is at all likely to offer it him ; but
it is equally wide of the mark to sum up his
opponents’ utmost hopes, as the mere ’ adding of a
cubit to life,’ even though that cubit be the one
he is himself so virtuous in consenting to forego.
Give him the alternative between a certain amount
of pmn for twenty rabbits and a greater amount
for twenty children, and I should hardly think he
would hesitate. Nor probably would he take on
himself to stop antiseptic dressings for a single
day in the London hospitals, on the ground of
our owing them to Vivisection ; for in so doing he
would simply be balking his opponents’ purchase,
of the saving of the greater suffering through the
infliction of the lesser, by the contemptible expe-
dient of diminishing the amount saved.

But whatever Dr. Macdonald might say on
this point, there is an argument used on his side
which expressly refuses to take count of amounts
of suffering, or to attempt a comparison between

VOL. L N

178 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

what is inflicted and what is saved ; and which is,
therefore, as incompatible with our fundamoital
principle as the views hitherto considered on the
other side. The argument is that Vivisection is,
in its inherent nature, so morally degrading and
abominable that that evil must alone outweigh any
practical benefits derivable from it. In the words
of Mr. Oxenham, * no progress in medical skill,
though it were ten times as great as the most
sanguine votaries of the modem School of Torture
venture to predict, could compensate for the deep
and damning degradation of all that is noblest
and most God>like in the nature of man himself.*
Now no Utilitarian need hesitate to echo this
sentence as it stands; the destructive effects of
moral degradation on human welfare could not
possibly be compensated. But if we give up all
idea of judging of actions by the sum of their
effects, and take our stand upon the single effect
on the character of the doer, wc shall be in danger
of arguing in a circle. Mr. Oxenham must be
too good a logician to infer the effect on the doer
from the character of the action, while at the
same time taking his view of the character of
the action from its effect on the doer. Thus, if it
be a^ed how a Vivisector is shown to be deeply

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 179

and damnably d^aded, while I can answer the
question perfectly in the case of certain Vivi-
sectors, I do not see how Mr. Oxenham, in his
scorn of any Utilitarian standard, is to answer it
at all. I consider Mi^endie and Mantegazza
deeply and damnably degraded for having sinned
in the most flagrant way against my fundamental
principle, and inflicted terrible -suffering in num*
bers of cases with no benefit, and no prospect of
benefit, to set against it; and in estimating the
wrongness of their actions, I can take count of
further degradation, as one among other disastrous
results. But it is impossible to take one’s stand
simply on degradation, as constituting the su-
preme evil of the case, because if there were no
other moral evil, there would not be that moral
evil. If a man is doing what is not wrong he is not
degraded thereby ; and his degradation cannot be
made a feature in the wrongness of his action,
unless the action can be proved wrong on some
indepetuhHt ground, external to its effect on him.
(There is indeed the alternative of establiriung the
d^^dation itself on some independent ground,
shomng that phytiologists are notorious for
oiker degraded actions ; but even Mr, Oxenham
would hardly undertake sudi a Midayan muck as

l8o A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

this.) There seems, then, no escape from judg^ng^
the actions by the test of reference to the end — of
comparison of the extent of what is inflicted with the
extent of what is saved. To call this, as another
able writer has done, ‘the Jesuit doctrine that the
End justifies the Means,' is to forget that in that
reproach we imply just what is here lacking — our
power, namely, to prove wrongness and harmful-
ness in the means without reference to the end.
Those who reject our test do not really seem to
see that they have but one refuge. If experi-
menters on animals, by the discovery of a specific
remedy for cholera, consumption, or cancer, ‘ would
not have advanced far towards establishing the
moral lawfulness of their practice’ — if, when the
question is simplified to a choice which of two
sufferings is to take place, the greater is to be
preferred — it can be on one ground only, that of
supernatural ordinance : God sends us cancer, and
that is enough. Only then the opposition of this
view to ordinary moral rule, and the indispensable-
ness to it of the theological basis, ought to be
frankly avowed.

Cleared from these encumbrances, our main
prindple may, perhaps, obtain more explicit assent;
from those at any rate who are willing to be saved

A CHAfTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN l8l

from their friends. But now comes the crux;
evading which, Vivisectionists misuse the principle
in a way that excuses others for rejecting it. In
our references to greater and lesser sufferings, no*
thing has so far been said implying a difficulty in
estimating and comparing them. Y et the difficulty
is in some cases so great that we only avoid it by
admitting it to be insuperable. One suffering may
be so wholly incommensurable with another that
no true impression is given by calling it a hundred
or a thousand times greater ; in other words, the
lesser, endured in a thousand frames, could not for
an instant be set against the greater endured in
a single frame. Nor is the essential distinction
between endurable and unendurable pain at all
impugned, as some seem to think, by the impo»'
sibility of drawing a distinct line between them —
an argument which would equally forbid us to
call yellow and red essentially distinct colours. To
any person who would choose (dhd who would
not ? ‘) that all the human race should suffer this

* I had written this dame before recalling that Mr. Romanes,
in a letter to the TViMer, had argued the pain of drawing London
cabs to be incomparably greater than that inflicted by experiments,
on the ground of thete being a million cases of drawing a cab for
one of tortnie in a laboratory. The very foot that Mr. Romanes
is a clear>]iead,ed and Mnd-haarted man drives me to recognise onr
difleraace here as too fandamantal tot aigament.

i 82 a chapter in the ethics of pain

night from face-ache, radier than that one, that is
rot^hly one thousand millionth of their number,
should pass it on the rack, the distinction is essen>
tial — is of kind, not degree ; nor would any such
person consider it a reductio ad absurdum of his
choice that he is unable to say, supposing the pain
of the rack to be mitigable in a graduated scale of
degrees by anaesthetics, at what precise point he
would reverse his decision, though clearly such an
extent of mitigation is imaginable as would demand
its reversal. But extend the numbers on the other
side ; multiply the thousand million by another
milhon, and the decision will be quite unaffected ;
and what is this but to say that extreme torture is
incommensurable with moderate pain ? The same
false reasoning, the same demand for a clearly
marked boundaty-Iine in the definition of ' torture,*
or ‘ intolerable suffering,’ or whatever other design
nation be adopted, has been applied to the ques-
tion of duration : liow long, it is asked, must the
suffering last, to come under the head intended ?
Admitting that we can include no such precise line
in our definition, we again deny the demand for it
to be legitimate ; it is enough to be able dearly to
realise cases where there can be no doubt that the
line has been passed.

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 183

To this view, that torture may reach an ex>
treme where it is incommensurable with moderate
pain, it has been objected by Professor H. Sidgwick
that he *does not find, in the practical fore-
thought of persons noted for caution, any recog-
nition of the danger of £^ny such that^ in order
to avoid the smallest extra risk of it, the greatest
conceivable amount of moderate pain should
reasonably be incurred .’ ' But 1 cannot allow this
to be a fair test. As a rule, happily, people’s
imaginations are sluggish in picturing possible
calamities, as in other directions; and even
if the calamity were well in sight, so that the
imagination could not but be stirred by it, the
effect on the mind of a very high probability of
immunity may practically be the same as that of
certainty. Prof. Sidgwick would allow an eternity
of pain to be incommensurable with some finite
period of pain ; but, if it were possible to condemn
a person to an eternity of pain, there would, I
imagine, be little difficulty in finding a hundred
men in London who, for the sake of a week's
carouse, would consent to decide by lot at the
end which of them should be so condemned — each
feeling that he was sure of the treat, and nearly

* Methods cf Ethics^ 3rd c(L p. III.

1 84 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

sure of escaping the penalty. This is an extreme
case ; but on exactly the same principle a person
' noted for caution ’ might go to a theatre, well
knowing that he ran one chance in some millions
of being burnt alive there ; and yet, when that fate
overtook him, might fully admit the incommen*
surability for which I contend, and might consent
to endure some tolerable affliction for years if so
he might be spared the intolerable one. 1 do not
think that the verdict could be fairly given by any
one to whom the alternatives were not presented
with a necessity of choice ; indeed, I do not think
that it could be given completely en cmnaissance
de cause by any one who had not had a pretty
recent taste of the extreme agony. My point
will be sufficiently made out] for the present pur-
pose, if it is a fact that most persons would choose
the chronic continuance of some endurable ache
rather than submit to a long and severe surgical
operation without an anaesthetic ; but if this fact
is disputable, I can fall back on what will scarcely,
I think, be disputed — ^that they would ask to go
back to the ache very soon after the knife was
actually inserted.

One more point must be made clear before we
proceed. The validity^ of the decision in the above

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 185

case of the pain of many versus the torture of one
m^ht be supposed to rest simply on this — that
each in turn of the many ought, if confronted with
the case, to consent to endure the lesser for the
sake of averting the greater suffering.' But this
would land us in difficulties. For each one of the
many would similarly be bound by Utilitarian
morality to prefer his own, or A’s suffering, to any
clearly greater suffering of B, even though far
short of torture-point, and yet would be justified in
giving the opposite decision if there were a number
of A’s. Thus any one might fairly chopse that B
should have a very bad face-ache sooner than that
a thousand other people should have a rather bad
one. And this being so, it is clear that the peculi-
arity and the justice of the decision in the torture-
case must rest ultimately on that independent seas/t,
which a person gets for himself without reference
to morality or altruistic choice, of incommensur-
ableness between the extreme of suffering and
degrees of it falling well short of that extreme.
The importance of diis is clear if it is recognised
as the ground which will enable us, without
deserting our Utilitarian rule, to say that great or
protracted torture may only be inflicted for the
* Sw above, pp. a6-a8.

l86 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

clear prevention of greater or more protracted tor-
ture. Other grounds fail us. Thus, the Spectator
defines torture as that which renders impossible
the existence of a moral relation, and substitutes a
tyrannical relation, between the inflicter and the
victim, making the former a mere instrument of
anguish and the latter a mere recipient of it. But
the alleged presence or absence of moral relation
would prove very inadequate to mark off permis-
sible from impermissible inflictions, because equally
in either case it would be represented that the
relation to the animal is overridden by the lai^er
moral relation to man. Lacking some such inde-
pendent ground as I have just sketched for putting
torture in a separate category, I should see no
more and no less moral relation between myself
and a horse, whether I fledged him for the sake of
bringing a doctor to an urgent case, or tortured
him for some wider beneficial result So far as
there can be said to be any isolated moral relation
between me and him, it means that I am not to
hurt him. But in each case alike this is violated ;
in each case I make him a helper for wider good
by doing something he personally objects to. As
far as he is concerned he is a mere ‘recipient of
anguish * in either case ; or if ' anguish ’ be too

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF FAIN 187

Strong for the flogging, we may imagine him ridden
to death, like the member of the trio which suc-
cumbed in bringing 'the good news from Ghent’
Could our animals surprise us as their relative once
surprised Balaam, the kindest master might occa-
sionally hear something of tyrannical relations.
And it is only my view of torture as something
per se, definable as such apart from moral relations,
that enables me to condemn the infliction of the
extremest anguish for which I reserve the word,
while holding the ride from Ghent or the produc-
tion of some days of distressing illness as legiti-
mate.

So much, then, for principles ; as to which,
though unable to treat them as quite the simple
affair that the current formuls would imply, I be-
lieve I have advanced nothing on which the main
body of Englishmen interested in the subject need
split When, however, we come to the practical
applications, when we ask what physiology is
actually doing or likely to do in the way of inflic-
tion and in the way of results, with a view of
balancing them, then indeed the sides fall asunder ;
and I can only very briefly seek to account in some
measure for the divergence, and indicate the sort

l88 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

of mutual allowances which might reasonably tend
to its diminution.

First, then, there are legitimate grounds for
strong public feeling on the subject, which should
be distinguished from the illegitimate. Experts
sometimes treat as a calumny the suggestion that
their imagination of suffering is apt to get blunted.
But that habit induces a certain indifference to
others’ sufferings, a certain diminution of the space
they occupy in the mind, is surely too universal a
truth for any one to need to be ashamed of it In
a way it is even a mercy that it is so. If sui^eons,
for instance, retained through life the vividness of
their earliest hospital impressions, not only they
but their patients might suffer. But the point
often forgotten is that this does not prevent the
earlier impression from being the truer one. The
useless beginner, oppressed and haunted by what
he witnesses, is more truly awake than the cheerful
and beneficent practitioner to events actually goh^
on then and there in the world of consciousness.
He comes nearer to a reviving of that sense of
the intolerableness of severe pain which every one
fe^ to be the true sense as regards his own pain,
and which is of all things the most curiously hard
to reproduce in imagination. To desire, then, that

A. CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 189

hoHtu^s, in estimating the pain of inarticulate
creatures, should recc^ise their special danger of
ttmlerestimatittg it, is only to treat them as human.
Nor must it be foigotten that science has at least
as little of a moralising as of a demoralising inilu»
ence ; that the rough and dull within her fold
retain their defects, with an immense addition to
their powers and temptations; and that in spite
of the vast preponderance of testimony in 1875 to
the humanity of students, there was (as any one
on reflection would know there must be) a darker
side; ignoring which, in his r^^ts or demands
for unfettered power over animals, the most humane
physiologist gives a handle to the enemy.

Again, physiological literature and addresses
naturally give an impression of scientiflc solidarity
between different times and countries which affords
some ground for erroneous deductions and indis*
criminate attacks ; especially since we cannot
{tfevent our present knowledge frdm being based
to some extent on rise sins the past. No im-
partial inquirer can fail to know that the callous-
ness to animal suffering on the Continent, especially
in France and Italy, is terriUe. When we have
ffrrt-hand accounts, when we find Bernard himself
rq^retring rise reckless mult^hcatum of experi*

190 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

ments in his own countiy, when we find English-
men smiled at for their solicitude about anaes-
thetics, it cannot go for much that some one has
observed no special abuses during a short stay in
some first-class laboratory. The truth of this pic-
ture was admitted by implication in the admirable
resolutions of the British Association Meeting in
1871 ; fragments of it have appeared, with severe
comments, in the Laiuet ; and many English men
of science have expressed their regret at it, both
in general and in detail But on the whole they
have hardly made themselves, as they well might,
the leaders and spokesmen of the English view,
which their leadership would redeem from any
look of priggishness. If foreigners retort with
references to English sport, the expert can give
the one clinching answer. He can say, ' Sport is
sport ; but what I care about is science ; and a single
cruel experimenter does more harm to science than
fifty humane ones can compensate, and is a worse
enemy to it than an army of frantic Anti-vivisec-
tionists. The tide of humanity’ may be at a differ-
ent level in different places, but it is irresistibly
advancii^ ; and a man who refuses to recogiuse
this is such a blunderer at his work as to ignore
one of its main conditions.’ Such language would

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN I9I

have more effect than anything else in indining
and helping the public to discriminate between
cases which utterly differ.

What ordinarily happens is this. The appro>
priate atmosphere having been created by mention
or description of real abominations, some reassuring
phrase is then quoted — e.g. that the painful experi*
ments in England are comparatively few; then
comes the startling announcement that ninety cats
have been used in a single series, and the indignant
inquiry whether that sounds few ; and the public
goes off with the impression that what was done to
the ninety cats was on a par with the most blood-
freezing proceedings of the Continent. Not one in
a thousand will hunt through the large Blue-Book
which would reveal to him that the cats were
operated on under chloroform, and that for the four
or hve remaining hours of their lives their suffering
was about equal to that produced in the human
subject by an old-fashioned gamboge pill. The
inclusion of this series of experiments in the same
list with some of the worst infamies of Mantegazza
is of course inexcusable ; but it would be likewise
impossible, but for an idea of scientific fraternity
which the science of this country might well go
even out of its way to dispel It is curious, by the

192 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN ^

way, in what different strain of intellectual deve-
lopment one finds the same difference between the
English and Continental attitude towards animal
suffering. That the avers^e London cabman should
treat his horse as the Neapolitan does his ; tiiiat a
benevolent English clei^yman should imitate an
Italian ctmfrire in resenting interference with some
children who were plucking a live bird, because it
was a shame to hinder the little innocents from
amusing themselves — these things are not more
inconceivable than that Lord Tennyson should
g^ve us a pendant to the poem in which V. Hugo
commemorated the torture of a toad by himself
and his schoolfellows ; or that Mr. Matthew Arnold
should have drawn the sublime picture in which
M. Renan has described Claude Bernard, standing
like an august priest at the sacrifice, and so
absorbed in the hallowed function of burying his
long fingers in the wounds he had made as to
foi^et the cries of his victims.

Once more : who can regret belonging to the
country where it is a certainty that Bernard’s
single classical sentence on the effects of curari,
coupled with the news of such extensive use of it
as he himself condemned, should spread wide
excitement and alarm ? But then, on the other

f A CaHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OP PAIN I93

hand, why should this excitement waste force in
knocking its head against the overwhelmii^ evi-
dence as to the employment and efficacy of true
anaesthetics ? There is less defence for the part
of the excitement which depends on ignorance of
tolerably elementary facts about sensation. The
language of physiologists has, no doubt, been a
little loose ; the lay mind may be excused for not
understanding the phrase ‘signs of pain ’ to denote
reflex actions in which no pain was felt. This
excuse, however, goes but a little way, and nothing
but a tincture of special knowledge will prevent
perpetual blunders. Evety one knows how exqui-
sitely sensitive is the eye ; most people know that
nerves are the channels of pain ; combine these
two facts, and what a dreadful operation should be
the cutting of the optic nerve. Yet, as a matter of
fact, it is painless. If certain agitators would in-
form themselves, among other things, pf the general
insensitiveness of internal parts, including especially
the brain, to treatment which is acutely painful on
the surface of the body, or of the fact that the
animals they describe as * baked alive ' succumb, as
we should do, at the temperature of high fever, they
would immensely strengthen their hands for dealing
with real abuses. Nothing discredits their case so
VOL. L O

194 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

much as the confounding of what tortures animals
with what only tortures the uninstructed imaginations
of men and women. But again it must be said» as
a counterpoise, that imagination may err by defect
not less than by excess ; I do not mean by the
callousness of habit noticed above, but by natural
defect, which is the more dangerous, in that, like
colour-blindness, it is often unsuspected. It is
strange what dim ideas the most kindly people
may have of what others mean by agony. There
is a paragraph in Virchow’s address which looks as
if it had never crossed his brain that a person can
object to some experiments on animals and not to
all ; and an eminent witness before the Commis-
sion, as an illustration of the severest suffering he
could imagine, gave a case of paralysis !

When we turn now from suffering, real and
imaginary, to the past and future benefits claimed
for Vivisection, it is easy to damage the strength of
the evidence by exaggerating itb clearness, and not
allowing for the confusing effect on laymen of
certain inevitable aspects of it. As it happens, by
far tfie most vaunted example, the discovery of
the circulation, is precisely the one where the op-
posite case is strongest ; or rather would be, if
its adherents, instead of resting it on words of

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OP FAIN I95

Harvey’s which do not in the least prove it, and so
getting it demolished by Mr. Huxley,' would be
content to offer a reward for the discovery of a
loophole in Dr. J. H. Bridges’s masterly argument*
And in less disputed instances it cannot but strike
the outsider disagreeably that the magnitude of the
result seems usually in inverse ratio to the suffer*
ing inflicted. Jenner’s punctures, Simpson’s chloro-
form-inhalations, the twitch of Galvani’s frog, make
a damaging foil, e.g., to the experimental proof by
which the French mind convinces itself that animals
starve to death after they have been demonstrably
deprived of the means of swallowing. Then again,
the scientific world may sigh over Bell's apostasy
and the fogs it led him into, orsmileatFergusson’s
random assertion of the futility of all experiments
under anaesthetics, which could only mean that an
anaesthetic reverses or suspends every process of
life ; but, names being names, thepther side is not
simply perverse in regarding Bell and Feigusson
as doughty champions. Nor can broad generalities
•‘-as that the right basis of treatment must be inti-
mate knowledge of vitad processes in health and
disease — ^impr^ their truth on the laymaui who

• Jfgrtni^tfy Rtoiew for Febrtuiiy t8j8.

* Ibid, July iSyfi.

os

196 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

knows just so much of medicine as that existing*
remedies have been, almost without exception,,
discovered empirically, without any aid from such
knowledge ; and who hnds distinct opinions in the
sa)dngs and writings of experts, as to the inferiority
in value of physiological knowledge to clinical obser-
vation. Magendie’s crude scorn at the idea of vivi-
sections affecting medical usefulness, Bernard’s * nos
mains sent vides] Brown-S^quard’s description of
the teachings of Vivisection on the functions of the
brain as a ‘ tissue of errors ’ — these cannot but seem
effective weapons to those who use them.

And all this is surely a plea for long sufferance.
As regards the past and present, experts might
remember that their case is strongest exactly
where it is hardest for others to realise its strength.
That strength lies not so much in immediate ap-
plications (though between Hunter’s ligatures and
Pasteur’s inoculations we might fill in no mean
list),' as in the enormously different attitude in
which a doctor stands to his patient, on the intelli-
gence of treatment which is hard to particularise

* Main items in such a list would be the treatment of aneurism,
of angina pectoris, of diabetes, of various sorts of asphyxia, of dis-
ease of the aortic valves, to some extent of tuberculosis, prophylaxis
in cholera epidemic, prophylaxis of trichinosis, the rational appli-
cation of cold in fever, and antiseptic dressing.

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN I9f

only because it is so alUpervading. In the very
fewness of specific ronedies lies an evidence how
much must be attributed to this general advance ;
for it is no exaggeration to say that a few months
in a hospital will now enable a student to smile
at not a little of a most comprehensive medical
work published half a century ago by perhaps the
acutest physician of his day — Richard Bright. It
is not the knowledge that this will cure this, or
that the other, but the clear picture of a number of
processes, which su^ests and modifies treatment
in innumerable ways. The rational abandonment
of bleeding, the numberless uses of a true theoty of
nutrition and of the various actions of foodstuffs,
the treatment of nervous diseases with reference to
their origin instead of by painful local remedies —
these are surely weighty instances of a substitu-
tion of rational for irrational therapeutics, resting
essentially on a wide and detailed picture of the
living economy. That such a picturb could exist but
for experimental physiology is hardly pretended,
though it may exist perfectly in the mind’s eye of
a man who has never seen a single considerable
«xperiment — a truth strangely ignored in the aigu-
ment that great modem doctors have owed nothing
to the study ; and, indeed, so thoroughly pervasive

198 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

of the subject is this pictorial knowledge, that the
strata of medical stupidity scarcely exist in which
an Anti-vivisectionist patient could be safe against
somehow profiting by it.

As regards the future, the one great excuse for
distrust of experts is their frequent confusion
of the just claim to be the sole authoritative wit-
nesses as to expected results, with the totally
different claim to be sole judges of the cost at
which those results may be rightly bought — the
latter being obviously not a technical but a moral
question, to be decided on general moral principles.
The larger claim lurks, of course, in the convenient
formula that ‘ only experts can judge of the neces-
sity * of this or that. But for this, the public would
find it easier to perceive that the act of faith de-
manded of them (i) is demanded by many persons
having no sort of personal ambition in the subject,
and representing (if names be weighed as well as
counted) an enormous preponderance of skilled
opinion ; (2) is not greater than they feel to be due
in many other branches of knowledge. Experts
do not conceal that in many directions diagnosis
and to some extent prophylaxis are their chief
trophies ; but they alone cam judge of the true
relation of what they know to what they hope to

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN I99

know ; and the judgment is often a sort of trained
instinct of whose processes no cut>and-diy account
can fairly be required. The sort of stimulus to
pathological science, derived, e.g., from, mastery of
the mechanism of inflammation, might be compsu^d
to the effect on philolc^, in its early days, of a
trouvaille of inscriptions in some unfamiliar dialect.
To the outsider either event is barren of meaning ;
to the expert each is replete with promise, not of
some single separate application, but of gradual
amplification and modification of the grammar of
his subject, and so of further command over all
that it embraces, through points of fusion with
other knowledge which the philologist even less
than the pathologist may be able to particularise
beforehand. The growth of medicine is not simply
cumulative : it is organic and transformative. The
art has barely merged into the science, the science
is still in its cradle. But it has already strangled
some serpents ; and to separate its past and future
development from that of physiology is an idea
which (it is safe to say) would have occurred to no
one had no animal suffering been concerned.

Further to attempt an application ot principles
to practice would involve more technical detail
than would here be suitable. 1 can but state my

200 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

general belief that the application is greatly faci-
litated by that apparent narrowing of our main
principle which resulted from our view of torture ;
and that holding to that view, and to the truth that
realisation of suffering requires an effort, we may
obtain tolerably secure guidance, in spite of the
frequent uncertmnty of the data. But the fact that
pros and cons may admit of fair balancing by no
means implies that the individual most interested
is qualified fairly to balance them. In work which
necessarily concentrates interest and attention on
immediate rather than more remote results, the
general formula that on a balance of pros and cons
science is beneficial, is easily installed in the back-
ground of the worker’s mind, as a defence he can
always resort to, and not brought forth to confront
the actual things which are to be done under a
vague sense of its sanction. That for many ex-
periments there is not tnore than an appreciable
chance of beneficial results does not imply that for
many there is not less than an appreciable chance ;
and the good general character of science,/^ the
fact that the positive value of separate items of it
may often be hard to prophesy or to prove, gives
no right to the infliction of suffering which the
general scientific mind of the time would surmise

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 20l

to be not in the direction of- possible benefit
There are reasons why the surmise can be better
ha2arded in physiolc^ than in some other sciences.
Take, for instance, two prime portions of the animal
economy — the blood and the brain. Before the
discovery of the circulation, it might have been
safely predicted that benefit would result, in ways
not realisable till the discovery was made, from
exact knowledge of what the blood really did.
Can the same be s«ud of exact localisation of brain
centres ? Could that exact local knowledge have
relevance to any except local treatment? And
can it be expected that surgeons will ever make
-dissections of the living brain for such a purpose ? *

These considerations clearly have an important
bearing on the question of authoritative control
Th^ put the submission of a bond fide investigator
to control on an altogether higher footing than
obtains, e.g., in the case of the Factory Acts. A
sii^le expert, bent on his speciaf idea, cannot be
•exactly in the position of the impartial scientific
mind of his time ; and the conditions of his decision
in serious cases are sufficiently doubtful to make it

' I am aot indiscriininatelj attacking these bnin-«xperimeots,
many of vhkli can be mndered painless ; only suggesting with
orhat cantitm in theii cose pain should be considered.

202 A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN

rather a test of his realising them that he should
shrink from single responsibility. But to relieve him
by shifting the single responsibility to a Secretary
of State is certainly not to improve matters : the
chance of undue precipitation is merely replaced
by the certainty of timid and uncomprehending re-
straint Whatever the difficulties of detail, the one
expedient seems to be a responsible Board, consisting
chiefly, of course, of experts, but with some amount
of representation of educated opinion outside pro-
fessional ranks, even though this might entail the
presence of one or two of those purblind persons
who, according to Virchow’s scornful distinction,
‘take more interest in domestic animals than in
the discoveiy of Truth ’ ; holding, perhaps, that
the central Utilitarian principle here adopted, the
discovery of which at any rate required many
centuries of experiments, may perhaps contain
some truth of its own worth thinking about.
Authoritative testimony was given in 1875 that
some such Board, with complete knowledge of what
had and what had not been done in various depart-
ments of physiological research, would be of positive
value in oi^anising and concentrating it ; and the
minor annoyance of occasionally waiting for de-
liberation and sanction may surely be submitted

A CHAPTER IN THE ETHICS OF PAIN 203

to, seeing that we have eternity before us, and
that the complete moral stability of England’s
position in the mattei is in question. That such a
Board would command public confidence is more
than probable ; while it would relieve physiologists
from the burdens under which th^ are groaning,
not only in particulars, by its more judicious use of
licensing power, but by the general fact of being a
reasoned and helpful instead of a merely watch*
ful and hostile control. Freed thus from both
the appearance and the reality of unfair restric-
tion, English physiology, instead of appealing to
foreigners to pity it, and casting regretftil glances
back to the pre-humanitarian days, or across the
Channel to the schools whose unfettered licence
the greatest of physiologists deplored, would take
up with spirit its obvious rdle of proving that the
best humanity is the best science.

204

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION.

Few things are more trying, even to a disinterested
spectator, than to see a cause suffering from its
own advocates. Especially trying, in the case of
an exciting and many-sided subject, is that false
simplification which reduces the disputants to two
violently antagonistic camps, each collectively re-
sponsible in the eyes of the other for every sin or
folly of its worst or weakest members. And worst
of all is it when this thoroughly unscientific pro-
cedure is adopted by the very camp whose express
watchword is Science — ^the camp of the faithful few
charged, like Gideon and his three hundred lamp-
bearers, to confront with the light of truth the
unscientific hosts of darkness, and ipso facto, one
Would think, to exhibit the virtues of fairness and
accuracy which it would be unreasonable to expect
from their opponents.

Some thought of this kind must surely have

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 205

sugifested itself to many not wholly uninstructed
persons, while perusing the case for uncontrolled
Vivisection in the Nineteenth Century for Decem-
ber 1 88 1. The papers contained, it is needless to
say, much that was true and instructive ; all the
more ungrateful, though in the scientific interest
all the more necessary, is it to point out certain
defects in them, which are only too t}rpical of the
controversy, and likely in the present case to change
what might have been weighty teaching into a new
source of exacerbation. The temper of Science
has, no doubt, been sorely tried. Still, might not
professed enthusiasts for Truth, as revealed, e.g., in
the cerebral hemispheres of monkeys, extend even
to the inferior workings of their adversaries’ brains
some measure of just attention ? And might not
the benevolence which will face such disagreeable
labours without a murmur fairly ^nd itself above
the level of branding ignorance as insincerity ? Pro-
fessor Owen’s talk about * pseud6%umanitarians ’
and ‘hired scribes,’ Dr. Wilks’s endorsement of
Virchow’s disastrous remark at the International
Medical Coi^^ress of 1881 that 'the charge of
cruelty was a subterfuge^ rival in rashness any-
thing to be found in the abolitionist literature.
Few blunders, indeed, seem more wanton than this

206

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

Affectation of ignoring the obvious objection to
torture as such, by identifying it with a general
hostility to all scientific learning — a hostility which,
according to Virchow’s prophecy, will soon be pre-
venting the practical study of anatomy. He even
asserted that there exist in every country ' all sorts
of brotherhoods and associations which work ener-
getically against scientific examination of corpses.’
If so, their eneigy in England must have been
chiefly devoted to their own concealment. But he
at any rate might convince himself in half an hour
that his opponents on Vivisection would repudiate
any such object ; and to force even on the most
fanatical of them the confusion between cutting a
live body and cutting a dead one merely suggests
that the distinction is not a very essential one to
Virchow himself. Again, Dr. Wilks complains
that his opponents have selected’’ the word ‘Vivisec-
tion ’ with the intention of conjuring up the maxi-
mum of sensational horror. They can scarcely be
blamed for their ‘selection ’ of the only word they
found in use, even though its connotation be often
regrettable and misleading. But the physioi<^^ts
have not been very consistent in their objection to
it. Is it wholly over-squeamishness which, revolts
when laudation of so great a man as Harvey can

AN EFII^UE ON VIVISECTION

307

find no more succulent title for its hero than ' aich<
vivisector’? The infliction of suffering even to
save other suffering is surely at the best a grim
necessity, not a thing to smack one’s lips over.
And at the very least one might expect that those
who are confessedly writing not for the convinced,
but for the unconvinced — for those, that is, who
have not taken a definite side — would scan their
own words, as far as possible, with the eyes of the
public they are addressing ; and would thus be led
to perceive the picture of two sides, one consisting
wholly of able and blameless devotees to duty and
philanthropy, the other as exclusively of persons
who divide their time between telling lies, placard-
ing the walls with demoralising pictures, and
shrieking at the idea of a mouse being pricked with
a needle, to be almost too dramatic and complete.
That this method of treating all criticism and
opposition in a lump is as unreasonable as it is
obviously impolitic will, I think, imthe present in-
stance be doubly clear from an examination of the
arguments which accompany it.

It is noticeable, in the first place, that (with a
single unfortunate exception) no effort is made in
these papers to obtain any deeper or more explicit
firvtciple of permissible inflictions than is involved

208

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

in the licence which contemporary public opinion
accords to inflictions in other directions, and in
comparisons of degrees of pain and profit in the
respective cases.’ This treatment has the disad*
vantage of precluding any clear distinction between
questions of principle and questions of fact — a
distinction which the nature of the controversy
renders specially desirable ; since on the one hand
the search after an ethical basis has been much
confused, or often overlaid, by disputes about all

* In the comparison of the pains of Vivisection with those inflicted
in sport and in farming operations, while fully holding with Sir J.
Paget that the latter are on the whole far more severe, and of course
infinitely more numerous, than Vivisection as properly conducted
would inflict, I cannot but think that he strangely underestimates
very much that the practice has included. For instance, he compares
Paris vivisections, which have had a particularly bad name, with
the shooting of lions in Algeria— a rapid death, entailing less sofTer*
ing for the most part than the one which Nature would inevitably
bring. He s.iys, too, that he never saw anything in any experi-
ment worse than lAndseer’s * Death of the Otter * ; but the minute’s
death-struggle of an animal with free power to struggle and cry (a
vent to the enormous importance of which human experience amply
testifies) is surely quite incomparable— I need not say with the
sufferings of the bound victims in the prolonged demonstrations to
which he has himself borne witness, or with the multiplied day-long
horrors of the veterinary college at Alfort, or the month-long agony
at the laboratory of Pavia {Lmtcet^ No. 2482, p. 415), but with any
at all formidable cutting operation performed, as so constantly abroad,
without anaesthetics. Putting aside this single positive point, the
present criticism has comparatively little application to Sir J. Paget’a
careful and temperate paper, except as regards omhsiom.

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 209

sorts of practical and personal details ; and on the
other hand the evidence of facts, including much
difficult matter not only of science but of human
character, has been involved in all the heat of
ethical controversy — the very worst atmosphere
for the candid weighing of it. At the same time
I think that one may dimly trace even in the two
cruder contributions, what is tolerably clear in Sir
J. Paget’s, a sense that the true principle on which
a stand must be taken is the right to inflict the
lesser suffering for the sake of averting the greater.
I will not dwell here on this topic, having dis-
cussed it pretty fully in the preceding Essay.
One remark only I will venture to repeat, as no
suggestion of it is to be found in the Nineteenth
Century papers — namely, that on the above prin-
ciple vre must face the difficulty or impossibility of
balancing a single case of prolonged and extreme
pain gainst a number of cases of far shorter or
less extreme pain. I admit with rqgret that this
reservation must throw into opposition (theoretically
at all events) more than one eminent English phy-
siolc^st, who, recognising no such distinction as I
drew, and thinking that possible alleviation for the
many might be set against certain torture for the
one, have owned that there is no extreme of pro-
VOL. I. P

210

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

tracted agony which they would think it wrong to
inflict if the object were ‘sufficient.’ The only
sufficient object in my view would at any rate have
some close reference to degree, and could not be
settled by mere numbers ; just as I would sooner
that ten thousand hares should be coursed than
that one should be nailed and crushed ‘ with much
love and patience ’ by Mantegazza, or that a million
horses should be overdriven than that one should
illustrate the ghastly traditions of Alfort And I
would stake a good deal on finding that, of persons
sufficiently interested to make a choice at all,
ninety-nine out of every hundred would agree with
me. But, apart from this difficulty, it is much to
find the general principle even covertly acknow-
ledged ; and I believe that it is in the spirit of English
physiology to recognise it more and more distinctly.

Nevertheless it is impossible quite to pass
over the exception above referred to, where an
explicit principle is laid down, of a different and
even opposite nature to the Utilitarian one. It has
figured much in the controversy, and here takes
the form of a quotation from an eminent physician's
address to the British Association The only
restriction which Christian morality imposes upon
such practices is that no more pain duill be inflicted

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 21 1

than is necessary for the object in view.’ It is
really amazing that any one should fail to perceive
this formula to be just as applicable to the elabo-
rate Italian method of ensuring for hours or days
the very maximum of torture without destruction
of life, as to the momentary pricking of a baby’s
arm ; * the object in view ’ in the former case being
the observation that the animal’s strength or tem-
perature is appreciably affected by that amount
of pain, which from the very meaning of the words
therefore, is no more than is ‘ necessary ’ for the
object. ’ I am seeking after truth,’ the experi-
menter here might perfectly plead in Dr. Wilks’s
own words, ’and if I find it (which in this case
I have done) I am satisfied.’ If Dr. Wilks is not
equally satisfied, his instincts are better than his
logic. Disagreeably in accordance, too, with this
same formula are his remarks on scientific method,
according to which * the rocks are broken and put
in the crucible, the water is submitted to analysis,
the plant is dissected ; ’ and ' in animal life the
same method must be adopted to unlock the se-
crets of nature. The question of the animal being
sensitive cannot alter the mode of investigation.’ '

' Contrast with this Dr. Shatpejr’s and Dr. Acland’s evidence
before the Royal Commissimi. The latter expressly deplores that

212

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

Nor, surely, could the 'question* of the animal
being human. Had these remarks been published
a month earlier, I could hardly have expressed
myself as confidently as I did in the last Essay as
to the practical repudiation by English physiology
of the Continental view that a chance of knowledge,
however remote from further benefit, may be bought
at any price.

But I think it would be harsh to judge Dn
Wilks’s ethical position wholly in the light of these
unfortunate passages; and that, if his favourite
method of analysis were fairly applied to his own
and Professor Owen’s principles, the result would
turn out to their advantage. Even so, unfortu-
nately, it would not go far to redeem their general
mode of advocacy. Their aigument will be found
to contain one misstatement, one omission, and one
fallacy, all of the gravest importance, and closely
connected with one another. The misstatement
is that the sole ground adduced or adducible for
subjecting Vivisection to control is its inutility ; the
omission is of any hint that the practice has ever
been abused \ from which two lapses is born the

* so many persons have got to deal with these wonderful and beau-
tiful organisms just as they deal with physical bodies that have no
Ceding and consciousness.'

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION *13

fallacy — ^that the practice itself, like the opposition
to it, can be treated in the lump, and that it is
enough to prove that benefits may be traced to it
for the case gainst restriction to be triumphantly
vindicated. Of course those who deny the benefits
past or future in toto — like the baronet who wrote
to the Royal Commission that ‘medical science
has arrived probably at its extreme limits,’ and can
gain nothing from a practice which ‘ goes hand in
hand with atheism ’ — deserve any castigation they
get But is it worthy of the scientific cause to rely
substantially on an argument which is only good
against these hopeless fanatics ? The misrepresen-
tation is twofold. First, a very slight dip into Anti*
vivisectionist literature would reveal that its ablest
contributors expressly take their stand not on the
inutility, but on the independent iniquity, of the
practice. The pritnd fade unreasonableness of this
in cases of palpable benefit, and the ethical neces-
sity for that fair balancing of the suffering inflicted
and the suffering saved which these persons ex-
pressly disown, I have before endeavoured to show ;
which is surely on the whole a more judicious way
of dealing with well-known opponents than to deny
their existence. But secondly, the strength of the
opposition to Vivisection lies, of course, in the

214 AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

notorious fact that an immense amount of the
suffering it has caused has been absolutely usel^ ;
in the way partly of withholding anaesthetics, partly
of reckless repetitions and so>called demonstrations,
partly of experiments from which it was not even
pretended that any possible benefit could arise.
On the last head I do not forget that, though in
many particular cases a mere chance of benefit, or
a mere grain of knowledge, is set agaunst the cer-
tainty of suffering, this goes for nothing if now and
again the thousand chances throw up, or the thou-
sand grains swell into, such a single result as will
outweigh all the sufferings put together. But no
one will for a moment pretend that this argument
applies to some of the proceedings I have men-
tioned, or to others which, though we have the
operators’ own testimony for them, I will not risk
the charge of sensationalism by recounting.

'These charges do not apply to England,’
Professor Owen and Doctor Wilks will reply. But
then, surely, had they known the things that
belong to their peace, that is the exact point they
should have dwelt on, instead of attributing an
agitation that sees these atrocities perpetrated in
the name of Science to the pricking of mice with
needles. On the topic of pain, of course, no less

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

ais

than on that of utility, tlie ignorance and haste of
adverse clamourers have bred most serious injustice ;
but they would have been comparatively power-
less, had Vivisection at all times and places kept
within the bounds which the good sense and good
feelii^ of our leading physiologists would mark
out ‘ But that being so,’ these last may say,' why
should our apobgia be concerned with anything
beyond ourselves ? ’ The answer lies partly in the
very nature of a practice open alike to persons of
the most opposite characters, partly in the pre-
sumable oneness of the ‘ scientific method.’ The
appearances of sympathetic fellowship with their
foreign brethren are of necessity quite sufficiently
strong to chaise our experts with the onus of defining
its limits. None can know better than they the
enormous difference between the English and the
Continental practice ’ on all three of the heads 1
have mentioned ; yet we may hunt through their
writings and listen to their .speeches without en-
countering a hint of this knowledge. ' Scientific

■ For a single instance, I may refer to Dr. Anthony’s evidence
before the Commission, Answer 2437. Or Darwin’s answer,
thoroughly representative of the English evidence throughout, as to
the duty of using all possible means of mitigation, might be com-
pared with the evidence of the single foreign witness — Answers
4673 ud 3 S 3 S- 3 S 44 <

2I6

AN EPILOGUE ON YIYISECTION

books and discourses/ they may urge, ‘are not
the places for moral discussions or judgmen|s.'
But how can the same be said of professedly popu*
lar papers like those I am discussing, the very
object of which should be to remove misappre-
hensions, and to make outsiders understand what
true and humane science means by Vivisection ? Is
it not just here that one would count on finding
this highest evidence of superior civilisation em-
phasised with pride, rather than kept out of sight
like a stigma? Whatever their own purity of
turn, however safe Vivisection w'ould be in their
hands, those who publicly heap indiscriminate
laudation on a practice widely associated with
heartless abuses can hardly complain if the attack
also is somewhat indiscriminate, and if their sensi-
tiveness on the score of those abuses is not instantly
taken for granted. What they treat in the lump
and call beneficent, others will take the liberty of
treating also in the lump and calling damnable ;
with equal reason and equal unreason in either
case.

But there are things more damaging even than'
this reticence. What are we to say when, at diis
time of day, we find it seriously set forth in black
and white that it is impossible for a clever and

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 217

persevering man to fail in tender regard for others*
feelings, and that the invention of an ingenious
machine is a quite sufficient diploma of humanity ?
Clearly the bull of Phalaris and its mediaeval
equivalents are a fable ; Magendie never lived ;
Lm Fisiologia del Dolore is a forgery, or its de-
scription of its author’s patience and his instrument-
maker’s ingenuity a falsehood ; and Sir. J. Paget’s,
Dr. Sharpey’s, and Dr. Anthony’s printed evidence
about foreign lecture-rooms was given in a dream.
Why does Dr. Wilks compel a reference to topics
so irrelevant to English science and its professors
as these ? Might not such defences at least be
left to the rhetoric of scientific platforms, and kept
out of the open arena of the Nineteenth Century^
where their chief effect must be to suggest doubts
as to the humanity that can need them ? But
even apart from this, the argument that the prac-
tice is not in danger of abuse because none but
ferocious brutes would abuse it. Is radically fal-
lacious; the dangerous fact being just precisely
that it is not in brutality and ferocity, but in de-
fective im^nation and the indifference of custom,
that abuses find their normal and sufficient cause.
Custom is powerful for good as well as for evil ;
and we may rejoice to know that in Englidi

218

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

laboratories needless repetition of an experiment
involving pain, or omission to administer anaes-
thetics for the sake of saving time or trouble,
would be regarded as a wanton outrage to scientific
routine no less than to morality. But this happy
and exceptional state of things is no contradiction
of the general truth that even in the case of
otherwise humane men, especially in youth, the
prestige and fascination of research, and the weak-
ening of separate responsibility in the atmosphere
of a skilled and ambitious guild, may be serious
enemies to creatures which {pace Dr. Wilks) are
even more at an operator’s mercy than ‘ defence-
less children.’ A natural tendency, implied in the
repentance of such men as Haller and Reid, and
freely acknowledged by some of our foremost
experts, needs not to be indignantly repudiated
only carefully watched against.

And this brings me to a further topic. Both
Professor Owen and Dr. Wilks treat any sort of
restraint or supervision of Vivisection not only as
unnecessary in itself, but as a slur on an honour-
able class. The same two objections figured to
some slight extent in the evidence before the
Commission in 1875, though there the general
disposition was very decidedly to welcome some

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 219

kind of authoritative control. A third objection,
that State control would be unfairly restrictive,
seems to have proved, under the present Act at
least, only too well-founded; but the other two,
which naturally go together, stand on a very differ-
ent footing. As r^ards necessity, there was a
tolerable consensus that if certain things were true
which the Commissioners held to be proved, legis-
lation must come; and it may be inferred that
there would have been even more unanimity here,
had the information of some of the witnesses been
at the time within the knowledge of all. At any
rate evidence of plague-spots particularly likely
to be kept out of sight cannot be affected by the
fact of their not having attracted wide attention.
The Commission, after referring to grosser abuses
(which they trusted were abnormal, though ad-
mitting here the most insuperable obstacles to
obtaining evidence), reported that there were other
cases ‘in which carelessness and indifference pre-
vail to an extent sufficient to form a ground for
legislative interference.’ It is to be presumed that
Professor Owen had not recently perused this page
of tile report when he wrote of ‘ the failure of a
Royal Commission to obtain evidence of the abuse
of physiolt^cal vivisection in Great Britain.’ In

220

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

the face of such evidence, to speak of interference
as a slur would be to imply a bond of scientific
esprit dc corps with the clumsiest injurersof science.
This sort of objection goes rather to show that
the recognition of the rights of animals is still
even in England rather instinct than principle.
No one thinks it a slur in any business where there
is danger of unwarranted injury to human frames
that control should be exercised : no one takes
umbrage at doctors* licenses, or at the Anatomy
and the Factory Acts. The sore point in the
present case seems really to be the old subject of
sport, whose unchartered freedom not unnaturally
keeps up by comparison a perpetual sense of ill-
usage. Valid reasons might, however, be found for
postponing that subject to the other, though, in a
Legislature which deserts business for Epsom, these
are of course not the reasons for which it is post-
poned. For in the first place, the possible degree
of suffering, as opposed to the mere number of
sufferers, must again be remembered ; and British
abuses need not necessarily be less extreme than
Continental* because far rarer. And in the second
place, abuses in sport and in the capture of wild
animals may at least be expected to decrease
{as they have actually done) by the natural de-

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

321

vdopment of humanity — ^being due to stupidity
and ignorance, and exposed to the full influence of
public opinion ; while any abuse of the other sort
is necessarily a private, at the worst even a hole-
and-corner business, far more demoralising in its
deliberateness and secrecy ; and the particular
curiosity and power which join to produce the
danger in the lowest stratum of the student-world
are inherent in the particular education. Legis-
lation here is more than a barrier : it is a nucleus
round which nascent moral instinct may develop.

I should be sorry to seem to fail in sympathy
with high-minded men who And a useful career
checked for the moment by unreasonable restric-
tions, and themselves the objects of a clamour
which on such a subject is specially easy to in-
voke, and which is largely (though, as we have seen,
not exclusively) founded on ignorance. But the
opportunity of December 1881 was a peculiarly
good one ; no such widely-read defence of experi-
mental physiology is likely to appear for years to
come; and it is impossible not to regret that
some of the space occupied with the. rebutting of
‘ slurs,’ and with sarcasms about the follies of peers
and prelates, was not devoted to more practical
topics. The matter will be Anally settled, not by

222

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

names and authorities, but by instruction ; and
for this the state of the public mind gives ample
scope.

For example, it is easy to trace a widely dif
fused impression that even in this country anaes*
thetics are seldom or imperfectly administered.
When examined, the case here will be found to
rest almost entirely on the shoulders of a single
witness, whose words must now have been quoted
many hundreds of times ; his statement being that
complete anaesthesia is seldom attempted, owing
to the difficulty of producing it, and that if pro-
duced, it * only lasts for at most a minute or two.’
Would it not, then, be well worth while to point
out in detail how little this can weigh against the
evidence of expert after expert that complete
anaesthesia is producible and habitually produced
with perfect ease, and that it can be kept up for
hours at a time, and was so kept up, e.g. in a long
experiment, in which the adverse witness declared
its use impossible ? ‘ The only difficulty has been
sometimes to prevent its passing on into death ;
and this has been assumed to mean that it is not
complete — an assumption of just enough plausi-

' See Answeis 3205, 3383-6, 4334-7 and 5737-9 in the Report
of the Commiiaon, and compaR 5777-8 with 3454-7.

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION 22 $

bility to deserve the very few words which would
show its groundlessness. Then i^ain, so long as
the distinction is kept clear between what is
defended and what is indefensible — a condition as
much of good faith as of good policy — there can
be nothing but advantage in pointing out the true
nature of certain experiments which, as ordinarily
described, are calculated to strike the lay mind as
quite other than they are. The pain of burning,
for instance, known by all to be excruciating, is so
through its excessive stimulation of the nerves of
the skin. Now, to produce this effect in the ex-
ternal covering of the body, the temp>erature must
be very much higher than the maximum internal
temperature compatible with life. This latter
differs greatly for different animals, and is much
lower, for example, for a frog than for a man. It
follows that if a frog were kept in water which
would be of quite bearable heat for a man, and its in-
ternal temperature were thus raised, it would rapidly
die ; but to describe it as ‘ boiled to death ’ would
be wholly incorrect ; since the phrase would sug-
gest the well-known action of boiling water on the
skin, which, tc^ether with the pain it entails,
would in the supposed case have no existence.
There would be no object, now, in making this

224

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

experiment^ but it serves as an illustration.
Similar remarks apply to the 'baking alive/ of
which a great deal has been made. The experi-
ments in this case again were not such as need to
be repeated ; but the actual mode of death was
certainly not exceptionally painful. The animals
here being warm-blooded, and the surrounding
medium not water but air, the temperature was
much higher than in the above case of the frog ;
but it was considerably under the 260® Fahr. which
men have endured for several minutes with per-
fect impunity, and as applied was not nearly high
enough to blister the surface or injure the cutaneous
nerves. The effects were internal and toxic ; and
tho stages of death were quickened circulation and
respiration, and agitation, followed either by coma
or by a short period of convulsions, probably almost
or wholly unconscious. ‘ What this means, as

' Similar experiments made on man make it practically certain
that the conscious period of agitation is one of discomfort rather
than of pain. ITie observers who have experimented on themselves
have found giddines.s and faintness come on at about the stage where
the discomfort begins to l)e excessive. (Compare Fordyce and
Blagden’s experiments on themselves, in the Phihsophicai Tram*
actiam for 177$, with the account of Boerhave's experiments on
animals in the Memoires dePAradtfmie Royok des Sciences for 1764. )
Mr. J. N. Langley h.is pointed out to me bow closely the effects of
high temperature on animals resemble those of sunstroke on man
(see Maclean's Diseases of Tropical Climates, pp, 149, 151}; and

AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

3«5

compared with what would naturally be conveyed
by the words ‘ baking alive,’ any one can judge by
imagining his own state of mind if, after he had
been condemned to the one, his sentence urere
suddenly changed to the other. Again, knowledge
.once gained does not need to be re-established ;
and it may be said as a rule that the earlier and
more salient facts of physiology are those requiring
the roughest experimental methods. Even apart
from the change of character wrought by anaes-
thetics, ample testimony has been given to the
diminution of the need for the severer sorts of
operations, parallel with the increasing organisation
of facts ; and it is hard even to imagine any object
now for experiments at all comparable to Bell’s on
recurrent sensibility. The pain of toxicological
experiments is almost invariably short; and the
distress of induced diseases, not more painful than
those by which we expect that the majority of our-
selves will die, cannot weigh for a moment against
the expected benefits both to men and animals, in
the dawn of which Pasteur’s contemporaries may be
proud to live.

snnsbdce is not a spedaltjr painful form of death. Bernard says
that *si la temperature eat asses eierde, la most sunrient si rapide-
ment qne I'animal semble foudroyd ’ ( La Chaleur Attimale, p. 356).

VOL. L Q

23^6 AN EPILOGUE ON VIVISECTION

These examples may suggest the sort of facts
which can hardly be too often stated or too care«
fully explained, and which are ten times more con-
vincing to a layman than the most imposing array
of testimonials to character or of ex cathedrd judg-
ments. I am not excusing the mistakes and ex-
aggerations of the abolitionists ; I regard them as
of painful importance, since from them careless or
bigoted opponents draw their cheap excuse for
treating all consideration of the question from any
but their own standpoint as ignorance and pre-
sumption. But I do not believe that even the
best instructors can exercise their legitimate influ-
ence on popular opinion, or meet opposition in a
really effective way, without paying more heed to
the bearings of the various points here discussed —
points which, obvious enough, and coming with no
force at all from me^ only need to be fully and
fairly recognised by them to make the future of
JEnglish physiology secure.

THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE IN
MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY.

Among contemporary studies, that which (for the
convenience of including its various departments
under a common name) has been designated as
’Psychical Research’ holds, in more ways than
one, a position of unfortunate uniqueness. The
main peculiarity, which is at the root of most of
the others, seems to be this — that, while the study
is primarily one of facts, and, to have any per*
manent value, must be a scientific examination of
the facts as part of Nature, it ofrej'’s (at any rate
in some of its more striking branches) little im-
mediate attraction and little direct opportunity
to the men of facts — ^the men whose recognised
mission is to deal with natural phenomena in a
sdentific way. SupertOT knowledge and strength
of conviction are not usually here, as in other

228 THE NATURE Of EVTOENCE

departments of natural science, the result of skill
and pains. Those first convinced of the facts are
not, as a class, persons of any intellectual supe-
riority, not persons whom some special aptitude
for observation or power of reasoning has taught
truths to which the great body of mankind must
be led up by following their guidance ; but simply
persons who, without any special training or ability,
often even without any will or effort of their own,
have come across certain somewhat rare phenomena.
It follows as a matter of course that surprising
facts, in the hands of persons who are average
specimens of the uncritical majority of mankind,
should get involved with all sorts of misinterpreta-
tion, bad argument, and wild theory ; and that the
conviction of reality which the facts inspire should
be equally extended to purely subjective hallu-
cinations, and to results of conscious and uncon-
scious deception. One consequence of this is that
those who seriously endeavour to advance the
study of the facts have always to be facii^ in two
directions at once, and to wage equal war on two
opposite habits or tendencies — the tendency to
eaty credulity on the one hand, and to easy
incredulity on the other. No subject has ever
suffered so much at the same time from those who

229

IN MATTERS' EXTRAORDINARY

profess friendship and those who profess hostility
to it. And the difficulty of making way in this
double-facing sort of fashion is much increased by
the relation of the two opposite extremes to one
another. Sometimes the path of progress gets
encumbered by the cross-lungcs of the infuriated
disputants on right and left of it ; but more often
both these parties, in their desire to get out of
sight and hearing of one another, get also out of
sight and hearing of the unfortunate middle party
on the path ; and so march happily along, each
claiming a victory, but without a fight, to the oft-
refieated tune of a few fine-sounding formulae.

It is, indeed, only natural that a subject so
large, and for scientific purposes so new, should
offer special facilities for controversialists, even with
the best intentions, to miss each other and to avoid
close grappling ; and it is in the hope of in some
measure defining the ground of the 'psychical
researcher’s ’ contention with the incredulous oppo-
nents of his work that the following remarks are
offered. For it is impossible for him not to feel
that the real issues between that party and himself
me missed or confused, when he so constantly finds
tiiem resting their case on general facts which he
would be the first to admit; and directing thdr

Z30

THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

attacks to particular absurdities which he would be
the hrst to condemn. For example, Dr. Carpenter
in his Spiritualism, Mesmerism, &c., has r^htly
laid down the two great sources of fallacy in such
matters : — the disposition to attribute whatever is
not immediately understood to occult agencies;
and the myth-making tendency, in yielding to
which the average imagination of mankind hnds
its easiest and most congenial exercise. Again, he
has shown just scientific instinct in his exposure
of the particular lapses and weaknesses even of
scientific opponents — e.g. Prof. Gr^oiy’s easy as-
sumption that because a mesmerist caused a man
to rise to the very tips of his toes by holding his
hand over him, he could have held the man sus-
pended without contact ; or the same gentleman’s
hypothesis that the reason why clairvoyants could
not read the number of Simpson’s bank-notes was
that the selfish motive for employing the power
prevented its proper exercise. But in dwelling on
these points, he contrives to give the controversy an
air which saves the trouble of any close argument.
'The idea is inevitably suggested to the mind of the
ordinary reader that any one who differs from Dr.
Carpenter’s conclusions must be both so incapable
of a wide view of mental history and science as

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY a5t

wholly to overlook the common love of wonder*
mongering ; and so unaware of the nature and
necessities of experimental research as to be willing
to accept an unsupported guess for a certainly, if
only it accords with a theory. There is thus little
chance of a hearing for a voice which pleads for dis-
crimination in the treatment of cases; for a fair
consideration of the conditions to which love of
wonder-mongering is, and of those to which it is
not, relevant ; and of the things which, when pre-
sent, it cannot, as well as of those which it can,
effect; and generally for a clear recognition and
appropriate application of distinct principles of
evidence, without reference to any one’s theories or
pre-suppositions.

‘But,’ Dr. Carpenter might have said, ‘is not
the whole effort of Science, in its dealings with the
phenomena which it discredits, to make the prin-
ciples of evidence distinct ? Did not I myself, in
the book just cited, make the nature of the scien-
tific criterion clear to all eyes not blinded by
superstition i ’ Well, as he was fond of the ar^~
mentum ad homiuem, we cannot do better than
consider his own very typical remarks on this
latter point

First, then, we learn from him that evidence of

332 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

what is new *must correspond in strength with
the degree of its incompatibility with doctrines
generally admitted as true ; and where statements
obviously contravene all past experience and the
universal consent of mankind, any evidence is inade-
quate which is not complete.’ Into the relevance of
this formula to the particular facts to which Dr.
Carpenter would apply it, we need not here enquire.
One might, indeed, have fairly asked him first to
settle his account with his fellow-sceptics ; for it must
surely have somewhat bewildered him, if he chanced
to read the Daily News for January I2, 1883,
to hnd a high historical authority resting the case
against the phenomena which he had discredited
as ‘contravening the universal consent of man-
kind,’ on the precise ground that they have been
pretty universally consented to. But it would be
a task far beyond my present scope to determine
how far records of past experience confirm, in-
stead of contradicting, allegations which modem
science has treated with uninquiring contempt
The present question is a more general one ; not
whether the formula is applicable, but whether it is
true.

Let us try to imagine what the statements are,
of which it would be correct to say that they con-

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 233

travene all past experience and the universal con>
sent of mankind. Such statements can, no doubt,
be imagined — as, for instance, that it is generally
lighter by night than by day — but I have never
heard of any one professing to bring evidence,
either adequate or inadequate, in their support
And putting aside propositions the contradictions
of which, though verbally expressible, have never
actually been made, the only instances that it is
easy to recall of anything like contradiction of
universal consent are those where the fact consented
to has been subsequently proved to be a figment
Such a figment was the revolution of the sun
round the earth ; as to which, so far from its being
the case that complete positive evidence of the real
facts was necessary before the old hypothesis could
be called in question, that hypothesis was bound
to be called in question, without a scintilla of
positive evidence, the moment it occurred to any
one to connect celestial phenometia with the ex-
tremely common experience that to an observer
who is himself in motion stationary objects will
appear to move. Matters of very wide consent,
when th^ have gone beyond undeniable facts of
sense, have naturally been matters of immediate
inference from those facts. Such inferences may,

234 the nature of evidence

no doubt, be of a kind which, if false, would palpably
conflict with some part of ordinary experience;
but putting these aside, and considering that
Ic^cal and reflective minds have always been a
minority in the world, we may say that the more
instinctive and the more nearly universal the in-
ference, the greater has been the chance of its being
unwarranted, and the smaller the amount of direct
evidence required to shake it. The inferences of
the ignorant And, however, an occasional parallel
in those of the learned. An attempt is sometimes
made to draw a distinction between the belief in
such facts as the levitation of objects without con-
tact or sense of muscular eflbrt, and the belief in
the revolution of the sun round the earth, in the
following way. In the latter case, it is said, the
impression conveyed to the senses of the observers
was true, a bond fide result of natural forces,
but it was then misinterpreted by means of an
unwarranted inference; whereas in the cases of
alleged levitation, the actual impression conveyed
to the senses must have been false, in the sense
that it was a purely subjective illusion, or else due
to intentional fraud — because the natural occur-
rence of the event would involve the inconceivable
phenomenon of action without reaction, or a creation

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 23$

of potential energy (which will become active when
the object falls) without any corresponding ex>
penditure. It strangely escaped the observation
of even so acute a man as Faraday, that this latter
statement involves an inference logically quite as
unwarranted as that concerning the solar revolution ;
namely that, because there was no sense of effort,
there could be no expenditure of energy — in other
words, that a single human sense is an infallible
criterion of the forces to whose operation human
organisms may contribute. To perceive and avoid
this fallacy is, of course, quite a different thing
from admitting the truth of the alleged facts;
which must be judged of strictly according to the
quantity and quality of the evidence for them.
And it is really terrible to think what Dr. Car*
penter’s statement would commit us to ; for if
matters of ' universal consent’ must necessarily be
confronted with ‘complete evidence’ before we
may presume to doubt them, a whole host of cases
at once occur which will demand that most im-
possible feat — to prove a negative. It was once a
' doctrine generally admitted as true ’ that witches
occasionally turned into black cats : was every one,
then, scientifically bound to accept this doctrine
until such day as the number of witches and of

2^6 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

black cats in the world vras satisfactorily accounted
for?

But I do not wish to pin Dr. Carpenter down
to a single sentence ; let us try a few more of his
utterances. ‘Any statement/ he says, ‘must be
put out of court that is completely in opposition to
the universal experience of mankind, as embodied
in those laws of Nature which are accepted by all
men of ordinary intelligence.’ ‘We must utterly
fail to appreciate the true value of evidence, if we
do not take the general experience of intelligent
'men, embodied in what we term “ educated common-
sense,” as the basis of our estimate.’

Here is a change indeed ; and at first sight
much for the better. We here, at least, get an in-
timation that quality as well as quantity of opinion
is to go for something, and that a view finds better
credentials in the intelligence and education of its
professors than in the fact that a multitude of
human beings have unthinkingly concurred in it.
But closer inspection brings disappointment. Dr.
Carpenter has himself told us that if submarine
telegraphy had not been led up to by progressive
steps, the idea of the Atlantic cable would have
been scoffed at ; which at once suggests how large
a part accident plays in the attitude of the edu-

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 237

cated public to any new idea. Might th^ not
witii even more reason have scoffed at an idea
which was lately quite suddenly propounded, the
possibility of the movement of a disc by the me*
chanical action of light — ‘ a revelation with r^ard
to matter * which Dr. Carpenter describes as ‘ com-
pletely transcending if not violating previous ex-
perience,’ but which, he tells us, experts were so
far from scoffing at that they were perfectly willing
to accept it, on what ultimately turned out to be
insufficient evidence? Again, to take a similar
instance, would not the laws of Nature, as accepted
by men of ordinary intel%ence, at any rate involve
the certainty that a person who thrusts h!s hand
into molten iron will be bound to suffer for it —
which nevertheless is found on trial not to be the
case?

’ True,’ Dr. Carpenter might have said ; ' but
physicists can explain why : in " educated common-
sense” I include readiness to accept the dicta of
experts.’ Be it so ; but with what a tremendous
run we have come down from the general consent I
Indeed, in many cases the new criterion will be
found to be the very opposite of the old, for con-
tinually the expert has to resist the general opinion,
before he can even beg^ to guide it But let that

238 THE lUtTURE OP EVIDENCE

pass : let us examine this criterion of * educated
common-sense* on its own account It is based
ultimately, as we have just seen, on the dicta of an
extremely small and specialised minority ; so that
we are driven to understand the * general experience
of intelligent men ’ to express, not what the words
would naturally suggest — not the direct experience
of intelligent men as to the subject under consi-
deration, whatever it may be — but the experience
that specialists are usually worthy of trust in their
own subject. The criterion, then, depends on two
things — the skill of a comparatively small group of
men, and the allegiance to them of the general edu-
cated p*ublic. Cases, however, may obviously occur
where the vagueness of these last words will cause
a serious difficulty. The allegiance of the educated
public being one factor in the criterion, we shall
sometimes want to know who they are ; to apply
the criterion, we shall need a further definition of
them ; and, though convenient for the speciaUst,
it would be rather too crudely circular to define
them as just those who, in the particular case, pay
the aforesaid all^iance. But there is a still worse
danger ; for what if the allegiance be found alto-
gether to fail ? Dr. Carpenter himself innocently
supplies us with the assurance that this may be the

IN MATTERS EXTRAQiDINARY 339

case. * The majority,’ he says, ' sometimes go mad,
the few who retain their common'Sense being the
exceptions ’ ; and he instances the persecutions of
the witches. This is driving us from pillar to post
with a vengeance. Once again we have to shift our
criterion, which we must now be content to find in
the opinions of a few experts minus the allegiance,
or it may be in the teeth of the opposition, of the
general educated public.

But we are not yet at the end of our troubles.
We needed just now a definition of the ' educated
public ’ ; we shall now still more need a definition
of ‘experts.’ How are a small minority of the
educated public to make good their claim in
matters where the majority refuse to follow them
— these, be it observed, being ordinarily just the
matters where their customary method of vindi*
eating their authority, the method of direct experi*
mental treatment, fails them 'i Here clearly th^
cannot justify themselves to the majority ; but can
they even justify themselves to themselves ? They
have, in Dr. Carpenter’s own words, ‘no other
defence of their position than the inherent incredi-
bility of the opposing testimony.’ If so, thqr must
indeed be in a sad case ; their defence being pre*
eisely the one which a plain man would oppose to

240 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

the assertion that a human hand may be none the
worse for a plunge into molten iron. This, then, is
what we are reduced to at last After being first
hunted from universal consent to the general con-
sent of educated men, and then from this last to the
consent of that handful of educated men who re-
main sane when all the rest go mad, we find this
handful not only without the means of establishing
their superior sanity in a mad world, but actually
altogether disappearing as a separate class; for
while they are taking their stand on the perception
of inherent incredibilities, it is suddenly perceived
that all the mad people about them are doing pre-
cisely the same thing. So that all these incom-
patible criteria of the value of evidence end by
actually leaving us with no criterion at all !

I have just spoken of subjects where scientific
experts lose their normal power of guiding opinion^
and even their chance of making out their claim to
bi experts, because they cannot use their ordinary
experimental methods. Dr. Carpenter would per-
haps have denied that * psychical research* fails
under this category. He might have pointed out
that the sphere of experiment is not confined to
definite localities and technical apparatus; that
experimental knowledge of menial phenomena,.

IH MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 34I

especially, is gained by wide observation of humut
beings in various morbid and healthy conditions ;
and that the power of rightly estimating evidence,
in general, and in particular of criticising what is
known as the ‘ evidence of the senses,’ requires a
large amount of practice and skill. This is undeni*
ably the case ; and I should not only admit, but
expressly contend, that there are parts of the im-
mense field here opened up where an ' expertness ’
of the literal scientific kind may be applied, and
may claim to be recognised.

Thus, the multiform manifestations of hysteria
form a subject in knowledge of which the physi-
cian may show himself as superior to the layman
as in the treatment of fever. Again, the subject of
hallucinations of the senses in sane and healthy
persons is one on which so much ignorance prevails
that a competent knowledge of it — ^without which
we cannot in some departments of the research
make a single safe step — must be (reckoned as a
technical acquirement. And apart from such ex-
ceptional experiences, there are various points be-
longing to the natural history of illusion and error
which, while obscure enough to be often overlooked,
are still definite enough to enable one who does
not overlook them to establish thereby his claim

VOL. I. R

242 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

to authority. For example, people have com-
monly imagined that they can testify correctly to
what they are or are not doing with their own
hands ; and it needed some ingenious experiments
of Faraday’s to show them that, in a state of what
they believe to be perfect passivity, they may be
exerting pressure enough to move a heavy table,
and that the pressure may be prevented if their
eyes are made aware of the first symptom of it by
the movements of an indicator. Again—to pass
to the more general conditions of human observa-
tion and memory— not one educated person in a
thousand has any well-grounded view as to the ex-
tent of a conjurer’s powers of deception ; any one,
therefore, who has taken the trouble to obtain such
a view — which many a successful conjurer has
never done — may claim to be an expert. Or we
might take the familiar game of ' Russian scandal.’
It is, in its way, a genuine experiment, and as such
may result in authoritative knowledge. A person
who has witnessed it frequently and intelligently
enough to judge how large is the average amount of
error that will creep into a statement by successive
repetitions, may fairly be considered an expert, as
compared with a person who has lacked the oppor-
tunity or the insight necessary for forming such a

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 243

judgment; and that the latter sort of person is
immensely in the majority, even among the edu>
cated class, is clear from the surprise almost inva*
riably exhibited by those who join in the game at
a result which the expert will prophesy as certain.
Or, again, the question may be one of inference.
Consider the ever-fresh interest shown in ‘odd
coincidences ’ — ^the everlasting stories, of how
A momentarily mistakes B for C in the street, and
then meets C immediately after, and infers that the
two facts must somehow be connected. Interest in
such an occurrence simply proves that a very simple
mental fact has not been observed — the fact,
namely, that it was the coincidence, and nothing
else, that caused the mistaking of B for C to be
recorded and remembered ; while the hundreds or
thousands of cases where there is no coincidence —
where A momentarily mistakes B for C and does
not immediately after meet the latter — leave no
impression on the mind. Thus the few cases where
the coincidence has been presented — ^the few suc-
cesses, so to speak — stand out prominently, and
are not duly weighed against the numerous failures ;
and A relates, as a fact worth attention, that when-
he mistakes one person for another in the street,
he is sure to encounter that other within half an

244

THS NATURE OF EVIDENCE

houfi and he concludes there is ' something in it^
It needs an amount of acumen which is just above
the average, and to that extent is * expertness,’ to
perceive that the odd thing would be if there were fw
* odd coincidences * of this kind. And, beyond this,
the topic of coincidences sometimes assumes a form
—as notably in the very interesting cases of ap-
paritions at the time of death— which demands for
its proper treatment a certain * expertness ’ in the
theory of chances, and therefore a certain grasp of
elementary mathematical conceptions.*

But though it is possible thus to produce a list
of points connected with ‘ psychical research,’ where
one man may be truly as superior to another as in
physics the trained student to the first’ man in the
street, the great peculiarity still remains, that in
psychical matters the first man in the street is quite
ready to talk as if hi were the expert. We are in
a region where most of us seem to ourselves ex-
perts, in the sense of entertaining superior views
as to what is or what is not possible or provable, but
where we find no at all direct or certain way of

* For A detailed treatment of several of these points, see PAan>
tasms of th* Livinit chaps, iv., x., xi., and ziii, ; and Messrs.
Hodgson and Davey’s papers on * The Possibilities of Mal-obser-
vadon,* Ac., in vol, iv, of the Proutdingt rf the Saciify f^r Psychical
PiSittrch

IN MATTSItS EXTRAORDINARY 245

making good our superiority to others. It is the
land not of attikority, but of opinwH ; where any
member of the intelligent and educated public, as
such, feels ready to embark on discussion at a
moment’s notice with any other, and, when the
differences prove irreconcilable, can only take
refuge in denying that other to be at the requisite
standpoint of education or intelligence— an opinion
which, whatever its consoling power, can only be
made an argument by the adoption of the old
circular method. And it is extremely noteworthy
that people’s conhdence in their own opinion by no
means always declines as the chance of appeal to
skilled authority decreases. The man of general
intelligence is often quite as confident in the region
of opinion as the expert in the region of experi*
ment — his confidence seeming to bear proportion
not so much to possibilities of proof as to impossi-
bilities of disproof.

The controversies which illustrate this fact na-
turally vary from age to age. Modern illustra-
tions may be found in such questions as whether a
body can act where it is not, or whether mind can
exist apart from a material organisation, or in
what sense the will is free. Nobody recognises any
special body of skilled opinion on such subjects ;

246 THK NATURE OF EVIDENCE

at any rate, nobody recognises as authoritative any
dicta about them which run counter to his own
prepossessions. If it be said that the obscurity of
such philosophical questions does not prevent clear
reasoning about them from being in the long run
appreciated, and that there is at any rate a point
up to which all competent reasoners agree, and a
sense, therefore, in which they will acknowledge
each other and be acknowledged by the outside
world as experts, it must still be admitted that
there is here scarcely a vestige of any such relation
of skilled to unskilled opinion as normally prevails
in scientific matters. In philosophy the amount
of certain agreement is so small, and differences
start in such absolute fundamentals, as to render
‘expertness' rather a description of the qualities
displayed in the process of dialectic, than a means
or a guarantee for the establishment of authoritative
results. Here, therefore, the class of experts occu-
pies a position entirely different from that which
Dr. Carpenter desiderates : in matters where men
of equal practice and acumen are at issue from the
very foundations, any wide common all^iance to
them on the part of non*experts is out of the
question. But over and above this difference of
position, the classes of philosopkical and of scientific

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 847

experts are themselves different — consist for the
most part of different individuals. So far from
special skill in experimental research, and the
habits of mind normally connected with such skill,
being pre-requisites to skilled labour in the field of
philosophy, the two sorts of aptitude are rarely
found united — a fact which clearly puts Dt. Car-
penter’s claim to extend the sphere of scientific
authority still more completdy out of court. We
may try to regard this separation as a mere friendly
division of labour ; but conditions may at any
moment arise which test it in a practical way, and
reveal it as a radical difference of instinct. What,
for instance, can be more startling, to a mind even
slightly tinctured with philosophy, than the suicidal
want of logic of the modem cock-sure school of
Empiricists; as when an eminent comparative
anatomist refuses even to take part in a trial of
professed ‘Thought-transference,’ on the ground
that it is an impossible hypothesis, and Materialism
thus lays down the law to a Universe which Em-
{Hricism humbly interrogates ?

' But even so,’ it will be said, ‘ gianting that
philosophy is a region where authority is at present
very far from paramount how does this relieve
you from the obligation of bowii^ to authority,

248 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

unless you mean that your ** psychical evidence
would fall naturally under the purview of philo*
sophers-— that the questions which are exercising
you belong to the department of philosophical as
opposed to scientific enquiry?* Now, as pure
questions of fact, they certainly do not so belong ;
and it may be convenient to state at once, on
behalf of those who are seriously occupied with
these matters, that they present their evidence
neither to men of science nor to philosophers as a
separate class, but to the educated common-sense
{happily nowadays by no means uncommon) which
can appreciate the broad conceptions of science,
without imagining them exhaustive, or confound-
ing the scientific with the philosophic reading of
the Universe. But my present point is that the
questions to which I began by referring are per-
petually not treated as pure questions of fact ; that
they almost always get mixed up with questions
which are distinctly philosophical ; and that these
have a most important bearing on the attitude in
urhich the evidence is listened to, or (it may be) not
listened to. The answers given to these latter
questions may be good philosophy or bad philo-
sophy ; but both questions and answers at any rate
entirely transcend the region of scientific authority;

IN MATTEttS EXTRAORDINARY 349

experimental lesearch might goon for ever without
settling them. The roHonaU of individuality, of
matter and spirit, of life and death — ^these are
not laboratory questions. If men of science treat
them as such, the result is simply bad philosophy,
not science. But the important fact is that, whether
the philosophy be good or bad, well or ill reasoned,
its various forms must exercise a powerful influence
on the hospitality (.so to speak) of the mind towards
the sort of facts which we are bringing forward. We
cannot, for instance, consider ourselves cut loose
from philosophy, so long as it is possible for those
who have philosophically rejected the idea of ' ac>
tion at a distance ’ to refuse on that account to
examine alleged cases of 'Telepathy,* where no
physical medium of transmission can be assigned ;
or for those who have philosophically rejected the
idea of personal continuance after this life, to refuse
on that account even to listen to any evidence for
phantasms of the dead.' And therft is yet another
way in which philosophy, so far from lightening
the primary task of getting the facts fairly acknow*
ledged, may constitute a neu' embarrassment For

' The word ‘evidence’ is to be understood strictljr. The
greater part of what pcqnlarly passes as evidence on these subjects
has no daim whatever to the name, tbou^ occanonalljr instructive
in relation to the general subject of hallucinations of the sane.

2S0 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

there are points of view from which the facts might
be admitted as true, but regarded as philosophically
unimportant. So that here we fall between the
two classes of experts — the men of philosophy
declining to be interested in what does not support
or affect their system, and the men of science de-
clining to consider matters in respect of which they
cannot establish their own authority by special
experimentation.

But to return from the views and sentiments
which affect the reception of * psychical ’ facts to the
facts themselves. Quite apart from obscure philo-
sophical questions, the mere treatment of the evi-
dence, the mode of arriving at the truth of the facts,
has often no relation at all to the ordinary rules of
experimental procedure ; and the right attitude to
new facts depends here on something which is both
more and less than laboratory and hospital expe-
riences. The method is wider but less precise, more
various but less technical ; and the application of
it demands disengagedness and common-sense
rather than any specialized aptitude. Where phe-
nomena cannot be commanded at will (as is the
case in some of the more striking departments of
our research, comprising abnormal affections of the
mind and senses), the work of investigating them

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 2$t

must consist, not in origination, but in the collect*
ing, sifting, and bringing into due light and order,
of experiments which Nature has from time to time
given ready-made. And the due estimation of
these depends, in the broadest sense, on the due
estimation of testimony; on what may be called
historical, as opposed to experimental, methods of
enquiry ; on that sort of many-sided acumen by
which the historical student judges ^e records of
actors and witnesses, many of whom had no idea
of ‘ making history ’ ; on the general sagacity by
which questions of probability and credibility, and
disputes as to accident, coincidence, and design, are
decided m the matters of everyday life. I am
far, indeed, from implying that the requisite saga-
city — because general in its scope— -is a matter of
at all general attainment. The plentiful lack of
‘ educated common sense,’ which we noted above,
in connection with * Russian scandal ’ and ’ odd
coincidences ’ was a sufficient proof tto the contrary ;
and for dealing with some departments of* psychical
research,* we saw that ‘educated common-sense’
must be taken to include some infusion of technical
or quasi-technical knowledge. But though the re-
quirements may go beyond the bounds of a good
general education, th^raie still such as a few hours

2S2 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

of easy study will supply ; and we may say, with-
out reserve, that correct judgment in ' psychical '
matters depends on points of intelligence, experi-
ence, and character, which it would be absurd to
attempt to embrace in a definition, or to identify
with any particular department of skill.

It naturally follows — and this I should be the
first to concede — that serious students of ‘ psychical *
subjects cannot fully claim the position which is
associated with ‘expertness* in the physical sciences.
They cannot speak ex catftedrA, as those to whom
a peculiar aptitude for direct dealing with some
special class of natural facts has given an acknow-
ledged right to have their opinions on the subject
of their enquiry accepted, even where only im-
perfectly understood. This peculiarity should be
duly recognised as bound up with the very nature
of the research. It does not merely depend on the
fact that for the average man the questions investi-
gated arc complicated by a variety of imaginative
and emotional factors ; or that a large number of
the public addressed do not wish to be taught, in-
asmuch as they deny beforehand that there is any-
thing to learn, and are prepared with cut-and-dry
opinions as to the value of evidence which they have
never seriously looked at It depends primarily on

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 355

the impossibility of demonstrating the phenomena
to order, and on their aloofness from any specialized
form of skilled handling. I do not wish unduly to
depreciate the qualifications required. For ex-
ample, in enquiries relating to Thought-transference
and to Hypnotism, and (unless French science has
gone singularly astray) to the effect of magnets, &c.,
on ' sensitives,’ results may be obtained, not, indeed,
always at will, but still by the method of direct
experiment ; and experimental work may always
be done skilfully or clumsily, with or without the
requisite precautions. But even here the fact that
the experiments must be devised and the precau-
tions taken by the light of common sense, and not
of specialized knowledge, produces distinct effects
on the manner in which the testimony of tite experi-
menters is received by others. So far from its
being accepted as authoritative, all the circum-
stances and chances are weighed, and various
hypotheses passed in review, byprtfrisely the same
faculties and methods as are brought to bear on an
historical or legal case. And in the case of the
spontaneous phenomena, this is throughout the
only mode of investigation. But fully admitting
this, I must at the same time protest in the
strongest manner against the idea that knowle^e.

354 the nature of evidence

because it is not technical, is essentially unscientific
— ^an idea which plays a leading part among the
cut-and-diy opinions just referred to. I must
altogether deny that inductions from evidence need
lack certainty, because the phenomena themselves
have been observed and reported, by those who
came across them, without any view to scientific
ends. The whole spirit of recent anthropology
and history might suggest, one would think, the
illegitimacy of identifying ‘ science ’ with a com-
mand of physical appliances, and of quarrelling
with one mode of arriving at truth because it is
not another. We psychicists render unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar’s; we have been wont
to go to the recognised authorities, wherever the
recognised departments of science overlap our ovm ;
but surely no diploma of skill in the physical or
medicad sciences can be necessary to warrant the
assertion that physics and medicine hold no
monopoly of scientific method. And if it be
thought a disadvaintage to a subject that right
judgment in it should depend on general sagacity
rather than on specialized skill, we may at any rate
set against this the cerate advantage that the
facts themselves admit of being completely brought
within the knowledge of all. In the very admission

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 255

that the advocates need not be technically experts,
it is implied that the testimony which they bring
forward is not of such a sort that only an infini-
tesimal fraction of the thinking public can form a
sound judgment concerning it. And the very
difficulty of the further conceptions involved, the
impossibility for the present of any complete or con-
vincing explanation, makes it all the easier in this
case to separate the consideration of facts from
that of theories. The appeal is thus made to
educated common-sense entirely on its own level.
Our business is simply to make evidence accessible
— to take care that facts which easily might not be
seen shall be seen. As soon as they are seen, they
begin to throw light on one another ; but the work
of estimating their significance and forming con-
clusions from them must for the present be done,
if not by each person by himself, at any rate inde-
pendently of authority. The subject is of such a
nature that we should certainly not be able, even
did we desire, to persuade the public to leave it to
us, or to any other small group of persons, to do
that work for them.

But, while thus expressly disclaiming the sort
authority r^htly claimed by scientific experts,
and expressly presenting our evidence to the

2 S 6 the nature of evidence

common*sense which, if it presumed to pass
judgment on technically scientific matters, might
often be so woefully wrong, we must with equal
expressness repudiate any special authority in
others. And, above all, must we separate ourselves
from experts in Dr. Carpenter’s sense, and disown
the mark by which (as we have seen) he specially
distinguishes the class— the acceptance, namely, of
the ‘ inherent incredibility ’ of any alleged pheno-
mena as a sufficient excuse for avoiding serious
consideration of them. On the contrary, one of our
chief topics must be the historical fact that the line
which can thus be drawn is of the most shifting
kind ; that it advances here and recedes there ;
that dreams become realities as fast as realities
become dreams ; and that the very things which
have been inherently incredible in one place or age
have been the commonplaces of another.

It is easy, of course, to foresee the kind of
objection which this line of ai^ument will provoke.

* Even granting,’ it will be urged, ‘that there ate
departments of knowledge, not improperly desig-
nated as scientific, where true opinion depends
on historical methods of enquiry, your position
will reap no benefit from the concession. The
historian is successful in tracing out through

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 2$/

tangled conditions the true character of a person
long deceased, or in evolving from a mass of
biassed or conflicting testimony the fact that an
event took place thus and thus and had such and
such consequences, simply because there is no
strong d priori probability against the person’s
character or the course of events having been as
he describes it. The evidence, for instance, that
Tiberius was in the main a great and good man,
will not have to overmaster any conception of a
natural impossibility, or even improbability, that a
Roman emperor should be great and good. But
in the case of your alleged facts such conceptions
exist, and exist legitimately, being, in fact, merely
a recognition of the known course of Nature.
Even if it be granted that an experimental expert,
qtid his skill in experiment, has with respect to
them no jurisdiction, that general conception of
the uniformities of Nature which owes its existence
to special scientific researches wil> none the less
be authoritative ; and it demands the rejection of
your evidence, and makes the character of your
witnesses irrelevant. Testimony which would be
unimpeachable in the affairs with which the lawyer
or the historian has to deal must here be unworthy
of attention,’

VOL. 1.

s

258 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

This objection has a great look of strength ; for
while it in fact contains both truth and error, the
truth is patent and the error latent. In the first
place, it is quite true that the amount and quality
of the testimony requisite for establishing new or
unusual occurrences cannot be determined without
distinct reference to ^ priori improbabilities. And,
in the second place, all our realisation of past de-
lusions as to natural law still leaves us with a legi-
timate and ineradicable feeling that the world in
our day is so well known, that Nature has been so
widely studied, the inter-connection of her depart-
ments so well understood, and local and partial
views of her so completely supplanted by the diffu-
sion of a common education, as to make radical
upsettings of our positive conceptions of her impro-
bable to the verge of impossibility. Hut we must
be careful that the strength with which this feeling
comes home to us docs not carry with it a prejudice
against alleged experience, of however unusual or
novel a sort, as likely to upset our previous con-
ceptions, or to contradict anything about them ex-
cept their finality. The very strength with which
the conceptions are held ov^ht surely to secure us
against such timidity. It has again and again
happened that observation of facts has outrun the

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY

259

knowledge of their conditions, and that opinion as to
the facts has in such cases been widely led astray —
whether in the direction of credulity or of incredu-
lity depending on the temper of the individual or
the age ; and then, after a time, analogies present
themselves, or the special conditions which made
the facts possible are more completely elucidated ;
and it is found that there has been no breach of
continuity, and no contradiction — only a further ex-
tension and determination — of natural law. And
neither in the advanced and seemingly impregnable
positions of modern science, nor in the wide diffu-
sion of 0 common education, do we find any suffi-
cient ground for supposing that new or unusual facts
will cease to appear and gradually make good
their position in the natural scheme. Rather might
we expect that, as the tide ol evolution flows on,
the novel conditions which produce such facts
would necessarily come into existepcc ; and that,
as ready means of communication are everywhere
multiplied, the isolated facts which, owing to their
isolation, were once accounted unusual, and pro
tanto discredited, would be recognise^ as consti-
tuting a distinct natural class. Certainly, then,
confidence in natural law, and in the positive con-
quests of Science, need constitute of itself no barrier

26 o

THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

to the admission of new or unusual facts. But
when such testimony, instead of being jealously
tested on its own account, is ruled out of court, when
men deny that it can have any appreciable value at
all, when the best of it is treated as on a par with the
worst and the accumulation of it as a mere sum-
mation of noughts, we encounter a fallacy of the
gravest kind. The supposed absence of previous
experience, a purely negative induction, is first
treated as having the same positive value as expe-
rience itself, and elevated into a law of Nature ; and
then the presumption of improbability against facts
which contravene the law, instead of being weighed
against and regulated according to the forthcoming
testimony, is counted twice over — a process ot
weighing by which the testimony is easily made to
kick the beam. Let us briefly examine this double
fallacy.

It will not be necessary to pause long on so
obvious a proposition as that negative inductions
from experience arc, from their very nature, not
final ; and that to make them final is arbitrarily to
close the door on the possibility of new conditions
which may affect the result.' This hypothesis of

* The same may, of course, \ye said of positive inductions ; but
in their case there is not the same danger of overlooking the limit-

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY

261

new conditions no doubt demands careful use. For
there are cases where the existence of the supposed
condition is in itself quite as improbable as the
occurrence of the alleged fact ; and in such cases
the d priori improbability of the new fact is not at
all diminished by the assumption of the new condi*
tion ; the issue is merely thrust a step further back.
For example, the existence of a ‘ mesmeric
effluence,* capable of being shed from the human
hand, cannot be said to be in itself more probable
than the fact recorded by Dr. Esdaile, the produc-
tion of anaesthesia by a draught of the water over
which pa.sses have been secretly made ; and it
would be absurd to complain of a person who de-
clared the fact — the alleged production of the an-

ing conditions. The reason, I think, is this. An overwhelming
majority of the assertions of Science being concerned with the
things which can and do happen — things definite in kind and dis*
tinctly represented in the mind— it is natural that the assertions
should in every case contain precise and complete recognition of
the conditions of the happening ; Science^ indeed, may be said
to consist of such precise and complete statements. When, on
the other hand, assertions are made to the effect that things do
not or cannot happen, the fact that such things are necessarily
/ifidefinite in kind (for no one takes the trouble to classify nonen-
tities), and as a rule are ^distinctly represented to the mind, has a
tendency to prevent any precise or complete statement of the con*
ditions under which they do mt happen ; as a substitute for which
it is common to supply a vague general reference to the * experience
of mankind.*

262

THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

aesthesia — to be impossible or violently improbable^
for ignoring the ‘ effluence/ the supposed condition
of its occurrence. But there are other cases, where
the alleged fact is scarcely less remote from analogy
than this, and equally depends on new conditions,
but where a like improbability does not apply d
priori to the latter. So far from being improbable,
indeed, the new conditions may even be palpably
present. Take, for instance, the case of recent ex-
periments in Thought-transference. The new con-
dition here has simply been that the phenomenon
.shall be repeatedly and steadily tried for — that one
or more minds shall for a time be concentrated ex-
clusively on a particular object, with the view that
the impression of it .shall be transferred to another
mind. Yet an able opponent has actually argued
against the occurrence of the fact, on the ground
that, had it been possible for it to occur, the history
of human intercourse would have been different,
as our whole stream of tliought from moment to
moment would have been visible to our neighbours.
The conditions under which the fact of Thought-
transference is alleged to have been observed could
not be more flagrantly ignored. And in face of
such an instance and such a blunder, the assertion
for any negative experience of mankind (even

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 26 $

supposing it to have been uniform and universal)
of a positive value, which not even the best testi*
mony to a different result can outweigh, surely
loses its plausible sound. It is not the vindication,
by comparison, of tlie infinitely greater against the
infinitely less amount of experience ; it amounts to
a positive assertion that a new fact, to which clear
analogies are not forthcoming, can never be proved
by testimony — what is practically nothing less than
a veto on the advance of science by a purely empi-
rical road. The veto is pronounced, moreover — as
lias been well observed — in the very teeth of the
one induction from experience, which, of all others,
may be pronounced historically and scientifically
valid — namely, that ‘ other inductions from expe-
rience, and especially negative inductions, are nof
final*

But the tendency to regard alleged new facts
off-hand as contradicting experience, instead of as
limiting a negative induction fronii the absence of
experience, is not the only difficulty with which
testimony to the extraordinary has to contend. A
more insidious fallacy lies in first regarding facts
as improbable or impossible on the ground of
absence of evidence, and then, when evidence is
offered, refusing to look at it on the ground of this

264 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

very improbability or impossibility. That edu-
cated persons, otherwise trustworthy, testify to
marvels, is expressly made a ground for under-
valuing their testimony, in weighing it against the
improbability of the fact. The argument is briefly
this: ‘The fact is so improbable that extremely
good evidence is needed to make us believe it ; and
this evidence is not good, for how can you trust
people who believe in such absurdities ? * I do not
mean that the circularity of the reasoning is often
so explicitly brought out ; it can easily be con-
cealed by a little expansion ; but that these are
the lines along which many minds unconsciously
work I am quite confident. Nothing else will
explain the carelessness or unfairness with which
some of our own evidence has been treated, by
critics not habitually careless or consciously unfair.
I may refer to a single recent instance where the
common objection to a chain of deductive reason-
ing — that it is as weak as its weakest link — was
suddenly brought to bear on the inductive method,
and the Saturday Review discovered that a
collection of items of evidence is as weak as its
weakest item. Somehow or other the evidence
must be disallowed — that is the instinct which is
at the bottom of such a piece of criticism; any

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 26 $

evidence tending to prove the improbable fact
thereby forfeits its claim to respect. Now clearly
the value of the evidence ought t6 be judged, in
each case, not by what it tends to prove, but by
considering the facilities for observation or mal-
observation, and the capacity and character of the
observers. The improbability that the evidence
shall be false has as good a claim to be iudepend-
ently estimated as the improbability that the fact
shall be true. The more completely the fact lacks
analogies among previously-known facts, the
stricter, of course, must be our requirements as to
the amount and conditions of the evidence ; if we
could mark on a scale the degrees of evidence
necessary to establish various facts, then, the newer
the fact, the higher must the line be drawn. But
even for the newest facts, at any rate in cases
where the conditions of observation are simple,
the evidence-line remains far lower than is often
realised. Taking the case of onl/ six witnesses
who will speak the truth, and for each of whom
the chance of being deceived ' under the given

* What the chance of being deceived is may be a matter unex-
pectedly difficult to decide, and requiring very special investigation,
A novel and elaborate proof of the extent to which intelligent per-
sons may be deceived by skilful conjuring, under conditioas which
appeared to them to make deceit impossible, will l>e found in the

P,66 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

conditions is one to ninety-nine, Babbage deduces
that the improbability of their independent concur-
rence in testifying to what is not a fact is five
times as great as an assumed improbability of two
hundred thousand millions to one against the
marvel which they are supposed to attest. This
method of quantitative estimation is not wholly
satisfactory ; but it may fairly be pressed to the
point of showing what a very small amount of
good testimony — under simple and definite condi-
tions of observation — is sufficient to outweigh the
whole argument from the previous universal
absence of experience. The improbability of the
fact might be quite fairly • represented as the
improbability that this testimony would ever be
forthcoming for it : when the testimony is forth-
coming, no deduction can be made from it on the
ground of the improbability of the fact. That im-

papers above referred to, in vol. iv. of the Proceedings of the
Society for P^ychUal Rescan h ; and shows the inherent rottenness
of the evidence on which the huge fabric of modem Spiritualism has
principally rested. On this account, while gratefully acknowledging
how much this part of my Essay ow^es to the previous enforcement
of the same principles of evidence by my friend, Mr. C. C. Massey,
1 must express my total dissent from the application whidt he has
made of them to Prof. Zollner’s experiments with the notorious
medium, Slade. (See Appendix A. to his translation of Zdllner’s
Transcendental Physics,)

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 367

probability has already been counted once, in fixing
the amount and the conditions of the evidence
required ; there can be no excuse for counting it
again.

It would be easy to trace out this circular
fallacy further ; and it is at the root of most of the
prejudice which our work encounters, I may just
point out one other form which it is sometimes
found to assume. ' It is improbable or impossible
that these facts should occur,’ our opponents
say, ‘for if they were in rerttm nature, it is im-
probable or impossible that they should not have
occurred before'. Nature i.s uniform.' Yet when
we venture ourselves to illustrate this uniformity of
Nature — when we take such a case as apparitions
at the time of death, and point cut that the human
race have always been hearing of them — ^we are
told that we ought to be ashamed, in this age, of
reviving the discredited superstitions of the past.
That is to say, certain events cannot be believed
to happen now, because they did not happen then ;
and they cannot be believed to have happened
then, because they do not happen now.

I will conclude with a comment on two less
obvious topics, which have had an important place
in die present controvert.

268 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

I. Considerable injury has been done to the
argument for the credibility of novel events by
Babbage’s illustration of the calculating engine.
This machine produced a series of similar results
long enough to persuade any intelligent looker-on
that the production of such results was the law of
its being, a uniformity which it could never trans-
gress — when suddenly the series was interrupted
by a single isolated exception, after which it re-
sumed its former regularity. Now this illustration
no doubt contains a true analogy to natural pro-
cess, in opposition to tlie vulgar conception of
miracles ; for the complete law of the machine, the
set of causes which in time produced the excep-
tion, was, of course, in unbroken operation from
the beginning. But the mind recoils from the idea
of such sudden and complete exceptions. We de-
mand some perceptible graduation of causes — that
some qualitative resemblance shall be perceptible,
at any rate after the new event has been observed,
between it and other events which preceded it
We perceive no analogies for the supposition that
underneath the play of natural forces, as observed
with all our skill and patience, there is a modifica-
tion of conditions of which the course of events
shows no sign except in one catastrophic moment

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 269

— a stealthy approach to something which,, when it
happens, will present no kinship with other obser*
vations. If the arrangement which contains such
exceptions cannot be pronounced priori im-
possible, the deceptive cunning of it is alien to our
conception of Nature as a s}rstem in which, as we
gradually extend our knowledge, continuity and
the inter-connection of processes become more
and more apparent Ail our experience of novel
discovery as further confirming the uniformities
of Nature, by lighting up vast tracts of it and
enabling us to explain past events and to predict
future ones, confirms our instinct in this respect ;
and negatives a line of invisible events issuing in
a visible event which throws light neither back-
wards nor forwards, recalling no comprehensible
intimations of itself in the past, and as to the
future leaving us in the dark as to how many more
such shocks may not be in store for us. The con-
tinuous latency for us of a condition which in itself
is entirely on a par with the host of patent con-
ditions — of a condition which exhypothesi has been
at work in the very events that we have been ob-
serving, and is not a new supernatural factor sud-
denly imported into a natural order — is, in fact,
almost impossible to conceive as part of the un-

370 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

assisted play of Nature. We, the observers, being
part of Nature, and the orderly Nature known to
us being a Nature in relation to our faculties, the
supposed persistent absence of the relation in one
out of the myriad interconnected lines of natural
process inevitably suggests a previous winding-up
of us and of things to tliat result, a sort of pre-
established absence of harmony — or a pre-esta-
blished harmony between this particular line of
proce.ss and our own powers of persistently over-
looking it. The more we try to picture so sheer a
breach between Nature and our comprehension of
her, the more persistently (to borrow Clifford’s
phrase) will an inward monitor of which we can
give no account whisper ‘ Bosh ! ’ And it is hardly
necessary to point out how strongly the natural
instinct here is confirmed by the modem doctrine
of evolution — opening up as it does to the imagina-
tion almost limitless possibilities of novelty, while
at the same time it connects perception of law in
the veiy widest way \vith perception of tetidetuies^
which were just what Babbage’s machine con-
cealed.

2. As r^ards ‘impossible hypotheses ’—there
are two hypotheses w'ith regard to Nature which
can be pronounced impossible in an d priori way

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 271

with a quite unique degree of certainty ; the hy-
potheses (i) that matter, and (2) that energy, can
be destroyed or created. But if we examine into
the ground of this uniqueness, it seems to be this —
that while all carefully-tested experience has been
that neither matter nor energy has been destroyed
or created, toe cannot even picture to ourselves an
e:^rieticc which would prove the reverse. Of any
other event which we are accustomed to hold im-
possible, we can future to ourselves the proof.
We can picture a man 50 feet high ; and if enough
accurate observers had examined him, we should
hold his existence to be proved. We can picture
a pencil writing without visible support ; and if
the testimony to it reached a certain level, such an
occurrence would have to be admitted as a reality.
But in respect of the two hypotheses above-named,
the utmost we can picture is an experiment where
matter or energy would appear or disappear, in
the sense of transcending our mean^of ascertaining
how it arrived or what had becomeTof it. Now
suppose the most delicate and exhaustive physical
means to be applied, and to fail to account, say,
for the disappearance. Our choice of h}q)otheses
would then lie between destructibility and some
explanation which might, /rvmd facie^s&cm equally

^^2 THE NATURE OF EVIDENCE

vnld, such as the passage of matter through matter.
But in the absence of any reasonable ground of
decision, the latter hypothesis would be bound to
prevail. For the escape of matter and enetgy in
unobserved ways is familiar to our everyday habits
of thought — e.g. where water evaporates, or where
a stove cools without the room becoming sensibly
warmer ; and this instinct would suffice to turn the
scale in favour of the view that our means for
following them in their course had, after all, not
been exhaustive. So again, no novel exhibition of
energy — not even an apparent ‘ perpetual motion ’
— would convince us that new energy had been
created ; in the extremest case, our instinct of
analogy would lead us to prefer the hypothesis
that pre-existent energy was really at work, though
in some untraceable form. To destroy our con-
viction that matter and energy are invariable in
amount, nothing less than a whole new genus of
experiences would be needed. This observation
is of some importance ; inasmuch as the idea that
the amount of one or the other might vary is per-
petually used, and was used even by Faraday,' to
prove the existence of a vaguely-defined class of
impossible hypotheses, evidence for which must be
* Lectures pn EdutoHm^ pp. 55-6.

IN MATTERS EXTRAORDINARY 273

ruled d priori out of court ; without any perception
of the fundamental difference between these two
hypotheses, which are ‘ impossible * in a strict and
special sense, and the other supposed representa*
tives of the class. Every hypothesis must be
judged on its own merits ; and the character of
this particular pair clearly affords no countenance
whatever either to such general assertions as that
in scientific inquiry ‘ clear ideas of the naturally
possible and impossible* must precede the ex-
amination of facts, — ue. must precede the means
by which alone they themselves can be produced
— or to such special applications of that prindple
as I exemplified above, in the recent attitude of a
distinguished anatomist towards the h}pothesis of
Thought-transference.

VOL. I.

T

274

THE UTILITARIAN ‘ OUGHT. '

In one of the acutest and by far the most amusing
of all speculative works known to me — A Defence
of Philosophic Doubt— Mr. A. J. Balfour says that
' the whole of our morality must be deduced from
general principles which are not, and which cannot
be, themselves inferences from particulars.’ Ex-
panding his view in an Appendix, he defines an
ethical proposition as one ‘which prescribes an
action with reference to an end,’ the fundamental
proposition, or major premiss for any ethical de-
duction. being that such and such an end for me is
final and chosen for itself alone ; and to such proposi-
tions, over and above the character already men-
tioned of being essentially and not inferences

from particulars, he attributes the further character
of beii^ essentially tum-scientife and not based on
experience The great peculiarity of the above
definition of ethical propositions clearly is that it

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ .275

includes non-moral and immoral propositions
equally with moral ones, and gets rid therefore of
the differentia of the latter which has been held to
consist in universal obligation : in other words, ' /
ought to do so and so ’ can only mean * I find or
consider so and so binding on me^ and can never
lead on to ‘ You ought to consider it binding on
youl Nor is there any escape from this conclusion,
if Mr. Balfour’s account of ethical propositions is
exhaustively correct in respect of all systems. My
first object in this Essay is to show that in respect
of at any rate one system, Utilitarianism, it is not
exhaustively correct ; and my mode of doing this
will be by inquiring to what extent the two charac-
teristics above mentioned apply to the basis of that
system — ^that is to say, whether, or in what sense,
the basis of Utilitarianism is (i) non-scientiiic, (2)
general and not an inference from particulars.

Mr. Balfour defines Science as * knowledge of
phenomena and the relations subsisting between
phenomena.’ Roughly speaking, he says, a scien-
tific proposition ‘may be said to state facts or
events real or hypothetical,’ which description, he
holds, does not apply to a proposition announcing
obligation. ‘ I ought to speak the truth ’ ‘ does not
announce an event ; and if some people would say

276 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

that it stated a fact, it is not certainly a fact eithier
of the “ external ” or of the “ internal ” world,’ i.e.
either of physics in the widest sense or of psychology.
Now the proposition ‘ I ought to speak the truth ’
is clearly with most thinking persons only a con-
clusion from some more fundamental proposition ;
the major premiss of the implied syllogism being,
for the Utilitarian, ‘I ought to do that which
promotes the greatest happiness,' or some kindred
phrase. My contention, then, is that this Utilitarian
major premiss is not simple, but compound ; and
that it is made up of two simple elements, an ulti-
mate fact and an ultimate axiom, which fact and
axiom are both in nature entirely scientific.

Before examining them, I may concede at once
that the basis of the system, as commonly stated,
does undoubtedly come within the range of Mr.
Balfour’s description : for reasons which will appear
as we go on, however, I should be glad to begin by
stating it in this form, and examine the results,
before stating it in my own. As commonly con-
ceived, then, the fact may be thus expressed : — I
find my happiness to be a desirable end ; and as
multitudes agree with mein this experience, it may
be further asserted that the happiness of each of
these individuals is in the same sense a desirable

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 2/7

■eftd. We now come to the axiom, which may be
put thus -the happiness of A, and that of B, and
that of C, being each in the same sense a desirable
end, the happiness of A plus the happiness of B is
more of a desirable end, or a more desirable end,
than the equal happiness of C. Now at this point
an ought clearly comes in ; for I should say that
any one considering the case, ought to admit the
truth of this axiom. And in using such terms, I
at any rate can limit myself to the same meaning
as when I say that any one who considers whether
a whole is greater than its part ought to decide in
the affirmative. That which Mr. Balfour holds
to be the differentia of ethical, i.e. according to
him of non-scientific, propositions, I hold equally
applicable to the axioms of Mathematics, each of
which is by implication ‘ a proposition announcing
obligation, which itself requires no proof ; and
equally in their case the assertion«of obligation, if
denied, leaves the asserter without any argumen*
tative reply. Practically, I should say that the
■chances of denial are equally remote in the two
cases ; that eveiy one who finds happiness to be
desirable at all, will, on exercising his reason,
perceive the happiness of the greater number to be
more desirable than that of the smaller ; and that

278 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

though, if he be C and an egoist, he may prefer C’s
happiness to the similar happiness of A and B, his
reason can have no part in that preference, in which
he will not expect any impartial and rational
fellow-creature to concur.

Why, then, is the Utilitarian system, as thus
based, open to the charge of being non-scientihc ?
The usual answer of course would be that in
passing beyond the theoretic statement, and bring-
ing the axiom of greater desirability into relation
to amduct, we introduce a sense of duty which is
essentially non-scientific. I shall have to speak of
this further on ; and will only here remark that the
answer at any rate does not seem open to Mr.
Balfour ; who, clearly perceiving Ethics to be con-
cerned not with the causes but with the reasons
for action, has pointed out that it would remain
wholly unchanged if not a single man ever had
done or ever could do right. Duty surely implies
possibility. But waiving this, and deferring the
question whether in relating the ought to action
we shall really affect its scientific character, I want
first to show how, even restricting it to theoretic
ground, we still cannot thereby make our system
scientific. For though the axiom be scientific, the
fact to which it was applied is not. As above

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

279

given, the direct axiomatic judgment that the
happiness of the greater number ought to be prf
ferred as the more desirable end, presupposes that
the happiness of each individual is already abso-
lutely desirable, in the sense not of that which is
desired or capable oi being desired, but of that which
ought to be desired.' And this primary judgment,
that happiness ougftt to be desired, is an ethical and
not a scientific judgment. The ought Ranting that
it can be legitimately used) is of a totally different
sort from the scientific ought which came in with

' This distinction, as is well known, was overlooked by Mill,
who assumos as self-evident that that is * desirable * which * people
do actually desire ’ ; and thus, alter showing that what each desires
for himself is a good, that this good is happiness, and so that gene*
ral happiness is a * good to the aggregate,’ he can imagine himself
to have given a complete proof that the general happiness is what
each individual ou^ht to desire. Mr. Balfour’s expressions seem
open to a similar charge of ambiguity, llis assertion that the fun-
damental ethical proposition of every ethical system states an end
which an adherent of that system * regards as final-~as chosen for
itself alone,’ can only be reconciled with the statement (which Mr.
Balfour rightly calls tautological) that ethical propositions announce
obligation, by taking the words * chosen for itself alone * as ' one
which he ou^ to choose for itself alone.* The fundamental propo-
sition, according to the literal meaning of Mr. Balfour’s words,
would lack, and lead to deductions lacking, any ethical or obliga-
toiy character at alL How, for instance, is ' I choose my own
pleasure for itself alone* other than a scientific statement of pure
fact ? And even if I say * I cannot help so choosing,* it is a scien-
tific statement of compnlrion, not an ethical statement of obUga*

280

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT"

the axiom ; the fact of the difference being as in*
tuitively felt as the sense of the ought in either
case. Is it possible then to find some other way
of basing the Utilitarian system, which shall con-
tain no ought except the axiomatic one ? It seems
to me that this may be done as follows.

We must first get our primary fact so stated as
to keep clear of the confusion between ‘ the desired *
and ‘ the desirable." How will ‘ I feel a desire for
happiness’ serve ? It sounds sufficiently undeniable,
but on examination it in turn proves to be ambig-
uous. It may mean, ‘ I feel a desire for happiness
quA happiness \ ’ or, it may mean, * I feel a desire
for happiness qtiA mine,* Which of these two quite
different meanings is the true one? To answer

this question I must ask another. Do I desire your
happiness as well as and apart from my own ? If I
do, I am forced to conclude that it is happiness qud
happiness, not quA mine, which is for me the desired
par excellence^ or the general end of action ; for
while my seeking my happiness apart from yours
(which I often do) is quite compatible with the
hypothesis that happiness quA happiness is my end,
my seeking happiness apart from mine (which

sometimes do) is quite fncompatible with the
^ypothesis that happiness quA mine is my end.

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 28 1

Now, as a matter of fact, I do desire your happiness
— not in the least because I ought, but because I
cannot help it I desire it, moreover, apart from
my own — apart, that is, from any sympathetic
j>leasure which the gratification of the desire might
bring me ; for I should desire it even if I knew
myself to be on the brink of annihilation. This,
then, I take as the primary fact required ; and if I
were the only person whose morality was concerned,
I might proceed instantly to my argument. But,
as I am writing for others, it is necessary to point
out that, as far as I have got, every one of my
readers practically agrees with me. For the pro-
position, ‘ I feel a desire for your (or for the general)
happiness,’ is one which only those could be held to
deny who, if convinced that the general happiness
could be secured by their lifting a finger, would
refuse to do so. A thoroughly selfish person may
be an altruist^ as long as no sacrifices are demanded
•of him ; and the immense amount, the immense
preponderance it may be, of unreflective egoism
in the world is perfectly compatible with the fact
that, with those who reflect at all, the altruistic
Attitude is the normal one. It is commonly not by
ddiberate choice as against the general happiness
that a piece of egoistic happiness is preferred, but

282 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

by keeping the idea of the general happiness out
of sight ; or, in many cases, by some such ‘ flatter-
ing unction ’ as, e.g., that the suffering which might
be alleviated, at the cost of some indulgence of
one’s own, is so infinitesimal a drop in the ocean o(
misery as to make the sacrifice quixotic. This
voluntary blindness or self-deception does not, as a
rule, outlive the actual moments of gratification ;
and the perpetual reversion, in the intervals of life
between, to the impartial and reflective standpoint
of the general end, cannot but give to such mo-
ments the air of aberrations.

And now to proceed. The primary fact is,

‘ I feel a desire (not only for my but) for your
happiness.’ This statement is clearly psycho-
logical and scientific, announcing no obligation.
A similar description applies to the more ex-
tended form ‘ I feel a desire for the general happi-
ness,’ which is just as much an assertion of scientific
fact as ‘ Sugar gratifies my palate.’ For simplicity’s
sake let me reduce this latter form to * 1 feel a
desire for the happiness of x, y, and z, all strangers
to me.’ I now go on to say ‘ I desire the happi-
ness of X andy more than the equal happiness of
£.’ But I now claim to bring in the axiomatic
ought, and say that I ought so to desire ; the fact

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 28 $

which justifies my doing so being simply the fact
that a comparison has been instituted, and an alter-
native presented which needs to be reasonably de-
cided one way or the other.* The sense of axiom-
atic obligation attaches not to the desire where
there is no alternative, but to the preference where
there is an alternative. As long as my or any other
happiness is considered absolutely, I do not feel that
1 can make a distinction between ‘ I might to de>
sire,’ and * I do desire.’ Imagining myself alone on
a desert island, ‘ I feel that I ought to ’ would
simply signify ‘ I mean to ’ ; and if there had never
been such a thing as comparison or conflict of
interest, if the gratification of every one’s desires
had always been completely compatible with that
of every one else’s, and the gratification of present
desires with that of future ones, 1 do not see how
the idea of an ethical ought could ever have pre-
sented itself : every one who felt a desire for
others’ happiness would have felt'that desire to
be as natural and as little obligatory as I should

’ The comparison may take place even within the limits of
individual experience, t,g. where there is a consdous weighing
of a lesser and nearer against a greater and more remote pleasure,
in cases where we can eliminate the ordinary lurd-in-the-hand
notkm which depends on the comparative uncertainty of the
fatnre.

284 the utilitarian 'ought’

feel my desire for my own happiness to be on a
desert island. I do not think that even the fact
that other people did not share the feeling could
have suggested the judgment that they ought to
share it, inasmuch as ex hypotkesi such absence of
intuition on their part would not have had any
effect in preventing or diminishing any one’s happi-
ness. But as soon as an alternative is presented,
as soon as I am asked whether, of three equal actual
ends of mine, the happiness of x and of y and of ir,
I prefer the result that one should be attained and
two unattained or that two should be attained and
one unattained, I cannot decide on the latter without
at the same time feeling that I am under a reason-
able obligation to decide on it, precisely similar to
that which drives me to admit in any other case that
two is greater than one. It would be nothing to
the purpose to reply that, desire being a mere matter
of fact, not under the control of the will, if any
person were so abnormally constituted as in fact
not to desire the happiness of x and y more than
the equal happiness of xr, the ' ought ’ of Ethics would
not apply to him. My point is that the ' ought ’ of
Science would Belief is as little under the control
of the will as desire ; but, however unable a sane
person was to believe some mathematical axiom, we

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 28$

surely should not hesitate to say that he ' ought ’
to believe it.

And having arrived at this point, I seem to
have reached ground on which I can make myself
the z of the alternative without altering my sense
of obligation. If a particular choice appears reason-
able to me when the letters are merely the symbols
of some three’ real but still unknown individuals,
nothing can make it appear reasonable to me that I
should alter my choice (though very likely I should
alter it) when I find that z is to be m}rself. Had
I known this to begin with, had the question never
been presented to me except with z as nlyself, I
might weli have been unable to apply the axiom,
because there would have been no principle of con-
duct to confront with the very probable fact that
my happiness is actually more desired by me than
that of X and y ; but after passing through the
stage of considering and deciding the alternative
on impartial and purely reasonable ground, I
cannot afterwards, when no change is introduced
except that a particular name, my own, is given to
z, decide differently and at the same time feel that
I am deciding reasonably. If I egoistically prefer
£%, i*. my own, happiness as the end most desired
by me, it is simply an ' I mean to,’ not an ‘ I ought

286 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

to.’ Reason will have nothing to say to it ; that is,
though I may not be acting tmreasonably, I shall
certainly be acting n^n-rcasonably ; just as, to
anticipate a future point, I hold myself to be acting
not unreasonably but non-reasonably in seeking
my own happiness when there is no alternative in
question. And if the one decision is thus non-
reasonable, the other must be reasonable, unless
the alternative admits from me of no reasonable
solution. Nor is there any real illegitimacy in
applying an axiom, and so getting an ought, on the
understanding that a certain thing (the happiness of
X and y) is the thing actually by me more desired,
and retaining the ought even when that thing has
become, it may be, the thing by me less desired.
For there is nothing essential to the reasonableness
of the comparison and the validity of the decision
in the fact of its being my own particular mind in
which the compared desires — the actual terms of
the comparison — as well as the comparison itself,
take place. The decision that of two things which
are essentially ends, the greater, that which
has most end-stuflf in it, must quA end prevail —
that in reason the end cannot but be preferred for
which there is actually going the greater amount
of desire — if valid when the lesser end and the two

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 38 /

-which together make up the greater end are all
desires of mine, loses nothing of its axiomatic
cogency, by a change in the mental habitat of one
or more of the desires ; any more than the axiom
‘things which are equal to the same thing are
equal to one another* loses in cogency by a change
of the position in space of some particular trio of
equal things. The perception of the more end-stuff,
the more of that the essence of which is to direct
action, cannot be affected by the fact that the less
with which it is compared has its place in my mind,
and through that momentary proximity looks more
to me.

To this reasoning it has not unnaturally been
objected ' that my use of the word ‘ end ’ involves
the same ambiguity as we found lurking in the word
‘ desirable ’ ; that my ‘ end ’ slips over from fact to
duty — from that which is to that which ought to be
desired ; and that if ‘ more end-stuff* were consis-
tently confined to * that which stir^more desire in
me,* I could never argue anything to have ‘ more
end-stuff in it ’ if in fact it does not stir more desire
in me. I believe, however, that this objection can
be completely met A thing which is not at the mo-
ment most desired may yet have ‘more end-stuff in

' By Mi« Martin (Mn. James Ward), in Mind, vol, vii p. 556,

288

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

it/ in virtue of its conformity to a larger general
end ; and this larger end, though in my view strictly
scientific — an ‘ is preferred/ not an ‘ ought to be pre-
ferred ’ — is not necessarily one that is preferred at
every particular moment. It is preferred generally,
not necessarily always. Thus, in calling happiness
quA happiness the general end of action, I mean
neither that it is what otight to be aimed at, nor
what is at any moment desired or most desired r
I mean that it is that with which the idea of ulti-
mate end — of the desired par excellence — is most
profoundly and habitually associated. A man
may say with truth that success at the bar is his
ultimate and pervading end, without implying that
he ought to have adopted that profession rather
than another ; and if he neglects important busi-
ness for a day, and amuses himself in the country',
which is what he that day most desires to do, he
will feel unreasonable, because he has within a
short period of time acted as if two mutually
exclusive things, amusement and success at the
bar, were ‘ the end.’ I feel a similar unreasonable-
ness when I adopt, through egoism, some course
which entails on the whole less happiness, less
therefore ot that which in my habitual view and
by inveterate association is identified with end-

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 389

Stuff. Happiness being posited as the general end,
then, in every alternative which presents a pair
of particular ends, it ought to be seen that that
vdiich entails more happiness is the greater end
— ^has more of what is habitually regarded as
conduct-directing stuff ; and a jar is produced by
conduct which, being directed to what has less con-
duct-directing stuff, would lead an impartial spec-
tator to suppose that the above axiom is not seen.

It is conduct, then, that gives reason a chance.
What my egoism may make it impossible for me
to prefer in my actual desire still remains for me
what it is reasonable to aim at in my conduct—
which, to be reasonable, must follow my axiom
and not my accidental desire ; the difficulty of
keeping my axiom in the form ‘ought to prefer
or desire’ something which, it may be, I cannot
prefer or desire being relieved just by this power of
preferring in conduct — by this possibility of con-
verting the ‘ought to desire’ into ‘"ought to aim
at’ If the axiom were confined to desire, to the
exclusion of conduct it might be represented that
derire and volition, with their tendency to act in-
dependently of reason, produce in any axiom into
which they enter an essential difference from other
quantitative axioms. For while one can say not

VOL. 1. u

290

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

only that the whole ought to be acknowledged as
greater than its part, but that to any individual at
any moment it actually appears so, one cannot say
that to oneself at any moment one’s own desire
for the larger total of happiness actually appears
greater than one’s desire for one’s own particular
bit ; but only that the total end, when viewed from
the reflective standpoint to which the mind habit-
ually reverts, must be acknowledged as greater.
For the moment egoism may make it appear less ;
and if it were then impossible for me to acknow-
ledge it greater, the scientific character of the
axiom that I ought so to acknowledge it would
certainly suffer ; but conduct gives me a means of
showing, and of knowing, that I acknowledge it
greater, even in the teeth of my own egoistic desire.

Here, then, we seem to have got what we
sought, a Utilitarian basis with no ought in it
except the scientific or axiomatic one. And it is
a basis suitable to all conditions of mind except
one. If any one starts with an ethical (non-
scientific) intuition that happiness ought not to be
desired, the scientific proposition (which he might
perfectly accept) that if he dws desire it he ought
in reason to prefer the less to the more, would
not be a principle of conduct; for the scientific

THE UTILITARIAN ^ OUGHT' 29I

ought ’ could have no ethical validity against the
prior ethical * ought not' But it cannot be argued,
conversely, that for the scientific ‘ ought ' to have
ethical validity there must be a prior ethical intui-
tion that happiness oug^ht to be desired ; all that is
required is the absence of the contrary intuition.
Given a man to whom happiness is the desired par
excellence^ and who is aware of no intuition that
conflicts with his desire^ and we can at once call on
him to prefer the greater to the less.

The prevalent instinct that the obligation of
assent is radically different in the case of ethical
and of : cientific principles seems to depend on
this — that in asserting that we believe scientific
axioms we rarely have occasion to add distinctly,
even in thought, the words ‘ and so ought you ' ;
whereas in asserting ethical axioms, those words
represent as a rule what is most prominent in our
intention. For in the subject-matter of Science
there are never any temptations for men to set at
nought the rational axioms, which are therefore
accepted practically as well as theoretically. But
in the subject-matter of Ethics such temptations
are numerous ; and we seek to bring other people's
actions into conformity with our principle, by
keeping perpetually before their eyes the fact that

292 the utilitarian ‘ought’

theoretically it is also their principle — the principle
which as rational beings they cannot but admit to
state the rational end of conduct, and which there-
fore they can only transgress under pain of run>
ning counter to their reason. But no difference of
nature is here implied between the theoretical and
the practical ought ; the former means ‘ must hold,
as a rational being ’ ; the latter means ‘ must do,
under pain of running counter to reason ’ ; which
clearly in no way extends the meaning of the obli-
gation. Ends are of course essentially different
from anything else, such as iron, which can be
quantitatively estimated, and there must accord-
ingly always remain a sense in which the differ-
ence between an axiomatic statement of duty and
an axiomatic statement of fact may be called es-
sential ; but this difference Ues in the sufy'ect-matt^
to which the axiomatic ought is applied, not to the
form or oughtuess. I do not of course deny that
the meaning of the practical ought may be ex-
tended by Utilitarians, as it is by moralists of
other schools, in such a manner as to justify Mr.
Balfour’s view of its non-scientihe character : all I
am concerned to show is that it can be used in my
sense, and that then the parallelism can be made
complete between the ethical and the scientific

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 393

series of propasitions. ‘ You find (experientially)
that a pound has weight ; you ought (theoretically
and rationally) to hold that two pounds have nuwe
weight ; if you wish to avoid absurdity, you ought
(practically and rationally) to sink a plummet with
the latter rather than the former.’ ‘ You find (ex-
perientially) that the happiness of an individual is
an end ; you ought (theoretically and rationally)
to hold that the happiness of a plurality of indi-
viduals is more of an end ; if you wish to avoid
absurdity, you ought (practically and rationally) to
promote the latter rather than the former.’ In the
second series, no less than the first, the final im-
perative is in form hypothetical : but in the second
it becomes truly categorical, in so far as every one
whose mind acts at all shrinks inevitably from t^e
jar of being consciously absurd. And even if this
imperative were regarded not as supplanting but as
supplementing an fiuj'Ai of purely ethical intuition,
its share in that uniform certainty* which is com-
mon to scientific axioms might still give it very
great practical value. 1 am aware that the value
will be different for different minds — that some to
whom the above view may appear logical (if there
be any such) will still hold that it has no particular
substance or importance. Personally, I should be

294 the utilitarian ‘ought’

hard to convince on this point; inasmuch as I
never consciously prefer or feel inclined to prefer
my own happiness to the greater happiness of
others, without feeling an obstacle in the passion-
less axiomatic reflection that two is more than
one, and that my happiness, since it ' cannot be a
more important part of good, taken universally,
than the equal happiness of any other person,’
ought (from my habitual standpoint as to the end
of action) to be a lesser aim than the greater hap-
piness of any other person or persons. Whether
the axiom, when this latter obligational form is
given to it, ceases to be ‘ scientific,’ is perhaps no
more than a verbal question. The word is at any
rate an intelligible one, to describe that quality
of quantitative axioms which is common to them
all, and in comparison with which any element
that is not common to them all — that differen-
tiates, a quantitative axiom in Ethics from a
quantitative axiom in Geometry — appears quite
subordinate.

But it may be said that there is still one pecu-
liarity of the ethical which, even after the

scientific character of the Utilitarian proposition
has been carried as far as I have carried it, re-
mains irreducible ; the fact, as expressed by Pro--

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT* 29

fessor Sidgwick, that an ethical proposition is
' inseparably combined with an impulse to action
of a peculiar kind, which it is necessary to distin-
guish from non-rational desires or inclinations * ;
that the cognition of rightness is ‘ the cognition of
a dictate or precept of Reason,’ which phrase
‘ implies that in rational beings as such this C(^-
nition of rightness gives an impulse or motive to
action.’ Now this impulse or motive to action
can clearly only exist for me in relation to my
own action ; so that if its presence is made essen-
tial to the Utilitarian proposition quA ethical, I
shall never be able to use that proposition either
generally, as ‘ The greatest happiness ought to be
aimed at,’ or particularly, in the second person, as
‘ You ought to aim at the greatest happiness.’ I
do not think, however, that Professor Sidgwick
would allow the essential difference, implied in
Mr. Balfour’s view, between ought in the first and
ought in the second person ; and in diat case, as I
can see here no via media betw'een Mr. Balfour’s
view and my own, I conceive that Professor Sidg-
wick’s sentences must be susceptible of interpre-
tation in a sense conastent with the essentially
scientific character of the Utilitarian proposition,
even as used in the first person. I should say,

296 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT

then, that the scientific character of that proposi-
tion is not affected by the mere fact of its bang
combined with an impulse. The judgment ‘ This
smell is disagreeable ’ is inseparable from an im-
pulse to get away from the smell, but it is none
the less a scientific proposition ; and the difference
between such a proposition and the Utilitarian one
lies simply in the latter’s having an end as its
subject-matter, and so stating, as scientifically
reasonable, the precise fact which the impulse
repeats : ‘ 1 ought, scientifically, to recognise the
superior dimensions of a certain end, and my
impulse corresponds with my cognition.’ Not
that I would deny to the ethical proposition, as I
perpetually make it, a peculiarity intuitively felt
as such, and transcending the ground of scientific
assertion even when that assertion is taken as inclu-
sive of an impulse ; but that peculiarity does not
for me reside in the proposition quA proposition,
but in the further mental condition in whidi it is
often affirmed. As the above-mentioned impulse
does not present itself in the ‘ You ought ’ but only
in the '/ oiight,’ so I should say that this further
peculiarity does not present itself even in the ‘7
ought,' till that proposition is more or less deli-
beratdy and definitely related by me to my actual

THE UTIUTARUN ‘OUGHT’ 397

iuture conduct ; the peculiarity then consisting just
in what was noticed above, a unique sense of jar
and conflict if conduct and reason are allowed to
fall out of unison — ^an ultimate dislike to allow
conduct to become unreasonable, such as I And
otherurase exemplified in my refraining several times
a day from doing some perfectly indifferent and
trivial action, the idea of which comes across me,
but of which I simply feel that its purposeless per-
formance would lack rationality. And it seems to
me tliat I am justified by Professor Sidgwick himself
in thus assuming the sufficiency in Ethics of reason-
ableness and unreasonableness as essential and ulti-
mate notions. For in considering the strange per-
sistency of the question ‘ Why should I do what I
see to be right ? ’ and in accounting for it most
happily by showing that several different views of
the ultimate reasonableness of conduct exist side
by ride in the thought of ordinary men, so that an
answer from one point of view alwhys allows the
questmn to slip round again from another, he
seems to imply that, could these views of ultimate
reasonableness be harmonised or reduced to one,
the question ‘ Why should I do what I see to be
right ’ would be set at rest — which in turn most
«irdy imply that , the judgment ‘ I ought ' need

298 THE UTILITARIAN 'OUGHT’

not be in essence an}^ing more than ultimatel}r
reasonable, however peculiarly coloured in the
process of relating it to one’s actual conduct. I
may further suggest that, on Professor Sidgwick’s
view that the desire for one’s own happiness, or
‘ rational self-love,’ is one ultimate principle, and,
as such, inclusive of the ‘peculiar’ ethical impulse
‘which it is necessary to distinguish from non-
rational desires and inclinations,’ this impulse must
after all have such an enormous range of application
that its peculiarity will not prevent its being rather
the rule than the exception.

To return now to our analysis of the Utilitarian
proposition : we have seen how it is in the super-
vention of the axiom on the primary fact of expe-
rience that the scientific ought comes in ; but I
should say further that this, too, is the point at
which the proposition becomes rational, as opposed
(not to irrational but) to «^«-rational. Thus, when
Mr. Balfour expresses his view of the non-scien-
tihc character of ethical propositions 1^ saying
that ‘the rational basis’ of any ethical system
‘ must be something other than an experience or
a series of experiences,’ I am able to endorse his
words ; only I should apply them similarly to
many sdentific systems. I imagine that the basis

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT' 299

of any system dealing with quantities, in order to
be rational, must include more than mere facts
of experience, such as ‘Stones have weight,* or
‘ Happiness is a desired end.’ It must include
at least one axiom : that is, it must include some-
thing in which the mind does more than merely
receive and record ; something in which it is
active, even though the activity be no more than
trying to conceive the opposite and finding itself
baffled in the effort. In Ethics the primary expe-
riential basis, that happiness is an end, becomes
rationalised only when I superpose the axiom, and
assert that the happiness of the greater number
must be acknowledged a more abundant end than
that of the smaller. Similarly the fact of expe-
rience that a cubic foot of iron has weight only
becomes part of a rational basis for mechanics
when we superpose some axiom, and say, that
two such cubic feet must be acknowledged to have
more weight ; not till then can we perceive power
to be economised by a lever which makes use of
the former to raise the latter. Another considera-
tion is this: if the mere taking happiness as an
end is to be held reasonable, a mollusc often shows
itself reasonable ; wlule yet, as we do not attribute
to it reason, its reasonableness is a matter not

300 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT*

of its but of our perception. It is surely best to
avoid language which would thus drive us to pre-
dicate a reasonableness divorced from reason and
unknowable by its possessor.

It will be seen that to limit the use of the word
rational in the way I suggest is not by any means
to make Utilitarianism the only strictly rational
system. For, in the hrst place, the intuitions
which can strictly be called rational are not con-
fined to quantitative axioms. Thus the ultimate
mode of inference of the ordinary syllc^ism is
rational, and its validity matter of universal
intuition ; so that any ethical basis which can be
represented as the necessary conclusion of such a
syllogism will be at least formally rational, what-
ever its premisses may be. For instance, ‘The
messi^e of revealed religion emanates from Omni-
science ; the rules of revealed religion as to what
we ought to do are part of its message ; therefore
the rules of revealed religion as to what we ought
to do emanate from Omniscience, from a
source whidi knows what we ought to do ; ’ or, in
other words, we ought to do what revealed religion
prescribes. Here the non-scientihc ediical ‘ ought ’
is not got rid of; but the intuition respect!^ it
being shifted from us to Omniscience, I have to

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT* 3OI

admit that, so far as the major premiss of the
^Uogism is to anyone as certain an intuition (or
a exclusion from intuitions as certain) as that
happiness is an end, his ethical basis is as ‘rational’
as mine, and he can equally demand that all who
agree as to his premisses shall accept it. And the
basis being the conclusion from a syllogism, Mr.
Balfour’s assertion that the several principles at the
base of all ethical systems must of necessity be
underived and require no proof, certainly seems to
require some proof of its own. In the second
place, the quantitative axiom itself is of coarse
applicable to the primary statement of something
other than happiness as the desired end, e^. perfec-
tion : but the number of those who adopt the basis
of Perfectionism, while clearly distinguishing it
from that of Utilitarianism, is so small as to be
safely neglected. It may thus, I think, be said
that only in the Utilitarian system can an ex-
tremely common individual experience of feeling
be supplemented and universalised by the axiom
or intuition of reason, and the ‘ I ought ’ thus pass
over directly to the ‘ You ought’

According to this view, I should avoid using
rational to mark the distinction drawn by Professor
Sit^^ck between tlie two principles of Eristic

302 THE utilitarian ‘OUGHT’

Hedonism. ‘If the Egoist strictly confines him-
self to stating his conviction that he ought to take
his oum happiness or pleasure as his ultimate end,
there seems no opening for any line of reasoning
to lead him to Universalistic Hedonism as a first
principle. . . . When, however, the Egoist offers,
either as a reason for his egoistic principle, or as
another form of stating it, the proposition that his
happiness or pleasure is Good, not only for him
but absolutely, he gives the ground needed for
such a proof. For \vc can then point out to him
that his happiness cannot be a more important
part of Good, taken universally, than the equal
happiness of any other person,’ That is to say,
the latter position is plainly irrational ; but on
what terms can the former be called rational .> In
the case of that lusus naturee, a person wholly
devoid of the altruistic instinct, or in the case of an
Altruist living on a desert island, it might seem
pedantic to object to calling his exclusive seeking
of his own happiness rational, though I should still
prefer not irrational', but even in such extreme
conditions, I should not see the rationality of his
saying that he ought to seek it. Waiving the ob*
jection above suggested that he could not truly
feel he ought to in any sense distinct from he means

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 3O3

io, and granting for the moment that he could so
feel, what is there, I ask, in point of riUionedityXo^ViF-
tinguish that feeling from the feeling of warmth or of
hunger ? Is any safe ground of definition to be
found for rational^ if once we allow the extension
of the word to propositions which do no more
than state an individual experience, and to which
no assent of others can be ‘ rationally ’ demanded ?
And certainly no assent of others could be ration-
ally demanded for a proposition which would in
itself be just as much non-rational when made by
them as when made by him. Assent of others can
only be rationally demanded for axioms which.
Just because the assent can be demanded, wc call
scientific ; and we have seen that the ideal Egoist
— one whose ‘ primary fact ’ is that he feels no
desire for any happiness except his own — affords
no chance for any such axiom to be applied.

This same distinction of rationajity, and so of
universality, will of course mark off any Utilitarian
proposition from the ncm-moral and immoral ones
which are included with it in Mr. Balfour's defini-
tion of the essence of an ethical judgment. The
connection between obligation and rationality (in
the strict sense wdiich I have been defending)
reinstates the connection which he disowns between

304 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

the obligation of a moral law and its unvoersedityt
in the sense that all intelligences ought to r^ard
themselves as bound by it He says we may
dismiss this connection, because it amounts to
saying that there is a moral law obliging all intelli>
gences to be bound by other moral laws, and that
this law would need in turn another moral law
behind it, so that we should be committed to an
infinite series. But, according to my aigument,
the assertion that ‘ all intelligences ottght to regard
themselves as bound’ is not a moral law but a
scientific assertion ; provided that for ‘all intelli-
gences ’ we substitute ‘all intelligences which share
the primary non-ethical intuition that happiness as
such is a desired end.’ The substituted words will
not suggest to the Utilitarian a very large conces-
sion, part of his business being to prove that they
potentially include ‘ all ’ ; eg. to show that the
desire for one’s own and others’ happiness is
implicit in motives where its presence is over-
looked, and to dispel prejudices which prevent the
admission of this, by pointing out that the Utili-
tarian principle produces rules of conduct iden-
tical with those approved by holders of would-be
adverse principles; and so far as he succeeds, his
law is universal, just because it is axiomatic and so

THE UTILITARIAK ‘OUGHT’ 30$

in the strictest sense rational And to all who
share that primary intuition about happiness, the
c<^ncy of the law may be immediately asserted,
however little they may have been aware of it ; the
universal cogency of the axiom that the whole is
greater than its part, or that two is greater than
one, being quite unaffected by the fact that some
one has never chanced to bring it to bear on some
particular subject-matter. However many people
took to denying those axioms, those who still held
them would still feel that every one ought to admit
them. And this would involve the rejection of
another of Mr. Balfour’s individualistic dicta,
namely, that ‘to be bound by a moral law is
exactly the same thing as to regard it as binding
on you.’ '

It is worth while to note in passing the point of
practical difference between a state of things where
each individual merely felt it to be his duty to
make the happiness of others his end, which of

' This propoation, which Mr. Balfour again puts forward as
self-evident and without proof, would be still more markedly
contradicted if the syllogistic conclusion above suggested, that the
precepts of revealed religion ought to be obeyed, were a valid
ethical basis ; which depends of course on the truth of the non-
ethical premiss that such reli^on is the voice of Omniscience.
Granting that, the umversal validity of the conclusion would re-
main whcdly unaflected by any individual’s omission to perceive it.

VOL. L X

3o6 the utilitarian ‘ought’

course would be the utmost limit of Utilitarianism
attainable on Mr. Balfour’s principle, and the ideal
of true Univcrsalistic Hedonism, where, with the
same feeling as to his own duty, each would feel
that it was also the duty of others. The sense of
solidarity and security derivable from the sense that
it is incumbent on others to regard my happiness,
seems to me fully as important as that probable in-
crease of my happine.ss through my own altruistic
impulses which has been a hundred times more
dwelt on, and which of course might exist as well
on Mr. Balfour’s principle as on mine.

So much for the question as to the scientihc
and rational character of the Utilitarian proposi-
tion. I pass now to my second question, — in what
way can that proposition be said to be general and
not an inference from particulars } If we recur to
our former analysis, the primary /aci, ‘ I desire your
happiness, or eveiybody’s happiness,’ or ‘I find
such happiness an end,’ is clearly general only in
the sense of shortly summing up a number of par-
ticular cases of my experience, each of them as
certain as the collective statement, which has no
authority beyond their certainty; it is based on
particulars, just as ‘ I find sugar sweet’ is based on
particulars. And as regards the supervening axunw,

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 307

that, the happiness of an individual being an end,
the more the individuals the greater the end, we
have only to apply Mr. Balfour’s own account of
the axioms of Mathematics, where he points out
that ‘ “ two hundred and forty pence and twenty
shillings being each equal to a pound, are equal to one
another,” is one of an indefinite number of similar
self-evident propositions which are described by
saying that “ things which are equal to the same
thing are equal to one another,” ’ but which it would
be absurd to deduce from that general premiss, inas-
much as the individual conclusion is to begin with
as certain as the premiss. The particular cases
of deciding that the greater amount of what is
essentially an end must be acknowledged as more
of an end than the lesser amount, do not derive
their validity from correspondence with the for-
mula ; each is ultimate in itself.

In discussii^ Utilitarianism I have been con-
fining myself so far to the simplest type of the
doctrine. We may of course be called on to decide
questions more difficult than the balancing of
greater and lesser lumps of individual happiness, or
of similar happiness enjoyed by a greater and by a
lesser number ; e.g. the question of balancing the
greater hapfuness of a lesser gainst the lesser

3o8 the utilitarian 'ought'

happiness of a greater number, or the pain of
some against the pleasure of others. There are,
however, noteworthy gradations of difficulty in
such cases, in some of which the scientific cer*
tainty seems quite attainable. For example, the
assertion that for myself I would not endure a
night's toothache for the sake of a day’s walk in the
country, is as completely a statement of psycho-
logical, of scientific, fact as the single terms ' I
like this,* ‘ I dislike that.* As to the mode and
degree in which pleasures and pains can be esti-
mated and compared by the individual like pbts
and minus quantities, this primary psychological
fact may present much that is obscure ; but there
is no obscurity about the fact itself that they are so-
estimated and compared, and that in the experience
of the individual + 6 will not balance — 7. And
when I pass on from the individual experience and
say, and call on others to say with me, that such an
amount of pleasure in A ought not to be purchased
by such an amount of pain in B (a fortiori of course
in a plurality of Bs), I am merely, as in our former
case, supplementing a scientific fact by a scientific
axiom. The obligation of admitting that the want
of balance between the -f 6 of pleasure and the — 7
of pain is independent of the question in what

THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’ 309

particular individual or individuals the pleasure and
pain are exhibited, is precisely on a par with the
obligation of admitting that the necessary equality
in size of things equal in size to the same thing
is independent of the question of what particular
substance the things are made.

The case of weighing the pain of one against
the pleasure of several stands on different ground,
owing to the difficulty here of applying a self-evi-
dent axiom to the data of individual experience.
There would be an opportunity for the ‘ought,’
however, in many cases where the several items of
happiness, distributed over the many people, were
such as could be successively enjoyed by a single
person ; as he could then decide whether he would
purchase the lot for himself at the price of the single
item of pain. For instance, I suppose that a good
many people would purchase half-a-dozen nights at
the theatre by the pain of the extraction of a bad
tooth ; but I doubt if the most enthusiastic play-
goer would purchase a hundred nights at the ex-
pense of the pain of an amputation. On this prin-
ciple I could rationally say that the five minutes’
happiiKss of a thousand people ought not to be
purchased by the five minutes’ misery of one. But
if the question were whether the eternal happiness

310 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

of a thousand might be purchased by the eternal
misery of one, though I should certainly give a
similar decision, I cannot say that any one ought to
agree with me with the immediate ought of rational
intuition. I can only show that neither could one
who differs from me use the ought to me. I should
not, it is true, despair of supporting my opinion here
by the less direct method of showing the obligation
of justice to be a fair deduction from the funda-
mental Utilitarian proposition ; and then maintain-
ing that the only way of bringing justice to bear
on the case would be by confronting in turn each
member of the thousand with the one whose misery
would be the price of his happiness, and deciding in
each case that the price is illegitimate.' But, even
so, questions are easily imaginable which would
admit of no precise mode of decision ; as we see if
we think of the infinite number of degrees between
eg. balancing the prolonged happiness of many
against the minute’s considerable suffering of one
(where I think the former might fairly preponde-
rate), and balancing the month’s moderate cheer-
fulness of many s^ainst the minute’s ^ony of one
(where according to my intuition the former would
kick the beam) ; and just in proportion as this
‘ See above, pp. 26-28.

THE UTILITARIAN ‘ OUGHT ’ 311

uncertainty and probable difference of opinion
exists, I should say that there is no rational basis
for decision. This may seem to be a considerable
concession to Mr. Balfour ; practically, however, I
doubt if it would often prove so.

On another point in Mr. Bajfour’s discussion,
his account of the moralist’s duties, a very few
words will suffice ; since his view here, being en-
tirely consistent with his view of ultimate ethical
propositions, is subject (if I am right) to the same
modifications. Holding the essentially non-scien-
tific and individualistic character of these proposi-
tions, he naturally holds that the moralist is con-
cerned simply with the fact of their existence, not
with the proof of their validity; and that his
function is to help each man clearly to ask and
answer for himself the two questions, ‘ What do 1
hold to be the ultimate ends of action? and — If
there is more than one such end, how do I esti-
mate them in case of conflict ? ’ In respect of the
moral systems whose fundamental propositions
truly answer to Mr. Balfour's description, this
account of the moralist’s chances seems unassail-
able. But so far as Utilitarianism is in the strict
sense rational, as above contended, its preacher
cm of course occupy bimsdf witii the proof of its

312 THE UTILITARIAN ‘OUGHT’

validity, by getting people to apply the axiom we
have been discussing to their individual intuition of
happiness as an end.' Nor do I quite follow this
sentence, — ‘ Above all he (the moralist) must beware
of substituting some rude simplification for (what
may perhaps be) the complexity of Nature, by
deducing (as the Utilitarians do) all subordinate
rules from one fundamental principle, when, it may
be, this principle only approximately contains
actual existing ethical facts,’ These actually exist-
ing ethical facts are, I suppose, the various ends
which individuals actually regard as final. And
if, after the clearing away of all confusions, you
still hold to some other end than mine, I cannot of
course call on you to deduce subordinate rules
from my principle rather than from yours ; but the
actual ends accepted as ultimate are hardly so
numerous that it will argue crude disrespect for
the complexity of Nature if I show that my prin-
ciple is implicitly avowed in, or is the rational ex-
tension of, yours. And as regards the deducing of
subordinate rules for myself and my fellow-Utilita-

* Even a system which would deduce its fundamental principle
from God’s omniscience, as above suggested, gives the moralist
wider scope than Mr. Balfour admits ; for indirectly, at any rate, be
will be occupied with the proof of his principle, in proving the
truth of his non-ethical premiss.

THE UTILITARIAN < OUGHT’ 313

nans, why am 1 to beware of it, any more than of
deducing my geometry from certain intuitions and
axioms which to some one else, for aught I know,
are not self-evident ?

My last point of difficulty is this. Mr. Balfour
says with regard to changes of ethical system, that
'what we mean, or ought to mean, by an improve-
ment in the past, is an approach to our own
standard, and since any change at all corresponding
in magnitude to this in the future must involve a
departure from that standard, it must necessarily
be a change for the worse.’ Now does he mean
for the worse according to the ideas then existing
in the world, or for the worse according to the
view which we, with our present ideas, would take ?
He can hardly mean the former, since (i) there is
absolutely nothing to put the relation between our
successors and ourselves on any different footing
from that between ourselves and our predecessors
beyond whom we think we have nibrally advanced ;
and ( 2 ) according to Mr. Balfour’s own statement,
a superior system of morality means one ‘ which
we ^ould adopt if presented to us’ ; and as our
successors may be expected at least to have
knowledge of our systems, the hypothesis that
they would at the same time cleave to one admit-

314 the utilitarian ‘OUGHT’

tedly inferior is negatived. But if the supposed
future system will only be worse than ours in
the sense that we, with our present eyes, should
regard it as such, I do not see why that need at all
distress us, since it will be better than ours in the
eyes of all whom it will actually concern.

Mr. Balfour might agree so far, though his tone
rather suggests the contrary ; but a more radical
objection is this. His view implies that change
and development of moral systems extends of
necessity to the most fundamental principles.
Even of the past this is only true within limits ;
since much of moral philosophy has been con*
cerned with making actual principles explicit, and
reconciling apparent contradictions. But, what is
more, the process has been increasingly of this
kind ; so that as regards the future I cannot see
why we are driven to imagine any change of the
most radical kind ; why we may not regard the
‘ approach to our standard ’ which has taken place
in the past as likely to continue in the future, and
to be .more and more an approach of practice to
an admitted principle. If the Utilitarian sees the
history of the development of his principle to have
been the gradual making explicit of the primary
intuitions that happiness as such is an end, and

THE UTILITARUN 'OUGHT* 315

that of what is essentially an end the latter amount
must be the larger end — ^what is there to suggest
to him that, if once the principle were universally
acknowledged and acted upon, men would begin
to gravitate away towards some other principle ?
To suppose such a tendency seems something like
supposing that if once Evolution succeeded in com-
pletely adapting species to their environment, it
would then begin to reverse its operations and to
tend towards the survival of the unhttest. Neither
in the evolution of morality nor of physical life has
the condition of stable equilibrium been reached,
and so change has been perpetual. But the change
in the external environment, which, so far as it is
continuous, implies a necessarily unstable equili-
brium in the result of physical evolution, has
nothing corresponding to it in the moral sphere ;
where the changes associated with changing forms
of society have followed no blindly cosmical series,
but (it is surely not too much td say) have been
more and more consciously related to a dimly re-
cognised ideal. Nothing that we can conceive as
happening will make happiness less of an end,
which, so far as attained through social impulses,
is self<onfirmatory and self-propagating.

3i6

MONISM.

Few speculations of recent times have presented
so imposing a view in so small a compass as the
late Professor Clifford’s brilliant paper ‘ On the
Nature of Things -in -themselves.’ When that
paper was first published, I was struck with some
difficulties in the aigument, which I did not subse-
quently see noticed in any of the reviews of its
author’s collected Essays. I did not venture at
once to put them forward, not exactly knowing
how far the theory had been taken seriously : it
seemed at any rate at the time to excite curiously
little attention, for a doctrine which, if right,
would be so neatly and exclusively right, and if
wrong, should apparently be susceptible of easy
and precise confutation. It gradually became
clear, however, that others had long been occupied
with the idea, and believed it capable of great

MONISM

317

development. ' And in addition to this, the tone of
some later criticism on the subject of Spinoza
suggests certain more general difficulties in the
whole position of dogmatic Monism, which may, I
think, gain in force from comparison with those
inherent in Clifford’s peculiar form of it A very
few words of introduction will serve to indicate
the way in which the problem presents itself to
ordinary minds, and the point at which Clifford
takes it up.

I imagine that the stages which the mind
normally goes through, as regards the question of
the existence of things external to the perceiving
consciousness, are these.

The first stage is one which uninstructed per-
sons scarcely ever, I think, get beyond : the un-
questioning idea that the things they see would be
somehow there, lying about in space, whether or
not there had ever been any mind to perceive
them ; that when they are there,' a substance, or a
something, underlies their sensible qualities, and is
quite external to the feeling in the percipient.
Clifford's opinion, on the other hand, is that] the
actematity divined by uninstructed persons is
simply the element of externality in the ‘social
object,’ the conviction that the object is a real or

MONISM

3*8

possible object to other minds outside one’s own.
This view certainly does not agree with my expe-
rience, even as regards persons of good general
education.

The next stage arrives, to most of those w'ho
pass beyond the first stage, when Idealism of the
Berkeleyan type is first presented to them ; and
generally, I think, the first impression is that such
Idealism is a flawless theory of existence. The
more obvious difficulties — that we need an expla-
nation why my sensations and yours often exactly
correspond, i.e. why we simultaneously perceive
the same object ; or again, that objects change in
the absence of minds, i.e. we find their qualities
on successive occasions differing by amounts only
to be reached (as our general knowledge of pheno-
mena teaches us) by gradual steps, which steps
have had no representative in human conscious-
ness and suggest therefore an unknown substance
which is not mind — these difficulties, I say, may
be lexically met by Berkeley’s hypothesis of an
eternal and ubiquitous mind. But Idealism of
this t}^e seems often to be held in a vague and
unphilosophical way by persons of poetical tem-
perament, with whom the all-embracing mind is
rather a notion congenial to their religious in-

MONISM 319

stincts, than perceived to be logically necessary to
the scheme.

By far the most important stage, however, is
reached when a person first realises that each feel-
ing and thought is accompanied by definite move-
ments of brain-substance.' (It will save trouble to
speak throughout as if these inmost nervous pro-
cesses, which indubitably exist, could actually be
perceived by an outside spectator.) As long as
you and I were looking at the same object, and
our parallel streams of feeling thus closely resem-
bled each other, some hypothesis of action of mind
on mind, or of both as reflections of God’s mind,
might possibly seem to account for the resem-
blance, without the supposition of an external

' In the absence of any knowledge of brain, the same stage
would be represented by the recognition of unvarying correspondence
between mechanical and measurable facts, such as vibrations, and
sensuous impressions or secondary qualities, such os those of colour
and sound. But in these days of physiology, all the mechanical
facts arc at once realised as producing and running up to material
changes in the brain ; so that it is with this (downing point of the
material side of the phenomenon that we naturally associate its sen-
sory counterpart. And I cannot but think that this direct localisation
of all the various mechanical counterparts of sensation in one organ,
which every one thinks of as a part of himself, and which has
obviously had its own material development contemporaneously with
the devdopment of consciousness, though it does not logically alter
the puszle of the correspondence, tends to make it far more vividly
reatoble to those who have not technically studied philosophy.

320

MONISM

non-mental reality. But when j>ou watch the
object, and / watch (as I may suppose myself to
do) the movements of your brain, then each item
of your impression of the object, each thing in
jn>ur consciousness, will have a counterpart in an
item of my impression of your brain, which will be
a thing in mjf consciousness : that is, the series of
your feelings will present an exact parallelism,
without the slightest resemblance, to the series of
my feelings. And the total difference of this
parallelism of feelings without resemblance, from
the parallelism with resemblance when we 'were
both looking at the same object, suggests far more
strongly than the latter alone did that the source
of the parallelism is external to our two minds.
The dawn of this notion I should call the dawn of
a philosophical conception of a dualism in mind
and matter, as opposed to the unphilosophical
conception of externality described as the first
stage. That is to say, your brain, with its move-
ments corresponding to yet wholly unlike your
feelings, is the sort of matter in respect of which
that dualism first presents itself in our day as an
urgent philosophical problem.

From what has been said it will readily be
seen that, when we speak of ‘transcending the

MONISM

321

duality of mind and matter/ the word 'matter*
may signify two very different things. It may
signify (A) any and every object in the ex-
ternal world which the senses perceive; or it
may signify (B) the physical oi^anisms — in the
last resort the brains — of the percipients. In
the attempts to transcend the duality, vltiich
have of course made up a great part of the his-
tory of philosophy, sometimes one signification
and sometimes the other has been prominent.
These attempts may be classified roughly under
three heads. Either (i) mind and matter may
be kept parallel, as sides or representations of
some unity common to both : here matter has
usually been contemplated in the A sense, but
by Spinoza also in the B sense. Or (2) matter
may be put behind mind : here the B sense of
mattec has been prominent Or (3) mind may be
put behind matter : here the A sense of matter has
been prominent The actual divisions, however,
are far more numerous. The first mode splits
at once into three. Thus the unity may be
made a substance of which thought and exten-
sion are attributes, as in the theory of Spinoza^
which however has probably now no single literal
adherent Or absolute substance being rejected,

Y

VOL. I.

322

MOmSM

the duality may be transcended, as in modem
Phenomenism, by regarding the two terms in any
external perception as aspects or 'moments’ of
the same fact, which as in consdousness is mental
or subjective, and as in existence is material or
objective. Or again, in the conception of the
unity as a process in which consciousness and
phenomena alike consist in a mutual determina-
tion of subject and object, brought about through
the one reality of Thought, we have the most
popular modern form of Idealism. As thus de-
fined, this last form of the first mode may really
be equally considered a form of the third ; though
to English ears the third mode (as defined by
the putting of mind behind matter) rather sug-
gests the older Idealism, which knows nothing
of these mutual determinations, but makes the
subject merely hold together a series of feelings.
And these Idealistic forms of unity further agree
in the negative characteristic, that they neither
of them recognise the existence and facts of bratn
as the kernel of the whole problem ; they neither
of them reduce the general problem of mind
and matter to the particular problem of mind
and brsun, and thus their solutions, however valu-
able in other ways, leave the prime mystery un-

MONISM

3*3

solved. The second of the above three modes,
on the other hand, the one which puts matter
behind mind, has faced the facts of brain; but
the doctrine founded on that recognition has been
too crude to deserve the name of philosophy.
Its crudest expression of all was the dictum that
thought is a secretion of brain ; and we find
rather a softening of expression than an actual
development of idea in the more recent phrase
that thought is a function of brain — which would
naturally imply that in its relation to the brain
it is on a par, e.g.y with co-ordination of move-
ments. If all that those who use the phrase mean
is that tfic movements of mind are correlated with
nervous processes, they might with equal accuracy,
and less chance of misleading, call brain or rather
brain-movements a function of thought. But at
any rate their position has no claim to be called
monistic ; the name Dualism, apart from any der-
matic theory, having at least the advantage of
keeping the real crux in view.‘ *

' Mr. Spencer and Lewes must be certainly designated Dualists,
though the fundamental Dualism in their case is other than that of
matter and mind or of physical and psychical events. Mr. Spencer
does indeed use the word in the latter sense, as conveniently de-
scriptive of our experience, when he says that we mnst ' rest
•content with that duality of our symbols’ (the physical and the
psychical, Force and Feeting) ’wfaidi our condition necessitates*:

Y a

324

MONISM

We have still remaining, however, another
form of the third mode ; which, while agreeing
with the second mode in its explicit recognition
of the facts of brain, agrees with other forms of

but he still imagines that mental and neural process may really be
' faces of the same thing,* and his philosophical dualism lies deeper.
Ills radical position as a Realist is that * Being is fundamentally
divisible into that which is present to us as mind ’ (and this cannot
but include nervous processes, which arc real or imagined objects in
our mind just as much as any other phenomena) ' and that which,
lying outside of it, is not mind.* We certainly seem justified m
adding, not only not mind, but not even Mr. Spencer’s unknown
< substance of mind * ; since the substance of mind could scarcely be
identified with something ^ lying outside of mind.* The above defi-
nition of Realism seems thus necessarily to drive us to two unknowns,
not the single unknown put forward as a bare possibility in § 63,
and as a certainty in § 273, of the Psychology \ but either way we
equally get a duality, whether between two unknowns or between
the known and the unknown. As regards Lewes, it is perhaps
easier to show that he ought to have considered himself a Dualist
than that he did so. Being far more confident than Mr. Spencer
in his identification of ‘ neural tremors ’ with feeling, and far less
aware of a uniting and permanent something with which no correla-
tion of neural tremors is possible, he is able to hold a large amount
of monistic language : but, believing in an objective world which
does not arise in consciousness, as including that world, objective to
a subject, which does so arise, he equally with Mr. Spencer postulates
an unknowable, in the face of which the monism becomes impossi-
ble to maintain. For we cannot make the neural tremors a con-
necting link between the world which does not arise in consciousness
and the world which does. The phenomena of nerve-matter, as
presented or represented in a mind, must bear precisely the same
relation (which, whatever it is, is not identity) to the including
extra-phenomenal existence as do any other facts of perception.
Mind and flon-mind are thus left confronting one another, without
their duality being in the least affected by the notion of indusioii.

MONISM

325

Idealism in putting mind or something of the
nature of mind in the position of sole reality. It
has lent itself to development at any rate to this
extent, that it has surmounted some of the more
obvious difficulties of Idealism, can be represented,
in Clifford’s words, as ‘a necessary consequence of
recent advances in the theory of perception,’ and
can be stated, as he has shown, with a thorough
air of scientific precision ; his particular state-
ment of it being, I should suppose, by far the
most comprehensible and attractive that has yet
appeared.

I come now to the argument itself. It is dis-
tinctly divisible into two parts. The main aim of
the first part is to prove that every bit of what I
call matter, even inorganic matter, is correlated
with feelings, or rather with ‘ those remoter ele-
ments which cannot even be felt, but of which the
simplest feeling is built up,’ just as facts of that
particular organic piece of matter which I perceive
as your brain are correlated with that infinitely
complex web of feelings which constitutes your
mind ; that in a manner varying infinitely in
complexity, but one in kind, all matter is corre-
lated with ‘mind-stuff,’ just as the most highly

326

MONISM

organised matter that we know of is correlated
with mind. The proof is briefly this : that I am
obliged to infer qects, feelings of yours, things out
of my consciousness, in correspondence with cer-
tain sorts of matter (your brain) ; and as the line
of ascent from inorganic matter to the highly
organised matter of your brain is an unbroken one,
there is no point in the ascent at which I am at
liberty to begin to infer facts out of my conscious-
ness ; and therefore I must infer such facts, in the
shape of mind-stufl* of an extremely elementary
kind, even at the bottom. This method of proof,
I may observe, exactly corresponds with what has
been said above — that brain is the sort of matter
in respect of which the opposition of mind and
matter comes naturally to a philosophic crisis ; it
is from the observed correlation in this particular
case that Clifford argues to every other case, and,
starting thence, is led to credit all matter with
having some mind-stuff belonging to it But to
the argument as it stands, it must be objected that
what is really correlated with mentation is not
cerebral existence, but cerebral change’, so that
the utmost that we could be led to predicate
inert matter would be potentiality of mentation
under certain cotulitions of change. Clifford would

MONISM

3*7

have replied, I suppose, that there is no such thing
as 'inert matter;’ that molecular vibration can
never cease until heat shall have disappeared from
the world. This mode of motion, however, is far
removed from those motions of chemical change
in the brain which are correlated with conscious-
ness. I do not suppose that any chemist or phy-
sicist would assert with confidence that there is
a gradual transition from heat-motions, in matter
whose chemical constitution remains unaltered,
to even simple chemical processes. But at any
rate, when we come to organic matter, a chemical
peculiarity is found of the most specific kind — the
alternations, namely, of waste and repair, the per-
petual breaking down and building up of tissue.
As this peculiarity begins somewhere, the 'line of
ascent ’ from inorganic matter to brain is not ' un-
broken’; and though it might be an assumption
to say that change in matter specialised to this
extent is the necessary condition of mentation, it
must surely be an equal assumption to say that it
is not. Yet such an assumption seems essential
to Clifford’s argument.

The aim of the second part of the paper is to
prove that the mind-stuff, which in the first part
'we have seen reason to think of as going along

328 MONISM

with the material object/ is neither more nor less
than the reality — not a reality but the reality — of
the material object, represented in our minds as
that object ; in other words, that the Universe con-
sists of nothing but mind-stuff, some of which is,
while some is not, woven into the complex form of
minds. The words I have italicised will serve to
mark at once the point in respect of which accept-
ance of the first part of the paper contains no
ground for acceptance of the second. That every
material motion implies an eject, and in that sense
that every object we perceive has mind-stuff going
along with it, all who can accept the earlier argu-
ment must admit. The second part confines all
external reality to this external reality ; and it is
in the independent argument by which Clifford
attempts to prove this latter point that my next
difficulty lies.

He takes as an example a man looking at a
candlestick, and finds in the situation four terms:
{a) the candlestick, an object to me ; {b) the ‘cere-
bral image ’ of the candlestick, *>. the particular
state of man’s brain which is correlated with his
perception of the candlestick — also a (supposed)
.object to me ; {c) the man’s perception of the
candlestick, the ‘ mental image’; {d) the external

MONISH

329

reality to which this perception corresponds.
These are disposed in the following proportion : —

(1) The external reality :

(2) The man’s perception of the candlestick: :

(3) The candlestick as object to me;

(4) The man’s brain as object to me.

He then proceeds to say : — ‘ Now the candlestick
and the cerebral image are both matter ; they arc
made of the same stuff. Therefore the external
reality is made of the same stuff as the man’s
perception or mental image, that is, it is made of
mind-stuff’ The perception, he adds, imperfectly
represents the external reality, as the particular
affection of brain-matter imperfectly represents,
while corresponding point for point with, the phe-
nomenal candlestick.

Now let us substitute, in terms (2) and (4) of
the above proportion, my perception of the candle-
stick and my brain as object to rofi, for the man’s
perception and the man’s brain. The primA facie
objection to this substitution, in that I cannot at
the same moment have the candlestick and my
brain as an object, has no real validity. Practically,
of course, I can no more examine the man’s mole-
cular processes than I can my own : but as 1 know

330

MONISM

they go on, and could be fully described and
delineated were the physical means of examin-
ation adequate, I am at liberty to suppose myself
witnessing them in the case of his brain ; and as
regards my own, nothing more is wanted than
that, since the candlestick itself and my brain as 1
watch it cannot even be supposed to be objects to
me simultaneously, ray brain in that condition
shall be an object subsequently represented to me,
c,g, by accurate descriptions and diagrams. So
the proportion w^ill become: —

(1) The external reality :

(2) My perception of the candlestick : :

(3) The candlestick as object to me :

(4) My brain as object to me.

But (2) and (3) are now identical; so that the
neatness of making out the two first terms to be of
one kind of stuff, and the two last of another, is
found to have depended on the mere artifice of
imagining two people to be concerned instead
of one.^ If it be replied that it is not necessary
for Clifford’s illustration that the two first terms

' CliiTord has himself turned the third person into the first,
apparently without noticing the effect on his argument He then
‘ananges and words the proportion thus : —

MONISM

331

should be of different stuff from the two last, the
answer is obvious. If the relation between the
external reality and the candlestick as object to
me is the same as that between two things, (3) and
(4), which are objects to me, then for me the ex-
ternal reality is itself an object and not an eject —
which is absurd.

But examining further into what is implied in
the proportion, we find more than this to complain

The physical conhgaration of my cerebral image of the object :

The physical configuration of the object : :

My perception of the object (the object regarded as complex of
my feelings) :

The thing-in-itself.

Here the first term (which in the formci case was the fourth, the
order having been inverted) » My brain as object to me ; and the
second term (which in the former case was the third) » The candle-
stick as object to me ; so that again the second and third terms aie
identical, as in the proportion in the text. The wording, and
especially the clause between brackets, tend greatly to conceal this
fact ; but a moment*s thought makes it clear that the * physical
configuration of the object* is my perception of it, including all the
items of impression of which that perception is made up ; and the
'complex of my feelings’ is merely the complete of these same items.
The latter phrase unfortunately suggests, beyond the mere perception
of the object, the various ideas and associations which may be
connected with that particular object, and hence gets an unwarrant-
able appearance of meaning something different from the * physical
configuration.* The existence of such ideas and associations is
clearly quite irrelevant to the argument ; it is just a chance of my
individual experience ; and I may substitute for the candlestick an
object perceived for the first time, in connection with which I had
no previous ideas and associations.

332

MONISM

of. The things in terms (3) and (4) are inter-
dependent : for whatever the mode of relation may
be, we have no evidence that perception of an
object can take place without corresponding brain-
affections. Carrying then this interdependence
into terms (i) and (2), I have to say that the it,
the external reality with which I can never come
in contact, is dependent on my possible perception
of it ; and also that my mind depends for a mode
of its being (for my perception of objects is a mode
of being of my mind) on that whose essential
character it is to be for ever outside it. And the
question then occurs how, qnd mind-stuff, I could
ever become aware of its existence.^

Clifford’s answer is that it is represented in my
mind. The word must not conceal the fact, which
the proportion makes evident, that mind-stuff is
made to act on mind-stuff as object acts on object,
e^, as candlestick acts on brain-matter. Now
object can act on object, or (in the ordinary phrase-
ology) the presence of the candlestick causes cer-
tain affections of my brain, because both candle-
stick and brain belong to the phenomenal or
objective order, ie. to an order of things which are
comprisahle in my single mind, and among which
I find universal relations of sequence and coexist-

MONISM

535

ence, conveniently expressed by words like cause
and law. And the stretch of imagination to con*
ceiving similar relations as existing between my
mind and a reality external to my mind is, of
course, a vast one whatever that reality may be,
and is disguised but not diminished by calling the
mode of relation or action representation. But the
view which refuses to what is ‘ represented ’ as
matter any other reality than that of mind-stuff
introduces a difficulty wholly of its own. For
suppose all matter to become highly organised,
and by a parallel process all mind-stuff to be-
come woven into minds (this being obviously a
quite allowable hypothesis, since the validity of
Clifford’s argument docs not at all depend on
whether some of the mind-stuff in the Universe
does or docs not remain in an elementary con-
dition) ; or if it be thought simpler, imagine that
the amount of reality in the Universe is reduced to
two minds. Each of these, then, is represented in
the other as a material brain, an object of which
we may suppose them (as we h^ve supposed our-
selves throughout) to have complete means of per-
ception. But as a mind, at any rate according to
Clifford’s view of it, is its contents or perceptions
for the time being, each of these perceiving minds,

334

MONISM

according to him, would be a material representa-
tion of the other : therefore each would be a
material representation of a material representation
of itself. But to call this reality is surely to try
to get visible content into two mirrors facing one
another in empty space : or, on the supposition
of a multitude of such minds, into a universe of
mirrors. Such a universe would be as truly empty
as if there were only one mirror — or one mind —
when, on Clifford’s principles, all chance of repre-
sentation and so of reality would be over.

It may seem at first sight as if I had here for-
gotten my claim to know my own brain-move-
ments as objects ; and as if a universal mind,
correlated with a brain which was a materia! repre-
sentation of the Universe, might pass a reasonably
good time in contemplating that remarkable organ.
But such a view assumes the possibilit}' of watch-
ing the brain-process correlated with the very act
tn which it is itself watched. Now this I must
maintain to be strictly inconceivable, if the one is
the condition of jthe other ; and in the supposed
case, at any rate, no further condition could exist,
as it would have to be outside the Universe. The
meaning of condition would disappear if each
moment’s watching could either ' condition ’ or ‘ be

MONISM

•335

conditioned by’ its own content ; and the idea of
an anima mundi, or a material universe throughout
self-conscious of its own changes, whatever it may
be worth, can.never be reached from cerebral ana-
logies.* It is worth noting by the way that even
if such a process were conceivable and possible, it
would probably not be agreeable. The increas-
ing scope and complexity of mind is conceived
as strictly parallel with the increasing scope and
complexity of brain. I am justified therefore in
supposing that if I attained to a universal mind,
and if my brain were the Universe, I should find
its movements as ugly and boring a spectacle -as if ^
I now watched my present brain working under a
microscope.

Though the objection just made can be more
simply stated on the supposition that no mind-
stuff is supposed to remain in the uncombined
and elementary condition, but that all there is
is fitted together into the texture of perceiving
minds, yet when the objection has been once

* If immediate and absolute self-representation is impossible for a
materially-conditioned intelligence* clearly no reality con be extracted
from it for that mediate representation which we were just before
imagining as reflected from each to the other of two semi -universal
minds, each of them correlated with a brain that materially repre-
sented half the universe. I believe therefore tliat the metaphor ot
the empty mirrors is strictly correct.

336 MONISM

granted on this supposition, it is easily seen to be
equally applicable to a universe in the condition
that Clifford describes. For by the undoing of
some of the superfluous minds we h^ive imagined,
and the reducing of their elements of feeling to
the uncombined state, by the withdrawal, that is,
of their power to represent, we should clearly not
be endowing them with any additional reality or
power of being represented ; to destroy them as
mirrors cannot be made to give them the neces*
sary opacity of objects, without reinstating about
as marked a distinction between mind and matter
as the old one which Clifford is anxious to
transcend.

This difficulty of getting objective content into
the Universe shows itself equally strongly in a
portion of Clifford’s paper which has not yet been
mentioned — his doctrine of the gradual develop-
ment of conscious minds through the interweaving
of elements of mind-stuff. On his theory, a single
unit of mind-stuff is a thing-in-itself : it would be
equally real were there nothing besides itself in
existence ; since for that which is far too elemen-
tary to perceive objects, it could not matter that
there were none to perceive. As the units gradu-
ally combine, however, there result minds, i.e.

MONISM 337

existences which cannot be conceived without
objects ; and the puzzle is to get, out of a universe
of mind-stuff units, the means of identifying or
connecting the process of independent combination
of some of them into minds, in which objects are
an essential part, with the representation therein
of others, which do not enter into the combination,
as these objects. For simplicity’s sake, let us say
that a mind results from the interweaving of ele-
ments A, B, and C ; and let D stand for external
bits of mind-stuff. Now a mind is not first made
and then provided with perceptive contents; the
process of formation is a process of getting such
contents, a process of developing perception of
objects. Thus Clifford’s interweaving of A, B, and

C, things-in-themselves wholly independent of D,
must yet depend throughout on the existence of

D, and the product is not merely a means of
representing, but an actual representation of, this
external existence ; that is, things* which have
no relation to a reality outside them can only
combine in virtue of that reality, and in com-
bining become that relation. In other .words,
from the piling together of units which for re-
flectii^ purposes are so many lumps of lamp-
black, there gradually results not only a mirror,

VOL. I. Z

33S MONISM

but a mirror which reflects the wall on which it
hangs.

It should be remarked how utterly difTerent is
the difficulty here from that involved in the simul-
taneous development of nerve-matter and consci-
ousness. In that simultaneous development, how-
ever inexplicable it may be, we have at any rate
an interdependence of one definite order of events
with another definite order of events. In Cliflford’s
universe we have an order of events, the inter-
weaving of mind-stuff units, depending on some-
thing which is not an order of events at all ; a
progressive establishment of relations, made possi-
ble through, and issuing in a representation of,
relationless elements described by him as far
simpler than the simplest feeling, and stationary
therefore in the same proportion.

My criticisms so far have been concerned with
the object, both in itself and in its relation to the
gradual formation of minds. But Clifford’s ac-
count of the subject seems open, on its own
account, to equally grave objections. He considers
that tl\e sense of a uniting personality is not given
in the actual moment of feeling, but in subsequent
reflection ; and ‘ consists in the power of establish-
ing a certain connection between the memories of

MONISM

339

any two feelings which we had at the same in*
stant* At the instant, a feeling exists an und fUr
sich, and not as my feeling : *but when, on reflec-
tion, I remember it as my feeling, there comes
up not merely a faint repetition of the feeling,
but inextricably connected with it a whole set of
connections with the general stream of my con-
sciousness’; and this memory again, so far as it is
itself a feeling, is absolute, Ding-an-sick. ‘The
feeling of personality, then, is a certain feeling
of connection between faint images of past feel-
ings ’ ; personality is ‘ the property of the stream of
feelings that part of it consists of links binding
together faint reproductions of previous parts.’

The metaphor of the complex stream, or of
interlacing strands, is convenient ; but the true
metaphor for a combination of elements each of
which is a Ding-an-sich must surely be a rope of
sand. All the phrases used to describe the mode
of complication lie open to Green’s pitiless indict-
ment of the modem empirical psychology, in
assuming the unifying consciousness which they
profess to account for. How can I remember
anything as my feeling, in the absence of a uniQr
winch is neither my past nor my present state, but
which by its persistence gives a ground for their

340

MONISM

relation ? Does not the very word remember
express the whole vital difference between a feel-
ing and the fact that I had a feeling ? Again, this
unity certainly does consist partly in ‘the power
of establishing a certain connection ’ between the
memories of simultaneous feelings ; but how is this
connection to be got out of the separate feelings
which it connects ? Still more, how is it possible
to call such a link itself a feeling, a member of a
stream of feelings? Granted that we can expe-
rience a ‘ feeling of relation,’ the peculiarity of the
consciousness of this is that it witnesses to a fact
not comprisable within the moment of the expe-
rience. How can that fact — that condition of the
relation — be one of the relateable terms ? *

And this difficulty of getting a unified con-
sciousness, which consists in the perception of a
world of facts or relations, from any manipulation

' A similar objection might of course l)e urged from the side of
brain ; the perception of brain-processes being as dependent on a
persistent subject as any other order of facts. A less obvious but
equally valid argument is this ; that such brain -movements as are
correlated with feelings would not be thought of as a unity or a
complex at all, except through a latent pre-supposition of that unity
of consciousness which the correlated feelings are supposed to con-
stitute. I could as much get the unity of complex interweaving
from the movements of motes in a sunbeam as from the mere
juxtaposition, in the space of your brain, of a number of separate
occurrences, sequent on a number of separate sorts of external
stimuli.

MONISM

34 *

whatever of unrelated feelings, naturally suggests
a reconsideration of the argument which attributed
the elements of feeling even to inoi^anic matter,
on the assumption of the continuity of the ele-
ments of feeling with developed consciousness.
The argument, it will be remembered, was, that I
find a continuity in matter from the elaborate
combinations in your brain, in association with
which 1 know that ejects or facts out of my con-
sciousness exist, down to the simplest inorganic
forms; when then I trace the chain of matter
upwards, it seems impossible to say at any par-
ticular point, ‘ Here ejects begin — here I may
begin to assume the existence of facts out of my
consciousness, in association with the matter which
is an object in my consciousness ’ ; and the alter-
native is to assume a parallel continuity of ejects
in association with all matter down to its simplest
forms. Clifford does not tell us how he found his
way below simple feelings, or by ^at right he
assumed that ‘the simplest feeling is built up out
of remoter elements which cannot even be felt/ or
what sort of reality he attributes to elements of
feeling which are out of relation to a consciousness,
amd are not determined by even so elementary a
relation as that of sequence. But even if sudi

343

MONISM

elements exist, their nature is wholly unknown to
us ; and the continuity, if it exists, is only of things
quA ejects, of things as determined solely by the
fact of being out of my consciousness. Now the
quality of ejectivity, common to the ‘mind-stuff’
elements of a stone and to the mind correlated
with your brain,* clearly need not imply the possi-
bility of a combination of one into the other which
Clifford has assumed. We might therefore grant
the stone its ejectivity, without granting that
‘ reason, intelligence, and volition are properties of
a complex which is made up of elements them-
selves not rational, not intelligent, not conscious.*
But we should then be leaving the cardinal pro-
blem of consciousness just what it has always been,
and totally untouched by Clifford’s theory. Some-
where in the chain, as he admits, consciousness
appears for the first time : the evidence is too
strong to admit of this being carried down to the
bottom. And to say at any particular point, ‘Here
consciousness, *>. a sense of relations, begins’ is
only rendered les.s startling than to say, ‘Here
ejects begin,’ by the assumption of the continuity

* If 1 compare the external reality of the stone not with your
mind but with mine, even this common quality of ejectivity dis*
appears, and I am bidden to call ‘mind>stuff’ that of which not a
siiigle quality of mind, positive or negative, can be predicated.

MONISM

343

of one with the other ; the assumption, that is, of
relations set up by and among things of which the
primary hypothesis is that they are excluded from
relations. Nor can the difficulty be in any way
evaded by dwelling on the gradualness of the
development of consciousness. The very first time
that any creature perceived a change from one
feeling to another, an event had occurred which is
as strong an argument against Clifford’s account
of mind-formation as any that could be brought
from the mental workings of a Shakespeare or a
Newton.

The question here discussed is, in Clifford’s
words, ‘one in which it is peculiarly difficult to
make out precisely what another man means, and
even what one means oneself.’ Nevertheless his
exposition is so characteristically lucid that it is
difficult to imagine one has mistaken his meaning :
and the very fact that not a tithe of Ihe ingenuity
that went to the propounding of the doctrine is
necessary to the discovery of its flaws is, I think,
suggestive in relation to the whole subject of
Monism, in respect, at any rate, of its profession to
face the brain-difficulty. From its earliest appear*
ance in the system of Spinoza, down to this latest

344

MONISM

and most plausible shape which it has received
from an eminent man of science, such Monism has
had the air of being par excellence the scientific
theory of the Universe ; and it is the emphasis
which has been given to this notion in recent
criticisms of the earlier form of the doctrine, that
led me back to the difficulties I had found in the
later one, and to a reconsideration of the general
validity of the claim. There is not wanting, how-
ever, a more special connection between these two
particular aspects of the Protean doctrine, amount-
ing indeed, according to these recent views, to a
vital affinity; for Prof. F. Pollock, in his truly
admirable work on Spinoza, has indicated the
mind-stuff theory as really latent in Spinoza’s
system, and as what Spinoza himself w’ould have
arrived at, ‘if he had not been unconsciously
haunted by a remnant of Cartesian dualism.’ And
this position may be first briefly examined.

One point of identity must certainly be con-
ceded : Spinoza does indisputably conceive of
something of the nature of mind as going along
with all extended matter. But this piece of agree-
ment cannot annul other points of the system
which seem fatal to that ‘latent idealism’ which
Prof. Pollock extracts from it. This ‘ latent ideal-

MONISM

345

istn/ which, once established, is enabled- by the
above positive conception to take a mind-stulT
form,' is itself arrived at by a n^ative route. In
some admirably written pages, Prof. Pollock proves
that all Spinoza's attributes except Thought are
superfluous ; but instead of treating this as a
refutation of Spinoza, he modestly insists on giving
Spinoza the potential credit of the refutation.

* In the course of his statement of the mind-stuff theory, Prof.
Pollock uses one argument not used by Clifford, and worthy of
notice as suggesting an objection which will reappear further on,
that Science and Metaphysics are not quite the same thing. He
argues that the unknowable substratum of objects must be of the
nature of mind on the following ground : — that there is one peculiar
kind of unknowable which is undoubtedly of that nature, vis., other
people’s minds (the existence of which is for each of us a matter of
inference, not of immediate knowledge), and that it is unscientific
needlessly to multiply causes and conditions ; so that this recognised
mediately-known sort of unknowable may and must do duty for the
reality, also unknowable, divined as underlying phenomena. I do
not know that any direct or precise argument can be brought
against the validity of this reasoning ; but 1 cannot but think that
we should be foisting some element of the known into the unknow-
able even in the act of supposing it valid. The hypothesis of an
unknowable non-mental substratum of matter may be attackable in
other ways; but it goes too deep to be seriously affected by a
likelihood of parsimony in uiiknowables The argument of parsi-
mony has its origin and its force in our experience of physical
^nditions and efficient causes on the plane of the knowable, where
the conditions are modifiable and the superfluous causes get elimin-
ated by degrees : it can hardly seem convincing against an hypothesis,
suggested on indepesuUed grounds^ oi a mode of being which, as
absolutely unmodifiable and unknowable, is not more likely than
unlikely to be identical in substance with another unknowabUs.

346

MONISM

The proof is unanswerable; and we may amuse
ourselves with supposing that, had Spinoza been
one of our contemporaries, he would have appre-
ciated, and might even himself have supplied, the
argument. But such suppositions can hardly be
seriously read back into the philosophy of a past
age. We readily grant that, if any one is born into
a philosophical epoch which is not dominated by
Cartesian dualism, he runs a good chance of not
being haunted thereby; but to speculate what
Spinoza’s line of theory would in such a case have
been seems rather like speculating what sort of
person one would be oneself if one had had some
one else’s ancestry. The data are too vague and
too inextricably intermixed ; it is always a little
too easy to take the particular elements in a philo-
sopher which can be seen to lead to a consistent
development, and to ascribe to these a central
position in his mind, of which he himself gives no
indication. At any rate, when we go to Spinoza’s
actually stated scheme, with all its patient elabora-
tion of construction and undoubting confidence
of tone, we find elements, impossible to treat as
accidents or excrescences, which are stubbornly
inconsistent with the position represented by Prof.
Pollock as almost within his grasp; so much so.

MONISM

347

that that position (if I may hazard a guess) would
have caused him quite as much surprise as any
other modem form of Monism ; so much so, I may
even say, as to preclude any confidence that, had
his life been miraculously preserved, he would now
be in agreement with Clifford rather than with
Mr. Spencer.

Thus, in the very proof to which I have re-
ferred, of the superfluity of all the attributes except
Thought, Prof. Pollock necessarily points out the
entire mutual independence of Spinoza’s attributes;
and this obviously involves the conclusion that
Extension could exist (it is for Spinoza to say
in what manner) if the independent attribute of
Thought were eliminated, just as much as it
involves Prof. Pollock’s conclusion that Thought
(including the perception of things as extended)
could exist if the independent attribute of Exten-
sion were eliminated. In Prof. Pollock’s own
words, Spinoza ‘would never have' ‘admitted that
the material world is extended only in respect of
our perception.’ The same contradiction of Ideal-
ism reappears in the consideration of God. Though
Spinoza’s God is a thinking being who can think
infinitely in infinite ways, Prof. Pollock has ex-
pressly remarked how he is ‘not exclusively or emi-

348

MONISM

nently a thinking being/ any more than man is,
who is corporeal and extended just as much as
thinking. Everywhere there is the same irredu-
cible and independent parallelism of Extension and
Thought, of the untenability of which Prof. Pollock
himself would have convinced me, had I needed
convincing : my difference from him lies simply in
my holding that the parallelism must be reckoned
as belonging not to the accidents but to the
essence of Spinoza’s philosophising ; that the flaw,
however much at the time inevitable, is too radical
for one to judge of how Spinoza’s mind would have
worked, or what his system would have been,
without it.

Nor can I follow Prof. Pollock in crediting
Spinoza with any sort of anticipation of modern
Idealism even in the single respect of rejecting the
unknowable. Prof. Pollock’s own view is that ‘ it
amounts to a contradiction in terms to speak of
^‘unknowable existence” or ^‘unknowable reality”
in an absolute sense,’ and that existence must be
identifled with ‘ the possibility of being known and
perceived ’ ; and he is fain to And this view in his
favourite philosopher, of whom he says that ‘ there
can hardly be a reasonable doubt that for him to
exist and to be intelligible were all one.’ For

MONISM

34 ^

Spinoza to exist and to be intelligible have not
always been found all one by his readers. But,
flippancy apart, while the idea in Prof. Pollock's
mind is perfectly clear, in Spinoza’s mind it was,
even if present, mixed up with what amount to
total contradictions of itself ; and this fact has not,
I think, been exactly brought out in Prof. Pollock’s
very felicitous account of the particular difliculty in
the system with which it is connected. The difli*
culty is the old one propounded by Tschirnhauscn.
The attributes being inflnite in number, and an
attribute being ' that which the understanding per-
ceives concerning substance,' how is it that our
understanding perceives (beyond itself) only one of
these attributes, viz., extension ? Spinoza’s answer,
as simplified by Prof. Pollock, is that ‘ every mode
of every attribute other than thought has a several
mind or modification of thought to itself,’ so that
' the modes of thought ’ (r>. in this connection not
minds, but sorts of mind, called here by Spinoza
infinite ideas) * are numerically equal to the modes
of all the other attributes together.’ But Spinoza
says more than this : he says, and the consistency
of his system demands that he shall say, that these
modes of thought other than our mode or mind,
and corresponding to other attributes than exten-

350

MONISM

sion, 'have severally no connection among them-
selves.' In other words, these various 'modes of
thought ’ are as different and unconnected among
themselves as the disparate and self-complete
attributes correlated with them ; they are not
related in the least as my thought to your thought ;
and their contents arc unable — not only actually
but essentially unable — to exist in our mind,
standing to it in a totally different relation, e.g.
from that held by the world of sound to a man
bom deaf.' Are we then justified in calling them
thought, merely in order that esse may still ver-
bally ? Our thought, from its simplest to

its most complex manifestations, is a connected
whole of a 'certain kind: to postulate something
else of another kind and call it thought, for the
sake of accommodating the unknowable with a
possibility of being known, is merely to shift the
bugbear of unknowability from the object to the

> It is perfectly true, as Prof. Pollock says, that ‘we can
conceive, though not imagine, relations of thought to other worlds,
analogous to those which we perceive between thought and exten-
sion.* Such another world of unimaginable objects might be
exemplified by the world of sound in relation to the thought of the
deaf man. But it seems to me even more impossible to reduce
what Spinoaa has actually said to anything like this than to make
out that his explanation, were this its meaning, would be consistent
or adequate.

MONISM

351

subject. The difficulty of sa}dng with Mr. Spencer
that an unknowable object exists, cannot be
evaded by saying that the object in question,
unknowable to us, is knowable by a ‘ knowledge ’
which has no relation to what we call knowledge,
by that therefore of which all we have a right to
say is that it does not know.

Even Prof. Pollock seems to consider ‘ an in-
telligence other than ours,’ and ‘ consciousness not
analogous to human consciousness,’ as legitimate
expressions ; but that they should seem legitimate
in the sense which Spinoza’s theory demands is
simply owing to an ambiguity, of language. Wc
are famiLur with the idea of an intelligence similar
to but indefinitely transcending our own in power
and knowledge; pereijii may be quite fairly trans-
lated ‘possibility of being known and perceived,’ in
a way which allows the North Pole, or even the
molecular movements in the centre of Siqus, to be '
included in it just as much as the paper I am
writing on. But the sense is totally changed if the
supposed ‘possibility’ is not just an increase in the
content and scope of those affections which we call
perceiving and knowing, but involves the assump-
tion of affections, still txtlUd perceiving and know-
which have no relation to affections } and

352

MONISM

only through this tacit passage from an intelligence
other than ours in the sense that Newton*s was
other than mine, to a verbal figment which pro-
fesses to retain in some way the substance ol
knowing while dispensing with all its predicates,
is it possible to claim for Spinoza the credit of
discarding the unknowable. Such an abuse of
words would be quite parallel to the familiar moral
fallacy of calling God good, while refusing to
apply to his supposed actions and purposes the
criteria through which alone the idea of goodness
has been established.

So much, then, for the relation of Spinoza to
his putative metaphysical offspring; as regards
which, so far as I may have differed from Prof.
Pollock, I have done so by the aid of his own
admirably candid and lucid exposition. As re-
gards the more general question of the scientific
character of Monism, as represented in Spinoza, I
feel that the difference lies deeper. Prof. Pollock’s
treatment of this topic seems to me, indeed, almost
the only real blemish in his brilliant work; and
the same remark applies to the review of that work
by one, at least, of its ablest critics, Mr. Leslie
Stephen,' Prof. Pollock sums up his account of

^ In the Fortmghtly RtoUw for December, iSSo.

MONISM

SS3

Spinoza’s monistic theory, in its bearings on the
problem of the connection of brain and mind» as
follows: —

Not that his metaphysical principles are in themselves
unable to furnish means of dealing with the problem : on
the contrary they very much simplify it. The puzzle of
sensation, when considered in the usual way, is that there is
a relation between the heterogeneous terms of consciousness
and motion. Something happens in my optic nerves, phy-
siology may or may not be able to say exactly what, and
thereupon I see. Can my sensation of sight be said to re-
semble the thing seen, or the images on my two retinae, or
the motions in the optic nerves, and if so, in what sense ?
These questions are essentially insoluble on the common
supposition that body and mind are distinct substances or
orders in rature. If body and mind are really the same
thing, the knot is cut, or rather vanishes. The problem of
making a connection between the inner and the outer series
of phenomena becomes a purely scientific one. It is no
longer a metaphysical paradox, but the combination of two
methods of observing the same facts, or facts belonging to
the same order ; and the science of physiological psychology
can justify itself on philosophical grounds, besides making
good its claims by the practical test of, results. ... On
Spinoza’s principles, to ask why mind should correspond
with mattqr is like asking why the convexity of a curve
should answer to the concavity.

On which Mr. Stephen remarks : —

If Spinoza’s way of putting this is not satisfactory . . .
he grasps the true difficulty and understands the conditions
VOL. I. A A

354

MONISM

of a satisfactory answer. ... He strikingly anticipated the
general tendency of modem thought in regard to a problem
which we must admit to be still unsolved. . . . Till language
has been brought into confomiity with philosophic thought,
all attempts to express the undiluted truth must be more or
less failures.

Such language seems to confound the aims,
methods, and possibilities of Science with those
of Metaphysics. The unity and continuity of Na-
ture, which it was Spinoza’s great merit to have
grasped, is a unity and continuity .of things in my
consciousness— objective phenomena, in the ever-
advancing knowledge of the relations of which the
conception of unity and continuity is ever becom-
ing more full and complete. If I had been placed
in chaos, with powers the same in kind as I
actually possess (/>. the power of knowing an
objective order), but infinitely increased in degree,
30 that I could have deduced the whole chain of
evolution down to the formation of brains, I could
have had not the faintest prophetic inkling of the
dawn and development of any consciousness ex-
ternal to my own. If at this moment I knew
intimately every idea and feeling of every mind in
existence, and every inmost and minutest nervous
process which accompanied each, my knowledge of
the infinite number of facts in which the paral-

MONISM

35S

telism was displayed would not go a single step
towards establishing for my mind a unity or con>
tinuity between what I can or might perceive, the
nervous processes in other people’s brains, and
what I can never perceive, the accompanying feel-
ings in other people’s minds. Or, to put it more
generally, if such minute knowledge became uni-
versal, it would not go a step towards establishing
a unity or continuity between physical facts, per-
ception of which can be shared with all the world,
and psychical facts which are essentially unshare-
able. Even putting other minds aside, however
completely 1 realise that all phenomena, and so
brain-movements as much as any other, are mental
facts, and that in that sense ‘ body and mind are
really the same things,’ I get no whit nearer to
understanding the strict dependence of all other
mental facts on that one limited set of mental
facts. Unity is out of the question. I should only
get unity between my own perceptions and my
own brain-piovements in the case, described above
as inconceivable, of watching the actual brain-
movements that accompanied the act in which
th^ tbemselves were watched.

The issue is really so simple that an attempt
to show that the problem is solved or ultimately

A A S

356

MONISM

soluble is liable to suspicion just in proportion as
it is complicated and hard to follow. No conceiv-
able process or progress of thought can get behind
the fact that whether two things, known as distinct
(such as brain-movement on the one hand and any
other fact, objective or ejective, on the other), can
be further known to be sides or aspects of one
thing, depends on whether the knower*s position
relatively to them can be altered. And in the
present case, the multiplication of these pairs of
distinct though correlated facts, is not such as
brings with it any possibility of that alteration of
conditions which is so prime a factor of our expe-
rimental knowledge: it is a mere blank and un-
modifiable parallelism of lines whose parallelism
and consequent inability to meet is their sole
knowable relation. The difficulty therefore is not
met but masked by the convenient words aspects
and sides; since these receive their only meaning
from their application to perceived objects, with
regard to which position cmi be altered and condi-
tions variously modified. And the curve simile, so
far from being helpful or approximative, is radically
delusive. For if we take a concrete case, where it
is possible to regard the convexity and concavity of
a curve as two distinct but corresponding things^

MONISM

357

■e^. the surface of a rounded body accurately
enclosed in a removable covering, the convexity
mid concavity present the closest rtsemblance in
several respects: thus the arcs subtending their
corresponding portions are identical, and tiie gra*
dation of curvature of each at each corresponding
point is identical. This illustration therefore, and
any analogous one, must necessarily suggest just
that essential resemblance of the corresponding
terms, the entire absence of which is the dis«
tinguishing characteristic of the case supposed to
be illustrated.

Yet it seems, according to Prof. Pollock, that
ont need only state body and mind to be the same
thing, or aspects of the same thing, to have the
right to consider that the problem has become
practical instead of theoretic, and that the registra-
tion, not the existence, of the correspondences of
brain and mind is henceforth the only thing we
need exercise ourselves aboyt. A problem is
doubtless simplified by ignoring all that makes it
problematic. The assumption of that which we
can never know may leave us with de%htfully
unpuzzled minds for recording that which we have
never doubted ; but that is the only sense in which
it could 'fumi^ means of dealing’ with anything.

MONISM

358

If then, in saying that *physiol<^ical psychology
can justify itself on philosophical grounds,’ Prof.
Pollock means that the accurate observation of the
synchronous changes of nerve-matter and consci-
ousness is more justified as an intelligent pursuit
by a ‘philosophical' and unprovable assumption
put behind it, we reply that it stands as little in
need of any such justification as the study of che-
mistry or botany. If he means that attention to that
branch of experience justifies itself as tending to
confirm a monistic solution of the philosophical
difficulty, we reply that experience of two orders
can never come any nearer to being experience of
one. If in saying that Spinoza ‘ understands the
conditions of a satisfactory answer,' that ‘the pro-
blem is still unsolved,’ and that the truth cannot be
expressed 'till language has been brought into
conformity with philosophic thought,’ Mr. Stephen
means that the difficulty is being gradually sapped,
that the problem is one admitting of approxima-
tive solutions, he surely fails to recc^nise that all
materials for approximate solutions are wanting;
that the riddle is not one in respect of which facts
can be discovered and evidence amassed, but
remains perfectly isolated and ultimate, without a
single avenue leading to it or from it For psycho-

MONISM

359

Ic^cal observation, for tracing tlie evolution of
consciousness on the one hand and of the physical
oiganism on the other, ample materials exist: but
psychology and evolution, if every fact relating to
both were at this moment known, would not bring
us an inch nearer to adjusting the claims of
Monism and Dualism. Spinoza failed, not because
he was the rough-hewer of a comprehensive idea
which needed the labours of many other workers
for its perfect elaboration, but because his idea
contained no sort of workable stuff. To extol his
metaphysical position as an extension of the view
of the unity of Nature, is to extol it for precisely
that wherein its weakness is manifested — the effort
namely to get from a doctrine whose whole force
lies in experience a momentum which should carry
it beyond the confines of experience.

It may be noted, moreover, in passing, that
Prof. Pollock seems to make rather too much of
his text, both as to the extent of the discover-
able connections between physiology and psycho-
logy, and as to the bearings of those connections
on the latter science. A propos of Spinoza’s firm
grasp of a parallelism of complexity between body
(Spinoza would now doubtless have said brain)
and mind, he remarks that 'there could not be a

MONISM

360

more distinct or positive declaration of the neces*
sity that psychology, if it is to be a serious branch
of scientific enquiry, shall go hand in hand with
physiology, and verify its results, as far as possi-
ble, by physiological observation.' It seems to me
that Spinoza's own case is enough to refute the
view as thus stated ; for his numerous and admira-
ble psychological observations certainly demanded
no physiological knowledge. A firm grasp of the
general fact of the invariable correspondence be-
tween nervous and mental processes means some-
thing quite different from imagining that we know
or ever can know the parallelism in detail, or that
in this sense the studies of the two sets of things
can ' go hand in hand.’ Did every step in psycho*
logy depend on exact knowledge of physiological
counterparts, psychology might have waited for
ever: fortunately, however, there is nothing to
prevent its being made an exact study on its own
account, a possibility which we m^ht safely affirm
even were it not in course of being rapidly real-
ised. Our knowledge of the physiological coun-
terparts, on the other hand, is, and seems destined
to remain, of a comparatively rough and rudimen-
tary sort. The gist of the matter lies in ultimate
nervous processes which are of course utterly

MONISM

361

beyond our reach. But, putting molecular motions
aside, the broadest facts, the most elementary
functions of the various parts of the cerebrum and
the part played by them in connection with the
simplest perceptions and volitions, are still matters
of dispute; while even the most general physio-
logical translations of psychological laws the
limiting and differentiation of areas of nervous
discharge, corresponding to increasing definiteness
of perception), are rather reasonable hypotheses
than results of experiment. Nor do I see how
such principles, however interesting as matters of
knowledge, can be truly said to ‘verify’ or in
any way affect the psychological facts which must
necessarily be observed quite independently.

1 am, of course, not charging either Prof.
Pollock or Mr. Stephen with imagining Spinoza’s
form of Monism to be demonstrable or even
probable; but they both seem to regard his at-
tempt as in the right line — as containing a germ

*

likely to fructify, and parallel with the ideas which
4raw ever fresh certainty and vitality from fresh
experience. They both seem to class Monism as
one of the instances — a Triton among the min-
nows, of course, but still belonging in kind to the
instamces — ^in which the unity Nature, if not yet

362

MONISM

absolutely established, at any rate ought to com^
mend itself as a scientific truth to persons with
clear heads and a sense of analogy ; and they thus
look on Spinoza’s theory, however faulty in detail,
as corresponding to the general tendency of mo-
dem scientific thought. I should have said, on the
other hand, that modern scientific thought, in its
cruder forms, had simply ignored metaphysics:
and in its more intelligent forms, had clearly
recognised that the radical distinction between
brain and mind can as little be bridged over by
the multiplication of correspondences as by the
bold assumption of a common substance. And as
among monistic systems Spinozism has no supe-
riority in the way of connection^ so neither has it
any superiority in the way of compatibility^ with
the teachings of Science. Pure Idealists and pure
Phenomcnists may accept those teachings to the
full ; and if they leave the brain-and-mind riddle
unanswered, it may be because they perceive * the
conditions of a satisfactory answer’ to be unat-
tainable. So little is a ‘unity of nature’ in meta-
physical tendencies a scientific postulate. Indeed
the only hope, a forlorn one as 1 have tried to
show, of establishing a special claim for Spinoza
seems to lie, after all, in definitely connecting him

MONISM

363

with the mind-stuff theory; which has a truly
scientific character in its emphatic recognition of
the essential distinction of object and eject, and of
brain as the object at the centre of the difficulty ;
and which at any rate is remarkable as being at
present the one form of Monism, dealing explicitly
with brain as well as thought, which possibly
might be claimed as answering to the prophecies
hinted by Mr. Stephen, or as justifying us in
feeling with Prof, Pollock that the time-honoured
crux is henceforward reduced to scientific ques-
tions of physiological psychology. I was surprised
therefore to find no more explicit mention of
Clifford’s attempt in that later treatment of the
monistic position in juxtaposition with which I
have here presented it; for it at all events pro-
fesses to do that to the doing of which Spinoza
has been represented as pointing the way. But on
the one hand, the questions with regard to it
which have been here raised seem to need answer-
ing ; and on the other hand, the fact ^f it should
so turn out) that they indicate flaws, is not more
st^gestive of the hopelessness of dogmatic Mo-
nism, than the consideration that this latest and
most scientific form of it might really be equally
claimed as a theory of Dualism ; the admission of

364 MONISM

absolute existences below the level of conscious-
ness seeming, as we saw, to reintroduce the old
duality of knowable and unknowable under cover
of the so-called mind-substance.

The efforts of Philosophy to escape from
Dualism are likely to continue ; but 1 venture
to predict that, if they are ever crowned with
success, whether in this or in some future stage
of our mental evolution, it will be not by any-
thing akin to Monism as hitherto taught, but
by an at present unguessed Tertium Quid.

Note on the Organism in Relation to Perception.

In a little book which has been less noticed than it deserves
— the late Dr. Ingleby’s Introduction to Metaphysic— ^ bold
attempt has been made to explain the bodily organism, and
its relation to perception, on Idealistic principles— or at any
rate on principles so far Idealistic that they represent the
subject as constructing his own object. Dr. Ingleby’s view
is that perception is construction, the real process being the
exact reverse of the apparent one, in which we seem to be
simply passive and receptive. We seem so just because
of the perfection of our activity— because we are acting wholly
without friction or resistance. Now given that I do represent
an external world, that I shall seem to stand in a merely
receptive relation to it, that it shall seem to come back on
me as object perceived rather than as object constructed, it
follows, he argues, that part of the construction must be a
mode of something whose function it will be to

ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION 365

mediatt the representation of objectivity ; ' and he identihes
this mode of receptivity with the organism. And as my
representations partly consist of objects in space, my mode
of perception will have to be consistent with that relation ;
whence is deduced an extended and sensitive organism, the
differentiation of part of which into nen'e-tissue and a central
organ of perception would present no special difficulties. In
other words, for me to find myself in a phenomenal world, I
have to clothe my self-consciousness komogeneously with
that world. My organism represents phenomenally the real
internal constitution of my Ego, its inherent machinery for
turning out its effects — those effects being the phenomenal
world in which it seems passively to find itself, but which it
really constructs under the stimulus of sensation derived
(according to Dr. Ingleby) from a real transcendental Non-Ego.
And as the brain thus represents an actual process of the
Ego, its movements, though they tell us nothing as to the
nature of the process, must naturally correspond with it.

On this view, it will be seen, Idealism would be unintel-
ligible and impossible unless percipients had bodies; and
the very fact of the correspondence of perception with nerve-
processes, which has been represented in the above Essay as
the insoluble problem par excellence^ appears as a matter of
It^cal necessity. In spite, however, of the attractive neatness
and simplicity of the doctrine, it is to me wholly uncon-
vincing. * **

I should first ask — If the Ego, in order to construct objects,
must 6 rst construct a mediating organism, which organism is
itself an object, how does the Ego construct it ? A thing cannot

* These phrases and others in the present note are borrowed
froip an (in part unpublished) exposition of Dr. Ingleby's theory by

Mr. C. C. Massey.

366 ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION

well mediate the representation of itself. But even if this
objection could be met, it would bring us no nearer to proving
the necessity of such a construction--to proving that a mode
of existence which is subjectively sensitive, is, ipso /acto,
objectively sensible, an organism which others can perceive.
Our own organisms being undoubtedly there, it is a temptation
to ingenuity to deduce^ instead of simply acknowledging,
that they had to be there ; but if * disembodied intelligence '
could be proved, if some being could make us aware that he
perceived us without our being able to perceive him, I doubt
if it would have occurred to any one to deduce an organism
for him from the mere fact of his perception. The argument
seems to identify the two relations which are really funda-
mentally different, though most unfortunately, as we have
seen, they equally admit of being represented as the * relation
of mind to matter,’ and as exhibiting the one as the * other
aspect ’ of the other. They are : —

(A) The relation of my perception — say, of the lamp— to
a corresponding change in that which makes others aware of
my existence, namely, my organism ; a relation only compa-
ratively recently discovered ; a relation for subsequent re*
flection ; which has the same existence for you as for me ;
and which for you (in Clifford’s phrase) is a relation of eject
to object.

(B) The relation of my perception of the lamp, qud mine^
to the lamp as perceived — the relation of me determined to
that which appears to determine me \ a relation involved in
the immediate act of perception ; which exists for me only ;
and which is a relation of subject to object

To the second of these two relations the antithesis of
sensitive and sensible applies as a matter of logical necessity.
To the first it does not so apply ; for the mere fact that I am
sensitive does not in itself imply that I have any means of

ORGANISM IN REI*ATION TO PERCEPTION j67

maldng others aware of my existence. Thus, while it is true
that my mode of existence must be conceived both objectively
as sensible and subjectively as sensitive, its objective aspect
is tfte lamp for me^ not my organism for you. It is, of course,
in a mode of existence conceived objectively as sensible, and
ejectively (by others) as sensitive, that we have our chance
{or one chance, for others are conceivable) of finding ourselves
in a universe peopled by fellow-creatures; but that we so
find ourselves is an empirical fact, not a metaphysical or
logical necessity. As my visual perceptions do not include
my own eyes as objects for me, neither do they imply them
as objects for others ; and if 1 can conceive this, I can
equally conceive myself alone or isolated in the Universe, and
without an organism, my existence being a scries of presen-
tations in every one of which relation B would be exhibited,
while relation A would have disappeared. That is to say,
my organism — my means of expression, or of becoming an
object (and inipiying ejects) to others^is a natural condition
•of my existence as a member of a society ; but is not a con-
dition of the fact that I myself, as subject, am sensitive to a
sensible world. It may be a necessity, in the sense that
things could not have been different from what they are;
but the necessity is not explained by being assumed ; and
the assumption is none the less an assumption for fitting so
conveniently into Dr. Ingleby’s scheme.

The confusion (as it seems to me) may be largely traced
to an ambiguity in the word * organism.’ 1 do not say that
the word cannot be intelligibly applied to ‘ the mode of recep-
tivity to and reaction upon impressions.’ 1 can imagine myself
saying that 1 am ‘organic’ to the lamp in the act of perceiving
it, since it enters into a system of relations which have been
organised in my experience ; and I can understand calling
a relatively fixed association of conscious sutes an ‘organic

368 ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION

constitution.’ But the identity of word must not surely be
taken to imply any necessary or logical correspondence or
connection between ^organism’ in this new sense and the

* means of expression* — ^the objectivity to others— which was
before considered. Regarded as a ‘ mode of receptivity/ the

* organism * exists solely for the subject of relation B, whom
we can conceive to be alone in the Universe— or alone in his
universe ; and it implies no body, or matter, or phenomenal
aspect of any sort, belonging to him. In a word, the pheno-
menality of the subject is not in the least implied in the
admittedly necessary phenomenality of objects to the subject.

Only one way occurs to me of meeting this difficulty — to
conceive the Non-Ego as Clifford did, and to regard the

* lamp for me * as a * means of expression * or obverse of some
psychical existence behind what I call the lamp. On this
view, which would endow the lamp or its atoms with a
certain amount of embryonic (and for me ejective) mind-stuff,
Dr, Ingleby might have denied the conceivability of my find-
ing myself alone at any rate in a visible universe (personally,
I could make myself happy in an audible one) ; since the
phenomena which entered into my states of consciousness
would imply the joint existence with me of a multitude of
psychical entities or ejects ; and not the mere existence or
potentiality of a multitude of objectSy having no psychical
existence except on the arena of a developed mind. My
modesty is still such that I cannot think my being there
¥rould make any difference to these ejects. I cannot feel
that their existence implies in me an objective organism —
that because 1 am sensitive to their objective side, their
ejective side is therefore sensitive to me ; in short, that the
lamp which I look at really finds me phenomenal. Still,
perhaps it politely, though unconsciously, strives to do sa
But at this rate, the view of the necessary phenomenality of

ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION 369

the organism should surely be based directly on the mind-
stuff hypothesis, which may be defended by certain complex
arguments of its own ] and not on the simple and necessary
correlation of subject and object, which certainly does not
logically involve any such hypothesis. I should then be able
to add some further arguments to those which I have brought
against Clifford’s theory. For instance, I should support my
objection to labelling ‘means of expression ’ and ‘mode ot
receptivity’ with the same term, by pointing out that the
receptivity appears to be at its minimum where the expres-
sion is at its maximum. The receptivity of what we call
Inorganic Nature must be almost nil ; the little minds of its
atoms have not developed even the beginning of a con-
sciousness, as Clifford expressly admitted. ‘ Well,’ it may be
said, ‘ and may not that be the very reason why inorganic
matter is so dense, and gross, and inexpressive — mere dead
clay — whereas organic matter shows itself increasingly mo-
bile the higher its development, and in higher states of exist-
ence may very likely be increasingly tenuous ?’ But, in the
first place, consider not clay, but free gas, or matter in its
radiant form ; it has tenuity and mobility enough — if those
are to be among the conditions of ‘ expressiveness.’ And in
the second place, seems a very question-begging word.
Though an attractive picture may be drawn of the flexible
and adaptable organism that our advance in sjpirituality may
develop, I cannot manage to carry the analogy all through
Nature. Are not some of our very loftiest ideas of force
and grandeur derived from dense, and heavy, and above all
stable (not fluid) things— the Weisshom, the Pyramids, and
the Moon ? These things are, in a sense, more expressive to
me than even the best philosopher’s organism— especially as
for present purposes the ‘expression’ of his profoundest
VOL. I. B B

370 ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION

thought is not his kindling eye or animated gesturesi but his
molecular brain-movements.

To return, however, to Dr. Ingleby’s * subject.’ No doubt
his perception of objects in spatial relations implies his per-
ception of himself as locally placed ; but locally placed only
as a mathematical point. His mode of receptivity — or his
* organisation’ if the word commends itself— of visual pheno-
mena in no way implies phenomenalisation of the ideal point
or centre of local relativities as an * organism,’ an object
among other objects ; any more than his organisation of a
set of sounds as one tune implies that he hears himself hum-
ming another. How could such a local point, which U
implied by my perceptions of an external world, be, or do
duty for, the organism which is not so implied — the sensible
object which puzzles or should puzzle the Idealist by pre*
senting nerve-changes that are at once correlated with and
irrelevant to his ideas ? A mode of receptivity, or relation to
phenomena, is not a phenomenon, however * organically con-
stituted.’ It may perhaps be replied that I posit myself in
space, and that as myself is, in reflection, an object to me,
1 posit it as a spatial object. But however much 1 try to
identify myself with the ideal centre of spatial relations, I do
not thereby give to that centre extension ; how then could i
possibly be an object, a perceptible organism to others?
And again, how could a perfectly simple point exhibit a
complicated series of correspondences with my receptivity to
(or my construction of) my orderly various world of coloured
objects, which hold to that point only one relation — the
nakedly spatial ?

1 should allow that if I had no visible and extended
organism, if 1 had not found this in the world of external
objects, though my experience of my world might be as keen
and various as now, the words 'space* and ' externality’ might

ORGANISM IN RELATION TO PERCEPTION 37 1

not retain at all their present connotation. The presentations
cf the * external’ world would probably pass before my sup-
posed point more after the fashion of the passages of a
symphony; and though the relation of their parts to the
point would still be quite definite, and the ‘externality’
represent a specific form of experience, I doubt whether it
would involve anything like the sense of vts^-vts^wss or
parallelism, suggested to me now by such a phrase as ‘ posit*
ing myself in space.’ But clearly the surmise that, when my
local existence was reduced to a point, my visual experiences
might be modified, is no concession to the view that visual
experiences in themselves imply a local ‘ positing ’ of some-
thing wholly different to the point — to wit, an extended
body. And how about experiences which are not visual or
external at all? Percipience of an external world by no
means exhausts percipience ; and I put the question : How
do I repres«*nt myself, or how can I be shown to need to
represent myself, as a phenomenon similar to the phenomena
which I encounter in another world of experience — the world
of music ? A tune is a presentation, or a series of presen-
tations, which, for all that concerns the point in debate, is
exactly on a par with the lamp. If then it can be demon-
strated that, when 1 contemplate external objects, 1 must bean
object among them, what precludes a similar demonstration
that, when I contemplate tunes, 1 must a tune among
them, except the inherent absurdity of the notion ? Perhaps it
might be held that, when experiencing music, 1 am perceptible
under different modes of perception from those involved in
my bodily perceptibility. But such an idea is in the first
place opposed to the fact that nobody ever found me so>
and in the second place, would be a mere blind. The logical
position could only be-— It is implied by the fact that I have
perceptions of sight and touch, that 1 am visible and tangible

yj2 ORGANISM IK RELATKXK TO Tmtas^igtt

to others : it is similarly implied by the feet that I haive
perceptions of sound, that 1 am audibU to others. That is
the only mode of perception that could have any lelevanGe to
the argument. But in general, I would assert that not a stq^
can be made in deducing the phenomenality of the subject
from any sort of experience in which the two qualities of
extension and externality are not prominent A quite parallel
case to music would be that of mere ^^/wr-percqpt$. How
would a percipient who had seen nothing but blue sky
^clothe his self-consciousness homogeneously?’ I expect
that it would need the propounding of the problem to make
him look properly blue.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


**********************************************************************
END OF VOL. I — VOL. II FOLLOWS
**********************************************************************


FERTIUM

QUID.

VOL. H.

TERTIUM QUID:

I

•'U.

Q

\\

CHAPTERS ON VARIOUS DISPUTED QUESTIONS ]'j

lip

‘\

M

EDMUND GURNEY,

I.ATb hELLOW OP TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOJ.. II.

LONDON:

KEG AN PAUL, TRENCH, k CO., i 1‘ATERNOSTER SQUARE.

1887.

( 77 « of tfamtation and of yeprodiutwn are reserved,)

• CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.

— . . .

PAGE

Wa<;ner and Wagnerism .i

A Musical Crisis.47

A Permanent Band for the East-End 96

Poets, Critics, and Class-Lists . . . . 119

The Appreciation of Poetrv . . .191

The Psychology of Music.251

"v'"

I ; ' 1 t

! > ', ,
'In.. I /

V'

Hfi

^ IK

'17 A ^

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM}

In bunten Bildem wenig Klarheit,

Viel Irrthum und ein Fuiikchen Wahrheit.

Goethe.

There is no more characteristic page in the whole
of Rousseau’s Confessions than the one where he
describes a summer day in the woods, passed, with¬
out the faintest approach to love-making or flirta¬
tion, in the society of two young ladies whom he
met riding there, and with whom he made friends
by helping them to ford a brook. He left them in
the evening after sharing their picnic meal, and
never saw them again; but he asserts without the
slightest doubt that, on examination, he flnds this to
have been the happiest day of his life. Not a very
striking or creditable discovery after all, it will be
said. But not one in a thousand of Rousseau’s
congeners in habits and temperament would have

' The following pages on Wagner were written some months
before death closed his career—a career which, whatever criticism
it may demand, at least demands from every candid critic the
homage due to rare genius and dauntless consistency.

VOL. II.

B

V'

2

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

had the originality to make it or the honesty to
avow it And the moral of the incident, though

immediately applicable to those who confound
satiety with enjoyment, has in reality a far wider
scope. The instinct of going straight for inform¬
ation as to what we really like to the best authority,
namely ourselves, is truly a rare one. It would
be a blow to most of us, could our feelings towards
very much that we reckon among the pleasures of
life be suddenly viewed from a standpoint as de¬
terminedly individual as Rousseau’s, and divested
of all reference to what we are expected to like, or
vaguely suppose that other people like. So viewed,
the various scenes which figure in novels as types
of complete well-rounded enjoyment might often
startle us with their patchy and scrappy appearance.
Balls, parties, art-galleries, the Opera—the things
the world says that it likes and then believes what it
says—what flaws might not each in turn reveal to
one and another of us ? What vistas of weariness
might we not look back along and recognise for
our own ^

It is naturally in the domain of Art that this
thought becomes most oppressive. For social
fictions much may always be said ; on the whole,
probably, the world would be worse instead of

WAGNER ANiy WAGNSmSM

3

better off if people never smiled and looked pleased
at meeting unless they were really glad to see each
other, and if all social gatherings Were abandoned
at which a majority of those present were tnwaidly,
bored. But with Art it is different. There is not
the slightest reason why any human being should
spend a single minute of his life in looking at a
picture, or in listening to music, unless he either
takes interest in it now, or expects by looking or
listening to be enabled to take interest in it or
something like it hereafter. In some cases the in¬
terest admits of wide varieties, and may be woven
of many strands; it may have more direct relation
to knowledge than to feeling; it may lie in sug¬
gestion and illustration rather than in form and
colour; it may be archaeological and historical as
well as aesthetic. But for most people it must
needs be primarily the latter, whatever other
elements be interfused. And there is one art in
particular in which everything extraneous to the
aesthetic element is lacking; in which the past as
such has no existence ; in which those who are dead
speak to us indeed in clearest language, yet reveal
to us dimly, if at all, what manner of men they
were, and tell us nothing of how they lived in the
world or how they conceived of it. Their revela-

4

WAGNER Amy WAGNERISM

tion to US, so far as we have the key to it, is not
of what was, but what is, is our life as much as
their life, a n(ne/ not a tAm, a renewal not a record:
the temples they have made for us were

* built

To Music, therefore never built at all,

And therefore built for ever.*

Surely, then, it is just to this art that we should
look for an exceptionally clear distinction between
true and false popularity, between enjoyment and
vogue ; here, if anywhere, might we hope to escape
the blight of conventional admiration and pleasure
done to order. Accordingly we look round and ask
if it is so. And the answer is a mixed one. There
is truly a sense in which Music is, of all the arts, the
most literally and directly and clingingly popular,
and the one whose popularity can be by far the
most clearly and definitely evinced; on the other
hand, there is a sense in which Music is, of all the
arts, the greatest sufferer from the rarity among us
of Rousseau's inveterate habit of calling things
enjoyable when, and not before, he found them so.

This latter sense has to do partly with peculi¬
arities in the mere presentation of the art, and not
belonging to its nature. Music is (with the excep¬
tion of a single branch of Poetry) the only great

WAGNER AND WAGNl^aSlt 5

art in whose service perfarfi^s as weH as creators
are enlisted^ and it has the defect of its quality.
Performance opens the door to vanity ; and vanity
is the paralysis of artistic achievement That
society-music should usually be a nuisance follows
directly from the treatment of it as a means of
persona] display; and it is a solemn thought that
the time draws near when perhaps half—not the
wise half—of the virgins, now in the schoolroom,
who have been ' taking up the violin * will be turned
loose on the drawing-room. Nor can we regard as
much more than society-music of another kind the
stale vocal frippery which season after season sees
expensively paraded on the alien stage of our
national theatre.^ It is not, however, so much with

' More distressing than even the purely conventional presenta¬
tion of what is joyless is the deliberate sub^itution of it for some¬
thing better, on the blind assumption that it is what people prefer.

I have known a great singer, advertised to sing Wa/i her, Angels,
and able to do so in such a manner as would have steeped the very
soul all his hearers in beauty, jauntily defraud them of their
spiritual rights, and substitute a trilling ballad, on the ground that
they were ‘ a popular audience. ’ Of course they clapped, and only
a minority knew what they had lost. So again, I was listening
one Bank Holiday to a first-rate band in Regent’s Park, The pro¬
gramme contained the names of several good overtures and good
German dances, and far on in the second part the words Hallelujah
Chorus* So warm was the appreciation of the audience, undamped
even by pelting showers, that, though I knew the effect of this
masterpiece to be a <%rtamty, 1 could not forbear waiting to watch

6 WAGNER ANI> WAGNERTSM

miMbrtunes of this sort as with peculiarities lyingf
deep down in the nature of the art, that I want
here to connect Rousseau's test; the more fitly in-
asmuch as it was d prcpos of the music of his own
day that Rousseau himself, as it happens, set a
signal example of its application.

Detachment from an3^hing that has the preten¬
sion of a progressive artistic movement can never
in itself be an enjoyable condition Something seen
primd facie^ always to go for more than some¬
thing not seen ; and failure to admire what seems
widely admired must always tend in the direction
of self-distrust. In such a case only a resolute
escape from the buzz of the immediate present
to the great principles and features which distin¬
guish permanent from ephemeral work will restore
the confident sense belonging to the wider view—
the sense of being after all on the side of the great
battalions. The way of arriving at this wider view
by applying these principles is what I want here to
indicate. But though not a long or arduous, neither

it. I might have known better. The programme was steadily
adhered to till that point, and then some jigging piece of tuneless
rubbish was substituted. Being there, I watched the faces lately so
radiant, and the feet and umbrellas that had been so busy tapping
time: not a gleam on any face, not a movement of any foot, and
I am thankful to say on |his occasion not a sound of applause at
the end.

7

WACN£R AND

* ^

is it exactly an ajnusing way ; and tliis is a bull
which it will be well to take at once by the horns.

To be at once sound and sparkling is rarely given

*

to the wine of musical criticism ; and in sepanatimi,
while the body of fact is specially dry, the bubbles
of fancy are specially innutritions. We have, no
doubt, a special and semi-technical literature of
real value, whether in programme-analyses of par¬
ticular works, not meant to retain their flavour in
detachment from place and performance, or in
permanent studies of particular composers ; but in
any more general and impersonal talk about this
singular art, reality and common sense are terribly
handicapped. Most students of the Oper und
Drama must have admired, as in a dream, the
earnest minuteness with which every sort of con^
scious reference, theoretic and practical, is read into
the past history of Opera and its public ; the only
point of view omitted being the true one which
recognises in the genus opera-goer, through all its
varieties, a wholesale indifference to theory, and a
quite unpractical habit of enjoying what it may and
enduring what it must. So on contemporary ques¬
tions, one may encounter in the writings of Wagner
and his school pa^e after page of quite delightful
reading, as long as one can abstract oneself from

6 WAGKER AND WAGNER7SM

all thought of music and language as one has actu¬
ally experienced them. ‘Melodies* which last a
whole evening; ‘infinite form*; union of Poetiy

f

and Music, ‘ each at its highest,* while yet both
emanating from a single inventive source—or if from
two, at any rate from a dramatist with music suffi-
dently on his brain to be able to accept Wagner*s
dictum that the sole test of worthy dramatic writing
is suitability to be sung throughout, and from a
musician in whom literary sensibilities are so domi¬
nant as to render him barren of notes, until fertilised *
by the minutest verbal details of the poem where
his melos is ‘ implicit ’; a consequent mutual inter¬
dependence of words and notes extending to the
‘ finest ramifications * of the phrases ; the sufficiency
of alliteration, if unintermittent, to keep ‘ feeling *
on a four hours’ stretch of poetical excitement; the
deliverance of Music from the burden of time
and the materially-based laws of rhythmic stimu¬
lation, which have held it in such timid awe; the
abandonment of the difficult search—difficult even
to the facile Haydn, and to Beethoven matter for
raving and stamping—after those rare combinations
of sound which shall arrest and fascinate the atten-
tioUi and which are unnecessary now that every
variety of human emotion turns out to be express!-

9

WAGNER AND wiONE^SM

ble in sound-material at a moment’s notice by a
vague sort of poetic inspiration, and can be turned
on and ofif as easily as the horns or the big dram.
It all seems so comfortable for all concerned, tiil
one remembers.that the greatest melodies in the
world, though years may have gone to their making,
vary in length between a few seconds and a few
minutes; that form is as essentially finite in time
as in space; that even taken in its loosest and most
ambiguous sense, and with the aid of devices and
modes of amplification which are out of the question
in Opera, a musical form could not well be made
to cover half an hour—while, in its more vital and
definite sense, a few score of bars are the limit of the
stretch in the direction of infinity which it will stand
without either (i) going back on its own phrases, or
(2) changing to something else, or (3) falling to
pieces; that no considerable musician, with the pos¬
sible exception of Wagner himself, has ever shown
himseifso much as a tenth-rate poet, and that not one
in a hundred of even /tts most conscientious allitera¬
tions has any relation to feeling at all; that while by
far the greater part of first-class dramatic poetry
is eminently unsuited, an immense amount of less
noticeable verse is eminently suited, for dramatic
musical setting; that notes and words, being things

WAGKEk WAG^KJE^M

' I'b

disp^^ztCfCm mtlsticAllyamtur
tk?di doing their independent duty from tlielf in*
dependent resources, and so ^ramifying' into phrases,
of Independent s^tiicance and independottly
herent growth; that in Music the spiritual power
Is^ so rooted in the temporal, that definite and
unchangeable relations of time-length, felt as such,
belong to the inmost nerve and fibre of musical
vitality ; that Music will artistically express human
emotion only on the one condition that she shall
first artistically impress human ears; and that there*
is no royal road to that impressiveness, by which a
composer can shirk the pursuit of definite (and
therefore extremely finite) forms in the dim region
of rhythmically directed impulse, or the fashioning
forth from the shapeless material, often by slow
degrees, of that which he may first have divined
only in shadowy outline. And here every clause
shears off a glory from the brilliant Wagnerian
phantasy, and substitutes a piece of dry truth.
Eveiy clause, too, if fully traced out, would become
only truer and drier, and might demand the reader’s
attention to abstract-looking terms like * key,’ and
^ tonality/ and even to more distinct technicalities
like ‘modulation* and ‘diminished sevenths’; in
place of the familiar words and concrete images

a

mdvivid gJisifkses of andiialiu^ i

aitiG <^ visual art can %ht U|^ Ills pag^«
t&ere would be any difficult in praying to
most casual reader that^ in mechanic^ly
'Tommy, make room for your uncle/ be has been,
exhibiting the essential meaning of tcmallty and
modulation as truly as if he had written a sym¬
phony ; or that the amused suiprise at the chorale-
like parody of the same melody in a recent London
burlesque—

was ample guarantee for the general susceptibility
to the artistic use of diminished sevenths. But it
will be enough here to refer as a basis to two
cardinal distinctions; of which one marks off Music
as an art from other arts, and the otlier defines the
two great elements of which Music itself consists.
Music, then, is, first and foremost, a presmtative
and not (like Poetry, Painting, and Sculpture) a
re-presentative art its distinctive function being
unceasingly to present us, and uniquely to impress
us, with things peculiar to itself, and unable to draw
their impressive quality from any extraneous source.

13 vrAamm and wAmxmit

and Jd that setise alwa^rs * absolute/

"^^rther connections they may lend themsdves.
And its elements ane absttmt form and abstract
cotmr^ form and colour which occur nowhere
outside it

. There is something so stale in the very look of
these distinctions that I almost blush once again
to write them down; yet the full point of them,
which was never so important as now, is almost
habitually missed. Everybody knows, indeed,
that the melodic and harmonic combinations of
Music cannot portray particular scenes and people
in the same way that the forms of Painting can;
everybody recognises, too, that a tune is an
arrangement of notes, and something different from
the particular sort of tone-colour or timbre of the
particular instrument on which the notes are
rendered. But press these axioms a little further,
or expand them into truths only just less elemen¬
tary, and what sort of recognition do they get ?
Do not nineteen out of twenty concert-books
practically deny that in music, at its highest, no
less than its lowest, the freedom from obligation
to portray or represent extends just as much to
emotions as to %enes and people, and that the
most distinctive impressions made by music are

4^otk»ial after a sort as little <idmal^b3ri^
of ^Missions as lire sound-forim thetnselve^'liy
the liaes of geometry? Again* does not^Hie
Ikdiions^le habit of just giving the {»^ng glj^e
of a single hearing to highly-wrought works abso^
hitely set at nought the fact that from every p<^nt
of view the form* which may have cost nothing*
and which almost invariably takes some acquaint¬
ance fully to reveal itself, is quite beyond all
comparison more important than the colour* which
may have cost hundreds of pounds, and which
reveals itself in a moment ?

It will be convenient to pursue the latter topic
hrst; and an instance or two may make it plainer.
Mozart, let us say, writes an air, as an item in an
opera, for the whole of which he receives, perhaps,
a quarter of what sopranos of the future will re¬
ceive nightly for singing it. The air is a world's
wonder; but unfortunately he has left, just before
the closing bar, a place where the singer will be,
allowed to introduce a cadenza. She seizes the
opportunity—^would, indeed, hardly feel that she
was acting honourably if she did not—occupies a
couple of minutes with trills and roulades, which
exhibit the remarkable constitution, not of Mozart's
brain, but of her own larynx, and comes to a con*

14

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

elusion. It would not be hard to apply Roa5Seau*s

test here, and to show that though many of the

audience thought it was the trills, it was really the

tune, that th^ liked the most—^being truly more

akin to gods than to birds, and more at the mercy

of a brain than of a larynx. But apart from this,

let us look at what we have got. We have, first,

Mozart’s form and the vocalist’s colour combined

in the performance of the song; then the colour

without form in the trills , is there now any third

stage in which we shall get the form without the

colour ? The answer is obvious. We shall be able

to summon up that form next day without getting

the prima donna to call on us, as with sufficient

experience we shall be able to summon up much

more complicated ones, or if we have not sufficient

*

^ ear * for this, we shall at any rate redbgnise and
enjoy it when rendered in some far less exceptional
and expensive colour. So far as we live in the
kingdom of Music at all, that form will become,
either at once or on reiteration, one of our perma¬
nent and familiar possessions there. It might even
have become so without any prima donna at all,
and d fortiori without her trills; in other words, its
life is not confined to a few rich cities. Or again,
Schubert writes a pianoforte-duet, that is, a set of

forms to be pendered ^

pianoforte tone; for whidi, as a^l, be gds
nothings Years afterwards it h divlj^edl tbst/t^
piece Vitas conceived as a symphony^ and it 'la
arrai^ed for instruments^ and set befoj^ the vmtid
in all the rich and varied array of orchestral in*

V

vestiture. All the better, of course; but the
essence of it, that in it which it took a supreme
musician to produce, was there before, just as much
as in the songs of his which have been a joy to
thousands who have never heard them sung by an
exceptional voice. If Schubert had had to wait
for prima donnas and orchestras, we should not
have known much about him.

* But,* it will be asked, * what is the bearing of
all this on Wagner and Wagnerism?* Simply
this*: fhaticolour has become tho bane of Music,

i

and that Ws^er and his orchestra have been one
chief cause of its becoming so. ‘But surely,’ it
may be objected, ‘you cannot reckon it against
Wagner that he could not produce his effects with¬
out an elaborate orchestra, any more than you
could reckon it against Wellington that he could
not have won Waterloo without the Prussians: he
never meant to.’ Perhaps not; but that some most
legitimate effects absolutely demand an orchestra

WAGNER AND WA<^SBim

t6

k m <:^>i$tradiction to this far more important &ct

ali great composers, and others in so far as

they have at all partaken of greatness, have won

*

recognition simply and solely by strains which will
outlive the hour of performance; which, even if
•scored for an orchestra, can dispense with the
present blaze and actual sonority of orchestral
presentation; adopting, it may be, some humbler
guise, or else asserting themselves to the purely
inward ear—^whether of neophyte or expert, whether
as a four-bars* melodic subject or as a whole sym-*
phonic movement~in the full uncontrollable glory
of their form. Such quiet moments may outweigh
the tedium of many a sonorous evening. And,,
indeed, such music as about ninety per cent of
the bars in the Gotterddmmerung —stuff that can
be rendered just endurable for one evening at the
cost, say, of a thousand pounds, by the resonance
of its dead and the ruin of its living instruments,^
by the natural tone of a superb band and the un¬
natural torture of an ultra-superb voice—makes an
addition to the sum of human happiness which nO'
one whose personal predilections do not swamp his
arithmetic could compare with that of any single
morceau of Don Giovanni or any single page of the
Musiah^

nuch

nol^ we should not be talkiug-. about hiip*
lure what ^ve him a lasting place mmg idie
^were they more abundant in relation to his w^ipie
production, one might say among the greatest-^^*-of
the musical hierarchy; but unfortunately, they^^
just exactly not what his theories' support or ac^i^ot
for, and just exactly not what is representative of
his influence on others. No one, after marvelling
at the opening tune of Tannhduser or the opting
act of the Moistersinger^ goes home and writes a
twin to it; but it is only too easy to take the hint
that bits of impressive or attractive motive are
things as important to manager as they are hard
to make; and that the public will enter no protest
if the gaps between them are filled up with de¬
clamatory odds and ends, provided something on
the stage be more or less occupying their atten¬
tion, and the accompanying crashes and currents
of orchestral noise be sufficiently full and varied,*
Why spend time in racking one’s brains like Haydn,
or stamping and fuming like Beethoven, for ever
seeking out and rescuing from the dead waste of
dispersed sound-elements the rarities of melodic
and harmonic form, for ever toiling,. Fyginalion-
VOL. II. ' c

vital strains ? * Of course: he, luis< If he^liad

is WAGNEE ANP wA^mRtsm

like, over those vexatious delicately-poised
Isms whose limbs and features must gather inio
lovely shape in the unity of close vital combination^
or not at all—^when it will do as well to tack on*.
bar to bar, and passage to passage, that have never ,
gathered shape out of dispersion, nor found their
life in unity; to stir the many-hued sound-waves,
and call them ‘ dramatic * for now lappings now thun* .
dering on the ear; to lash chaos into iridescence,
and call it alive because it glitters ?

Here, then, in the dazzling wealth of the modeib
orchestra, lay the great temptation; and Wagnerism ^
in modem music means, before all things, succumb¬
ing to it. Not, of course, that in an opera the
orchestra need be pedantically restricted to its
highest mission, that of revealing, or helping the
voices to reveal, really noble form. The form may
be far from melodically inventive, may even run
very much to mere figure-passages or chromatic
scales on a rudimentary basis of brass and drum,
and yet, as long as it is rhythmically coherent,
may produce really successful and exciting scene¬
painting ; as notably in the ride which opens, and
the fire-charm which closes, the last act oi the
iVaH^re, But such scenes, necessarily few and
far between, are not in the least represents^ve of

. tbe parts of iS^t ; ft 1$

Iiifter that Wagfier’s'CMiichestral ^poftmihles,
by his theory of ^spreading his melody boldly/lead
^perpetually to such disastrous results. Frofessiiig
«to cast off Beethoven’s shackles, i,e* the condftloiis
of key and time by which alone successions of sotind
can be made organic, he * throws himself fearlessly
into the sea of music; ’ and sinking, finds himself
naturally in the variegated home of invertdbrate
strains, things with no shape to be squeezed out of,
no rhythmic ribs to be broken, tossed hither and
thither, as hard to grasp as jelly-fish, as nerveless
as strings of seaweed. And to realise .what this
entails on the hearer, we have to translate these
shapeless shapes, just like any other sound-forms,
into terms of motion—of something which we do
not just look at, but have in a way to live: they
mean our enforced flurry, our active impotence.
But their creator is wise in his generation. Give
the public from a couple to a score of firm bars
they can seize and feel reliance in, and keep their
eyes employed ; and on those terms their ears will
be quite content to stray about without landmark
or clue, arreted a moment by the trumpets, look^
fng vainly for direction to the voices* bustled on
again by the fiddles fto wbom, as to the rest of the

f^ei^tra, thd ch^e is tM best fisn m t}ie
any way and every way, for the next quarter of an
hour. Or, if they are in danger of turning restive
amid these passages that lead nowhere/ these
keyless dounderings on the ever-shifting quicksands
of diminished sevenths, let one of the established
motives crop up now and again for their support,
and the faithful creatures will welcome it as an
undeserved gratuity.

But are they quite so content? We seem to
have got a long way from Rousseau; but what
would he have said ? He stated very distinctly
his opinion of Rameau’s recitatives, ‘que tout le
monde admire en bdillant;* how would he have
regarded the ‘noble declamation’ of the modem
* melos * ? Brave words, and still confronted, after
the lapse of a century, with the same humble fact
Successions of sound which have no melodic
cogency, which as they proceed impress the ear
with no sense that their notes ought to have, or to
have had, this direction or duration rather than
that or the other, not only have no possible element
of nobility, but are all exactly on a par. The un¬
shaped, the fortuitous, the abortive, as such, admits
of neither dev.9lopment nor degree; and it would
specially have interested Rousseau to remark that

an enormous proportion of the-^te stisig ,

and his companions, and st|Lnduig not in^mtisgbal
subordination to some ihteres0hg orches^M motive
but on' their own d^lamatory legs, might just ai
well have been written by Rameau-as by‘Wagner.
Still, I think that on the whole he would have ad¬
mitted a considerable improvement. Not only arc
Wafer’s dramas, however crude in conception and
lame in language, yet often redeemed in parts by

well-imagined scenic effects; but none of his re-
*

presentative works are wanting in splendid musical
features. The second act of Lohengrin itself has,
between the ^ part which is strongly repulsive and
the part which is feebly attractive, about a score of
bars of that ineffable kind which makes one doubt
whether music .should be called a spinal or a' cuta¬
neous affection. But, clearly, if the scores are ever
to become thousands, the first point is that the
somewhat blind combination of faith, hope, and
charity which supports the public through the
formless tracts should not be mistaken for an
artistic exercise ; and that each inarticulate mem¬
ber of that public should learn explicitly to
distinguish mere sensuous thrills and transient sur¬
prises of the ear from the true abiding objects of his
and every musician’s ideal world.

^ tlTAOlfSK AK0 VAfiSBSiaW

Some natand UAm^ of xmgrasped or utt-
giraspabk sound may admitted: there are doubt**
less persons who resign themselves to regard
its pres^ce as a vaguely emotional background to
the passing scene, getting subdued or emphattc»
br^ht or gloomy, at appropriate places, like the
gestures of the actors or the clouds that figure so
largely in the Wagnerian stage-effects. But the
average opera-goer, the ‘ naive layman * for whom
Wagner expressly professes to write, is far more^
distinctly * musical' than this ; and, while accepting
as the normal operatic dispensation an immense
amount of sound that has no significance for him,
still lives musically only for the passages of
tangible form—genuine specimens of what I have
elsewhere called the * Ideal Motion.* And by this
1 do not mean merely bits that are rhythmically
and tonally coherent; for Wagner’s phrase-build¬
ing, even where not incoherent or violently strained,
Is often singularly uninventive; witness (to take
a single instance which can be suggested without
music-type) the shamelessly frequent piling up of
a sham crisis, by the mere repetition of a tune¬
less fragment on successively higher steps of the
scale. Still less , do 1 mean mere bits of Lei^
moHv, real or spmious^ which may dodge in and

AMD WUlSStSaSU 43

I

<mt of the petty hubbub the or

drift despairingly anud the tunnoil of die ^ond
and third acts of the Gotterddmmeru^g^ too h^i-
less themselves to help even a drowning ean^ 1
mean passages of genuine musical invention that
can be welcomed and clung to; passs^es in whidi
the ear’s path seems new indeed^ but preordained;
whose mastery the ear owns in the process, not of
being dragged about at their mercy, but of itself
mastering them. And these, for all the treating
them as belonging to * one laige melody,’ and con¬
cealing their transience by the avoidance of frank
full-closes, are often just as much scattered morsels

* The list of ninety motiTes set out in that wonderfully humor¬
ous little book, Guide through the Music of JR, Wagner^s * JRmg of
the Nibelung' —which, not content with the * dusky harmonies of the
cooking*motive and the coaxing crawlii^-motive,’ fismiliarised ue
with the * spook' and with the mysteries of *branglii^' and
* brustling'—is made up in great part of minute fragments of note-
combination, arbitrarily selected and interpreted, and having no pre¬
tension to any melodic character—some of them moreover occurring
only once, so that it seems impossible to find in what possible sense
the term Leit-motiv can be applied to them. The manner of de¬
monstrating the relationship and transformation of various mem¬
bers of this list may be perfectly exemplified, without the use oi
music-type, by the following extract from an almost equally
amusing work, the Benjamin Franklin Primer : * Nag is an
Englkh term derived from the Latin equust a horse, from which
we get equine, Equi is dropped, and the final e dian^ to
cuph<»qr.'

if th^ were embedd^ in r^tatwa sfa0^^st

much the |dums of Wagner’s as of Verdi’s
eonfe^oneiy. Music of the most individual and
haunting kind It would indeed be absurd to demand
throughout a long operatic scene. But there are
many grades from the order of excellence which
ensures vivid and loving remembrance to that which
ns^rely ensures pleased and active recognition on
acquaintance; and sufficient individuality to satisfy
the latter test is surely the least 'we can accept
in the majority of the musical sentences of any
scene that aspires to the dignity of healthy
popular art.

' But how splendid the plums can be when we
get them 1’ Yes, indeed ; that is what so greatly
complicates the Wagner question ; simply because
no musician approximately so great as he on his
day has had approximately so few days. Professing
to * spread melody ’ over interminable dramas, over
libraries of music-paper, he is really the tiUhittiest
of composers, as St. James’s Hall delights to find^
What may be the accurate measure of his greatness^
as judged by his best efforts, we need not here
particularly inquire: a valid answer must depend
not. on argument but on evidence, scarcely yet at-
tainable> as to the width, the depth, and above^

WACNEK AND mSfNSSXEnt ‘i$

aU permanence of the effect It, may be

• a

worth remarking, however, that for those whose

' V

personal instincts on the matter are e<|ixaUx
removed from both extremes of current opinion^
the setting of this best work of his.in the veiy
highest class is, just because of their genuine
admiration of it, a more vexatiously puzzling
phenomenon than the description of it as simply
dull and unmelodious. In Tristan^ for example,
which contains considerable tracts of exciting and,
for Wagner, unusually sustained beauty, is not the
cloying quality at least as distinctive as the
exciting, the sense of strain and mannerism at least
equal to that of achievement ? To the melody,
even at its hnest, there clings a faint flavour of
disease, something over-ripe in Jts lusciousness and
febrile in its passion. And this effect is strangely
cumulative. Steadily through the whole evening
one feels a growing sense of being imprisoned in
the fragrance of a musical hot-house, across which
the memory of some great motive of HandeFs or
Beethoven's sweeps like a whiff from breezy pine-
Woods by the sea. Or take a more compact
instance, where, even if there lurk a certain strain of
toarseness, there is certainly no hint of disease, the
fmiliar overture to TannkaUser^z. piece of such '

wAxsmssi Mxm wAj&KE&zsair

superb popular qualities that, had Music done
nothing greater, she might well hdid up h^r head
among the art& Only—^when one thinks of dte
Lion^ra ? How the sphere of musical possibilities,
which seemed so wide and perfect, breaks up on a
sudden to unfathomable depths and heights ; to
ignore which is surely no true complimei^ to the
lesser work.

The pursuit of such comparisons would carry
us too far, even were it possible to make it prodt^
able. Keeping to Wagner himself, one may still find
the problem sufficiently puzzling, and the innocent
question, * Are you a Wagnerite ? ’ the hardest in
the world to answer in anything under five minutes.
How singular is the art in which it is even possible
for so lovely a will-o'-the-wisp as that burden of
the ‘ Rheingold, reines Gold * to lead on the trust¬
ful ear into so blind a morass; lightened indeed
by some melodic rays from the fire-god, but not
to be forgotten or forgiven even when, after two
hours’ eclipse, the * pure gold ’ of the earlier strain
flashes out on the further side! How strange
must be the conditions of invention, for the
brain that had filled the air of Europe with the
haunting delight of the march in Tatmhauser to
pfoduce afterwards in the same gmre, as an elabo-

xate masterpiece for a great occasiois^ anj^llimg so
tuxgldly tame, so saliently flat, as the rmtin * sub¬
ject ’ of the Huldigungsmarsch f To do Wagaer
justice, however, he has often shown himself toler¬
ably knowing as to where the plums come: in the
Walkure^ for instance, he has sweetened one of the
longest of operatic love-scenes with the flavour of
a single one, and has spread out another, like jam,
through pretty well the whole of the Meistersinger
—^which alone would go far to account for the just
popularity of those delightful works. But it is
this very flneness of the plums which is a chief aid to
disguising their paucity. It enables the composer
to take advantage, not only of the long habituation
of the operatic public to not dreaming of flnding
more than a small fraction of their repast artisti¬
cally exhilarating, but also of their modesty; in
that, flnding a certain amount of exhilaration of a
fine quality, they are always ready to attribute the
sparseness of it, not to his want of invention, but
to their own want of insight. Then, too, those
Offsite modes of listening, the drifting and the
alert, which we just now distinguished, though
typical are not constant. Few ears perhaps ex¬
emplify eidier of them for long together. They
shift and alternate almost as uncertainly as sense

3S VtAOSnSR ANS WAGOtBK^

♦ y

and nonsense^ form and fog, in the actual straix^:;:
ahd the facility of transition for the listener means
also the facility of imposture for the composer, in
the turning to fraudulent account of that ihdisr
criminate cloak of colour. which in these days he
can throw at will over every part of his work. All
the more imperatively must the alert attitude, and
the right of verdict which it gives, be urged on the
public. For, indeed, except those to whom Music
presents itself, not as an art of engrossing beauty,'
but only as a diffusive stimulant favourable to
some independent play of thought, few can really
so surrender their ears as to find pleasure in rest*
less sonority for many minutes at a time. In a
favoured minority (especially if committed by a
previous pilgrimage to Baireuth) the swallowing of
diy unsweetened doses of ' noble declamation,*^
though rather suggestive of sulphur without treacle,,
may produce some pardonable self-satisfaction—
the Teutonic pleasure-taker’s diligent pride in ful¬
filling his task getting quite a cultured tinge from
a vague notion that this sort of tiling was highly
relished by ‘the Greeks.* But that the ‘naXve
layman ’ is not careful to measure the dose, means
simply that he takes the affair en bloc ; that this
'is ‘music,* which is of course presupposed to be

■WAGismimB

#•

ami coine» all in -one finformanice
wbatkUBally is etyoyabie; in .s&ort> Uiat it faas never
‘OccuitM to Jum to ask, with Kousseau, *Dxd ?
that last minute worth having? Do 1 wai^t another
like it?’

' * But,* it may be said, ‘are you not getting quite
^away from the normal conditions of average music^
appreciation ? Does not the more vivid enjoyment
almost habitually come in fragments ? ’. Now, while
altogether demurring to this in respect of the
numerous classical works which have won the
truest popularity in this country, I admit of course
that non-perception of form by any particular
hearer is no proof of its absence, and that the
blaze of sonority may cover fulness as well as
emptiness. Rousseau’s question might well be
answdred in the negative by many an honest
amateur, on first introduction to many a master¬
piece. The only mode of distinction I can here
•suggest is the subjective one, the much-ignored test
of repeated hearings (best realised often in piano¬
forte arrangements), whereby the forms, if they are
there, may be seized and recalled—a test as truly
satisfied of course by Wagner in his great moments
as by any one else, and only the more recom¬
mended by his self-stultifying dread of it; by his

' ^ - wAswaz Atm waokckism

V

express seoni of my tliealiiad mu^ which Is at
all reproducible untheatrical means; and by
Jus express declaration that his * melody^ is
meant to be seized and recalled, and that any one
who complains of it on that score might with equal
.wisdom seek to whistle the vague multitudinous
hum of a forest. Objectively to prove the emptiness
I speak of, and the amazing hardihood of Wagner^s
claim to have advanced on his greatest predecessor
by applying the principles of symphonic construe*
tion to Opera, would require technicalities; and*
indeed could only be adequately done by confront*
ing hundreds of pages of his hgureless counter¬
pointless see-sawings with some popular samples
of the closely-wrought movements of Beethoven^
perspicuous through all their elaboration, and with
all their living threads woven into a single larger
life.

‘ But,^ again it may be urged, * music in Opera
is not a structure but a stream ; it is not meant
primarily to gratify the ear, but to illustrate the
passing action ; it is expressive and dramatic ; who
wants it to be symphonic ? ’ I, for one, certainly
do not; only Wagner so repeatedly assures us that
lie does ; that that is just what it ought to be, and
what (in spite of *^being a fonest-hum) his own t$m

vrAiamsL akd .ir'

Kowerer, iet iiiat nant; it Is to. te '^eiEr'

pr^ss^ve; idiat are the senses and dbe eoiH^lotMi
of expresdveness ? The two vkws on this
subject admit of no compromise. Ehher miisscal
sounds can be artistically expressive of extra*
musical ideas and emotions without gl^dng the ear
anything it wants or cares about its own
account—' can press on to the common centres of
artistic sensibility and association without paying
their respects on the way to the head of their own
department; or they cannot. 1 say arUsticaUy
expressive: mechanically^ no doubt, unbeautiful
sounds can be expressive, and that in two ways.
By a mechanical convention^ a particular personage
or idea may be * expressed * by a particular label
of notes, just as well as by the printed letters of a
name; and by a mechanical sy^nbolism, dismal
sounds may express dismal emotions, and soft
sounds soft emotions, and wabbly sounds uncertain
emotions, and emphatic sounds determined emo-

* This is an under-statement. Passages of the Oper uf^Drama
go the length of asserting an a,bsolute mcompatibility between dra¬
matic expression and the power of independently satisfying the ear.
Equally amazing is the statem^t that it is impossible for tnvitt-
tim to appear in any composition bdongii^ to a recognised class
<» scheme, as aria, minuet, condo; which is just like saying that
invention cannot appear in any poetry written in a recognised

32 WAGNER ANP WAGNERISM

tions. In either case the sounds are read or re^~
cognised by the lamp, not of beauty, but of reason:
they make the hearer think to himself, * this is ta
show that the hero feels soft,’ or * that is to suggest
that the heroine feels wabbly ’—* this combination
means the motive of the treaty, and that the motive
of the forge.’ Granting to the symbols, in their
broader aspects, some aesthetic content of the sort
above referred to, in the various ethical colourings,
exciting or depressing, light or solemn, that may
tinge the impression of sound on a simply drifting
ear, I need hardly point out how transitory and
intermittent must be the value of such a back¬
ground for dramas constructed on ordinary princi¬
ples—^not consisting of a series of highly emo¬
tional tableaux, but of scenes where words tell the
whole story, and where the personages carry on the
logical machinery of intercourse in the usual way.
The idea of making a dim emotional atmosphere
for scenes of the sort of ponderous pettiness that
abounds in the des Nibelungen is truly as

vain as that boasted interpenetration of the finest
tissues of note and word, which has so conveniently
enabled soi^isant poetiy and music to shelter
their shortcomings each behind the stalking-horse
of the other. But even were the possibility of such

WAGNER and WAGN^SM 33

a vague atmosphere ^titinudlts» we have .^lat

normal ears will never for long forget thdr instinct
of closer attention. A forgetfulness idiich would
be a reductio ad ahsurdum of Opera if engendered^
by an exciting libretto, is not likely to engender
itself under the influence of a dull one. And
where the attention does not get what it can:
musically assimilate, the only scope offered to it
will be in discovering such appropriateness as
it may in the purely external character of the
sounds; in observing, that the instruments
have a little bit of flurry when the sentiment is
violent, calm down again when the sentiment is
slow, or take lugubrious steps when the sentiment
is doleful; and in recognising here and there the
labelling phrases. And it can scarcely need proof
that such abstract qualities as recognisability and
appropriateness, in things which are neither plea¬
surable nor useful, do not come even within the
outer circle of the aesthetic.

Clearly, then, if sound is to get beyond the
barren stage of being readable, if it is to become
artistically expressive and not merely crudely
symbolic, it must take on something of its own,
f.^., it must take on independent musical character
by developing definite musical contour; just as

VOL. II.

D

34

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

the crude symbol of barly pictorial art might be
developed, say, into definite human contour. And
(rf the presence and the interest of such contour
the unreasoning ear is the sole arbiter. Its arbitr^*-
tion, too, is decidedly despotic, and its scrutiny of
the strictest For, first, it must be remembered
that the ear has a rare way of attending to one
thing at a time. It cannot shift about like the eye '
from point to point, and grasp in a moment a mul¬
titude of relations. The section of the series now
being evolved before it is what engrosses it; and
even in the most elaborate work, the sort of re¬
lations it may perceive in that section to other
more or less contiguous sections are broadly
reducible to the two simple ones of recurrence
(with or without modification) and contrast. And
secondly, the things attended to by the ear being
things per se, and having their life in independence
of that outer life from which our knowledge and
ideas are gathered, are, even when most suggestive
of that outer life, yet wholly lacking in those in¬
stantaneous glimpses down numerous vistas of
association which word after word opens up in
Poetiy. This is enough to suggest how it is that,
while in Poetry and Painting neutral and even
ugly things may be grouped round beautiful things

WAGNER AND WAGNERISitf 3S

or minister to a fine strain of l^ought, in the
presence of which their presence is petceiveci and
accounted for, in Music what is ugly and inco*
herent reveals itself in unrelated nakedness. And
the ear's strictness is thus at once accounted for
and justified. It must take kindly to the strains
which salute it, and find in them the coherent stuff
that it wants, before it will at all credit them
with emotional messages or pass those messages
on further. It must frankly enjoy the label before
it will permit the slightest artistic appreciation of
the labelled idea. Only give it its due, and it will
open the channel with astounding, almost with in-
discriminating, readiness to every sort of artistic
association and fusion. But no outside signs of
expression, no noisy stamps of determination, no
spasms of exaggerated intervals, will take it in ;
no juggling with the labels, or mixing them up to¬
gether, will move it to more than scornful amuse¬
ment, unless the juggling be the true magician's
juggling, and produce the musical magician’s prime
result—beauty. And inasmuch as this beauty is
essentially an attribute of form, and musical forms
are built, just as much as human ones, out of
definite elements, the substitution in Opera of the
dramatic stream for the symphonic structure —how-

36 WAGNER AND WAONERISM

ever rightly descriptive of the general arrangement
of the larger musical sections—is a perpetual trap.
For that most intimate and organic sort of structure
which lies in the constant vital necessity of each
bar as it stands to its neighbours as they stand,
can never be abandoned while the ear holds the
keys of emotion—a musical ear being nothing
more or less than one which is percipient of such
structure.

Here again, then, is the place for self-questionings
d la Rousseau. We need not go even this short way
in the examination of the claim of structureless
sound to be dramatically expressive, before asking
ourselves whether expressiveness so produced is
what we like. The personages of the Ring make
many pages-full of remarks which are simply typical
of their dull and disreputable characters, but which
—since words and music profess to well up from
the same inward source—it would be self-stulti-
fication to say cannot be set to notes; and as it
would be highly inappropriate to give them beauti¬
ful notes, Wagner has appropriately given them
ugly ones. Let the hearer discover for himself how
far the abstract fact that they satisfy that condition
is a nourishing piece of imaginative food ; or* how
far, under the surrender of the musical sense to

WAGNfiR AND WAGNERISM ' 3 JF

r - ft

hours of sustained incoherence, it becomes really a
subject for delighted contemplation that the story
is also a trifle higgledy-piggledy, and much of the
dialogue very unsuited to fine rhythmic setting.
And if he is so fortunate as to be able for a tinte
to take refuge in passive self-abandonment to the
shifting tides, and can forget to care what particular
ways the notes go, so long as he feels that a good
number of them are going, let him still consider
how far this formless effect, this relapse to the
vaguest, most general, and least musical of musical
attitudes, testifies to the 'bold regeneration* that
we hear so much about, and is calculated to 'be
the fair beginning of a time * in Art.

And here we have really merged into the asser¬
tion and vindication of our second cardinal point
—Music’s constant and characteristic independence,
alike at its highest and lowest, of ideas and emotions
known and nameable outside itself. The reason
why Wagner has been safely able to ignore \his
elementary fact in musical psychology is this—
that the clear perception of it demands something
quite alien both to the actual impressions of the
art, and to the habits of mind of most of those
impressed—namely a moment or two of deliberate
analysis. For want of this, those whose eveiy

38 WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

intuition of musical beauty exemplifies the fact
are often the first to deny and resent it. ‘You
talk about beautiful music not expressing things/
one of them will urge; ‘ why to me the bits of music
I most care about express things beyond all words^
whole worlds of emotion, and infinity and eternity
into the bargain.’ Quite so; that is accurate; that
is a way they have; and it is just what is not (how¬
ever much compatible with) the expression of this
or that particular emotion— i.e» of that which is
proved not to be beyond all words by being • accu¬
rately definable in words, as gaiety, dejection^
yearning, triumph. And whoever remembers the
places where he gets this ineffable feeling will find
on looking that, while it is only occasionally con¬
nected with the sort of definable expression which
makes him say, * That is very melancholy,* or' That
is very jubilant,* it is absolutely invariably connected
with a piece of sound-movement of which each unit
anti fragment in turn has its irresistible rightness^
and comes charged with the sense of a necessary
‘ whence * and ‘ whither *—that is to say, a piece of
objective and organic form. But as long as those
who truly enjoy do not exercise this arhount of
reflection on their enjoyment, then, however clear
be their intuition, they will always be in danger^

WAGNER AND WACNERIbM 30

when they talk about it, of confounding the occa¬
sional and definable with the essential and unde-
finable emotion ; and of attributing their delight in
some passage of music, which is as much an indi¬
vidual object as the Venus of Milo, to some per¬
fectly general ground—as that it ‘expresses peace'
—instead of to the fact of its notes going not any

4

other way but just that one way ; which is delight¬
ful to them, and able permanently to remain so,
just in proportion as genius went to the divining it
and fashioning it forth. And as long as this con¬
fusion is possible, Wagner and his school can always
take refuge in the ad captandum fallacy that the
expression of definable emotions and ideas is the
one great thing for Music to aim at; can discredit
the opposite view as a narrow plea for ‘absolute
music,' in the sense of music which has no need or
power of fusion with poetry and drama; and can
ignore the all-essential work of divining and fashion¬
ing forth the cogent ways for notes to go, to which
the makers of modern music have devoted their
whole energy, and which, so far from excluding any
more definable sort of expression, will alone lift such
expression out of the mechanical into the aesthetic
r^ion.*

* As Music stands so singularly apart among human interests,

40 WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

And I would fain pause for a moment on the
wanton injustice that is done to Operd itself by
not recognising that even here, in the very sphere
where Music is summoned to take on the depiction
of definable passions to the utmost of her power,
the vague but powerful expression of these is but a
fraction of what she has done and is ready to do
for word and scene; that the emotional element in
her which is her own, and therefore unnameable, is
not on that account condemned to an isolated exist¬
ence ; that the ethical suggestion may become so
fragmentary^ or the tinge of special sentiment so
faint, as practically to vanish in the atmosphere of
purely musical delight, and yet that that delight
will glorify and transfigure and seem part of the
inmost essence of any at all artistic elements in
that to which it is wedded. In that transfiguration,
what is serious takes on sublimity, and what is
ludicrous gets edged with loveliness; nay, even
hackneyed things will become haunting, and com-

80 the various things that can be said about it always seem to me
in a special degree connected among themselves, and incapable of
being supplied from analogy. The result is that any omission (and
in an Essay of this length very much, of course, has to be omitted)
may suggest a flaw. To guard myself against this, and still more
against a possible daarge of onesidedness and dogmatism, I may
perhaps be allowed to refer especially to the chapters on Colour,
Esqnression, Opera, and Criticism, in 7%e Power qf 'Sound,

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM 4I

'mbnplace things possessing. It would be an im¬
mense gain if composers would only put to various
specimens of music commonly called ‘expressive*
the simple test of asking how far, if heard in detach¬
ment, each would inevitably suggest some particular
nameable idea or sentiment and no other; and would
thus learn explicitly to recognise how extremely
loose and general are the conditions of external
reference within which Music, if true to itself may
still be most genuinely dramatic in the sense of
enormously intensifying dramatic effect. To those
who had thus consciously confuted for themselves
the central principle emphasised in almost every
page of the Oper und Drama^ we might readily
concede the advantage of possessir^, in word and
scene, a definite starting-point, raison cTStre, and
control, for their inventive stream ; without having
always to fear the chartered libertinism so charac¬
teristic of modern ‘ dramatic * writing. And truly
a theory which would exclude from the stage such
music as half the solos in the Beggarf Opera and
half the concerted pieces in Fidelia, as ‘ Batti batti *
and the minuet in Don Giovanni, as the prize-song
in the Meistersinger and the shadow-song in Dinorah^
as the pilgrims* hymn in Tannhdus^ and the gipsy-
chorus in Preciosa —inventions whose power to

42 WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

impress the hearer may be proved in any popular
concert-room to lie just in expressing themselves,
but which borrow from their stage-concomitants
almost as much romance as they lend—is negatively
as great an outrage on this joint art of Opera as
the positive one which * unites * Poetry and Music
by dogging bald words with intervals dung out of
a bag.

Here, then, in the false theory of expression,
lay the second great trap. The prosaic fallacy that
the essence of Music is vague nameable expressive*
ness, instead of definite unnameable impressiveness,
is only carried out by making the expressiveness
itself mechanical and independent of any impres¬
siveness whatever. And the root-fallacy was the
more dangerous to Wagner, in that just as colour
was the practical, so this is the theoretical mode of
excusing and concealing the fitfulness of his enor¬
mous musical gift; besides affording scope to that
other gift, always a hazardous one to non-literary
art, of considerable literary ingenuity. Much might
be said about the particular mode of support
selected for the theoiy—the solemn joke of making
out Beethoven (poor Beethoven! with his uncouth
mutterings and shoutings, driving his invention
along the rhythmic tracks where alone melodies will

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM 45

ever be surprised and caught; to have been de¬
pendent on ‘ preconceived poetical ideas ; * and of
setting a gulf between his sources of inspiration
and those of his predecessors. Some of the ideas
have even been written down for him by Wagner,
in the mountains of flabby verbiage known as

* Programmatische Erlauterungen * which occasion¬
ally figure in our concert-books—impotent heavings
of that portent of prose Dicktung which is so apt
to entrap the Jonahs whom Poetry casts overboard.
The convenience of this means of claiming descent
from the greatest of musicians on the side of

* poetical ideas,’ when musical ones too obviously
fail, is undeniable; and a theory born of a deficiency
may appropriately be bolstered by a blunder—
historic neatly replacing melodic invention. But I
must hurry on to a final word—as to the further
bearing of these latter points on production in
general. The first great bane of contemporary
music lay, we saw, in displacement of coherent form
by incoherent colour; the second no less certainly
lies in a cognate displacement of steady effort
directed to the distinctively musical exaltation, by
random attempts at definite representation and
suggestion. Wagner’s successes in this line— eg*
the wonderful passage where Siegfried is breaking

44 WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

through the ring of fire'—of course defy imitation,
because they result from splendid musical invention,
in other words, from the presence of the distinctive
exaltation; equally, of course, the genre without
the invention is imitated. Would that the evil
influence were confined to the theatre. But it only
needs now to salute some loose jumble of images
and sentiments as * poetry,* for that alien parent¬
age, which all great musical work from Handel
and Bach to Schumann and Brahms scornfully
disowns, to become a true Sycorax for the mon¬
strosities of the modern programme-music; while
Caliban can go through his pantomime bedizened
in all the gaudy trappings, can wield all the thunder¬
bolts and turn on all the lime-lights, of the wonder¬
ful modern orchestra.

And here, again, no hearer should be so humble
as to refrain from asking himself how much he
really likes it. A most natural impulse to that
humility is found in the reflection that technically-

* Alas for the uninitiated 1 Having been forewarned of this
passage, 1 felt my pleasure in listening to it distinctly increased by
the idea that the hero’s advance through the flames was ty|nfied by
the manner in which the melodic strain seems again and again to
force its way through the changing harmonies. What, th^, was
my chagrin, on consultii^ the Guide through the Music above men¬
tioned, to discover that the strain was the ' slumber-motive,’ and
that what was really being typified was BriinhUde’s repose!

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM 45 ,

instructed musicians, who must' know more about
it ’ than he does, encourage and perform in such
exhibitions. But it cannot be too strongly urged
that the conditions of enjoyment in performing and
ixi listening may be widely different, and that Music,
being so much in the hands of performers, runs a
peculiar risk from that very fact. Performance may
be good fun, even for a voice which is wasting its
sweetness on such desert airs as some of Wagner’s
recitatives. All skilful conquest of difficult things,
and accurate thridding of labyrinthine things, and
collaboration in the production of overpowering
things, are exciting outlets of energy; and in these
respects connoisseurs, who appreciate technical
difficulties and can see how the thing is made, are
more or less one with the performers. But I am
speaking of the average music-lover: it is surely
for him rather than for exceptional experts that
Music must be held to exist. All this may be
amusing for tkem\ is it amusing for him, whose
attention is mainly occupied in verifying the printed
assurance that the noise means this, that, and the
other ? Or even if it be for a time amusing, is not
that the utmost that can be said for it } unless or
until perchance the strains wander, sure of a for¬
giving welcome, into the paths of musical beauty^

WAGNER AND WAGNERISM

Still seeking there, if they will, such delicate sug¬
gestiveness of outer things as under Schumann’s
wand could make of a humble piano a joker of
divinest jokes. At any rate, whoever it be who truly
finds his poetry in the ' desolate disarray * of ordi¬
nary programme-images, and his music in their
broken sound-reflection—if this is what he prefers
to the art which is no more truly typified by Volkslied
and chorale, by Beethoven’s sonatas and Schubert’s
songs, than by the noble melodies that have won
Wagner the popular heart—let him at least say so
and recognise the distinction, that we may know
where we are. For it would be speculatively
interesting, however mournful, to mark how, so far
as his taste prevails, the symbolism from which
Painting and Sculpture were able to emerge, just
because in their case it was frank and rigid and ex¬
pressionless, need only seize in sound the chance of
making itself ingenious and fluctuant and pseudo-
expressive, to become the engulfing death of the
sister art.

47

A MUSICAL CRISIS.

Virtii diversi esser convegnon fmtti
Di principj formal!.

Dante.

In writing a paper about Music for the general
reader, there is always this difficulty—that, how¬
ever modern and however popularly interesting
be the topic selected, no profitable discussion of it
can avoid beginning as it may seem a long way
off, among quite fundamental conceptions, luckily
few, but unluckily dry. In dealing with visual art,
the critic is not obliged to start all his views from
an inquiry into men's natural love of imitation, or
into the reasons why church spires must be built
point upwards, or into the most obvious implica¬
tions of terms like form and colour. But in the
case of Music, however cramped by its conditions,
he will not gain in the end by ignoring them; his
work may easily lose a place in science without
finding one in literature. And the necessary

,43 A MUSICAL CRISIS

conceptions may, perhaps, be galvanised into some
sort of interest by representing them under the
guise of four fundamental paradoxes^ neither meta¬
physical nor technical, which truly mark Music off
from all other arts, and round which every essen¬
tial fact and argument about it may, I think, be
shown to centre. Without further preface, then,.
Music is, of all the arts, (i) at once the most
abstract and the most popular; (2) at once the
oldest and the youngest; (3) at once the simplest
and the most complex ; (4) at once the vaguest and
the most definite. Of these pairs of distinctions,,
the first has to do with the art’s broad general
attributes ; the second with its history and mode
of development; the third with certain varieties of
actual structure, objectively regarded, which it now
presents; the fourth concerns partly such objective
varieties, and partly the sorts of feeling associated
with them. It is in connection with this last pair
that we shall find our chief key for criticism, and
through it we may approach the question sug¬
gested in the title of this paper. But none of the
pairs can be properly realised or explained with¬
out reference to the others; and a brief examina^
tion of the first three will lead us naturally up to
the fourth.

A MUSICAL CRISIS

49

The of the four paradoxes would be fitly
placed, if only because it enables me at once to
emphasise the apology that I have already hinted*
However truly the popularity of this art may be
one of the most important facts in the worlds
and one of the most stimulating to practical en¬
deavours, its abstract nature is no less a positive
bar to the sort of treatment which is so profoundly
moving and exhilarating in the hands of compe¬
tent critics in other walks. Eliminate all memory
of Music from the world, and the events and sights
and even the sounds of life would go on just as
before; men would use their voices in speech, be
soothed by the stream, be startled by the thunder.
Conversely, eliminate all memory of the events
and sights and noises of life, and still (if we could
conceive existence under such conditions), while
the subject-matter of poetical and pictorial and
plastic representation and the inspiring uses of
Architecture would wholly have disappeared, the
essential message of Music to the ear and heart
would not be lost; he who had known and loved
a tune could know it and love it still. But the
result is that he who does more than know and
love tunes, and essays to talk of them, has no
familiar region of natural and human beauty with
VOL. II. E

50

A MUSICAL CRISIS

which to compare them. It is for more fortunate
critics to make the world itself seem richer from
.the standpoint of arts which extract and combine
its beauties. While the forms of the musician's
world are transporting him and thousands of his
fellows with their beauty, the language in which he
is constrained to deal with them, if he would avoid
the stale froth into which Schumann's sparkling
subjective fancies and Hoffmann's grotesque whim¬
sicalities have now degenerated, seems doomed to
be as sapless and unsuggestive to the general
reader as if he were describing geometrical patterns.
There is no avoiding the beggarly elements. The
phenomena are not made up of parts separately
suggestive or fit to be dwelt on, not of eyes and
lips and limbs, not of sculptured arches and soaring’-
minarets; but of this note, and this, and this, each
quite abstract and insignificant, pieced together
by dint of what looks more abstract still, namely
various degrees of resemblance or relationship
between them, into something which may turn out
to be, if still abstract, yet the very opposite of
insignificant, namely a fine tune. As Rip van
Winkle used to say, * That’s all about it:' a street-
^5oy, practically, knows as much; Beethoven,
theoretically, knew no more; and any further

A MUSICAL CRISIS

51

description will be apt to run to adjectives and
interjections, which supply not so much the
grounds as the outlets of feeling. One can only
ask the reader to do his part, and to make the
words as concrete as possible by keeping some
familiar tune before his imagination; which if he
can do, however little technically a musician, he
must consent to wake, d la M. Jourdain, to the fact
that he has been at home in the mysteries of
* tone-relation ’ all his life.

It will be noted that the abstractness of Music
extends even to its shapeless material. The mere
sounds which it works up into its peculiar and
coherent forms have no natural existence. Few
and most fragmentary are the sounds, even among
the so-called musical sounds of Nature, which
present even for a moment such certainty of
timbre and pitch as would adapt them for member¬
ship in a system of true musical notes. Nor is
this fact without its bearing on the popular effect
of Music ; for as stimulation of the ear is, to begin
with, a more arresting and impressive sort of affec¬
tion than stimulation of the retina, owing to its
normally lesser persistency and greater concen¬
tration in particular moments, so the rarity of
distinctly musical tone among sounds increases die

A MUSICAL CRISIS

S2

nervous effect. But it is in the shapes which art
creates by the combination of these separate sounds,,
that the abstract character of Music, and at the
same time its power over men, are fully revealed.
Not among continuous sounds, however soothing,
nor among random sounds, however sweet, not
among murmurs of winds or waters or CEolian
harps, but among consciously created and coherent
structures, do its votaries wander; often delighted
by their beauty, often puzzled by their complexity,
often wearied by their emptiness; and ever and
anon, it may be, startled and puzzled at finding
the heart touched by forms so impalpable, the
imagination haunted by shapes so aloof from all
others with which the senses feed it. I shall have
more to say hereafter as to this all-essential
distinction of material and form ; of the sounds in
separation, whose colour or timbre (violin-tone,
clarinet-tone, bassoon-tone, and so on) takes
effect mainly on the mere physical organ, and the
sounds in artistic combination, addressed to that
higher faculty which discerns the particular combi¬
nation as a true recognisable unity, whether a
formed whole or a formed member of one. The
extreme commonness of this faculty, of this habit
of construing a series of tones under the unity

A MUSICAL CRISIS

S3

■of form, is one of the things we disregard only
because it is so constantly before us. It is a
faculty as truly exercised by the savage chanting
his monotonous refrains, by the little child croon¬
ing over some scrap of melody, as by the expert
who with the eye and the inward ear thrids the
mazes of some elaborate score. And granted the
commonness of the faculty, that veiy abstractness
of its object-matter, which seemed hard to connect
with the universal popularity of the art, becomes a
ground of explanation for it. Even as savage
chants can lash into furious delight men whose
pleasure in other art extends, at most, no farther
than an infantine pleasure in rude imitation, so it
is just because the perception of more developed
strains presupposes (beyond the commonest musi¬
cal opportunities) no education at all, either of
the senses or of the imagination or of the emotions,
that Music can win its triumphs in modern cities
where the eye is starved, can appeal to the prosaic
many as well as to the poetical few, and can open
a common world to those whom no other interest
unites.

We pass now to our second paradox. Music ns
the one primeval art which we share with the
brutes. Some of them produce indeed archi-

54

A MUSICAL CRISIS

tectural structures; but we have no reason to-
suppose that they derive any distinctive pleasure
from them ; and as mere works of utility they do
not enter the province of art. That particular
arresting quality mentioned as belonging to musi¬
cal materialy to sounds coloured with distinct
musical timbre as opposed to the uncertain neutral
sounds of ordinary life, simply needed nervous
systems for its discovery. And the additional fact
that these sounds were often producible at the will
of a creature, by a conscious and exciting effort^
puts them into a different category from those
visible adornments, plumage and so on, which
were a permanent gift of Nature to their passive
possessor ; so that in the deliberate exercise of the
power for the sake of pleasure to the possessors or
members of his tribe we see a veritable art-germ.
But not only so ; the germs of form are also found
in the animal kingdom, in that appreciation of
regularity of recurrence which, at its simplest, is
almost as purely sensuous as pleasure in formless
sound, and within the reach of comparatively
simple nervous organisations. And it is this same
recurrence which, when it assumes true regularity,

f

we call rhythm; and which in the shape of a basis
of regular accents remains, and will remain to the

A MUSICAL CRISIS

55

end of time^ a characteristic of all series of sounds
possessing wide permanent charm for human ears.
Though appreciation of rhythm makes its appear¬
ance below the human stage^ we need not go
beyond our own time, and savage members of our
own race, for the evidence as to the priority of the
musical to the other artistic instincts* This is
the better worth noticing in that the prominent
quality of savage performances to a civilised ear
is their monotony and hideousness; and though
many have remarked the precision^ few have re¬
marked the hi^h developmenty of their rhythmic
element. I was much struck with this in the
performances of the Zulus at the Westminster
Aquarium, where not only was the device of
‘syncopation’ effectively used, but the still more
recherchi effect of double against triple time*
This represents an advance of the artistic sense
of audible form decidedly beyond the appreciation
of abstract visual form evinced in the stars and
simple patterns with which savages often adorxt
themselves; and to what is more developed wd
may reasonably attribute the earlier beginning.
Evidence of a similar priority is found in the
individual life, in the age at which babies manif^t
delight in bits of rhythmic stimulation*

56

A MUSICAL CRISIS

Yet in- spite of this antiquity, Music is the one
art, specimens of which, brought not merely from a
remote past but from the Europe of a few centuries
ago, not merely from barbarous communities but
from the Athens of Phidias and Sophocles, must
and would totally fail to convey to us the essence
of what they conveyed to their original public, even
if found, by good fortune, to be a stage or two re¬
moved from pure incoherent ugliness. This want
of appeal to modern European ears of music other
than their own, and the consequent dating of
music, as we care to listen to it, from quite a
modem epoch, depends not on any development
of musical instruments, not therefore on any im¬
provement of the colourings of Music, but purely
on that further factor in musical formation which
is not the rhythmic—namely, the gradations of
pitch. Out of the infinite number of such grada¬
tions obtainable between the lowest and highest
notes that the ear can apprehend, it is necessary
that a certain limited number, a certain scale of
notes at fixed intervals from one another, should
he selected, and that combinations should be made
wholly out of these selected items ; this is the con¬
dition for producing definite and recognisable
combinations. Now this selection is in a great

A MUSICAL CRISIS

57

measure arbitrary. There are certain larger in¬
tervals which seem to have figured in all selec¬
tions of any degree of development; but the
notes selected between these main landmarks have
varied greatly at different times and places; and
no one can genuinely appreciate combinations built
from the units of some different series from that
which his ears have been accustomed to. Such
combinations may appear to him only wearyingly
monotonous, as in systems which use some but not
all of the notes of his own system, e.g, old Scotch
tunes playable on the black keys of a piano. But
when the scale of notes is totally different from his
own, the combination which to a familiar ear is a
formed and pleasurable melody will strike him
as simply an incoherent and fortuitous succession,
the effect being, perhaps, most distressing in case
of systems which use steps of pitch smaller than
the .smallest in his own system; as in Arabian
music, which admits notes separated only by the
eighth part of a tone, with the result that to a Euro¬
pean ear the higher note sounds as if it was meant for
the lower and taken grievously sharp, or vice versA,
Our own scale-system was attaining its final shape
only about three centuries ago, and (it is needless
to say) has proved its special excellence by the

SS A MUSICAL CRISIS

music to which it has served as a basis—the forms-
into which it has proved possible to work up the
intervals that it presents. And thus it is that Music,
though its roots are lost in an endless past, must
for us mean modern European music, and that
could we resuscitate even the civilised music of
other times, our ears would fail to grasp or wel->
come it.

We pass now to our third pair of contrasts: in
musical structure we recognise the simplest as well
as the most complicated sort of artistic production.
Regarded in one way, this merely carries on the
idea of the last pair, that we can trace back the
germs of Music and the musical faculty into further
and simpler elements than those of other arts, the
primary nervous stimulation being in nature far
more elementary than the rudest sketch or verbal
phrase. But the contrast between the simplicity
and the complexity of Music has a sense far
beyond this ; a sense of paramount importance to
a true view of its developed state. In Music, €l$
it now stands^ the simplest constructions hold a
quite unique position, a pre-eminence quite un¬
known in any other branch of art; there is a sense
in which they may be said to be throughout of far
more vital importance than any more elaborate

A MUSICAL CmSIS

59

work. The history of Music is no gradual advance
from the few touches to the many, from the bare
outline sketch to the rounded completeness and
nicely adjusted gradations of developed forms, where
the simpler groupings get left behind like the
naive beginnings of other arts. Not, of course, but
that in other arts we are familiar with the notion
that the value of a work cannot be weighed by time
or space or labour. Acres of canvas, covered with
the work of many lifetimes, may not be worth a
sketch of Leonardo's j libraries of epics and trage¬
dies might be gladly surrendered to the flames to
save a page of Sappho. But even though a rough
sketch may reveal to the connoisseur —ex ungue
leonem —that only a great master could have pro¬
duced it, no one will maintain that it can or ought
to reveal the glory of Painting to the world at large
as truly as the more elaborated work. The case of
Poetry presents, no doubt, a difference; for here
small and unpretentious works may have qualities
which the whole poetical public recognises as
supreme, and, moreover, the greatest poems in the
world live in the hearts of men more by short bits
than is generally recognised. But to begin with>
the simplicity of such gems is far less total than
that of some musical inventions which produce flbe

6o

A MUSICAL CRISIS

characteristic musical impression in the very highest
degree, and demanded the very rarest power in their
inventors. The Daffodils and Fullfatkom five and
the lines about Francesca are simple, but we at any
rate know of verse considerably simpler, as Ba bay
Mack sheepy and Let dogs delight : whereas a vulgar
street-tune, a milk-and-water drawing-room ditty, is
often less utterly simple in structure and in unity of
impression than Eirl feste Burg^ or than many a
melody of Handel, Mozart, Beethoven, and Schu¬
bert, which has moved the human breast with all
the might that it is given to Music to wield. But
this is far from being all. The great fact is that
short and graspable pieces of musical combination,
limited groups of bars which the ear receives as
close self-dependent organisms, are the indispens¬
able nuclei from which more elaborate structures
spring, A long movement will contain a limited
number of such ‘subjects,* acting as centres of
growth for more extended passages in which their
features reappear. This sort of evolution is en¬
tirely peculiar to musical structure. And it is to
bt particularly remarked that though one may call
l^ese cardinal subjects germs or nucleiy that de¬
scription is in no way to imply imperfection. On
the contraiy, it is these that must be the pri-

A MUSICAL CRISIS 61

manly and vitally perfect things; they are not
mere seeds which give birth to what is beautiful;
it is their independent force and beauty which give
, the chance for the more elaborated and discursive
beauties along the path of their so-called * develop¬
ment/ Where those independent qualities are
absent in the germinal motives, no ingenuity of
treatment will give the supervening structure that
power of wide appeal and haunting charm in virtue
of which the greatest music in the world ts the
greatest.

In striking contrast to the character of seizable-
ness and narrow limitation of length of these quint¬
essential bits of music, whether Volkslied or Leit-
motiv or symphonic ‘subject,’ stands the intricacy
of the combinations through which the art of sound
will lead the yielding ear. In a way, of course, a
single large and magnificent building may be called
more complicated than any piece of music, in virtue
partly of the numerous purely mechanical problems
of building, partly of the immense multiplicity and
richness of detail. But it may be doubted whether
the essential forms of any architectural structure
exhibit such abundance of computation and artifice
as find scope in the so-called scientific mazes of
contrapuntal composition. It would be interesting

A MUSICAL CRISIS

to show how Music has suffered at different times
from the abuse and from the neglect of this elabo-
rative power; how the ear may be defrauded of its
rights and balked of its due amid the involutions
of an ingenious pattern, no less than amid the dis¬
persion of a motiveless chaos. But our present
point must rather be that it is to direct and melodic
formation that we must look for redemption from
either danger; and this will be best pursued in
connection with our fourth and last paradox.

The various ways in which Music shows its
definiteness and its vagueness may be best sug¬
gested by instances. The more extreme cases
present no difficulty. There can be no doubt that
any one who whistles a barrel-organ tune after
hearing it has received from it a definite impression,
aesthetic or not, according as he has or has not en¬
joyed it Equally, there can be no doubt that any
one whose ears have been introduced to some long
and elaborate composition under the echoing roof
say, of King’s College Chapel at Cambridge, and
who could neither whistle a bar of it, nor even
recognise it again if he heard it, has received from
it a vague impression, also very likely aesthetic.
But there are two other^ cases of a more mixed
kind. The less expert or feimiliar ear may find only

A MUSICAL CRISIS

63

vagueness in the very strains which to the more
expert and familiar ear are as definite, for good or
evil, as the barrel-organ tune. Each condition, for
instance, is fairly represented in the performance of
5ome vast polyphonic tissue of Bach’s ; the definite
one by the majority of the chorus who render, and
the vague one by the majority of the audience who
gape at it. And lastly, the impressions of the
more and of the less expert or familiar ear may
present the difference, not of vagueness and defi¬
niteness, but of two sorts of indefiniteness which
we may distinguish as incoherence and vagueness.
The more expert or familiar ear may be in quite a
■different condition from that which we imagined in
King’s Chapel; it may quite detect all that is
going on, and may even be in a position after
several hearings to recall and recognise the se¬
quence of the different portions; but if the sequence
conveys to the hearer an impression of fortuitous¬
ness, of being made of parts not interdependent or
necessary to one another in the sense that one bar
or phrase demands or conditions the next, then he
will no longer call the music vague^ but incoherent.
And on him such music will produce not an
aesthetic, but a balking and fatiguing impression;
while on another, who has npt sought and so has

64 A MUSICAL CRISIS

I

not missed coherence, the impression may be as
pleasingly vague, and consequently as aesthetic, as
were the billowing echoes of the King*s anthem^
In practice these various states may, of course,
cross and alternate and present themselves in
various degrees to a single pair of ears in the
course of a few minutes; but they will be emi¬
nently useful to bear in mind as separate types.

And now for a page I must ask the reader to •
descend with me to the lowest nadir of truth and
dulness that I have in store for him. We cannot
advance a step farther without a clear notion
of what the coherence I have mentioned really
consists in; a clear notion, that is to say, of the
fundamental principle of melodic formation. This
requires for its comprehension no musical pro¬
ficiency beyond the power of realising a simple
tune; none the less do accomplished musicians,
every one of whose melodic intuitions depends on
its truth, go through life either denying or ignoring
it It will look, moreover, at once so innocent and
so abstract, that I search in vain for some mode of
statement that shall force to the front its enor-
mous practical importance. Perhaps the best way
will be to anticipate by just mentioning that,
while it is exemplified in at least 99 per cent, of

6s

A MUSICAL CRISIS

the bars written by such composers as Handel^
Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Schu*
mann, Mendelssohn, and Brahms, the proportion
of Wagner’s bars which do not set it at defiance
could scarcely, on the most liberal estimate, be
put at over a half. Recalling, then, the general
fact already noticed, that every note in every
melodic succession has two aspects, a place in
time and a place in pitch, we may develop it as
follows; every specimen of developed melody is
the resultant of one particular set of related time-
lengths (called the rhythm), and one particular set
of related points in pitch (which has no separate
name), each of these formative factors being at
every point indispensable to the other. It follows
that alterations in the time-relations—the change
of a crotchet into a minim here or into a quaver
there, or the spreading of one bar into two or con¬
densing of two bars into one—are bound to be as
fatal to any particular form as alterations of the

•

points in pitch, the replacement of As by ^s, or
any other ' false notes ’; and if such alterations
can be made without the form’s sensibly lapsing
into incoherence and absurdity, it must be because
in its original state it too completely lacked joints
and ribs and vertebrae to be capable of dislocation
VOL. II, F

66

A MUSICAL CRISIS

—because it had too little sense to begin with to
be suddenly converted into nonsense.

This, then, is the accurate expansion of the
vaguely recognised fact that time and pitch both
enter somehow into Music. It may be otherwise
expressed by saying that melody is perceived in
tivo dimensions^ which, while distinct in themselves,
agree in being each accurately measured, and are
then as fused in their effect as height and breadth
in a visible object; and time being one of the
dimensions, its measurements are not a means of
supporting or defining the melody, but with the
coincident pitch-measurements are the melody.
That this principle presents some difficulty, I
infer from having found it often explicitly, and still
oftener implicitly, disavowed, and hardly once
explicitly affirmed and applied ; the recognition
of it being, none the less, to a true conception of
melody much what the recognition of two blades
and of their mutual effect is to a true conception
of scissors.'

* I have space only for one or two short instances of its denial.
The assertion by an excellent musician, in one popular manual,
that a melody * is not expressive of formal beauty and in another,
that rhythm is * supplementary,^ but ' will heighten the beauty of a
melody ’; the belauded aspiration for a time when the * tyranny of
measure ’ shall escape notice, and music so * attain self-conscious-

A MUSICAL CRISIS

67

By true conception I of course do not mean
true appreciation. Thank heaven, no appreciation
of terms, no following of propositions, however
elementary, is needed for that. No word that I
or any one else can use will ever reveal or even
modify to any human being the essential impres¬
sion for which his own ears are the sole channel,
save now and again, it may be, by the indirect
process of getting him to direct his ears in this or
that direction. By conception, I mean a purely
external and logical, not an inward and artistic,
comprehension of the phenomena. The dry facts

ness ’; the Wagnerian description of rhythm as * an intruder in
the realm of absolute music even the misapplied phrase ' time
and tune *} may stand for innumerable cases showing how constantly
rhythm is regarded as a mere adjunct or casual support, not as
a constituent, of melody. 1 need hardly warn the reader against
confusing rhythm, which is purely a matter of titae-r^/a/u^s, with
or against imagining that the strictness of these relations
precludes a certain amount of elasticity in the way of hurryings
and retardations, in which the sense of the true relations is com>
pletdy preserved.

To make the above account complete, one further fact is needed.
Time and pitch, we have seen, equally admit of accurate measure¬
ment. But while the pitch-series of a melody, we found, is made
up of items of a particular scale with gaps or intervals between the
steps, in the time-series, from the very nature of time, such gaps
can never occur. That is to say, time is passing, and is felt as pass¬
ing, between the moments when the successive notes are attacked ;
whoice it is easy to see that measured itenys of the time-series may
pass in silence^ without being occupied by any item of the pitch-
soies—sttch silent time-items being called rats.

68

A MUSICAL CRISIS

which I have set forth, exemplified as they are
equally in the half-automatic enjoyment of the
street-boy and the wrapt appreciation of the con¬
noisseur, have the same relation to tlie pleasurable
experience as physiological knowledge has to the
exhilarating sense of vigorous life. But the bear¬
ings of physiological knowledge on life have their
importance; for life brings occasions which de¬
mand more than the mere power to enjoy—to
wit, some reasoned knowledge of that on which
the power depends, of the conditions of health
and disease, of the foods that nourish and the
foods that cloy. And the world-life of Music is
rife in occasions when its public, for want of some
slight inquiry, accept what they enjoy little for
what they might enjoy much, and ride anchorless
at the mercy of puffers and experts; not realising
the conditions of what has most truly delighted
them, nor separating it from much that they have
endured in patience or believed in vicariously, nor
standing on their right, as the majority of those
for whom Music exists, to rely on the verdict of
their own ears.

But to return to our melody. The objective
conditions above stated, the extreme definiteness
of formation necessary to coherent melodic motive^

A MUSICAL CRISIS

would naturally lead us to expect that the pheno¬
mena as appreciated by the hearer would present
a similar character. Experience abundantly justi¬
fies the expectation. There never can be any
doubt about melody (by this word I mean to
include a passage of any length which possesses
organic unity) once known and loved. It may not
be grasped on a first, or a second, or even a third
hearing; ears vary immensely in their tether—in
the length and elaborateness of the passages they
can bind into organic series. But once so grasped,
such a series, whether four bars long or forty, is as
much itself and nothing else as a familiar face or a
familiar road; and can often indeed be recalled
by average musical capacity with an absolute
precision, unequalled in any mental picture of
visible objects that the most gifted observer could
summon up. However ineffable and mysterious
be the delight, considered apart from its object—
from the individual succession of notes which pro¬
duces it—there is still no subjective vagueness or
uncertainty about it In the very act of being pro¬
duced, it is fused and one with an impression as
definite and objective as that of the Parthenon;
it presents itself as an indescribable glorying in
that particular motive as being just what it is.

fo A MUSICAL CRISIS

Here, then, we have a double mode of testing*
how far any music, presented to us as melodic^
possesses the definiteness of true organic form.^
We may either make alterations in its structure
^by altering some of the time-relations as sug¬
gested above), and so detect how far it has genuine
structure enough to be capable of sensibly falling
to pieces; or, surrendering ourselves to its in¬
fluence, we may note the degree of possessingness
and permanence in the artistic impression. It
must not be supposed that these tests will equally
serve to distinguish good from bad, or enjoyable
from unenjoyable music. Even the second one,
though almost, is not quite infallible for this pur¬
pose ; for though dull strains are certainly not as
a rule vividly or accurately realised and recalled^
at any rate in lengths of any considerable extent,
yet it is a familiar experience to be haunted by
phrases which are felt as positively wearisome and
distressing. And the former test alone would be
quite inadequate; for just as a plain face may

* Any music figured on music-paper puts in a visible claim to
bave true artistic formation. It is therefore worth remarkii^ that
in pronouncing much of it formless (as the application of our tests-
will oblige us to do), we are using the word as we should use it of
some clumsy clod of earth or random scrawl of lines, not meaning
that such objects have not some sort of figure in space, but that th^
shapes are shape/m—are inartistic, fortuitous, and unarresting.

A MUSICAL CRISIS

71

possess as definite features, related to each other
in as definite ways, as a beautiful one, so trivial
and unimpressive musical forms may present as
much definiteness of structure as refined and im¬
pressive ones. But this structural test is of the
utmost practical importance as marking the con¬
ditions inside which it is possible, and outside
which it is impossible, that beauty of a perma¬
nently arresting and vital sort should exist; much
as a spine and ribs are indispensable elements,
though not guarantees, of a beautiful human figure.
The reason why no one would think of dwelling on
these conditions of human beauty, is that they are
so obvious and universal; there are no vague
things professing to be human figures in which
such features are absent or doubtfully present.
We shall see, if we now pass on to the vag^e side
of Music, how differently the case stands with its
abstract and ever new combinations.

We have already remarked the existence in
Music of a vagueness distinct from incoherence or
mere negation of form, and having positive aesthetic
value ; and the very words suggest its connection
with the positive elements of Music which are other
than form, viz. material and colour—that is to
say, musical sounds considered in respect of their

A MUSICAL CRISIS

.72

immediate sensuous qualities of mass and tone, not
of their melodic and harmonic combinations. Pur¬
suing this connection, we find in the first place the
peculiarities of musical tone, which fit it for artistic,
combination, intensifying instead of destroying cer¬
tain qualities of wide occurrence in the domain of
sound in general. No region of impression ap¬
proaches sound in the sort of effect of which we find
it hard to say how far it is purely nervous, and
how far penetrated by genuine though most vague
imaginative qualities. Even our start at a sudden
loud sound seems possibly connected with some
dim momentary suggestion of external power, which
has its roots possibly in catastrophes of remotest
ages ; while the longer roll of thunder or the near
roar of a cataract gives time for the startled feeling
to soften into wonder and awe. We look in vain
for a parallel to this in any simple but unusual
stimulation even of the aesthetic sense of sight, as
if we look at the sun when just bearably bright.
So again it is haird to say how far further intuitions
of gentle continuance and spiritual calm do not
mingle in the soothing effect produced on the
nerves by the monotony of flowing water, or the
undistinguished murmurs of summer woods. All
such emotional swayings are producible in a pecu**

A MUSICAL CRISIS

73

liar degree by sudden bursts, rolling volumes, or
peaceful continuances of music, which conveys to
the hearer, whether owing to his or its deficiency,
no impression of definite and recognisable form.
Not only does its marked colour-quality increase
the nervous effect as compared with the more
neutral sounds of winds and waters, but a musical
piece by its frequent changes of pace and loudness
has special opportunity for condensing, and, by
contrast, intensifying the solemn, the exciting, and
the soothing elements. Still more important is the
less direct effect of continuous sound, in so arousing
and attuning the general mental faculties that they
readily direct themselves along any favourite chan¬
nels of thought and fancy—an effect producible to
some extent even by the monotonous roll of a rail-
way-carriage. And here again musical sound, owing
to its more possessing influence on the nervous
organisation, assumes a special power of quickening
and easing the independent movements of the
brain; a familiar instance being the use of Music
in assisting public devotions.

And now, beyond this superiority in its degree
of effect, a distinction must be drawn which marks
off the material of Music, not only from all
natural sounds, but from the material of all other

74

A MUSICAL CRISIS

arts. By the slow supervention of form upon the
bare material of possible tones, material of a more
formed sort, but still for artistic purposes simply
material, has been stored up. Our scale itself is
an instance. The selection of its constituent tones
was a tentative and gradual formative process, the
different intervals being tried and unconsciously
tested in all sorts of forms; but once fixed, its notes
and intervals are there as material for any one to
use, while its timeless neutrality would prevent any
one calling the scale itself a form. So again by
the special frequency of particular bits of note¬
linking, especially in chord-formation and obvious
chord-progressions, elements are stored up which
are truly material, in the sense that they have
themselves scarcely a vestige of aesthetic signifi¬
cance, and are common fragments, capable, like
fragments of masonry, of entering into all sorts of
torms. And all this has important bearings on
the effect of successions of coloured sound on ears
which detect therein little or nothing of organic
motive. Such ears may still receive far more than
the mere sense of shifting colour. No ears pro¬
bably are so perfectly unmusical as to be quite
unaffected by having perforce lived among the
music of the modern scale- and chord-system; in

A MUSICAL CRISIS

75

Other words, to detect no difference if Arabian
intervals were made prominent and all the har^
monies purposely disarranged. But for some dim
perception of natural variety and natural con¬
secutiveness, the finest colour would soon become
insupportable to the most tolerant ear, as if an
Asiatic scale, or the alternate chords of B and
were continued for an hour on the mellowest organ
in the world. It is, in fact, the perception of such
amount of formed movement as cannot but exist
even in the most formless music of an advanced
epoch, that counterbalances the wearying effect on
the nerves of anything so aggressive as musical
timbre. We can allow a gurgling stream to sound
in our ears for a whole afternoon; but not even a
Farinelli could reconcile us to a single distinct note
for a couple of minutes.

Such, in briefest outline, is the case for the
value of musical vagueness: and in the genuineness
of that value—paradox number five—lies the
greatest danger to the art. There are many to
whom the heightening of the general plane of
emotion, the steeping of the mind in an atmo¬
sphere where it soars with unwonted ease on familiar
tracks, now soothed into religious calm, now
stirred into mundane agitation, and, above all,

A MUSICAL CRISIS

-»76

those dim translations of imaginative aspects of
existence, heard in the hush and fury, the crises
and contrasts, the onsets and reluctations, of
musical movement—there are many, I say, to whom
all this seems of such singular and magical virtue,
that they are surprised or resentful at the i<lea that
the true magic of Music must be sought elsewhere.
When one speaks of there being something more,
they forget that they realise something more every
time their ears welcome a familiar melodic phrase,
and that that is all one means. Yet surely the
idea may be put with irresistible force in two ways.
First—to look at the matter from outside—if the
formed beauty of the statues in the Laurentine
Chapel must be esteemed a higher product than
the fairest wall of cliff or sun-bathed boulder in
the mountains of Carrara, must it not equally be
granted that the part in music which it took a
Handel or a Beethoven to produce, the particular
combinations which their intuition discovered and
their patient toil wrought out, has superior artistic
significance to the part which, given an adequate
instrument, requires no more inventive modelling
than most tolerable organists can supply at a mo*,
menfs notice ? This analogy is not at all impugned
^y the fact that musical material, even in its most

A MUSICAL CRISIS

77

inventionless combinations, may iiave more emo¬
tional quality than marble. As long as it is in the
force or beauty of the mere sound, and not of its
particular formation, that a hearer finds the sub¬
stance of his impression, it is clearly not inventive
genius that is impressing him.

And next—to look at the matter from inside—
must not the shapes which take entire and indi¬
vidual possession of the mind, which can be
suggested to it again through a piano or some
quite inferior sound-medium, nay, can even so
dispense with their coloured investiture as to recur
again and again to the memory at times of silence
and solitude, or amid the ordinary bustle of life—
to one perhaps in their full development, to another
in fragmentary germ, but always as familiar friends
—must not these be reckoned a more priceless
possession for our race than any vague kaleido¬
scopic glories, than all the shifting subjective
phantasmagoria, evocable for a passing hour, at
particular places and under exceptional conditions,
through the agency of musical mass and colour ?
Do not all those matchless motives that satisfy
Wagner’s test of pure worthlessness by haunting
our memories * we know not why’—does not a simple
Volksliedy or a noble symphonic ' subject,’ indepen-

A MUSICAL CRISIS

■dent of time and place, safely enthroned in the
shrines of thousands of individual hearts—live a
life unknown to that glorious or glittering throng
of sounds which, in cathedral or theatre, may
bathe the ear with solemn waves or sparkling spray,
and leave behind them as little as the floating
clouds of incense or the glamour of the lime¬
lights ? And even for the less noteworthy strains,
which in many works form the tracts between such
more vivid foci, is not at least the fact of being
gladly greeted and actively recognised as them¬
selves and nothing else an undeniable badge of
distinction? I am obliged here to put the con¬
trast strongly. I cannot write a chapter of saving
clauses, and I have already said that these typical
characters of Music are rarely completely separated.
Fragments of real form may exist in a generally
formless work; or may emerge from the general
mass and blaze of sound, which may at first over¬
power the distinguishing faculty even of a trained
and attentive ear. But while the ears whose
instinct is to seek will refuse to be put off, or to
recognise as aesthetically vague what simply eludes
their grasp, the common habit of single hearings—
of treating music (often, alas! deservedly) as a sort
c^f douche for the ear, not meant to stick or sink in-*-

A MUSICAL CRISIS

79

accustoms many to be quite content with vague¬
ness ; and then, I repeat, its real value becomes a
snare. For, indeed, it is this which has enabled
Wagner to represent as an advance the lapse into
a sort of shifting coloured suggestiveness, bound
to no independent virtue, of what is pre-eminently
an art of form—the art whose great characteristic
triumphs (including, of course, his own) are won
by the extraordinary individuality of the shapes
which it can present.

Here, then, is the crucial question for every
musical presentation to which the word fine could
be in any sense applied. Is it fine music, or is it
only fine noise } or, since it may be each in turn
within the space of half a minute, during how
many minutes altogether is it the one or the other ?
Has what is heard the stuff to be the permanent
bread and wine of artistic life for tens of thousands;
or is it just an innocuous whiff of opium for those
who crave some vaguely exciting background
either for their own fancies, or for public solemnities,
or for dramatic performances ? If the former, then,
whether its name be the Old Hundredth or the
Eroica symphony, its strength and permanence
depend on its vertebrate structure, on orgfanic
interdependence of bars and phrases and fulness

A MUSICAL CRISIS

So

of closely-knit motive. If the latter, then, whether
its sonorities roll about harmlessly for a few
minutes, like the chord-progressions with which an
organist drowns the tuning of an orchestra, or
assault the ear for as many hours with the raiest
sound-colour that the world affords, between the
lucid intervals of the Rheingold or the Gotterddm^
merungf its emptiness and transience depend on
its wivertebrate structure, on inorganic dispersion
of bars and phrases and lack of closely-knit motive.
I wish to keep clear of music-type and techni¬
calities, and will only therefore suggest to the
musical reader to spend half an hour in applying
my first test to some specimens of Wagner’s
‘melodic* declamation. Avoiding the Meister^
singer and some favoured acts elsewhere, and
skipping any passages where the true ideal of
impressive orchestral motive is attained, or even

r

(to be generous) whqre the witty compilers of the
Nibelung motive-book could with much certainty
detect their prey, let him count the pages where
the casual halving or doubling of the time-values
of a fair spfmVdmg of the notes, or the spreading
here and there of one bar into two, produces a real
rebellion of the ear against the change, in the
sei^ that something cogently right is found to be

A MUSICAL CAlSIS

8l

made helplessly wrong. I think that even devotees
may be thus surprised at the patience they have
been unwittingly displaying; for it scarcely needs'
proof that shapes which cannot be dislocated ouf
of shape can have neither strength, nor beauty,
nor (in any vital sense) expression. One has the
less scruple in pressing this test for Wagner’s
practice^ seeing that in his theory^ through many
pages of discussion on fine-drawn and unreal
relations of melodic to verbal rhythm, the recogni¬
tion of the fundamental relation of rhythm to
melody—resting on the fundamental principle of
regular nervous stimulation—is conspicuous by
its absence. Yet the quality which Wagner has
dimly perceived to be common to Beethoven’s
symphonies and to the simplest dance-tune, and
which, indeed, constitutes the * tyranny * that
musical form is to advance by throwing off, is of
course no other than this. One wonders whether,
according to the same theory of evolution, there is
a good time coming for the human form in which
the flesh wll throw off the tyranny of the bones.

I cannot here pursue the criticism of Wa^er
into detail, or re-examine in its historical and
psychological aspects his strange confusion of the
presentative forms or Ihiai which Music finds in

VOL. IT.

G

A MUSICAL CRISIS

S2

herself, and in which she expresses herself, with
the representative ideas which Poetry draws from
the world and which express her version of the
world; his singular affiliation of an art which,
starting in physical impulses of the remotest past,
has never lost its exceptionally direct relation to
the organism, and so appeals to the most prosaic
of mankind, on that other art of intellectual birth
and quicker growth with which Music long formed
unequal, and is still always willing to form equal
alliances^—in a word, the confusion of possible

* One aspect of this subject, however, is so intimately concerned
with our present distinction of the vague and the definite, ^at I
cwnot quite omit it. An extremely common error recognises that
distinction in the relation of music to the words to w^hich it is ‘ set. ’
Wt^er asserts as self-evident that the norntal condition of the
alliaacc is for the words to be definite (his own are often painfully
so), and for the music to make up for its lack of concrete meaning
and greater vagueness by the more intense emotional colouring with
which it can invest the verbal sentiment. Now whether we call it
ethically v£^ue or lestheticfilly indescribable— it is often both—^the
emotional colouring, to be vivid and permanent, must depend, as
we have seen, on definite musical impression. * Wliat any music
means for me,’ said Mendelssohn in relation to song, ^ is not something
too indefinite for words, but too definite ’—a sentence which ought
to he inscribed in letters of gold over the door of every composer’s
workroom. That the words can be similarly definite and individual,
in the sense of making satisfactory pieces on their own account, Heine
and Mr. W. S. Gilbert in their dififerent styles would alone suffice
to prove. But special suitability of first-rate verse for musical set¬
ting is extremely rare : it is fortunate therefore that individual and
Independent merit in the words is in no way a necesrity, as it is

A MUSICAL CRISIS

83

union of effect with actual unity of substance. 1
have tried elsewhere to confute this aliped
identity in source and essence of musical with
poetical production; on the strength of which
words, even when of the nature of formal heraldic
proclamations or philosophical disquisitions, can,
it seems, be ‘ expressed * by spattering them with
random flakes of vocal intervals thrown off from a
chopping sea of restless orchestration. It is rather
with practice that I would now deal in the light
of the above conceptions; and I take Wagner as
representative of the crisis through which Music is
now passing, not because he has theorised, but
because in his actual productions the forces of
good and evil*are so markedly combined. Side
by side on his pages stand the types of the two
forces, of revelation and negation, of life and
decay, known for what they are only by the ear

in the music. A most elementary sort of poetry, such as we might
pass without a second thought in a collection, will supply senti¬
ments and images which become charged with whole worlds of
romance, when the musical motive has dominated and blended,
their stray suggestions into the unity of its own coherent indiiddu-
ality. In the. failure to see this clearly lies a very main distance
to Wagner’s theory and practice of * expressing ’ poetical id^ and
emotions by note>phrases lacking any coherent individuality, and
throwing the onus of coherence on the words, while he still reaps
the benefit of nobody’s judging the words as if they were meant
for independent realisation.

A MUSICAL CRISIS

S 4

which recognises the greatness and the urgency of
its own legitimate claims—nobly-formed tune and
artfully-coloured incoherence, natural impressive¬
ness and tortured pseudo-expressiveness, deserts
of weariness and oases of delight. And it must be
the aim of all who perceive this to get the facts
recognised for what they are; not to allow one
limb of our paradoxes to be realised (as it often is)
without the other; not to let it be supposed that
because melodic forms are abstract they are arbi-
traty, or can become a force in the world inde¬
pendently of deep-seated conditions, as certain, if
as few, as the mechanical conditions of Architecture;
nor that because the vast development of the art
is new, the essential rhythmic condition is not old^
older than our race; nor that because Music can
present complexities which task experts, it can
cease to find both its basis and its crown in clearly-
defined and clearly-realised motives; nor that
because it is vague and of all things most transient
when we do not grasp it, It is not definite and of
*aU things most permanent when we do.

Nor must the juxtaposition of right and wrong
in Wagner^s particular productions blind us to the
fact that it is the wrong that almost exclusively
"prevails in his influence on production in general*

85

A MUSICAL CRISIS

All our admiration of him as a great creator must
not disguise the danger of lauding him as a 'great
innovator * or a ' daring reformer.* As a creator,
he has perforce done what all other great creators
have done, set his exploring faculty along the dis¬
tinct paths of rhythmic impulse ; along which path
he has, like them, found sound-forms gathering
into shape—not indeed crowding on him as on the
supreme masters, but still revealing themselves to
him, and through him to the world, in mastering
force and beauty. As an innovator, owing partly
to his lack of continuous creative power and partly
to his unconsciousness of that lack, he has been
before everything the apostle of disintegration, the
facile tempter of others off the paths of firm and
formed motive into the wastes of shifting and shift¬
less sonority. Such is the ' reformatory * tendency
of a theory which would divert musical invention
from the real to the unreal—from the patient
pursuit, in the only possible place and by the only
possible faculty, of such combinations as alone
can either dignify Music or transfigure theii'
non-musical concomitants, to the extrication of
^expressive* notes from their supposed lurking-
place in the verbal details of more or less
questionable 'poetiy.* Those yeiy achievements

86

A MUSICAL CRISIS

which are the chief positive result of Wagner's
quarrel with his predecessors, and which he has
shown to have capabilities of true dramatic service
—^the relaxation of the stereotyped sections of solo
and concerted piece, and the throwing of the
weight of the music into the orchestra—have proved
a snare. As regards the part assigned to the
orchestra, if its successful employment points to a
really valuable field of operatic development, Wagner
has none the less taught us what new and unique
chances it affords for successful imposition. And
as regards the stereotyped barriers, they might con¬
ceivably have been broken through in serious Opera
—as Beethoven broke through the conventional
outline of paragraphs in chamber-music and sym¬
phony—without relaxing an iota of the principle of
genuinely organic movement in the successive sen¬
tences of which the series must perforce consist, had
Wagner been a Beethoven, or even had his own
inventive springs been more abundant. But as, on
the one hand, the weakness of Italian Opera lay,
not in the barriers, but in the poorness of the stuff
they enclosed, so, on the other, the strength of
Beethoven lay, not in the bursting of the barriers,
but in the splendour of the stuff with which he
overflowed them. This burster of barriers is, in

A MUSICAL CRISIS

ST

point of fact, the most organic and the most
‘inevitable* composer that ever lived—the Com¬
poser whose every sentence and paragraph comes
to seem the most necessary in its place, and in
whom therefore the root-principle of musical form,
strict interdependence of parts, reaches its furthest
development. But this by the way. It is not with
these larger developments, but with the sentences
and paragraphs themselves, made up of notes and
note-groups, that we are now concerned. And here
the principle admits of no relaxation. Some of the
most beautiful long compositions in the world—
by Haydn, Mozart, Schubert, and Schumann—are
comparatively loose in the larger aspects of struc¬
ture— i.e. they do not produce the Beethoven sense
of inevitableness in the sequence of paragraphs;
but no musical sentence has ever profoundly im¬
pressed human ears without inevitableness in the
sequence of notes and note-groups. The question is
not of this or that arrangement of periods, of this or
that mode of punctuation and transition—points on
which an opera-writer may fairly claim the utmost
liberfy—‘but of a certain continuity of musical
interest during the minutes (not necessarily con¬
tinuous) that music is going on. To this that
very liberty is a constant danger; yet to this no

A MUSICAL CRISIS

SS

composer on whom Beethoven’s mantle has at all
fallen ‘ so as to hurt' can presume to sit loose.

But the evil influence is in no way confined to
Opera. In all directions we find the same garish
impatient fragmentariness; the same tendency to
do what is easy and wrong, instead of what is
difficult and right. No writer can catch from
Wagner or any one else the heaven-sent gift of
tune: only too easy to catch is the notion that
colour and noise will do as well, with perhaps a
printed programme whereby the hearer’s humble
instinct to interrogate his ears may be swamped in
the sublime faith that he is listening to a * poem.’
Not without instructive irony is the very fact that it
was in Wagner’s bitter opponent, Berlioz, that this
particular development of modern music found its
protagonist, and in Wagner on the other hand a
pretty severe critic; for, lying far deeper than his
criticisms of it, its fundamental principle—that
vital music can be tapped from some other than a
distinctively musical source, and by something else
than the direct and undeviating exercise of
distinctively musical invention—will assuredly
never own for its chief prophet any other than
himself. And nowhere else in the domain of Art
am the confusion be so utter, or the contagion of

A MUSICAL CElSis

89

-error in high places so rapidly disastrous, simply
because no other art has the power of sinking into
•an incoherence at all comparable to that of Music.
Even critics who discern the approaching collapse
of classical painting in the wastes of muscle and
huddled foreshortenings dispersed over Michael
Angelo's Last Judgment, still perceive that the
members at any rate combine into human shapes,
in strongly conceived if uncomfortable attitudes,
and do not expect to find the canvas of the next
generation of painters covered with mere stray arms
and legs. But in Music, let the composer give up
the search for individual sound-shapes, for series of
notes arresting as forms, and not for being shrieked
by piccolos or blared by trumpets—and the
•collapse is total. If nothing but rayless ingenuity
were expended on this sort of work, one might
shrug one's shoulders ; but it is impossible to forget
that not Berlioz only, but men like Rubinstein, and
Raff, and even perhaps Liszt, were born with a
spark of the divine fire, which has enabled more
than one of them to produce bits of exquisite work,
sometimes complete on a small scale, sometimes
shed in fragments over a laiger area; and which
might have given them too a place among the im¬
mortals, had it but been allied with the moral attri-

A MUSICAL CRISIS

9P

bute which, quite as much as genius, has seemed to
mark out Brahms as of the lineage of Beethoven*—
the habit of stem and patient self-criticism. As
things are, it is not too much to say that there is
more of the genuine pleasure-giving quality in
many a naive page of native growth than might
be found in a cart-load of foreign importations.

I should hardly, however, have dignified with
the name of crisis the fact that a certain number
of composers have fallen slaves to their instruments
and orchestras, and produce scores full of joyless
work. Were that all, one might find compensation
in the reaction, when clever musicians sit down and
charm a large company by jodelling, to two chords,,
strains compared with which Mandolinata is pro¬
found—delightfully recalling Punch’s delightful
joke about the preciousness of'Little Bo-peep.^
The serious fact is rather that the joyless music is
getting rdpandut and that audiences seem more and
more ready to mistake for the best that the art can
give them the sort of mechanical amusement which
they derive from its vagaries. Such blunting and
misdirection of the popular instincts is fatal, not
perhaps so much to the genuine enjoyment when it
comes, but to the essential habit of seeking for it in
repeated hearings, and giving to all music that can

A MUSICAL CRISIS

9t

truly move us the same chance of sinking deep into
our love and memoiy as we give, without thinking
about it, to some favourite domestic piece, or to
some cherished specimen of pictorial or poetic art
And this brings me to a comforting reflection*
Hoping as I do, from signs too numerous even to
mention here, that in the great future of Music in
England the main fact will be the very opposite
of listening to superfine orchestras, namely, the
universally increased rendering pf music by the
people themselves, I am able to regard the pre¬
sent unhealthy condition, depressing though it be,
as still very possibly transient and local. It is
naturally in London that the unhealthy symptoms
are most prominent. One easily sees how the fact
of expensive performance is a peculiarly misleading
sort of impfimatur \ the trustful hearer is slow to
believe that a work* at which sixty admirable
instrumentalists have been perspiring for an hour
(to say nothing of rehearsals) is the musical
analogue, say, of Pollok’s Course of Time, But in
the first place, increased knowledge will bring confi¬
dence to many a doubting judgment; and in the
second place, these musical abortions luckily make
immense demands on their performers, and in that
way are limited to rare places and occasions. On

92

A MUSICAL CRISIS

such our art, in its great popular character, can
never depend. Of the legion of Wagner’s fallacies,
the supposition that the life of a people’s music
can or ought to emanate from special performances
for an £iie few at some favoured centre, is the
grossest insult both to music and people, to say
nothing of common sense. One might with more
reason represent the life of poetry in England as
consisting in sending up delegates to the Lyceum.
The dignity of an Avatar will never compensate the
* heavenly maid ’ for this blasphemy against what is
divinest in her ; and that a man of Wagner’s sin¬
cerity should so have lost the habit of genial and
sympathetic observation as explicitly to deny the
musical art-life of his own people, and to describe,
the abundant wells of daily delight which
Schumann opened up to them and to us as * com¬
plete uuproductiveness in Art,’ is a really ludicrous
Nemesis on his Qwn constant defiance of the
rhythmic and tonal conditions of great popular
music. But in England, at any rate, the art
numbers its centres by thousands; and if its life Is
to give delight, and the delight is measured by de¬
gree and permanence, it is surely a truism to say
that the practice-room in which a choral society
becomes familiar with the masterpieces of Handel

A MUSICAL CRISIS

93

and Mendelssohn, or the piano through which a
household makes friends for life with Beethoven
and Schumann, is more of a centre of musical life,
and brings forth a hundred times more of it hour
by hour, than the most elaborate presentations of
work like Liszt’s (anything but) Divine Comedy^ or
Rubinstein’s Paradise (very decidedly) Lost^ or the
nightmare movements of the Harold and Leftore
symphonies—not to mention a good many hun¬
dreds out of the thousand minutes occupied by
Wagneris tetralogy—^from which not one per cent,
of the audience carry away a vestige even of the
very sparse delight that they may have received.

But though, as long as the popular taste de¬
velops, the present prevalence of the phenomena
here discussed might appear hardly to constitute a
crisis in the history of the art, there is a deeper
sense in which it may be the sign of one. On a
broad view of musical life in its public and private
aspects, it can hardly be denied that we are getting
more and more used to the paucity of strains at
once perspicuous and magnificent in contemporary
production, and turning more and more instinctively
io the past for our greatest music. What does this
portend ? Is there something in it beyond the mere
crowding out of untried work by what is well estab-

04.

A MUSICAL CRISIS

lished in public favour—a crowding out which is to
some extent inevitable in an art each of whose
presentations must exclusively occupy a very ap¬
preciable space of time? We have among us
writers of indisputable genius and enthusiasm, and
the outer conditions of great public receptivity and
an immense spread of musical knowledge are in their
favour. Are the inner conditions equally favourable
to true greatness and permanence in their work ?
or are they doomed by the very atmosphere into
which they were born to be a generation of Epigoni ?
The nature and history of Music both suggest that
in this art the exceptional is what is to be expected;
as regards creative originality, is it to be an excep¬
tionally long meridian or an exceptionally rapid
decline ? Does the multitude of known direc¬
tions in which the musical faculty of the in¬
ventive few, as well as of the uninventive many,
has been led from childhood, leave unimpaired
the aptitude for striking out into new directions,
which, though new, shall have the power of draw¬
ing other ears into them'with glad compulsion?
Does the inevitable and lifelong possession of brain
and heart by the crowd of haunting shapes which
represent the inventive achievements of the last few
gotierations, allow the old spring and scope for

A MUSICAL CRISIS 95

spontaneous ims^inings ? Is there really a danger
that the present progress of Music> where it is not
towards chaos, is towards the ingenuity and com¬
plexity which would reduce it to the refined amuse¬
ment of a small specially-gifted minority? Our
third paradox taught us that comparatively short
motives of arresting interest are necessary to great
works : will they cease ? Our second paradox
taught us that the note-material of our music is of
modern development, and it has been assiduously
racked and re-racked for combinations: will it hold
out ? Volkslieder like those of the past do not
seem now to blossom up: can we look for an eternity
of striking ‘ subjects ' in concert-music or Opera ?

I have not space to attempt a reply, even were
a definite reply possible ; but perhaps, as regards
the public at large, we may find some solace in a
reference to our first paradox. In Music, if any¬
where, we may expect vitality in what for a
generation and upwards have been lived on as
masterpieces. For not only cannot musical struc¬
tures crumble like earthly temples, but the very
abstraction from outer regions of idea and sentiment
whkh gives them their wide appeal, sets them out
of danger from the changes and chances of political,
religious, and social life.

96

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE

EAST-END,

In one of his admirable articles on social reform, the
Rev. S. A. Barnett struck a true note in pointing^
out that the plain social duty of those whose livea
are sheltered and prosperous to those whose lives
are struggling and forlorn is the supply of what he
boldly called luxuries. In the main it is possible,
and if possible expedient, that the life of individuals
and families should- be maintained by their own
exertions. But that it should be made worth living
by their own exertions, is often wholly impossible ;
seeing that the minutes and hours of which it is
forced to consist have nothing worth living about
tibem, and have no tendency to beget other minutes
and hours better or brighter than themselves. Here,,
then, direct assistance gets its fair and boundless fields
Blithe field is made up of two very distinct portions^
-r^the one concerned with the means of cleanliness,
decency, and self-respect, the other with more

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END 9/

»

positive pleasures; and just because the importance
of the former portion so much absorbs the thoughts
and hopes of reformers, and the more positive enjoy¬
ments are regarded as an extra, is a reminder
occasionally needed that to be clean, decent, and self-
respecting is by no means to live a life worth living.
For most lives, excitement is not an extra but an
essential—more truly a condition of health than
even personal cleanliness. And of all charitable
duties, the provision of excitement in its higher
forms is in one sense the plainest \ seeing that while
any other sort of direct giving is fraught with
doubts and dangers, and needs to be cautiously
planned indeed if it is to avoid the evil of encou¬
raging thriftlessness and weakening self-reliance,
this particular sort admits of neither doubt nor
danger, and every atom of the gift represents so«
much sheer gain, without the possibility of draw¬
back.

The reason why this view, which might be
widely agreed to in theory, is not more boldly
acted on, is, 1 believe, a lurking doubt as to the
opacity for the higher enjoyments of persons
whom fate has first condemned and then adapted
to ugly and sordid conditions. It is thought that,
some amount of elevation in mind and habits

YOl^ ll.

H

9$ A PERMANENT BAND FOR. THE EAST-END
*

must be produced by the slower machineiy of
board-schools, temperance-movements, and im¬
proved dwellings, before these enjoyments can
have their chance, or at any rate before they can
be distributed broadcast. Taking men in the
mass, comfort, it is thought, must come before
beauty; fairly civilised material conditions before
the appreciation of art. Now, if it is the art of
Shakespeare and of Tennyson that is meant, I
fear I must entirely agree; if it is the art of Turner
and of Watts, I must in great part agree ; if it is
the art of Handel and of Strauss, I cannot agree
in the very least. That it should happen, by a
divine chance, that one great art exists which is
independent both of the visible world and of the
life led in it, is just one of those pregnant facts
whose moral we overlook because they are so

y

near us—the moral here being that the art in
question has the perpetual power of flourishing
among the meanest surroundings, and of mingling
its current with the most prosaic lives. And what
is this but to say that it is the peculiar art for
modem industrial communities, and the unique
means for fighting the public-houses ? To be a
iittle more precise, I am persuaded, after long and
careful observation, of ^he axiomatic truth of the

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END 99

*

three following statements:—That the apprecia¬
tion of the best and most refined music requires
neither goodness nor refinement, though indirectly
it may promote both; that it does not even re¬
quire education, except such education as is in¬
volved in the very act of hearing; and that in
respect not of all but of much good music (which
on this very account we may claim to be the best ^),
the fullest faculty of this appreciation is inborn in
a large number—and a considerable degree of it
in a large majority—of the inhabitants of this
country; many of whom, however, go perforce
from the cradle to the grave without the chance of
discovering its existence, and so without the chance
of demanding its exercise as their birthright. I

* The common^idea that there is a sort of incompatibility be¬
tween good music and popular music (or populacf. music) depends
on the undoubted fact that music exists which cannot be denied to
be good, but which can only in the millennium become popular.
But if there is one thing that 1 would assert with more confidence
than another, it is this: that though you may easily give a rough Eng¬
lish audience music too difficult for them, you can never give them
music too good for them. I would not shrink from an extreme test.
Take the roughest audience, and try them with the most vulgar,
bouncmg, and obtrusively * popular ’ composition, and then with
some perfectly quiet piece divine tune—for instance, Braham’s
Death of Nelson, and Handel’s Love in Her Eyes —each to be
sung as well as possible. It is just possible that the former might
get most applause on the first hearing; if it continued to do so
on the ^dxd, I would be content never to say a word more about
popular music.

K2

"100 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-^END

am inclined to believe that the faculty h most in¬
stinctive and universal below the classes of educated
and comfortable people, but cannot state this with
positiveness. Of the other' statements, I have
attempted elsewhere to give the reasons and the
proofs; I can here only dwell on the kind of action
which they demand if they even distantly approach
the truth.

That action can be nothing less than the estab¬
lishment of daily music, of a sort that thousands
can hear, wherever it is certain that thousands
will come and hear it; and to begin with, in the
East-End of London. I should be the last to under¬
value the admirable work done by the various
Societies which give regular concerts and enter¬
tainments in poor districts, or the still more ad¬
mirable work of those who are starting and super¬
vising local classes for musical instruction. It is
to this latter movement—the thin end of a mighty
wedge—rather than to any National Training
School, that we must look, as time goes on, for a
revelation of the musical possibilities of our nation.
3nt meanwhile very much more than this is
wanted. These dispersed efforts need some huge
palpable musical fact for a setting; some constant
»eathibi^on of the art, such as may arrest the att^-

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END XOl

tion of multitudes who would never find thchr way
to a * People’s Entertainment ’ or a * Ballad Concert/
still less to a choral practice. A large band playing
good music daily or rather nightly throughout the
year, in a large covered space, is the least that I
would advocate.

The first objection to such a scheme will per¬
haps be that, in view of the other schemes already
launched, it is unnecessary. I wish therefore to
make it clear that the institution of a large per¬
manent band in the East of London is a wholly
different project, and would have a wholly different
aim, from those other schemes. For the work which
amateurs are doing there will always be ample
scope ; but concerts of the kind that they supply
can never meet the primary want that I have in
view. I have never pretended that, because people
live at the East-End, their hearts and understandings
are necessarily at the mercy of ballads; still less
that a large proportion of them will care to spend
their evenings in sitting quietly, listening to high-
class chamber music. To expect that would in¬
deed be quixotic. Such hours of refined and
unsensational aestheticism are not as yet for
the masses, whether of the rich or of the poor.
The printed reports of these meetings—how the

‘ 102 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

audiences are apt to be scanty and require to be
amusedi and how it will be necessary to educate
them up to the class of music that is desired for
them^—sufficiently indicate that the familiar demons
of ugliness, squalor, and discontent have too deep
a hold on average East-End life to be exorcised
by the tinkle of a piano or the tones of amateur
vocalists, even though Beethoven speak through the
one and Schubert through the other. All honour to
the benevolent entertainers who cast their bread
upon the waters ; the swans will come and eat it,
and the geese may learn to follow. But mean¬
while what is required is something stronger and
more stimulating—something that the people may
feel in the spine and at the roots of the hair, as
well as in the ears. A child who has seen fifty

Hi

other London churches with indifference will feel
a thrill of awe on entering St. Paurs. In matters
of art our city populations are as children ; and I
want this great centre of performance to be a sort
of musical St. Paurs—dominant and exceptional,
with an atmosphere of its own, and able to infuse
a spice of the awful even into a Strauss waltz.

* See a letter of Mrs. Ernest Hart, the energetic Secretary of
the P(^Iar Ballad Concert Committee, in the Pall Mall GautU for
,, Nov. 20 ^ 1884 .

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END 10$

But then sound, to be awful and to get at the
spine, needs ample appliances—needs to be nour*
ished in its depths by double-basses, and trumpeted
forth in its heights by brass; and the sinews of
trumpeters and double-bass players are—money.
Work like that is a complicated craft; it must be

A

depended on like machinery. It is not amateur
work, any more than the building of St. PauVs
was. ‘ And in the richest city of the world, where
the arts of the eye are so sumptuously housed,
Music may surely claim one spot where her in¬
visible temple shall be reared in truly imposing
style—‘ never built at all, and therefore built for
ever^—daily new-created in our midst, and free
as national property for any who will to enter.

I would not be misunderstood. No one has
spoken more strenuously than I in contempt of the
mere sonorous investiture of Music, which is as
much at the service of the flimsiest phrase-monger¬
ing as of the loftiest invention. It is the growing
tendency to mere restless sonority which I hold
to be the febrile symptom, the sure sign of decay,
in recent production. But to catch and command
rude ears, you must give them the striking inves¬
titure—^the bright and massive sound-colours—as
a bait, if nothing else. In the absence of special

*104 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

education, it is only the specially gifted who will
grasp at the essential beauties of music where, as
in chamber compositions played in a large Concert
room, there is a lack of full sensuous quality. For
the average hearer you must supply that quality,
only taking care that the sensuous sonority is the
embodiment of something worth embodying. The
band itself, with its wealth of sound-power, is a
mere condition or instrument; the aim lies beyond.
No amount of sonorous beauty will endow with the
power to grip the attention and haunt the memory
strains which it took anything less than genius to
create. The function of the band is simply to be
the mouthpiece of genius—to present, with the
force and emphasis that the masses require, the one
sort of great ideas that they can intuitively appre¬
hend. Some might say, get the band and then
think about the programmes; I say no one who
does not see that the programmes are the vital
point ought to try to justify the band.

On this vital point I will offer here only two
suggestions. One frequent feature of German
ooncertsshould be freely adopted, and scores of great
melodies, vocal or any other, should be arranged
for orchestral presentation—played, for instance, by
wind, and accompanied^ by strings. This is the

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END 10$

■only substitute—and a Very good one too—for rare
and expensive solo voices. Purism on this and
every other head should be tjirown to the winds.
Let the master be unmistakeably heard; let his
forms be made palpable to the ear ; their message
will be felt in time. And, more important still,
the band should take a lesson from the barrel-
organs, and repeat the same works again and again.
Popular music is familiar music; and familiar
music is music that has had its fair chance of sink¬
ing in. We do not walk through art-galleries at
four miles an hour ; we stop and look ; and Music
must be treated with the same respect. Nothing
should be played which has not the stuff in it, when
sufficiently heard, to become more or less of a pos¬
session—from week’s end to week’s end not a passage
that is not able and worthy to be recognised as a
friend; and a considerable number of pieces which
reach this degree of excellence, ranging in kind
from the C minor Symphony to the Blue Danube
waltz, from the Figaro and Tannhauser overtures
to selections from Dorothy and Patience^ should
appear in the programme at least fifty times a
year. In no other way could a fair chance be
afforded to that haunting and recurring power
whereby this art can so strangely pervade and

I06 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

iiradiate common life, and to which every stray
scrap of song, every whistling street-boy, bears
unconscious witness.

This, then, is my plea for a large scheme. The
large scheme would succeed; fifty small ones
would fail—fail, I mean, to do the particular work
wanted. An ordinary band sent down twice a
week to play tuneless jigs and bandmasters* varia¬
tions after the fashion that passes muster in the pros¬
perous West,* would not be a step in the right direc-

* 1 am glad of this opportunity to enter a protest against the
astonishing feebleness and joylessness of much of the music played
by our superb military bands. One is struck by this whenever one
happens to hear a good many of their performances in close proxi>
mitf, as at the summer evening fHes in the South Kensington,
grounds (when, however, there was always a sprinkling of good
pieces), or in the streets and parks on the Jubilee day. It is the
old question of form and colour, substance and investiture, discussed
in the preceding Essays—the old fallacy that sonorous tone and fine
performance will make any rubbish fit to listen to. Considering
the splendid array of overtures, marches, and dance-tunes existing
in the world, and either already adapted or immediately adaptable
to open-air bands, one can only account for the presentation of
pieces which are a mere series of puerile inanities by supposing
that the bandmaster either (i) sees no difference between champagne
and ditch-water, or ( 2 ) imagines that his audiences prefer the latter.
Total lack of musical sensibility on his own part would have to be
left as incurable, but not so the delusion as to other people. He is
out of touch with them, perhaps, when surrounded by his band; and
a i^od deal might be done if he would resign his b&ton for a few
weeks, and devote himself to a study of the aiTdiences. Even
lltoltd English faces are to some extent legible. But I would give-

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END lO/

tion, but a distinct hindrance. But once let the great
primary centre be established—once let the people
know that a unique sensation is to be had for the
walking to it, and that the means for evoking it are
theirs in perpetuity—and every allied scheme, every
smaller centre, will be vitalized. To most London¬
ers the fact that the nerve for that sensation is
inborn in their own frames is wholly unknown.
Let the fact be borne witness to on a truly metro¬
politan scale, and we shall soon hear another side
to the story that in this metropolis ‘ the supply of
good music outruns the demand.’

And now as to practical difficulties. The
large covered space would, one cannot doubt,
be supplied if the band were guaranteed. The
Hall of the People’s Palace is, I fear, too small,
though it might do to begin with; but either
Victoria Park or Columbia Market would afford a

a great deal to bring the matter to a more decided test. I used to
wish at South Kensington that cards could be distributed to every
one on entering, with a printed request that all nvho cared to do so
would hll in below the names of the three pieces in the programme
that they liked the best, and would return the cards on going out.
Every evening that I was there several things were played which,
I fun certain, would not have found a place on any single card.
It cannot seem pedantic to wish to exclude from every programme
to the end of time pieces which give no ray of melodic delight* and
which leave no single hearer with the slightest desire ever to hear
or Uiink of them again.

ioS A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

Splendid site, and the construction might be of the
roughest kind. But the cost of the band is more
serious ; it could not, as far as I can learn, be less
than 5,000/. a year, or say a capital sum of 100,000/,
Even this would of course not supply first-rate
players, as the nightly employriient would preclude
other orchestral engagements; but fifty good
second-class players, who, from constantly working
together, might develop into a very effective band,
could, I believe, be obtained for the above sum.
Where is the sum to be found ? One’s first idea is
that there could not be a fitter use for a fraction
of the enormous income liberated by the reform
of the City charities. Can any mode of expendi¬
ture be named which is more completely covered
by the terms of Mr. Bryce’s Act, or by which such
a sum of public money could be made to yield so
large a harvest of public enjoyment ? Before
another generation has passed, such a question
may have a practical bearing; but at present 1
scarcely venture to hope for help from any public
source. Still less do I imagine that, amid urgent
claims on every side, it would be either possible
ot desirable to divert into this particular channel
as much as 5,000/. from the aggregate fund annu¬
ally contributed by private persons to London

A PERMANENT BAND FOR TEtE EAST-END 109

charities. It seems, then, that the thing must be
done, if at all by the musical public—by the extra
liberality of those among us who not only love
Music, but believe in it. To what extent my faith
is actually shared, I cannot tell. There are people,
as it Js often dispiriting to find, by whom the art
in which lies the chief interest and pleasure of
their lives has never been seriously considered as
anything but a delightful appanage of prosperity
and refinement. But among the thousands of
well-to-do English men and women in whom the
musical interest is strong, there are some, 1 know,
who will admit the view here sketched to be
based on facts; and others probably are open to
conviction on the matter, if haply they could be
led to look and observe for themselves. Will a
thousand of these persons give lOO/,} Or is it,
perhaps, less quixotic to ask if a hundred will
give looo/. ? Or must we wait on the off-chance of
a millionaire who can seize the situation, and who
will be inspired to do at a stroke the greatest
deed—^putting creation aside—ever done for Music }
I am not even sure that that saving clause is
needed. If it is much ' to make undying music,’ it
is surely not much less to make music undying.

Meanwhile, however, I cannot help suggesting

no A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

one way in which a start might be made. There
is, as it happens, one private fund marked out as
beyond all comparison the fittest for the money
to come from, and the tapping of which, so far
from draining off a penny from any other bene-
^cial employment, would simply relieve the givers
and their friends from a certain amount of ennui
and discomfort—the fund, namely, which provides
the most expensive sort of society-music at evening
parties during the season. The money spent
in depressing a few scores or hundreds of lives
during twenty or thirty hours in the year at one
end of London, would operate to brighten as many
thousands or tens of thousands of lives during six
hundred hours in the year at the other end; and
at the same time fashionable England would be
relieved of the reproach of encouraging the most
brainless and soulless form of virtuosoship that ever
got itself patented as the artistic pick-me-up of a
cultivated society. I do not wish to exaggerate,
and am willing to believe that mingled with those
who are simply annoyed and aggrieved by the en¬
forced hush of the conversation, there are a few
who experience a pleasing titillation as they hear,
for the hundredth time, the nerveless Italian ca¬
dences and mechanical trills and roulades issue

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END HI

from some well-practised larynx. But will a ^ngle
member of this latter class tell me that the titilla-
tion is an important fact in his life, or even in his
artistic life—that the prospect of the next season or
the next evening would be perceptibly darkened to
him if this element were to be lacking.^ If he
cares for music as glorious art, are there not public
concerts where its fullest glories are displayed ?
If he cares for music as sugary sound, are there
not the Opera and the * Star * concerts, where the
same prima-donnas deal out the same sensuous
strains, considerably sweetened in quality by space
and distance ? Honestly, and putting the matter
on the lowest ground, what would the loss of
happiness in the West, to be set against the gain
in the East, actually amount to ? Would there
be a single twinge of pain in a single human
breast, if the old drawing-room regime were at
this moment declared at an end ? And to think
that, for the price thus wasted, a new world might
instantly be opened to multitudes who have never
so much as guessed its existence, and its language,
never heard before, prove more native to them than
their own I Even apart from the regular evenings
of innocent and restful enjo3m)ent while the music
was actually going on, to think that a score of

iJ2 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

th€ great tunes of the world ^ might get into the-
air, as the barrel-organ melodies do—might get
domiciled in the streets where the sunshine has
so poor a chance; wafting some at least of the
dwellers there, in many a chance moment, out of
the midst of care and squalor, to the heights of
the utmost beauty that the spirit of man has ever
scaled!

I am putting the matter, as I have said, on
the lowest ground. I am not asking any one to
make sacrifices for the sake of others. Keeping
still to that ground, can we suppose that the
credit and glory which now attach to the giving
of expensive musical soirees would be diminished
in the case of the men and women who should
adopt the plan I have suggested—^who should
spread their soirees over the whole year, and mul¬
tiply their guests by thousands ?

It happened that some months after the above
remarks were first printed, another appeal appeared
which led or rather drove me to add a few words
to my own. In an account of * Half an Hour in the
College of Music,* published in the Pa// Ma//
Gaaette^ Sir George Grove was made to say, *How
can we be called a musical nation, when we ^)end

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END II 3

millions a year to hear German or Italian music
played and sung by German and Italian musicians ;
and when, if one is asked, ** Who is your best Ehg<p
lish pianoforte-player ? ” there is literally no answer
to make ? This is shameful, and must be put right/
And to help to put it right he asked for an additional
100,000/. He ought to have it. But the sum—
as I could not help remembering—^was the very one
that I had named as the practical measure of
a scheme which, from the * national' point of view,
has an incalculably higher claim. The question
whether a nation is musical—I have elsewhere
suggested—must be decided, not by the birthplace
of the persons whom it pays for its music, but by
the quantity and quality of the musical nutriment
that it can itself enjoy and assimilate. Judged by
this test, the musiccilness of our nation is an ocean
that will never be fathomed. If this is a rash
assertion, it is at any rate one in which 1 find
myself supported by every one who has ventured
beyond the shallows of 'society,’ and taken the
trouble to throw out the plumb-line. But the
truth will be recognised, not by galvanising more
superfine musicians into existence, but by getting
for the superfine music that already exists some
sort of popular hearing—by dmng, in fact, for this
VOL. II. I

114 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

arti at much less cost and for a much wider effect^
what we do as a matter of course for other arts at
the National Gallery and British Museum. I mean
no disrespect to those innermost shrines of musical
life, * with4heir soft pile carpets,’ where the Rubin**
steins and Sarasates of the rising generation sit
battling with arpeggios and double-shakes; indi¬
rectly they may help to quicken and multiply the
far more important centres—the domestic shrines,
scattered all over the land, where the gods of
Music are worshipped as familiar presences. But
meanwhile we wait in vain for the sort of musical
centre which should be the most important of
all to a people whose masses can at present find
change and recreation only in the public-house,
and lack all means and all aptitude for perfor¬
mance—the 'National Gallery’ of Music, where
fine tunes may be daily presented gratis, as fine
pictures are, to all Tii^ho choose to have them ; with
the immense advantage over the pictures, that
th^ are enjoyed by sitting still and doing nothing,
instead of by walking about and putting the head
ait unusual angl^ and thus present that ideal
mreation, the combination of excitement with

rest. Why is it not more widely recognised that the

« ^ *

JtHTt of endowment which I have suggested h the

A IPERMANEKT BAND FOR 1CAST-END II 5

true analogue and the only analogue in Music to
those sumptuous treasure-houses in Trafalgar Square
and Great Russell Street ? Why should a nation
which * has ears but not eyes ’ devote ;^0|00o/. in a
single year to bringing itself into direct contact
with Raphael through one sense, and not have
devoted a penny in fifty years to bringing itself
into direct contact with Beethoven through another ?
Can any single reason be assigned why Music
should not at least be ‘ levelled up * ?

* But even for that/ it will be said, * training-
schools are needed; the performers must be
well trained if the music is to be adequately
rendered/ Of course they must; but for the
purpose which I propose the present supply of
well-trained performers is amply sufficient. When
there comes to be—^as in time there may—an
efficient permanent orchestra in every large town
in the kingdom, good teaching will of course have

V

to be extended. But a metropolitan city is wholly
exceptional. For no town except London do we
spend thousands annually on pictures; and what
I am urging is simply a conspicuous start, a repte-
s^ntative exhibition, a great metropolitan example.
For the immediate establishment of a large and
efficient band at the East-End, of London all that

H6 A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

is wanted is money. The great composers will
do the rest; they are great, just because they
can do the rest; and the rest, 1 make bold to say,
means nothing less than one of the greatest social
reforms of the generation. Does not such a result
suggest a larger evolution of happiness, and a
greater development of national musical life, than
even Sir G. Grove’s ‘ fifty more open scholarships * ?
I do not think that he himself would deny it; for
he is far enough from the Pharisaism which would
make music an esoteric cult, and which we have
lately seen reach the pitch of identifying a * national
art' with occasional picked performances to the
passionate pilgrims of Bayreuth, An epicure’s
feast may be * an entirely holy thing ’ in its way;
so may a school of gymnasts; but a nation does
not get its food from the one or its strength from
the other. As little will it be made musical by
the fact that connoisseurs can have their finest
taste for executive perfection gratified, or that a
free course of training is offered to promising voices
smd lissom fingers. A great melody is worth
A thousand prima-donnas; and the permanent
means of spreading great melodies broadcast, at
an annual cost of far less than a single prima-
donna's income, is an aim beside which any multi^

A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END 11/

plication of individual proficiency looks insignid**
cant.

Not that I would for a moment represent the two
aims as antagonistic. For his own sake, and for
that of his cause, the gifted and enthusiastic Director
of the College of Music deserves all he can obtain;
and so far as his pupils become nuclei for the
popular spread of their art—for example, in the
way of organising amateur orchestras and singing
classes throughout the country—they will do very
much to justify the name of 'national' for their
place of education. But that remark about the
'best pianoforte-player’ chilled the heart with a
vision of superlative soloists, and practice made
perfect with a view to expensive display. And
under the influence of that chill I cannot but con¬
trast the two schemes;—the one, whose basis is the
knowledge that we are a musical nation, and that
the only thing needed to prove it beyond cavil is to
let us hear music; and the other, whose basis is
the assumption that we are not a musical nation,
but that we shall become one on the day that the
Angers of some born Englishman shall perform
more marvellous feats of execution or expression
than those of his foreign rivals.

But 1 know that 1 talk to the winds; it b

11$ A PERMANENT BAND FOR THE EAST-END

SO much more convenient to acquiesce in assump¬
tions than to face the responsibilities of knowledge.
The golden bridge between our joyless populations
and the new world where most of them would be
instantly at home will not be supplied in our day.
Double shakes will continue to be applauded; gin
will continue to be drunk; and fortunately those
for whom I plead will know nothing of what they
miss. Sir G. Grove can afford to treat my com¬
plaint with indulgence; for he will get his loo,ooo/.»
and I shall never get mine.

119

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS.

* Comparisons are odious/ is an aphorism com¬
monly accepted—always, however, as reflection
will show us, with reference to other people^s com¬
parisons, and never to our own. There are in reality
few commoner signs of any sort of mental alertness
than the love of comparison and classification for
its own sake—the tendency to dwell on degrees of
superiority and inferiority as such. We can trace
its presence equally in the schoolboy's deep curiosity
or still deeper conviction as to * the best * and * the
next best' in the various departments of cncket,
in the Swiss tourist's unfailing interest in realising
whidi peak is higher and which lower than another,
and in the national enthusiasm with which we re¬
gard a Newton or a Nelson. The afiection is not
easy to analyse; but its main ingredient is, perhaps,
just the primary instinct to take a side—^the instmct
of partisanship which comes out among the specta*

wo POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

tore of every sort of contest, and which, e*g,, would
make ninety-nine Londoners out of a hundred, even
though innocent of the remotest connection with
either of the contending Universities, feel ashamed
of admitting complete indifference as to the result
of the annual boat-race. And in its more refined
forms, where the element of hero-worship more or
less enters, the instinct of comparison is really so
valuable a way of adding interest to our intellectual
life, that to be destitute of it may be accounted
a misfortune and a proof of torpor. It quickens
I passive perception into active participation. A
personal and emotional colouring is given to the
act of judgment, when one's own mind is recog¬
nised, not as a mere roister, nor even as a pas¬
sionless umpire, but as the sensitive and sympathetic
stage on which one's heroes have actually to measure
their strength and find their level—as the living
and independent means through which the degrees
of their excellence become distinct realities.

But like everything else which tends to a sense
of one's own centrality, this habit of classification
tieeds watching. In matters of daily intercourse
we all recc^nise the odiousness of comparisons,
when something that is moving our approbation is
iS^ed into disadvantageous contrast with something

tOETS, CRITICS, AND CliASS-LISTS 121

«lse, absent or unknown to us, the suggestion of
which chills our pleasure in proportion as it warms
the self-importance of the person who introduces
it. And further on we may have to notice that
this sort of bad manners is not wholly lacking in
literary criticism. But I want now more particularly
to notice another danger, one affecting not the
manner but the validity of the criticism; I mean
the assumption that, because the justice of our
classification is keenly felt, it is therefore demon¬
strable. We first attempt to give clearness and
solidity to our position in our own minds by means
of a formula, by entrenching our convictions behind
some short and convenient canon or principle;
neglecting thereby the chance that their truth, even
for us, may be a very composite thing, whose
strength and weight is really disposed over many
points. And then, as the fact of having our own
order of merit is inseparable from the impulse to
convince others of its justice, and as the normal
mode of convincing others of anything is by argu¬
ment, we are naturally led into trying to make
argument cover the ground, just as we tried to
make our formula cover it; which, in turn, may
involve us in the struggle to prove or confirm
by argumentative methods what really belongs in .

ttt POETS, CRITICS, AND iXASS-LISTS

latge measure to the domain of instinct, and is as
unamenable to reason as tastes and scents—^much
as though one should try to secure a sunbeam that
has visited one’s chamber by strengthening the
door and walls.

This danger belongs to verbal treatment of all
imaginative work; but the held where it is most
prominent is that of literary, and specially of poeti*
cal, criticism. In other arts, the need of a purely
unreasoning faculty, of something in both producer
and percipient which cannot be put into words—an
* eye for colour,’ an * ear for music *—is too obvious
to be for long lost sight of. Not, indeed, but that
it often is lost sight of; but the very inadequacy of
any attempts to convey in words what is the essence
of the effect in these other directions acts as a sort
of antidote, and would alone suffice to keep before
us the radical truth. The arts present, in this
connection, a natural ascending series. Music, in
its abstraction and aloofness from visible and in*
t^lectual subject-matter, is naturally the one where
reason soonest deserts the field; and, as a rule, the
expository efforts so common in musical pro*
grammes, after telling us all that the composer had
in bis mind and meani to say, end by naively
admitting that what concerns us is, after aH, what

POETS, CRITICS, AND CL4^iJSTS 223

he did say—^to wit, a certain self-justified succession
of tones, appreciable only by means of a particular
faculty which knows no law but its own. A simi¬
larly independent and wholly abstract element gives
meaning to such a term as * visual harmonies.' It
is the exclusive source of pleasure in the pattern of
the sporting handkerchief, so humorously depicted
by Mr. Ruskin; and it has a vague but large share
in the pleasure of architectural combinations. But
not only are the principles of proportion here more
describable than in Music, but there begins to be a
large infusion of a more concrete element; aiid the
author just named has nowhere used words with
more persuasive truth and eloquence than in tracing
the subtle but still penetrable affinities between
features of buildings and the human life which they
encompass. Still passing on in the direction of the
concrete, we come to plastic and pictorial art, where
the presence of visible and independently compre¬
hensible subject-matter gives words a far larger
diance—a chance too of being used in the wrong
direction as well as in the right; so that against
Mr. Ruskin’s lessons of truthful and loving scrutiny
of Nature, drawn from the demonstrable presence
or absence of it in the work of particular men, we
have to set the irritati<m of criticism like Lessing’s,

t»OETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

when he elaborately supplies us with reasons why
we cannot help admiring works which we perhaps
do not admire at all, or argues out his evidences
of consummate plastic imagination from points of
treatment which might have occurred to any blind
child of ordinary intelligence. But it is naturally
when we come to Poetry—the art which deals not
only with visible aspects of life, but with all life,
with the whole sphere of the concrete, and not only
has this as its subject, but has words themselves as
its material—that verbal exposition finds its freest
scope. Here it is that reasoned criticism will go
furthest towards covering the field; and in pro¬
portion to the extent which it really will cover, and
to the amount of excellent and illuminating work
that it can do and has done, is the danger that the
part which it will not cover, the part which, like the
essence of Music, cannot be explained or argued
about, will be ignored. Even the admission of its
existence in a passing phrase will be apt to remain
a dead letter. It is with difficulty that the critic
who feels that he has to fight, and that Reason is
his sole weapon, can avoid language implying that
in wieldii^ it he is dealing with the whole, instead
of a part only, of the artistic results which he ap¬
praises.

POETS, CRITIC^ AND CX^SS-USTS I25

A

And nowhere does either the impulse towards
argumentative criticism, or the limit of its efficiency,
appear so clearly as in that point of comparison
and classification with which we started, and by
which a good half of poetical controversy is animated
and dominated. For were Reason able to provide
us with assured canons, free from all taint of idio¬
syncrasy, from which orders of poetical merit might
be conclusively deduced, we should surely by now
have seen some signs of agreement as to their
authority. How much agpreement has Reason pro¬
duced }

Consider the controversy which is absolutely
perennial in private debates on literaiy subjects,
and which some three or four years ago engaged
the pens of such doughty champions that it may
take its place as a classical instance of ineradicable
literary differences—the controversy as to the rela¬
tive greatness of the three most conspicuous English
poets of the early part of this century. Of the three
pronunent critics who entered the lists in this dis¬
pute, each made a different classification. Mr.
Matthew Arnold's order is Wordsworth, Byron,
Shelley; Mr. Alfred Austin’s is Byron, Wordsworth,
Shelley; Mr. Swinburne’s is Shelley, Wordsworth,
Byron, the two latter being perhaps Inacketed, on

126 rOKIS, CRITICS, AND CL^SS-USTS

the View that Wordsworth’s great acluevefitents were
the higher in quality but the less in amount Each
order would find other powerful advocates. 1
imagine, for instance, that Mr. Ruskin would s^^ree
with Mr. Austin, and Mr. Symonds with Mr. Swin¬
burne, while Mr. Myers and many others would
place Wordsworth first and Shelley second. Pro¬
bably every one who takes a serious interest in
Poetry has his order, and would be ready to give
some reasons for it. Let us glance at some of the
reasons that have been lately given.

Mr. Swinburne’s reasons are rather stated in
impressive language than developed in any syste¬
matic way. They are, briefly, that Wordsworth
was tainted with Philistinism, and that Byron could
not sing; while it is assumed without question or
aigument that Shelley (besides being free from
Philistinism, and outsinging nearly every one) was
one of the few prophets, as contrasted with the
many pleasure-givers, among poets. But the other
two critics have both striven hard to universallse
their faith. The standard on which Mr. Arnold
ba^ his estimate has become famous. It is ' cri-
tlc^m of life ’; that is what he holds literature, and
Fiqetiy as the highest branch of literature, to be
concerned with. And he has little difll^

TOETS, CMTICS, AND CUVSS-LISTS 127

^Ity in showing that Wordsworth’s criticism of life
was, on the whole, a truer and healthier one than
Byron’s, while Shelley hardly criticised life at all.
Then comes Mr. Austin, and in two very striking
and suggestive papers * opposes Mr. Arnold’s posi¬
tion. By dint of rigorously confining ‘ criticism ’ to
the meaning of passing judgment, he in turn has
little difficult}- in showing that, of the great poets
of the world, some have not passed judgments at
all, and others have passed judgments in which the
advance of society has shown the most serious
limitations. Some of Mr. Austin’s subsidiary con¬
tentions scarcely seem so strong. For instance,
he objects that * to make the relative greatness of a
poet depend upon the healthfulness and truth of
his criticism of life is to place the estimate of his
poetry at the mercy of the opinion of anybody and
everybody as to what is a true and healthy criticism
of life, about which no consensus exists’—a reductio
€id ahsurdum which surely has no force unless
through a totally unwarranted assumption that
there exists some transcendental estimate of Poetry
to which every individual not only should but will
conform. The fact that.persons differ as to what

* In tHe CtmUmporary RettUw for December 1881 and jfannaiy
188s.

12 ^ POETS, CRITICS, AN 0 CLASS-LI^TS

is the true criticism of life no more affects Mn
Arnold^s canon, no more precludes him from holding
that there is a true criticism of life as opposed to
an untrue, and that the greater poet gives the truer
criticism, than the fact that many call evil good and
good evil precludes him from holding that there is
a right and wrong in conduct, and that the greater
teacher points out the better way. But as regards
Mr. Austin’s main objection, Mr. Arnold, I imagine,
would say that its force rests wholly on the restricted
meaning assigned to the word * criticism ’; that that
word may fairly claim to include any examination
or interpretation of life which clears our views and
enlaiges our knowledge of it, even though no judg¬
ment be explicitly passed ab extra \ and that in
this way Shakespeare, whom Mr. Austin represents
as never having criticised life, might be considered
as one of its greatest critics, and even one of its
greatest moral interpreters; and, indeed, must be
so considered, unless Mr. Austin would push his
assertion of Shakespeare’s objective and impartial
treatment of human phenomena to the point of
mstintaining that we rise from his works in precisely
riie same emotional attitude towards lago and
Desdemona,and passing precisely similar judgnients

V

oh Cordelia's conduct and Conerirs.

POETS, CRITICS, ANi 3 CLASSUUSTS 12 ^

Probably, however, * criticism * did need to have
its province more clearly defined ; and there can be
no doubt that, in opposing to it his own standard
—objective representation of life—and estimating
poets by the amount of life they have represented,
Mr. Austin has suggested much of what might be
found lacking in the other standard. But he, in
turn, illustrates the danger of putting all one's eggs
into one basket, and making a single criterion of
excellence bear the burden of all the comparative
estimates which we can or should make of poets.
He gives a very eloquent account of the ideal
objective poet—^the poet with the most catholic
and impersonal sympathies and the greatest absence
of private prepossessions; and then, as a proof that
such an account must exhibit the one standard by
which poetical achievement should be judged, he
thinks it enough to say, ‘ Is it not true of Shake¬
speare ?'—forgetting that it is eveiy whit as much
i^»true of another poet whose fame can certainly
not be said to be lower or less deserved than
Shakespeare’s—of Dante. However much Dante
represented the life of his age, he did so from an
intensely subjective and critical standpoint and his
individual character is as prominent in his artistic
work as Shakespeare’s is the r^erse. Nor is this

VOL. II. K *

rso POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

the case merely in respect of his character as a
patriot, or an exile, or a religious or political partisan,
or even a worshipper of ideal love; he reveals more
wholly personal traits than any of these heads would
imply. Take as an instance the exquisite courtesy,
for its delicacy almost unique in literature, which
prompts him to open his address to the blinded
company in Purgatory with the words,

O gente sicura di veder 1’ alto lume—

or which made him just before refuse even to
glance at the sufferers who could not see him in
return—feeling the respect due from man to man
to be such that merely a look, merely a passing
exhibition of interest and excitement in misfortune
which we are powerless to aid, is a sort of wrong,
an ‘oltraggio,* something consciously won by us
out of others’ pain. If things like this exemplify
what Mr. Arnold jcalls ‘ the noble and profound
application to life of ideas which thd poet has
acquired for himself,’ and if it is on things like this
that much of our special love for Dante’s poetry
depends, we can hardly accept as complete or
unique a canon which would make a poet great in
proportion as such ideas are kept out of sight.

We need not pursue lurther this specimen a

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS 1^1

controversy which might well be endless. Every¬
body may learn something from the reasonings
of those who differ from him on such a subject;
but is there nothing else to learn ? When Goethe's
youthful companions were engrossed each with the
conviction that his own school-essay was the best,
Goethe alone had self-detachment enough to grasp
the incident as a whole, and to see the lesson of all
these incompatible convictions. And might not
critics of Poetry learn more than they do from the
great primary fact that these differences exist?
For it is difficult to imagine any meaning for the
‘ greatness' of a poet, or any canon whereby it might
be sought to assert objective rightness for a par¬
ticular classification of poets, which would not pro
tanto be invalidated by the fact that a considerable
number of persons, similarly interested in the sub¬
ject and sincere admirers of all the candidates, adopt
with equal assurance a quite different classification.
At any rate, if there be any such esoteric meanings
and canons, they find no place in ordinary criticism,
which seems always to use * greatness’ and the de¬
grees of the adjective * great * with a certain reference,
understood if not expressed, to the general verdict.
The critic is not content with giving reasons why
SO and so is great, greater, or greatest, but ^eaks

133 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

as If this is a truth which must prevail in the world
at large. And so strong is this instinct of faith
that even the serious discordance of view here and
now leaves it undisturbed ; the critic merely shifts
the arena, and teaches us to look for the really
authoritative verdict elsewhere and hereafter. The
rival muses are to find their Paris in the voice of
posterity or in the judgment of foreigners—perhaps
at Paris I One may doubt, however, whether this
appeal can be really meant to be taken as altogether
final. Even supposing Frenchmen to remain for
ever blind to the peculiar magic of Wordsworth
(which, I think, is likely), or if, in the year 1900^
there are as many English dissentients as there
would be now from the view that he is the greatest
English poet of the century (which, I think, is by no
means improbable), I hardly think that Mr. Arnold
would abandon his own opinion on the subject.
And if this be so, sorely the actual discordance of
view might suggest something else than the pro¬
jection of the ideal unanimity into future and
dubious regions. It might at least suggest that
1^ mistake has lain in over-simplification, and that
the field of dispute has been unduly narrowed, and
tSiat the actual competition between the poets, on
t^e lurena of men’s minds, Is something larger than

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS X 33

a competition between two or three compact prin¬
ciples.

But it suggests more than this. It suggests the
pervading importance of some element in a poet's
work which a critic cannot elucidate, or bring into
relation with the various debateable aspects of in¬
tellectual and emotional life, and which he is power¬
less, therefore, to make others share—an element
of beauty lying beyond the scope of knowledge,
even of emotional and imaginative knowledge.
This latter knowledge includes, of course, much of
what is poetically beautiful, so that 1 am urging no
such truism as that to know and to enjoy are
different things. My point is one which, if it be
despised as a truism, is often ignored as a truth—
namely, that any poetry which we love in the most
characteristic way, which is for us poetry par excel^‘
lencCf contains for us another quite distinct sort of
beauty, the perception of which stands outside any
relations of fact which it is now in our power to
define, and must therefore be accepted as a matter
of irreversible taste and instinct. Now, it is a
well-kiK)wn characteristic of convictions resting on
taste and instinct that our feeling of their being
normal, and such as others must somehow or other
share, is strong almost in proportion to its blind-

1^4 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

ness and lack of logical standpoint. In questions
of taste we may perpetually observe an eagerness
of advocacy such as is seldom exhibited in matters
which are- accurately demonstrable. So that both
that tendency to appeal to the general verdict
and that personal sense of rightness independent
of it, on which I have remarked, may be taken as
signs of this elusive element in poetical work. And
even the critic who is most earnest in assigning
to poets their rank according to the rational im¬
portance and scope of the things they have said
would never, I must maintain, have thought of
arguing for that as their poetical rank, had not some
portions of their work been pervaded for him by a
quality quite impenetrable to his arguments; nor
can 1 for a moment imagine that, if either Mr.
Arnold or Mr. Austin should by his reasonings
convert the other on the question as to what is the
prime reasonable canon of excellence, such conver¬
sion would bring about any bond-jide change of
classification. To the luckless reader, at any rate,
Who finds himself assenting to each side in turn, it
will bring satisfaction to believe that the order of
merit was not in either case deduced by the appli-
cition of the standard,, but had bedn a strong
teaiity in the critic’s mind long before his standat^

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-DISTS 135

was evolved to justify it, and that the diffejrence in
the orders of merit may well mean, not that either
standard is wrong, but that both are incomplete ;
while there is nothing unreasonable in their incom¬
patibility, if what is needed to complete them is
an element essentially unamenable to reason.

The same conclusion might, I think, be drawn
by nearly eveiybody who cares and talks about
Poetry, in reference to private discussions. To the
familiar experience that our estimates and prefer¬
ences seem very often to lie outside the sort of
arguments produced in opposition to them, or
equally (let us confess) in defence of them, we shall
be able to add the following observation—that the
points which figure in controversy are often not
points on which the controversialists are really
much parted; that it is not something which the
one party can and does express that the other
really dissents from, but something which the one
cannot and does not express that the other is
more or less unconscious of. My own experience,
at any rate, is that I hardly ever distinctly or
strongly differ from the remarks that I encounter
about pcetiy of any degree of admitted excellence,
except so far as they set up or imply comparisons*
Whatever it be that is dwelt uponr-subtle insight

136 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

into character, deep sympathy with Nature, life
finally criticised, life finely represented, originality
or scope of conception, robustness or delicacy of
> language—it really is usually there in such degree
as fairly to justify what is said about it. Of course
there are exceptions. I suppose that, if one read
through the volume that has been written on three
sonnets of Petrarch’s, one might hnd a good deal
that one would resist as overstrained and ridicu¬
lous. But it is usually disparagement that begets
resistance; and disparagement is happily far less
common than praise, and moreover is usually com¬
parative rather than absolute—for instance, Lord
Lytton’s recent disparagement of Dante' may be
charitably ascribed to a wish to magnify Mr.
Wilfrid Blunt. And as a rule, when criticism of
poetry stirs in the average breast a sense of resist¬
ance, I believe that it is not nearly so much the
resistance of distinctly differing from what is said,
as the duller feeling that in spite of this, that, or
the other merit, the noble sentiment, the sympa¬
thetic eye, the luxuriant imagination, the musical
language—the very terms that one uses in vindica¬
tion of one’s own favourites—the particular poem
Is still one which will never become part of one’s
> In the Hin^unth Century for November i^i.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CEASS-USTS 137

life, and as far as oneself is concerned might
almost as well not have existed. N^lecting this
feeling, and provided only that all expressions of
comparison be neglected, most poetry-lovers will,
I think, find that what any person of any degree of
sensibility and culture says about poets and poems,
especially his favourite poets and poems, contains
an immense percentage of truth. But so far as
people say what is true, the things said cannot
seriously conflict; so that if the things people
could say and have said on this subject went to the
root of their verdicts, their verdicts ought to pre¬
sent remarkable unanimity. And as we find that
the very opposite is the case, the natural inference
is that their pleadings do not go to the root of their
verdicts, and that the difference in their verdicts
largely depends on differences of susceptibility to
an element of whose seeming presence or absence
they can gpve no rational account

1 have said that some phrase admitting an
clement which cannot be discussed usually occurs
in the course of poetical discussion. Mr. Austin
quotes passages of verse to exemplify what is and
what is not poetiy, and confesses that the difference
defies analysis; that he knows when the verse
poetxy, but not how it comes to be poetiy. And

138 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS ’

this element, which he cannot isolate or analyse, he
describes as that which turns representation into-
transfiguration, and he identifies it with imagination.

* Poetry,' he says, ‘ is an imaginative representation^
in verse or rhythm, of whatever men perceive, feel,
think, of do/ But here one must surely demur to
the looseness of the word * imaginative/ For that
word is naturally and truly applied to a great deal
of work in prose; and between such prose and
poetry the only difference left, according to Mr.
Austin*s definition, would be that the latter is in

* verse or rhythm-'; whence it would follow that if
such prose were turned into verse, by a mere re¬
arrangement of the verbal material in which it is
presented, it would necessarily and in all cases
become genuine poetry—a conclusion which I think
that no one on reflection could accept. Again, Mr.
Arnold tells us that the criticism of life, which the
poet applies to his subject, is applied * under the
conditions immutably fixed by the laws of poetic
beauty and poetic truth/ But once more I must
cavil at the phrase, which appears to me thoroughly
delusive. For it suggests something the nature and
^ope of which is matter of general recognition and
hln^eement—something similar to the ‘laws of
harmony * in Music, which, so far as they are lawa

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS 139

at all, no one who publishes music transgresses save
by the rarest accident; whereas, so far from the
part of the matter thus left outside criticism having
any certainty of application, it is mainly in it (as I
shall argue) that the differences which criticism
labours to remove have their roots. But apart
from this, ‘ laws of poetic beauty,* in a critic’s mouth,
amount simply to a confession that, with all his
efforts, he has rendered no complete account of the
faith that is in him. The phrase serves conveniently
to cover all that his exposition has left uncovered,
but it leaves us quite uncertain what it is meant to
include. It does not necessarily mean more than
that LAssommoir, which (if we allow to criticism
the extended sense above suggested) undeniably
criticises more life more truly than Paradise Lost^
would not, when hitched into alexandrines, make a
superior poem. From Mr. Arnold’s treatment of
Byron’s metrical flaws, however, we may perhaps
gather that he includes metrical accuracy among
his immutably-fixed conditions; yet even here,
where he comes nearest to what is wanted, he leaves
us quite uncertain as to how deep he considers that
point to go— £.g, whether he holds that Byron’s
tank could have been established had such flaws
been perpetually prominent in all his woric—if he

I 4 P POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

had always written in the style of ‘ The Two Prin¬
ciples/ and never in the style of ‘The Isles of
Greece/ Nor in his essay on Wordsworth does he
ever recur to the above phrase as though it contained
a vital point, but rests his whole advocacy on purely
rational grounds; and he has written sentences
which tend to show that he would oppose any
attempt to set excellence in respect of any magical
or non-reasonable element in the balance against
excellence of the reasonable and debateable kind.
For he says that he ranks Wordsworth above
Leopardi, in spite of what he holds Leopardi*s
superiority as an artist—and this, whatever else it
Includes, beyond doubt includes our non-reasonable
element—on account of the superiority of Words-
worth’s criticism of life; and says it in such a way
as to imply that, if we agree with him on this latter
point, the poetic superiority is incontestable. Again,
he says that Wordsworth ‘left a body of poetical
work superior in power, in interest, in the qualities
which give enduring freshness ’ to that of any poet
{Goethe excepted) of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries; but in expanding this view he dwells
wholly on points in Wordsworth’s poems which
represent his attitude to life and Nature, and which
thus be made matter of interesting discussioiL

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS*USTS I4X

He does not lecognise among these 'qualities
vdiich give enduring freshness ’ any element before
which the critic must stand helpless and discussion
cease.

At this point, however, it will probably occur to
the reader that we are going too fast. * Let it be
granted,* he may say, 'that the short, simple
canons and definitions break down—that there
is no such royal road to sound aesthetic judg¬
ments as Mr. Arnold and Mr. Austin have
supposed. Still, criticism like theirs by no means
exhausts the field open to reasoned discussion of
a poet’s work. They judge his poems in the
gross; but his poems consist of poetry, and the
poetry can be judged in detail—line after line,
feature after feature. The relation of emotion to
expression is far from being altogether a mystery ;
particular effects of poetic style and diction often
have causes which can be assigned and "reason^
ably ” demonstrated, quite apart from “ representa¬
tion ” or “ criticism of life ” j and we must not at
once fall back on " magic ** and a " non-reasonable
element/’ merely because attempts to appraise
poetry by its wider subject-matter alone prove
inadequate.’ Now this is, of course, perfectly true.
That Poetry consists largely of these reasonable

142 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

beauties is a fact that might be illustrated in a
hundred ways. One specially frequent and obvi¬
ous way is the mere fitness between the sentiment
of a passage and its investiture of imager>'.
Thus, Shelley’s stanzas on the exchange, at duty’s
call, of loved companionship for loveless solitude—

Away ! the moor is dark beneath the moon,

Rapid clouds have drunk the last pale beam of even :
Away ! the gathering winds will call the darkness soon.

And profoundest midnight shroud the serene lights of
heaven.

Pause not I the time is past! Every voice cries ‘Away! ’ &c—

present a beauty of this kind which it is quite easy
(though happily quite unnecessary) to make explicit
and talk about. But many less tangible points of
expression can also be reasonably treated, in the
sense of being referable to recognised general
principles. These principles seem to be just two
in number : the pleasure of harmony^ as where the
language in its style or flow is markedly suitable
to the sense; and the pleasure of contrasty when
it comes under the head of * unity in variety.* *
An example or two will make each definite.
The change from iambic to trochaic rhythm in the
middle of The Lotus-eaters is too well known to

‘ Hus principle of ‘unity in variety^ is doubtless at the root
ol our pleasure in maophorictU language, which is, a^n, an ob-

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASSrLISTS I43

quote; but for a more sustained adaptation of lan¬
guage to meaning, literature contains perhaps no¬
thing finer than this passage in the Vision of Sin :—

Then methought I heard a mellow sound,

Gathering up from all the lower ground ;

Narrowing in to where they sat assembled,

Low voluptuous music winding trembled,

Wov’n in circles: they that heard it sigh’d,

Panted hand in hand with faces pale,

Swung themselves, and in low tones replied;

Till the fountain spouted, showering wide
Sleet of diamond-drift and pearly hail;

Then the music touch’d the gates and died;

Rose again from where it seem’d to fail.

Storm’d in orbs of song, a growing gale;

Till thronging in and in, to where they waited,

As ’twere a hundred-throated nightingale.

The strong tempestuous treble throbbed and palpi¬
tated ;

Ran into its giddiest whirl of sound,

Caught the sparkles, and in circles,

Purple gauzes, golden hazes, liquid mazes, ^

■ Flung the torrent rainbow round :

*

viously * reasonable ’ element. Explicable beauties of this sort
may, of course, be frequent even in the most baffling verses. Thus,
in an example far excellence of the Intangible in poetry, Shelley’s
Life of Life^ the lines—

In those looks, where whoso gazes
Faints, entangled in their mazes—
present, in the image, at least one completely seizable point. This
couplet, by the way, was not improved, in proof, by the printer’s
substitution of books for looks —not made, I trust, with any special
reference to the pr^ent discussion.

144 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

Then they started from their places,

Moved with violence, changed in hue.

Caught each other with wild grimaces,
Half-invisible to the view,

Wheeling with precipitate paces
To the melody, till they flew,

Hair, and eyes, and limbs, and faces.

Twisted hard in fierce embraces.

Like to Furies, like to Graces,

Dash’d together in blinding dew :

Till, kill’d with some luxurious agony.

The nerve-dissolving melody
Flutter’d headlong from the sky.

The effect here is, of course, one of movement
and cadence of a very pronounced sort. A good
case of harmony of mere style, apart from any
special rhythmic peculiarity, is the stanza from
Mr. Browning’s Youth and Art —

No harm ! It was not my fault
If you never turned your eyes’ tail up
* As I shook upon E in alt.^

Or ran the chromatic scale up—

where the colloquial phrase in the second line, and
the ingeniously surprising rhymes of the third and
fourth, give exactly the petulant turn of humour
that befits the sense. Another stylistic point of
which the rare beauty is completely explicable and
reasonable, while yet depending on a rh3ane, occurs
in a later stanza of the same poem—

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASSh-LISTS I45

Elach life unfulfilled, you see;

It hangs still, patchy and scrappy :

We have not sighed deep, laughed free,

Starved, feasted, despaired, been happy—

where the distinction of the last two words clearly
is that from their metrical position they can do
double duty—forming the strict antithesis to ' de¬
spaired,’ as ‘ laughed free ’ does to * sighed deep ’
and ‘ feasted ’ to ‘ starved,’ but also standing in
apposition to all the preceding part of the couplet,
and resuming and interpreting its whole meaning.

The principle of contrast could not be better
exemplified than by the lines in a famous passage
of Paradise Lost -

The other shape.

If shape it might be call’d, that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, and limb ;

Or substance might be call’d that shadow seem’d,

For each seem’d either—

where the wonderful effect may in part, at any
rate, be traced to the combination of the clear*
cut simplicity, the logical compactness, in the form
of the description, with the weird and horrible
vagueness of the idea.

It would be easy and amusing to trace the
various applications of these two principles through
a number of instances. But to do so would

VOL. II.

L

146 POBTS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

require a separate Essay. Nor is such dissecting
out of verbal and stylistic features a sort of
analysis that, from the point of view of apprecia¬
tion, seems profitable. Indeed its effect may rather
be to make the beauties seem less beautiful by
robbing them of their directness of appeal; just as
many a beginner in the study of musical harmony
must have found that certain 'lost chords* lost
something when they were found, and that certain
favourite effects shed a portion of their intangible
charm as their construction and the laws of their
treatment became obvious. And as regards
Poetiy, I am much more concerned to emphasise
the fact that quintessentially poetic passages
abound where such analysis finds no opportunity
—where there is no peculiarity of -style or diction
that can be isolated for inspection, and where any
comment that we can supply is merely descriptive,
and not in the least explanatory. It does not
help us to the secret of the lines—

Across the hills, and far away
Beyond their utmost purple rim.

And deep into the dying day
The happy princess followed him—

10 say that the style is early Tennyson, and the
jjliiljon enchanting; yet I doubt if much more can

POETS, CRITICS, AND ClAsS-LISTS I47

be said. Or take that most haunting strain of Mr.

Swinburne's—

So hath it been, so be it,

For who shall live and flee it ?

But look that no man see it
Or hear it unaware ;

Lest all who love and choose him
See Love, and so refuse him;

For all that And him lose him,

But all have foun'd him fair.

Wherein lies its rarity ? In a ms^ical use of mono¬
syllabic words ? Yes, truly; but we succumb to
it because it is ms^ical, not because it is mono¬
syllabic. Let me suggest another version ;—* So
has it been; so let it be ; for who of men shall be
spared ? But keep it far from their eyes and from
their ears; lest they who might choose Love for
their well-beloved should know him, and so pass
him by; for fair he is to those that find him,
but lost as soon as found.’ The non-reasonable
element is assuredly worth thinking about if, as 1
venture to hold, the difference between these joy¬
less sentences and Mr. Swinburne’s lines consists in
nothing else.

Now those who care most about Poetcy ffnd
the poetry riiat they care most about redolent of
this iinanal3r8able charm. And it seems prd>able

' 14^ POETS, CRITICS, ANP a#A$S-LlSTS.

that the sort of analysis before described, even
where it is applicable, is held to account for much
more than it really does, just because people only
apply it where there is some very distinct charm
to be accounted for, and do not think of trying
whether similar points of artistic fitness might not
be discovered in a vast amount of modern verse
which yet no one cares much about.- I believe
that such discoveries might easily be made, but will
not inflict .any of them on the reader. It is enough
to perceive that, if the maximum of poetical charm
can make itself felt in passages where reasonable
analysis is obviously inadequate, much of the
charm of passages where it is less inadequate pro¬
bably depends on the presence of a non-reasonable
element. But if a more clinching proof be needed
of the far-reaching influence of such an element, it
seems enough to point to the constant untranslate*
ableness of the best Poetry; for this most distinctive
mark of the non-reasonable element in Poetry, as I
conceive it, such canons and definitions as Mr.
Arnold’s and Mr. Austin’s seem to leave abso-

I

lutely no room. It is not only that they supply
no grounds why any one of the numerous good
ver8&-translations, in which the sense of ^ flne
poem is irreproachably rendered, should fall far

FOOTS, CRITICS, AND CLAS$*LISTS 14^

short of the original in the impression it Is able
to produce; but that, if their accounts were suih*
cient, this indisputable fact would have no exists
-ence.

1 must hold, then, that our non-reasonable
element requires much more attention than it has
received. It is like a chemical residuum, which
introduces error into any calculations that venture
to ignore it. And in attending to it we fortu-
nately run no risk of dissecting away the life of
any poetry that is dear to us. On the contrary,
the more its general nature and scope are realised,
the more hopeless and useless will such dissections
appear. We need not shrink, therefore, from
pushing as far as we can the question in what it
consists.

The almost universal habit of those who treat
of it at all is to treat it as having only one con*
stituent, and to identify it with the purely musiml
or sensory element in verse. There is a great tempta¬
tion to adopt this treatment, in that it gives the
matter a look of simplicity and avoids all cross¬
divisions; and some readers have probably seen
little but pedantry in my presenting the differen¬
tiating quality of Poetry as a problem^ when the

150 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-USTS

key to it is so perfectly obvious. The purely
musical element involved, the part which appeals
exclusively to the ear and represents and depends
on nothing outside itself, stands out in clear and
unmistakable contrast to the part which appeals
exclusively to the intellect, and which depends on
an external world of material and spiritual facts;
and a convenient distinction of language marks
the former as the simply presentative, even as it
marks the latter as the representative element^
How convenient, therefore, to assume that the ele¬
ment in Poetiy which so enormously affects our
estimate of it, while still baffling our analysis and
defying our arguments, is none other than this
musical or presentative element; which, in the very
fact that its appeal is to a bodily sense and does
not represent or depend on anything outside it¬
self, reveals the ground why we cannot furdier
analyse it or argue about, it.

And a superficial glance at the other arts will
seem to confirm such a view. For Music, the art
where it is clear that beauty, and the greater and
of it, most completely baffle analysis and defy

I

atgument, is also the very type of a presentative
Att; and in the case pf^Fainting and Sculptuiie>
' See the tesuD^ on pp. ii, is.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLisS^tlSTS X$1

vrhere, though much in them admits of axmlysis
and argument, we are constantly constrained to
recognise a beauty beyond the reach of either, it
is again easy and plausible to ascribe this quality
to the forms and colours regarded as abstract
presentations—as taken in abstraction from
what they represent, and presented to the organ
of vision on its own and their own account. This
easy way with the arts is, however, as misleading
as it is convenient. 1 have tried elsewhere to
show how vain it is to suppose that, in looking
at the representative forms of Fainting and Sculp*
ture, we can make any bond-fide abstraction of
their representative nature, and enjoy their con¬
tours in absolute unconsciousness that a marble
man means a man, and a painted tree a tree;
and that, this being so, the beauty of such forms,
even where it is most baffling, can never be truly
independent of their character as representations,
and must always have its roots in subtle and
peihaps infinitely remote associations with the
objects and facts of the outside world. The com-
|>drison of Poetry with Music gives, perhaps, more
^cuse for error; for it is (or should be) so plain
that the essence of beauty in Music cannot be
proved or discussed in terms of reason, and also

152 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

that there is an essential element in Poetry which,
like Music, is addressed to the ear, and is even
habitually designated by the adjective 'musical,'
that the impulse is at first irresistible to regard
that part of poetical beauty which we find our¬
selves unable to prove or discuss in terms of
reason as nothing more or less than this ' musical ’
element.

That it really is something more may, however,
be shown by the very simplest experiments. For
this musical or presentative element in verse should
clearly produce its most unmixed and unmistakable
effect on ears which are not further serving as organs
for the understanding, and to which the words are
mere sounds conveying no ideas or images. This
condition is satisfied by the ears of any one who
listens to verse in a language which he does not
understand; and to make the experiment conclusive
we ought of course to take persons of sensitive ear,
as shown by their being keenly alive to the pleasure
of good verse in languages which they do under¬
stand. A very few trials will reveal how extremely
dl^ght, and how rapidly tired of, is the pleasure which
this exclusive appeal to the ear can really produce;

further, how little its amount in different cases
^^je^3CHid5 with the verdicts of a person familiar

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-USTS 15$

with the language. Masterpieces of verbal * music ’
will not be picked out from quite ordinary verses;
and quite ordinary verses, read with unction and
sonority, will readily be taken on trust as master*
pieces. The amount of aesthetic impression pro*
ducible in a Frenchman, ignorant of English, by
Lord Tennyson's best blank verse may not exceed
the amount that he would obtain from a sonorous
reading of an article in the TimeSy and will probably
fall decidedly short of what he would experience
from many a rhyming jingle ; and to a Greek
ear it is probable that even German hexameters,
strongly scanned, would have seemed preferable to
the stateliest alexandrines.

Every one must, I think, allow how impossible
it is that the full delight of Poetry, as distinct from
imaginative prose, should result from the mere
addition of this faint, monotonous, sensory pleasure
to the totally different imaginative pleasure pro¬
duced by the meaning of the words. But a still
more direct proof is possible, if we carefully ex¬
amine the nature of the change made when Poetry
has been stripped of Its musical element. What I
am urging is so little likely to be fully realised
from mere abstract-looking sentences, and depends
for its eiibct so entirely on definite experiment^

XS4 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

that I may be excused for bringing it at once to
the test. I can but select a passage which happens
to have for me personally, and for some others
may not have, the poetical character in high per¬
fection. For those others, of course, the experi¬
ment could only be satisfactorily made through
the selection, by each, of one or two passages
which have the same character for him. However,
there will perhaps be no very wide complaint of
the selection of the finest stanza in what many
hold to be Wordsworth*s masterpiece, the Ode ta
Duty :—

Stem Lawgiver I yet Thou dost wear
The Godhead’s most benignant grace;

Nor know we anything so fair
As is the smile upon Thy face :

Flowers laugh before Thee on their beds,

And fragrance in Thy footing treads ;

Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong,

And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and
strong.

Let the third and fourth lines be rendered, ' Kor
we know anything so fair as the smile on thy
laee/ All will grant that, while the meaning of
Ijie sentence for the understanding remains iden-
its total effect has been changed, and chaxiged
Ibf the worse. Now the alternative Is that the

POETS, CRITICS, ANO CLiiSS-LISTS 155

change either does or does not extend be^nd a
change in the sensuous impression made by the
flow of sound on the ear. Any one who maintains
that it does not so extend is committed to the fol¬
lowing assertion:—^That his complete pleasure in
the sentence has been diminished only by the
amount of the fall in pleasure which he will ex¬
perience if a sentence of poetry in a language
unknown to him is read over, first in its proper
metrical form, and then in a prose version. And
as we have found this amount to be extremely
small, the assertion implies that Wordsworth's
couplet gives him scarcely more pleasure than my
prose version of it. If that is his real experience,
there is an end of the matter as regards him. One
can but believe that he is in a small minority; and
whether he is or not, the difference of result in the
case of even one other person would be a fact that
nobody could get behind or upset.

As illustrating in another way how different a
tiling the effect of rhythm in verse is from the
mere addition of that quota of satisfaction which
the sound as such could afford to the ear, we may
further remark that when in the midst of beautiful
verse the' rhythm suddenly falters, the irritation
produced may be quite on a p^r with the pkasure*

156 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

which has preceded it, and immeasurably greater
than that produced by a mere break in a series of
rhythmic sounds, as when some one momentarily
interferes with the ticking of a clock. The nearer
analogue would be a false note in a beloved
melody. A single instance must suffice. In a
beautiful sonnet by Keats occur the lines—

And calmest thoughts come round us—as of leaves
Budding—^fruit ripening in stillness—autumn suns,
Smiling at eve upon the quiet sheaves.

When the passage is familiar, it is just possible, by.
going at the second of these lines as if it were a
five-barred gate, to clear the syllables, pening in
sHUi as a single foot, and so to pass along on the
regular five-foot rhythm ; but, coming fresh on it,
no one could read it save as a line of six feet, as
excessive by the whole amount of the word * bud¬
ding,’ with the result that the back of the metre is

K

completely broken—in a species of verse, too, which
is peculiarly bound to formal perfection. We can
put up with a halting line in a drama, as we can
let pass a false note in a complicated chorus, but
not in a lyric or sonnet.

What has obscured the true state of the case
is,' be^Koid question, the connotation of the wotd
suggestmg, as it cannot but do, a pleasure

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-OSTS 157

which is far more than ^nsoiy, and the very re¬
verse of faint and monotonous; so that we easily
and vaguely regard the * musical element* in Poetry
as constituting a vast independent source of delight,,
and as adding to the delight from other sources an
amount immensely beyond what proves to be its
actual capacity. All the more important is it to
observe the poverty of this source on its own
account, and to note how radically delusive is the
comparison with Music proper, treated in any other
^Way than as a contrast. The extent of the mis¬
conception is shown in all sorts of ways. Nothing,
for instance, is cofnmoner than to hear it remarked
as a strange fact that So-and-so should take such
a delight in verse and yet not care for Music. I
am not referring to the fashionable habit of regard¬
ing all the arts as One, or all as forms of Poetry,
or any such vag^e verbal jugglery; biit to the
definite idea that an ear which can appreciate
verse ought, ipso facto, to be what is called ‘a
musical ear/ an ear which will appreciate Music..
Were this so, the * strange fact * would, of course,
be not so much strange as impossible. It is really
about as strange as that a person who likes milk-
puddings should be indifferent to milk-punch, or
vice versd.

1^8 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

Verse and Music have one dement in com*
mon—an element of measured rhythm or time-
regularity in the order of sounds, most broadly
and shortly expressed as regularity of recurrence. ‘

’ The prindple of regularity of recurrence, of anticipation
regularly satisSed on a scheme which the analc^y of musical bars
compds a musician to regard as an accentiml one, whether the
recurring points of division are actually given with greater strength
of tone or not, is the fundamental one no less of classical than of
modem versification. Much unnecessary confiidon has been pro*
duced by opposing a sdieme of quantities, as the principle of das*
deal metres, to a scheme of accents, as the principle of modern
metres; the strict observation of quantities, however delicate and
important a feature, bdng still only one way in which the universal
prindple of regular recurrence is revealed to the ear, and main¬
tained as the underlying ground of order in the midst of elastic
devlatioas from it. Rhyme in itself is, of course, not an element
common to Verse and Music, since Music has no rhyme, but
rhyme pmpetually assists (in French verse even replaces) accents,
as a, mode in which r^^larity of recurrence is exhibited.

1 diall have something to say in the next Essay about the dif*
ference between Poetry and Music, even in respect of the metrical
element whose fundamental prindple is common to both; and ‘
about the total irrelevance lo Music of any ddicate verbal melody,
and the strange absurdity of representing (as M. de Banville does)
ability to be sung as * la conlition indispensable et premiere de
toute po4sie,* or asserting (as Dr. Hueffer does) the * identity
k/L musical and metrical laws.’ Dr. Hueffer, by good luck, im-
plidtly refutes himself by the remainder of his own sentence. That
idmitity, he says, was fully understood by Dante, * who was what
every Ij^cal poet by rights diould be— z. musician. ’ Consequently,
not 4 di^^e modem lyricist of eminence has been * what he by
s^g^Hs should be,’ and we are Idt to lament the barbarous hftrahn<>q«
of Shelley’s, Victor Hugo’s, Lord Tmmyson’s, ani Mr.

SisibaRie% best verses.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLXSS-LISTS 159

Music consists in the fusion of an order of this
sort with an order of another sort—that of sounds
in respect of pitch. The product is as different
from each of its components as water is different
from oxygen and hydrogen; but an ear will not
appreciate the product unless it has the power of
realising each of the components separately—just
as an eye would not appreciate the shape of an
object unless it could so move as to perceive the
height and the breadth of it separately. Thus no
amount of perception of rhythm or time-order will
help a person to appreciate melodic shapes, unless
his ear is also sensitive to the other order, in the
sense of instinctively perceiving the distances and
pitch-relations of the notes that compose it. It is
natural to take sensitiveness to pitch as the test of
‘a musical ear,* for the reason that the pitch-
element is exclusively a concern of the ear, whereas
rhythmic stimulation can be appreciated also by
the senses of sight, touch, and muscular motion;
but it is, of course, only because a sufficient sensi¬
tiveness to the time-element may be taken for
granted, that an ear thus endowed is * musical ’ in
the sense of understanding and remembering tunes.
Now this gift of' a musical ear,’ though even the
perfection of it is very common, Is by no means

l6o POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

universal; and it is as totally unconnected with any
other mental or bodily attribute as long sight.
Even this brief description of it will suffice to show
both how an ear may be (as it frequently is) at once
delicately sensitive to the charm of verse-effects
and inappreciative of Music; and also why tiie
satisfaction obtainable from sounds ordered by
rhythm only—as in a performance on the drum, or
in verse as tested by presentation in an unknown
tongue—must be infinitely slight in comparison
with the complete pleasure obtainable from Music.

It may possibly be objected that in this latter
conclusion I am overlooking certain artistic ele¬
ments in the sound of verse beyond the rhythmic—
namely, alliteration and skilful arrangement of
vowel sounds. But, immensely as these elements
often contribute to the total effect of good verse,
experiments with a person ignorant of the language
will again show how inconspicuous and uncertain is
any abstract effect that they are capable of produc¬
ing on the ear. Thus tested, the amount of plea¬
sure which the artistic introduction of them in verse
wtU add to the sensuous impression producible by
the reading of ordinaiy prose, or of verse in which
no such special art has been employed, will prove
to be a negligible quantity.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS l6l

It seems, then, quite impossible to hold that the
marked difference of effect between imaginative
verse and imaginative prose should be accounted
for by the mere addition of the ear-pleasure of the
sound to the mind-pleasure of the sense, and to
regard the complete message of Poetry as just the
sum of these two pleasures. Equally impossible is
it to doubt that the presence of this sound-element
is essential to the total effect; for the form, as dis¬
tinct from the matter, of Poetry consists in nothing
else. We are thus driven to recognise that the effect
is in some way not a sum but a product of its
elements; so that if we reckon the imaginative
pleasure alone as lOO, and the sound-pleasure
alone as 5, the resulting pleasure is not 105, but
500. But the better metaphor is that of chemical
compounds. The off-hand notion is that, as Poetry
consists of sense and sound, the pleasure which
is not due to the sense must be due to the sound;
but if we call the sense * oxygen * and the sound
* nitrogen,’ the intoxicating effect is obtained, not
by mixing the two constituents, as in air, but by
combining them, as in laughing-gas. Our * non-
reasonable element,’ thus regarded, is not an ele¬
ment proper but a reaction^ in which the nature
VOL. II. M

162 poets, critics, and class-h§ts

of the constituents, as known in separation, is
quite transformed. The point is one which might
well be emphasised for its scientific (apart from
its artistic) interest. For this sort of combina-»
tion, this veritable psych(H:hemistry^ has not been
nearly enough recognised in psychology ; and the
cases where it occurs need to be noted and marked
off from the very common cases where impressions
are simply summed—as, for instance, when I eat
my dinner at a window commanding a fine view.
In the case of verse, the reaction is probably of an
e^cceptionally complicated sort; but some attempt
can be made to divine its most general condi¬
tions.

In the first place, then, verse-rhythm in words
is the imposition of a sensible order on what
naturally and normally has only a logical order;
and there is piquancy in the feeling that so little
is this ideal control a fettering incident, that each
order seems to gain verve and spontaneity from
the other, or rather from the latent sense that the
other, though present and operative, is powerldSs
to hamper it Much more important, however, is
it to notice how the sense that. onetl^sigle thing
--r*«the word-series—is .lending itself to this joint
<dpminance may take the form of a sort of trans-.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS 16 $

iigured surprise.^ For our normal experience of
language throughout our lives has taught us to
regard it as simply a set of symbols whereby ideas
are conveyed from one mind to another; and not
once in a million times, when we listen to a
sentence, is there a thought of attending to the
sound of it as such, or of regarding the ear as
the organ primarily addressed, and not as^a mere
neutral channel through which the sense penetrates

inwards. And conversely, when our ears are occu^-^

*

pied with sound as such—^whether in submission
to the soothing influence of winds or streams
or distant city-noises, or in observation of some
rhythmically recurring stimulus, such as the ticking
of a clock or the breaking of waves, or in attention
to instrumental music, or even (we might often
fairly add) to vocal music, considering how sub¬
ordinate a feature the words there are apt to be,
and how contentedly we resign ourselves to not
distinguishing them—there is no thought of look¬
ing beyond the hearing faculty or of regarding the

’ The Toot’prindple here involved is the old one of * ludty in
variety ’—the stng'ia line of words, * dominated at once by tlM idea
which they express in their grammatical connection and by their
metrical adjustment,’ clearly possessing itoo iadcpoident iiincUons
or aspects. See the fuller discussion of * The Soiind>dement in'
Verae ' in chap, xixp of 7^ JFm/er ^ SmmL

I64 FOETS, CRITICS, AT^D CLASS-1«ISTS

sounds as s3mibols of a logical idea. Therefore
when, as in verse, the sounds are pointedly ad¬
dressed doiA to the ear and to the understanding,
the rarity of the combination of aspects contributes
a strain of feeling partly akin to that with which
we follow an exhibition of skill, and partly to
that with which we receive an unexpected gratuity.
There can be no doubt that this sense of rarity,
though of course not isolated or brought pro¬
minently into consciousness, has none the less a
very pervading share in the transfiguring influence.

Nor is this all. Rhythm perpetually not only
transfigures the poetical expression of an idea, but
tn^ikes the existence of that expression possible.
This is tolerably obvious in the case of what is
often called par excellence poetical language-
language which keeps clear of prosaic homeliness
and prosaic precision and of technical and abstract
terms, and confines itself to a more picturesque
and loftier vocabulary. Prose, of course, makes a
similar selection in certain cases, but only when
deliberately adopting a peculiar tone; only in
special instances should we expect ‘ chamber'
rather than ‘room,* or ‘passing’ rather than * very.*
Sut verse, even quite simple verse, can keep con-
tiQUOusly on this- level of exclusiveness, and there

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS j6$

are, moreover, many abbreviations arid inflections
^such as *tis and 'twas, thou and ye for you, th for s
in the third person singular) which have in them
nothing ornate, but which are now almost conflned
to verse, and are there in constant use. Clearly
it is the rarity of rhythmic, as compared with
non-rhythmic, speech that supports such rarity of
poetic as compared with non-poetic diction; that
is to say, verse, being in one respect—namely, its
effect on the ear—a marked exception from ordinary
language, thereby establishes for itself the means
of being exceptional, without seeming unnatural, in
other ways. Verse-rhythm supplies the condition
which allows us to welcome as a matter of course
the continuous assumption of a dignified style, and
forestalls the inquiry, which in prose we should be
perpetually making, as to its particular fitness at
each point in turn. But the influence 1 mean
extends far beyond these facilities for the use of
lofty and so-called * poetical’ diction. We shall
best see this by an instance. Consider the following
quatrain of Wordsworth’s:—

Love had he found in huts where poor men lie ;

His daily teachers had been woods and rills,

The silence that is in the stany sky,

The sleep that is among the lonely hills.

l66 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

All will admit the rare charm of the second
couplet; and^ while noting the beautiful allitera¬
tion and the balanced cadence of the closing
syllables in either line, we still readily distinguish
the repeated words * that is ’ as the poetical key¬
note—^as the point in the lines which gives them
thdr special rarity. And the very fact that the
words in question are not ornate or * poetical,* but
of the humblest and most mechanical sort, makes
the instance a crucial one for our purpose. By
these humblest parts of speech the poet with a
single touch makes the silence and the sleep seem
part of the inmost and eternal nature of the sky
and the hills—as it were a perpetual brooding
presence in them. ‘ Yes,* it will be said, * but that
is a piece of poetic imagination. How is the
rhythm as such in any way answerable for it ? *
In this way—that the influence of those little
words on the mind, the fulness of their sense,
depends on , their sound occurring where it does,
as an integral portion of two successive line of
definite and equal length and structure. Their
importance, their power to bear naturally the
weight of suggestion which we have attributed to
result from their being built into the fabric
bf^the rhythmic organism, so that the ear could not

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS t6f

possibly dispense with them. It is the attraction
and attention of the ear to their bodily presence
that endows them with a potential dignity unusual
in words so small and colourless ; and thus endowed
they swell in the complete sentence to the capacity
of real imaginative significance. Should the
charm be found in some faint measure to survive,
even after the lines have been rendered into prose
by alterations of their other parts, it will be because
even then the marked parallelism of clauses, and
the repetition of those two words at the same
place in each, cannot help striking the ear with
somewhat of a rhythmic effect. Destroy the last
remnant of this by isolating one of the clauses, as,
* He had fouod a daily teacher in the sleep that Is
among the lonely mountains ; ’ and even if the ex¬
pression be found natural, for me, at any rate, the
magic, and with it the fulness of significance, have
vanished.

1 am well aware how ponderous and repulsive
such handling as this of any delicate poetical
beauty must appear; and also how dangerous it is
to rely on examples, the choice and treatment of
which may be attributed to some idiosyncrasy of
taste. But 1 can at least reply that the very
clumsiness and inadequacy of words is so far

l68 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

evidence in support of an argument which would
vindicate the place in Poetry of what lies beyond
the domain of words; while as for idiosyncrasies
of taste—or, at any rate, such measure of them
as produces in various groups of persons various
special perceptions of beauty, unshared, or only
partially shared, by others—they are precisely
what 1 here maintain to be inevitable, and what I
am ai^uing to show that criticism far too little
recognises.

But we can penetrate a little further still into
the mysteries of our ‘ non-reasonable ’ element.
We have assumed without difficulty that poetical
ideas and sentiments, as resting ultimately on facts
of real experience, are just that part in Poetry
which lies within the range, not only of reasonable
discussion, but in laige measure even of proof.
But this applies to ideas and sentiments only as
embodied in complete propositions. Now of course
Poetry, like all other uses of developed language,
consists of such propositions ; but the smaller ele¬
ments of which the propositions are formed, the
single words and single smallest combinations of
words, perpetually assume in Poetry a quite unique
imiependence of interest. This may be stated a$
A matter of the commonest experience; and for

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS 169

once a really useful analogy may be found in the
art where attempts at such analogies are the very
beam in the eye of contemporary art-criticisnL
Every lover of Music knows the way in which his
delight at some beautiful musical sentence will
often seem to culminate at a particular point, in
some special note or chord, the feeling for which 1
do not know how better to describe than as a desire
to hug it as it passes. Now that note or chord
would of course have no value alone ; in isolation
it would be of no more value than the tip of a nose
broken off a statue, or a stone detached from a
temple. Its effect depends on its place in an
organic whole; and though we may often say,
* How beautiful that note or that chord is ! ’ we see
at once that it is the complete melodic sentence
that is really beautiful, though the beauty may be
more vividly realised at that point than at any
other. Similarly in Poetiy we find moments of
culminating delight—

All the charm of all the Muses

Flowering often in a single word—

where one wants to *hug* the unit in the same

«

way; one cannot dwell on it enough or squeeze
enough out of it Similarly, too, we see that it is

1/0 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

not the word itself that we can credit with the
effects ; we might look at it in the dictionary with¬
out any emotion. The single element, the wprd,.
like the note, is enabled to create this impression
of a glory inherent in it only by its relation to
surrounding elements and to the whole. As far
as this, then, the resemblance of the two cases
extends. But the word, though in detachment
it could not move us as it does, may have, even
in detachment, what the single note cannot have
-^a meaning and a multitude of associations of
its own; and these enter into, though they could
not alone engender, the special character just
noticed. And, moreover, it lies in the very nature
of language that a word may bear a far larger
share of the whole meaning of a phrase, in com--
parison with the mechanical parts of speech that
make the verbal cement for the leading words,
than a single note can possibly bear in relation to
the co-ordinate elements of a melodic form; so
that the delusive impression that the glory of
which we are conscious is inherent in the word
itself is really here far less of a delusion than the
similar impression in the case of the note. The
word does really contain in itself a dim body of
suggestiveaess in excess of the amount tibiat it is

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS I71

bound to contribute to the strict intelligibility of
the particular sentence ; and when we dwell on it
and mentally * hug ’ it in the way that I have noticed,
all this individuality is brought vividly home to us
as part of the feeling. And here it becomes
evident how truly the nameless, the unanalysable
charm of the best Poetry is bound up with its
representative, and not solely with its presentative
or musical, element For everything that enters
into the meaning and association even of a single
word is of course in nature representative; though
the associations may be so diffused and intangible^
and may have gathered together so insensibly from
innumerable sources in life and literature, that at
the moment of the word’s occurrence their presence
may be felt only as an emotional atmosphere sur¬
rounding the nucleus of more tangible meaning.
And the more any sentence as a whole is charged
with poetical significance, the more will this in-^
dividual significance of particular wprds in it make
itself felt. It is as though the elements yielded
the fulness of their separate glory only to the
master who can create for them a further glory In
their union.

‘ But,* it may be said, ‘ this peculiarity in the
imaginative and poetic use of words seems to carry

JZ 2 POJITS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-USTS

US beyond the sphere of verse; for prose also has
proved capable of transcending reason, and of
making separate words and expressions Hash on us
with unwonted and inexplicable life/ Now, in
dwelling on the non-reasonable part in poetical
beauty, I am in no way committed to the assertion
that all its constituents are excluded from prose,
but only to the assertion that the metrical form
makes a difference of kind. It cannot be for no¬
thing that the very idea of * poetical prose * inspires
dread ; and the instances of prose-writing where
we hnd delight of the intangible and non-reason¬
able kind are exceptions that only prove the rule.
One has but to test by self-examination the living
force of words in a specimen of verse and of poetical
prose which may respectively seem to oneself first-
rate of their kind. For such typical passages may
often be regarded as fairly on a par in respect of the
ideas and emotions which they reasonably express;
and the prose may unquestionably further resemble
the poetry in a certain subtle individuality of life
in its more prominent words, so far as this life
can be quickened in them by the idea itself, aided
by such qualities of sound-arrangement as are
possible apart from metre. So far the poetical
merits of the respective passages may be equal $

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS*LISTS I75.

yet only one of them is Poetry. I hesitate to
exemplify what to many must seem so obvious*
But as poetical prose may have received scant
justice in the prose-versions of Poetry above given, let
us take just one example of another sort—an exam¬
ple of original prose-expression and original verse^
expression of the same topic, and one, moreover,,
where eveiy association of authorship and context
is to the advantage of the prose, while the verse is
in itself none of the highest. The picture in the
Vita Nuova of the ardour of childish love loses
little in Miss Rossetti’s beautiful translation ;—

Almost at the beginning of her ninth year she appeared
to me, and I saw her almost at the end of my ninth year.
And she appeared to me clothed in a most noble colour—^a
subdued and decorous crimson; girdled and adorned in
such wise as was suitable to her most youthful age. Thence¬
forward Love swayed my soul, which was even then espoused
to him; and began to assume over me so great and so
assured a lordship, empowered thereto in virtue of my
imagination, that I must needs perform to the full all his plea¬
sures. He oftentimes commanded me to seek to behold this
youngest angel; wherefore I, in my boyhood, many times
sought her out, and saw her so noble and laudable in bear¬
ing, that certes of her might be spoken that word of the
poet Homer: She appeared not to be made by any mortal
man, but by God.

A moving description, truly, even if we knew

174 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

nothing of the author*s history; yet if my readers
had been suddenly asked what words have most
lingered in their ears as the incarnation of childish
romance, how many of them would have recited
this passage ? They may say that they recalled it,
but had forgotten the exact expressions. Quite so;
but it is just in virtue of * exact expressions * that
Poetry is magical. And that being the case, might
not the magic strain required rather be—

It was many and many a year ago,

In a kingdom by the sea,

That a maiden there lived, &c.—

where the romance steals upon us even before the
nominative of the sentence is reached ? Edgar
Allan Poe’s emotions were to Dante’s as a petulant
hill-torrent to a majestic river; but verse is verse*
and its relation to our emotions admits of no
substitute.

/was a child and was a child
In this kingdom by the sea;

But we loved with a love that was more than love,

I and my Annabel Lee;

With a love that the winged seraphs of Heaven
Coveted her and me.

So it is. Language, which in prose does little more
th^n transmit thought, like clear glass, becomes—^

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS I75

«ven as that becomes—by art's adjustments and
the moulding of measured form, a lens, where
the thought takes fire as it passes. The poet
speaks through a medium which seems to Intensify
the point and to extend the range of what he would
tell us by some power outside his own volition.
Such a power, in fact, a rhythmic order, in its fun¬
damental appeal to human nerves, literally is.

And we may now push a stage further our
attempt, not to analyse^ but to localise the secret
whereby an abstract order of sound, the radical
conditions of which differ from everything else in
a poet’s work by their physical basis and indepen¬
dent existence, gets wrought into the very tissue
of his thought. Having noticed how the per¬
ception of words in their metrical aspect, as in¬
dispensable parts of a scheme of sound, may give
them a prominence and importance that reacts on
their meaning, we might guess how intimately this
same feature in metre would associate itself with
our more recent point—^with that individuality of
particular words and combinations whereby their
signihcance seems to overflow that which in their
logical coherence they convey. And so indeed it
proves to be: the ictus of the verse comes upon us
as the opera^ve force which shocks the words into

176 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

their unwonted life. And what is more, this life
reacts on the rhythm itself in its merely physical
aspect. The physical effect which, as produced by
a drum or by verse in an unknown tongue, we
found so deficient in independent sesthetic power,,
is found to have undergone such a transformation
that the impulse to yield to it, to let one's inner
sense rock and sway with it, to give it its full effect
by the voice or actually to mark it by movements
of the body, is increased a hundred-fold. Any
one who is susceptible to verse may verify this in
the most convincing way, if he will learn by ear a
few choice lines in some language unknown to
him, and then, next time he finds himself repeat¬
ing over in the abandon of solitude some favourite
passage of verse, will recite the other in immediate
juxtaposition. The physical drop will be as evi¬
dent as the intellectual; no emphasis given to the
rhythm of the uncomprehended words will stir, in
anything approaching its full strength, the nervous
impulse to responsive motion.

One further point may conclude this necessary^
though, I fear, most unattractive, part of our sub¬
ject. In considering the total contribution of
m0nce to imaginative language, it is impossible to
overlook the quality of permanence, I do not

POETS, CRZTtCS, AND CLASS-LISTS^ I77

mean permanence merely in the sense tiiat fnetri^'
cal words live in the memory, and tibat of the
correct quotations which could be obtained at any
time out of the whole range of literature (putting
aside anything that has been deliberately taught or
systematically repeated) the number of sentences
in verse would be to those in prose as 1000 to i*.
This is, of course, a most important fact; but I
am here dealing only with elements of effect that
enter into the actual moment oi enjoyment. How
a feeling of permanence may rank in art as such
an element is most prominently exemplified in
Architecture. In the awe produced by the size and
strength of a mighty building, the most casual
analysis will detect backward and forward glances
to the changing generations among whom it has
stood and will stand unchanged. In the case of
Poetry the feeling is subtler, and has little such
direct relation to actual survival among men.
But we have only to refer to what was said above
on the rarity of Poetry in the world, as compared
with prose, and to remember the transience which
is so proverbial a quality of language in general—

' Jhtm wrep6€ifra —to see how naturally the excep¬
tional presentation will connect itself with excep¬
tional durability,—how the occa^bnal bestowal of
VOL. IL N

17S POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LTSTS

art on the fashioning of what normalljr is un¬
fashioned, and dies as soon as uttered, cannot but
suggest the purpose and power of making it live.
And while some measure of the effect may be
traced in any language, whether verse or prose,
where art has markedly presided at the choice and
arrangement of words, yet here again we shall
find the quintessence of it in the distinctly metri¬
cal quality of verse. It is a sense of combined
parts, and their indispensableness one to another,
which gives us a sense of permanence iii an arch
as compared with a casual heap of stones; it is a
similar indispensableness which gives to metrical
language an air of permanence impossible even to
the most harmonious sentence whose sounds con¬
form to no genuine scheme. And again, in the
case of this constituent as of the others, we have
no difficulty in seeing that its influence is really a
joint one of sound and sense—that, though founded
in the nature of metrical sound as such, it Is not
merely a sound-quality superposed ah extra on the
intelligible beauty of the words, but depends for
Its existence on their intelligible character. None
iWQuld derive the same impression of permanence

iBrpiti nonsense verses, or even from trivial verses,

'

iiqwever metrically moulded. The idea conveyed.

POETS, CRITICS, AMD CLASS^ISTS tf 9

must seem worthy of being carved out in durable
materiali for the durability itself to get any
noticeable aesthetic character. We cannot glozy
in the enshrining for memory of things that we
do not care to remember. But for that which is
of true spiritual significance the fairly>fitted body
of sound is greeted as the inevitable investiture;
and thus justified and quickened, the strength of
the mutually indispensable parts seems no longer
that of mere structure but of organic life.

So much, then, for our non-reasonable element.
It has detained us so long tiiat I will defer to
the next Essay the further study of its close
connection with varietif’ of taste. Meanwhile,
what has been said of it, if at all true, will
invalidate a good many plausible axioms about
Poetry. What can look more sound than Mr.
Austin’s definition of the art as ' a transfiguration
or imaginative representation of life in verse or
rhythm ? * Yet if this does not say, it assuredly
implies, that the rhythmic qualities lie. outside
the imaginative qualities, and are superposed on
them; it suggests no sort of reaction or- inter¬
action, producing quite new qualities. But the gist
of die matter is that the imaginative or the
transfiguring power of what is most genoindy

I *

l8o POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS4JST$

Poetry cannot be at all completely judged apart
from the actual rhythmic presentation ; that the
union of the elements goes to the very root of the
imaginative process; that the essential difference
between the most imaginative prose writer (who is
nothing more) and the imaginative poet is not a
technical one, not a matter of a more or less
striking mode of presentation for their ideas, but
extends to the nature of the imagination itself, and
to the inmost essence of the things it finds to tell
us. For, however much common ground there
may be to the two, the imagination of the genuine
poet has always the distinctive quality that images
and ideas perpetually spring up in it, not only de¬
manding rh3^hmic expression—though that is true,
and that is much—but actually clothed, or rather
embodied, in rhythm. Not of course at first in all
the amplitude of their rhythmic life, nor in any
very prolonged flow—that is a piece of luck for
now and then, luck, however, of the sort that only
comes to one who deserves it—but in phrases that,
flashing at once into their place in the metrical
sdieme, light up the path for others to follow; in
word-fragments and line-fragments, which, even
before they come in sight of their ultimate combi¬
nation, are yearning and struggling towards it, and

POETS, CRITICS, AN1> CtASS-USTS l8l

even as they enter their diviner^s mind, are instinct
with the presage of the fuller glory to which they
tend. But it is doubly useless, in a case whete
the complete result, which we can all sit and con*-
template, defies adequate description, to beat about
for words to describe the shifting and subtle pro¬
cesses that lead up to it.

And now, suppose the limitations of reasoning
criticism to be agreed to. Suppose it granted that
reasonable grounds may very well suffice to class,
for us Milton and Southey, or Shakespeare and
Addison; but hardly Byron and Shelley, or Ros¬
setti and Browning. It may still be asked—Does
the critic really produce no effect beyond that of
reasoned exposition? Is his influence wholly
limited to the ground which his logical advocacy
covers ? To assert this would be greatly to under¬
rate his functions. What he cannot do by argu¬
ment he can most assuredly often do by infection
—by the contagious influence on the minds of
others of a more vivid view and a more concen¬
trated pleasure. It is easy to disparage this sort
of unreasoned influence as producing a second--
hand and vicarious admiration, which cannpt have
the genuineness of the original article. But such

XS3 POETS, CRITICS, ANO CLASS-LISTS

dtsparagement seems very shallow. The effect is
not that the influenced person consciously exerts
himself to see or hear with the eyes or ears of
another, but that, his attention being sympatheti¬
cally fascinated, the electric contact (so to speak)
is made for him, and his own eyes and ears are
brought steadily to bear on beauties which they
might otherwise have passed over. Surely we
must all have had this brought home to us again
and again even through the simplest of all means-^
iihat of quotation. A passage standing out alone,
put forward by some one as what to him, at any
rate, has been peculiarly or characteristically im¬
pressive, will often get from that mere fact a new
sort of place in our regard, and will strike us
when we meet it again in its place with quite a
new air of distinction. But the effect may go
much beyond this. It is impossible to gainsay the

*b

testimony of those who find tiiemselves now cherish¬
ing in the inmost sanctuary of their imagination,
and brooding over with intensest personal affection,
some treasure to which (even though it may have
crossed their mental field of vision a score of times)
access was first opened to them through the sheer
really of another’s enthusiasm. Even om that

7

nOfihreasoi^ble and intuitive ground where there

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS IS3

can be no definite instruction, and where it is sup«-
posed that the individual must do what he can
with such instincts as nature has conferred on
him, our lives are curiously intertwined with those
of others; and for most of us the relation is really
a very loose one between the amount which our
emotional self proves able to contain and assimi¬
late, and the amount which its unassisted feelers
would suffice to supply to it. And this mutual
helpfulness assumes quite unprecedented import¬
ance in an age like the present, when the multi¬
plicity and dispersion of interests and pursuits
makes systematic study of art or literature an im¬
possibility to all but a small minority, and when
the amount that a man may pick up by the way
greatly depends on his alertness to be helped into
quick rapport with the best that he can get.

And Poetry is, beyond doubt, the ims^native
region where this contagious influence is most
effective. Here, again, as in so many other ways,
Music and Poetry, the two arts of the ear whose
exceptional opportunities of union have led to a
superstition as to their fundamental unity, occupy
tile two extremes of the scale. Music is, of course,
unequalled as the art in the simultaneous apprecia¬
tion of whidi numbers can tmite, enhancing thetr

184 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

enjoyment by so doing, and adding to its dignity
by realisation of its social aspect. But here the
power to appreciate, and the immediate suscep¬
tibility to the impression, are pre-supposed: the
sympathy comes in as an augmentative, not as a
revealing, influence. The essential impression of a
musical sentence, apart from all extraneous associa¬
tions, is a simple thing, is a thing as it were all of
one piece, to be dwelt on in one way by the concen¬
tration on it of a quite independent and unique
faculty. It maybe pleasing to one musical hearer,
displeasing or indifferent to another ; but its sim¬
plicity and independence give it a hit-or-miss
character. On sufficient acquaintance it either
speaks or it does not speak; and the brooding
over it on account of another’s enthusiasm about
it will hardly prove a means whereby latent poten¬
tialities of feeling about it are wakened into
activity. It is in virtue of just the opposite
characteristics in a poetical passage that the op¬
posite result is produced. It is a complex, often
even a Protean thing, and derives its character
firdCD, it may be, numerous strains of associations,
playing through verbal and rhythmic combinations
seem to put on new aspects under out vety
Hence the constant chance of latent am*

POETS, CRITICS, AND Cti^SS-DISTS 18$

mon ground, the chance that the inspiring shock
of sympathy with another’s enthusiasm will super¬
vene on elements of idea and emotion which were
only waiting for that shock, to crystallise into the
fullest and most characteristic poetical impression.

But to return to the influence itself: it is em¬
phatically one which can never be brought to bear
without tact and self-command in the expression
of preferences. Just in proportion as we are ready
to be infected with an intuitional delight, for which
reasons cannot be assigned, are we resentful at
having it thrust down our throats as a dogma.
And such an offence in respect of matters of taste
and instinct is far more trying than that basing of
verdicts on grounds bound to be inadequate which
was discussed before. Mr. Swinburne is here the
most prominent offender, simply because his mag¬
nificent powers and his wonderfully vivid and
delicate sense of beauty give him in this direction
the most exceptional opportunities. As a critic
he is never guilty of overlooking the non-reason-
able element in verse. So profoundly impressed
is he with the literal magic of the best poetry, that
his remarks are even overapt to run rather into
elaborately-worded descriptions of what pleases
him than into su«ch reasoned discussion as Mr«

l86 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

Arnold’s or Mr. Austin’s. We have almost a
surfeit of poems * fresh as dawn and fine as air,’ or
' sovereignly faultless in form and colour of verse,^
or with ‘the odour and colour of cloudless air;’ of
‘ ardent affluence of colour and strenuous dilation
of spirit,’ * sweet and sovereign oppression of ab¬
solute beauty,’ ‘sweet and sovereign unity of
perfect spirit and sense,* ‘ sovereignty of language
and strong grasp of spirit,’ ‘solid and flawless
excellence of jewels and setting,’ ‘abysses of
luminous sound and sonorous light,’ and so on.
Still there is amply enough of what is true and
beautiful in most of his descriptions to make it
clear that he has a genuine mMer^ less as a reason¬
ing than as an infectious critic. By what fatality,
then, does he introduce at every turn expressions
that inevitably awake an impulse of resistance ^
Why, instead of trusting his own persuasive
powers, does he so constantly adopt the attitude of
a man who is sure to be attacked, and who must,,
therefore, entrench himself every moment behind
die very strongest words, so as to frighten or
^Idfy his imaginary assailants beforehand?

And in all this, it is our old friend, or enemy,.

■*11

iStm instinct of classification, which is chiefly re-
i^i^dble. To possess this instinct in an altc^etber

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-USTS 18/

morbid degree is specially unfortunate for a critic
who belongs, or should belong, to the infectious
class. In spite of his disowning all desire 'to
wrangle for the precedence of this immortal or of
that,’ orders of merit of one kind or another, ex*
pressed or implied, literally bristle on his pages,
representing in literature the social oifence which-
has earned for comparisons as a class their familiar
attendant epithet.' As introduced by him, every

' I append a few specimens. * All Mr. Rossetti’s translations
bear the same evidence of a power not merely beyond reach but
beyond attempt of other artists in language.’ Frangois Victor
Hugo’s version of Shakespeare, and Urquhart’s of Rabelais, *may
rank together in glorious rivalry beyond eyeshot of all past or
future competition.’ Sister Helen is ’ out of all sight or comparison
the greatest ballad in modem English.’ In Jenny ’ the purity and
nobility of its high and ardent pathos are qualities of amoral weight
and beauty beyond reach of any rivalry.’ The Vision of Judgment
is raised * beyond comparison with any other satire.’ Kuhla Khan
is * the supreme model of music in our language, unapproachable
except by Shelley.’ * For purity and volume of music Shelley is
to Coleridge as a lark to a nightingale *—^which may be true ; but
then in a note it is added, * From this general rule 1 except of course
the transcendent antiphonal music which winds up the Prometheus ’
—where the * of course ’ is characteristically irritating. Shelley^s
version of the Cyclops displays * matchless grace of unapproachable
beauty ’; and his superiority to Byron is a(hnitted ’ by all capable
articulate creatures’—an instance of downright bullyii^. Shake*
s^re is * the greatest, save one, of all poetic thinkers ’; where die
unexplained exception, suggestive of something which * eveiy sdiool-
boy knows, * is a sort of passing bufiet for the innocent reader. Any
one of four special lyricsof Victor Hilo’s would * suffice to (publish,. ^
beyond debate and beyond acclamation,' the absolute sovei^gnty '

l88 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-LISTS

'Cs^ of excellence seems to come before us
staggering under the weight of its relations to
other cases. We never lose the feeling that it is
being backed against something else, or something
else against it—^that some act of fealty is being
■demanded of it or for it; and though Mr. Swin¬
burne is the last man deliberately to dwarf any
greatness that he recognises, we tire of the way
in which authors are hurried off, on any pretence,
to make their genuflexions before one or another
•of his gods. In his company we lose the power
of admiring our heroes directly and naturally; from
the free citizenship of an intellectual republic we
and they seem to pass to the slavery of a
hierarchy, in which the rank of everybody and

&C., as thot^h words could annul the fact of its having been
both debated and disputed by many very capable judges. * It ought
to be, if it be not, superfluous to set down in words the assurance
that we claim for no living poet a place beside the Master.' * We
have no poet comparable * to Mr. Arnold * for power and perfection
of landscape/ A hymn of Miss Rossetti’s is * so much the noblest
•of sacred poems in our language that there is none which cmnes
near it enough to stand second.' Two odes of Keats are * poems
winch for perfect apprdiension and execution of all attainable in
their own sphere would weigh down all the world of poetry. ’ And
agsix^ with regard to Keats we hear of * that especial field of wodc
where all the g^ts and all the gods of art would fail to stand
l^3;ai]lst him for an hour. . . . There he is unapproachable; this is
^ throne, and he may bid all kings of song to come baw to it.'
'Ond iseednot differ very widely (torn these dicta to smart vmdef
the ^'Usage of their style.

POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS-IJSTS

everything is as precisely assigned as in the ritsai
of some Eastern religion, and no one can walk for
bowings and scrapings. The very mention of a
poet or of a poem seems to imply for him a sense
of their place, accurately fixed by a combative
examiner, in about twenty different triposes. So
great is the air of exactitude which, with the turn
of a phrase, Mr. Swinburne can give to his class-
lists, and so multifarious are the aspects and
qualities in respect of which works and workers
are classed, that the reader’s endeavours to adjust
his judgment resemble a perpetual process of
pulling and wrenching. Nor can one ever be sure
when one is at the end of this Procrustean process.
One never knows what new department of ex¬
cellence may not at any moment crop up, in which
some poet will turn out to be * out of all sight or
comparison * superior to all his compeers, except,.
* of course,’ this, that, or the other of them.

Gentler methods would surely be in every way
an advantage; for this exaggeration of positiveness
and detailed precision in undemonstrable matters
not only weakens the force of the judgments, by
suggesting that they would never have been thus
pronounced had not their author felt that th^
were bound to be differed from^ but actually

190 POETS, CRITICS, AND CLASS LISTS

prompts the difference. Mr. Swinburne has him¬
self remarked on the falseness of the verdicts
which great artists have not infrequently passed
on one another; and in so doing he has admitted,
as completely as his general tone denies, the
justice of our main conclusion, that even among
* capable articulate creatures’ there is a large
amount of necessary divergence of intuition in
Poetry. But our argument will yield a further
corollary, of which he, of all others, should reap
the benefit—namely, that one who at any point
perceives and enjoys more than others establishes a
claim not so much to be differed from as envied
by them. This truth, which lies at the very root
of the infectious influence of mind on mind, might
perhaps help most of us here and there to a slight
though salutary lift in each other’s estimation; but
Mr. Swinburne in particular, should he realise it,
might make his wonderful range of poetic insight
and sympathy contribute almost as much to our
admiration of him as (what he cares far more
about) our admiration for the many objects of his
generous and enthusiastic praise. And the first con>
dition—^to give the keynote of this Essay its final

dtie—would be to strike a pen through nine out of

^ '

^f^rery ten of his comparatives and superlatives.

I9I

-t I

■‘■r* '

',/i vWt “ ,

“ “"I

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY.

We were mainly occupied in the last Essay with
the nature of what I called ‘ the non-reasonable
element' in Poetry, and its distinction from the
merely musical element with which it is often
identified ^his alternative was put: that the
eompiei.e result of any Poetry which moves us in
the most distinctive way—?>. in the way which most
distinguishes Poetry from prose—either is or is not
something more than the effect producible by the
sense^ as expressed in unmetrical language, plus
the extremely slight pleasure producible by the
mere metrical sound in itself, ar tested for instance
in an unknown tongue. To express the alternative
in another way—if any passage of Poetry which
we select as characteristically impressive be de¬
prived of its metre, the change is felt in one of
two ways: either a change of sounds merely
defrauding the bodily organ, or as entailing a> loss
beymid that of the bodily mgan. If there are any ^

192 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

persons who feel it only in the former way, which
may be doubted, there are large numbers who feet
it in the latter, and who would be entitled by
their larger perception to hold the others defective'
in distinctive feeling for Poetry.

The chief conclusion to which this remarkable
fact led us was that the combination of the elements
of sound and sense has a transfiguring influence,
whereby the final result is made quite other than
our knowledge of the respective elements could have
taught us to expect; and that therefore the trans¬
figuring power of Poetry, and the distinctively
poetical imagination, cannot be confined in their
operation to one of the elements—namely, the
sense—nor identified with any imaginative power
which might be revealed in prose, but must embrace
the whole of the distinctively poetical result. How¬
ever large a part of the imaginative virtue still
survives, in company with the logical meaning,
when a poem is rendered in an unmetrical version,
yet if (as we have agreed) the loss thereby
entailed extends beyond the sensory organ, there
is no escape from the admission that with the
sensory element of the metre vanishes a genuine
part of the imaginative or supersensory quality,
is the part that 1 have felt justified in

THE APPRECIATION OP POETRY I 93

calling the most distinctively poetical part of
Poetry; and the power of an individual to pro^
duce it may be equally fairly called the dis*
tinctively poetical imagination. Moreover, since
the very essence of the result lies in combination, we
found it but natural to infer that this distinctively
poetical imagination—jthis instinct for sound and
sense in combination—presides, like an inscrutable
principle of chemical affinity, at the very earliest
stages of the poetical or combining process; an
inference which the facts of composition abundantly
confirm. And the more all this is realised, the more
profound will be our admiration of the poetic power.
For even if we have to some extent succeeded in
analysing the effect, we have nowhere penetrated
to its genesis; its elements are already combined
even in the rudest germ which reveals poetic
potentialities. The magic—or, if we prefer it, the
genius—which brings them together remains as
inscrutable to us after all our analysis, and as
little derivable from anything else that we know
of, as the principle of chemical affinity itself; and
we are no more likely to reduce genius to rules
than to build up living tissue in a laboratoiy.

The first consequence of this view was seriously
to invalidate all definitions of the nature and

VOL. II.

O

IQ4 the appreciation of poetry

function of Poetry, regarded ks canons for produc-
ing unanimity in our comparative estimates of
poets. And in the present Essay, which aims at
yet further liberalising and delimitising the con¬
ditions of poetic appreciation, I shall have yet
further to enforce the close connection of our non-
reasonable element with varieties of taste. It
might be a non-reasonable but still a constant
element; in reality, I believe that it is the incon’-
stant element par excellence. Nor are the diversities
of susceptibility with regard to it diversities of
degrpe only, some persons being keenly alive to it
in a multitude of cases and others affected by it
comparatively slightly and rarely; but of kind, in
the sense that those who are keenly alive to it in
particular places exhibit no certain correspondence
as to those places, A feeling it strongly where B
feels it weakly, and vice versd ; so that estimates
in which it is operative must always be in some
measure idiosyncratic.

In trying to account for this, a word must first
be said respecting one very powerful influence,
iii^ch may fairly be called non-reasonable, though
standing so far apart from the other constituents

the non-reasonable element that I purposely
Icept it out of the preceding discussion. 1 mefm

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY I9l

that most general bent of a personas mental habits
that natural affinity for this rather than that region
of ideas and emotions in the broadest sense,
which goes far deeper than any assignable grounds,
and can as little be argued about or called in ques¬
tion as a characteristic love of contemplation ar
love of action. 1 do not pretend that such a bent
is universal; and, moreover, when we get away from
the very most fundamental cast of imagination we
soon shade into the reasonable region ; there is no
difficulty, for instance, in assigning grounds, why
Marmion should be specially admired by a school¬
boy, and the Christian Yearhy an Anglican clergy¬
man, and Horace’s Satires by a cultivated diner-out.
But a greater susceptibility to dramatic than to
lyric Poetry or vice versdy exceptional satisfaction
or dissatisfaction in Shelley or Mrs. Browning, a de¬
cided opinion on the relative merits of ChUde Harold
and In Memoriamy may all depend on a mental
hue too native and pervading to be seizable or to
offer points either for attack or defence. Of course
this sort of bent, even where there is no doubt of its
influence, in itself supplies a mere vague ^und on
which the distinctly enjoyable elements can play: a
person, whose imagination takes the reflective
turn will not, or should not, admire verse simply

jg6 TH® APPRECIATION OF POETRY

for being reflective. But, given the other con¬
ditions, the general bent may become operative,
and involve special capacities and special in¬
capacities for the enjoyment of iirst-rate work in
this or that direction.

We get (Ml more difficult ground when we try
to realise personal predilections in relation to those
more precise features of the non-reasonable element
which were exhibited in the last Essay. Without
doubt the power of special words and phrases to
seem charged with an emotional force beyond what
their logical connexion would imply —* cette sor^
cdUf^ie * (to quote M. de Banville) *grdce d laquelle
des td/es nous sont nicessairement communiqu^es
iTune manikre certaine par des mots qui cependant
ne Us expriment pas' —^has some relation to a
particular intuition of language in the person so
affected them; for another person, of equal
general susceptibility to verse, may be fully ap¬
preciative of the sense expressed by the words,
and yet not be similarly affected. But this in¬
tuition of language, both in itself and in its
history, is beyond our power of analysis. We
can never unravel the infinitely subtle methods
in which any individuars relation to his own
language, or more precisely, the connection its

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY tg^

words with things as they exist for him, has
come to be exactly what it is. The process
can be as little scrutinised as the gradual for-*
mation of tissue in the living body. But even
among the most similar persons we seem to discern
wide differences, if not in the actual connotation, at
any rate in what may be called the atmosphere
of words. The simplest case of all is the one where
there may be said to be no connotaticm, but only
atmosphere—the case of proper names* Every one
who has taken part in comparisons of ^favourite
names * by a group of people must have observed
both how large is the amount of disagreement, and
how frequently preferences and aversions fail to be
accounted for by the association of the name with
a particular bearer of it either in fact or fiction;
and further, how little of certain reference the pre¬
dilections have to true beauty of abstract sound.
As bits of sound, Sophia and Maria, which are cer¬
tainly unpopular names, should stand high, and
Madge low; nor could a Russian ignorant of
English be at all trusted to pronouce Naud and
MelUe inferior in sound to Maud and Nellie, This
alone shows that words may have a sort of
individuality which neither their definite suggestions
nor their sound will completely account for. And

198 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

though the possession by some words of a lai^e
amount of unmistakable connotation may much
disguise the fact/ many of them do yet un¬
doubtedly present the same peculiarity as proper
names, in a genuine but variously felt atmo¬
sphere. The variety is doubtless due in part to
accidents of individual experience, and to remote
and forgotten influences; but as the mind, with
its native capacities, has been present as a select¬
ing and organising influence through all the
interactions of experience and language, native
varieties of mind would certainly entail varieties in
the intuition of language, even in persons whose en¬
vironment and education had been entirely similar.

The result is that the language, which as a set
of symbolic sounds is the same for all, really corre¬
sponds to sets of symbolised things which, could one
person ever view more than one of them, would
seem as various as the individuals in whose several
minds they exist. Our individuality is in fact re¬
presented in that which our native tongue is and
does for each of us—in that particular world of
things, not quite the same as any other, which a
given set of sound-symbols summons up before each
of us. If we could figure the significations of the
words of a language as spread out in a sort of

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY I99

sup^des, occupying areas and connected by
among themselves in correspondence with the
pression that they make on any particular mindj
and could then compare various specimens of snch
symbolic diagrams by Euclid’s simple method of
applying one to another, we should be struck in
all directions by the crossings and deviations and
excrescences and overlappings. Such an imaginary
diagram may further help us to realise that words
with their meanings, as they exist in any one’s mind,
are not a mere heterogeneous medley such as we
hnd in a dictionary; but that each has its points
and degrees of association with a number of others,
even in their aspect as mere potential elements not
yet wrought together into logical sentences. Hence
the affinity or want of affinity between mind and
mind in respect of them means, not just that a word
here or there happens to have obtained the same or
a different connotation or atmosphere for each ; but
that there is for them up to a certain point a
similarity or dissimilarity in the complexion of ike
langtiagCy which may reappear in all sorts of com*-
binations. And the idea of this chamdieon-like
character in words or their shortest combinations
may be carried on (tbough 1 will not attempt the
baffiing task of further ex;pres$ing it) to those

200

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

less definite characters of phrase and style, our in¬
stinct for which must have been formed in even
subtler and less direct ways. And if this be so, we
may surely recognise in that heightened force and
transfiguring atmosphere, which may belong to se¬
parate words or turns of expression in imaginative
verse, just the condition to give varieties of verbal
intuition the best chance of revealing themselves.
For poets are the people for whom intuition of
language, the meanings of words as taken to include
both connotation and atmosphere, are most rich and
vivid—for whom that which corresponds to lan¬
guage, that which for each of them is his one known
world of objects and ideas, has most individuality.
In the effect of their work on others, therefore, it
might be expected that varieties of individual sus¬
ceptibility to language would be brought out with
special distinctness—not by that part of the work
(perhaps by far the larger part) which admits of
tolerably complete criticism, but by that smaller
body of verse wherein is included whatever pro¬
duces on any of us in any eminent degree the dis¬
tinctively magical effect of Poetiy.

Examples crowd on the mind; but it is just in
verse of this highest kind that, according to our
view of the magical effect as resulting from a

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

201

transfig^rative combination of elements, the influ¬
ence of any particular element is hardest to trace
and deflne. Thus we shall more readily And our
evidence in that sort of poetical beauty where the
peculiar force and atmosphere of words, if not dis¬
played in its highest efliciency, is yet displayed
most clearly, because with least admixture of
reasonable pleasure from the ideas expressed.
Such beauty may be sought either in the class of
poetry often disparaged as ‘ sound without sense/ of
which the first stanza of Jabherwocky is an extreme
example ; or in the fragments of verse—a very
large amount, could they be added together—one
of which will haunt one of us, and another another,
with a charm and persistency that seem unrelated,
or at least very disproportionate, to their precise
meaning. * Sound without sense,^ by the way, is
a very delusive phrase, for as mere sound we have
sufficiently seen how little power the most sonorous
words have to produce any thrilling aesthetic effect.^

* I regret that I did not read Mr. T. Watts’s masterly artide

* Poetry’ (Encycl. Brit.) in time to discuss his diflferent view on
this point in the preceding Essay. He stems to me gireatly to ex¬
aggerate the independent possibilities of verbal sound. * Sappho’s
passion,’ he says, * is expressed so completely by the mere sound of
her verses that a good recitation of them to a person ignorant of
Greek would convey something of that passion to the listener ’; and
again : * Poe’s UUdumcy properly urtcped, would produce sometl^bg

d02

THE APPRECIATION 6F POETRY

The ^ sense * intended is sense for the reason, sense
of the coherent sort which would justify itself as in
some degree worth saying if said in prose; but
this may be absent, as in the yahherwocky stanza,
or present only to a very moderate extent, as
in Kubla Khan^ and yet an atmosphere of sugges¬
tiveness be left to the words which cannot but
be included in their sense, if * sense * and * sound *
are meant to sum up all their qualities. The
atmosphere and suggestiveness in any verse which
haunts us in the way described seems to exhibit in
a very undiluted form the element which we have

like the same effect upon a listener knowing no word of English
«s it produces upon us.’ The matter is one purely of experiment ;
and the person on whom the experiment is tried ought, of course,
not to receive the slightest clue as to the meaning or authorship
of the words, or even as to whether it w(is poetry admired by the
reciter or only doggerel. 1 have seen foreigners of literary tastes,
but ignorant of English, simply amused by what seemed to them
thesing'Song of fine English verse properly enough * intoned.’ I
am certain that, if due precautions were taken, * ’Twas brillig’ &c.,
or * the Jumblies ’ would im^ess such persons quite as mudi as
UkUumt, and that they could be made to detect some of the passion
of Sappho in many a Greek prize^poem, if not in the Knife-
grinder*, in short, that there is no limit to the *<sells ’ of which they *
would teadily becmne the victims. But even were it posable to-
point fo afew exceptional Amrs de force, my view would hold, good
to respect of Poetry in general. Language has got much too fat
away from its origin in the emotional cry, for its symbols to pro¬
duce by their abstract sound-arrangements any certain, emotional
ocdourii^)^ and even the slij^t suggestiveness possible to sueh
anai^^enieats can just as easily contradict as confom to the sense-<r
^ as drown in almost any good parody.

THE APPHECIATION OF POETRY 205

been examining. If, then, great varieties are
servable in this particular region of ei}ect«*if whet
insists in running in A’s head is found quite vokr
arresting by B, and vice vers A —we have just
proof we want of the different appeal of language,
even apart from its professed meaning, to different
minds. Now I believe that experience will show a
specially wide variety of experience in this precise
direction. The experiences do not figure much in
print, because from their very nature they can only be
stated, and not discussed or defended. It is rather
in chance conversation or snatches of quotation that
one discovers how many private analogies there
are to that ‘ rich Virgilian rustic measure,’ whose
'ballad burden music’ sounded in Tennyson’s
inward ear during a whole day’s drive, to be after¬
wards celebrated in one of his own most memory-
haunting poems. And this power of words, which
we trace readily when we get it thus more or less
in abstractioiif assuredly will not cease to exist,
however impossible it may be to make it separately
evident, in the more complete poetic effect where it
is fused with an independently impressive meaning.

And now let us pass to another topic—to what
is considered especially the domain of the ear —the
recognition of verse as more or less ' musical

204 the appreciation of poetry

though that term (as we have seen) cannot be for a
moment confined to the mere abstract sound, so
poor and monotonous in sensuous quality, but in¬
cludes something of the style and grammatical
how, if not of the actual meaning, of the language.
And here again, amid very wide agreement, striking
differences of instinct reveal themselves, harder,
perhaps, to account for than any others. Differences
of degree one would, of course, be prepared for,
and they are of the utmost importance in com¬
parative estimates of poets. For a person whose
ear is not discriminative will make his estimate of
the result irrespectively of one of its elements, and
may thus easily judge a poem, the whole effect of
which, as in all the truest Poetry, depends on the
fusion of sound and sense, to be inferior to another
in which the sound-constituent has had little or no
vital share. A person who is more interested in
some vigorous abortion of Mr. Walt Whitman*s
than in Mr. Swinburne’s Garden %f Proserpim
may easily fail to see where Shelley is superior to
Byron. But there is a difference beyond this
obvious one of degree—a difference in the quality
of the sensibility to verbal music, best exemplified
by its producing in one person satisfaction or dts-
sati^acdon with lines or passages which affect

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 20$

another in the contrary way. Of course, it is
always open to any one who encounters disag^e*
ment on a question of this kind—especially if it
take the form of indifference to something that to
him seems a flaw—to regard it as a sign of a less
sensitive ear; but when he finds other places where
the position is reversed, and especially when there
is also an immense amount of common ground
where the two parties vie in the keenness of their
appreciation, this view becomes hard to maintain.
He would be a bold man who should assert that
he possesses an ear more sensitive to the music of
verse than Mr. Swinburne’s ; yet a good many of us
will certainly go to our graves believing ourselves
right in asserting, and Mr. Swinburne wrong in
denying, that Lord Tennyson’s ear is, and always
has been, almost infallible; and that so far from
his work having been, as Mr. Swinburne asserts,
laboriously made musical by long years of labour,
there never has been verse more naturally and
variously instinct with the musical magic. As a set¬
off, we, or let me say I, believe, and even perceive,
that Mr. Swinburne detects melody which gives
him genuine delight in places where my ear is deaf
to it, and that he is thereby immensely the gainer.

The point marks a curiou$ difference from Music

ao6 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

proper. There, of course, the widest differences of
taste exist; but the occasions are extremely rare
where there could be any dispute between educated
musicians on a question of technical correctness-^
as rare as the occasions where educated littdratears
would be at issue on a question of grammar. Not
one page in a thousand of published music contains
a downright blunder. It is true that Music often
sinks into incoherence and formlessness through
neglect of metrical conditions ; but even in the most
random recitative, where this neglect goes further
than would be possible in anything recognisable as
verse, the notes, as figured on music-paper, profess
to be arranged in bars of equal length, and to have
definite proportional time-values, as to which there
is no dispute. A similar unanimity in the per¬
ception of verbal flow is guaranteed to a certain
extent by the strict quantities of the classical
languages. Greek and Latin verse, at any rate,
could not present us with lines a foot too long, like
the one of Keats quoted in the preceding Essay.
But the more elastic rhythms of modem, and*
especially of English, verse, which, though neces¬
sarily resting on a strict scheme of accents, may
deviate firom that scheme in any degree which
allows it still to be felt as their underlying and

20 /

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

controlling type, are of a markedly different nature^
and stand in direct contrast to the accurately
measured rhythms of developed Music.

• I may be excused for bringing out this differ¬
ence with some explicitness, as it is .perpetually
being ignored or contradicted. I referred in my
last Essay to the common notion that a lyric poet

* ought by rights * to be a musician, and that
musical setting is the authoritative test of the true
verbal flow. This is a singular instance of the
way in which an imposing-looking doctrine will
override the most obvious facts. The difference
between Music and Poetry, which the vapours of
modern criticism constantly strive to conceal in
the higher atmosphere of transcendental aesthetics,
extends as far down even in this mundane and
structural feature of rhythm. Not indeed to the
very bottom of it. We have seen that the funda¬
mental principle of regular recurrence, of a scheme
of regular accents, is common to both arts; though
I may add it is just that common principle which
the school who are most determined to make out
that the two arts are one are, by an odd perversity,
the first to ignore—the ‘ oneness ’ being apparently
more obvious to them in pieces of unmetrical

* declamation ’ than in pieces of formed and straight-

2o8 the appreciation of poetry

forward song. But in all that supe^enes on that
common principle the difference may be complete.
In Music, the presiding outline of recurring accents
will allow the intervals of time between the regular
accented points to be divided up among lengths
of sound and silence in the most various ways.
When melody is imposed on words, a limit is put
to this variety by the double necessity of keeping
the series of words reasonably continuous, and of
suiting the capacities of the human voice; but
within this limit the only special conditions are that
the accented part of the bar shall not be allotted
to some particularly inconspicuous word, and that
the markedly conspicuous syllables in the verbal
rhythm shall be treated with respect. These con¬
ditions being observed, the melodic rhythm takes
complete possession of the words. In some quite
simple cases it may accord with their direct flow,
as in an ordinary hymn-tune; in other cases the in¬
dependent verbal rhythm completely disappears—
how completely an example may best show. Let
any one, after repeating over in a natural way the
passage beginning, 'Orpheus with his lute made
trees,' reproduce its flow by repeating the syllable
la in monotone; then let him treat the notes of
Sir A. Sullivan's admirable setting in the same

* THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 209

way, and compare the two rhythms. Outi^de the
conditions mentioned they have absolutely no con
nection. Or, if it be said that the melodic rhythm
here exhibits rather an exceptionally wide depar¬
ture from the verbal flow, let the experiment be
tried with the words and notes of a song of un-.
surpassable directness and simplicity, and one in
which the union of the elements is absolutely
perfect. One line, the first, will be quite enough :
‘ Du bist die Riih’, die Ewigkeit' is of course a set
of regular dissyllabic feet, and runs thus—

LS. la' 1 la la' I I2L la' I la la'.

The notes to which Schubert has set it are in triple
(t.e, primarily trisyllabic) feet, and their flow is—
La'la la | La'a la | La'a la | la'.

The conditions 1 named are again observed ; stress
is given to and to the first syllable of

EwigkHt^ and die is in each instance thrown into
the weak part of the line; but the difference of the
two rhythms is again complete. And in the face
of such facts, which stare at us from almost evety
line of voc^ music, we are told that the musical
is the key to the verbal rhythm ! The process in
which the subtler verbal music of modem > verse
inevitably disappears, in something which may

I

VOL. II. P

210

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

occasionally be as good, but is at least wholly
different, is to present us with the authorised
version of that music!

I need not press this point further on any one
who will interrogate his own ears as to the rhythmic
aspect of words, in any specimen of verse where it
is most obvious to him ; but it is worth suggesting
that evidence of the truth might be drawn from the
very place always relied on as the stronghold of
the opposing view. The lyric parts of Greek
dramas, we are told, were written to be sung or
chanted. Of course they were ; and of course that
is the reason why, as every schoolboy knows, they
are of essentially different construction from modern
lyric verse, which is written to be read or said; and
why, as read or said, they are often no more to our
ears than sonorous prose; and why their metrical
scheme has to bs laboriously sought out by the
student, and even when ascertained is often merely
a scheme for the eye. It was in subordination to
the time-values imposed by musical form that
these sonorous word-labyrinths could attain dis¬
tinct ’metrical comprehensibility. Whether the
words or the notes were first composed, or whether
, they Rrere gradually and simultaneously fashioned,
itnakes no difference. The relation of the music to

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 21 f

what the words are without the music remains the
same; and is in fact that held by modem music in
many cases (e.^. in Handel’s oratorios) to down¬
right prose, which it forces or persuades, by the
very terms of the alliance, to become for the nonce
metrical.

I may take this opportunity of protesting
against another canon or test of poetical metre
which has been promulgated, more specious be¬
cause less instantly bound to break down than the
setting to music—that, namely, of ‘ natural reading.*
This can only mean the reading which would be
natural to the words apart from their subjection
to the special control of verse; and frequently, of
course, such reading will sufficiently reveal that con¬
trol. None the less is the canon a fallacy, as one
out of innumerable possible examples will show.
No one who repeats over the following sentences
—^ My brother John came and called, “ Aren’t you
there ? ” ’ and * Mary, get over the garden gate ;
mother’s at home’—will fail to detect that the
latter is potentially verse, instantly inviting another
line and a ihyme, as, * Many a minute she’s had to
wait; * wMe the former sentence may be said over
‘naturally’ a hundred times without falling into
any sort of rhythmic order. Yet Shelley has in-

212

THE AM^RECIAtlON OF POETRY

troduced the one run as parallel to the other in
one of his finest lyrics, the Ode beginning—

Swiftly walk over the western wave,

Spirit of night!

After he has got the flow of the first three stanzas
well into our ears, he starts the fourth with the
words—

Thy brother Death came and cried,

* Would’st thou me ? *

Clearly the requisite correspondence can only be
felt^ and a feeble hurrying off of the first line of
this couplet prevented, by keeping empty of sound
the moment occupied by the syllables ver the in
the opening stanza (on the principle of a * rest ’ in
music), and so reserving ' came ’ for the ictus^ which
it can only receive at its duly measured distance
from ‘Death*—a distance which would be dis¬
tinctly ««natural between ‘John * and * came,* in the
above prose-analogue. I have given this instance
because it occurs in a particularly plain, straight¬
forward metre. In more complicated rhythms, T
should have thought that every one must have
discovered the inadequacy of ‘ natural reading * to
settle the metre, by finding several trials necessary
before the right run is hit on—though once hit
m, it of course becomes as clear as noonday. To

TriE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 21 $

take one instance—in the * natural reading * of the
words ‘By the waters of Babylon we sat down
and wept/ dawn would have no more emphasis
than sat’f the syllables would be about equal
in value. It is one of Mr. Swinburne’s most
characteristic triumphs to have detected the glori*
ous new rhythm which the words would yield, and
thereby to have actually invented a new metre;—

By the | waters of { Bdbylon we sat | d6wn and | wdpt,
Re* I m^mbering | thde,

That for | dges of | dgonyhast en- { ddred and | sl^pt
And I wduld’st not | sde.

Sat d6wn here is the metrical equivalent of en-
Mred \ but not till we have got the third line into
our ears is the force and swing of the five-syllable
foot discerned. It is, of course, not necessary that
in recitation the sat should actually be made as
insignificant in sound as the first syllable of est-
dured ; it may even have all but its full natural
value as compared with down. When once the
rhythm has been caught, the slight extra stress
laid on the down will resemble the ‘ accent ’ given
to the first note of a bar or group in some regular
pianoforte passage; and will thus prove amply
aufiicient to sustain the metre,

_ j \

This digression has ended by bringing us back

214 the appreciation of poetry

to what was our immediate point—^the elasticity,
and frequent deviations from the strict metric
scheme, that so largely characterise the flow oC
modern verse ; whence the remarkable consequence
that it admits of varieties, sometimes even in the
way it is actually read, and often in the way it is
instinctively felt One sometimes meets really
surprising instances of such variety of instincti
which admit of no precise explanation,^ The ex¬
planation, could we ever get at it, would again
(like everything connected with verbal melody)
go far deeper than the mere sound—at any rate
in the case of persons who have got beyond

* The most striking modem instance may perhaps be fonnd in
Mr. Arnold’s English hexameters (which their creator must have
found musical), and Mr. Spedding’s and Mr. Swinburne’s remarks
on them. Or, to take an example of a single line, we may consider
Mr. Swinburne’s criticism of Shelley’s

Fresh spring, and summer and winter hoar,

t

in which he finds * more divine and sovereign sweetness ’ than in
any other line in English. Yet he says that the effect is obtained
by the suppression of a sdngle syllable, as in this line—>

Is it with thy kisses or thy tears ?

Ibe line is a five-foot one, corresponding to

Trembling at that where I had stood before,

in Uie preceding stanza; surely thai the suppression is of iwa
' syllables; and ate eadi of them tak^n as a complete

^1^. 1, at any rate, can get music into the line on no other terms.

THE APPRECIATION OE POETRY 215

the Stage of r^arding any demtion from the
strict iambic scansion of blank verse and heroics
as a liberty. If the rhythmic run as to the ment
of which two persons disagree were put before
them in nonsense-syllables, their ears would often
reveal no definite discordance. But when the
rhythm is dominating comprehensible language,
that different individuality which, as we have seen,
the same word or word-fragment may present
to different minds comes in as a disturbing fact,
and receives fresh illustration; for something in
the physiognomy of the words may have the effect
of making them seem either to resist or to yield
to the particular rhythmic domination, and to do
either in a variety of degrees.

This may conclude our brief analysis of the
mode in which the non-reasonable part of poetical
effect is related to the actual varieties in individual
taste. The relation is none the less important for
being confined mainly to die estimate of individual
passages and stanzas and single lines; for not
only are such' fragments wont to be taken as the
basis for deliberate critical judgments; but (as
we shall shortly see) they are of quite pre-eminent
Importance in the popular estimate of poets.
Though the inquiry has lain among facts too

ai6 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

obscure and intangible to allow of our tracing the
complete operation of causes up to any particular
result in this or that person’s appreciation, it will
have done its work if it has helped to show that
the varieties are inevitable, and rest on valid
grounds which can be, so to speak, localised, if not
thoroughly sifted. Emerging now into clearer air,
we may see how our conclusions bear on the sub¬
ject of appreciation of Poetry in general.

First of all, we are led to remark how unique
for any average person must be the position of his
native language in respect of his appreciation of
verse. That immediate intuition of language, that
sense of an atmosphere and special physiognomy
in words which springs naturally from very early
associations, the delicate instinct for verbal rh3d:hm,
both in itself and in its relation to the sense—the

•V

very elements which are essential to the high
efficiency of the non-reasonable element in verse—
must for the majority even of educated people be
practically confined to their own tongue. This
remark, 1 am aware, is likely to meet with dissent.
But that, for an average lover of Poetiy, its qulnt-
essent^ effects should belong peculiarly to pro-*
^ductions in his own language is surely not strai^e

THE APFREOATION 6F POETRY 21/

if we consider the marvellously close connection
of the elements of that one language with the
whole of his mental life and growth. To the
poetry of other languages, even when they are but
moderately well known, enough may remain in
the reasonable element, with a large measure of the
rhythmic, to open up springs of strong imaginative,
delight; but the delight is not the same as when
the language seems the spontaneous incarnation of
the thought, I am speaking, be it observed, of the
majority. A minority doubtless exists for whom
the distinctive magic of verse does exist in lan¬
guages other than their own; but it would be a
curious point to ascertain how far the magic at
all corresponds with that felt by a native. Greek
and Latin poetry stand on somewhat exceptional
ground ; the study of these languages giving the
very amplest opportunities for the formation of a
vivid literary interest, since it is conducted entirely
on the line of literature, and for the most part
of hrst-rate literature; and the poems themselv^
o^O^ing the rarest attractions to a taste for arti^-
cally ordered words as such, in the accuracy (as
well as in the magnificence) of their metres. The
Individuality with which words and phrases may
get to live in a literary, as opposed to a nativfi

21 8 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY ^

aspect may thus attain wonderful distinctness; and
some persons (though I believe them to be very
exceptional) may find their favourite classical
passages haunting their memory as passionately
and persistently as any poetry in their own lan¬
guage. The delight is undoubted; all that one
would like to know is what qualitative resemblance
it bears to that of an ancient Greek or Roman of
equal natural sensibility. That the resemblance
would often not be strong is, I think, suggested
by the point in connection with modern verse to
which 1 wish next to call attention.

In verse of another language, it is not at all
uncommon to find ourselves not only failing to be
specially impressed by what natives find specially
impressive—and this would far oftener appear if
we were left to ourselves without their guidance,
since nothing is so infectious as admiration—but,
conversely, impressed by what natives do not find
specially impressive. A very instructive instance of
this is Goethe’s peculiar admiration for Moore.
In verse so simple as Moore’s, it specially needs the
native ear to detect with real certainty the presence
or absence of the impalpable something which
ji^arates the magical from the commbnplac&
Heine would be the parallel instance for English-

, THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 12 19

men; only with Heine we find ourselves con¬
firmed (as well as guided) by the verdict of his
own countrymen. The phenomenon is easily ex¬
plained. The slight strangeness that belongs to
foreign, as compared with native, words makes it
easy to invest them with a sort of distinction which
out of our own minds does not belong to them;
and by this means the simplest phrase in a foreign
language easily becomes a sort of wonder to us.
It has a piquancy as of a thing which we seem to
know all about, and yet which stimulates our in¬
terest by keeping, so to speak, a little way off from
us; as even a word in our own language seems
occasionally to do when we isolate and over-care-
fully consider it. And there comes to be a very
distinct fascination in seeing meanings which, ex*
pressed in a language known from infancy, might
appear of no particular value, rehabilitated in a
less familiar linguistic garb, which forces us to
more conscious attention, and repays us by this
novel picturesqueness. One readily sees how in
this way the stanzas beginning—

Those evening bells, those evening bells,

How many a tale their music telb!

m^t obtain in a German ear a magic no4e the'
less real for being purely subjective. And though

220 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY ^

the habit* of beginning,and vety commonly ending,
our study of foreign poetry with thoroughly well
accredited specimens may save mistakes on a large
scale, in matters of detail we have probably most
of us been the happy and unsuspecting victims of
similar experiences.

On the whole, then, v;e may conclude not only
that considerable differences are bound to exist
between native and foreign appreciation of Poetry,
but that a main cause for their existence may lie
in a region where it has not been usual to look for
it. Those facts concerning the non-reasonable
intuitions of language and rhythm, which (in the
case of living languages, at any rate) tend to pre¬
clude foreign productions from taking as complete
and haunting possession of the mind as native, may
be quite as much at the root of the matter as those
more distinctly intellectual qualities of authors*-as
shown in subjects and ideas and general mode of
treatment—which may bear the marks of national
character too unmistakably to appeal with wide
and complete success to another people. A further
consideration will enable us to carry this conclusion
a little more into detail. As languages develop,
idiere is a gradual increase in that subtle atmo¬
sphere of association and suggestiveness which

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 231

causes many words to present what I have called
a different physiognomy to different people* and
suggests rhythmic combinations in which that
difference becomes specially operative—this atmo^
sphere being in fact largely due to those very
poetical usages on the appreciation of which it in
turn so decidedly reacts. It is not that the language
becomes more poetical—the reverse may rather be
the case—^but the use of words and their possibilities
for Poetry become more complex. Hence it is
that the earliest poems of a langprage are those
which produce the greatest similarity of impression
on different readers. This appears to some extent
even in the literature of the dead languages*
Homer, for instance, is probably very far more the
same—understood and felt in the same way—to
all his readers than Virgil; and the result is seen in
comparative estimates—Homer’s pre-eminent rank
being never disputed, while Virgil, who has been
deemed by not a few the very greatest of poets*
is quietly referred to by M. de Banville and Mr.
Saintsbury as a respectable member of the second
class. And similarly, Chaucer and Dante are more
the same to all readers, probably even of their own
nation, and certainly if we include readers of all
nations, Shelley and Leopardi, and even than

222 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

Shakespeare. It would be absurd, of course, to
lay the whole stress on the linguistic element;
divergences of modem thought are enough to
account for a special discordance in the estimation
of various modern poets. But a proof that the
other element largely enters is the fact that in a
foreign language we are far less able than in our
own to care deeply for poetry to the ' thought ’ of
which we are opposed or indifferent. And it is
very noticeable that the modem poet who has had
the greatest European reputation, and in whose
case we may therefore infer that the impression
produced on native and on foreign readers has
been most nearly of one and the same kind —Byron
—is precisely the one who is most defective in
exquisiteness of language and rhythm, and ^ fortiori
in that nameless fusion of the two which made up
our non-reasonable element; who, indeed, often
displayed towards it 'the insensibility of a bar¬
barian.’

As a precisely converse case I would venture to
adduce Wordsworth; and Mr. Arnold, in prophesying
that in time foreigners will come to accept Words¬
worth as (with one exception) the greatest English
poetsince ShakespearCi seems to me to overlook both
the part which the non-reasonable element holds

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 22 $

in Wordsworth’s best work> and the almost essential
connection of its power with familiar knowledge of
English. In Wordsworth at his highest, from the
very simplicity of the effects, the magic is, if not
more possessing, at any rate more astonishing than
is possible in effects more elaborately and con¬
sciously exquisite. His simplicity at its best (and
it is only by his best that he will live even for
Englishmen) is of a sort possible only in an ex¬
tremely advanced stage of a language and literature
—none the less so that he himself imagined (and in
many cases only too correctly) that he was making
Poetjy talk the speech of quite commonplace life.
And this is of all qualities the hardest for a foreign
oar to catch, the distinction from what is really
commonplace' being conveyed by such curiously
intangible means. We have seen, indeed, through¬
out what a Protean thing is the highest charm of
Poetry ; but in language which is obviously choice
there is something at least to get hold of. I could
imagine that a foreigner here and there might
appreciate the magic of Rossetti,^ but hardly of

* This surmise strikes me as hazardous after reading an admiring
aitide on Rossetti, recently published in a leading French review,
where a version of the magnificent sonnet, * Look in my &ce : my
name is Might-have-been,* opens thus: * Regardez-moi dans le
visi^ : mon nmn est ce qu aurait pu avoir lieu.’

the appreciation or poetry

V

Wordsworth. Yet Wordsworth could never be a
power in the world apart from this indescribable
quality. In what proportion of his poems it exists
is a question which would be variously answered j
but it would hardly, I think, be rash to assert that
his place in the English hierarchy will in the future
depend on a very decided minority even of those
included in Mr. Arnold’s admirable little collection •
The expectation then that foreigners, who (if I am
right) are almost debarred from detecting his most
characteristic poetical excellence, will ever be
brought widely to acknowledge his pre-eminence,
on the ground of conceptions which, whatever their
importance, might be completely expressed in
French prose, seems to ignore the laws by which
Poetry penetrates to human hearts. Byron’s wit
and rebellious rhetoric were precisely what was-
wanted to spice'his verse for European consump^
tion; but no religion of Nature is likely to command
success beyond the region where its p|;esentation
can be felt as quintessentially poetical.

Even Mr. Arnold’s precedents for taking foreign
opinion as a crucial and independent test of the
rdative greatness of our own poets are not quite
so d^nclusive as they look. One cannot quarrel
with the case of Shakespeare; though as a dramatist^

' * .if »

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 22 $

and a dramatist who could be taken As the
champion of the liberty of genius against the
slavery of rules, he enjoyed special facilities for
obtaining Continental recognition; while even with
him one can seldom be sure how much is not taken on
trust from us. And, though Germany has certainly
adopted him, our own view of him will hardly be
much fortified by confirmation from some one who
openly or secretly prefers the rhetoric of Racine,
or even of Victor Hugo. But the case of Milton
is far more questionable. Outside this country
Milton is simply the author of Paradise Lost\
and Paradise Lost is precisely the poem which
foreigners will believe to be very sublime if told
so, and will study with the conscientious satisfaction
of killing off a classic, but which can never be to
more than an occasional one of them a large
spiritual fact. Indeed, to how many of ourselves
can it be said to be one ? To how many is it a
beloved poem, and not rather a remarkable piece
of literary workmanship, lit up, amid much that is
tedious and artificial, by a considerable number of
passages of extraordinary splendour, whidi are just
what depend for standing out from the rest on the
delicate susceptibility to language and rhythm of'
a native ear ? 1 can scarcely believe Mr. Arnold;;

VOL. II. . Q

226 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

teall/ to hold that the amount of eQlotionai^life
produced from year to year on the Continent by
the perusal of Paradise Lost is such as would
have compelled foreigners to give it a foremost
rank among the productions of the human mind,
apart from the prestige attaching to it here as the
accredited specimen of the epic in twelve or twenty-
four or a hundred books, which is hardly less de
rigueur as a national appendage than a metro¬
politan city or museum.

But the more interesting questions as to the
popularity of Poetry are naturally those which
we need not cross the Channel to encounter; and
after our long discussion of the critical apprecia¬
tion of native Poetry, it will be a relief to turn
to the non-critical. If the two topics need a
connection, we may find one in remarking how
little the critics represent the public. This seems
really to be only one more odd consequence of our
* non-reasonable element,* As we have seen, that
^element is emphatically one which operates mainly
In picked passages of limited length. It follows
that its strongest influence in the formation of
^comparative estimates will appear not so much
in the case of the professed student of Ppetiy as
the average poetry-lover, who troubles himself

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 22f

comparatively little with the larger aspects of
literature, and thinks very much more about poems
as made than about the minds of their makers*
This is a distinction which more pronounced
students may easily foiget, but which it is specially
necessary to remember in any judgment of the
mission and success of Poetry in the world at
large. Either the right to possession in the poetic
treasury must be circumscribed in the most Phari¬
saical manner, or we must recognise in an enor^
mous number of persons a relation to the art
wonderfully different from that of the literary
critic. For one person who could produce three
moderately true and coherent sentences on the
scope of Sheilas or Wordsworth's work, a thou¬
sand have received the strongest individual im¬
pression from Skylark or the Ode on Inttma^
Hons of Immortality, This in no way detracts
from the value of enlightened criticism, ,whidi
numbers of these very people may attend to and
enjoy; but their enjoyment and attention will be
apt to be of somewhat sporadic and fortuitous
kind, which their instinctive preferences are like^
to survive. And this surely has a very distinct,
bearing on the habit, noticed in the preceding
Essay, of backing up any stlindaid of excdlence

' 2^8 THE appreciation OF POETRY

which the critic himself may adopt and expound*,
by explicit or implicit reference to the general
opinion. For it is just in the general opinion—
inasmuch as it is the opinion of a mass of people*
each of whom* so far as he has judged indepen¬
dently* has judged by fragments—that the poetical
element which cannot be proved or debated* but
which may be fully exemplified in fragments, is
exceptionally influential. And in proportion to
the largeness of the instruction which criticism can
give about the general scope of various poets’ work
—on such laige questions as how much or how
well on the whole they have criticised or repre¬
sented life—is the smallness of the addition that it
can make to the appreciation of the gems which
any one has found out, or which have found him out,
without it

The standard of popularity is one which has
rarely, I think, been fairly considered. It is really
a standard by itself, which it will prove very hard
to connect definitely with any other; and the results
it can give depend, not on arguable grounds, but
mi statistics. And though the critics, if it came to
the point) might sometimes be shy of takmg ^at
general census which is to confirm their particular

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 229

view; popularity does nevertheless, if rightly un¬
derstood, seem to give us the best approach we
are likely to get to an authoritative criterion. But
it must be rightly understood. The author of
Natural Religion has poured scorn on the judging
of Poetry by the pleasure that it gives, and calls
the application of such a test 'utilitarian,' But
for that name to imply disparagement, it would
have to be confined (as the ethical opponents of
Utilitarianism have so often insisted on confining
it) to the mere pursuit of the most obvious
pleasure of the moment, whatever it may be. The
injustice of this is clear; though the danger of the
prevalence of that base form, which would de¬
throne some classic in every generation, cannot be
too clearly recognised in Art as in Ethics. But
the question how far a legitimate extension of the
term ‘ popularity * would not reverse its more im¬
mediate and ephemeral implications—how far, for
instance, the individual moments veiy materially
brightened in the last ten years by the fact of
Mr. Browning’s having existed, might not compare
favourably in number with those very matmally
brightened by the fact of' Ouida's' having existed
—is one of more than mere speculative intere^.
There is a very practical reason for recognising the

2$0 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

less dircct ways in which Poetry affects pleasure^ or
rather happiness, and for recognising these ways
explicitly as happiness-givings and not merely
as edifying and elevating—a reason of which the
author of Natural Religion would, I am sure,
see the force; namely, that we are thus enabled to
meet on their own ground those who proclaim the
indifference of the views and the subject of a
poem, and the poet’s equal claim to our admiration
and gratitude for adorning and transfiguring any
views and any subject, provided by so doing he
can evoke pleasurable emotion.

Having dwelt so much on the non-reasonable
element of Poetry, I am specially concerned to
emphasise this other point For Poetry can un¬
doubtedly shed her magic charm both on the
evil and on the good. ^ Touts Imotion lui serf:
die est mauvaise et bonnet chaste et libertine;*
and the school of the critic from whom I quote
contend that this is not only what she can
be;, but what she ought to be. A contention
earnestly put forward in the sacred name of
Beauty always looks a little difficult to confute;
but the difficulty is wholly due to that name’s
fallacious suggestion of some objective quality in
the work itself, independent of its effect on the

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 23 I

observer. Once translate that quality {as eveiy
quality of ideal no less than of material objects
must be translated) into the effect it produces^
once perceive that beauty has no merit or mean»
ing save as a means of happiness—and it becomes
immediately clear that so far as ' beauty' is used
in an exclusive sense, embracing some happiness¬
giving elements and not others, it has no claim
to be considered the sole end or criterion of
Poetry. That it is the dominant quality, in the
sense that only through its presence can any other
qualities become effective, I have been doing my
best to urge ; but this clearly allows us to hold
that not beauty in any exclusive sense, but happi¬
ness, is the end and the criterion. And then we
establish our point, if we can go on to show that
the amount of happiness which enters the world
through the agency of this or that poem immensely
depends on the views and the subject, whose imr
portance it has been sought to minimise or to
deny for the supposed glorification of Beauty.

And to show this is surely not difficult. It is
siinply a question how much we consider the
appeal of Poetry to be related to the independent
attitude the reader towards the things talked
about The order and degree in which the sevei^

232 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

arts have reference to the spectator’s views of things
outside their mere artistic excellence, and in whichi
therefore, an afEnity between the artist’s views and
his own is of importance to him, naturally corre¬
sponds with the order and degree in which they
actually deal with life outside them—to the extent,
at any rate, that Music is at one end of the scale
and Poetry at the other. To estimate with any
accuracy the arnount of wealth which artistic work
conveys to a man, we must consider not only the
minutes when it is actually absorbing him, but the
number and strength of the connections that it
forms with other minutes. Now the vast majority
of these other minutes are occupied with a life
lived outside any sort of art, and with various
material and spiritual aspects of the world experi¬
enced in a life outside any sort of art. And this life
and these aspects are not things as to which it is
possible for a man to be in a state of balanced
indifference. His inward communings must laxgely
consjist in the instinctive application of a more or
tess definite set of views to the ever-passing stream
of facts, and in comparing or seeking to modify
Jibe aspects of the world according to the emotions
which they have come to excite in himself. It
.surely Ihon stands to reason that, ceteris paribus^-

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 233

that is to say, beauty or artistic excellence, so far
as we can isolate it, being equal—the poetiy will
be most companionable to him, and will therefore
on the whole enrich the greatest number of minutes
in his life, which is most in harmony with familiar
strains of thought and feeling ; which, instead
encountering friction and resistance, or having to
carve out its channel to his affections by sheer dint
of beauty, finds channels already marked out for
it to fill and overflow. It is but the old principle
of association. If a main part of any one’s emotional
life is rooted in certain views and sentiments, which
are necessarily brought into consciousness and kept
fresh from day to day by the constant occurrence
of material for their application, and if, as it
happens, these views and sentiments have found
recognition in some poetry and not in other poetry,
then it is the memory of the former and not of the
latter which will tend to recur when the conscious¬
ness is present; and it is the former and not the
latter which, even when not definitely recalled,
will by a more gradual process have endowed
the views and feelings vdth its own warmth and
radiance. To those, then, who hold, as most \^io
think at all do now hold, that morality in its widest
meaning is the great progressive force of the worlds

^34 the appreciation of poetry

and that * joy in widest commonalty spread ’ Is the
goal to which it tends, it is impossible, ceteris:
paribus^ but that that poetry should convey most
spiritual wealth, and involve the greatest number of
enriched minutes, which is in recognisable harmony
with these sentiments, rather than poetry which is
either markedly self-centred or markedly visionary
and fantastic.

. It may be said that I am forcing too strong a
contrast, and that an immense amount of the best
poetry is as free from any assignable moral sug*
gestiveness, even of the vaguest kind, as from
self-centred sensuousness or flights of unsubstantial
and irresponsible fancy. This objection has only
much force as long as ^moral’ is unfairly taken as
meaning in some way didactic, or as implying some
necessary reference to actual conduct. But to a
consistent Utilitarian, poetry may be moral which
has no explicit reference to anything beyond the
writer’s own pleasure, provided its suggestions are
such as may naturally enter with irradiating or
soothing influence into many moments of many
healthy lives. Such poetry, for example, is
wandered lonely as a cloud,’ where the couplet—

They flash upon that inward eye '

Which is the bliss of solitude—

TKfB APPRECIATION OF POETRY ^ 235

reveals one of the most striking ways In which
natural beauty is able to intertwine its iniiuence
with moments of common life. And as the eae-
perience is one which all would more and more
share according as the conditions of life were
healthier, and which is for all indefinitely intensified
and transfigured by its concentration in these perfect
lines, the poem is eminently in harmony with
the Utilitarian ideal. But, indeed, my contrast,
even if objected to as a test of excellence, seems
incontestable on the ground of fact. Thus, to take
four poems in which the art is unsurpassable and
therefore (if ‘the duf-d'csuvre is adequate to the
chef^d^ muvre') equal, can it be denied that Gray’s
Elegy and Wordsworth’s Solitary Reaper will en¬
rich more minutes of most readers’ lives than
Coleridge’s Christabel and Mr. Swinburne's Before
Dawn ? And sufficient evidence for the impossi¬
bility, in these moral and self-conscious days, that^
literature should be judged excellent irrespectively
of the subjects and views which it adopts, and
should sit as loose to the moral realities of life
as do the arts of abstract form, may surely be
drawn from the disastrous results which the pro¬
fessedly exclusive worship of Beauty has produced
in it To take a single instance^ it is entirely

^36 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

owing to that tone of worship, to the rank
incense offered to the senses, to the spurious
halo of ideality or even of holiness shed round
absolutely egoistic and unsocial pleasure, as Ibe
one bright centre in a world which is otherwise
perfectly dull and despicable, that Mademoiselle
de Maupin is so much more indefensible a book
than the extremest specimens of M. Zola's frankly
hideous realism. * Nothing that leaves us de¬
pressed,' as Mr. Swinburne has truly said, ‘is a
true work of art ’; and who but a fool would not be
depressed by the view that the world exists for
people with beautiful bodies and unbridled appetites,
if he happens to possess neither ?—or equally, we
may add, if he happens to possess the latter without
the former, the idea of a close caste of voluptuaries
being as offensive to the masses of the vicious as
of the virtuous. The immeasurable difference be¬
tween the results of such beauty-worship as this of
Gautier and beauty-worship like that of Keats must
surely be sought in something outside beauty-
worship ; and to that something 1 know not what
comprehensive name can be given except * morality.*
This topic might lead us far. But it is enough
to have suggested that the popularity of Poetiy
must be decided, not by any blatamt clamour in

THE APPRECIATION Ot POETRY 2^7

which a number of people may happen for the
moment to concur, but by the number of minutes
in individual lives which are consciously or un-^
consciously enriched by it; and that, so understood^
popularity is hardly to be despised as a standard
of excellence. Coming to the more direct applica*>,
tion of the standard, we must admit the difficulties
incident to any comparison of pleasures which
considers depth as well as surface, and asks not
only how far the pleasure or influence extends, but
how intense and penetrating is its character. Bui
even on this more difficult point we may often
obtain sufficient certainty, if not for a complete
classification of poetical achievements, at least for
testing and correcting estimates which leave the
canon of popularity out of account. Thus, on the
one hand, we might decline to weigh as evidence
of superiority the fact of Byron’s having excited
far wider admiration on the Continent than Shelley
or Wordsworth, until it had been carefully noted
that the admiration is of a somewhat superficial
kind, and depends chiefly on wit and rhetoric, and
hardly at all on the most distinctively poetical

qualities. On the other hand, noting, and perhaps

*

sharing, the extreme enthusiasm of specialists in
the artistic use of language for such a poem ai^

2SB the ATPREaATIOK OF POETRY

JCudla Khcmt we might inquire on how laige a public <

it is possible that it should have the effect of more

*

than a passing whiff of lovely music«

But apart from individual poets, there is one
sort of classification which seems specially illegiti¬
mate without distinct reference to the happiness
test—that, namely, of different styles of Poetry as
comparatively superior and inferior. The supersti¬
tion in favour of Epics has been already glanced at
It arose not unnaturally from the supreme excellence
of a few existing specimens; but the argument that
some particular sort of work must be higher in
icind than any other because only a few workers
have succeeded in it is clearly very inconclusive—
as though one were to say that the Oratorio is
inherently higher * in kind * than the Symphony or
the Opera. It would be at least as fair to maintain
on the other side that; if there were some intrinsic
superiority in the kind, more out of the number
of considerable poets who have attempted the kind
would have produced considerable results.

An interesting attempt to classify styles of
Poetry has been made by Mr. Alfred Austin.
Supplementing his doctrine that amount of life
imsginarively represented is the t^t of poetical

THE APPRECIATION OP POETRP 239

exc^lence, he divides the sorts of life whidi
Poetry represents under the heads of Actiotri
Reflection, Emotion, and Perception, thus arranged
(he considers) in order of their comparative ex¬
cellence or importance ; whence he assigns a cor¬
responding order of merit to the Epic, Dramatic,
Reflective, Lyrical, and Descriptive styles of
Poetiy, and thus obtains what he regards as 'a
critical canon of considerable pregnancy/ As
Aaron’s rod budded, I suppose that a canon may
be pregnant; but I cannot think that this one
brings forth much in the way of illumination. It
seems much more likely to * breed fruitful hot
water ’ between the partisans of the various schools,
or of the representative poets of each. One might
object to it in limine that it would make out
the choruses of the Agamemnon to be work of an
inferior order to the dialogue, and the most re¬
nowned passages in the Iliads such as the descrip¬
tions of the shield of Achilles and of the watch-
flres, to be lapses from Homer^s highest style; or,
if this be thought hypercritical, that at any rate
the descnption, ‘ imaginative representation of
l^eat action,^ cannot by any possibility be applied
to Hamlet^ or to the fourth book of the JSneuk
or to the Divina Commedia, ,By dropping 'great

THE APPKECIATION OE POETRY

240

action,* and falling back for the distinguishing mark
of his first class on its ‘ dealings with * more of life,
Mr. Austin might, no doubt, find room in it for
these masterpieces ; though the last of them would
still break through the classification, since it is not
properly either epic or dramatic. But new diffi¬
culties would spring up. The Ring and the Book
deals with more life and with life in more complex
aspects than any contemporary poem, and its mode
of treatment is extraordinarily impressive ; nor can
it be said to lack * poetic beauty and poetic truth.^
But shall we feel its excellence particularly well
brought out by calling it (as Mr. Austin’s principle
would compel us to do) a remarkably fine specimen
of the highest style of Poetry, when all that, on the
same principle, we could say of the Pythian Odes
or Lycidas would be that they are remarkably
fine specimens of a lower style of Poetiy >

And when we*eome to look at the difference,
is it not closely associated with the fact that these
latter poems make, or have in their time made, for
themselves a far latter audience than we can ever
imagine The Ring and the Book making? And,
going a little farther, may we not say that their
power to do this has depended on the old point—'
a high degree of that verbal and rhythmic

THE APPRECIATION 0!F POETRY 24 f

ms^c which is irrespective of life ,* and that the
occurrence of that same verbal and rhythmic
magic (unless in the most fragmentary way) was
an impossibility in Mr. Browning’s poem, because
incompatible with that subtle and complex method
of Mealing with life’ on which its claim to be
a great poem at all is based? Poetry being a
compound, the fullest efficiency of which is pos¬
sible only by the fullest excellence of reasonable
and non-reasonable elements, declines from its
highest point in proportion as the amount of
either of them is in defect; and in criticism
the neglect of either tends always, by antagonism,
to produce neglect of the other. The importance
of sound subject-matter and a sound attitude
towards life being neglected or denied by some,
in favour of a limited something called Beauty,
the reaction against such false and exclusive
worship, and the fear of seeming to give in to it,
blind others to the fact that the non-reasonable
or magical element, which largely constitutes that
beauty, is a factor indispensable to the most
valuable, the most happiness-giWng, poetzy.

Mr. Austin, no doubt, professes to apply his
criterion only to such specimens of each style as
conform to those ' laws of poetic beauty and poetic

VOT, Tf. R

242 the appreciation of poetry

truth' under which, if anywhere, we have seen that
the non-reasonable element must be accommodated.
But to justify his hierarchy of styles he would
have to take specimens which equally conform to
those laws—specimens which, so far as that
element goes, start level; so that their particular
excellence in respect of it will introduce no con¬
fusion into the comparative estimates of the styles
to which they respectively belong. And * to do
this is practically impossible. Thus, in the style
to which is assigned the foremost rank, we at once
find that the most prominent recent instance, the
most considerable poem of the contemporary poet
who has most dealt with action, is one to which
the appearance of the magical element in anything
remotely approaching its fullest force’seems neces¬
sarily forbidden. The ‘style* of The Ring and
the Book is found repellant even by some to
whom the art of many of Mr. Browning's rhymed
poexns is of the most 'tantalisingly captivating sort;
and our terms become sadly confused if poetic
superiority be claimed for a general style which
includes a great poem composed In a particular
■* style * that no one describes as poetic. Nor would
it seem at all a sufiident answer to say that other
long wodcSi such as those of Hornet and Shadcse^

THE APPRECIATION OP POETRY 243

speare, which belong to the class that deals widi
action, have further shown supremacy in the
magical use of rhythmic language. For it is just
by pushing to an extreme the very characteristic
of the class itself, just by belonging to the class in
a still more superlative degree, and dealing with
action and the springs of action in a more many*
sided and complex way, that The Ring and the
Book has been put (in most of its course) outside
the chances of such magical use.

But a further unreality attaches to such an
arrangement of classes of Poetry in order of merit
or importance; and, again, the defect seems con¬
nected with a want of due reference to the part
which poetical productions are now playing, and
likely still to'play, in the actual arena of human ex¬
perience. It lies in ignoring the conditions under
which one or another class may most naturally
flourish. Poetry itself may seem to us superior
or inferior; but the class or style of Poetty is,
so to speak, an instrument which is greatest when
it is best adapted to its purpose. If we believe at
all in a necessary course of mental as of material
development, then even those who regard the
movement as rather away from than towards the
best poetical ccmditlons must still admit thi)t new

244

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

stages of the movement will demand new modes of
poetical expression. That a poet has worked in one
style rather than another has often been less a
matter of his own choice than of his time and sur*
roundings; and the comparisons which might be
defensible as applied to the actual products seem
somewhat meaningless as applied to the modes or
instruments, which can be fairly judged only by
their adequacy to the work required of them. It
would seem, then, that in a century in which by far
the larger amount of poetical force has found its
inevitable vent in lyrical and reflective channels,
language is more or less strained by insistence on
the innate superiority of a style of Poetry less in
harmony with the irresistible Zeit-geist

Our view here is apt to be a little obscured
by the unique supremacy of Shakespeare; for,
finding him to be our greatest, in the direct sense
of being our moSt happiness-giving,^ poet, men are
predisposed to catch at any classification which
assigns the highest rank to the poetry of action;

^ This can hardly be questioned, even in the age of Tennyscm,
if it is remembered that Shakespeare is the only poet of quite the
highest rank who gives immense pleasure (according to their own
account) to persons who are otherwise somewhat indifferent to
poetry ; and the sum of happiness due to him is thus swelled in a
very exceptional way.

THE APPRECTATION OF POETRY 245

though even on Shakespeare’s account, when one
remembers what his verbal and rhythmic magic at
its best can be, one may resent having that element
of Poetiy treated as a sort of recognised common
quantity, possessed in practically equal measure by
the considerable poets of all the compared classes.
But had Shakespeare never been born, I doubt if
many living Englishmen, unbiassed by study of
Greek literature, would have discovered in the
drama an inherent superiority over all other styles ;
while as for our English epic, with its contro¬
versies and its classical allusions, it would be mere
paradox to maintain that it does or can exercise as
wide and deep an emotional influence as the great
lyric outburst of the present century. And even
if we go to really popular epics, and admit the
Iliad and the Odyss^ to be the greatest of poems^
yet if they could only have been produced when
and where they were, and if the epic, in the aspects
in which it represents the class of ' action,’ has not
since approved itself as the channel through which
the greatest poetical force obtains access to the
world, nothing seems gained by proclaiming this
class to be objectively the greatest of styles, to
people who cannot but draw most of their sus*;
tenance frcxn othisr styles. If they had a choice;

246 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

it might be different; but, till Greek is universally
known, the lyric and reflective poetry of their
own language must be (some plays of Shakespeare
perhaps excepted) the greatest poetical fact in the
world to them, I should prefer to avoid the word
‘ greatest * altogether in connection with styles,
and would only insist that for eveiy nation and
every generation the most important style is that
whose products have the widest and most pene¬
trating spiritual influence. The poems, or passages
from poems, whose penetrating influence has spread
through many nations and many generations, have
no doubt established a sort of claim to be called
, the greatest individual specimens of the art; these,
however, cannot possibly be included under any
single style.

To sum up now the main results of this and the
preceding Essay. We found the weakest point
of poetical criticism, and the chief source of un¬
fruitful controversy, in a tendency to overmuch
comparison—not the comparison which simply
seeks to bring out characteristic qualities and
poetical affinities (for of this we can hardly have
too much), but the comparison which Insists on
applying some over-tigM measuring-rule Ibr the

THE APPRECIATiaN OF POETRY 247

establishment of absolute orders of merit, whether
of poets or poems or classes of Poetry. That
tendency we examined in its more general aspect,
and «then followed out to its particular effect in
connection with Poetry. We traced it to that
natural love of classification which to many edu¬
cated persons makes it almost a necessity of interest
in any subject where scope is given to varieties
of excellence, that they should assign stars to their
magnitudes, set up their special heroes who will
have foils in lesser luminaries, and assert the
power of their own personality in emphasising the
verdicts of their own particular experience. This
habit, we saw, was almost inevitably associated
with the desire to impress on others the justice of
one's own verdicts—an association specially strong
in the case of so enormous an intellectual and
emotional interest as Art. And the normal means
of impressing one’s views on others being by
reasonable argument, we found further that Poetry
is precisely the art which affords to this means the
largest and most legitimate scope, and where any
element beyond its range is most easily neglected ;
.and consequently that critics of poets and Poetry
perpetually ^emed to rest their whole case on
tbe reasoned expo^tion^ and reasonable cahons tjf

248 THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

excellence which they were able to supply. In
the great divergence of existing verdicts we saw
a plain hint, confirmed in other ways, that some
element which played an important part iq the
formation of the judgments was ignored in the
expositions; and that the very allowance that
might apparently be made for it, in a vague phrase
such as * laws of poetic beauty and poetic truth,'
betokened neglect of the enormous power and
variety of its influence. The moral was that, if
there is so much in our poetical convictions and
preferences which we must accept without ex¬
plaining, we should be chaiy of attaching too
absolute a value to our own orders of merit, and
of measuring poetical achievements by any ‘ rea¬
sonable ’ considerations.

A discussion of the nature of this magical or
non-reasonable element led on to its bearings on
varieties of taste, and so on varieties of judgments
and of comparative estimates of poets and poems.
We found, too, that the same neglect of it which so
swells the controversial and ephemeral part of criti¬
cisms is at the root of various rather unreal views as
to the position and future of Poetry in the modern
world; and that critics often ignore, the actual

1. A

position of poetical productions in the minds of

THE APPRECIATION OF POETRY 249

meti, even while loosely appealing to the world's
verdict Passing on to more general questions
of appreciation of Poetry, we found that the
canon of ‘popularity* or ‘the general verdict*
must be treated at once with respect and with
caution. For if popularity in its fullest sense
seems to be the best, and indeed the only, con¬
ceivable objective standard of excellence, we have
also to recognise that the appeal to it cannot be
made very definite at any particular date, and that
no census would be delicate enough to measure
the depth as well as the width of poetical in¬
fluences ; and, above all, that that extreme acute¬
ness of pleasure, which is at the root of any one's
irresistible impulse to claim the general verdict for
this or that poet, is to be regarded as more or less
idiosyncratic—not, of course, in the sense that he
is alone in it, but that the perhaps large class who
share it are still confronted with other large
classes, whose experience of the same feeling lies
In different directions.

It is hard to enforce points like these without
conveying an impression of factious opposition; but
1 have not said a word that detracts from the sub¬
stantial value of the critical writings to which 1 have
mainly referred. What 1 haye urged leaves the

250 tHE APPRECIATION OF POETRY

positive sphere of reasoning and expository criticism
absolutely unchanged; indeed in considering the
standard of popularity, taken in the deeper Utili¬
tarian sense, the essential importance of the poet's
choice of subject, and of his relation to the very
points on which reasoning and expository critics can
find most to say, was insisted on with an urgency
to which some of those critics would themselves
demur. Nothing has been opposed, except the
habit of backing favourites and passing universal
judgments—and even this only in excess. Let the
champions continue from time to time to enter the
lists and have their tilts; man is a combative
animal, and poetical polemics may amuse even
where they do not instruct. But the recognition,
in principle, that things seen, even by other
people, go for more than things not seen, even
by oneself, and» in practice, that energy is more
profitably spent in struggling towards the other
people's standpoints than in defending one's own,
would tend, I believe, to a most salutary increase
in the sum of happiness derived from appreciation

t

of Poetry.

251

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC^

Mr. James Sully, in a generous review of TAs
Power of Sound published in Mind, vol. vi^ put
forward certain objections in so clear and com¬
pact a form as to invite reply. And though I can

* Some apology is perhaps needed for including in a collection
of Essays what is in form merely a reply to criticisms of a previous
book. A good deal of what is here said might, no doubt, have
found a more appropriate place in a second edition of the work
itsdf: might, but for one sufGcient reason—the practical certainty,
namely, that the work itself will never reach a second edition.
Though .e^cpressly addressed to the * naive layman,* demanding
no preliminary knowledge of even the simplest technicalities, and
lai^y devoted to a vindication of the essentially popular character
of the art which is its subject, its bulk got it at once stamped as
* ponderous,* and it has been supposed to be an esoteric treatise,
comprehensible only to experts. After seven years, an impression
cf tlijs sort is not Ukely to get corrected. But so strange a thing is
authorship that even the failure of a book does not preclude the
desire that its positions should be made as intelligible as possiUe;
and it is as tending possibly to make some points clearer tluut these
brief supplementary remarks are reprinted, with some notice
fmeign criticism which has appeared since they were first publi^ed.
Though necessarily much comprised, th^ are so written as t(^
be undmtood without consultadon of the * ponderous * tome to
which they refer.

352 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

scarcely hope here to make any positive addition
to my side of the case, or to be more convincing in
a brief paper than in a long book, there may be

m

some advantage in embracing the views attacked
in a succinct statement, and pointing out where
and how (as it appears to me) the attack leaves the
gist and strength of my arguments untouched.

Mr. Sully’s main difference from me lies in his
refusing to recognise the unique and independent
character which I attribute to what I have called
‘ the musical faculty,* and the consequent impossi-
Wlity of obtaining ultimate or even approximate
explanations of its actions and verdicts, and of the
more distinctive sort of musical impressions ; * the
hopelessness * (to quote my preface; * of penetrating
Music in detail, and of obtaining, whether in ob¬
jective facts of structure or in fancied analogies
and interpretations, any standpoint external to the
actual inward impression, from which to judge it’
—from which to measure and account for its pre¬
sentation in any particular case of a characteristic
pleasure-giving quality. The faculty to which I
refer the perception of this quality Mr. Sully re¬
gards as an * unnecessary deus ex mackin&l brought
In to cut the knot of an sesthetic problem admittedly
complex and difficult, but likely (he thinks) to

^ THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 2 55

yields without any such hypothesis, to the further
progress of psychological investigation. Professor
C, Stumpf, of Halle, in an elaborate and for the
most part very sympathetic examination of my
work, made a similar objection to what he called
my ' obstinate nativism/ ^

Now I must observe, to begin with, that there
is a sense in which, and a point up to which, the
* faculty’ and its uniqueness and independence
would, 1 can hardly doubt, be admitted by Ml
S ully and Professor Stumpf; and that for the
greater number of the positions and arguments
connected with it in The Power of Sound (e,g. in
respect of the relations of Music to the other arts,
and to human emotion and character), that sense
would be amply sufficient Quite apart from abstruse
psydiological problems, and simply taking * musical
faculty ’ as I have defined it, to denote the ability
to construe and enjoy a number of successive tones as
a unity or single and recognisable bit of melodic
forMy we find in it a useful name for a particular
power which two persons, alike in all other respects
of taste and temperament, may differ by the whole

t

* Musi^sychoto^ in England^ Leipzig, 18S5. Pn^easor
Stttnipf *s own views will doubtless be devdoped in the eoodtndii^
vdume of bis gxeat work on Tmp^^uhgU, , /

254 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MDSIC

extent of possessing in perfection and not possess¬
ing at all. And in the broadest and most obvious
of all musical facts—the impossibility of connecting
the possession of this faculty with any other
ticuUr characteristic, moral, inteUectual, or even
artistic—a uniqueness and independence of a very
remarkable kind is surely established. For this re¬
markable fact, whichbelongs not to scientific researr*
but to the most ordinary observation, I find a basis
(and an explanation, so far at any rate as things
are explained by bang referred to something more
ultimate and fundamental than themselves) in that
more precise view of the uniqueness and independ¬
ence of the musical faculty which resuits from a
careful examination of the exact work which it per¬
forms—of the characteristics of the special ‘ forms ’
with which it deals. Each of these forms consists of
a particular set of accurate ftw^-measurements fused
into combination with a particular set of accurate
jW'tol-measurements, of which latter the ear alone,
among the senses can take cc^isance. Here again I
■ do not imderstand Mr. Sully to differ from me. In
the and in the degree in which tiiese pro¬

portions of melodic form differ essentially from afl
visual and tactual proportions (for the proof how
complete difference is I must ref« to my

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 255

7th and 8th chapters), in that sense and in
that degree the faculty which takes cognisance oi
them has a unique and independent characten
There need be no more difficulty in admitting s6
much than in admitting that the rationale of tone-
relationship propounded by Helmholtz finds no
parallel in connection with the eye or the other
sense-organs.

But now we come to the point of parting.
Admitting (as I imagine he would) the uniqueness
and independence up to the point indicated, Mr.
Sully would still refer the characteristic pleasure
of melody to discovered or discoverable laws and
conditions lying outside of theparticular operations
in which the faculty follows and surveys the pro¬
portions presented to it. To him the uniqueness
and independence of the faculty are not of so
fundamental a sort, but that the most characteristic
and individual effects of its exercise may be shown
to have their root and essence in something more
general than itself^ in regions of idea and emotion
external to that exercise, and which that exercise
is a mere means of presenting or representing;
the various actions of the faculty, as brought to
bear on the various objects presented to it, being
in fact but the turnings on pf so many t^ps to

2 S 6 the psychology of music

these various reservoirs, where the act of turning is
simply a means, and contributes no essential and
independent ingredient to the aesthetic result

Now, in respect of their general influence on
Music, I have attached very great importance to
those external regions of idea and emotion on
which Mr. Sully dwells. But I am unable to con¬
nect them as he does with what 1 have called the
most characteristic and individual effects of Music ;
and I proceed now briefly to develop what I mean
by these italicised phrases. For it is just in this
distinction between the general and the individtial
qualities of Music that the kernel of the difference
between Mr. Sully and myself lies. In this dis¬
tinction also lies the key of my whole argument;
and I have therefore no resource but to try to
suggest in a few pages what it needed as many
chapters properly to elucidate.

1 have ui^ed >^ain and again (especially in my
5th and loth chapters) that the central fact and
problem of Music lies in the shortness of the melodic
forms in which the maximum or minimum of beauty
may appear; in other words, in the extraordinary
diffl^ence of pleasure-giving quality which, to any
given person at any given time, may be presented
by two bits of form each comprised within the

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF. MUSIC

257

narrowest limits. Till this fact is faced, ft is worse
than useless to go on and imagine we are getting
nearer to the root of the matter by consideration
either of the sensuous effects of mere sonorous im*
pression on the nervous system, or of the artistic
aspects of large compositions, such as their wide
variety, happy contrasts, finely balanced parts, and
so on.' And the fact, in itself so startling, has at
any rate the advantage of giving us extremely
definite touchstones by which to try the various
explanations of melodic impressiveness which have
been offered. If any proposed explanation fails
hopelessly when confronted with this central fact;
if its terms are found to apply equally to two forms
which differ by the whole extent of giving consum¬
mate pleasure and giving no pleasure at all; it
cannot be in any way what it professes to be, viz.
an explanation of the pleasure.

* It may save confusion to point out that in discussing the
characteristics of these aspects of musical timbre and of large
stmetare, and their respective relations to the shorter and more
closely organic combinations in which I find the fundamental fact
of the musical art, I have frequently called the former ^neraJ as
compared with the latter; but that the general, opposed to the
individual, characters discussed in this essay are those found in the
' short coutbineHions themselves^ and are such as, translated into the
domain of vision, e.gl of &ces, would amount to the possession of
human features and expression, as distinct from the possession of
beauty or special pleasure-giving quality.

VOL. 11 .

S

258 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

Of such professed explanations three stand out
pre-eminent;—(i) that of discoverable points of
structure, whether in matter of order and symmetry
or of freedom and contrast, which may be con¬
nected with recognised general laws; (2) that of
suggestion of physical movement or of physical
impulse ; (3) that of suggestion of the cadences of
emotional speech. I must be satisfied here with
the briefest reference to the arguments and ex¬
amples by which I prove (as I conceive) the utter
inadequacy of all of them.

First, as regards order and discoverable prin¬
ciples of adjustment, there are of course certain
conditions of orderly structure which must be ob¬
served under pain of producing incoherent gibber¬
ish ; but in Music these are so wide as to cover
similarly the very cases whose felt difference is the
thing to be accounted for. No observation of points
of structure wHl yield us any law or laws, external
to the single unanalysable impression in each case,
which shall serve to separate successions of tones
which give pleasure from others which give none.
In my 9th chapter I have shown how little the
element of order displayed in the material of
Musk—in tone-relationships and* scales and so on
—will account for d^ees of beauty in melodic * free

THE PSYCHOLOGY QF MUSIC 259

forms *; and in my 8th chapter 1 have given in¬
stances of pairs of such forms, good and bad, in npt
one of which * is a single technical point presented
which could be for a moment mentioned as differ¬
entiating the good from the bad, or forming the
slightest basis for an induction on the subject.
Nor are the words good and had here meant to refer
to any acknowledged classification. Any indi¬
vidual, whatever his taste, who among the tunes he
knows discriminates those which give him pleasure
from those which do not, will find it entirely hope¬
less to form any generalisation of structural features
which are present in the former and absent in the
latter.’ On this point Mr. Sully says: The ele¬
ment of order in one of those vulgar and wearisome
tunes which Mr. Gurney rightly despises after all
counts for something, as might at once be seen by
contrasting it with an unordcred sequence of notes/’
Of course it counts for something, in the sense that
it is a condition of the notes being comprehensible,
construable as a unity; but being found in forms
which are either neutral or negative as regards
pleasure-giving quality, I fail to see how it can
count for anything whatever as a distinction be-
. tween the pleasurable and the non-pleasurable.

So much for orderliness of structure: as regards

26o the psychology of music

freedom and contrasty I must refer for my own
views to my loth chapter, §§ 8 and 9, but must
devote some words here to Mr. Sully*s criticism.
Among the conditions of the distinguishing
beauty ” of “ admittedly beautiful melody,” he says
that ** something may be set down to discoverable
elements of form, as that very freedom which Mr.
Gurney appears to look on as something inexplic¬
able. The charm of a good deal of the best music
is due, and is consciously referred, to some striking
departure from familiar directions, which however
is at the same time not otherwise disagreeable. It
is curious, by the bye, that in an art which owes
so much to a perception of individual freshness,.
Mr, Gurney nowhere assigns any aesthetic value to
the humble quality of novelty.” In saying that I
assign no aesthetic value to novelty, Mr. Sully can
hardly mean that I have not dwelt sufficiently on
individuality c? novelty as a characteristic of fine
musical motive, that being a point which I have
very specially emphasised. To quote two instances
out of many—‘ The forms, when they occur, and
so far as they are impressive, are each new and
unique things, not like new expressions or postures,
or alterations and reminiscences, of known things:
eadh fresh melodic presentation which is profoundly

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 26l

felt is felt as till then wholly txnknowtu* 'The
primary requisite, both in simple and elaborate
musical work, is that it shall contain motives of
individuality as well as beauty; for of Music more
truly than of anything else may we say with Bacon
" there is no excellent Beauty that hath not some
strangenesse in the proportion.” ’ All, then, that
Mr. Sully can mean is that 1 do not regard the
freedom and novelty felt in such motives to be
properly an explanatimi of their effect. I certainly
do not; it is part of the effect to be explained, or
as 1 think not to be explained. It is a quality
which can be perceived and judged of only from
within the action of the musical faculty, in follow¬
ing and surveying the particular set of proportions.
Precisely what has been said in reference to the
pleasure-giving quality in general applies to this
particular sub-quality. No look of notes on music-
paper, no analysis of structure, no computation of
numerical relations, will establish any sort of con¬
dition or set of conditions applicable to combina¬
tions which present freedom and novelty, and not
tb others which present triteness and tameness of

contour. If in a sense it is legitimate to say that

*

a combination is beautiful because it is free and
novel, we then immediately ask, Why do we call

262 THE PSYCHOLOGV OF MUSIC

ft free and novel? and the only answer is that
the musical faculty finds it so. When Mr. Sully
goes on to speak of beauty as ** guaranteed when
the degree of agreeable divergence from the com¬
mon run of compositions reaches a certain height,,
provided always that it is in itself a worthy and
sufficiently complex result,” the words scarcely look
as if he were keeping steadily before his imagina¬
tion the typical ,case to the test of which I must
insist on bringing, in the first instance, every ex¬
planation of melodic beauty—the case of perfectly
short and simple forms. Where and what is the
“ agreeable divergence ” or the “ striking departure
from familiar directions” in the principal subject
of the Leonora overture, or in Batti baitiy or
in Angels ever bright and fairy or in Schubert’s
Forelky with its perfectly naive and obvious strains
such as a child .might pick up in a moment, and
its simple alternations of tonic and dominant
harmonies—a tune of absolute commonness, were
it not that the musical faculty pronounces it of
extraordinary rarity ?

As regards the sense of novelty in sound-
shapes, and the autocratic faculty which judgea

of itf we may usefully contrast the appreciation of

\

abstract fm'm by the eye. The great difier^Ce is

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 263

this: that the abstract visual form nn/er approaches
complete abstraction from the objects and facts of
the external world. The general laws of growth,
especially in vegetation, the general laws of the
disposition of weight, especially in buildings, the
association of ideas of force and spontaneity with
curvature, owing to the constant exhibition of
curves in the natural phenomena of land, sea, and
sky—such elements make up a body of visual habit
and instinct which must enter more or less into
every zesthetic judgment.' Thus the fact that a
spire must stand upon its base, not its point, or
that the more peaceful operations of nature tend
to smoothness and symmetry, may have a distinct
bearing on the impre.ssion that we receive from the
most abstract linear pattern. It may be top-heavy,
for instance, just as much as an inverted spire.
And into this sort of instinct other senses than
the visual very distinctly enter; to wit, the mus¬
cular and the tactile. Our objection to seeing
things topple over, which is at the root of our
instinct that a spire must not stand on its point, is
a muscular objection, a faint representation of
trouble In setting them up again. The contact of
curves and continuous surfaces with the body is
grateful, that of rough and irregular surfaces re-

264 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

i/r-

pellent, and so on. Thus, in respect of abstract
visual forms, we cannot speak of any single or
special ‘faculty* by which the proportions are
judged ; such forms do not belong, like tunes, to a
world apart, in which they are the only objects.
And it is, no doubt, partly owing to the constant
and inevitable reference of visual forms, however
abstract, to real (and often hard) facts, that the
eye feels a wrongness in novelties which deceive
its expectations and balk its natural tendencies—
in jags and interruptions, sharp unsymmetrical
angles, and other unbalanced features; whereas, in
sound-forms, which involve no such reference and
are a law to themselves, the deception of the ear’s
expectations is not felt as wrong, and novel un¬
symmetrical turns of phrase are, as Mr. Sully and
I agree, extremely frequent and delightful.

To return, however, to our main route. We
have found that in respect of structure —of dis¬
coverable principles of order, or of freedom under
conditions of order—we do not get an explanation,
even in that most limited sense of inductive laws
shown by observation to embrace and coincide
with the pleasure-giving cases; much less a true
exjplanation of their peculiar pleasure^^viiig
quality. Next as to physical movement Mr.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 26$

«

Sully says: ** I do aot see that Mr. Gurney’s idea
derives much support from the contention that the
^ Ideal Motion ’ of Music is something sui generis^
for surely there is some analogy between the form-
yielding motion of Music and the form-yielding
movement of an object in space.” I have devoted
much space to an examination of the analogy of
musical movement both to bodily movement and
impulse and to external movement in space, and
of all that it involves. What it does not involve
is, most clearly, the solution of our problem—why,
namely, of two brief combinations of notes which
are exactly on a par in respect of this analogy,
one gives the maximum of pleasure and the other
none at all. In the present instance I need not
dwell further on this fact, as it is not as specially
bearing on that central problem that the topic is
introduced by Mr. Sully; but its bearing on the
uniqueness of the musical faculty cannot be alto¬
gether passed over. I have, in my 8th chapter,
attempted to show how little the movement of an
object in space can be truly called ‘form-yielding,’ in
comparison with melodic movement I can quote
but a single fragment. A propos of a machine
devised by Professors Perry and Ayrton, ^hereby
the shadow of a ball, thrown on a variously

266 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

illuminated surface, Could be made to go through
all manners of graceful movements, with variations
of size and pace, and so to yield what they regard
as visible music, I say:—‘ The progressive form,^
the Ideal Motion, of which each step is necesssuy
to the whole—which is organic by dint of the
relation of each component part to others, some
of them separated from it by a very appreciable
interval of time and, it may be, by a large number
of intervening units of tone—is wholly due, as
we have seen, to the fusion with rhythm of the
/f/^^-element in which tone relationship is the
all-important feature. This is the sort of form
unchangeable in each case, along which we pass
in glad compulsion. No similar necessity, no true
organism, could ever be discerned in the sequence
of movements of the Professors* ball, however
graceful and various. The eye might have its
negative requirements, and resent irregular angu¬
larities of direction and violently sudden changes
of pace; but the positive faculty of linking a
long series of the swiftly vanishing impressions
Into a unity*—that faculty which the unique sense
of tone* relationship alone makes possible in the
case of the ear—has no possible analogue in the
case <A vision, in the absence of any similar means

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 267^

of correlating the elements of a visual series.*^
This being so, I do not see how any one can
deny the faculty to be sui generis^ unless he
is prepared to contend that other faculties than
the musical, or other senses than the auditory,
can take cognisance of pitch-relations. The
musical faculty is at any rate sui generis to the
extent of apprehending, and alone apprehending,
this sort of motion ; and Mr. Sully seems here
to be implicitly denying it that amount of unique¬
ness and independence which at the beginning of
this paper I credited him with accepting, and
which seems necessarily involved in the simple
fact that A picks up and remembers a tune which
to B is a mere fortuitous succession of sounds.

The same remark applies to his next sentence:,
** Nor do I think that the idea of a unique faculty
is greatly aided by the supposition of a special
cogency in musical sequence, which I suspect is
veiy much a matter of custom general or special
(where the melody has become familiar), and de¬
pends on the fact, too lightly touched on by Mr.
Gurney,^ that melody is essentially a response to

^ I have, however, more than once emphasised this partially
point, and have included it (p. 175) in my Hst of the seven chief
general characteristics of melody.

268

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

a continually renewed attitude of expectant atten-
tion/* I should find here, no doubt, a more par¬
ticular point of difference if Mr. Sully means that
the cogency of a fine motive may not be felt qtlite
as much on the first as on the twentieth hearing;
for by cogency I simply mean the sense that altera¬
tion either of notes or rhythm would destroy the
individual organism. But so far as this is accepted,
it connects itself with a sort of uniqueness in the
apprehending faculty which 1 should have thought
indisputable, w^hatever view might be taken on
that further question of the influence of external
references which I have regarded as the chief
one in dispute between Mr. Sully and myself.
Professor Stumpf also finds a difficulty in this
matter of cogency. He compares the sequence
of impressions in a melody to the series of visual
or of gustatory impressions which we receive in a
stroll through a park or in working through a well-
arranged menu. Either of these series, he thinks,
constitutes a whole, which is apprehended in th^
same way as the melodic whole. But is it possible
that he considers the unity the same in kind ? If
his stToU or his dinner were interrupted in the
mid(§e, or If a portion of each were marred by
some accident, would not Iris feeling be just that

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 269

he had not had enough, or that for a certain por«
tion of the time occupied his enjoyment had failed ?
Would not every moment that was enjoyed retain
its full independent value? And would an indi¬
vidual thing, capable of surviving in memoiy as its
exact self and nothing else, have been kept out of
existence, if the items had been altered—if a por¬
tion of the path had been shadowed by oaks in
stead of elms, or if salmon had been substituted for
turbot ? Clearly not; the sequences are perfectly
loose and all but fortuitous. The sequence in a
melody, on the other hand, is cogent and organic,
just because its several moments have no inde¬
pendent value, and because a substitute of other
items would render that particular thing abortive.

Before quitting the topic of physical movement,
I must notice a view of considerable interest which
was put forward by M. Georges Gu^roult, in a
review of my book published in the Revue
Philosophique for April, 1882. He regards the
visible movement to which music is truly analogous
as' something quite different from the harmoniously
varied pattern producible by Professors Perry and
Ayrton’s machine. The true parallel, he thinks,
must be found in the gestures of a great actor or
orator. This comparison enables him to ^ve.^

2JO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

plausible-looking reply to my remark that, if the
forceful character often felt in music really de¬
pended on such qualities of movement as are
obviously akin to forceful movements presented
to the eye in space, a rapid fortissimo study of
Czerny’s ought to be felt as more forceful than,i
the quiet but irresistible motive which I quote
from a Beethoven sonata. The study of Czerny’s,
he says, may be compared to the violent exer¬
tions of a person who is polishing a floor, or who
has burnt his finger and moves it spasmodically
to and fro to relieve the pain. The actor or the
orator will actually move his body much less than
this, but in so doing will aflect our emotions much
more. Yet (M. Gu<§roult argues) we do not regard
the gestures associated with acting or with orato^"
as constituting a species of their own, distinctTrom
all other physical movements; why'fiheh should

ml'"

musical movement be so regarded ?

I must trebly dissent from this argument. In
the first place, thee movements of the living face
and form are a class distinct from all other
physical movements, in so far as they express
emotions which other physical movements do not
express. Movements of just the same pace and
extent might be seen in other objects without

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 2^1

rousing the slightest emotion. A bird’s wings may
vibrate with much the same motion as Lear’s raised
hands, in the gesture with which he accompanies the
crisis of his denunciation ; a young tree may bend
and sway beneath the wind with the same sort of
movement as that with which Lear bows and rocks
over the body of Cordelia; but the bird and the
tree rouse in us no sense of anger or despair. A
twitch of the ear, which some people can give at
will, reveals no trace of feeling ; an equal twitch of
the upper lip might express a spasm of scorn
or loathing. It is surely too obvious to need ex¬
pounding that human gesture has become to us a
revelation of emotion by a process of association
which is wholly lacking in the case of all other
movements. In the second place, even Talma’s
gestures would not have given much rapture, if
they had gone on for half an hour or more, as the
greatest musical compositions do, without receiving
any support or justification from word and story.
And in the third place, M. Gudrqult’s rapproche^
ment, if meant as in any way explanatory of
melodic effect, would covertly introduce the old
pernicious fallacy—^which yet he seems to agree
with me in deploring—that Music is primarily a
representative art, bound, like stage-gesture,, to the

2/3 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

perpetual depiction of recognised emotions and
sentiments as they occur outside it, instead of
being primarily a presentative art, bound to the
perpetual production of pleasurable impressions
that are otherwise unknown.

M, Gudroult goes on to argue for the greater
'effective* aesthetic movement in a production of real
musical art, as compared with a Czerny study, by
pointing to the similarity and monotony of figure
which characterise the latter, in contrast to the

ever varied and unexpected individualities of note

«

and phrase in the former. The contrast is perfectly
just; but clearly general description is not analysis.
As regards variety, it is enough to observe—as
before in respect of Mr. Sully*s ‘ agreeable divergence
from the common run of compositions*—that it is a
quality far more identified with extended works
than with the shorter quintessential passages
which constitute our primary problem. Nobody
will say that the separate sections of the Andante
of the Pastoral Sonata, or of the Allegretto of the
Seventh Symphony, impress us by dint of their
variety, though the variety due to their juxtaposition
is, of course, in the complete work, a point only
secondaiy (longo intervallo) to their individual
beauty. And as regards individuality, our (omer

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

275

pcnnt again applies. The general condition that»
for a bit of music consisting in movement to have
artistic worth, it must present a certain freshness
and spontaneity of movement, gives no clue what¬
ever to the special conditions of the freshness in
any particular case ; that is to say, it affords us no
means of discovering, apart from the particular
impression that we receive, why one progression is
felt as a surprise—takes us somehow into quite a
new place in the tone-world—while another, though
equally formed by a combination of notes which
our ears have never previously encountered, pro¬
duces not the slightest extension of our musical
horizon.^

* Professor Stumpf objects to the marked distinction which I
make between the impressive character of all the music that gives
pleasure, and the definably expressive character (peaceful, joyful,
gloomy, etc.) of some of it, on the ground that no sharp line can be
drawn between the music which is and that which is not definably
expressive—that there are any number of transition-stages. I have
myself drawn attention to the fact, and cannot understand the
objection. My position would be sufficiently established if I could
point to a single musical passage—as a matter of fact I could
of course point to thousands—which produced the distinctively
musical exaltation, while yet not specially suggesting any single
adjective drawn from the category of the emotion^ And as for the
inability to mark where definable expression begins, it would surely
be legitimate to dmw a clear distinction between abstract urcaoge«
ments of lines and pictorial representation of objects, without
marking an exact point fU which the abstract arrangement might,
perdiance, suggest to the eye aome vague outline of a concrete object,

VOL. II. T

274 PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

The remaining region of external reference
which awaits discussion is that of speech. Here
again, as in the case of physical movement, I have
carefully dwelt on the general influence of speech
on Music. To quote only a few sentences, I say
that though ‘every argument based either on
structure or feeling confutes the idea of special
relationships between the actual progressions of
sound in the two cases,’ yet * the general bearing
of speech on melody is none the less important; to
it is due the vivid effect, which a fine melody pro¬
duces, of being something said —a real utterance
of transcendent significance. So prominent is this
characteristic, that the impulse to project some
sort of personality behind melodic strains seems
absolutely irresistible. . . . The fact that I seem
to myself to use the word utterance in a literal
and not a metaphorical sense in respect of melody
is an instinct which I cannot get behind, and
which can only be entirely realised by those who
share it A splendid melodic phrase seems con¬
tinually not like an object of sense, but like an
affirmation not sb much prompting admiring
ejaculation as compelling passionate assent The
impulse is to exclaim, “ I should think so indeed 1 ”
rather than ** How beautiful 1 ” Hie delusion, if

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 2/5

delusion it be, seems quite explicable by the
general association with speech/ and so on.

But in this instance of speech, I have gone
much beyond the admission of this most general
influence. Though in my chapter on ‘ The Speech-
theory * I have opposed to the utmost Mr. Spencer*s
view of a close and special connexion between
musical cadences and speech-cadences, on which
he bases the whole emotional effect of Music, I
have attributed to speech a laige share of the pro¬
duction in Music of definite nameable expressions,
as tranquil, vivacious, capricious, and so on. Mr.
Sully says: ** Mr. Gurney’s argument against Mr.
Spencer is, 1 think, conclusive up to k certain
point. Undoubtedly the resemblances between
Music as we know it and speech are not close; un¬
doubtedly different kinds of emotional speech
sometimes have the same musical qualities. Never-
theless this does not disprove the contention that,
in a general way. Music represents vocal utterance
{a fact indeed which Mr. Gurney concedes); or
that a particular melody tends to call up certain
groups of feelings rather than others.” Some par¬
ticular melodies of course do. I have devoted a
long chapter (chap, xiv.) and many examples to the
elucidation of these * groups of feelings,’ and of the

2^6 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

definitely expressive qualities of Music. It is true
that I have referred these qualities not so much
directly to speech ^s to facts of physical impulse and
gesture^ these beiug of a more universal and funda¬
mental nature. But not only have I (at the end of
the chapter on * The Speech-theory *) given speech
special credit for certain more or less definite sorts
of effect, in connexion with which I would fully
accept Mr. Sully’s description of musical beauty as
“ often inextricably bound up with obscure sugges¬
tions of feeling ** (i.e. of feeling knowable and name-
able outside Music); but I have said—‘ All those
features of physical motion mentioned in the four¬
teenth chapter as having their counterparts in Music,
which, as we saw, is able to suggest definite emo¬
tions so far as physical motions are themselves
expressive of such emotions, may naturally be
presented in speech. And the connexion of Music
wiUi the presentation of them in speech is naturally
exceptionally close. For first, in the use of lan¬
guage under emotion there is not only the varied
play of energy parallel to that which may be mani¬
fested by muscular exercise of other sorts, but this
varied play takes effect in the actual material of
Sound, and so obtains the widest and easiest channel
for association with the art of Sound. And secondly^

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 2/7

speech stands apart from other physical modes of
expression in having normally a large amount of
^onUimity! and so on. But all this opens up no
sort of connexion between speech and our central
musical problem^ which concerns a pleasure-giving
or distinctively f^pressive quality present in multi¬
tudes of cases where definable ^ressive quality is
•either absent or present only in the widest and
vaguest way. The proof of this would only suffer
by fragmentary quotation ; but I shall certainly be
disappointed if any reader of my chapter on * The
Speech-theory ’ remains unconvinced on two funda¬
mental points : (i) the general futility of attempt¬
ing to connect in detail melodies—genuine or¬
ganisms the separate intervals and fragments of
which give no more idea of them than a number of
scattered bricks gives of a building, and might
equally occur in melodies of the most diverse
characters—with * that infinite and indefinite
medley which, under the name of “ cadences of
speech,” we find talked of as a set of universally
recognised successions of tones, appropriated, one
apiece, to every shade of feeling we ever experience; ’
•(2) the hopelessness of getting any explanation of
individual pleasure-giving effect of melodies from
the general qualities (loudness^ rapid variation Of

2/8 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

pitch) width of interval, &c.) on which Mr. Spencer
dwells ; inasmuch as * the effect (a) may be absent
in the presence of all his conditions, (fi) may .be
present in their absence.’

We have thus glanced at the three suggested
bases of melodic beauty, one having to do with
structure and order, the other two with sugges¬
tions of concrete external phenomena—movement
and speech; and in none of the three do we
find anything which will mark off for us those suc¬
cessions of tone which /fave, from those which /ac^,
the particular quality presented as our central
problem ; the quality of producing, for any par¬
ticular individual at any particular time, a particular
impression, of which in innumerable cases no more
precise description can be given than that it is in
a unique way agreeable.

Should any reader of my book be led to agree
with me so far, I do not think that he would feel the
following further argument of Mr. Sully to be truly
applicable :—** I think then that we are in a position
to divine vaguely and imperfectly where the charac¬
teristic beauty of different compositions lies. Mr.
Gurne/s ably developed argument is really telling
only gainst the mere formalist who holds that all
beauty is resolvable into universal principles of

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 2/9

form, and against the mere idealist who asserts that
suggested emotion exhausts the mystery of musical
charm. As against one who thinks that musical
beauty is too complex a product to be explained by
any one principle and depends on a subtle blending
of many distinct influences, his argument looks very
much like a fallacy of composition :—The charm of
music is due neither to this, that, nor the other cause:
therefore it is not due to all taken together.”. Re¬
calling the fact that I am beginning at the beginning
and dealing with the charm of distinct and short
melodic forms, for which the vague general phrase
‘ charm of music ’ is a very equivocal substitute, I
need only slightly expand Mr. Sully's last sentence,
to be able to endorse it without laying myself open
to any charge of fallacy :—I take two melodies, A
with charm, B without; and I say, the charm of A
is not due to order, for B is equally orderly; nor to
suggestion of physical movement, for B bears jilst
the same analogy to physical movement; nor to
suggestion of speech, for B is just as suggestive (or
unsuggestive) of speech; therefore it is not due to
all taken together. What it is due to (primarily,
at any rate) is the fact that the notes in A go one
way and the notes in B another; that A presents
one set of sound-proportions, and B another, to the

28 o the psychology of music

single faculty which can judge of such matters; so
that however much such a faculty may be dtus ex
machind^ it can hardly be deemed * unnecessary.’
Rejecting this simple hypothesis, that the exercise
which constitutes the perception of melodies as forms
or unities has also a prime share in the appreciation
and enjoyment of them, Mr. Sully finds what serves
him at once as a solution of the problem, and as an
excuse for the impossibility of making good its
application to particular cases, in the number and
complexity of the elements to which he would refer
the enjoyable effect. Yet this bewildering host of
subtly-fused ingredients turns out, when looked at,
to reach the not very formidable number of three,
which moreover are almost as easy to test as to
count, and certain (if j am right) to be rejected on
testing.

Mr. Sully thinks that 1 draw a too hard and
fast line between beautiful and unbeautiful music.
** To the scientific psychologist,” he says, “ there is
no such distinction. Beauty is nothing but a
special accumulation of pleasurable elements, and
passes into the simply pleasant by insensible
transitions. It is, as Mr. Cyples has well said, a
massing of grateful impressiems.” This last point
h certainly veiy generally true; though 1 must

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC ZBl

remark that a beloved melody has a most sir^ular
power of seemiftg simply intense, without suggest¬
ing any complex massing of various elements of
effect; and though I must persist, as just shown,
in rejecting the actually suggested elements m
masse quite as much as separately. But as regards
the hard and fast line, in the case of most people
at any rate, it persists in drawing itself, for each
individual, between certain bits of music which at
a particular stage of his development give him the
characteristic pleasure and those which do not
In dwelling on these cases, simply as being those
which present the problem clearly and decisively,
I in no way deny the existence of an enormous
number of other bits, pleasurable in various de¬
grees, which would bridge over the gap between
the extremes. Nor do I see how my position is
invalidated, as Mr. Sully and M, Gu^roult think
that it is, by the fact of wide differences in the
scope and in the verdicts of the musical faculty in
different individuals. Till we can in some way see
round it, and trace (as we never shall trace) its
innermost connexions with the organism, 1 do not
^see what right we should have to expect entire
similarity in its operations—though 1 must add
that with persons of 'good ear’ who have had

282 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

Similar chances in the way of becoming early
familiar with the same music, the similarity of
perception and taste in this region is often quite
exceptionally close, in spite of wide difference in
all other respects of character and intellect; sa
that to this extent I should not object to endorsing
the view which M. Gu^roult attributes to me, that
the beautiful is ‘ un caract^re incorpord aux oeuvres
d*art d'une manidre permanente, invariable.’ Such
a view, however, is not in the least implied in my
position that what each person thinks beautiful in
Music is discovered by himself, and for himself, in
a manner which it.is hopeless for him to analyse
into elements of idea and emotion known outside
Music

My reply to Mr. Sully in these last paragraphs
is also in great measure a reply to Professor Stumpf
As Professor Stumpf seems to agree with the whole
of my adverse criticism of hitherto suggested
explanations, while yet objecting to my view that
the characteristic pleasure of melody does not
admit of genuine analysis, I hoped that he had in
store some fresh explanation of his own. I was
disappointed, therefore, to find that he considered
that 1 myself had laid down true 'principles of

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 283

explanation/ of the pleasure, in the shape of certain
very general conditions (such as the exceptional
character of musical tone in the domain of sound,
the listener's constantly renewed attitude of ex¬
pectation, the dim analogies with verbal utterance,
&c.), most of which are equally realised by music
that gives no pleasure. By extending the list of
such general conditions he expects to cany analysis
almost to the very heart of the matter. Thus,
when 1 point out an initial obstacle to the analysis
of melodic effect, in the absolute fusion of the
rhythm and the pitch, the time-values and scale-
values^ of the component notes—neither element
having any melodic value apart from the other—^he
imagines that he meets me by saying that certain
characteristics of single notes can be analysed;
for instance, that we can understand the association
of different sorts of feeling with a soft deep note, a
soft high note, a loud deep note, and a loud high
note; and that we can account for the respective
effects of a diminuendo and a crescendo in ascend*
ing and in descending passages! 1 confess that I
cannot understand how a person who has ever
enjoyed in a really possessing way eight bars of
quiet tune can think that he is even approaching the
heart of that matter by multiplying consideraticms

284 PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

irrelevant to the unity and individuality which are ‘
its very self. And I seem to read a sort of doubt
even in the words of Professor Stumpf. For he
prefaces this portion of his critique by a warning
that I exaggerate the strength and depth of the
musical impression ; that the real might of Music is
only exercised on scattered individuals at favour¬
able moments; that some people do not even
care about it; and that the explanation which he
desiderates is of the effective residue of enjoyment
after all these allowances have been made. So
that perhaps, after all, we are talking about different
things ; and he may be content to leave out of his
account as abnormal and sporadic those experiences
of * strength and depth * with which 1 am primarily
concerned, and the extreme commonness of which
is to me the most certain and the most important
fact of contemporary aesthetics.

The only direction in which Professor Stumpf
attempts to work out his view with any detail is
that of analysing the effect of melody into the
independent characters of some of its component in¬
tervals. He quotes with applause some sentences of
Hanslick’s, to the effect that every separate musical
clement, and therefore eveiy isolated interval, has
‘a fixed physic^nomy, and makes a definite aesthetic

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 285

impression, the study of which constitutes the
philosophy of Music. Exactly to the same extent
as the study of an artist’s palette, prepared with all
the tints that he requires for his work, constitutes
the philosophy of Painting. But if anything further
had been needed to convince me of the hopelessness
of such * analysis,* Professor Stumpfs attempt would
have supplied what was wanting. He reminds me
that I have myself ascribed definite expression to
the characteristic thirds of the major and the minor
scale; and he adds that the ascent of a fourth
from the dominant to the tonic has in it something
specially active, and that the ascent of a fifth from
the tonic to the dominant has a character of solemn
expectation. Sixths, like every one else, he considers
s^eeable; sevenths, bold and pert (keck). He is
too candid not to admit that the expression even
of the most definitely expressive of these intervals
is not constant—that e.g. the composer sometimes
deliberately annuls the* something specially active*
of the ascending fourth; andU this alone would
suggest a doubt as to how far the analysis had
really penetrated. But, in fact, to imagine that
melody receives an explanation from points of
* expression * like these is like imagining that a
painter could produce a striking portrait of a person

286 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

whom he had never seen, on the strength of knowing
that on one day he had smiled and on another had
looked grave. The intervals, all or any of them, may
occur again and again in the most diverse melodic
forms—pretty, ugly, trivial, sublime. I have shown
by examples (The Power of Sound, pp. 152-3) how
changes of the time-values of the notes may make of
the self-same succession of intervals two results as
different as Apollo and a satyr. In the face of such
facts we shall scarcely accept the vague and incon¬
stant ethical colourings of a minority of the intervals
—for by far the commonest interval, the second, has
none at all—presented in an order which, from the
point of view of definable emotional experience,
is the merest jumble, as an aid towards under¬
standing the intensely individual and peremptory
revelations of impressive tunes. Certain qualities
of certain items which are as frequent in some
namby-pamby ballad as in Dove Sono, in some
vile street-jig as in the Rosatnunde ballet-music,
will not carry us ^<;ry far into Mozart’s and Schu¬
bert’s secret.

In support of his view. Professor Stumpf cites
an example of my own—a melody from Fra Diavolo,
in which sixths alternate with sevenths—and re¬
marks that, having ascertained sixths to be pleasing

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 28/

and sevenths pert when the intervals are taken
separately, we recognise these same characters in
them in the melody. Now, I must take leave to
doubt whether it would have at all occurred to
him to describe the ethical character of sevenths
in isolation as kecky if he had regarded them really
in isolation. The illusion, when one takes an in¬
terval out of a melody, that it retains the character
that one seemed to see in it in the melody, is a very
natural one, because we have not truly cleared the
melody out of our minds; it is faintly represented
in the very act by which we attempt to judge the
‘ isolated ’ interval. Will Professor Stumpf really
assert that KeckhHt is a recognised character of
sevenths ? Can he quote even a single other person
who has ever so described them ? Moreover, one
of the four sevenths in the bars which he quotes is
a major seventh; and on his principles it would be
an extraordinary thing if intervals so distinct from
one another as the major and the minor seventh
presented the same ethical cha^cter.

But let this pass. Let us suppose for the
moment that we all know that a seventh is pert,
just as we all know that a sixth is suave. That
is a reason, forsooth, why the tune in which these
intervals for a time alternate is a thing of beauty

288

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

which clings to the inner ear! Rapid ^temationa ^
of a sense of suavity with a sense of pertness
make, it appears, a self-justified aesthetic com*
bination, of which it might be said d priori that if
ever realised in musical intervals it would yield a
beautiful melodic form.* But why is that com*
bination superior d priori to rapid alternations of
a sense of suavity with, say, a sense of solemn
expectation ? This, on Professor Stumpfs princi¬
ples, should give us fifths instead of sevenths to
alternate with our sixths; and the result is the
hideous abortion into which I have converted
Auber’s melody (p. 198). Professor Stumpf admits
that thus arranged the notes *■ lose their sense; * and
actually reproaches me with having, in so arranging
them, thrown overboard considerations of melodic
structure I As if my whole aim were not to show
that it is structure, and not vague impressions of

' Professor Stumpf says that * the sixths define the effect of the
'whole far more than the sevenths,* feeling, perhaps, that suavity
must preponderate over pertness if the mixture is to be agreeable.
Even this subsidiary point is characteristic of the difference between
us. So far as my pleasure in the whole is quickened at certain
instants rather than at others, it is undoubtedly at the instants of
the sevenths^ when the * Ideal Motion * wins its way over and lands
one the other side of that less obvious interval. And I should be
sorinfised if the experience of most people who care Uie tone did
not coincide with mine.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 28 ^

suavity and pertness, that is the vital thing! I
take a tune, and say that its pleasurable effect on
us is due to its having, thanks to the genius of its
constructor, a particular shapeliness which our ears
apprehend with ease, while yet with a sense of
being exercised in a fresh and rare way. Professor
Stumpf, on the other hand, holds that its effect
on us (or much of it) is due to the presentation
of a considerable amount of suavity and pertness
by its component items. I apply an obvious test,
and (preserving its harmonic basis) I dislocate it
as a melodic shape, while leaving to its component
items their former amount of suavity, and another
quality quite as aesthetic as pertness ; and I ask
what has become of its pleasurable effect All
gone, he admits; but my test proves nothing,
because I violated the conditions of shapeliness
by dislocating it! Professor Stumpf, by the way,
ventures on a little dislocation on his own account,
and considers the question why it would be un¬
satisfactory (fatal, rather) to substitute descending
thirds for the ascending sixths. His answer is
that this descending piovement would be 'rather
insipid.’ We live and learn. Not only are
sevenths by nature pert, but descending thirds are
by nature insipid; witness the ^op^ing of the C
VOL. II. U

290

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MTJSIC

Minor Symphony 1 If this is psychological analyr
sis, I must be content to remain what Professor
Stumpf calls me—a sceptic in the things of
psychology. But would he reply that he did not
mean that descending thirds were by nature in¬
sipid, but only that they would be insipid in this
particular place ? If so, could there be a clearer
abandonment of the claim to have analysed the
melody ? Instead of the elements explaining the
effect of a particular combination, the particular
combination has to be invoked to explain the
effect of the elements,

I need notice only one further argument
Referring to the fact that melodies, when repeated
in the course of a piece, are often more or less
modified in phrase, whereby their character is to
some extent but not fundamentally changed,
Professor Stumpf remarks that this shows that
different mdodies present common elements of
effect, and that definite modifications produce a*
definite heightening or qualitative charge of im¬
pression ; and that, therefore, melodies do not
elude analysis, and my ' nativism * is broken in
two. How can my nativism possibly be concerned
to deny that successions of notes which are in laige
measure identical present common elments of

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 29 I

L

effect ? Two faces, each of which is unmistake-
able, may surely present a family likeness. And
what sort of connexion is there between the
fact that a complete melody consists of phrases,
alteration of one or more of which will alter
the impression, and the fact that the distinc¬
tive charm, in whatever melodic phrase or melodic
whole it may be found, cannot be accounted for
by a consideration of the separate elements—the
bricks and mortar—from the combination of which
it results ? Of course a tune may be practically
analysed, in the sense of being looked at in parts ;
and in any part which is a sufficiently large and
integral a portion of the whole, part of the effect
of the whole may be found to survive. But how
can this possibly be represented as analysis of the
effect. Pushed a little further, analysis of this sort
is, of course, so far from being explanatory that it
destroys what there was to explain. As we cut
the tune into smaller and smaller bits, the effect
wholly disappears from all of them, just as the
beauty would disappear from a face which we
dissected into smaller and smaller pieces.

Professor Stumpf concludes his critique by
some paragraphs on the subject of consonance and
harmony. He seems in one way ; to exaggerate the

2^2 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

difference here between the view of HeImholt^»
with which I in the main agree, and his own. 1
consider the fundamental fact in the pleasure of
consonance to be the blending of two tone’s in
such a way that each seems to some extent lost in
the combination, which strikes us as a single new
thing. The same idea is represented in Professor
Stumpf’s Verschmelzung und Krasis ; though he
strangely seems to think that the problem is not
why we sometimes perceive simultaneous tones as
one, but why we ever perceive them as two. 1
regard the blending as a consequence of the sufh*
ciently smooth on-flowing of the two tones, uninter¬
rupted by beats. I do not say that the one thing
accounts for the other, in the sense that we should
d priori have expected the blending of the tones
from their smooth parallelism. The fact could only
be explained physiologically by much more minute
knowledge of the nervous processes than we have
as yet attained ; and I doubt if a psychological ex¬
planation is even possible. At any rate I am pret^
confident that we get no nearer it by talking, as
Professor Stumpf does, of *a perception of the
relation of blending,' and of a multitude of repre*

V

sentations, drawn from an outer life of love and
sadness, which associate themselves (how and why

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC 293

w€ are not told) with this perception. When the
Smooth parallel flow is interrupted by beats, not
only is the agreeable blending prevented, but a
disagreeable impression is produced, of which w^
can picture (though with difficulty, as I have shown
in my Appendix ‘ On Discord ’) some sort of physio¬
logical explanation. Professor Stumpf seems to
hold that beats have nothing to do with the sensa¬
tion of discord. I cannot understand this scepti*
cism. The discord of a second, for instance, is
perceived actually in the making, as two notes in
unison are gradually separated. The beats are
^t first so slow that they can be easily counted;
and as they gradually become too quick to count
the characteristic sensation appears and increases.
Nor can I see the force of Professor Stumpf's
objection that the discord is felt to be the
same in different octaves, though the beats double

in number with each octave of ascent. The dis*
« *

€ordant interval is felt as the same, because it is
the same; and as for the discord^ the mere un¬
pleasant sense of jar, I doubt if it has any specific
qualitative character. Thus the mere doubling in
number of the physical nervous events which
produce the jar would not be bound to intro¬
duce any qualitative diiferenc^any more tffian

THE PSYCHOLOGY Of MUSIC

doubling the rate at which I scrape my arm with
a finger-nail would produce any qualitative differ-
ence in the pain. But on this topic Professor
Stumpf has not developed his view at sufficient
length, in the pamphlet which I am considering,
for it to be profitable to pursue the controversy.

A few words must be added as to that single
range of extra-musical association to which I have
allowed high value in connexion with the charac¬
teristic melodic pleasure; that, namely, which
appears in Darwin's theory of the primeval use of
Music under conditions of sexual excitement, and
ks consequent transfusion with highly exciting
emotional elements. As to this Mr. Sully says:

Is it not surely more philosophic to say that the
more recent yet far extending ages of human
converse with their vast accumulation of emotional
experience m^wt have had at least as much effect
on Music as the very remote and at the same time
limited experiences of love-making among our
pre-human Jubals ? Mr. Gurney may say that th^
link of association is distinct in the two cases.
But one may still ask whether the pleasure given
to some anthropoid ape by the exercise of his em¬
bryonic musical faculty can easily be supposed to

THfi PSYCHOLOGY OF MtJSlC 295

resemble in quantity or quality the pleasure giim
to a fully-developed modem ear so closely as to
account for the wonderfully far-reaching trans¬
mission of emotional effect ” But he is here
scarcely putting himself at my point of view.
The reason why I can accept Darwin’s suggestion
is that I think it possible (though extremely diffi¬
cult) to connect it with that discriminating and
autocratic character of the musical faculty, which
is to me so prime a fact both of experience and of
inference. But for this, Darwin’s theory would be
open (as he himself most candidly admitted to me)
to the very same objection that I have found to
Mr. Spencer’s and the other hypotheses which we
have been considering; namely, that its generality
wholly precludes its meeting our point—that it
could at most only help us to see why Music is
emotional (which it too often is not), and not in
the least why certain progressions of sound are
felt as having a characteristic pleasurable quality
unfelt in others.

I do not quite feel the weight of Mr. Sull 3 r*s
remarks about the remoteness of the suggested
source; or rather, feeling their weight, I still feffel
that it represents only the kind of imaginative
effort which in our day is beii^ perpetualijr de-

296 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MtJSlC

manded of the evolutionist; for we are surely now^
familiar with the notion of the enormous remote¬
ness of the time, and the crudeness of the material
from which our various mental faculties have been
developed and sublimated. 1 have explained (in
my 6th and 14th chapters) in what way 1
think the remoteness and crudeness in this case
even favourable to my application of the hypo¬
thesis. Here I can but refer again in passing to
that particular fact of musical emotion which was
prominent in our discussion of the musical faculty,
and in which, though Darwin (being professedly
unmusical) did not mention it, the real relevance
and explanatory power of his facts seems to me
to lie; the fact, namely, that * Music is perpetually
felt as strongly emotional while defying all attempts
to analyse the experience or to define it even in the
most general way in terms of general emotions; ’
that it presents. * phenomena charged with feeling,
and yet in whose most characteristic impressive¬
ness separate feelings seem as fused and lost as
the colours in a ray of white light; *—which is
* precisely what is explained, if we trace the stroi^
undefinable affection to a gradual fusion and trans¬
figuration of such overmastering and pervading
passions as the ardours and desires of primitive

THE PSYCHOLOGY Of MUSIC ^97

loves,’ and so on. And remembering Darwm’s
case of the gibbon, 1 see no objection to supposing
the enjoyment taken in note following note by our
semi-human ancestors to have been akin, however
little comparable in degree, to our enjoyment of
note following note in a modem * subject,’ the
embryonic strain containing in embryo that ele¬
ment of musical order which is characteristic of the
developed one and is conspicuous by its absence
in speech.

But while I do not fully share Mr. Sully’s exact
difficulty on this subject, in the application of
Darwin’s theoty I do find a difficulty of the most
serious kind, which has never I think been recog¬
nised—or more precisely speaking, what has not
been recognised is that Darwin’s idea can be
brought to bear on what I have called the central
problem of Music only by a mode of application
which involves this difficulty. For its discussion I
must refer to my 6th chapter, § 7: put in the
briefest way, in lies in the process by which contact
with the emotional spring suggested by Darwin
can be supposed to be made and broken in the
cases of impressive and unimpressive melody re¬
spectively. ' There is this fundamental distinction
between the relation of Assocktion to Form in the

99 ^ THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

visual and auditoiy regions, that in the former it is,
prominently connected with sptcM forms (notably
e g. with the contours of faces and figures), while
in the latter it' (i e. the particular and all-impor¬
tant range of sexual association to which Darwin
points) * can only be connected with a special mode
of exercise ^—that of the musical faculty—and not
with any definite melodic forms common to us and
our semi-human progenitors. We have to attribute
to this faculty an independent view, an independent
power of being satisfied, a discriminating sense of
proportion in virtue of which one bit of its exercise
proves immeasurably superior to another, while
holding at the same time that the satisfactory
result is not felt in independence of the emotional
flow from the associational source to which it opens
a passage, and to which the satisfactoriness or im¬
pressiveness as we know it should be mainly due.
This difficulty,-! confess, seems to me scarcely less
than that of leaving Darwin's suggestion on one
side.

There is one subsidiary topic on which Mr,
Sully again seems hardly to meet my point In
reference to the statement (in my ist chapter) of
the great difficulty which exists in accounting for
the extraordinary ddicacy and complexity of the

THE PSYCHOLOGY O^ MUSIC 29^

auditory apparatus, whether by direct adaptathm
or by natural selection, he says that as regards tile
latter I seem slightly to overstate the case: since,

" in the case of man at least, it may be plausibly ^
contended that the perfect discrimination of vocal
sound as to its quality or timbre and general level
or height, even of the rough and constantly shifting'
sound which seems to characterise primitive speech,
would involve an organ for the discrimination of
pitch;'* and **among all gregarious and social
species endowed with a vocal organ . . . the
structures supposed to be specially concerned in
the perception of musical quality would tend to be
evolved by natural selection.*’ But he does not
notice the important argument of Mr. Spencer of
which I have quoted some sentences, and which I
have never seen in any way answered. The argu¬
ment is that ** as fast as essential faculties multiply,
and as fast as the number of organs that co-operate
in any given function increases, indirect equilibra¬
tion by natural selection becomes less and less
capable of producing specific adaptations, and
remains fully capable only of maintaining the
genm^l fitness of constitution to conditions ; ^* and
again, ** as fast as the number of bodily and tnentid
facilities increases, and as fast as the maintenance

300 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MUSIC

of life comes to depend less on the amount of an/,
one, and more on the combined action of all, so
fast does the production of specialities of character
by natural selection alone become difficult.” I have
given my reasons for holding that the delicate
discrimination both of colour and pitch must be
referred to an epoch when this argument would
have its full strength. Speculation in those con¬
veniently remote regions seems to me often scarcely
to realise what it is about, in invoking the whole
machinery of natural selection for minute changes
of all sorts, at stages of development sufficiently
advanced to make the Invocation of the principle
even for some very decided improvement of a
sin^ organ decidedly unsafe.

I part from my critics with regret. Though I
have naturally dwelt here on points of difference,
1 should be <^rry that they should not know
what warm gratification 1 have derived from their
very cordial reception of my attempt. I am even
grateful to them—a gratitude which 1 can scarcely
expect my readers to share-^for the occasion
rapidly to retrace some of the drier portions of
my former course in the present reply. 1 linger
round a subject which has been to me, for as long

THE PSYCHOLOGT QF MUSIC 5OI

as I can rememberi both a central interest and—
from the lack of natural facility and early training—
a chronic torment. How many people, I wonder,
fujly realise the significance of a lifelong craving
for a particular outlet of expression, in one to whom
the mechanical means, lavished on numbers who
set no special store by them, are denied ? Perhaps
the experience is common enough—part of its
poignancy is that it is almost always bound to
be dumb. For proper expression of it, the artist
manqu^t standing hungrily aside and applauding
others for their familiar intercourse with the di¬
vine mistress to whom he has sacrificed in vain,
might be commended to Mr. Browning as the
subject for a dramatic monologue. One thing, at
any rate, is tolerably certain: that had the facility
and the training been mine, and had I become a
master of the art instead of being dragged at its
chariot-wheels, I should have troubled myself but
little, and others less, with speculations respecting it
And in that case 1 should have been incompar¬
ably the richer, and the world not much the poorer.
Yet I should like to think that there are a few
lovers of Music to whom its popular aspects
and possibilities (for to these eveiy one of my
arguments directly or indirectly points) have been

302 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MU^IC

somewhat more clearly brought home by what I
have written. The more quickly the grounds of'
the unique position of Music in the world of feeling
are recognised, the more quickly will the possibjjii-
ties become realities. In such a thought might lie
some possible compensation for having had to de¬
liver myself about Music, instead of in it. That,
for me, is a fate which even those transcendentalists
and higher interpreters who are most repelled by
the Philistine character of the deliverances might
deem an ample expiation of them ; and it would
at least be alleviated by the assurance of having
helped, in however humble a measure, to rationalise
and humanise the fermenting enthusiasm which a
little more insight and a little more faith might con¬
vert into the most fruitful form of philanthropy.

PRINTED BY

SfOrmwOODB and CO., MSW.8TXBBT SQUARK
VXWOON

A LIST OF

KEXiAN PAiJL^ TRENCti 3 CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.

A LIST St

KEGAN PAUL, tREHCH da tos

PUBLICATICfUS*

CONTENTS.

lAGB

jpBNtRALjLlTJtfmiUilB. . 2

FAB^MEitt LiaiAJi^^ . , l8

ij^ir CaXMENTARY * . 20

IMbENATIC^AL SciBMtlFIC
SBEISSI " 2Q

MiLIIARY WORK^r
Poetry .

Novels and Tales
Books Voti^o

CCNCCIAI^ UTERATUtlE.

Karratlve of ,the EuphtWei

><«ional
voa^^ De

3 ^*

f. JiTn From a Quiet Flaee. ▲^Volume of Sermons,

jproift 8vo, sx. * 4

'"4<LEXJlA^D£X, fVtlAamf D,D.^ Btsho^ e/Deny' ^The Great Ques-
tioiii aiui other ^rmons. Crown 8vo, 6r.

ALLIES, T. W,, Per Crucem ad Eiill||lc|. The Result of a
* Life, 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 25 f. ^

^ A XJf6*8 Decision* Crown Svo* yA 6</. ^

7*—The of Catholic E:#Ancipa-

1 ^he Pjrogxww^e GatholiS Church in Idle
\0Af in'^mSaglAnd) from 1771-1890.

hLWA. V

Airelli'i

History anOllPrlnciplos of the
™. , ^ „ Ah aid to the Study of Si^tific aad

. _ Jodapilidence. Demy 8vo, i6s,

agyytOQS doing ^;|r^Goo({ 7 An Diquuy into thsh

Social rffiA CrownAveii if,

AJf/ST0TLS.^n6 ^Icomaeheaii Ethics of Aristotle. Trans
I hted by R Peters, M. A. Third Edition. Crown 8ro,

ana natal., Witli

6t,

am, IlItttmUoas tad ll»j^ Cmm

Aucassla and nicolattai^ Editjl in Old Fitoc^ and wadered ^

W. BoiXanfLLON. Fcap 8vo, ys. ^ i

^X.Z^An Sngllali-^Arablo J^aa^ocxfk^
Jl. w liiw <]to w^valoit for Mnghsh Words and lluMlMtui
i:c^e]:9d into Utarary and ' 'jji^|i(j|i^

Snglish Gonstltutlon* fifth Edttidih

X/imlbitrCl Straat. A Descnption of the Mone|NtCftthet. Nmtla
$* Ira^OB. Crown 8vo, fs* 6 a

f Aiwa on Parliamentary Refortin^^CiMiiia Se«b 5r. ^

jBcnSS AatlalOMNathe Depreciatlcm ejfl&llveivaad Tpim
p oonnectad with it. Second is,

%k Miclpleaff Colllart VeolAatlaia* ^^om ^mt4jk
^ CyewnSwkS^^-r ^

;i)ia Prlnoiplw of GlvU nagUieeir^ m onAA tl|.
Ag^cultuw and natate ^mn^sienl^

and PoemUt leap Svo,

ir. 6 d, ^ f ^

Ca^. AT.—The I^arge and Small GaWe at
Bengal and the Korth-Weatem Provinces of India#
With so TTUDBnflnfiT New and Cheaper Fditioii. Small 4tfV*
tea 6d

a Baturaltet In South Ammeim*
VSk Clown 8 t(^ t4 dd ^

A 4 U 4 /i!^AdHif,M and f,

Excises select^ pte^0h^ Hy *.? ^L#

a: p., Ma jt piwteaaf ISmMPiI^

Containing g|SbIema m juritheeeiiPbJM BmiWV
IfensnratKMi, for Stsdente el Bw GM«M|v

8 yo, 6 r. ^ ^

gMZW, iSmAaawd; ^r, Whljlolegieal Xldroflliewdll to

Greek and I«atin for jpndenti. TiMdated and i^pted
£pom the Oentwui) hy C* Ksoan Paitk,^ jMf«A ^ and Ih
StONB, M K Tl^ Crown See# 6x.

witn
tea &

A List of

Becket, Thomas,, Martyr Pittriot* !ISy Ih A. TaottisoN, Kl.A.

Clown 8vo. 6 j.

JiENSOK A. C.—William Laud, sometlmS Archbishop
Canterbury. A Study. With Pottrait. Crown 8vo,

BWOMFIELD^ The Reminisce^^S of Court and Dip¬

lomatic Life. Kew an4 Cheaper sidltion. With f^eispiece.
Clown 8vo, 6s. ' » '

JiLUN7\ The Vets, AiJideaion. — The Divide Patriot, and other
Seinion*:, Preached in Scarborough ai|}d in Cannes, and
Cheaper Edition. Ciown 8vo, 4^. 6</. **

JiL UNT, WHfnd .y.—The Future of Islam. Crownigvor 0#^.'

Ideas about India. Ciown 8\o. Cloth, 6^. , ^ ^ '

EOlVENy //. C., M.A. —Studies in English. For the use of Modem
Schools. Tenth Thousand. Small crown 8vo,

I

English Grammar for Beginners. Fcap. Svo, is. • *

Simple English Poems. English Literature for Junior Classes.
In four parts. Paits I., II., and III., 0u', each. Pad IV,, ijr.
Comptete, $s. ^ /

BRADLEYy F. B. —The Principles of Logic. Demy Svo, 16c.

Bi'i^shaw, Henry: Memoir, hy G. W. Prothero. With
Portrait and Facsmiic. Demy Svo. ii6i. ^

Rev. T. A.-History of the Holy Eucharist in
Great Britain. 2 yols. Demy Svo, iSr.

BHQOKMy Rev. Siopfl^ A.-^\\^ Fight of Faith. Sermons preached
on various occasions. Fifth Edition. Crown Svo, 7 j. 6d.

The Spirit Of the Ghristiam Life. Third Edition. Crown

8VO, 5f.

Theology In the English Poets.- Cow per, Coleridge, Words-
woilh, Olid Burnt,. Sivth Edition. Post Svo, $s,

Clirist in Modern Life. Seventeenth Edition. Ciown Svo, $s.
Sermons. First .Sene';,. Thirteenth Edition. Crowi^^vo, 5J.
Sermons. Socoml Scilcs. Sixth Edition. Crown Svo, 5^.

BHOWBt Iloraiio F .—Life on the Lagoons. Whh 3 Illustrations
and Map. Crown Svo, 6 j.

j yenatlan Studies, i^rown Svo, 7^. Gd. ^

BRX)WN, Reo. % A<*&rjwVf.-Tho 'Hlgh'er Life. Itb Reality, Ex-
, peticnce, and Destiny. Seventh Edition. Ciown Svo, 5r.

Doctrine of Annihilation in the Light of the Gospel of
Love. Five Discoui«.Cir. Fouith Edition. Ciowu Svo, 2^. 6^/.

The Christian Policy of Life. A Book for Young Men of
Bubiness. Third Edition. Crown 8\o, 3 ^. (>./

Kegan Paul^ Treneh & Co's Publications, 5

BVRKE, Laic Very Rev, T, iK—His LU^ By W, J. Fitz.

2 vols. With Portrait* Demy svo, 3ar.

.BURTOEt^ The Inner Life of Syria, Palestine, and

the Holy Land. Post 8vo, 6j.

BURYi Phlloblblon. Edited by E. C. Thomas. Crown

Svs. icu. 6<f. ^

CANDLER^ C.—The Prevention of Consumption. A ^fode of
Prevention, founded on a New Theory of the Nature of the
Tubercle-Bacillus. Demy 8vo, lor. 6^/.

B.—The Principles of Mental Physiology.

‘*Whh their Applications to the Training and_ Discipline of the
Mind, and the Study of its Moibid Conditions. Illustrated,

^ , Sixth Edition. 8vo, I2r.

Nature, and Man. With a Mcmoiial Sketch by the Rev. J.
Estun Carpenter. Portrait. Laige ciown 8vo, 8r. 6 {/.

Catholic Dictionary. Containing some Account of the Doctrine,
Discipline, Riles, Ceremonies, Councils, and Religious Orders of
the Catholic Church. Edited by Thomas Arnold, M. A. Third

^ Edition. Demy 8vo, air.

Charlemagne. A History of Charles the Great. By J. I. Mombimit,
D.D. Medium 8Vo. i^r.

C^ARLESf Rev. R, //.—Forgiveness, and other Sermons. Crowa
8vo, 4J. 6 d.

CI/EYNEt Canoft.—Uhe Prophecies 0 $ Isaiah. Translated with
Critical Notes and Dissoitations. 2 vols. Fifth Edition. Demy
8vo, 25J.

Job and Solomon; or, the Wisdom of the Old Testaroont.

* Demy 8vo, i2f. 6/.

The Psalms ; or. Book of The Praises of Israel. Translated
with Commentary. Demy 8vo. i6j.

Churgress, The. By “ Tut Prig.” Fcap. 8vo, 3J. 6 d.

CtAIRAUA — Elements of Geometry. Translated by Dr,
Kaines. With 145 Figures. Ciown 8vo, 4r, 6 d.

CLAPPERTON.Jam —Scientific Meliorism and the
Evolutibn of Happiness. Lar^e crown 8vo, 8j. 6/.

CLODDi Eduardt F.R.A.S^—Xh% Childhood 0/ the World; a
flimplc Account of Man in Early Times. Eighth Edition.
Crown 8vo, 3*.

A Specid Edition for Schools, is.

The Childhood of Heliglons. Including a Simple Account of
the Birth and Growth of Myths and Legends. Eighth Thousand*
Crown 8vo, 5^.

A Special Edition for Schools, Qd,

6

A Liit of

CLODDt Edward, E^E.A.S^^—eontinwd.

Jesus of Nazareth. With a brief sketch of Jewish History to the
Time of His Birth. Second Edition.'^ Small crowti*Svo, 6 s,

A Special Edition for Schools. In 2 parts. Each is. 6 d.

COGffLAN, J. Cole, J?./7.^The Modem Pharisee, and ethev
Sermons. Edited by the Very Rev. H. H. Digkinsok, t>.D.,
Dean of Chapel Royal, Dublin. New and Cheaper Edition.
Crown 8vo, yr. 6 d.

COLERIDGE, The Hon, Demetriui* Cfowa 8vo, ^s,

CONNELL, A. A^~Dlsoontent and Danger in India. Small
crown 8vo, p. 6 d,

The Economic Revolution of India. Crown 8vo, 4^. 6^

CORE, the late Rev, T. J., M.A. —Favilla : Tales, Essays, and Poems.
Crown 8vo, 5x.

CORY, WUliam.^K Guide to Modern English History. Part 1.
. —MDCCCXV.-MDCCCXXX. Demy 8vo, gs. Part 11.-

MUCCCXXX.-MDCCCXXXV., 15^.

[COTrdN, If. % 5’.—New India, or India in Transition,
t Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 4^. 6 d.; Cheap Edition, paper

covers, IS.

COWJE, Right Rev. IV. <7.—Our Last Year in New 2ealand.
1887. Crown 8vo, *is, 6 d.

COX, Rev. Sir George W., M.A,, Bart. —The Mythology of the
Aryan Nations.' New Edition. Demy 8vo, i6f.

Tales of Ancient Greece. New Edition. Small crown Svo, 6 s.

A Manual of Mythology in the form of Question and
Answer. New Edition. FeSp. Svo, 3r.

An Introduction to the Science of Comparative Myth«
ology and Folk-Lore. Second Edition. Crown Svo. ^s. 6d.

COX, Rev. Sir G, W., M.A., Bart., and yONES, Eustace Hinton.—
Popular Romances of the Middle Ages. Third
Edition, in 1 vol. Crown Svo, 6 s.

COX, Rei'. Samuel, D.D.—K Commentary on the Bbok of Job.
With a Translation. Second Edition. Demy Svo, 15^.

Salvator Mundi; dr. Is Christ the Saviour of all Men ? welilb

Ration. Crown Svo, 2s. 6 d,

The Larger Hope. A Sequel to “Salvator Mundi.’* Second
Edition. x6mo, is.

The Genesis of Evil, and other Sermons, mainly expository.
Ihird Edition. Crown Svo, 6 s.

Balaam. An Exposition and a Study. Crown Svo, 5r.

Miracles. An Argumcmt and a Challenge. Crown Svo, 2 s. 6 d,

Kcgan Paul, Trench & Cols Publications,

7

CRA VEN, Mrs.—‘A Year’s MedltAtions. CrowA tv6, ti,

CRAWFURD, Portugal, Old And Uew. With llluslra*

dons and Maps. New and Cheaper Edition. Crowh 8 vo, dr.

Cross Lights. Crown 8 vd. 5 r.

VRUISE, Francis Richard, M.D. —'t'hoxnas ^ K.e£ti|)!iS. K(Aes tl
a Visit to the Scenes in which his Life Was spent. With Portraits
and Illustrations. Demy 8 vo, X2.r. ,

Dantes The Banquet (II Convito). Translated by KATHAiUZffi
Hillard. Crown 8vo. 7r. ^ d ,

DARMESTETER, Arsefte.—Tlcie Life of Wbtds as the Symbols
of Ideas. Crown 8 vo, 4 ^. 6d.

DAVIDSON, Reu, Samuel, D.D., ZZ.i?.—CanOtt of the Bible*.
Its Formation, History, and Fluctuations. Thiid and Revised
Edition. Small crown 8 vo, 5 r.

The Doctrine of Last Things couUined id the New Testa¬
ment compared with the Notions of the Jews and the Statei^Snts
of Church Creeds. Small crown 8 vo, 3 ^. 61 ^. * iT

DAWSON, Geo., M.A. Prayers, with a DiScoUbse bik Praye*ii
Edited by his Wife. First Series. Tenth E^tion. StAaU CroWh
8 vo, 3 r. 6d.

Prayers, with a Discourse on Prayer, Edited by George
S t. Clair, F.G.S. Second Series. Small Crown 8 vo, is, 6d,

Sermons on Disputed Points and Special Occasions.'
Edited by his Wife. Fourth Edition. Crowh 8 vo, ik.

Sermons on Daily Life and Duty. Edited by his Wife*
Fifdi Edition. Small Crown 8 vo, 3 r. 6d,

The Authentic Gospeli and. other Sermons. Edited b)r
GfeORGB St. Clair, F.G.S. Tmrd Edition. Crown 8 vo, 6s,

Kvery-day Counsels. Edited by George St. Clair, F.GkS.
Crown 8 vo, 6i. ^

Biographical Lectures. Edited by George St. Clair, F.G.S.'
Third Edition. Large croWn 8 vo, yx. 6d,

Shakespeare, and other Lectures. Edited by GhoRba fit*
Clair, F.G.S. Large crown 8 vd, p, &f*

D£ yONCpURT, Madame d/^im.-^Wholesoms Goakbry^ Efitii
Edition. Crown Svo, cloth, ix. 6d; paper covers, lx. .

DBbfT, ff, C.-^A Tear in Brasil. With Notes OA Rdidon, ideteot-
ology, Natural History, ete. Maps ahd llliistrauons. Demy
Svo, i8x.

DOWDEN, Edtaard, LL,D ,—ShhkspeAe ; a Critical Study of his
Mind and Art, Ninth Edition. Post Svo, I2x.

8 A List of

- 4 -----

\

DOWDJiNf Edward^ LL.D. — continued.

Studies In Literature, 1789-1S77. Fourth Edition. Large
post 8vo, dr.

Transcripts and Studies. Large post Svo. 12s.

Drummond, Thomas, Under Secretary in Ireland, 1835 - 40 .
Life and Letters. By R. Barry O’Brien. Demy 8vo. i4r.

Dulce Domum. Fcap, Svo, 5J.

DU MONCEL^ Count. —The Telephone, the Microphone, and
the Phonograph. With 74 Illustrations. Third Edition.
Small crown Svo, 5s,

’ DUNNf IT. Percy. —Infant Health. The Physiology and Hygiene
of Early Life, Crown Svo. 3jr. 6rf.

DUJCUYj Victor, —History of Rome and the Roman People.
Edited by Prof. Maiiaffv. With nearly 3000 Illustrations. 4to.

6 vols. in 12 parts, 3or. each vol.

Education Library. Edited by Sir Philip Magnus

An Introduction to the History of Educational
Theories. By Oscar Browning, M.A. Second Edition.
3s. 6d.

Industrial Education. By Sir Philip Magnus. 6s.

Old Greek Education. By the Rev. Pi of. Mahaffy, M.A.
Second Edition. 3 ^. 6d.

School Management. Including a general view of the work
of Education, Oiganiration, and Discipline. By Joseph Landon.
Seventh Edition, dr.

EDWARDESt Major-General Sir Herbert B .—Memorials of his
Life and Letters.* By his Wife. W^ith Portrait and Illuslra*
tions. 2 vols. Demy Svo, 36^.

Eighteenth Century Essays. Selected and Edited by Austin ,
Dobson. Cheap Edition. Cloth u. 6d.

ELSDALE, 'Studies in Tennyson’s Idylls. Crown Svo, 5J.

Emerson's (Ralph Waldo) Life. By Oliver Wendell IJolmes.
English Copyright Edition. With Portrait. Crown Svo, 6f.

EYTON^ Rev, Eobert. —The True Life, and other Sermons. Crown
Svo, 7f. 6d.

Five o'clock Tea. Coidaining Receipts for Cakes, Savoury Sand¬
wiches, etc. Seventh Thousand Fcap. Svo, cloth, u. 6d. ;
paper covers, \s.

FLJNNf D. Edgar, —Ireland : its Health-Resorts and Water*"
ing-Places. With Frontispiece and Maps. Demy 8vo, 54;

Kegan Pattl^ Trench & Co's Publications,

9

Forbes, Bishop: A Memoir. By the Rev, Donald J, Mackay.
With Portrait and Map. Crown 8vo, *is. 6d,

FOTHERINGHAMt James.— in the Poetry of Robert'
Browning. Second Kdilion. Crown 8vo, ts.

Franklin (Benjamin) as a Man of Letters. By J. B. Mac-
Master. Crown 8vo, 5 j.

FKEWEN'^ Moieton. —The Economic Crisis. Crown 8vo, 2s. M.

From World to Cloister; or, My Novitiate. By Bernard.
Crown 8vo, 5 r.

FULLER^ Rezf. Pan-Anglicanism: What is it? or,

The Church of the ReconciHation. Crown 8\«. 5r.

GARDINER, Samuel R., ami J. BASS MULUNGER, UTA.^
Introduction to the Study of English History. Second
Edition. Large crown Svo, gs.

GEORGE, Henry, —Progress and Poverty, An Inquiry into the
Causes of Industiial Depressions, and of Increase of Want with
Increase of Wealth. The Remedy. Fifth Library Edition.
Post Svo, 7 j. (kI. Cabinet Edition. Crown Svo, 2?. 6</. Also a
Cheap Edition. Limp cloth, is, 6(1, ; paper covers, is.

Protection, or Free Trade. An Examination of the Tariff
(Question, with especial regard to the Interests of Labour. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, $5. Cheap Edition, limp cloth, is. 6 d, \
paper covers, is.

Social Problems. Fourth Thousand. Crown Svo, 5 j. Cheap
Edition, paper covers, is. ; clotli, is. 6 d.

GILBERT, .d/rj. — Autobiography, and other Memorials.
Edited by JosiAii Giliiert. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo,
7 j. 6 d.

GILLMORE, /hrfvr.—Days and Nights by the Desert. Illus¬
trated. Demy Svo, lox. 6 d.

GLANVILL, Joseph, — Scepsis Scientiflca ; or, Confest Ignorance,
the Way to Science; in an Esi.ay of the Vanity of Dogmatizing
and Confident Opinion. Edited, with Intioductory Essay, by
John Owen. Elzevir Svo, printed on hand-made paper, 6 j.

GLASS, 11 . A.— The Story of the Psalters. A History of the
Metrical Versions from 1549 to 18S5. Crown Svo, $s.

Glossary of Terms and Phrases. Edited by the Rev. H. Perc\
Smith and others. Second and Cheaper Edition. Medium
Svo, 71. 6 d.

GLOVER, F, M.A. — ^Exempla Latina. A First Construing Book,
with Short Notes, Lexicon, and an Introduction to the Analysis
of Sentences. Second Edition. Fcap. Svo, 2s.

GOODCHlLD,John A, Chats at St. Ampelio. Crown Svo, 5J.

10

A List of

(» 00 DENt)UGffi Commodore ( 7 .—-Memolf of, with Extracts ftottt

his Letters and Journals. Edited hj his Widow. With Steel
Engraved Portrait. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5r.

GORDON^ Major-General C. G .— His Journals at Kartoum.
Printed from the original MS. With Introduction and Notes by
A. Egmont Hake. Portrait, 2 Maps, and 30 lllu<M;rations.
Two vols., demy Svo, 2is. Also a Cheap Edition in X vol., 6i,

Gordon’s (General) Last Journal. A Facsimile of the lost
Journal received in England from General Gordon. Ki^ro*
duced by Photo-lithography. Imperial 4to, 3J4

£ vents in his Life. From the Day of his Birth to the Day Of
his Death. By Sir H. W, Gordon. With Maps and Illus¬
trations. Second Edition. Demy Svo, yr. 6 d.

GOSSEf Edmund* — Seventeenth Century Studies. A Contri¬
bution to the Histoiy of English Poetry. Demy Svo, tos. 6d.

GOGGff.E.—The Bible True from the Beginning. Vol. 1 ,
Demy Svo, l6x.

COULDf Rev. S. Baring, M.A .— Germany, Present and Past.
New and Cheaper Edition. Large crown Svo, fs. 6<f.

GO WAN, Major ^ Walter E.—A. IvanolT’s Russian Grammar.
U6th Edition.) Translated, enlaig;ed, and arranged for use ot
Students of the Russian Language. Demy Svo, 6s,

GOWER, Lord Ronald. My Reminiscences. Miniature Edition,
printed on hand-made imper, limp parchment antique, lor. 6d.

Bric-k-Brac. Being some Photoprints illustrating art objects at
Gower Lodge, Windsor. With descriptions. 3 uper royal Svo.
15X.; extra binding, 2ix.

Last Days of Mary Antoinette. An Historical Sketch.
With Portrait and Facsimiles. Fcap. 4to, lox. 6d.

Rotes of a Tour from Brindisi to Yokohama, 188^-
1884. Fcap. Svo, 2s. 6d,

CRAHAM, Williamt M.A. — The Creed of Science, Religious, Mbral,‘
land SociaL Second Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, 6s.

Ifhe Social Problem, in its Economic, Moral, and
Political Aspects. Demy Svo, 14X.

CRIMLEYf Retf, H, N., Tremadoo Sermons, chiefly on
the Spiritual Body, the Unseen World, and the
Divine Humanity. Fourth Edition. Crovm Svo, 6s.

The Temple of Humanity, and other Sermons, drown Svo,

Alfffd.—0\XT Qathollb tnheritantia in the Larger
Hope. Crown Svo, is. 6d*

Wagner’s Parsifal. A Study. Fcap. Svo, ir* 6d,

Kegan Pau^ Trench & CoJs Publications. li

HADDOIT^ The larger Life, Studies in Hinton's

Ethics. Crown 8vo, 5^.

HAECKELf Prof. Ernst .—The History of Creation. Translation
revised by Professor E. Ray Lankbster, M.A., F.R.S. With
Coloured Plates and Genealogical Trees of the various groups
of both Plants and Animals. 2 vols. Third Edition. Post
6vo, 32r.

The History of the Evolution of Man. With numerous
Illustrations. 2 vols. Post 8vo, 32^.

A Visit to Ceylon. Post 8vo, js. 6d,

Freedom in Science and Teaching. With p, Prefatory Mote
by T. H. Huxley, F.R.S. Crovm 8vo, 5^.

Hamilton, Memoirs of Arthur, B.A., of Trinity College, Cam*
bridge. Crown 8vo, 6f.

Handbook of Home Rule, being Articles on the Irish Question by
Various Writers. Edited % Jamfs Bryce, M.P. Second
Edition.*^Crown 8vo, ix. sewed, or is. 6d. cloth.

IfAWEJS^ Rev. Pt, R., M.A .—Current Coin. Materialism—^The
Devil—Clime—Drunkenness—^l^auperism-*-£motion—Recreation
—The Sabbath. Fifth Edition. Crown Svo, Sx.

Arrows In the Air. Fifth Edition. Crown Svo, 5x.

Speech in Season. Sixth Edition. Crown Svo, 5x.

Thoughts for the Times. Fourteenth Edition. CroWh Svo, 5X.

Uhsectarian Family Prayers. New Edition. Fcap. Svo,
lx.

JIA WTHORNEt Ah/Aa«iV/.—Works. Complete in Twelve Volumes.
Large post Svo, ^s. 6d, each volume.

HEIDENHAINi Rudolph^ Hypnotism, or Animal Mag¬

netism. With Preface by G. J. Romanes. Second Edition.
Small crown Svo, 2x. 6</.

HENDRIKSy Dorn Lawrence.-^'Th.Q London Chdrtferhouse : its
Monl^ and its Martyrs* Illustrated. Demy Svo, 14X.

HIKTOtf^ *f .—^Life and Letters. With an Introduction W Sir W.
W. Gull, Bart., and Portrait engraved on Steel by C. H. Jeens.
Sixth Edition. Crown Svo, 8x. m.

Philosophy and Rtilgion. Selections from the Manuscripts of
the late James Hinton. Edited by Caroline Haddon. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, jx.

The Law Breaker, and The Coming bf the Law.

Edited by Margaret Hinton. Crown Svo, dr.

The Mystery of Pain. New Edition. Fcap. Svo, |x.

Homer's Iliad. Greek text, with a Translation by J. Q. Cordery.
2 vols. Demy Svo, 24X.

12

A List of

HOOPER^ Dinners: How to Serve them with

Elegance and Economy. Twenty-first Edition. Crown
8vo, 2s. 6</.

Cookery for Invalids, Persons of Delicate Digestion,
and Children. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo, 2;. 6d,

Every-day Meals. Being Economical and Wholesome Recipe?
for Breakfast, Luncheon, and Supper. Seventh Edition. Crown
8vo, 2.r. fief.

flOPKINSy — Work amongst Working Men. Sixth

Edition. Crown 8vo, 3f. 6d.

FIORNADAY, W. T .—Two Years in a Jungle. With Illustiations.
Demy 8vo, 2ir.

IIOSPITATJRR^ E, —^The Modern Applications of Electricity.
Translated and Enlarged by Jtiuus Maifu, Ph.D. 2 vols.
Second Edition, Revised, with many additions and numerous
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, 25J.

HOWARD^ Rohrtf M.A.—'T'hQ Church of England and other
Religious Communions. A course of Lectures delivered in
the Palish Church of Clapham. Crown Svo, yj. 6<f.

IIVNDMAF/t //. .Af.—The Historical Basis of Socialism in
England. Large crown Svo, 8jr. 6d,

IDDESLElGfft Earl of. —The Pleasures, Dangers, and Uses
of Desultory Reading. Fcap. Svo, 2s. 6d.

FM TJFURI/, Everard A—Among the Indians of Guiana.
Being Sketches, chiefly anthropologic, from the Interior of British
Guiana. With 53 Illustrations and a Map. Demy Svo, i8s.

yEAFERESONf fferhert //.—The Divine Unity and Trinity.
Demy Svo, 12;.

JENKINS, A., and RAYMOND, 7.—The Architect’s Legal
Handbook. Fourth Edition, revised. Crown Svo, 6^.

JENKINS, Rev, Canon R, C. —Heraldry. English and Foreign.
With a Dictionary of Heraldic Terms and 156 Illustrations,
Small crown Svo, 3;. 6 d.

Jerome, St., Life. By M. J. Martin. Crown Svo, 6s.

JOEL, Z.—A Consul’s Manual and Shipowner’s and Ship¬
master’s Practical Guide In their Transactions
Abroad. With Definitions of Nautical, Mercantile and Legal
Terms; a Glossary of Mercantile Terms in English, French,
German, Ital^n, and Sp^ish; Tables of the Money, Weights,
and Measures of the Principal Commercial Nations and their
Equivalents in British Standards; and Forms of Consular and
Notarial Acts. Demy Svo, I2x.

Kegan Paitl^ Trench & Co's Publications, 13

JOHNSTON, H. H., The Kilima-njaro Expedition.

A Record of Scientific Exploration in Eastern Equatorial Africa,
and a General Description of the Natural iTistory, X^nguages,
and Commerce of the Kilima-njaro District With 6 Maps, and
over Sodllustrations by the Author. Demy 8vo, 2ir.

KAUFMANN, Rev. M., M.A. —Socialism its Nature, its Dangers,
and its Remedies considered. Crown 8vo, fs. 6d.

Utopias; or. Schemes of Social Improvement, from Sir Thomas
More to Karl Marx. Crown 8vo, 5r.

Christian Socialism. Crown 8vo, 4r.

KA Y, David, F.R.C.S. —Education and Educators. Crown 8vo.
7s. 6d,

Memory: what it is and how to improve it. Crown
8vo, 6s.

KAY, Joseph. —Free Trade in Land. Edited by his Widow. With
Preface by the Right lion. John Bright, M.P. Seventh
Edition. Crown 8vo, 5r.

Also a cheaper edition, without the Appendix, but with a Review
of Recent Changes in the Land Laws of England, by the Right
Hon. G. Osborne Morgan, Q.C., M.P. Cloth, is. 6d. ; paper
covers, is.

KELKE, W. H. H. —An Epitome of English Grammar for
the Use of Students. Adapted to the J.ondon Matriculation
Course and Similar Examinations. Crown 8vo, 4r. 6d.

KEMPIS, Thomas d.—Of the Imitation of Christ. Parchment
Library Edition.—Parchment or cloth, 6s. ; vellum, 7s. 6d, The
Red Line Edition, fcap. 8vo, cloth extra, 2x. 6d. The Cabinet
Edition, small 8vo, cloth limp, ix.; cloth boaids, lx. 6d. The
Miniature Edition, cloth limp, 32mo, ix.; or with red lines, ix. 6d.

All the above Editions may be had in various extra bindings,

Notes of a Visit to the Scenes in which his Life was
spent. Wilhnumeious Illustrationb. By F. R. CRUibE, M.D.
Demy Svo, I2x.

KENDALL, Henry. —The Kinship of Men. An argument from
Pedigrees, or Genealogy viewed as a Science. With Diagrams.
Crown Svo, 5x.

KENNARD, Rev. R. B.^A Manual of Confirmation. i8mo.
Sewed, ^d.; cloth, ix. i

KIDD, Joseph, Af.Z?.—The Laws of Therapeutics; or, the Science
and Art of Medicine. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s,

KIKGSFORD, Anna, A/.Z?.—The * Perfect Way in Diet. A
Treatibc advocating a Return to the Na ural and Ancient F^od o/
our Race. Third Edition, Small crown Svo, 2x.

A List of

14

n

JCaUf&SLBVt CAarUs, and Memories ol his Ufe«

iSdited by his Wife. Witk two Steel Engraved Pi^traits, and
V^n^tee cm Wood. Sixteenth Cabinet Editioik ^ a vola. Crown
Svo, 12S,

Also a People’s Edition, in one volume. With Portrait, Crown

8vo, 6s.

All Saints* Day, and other Sermons. Edited by the Kcv. W.
Harrison, lliird Edition. Crown 8vo, fs. 6d,

True Words for Brave Men. A Book for Soldiers’ and
Sailors’ Libraries. Sixteenth Thousand. Crown 8yo, zs. 6d.

KiiOX^^ Jkxander New Playground ; or, Wanderings in

Algeria. New and Cheaper Edition. Large crown 8vo, 6s.

Lamartine,'Alphonse de, Ulfe. By Lady Margaret Domvile.
Large crown Svo, 7^. 6</.

Land Concentration and Irresponsibility of Political Power,
as causing the Anomaly of a Widespread State of Want by the
Side of the Vast Supplies of Nature. Crown Svo, 5r.

School Management ; Including a General View
of the Work of Education, Organization, and Discipline, Seventh
Edition. Crown Svo, dr.

LANG, Andr-ew ,— Lost Leaders^ Crown Svo, 5 j,

lAUAfB, S, i'.— The Rise and Early Constitution of Univer¬
sities. With a Survey of Mediaeval Education. Crown Svo, 6r.

LBFBVBB, Nan. G. Peel and O’Connell. D^my

Svo, lor.

Incidents of Coercion. A Journal of visits to Ireland. Third
Edition. Crown Svo, limp cloth, ir. 6d .; paper covers, ir.

Letters from an Unknown Friend. By the Author of " Charles
Lowder,’^ V.’ith a Preface by the Rev. W. H. Cleaver. Fcap.
Svo, IS.

LILLIE, Arthur, M.R.A.S.—^^Yxti Popular Life of Buddha.
Containing an Answer to the Hibbeit Lectures of i^i. With
XUustratious. Crown Svo, 6r.

Buddhism in Christendom ; or, Jesus the Essene. With
Illustrations. Demy Svo, I5r.

LITTLE^ E. ^.-Log-Book Notes through Life. Oblong.
Illustrated. 6s.

LOCNEE, C<z;r/.—An Explanation of Organ Stops, with Hints
for Effective Comtwations. Demy Svo, Ss.

LONGFELLOW, H. WadsTwrth, —Life. By his Brother, Samgel
Longfellow. Wiift Portraits and lllustrattons. 3 vols. Demy
Svo, 42 r,

Kegan Pmil^ Trench & Co!s Publications. 15

£.QJiSDALEt Margaret.~-^iB\&t Dora: a Biography. With PQntnli.
Thirtieth Edition. Small crown 8vo, at. m.

George Eliot: Thoughts upon her Tile, her Bodhfb
llerself. Second Edition. Small crown Svo, is. 6d.

LQUNSBURY^ Thomas James Fenimore Cooper. With
Portrait. Crown 8vo, 5r.

LOWDER^ Charles.—‘A. Biography. By the Author of St, Teresa.”
Tw’elfth Edition. Crown 8vo. With Portrait. 3J. 6d. "

LOcITES, Eva C. ^.—Lectures on General Nursing, delivered to
the Probationers of the London Hospital Training School fc^
Nurses. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, zs. (\d.

LYTTONy Edward Bulwery Life, Letters and Literary

Remains. By his Son, the Earl of Lvtton. With Portraits,
Illustrations and Facsimiles. Demy 8vo. Vols. I. and 11 ., 32^,

MACHIA VELLIy Niccolb. ~ Life and Times. By Prof. Vih-arl
T ranslated by Linda Yillari. 4 vok. Large post Svo, 481.

Discourses on the First Decade of Titus Livius. Trans¬
lated from the Italian by Ninian Hill Thomson, M.A. Large
crown Svo, I2r.

The Prince. Translated from the Italian by N. H. T. Smaff
crown Svo, printed on hand-made paper, bevelled boards, dr.

SdASiNEILLy y. G. Swift.—‘"SiXisa the Union was carried.
Crown 8vo, cloth, is. 6d.; paper covers, is,

MA GNUSy About the Jews si nee Bible Times. From the

Babylonian Exile till the English Exodus. Small crown Svo, dc.

MAGNUSy Sir Industrial Education, Crown Svo, dr.

Maintenon, Madame de. By Emily Bowles. With Portrait,
Large crown Svo, ^s. 6d.

Many Voices. A volume of Extracts from the Religious Writers of
Christendom from the First to the Sixteenth Century. With
Biographical Sketches. Crown Svo, cloth extra, red edges, 6s.

MARKHAMy Capt. Albert HastmgSy .ff.AT.—The Great Frozen Sea s
A Personal Narrative of the Voyage of the Akti during the Arctic
Expedition of 1875-6. With 6 full-page Illustrations, 2 Maps,,
and 27 Woodcuts. Sixth and Cheaper Edition. Crown Svo, or.

MARTINEAUy Gertrude.—X^xxXlme Lessons on Morals, Small
crown Svo, 3J. 6d.

MASONy Charlotte M.—'^ome Education : a Course of Lectures to
Ladies. Crown Svo, 3?. 6d.

MASSE Yy Gerald. — The Secret Drama of Shahspeare’s
Sonnets. 410. i2r. 6d.

A List of

l6

Matter and Energy; An Examination of the Fundamental Concep*
captions of Physical Force. By B. L. L. Small crown 8vo, 2s. '

MATUCEf H Ogrant, A Wanderer. Crown 8vo, 5 j.

MAUDSLEY, H., Body and Will. Being an Essay con*

cerning Will, in its Metaphysical, I’hysiological, and Pathplogical
Aspects. 8vo, I 2 s, *

Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo, 6 s.

McGRATH^ Terence. —Pictures from Ireland. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo, 2r.

McKinney, S. B. f?.—science and Art of Religion. Crown
8vo, 8r. 6 d. *

MILLER, Edward. —The History and Doctrines of Irvingism ;
or, The so-called Catholic and Apostolic Church. 2 vols. Large
post 8VO, 15^.

MILLS, Herbert. —^Poverty and the State ; or. Work for the Un¬
employed. An Inquiry into the Causes apd Extent of Enforced
Idleness, with a Statement of a Remedy. Crown 8vo, 6 s, Cheap
Edition, limp cloth, ir. 6 d. ; paper covers, ir.

MINTON, Rev. Zrawm.—Capital and Wages. 8vo, 15J.

Mitchel, John, Life. By William Dillon. 2 vols. 8vo. With
Portrait. 2 ls ,

MITCHELL, Lucy M. —A History of Ancient Sculpture. With
numeious Illustrations, including 6 Plates 111 Phototype. Super¬
royal 8vo, 42J.

MIVART, St. George, — On Truth. Demy 8 vo, i6j.

MOCKLER, E.—K Grammar of the Baloochee Language, as
it is spoken in Makran (Ancient Gedrosia), in the Persia-Arabic
and Roman cbaractcis. Fcap. $vo, 5^.

MOIIL, JtUius and Mary. —Letters and Recollections of. By
M. C. M. Simpson. With Portraits and Two Illustrations. Demy
8vo, 15X.

MOLES WORTH, Rev. W. Nassau, M.A. —History of the Church
of England from 1660. Large ciown 8vo, js. 6 d,

MOORE, Aubrey L. —Science and the Faith; Essays on Apologetic
Subjects. Crown 8vo, 6 s.

MORELL, y. R. —Euclid Simplified in Method and Language.
Being a Manual of Geometry. Compiled from the most important
French Works, approved by the University of Paris and the
Minister of Public Instruction. Fcap. 8vo, 2s. 6 d.

MORISON, y. Cotter, — The Service of Man; an Essay towards the
Religion of the Future. Crown 8vo, sr.

MORRIS, Couvemeur, U.S. Mimstet /> tiwri?.—Diary and Letters.

2 vols. Demy Svo, 30J,

Kegan Paul^ Trench & Co.^s Publications. 17

MORSEy £, S.y Ph.D. —First Book of Zoology. With numerous
Illustrations. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 2 j. td.

My Lawyer : A Concise Abridgment of the Laws of England. By a
Barrister>at-Law. Crown 8vo, 6s. 6d,

Natural History. “ Riverside ” Edition. Edited by J. S. Kingsley.
6 vols. 4to. 2200 Illustrations. £6 6s.

NELSOt/y y. H.y M.A. —A Prospectus of the Scientific Study
of the Hindu Law. Demy 8vo, 9 j.

^ Indian Usage and Judge-made Law in Madras. Demy
8vo, I2r.

NEVILLy F. —The Service of God. Small 4to, 3f. 6d.

NEWMANy Cardinal. —Characteristics from the Writings of.
Being Selections from his various Works. Arranged with the
Author’s personal Approral. Eighth Edition. With Portrait.
Crown 8vo, 6.r.

*** A Portrait of Cardinal Newman, mounted for framing, can

be had, zs, 6 d.

NEWMANy Francis Wilham .— Essays on Diet. Small crown-Svo,
cloth limp, zs.

Miscellanies. Vol. II. Essays, Tracts, and Addresses, Mhral
and Religious. Demy Svo, izs.

Reminiscences of Two Exiles and Two Wars. Crown
Svo, 3r. 6d,

New Social Teachings. By Poi.TTrrus. Small crown Svo, Sr.

NICOLSy ArthuTy F.G.S.y 5 ’.—Chapters from.the Physical

History of the Earth; an Introduction to Geology and
Palaeontology. With numeious Illustrations. Crown Svo, Sr.

NOELy Tfit Hon. AVrf!?/*.—Essays on Poetry and Poets. Demy
Svo, I2r.

NOPSy Marianne. —Class Lessons on Euclid. Part I. containing
the First Two Books of the Elements. Crown Svo, 2r. 6d.

Nuces: Exercises on the Syntax of the Public School Latin
Primer. New Edition in Tliree Parts. Crown Svo, each ir.
The Three Part! can also be had bound together, 3J.

OATESy Franky F.iP.G.i'.—Matabele Land and the Victoria
FaBs. A Naturalist’s Wanderings in the Interior of South
.Mrica. Edited by C. G. Oates, B.A. With numerous Illustra¬
tions and 4 Maps. Demy Svo, 2ir. '

O'BRIENy R. Irish Wrongs and English RemedieSf

with other Essays. Crown.Svo, Ss.

OLIVERt Roker/.—Unnoticed Analogies. A Talk on the Irish
Question. Crown Svo, 6dy

c

A List of

1%

&MEARA^ KatkUen.—¥LeDxi T?BTtBfve and his Gounsdls ltd
the Sick. Small cro-vm Svo, 5^.

One and a Half in Norway. A Chronicle of Small Beer. By
Either and Both. Small crown 8vo, 3^. 6 A.

OTTLEYf H, BichrsUth.'-^loA Great Dilemma. Christ His Own
Witness or His Own Accuser. Six Lectures. Second Edition.
Crown 8vc^ Jr. 6 d,

Our Priests and their Tithes. By a Priest of the Province of
Canterbctry. Crown 8 vo, 5 r.

Our Public Schools—Eton, Harrow, Winchester, Rugby,
Westminster, Marlborough, The Charterjhouse.
Crown Svo, 6 r.

OfVE^t -^•—Across the Hills. Small crown Svo, ir. 8^.

PALMERy the /ate William. —Notes of a Visit to Russia in
1640 - 1841 . Selected and arranged by John H. Cardinal
Newman, with Portrait. Crown Svo, 8r,

Early Christian Symbolism. * A Series of Compositions ftom
Fresco Paintings, Glasses, and Sculptured Sarcophagi. Edited
by the Rev. Provost Northcote, D.D., and the &v. Canon
Brownlow, M.A. With Coloured Plates, folio, 421., or with
Plain Plates, folio, 2$s.

Parchment Library. Choicely Printed on hand-made paper, limp
parchment antique or cloth, 6 s.; vellum, Js. 6 d. each volume.

Sartor Resartus. By Thomas Carlyle.

The Poetical Works John If ilton. 2 vols.

Chaucer^ Canterbury Tales. Edited by A. W. Pollard.
a vols.

Letters and Journals of Jonathan Swift. Selected and
edited, with a Commentary and Notes, by Stanley Lane-PoOle.

Be Quincey’s Confessions of an English Opium Eater.
Reprinted from the First Edition. Eldited by Richard Garnett.

The Gospel according to Matthew, ^Mark, and Luke.

Selectione from the Prose Writings of Jonathan Swift*
With a l^e£ace and Notes by Stanley Lane-Poolb and
portrait.

English Sacred Lyrics.

Sir Joshua ReyiuddslB Discourses. Edited by Bmihin)

Gosse. • ^

Selections from Milton’S Prose Writin|s. Edited

Ernest Myers.

Kegan Paul, Trehch & Co'i Publications, .19

Paccfament Wcicox^^otUinmi.

Tbi9 Book ojf Psalxxis. Transited b]^ the Rev. Cation >T. K.
Cheyne, M.A., D.D.

The Vicar of Wakefield, With Preface and Notea by AwiTlW
Dobson.

English Comic Dramatists. Edited by Oswald CsAWfuaiaif

♦

English Lyrics.

The Sonnets of John Milton. Edited by Maek pATTiStfn#
With Portrait after Vertue.

French Lyrics. Selected and Annotated by GfiORai SAiNtv*
BURY. With a Miniature Frontispiece designed suid etched by
H. G. Glindoni.

Fables by Mr. John Gay. With Memoir by Austin Dobson.
and an Etched Portrait from an unfinished Oil Sketch by Sir
Godfrey Kneller.

Select Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley* Edited, with an
Introduction, by Richard Garnett.

The Christian Year. Thoughts in Vene for the Sund^s and
Holy Days throughout the Year. With Miniature Portrait of the*
Rev. J. Kebk, after a Drawing by G. Richmond. R.A.

Shakspere’s Works. Complete in Twelve Volumes.

Eighteenth Century Essays. Selected and Edited by Austin
Dobson. With a Miniature Frontispiece R. Caldecott.

Q* Horati Flacci Opera. Edited by F. A. Cornish. Assistant
Master at Eton. With a Frontispiece after a design by L. Alma
Tadmna, etched by Leopold Lowenstam.

Edgar Allan Poe’s Poems. With an Essay on Ins Poetry by
Andrew Lang, and a Frontispiece by Linley Sambonrne.

ihakq;>ere’s Sionnets. Edited by Edward Dowden. With a
Frontispiece etched by Leopold Lowenstam, after the Death
Mask.

English Odes. ‘ Selected by Edmund Gosse, With Fronttf?
I^e on India paper hy Hamo Thomycroft. A.R.A.

Of the Imitation, of Christ. By Thomas k KgHPis. A
revised Translation. With Frontispiece on India from a
Design by W. B. Ridunond.

l^oems: Sdected from Percy Bvibshs Sm^LLsy. DMH^catcd to
lAdy With A Preface hy RiC»Aiti> <#Ah|fiSTr and a

Mhuntute Fronti^^^f

^Ak^LOBi 'jQ$tph,^\kv Hallways. iSkefjxiliea. IBsUAIcbI and
DeECfiptive. With Praetical Inform^on as Faxes and Rates,
etc., and a Chapter on Railway Reform. ^ Crown Svo.

20

A List of

PASCAL, The Thoughts of. Translated from the Text of

Auguste Molinier, by C. Kegan Paul. Large crown 8vo, with
Frontispiece, printed on hand-made paper, parchment antique, or
cloth, 12S. ; vellum, 15J. New Edition. Crown 8vo, 6f.

PA TON, IV. . 4 .—Down the Islands. A Voyage to the Caribbees.
With Illustration. Medium 8vo, i6s.

PAUL, C. Kegan .—Biographical Sketches, Printed on hand-made
paper, bound in buckram. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, yj. i)d.

PEARSON, Rev. S. —Week-day Living. A Book for Young Men
and Women. Second Edition, Crown Sv'O, 5^.

PEN RICE, Major ^.—Arabic and English Dictionary of the
Koran. 4to, 21^.

PESCIIEL, Dr. Osfar.-^'T'h.Q Races of Man and their Geo¬
graphical Distribution. Second Edition. Large ciown
8vo, 9r.

PIDQEON, D. —An Engineer’s Holiday J or, Notes of a Round
Trip fi-om Long. 0° to 0°. New and Cheaper Edition. Large
crown Svo, ys. 6d.

Old World Questions and New World Answers. Second

" Edition. Large crown Svo, ys. 61.

Plain Thoughts for Men. Eight Lectin os delivered at Forester’s
Hall, Clerkenwell, during the London Mission, 18S4. Ciown
Svo, cloth, IJ. 6d; paper covers, ir.

PLOXVRIGIIT, C. . 5 .—The British Uredineaeand Ustilagineae.
With Illustrations. Demy Svo, I2r.

PRICE, Prof, — Chapters on Practical Political

Economy. I’eing the Substance of Lectures delivered before
the University of Oxford. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown
Svo, 5r.

Prigment, The. “The Life of a Piig,” “Prig’s Bede,” “How to
Make a Saint,” “The Chuvgtess.” In i vol. Crown Svo, 6r. .

Prig’s Bede ; the Venerable Bede, Expurgated, Expounded, and Ex¬
posed. By The Prig.” Second Edition. Fcap. Svo, 3j. 6if,,

Pulpit Commentary, The. {Old Testament Series.) Edited by the
Rev. J, S. Exell, M.A., and the Very Rev. Dean II. D, M.
Spence, M.A, D.D.

Genesis. By the T. Wiiitelaw, D.D. With Homilies by
the Very Rev. J. F. MoxtGoMERY, D.D., Rev. Prof. IL A.

' Redforu, M.A., LL.B., Rev. F. Hastings, Rev. W.
Roberts, M.A. An Introduction to the Study of the Old’
Testament by the Venerable Archdeacon Farrar, D.D., F.R.S.;
and Introductions to the Pentateuch by the Right Rev. H. CoT«
TERiLL, D.D., and Rev. T. Whitelaw, M.A. Ninth Edhioot
1 vol., '

Kegan Paul^ Trench & Co's Publications,

Pulpit Commentary, The^conimued, ♦

Exodus. By the Rev. Canon Rawlinsok, With Homilies by
Rev. J. Orr, D.D., Rev. D. Young, B.A., Rev. C* A. Good-
hart, Rev. J. Urquhart, and the Rev. H. T. ROBJOHNS.
Fourth Edition. 2 vols., 9r. each.

Leviticus.^ By the Rev. Prebendary Meyrick, M.A. With
Introductions by the Rev. R. Coi,lins, Rev. Professor A. Cave,
and Homilies by Rev. Prof. Redford, LL.B., Rev. J. A.
Macdonald, Rev. W. Clarkson, B.A., Rev. S. R. Aldridge,
LL.B., and Rev. McCheyne Edgar. Fourth Edition, 15^.

Numbers. By the Rev. R. Winterbotham, LL.6. With
Homilies by the Rev. Professor W. Binnie, D.D., Rev. E. S.
Prout, M.A., Rev. D. Young, Rev. J. Waite, and an Intro¬
duction by the Rev. Thomas WiiiTELhw, M.A. Fifth
Edition. 15r.

Deuteronomy. By the Rev. W. L. Alexander, D.D. With
Homilies by Rev. C. Ciemance, E.D., Rev. J. Orr, D.D.,
Rev. R. M. Edgar, M.A., Rev. D. Davies, M.A. Fourth
edition. 15;.

Joshua. By Rev. J. J. Lias, M.A. With Homilies by Rev.
S. R. Aldridge, LL.B., Rev. R. Glo\er, Rev. E. de
PRESsiiNSfi, D.D., Rev. J. Waite, B.A., Rev. W. F. Adeney,
M.A.; and an Introduction by the Rev. A. Plummer, M.A.
Fifth Edition. I 2 s. 6 d.

Judges and Ruth. By the Bishop of Bath and Weli.s, and
Rev. J. Morison, D.D, With Homilies by Rev. A. F. Muir,
M.A.,‘ Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A., Rev. W. M. Statiiam, and
Rev. Professor J. Thomson, M.A. Fifth Edition. lOir. 6 d.

J and 2 Samuel. By the Very Rev. R. P. Smith, D.D. With
Homilies by Rev. Donald Fraser, D.D., Rev. Prof. Chatman,
and Rev. B. Dale. Seventh Edition. 15J. each.

1 Kings. By the Rev. Joseph Hammond, LL.B. With Homilies
by the Rev, E. de PressensE, D.D., Rev. J. Waite, B.A.,
Rev. A. Rowland, LL.B., Rev. J. A, Macdonald, and Rev.
J. Urquhart. Fifth Edition. 15^. *

1 Chronicles. By the Rev. Prof. F. C. Barker, M.A., LL.B.
With Homilies by Rev, Prof. J, R. Thomson, M.A., Rev. R,
Tuck, B.A„ Rev. W. Clarkson, B.A., Rev. F. Whitfield,
M. 4 ., and Rev. Richard Glover. 155. ^

Hzra, Nehemiah, and Bsther. By Rev. Canon G. Rawlinson,
M.A. With Homilies by Rev. Prof. J. R. Thomson, M.A., Rev,
Prof. R. A. Redford, LL.B., M.A., Rev. W. S. Lewis, M.A.,
Rev. J. A. Macdonald, Rev. A. Mackennal, B.A., Rev. W,
Clarkson, B.A., Rev. F. Hastings, Rev. W. DiNwiddie,
LL.B., Rev. Prof, Rowlands, B.A., Rev. G. Wood, B.A.,
Rev. Prof. P. C. Barker, M.A., LL.B., and the Rev. J. S*
Exell, M.A. Seventh Edition, x vcl., 12s, 6 d,

62

A List of

Pulpit Commentary, *

Isaiah. By the Rev. Canon G. RawLiNSoN, M.A. With Homities
by Rev. Prof. E. Johnson, M.A., Rev, W. Clarkson, B.A.,
Rev. W. M. Statham, and Rev. R, Tuck, B.A. Second
Edition. 2 vols., i5r. each.

Jeremiah* (Vol. I.r By the Rev. Canon T. K, Cheyne,
D.D. With Homilies by the Rev. W. F. Adenev, M.A., Rev.

A. F. Muir, M.A., Rev. S. Conway, B.A., Rev. J. Waite,

B. A., and Rev. D. Young, B.A. Third Edition. 15^.
Jeremiah ^Vol. II.) and Lamentations. By Rev. Canon T. K.

Cheyne, D.D* With Homilies by Rev. Prof. J. R. Thomson,
M.A., Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A., Rev. A. F. Muir, M.A.,
Rev. S. Conway, B.A., Rev. D. Young, B.A. isr.

Hosea and Joel. By the Rev. Prof. J. j. Given, Ph.D., D.D.
With Homilies by the Rev. Prof. J. R. Thomson, M.A., Rev.

A. Rowland, B.A., LL.B., Rev. C. Jerdan, M.A., LL.B.,
Rev. J. Orr, D.D., and Rev. D. Thomas, D.D. 15^.

Pulpit Commentary, The. {Nhtf Testamtwt Series.'S

St- Mark. By Very Rev. E. Bickersteth, D.D., Dean of Lich¬
field. With Homilies by Rev. Prof. Thomson, M.A., Rev. Prof.
J. J. Given, Ph.D., D.D., Rev. Prof, Johnson, M.A., Rev. A.
Rowland^ B.A., Rev. A. Muir, and Rev. R. Green.

Fifth Edition. 2 vols., lor. 6 d. each.

St. Luke. By the Very Rev. H. D. M. Spence. With Homilies
by the Rev. T. Marshall Lang, D.D., Rev. W. Clarkson,
and Rev. H. M. Edgar. VoI. I., lox. 6 d.

St. John. By Rev. Prof. H. R. Reynolds, D.D. With
Homilies by Rev, Prof. T. Crpskery, D.D., Rev. Prof. J. R,
Thomson, M.A., Rev. D. Young, B.A., Rev. B. Thomas,
Rev. G, Brown. Second Edition. 2 vols., iSx. each.

The Acts of the Apostles. By the Bishop of Bath and Wells.
With Homilies by Rev. Prof. P. C. Barker, M.A., LL.B., Rev.
Prof. E, Johnson, M.A., Rev. Prof. R. A. Redford, LLB.,
Rev. R. Tuck, BiA., Rev. W. Clarkson, B.A. Fourth.
Editi9li. 2 vols., EOT. 6</. each.

1 Corinthians. By the Ven. Archdeacon ParrAr, D.D. With

Homilies by Rev. Ex-Chancellor Lipscomb, LL.D., Rev.
David Tjiomas, D.D., Rev. D. Fraser, D.D,, Rev. Prof.
*J. R. Thomson, M.A, Rev. J. WAn*E, B.A.* Rev. R. Tuck,

B. A4 Rev. £. Hurndall, M,A., and Rev. H. Bremner, B.D.
Fourth Edition. 15X.

2 Corinthians and Galatians. By the Ven. Archdeacon
Farrar, D.D., and Rev. Prebendary K Hdxtable. With
Honulies by Rev. Ex-Chancellor Lipscomb, LL.D., Rev. David
Thomas, D.D., Rev. Donald Fraser, D.D., Rev. R. Tuck,
B.A., Rev. E. Hurndall, M.A., Rev. Prof. J. R. Thomson,
M-A,, Rev, R. Finlayson, B.A., Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A.,
Rev. R. M. Edgar, Mjt., and Rev. T-Crc^kery, D.D. Second
Edition. 2ir.

Kegan Paul, Trench & Co's Publications, 35

Pulpit Commentary,

Ephesians, Pbilipplans, and Golossians. By the Itev. Prof.
W. G. Blaikie, D.D., Rev. R C. Caffin, M.A., and Rev. G.
G. Findlay, B.A. With Homilies by Rev, D. Thomas, D.D.,
Rev. R. M. Edgar, M.A., Rev. R. Finlayson, B.A., Rev.
W. F. Adeney, M.A., Rev. Prof. T. Croskery, D.D., Rev.
E. S. Prout, M.A., Rev. Canon Vernon Hutton, and
Rev. U. R. Thomas, B.D. Second Edition, ais.

Thessalonians, Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. By the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, Rev. l)r. Gloag, and Rev. Dr. Eales.
With Homilies by the Rev. B. C. Caffin, M.A., Rev. R,
Finlayson, B.A., Rev. Prof. T. Croskery, D.D., Rev. W. F.
Adeney, M.A., Rev. W. M. Statham, and Rev. D. Thomas,
D.D, 15*

Hebrews and James. By the Rev. J. Barmby, D.D,, and Rev.
Prebendary E. C. S. Gibson, M.A. With Homiletics by the
Rev. C. Jerdan, M.A., LL.B., and Rev. Prebendary E. C. S.
Gibson. And Homilies by the Rev. W. Jones, Rev. C. New,
Rev. D. Young, B.A,, Rev. J. S. Bright, Rev. T. F. Lockyer,
B.A., and Rev. C. Jlrdan, M.A., LL.B. Second Edition. 15^.

PUSEY^ Sermons for the Church’s Seasons from
Advent to Trinity. Selected from the Published Sermons
of the late Edward Bouverie Pusey, D.D, Crown 8vo, 5^.

QUEKETT^ R€v. TV, —My Sayings and Doings. With Remi¬
niscences of my Life. With Illustrations. Demy 8vo, i 8 s,

RANKE., Leopold von. —Universal History. The oldest Historical
Group of Nations and the Gieeks. Edited by G. W, Prothbro.
Demy 8vo, l6r.

Remedy (The) for Landlordism; or, Free Land Tenure. Small
crown 8vo, 2jr. bd,

RENDELL^ J. M. —Concise Handbook of the Island of
Madeira. With Plan of P"unchal and Map of the Island. Fcap.
8vo, IS. 6 d.

REYNOLDS^ Rev. y. fT.—The Supernatural in Nature. A
VeriHcation by Free Use of Science. Third Edition, Revised
and Enlarged. Demy 8vo, 14;.

The Mystery of Miracles. Third and Enlarged Editkui.
Crown 8vo, 6 s.

The Mystery of the Universe our Common Faith. Demy

8vo, 14J. ''

The World to Gome: Immortality a Physical Fact. Crown
8vo, 6 s.

RIBOT, Prof. TJi. —Heredity: A Psychological Study of its Phenomena,
its Laws, its Causes, and its Consequences. Second Kditkm.
Large crown 8vo, 91'.

24

A List of

RICHARDSON^ “What are the Catholic Claims?”

With Introduction by Rev. Lukb Rivington. Crown Svo,

3r. 6flf. ^

RIVINGTON, Authority, or a Plain Reason for join¬

ing the Church of Rome. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo.,
3<r. td*

ROBERTSON, The late Rev. F. W., M.A.—XAte and Letters of.
Edited by the Rev. Stopford Brooke, M.A.

I, Two vols., uniform with the Sermons. With Steel Portrait.
Crown 8 vo, yi, €d.

II. Library Edition, in Demy 8vo, with Portrait, xar.

III. A Popular Edition, in i vol. Crown 8vo, 6 s,

Sermons. Five Series. Small crown 8vo, 3r. w. each.

Notes on Genesis. New and Cheaper Edition. Small crown 8vo,
3r. 6 d.

Expository Lectures on St. Paul's Epistles to the
Corinthians. A New Edition. Small crown 8vo, 51,

Lectures and Addresses, with other Literary Remains. A New
Edition. Small crown 8vo, 5^.

An Analysis of Tennyson’s “ In Memoriam.” (Dedicated
by Permission to the Poet-Laureate.) Fcap. 8vo, 2s,

The Education of the Human Race. Translated from the
German of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Fcap. 8vo, 2s. td.

A Portrait of the late Rev. F. W. Robertson, mounted for framing*
can be had, is. 6 d.

ROGERS, William. —Reminiscences. Compiled by R. H. Hadden.
With Portrait. Crown 8vo, 6 s. Cheap Edition, 2 s. 6 d.

ROMANES, G. y. —Mental Evolution in Animals. With a
Tosthumous Essay on Instinct by Charles Darwin, F.R.S.
Demy 8vo, 12s '

Mental Evolution in Man : Origin of Human Faculty.
Demy 8vo,

ROSMINI SERB A TI, Aftiamo .— Life. By the Rev. W. Lockhart.
2 vqIs. With Portraits. Crown 8vo, i2x.

ROSS, Italian Sketches. With 14 full-page Illustrations.

Crown 8vo, ys, 6 d.

RULE, Mariin, Life ^nd Times of St- Anselm,

, Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of the
Brltains. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 32X.

SANTIAGOE, The Curry Cook’s Assistant. Fcap. 8vo,

cloth. IJ. 6 d,} pap«r Voters, ix,

^AVERY, C. A.—The Church of England; an Hlstorlcai
Sketch. Crown 8vo, if. 6 d,

K^gan Fault Trench & Cols Publications, 25

SA YCEf Eat. ArcMbaJd Intitiducilon to fho Sol^ace ctf

X4anguage. 2 vqIs. Second Edition, large post Svo, 2»* ^

SCOONESt W, Ba^Hste ,—Four Centuries of English Xietten^ s'
A Selection of 350 Letters by 150 Writers, from tbe Petiod of tte
Fasten Letters to the Present Time. Third Edition. Lfuge
crown 8vo, 6r.

SelwyUf Bishop, of New Ztaland and ^ LichJUld, A Sketch of hii
Life and Work, with Further Gleanings from Letters,
Sermons, and Speeches. By the Rev. Canon Curtsis. Large
crown 8vo, 7r. 62f.

SEYMOURt Home Rule and State Supre¬

macy. Crown 8vo, 3ir. 6 d,

Shakspere's Macheth. With Preface, Notes, and New Renderings.
By Matthias Mull. Demy 8vo, frr.

Shakspere’s Works. The Avon Edition, 12 vols., fcap. 8vo, cloth,
l8x.; in cloth box, 2ir.; bound in 6 vuls., cloth,

Shakspere’s Works, an Index to. By Evangeline O’Connor.
Crown 8vo, 5J.

SHELLEYt Percy Bysshe.—IAI b, % Edward Dowden, LL.D.

2 vols. With Portraits. Demy Svo, 361.

SHILLITQt Rev. Joseph. —Womanhood: its Duties, Temptations,

. and Privileges. A Book for Young Women, Third Edition.

Crown Svo, 3J. ^d.

Shooting, Practical Hints on. Being a Treatise on the Shot Gun
and its Management. By *'20 Bore.*' With 55 Illustrations.
Demy Svo, I2J.

Sister Augustine, Superior of the Sisters of ChaiituT at the St.
Johannis Hospital at Bonn. Authorized Translation by Hans
Tharau, from the German “Memorials of Amalie von
LasAulx.” Cheap Edition. Large crown Svo, 4r. 6f.

SKINNERtJames.-^K Memoir. By the Author of “Charles Lowder. ”
With a Preface by the Rev. Canon Carter, and Portrait.
Large crown, ^ 5 . 6 d.

Also a cheap Edition. With Portrait. Fourth Edition. Crown
» Svo, 3J. 6 d,

SMITHt The Music of the Waters: Sailor’s Chanties

and Working Songs of the Sea. Demy Svo, its.

Spanish Mystics. By the Editor of “ Many Voices.” Crown Svo, jr.

Specimens of English Prose’ Style from Malory ^to Ma*-
caulay. Selected and Annotated, with ah Introductory Essay,
by George Saintsburv. Large crown Svo, printed on hand*
made paper, parchment antique or cloth, 12s.; vellum, .t^s,

STRACHEYfS^Jfhn, G.C. S'./.—India. With Map. Demy^vo, 1$/.

A List of

F|ip«rs on Hdneatlon^ mid Sceaet from School life* By B« H*
SeMfid Edition. Small crown Svo, jr. bd,

H'IS£IC£A^l7S,--^OTgaLnlc Chemtstiy. Translated and

f dited, widi Eattnsive Additions* by W. K. HODGKINSON,
h*D., and A. J* Grcbnaway, F.I.C. Second and jpheaper
Editicm. Demy 8 vo, I 2 r. 6d»

Suikin. 1885: being a Sketch of the Campaign of this year. By an
Ofiicer who was ther^. Second Edition. Crown 8 vo, > 2 .'. 6 if.

SULLYi Jamesf M.A ,—^Pessimism : a History and a Criticism.
S^ond Edition. Demy 8 vo, I 4 £.

SWEDENBORG, Eman.^'De Cultu et Amore Del tibl Agitur
de Telluris ortu, Paradiso et Vivario, turn de Prl-
mogeniti Seu Adaml HatlvUate Infantla, et Amore.
Crown 8 vo, 6 r,

On the Worship and love of God. Treating of the Birth
of the Earth, Paradise* and the Abode of Living Creaturea.
Translated from the original Latin. Crown 8 vo* pSod,

Prodromus Philosophic Ratiocinantis de Infinite*

tionis Animse et Corporis. Edidit Thomas MurraV Gorman*
M.A. Crown 8vo* yr.

TARRING, C. 7 .—A Practical Elementary Turkish Grammar,
Crown 8 vo, 6s,

TA YLORj Rev. Cattptt Isaac, LL,D .—The Alphabet. An Account of
the Origin and Development of Letters. With numerous Tables
and Facsimiles. 2 vols. Demy 8 vo, 36 /.

Iieaves from an Egyptian Rote-book. Crown 8 vo, 5 ^.

TAYLOR, ReyneUt C.B., C.S.I. A Biography. By E. Gambikr
Parry, with Poytalt and Map. Demy 8 vo, 141 :.

f

TA ilLOR% Sir Afe»>y.-‘The Statesman. Fcap* 8 vo, 3 ^. 6d.

THOM, J. Laws of Life after the Mind of Christ.

ISiro Series. Crown 8 vo, p. 6d, each.

JHOUfESON, Sir H.—Biet in Relation to Age and Activity.
Fcap. 8 vo, cloth, is, 6d,; paper covers, ir.

Modern Cremation. Crown 8 vo, 2 s, 6d.

TODH&NTER, Dr, 7 .—A Study of Shelley. Crown 8vo, p,

TOLSTOI, Comet 2:<e.>-^hrtit^ Christianity. TraiuOated from the
Riniteit large crowft Svo, it.isd, ^

Unions; Their Origin, Ob|ect 8 , and
Sflleaoy* SmtU crown 8 vo, ir. 6d, ; paper covets, fi.

Kegan Paul, Tmuh & Co^s PuhUcaHons, iHjf

TRENCff, The IcUe X. C.t ArcMka^^l^mm AJXd IfMMiliM
Bf the Atithor of “Cities Lo«der<*’ WiSk tWlT^ptiiits.
S Vols, SvOf 2XX.

Notes on the Parables of Our Lord* Siro» lifx Cheep
Edition. Fiftj>sixth Xhousasd. fs» 6 d.

Notes on the Miracles of Our Lord* 8 to, fix; Cheap
Edition. Forty-eighth Thousand, ys.

Studies in the Gospels. Fifth Edition^ Ecvised. ^ro, lor. 6d.

Brief Thoughts and Meditations on Some Passages In
Holy Scripture. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, jx. €d.

Synonyms of the New Testament. Tenth Edidoa, En¬
larged. 8vo« X 2 X.

Sermons New and Old. Crown 8vo, 6x.

Westminster and other Sermons. Crown 8vo» 6 s,

On the Authorized Version of the New Testament^
Second Edition. 8vo, Js,

Ciommentary on the Epistlea to the Seven Churches In
Asia. Fourth Edition^ Revised. 8vo, 8 s, 6d,

The Sermon on the Mount. An Exposition drawn frc»n the
Writings of St. Augustine, with an Essay on his Merits ss
Interpreter of Holy Scripture. Fourth Edition, Eidatged. Svo,
lor. oi/.

Shipwrecks of Faith. Three Sermons preached before the
University of Cambridge in May, t86]r, Fcap. 8vo, Ms, 6d,

Lectures on Mediaeval Church History. Being the Sfilb-
stance of Lectures delivered at Queen’s Coti^e, Londoh. Second
^ition. 8vo, I2x.

English, Past and Present. Thirteenth Editiaii, Revised and
Improved. Fcap. 8vo, 5 j.

On the Study of Words. Twentieth Edition, RetdM.

. Fcap. 8vO| 5^.

Select Glossary of English Words used Formerly In
^nses Different from the Present. Sixth Editioii,
Revised and Enlarged. Fcap. 8vo, jjx.

Proverbs and Their Lessons* Seventh Edition, Enlarge^
Fcap. 8vo, 4X.

poems. CoUocted and Arranged anew. Tenth Edithm.

Svo, ys, 6d,

Poem. Library Edition, svob. Small crown 8vo| for.

Sacred liatln Poetry. Chiefly Lyrical, Selected ai^ Axtail^
for jUse. Third Edition, Corrected and Insprovea* i^p.

A List of

TRENCH^ The loti iP. C., Anhbisha^ — continued^ .

A j^ousehold Book of ’English Poetxy. Selected aad
Arranged, with Notes. Fourth Edition, Revised. Extra tcsLp,
Svo, 5s.

An Essa'jr on the Life and Genius of Calderon.^ With
Translations from his ** Life’s a Dream ” and ** Great Th^tre of
the World.” Second Editiooi Revised and ImjMoved, Extra
fcap. Svo, 5$. 6^*.

Guatavus Adolphus in Germany, and other Lectures
on the Thirty Years' War, Third Edition, Enlarged.
Fcap. Svo, 4r.

Plutarch ; his Life, his Lives, and his Morals. Second
Edition, Enlarged. Fcap. Svo, 3r. 6 d.

Remains of the late Mrs. Richard Trench. Being Selec¬
tions from her Journals, Letters, and other Papers. New and
Cheaper Issue. With Portrait. Svo, 6 s.

TUTHILL^ C. A. AT.—Origin and Development of Christian
Dogma. Crown Svo, 3r. 6 d»

Two Centuries of Irish History. By various Writers. Edited by
Prof. J. Bryce. Demy Svo, i6j-.

UMLAUFTt Prof. /’.-—The Alps. Illustrations and Maps. Syo, 25J.

VAL ePEREMAO, Rev, f, /*.—The Serpent of Eden. A Philo-
Icgical and Critical Essay. Crown Svo, 4^. 6 d.

VOLCJCXSOMf E. W. Catechism of Elementary Modem
Chemistry. Small crown Svo, 3J.

WALLERt C. Unfoldings of Christian Hope. Second
Edition. Crown Svo, 35, 6 d.

WALPOLEy Chas. George.—A Short History of Ireland from the
Earliest Times to the Union with Great Britain.
With 5 Maps and Appendices. Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6 s.

WARBt Wilfrid ,—The \^rish to Believe. A Discussion Concern-*
ing the Temper of Mind in which a reasonable Man should
undertake Religious Inquiry. Small crown Svo, 5x.

WARDy William George, PA.i?.—Essays on the Philosophy of

. Theism. Edited, with an Introduction, by WlLYRin Ward.
a vols. Demy Svo, aix.

WARTER, 7 - W.—An Old Shropshire Oak. 2 vols. Demy Svo,

2 &.

WEDMORE, />«d 5 fr»VA— The Masters of Genre Painting. With
Sixteen Illustrations. Post Svo, •js. 6 d.

WfflElEy, charles.-^ln Cap and Gown. Crown Svo,

WHITMAIf, Conventional Cant: Its Results and

Remedy. Crown Svo, &r.

Kegan Paul^ Trinch & Co*s PitbUcatwiSi ^ 50

'■■ ' . ■ .* 4 -.-

WHITNEY^ Prof, William Z>ZMi'M~EaB6XltiaIS lllf JSOtfUWh
Grammar, for the Use of Schools* Second Editi^* Gro^
8vo, 3J. 6<f.

WHITWORTH, Geor^ Clifford.-^hxi Anglo-Indian Bictlonary:
a Glossary of Indian Terms used in English, and of such English
or other Non-Indian Terms as have obtained special meanings in
India. Demy 8vo, cloth, 12 j.

Wllbarforce, Bishop, of Oxford and Winchesier. Idfe* By,his
Son Reginald Wilberforce. Crown 8vo, 6f.

W/LSOH, Mrs. R. F. —The Christian Brothers. Their Origin and
Work. With a Sketch of the Life of their Founder, the Ven.
Jean Baftiste, de la Salle. Crown 8vo, 6f.

WOLTMANN, Dr. Alfred, and WOERMANN, Dr. AW.—History
of Painting. With numerous Illustrations. Medium 8vo.
Vol. I. Painting in Antiquity and the Middle Ages. 28x*;
bevelled boards, gilt leaves, 30J. Vol. II. The Painting of the
Renascence. 42X. ; bevelled boards, gilt leaves, 4$^.

Words of Jesus Christ taken from the Gospels. Small crown
8vo, 2s. 6ff.

YOUMANS, Edward L., M.D.—A. Class Book of Chemistry, on
the Basis of the New System. With 200 Illustrations. Crown
8vo, 5J‘* ^

YOUMANS, Eliza A. —First Book of Botany. Designed 'to
cultivate the Observing Powers of Children. With 300
Engravings. New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, 2x. 6 d.

THE INTERNATIONAL SOIENTIFIO SERIES.

t. Forms of Water In Clouds and Rivers, Ice and Glaciers.
By J. Tyndall, LL.D., F.R.*S* With 25 Illustrations. Ninth
Eflition. S^-

II. Physics and Politics; or, Thoughts on the Application of the
Principles of “Natural Selection” and “ Inheritance” to Political
Society. By Walter Bagehot. Eighth Edition. 5x,

in. Foods. By Edward Smith, M.D., LL.B., F.R.S. "With nttmcwms
Illustrattons. Ninth Edition. Ss.

IV. Iklind and Body: the Theories of their Relation. lEfy

Alexander Bain, LL,D. With Four' llluslrationa.' Eighth
' Edition. Ss, * ,

V. The Study of'Sociology. By Herbert Spencer* Fourtwatth

Edition, ss.

$0 ^ Litt if

Oem 8 «mitloi 3 L oC Bnergy. Bf Balfour St^urart, II44**
{<L.D., F<ILS. Wltli 14 Iliustratitms. Sovon^ Edition* 5^.

VII. Animal Xiooomotion; or, Walking, Swimming, and Flying. By
J. B. Fettigjnw, M*D., F.R.S.| etc. With 130 Illustrations.
Third Edidon. jr.

Vltl. He^ponslbility in Mental Disease* By Henry Maudsl^ri
M.D. Fourth Edition. 5^.

IX. The New Chemistry* By Professor J. P. Coolce. With 31

Illustrations. Ninth Edition. 5^.

X. Tihe Selence of Daw. By Professor Sheldon Amos. Siath Edition*

Jr.

XJ. Animal Medhdnlsm: a Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial ZiOce*
motion. By Professor E. J. Marey. With 117 lUiistratlons.
md Edition, sr.

XUr The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism. By Professor
Oscar Schmidt. With 26 Illustrations. Seventh E^tion. 5^.

Xm* The History of the Conflict between Religion and
{Science. By J. W. Draper, M.D., LL.D. Twentieth Edition.

5 ^*

XIV. Fungi: their Nature, Inhuences/and Uses. By M. C.
Cooke, M. A*, LL.D. Edited by the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A.,
F.L.S. With numerous Illustrations, Fourth Edltkm. ^r.

XV* Chemistry of Light and Photography. By th.
Hermann Vogel. With xoo Illustrations. Fifth Edition. 5^.

XVI. Tho Life and Growth of Language. By Professor William

Dwight Willing. Fifth Edition. 5r.

XVII. Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. By W.

Stanley Jevons, M.A., F.R.S. Eighth Edition. 5r.

X^VIU. TiM Nature of Light. With a General Account of Physical
Optics. By Eugene Lommel. With x88 Illustrations ai\d a
T^le of Spectra in Chromo-lithography. Fifth Edition. 5x.

XlX. ‘Animal ParaMtes and Messmates. By P. J. Van Beneden,
With 83 lUnstrations. Third Edition. 5r.

XX* On Fermentation. ^ PrdGosior Sehiitsenbeie^. ' With ^
Blnstratioiia. Fourth Edition. 5;.

XXI. The Five Senses of Man. By Professor Bernstein. With
gi Biustsatkms. Fifth Edition. $s. ,

XXII* The Theory of Sound in its Relation to Music* ByPro-
ftaior Fiefto Blasmm. With numerous Wustiatioes. Third

XXlU. l^udies In Spectrum Analysis* By J. Normih tockyeu'
F.R. 3 . six photograi^ lUnsUations of Speous, S

^ numerous engravings on Vfood, Fourth Edhi<m. 8^*

Kegaftr Paul, Ttench & Cols PuMicathns* Jti

'XXIV. "A History of the Growth of the Stem Xf

Professor ^ H. Thurston. With nitmerous lllustndlt^ Fourth
Edition. 5r.

XXV. Education as a Science. By Alexander Bain, LL.C, Sev^di

Edition. Ss,

XXVI. The Human Species. By Professor A. deOuatrefaffes. Foefth

Edition. 5r.

XXVII. Modern Chromatics. With .^^lications to Art and 'In*
dustry. By Ogden N. Rood. .With 130 original lUu8txati<ms.
Second Edition. 5^.

XXVIII. The Crayfish: an Introduction to the Study of lEoology, By
Professor T. H. Huxley. With 82 Illustrations. Fifth Edition, $s,

XXIX. The Brain as an Organ of Mind, By H. Charlton Bastion,^
M.D. With numerous Illustrations. Third EdiUop. 5 j.

XXX. The Atomic Theory. By Pn^. Wurtz. Trapdated’ by fl*

Cleminshaw, F.C.S. Fifth Edition, gr.

XXXI. The Natural Conditions of Existence ail they efCaet
Animal Life. By Karl Semper. With 2 Maps and 106
Woodcuts. Third Edition. §s,

XXXII. General Physiology of Muscles and Mervei^. By Prof.
J, Rosenthal. Third Edition. With 75 Illustrations, gr. '<

XXXin. Sight s an Exposition of the Principles of Monocular and
Binocular Vision. By Joseph le Conte, LL.D. Second Edition^
With 132 Illustrations. Ss,

XXXIV. Illusions: a Psychological Study. By James StUly. Third
Edition. 5^.

XXXV. Volcanoes: what they are and what they teach.
By Professor T. W. Judd, F.R.S. With 96 lUust^ioos on
Wood. Fourth Edition, gj.

XXXVI. Suicide: an Essay on Comparative Moral Statidics, By Prdf.
H. MoiseUi. Second Edition. With diagrams, gr.

XXXVn. The Brain and its Functions. By J. Luys. With
Illustrations. Second Edition.' gj.

XXXVm. Myth and Science: an Essay. By Tito Vjgpoli, Third
Edition. With Supplmentaty Note. gr.

XXXIK> '^he Sun* By Professor Youeg. With IBustrationi, Thkd
Editicm. gr.

Be««> md 'l^f^spe: a Record of Ohserve^enu on tie
Habhn of the Social Hymenoptera. By Sv T^n Lqhhock, Bart,
M.P. With $ ChroiBO*lithograp^ lllustrs^m* Nil# Edidon.

gf. '

32

A List of

i \

XLI, Animal Intelligej^ce. By G. J. Romanesi LL.D., F.R.S.
Fourth Ffdition. Si* ^

XLIl. The Concepts and Theories of Modem Physics., By
J. B. StaUo. Third Edition. Ss,

XLUI. Diseases of Memory : An Essay in the Foatiye Psychology.
By Prof. Th. Ribot. Third Edition, ss.

XLIV. Man before Metals. By N. Joly, with 148 Illustrations.
Fourth Edition. 5^.

XLV. The Science of Politics. .By Prof. Sheldon Amos. Third
Edition. 5 t.

XLVI. Elementary Meteorology. By Robert H, Scott Fourth
Edition. With Numerous Illustrations. 5^.

XLVII. The Organs of Speech and their Application in the
Formation of Articulate Sounds. By Georg Hermann
Von Meyer. With 4^ Woodcuts. 5^.

XLVllI. Fallacleh. A View of Logic fiom the Practical Side. By
Alfred Sidgwick. Second Edition. 5^.

XI.IX. Origin of Cultivated Plants. By Alphonse de Candolle.
Second Edition. 5^.

Jelly-Fish, Star-Fish, and Sea-Urchins. Being a Research
on Primitive Nervous Systems, By G. J. Romanes. With
Illustrations. 5^.

LI. The Common Sense of the Exact Sciences. By the late
William Kingdon CliHbrd. Second Edition. With 100 Figures.
5 ^.

LI I. Physical Expression: Its Modes and Principles. By
Francis Warner, M.D., F.R.C.P., Hunterian Professor of Com¬
parative Anatomy and Physiology, R.C.S.E. With 50 Illus¬
trations. 51.

LlII* Anthropoid Apes. By Robert Hartmann. With 63 Illustra¬
tions. p, *

LIV. The Mammalia in .their Relation to Primeval Times.^
By Oscar Schmidt. With 51 Woodcuts. Ss,

LV. Comparative Literature. By H, Macaulay Posnett, LL.D. p»

LVt. £larthquakes and other Earth Movements. By Prof.
John Milne. With 38 Figures. Second Edition. 5^.

LVIT. Microbes, Ferments, and Moulds. By E. L. Trouessart
With 107 Illustrations. Sx.

LVin* Geographical and Geological Distribution of Animals.
By Professor A. HlUprin. With Frontispiece. 5X. ’

LtX. Weather. A Popular Exposition of the Nature of Weather
Changes from Day to Day. By the Hon. Ralph Aberd^nal^.
Seccatd Edition, With 0 IHiatrations. p.

Kegan Paul, Trench & CoU Publications, 33

LX. Animal Magnetism. By Al^d Bloet and Cluurl^
jsecond Edition. 5^.

LXI. !^anual of British Discojnycete^ with desqrlptions of all the
Species of Fungi hitherto found in Britain included in the Familyf
and liUuatrations of the Genera. By WiUiam Phillips^ F.L.S.

LXII. International Law. With Materials fo| a Code of Inter¬
national Iraw. By Professor Leone Levi. $s,

LXIII. The Geological History of Plants. By Sir J. WiUiam
Dawson.> With 80 Figures. 5r.

LXIV. The Origin of Floral Structures through Insect
and other Agencies. By Rev. Prof. G. Henslow. With
88 Illustrations. 5r.

LXV. On the Senses, Instincts, and Intelligence of Animals.
With special Reference to Insects. By Sir John Lubbock, Bart,
M.P. 100 Illustrations. Second Edition. 5r.

LXVI. The Primitive Family: Its Origin and Development.
By C. N. Starcke.

MILITARY WORKS.

BRACJ^ENBURY, Col. C. B., i?.^.— Military HandhooHs for
Regimental Officers.

I. Military Sketching and Reconnaissance. By Col.

F. J. Hutchison and Major H. G. MacGregor. Fifth
Edition. With 16 Plates. Small crown 8vo, 4.r.

II. The ipilements of Modem Tactics Practically

applied to English Formations. By Lieut..CoI.
Wilkinson Shaw.' Sixth Edition, With 2$ Plates and
Maps* Small crown 8vo, 9r.

III. Field Artillery. Its Equipment, Organization and Tacdcs.

By Major Sisson C. Pratt, R.A. With is Plates. Third
Edition. SmaU crown 8vo, dr.

IV* The Elements of Military Administration. First
Fart: Permanent System of Administration. ' By Major
J. W. Buxton. SmaU crown 8vo, Js, 6d,

y. Military Law: Its Procedure and Practice. By
Major Sisson C. Pratt, R.A Fourth Edition. Reviaed.
crown 8v<^ 4s, 6d,

VL Gavah^ in Modsm War. By Major-General F. Cheaeyix
Trcn^f Small crown $vo, dr.

o

34

A List of

^RACKENBURY, Col. C. B., R.A.—continued.

VII. Field Works. Their Technical Construction and Taclical
Application. By the Editor, Col. C. B. Brackenbury, R.A:
Small crown Svo, in 2 parts, 12s.

VROOKEy Majory C. JC .—A System of Field Training.. Small
crown Svo, cloth limp, 2s.

Campaign of Fredericksburg, Kovember—December, 1862 .
A Study for Officers of Volunteers. By a Line Officer. With
5 Maps and Plans. Second Edition. Crown Svo, ^s.

CLERYy C. FraftciSy Col .—Minor Tactics. Witli 26 Maps and Plans.
Eighth Edition, Revised. Crown Svo, gj.*

COLViLEy Lieut.’Col. C. Z?'.—Military Tribunals. Sewed, 2s. 6d.

CRA UFURDy Capt. H. J .—Suggestions for the Military Train.-
ing of a Company of Infantry. Crown Svo, i.r. (id.

ilAMlLTONy Capt ./««, A.D.C .—The Fighting of the Future. 1*

lIARRISONy Col. A*.—The Ofiicer’s Memorandum Book for
Peace and War. Fourth Edition, Revised thioughout,
Oblong 32mo, red basil, with pencil, 3^. 6 d.

Notes on Cavalry Tactics, Organisation, etc. By a Cavalry
Officer. With Diagrams. Demy Svo, 12s.

FARRy Col. H. IlallaiUy C.M.G .—The Dress, Horses,and
Bquipment of Infantry and Staff OfXicers. - Crown
Svo, Ijr.

Further Training and Equipment of Mounted In¬
fantry. Crown Svo, i.f.

SCJJA W. Col. H.—'Xh6 Defence and Attack of Positions and
localities. Fourth Edition. Crown Svo, 3^. (id.

Sl'ONEy Capt. F. GleaAowey R.A .—Tactical Studies from the
Franco-German War of 1870 - 71 . With 22 Lithographic
Sketches and Maps. Demy Svo, lor. (nd.

WlLKlNSONy Jf. SpemcTy Capt. 20th Lancashire R. V. — Citizen
Soldiers. Essays towards the Improvement of the Volunteer
Force. Crown Svo, zs. (id.

POETRY.

AL^XANDERy Wilhauiy D.D.y Bishop op Derry. —St. Augustine’s
Holiday, and other Poems. Crown Svo,

AUCBMUl'YyA. C.—Poems of English Heroism : From Biunaa-
, burh to Lucknow; horn AllieLtan to Albert. Small crpwn Svo.

is.iid. - ' ' ‘

Kegan Paul^ Trench & Co's Pubhcatmts* 35

BARNES, William.—'Po&ms of Rural Life, In ^ the Dorset
Dialect. New Edition^ complete in one vol. Crown 8vo,
6s.

BA YNES, Rev. Canon H, Home Songs for Quiet Hours.
Fourth and Cheaper Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cluthj 2r, 6d.

BEV/NGTON, L. S. —Key Notes. Small crown 8vo, 5x.

BLUNT, Wilfnd Scazven.— Th.^ Wind and the Whirlwind.
Demy 8vo, is. 6d.

The Love Sonnets of Proteus. Fifth Edition. Elzevir 8vo,
5 ^-

In Vinculis. With Portrait. Elzevir 8vO| 5^.

BOWEN, H. C., ilf.-( 4 .--Simple English Poems. English Literature
for Junior Classes. In Four Parts. Parts L, 1 L> and HI., 6d,
each, and Part IV., is. Complete, 3^.

BRYANT, W. C. —Poems. Cheap Edition, with Frontispiece. Small
ciq;nm 8vo, 3 j. 6d.

Calderon’s DT*amas : the Wonder-Working Magician—Life is a
Dieam—the Pulsatory of St. Patrick. Translated by Dexis
Florence MacCartuy. Post 8vo, loj.

Camoens’ Lusiads. — Porti^uese Text, with Translation by J. J.
Aubertin. Second Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, I2s.

CHRISTIE, Albany /.—The End of Man. Fourth Edition. Fcap.
8vo, 2s. 6d.

COLERIDGE, Hon. Stephen. —Fibulae. Small crown 8vo, 4?. 6d.

COXHEAD, Ethel. —Birds and Babies. With 33 Illustrations.
Imp. i6mo, IS.

Dante^s Divina Commedia. Translated in the Tena Rima of
Original, by F. K. H. PIaselfoot. Demy 8vo, 16s.

DENNIS, y. —English Sonnets. Collected and Arranged by. Small
crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.

DE VERB, Aubrey .— Poetical Works.

I. The Search 'after Proserpine, etc, 3^. 6d.

II. The Legends of St. Patrick, etc. 3r. 6d.

III. Alexander the Great, etc. is. 6d.

The Foray of Queen Meave, and other Legends hf Ireland's
Heroic Age. Small crown 8vo, 3r. 6d.

Legends of the Saxon Saints. Small crown 8vo, 3r. 6d.

Legends and Records of the Church and the Empire.
Small crown 8vo, is. 6d.

DOBSON, Austin. — Old World Idylls, and other -• Eighth

Edition. Elzevir 8vo, jE^lt top, 6^.

A tUi ^

At the Sign Of the Lyre. Sixth Edition. EliM $vo, gilt
top, dr. ^

DOWDEN, Edward, ZX. 2 ?.—ShakSpere’fi SohnetS. With
diictioh ai^ Notes, tixtge post 8 to, p, 6d,

DURANT, AiMse^ —^Dhnte. A Dramatic Poem. Small Orov^ti

DVTt; Tdru.-^A Sheaf Gleaned in FrehOh Fields. Ne^^ Edition.
Demy Svo, lor. 6d,

Ancient Ballade and Legends of Hindustan. With an
Introductory Memoir by Edmund Gosse. Second Edition,
i8mo. Cloth extra, gilt top, Ss.

EZZ/OTTf E^gneser, The Com Lem Rhymer .— Poems. Edited ty his
sem, the Rev. Edwin Elliott, of St. John's, Antfgna. 2 vols.
Crown Svo, iSj.

3 ^nglish Verse. Edited by* W. J. LiNTON and R. H. Stoddab££»,
5 vols. Crown Svo, cloth, 5^. each.

I. Chaucer to Burns.

II. Translations.

Ilf. Lyrics of the Nineteenth Century.

IV. Dramatic Scenes and,Characters.

V. Ballads and Romances.

COSSE, Edmund .—New Poems. Crown Svo, "js. 6d.

Firdausi in Exile, and other Poems. Second Editioiti. Elzevir
Svo, gilt top, 6s.

GURNEY, Rev. Alfred. —The Vision of the Eucharist, and oliher
Poems. Crown Svo, St.

A Christmas Faggot. Small crown Svo, 5^.

HARRISON, Clifrord .—In Hours of Leisure. Second Edition.
Crown Svo, Sj.

KEA TS, ybhn .—Poetical Works. Edited ly W. T. Arnold. Large
crown Svo, choicely printed on hand-made paper, with
in eau-forte. Parchment > or cloth, 12s.; vellum, 15^. New

Edition, crown Svo, cloth, 3^. 6 d.

KING, Mrs, Hafmlion.-^llhA Disciples. Tenth Edition. Small
Svo, 5r.; Elzevir Edition, cloth extra, 6s,

A Book of Dreams, Third Edition. Crown Svo, 6d,

The Sermon in the Hospital (From **The DSii^p!ei’*J Fcap,
Svo, IS, Cheap Edition for distribution 3d'., of aor. per 100.

Lang, Ballades in Blue China, mm Svo, p.

SLhymevI h la Mode. With Frontispiece by E. A,

Second Edition. Elzevir Svo, ^th extra, gilt top, 5J-.

Kegan Fault Trench & Co*s PuhlicaHcns, , ^

k

LARMINJEf 2 ^. — Glanlua, and oth^ Foejms, SmaU crown %i»,

lAving English Poets MDCGGLXXXII. With F|ton|i8^^e by
Walter Crane. Second Edition. lAi^e crown 8vo. ifrmted cm
^iSf^d-made paper. Farchmenl or cloth, |zr.; ydlno)i I5r. ' *

LOCKERt Xtondon Lyrics. Tenth Edition. Widi Portiaiti
Ehevir 8vo. Cloth extra, gilt top, 5r.

I.USTED, C. T, —Semblance, and other Poems. Sma^l cfK>wn 8vo,
3r. ddT.

MAQNUSSONt Einkr, M.A.^ and PALMER, E. If,, M.A.—^loUan
Ludvig Runeberg’s Lyrical Songs, IdyUs, and Epi¬
grams. Fcap. 8vo, 5r.

MEREDITH, Omn \The Earl (f LyUon\. —Luclle. New Edition.
With 32 Illustrations. i6mo, 3^. bd. Cloth extra, gilt edges,
4 ^. 6<f.

MORISOH, Jeanie. —Gordon. An Our-Day Idyll. Crown 8vo, 3J.

MORRIS, Zauns .—Poetical Works of. New and Cheaper Editions,
with Portrait. In 4 vols., 5r. each.

Vol. I. contains ** Songs of Two Worlds.” Thirteenth Edition.

Vol. II. contains “ The Epic of Hades.” Twenty-third Edition.

Vol. III. contains “Gwen” and “ITie Ode m pfe.” Seventh
Edition.

Vol. IV. contains “ Songs Unsung ” and “ Gycia.” Fifth Edition.

Songs of Britain. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo, 5^.

The Epic of Hades. With 16 Autotype Illustrations, after the
Drawings of the late George R. Chapman. "410, cloth extra, gilt
leaves, 4 ir. ‘

The Epic of Hades. Presentation Edition. 4to, cloth extra,
gilt leaves, tor.

The Lewis Morris Birthday Book. Edited by S. S. Cope>
MAN, with Front^pjlece after a Design by the late George R.
Chapman. 32moi cloth extra, gilt edges, 2s,; cloth linitp, is, 6d,

MORSHEAD, D, The House of Atreus. Sei^ the
Agamemnon, Libation-Bearers, and Furies of ^Eschylns. Trans¬
lated into Eziglish Verse. Crown 8vo, yr. ,

The Suppliant Maidens of .^schylus. Crown 8vo, jr. td,

MULHOLLAND, Vagrant Verses. Small crown Svo, 5r.

NOEL, The Hm. Roden. —A Little Child’s MonuZhpnt. Third
Edition. Small crown 8'vo^ $s. 6d.

The Iflouse of Ravensburg. New Edition. Smalt crown
8vo, 6f.

The l^ed Plag, and other Poems. New Edition. Small cronu
8vo,

A List of

^OELi Tke Hon, Roden — continued,

Sotigs of the Heights and Deeps. Crown Svo, 6 s,

A Modern Fausti and other Poems. Small crown 8vo, $5.

OHAGAH, yokn.<—'I'h% Song of Roland. Translated into English
Verse* New and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo, $si

Publisher’s Playground. Fcap. 8vo, 3 r. 6 d.

Rare Poems of the 16th and 17th Centuries. Edited by W. J.

Linton. Crown 8vo, 5 j.

ROS/JVSOHf A. Mary F,—K Handful of Honeysuckle. Fcap,
8vo, 3r. 6 d,

The Crowned Hippolytus. Translated from Euripides. With
New Poems. Small crown 8vo, 5r.

SEALf W. H ,— ^Visions of the Night. Crown 8vo, 4 j.'

RMITH^J, W. GiIbart.—T)iB Loves of Vandyck. A Tale of Genoa.
Small crown 8vo, 2s. 6 d.

The Log o’ the “Norseman.” Small crown 8vo, p.
Serbelloni. Small crown 8vo, 5r.

Sophocles: The Seven Plays in English Verse. Translated by J.ewis
Campbell. Crown 8vo, yj. 6 d.

SYMONDSf John Addington .—Vagabonduli Libellus. Crown
8vo, ox.

TAYLOR^ Sir ff, — Works* Complete in Five Volumes, Crown
8vo, 30X.

Philip Van ArtevAde. Fcap. 8vo, 3x. 6 d,

The Virgin Widow, etc. Fcap. 8vo, 3X. 6 d.

TODHUNTERf Dr, J ,— Laurella, and other Poems. Crown 8vo,
6 s, 6 d,

Forest Songs. Small crown Svo, 3X. 6 d, •

The True Tragedy of Rienzi : a Drama. 3x. 6 (L
Aloestls s a Dramatic Poem. Extra fbap. 8vo, 5x.

Helena in Troas. Small crown 8vo, 2x. 6 dt

The Banshee, and other Poems. Small crown 8vo, 3x. 6 d,

TYNAIYf Catherine.—Lx}Xk.i^ de la Valllere, and other Poems,
Sthall crown 8vo, 3X. 6 d.

Shamrocks* Small crown 8vo, ^x.

Twilight and Candleshades. By Exdl. With 15 Vignettes.
Small crown 8vo, 5x«

Victorian Hymns; English Sacred Songs of Fifty Years.
Dedicated to the Queen. Large post 8vo, tox. 6 d,

Kegan Pauly Trench & Cols PuhlicaUons^ ‘ 39

Wordsworth Birthday Book, The. E^ted by ADSLAmE aad
Violet Wordsworth. 32 mo, limp cloth, is, 6 a ; doth extiiE|Eir,

Wordsworth, Selections from. By Wm. Knight and other
members of the Wordsworth Society. Large crown 8 vo. Printed
on hand>made paper. With Portrait. Parchment, X 2 jr; vellnut,
15J.

y/^ATSy W. /?.—The Wanderings of Oihin, and other Poemi,
Small crown Svo, 5 f. ,

NOVELS AND TALES.

DAKERy Kingscote Stories. Crown Svo, 5 J.

Bertram de Drumont. Crown Svo, 5 ^.

BANKSy Mrs, G. Z.— God’s Providence House. Crown Svo, 6 j.

CRAWFURDy OrMald. —Sylvia Arden. With Frontispiece. Crown
Svo, i^.

GARDINERy Linda ,— His Heritage. With Frontispiece, Crown
Svo, 6s,

CRAY, Mojcwei/.—The Silence of Dean Maitland. Fifteenth
Thousand. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

GREY, Rowland .—In Sunny Switzerland. A Tale of Six Weeks.
Second Edition. Small crown Svo, 5 ^.

Lindenblumen and other Stories. Small crown Svo, 5 ^,
By Virtue of his Office. Crown Svo, 6s,

HUNTERy Hay. — The Crime of Christmas Day. A Tale of the
' Latin Quarter. By the Author of “My Ducats and my

Daughter.” u.

HUNTERy Hayy and WHYTEy Waller,—My Ducats and My
Daughter. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

INGELOWy Jmn,—OfX the SkelHgs. A Novel, With Frontispiece.
Crown Svo, 6s,

LANGy Andrew. — In the Wrong Paradise, and other Stories,
Crown Svo, 6s,

,MACDONALDy C.—Donal Grant A Novel. With rrontisJ)iece.
Crown Svo, dr.

Home Again. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

Castle Warlock. A Novel, With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6 ;.

Malcolm. With Portrait of the .\ulhor engraved on 'SteeL
Crown Svo, dr.

A List #

StACDOJUtALDi

* The lUCantulfi ot X.ossld. With Ftontispiec^ Croim Svoy 6s,

St* Geori^e ft&d St. Michael. With Frontispiece. CtoniriiS^hySI.

Whiii^ Mine's Mine. With Frontispiece. Crown $vo, 6f.

Annals of a Quiet Neighbourhood. With Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo, 6s.

The Seaboard Parish: a Sequel to ** Anjjials of a Quiet Neigh*
bourhood.’* With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, dr.

Wilfred Guxnbermede. An Autobiographical Story. With
Frontispiece. Crown Svo, dr.

Thomas Wingfold, Curate. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo,
dr.

Paul Faber, Surgeon. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo,

The Elect Lady. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

MALET^ ZrMir.—Colonel Knderby’s Wife. A Novel. With
Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

A Counsel of Perfection. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, dr.

MULEOLLANDi Marcella Grace. An Irish Novel. Crown
Svo, dr.

A Fair Emigrant. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

OGtEf Anna C.~A Lost Love. Small crown Svo, 2 j. 6d.

PALGRAyEf W, (j%^W.-*-Hermann Agha; an Eastern Narrative.
Crown Svo, 6s.

Romance of the Recusants. By the Author of “life of a Frig.”
Crown Svo, fjr.

SEVERNEf EIorence,--*TYi% PUlar House. With Frontispiece*
Crown Svo, dr.

^EA Wf Mam Z.*»t[astle Blair; a Story of Youthful Days. Crown
Svo, 3r. 6d,

STRETTOE, ^«W;~through a Needle’s Eye. A Story. With
Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

TA YLOR, Cd. Msadms,, C.S.T., M.R,I,A.^SeBtA. A Noiei WhS
Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s,

Tljppoo Sultaun: n Tale d the Mysore War. With FtontiSpiecd
Crown Svo, dr.

Ralph Darnell. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, dr.

A Noble Queen. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, ds.

The Confessions of a Thug. With Frontispiece. Crown Svo, 6s.

Tara : a hfahratta Tale. With Fxontispiecei Crown Svo, 6s.

I^iriibln Sound at lihe Sea. With Frontispiece, Crown Svo, dr.

Kegan Paul^ Trench & Co's PubHcaHons. 41

BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. '

Brave Men's Footsteps. A Book of Example and Anecdote for
Young People. By the Editor of "Men who have Risen.*' With
4 Illustrations by C. Doyle. Ninth Edition. Crown 8 vo, 2 r.

COXffEAD, Efhel.—Birds and Babies. With 33 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Imp. i 6 mo, cloth, ir.

DAVIES, G. Chrtstopker.--~Bsmhles and Adventures of our
School Field Club. With 4 Illustrations. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8 vo, y, 6d,

EDMONDS, Herhert»—^^ Spent Lives: a Series of Modem Bio«
graphics. New and Cheaper Edition. * Crown 8 vo, 3 r. 6d,

EVANS, Mark,—The Story of our Father's Love, told to Children.
Sixth and Cheaper Edition of Theology for Children. With 4
Illustrations. Fcap. 8 vo, is. 6d,

MAC KENNA, S. y. —Plucky Fellows. A Book for Boys. With
6 Illustrations. Fifth Edition. Crown 8 vo, 31 . 6d.

MALET, Lucas.—l^iiXle Peter. A Christmas Morality for Children of
any Age. With numerous Illustrations. Fourth Thousand. 5^*

REANEY, Mrs, G, 3*.—Waking and Working; or, From Girlhood
to Womanhood, New and Cheaper Edition. With a Frontis>
piece. Crown 8 vo, 3 r. (id.

Blessing and Blessed: a Sketch of Girl Life. New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown 8 vo, 3 ^. (id.

Rose Gurney^ Discovery. A Story for Girls. Dedicated to
their Mothers. Crown 8 vo, 3 ^. (id,

English Girls; their Place and Power. With Prefice by the
Rev. R. W. Dale. Fifth Edition. Fcap. 8 vo, zs, 6d,

Just Anyone, and other Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
i 6 mo, IS. 6d,

Sunbeam Willie, and other Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
i 6 mo, IS. 6d,

Sunshine Jenny, and other Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
x 6 mo, IX. 6d,

STORE, Francis, and TURNER, ^awxx.—Canterbury Chimes;
or, Chaucer Tales re^told to Children. With 6 Illustrations from
the Ellesmere Manuscript. Third Edition. Fcap. 8 vo, 3 x. 6d,

STRETTpN, ffesba.—'DaMid Lloyd's Last Will. With 4 Illustra-
tions. New Edition. Royal i 6 mo, 2 x. 6d,

WffITAKER, Christy's Inheritance. A London Stoiy.

Illustrated, Royal l6mo, is,

PRINTED BV Wll-LIAM CUOW FS AND LIMTT£D«

LONDON AND BFCCI-FS.

MESSRS.

KEdAN PAUL, TRENCH & CO.’S

EDITIONS OF

SHAKSPERE’S WORKS.

THE PARCHMENT LIBRARY EDITION.
THE A VON EDITION.

TJie Text of these Editiojis is mainly that of Delius. Wher¬
ever a variant reading is adopted^ some good and recognized
'Shdksperian Critic has been followed. In no case is a new
rendering of the text proposed: nor has it been thought ne¬
cessary to distract the readet^s attention by notes or comments

I, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.

[P- T. 0,

SHAKSPERE’S WORKS.

m t

THE AVON EDITION.

Printed on thin opaque paper, and forming 12 handy
volumes, cloth, i8j., or bound in 6 volumes, 15^.

The set of 12 volumes may also be had in a cloth box,
price 21^., or bound in Roan, Persian, Crushed Persian
Levant, Calf, or Morocco, and enclosed in an attractive
leather box at prices from 31^. 6^, upwards.

SOME PRESS NOTICES.

“ This ediiion will be useful to those who want a good text, well and
clearly printed, in convenient little volumes that will slip easily into an
overcoat pocket or a travelling-bag.”— St. fames*s Gazette.

** We know no prettier edition of Shakspere for the price.”— Academy.

** It is refreshing to meet with an edition of Shakspere of convenient
size and low price, without either notes or introductions of any sort to
distract the attention of the reader .”—Saturday Hemew.

**lt is exquisite. Each Volume is handy, is beautihilly printed, mid
in eveiy way lends itself to the taste of the cultivated student of Shak*
spere.*^^— Scotsman.

LoNpON: Kkgan Paul, Trench & Co., i, Paternoster Square.

SHAKSPERE’S WORKS. '

THE PARCHMENT LIBRARY EDITION.

In 12 volumes Elzevir 8vo., choicely printed on hand-made
paper, and bound in parchment or cloth, price ^£’3 i2x.,
or in vellum, price 10s.

The set of 12 volumes may also be had in a Strong cloth
box, price ^£3 lys., or with an oak hanging shelf, ^£3 i8j.

SOME Pl^ESS NOTICES.

. There is, perhaps, no edition in which the works of Shakspere
can be read in such luxury of type and quiet distinction of form as this,
and we warmly recommend it.”— Pall Mall Gazette.

“For elegance of form and beauty of typography, no edition of
Shakspere hitherto published has excelled the 'Parchment Library
Edition.* . . . They are in the strictest sense pocket volumes, yet the
type is bold, and, beii^on fine white hand-made paper, can hardly tax
the weakest of sight, ^e print is judiciously confin^ to the text, notes
being more appropriate to library editions. The whole will be comprised
in the cream-coloured parchment which gives the name to the series.”
—DaUy News,

“ The Parchment Library Edition of Shakspere needs no further
praise. ’*— Saturday Peview.

Just published, Prke 5 ^.

AN INDEX TO THE WORKS OF SHAKSPERE.

Applicable to all editions of Shakspere, and giving reference, by topics,
^ notable passa^'es and sigmficant expressions; brief histones or the
tjbys; gec^praphical names and historic incidents; motion of alt
^uiracters and sketches of important ones ; together with explanations'
of allusions and obscure and obsolete words and phrases.

By EVANGBLIITE M. O’CONNOR.

>r j

LOHt>ON ; Kegan Paut, Tebncw & Co., I, Paternoster Snu>»v

SHAKSPERE’S WORKS

SPECIMEN OF TYPE.

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE Act x

Salar, My wind, cooling my broth.

Would blow me to an ague, when I thought
What harm a wind too great might do at sea.

I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
But I should think of shallows and of flats,

And see my wealthy Andrew, dodc’d in sand,

Vailing her high-top lower than her ribs
To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
And see the holy edince of stone.

And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which touching but my gentle vessel’s side,

Would scatter all her spices on the stream,

Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks.

And, in a W'ord, but even now worth this.

And now worth nothing ? Shall 1 have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechanc’d would make me sad ?

But tell not me : I know Antonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.

Ant. Believe me, no : I thank my fortune for it,
hly ventures are not in one bottom trusted.

Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year :

Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.

Salar. NVhy, then you are in love.

• Ant. Fie, fie !

Salar. Not in love neither ? Then let us say yoa
are sad.

Because you are not merry; and ’twere as easy
For you to laugh, and leap, and say you are merry.
Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed
Janus,

Nature hath fram’d strange fellows in her time :

Some that will evermore peep throt^h their eyes
And laugh like p9>Trots at a bi^-piper i
And other of such vinegar aspect

Paul* Trench & Co., r. Paternoster S(^uaz^
