Phantasms of the Living, Vol. 2 (Edmund Gurney, Frederic Myers, Frank Podmore, 1886)
==========================================================
The second volume of the 1886 Phantasms; cases, theory, and the telepathy hypothesis. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/phantasmsoflivin02gurn).

'  '.  f'M,i.^y.''Wii'yi*  tilt-:


m


Mm-'


rip*


aA^-


Boston

Medical  Library

8  The  Fenway


PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIVING.


Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School


PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIYING


BY

EDMUND     GURNEY,    M.A,

LATE  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE,


FREDERIC    W.    H.    MYERS,    M.A.

LATE  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE,


FRANK    PODMORE,    M.A.


VOLUME    II.


LONDON  :

ROOMS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH,

14,  Dean's  Yard,  S.W.

TRUBNER  AND  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL,  E.C.

1886.


x%


FURTHER   ADDITIONS   AND    CORRECTIONS.


Page  vi,  line  13.  For  247  read  248.  Line  18.  For  "nearly  a
trillion  of  trillions  of  trillions  "  read  ''  about  a  thousand  billion  trillion
trillion  trillions."

Page  16,  line  23.  If  only  cases  are  reckoned  where  the  auditory
phantasm  was  recorded  or  described  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived,
the  odds  will  be  reduced  to  about  a  million  to  1.

Page  17,  line  29.  If  only  cases  are  reckoned  where  the  visual
phantasm  was  recorded  or  described  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived,
the  odds  will  be  reduced  to  about  a  hundred  billion  trillions  to  1.

Page  21,  end  of  §  8.  In  the  numei'ical  estimates,  I  have  throughout
confined  the  reasoning  to  sensory  experiences,  and  have  not  attempted  to
extend  it  to  the  ideal  and  emotional  impressions  which  were  considered  in
the  6th  and  7th  chapters.  This  is  because  a  trustworthy  census  of  strong
but  purely  subjective  impressions  of  these  commoner  and  often  vaguer
kinds  would  have  been  imjDossible  to  obtain.  There  is,  however,  one
important  point  which  concerns  the  non-sensory  experiences  as  well  as  the
sensory,  and  which  ought  not  to  be  omitted  from  the  argument  ;  the
occurrence,  namely,  at  various  times,  to  a  single  percipient,  of  several
"  veridical "  impressions,  sometimes  similar,  sometimes  different  in  type.
(See  p.  77,  note.)  It  is  clear  how  enormously  this  multiplication  of  the
coincidences  in  one  person's  history  multiplies  the  already  enormous  odds
against  chance  as  their  cause.

Page  24,  line  3  of  note.     For  40  read  39

Page  26,  line  8  of  note.  For  32  read  31.  This  correction  will  slightly,
but  not  appreciably,  afiect  the  subsequent  estimate.

Page  50,  case  233.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that  she
woke  her  sister  at  the  time  of  her  experience,  and  also  described  it  to  her
fai\iily  at  breakfast,  before  the  news  of  the  death  anived.  Her  sister —
who  probably  supposed  it  to  be  a  dream,  and  fell  asleep  again  at  once —
had  no  recollection  of  it  when  it  was  referred  to  some  years  ago.

Page  52,  case  235.  The  narrator's  first  initial  is  G.  We  have  applied
to  the  gentleman  to  whom  the  earlier  account  was  sent ;  but  he  forwarded
it  to  some  one  else,  and  cannot  now  recollect  to  whom.  The  friend  with
whom  Colonel  Swiney  was  staying  has  long  since  left  Norfolk,  and  we
have  not  been  able  to  trace  him.

Page  68,  line  23.     For  296  read  246.

Pages  139-41,  case  296.  Further  knowledge  and  a  more  critical
study  of  this  case  suggest  doubts  as  to  whether  it  should  have  been
included.  It  will  be  seen  that  three  important  points — the  impression  of
seeing  the  handle  turn,  the  getting  out  of  bed  to  search,  and  Mr.  Phillips's
statement  as  to  his  wife's  having  imagined  herself  to  be  in  the  narrator's
house — are  not  mentioned  in  the  diary,  but  only  in  the  account  written
more  than  3|^  years  afterwards.  Moreover,  it  appears  probable  from  an
inspection  of  the  diary  that  the  entry  for  Oct.  23  was  not  written  on
that  day,  but  after  the  news  of  the  death  had  arrived  on  the  following-
day  ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  unlikely  that  the  description,  "  steps  as  of
a  female  walking  aimlessly,"  was  to  some  extent  suggested  by  the  news.


Page  346,  line  5.  For  maladie  read  malade.  With  this  account  should
be  compared  the  apparent  instance  of  thought-transference  in  a  case  of
hysterical  catalepsy,  recorded  by  Dr.  Bristowe  in  the  British  Medical
Jotirnal  iov  Yeh.  8,  1879.

Page  390,  line  1.     For  Kirkbright  read  Shuck  burgh.

Page  393,  case  419.  A  first-hand  account  from  Mr.  John  A.  Orr,
F.R.C.S.I.,  of  Fleetwood,  shows  that  the  dream  on  which  the  mother  acted
had  conveyed  no  more  than  the  idea  of  her  son's  serious  illness,  and,  more-
over, had  been  dreamt  some  nights  before  the  accident,  as  she  arrived  on
the  morning  of  its  occurrence.     The  case  should,  therefore,  be  omitted.

Page  397,  case  424.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that
the  ex2Derience  was  a  very  vivid  impression  on  waking,  rather  than  an
actual  dream.  The  impression  was  sufficiently  disquieting  to  keep  her
awake  for  several  hours.

Page  398,  case  425.  In  conversation,  Mrs.  Tandy,  a  daughter  of  the
narrator's,  who  has  heard  the  percipient  describe  her  vision,  expressed  a
distinct  opinion  that  she  spoke  of  it  as  a  tvaking  experience.

Page  404,  case  432.  The  narrator  mentioned  in  conversation  that
her  dreams  are  rarely  painful  or  distressing,  and  that  she  has  never  on  any
other  occasion  taken  action  on  a  dream.

Page  461,  first  line  of  case  499.     For  1877  read  1867.

Page  469,  case  505.  The  narrator  not  only  told  her  sister  of  her  ex-
perience on  the  morning  (Tuesday)  after  it  occurred,  but  wrote  the  same
day  to  England,  expressing  her  uneasiness  about  her  nephew,  and  asking
if  anything  was  wrong  with  him  ;  and  Mrs.  Wilkinson,  (of  63,  Harcourt
Terrace,  Redcliffe  Square,  S.W.,)  the  boy's  mother,  remembers  receiving
this  letter  on  the  Wednesday  evening,  while  she  was  herself  in  the  act
of  writing  to  tell  Miss  Wilkinson  of  the  accident.  (Miss  Wilkinson  was
therefore  mistaken  in  saying  that  her  sister-in-law  wrote  on  the  day
after  the  accident.)  Mrs.  Wilkinson  further  mentioned  in  conversation
that  on  the  Monday,  while  lying  in  a  semi-conscious  state,  the  boy
constantly  asked  whether  his  aunt  had  been  told  of  the  accident.  He  was
much  attached  to  her,  and  had  been  nursed  by  her  through  a  serious
illness.

Page  474,  case  509.  We  have  procured  an  official  certificate  from  New
South  Wales,  which  corroborates  the  narrator's  statement  that  her  mother
died  on  June  17,  1868.

Page  513,  case  556.  The  name  of  the  percipient  has  been  privately
communicated.

Page  515,  case  558.  We  have  now  received  a  written  account  of
this  incident  from  another  daughter  of  the  percipient,  who  was  present  at
the  time.  It  was  inferred  that  the  dying  man  spoke  of  the  little  grandson
of  whose  sudden  illness  and  death  he  had  been  kept  in  ignorance,  froin  the
fact  of  his  turning  to  the  child's  mother  and  addressing  her  in  the  way
desci'ibed  (the  second  account  substitutes  "  Don't  fret  "  for  "  Never  mind");
but  it  ought  to  be  added  that  he  had  lost  a  son  of  the  same  name  24  years
before.

Page  524,  end  of  case  569.  The  name  of  the  percipient  has  now
been  privately  communicated.

Page  566,  line  4  from  bottom.  The  narrator  explains  (Dec.  22,  1886)
that  her  father  was  "  an  amateur  doctor  "  only ;  he,  had  been  a  solicitor
by  profession,  but  had  studied  medicine.

Page  584,  line  29,  and  page  585,  line  4.     For  Heaton  read  Seaton.


SYNOPSIS   OF  VOLUME  II.


Additions  and  Corrections ■   .       xxi-xxvii

CHAPTER  XIII.

The  Theory  op  Chance-Coincidence.
§  1.  Assuming  the  substantial  correctness  of  much  of  the  evidence
for  phantasms  which  have  markedly  coincided  with  an  event  at  a  distance,
how  can  it  be  known  that  these  coincidences  are  not  due  to  chance  alone  ?
In  examining  this  question,  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  waking  cases
from  dreams — in  which  latter  class  (as  we  have  seen)  the  scope  for  chance-
coincidences  is  indefinitely  large  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         1-4

§  2.  The  answer  to  this  question  depends  on  two  points — the  frequency
of  phantasms  which  have  markedly  coincided  with  real  events,  and  the
frequency  of  phantasms  which  have  not.  If  the  latter  class  turned  out  to
be  extremely  large — e.g.,  if  we  each  of  us  once  a  week  saw  some  friend's
figure  in  a  place  which  was  really  empty — it  is  certain  that  occasionally
such  a  subjective  delusion  would  fall  on  the  day  that  the  friend  happened
to  die.  The  matter  is  one  on  which  there  have  been  many  guesses,  and
many  assertions,  but  hitherto  no  statistics    .....         4-6

§  3.  To  ascertain  what  proportion  of  the  population  have  had
experience  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  a  definite  question  must  be
asked  of  a  group  large  and  varied  enough  to  serve  as  a  fair  sample  of  the
whole.  The  difficulty  of  taking  such  a  census  has  been  much  increased  by
a  wide  misunderstanding  of  its  purpose         .....         6-8

§  4.  But  answers  have  been  received  from  a  specimen  group  of  5,680
persons ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  suppose  this  number  sufficient         8-10

§  5,  It  may  be  objected  that  persons  may  have  wrongly  denied  such
experiences  (1)  through  forgetfulness — but  the  experiences  of  real  im-
portance for  the  end  in  view  are  too  striking  to  be  readily  forgotten ;
(2)  by  way  of  a  joke  or  a  hoax — but  this  would  lead  rather  to  false
confessions  than  false  denials  ;  (3)  in  self-defence — but  such  error  as  may


vi  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.

have  been  produced  by  this  motive  has  probably  been  more  than  counter-
balanced in  other  ways     ........         10-12

§  6.  First  as  to  auditory  hallucinations,  representing  recognised  voices —
in  the  last  12  years  such  an  experience  has,  according  to  the  census,
befallen  1  adult  in  every  90  ;  but  it  would  have  had  to  befall
7  in  every  10,  to  justify  the  assumption  that  the  cases  recorded  in  this
work  on  first-hand  testimony,  of  the  coincidence  of  the  experience
in  question  with  the  death  of  the  person  represented,  were  due  to
chance.  The  odds  against  the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  said  coinci-
dences are  more  than  a  trillion  to  1  .  .  .  .  .         .  12-16

§  7.  Next  as  to  visual  hallucinations,  representing  a  recognised  face
or  form — in  the  last  12  years  such  an  experience  has,  according  to  the
census,  befallen  1  adult  in  every  247  ;  but  it  would  have  had  to
befall  every  adult  once,  and  most  adults  twice,  to  justify  the  assumption
that  the  cases  recorded  in  the  present  work  on  first-hand  testimony,  of  the
coincidence  of  the  experience  in  question  with  the  death  of  the  person
represented,  were  due  to  chance.  The  odds  against  the  accidental
occurrence  of  the  said  coincidences  are  nearly  a  trillion  of  trillions  of
trillions  to  1 16-18

§  8.  The  extreme  closeness  of  some  of  the  coincidences  afibrds  the  basis
for  another  form  of  estimate,  which  shows  the  improbability  of  their
accidental  occurrence  to  be  almost  immeasurably  great      .         .         18-20

And  a  number  of  further  cases  and  further  considerations  remain,  by
which  even  this  huge  total  of  improbability  would  be  again  swelled.
The  conclusion,  therefore,  after  all  allowances,  that  at  any  rate  a  large
number  of  the  coincidences  here  adduced  have  had  some  other  cause  than
chance  seems  irresistible  ........         20-21

§  9.  An  argument  of  a  quite  different  sort  may  be  drawn  from  certain
peculiarities  which  the  group  of  coincidental  hallucinations  present,  when
compared,  as  a  whole,  with  the  general  mass  of  transient  hallucinations
of  the  sane.  The  chief  of  these  peculiarities  are  (1)  the  decided  pre-
ponderance of  visual  cases  over  auditory,  and  (2)  the  immense
preponderance  of  cases  where  the  figure  or  voice  was  recognised  as
representing  some  one  known  to  the  percipient :  whereas  among  clearly
subjective  hallucinations  there  is  a  very  great  preponderance  of  auditory
cases,  and  almost  an  equality  between  recognised  and  unrecognised
phantasms,  the  preponderance  being  slightly  with  the  latter      .         22-25

Another  striking  point — the  preponderance  of  cases  in  which  the
distant  event  with  which  the  phantasm  coincides  is  death,  or  one  of  the
crises  that  come  nearest  to  death — again  marks  out  the  coincidental
phantasms  as  a  distinct  group  of  natural  phenomena  .         ,         25-28


SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  11.  -  vii

CHAPTER  XIV.

Further  Visual  Cases  Occurring  to  a  Single  Percipient.

§  1.  Visual  hallucinations  may  present  various  degrees  of  apparent
externalisation,  beginning  "with  what  is  scarcely  more  than  a  picture  in
the  mind's  eye,  and  ending  with  a  percept  which  seems  quite  on  a  par
with  all  surrounding  objects.  Examples  of  these  varieties  in  telepathic
phantasms        ..........         29-37

§  2.  Examples  of  completely  externalised  phantasms.  In  connection
with  one  case  (No.  225)  it  is  shown  that  a  slight  liability  to  subjective
hallucinations  (which  a  few  telepathic  percipients  have  exhibited)  need
not  seriously  affect  the  probability  that  a  particular  experience  was
telepathic.  Another  case  (No.  242)  is  remarkable  in  that  the  actual
percipient  had  no  direct  connection  with  the  agent,  but  was  in  the  vicinity
of  a  person  intimately  connected  with  him         ....         38-62

§  3.  Cases  where  the  hypothesis  of  illusion  or  mistaken  identity  has
to  be  taken  into  account.  This  hypothesis  would  not  exclude  a  telepathic
origin,  as  telepathic  illusions  are  quite  conceivable  phenomena.  But  more
probably  these  cases  were  hallucinations  ;  and  if  so,  their  telepathic  origin
would  hardly  be  doubtful.  One  of  them  (No.  243)  exhibits  the  point  of  a
previous  compact  between  the  agent  and  percipient,  that  whichever  died
first  should  endeavour  to  make  the  other  sensible  of  his  presence.  Such
a  compact,  latent  in  either  mind,  may  quite  conceivably  have  some
conditioning  efficacy  ........         62-73

§  4.  Cases  of  a  rudim,entary  type — perhaps  of  arrested  development —
not  representative  of  a  human  form  ;  they  might  be  compared  to  a  motor
effect  which  is  limited  to  a  single  start  or  twitch.  The  class  is  too  small
to  carry  any  conviction  on  its  own  account,  but  its  type  is  not  so
improbable  as  might  at  first  appear  ......         73-76

§  5.  Certain  cases  involving  no  coincidence  with  any  ostensibly
abnormal  condition  of  the  agent.  (1)  Instances  where  several  percipients,
at  different  times,  have  had  hallucinations  representing  the  sam,e  person,
in  whom  a  specific  faculty  for  producing  telepathic  impressions  may  there-
fore be  surmised       .........         77-90

§  6.  And  (2)  instances  where  a  presumption  that  a  hallucination  was
.  not  purely  subjective  is  afforded  by  peculiarities  of  dress  or  aspect  in  the
figure  presented        .........         90-96

§  7.  And  (3)  instances  where  the  phantasm  appears  at  a  time  when  the


viii  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.

person  whom  it  represents  is,  unknown  to  the  percipient,  actually  approach-
ing him,  with  thoughts  more  or  less  consciously  turned  in  his  direction.
The  last  two  examples  (Nos.  265  and  266)  are  auditory  .         .         96-100


CHAPTER  XY.

Further  Auditory  Cases  Occurring  to  a  Single  Percipient.

§  1.  Cases  where  the  phantasm  has  been  of  a  recognised  voice — the
words  heard  having  been,  certainly  in  some  cases  and  possibly  in  others,
those  which  the  distant  agent  was  uttering.  One  case  (No.  269)  illustrates
the  feature  of  repetition  after  a  short  interval        .         .         .         101-108

§  2.  Cases  where  what  was  heard  was  the  percipient's  own  name —
which  is  a  very  common  form  of  purely  subjective  hallucination.

In  most  of  these  cases  there  may  probably  have  been  a  certain  occupa-
tion of  the  agent's  thoughts  with  the  percipient     .         .         .  108-114

§  3.  Cases  where  the  phantasm  has  been  of  an  unrecognised  voice.
In  one  instance,  (No.  279)  several  experiences  of  the  sort,  in  close
coincidence  with  the  deaths  of  relatives,  have  occurred  to  the  same
percipient     ..........         114-118

§  4.  Oases  where  the  impression  was  of  a  complete  sentence,  convey-
ing either  a  piece  of  information  or  a  direction,  projected  by  the  percipient
as  a  message  from  without    .......         118-124

§  5.  An  example  where  the  sound  heard  was  vocal,  but  not  recognised
and  articulate       .........         124-125

§  6.  Phantasms  of  non-vocal  noises  or  shocks.  These  are  parallel  to
the  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations ;  but  need  a  more  jealous  scrutiny,
since  odd  noises  are  often  due  to  undiscovered  physical  causes  in  the
vicinity.  Still,  some  impressions  of  the  sort  are  pretty  clearly  hallucina-
tory ;  and  the  form  is  one  which  telepathic  hallucinations  seem  occa-
sionally to  take.  The  final  case  (No.  291)  suggests  the  possibility  of
family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influences  .         .         .         125-132


CHAPTER  XVI.

Tactile  Cases,  and  Cases  Affecting  More  than  One  of  the
Percipient's  Senses.

§  1.  Purely  subjective  impressions  of  touch,  of  at  all  a  distinct  kind,
are  rare  ;  and  when  they  occur,  may  often  be  accounted  for  as  illusions  due


SYNOPSIS    OF    VOL    II.  ix

to  an  involuntary  muscular  twitch.     It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that
telepathic  hallucinations  of  this  type  should  be  rare       .         .  133-134

The  most  conclusive  examples  are  those  where  an  affection  of
touch  is  combined  with  one  of  sight  or  hearing.     Examples  ,  135-139

§  2.  Combined  affections  of  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  :  one
case  (No.  299)  is  peculiar  in  that  the  person  who  was  probably  the  agent
was  in  the  percipient's  company  at  the  time  .         .         .         139-149

§  3.  A  case  where  the  impressions  of  sight  and  hearing  were  separated
by  some  hours      .........         149-152


CHAPTER    XVII.

Recipeocal  Cases.

§  1.  It  occasionally  happens  that  at  the  time  when  A  telepathically
influences  B,  A  on  his  side  has  an  impression  which  strongly  suggests  that
B  has  reciprocally  influenced  him.  The  best  proof  of  this  is  where  A
expresses  in  words  some  piece  of  knowledge  as  to  B's  condition.  Other
more  doubtful  cases  (of  which  a  few  are  quoted)  may  be  provisionally
referred  to  the  same  type ;  but  unless  A's  description  includes  something
which  he  could  not  have  known  or  guessed  in  a  normal  manner,  his
alleged  percipience  of  B  cannot  be  assumed  to  have  been  more  than  mere
subjective  dream  or  vision    .......  153-158

§  2.  Examples  of  apparently  reciprocal  action.  They  may  be  regarded
as  special  cases  of  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  "  ;  A's  percipience  of  B  being
apparently  active  rather  than  passive,  and  due  to  some  extension
of  his  own  faculties,  connected  with  the  abnormality  of  condition
that  occasions  his  agency,  and  not  to  any  special  abnormality  in  B's
condition      ..........  158-166

The  cases  which,  on  the  evidence,  would  be  clearly  reciprocal,  are  so
few  in  number  as  to  justify  a  doubt  whether  they  represent  a  genuine
type.  Supposing  them  to  be  genuine,  however,  their  rarity  is  not  hard  to
account  for ;  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  time  will  bring  us  more  well-
attested  specimens        .  .  .■        .         ,  .  ,         .         .  167


X  "         STJVOPSIS  OF  VOL  II.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Collective  Cases.

§  1.  Phantasms  which  have  affected  the  senses  of  more  than  one  per-
cipient, are  a  specially  perplexing  class.  On  the  face  of  them,  they
suggest  a  real  objective  presence  of  the  person  seen  or  heard.  But  such
"objectivity"  (unless  conceived  as  some  illusive  form  of  matter)  can
hardly  be  defined  except  just  as  a  temporary  existence  in  more  minds  than
one  :  it  does  not  explain,  but  merely  repeats,  the  fact  that  the  experience
is  collective  ..........         168-170

In  the  absence  of  evidence  (worthy  of  the  name)  that  a  telepathic
phantasm  has  ever  given  a  test  of  physical  reality — e.g.,  by  opening  a  door
or  a  window — we  are  led  to  inquire  how  far  the  phenomena  of  collective
hallucination  can  be  covered  by  a  theory  of  purely  psychical  impressions.
Two  views  (which  will  subsequently  prove  capable  of  amalgamation)
present  themselves  : — (1)  that  A,  at  a  distance,  produces  simultaneous
telepathic  impressions  on  the  minds  of  B  and  C,  who  happen  to  be  together;
(2)  that  B's  impression,  however  originated,  passes  on  to  C  by  a  process
of  thought-transference — the  hallucination  itself  being,  so  to  speak,
infectious 170-171

§  2.  The  Jirst  of  these  hypotheses  presents  great  difficulties.  For  our
review  of  telepathic  hallucinations,  so  far,  has  shown  that  they  may  take
very  various  forms,  and  may  be  projected  at  various  intervals  of  time
(within  a  range  of  a  few  hours)  from  the  crisis  or  event  to  which  we  trace
them  ;  so  that,  supposing  several  persons  to  have  been  the  joint  recipients
of  a  telepathic  impression,  it  seems  most  improbable  that  they  should
independently  invest  it  at  the  same  moment  with  the  same  sensory  form.
Nor,  again,  should  we  expect  to  find,  among  those  jointly  affected,  any
person  who  was  a  stranger  to  the  distant  agent ;  nevertheless,  cases  occur
where  such  a  person  has  shared  in  the  collective  percipience.  And  yet
again,  on  this  theory  of  independent  affection  of  several  persons,  there
seems  no  special  reason  why  they  should  be  in  one  another's  company  at
the  time,  since  the  agent  may  presumably  exercise  his  influence  equally  in
any  direction ;  nevertheless,  cases  where  the  percipients  have  been  apart
are,  in  fact,  extremely  rare  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  171-172

A  few  examples  of  the  sort  are  given;  but  in  several  even  of  these,  the
percipients,  though  not  together,  were  very  near  one  another,  and  had
been  to  some  extent  sharing  the  same  life      ....  173-183

§  3.  As  to  the  second  of  the  proposed  hypotheses— that  one  percipient
catches  the   hallucination  from    another  by   a   process    of   thought-trans-


SYJVOFSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xi

ference — the  question  at  once  suggests  itself  whether  such  communicability
is  ever  found  in  cases  where  no  distant  agent  is  concerned — cases  of
purely  subjective  hallucination.  Such  an  idea  would,  no  doubt,  be  as  new
to  scientific  psychology  as  every  other  form  of  thought-transference ;  but
transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane  have  been  so  little  studied  or  collected
that  it  is  not  surprising  if  the  evidence  for  collective  experiences  of  the
sort  has  escaped  attention — though  collective  illusions  have  sometimes
been  described  as  hallucinations   .         .         .         .         .         .         183-184

It  is  in  collective  cases  that  the  importance  of  distinguishing  illusions
from  hallucinations  becomes  plain.  In  illusions,  the  persons  affected
receive  an  actual  sensory  impression  from  a  real  object,  the  error  being
simply  in  their  way  of  interpreting  it ;  and  in  the  interpretation  they  are
often  greatly  at  the  mercy  of  one  another's  suggestions.  Many  historical
incidents — such  as  visions  of  signs  in  the  heavens  and  of  phantom
champions — might  be  thus  explained 184-186

In  other  alleged  instances  of  "  collective  hallucination "  there  is  no
proof  that  the  impression  was  really  more  than  a  vivid  mental  picture,
evoked  under  excitement.  And  even  where  the  image  probably  has  been
externalised  in  space — as,  e.g.,  in  religious  epidemics,  or  in  experimentation
with  hypnotised  subjects — most  cases  may  be  at  once  explained,  without
any  resort  to  thought-transference,  as  due  to  a  common  idea  or  expectancy.
(Apart,  however,  from  special  excitement  or  from  hypnotism,  the  power
of  mere  verbal  suggestion  to  produce  delusions  of  the  senses  may  easily  be
exaggerated) 186-188

It  is  only  when  these  various  conditions  are  absent — when  the  joint
percept  is  clearly  hallucination,  and  is  also  projected  by  the  several
percipients  without  emotional  preparation  or  suggestion — that  the
hypothesis  of  thought-transference  from  one  percipient  to  another  can
reasonably  be  entertained 189-190

§  4.  The  examples  to  be  adduced,  of  collective  hallucinations,  not
apparently  originating  in  the  condition  of  any  absent  living  person,
include  cases  which  may  be  regarded  by  some  as  indicating  post-mortem
agency.  It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  the  vexed  question  as  to
whether  the  power  of  exercising  psychical  energy  can  or  cannot  continue
after  physical  death.  Whatever  answer  that  question  received,  these  cases
would  still,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  (for  reasons  set  forth  in  §  2,)  bear
witness  to  a  quite  mundane  transference  between  the  minds  of  the  living
percipients  .  .  .  .         .         .  .  .  .  ,  190-192

§  5.    Fiswa^  examples.     Hallucinations  of  light        .  .  192-194

Various  out-of-door  experiences,  not  easy  to  explain  as  illusions  194-198
Examples  of  the  simultaneous  appearance  of  an  unrecognised  figure  to


xii  SYIfOFSIS  OF  VOL.  11.

two  percipients,  who  in  most  instances  were  in  each  other's  company  at
the  time.  The  two  impressions  received  in  several  cases  were  not  precisely
similar,  and  in  one  (No.  322)  were  markedly  different    .  .  198-207

Similar  appearances  of  recognised  phantasms ;  one  o£  which  (case  333)
represented  the  form  of  one  of  the  percipients       .  .  .  208-218

The  auditory  class  requires  special  care,  owing  to  the  liability  9f  real
sounds  (whose  source  is  often  uncertain)  to  be  misinterpreted.  Examples
of  voices       ..........         218—221

And  of  mMsica?  hallucinations  .  .  .  .  .  221-223

The  examples  may  at  all  events  show  that  a  purely  psychical  account  of
these  joint  experiences  is  possible.  It  is  not,  indeed,  obvious  why  hallucina-
tions of  the  senses  should  be  a  form  of  experience  liable  to  transmission  from
mind  to  mind  ;  but  as  regards  the  cases  which  are  telepathically  originated,
some  explanation  may  perhaps  be  found  in  the  fact  that  they  at  any  rate
involve  a  disturbance  of  a  very  peculiar  kind         .  .  .  224-225

§  6.  Collective  hallucinations  of  telepathic  origin.    Auditory  examples,
representing  vocal  sounds       .......  226-230

And  non-vocal  sounds      .......  230-235

Visual  examples.  In  two  of  these  (JSTos.  345  and  346)  the  experiences
of  the  several  percipients  were  not  precisely  similar.  Another  case
(No.  349)  affords  an  opportunity  for  estimating  the  probability  of  a
collective  mistake  of  identity         ......  235-264

§  7.  The  fact  that  in  most  of  the  examples  the  two  percipients,  B  and
C,  were  together  suggests  that  mere  community  of  scene,  or  of  immediate
mental  occupation,  may  establish  a  rapport  favourable  to  "psychical"
transferences         .........  264-266

And  this  conception  may  lead  us,  in  cases  where  a  distant  agent.  A,  is
concerned,  to  an  amalgamation  of  the  two  hypotheses  (see  §  1)  which  have
hitherto  been  treated  separately.  C's  experience,  qua  hallucination,  that
is  to  say  in  its  sensory  character,  may  be  derived  from  B's ;  but,  for  all
that,  A  may  be  telepathically  affecting  C.  It  may  be  A's  joint  influence
on  B  and  C  that  has  conditioned  the  transference  of  sensation  between
them ;  or,  in  cases  where  C  holds  no  intimate  relation  to  A,  a  rapport  may
be  established,  ad  hoc,  between  A  and  C  by  the  rapport  of  both  of  them
with  B — who  thus  serves,  so  to  speak,  as  a  channel  for  C's  percipience  ;  and
this  would  even  help  to  explain  the  cases  where  B  is  not  himself  con-
sciously percipient         ........         266-268

The  conception  of  rapport  through  community  of  mental  occupation
might  explain  the  various  cases  where  the  telepathic  influence  seems  to
have  been  locally  conditioned,  by  the  presence  of  the  percipient  in  a  place
that  was    interesting  to  the  agent.     And    the   idea    may  receive  a  still


SYIfOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xiii

further  extension  in  cases  where   there  is  reason  to   suppose  a  reciprocal
telepathic  clairvoyance  of  the  scene  on  the  agent's  part         .  268-269

Conjectures  of  this  sort  concerning  the  more  outlying  telepathic
phenomena  have  an  air  of  rashness ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  "  psychical  "
transferences  are  possible,  when  once  admitted,  opens  up  a  scheme  of
Idealism  within  whose  bounds  (if  bounds  there  be)  the  potential  unity
between  individual  minds  is  at  any  rate  likely  to  realise  itself  in  surprising
ways  ...........         270


CONCLUSION.

§  1.  The  case  for  spontaneous  telepathy,  being  essentially  a  cumulative
one,  hardly  admits  of  being  recapitulated  in  a  brief  and  attractive  form.
Nothing  but  a  detailed  study  of  the  evidence — dull  as  that  study  is — can
justify  definite  conclusions  concerning  it.  After  all,  the  dulness  is  perhaps
not  greater  than  attaches  to  the  mastery  of  details  in  other  departments
of  knowledge  ;  and  it  cannot  be  too  clearly  realised  that  what  the  research
requires  is  not  sensational  incidents,  but  verified  dates  .  271-272

§  2.  The  present  instalment  of  evidence,  with  all  its  defects,  may  yet,
by  making  the  idea  of  telepathy  better  understood,  facilitate  collection  in
the  future ;  and  already  various  difficulties  and  prejudices  show  signs  of
giving  way  ...........        273

§  3.  But  though  a  fair  field  is  sure,  in  time,  to  be  allowed  to  the
work,  its  advance  must  depend  on  very  wide  co-operation  ;  and  the  more  so
as  the  several  items  of  proof  tend  to  lose  their  efiect  as  they  recede  into
the  past.  The  experimental  investigations  must  be  greatly  extended,  the
spontaneous  phenomena  must  be  far  more  intelligently  watched  for  and
recorded,  before  the  place  of  telepathy  in  scientific  psychology  can  be
absolutely  assured         ........         273-274


NOTE  (BY  MR.  MYERS)  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OE
PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.

§  1.  The  hypotheses  contained  in  this  note  are  tentatively  advanced,
but  may  at  least  direct  observation       .  .  .  .  .         .277

§  2.  The  theory  which  represents  a  veridical  phantasm  as  the  externat-
isation  of  a  telepathic  impression  encounters  a  difficulty  in  the  fact  that
when  two  (or  more)  persons  are  together  the  phantasm  is  usually,  though
not  always,  perceived  by  hoth        ......  277-278


xiv  jSYMOFSIS  of  vol.  II.

§  3.  This  complex  fact  seems  in  the  first  place  inconsistent  with  the
popular  theory  of  a  material  ghost,  or  "  meta-organism," — a  theory  on
other  grounds  objectionable ;  ......         278-279

§  4.  Nor  can  we  always  assume  a  separate  telepathic  impulse  from  A  to
B  and  from  A  to  C.  Mr.  Gurney  therefore  supposes  a  fresh  telepathic
communication  from  B  to  C :         .  .  .  .  .  .         .         279

§  5.  But  no  such  cases  of  communication  of  hallucinations  are  recorded
by  alienists  who  have  treated  of  "  folie  a  deux  "  ;  .         .         279-280

§  6.  And  in  morbid  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  no  degree  of  duration  or
intensity  seems  to  effect  this  communication  of  the  hallucination  to
bystanders 280-282

§  7.  Moreover,  in  Mr.  Gurney 's  collection  of  casual  hallucinations  of
the  sane,  there  are  no  collective  cases  which  are  indisputably
falsidical;  .........         282-284

§  8.  Alleged  phantasms  of  the  dead,  for  instance,  cannot  all  be  classed
with  certainty  as  merely  illusory  in  the  present  state  of  our
knowledge  .  ..........        284

§  9.  It  may  be  better,  then,  to  fall  back  on  observation  of  the  experi-
mental cases,  and  to  note  that  in  them  the  percipient  exercises  a  species  of
supernormal  activity     ........         284-286

§  10.  Such  activity,  if  pushed  further,  might  become  first  telepathic
clairvoyance,  then  independent  clairvoyance  .         .         .         286-287

§  11.  Clairvoyant  perception  seems  to  be  exercised  in  inverse  ratio  to
activity  of  normal  faculties,  and  to  be  stimulated  by  influence  from  another
mind    ............        287

§  12.  If  this  be  so,  we  have  an  analogy  which  throws  light  on  cases
in  this  book  where  a  dreaming,  or  even  a  waking,  percipient  becomes
conscious  of  a  distant  scene  ;......         287-289

§  13.  And,  furthermore,  our  cases  suggest  that  correspondently  with
clairvoyant  perception  there  may  be  phantasmogenetic  efficacy  :     .         289

§  14.  So  that  all  the  persons  present  together  may  be  equally  likely  to
discern  the  phantasmal  correlate  of  the  dying  man's  clairvoyant  perception ;
and  collective  cases  will  no  longer  present  a  unique  difficulty  .  289-290

§  15.  And  this  will  hold  good  whatever  view  we  take  of  the  relation


SYJVOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xv

to  space  or  matter,  either  of  the  clairvoyant  percipience  or  of  its  phantasmal
correlate 290-291

§  16.  This  view  suggests  test-experiments.  Points  to  be  noticed  in  a
collective  hallucination ;        .  .  .         .  .  .         .  291-292

§  17.  And  in  a  hallucination  induced  by  hypnotic  suggestion  292-293

§  18.  But  if  the  dying  man's  conception  of  himself  is  thus  presented
as  a  quasi-percept  to  a  group  of  persons  collectively,  then  some  cases  where
there  is  one  percipient  only  may  be  similarly  explained  .         .  293-294

§  19.  If  we  consider  the  indications  of  origin  in  one  or  the  other  mind
given  by  the  dress  of  phantoms,  we  find  no  clear  case  where  such  origin
must  be  referred  to  the  percipient's  mind  ;    .  .  .  .  294-297

§  20.  And  the  symbolism  of  phantoms  also  is  generally  such  as  may
have  been  common  to  both  minds  .....         297-298

§  21.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  cases  where  the  dying  man's  actual
dress  at  the  moment,  though  an  improbable  one,  is  reproduced  by  the
phantom,  which  thus  is  clothed  according  to  the  dying  man's  conception
of  himself,  and  probably  not  according  to  the  percipient's  antecedent
conception  of  him  ;.........  298

§  22.  And  the  symbolism  of  the  figure  sometimes  conveys  true  infor-
mation, or  is  in  other  ways  probably  referable  to  the  dying  man    299-300

§  23.  And  the  cases  of  imperfect  or  deferred  recognition  seem  similarly
to  indicate  that  the  aspect  of  the  apparition  has  not  been  determined  by
the  percipient  himself  ........  300-301

§  24.  Moreover,  the  attraction  which  determines  the  phantasmal
presence  seems  sometimes  to  be  local  rather  than  personal ;  as  if  the
percipient  merely  saw  an  apparition  which  was  generated  by  causes
independent  of  himself  .  .         .         .  .  .  .  301-302

§  25.  It  may  be  said  that  on  this  view  the  mass  of  our  cases  should  be
reciproccbl.  But  in  order  to  prove  a  case  reciprocal  it  is  necessary  that
clairvoyant  percipience  should  be  recollected,  which  is  a  rare  thing  302-303

§  26.  Still  further,  the  agent's  death  often  prevents  his  recounting  such
percipience  as  he  may  have  enjoyed.  His  last  words  sometimes  indicate
that  there  has  been  such  percipience.     Dr.  Ormsby's  case     .  303-306

§  27.  In  our  few  cases  ol  voluntary  self-j^rojection  the  experience  seems
rarely  to  have  persisted  into  waking  memory  ;       .  .         .         306-307


xvi  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.

§  28.  And  after  clairvoyant  dreams  the  fact  of  the  clairvoyant  m-yas'iori
may  be  forgotten  till  revived  by  accidental  presence  in  the  scene  thus
discerned      ...........        307

§  29.  Invasion,  however,  is  sometimes  remembered ;  faintly  and
brokenly  by  an  agent  waking  at  the  time  ;    .  .  .  .  307-308

§  30.  More  often  and  more  distinctly  by  an  agent  sleeping  at  the
time 308

§  31.  Such  reciprocity  seems  further  facilitated  by  a  state  of  trance
or  delirium  ..........         309-310

§  32.  Stages  by  which,  in  this  view,  veridical  phantasms  gradually
approach  a  reciprocal  type    .......  310-311

§  33.  Power  of  the  death  or  crisis  of  one  person  to  evoke  the
clairvoyant  percipience,  and  invite  the  supernormal  invasion,  of  another.
Parallel  with  clairvoyance  mesmerically  induced   .  .  .  311-312

§  34.  A  true  classification  must  depend  on  the  condition  and  crises  of
the  unconscious  rather  than  of  the  conscious  self  .  .  .  312-314

§  35.  In  the  meantime  reciprocal  percipience  may  be  taken  as  the  type
of  a  fully-developed  veridical  hallucination ;  its  relation  to  space  and
matter  being  as  yet  unknown         .  .  .         ,.  .  .  .        314

§  36.  Suggested  analogy  of  telepathic  with  vital  or  organic  com-
munication .........         314-316


SUPPLEMENT.

INTRODUCTION.

§  1.  The  supplementary  evidence  for  telepathy,  like  that  in  the  main
body  of  the  work,  consists  of  experimental  cases  (Chap.  I.)  and  of
spontaneous  cases  (Chaps.  II. -IX.)       ......         321

§  2.  The  spontaneous  cases,  in  the  aggregate,  have  less  force  than  those
which  have  preceded — the  chances  of  error  in  many  of  them  being  very
appreciable,  and  some  of  them  being  second-hand.  Still,  the  evidence  is  for
the  most  part  of  a  character  which  allows  us  to  suppose  that  the  essential


SYJ^rOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.  xvii

point  has  been  truly  retained,  even  though  details  may  have  been  altered
or  added 321-322

§  3.  And  since  this  evidence,  which  might  not  prove  the  reality  of
spontaneous  telepathy,  is  sufficient,  even  alone,  to  establish  a  very  strong
presumption  for  it,  it  lends  an  important  support  to  the  cumulative
argument  already  presented  .......  322-323


CHAPTER  I.

Further  Examples  of  Thought-Transperence,  Principally  in

Hypnotic  Cases.

§  1.  Experiments  in  the  transference  of  tastes  and  pains     .       324-329

Occasionally  the  transference  seems  to  be  from  the  "  subject  "  to  the

operator  ..........       330-331

§  2.  Examples  of  the  power  of  the  ivill  in  producing  the  hypnotic
condition,  or  in  evoking  particular  actions     ....  331-334

§  3  Transferences  of  ideas  unconnected  with  movement.  One
remarkable  record  (No.  366)  exemplifies  a  very  long-continued  suscepti-
bility on  the  percipient's  part.  Several  of  the  cases,  here  treated  as
telepathic,  have  been  attributed  without  sufficient  grounds  to  independent
clairvoyance  .....  ...  334-348


CHAPTER  II.

Ideal,  Emotional,  and  Motor  Cases.

§  1.  Examples  of  spontaneous  thought-transference  of  a  tolerably
literal  kind,  several  of  which  suggest  a  fugitive  faculty  of  percipience
developed  by  illness      ........         349-362

§  2.  Examples  of  an  apparently  abnormal  intuition  of  the  approach
or  proximity  of  certain  persons      .  .  .  .  .  .  363-36.5

§  3.  Cases  where  the  "  agency "  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  assign,
and  which  recall  the  Creek  notion  of  4>rjM      ....  365-370

§  4.  Emotional  impressions  (involving  in  one  case — No.  391 — distinct
physical  discomfort)  which  the  percipients  connected  at  the  moment  with
particular  individuals   ........  370-374

VOL.    II.  b


lii  SYNOPSIS  OF  VOL.  II.

§  5.  Emotional  impressions  not  so  connected     .  .  .  374-376

§  6.  Examples  of  motor  effects  .....         376-379


CHAPTER  III.

Deeams.

§  1.  Examples  of  simultaneous  dreams  corresponding  in  con-
tent               380-383

§  2.  Examples  of  dreams  which  have  seemed  to  represent  some
thought  or  mental  picture  in  thQ  imndi  oi  3u  waking  &gent         .  383-393

§  3.  Examples  of  dreams  which  have  directly  corresponded  with  a
real  event  (usually  death)  that  befell  the  agent       .  .  .  393-401

§  4.  Examples  of  pictorial  dreams  with  a  similar  correspondence ;
in  many  of  which  the  dreamer  has  invested  the  idea  with  original
(symbolic  or  fantastic)  imagery     ......         401-428

§  5.  Examples  of  dreams  that  may  be  described  as  telepathically
clairvoyant,  in  several  of  which  (Nos.  481-4)  the  object  prominently
presented  has  been  a  letter     .......         428-448


CHAPTER  IV.

"  Borderland  "  Cases.

§  1.  First-hand  cases  of  rather  remote  date  :  Visual  cases  449-459

Auditory  cases         ......••  459-461

§  2.  First-hand  and  more  recent  cases  :  Visual  cases          .  461-470

Auditory  cases 470-474

§  3.  A  group  of  first-hand  cases  taken  from  printed  sources  474-477

§  4.  Second-hand   cases  from  informants  who  were  nearly  related  to

the  original  witnesses   ........  477-496

§  5.  And  from  informants  who  were  not  so  related  .          .  496-508


SYJ^OPSIS  OF   VOL.   11.  xix

CHAPTER   Y.

Visual  Oases.

§  1.  First-hand  death-cases      .         .  .  .  .  .  509-523

§  2.  First-hand  cases  where  the  conditioning  event  on  the  agent's  side
was  something  other  than  death    ......         523-532

§  3.  Second-hand  cases  from  informants  who  were  nearly  related  to
the  original  witnesses.  In  connection  with  one  of  these  cases  (No.  583)
some  remarks  are  made  on  the  Scotch  "  second  sight "  ;  another  case  (No.
586)  illustrates  the  difference  between  the  right  and  the  wrong  sort  of
transmitted  evidence    .  .       •  .  .  .  *         .         .  532-542

§  4.  Second-hand  cases  from  informants  who  were  not  nearly  related
to  the  original  witnesses        .......  543-558

§  5.  Ancient  cases,  which,  by  rare  exception,  were  recorded  in  such  a
way  as  to  have  permanent  value   ......         558-560


CHAPTER  VI.

Auditory  and  Tactile  Cases.

§  1.  Oases  where  the  impression  was  of  distinct  words      .  561-568

§  2.  Cases   where  the   impression  apparently   represented  what  was

actually  in  the  agent's  ears  at  the  time           ....  568-570

§  3.  Non-vocal  cases 570-574

§  4.  Tactile  cases 574-576

A  case  suggesting  a  peculiar  sympathy  of  physical  condition  576-577


CHAPTER   VII.

Oases      affecting      more      than      one      of      the      Percipient's
Senses 578-589


CHAPTER   VIII.
Reciprocal  Cases 590-599


VOL.  II.


h  2


XX  SYJVOFSIS   OF   VOL   II.

CHAPTER   IX.

Collective  Cases.
§  1.  Three  outlying  cases         .         ...         .         .         .         600-603

§  2.  Visual  cases,  apparently  connected  with  the  condition  of  a  distant
agent,  occurring  to  percipients  who  were  apart      .  .  .  603-607

§  3.  And  to  percipients  who  were  together       .         .         .         607-623

§  4.   Visual  cases  where  it  is  doubtful  whether  there  was  any  "agency"
on  the  part  of  the  person  whom  the  phantasm  represented     .  623-630

§  5.  Auditory  cases,     where    the   impression   was   of    a    recognised
voice  ..........         631-634

§  6.  And    where   the   impression    was    of    inarticulate    or    non- vocal
sounds  634-641


ADDITIONAL   CHAPTER

Of  Cases  received  too  late  for  Insertion  in  their  Proper  Places.

§  1.  Experimental  cases —

Reproduction  of  diagrams  .....         642-653
Transference   of     ideas    of    numbers,  words,  and

objects         .......         653-666

Transference  of  tastes  .....         666-669

Transference   of    ideas   below   the   threshold   of

consciousness       ......         669-671

§  2.  Transitional  cases-
Production  of  visual  phantasms  at  a  distance       .         671-676
Hypnotic  effects  at  a  distance      ....  676-687

§  3.  Spontaneous  cases  of  various  types.  The  last  two
(Nos.  701  and  702)  afford  a  specially  good
illustration  of  the  psychological  identity  of
dreams  and  hallucinations  .....  687-705


Table  of  numbered  cases  ......  707-722

Analysis  op  the  Table     .......         723

Index 725-733


ADDITIONS    AND    COEEECTIONS.

VOLUME  II.

Page  13,  line  13  from  bottom.  "  One  in  every  90  of  the  population."
The  probability  that  the  ratio  ^,  observed  in  the  specimen-group,  may  be
fairly  assumed  as  correct  for  the  whole  population,  admits  of  precise
determination.  A  general  idea  of  its  degree  of  correctness  may  be
obtained  from  the  following  analogue,  which  I  owe  to  Mr.  F.  Y.  Edge-
worth.  Suppose  5680  balls  to  be  drawn  from  a  bag  containing  immense
numbers  of  black  and  white  balls,  mixed  in  a  certain  ratio.  If  the  real
ratio  of  black  balls  to  the  total  be  g^,  the  odds  against  our  drawing  so
small  a  proportion  of  black  balls  as  -^ — i.e.,  the  odds  against  the  ratio
appearing  to  be  -^ — are  about  10  to  1.  If  the  real  ratio  be  eV?  the  odds
against  its  appearing  to  be  so  small  as  ^q  are  about  500  to  1.  If  the  real
ratio  be  ^,  the  odds  against  its  appearing  to  be  so  small  as  yV  a.re  more
than  100,000  to  1.  It  will  become  obvious,  I  think,  as  we  proceed,  that
even  in  this  last  contingency — on  the  violently  improbable  assumption
that  the  true  ratio  of  hallucines  in  the  population  is  double  that  observed
in  the  specimen  group — my  general  conclusion  would  remain  safe,  even  for
the  auditory  cases ;  and  a  fortiori  for  the  visual  cases,  where  a  far  smaller
ratio  is  substituted  for  ^q.  But  it  is  enough  to  notice  that  practically,  as
the  ratio  for  the  population  is  as  likely  to  be  less  than  the  specimen-ratio
as  greater,  and  as  it  cannot  differ  from  it  very  materially  on  either  side,
the  specimen-ratio  may  safely  be  used.

Page  24,  line  1.  For  13  read  12,  and  for  6  read  7.  Lines  17-22.
Among  the  "  recognised "  visual  cases,  I  include  three  where  the  figure
seen  did  not  represent  the  person  who  was  probably  the  agent.  I  do  not
reckon  on  either  side  two  cases  of  mis-recognition,  which  might  equally
well  be  described  as  partial  recognition;  nor  three  cases  where  the  recogni-
tion was  retrospective ;  nor  four  "  collective  "  cases  where  one  of  the  per-
cipients recognised  the  agent,  but  the  other  was  a  stranger  to  him.  I
reckon  in  the  unrecognised  class  three  cases  where  the  percipient  was  a
stranger  to  the  agent,  but  described  his  appearance  correctly.  Among
the  "  recognised  "  auditory  cases,  I  include  two  where  the  voice  heard  was
not  that  of  the  supposed  agent.  I  do  not  reckon  on  either  side  case  279;
nor  case  507  where  the  recognition  was  retrospective ;  nor  the  case  of
mis-recognition.  No.  570.

Page  25,  note.  The  slight  difference  from  the  numbers  given  in
Vol.  I.,  pp.  392  and  498,  is  due  to  cases  received  since  those  pages  were
printed  off.


xxii  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

Page  26,  lines  12  and  13.  For  399  read  401,  and  for  303  read  304.

Page  27.  "  The  only  way  of  meeting  this  argument,"  &c.  In  more
technical  language,  the  point  stands  thus.  The  determination  of  the
a  posteriori  probability  that  certain  events  took  place  by  chance  depends
not  only  on  the  "  objective  "  probability  of  the  occurrence  of  such  events
under  a  regime  of  chance,  but  on  d  priori  probabilities  depending  (except
in  imaginary  problems  about  bags  and  balls)  on  what  Professor  A.  Marshall
has  felicitously  called  "  that  abstract  and  essence  of  past  experience  which
is  on  the  one  side  science,  and  on  the  other  practical  instinct."  And  as
Mr.  P.  Y.  Edgeworth  remarks,  in  writing  to  me  on  this  topic,  "  Scratches
or  ordering  boots  might  be  as  unique  experiences  as  death,  or  at  any  rate
not  materially  more  frequent ;  yet  all  would  agree  that  the  d  priori
probability  of  a  causal  connection  between  a  phantasm  and  ordering  boots
is  nil;  while  as  to  death,  many  would  think  differently."  Now  in
applying  this  remark,  it  must  be  remembered  that  that  which  alone  could
make  a  number  of  the  coincidences — whether  between  phantasms  and
orderings  of  boots,  or  between  phantasms  and  deaths — explicable  as
accidental  occurrences,  would  be  the  universal  though  unknown  and
unnoticed  prevalence  of  spectral  illusions.  This  is  itself  a  huge  im-
probability, determined  as  such  by  the  relation  of  the  statistical  results  of
my  census  to  complex  a  priori  probabilities  concerning  facts  of  human
memory  and  testimony.  And  what  I  have  implied  in  the  text  is  simply  that
it  is  an  improbability  so  huge  as  to  outweigh  the  a  priori  improbability  of  a
causal  connection  between  phantasms  and  deaths,  though  not  perhaps  the
a  priori  improbability  of  a  causal  connection  between  phantasms  and
orderings  of  boots.

Page  37,  first  note.  Since  this  note  was  printed,  I  have  met  with  an
interesting  case  of  the  peculiar  sensation  described,  in  connection  with
purely  subjective  hallucinations.  Mr.  J.  Russell  Lowell  tells  me  that  in
past  years  he  had  frequent  hallucinations  of  vision,  of  both  the  recognised
and  the  unrecognised  sort,  which  greatly  interested  him ;  and  that  the
experience  was  ushered  in  (he  believes  invariably)  by  a  feeling  of  marked
chill,  which  seemed  to  ascend  from  the  feet  to  the  head.

Page  37,  second  note.  Mr.  Lowell  also  tells  me  that  though  the  figures
he  saw  were  sometimes  quite  natural-looking,  at  other  times  they  were  of
the  semi-transparent  sort  here  described,  allowing  the  wall  or  furniture  to
be  seen  through  them.  He  spoke  of  these  as  looking  as  if  composed  of
"  blue  film  " — a  description  which  is  of  great  interest,  when  taken  in  con-
nection with  some  of  the  telepathic  cases,  e.g.,  Nos.  210,  311,  315,
485,  555.

Page  39,  line  2  from  bottom.  Por  Act  read  Acte.

Page  42,  case  226.  In  conversation,  General  H.  informed  Mr.  Pod-
more  that  the  native  who  was  with  him  at  the  time  of  his  experience  was
not  facing  the  figure,  but  still  would  probably  have  been  aware  of  the
presence  of  a  real  person  who  occupied  the  spot  where  the  figure  was  seen.


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxiii

Page  66  note.     For  case  197  read  cases  197  and  509.

Page  67,  case  245.  The  narrator  has  added,  in  conversation,  that  he
was  in  Huddersfield  for  the  day  only,  and  that  his  sudden  resolve  necessi-
tated his  telegraphing  to  the  friends  with  whom  he  was  staying.  For  the
moment  he  does  not  know  the  address  of  these  friends;  but  he  hopes  to
procure  us  their  recollections  as  to  the  receipt  of  this  telegram  and  his
subsequent  explanation  of  it.

Page  71,  case  249.  The  following  corroboration  is  supplied  by  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Coates,  of  156,  Waperton  Road,  Bradford,  who  were  with  Mr.
Carr  at  the  time  : —

"June  23,  1886.

"  We  shall  only  be  able  to  confirm  the  statement  of  Mr.  T.  Carr.  So
far  as  we  can  remember,  while  we  were  sitting  in  the  room,  T.  0.  came
from  his  chair  to  the  window  ;  and,  while  looking  out  of  the  window,  he
made  the  remark,  '  Ah,  there  is  [X.]  coming  to  see  us,'  and  stepped  back
from  the  window,  waiting  to  hear  a  knock  at  the  door,  which  however  did
not  come.  T.  C.  remarked  that  he  must  have  gone  up  the  yard,  and  looked
at  the  clock  to  see  what  time  it  was.  We  afterwards  heard  that  at  the
time  we  thought  [X.]  was  in  the  yard,  he  was  just  about  dying.

"Charles  Coates.

"  Annie  Coates."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Coates  gave  the  time  as  about  4  p.m. ;  and  spoke
of  Mr.  Carr's  consulting  his  watch.

Page  72,  case  250.  In  conversation  I  have  learnt  from  Mr.  Schofield
that  he  had  been  absent  from  home  for  some  days — which  explains  his
having  heard  nothing  of  the  illness.  The  deceased  had  a  warm  affection
for  his  mother.

Page  85,  case  257.  Since  this  case  was  printed,  a  hallucination
representing  the  same  person  has  been  seen  by  a  fourth  percipient.  Mrs.
Olanville  writes  from  Shute  Haye,  Walditch,  Bridport,  on  Aug.  23,  1886 : —

"  After  breakfast  this  morning,  I  was  outside  the  breakfast-room
window,  looking  about,  when  I  saw  Mrs.  Stone  walking  up  one  of  the  paths
by  the  side  of  the  lawn.  I  followed  her.  The  path  is  long  and  winds
round.  I  saw  her  turn  the  corner  into  a  path  that  led  through  the  orchard,
but  when  I  came  there  I  could  not  see  her.  I  wondered  at  her  walking
so  quickly  as  to  go  out  of  sight,  and  strolled  on,  following  the  path,  which
led  me  back  to  the  house.  Here  I  saw  Mrs.  Stone  talking  to  the  gardener.
She  was  surprised  when  I  asked  her  how  I  could  have  missed  her,  and
said  she  had  not  been  walking  at  all,  had  not  left  her  plants.  Well,  I  saw
her,  her  black  dress,  her  white  cap,  her  walk,  Mrs.  Stone  certainly,  but
whether  out  of  herself,  or  by  an  impression  on  my  brain,  I  cannot  tell
— but  I  never  saw  anything  more  distinctly."  [A  plan  of  the  paths  was
enclosed.]

Mrs.  Stone  writes,  Aug.  25,  1886  : —

"  You  wish  me  to  give  an  account  of  my  proceedings  when  Mrs.  Glan-


xxiv  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

ville  saw  my  double.  About  10  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  August  23rd,
I  had  gone  direct  from  the  house  to  water  some  flowers  in  a  greenhouse
marked  in  Mrs.  Glanville's  plan.  My  mind  was  rather  disturbed  at  not
hearing  from  my  son.  I  was  watering  in  a  rather  dazed,  mechanical  way,
but  did  not  lose  consciousness.  Walking  from  the  place  I  met  Mrs.  Glan-
ville,  who  said,  '  How  could  you  get  here  without  my  seeing  you  ? '  I  had
not  been  near  the  spot  where  she  saw  me."

The  percipient  in  this  case  has  had  one  other  visual  hallucination
representing  a  living  person,  which  was  very  likely  telepathic.  She  thus
describes  it : —

"  I  remember  one  experience  of  the  same  sort  happening  when  I  was  a,
girl.  I  certainly  did  see  an  old  gentleman  in  the  street  who  was  then  on
his  death-bed,  but  nobody  would  believe  it.  He  was  standing  outside  his
shop-door ;  there  were  two  other  men  with  him.  I  can  see  him  now  in
my  mind's  eye — a  tall  thin  man  ;  I  knew  his  face  quite  well.  When  I
said  at  dinner  that  Mr.  Worth  was  better,  for  I  had  seen  him  in  the  street,
my  father  told  me  he  had  just  called,  and  Mr.  Worth  was  very  ill,  in  fact
dying,  and  I  must  be  mistaken."

Page  112,  case  277.  The  narrator  has  explained  to  me  that  her
mother  was  taken  ill  on  the  Saturday  night,  and  lay  all  that  night  and  the
next  day  on  the  sofa,  muttering  to  herself,  but  not  thought  to  be  dying.

Page  116,  case  281.  We  have  procured,  from  the  Acting  Registrar-
General  at  Fiji,  a  certificate  which  shows  that  the  death  took  place  on
Sept.  8,  1875.  But  we  learn  from  the  Astronomer-Royal  that,  until
recently,  the  nomenclature  of  days  of  the  month  at  Piji  followed  the  rule
of  Australia.  Sept.  8,  1875,  therefore,  began  there  nearly  12  hours  before
it  began  here  ;  so  that  unless  the  deceased  was  bathing  late  in  the  evening,
the  narrator's  experience  must  have  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12
hours.  This,  of  course,  is  on  the  supposition  that  the  experience  was
really  on  the  night  of  the  8th,  and  not  of  the  7th ;  in  which  latter  case
the  coincidence  might  have  been  exact.  The  narrator  is  sure  that  the  8th
was  the  date — not,  however,  from  any  independent  recollection  of  the
number  8,  but  on  the  ground  that  she  referred  to  her  diary  after  she  heard
of  the  death,  and  verified  the  coincidence,  which  she  then  mentioned  to
one  or  two  persons.  But  it  will  be  seen  from  her  account  that,  for  aught
she  knew,  the  death  might  have  occurred  on  the  7th ;  and  therefore  the
days  would  have  seemed  to  her  to  have  very  probably  coincided  if  the  day
which  she  found  noted  in  her  diary  was  also  the  7th.  Should  the  diary
ever  be  found,  the  point  may  be  cleared  up.

Page  123,  case  287.  Since  this  case  was  printed,  I  have  learnt  from
Dr.  Joseph  Smith  that  he  was  seeing  Mrs.  Gandy  nearly  every  day.  He
nevertheless  feels  pretty  confident  that  his  experience  was  not  due  to  any-
thing that  he  had  heard  or  observed — arguing  that  that  explanation  of  it,  if
it  had  been  the  true  one,  would  have  occurred  to  him  at  the  time.  But
extremely  slight  and  transient  impressions  may,  for  aught  we  know,  serve
as  the  germ  of  subsequent  hallucinations,  just   as   they  may  serve   as  the


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxv

germ   of   subsequent  dreams  ;  and  the   case  ought  not,  I  think,  to  have
received  an  evidential  number.

Page  199,  case  319.  Both  witnesses  are  positive  that  the  case  was  not
one  of  mere  illusion ;  though  it  was  dusk,  there  was  enough  light  for  the
clergyman  to  observe  that  the  figure  outside  was  rather  badly  dressed,
besides  difiering  from  Dr.  Cant  in  being  considerably  stouter  and  wearing
a  beard.  They  discussed  the  matter  the  same  evening,  at  about  1 1  p.m.
In  the  interval,  something  had  occurred  by  which  Dr.  Cant  tells  us  that
he  was  a  good  deal  impressed.  At  about  8  p.m.  he  was  called  to  visit
a  stranger,  who  was  dying,  and  who  had  expressly  desired  his  attend-
ance ;  and  he  was  startled  by  the  close  (though  not  exact)  resemblance
of  this  man  to  the  hallucinatory  figure.

Page  209,  case  326.  Mrs.  R.'s  sister.  Miss  Norman,  of  Stone,  Stafibrd,
has  sent  the  following  independent  testimony,  dated  June  21,  1886  : —

"  After  the  lapse  of  so  many  years,  the  statement  I  now  write  is  all
that  I  can  remember  of  seeing  my  father  and  mother  walking  together,  in
the  year  1843,  in  the  village  where  we  then  resided.  At  the  time,  my
father  was  from  home,  very  ill ;  and  my  mother,  to  the  best  of  my  remem-
brance, was  out  on  that  day.  I  have  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  the
vision,  which  I  think  remarkable.  My  parents  were  walking  together
by  the  churchyard  wall,  close  to  the  parsonage.  This  happened  in  September,
1843."

Mrs.  R.  writes  that  she  is  confident  that  neither  she  nor  the  man-
servant saw  her  mother's  figure  : — "  He  saw  just  what  I  saw — my  father
entering  the  church  by  the  vestry  door."  After  so  long  an  interval,  it  is
likely  enough  that  the  sisters'  accounts  might  differ,  even  if  their  expe-
riences had  been  identical.  But  it  seems  quite  possible,  on  the  analogy  of
several  other  cases,  that  the  simultaneous  hallucinations  were  not  exactly
identical.

Page  237,  line  24.  After  Mr.  R.  Hodgson  insert  "  and  later  the
present  writer."

Page  247,  lines  4,  5.  The  testimony  in  question  has  now  been
obtained,  and  is  as  follows  : —

"  Lakeside  Cottages,  Newby  Bridge.

"June,  1886.

"  It  was  one  evening,  about  4  years  ago,  that  I  sat  in  the  kitchen,  at  Lin-
dale  Parsonage,  at  supper,  and  looking  at  the  window  I  saw,  at  the  side  of  the
blind,  which  was  not  hanging  quite  straight,  a  very  pale  face  looking  at
me.  It  was  turned  sideways  when  I  first  saw  it,  and  thinking  it  was  one  of
the  young  men  from  the  village  come  up  to  make  game  of  us,  I  made  a  face
at  it ;  then  it  turned  full  face  towards  me,  and  I  saw  that  it  was  the  face  of
Mrs.  John  Robinson,  my  present  husband's  first  wife.  It  looked  very  pale.
I  watched  it  with  the  other  servants  for  about  3  minutes  perhaps,  and  then
it  dropped  down  and  disappeared.     I  could  see  all  round  it,i  so  that  I

1  Compare  cases  553  and  572.     .


xxvi  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.

could  see  that  it  was  not  a  real  face,  and  it  was  too  close  to  the  window
for  that.     It  looked  as  if  resting  on  the  sill.

"  I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion  seen  anything  which  was  not
really  there.  "  Helen  Robinson."

Page  297,  line  14.     Before  p.  546  insert  Yol.  I.

Page  336,  case  366.  The  phenomena  of  mesmeric  rapport  described  in
this  case  strongly  suggest  a  specific  influence  exercised  by  the  operator,  of
a  sort  not  as  yet  recognised  in  the  various  scientific  theories  of  hypnotism ;
but  a  more  decisive  proof  of  such  an  influence  is  of  course  afibrded  if  the
same  operator  has  produced  kindred  efiects  on  more  than  one  "  subject."
After  the  case  in  the  text  was  printed,  I  heard  from  Mrs.  Pinhey  of
another  occurrence  which,  from  this  point  of  view,  is  of  the  greatest
interest,  besides  supplying  a  parallel  to  the  examples  of  the  telepathic
production  of  hypnotic  sleep  given  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  88,  and  below,  pp.  679-87.
During  the  period  when  the  events  described  in  case  366  were  proceeding,
Mrs.  Pinhey  was  staying  with  some  friends  at  Pakenham,  and  was
requested  by  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan,  one  of  the  party,  to  try  to  induce
-mesmeric  sleep  in  another  guest.  Miss  Lofit.  Mrs.  Pinhey  was  rather
unwilling,  but  at  last  consented.

"  The  experiment  was  quite  successful  as  far  as  it  went.  Miss  L.  soon
went  off  into  the  sleep  and  was  laid  upon  a  bed  in  that  state.  I
believe  she  did  not  wake  for  some  hours.  The  Trevelyans  and  Miss  Lofit
were  to  leave  the  next  day,  and  before  they  did  so  Sir  Walter  startled  me
by  making  the  following  request :  '  Would  I,  as  an  experiment  and  to
oblige  him,  undertake  to  retire  at  a  certain  hour,  which  he  fixed,  that
evening,  and  make  the  usual  passes  with  an  intention  of  again  mesmerising
Miss  Lofit,  who  would  by  that  time  be  with  him  and  his  wife  at  a  hotel
at  Lincoln  or  Leicester,  or  some  town  which  he  named  but  which  I  have
now  forgotten  % '  Again  I  hesitated.  *  *  However,  curiosity,  and  a
comfortable  assurance  that  there  could  be  nothing  in  it,  gradually  con-
quered my  repugnance,  and  I  promised  to  make  the  attempt,  heartily
hoping  that  it  might  not  succeed.  The  Trevelyans  and  Miss  Lofit  all  left
at  about  noon  for  the  railway  station,  and  travelled  by  train  to  their
destination.  The  day  passed  as  usual,  and  I  began  to  feel  more  confidence
and  could  almost  laugh  at  my  former  fears.  When  the  appointed  time
came,  I  retired  quietly  to  my  own  room,  and,  imagining  Miss  Lofit  before
me,  I  made  the  usual  passes  ^  just  as  I  had  done  the  evening  before,  and  for
about  the  same  length  of  time.  It  appeared  very  absurd  and  I  could  not
help  laughing  at  the  situation;  but  I  kept  my  own  counsel  and  said
nothing  to  anyone.

"  A  day  or  two  later,  when  I  had  returned  home,  a  letter  came  for  me
from  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan.  It  informed  me  in  a  few  words  that  at  the
preconcerted  hour  Miss  Lofft  was  sitting  at  table  after  tea  or  supper,  that
she  suddenly  began  to  feel  very  drowsy,  said  her  sensations  were  the  same
as  when  she  was  being  mesmerised,  and  that  at  last  she  slept  much  as  she
had  done  the  evening  before,  though,  I  think,  less  deeply  and  for  a  shorter
time.  I  confess  that  I  was  so  astonished  at  this  news,  and  found  it  so
disagreeable   and  bewildering,  that  I  destroyed  the  letter,  an  act  I  have

1  Possibly  effective  indirectly,  as  aiding  concentration  of  attention.


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  xxvii

often  since  regretted,  and  said  as  little  as  possible  about  the  matter  to
anyone.  I  instinctively  felt  that  it  would  be  commonly  regarded  as  so
incredible  that  I  had  better  say  nothing  about  it,  lest  it  should  throw
discredit  upon  the  other  experiments.  Nevertheless,  the  main  facts  are
perfectly  true,  though  I  will  not  undertake  to  answer  for  every  detail.
For  instance,  it  is  certainly  true  that  Miss  LofFt  was  affected  in  the  way  I
have  described,  but  I  cannot  remember  to  what  exact  extent."

[A  niece  of  Miss  Lofft  tells  us  that  she  remembers  Mrs.  Pinhey  mes-
merising her  aunt  at  Pakenham  ;  but  she  was  not  told  of  the  subsequent
experiment.]

Of  course  if  this  occurrence  stood  alone,  the  most  natural  hypothesis
would  be  that  Sir  Walter  Trevelyan  had  in  some  way  betrayed  what  was
being  attempted,  and  that  the  trance  was  caused  by  suggestion  and
expectancy.  But  in  view  of  other  cases  of  the  same  sort,  and  especially  of
the  recent  French  records,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  he  was
sufficiently  on  his  guard  not  to  mar  his  own  carefully-planned  experiment,
and  that  the  incident  was  genuinely  telepathic.

Page  413,  case  445.  We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the
lady's  death  took  place  on  March  2,  1843.  The  narrator  tells  me  that
there  was  no  immediate  apprehension  of  it — that,  for  aught  he  knew,
"  she  might  have  lived  for  20  years."  He  thinks,  but  cannot  be  sure,
that  his  eyes  were  open.

Page  422,  lines  4  and  16.  For  Harley  read  Holies.  The  note  to
this  case  (within  brackets)  is  not  quite  correct,  as  a  sailing-vessel  bound
for  Melbourne  might  have  6  weeks'  start,  and  still  be  outstripped  by  a
steamer.  But  even  with  this  correction,  the  time  of  the  second  dream
cannot  be  brought  into  correspondence  with  any  customary  hour  for  a
London  funeral.

Page  460,  second  note.  For  568  read  569  ;  for  639  read  638 ;  for  654
read  653.

Pas:e  485,  case  522.  A  sister  of  the  narrator's,  who  had  also  heard  of
the  experience  from  her  father's  lips,  confirms  the  account  given.

Page  511,  case  552.  In  conversation,  Mrs.  Rooke  mentioned  that
she  saw  the  figure  as  she  was  coming  out  after  prayers,  all  the  students
being  behind  her.  This  is  important,  as  telling  against  the  hypothesis  of
mistaken  identity.  She  regards  that  hypothesis  as  out  of  the  question,  the
recognition  of  the  face  being  complete.  The  dress  was  a  grey  suit  with
black-barred  pattern,  and  cap  to  match,  such  as  the  young  man  had  been
used  to  wear  at  the  college.  Mrs.  Rooke  did  not  mention  her  experience
to  her  husband,  not  liking  to  appear  superstitious ;  but  both  he  and  she
agree  that  she  mentioned  it  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the  death  arrived,
which  was  about  6  weeks  later ;  the  words  "  many  months "  in  her
account  seem  therefore  to  be  a  slip.

Page  612,  note.  Omit  659,  and  add  cases  30,  190,  198,  495,  530,
537,  591.


XIII.]


CHAPTER  XIII.

THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.

§  1.  An  issue  has  now  to  be  seriously  considered  which  I  have
several  times  referred  to  as  a  fundamental  one,  but  which  could
not  be  treated  without  a  preliminary  study  of  the  subject  of  sensory
hallucinations.  That,  as  I  have  tried  to  show,  is  the  order  of
natural  phenomena  to  which  "phantasms  of  the  living"  in
general  belong ;  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  projections  of  the
percipient's  brain  by  which  his  senses  are  deceived.  We  have
further  found  that  in  a  certain  number  of  cases — which  may  be
taken  as  representing  the  still  larger  number  to  be  cited  in  the
following  chapters — a  phantasm  of  this  kind  is  alleged  to  have
coincided  very  closely  in  time  with  the  death,  or  some  serious  crisis
in  the  life,  of  the  person  whose  presence  it  suggested.  The  question
for  us  now  is  whether  these  coincidences  can,  or  cannot,  be  ex-
plained as  accidental.  If  they  can,  then  the  theory  of  telepathy —
so  far  as  applied  to  apparitions — falls  to  the  ground.  If  they
cannot,  then  the  existence  of  telepathy  as  a  fact  in  Nature  is  proved
on  the  evidence;  and  the  proof  could  only  be  resisted  by  the
assumption  that  the  evidence,  or  a  very  large  part  of  it,  is  in  its
main  features  untrustworthy.  It  is  very  necessary  to  distinguish
these  two  questions — whether  the  evidence  may  be  trusted ;  and  if
trusted,  what  it  proves.  It  is  the  latter  question  that  is  now  before
us.  The  character  of  the  evidence  was  discussed  at  some  length  in
the  fourth  chapter,  and  is  to  be  judged  of  by  the  narratives  quoted
throughout  the  book.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is  assumed  that
these  narratives  are  in  the  main  trustworthy ;  that  in  a  large
proportion  of  them  the  essential  features  of  the  case — i.e.,  two  marked
experiences  and  a  time-relation  between  them — are  correctly  recorded.
Here,  then,  is  the  issue.  A  certain  number  of  coincidences  of  a
particular  sort  have  occurred:   did  they  or  did  they  not  occur  by

VOL.    II.  B


2  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

chance  ?  Now  there  are  doubtless  some  who  do  not  perceive  that  this
question  demands  a  reasoned  examination  at  all.  They  settle  it  a
'priori.  "  One  is  constantly  coming  across  very  startling  coincidences,"
they  observe,  "  which  no  one  thinks  of  ascribing  to  anything  but
chance;  why  should  not  these,  which  are  no  more  startling  than
many  others,  be  of  the  number  ?  "  This  idea  need  hardly  detain  us  :
the  point  in  our  cases  is,  of  course,  not  that  the  coincidence  is  start-
ling  1 — that  alone  would  be  insignificant — but  that  the  same  sort  of
startling  coincidence  is  again  and  again  repeated.  That  is  clearly
a  fact  which  demands  treatment  by  a  particular  method,  often  vaguely
appealed  to  as  "  the  doctrine  of  chances."  The  actual  application  of
that  doctrine,  however,  even  to  simple  cases,  seems  to  require  more
care  than  is  always  bestowed  upon  it.

Especially  is  care  required  in  the  simple  preliminary  matter  of
deciding,  before  one  begins  to  calculate,  what  the  subject-matter  of
the  calculation  is  to  be — what  precise  class  of  phenomena  it  is  to
which  the  doctrine  of  chances  is  to  be  applied.  I  need  only  recall
Lord  Brougham's  treatment  of  his  own  case  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  396-7).  His
attempted  explanation,  as  we  saw,  entirely  depended  on  his  miscalling
his  experience,  and  referring  it  to  the  class  of  dreams — a  class
numerous  enough,  as  he  rightly  perceived,  to  afford  scope  for  numbers
of  startling  coincidences.  And  his  remarks  illustrate  what  is  really  a
very  common  outside  view  of  psychical  research.  Dreams,  and
hallucinations,  and  impressions,  and  warnings,  and  presentiments — it
is  held — are  the  "  psychical  "  stock-in-trade  ;  and  these  phenomena
are  all  much  on  a  par,  and  may  all  be  shown  by  the  same  arguments
to  be  undeserving  of  serious  attention.  There  has  been  the  more
excuse  for  this  view,  in  that  those  who  have  claimed  objective  validity
for  what  others  dismiss  as  purely  subjective  experiences  have  often
themselves  been  equally   undiscriminating.     Even  this  book  might

1  It  is,  however,  something  to  get  even  the  startling  character  of  the  coincidence
admitted.  For  there  are  writers  of  repute  who  seem  to  think  that  the  whole  occurrence
receives  a  sufficient  rationalistic  explanation  when  some  plausible  subjective  cause  for  the
hallucination  has  been  suggested.  The  Abbd  de  St.  Pierre,  after  telling  the  well-known
story  of  Desfontaines'  appearance  to  his  friend  Bezuel,  at  the  time  of  the  former's  death
by  drowning,  and  while  the  latter  was  apparently  in  a  swoon,  opines  that  the  swoon  was
the  cause  of  the  apparition  ;  and  Ferriar,  who  agrees  with  the  Abb^  in  this,  and  adds,  "  I
know  from  my  own  experience  that  the  approach  of  syncope  is  sometimes  attended  with
a  spectral  appearance,"  agrees  with  him  also  in  leaving  the  little  detail  of  the  drowning
wholly  out  of  account.  So  with  respect  to  the  story  told  by  Baronius,  of  the  appearance
of  Ficino,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  to  Michael  Mercato,  who  was  studying  philosophy.
Ferriar  (instead  of  making  inquiry  into  the  evidence  of  dates,  which  would  show  the  story
tn  be  spurious)  explains  that  Mercato 's  study  of  philosophy  may  have  revived  the  idea  of
his  friend  in  a  vivid  manner.  It  would  certainly  be  a  very  vivid  manner  that  could
kill  the  friend  at  a  distance.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  3

lead  a  critic  who  confined  his  perusal  to  the  headings  of  the  chapters
to  imagine  that  dreams  form  a  corner-stone  of  the  argument ;  and  in
admitting  that  topic  at  all,  we  have  so  far  laid  ourselves  open  to
misunderstanding.  Thus  a  distinguished  foreign  critic  of  our  efforts
thought  the  subjective  nature  of  what  we  regard  as  telepathic
incidents  sufficiently  proved  by  the  suggestion  that  "  any  physician
will  consider  it  quite  within  the  bounds  of  probability  that  one  per
cent,  of  the  population  of  the  country  are  subject  to  remarkably  vivid
dreams,  illusions,  visions,  &c,,"  and  that  each  of  these  persons  is
"  subject  to  a  dream  or  vision  once  a  week."^  It  is  obvious  enough
that  in  circles  whose  members  have  "  spectral  illusions  "  of  their
friends  as  often  as  once  a  week,  the  approximate  coincidence  of  one  of
these  experiences  with  the  death  of  the  corresponding  person  will  be
an  insignificant  accident.  But  we  have  not  ourselves  met  with  any
specimen  of  this  class;  and  the  present  collection  comprises  first-hand
accounts  of  recognised  apparitions,  closely  coinciding  with  the  death  of
the  original,  from  109  percipients,  of  whom  only  a  small  minority  can
recall  having  experienced  even  a  single  other  visual  hallucination  than
the  apparition  in  question.^  Once  again,  then,  let  me  repeat  that,
though  this  work  connects  the  sleeping  and  the  waking  phenomena  in
their  theoretic  and  psychological  aspects,  it  carefully  and  expressly
separates  them  in  their  demonstrational  aspect.  The  extent  to  which
either  class  demonstrates  the  reality  of  telepathy  can  only  be  known
through  the  application  of  the  doctrine  of  chances ;  but  the  application

1  Another  trap  lies  in  the  word  hallucination  (see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  458-9);  which  in
this  book  is  strictly  limited  to  sensory  affections,  but  which  common  usage  often
applies  to  purely  mental  errors.  But  for  this  equivoque,  an  eminent  physiologist  would
perhaps  hardly  have  thought  he  made  a  point  against  us  in  the  remark — a  rather  rash
one  from  any  point  of  view — that  our  evidence  is  manifestly  derived  for  the  most  part
"from  a  class  of  persons  given  to  hallucination,  especially  clergymen  and  women,  who
are  naturally  inclined  to  believe  marvels."  (Deutsche  Rundschau  for  January,  1886,  p.  45.)
Among  509  informants  from  whom  I  have  received  accounts  of  apparently  subjective
hallucinations  of  sight  and  hearing,  I  find  the  proportion  of  females  to  males  almost
exactly  3  to  2,  and  clergymen  most  sparsely  represented.  Of  the  527  percipients
concerned  in  the  hallucinations  of  sight  and  hearing  which  are  included  as  telepathic
evidence  in  these  volumes,  241,  or  more  than  46  per  cent.,  are  males  ;  286,  or  less  than  54
per  cent.,  are  females  ;  and  28,  or  between  5  and  6  per  cent.,  are  ministers  of  religion.
The  slight  preponderance  of  female  informants  may  probably  be  due  to  their  having,
as  a  rule,  more  leisure  than  men  for  writing  on  matters  unconnected  with  business.

2  Explicit  denials  have  been  given  by  73  out  of  the  109.  From  22  others  no  answer
has  been  obtained  on  the  point,  either  through  our  own  failure  at  first  to  realise  its
importance,  or  owing  to  death  or  some  unavoidable  cause  ;  but  of  these  22,_  the  majority
have  pretty  clearly  implied  that  what  they  describe  was  a  unique  experience.  Of  the
14  who  can  recall  some  further  instance  or  instances,  4  have  had  a  single  apparently
subjective  hallucination  under  exceptional  conditions  of  bad  health  or  mental  strain ;
3  have  had  one  such  experience  when  in  a  normal  state  ;  and  7  have  had  several  such
experiences — some  of  which,  however,  differed  from  the  telepathic  cases  in  not  representing
a  living  figure,  while  others  were  themselves  either  probably  or  possibly  of  telepathic
origin.  I  may  add  that  in  a  large  number  of  other  cases,  not  given  in  the  actual  words  of
the  percipient,  there  is  very  good  reason  to  believe  the  experiences  to  have  been  unique.

VOL.    II.  B    2


4  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

must  be  made  to  them  separately,  not  together ;  we  must  not,  like  Lord
Brougham,  argue  to  one  class  from  the  data  of  the  other.  I  have  already
applied  the  doctrine  to  a  particular  class  of  dreams,  with  results
which,  though  numerically  striking,  left  room  for  doubt,  owing  to  the
peculiar  untrustworthiness  of  memory  in  dream -matters.  It  remains
to  apply  it  to  the  waking  phantasms;  and  here  I  think  that  the
results  may  fairly  be  held  to  be  decisive.

§  2.  It  is  clear  that  the  points  to  be  settled  are  two: — the
frequency  of  the  phantasms  which  have  markedly  corresponded
with  real  events  ;  and  the  frequency  of  phantasms  which  have  had
no  such  correspondence,  and  have  been  obviously  and  wholly
subjective  in  character.  These  points  are  absolutely  essential  to
any  conclusion  on  the  question  before  us  ;  and  if  not  settled  in  any
other  way,  they  must  be  settled  by  guesses  or  tacit  assumptions.
The  theory  of  chance-coincidence,  as  opposed  to  that  of  telepathy,
has  so  far  depended  on  two  such  assumptions.  The  first  is  that  the
coincidences  themselves  are  extremnely  rare.  They  can  then  be
accounted  for  as  accidental.  For  we  know  that  there  are  such  things
as  hallucinations  representing  human  forms,  which  do  not  correspond
with  any  objective  fact  whatever  outside  the  organism  of  the  per-
cipient ;  and  it  would  be  rash  to  deny  that  the  death  of  the  person
represented  may  now  and  then,  in  the  world's  history,  have  fallen
on  the  same  day  as  the  hallucination.  The  second  assumption  is
that  these  purely  subjective  apparitions  of  forms  are  extremely
common.  It  can  then  be  argued  that  even  a  considerable  number
of  them  might  fall  on  the  same  day  as  the  death  of  the  corresponding
human  being.  Supposing  that  we  could  each  of  us  recall  the  occa-
sional experience  of  gazing  at  friends  or  relatives  in  places  which  were
really  empty,  then — since  people  are  perpetually  dying  who  are  the
friends  and  relatives  of  some  of  us — every  year  might  yield  a
certain  crop  of  the  coincidences.

But  as  soon  as  we  make  these  assumptions  explicit  and  look  at
them,  we  see  how  baseless  and  arbitrary  they  are.  Why  should
either  of  them  be  admitted  without  challenge?  The  second  one
especially  seems  opposed  to  what  we  may  call  the  common-sense
view  of  ordinary  intelligent  men.  The  question  whether  or  not  a
very  large  proportion  of  the  population  have  had  experience  of
morbid  or  purely  subjective  hallucinations  is  one,  I  submit,  where
the  opponents  of  the  chance-theory  might  fairly  take  their  stand


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  5

on  the  ordinary  observation  of  educated  persons,  and  have  thrown
on  others  the  onus  of  proving  them  wrong.  On  this  point  a  broad
view,  based  on  one's  general  knowledge  of  oneself  and  one's  fellows,
does  exist ;  and  according  to  it,  "  spectral  illusions " — distinct
hallucinations  of  the  sense  of  vision — are  very  far  from  the  everyday
occurrences  which  they  would  have  to  be  if  we  are  to  suppose  that,
whenever  they  coincide  in  time  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen,
they  do  so  by  accident.  Nay,  if  we  take  even  one  of  our  critics,  and
bring  him  fairly  face  to  face  with  the  question,  "  If  you  all  at  once
saw  in  your  room  a  brother  whom  you  had  believed  to  be  a  hundred
miles  away  ;  if  he  disappeared  without  the  door  opening ;  and  if
an  hour  later  you  received  a  telegram  announcing  his  sudden  death
— how  should  you  explain  the  occurrence  "  ?  he  does  not  as  a  rule
reply,  "  His  day  and  hour  for  dying  happened  also  to  be  m/ij  day  and
hour  for  a  spectral  illusion,  which  is  natural  enough,  considering
how  common  the  latter  experience  is."  The  line  that  he  takes  is,
"  The  supposition  is  absurd ;  there  are  no  really  authentic  cases  of
that  sort."  Under  the  immediate  pressure  of  the  supposed  facts,  he
instinctively  feels  that  the  argument  of  chance-coincidence  would
not  seem  effective.

Still,  "  common-sense" — though  it  would  support  what  I  say —
is  not  here  the  true  court  of  appeal.  And,  moreover,  it  is  not  unani-
mous. On  the  second  point,  as  on  the  first,  I  have  received  the  most
divergent  replies  from  persons  whom  I  have  casually  asked  to  give  a
guess  on  the  subject ;  and  some  have  guessed  the  frequency  of  the
purely  subjective  hallucinations  as  very  much  below  what  it  actually
is.  The  moral — that  we  cannot  advance  a  step  without  statistics-
seems  pretty  obvious,  though  the  student  of  the  subject  may  read
every  word  that  has  ever  been  published  on  both  sides  of  the
argument  without  encountering  a  hint  of  the  need.  There  is  plenty
of  assertion,  but  no  figures ;  and  a  single  instance,  one  way  or  the
other,  seems  often  to  be  thought  decisive.  To  A,  who  has  himself
seen  a  friend's  form  at  the  time  of  his  death  at  a  distance,  the
connection  between  the  two  facts  seems  obvious;  B,  having  heard  of  a
phantasm  of  a  living  person  which  raised  apprehensions  as  to  his
safety,  but  which  "  came  to  nothing,"  is  at  once  sure  that  A's  case
was  "  a  chance."  I  have  even  seen  this  view  expanded,  and  a  lead-
ing review  gravely  urging  that  the  coincidences  must  be  regarded
as  accidental,  if  against  every  hallucination  which  has  markedly
corresponded  with  a  real  event  we  can  set  another  which  has  not.


6  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

This  is  certainly  a  statistical  argument — of  a  sort — and  might  be
represented  as  follows: — At  the  end  of  an  hour's  rifle-practice  at
a  long-distance  range,  the  record  shows  that  for  every  shot  that
has  hit  the  bull's-eye  another  has  missed  the  target :  therefore  the
shots  that  hit  the  bull's-eye  did  so  by  accident.

§  3.  Perhaps  the  neglect  of  statistics  has  in  part  been  due  to  an
apparent  hopelessness  of  attaining  a  sufficient  quantity  of  reliable  facts
on  which  to  found  an  argument — to  an  idea  that  any  census  on  which
a  conclusion  could  be  founded  would  have  to  be  carried  out  on  a
scale  so  vast  as  to  be  practically  impossible.  "  Do  you  intend,"  I  have
been  sometimes  asked,  "  to  ask  every  man  and  woman  in  England
whether  he  or  she  has  experienced  any  subjective  hallucination
during,  say,  the  last  twenty  years,  and  also  to  get  a  complete  record
of  all  the  alleged  coincidences  within  the  same  period,  and  then  to
compare  the  two  lists  ? "  Happily  nothing  at  all  approaching  this  is
required.  We  shall  find  that  approximately  accurate  figures  are
necessary  only  on  one  point — the  frequency  of  the  subjective  halluci-
nations ;  and  this  can  be  ascertained  by  making  inquiries  of  any
fraction  of  the  population  which  is  large  and  varied  enough  to  serve
as  a  fair  sample  of  the  whole.  Even  this  smaller  task,  however,  is  a
very  tedious  one,  consisting,  as  it  does  for  the  most  part,  in  carefully
registering  negative  information.  The  believer  in  telepathy  may  feel
that  he  is  doing  much  more  to  advance  his  belief  by  narrating  a
striking  positive  instance  at  a  dinner  party  than  by  ascertaining,  for
instance,  from  twenty  of  his  acquaintance  the  dull  fact  that  they  have
never  experienced  a  distinct  visual  hallucination.  Just  in  the  same
way  a  scientific  lecturer  may  win  more  regard  at  the  moment  by  a
sensational  experiment  with  pretty  colours  and  loud  explosions  than
by  laborious  quantitative  work  in  his  laboratory.  But  it  must  be
persistently  impressed  on  the  friends  of  "  psychical  research  "  that  the
laborious  quantitative  work  has  to  be  done  ;  and  it  is  some  satisfaction
to  think  that  the  facts  themselves  may  stand  as  material  for  others  to
deal  with,  even  if  the  conclusions  here  drawn  from  them  are  incorrect.

Nor  has  the  dulness  of  the  work  been  by  any  means  the  only  diffi-
culty :  its  purpose  has  been  widely  misconceived,  and  its  scope  has
thereby  been  much  curtailed.  The  proposal  for  a  numerical  estimate
was  introduced  in  a  circular  letter,  every  word  of  which  might  have
been  penned  by  a  zealous  sceptic,  anxious  above  all  things  to  prove
that,  in  cases  where  the  phantasm  of  a  distant  person  has  appeared


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  7

simultaneously  with  the  person's  death,  the  coincidence  has  been  an
accidental  one.  Not  a  syllable  was  used  implying  that  the  authors  of
the  letter  had  themselves  any  opinion  as  to  whether  phantasms  to
which  no  real  event  corresponds  are  or  are  not  common  things ;  it
was  simply  pointed  out  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  idea  how
common  they  are,  before  deciding  whether  phantasms  to  which  real
events  do  correspond  are  or  are  not  to  be  fairly  accounted  for  by
chance.  And  since  sensory  hallucinations,  whatever  their  frequency,
are  at  any  rate  phenomena  as  completely  admitted  as  measles  or
colour-blindness,  it  did  not  occur  to  us  that  the  following  question
could  possibly  be  misunderstood : —

Since  January  1,  1874,  have  you — when  in  good  health,
free  from  anxiety,  and  completely  awake — had  a  vivid  impression
of  seeing  or  being  touched  by  a  human  being,  or  of  hearing  a
voice  or  sound  ^uhich  suggested  a  human  presence,  when  no  one
was  there  ?     Yes  or  no  ?  ^

Clearly,  the  more  yeses  are  received  to  this  question — i.e.,  the
commoner  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  prove  to  be — the
stronger  is  the  argument  for  chance  as  an  adequate  explanation  of  the
instances  of  coincidence ;  the  more  noes — the  rarer  the  purely
subjective  hallucinations  prove  to  be — the  stronger  the  argument
that  the  death  or  other  crisis  which  coincides  with  the  apparition
is  in  some  way  the  cause  of  the  apparition.  We  should  have
expected,  if  any  injustice  was  to  be  done  us,  that  it  would  have
taken  the  form  of  attributing  to  us  an  inordinate  desire  for  noes.
To  our  amazement  we  found  that  we  were  supposed  to  be  aiming
exclusively  at  yeses — and  not  only  at  yeses,  but  at  yeses  expanded
into  orthodox  "ghost-stories" — to  be  anxious,  in  fact,  that  every  one  in
and  out  of  Bedlam  who  had  ever  imagined  something  that  was  not
there,  or  mistaken  one  object  for  another,  should  tell  us  his  ex-
perience, with  a  view  that  we  might  immediately  interpret  it  as
due  to  the  intervention  of  a  bogey.  A  more  singular  instance  of
the  power  of  expectancy — of  the  power  of  gathering  from  words  any

1  This  comprehensive  question  has  been  actually  asked  in  several  parts.  As  first
put,  for  example,  it  contained  no  limitation  as  to  date — as  I  was  anxious  to  oVjtain
accounts  of  as  many  hallucinations  of  the  sane  as  possible;  and  the  fact  that  any
experience  recorded  had  or  had  not  fallen  within  the  specified  period  of  12  years  was
ascertained  by  subsequent  correspondence.  The  details  of  the  experience  were  also  a
matter  of  subsequent  inquiry.

I  need  hardly  warn  the  reader  not  to  confound  the  group  of  hallucinations  belong
ing  to  the  limited  number  of  persons  who  were  expressly  asked  the  above  question,  with
the  large  collection  of  similar  exxaeriences  which  has  been  frequently  mentioned  in  some
of  the  preceding  chapters.  That  large  collection  includes  the  smaller  group,  and  also
census-cases  which  fell  outside  the  12  years'  limit ;  but  it  includes  also  a  far  larger
number  of  cases  which  were  received  quite  irrespectively  of  the  census.


8  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

meaning  that  a  critic  comes  predisposed  to  find  there — can  hardly
be  conceived.  A  statistical  question  on  a  perfectly  well-recognised
point  in  the  natural  history  of  the  senses  was  treated,  in  scientific
and  unscientific  quarters  alike,  as  a  manifesto  of  faith  in  "  super-
natural "  agencies ;  and  we  found  ourselves  solemnly  rebuked  for  ignor-
ing the  morbid  and  subjective  character  of  many  hallucinations — that
is  to  say,  for  ignoring  the  fact  which  we  had  set  forth  as  the  very  basis
of  our  appeal,  and  from  which  its  whole  and  sole  point  was  derived.
§  4.  If  I  have  dwelt  thus  on  difiiculties  and  misconceptions,  it  is
not  that  I  may  boast  of  having  altogether  triumphed  over  them.  On
the  contrary,  they  have  made  it  impossible  to  attain  more  than  a
fraction  of  what  I  once  hoped.  I  began  with  the  idea  that  the
census  might  be  extended  to  50,000  persons ;  the  group  actually
included  numbers  only  5705.  Still,  though  this  is  certainly  not  a
showy  number,  any  one  who  is  familiar  with  work  in  averages
will,  I  think,  admit  that  it  is  adequate  for  the  purpose ;  and  the
friends  who  have  assisted  in  the  collection  of  the  answers  (to  whom
I  take  this  opportunity  of  offering  my  grateful  thanks)  need
certainly  not  feel  that  their  labour  has  been  in  vain.  It  is  possible
for  a  small  group  to  be  quite  fairly  representative.  Thus,  if  50
males  were  taken  at  random  from  the  inhabitants  of  London,  if  the
heights  of  their  respective  owners  were  measured,  and  added  together,
and  if  the  total  were  divided  by  50,  the  result  might  be  taken  as
representing,  within  extremely  small  limits  of  error,  the  average
height  of  adult  male  Londoners ;  we  should  not  get  a  much
more  correct  result  by  taking  the  mean  of  500,  or  500,000  heights.
This  is  the  simplest  sort  of  case.  When  it  is  a  question  of  what
proportion  of  the  population  have  had  a  certain  experience  which
many  of  them  have  not  had,  we  must  take  a  larger  specimen-
number,  adjusting  it  to  some  extent  by  our  rough  previous  know-
ledge. For  instance,  if  we  want  to  know  what  proportion  of  the
inhabitants  of  London  have  had  typhoid  fever,  it  would  not  be  safe
to  take  50  of  them  at  random,  and  then,  if  we  found  that  10  of
these  had  had  the  illness,  to  argue  that  one-fifth  of  the  inhabitants
of  London  had  had  it.  Our  rough  knowledge  is  that  a  great  many
have  not  had  it,  and  that  a  good  many  have ;  and  in  such  circum-
stances we  should  probably  get  a  very  appreciably  more  certain
result  by  enlarging  our  representative  group  to  500.^      If,  again,  the

1  In  the  recently  issued  Supplement  to  the  Registrar-General's  Reports  for  1870-80.
he  bases  his  conclusions  as  to  the  proportionate  deadliness  of  different  diseases  in  the
various  occupations  on  batches  of  500-1000  deaths.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  9

experience  was  of  extraordinary  rarity,  such  as  leprosy,  the  number
of  our  specimen-group  would  have  to  be  again  increased ;  even  if  we
took  as  many  as  500,000  people  at  random,  that  is  about  one-ninth  of
the  population,  and  ascertained  that  one  of  them  was  a  leper,  it
would  not  be  safe  to  conclude  that  there  were  nine  lepers  in  London.
Now  our  rough  knowledge  as  to  hallucinations  would  place  them  in
this  regard  very  much  more  on  a  par  with  typhoid  fever  than  with
leprosy.  We  realise  that  a  great  many  people  have  not  had  experience
of  them ;  but  we  realise  also  that  they  are  in  no  way  marvellous  or
prodigious  events.  And  if  a  group  of  5705  persons  seems  a  some-
what arbitrary  number  by  which  to  test  their  frequency,  the  view  that
it  is  too  small  and  that  50,000  would  be  greatly  preferable,  is  one
that  can  at  any  rate  hardly  be  held  with  consistency  by  advocates  of
the  theory  of  chance-coincidence.  For  the  main  prop  of  that  theory,
as  we  have  seen,  is  the  assumption  that  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tions are  tolerably  common  experiences ;  whereas  it  is  only  of
decidedly  rare  experiences  that  the  frequency,  in  relation  to  the
whole  population,  would  be  much  more  correctly  estimated  from  the
proportion  of  fifty  thousand  people  that  have  had  them  than  from
the  proportion  of  five  thousand  people  that  have  had  them.  How-
ever, the  adequacy  of  the  latter  number  approves  itself  most  clearly
in  the  course  of  the  census  itself.  We  find  as  we  go  on  that
hallucinations  are  sufficiently  uncommon  to  force  us  to  take  our
specimen-group  of  persons  in  thousands,  not  in  hundreds,  but
not  so  uncommon  as  to  force  us  to  take  very  many  thousands  :
after  the  first  thousand  is  reached  the  proportion  of  "  yeses  "  to
"  noes "  keeps  pretty  uniformly  steady —  as  would,  no  doubt,  be
the  case  if  the  question  asked  related  not  to  hallucinations  but  to
tj^hoid  fever.

As  regards  the  sort  of  persons  from  whom  the  answers  have
been  collected — if  there  have  been  any  answers  from  persons  whose
deficiencies  of  education  or  intelligence  rendered  them  unfit  subjects
for  a  simple  inquiry  bearing  on  their  personal  experience,  they  form,
I  may  confidently  say,  an  inappreciable  fraction  of  the  whole.
Perhaps  a  fourth  of  the  persons  canvassed  have  been  in  the  position
of  shopkeepers  and  artisans  or  employes  of  various  sorts ;  but  the
large  majority  have  belonged  to  what  would  be  known  as  the
educated  class,  being  relatives  and  friends  of  the  various  collectors.  It
is,  no  doubt,  safest  to  assume  that  a  certain  degree  of  education  is  a
pre-requisite  to  even  the  simplest  form  of  participation  in  scientific


10  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

work ;  and  this  condition,  it  will  be  observed,  in  no  way  detracts  from
the  representative  character  of  the  group.  A  few  thousand  educated
persons,  taken  at  random,  present  an  abundantly  sufficient  variety  of
types ;  and,  indeed,  for  the  purpose  in  view,  the  group  is  the  more
truly  representative  for  belonging  mainly  to  the  educated  class,
inasmuch  as  it  is  from  that  class  that  the  majority  of  the  cases
which  are  presented  in  this  work  as  probably  telepathic  are  also  drawn.

§  5.  To  say,  however,  that  the  answers  came  in  the  main  from  an
educated  class,  is  not,  of  course,  a  guarantee  of  the  accuracy  of  the
census ;  and  before  giving  the  actual  results  it  may  be  well  to
forestall  some  possible  objections.

It  may  be  said,  to  begin  with,  that  people  may  have  had  the
experience  inquired  about,  but  may  have  forgotten  the  fact.  This
is  the  objection  which  was  considered  above  in  respect  of  dreams  of
death,  and  which  there  seemed  to  have  decided  force.  In  respect  of
waking  hallucinations  of  the  senses,  its  force  is  very  much  less.  No
doubt  hallucinations  may  exhibit  all  degrees  of  vagueness ;  and  it  is
very  possible  that  extremely  slight  and  momentary  specimens  may
make  little  impression,  and  may  rapidly  be  forgotten ;  but  for  the
purposes  of  the  census  it  would  not  in  the  least  matter  that  persons
whose  experience  had  been  of  this  slight  and  momentary  kind  should
answer  no  instead  of  yes.  It  would  have  been  unwise  to  complicate  the
question  asked  by  an  attempt  to  define  the  extent  of  vividness  that  the
hallucination  must  have  reached,  to  be  reckoned  as  an  item  in  our
census;  but  clearly  the  only  subjective  hallucinations  of  which  it
really  concerns  us  to  ascertain  the  frequency  are  those  which  are
in  themselves  as  distinct  and  impressive  as  the  hallucinations  that
we  represent  as  telepathic;  and  any  that  fall  below  this  point  of
distinctness  and  impressiveness  have  no  bearing  on  the  argument.
And,  per  contra,  it  will  be  seen  that  by  not  limiting  the  wording  of
the  question  to  distinct  and  impressive  hallucinations,  the  collector
exposes  himself  to  receiving  the  answer  "  yes  "  from  persons  whose
hallucination  actually  was  very  vague  and  momentary,  but  who  do,
as  it  happens,  remember  its  occurrence.  In  point  of  fact,  this  has
occurred  a  good  many  times ;  and  the  swelling  of  the  list  of  yeses  by
this  means  probably  outweighs  any  losses  of  what  should  have  been
genuine  yeses  through  failure  of  memory.  For  consider  what  such
failure  of  memory  would  imply.  A  fact  of  sight,  hearing,  or  touch,
as  clear  and  unequivocal  as  most  of  the  sensory  impressions  which
we   adduce    as    evidence   for   telepathy,    must   be   very  clear   and


xiii.l  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE,  11

unequivocal  indeed.  And  the  absence  of  the  normal  external  cause
of  such  an  impression,  when  recognised,  can  hardly  fail  to  give
rise  to  genuine  surprise — the  surprise  that  follows  a  novel  and
unaccountable  experience :  this  has  been  the  result  of  almost  all
the  "  telepathic  "  phantasms,  quite  independently  of  the  news  which
afterwards  seemed  to  connect  them  with  reality.  Now,  can  it  be  a
common  thing  for  an  experience  as  unusual  and  surprising  as  this  to
be,  within  a  dozen  years  or  any  shorter  period,  so  utterly  obliterated
from  a  person's  mind  that  his  memory  remains  a  blank,  even  when
he  is  pointedly  asked  to  try  and  recall  whether  he  has  had  such  an
experience  or  not  ?

A  second  objection  is  this.  It  has  been  suggested  that  untrue
answers  may  be  given  by  persons  wishing  to  amuse  themselves  at
our  expense.  Now  I  cannot  deny  that  persons  may  exist  who  would
be  glad  to  thwart  us,  and  amuse  themselves,  even  at  the  cost  of
untruth.  But  when  the  question  is  put,  "  Do  you  remember  having
ever  distinctly  seen  the  face  or  form  of  a  person  known  to  you,  when
that  person  was  not  really  there  ? "  it  is  not  at  once  obvious  whether
the  amusing  untruth  would  be  "  Yes  "  or  "  No."  In  neither  case
would  the  joke  seem  to  be  of  a  very  exhilarating  quality ;  but,  on  the
whole,  I  should  say  that  "  Yes "  would  be  the  favourite,  as  at  any
rate  representing  the  rarer  and  less  commonplace  experience.  "  Yes  "
is,  moreover,  the  answer  which  (as  I  have  explained)  it  has  been  very
generally  thought  that  we  ourselves  preferred;  so  that  to  give  it
might  produce  a  piquant  sense  of  fooling  us  to  the  top  of  our  bent.
But  the  reader  has  seen  that,  so  far  as  the  census  might  be  thus
affected,  it  would  be  affected  in  a  direction  adverse  to  the  telepathic
argument ;  for  the  commoner  the  purely  casual  hallucinations  are
reckoned  to  be,  the  stronger  is  the  argument  that  the  visions  which
correspond  with  real  events  do  so  hy  chance.  And  if  the  number  of
these  coincident  visions  makes  the  chance-argument  untenable,  even
when  the  basis  of  estimation  is  affected  in  the  way  supposed,  a
fortiori  would  this  be  the  case  if  the  yeses  were  reduced  to  their  true
number.

Yet  another  objection  is  that  persons  who  have  had  hallucinations
may  sometimes  be  disinclined  to  admit  the  fact,  and  may  say  "  No  "
instead  of  "  Yes "  in  self-defence.  This  source  of  error  must  be
frankly  admitted ;  but  I  feel  tolerably  confident  that  it  has  not
affected  the  results  to  a  really  detrimental  extent.  Any  reluctance
to  give  the  true  answer  is,  as  a  rule,  observable  at  the  moment ;  and


12  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

in  most  cases  it  disappears  when  the  purpose  of  the  census  is
explained,  and  careful  suppression  of  names  is  guaranteed.  And
against  this  tendency  to  swell  the  noes  may  be  set  several  reasons
why,  quite  apart  from  untruth,  a  census  like  this  is  sure  to  produce
an  unfair  number  of  yeses.  Quite  apart  from  any  wish  to  deceive,  the
very  general  impression  that  yeses  were  what  was  specially  wanted
could  not  but  affect  some  of  the  answers  given,  at  any  rate  to  the
extent  of  causing  indistinct  impressions  to  be  represented  as  vivid
sensory  experiences  ■}  and  it  has  also  led  some  of  those  who  have
aided  in  the  collection  to  put  the  questions  to  persons  of  whom  it  was
known  beforehand  that  their  answer  would  be  yes.  Moreover,
when  question-forms  to  be  filled  up  are  distributed  on  a  large
scale,  it  is  impossible  to  bring  it  home  to  the  minds  of  many
of  the  persons  whose  answer  would  be  "  No  "  that  there  is  any
use  in  recording  that  answer.  They  probably  have  a  vague  idea
that  they  have  heard  "  negative  evidence "  disparaged,  and  fail
to  see  that  every  percentage  in  the  world  involves  it — that  we
cannot  know  that  one  man  in  100  is  six  feet  high  without
evidence  that  99  men  in  100  are  not  six  feet  high.  This  difficulty
has  been  encountered  again  and  again ;  and  on  the  whole  I  have  no
doubt  that  the  proportion  of  yeses  is  decidedly  larger  than  it  ought
to  be.  Fortunately,  incorrectness  on  this  side  need  not  trouble  us — ■
its  only  effect  being  that  the  telepathic  argument,  if  it  prevail,  will
prevail  though  based  on  distinctly  unfavourable  assumptions.

§  6.  And  now  to  proceed  to  the  actual  results  of  the  census,  and
to  the  calculations  based  thereon.  I  will  begin  with  auditory  cases.
Of  the  5705  persons  who  have  been  asked  the  question,  it  appears
that  96  have,  within  the  last  12  years,  when  awake,^  experienced  an
auditory  hallucination  of  a  voice.  The  voice  is  alleged  to  have  been
unrecognised  in  48  cases,  and  recognised  in  44,  in  13  of  which  latter
cases  the  person  whose  voice  seemed  to  be  heard  was  known  to  have
been  dead  for  some  time.     In  the  remaining  4  cases  it  has  been

1  For  instance,  a  lady  who  answers  that  she  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination,  and  is
■written  to -with  the  view  of  finding  out  in  what  it  had  consisted,  then  states  that  "it
was  not  an  auditory  experience,  but  merely  a  feeling  that  something  had  happened."
Here  the  answer  could  be  rectified ;  but  even  the  many  hundreds  of  letters  that  have
been  %vritten  on  the  subject  have  not  served  to  eliminate  all  doubtful  cases.

2  I  have  not  made  a  separate  calculation  for  "borderland  "  cases;  as  the  attempt  to
obtain  separate  statistics  under  that  head  would  have  complicated  the  census,  and  the
only  chance  of  carrying  it  through  successfully  was  to  keep  it  as  simple  as  possible.
The  question  as  to  hallucinations  specially  included  the  condition  of  being  awake ;  but
naturally  some  of  the  experiences  recorded  had  taken  place  when  the  hallucinated  person
was  in  bed  (Vol.  i.,  p.  393).  I  reckon  these  cases  among  the  yeses ;  and  I  include  similar
experiences  in  the  group  of  coincidental  hallucinations  which  appears  later  in  the
calculation.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.  13

impossible  to  discover  whether  the  voice  was  recognised  or  not ;  the
numbers  being  so  even,  I  shall  perhaps  be  justified  in  assigning  2  of
these  to  one  class,  and  2  to  the  other.  The  computation  will  be
clearer  if  we  consider  only  the  cases  in  which  the  voice  was
recognised,  and  the  person  whom  it  suggested  was  living  ;  these,  then
may  be  taken  as  33.  But,  out  of  the  33  persons,  10  ^  profess  to  have
had  the  experience  more  than  once.  Such  cases  of  repetition,  or  at
any  rate  most  of  them,  might  fairly  have  been  disregarded ;  for  since
the  large  majority  of  the  persons  who  have  had  one  of  the  coinci-
dental hallucinations,  which  appear  later  in  the  calculation,  can  recall
no  other  hallucination  besides  that  one,  I  might  in  the  same  propor-
tion confine  the  present  list,  which  consists  wholly  of  non-coincidental
or  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  to  similarly  unique  experiences,
and  leave  out  of  account  those  occurring  to  people  who  seem  rather
more  pre-disposed  to  such  affections.  However,  in  order  to  make
ample  allowance  for  the  possibility  that  the  witnesses  in  the  coinci-
dental cases  may  have  had  subjective  hallucinations  which  they  have
forgotten,  let  us  take  the  repetitions  into  account ;  and  let  us  suppose
each  of  the  10  persons  just  mentioned  to  have  had  4  experiences
of  the  sort  within  the  specified  12  years.  The  most  convenient
way  of  making  this  allowance  will  be  to  add  30  to  the  former  total
of  33 — i.e.,  to  take  the  number  of  persons  who  have  had  the
experience  under  the  given  conditions  as  63.  This  amounts  to  1
in  every  90  of  the  group  of  5705  persons  named,  or  (if  that  group
be  accepted  as  fairly  representative  of  the  population  of  this  country)
1  in  every  90  of  the  population.

Let  us  now  see  what  the  proportion  of  the  population  who  have
had  such  an  experience  ought  to  be,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the
similar  impressions  of  recognised  voices  presented  in  this  book  as
telepathic  were  really  chance-coincidences.  As  before  in  the  case
of  dreams  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  303-7),  I  take  cases  where  the  coincidence  of
the  hallucination  was  with  death — the  reasons  for  this  selection  being

(1)  that  death  is  the  prominent  event  in  our  telepathic  cases ;  and

(2)  that  for  the  purpose  of  an  accurate  numerical  estimate  it  is
important  to  select  an  event  of  a  very  definite  and  unmistakeable
kind,  such  as  only  happens  once  to  each  individual.  Again  also,  in
accordance  with  the  official  returns  which  give  jfl^  as  the  annual
death-rate,  the  proportion  of   anyone's  relatives  and  acquaintances

^  Some  of  these  cases  were  quite  clearly  "  after-images  "  (see  Vol.  i.,  p.  502).  One
informant  describes  the  impressions  as  very  faint,  and  another  experienced  them  only
when  over-tired.


U  TEE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

who  die  in  the  course  of  12  years  is  taken  as  —^  ;  and  as  we
have  seen  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  305-6),  it  will  make  no  appreciable  difference
to  the  calculation  whether  a  person's  circle  of  relatives  and  acquaint-
ances, the  voice  of  any  one  of  whom  his  hallucination  may  represent,
is  large  or  small.  The  probability,  then,  that  a  person  hallucinated
in  the  way  supposed  will,  by  accident,  have  his  hallucination  within
12  hours  on  either  side  of  the  death  of  the  relative  or  acquaintance
whose  voice  it  represents,  is  1  in  ^'^  ^  ^H^  ^°°°,  or  fg^^.  That  is
to  say,  each  coincidental  hallucination  of  the  sort  in  question  implies
16,590  purely  subjective  cases  of  the  same  type.  Now  our  collection
may  be  reckoned  to  include  13  first-hand  and  well-attested  coinci-
dental cases  of  this  kind,  which  have  occurred  in  this  country  within
the  specified  time.^  On  the  hypothesis,  therefore,  that  these  cases
were  accidental,  the  circle  of  persons  from  whom  they  are  drawn  ought
to  supply  altogether,  in  the  specified  12  years,  215,670  examples.

The  next  point  to  decide  is  the  size  of  the  circle  from  which  our
coincidental  cases  are  drawn.  The  number  here  is  not  one  that  it  is
possible  to  estimate  accurately:  what  must  be  done,  therefore,  is  to
make  sure  that  our  margin  is  on  the  side  adverse  to  the  telepathic
argument,  i.e.,  to  take  a  number  clearly  in  excess  of  the  true  one.
Our  chief  means  of  obtaining  information  has  been  by  occasional
requests  in  newspapers.  A  million-and-a-half  would  probably  be
an  outside  estimate  of  the  circulation  of  the  papers  which  have
contained  our  appeals ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  every  para-
graph in  a  paper  is  studied  by  every  person,  or  by  a  tenth  of  the
persons,  whom  the  paper  reaches.  However,  I  will  make  the
extreme  assumption  that  as  many  as  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  people
have  by  this  means  become  aware  of  the  kind  of  evidence  that
was  being  sought — an  assumption  which  probably  arrogates  to  us
who  sought  it  many  times  as  much  fame  as  we  really  possess ;  and
I  will  allow  another  50,000  for  those  who  have  become  aware  of
the  object  of  our  work  through  private  channels.  This  would  raise
the  number  of  the  circle  from  whom  our  evidence  is  drawn  to
300,000,  or  about   sV  of  the  adult  population.^       No  one,  I  think,

1  Nos.  33,  158,  184,  190,  197,  272,  273,  278,  298,  300,  310,  340,  702.  In  one  of  these  cases,
No.  197,  it  is  possible,  on  the  facts  stated,  that  the  12  hours'  limit  was  slightly  exceeded.
I  have  not  included  case  613,  as,  though  there  were  only  a  very  few  people  by  whom  the
percipient  could  have  been  addressed  as  "Pa," — which  was  the  word  he  heard — and
one  of  these  died  at  the  time  at  a  distance,  the  father  did  not  identify  the  voice  with  the
particular  son  who  died.

2  In  the  "adult  population"!  mean  to  include  all  persons  above  15  years  of  age.
In  the  Supplement  to  the  45th  Annual  Report  of  the  Registrar-General,  p.  xix.,  the
proportion  of  such  persons  is  given  as  "64  of  the  whole  ;  which  would  make  their  number
about  24,000,000.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHAFCE-COINCIDENGE.  15

will  maintain  on  reflection,  that  I  am  taking  too  low  an  estimate.
Would  anyone,  for  instance,  suppose  that  if  he  canvassed  the  first
1000  adults  whom  he  met  in  the  streets  of  any  large  town,  he  would
find  that  12  or  13  of  them  had,  within  the  last  three  years,  been  aware
of  what  we  wanted,  and  of  the  address  to  which  information  might  be
sent  ?  and  for  rural  districts  such  a  supposition  would  be  even  more
violent.  But  I  am  further  supposing  that  this  area  of  300,000  persons
has  been  drained  dry — again  an  extravagant  concession  ;  for  though
it  is  easily  assumed  that  anyone  who  has  ever  had  a  "  psychical  "  ex-
perience is  desirous  to  publish  it  abroad,  as  a  matter  of  fact  people  do
not  usually  take  the  trouble  to  write  a  letter  about  family  and  personal
matters  to  perfect  strangers,  on  the  ground  of  a  newspaper  appeal ;
and  I  have  already  mentioned  that  we  ourselves  know  of  much
evidence  which  the  reluctance  or  indifference  of  the  parties  concerned
has  made  unavailable  for  our  collection  ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  doubt
that  much  more  remains  unelicited  even  among  those  whom  our
appeal  has  reached.  A  further  strong  argument  for  the  existence
of  these  unelicited  facts  is  the  very  large  proportion  of  our  actual
cases  that  has  been  drawn  from  a  circle  of  our  own,  unconnected
with  "psychical"  inquiry — from  the  friends,  or  the  friends'  friends,
of  a  group  of  some  half-dozen  persons  who  have  had  no  such  ex-
periences themselves,  and  who  have  no  reason  to  suppose  their  friends
or  their  friends'  friends  better  supplied  with  them  than  anybody  else's.^
Here,  then,  is  the  conclusion  to  which  we  shall  be  driven,  if  our
coincidental  cases  were  really  purely  subjective  hallucinations,  and
the  coincidence  was  an  accident : — that  in  a  circle  of  300,000,  within
12  years,  215,670  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  type  in  question
have  taken  place  ;  that  is  that,  on  an  average,  7  persons  in  every  10
have  had  such  an  experience  within  the  time.  But  the  result  of  the
census  above  described  showed  the  proportion  to  be  1  person  in  every
90  only.     Thus  the  theory  of  chance-coincidence,   as  applied  to  this

1  An  approximation  to  an  estimate  of  the  actual  circle  whom  we  have  effectively
reached  may  perhaps  be  made  as  follows : — Of  the  24  coincidental  dreams  of  death,
mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  .307,  4  were  derived  from  a  canvassed  group  of  5360  persons;
of  the  13  coincidental  auditory  hallucinations  mentioned  above,  none  were  derived  from
the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons ;  and  of  27  coincidental  visual  hallucinations
(of  a  definite  type  to  be  explained  immediately),  1  was  derived  from  a  canvassed
group  of  5705  persons.  Thus  of  64  coincidental  experiences  of  specified  sorts,  5,  or  about
one-thirteenth,  were  obtained  by  canvassing  a  body  which  (to  take  a  mean)  we  may  call
5535  :  we  may  surmise,  then,  that  the  circle  from  whom  the  whole  number  were  drawn
amounts  to  about  13  times  5535,  or  71,955.  This  is  no  doubt  a  very  rough  calculation ;
the  number  of  coincidental  (or,  as  we  should  say,  telepathic)  experiences  yielded  by  a
random  group  of  5535  persons  being  too  small  for  us  to  be  confident  that  it  represents
the  average  proportion  in  other  groups  of  the  same  size.  But  the  estimate  is  probably  not
so  inexact  but  that  it  may  safely  be  taken  as  showing  the  assumption  of  300,000,  made  in
the  text,  to  be  extravagantly  unfair  to  the  telepathic  argument.


16  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

class  of  cases,  would  require  that  the  proportion  of  those  who  have  not
had,  to  those  who  have  had,  a  subjective  hallucination  of  a  recognised
voice  should  be  63  times  as  large  as  it  has  been  shown  to
be ;  that  is,  would  require  either  that  the  subjective  hallucinations
should  be  63  times  as  numerous  as  they  actually  are,  or  else
that  the  circle  from  whom  our  coincidental  cases  are  drawn  should
amount  to  63  times  the  assumed  size — in  other  words,  that  our
existence  and  objects  should  have  been  prominently  before  the
minds  of  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  adult  population  of  the  country !
Another  form  of  the  estimate  is  as  follows.  The  probability  that
a  person,  taken  at  random,  will,  in  the  course  of  12  years,  have  the
form  of  hallucination  in  question  is  ^;  the  probability  that  any
assigned  member  of  the  general  population,  and  therefore  any
particular  person  whose  phantasmal  voice  is  heard,  will  die  within
12  hours  of  an  assigned  point  of  time  is  iMo  ^  sis;  hence  the
probability  that,  in  the  course  of  12  years,  a  hallucination  of  this
form  and  the  death  of  the  person  whose  voice  seems  to  be  heard
will  fall  within  12  hours  of  one  another  is  ^  x  iMo  ^  shs,  or  almost
exactly  1  in  1,500,000.  And  the  circle  from  which  our  coincidental
cases  are  drawn  is  assumed  to  be  300,000.  From  these  data  it  may
be  calculated  that  the  odds  against  the  occurrence,  by  accident,  of  as
many  coincidences  of  the  t5rpe  in  question  as  that  circle  produced,  are
more  than  a  trillion  to  1.

\  7.  But  the  reductio  ad  ahsurdum  becomes  far  more  striking
when  we  apply  the  doctrine  of  chances  to  visual  cases.  Out  of  the
5705  persons  taken  at  random,  of  whom  the  above  question  was  asked,
only  21  could  recall  having,  in  the  conditions  named  and  within  the
specified  12  years,  experienced  a  visual  hallucination  representing  a
living  person  known  to  them.  But  two  of  the  21  had  had  2
experiences  of  the  sort ;  so  let  us  take  the  total  as  23.-^  That  is,  the
experience  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  one  248th  of  the  group  of
persons  asked,  or,  if  that  group  be  fairly  representative,  to  1  person  in
every  248  of  the  population.^     Now,  just  as  before,  each  coincidental

1  This  is  a  liberal  allowance ;  for  it  includes  several  cases  where  there  was  such  an
amount  of  anxiety  or  expectancy  on  the  part  of  the  hallucinated  person  as  would  prevent
us,  if  it  were  present  in  a  coincidental  case,  from  including'  such  a  case  in  our  telepathic
evidence.  In  7  of  the  cases,  the  form  seen  was  an  "  af ter-imag'e  "  of  what  had  been,  for
some  time  previously,  part  of  the  perceiver's  daily  visual  experience.

2  It  will  be  seen  that  1  in  248,  though  a  small  proportion,  is  yet  quite  large  enough  to
make  it  likely  that  most  of  us  should  casually  have  heard  of  a  case  or  two  of  the  kind.
For  there  are  probably  more  than  248  jDersons  whom  we  are  each  of  us  sufficiently  near  to
make  it  natural  that  an  unusual  experience — such  as  a  distinct  "spectral  illusion" —
befalling  one  of  them,  should  directly  or  indirectly  reach  our  ears.  This  is  worth  noting,
because  one  sometimes  hears  the  statement,  "  Why  /  heard  the  other  day  of  a  person


-xiii.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  17

hallucination  of  the  sort  in  question,  supposing  it  to  have  been
purely  subjective  and  the  coincidence  to  have  been  accidental,  should
stand  for  16,590  purely  subjective  hallucinations.  But  our  collection
includes  31  first-hand^  and  well-attested  coincidental  cases  of  this
type,  which  have  occurred  in  this  country  within  the  specified  time  ;^
and  the  circle  of  persons  from  whom  they  were  drawn — liberally
supposed,  as  before,  to  number  300,000 — ought,  therefore,  to  supply
altogether,  in  the  specified  12  years,  514,290  examples.  That  is  to
say,  it  ought  to  have  happened  on  an  average  to  everybody  once,
and  to  most  people  twice,  within  the  given  time,  distinctly  to  see  an
absent  relation  or  acquaintance  in  a  part  of  space  that  was  actually
vacant.  But  the  census  has  shown  that,  within  the  given  time,  only
about  1  in  every  248  persons  has  had  such  an  experience  even  once.
Thus  the  group  of  visual  coincidental  cases  now  in  question,  if  ascribed
to  accident,  would  require  either  that  the  subjective  hallucinations
should  be  more  than  396  times  as  numerous  as  they  actually  are ;
or  else  that  the  circle  from  whom  our  coincidental  cases  are  drawn
should  amount  to  more  than  396  times  the  assumed  size — in  other
words,  that  our  existence  and  objects  should  have  been  prominently
before  the  minds  of  every  adult  member  of  a  population  5  times  as
large  as  the  existing  one.

The  second  form  of  estimate  in  the  last  section,  applied  to  visual
cases,  will  give  as  the  probability  that  the  hallucination  and  the
death  will  fall  within  12  hours  of  one  another,  „^g  x  ^^  x  ^^  or
1  in  4,114,545.  And  the  circle  from  which  our  coincidental  cases
are  drawn  is  assumed  to  be  300,000.  From  these  data  it  may  be
calculated  that  the  odds  against  the  occurrence,  by  accident,  of  as  many
coincidences  of  the  type  in  question  as  the  31  which  that  circle  pro-
duced, are  about  a  thousand  billion  trillion  trillion  trillions  to  1.
Or,  to  put  it  in  yet  another  way — the  theory  of  chances,  which  gives  1
as  the  most  probable  number  of  coincidences  of  the  type  in  question
for  every  4,114,545  of  the  population  to  yield,  will  give  6  as  the  most

who  had  been  disturbed  by  seeing  an  apparition  of  a  friend,  and  nothing  came  of  it,"
made  as  though  it  amounted  to  a  proof  that  such  experiences  were  common  enough  to
afford  scope  for  any  number  of  marked  coincidences.

1  In  3  of  the  cases  the  evidence  is  not  first-hand  from  the  percipient,  but  is  of  the
nature  described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  148.

2  Nos.  26,  27,  28,  29,  170,  172,  173,  174,  175,  182,  184,  195,  197,  199,  201,  202,  214,  231,
236,  237,  238,  240,  249,  298,  300,  350,  355,  695,  697,  702,  and  the  case  described  in  Vol.  i.,p.
130,  note.  As  regards  recognition,  Nos.  170  and  355  do  not  stand  on  quite  the  same  ground
as  the  other  cases.  I  am  not  reckoning  case  241,  where  the  recognition,  such  as  it  was,
was  retrospective ;  nor  case  500,  where  it  seems  at  any  rate  as  likely  as  not  that  the  12
hours'  limit  was  somewhat  exceeded.  In  3  cases,  Nos.  197,  201,  231,  it  is  possible,  on  the
facts  stated,  that  the  limit  was  exceeded  ;  but  in  the  two  latter  cases  this  is  very  impro-
bable, and  the  coincidence  may  have  been  exact.

VOL.    II.  C


18  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

probable  number  for  the  whole  adult  population  to  yield,  within
the  given  period.  Yet  we  draw  more  than  5  times  that  number  from
a  fraction  of  the  adult  population  which  can  only  by  an  extravagantly
liberal  estimate  be  assumed  to  amount  to  an  80th  part  of  the  whole,
and  which  has  been  very  inadequately  canvassed.

§  8.  In  the  above  estimates,  I  have  allowed  to  the  so-called
coincidence  the  rather  wide  limit  of  12  hours.  But  in  most  of  the
actual  cases  it  has  been  much  closer  than  this  ;  and  it  will  be  worth
while  to  show  how  a  single  case  of  very  close  coincidence  may
legitimately  strengthen  the  argument.  First,  it  must  be  unre-
servedly admitted  that  a  single  case,  if  it  stood  alone  and  no  similar
one  had  ever  been  heard  of,  would  have  no  cogency  whatever  as
evidence  of  the  operation  of  anything  beyond  chance.  The  most
extraordinary  coincidence,  as  above  remarked,  may  yet  be  totally
insignificant.  The  a  priori  improbability  that  the  tallest  man  of  the
century  will  be  born  during  a  transit  of  Venus  is  enormous  ;  but  such
a  conjunction  of  events,  if  it  happened,  might  be  at  once  and  with
moral  certainty  ascribed  to  accident ;  and  wdth  equal  certainty  might
it  be  predicted  that  such  a  conjunction  would  never  recur.  And
without  resorting  to  imaginary  examples,  we  often  encounter
conjunctions  and  coincidences  which  would  have  appeared,  before
they  happened,  to  be  extremely  improbable,  but  the  happening  of
which  is  none  the  less  clearly  accidental.  The  odds  are  very  great
against  two  of  the  foremost  men  in  a  century  being  born  on  the  same
day ;  yet  this  happened  in  the  case  of  Darwin  and  Lincoln,  and  no
one  imagines  that  one  birth  depended  on  the  other.  "  Extraordinary
coincidences  "  are,  in  fact,  quite  ordinary  things ;  and  only  when
previous  experience  has  given  us  ground  for  suspecting  (however
faintly)  that  the  conjunction  in  time  or  special  combination  is  due  to
some  positive  causal  link,  can  we  connect  the  a  priori  improbability
of  a  new  case  with  an  a  posteriori  argument  that  cases  of  that
type    are   not   due    to   chance.^      Now  the  result   of  §  7   may  be

1  In  a  general  way,  coincidences  where  previous  experience  affords  some  ground  for
suspecting  (however  faintly)  a  cause  other  than  chance  are  distinguished  from  coin-
cidences where  no  such  ground  exists  by  this  fact — that  the  latter  sort  of  cases,  if
A  priori  highly  improbable,  are  not  mentioned  or  described  until  after  they  have  happened.
From  the  mere  fact  that  they  do  not  belong  to  any  known  or  surmised  type,  they  do  not
enter  into  anyone's  head  :  no  one  suggests,  without  any  sort  of  grounds,  that  a  particular
thing  will  happen  to  some  one  at  a  particular  time,  or  predicts  any  particular  highly
improbable  coincidence,  and  then  afterwards  finds  this  thing  or  this  coinci-
dence actually  occurring.  Now  it  will  scarcely  be  contended  that  the  co-
incidence of  an  apparition  with  the  death  of  the  person  seen  is  a  combination  of  events
which  has  never  entered  anyone's  head  ;  for  it  has  entered  the  heads  even  of  those  who
deny  that  it  has  ever  occurred,  or  who  ascribe  its  occurrence  to  accident.  But  the  idea
lias  of    course  had   much  more  than  this    negative  sort  of  existence  ;  there  has  been  a


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  19

summarised  as  follows.  The  census  leads  us  to  infer  that,  during
the  years  1874-85,  out  of  300,000  inhabitants  of  this  country
taken  at  random,  ^^  ^05°'°°°  *^^  ^'^0^  have  had  a  recognised  visual
hallucination,  representing  a  living  person,  which  did  not  coin-
cide with  the  death  of  that  person.  And  during  the  same  period,
out  of  the  same  number  of  persons  (supposing  our  inquiries  really
to  have  extended  to  so  wide  a  circle,)  at  least  31  have  had  a
recognised  visual  hallucination  which  did  coincide — in  the  sense  of
falling  withing  12  hours  of — the  death  of  the  person  seen.  That  is,  out
of  1209-1-31  or  1240  hallucinations,  31,  or  1  in  40,  have  fallen  within
12  hours  of  the  death  of  the  person  seen.  Now  let  us  apply  this
conclusion  to  case  28  (Vol.  I.,  p.  210).  When  Mr.  S.  had  his  visual
hallucination  representing  his  friend,  he  would  have  been  justified  in
regarding  the  probability  that  his  friend  would  prove  to  have  died
within  12  hours  of  the  vision  as  1  in  40 ;  whereas,  if  there  was  no
ground  at  all  for  surmising  that  a  causal  connection  may  exist  be-
tween deaths  and  apparitions,  he  would  only  have  been  justified  in
regarding  the  probability  of  his  friend's  dying  on  that  day  as  about
1  in  20,440 — estimated  from  the  death-rate  which  tables  of  mortality
give  for  men  of  his  friend's  age  (48  years).  But  it  will  be  observed
that  the  death  and  the  apparition,  for  aught  we  know,  were  abso-
lutely simultaneous,  and  at  any  rate  were  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour
of  one  another.  Since,  however,  the  death  may  have  occurred  12
minutes  before  or  12  minutes  after  the  apparition,  we  must
take  into  account  the  double  period ;  or,  to  allow  for  difference
of  clocks,  let  us  say  half-an-hour.  Now,  on  the  supposition
that  telepathy  is  a  reality  in  the  world,  closeness  of  coincidence
rather  increases  than  otherwise  the  probability  that  the  death
and  the  apparition  in  any  particular  case  are  causally  connected ;
whereas  the  probability  of  a  death  accidentally  falling  in  a  particular
half-hour  is,  of  course,  48  times  less  than  that  of  its  falling  on  a
particular  day.  Thus  the  a  priori  probability  that  the  death,  if  uncon-
nected with  the  apparition,  would  fall  in  the  particular  half-hour  in
which  the  apparition  fell,  was  1  in  981,120  ;  and  in  considering  the
question  of  connection,  it  is  this  extremely  small  degree  of  probability
which  has  to  be  contrasted  with  the  1  in  40  which  we  have  taken  as


good  deal  of  positive  belief  that  such  combinations  occur,  and  that  their  occurrence  implies
a  causal  connection  between  the  death  and  the  apparition.  And  though  this  belief  may
have  been  rash  and  premature  before  the  necessary  statistics  had  been  obtained,  I  have
tried  in  the  last  two  sections  to  show  that  it  may  now  be  justified  by  precise  calculation.

VOL.    II.  c    2


20  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.        [chap.

about  the  true  a  iDriori  probability  that  this  particular  half-hour
would  prove  to  be  that  of  the  death.

But  the  significance  of  extreme  closeness  of  coincidence  may  be
yet  more  strikingly  suggested,  if  we  consider  the  probability  of  the
joint  event  before  either  part  of  it  has  occurred.  My  census  gives  ^\s
as  the  probability  that  a  particular  individual  would  within  12  years
have  a  visual  hallucination  of  a  friend  not  known  to  be  dead.  Mr.  S.
has,  say,  x  friends,  of  whom  about  a  fourth  would  naturally  die  in
this  period  ;  and  the  period  comprises  210,240  half-hours.  Thus  the
probability  of  Mr.  S.'s  hitting  off  by  chance  such  a  coincidence  as  he
did  hit  off  was  aia  X  i  X  |  X  ^t^wIq'  o^  about  1  in  208  millions.^
It  might,  I  think,  be  safely  said  that,  in  the  world's  history,  no  one
has  ever  contemplated  the  possible  participation  of  himself,  or  of  any
other  specified  person,  in  an  event  of  this  degree  of  unlikelihood,  and
has  afterwards  found  his  idea  realised.  But  apart  from  this,  the  points
to  be  specially  weighed  are  (1)  that  Mr.  S.'s  case  was  drawn  from  a  very
inconsiderable  fraction  of  the  population — a  fraction  liberally  estimated
at  sV  ;  and  (2)  that  this  fraction  of  the  population  has  supplied  many
other  parallel  instances  of  great  closeness  of  coincidence.  Taking  only
the  "borderland"  and  waking  phantasms  recorded  on  first-hand  testi-
mony in  the  main  body  of  this  work,  I  find  that  66  of  them  are  repre-
sented as  having  occurred  within  an  hour  of  the  event  on  the  agent's
side — which  event  in  41  of  the  66  cases  was  death;  15  more,  according
to  the  facts  stated,  were  within  two  hours  of  the  event,  which  in  10  of
the  15  cases  was  death  ;  and  in  nearly  all  these  cases,  as  well  as  in
several  others,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  coincidence  was  absolutely
exact.  I  do  not  forget,  what  I  have  expressly  pointed  out  in  Chapter
IV.,  that  exaggeration  of  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  is  a  likely
form  for  exaggeration  in  such  matters  to  take  f  but  in  a  considerable

1  The  denominator  of  the  third  of  the  four  fractions  which  are  multiplied  together
will  diminish  or  increase  according  as  the  period  considered  is  longer  or  shorter  than  12
years.  Otherwise  the  length  of  the  period  is  not  material ;  since  the  first  fraction  may-
be assumed  to  vary  inversely  with  the  last.

The  death,  it  will  be  observed,  might  happen  in  any  half -hour  ;  and  therefore  the
total  of  half -hours  must  be  reckoned,  without  deduction  of  those  in  which  a  waking
hallucination  would  be  impossible  —as  in  sleep  ;  or  of  those  in  which  it  would  be  specially
improbable — as  during  conversation  or  active  exercise.  The  case  is  like  that  of  drawing
two  tickets  simultaneously  from  two  bags,  one  of  which  contains  the  numbers  frjm_  1  to
100,  and  the  other  the  niimbers  from  1  to  1000.  The  probability  that  the  two  tickets
drawn  will  bear  the  same  number  is  not  x^^  but  xinju-  I  neglect  the  remote  chance  that
several  friends  might  die  in  one  half -hour — which,  however,  can  be  shown  not  to  affect
the  result.

-  Thus  it  would  be  quite  unjustifiable  to  add  to  the  list  a  number  of  cases  in  the
Supplement  where  the  coincidence  is  stated  to  have  been  exact.  Still  the  Supplement
contains  several  accounts— c.r/.,  Nos.  508,  510,  569,  584,  599— which  may  fairly  be  assumed
to  be  correct  in  this  particular.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  21

number  of  the  cases  mentioned,  good  reason  is  shown  for  believing
it  to  have  been  as  close  as  is  stated.

But  the  huge  total  of  improbability  is  nothing  like  complete.
Nothing  has  been  said  of  the  aggregate  strength  of  the  cases  where
the  phantasm  was  unrecognised.  Nothing  has  been  said  of  the  large
array  of  cases  where  the  coincident  event  was  not  death,  but  some
other  form  of  crisis — a  class  which  does  not  lend  itself  easily  to  a
precise  numerical  estimate,  but  whose  collective  force,  even  if  it  stood
alone,  would  be  very  great.  Once  more,  each  of  the  two  classes  of
cases — the  "  reciprocal  "  and  the  "  collective  " — which  still  await  dis-
cussion, includes  specimens  of  visual  and  auditory  phantasms  ;  and
some  of  these  afford  an  immensely  higher  probability  for  a  cause  other
than  chance,  than  the  more  ordinary  cases  where  only  one  person  is
impressed.  For  the  improbability  of  one  sort  of  coincidence,  that
between  B's  unusual  hallucination  and  A's  condition — has  now  to  be
multiplied  by  the  improbability  of  another  sort  of  coincidence,  that
between  B's  hallucination  and  a  second  unusual  impression  (whether  a
hallucination  or  of  some  other  form)  on  the  part  of  A  or  C.  Nor
even  so  will  the  argument  for  telepathic  phantasms  be  nearly
exhausted.  For  it  will  have  been  observed  that  throughout  I  have
been  taking  into  account  nothing  beyond  the  bare  facts  of  the  death
and  the  hallucination,  and  altogether  neglecting  the  correspondences
of  detail  which  in  some  cases  add  indefinitely,  and  almost  infinitely,
to  the  improbability  of  the  chance  occurrence.

It  would  be  very  easy  to  amplify  this  reasoning,  and  to  extend  and
vary  the  computations  themselves ;  but  the  specimens  given  are
perhaps  sufficient.  They  cannot  possibly  be  made  interesting  ;  but
they  are  indispensable  if  the  question  is  ever  to  be  set  at  rest,  and  the
appeal  to  the  doctrine  of  chances  to  be  anything  better  than  empty
words.  Figures,  one  is  sometimes  told,  can  be  made  to  prove
anything ;  but  I  confess  that  I  should  be  curious  to  see  the  figures
by  which  the  theory  of  chance-coincidence  could  here  be  proved  ade-
quate to  the  facts.  Whatever  group  of  phenomena  be  selected,  and
whatever  method  of  reckoning  be  adopted,  the  estimates  founded  on
that  theory  are  hopelessly  and  even  ludicrously  overpassed.  With  so
enormous  a  margin  to  draw  on,  there  is  no  particular  temptation  to
exaggerate  the  extent  to  which  the  evidence  for  the  phenomena
is  to  be  relied  on.  In  some  cases  it  is  possibly  erroneous ;  in  many
it  is  undoubtedly  incomplete  ;  narratives  may  have  been  admitted
which  a  more  sagacious  criticism  would  have  excluded.     But  after


22  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  [chap.

all  allowances  and  deductions,  the  conclusion  that  our  collection
comprises  a  large  number  of  coincidences  which  have  had  some  other
cause  than  chance  will  still,  I  believe,  be  amj)ly  justified.-^

I  9.  But  I  have  not  yet  done.  There  are  considerations  of  a
quite  different  kind  which  still  further  strengthen  the  argument  for
telepathy  as  against  chance.  At  the  close  of  the  last  chapter,  I
briefly  referred  to  certain  points  of  contrast  between  the  telepathic
and  the  purely  subjective  class  of  hallucinations.  I  have  now  to  take
up  this  thread  and  to  show  that,  though  the  hallucinations  which
may  be  regarded  as  telepathic  or  veridical  include  many  cases  which
may  differ  from  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  only  in
the  fact  of  being  veridical,  yet  the  group,  as  a  whole,  presents  some
well-marked  peculiarities.

The  first  of  these  peculiarities  is  the  great  'preponderance
of  visual  cases.  Among  hallucinations  of  the  insane,  the  proportion
of  auditory  to  visual  cases  is  often  given  as  about  3  to  1 ;
this  estimate,  however,  seems  to  have  been  merely  copied  by
one  writer  from  another  since  the  days  of  Esquirol ;  and  I  am
not  aware  that  any  statistics,  on  a  large  scale,  have  been  obtained  or
published.  Dr.  Savage,  however,  tells  me  that  he  thinks  that  this  is
about  the  usual  proportion  at  Bethlem  Hospital ;  and  Dr.  Lockhart
Robertson  writes  to  me,  "  Esquirol  has  put  the  proportion  lower  than
I  should  do,  I  should  say  5  to  1  at  least ;  auditory  hallucinations
are  very  frequent,  visual  rare."  With  respect  to  the  transient  hallu-
cinations of  the  sane,  so  far  as  the  results  of  my  census  are  accepted,
there  is  no  doubt  on  the  matter.  We  have  seen  that,  out  of  5705
persons  taken  at  random,  46  proved  to  have  had,  within  the  last  12
years,  an  auditory  hallucination  of  the  "  recognised  "  type,  of  whom  10
had  had  the  experience  more  than  once ;  and  only  21  a  visual  one,
of  whom  2  had  had  the  experience  more  than  once.  It  becomes,  then,
at  once  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  of  the  hallucinations  which,  with-
in the  same  period,  have  coincided  with  real  events,  31  should  be
visual,  and  only  13  auditory — or  26  and  8,  if  we  omit  5  which  affected
both  senses  ;  while  the  whole  collection  of  numbered  cases  in  this  work
includes  271  phantasms  which  were  visual  without  any  auditory  element,
and  85  only  which  were  auditory  without  any  visual  element.      This

1  I  have  given  no  separate  estimate  of  the  coincidental  cases  which  happened  before
•Jan.  1,  1874  ;  as  to  do  so  would  have  been  simply  to  reproduce  the  reasonings  of  §§  6  and
7  with  rather  less  striking  results.  Nor  have  I  taken  account  of  the  experiences^  of
foreigners,  as  these  could  not  be  brought  into  relation  to  statistics  on  subjective
hallucinations  belonging  to  this  one  country.  But  these  further  cases  have  a  true
force  of  their  own,  in  indicating  the  general  diffusion  of  the  phenomena.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  23

difference  would  alone  be  a  serious  objection  to  explaining  the  coinci-
dences as  accidental.  Nor  could  the  advocates  of  the  chance-theory
fairly  evade  the  objection  by  attributing  the  inversion  of  the  ordinary
proportion  to  faults  of  evidence.  For  why  should  evidence  be  faulty  in
this  partial  and  one-sided  way?  Why  should  people's  memories  deceive
them  more  as  to  the  fact  of  having  seen  something  on  a  particular  day
than  as  to  the  fact  of  having  heard  something  ?  On  the  telepathic
theory,  on  the  other  hand,  the  peculiarity  seems  to  admit  of  explana-
tion. The  majority  of  the  auditory  cases,  in  transient  hallucinations  of
the  sane,  are  of  hearing  the  name  called,  or  of  hearing  some  short
familiar  phrase ;  and  of  such  cases,  as  we  saw  above  (Vol.  I.,  pp.
489-90),  the  most  natural  physiological  explanation  is  that  they  are
not  produced  by  a  downward  stimulation  from  the  higher  tracts  of
the  brain,  but  are  due  to  a  sudden  reverberation  at  the  sensory  centre
itself,  which  is  readily  excited  to  vibrations  of  a  familiar  type.  The
telepathic  hallucinations,  on  the  other  hand,  were  traced  (as  far  as
their  development  in  the  percipient  is  concerned)  to  a  stimulation
passing  downwards  to  the  sensory  centres  from  the  higher  or
ideational  tracts  of  the  brain.  There  is,  then,  no  difficulty  in
supposing  that  the  auditory  centre  is  more  prone  than  the  visual
to  spontaneous  recrudescence  of  vibrations ;  but  that  the  downward
excitation,  which  hurries  ideas  and  images  on  into  delusive  sensory
percepts,  finds  a  readier  passage  to  the  visual  centre  than  to  the
auditory — or  at  any  rate  that,  where  the  idea  of  a  particular
individual  is  to  be  abnormally  embodied  in  a  sensory  form,  it  is
more  natural  and  direct  to  visualise  it,  in  a  shape  that  conveys
his  permanent  personal  attributes,  than  to  verbalise  it  in  some
imagined  or  remembered  phrase.

A  subordinate  point,  but  one  which  is  still  worth  noting,  is  that
the  proportion  of  cases  where  more  senses  than  one  have  been  con-
cerned is  considerably  larger  in  the  telepathic  than  in  the  purely
subjective  class  of  hallucinations — which  seems  to  imply  what  may
be  called  a  higher  average  intensity  in  the  former  class.  Out  of  590
subjective  cases,  I  find  that  49,  that  is,  a  trifle  over  8  per  cent,  of  the
whole  number,  are  alleged  to  have  concerned  more  senses  than  one  ;
of  which  24  were  visual  and  auditory,  8  visual  and  tactile,  13  auditory
and  tactile,  and  4  concerned  all  three  senses.  Taking  the  telepathic
evidence,  I  find  that,  out  of  423  cases  where  a  sensory  hallucination
seems  to  have  been  distinctly  externalised,  80,  or  19  per  cent,  of  the
whole  number,  are  alleged  to  have  concerned  more  senses  than  one  ;


24  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

of  which  53  were  visual  and  auditory,  13  visual  and  tactile,  6  auditory
and  tactile,  and  8  concerned  all  three  senses.  I  may  add  that  the
proportion  of  19  per  cent,  remains  exactly  the  same  if  only  the
first-hand  cases  included  in  the  body  of  the  work  be  taken  into
account,  and  cannot  therefore  be  attributed  to  exaggeration  of  the
facts  in  those  narratives  in  the  Supplement  which  are  given  at
second-hand.^

The  next  distinguishing  mark  of  the  class  of  phantasms  which
have  coincided  with  real  events  is  the  enormous  proportion  of  them  in
which  the  figure  or  the  voice  was  recognised.  In  the  purely  subjec-
tive class  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  recognised  and
unrecognised  phantasms  seem  to  be  about  equal  in  number.  Thus,
if  we  confine  ourselves  to  cases  where  a  human  presence  was
suggested,  of  the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons,  17  had  seen
unrecognised  figures,  to  21  who  had  seen  recognised  ones;  and  50
had  heard  unrecognised  voices,  to  46  who  had  heard  recognised  ones.
Of  the  visible  phantasms  described  in  this  work  as  probably  tele-
pathic, which  represented  human  forms  or  faces  without  any  sound
of  a  voice,  237  have  been  recognised,  and  only  13  unrecognised.
Of  the  phantasms  described  in  this  work  as  probably  telepathic,  which
consisted  simply  of  voices  uttering  words,  36  have  been  of  a  recog-
nised and  21  of  an  unrecognised  voice  ;  but  among  these  211  include  6
cases  where  the  words  heard  were  as  closely  associated  with  the  agent  as
if  the  tone  had  been  his,  since  they  actually  named  him  ;  and  a  seventh
where  a  place  specially  connected  with  him  was  named.  Out  of  38  cases
which  included  both  a  form  and  a  voice,  the  phantasm  was  unrecognised
in  only  2.  It  may  be  said  that  the  fact  of  recognition  is  the  very
fact  which  has  led  us  to  refer  the  phantasm  to  the  telepathic  class,
and  that  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  recognised  phantasms
preponderate  in  our  evidence.  But  this  is  not  what  has  happened.
Important  as  the  recognition  is,  and  greatly  as  the  lack  of  it  detracts
from  the  evidential  force  of  a  case,  it  is  the  coincidence,  not  the
recognition,  that  we  have  throughout  regarded  as  the  main  point ;
and  cases  have  never  been  suppressed  for  lack  of  recognition  alone,
provided  the  coincidence  was  close — non-recognition  being  easily
explicable  on  the  view  of  telepathic  hallucinations  above  propounded

1  If  only  the  subjective  cases  received  from  the  canvassed  group  of  5705  persons  be
considered,  those  which  concerned  more  than  one  sense  amount  to  less  than  4  per  cent.  ;
while  of  the  40  special  coincidental  cases  enumerated  in  p.  14,  first  note,  and  p.  17,  second
note,  8,  that  is  20  percent.,  concerned  more  than  one  sense — or  17-J  per  cent,  if  we  exclude
one  case.  No.  199,  where  it  is  not  quite  certain  that  what  was  heard  was  not  a  real  sound.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  25

(Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40).  The  fact  is  simply  that  we  have  received  com-
paratively few  cases  of  unrecognised  phantasms  of  human  figures  or
voices  which  have  closely  coincided,  and  afterwards  been  associated,
with  some  marked  event  closely  affecting  the  percipient ;  and  those
which  we  have  received,  on  trustworthy  authority,  have  been
included  in  our  collection.  And  if  it  be  further  suggested  that  the
persons  concerned  are  themselves  little  likely  to  remark  the  coinci-
dence, if  the  phantasmal  form  or  voice  was  not  recognised,  my
reply  is  (1)  that  this  seems  a  very  sweeping  assumption  ;  and  (2)
that  so  far  as  it  is  valid  as  an  argument,  it  implies  the  existence
of  a  large  number  of  unnoted  cases,  over  and  above  those  which  it
is  possible  to  collect,  of  those  very  coincidences  whose  perpetual
repetition  is  already  such  a  mountainous  obstacle  to  the  theory  that
they  occur  by  chance.^

Further  knowledge  may  possibly  bring  to  light  other  points  in
which  the  hallucinations  that  have  corresponded  with  real  events —
taken  in  their  immediate  aspect  as  phenomena  and  quite  apart  from
this  correspondence — may  be  distinguished  from  the  general  body
of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  And  while  the  resemblances,
brought  out  in  the  two  preceding  chapters,  between  the  coincidental
and  the  non-coincidental  or  purely  subjective  experiences,  were
sufficient,  I  think,  to  show  that  the  coincidental  cases  are  truly
hallucinations  of  the  percipient's  senses,  clearly  every  feature  which
can  be  named  as  distinguishing  these  hallucinations, — every  feature
which  tends  to  separate  them  off  as  a  restricted  group — thereby
increases  the  difficulty  of  attributing  the  correspondences  to
chance.

The  last  point  to  which  I  must  call  attention,  as  conflicting  with

^  It  may  still  be  thought  that  the  visual  and  the  recognised  phantasms  are  at  any
rate  more  interesting  than  the  auditory  and  the  unrecognised,  and  that  that  is  a  reason
for  their  preponderating  among  the  telepathic  cases  that  we  have  received.  I  would
admit  this  to  some  extent.  That  some  difference  in  the  record  is  made  by  the  superior
interest  of  visual  and  of  recognised  phantasms,  may  be  argued  from  the  numbers  in
my  total  collection  of  hallucinations,  putting  aside  those  presented  as  telepathic  evidence.
Thus,  in  spite  of  the  visual  hallucinations  being  shown,  by  the  canvassing  of  a  limited  group
of  persons,  to  be  the  rarer  phenomena,  I  have  a  total  of  311  visual  cases  to  only  187
auditory — a  fact,  by  the  way, which  may  suggest  how  Krafft-Ebing  (Die  Sinnesdelirien,
p.  32),  Griesinger  (Die  Pathologie  und  Therapie  der  PsycMschen  Krankkeiten.  p.  100)  and
Wundt  (Grundziige  der  Physiologischen  Psychologie,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  353)  have  been  led  into
asserting  that  the  visual  class  is  the  more  numerous.  Again,  among  cases  where  a  human
presence  was  suggested,  in  spite  of  the  recognised  and  unrecognised  classes  being  shown,
by  the  canvassmg  of  a  limited  group  of  persons,  to  be  about  equal,  I  have  172  visual
examples  of  the  recognised  sort  to  only  116  of  the  unrecognised,  and  82  auditory  examples
of  the  recognised  sort  to  only  64  of  the  unrecognised.  Still,  remembering  that  the
vitally  interesting'  point  in  the  coincidental  cases  is,  after  all,  the  coincidence,  and  not  the
mere  form  of  the  phantasm,  the  allowance  which  may  thus  be  fairly  made  cannot,  I  think,
suffice  to  explain  the  proportions  given  in  the  text.


26  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANGE-GOINGIDEFCE.         [chap.

the  theory  of  chance-coincidence,  is  a  characteristic  not  of  the
telepathic  phantasms  themselves,  but  of  the  distant  events  with
which  they  and  other  telepathic  impressions  coincide  ;  but  it  none  the
less  serves  to  distinguish  these  coincidences  as  due  to  a  definite  and
peculiar  cause.  It  is  the  very  large  proportion  of  cases  in  which
the  distant  event  is  death}  It  is  in  this  profoundest  shock  which
human  life  encounters  that  these  phenomena  seem  to  be  oftenest
engendered ;  and,  where  not  in  death  itself,  at  least  in  one  of  those
special  moments,  whether  of  strong  mental  excitement  or  of  bodily
collapse,  which  of  all  living  experiences  come  nearest  to  the  great
crisis  of  dissolution.  Thus  among  the  668  cases  of  spontaneous
telepathy  in  this  book,  399,  (or  among  423  examples  of  the  sensory  ex-
ternalised class,  303,)  are  death-cases,  in  the  sense  that  the
percipient's  experience  either  coincided  with  or  very  shortly  followed
the  agent's  death ;  while  in  25  more  cases  the  agent's  condition,  at
the  time  of  the  percipient's  experience,  was  one  of  serious  illness
which  in  a  few  hours  or  a  few  days  terminated  in  death.  Nor,  in
this  connection,  can  I  avoid  once  more  referring  to  the  large  number
of  cases  in  which  the  event  that  befell  the  agent  has  been  death
(or  a  very  near  approach  to  it)  by  drowning  or  suffocation.  Out
of  the  399  death-cases  just  mentioned,  there  are  35,  or  nearly  9  per
cent.,  where  the  death  was  by  drowning, — clearly  a  very  much  higher
proportion  than  deaths  of  this  particular  form  bear  to  all  deaths,
for  even  of  accidental  deaths  among  the  male  population,  only  5  per
cent,  are  due  to  drowning — and  in  6  other  cases  the  agent's  escape

1  The  point  is  one  to  which  I  have  adverted  in  connection  with  dreains(  Vol.  i. ,  pp.  308-10),
But  there  we  saw  a  certain  force  in  the  objection  that  the  coincident  dreamof  death  might
get  remembered  just  by  virtue  of  the  coincidence,  while  other  equally  vivid  dreams  of
death  might  be  forgotten.  Let  us  see  what  would  be  implied  if  a  similar  supposition  were
made  in  the  case  of  the  waking-hallucinations.  Taking  the  number  of  adults  in  the
country  as  24  millions,  then,  even  on  the  extravagant  assumption  which  I  made  as  to  the
size  of  the  area  from  which  our  cases  are  drawn,  the  probable  number  of  coincidental
phantasms  for  the  United  Kingdom,  during  the  last  12  years,  amounts  to  as  many  as  32  x
80,  or  2560.  Now  the  census  gives -i^iyV^^—;  or  96,744,  as  the  number  of  persons  in  the
United  Kingdom  who,  on  being  asked,  would  remember  having  had  a  purely  subjective
visual  hallucination  of  this  type.  Therefore,  if  these  were  all  the  hallucinations  that
had  occurred,  1  in  every  38  of 'them  would  correspond  with  the  death  of  the  person  whose
figure  appeared ;  that  is  to  say,  for  each  hallucination,  the  probability  that  it  would
coincide  with  the  death  would  be  1  in  38.  Now  for  each  of  the  remembered  hallucina-
tions we  found  the  probability  of  the  accidental  occurrence  of  the  coincidence  to  be
^^_.  We  thus  arrive  at  the  total  which  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations,
remembered  and  unremembered,  will  have  to  reach  in  order  to  bring  the  probability
of  an  accidental  coincidence  up  to  u\  :  they  will  have  to  be  altogether  ^i^  or  436
times  as  numerous  as  the  remembered  cases.  But  as  1  person  in  248  remembers  a  case,
this  will  mean  either  that  nearly  every  sane  and  healthy  adult  in  the  country,  while
awake,  has  seen  a  phantasm  representing  a  living  acquaintance  twice  within  the  last  12
years,  or  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  them  have  seen  such  a  phantasm  more  than
twice ;  and  that  435  'out  of  every  436  of  these  startling  experiences  have  been  totally
forgotten  by  the  persons  affected.


XIII.]  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.  27

from  such  a  death  was  a  narrow  one.^  And  if  we  do  not  insist  on
the  form  of  death,  but  only  on  its  suddenness,  the  above  proportion  still
remains  a  very  striking  fact  ;  since  deaths  by  accident,  even  among
males,  are  only  a  little  over  4  per  cent,  of  the  total  of  deaths.

We  do  not  know  why  the  conditions  of  death  generally,  or
of  sudden  death,  or  of  any  particular  form  of  death,^  or  of  excite-
ment or  collapse,  should  be  effective  ;  but  we  at  all  events  know
that  the  conditions  are  themselves  unusual.  Similarly  in  most
cases  of  experimental  thought-transference,  the  agent's  mind  is
unusually  occupied  by  its  concentrated  fixation  on  a  single  object ;
and  whether  it  be  in  the  curiosities  of  an  afternoon  or  in  the  crises
of  a  lifetime  that  telepathy  finds  its  occasion,  the  peculiarity  of  the
agent's  state  has  at  any  rate  that  degree  of  explanatory  power  which
succeeds  in  connecting  the  rare  effect  with  the  rare  cause.  In  neither
case  can  we  trace  out  the  actual  process  whereby  the  percipient  is
influenced ;  but  we  have  the  same  sort  of  ground  for  refusing  to
attribute  to  chance  the  oft-repeated  apparitions  at  the  time  of  death,
as  the  oft-repeated  successes  in  guessing  cards  and  reproducing
diagrams.

The  only  way  of  meeting  this  argument  would  be  to  show  that
similar  coincidences  have  been  frequently  met  with  in  connection
with  definite  events  which  produced  no  unusual  physical  or  mental
state  in  the  person  to  whom  they  occurred.  For  instance,  if  B  at  a
distance  has  a  vision  of  A  on  the  day  that  A  scratches  his  finger  or
orders  a  new  pair  of  boots,  it  would  seem  wholly  irrational  to  connect
the  two  facts.  Accordingly,  if  many,  or  even  several,  such  coincidences
were  on  record,  I  should  have  to  admit  that  the  operations  of  chance
altogether  overpass  my  estimate,  and  that  the  data  on  which  the
previous  argument  rested  must,  therefore,  be  somehow  defective.
Or,  to  take  a  case  where  some  emotional  disturbance  is,  as  a  rule,
involved,  if  it  proved  to  be  not  extremely  uncommon  to  have  a
vision  of  an  absent  friend  on  the  morning  of  his  marriage,  I  should
feel  *  that  my  argument  was  so  far  weakened ;  for  it  would  be
difficult    to   suppose    that   the   emotions   connected  with   that    one

1  Tvfos.  48,  59,  60,  105,  138,  159,  165,  188,  236,  281,  282,  297,  341,  349,  416,  487,  513,
525,  528,  529,  535,  536,  537,  540,  541,  559,  570,  581,  582,  583,  596,  600,  603,  608,  636,  648,
659,  662,  664,  674,  675.  I  have  explained  (Vol.  i.,  pp.  335-6)  that  cases  are  not
admitted  as  evidence  where  the  percipient's  experience  might  be  attributed  to  his  own
state  of  apprehension  as  to  the  agent's  fate.

2  At  the  same  time,  with  respect  to  drowning,  one  cannot  but  recall  the  peculiar
vividness  and  concentration  of  psychical  life  which  (from  the  accounts  of  many  persons
who  have  been  ultimately  rescued)  seem  to  characterise  the  earlier  stages  of  that  form
of  death.


28  THE  THEORY  OF  CHANCE-COINCIDENCE.         [chap.

morning  stood  distinctly  apart  from  those  of  other  seasons  dedi-
cated to  happiness  and  the  affections.^  But  in  point  of  fact  we  do
not  find  that  coincidences  of  these  types  prevail.  The  coincidental
phantasms  seem  limited  to  seasons  of  exceptional  crisis  or  excite-
ment on  the  agent's  part ;  and  this  limitation ,  in  once  more
marking  out  these  phantasms  as  a  distinct  group  of  natural  pheno-
mena, strongly  confirms  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  statistical
results.

I  am  not  forgetting,  in  these  final  remarks,  what  I  have  expressly
stated  before  (Vol.  I.,  p.  97),  that  the  action  of  telepathy  must  not  be
dogmatically  confined  to  those  examples  of  striking  coincidence  which
are  suitable  to  be  quoted  in  demonstration  of  it ;  and  even  in  respect
of  such  extreme  affections  as  hallucinations  of  the  senses,  I  should
hesitate  to  assert  that  they  cannot  be  due  to  an  absent  agent  whose
condition  is  not  markedly  abnormal.^  I  regard  it,  however,  as  so
unlikely  that  this  is  often  their  source — I  regard  the  probability  as  so
enormous  that  a  phantasm  seen  or  heard  by  A  only,  and  representing
B  who  is  at  the  time  living  a  piece  of  ordinary  life,  is  of  purely
subjective  origin — that  the  above  argument  remains  in  my  view  a
fair  one ;  and  it  is  at  any  rate  fairly  addressed  to  those  (whom  of
course  I  have  had  chiefly  in  view  throughout  the  present  chapter)
who  have  not  hitherto  admitted  or  considered  the  case  for  telepathy
even  as  based  on  the  markedly  coincidental  examples.

1  In  accordance  with  this  view,  and  in  the  absence  of  very  special  details,  we
should  feel  bound  to  exclude  from  our  evidence,  as  an  "ambiguous  case,"  any  stray
coincidence  of  the  sort  that  we  encountered.     The  following  is  an  instance :

Miss  Keith  Breinner,  daughter  of  Captain  Bremner,  the  chief  constable  of  Tif eshire,
was  sitting  at  the  window  of  the  dining-room  in  the  forenoon  (precise  hour  forgotten)  of
the  18th  June,  1884,  when  looking  out  of  the  window  she  saw,  in  a  flowor-bed  about  20
feet  distant,  what  seemed  to  her  the  face  of  Mary  D.,  growing_  out  of,  a  yellow  pansy.
The  face  was  quite  distinct  and  life-like,  and  seemed  to  be  laughing  as  it  looked  at  her.
Miss  Bremner  is  quite  certain  that  what  she  saw  was  not  merely  a  fancied  resemblance  in
one  of  the  flowers  to  Miss  D.'s  face.  The  face  was  too  clearly  and  distinctly  seen  for
that.  Moreover,  it  seemed  to  be  of  the  size  of  life.  There  could  have  been  no  mistake
about  it.  Miss  Bremner  did  not  look  long.  She  turned  away,  and  the  face  was  gone
when  she  looked  again.  Later  in  the  day  she  told  her  mother  what  she  had  seen,  and
Mrs.  Bremner  remarked,  "I  wonder  when  Mary  D.  will  be  married  ;  it  should  be  about
this  time."  They  heard  afterwards  that  Miss  D.  had  actually  been  married  on  that  day,
and  at  about  the  time  when  Miss  Bremner  saw  the  apparition  of  her.  Miss  Bremner  has
never  had  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses.

This  account  was  written  down  by  Mr.  Podinore  after  an  interview  with  Miss
Bremner,  and  submitted  to  her.     She  writes  : —

"  The  above  account  correctly  describes  what  I  saw. — Keith  Bremner."
Mrs.  Bremner  wrote  from  Sandilands,  Cupar,  Fife,  on  September  22nd,  1884  : —
"Mrs.  Bremner  begs  to  inform  Mr.  Podmore  that  her  daughter  told  her  immediately
she  saw  the   face   in  the  pansy.      Mr.  Podmore's    written   statement   is    quite   correct.
The  wedding  took  place  on  Wednesday,  the  18th  of  June."

"'   See,  for  example,  the  cases  in  Chap,  xiv.,  §  7.


XIV.]


CHAPTER  XIV.

FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.

§  1.  In  Chapter  XII.,  a  good  many  specimens  of  telepathic  phantasms
were  quoted,  in  illustration  of  certain  special  points ;  and  particularly
as  showing  what  part  in  the  phenomena  we  may  attribute  to  the
obscure  action  of  the  agent's  and  of  the  percipient's  mind  respec-
tively, and  how  the  original  impulse  may  become  modified  in  transitu.
A  still  larger  number  of  cases  remain,  of  which  only  a  few  present  speci-
ally noticeable  characteristics  of  dress,  or  development,  or  phantasmal
imagery  ;  but  which  have  their  share  with  the  others  in  the  cumu-
lative proof  of  telepathy,  and  include  moreover  several  fresh  features
and  types.  The  present  chapter  will  be  devoted  to  visual  examples.
In  the  "  General  Sketch  of  Hallucinations  "  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  480-3
and  488),  I  mentioned  the  various  degrees  of  externalisation
that  the  phenomena  may  present ;  beginning  with  the  ideal  picture
which  is  not  a  sensory  hallucination  at  all — which  is  realised  as
a  purely  internal  impression,  as  seen  by  the  "  mind's  eye " ;  and
ending  with  the  actual  percept,  which,  though  equally  the  product
of  the  percipient's  mind,  seems  to  take  its  place  in  the  external
world  on  a  par  with  all  the  other  objects  within  his  range  of
vision.  Now  between  these  first  and  last  stages  there  seems  a  wide
gap ;  and  if  our  review  of  telepathic  incidents  had  to  pass  at  one
step  from  the  vivid  pictures  flashed  from  mind  to  mind,  to  the
phantasmal  figure  "  out  in  the  room,"  there  might  be  a  certain
difficulty  in  conceiving  two  such  diffierent-seeming  phenomena  as
having  a  similar  origin.  It  is  satisfactory,  then,  to  be  able  to  point
to  several  intermediate  stages.  That  such  stages  are  found  in  the
telepathic,  as  well  as  in  the  purely  subjective  or  pathological,  class  of
phantasms,  is  only  a  fresh  indication  that  telepathic  phantasms,  in
spite  of  their  peculiar  origin,  are  worked  (so  to  speak)  by  the  ordinary
mechanism  of  hallucination.


30  FURTHER  VISUAL   CASES  [chap.

I  may  first  quote  a  case  which  shows  how  the  percipient  may  him-
self be  doubtful  as  to  the  degree  of  externality  that  the  phantasmal
appearance  had.  In  the  summer  of  1884,  Mr.  Henry  H.  Howorth,
M.P.,  of  Eccles,  Manchester,  filled  up  a  question-form  with  the
information  that  one  morning,  in  1857,  he  had  a  visual  hallucination
representing  a  great-uncle  ;  and  added  : —

(218)  "  My  great  uncle  died  at  the  very  time  ;  and  someone  came  to
bring  me  home  from  school,  where  I  then  was.  I  don't  think  I  was  at  all
excitable  or  impressionable.  My  uncle  was  a  very  unlikely  person  for  me
to  have  thought  about.  He  had  been  for  years  troubled  with  gout  of  a
chronic  type,  but  was  otherwise  hearty  and  well,  and  to  a  boy  had  the
appearance  of  robust  health.  He  was  much  attached  to  my  mother  and
her  children.

"  Henry  H.  Howorth."

Recounting  the  same  incident  on  December  2nd,  1885,  Mr.  Howorth
wrote  : — -

"  I  was  a  young  boy  about  12  years  old,  and  at  school  at  Whalley,
when  I  felt  an  overpowering  sense  that  something  very  serious  had  hap-
pened to  my  great-uncle,  who  had  been  a  foster-father  to  my  mother,  and
was  much  attached  to  me.  The  same  day  someone  came  to  fetch  me  home,
as  he  had  died.  When  you  look  across  a  gap  of  30  years,  memory  is
blunted  as  to  details,  and  I  cannot  pretend  to  fill  in  the  story.  I  never
remember  having  a  similar  visitation."

On  my  pointing  out  that  the  second  account  difiered  from  the  first  in
making  no  mention  of  any  visual  experience,  Mr.  Howorth  wrote  : —

"  I  could  not  say  at  this  distance  of  time  whether  the  experience  I  had
was  visual  or  mental  merely,  for  the  distinction  in  the  case  of  a  boy  would
perhaps  not  be  marked  in  the  memory,  I  can  only  say  the  impression  was
a  very  vivid  and  sharp  one."

I  should  regard  this  indistinctness  of  memory  as  a  tolerably  sure
sign  that  the  impression  was  not  of  the  truly  sensory  (that  is,  of
the  most  unique  and  startling)  sort,  but  rather  a  vivid  mental
picture  of  the  type  noticed  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  209,  and  further  exemplified
in  the  6th  chapter.  In  the  stage  next  above  this,  the  observer  may
still  find  it  hard  to  say  whether  what  impresses  him  is  purely  ideal,
or  whether  his  sense-organs  are  partly  concerned — there  being  a  sense
of  externality,  but  not  exactly  a  projection  into  the  surrounding
world.  Case  66  (Vol  I.,  p.  267)  was  really  an  example  in  point — the
scene  having  apparently  been  something  more  than  a  vivid  mental
picture  but  not  confounded  with  the  objective  world,  or  located  in
the  actual  place  where  the  percipient  was  at  the  time.  Very  similar  is
an  experience  which  befell  a  master  at  a  large  public  school,  in  the


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  31

summer  of  1874  or  1875.  Having  been  detained  at  home  while  a
party  of  boys,  accompanied  by  some  masters  and  ladies,  made  a
steamer  excursion,  he  was,  he  says,

(219)  "  Standing  vacantly  at  the  door  of  his  house,  doubtless  thinking  of
the  absentees  and  conjecturing  how  they  were  then  employed.  Suddenly  he
seemed  to  see  a  boy  slip,  when  crossing  the  landing  stage  from  the  quay  to
the  vessel,  and  fall  into  the  water,  wounding  his  mouth  as  he  fell.  There
the  vision  ended.  Mr.  A.  [the  narrator]  returned  to  his  work,  in  which  he
was  absorbed,  until  the  return  of  Mrs.  A.  ;  but  so  vivid  was  the  impression
on  his  mind  of  the  reality  of  the  occurrence  that  he  had  looked  at  his
watch  and  noted  the  time  exactly.

"  On  his  wife's  return  Mr.  A.  at  once  said  to  her,  '  Did  you  get  that
boy  out  of  the  water  ? '

"  '  Oh,  yes ;  there  was  no  harm  done  beyond  the  fright.  But  how
should  you  know  anything  about  it  ?  I  am  the  first  to  arrive ;  tliey  are
walking.     /  di'ove.'

"  '  Well,  how  about  his  lip '?     Was  it  badly  cut  1 '
"  '  It  was  not  hurt  at  all ;  you  know  X.  has  a  harelip.'
"  Mr.  A.  has  no  explanation  to  offer :  these  are  the  facts."
[Mr.  A.  was  under  the  impression  that  the  coincidence  was  precise.
But    the   time   of   the    vision   was   about   7  p.m.  ;    and  we  learn    from
the  wife  of  the  head-master,  who  was  present,  that  the  accident  occurred
before  luncheon  ;  therefore,  if  telepathic,  the  case  was  one  of  the  deferred
class.     This  lady  remembers  that  some  of  the  party  were  afraid  that  the
boy  had  cut  his  face,  till  the  fact  of  the  harelip  was  recalled.     If  we
suppose  the  agent  to  have  been  Mrs.  A.,  then  the  impression  of  the  scene
(as  in  the  somewhat  similar  dream-case,  No.    101)  would   seem  to  have
been  transferred,    so  to    speak,    ready-made — and   to   have  received  no
development  from  the  percipient.]

The  following  case,  though  undoubtedly  sensory,  seems  still  to
belong  to  a  somewhat  indescribable  stage  of  visualisation.  If
interpreted  as  telepathic,  it  is  further  of  interest  as  illustrating  that
rarer  type  where  the  phantasm  is  not  merely  representative  of  the
agent,  but  visibly  reproduces  some  actual  percept  or  idea  which  is
prominently  present  at  the  time  to  the  agent's  consciousness  (see
Chap.  XII.,  beginning  of  §  5).  The  account  is  from  Mr.  F.  Gottschalk,
of  20,  Adamson  Eoad,  Belsize  Park,  N.W.,  and  is  dated  Feb.  12, 1886.

(220)  Mr.  Gottschalk  begins  by  describing  a  friendship  which  he
formed  with  Mr.  Courtenay  Thorpe,  at  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Sylvain  Mayer,
on  the  evening  of  February  20th,  1885.  On  February  24th,  being  anxious
to  hear  a  particular  recitation  which  Mr.  Thorpe  was  shortly  going  to  give,
Mr.  Gottschalk  wrote  to  him,  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  to  ask  what  the
hour  of  the  recitation  was  to  be.  "  In  the  evening  I  was  going  out  to
see  some  friends,  when  on  the  road  there  seemed  suddenly  to  develop
itself  before  me  a  disc  of  light,  which  appeared  to  be  on  a  different  plane  to
everything  else  in  view.     It  was  not  possible  for  me  to  fix  the  distance  at


32  FURTHER  VISUAL   CASES  [chap.

which  it  seemed  to  be  from  me.^  Examining  the  illumined  space,  I  found
that  two  hands  were  visible.  They  were  engaged  in  drawing  a  letter  from
an  envelope  which  I  instinctively  felt  to  be  mine  and,  in  consequence,
thought  immediately  that  the  hands  were  those  of  Mr.  Thorpe.  I  had  not
previously  been  thinking  of  him,  but  at  the  moment  the  conviction  came  to
me  with  such  intensity  that  it  was  irresistible.  Not  being  in  any  way
awe-struck  by  the  extraordinary  nature  and  novelty  of  this  incident,  but
in  a  perfectly  calm  frame  of  mind,  I  examined  the  picture,  and  found  that
the  hands  were  very  white,  and  bared  up  to  some  distance  above  the  wrist.
Each  forearm  terminated  in  a  ruffle  ;  beyond  that  nothing  was  to  be  seen.
The  vision  lasted  about  a  minute.  After  its  disappearance  I  determined
to  find  out  what  connection  it  may  have  had  with  Mr.  Thorpe's  actual
pursuit  at  the  moment,  and  went  to  the  nearest  lamp-post  and  noted  the
time.

"  By  the  first  post  the  next  morning,  I  received  an  answer  from  Mr.
Thorpe,  which  began  in  the  following  way :  '  Tell  me,  pray  tell  me,  why
did  I,  when  I  saw  your  letter  in  the  rack  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  know
that  it  was  from  you  ? '  [We  have  seen  this  letter,  which  is  dated  "  Tues-
day night  "  ;  and  February  24th,  1885,  fell  on  a  Tuesday.]  Mr.  Thorpe
had  no  expectation  of  receiving  a  letter  from  me,  nor  had  he  ever  seen  my
writing.  Even  had  he  seen  it,  his  knowledge  of  it  would  not  affect  the
issue  of  the  question,  as  he  assured  me  that  the  impression  arrived  the
moment  he  saw  there  was  a  letter  under  the  'T  clip,' before  any  writing
was  visible.  [Mr.  Gottschalk  explains  that  from  the  construction  of  the
rack,  which  he  has  examined,  the  address  on  the  envelope  would  be  invisible.]

"  On  the  evening  of  February  27th,  by  arrangement,  I  again  met  him
at  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Mayer,  and  there  put  questions  to  him  with  a  view  to
eliciting  some  explanation.  As  near  as  possible,  I  give  them  as  they  were
put  at  the  time,  and  add  the  answers.  It  is  necessary  for  me  here  to
state  that  he  and  the  Doctor  were  in  complete  ignorance  of  what
had  happened  to  me.  Having  first  impressed  upon  him  the  necessity
of  answering  in  a  categorical  manner  and  with  the  greatest  possible
accuracy,  I  commenced  : —

"'When  did  you  get  my  Tuesday's  letter?'  'At  7  in  the  evening,
when  I  arrived  at  the  theatre.'  '  Then  what  happened  ? '  '  I  read  it,  but,
being  very  late,  in  such  a  hurry  that  when  I  had  finished  I  was  as  ignorant
of  its  contents  as  if  I  had  never  seen  it.'  '  Then  ? '  'I  dressed,  went  on
the  stage,  played  my  part,  and  came  off.'  '  What  was  the  time  then  ? '
'  About  20  minutes  past  8.'  '  What  happened  then  ? '  'I  talked  for  a
time  with  some  of  the  company  in  my  dressing-room.'  '  For  how  long  ? '
'  Twenty  minutes.'  '  What  did  you  then  do  ? '  '  They  having  left  me,  my
first  thought  was  to  find  your  letter.  I  looked  everywhere  for  it,  in  vain.
I  turned  out  the  pockets  of  my  ordinary  clothes,  and  searched  among  the
many  things  that  encumbered  my  dressing-table.  I  was  annoyed  at  not
finding  it  immediately,  especially  as  I  was  anxious  to  know  what  it  was

^  (7f.  a  remark  in  M.  Marillier's  account  of  his  interesting  subjective  experiences,
referred  to  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  .521 : — "  Je  ne  pourrais  indiquer  ni  la  place  de  I'image  que  j'ai
objectivee,  ni  la  distance  k  laquelle  elle  se  trouve."  The  indescribableness  of  a  certain  sort
of  extemalisation  is  well  brought  out  in  the  same  writer's  description  of  his  vision  of  parts
of  his  body  which  could  never  actually  be  seen  by  him — e.g.,  the  back  of  his  head.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  33

about.  Strangely  enough  I  discovered  it  eventually  in  the  coat  which  I
had  just  worn  in  the  piece  "  School  for  Scandal."  I  immediately  read  it
again,  was  delighted  to  receive  it,  and  decided  to  answer  at  once.'  '  Now
be  very  exact.  What  was  the  time  when  you  read  it  on  the  second
occasion  ? '     '  As  neai'ly  as  I  can  say  10  minutes  to  9.'

"  Thereupon  I  drew  from  my  pocket  a  little  pocket-diary  in  which  I
had  noted  the  time  of  my  vision,  and  asked  Dr.  Mayer  to  read  what  was
written  under  the  date  24th  February.

"  '  Eight  minutes  to  9.'

[Mr.  Gottschalk  has  kindly  allowed  us  to  inspect  his  diary,  which
confirms  all  the  dates  given.]

"  Having  established  in  this  way,  without  any  assistance,  the  coin-
cidence of  time  between  his  actually  opening  the  envelope  and  my
seeing  him  do  so,  I  was  satisfied  as  to  the  principal  part,  and
proceeded  to  analyse  the  incident  in  detail.  The  whiteness  of  the  hands
was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  actors  invariably  whiten  their  hands
when  playing  a  part  like  the  one  Mr.  Thorpe  was  engaged  in — '  Snake '  in
the  '  School  for  Scandal.'  The  ruffles  also  formed  part  of  the  dress  in  this
piece.  They  were  attached  to  the  short  sleeves  of  the  shirt  which  Mr.
Thorpe  was  actually  wearing  when  he  opened  my  letter.

"  This  is  the  first  hallucination  I  ever  had.  I  have  had  one  since  of  a
similar  nature,  which  I  will  recount  separately.

"  Ferdinand  Gottschalk."

Dr.  Mayer,  of  42,  Somerset  Street,  Portman  Square,  W.,  corroborates
as  follows  : —

"  March  1,  1886.

"  I  well  remember  having  read  something  [i.e.,  in  Mr.  Gottschalk's
diary] — the  exact  words  memory  will  not  allow  me  to  give — which  tallied
almost  exactly  with  the  story  told  by  Courtenay  Thorpe ;  and  can  bear
positive  testimony  of  the  above  conversation  having  taken  place.

"  Sylvain  Mayer."

[We  cannot  lay  any  stress  on  Mr.  Thorpe's  impression  as  to  the  letter
and  its  writer,  since  that  may  easily  have  been  accidental.  But  it  is  a
point  to  be  noticed  that  he  read  the  letter  with  very  decided  pleasure,  after
a  considerable  hunt  for  it — in  other  words,  that  the  reading  of  the  letter
stood  out  rather  distinctly  from  the  general  run  of  such  experiences.
Though  the  incident  is  trivial,  the  close  correspondence  of  time  and  detail
is  strongly  suggestive  of  telepathic  clairvoyance.  In  the  second  case
mentioned,  an  illuminated  disc  was  again  seen,  which  "  seemed  not  to
belong  to  the  surroundings  "  ;  but  the  details  were  not  quite  as  distinctive
as  in  the  above  instance.]

The  fragmentary  nature  of  the  hallucination  in  this  case  has
parallels,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  purely  subjective  class.^  The  "  disc
of  light  "  is  also  to  be  noticed.    (See  Chap.  XII.,  §  7,  and  compare  the

1  Vol.  i.  p.  504.  The  case  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  referred  to  below  (p.  38,
note),  included  visions  of  parts  of  figures,  faces,  half -faces,  and  limbs.  There  are  many
degrees  of  incompleteness.  Thus,  one  of  my  correspondents,  when  out  of  doors,  was
startled  by  the  sight  of  a  man  whose  bearded  face  was  clearly  distinguished,  but  whose
form  stopped  short  at  the  knees ;  another,  on  waking,  saw  "  a  shadow  "  bending  over  her,
but  with  a  face  that  was  distinct.     A  very  interesting  case  is  that  of  the  quarter-length  Mr.

VOL.    II.  D


34  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"  bright  oval"  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  503,  the  "large  flickering  oval,"  p.  176,  and
the  face  "  in  the  centre  of  a  bright,  opaque,  white  mass,"  in  case  184.
The  exact  description — a  "  disc  of  light  " — recurs  in  the  dream-case
No.  464.)

In  the  next  stage  of  visualisation  the  percipient  sees  a  face  or
figure  projected  or  depicted,  as  it  were,  on  some  convenient  surface —
the  image  being  thus  truly  externalised,  but  in  an  unreal  and  unsub-
stantial fashion,  and  in  a  bizarre  relation  to  the  real  objects  among
which  it  appears.  In  this  respect  it  might  be  compared  to  the
"  after-image  "  of  the  sun,  or  of  some  object  that  has  been  intently-
scrutinised  through  a  microscope,  which  we  involuntarily  import  into
our  views  of  the  surrounding  scene.  The  following  example  is  taken
from  the  Memoirs  of  Georgiana,  Lady  Chatterton,  by  E.  H.  Dering
(1878),  pp.  100-102.  It  exemplifies  again  the  peculiarity  observed
in  the  last  case — the  blood  being  a  feature  in  the  vision  which  we  maj^
confidently  refer  to  the  agent's  mind.     Lady  Chatterton  narrates  : —

(221)  "My  mother  [thewife  of  the  Rev.  Tremonger  Lascelles,  Prebendary
of  Winchester,]  had  not  been  very  well,  but  there  was  nothing  alarming
in  her  state.  I  was  suffering  from  a  bad  cold,  and  went  early  to  bed
one  night,  after  leaving  her  in  the  drawing-room  in  excellent  spirits,  and
tolerably  well.  I  slept  unusually  well,  and  when  I  awoke,  the  moon  was
shining  through  the  old  casement  brightly  into  the  room.  The  white
curtains  of  my  bed  were  drawn  to  protect  me  from  the  draught  that
came  through  the  large  window  ;  and  on  this  curtain,  as  if  depicted  there,
I  saw  the  figure  of  my  mother,  the  face  deadly  pale,  with  blood  ^  flowing
on  the  bed-clothes.  For  a  moment  I  lay  horror-stricken  and  unable  to
move  or  cry  out,  till,  thinking  it  might  be  a  dream  or  a  delusion,  I  raised
myself  up  in  bed,  and  touched  the  curtain.  Still  the  appearance  re-
mained (although  the  curtain  on  which  it  was  depicted  moved  to  and  fro
when  I  touched  it)  as  if  reflected  by  a  magic-lantern.  In  great  terror  I
got  up,  and  throwing  on  a  cloak,  1  rushed  off  through  some  rooms  and  a
long  passage  to  my  mother's  room.  To  my  surprise,  I  saw  from  the
further  end  of  the  passage  that  her  door  was  open,  and  a  strong  light
coming  from  it  across  the  passage.  As  she  invariably  locked  her  door
when  she  went  to  bed,  my  fears  were  increased  by  the  sight,  and  1  ran  on
more  quickly  still,  and  entered  her  room.  There  she  lay,  just  as  I  had
seen  her  on  the  curtain,  pale  as  death,  and  the  sheet  covered  with  blood,
and  two  doctors  standing  by  the  bedside.  She  saw  me  at  once  and
seemed  delighted  to  see  me,  though  too  weak  to  speak  or  hold  out  her
hand.  '  She  has  been  very  ill,'  said  the  doctor,  '  but  she  would  not  allow
you  to  be  called,  lest  your  cold  should  be  made  worse.  But  I  trust  all
danger  is  over  now.     .     .     .     The  sight  of  you  has  decidedly  done  her

Gabbage,  cited  by  M.  Ribot,  Maladies  de  la  PersonnaliU,  p.  Ill ;  with  which  compare
case  301  below.  For  further  telepathic  examples,  see  cases  161,  240,  350  (in  "Additions
and  Corrections  "),  553,  572.

1  Compare  the  dream-cases  Nos.  432,  463  466,  467.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  35

much  good.'  So  she  had  been  in  danger,  and  would  not  disturb  me  !  Oh  !
how  thankful  I  felt  to  the  vision  or  fancy,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been."

Mrs.  Ferrers,  of  Baddesley  Clinton,  Knowle,  a  niece  of  Lady
Chatterton's,  wrote  to  us  on  October  24th,  1883,  "  This  account  is  taken
from  a  diary  of  my  aunt's."     She  adds  later  : —

"  I  have  often  and  often  heard  my  aunt  relate  that  vision,  but  it  was
not,  so  far  as  I  know,  recorded  in  any  contemporary  diary.

"  Lady  C.  related  the  story  to  Lockhart  and  his  daughter  about  1843,
and  then  wrote  it  down  in  her  diary.  The  entry  is  not  dated  ;  the  date
before  it  is  May,  1843,  that  which  follows,  1842,  but  it  was  evidently
written  down  between  1839  and  1848.  The  book  is  very  badly  arranged
as  to  chronology.  I  can't  fix  the  date  of  Lady  C.'s  mother's  death  from
it  except  that  it  was  prior  to  1836.  "  R.  H.  Ferrers."

Here  the  picture,  though  not  producing  the  impression  of  a  solid
and  independent  object,  was  clearly  no  mere  illusion,  no  mere
momentary  translation  of  the  folds  or  pattern  of  the  drapery  into  a
human  face  ;  it  was  accurate  and  persistent  enough  to  resist  a  touch
which  shook  the  curtain  on  which  it  was  shown.  It  is  a  point  of
interest  that  (besides  a  second  veridical  case  given  in  Chap.  XII.  §  7,)
Lady  Chatterton  mentions  having  experienced  another  hallucination
which,  like  the  one  just  quoted,  appeared  on  a  flat  surface}  On
the  theory  of  telepathic  phantasms  explained  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  5,  it  is
of  course  quite  natural  that  a  veridical  and  a  non-veridical  vision,
or  that  several  veridical  visions,  occurring  to  the  same  person,  should
present  this  amount  of  likeness,  as,  e.g.,  in  Mr.  Gottschalk's  experience.
But  the  point  is  one  that  we  can  rarely  observe,  as  few  of  our  telepathic
percipients  have  had  any  second  hallucination  of  the  senses  at  all.

But  yet  further  stages  remain,  on  the  path  to  the  final  one  of  natural
solid-looking  externality.  In  the  following  case  the  image  appeared
with  somewhat  more  of  apparent  relief  than  in  Lady  Chatterton's,
but  certainly  not  yet  as  co-ordinate  in  any  natural  fashion  with  the
real  objects  in  view.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Richard  Searle,
barrister,  of  Home  Lodge,  Heme  Hill,  who  tells  us  that  he  has  had

no  other  experience  of  a  hallucination.

"November  2nd,  1883.
(222)  "One  afternoon,  a  few  years  ago,  I  was  sitting  in  my  chambers  in
the  Temple,  working  at  some  papers.  My  desk  is  between  the  fireplace  and
one  of  the  windows,  the  window  being  two  or  three  yards  on  the  left  side
of  my  chair,  and  looking  out  into  the  Temple.  Suddenly  I  became  aware
that  I  was  looking  at  the  bottom  window-pane,  which  was  about  on  a  level

1  She  records — apparently  in  her  journal — that,  when  sleeping  as  a  child  in  a
"haunted  room,"  she  woke  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  saw  a  brilliant  light  on  the
wall,  and  figures  of  men  passing  over  it,  as  in  a  panorama,  fighting.  She  inferred  from
the  words  and  gestures  of  her  nurse,  who  was  apparently  sitting  up  in  her  sleep  with
fixed  and  open  eyes,  that  she  saw  the  same  scene  ;  and  the  nurse  may  possibly  have  been
the  "agent "  of  the  child's  impression  (see  Chap,  xviii.  §  5).

VOL.    II.  T>    2


36  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

with  my  eyes,  and  thei'e  I  saw  the  figure  of  the  head  and  face  of  my  wife,
in  a  reclining  position,  with  the  eyes  closed  and  the  face  quite  white  and
bloodless,  as  if  she  were  dead.

"  I  pulled  myself  together,  and  got  up  and  looked  out  of  the  window,
where  I  saw  nothing  but  the  houses  opposite,  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion
that  I  had  been  drowsy  and  had  fallen  asleep,  and,  after  taking  a  few
turns  about  the  room  to  rouse  myself,  I  sat  down  again  to  my  work  and
thought  no  more  of  the  matter.

"  I  went  home  at  my  usual  time  that  evening,  and  whilst  my  wife  and
I  were  at  dinner,  she  told  me  that  she  had  lunched  with  a  friend  who  lived
in  Gloucester  Gardens,  and  that  she  had  taken  with  her  a  little  child,  one
of  her  nieces,  who  was  staying  with  us  ;  but  during  lunch,  or  just  after  it,
the  child  had  a  fall  and  slightly  cut  her  face  so  that  the  blood  came.  After
telling  the  story,  my  wife  added  that  she  was  so  alarmed  when  she  saw  the
blood  on  the  child's  face  that  she  had  fainted.  What  I  had  seen  in  the
window  then  occurred  to  my  mind,  and  I  asked  her  what  time  it  was
when  this  happened.  She  said,  as  far  as  she  remembered,  it  must  have
been  a  few  minutes  after  2  o'clock.  This  was  the  time,  as  nearly  as  I  could
calculate,  not  having  looked  at  my  watch,  when  I  saw  the  figure  in  the
window-pane.

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  this  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have
known  my  wife  to  have  had  a  fainting-fit.  She  was  in  bad  health  at  the
time,  and  I  did  not  mention  to  her  what  I  had  seen  until  a  few  days  after-
wards, when  she  had  become  stronger.  I  mentioned  the  occurrence  to
several  of  my  friends  at  the  time.  a  t>     g  "

Mr.  Paul  Pierrard,  of  27,  Gloucester  Gardens,  W.,  writes  as  follows  : —

"  4th  December,  1883.

"  It  may  be  interesting  for  special  observers  to  have  a  record  of  an
extraordinary  occurrence  which  happened  about  four  years  ago  at  my  resi-
dence, 27,  Gloucester  Gardens,  W.

"  At  an  afternoon  party  of  ladies  and  children,  among  whom  were  Mrs.
Searle,  of  Home  Lodge,  Heme  Hill,  and  her  little  niece,  Louise,  there
was  a  rather  noisy,  bustling,  and  amusing  game  round  a  table,  when  little
Louise  fell  from  her  chair  and  hurt  herself  slightly.  The  fear  of  a  grave
accident  caused  Mrs.  Searle  to  be  very  excited,  and  she  fainted.

"  The  day  after,  we  met  Mr.  Searle,  who  stated  that  in  the  afternoon  of
the  preceding  day  he  had  been  reading  important  cases  in  his  chambers,
No.  6,  Pump  Court,  Temple,  when  a  peculiar  feeling  overcame  him,  and
he  distinctly  saw,  as  it  wei-e  in  a  looking-glass,  the  very  image  of  his
wife  leaning  back  in  a  swoon,  which  seemed  very  strange  at  the  moment.

"  By  coinparing  the  time,  it  was  found  that  this  extraordinary  vision
was  produced  at  the  very  same  instant  as  the  related  incident.

"  We  often  spoke  of  the  case  together,  and  could  not  find  any  explana-
tion to  completely  satisfy  our  minds  ;  but  we  registered  this  rare  fact  for
which  a  name  is  wanted.  '  u  Paul  Pierrard.'

Here  there  was  more  than  the  mere  representation  of  the  agent;
she  was  represented  apparently  in  the  aspect  which  she  actually
wore,  but  in  which  the  percipient  had  never  seen  her,  and  in  which


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  37

she  would  hardly  be  consciously  picturing  herself.  We  are  scarcely
driven,  however,  in  this  case,  to  the  difficult  conception  of  "  telepathic
clairvoyance "  set  forth  in  Chapter  XII.,  §  8  ;  for  it  is  possible  to
suppose  that  the  idea  of  fainting,  impressed  on  Mr.  Searle's  mind,
worked  itself  out  into  perception  in  an  appropriate  fashion.

The  stage  of  visualisation  in  the  next  case  is  particularly  inter-
esting. The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Taunton,  of  Brook  Vale,  Witton,
Birmingham.

"January  15th,  1884.

(223)  "  On  Thursday  evening,  14th  November,  1867,  I  was  sitting  in
the  Birmingham  Town  Hall  with  my  husband  at  a  concert,  when
there  came  over  me  the  icy  chill  which  usually  accompanies  these
occurrences.!  Almost  immediately,  I  saw  with  perfect  distinctness,
between  myself  and  the  orchestra,  my  uncle,  Mr.  W.,  lying  in  bed
with  an  appealing  look  on  his  face,  like  one  dying.  I  had  not  heard
anything  of  him  for  several  months,  and  had  no  reason  to  think  he  was
ill.  The  appearance  was  not  transparent  or  filmy,  but  perfectly  solid-
looking;  and  yet  I  could  somehow  see  the  orchestra,  not  through,  hut
behind  it.  I  did  not  try  turning  my  eyes  to  see  whether  the  figure
moved  with  them,  but  looked  at  it  with  a  fascinated  expression  that
made  my  husband  ask  if  I  was  ill.  I  asked  him  not  to  speak  to  me  for  a
minute  or  two  ;  the  vision  gradually  disappeared,  and  I  told  my  husband,
after  the  concert  was  over,  what  I  had  seen.  A  letter  came  shortly  after
telling  of  my  uncle's  death.  He  died  at  exactly  the  time  when  I  saw  the
vision.  "  E.  P.  Taunton."

The  signature  of  Mrs.  Taunton's  husband  is  also  appended.

"Rich.  H.  Taunton."

We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Belfast  News-Letter  that  Mr.  W.
died  on  November  14th,  1867.

The  phantasm  here  was  perfectly  external,  and  is  described  as
"  perfectly  solid-looking  "  ;  yet  it  certainly  did  not  hold  to  the  real
objects  around  the  same  relation  as  a  figure  of  flesh  and  blood  would
have  held ;  it  was  in  a  peculiar  way  transparent.  This  feature  is
noticeable,  as  it  is  one  which  occasionally  occurs  also  in  hallu-
cinations of  the  purely  subjective  class.^  It  may  thus  be  taken  as  one
of  the  numerous  minor  indications  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of
telepathic  phantasms  (see  Chapter  XII.,  §  10).

1  This  refers  to  a  few  other  experiences  of  a  dififerent  character,  one  of  which,  how-
ever, involved  a  hallucination  of  sight.  The  cold  sensation  described  was  a  feature  in
cases  28  and  149  ;  and  appears  again  in  case  286,  where  the  percipient  describes  a  sensa-
tion as  of  "cold  water  poured  on  the  nape  of  the  neck";  in  case  302,  where  what  is
described  is  a  sense  of  physical  chill,  mthout  any  flutter  of  the  nerves  ;  and  in  cases  313
and  352.  Compare  also  cases  211  and  263,  where  however,  (as  perhaps  in  some  of  the
other  instances)  the  feelings  may  not  have  been  due  to  anything  more  specific  than
momentary  shock  or  alarm.

2  Of  many  subjective  hallucinations,  it  has  been  specially  noticed  that  they  hid  what-


38  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

I  2.  In  the  remaining  cases  the  illusion  seems  to  have  been  practi-
cally complete.  They  constitute  what  may  be  called  the  normal  type
of  these  abnormal  phenomena.  The  hallucination  goes  through  no
gradual  process  of  formation,  and  is  externalised  as  fully  and
naturally  as  a  real  object ;  the  agent  contributes  to  it  little,  if  any,  of
the  actual  detail  of  his  condition ;  the  percipient  contributes  to  it
no  special  imagery  or  setting  of  his  own.

The  following  narrative  is  from  M.  Gaston  Foumier,  of  21,  Rue  de
Berlin,  Paris,  an  intimate  friend  of  our  esteemed  collaborator,  M.  Ch.
Richet.     He  has  antedated  the  occurrence  by  about  18  months.

"  16,  Octobre,  1885.

(224)  "  Le  21  fevrier,  1879,  j'etaisin-\dte  a  diner  chez  mes  amis,   M.  et

Mme.  B .     En  arrivant    dans    le    salon,    je   constate  I'absence   d'un

commensal  ordinaire  de  la  maison,  M.  d'E ,  que  je    recontrais  presque

toujours  a  leur  table.     J'en  fais  la  remarque,  et  Mme.  B me    repond

que  d'E ,  employe  dans  une  importante  maison  de  banque,   etait    sans

doute  fort  occupe  en  ce  moment,   car   on  ne   I'avait  pas  vu  depuis  deux

jours.    A  partir  de  ce  moment,  il  nefut  plus  plus  question  de  d'E .    Le

repas    s'acheve  fort  gaiement,  et  sans  que  Mme.  B donne  la  moindre

marque  visible  de  preoccupation.     Pendant  le  diner,  nous  avions  forme   le

projet  d'aller  achever  notre   soiree  au  theatre.     Au  dessert  Mme.  B

se    leve  pour  aller    s'habiller   dans    sa    chambre,     dont    la   porte,    restee

entr'ouverte,  donne  dans  la  salle-a-manger.     B et  moi    etions  restee  a

table,  fumant  notre  cigare,  quand,  apres  quelques  minutes  a  peine,  nous
entendons    un    cri  terrible.     Croyant  a  un  accident,  nous  nous  precipitons

dans  la  chambre,  et  nous  trouvons  Mme.  B assise,  prete  a  se  trouver

mal.  Nous  nous  empressons  autour  d'elle  ;  elle  se  remet  peu  a  peu,  et
nous  fait  alors  le  recit  suivant.

"  '  Apres  vous  avoir  quittes,  je  m'  habillais  pour  sortir,  et  j'etais  en  train

ever  was  behind  the  place  which  they  appeared  to  occupy ;  and  the  rule  seems  to  be-
that  when  the  percept  is  completely  externalised,  it  is  solid-looking.  But  exceptions  are
not  infrequent.  Whitish  transparent  figures  were  a  feature  in  a  pathological  case  first
published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  and  Miscellany  (Edinburgh),  No  vi.,  p.  290,  &c.,
and  described  in  the  well-known  article  on  "  Spectral  Illusions  "  in  Chambers^  Miscellany.
Wundt  fO/j.  cit..  Vol.  ii.,  p.  357,)  records  the  experience  of  an  overseer  of  forests,  who
saw  heaps  of  wood  all  round  him  in  his  house,  but  also  saw  the  furniture  and  carpet
just  as  usual.  {Cf.  case  193.)  Miss  Morse,  of  Vermont,  a  careful  observer,  who  has  had
hallucinations  at  rare  intervals  during  a  good  many  years,  tells  me,  that  at  first  "they
seemed  to  be  pictured  just  W2'i/i.m  instead  of  before  my  eyes."  Lately,  however,  "they
have  iisually  been  proj  ected  into  space ;  but  however  real  the  apparitions  at  first
appear,  a  close  inspection  reveals  that  they  have  no  solidity — that  objects  can  be
seen  through  them."  Another  of  my  informants,  who  on  waking  had  a  hallucination
of  a  tall  female  figure,  noticed  that  he  could  see  a  towel  through  her  ;  and  similarly  in
one  of  my  cases  of  persistent  dream-images.  Professor  Goodwin  reports  that  with  him
they  ' '  retain  an  appearance  of  solidity  for  some  seconds  after  waking,  the  furniture  of  the
room  being  distinctly  recognised  through  these  figures,  like  a  dissolving  view."  Another
correspondent  describes  such  images  as  seen  "  as  it  were  with  one  eye  asleep,  the  other
awake."  In  one  oiV&tevson'H  cases  {Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  for  Jan.,
1843),  the  phantasm  appeared  as  though  seen  through  gauze.  I  may  also  refer  to  the
telepathic  phantasms  which  gave  the  impression  of  being  formed  from  mist  (Chaja  xii.,
§  3,  cases  315,  518,  and  Mrs.  Deane's  experience,  p.  237).  I  have  mentioned  that
the  disaippearance  is  occasionally  through  a  stage  of  increased  tenuity  and  trans-
l^arency.


XIV.]  OCCTJRRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  39

de  nouer  les  brides  demon  chapeau  devant  ma  glace,  quand  tout-a-coup  j'ai

vu  dans  cette  glace  d'E entrer  par  la  porte.^    II  avait  son  chapeau  sur

la  tete  ;  il  etait  pale  et  triste  ;  sans  me  retourner  je  lui  adresse  la  parole,

"  Tiens,  d'E ,  vous  voila  ;  asseyez-vous  done  ";  et  comme  il  ne  repondait

pas,  je  me  suis  alors  retourne  et  je  n'ai  plus  rien  vu  ;  prise  alors  de  peur,
j'ai  pousse  le  cri  que  vous  avez  entendu.'

"  B ,  pour  rassurer  sa  femme,   se  met  a  la    plaisanter,   traitant

I'apparition  d'hallucination  nerveuse,  et  lui  disant  que  d'E— —  serait  trfes
flatty  d'apprendre  a  quel  point  il  occupait  sa  pensee  ;  puis,   comme  Mme.

B restait  toute  tremblante,  pour  couper  court  a  son  emotion,  nous  lui

proposons  de  partir  tout  de  suite,  alldguant  que  nous  alliens  manquer  le

lever  du  rideau.     '  Je  n'ai  pas  pense  un  seul  instant  a  d'E ,'  nous  dit

Mme.  B ,  '  depuis  que  M.  F— —  m'a  demande  la  cause  de  son  absence.

Je  ne  suis  pas  nerveuse,  et  je  n'ai  jamais  eu  d'hallucination ;  je  vous
assure  qu'il  y  la  quelque  chose  d'extraordinaire,  et  quant  a  moi,  je  ne

sortirai  pas  avant  d'avoir  des  nouvelles  de  d'  E .     Je  vous  supplie

d'aller  chez  lui,  c'est  le  seul  moyen  de  me  rassurer.'     Je  conseille  a  B

de  c^der  au  ddsir  de  sa  femme,  et  nous  partons  tous  les  deux  chez  d'E ,

qui  demeurait  a  tres  peu  de  distance.  Tout  en  marchant  nous  plaisantions
beaucoup  sur  les  frayeurs  de  Mme.  B .

"  En  arrivant  chez  d'  E ,  nous  demandons  au  concierge,  '  D'  E-


est-il  chez  lui'  ?     '  Oui,   messieurs,   il  n'est  pas  descendu  de  la  journee.'

D'  E habitait  un  petit   appartement  de  gargon  ;  il  n'avait  pas  de

domestiques.  Nous  montons  chez  lui,  et  nous  sonnons  a  plusieurs  reprises
sans  avoir  de  reponse.     Nous  sonnons  plus  fort,  puis  nous  frappons  a  tour

de  bras,  sans  plus  de  succes.     B ,  emotionne  malgr^  lui,  me  dit,  '  C'est

absurde,  le  concierge  se  sera  trompe ;  il  est  sorti ;  descendons.'     Mais  le

concierge  nous  affirme  que  d'E n'est  pas  sorti,  qu'il  en  est  absolument

sur.  Veritablement  efFray^s,  nous  remontons  avec  lui,  et  nous  tentons
de  nouveau  de  nous  faire  ouvrir ;  puis  n'  entendant  rien  bouger  dans
I'appartement,  nous   envoyons  chercher  un  serrurier.    On  force  la  porte,  et

nous  trouvons  le  corps  de  d'E ,   encore  chaud,  couche  sur  son  lit,   et

troue  de  deux  coups  de  revolver.

"  Le  medecin,  que  nous  faisons  venir  aussitot,  constate  que  d'E

avait  d'abord  tente  de  se  suicider  en  avalant  un  flacon  de  laudanum,  et
qu'  ensuite,  trouvant  sans  doute  que  le  poison  n'  agissait  pas  assez  vite,  il
s'etait  tire  deux  coups  de  revolver  a  la  place  du  cceur.  D'apres  la  con-
station  medicale,  la  mort  remontait  a  une  heure  environ.  Sans  que
je   puisse   preciser   I'heure   exacte,     c'etait     cependant    une    coincidence

presqu'  absolue  avec  la  soi-disant  hallucination  de  Mme.   B .     Sur  la

cheminee  il  y  avait  une  lettre  de  d'E ,  annongant  a  M.  et  Mme.  B

sa  resolution,  lettre  particulierement  affectueuse  pour  Mme.  B .

"  Gaston  Fournier."

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Myers,  M.  Fournier  expressed  himself  un-
certain as  to  the  correctness  of  his  date.     We  have  procured  a   copy  of

the  Act  de  Deces,  which  records  that  the  date  of  d'E 's  death  was

October  7,  1880  ;  also  that  it  took  place  at   10  a.m.     If  this  was  so,  it

1  The  vision  in  the  glass  is,  of  course,  itself  the  hallucination  in  this  case  (c/.  Vol.  i.,
p.  444,  note),  and  does  not  imply  either  actual  reflection,  or  even  a  corresponding  phantasm
to  be  seen  in  the  room,  had  Mme.  B.  turned  her  head.  That  such  a  phantasm  might  have
appeared  is,  however,  shown  by  the  case  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  469,  note.


40  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

would  still  be  quite  possible  that  the  body,  which  was  clothed,  should  be
found  warm  in  the  evening.  Probably  the  hour  could  not  be  stated  with
anything  like  precision  ;  and  it  is  as  likely  that  the  official  record  fixed  it
too  early  as  that  M.  Fournier's  medical  authority  (supposing  him  to  be
correctly  quoted)  fixed  it  too  late.  But  we  clearly  cannot  assume  the
coincidence  to  have  been  nearly  as  exact  as  M.  Fournier  imagined.

Mme.  B.  is  dead.  M.  B.  is  unfortunately  in  South  America ;  and
though  we  hope  to  obtain  his  account  of  the  occurrence,  it  has  not  arrived
in  time  for  insertion.

Mrs.  Leonard  Thrupp,  of  67,  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  W.,
narrates:—  "November,  1883.

(225)  "  In  the  month  of  October,  1850,  I  was  staying  in  the  house  of
Mr.  D.,  an  East  Indian  merchant,  No.  1,  South  wick  Crescent,  Hyde  Park.

"  One  evening,  a  Mr.  B.,  with  three  daughters,  came  to  dine — the
youngest  a  blooming  rosy  girl  of  17.  Mr.  B.  had  lately  bought  a  house
in  Devonshire,  which  was  being  added  to  and  furnished.  He  made  our
host  promise  to  go  down  to  the  house-warming  at  Christmas.

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards,  that  gentleman  was  out  one  night,  and  his
sister,  Mrs.  R.,  and  I  sat  by  the  fire  in  a  large  double  drawing-room.  She
was  knitting,  and  from  her  position  could  see  into  the  smaller  room  which
was  not  lighted.  I  had  my  back  to  that  room,  and  was  reading  aloud  one
of  Charles  Dickens'  serial  stories.  All  of  a  sudden  she  dropped  her  work,
exclaiming  faintly,  '  Good  God  ! '  '  What  is  the  matter  ? '  I  cried.  She
pointed  into  the  semi-darkness,  and  whispered  (as  if  awe-struck),  '  There's
Louisa  B.'  I  rose,  looked,  but  saw  nothing.  She  said,  '  Are  you  afraid  to
go  in  ? '  '  Not  at  all,'  I  replied,  and  went,  and  passed  my  arm  round  to
prove  it  was  mere  fancy  on  her  part.  However,  the  result  showed  that
was  youthful  presumption  on  my  part.

"  The  next  morning,  Mr.  D.  heard  the  story  from  his  sister  in  her  own
apartment,  where  she  breakfasted.  He  said  to  me  in  the  breakfast-room,
'  Did  not  you  see  anything  last  night.  Miss  Hill  1 '  '  Nothing  whatever,'  I
replied.  '  Well,'  said  he,  '  I  suppose  you  think  us  Scotch  very  superstitious,
but  an  aunt  of  ours  and  two  of  my  sisters  have  the  gift  of  second -sight.'

"  That  day  passed,  but  the  following  day  at  noon,  Mr.  D.  met  me  at
the  bottom  of  the  stairs  with  an  open  letter  and  said,  '  That  was  no  fancy
of  Mrs.  R.'s  ;  poor  Louisa  B.  died  at  9  o'clock  that  evening,  of  brain  fever,
after  measles.'  "  Anne  Elizabeth  Theupp."

Since  giving  this  account,  Mrs.  Thrupp  has  referred  to  old  letters,  and
has  come  to  the  opinion  that  the  date  must  have  been  towards  the  end  of
1847.  We  find,  however,  from  the  obituary  in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine
that  a  death,  which  is  almost  certainly  that  of  the  Miss  Louisa  B.  of  the
narrative,  took  place  on  July  8,  1847.  This  suggests  that  the  detail  of
sitting  hy  the  fire  is  inaccurate — the  temperature  at  9  p.m.  on  that
day,  as  we  learn  from  the  Greenwich  Observatory,  having  been  60°  ;
but  Mrs.  Thrupp  is  quite  certain  that  her  memory  is  right  on
this  point.  She  further  tells  us  that  there  were  reasons  why  Miss
B.  should  have  wished  to  see  Mr.  D.,  who  was  an  old  friend  of  the
family,  but  that  she  knew  little  of  Mrs.  R.  Mrs  R.  has  been  dead
some  years ;  and  Mrs.  Durward,   a  lady  who  was  her   companion  at  the


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  41

time,  and  who — as  Mrs.  Thrupp  recollects — assisted  Mrs.  R.  to  bed,
remembers  no  more  of  the  matter  than  that  Mrs.  R.  was  excited.  She
mentions,  however,  that  Mrs.  R.  was  "  subject  to  a  kind  of  seizure,"  in
which  she  would  become  quite  rigid,  and  point  with  her  finger  to  where
she  imagined  her  husband  to  be,  exclaiming,  "  There  he  is."  These  fits
occurred  perhaps  half  a  dozen  times  in  a  year,  and  were  brought  on  by
any  news  of  him  that  distressed  her.  Mrs.  Durward  never  knew  her  to
have  apparitions  of  anyone  except  her  husband.

This  case  is  an  example  of  an  appearance  to  a  person  only
slightly  connected  with  the  agent ;  and  it  cannot  but  suggest  the
question,  would  Mr.  D.  have  seen  the  figure  had  he  been  present  ?
I  shall  recur  to  the  point  in  connection  with  "collective  "  hallucinations
(Chap.  XVIII., §  7).  As  to  Mrs.  R.'s  pathological  visions,  I  may  point
out  that  the  extent  to  which  they  weaken  the  evidence  for  telepathy
afforded  by  the  present  incident  may  easily  be  exaggerated.  People
seem  sometimes  to  regard  any  real  or  supposed  tendency  to  subjective
hallucination  on  the  part  of  the  percipient  as  at  once  fatal  to  an
alleged  telepathic  case.  Now  let  us  grant  for  the  moment  that  Mrs.
E.'s  visions  of  her  husband  prove  a  tendency  to  similar  subjective
visions  of  other  persons  known  to  her ;  and  let  us  make  the  extreme
supposition  that,  unknown  to  her  intimate  attendant  who  never  knew
her  to  have  any  such  experience,  she  actually  had  50  in  the  course
of  her  adult  life — or  on  an  average  one  in  every  292  days,  if  we
reckon  her  adult  life  as  40  years.  Then  the  probability  of  her  having
a  vision  of  the  sort  on  the  particular  day  on  which  Miss  B.  died  would
be  2¥2.  But  the  probability  that  that  particular  vision  would  repre-
sent Miss  B.,  with  whom  she  had  only  a  slight  acquaintance,  would
clearly  be  very  small ;  let  us  be  liberal,  and  call  it  to.  Thus  the
probability  of  her  hitting  off  the  above  coincidence  by  accident  would
be  at  most  nho,  even  if  we  took  only  the  identity  of  day  into
account ;  and  very  much  less  if  we  relied  on  the  alleged  identity
of  hour.  It  would  surely  be  irrational  to  exclude  from  the  cumu-
lative telepathic  evidence  a  case  where  the  probability  of  accidental
occurrence  remains  as  minute  as  this.

The  next  case  is  from  General  H.,  who,  unfortunately,  will  not
permit  the  publication  of  his  name.  The  account  was  procured
through  the  kindness  of  Miss  A.  A.  Leith,  of  8,  Dorset  Square,  N.W.

"November  11th,  1884.

(226)  "In  1856  I  was  engaged  on  duty  at  a  place  called  Roha,  some  40
miles  south  of  Bombay,  and  moving  about  in  the  districts  (as  it  is
termed  in  India).  My  only  shelter  was  a  tent,  in  which  I  lived  for
several  months  in  the  year.     My  parents,  and  only  sister,  about   22   years


42  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

of  age,  were  living  at  K.,  from  which  place  letters  used  to  take  a  week
reaching  me.  My  sister  and  I  were  regular  correspondents,  and  the  post
generally  arrived  about  6  a.m.,  as  I  was  starting  to  my  work.  It  was  on
the  18th  April  of  that  year  (a  day  never  to  be  forgotten)  that  I  received
a  letter  from  my  mother,  stating  that  my  sister  was  not  feeling  well,  but
hoped  to  write  to  me  the  next  day.  There  was  nothing  in  the  letter  to
make  me  feel  particularly  anxious.  After  my  usual  out-door  work,  I
returned  to  my  tent,  and  in  due  course  set  to  my  ordinary  daily  work.
At  2  o'clock  my  clerk  was  with  me,  reading  some  native  documents  that
required  my  attention,  and  I  was  in  no  way  thinking  of  my  sister,  when
all  of  a  sudden  I  was  startled  by  seeing  my  sister  (as  it  appeared)  walk
in  front  of  me  from  one  door  of  the  tent  to  the  other,  dressed  in  her  night-
dress. ^  The  apparition  had  such  an  effect  upon  me  that  I  felt  persuaded
that  my  sister  had  died  at  that  time.  I  wrote  at  once  to  my  father,
stating  what  I  had  seen,  and  in  due  time  I  also  heard  from  him  that
my  sister  had  died  at  that  time.  ct  j    q    jj  "

An  obituary  notice  in  AllerHs  Indian  Mail  shows  that  General  H.'s
sister  died  on  April  18th,  1856.

In  answer  to  inquiries.  General  H.  writes  :

"  By  the  context  of  the  narrative  you  will  see  it  was  2  p.m.,  broad
daylight.     My  vision  corresponded  with  the  exact  time  of  death.

"  I  have  never  seen  any  other  apparition.

"  You  must  excuse  my  sanctioning  my  name  being  appended  to  the
account,  though  I  am  as  certain  of  it  as  I  am  of  my  own  existence."

[General  H.  further  informs  us  that  his  parents  are  dead,  and  that
there  is  no  friend  living  who  may  have  seen  his  letter.]

The  next  case — a  recent  one — is  of  a  very  unusual  type  as
regards  the  effect  on  the  percipient,  and,  perhaps,  on  that  very
account  suggests  the  telepathic  explanation  rather  more  strongly
than  the  facts  warrant.  But  as  regards  the  facts  themselves,  there
can  be  little  doubt.  The  evidence,  though  it  does  not  come  from  the
percipient,  is  of  the  sort  which  is  as  good  as  first-hand ;  and  this  is
the  more  fortunate,  in  that,  as  it  happens,  there  never  was  a  moment
at  which  the  first-hand  evidence  could  have  been  given.  The  account
is  in  the  words  of  Mr,  H.  King,  of  the  Koyal  Military  College,  York

Town,  Famborough,  Hants.

"March,  1885.
(227)  "  On  Thursday  night,  October  30th  [1884],  H.  M.  and  I  went  to
dine  at  Broadmoor.  We  stayed  till  10  p.m.  or  so,  and  on  leaving  the  house
were  talking  of  different  things,  M.  being  quite  as  usual ;  when,  after
five  minutes'  walk,  M  suddenly  stopped,  and  said,  '  Look,  look  !  oh,
look  ! '  We  thouglit  nothing  of  it  at  first,  but  he  still  kept  pointing
with  his  finger  at  some  imaginary  thing  in  the  darkness.  The  spot  we
were  in  was  very  dark,  with  a  wood  on  our  right  and  a  field  on  our  left,

1  Tor  this  feature,  compare  the  dream-case,  No.  118.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  43

separated  from  us  by  a  railing.  Thinking  M.  saw  somebody  hiding
behind  a  bush  I  went  forward,  but  saw  nothing.  M.  now,  still  saying
'  Look  at  her,  look  at  her,'  fell  back  against  the  railing  and  lay  motion-
less with  his  back  against  it.  We  ran  to  him,  asking  him  what  was  the
matter,  but  he  only  moaned.  After  a  while  he  seemed  better.  We
wanted  him  to  come  on,  but  he  said,  '  Where  is  my  stick  1 ' — which  he  had
dropped.  '  Oh,  never  mind  your  stick,'  I  said,  for  I  was  afraid  of  not
being  at  the  college  before  the  shutting  of  the  doors  ;  but  he  would  look
for  his  stick,  which  he  found  by  lighting  a  match.  We  walked  on
together,  M.,  notwithstanding  all  my  efforts  to  get  him  into  conversation,
not  saying  a  word.  After  walking  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  he
suddenly  said,  '  Where  were  they  carrying  her  to  ?  I  tell  you  they  were
carrying  her  ;  didn't  you  see  them  carrying  her  ? '  I  tried  to  quiet  him,
but  he  kept  on  saying,  '  I  tell  you  they  were  carrying  her.'  In  a  short
time  he  was  pacified  and  walked  quietly  on  for  half  a  mile  or  so,  when  he
said,  looking  round  in  surprise,  '  Hullo  !  we  must  have  come  a  short  cut.
I  know  this  house.'  I  said  we  hadn't ;  but  he  said,  '  We  must  have  run
then.  It  seems  only  a  minute  ago  since  we  left  the  house.'  He  several
times  expressed  his  surprise  at  the  quickness  we  had  done  the  last  half-
mile  in.     He  was  all  right  from  this  to  the  college.

"  On  Sunday  morning  he  told  me  that  something  very  bad  happened  on
Thursday  night.  An  old  lady  who  was  very  fond  of  him,  but  whom  he  hadn't
seen  for  a  long  time,  had  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease.  She  had  been  out
somewhere  and  had  come  home,  when,  as  she  was  receiving  some  friends,  she
fell  dead,  and,  to  use  his  words,  she  was  carried  out.  I  immediately  asked
him  at  what  hour  did  she  die  ?  He  said  at  between  10  and  11.  (It  was
a  little  after  10  when  he  saw  his  vision.)  I  could  not  get  the  exact  hour
of  the  lady's  death,  as  he  didn't  like  the  subject.  When  he  told  me  this,
he  knew  nothing  of  what  occurred  on  the  walk  home.  When  he  was
told  of  it,  he  didn't  remember  a  thing  about  the  vision ;  but  said  if  he
hadn't  known  that  he  hadn't  drunk  anything  (which  was  true),  he  would
have  said  he  had  been  drunk.  He  seemed  to  have  been  in  a  sort  of  stupor
all  the  time.  I  think  I  ought  to  mention  that  he  told  me  long  before
this  that  he  had  seen  a  vision  of  a  girl  who  had  been  drowned. ^  This  is
a  true  account  of  what  happened.

(Signed)  "  H.  King  (the  writer  of  the  above).

"A.  Hamilton-Jones."

Mr.  H.  King  adds,  "  My  friend  [Mr.  Jones]  remembers  perfectly
M.'s  not  being  surprised  at  the  news  [of  the  death],  and  his  saying  it
seemed  to  have  happened  before."

[Mr.  R.  A.  King,  of  36,  G-rove  Lane,  Denmark  Hill,  uncle  of  the
narrator,  through  whose  kindness  we  obtained  this  account,  says  :  "  M.
has  such  a  horror  of  the  whole  affair  that  my  nephew  does  not  let  me
write  to  ask  him  about  the  old  lady's  death."  We  are  thus  unable  to
verify  the  date  of  the  death  independently.  M.'s  name  is  known  to  me.
He  has  left  the  Military  College.]

The  next  case  is  from  the  Rev.  F.  Barker,  late  Rector  of  Cottenham,
Cambridge.

1  This  other  vision  followed  closely  on  an  accident  which  had  much  distressed  the
percipient.


44  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"July  2nd,  1884.

(228)  "  At  about  11  o'clock  on  the  night  of  December  6th,  1873,  I  had
just  got  into  bed,  and  had  certainly  not  fallen  asleep,  or  even  into  a  doze,
when  I  suddenly  startled  my  wife  by  a  deep  groan,  and  when  she  asked  the
reason,  I  said,  '  I  have  just  seen  my  aunt.  She  came  and  stood  beside  me,
and  smiled  with  her  old  kind  smile,  and  disappeared.'  A  much-loved  aunt,
my  mother's  sister,  was  at  that  time  in  Madeira,  for  her  health,  ac-
companied by  my  cousin,  her  niece.  I  had  no  reason  to  think  that  she  was
critically  ill  at  this  time,  but  the  impression  made  upon  me  was  so  great
that  the  next  day  I  told  her  family  (my  mother  among  them)  what  I  had
seen.  Within  a  week  afterwards  we  heard  that  she  had  died  on  that  very
night,  and,  making  all  allowance  for  longitude,  at  about  that  very  time.

"  When  my  cousin,  who  was  with  her  to  the  last,  heard  what  I  had
seen,  she  said,  '  I  am  not  at  all  surprised,  for  she  was  calling  out  for  you
all  the  time  she  was  dying.'

"  This  is  the  only  time  I  have  experienced  anything  of  this  nature.  I
think,  perhaps,  this  story  first-hand  may  interest  you.  I  can  only  say  that
the  vivid  impression  I  received  that  night  has  never  left  me.

"  Febdbeick  Barker."

We  find  the  date  of  death  confirmed  in  the  Times  obituary.

Mrs.  Barker's  account  is  as  follows  : —

"  I  recollect  the  circumstances  well,  upon  which  my  husband  wrote  to
you.  It  must  have  been  somewhere  about  11  o'clock.  He  was  not
asleep  (for  he  had  only  just  spoken),  when  he  groaned  deeply.  I  asked
what  was  the  matter,  and  he  said  his  aunt,  who  was  then  in  Madeira,  had
appeared  to  him,  smiling  at  him  with  her  own  kind  smile,  and  then
vanished.  He  said  she  had  '  something  black,  it  might  have  been  lace,
thrown  over  her  head.'  The  next  day  he  told  many  relations  of  the
occurrence,  and  it  turned  out  she  died  that  very  night.  Her  niece.  Miss
Garnett,  told  me  she  was  not  at  all  astonished  that  he  should  have  seen
her  aunt,  for  that  while  she  was  dying  she  was  calling  out  for  him.  He
had  been  to  her  almost  like  a  son.

"P.  S.  Barker."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barker  says,  "  My  recollection  is  of  some
lace-like  head-gear,  as  of  a  black  lace  veil  thrown  round  the  head."

The  following  statement  is  from  Miss  Garnett,  who  was  with  Mr.
Barker's  aunt  at  the  time  of  her  death  : —

"  Wy reside,  near  Lancaster.

"October,  1885.

"  I  beg  to  certify  that  I  was  with  my  aunt.  Miss ,  at  the  time

of  her  death  in  Madeira,  December  6th,  1873.  On  hearing  that  my  cousin,
the  Bev.  F.  Barker,  now  living  in  Stanley  Place,  Chester,  had  had  some
kind  of  a  vision  of  my  aunt  at  a  time  almost  exactly  corresponding  with
that  of  her  death,  I  told  my  uncle,  from  whom  I  heard  of  the  occurrence,
that  I  was  not  surprised,  since  my  aunt  had  so  frequently  expressed  a
wish  to  see  Mr.  Barker  during  the  last  few  days  of  her  life

"  Louisa   Garnett."


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  45

The  following  case  was  first  published  in  Burma,  Past  and
Present,  by  Lieut.-Gen.  Albert  Fytche,  C.S.I,  Vol  I,  pp.  177-8.

(229)  "A  remarkable  incident  occurred  to  me  at  Maulmain,  which  made
a  deep  impression  upon  my  imagination.  I  saw  a  ghost^  with  my  own  eyes
in  broad  daylight,  of  which  I  could  make  an  affidavit.  I  had  an  old
schoolfellow,  who  was  afterwards  a  college  friend,  with  whom  I  had  lived
in  the  closest  intimacy.  Years,  however,  passed  without  our  seeing  each
other.  One  morning  I  had  just  got  out  of  bed,  and  was  dressing  myself,
when  suddenly  my  old  friend  entered  the  room.  I  greeted  him  warmly ;
told  him  to  call  for  a  cup  of  tea  in  the  verandah,  and  promised  to  be  with
him  immediately.  I  dressed  myself  in  all  haste,  and  went  out  into  the
verandah,  but  found  no  one  there.  I  could  not  believe  my  eyes.  I  called
to  the  sentry  who  was  posted  at  the  front  of  the  house,  but  he  had  seen  no
strange  gentleman  that  morning  ;  the  servants  also  declared  that  no  such
person  had  entered  the  house.  I  was  certain  I  had  seen  my  friend.  I  was
not  thinking  about  him  at  the  time,  yet  I  was  not  taken  by  surprise,  as
steamers  and  other  vessels  were  frequently  arriving  at  Maulmain.  A  fort-
night afterwards  news  arrived  that  he  had  died  600  miles  ofi',  about  the
very  time  I  had  seen  him  at  Maulmain."

General  Fytche  writes  to  Professor  Sidgwick  as  follows  : —

"  Durling  Dean,  West  Clifi',  Bournemouth,"
"December  22nd,  1883."

"  A  paper  containing  answers  to  your  list  of  questions  is  enclosed.  I
don't  think  I  have  anything  further  to  add,  except  to  reiterate  my  convic-
tion that  my  friend's  etcJw^ov  did  appear  to  me  as  stated.  My  friend's
death  was  a  sudden  one  ;  I  had  never  heard  of  his  previous  illness,  nor
had  I  been  thinking  about  him  in  any  way.  In  animistic  philosophy,
savage  or  civilised,  I  believe  it  is  admitted  that  an  apparition  of  the  kind
bears  the  likeness  of  its  fleshly  body.

"  Answers  to  questions  as  to  the  apparition  at  Maulmain  : —

(1)  "The  printed  narrative  was  written  from  memory.  I  kept  no
diary  after  my  papers  were  burnt  at  Bassein  (see  p.  24  of  book).  There
are  no  letters  extant  which  I  am  aware  of  which  were  written  at  the  time
of  the  occurrence.

(2)  "  The  news  of  my  friend's  death  was  conveyed  by  the  public  news-
papers, which  arrived  at  Maulmain  by  the  mail  steamer  about  a  fortnight
after  the  incident  in  question.  They  stated  that  the  death  of  my  friend
occurred  in  the  early  morning  of  the  day  his  spirit  appeared  to  me.

(3)  "  When  the  apparition  was  addressed  by  me,  it  did  not  respond  by
word  or  sign,  at  least  so  far  as  I  observed.  I  was  not  thinking  of  an
apparition.     I  took  it  for  my  friend  in  the  flesh.

(4)  "The  event  occurred  some  26  years  ago,  and  the  persons  who
resided  near  me  at  the  time,  and  whom  I  visited  on  the  morning  of  the
occurrence,  are  dead.  The  year  following  I  visited  England,  and  mentioned
the  circumstance  to  several  members  of  my  family,  and  amongst  others,  I
think,  my  cousin,  Louis  Tennyson  d'Eyncourt,  one  of  the  London
magistrates,  but  it  was  not  a  matter  that  I  ever  talked  much  about.

(5)  "  I  have  had  no  similar  experience.     I  have  had  no  hallucination  of

1  See  p.  48,  note.


46  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

sight  or  hearing,  and  have  always  been  considered  as  a  person  of  the
strongest  nerve.  "  A.  Fytche  (General)."

Mr.  d'Eyncourt  writes  from  31,  Cornwall  Gardens,  S.W.,  on  Dec.  21,
1885  :—

"  General  Fytche  paid  me  a  visit  at  Hadley  a  year  or  two^  before  he
published  his  book — I  should  say  from  15  to  18  years  since,  and  told  me
the  story  as  narrated  afterwards  in  his  book ;  and  it  made  a  great
impression  on  me  and  my  family.  I  cannot  remember  what  year  he  told
me,  but  certainly  not  25  years  since ;  perhaps  20  would  be  nearer  the
mark."

[General  Fytche  is  under  a  promise  not  to  disclose  his  friend's  name ;
which  prevents  us  from  ascertaining  the  exact  date  of  the  incident.]

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  Evans,  of  Byron  Cottage,  Chalford,
near  Stroud.

"April  17th,  1884.

(230)  "In  the  fall  of  1867,  I  took  a  trip  to  Canada;  and  one  evening,
the  early  part  of  October,  the  same  year,  I  was  sitting  with  a  merchant  of
Toronto,  in  the  dress-circle  of  the  theatre ;  and  during  the  evening  my
attention  was  attracted  towards  a  portion  of  the  pit,  which  was,  through
shadow,  slightly  obscured,  by  a  face  looking  up  at  me  in  an  intent,  weird,
and  agonising  manner,  that  caused  a  feeling  of  awe  to  overpower  me,  as  I
recognised  in  the  features  my  twin  brother,^  who  at  that  time  was  in
China.  The  figure,  although  in  shadow,  appeared  lighted  up  super-
naturally,  and  revealed  itself  plainly,  so  that  I  could  not  be  mistaken  about
the  face.  I  instantly  exclaimed  to  my  friend,  '  Good  God  !  there  is  my
brother,'  pointing  at  the  same  time  to  the  figure.  He  said,  'I  cannot  see
anyone  looking  up  here.'  However,  I  was  so  excited  I  rushed  down  to
the  pit  where  he  stood,  but  could  not  see  anyone  resembling  him  in
features  whatever.  I  am  not  superstitious  or  a  Spiritualist,  but  could  not
get  over  the  startling  circumstances  for  some  time.

"  On  my  return  home  to  England,  shortly  afterwards,  much  to  my
grief  and  sorrow,  I  found  my  brother  had  died  at  the  French  Hospital,
Shanghai,  on  the  6th  October,  1867.  The  incident  in  the  theatre  flashed
into  my  thoughts,  and  impressed  me  I  had  seen  his  apparition,  and  I  took
the  trouble  to  ascertain  date  of  performance,  and  found  it  corresponded.
I  could  not  be  mistaken,  as  it  occurred  the  first  week  I  was  in  Toronto,
and  the  patronage  of  the  military  placed  the  performance  precisely  on  the
6th  October,  1867.

"  I  am  prepared  to  make  an  afiidavit  that  such  are  the  facts.

"J.  Evans."

We  find  from  a  certified  copy  of  the  Register  of  Deaths  kept  at  the
British  Consulate,  at  Shanghai,  that  the  death  took  place  on  October  6th,
1868  (not  1867),  at  the  General  Hospital.

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Evans,  explaining  that  it  would  be  the  evening,
(10.37  p.m.)  not  of  October  6th,  but  of  October  5th,  at  Toronto,  that  would
correspond  with  October  6th,  midday,   at  Shanghai.     As  I  anticipated,  it

1  The  interval  must  have  been  longer  than  this,  as  the  book  was  published  in  1878.

2  Other  cases  where  the  agent  was  a  twin  brother  are  Nos.  76,  77,  78,  and  134.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  47

turned  out  that  he  had  assumed  that  October  6th  in  one  place  would  be
October  6th  in  another,  and  had  simply  asked  which  opera  was  performed
on  October  6th.     He  says  : —

"  I  wrote  to  my  friend  in  Toronto,  asking  him  if  the  '  Grand  Duchess  '
were  performed  on  October  6th,  and  he  replied  in  the  affirmative  ;  but  at
the  same  time  it  was  performed  on  the  5th,  I  am  sure,  as  well  as  on  the
■6th.     The  company  was  performing  opera  houffe  during  the  entire  week.

"  I  have  never  had  any  hallucinations  before  or  since."

We  have  procured  from  Toronto  a  copy  of  the  Daily  Globe,  which
shows  that  the  "  Grand  Duchess  "  was  performed  on  both  nights.

[Mr.  Evans  has  had  no  recent  communication  with  his  companion  of
the  evening,  who  was  only  an  acquaintance ;  and  corroboration  cannot  be
obtained.  The  uncertainty  as  to  the  day  of  the  apparition  seems  irre-
movable. If  it  was  the  5th,  the  coincidence  may  have  been  quite  exact ;
if  it  was  the  6th,  the  12  hours'  limit  must  have  been  exceeded,  unless  the
death  took  place  in  the  hour  or  two  preceding  midnight.]

Here  we  have  to  notice  once  more  the  luminous  appearance  of
the  phantasm  (Chap.  XII.,  §  7).

The  following  narrative  appeared  in  the  Daily  Telegraph,  in
October,  1881.  Unfortunately  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  corro-
boration or  further  details,  as  we  have  failed  to  discover  the  writer's
present  address.      We  learn   from  the  War  Office  that  he  resigned

his  militia  commission  in  August,  1880.

"  West  Brompton.

"October  25th,  1881.
(231)  "  Sir, — Of  many  comrades  who  gave  up  their  lives  for  Queen  and
country  in  Zululand  and  Natal,  for  none  have  I,  or  those  who  knew  him,
felt  a  keener  pang  of  regret  than  for  Rudolph  Gough.  In  November,  1878,
Gough,  having  retired  from  the  Coldstream  Guards,  proceeded  as  a
volunteer  to  Natal,  where  on  arrival  he  was  given  a  company  in  Com-
mandant Nettleton's  battalion  of  the  Natal  Native  Contingent,  with  which
regiment  he  served  in  the  first  advance  into  Zululand.  The  Etshowe
relief  column  commenced  its  advance  on  March  29th,  and  reached  the
Inyone  River  on  the  evening  of  that  day.  To  all  our  astonishment,  Gough,
who  had  risen  from  a  sick  bed  in  Durban,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant
George  Davis  of  his  own  regiment,  arrived  in  camp  at  dusk,  having  ridden
through  from  Durban,  a  distance  of  82  miles,  in  little  over  a  day.  Gough,
who  had  suffered  badly  en  route,  was  again  severely  attacked  by  that
curse  of  South  African  Armies — dysentery — and  was  ordered  to  one  of  the
ambulances,  where  he  remained  until  the  morning  of  the  action  of  Gingih-
lovo.  The  moment  the  alarm  sounded,  the  poor  fellow  staggered  out  and
took  command  of  his  company,  and  afterwards  actually  led  his  men  over
the  shelter  trench,  when  the  cheer  was  started  and  the  charge  sounded.
The  excitement  and  exertion  proved  too  much  for  my  poor  friend's
enfeebled  frame,  and  utter  collapse  followed.

"  On  April  17th,  just  before  '  tattoo,'  I  was  sitting  in  the  gipsy-looking
edifice  that  the  officers  of  the  King's  Royal  Rifle  Corps  had  rigged  up,


48  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

which  we  dubbed  the  '  mess  house '  or  '  banqueting  hall,'  finishing  a
letter  to  a  newspaper  for  which  I  acted  as  correspondent,  when  the
brigade  bugler  rang  out  '  last  post.'  I  walked  to  the  door,  outside  of  which
I  saw  standing  the  man  who,  two  days  ago,  I  had  been  told  was  dying  on
the  other  side  of  the  Tugela.  I  could  not  describe  on  paper  the  extra-
ordinary sensation  that  Gough's  unexpected  appearance  gave  me.

"  Some  few  days  after  I  returned  to  Fort  Pearson  to  re-assume  com-
mand of  the  Natal  Native  Pioneers.  After  reporting  my  arrival,  I  made
my  way  to  the  post-oiiice,  where  I  was  much  shocked  at  being  told  of  my
friend's  death.  The  postmaster  handed  me  a  telegram,  which  had  been
suffered  to  remain  in  a  pigeon-hole  for  some  days,  instead  of  being  sent  on
to  the  front.  It  was  from  the  civil  surgeon,  who  helped  to  soothe  the  last
moments  of  my  friend,  and  ran  as  follows  :  '  Captain  the  Hon.  H.  E,.
Gough  is  dying.  He  has  been  asking  for  you  all  day.  Come  down  here  if
possible.'  On  subsequent  inquiries  at  the  hospital,  I  found  that  he  had
died  at  exactly  the  hour  I  fancied  I  had  seen  him  outside  the  mess  house
at  Gingihlovo.  Prior  to  the  occurrence  I  have  narrated,  I  never  had  the
faintest  belief  in  the  actuality  of  supernatural  ^  phenomena  of  any  nature.

"Stuart  Stephens.
"  (Late  Lieutenant  4th  Battalion  Royal  Dublin  Pusiliers.)"

Miss  I.  F.  Galwey  writes  to  us  from  5,  Earlsfort  Terrace,  Dublin : —

"May  18th,  1885.

"  I  met  two  of  young  Gough's  cousins  on  Saturday  ;  and  they  assure  me
that  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Stephens  i?  a  perfectly  authentic  one,
and  is  fully  believed  by  all  the  family  ;  but  they  know  nothing  of  Mr.
Stephens,  except  that  he  was  a  comrade  of  poor  Rudolph's,  and  that  just
before  his  death  he  had  expressed  an  earnest  desire  to  see  him."

[The  London  Gazette  for  July  22nd,  1879,  gives  the  date  of  the  death
of  Captain  Gough  as  April  19th.  It  seems  very  probable  that  the  "  17th  "
in  Mr.  Stephens'  account  is  a  misprint.  For  if  he  inquired  at  the
hospital  and  learnt  the  identity  of  hour,  it  is  not  likely  that  he  made  so
grave  a  mistake  as  to  the  day.  But  from  the  South  African  Campaign  of
1879,  by  J.  R.  Mackinnon,  we  learn  that  Captain  Gough  had  been
desperately  ill  for  some  days  before  his  death  ;  so  that  even  if  the  vision
did  precede  the  death  by  two  days,  it  might  still  be  connected  with  his
condition.  It  is  clear,  too,  from  the  words  of  the  telegram  that  his
thoughts  had  been  directed  to  the  percipient  for  some  little  time  before  his
death.]

It  might  perhaps  seem  that  this  case  ought  to  have  been  disallowed,
on  the  principle  that,  when  the  percipient  is  in  anxiety  about  the
person  whose  phantasm  appears,  there  is  an  appreciable  chance  that
the  appearance  is  the  purely  subjective  creation  of  his  own  brain
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  508-9).  But  it  would,  perhaps,  be  a  trifle  pedantic  to  apply
this  principle  to  cases  which  occur  in  the  thick  of  a  war,  where  the
idea  of  death  is  constant  and  familiar.      In  such  circumstances,  the

1  I  must  once  again  disclaim  all  responsibility  for  this  and  similar  expressions  on  the
part  of  informants.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  49

mental  attitude  caused  by  the  knowledge  that  a  comrade  is  in  peril
seems  scarcely  parallel  to  that  which  similar  knowledge  might  pro-
duce among  those  who  are  sitting  brooding  at  home.  At  any  rate,
if  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  absent  comrades  be  a  natural  and  known
source  of  hallucinations  during  campaigns,  it  is  odd  that,  among  several
hundreds  of  cases  of  subjective  hallucination,  I  find  no  second  instance
of  the  phenomenon.

The  following  account  is  from  a  lady,  Miss  H.,  whose  name  and
address  maybe  given  to  private  inquirers,  and  who  would  gladly  have
allowed  its  publication  had  friends  not  been  unwilling.  Having
stated  that  on  Thursday,  November  16th,  1854,  about  10  o'clock  at
night,  she  had  a  vision  of  an  intimate  friend,  who  died  that  evening
at  7,  she  was  asked  to  furnish  particulars,  and  replied : —

"November,  1885.

(232)  "I  had  had  16  hours'  travelling  in  the  interior  of  a  diligence,
crossing  the  Apennines  from  Bologna  to  Florence.  I  was  perfectly  well,  but
unusually  tired.  I  was  in  the  Hotel  Europa,  in  Florence,  and  was  quite
wide  awake,  not  having  had  the  necessary  moments  in  which  to  compose
myself  to  sleep.  My  sister  had  just  fallen  asleep.  My  friend  stood  at  the
side  of  the  bed  nearest  to  me,  near  the  foot,  and  looked  at  me  fixedly.  She
was  in  white,  and  looked  exactly  as  she  did  in  life.  She  was  an  old  lady,
and  had  been  almost  bedridden  for  long.  She  had  taken  very  keen
interest  in  our  Italian  tour.  I  lost  my  presence  of  mind,  and  woke  my
sister.  I  also  called  out  to  my  father,  who  was  in  the  adjoining  room,  not
yet  asleep,  but  too  tired  to  do  more  than  answer,  though  he  remembered
the  circumstance  of  my  calling  to  him  the  next  morning.  Directly  this
alarm  was  shown,  the  vision  disappeared.  It  was  both  vivid,  and  produced
a  supernatural  sensation  which  I  never  before  or  since  experienced  to
anything  like  the  same  extent.  "  E.  H.  H."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on
Thursday,  November  16th,  1854.  Inquiries  have  been  made  at  the  hotel
in  Florence,  in  order  to  obtain  confirmation  of  the  date  of  Miss  H.'s
stay  there  :  but  the  hotel  changed  hands  a  few  years  later,  and  the
information  cannot  be  got.

Miss  H.  has  experienced  only  one  other  hallucination,  and  that  was
"  in  the  height  of  a  severe  illness,"  when  she  fancied  her  maid  was
at  the  bedside.  In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  writes  that  the  sister  who
was  with  her  cannot  recall  the  occurrence  ;  and  adds  : —

"  The  fact  is  she  only  woke  for  an  instant,  and  as  she  is  9  years
younger  than  myself,  and  I  saw  she  believed  I  had  only  been  dreaming
this,  I  spared  her.  I  had  not  fallen  asleep.  I  did  not  argue  the  point
with  her,  or  refer  to  it  again  for  some  long  time  after.  It  was  the
same  with  my  father.  I  called  out  Mrs.  W.'s  name,  and  he  referred
to  it  as  a  dream  in  the  morning.  But  I  confided  in  a  sister,  then
recently  married  to  a  Norfolk  clergyman,  who  was  very  near  my  own  age.
I  was  the  more  led  to  do  this  as  the  lady  who  stood  near  me  was  her
husband's    mother.       The    account    goes    on    to  say  how    exceptionally

VOL.    II.  E


■.n  f^i


50  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

interested  the  lady  had  been  in  the  route  and  experience  of  the  travellers;
and  concludes  thus  :  "  In  those  days  such  things  were  subjects  of  ridicule
and  unbelief  more  than  they  now  are,  and  I  am  surprised  how  lightly  I
took  what  yet  I  felt  positive  was  no  dream."

The  sister  to  whom  Miss  H.  mentioned  her  experience  writes  to  her  as
follows,  on  December  4th,  1885  : —

"  My  Dear  Elise, — I  fully  remember  your  naming  the  vision  of  Mrs.
W.  which  you  had  on  the  very  evening  on  which  she  died.  We  compared
notes  faithfully  at  the  time ;  and  it  was  most  remarkable  because  she
had  not  been  visibly  worse,  and  died  at  the  last  suddenly.  She  had
thought  a  great  deal  about  you  being  in  a  Roman  Catholic  country  at
the  time  of  some  great  council,  and  had  named  in  two  or  three  letters  that
she  should  be  glad  when  you  got  home ;  so  you  were  on  her  mind.  I
believe  you  named  it  in  a  letter,  but  I  can't  find  it.  But  I  am  as  sure
of  the  fact  of  your  telling  me  (on  your  return  home,  and  coming  here  on
the  way)  all  particulars  as  if  it  was  yesterday — the  rooms  en  suite,  and
our  father  hearing  you  call  out  to  Memie,  who  had  fallen  asleep  before
you  ;  and  you  naming  '  Mrs.  W.'  to  father,  and  he,  supposing  it  was  a
dream,  trying  to  soothe  you.  And  you,  though  feeling  sure  you  were
awake,  yet  tried  to  think  it  was  a  sort  of  dream  '  as  when  one  awaketh.'
The  first  news  you  received  from  England  was  the  account  of  the
peaceful  and  rather  sudden  death  of  one  who  was  renowned  for  energy
of  spirit  all  her  life,  and  who  was  full  of  imagination  and  great  love  for
you.  This  is  my  statement.  The  dates  were  carefully  compared,  that  I
am  sure  of.  My  husband  is  as  certain  as  I  am  of  all  I  say. — Your
afi"ectionate  sister,  "M.  A.  W."

The  next  case,  like  the  last,  seems  fairly  to  fall  among  waking
rather  than  "  borderland "  impressions,  since  a  special  reason  is
remembered  for  wakefulness.  It  is,  however,  still  more  remote,  and
depends  on  a  single  memory.  The  Rev.  H.  E.  Noyes,  of  Christ
Church  Vicarage,  Kingstown,  a  nephew  of  Mrs.  G.,  the  narrator,
(formerly  of  the  Parsonage,  Kingstown,)  vouches  for  the  strength  of
the  impression  made  on  her.  "  1883.

(233)  "  On  February  26,  1850,  I  was  awake,  for  I  was  to  go  to  my
sister-in-law,  at  Kingstown,  and  visiting  was  then  an  event  to  me.  About
2  o'clock  in  the  morning  my  brother  walked  into  our  room  (my  sister's)  and

stood  beside  my  bed.     I  called  to  her,  '  There  is .'  He  was  at  the  time

quartered  at  Paisley,  and  a  mail  car  from  Belfast  passed,  about  that  hour,
not  more  than  about  half  a  mile  from  our  village.  When  he  could  get  a
short  leave,  he  liked  to  come  in  upon  us  and  give  us  a  delightful  surprise.
I  even  recollect  its  crossing  my  mind  what  there  was  in  the  house  ready
that  we  could  give  him  to  eat.  He  looked  down  most  lovingly  and  kindly,
and  waved  his  hand  and  he  was  gone.  I  recollect  it  all  as  if  it  were  only  last
night  it  all  occurred,  and  my  feeling  of  astonishment,  not  at  his  coming  in-
to the  room  at  all,  but  at  where  he  could  have  gone.   At  that  hour  he  died."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  the  Army  List,  and  find
from  a  newspaper  notice  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  morning,
and  was  extremely  sudden.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  51

The  next  account  was  given  to  us  by  Mrs.  Swithinbank,  of
Ormleigh,  Mowbray  Road,  Upper  Norwood.  The  incident  occurred
about  1867.  "  1882.

(234)  "  When  my  son  H.  was  a  boy,  I  one  day  saw  him  off  to  school,
watching  him  down  the  Grove,  and  then  went  into  the  library  to  sit,  a
room  I  rarely  used  at  that  time  of  the  day.  Shortly  after,  he  appeared,
walking  over  the  wall  opposite  the  window.  The  wall  was  about  13  feet
distant  from  the  window  and  low,  so  that  when  my  son  stood  on  it  his
face  was  on  a  level  with  mine,  and  close  to  me.  I  hastily  threw  up  the
sash,  and  called  to  ask  why  he  had  returned  from  school,  and  why  he  was
there  ;  he  did  not  answer,  but  looked  full  at  me  with  a  frightened  expres-
sion, and  dropped  down  the  other  side  of  the  wall  and  disappeared.  Never
doubting  but  that  it  was  some  boyish  trick,  I  called  a  servant  to  tell  him
to  come  to  me,  but  not  a  trace  of  him  was  to  be  found,  though  there  was
no  screen  or  place  of  concealment.     I  myself  searched  with  the  same  result.

"  As  I  sat  still  wondering  where  and  how  he  had  so  suddenly  disappeared
a  cab  drove  up  with  H.  in  an  almost  unconscious  state,  brought  home  by  a
friend  and  schoolfellow,  who  said  that  during  a  dictation-lesson  he  had
suddenly  fallen  backward  over  his  seat,  calling  out  in  a  shrill  voice,
'  Mamma  will  know,'  and  became  insensible.  He  was  ill  that  day,
prostrate  the  next ;  but  our  doctor  could  not  account  for  the  attack,  nor
did  anything  follow  to  throw  any  light  on  his  appearance  to  me.  That  the
time  of  his  attack  exactly  corresponded  with  that  at  which  I  saw  his  figure
was  proved  both  by  his  master  and  class-mates."

The  Rev.  H.  Swithinbank,  eldest  son  of  the  writer  of  the  above,
explains  that  the  point  at  which  the  figure  was  seen  was  in  a  direct  line
between  the  house  (situated  at  Summerhill  Terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tyne)
and  the  school,  but  that  "  no  animal  but  a  bird  could  come  direct  that
way,"  and  that  the  walking  distance  between  the  two  places  was  nearly  a
mile.  He  describes  his  brother  as  of  a  nervous  temperament,  but  his
mother  as  just  the  opposite,  a  calm  person,  who  has  never  in  her  life  had
any  other  similar  experience.

The  next  account  is  from  Colonel  Swiney,  of  the  Duke  of  Cornwall's

Regiment.     Possibly,  in  this  as  in  some  other  cases,  publication  may

lead  to  our  obtaining  corroborative  evidence  from  persons  to  whom  we

have  as  yet  been  unable  to  apply  for  it.

"  Richmond  Barracks,  Dublin,  July  14th,  1885.

(235)  "  It  was  some  time  in  the  latter  end  of  September,  1864,  when
quartered  at  Shorncliffe  Camp,  I  thought  I  saw  my  eldest  brother  (whom  at
the  time  I  believed  to  be  in  India,  where  he  was  serving  in  the  Royal
Engineers)  walking  towards  me,  and  before  I  could  recover  from  my
astonishment,  the  figure  had  disappeared.  I  perfectly  well  remember
mentioning  the  fact  to  some  of  my  brother  ofiicers,  and  saying  how
curious  it  was,  but  never  thought  much  about  it  until  I  received  news  of
his  death,  which  had  occurred  about  (as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  without
having  made  any  note)  the  time  I  had  imagined  I  had  seen  him — viz.,
September  24th,  1864 — at  Nagpore,  East  Indies,  and  but  for  the  fact  of
his  death,  I  should  never  probably  have  recalled  the  circumstance.     I  do

VOL.    II.  E   2


52  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

not  attach  much  importance  to  this ;  it  might  have  been  a  coincidence,
remarkable  certainly,  but  nothing  more.  I  am  afraid  it  will  not  be  of
much  use  to  you  in  your  inquiries,  as  half  its  value  is  gone  by  my  not
being  able  to  bring  corroborative  evidence  to  prove  that  I  had  mentioned
the  fact  prior  to  hearing  of  his  death,  although  in  my  own  mind  I  am
perfectly  certain  I  did  so.  Richard  Edgcumbe  was  quartered  at  Shorn-
cliffe  at  the  very  time  this  occurred.  a  g    q    S^iney."

[It  was  from  Mr.  R.  Edgcumbe  that  we  first  heard  of  this  incident.
He  did  not  himself  hear  of  it  until  some  years  after  its  occurrence.]
In  answer  to  inquiries  Colonel  Swiney  adds  : —

(1)  "Years  afterwards,  in  1871,  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  I  wrote
a  long  account  of  it  to  a  Yorkshire  gentleman  who  was  collecting  data  on
the  subject  of  hallucination.

(2)  "I  have  had  a  personal  interview  with  Colonel  Schwabe,  who  was
a  subaltern  with  me  in  the  Carabineers,  and  he  cannot  recall  the  cir-
cumstances at  all,  indeed  has  no  recollection  whatever  about  it.  This
may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of  his  having  gone  abroad  very  shortly
afterwards,  and  we  did  not  meet  for  some  months  after  I  had  heard  of
my  brother's  death.  At  the  time  I  heard  of  his  death  I  was  stopping
with  Charles  Gurney,  shooting,  near  Norwich,  some  time  the  latter  end
of  October,  if  not  the  beginning  of  November.  When  I  received  the
letter  I  knew  what  was  in  it ;  and  if  I  only  knew  Charles  Gurney's
address,  I  should  like  to  have  asked  him  if  he  ever  remembers  the  morning
I  received  the  bad  news  before  I  left  for  London,  saying  '  How  curious  ;
I  thought  I  saw  him  coming  towards  me  at  ShornclifFe  a  few  weeks  ago.'

(3)  "The  24th  of  September,  1864,  was  a  Sunday.  I  cannot  say
whether  that  was  the  day  I  mentioned  it.  My  brother  died  some  time,
as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  after  the  family  with  whom  he  was  stopping  had
returned  from  church  ;  for  I  remember  the  letter  saying :  '  He  was  so
much  better,  and  asleep,  that  we  thought  it  safe  to  leave  him  for  an  hour
or  so.  On  our  return,'  it  went  on  to  say,  '  we  found  he  was  very
feverish,  and  he  died  that  afternoon.'  Now  the  time  I  saw  the  hallucina-
tion could  not  have  been  later  than  2  p.m.  Allowing  for  the  five  hours
difierence  of  longitude,  that  would  be  about  9  a.m.,  and  would  not  tally."

[Colonel  Swiney  seems  to  have  reckoned  the  difierence  the  wrong  way,
At  any  moment  the  time  of  day  in  India  is  four  or  five  hours  later  than
the  time  of  day  in  England ;  and  thus,  if  the  days  were  the  same,  the
death  and  the  vision  may  have  coincided  exactly.]

The  Army  List  for  December,  1864,  and  Allen's  Indian  Mail  for
October  20th,  1864,  give  the  date  of  Lieut.  John  D.  Swiney's  death  as
September  25th  ;  and  it  was  the  25th,  not  the  24th,  that  fell  on  a  Sunday.
When  Colonel  Swiney  heard  of  the  death  he  was  clearly  under  the
impression  that  his  experience  had  occurred  on  a  Sunday — which  is  a
marked  day  ;  and  his  subsequent  mistake  as  to  the  day  of  the  month  seems
therefore  unimportant.

The  next  case  is  from  Miss  Bale,  of  Church  Farm,  Gorleston.

"September  17th,  1885.
(236)   "  In  the  June  of  1880, 1  went  to  a  situation  as  governess.     On  the
first  day  of  my  going  there,  after  retiring  for  the  night,  I  heard  a  noise  which


^^y-x-p^A.)


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  53

was  like  the  ticking  of  a  watch.  I  took  no  particular  notice  of  it,  but  I
noticed  that  every  time  I  was  alone  I  heard  it,  more  especially  at  night.
I  even  went  so  far  as  to  search,  thinking  there  must  be  a  watch  concealed
somewhere  in  the  room.  This  continued  until  I  grew  quite  accustomed  to
it.  It  was  on  the  12th  of  July,  when  I  was  coming  from  the  dining-room
with  a  tray  of  glasses  that  I  saw  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  dark  figure
standing  just  outside  the  door,  with  outstretched  arms.  It  startled  me,
and  when  I  turned  to  look  again  it  was  gone.

"  On  the  23rd  September  I  received  news  that  my  brother  was
drowned  on  the  12th  of  July.  I  heard  the  ticking  up  to  the  time  I  had
the  letter,  but  never  once  afterwards.

"F.  A.  Bale."

Writing  again.  Miss  Bale  says  : —

"  I  enclose  the  letter  informing  us  of  my  brother's  death,  also  one  from
the  captain  of  the  ship,  for  your  perusal.

"  I  made  no  entry  in  my  diary  of  the  apparition  I  saw  on  the  12th  of
July,  but  I  distinctly  remember  the  time.  I  sat  down  a  little  while  to
recover  my  fright,  and  then  I  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  20  minutes  past  6.
I  enclose  the  address  of  a  friend  who  I  am  sure  remembers  it  as  well  as  I  do.
You  will  see  by  enclosed  where  my  brother  was  when  he  met  with  his  death.

"  The  apparition  did  remind  me  of  my  brother,  as  I  last  saw  him  in  a
long  dark  ulster,  and  it  was  about  his  height,  but  that  was  all  I  could  dis-
cover, for  when  I  looked  a  second  time  it  was  gone.  What  made  me
mention  the  ticking  was  the  peculiarity  of  its  following  me  everywhere,
providing  I  was  alone."

The  enclosed  letter,  written  by  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Purey-Cust  on  board
the  Ship  "  Melbourne,"  announced  that  Mr.  William  Bale's  death  occurred
at  6  p.m.,  on  July  12th,  1880,  about  150  miles  south  of  Tristan  d'Acunha,
longitude  12  deg.  30"  W.  Mr.  Purey-Cust  has  since  told  us  that  on  that
day — and  on  that  day  only — the  position  of  the  ship  had  to  be  found  by  dead
reckoning,  the  sun  not  being  visible.  The  error  in  time  arising  in  this  way
could  not,  however,  have  amounted  to  more  than  a  minute  or  two,  and  Mr.
Purey-Cust  gives  particulars  which  make  it  almost  impossible  that  he  can  be
mistaken  in  stating  that  the  accident  occurred  at  6  p.m,  by  the  ship's  clock.

Mrs.  Hart,  of  Baker  Street,  Gorleston,  writes  to  us  : —

"  September  28th,  1885.

"  On  the  night  of  the  12th  of  July,  1880,  Miss  Bale  came  to  my  house
to  supper,  and  she  told  me  that  she  was  coming  from  the  drawing-room
and  she  saw  a  dark  figure  standing  just  outside  the  door  ;  she  appeared
very  nervous.  She  said  it  reminded  her  of  her  brother,  and  remarked  to
me  then  that  she  knew  something  must  have  happened  to  him.  I  asked
her  if  she  noticed  the  time  she  saw  it,  and  she  told  me  that  the  apparition
had  startled  her  very  much,  and  she  had  sat  down  a  little  time  to  recover
the  fright  it  gave  her,  and  then  she  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  6.20.  She
had  previously  told  me  of  a  ticking  she  heard  everywhere  she  went,  so  long
as  she  was  alone,  but  directly  anyone  joined  her  it  ceased ;  and  she  told
me  she  heard  it  up  to  the  day  she  received  the  news  of  her  brother's  death,
but  not  afterwards.

"H.  Hart."

Miss  Bale  adds  : —


54  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASUS  [chap.

"September  24th,  1885.

"  There  was  one  incident  I  did  not  tell  you,  thinking  it  too  trivial,  as  I
did  not  notice  the  date  or  hour,  but  I  know  it  was  shortly  before  I  heard
the  news  of  my  brother's  death.  I  had  been  in  bed  a  short  time,  and  I
heard  a  tremendous  crash  like  the  smashing  of  a  lot  of  china.  I  felt  too
nervous  to  go  and  see  what  it  was,  but  nothing  was  broken  or  disturbed  in
the  morning,  and  for  three  nights  in  succession  I  heard  the  same.  I  am  not
inclined  to  think  that  it  was  in  any  way  corresponding  with  my  brother's
death.  I  certainly  have  never  heard  imaginary  voices  nor  seen  imaginary
figures  except  the  apparition  I  saw  the  day  my  brother  was  drowned."

[There  seems  to  be  no  reason  for  connecting  the  ticking  sound  with
Mr.  Bale's  death,  any  more  than  the  crash  of  china ;  and  it  is  probable
that  it  was  due  to  a  merely  physical  affection,  to  which  the  shock  of
receiving  the  news  perhaps  put  an  end.  It  seemed  right,  however,  to
mention  it ;  since,  if  it  was  a  hallucination,  it  would  tend  to  show  that
Miss  Bale  was  for  some  time  in  a  condition  favourable  to  purely  subjective
hallucinations — which  would  slightly  weaken  the  force  of  the  coincidence
of  the  visual  hallucination  with  her  brother's  death.  It  will  be  noticed
that,  allowing  for  longitude,  the  death  occurred — according  to  the  state-
ments made — about  half-an-hour  after  the  apparition  But  as  the
difference  is  so  small,  it  seems  more  probable  that  it  is  due  to  error  in
Miss  Bale's  observation  or  memory,  or  in  the  time  of  her  clock,  than  that
so  close  a  coincidence  was  purely  accidental.]

The  next  few  cases,  though  depending  in  the  first  instance  on

witnesses  in  a  humbler  station,  are,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  faithfully

reported.     The  narrator  of  the  first  of  them  is  Ellen  M.  Greany,  a

trusted  and  valued  servant  in  the  family  of  Miss  Porter,  at  16,  Russell

Square,  W.C.

"May  20th,  1884.

(237)  "  I  sat  one  evening  reading,  when  on  looking  up  from  my  book,  I
distinctly  saw  a  school-friend  of  mine,  to  whom  I  was  very  much  attached,
standing  near  the  door.  I  was  about  to  exclaim  at  the  strangeness  of  her
visit,  when,  to  my  horror,  there  were  no  signs  of  any  one  in  the  room  but
my  mother.  I  related  what  I  had  seen  to  her,  knowing  she  could  not
have  seen,  as  she  was  sitting  with  her  back  towards  the  door,  nor  did  she
hear  anything  unusual,  and  was  greatly  amused  at  my  scare,  suggesting  I
had  read  too  much  or  been  dreaming.

"  A  day  or  so  after  this  strange  event,  I  had  news  to  say  my  friend  was
no  more.  The  strange  part  was  I  did  not  even  know  she  was  ill,  much
less  in  danger,  so  could  not  have  felt  anxious  at  the  time  on  her  account,
but  may  have  been  thinking  of  her  ;  that  I  cannot  testify.  Her  illness
was  short,  and  death  very  unexpected.  Her  mother  told  me  she  spoke  of
me  not  long  before  she  died,  and  wondered  I  had  not  been  to  see  her,
thinking,  of  course,  I  had  some  knowledge  of  her  illness,  which  was  not
the  case.  It  may  be  as  well  to  mention  she  left  a  small  box  she  prized
rather,  to  be  given  to  me  in  remembrance  of  her.  She  died  the  same
evening  and  about  the  same  time  that  I  saw  her  vision,  which  was  the  end
of  October,  1874.  a  Ellen  M.  Greany."


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  55

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Ellen  Greany  adds  that  this  hallucination  is
the  only  one  she  has  ever  experienced.  She  tells  Miss  Porter  that  she
went  to  see  her  dead  friend  before  the  funeral,  which  accords  with  her
statement  that  she  heard  the  news  of  the  death  very  soon  after  it
occurred ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  at  the  time  when  she
heard  the  news,  she  was  able  correctly  to  identify  the  day  of  her  vision.

Her  mother  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  Acton,  July,  1884.
"  I  can  well  remember  the  instance  my  daughter  speaks  of.  I  know
she  was  not  anxious  at  the  time,  not  knowing  her  friend  was  ill.  I  took
no  notice  of  it  at  the  time,  as  I  do  not  believe  in  ghosts,  but  thought  it
strange  the  next  day,  when  we  heard  she  was  dead,  and  died  about  the
same  time  that  my  daughter  saw  her.

"  Margaret  Greany."

[I  have  seen  Ellen  Greany,  who  is  a  superior  and  intelligent  person.
She  went  over  her  story  without  prompting,  giving  an  entirely  clear  and
consistent  account,  and  standing  cross-examination  perfectly.  But  the
favourable  effect  of  such  an  interview  on  one's  own  mind  cannot,  of  course,
be  conveyed  to  others.]

The  following  account  was  first  published  in  The  Englishman,  on
May  13th,  1876.

(238)  "  A  labourer  named  Duck,  employed  by  Mr.  Dixon,  of  Mildenhall
Warren  Farm,  near  Marlborough,  was  in  charge  of  a  horse  and  water-cart
on  the  farm,  when  the  animal  took  fright  and  knocked  him  down.  The
wheel  went  over  his  chest,  and  he  died  shortly  afterwards.  Immediately
after  the  accident,  Mr.  Dixon  despatched  a  woman  to  Ramsbury,  where
Duck  lived,  to  make  known  the  fact  to  his  wife.  On  arriving  at  her  home
the  messenger  found  her  out  gathering  wood,  but  shortly  after  a  girl,  who
was  her  companion,  arrived,  and  without  being  told  of  what  had  occurred,
volunteered  the  statement  that  Ria  (Mrs.  Duck)  was  unable  to  do  much
that  morning,  that  she  had  been  very  much  frightened,  having  seen  her
husband  in  the  wood.  Shortly  afterwards  Mrs.  Duck  returned  without
any  wood,  and  being  informed  by  a  neighbour  that  a  woman  from
Mildenhall  Woodlands  wished  to  see  her,  ejaculated  '  My  David's  dead
then.'  Inquiry  has  since  been  made  by  Mr.  Dixon  of  the  woman,  and  she
positively  asserts  that  she  saw  her  husband  in  the  wood,  and  said,  '  Hallo,
David,  what  wind  blows  you  here  ? '  and  that  he  made  no  answer.  Mr.
Dixon  inquired  what  time  this  occurred,  and  she  replied  about  10  o'clock,
the  time  at  which  the  fatal  accident  occurred."

On  the  appearance  of  this  account,  our  friend,  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival,  of
36,  Bryanston  Street,  W.,  wrote  to  Mr.  Dixon  to  inquire  into  the  facts,
and  received  from  him  the  following  confirmation  : —

"May  25th,  1876.

"As  soon  as  it  happened  (Duck's  death),  I  sent  one  of  my  female
servants  to  inform  his  wife  of  the  sad  occurrence,  to  a  place  called
Ramsbury,  about  four  miles  from  where  it  occurred.       But  when  she  got


56  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

there,  his  wife  was  gone  to  get  wood  at  a  distant  wood,  the  woman  stopping
for  her  return  at  an  adjoining  cottage.  But  Maria  returned  without  any
wood,  saying  she  had  seen  her  husband,  and  asked  him  how  he  came  there —
telling  the  woman  that  she  knew  her  business,  that  she  was  come  to  inform
her  of  her  husband's  death,  and  that  she  had  seen  him  as  plain  as  ever  she
did  in  her  life,  and  said  to  him,  'Hallo,  David,  what  wind  blew  you
here  1 '  but  as  she  saw  him  no  more,  she  became  much  frightened,  and  left
the  wood."

"June  1st,  1876.
"  The  woman  I  sent  told  me,  when  she  got  to  Ramsbury  to  Duck's
house,  her  neighbour  told  her  that  she  was  gone  to  get  wood  and  her  (the
neighbour's)  little  girl  was  gone  with  her.  The  girl  soon  returned  saying
Maria  Duck  was  much  frightened  in  the  wood,  and  had  seen  her  husband
and  spoken  to  him,  but  as  he  made  no  reply  she  became  faint,  and  told  the
girl  to  go  home,  as  she  knew  something  had  happened  to  David.  That  was
before  she  knew  the  woman  was  sent.  When  she  got  home  and  found  the
woman  waiting  for  her  return  she  said  she  knew  her  errand,  and  asked
her  if  her  husband  was  not  dead,  and  seemed  much  frightened,  the  woman
telling  her  he  was  very  ill,  and  thought  he  would  not  be  living  to  see  her
again.  When  she  got  to  Warren,  she  found  him  dead,  and  told  us  the
time  she  saw  him,  which  was  exactly  the  time  he  lost  his  life ;  therefore  I
think  the  public  is  bound  to  believe  it,  although  it  seems  to  us  quite  a
mystery.  Duck's  wife  is  now  in  Hungerford  Union,  her  home  broken  up
by  his  death.  The  woman  I  sent  is  Mary  Holick,  has  been  living  with  me
some  time,  and  her  word  is  to  be  relied  on.

"  Benjamin  Dixon."

Mrs.  Duck  has  since  died ;  but  Mrs.  Holick  dictated  and  signed  the
following  account  : —

"January  26th,  1886.

"  I  well  remember  about  poor  old  David  Duck.  I  am  never  likely  to
forget  it.  The  cart-wheel  passed  over  his  chest  and  killed  him,  and  I
was  sent  down  by  Mr.  Dixon  to  tell  his  wife  at  Ramsbury.  She  was  not
at  home ;  she  was  out  gathering  wood  with  the  little  girl  of  a  neighbour  ;
so  I  went  to  this  neighbour's  house  to  wait.  Presently  the  little  girl  came
in,  and  said  that  Mrs.  Duck  was  in  a  great  way  because  she  had  seen  her
husband  in  the  wood,  and  when  she  spoke  to  him  and  said,  'What  wind  blows
you  here,  Davie  1 '  he  disappeared  away,  and  she  fell  back  on  the  bank
half  fainting  with  fright ;  and  the  little  girl  ran  down  and  found  her  like
it.  So  she  had  gathered  very  little  wood.  If  the  little  girl  had  not  told
me  first,  I  never  could  have  really  believed  that  she  had  seen  him.  But
when  she  came  back,  about  half-an-hour  after  the  little  girl  (who  had  come
on  in  front,  full  of  what  Mrs.  Duck  had  seen),  it  was  all  true.  I  shall
never  forget  her ;  she  came  in  with  her  hands  stretched  out,  and  said,
looking  at  me,  '  She  has  come  to  tell  me  that  my  Davie  is  killed.  I  knew
he  was  ;  I  have  seen  his  ghost.  I  didn't  need  anyone  to  tell  me.'  And
then  she  told  us,  afterwards,  how  she  had  suddenly  seen  him  in  front  of
her,  in  his  usual  clothes ;  and  how  she  spoke  to  him,  and  he  vanished.
She  lived  about  half  a  mile  from  the  woman  I  was  waiting  with ;  and  we
sent  another  woman  to  her  house  to  tell  her,  when  she  came  home,  that
a  person  from  Mr.  Dixon's  wanted  to  see  her.     So   directly   she  told  her,


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  57

she  said,  '  She  has  come  to  tell  me  my  poor  Davie  is  killed  ;  but  I  didn't
want  anyone  to  tell  me,  for  I  know  ;  I  have  just  seen  his  ghost.'  And  the
woman  said,  '  Don't  give  way  now,  but  come  with  me,  there's  a  good
woman.'  And  they  came ;  and  I  shall  never  forget  her  as  she  came
stumbling  up  the  steps,  and  looked  at  me  and  said,  '  For  God's  sake  tell
me  ;  my  Davie  is  dead.'  She  had  seen  him  just  as  natural  as  life,  every
bit ;  but  the  little  girl  never  saw  anything,  only  she  knew  Mrs.  Duck  had,
when  she  helped  her  off  the  bank,  where  she  fell  when  he  disappeared.
She  was  a  very  good  woman,  I  think,  and  her  husband  was  a  very  quiet
man;  and  she  was  as  strong  as  any  man,  and  worked  hard  from  early
morning."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  David  Duck  died  on
March  31,  1874.

[Mrs.  Holick's  account  fairly  comes  into  the  class  of  evidence  reckoned  :  ri^lt'Seut
as  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148)  ;  as,  though  she  did  not  .;,  4,^4^,,^^
actually  receive  a  description  of  the  apparition  from  Mrs.  Duck's  own  lips
before  Mrs.  Duck  heard  the  fatal  news,  she  saw  her  in  the  state  of
agitation,  and  heard  her  express  the  conviction,  which  the  apparition  had
produced.  Mrs.  Holick  is  quite  clear  that  she  herself  was  the  first  to
communicate  the  news.]

In  the  next  example  accident  has  made  the  evidence  for  the  facts
very  fairly  strong ;  but  the  case  is  to  some  extent  weakened  by  the
percipient's  knowledge  that  the  person  whose  phantasm  he  saw  was
ill.     The  case  was  first  described  to  us  by  a  clergyman  as  follows  : —

"March  5th,  1885.

(239)  "Some  18  or  19  years  ago,  I  remember  calling  on  a  working  ^^  jjf"
maltster,  whose  employer  was  living  at  Lincoln.  His  employer  was  ill  at  /  ^j/>  /
the  time,  and  I  asked  the  man  if  he  had  heard  from  him  lately.  'No,'  he  '  %^*
said,  '  but  I  am  afraid  he  is  dead.'  And  on  my  inquiring  why  he  thought  -^■x^'^'-'^-
so,  he  replied  that  on  going  out  that  morning  early,  he  had  seen  his  em-
ployer standing  on  the  top  of  the  steps  that  lead  up  to  the  kiln  door,  as  ;  c/U"^;;  #v
plainly  as  he  ever  had  seen  him  in  his  life.  HA-w^/il!;:^

It    was    as    he    expected  :    the   first    news    that    came    reported   his     .^,y^,t„^^^^—
employer's  death.  '

"I  have  no  doubt  the  man  I  speak  of  either  saw  this  appearance,  or      ' ''*'  'J' \
believed  he  saw  it."  i^j»  .'•

In  answer  to  inquiries,  this  informant  says  : —  x  l  v .  t

"March  12th,  1885.  ^

"  Since  receiving  your  letter,  I  have  had  the  curiosity  to  look  over  my
old  diaries,  thinking  I  might  have  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  and
under  the    date    of  Thursday,    the  22nd    of    October,   1863,  I    find  the

Dead,
following  : — '  Report  of  Mr.  W.'s  death.  M.  saw  his  "  wraith  "  on

A

Tuesday  morning  about  5  o'clock.'

"  This  difiers  somewhat  from  what  I  told  you  in  my  last  letter,  for  I
said  that  the  man  had  seen  the  appearance  that  same  morning  in  which  I
spoke  with  him.     Here  it  seems  it  was  two  days  before.     But  still  he  had


58  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

told  me  before  it  was  known  for  a  certainty  that  Mr.  W.  was  dead.  For
you  observe  the  word  '  dead '  put  in  over  the  y^.  This  I  know  from  my
own  habit  was  put  in  afterwards.  There  is  no  communication  between
this  place  and  Lincoln,  except  on  the  market  day,  Friday.  At  that  time
of  year,  moreover,  the  carriers  who  go  to  Lincoln  would  not  get  back
before  night,  and  consequently  I  should  most  probably  not  have  learned
the  certainty  of  the  report  until  some  time  on  Saturday.  Then,  instead  of
making  a  new  note  of  it,  I  simply  put  in  the  word  '  dead  '  to  show  that
the  report  was  true  when  I  first  heard  it.  Moreover,  I  used  the  Scotch
word  '  wraith  '  instead  of  '  ghost '  or  '  spirit,'  as  I  had  an  idea  that  the
former  word  was  applied  to  appearances  before  death.

"  I  observe  that  the  man  said  '  about  5  o'clock.'  Of  course,  this  would
be  a  vague  expression  for  any  time  up  to  5.30,  or  thereabouts,  when  the
morning  would  not  be  very  clear  perhaps,  but  sufficiently  so  to  enable  one  to
see  an  object  some  10  or  12  yards  oflf,and  I  am  not  sure  it  was  quite  so  much.
"  I  cannot  say  that  Mr.  W.  was  dead  at  the  time  M.  saw  the  appear-
ance, but  he  was  certainly  dead  at  the  time  he  told  me  of  it,  otherwise  I
should  not  have  inserted  the  word  '  dead '  where  I  did.

I  may  add  that  Mr.  W.  had  formerly  lived  in  this  village,  and  I  had
known  him  well.  He  had  gone  to  live  in  Lincoln  only  a  short  time  before
his  death.  His  malt  kiln  was  his  only  means  of  providing  for  his  wife  and
family — five  or  six  young  children — and  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of
coming  over  to  see  how  things  went  on,  twice  a  week.  There  is  nothing
more  natural  than  that  his  thoughts  (and  they  must  have  been  very
anxious  thoughts)  should  have  been  fixed  on  that  one  place."

The  following  is  the  percipient's  own  account  : —

"Ridley's  Yard,  North  Gate,  Newark,  Notts.,  March  16th,  1885.

"  I  have  received  your  letter  asking  me  to  forward  you  what  I  said
about  my  dear  Mr.  Wright,  for  he  was  a  very  good  master.  I  said  I  saw
him  standing  on  the  steps,  with  one  hand  on  the  handrail ;  my  light  went
out,  and  I  saw  no  more,  and  he  died,  and  I  hope  he  is  at  rest.  That  was
at  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  before  he  departed  from  us.   u  j_  Meerill."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Merrill  adds,  on  April  6,  1885  : —
"  I  am  very  sorry  to  let  you  know  that  I  do  not  remember  the  date
that  dear  Mr.  Wright  died,  but  I  think  it  was  the  latter  end  of
1863.  I  looked  my  old  books  over,  but,  with  the  trade  being  carried  on
in  the  same  way,  I  have  nothing  to  go  by.  I  saw  him  as  plain  as  in  the
middle  of  the  day,  for  he  stood  just  the  same  as  he  did  when  he  came  at
noon,  looking  on  to  the  house  for  me  to  go  to  him.  I  never  saw  anything
before,  to  my  mind."  [The  last  sentence  is  in  answer  to  the  question
whether  the  above  was  his  only  experience  of  a  hallucination.]

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Wright  died  on
October  22,  1863,  of  "  gastric  fever."  The  apparition  therefore  took  place
two  days  before  the  death,  but  no  doubt  at  a  time  of  critical  illness.  In
conversation,  Mr.  Merrill's  wife  stated  that  she  remembered  laughing  at
her  husband's  account  of  his  strange  experience  when  he  returned  home.
Neither  of  them  seems  to  have  then  connected  the  apparition  with  the  idea
of  death.

The  following  case  was  written  down  by  our  valued  helper,  Miss


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  59

Porter,  from  the  account  of  Mrs.  Banister,  of  Eversley,  mother  of  the

percipient,  Mrs.  Ellis,  of  Portesbery  Poad,  Camberley,  who  has  signed

it  as  correct.

"August  5th.

(240)  "  In  September,  1878,  I,  then  residing  in  York  Town,  Surrey,
three  times  during  the  day  distinctly  saw  the  face  of  an  old  friend,  Mr.
James  Stephenson,  who  I  afterwards  heard  died  that  day  in  Eversley,  five
miles  ofi*.  I  saw  it  first  about  half -past  10  in  the  morning  ;  the  last  time
it  was  nearly  6  o'clock.     I  knew  him  to  be  ill.

(Signed)  "  Mary  Ellis."

A  memorial  card  shows  that  Mr.  Stephenson  died  on  Sept.  19,  1878.

Mr.  Stephenson  had  not  been  on  friendly  terms  with  Mrs.  Banister  or
her  daughter  ;  but  Mrs.  Banister,  by  his  desire,  went  to  see  him  just  before
his  death.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Ellis  says ; —

"  I  told  my  husband,  and  a  young  man,  whose  name  is  Swiney,  at  the
tea-table  the  same  afternoon,  and  after  leaving  the  table  to  go  into  another
room  I  saw  it  again — which  was  the  last  time.  I  did  not  hear  of  Mr.
Stephenson's  death  until  the  next  day,  nor  did  I  know  that  he  was  so
near  death.  My  husband  remembers  it  well,  but  the  children  were  then
too  young  to  notice  such  a  thing.  I  have  never  seen  anything  like  it
before  or  since,  and  I  hope  I  never  shall  again.

"Mary  Ellis."

Mr.  Ellis  writes  : —

"  I  quite  well  remember  my  wife  speaking  of  the  figure  that  she  had
seen  during  the  day.     The  next  day  we  heard  of  Mr.  Stephenson's  death.

"E.  J.  Ellis."

Mr.  Herbert  Swiney,  writing  on  September  29th,  1885,  from  Tregar-
then  House,  Romford  Road,  Forest  Gate,  says  that  he  only  faintly
recollects  the  matter.

If  correctly  reported,  this  case  presents  two  of  the  rarer  features
which  are  common  to  telepathic  and  to  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tions ;  the  fragmentary  nature  of  the  percept — a  face  only, — and  the
repetition  after  an  interval  of  some  hours.^

The  next  case  must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  non-recognition,  as  the

resemblance  between  the  phantasm  and  the  person  who  died  was

not  remarked  until  the  fact  of  death  was  known.     The  narrator,  Mr.

S.  J.  Masters,  of  87,  Clifford  Crescent,  Southampton,  will  hardly  be

accused  of  excessive  sentimentality.

"December  14th,  1882.

(241)  "  Last  Easter  Sunday,  I  was  retiring  to  bed,  just  after  11  o'clock,
and  had  stepped  off  the  stairs  on  the  landing  that  led  to  my  room  (my
parents'  bedroom  door  being  in  front  of  me,  about  10  or  12ft.,  and  my  door

1  As  to  the  first  point  see  above,  p.  33,  note  ;  as  to  the  second,  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  445,  an
below  p.  237,  note.


60  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

being  about  2£t.  to  the  right,  so  that  I  had  to  pass  it  to  get  to  my  room).
I  saw  their  bedroom  door  was  open,  and  I  was  rivetted  to  the  spot  by
seeing  standing  in  the  room  doorway  in  front  of  me,  a  figure  of  a  female  ;
although  I  could  not  distinguish  the  dress,  I  could  plainly  see  the  features,
and  especially  the  eyes.  I  must  have  stood  there  at  least  20  seconds,  for
my  mother,  hearing  me  stop  suddenly  before  reaching  my  room,  at  last
opened  the  door  (below)  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  I  then  came
downstairs  and  stopped  with  them  till  we  all  retired  together.  The  figure
collapsed  when  my  mother  called  upstairs,  and  the  light  I  held  in  my  hand
shone  through  the  doorway  to  the  opposite  wall,  which  had  been  obscured
by  the  figure,  as  if  it  had  had  a  tangible  body.

"  It  was  not  till  the  following  Wednesday  that  my  mother,  on  reading
the  mid-weekly  local  paper,  saw  the  death  of  a  young  lady  with  whom  I
had  once  kept  company  for  a  short  time.  On  inquiry,  I  found  she  died
about  the  same  time  as  I  saw  the  apparition.  I  feel  convinced  it  was  her,
for  the  eyes  had  the  same  expression,  although  I  could  not  recognise  her
at  the  time ;  not  having  seen  the  girl  for  quite  six  months,  I  had  almost
forgotten  her  existence.  She  died  in  decline,  which  accounts  for  her  not
being  about  the  town  before  her  death.

"S.  J.  Mastees."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on
March  5,  1882.  This  was  a  Sunday,  but  not  Easter  Sunday.  The
mention  of  the  Wednesday  paper  seems  also  to  be  a  mistake ;  as  the  death
does  not  appear  in  the  Wednesday  issue  of  either  of  the  two  bi-weekly
Southampton  papers,  though  it  appears  in  the  Saturday  issue  of  one  of
them,  on  March  11th.  These  mistakes  are  not  important.  For  even  apart
from  Mr.  Masters'  observation  of  the  coincidence  at  the  time,  Easter
Sunday  seems  a  very  unlikely  day  to  have  been  named,  if  the  experience
had  really  fallen  on  a  week-day ;  and  if  it  fell  on  a  Sunday,  there  is  no
reason  to  doubt  that  it  fell  on  the  Sunday  before  the  announcement  of  the
death — i.e.,  on  the  day  of  the  death.

The  narrator's  mother  corroborates  as  follows : —

"  I  remember,  perfectly  well,  the  circumstance,  and  the  efiect  it  pro-
duced on  my  son  at  the  time.  He  is  not  of  a  nervous  disposition,  nor
a  believer  in  anything  at  all  approaching  Spiritualism,  as  we  all  belong
to  the  Church.  His  father  and  I  thought  it  might  betoken  the  death
of  some  near  friend  or  relative,  having  heard  of  such  things,  but  never
had  seen  so  direct  an  appearance  ourselves.

"  Elizabeth  Masters."

[Mr.  Masters  has  reason  to  think  that  the  young  lady's  attachment
to  him  had  continued.  He  reports  that  on  more  exact  inquiry,  he
finds  the  death  to  have  occurred  within  a  quarter-of-an-hour  of  the
apparition — probably  after  rather  than  before  it.  Asked  if  he  had  ever
experienced  any  other  hallucinations,  he  replied  in  the   negative.]

The  next  case  is  one  of  the  most  singular  in  our  collection.  It  is
from  Mrs.  Gierke,  of  Clifton  Lodge,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Norwood,
S.E.


XIV.]  OCCUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  61

"October  30th,  1885.

(242)  "  In  the  month  of  August,  1864,  about  3  or  4  o'clock  in  the  after-  ^h
noon,  I  was  sitting  reading  in  the  verandah  of  our  house  in  Barbadoes.
My  black  nurse  was  driving  my  little  girl,  about  18  months  or  so  old,  in
her  perambulator  in  the  garden.  I  got  up  after  some  time  to  go  into  the
house,  not  having  noticed  anything  at  all — when  this  black  woman  said  to
me,  '  Missis,  who  was  that  gentleman  that  was  talking  to  you  just  now  %  '
'There  was  no  one  talking  to  me,'  I  said.  '  Oh,  yes,  dere  was.  Missis — a
very  pale  gentleman,  very  tall,  and  he  talked  to  you,  and  you  was  very
rude,  for  you  never  answered  him.'  I  repeated  there  was  no  one,  and  got
rather  cross  with  the  woman,  and  she  begged  me  to  write  down  the  day,
for  she  knew  she  had  seen  someone.  I  did,  and  in  a  few  days  I  heard  of
the  death  of  my  brother  in  Tobago.  Now,  the  curious  part  is  this,  that  /
did  not  see  him,  but  she — a  stranger  to  him — did  ;  and  she  said  that  he
seemed  very  anxious  for  me  to  notice  him.

"  May  Clerke."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Clerke  says  : —

"  (1)  The  day  of  death  was  the  same,  for  I  wrote  it  down.  I  think  it
was  the  3rd  of  August,  but  I  know  it  was  the  same.

"  (2)  The  description,  *  very  tall  and  pale,'  was  accurate.

"  (3)  I  had  no  idea  that  he  was  ill.     He  was  only  a  few  days  ill.

"  (4)  The  woman  had  never  seen  him.  She  had  been  with  me  for
about  18  months,  and  I  considered  her  truthful.  She  had  no  object  in
telling  me."

In  conversation,  I  learned  that  Mrs.  Clerke  had  immediately  mentioned
what  the  servant  said,  and  the  fact  that  she  had  written  down  the  date,  to
her  husband,  Colonel  Clerke,  who  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  I  well  remember  that  on  the  day  on  which  Mr.  John  Beresford,  my
wife's  brother,  died  in  Tobago — after  a  short  illness  of  which  we  were  not
aware — our  black  nurse  declared  she  saw,  at  as  nearly  as  possible  the  time
of  his  death,  a  gentleman,  exactly  answering  to  Mr.  Beresford's  descrip-
tion, leaning  over  the  back  of  Mrs.  Clerke's  easy-chair  in  the  open
verandah.     The  figure  was  not  seen  by  any  one  else.

"  Shadwbll  H.  Clerke."

We    find    it    stated    in  Burke's   Peerage  that  Mr.  J.  H.  de  la  Poer
Beresford,  Secretary  for  the  Island  of  Tobago,  died  on  August  3,  1863  ■
(not  1864).

If  this  incident  is  to  be  interpreted  telepathically,  it  is  scarcely-
possible  to  suppose  that  Mrs.  Clerke's  own  presence  did  not  play  a  part
in  the  phenomenon.  The  case  would  then  be  comparable  to  some  of  /
the  "  collective "  cases  (to  be  cited  in  Chap.  XVIII.),  where  one
of  the  percipients  is  a  stranger  to  the  agent ;  the  difference  being
that  here  the  person  who  should  (so  to  speak)  have  been  the  principal
percipient  was  as  unconscious  of  the  impression  which  she  received


62  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

as  we  have  found  the  percipient  to  be  in  some  of  the  experimental
cases.^  Another  instance  of  the  same  kind  is  No.  355  (p.  256,  and
see  p.  267).

§  3.  I  will  now  give  a  group  of  cases  in  respect  of  which  the
hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity  has  to  be  taken  into  account.  The
apparition  in  all  of  them  was  seen  out-of-doors,  and  in  several  of  them
in  the  street — which  is  the  place  where  such  mistakes  are  most  liable
to  occur.  Now,  with  respect  to  mistakes  of  identity,  made  at  the
time  when  the  person  who  seems  to  be  seen  is  really  dying  at  a
distance,  one  general  remark  has  to  be  made — namely,  that  cases  in
which  they  have  occurred  are  not  thereby  at  once  put  out  of  court,
for  the  purpose  of  my  argument.  For  if  telepathic  hallucinations
are  facts  in  nature,  the  possibility  of  telepathic  illusions  cannot
reasonably  be  excluded.     Illusions,  as  I  have  remarked,  (Yol.  I.,  p.  460,)

1  As  one  more  example  of  the  psychological  identity  _  of  hallucinations  and  dreams
(Chap,  xii.,  §  5),  I  may  quote  an  account  of  a  dream  which  is  an  exact  parallel  to  the  above
waking  case.

In  the  last  week  of  February,  1885,  Miss  Harris,  of  9,  Queen  Square,  Bloomsbury,
W.C,  wrote  to  us  as  follows  : —

"  On  Thursday  night,  the  19th  of  February,  1885,  I  dreamed  the  following  dream.  A
servant,  a  Lincolnshire  woman,  has  lived  in  our  house  for  two  years  ;  and  of  her,  whom  I
never  see  in  the  day,  I  dreamt,  as  portentously  as  if  her  troubles  were  my  own.  There  is
nothing  remarkable  in  this  young  woman's  character  or  experience.  She  is  but  an  ordinary
rather  rough  specimen  of  a  village  girl,  quiet  and  respectable.

"  In  my  dream  a  long  country  lane  was  before  me  ;  in  this  I  walked  with  the  Lincoln-
shire cook,  without  speaking  ;  yet  I  knew  that  my  companion  was  going  with  me  as  a  sort  of
escort  to  some  errand  of  my  own.  Then  a  face  appeared  over  the  hedge,  a  solemn,  silent
face,  exactly  resembling  that  of  the  one  who  noiselessly  moved  beside  me ;  the  sternest
suffering  was  impressed  upon  the  plain  hard-lined  countenance.  From  beside  me  the
country  servant  instantly  departed  to  follow  the  warning  voiceless  form  through  the
hedge,  into  a  little  house.  Only  a  long  minute  passed,  and  the  servant  rushed  from  the
hedge,  absolutely  wringing  her  hands,  crouching  to  the  ground  in  dumb  agony.  '  'Tis  my
sister  called  me,  she  beckoned  me  in  ;  but  she  will  not  speak  :  she  will  not  have  me  with
her.'  As  she  spoke  the  vision  returned.  It  looked  over  the  low  hedge,  with  the  same
indescribable  expression  of  sadness  unspeakable — of  a  terrible  woe  impossible  of  utterance.
It  flung  back  its  sleeve,  and  lifting  one  arm,  pointed  to  a  single  white  spot  in  the  centre  of
a  finger.  And  as  suddenly  as  I  had  fallen  on  this  dream,  so  suddenly  I  awoke.  I  tried
to  cast  off  the  shadow  the  dream  had  cast  on  me.  But  the  same  evening  came  the  news
that  the  country  cook's  sister  was  very  ill,  and  had  prematurely  been  confined  with  a
child  born  dead.

"Emily  Makion  Haekis.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Harris  adds  : —

"  Certainly  I  repeated  my  dream  even  before  I  left  my  room.  I  asked  the  housemaid
whether  she  knew  of  any  reason  her  fellow-servant  might  have  to  fear,  or  to  hear  bad
news.  She  said,  'No,' and  after  that  I  told  my  sister.  Nothing  was  said  about  the
dream  during  Friday.  On  Saturday  morning,  when  I  returiied  from  a  class — having
dismissed  the  occurrence  from  my  mind  for  the  time — my  sister  immediately  told  me  that
the  coincidence  of  dream  and  fact  were  marvellously  similar.  The  poor  woman  whom  I
saw  with  such  dumb  appeal  on  her  countenance,  was  alone,  unable  to  speak,  meeting  her
trouble  alone,  her  husband,  who  is  a  policeman,  being  on  night  duty.  She  thought  it  was
impossible  to  be  heard,  till  she  found  a  stick  of  his,  and  contrived  to  knock  on  the  floor. "

Miss  Harris's  sister  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  March  16th,  1885.

"  It  was  directly  I  came  out  of  my  room,  before  I  went  down  stairs,  that  ray  sister
told  me  the  dream  she  wrote  to  you  about,  and  which  she  had  dreamed  between  night  and

morning.  tt    tt  .>

'  Clara  de  H.  Harris.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  63

are  merely  the  sprinkling  of  fragments  of  genuine  hallucination  on  a
background  of  true  perception ;  and  it  is  surely  not  more  difficult  to
suppose  that  a  mind  which  is  telepathically  affected  can  project  its
sensory  delusion  on  some  real  figure  which  bears  a  general  resem-
blance to  the  agent,  than  that  it  can  project  it  in  vacancy.  But  of
course  the  coincidence  with  A's  death  of  an  illusion  in  which  the
perceiver  mistook  B  for  A  would  have  far  less  force  as  evidence  for
telepathy  than  the  coincidence  with  A's  death  of  a  hallucination
representing  him,  simply  because  purely  subjective  mistakes  as  to
identity  are  far  commoner  things  than  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tions. To  find  the  probability  that  a  person  will  by  accident  make
a  particular  mistake  of  identity  on  a  particular  day  of  his  life,  we
must  multiply  the  fraction  ,,^ber  of  dlys  of  ms  me  ^1  ^^e  number  of
similar  mistakes,  in  similar  circumstances  of  light,  distance,  &c,,
that  he  makes  altogether;  and  we  must  divide  the  result  by  the
number  of  acquaintances  any  one  of  whom,  if  chance  alone  acted,  is
as  likely  as  the  one  who  died  on  the  particular  day  to  be  the  one
wrongly  identified  on  that  day.  This  process  may  reduce  the  proba-
bility of  a  telepathic  explanation  of  the  coincidence  from  odds  of
millions  to  1  (as  found  in  the  case  of  hallucinations,  pp.  18-20)  to
odds  of  thousands  to  1  ;  but  in  a  cumulative  argument,  odds  of
that  magnitude  are  clearly  not  to  be  neglected.  However,  with
regard  to  the  following  specimens,  or  most  of  them,  such  considera-
tions are  hardly  needed.  They  seem  pretty  certainly  to  be  cases  of
hallucination,  and  stand,  for  instance,  on  different  ground  from  the
incidents  mentioned  above  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  123-4),  where  the  hypothesis
of  mistaken  identity  seemed  fairly  plausible.

The  first  account  is  from  the  Chevalier  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  of  the
Palazzo  Fenzi,  Florence,  a  corresponding  member  of  the  S.P.R.  The
peculiar  melancholy  described  as  preceding  the  vision  may  possibly
exemplify  the  gradual  emergence  of  telepathic  impressions  into
consciousness,  which  was  exemplified  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3.

"November  13th,  1883.
(243)  "Some  months  before  his  demise,  my  brother  (Senator  Carlo
Fenzi)  one  day,  as  we  were  driving  to  town  together  from  our  villa  of  St.
Andrea,  told  me  that  if  he  should  be  summoned  first,  he  would  endeavour
to  prove  to  me  that  life  continued  beyond  the  chasm  of  the  grave,  and  that
I  was  to  promise  him  the  same  in  case  I  went  first;  ^hut,''  said  he,  'I
am  sure  to  go  first,  and,  mind  you,  I  feel  quite  sure  that  before  the  year
is  out — nay,  in  three  months — I  shall  be  no  more.'  This  was  said  in  June
and  he  died  on  the  2nd  of  September,  the  same  year,  1881.


64  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"  Now,  on  that  fatal  morning  (the  2nd  of  September),  I  was  some  70
miles  away  from  Florence,  namely,  at  Fortullino,  a  villa  of  ours  on  a  rock
on  the  sea,  10  miles  south-east  of  Leghorn.  Well,  at  about  half -past  10  in
the  morning,  I  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  deep  melancholy — -a,  thing
very  unusual  with  me,  who  enjoy  great  serenity  of  mind.  I  had,
however,  no  reason  for  being  alarmed  about  my  brother,  who  was  then
in  Florence — as,  although  he  had  not  been  very  well,  the  latest  news
of  him  was  very  good,  as  my  nephew  had  written  to  say,  '  Uncle  is  doing
very  comfortably,  and  it  cannot  even  he  said  that  he  has  really  been  ill ' — so
that  I  could  not  account  for  this  sudden  gloomy  impression ;  yet  the  tears
stood  in  my  eyes,  and  in  order  not  to  burst  out  crying  like  a  baby  before
our  family  party,  I  rushed  out  of  the  house  without  my  hat  on,  although  it
was  blowing  a  hurricane,  and  the  rain  fell  in  torrents,  accompanied  by
permanent  flashes  of  lightning,  and  the  loud  and  unceasing  roar  of  the
sea  and  of  thunder.

"  I  ran  and  ran,  and  only  stopped  when  I  had  reached  the  end
of  a  spacious  lawn,  from  whence  are  seen,  close  on  the  other  side  of
a  small  stream  (the  Fortulla),  the  huge  stones  or  rocks  heaped  on  one
another,  and  stretching  for  a  good  half  mile  along  the  sea  coast.  I
there  gazed  to  try  and  see  a  youth,  a  cousin  of  mine,  who,  having  been
born  among  the  Zulus,  retained  enough  of  love  for  savage  life  to  have
yielded  to  the  wish  of  going  out  in  that  terrible  weather,  'to  enjoy,'  he
said,  '  the  fury  of  the  elements.'  Judge  of  my  surprise  and  astonishment
when,  instead  of  Giovanni  (such  is  my  cousin's  name),  I  saw  my  brother,
with  a  top  hat  and  his  big  white  moustachios,  stepping  leisurely  along
from  one  rock  to  another,  as  if  the  weather  were  fair  and  calm  !  I  could
not  believe  my  eyes  ;  and  yet,  there^he  was — he,  unmistakeably  !  I  thought
of  rushing  back  to  the  house  to  call  every  one  out  to  give  him  a  hearty
welcome,  but  then  preferred  waiting  for  him,  and  meanwhile  waved  my
hand  to  him  and  called  out  his  name  as  loud  as  I  possibly  could,  although
with  the  awful  noise  of  wind,  and  sea,  and  thunder  combined,  nothing
could  naturally  be  heard.  He  meanwhile  continued  to  advance,  until,
having  reached  a  rock  larger  than  the  rest,  he  slipped  behind  it.  The
distance  between  myself  and  the  rock  was,  as  nearly  as  I  can  judge,  not
more  than  60  paces.  I  waited  for  him  to  reappear  on  the  other  side — but
to  no  purpose,  and  I  only  saw  Giovanni,  who  was  just  then  emerging  from
a  wood,  and  stepping  on  to  the  rocks.  Giovanni,  tall  and  slight,  with  a
broad-brimmed  hat  and  dark  beard,  was  altogether  a  very  difi'erent  type,
and  I  thought  that  my  having  seen  Charles,  my  brother,  must  have  been
a  freak  of  my  sense  of  vision,  and  felt  rather  annoyed,  and  almost  blushed
at  the  idea  that  I  could  have  been  so  deceived  by  a  sort  of  phantom  of  my
own  fancy ;  yet  could  not  help  telling  Giovanni,  '  There  must  be  some
family  likeness,  for  I  must  positively  have  taken  you  for  Charles,  although
I  cannot  make  out  how  you  could  have  gone  from  behind  the  huge  rock
into  the  wood  without  my  seeing  you  cross  over.'  '  /  never  was  behind  the
roch^  he  said,  '■for  when  you  saw  me,  I  had  but  just  put  my  foot  on  the
rocks. ^

"Meanwhile  we  went  home,  put  on  fresh  clothes,  and  then  joined  the  rest
to  breakfast.  My  melancholy  had  left  me,  and  I  conversed  merrily  with
all  the  young  people.  After  breakfast  a  telegram  came,  telling  me  and  my
daughter  Christina  to  hasten  home,  as  Carlo  had  suddenly  been  taken  very


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  65

ill.  We  made  preparations  to  at  once  depart,  and  meanwhile  another
telegram  came,  urging  us  to  make  all  possible  haste,  as  the  illness  was
making  rapid  strides,  but  although  we  caught  the  nearest  train,  we  only
arrived  in  Florence  at  night ;  where  we  found,  to  our  horror,  that  my
brother  had  died  just  at  the  time  when  in  the  morning  I  had  seen  him  on
the  rocks,  when,  feeling  that  his  moments  were  numbered,  he  had  been
continually  asking  for  me,  regretting  not  to  see  me  appear.

"  In  kissing  his  cold  forehead  with  intense  sorrow,  as  we  had  lived
together,  and  loved  one  another  during  our  whole  lives,  I  thought,  '  Poor,
dear  Charlie  ;  he  kept  his  word  I '  "  Sebastiano  Fenzi."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Chevalier  Fenzi  tells  us  that  his  "eyesight  is
excellent,  especially  at  moderate  distances."  He  has  had  one  other
experience  of  visual  hallucination — representing  an  unrecognised  figure —
which  was  probably  subjective.

The  "  Giovanni  "  of  the  narrative  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"Athens,  (English  address,  131,  Tavistock  Street,  Bedford).

"  May  3rd,  1884.

"  My  cousin,  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  of  Florence,  has  sent  me  your  letter  of
13th  March  last,  with  a  request  that  I  would  give  you  my  recollections  of
the  strange  circumstance  attending  the  death  of  his  brother,  Carlo  Fenzi,
in  September,  1881,  a  circumstance  which  made  (and  has  left)  a  deep
impression  on  my  mind.  I  will  endeavour  to  recall  the  whole  circumstance.
Nearly  three  years,  it  is  true,  have  since  passed,  but  my  recollection  of
the  event,  on  account  of  its  strangeness,  remains  clear.

"Passing  through  Italy  in  the  autumn  of  1881,  I  profited  by  the
occasion  to  visit  my  relatives.  At  Milan  I  learnt  that  the  major  portion
were  at  Fortullino,  my  cousin's  seaside  villa.  Thither  I  accordingly
went,  arriving  the  last  days  of  August.  Fortullino  is  a  charming  villa,
situated  on  the  top  of  a  clifi"  on  the  sea,  and  surrounded  by  deep  growths
of  trees  and  shrubs.  The  weather,  during  the  beginning  of  my  stay,
was  very  bad,  rain,  thunder,  strong  winds,  and  heavy  sea.  I  remember
that  on  the  morning  of  my  cousin's  death — none  then  dreamed  the  end
was  near — indulging  in  a  favourite  weakness  (?). — I  started  ofi"  alone  for
an  escapade  along  the  shore.  Descending  by  the  hillside  to  the  beach,  I
passed  on,  leaping  from  boulder  to  boulder,  climbing  over,  or  passing
round  them  when  too  huge,  past  a  bend,  which  hid  me  from  a  view  of
the  villa,  for  some  distance  along  the  shore.

"  Returning  for  breakfast,  I  found  the  rain  (driven  into  my  face  by
the  wind)  blinding,  and,  fearing  an  accident,  entered  the  wood.  The
undergrowth  of  the  shrubs,  and  the  wet  state  of  the  ground,  urged  me  to
try  the  open  again.  This  I  did,  emerging  just  inside  the  bend,  in  full
sight  of  the  house.  To  my  surprise  I  saw  my  cousin  standing  on  the  edge
of  the  cliff.  When  I  approached  him  he  remarked  that  there  must  be  a
strange  family  likeness,  as  he  had  mistaken  me  for  his  brother  Carlo,
being  on  the  rocks,  but  wondered  how  I  had  managed  to  enter  the  wood
unseen  by  him,  and  then  suddenly  leave  it  again.  I  replied  that  he  had
not  seen  me  on  the  rocks  before  leaving  the  wood  (for  I  was  out  of  sight).
The  matter  shortly  afterwards  dropped.  Scarcely  was  breakfast  over  than
a  wire  arrived,  summoning  him  and  his  daughter  Christina  to  Florence, —
Carlo  was  very  ill.     They  left  at  once,  I  staying,  at  their  request,  with

VOL.    II.  ^


66  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

the  younger  members  at  Fortullino.  Our  next  news  was  that  Carlo  Fenzi
had  died — about  the  very  time  that  Sebastiano  had  fancied  to  have
mistaken  me  for  his  brother.  u  j^^j^  Douglas  de  Eenzi."

i-v*^  [Even  apart  from  the  evidence  that  "Giovanni"  was  not  in  sight
when  the  figure  was  seen,  it  would  be  difficult  to  regard  this  as  a  case  of  mis-
taken identity.     For  Chevalier  Fenzi,  being  specially  on  the  look  out  for

at.  "  Giovanni,"  would  be  specially  unlikely  to  mistake  him  for  someone  else.]

Here  we  encounter  a  feature  of  which  there  are  altogether  nine
examples  in  the  present  collection^ — a  previous  compact  between  the
parties  that  the  one  who  died  first  should  endeavour  to  make  the  other
sensible  of  his  presence.  Considering  what  an  extremely  small
number  of  persons  make  such  a  compact,  compared  with  those  who
do  not,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  its  existence  has
a  certain  efficacy.  The  cause  of  this  might  be  sought  in  some
quickening  of  the  agent's  thought,  in  relation  to  the  percipient,  as  the
time  for  fulfilment  approached.  But  considering  how  often  spontaneous
telepathy  acts  without  any  conscious  set  of  the  distant  mind  towards
the  person  impressed,  it  is  safer  to  refer  the  phenomenon  to  the
same  sort  of  blind  movements  as  seem  sometimes,  at  supreme  crises,  to
■evoke  a  response  out  of  memories  and  affinities  that  have  long  lapsed
from  consciousness  (see  Chap.  XII.,  §  9)  ;  on  which  view,  the  efficacy
of  the  compact  may  quite  as  readily  be  conceived  to  depend  on  its
latent  place  in  the  percipient's  mind  as  in  the  agent's.

In  the  next  case — from  Major  Owen,  of  4,  Grove  Road,  East-
bourne— the  tie  between  the  two  parties  was,  we  learn,  one  rather  of

blood  than  of  affection.

"November  17th,  1883.

(244)  "  In  the  year  1870,  I  went  one  morning  from  my  then  home,  in
Clifton,  to  order  various  eatables  for  the  day.  On  my  way,  I  saw  coming
towards  me,  on  the  same  side  of  the  street,  J.  E.  H.,  a  male  cousin.  To
avoid  meeting  him,  I  went  across  to  the  other  side,  and  walked  into  a
fishmonger's  shop,  and  watched  him  pass  on.  I  remained  in  the  same
place,  looking  into  the  street,  and  I  saw  him  (or  it)  pass  back  again.  I
felt  so  annoyed  at  the  idea  of  J.  E.  H.  being  in  Clifton  that  I  hurried
home  to  tell  my  wife  that  I  had  seen  J.  E.  H.,  and  that  he  was  evidently
making  inquiries  as  to  our  residence,  and  would  certainly  be  here  directly.
I  stayed  at  home  all  that  morning,  but  J.  E.  H.  never  appeared.

"  The  next  day,  or  day  after,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  son  of  J.  E.  H.,
telling  me  his  father  had  died  the  very  day  I  had  seen  the  apparition.

"  H.  M.  Arthur  Owen."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Owen  says  : —

1  See  cases  146,  165,  169,  194,  355,  514,  526,  537  ;  also  Mr.  Cooper's  "  ambiguous  "  case,
Vol.  i.,  p.  507.  In  case  210  there  had  been  a  request,  but  not  a  compact ;  and  in  case  197
a  promise  on  the  side  of  the  person  who  died.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  67

"  I  have  ascertained  from  the  widow  of  J.  E.  H.  that  he  died  Tuesday,
November  2nd,  1869,  not  as  I  wrote  to  you,  1870,  between  2  and  3  p.m.
I  saw,  as  I  believe  to  this  moment,  J.  E.  H.  certainly  before  noon  on  that
day.  My  wife  can  testify  to  the  fact  of  my  having  seen  J.  E.  H.  before
I  heard  of  his  death,  as  I  went  back  to  my  house  to  tell  her  J.  E.  H.  was
in  Clifton,  and  she  must  expect  to  see  him  any  moment."

Mrs.  Owen  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"I  perfectly  recognise  the  circumstance  detailed  to  you  by  my  husband
of  his  having,  as  he  thought,  seen  J.  E.  H.  walking  in  the  streets  of
Clifton  ;  indeed,  he  came  home  on  purpose  to  prepare  me  for  his  coming
to  our  house,  and  the  whole  day  we  were  expecting  he  would  appear.

"  M.  Owen."

[Major  Owen  has  had  no  other  hallucination,  and  his  sight  is  excellent.
In  conversation,  Mrs.  Owen  described  J.  E.  H.'s  figure  to  Mr.  Podmore  as
unmistakeable ;  very  tall  and  thin,  with  small  black  eyes  and  a  very  small
head.]

The  next  case  is  from  the  Rev.    W.  E.    Dutton,   of  Lothersdale

Rectory,  Cononley,  Leeds.     It  will  be  seen  that  the  impression  may

possibly  have  been  reciprocal.

"  January,  30th,  1885.
(245)  "  I  am  not  quite  clear  as  to  the  exact  date,  but  about  the  middle  of
June,  in  the  year  1863,  I  was  walking  up  the  High  Street  of  Hudders-
field,  in  broad  daylight,  when  I  saw  approaching  me,  at  a  distance  of  a  few
yards,  a  dear  friend  who  I  had  every  reason  to  believe  was  lying
dangerously  ill  at  his  home  in  Staffordshire.  A  few  days  before,  I  had
heard  this  from  his  friends.  As  the  figure  drew  nearer,  I  had  every
opportunity  of  observing  it ;  and,  although  it  flashed  across  my  mind  that
his  recovery  had  been  sudden,  I  never  thought  of  doubting  that  it  was
really  my  friend.  As  we  met  he  looked  into  my  eyes  with  a  sad  longing
expression,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  never  appeared  to  notice  my  out-
stretched hand,  or  respond  to  my  greeting,  but  quietly  passed  on.  I  was
so  taken  by  surprise  as  to  be  unable  to  speak  or  move  for  a  few  seconds,
and  could  never  be  quite  certain  whether  there  was  uttered  by  him  any
audible  sound,  but  a  clear  impression  was  left  on  my  mind,  '  I  have  wanted
to  see  you  so  much,  and  you  would  not  come.'  Recovering  from  my
astonishment,  I  turned  to  look  after  the  retreating  figure,  but  it  was  gone.
My  first  impulse  was  to  go  to  the  station  and  wire  a  message ;  my  next,
which  was  acted  upon,  was  to  start  off  immediately  to  see  whether  my
friend  was  really  alive  or  dead,  scarcely  doubting  that  the  latter  was  the
case.  When  I  arrived  next  day  I  found  him  living,  but  in  a  state  of  semi-
consciousness. He  had  been  repeatedly  asking  for  me,  his  mind  apparently
dwelling  on  the  thought  that  I  would  not  come  to  see  him.  As  far  as  I
could  make  out,  at  the  time  I  saw  him  on  the  previous  day  he  was
apparently  sleeping.  He  told  me  afterwards  that  he  fancied  he  saw  me,
but  had  no  clear  idea  how  or  where.  I  have  no  means  of  accounting  for
the  apparition,  which  was  that  of  my  friend  clothed,  and  not  as  he  must
have  been  at  the  time.^  My  mind  was  at  the  moment  fully  occupied  with
other  matters,  and  I  was  not  thinking  of  him.

1  On  the  view  of  telepathic  hallucinations  which  has  been  here  advanced,  this  point
of  course  presents  no  difficulty ;  see  Chap.  xii.  §§  5  and  6.

VOL.    II.  F    2


68  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"  I  may  add  that  he  rallied  afterwards,  and  lived  for  several  montlis.
At  the  time  of  his  death  I  was  far  from  home,  but  there  was  no  repetition
of  the  mysterious  experience.  "  W.  E.  Dutton."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  his  only  experience  of  a
hallucination  of  the  senses,  Mr.  Dutton  replies  : —

"  I  have  never  had,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  any  other  experience  of
the  nature  described  in  my  narrative,  and  do  not  think  I  am  a  subject  for
such  impressions.  This  makes  the  solitary  experience  all  the  more
mysterious  to  me."

Asked  as  to  his  eyesight,  he  adds  : — "  I  am  not  and  never  have  been
shortsighted,  but  just  the  contrary.  Nor  do  I  remember  to  have  made  a
mistake  of  identity  except  on  one  occasion,  and  that  in  the  case  of  a
person  I  had  seen  only  once."

[Here  the  behaviour  of  the  phantasm  is  very  unlike  that  of  a  stranger
who  found  himself  mistaken  for  someone  else.  The  case  is  of  course
weakened  by  Mr.  Dutton's  knowledge  of  his  friend's  serious  illness,  which
makes  it  more  likely  than  it  would  otherwise  be  that  the  hallucination  was
purely  subjective  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509).  But  the  fact  of  his  friend's  mind
having  been  distinctly  occupied  with  him  (possibly  even  telepathically
clairvoyant  of  him)  is  a  point  on  the  other  side.]

Mr.  Arthur  Ireland,  of  the  School  House,  South  Witham,  near
Grantham,  wrote  to  us  on  January  5, 1884  : —

(296)  "About  14  years  ago,  about  3  o'clock  one  summer's  afternoon,  I
was  passing  in  front  of  Trinity  Church,  Upper  King  Street,  Leicester,  when
I  saw  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  a  very  old  playmate,  whom,  having
left  the  town  to  learn  some  business,  I  had  for  some  time  lost  sight  of.  I
thought  it  odd  he  took  no  notice  of  me ;  and  while  following  him  with  my
eyes,  deliberating  whether  I  should  accost  him  or  not,  I  called  after  him
by  name,  and  was  somewhat  surprised  at  not  being  able  to  follow  him  any
further,  or  to  say  into  which  house  he  had  gone,  for  I  felt  persuaded  he
had  gone  into  one.  The  next  week  I  was  informed  of  his  somewhat
sudden  death  at  Burton-on-Trent,  at  about  the  time  I  felt  certain  he  was
passing  in  front  of  me.  What  struck  me  most  at  the  time  was  that  he
should  take  no  notice  of  me,  and  that  he  should  go  along  so  noiselessly^  and
disappear  so  suddenly,  but  that  it  was  E.  P.  I  had  seen  I  never  for  one
moment  doubted.  I  have  always  looked  upon  this  as  a  hallucination,  but
why  it  should  have  occurred  at  that  particular  time,  and  to  me,  I  could
never  make  out.  "  Arthur  Ireland."

To  inquiries,  Mr.  Ireland  replies : —

(1)  "I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion  had  any  hallucination  of  the
senses  at  all.

(2)  "  I  mentioned  the  incident  of  having  met  E.  P.  to  my  mother,  and
remarked  on  the  seeming  slight  of  his  not  acknowledging  me.  Of  course,
when  the  news  of  his  death  came,   mother  remarked  that  I  was  mistaken,

1  This  feature  recurs  in  Dr.  Leslie's  narrative,  p.  252.  Visual  hallucinations,  as  we
have  seen,  often  involve  further  the  sounds  that  a  real  person  would  have  made  ;  but  the
absence  of  this  complete  development  (c/.  case  252)  is  only  on  a  par  vs^ith  the  common
occurrence  of  hallucinations  of  voices  close  at  hand,  where  no  visible  phantasm  appears.


XIV.]  OCCUBRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  69

and  although  not  feeling  convinced,  I  had  to  assent  to  such  a  seemingly-
apparent  truism.  My  mother  has  since  died,  or  we  might  have  had  this
added  testimony.

(3)  "  I  am  thankful  to  say  that  my  eyesight  is  good,  and  I  remember
no  instance  of  mistaking  one  person  for  another.  Of  course  I  could  not
swear  that  there  was  no  mistake  ;  but  I  do  assert  that  I,  without  knowing
he  had  left  the  town,  and  with  nothing  to  make  me  think  of  him,  was
suddenly  certain  that  E.  P.  was  coming  towards  me  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  street ;  that  I  watched  him  attentively  for  any  sign  of  recognition ;
that  I  called  after  him,  and  could  never  explain  his  disappearance,  or
account  for  the  unnatural  noiselessness  of  his  movements  or  the  suddenness
of  his  appearance.

"  I  conclude  by  assuring  you  that  so  far  I  have  been  of  a  very  realistic
turn  of  mind,  and  am  not  aware  that  I  am  in  the  least  superstitious  or
even  imaginative.  That  which  I  have  written  is  the  truth,  according  to
my  experience,  placed  at  your  disposal  to  help,  if  of  any  service,  in  the
unravelling  of  that  for  which  at  present  there  seems  no  adequate
explanation."

Mr.  Ireland  was  in  doubt  as  to  the  exact  date.  We  learn  through  a
sister  of  Mr.  E.  P.'s — -and  have  confirmed  her  statement  by  the  Register-
that  the  death  occurred  on  January  9th,  1869.  Mr.  Ireland  was  therefore
mistaken  in  referring  it  to  the  summer.  But  he  is  quite  certain  that  he
"  received  the  information  of  it  within  a  week  after  it  took  place,"  and
remarked  to  his  mother  on  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.

[Here  the  words  "  without  knowing  he  had  left  the  town  "  somewhat
weaken  the  case.  But  the  mode  of  appearance  and  disappearance  strongly
suggests  that  the  figure  seen  was  not  a  stranger  mistaken  for  E.  P.  but  a
hallucination ;  and  if  so,  there  is  the  strongest  probability  that  it  was
telepathic]

The  next  case  is  taken  from  a  book  called  John  Leifchild,  D.D.,
his  Public  Ministry ;  founded  upon  an  Autobiography,  by  J.  R.
Leifchild,  his  son  (published  by  Jackson,  Walford  and  Hodder,  1863).
The  account  is  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Leifchild  himself,  not  of  his  son.

(247)  "I  give  an  account  of  an  occurrence  which  soon  after  befell  my
aunt,  for  the  truth  of  which,  as  an  event,  I  can  vouch,  but  of  which  I  can
ofier  no  solution.  She  was  standing  in  a  little  shop  fronting  the  street  while
a  customer  was  being  served.  On  a  sudden,  her  absent  son  passed  in  the
street  before  her,  and,  as  he  passed,  gave  her  a  look  of  recognition,  which
so  surprised  and  overjoyed  her  that,  forgetting  everything  else,  she  rushed
into  the  street  after  him.  When  there,  she  could  not  see  him,  and
concluded  that  he  was  gone  to  the  alley,  which  led  to  the  abbey,  and  meant  to
hide  himself  away.  We  went,  as  soon  as  we  could  assemble,  in  search  of
him,  but  could  not  discover  any  trace  of  the  son.  My  aunt  then  concluded
that  she  had  seen  his  spirit,  and  fell  seriously  ill.  I  noticed  the  circum-
stances in  writing  at  the  time,  and  pondered  over  them.

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards  my  father  came  to  see  us,  and  my  aunt  truly
divined  his  errand.  He  had  received  a  letter  from  the  captain  of  the
ship  in  which  her  son  was  sailing,  stating  that  the  unfortunate  lad  had
fallen   from   the   mast,  and   fractured   his    skull.       While    lying  on   his


70  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

death-bed  he  directed  the  captain  to  write  to  my  father,  whose  address  he
named.  The  dates  of  this  misfortune  and  the  hallucination  corresponded
precisely."

[This  certainly  cannot  be  proved  not  to  have  been  a  case  of  mistaken
identity ;  for  the  "  look  of  recognition  "  cannot  be  pressed,  that  being  just
the  sort  of  detail  that  might  creep  in  afterwards,  and  the  evidence  for  it
being  second-hand.  At  the  same  time,  the  sense  of  reality  seems  to
have  been  of  a  kind  which  excluded  this  hypothesis  in  the  percipient's
mind  :  people  do  not  as  a  rule  "fall  seriously  ill"  as  a  consequence  of
mistaking  one  person  for  another  in  the  street.]

The  next  case  was  thus  narrated  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  in  an  article
on  "  Apparitions,"  Encyclopcedia  Britannica,  Vol.  II.,  p.  207.

(248)  "  The  writer  once  met,  as  he  believed,  a  well-known  and  learned
member  of  an  English  University  [Professor  Conington],  who  was  really
dying  at  a  place  more  than  100  miles  distant  from  that  in  which  he  was
seen.  Supposing,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  the  writer  did  not
mistake  some  other  individual  for  the  extremely  noticeable  person  whom
he  seemed  to  see,  the  coincidence  between  the  subjective  impression  and
the  death  of  the  learned  professor  is,  to  say  the  least,  curious."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lang  wrote,  on  January  30th,  1886  : —

"  Savile  Club.

"^  It  was  when  I  was  living  in  St.  Giles  that  I  saw  the  real  or  sham
J.  C.  I  was  under  the  lamp  in  Oriel  Lane,  about  9  at  night,  in  winter,
and  I  certainly  had  a  very  good  view  of  him.  I  believe  this  to  have  been
on  a  Thursday,  but  it  may  have  been  a  Friday.  I  think  it  was  on  the
Saturday  that  Scott  Holland  did  not  come  to  a  breakfast  party,  and  sent
a  note  that  Conington  was  dangerously  ill.  I  said,  '  He  can't  have  been
very  ill  on  Thursday  (or  yesterday,  I  can't  be  sure  which),  for  I  met  him
near  Corpus.'

"  I  am  constantly  failing  to  recognise  people.  Conington,  however,  was
not  easily  mistaken,  and  I  know  no  one  in  Oxford  who  was  at  all  like  him.
Whoever  he  was,  he  was  in  cap  and  gown.  u  j^    Lang."

Mr.  Lang  tells  us  that  he  has  never  had  a  hallucination  on  any  other
occasion.

The  notice  of  the  death  in  the  Times  shows  that  it  took  place  on
Saturday,  October  23,  1869  ;  but  information  received  from  Canon  Scott
Holland,  who  heard  from  Professor  Conington  four  times  in  the  course  of
the  week,  leaves  no  doubt  that  he  knew  himself  to  be  dying  on  the
Thursday  night.  The  experience  narrated  therefore  coincided  with  a
time  of  critical  illness,  though  not  with  the  death.

[This  is,  no  doubt,  an  experience  which  might  have  been  without
difficulty  accounted  for  as  a  mistake  of  identity,  had  the  person  who  seemed
to  be  seen  been  in  a  noi-nial  state  at  the  time.  But  in  any  such  case  the
coincidence  is  an  inexpugnable  fact  or  factor,  the  probability  of  which,  as
the  result  of  accident,  cannot  reasonably  be  estimated  save  in  relation  to
numbers  of  similar  and  more  striking  examples ;  and  its  force,  as  I
pointed  out  above  (pp.  62-3),  is  by  no  means  entirely  dependent  on  the
supposition  that  the  experience  was  a  hallucination  and  not  an  illusion.]


i


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  71

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  T.  H.  Carr,  of  1,  The  Terrace,  Carlton

Hill,  Woodhouse  Lane,  Leeds.

"February  18th,  1886.

(249)  "  I  cannot  make  you  fully  understand  the  case  unless  you  are
acquainted  "a^ith  the  Friends'  Meeting  House  premises.  In  passing  through
the  front  gate,  the  Meeting  House  is  on  the  left,  and  my  house,  the  first
of  5  terrace  houses,  up  a  few  steps  on  the  right  hand ;  but  they  stand
back  a  few  feet  at  the  end  of  a  high  wall.  And  on  account  of  the  height
of  this  wall  we  could  only  just  see  the  top  part  of  the  head  and  hat  of  any
gentleman  coming.

"  It  was  when  I  was  standing  at  my  front  window  on  Christmas  Day,
1884,  that  I  saw  the  head  of  a  gentleman  walking  up  the  yard  which  I
thought  was  Daniel  Pickard  coming  up,  but  on  getting  nearer  I  saw
that  the  hair  was  whiter  than  Daniel's  ;  and  on  looking  again,  I  thought
it  was  the  head  and  hat  of  Mr.  X.  But  to  see  him  right,  I  thought  he
would  think  me  rude  to  be  standing  close  to  the  window  and  watching  him
turn  the  corner,  so  I  walked  backwards  a  couple  of  paces,  expecting  to  see
him  pass  close  to  the  terrace.  But,  to  my  surprise,  he  vanished  in  a
moment,  and  I  saw  no  more.  I  was  struck  with  the  affair,  and  took  out
my  watch,  and  it  was  just  4  o'clock.

"  A  couple  of  hours  after,  B.  Geddard,  the  caretaker,  came  down  the
yard,  and  said,  '  Hast  thou  heard  that  Mr.  X.  is  dead  1 '  I  said,  '  No  ;
when  has  he  died  ? '     He  replied,  '  To-day  at  4  o'clock.'

"Thomas  H.  Carr."

We  find  from  a  newspaper  obituary  that  Mr.  X.  died  on  December
25th,  1884,  after  an  illness  of  less  than  a  week.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Carr  adds  that  for  distant  objects  his  eye-
sight is  excellent ;  that  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion  experienced
any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses  ;  and  that,  though  he  knew  Mr.  X.  to
be  ill,  he  had  no  idea  that  the  illness  was  serious.

It  was  impossible  to  judge  of  this  case  without  an  actual  observation
on  the  spot.  Mr.  Carr's  house  stands  in  an  enclosure  which  is  divided
from  the  street  by  open  railings  ;  and  nobody  would  be  walking  along  the
line  which  the  figure  appeared  to  be  taking,  unless  he  were  coming  to  the
small  row  of  houses  of  which  Mr.  Carr's  is  the  first — in  which  case  his
whole  figure  would  be  visible  in  a  very  few  seconds  after  the  upper
part  of  it  carne  into  view.  To  disappear  as  it  did,  the  figure  would  have
had  to  retire  by  the  way  that  it  came,  hut  closer  to  the  wall.  Mr.  Carr
was  perfectly  familiar  with  the  aspect  of  Mr.  X.,  who  used  frequently  to
come  to  see  him,  and  whose  head  and  tall  hat  were  quite  suflicient  to
distinguish  him  from  other  people  known  to  enter  this  private  enclosure.
The  broad  brim  of  the  hat  was  peculiar  ;  and  Mr.  X.  also  walked  with  a
peculiar  droop  of  the  head  Moreover,  the  fact  that  at  the  first  moment  Mr.
Carr  took  the  person  he  saw  for  some  one  else,  and  then  corrected  his  judg-
ment, shows  at  any  rate  that  his  recognition  of  Mr.  X.  was  not  that  of  a
mere  hasty  glance.  He  was  extremely  startled  by  the  sudden  disappear-
ance of  his  friend,  and  at  once  hurried  out  to  see  what  could  have  become
of  him,  but  no  one  the  least  resembling  him  was  in  view.  The  incident
perplexed  and  disturbed  him  at  the  moment  far  more  than  the  words  "  I
was  struck  with  the  afiair  "  might  seem  to  imply.


72  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

The  final  case  of  this  group  (procured  for  us  by  the  Rev.  J.  A.
Macdonald,  of  Rhyl,)  is  from  Mr.  Schofield,  of  350,  Belgrade  Terrace,
Manchester,  a  manufacturing  chemist,  and  an  office-bearer  in  the
Collyhurst  Wesleyan  Church.

(250)  "  About  the  year  1857,  while  I  was  apprenticed  at  Bacup,  I  came
:»*''-*'  \  home  to  Newchurch,  in  Rossendale,  one  Wednesday  evening.  On  arriving  at
.„.  ,  ■  the  gate  of  the  garden  fronting  my  father's  house,  I  saw  Martha  Mills,  a
young  woman  with  whom  we  were  well  acquainted,  at  the  gate  as  if  coming
from  the  house.  I  spoke  to  her,  but  she  made  no  answer,  and  I  passed  on
into  the  house.  When  I  got  into  the  house  I  remarked  to  my  mother
that  I  had  met  Martha  Mills  at  the  gate,  and  that  she  did  not  answer
me  when  I  spoke  to  her.  My  mother  [since  dead]  said,  '  You  could  not
have  seen  her,  for  she  is  either  dead  or  dying.'  I  had  not  heard  of  her
illness  ;  but  she  died  about  the  same  time  that  I  had  seen  her.

"Richard  Schofield."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Schofield  tells  us  that  he  has  never  had

any  other  visual  hallucination.     He  adds  : —

^ti  Ji  i^».       "  It  was  in  the  winter,  and  the  light  would  not  be  sufficient  to  enable

L,vM^.  me  to  distinguish  a  living  person  at  the  distance  at  which  Martha  Mills

'  appeared  to  me ;  yet  I  saw  her  very  distinctly,    and  at  the  time  had  no

doubt  that  it  was  she.     I  was  not  astonished  at  the  time  at   the  vividness

with  which  I  had  seen  her  features ;  for  I  did  not  until  afterwards  reflect

upon  the  distance  of  the  street  lamp,  and  general  darkness  of  the  night."

The  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  Mr.  Schofield's  recollection  that  the
occurrence  fell  on  a  Wednesday,  and  in  the  winter,  but  shows  that  it  is
rather  more  remote  than  he  supposed — the  date  of  Martha  Mills's  death
being  December  15,  1852.  The  coincidence  of  time  between  the  vision
and  the  death  was,  as  far  as  he  can  remember,  exact.  Martha  Mills  was
just  a  neighbour,  who  would  be  in  and  out  at  the  Schofields'  without
ceremony.

Here  Mr.  Schofield  asserts  that  he  saw  the  face  distinctly ;  but
afterwards  adds  that  the  light  was  insufficient  to  admit  of  such
distinct  perception,  had  the  figure  been  a  real  person.  Now,  taken
together,  these  statements  might  seem  to  tell  in  favour  of  the  abnormal
— the  hallucinatory — nature  of  the  vision  :  ^  at  the  same  time  it  would
be  an  equally  reasonable  inference  that  perhaps  he  did  not  really  see
the  face  as  distinctly  as  he  afterwards  supposed.     When  persons  whom

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  462,  note,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  7.  A  case  of  subjective  hallucination  exjDe-
riencedbythe  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham  further  illustrates  the  point.  He  distinctly  saw  in  church
the  figure  of  a  parishioner  of  marked  appearance,  who,  it  turned  out,  had  not  been  there,  and
whose  place  had  not  been  occupied  by  anyone  else.  "  When  I  became  convinced  it  was  a
hallucination,  it  then  occurred  to  me  that  the  clearness  with  which  I  had  noted  the
eyes  and  the  careworn  look  proved  it ;  for  my  eyesight  is  now  unable  to  distinguish
such  details  of  features  at  the  distance  of  the  pew  in  question."  It  is  interesting  in  this
connection  to  remark  that  Mr.  Newnham,  for  the  larger  part  of  his  life,  enjoyed  particularly
good  sight ;  while  another  corresijondent,  who  occasionally  sees  subjective  phantoms,
and  who  has  been  short-sighted  from  birth,  says,  "I  experience  the  same  difficulty
in  discerning  the  unreal  that  I  do  when  viewing  real  objects  ;  unless  the  persons  come
near,  I  cannot  clearly  distinguish  their  features."


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  73

one  knows  are  seen  in  places  where  it  is  very  natural  that  they  should
be,  one  often  accepts  a  very  slight  and  general  glance  as  a  sufficient
ground  of  recognition;  and  it  is  easy  afterwards  to  mistake  the
inference  that  one  drew  from  this  glance  for  actual  ocular  observation.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Schofield  spoke  to  the  figure,  and  it  did
not  answer  him  ;  which  would  at  any  rate  be  unlikely  conduct  on  the
part  of  a  real  person.

§  4.  The  next  type  that  presents  itself  is  different  from  any  that
has  yet  been  mentioned.  We  have  encountered  several  cases,  which
there  seemed  strong  grounds  for  considering  telepathic,  where
the  phantasmal  form  was  not  recognised ;  and  we  have  seen  that
on  the  theory  that  the  telepathic  impulse  may  take  place  on  various
levels,  or  even  below  any  level,  of  consciousness,  and  maybe  projected
into  sensory  form  by  the  percipient  with  various  degrees  of  distinct-
ness, this  lack  of  recognition  is  not  surprising.  But  all  the  visual
cases  so  far  examined  have  presented  a  human  appearance :  the
hallucination  has  been  developed  at  any  rate  up  to  that  point.  It
will  be  remembered,  however,  that  there  have  been  instances  where  the
human  appearances  developed  out  of  something  of  a  formless  kind,
which  gradually  assumed  outline  and  detail  (Chap.  XII.,  §  3) ;  and  this
might  naturally  lead  us  to  expect  that  other  cases  might  occur  of  a
more  rudimentary  type — hallucinations,  as  we  might  say,  of  arrested
development,  and  not  suggestive  or  but  faintly  suggestive  of  any
human  likeness.  Instances  of  the  undeveloped  type  are  met  with
among  the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  ;  but  they
are  very  rare  in  comparison  with  the  hallucinations  which  represent  a
definite  figure  ;  ^  it  need  not,  therefore,  surprise  us  to  find  that  the
analogous  group,  which  there  are  grounds  for  regarding  as  very  pos-
sibly telepathic,  is  a  small  one.  Physiologically,  we  might  com-
pare these  undeveloped    flashes  of  hallucination  to  a  motor  effect

1  In  my  collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  only  visual
examples  that  I  find  of  a  quite  rudimentary  type  are  a  star,  and  two  or  three  appear-
ances of  shapeless  cloudy  masses  ;  to  which  I  might  add  a  few  of  the  "  collective  "  cases  m
Chap,  xviii.,  §  5.  But  since  this  chapter  was  written,  M.  Marillier's  paper,  above  cited,
has  supplied  me  vidth  a  case  eminently  in  point.  After  describing  some  most  distinct  and
complete  hallucinations  from  which  he  suffered  at  one  period  of  his  life,  he  continues  :—
"  Depuis  lors,  je  n'ai  plus  eu  d'hallucinations  trfes  nettes  ;  parfois  encore  je  vols  des  lueurs,
j'entends  des  craquements,  des  bruissements,  je  sens  en  moice  sentiment  d'attenteanxieuse
qui  precfede  d'ordinaire  I'apparition  d'une  hallucination  ;  mais  rien  ne  paralt  :  Thallucma-
tion  est  r^duite  avant  meme  qu'elle  ait  eu  le  temps  de  se  produire."  This  seems  exactly  to
illustrate  "arrested  development."  See  also  case  311  below,  where  a  hallucination  of
light  develops  into  a  human  form  ;  a  converse  case,  No.  553,  where  a  developed  halluci-
nation passes  into  a  mere  impression  of  light ;  case  332  where  it  seems  probable  that  what
appeared  to  one  percipient  as  a  complete  and  recognised  figure  appeared  to  another  as  a
formless  luminous  cloud  ;  and  case  346  where  what  appeared  to  one  percipient  as  a  com-
plete figure,  which  touched  him,  appeared  to  another  as  a  misty  shadow.


74  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

which,  instead  of  taking  the  complex  form  of  automatic  writing,  is
limited  to  a  single  start  or  twitch.  The  experiments  in  Chap.  II.,
§13,  seemed  to  indicate  that  the  sequel  of  a  telepathic  impulse
might  be  a  single  tremor  or  vibration,  sent  down  to  the  motor  centre
from  the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain  ;  just  so  may  we  suppose  the
speech-centre  to  have  been  stimulated  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  K.'s  cry
(Vol.  I.,  p.  398) ;  and  in  the  rudimentary  hallucinations  the  stimula-
tion of  the  sensory  centre  may  be  conceived  as  of  the  same  simple  and
explosive  sort.

The  following  case  stands  in  an  intermediate  position,  as  there
was  a  suggestion,  but  not  exactly  a  representation,  of  human  form.
The  account  is  from  a  witness  whom  we  believe  to  have  stated  the
facts  correctly.  She  is  the  wife  of  an  Inspector  on  the  G.N.  Railway,
and  resides  at  4,  Taylor's  Cottages,  London  Road,  Nottingham.

"April  23rd,  1883.

(251)  "  We  received  a  letter  a  few  days  since,  asking  me  to  give  you
the  account  of  our  dear  little  girl's  death,  which  took  place  on  the  17th  of
May,  1879.  I  beg  to  state  it  is  as  fresh  on  my  mind  as  if  it  only
occurred  a  few  days  ago.  The  morning  was  very  bright,  and  I  think
the  sun  shone  more  bright  than  I  had  ever  seen  it  before.  The  child  was
four  years  and  five  months  old,  and  a  very  fine  girl.  A  few  minutes  after
1 1  she  came  running  into  the  kitchen  and  said  to  me,  '  Mother,  may  I
go  and  play  ? '  I  said,  '  Yes.'  She  then  went  out.  Soon  after  I  spoke
to  her,  I  went  and  fetched  a  pail  of  water  from  the  bedroom.  As  I  was
walking  across  the  yard,  the  child  came  in  front  of  me  like  a  bright
shadow,  1  and  I  stopped  quite  still  and  looked  at  her,  and  turned  my  head
to  the  right,  and  saw  her  pass  away.  I  emptied  my  water,  and  was  coming
in.  My  husband's  brother,  who  was  staying  with  us,  called  to  me,  and
said,  '  JFanny  have  got  runned  over.'  I  then  came  through  the  house
and  went  just  across  the  road,  and  found  her.  She  was  knocked  down
by  the  horse's  feet,  and  the  wheel  of  a  baker's  cart  had  broken  the  brain
at  the  back  of  her  neck.     She  only  breathed  a  few  minutes  in  my  arms.

"  This  is  just  as  the  sad  accident  occurred.  I  have  been  looking  for
the  piece  of  paper  with  it  in,  but  I  cannot  find  it.       "Anne  E.  Weight."

The  accident  occurred  at  Derby.  The  Derby  and  Chesterfield  Rei^orter
gives  a  full  account  of  it,  whicli  completely  corresponds  with  the  above.

[In  a  conversation  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on  December  16th,
1883,  Mrs.  Wright  explained  that  the  apparition  was  "like  a  flash  of
lightning  in  the  form  of  a  child's  shadow."  It  could  not  have  been  a
real  child  ;  it  was  "  not  the  least  like  one,"  nor  did  she  recognise  in
it  the  image  of  any  particular  child  ;  but  it  gave  her  a  kind  of  shock
and  made  her  think,  "  I  wonder  where  those  children  are."  It  lasted
long  enough  for  her  to  gaze  steadily  at  it — "  about  half  a  minute  " —
and    "  moved    away  to   the    right,    with  her  eyes  upon    it,"    and  so  dis-

1  Cf.  Case  491,  where  a  "shadowy  light"  seems  to  have  developed  into  more  definite
form.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  75

appeared.  Not  more  than  a  quarter  or  three-quarters  of  a  minute
passed  before  her  brother-in-law  called  to  her.  It  must  have  been  5  or  7
minutes  since  the  child  had  gone  to  play,  when  the  accident  happened.
Mrs.  Wright  afterwards  learnt  from  an  eye-witness  what  the  child
had  been  doing  out  in  the  road  for  some  minutes  previously  to  the
accident.  While  holding  the  dying  child  in  her  arms,  she  said  to  the
people  standing  by,  "  This  is  her  death-blow.  I  saw  her  shadow  in  the
yard."     She  has  had  no  hallucination  of  vision  on  any  other  occasion.]

It  is  open  to  doubt,  of  course,  whether  the  experience  here  was  of  a
sufficiently  marked  kind  to  have  remained  in  the  percipient's  mind,
had  no  accident  occurred.  But  the  description  of  the  phantasm
appears  at  any  rate  to  point  to  something  more  than  a  mere  illusion
caused  by  the  sunlight ;  nor  is  it  of  a  sort  that  seems  specially  likely
to  have  been  unconsciously  invented  or  exaggerated  after  the  event.    .

The  next  two  cases  are  of  a  much  more  rudimentary  type.  The
narrator  of  the  first  is  the  Rev.  James  Went,  M.A.,  of  Southlea,
Knighton,  Leicester,  Headmaster  of  the  Leicester  Grammar  School.

"  December  21st,  1885,
(252)  "  In  the  year  1870, 1  held  an  assistant-mastership  in  a  large  gram-
mar school  in  the  Midland  counties.  At  the  beginning  of  one  of  the  school
terms  a  boy  had  come  to  the  town  to  reside  with  his  uncle,  for  the  sake  of
attending  the  school.  He  was  a  quiet,  thoughtful-looking  boy,  and  he  and
I  were,  I  think,  attracted  to  each  other.  A  short  time  after  he  had  come
to  the  school,  he  was  taken  ill  during  school  hours.  Seeing  that  he  was  in
pain  I  suggested  that  he  should  go  home,  and  he  did  so.  He  was  absent
for  perhaps  three  or  four  days,  and,  I  think,  meantime  I  made  inquiries  of
his  cousin,  who  also  attended  the  school,  and  got  the  impression  that  he
was  not  seriously  ill.  At  all  events,  I  had  no  idea  that  he  was  in  any
danger,  nor,  indeed,  as  I  ascertained  afterwards,  had  his  friends.  One
evening  I  was  sitting  in  my  drawing-room  reading,  my  wife  being  in  the
dining  room  behind,  when  I  became  aware  of  a  vague  presence  within  a  few
feet  of  me.  It  assumed  no  shape,  and  was  nothing  more  than  an  indefin-
able dark  appearance  as  of  massed  and  disordered  drapery,  though  there
was  no  rustling.  Slight  as  it  was,  however,  I  was  quite  conscious  of  it,
and  I  can  recall  it  at  this  distance  of  time.  It  made  me  feel  a  little
uncomfortable,  and  I  put  down  my  book  and  joined  my  wife  in  the  next
room.  The  discomfort  passed  away  at  once,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  it.
In  the  course  of  an  hour,  however,  I  received  a  note  which  informed  me
that  my  pupil  had  died  at  about  the  same  time,  so  far  as  I  could  make
out,  that  I  had  been  conscious  of  this  appearance.  I  was,  of  course,  at
once  reminded  of  it,  and  took  some  little  trouble  to  ascertain  the  time.
When  I  received  the  note  informing  me  of  his  death  I  mentioned  the
incident  to  my  wife,  and  she  at  the  present  time  remembers  my  doing  so.

"  I  give  the  narrative  for  what  it  is  worth.  It  is  very  vague,  but  I
have  endeavoured  not  to  overstate  the  incident.  "  James  Went."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Went  says  : — "  I  have  never  on  any  other
occasion  had  any  hallucination  of  the  senses."


76  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

Mrs.  Went  writes  as  follows  on  Dec.  29,  1885  : —

"  I  remember  well  my  husband  mentioning  to  me,  directly  after  he
heard  of  the  boy's  death,  a  queer  sensation  that  he  had  experienced  an
hour  previously  that  evening,  and  his  belief  that  he  had  seen  something
which  he  could  not  describe.  "  Feances  J.  Went."

The  stage  of  development  here  seems  just  on  a  par  with  that  out
of  which  the  appearances  in  cases  193,  194,  and  315  took  definite  shape.

The  next  case  is  from  the  late  Rev.  Stephen  H.  Saxby,  of  Mount
Elton,  Clevedon,  who  was  present  when  the  incident  occurred.

"  1883.

(253)  "About  the  year  1841,  I  was  in  a  room  with  my  father  in  our
house  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  when  he  exclaimed,  '  Good  God,  what  is  thaf?'
starting  up  as  he  spoke,  and  apparently  looking  at  something.  He  then
turned  to  me  and  said  that  he  had  seen  a  ball  of  light  pass  through  the
room,  and  added,  '  Depend  upon  it.  Nurse  Simonds  is  dead.'  This  was  an
old  servant  in  London,  to  whom  he  had  been  sending  money,  in  illness.
In  course  of  post  came  information  that  she  passed  away  at  the  very  time
in  question.  "  S.  H.  S."

[The  exact  date  of  death  cannot  be  traced,  the  name  being  a  common  one.]

It  is  superfluous  to  remark  that  such  an  incident  as  this  would
deserve  no  attention  if  it  stood  alone  ;  for  therein  it  only  resembles
almost  any  example  of  coincidence  that  can  be  adduced.  But  in  the
case  of  the  rudimentary  visual  phantasmfs,  the  evidential  weakness
extends  to  the  whole  class,  which  is  far  too  small  to  carry  any
conviction,  or  to  be  even  worth  presenting  on  its  own  account ;  and
to  many,  I  am  aware,  the  very  mention  of  it  will  seem  rather  to
weaken  than  to  strengthen  my  argument.  But  it  is  only,  I  think,
the  vague  habit  of  conceiving  death-apparitions  as  objective  presences
instead  of  as  hallucinations,  that  makes  a  "  ball  of  light  "  appear  so
much  more  bizarre  and  improbable  a  manifestation  than  the
semblance  of  the  distant  person's  form.  If  the  percipient  has  never
on  any  other  occasion  had  an  experience  of  the  kind,  it  seems
unreasonable  to  leave  the  fact  of  the  coincidence  out  of  account,
merely  because  the  hallucination  is  of  a  rare  type ;  and  seeing  that
this  small  rudimentary  class  is  backed  by  the  far  larger  and
more  convincing  class  of  recognised  phantasms,  we  may  admit  the
presumption  thus  raised  that  the  smaller  group,  like  the  larger,  is
telepathic,  while  still  admitting  that  the  smaller  group  adds  no  ap-
preciable weight  of  its  own  to  the  cumulative  proof  of  telepathy.
The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  rudimentary  auditory  cases,  some  of
which  will  be  given  in  the  next  chapter — though  to  these  the  con-
ception of  arrested  development  is  less  applicable.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT  11

§  5.  The  types  that  next  claim  notice  are  peculiar  in  that  they
involve  no  coincidence  with  any  ostensibly  abnormal  condition  of  the
agent.  Evidence  that  certain  hallucinations  are  telepathic,  and  not
purely  subjective,  in  origin  may  be  afforded  by  coincidences  of  a
different  sort.  Thus,  a  person  may  have  a  hallucination  representing
a  friend  in  some  costume  in  which  he  has  never  seen  him  or  imagined
him,  but  which  proves  to  have  been  actually  worn  by  him  at  the  time.
Or  again,  several  persons,  at  different  times,  may  have  had  a
hallucination  representing  the  same  person,  though  that  person
was  apparently  experiencing  nothing  unusual  on  any  of  the  occasions
when  his  form  was  thus  seen.  Clearly  it  would  be  difficult  to  regard
a  repetition  of  this  sort  as  accidental.  It  being  comparatively  a  rare
event  for  a  sane  and  healthy  person  to  see  the  form  of  an  absent
person  at  all,  that  two  or  more  sane  and  healthy  persons  at  different
times  should  see  the  form  of  the  same  absent  person,  is,  on  the  theory
of  chances,  so  unlikely  as  to  suggest  a  specific  faculty  on  the  absent
person's  part  for  promulgating  telepathic  impulses.

This  latter  type  is  important  from  its  bearing  on  the  question
whether  the  peculiarity  of  organisation  which  conduces  to  telepathic
transferences  belongs  rather  to  the  percipient  or  to  the  agent,  or  (as
experiment  would  lead  us  to  suppose)  in  some  measure  to  both.  To
decide  this  question  we  should  naturally  ask  which  happens  the  more
frequently — that  the  same  percipient,  or  that  the  same  agent,  is  con-
cerned in  several  telepathic  incidents.  Now  of  repetitions  to  the  same
percipient  we  have  several  examples  ;^  but  that  the  same  agent  should
figure  repeatedly  is  made  unlikely  by  the  very  nature  of  the  ordinary
type  of  case,  which  implies  (over  and  above  any  natural  peculiarity  of
organisation)  an  exceptional  crisis — indeed,  more  often  than  not  the
crisis  of  death,  through  which  no  one  can  pass  more  than  once.  The
only  chance  for  a  dying  agent  to  show  a  special  faculty  for  originating
telepathic  impressions  is  by  impressing  several  persons ;  and  cases
of  simultaneous  or  collective  percipience,  which  may  possibly  be  so

1  The  evidence  for  one  instance  may  of  course  be  better  than  for  another  or  others
which  may  have  fallen  to  the  experience  of  the  same  percipient ;  but  the  following  cases
seem  at  any  rate  worth  considering  in  respect  of  this  feature  of  repetition  :— Nos.  21,  38,
56,  and  184  ;  41  and  477  ;  44  and  116  ;  53,  with  the  preceding  incidents  ;  69  ;  73  and  103  ;
74  and  423  ;  77  and  263 ;  80  and  201 ;  86,  479  and  480  ;  111,  161  and  464 ;  126  and  201 ;
129,  164  and  551 :  136  and  137  ;  140  and  642 ;  167  and  315 ;  191  and  280 ;  198  and  274  ;
279  ;  311,  367  and  693  ;  370  and  665 ;  408,  553,  554  and  650 ;  411  and  463  ;  502 ;  513  ;  514
and  515 ;  559  and  560 ;  the  case  on  p.  355 ;  and  perhaps  Nos.  99,  392,  619,  625,  692.  See
also  the  account  which  Thomas  Wright,  of  Birkenshaw  (the  champion  of  the  Wesleyans
in  the  North  of  England),  gives  of  his  aunt's  experiences  (Autobiography  pp.  5-7).  Mrs.
Newnham  affords  another  instance,  but  with  her  the  agent  has  always  been  her  husband
(Vol  i.,  pp.  63-70,  and  cases  18  and  35).  Compare  in  this  respect  cases  90  and  700 ;  and
also  case  55.


u


78  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

explicable,  will  be  considered  later  (in  Chap.  XVIII.).  Meanwhile  the
cases  where  telepathic  impressions  seem  now  and  again  to  be  throwTi
off  at  haphazard,  and  independently  of  death  or  any  other  crisis,  are
theoretically  of  at  least  equal  interest.  For  they  tend  to  confirm  what
experiment  would  lead  us  to  suppose,  that  agency  as  well  as
percipience  depends  on  specific  conditions  as  yet  unknown  ;  and  this
dependence  on  peculiarity  of  constitution  in  two  people  would  go  far  to
account  for  an  otherwise  puzzling  fact — the  rarity,  in  comparison  with
the  number  of  deaths  and  crises  that  take  place,  of  spontaneous
telepathic  incidents  connected  with  them.

Of  the  class  of  repeated  hallucinations  representing  the  same
person,  we  have  about  five  presentable  records.^  Most  of  the  inci-
dents therein  described  seem  to  illustrate  what  may  be  called  purely
casual  agency ;  but  in  a  few  of  them  the  agent's  state  was  more  or
less  abnormal — which  is  so  far  of  course  in  favour  of  a  telepathic
explanation  of  the  phenomena.  The  first  account  is  from  Mrs.
Hawkins,  of  Beyton  Rectory,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.

"  March  25th,  1885.
B   /  (254)   "  I  send  you  my  cousins'  accounts  of  my  apparition.

"  I  have  also  sent  you  the  account  of  my  next  appearance,  which
unfortunately  cannot  now  be  related  by  the  eye-witness.

"  Again,  a  third  time  one  of  my  little  sisters  reported  that  she  had  seen
me  on  the  stairs,  when  I  was  seven  miles  off — but  she  might  so  easily  have
been  mistaken  that  I  have  never  put  any  faith  in  that  appearance.  Then
I  was  about  20.

"  For  many  years  after  that  these  appearances  seem  to  have  entirely
ceased,  but  in  the  autumn  of  1877  I  was  seen  in  this  house  by  my
eldest  son,  then  aged  27,  who  may,  I  hope,  give  you  his  own  account
of  it.  "  Lucy  Hawkins."

Mrs.  Hawkins  prefaces  her  cousins'  accounts  thus  : —

"  The  event  described  in  the  enclosed  accounts  took  place  at  Cherington,
near  Shipston-on-Stour,  in  Warwickshire,  the  residence  of  my  uncle,  Mr.
William  Dickins,  who  was  for  many  years  chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions  in

1 1  am  excluding  from  the  list  a  case  received  from  Miss  E.  D.  Jackson,  of  Strangeways,
Manchester,  where  she  and  her  hostess,  on  separate  occasions,  saw  the  figure  of  a  maid-
servant who  was  not  really  present ;  partly  because  the  experiences  both  took  place  when
the  percipient  was  in  bed  in  the  morning,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  a  condition  favour-
able to  purely  subjective  hallucinations  ;  partly  because  the  sight  of  a  person  who  is  daily
before  the  eyes  is  a  common  form  for  such  hallucinations  to  take.     (See  Vol.  i.,  p.  505.)

None  of  the  hitherto  published  cases  of  the  repeated  appearance  of  the  same  person's
"double"  rest  on  good  traceable  authority.  The  case  of  Mdlle.  Sag4e,  published  in  Mr.
Dale  Owen's  Footfalls  (p.  348),  in  1863,  was  withdrawn  in  a  later  edition,  as  second-hand
and  not  well  substantiated.  Some  instances  are  recorded  in  connection  with  witchcraft —
e.g.,  in  Mather's  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  (Boston,  1693),  pp.  106-112  ;  but  here
tiie'idea  of  the  person  whose  form  appeared  was  present  as  a  permanent  source  of  appre-
hension in  the  minds  of  all  the  percipients.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  79

the  county.  The  ladies  who  saw  the  appearance  are  two  of  his  daughters,
one  of  them  a  little  older  than  myself,  the  other  3  or  4  years  younger.
I  was  then  just  17.

"  The  only  mistake  that  I  can  discover  in  either  of  the  accounts  is  that
Mrs.  Malcolm  says  I  had  been  hiding  with  her  '  brother,'  whereas  I  had
really  been  all  the  time  with  her  sister,  Miss  Lucy  Dickins — a  fact  of  no
importance  except  that  she  (Miss  D.)  might  (if  necessary)  bear  witness
that  I  had  really  been  with  her  all  the  time  in  the  washhouse,  and  so  could
not  have  been  near  where  I  was  seen.

"  I  remember  we  were  all  somewhat  awed  by  what  had  happened,
and  that  it  broke  up  our  game.  I  myself  quite  thought  it  was  a
warning  of  speedy  death ;  but  as  I  was  not  a  nervous  or  excitable  girl,
it  did  not  make  me  anxious  or  unhappy,  and  in  course  of  time  the
impression  passed  oflF.

Writing  to  Mrs.  Hawkins  in  September,  1884,  Miss  Dickins  said  : —

"  Georgie  [Mrs.  Malcolm]  is  coming  here  on  Friday,  and  1  propose  then
to  show  her  your  letters,  and  Mr.  Gurney's,  and  that  we  should  each
write  our  impressions  of  what  we  saw  independently,  and  see  how  far
they  agree,  and  we  will  send  the  result  to  you.  It  is  all  very  fresh
in  my  memory,  and  I  can  at  this  moment  conjure  you  up  in  my  mind's
eye,  as  you  appeared  under  that  tree  and  disappeared  in  the  yard.  I  even
recollect  distinctly  the  dress  you  wore,  a  sort  of  brown  and  white,  rather
large  check,  such  as  was  in  fashion  then,  and  is  now,  but  was  in  abeyance
in  the  intermediate  years."

Shortly  afterwards  Miss  Dickins  wrote  : —

"  Cherington,  Shipston-on-Stour.

"September  29th,  1884.

"  I  send  the  two  accounts  which  Georgie  and  I  wrote  about  your
apparition.  We  wrote  them  independently,  and  so  I  think  they  are
wonderfully  good  evidence,  as  they  tally  to  almost  every  particular,  except
the  little  fact  that  I  thought  she  joined  me  in  searching  the  yard
for  you,  and  she  thinks  not — but  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  main
fact  of  the  story,  our  entire  belief  that  we  saw  you  in  the  body."

"  In  the  autumn  of  1845,  we  were  a  large  party  of  young  ones  staying
in  the  house,  and  on  one  occasion  were  playing  at  a  species  of  hide-and-
seek,  in  which  we  were  allowed  to  move  from  one  hiding-place  to  another,
until  caught  by  the  opposite  side.  At  the  back  of  the  house  there  was  a
small  fold-yard  opening  on  one  side  into  the  orchard,  on  the  other  into  the
stableyard,  and  there  were  other  buildings  to  the  left.  I  came  round  the
corner  of  these  buildings,  and  saw  my  cousin  standing  under  some  trees
about  20  yards  from  me,  and  I  distinctly  saw  her  face ;  my  sister,  who  at
the  moment  appeared  on  the  other  side,  also  saw  her  and  shouted  to  me  to
give  chase.  My  cousin  ran  between  us  in  the  direction  of  the  fold-yard,
and  when  she  reached  the  door  we  were  both  close  behind  her  and  followed
instantly,  but  she  had  entirely  disappeared,  though  scarcely  a  second  had
elapsed.  We  looked  at  one  another  in  amazement,  and  searched  every
corner  of  the  yard  in  vain ;  and  when  found  some  little  time  afterwards,
she  assured  us  that  she  had  never  been  on  that  side  of  the  house  at  all,  or
anywhere  near  the  spot,  but  had  remained  hidden  in  the  same  place  until
discovered  by  one  of  the  enemy.  "  S.  F.  D."


80  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"  I  well  remember  the  incident  of  your  '  fetch  '  appearing  to  us.  I
believe  I  wrote  down  the  details  at  the  time,  but  do  not  know  what  has
become  of  that  record,  so  must  trust  to  my  memory  to  recall  the  circum-
stances, and  do  not  fear  its  [not]  being  faithful  though  nearly  40  years
have  passed.

"  We  were  playing  our  favourite  game  of  Golowain,  which  consisted  in
dividing  into  sides  at  hide-and-seek,  the  party  hiding  having  the  privilege
of  moving  on  from  place  to  place  until  they  reached  the  '  Home,'  unless
meanwhile  caught  by  the  pursuing  party.

"  As  I  stood  towards  the  end  of  the  game,  as  a  seeker,  in  the  orchard,
I  saw  you,  who  belonged  to  the  opposite  party,  stealing  toward  me.  As
your  dress  was  the  same  as  your  sister's,  and  there  was  the  possibility  of
my  mistaking  you  for  her,  who  was  on  my  side,  I  shouted  her  name,  and
she  answered  me  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  wood.  I  then  gave  chase,
and  you  turned,  and  looked  at  me  laughing,  and  I  saw  your  face  distinctly.
But  at  the  same  instant,  Nina,  also  my  friend,  but  your  enemy,  appeared
round  some  corner,  and  being  still  nearer  to  you  than  I  was,  I  left  the
glory  of  your  capture  to  her.  She  was  close  upon  you  as  you  fled  into  a
cow-yard.  I  was  so  sure  your  fate  was  sealed  that  I  followed  more
slowly,  and  hearing  the  bell  ring,  that,  according  to  the  rules  of  our  game,
recalled  us  to  the  '  Home,'  I  went  on  there,  to  find  Nina  upbraiding  you
for  having  so  mysteriously  escaped  her  in  this  cow-yard.

"  In  astonishment  you  said  you  never  had  been  near  the  place.  Of
course  I  supported  my  little  sister  in  her  assertion;  whilst  our  brother
supported  you,  saying  he  had  been  hiding  with  you,  and  that,  being  tired,
you  had  both  remained  hidden  in  one  place  until  the  bell  warned  you  that
the  game  was  over — that  place  being  a  washhouse  in  a  distinct  part  of  the
premises  from  the  cow  or  fold-yard,  into  which  we  believed  we  had  chased
you.

"G.  M.  (wee  Dickins)."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  both  Miss  Dickins  and  Mrs.  Malcolm  say  that
they  have  never  had  any  other  experience  of  visual  hallucination.

Mrs.  Hawkins  continues  : —

"  The  second  appearance  of  my  '  double  '  was  in  the  spring  (February
or  March)  of  1847,  at  Leigh  Rectory,  in  Essex,  my  father,  the  Rev.  Robert
Eden  (now  Primus  of  Scotland),  being  rector  of  the  parish.

"  The  person  who  saw  it  was  the  nurserymaid.  I  am  not  quite  sure  of
her  name ;  but  if,  as  I  think,  she  was  a  certain  '  Caroline,'  she  has  been
dead  many  years,  therefore  I  can  only  give  you  my  own  very  vivid  recol-
lections of  her  story,  told  with  tears  of  agitation.

"But  first  I  should  mention  that  I  had  the  mumps  at  that  time,  and
was  going  about  with  my  head  tied  up,  and  the  only  other  person  in  the
house  who  had  it  was  my  little  brother,  nearly  10  years  younger  than
myself,  who  could  not  possibly  be  mistaken  for  me.

"  On  the  first  floor  of  Leigh  Rectory  there  is  a  passage  which  runs  the
length  of  the  house,  terminated  at  one  end  by  the  door  of  a  room  that  was
then  the  nursery.  One  morning,  about  10.30,  '  Caroline  '  came  out  of  the
nursery,  and,  walking  along  the  passage,  had  to  pass  a  doorway  opening  on
to  the  stairs  which  led  down  into  the  front  hall.  As  she  passed,  she  glanced
down,  and  saw  me  (conspicuous  by  the  white  handkerchief  round  my  head,


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  81

and  facing  her)  come  out  of  the  drawing-room  door  and  walk  across  the
corner  of  the  hall  to  the  library.  She  proceeded  along  the  passage,  and,
coming  to  the  foot  of  the  attic  stairs,  met  our  maid,  who  said  to  her,  '  Do
you  know  where  Miss  Eden  is  1  I  want  to  go  to  her  room.'  '  Oh  yes,'
answered  Caroline,  '  I  just  saw  her  go  into  the  library.  So  they  came
together  up  to  my  room,  which  was  one  of  the  attics,  and  found  me  sitting
there,  where  I  had  been  for  at  least  half  an  hour,  writing  a  letter.  After
a  moment's  pause  of  astonishment,  they  fled,  though  I  called  to  them  to
come  in.  When  I  went  downstairs  a  few  minutes  afterwards,  and  reached
the  passage,  I  saw  in  the  nursery  a  group  of  maids,  all  looking  so
perturbed  that,  instead  of  proceeding  down  the  front  stairs,  I  went  on  to
the  nursery  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  But  as  no  one  answered,
and  I  saw  the  nurserymaid  was  crying,  I  thought  they  had  been  quarrel-
ling, and  went  away,  quite  unconscious  that  it  was  on  my  account  they
were  so  disturbed.  "  Lucy  Hawkins."

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Hawkins'  son  : —

"June  20th,  1885.

"In  the  autumn  of  1877,  I  was  living  at  my  father's  house,  Beyton
Rectory,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.  The  household  consisted  of  my  father,
mother,  three  sisters,  and  three  maid  servants.  One  moonlight  night  I
was  sleeping  in  my  room,  and  had  been  asleep  some  hours,  when  I  was
awakened  by  hearing  a  noise  close  to  my  head,  like  the  chinking  of  money.
My  waking  idea,  therefore,  was  that  a  man  was  trying  to  take  my  money
out  of  my  trousers  pocket,  which  lay  on  a  chair  close  to  the  head  of  my
bed.  On  opening  my  eyes,  I  was  astonished  to  see  a  woman,  and  I  well
remember  thinking  with  sorrow  that  it  must  be  one  of  our  servants  who
was  trying  to  take  my  money.  I  mention  these  two  thoughts  to  show
that  I  was  not  thinking  in  the  slightest  degree  of  my  mother.  When  my
eyes  had  become  more  accustomed  to  the  light,  I  was  more  than  ever
surprised  to  see  that  it  was  my  m,oiher}  dressed  in  a  peculiar  silver-grey
dress,  which  she  had  originally  got  for  a  fancy  ball.  She  was  standing
with  both  hands  stretched  out  in  front  of  her  as  if  feeling  her  way  ;  and
in  that  manner  moved  slowly  away  from  me,  passing  in  front  of  the
dressing-table,  which  stood  in  front  of  the  curtained  window,  through
which  the  moon  threw  a  certain  amount  of  light.  Of  course,  my  idea  all
this  time  was  that  she  was  walking  in  her  sleep.  On  getting  beyond  the
table  she  was  lost  to  my  sight  in  the  darkness.  I  then  sat  up  in  bed,
listening  ;  but  hearing  nothing,  and,  on  peering  through  the  darkness,  saw
that  the  door,  which  was  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  to  get  to  which  she
would  have  had  to  pass  in  front  of  the  light,  was  still  shut,  I  then
jumped  out  of  bed,  struck  a  light,  and  instead  of  finding  my  mother  at  the
far  end  of  the  room,  as  I  expected,  found  the  room  empty.  I  then  for
the  first  time  supposed  that  it  was  an  'appearance,'  and  greatly  dreaded
that  it  signified  her  death.

"I  might  add  that  I  had,  at  that  time,  quite  forgotten  that  my
mother  had  ever  appeared  to  any  one  before,  her  last  appearance  having
been  about  the  year  1847,  three  years  before  I  was  born.

"  Edward  Hawkins."

^  This  is  an  excellent  instance  of  delayed  recognition  ;  cf.  case  249  above,  and  Chap,
xii.,  §§  2  and  3.

VOL.    II.  G


82  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  E.  Hawkins  says  :  — "  I  can  assure  you  that
neither  before  nor  since  that  time  have  I  ever  had  any  experience  of
the  sort."

The  second  account  is  from  the  Rev.  T.  L.  Williams,  Vicar  of

Porthleven,  near  Helston.

"August  1st,  1884.

(255)  "  Some  years  ago  (I  cannot  give  you  any  date,  but  you  may  rely
/f—^pn  the  facts),  on  one  occasion  when  I  was  absent  from  home,  my  wife  awoke
one  morning,  and  to  her  surprise  and  alarm  saw  my  si'^w^ov  standing  by
the  bedside  looking  at  her.  In  her  fright  she  covered  her  face  with  the
bedclothes,  and  when  she  ventured  to  look  again  the  appearance  was  gone.
On  another  occasion,  when  I  was  not  absent  from  home,  my  wife  went
one  evening  to  week-day  evensong,  and  on  getting  to  the  churchyard  gate,
which  is  about  40  yards  or  so  from  the  church  door,  she  saw  me,  as  she
supposed,  coming  from  the  church  in  surplice  and  stole.  I  came  a  little
way,  she  says,  and  turned  round  the  corner  of  the  building,  when  she  lost
sight  of  me.  The  idea  suggested  to  her  mind  was  that  I  was  coming  out
of  the  church  to  meet  a  funeral  at  the  gate.  I  was  at  the  time  in  church
in  my  place  in  the  choir,  where  she  was  much  surprised  to  see  me  when
she  entered  the  building.  I  have  often  endeavoured  to  shake  my  wife's
belief  in  the  reality  of  her  having  seen  what  she  thinks  she  saw.  In  the
former  case  I  have  told  her,  '  You  were  only  half  awake  and  perhaps
dreaming.'  But  she  always  confidently  asserts  that  she  was  broad  awake,
and  is  quite  certain  that  she  saw  me.  In  the  latter  case  she  is  equally
confident.

"My  daughter  also  has  often  told  me,  and  now  repeats  the  story,
that  one  day,  when  living  at  home  before  her  marriage,  she  was  passing
my  study  door  which  was  ajar,  and  looked  in  to  see  if  I  was  there.
She  saw  me  sitting  in  my  chair,  and  as  she  caught  sight  of  me  I  stretched
out  my  arms,  and  drew  my  hands  across  my  eyes,  a  familiar  gesture  of
mine,  it  appears.  I  was  not  in  the  house  at  the  time,  but  out  in  the
village.  This  happened  many  years  ago,  but  my  wife  remembers  that  my
daughter  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  at  the  time.

"  Now  nothing  whatever  occurred  at  or  about  the  times  of  these
appearances  to  give  any  meaning  to  them.  I  was  not  ill,  nor  had  anything
unusual  happened  to  me.  I  cannot  pretend  to  ofier  any  explanation,  but
simply  state  the  facts  as  told  me  by  persons  on  whose  words  I  can  depend.

"  There  is  one  other  thing  which  I  may  as  well  mention.  A  good
many  years  ago  there  was  a  very  devout  young  woman  living  in  my  parish,
who  used  to  spend  much  of  her  spare  time  in  church  in  meditation  and
prayer.  She  used  to  assert  that  she  frequently  saw  me  standing  at  the
altar,  when  I  was  certainly  not  there  in  the  body.  At  first  she  was
alarmed,  but  after  seeing  the  appearance  again  and  again  she  ceased  to
feel  anything  of  terror.     She  is  now  a  Sister  of  Mercy  at  Honolulu.

"  Thomas  Lockyer  Williams."

[The  circumstances,  and  the  frequency,  of  this  third  percipient's
experiences  decidedly  favour  the  view  that  they  were  merely  subjective.]

Mrs.  Williams  writes  : —

"June  20th,  1885.
"As  requested,  I  write  to  tell  you  what  I  saw  on  two  occasions.     I


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  83

am  sorry  that  I  am  unable  to  give  you  the  dates,  even  approximately,  as
many  years  have  passed  since  I  had  the  experiences  referred  to.  On  one
occasion  my  husband  was  absent  in  Somersetshire,  and  on  waking  one
morning  I  distinctly  saw  him  standing  by  my  bedside.  I  was  much
alarmed,  and  instinctively  covered  my  face  with  the  bedclothes.  My
friends  have  often  tried  to  persuade  me  that  I  was  not  broad  awake,
but  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  was,  and  that  I  really  saw  my  husband's
appearance.

"  The  other  occasion  was  on  a  certain  evening  I  was  going  to  church,
and  on  getting  to  the  churchyard  gate,  which  is  about  20  yards  from  the
door  of  the  church,  I  saw  my  husband  come  out  of  the  church  in  his
surplice,  walk  a  little  way  towards  me,  and  then  turn  off  round  the
church.  I  thought  nothing  of  it  until  on  entering  the  church  I  was
startled  at  seeing  him  in  his  place  in  the  choir,  about  to  conduct  the
service.  It  was  then  broad  daylight,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  saw  the
appearance.  Nothing  whatever  occurred  after  either  of  these  appearances,
and,  of  course,  I  can  in  no  way  account  for  them.

"  Emma  Williams."

In  reply  to  the  qiiestion  whether  his  wife  or  daughter  had  ever
experienced  any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  Mr.  Williams  replies
confidently  in  the  negative.

The  following  account  is  from  Miss  Hopkinson,  of  37,  Woburn

Place,  W.C.      It   will  be  seen  that  in  this  case  and  the  next,   the

evidence  is  not  first-hand  from  any  of  the  percipients  ;  nor  are  the

cases  strictly  covered  by  the  rule  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148)  which  admits  to  the

body  of  this  work  the  evidence  of  persons  to  whom  the  percipient's

experience  has  been  described  before  the  arrival  of  news  of  the  agent's

exceptional  condition.^     But  that  there  was  here  no  such  exceptional

condition  does   not  in    any  way  increase    the    probability  that    the

narrator  has  imagined  that  she  was  informed  of  experiences  of  which

in  fact  she  was  not  informed.     And  the  news  that  some  one    has

had  a  waking  vision  of  oneself  being  calculated  to  make  rather  a

special  impression  on   the  mind   and  memory,  the  agent  in  these

instances  is  at  any  rate   in  a  different  position   from   an  ordinary

second-hand  witness.

"  February  20th,  1 886.        a'  ,  ^-^.^

(256)  "In  the  course  of  my  life  I  have  been  accused  four  times  of
appearing  to  people  ;  neither  can  I  account  for  those  supposed  visits."

Asked  to  give  details,  and  to  obtain  corroboration.  Miss  Hopkinson
replied  : —

"  It  would  be  really  quite  excusable  if  you  did  not  believe  one  word
of  my  statements.  I  can  get  you  no  further  information  to  support
them.     In  the  first  instance  of  my  supposed  appearance,  which  happened

^  Miss  Hopkinson's  case,  however,  as  regards  one  incident  in  it — the  third — is  not  even
an  apparent  exception  to  the  rule.

VOL.    II.  G    2


84  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

some  years  ago,  the  young  lady  died  very  shortly  afterwards.  Her
parents,  too,  are  also  dead.  In  the  second,  I  gave  the  gentleman  on
whom  I  called  to  understand  that  he  had  made  a  mistake — I  could  not
ask  him  about  it  now.  In  the  third,  though  the  lady  only  a  day  or  two
ago  repeated  to  me  her  original  account  of  my  visit  to  her,  she  totally
declined  writing  it  out  for  me,  or  letting  me  use  her  name,  on  the  idea,
which  I  find  very  common,  that  these  soi-t  of  things  are  irreligious.  The
fourth  time  rather  differed  from  the  others ;  but  the  young  lady  in  that
case  died  soon  after.  I  am  conscious  that  in  all  these  cases  I  was  thinking
intensely  of  the  individuals."

The  following  are  the  fuller  details  : —

"  Case  1  occurred  many  years  ago.  A  young  lady,  sleeping  in  a  house
next  door  to  the  one  I  was  in,  declared  that  I  visited  her  during  the  night
when  she  was  lying  awake,  and  that  I  performed  some  slight  service  for
her.  She  was  so  positive  in  her  statements  that  my  denial  was  not  be-
lieved by  those  around  her.  I  was  perfectly  certain  I  had  never  left  my
room,  nor  could  I  have  done  so  without  its  being  known.  I  will  not
draw  on  my  memory  for  further  particulars  ;  I  might  be  wrong  after  so
long  a  time.

"  Case  2.  Seven  years  ago.  I  had  gone  into  the  City  (a  place  I
always  avoid)  on  a  small  matter  of  business  connected  with  a  relative  of
mine,  and  I  was  very  anxious  he  should  know  nothing  about  it ;  my
thoughts  therefore  were  occupied  by  him.  I  was  almost  startled  from  my
reverie  by  the  clock  of  Bow  Church  striking  3.  In  the  evening  I  saw  my
relative,  and  the  first  thing  he  said  was,  '  L.,  where  did  you  go  to-day  ?  I
saw  you  come  in  to  my  place,  but  you  passed  my  office  and  I  don't  know
what  became  of  you.'  I  said,  'At  what  time  were  you  ridiculous  enough
to  think  I  should  call  upon  you?'  'As  the  clock  struck  3,'  he  re-
plied. I  turned  the  subject — nor  have  I  ever  reverted  to  it  since.  This
gentleman  knew  my  dress  and  general  appearance  most  intimately.  Of
course,  I  was  not  likely  to  visit  him  except  on  business,  and  by
appointment.

"  Case  3.  About  6  years  ago.  I  was  staying  in  a  country  town  100  miles
from  London,  at  a  busy,  matter-of-fact  home,  with  bright  young  people.
One  morning  I  came  down  to  breakfast  oppressed  with  a  sensation  I
could  not  understand  nor  shake  off.  It  resolved  itself  towards  the  after-
noon in  an  absorbing  thought  of  a  relative  in  London,  and  I  then  wrote
to  ask  her  what  she  was  doing.  But  a  letter  from  her  crossed  mine,  to
ask  me  the  same  question.  When  I  next  saw  her  she  told  me  what  only
last  week  she  exactly  repeated  again  :  she  was  sitting  quietly  working,
when  the  door  opened,  and  I  walked  in,  looking  as  usual ;  and  though  she
believed  I  was  miles  away,  she  concluded  I  had  come  back,  and  did  not
realise  to  the  contrary  till  I  turned  and  walked  out  of  the  room.

"  Case  4.  Four  years  ago.  A  young  lady  asserted  I  stood  at  the
bottom  of  her  bed  (she  was  not  well  at  the  time)  and  told  her  distinctly  to
get  up  and  dress  herself,  and  that  I  thought  her  well  enough  to  do  so.
She  obeyed.  I  told  her  she  was  quite  mistaken  ;  I  had  done  nothing  of
the  sort.  She  evidently  thought  I  was  denying  the  fact  for  some  reason.
I  was  about  20  minutes'  walk  from  this  young  lady's  room  at  the  time.


t/V^


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  85

She  was  perfectly  clear  in  her  statement ;  and  I  would  not  argue  the
point  with  her.     Her  illness  was  not  in  the  least  mental.

"  Louisa  Hopkinson."

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Shute  Haye,  Walditch,

Bridport.

"  1883.

(257)  "  On  three  occasions,  each  time  by  different  persons,  I  have  been
seen  when  not  present  in  the  body.  The  first  instance  that  I  was  thus  seen
was  by  my  sister-in-law,  who  was  sitting  up  with  me,  the  night  after  the
birth  of  my  first  child.  She  looked  towards  the  bed  where  I  was  sleeping,  i^  y^^.
and  distinctly  saw  me  and  my  double  ;  the  first  my  natural  body,  the  ^^  Z
second  spiritualised  and  fainter ;  several  times  she  shut  her  eyes,  but  on
opening  them  there  was  still  the  same  appearance,  and  the  vision  only
faded  away  after  some  little  time.  She  thought  it  a  sign  of  my  death.  I
did  not  hear  of  it  for  many  months.

"  The  second  instance  was  by  my  niece  ;  she  was  staying  with  us  at
Dorchester.  It  was  rather  early  on  a  spring  morning  ;  she  opened  her
bedroom  door,  and  saw  me  ascending  the  flight  of  steps  opposite  her  room,
fully  dressed  in  the  mourning  black  gown,  white  collar,  and  cap,  which  I
was  then  wearing  for  my  mother-in-law.  She  did  not  speak,  but  saw  me,
as  she  thought,  go  into  the  nursery.  At  breakfast  she  said  to  her  uncle,
'  My  aunt  was  up  early  this  morning,  I  saw  her  go  into  the  nursery.'
'  Oh  !  no,  Jane,'  my  husband  answered,  '  she  was  not  very  well,  and  is
going  to  have  her  breakfast  before  coming  down.'

"  The  third  instance  was  the  most  remarkable.  We  had  a  small  house
at  Weymouth,  where  we  occasionally  went  for  the  sea.  A  Mrs.  Samways
waited  on  us  when  there,  and  took  care  of  the  house  in  our  absence ;
she  was  a  nice  quiet  woman,  thoroughly  trustworthy,  the  aunt  of  my
dear  old  servant  Kitty  Balston,  then  living  with  us  at  Dorchester.  She
had  written  to  her  aunt  the  day  before  the  vision  occurred,  telling  her  of
the  birth  of  my  youngest  child,  and  that  I  was  going  on  well.  The  next
night  Mrs.  Samways  went  to  a  meeting-house,  near  Clarence  Buildings ;
she  was  a  Baptist.  Before  leaving,  she  locked  an  inner  door  leading  into
a  small  courtyard  behind  the  house,  and  the  street-door  after  her,  carrying
both  keys  in  her  pocket.  On  her  return,  unlocking  the  street-door,  she
perceived  a  light  at  the  end  of  the  passage,  and  on  going  nearer  saw,  as
she  thought,  the  yard-door  open.  The  light  showed  the  yard  and  every-
thing in  it,  but  in  the  midst  she  clearly  recognised  me,  in  white  garments,
looking  very  pale  and  worn.  She  was  terribly  frightened,  rushed  into  a
neighbour's  house  (Captain  Court's),  and  dropped  in  the  passage.  After
recovering.  Captain  Court  went  with  her  into  the  house,  which  was  exactly
as  she  had  left  it,  and  the  yard-door  securely  locked.  I  was  taken  very
faint  about  the  same  time,  and  lingered  for  many  weeks,  hovering  between
life  and  death.  "^

1  Taken  in  connection  with  these  instances,  the  following  experience  of  Mrs.  Stone's
own  is  of  considerable  interest.     (See  Vol.  i.,  p.  555,  note.)

"When  about  9  or  10  years  old  I  was  sent  to  a  school  in  Dorchester  as  a  day  boarder  ;
it  was  here  my  first  curious  experience  occurred  that  I  can  clearly  remember.  I  was  in  an
upper  room  in  the  school,  standing  with  some  others,  in  a  class  opposite  our  teacher.  Miss
Mary  Lock  ;  suddenly  I  found  myself  by  her  side,  and  looking  towards  the  class  saw
myself  distinctly— a  slim,  pale  girl,  in  a  white  frock  and  pinafore.     I  felt  a  strong  anxiety


86  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

Professor  Sidgwick  has  visited  Mrs.  Stone,  and  after  thoroughly
questioning  her  on  her  narrative,  he  writes  (September  23rd,  1884)  : —
"  She  certainly  understands  thoroughly  the  importance  of  accuracy.  She
said  she  had  heard  of  her  apparition  direct  from  tlie  seers,  in  the  two  first
cases  mentioned.  She  had  never  heard  of  her  sister-in-law  having  had  any
other  hallucination  before  this  time  (1833)  or  afterwards,  until  very
lately,  when  she  has  had  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person.  She  is  old,  and
Mrs.  Stone  is  unwilling  to  trouble  her  on  the  matter.  Nor  does  she  think
that  her  niece,  Jane  Studley  (who  is  dead),  ever  had  any  other  hallucina-
tion. As  regards  the  third  instance,  Mrs.  Stone  only  heard  it  after  her
recovery,  from  Kitty  Balston,  whose  account — as  repeated  by  Mrs.
Stone — was  that  Mrs.  Stone  was  taken  ill  in  the  evening,  or  rather
just  before  the  evening,  and  was  quite  unconscious  at  the  time  when  she
was  seen  by  Mrs.  Samways."

[In  the  last  of  Mrs.  Stone's  cases,  we  should  naturally  conclude  that
the  appearance,  if  telepathic,  was  connected  with  her  illness  ;  but  the
other  two  appearances  seem  to  have  been  purely  casual.  Possibly,  how-
ever, the  first  may  have  been  due  to  her  sister-in-law's  failing  to  focus  the
two  eyes  together,  which  is  a  common  infirmity  in  some  cases  of  debility  ;
but  we  should  expect  a  person  who  sufi^ered  in  this  way  to  be  aware  that
she  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  objects  double.]

The  remaining  account  is  from  Mr.  Gorham  Blake,^  mining
engineer,  now  residing  at  Loudsville,  White  Co.,  Georgia,  U.S.A.,
and  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  in  the  summer  of  1884.  Mr.  Blake
begins  with  an  account  of  long-continued  success  in  alleviating  pain
by  hypnotic  processes — a  success  which  he  attributes  in  great  measure
to  abstinence  from  stimulants,  and  to  the  fact  that  his  profession  has
necessitated  much  active  exercise  in  the  open  air.  He  then  narrates
the  following  cases,  in  all  of  which  (except  the  first,  where  the  per-
cipient's experience  was  not  sensory  in  character)  the  agency,  if
such  it  was,  seems  to  have  been  purely  casual.

(258)  "  In  1869,  I  crossed  the  great  Humboldt  (40  mile)  desert,  in  the

State  of  Nevada,  for  the  sixth  time,  alone,  in  the  saddle  ;  by  an  accident

my  horse,  a  wild  mustang,  escaped,  leaving  me  at  10  a.m.  on  foot  in  that

x^ankle-deep  alkali  sand,  under  the  blazing  July  sun,  and  twenty  miles  from

,^My^.    a  drop  of  water,  except  that  in  my  saddle-bags  on  my  horse.     Hours  were

,.^,       spent   in  the    chase    for  my  horse.     Then   I   tried  to  shoot  him,  but  he

■""^^         escaped,   leaving  me  exhausted,    sunstruck,   dizzy,   and  finally    helplessly

dying    on    the    hot    shadeless   alkali,  about  noon.     I  passed  the  agony  of

death  by  thirst,  heat,  and  exhaustion,  and  became  insensible.  It  was  rarely

to  get  back,  as  it  were,  but  it  seemed  a  violent  and  painful  effort,  almost  struggle,  when
accomplished.     I  was  much  frightened,  but  did  not  mention  it  till  many  years  after."

I  may  mention  that  Mrs.  Stone's  daughter  has  had  a  similar  experience ;  so  that  here
is  perhaps  another  example  of  hereditary  tendency.

1  In  the  case  of  foreign  informants  whose  personal  acquaintance  we  have  been  unable
to  make,  we  have  taken  pains  to  assure  ourselves  as  to  their  character  and  position .  I
mention  this  because  the  absence  of  testimonials  has  led  some  jiersons  to  imagine  that  we
accept  accounts  without  criticism  or  inquiry.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  87

a  traveller  passed  that  way  in  that  season,  the  track  marked  only  by  the
bones  of  dead  animals.  A  chance  traveller  came,  saw  my  horse,  and  found
me  insensible,  laid  me  in  the  shade  of  his  waggon,  and  bathed  me  with
water  and  vinegar  until  I  came  back  to  life.  He  lassoed  my  horse,  and
at  sundown  I  mounted  and  rode  to  the  settlements.  Between  2.30  and  3
o'clock  that  afternoon  one  of  my  sensitive  lady  friends  in  Boston,  Massa-
chusetts (2,600  miles  distant),  while  talking  with  her  husband,  suddenly
threw  up  her  hands  and  said,  '  Mr.  Blake  is  dead,'  and  could  not  be
reconciled  to  the  contrary.  She  persuaded  her  husband  to  visit  my  father
in  the  same  city,  and  learn  where  I  was,  &c.  Two  years  after  (in  1871)
I  visited  the  friends,  and  was  immediately  asked,  '  Where  were  you  two
years  ago,  the  last  week  in  July  % '  On  comparing  notes,  and  allowing  for
the  difference  in  time,  we  concluded  that  at  the  time  I  became  insensible
in  the  desert  my  lady  friend  received  the  intelligence.  I  know  I  thought
of  the  lady  and  her  husband  while  lying  on  the  sand,  as  we  were  long  dear
friends."

The  percipient  in  this  case,  Mrs.  Copp,  and  her  husband,  are  dead.
But  I  have  copied  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  (dated  Boston,
Dec.  19,  1885)  written  to  Mr.  Gorham  Blake  by  Mrs.  Dresser,  who
was  one  of  their  most  intimate  friends.  She  says  :  "It  is  written
just  as  I  remember  Mrs.  Copp  and  the  Captain  telling  us  on  their  side."
Mrs.  Dresser's  account  begins  by  describing  how  the  friendship  between
the  Copps  and  Mr.  Blake  began,  through  the  latter's  care  of  Captain
Oopp  in  a  dangerous  illness  on  board  ship.

"  In  the  year  186 — [she  is  not  sure  of  the  date]  Mr.  B.  had  not  been  in
Massachusetts  for  years.  One  day  Mrs.  C.  was  talking  cheerfully  with  her
sister  about  trifling  matters,  and,  while  walking  across  the  room,  holding
a  dish  with  both  hands,  suddenly  the  dish  and  contents  were  dropped  on
the  floor,  and  at  the  same  instant  she  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  dear  !  B.  is  dead  ! '
Her  sister,  surprised,  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  1 '  The  answer  was,  '  I
don't  know.'  But  again,  in  the  same  impulsive  way,  she  cried  out,  '  Oh,
he  is  dead  ! '  She  could  give  no  reason  why  she  said  this,  only  that  she
was  raade  to  do  it.  This  fact  impressed  her  so  sadly,  and  also  her
husband  when  he  was  told  of  it,  although  it  was  inexplicable,  that  they
agreed  to  write  down  the  date,  so  that  they  could  refer  to  it  should  occasion
require.  A  month  afterwards.  Captain  C.  inquired  by  letter  of  Mr.  B.'s
brother  what  news  had  been  received  from  California,  but  gave  no  reasons
for  this  inquiry.  '  Yes,'  was  the  reply,  '  we  have  just  heard  from  there ;
and  he  was  in  good  health.'  After  this  report  Captain  C.  and  wife  did  not
trouble  themselves  about  the  above  incident.

"  It  so  happened  that  in  that  same  autumn  Mr.  B.  visited
Massachusetts ;  and  these  friends  were  among  the  first  seen.  After
a  mutual  interchange  of  the  news  which  had  occurred,  Captain  C.
happened  to  remember  that  curious  incident,  and  inquired  at  once,  '  B.,
what  were  you  doing  one  day  last  — —  ?  Were  you  sick  at  the
time  1 '  B.  replied,  '  No,  I  was  well — nothing  was  the  matter  with  me.'  But
after  further  inquiry  about  the  time,  Mrs.  C.  consulted  the  record  she  had
made  of  the  exact  date  when  the  event  happened,  and  then  told  him  of  her
peculiar  experience," — whereupon  Mr.  B.  narrated  his  adventure,  of  which
Mrs.  Dresser's  version  agrees  with  his  own  description  above.


88  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

[It  will  be  seen  that  the  discrepancies  between  the  two  accounts  are
very  trifling.]

Mr.  Blake  continues  : —

"  In  the  year  1870  I  was  in  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  near  Boston,
and  had  an  occasional  correspondence  with  Miss  S.,  an  American,  then
residing  in  Europe.  I  received  a  letter  from  her,  dated  Miirzzuschlag,
August  6th,  1870,  in  which  she  says  :  '  Yesterday  I  sat  alone  in  my  room,
arranging  my  herbarium,  till  I  was  very  tired,  but  there  was  such  a
fascination  in  the  work  that  I  did  not  seem  able  to  break  the  spell  and
leave  it ;  but  of  a  sudden  someone  touched  my  shoulder  with  such  force
that  I  immediately  turned.  You  were  as  plainly  to  be  seen  as  if  in  the
body,  and  I  said^  "  Why,  Mr.  Blake,  are  you  really  here?  "  and  directed  by
you  I  laid  aside  my  work,  and  went  to  the  woods.  I  do  not  know  that
my  mind  was  upon  you  at  the  time.  I  tried  to  trace  the  influence  to  a
concentration  of  thought  upon  you,  but  failed  to  do  it.  Whether  it  was
your  letter,  your  spirit,  or  my  imagination,  certainly  it  was  a  reality  to  me.'
I  wrote  for  more  particulars.  She  answered  :  '  Vienna,  Austria,  23rd
October,  1870.  In  explanation  of  your  coming  to  me,  I  heard  your  voice,
or  a  voice,  speak  my  name.  I  turned,  and  you  stood  near  me.  I  arose  as
if  it  were  a  reality,  and  as  I  turned  again  you  were  gone  ;  and  yet  before
I  did  that  it  seemed  many  minutes,  for  I  said,  "Is  it  you ? "  and  you
replied,  "  Do  you  not  know  me  1 "  and  then  you  said,  "  I  have  come  because
you  are  tired,  for  you  to  go  to  the  woods  and  rest  yourself,"  and,  as  I  told
you,  I  obeyed  the  summons,  and  wished  that  I  could  have  a  tangible
evidence  of  your  companionship.'  My  diary  does  not  record  any  dream
or  thought  of  Miss  S.  on  August  5th,  1870.  I  was  at  home,  and  quiet,
and  under  good  conditions  for  such  a  visit  as  that  described  by  Miss  S.

"In  November,  1883,  being  in  New  York,  I  was  in  correspondence
with  Mrs.  G.,  who  was  residing  in  San  Francisco.  A  letter  written  by
her  in  November,  says  :  '  Last  evening,  I  saw  you  distinctly  standing  by
my  side  ;  you  seemed  trying  to  speak,  but  did  not ;  you  made  passes  over
me,  and  I  felt  your  influence  plainly  ;  you  were  here  several  minutes,  then
disappeared.'

"  In  another  letter  she  wrote  :  '  You  came  to  me  yesterday  afternoon,
in  Market  Street,  at  the  corner  of  Stockton  Street,  you  crossed  the  street
with  me.  I  turned  to  speak  with  you,  and  you  were  gone.  I  have  seen
you  many  times  in  this  way.'

"While  Mrs.  G.  has  been  sitting  in  a  room,  sewing  and  conversing,  I,
being  in  a  room  40  feet  distant,  have  willed,  or  asked,  that  she  come  to
me,  and  she  instantly  broke  off  the  conversation,  came  to  my  room,
knocked,  and  on  my  asking  her  to  come  in  she  opened  the  door,  entered,
and  seemed  a  little  confused,  and  said,  '  Well,  I  don't  know  what  I  came
in  here  for.'     I  have  had  many  instances  of  this  kind."

Mr.  Blake  has  forwarded  to  us  the  following  letter,  written  to  him  by
the  Mrs.  G.  of  these  last  incidents.  It  will  be  seen  that  she  is  to  some
extent  predisposed  to  hallucination,  which  of  course  weakens  these  items
of  the  evidence,

"  San  Francisco,  Cal.

"  March  22nd,  1885.

"  Dear  Sir, — You  ask  me  to  narrate  the  circumstances  under  which


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  89

I  saw  you,  as  I  wrote  you  in  November,  1883.  At  that  time  I  was  in  my
room  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  I  saw  you  distinctly  standing  by  my
side.  It  was  about  1 1  o'clock  p.m.  You  seemed  trying  to  speak,  but  did
not.  You  made  passes  over  me,  the  influence  of  which  I  plainly  felt.
You  remained  several  minutes,  then  disappeared.

"  Another  time  you  came  to  me  at  12  o'clock,  while  I  was  walking  on
Market  Street,  near  the  corner  of  Stockton.  You  crossed  the  street  with
me.  I  turned  to  speak  with  you,  but  you  had  disappeared.  I  have  seen
you  several  times  that  way,  as  I  have  three  other  persons  whom  I  know  to
be  alive  and  in  good  health. — Yours  truly,  "  Mary  A.  Gordon."

Mr.  Blake  continues  : —

"On  September  28th,  1870,  I  arrived  in  New  York  from  Boston
about  7  o'clock  a.m.,  having  with  me  a  valise  and  umbrella.  I  went  to
Dr.  P.'s  house  on  Fourth  Avenue,  rang  the  bell,  and  Dr.  P.  came  to  the
door,  when  the  following  conversation  took  place  : — Blake  :  '  Good  morning.
Can  you  accommodate  me  with  a  room  ? '  Dr.  P.  :  '  Yes,  but  why  didn't
you  come  in  last  evening  V  B.  :  '  Because  I  was  in  Boston  last  evening.'
P.  :  '  Why  you  called  here  last  evening  ! '  B.  :  '  That's  impossible,  for  I
have  just  arrived  on  the  boat  this  morning.'  P.  ;  *  I  certainly  saw  you
here  last  evening.  You  asked  for  a  room.  I  asked  you  to  walk  in  ;  you
turned  and  went  away.  I  thought  it  strange,  and  that  you  must
have  misunderstood  me.  I  think  my  wife  saw  you  too.'  Turning  to  his
wife  :  '  Did  you  see  Mr.  B.  last  evening  1 '  Mrs.  P.  :  '  Yes,  he  was  stand-
ing at  the  door  with  a  valise  in  one  hand  and  umbrella  in  the  other  ;  then
turned  and  went  away.  I  saw  him  as  I  passed  through  the  hall.'  ^  B.  :
'  It's  a  mistake,  or  my  double,  for  you  can  see  by  my  diary  that  I  was  in
Boston  yesterday,  and  the  business  I  attended  to.'

"  I  left  my  baggage  in  the  room  and  went  down  town,  returning  in
the  evening.  Dr.  P.  called  me  into  the  parlour,  where  I  met  an
acquaintance.  Dr.  C.  Dr.  P.  immediately  said,  '  Another  witness  on  our
side.  Dr.  C.  saw  you  down  town  last  evening.'  '  Yes,'  said  Dr.  C,  '  I
saw  you  walking  along  Broadway.  You  seemed  to  be  in  a  hurry,  and  I
was  in  a  hurry  to  catch  the  ferry-boat ;  I  bowed  to  you,  and  you  returned
it,  and  hurried  on.  You  had  a  valise  in  your  right  hand  and  umbrella  in
your  left  hand,  and  had  on  a  high  silk  hat,  while  I  have  seen  you  before  in
a  felt  hat,  low  crowned.'  We  all  concluded  it  was  my  double,  as  at  about
the  hour  they  saw  me,  6  p.m.,  I  was  resting  quietly  aboard  the  boat  before
she  left,  and  remembered  thinking  where  I  should  take  a  room  after
getting  to  New  York  in  the  morning ;  but  I  did  not  remember  the
particulars  related  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  P.,  or  Dr.  C.  I  think  I  fell  into  a
doze,  or  short  sleep,  while  resting,  as  has  been  the  case  several  other  times
when  my  double  has  been  seen  at  a  distance  from  where  my  body  was.

"  GoRHAM  Blake."

The  first-hand  testimony  of  the  percipients  is  of  course  much  needed,
and  I  explained  to  Mr.  Gorham  Blake  the  importance  of  obtaining  it.
He  has  made  efforts  to  do  so,  but  cannot  ascertain  the  present  addresses
of  the  persons  concerned.     He  writes  • —

1  It  will  be  observed  that  this  hallucination  (if  such  it  was,  and  not  a  mere  case  of
mistaken  identity)  was  collective,  as  also  was  the  first  experience  described  in  case  254.
The  discussion  of  this  feature  is  reserved  for  Chap,  xviii.


90  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

"  I  enclose  the  only  two  papers  on  the  subject  that  I  can  now  find  ;
one  from  Mrs.  Gordon  [quoted  above],  and  one  from  Mrs.  Gould,  that  I
did  not  before  write  of.  In  connection  with  the  latter  I  will  say  that  I
called  at  the  Light  for  Thinkers  office,  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and  saw  Mrs.
Gould  for  the  first  time.  She  said  she  had  seen  my  face  before,  and  told
me  as  related  in  enclosed  paper.  She  was  not  feeling  well,  and  I  held  her
hands,  and  placed  mine  on  her  head  to  impart  magnetism,  and  relieved
her.  I  saw  her  two  or  three  times  while  in  the  city,  and  received  the
enclosed  from  her  after  my  return  home."

The  enclosure  is  as  follows  : —  "April    1885

"  One  day,  while  resting,  I  happened  to  glance  towards  a  window,  in
the  fifth  story,  and,  just  outside,  beheld  the  spirit^  of  my  friend,  Mr.  Blake,
who  seemed  unable  to  get  into  the  room  ;  but,  on  rising  and  throwing  up
the  sash,  he  appeared  to  come  in  and  stand  by  my  chair,  make  passes  over
me,  magnetising  me,  and  seeming  to  envelope  me  with  something,  just  as  a
spider  does  a  fly  in  its  web.  Before  this,  in  fact  some  three  or  four  weeks
before  I  had  ever  met  or  seen  him,  while  in  a  passive  mood,  I  saw  his
head  clairvoyantly,  so  distinctly  that  when  he  came  to  my  office  for  the
first  time  I  recognised  him  as  the  person.  And  although  he  was  at  these
times  alive  and  well,  I  saw  and  recognised  his  presence  as  distinctly  as
though  he  had  been  there  in  form.  u  q     j^   Gould  "

[The  last  incident  cannot,  of  course,  carry  much  weight,  as  the  recog-
nition was  a  completely  retrospective  act ;  and  as  regards  Mrs.  Gould's
other  experience,  the  fact  that  Mr.  Blake  had  been  hypnotising  her  must
perhaps  be  regarded  as  favouring  the  hypothesis  of  a  purely  subjective
hallucination.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  sufficient  evidence
that  hypnotic  treatment  induces  a  liability  to  hallucinations  representing
the  hypnotiser,  unless  that  hallucination  has  been  specially  imposed  on
the  "  subject's  mind — as  any  other  might  be — while  in  the  state  of  trance.]

Another  foreign  example  is  omitted,  as  we  have  been  unable  to
obtain  the  testimony  of  the  percipients.  It  is  clear  that  the  fact
of  the  telepathic  transference  in  these  casual  cases  cannot  be  con-
sidered to  be  proved  f  but  the  mention  of  the  type  here  may  serve  to
elicit  further  instances.

§  6.  Of  the  other  class  mentioned,  where  peculiarities  of  dress
or  aspect  afford  the  only  presumption  that  a  hallucination  was  more
than  purely  subjective — i.e.,  was  due  to  an  absent  agent  who,  never-
theless, was  in  a  perfectly  normal  state  at  the  time — the  following
examples  may  serve.^  The  first  is  from  Captain  A.  S.  Beaumont,  of
1,  Crescent  Road,  South  Norwood  Park.

1  See  p.  48,  note.

2  The  class,  it  may  be  remembered,  is  the  second  of  the  four  types  of  "  ambiguous
cases  "  defined  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  505.

3  As  regards  the  connection  of  these  appearances  with  the  agent's  sub-conscious  sense
of  his  own  aspect,  I  need  not  repeat  the  remarks  already  made  (Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  in  respect
of  the  far  stronger  group  where  there  were  similar  peculiarities  plus  some  exceptional
condition  of  the  a^ent.


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  91

"February  24th,  1885.

(259)  "About  September,  1873,  when  my  father  was  living  at  57,
Inverness  Terrace,  I  was  sitting  one  evening,  about  8.30  p.m.,  in  the  large
dining-room.  At  the  table,  facing  me,  with  their  backs  to  the  door,  were
seated  my  mother,  sister,  and  a  friend,  Mrs.  W.  Suddenly  1  seemed  to  see
my  wife  bustling  in  through  the  door  of  the  back  dining-room,  which  was
in  view  from  my  position.  She  was  in  a  mauve  dress.  I  got  up  to  meet
her,  though  much  astonished,  as  I  believed  her  to  be  at  Tenby.  As  I
rose,  my  mother  said,  '  Who  is  that  ? '  not  (I  think)  seeing  anyone  herself,
but  seeing  that  I  did.  I  exclaimed,  '  Why,  it's  Carry,'  and  advanced  to
meet  her.  As  I  advanced,  the  figure  disappeared.  ^  On  inquiry,  I  found
that  my  wife  was  spending  that  evening  at  a  friend's  house,  in  a  mauve
dress,  which  I  had  most  certainly  never  seen.  I  had  never  seen  her
dressed  in  that  colour.  My  wife  recollected  that  at  that  time  she  was
talking  with  some  friends  about  me,  much  regretting  my  absence,  as  there
was  going  to  be  dancing,  and  I  had  promised  to  play  for  them.  I  had
been  unexpectedly  detained  in  London.  u  Alex.  S.  Beaumont."

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  friend  who  was  present  : —

"11,  Grosvenor  Street,  W.

"March  5th,  18&5.

"  As  far  as  I  can  recollect.  Captain  Beaumont  was  sitting  talking,  V^  »,^
when  he  looked  up,  and  gave  a  start.  His  mother  asked  him  what  was  ..,.^„:;XC.^
the  matter.  He  replied,  '  I  saw  my  wife  walk  across  the  end  of  the
room,  but  that  is  nothing  ;  she  often  appears  to  people  ;  her  servants  have
seen  her  several  times.'  The  room  we  were  in  was  a  double  dining-room,
one  end  was  lit  with  gas,  and  the  other,  where  Mrs.  Beaumont  appeared,
was  comparatively  dark.  Ko  one  else  saw  her  except  her  husband.  Mrs.
Beaumont  was  at  the  time  in  Wales,  and  this  happened  in  Inverness
Terrace,  Bayswater.  u  Florence  Whipham."

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : —

"  I  distinctly  remember  hearing  from  my  husband,  either  the  next
day  or  the  second  day  after  his  experience  ;  and  in  his  letter  he  asked,
'  What  were  you  doing  at  such  an  hour  on  such  a  night  % '  I  was  able  to
recall  that  I  was  standing  in  a  group  of  friends,  and  that  we  were
regretting  his  absence.  I  was  in  a  mauve  dress,  which  I  am  confident
that  he  could  never  have  seen.^  u  q    Beaumont  "

1  The  disappearance  of  the  figure  on  sudden  speech  or  movement  is  a  feature  which
occurs  both  in  subjective  and  telepathic  phantasms,  and  there  could  not  well  be  a  clearer
indication  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the  latter.  In  my  large  collection  of
subjective  cases  I  have  only  three  or  four  distinct  instances,  e.g.,  the  first  narrative
in  Chap,  xii.,  §  2  ;  but  then  it  is  only  in  a  few  cases  that  the  percipient,  by  speaking  or
distinctly  moving,  has  afforded  the  condition.  The  point  was  one  of  those  observed  in
Dr.  Jessopp's  well-known  case  (Athenceum  for  Jan.  10,  1880).  For  telepathic  examples,
see  cases  26,  159,  163,  178,  192,  196,  201,  214,  241,  540.

2  A  similar  case  is  described  by  Miss  E.  M.  Churchill,  of  9,  Eversley  Park,  Chester,
who,  in  October,  1883,  when  at  lunch,  had  a  visual  hallucination  representing  an  absent
sister.

"  I  remember  remarking  at  the  time  that  I  thought  I  saw  my  sister  all  in  brown,  and
that  she  had  nothing  of  that  colour  as  far  as  I  knew.  A  few  days  afterwards  I  received
a  letter  from  another  sister,  in  which  she  mentioned  that  my  younger  sister  and  she  had


92  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

Captain  Beaumont  adds  that  he  has  never  had  any  other
hallucination  of  the  senses  except  on  the  occasion  next  described.
This  other  case,  in  which  the  same  agent  and  percipient  were
concerned,  and  a  third  case  appended  to  it  (in  which  the  sameness  of
agent  and  difference  of  percipient  recall  the  repetitions  of  the
preceding  section),  would  be  quite  without  evidential  value  if  they
stood  alone  ;  but  they  are  of  interest  in  connection  with  the  fore-
going stronger  example.

"February  24tli,  1885.

(260)  "In  1871  I  was  staying  at  Norton  House,  Tenby,  for  the  first
time,  and  had  just  gone  to  bed,  and  was  wide  awake.  I  had  the  candle
on  my  right  side,  and  was  reading.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed  and  to  the
right  was  a  door,  which  was  locked,  and,  as  I  learnt  afterwards,  pasted  up
on  the  other  side.

"  Through  this  I  saw  the  figure  of  my  future  wife  (the  lady  of  the
house)  enter,  draped  in  white  from  head  to  foot.  Oddly  enough,  I  was
not  specially  startled.  My  idea  was  that  some  one  was  ill,  and  that  she
had  come  to  get  something  out  of  the  room.  I  averted  my  head,  and
when  I  looked  up  again  the  apparition  was  gone.  I  suppose  that  I  saw
it  for  two  or  three  seconds.  c<  ^^Bx.  S.  Beaumont."

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : —

"February  24th,  1885.

"In  1872,  two  or  three  months  after  my  marriage.  Captain  Beaumont
and  I  returned  from  London  to  Tenby.  I  went  up  into  my  dressing-room
and  gave  the  keys  of  my  luggage  to  my  servant,  Ellen  Bassett.  I  was
standing  before  the  looking-glass  with  my  back  turned  to  her,  and  I  heard
her  utter  a  little  sharp  cry.  I  turned  round,  saying,  '  What's  the  matter  ? '
and  saw  her  with  my  nightcap  in  her  hand.  She  said,  '  O,  nothing,
nothing,'  and  I  went  downstairs.  The  day  after,  my  husband  saw  her
taking  off  the  paper  which  pasted  up  the  door  between  my  bedroom  and

been  getting  new  winter  things,  and  were  dressed  in  brown  from  head  to  foot.  I  think  I
was  quite  well  at  the  time,  but  my  sister  was  ill,  which  I  was  not  aware  of  for  some  weeks
afterwards."

Miss  Churchill  has  often  had  slight  momentary  hallucinations,  as  of  some  one  at  her
side  ;  but  says  that  this  one  was  far  the  most  distinct  that  she  has  ever  experienced.  But
brown  is,  of  course,  a  common  colour,  and  the  case  is  only  worth  quoting  in  connection
with  the  one  in  the  text.

The  following  is  a  dream-case  of  the  same  type,  which  has  been  narrated  to  Mr.  Myers
by  both  the  persons  concerned.     The  narrator  is  Mrs.  W.

"Mrs.  P.,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  W.,  was  staying  in  Devonshire,  and  one  night  had  a
curious  dream  about  Mrs.  W.  She  dreamt  that  she  (Mrs.  P.)  came  into  the  drawing-
room  in  Mrs.  W.'s  house  at  T.,  and  had  not  been  many  minutes  in  the  room,  before  Mrs.
W.  came  in  in  a  loose,  red  dress,  looking  very  ill.  Mrs.  P.  said  to  her,  '  How  very  ill  you
look  ! '  Mrs.  W.  then  answered  she  had  been  very  unwell,  but  was  then  rather  better.
Mrs.  P.  thought  this  dream  odd,  and  mentioned  it  to  her  friends.  About  a  week  after,
she  came  on  a  visit  to  Mrs.  W.,  and  while  she  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  mentioned
the  dream,  and  pointing  to  a  rose-coloured  flower,  remarked  that  was  the  exact  shade  of
the  dress  worn  in  the  dream.  After  comparing  notes  as  to  the  date,  they  found  that  on
the  day  of  Mrs.  P.  's  dream  Mrs.  W.  had  been  very  unwell,  and  had  worn  a  dressing-gown
of  the  exact  shade  almost  all  day.  The  chief  peculiarity  in  this  is,  that  Mrs.  P.  had
never  seen  her  friend  in  any  colour,  Mrs.  W.  always  wearing  black,  so  if  she  had  thought
of  Mrs.  W.  naturally  it  would  be  in  black, "


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  93

the  dressing-room.  He  said,  '  What  are  you  doing  1 '  She  said  she  was
opening  that  door.  He  said,  '  Why,  the  first  night  that  I  slept  in  this
house,  I  saw  your  mistress  walk  through  that  door.'  (I  must  explain  that
Captain  Beaumont  had  been  a  guest  in  this  house  on  a  good  many  occasions
before  our  marriage.  On  the  occasion  mentioned,  he  had  imagined  that
perhaps  someone  was  ill  in  the  house,  and  that  I  had  entered  his  room  to
get  something,  thinking  him  sure  to  be  asleep.)  Then  the  maid  told  him
that  she  had  seen  me  the  night  before  we  came  home — she  did  not  know
exactly  what  day  we  were  coming,  and  had  been  sleeping  in  the  same  bed
as  he  had  been  in  when  he  saw  me.  She  was  just  going  to  step  into  bed,
when  she  saw  me  enter  '  through  the  door,'  ^  with  a  nightcap  on,  and  a
candle  in  my  hand.  She  was  so  terrified  that  she  rushed  out  of  the  room
by  the  other  door,  and  told  the  other  servants  she  was  sure  I  was  dead.
They  comforted  her  as  well  as  they  could,  but  she  would  not  return  to  the
room.  The  cause  of  her  crying  out,  when  I  heard  her  do  so,  was  that,  in
unpacking,  she  recognised  the  identical  nightcap  that  the  apparition  had
worn.  The  curious  point  is  that  the  nightcap  was  one  that  I  had  bought
in  London,  and  had  not  mentioned  to  her,  and  was  perfectly  unlike  any
that  I  had  ever  worn  before.  It  had  three  frills.  I  had  been  accustomed
to  wear  nightcaps  of  coloured  muslin  without  frills.

"The  same  servant,  some  months  after  the  nightcap  incident,  went
into  the  kitchen  and  said  to  the  other  servants,  '  We  shall  have  news  of
missus  to-day  ;  I've  just  seen  her  standing  in  the  dining-room  door  ;  she
had  on  a  black  velvet  bonnet  and  black  cloak.'  (W^e  had  been  in  London
some  weeks.)  This  occurred  about  9  o'clock  a.m.  About  10.30  she
received  a  telegram  from  us  to  say  we  should  be  home  that  evening  ;  the
telegram  was  sent  from  Paddington  Station  as  we  waited  for  our  train.
The  bonnet  and  cloak  had  been  bought  in  town  without  her  knowledge.

"  The  maid  was  with  me  for  years,  and  was  certainly  not  nervous  or
hysterical.     I  have  now  parted  with  her  for  some  years.

"C.  Beaumont."

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Murray  Gladstone,  of  Shedfield  Cottage,

Botley,  Hants.

"January  18th,  1886.

(261)  "I  went  on  Saturday  afternoon  [last]  to  see  an  old  man  and
woman  named  Bedford,  who  live  in  a  cottage  about  half  a  mile  from  our
house.  Mrs.  Bedford  was  ill  in  bed,  and  I  went  upstairs  to  see  her.  I  sat
down  by  the  bedstead,  and  talked  to  her  for  a  few  minutes.  Whilst  I  was
there,  the  thought  struck  me  that  the  light  from  the  window,  which  was  oppo-
site the  foot  of  the  bed,  was  too  strong  for  the  invalid ;  and  I  determined,
without  saying  a  word  about  it  to  either  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Bedford,  to  give  her
a  curtain.  This  (Monday)  afternoon  I  again  went  to  see  the  old  couple  ;
but  this  time  I  only  saw  Mr.  Bedford  in  the  room  downstairs.  And  after
a  few  remarks  he  said,  '  My  wife  has  seen  you  yesterday  (Sunday)  morn-
ing ;  she  turned  her  head  towards  the  side  of  the  bed  and  said,  "  Is  that
her  1 "  (I  did  not  speak,  as  I  thought  she  was  dreaming.)  "  Yes,"  she  went
on,  "  it  is  Mrs.  Gladstone,  and  she  is  holding  up  a  curtain  with  both  her
hands  "  (imitating  the  posture),  "  but  she  says  it  is  not  long  enough.    Then

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  432,  note.


C^


94  FURTHER   VISUAL  CASES  [chap

she  smiled  and  disappeared."  '  When  Mr.  Bedford  had  told  me  the  above,
I  exclaimed,  '  That  is  just  what  I  did  yesterday  morning  whilst  I  was
dressing.  I  went  to  a  cupboard  in  my  room,  and  took  out  a  piece  of
serge,  which  I  thought  would  answer  the  purpose,  and  held  it  up  with
both  hands  to  see  the  length,  and  said  to  myself,  "  It  is  not  long  enough.'"
I  may  mention  that  I  had  only  once  before  been  to  visit  Mrs.  Bedford,
about  a  year  ago,  before  I  went  on  Saturday ;  and,  of  course,  both  times
wore  my  walking  dress.  But  when  seen  by  Mrs.  Bedford  in  this  vision,
she  particularly  noticed  that  I  wore  no  bonnet,  which  must  have  been  the
case,  as  this  occurred  before  9  o'clock.  u  Augusta  Gladstone  "

Mrs.  Gladstone  adds  : —

"  Mrs.  B.  described  me  as  being  in  white,  and  I  asked  her  what  I  had
on  my  head.  She  said,  '  A  thing  like  this  ' — taking  hold  of  a  woollen  cap
which  I  had  given  her.  It  was  the  fac-simile  of  one  which  I  must  have
had  on  at  the  time  ;  and  they  were  not  common,  for  I  had  knitted  them
of  wool  and  of  a  particular  shape."

Mrs.  Bedford  has  had  one  other  hallucination,  when  she  saw  the
figure  of  a  young  grandchild  standing  by  her  bedside.  This,  however,
happened  at  night,  and  may  have  been  half  a  dream.

When  Mrs.  Bedford  described  her  experience  to  the  present  writer,
she  did  not  use  the  word  curtain,  and  she  did  not  recall  the  remark  about
the  stuff  not  being  long  enough  ;  which  suggested  that  these  items  might
have  crept  into  the  narrative  after  Mrs.  Gladstone's  side  of  the  affair  had
been  related.  Mr.  Bedford  is,  however,  positive  that  they  formed  part  of
what  his  wife  told  him  at  the  time,  and  before  he  saw  Mrs.  Gladstone ;
and  Mrs.  Gladstone  is  equally  positive  that  they  were  included  in  his
account  to  her,  and  also  that  she  has  herself  heard  of  them  from  Mrs.
Bedford.

The  next  example  is  from  Colonel  Bigge,  of  2,  Morpeth  Terrace,
S.W.,  who  took  the  account  out  of  a  sealed  envelope,  in  my  presence,
for  the  first  time  since  it  was  written  on  the  day  of  the  occurrence.

(262)  "  An  account  of  a  circumstance  which  occurred  to  me  when
quartered  at  Templemore,  Co.  Tipperary,  on  20  February,  1847.

"This  afternoon,  about  3  o'clock  p.m.,  I  was  walking  from  my  quarters
towards  the  mess-room  to  put  some  letters  into  the  letter-box,  when  I
distinctly  saw  Lieut. -Colonel  Reed,  70th  Regiment,  walking  from  the
corner  of  the  range  of  buildings  occupied  by  the  officers  towards  the  mess-
room  door  ;  and  I  saw  him  go  into  the  passage.  He  was  dressed  in  a
brown  shooting  jacket,  with  grey  summer  regulation  tweed  trousers,  and
had  a  fishing  rod  and  a  landing-net  in  his  hand.  Although  at  the  time  I
saw  him  he  was  about  15  or  20  yards  from  me,  and  although  anxious  to
speak  to  him  at  the  moment,  I  did  not  do  so,  but  followed  him  into  the
passage  and  turned  into  the  ante-room  on  the  left-hand  side,  where  I
expected  to  find  him.  On  opening  the  door,  to  my  great  surprise,  he  was
not  there ;  the  only  person  in  the  room  was  Quartermaster  Nolan,  70th
Regiment,  and  I  immediately  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  the  colonel,  and
he  replied  he  had  not ;  upon  which  I  said,  '  I  suppose  he  has  gone
upstairs,'  and  I  immediately  left  the  room.     Thinking  he  might  have  gone


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  95

upstairs  to  one  of  the  officer's  rooms,  I  listened  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs
and  then  went  up  to  the  first  landing  place  ;  but  not  hearing  anything  I
went  downstairs  again  and  tried  to  open  the  bedroom  door,  which  is
opposite  to  the  ante-room,  thinking  he  might  have  gone  there  ;  but  I  found
the  door  locked,  as  it  usually  is  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  I  was  very
much  surprised  at  not  finding  the  colonel,  and  I  walked  into  the  barrack-
yard  and  joined  Lieutenant  Caulfield,  66th  Regiment,  who  was  walking
there  ;  and  I  told  the  story  to  him,  and  particularly  described  the  dress  in
which  I  had  seen  the  colonel.  We  walked  up  and  down  the  barrack -yard
talking  about  it  for  about  10  minutes,  when,  to  my  great  surprise,  never
having  kept  my  eye  from  the  door  leading  to  the  mess-room  (there  is  only
one  outlet  from  it),  I  saw  the  colonel  walk  into  the  barracks  through  the
gate — which  is  in  the  opposite  direction — accompanied  by  Ensign  Willing-
ton,  70th  Regiment,  in  precisely  the  same  dress  in  which  I  had  seen  him,
and  with  a  fishing-rod  and  a  landing-net  in  his  hand.  Lieutenant  Caul-
field  and  I  immediately  walked  to  them,  and  we  were  joined  by  Lieut.-
Colonel  Goldie,  66th  Regiment,  and  Captain  Hartford,  and  I  asked  Colonel
Reed  if  he  had  not  gone  into  the  mess-room  about  10  minutes  before.  He
replied  that  he  certainly  had  not,  for  that  he  had  been  out  fishing  for
more  than  two  hours  at  some  ponds  about  a  mile  from  the  barracks,  and
that  he  had  not  been  near  the  mess-room  at  all  since  the  morning.

"  At  the  time  I  saw  Colonel  Reed  going  into  the  mess-room,  I  was  not
aware  that  he  had  gone  out  fishing — a  very  unusual  thing  to  do  at  this
time  of  the  year  ;  neither  had  I  seen  him  before  in  the  dress  I  have
described  during  that  day.  I  had  seen  him  in  uniform  in  the  morning  at
parade,  but  not  afterwards  at  all  until  3  o'clock — having  been  engaged  in
my  room  writing  letters,  and  upon  other  business.  My  eyesight  being
very  good,  and  the  colonel's  figure  and  general  appearance  somewhat
remarkable,  it  is  morally  impossible  that  I  could  have  mistaken  any  other
person  in  the  world  for  him.  That  I  did  see  him  I  shall  continue  to  believe
until  the  last  day  of  my  existence.

"  William  Matthew  Bigge,

"  Major,  70th  Regiment."

On  July  17th,  1885,  after  Colonel  Bigge  had  described  the  occurrence,
but  before  the  account  was  taken  from  the  envelope  and  read,  he  was  good
enough  to  dictate  the  following  remarks  to  me  : —

"  When  Colonel  R.  got  ofi'  the  car  about  a  couple  of  hours  afterwards,
Colonel  Goldie  and  other  officers  said  to  me,  '  Why  that's  the  very  dress
you  described.'  They  had  not  known  where  he  was  or  how  he  was
engaged.  The  month,  February,  was  a  most  unlikely  one  to  be  fishing  in.
Colonel  Reed  was  much  alarmed  when  told  what  I  had  seen.

"The  quartermaster,  sitting  at  the  window,  would  have  been  bound  to
see  a  real  figure  ;  he  denied  having  seen  anything.

"  I  have  never  had  the  slightest  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any
other  occasion."

[It  will  be  seen  that  these  recent  remarks  exhibit  two  slips  of  memory.
It  is  quite  unimportant  whether  Colonel  Reed  was  seen  walking  in  at  the
gate  or  getting  off  a  car.  But  in  making  the  interval  between  the  vision  and
the  return  two  hours  instead  of  ten  minutes,  the  later  account  unduly
diminishes  the  force  of  the  case.     If  there  is  any  justification  at  all  for  the


96  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

provisional  hypothesis  that  the  sense  of  impending  arrival  is  a  condition
favourable  for  the  emission  of  a  telepathic  influence,  it  is  of  importance
that,  at  the  time  when  the  phantasmal  form  was  seen.  Colonel  Reed  was
not  busy  with  his  fishing,  but  was  rapidly  approaching  his  destination ;
for  thus  the  incident,  at  any  rate,  gets  the  benefit  of  analogy  with  other
cases.  This  illustrates  what  was  said  above  (Vol.  I.,  p.  131),  that  where
memory  errs,  it  is  not  always  in  the  direction  of  exaggeration.]

I  7.  The  last  case  quoted  might  equally  well  serve  as  an  example
of  the  next  and  concluding  group,  the  peculiarity  of  which  is  that  the
real  person  whom  the  phantasm  represents  is — unknown  to  the  per-
cipient— actually  approaching.  When  these  "  arrival  cases  "  were
referred  to  above  (Vol.  I.,  p.  517),  it  was  noted  that  the  mere
sense  of  returning  home  cannot  be  held  to  constitute  an  abnormality
in  the  least  degree  parallel  to  death,  or  the  other  recognised  condi-
tions of  spontaneous  telepathy ;  and  our  first-hand  specimens  are  in
themselves  too  few  for  complete  assurance  that  we  have  in  them  a
genuine  t3rpe  of  transfer.  At  the  same  time  they  find  a  parallel
in  the  i-jTipressioTi-cases  quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  252-4 ;  and  taken  in
connection  with  the  two  preceding  groups,  they  at  any  rate  increase
the  probability  that  impressions  from  a  normal  agent  may  be
occasionally  capable  of  acting  as  the  germ  of  a  telepathic  phantasm.

The  first  example  is  from  Mr.  James  Carroll,  who  gave  the  account

quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  281.     The  agent  was  the  same  twin-brother  who

was  concerned  in  that  former  case.

"September,  1884.

(263)  "  In  the  autumn  of  1877,  while  at  Sholebrook  Lodge,  Towcester,
Northamptonshire,  one  night,  at  a  little  after  10  o'clock,  I  remember  I
was  about  to  move  a  lamp  in  my  room  to  a  position  where  I  usually  sat
a  little  while  before  retiring  to  bed,  when  I  suddenly  saw  a  vision  of  my
brother.  It  seemed  to  affect  me  like  a  mild  shock  of  electricity.  It
surprised  me  so  that  I  hesitated  to  carry  out  what  I  had  intended,  my  eyes
remaining  fixed  on  the  apparition  of  my  brother.  It  gradually  disap-
peared, leaving  me  wondering  what  it  meant.  I  am  positive  no  light
or  reflection  deceived  me.  I  had  not  been  sleeping  or  rubbing  my  eyes.
I  was  again  in  the  act  of  moving  my  lamp  when  I  heard  taps  along
the  window.  I  looked  towards  it — the  window  was  on  the  ground-floor —
and  heard  a  voice,  my  brother's,  say,  '  It's  I ;  don't  be  frightened.'  I  let
him  in ;  he  remarked,  '  How  cool  you  are ;  I  thought  I  should  have
frightened  you.'

"  The  fact  was,  that  the  distinct  vision  of  my  brother  had  quite
prepared  me  for  his  call.  He  found  the  window  by  accident,  as  he  had
never  been  to  the  house  before ;  to  use  his  own  words,  '  I  thought  it  was
your  window,  and  that  I  should  find  you.'  He  had  unexpectedly  left
London  to  pay  me  a  visit,  and  when  near  the  house  lost  his  way,  and  had
found  his  way  in  the  dark  to  the  back  of  the  place."


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  97

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Carroll  says  : —

"You  are  quite  right  in  supposing  the  hallucination  of  my  brother  to
be  the  only  instance  in  my  experience."

In  another  letter,  Mr.  Carroll  says  : —

"As  to  the  apparition  of  my  brother  in  Northamptonshire,  at  a  place
and  window  where  he  had  never  before  been, — I  think  I  said  the  room
was  very  light  indeed,  the  night  very  dark.  Even  had  I  looked  out  of  the
window  I  could  not  have  seen  him.  With  my  head  turned  from  the
window,  I  distinctly  saw  his  face.  I  was  affected  and  surprised.  It
seemed  like  a  slight  shock  of  electricity.  I  had  not  recovered  from  the
effects  when  the  second  surprise  came,  the  reality — my  brother.  I  did  not
mention  the  subject  to  him  then,  being  rather  flattered  at  his  astonishment
at  my  cool  demeanour.  The  coolness  was  caused  by  the  apparition  first  of
him.  The  window  my  brother  came  to  was  at  the  back  of  the  house.  He
found  my  window  out  only  by  accident,  or,  as  he  said,  he  thought  it  was
my  window."

[Mr.  Carroll  is  a  clear-headed  and  careful  witness.  He  is  quite
positive  as  to  this  being  his  only  experience  of  a  hallucination.  In  con-
versation, he  stated  that  there  were  no  mirrors  in  the  room,  and  that  the
figure  was  seen  not  in  the  direction  of  the  window.  He  thinks  that  the
interval  between  the  hallucination  and  his  brother's  appearance  was  about
a  minute.]

Here  the  gradual  disappearance,  if  correctly  remembered,  is
interesting  as  a  feature  which  is  occasionally  met  with  in  purely
subjective  hallucinations  (Chap.  XII.,  §§  2  and  10).^

The  next  example  is  a  "  collective "  case,^  but  had  better  be
quoted  in  the  present  connection.  The  narrator  is  the  late  Rev.  W.
Mountford,  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  a  minister  and  author  of  repute.  ^^  v.^1  *•<  ^

(264)  "  One  day,  some  15  years  ago,  I  went  from  the  place  of  my  abode
to  see  some  friends  who  resided  in  the  fen  districts  of  Norfolk.  They  were  ■  -  f-  "
persons  whom  I  knew,  not  merely  well,  but  intimately.  They  were  two
brothers  who  had  married  two  sisters.  Their  houses  were  a  mile  and  a
quarter  apart,  but  standing  on  the  same  road,  and  with  only  two  or  three
other  habitations  intervening.  The  road  was  a  straight,  bare,  open  road,  like
what  is  so  often  to  be  seen  in  the  fens,  and  used  chiefly  and  almost
exclusively  by  the  occupants  of  the  few  farms  alongside  of  it.  The  house
at  which  I  was  visiting  stood  about  10  yards  from  the  edge  of  the  road.
The  day  was  fine  and  clear — a  day  in  March.  About  4  o'clock  in  the
afternoon  I  stood  at  the  window,  and  looking  up  the  road  I  said,  '  Here
is  your  brother  coming.'  My  host  advanced  to  the  window  and  said,  '  Oh
yes,  here  he  is ;  and  see,  Robert  has  got  Dobbin  out  at  last.'  Dobbin  was
a  horse  which,  on  account  of  some  accident,  had  not  been  used  for  some
weeks.     The  lady  also  looked  out  at  the  window,  and  said  to  me,   '  And  I

1  Compare  cases  185, 194,  207,  263,  311,  315,  331,  350,  488,  503,  514,  544,  553,  567,  672,
673  ;  also  cases  189  and  328,  and  the  account  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  454,  note,  where  the  expression
"  melted  away  "  is  used.

2  Compare  the  carriage  cases  described  in  Chap,  xviii.,  §  5.

VOL.    II.  H


98  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES  [chap.

am  so  glad,  too,   that  my  sister  is  with  him.     They  will  be  delighted  to
find  you  here.'

"  I  recognised  distinctly  the  vehicle  in  which  they  rode  as  being  an
open  one,  also  the  lady  and  the  gentleman,  and  both  their  dress,  and
their  attitudes.

"  Our  friends  passed  at  a  gentle  pace  along  the  front  of  the  window,  and
then  turning  with  the  road  round  the  corner  of  the  house,  they  could  not
longer  be  seen.  After  a  minute  my  host  went  to  the  door  and  exclaimed,
'  Why,  what  can  be  the  matter  ?  They  have  gone  on  without  calling,  a
thing  they  never  did  in  their  lives  before.     What  can  be  the  matter  1 '

"  Five  minutes  afterwards,  while  we  were  seated  by  the  fireside,  the
parlour  door  opened,  and  there  entered  a  lady  of  about  25  years  of  age ;
she  was  in  robust  health  and  in  full  possession  of  all  her  senses,  and  she
was  possessed,  besides,  of  a  strong  common-sense.  She  was  pale  and
much  excited,  and  the  moment  she  opened  the  door  she  exclaimed,  '  Oh,
aunt,  I  have  had  such  a  fright.  Father  and  mother  have  passed  me  on
the  road  without  speaking.  I  looked  up  at  them  as  they  passed  by,  but
they  looked  straight  on  and  never  stopped  nor  said  a  word.  A  quarter  of
an  hour  before,  when  I  started  to  walk  here,  they  were  sitting  by  the  fire  ;
and  now,  what  can  be  the  matter  *?  They  never  turned  nor  spoke,  and
yet  I  am  certain  that  they  must  have  seen  me.'

"  Ten  minutes  after  the  arrival  of  this  lady,  I,  looking  through  the
window  up  the  road,  said,  '  But  see,  here  they  are,  coming  down  the  road
again.'

"  My  host  said,  '  No,  that  is  impossible,  because  there  is  no  path  by
which  they  could  get  on  to  this  road,  so  as  to  be  coming  down  it  again.
But  sure  enough,  here  they  are,  and  with  the  same  horse  !  How  in  the
world  have  they  got  here  % '

"  We  all  stood  at  the  window,  and  saw  pass  before  us  precisely  the
same  appearance  which  we  had  seen  before — lady  and  gentleman,  and
horse  and  carriage.  My  host  ran  to  the  door  and  exclaimed,  '  How  did
you  get  here  ?  How  did  you  get  on  to  the  road  to  be  coming  down  here
again  now  1 '

"  '  I  get  on  the  road  1  What  do  you  mean  1  I  have  just  come  straight
from  home.'

"  '  And  did  you  not  come  down  the  road  and  pass  the  house,  less  than
a  quarter  of  an  hour  ago  1 '

"  '  No,'  said  the  lady  and  gentleman  both.  '  This  is  the  first  time  that
we  have  come  down  the  road  to-day.'

" '  Certainly '  we  all  said,  '  you  passed  these  windows  less  than  a
quarter  of  an  hour  ago.  And,  besides,  here  is  Mary,  who  was  on  the  road
and  saw  you.'

"  '  Nonsense,'  was  the  answer.  '  We  are  straight  from  home,  as  you  may
be  very  sure.  For  how  could  you  have  seen  us  pass  by  before,  when  you
did  see  us  coming  down  now  1 '

"  'Then  you  mean  to  say  that  really  you  did  not  pass  by  here  10  or  15
minutes  ago  1 '

"  '  Certainly  ;  for  at  that  time,  probably,  we  were  just  coming  out  of
the  yard  and  starting  to  come  here.'

"  We  all  of  us  remained  much  amazed  at  this  incident.  There  were
four  of  us  who  had  seen  this  appearance,  and  seen  it  under  such  circum-


XIV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT,  99

stances  as  apparently  precluded  any  possibility  of  our  having  mistaken
some  casual  passengers  for  our  intimate  friends.  We  were  quite  satisfied
that  we  had  really  not  seen  our  bodily  friends  pass  down  the  road,  that
first  time  when  we  thought  that  we  saw  them.  As  for  myself,  I  was  sure
that  it  was  not  they  ;  and  yet  hardly  could  I  help  feeling  that  it  could
have  been  no  persons  else.

"  There  is  an  old  saying  about  keeping  a  thing  10  years,  and  then
finding  a  use  for  it.  This  curious  experience  of  mine  is  as  vivid  in  my
mind  as  though  it  were  of  yesterday.  Is  it  of  use  as  illustrating
mistakes  as  to  identity,  or  is  it  rather  a  singular  instance  of  what  is  called
second-sight  ?

This  account  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  August,
1860.     On  our  writing  to  Mr.  Mountford  on  the  subject  he  replied  : —

"  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  U.S.A.
"8th  August,  1884.

"The  narrative  of  which  you  have  sent  me  a  copy  was  written  by
myself,  as  you  had  rightly  supposed.  It  was  carefully  prepared,  and  I
believe  it  to  be  as  exactly  true  as  any  report  ever  made  by  phonograph  or
photograph.

"  At  the  time  when  the  occurrence  happened,  I  was  simply  amazed  at
it,  and  I  felt  but  just  simply  as  some  untaught  ploughman  might  have  felt
in  the  open  field,  if  an  aerolite  had  fallen  at  his  feet,  hot  from  the  skies.

"The  persons  besides  myself,  of  whom  I  wrote  in  that  account,  were
all  of  the  family  name  of  Coe,  and  were  all  of  Islington,  near  King's  Lynn ;
and  they  were  all  living  at  the  time  when  I  wrote  about  them,  but  they
have  all  been  carried  away.

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  Mrs.   Robert   Coe  said    that  she   and   her  i
husband  knew  of  their  daughter's  having  started  to  see  her  aunt,  but  that
they    had    had    no   intention   of    following   her   till    Mr.    Robert    Coe, '
suddenly  starting  from  his  chair  by  the  fireside,  exclaimed  '  Let  us  go  to
Clement's.' "

[It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  this  experience  was  not  recorded  in
writing  at  the  moment,  and  signed  by  all  the  persons  concerned.  At  the
same  time  the  hypothesis  that  it  was  a  mere  mistake  or  illusion  is  strongly
discountenanced  by  the  persistence  of  the  contrary  impression  in  a  sound
and  rationally  sceptical  mind.  For  the  natural  tendency  of  such  a  mind
is  undeniably  to  be  less  certain  of  the  reality  of  abnormal  facts  after  a  long
interval  than  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence.  ^J

It  will  be  convenient  to  complete  the  account  of  this  "  arrival  "
type  by  citing  at  once  a  couple  of  auditory  cases,  which  belong
by  rights  to  the  next  chapter.  The  following  account  is  from  Mr.
J.  Stevenson,  of  28,  Prospect  Street,  Gateshead.

1  It  is  interesting,  for  instance,  to  find  an  able  observer,  M.  Marillier,  candidly
admitting  that,  but  for  written  notes  and  other  indisputable  evidence,  he  could  easily
come  to  believe  that  his  own  very  vivid  subjective  hallucinations  of  some  years  ago  were  a
disease  of  memory,  and  were  never  really  experienced  (JRevue  Philosophique  for  February,
1886,  p.  206).

VOL.    II.  H    2


100  FURTHER  VISUAL  CASES.  [chap.

"  April  20th,  1885.

(265)  "During  the  months  of  May  and  June,  1881,  my  brother  was
staying  with  us.  He  went  out  one  Sunday  night  between  5  and  6  o'clock.  He
did  not  say  what  time  he  would  return,  but  his  time  was  generally  about
10  p.m.  About  7  o'clock,  while  I  was  reading  by  the  window,  and  Mrs.
Stevenson  by  the  fire,  all  being  quiet,  I  heard  a  voice  say  '  David  is
coming.'  I  instantly  turned  to  Mrs.  S.,  asking  what  she  said.  She  said,
'I  have  not  spoken  a  word.'  I  told  her  that  I  heard  someone  say  that
'  David  is  coming.'  I  then  thought  I  had  imagined  it,  but,  lo  and  behold  !
in  less  than  3  minutes,  in  he  comes,  quite  unexpected.  I  was  surprised,
but  did  not  mention  anything  to  him  about  it.  The  position  of  the  house
prevented  us  from  seeing  him  until  just  about  to  enter  the  house.  He  was
in  good  health,  as  we  all  were  at  the  time.  This  is  a  candid  statement  of
the  facts,

"  Jos.  Stevenson."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Stevenson  adds  : —

"  This  was  the  sole  experience  I  have  had  of  the  kind.  I  have  never
experienced  any  hallucination."

Mrs.  Stevenson  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  In  reference  to  my  husband's  letter  of  April  20th,  I  have  pleasure  in
testifying  to  the  accuracy  of  his  account,  and  of  his  drawing  my  attention
to  the  fact  at  the  time  mentioned.

"Serena  Stevenson."

The  remaining  auditory  specimen  (266)  is  from  Mrs.  Robinson,
residing  at  The  Warren,  Caversham,  Reading,  who  has  never  experi-
enced a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  Some  14  years  ago,  she
tells  us,  she  was  sitting  at  needlework  in  the  evening,  when  she  heard
the  voice  of  her  son,  Stansford  Robinson — who  was  supposed  to  be
abroad,  but  had  not  been  heard  of  for  some  time — calling,  "  Nar,
Nar,  Nar,"  the  pet  name  of  an  old  family  nurse.  The  triple  call  was
twice  repeated.  Mrs.  Robinson  opened  the  door,  fully  expecting  to
find  her  son  in  the  hall,  but  no  one  was  there.  The  son  "  returned
unexpectedly  next  day,  very  ill,  and  died  soon  after."  ^

1  It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  point  out  the  wide  difference  between  such  hallucina-
tions of  voices  and  one  of  the  alleged  phenomena  sonaetimes  included  under  the  general
name  of  "second-sight" — to  wit,  notice  given  of  the  approach  of  travellers,  some  time
before  their  actual  arrival,  by  a  sound  of  horses'  feet  outside  the  house.  _  (See,  e.g.,
Jjescription  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  by  George  Waldron,  1744,  p.  75.)  It  is  obvious  (1)  how
easily  an  auditory  impression  of  that  sort  may  be  a  mere  illusion — just  as  the  swirling  of
leaves  is  probably  accountable  for  many  of  the  tales  of  phantom  carriages  driving  up  to
the  door  ;  and  (2)  how  certain  it  is  that,  among  a  population  holding  such  a  belief,  the
occasional  coincidence,  when  the  suggestive  sound  was  heard  and  the  guest  arrived,  would
be  noted  as  a  marvel,  and  the  sounds  which  no  arrival  followed  would  find  no  place  in  the
reckoning.  It  would  not  occur  to  a  Manx  peasant  to  make  capital  out  of  even  the
failures — as  I  have  actually  seen  done — by  calling  them  "  inverted  coincidences  "  !


XV.]


CHAPTER  XV.

FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE
PERCIPIENT.

§  1.  In  examining  cases  of  auditory  phantasms  which  have  strikingly-
corresponded  with  real  events,  we  have  two  main  points  to  look  to.
First,  there  is  the  phantasm  regarded  merely  as  a  sensory
phenomenon,  on  a  par  with  the  visual  phantasms.  This,  of  course,
is  the  sound  in  itself ;  which  is  occasionally  of  an  inarticulate  sort,
a  simple  noise  ;  but  which  in  the  large  majority  of  instances  repre-
sents the  tone  of  a  human  voice — the  voice,  like  the  visual  phantasm,
being  either  recognised  or  unrecognised.  But,  secondly,  when  the
phantasm  is  a  voice,  there  is  a  further  element,  which  has  as  a  rule
no  analogue  in  the  visual  class — namely,  what  the  voice  says ;  and
this  is  likely  to  afford  us  some  clue  as  to  whether  a  complete  and
definite  idea  has  been  telepathically  conveyed  from  the  agent
or  merely  an  impulse  or  germ  which  the  percipient  has  developed  in
his  own  way.  We  find  that  the  auditory  cases,  like  the  visual,
present  various  stages  of  apparent  externalisation  ;^  but  the  discrimina-
tions here  are  less  marked — it  being  more  difficult  in  the  case  of
sounds  than  of  sights  to  decide,  in  recalling  them,  how  far  the
impression  seemed  inward,  and  how  far  outward ;  while  even  if  the
special  stage  be  clear  in  the  percipient's  mind,  it  is  not  easy  to  find
words  to  describe  it.

I  will  begin  with  recognised  voices ;  and  will  first  quote  a
few  cases  where  the  analogy  to  experimental  thought-transference
is  strongest,  inasmuch  as  what  the  percipient  heard  seems  to  have
represented  the  actual  sensation  of  the  agent,^  the  very  words  which
he  was  hearing  while  he  uttered  them — in  one  instance,  however,  so
dulled  as  to  be  indistinguishable  as  words.     The  following  account

1  See  the  account  of  some  of  these  stages  as  exemplified  in  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tions, Vol.  i.,  pp.  480-2.

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  536,  note.


102  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

is  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Walditch,  Bridport,   the  narrator  of  case  257,

above.

-'^-■'  "January  29th,  1883.

(S57)  "  On  the  1 3th  of  January,  1882,  my  eldest  son,  who  had  been
paying  us  a  visit,  left  by  a  morning  train  for  his  home ;  but  I  did  not
know  the  exact  time  at  which  he  would  reach  his  destination.  In  the
afternoon  of  that  day,  my  daughter  having  gone  to  the  neighbouring
town  (Bridport),  I  was  sitting  at  work  by  a  window  of  which  the  upper
ventilator  was  open.  Suddenly  I  heard  my  son's  voice  distinctly ;  I  could
not  mistake  it ;  he  was  speaking  eagerly,  and  as  if  bothered ;  the  voice
seemed  wafted  to  me  by  an  air  current,  but  I  could  not  distinguish  words.
I  was  startled,  but  not  very  much  frightened  ;  the  voice  did  not  seem  to
indicate  accident  or  calamity.  I  looked  at  my  watch,  which  pointed  to
three  minutes  past  3.  In  perhaps  a  few  seconds,  his  voice  began  again,
but  soon  became  faint,  and  died  away  in  the  distance.  When  my  daughter
came  in,  I  told  her,  and  mentioned  the  hour ;  she  said  that  was  just  the
time  my  son  expected  to  arrive,  if  the  train  was  punctual.  I  also
mentioned  it  to  my  son  who  is  living  with  me.  The  next  morning  I  was
very  thankful  to  get  a  post-card  from  my  eldest  son  :  '  Arrived  all  right,
train  very  punctual,  just  three  minutes  past  3  ;  but  to  my  annoyance,  I
found  no  carriage  waiting  for  me,  or  my  luggage,  only  Frank  on  his
bicycle.  He  explained  that  they  had  made  a  mistake  by  looking  at  the
station  clock  (which  was  an  hour  too  slow),  and  had  driven  away  again.'
I  wrote  the  whole  account  to  my  son,  but  he  is  rather  sceptical  on  these
subjects ;  he  could  not  but  own  it  was  a  strange  coincidence,  but  asked,
'  Why,  mother,  didn't  you  hear  Frank's  voice  too  ? '

"Lucia  C.  Stone."

Miss  Edith  Stone  has  confirmed  verbally  what  is  recorded  of  her  in
the  above  account.  Another  son,  Mr.  Walter  Stone,  also  recollects  having
been  told  of  the  incident.

On  February  16th,  1885,  Mrs.  Stone  wrote  as  follows  : —
"  A  few  days  since,  I  came  upon  my  son's  letter,  written  rather  more
than  a  week  after  the  occurrence.  The  post-card  mentioned  was  lost,  and
it  was  by  chance  this  letter  turned  up.  I  enclose  the  first  page  for  what
it  is  worth,  very  trivial  save  for  the  impression  it  made  on  me.  I  am
more  than  ever  convinced  of  the  value  of  verifying  matters  of  this  kind."

The  first  page  of  the  son's  letter  ran  as  follows  : —

"Eton,  January  22nd,  1882.

"  Dearest  Mother, — If  you  heard  my  voice  it  must  have  been  when
I  was  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  carriage,  and  expressing  loudly  my
surprise  at  its  not  having  arrived  at  the  station  to  meet  me.  I  think  I
told  you  that  Frank  was  there,  on  his  bicycle,  and  we  both  jabbered
considerably.     You  ought  to  have  heard  him  too."

[Mrs.  Stone  has  had  no  other  hallucination  of  a  recognised  voice,  except
on  one  occasion,  20  years  ago,  soon  after  a  bereavement  (see  Yol.  I.,
pp.  510-2).  More  than  five  years  ago,  she  had  on  several  evenings  the
impression  of  hearing  voices  in  the  room  below  her  own.  This  slight
7  ^  predisposition  to  auditory  hallucination  would  hardly  affect  the  case  ;  but
the  coincidence  is  of  course  rendered  less  striking  by  the  reflection  that


-4^


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  103

Mr.  Stone  may  have  spoken  "  eagerly  and  as  if  bothered  "  on  a  good  many
other  occasions.]

The  next  case  is  more  complete,  inasmuch  as  the  actual  word  used
by  the  agent  was  distinguished  by  the  percipient.  The  account  is
from  Mr.  E,.  Fryer,  of  Bath,  brother  of  our  valued  friend  and  helper,
the  Eev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Clerkenwell,  who  tells  us  that  he  "  distinctly
remembers  being  told  of  the  occurrence  within  a  few  weeks  of  its
happening."  He  explains  that  "  Rod  "  was  the  name  by  which  his
brother,  the  percipient,  was  called  in  the  family.  p

"January,  1883.  ,,^.<^'  '

(268)  "A  strange  experience  occurred  in  the  autumn  of  the  year '-^^''  ^^
1879.  A  brother  of  mine  had  been  from  home  for  3  or  4  days,  when,  one  d^'^'^  "'
afternoon,  at  half-past  5  (as  nearly  as  possible),  I  was  astonished  to  hear
my  name  called  out  very  distinctly.  I  so  clearly  recognised  my  brother's  ..c'f^
voice  that  I  looked  all  over  the  house  for  him  ;  but  not  finding  him,  and
indeed  knowing  that  he  must  be  distant  some  40  miles,  I  ended  by
attributing  the  incident  to  a  fancied  delusion,  and  thought  no  more  about
the  matter.  On  my  brother's  arrival  home,  however,  on  the  sixth  day,  he
remarked  amongst  other  things  that  he  had  narrowly  escaped  an  ugly
accident.  It  appeared  that,  whilst  getting  out  from  a  railway  carriage,
he  missed  his  footing,  and  fell  along  the  platform  ;  by  putting  out  his
hands  quickly  he  broke  the  fall,  and  only  sufiered  a  severe  shaking,
'  Curiously  enough,'  he  said,  '  when  I  found  myself  falling  I  called  out
your  name.'  This  did  not  strike  me  for  a  moment,  but  on  my  asking  him
during  what  part  of  the  day  this  happened,  he  gave  me  the  time,  which  I
found  corresponded  exactly  with  the  moment  I  heard  myself  called."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  R.  Fryer  adds  : —

"  I  do  not  remember  ever  having  a  similar  experience  to  the  one
narrated  to  you ;  nor  should  I  care  to,  as  the  sensation,  together  with  the
suspense  as  to  the  why  and  wherefore  of  the  event,  is  the  reverse  of  pleasant."

In  conversation,  he  has  explained  that  he  had  frequently  expostulated
with  his  brother  on  the  latter's  habit  of  alighting  from  trains  in  motion ;
and  the  automatic  utterance  of  his  name,  on  this  occasion,  might  thus  be
accounted  for  by  association.

The  agent's  account  of  the  matter  is  as  follows  : —

"  Newbridge  Road,  Bath.

"November  16th,  1885.

"In  the  year  1879,  I  was  travelling,  and  in  the  course  of  my  journey
I  had  to  stop  at  Gloucester.  In  getting  out  of  the  train,  I  fell,  and  was
assisted  to  rise  by  one  of  the  railway  officials.  He  asked  if  I  was  hurt,
and  asked  if  I  had  anyone  travelling  with  me.  I  replied  '  No '  to  both
questions,  and  inquired  why  he  asked.  He  replied,  '  Because  you  called
out  "  Rod."  '     I  distinctly  recollect  making  use  of  the  word  Rod.

"  On  arriving  home,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  I  related  the  circum-
stance, and  my  brother  inquired  the  time  and  date.  He  then  told  me
he  had  heard  me  call  at  that  particular  time.  He  was  so  sure  of  its
being  my  voice  that  he  made  inquiries  as  to  whether  I  was  about  or  not.

"John  T.  Fryer."


104  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

Curiously  similar  is  the  next  case,  sent  to  us  by  Miss  Frome,  of
Ewell,  Surrey,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  friend,  a  doctor  by  profession
whose  experience  is  narrated.  She  thoroughly  relies  on  his  word,  and
has  communicated  his  name.  He  himself  dislikes  the  subject,  and
has  no  belief  that  such  coincidences  can  be  anything  but  accidental.

"April  14th,  1884.

(269)  "In  February,  1862,  an  undergraduate  of  one  of  our  northern
universities  was,  and  had  been  for  some  time,  reading  hard  for  the
approaching  examination  for  the  degree  which  he  was  desirous  of
acquiring.  His  brother,  an  officer  in  the  merchant  service,  was  at  sea,
and  at  this  time  in  a  ship  not  far  from  the  coast  of  the  East  Indies.

"  One  evening,  about  7  p.m.,  the  former  was  at  work  in  his  own  rooms,
in  company  with  a  friend,  also  studying  with  the  same  object,  when  he
suddenly  heard  his  Christian  name,  shortened  as  was  the  custom  in  his  own
family  circle,  of  which  there  were  none  (or  even  of  intimate  friends)  in  the
city  he  was  then  inhabiting.  He  heard  himself  called  sharply  and  clearly,
and,  astonished  rather,  looked  up  from  his  books  and  asked  his  friend  if
he  spoke,  who  answered  in  the  negative,  evidently  surprised.  Again,  in
an  instant,  he  heard  the  sound  again,  and  turned  to  his  friend,  saying,
'  Don't  be  foolish  ;  what  is  it  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  I  said  nothing.'  He  then
asked,  '  Did  you  not  hear  anything  ^  My  name  called  1 '  '  No,  I  heard
nothing,'  was  the  answer.

"  Almost  as  these  brief  words  were  passing  between  the  two  men,  he
of  whom  this  story  is  related  heard  again,  once,  twice,  quickly  repeated,
his  name,  clearly  and  distinctly,  and  then  he  seemed  to  recognise  it  as  like
his  brother's  voice.  He  could  not  understand  it,  and,  feeling  rather
mystified  and  put  out,  thought  he  would  stop  work  and  rest,  so  telling  his
friend  he  would  do  no  more  that  night,  went  off  to  the  theatre.  On  his
return,  sitting  over  the  fire,  he  thought  the  matter  over,  and  came  to  the
conclusion  that,  being  out  of  health  to  some  extent,  the  mental  fatigue  he
was  going  through  had  upset  his  brain  functions  a  little ;  so  he  put  the
subject  from  him,  simply  making  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  and  thought  no
more  of  it.

"  Some  months  later,  about  the  end  of  June,  he  was  in  London  to  meet
his  brother,  who  was  returning  from  sea.  On  the  evening  of  the  arrival
of  the  latter,  the  two  brothers  were  talking  together,  the  younger  describing
his  voyage  and  the  various  incidents  that  had  happened,  and  suddenly  said,
'  By  the  way,  I  was  very  nearly  not  coming  home  any  more  ;  I  had  a  very
narrow  squeak  of  being  drowned.  I  fell  overboard  one  night  somewhere
about  midnight,  and  I  thought  I  was  done  for,  but  after  a  while  I  was
luckily  picked  up.  However,  it  was  a  close  shave,  and  I  did  not  expect  to  see
you  again,  old  chap,  but  I  thought  of  you,  and  sung  out  and  called  at  you.'

"  The  elder  brother,  recollecting  the  occurrence  to  himself  in  the
northern  city,  asked  the  other  when  this  occurred,  and  heard  in  reply  that
it  was  on  the  same  day  on  which  that  which  has  been  stated  happened  to
him.  He  then  told  his  brother  his  story,  and,  comparing  the  two,  all
points  agreed  except  the  hours,  about  7  o'clock  and  about  midnight —
when  the  sailor  brother  quietly  pointed  out  that,  allowing  for  the
difference  of  time  in  the  two  places,  the  actual  time  was  probably  the  same.


XV.]  OC CUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  105

"  They  talked  the  matter  over,  but  could  make  no  more  of  it.  Neither
of  them  had  any  belief  in  supernatural  manifestations.  Nothing  of  the
kind  ever  happened  to  them  again  in  after  life  in  any  degree.  The  younger
brother  died  at  sea  a  few  years  ago."

Here  we  have  once  more  the  feature  of  repetition  after  a  short
interval,  which  seems,  by  the  way,  to  be  decidedly  commoner  in  audi-
tory hallucinations  of  the  telepathic  than  of  the  purely  subjective
class.^  Another  fact  to  be  noticed  is  that  the  voice  was  not  heard  by
the  percipient's  companion — this  being  a  point  in  which  the  hallucina-
tory character  of  telepathic  affections  of  the  senses  often  appears
(Chap.  XII.,  §  10).2

In  the  following  case,  it  is  alleged  that  the  actual  words  heard

were  used  by  the  agent.     The  narrative  is  from  an  English  physician

residing  in  a  foreign  town,  who  wishes  his  name  suppressed,  fearing

professional  prejudice.  ^

"  October  22nd,  1883.        i^o'^^^^

(270)  "  Years  ago  there  were  two  girls,  half  Italian  half  English,  here,      ^*^
one  with  a  very  fine  voice.     The  poor  girl  from  over-straining  got  spitting

of  blood.  I  attended  her.  One  morning  she  begged  me  to  see  her  sister,
who  was  crying  her  heart  out,  as  she  expressed  it,  hysterics,  &c.,  &c.,
owing  to  an  absurd  dream,  she  said.  I  went  into  her  sister's  room,  and
found  her  as  described ;  she  then  told  me  it  was  not  a  dream,  but  that
she  was  broad  awake,  and  heard  her  sister's  voice  from  the  garden —
'Georgie,  Georgie,  I  must  see  you  before  I  die.'  By  dint  of  coaxing,
bullying,  reasoning,  and  exhortation,  I  got  her  quieted  down,  and  nothing
more  was  thought  of  it ;  but  at  the  time  required  to  hear  from  England,
a  letter  came  announcing  her  sister's  death ;  and  further  inquiries
elicited  that  it  occurred  exactly  at  the  time  she  heard  the  voice  (allow-
ing for  distance),  and  that  the  last  words  she  uttered  were  those  heard
from  the  garden."

[In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  the  narrator  says  that  he  did  not  actually
see  the  letter  which  conveyed  the  intelligence  of  the  sister's  death ;  the
exactitude  of  the  coincidence  rests  therefore  on  second-hand  evidence.  He
was,  however,  in  daily  communication  with  the  family.]

In  the  next  case,  the  words  heard  were  vividly  imagined  by  the
agent,  and  may  very  probably  have  been  uttered,  or  half-uttered.
The  account  is  from  Mr.  J.  Pike,  of  122,  Stockwell  Park  Road,  S.W.  ,

"October,  1883.  ^.  •'

(271)  "Travelling  some  years  since  from  Carlisle  to  Highbury,  by  the  ^  *'  .  ^
night  mail  train,  and,  finding  myself  alone  in   my  compartment,  I  lay  at  ^^'
full  length  on  the  seat  with  a  view  to  sleep,  having  previously  requested  the

1  Compare  cases  154,  266,  278,  285,  287,  341,  342,  508,  674,  676,  679 ;  and  see  Chap,
xii.,  §  10.

2  See,  e.g.,  cases  28,  34,  189,  206,  212,  242,  265,  271,  274,  307,  329,  337,  347,  355,  491,
517,  522,  534,  561,  567,  607,  609,  610,  618,  620,  633,  634, 'C38.  Cases  552  (see  "  Additions  and
Corrections, "  under  heading  p.  511),  and  685  should  perhaps  be  added.  In  cases  666  and
684,  the  experience  was  unshared  by  one  of  the  persons  present.


106  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

guard  to  wake  me  at  the  Camden  Town  Station.  I  soon  fell  into  a  deep
sleep,  one  of  those  profound  slumbers  the  awakening  from  which  is  almost
painful.  Roused  suddenly  by  the  guard  waking  me  (somewhat  roughly
and  impatiently,  because  the  train  was  behind  its  time),  I  found  that  I  had
been  dreaming  (what  proved  indeed  to  be  the  case)  that  it  was  morning ;
that  I  was  at  home,  in  my  bedroom,  in  the  act  of  dressing,  and  at  the
moment  of  awakening  had  been  on  the  landing  and  twice  called  the
servant  by  her  name,  '  Sarah,'  and  asked  her  to  bring  me  some  hot  water.

"  On  actually  arriving  at  home,  I  learnt  that  at  the  time  when  I  had
been  thus  dreaming  that  I  was  calling  to  the  servant,  she  had  heard  her
name  called  by  me  twice,  distinctly  ;  that — forgetting  for  the  moment  that
I  was  not  in  the  house — she,  hastily  discontinuing  the  breakfast  prepara-
tions, ran  upstairs,  and  afterwards  came  down  again  '  as  white  as  a  ghost '
— according  to  the  description  given  to  me  by  the  children  who,  with
astonishment,  witnessed  her  proceedings,  and  not  having  themselves  heard
the  call,  naturally  wondered  what  it  all  meant.  Sarah  subsequently
informed  me  that  the  '  fright '  she  experienced  on  realising  the  fact  that  I
was  not  there  had  made  her  '  quite  ill.'  "

Mr.  Pike's  daughter  gave  the  following  corroboration  on  Oct.  30,  1883  : —

"  I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  of  our  servant  being  frightened  by
hearing  my  father's  voice  calling  from  upstairs,  at  a  time  when  we  knew
he  could  not  be  anywhere  near  our  home.  The  servant  took  a  poker  in
her  hand  and  went  upstairs,  thinking  there  must  be  some  man  there  who
had  imitated  my  father's  voice.  ISTothing,  however,  was  discovered  to
explain  the  mystery  until  my  father's  arrival  at  home,  when  he  told  us
that  at  the  time  the  call  was  heard  he  had  been  dreaming  that  he  was  at
home  and  calling  for  hot  water.  u  Alma  M.  Pike."

[The  genuineness  of  this  case  does  not,  of  course,  depend  on  the
servant's  evidence,  but  on  the  testimony  of  Miss  Pike  that  the  servant
mentioned  her  experience  before  Mr.  Pike's  arrival.  I  have  stated  above
(Vol.  I.,  p.  514)  that  my  collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations
includes  several  instances  where  a  servant  has  seemed  to  hear  her  mistress
calling  her — a  fact  which  of  course  goes  to  weaken  the  force  of  the
described  coincidence.  But  the  superior  vividness  of  the  impression  in  the
present  instance  seems  proved  by  the  emotion  and  alarm  which  followed  it,
and  which  had  no  sort  of  parallel  in  the  purely  subjective  cases  referred  to.]

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  condition  of  the  agent  was  not  one  of
distress  or  crisis,  but  simply  that  of  vivid  dream  ;  and  the  case  is  in
this  way  exceptional.  Affections  of  a  waking  percipient  by  a
dreaming  agent— or  at  any  rate  cases  which  could  be  used  as
evidence  for  such  affections — seem  a  rarer  tjrpe  than  that  of  simul-
taneous and  correspondent  dreaming,  illustrated  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.,  314-8,
and  in  Chap.  III.  of  the  Supplement ;  but  cases  94  and  96  were  very
probably  examples  of  it.  In  the  present  instance,  it  should  be
noted  that  the  part  of  the  dream  which  apparently  affected  the
percipient  took  place  in  the  very  shock  of  waking  ;  and  such  a  shock,


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  107

though  not  critical  or  exactly  painful,  clearly  involves  a  far  wider  and

more  sudden  change  of  psychical  condition  than  often  occurs  to  us

during  waking  life.

In  the  next  case  it  is  very  possible  that  the  agent  actually  used

the  words  heard,  but  proof  of  this  fact  is  unattainable.    If  he  did  not,

we  must  suppose  some  idea  of  his  distress  to  have  been  objectified

by  the  percipient  in  the  "  agonised  tone."     The  account  is  from  Mr.

Lister  Ives,  master  at  the  Grammar  School,  Stockport.

"1883.

(272)  "  About  midday  of  the  24th  July,  1875,  I  was  in  the  baths  at
Llandudno,  when  I  suddenly  and  distinctly  heard  my  boy's  voice  calling
loudly  and  in  an  agonised  tone.  So  assured  was  I  o£  it  being  his  voice,
that  I  hastily  got  out  of  the  bath  and  looked  out  of  the  nearest  window,
thinking  he  must  be  on  the  rocks  beneath — the  bath-house  stands  on  a
rock,  though  since  then  much  has  been  cut  away — though  I  believed  him
at  the  time  to  be,  as  indeed  he  was,  at  the  other  side  of  the  Orme's  Head,
three  or  four  miles  away.  The  boy  was  killed  at  that  very  time  by  a  fall
from  the  rocks."

We  find  from  a  report  of  the  accident  in  the  Stockport  Advertiser  that
the  date  was  the  26th  (not  the  24th)  of  July.  The  boy  had  joined  his
parents  on  the  24th,  which  may  perhaps  account  for  the  mistake.

Mrs.  Ives  says  : —

'''■  Until  late  at  night,  when  the  boy  did  not  return,    my   husband  had
thought  no  more  of  the  circumstance.     When  the  boy  could  not  be  found
he  exclaimed,  '  We  shall  never  see  him   alive  again,'  for  he   remembered
the  sound  of  the  voice ;  but  it  was  not  until  some  time  afterwards  that  he  *
told  me  that  he  felt  assured  he  had  heard  the  last  cry,  not  a  supernatural '
warning,    but   a    cry   for   help   when   none    could    reach    him.     I    madel
memoranda  of  all  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  unhappy  afiair,
and  of  that  [i.e.,  the  voice]  among  the  rest.     With  regard  to  the  distance
which  the  sound  came,  I  can  scarcely  give  absolute  information.     The
headland  is  of  peculiar  form  ;  but  according  to  local  maps,  if  they  are  to  .,'^,  ff^  Jcji
be    relied  upon,  if    it  were  possible    to  take    a  direct    line  through  the    v  ^^^^J^
mountain  from  the  Crab  Rocks,  where  my  boy  was  found,  to  the  baths  ^

where  Mr.  Ives  was,  it  would  measure  something  over  3,000  yards  ;  round
by  the  path,  as  it  then  was,  about  3  miles  ;  over  the  summit,  I  cannot  tell
how  far."

Mr.  C.  Kroll  Laporte,  of  Birkdale,  Southport,  says : —

"  Mr.  Ives  told  me  all  this  [i.e.,  the  incident  of  the  voice]  the  day  after
the  funeral,  and  I  noted  it  down."

[Our  colleague,  Mr.  Richard  Hodgson,  has  had  an  interview  with  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Ives.  Mr.  Ives  has  had  no  other  hallucinations.  The  time  of
the  boy's  death  was  estimated  only.  He  was  expected  back  to  dinner  at
1  p.m.,  and  it  was  between  12  and  1  p.m.  that  Mr.  Ives  was  bathing
and  heard  the  cry.  The  words  he  heard  were,  '  Papa  !  mamma  ! '  in  an
agonised  tone.  The  boy  was  18  years  of  age.  He  appeared  to  have
fallen  on  the  rocks  face  downwards,  from  a  height  of  about  80  feet.     The


108  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

cliff  at  the  spot  begins  at  the  summit  with  a  sloping  bank  of  grass,  "which
suddenly,  however,  is  followed  by  an  almost  sheer  precipice,  not  seen  from
the  top  of  the  bank.]

§  2.  We  come  now  to  cases  where  the  name  heard  was  probably
not  actually  spoken.  The  fact  that  the  impression  so  often  takes  the
form  of  a  call  of  the  percipient's  name  might  be  connected  with  the
fact  that  this  is  also  the  commonest  form  of  purely  subjective
auditory  hallucination ;  and  might  be  taken  as  a  fresh  indication —
parallel  to  the  indications  which  have  been  noted  in  the  visual  class —
that  the  telepathic  phantasm,  as  a  sensory  phenomenon,  truly  belongs
to  the  class  of  hallucinations.  But  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  this
form  of  communication  that  it  should  strongly  suggest — what  in  the
following  instance  is  positively  affirmed — a  certain  occupation  of  the
agent's  thoughts  with  the  percipient.  We  have  often  independent
reason  to  suppose  a  similar  condition  in  the  visual  cases  ;  but  there
is  seldom  anything  in  the  visual  phantasm  of  the  agent  to  make  it
apparent.

The  first  case  is  from  Mr.  G.  A.  Witt,  of  Fontenay  House,  Grove
Park,  Denmark  Hill,  S.E.

"September  26th,  1885.

(273)  "When  I  left  Bombay,  on  March  1st,  1876,  by  ss.  'Persia,'  for
Naples,  an  elder  brother  of  mine  was  living  in  Germany,  and  in  very  bad
health,  though  I  did  not,  at  the  time,  anticipate  his  early  death.  When
in  the  Red  Sea  one  day,  sitting  on  deck  and  reading  the  Saturday  Review,
with  other  passengers — and  I  think  Mrs.  Fagan  also — sitting  near  me  and
reading,  I  fancied  I  heard  my  brother's  voice  calling  me  by  my  Christian
name.  It  seemed  so  distinctly  his  voice,  and  T  thought  I  heard  my  name
so  clearly  called,  that  it  quite  startled  me,  and  made  such  an  impression
on  me  that  I  mentioned  it  to  some  of  my  fellow  passengers,  and  at  their
suggestion  took  note  of  the  hour  and  day  it  occurred.

"On  arriving  at  Naples,  some  12  or  14  days  later,  I  found  a  letter
there  from  my  mother,  bearing  the  same  date  as  the  one  I  had  put  down
in  the  Red  Sea,  in  which  she  told  me  that  she  was  sitting  writing  by  my
brother's  deathbed,  &c.,  adding  in  a  postscript  the  same  day  that  he  had
just  passed  away.

"  I  never  ascertained  whether  the  hour  I  had  put  down  was  the  same
in  which  my  poor  brother  had  died,  and  now  really  all  I  remember  is  what
I  have  just  stated.  <(  q.    ^    Witt  "

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr   Witt  says  : —

"  I  was,  at  the  time,  not  at  all  anxious  about  my  brother  ;  and  the
'  voice '  at  the  time  impressed  me  as  very  strange,  as  I  really  had  not
thought  of  him  for  some  time.  My  brother  died  in  Kiel,  Holstein.  The
date  was  the  13th  of  March,  1876.  This  was  the  date  of  my  brother's
death  ;  and  I  remember  that  that  was  what  caused  me  to  mention  the
matter    again  to    those  whom  I  had  told  on  board  the  steamer  that  I


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  109

thought  I  had  heard  my  brother's  voice.  I  must  repeat,  however,  that
what  I  am  stating  now  is  from  memory  only,  and  the  '  note '  I  had
made  of  the  occurrence  at  the  time  no  longer  exists.

"  It  is  also  the  only  time  that,  as  far  as  I  remember,  anything  of  the
kind  has  happened  to  me."  [This  is  in  answer  to  the  question  whether
he  had  experienced  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.]

Mrs.  Fagan,  of  26,  Manchester  Square,  W.,  writes  to  us  as  follows  : —

"August  28th,  1885.

"  On  board  ship,  coming  from  India,  one  morning  I  passed  Mr.  Witt,
who  was  reading  on  deck.  He  stopped  me  and  said  that  a  strange  thing
had  happened  to  him,  and  on  my  asking  what  it  was,  said  that  he  had  heard
his  brother's  voice  calling  him,  '  Gustave,'  more  than  once  (three  times,  I
think,  but  am  not  sure).  He  added  that  he  had  heard,  before  leaving
Bombay,  that  his  brother  was  very  seriously  ill,i  and  thinking  that  perhaps
he  was  then  dying,  or  just  dead,  he  made  a  note  of  the  date.  I  asked  him
to  let  me  know  afterwards  if  the  brother  really  died  about  that  time,  and
he  said  he  would  do  so.

"  On  meeting  him  in  London  afterwards,  I  inquired  if  his  conjecture  had
proved  correct,  and  he  said  it  had.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  time  when
Mr.  Witt  heard  the  voice  coincided  exactly  with  the  brother's  death,  as
the  difference  in  the  local  time  made  it  difficult  to  decide  that  point
without  calculation ;  and  I  did  not  hear  that  any  calculation  was  made.
But  the  two  events  occurred  at  about  the  same  time.  Mr.  Witt  offers
no  explanation  or  opinion  on  the  matter,  only  saying  that  it  was  very
strange."

We  have  procured,  through  the  Biirgermeister  of  Kiel,  an  official
certificate  of  the  death  of  Mr.  John  T.  Witt,  which  shows  that  it
occurred  on  March  13,  1876,  at  9.30  p.m.  Supposing  therefore  that  Mr.
G.  A.  Witt's  experience  was  immediately  mentioned  by  him,  and  that
Mrs.  Fagan  is  right  in  her  recollection  that  this  was  in  the  morning,  it
must  have  preceded  the  death  by  a  good  many  hours.  If  either  of  these
suppositions  is  incorrect,  the  coincidence  may  have  been  closer.

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Stella,  of  Chieri,  Italy,  who  was

the  percipient  in  the  visual  case,  No.  198.

"December  29th,  1883.

(274)  "  On  the  22nd  of  May,  1882,  I  was  sitting  in  my  room  working
with  other  members  of  my  family,  and  we  were  talking  of  household  matters,
when  suddenly  I  heard  the  voice  of  my  eldest  son  calling  repeatedly
'  Mamma.'  I  threw  down  my  work  exclaiming,  '  There  is  Nino,'  and  went
downstairs,  to  the  astonishment  of  every  one.  Now  my  son  was  at  that
time  in  London,  and  had  only  left  home  about  a  fortnight  before,  for  a  two
months'  tour,  so  naturally  we  were  all  surprised  to  think  he  had  arrived
so  suddenly.  On  reaching  the  hall,  no  one  was  there,  and  they  all  laughed
at  my  imagination.  But  I  certainly  heard  him  call,  not  only  once,  but
three  or  four  times,  impatiently.  I  learnt,  a  few  days  afterwards,  that  on
that  day  he  had  been  taken  ill  in  London  at  the  house  of  some  friends,  and

1  This  of  course  was  true,  in  a  sense  ;  but,  in  view  of  the  possible  suggestion  that  the
hallucination  was  due  to  mere  anxiety,  it  is  important  to  notice  that  Mr.  Witt  had  re-
garded his  brother  as  a  chronic  invalid,  and  expressly  affirms  that,  so  far  from  being
anxious  about  him,  he  had  not  even  thought  of  him  for  some  time.


19


110  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

that  he  had  frequently  expressed  a  wish  that  I  should  come  and  nurse  him,
as  not  speaking  English  he  could  not  make  himself  understood."

Mrs.  Stella  tells  us,  on  inquiry,  that  this  is  her  only  experience  of  an
auditory  hallucination.

The  following  corroboration  is  from  a  lady  who  was  present  at  the
time  : —

"Breslau,  February  18th,  1884.

"  Mrs.  Stella  asked  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  an  episode  which
occurred  in  my  presence,  while  on  a  visit  to  her  two  years  ago  ;  and  the
following  are  the  facts  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember  them.  We  were
sitting  working  together,  when  Mrs.  Stella  said  she  heard  the  voice  of  her
son,  who  was  absent  in  England  at  the  time,  calling  her.  This  caused  us
some  surprise,  as  he  was  not  expected  home,  nor  had  we  heard  any  sounds
of  an  arrival.

"  On  going  downstairs  to  meet  him,  we  found  no  one,  which  astonished
us,  as  Mrs.  Stella  had  been  so  positive  that  she  had  heard  him  call.  We
afterwards  heard  that  on  that  day  he  had  been  taken  ill  in  London.  I
may  here  remark  that  young  Mr.  Stella  is  very  much  attached  to  his
mamma,  and  especially  dependent  upon  her  in  sickness.

"  Clara  Schmidt."

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  W.  T.  Bray,  of  Schekoldin's  Paper  Mill,
Yimishma,  Government  of  Kostroma,  Russia.

«  June  14th  (O.S.),  1885.

(275)  "  I  was  employed  as  assistant  engineer  on  the  Moscow-Kursk
Railway,  and  one  day  was  standing  in  the  erecting  shop.  There  were  14
engines  under  repair,  and  4  tenders,  and  amidst  all  the  attendant  noise
of  such  work  of  fitters  and  boilermakers,  I  heard  a  voice  quite  close  to  me
call  twice,  '  Will,  Will  ! '  The  voice  resembled  my  father's  (he  was  the
only  person  who  called  me  '  Will '),  and  in  a  tone  he  used  when  he  wished
to  particularly  draw  my  attention  to  anything.  When  I  went  home  I
remarked  to  my  wife  I  was  afraid,  if  ever  I  heard  from  poor  father  again,
or  from  any  one  about  him,  [there  had  been  a  certain  breach  of  inter-
course,] it  would  be  bad  news,  for  I  distinctly  heard  him  call  me  twice.
About  three  weeks  afterwards,  I  had  a  letter  from  a  sister,  stating  he  had
died,  and  when  ;  and  his  last  words  were,  '  Good-bye,  Will !  good-bye,  Will ! '
Upon  comparing  thedate  and  time,  he  died  about  the  time  I  heard  the  voice."

Mr.  Bray  adds,  in  a  letter  dated  August  21st  (O.S.),  1885  :  —

"  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  get  a  few  lines  likely  to  confirm  my  statement
to  you  ;  the  circumstance  occurred  so  long  ago.  I  remember  mentioning  it
to  my  wife  at  the  time,  but  she  cannot  distinctly  remember  it,  and  I
mentioned  it  to  no  one  but  her,  and  then  only  at  the  time.  I  remembered
the  work  I  was  looking  after  at  the  time,  and  upon  hearing  of  my  father's
death  I  traced  the  time  by  the  factory  books ;  and  as  no  one  either  here  or
in  England  ever  called  me  '  Will '  but  he,  I  always  feel  quite  satisfied  in
my  own  mind  that  I  heard  his  voice,  especially  as  I  was  told  in  the  letter
announcing  his  death  his  last  words  were,  '  Good-bye,  Will  !  good-bye,
Will ! '  "  W.  Thos.  Bray."

In  answer  to  a  question  whether  he  had  ever  had  any  other  auditory


^-


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  Ill

hallucination,  Mr.  Bray  replies,  "  Such  a  thing  never  occurred  to  me  before,
neither  has  anything  occurred  since."  He  adds  that  his  father  died  on
March  22,  1873  ;  and  we  have  confirmed  this  date  by  the  Register  of  Deaths.

We  first  heard  of  this  case  from  Mr.  Bray's  son,  who  said  that  he  was
himself  told  of  his  father's  experience  at  the  time,  and  that  at  his  suggestion
a  note  of  the  day  and  hour  was  made.  But  his  account  presents  so  many
differences  from  the  first-hand  one  that  his  memory  on  this  point  cannot
be  relied  on.

The  next  case  is  from  Mr.  D.  J.  Hutchins,  of  173,  Severn  Road,

Cardiff.

"December  17th,  1883.     ^,-.     ^^

(276)  "  My  father  died  suddenly,  about  48  miles  away  from  where  my  (^y^^
mother  resided.  I  had  to  acquaint  her  of  the  melancholy  fact.  A  railway
journey,  and  then  a  drive  of  12  miles  would  take  me  to  her  abode.  I
should  arrive  about  6  a.m.  on  a  dark  November  morning.  Secretly
perplexed  how  I  should  break  the  news,  I  was  relieved  and  surprised  to
see,  as  I  neared  the  house,  smoke  issuing  from  parlour  and  kitchen
chimneys.  On  arriving  at  the  gate,  and  before  time  was  given  me  to
jump  out  of  the  trap,  mother  was  at  the  door  and  said,  '  Daniel,  your
father  is  dead.'  I  asked,  '  How  do  you  know  ? '  She  replied,  '  He  came
and  called  for  me  last  night  about  9  o'clock,  and  then  vanished.  I  have
not  been  to  bed  since.'  Sorrow,  combined  with  a  strange  feeling  that
somehow  or  other  she  might  have  been  the  means  of  hastening  his  death,
caused  her  to  die  suddenly  a  short  time  afterwards.  She  was  an  intensely
religious  woman,  without  superstition.  I  well  remember  the  anger  she
always  displayed  when  she  heard  that  her  children  had  been  listeners  to
the  usual  fireside  talk  about  ghosts  and  presentiments.

"  D.  J.  Hutchins."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hutchins  adds  : —

"February  15th,  1886.

"  With  reference  to  the  time  of  the  death  of  my  father,  it  was  on  the
21st  November,  1855.  He  was  found  dead  in  the  fields  between  Llantris-
sant  Station  and  Lanclay  House,  Llantrissant,  where  he  had  for  many
years  resided  as  house-steward  to  Lady  Mary  Cole.  [In  conversation  Mr.
Hutchins  has  explained  that  his  father  was  last  seen  alive,  walking  from
the  station,  and  apparently  in  perfect  health,  about  6  p.m.,  and  that  his
body  was  found  soon  after  9  o'clock  the  same  evening.]  My  mother  was
in  our  cottage — Rose  Cottage — near  Penrice  Castle,  where  we  usually
resided  during  summer.  She  was  preparing  to  leave  just  preparatory  to
closing  the  place  for  the  winter.  My  father  left  her  on  the  morning  of  the
day  of  his  death,  [having  been  requested  to  superintend  some  work  at  a
distance].

"  At  the  time  when  I  wrote  to  you,  the  circumstances  were  more  vivid
in  my  memory  than  at  present ;  consequently  I  cannot  actually  say  whether
my  mother  said,  'Your  father  appeared  to  me,'  in  connection  with  his
voice.  But  this  I  distinctly  remember  :  my  mother  said,  '  I  heard  your
father  call  me  by  my  name,  "  Mary,  Mary,"  and  then  I  went  to  the  door  ;
and  I  have  not  been  in  bed  since.'  "  In  conversation,  however,  it  appeared
that  Mr.  Hutchins  is  morally  certain  that  the  experience  was  visual  as
well  as  auditory.


112  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

In  a  later  letter,  Mr.  Hutchins  expressed  some  doubt  as  to  the  year  of
the  occurrence ;  and  we  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death
took  place  on  November  21st,  1853,  not  1855.

The  next  case  is  from  Miss  Burrows,   residing   at  Hollar d  Hall,

Stretford  Eoad,  Manchester.

"  December,  1884.
(277)  "  I  can  furnish  you  with  an  instance  of  my  name  being  called
by  my  mother,  who  was  18  miles  off,  and  dying  at  the  time.  I  was  not
aware  she  was  ill,  nor  was  I  thinking  about  her  at  the  time,  No  one  here
knew  my  name,  and  it  was  her  voice  calling,  as  I  was  always  addressed  at
home,  '  Lizzie.'     I  can  give  you  more  exact  information  if  you  require  it.

Later,  Miss  Burrows  writes  : —

"March  18th,  1885.

"In  regard  to  the  voice  which  I  heard  call  my  name  on  the  19th
February,  1882,  I  recognised  it  instantly  as  being  that  of  my  mother.  It
was  very  loud,  sharp,  and  impetuous,  as  if  frightened  at  something  Our
house  is  detached,  very  quiet,  and  the  only  inmates  of  the  house  beside
myself  were  two  gentlemen,  aged  respectively  58  and  37,  and  a  widowed
daughter-in-law  [of  the  elder  gentleman]  who  had  lived  with  them  five
years ;  and  not  one  of  them  knew  my  Christian  name.  I  was  thunder-
struck, and  ran  out  of  my  room  to  see  if  I  could  account  for  the  voice.  /
told  the  lady  the  same  morning.

"  I  never  saw  anything  I  thought  supernatural,  and  only  once  before  had
anything  like  a  similar  hallucination.  [This  other  experience  took  place
1 2  years  previously,  when  Miss  Burrows  and  her  mother  heard  some  sounds
which  seemed  to  them  unaccountable.]  My  father  and  mother  were
not  superstitious  people,  and  a  healthier  family  could  not  possibly  be  than
ours."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Burrows  adds  : —

"  I  heard  the  voice  call  my  name  on  the  Sunday  morning  at  8.  My
mother  was  dying,  and  quite  unconscious,  from  the  Saturday  night  (the
night  before)  until  the  Monday  at  8  a.m.,  when  she  died."

We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Bury  Guardian  that  Mrs.
Burrows  died  on  Monday,  February  20,  1882.

Mrs.  Griffiths,  of  31,  Rosaville  Road,  Fulham  Road,  S.W.,  confirms  as
foUows:—  "March  25th.

"  I  am  very  glad  to  be  able  to  corroborate  the  statement  made  by  Miss
Burrows,  about  hearing  herself  called  by  name  at  the  time  of  her  mother's
death.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  date,  but  it  was  a  Sunday  morning
in  February,  1882,  and  when  I  came  down  to  breakfast  she  told  me  about
it,  and  said  that  a  voice  called  '  Lizzy '  distinctly,  and  it  sounded  just  like
her  mother's.  The  next  morning  she  had  the  news  of  her  mother's
death ;  and  she  had  not  any  idea  that  she  was  ill  before,  so  that  it
could  not  have  been  fancy.

"  H.  Griffiths."

It  will  be  seen  that  Miss  Burrows  gives  February  19th  as  the  date
of  her  experience,  and  Mrs.  Griffiths  mentions  independently  tiiat  the  day


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  113

was  a  Sunday  in  February.  The  19th  of  February,  1882,  fell  on  a
Sunday.  There  having  been  an  interval  of  24  hours  between  the
percipient's  experience  and  the  death,  the  case  could  not  be  included
in  the  group  which  I  used  in  the  statistical  argument  above,  Chap.
XIII.,  §  6.1

We  owe  the  next  case  to  Mrs.  Passingham,  of  Milton,  Cambridge.
The  narrator  is  Mrs.  Walsh,  a  sick-nurse  whom  Mrs.  Passingham
knew  well,  and  of  whom  she  says  : —

(278)  "  The  fact  of  her  having  quarrelled  with  her  favourite  sister,  and
her  dying  without  a  reconciliation,  affects  her  deeply,  and  she  had  tears  in
her  eyes  as  she  told  me  the  story.  She  declares  she  was  not  asleep,  and  it
was  not  a  dream ;  she  had  only  just  put  out  the  light  and  had  not  got  into
bed."

Mrs.  Walsh  writes  to  us  on  May  6th,  1884  : —

"  107,  Queen's  Crescent,  Haverstock  Hill.
"On  October  24th,  1877,  I  was  in  London,  and  after  preparing  to
go  to  bed,  I  had  just  extinguished  the  light,  when  I  heard  the  voice  of  my
sister,  who  was  then  in  Wolverhampton,  call  me  by  my  name,  '  Joanna.'
I  instantly  answered,  '  Yes,  Polly.'  The  voice  was  low,  almost  a  whisper,
but  perfectly  clear,  and  I  was  so  sure  that  she  spoke  that  I  turned  to  the
part  of  the  room  from  which  the  voice  came.  Again  I  heard  the  voice,
and  after  that,  once  more,  making  three  times  in  all.

"  When  I  realised  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  my  sister,  I  felt — not
exactly  frightened — but  awed,  and  I  could  not  sleep  till  near  morning  for
thinking  of  it.  The  next  day,  I  heard  from  my  family  that  they  had  had
a  telegram  to  say  that  she  was  dangerously  ill,  and  some  one  was  to  go  to
her.  Another  sister  went  and  found  her  dead ;  and  the  time  of  her  death
agreed  exactly  with  the  time  when  I  heard  the  voice.  She  died  very
suddenly  of  mortification,  and  I  had  not  the  least  idea  she  was  ill ;  also,
we  had  become  estranged  from  each  other,  although  we  were  exceedingly
fond  of  each  other,  and  I  think  that  is  the  reason  she  spoke  to  me.

"Joanna  Walsh."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  at
Wolverhampton  on  the  23rd  October,  1877,  and  not  the  24th.  The  24th
was  probably  impressed  on  Mrs.  Walsh's  memory,  as  being  the  day  when
the  alarming  news  reached  her.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Walsh  adds  : —

"  In  answer  to  your  first  question  I  must  tell  you  that  at  the  time  of
my  sister's  death  I  was  with  almost  entire  strangers,  and  therefore  do  not
think  I  mentioned  what  I  had  heard  to  anyone  until  after  I  had  a  letter
saying  she  was  ill,  and  almost  directly  afterwards  a  telegram  saying  she
was  dead.  To  explain  clearly,  when  I  had  the  letter  saying  she  was  ill,  I
mentioned  it  to  my  sister  who  brought  the  letter ;  then  when  I  had  the
telegram  to  say  she  was  dead,  I  found  that  the  time  corresponded  exactly
with  the  time  I  heard  her  voice.

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  that  I  ever  had.  [This  is  in
answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  hallucination
of  the  senses.]

VOL.    II.  I


114  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

"  I  didn't  for  one  moment  doubt  whose  voice  it  was,  as  I  immediately
answered  by  name."

§  3.  I  may  make  the  transition  from  the  recognised  to  the  un-
recognised auditory  phantasms  by  an  account  of  several  experiences,
occurring  to  the  same  percipient,  in  one  of  which  the  voice  was
recognised,  but  not  in  the  others.  The  witness  is  Mrs.  Wight,  of
12,  Sinclair  Koad,  West  Kensington.

(279)  "  On  five  occasions  in  my  life  I  have  heard  my  Christian  name
uttered  in  a  peremptory  manner,  as  if  by  some  one  who  was  in  need  of  my
aid ;  and  after  each  occasion  I  have  learnt  that  a  relation  had  died  at  a
time  closely  corresponding  to  the  call.  I  have  never  on  any  other  occasion
had  any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses  whatever.

"  The  first  two  occasions  of  my  hearing  the  call  corresponded  with  the
deaths  of  two  aunts,  who  had  brought  me  up  in  my  childhood,  when  my
parents  were  in  India.  In  these  cases  I  cannot  say  whether  the  call  was
on  the  very  day  of  the  death  or  not ;  it  was  certainly  within  a  very  few
days.

"  The  next  and  most  striking  occasion  was  at  the  time  of  the  death  of
my  mother,  which  took  place  in  India,  on  November  8th,  1864.  I  was
living  at  the  time  with  a  cousin,  Mrs.  Harnett,  and  her  husband,  at  St.
John's  Wood.  I  was  sitting  one  morning  in  a  room  with  Mr.  Harnett,
when  we  both  distinctly  heard  a  voice  utter  my  name  as  it  seemed  from
outside  the  room.  I  at  once  went  to  look,  but  it  proved  that  no  inmate
of  the  house  had  called  me.  Indeed,  there  was  no  one  except  my  cousin
who  would  have  used  my  Christian  name ;  and  all  our  search  and  efibrts
to  solve  the  mystery  were  unavailing.  As  Mr.  Harnett  had  heard  of  the
similar  occurrence  on  the  death  of  my  aunts,  he  made  a  note  in  writing  of
the  date.  In  about  three  weeks,  we  received  the  news  of  my  mother's
death  in  India,  after  a  week's  illness  ;  and  I  had  Mr.  Harnett's  assurance,
as  well  as  my  own  memory,  that  the  date  of  death  corresponded  with  the
day  of  the  call.

"  The  next  occasion  was  at  Brighton  ;  and  this  was  the  only  time  when
the  voice  was  recognised.  As  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  I  heard  the  voice
of  Admiral  Wight,  my  father-in-law,  who  had  died  before  my  mother,
calling  me  as  he  frequently  had  done  in  life.  In  a  day  or  so,  his  widow
wrote  and  told  me  of  the  death  of  his  son,  my  husband's  half-brother.  I
had  known  that  he  was  very  ill,  but  was  not  in  immediate  anxiety  about
him.

"  The  fifth  occasion  was  in  June,  1876,  and  was  immediately  followed
by  the  news  of  the  death  of  an  infant  niece,  aged  9  months,  whom  also  I
had  known  to  be  ailing.  In  these  last  two  cases,  again,  I  cannot  be  sure
whether  the  days  of  the  call  and  of  the  death  corresponded ;  if  not,  they
most  certainly  very  nearly  did.  u  Sarah  Wight."

[The  above  account  was  written  out  by  me,  January  31st,  1884,  imme-
diately after  a  long  interview  with  Mrs.  Wight,  in  which  every  detail  was
gone  over  again  and  again.  I  sent  the  account  to  Mrs.  Wight,  who  made
a  few  trifling  additions,  and  signed  it.]


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  115

Mrs.  Wight  adds  : — "  Mrs.  Harnett  is  in  delicate  health,  and  I  should
not  like  to  trouble  her.  When  I  spoke  to  her  about  it,  she  remembered
the  incident."

The  strength  of  this  narrative,  of  course,  lies  in  the  third  case,
where  the  correspondence  of  day  was  made  out  to  be  exact.      The  ciw  wi^^
hypothesis  that  the  call  on  this  occasion  was  a  real  call  outside  the
house,  though  repudiated  by  Mrs.  Wight,  cannot  be  so  confidently
rejected  by  those  who  realise  the  difficulty  of  localising  sounds  with
precision.     Still,  the  fact  of  her  having  on  other  occasions  experienced
impressions  of  exactly  this  form — the    commonest    of  all    forms    of
sensory  hallucination — distinctly  supports   the  view  that  the  experi-  ''-^  *^  "^
ence  was  hallucinatory ;  and  if  so,  the  coincidence  of  day  is  a  strong  -'/^  '-*«^'^
point  in  favour  of  the  telepathic  explanation.     I  will  not  pause  here  '     -y""**^
on  the  fact  that  in  this  instance  there  was  a  second  percipient,  as  d^o  v»-<^-'«-  <
that  topic  will  be  fully  discussed   in   the    chapter   on   "  Collective  sfenii^---^
Cases."  f '■"^^  .

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Goodyear,  now  of  Avoca  Villa,  Park
Road,  Bevois  Hill,  Southampton,  who  refers  in  it  to  a  visual  case
quoted  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3.

"February  9th,  1884.  i.^^

(280)   "  I  am  very  fond  of  shooting,  and  one  evening  I  had  gone  out  rs  yK

with  my  bag  and  gun.  I  was  crossing  some  open  meadows,  when  suddenly  f^"
a  fearfully  shrill  cry  of  '  Tom  '  rang  in  my  ears.  I  instantly  answered
loudly,  '  Yes,  yes,'  turning  sharply  round  to  see  who  was  in  pain,  but  there
was  no  one  near,  and  again  the  scream  rang  out  terribly  loud.  I  answered
again,  '  Yes,  yes,'  and  then  I  heard  no  more.  I  retraced  my  steps,  for  I
was  quite  unstrung ;  but  later  on,  when  it  was  dark,  I  went  over  to  see
the  keeper  in  whose  woods  I  was  going  to  shoot,  and  told  him  what  had
happened.  He  said,  '  Bad  news,'  and  he  was  right ;  for  next  morning
summoned  me  to  join  my  bereaved  sweetheart,  who  at  that  very  time,
certainly  to  within  a  very  few  minutes,  lost  her  father.  I  knew  her  father
was  ill,  had  been  for  some  18  months,  but  was  not  thinking  about  them
at  the  time.  I  do  not  know  whether  these  cases  are  particularly  striking,
or  whether  there  are  heaps  of  similar  ones,  but  they  are  just  what
happened,  and  will  for  ever  live  fresh  in  my  memory.

"  T.  W.  Goodyear."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on
March  7,  1876,  after  a  2  years'  illness.

Asked  if  this  is  the  only  auditory  hallucination  that  he  can  recall,
Mr.  Goodyear  replies  in  the  affirmative.

Asked  whether  the  lady  really  uttered  his  name  at  the  time,  he
replies,  "  My  wife  does  not  think  she  uttered  my  name  aloud,  though  for
several  reasons  she  was  thinking  intensely  of  me."  He  has  told  me  in
confidence  special  circumstances  which  caused  the  mind  of  the  dying  man

VOL.  II.  I    2


116  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

to  be  much  occupied  with  him,  and  which  caused  the  mind  of  his  fiancee
to  be  directed  towards  him  with  a  special  longing  for  his  presence.

The  following  account  was  received  in  October,  1884,  from  Mrs.
Wilkie,  who  prefers  that  her  address  should  not  be  published.

(281)  "  In  September,  1875,  I  was  in  Callander,  in  lodgings  with  my
sister  and  other  friends.  On  the  night  of  the  8th  I  had  gone  to  bed,  but
had  only  lately  put  out  the  light,  and  was  quite  wide  awake  ;  when  I  heard
from  apparently  just  behind  the  curtain,  at  the  side  of  the  bed,  the  words
'Oh!  Eliza,'  (my  name)  in  a  mournful  tone.  I  was  so  much  impressed  by
the  occurrence  that  I  noted  down  the  date  next  morning,  and  told  my
sister  of  what  I  had  heard.  As  time  passed  on,  and  I  heard  from  all  my
own  people  and  heard  of  nothing  having  happened  to  any  of  them,  I  quite
forgot  the  circumstance.

"  Several  months  after,  I  heard  of  the  death  by  drowning,  in  the  Fiji
Islands,  of  a  gentleman,  a  distant  cousin  of  mine,  whom  I  had  known  very
well.  His  relations  did  not  know  on  which  day  his  death  took  place,
but  it  was  between  the  7th  and  9  th  of  September,  as  they  got  a  letter
from  him  begun  on  the  7th,  and  his  partner,  who  was  away  from  the
place,  came  home  on  the  9th,  and  found  him  drowned.  He  had  gone  out
bathing,  it  was  supposed,  and  taken  cramp.

"E.  K.  Wilkie."

We  find  a  notice  in  the  Edinburgh  Courant  which  states  that  the
death  occui-red  "early  in  September,  1875."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  the  only  hallucination  of
the  senses  that  she  has  ever  had,  Mrs.  Wilkie  replies,  "Yes,  the  only  one."
She  believes  that  the  diary  in  which  her  experience  was  at  once  noted
may  still  be  in  existence,  but  has  searched  for  it  in  vain.  Should  she
ever  find  it,  she  has  promised  to  show  me  the  entry.

Mrs.  Wilkie's  sister,  Mrs.  Rowe,  writes  to  us  on  December  1,  1884  : — ■

"South  Ste.  Marie,  Mich.,  U.S.A.

"In the  year  1875,  the  month  of  September,  I  was  staying  at  Callander
with  my  sister,  Mrs.  Wilkie.  I  remember  her  telling  me  one  morning  of
having  heard  her  name  spoken  the  night  before,  from  behind  the  curtain
at  the  head  of  her  bed,  these  words  :  '  Oh !  Eliza ' ;  and  this  occurred
hefore  she  heard  of  the  death  of  her  friend.  n  J)oea  H   Rowe  "

The  narrator  of  the  next  case  is  Mrs.  Wyld,  of  59,  Devonshire  Road,

Birkenhead,

"May  10th,  1885.

(282)  "  I  would  very  gladly  write  the  short  statement  you  ask  for,
but  though  to  my  own  mind  it  is  pretty  cone  usive,  still  I  feel  that  to
outsiders  it  is  wanting  in  two  important  details  :  (1)  I  mentioned  the
fact  of  hearing  the  voice  to  no  one  at  the  time  [but  see  below],  and  (2)
I  could  not  tell  whose  voice  it  was.

"  It  was  on  Thursday  evening,  January  10th,  1884,  that  I  was  sitting
alone  in  the  house  reading,  and  it  seemed  strange,  and  still  not  strange,  to
hear  my  name  called  with  a  sort  of  eager  entreaty.


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  117

"  Shortly  after,  the  others  came  in.  I  was  leaving  for  Ellesmere  next
day,  and  in  the  bustle  of  departure  I  thought  no  more  of  the  circum-
stance. It  was  only  when  coming  down  to  breakfast  on  the  Saturday
morning  and  finding  the  letter  telling  of  E.'s  death,  that  I  instantly
recalled  the  circumstances,  and  saw  that  the  time  and  day  corresponded
with  when  they  knew  she  must  have  slipped  out,  and  down  to  the  river.

"  I  wonder  I  did  not  associate  it  with  her,  for  she  had  written  me
some  very  pitiable  letters  beforehand.  I  had  not  the  least  idea  her  mind
was  affected.  We  were  school-fellows  together  for  nearly  three  years  and
great  friends.  "  Mary  Wtld."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Wyld  adds  : —

"  I  never  have  had  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  at  any  other  time.
It  was  about  8  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  fancy,  when  I  heard  the  voice.
She  was  not  found  till  2  o'clock  the  next  morning  when  the  tide  turned  on
the  river ;  she  then  had  been  dead  several  hours,  having  slipped  out,  I
fancy,  between  7  and  9  the  previous  evening."

We  have  verified  the  date  given,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  death,
in  two  local  newspapers.  It  appears  that  though  the  body  was  not
recovered  till  early  next  morning,  it  was  seen,  and  the  shawl  that  was
round  it  was  even  seized  and  drawn  into  a  boat,  at  10  p.m.

Mrs.  Wyld  afterwards  found  that  she  had  mentioned  her  experience
at  the  time  to  her  mother,  who  writes  to  us  on  March  19,  1886  : —

"  Mrs.  Wyld  was  staying  with  me  in  Scarborough,  when  she  heard  the
voice  in  which  you  are  interested.  She  was  alone  in  the  house  (excepting
servants),  and  when  I  returned,  an  hour  after,  she  related  what  had  seemed
to  her  peculiar.  The  date  I  do  not  now  remember ;  but  Mrs.  Wyld  left
Scarborough  the  next  day ;  and  in  two  or  three  days  after,  she  wrote  to
tell  me  of  the  sad  event  having  taken  place  that  evening.

"M.  Balgaenie."

[The  non-recognition  here  rather  tends  to  strengthen  the  case,  by
increasing  the  improbability  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to  anxiety
about  the  absent  friend.]

The  following  case  is  from  Miss  Harriss,  of  25,  Shepherd's  Bush

Koad,  W.

"January  25th,  1884.

(283)  "  Exactly  the  hour  in  the  afternoon  that  my  mother  died,  being
out  for  a  long  walk  in  the  country  with  a  companion,  and  having  parted
from  her  to  pick  wild  flowers,  I  heard  myself  distinctly  called  several  times.
With  a  feeling  as  if  some  ill  were  approaching,  I  looked  at  my  watch
instinctively,  and  found  it  half-past  4.  I  cannot  tell  why  I  did  so,  for  I
was  then  only  a  school-girl,  and  calling  to  my  companion  I  found  she  had
not  addressed  me.     I  dreamed  of  my  mother's  death  the  same  night.

"A.  Harriss."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Harriss  adds  : —

"  My  mother  died  on  25th  September,  1875.  She  was  in  better  health
than  I  had  seen  her  for  years  when  I  left  her  about  six  weeks  before,  which
was  the  reason  of  my  doing  so.  She  died  suddenly  of  heart  disease.  I
had  heard  from  her  only  two  days  before,  in  good  health  and  spirits.     The


118  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

hour  of  death  was  stated  in  the  letter  and  telegram  ;  I  think  I  have  both
still.

"  I  never  had  another  auditory  hallucination.  I  never  had  another
dream  of  death  besides  that  about  my  mother ;  it  was  very  vivid  and
distressing.     I  saw  her  dying."

The  following  is  an  extract,  copied  by  the  present  writer,  from  a  letter
written  to  Miss  Harriss  by  her  father,  and  dated  September  25,  1875  : —

"  Ashfield.
"  My  Dear  Annie, — You  will    be    much    surprised  that   your   dear
mamma  passed  away  this  afternoon  about  3.45,  so  gently  that  we  could
not  believe  that  she  was  really  gone.     .     .     I   think  she  was  not  quite
conscious  at  the  time. — Your  affectionate  father,       "J.  H.  Harriss."

The  friend  who  was  with  Miss  Harriss  at  the  time  writes  to  us  on
July  12,  1884,  from  58,  Cornwall  Gardens,  S.W.  :—

"  The  following  is  an  answer  to  your  inquiries  regarding  my  recollection
of  a  certain  incident  relating  to  the  death  of  Miss  Harriss'  mother.  I
remember  her  coming  down  one  morning  much  disturbed  at  a  very  vivid
dream  she  had  during  the  night,  in  which  she  saw  her  mother  lying  dead.
About  an  hour  after  she  told  us,  the  post  came  in,  bringing  Miss  Harriss
the  news  of  her  mother's  death.  The  previous  day  Miss  Harriss  had  been
in  the  woods  with  me,  and  came  and  asked  me  why  I  called  her,  and  what
was  the  matter.  On  finding  I  had  not,  she  told  me  she  had  been  quite  sure
some  one  was  calling  her,  and  wanted  her.  I  believe  afterwards  we  were
struck  at  the  curious  coincidence  of  her  mother  being  taken  ill  that  after-
noon, and  being  actually  dead  about  the  time  of  her  dream.

"  Edith  Darwin."

[In  conversation.  Miss  Harriss  assured  me  again  that  she  is  positive
that  the  hour  at  which  she  heard  the  voice  was  the  hour  of  her  mother's
death.  If  her  recollection  of  the  time  which  she  noted  by  her  watch  is
correct,  this  is  an  instance  of  exaggeration  of  correctness,  as  there  was
an  interval  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour.]

Here  we  can  hardly  attribute  the  dream  to  any  excitement  caused
by  the  previous  hallucination,  since  that  does  not  appear  to  have
suggested  her  mother  to  Miss  Harriss.  If  we  regard  both  incidents
as  telepathic,  and  as  due  to  a  common  cause,  the  case  would  be  an
interesting  instance  of  "  deferred  impression " — the  dim  impulse
which  immediately  after  the  death  emerged  as  an  unrecognised
phantasm,  developing  into  more  definitely  "  veridical  "  shape  in  sleep.

§  4.  And  now  we  come  to  cases  where  the  auditory  impression
was  of  a  complete  sentence,  conveying  either  a  piece  of  information
or  a  direction.  The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Killick,
of  Great  Smeaton  Rectory,  Northallerton,  and  is  quoted  from  an
undated  letter  to  the  Rev.  R.  H.  Davies,  of  Chelsea,  who  tells  me,  on
November  25th,   1885,  that  it  must  have  been   received   "  ten   or


XV.]  OC CUBBING  TO  A  SINGLE  PEBCIPIENT.  119

twelve  years  ago."  Mr.  Killick  sent  us  on  April  23rd,  1884,  an
almost  precisely  similar  account.  We  have  not  been  able  to  obtain
direct  confirmation  from  his  wife,  who  is  an  invalid  ;  but  he  tells  us
that  her  memory  confirms  his  own.  The  incident  happened,  however,
rather  more  than  80  years  ago.

(284)  "  A  very  much  loved  little  daughter  (now  married)  was  with  my
family  at  our  vicarage  in  Wiltshire,  and  I  was  in  Paris.  One  Sunday  after-
noon, I  was  sitting  in  the  courtyard  of  our  hotel,  taking  coffee,  when  a
sudden  thought  shot  into  my  mind,  '  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  water.'  [In
the  later  account  the  parallel  clause  is — "when  all  at  once  I  seemed  to
hear  a  voice  say,  ^  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  pond.'"]  I  should  tell  you  that
we  had  large  grounds,  and  a  fine  piece  of  artificial  water,  with  a  grass  walk
all  round,  and  a  waterfall  and  cave,  &c. — a  favourite  part.  [In  the  later
account,  Mr.  Killick  adds  that  this  pond  "  was  my  horror  for  the  children.
They  were  never  allowed  to  go  near  it,  except  with  one  of  the  family."]
I  tried  to  banish  the  thought,  but  in  vain.  I  went  out  into  the  city  and
walked  for  hours,  trying  to  obliterate  the  impression  in  every  possible
way,  but  in  vain.  I  walked  till  I  was  too  tired  to  walk  any  longer,
and  returned  and  went  to  bed,  but  not  to  sleep.  I  went  next  day  to
the  Post-office,  hoping  for  letters;  but  there  were  none.  I  could  not
stay  in  Paris,  so  I  went  to  the  Ambassador's  and  got  a  passport  for
Brussels.

"  In  the  course  of  time  I  had  letters  saying  all  were  well ;  and  I
finished  my  journey,  and  never  spoke  of  my  '  foolish  nervousness ' — as  I
admitted  it  to  be.

"  Some  months  afterwards  I  was  at  a  dinner  party,  and  the  hostess
said,  '  What  did  you  say  about  Etta,  when  you  heard  1'

"  '  Heard  what  1 '  I  said.

"  *  Oh  ! '  said  the  lady,  '  have  I  let  out  a  secret  1 '

"  I  said,  '  I  don't  leave  till  I  learn ! '

"  She  said,  '  Don't  get  me  into  trouble,  but  I  mean  about  her  falling
into  the  pond.'

"  '  What  pond  1 '

" '  Your  pond.'

"  '  When  1 '

«  '  While  you  were  abroad.'

"  I  was  about  leaving,  so  I  said  very  little  more,  but  hastened  home.
I  sought  our  governess,  and  inquired  what  it  all  meant.

"  She  said,  '  Oh,  how  cruel  to  tell  you,  now  it's  all  over  !  Well,  one
Sunday  afternoon  we  were  walking  by  the  pond,  and  Theodore  said,
"  Etta,  it's  so  funny  to  walk  with  your  eyes  shut "  ;  so  she  tried,  and
fell  into  the  water.  I  heard  a  scream,  and  looked  round  and  saw
Etta's  head  come  up,  and  I  ran  and  seized  her  and  pulled  her  out.
Oh,  it  was  so  dreadful !     And  then  I  carried  her  up  to  her  mamma,  and


she  was  put  to  bed,  and  soon  got  all  right.'  ^. ,     i  _

"  1  inquired  the  day  ;  it  was  the  ver]/  Sunday  that  I  was  in  Paris,  and  cKur^   f]

had  this  dreadful  conviction.  h^)       ii

"  I  asked  the  hour.      About  4  o'clock  !     The  very  time,  also,  that  the  i,Jt..M^

unwelcome  thought  plunged  into  my  mind.  Lf^*


120  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

"  I  said,  '  Then  it  was  revealed  to  me  in  Paris  the  instant  it  happened ' ;
and,  for  the  first  time,  I  told  her  of  my  sad  experience  in  Paris  on  that
Sunday  afternoon.  "  R.  Henry  Killick."

Mr.  Killick  writes  us  on  May  6th,  1884  : —

"  As  to  your  queries  :  you  ask  was  the  impression  unique  in  my  expe-
rience. I  think  it  was.  I  cannot  remember  anything  like  it.  You  ask,
was  the  pond  a  source  of  danger,  &c.  The  children  were  never  allowed  to
go  near  it  without  grown-up  people  being  with  them ;  it  was  prohibited  ;
and  it  was  quite  away  from  their  part  of  the  grounds.  We  were  so  strict
!  and  careful  that  the  accident  seemed  an  impossibility.  We  had  never  had
\  any  alarm  on  the  subject.

"  At  that  time  I  had  ten  children  at  home  ;  and  yet  it  was  the  special
one  that  had  the  accident  who  was  present  to  my  mind  at  that  moment.
The  voice  seemed  to  say,  '  Etta  has  fallen  into  the  pond.'  "

The  two  expressions  "  A  sudden  thought  shot  into  my  mind,"  and
"  I  seemed  to  hear  a  voice  say,"  are  perfectly  compatible,  as  expressing
a  hallucination  only  slightly  externalised  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  480-1)  ;  but  such
descriptions  might,  no  doubt,  apply  equally  to  something  too  inward
to  be  called  hallucination  at  all  ;  and  in  fact  a  parallel  but  less
distinct  case  (No.  80)  has  been  classed  among  emotional  and  not
sensory  impressions.  In  other  respects,  the  present  narrative  reminds
us  of  Mr.  Jukes's  case  (Vol.  I.,  p.  407),  and  of  Mr.  Everitt's  case
(Vol.  I.,  p.  409).  The  sense  of  a  third  personality — a  messenger —
implied  in  the  form  of  the  message,  may  be  interpreted  as  the
subjective  contribution  of  the  percipient ;  who  projects  his  impression
in  the  fashion  in  which  it  would  most  naturally  strike  his  senses,  if  it
really  came  to  him  in  a  normal  way  from  without.

A  still  more  remarkable  case  has  been  supplied  to  us  by  Dr.
Nicolas,  Count  Gon^mys,  of  Corfu,  a  member  of  our  Society,  from
whose  long  paper,  which  was  in  French,  the  following  account  is
abstracted.     The  first  person  is  retained  for  the  sake  of  clearness.

"February,  1885.

(285)  "In  the  year  1869,  I  was  Officer  of  Health  in  the  Hellenic  army.

By  command   of  the  War   Office,  I  was  attached  to  the  garrison  of  the

Island  of  Zante.      As  I  was  approaching  the  island  in  a  steamboat,  to

take    up  my  new  position,  and  at  about   two  hours'    distance    from  the

shore,  I  heard  a  sudden  inward  voice   say  to  me,  over  and  over  again,  in

Italian,  '  Go  to   Volterra.'     I   was  made  almost  dizzy  by  the  frequency

with  which  this  phrase  was  repeated.     Although  in  perfectly  good  health

/    at  the  time,  I    became    seriously  alarmed    at    what    I  considered  as  an

"^  auditory    hallucination.     I    had    no    association  with    the    name    of   M.

Yolterra,  a  gentleman  of  Zante  with  whom  I  was  not  even  acquainted,

although  I  had  once  seen  him,   10  years  before.     I    tried  the    effect  of

^    stopping  my  ears,  and  of  trying  to  distract  myself  by  conversation  with


XV.]  OCCUBRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  121

the  bystanders ;  but  all  was  useless,  and  I  continued  to  hear  the  voice
in  the  same  way.  At  last  we  reached  land ;  I  proceeded  to  the  hotel
and  busied  myself  with  my  trunks ;  but  the  voice  continued  to  harass
me.  After  a  time  a  servant  came,  and  announced  to  me  that  a  gentleman
was  at  the  door  who  wished  to  speak  with  me  at  once.  '  Who  is  the
gentleman?'  I  asked.  '  M.  Volterra,'  was  the  reply.  And  M.  Volterra
entered,  weeping  violently  in  uncontrollable  distress,  and  imploring
me  to  follow  him  at  once,  and  see  his  son,  who  was  in  a  dangerous
condition.

"I  found  a  young  man  in  a  state  of  maniacal  frenzy,  naked,  in  an
empty  room,  and  despaired  of  by  all  the  doctors  of  Zante  for  the  last '
five  years.  His  aspect  was  hideous,  and  rendered  the  more  distressing  by  '
constantly-recurring  choreic  spasms,  accompanied  by  hissings,  bowlings,
barkings,  and  other  animal  noises.  Sometimes  he  crawled  on  his  belly
like  a  serpent ;  sometimes  he  fell  into  an  ecstatic  condition  on  his  knees ;
sometimes  he  talked  and  quarrelled  with  imaginary  interlocutors.  The
violent  crises  were  often  followed  by  periods  of  profound  syncope.  When
I  opened  the  door  of  his  room  he  darted  upon  me  furiously,  but  I  stood
my  ground  and  seized  him  by  the  arm,  looking  him  fixedly  in  the  face.
In  a  few  moments  his  gaze  fell ;  he  trembled  all  over,  and  fell  on  the  floor
with  his  eyes  shut.  I  made  mesmeric  passes  over  him,  and  in  half  an
hour  he  had  fallen  into  the  somnambulic  state.  The  cure  lasted  two
months  and  a  half,  during  which  many  interesting  phenomena  were
observed.  Since  its  completion,  the  patient  has  had  no  return  of  his  [(uiZ^K
malady."  iKjUl^

A  letter  written    to    Count  Gonemys  by  M.  Volterra,    dated  Zante,      '      '     *
7th  (19th)  June,  1885,  contains  the  most   complete  corroboration  of  the
above  statement  in  all  that  concerns  the  Volterra  family.     The  letter  con-
cludes as  follows  : —

"Before    your    arrival   at    Zante    I    had    no    acquaintance    with  you
whatever,  although  I  have  been  many  years  at  Corfu  as  Deputy  to  the  fJ
Legislative  Assembly  ;  nor  had  we  ever  spoken  together,  nor  had  I  ever  '  ■
said  a  word  to  you  about  my  son.     As  I  before  said,  we  had  never  thought
of  you,  nor  desired  your  assistance,  until  I  called  on  you  on  your  arrival  as
officer  of  health,  and  begged  you  to  save  my  son.

"  We  owe  his  life  first  to  you  and  then  to  mesmerism.
"  I  hold  it  my  duty  to  declare  to  you  my  sincere  gratitude,  and  to
subscribe  myself  affectionately  and  sincerely  yours,  j/jM-t*^

"  Demetrio  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri.         ^  c*«i

(Additional  signatures)  "  Laura  Volterra  "  [M.  Volterra's  wife].  ^        ^^^^

"  DiONisio  D.  Volterra,  Count  Crissoplevri."      vH'<«^

"  O  flepaTTsvOstc  Av«?a(7toc  'BoXreppoc."  (Anastasio      M-  ^*y*

Volterra,  the  cured  patient).
"  C.  Vassopoulos  (come  testimonio)  "
"  Demetrio,  Comte  Guerino  (confermo)."
"  Lorenzo  T.  Mercati."

The  form  of  the  monition  here,  as  the  form  of  the  statement  in
the  former    cases,    I   should   attribute    to    the   percipient's    shaping  i
imagination.     The  narrative,  however,  will  be  seen  to  present    one  i


122  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

peculiarity  which  we  have  encountered  in  no  other  instance  ;  ^  at  the
time  that  the  impression  was  received,  the  agent  and  the  percipient
were  personally  unknown  to  one  another.  Still,  if  my  surraise  be
allowable  as  to  the  conditions  by  which  a  line  of  telepathic  com-
munication may  be  established  between  persons  unconnected  by
blood  or  affection,  we  might  certainly  find  a  likely  condition  in
such  an  attitude  as  that  of  the  supposed  agent  in  this  case.  We
cannot  reasonably  suppose  that  any  casual  stranger  had  as  good
a  chance  of  being  telepathically  impressed  by  M.  Volterra  as  the
person  who — though  his  name  and  personality  may  have  had  no
place  in  M.  Volterra's  mind — was  yet,  by  virtue  of  his  special  know-
ledge and  of  his  actual  approach,  more  nearly  connected  than  any
one  else  with  the  engrossing  subject  of  his  thoughts.

The  following  example,  from  a  clergyman  who  unfortunately
withholds  his  name  from  publication,  is  very  similar,  the  inward
nature  of  the  sound  being  again  noticeable.  But  here  the  agent  and
percipient  were  friends.

(286)  "In  March,  187 — ,  I  went  to  the  curacy  of  A.,  and  had  been,  as
well  as  I  remember,  about  a  month  there,  when  the  following  happened.  I
am  a  native  of  a  town  in  the  North  of  England,  and  in  my  childhood  had
a  friend  of  my  own  age  whom  I  will  call  C.  Our  friendship  lasted  till  man-
hood, though  our  circumstances  and  walks  of  life  were  very  different ;  and  I
had  always  a  great  deal  of  influence  over  him,  insomuch  that  he  would  allow
himself  to  be  restrained  by  me  when  he  would  not  by  others.  He  became,
towards  his  20th  year  or  so,  rather  addicted  to  drink,  but  I  always  had  the
same  friendship  for  him,  and  would  have  done  anything  to  serve  or  help
him.

"In  187 —  his  family  were  living  at  X.  (near  Z.),  and  as  all  my
other  old  friends  had  long  left  the  neighbourhood  of  Z.,  my  native  town,  I
always  used  to  go  to  them  whenever  I  visited  that  part,  as  I  was  and  am
still  on  sufficiently  friendly  terms  with  them  to  go  at  any  time  without
notice.  On  the  day  in  question  I  had  been  visiting  some  of  the  parish-
ioners, and  having  made  an  end  of  this,  came  to  a  cross-road  of  two  of  the
lanes  near  the  church  ;  and  not  only  was  I  not  thinking  of  my  friend,  whom
I  had  not  heard  of  for  some  years,  but  I  distinctly  remember  what  I  was
thinking  of,  which  was  whether  to  go  home  to  my  lodgings  for  my  tea,
turning  to  the  left,  or  whether  to  trespass  on  the  hospitality  of  a  lady  who
lived  to  the  right  of  the  crossing.  "When  thus  standing  in  doubt,  a  kind  of
shudder  passed  through  me,  accompanied  by  a  most  extraordinary  feeling,
which  I  can  only  compare  to  that  of  a  jug  of  cold  water  poured  on  the  nape  of
the  neck,  and  running  down  the  spine;  ^  and  as  this  passed  off,  though  I  can-
not say  I  heard  a  voice,  I  was  distinctly  conscious  of  the  words,  '  Go  to  Z.
by  this  evening's  train,'  being  said  in  my  ear.      There  was  no  one  at  the

1  A  possible  exception  is  case  30,  Vol.  i.,  pp.  214-8.
2  Cf.  case  223,  p.  37,  and  the  note  thereon.


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  123

time  within  100  yards  of  me.  I  was  not  very  flush  of  money  just  then,
and  could  not  well  afford  the  expense,  besides  not  wishing  to  absent  myself
from  duty  so  soon  after  taking  it  up.  But  it  seemed  so  distinct  that  I
almost  made  up  my  mind  to  obey  it ;  but  on  announcing  the  fact  to  my  land-
lady, to  whom,  of  course,  I  could  not  tell  my  true  reason,  she  remonstrated
so  earnestly  that,  coupling  this  with  the  affairs  of  my  duty,  &c.,  I  did
conclude  to  disregard  it.  I  could  not,  however,  settle  to  anything,  read,
write,  or  sit  in  comfort,  till  the  time  was  elapsed  when  I  could  have  caught
the  train,  when  the  uneasy,  restless  feeling  gradually  went  off,  and  in  a
few  hours  I  was  ready  to  laugh  at  myself.

"  Three  or  four  days  after,  I  received  the  sad  news  that  my  friend  had
on  that  day  gone  down  home  from  London,  had  been  taken  ill,  and  two
days  afterwards  had,  in  a  fit  of  temporary  insanity,  put  an  end  to  his
life.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  had  I  obeyed  the  intimation
I  might  have  saved  his  life  ;  for  I  must  have  gone  to  their  house,  no
other  in  the  neighbourhood  being  available  ;  and  had  I  found  him  in  the
condition  in  which  he  was,  you  may  be  very  sure  he  would  never  have  got
out  of  arm's  length  of  me  until  all  danger  was  over.  I  have  ever  since
reproached  myself  with  it,  and  have  made  up  my  mind  that  should  I  ever
have  such  another  experience  I  will  do  what  is  directed,  seem  it  never  so
absurd  or  difficult."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  adds : —

"  I  was  in  health  just  as  usual,  no  better  and  no  worse.  I  had  good
health  all  the  time  I  was  at  A.,  and  in  particular  I  never  have  suffered
from  indigestion  since  I  was  a  child.  I  have  never  at  any  other  time
had  such  a  physical  sensation,  or  such  a  sensation  of  a  voice ;  and  nothing
has  ever  happened  to  me  which  would  lead  at  all  satisfactorily  to  the
conclusion  that  any  abnormal  phenomena  were  present."

The  narrator  has  privately  told  us  the  year  of  the  occurrence,  and
the  place  where  the  suicide  took  place ;  and  we  have  verified  these  details
in  the  Register  of  Deaths.  The  event  took  place  later  in  the  year  than  he
imagined — in  November.  In  conversation,  he  has  explained  that  "  Go  to  Z  "
practically  meant  the  same  for  him  as  "  Go  to  these  friends,"  as  he  would  be
quite  certain  to  stay  with  them.  Their  place  of  business  was  still  at  Z.
At  the  time  of  his  experience,  his  friend  was  in  a  very  critical  condition.

The  next  case  is  worth  quoting  as  parallel  to  the  two  last,  though
it  has  less  evidential  force ;  for,  at  this  distance  of  time,  we  cannot
make  sure  that  something  had  not  occurred  during  the  preceding
days,  that  might  have  half  unconsciously  suggested  to  the  percipient
the  need  which  he  was  so  strangely  impelled  to  relieve.  The  account
is  from  Dr.  Joseph  Smith,  for  many  years  leading  medical  practitioner
in  Warrington,  and  a  class-leader  in  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church.

"  November  24th,  1884.

(287)  "  When  I  lived  at  Penketh,  about  40  years  ago,  I  was  sitting  one

evening  reading,  and  a  voice  came  to  me,  saying,  '  Send  a  loaf  to  James

Gandy's.'     Still  I  continued   reading,  and  the   voice  came  to  me  again,

'  Send  a  loaf  to  James  Gandy's.'     Still  I  continued  reading,  when  a  third


124  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

time  the  voice  came  to  me  with  greater  emphasis,  '  Send  a  loaf  to  James
Gandy's ' ;  and  this  time  it  was  accompanied  by  an  almost  irresistible
impulse  to  get  up.  I  obeyed  this  impulse,  and  went  into  the  village,
bought  a  large  loaf,  and  seeing  a  lad  at  the  shop  door,  I  asked  him  if  he
knew  James  Gandy's.  He  said  he  did ;  so  I  gave  him  a  trifle  and  asked
him  to  take  the  loaf  there,  and  to  say  a  gentleman  had  sent  it.  Mrs.
Gandy  was  a  member  of  my  class,  and  I  went  down  the  next  morning  to
see  what  had  come  of  it,  when  she  told  me  that  a  strange  thing  had
happened  to  her  last  night.  She  said  she  wanted  to  put  the  children  to
bed,  and  they  began  to  cry  for  food,  and  she  had  not  any  to  give  them  ;
for  her  husband  had  been  for  four  or  five  days  out  of  work.  She  then
went  to  prayer,  to  ask  God  to  send  them  something ;  soon  after  which  a
lad  came  to  the  door  with  a  loaf,  which  he  said  a  gentleman  gave  him  to
bring  to  her.  I  calculated,  upon  inquiry  made  of  her,  that  her  prayer  and
the  voice  which  I  heard  exactly  coincided  in  point  of  time.

"  Joseph  Smith,  M.D."

§5.1  will  now  give  one  case  where  the  sound  heard,  though  vocal,

was  not  articulate.^     The  seemingly  direct  reproduction  of  the  actual

sound  which  the  agent  was  making  (and  therefore  hearing)  at  the

time  recalls  the  first  cases  of  this  chapter  ;  but  in  the  present  instance

there  was  no  recognition,  which  is  of  course  an  evidential  defect.    The

case  is  one  where  jpros  and  cons  have  to  be  carefully  balanced ;  it

has  been  admitted  as  the  experience  of  a  matter-of-fact  man,  but

1  would  certainly  have  been  rejected  had  it  been  that  of  a  nervous  or

^  imaginative  woman.     The  narrator  is  Mrs.  B.,  who  contributed  also

■  case  192,  (to  which  she  refers  in  the  first  line,)  and  whose  name  may

be  given  to  anyone  interested  in  the  subject.

"December,  1884.

(288)  "  Some  six  years  after  the  above  occurrence,  in  the  September
of  1870,  my  husband  was  at  D.  Hall  for  his  holiday.  His  parents  were
then  living  at  Dieppe.  He  was  roused  one  night  by  a  peculiar  moaning,  as
if  some  person  or  animal  was  in  pain.  He  got  up  and  went  through  the
house  and  out  into  the  gardens  and  shrubberies,  but  could  see  nothing.
He  heard  the  same  noise  at  intervals  all  that  day,  but  could  not  find  out
the  cause.  He  returned  to  London  next  day,  to  find  a  telegram  summon-
ing him  to  Dieppe,  as  his  mother  was  dying.  When  he  got  into  the  house
at  Dieppe,  the  first  sound  he  heard  was  a  repetition  of  the  same  noise  that
he  heard  at  D.  Hall,  and  he  found  it  was  his  mother  who  was  making  it,
and  he  learned  she  had  been  doing  so  for  two  days.  She  died  a  few  hours
after  he  arrived.  We  had  no  knowledge  of  Mrs.  B.'s  illness  at  the  time
my  husband  heard  the  noise.

"  My  husband's  parents  had  been  obliged  to  leave  D.  Hall  under
painful  circumstances,  and  possibly  the  thoughts  of  her  loved  home  may
have  been  paramount  with  Mrs.  B.,  or  it  may  have  been  that  they  flew  to

1  The  strongest  example  in  our  collection  that  can  be  thus  described  is  the  scream
case,  No.  34,  to  which  some  "borderland"  parallels  are  given  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  403-5.  As
possibly  a  direct  reproduction  of  the  agent's  sensation,  the  present  experience  might  be
compared  to  cases  151  and  342.


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  125

my  husband,  who  was  her  youngest  son.  At  any  rate,  my  husband  always
held  that  it  was  his  mother's  moaning  he  heard  at  D.  Hall  though  she  was
in  France.  She  was  speechless  when  he  reached  her,  so  no  solution  could
be  arrived  at.  "  E.  A.  B.

We  find  from    a   newspaper    obituary   that  the  death  took  place  at
Dieppe,  on  September  12,  1870.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : —

"  My  late  husband  was  alone,  at  his  old  home  in  Norfolk,  when  he
heard  the  moaning  I  told  you  of.  He  was  shortly  after  (the  same  after-
noon, I  think)  telegraphed  for  to  go  to  Dieppe  to  see  his  mother.  He
was  quite  unaware,  till  he  got  the  telegram,  that  she  was  ill.  He  returned
to  Selhurst,  where  we  were  living,  and  where  I  was,  on  his  way  to  Dieppe,
and  then  told  me  about  this  noise.  On  his  return  from  Dieppe,  after  his
mother's  death,  he  said,  '  You  remember  my  telling  you  of  the  moaning  I
heard  at  D.  The  first  sound  I  heard  in  the  house  at  Dieppe  was  the  same,
and  it  was  my  mother  making  it.'  He  further  added  that  he  was  told  she
had  made  it  for  a  day  or  two.  I  am  perfectly  clear  about  his  hearing  it
first  at  night  in  the  house,  and  on  the  following  morning  in  the  shrub-
beries, which  were  a  little  distance  from  the  house.  I  never  heard  either
my  husband  or  his  father  speak  of  ever  hearing  sounds,  or  seeing  anything
before  or  after  the  occurrences  I  have  mentioned  [^.e.,  this  case  and  case
1921.  They  were  both  matter-of-fact  men,  and  very  free  from  superstitious
ideas.  I  was  a  young  woman  at  the  time  these  things  took  place  (I  am
only  41  now),  so  my  memory  of  them  is  very  clear  and  good.  Six  weeks
or  two  months  after  my  husband  heard  these  sounds,  we  were  together  at
D.,  and  he  showed  me  the  spot  in  the  shrubbery  where  the  sound  had  been
loudest."

[If  the  percipient's  experience  had  been  confined  to  the  moaning  heard
in  the  night,  the  incident  would  not  have  been  worth  attending  to,  for
reasons  to  be  immediately  adduced.  But  the  continuance  of  the  sound
during  the  day,  and  out  of  doors,  makes  a  decided  diflference.]

I  6.  We  now  come  to  a  few  specimens  of  the  non-vocal  sound-
phantasms — the  mere  noises  or  shocks — which  are  the  parallel  among
auditory  hallucinations  to  the  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations  which
were  considered  in  the  last  chapter.  But  the  auditory  cases  need  a  far
more  jealous  scrutiny,  before  we  are  justified  in  regarding  them  as  even
probably  telepathic  in  origin.  Odd  noises,  especially  at  night,  are  very
common  phenomena  ;  and  though  the  particular  cause  of  them  is
often  hard  to  detect,  the  physical  conditions  of  our  indoor  life  are
prolific  of  possible  causes-  Most  of  us  are  in  constant  proximity  to
wind  that  may  blow  through  crevices,  and  rattle  or  flap  or  dislodge
loose  parts  of  our  windows  and  walls  and  chimneys  ;  and  to  water  in
pipes  or  cisterns  that  may  leak,  or  burst,  or  may  contain  bubbling  air;
and  to  slates  that  may  fall ;  and  to  wooden  furniture  and  floors
that  may  crack  and  creak.  And  if  any  one  should  say  that  he  has
heard  a  noise  which,  from  its  nature  or  its  position,  could  not  be


126  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

accounted  for  by  any  such  ascertainable  cause,  he  might  be  reminded
that  sounds  are  the  hardest  things  in  the  world  to  localise  ;  and  that  no
one  who  has  not  given  special  attention  to  the  subject  can  realise  how
easy  it  is  to  mistake  the  source  and  character  of  an  auditory  impres-
sion.^ Thus,  while  it  is  impossible  to  contend  that  the  "  ball  of  light  "
which  appeared  to  Mr.  Saxby  was  a  real  ball,  and  impossible  therefore
to  deny  that  the  coincidence  of  the  hallucination  with  the  death  of
some  one  to  whom  he  was  attached  was  an  odd  circumstance,  it  is
quite  possible  to  contend  that  some  unaccountable  crash  which  some-
one has  heard  was  not  a  hallucination  at  all,  but  a  real  objective  sound ;
d,nd  the  coincidence  of  such  a  crash  with  the  death  of  a  near  relative
is  the  less  odd  in  proportion  as  unaccountable  crashes  are  common
occurrences.  Still,  unaccountable  noises  are  not  of  such  daily  and
hourly  occurrence  but  that  a  sufficiently  large  and  well-established
group  of  the  coincidences  in   question  might  be  taken  as  possible

1  I  may  mention,  as  a  marked  instance  of  this,  a  personal  experience  which  I  have
again  and  again  repeated.  The  dripping  of  a  small  fountain,  heard  from  some  yards  ofif,
produces  on  my  ears  the  precise  effect  of  a  heavy  waggon  which  is  being  slowly  dragged
up  a  gravelly  road  at  a  considerable  distance.

The  following  is  probably  a  case  of  mistaken  localisation.  The  account  is  from  the
Rev.  Edward  Bonus,  of  the  Rectory,  Hulcot,  Aylesbury.

"July,  1882.

■'  The  house  is  the  Rectory  of in  the  county  of  Wilts.     Of  the  two  clergymen

concerned,  one  is  now  dead  ;  the  other  has  read  through  and  signed  this  account,  certify-
ing its  accuracy.     This  matter  happened  about  20  years  ago.

"One  day,  a  friend  of  the  then  rector  came  on  a  visit  for  a  few  days,  and  rode  on
horseback.  It  was  winter  time.  He  put  his  horse  into  his  friend's  stables,  and  the  two
clergymen  spent  the  evening  together.  They  went  to  bed  as  usual  about  11.  During  the
night  the  friend  heard  the  steps  of  a  horse  very  distinctly  on  the  stairs  ;  was  not
frightened,  but  greatly  surprised.  He  at  once  got  up,  lighted  his  candle,  and  went  down-
stairs, but  could  see  nothing,  and  now  was  frightened.  He  returned  to  bed,  and  shortly
again  heard  the  same  noise  ;  again  he  got  up,  this  time  too  frightened  to  go  downstairs,
but  went  to  his  friend's  room.  He  was  asleep,  so  he  roused  him,  and  told  him  what  he
had  heard;  they  then  remained  together,  leaving  the  light.  Very  soon  they  both  heard
the  noise  in  the  most  certain  and  distinct  manner ;  so  they  both  dressed  and  searched  the
house — could  see  or  find  nothing ;  they  then  went  to  the  stables,  and  to  their  sorrow  the
horse  was  dead.

"  They  both  believed  the  spirit  of  the  horse  had  entered  the  house.  The  horse  died
of  heart  disease  ;  it  was  afterwards  examined.  Never  again,  as  far  as  I  have  ever  heard,
was  the  same  man  visited  by  any  kind  of  noise.

"  I  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  two  clergymen,  and  have  heard  them  tell  the
story  very  many  times.

"Edward  Bonus."

"  This  account  is  correct. — H.  S.  L."

What  one  may  surmise  to  have  happened  is  that  the  friends  heard  a  sound  resembling
heavy  steps,  and  inferred  that  it  was  on  the  stairs.  We  learn,  on  inquiry,  that  "  a  horse
kicking  in  the  stables  could  be  distinctly  heard  in  the  house  "  ;  which  suggests  the  true
nature  of  the  particular  horse's  "agency  "  in  the  matter.

In  Morrison's  Reminiscences  of  Sir  W.  Scott  there  is  an  account  of  the  strange  sounds
—like  the  drawing  of  heavy  boards  along  the  new  part  of  the  house— which  woke  Scott
and  his  wife  on  the  night  of  the  death  of  their  friend,  Mr.  Bullock,  who  had  lately  been
assisting  them  in  the  work  of  building  and  improving.  The  coincidence  made  a  great
impression  on  Scott,  which,  however,  we  cannot  hold  to  have  been  justified.  For  Lock-
hart's  Life  contains  a  letter  of  Scott's,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  same  sound  had  been
heard  on  the  preceding  night,  when,  though  "awaked  by  a  violent  noise,"  be  only
"fancied  something  had  fallen,  and  thought  no  more  about  it."


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  127

indications  of  telepathic  action,  especially  as  we  have  the  analogy
of  rudimentary  visual  hallucinations  to  point  to.^  Moreover,  there  is
no  doubt  that  surprising  noises  and  crashes,  though  often  due  to
undiscovered  external  causes,  are  also  a  form  of  purely  subjective
hallucination^ — which  makes  it  at  least  probable,  if  telepathy  be  a
reality,  that  they  will  also  be  a  form  of  telepathic  hallucination.

The  kinds  of  non- vocal  impression  which  are  least  likely  to  be  due
to  a  real  but  undiscoverable  cause  in  the  vicinity  are  those  which  are
distinctly  musical — the  sound  being  produced  not  in  the  gliding
random  fashion  of  an  ^olian  harp,  but  in  a  series  of  well-defined
tones.  Some  examples  of  literal  music  will  be  given  in  Chap.  XVIII.
But  I  will  give  here  an  example  where  the  sound  heard  was  of  the
ringing  of  bells,  which  is  a  known  form  of  hallucination.^  The
narrator  is  a  gentleman  who  does  not  wish  his  name  and  address  to  be
published,  though  he  has  no  objection  to  their   being   communicated

privately.

"May  28th,  1885.

(289)  "  In  1862,  I  sailed  to  Bombay  in  one  of  Dunbar's  old  frigate.-built
ships.  I  was  depressed  the  whole  voyage  with  an  undefined  presentiment
of  'bad  news  from  home.'  At  Bombay  I  used  to  get  my  messmates  to  go
ashore  for  letters  (a  great  privilege),  even  when  it  was  my  turn  to  do  so  ;
my  nervousness  was  so  great.  However,  we  sailed  for  home,  and  reached
and  left  St.  Helena,  and  no  black  letter  was  delivered  to  me.

"  Two  days  after  leaving  St.  Helena  I  was  up  aloft  doing  some  trifling
sailor's  work  with  the  fourth  officer,  on  the  mizen  topsail  or  top  gallant
yard,  when  I  heard  a  bell  begin  to  toll.  I  said  to  him,  '  Do  you  hear  that
bell  tolling '? '  '  No,'  he  said,  '  I  hear  nothing.'  However,  my  agitation
was  so  great  that  I  went  down  and  examined  both  our  bells ;  and  placed
my  arm  near  them,  to  see  if  they  were  vibrating  or  if  any  chance  rope
was  swinging  loose  and  striking  them.  However,  while  doing  this,  I  still
heard  the  boom  of  the  tolling  bell,  and  it  seemed  far  away.  I  then,
when  I  had  satisfied  myself  that  the  sound  was  not  attributable  to  either
of  our  ship's  bells,  went  up  aloft  and  scanned  the  horizon  in  search  of
a  sail,  but  saw  none.  I  then  said  to  my  messmates,  '  That's  my  "  black
letter."     I  knew  I  should  have  bad  news  this  voyage.'

1  A  combination  of  rudimentary  visual  with  rudimentary  auditory  hallucinations  is
recorded  by  Madame  G-uyon  [La  Viede  Madame  Guyon,  ecrite  par  elle-meme,  Paris,  1791,
Vol.  iii.,  p.  170) — in  a  case,  however,  which  cannot  be  presented  as  telepathic,  inasmuch
as  Madame  G-uyon  was  expecting  the  death  of  the  friend  which  coincided  with  the
hallucination.  The  sight  was  a  glimmer  in  the  room,  which  caused  some  little  gilt  nails
near  the  bed  to  glow  :  the  sound  was  a  crash  as  if  all  the  window-panes  in  the  house  had
fallen.

2  See  the  statistics  given  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  503.

3  For  instance,  no  one  is  likely  to  explain  as  a  misinterpretation  of  real  sounds  the
case  given  by  Mr.  Kinglake  in  Eotlien,  p.  239.  In  the  midst  of  the  desert  he  heard  peal-
ing for  ten  minutes,  as  it  appeared  to  him,  the  familiar  bells  of  his  native  village.  I  have
received  a  very  similar  example  from  a  lady  who  heard  bells  when  leading  a  very  solitary
life  in  a  remote  part  of  India — which  is  one  of  the  7  cases  mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  503.
A  second  apparently  telepathic  case  is  No.  344.


128  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

"  At  Falmouth  we  called  for  orders  ;  and  there  I  found  that  a  lady  who
filled  the  place  of  elder  sister  to  me  (my  aunt  by  marriage),  and  to  whose
younger  sister  I  am  married  now,  had  been  suddenly  carried  off  by  illness
— at  that  time,  as  near  as  we  could  calculate,  allowing  for  the  different
longitude.  She  was  young  (29),  lovely,  and  most  winning  in  her
manners.  I,  boy-like,  adored  her,  and  she  used  to  say  that  I  was  her  young
sailor  lover ;  as  my  uncle,  a  captain  in  the  Navy,  was  her  old  sailor
lover.

"  I  am  40  years  old  now,  and  have  been  through  dangers  of  all  sorts,
in  imminent  danger  of  death  many  times,  but  I  have  never  had  a  pre-
sentiment since.  After  nearly  25  years  I  can  still  remember  the  boom,
boom,  of  that  old  bell  in  the  Manx  churchyard,  which  I  heard  in  latitude  14
S.,  or  thereabouts."

Asked  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  a  hallucination  on  any  other
occasion,  the  narrator  replied  : —

"  I  have  never  suffered  from  any  hallucinations.  I  have  led  an  active
life,  including  much  loneliness,  being  for  weeks  together  in  the  jungles
shooting  and  surveying  alone,  save  for  native  servants,  and  far  from  white
men,  and  during  all  that  time  my  brain  never  played  me  any  tricks."
Later,  he  wrote  : — "  I  have  not  been  a  dreamer,  fool,  or  a  mystic,  but  a
hard-working,  clear-headed  man  of  business.  I  tell  you  all  this,  not  in  a
boasting  spirit,  but  simply  to  prove,  so  far  as  possible,  that  I  am  not  a
likely  subject  for  '  illusions  '  or  '  hallucinations.'  You  must  remember  that
this  occurred  when  I  was  a  careless  youngster  of  17,  on  my  first  voyage  to
sea.  I  could  not  account  for  it  then  ;  nor  can  I  now.  The  impression  is
as  vivid  as  ever."

Asked  whether  any  bells  would  have  been  ringing  at  the  time  of  the
lady's  death,  he  says  : —

"  Yes.  Malen  Church  bell  would  have  been  tolling  in  Castletown  at
that  time,  for  the  passing  hell  or  for  the  funeral.  I  never  asked  whether
the  passing  hell  was  rung,  but  it  is  a  common  habit  in  the  Isle  of  Man  to
toll  the  church  bell  immediately  after  the  decease  of  any  one  of  some
social  importance.  I  feel  sure  it  was  done  in  this  case  ;  we  were  so  well
known  there.  I  mean  it  is  done  for  the  gentry,  and  such  of  the  farmers.
and  shopkeeping  class  who  care  to  pay  for  it.

"  I  may  add  that  the  lady  who  died  was  inexpressibly  dear  to  me,  being
more  like  a  sister  than  an  aunt."

The  name  of  the  lady  was  given  to  us  in  confidence,  and  also  the  date
of  her  death  ;  and  we  have  verified  this  date  by  reference  to  an  Isle  of
Man  newspaper.  The  day  proved  to  be  a  Sunday.  This  was  pointed  out
to  our  informant,  in  case  he  might  be  able  to  recall  anything  which  would
point  to  a  Sunday  as  the  day  of  his  experience.     He  replied : —

"  I  cannot  well  remember  the  day,  but  I  think  that,  from  what  I  do
remember,  it  was  a  Sunday.  I  was  probably  stowing  the  mizen  top-
gallant sail,  or  doing  some  necessary  work  up  aloft ;  but  I  remember  that
when  I  went  down  to  look  at  the  bells  the  ship  was  still,  and  I  don't
remember  any  work  going  on.     I  am,  however,  not  certain  on  this  matter. "^


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  129

If  this  case  was  telepathic,  it  must  remain  doubtful  whether  the
form  of  the  impression  represented  the  last  sensations  or  ideas  of
the  dying  person,  or  was  a  piece  of  death-imagery  supplied  by  the
percipient,  as  illustrated  in  several  of  the  visual  cases  of  Chap.  XII.
The  preceding  distress  and  nervousness  were  probably  subjective,  but
can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  hallucination.

When  we  pass  from  musical  impressions  to  noise  proper,  the
degree  of  oddness  and  unaccountableness  in  a  sound  is  a  point  which
it  is  very  hard  to  judge  of  from  description.  The  reader  may  form
his  own  opinion  of  the  following  account,  received  from  Mrs.  Samuda,
of  Shipton  Court,  Chipping  Norton.  I  do  not  number  it  as  an
evidential  case.

"  If  the  details  of  what  occurred  to  me  (and  which  I  believe  to  have
been  purely  accidental)  can  be  of  any  service  to  your  Society,  I  will  with
pleasure  describe  them ;  but  in  doing  so  I  must  beg  that  you  will
thoroughly  understand  that  I  do  not  in  the  least  believe  in  any  of  these
coincidences,  and  at  the  time  was  much  amused  when  I  was  told  that
the  sounds  I  heard  were  death- warnings.  On  the  5th  of  October,  1878,
about  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  was  suddenly  aroused  by  three  distinct
loud  knocks  exactly  over  the  head  of  my  bed.  At  the  time  I  was  ill,
and  the  nurse  was  sleeping  in  my  room.  She  also  distinctly  heard  the
sounds.  The  first  thing  the  next  morning,  I  received  a  telegram  to  say
my  grandfather,  Sir  Francis  Grant,  P.R.A.,  had  died  suddenly  the  night
before  at  8  o'clock.  When  I  told  the  nurse  of  the  telegram,  she  instantly
said  the  three  knocks  I  had  heard  were  a  death  warning.

"On  the  20th  March,  1879,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  mother,  saying
that  my  brother,  Rupert  Markham,  had  been  ill,  but  was  now  going  on  quite
well  again,  and  that  I  need  not  be  the  least  anxious.  On  the  morning  of
the  21st,  about  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  distinctly  heard  the  same
three  knocks  ;  my  husband  also  heard  them.  At  10  o'clock  that  morning
I  received  a  telegram  desiring  me  to  come  immediately,  as  my  brother
was  dying.  When  I  arrived  at  Melton  Mowbray,  9.30  p.m.,  my  brother
was  just  dead.

"About  the  2nd  of  May,  1879,  at  6  o'clock  in  the  morning,  my  hus-
band and  I  both  heard  the  same  three  knocks,  and  were  so  much  impressed
at  this  occurring  for  a  third  time  that  he  instantly  made  a  note  of  it.
At  that  time  my  eldest  brother  had  just  started  for  Zululand,  so  we  much
feared  something  might  have  happened  to  him.  For  three  weeks  after  this
we  heard  nothing,  then  a  letter  came  saying  my  brother  was  dangerously
ill,  but  shortly  afterwards  we  heard  by  telegram  that  he  was  perfectly
well  again.  I  tell  you  this  third  instance  to  show  you  that  there  cannot
possibly  be  anything  but  a  mere  chance  in  these  accidents  being  repeated."

[The  coincidence  in  the  first  case  was  probably  closer  than  is  repre-
sented ;  for  all  the  newspaper  accounts  give  the  date  of  Sir  F.  Grant's  death
as  Saturday,  October  5th  ;  the  Times  and  the  Leicester  Chronicle  say  "Satur-
day morning"  ;  and  the  Daily  Telegraph  says,  "  early  on  Saturday  morning."

The  Leicester  Chronicle  confirms  the  date  of  death  in  the  second  case.]
VOL.    II.  K


130  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES  [chap.

Mrs.  Samuda  does  not  say  whether  she  herself  regards  the
knocks  as  hallucinations,  or  as  objectively  caused.  If  they  were  the
former,  then  the  question  of  "  belief  in  these  coincidences  "—i.e.,  the
question  whether  they  are  due  to  accident,  or  to  telepathy — must  (as
we  have  seen)  be  judged  by  the  application  of  the  doctrine  of
chances  on  a  basis  of  very  wide  statistics ;  and  certainly  will  not  be
decided  in  favour  of  accident  by  the  fact  that  the  percipient  has
observed  a  coincidence  in  two  cases  and  not  in  a  third.  But  the  coin-
cidence with  the  death  was  not  very  close  in  the  second  case,  and
possibly  not  in  the  first ;  and  real  sounds  due  to  some  defect  in
the  house  or  furniture  may  have  happened  to  be  a  little  louder
than  usual  on  these  occasions,  and  perhaps  afterwards  became
exaggerated  in  memory.  The  fact  that  the  experience  was  in  each
case  shared  by  a  second  person  is  strongly  (though,  as  we  shall  see
later,  not  decisively)  in  favour  of  this  view.

The  following  case  has  more  weight.  The  account  was  written
down  on  June  2nd,  1876,  by  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  from  the
dictation  of  the  percipient,  the  late  Miss  Vaughan,  of  6,  Chester
Place,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.

(290)  "  In  the  autumn  of  1856,  Mrs.  D.  was  lying  dangerously  ill,
near  Windsor ;  when  I  received  a  letter  on  Friday  from  her  daughter,  who
had  been  invited  to  the  marriage  of  Mr.  Cox  with  Miss  Alderson,  telling
me  that  as  their  mother  was  rather  better,  they  thought  they  might  come
up  to  the  marriage  on  Tuesday  if  I  could  give  them  a  bed.  On
the  Saturday  night  I  went  to  bed  at  my  usual  hour,  12  o'clock,  but
did  not  go  to  sleep  for  some  time ;  when  I  was  suddenly  startled  by
three  sets  of  three  extraordinary  loud  knocks,  like  strokes  of  a  hammer  on
an  empty  box,  at  my  bed  head,  followed  immediately  by  a  long  loud
cry  of  a  woman's  voice,  which  seemed  to  die  away  in  the  distance.  I
called  my  maid  instantly,  and  begged  her  to  look  out  of  the  window,  and
see  if  there  was  anyone  in  the  street.  She  opened  the  shutters,  threw
up  the  window,  and  said  there  was  no  one ;  that  I  must  have  been
dreaming ;  it  was  quite  late.  I  said  '  No,  it  had  not  yet  struck  1,'  and
sent  her  to  look  at  the  clock  ;  she  returned,  and  said  it  wanted  10  minutes
to  1.  I  said  the  noise  must  have  come  from  the  room  adjoining  mine,
in  the  next  house.  She  said  the  house  was  empty ;  but  this  I  could  not
believe,  so  I  sent  her  early  on  Sunday  morning  to  see.  She  came  back,
saying  the  windows  were  all  shut,  and  she  had  knocked  for  some  time  in
vain.  On  the  following  morning  I  sent  her  to  the  person  in  Albany  Street
who  had  charge  of  the  house,  thinking  somebody  must  have  slept  in  it  on
Saturday  night.  The  person  in  charge  said  this  could  not  be  the  case,
as  she  had  the  key  ;  but  she  went  to  look,  and  came  to  tell  me  that  no  one
could  possibly  have  got  in.

"  In  a  very  few  hours  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  one  of  the
Miss    D.'s,    to    tell   me  that   their   mother    became    suddenly   worse    on


XV.]  OCCURRING  TO  A  SINGLE  PERCIPIENT.  131

Saturday  morning,  and  had  died  in  the  course  of  the  night.  Some  time
subsequently,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  nurse,  and  she  told  me
that  Mrs.  D.  had  exactly  died  at  a  quarter  before  1  on  Sunday  morning,
uttering  a  loud  cry  at  the  moment  of  her  death.  She  had  just  been  giving
her  a  cup  of  beef  tea,  and  had  replaced  it  on  the  mantelpiece,  where  there
was  a  clock,  on  which  she  observed  the  hour.  I  had  thought  that  the
whole  must  have  proceeded  from  the  next  house.

"  Mrs.  D.  had  been  a  very  intimate  friend  of  mine  ;  I  know  I  was
much  in  her  thoughts,  and  a  few  days  before  her  death  she  had  said  she
hoped,  now  she  was  a  little  better,  to  be  well  enough  to  see  me."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  D.'s  death  took  place
on  a  Sunday — October  26th,  1856.

In  November,  1876,  Mr.  H.  Wedgwood  read  the  account  of  Miss
Vaughan's  vision  to  Miss  E.  T.,  a  common  friend  of  Miss  Vaughan's  and
Mrs.  D.'s,  whom  Mr.  Wedgwood  has  known  all  his  life.  She  was  staying
with  her  sister  at  Hastings  at  the  time  of  the  incident,  and  received  a
letter  from  Miss  Yaughan  telling  them  of  Mrs.  D.'s  death,  and  of  her
having  come  to  her.  Miss  T.  was  greatly  interested  in  this  intelligence,
and  hurried  up  to  London,  where  she  heard  from  Miss  Yaughan  the  story
exactly  as  narrated  by  Mr.  Wedgwood,  down  to  the  news  of  Mrs.  D.'s
death ;  but  Miss  Yaughan  had  not  then  seen  the  nurse,  and  was  con-
sequently ignorant  of  the  precise  agreement  in  time  between  the  fact  of
her  outcry  at  the  moment  of  death  and  Miss  Yaughan's  hearing  the
scream.  Two  or  three  months  after,  Miss  Yaughan  told  her  what  she  had
heard  from  the  nurse.

Miss  T.  has  seen  this  statement,  and  appends  the  words  :  "  Quite
correct.— E.  H.  T.     November  5th,  1883."

Mrs.  Yaughan,  of  the  Deanery,  LlandafF,  writing  on  June  10,  1886,
sends  us  an  account  of  the  occurrence  which  differs  from  Miss  Yaughan's
only  in  one  or  two  trifling  details,  and  adds  :  "  Miss  Yaughan  often  spoke
of  it  to  us."

The  fact  of  the  scream,  though  it  seems  to  have  corresponded  with
an  actual  cry  of  the  supposed  agent,  could  not  be  pressed ;  as  such
sounds  are  not  uncommon  in  London  streets  at  night,  and  the  loud-
ness and  apparent  closeness  of  the  cry  may  have  been  exaggerated.
But  the  knocks  in  this  case,  if  correctly  described,  seem  less  easy
to  explain,  except  as  hallucination ;  and  the  hallucination  (if  the
present  class  be  admitted  at  all)  would  have  a  'prima  facie  claim  to
he  considered  telepathic — the  tie  of  affection  between  the  two  parties
being  a  strong  one,  and  the  coincidence  extremely  close.  Technically,
the  incident  ought  perhaps  to  be  classed  among  "  borderland  "  cases  ;
hut  this  particular  form  of  hallucination  does  not  seem  to  be  specially
connected  with  the  moments  that  immediately  precede  or  follow
sleep ;  and  the  percipient  must  apparently  have  been  wide  awake
before  the  sounds  ceased.  A  few  more  examples  of  the  non-vocal  sort
will  be  found  among  the  "  collective  "  cases  in  Chap.  XYIII. ;  others,

VOL.    II.  K    2


132  FURTHER  AUDITORY  CASES.  [chap.

in  view  of  the  evidential  weakness  of  the  class,  are  relegated  to  the

Supplement.

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  of  a  phantasm  which,

though  located  in  the  ear,  perhaps  rather  concerned  the  sense  of  touch

than  that  of  hearing.     If  it  was  telepathic,  it  is  a  remarkably  clear

instance  of  the  direct  reproduction  of  the  agent's  sensation  in  the

percipient's  consciousness.^     The  account  is  from  Mrs.  Arthur  Severn,

of  Brantwood,  Coniston.

"1883.

(291)  "Years  ago,  in  Scotland,  at  my  own  home,  I  was  in  the  drawing-
room  with  my  mother  and  aunt ;  the  latter  was  busy  writing  at  a  table  in  the
middle  of  the  room,  facing  my  mother,  who  was  on  a  sofa  sewing,  while  I
was  quietly  amusing  myself  in  my  own  way.  It  was  all  very  quiet,  when
suddenly  I  was  much  startled  by  my  mother,  who  gave  a  scream  and  threw
herself  back  on  the  sofa,  putting  both  her  hands  up  to  cover  her  ears,
saying,  '  Oh,  there's  water  rushing  fast  into  my  ears,  and  I'm  sure  either  my
brother,  or  son  James,  must  be  drowning,  or  both  of  them  ! '  My  aunt
Margaret  jumped  up,  and  was  rather  angry  and  said,  '  Catherine,  I  never
heard  such  nonsense,  how  can  you  be  so  foolish  ! '  My  aunt  seemed  vexed
and  ashamed  it  should  happen  before  me,  for  I  was  very  frightened,  and
remember  it  all  so  vividly.  My  poor  mother  cried,  saying,  '  Oh,  I  know
it's  true,  or  why  would  this  water  keep  rushing  into  my  ears  ? '

"  Alas  !  it  proved  too  true,  for  very  soon  I  could  see  people  running  very
hard  towards  the  bathing-place,  and  I  remember  the  shudder  that  then  ran
through  me,  and  the  hope  that  my  mother  would  not  look  out  of  any  of
the  windows.  Soon  my  uncle  came  hurrying  to  the  house  very  white  and
distressed ;  all  he  could  say  was,  '  hot  blankets  ! '  but  it  was  too  late —
poor  James  was  drowned.  He  was  21  years  old,  and  my  mother's  eldest
child.     Both  the  other  witnesses  of  this  scene  are  dead.

"  Joan  R.  Severn."

[The  narrator's  brother,  James  Agnew,  was  drowned  while  bathing  in
the  river  Bladnoch.  The  date,  as  we  find  from  a  copy  of  an  inscription  in
Wigtown  churchyard,  was  June  8,  1853.]

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  narrator  here  was  herself  the  percipient
in  the  still  more  remarkable  case  of  apparently  direct  transference,
quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  188.^

1  Other  drowning  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  if  correctly  described,  afford  an  equally-
clear  illustration  of  the  percipient's  independent  investiture  of  the  idea  transferred,  the
impression  being  of  the  dripping  of  water — a  sound  which  would  be  neither  in  the  agent's
ears  nor  in  his  thoughts.  See,  e.g.,  cases  513  (1)  and  528  ;  and  compare  the  account  of  the
Breton  tradition  in  the  Dictionnaire  Historique  et  Geographique  de  la  Province  de  Bretagne,
by  J.  B.  Ogde  (Edition  of  1845),  Vol.  i.,  p.  374.

2  Other  possible  instances  of  hereditary  or  family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influence
are  cases  14  and  15  ;  the  cases  mentioned  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  424,  note  ;  cases  310,  497,  and
617  ;  cases  413,  111,  161,  464 ;  cases  232  and  561 ;  cases  450  and  462 ;  cases  421  and  503 ;
cases  422  and  .586;  cases  496  and  532;  case  562;  and  several  of  the  collective  cases  in
Chap,  xviii.,  §§  2  and  6,  and  in  the  Supplement,  Chap.  ix.  I  may  add  that  my  collection
of  casual  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane  includes  4  cases  where  a  parent  and  child
have  been  affected  at  different  times.  In  one  of  these  cases  (received  from  Mrs.  Freese,
of  Granite  Lodge,  Chislehurst)  the  son's  vision  nearly  reproduced  the  one  w-hichhis  mother
had  experienced  years  before.  Another  instance  of  hereditary  susceptibility  to  halluci-
nations is  mentioned  by  Abercrombie  ;  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  Ixxxii.


XVI.]


CHAPTER  XVI.

TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE
PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.

§  1.  In  the  chapter  on  "  borderland  "  cases,  and  again  in  Chapter  XII.,
when  illustrating  the  development  of  hallucinations  by  the  per-
cipient's own  imagination  under  the  stimulus  of  a  telepathic  impulse,
I  quoted  several  instances  in  which  two  of  his  senses  played  a  part —
as  where  an  impression  of  sound  preceded  and  led  up  to  the  visible
phantasm.  And  I  have  mentioned  (pp.  23-4)  that  the  proportion
of  the  telepathic  cases  in  which  the  experience  assumes  such  a
complex  or  multiple  form  seems  decidedly  larger  than  obtains  among
the  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  The  present  chapter
will  contain  those  remaining  telepathic  instances  which  belong  to
seasons  of  complete  waking  consciousness.  In  some  of  these,  as  it
happens,  the  sense  of  touch  is  involved;  and  I  may  take  the  oppor-
tunity of  saying  a  necessary  word  or  two  on  affections  of  that  sense.
Among  purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  those  of  touch
seem  to  be  rarer  even  than  those  of  sight,  and  much  rarer  than
those  of  hearing.  My  large  collection  includes  only  68  examples  (a
few  being  cases  of  repeated  experiences),  of  which  43  were  of  touch
only,  8  were  associated  with  a  visual  hallucination,  13  with  an  auditory
hallucination,  while  4  concerned  all  three  senses.  The  canvassed  group
of  5705  persons  (pp.  7,  8)  yielded  only  23  distinct  experiences  of
the  sort ;  and  of  these  23,  one  occurred  to  a  person  who  was  out  of
health,  one  in  association  with  a  visual,  and  two  in  association  with
an  auditory  hallucination.  Moreover,  in  many  of  the  cases  where  touch
alone  has  been  concerned,  it  is  easy  to  suppose  that  the  sensation
was  caused  by  an  involuntary  muscular  twitch — an  instance  is  even
on  record  where  a  hallucination  of  sight  and  sound  took  its  origin  in  an
objective  sensation,  caused  by  the  momentary  cramp  of  a  muscle^ —

1  Paterson's  paper  in  the  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal  for  Jan.,  1843.


134  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

so  that  the  number  of  genuine  tactile  hallucinations  would  be  even
smaller  than  appears.  It  will  not  surprise  us,  then,  to  find  that
telepathic  affections  of  this  sense — or  what  might  reasonably  be
adduced  as  such — are  also  rare.  A  couple  of  cases  have  been  already
quoted ;  in  neither  of  which  did  the  touch  suggest  any  human  con-
tact, while  each  included  a  peculiarity  beyond  the  mere  touch — the
first  that  of  pain  (Vol.  I.,  p.  188),  and  the  second  probably  that  of
sound  (p.  132,  above).  We  have,  however,  a  few  cases  where  the
mere  touch  is  alleged  to  have  been  more  or  less  distinctive,^  of  which
I  will  quote  here  one  specimen.  Mr.  J.  C.  Harris,  of  Wellington,
New   Zealand,  proprietor  of   the   New    Zealand    Times  and   New

Zealand  Mail,  writes  :—

"July  6th,  1885.

(292)  "My  wife  had  an  uncle,  a  sea  captain,  who  was  very  fond
of  her  as  a  child,  and  often,  when  at  home  at  London,  used  to  take
her  on  his  knee  and  stroke  down  her  long  thick  hair.  She,  with
her  parents,  went  from  London  to  Sydney,  and  her  uncle  pursued  his
avocation  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Some  3  or  4  years  afterwards,  she
was  upstairs,  dressing  for  dinner,  and  had  her  hair  loose  upon  her
shoulders ;  suddenly  she  felt  a  hand  placed  on  the  top  of  her  head,  and
brought  down  smartly  along  her  hair  on  to  her  shoulders.  Startled,  she
turned  round  and  exclaimed,  '  Why,  mother,  how  could  you  frighten  me
so  1 '  for  she  assumed  her  mother  had  played  a  little  joke  on  her.  There
was  no  one  there  however.  When  she  related  the  circumstance  at  the
dinner-table,  a  superstitious^  friend  present  advised  them  to  make  a  note
of  the  day  and  date.  This  was  done.  In  due  course  came  the  news  of
the  death  of  her  uncle,  William,  on  that  day — allowing  for  difference  of
longitude  at  about  the  time  she  felt  the  hand  on  her  head.

"J.  Chantrey  Harris."

The  following  is  Mrs.  Harris's  own  account  of  her  experience  : —

"  Hill  Street,  Wellington,  New  Zealand.

"December  5th,  1885.

"  I  regret  extremely  that,  anxious  as  we  are  to  assist,  in  however
small  a  degree,  the  cause  of  science,  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  give  con-
firmatory evidence  of  my  own  little  experience.  Of  the  friends  who  were
associated  with  me  at  the  time,  but  one  is  living,  and  she  lives  away  in
Queensland.  The  notes  were  not  considered  of  sufficient  consequence  to
be  kept ;  and  neither  mourning  card  nor  obituary  notice  are  available.
Consequently  my  account  cannot,  as  I  quite  understand,  have  much  value,
uncorroborated  as  it  is.  However,  as  a  matter  of  courtesy,  I  will  make
my  statement,  feeling  well  assured  that  you  will  accept  it  as  authentic.

1  In  11  out  of  the  43  cases  just  mentioned,  the  touch  is  alleged  to  have  been  recognised,
and  in  7  of  these  the  person  whose  presence  was  suggested  was  dead.  There  is  no  difficulty
in  regarding  such  cases  as  "  after-images  "  ;  but  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  512,  note.

2  We  are  bound  to  accept  Mr.  Harris's  description  ;  and  can  only  wish  that  supersti-
tion oftener  took  the  form,  as  here,  of  prompting  the  only  scientific  course.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.     135

"  The  occurrence  happened  so  long  ago  that,  while  the  incident  is  fresh
enough  to  my  memory,  the  precise  date  (never  carefully  noted)  has  ^..4^1
escaped  it.  The  year  was  1860,  the  month  April.  I  was  a  young  girl,
standing  before  the  dressing-table  in  my  bedroom,  arranging  some  detail
of  my  toilet.  It  was  about  6  p.m.,  at  that  time  of  year,  twilight,  when
suddenly  a  hand  was  placed  upon  my  head,  passed  down  my  hair,  and  fell
heavily  on  my  left  shoulder.  Startled  at  the  unexpected  touch,  I  turned
quickly  to  remonstrate  with  my  mother  for  entering  so  quietly,  when,  to
my  surprise,  I  found  no  one  there.  On  the  instant  my  mind  flew  to
England,  whither  my  father  had  gone  the  preceding  January,  and  I
thought  '  something  has  happened,'  though  what  I  could  not  define.

"  I  went  downstairs,  and  related  my  fright  to  the  family.  In  the
course  of  the  evening,  Mrs.  and  Miss  W.  came  in,  and,  on  commenting
upon  my  paleness,  were  told  about  the  matter.  Mrs.  W.  immediately  said,
'  Put  down  the  date,  and  see  what  comes  of  it.'  This  was  done  ;  and  the
incident  soon  ceased  to  trouble  us,  though  the  family  awaited  with  some
anxiety  my  father's  first  letter  from  home.  It  came  in  due  time,  and  told
how,  when  he  reached  England,  he  found  his  brother  Henry  seriously  ill —
dying,  in  fact.  As  a  child  I  had  been  his  little  favourite,  and  in  death
my  name  was  the  last  word  he  uttered.

"  Upon  comparing  dates,  and  allowing  for  difierence  in  longitude,  we
found  that  the  time  of  my  uncle's  death  coincided  exactly  with  that  of
my  strange  experience.  I  recollected,  too,  that  it  was  a  familiar  habit
of  my  uncle  to  stroke  my  hair  with  a  caressing  touch.  My  mother,  who
resides  with  me,  is  the  only  person  who  can  confirm  the  story,  and  she
appends  her  signature  to  this,  in  confirmation  thereof.

"Elizabeth  Harris."
(Attesting  signature)     "  Elizabeth  Bradford."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  ever  had  a  hallucination  of
the  senses  on  any  other  occasion,  Mrs.  Harris  replies  : —  '

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  in  my  life."

We  find  from  the  Thame  Gazette  and  the  Oxford  Chronicle  that  Mrs.
Harris's  uncle  died  on  May  12,  (not  in  April,)  1860,  aged  51.

[The  coincidence  here  seems  to  have  been  very  close,  if  we  can  trust
Mrs.  Harris's  memory  that  a  written  note  of  the  date  of  her  impression
was  compared  with  the  date  of  the  death.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  she
did  not  at  the  time  associate  her  experience  with  her  uncle's  former  mode
of  touching  her.]

But  the  more  conclusive  cases  of  recognition  are  naturally  those

where  a  second  sense  has  been  concerned  ;  the  element  of  touch  being

then  a  natural  enough  feature  in   a  highly  developed  phantasmal

impression.     In  the  following  case  the  second  sense  involved  is  that

of  hearing.     The  account  is  in  the  words  of  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Shute  Haye,

Walditch,  Bridport ;  it  is  attested,  as  will  be  seen,  by  the  percipient.

(293)  "A  well-known  inhabitant  of  Walditch,  a  little  village  near
Bridport,  Dorset,  died  suddenly  last  May,  1881.  We  were  all  very  sorry,  and
felt  much  for  those  she  had  left.  She  was  an  honest,  industrious  woman,
a  good,  affectionate  wife  and  mother.     She  had  been  somewhat  ailing  for


^.c^    «->'«'-


136  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

some  time  past,  but  there  was  no  special  cause  for  alarm,  and  my  daughter
saw  her  engaged  (she  was  a  washerwoman)  in  her  usual  occupation  the
day  before  her  death.  From  her  husband  I  heard  the  following  narrative
of  facts,  which  he  received  from  his  son,  when  the  latter  came  down  to  his
mother's  funeral : —

"  '  My  wife  latterly  was  uneasy  about  one  of  her  sons,  Joseph  G-undry,
who  is  a  pointsman  on  the  Midland  Railway,  and  had  risen  to  an  office  of
much  responsibility.  Not  hearing  from  him  for  some  time,  she  feared  that
he  had  fallen  ill,  and  did  not  like  to  write  till  there  should  be  no  longer
any  cause  for  alarm.  There  was,  in  fact,  such  a  press  of  business  that  he
could  not  find  time  to  write.  On  the  night,  or  rather  morning,  of  his
mother's  death,  he  had  the  night-duties,  and,  there  being  no  train  about,
he  sat  down  for  a  short  time,  leaning  his  arms  on  a  table.  He  was  not
asleep  and  had  hardly  settled  himself,  when  a  hand  was  placed  on  his
shoulder,  and  a  voice  said  distinctly  :  '  Joe,  your  mother  wants  you.'  As
far  as  we  can  ascertain  this  was  about  the  time  that  his  mother  passed
away.  He  did  not  recognise  the  voice,  and  saw  no  one.  As  there  is  no
post  from  Bridport  that  could  reach  him  under  two  days,  his  father  tele-
graphed. When  the  telegram  was  brought  to  him,  he  said,  "  I  know  what
it  is,  my  mother  is  dead."  '  "

The  percipient  writes  : —

"  Hay  Street,  Sawley,  Derby.

"February  16th,  1883.
"  I  have  perused  the  attached,  [i.e.,  the  above  account]  and  find  it  to  be
substantially  correct.     I  attest  the  accuracy  of  the  report  as  printed,  and
I  am  prepared  to  bear  it  out.  "  Joseph  Gundry."

Mr.  Gundry  further  informs  us  that  he  has  never  on  any  other  occasion
experienced  any  sort  of  hallucination  of  the  senses.

In  the  next  example  the  sense  of  sound  is  again  concerned.  The
case  might  be  added  to  those  quoted  in  Chapter  XII.,  §  3,  of  the
gradual  development  of  telepathic  hallucinations,  leading  finally  to
recognition.  The  narrator  is  the  Eev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  late  Vicar
of  Maker,  Devonport,  already  so  often  mentioned.

(294)  "In  July,  1867, 1  was  living  at  Bournemouth,  and  was  temporarily
acting  as  chaplain  to  the  Sanatorium  there.  A  very  sad  case  came  in
unexpectedly  of  a  young  man  in  the  last  stage  of  consumption.  He  was
so  ill  that  we  could  not  take  him  into  the  institution,  but  accommodated
him  in  lodgings.  I  visited  him  for  some  time,  as  his  clergyman.  Then  the
chaplain  returned  home ;  and  I  myself  left  for  my  holiday.  I  did  not
expect  to  see  the  young  man  again  ;  but,  to  my  surprise,  on  my  return
home,  on  September  21st,  I  found  he  was  still  alive  ;  and  the  doctors  said
he  might  yet  live  some  weeks.

"  On  Sunday,  September  29th,  I  had  been  reading  prayers  at  the
chapel  in  the  Sanatorium,  and  the  chaplain  preached  at  the  evening
service.  It  was  near  the  end  of  the  sermon,  and  about  8  o'clock,  not
later,  but  I  cannot  tell  to  five  minutes.  I  suddenly  felt  a  firm,  but
gentle  touch  on  my  right  shoulder.     So  impressed  was  I  with  the  instinct


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.     137

that  this  indicated  the  presence  of  some  unseen  being,  that  I  at  once
asked  '  Is  it  S.? '  (the  Christian  name  of  a  pupil  of  mine,  who  died  in
1860).  The  answer  came  back  at  once,  in  the  clear  tones  of  the  inner
voice,^  '  No,  it's  William.'     I  have  no  recollection  of  anything  more.

"  After  service  was  over,  I  inquired  about  my  young  friend,  and  was
told  that  the  matron  had  been  sent  for  to  him,  as  he  was  suddenly  taken
much  worse.  Next  morning  I  heard  that  he  died  about  8.10.  It  was,
therefore,  about  10  minutes  before  his  actual  death  that  I  experienced  the
communication.  I  may  add  that  I  had  not  been  thinking  specially
about  him,  that  I  had  not  visited  him,  or  received  any  message  from
him  since  my  return,  and  that  I  had  no  reason  whatever  to  expect  his
speedy  decease.

"P.  H.  Newnham."

An  obituary  notice  in  the  Lyniington  and  Isle  of  Wight  Chronicle
confirms  the  fact  that  William  Bryer  died  on  September  29,  1867.

Mrs.  Newnham  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  I  perfectly  remember  my  husband  telling  me,  on  his  return  home
from  the  service  at  the  Sanatorium  Chapel,  of  the  touch  and  voice,  and
saying  he  felt  sure  William  was  dead.  He  did  not  hear  of  his  death  till
the  next  morning.  '' M.  Newnham."

[Mr.  Newnham  seems  to  have  a  slight  predisposition  to  subjective  iUi*^  ^
auditory  phantasms,  but  has  never  experienced  a  similar  vivid  hallucina-  ,,^(.£1:^
tion  of  touch.]  .i-«*it.*^*6

This  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  subjective  experience  due  to  W**^  U-
anxiety.  Mr.  Newnham  had,  no  doubt,  a  certain  emotional  interest  cv^-Vu
in  the  young  man  who  died,  and  was  aware  of  his  critical  condition.  ^
But  if  his  hallucination  had  been  a  purely  subjective  one,  caused  by
the  latent  emotional  idea,  one  would  certainly  have  expected  that  it
would  have  taken  a  form  suggestive  of  William  ;  whereas  Mr.
Newnham  actually  connected  it  at  first  with  a  different  person.  So
that  the  non-recognition  in  this  case  tends  to  increase  the  probability
of  the  telepathic  explanation  (c/.  case  282  above).

In  the  next  case,  the  second  sense  involved  is  that  of  sight.  The
narrator  is  Mrs.  Randolph  Lichfield,  of  Cross  Deeps,  Twickenham.
Her  husband  was  precluded  from  attesting  the  account  in  writing,  by
a  painful  affection  of  the  hand.

"  1883.

(295)  "  I  was  sitting  in  my  room  one  night,  before  I  was  married,  close
before  a  toilet-table,  on  which  the  book  I  was  reading  rested ;  the  table
fitted  into  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  the  wide  glass  on  it  reached  nearly
to  the  ceiling,  so  that  any  one  in  the  room  could  be  seen  full  length.  The
book  I  was  reading  was  not  at  all  calculated  to  affect  my  nerves,  or  excite

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  480-1.


« t-*


138  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING  [chap.

my  imagination  in  any  way.  I  was  perfectly  well,  in  good  spirits,  and
nothing  had  occurred  since  receiving  my  morning's  letters,  to  remind  me  of
the  person  concerned  in  the  strange  experience  you  have  asked  me  to  relate.

"My  eyes  were  fixed  on  my  book,  when  suddenly  \feU}  but  did  not
see,  some  one  come  into  my  room.  I  looked  straight  before  me  into  the
glass  to  see  who  it  was,  but  no  one  was  visible.  I  naturally  thought  that
my  visitor,  seeing  me  deep  in  my  book,  had  gone  out  again,  when,  to  my
astonishment,  I  felt  a  kiss  on  my  forehead — a  lingering,  loving  pressure.
I  looked  up,  without  the  least  sensation  of  fear,  and  saw  my  lover  standing
behind  my  chair,  stooping  as  if  to  kiss  me  again.  His  face  was  very  white
and  inexpressibly  sad.  As  I  rose  from  my  chair  in  great  surprise,  before
I  could  speak,  he  had  gone,  how  I  do  not  know ;  I  only  know  that,  one
moment  I  saw  him,  saw  distinctly  every  feature  of  his  face,  saw  the  tall
figure  and  broad  shoulders  as  clearly  as  I  ever  saw  them  in  my  life,  and
the  next  moment  there  was  no  sign  of  him.  For  the  first  minute  I  felt
nothing  but  surprise ;  perplexity  expresses  better  what  I  mean ;  fear,  or
the  idea  I  had  seen  a  spirit,  never  entered  my  mind  ;  the  next  sensation
was  that  there  must  be  something  the  matter  with  my  brain,  and  a  feeling
of  thankfulness  that  it  had  not  conjured  up  some  terrific  vision,  instead  of
an  agreeable  one.  I  remember  praying  that  I  might  not  fancy  anything
that  would  frighten  me.

"  The  next  day,  to  my  great  surprise,  there  was  not  my  usual  morning's
letter  from  him  ;  four  posts  came  in  and  no  letter  ;  all  the  next  day,  no
letter.  I  naturally  objected  to  the  novel  feeling  of  finding  myself
neglected,  but  should  not  have  thought  of  letting  theneglector  know  it,  so
would  not  write  to  inquire  the  cause  of  his  silence.  On  the  third  night
— still  no  letter  all  day — as  T  was  going  upstairs  to  bed,  thinking  of
something  totally  unconnected  with  R.,  as  I  put  my  foot  on  the  top  stair,
I  felt,  suddenly,  but  most  intensely,  that  he  was  in  my  room,  and  that  I
could  see  him  just  as  I  had  done  before.  For  the  first  time  came  the  fear
that  something  had  happened  to  him.  I  knew  well  how  intense  his  desire
to  see  me  would  be,  and  thought — '  Could  it  have  been  really  that  I  saw
him  the  other  night  ? '

"  I  went  straight  to  my  room,  convinced  I  should  see  him  ;  there  was
nothing  to  be  seen.  I  sat  down  and  waited,  and  the  sensation  that  he  was
there,  and  striving  to  speak  to  me,  and  to  make  me  see  him,  became
stronger  and  stronger.  I  waited  till  I  became  so  sleepy  I  could  not  sit
up  any  longer,  and  went  to  bed  and  to  sleep.  By  the  first  morning's  post
I  wrote  and  told  him  I  feared  he  must  be  ill,  as  I  had  not  had  a  letter  for
three  days.  I  said  not  one  word  of  what  I  have  told  you  in  this.  Two
mornings  after,  I  had  a  few  lines,  shockingly  written,  to  tell  me  he  had
hurt  his  hand  out  hunting,  and  could  not  hold  a  pen  till  that  day,  but  was
in  '  no  danger.'  It  was  not  till  a  few  days  after,  when  he  could  write
distinctly,  that  I  knew  the  whole  truth.

"  This  is  it.  He  had  been  riding  an  Irish  hunter,  a  splendid  horse
across  country,  but  a  most  vicious  creature.  This  horse  was  so  used  to
getting  rid  of  any  one  he  found  on  his  back,  if  he  objected  to  their
presence  there,  and  had  such  a  variety   of  methods  of  doing  so,  throwing

1  If,  as  is  probable,  this  feeling  was  due  to  a  faint  auditory  hallucination  (Vol.  i.,  p.
528,  second  note),  the  case  would  be  one  of  the  rare  instances  of  hallucination  of  three
senses.    Compare  Nos.  185,  306,  313,  504,  .513  (1),  569.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     139

grooms,  huntsmen,  any  one,  when  the  fit  seized  him,  and  when  he  found
no  amount  of  rearing,  kicking,  no  bolting,  and  stopping  suddenly,  no
'buck-jumping '  would  unseat  najjiance,  and  that  he  had  at  last  found  his
master,  he  became  desperate.  He  stood  still  for  an  instant,  then  rushed
across  the  road  backwards,  reared  perfectly  straight,  and  pressed  his  rider's
back  against  the  wall.  The  crush  and  pain  were  so  intense,  R.  thought  it
must  be  death,  and  remembered  saying,  as  he  lost  consciousness,  '  May,
my  little  May  !  don't  let  me  die  without  seeing  her  again.'  It  was  that
night  he  had  bent  over  and  kissed  me.  He  turned  out  not  to  be  really
injured,  though,  of  course,  in  frightful  pain,  and  his  hand  could  not
possibly  hold  a  pen.  The  night  I  felt  so  suddenly  and  so  certainly  that  I
should  see  him,  and,  when  I  did  not,  felt  so  thoroughly  he  was  there  and
trying  to  let  me  know  it,  he  was  at  the  time  worrying  himself  about  not
writing  to  me,  and  wishing  intensely  that  I  might  feel  there  was  some
reason  for  his  silence.

"  I  told  my  mother  [since  deceased]  all,  just  as  I  have  told  you,  and
she  advised  me  to  say  nothing  about  his  supposed  visit  to  me  till  he  was
quite  strong  and  well  again,  and  I  could  do  so  personally.  When  he  came
to  see  me  afterwards,  I  made  him  tell  the  whole  of  his  account  before  I
mentioned  one  word  of  my  strange  experience  of  those  two  nights.

"  1  have  just  read  this  over  to  him,  and  he  vouches  for  my  having
exactly  described  his  share  of  this  strange  experience."

§  2.  The  remaining  cases  involve  the  senses  of  sight  and  hearing.

The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Haydn,  LL.D.,  Rector  of

Nantenan,  Co.  Limerick,  and  was  first  communicated  by  him  to  the

Oxford  Phasmatological  Society.

"  Nantenan  Glebe,  Askeaton.

"June  18th,  1883.

(296)  "  I  beg  to  submit  to  your  Society  the  following  brief  narrative,
extracted  from  my  diary.

"  Nine  miles  from  my  residence,  in  the  town  of  Adare,  Co.  Limerick,
lived  a  gentleman,  named  Phillips,  and  his  wife.  They  were  on  terms  of
unusually  close  and  affectionate  intercourse  with  myself  and  my  family;
they  frequently  driving  over  to  spend  the  day  here,  and  we  as  frequently
returning  the  visit.

"On  Thursday,  October  16th,  1879,  the  accouchement  of  Mrs.  Phillips
took  place ;  it  had  been  anticipated  with  some  anxiety  by  her  medical
attendant ;  but  we  were  gratified  to  learn  by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Phillips
that  the  event  had  passed  without  evil  consequences,  and  that  his  wife
was  rapidly  recovering.

"Matters  were  in  this  condition  when,  at  10  o'clock  on  the  night  of
the  ensuing  Wednesday,  October  22nd,  I  went  to  bed  as  usual.  I  slept  in
a  little  bedstead  in  an  angle  of  my  study  downstairs  ;  all  the  members  of
the  household  sleeping  in  the  upper  story.  I  had  seen  the  doors  fastened,
and  the  children  and  servants  were  all  in  bed.  As  is  my  custom,  I  was
reading  in  bed,  when,  in  the  midst  of  the  hitherto  unbroken  silence,  I
heard  quick,  light  footsteps,  evidently  those  of  a  female,  proceeding  along
the  hall,  as  if  entering  from  the  front  door,  and  then  traversing  the
passage  that  leads  to  my  study  door.


140  TACTILE  GASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

.  ,.^*r  ««  Arrived  immediately  outside,  they  seemed  to  me  to  resemble  those  of
U^<  a  person  in  the  dark,  vaguely  trying  to  find  where  the  door  was.  Under
the  full  impression  that  my  wife  had  come  downstairs,  I  called  her  name
loudly,  and  asked  what  was  the  matter.  While  I  spoke,  the  noise  ceased,
but  it  recommenced  immediately  ;  and  while  I  stared  at  the  door,  I  both
heard  and  saw  the  handle  turned  halfway  round,  ^  and  then  let  go,  as  if
the  person  entering  had  changed  her  mind.  Surprised  and  alarmed,  I
sprang  up  with  the  lamp  in  my  hand  and  opened  the  door.  All  was
perfectly  still  and  silent  without.  None  of  the  household  had  stirred,  nor
was  any  door  opened  that  had  been  closed.

"  I  returned  to  bed,  and  some  few  minutes  after  I  heard  the  clock
strike  11.  No  further  disturbance  occurred.  :7^A'is  happened,  observe,  on
Wednesday  night,  October  22nd,  at  a  little  before  11  o'clock.

"  On  Friday  morning  I  got  a  letter  from  Canon  O'Brien,  the  rector  of
Adare,  to  say  that  Mrs.  Phillips  had  died  on  Thursday  morning.  I
immediately  set  out  to  Adare  to  see  my  bereaved  friend,  and  found  him
almost  beside  himself  with  grief.  Mrs.  Phillips,  while  in  other  respects
advancing  to  convalescence,  had  suddenly  been  seized  with  scarlatina,
which  had  proved  fatal.  Thinking  it  might  ease  my  poor  friend  to  tell  me
the  sad  details,  I  encouraged  him  to  speak  on  the  subject.  He  complained,
as  one  of  his  bitterest  griefs,  that  for  the  last  night  of  her  life  his  wife  was
delirious,  and  did  not  know  him  or  her  mother,  who  was  present.  '  She
sank  gradually  on  Wednesday,'  he  said,  '  and  lost  her  senses  on  that
night — raving  about  persons  and  places  that  had  been  familiar  to  her,
and  evidently  fancying  herself  actually  present  in  distant  spots.  You  were
one  of  the  first-mentioned  ;  she  imagined  that  she  was  in  your  house
speaking  to  you.  I  quietly  asked  whether  he  happened  to  have  any  idea
as  to  what  hour  this  was  at,  when  he  answered,  '  A  few  minutes  before  11,
as  I  distinctly  remember  looking  at  my  watch.'

"Thus,  at  the  very  time  that  I,  nine  miles  away,  heard  the  un-
accountable noises,  my  dying  friend  was  speaking  and  acting  as  if  she
were  in  my  presence.  It  seems  impossible  not  to  connect  the  circumstances.

"John  Armoue  Haydn."

In  answer  to  our  inquiry  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  any  other
hallucination,  Mr.  Haydn  replies,  "My  senses  have  never  on  any  occasion
played  me  false."     He  further  explains  : —

"The  facts  of  the  narrative  and  its  dates  are  extracted  from  the
diary,  but  not  the  actual  language.  Those  facts  were  written  by  me  in
my  diary  immediately  after  their  occurrence ;  my  custom,  as  a  general
rule,  being  to  record  the  events  of  any  given  day  on  the  following  morning.
The  actual  extracts  I  can  give,  if  required,  and  should  be  happy  to  do  so.
The  story,  as  told  in  the  printed  slip  [i.e.,  the  above  account],  is  accurate  in
all  particulars,  and  most  utterly  reliable.  I  may  add,  and  deeply  regret  to
do  so,  that  poor  Phillips  himself  has  since  died."

The  following  are  the  verbatim  extracts  from  the  diary  : —

"  Thursday,  October  16th,  1879.  Birth  Phillips.  On  the  16th  inst.,  the
wife  of  John  D.  Phillips,  S.  I.  Adare,  Royal  Irish  Constabulary,  of  a  son."

"Thursday,  October  23rd,  1879.  A  most  singular  thing  occurred
last  night.     Just  after  going  to  bed,  while  I  was  reading,  I  heard  steps

1  See  p.  612  note,  and  compare  cases  696  and  698.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENTS  SENSES.    141

outside  my  door  and  in  the  passage,  as  of  a  female  walking  aimlessly.
Thinking  it  might  be  Louey,  I  called,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Imme-
diately after  the  sounds  ceased,  the  clock  struck  11."

"Friday,  October  24th,  1879.  Letter  from  Lucius  O'Brien,  to  say —
and  it  was  appalling  news — that  Mrs.  Phillips  is  dead !  She  died
yesterday  morning,  of  fever  and  scarlatina.  I  at  once  determined  on
going  over  to  Adare,  although  the  roads  were  knee-deep  and  the  day
savagely  showery.  I  can  never  forget  the  agony  of  poor  Phillips.
He  told  me  that  she  was  getting  rapidly  worse  all  day  on  Wednesday,
and  that  at  about  half -past  \Q  on  Wednesday  night  she  became  delirious,
and  raved  of  places  where  she  had  been."

The  Limerick  Daily  Chronicle  confirms  Oct.  23,  1879,  as  the  date  of
death.

The  hallucination  here,  if  telepathic,  well  illustrates  the  manner
in  which  the  impression  received  may  be  developed  by  the  percipient
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40).  The  dying  woman's  thoughts,  in  turning  to  her
friend,  would  naturally  be  of  seeing  him  and  speaking  to  him,  not  of  an
ineffectual  attempt  to  enter  his  room.  But  the  impression  which  the
brain  externalised  seems  to  have  got  no  further  than  the  suggestion
of  a  strange  and  unexpected  visit.

The  next  account  is  from  Miss  Paget,  of  130,  Fulham  Road,  S.W.
It  will  be  seen  that  the  words  which  the  percipient  heard  may  not
unnaturally  be  referred  to  the  sudden  idea  in  the  agent's  mind  that
his  unforeseen  accident  would  probably  get  him  into  a  scrape.

"July  17th,  1885.
(297)  "  The  following  is  the  exact  account  of  the  curious  appearance  to
me  of  my  brother.  It  was  either  in  1874  or  1875.  My  brother  was  third
mate  on  board  one  of  Wigram's  large  ships.  I  knew  he  was  somewhere  on
the  coast  of  Australia,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of  my  having  been  think-
ing of  him  in  any  special  way  ;  though  as  he  was  my  only  brother,  and  we
were  great  friends,  there  was  a  very  close  bond  always  between  us.  My
father  was  living  in  the  country,  and  one  evening  I  went  into  the  kitchen
by  myself,  soon  after  10,  to  get  some  hot  water  from  the  boiler.  There
was  a  large  Duplex  lamp  in  the  kitchen,  so  it  was  quite  light ;  the
servants  had  gone  to  bed,  and  I  was  to  turn  out  the  lamp.  As  I  was
drawing  the  water,  I  looked  up,  and,  to  my  astonishment,  saw  my  brother
coming  towards  me  from  the  outside  door  of  the  kitchen.  I  did  not
see  the  door  open,  as  it  was  in  a  deep  recess,  and  he  was  crossing
the  kitchen.  The  table  was  between  us,  and  he  sat  down  on  the
corner  of  the  table  furthest  away  from  me.  I  noticed  he  was  in
his  sailor  uniform  with  a  monkey  jacket  on,  and  the  wet  was
shining  on  his  jacket  and  cap.i  I  exclaimed,  '  Miles  !  Where  have  you
come  from  1 '  He  answered  in  his  natural  voice,  though  very  quickly,
'  For  Grod's  sake,  don't  say  I'm  here.'  This  was  all  over  in  a  few
seconds  and  as  I  jumped  towards  him   he  was  gone.     I  was   very  much

1  Compare  cases  513,  520,  535,  537.


142  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

frightened,  for  I  had  really  thought  it  was  my  brother  himself ;  and  it
was  only  when  he  vanished  that  I  realised  it  was  only  an  appearance.  I
went  up  to  my  room  and  wrote  down  the  date  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  which
I  put  away  in  my  writing-table,  and  did  not  mention  the  circumstance  to
any  one.

"  About  three  months  afterwards  my  brother  came  home,  and  the
night  of  his  arrival  I  sat  with  him  in  the  kitchen,  while  he  smoked.  I
asked  him  in  a  casual  manner  if  he  had  had  any  adventures,  and  he  said,
'  I  was  nearly  drowned  at  Melbourne.'  He  then  told  me  he  was
ashore  without  leave,  and  on  returning  to  the  ship,  after  midnight,  he
slipped  oflE"  the  gangway  between  the  side  of  the  ship  and  the  dock.  There
was  very  little  space,  and  if  he  had  not  been  hauled  up  at  once,  he  must
have  been  drowned.  He  remembered  thinking  he  was  drowning,  and
then  became  unconscious.  ^  His  absence  without  leave  was  not  found  out,
so  he  escaped  the  punishment  he  expected.  I  then  told  him  of  how  he  had
appeared  to  me,  and  I  asked  him  the  date.  He  was  able  to  fix  it  exactly,
as  the  ship  sailed  from  Melbourne  the  same  morning,  which  was  the
reason  of  his  fear  of  being  punished,  as  all  hands  were  due  to  be  on
board  the  evening  before.  The  date  was  the  same  as  the  date  of  his
appearance  to  me,  but  the  hours  did  not  agree,  as  I  saw  him  soon  after  10
p.m.,  and  his  accident  was  after  midnight.  He  had  no  recollection  of
thinking  specially  of  me  at  the  time,  but  he  was  much  struck  by  the
coincidence,  and  often  referred  to  it.  He  did  not  like  it,  and  often
when  he  went  away  said,  '  Well,  I  hope  I  shan't  go  dodging  about  as  I
did  that  time.'

"  I  was  about  22  at  the  time,  and  he  was  20.  I  was  always  rather
afraid  I  might  see  him  or  others  after  this,  but  I  have  never,  before
or  since,  had  any  hallucination  of  the  sense  of  sight.  My  brother  died
abroad  three  years  ago,  and  I  had  no  warning  then,  nor  do  I  imagine  I
shall  ever  see  anything  again.  I  am  never  on  the  look  out  for  things  of
that  kind,  but  if  I  ever  saw  anything  again  I  would  make  a  note  of  it.
I  destroyed  the  note  I  made  of  the  date  as  soon  as  I  had  verified  it,  not
thinking  it  could  interest  or  concern  anyone  else.  a  g,uTH  Paget  "

[I  received  a  third-hand  account  of  this  incident  two  years  before  the
above  was  written,  and  this  older  account  completely  agreed  with  the
present  more  recent  one ;  which  shows,  at  any  rate,  that  the  inci-
dents stand  out  with  distinctness  in  Miss  Paget's  memory.  In
conversation,  Miss  Paget  told  me  that  at  the  moment  when  she  mistook
the  apparition  for  her  brother  himself,  she  accounted  for  the  wetness,
which  she  so  distinctly  remarked,  by  supposing  that  he  had  got  wet
through  with  rain.  She  is  quite  sure  that  the  coincidence  of  night
was  clearly  made  out,  when  she  and  her  brother  talked  the  matter
over — which  of  course  makes  her  statement  as  to  the  coincidence  of  date
technically  incorrect,  as  the  accident  occurred  after  midnight.  If  longitude
be  allowed  for,  the  impression  must  have  followed  the  accident  by  about
10  hours.]

The  next  case  is  from  Marian  Hughes,  confidential  maid  and
secretary  to  Miss  Julia  Wedgwood,  of  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W.

1  See  p.  26.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     143

"December,  188:^.

(298)  "  In  the  winter  of  1878,  my  sister,  Mrs.  Barnes,  was  much  pressed
to  marry  a  man  named  Benson,  who  was  much  attached  to  her ;  and  not
succeeding  in  his  suit,  he  told  her  if  she  would  not  marry  him,  he  would
take  employment  in  India.     He  obtained  a  situation  to  go  out  to  Madras.

"  One  Saturday  night,  about  9  o'clock,  I,  in  the  following  spring,  went  to
see  my  sister  ;  she  was  much  agitated,  and  told  me  that,  just  before  I  came
in,  she  had  been  on  her  knees  scrubbing  the  floor  of  a  room  on  the  ground
floor  (with  a  window  that  anyone  could  stand  at  and  look  in),  when  she
heard  herself  called  twice,  '  Annie,  Annie,'  and  looking  up  at  the  window,
she  saw  what  looked  to  her  like  the  face  of  the  friend  who  had  wanted  to
marry  her.  She  at  once  got  up  and  rushed  out,  but  finding  no  one  there
became  convinced  she  had  seen  an  apparition  announcing  the  death  of  her
friend.  On  the  following  Monday,  she  sent  to  the  firm  in  the  City  with
which  he  was  connected,  and  was  informed  that  he  had  been  ill,  but  was
better  when  last  heard  of.  Shortly  afterwards,  knowing  Mr.  H.  Wedg-
wood's interest  in  this  kind  of  story,  I  informed  him  of  the  occurrence,
before  it  was  known  how  it  fared  with  my  sister's  friend  in  India.

"  My  sister,  some  weeks  afterwards,  told  me  that  she  had  learnt  from
his  employers  in  the  City  that  he  had  died  on  the  evening  of  the  day  she
had  seen  the  apparition  in  London.  "  Marian  Hughes."

The  Registrar  of  the  Diocese  of  Madras  writes  to  us  that  he  can  find
no  record  of  Benson's  burial ;  and  an  exhaustive  search  in  the  records  of
the  India  Oflice  has  been  equally  unsuccessful.  We  learn,  howevei',  from
the  India  Ofi&ce  that  the  returns  do  not  profess  to  be  absolutely  complete.

Writing  on  the  case  on  March  4, 1883,  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  says : —

"  The  story  was  told  me  by  Marian  Hughes,  my  daughter's  confidential
maid  and  attached  friend,  whose  truthfulness  may  be  entirely  relied  on.
I  wanted  to  hear  it  from  her  sister  herself,  but  found  that  she  considered  it
too  solemn  a  subject  to  speak  about.  I  was  told  of  the  apparition  of  the
friend  in  India  shortly  after  it  occurred,  and  requested  Marian  to  inform
me  as  soon  as  they  had  news  of  the  result."     He  adds : —

"  My  note  of  the  case  [i.e.,  the  original  note  made  when  he  first  heard
Marian  Hughes'  account]  was  dated  May  16th,  1878.  I  say,  'One  Satur-
day evening  about  six  weeks  ago,'  &c.  On  July  19th,  in  an  article,  I  say,
'  By  the  end  of  June  it  was  known  that  Annie's  friend  had  died
suddenly  on  the  evening  of  Saturday,  30th  March,  the  day  noted  by
Annie  as  the  day  of  the  apparition.'  "

[Mrs.  Barnes  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination  on  one  other  occasion,
when  she  heard  herself  called  by  the  voice  of  her  husband,  who,  it
turned  out,  had  died  at  a  distance  two  days  before.]

It  is  rare  for  nautical  stories  to  reach  the  level  of  evidence.  The
following,  however,  is  a  case  where  the  testimony  seems  hardly  to
leave  room  for  a  doubt  that  a  hallucination  of  a  particular  kind  was
experienced  at  a  particular  crisis  ;  and  the  question  of  its  interpretation
is  a  matter  not  of  nautical  but  of  scientific  judgment.  The  statement
(which  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritualist)  was  drawn  up  sixteen


144  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

days  after  the  incident  occurred,  through  the  prompt  energy  of  Mr.  W.
H.  Harrison,  and  on  the  suggestion  of  the  late  Mr.  Cromwell  F.  Yarley,
r  F.R.S.,  who  had  questioned  Captain  Blacklock  on  the  subject.

y\  y         (299)  "  The  steamship  '  Robert  Lowe '  returned  to  the  Thames  on  Tues-

^  -    day,  October  1 1  th,  1 870,  from  St.  Pierre,  Newfoundland,  where  she  had  been

'^  \      repairing  one  of  the  French  Atlantic  Telegraph  Company's   cables.     An

^        engineer  on  board,  Mr.  W.  H.  Pearce,  of   37,  Augusta  Street,  East  India

Road,   Poplar,   was  taken  ill  with  the  typhus  fever,   and  on  the  4th  of

October  last  he  died.      One  of  his  mates,  Mr.  D.  Brown,  of   1,  Edward

Street,  Hudson's  Road,  Canning  Town,  Plaistow,  a  strong,  healthy  man,

a  stoker,  not  likely  to  be  led  astray  by  imagination,  attended  him  till  the

day  before  he  died.     [Brown,  it  appears,  bore  the  best  of  characters,  and

had  a  strong  friendship  for  Pearce.]     On  the  afternoon  before  his  death,

at  3  o'clock,  in  broad  daylight,   Brown  was  attending  the  sick  man,  who

wanted  to  get  out  of  bed,  but  his  companion  prevented  him.     And  this  is

what  the  witness  says  he  saw : —

"  '  I  was  standing  on  one  side  of  the  bunk,  and  while  trying  to  pre-
vent Pearce  from  rising,  I  saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  bunk,  the  wife,
two  children,  and  the  mother  of  the  dying  man,  all  of  whom  I  knew
very  well,  and  they  are  all  still  living.  They  appeared  to  be  very  sorrow-
ful, but  in  all  other  respects  were  the  same  as  ordinary  human  beings.  I
could  not  see  through  them  ;  they  were  not  at  all  transparent.  They  had
on  their  ordinary  clothes,  and,  perhaps,  looked  rather  paler  than  usual.
The  mother  said  to  me  in  a  clearly  audible  voice,  "  He  will  be  buried  on
Thursday,  at  12  o'clock,  in  about  fourteeen  hundred  fathoms  of  water."
They  all  then  vanished  instantly,  and  I  saw  them  no  more.  Pearce  did
not  see  them,  as  he  was  delirious,  and  had  been  so  for  two  days  previously.
I  ran  out  of  the  berth  in  a  state  of  great  excitement,  and  did  not  enter  it
again  while  he  was  alive.  He  died  on  Tuesday,  not  Thursday,  and  was
buried  at  4  o'clock,  not  12.^  It  was  a  sudden  surprise  to  me  to  see  the
apparitions.  I  expected  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  when  I  saw  them  I
was  perfectly  cool  and  collected.  I  had  never  before  seen  anything  of
the  kind  in  my  life,  and  my  health  is,  and  always  has  been,  good.  About
five  minutes  afterwards  I  told  Captain  Blacklock  I  would  stop  with  the
sick  man  no  longer,  but  would  not  tell  him  why,  thinking  that  if  I  did,
nobody  else  would  take  my  place.  About  an  hour  later,  I  told  Captain
Blacklock  and  Mr.  Dunbar,  the  chief  engineer,  whose  address  is  Old
Mill,  near  Port  William,  Wigtownshire,  Scotland.'

"  The  other  sailors  on  board  say  that  they  saw  that  Mr.  Brown  was
greatly  agitated  from  some  cause,  and  they  gradually  drew  this  narrative
out  of  him."     Captain  Blacklock  says: —

"  Brown  came  down  into  the  cabin,  looking  very  pale  and  frightened,
and  declared  in  a  strong  and  decided  way  that  he  would  not  attend  the
sick  man  any  more  on  any  conditions — not  for  a  thousand  pounds.     I  told

1  This  markedly  illustrates  the  absence,  from  first-hand  and  immediate  accounts,  of
the  spurious  marvels  which  have  done  so  much  to  mask  the  facts  of  telepathy.  It  would
be  a  tolerably  safe  prophecy  that  in  any  third-hand  version  of  this  occurrence  the  great
point  would  be  that  the  death  and  burial  took  place  on  the  (^ay  and  at  the  hour  predicted.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  FEBCIPIENT'S  SENSES     145

him  that  he  ought  to  attend  a  sick  and  dying  comrade,  especially  as  a
storm  was  raging,  and  he  needed  kind  and  considerate  help,  such  as  any
of  us  might  need  one  day.  I  pressed  him  all  the  more,  as  I  wanted  a
strong  steady  man  to  attend  the  delirious  invalid  ;  besides,  it  being  bad
weather,  the  other  men  were  fagged  and  over-worked.  Brown  would  not
go  back,  and  he  left  the  cabin,  as  I  think,  crying,  so  I  sent  him  out  a
glass  of  brandy.  Shortly  after  that,  I  heard  he  was  very  ill,  and  that  his
mates  had  some  trouble  in  soothing  and  calming  him.

"  We  the  undersigned,  officials  on  board  the  '  Robert  Lowe,'  declare  the
above  statements  to  be  true,  so  far  as  each  of  the  circumstances  came
under  our  personal  notice,  but  we  none  of  us  commit  ourselves  to  any
opinion  as  to  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon.  We  give  the  statement
simply  because  we  have  been  requested  to  do  so,  rumours  of  the  occurrence
having  gone  abroad  and  caused  inquiries  to  be  made.

(Signed)     "J.  Blacklock,  Commander."

"  Andrew  Dunbar,  First  Engineer.

(Signatures  of  six  other  members  of  the  crew.)

"Witness,  W.  H.  Harrison.

"  October  20th,  1870."

[Captain  Blacklock  is  dead.  The  "  Robert  Lowe  "  was  lost  in  1872,
and  only  one  or  two  of  the  crew  escaped.  The  account  included  a  descrip-
tion of  some  distressing  experiences  of  Mrs.  Pearce's,  which  had  occurred
in  London  during  the  few  days  before  her  husband's  death,  and  filled  her
with  anxiety  on  his  account ;  but  this  anxiety  cannot  be  safely  assumed
to  have  been  in  any  way  a  condition  of  Brown's  experience.]

It  cannot,  of  course,  be  proved  that  this  was  not  a  case  of
purely  subjective  hallucination,  as  Brown  knew  the  Pearce  family  by
sight.  But  the  vision,  both  in  its  character  and  its  effects,  was  un-
like any  of  those  which  were  treated  above  (Vol.  I.,  Chap.  XI.)  as  due
to  expectancy  or  anxiety.  And  we  at  any  rate  have  the  coincidence
that  a  healthy  man  experienced  the  one  hallucination  of  his  life — and
an  extremely  vivid  and  highly-developed  specimen — in  broad  daylight,
at  a  time  when  the  friend  in  whose  beclouded  mind  the  very  scene
evoked  may  well  have  been  dominant,  was  dying  in  close  proximity  to
him.^

The  following  is  another  nautical  case,  as  to  which  it  is  not  easy
to  form  an  opinion.  The  points  against  it  are  that  it  is  from  an
uneducated  witness ;  and  that  it  contains  an  account  of  an  experience
which  in  one  respect — the  length  of  its  duration — has  scarcely  a
parallel,  as  far  as  I  know,  among  hallucinations  of  sane  and  healthy
persons.^     Nevertheless,  unless  the  account  is  an  absolute  fabrication,

i_Asregards  the  supposition  that  the  agent  was  the  sick  man  himself,  c/.  case  30,
Vol.  i.,  pp.  214-6.  As  to  the  appearance  of  more  figures  than  one,  see  the  remarks  on
case  202.

^  See  however  cases  590  and  621.

VOL.    II.  L


146  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

which  seems  very  unlikely,  the  reasonable  conclusion,  I  think,
would  be  that  a  telepathic  hallucination  was  produced,  though  its
details  may  have  been  exaggerated.  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  of  3,  Bouverie
Square,  Folkestone,  wrote,  on  October  21st,  1882  : —

(300)  "  Some  time  ago,  my  son  told  me  that  a  friend  of  his,  a  rough  and
simple-minded  fellow,  had  returned  from  Shields,  and  told  him  a  curious
tale.  The  man  is  a  sailor,  and  had  served  with  his  father  ever  since  he
was  a  boy,  in  a  collier  which  trades  between  this  port  and  the  North.  The
youth,  having  become  very  proficient  in  his  calling,  went  on  his  voyages,
leaving  his  father,  now  an  elderly  man,  at  home.  During  a  stormy  voyage,
and  not  far  ofi"  the  Humber,  the  young  sailor  saw  his  father,  whom  he  had
left  in  excellent  health,  pacing  the  deck,  and  calling  out  several  times,  as
he  was  wont  to  do,  '  Mind  your  helm,  Joe  ! '  The  young  man  wished  to
speak  to  his  father,  but  could  not ;  some  occult  power  prevented  him.  At
the  end  of  the  voyage  a  letter  awaited  the  young  sailor,  announcing  the
death  of  the  father  at  the  precise  time  when  he  appeared  to  his  son  ;  but
please  to  remark  (a  matter  of  some  importance,  I  think,)  that  the  appari-
tion remained  on  deck  some  three  hours,  until  the  vessel  got  to  Grimsby.
[This  differs  from  the  first-hand  account.]

"  I  disbelieved  my  son's  story,  and  requested  him  to  ask  his  friend  to
come  and  take  tea  with  me,  that  I  might  hear  the  account  from  his  own
mouth.  He  came.  The  simplicity  of  his  manner,  his  plain,  open-hearted
account,  and  I  may  even  say  his  stupidity,  manifested  in  his  peculiar
diction,  imparted  an  impress  to  his  tale."

At  our  request  Mr.  Lyons  interrogated  Edward  Sings  more  formally,
the  next  time  that  the  latter  visited  Folkestone.  The  following  is  Sings'
own  account : —

"  Folkestone.

"December  29th,  1882.

"  I  left  my  father  last  about  six  years  ago,  on  a  Good  Friday.  He  was
in  good  healtla  when  I  left  him.  We  were  in  a  gale  of  wind,  and  we  were
running  in  the  Humber ;  we  carried  the  main  gaff"  away ;  I  was  at  the
wheel  steering  her  in.  He  came  to  me  3  or  4  times,  tapped  me  on  the
shoulder,  and  told  me  to  mind  the  helm,  and  I  told  the  captain  my  father
was  drowned,  or  something  happened  to  him.  After  we  got  in,  when  it
was  my  watch,  he  was  walking  to  and  fro  with  me,  and  I  went  down  below
and  told  my  mate  I  could  not  stop  up,  and  I  did  not  like  to.  My  mate
took  my  watch.  I  never  could  speak  to  my  father,  for  something  kept  me
from  doing  so.  I  heard  of  my  father's  death  a  week  afterwards.  No  one
else  saw  my  father's  spirit.^  My  father  stopped  on  deck  with  me  an  hour,
and  as  I  could  not  stand  it  any  longer  I  went  below,  and  my  mate  took
my  place.  We  cast  both  anchors,  and  were  towed  into  Grimsby.  My
mother  and  sister  were  at  my  father's  death-bed,  and  they  told  me  that
my  father  asked  several  times  whether  I  was  in  the  harbour.

"  I  certify  this  to  be  a  true  account.  "  Edwaed  Sings."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  E.  Sings'  father  died  on

1  See  p.  48,  note.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.     147

April  7,   1877,   aged   53.     Good  Friday  fell  on  March   30;  and  this,  it
will  be  seen,  corresponds  very  well  with  the  above  statement.

Mr.  Lyons  has  kindly  visited  Sings'  mother  and  sister,  at  67,  Tontine
Street,  Folkestone,  and  received  a  similar  account  from  them.

The  next  case  is  from  a  lady  whose  name  may  be  given  privately.

She  herself  would   have  been  perfectly  willing    that    it    should    be

published,  because  the  incident  "  is  as  natural  and  real  to  me  as  any

other  event  in  my  life  " ;  but  she  thinks  that  the  publication  might

give  annoyance  to  some  of  her  relatives.  c„>-vc'^'"^^

"C Rectory.  ^"^"^

"  May  23rd,  1884.
(301)  "  In  June,  1878,  when  nursing  a  brother  who  was  ill,  I  woke  up
suddenly  about  2  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  24th,  calling  him,  and
feeling  strongly  that  he  wanted  me.  I  jumped  up  and  went  to  the
table,  intending  to  get  his  medicine,  as  I  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  by
day,  but  the  touch  of  the  table  brought  me  to  my  senses,  and  I  went
back  to  bed,  thinking  it  was  merely  fancy.  I  was  17  then,  quite  strong
and  well,  and  had  never  been  conscious  of  any  such  impression  before.
My  sister,  who  slept  in  a  room  opening  off  mine,  heard  me  call  my
brother's  name,  and  came  in  to  see  what  I  was  doing,  and  stayed  with  me
for  some  time.

"  On  asking  my  brother  the  next  morning  what  sort  of  night  he  had
had,  he  said,  '  Very  wakeful  at  first,  but  after  you  came  in  at  2  o'clock  I
went  to  sleep  all  right.'  I  said  nothing  to  him  of  my  experience  at  that
hour,  but  told  him  I  had  never  been  in  his  room  all  night.  He  answered,
'  Of  course  you  were ;  you  came  in  and  gave  me  my  drops,  and  settled  my
pillows,  and  then  I  got  up  and  did  what  you  told  me,'  which  was  opening
the  window.  I  assured  him  I  had  done  nothing  of  the  kind,  when  he  said
quite  impatiently,  '  I  couldn't  have  imagined  it  unless  you  had ;  but  you
mustn't  do  it  again  or  you  will  catch  cold,  running  about  the  house  at
night.'

"  I  said  no  more  about  it  for  fear  of  alarming  him,  and  I  never  told
anyone  of  it,  lest  they  should  think  the  nursing  was  making  me  ill,  but
I  was  quite  strong  and  well  at  the  time.  I  put  it  down  in  my  note-book
that  day,  and  a  year  later  I  have  another  reference  there  to  this  same
event.

"  Two  months  later,  in  August,  1878,  I  was  in  Hampshire,  my  brother
in  Sussex.  I  knew  he  was  dying,  but  had  no  reason  for  thinking  him  in
any  more  immediate  danger  on  that  day.  About  9  o'clock,  during  break-
fast, a  sudden  feeling  of  great  depression  came  over  me,  which  increased
and  I  could  not  shake  it  off  all  the  morning,  though  I  did  not  particularly
connect  it  with  my  brother.  One  of  my  sisters  noticed  it,  and  asked  if  I
felt  ill.  Later  on,  a  telegram  came  to  say  that  my  brother  had  died  quite
suddenly,  a  few  minutes  past  9  o'clock.  I  only  mention  this  because  it
was  the  only  other  occasion  on  which  I  ever  remember  being  conscious  of
such  a  sensation.

"K.  A.  O."

[This  last  coincidence  may  easily,  of  course,  have  been  accidental.]

VOL.  II.  1-2


148  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

Miss  0.  adds  : —

"  My  sister  is  away  from  home,  so  I  wrote  to  her  without  giving  any
reason  for  wanting  her  evidence,  and  tried  to  say  nothing  that  would
recall  this  occurrence  to  her  mind.  I  simply  asked  her,  '  Do  you  re-
member your  coming  into  my  room  one  night  during  H.'s  illness  1  If
you  do,  I  want  a  written  statement  of  what  you  remember.'

"  I  enclose  her  reply.  She  mentions  that  1  called  his  name,  and  that
she  found  me  crying,  which  was  true,  as  the  impression  that  he  wanted
me  was  so  strongly  upon  me,  and  yet  I  believed  it  to  be  fancy.  She
knows  that  I  never  left  my  room,  otherwise  I  might  have  thought  that
I  had  really  gone  down  the  passage  to  my  brother's  room,  which  was  at
the  other  end,  but  I  never  walked  in  my  sleep  in  my  life.

"  My  brother  was  so  positive  about  it  that  I  felt  certain  he  believed  I
had  actually  done  what  I  had  tried  to  do  in  my  own  room.  It  seemed
perfectly  natural  to  me,  but  I  said  nothing  to  my  people,  for  fear  they
should  think  the  strain  of  nursing  would  make  me  ill.

"These  are  the  references  in  my  note-book:  On  June  25th,  1878,
among  other  things  about  my  brother,  '  He  said  that  in  the  night  he
woke  up,  firmly  persuaded  that  I  had  been  in  his  room,  and  was  talking
to  him,  and  he  got  up  at  once,  and  did  exactly  as  I  told  him.'  On
June  24th,  1879:  'It  was  this  night  last  year  that  I  woke  up  in  the
middle  of  the  night  calling  H.,  and  then  E.  came  in.  And  the  next
morning  he  told  me  that  just  at  that  moment  he  thought  I  came  into  his
room,  and  he  got  up  to  do  as  I  told  him.'

"I  can't  account  for  his  thinking  I  told  him  to  open  the  window,
unless  from  the  fact  that  I  got  up  and  went  over  to  the  window  in  my
room  where  the  table  was.

"  My  brother  was  several  years  older  than  myself,  and  I  was  extremely
attached  to  him  ;  he  was  accustomed  to  my  doing  this  sort  of  thing  for
him  by  day.

"This  happened  at  Salehurst  Vicarage,  in  Sussex,  two  months  before
my  father  came  here.  I  never  spoke  of  it  to  them  until  this  week,  when
I  told  my  brothers  and  sisters."

The  following  is  the  enclosure  mentioned  : —

"May  21st,  1884.

"  I  remember  well  the  event  you  allude  to,  of  how  you  awoke  one
night,  calling  for  Herbert,  and  I  went  into  your  room,  found  you  crying,
and  tried  to  comfort  you.     I  have  often  thought  of  it  since.

"Emily  C.  O."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  K.  A.  O.  says  : —

"You  ask  if  this  experience  was  unique  in  my  brother's  case,  and  I
believe  it  to  be  so.  He  would  have  treated  anything  of  the  kind  merely
as  a  joke,  and  the  idea  that  such  a  thing  as  thought-transference  was
possible  would  never  have  crossed  his  mind.  Nothing  that  I  had  done
before  could  have  made  him  expect  me  at  night,  for  I  had  never  done
any  night  nursing,  and  he  himself  scolded  me  for  what  he  imagined  the
imprudence  of  my  proceeding.  If  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  going  to  his
room,  then  I  should  have  gone  at  once  when  I  felt  he  wanted  me,  but  as  I


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.    149

had  never  done  so,  I  was  afraid  of  alarming  him  by  going  in  at  night.     I
have  never  had  any  similar  experience."

This  case  resembles  No.  271  above,  in  the  point  that  the  "  agency"
was  apparently  exercised  at  the  moment  of  startled  waking  from
sleep ;  but  considering  the  circumstances,  the  present  coincidence
could  more  easily  than  the  other  be  regarded  as  accidental.  Had  the
brother's  experience  been  a  dream,  or  even  a  vision  between  sleeping
and  waking,  we  should  feel  that  to  be  the  reasonable  view.  There  is
one  feature  in  the  account,  no  doubt,  which  looks  very  like  dreaming
— the  brother's  remark,  "  You  gave  me  my  drops."  But  it  will  be
observed  that  this  is  not  mentioned  in  the  entry  in  the  note-book  ;
it  seems  therefore  very  probable  that  it  was  an  unconscious  addition
on  Miss  O.'s  part.  On  the  other  side  we  have  her  brother's  recorded
testimony  that  the  phantasmal  visit  took  place  at  a  time  when
he  was  "  very  wakeful " ;  and  it  would  be  at  least  noteworthy
that  he  should  have  had  what  we  are  led  to  suppose  was  the  one
w^aking  hallucination  of  his  life,  at  the  very  time  that  his  sister  was  ?  ^
also  experiencing  a  unique  and  closely  corresponding  impression.

§  3.  The  next  case  is  of  a  rarer  type  ;  as,  though  the  senses  of  sight
and  hearing  were  both  affected,  the  two  impressions  were  not
combined  in  the  same  incident,  but  were  separated  by  several  hours
interval.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Garling,  of  12,  Westbourne
Gardens,  Folkestone,  a  witness  as  free  from  credulity  and  superstitious
fancies  as  can  well  be  imagined.

"February,  1883.       //^'^"'^

(302)  "  One  Thursday  evening,  about  the  middle  of  August  in  1849,  I  -'<-  •'^
went,  as  I  often  did,  to  pass  the  evening  with  the  Rev. — Harrison  and  his
family,  with  whom  I  had  for  many  years  lived  on  terms  of  the  closest
intimacy.  The  weather  being  very  fine,  we  made  up  a  party  with  the
neighbours,  and  went  to  the  Surrey  Zoological  Gardens,  and  spent  the
evening  there.  I  note  this  particularly,  because  it  proves  that  he  and  his
family  were  in  good  health  incontestably  on  that  day,  and  that  no
suspicion  of  what  was  to  follow  so  soon  existed  with  anyone.  The  next
day  I  went  down  on  a  visit  to  some  relatives  in  Hertfordshire,  who  lived
at  a  house  called  Flamstead  Lodge,  about  26  miles  from  London,  on  the
high  road.  We  usually  dined  at  2  o'clock,  and  on  Monday  afternoon
following,  after  their  early  dinner,  I  left  the  ladies  in  the  drawing-room,
and  sauntered  through  the  paddock  down  to  the  high  road.  You  will
note  the  time  was  in  the  middle  of  a  sunny  August  day,  in  a  wide,  public,
commonplace  high  road,  not  a  hundred  yards  from  a  roadside  public-house —
I  myself  in  a  perfectly  cheerful,  healthy  frame  of  mind — no  surroundings
of  any  kind  to  excite  the  imagination,  some  country  people  not  far  off,


150  ,  TACTILE  CASES  AND  CASES  AFFECTING         [chap.

indeed,  at  the  time  I  speak  of.  Suddenly  a  '  phantom  '  stood  before  me,  so
close  that  had  it  been  a  human  being  it  must  have  touched  me  ;  blotting
out  for  a  moment  the  landscape  and  surrounding  objects  ;  itself  indistinct
in  outline,  but  with  lips  that  seemed  to  move  and  murmur  something,
and  with  eyes  fearfully  distinct  that  fixed  and  followed  and  glared  into
mine,  with  a  look  so  intense  and  deeply  earnest  that  I  fairly  recoiled  from
the  spot  and  started  backwards.  I  said  to  myself  instinctively  and
probably  uttered  it  aloud,  '  Good  God,  it  is  Harrison  ! '  though  not  think-
ing of  him  or  having  reason  to  think  of  him  in  the  remotest  degree  at  the
■cnonient.  In  probably  a  few  seconds,  which  seemed  to  me  far  longer,  it
/■anished,  leaving  me  rooted  to  the  spot  for  a  few  moments,  and  sensible
of  the  reality  of  the  vision  by  the  curious  physical  effect  it  left  upon  me.
This  was  as  if  the  blood  was  like  ice  in  my  veins  •}  no  flutter  of  the
nerves,  but  a  deadly  chill  feeling  that  lasted  more  or  less  for  nearly  an
hour,  and  only  gradually  wore  off  as  the  circulation  returned.  I  have
never  felt  any  similar  sensation  before  or  since.  I  said  nothing  to  the
ladies  when  I  returned,  as  I  should  have  frightened  them  out  of  their  wits,
and  the  impression  made  upon  me  gradually  became  fainter  as  the  day
wore  out.

"  I  have  said  that  the  house  was  near  the  high  road ;  it  stood  in  its
own  grounds  by  the  side  of  a  country  lane  leading  up  to  the  village,  200  or
300  yards  or  more  from  any  other  habitation,  with  a  seven-foot  iron
railing  in  front  to  keep  out  tramps  ;  gates  always  locked  at  night ;  about
30  feet  of  hard  gravel  and  paved  pathway  from  front  door  to  lane.  A
beautiful  quiet  summer  evening  followed.  Placed  as  the  house  was,  with
hard  gravel  and  high  iron  palisade  and  paving,  no  one  could  have
approached  the  house  in  the  deep  silence  of  that  summer  evening  without
being  heard  a  long  way  off.  There  was,  moreover,  a  large  dog  in  a  kennel,
placed  so  as  to  command  the  front  entrance,  especially  to  warn  off
intruders  ;  and  a  little  terrier  inside  that  barked  at  everybody  and  at
every  noise.  We  were  just  retiring  to  bed,  and  were  sitting  in  the
drawing-room,  which  was  on  the  ground  floor,  close  by  the  front  door,  the
terrier  within.  The  servants  had  already  gone  to  bed  in  a  room  quite  at
the  back,  60  feet  away.  They,  when  they  came  down,  told  us  they  were
asleep,  and  were  roused  by  the  noise.  Suddenly  there  came  to  the  front
door  a  noise  so  loud  and  continuous  (the  door  seeming  to  shake  in  the
frame  and  to  vibrate  under  some  tremendous  blows),  that  we  started  to
our  feet  in  amazement,  and  the  servants  came  in  a  moment  after,  half-
dressed,  running  downstairs  from  their  room  at  the  back  to  know  what  it
was.  We  went  at  once  to  the  door,  but  could  neither  hear  nor  see
anything  or  anybody.  And  the  dogs  gave  no  tongue  whatever.  The
terrier,  contrary  to  its  nature,  slunk  shivering  under  the  sofa,  and  would
not  stop  even  at  the  door,  and  nothing  could  induce  him  to  go  into  the
darkness.  There  was  no  knocker  on  the  door,  nothing  to  fall  down,  and
no  possibility  of  anyone  approaching  or  leaving  the  house,  so  situated,  in
that  profound  silence,  wii-hout  discovery.  They  were  all  horribly
frightened,  and  I  found  it  very  diflicult  to  get  them  to  go  to  bed,  but  I
was  myself  in  so  unimpressionable  a  frame  of  mind  that  I  did  not  at  the
time  connect  it  with  the  '  phantom '  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  still  went  to

1  See  p.  37,  note.


XVI.]  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.    151

bed  myself,  pondering  upon  it  and  seeking  some  obvious  explanation  to
satisfy  the  members  of  the  household,  but  without  success.

"I  stopped  there  till  Wednesday  morning,  having  no  suspicion  of  what
had  happened  in  my  absence.  On  that  morning  I  returned  to  town  to  my
chambers,  then  at  No.  11,  King's  Road,  Grays  Inn.  My  clerk  met  me
at  the  door  with,  '  Sir,  a  gentleman  has  been  here  two  or  three  times  ;  is
most  anxious  to  see  you ;  says  he  must  see  you  immediately ;  he  is  gone
out  for  a  few  minutes  to  get  a  biscuit,  and  he  will  be  back  directly.'  In
a  few  minutes  the  gentleman  returned,  and  I  recognised  at  once  a  Mr.
Chadwick,  also  an  intimate  friend  of  Harrison  and  his  family.  He  then
told  me,  to  my  amazement,  '  There  has  been  a  fearful  visitation  of  cholera
in  the  Wandsworth  Road,'  meaning  at  Mr.  Harrison's ;  '  all  are  gone.'
Mrs.  Rosco  was  attacked  on  Friday,  and  died  ;  her  maid  the  same  evening,
and  died.  Mrs.  Harrison  was  attacked  on  Saturday  morning,  and  died
that  evening.  The  housemaid  died  on  Sunday.  The  cook  also  was  taken
ill,  was  carried  away,  and  escaped  very  narrowly.  Poor  Harrison  was
attacked  himself  on  Sunday  night,  was  fearfully  ill  all  Monday  and
yesterday,  and  has  been  taken  away  from  the  Pest-house  in  the  Wands-
worth Road  to  Jack  Straw's  Castle  at  Hampstead,  to  get  into  a  better
air  ;  he  was  begging  and  praying  for  the  people  about  him,  all  Monday
and  yesterday,  to  send  for  you,  but  nobody  knew  where  you  were  gone  to.
You  must  take  a  cab  at  once  and  come  with  me,  or  you  will  not  see  him
alive.'  I  went  with  Chadwick  at  once,  but  he  was  dead  before  I  reached
the  place.

"  H.  B.  Gaeling."

The  obituary  in  the  Watchman,  for  August  15th,  1849,  shows  that  Mrs.
Rosco  died  from  cholera  on  August  4th,  Mrs.  Harrison  on  August  8th,
and  the  Rev.  T.  Harrison  on  Thursday  (not  Wednesday),  the  9th,  at
Hampstead.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Garling  says  : —

"  The  ladies  were  old,  and  have  been  dead  some  25  years.  Of  the
servants  at  the  house  all  trace  has  been  lost."

Mr.  Garling  added  a  few  details  in  conversation  with  the  present
writer.  The  figure  met  him  on  the  high  road,  so  close  to  his  face  that  he
hardly  observed  anything  in  detail  except  the  face.  He  has  had  one  other
hallucination,  when  he  seemed  to  see  the  figure  of  a  friend  at  the  foot  of
his  bed.  But  the  friend  was  one  whose  funeral  he  had  just  been  attending,
and  who,  moreover,  had  been  accustomed,  in  life,  to  sit  where  the  figure
was  seen  ;  and  Mr.  Garling  himself  was  going  to  sleep  at  the  time.  The
experience,  therefore,  cannot  be  argued  to  show  any  special  proclivity  to
subjective  hallucination.

The  auditory  experience  here  is  a  good  specimen  of  what  I  have  L^j-"-''^"^'*^^
called  the  rudiTnentarv  type — a  class  of  which  the  inconclusiveness  ^  ''^"^  ^****^
has  been  sufficiently  dwelt  on.     But  clearly  the  presumption  that  the     ■
sound  was  telepathic  in  origin  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  of  the  visual   '''*^
experience  which  preceded  it.     Telepathy  having  (as  we  may  reason-


152         CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  SENSE.      [chap.

ably  suppose)  produced  the  first  phenomenon,  it  is  not  unreasonable
to  credit  it  with  the  second ;  especially  since  the  second,  though
it  affected  so  many  persons,  seems  in  itself  particularly  hard  to  account
for  by  any  objective  cause  in  the  vicinity.  It  may  appear,  no  doubt,
extremely  strange  that  the  conditions  which  first  flashed  an  impression
to  the  one  person  directly  interested  should  afterwards  involve  the
whole  household  in  a  psychic  storm  ;  but  this  topic  belongs  to  the
concluding  chapter,  on  "  Collective  Cases."


XVII.]


CHAPTER  XYII.

RECIPROCAL  CASES.

§  1.  We  have  now  to  consider  a  quite  new  type  of  telepathic  action.
In  the  classes  which  have  so  far  been  passed  in  review,  whether
experimental  or  spontaneous,  the  parts  of  the  agent  and  the  per-
cipient have  been  well  defined,  and  the  current  of  influence  has  set
from  the  one  to  the  other  in  an  unmistakeable  fashion.  But  in  several
cases,  it  may  be  remembered,  (especially  Nos.  35  and  94,)  we  have  had
indications  that  the  influence  might  be  a  reciprocal  one — that  each
of  the  parties  might  receive  a  telepathic  impulse  from  the  other,  and
so  each  be  at  once  agent  and  percipient.  The  cases  referred  to
were  doubtful,  because  the  experience  at  one  end  of  the  line  was  a
dream  ;  and  dreams  having  an  almost  limitless  scope,  it  was  conceivable
enough  that  that  of  Mr.  Newnham,  for  instance,  though  it  curiously
corresponded  with  his  fiancees  actions  and  surroundings  at  the  time,
did  so  by  accident ;  and  that  therefore  his  mental  condition,  while  it
afi'ected  her,  was  not  affected  by  her.  But  had  he  had  a  waking  vision
of  her,  as  she  had  of  him,  we  should  have  considered  it  probable  that
the  influence  was  mutual ;  since  if  two  rare  or  unique  events,  which
present  so  obvious  a  'prima  facie  connection  as  A's  vision  of  B  and
B's  vision  of  A,  fall  at  the  same  time,  we  cannot  readily  assume  the
coincidence  to  be  accidental.  And  if  there  are  further  and  more
distinct  grounds  for  attributing  B's  vision  to  telepathy — say  because
A  is  dying  at  the  time — it  will  be  only  reasonable  to  regard  A's
vision  as  part  of  the  same  complex  phenomenon,  rather  than  to
suppose  that  A  has  an  accidental  vision  at  the  same  time  as  B  has  a
telepathic  one.  But  of  course  the  proof  of  a  reciprocal  influence
would  be  stronger  still  if,  at  the  tite  time  of  B's  impression  of  A,  A
expressed  in  words  some  piece  of  knowledge  as  to  B's  condition  which
could  not  have  been  acquired  in  a  normal  manner.  We  thus  see  that
a  group  of  cases  which  have  all   the  same  claim  to  be  considered


/


154  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

telepathic,  may  have  different  claims,  ranging  from  the  very  doubtful
to  the  very  conclusive,  to  be  considered  reciprocally  telepathic.^

I  will  begin  with  a  couple  of  the  more  doubtful  cases.  The
following  account  was  received  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  G.  J.
Romanes,  F.R.S.,  who  is  well  acquainted  with  the  narrator.

y

"March  18th,  1883.

(303)  "  On  the  night  of  the  26th  of  October,  1872,  I  suddenly  felt  very
unwell,  and  went  to  bed  about  half-past  9,  an  hour  earlier  than  usual,  and
fell  asleep  almost  immediately,  when  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream,  which
impressed  me  greatly ;  so  much  so,  that  I  remarked  to  my  wife,  on
waking,  that  I  feared  we  should  shortly  receive  bad  news.  I  imagined
I  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  near  a  table,  reading,  when  an
old  lady  suddenly  appeared  seated  on  the  opposite  side,  close  to  the
table.  She  neither  spoke  nor  moved  much,  but  gazed  very  intently  on
me,  and  I  on  her,  for  at  least  20  minutes.  I  was  much  struck  by  her
appearance,  she  having  white  hair,  very  dark  eyebrows,  and  penetrating
eyes.  I  did  not  recognise  her  at  all,  but  thought  she  was  a  stranger.  My
attention  was  then  directed  to  the  door,  which  opened,  and  my  aunt
entering  and  seeing  me  and  the  old  lady  staring  at  each  other  in  this
extraordinary  way,  with  much  surprise  and  in  a  tone  of  reproach
exclaimed,  '  John  !  don't  you  know  who  this  is  ? '  and  without  giving  me
time  to  reply  said,  '  Why,  this  is  your  grandmother,'  whereupon  my
ghostly  visitor  suddenly  rose  from  her  chair,  embraced  me,  and  vanished.

1  The  numerous  cases  where  two  friends  in  different  places  prove  to  have  been  each
exceptionally  engrossed  with  the  idea  of  the  other  at  the  same  moment,  must  not  be  put
forward  as  instances  of  telepathic,  much  less  of  reciprocal,  action  ;  for  we  may  always
suppose  that  the  impressions  only  appeared  to  have  been  exceptionally  vivid  after
the  fact  of  the  coincidence  had  given  them  a  certain  exceptional  interest.  The  undue
importance  often  attached  to  such  incidents  is  to  be  regretted,  since  it  confuses  the  subject,
and  to  some  extent  excuses  a  similar  confusion  on  the  part  of  opponents — as,  e.g.,  when  an
eminent  man  of  science  thinks  telepathy  sufficiently  refuted  by  this  very  consideration,
that  by  accident  friends  sometimes  think  of  one  another,  and  even  write  to  one  another,
simultaneously  (Z'ewtec/ie  jBu»rfsc/i«M  for  Jan.,  1886,  p.  45).  Nor  will  it  suffice  for  the
exceptional  character  of  one  of  the  impressions  to  be  established  beyond  doubt.  Tor
example.  Miss  Edith  Taylor,  of  9,  Endsleigh  Gardens,  N.W.,  tells  us  of  the  following
experience  of  herself  and  a  friend.

"June  25th,  1884.

"  I  was  living  at  the  time  in  Germany,  and  my  friend  in  Holland.  She  had  been
visiting  at  the  house  where  I  was  staying,  but  had  returned  home  some  weeks  before
the  '  illusion  '  occurred.  One  evening  in  the  autumn  of  1880,  I  was  walking  alone  in  the
garden,  trying  to  learn  some  German  poetry,  and  not  succeeding  very  well,  when  I  heard
some  one  step  on  to  the  gravel  walk  behind  me.  I  then  felt  the  touch  of  a  hand  on  my
arm,  and  my  friend's  voice  said  pretty  distinctly,  '  Edith,  Edith.'  I  turned  round  very
quickly,  and  I  believe  I  said,  '  Why,  what  is  it  ? '  I  certainly  expected  to  find  some  one
behind  me,  and  had  a  sort  of  wild  idea  that  it  must  be  my  friend,  from  the  curious  way  in
which  my  name  was  spoken,  the  foreign  accent  in  the  word.  Seeing  nobody  I  was  fright-
ened, and  went  in.  In  answer  to  the  letter  in  which  I  told  her  what  had  jjassed,  my
friend  wrote  back  that  it  was  curious  that  I  should  have  fancied  her  so  near  me  just  then.
She  had  been  reading  Italian,  which  we  had  studied  together  for  a  while,  and  had  very
much  wished  to  speak  to  me  about  some  passage  that  had  struck  her  in  the  lesson.  My
friend  had  not  heard  or  imagined  that  she  heard  me,  but  she  said  she  felt  as  if  the  air
were  full  of  me."

Miss  Taylor's  hallucination  was  quite  unique  in  her  life ;  but  we  cannot  tell  that  her
friend's  thoughts  were  not  pretty  constantly  directed  to  her  at  this  period  ;  and  there  is,
therefore,  no  reason  why  the  coincidence,  such  as  it  was,  should  not  have  been  a  pure
accident.


xvil]  reciprocal  CASES.  155

At  that  moment  I  awoke.  Such  was  the  impression  it  made  on  my  mind,
that  I  got  my  note-book  and  made  a  note  of  this  strange  dream,  believing
that  it  foreboded  bad  tidings.  However,  several  days  passed  without
bringing  any  dreaded  intelligence,  when  one  night  I  received  a  letter  from
my  father,  announcing  the  rather  sudden  death  of  my  grandmother,  which
took  place  on  the  very  night  and  hour  of  my  dream,  half -past  10.

"  About  four  months  after  her  death,  I  went  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,
where  she  lived,  to  get  information  from  my  relatives  as  to  what  my
grandmother  was  really  like.  My  aunt  and  cousin  described  her  in  every
particular,  and  their  descriptions  of  her  coincided  most  marvellously  with
the  figure  and  face  that  appeared  to  me,  the  white  hair  and  dark  eyebrows
being  a  peculiarity  in  her.  This  I  particularly  observed  in  my  dream.  I
learnt,  too,  that  she  was  extremely  fussy  in  the  arrangement  of  her  cap,
always  being  anxious  that  no  part,  even  the  strings,  should  be  out  of  place,
and  curious  to  relate,  I  noticed  in  my  dream  that  she  was  nervously
touching  her  cap  strings,  now  and  again,  for  fear  they  should  be  out  of
place.  My  cousin,  who  was  with  her  when  she  died,  told  me  that  my
grandmother  had  been  delirious  for  some  time  previous  to  her  departure  ;
and  for  a  moment,  when  in  that  state,  she  suddenly  put  her  arms  round
my  cousin's  neck,  and  on  opening  her  eyes  and  regaining  consciousness,  she
said  with  a  look  of  surprise,  '  Oh,  Polly,  is  it  you  1  I  thought  it  was  some
body  else.'  This  seems  to  me  very  curious,  as  it  was  just  what  she  did
before  she  vanished  from  me  in  the  drawing-room.  T  must  add  that  I  had
not  seen  my  grandparent  for  at  least  14  years,  and  the  last  time  I  saw  her
she  had  dark  hair,  bnt  this  had  gradually  changed  to  white,  leaving  her
eyebrows  dark,  and  I  am  positive  that  nobody  ever  mentioned  this
peculiarity  to  me."  ^  "  J.  H.  W."

Mrs.  W.  says  : —

"  July  1st,  1885.

"  I  quite  remember  my  husband  telling  me,  on  my  going  to  my  room  on
the  evening  of  the  26th  October,  of  a  remarkable  dream  he  had  just
had,  and  also  his  making  an  entry  in  the  pocket  book  on  the  following
morning.

"  F.  W."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Jane  W.  died  at  the  age
of  72,  on  Oct.  26,  1870  [see  below],  at  Brixton,  Isle  of  Wight.

Mr.  Podmore  says  : —

"I  called  on  Mr.  J.  H.  W.  to-day  (July  4th,  1884),  and  heard  the
account  from  him  viva  voce.  His  cousin's  corroboration,  for  a  reason  which  K  .  (^  .
he  explained  to  me,  cannot  be  obtained.  But  he  explained  to  me  that
he  went  to  see  his  cousin  within  three  months  of  the  death,  and  received
full  particulars  of  the  death-scene  from  her  then.  I  asked  him  if  he  stood
by  the  phrase  '  at  least  20  minutes,'  pointing  out  that  it  was  difficult  to
attach  any  precise  meaning  to  these  words ;  if  they  were  a  correct  descrip-
tion of  his  impressions,  a  grotesque  incident  must  have  been  interpolated

1  In  respect  of  this  last  feature,  the  case  may  be  classed  with  those  of  Chap,  xii.,  §  8.
The  nervous  fidgeting  with  the  cap-strings  may  possibly  be  regarded  as  a  distinctive
habit,  sufficiently  deeply  organised  to  be  a  feature  in  the  person's  latent  representation  of
her  own  physique.     See  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  the  section  referred  to.


156  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

in  the  midst  of  an  otherwise  realistic  dream.  He  maintains  that  the  words
are  correct ;  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  and  the  old  lady  sat  staring  at  each
other  across  the  table  for  a  very  long  time.  Mr.  W.  told  me  that  he
dreams  very  little ;  and  that  he  has  never  had  another  dream  which  he
thought  worth  noting.     He  has  never  dreamt  of  death."

After  a  second  call,  Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

"  I  received  an  account  from  Mrs.  W.  of  her  husband's  dream,  as  she
remembered  to  have  heard  it  within  an  hour  of  its  occurrence  and  sub-
sequently, which  tallied  precisely  with  the  account  here  given.  I  saw  also
the  note  made  on  the  following  morning.  It  occurs  at  the  head  of  the
first  page  of  a  small  pocket  sketch-book,  the  rest  of  the  page  being
occupied  with  pen  or  pencil  memoranda  of  accounts,  &c.  The  entry  is
'Odd  dream,  night  of  October  26th,  1870.'  The  last  numeral,  which
is  very  indistinct,  is  apparently  0.  Mr.  W.,  in  writing  his  original
account  in  March,  1883,  had  referred  to  this  note  and  read  the  final
numeral  as  2.  Hence  the  discrepancy.  He  has  no  other  memorandum  of
the  death.

"  I  pressed  him  as  far  as  I  could,  but  he  still  declines  to  give  his  name,
fearing  that  he  might  acquire  the  reputation  of  being  '  ghostly '  and
fanciful,  and  thus  injure  his  professional  prospects."

Clearly  the  dream  here  is  far  less  likely  to  have  been  accidental
than  Mr.  Newnham's.  But  the  inference  from  the  dying  woman's
^^^^  words,  that  she  may  have  been  in  some  way  affected  with  a  sense
y^,^  ■  of  her  grandson's  presence,  is,  of  course  not  one  that  can  be  pressed.
And  the  same  remark  applies  to  several  cases  where  A,  who  is  in  the
crisis  of  illness,  professes  actually  to  have  seen,  as  though  by  some
clairvoyant  flash,  an  absent  relative,  B,  who  turns  out  to  have  had
at  the  same  time  a  telepathic  impression  of  A ;  for  unless  special
details  of  B's  aspect  or  surroundings  are  described,  A's  alleged  per-
ception of  him  may  always  be  supposed  to  have  been  a  mere
subjective  dream  or  vision,  and  the  percipience  is  not  demonstrably
reciprocal.  -^

The  next  example — from  Mr.  J.  T.  Milward  Pierce,  of  Bow  Ranche,
Knox  County,  Nebraska,  U.S.A., — stands  somewhat  apart.

^„.  "  Frettons,  Danbury,  Chelmsford.

Hi.t»^f  ,  "January  5th,  1885.

^^  (304)  "  I  live  in  Nebraska,  U.S.,  where  I  have  a  cattle  ranche,  &c.

".  ^ '       I  am  engaged  to  be  married  to  a  young  lady  living  in  Yankton,  Dakota,
25  miles  north.

"About  the  end  of  October,  1884,  while  trying  to  catch  a  horse,  I
was  kicked  in  the  face,  and  only  escaped  being  brained  by  an  inch  or  two;

1  For  instances  of  the  sort,  see  cases  245  and  354 ;  also  612,  and  Mrs.  Fox's  account,
given  in  a  note  to  that  case.


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES,  157

as  it  was  I  'had  two  teeth  split  and  a  severe  rap  on  the  chest.  There  were
several  men  standing  near.  I  did  not  faint,  nor  was  I  insensible  for  a
moment,  as  I  had  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  the  next  kick.  There  was  a
moment's  pause  hefore  anyone  spoke.  I  was  standing  leaning  against
the  stable  wall,  when  I  saw  on  my  left,  apparently  quite  close,  the  young-
lady  I  have  mentioned.  She  looked  pale.  I  did  not  notice  what  she  wore  ;
but  I  distinctly  noticed  her  eyes,  which  appeared  troubled  and  anxious.
There  was  not  merely  a  face,  but  the  whole  form,  looking  perfectly  ma-
terial and  natural.  At  that  moment  my  bailiff  asked  me  if  I  was  hurt.  1
turned  my  head  to  answer  him,  and  when  I  looked  again  she  had  gone.  I
was  not  much  hurt  by  the  horse ;  my  mind  was  perfectly  clear,  for
directly  afterwards  I  went  to  my  office  and  drew  the  plans  and  prepared
specifications  for  a  new  house,  a  work  which  requires  a  clear  and
concentrated  mind.

"  I  was  so  haunted  by  the  appearance  that  next  morning  I  started  for
Yankton.  The  first  words  the  young  lady  said  when  I  met  her  were,
'  Why,  I  expected  you  all  yesterday  afternoon.  I  thought  I  saw  you
looking  so  pale,  and  your  face  all  bleeding.'  (I  may  say  the  injuries  had
made  no  visible  scars.)  I  was  very  much  struck  by  this  and  asked  her
when  this  was.  She  said,  '  Immediately  after  lunch.'  It  was  just  after
my  lunch  that  the  accident  occurred.  I  took  the  particulars  down  at  the
time.  I  may  say  that  before  I  went  into  Yankton,  I  was  afraid  that
something  had  happened  to  the  young  lady.  I  shall  be  happy  to  send  you
any  further  particulars  you  may  desire.

"  Jno.  T.  Milwaed  Pierce."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Pierce  says  : —

"  I  think  the  vision  lasted  as  long  as  a  quarter  of  a  minute."  He
has  had  no  other  visual  hallucination,  except  that  once,  when  lying  shot
through  the  jaw  by  an  Indian,  he  thought  he  saw  an  Indian  standing  over
him,  and  infers  that  it  was  not  a  real  one,  or  he  would  have  been  scalped.

Mr.  Pierce  wrote  on  May  27th,  1885  :—

"  I  sent  your  letter  to  the  lady,  but  did  not  get  an  answer  before
leaving  England,  and  upon  arriving  here  found  her  very  ill,  and  it  is
only  recently  I  have  been  able  to  get  the  information  you  wished  for.
She  now  wishes  me  to  say  that  she  recollects  the  afternoon  in  question,
and  remembers  expecting  me,  and  being  afraid  something  had  happened,
though  it  was  not  my  usual  day  for  coming ;  but  although  at  the  time  she
told  me  that  she  saw  me  with  a  face  bleeding,  she  does  not  now  appear
to  recollect  this,  and  I  have  not  suggested  it,  not  wishing  to  prompt  her  in
any  way."

In  another  letter  of  July  13th,  1885,  Mr.  Pierce  says: —

"  I  am  sorry  I  can  do  no  better  for  you  than  the  enclosed  letter.  The
fact  seems  to  be  that  events  of  absorbing  interest,  and  illness,  appear  to
have  driven  nearly  all  remembrance  of  the  incident  from  Miss  MacGregor's
mind,  attachiiig  no  particular  importance  to  it  at  first.  I  have  prompted
her  memory,  but  she  only  says,  no  doubt  I  am  right,  but  that  she  can't
now  recollect  it."


.C


158  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

The  letter  enclosed  from  Miss  Macgregor  is  as  follows  : —

"  Yankton,  D.T.

"July  ISth,  1885.

"  I  have  read  the  letter  you  sent  to  Mr  Pierce.  I  am  afraid  I  cannot
now  recall  the  time  you  mention  clearly  enough  to  give  you  any  distinct
recollection.

"  I  remember  feeling  sure  some  accident  had  happened,  but  I  told  Mr.
Pierce  at  the  time  everything  unusual  I  felt,  and  events  that  have  since
occurred  have,  I  am  afraid,  completely  efiaced  all  clear  recollections  of
the  facts.  "  Annie  MacGregor."

Knowing  Mr.  Pierce,  I  have  no  doubt  that  his  recollection  of  what
Miss  MacGregor  told  him  at  the  time  is  substantially  accurate,
and  if  so,  it  would  be  natural  to  interpret  her  experience  as  telepathic.
But  his  vision  may  have  been  purely  subjective.  I  am  not  aware,  it
is  true,  of  any  precisely  parallel  case,  unless  indeed  it  be  Mr.  Pierce's
other  experience,  with  the  Indian.  In  my  collection  of  purely
subjective  cases,  I  have  one  from  a  lady  who  was  troubled  by
hallucinations  for  some  time  after  a  concussion  of  the  brain ;  but
the  blow  which  Mr.  Pierce  received  was  a  comparatively  slight  one.
Still,  seeing  that  on  the  one  hand  his  faculties  may  have  been
momentarily  disordered  by  it,  and  that  on  the  other  the  person  whose
form  he  saw  was  in  a  completely  normal  state  at  the  time,  it  is  safer
not  to  lay  stress  on  the  reciprocal  aspect  of  the  case.

I  2.  The  remaining  cases  are,  I  think,  less  doubtful.  The  follow-
ing account  is  extracted  from  the  evidence  given  by  the  late  Mr.
Cromwell  F.  Varley,  F.RS.,  before  a  Committee  of  the  Dialectical
Society,  on  May  25,  1869  {Report,  p.  161.  Another  case  of  Mr.
Yarley's  will  be  found  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  288).

(305)  "  In  a  second  case  my  sister-in-law  had  heart  disease.  Mrs.  Yarley
and  I  went  into  the  country  to  see  her,  as  we  feared,  for  the  last  time.  I  had
a  nightmare  and  could  not  move  a  muscle,  While  in  this  state,  I  saw  the
spirit^  of  my  sister-in-law  in  the  room.  I  knew  that  she  was  confined  to
her  bedroom.  She  said,  '  If  you  do  not  move  you  will  die  ' ;  but  I  could
not  move,  and  she  said,  '  If  you  submit  yourself  to  me,  I  will  frighten  you,
and  you  will  then  be  able  to  move.'  At  first  I  objected,  wishing  to
ascertain  more  about  her  spirit-presence.  When  at  last  I  consented,  my
heart  had  ceased  beating.  I  think  at  first  her  efibrts  to  terrify  me
did  not  succeed,  but  when  she  suddenly  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Cromwell  !  I  am
dyino-,'  that  frightened  me  exceedingly,  and  threw  me  out  of  the  torpid
state,  and  I  awoke  in  the  ordinary  way.  My  shouting  had  aroused  Mrs.
Varley ;  we  examined  the  door,  and  it  was  still  locked  and  bolted,  and  I
told  my  wife  what  had  happened,  having  noted  the  hour,  3.45  a.m.,  and

1  See  p.  48,  note.


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL   CASES.  159

cautioned  her  not  to  mention  the  matter  to  anybody,  but  to  hear  what  was
her  sister's  version,  if  she  alluded  to  the  subject.  In  the  morning  she  told
us  that  she  had  passed  a  dreadful  night ;  that  she  had  been  in  our  room,
and  greatly  troubled  on  my  account,  and  that  I  had  been  nearly  dying.  It
was  between  3.30  and  4  a.m.  when  she  saw  I  was  in  danger.  She  only
succeeded  in  arousing  me  by  exclaiming,  '  Oh,  Cromwell  !  I  am  dying.'
I  appeared  to  her  to  be  in  a  state  which  otherwise  would  have  ended
fatally."

Even  this  incident  might  possibly  be  explained  (like  case  94)  as
an  instance  of  simultaneous  dreams  ^ — an  independent  and  original
nightmare  of  one  of  the  two  parties  concerned  inducing  that  of  the
other,  without  being  reciprocally  influenced  by  it.  The  next  case,
if  correctly  recorded,  could  not  be  so  regarded.  The  account  is
contained  in  a  letter  from  Mr.  T.  W.  Smith,  late  of  Leslie  Lodge,
Ealing,  to  the  Psychological  Society,  dated  February  26th,  1876,  and
kindly  lent  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  K.  Munton,  who  was  secretary  of  that
Society.  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  known  to  Prof.  Barrett,  left  Ealing
early  in  1877,  and  his  present  address  cannot  be  ascertained.

(306)  "  I  found  the  lady  who  is  now  my  wife  at  a  large  public  institution
to  which  I  was  appointed  headmaster,  in  1872.  On  leaving  her  situation,
I  induced  her,  for  certain  reasons,  to  conceal  the  fact  of  our  intended
marriage  from  those  of  her  friends  whom  she  had  left  behind  at  the
school,  and  the  only  way  to  do  this  was  not  to  write  to  any  of  them.

"  Some  six  months  after  our  marriage,  I  was  reading  in  bed,  according
to  a  habit  of  mine,  my  wife  asleep  at  my  side,  when  she  awoke  suddenly,

sat  up,  and  exclaimed,  in  very  earnest  tones,  '  Oh,  I  have  been  to .'

I,  of  course,  treated  what  she  forthwith  began  to  relate  to  me  as  a  more
than  usually  vivid  dream,  and  the  next  day  ceased  to  think  of  it.  She,
however,  recurred  to  her  dream  from  time  to  time,  and  I  remember  the
circumstantial  way  in  which  she  dwelt  upon  each  point  of  it,  especially  a
peculiar  expression  which  I  did  not  forget,  though  I  made  no  written  note
of  it  at  the  time.  Three  months  later  my  wife  went  to  visit  her  mother,
and  found  there  a  letter  from   one  of  her  friends,  urgently  entreating

some  one  to  write  and  say  whether  Miss (my  wife)  was  alive  or  dead.

I  was  induced  to  go  and  see  the  writer,  and  then  ascertained  the  cause  of
her  hastily-written  and  strangely-worded  epistle.     The  two  occurrences  on
the  same  day — as  well  as  I  could  fix  the  date,  for  neither  of  us  were  quite  '
certain  as  to  that  essential  particular — present  a  coincidence  which  I  have  '
never  been  able  satisfactorily  to  explain  on  any  hypothesis  consistent  with
what  is  at  present  known  of  nature's  laws.

"  My  wife  dreamt  that  she  was  in  a  well-remembered  room,  at  the  base  \
of  the  building,  in   company  with  four  females — two  of  whom   were  old
friends  and  two  strangers  to  her.     They  were  talking  and  laughing  and
preparing  to  retire  to  their  several  sleeping  apartments.     She  saw  one  of
them  turn  off  the  gas.     She  followed  them  upstairs,  entered  with  two  of

1  See  Vol.  i. ,  pp.  314-20,  and  the  opening  cases  in  Chap,  iii.  of  the  Supplement.


160  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

them  into  a  bedroom,  saw  '  Bessie  '  place  some  things  in  a  box,  undress,
and  get  into  bed  ;  then  she  went  to  her,  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  said,
'  Bessie,  let  us  be  friends.'     So  much  for  the  dream.

"  The  writer  of  the  letter  gave  me  this  account  of  what  had  occasioned
her  writing  ;  and  I  need  scarcely  say  that  I  did  not  first  mention  what  my
wife  had  dreamt,  for  in  that  case  it  might  be  supposed  that  I  had  myself
assisted  in  suggesting  the  remarkable  expression,  which,  in  my  opinion,
removes  the  occurrence  from  the  category  of  'remarkable  coincidences.'
She  and  her  friend,  '  Bessie,'  had  gone  to  bed  one  Sunday  night,  when  an
alarming  cry  from  the  latter  brought  the  other  to  her  bedside  :  '  I  have
just  seen '  (my  wife) ;   '  she  touched  me  and  said,  "  Let  us  be  friends."  '

"  The  next  day,  on  discussing  the  matter,  though  some  of  them  thought
that  Bessie  had  been  dreaming,  and  imagined  what  she  declared  she  saw,
others  thought  it  a  '  sign  '  that  my  wife  was  dead.  And  the  one  who  was
the  best  scribe  amongst  them  undertook  to  write  to  the  only  address  they
possessed,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  truth.  The  letter  had  not  been
forwarded  to  us  because  my  wife  had,  it  seems,  told  her  mother  my  wish
that  no  communication  with  her  former  friends  should  take  place.

"  The  odd  thing  about  the  dream  is  that  my  wife  had  always  been  on
good  terms  with  '  Bessie,'  and  was  so  on  parting  with  her.

"In  the  foregoing  account  of  the  dream,  and  what  I  may  call  its
complement,  I  omit  many  minor  points,  such  as  the  fact  that  two  new
comers  had  taken  the  place  of  two  former  friends  of  my  wife ;  that  the
effect  on  both  my  wife  and  Bessie  was  beyond  what  any  ordinary  dream
would  have  produced ;  and  that  the  two  females,  whom  my  wife  in  her
dream  saw  enter  the  bedroom,  did  really  occupy  the  same  room."

[It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  had  no  opportunity  of  ex-
amining the  letter  ;  ^  but  the  correspondence  of  the  two  experiences  would
hardly  have  impressed  Mr.  Smith  as  it  did,  if  it  had  not  included  a  very
striking  detail.]

1  The  importance,  in  these  apparently  reciprocal  cases,  of  obtaining  independent  evi-
dence from  both  sides,  is  well  shown  in  the  following  example,  A  lady  of  good  sense,
occupying  a  responsible  position— whose  name  is  suppressed  not  by  her  wish,  but  because
our  view  of  the  case  differs  considerably  from  hers— wrote  to  us  on  November  29,  1884  :—

"In  the  summer  of  1864,  I  had  cause  for  grave  anxiety  concerning  the  moral  condi-
tion of  a  very  dear  friend.  I  knew  that  W.  had  formed  a  connection  which,  if  persisted
in,  would  lead  to  his  ruin,  present  and  eternal.  On  the  30th  of  August,  1864,  I  retired  to
rest  about  half-past  10.  As  the  clock  struck  11  my  husband  was  alarmed  by  my  violent
sobbing,  which  caused  me  to  awake,  on  which  I  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  husband  !  it  is  all  over
with  poor  W.  I  have  seen  him,  in  my  dream,  brought  under  great  temptation  by  the
wicked  words  of  that  woman.  In  a  passion  of  tears  I  implored  him  to  have  mercy  on
himself.  At  first  he  seemed  to  hesitate,  then,  at  a  sign  from  her,  he  motioned  me  angrily
away,  saying,  "  I  will  have  none  of  your  restrictions.  I  have  been  held  back  by  them  too
long  already."     With  these  bitter  words  I  awoke,  to  find  myself  bathed  in  tears.'

"  For  three  days  this  vision  haunted  me  with  a  tenacity  I  could  not  shake  off.  Judge
then  my  surprise  at  receiving  the  following  narrative  from  W,  :—

"  '  On  the  night  of  August  20th,  while  sitting  smoking  my  cigar  (after  10  p.m.),  the
last  person  on  earth  I  wished  to  see  was  announced.  She  came  forward  to  me  with  words
of  bitter  reproach,  followed  by  tender  persuasion,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  door  of  my
dining-room  again  opened,  and  you  appeared,  in  a  long  white  gown,  your  hair  floating
over  your  shoulders.  With  a  wild  burst  of  weeping  you  implored  me  not  to  listen  to
another  word  she  uttered,  and  when  I  angrily  replied,  "  I  will  have  none  of  your  restric-
tions," with  a  look  of  anguish  unutterable  you  slowly  faded  from  my  sight.  Not  so  the
impression  produced  on  my  mind.  I  felt  God  had  sent  you  as  my  guardia,n  angel,  and,
like  one  of  old,  I  was  not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision.     I  was  saved  in  a  moment


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES,  161

The  evidential  weakness  of  this  narrative  is,  of  course,  the  doubt
as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  Supposing  the  two  experiences
to  have  fallen  on  the  same  night,  we  can  hardly  help  connecting
"  Bessie's  "  impression  (which  seems  to  have  been  a  hallucination  and
not  a  dream)  with  Mrs.  Smith's  remarkable  vision ;  which  latter  is
again,  apparently,  an  instance  of  thought-transference  of  that  extreme
form  which  I  have  described  as  telepathic  clairvoyance.^

That  this  last  word  is  the  appropriate  one  for  describing  (it  is  far
enough  of  course  from  explaining)  the  process  appears  from  other
examples ;  and  a  glance  at  the  condition  of  these  reciprocal  cases
will  show  that  it  would  naturally  be  so.  There  is,  as  a  rule,  no  difficulty
in  deciding  to  which  of  the  two  persons  concerned  the  origin  of  the
complex  phenomenon  should  be  traced ;  since  one  of  the  two  is
in  a  more  or  less  abnormal  condition,  as  compared  to  the  other.  In
Mrs.  Smith's  case,  the  abnormality  (outwardly  at  any  rate)  was  nothing
beyond  sleep  ;  but  in  other  examples  it  is  far  more  pronounced.  If,
then,  it  is  A  who  is  in  the  abnormal  state — dying,  or  whatever  it  may
be — we  attribute  B's  vision  of  him  to  that  state.  But  we  cannot
inversely  attribute  A's  vision  of  B  to  B's  state,  if  B's  state  is
completely  normal.     It  may,  no  doubt,  be  said  that  B's  state  ceases

of  supreme  danger,  and  desire  to  give  God  the  glory  for  so  evident  an  interposition  on
my  behalf. '

"I  did  not  keep  the  letter,  but  am  absolutely  positive  of  its  date  and  its  corroboration
of  the  remarkable  vision.

"E.  A.  A."

Mrs.  A.  's  husband  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"January  29th,  1885.

"  I  can  distinctly  recollect  the  night  on  vi^hich  my  wife  had  the  remarkable  dream
referred  to,  the  particulars  of  which  she  related  to  me  directly  she  awoke.  She  was
greatly  excited  and  much  troubled,  and  repeated  several  times,  '  I  hope  nothing  has
happened  to  W.  G.'

"  A  day  or  two  afterwards — it  may  have  been  the  second  or  third  day ;  of  this  I  am
uncertain — she  received  a  letter  from  our  friend,  which  I  saw  and  read,  and  which  con-
firmed in  an  extraordinary  manner  the  connection  with  her  dream.  Mrs.  A.,  I  think,
has  already  told  you  the  particulars,  which  I  need  not  enter  into  further.

"J.  A."

Now  though  this  account  was  undoubtedly  given  in  good  faith,  it  contains  some  very
suspicious  points.  The  conversational  style  of  interview  between  the  gentleman  (whose
previous  excited  state  naturally  marks  him  as  the  "agent")  and  the  apparition,  finds
hardly  any  parallel  in  our  first-hand  records  ;  and  it  is  rendered  doubly  strange  by  his
accepting  his  friend's  intrusion — at  that  hour  and  in  that  guise — as  a  quite  natural  inci-
dent. We  might  surmise  that  possibly  something  of  a  telepathic  nature  took  place  ;  but
that  it  was  exactly,  or  even  approximately,  what  is  reported  could  not  be  assumed  without
independent  corroboration.  I  therefore  „wrote  to  the  gentleman  concerned,  and  asked
him  whether  he  remembered  having  ever  seen  the  phantasmal  figure  of  a  friend,  whose
visit  was  apparently  intended  to  warn  him  at  a  critical  juncture.  He  replied:  "l
remember  the  circumstance  you  refer  to  distinctly  ; "  adding  that  he  was  at  the  time  over-
wrought in  body  and  mind.  But  on  my  asking  him  whether  any  one  else  was  present  at
the  time,  and  what  were  the  words  spoken,  he  replied,  "  There  was  no  one  present,  nor
any  words  spoken,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  ;  had  there  been,  I  don't  think  I  should
have  forgotten."  Clearly  a  case  where  there  is  this  amount  of  discrepancy  between  the
two  principal  witnesses  cannot  be  quoted  as  evidence.

1  Compare  Mr.  Moule's  case.  Vol.  i.,  p.  110,  note.

VOL.  II.  M


162  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

to  be  normal  at  the  moment  when  A  affects  him  ;  and  that  possibly
the  power  to  react  telepathically  on  the  impression  is  started  by  the
mere  fact  of  receiving  it.  But  the  more  natural  account  of  the
matter  would  surely  trace  A's  impression,  no  less  than  B's,  to  the
peculiarity  of  A's  state — by  supposing  either  that  A's  power  to  act
abnormally  in  a  certain  direction  has  involved  an  abnormal  extension
of  his  own  susceptibility  in  the  same  direction ;  or  else  that  some
independently-caused  extension  of  his  own  susceptibility  has  involved
the  power  to  act  abnormally.^  In  either  case,  his  reception  of  the
impression  would  be  active  rather  than  passive ;  of  the  sort  that  partly
seems  (as  I  tried  to  express  it  before)  like  the  momentary  using  of
B's  faculties — although  B's  state  is  not  now,  as  in  the  former
clairvoyant  pictures  and  dreams,^  supplying  any  exceptional  tele-
pathic stimulus.  Still,  though  A's  percipience  may  not  be  conditioned
by  B's  state,  it  must,  I  conceive,  be  conditioned  by  B's  existence  and
relation  to  A ;  and  the  distinction  again  stands  clear  between
telepathic  clairvoyance,  and  that  alleged  independent  clairvoyance
where  what  is  discerned  cannot  be  traced  in  any  natural  way  to  the
contents  of  any  other  human  mind.

The  next  example  is  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Parker,  of  60,  Elm  Park
Gardens,  S.W.,  who  wrote  to  us  on  May  24th,  1883  : —

(307)  "  The  following  experience  happened  in  the  month  of  November,
1877,  in  Regency  Square,  Brighton.  My  husband  [since  deceased]  was
undergoing  a  course  of  magnetism  from  Mr.  L.,  an  American.  The
treatment  consisted  of  rubbing  by  mesmeric  passes  down  the  back  and
arms  and  legs,  but  in  all  this  there  was  no  intention  of  putting  my  husband
to  sleep.  The  passes  were  intended  to  give  strength.  Mr.  L.  called
himself,  I  believe,  a  professional  mesmerist,  but  at  the  time  we  employed
him  he  was  not  practising  as  such.     He  had  come  to  Brighton  for  rest.

"  After  the  treatment  my  husband  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting,  for  some
hours,  in  his  wheel-chair,  at  the  top  of  the  Square  garden,  and  on  the   day

1  This  latter  hypothesis  seems  specially  applicable  to  cases  where  A's  condition  has
"been  one  of  mere  sleep  or  trance,  and  not  abnormal  in  any  more  serious  way.  For,  con-
sidering that  nearly  all  the  evidence  that  exists  for  the  reality  of  clairvoyance  goes
furtlier  to  show  that  sleep  and  trance  are  the  conditions  most  favourable  to  it,  we  should
certainly  rather  conceive  that  what  enables  A  to  affect  B  is  the  clairvoyant  perception
itself  of  B  or  B's  surroundings,  than  that  this  perception  is  a  secondary  result,  dependent
on  the  fact  that  A  has  impressed  B  by  dint  merely  of  being  asleep  or  entranced.  Case
271,  above,  may  possibly  be  an  instance  of  what  is  meant.  We  should  naturally  expect  that
where  the  conditions  are  much  the  same  on  both  sides,  A's  and  B's  parts  in  the
phenomenon  might  be  exactly  equal  and  parallel — each  being  perceived  by  the  other  in  the
other's  own  environment ;  and  case  644  seems  to  be  an  example  of  this.

1  may  note  here  that  the  evidence  for  a  heightening  of  telepathic  susceptibility  at  the
time  of  death,  and  in  seasons  of  illness,  is  not  confined  to  the  class  of  cases  now  in
question.  See  for  instance  cases  126,  147,  167,  303,  308,  311,  416  ;  and  the  opening
cases  of  Chap.  ii.  of  the  Supplement,  which  are  of  the  more  ordinary  thought-transference
type.

2  Vol.  i.,  pp.  258-67,  338-40,  and  868-88.


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  163

of  which  I  am  writing  he  had  expressed  a  wish  to  stay  out  rather  later
than  usual.  I  went  into  the  house  for  luncheon,  leaving  him  alone,  but
on  looking  out  of  the  window  a  little  later,  at  2  o'clock,  I  saw  a  man
standing  in  front  of  his  chair,  and  apparently  talking  to  him.  I  wondered
who  it  was,  and  concluded  it  must  be  a  stranger,  as  I  did  not  recognise  the
figure,  or  the  wide-awake  hat  and  rather  oddly-cut  Inverness  cape  which
he  wore.  However,  as  it  very  often  happened  that  strangers  did  stop  and
speak  to  him,  I  was  not  surprised.  I  turned  away  my  eyes  for  a  moment,
and  when  I  again  looked  up  the  garden,  the  man  had  disappeared.  I  could
not  see  him  leaving  the  garden  by  any  of  the  numerous  gates,  and  remarked
to  myself  how  very  quickly  he  must  have  walked  to  be  so  soon  out  of  sight.
B-egency  Square  does  not  possess  a  tree  and  scarcely  a  shrub,  so  that  there
was  nothing  to  impede  my  view.

•''  When  my  husband  came  in  a  little  later,  I  said  to  him,  carelessly,
'  Oh,  who  was  that  talking  to  you  in  the  square  just  now  ? '

"  He  replied,  '  No  one  has  spoken  to  me  since  you  left.  No  one  has
even  passed  near  me.'

" '  But  I  saw  a  man  standing  in  front  of  you  and — as  I  thought —
talking  to  you  about  a  quarter-of-an-hour  ago.  His  dress  was  so  odd,  I
couldn't  at  all  tell  who  it  could  be.'

"  At  this  my  husband  laughed,  saying,  '  I  should  think  not,  for  there
was  no  one  to  recognise.  I  assure  you  not  a  soul  has  been  near  me  since
you  left.'

"  '  Have  you  been  asleep  ? '  I  asked,  though  I  did  not  think  it  very
likely.  He  assured  me  he  had  not.  So  the  subject  dropped  ;  still  in  my
own  mind  I  knew  I  had  seen  the  mysterious  figure.

"  Two  days  afterwards,  Mr.  L.,  after  giving  my  husband  his  treatment,
came,  as  was  his  usual  habit,  to  speak  to  me  before  leaving  the  house.
After  a  few  words  and  directions,  he  said,  '  It  is  a  very  odd  thing,  but  the
same  experience  has  happened  to  me  twice  since  I  have  attended  your
husband,  that,  when  in  quite  another  place,  I  have  suddenly  felt  as
if  I  were  standing  by  his  side,  either  in  your  drawing-room  or  out  there  in
the  garden.'

"  I  looked  at  him,  and  for  the  first  time  noticed  his  overcoat  which  he
had  put  on  before  coming  into  the  room,  and  the  wide-awake  in  his  hand.
It  struck  me  that  these  articles  were  very  similar  to  those  worn  by  the
figure  I  had  seen,  and  that  in  every  way  Mr.  L.  resembled  this  same
figure.  I  asked  him  when,  and  at  what  time,  he  had  had  the  last
experience  spoken  of?  'The  day  before  yesterday,' was  the  reply.  'I
had  just  finished  an  early  dinner,  and  was  sitting  in  front  of  the  fire
with  a  newspaper.  It  was  about  2  o'clock ;  I  remember  the  time
perfectly.  Suddenly  I  felt  I  was  no  longer  there,  but  standing  near
your  husband  in  the  Square  garden.'

"  I  then  told  him  of  the  figure  I  had  seen  at  the  same  time  and  place,
and  how  I  now  recognised  it  to  be  his.  Afterwards  I  asked  my  husband
if  he  had  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  Mr.  L.,  but  he  had  not  done  so,
and  had  indeed  forgotten  all  about  it.  My  husband  was  the  only  person
to  whom  I  had  mentioned  the  fact  of  my  vision.  It  could  not  by  any
possibility  have  got  round  to  Mr.  L.  c«  Augusta  Parker."

[In  answer  to  the  inquiry  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  halluci-
VOL.    II.  M   2


cXo


164  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

nation  of  the  senses,  Mrs.  Parker  replied  that  she  had  had  one  other.  It
seems  likely,  however,  that  this  was  merely  a  case  of  mistaken  identity,
the  figure  being  seen  at  the  end  of  a  long  hotel-passage  ;  and  this  was  her
own  impression  at  the  time.]

This  case  again  seems  difficult  to  explain  except  on  the  reciprocal
theory.  It  is  true  that  there  is  not  the  same  proof  in  the  case  of  Mr,
L.  as  in  that  of  Mrs.  Smith  above,  that  the  scene  which  he  saw  was
transferred,  and  not  spontaneously  pictured ;  for  the  place  was
familiar  to  him,  and  no  unusual  details  are  mentioned.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  his  experience  seems  to  have  been  quite  unlike  an
ordinary  dream ;  its  very  unusualness  is  what  allows  us  to  connect  it
with  Mrs.  Parker's  simultaneous  and  unique  vision ;  and  if  we  may
regard  it  as  having  been  conditioned  by  the  presence  in  the  per-
ceived scene  of  his  patient,  Mr.  Parker — who  forms,  so  to  speak,  the
pivot  of  the  case — the  fact  that  Mr.  Parker  himself  was  not  con-
sciously affected  can  still  be  accounted  for  on  the  analogy  of  such
instances  as  Nos.  242  and  355.^

The  next  case  was  one  of  collective  percipience  ;  but  its  best
place  is  in  the  present,  chapter.  The  full  names  of  the  persons  con-
cerned may  be  mentioned,  but  not  printed.     Mrs.   S.,  one  of  the

percipients,  writes : —

"April,  1883.

(308)  "A  and  B^  are  two  villages  in  Norfolk,  distant  about  five  miles
from  each  other.  At  the  time  of  the  occurrence  about  to  be  related,  the
clergymen  of  these  parishes  both  bore  the  same  name,  though  there  was  no
relationship  between  them  ;  at  the  same  time  there  was  a  great  friendship
between  the  two  families.  On  the  20th  February,  1870,  a  daughter,
Constance,  about  14  years  old,  of  the  clergyman  of  A,  was  staying  with
the  other  family — a  daughter,  Margaret,  in  that  family,  being  her  great
friend.  Edward  W.,  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rector  of  A,  was  at  that  time
lying  dangerously  ill  at  home  with  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  and  was
frequently  delirious.  On  the  day  mentioned,  at  about  noon,  Margaret  and
Constance  were  in  the  garden  of  B  Rectory,  running  down  a  path  which
was  separated  by  a  hedge  from  an  orchard  adjoining ;  they  distinctly  heard
themselves  called  twice,  apparently  from  the  orchard,  thus  :  '  Connie,
Margaret — Connie,  Margaret.'  They  stopped,  but  could  see  no  one,  and
so  went  to  the  house,  a  distance  of  about  40  yards,  concluding  that  one  of
Margaret's  brothers  had  called  them  from  there.  But  to  their  surprise  they

1  I  should  further  conjecture  one  of  the  conditions  of  Mrs.  Parker's  percipience  to
have  been  the  fact  that  she  was  actually  contemplating  the  scene  in  which  Mr.  S.  seemed
to  find  himself  (see  pp.  267-9).

2  These  letters  are  substituted  for  those  actually  given  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  The
names  of  the  villages  were  not  suppressed  in  the  accounts  that  follow  ;  but  as  they  were
suppressed  in  this  first  one,  it  has  been  thought  right  to  suppress  them  throughout.


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  165

found  that  this  was  not  the  case;  and  Mrs.  W.,  Margaret's  mother,  assured
the  girls  no  one  had  called  them  from  the  house,  and  they  therefore  con-
cluded they  must  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing  they  had  heard  their
names  repeated.  This  appeared  to  be  the  only  explanation  of  the  matter,
and  nothing  more  was  thought  of  it.

"That  evening  Constance  returned  to  her  home  at  A.  On  the  follow-
ing day,  Mrs.  W.  drove  over  to  inquire  for  the  sick  boy  Edward.  In  the
course  of  conversation,  his  mother  said  that  the  day  before  he  had  been
delirious,  and  had  spoken  of  Constance  and  Margaret,  that  he  had  called
to  them  in  his  delirium,  and  had  then  said,  '  Now  I  see  them  running
along  the  hedge,  but  directly  I  call  them  they  run  towards  the  house.'
Mrs.  W.,  of  B,  at  once  called  to  mind  the  mystery  of  the  previous  day,
and  asked,  '  Do  you  know  at  what  time  that  happened  ? '  Edward's  mother
replied  that  it  was  at  a  few  minutes  past  12,  for  she  had  just  given  the
invalid  his  medicine,  12  being  his  hour  for  taking  it.  So  these  words
were  spoken  by  Edward  at  the  same  time  at  which  the  two  girls  had  heard
themselves  called,  and  thus  only  could  the  voice  from  the  orchard  be
accounted  for.

"M.  K.   S."

(The  "Margaret  "  of  the  narrative.)

The  following  statement  is  from  Mrs.  R.,  the  "  Constance "  of  the
narrative.

"Sept.  1884.

"  Margaret  and  I  were  walking  in  some  fields  at  B.,  away  from  the
road,  but  not  very  far  from  the  house.     Here  I  heard  a  voice  call  '  Connie
and  Margaret '  clearly  and  distinctly.     I  should  not  have  identified  it  with
Ted's  voice  \i.e.,   her  brother's  at  A.],  for  we  thought  it  was  one  of  the  B
brothers  at  the  time,  till  we  found  no  one  had  called  us.     I  remember  that
it  was  before  early  dinner,  and  that  I  was  expecting  to  be  fetched  home  that
same  morning,  because  of  Ted's  illness  ;  and  that  Mrs.  W.  thought  of  ask-
ing mother  if  Ted  had   mentioned  our  names  in  any  way,  before  she  told
her  of  what  had  passed  at  B.     I  ought  to  add  that  an  explanation  of  the  *
story  might  be  found  in  the  conduct  of  some  B  plough-boy,  playing  a  trick  '
upon  us.     The  situation  was  such  that  he  might  easily  have  kept  out  of  '■.
sight  behind  a  hedge.  jj  p    -p,    -o  „

Mr.  Podmore  says  : —

"  November  26th,  1883.

"  I  saw  Mrs.  R.  yesterday.  She  told  me  that  they  recognised  the
voice  vaguely  as  a  well-known  one  at  the  time.  She  thinks  that  the
coincidence  in  time  was  quite  exact,  because  Mrs.  W.  of  B  made  a
note  of  the  circumstance  immediately.  Her  brother^an  old  school-fellow
of  mine — cannot  recollect  the  incident  at  all."

[If  a  written  note  was  made,  the  girls'  experience  must  have  seemed
odder  than  the  "nothing  more  was  thought  of  it "  in  Mrs.  S.'s  account
would  imply.]

Mrs.  W.  of  A  'says  : —

"  My  son  was  about  17  years  old.  He  had  had  fever  and  infiamma-
tion,  and  was  weakened  by  illness.  It  was  about  12  o'clock.  I  was
sitting  with  him,  after  his  washing  and  dressing,  and  he  seemed  quiet  and


166  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  [chap.

sleepy,  but  not  asleep.  He  suddenly  sprang  forward,  pointed  his  finger,
with  arms  outstretched,  and  called  out  in  a  voice  the  loudness  of  which
astonished  me,  '  Connie  and  Margaret ! '  with  a  stress  on  each  name,  '  near
the  hedge,'  looked  wildly  at  them,  and  then  sank  down,  tired.  I
thought  it  odd  at  the  time,  but,  considering  it  a  sort  of  dream,  did  not
allude  to  it.  The  next  day,  Mrs.  W.  called  with  Connie  and  Margaret,
and  said  the  girls  had  heard  their  names  called ;  had  run  home ;  were
walking  by  a  hedge  in  their  field,  had  found  no  one  had  called  them
from  B  Rectory.  The  voice  sounded  familiar,  but  as  far  as  I  can
remember — my  daughter  will  say — it  was  not  distinctly  thought  to  be
Edward's.  I  at  once  told  my  story,  as  it  was  too  striking  not  to  be
named.  They  said  it  was  about  12  o'clock.  Though  he  was  constantly
delirious  in  the  evening,  when  the  pulse  rose,  he  was  never  so  in  the  middle
of  the  day,  and  there  was  no  appearance  of  his  being  so  at  the  time  this
occurred.

"M.  A.  W."
Mrs.  W.  of  B  says  :—

"August,  1884.

"  Connie  was  staying  with  us  on  account  of  the  illness  of  her  brother
Edward,  and  had — with  Margaret — been  reading  with  me  one  morning.
At  about  11.30  they  went  into  the  garden  to  play  (they  were  girls  of
about  1.3  and  14),  and  in  half  an  hour  came  up  to  the  window  to  know
what  I  wanted.  I  said  'Nothing,'  and  that  I  had  not  called  them,
though  they  had  heard  both  their  names  called  repeatedly,  I  asked  them
where  they  were  when  they  heard  it,  and  they  said  in  the  next  walk — -
which,  you  will  remember,  is  formed  on  one  side  by  the  orchard  hedge.
Margaret  said  directly,  '  There,  Connie ;  I  said  it  was  not  mother's,  but  a
boy's  voice.'  Then  I  turned  to  look  at  the  clock — for  we  had  some  boys
as  pupils  then — and  I  said,  '  It  would  not  be  one  of  the  boys,  for  they  are
not  out  of   the  study  ;  it  is  now  12  o'clock,  and  I  hear  them  coming  out.'

"  I  was  to  take  Connie  home  that  afternoon,  ^  and,  on  arriving,  of  course
my  first  question  was,  '  How  was  Edward  V  Mrs.  W.  told  me  that  he  had
not  been  so  well,  and  had  been  very  delirious.  She  said  that  morning  he
had  been  calling,  '  Margaret  !  Connie  !  Margaret  !  Connie  !  Oh,  they  are
running  by  a  hedge,  and  worCt  listen  to  me.'  I  did  not  say  what  had
happened  at  home,  but  asked  if  she  knew  at  what  time  this  had  so
distressed  him.  She  said  'Yes;'  for  she  had  looked  at  the  clock,  hoping
it  was  nearly  time  to  give  him  his  medicine,  which  always  quieted  him,  and
was  thankful  to  find  it  was  just  12  o'clock."

Here  we  seem  to  have,  on  the  part  of  the  two  girls,  a  telepathic
hallucination,  reproducing  the  exact  words  that  were  in  the  mouth
and  ear  of  the  sick  boy ;  and,  on  his  part,  a  vision  reflected  from
their  minds,  and  once  more  illustrating  how  what  might  be  described
as  clairvoyance  may  be  a  true  variety  of  thought-transference.  The
suggestion    at  the  end  of  Mrs.    E,.'s    account   must   not    be   over-

1  The  other  accounts  make  it  probable  that  it  was  not  till  next  day  that  Mrs.  W.  of
B  went  to  A.


XVII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  167

looked;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  know  of  precedents  for  hidden
plough-boys  calling  out  the  Christian  names  of  clergymen's  daughters
and  their  friends.  Nor  do  I  quite  see  how  such  a  freak  could  merit
the  designation  of  a  "  trick  "  ;  it  would  surely  be  a  mere  piece  of
aimless  and  pointless  rudeness — unless,  indeed  the  plough-boy  was
enjoying  a  telepathic  chuckle  at  the  idea  that  his  cry  might  be
confounded  with  another,  which  was  being  simultaneously  uttered
five  miles  off.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  number  of  these  reciprocal  cases  (even
with  the  addition  of  those  in  the  Supplement)  is  small — so  small  that
the  genuineness  of  the  type  might  fairly  enough  be  called  in  question.
There  is  some  danger  that  our  view  of  the  rarer  telepathic  phenomena
may  be  unduly  affected  by  the  sense  of  certainty  that  gradually  and
reasonably  forms  with  regard  to  the  broad  fact  of  telepathy  itself
The  argument  for  the  reality  of  telepathy,  we  must  remember,
depends  on  a  mass  of  narratives  so  large  as  to  make  a  universal  error
in  the  essential  point  of  all  or  nearly  all  of  them  exceedingly
improbable  ;  and  is  not  available  in  respect  of  peculiar  features,  which
are  present  in  only  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  alleged  cases.  For
these,  the  various  possibilities  of  error  so  fully  discussed  in  the  general
sketch  of  the  evidence  (Vol.  I.,  Chap.  IV.)  may  seem  quite  sufficient
to  account ;  and  the  greater  the  theoretic  interest  of  the  peculiarities,
the  more  jealously  must  their  evidential  claims  be  scrutinised.  As  to
reciprocality,  the  reader  will  form  his  own  opinion.  That  the
examples  should  be  few,  as  compared  with  those  of  the  simpler
telepathic  types,  cannot  at  this  stage  of  our  inquiry  seem  unnatural.
For  if,  amid  all  the  apparent  opportunities  that  human  lives  present,
the  unkiiown  and  probably  transient  conditions  of  telepathic  perci-
pience  and  of  telepathic  agency  only  occasionally  chance  to  coincide,
so  as  to  produce  a  telepathic  phenomenon  at  all  (pp.  77-8) ;  and  if,  of
the  two,  the  conditions  of  percipience  are  the  rarer,  as  experimental
thought-transference  would  lead  us  to  suppose ;  then  the  complete
conditions  of  a  reciprocal  case  must  be  rare  among  the  rare.  Still,  if
they  have  occurred,  they  will  occur  again.  If  my  colleagues  and  I  are
right  in  supposing  the  type  to  be  a  genuine  one,  we  ought  to  obtain,
as  time  goes  on,  some  more  well-attested  specimens  of  it ;  and  to  this
we  look  forward  with  considerable  confidence.


[chap.


CHAPTER    XVIII.

COLLECTIVE    CASES.

I  1.  The  telepathic  cases  quoted  in  the  foregoing  chapters  have  almost
all  affected  a  single  percipient  only  ;  and  the  fact  that  sometimes  the
percipient  was  in  company  at  the  time,  and  that  his  sensory
experience  was  unshared  by  any  one  present/  has  confirmed  the  view
(to  which  all  other  considerations  seemed  to  converge)  that  telepathic
affections  of  the  senses  are  in  the  most  literal  sense  hallucinations.
But  we  have  already  encountered  a  few  cases  where  the  senses  of
more  than  one  percipient  have  been  affected  f  and  what  awaits  us  in
the  present  chapter  is  the  discussion  and  complete  illustration  of  this
perplexing  feature.

Of  course  the  first  view  which  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  two
or  more  people  have  seen  or  heard  the  same  thing  at  the  same
time  is  that  the  sight  or  sound,  however  abnormal  and  unaccountable,
was  due  to  some  objective  reality  within  the  range  of  their  sense-
organs — in  other  words,  that  it  was  not  a  hallucination  at  all.^
Hence  those  apparently  telepathic  instances  where  a  sensory
experience,  representative  of  some  absent  person,  has  been  shared  by
more  than  one  percipient,  would  imply  the  immediate  presence  of
some  sort  of  physical  wraith,  or  at  any  rate  of  an  objective  human
presence.

I  scarcely  know  how  far  the  idea  of  a  literal  wraith  is  seriously
entertained  by  any  educated  person  in  the  present  day.  Gaseous
and  vaporous  ghosts  are,  I  imagine,  quite  at  a  discount ;  but  the
word  "  ether "  seems    sometimes  to  be  used  as  a  way  out   of  the

1  See  the  list  of  cases  given  m  p.  105,  second  note.

2  Nos.  14,  36,  169,  254  (first  incident),  258,  264,  279,  302  (second  incident),  308 ;  case
166  is  a  possible  instance.     See  also  the  dream-cases  127  and  144 .

<*  It  was  in  this  occasional  feature  of  collective  percipience  that  Falck,  in  1692,  found
the  strongest  argument  for  the  production  of  hallucinations  by  an  external  and  daemonic
power.  See  p.  72  of  his  able  and  elaborate  dissertation  against  Hobbes  and  Spinoza,  in
De  Ucmonologid  recentiorum  Autorum.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  169

difficulty.  For  many  ears  the  word  has,  no  doubt,  a  convenient
vagueness ;  but,  in  fact,  we  know  of  no  mode  by  which  ether  can
affect  the  retina,  except  through  waves  started  by  luminous  sub-
stances of  known  type.  And  even  if  etherial  ghosts  could  be  seen,
the  auditory  phenomena  would  remain  a  hopeless  obstacle  to  a
satisfactory  physical  explanation  of  them.  For  even  the  assumption
of  some  tenuous  and  elusive  form  of  matter,  which  somehow  hangs
about  in  relation  to  the  mysterious  ether,  seems  less  desperate
than  the  assumption  that  such  a  tenuous  presence  could  move  the
air  in  the  infinitely  complex  vibration-patterns  which  correspond
to  speech  or  music — that  is  to  say,  could  produce  at  will  an  effect
of  inconceivable  difficulty  and  complexity  on  certain  gross  elements
of  the  known  material  world.

As  to  the  notion  of  an  objective  presence  which  may  affect  the
perceptive  faculty  of  several  persons  without  producing  changes  in
the  external  world,  one  sort  of  case  is  conceivable  which  would  no
doubt  favour  it — e.g.,  if  two  persons,  situated  at  some  distance  from
one  another,  saw  the  appearance  in  the  respective  relations  of  dis-
tance and  posture  which  a  real  object  of  the  same  kind  would  bear
to  them — one  of  them,  it  might  be,  seeing  a  full  face,  and  the  other
a  profile.  But  I  know  of  no  examples  of  this  sort.  And  as  a  mere
theory,  the  notion  in  question  may  be  left  with  a  single  general
comment ;  for  though  our  path  skirts,  it  had  better  not  enter,  the
metaphysical  labyrinth  suggested  by  the  words  "  objective  reality."
Let  it  be  conceded  then  that,  where  there  is  a  consensus  of  percep-
tion, it  becomes  a  nice  question  for  Idealism  to  determine  how
far,  or  in  what  sense,  the  percept  lacks  an  objective  basis.  To  put  an
extreme  case — suppose  all  the  seeing  world,  save  one  individual,  had
a  visual  percept,  the  object  of  which  nevertheless  eluded  all  physical
tests  :  would  the  solitary  individual  be  justified  in  saying  that  all
the  others  were  victims  of  a  subjective  delusion  ?  and  if  he  said  so,
would  they  agree  with  him  ?  But  then  in  this  case,  or  in  a  less
extreme  one  of  the  same  kind,  we  might  at  any  rate  ask  one  of  the
perceivers  to  tell  us  what  meaning  he  can  attach  to  the  objectivity
of  his  percept,  beyond  that  it  has  its  existence  in  other  minds  besides
his  own.  If  he  fails  to  supply  us  with  any  further  meaning,  on
him  surely  lies  the  onus  of  proving  that  the  conditions  of  the
percept  lie  outside  the  perceiving  minds  ;  and  if  no  proof  be  forth-
coming, I  then  see  no  definite  way  of  distinguishing  this  "  objective  "
view  of  "  collective  hallucinations  "   from  the  view  to  be  considered


170  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

immediately,  which  regards  the  community  of  percipience  as  a  form
of  thought-transference.^

"  But  " — some  objectors  may  say — "the  question  has  been  begged
by  assuming  that  the  collective  percept  eludes  physical  tests.  True,
apparitions  have  not  yet  been  subjected  to  spectroscopic  analysis,  nor
have  phantasmal  remarks  been  recorded  by  the  phonograph  ;  but
suppose  that  the  form  of  a  dying  person  not  only  appears,  but  opens
the  door  or  the  window,  and  the  door  or  the  window  remains  open,
thus  affording  to  the  muscles  of  the  servant  who  closes  it  a  test  of  a
physical  change  in  the  external  world — what  account  is  to  be  given
of  this  ?  "  Now  clearly  such  phenomena,  even  if  established,  would
afford  no  convincing  analogy  by  which  to  judge  of  cases  where  no
similar  physical  tests  are  included.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no
records  of  the  sort  that  we  have  met  with  have  reached  the  evi-
dential standard  which  would  entitle  them  to  a  place  in  this  book
(see  Vol.  I.,  p.  165) ;  and  until  they  are  established  by  irrefragable
evidence,  there  is  another  analogy  which  has  in  every  way  a  prior
claim — namely,  the  facts  of  telepathy  as  so  far  set  forth.  Cannot
our  further  facts  be  explained  without  going  beyond  the  purely
psychical  transference  for  which  we  believe  that  we  have  ample
evidence  ?

Let  us  see  in  what  ways  a  theory  of  purely  psychical  impres-
sions could  cover  the  phenomena  of  collective  hallucination.  Two
possible  views  of  what  may  happen  present  themselves.  The  first  of
these  would  apply  only  to  veridical  cases — cases  which  are  "telepathic"
in  the  literal  sense.  On  this  view  the  simultaneous  experiences  would
be  traced  to  a  cause  external  to  the  percipients  ;  but  this  cause  would
not  be  a  real  object  within  the  range  of  the  percipients'  senses,  but  a
real  condition  of  an  absent  person.  A,  who  is  passing  through  some
crisis  at  a  distance,  produces  a  simultaneous  telepathic  impression  on
the  minds  of  B  and  of  C,  who  happen  to  be  together;  both  B  and  C
project  this  impression  as  a  hallucination  of  the  senses,  in  the  way
that  has  been  so  fully  considered  ;  and  the  hallucinations  more  or  less
nearly  resemble  each  other.

The  second  view  would  apply  equally  to  the  cases  which  are,  and
to  those  which  are  not,  telepathic,  in  this  literal  sense  of  relating  to  a

1  A  j3st/cfeica^  condition  outside  the  perceiving  minds  might,  no  doubt,  be  found  in
"  disembodied  intelligence ."  For  the  present,  it  is  enough  to  remark  that  this  change
of  "  agency  "  to  some  further  mind  would  leave  the  nature  of  the  phenomenon  unchanged.
Experience  thus  caused  may  be  called  objective,  if  we  will,  but  it  is  still  thought-
transference  ;  just  as  in  Berkeley's  view  the  whole  objective  universe  was  only  thought-
transference  in  excelsis.


xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  171

distant  agent.  The  view  is  that  the  hallucination  of  one  percipient,
however  caused,  begets  that  of  the  other,  by  a  process  of  thought-
transference  ;  the  hallucination  is  in  itself,  so  to  speak,  infectious.  B
and  C  are  together,  and  B  has  a  hallucination — it  may  be  veridical  and
due  to  a  telepathic  impression  from  the  distant  A,  or  it  may  be  non-
veridical  and  due  to  a  spontaneous  pathological  disturbance  of  B's
own  brain ;  and  this  experience  of  B's  is  then  communicated  to  C,
whose  brain  follows  suit  and  projects  a  kindred  image.  The  process
in  fact  would  strongly  recall  those  cases  of  simultaneous  dreaming
where  one  dream  may  be  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  other.^  It
would  be  a  fresh  example  of  the  psychological  identity  between  the
sleeping  and  the  waking  hallucinations  on  which  so  much  stress  has
already  been  laid.

Such  are  the  two  possible  views ;  and  we  have  now  to  decide  how
far  either,  or  both,  may  be  reasonably  entertained.  I  may  state  at
once  that  in  my  opinion  the  best  solution  that  the  problem  at  present
admits  of  involves  a  certain  combination  of  the  two  (see  §  7  below) ;
but  I  shall  consult  clearness  by  first  considering  each  of  them
separately.

§  2.  First,  then,  as  regards  the  theory  of  the  simultaneous  origi-
nation of  two  or  more  hallucinations  by  a  distant  agent — we
certainly  know  of  no  reason  why  a  state  of  the  agent  which  is
telepathically  effective  at  all,  should  be  bound  to  confine  its  effects
to  a  single  percipient.  That  it  generally  does  so  confine  them,
may  be  easily  explained  by  supposing  a  special  susceptibility  on  the
percipient's  part,  or  a  special  rapport  between  him  and  the  agent ;
but  that  occasionally  the  impression  should  extend  to  others,
who  Jiave  also  been  sympathetically  related  to  the  agent,  may
seem  no  very  astounding  fact.  Now  if  the  impression  were  a
merely  inward  experience,  an  impression  of  a  merely  ideal  or
emotional  kind,  and  did  not  give  rise  to  actual  hallucination,
this  account  of  the  matter  might  be  plausible  enough  :  it  would
apply  for  instance  to  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson's  case,  Vol.  I.,  p.  99.  But  it
will  be  remembered  that  we  have  seen  reason  to  regard  the
hallucination  as  distinctively  the  percipient's  work — as  something
projected  by  him  under  a  telepathic  stimulus  ;  and  we  have  found  these
sensory  projections  to  take  various  forms  according  to  the  projector's
idiosyncrasies.     We    have    found,   moreover,    that    the    time    during

1  Vol.  i.,  pp.  314-20,  and  the  opening  cases  in  Chap.  iii.  of  the  Supplement.


172  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

which  such  hallucinations  may  take  place  extends  over  several  hours
— that  we  cannot  name  an  exact  moment  at  which  the  telepathic
message  will  reach  consciousness,  or  externalise  itself  to  the  sense.  It
becomes,  then,  extremely  improbable  that  two  or  more  persons  should
independently  invest  their  respective  telepathic  impressions,  at  the
same  moment,  with  the  sarfie  sensory  form ;  that  they  should  all  at
once  see  the  same  figure,  or  hear  the  same  sound,  in  apparently  the
same  place.  We  should  expect  to  find  one  of  them  embodying  it  in
sound,  and  another,  perhaps  half  an  hour  later,  in  visible  shape  ;  or
one  of  them  embodying  it  in  sound  or  shape,  and  another  only
conscious  of  it  as  an  inward  idea ;  and  so  on.  And  for  divergences
of  this  sort,  the  evidence,  though  it  exists,  is  small  in  amount.

But  this  is  not  all.  On  the  theory  that  joint  telepathic  hallucina-
tions are  all  exclusively  and  directly  due  to  a  distant  agent,  there  is
one  thing  that  we  should  not  expect  to  happen,  and  one  thing  that
we  should  expect  to  happen.  (1)  We  should  not  expect  the  group  of
percipients  to  include  anyone  who  was  a  stranger  to  the  agent ;  or
who  was  not  personally  in  such  relations  with  the  agent  as  would
have  rendered  it  natural  for  him,  had  he  chanced  to  be  alone  at  the
time,  to  suffer  the  same  telepathic  experience.  Nevertheless,  cases
exist  where  such  an  outside  person  has  shared  in  the  perception.
And  (2)  we  should  expect  that  in  a  fair  proportion  of  cases  two  or  more
percipients  would  share  the  perception,  though  they  were  not  in  each
other's  company  at  the  time.  For  on  the  theory  that  is  being
considered,  there  would  be  no  virtue  in  the  mere  local  proximity  of
the  percipients  to  one  another ;  the  agent  is  supposed  to  affect  them
by  dint  of  his  respective  relations  to  each  of  them,  which  have
nothing  to  do  with  their  being  together  or  apart.  Now,  in  point  of
fact,  we  have  a  group  of  cases  where  the  persons  jointly  affected  have
been  apart,  but  they  are  disproportionately  rare  in  comparison  with
the  experiences  shared  by  percipients  who  have  been  together ;
and  in  several  of  them,  moreover,  B  and  C,  the  two  percipients,  were
near  each  other,  and  had  been  to  some  extent  sharing  the  same  life —
conditions  which  may  have  had  their  share  in  the  effect  (see
pp.  266-8).  However,  the  existence  of  this  type  might  no  doubt
be  regarded  as  an  argument  for  the  occasional  production  ah  extra
of  several  similar  and  simultaneous  hallucinations  ;  and  our  few
specimens  may  conveniently  be  cited  at  once.

I  have  already  given  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  362-3)  a  case  where  two  vivid
dreams  of  a  quite  unexpected  death  were  dreamt  by  persons  who


xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  173

were  in  the  same  house,  but  not  in  the  same  room.  The  following
is  a  somewhat  similar  instance,  but  only  one  of  the  experiences  was  a
dream.  Mrs.  Bettany,  of  2,  Eckington  Villas,  Ashbourne  Grove,
Dulwich  (the  narrator  of  case  20,)  writes  : —

"June,  1885.

(309)  "  On  the  evening  o£,  I  think,  March  23rd,  1883,  I  was  seized
with  an  unaccountable  anxiety  about  a  neighbour,  whose  name  I  just
knew,  but  with  whom  I  was  not  on  visiting  terms.  She  was  a  lady  who
appeared  to  be  in  very  good  health.  I  tried  to  shake  off  the  feeling,  but
I  could  not,  and  after  a  sleepless  night,  in  which  I  constantly  thought
of  her  as  dying,  I  decided  to  send  a  servant  to  the  house  to  ask  if  all
were  well.     The  answer  I  received  was,  '  Mrs.  J.  died  last  night.'

"  Her  daughter  afterwards  told  me  that  the  mother  had  startled  her
by  saying,  '  Mrs.  Bettany  knows  I  shall  die.'

"  I  had  never  felt  an  interest  in  the  lady  before  that  memorable
night.  After  the  death,  the  family  left  the  neighbourhood,  and  I  have
not  seen  any  of  them  since.

"  JeANIE    G WYNNE    BeTTANY."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  J.  died  on   March  23,

1883.

The  following  is  the  evidence  of  the  servant  who  was  sent  to
inquire  : —

"January,  1886.

"  I  remember  Mrs.  Bettany  sending  me  to  inquire  if  all  were  well  at
Mrs.  J.'s.  The  answer  they  gave  me  was  that  Mrs.  J.  was  dead.  Mrs.
Bettany  sent  me  to  inquire,  because  she  had  a  presentiment  that  Mrs.  J.
was  dead  or  dying."

Mrs.  Bettany  adds  : —

"  My  cook,  to  whom  I  had  not  mentioned  my  presentiment,  remarked
to  me  on  the  same  morning :  'I  have  had  such  a  horrible  dream  about
Mrs.  J.,  I  think  she  must  be  going  to  die.'  She  distinctly  remembers  that
some  one  (she  does  not  know  who,  and  I  think  never  did)  told  her  in  her
dream  that  Mrs.  J.  was  dead."

The  following  is  the  first-hand  evidence  to  the  dream  : —

"January  11th,  1886.

"  I  remember  that  some  one  in  my  dream  said  '  Mrs,  J.  is  dead.'  I  do
not  remember  the  rest  of  the  dream,  but  I  know  it  was  horrible.  I
told  Mrs.  Bettany  at  the  time,  and  she  then  told  me  about  her  presentiment
about  Mrs.  J.  "  M.  Went."

[M.  Went  has  occasionally  dreamt  of  the  deaths  of  people  she  knows,
without  any  correspondence.]

This  case  would  seem  to  have  been  in  some  way  "reciprocal";
and  it  is  unfortunate  that  we  cannot  obtain  further  details  of  the
dying  woman's  impression.


174  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

The  next  is  a  waking  and  sensory  example  of  the  same  kind.     It

was  first  obtained  in  writing  from  Mrs.   Fagan,  of   Bovey  Tracey^

Newton   Abbot,   the   mother   of  one   of  the   percipients ;   and   her

account  exemplifies  the  inaccuracies  which  second-hand  evidence  may

sometimes  introduce,  without  really  affecting  the  case  in  any  vital

point.

"  1883.

(310)  "While  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  [Mrs.  Fagan's  son],  then
Chaplain  of  Sealkote,  India,  was  dressing  for  dinner  on  Christmas  Day
evening,  1876,  his  cousin,  Christopher  ^  Fagan,  being  similarly  employed
in  an  adjacent  room,  both  heard  the  name  'Fagan  '  called.  The  Rev.  C.
C.  T.  Fagan,  though  thinking  it  strange  his  cousin  should  thus  address  him,
yet  knowing  no  one  else  was  in  the  house,  went  to  him  asking  what  he
wanted,  why  he  had  not  called  him  'Charlie  '  as  usual,  and  remarking
that  the  voice  was  like  that  of  Captain  Clayton,  a  cavalry  officer,  who  had
been  under  his  pastoral  charge,  but  was  then  at  a  distant  station.  His
cousin  replied  that  he  too  had  heard  the  voice,  and  probably  it  was  that
of  Major  Collis,  whom  they  were  expecting  to  dinner.  Upon  this  they
adjourned  to  the  drawing-room,  where  they  found  the  Major,  but  as  he
had  only  just  come  in,  he  had  neither  called  nor  heard  the  voice.

"  While  telling  him  of  what  had  occurred,  they  all  three  heard  the  same
voice  repeat  the  same  name,  and  Major  Collis  remarked,  '  It  is  like
Clayton's  voice.'

"  The  next  morning  a  telegram  was  received  to  the  effect  that  Captain
Clayton  died  at  that  hour  from  an  accident  received  while  playing  at  polo."

Major  Collis  told  our  friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  of  Clerkenwell,
that  Mr.  Fagan  and  his  cousin  were  standing  in  the  doorway  of  the  drawing-
room  talking,  when  they  heard  the  call,  "  Fagan."  He  himself  was
dressing  in  his  room,  and  they  called  out  to  him  to  know  what  he  wanted  ;
but  he  had  not  spoken,  nor  had  he  heard  the  call.  Whilst  they  were  talking
together,  the  voice  came  a  second  time,  and  all  three  heard  it.

On  being  applied  to  with  regard  to  the  discrepancy  between  these  two
accounts,  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  writes  : —

"  Sitapur,  August  25th,  1883.

"  So  far  as  my  memory  serves,  the  statement  of  Major  Collis  is
correct  as  to  the  curious  coincidence  of  which  he  has  told  you.  He  was
certainly  staying  in  my  house  at  the  time,  and  was  not  a  guest  merely
havited  to  dinner — as  my  cousin  was.  I  cannot  now  say  who  suggested
the  voice  sounded  like  that  of  Captain  Clayton.  "  C.  C  T  Fagan  "

Mr.  Fagan  says,  however,  in  another  letter :  "I  am  under  the
impression  that  my  cousin  did  not  hear  the  voice."  He  adds  :  "  At  or
about  the  time  in  question,  and  on  more  occasions  than  one,  I  have
imagined  that  I  heard  people  calling  me,  but,  I  may  add,  this  experience
is  now  seldom  or  ever  happening  to  me."

1  By  a  slip,  Mrs.  Fagan  has  called  her  nephew  by  her  son's  name — Christopher,  instead
of  George.


xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  175

Major  Collis  writes  to  us  on  August  2,  1884  : —

"  3,  Barton  Terrace,  Dawlish.

"  In  reply  to  the  questions  you  ask,  I  have  never  had  experience  of
any  other  auditory  hallucination  :  neither  have  I  ever  had  any  hallucina-
tions of  the  senses  whatever.  "  G.  Collis."

Mr.  Fagan's  cousin.  Lieutenant  G.  Forbes  Fagan,  of  the  10th  Lancers,
writes  to  us  : —

"  Simla,  July  31st,  1885.

"  I  remember  that  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  on  which  Captain
Clayton  met  his  death,  I  was  in  the  Rev.  C.  Fagan's  house  at  Sealkote  ;
and  he  said  he  had  heard  his  mother's  voice  calling  to  him,  and  that
something  was  sure  to  happen.  I  heard  no  voice  myself.  When  news
arrived  of  Captain  Clayton's  death,  my  cousin  said  the  voice  must  have
had  some  connection  with  it.  "  G.  F.  Fagan."

In  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Fagan,  Prof  essor  Sidgwick  learnt  that  Captain
Clayton  was  intimate  with  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan,  and  also  knew  Major
Collis.

The  Calcutta  Englishman  of  December  28th,  contains  a  telegram  of
December  26th  :  "  Last  evening  Captain  Clayton,  extra  aide-de-camp  to
the  Viceroy,  was  thrown  while  playing  polo,  and  died  during  tlie  night."

In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  the  hour  of  the  accident,  Major  Lord
William  Beresford  writes  to  us  : —

"As  well  as  I  remember,  it  was  6.15  in  the  evening  of  Christmas
Day,  1876,  and  he  died  in  my  arms  exactly  as  the  clock  struck  12.  He
never  spoke  after  he  fell."

[The  somewhat  ragged  form  in  which  this  evidence  is  presented  is  due
to  the  fact  that  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan  and  Major  Collis  are  understood  to
dislike  the  subject,  and  that  we  have  scrupled  to  press  them.  But  it  seems
quite  certain  that  at  a  time  closely  corresponding  to  that  of  the  accident,  two
percipients,  one  of  whom  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  heard  a
voice  which  belonged  to  no  one  in  their  vicinity.  As  to  the  immediate
connection  of  the  voice  with  Captain  Clayton,  the  evidence  is  not  so  clear  ;
but  as  regards  Lieut.  Fagan's  recollections,  we  cannot  but  remark  the
extreme  unlikelihood  that  the  two  hearers  should  imagine  Mrs.  Fagan's
voice  as  calling  her  son  by  his  surname ;  and  also  the  unlikelihood  that,
if  it  was  her  voice  that  her  son  recognised,  he  should  have  altered  this
interesting  point  in  the  account  which  he  gave  her.  The  case  is,  of
course,  to  some  extent  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the  Rev.  C.  C.  T.  Fagan
has  had  other  auditory  hallucinations.  It  is  worth  adding,  however,  i
that  one  of  these  experiences,  when  he  heard  his  mother's  voice  urgently
calling  him,  proved  to  have  coincided  with  a  very  sudden  and  exceptional
longing  for  his  presence  on  her  part  (Supplement^  Chap.  YL,  §  1)  ;  and
it  may  possibly  have  been  the  mention  of  this  fact  that  caused  a  confusion
in  Lieut.  Fagan's  memory,  and  led  him  to  associate  Mrs.  Fagan  with  the
present  experience.]

The  following  case  is  part  of  a  record  of  some  singular  hypnotic
experiences,    of  which    some    further    specimens   will    be   given   in


176  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

Chap.  I.,  I  3,  of  the  Supplement.     Mrs.  John  Evens,  of  Oldbank,

Enniskillen,  narrates  as  follows  : —

"  December  4th,  1885.

(311)  "  With  regard  to  the  apparition  or  optical  illusion,  I  have  a  perfect
and  clear  remembrance.  It  occurred  after  the  experience  related  [i.e.,
after  a  cataleptic  fit  produced  under  hypnotic  influence].  The  operator
had  left  me  with  an  earnest  request  to  my  husband  to  send  for,  or
fetch  him,  should  anything  seem  to  require  it.

"  I  was  wide  awake,  and  enjoying  the  freedom  from  pain ;  my  room
being  carefully  darkened.  The  operator  had,  while  with  me,  been
seated  on  a  chair  midway  between  my  bed  and  a  chest  of  drawers — about
three  feet  from  each.  I  was  thinking  very  gratefully  of  the  rehef  I  had
experienced,  when  I  noticed  a  blueish-white  light  round  the  chair.  It
seemed  to  be  flickering  and  darting  in  a  large  oval,  but  gradually  con-
centrated on  a  figure  seated  on  the  chair.  ^  The  appearance  did  not
startle  me  in  the  least ;  my  first  thought  was,  '  It  is  Mr.  T.,  a  young
officer  with  whom  we  were  very  intimate,  and  who  had  been  in  the
house  that  evening.  But  the  expression  of  the  mouth  struck  me  then,
and  I  thought  '  Can  it  be  Mr.  D.  1 ' — a  dear  friend  who  had  died  some
Httle  time  before.  All  this  time  the  face  seemed  to  be  changing,  and,  as
it  were,  settling.  Suddenly  it  flashed  into  my  mind  '  It  is  Mr.  B.'  (the
father  of  the  operator).  I  did  not  know  this  gentleman  at  all,  except
from  having  seen  his  photograph,  but  had  no  doubt  on  the  subject.
(Curiously  enough  his  mouth  and  that  of  Mr.  D.'s  were  singularly  alike
in  expression.)  The  figure  sat  in  a  kind  of  dim  halo.  I  felt  no  sur-
prise ;  nor  did  I  speak  to  it,  but  thought,  '  Oh,  you  have  come  to  find
P.  (the  son)  ;  he  has  been  here  all  the  evening,  but  has  gone  home  now.'
As  I  thought  this  the  halo  gradually  diffused  itself,  as  it  had  before
become  concentrated,  and  the  figure  vanished.  Besides  the  distinctness  of
feature,  a  movement,  of  crossing  and  uncrossing  the  knees  two  or  three
times,  struck  me.

"  That  same  night,  and  it  must  have  been  nearly  at  the  same  time,
the  friend  who  had  magnetised  me  was  awoke  by  hearing  his  name
called  twice.  His  impression  was  that  I  needed  his  aid,  and  he  was
prepared  to  come  (he  was  living  a  mile  off),  if  he  heard  the  call  repeated.
But  it  was  not.  The  next  day,  when  I  saw  him,  without  telling  him
any  of  this,  I  asked,  '  Has  your  father  any  noticeable  habit  or  trick  of
movement?'  At  first  he  said  'No,'  and  then,  'unless  you  would
describe  as  such  a  way  he  has  of  frequently  crossing  and  uncrossing  his
knees.     He  has  varicose  veins,  and  is  restless  at  times  ! '

"  This  was  the  whole  matter.  The  father,  who  dislikes  such  subjects,
would  never  say  whether  he  had  dreamed  or  been  thinking  intently  of
his  son ;  but  probably  it  was  so.  "  Agnes  Evens."

In  a  letter  dated  18th  December,  1885,  Mrs.  Evens  writes  that  she
thinks  the  occurrence  took  place  in  September  or  October,  1881.  She
has  never  experienced  any  other  visual  hallucination.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : —

1  As  to  the  oval,  see  the  remarks  on  case  220 ;  as  to  the  gradual  appearance  and
gradual  disappearance,  see  Chap,  xii.,  §§  2  and  3,  also  above,  p.  73,  note,  and  p.  97 ;  and
compare  case  315  below.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  177

(1)  "  I  cannot  be  sure  as  to  the  time  at  which  I  saw  the  appearance,
but,  putting  circumstances  together,  I  should  think  between  12  and  1
o'clock — nearer  the  latter  hour.

(2)  "lam  perfectly  certain  that  I  uttered  no  sound ;  the  phantom's
disappearance  seemed  to  answer  to  the  thought  that  passed  through  my
mind,  '  You  want  Preston ;  he  has  been  here  all  the  evening,  but  went
back  to  Fort  Tourgis  some  time  since.'

(3)  "  I  had  not  any  wish  for  his  presence.  I  was  lying  in  quiet
enjoyment  of  the  relief  from  agonising  pain  and  quivering  nerves,  in
which  condition  one  has  no  active  line  of  thought.  I  very  likely
thought  about  him,  with  a  lazy  kind  of  gratitude  to  him  as  the  author  of
the  relief  I  was  experiencing."

Captain  Battersby,  R.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  of  Ordnance  House,  Enniskillen,
son-in-law  of  Mrs.  Evens,  writes  : —

"December  21st,  1885.

"  I  had  mesmerised  Mrs.  E.  for  several  months,  for  severe  neuralgia,
with  the  view  of  affording  her  natural  sleep.  One  night  she  had  been
in  the  mesmeric  trance,  and  had  been  awoke  by  me,  and  I  had  returned
to  barracks — situated  about  half-a-mile  from  her  house — leaving  her  in
her  room.  I  went  to  bed,  and  to  sleep,  and  was  awakened  with  a  start
by  hearing  my  name  called  very  distinctly.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and
looked  for  the  caller,  but  saw  no  one.  It  was  too  dark  to  look  at  my
watch,  so  that  I  cannot  say  what  the  time  may  have  been.  It  oc-
curred to  me  at  the  time  that  Mrs.  E.  might  want  me  for  something.
I  did  not  recognise  the  voice,  and  indeed  had  no  chance  of  doing  so,
as  it  did  not  call  again.  In  the  morning  I  went  to  see  Mrs.  E.,  in
order  to  find  out  whether  she  had  had  any  unusual  experience.  She
asked  me  if  anything  had  happened  to  me  the  night  before.  I  said
'  Yes,'  and  asked  her  why  she  put  the  question.  She  said,  '  Has  your
father  a  habit  of  moving  one  leg  over  the  other,  now  and  then,  in  a
restless  way  1 '  This  was  the  case.  She  then  said,  about  1  a.m.  she  had
been  roused  from  sleep,  and  saw  a  phosphorescent  appearance  on  the
chair  near  her  bed,  which  resolved  itself  into  a  human  figure,  recognised
by  her  as  my  father  from  a  photograph  in  my  possession.  It  did  not
speak,  but  seemed  to  ask  her  mentally  '  Where  is  Preston  ? '  To  which
she  responded,  also  mentally,  '  He  was  here,  but  is  gone  home  ' ;  whereon
the  figure  disappeared.  I  was  somewhat  alarmed  at  the  occurrence,  and
wrote  to  ask  if  my  father  was  well.  He  was  so  ;  and  did  not  remember
having  any  dream  of  me  on  that  night.  Mrs.  E.  particularly  remarked
his  habit  of  crossing  first  one  leg  and  then  the  other,  of  which  I  had  not
previously  told  her.

"  T.  Peeston  Battersby."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Captain  Battersby  says  : —

"  I  beg  to  say  that  at  no  time,  except  on  the  occasion  referred  to  by
me  in  my  previous  letter,  have  I  woke  from  sleep  with  the  impression  of
having  been  called  In  fact  this  was  the  only  occasion  in  my  life  in  which
I  heard  or  saw  anything  unusual."

The  "  collective  "  character  of  these  two  experiences  is  clearly
very  doubtful ;  they  may  not  have  been  due  to  any  agency  on  the

VOL     II.  N


178  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

part  of  Captain  Battersby's  father,  or  connected  with  each  other.  But
considering  that  the  accidental  coincidence  of  the  two  unique  ex-
periences would  be  most  improbable,  and  that  a  hypnotic  rapport
probably  existed  between  Captain  Battersby  and  his  patient,  it  is  a
reasonable  supposition  that  his  mind  was  either  the  source  or  the
channel  of  a  telepathic  communication  to  hers.

The  next  case  was  received  from  Mrs.  Poison,  of  4,  Nouvelle  Route

de  Yillefranche,  Nice.

"January,  1884.

(3 1 2)  "  Some  years  since,  when  living  at  Woolstone  Lodge,  Woolstone,
Berks,  of  which  parish  and  church,  &c.,  &c.,  my  husband  was  clerk  in
Holy  Orders,  I  left  the  fireside  family  party  one  evening  after  tea,  to  see
if  our  German  bonne  could  manage  a  little  wild  Cornish  girl  to  prepare
her  school-room  for  the  morning.  As  I  reached  the  top  of  the  stairs  a
lady  passed  me  who  had  some  time  left  us.  She  was  in  black  silk  with  a
muslin  '  cloud  '  over  her  head  and  shoulders,  but  her  silk  rustled.  I  could
just  have  a  glance  only  of  her  face.  She  glided  fast  and  noiselessly  (but
for  the  silk)  past  me,  and  was  lost  down  two  steps  at  the  end  of  a  long
passage  that  led  only  into  my  private  boudoir,  and  had  no  other  exit.  I
had  barely  exclaimed  '  Oh,  Caroline,'  when  I  felt  she  was  a  something  un-
natural, and  rushed  down  to  the  drawing-room  again,  and  sinking  on  my
knees  by  my  husband's  side,  fainted,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  I  was
restored  to  myself  again.  The  next  morning,  I  saw  they  rather  joked  me
at  first ;  but  it  afterwards  came  out  that  the  little  nursery  girl,  while
cleaning  her  grate,  had  been  so  frightened  by  the  same  appearance,  '  a  lady
sitting  near  her,  in  black,  with  white  all  over  her  head  and  shoulders,  and
her  hands  crossed  on  her  bosom,'  that  nothing  would  induce  her  to  go
into  the  room  again  ;  and  they  had  been  afraid  to  tell  me  over  night  of
this  confirmation  of  the  appearance,  thinking  it  would  shake  my  nerves
still  more  than  it  had  done.

"  As  chance  would  have  it,  many  of  our  neighbours  called  on  us  the
next  morning — Mr.  Tufnell,  of  Uffington,  near  Faringdon,  Archdeacon
Berens,  Mr.  Atkins,  and  others.  All  seemed  most  interested,  and  Mr.
Tufnell  would  not  be  content  without  noting  down  particulars  in  his  own
pocket-book,  and  making  me  promise  to  write  for  inquiries  that  very  night,
for  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Henry  Gibbs.  She  had  been  staying  with  us  some
time  previously  for  a  few  days,  and  I  had  a  letter  half  written  to  her  in
the  paper  case.

"  I  wrote  immediately  to  my  uncle  (the  Rev.  C.  Crawley,  of  Hartpury,
near  Gloucester,)  and  aunt,  and  recounted  all  that  had  happened.  By
return  of  post,  '  Caroline  is  very  ill  at  Belmont '  (their  family  place
then),  '  and  not  expected  to  live ' ;  and  die  she  did  on  the  very  day  or
evening  she  paid  me  that  visit.  The  shock  had  been  over-much  for  a  not
very  strong  person,  and  I  was  one  of  the  very  few  members  of  the
Crawley  or  Gibbs  family  who  could  not  follow  the  funeral.

"  Georgiana  Polson."

[The  three  gentlemen  whom  Mrs.  Poison  mentions  as  having  been
immediately  informed  of  her  experience,  have  since  died.     If  the  narrative


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.        •  179

should  happen  to  meet  the  eye  of  any  near  relative  of  the  late  Rev.  G,
Tufnell,  it  might  perhaps  be  possible  to  find  out  whether  the  entry  in  the
pocket-book  is  still  existing.  According  to  the  account,  it  would  appear
that  the  Rev.  C.  Crawley  had  not  heard  of  the  death  on  the  second
morning  after  its  occurrence.  This  may  seem  a  little  unlikely  (as  he  was
a  relative  living  at  no  very  great  distance),  but  is  still  quite  possible.]

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Poison  adds  : —

"  I  have  never  before  or  since  suffered  from  any  experience  of  the
kind  [i.e.,  had  any  visual  hallucination].

"  I  cannot  give  you  the  date,  it  was  so  long  ago.  Still,  the  past  days
are  often  present  with  me,  and  the  scenes  of  that  night  are  as  fresh  in
remembrance  as  if  all  had  occurred  yesterday.

"I  have  no  idea  whatever  what  became  of  the  Cornish  nursery  girl.

"  I  wrote  to  my  aunt  and  uncle,  near  Gloucester,  to  tell  them  of  what
had  occurred.  They  replied  they  had  heard  Mrs.  Gibbs  (Caroline)  was
very  ill,  and  the  next  communication  informed  us  of  her  departure  ;  but  I
do  not  remember  whether  it  took  place  earlier  in  the  afternoon  or  later  at
night  than  when  I  saw  her."

The  following  is  from  the  lady  who  was  with  Mrs.  Poison  as  governess
at  the  time  : —

"  Clarence  Yilla,  Church  Road,  Watford.

"January  11th,   1884.

"  I  do  not  in  the  least  object  to  let  you  know  what  I  remember  of
the  incident  you  mention.  Many  years  ago  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Poison,  with
the  children  and  myself,  were  sitting  one  evening  in  the  drawing-room  at
Woolstone.  In  the  middle  of  the  evening  Mrs.  Poison  left  the  room,  but
soon  returned  ;  remaining  silent,  I  looked  up,  and  saw  her  drop  down  on
the  rug  fainting.  When  she  recovered,  she  told  us  she  had  seen  Mrs.
Gibbs  on  before  her  in  the  long  passage.

"  I  recollect  hearing  that  the  little  Cornish  girl  said  she  had  seen  that
same  apparition  while  cleaning  her  grate.  As  to  the  date  of  the  incident
I  can  only  say  that,  to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  it  happened  before  the
year  1851.  "  H.  L.Mackenzie."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  Mrs.  Gibbs  died  on  February
16,  1850.

In  the  next  case  one  of  the  experiences  was  emotional,  not  sensory,
but  was  apparently  of  a  very  marked  sort.  The  account  is  from  an
intelligent  informant,  who  has  been  for  many  years  in  the  service  of
a  family  kDown  to  the  present  writer.  Neither  the  witness  nor  (he
believes)  his  mother  ever  had  any  other  experience  of  the  sort.  His
mother  has  been  dead  for  some  years.

"  9,  Blandford  Place,  Clarence  Gate,  Regent's  Park.

"October  21st,  1882.

(313)  "In  the  winter  1850-51,  I,    Charles    Matthews,  was   living   as
butler,   25   years  of  age,  with  General  Morse  at  Troston  Hall,  near  Bury
St.  Edmunds.  My  mother,  Mary  Ann  Matthews,  was  in  the  same  establish-
ment as  cook  and  housekeeper,  a  very  upright  and  conscientious   woman,
VOL.   II.  N   2


180  •    COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

and  "was  much  liked  by  all  the  servants  excepting  the  ladies'  maid,  whose
name  was  Susan,  but  her  family-name  I  have  forgotten.  This  Susan
rendered  herself  disliked  by  all  in  consequence  of  her  tale-bearing  and
mischief -making  propensities,  but  she  stood  in  some  awe  of  my  mother,
whose  firmness  of  character  kept  her  in  check  to  a  great  extent.

"  Susan  fell  ill  of  jaundice,  for  which  she  was  medically  treated  for
some  months  at  Troston  Hall,  but  ultimately  was  removed  to  Bury  St.
Edmunds  Hospital,  and  placed  in  the  servants'  ward,  at  General  Morse's
expense,  where  she  died  about  a  week  after  admission.  He  used  to  send
a  woman  from  the  village  to  the  hospital,  seven  miles  distant,  to  make
inquiries,  on  such  days  as  the  carriage  did  not  go  to  Bury  St.  Edmunds ;
and  on  a  certain  Saturday  the  woman  went,  but  did  not  return  until  the
Sunday  evening,  when  she  said  she  had  found  Susan  unconscious  on  her
arrival,  and  as  death  was  evidently  approaching,  she  was  permitted  to
remain  in  the  ward  until  the  end.

"  During  this  Saturday  night  the  following  mystery  occurred,  which
has  ever  since  been  a  puzzle  to  myself.  Being  asleep,  I  was  awakened
with  or  by  a  sudden  feeling  of  terror.  I  stared  through  the  darkness  of
my  bedroom,  but  could  not  see  anything,  but  felt  overcome  by  an  un-
natural horror  or  dread,  and  covered  myself  with  the  bed-clothes,
regularly  scared.  My  room  door  was  in  a  narrow  passage  leading  to  my
mother's  room,  and  anyone  passing  would  almost  touch  my  door.  I  pa,ssed
the  remaining  portion  of  the  night  in  restlessness.  In  the  morning  I  met
my  mother  on  coming  downstairs,  and  observed  that  she  looked  ill  and
pale,  and  most  unusually  depressed.  I  asked  '  What's  the  matter  ?  '  She
replied,  '  Nothing ;  don't  ask  me.'  An  hour  or  two  passed,  and  I  still  saw
that  something  was  amiss,  and  I  felt  determined  to  know  the  cause,  and
my  mother  seemed  equally  bent  on  not  satisfying  me.  At  last  I  said,
'  Has  it  anything  to  do  with  Susan  ?  '  She  burst  into  tears  and  said,
'  "What  makes  you  ask  that  question  ? '  I  then  told  her  of  my  scare
during  the  night,  and  she  then  related  to  me  the  following  ^strange
story ' : —

"  '  I  was  awakened  by  the  opening  of  my  bedroom  door,  and  saw,  to
my  horror,  Susan  enter  in  her  night-dress.  She  came  straight  towards  my
bed,  turned  down  the  clothes,  and  laid  herself  beside  me,  and  I  felt  a  cold
chill  all  down  my  side  where  she  seemed  to  touch  me.^  I  suppose  I  fainted,
as  I  lost  all  recollection  for  some  time,  and  when  I  came  to  myself  the
apparition  had  gone — but  of  one  thing  I  am  sure,  and  that  is  that  it  was
not  a  dreamt

"We  heard  by  the  village  woman  on  her  return  the  Sunday  evening,
that  Susan  died  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  that  previous  to
becoming  unconscious  her  whole  talk  was  about  'returning  to  Troston
Hall.'  We  had  had  no  apprehension  whatever  of  the  death.  We  thought
she  had  gone  to  the  hospital,  not  because  she  was  in  danger,  but  for  the
sake  of  special  treatment.

"  This  is  a  simple  relation  of  facts,  so  far  as  I  can  state  them.  I
myself  was  not  a  superstitious  or  simple  fellow,  at  the  time,  having  seen
a  good  deal  of  the  world  ;  but  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  satisfy  my
own  mind  as  to  the  why  or  wherefore  of  the  occurrence."

1  Among  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane — alike  of  the  purely  subjective  and  of
the  telepathic  class— affections  of  three  senses  are  extremely  rare  (p.  25,  note).


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  181

Mr.  Matthews  tells  me  that  he  has  never  had  any  similar  sensation ;
and  he  believes  that  the  hallucination  was  unique  in  the  experience  of
his  mother,  who  died  some  years  ago.

In  the  remaining  cases  the  percipients  were  much  more  widely

separated ;  but  unfortunately  the  evidence  as  to  identity  of  time  is

very  far  from  complete.     The  following  account  is  from    Mrs.  Coote,

of  28,  Duke  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W.

"July  29th,  1885.

(314)  "  On  Easter  Wednesday,  1872,  my  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  W.,  sailed
with  her  husband  and  three  young  children  from  Liverpool  in  the  steamer,
'  Sarmatian,'  for  Boston,  U.S.,  where  they  arrived  in  due  course  and
settled.  In  the  following  November  she  was  seized  with,  and  died  from,
suppressed  small-pox,  at  that  time  raging  in  Boston.  About  the  end  of
November,  or  the  beginning  of  December  in  the  same  year,  I  was  dis-
turbed one  morning  before  it  was  light,  as  near  as  may  be  between  5  and
6  a.m.,  by  the  appearance  of  a  tall  figure,  in  a  long  night-dress,  bending
over  the  bed.  I  distinctly  recognised  this  figure  to  be  no  other  than  my
sister-in-law,  Mrs.  W.,  who,  as  I  felt,  distinctly  touched  me.  My  husband,
who  was  beside  me  asleep  at  the  time,  neither  saw  nor  felt  anything.

"  This  appearance  was  also  made  to  an  aged  aunt,  residing  at  this  time
at  Theydon  Bois,  near  Epping,  Essex.  She  is  now  alive,  aged  over  80
years,  and  residing  at  Hextable,  near  Dartford,  in  Kent.  She  is  still  in
full  possession  of  all  her  faculties.  She  told  my  husband  as  recently  as
the  4th  inst.,  that  the  appearance  came  to  her  in  the  form  of  a  bright
light  from  a  dark  corner  of  her  bedroom  in  the  early  morning.  It  was
so  distinct  that  she  not  only  recognised  her  niece,  Mrs.  W.,  but  she
actually  noticed  the  needlework  on  her  long  night-dress  !  This  appearance
was  also  made  to  my  husband's  half-sister,  at  that  time  unmarried,  and
residing  at  Stanhope  Gardens.  The  last  named  was  the  first  to  receive
the  announcement  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  W.,  in  a  letter  from  the  widower
dated  December  (day  omitted),  1872,  from  156,  Eighth  Street,  South
Boston,  still  preserved.  The  death  was  announced,  among  other  papers
(as  my  husband  has  recently  learned),  in  the  Boston  Herald.  A  com-
parison of  dates,  as  far  as  they  could  be  made  in  two  of  the  cases,  served
to  show  the  appearance  occurred  after  the  same  manner,  and  about  the
same  time,  i.e.,  at  the  time  of,  or  shortly  after,  the  death  of  the  deceased.
Neither  myself  nor  the  aged  Mrs.  B.,  nor  my  husband's  half-sister,  have
experienced  any  appearance  of  the  kind  before  or  since.  It  is  only
recently,  when  my  husband  applied  to  his  half-sister  to  hunt  up  the
Boston  letter,  that  we  learnt  for  the  first  time  of  this  third  appearance."

Mr.  Coote  writes  to  us  as  follows  : —

"  That  Mrs.  Coote's  '  vision  '  occurred  within  a  week  of  the  death  of
Mrs.  W.,  in  Boston,  U.S.,  is  undoubted  ;  and  without  any  efibrt  to  make
our  memories  more  precise,  I  may  add,  that  from  the  first  I  have  always
thought  that  the  most  marked  feature  in  the  case  was  (judging,  of  course,
from  an  opinion  formed  at  the  time  when  the  circumstances  were  fresh  in
my  memory)  that  it  occurred  within  the  24  hours  after  death.  I  am
afraid  after  this  lapse  of  time  that  nothing  conclusive  can  be  arrived  at  as
to  '  times '    in  the    other  two  cases,  beyond  the  general  idea  that  still


182  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

obtains  in  the  minds  of  both  the  aged  Mrs.  B.    and  Mrs. ,  that  the

visions  occurred  about  the  same  time  as  that  of  Mrs.  Coote,  and  after  the
same  manner.  Mrs.  Coote  desires  me  to  add  that  to  this  hour  she  has
never  exchanged  ideas  upon  this  vision,  even  with  the  aged  Mrs.  B.,
which  precludes  all  possibility  of  collusion  in  the  matter.

"  C.  H.  Coote."
[It  is  not  possible  to  obtain  a  first-hand  account  of  the  vision  from
Mr.  Coote's  half-sister  at  present.]

The  final  example  of  this  type  is  from  Mr.  de  Guerin,  of  98,  Sand-
gate  Road,  Folkestone,  who  has  had  another  apparently  telepathic
experience  (Vol.  I.,  p.  424).     He  has  had  no  subjective  hallucinations.

"  1883.

(315)  "The  first  instance  occurred  when  I  was  in  Shanghai.  It  was  the
month  of  May,  1854.  The  night  was  very  warm,  and  I  was  in  bed,  lying
on  my  back,  wide  awake,  contemplating  the  dangers  by  which  we  were
then  surrounded,  from  a  threatened  attack  by  the  Chinese.  I  gradually
became  aware  there  was  something  in  the  room ;  it  appeared  like  a  thin
white  fog,  a  misty  vapour,^  hanging  about  the  foot  of  the  bed.  Fancying
it  was  merely  the  efiect  of  a  moonbeam,  I  took  but  little  notice,  but
after  a  few  moments  I  plainly  distinguished  a  figure  which  I  recognised
as  that  of  my  sister  Fanny.  At  first  the  expression  of  her  face  was  sad,
but  it  changed  to  a  sweet  smile,  and  she  bent  her  head  towards  me  as  if
she  recognised  me.  I  was  too  much  fascinated  with  the  appearance  to
speak,  although  it  did  not  cause  me  the  slightest  fear.  The  vision  seemed
to  disappear  gradually  in  the  same  manner  as  it  came.  We  afterwards
learned  that  on  the  same  day  my  sister  died — almost  suddenly.  I
immediately  wrote  a  full  description  of  what  I  had  seen  to  my  sister,
Mrs.  Elmslie  (the  wife  of  the  Consul  at  Canton),  but  before  it  reached
her,  I  had  received  a  letter  from  her,  giving  me  an  almost  similar
description  of  what  she  had  seen  the  same  night,  adding,  '  I  am  sure  dear
Fanny  is  gone.'

"  When  I  promised  that  I  would  send  you  these  particulars  I  at  once
wrote  to  my  sister,  Mrs.  Elmslie,  and  she  replies,  '  I  do  not  think  I  was
awake  when  Fanny  appeared  to  me,  but  I  immediately  awoke  and  saw
her  as  you  describe.  I  stretched  out  my  arms  to  her  and  cried  '  Fanny  !
Fanny  ! '  She  smiled  upon  me,  as  if  sorry  to  leave,  then  suddenly
disappeared.'

"  When  this  occurred  we  [i.e.,  Mr.  de  Guerin  and  Mrs.  Elmslie]  were
upwards  of  1,000  miles  apart,  and  neither  of  us  had  a  thought  of  her  being
seriously,  much  less  dangerously  ill.  Before  her  death  she  had  spoken  of
us  both  to  those  around  her  bedside.  She  died  in  Jersey,  on  the  30th
May,  1854,  between  10  and  11   at  night."

The  Jersey  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  the  date  given.

Mr.  de  Guerin  kindly  applied  to  Mrs.  Elmslie  for  a  further  account.
In  her  reply,  she  rightly  remarks  that  at  such  a  distance  of  time  memory
of  details  is  unreliable,  and  is  not  sure  "  whether  that  which  took  place
was  in  the  nature  of  a  dream  or  of  a    vision."     She  desires,    therefore,

1  Cf.  cases  193,  194,  311,  332.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  183

that  her  full  description  of  what  she  saw  shall  not  be  published  ;  but  says
that  the  face  was  unmistakeable.     She  adds  : —

"  I  really  forget  whether  it  appeared  immediately  at  the  time  of  our
dear  sister's  death;  but  I  know  my  impression  at  the  time  was  that  it  fore-
shadowed   such  an  event,  the  news  of  which  in  due  course  came  by  mail."

In  conversation,  Mr.  de  Guerin  told  me  that  the  figure  appeared  self-
luminous  (see  Chap.  XII.,  §  7).  He  is  certain  that  his  own  and  Mrs.
Elmslie's  visions  were  on  the  same  night,  and  that  his  own  was  about
11  o'clock.  He  cannot  be  certain  whether  the  death  took  place  at  11  o'clock
p.m.,  of  the  previous  day,  in  which  case  it  must  have  preceded  the  visions
by  some  twelve  hours  ;  or  1 1  o'clock  p.m.  of  the  same  day,  in  which
case  it  must  have  followed  the  visions  by  about  twelve  hours.  Mr.  de
Guerin  further  told  me  that,  though  in  a  decline,  his  sister  had  been
very  decidedly  better  of  late,  and  he  was  in  no  sort  of  anxiety  about
her.  The  last  account  had  been  that  she  was  gaining  strength  and  flesh.
The  death  was  extraordinarily  sudden.

§  3.  I  turn  now  to  the  second  of  the  two  theories  above
propounded — the  theory  that  one  percipient  catches  the  hallucination
from  another  by  a  process  of  thought-transference.  This  is  certainly
the  explanation  that  would  suggest  itself  in  telepathic  cases  where
one  of  the  percipients  has  previously  had  no  relations,  or  only  slight
relations,  with  the  distant  agent.  But  clearly  the  most  conclusive
evidence  for  the  theory  of  infection  would  be  derived  from  cases
involving  no  distant  "  agent  "  at  all ;  cases  which  in  their  inception
are  pathologic,  not  telepathic — purely  subjective  delusions  on  the  part
of  some  one  present — but  which  proceed  to  communicate  themselves
to  some  other  person  or  persons.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  this  self-pro-
pagation is  an  occasional  property  of  hallucinations  as  such,  there  will
be  no  difficulty  in  extending  the  same  explanation  to  cases  where  the
hallucination  is  in  its  inception  due  to  a  distant  agent.  If  B's  purely
subjective  hallucination  may  affect  C,  it  is  only  what  we  should
a  'priori  expect  that  B's  telepathic  hallucination  might  affect  C  :  such
communicability  would  merely  be  one  more  of  those  points  of  resem-
blance, which  we  have  already  seen  to  be  so  numerous,  between  the
purely  subjective  and  telepathic  classes.  And  as  collective  hallucina-
tions even  of  subjective  or  non- veridical  origin  {i.e.,  not  due  to  the
critical  situation  of  some  distant  agent)  would  constitute  in  them-
selves a  form  of  thought-transference,  no  excuse  is  needed  for
examining  them  here  at  some  length.

What  evidence,  then,  do  we  find  that  hallucinations  of  the
senses,  as  such,  may  be  infectious  ?  It  must  be  allowed  at  starting
that  no  property  of  the  sort  has  ever  been  attributed  to  them  by


184  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

psychologists  of  repute  •}  the  doctrine  would  be  as  new  to  science  as
every  other  variety  of  telepathic  affection.  This,  however,  is  easily
accounted  for.  We  have  already  seen  that  psychologists  have
never  made  hallucinations,  or  at  any  rate  transient  hallucinations
of  the  sane,  the  subject  of  careful  collection  and  tabulation;  and
it  is  among  the  sane  rather  than  the  insane^  that  we  should  expect
any  phenomenon  of  thought-transference  to  present  itself.  It  is
therefore  not  surprising  that  the  rare  and  sporadic  evidence  for
collective  hallucinations  should  have  escaped  notice.  But  if,  on  the
one  hand,  collective  hallucinations  have  not  been  recognised  by  science,
on  the  other  hand  phenomena  have  sometimes  been  described  by  that
title  which  have  no  sort  of  claim  to  it.  It  is  here  that  the  real
importance  of  distinguishing  illusions  from  hallucinations  lies ;
and  I  cannot  well  proceed  without  first  making  this  distinction  plain.
Illusion  consists  either  in  perceiving  a  totally  wrong  object  in
place  of  the  right  one,  as  when  Don  Quixote's  imagination  trans-
formed the  windmills  into  giants ;  or  in  investing  the  right  object
with  wrong  attributes,  as  when  the  stone  lion  on  Northumberland
House  was  seen  to  wag  its  tail.^  Either  sort  of  illusion  may
easily  be  collective.  The  error  is  not  in  the  actual  sensory
impression,  which  is  given  by  the  real  object  and  is  common  to  all
present,  but  in  the  subsequent  act  of  judgment  by  which  the  nature
of  the  object  is  determined  ;  and  in  this  act  of  judgment  one
person  has  every  opportunity  of  being  influenced  by  another.  In  the
attitude  of  trying  to  imagine  what  further  attributes  will  fit  in
naturally  with  those  which  the  senses  perceive,  and  will  with  them
compose  some  known  object,  the  mind  is  almost  at  the  mercy  of
external  suggestion.  We  see  this  constantly  exemplified  in  cases
where  a  group  of  people  are  puzzling  as  to  the  nature  of  some  barely
visible  object,  or  of  some  imperfectly  heard  sound :  as  soon  as  some-
one expresses  an  opinion,  someone  else  is  pretty  sure  to  endorse  it,
and  to  see  or  hear  the  thing  in  the  suggested  sense,  though  on  nearer
approach  this  may  prove  to  have  been  incorrect.     Even  in  cases

1  This  was  written  before  the  appearance  of  Dr.  E.  von  Hartmann's  tract  on  Spiritism,
(lately  translated  by  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey),  in  which  he  treats  the  apparitions  seen  at  seances
as  collective  hallucinations  ;  but  he  regards  the  influence  exercised  on  the  sitters  by  the
medium  as  to  some  extent  exceptional  in  kind.

-  As  an  instance  of  the  insusceptibility  of  the  insane  to  abnormal  influences,  it  is
worth  noting  that  they  are  peculiarly  difficult  to  hypnotise.  On  the  other  hand,  I  ought
to  state  that  the  2nd  chapter  of  the  Supplement  contains  two  cases  of  what  looks  like
telepathic  affection  of  a  person  of  more  or  less  unsoTind  mind.

•*  I  have  never  discovered  on  what  authority  this  anecdote  rests ;  but  such  an  illusion
is,  I  believe,  quite  possible.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  185

where  we  feel  as  if  we  were  right  beyond  the  possibility  of  mistake,
it  often  needs  an  effort  to  realise  how  little  is  given  us,  and  how
much  we  ourselves  supply.  A  few  slight  sensory  signs  will  introduce
to  the  mind  a  whole  array  of  attributes  that  have  been  associated
with  them  on  other  occasions ;  the  whole  is  then  taken  to  be  a  single
and  immediate  perception  of  the  object ;  and  since  the  actual  sensory
signs  may  be  common  to  several  different  groups  of  attributes — i.e.,
to  several  different  objects — it  may  easily  happen  that  they  suggest
some  group  which  is  not  the  object  actually  present.  For  instance,
the  slight  sensory  signs  which  Scott  would  normally  have  interpreted
as  the  folds  of  coats  and  plaids  hanging  in  a  dimly-lit  hall,  were
interpreted  by  him,  at  a  moment  when  the  idea  of  Byron  was
running  strongly  in  his  head,  as  the  figure  of  the  deceased  poet.^
Here  the  idea  which  happened  to  be  dominant  at  the  moment  was
what  determined  the  false  judgment ;  and  such  a  dominant  idea  may,
of  course,  often  operate  upon  many  minds  at  once ;  as  when,  in  a
conflagration  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  a  sympathetic  crowd  watched  the
struggles  of  an  agonised  chimpanzee — alias  a  piece  of  tattered
blind — in  the  roof;  or  when  a  horrified  crew  recognised  in  a  piece  of  old
wreck,  which  was  floating  on  the  waves,  the  form  and  peculiar  limping
gait  of  a  drowned  comrade.^  The  case  of  the  proverbial  crowd  and
the  stone  lion's  tail  is  somewhat  different ;  for  there  the  object  was
clearly  seen,  and  recognised  for  what  it  was.  But  we  are  all  of  us
well  exercised  in  imagining  familiar  objects  as  moving  in  position
and  changing  in  coatour ;  and  the  power  of  evoking  mental  pictures
is  often,  I  think,  strong  enough  to  enable  us  slightly  to  modify  our
visual  impressions ;  while  such  devices  as  half-closing  our  eyes,  or
shutting  them  alternately  in  quick  succession,  or  moving  or  inclining

1  An  interesting  case  was  given  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Pollock,  in  the  Christmas  number,
for  1884,  of  the  Illustrated  Sporting  and  Dramatic  Neivs,  under  the  title  "The  Ghost  at  the
Lyceum."  Mr.  Pollock  has  assured  me  that  the  description  is  "an  absolute  record  of  fact,
without  a  word  of  garnish  "  ;  and  his  recollection  of  the  incident,  and  of  the  bewilderment
that  it  caused,  was  quite  confirmed  by  his  companion's  account,  as  reported  to  me  indepen-
dently by  a  common  friend.  Seated  in  a  box  at  the  theatre,  Mr.  Pollock  and  a  friend  saw,
during  several  hours  (with  intermissions  when  the  lights  were  turned  up),  the  vivid
appearance  of  a  decapitated  head,  with  a  fine  profile  and  a  grey  Vandyke  beard,  resting  on
the  lap  of  a  lady  in  the  stalls.  At  the  time,  they  rejected  the  idea  that  this  could  have  been
an  optical  effect  due  to  the  folds  of  the  lady's  garments — as  they  noticed  that  she  moved
more  than  once  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  while  the  face  remained  the  same.  Mr.  Pollock
seems  to  have  been  unaware  that,  as  a  possible  example  of  collective  hallucination,  the  vision
had  a  very  high  scientific  interest ;  or  he  would  scarcely,  even  for  "  sporting  and  dramatic"
purposes,  have  taken  refuge  in  so  meaningless  a  designation  as  "  ghost."  It  may  be,  how-
ever, that  the  case  was  after  aU  one  not  of  hallucination,  but  only  of  illusion.  It  is  at
any  rate  impossible,  from  the  record,  to  be  quite  sure  that  adequate  means  were  taken  to
exclude  this  hypothesis,  which,  as  Mr.  Pollock  has  recently  informed  me,  is  the  one  that
he  is  now  inclined  to  adopt.

-  Dr.  Hack  Tuke,  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body.  2nd  Edition,  p.  59  ;  Wundt,
Op.  cit.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  358.  ....


186  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

the  head,  will  increase  the  illusion.  It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  a
strong  effort  to  see  a  thing  in  a  way  in  which  others  are  professing  to
see  it,  should,  for  a  brief  period,  introduce  illusory  elements  into  what
seems  to  be  a  clear  and  complete  view  of  the  object.

These  considerations  will  certainly  suffice  to  explain  the  majority
of  the  collective  apparitions  on  record.  The  visions  seen  during
battles,  such  as  are  especially  frequent  in  the  history  of  the  Crusades
—either  signs  in  the  heavens  or  phantom  champions — may  easily
have  had  some  objective  basis.  The  streak  of  cloud,  which  at  one
moment  may  be  "  very  like  a  whale,"  might  at  another  be  equally
like  a  fiery  sword  ;  real  horsemen  might  be  unrecognised,  and  the  first
breath  of  rumour  that  they  were  supernatural  assistants  would  be
caught  up  with  avidity.^  More  deceptive  cases  however  occur,
which  are  not  illusions,  but  yet  have  as  little  claim  as  the  preceding
to  be  called  collective  hallucinations,  if  that  word  be  (as  throughout
this  treatise  it  is)  confined  to  the  strict  sensory  meaning.  Nothing,
for  instance,  could  better  illustrate  what  collective  hallucinations
are  not,  than  two  cases  which  Dr.  Brierre  de  Boismont^  has  adduced
to  illustrate  what  they  are.  A  battalion  of  infantry,  after  a  40
miles'  march  under  a  June  sun,  was  quartered  for  the  night  in  a
dismal  building  which  had  the  reputation  of  being  haunted.  The
surgeon  of  the  regiment  describes  how,  about  midnight,  these  soldiers
rushed  out  of  their  quarters  with  wild  cries,  and  declared  that  the
devil  had  entered  their  chamber  "  in  the  form  of  a  large  black  dog
with  curly  hair,  who  had  bounded  upon  them,  ran  over  their  chests
with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  disappeared  on  the  side  opposite
to   the  one  at  which  he  had  entered."      Now — on  the  supposition

1  The  reader  will  recall  the  phantom  battle  in  the  sky,  described  by  Motley  f' T/ie
Mise  of  the  Butch  EepuUic,  pp.  559-60),  as  to  which  the  depositions  of  five  witnesses  were
taken  on  oath.  The  collective  vision  of  an  army  marching  on  terra  firma,  described
by  the  Diike  of  Argyll  in  Good  Words  for  January,  1875,  would  be  less  easy  to  account
for  as  an  illusion  :  but  the  record  is  second-hand,  and  was  not  written  dovm  tiU  more  than
50  years  after  the  incident  is  alleged  to  have  occurred.  Phantom  champions  are  not  yet
extinct.  Mr.  J.  T.  Milward  Pierce,  of  Bow  Ranche,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.,  has  told  me
of  a  quite  recent  case,  narrated  to  him  by  one  of  the  witnesses — where  the  form  of  a
defunct  Indian  Chief,  "  Brown  Bear,"  led  his  tribe  in  a  battle  against  theDacotahs.  Mr.
Pierce  has  since  sent  me  a  first-hand  account  of  the  incident  from  another  professed
witness.

A  recent  case  of  a  more  ordinary  type  is  the  following,  from  Mrs.  Lane,  of  49,  Redcliffe
Square,  S.W.  When  at  school,  she  was  sleeping  in  the  bed  of  a  Miss  Winch,  who  had  been
sent  home  ill ;  and  waking  up,  she  was  much  alarmed  to  see  this  girl  standing  at  the  foot  of
the  bed.  She  addressed  the  figure,  which  nodded  slowly.  She  then  roused  her  companions,
"and  they  all  said  they  saw  Miss  Winch,  too."  The  girls  did  not  know,  what  was  learnt
next  day,  that  Miss  Winch  was  dying  ;  but  even  supposing  the  first  percipient's  vision  to
have  been  telepathic,  her  terrified  words,  and  the  dim  light,  would  probably  be  quite
sufficient  to  convert  a  bed-hanging  or  a  curtain  into  the  suggested  form  for  her  com-
panions' eyes.

2  Des  Hallucinations  (Paris,  1862),  pp.  280,  396.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  187

that  no  real  dog  or  cat  had  a  share  in  shaping  the  idea — what  can  be
more  likely  than  that  the  general  nervousness  took  sudden  form  from
one  man's  sudden  cry,  on  waking  from  a  nightmare  ?  There  is
not  the  slightest  proof  that  all  present  simultaneously  saw  the  dog,
and  followed  his  movements.  I  have  already  drawn  attention
to  the  ease  with  which  uneducated  persons  may  slip  into  believing
that  they  have  seen  what  they  have  only  heard  of;  and  under
excitement  this  is,  of  course,  doubly  easy.  One  man  may  have
believed  that  he  saw ;  the  rest  may  merely  have  believed  they  had
seen.  De  Boismont's  second  case  is  that  of  Dr.  Pordage's  disciples  in
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  who  saw  "  the  powers  of  hell
pass  in  review  before  them,  seated  in  chariots,  surrounded  by  dark
clouds,  and  drawn  by  lions,  bears,  dragons,  and  tigers.  These  were
followed  by  inferior  spirits,  who  were  provided  with  the  ears  of  a  cat
or  a  griffin,  and  with  deformed  and  distorted  limbs."  But  here  the
fact  that  "  it  made  no  difference  whether  their  eyes  were  open  or
shut "  renders  it  doubtful  how  far  the  impression  was  really  more
than  a  vivid  inward  picture ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  contradict,  and
everything  to  suggest,  the  notion  that  one  person  described  his
impressions  in  language  which  would  easily  conjure  up  the  general
scene  in  kindred  and  excited  minds.

But  apart  from  such  spurious  types,  cases  undoubtedly  remain
of  really  externalised  collective  hallucination,  which  are  still  perfectly
explicable  without  resorting  to  thought-transference.  The  history
of  religious  epidemics  supplies  instances  where  a  whole  group  of
persons  have  professed  to  behold  some  exciting  or  adorable  object,  and
probably  actually  projected  its  image  into  space  as  part  of  the
surrounding  world ;  but  where,  without  proof  (which  has  never  been
presented)  that  what  was  seen  was  independently  observed  and
described,  it  would  be  rash  to  suppose  any  other  cause  for  the
similarity  of  the  individual  experiences  than  a  previous  common  j
idea  and  common  expectancy.^  Nor  is  even  expectancy  a  necessary
condition ;  there  are  cases  where  the  suggestion  of  the  moment  seems
sufficient.  The  most  marked  of  these  are  hypnotic  hallucinations  :
it  is  as  easy  for  a  mesmerist  to  persuade  a  group  of  good  "  subjects  "
that  they  all  see  a  particular  phantasmal  object,  as  to  persuade  one  of
them  that  he  sees  it.     And  I  think  it  must  be  admitted  as  possible

1  A  probable  example  is  the  recent  remarkable  delusion  at  Corano— starting  from  a
peasant  girl's  alleged  vision  of  the  Virgin— in  which  a  crowd  of  children  and  many  adults
shared.     It  is  described  in  the  Times  for  July  31,  1885.


188  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

that  mere  verbal  suggestion  may  act  similarly  on  certain  minds  at
certain  times,  without  the  preliminary  of  any  definite  hypnotic  pro-
cess. I  say  at  certain  times  advisedly ;  for  all  clear  evidence  of  the
sort  seems  to  connect  the  phenomenon  with  circumstances  of  rather
special  absorption  or  excitement,  sometimes  even  with  a  state  of
semi-trance.^  I  do  not  know  of  any  instance  where  the  sane  and
healthy  A,  simply  by  saying  at  a  casual  moment  to  the  sane  and
healthy  B,  "There  is  such  and  such  an  object "  (not  really  present,
and  not  capable  of  being  imposed  as  an  illusion  on  some  object  really
present),  has  at  once  caused  the  object  to  be  conjured  up  in  space
before  B's  eyes.  In  the  most  extreme  case  that  has  come  to  my
knowledge,  where  something  like  this  has  proved  possible,  very
strong  insistance  and  repetition  on  A's  part,  of  the  sort  that  a
mesmerist  employs  when  seeking  to  dominate  a  "subject's"
mind,  are  needed  before  the  impression  develops  into  sensory
form.  In  cases,  therefore,  where  A  has  himself  had  a  hallucina-
tion of  which  he  has  spoken  at  the  moment,  and  B  has  shared
it,  it  is  too  much  to  assume  at  once  that  B's  experience  must  have
been  exclusively  due  to  the  verbal  suggestion ;  for  if  A's  mere
suggestion  can  produce  such  an  effect  on  B  at  that  particular  moment,
why  not  at  other  moments  when  he  suggests  the  imaginary  object
without  having  himself  seen  it  ?  None  the  less,  of  course,  ought  the
/flUv-  hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion  to  be  most  carefully  considered,  in
relation  to  the  special  circumstances  of  each  case,  before  any  other
hypothesis  is  even  provisionally  admitted.

I  have,  perhaps,  said  enough  to  define  the  phenomena  which  are
really  of  interest  for  us  here.     Fairly  to  allow  of  explanation  by

^  If  (as  intelligent  English  eye-witnesses  believe,)  a  semi-hypnotic  condition,  due  to
abnormally  concentrated  attention,  is  in  great  part  answerable  for  the  extraordinary
illusions  of  Indian  jugglery,  the  same  condition  might  naturally  be  looked  for  in  cases  of
collective  hallucination.  Very  suggestive  in  this  respect  is  the  following  record,  by
Professor  Sidgwick,  of  a  scene  described  to  him  by  Mazzini  : —

"In  or  near  some  Italian  town,  Mazzini  saw  a  group  of  people  standing,  apparently
gazing  upwards  into  the  sky.  Going  up  to  it,  he  asked  one  of  the  gazers  what  he  was
looking  at.  '  The  cross — do  you  not  see? '  was  the  answer  ;  and  the  man  pointed  to  the
place  where  the  cross  was  supposed  to  be.  Mazzini,  however,  could  discern  no  vestige  of
anything  cruciform  in  the  sky  ;  and,  much  wondering,  went  up  to  another  gazer,  put  a
similar  question,  and  received  a  similar  answer.  It  was  evident  that  the  whole  crowd  had
persuaded  itself  that  it  was  contemplating  a  marvellous  cross.  '  So,'  said  Mazzini,  '  I  was
turning  away,  when  my  eye  caught  the  countenance  of  a  gazer  who  looked  somewhat
more  intelligent  than  the  rest,  and  also,  I  thought,  had  a  faint  air  of  perplexity  and  doubt
in  his  gaze.  I  went  up  to  him,  and  asked  what  he  was  looking  at.  "  The  cross,"  he  said,
"there."  I  took  hold  of  his  arm,  gave  him  a  slight  shake,  and  said,  "There  is  not  any
cross  at  all."  A  sort  of  change  came  over  his  countenance,  as  though  he  was  waking
up  from  a  kind  of  dream  ;  and  he  responded,  "  No,  as  you  say,  there  is  no  cross  at  all.
So  we  two  walked  away,  and  left  the  crowd  to  their  cross. '  It  is  nearly  20  years  since  I
heard  this  story  ;  but  it  made  a  considerable  impression  on  me,  both  from  the  manner  in
which  Mazzini  told  it,  and  from  its  importance  in  relation  to  the  evidence  for  '  spiritual-
istic '  f)henomena."


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  189

thought-transference,  a  collective  case  must  present  evident  marks
(1)  of  being  a  hallucination  and  not  a  mere  illusion ;  (2)  of  having
occurred,  so  to  speak,  in  an  isolated  way,  and  not  under  the  dominance
of  any  special  prepossession  ;  and  (3)  of  having  been  independently
projected  by  the  several  percipients,  and  not  merely  conjured  up  by
one  on  the  suggestion  of  another.  It  is  naturally  not  always  easy
to  ascertain  how  far  these  conditions  are  met.  In  judging  of  the
auditory  cases,  especially,  great  caution  is  necessary ;  for,  as  we  have
seen  above  (pp.  125-6),  there  is  scarcely  any  sort  of  mere  noise  which
may  not  have  some  undiscoverable  external  origin  in  the  house  or  the
neighbourhood.  Intelligent  speech,  on  the  other  hand,  and  certain
musical  sounds,  such  as  bell-sounds  or  distinct  melodic  sequences,  if
externally  caused,  imply  conditions  the  presence  or  absence  of  which
it  is  usually  possible  to  ascertain.  So  again  in  the  visual  cases,  the
fact  of  dim  or  uncertain  light  may  favour  the  hypothesis  of  illusion  ;
but  where  the  light  is  good,  the  presence  or  absence  of  an  adequate
external  cause  in  the  vicinity  can  often  be  determined  with  all  but
complete  certainty.^     One  point  of  uncertainty  often  remains,  owing

^  I  am  including  only  cases  of  hallucinations  which  have  occurred  to  more  than  one
percipient  simultaneously,  or  very  nearly  so.  The  extremely  perplexing  cases,  few,  but  well
attested,  where  the  same  phantasm  has  been  independently  described  by  different
persons  who  have  at  different  times  encountered  it  in  the  same  locality,  may  possibly
be  also  connected  with  the  infectious  character  of  hallucinations ;  for  we  cannot  pro-
nounce it  to  be  indispensable  that  the  infectious  influence  should  act  at  the  moment.
A  certain  amount  of  evidence  for  this  explanation  is  afforded  by  cases  where  the  ex-
perience (not  apparently  due  to  suggestion  or  illusion)  has  sometimes  occurred  to
one  person  alone,  and  at  other  times  to  several  together.  But  the  hypothesis,
as  thus  extended,  becomes  doubtful  and  difficult,  and  is,  moreover,  only  one  out
of  several  hypotheses,  all  about  equally  doubtful  and  difficult,  that  may  be
suggested.  (See  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick's  paper  "  On  the  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society,
for  Phantasms  of  the  'Dea.d,^^  m.  the  Proceedings  of  the  S. P. R.,  Vol.iii.,  especially  pp.  146-8.)

Clearly  no  such  explanation  is  needed  for  the  general  run  of  traditional  appearances —
the  white  ladies,  headless  horses,  and  phantom  dogs,  which  are  the  most  widely-spread
forms  ;  or  the  phantasms  which  are  more  or  less  indigenous  to  a  particular  district,  like  the
"  corpse-candles  "  of  some  Welsh  counties,  and  the  figures  in  shrouds  of  the  Western
Scottish  islands.  To  account  for  these,  we  need  not  go  beyond  the  latent  idea  in  the
percipient's  own  mind.  But  it  seems  occasionally  to  happen  that  the  percipient  of  a
traditional  phantasm  is  a  person  not  previously  acquainted  with  the  tradition.  Thus  Mr.
Lowell  tells  me  that  he  once  saw  the  appearance  of  the  "  Witch-farm, "  on  the  Massa-
chusetts coast,  though  unaware  of  the  local  legend  concerning  it,  at  the  very  place  to
which  he  found  afterwards  that  the  legend  assigned  it ;  and  in  Dyer's  English  Folk-Lore,
p,  208,  a  case  is  reported  where  a  phantasm,  coinciding  with  and  possibly  originating  in
a  death,  took  a  form  that  exactly  accorded  with  the  ideas  of  death-apparitions  current
in  the  place,  though  the  percipient  was  a  transient  sojourner  whom  no  rumour  of  those
ideas  had  reached.

Another  type  (recorded  by  Aubrey,  Martin,  Dalyell,  Napier,  Gregor,  and  other
writers  on  "second-sight,"  and  possibly  genuine),  which  seems  to  strain  the  hypothesis  of
infection  somewhat  less,  is  that  where  physical  contact  with  the  percipient  of  an  abnormal
sight  or  sound  has  enabled^a  second  person  to  share  it.  Our  own  collection  contains  a  couple
of  modern  instances — one  first-hand  from  Mrs.  Taunton,  of  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near
Birmingham, the  other  from  two  daughters  and  ason-in-law  of  the  late  Mr. and  Mrs. George
Whittaker,of  the  Bowdlands,01itheroe,  the  first-hand  witnesses.  Such  a  phenomenon  might
at  least  be  compared  with  the  favouring  effect  of  contact  in  certain  "thought-reading"
results,  which  (by  rare  exception  among  results  where  contact  is  a  condition)  seem  not  to
be  explicable  as  "muscle-reading."


190  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

to  the  way  in  which  the  evidence  reaches  us :  we  cannot  be  sure  how
far  the  mere  verbal  description  of  one  percipient,  after  the  occur-
rence, may  not  have  caused  another  to  fill  in  or  modify  his  own
recollection  with  details  which  he  did  not  himself  observe.  But  if
both  clearly  shared  in  the  experience,  it  is  not  important  that  their
percepts  may  not  have  been  so  precisely  similar  as  is  sometimes
alleged.  So  far,  indeed,  from  telling  against  the  theory  of  mental
transfer,  such  want  of  identity  is  rather  what  we  might  have  expected,
both  from  the  numerous  approximate  successes  in  experimental
thought-transference — e.g.,  in  reproducing  drawings— and  from  the
evidence  that  a  telepathic  impression  is  liable  to  be  reacted  on  in
various  ways  by  the  person  whom  it  affects.

§  4.  I  fear  to  weary  the  reader  by  yet  further  explanations  and
distinctions  before  examples  are  given.  But  difficulty  of  exposition
and  risk  of  misapprehension  alike  culminate  in  this  final  chapter ;
and  the  patience  which  has  been  able  to  accompany  me  thus  far  must
be  so  considerable  that  I  venture  to  make  one  more  demand  on  it.

I  have  propounded  the  question,  what  evidence  do  we  find  that
purely  subjective  hallucinations  of  the  senses  may  be  infectious  ?  and
I  have  implied  that  I  am  able  to  produce  some  evidence  of  the  sort.
And,  in  fact,  I  am  about  to  cite  examples  which  I  think  that
the  majority  of  my  readers — or  of  such  of  them  at  any  rate  as
accept  the  substantial  accuracy  of  the  facts — will  regard  as  going  some
way  to  establish  the  point.  But  there  are  those,  I  am  aware,  in  whose
minds  some  of  my  instances  will  produce  a  doubt  whether  the
experiences  were  really  subjective — whether  they  may  not  have  had
some  unknown  origin  external  to  any  of  the  perceiving  minds ;  and  I
admit,  though  the  doubt  weakens  my  argument,  that  it  is  one  which
I  in  some  measure  share.  To  explain  this,  I  must  recur  to  a  point
that  was  very  briefly  touched  on  in  Chap.  XI.  (Vol  I.,  p.  512,  note).
It  may  be  remembered  that  the  question  there  arose  whether  post-
inortem  appearances  of  persons  some  time  deceased  were  necessarily
subjective  hallucinations,  or  whether  they  might  not  be  amenable  to  a
telepathic  explanation  ;  and  I  observed  that,  while  telepathy — being
a  psychical  and  not  a  physical  conception — was  quite  able  to
embrace  these  phenomena  as  possibly  due  to  the  action  of  human
minds  continuing  after  bodily  death,  yet  the  evidence  for  them  (of  a
sort  that  would  preclude  their  being  regarded  as  purely  subjective
experiences)  was  scanty  and  inconclusive ;  and  I  dismissed  the  topic


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  191

as  not  germane  to  an  inquiry  concerning  telepathic  transferences
between  the  minds  of  living  persons.  But  the  topic  which  was
rightly  thus  dismissed  when  we  were  considering  affections  of  a  single
percipient,  forces  itself  on  us  again  when  we  encounter  cases  of
joint  percipience.  For  suppose  that  the  object  which  B  and  C  both
simultaneously  behold  is  the  form  of  the  deceased  A.  Then,  if  (1)
the  idea  of  B's  and  C's  affection  by  the  still  continuing  mind  of  A  be
rejected — as  it  would  be  by  disbelievers  in  survival  after  physical
death — yet  B's  and  C's  simultaneous  affection  remains  a  fact  which
demands  recognition  in  this  book ;  because,  if  A  does  not  affect  them,
then  one  of  them  must  affect  the  other,  i.e.,  the  case  is  one  of
transference  between  the  minds  of  living  persons.  And  if  (2)  the
idea  of  A's  continuing  power  to  affect  B  or  C  be  admitted  as  tenable,
but  the  joint  affection  of  B  and  C  by  A  be  regarded  as  improbable,
(owing  to  the  difficulties  already  pointed  out  of  conceiving  the  projec-
tion, under  a  telepathic  impulse,  of  exactly  simultaneous  and
corresponding  hallucinations)  yet  again  a  fact  remains  which  demands
recognition  in  this  book  ;  because,  if  A  affects  B  and  not  C,  then  C's
vision  of  A  must  be  obtained  from  B,  and  the  case  is  again  one  of
transference  between  the  minds  of  living  persons.

The  reader  will  now,  perhaps,  divine  why  I  hesitate  to  apply  the  '^^^U
words  "  purely  subjective  "  to  some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  cases  in  the
group  that  awaits  us.  Though  no  absent  living  person  was  concerned
in  them  as  agent,  I  think  it  would  be  rash  and  unscientific  to  prejudge
the  question  (deliberately  left  open  in  Chap.  XL)  whether  they  had
an  origin  in  psychical  conditions  which  have  survived  the  change  of
death.  I  have  shown  that  alike  on  either  of  the  above  hypotheses —  i  u^  /-
alike,  whether  the  dead  (1)  have  not,  or  (2)  have,  minds  which  can
influence  the  living — cases  of  collective  percipience  suggestive  of
the  dead  fall  within  the  legitimate  scope  of  the  present  inquiry ;  but
I  am  anxious  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  dogmatic  decision  between
(1)  and  (2).  I  am  about  equally  dissatisfied  with  the  arguments
adduced  for  the  former,  and  with  the  evidence  adduced  for  the  latter.
But  in  my  view  the  cases,  whatever  else  they  involve,  at  any  rate
involve  an  element  of  quite  mundane  thought-transference  between
the  minds  of  the  living  persons  concerned;  and  I  must  beg  the  reader
to  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  simply  as  probable  or  possible  cases  of
thought-transference,  and  not  as  manifestations  from  the  dead,  that
those  of  them  which  may  seem  to  have  reference  to  the  dead  are  here
adduced.     If  the  senses  of  B  and  C  are  similarly  and  simultaneously


192  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

affected  without  the  presence  of  any  material  cause,  then  alike  whether
there  is  or  is  not  a  real  immaterial  cause  outside  their  two  selves,  I
believe  that  the  joint  phenomenon  still  depends  (partly,  if  there  is
such  a  cause,  wholly,  if  there  is  not)  on  psychical  communication
between  their  two  minds.  As  to  the  point  that  is  left  in  abeyance —
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  the  said  cause — all  varieties  of
opinion  will  be  allowed  for  by  defining  the  group,  not  positively,  as
cases  of  "  purely  subjective  "  origin,  but  negatively,  as  cases  which  do
not  apparently  originate  in  the  condition  of  any  absent  living  person.

I  5.  I  will  begin  with  visual  examples.  The  following  is  a
collective  hallucination  of  what  I  have  called  a  rudimentary  type,  as
not  suggesting  any  special  form  or  human  presence ;  but  it  is  a
remarkably  prolonged  and  elaborate  specimen  of  the  sort.^  The
narrator  is  Mrs.  Ward,  of  Glen  Aray  Lodge,  Windsor.

1  Another  striking  rudimentary  hallucination,  of  the  cloud  type,  in  which  two  persons
(out  of  the  four  who  were  present)  shared,  is  described  in  Notes  and  Queries  for  September
8th  and  22nd,  and  November  10th,  1860,  and  for  January  5th,  1861.  The  narrator  is  Mr.
E.  L.  Swift,  who  was  Keeper  of  the  Jewels  in  the  Tower  at  the  time  when  the  event
occurred,  in  the  Jewel  House.  An  incorrect  version  was  given,  without  authority,  in
Gregory's  Animal  Magnetism.

In  Vol.  i.,  p.  483, 1  drew  attention  to  a  particular  kind  of  impression,  which,  without

actually   developing  into   a   sensory   form,    yet   strongly   suggests    a  particular  person's

presence.     It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  such  an  impression — which  seems   a  sort  of

potential  hallucination — may  be  collective.     Mrs.  Easton,  of  14,  The  Crescent,  Taunton,

writes,  in  January,  1884  : —

i^^'^'t^'^'  "I  have  been,  on  one  occasion,  impressed  with  the  certainty  that  a  sort  of — so  to

y^^^TlJ^  speak — invisible  presence  was  in  the  room,  and  my  sister,  who  was  in  the  same  room,  told

f^  me  some  hours  after,  that  she  had  the  same  impression  at  that  particular  moment,  I  not

having  spoken  of  the  matter  to  her.     This  took  place  about  two  or  three  days  after  the

death  of  a  near  relative."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Easton  adds  : —

"  In  answer  to  the  first  question  as  to  whether  we  ever  had  such  an  impression  at  any
other  time,  for  myself  I  can  answer  'No,'  decidedly,  and  my  sister  cannot  remember
anything  of  the  kind.

"  The  second  question  was,  did  we  connect  the  impression  with  our  deceased  relation
at  the  time?  For  myself,  I  can  answer,  'Yes' ;  my  sister  has  described  her  thoughts  at  that
praticular  moment  in  the  enclosed  letter.
■       ^  "  The  third  question,  '  Was  there  a  strong  bond  of  affection  ? '    Yes.

St/iu"  "Fourth   question,    'Can   we  be  sure  that  the  impression   in   each   mind    exactly

corresponded  in  time  ? '     I  am  quite  certain  that,  whatever  produced  this  unusual  f eehng,
we  both  experienced  it  at  the  same  moment,  although  perhaps  in  a  different  way,  being  so
unlike  in  temperament ;  I  remember  looking  at  my  watch  on  awakening,  to  know  the  time.
"Fifth  question,    'How  long   did   the   impression   last?'      For   some   seconds;  the
impression  on  my  mind  was  that  some  unusual  presence,  something  not  material,  was  near."
The  enclosure,  from  Mrs.  Welch,  of  5,  Colleton  Crescent,  Exeter,  was  as  follows  : —
"  In  August  last,  I  was  sleeping  in  the  room  with  my  sister.     I  think  it  was  the  third
night  after  our  father's  death,  and  he  was  lying  in  a  room  below.     I  was  aroused  out  of
my  sleep  with  a  feeling  as  if  some  person  had  entered  the  room,  and  come  as  far  as  the
foot  of  the  bed  when  I  awoke.

"  I  am  particularly  nervous  at  all  times,  of  course  after  the  recent  event  more  so  than
usual ;  yet  when  I  awoke,  I  did  not  feel  the  slightest  fear,  and  only  wished  I  could  see  the
time,  as  I  instantly  thought  I  should  hear  of  something  having  happened  at  that  moment
— the  more  so  as  our  step-mother,  we  knew,  was  in  a  veiy  precarious  state.

"My  sister  awoke  at  the  same  time,  and  on  my  telling  her  of  my  sensations  she  told
me  she  had  felt  the  same,  although  she  is  not  in  the  least  of  a  nervous  temperament."

In  reply  to  a  question  whether  such  an  impression  was  unique  in  her  experience,  Mrs.

Welch  says : —  .  -         <>

"  T  never  experienced  the  same  feelings  before,  that  I  can  recollect."  c^r  i-^--^-'-^-^—  ■


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  193

(316)  "  In  May,  1851,  I  and  my  husband,  the  late  E.  M.  Ward,  R.A.,    /      , ,    ^  ^
had  a  curious  experience  which  we  were  at  a  loss  to  account  for,  though  it     ,    /'/    .^^^
became  a  subject  of  frequent  conversation,  and   every  effort  was  made  to      ' ;
find  for  it  a  fitting  and  rational  explanation.

"  We  were  living  at  No.  33,  Harewood  Square.  It  was  in  the  month  ^'^''^*
of  May,  and  my  husband  and  I  had  been  to  a  quiet  gathering  of  friends  in
the  neighbourhood ;  we  returned  about  1 2  o'clock,  letting  ourselves  in,  for
the  servants  were  in  bed,  and  went  straight  to  our  bedroom.  Having
passed  such  a  quiet,  unexciting  evening,  there  was  nothing  much  to  talk
about,  and  my  husband  was  quickly  in  bed  and  asleep.  I  very  soon
followed  him,  and  was  just  getting  into  bed,  having  put  out  my  candle,
with  my  face  towards  the  door,  when,  much  to  my  surprise,  I  saw,  as
though  suspended  a  little  distance  from  the  top  of  the  door,  a  strange,
flickering  flame  ;  it  was  about  six  inches  high,  and  four  inches  across  the
widest  part,  pear-shaped,  and  of  a  blueish  lilac  tint.  I  was  considerably
startled  and  must  have  been  much  agitated,  for  my  husband  (as  he
informed  me  afterwards)  was  roused  by  the  sound  of  my  fast  beating
heart.  In  reply  to  his  inquiries,  I  drew  his  attention  to  the  strange  flame
which  I  still  saw  suspended  from  the  door  frame,  and  whilst  we  were
both  wonderingly  speculating  as  to  what  it  could  be,  it  was  joined  by
another  flame,  similar  in  every  respect,  but  smaller.  Greater  still  was  our
surprise  when  we  observed  these  two  mysterious  little  lights  slowly
advancing,  side  by  side,  towards  us ;  they  came  right  on  to  our  bed,  and
then,  determined  to  analyse  their  nature,  we  both  sat  up,  and  my  husband
grasped  them  with  his  hands,  rubbing  them  and  endeavouring  to  rid  us  of
their  society.  But,  to  our  astonishment,  this  treatment  had  no  more  efiect
upon  them  than  to  break  them  into  small  luminous  grains,  which  ran  all
over  the  bed- covering  like  quicksilver.  Gradually,  however,  this  bright
inundation  began  to  fade,  and,  as  we  still  continued  our  efforts  to
extinguish  it,  it  disappeared.

"  Such  is  the  account  of  the  occurrence.  That  it  actually  did  occur  to
us  we  never  entertained  the  slightest  doubt.  I  was  certainly  wide  awake
at  the  time,  and  my  mind  was  troubled  in  no  way,  and  I  was  in  good
health — otherwise  there  might  be  some  ground  for  the  belief  that  the  ap-
pearance was  the  hallucination  of  a  disordered  mind,  or  of  an  over-wrought
brain.  My  husband,  too,  was  undoubtedly  wide  awake,  and  retained  a
perfect  recollection  of  all  the  details  of  the  vision  the  next  day.  We
discussed  it,  and  tried  to  fathom  its  meaning,  over  and  over  again,  but
could  never  arrive  at  any  conclusion  about  it  at  all — except  that  as  it  did
not  act  as  a  forewarning  to  any  coming  event,  did  not  correspond  to  any
important  event,  and  did  not  appear  to  serve  any  purpose  at  all,  its
appearance  was  utterly  meaningless.

"  Henrietta  Mary  Ada  Ward."

In  a  later  letter,  Mrs.  Ward  adds  : —

"  As  the  lights  were  coming  to  the  bed,  there  were  two  streaks  of
moonlight  on  the  counterpane,  which  could  not  come  from  any  window,  as
the  room  was  darkened.  They  also  when  touched,  with  the  two  lamps,
merged  into  a  mass  of  diamonds."

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Ward  told  us  that  she  had  never  experienced  any
other  hallucination  of  the  senses

VOL,    II.  O


194  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

We  have  several  other  examples  of  collective  hallucinations  of
light.  In  one  (described  to  us  by  Mrs.  G.  T.  Haly,  of  122,  Coningham
Eoad,  Shepherd's  Bush,  W.,  as  having  occurred  a  few  days  after  her
husband's  death,  and  assumed  by  her  to  be  connected  with  him),  a
flame  as  of  a  candle,  but  bluer,  passed  and  repassed  the  bed  on  which
the  two  percipients  were  lying,  at  about  18  inches  height  from  the
floor.  In  another,  a  luminous  ball  was  seen  in  a  corner  of  the  room.
A  fourth  very  remarkable  instance,  of  the  brilliant  illumination  and
then  sudden  darkening  of  an  empty  room,  is  described  to  us  by  the
Rev.  Edward  Ram,  of  Norwich,  as  a  personal  experience  of  himself  and
his  wife — but  this  was  in  a  house  where  other  unaccountable  phen-
omena have  been  observed ;  as  was  also  the  case  in  a  fifth  instance,
where  a  light  is  described  by  one  percipient,  Mrs.  W.  B.  Richmond,
as  a  glow  over  the  whole  room,  out  of  which  (according  to  her
recollection)  two  bright  little  balls  of  light  seemed  to  flash  out ;  and
by  the  other  (her  mother)  as  "  flickering  about "  specially  in  a  par-
ticular part  of  the  room.  In  none  of  these  cases  does  it  seem  possible
that  the  light  was  in  any  way  cast  or  reflected  iato  the  room  from
outside.^

Coming  to  instances  of  a  more  developed  type,  we  have  a  con-
siderable group  of  cases  as  to  which  it  might  be  a  possible — though
I  think  a  rather  desperate — assumption  that  what  was  seen  was  a
real  object,  most  strangely  misinterpreted,  or  else  appearing  in  most
improbable  circumstances ;  and  which  I  do  not  therefore  number  as
evidential  items.  Specially  baffling  are  some  of  the  cases  where  a
carriage,  as  well  as  human  beings,  has  appeared.  For  instance,  Major
W.,  resident  near  Conon  Bridge,  Ross-shire,  writes : —

"  February  9th,  1882.

"  It  was  the  month  of  August ;  rather  a  dark  night  and  very  still ;
the  hour,  midnight ;  when  before  retiring  for  the  night  I  went,  as  is  often
my  custom,  to  the  front  door  to  look  at  the  weather.  When  standing  for  a
moment  on  the  step,  I  saw,  coming  round  a  turn  in  the  drive,  a  large  close
carriage  and  pair  of  horses,  with  two  men  on  the  box.  It  passed  the  front
of  the  house,  and  was  going  at  a  rapid  rate  towards  a  path  which  leads  to
a  stream,  running,  at  that  point,  between  rather  steep  banks.  There
is  no  carriage-road  on  that  side  of  the  house,  and  I  shouted  to  the
driver  to  stop,   as,  if  he  went  on,  he  must  undoubtedly   come  to  grief.

1  In  the  last  case,  the  second  percipient  suggests  the  lantern  of  thieves  trying  to  rob
the  pigeon-house.  But  in  the  first  place,  the  pigeon-house  was  not  robbed,  and  no  vestige
of  thieves  was  found  ;  and  in  the  second  place,  the  light  would  have  had  to  penetrate  a
very  dark  green  blind,  and  thieves  are  not  wont  to  require  for  their  work  an  advertisement
of  such  preternatural  brilliancy.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  195

The  carriage  stopped  abruptly  when  it  canie  to  the  running  water,
turned,  and,  in  doing  so,  drove  over  the  lawn.  I  got  up  to  it ;  and  by  this
time  my  son  had  joined  me  with  a  lantern.  Neither  of  the  men  on  the  box
had  spoken,  and  there  was  no  sound  from  the  inside  of  the  carriage.
My  son  looked  in,  and  all  he  could  discern  was  a  stiff-looking  figure  sitting
up  in  a  corner,  and  draped,  apparently,  from  head  to  foot  in  white.
The  absolute  silence  of  the  men  outside  was  mysterious,  and  the  white  figure
inside,  apparently  of  a  female,  not  being  alarmed  or  showing  any  signs
of  life,  was  strange.  Men,  carriage,  and  horses  were  unknown  to  me,
although  I  know  the  country  so  well.  The  carriage  continued  its  way
across  the  lawn,  turning  up  a  road  which  led  past  the  stables,  and  so
into  the  drive  again  and  away.  We  could  see  no  traces  of  it  the  next
morning — no  marks  of  wheels  or  horse's  feet  on  the  soft  grass  or  gravel
road ;  and  we  never  again  heard  of  the  carriage  or  its  occupant,  though  I
caused  careful  inquiries  to  be  made  the  following  day.  I  may  mention
that  my  wife  and  daughter  also  saw  the  carriage,  being  attracted  to  the
window  by  my  shout.     This  happened  on  the  23rd  of  August,  1878."

After  a  visit  to  the  house  in  September,  1884,  Mr.  Podmore  wrote  : —
"  Major  W.,  on  whom  I  called  to-day,  is  practically  satisfied  that  what
he  and  his  family  saw  was  not  a  real  carriage.  He  showed  me  the  whole
scene  of  its  appearance.  The  spot  where  the  carriage  appeared  to  turn
barely  leaves  sufficient  room  for  the  passage  of  an  ordinary  carriage,  and
that  a  carriage  should  turn  round  there  seems  almost  impossible.  The
carriage  went  for  some  distance  across  the  lawn — a  mossy  and  rather  damp
piece  of  grass — and  stopped  in  front  of  the  house  for  more  than  a  minute,
the  while  Major  W.  spoke  to  the  man,  but  without  receiving  any  reply.
His  wife,  whom  I  also  saw,  was  attracted  to  the  window  by  the  sound  of
the  wheels,  in  the  first  instance,  on  the  gravel.  Major  W.  made  many
inquiries  among  his  neighbours,  but  could  not  find  that  anyone  had  seen
the  carriage  at  all.  The  house  is  situated  on  a  peninsula  stretching  between
the  Cromarty  and  Moray  Firths,  and  some  3  miles  from  the  neck  of  the
peninsula.  The  locality  is  very  lonely,  there  being  no  villages  or  hamlets,
and  but  few  private  residences  of  any  kind ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine
the  errand  which  could  bring  a  strange  carriage  into  such  a  country  at  the
dead  of  night.  Major  W.  has  had  one  other  purely  subjective  hallucina-
tion."

In  another  of  the  carriage-cases,  the  hallucination  was  of  a  more
iDizarre  sort,  the  coachman  and  footman  on  the  box  having  black  faces,
and  the  four  ladies  inside  being  dressed  completely  in  black.  The
vehicle  passed  the  window  without  producing  any  sound  on  the
gravel.  In  a  third  case  (quoted  above,  pp.  97-9),  one  of  the  percipients
was  altogether  apart  from  the  three  others — they  seeing  the
phantasmal  carriage  pass  the  window,  and  she  meeting  it  some  way
down  the  road.  In  a  fourth  case,  our  informant — Mr.  Paul  Bird,  of
39,  Strand,  Calcutta — followed  a  phantom  gharrie  for  100  yards,
into  the  very  portico  of  Hastings  House  at  Alipore,  while  the  same
vehicle  was  watched  in  its  approach  by  his  wife  from  a  window.     But

VOL.    II.  O    2


196  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

more  of  a  puzzle  even  than  the  carriage-cases  is  a  narrative  received
from  two  daughters  of  a  well-known  clergyman — neither  romantic  nor
superstitious  witnesses — who  describe  a  vast  swarm  of  soundless
phantasmal  shapes,  dressed  in  old-fashioned  garments,  most  of  them
dwarfish,  and  two  with  sparks  round  their  faces,  by  which  they  and  a
maid  were  once  accompanied  for  about  200  yards  in  a  lane  near  Oxford.
"  One  might  imagine  it  to  be  a  kind  of  mirage  ;  only  the  whole
appearance  [owing  to  the  dresses]  was  so  unlike  what  one  would  have
seen  in  any  town  at  the  time  we  saw  it."^  If  this  must  be  regarded
as  illusion,  because  it  occurred  in  misty  moonlight,  yet  an  identity
of  impression  is  described  which  still  suggests  mental  infection : —
"  If  one  saw  a  man,  all  saw  a  man  ;  if  one  saw  a  woman,  all  saw  a
woman ;  and  so  on."

I  pass  by,  however,  as  necessarily  inconclusive,  the  greater
number  of  our  instances  of  collective  impression  where  the  appearance
was  seen  out  of  doors  in  imperfect  light — though  there  is  not  one
of  them  which  would  not  be  decidedly  more  remarkable,  as  a
specimen  of  joint  illusion,  than  any  that  I  have  found  recorded  in
print.^  The  following  daylight  example  is  from  the  Misses  Mont-
gomery, of  Beaulieu,  Drogheda.

"March  2nd,  1884.

(317)  "About  the  year  1875, 1  and  my  sister  (we  were  about  13  years
old  then)  were  driving  home  in  the  tax-cart  one  summer  afternoon  about  4

1  This  case,  which  in  brief  abstract  may  sound  like  a  frightened  girl's  story,  will
not,  I  think,  produce  that  impression  in  the  complete  account,  which  may  be  found  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  77.

2  The  following  case,  remote  but  first-hand,  is  made  interesting  by  the  fact  that  one
of  the  persons  present  did  not  share  the  experience.  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Walditch,  Bridport,
tells  us  that  one  beautiful  summer  evening,  after  sunset  but  while  it  was  still  quite  light,
she  was  driving  home  with  a  cousin  and  a  friend — "  three  more  merry  girls  could  hardly
be  met  with  " — and  a  man-servant.

"  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  on  the  right-hand  side,  walking,  or  rather,  gliding,  at  the
head  of  the  horse.  My  first  idea  was  that  he  meant  to  stop  us,  but  he  made  no  effort  of
the  kind,  but  kept  on  at  the  same  pace  as  the  horse,  neither  faster  nor  slower.  At  first  I
thought  him  of  great  height,  but  afterwards  remarked  that  he  was  gliding  some  distance
(at  least  a  foot)  above  the  ground.  Mary  was  sitting  by  me.  I  pointed  out  in  a  low
voice  the  figure,  but  she  did  not  see  it,  and  could  not  at  any  time  during  its  appearance.
Emily  was  sitting  by  the  man-servant  on  the  front  seat ;  she  heard  what  I  said,  turned
round,  and  speaking  softly,  'I  see  the  man  you  mention  distinctly.'  Then  the  man-
servant said,  in  an  awful,  frightened  voice,  '  For  God's  sake,  ladies,  don't  say  anything  !
please  keep  quiet  ! '  or  words  to  that  effect.  I  had  heard  that  horses  and  other  animals
feel  the  presence  of  the  supernatural ;  in  this  instance  there  was  no  starting  or  bolting,
the  creature  went  on  at  an  even  pace,  almost  giving  the  idea  of  being  controlled  by  the
figure.  The  face  was  turned  away,  but  the  shape  of  a  man  in  dark  clothing  waa  clearly
defined .  My  cousin  and  the  man-servant  saw  it  distinctly,  but  my  friend  was  unable  to
do  so,  though  the  figure  stood  out  plainly  against  the  evening  light ;  she  was  so  placed
that  she  ought  to  have  seen  it  particularly  well.  At  the  entrance  of  the  village  of
Charminster  it  vanished,  and  we  saw  it  no  more.     I  never  heard  the  road  was  haunted."

This  may  jjerhaps  have  been  an  oj^tical  effect  due  to  the  horse's  breath  ;  but  many
breathing  horses  are  out  on  summer  evenings,  and  I  should  be  glad  to  know  of  a  similar
effect  in  other  instances.  It  is  at  any  rate  odd  that  it  should  have  been  interpreted
in  the  same  way  by  several  observers.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  197

o'clock,  when  there  suddenly  appeared,  floating  over  the  hedge,  a  female  (^^i-''>-  '.
figure  moving  noiselessly  across  the  road ;  the  figure  was  in  white,  and
the  body  in  a  slanting  position,  some  10  feet  above  the  ground.  The
horse  suddenly  stopped  and  shook  with  fright,  so  much  so  that  we  could
not  get  it  on.  I  called  out  to  my  sister  :  '  Did  you  see  that  ? '  and  she
said  she  had,  and  so  did  the  boy  Caffrey,  who  was  in  the  cart.  The  figure
went  over  the  hedge,  on  the  other  side  of  the  road,  and  passed  over  a  field,
till  we  lost  sight  of  it  in  a  plantation  beyond.  Altogether,  1  suppose,  we
watched  it  for  a  couple  of  minutes.  It  never  touched  the  ground  at  all,
but  floated  calmly  along.  On  reaching  home  we  told  our  mother  of  what
we  had  seen,  and  we  were  perfectly  certain  it  was  not  a  mere  delusion  or
illusion,  nor  an  owl,  or  anything  of  the  kind.

"  I  have  never  seen  anything  like  this  nor  any  apparition  before  or
since.  We  were  all  in  good  health  at  the  time,  and  no  one  had  suggested
any  grounds  for  the  apparition  beforehand  ;  but  we  afterwards  heard  that
the  road  was  supposed  to  be  haunted,  and  a  figure  had  been  seen  by  some
of  the  country  folks.

"Violet  Montgomery.
"  Sidney  Montgomery."
Professor  Barrett,  who  knows  the  witnesses,  adds  that  Mrs.    Mont-
gomery remembers  the  incident  well,  and  the  terror  her  children  were  in
They  both  agreed  as  to  the  reality  of  the  figure.     Cafirey   has  gone  to
America,  and  been  lost  sight  of.

No  one  probably  will  suppose  that  the  witnesses  here  have
agreed  to  repeat,  for  our  benefit,  a  romance  which  they  fabricated  for
their  mother's  at  the  time ;  and  however  much  allowance  be  made
for  childish  terror  or  exaggeration,  the  community  of  experience  in
broad  daylight  seems  to  exceed  what  can  be  attributed  to  verbal
suggestions,  passed  from  one  to  another,  a  propos  of  a  fleece  of  cloud  ,
or  an  owl.  We  have  a  very  similar  instance  from  Mr.  W.  S.  Soutar,
solicitor,  of  Blairgowrie,  N.B. — who  records  that  he  and  his  brother,
as  young  boys,  at  play  behind  their  father's  house,  in  the  gloaming  ot  //
a  summer  "evening,  "  both  saw  an  apparition  in  the  shape  of  a  female
figure,  plainly  dressed,  with  a  striped  apron  over  the  face,  and  which
glided,  without  any  apparent  movement  of  the  feet,  from  the  road
till  about  half-way  between  it  and  the  hedge  surrounding  a  shrubbery
near  the  house,  when  the  figure  suddenly  disappeared.  There  was  no
cover  near,  behind  which  the  person  (if  in  the  body)  could  hide,  the
spot  where  it  disappeared  being  bare  and  open."  This  case,  however,
is  remote,  and  the  second  witness  is  dead.  A  much  more  striking
example  (brought  to  our  notice  by  Mr.  A.  Farquharson,  of  North
Bradley,  Trowbridge,  Wilts)  is  one  where  the  senses  of  two  adults —
a  gentleman-farmer,  described  as  a  hard-headed  unromantic  business-
man and  his  wife — were  similarly  deluded  in  an  exposed  space  and  in


198  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

broad  daylight ;  but  the  timidity  of  the  witnesses  precludes  me  from
giving  details.

To  come,  however,  to  indoor  cases,  of  a  less  dubious  type.  As  a
rule,  the  figure  seen  (just  as  in  purely  subjective  cases  occurring  to  a
single  percipient)  is  unrecognised.  The  following  account,  though
remote,  is  first-hand,  and  at  any  rate  deserves  quotation.  It  occurs
in  Letters  of  Philip,  2nd  Earl  of  Chesterfield  (1829),  p.  11.  The
incident  was  recorded  by  Lord  Chesterfield  in  ah  MS.  volume  con-
taining his  letters  and  "notes  for  my  remembrance  of  things  and
accidents,  as  they  yearly  happen  to  me."

(318)  "A  very  odd  accident  this  year  [1652]  befell  mee,  for  being
come  about  a  law  sute  to  London  .  .  I,  waking  in  the  mornmg  about
8  o'clock,  .  .  .  plainly  saw,  within  a  yard  of  my  bedside,  a  thing  all
white  like  a  stand^  sheet,  with  a  knot  atop  of  it,  about  4  or  5  foot  high,
w^  I  considered  a  good  while,  and  did  rayse  myself  up  in  my  bed  to
view  the  better.  At  last  I  thrust  out  both  my  hands  to  catch  hold  of  it,
but,  in  a  moment,  like  a  shadow,   it  slid    to  the  feet   of  the  bed,   out  of

w'^  I,   leaps    after  it,   c"^  see  it  no  more Doubting  least

something  might  have  happened  to  my  wife,  I  rid  home  that  day  to  Pet-
worth  in  Sussex,  where  I  had  left  her  with  her  father,  the  Earl  of  North-
umberland, and  as  I  was  going  upstairs  to  her  chamber,  I  met  one  of  my
footmen,  who  told  me  that  he  was  comming  to  me  with  a  packet  of  letters,
the  w^  I  having  taken  from  him  went  to  my  wife,  who  I  found  in  good
health,  being  .  .  .  with  Lady  Essex,  her  sister,  and  another  gentle-
woman, one  Mrs.  Ramsey  .  .  .  They  all  asked  me  what  made  me  to
come  home  so  much  sooner  than  I  intended.  Whereupon  I  told  them
what  had  happened  to  me  that  morn^;  which  they  all  wondering  at
desired  me  to  open  and  read  the  letter  that  I  had  taken  from  the  foot-
man, which  I  immediately  did,  and  read  my  wife's  letter  to  mee  aloud,
wherein  she  desired  my  speedy  return^  as  fear^  that  some  ill  w"^  happen
to  mee,  because  that  morning  shee  had  seen  a  thing  all  in  white,  with  a
black  face,  standing  by  her  bedside.  ...  By  examining  all  particulars
we  found  that  the  same  day,  the  same  hour,  and  (as  near  as  can  be  com-
puted) the  same  minute,  all  that  had  happened  to  me  had  befallen  her,
being  fortie  miles  asunder.  The  Lady  Essex  and  Mrs.  Ramsey  were
witnesses  to  both  our  relations."  ^

1  In  another  case  where  a  phantasm,  again  of  a  very  unusual  aspect,  was  simultaneously
perceived  by  two  persons  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  we  have  the  special  reason  for
supposing  it  to  have  been  purely  subjective  in  origin,  that  both  percipients  were  some-
what liable  to  subjective  visual  hallucinations  ;  but  though  it  comes  to  us  on  good  authority,
it  is  third-hand,  and  cannot  receive  an  evidential  number.  Dr.  T.  King  Chambers,
r.R.C.P.,  of  Shrubs  Hill  House,  Sunningdale,  writes  : —

"  December  26th,  1885.

"  My  uncle  by  marriage,  Colonel  Macdonald,  was  subject  to  frequent  hallucinations,
when  sitting  up  late  reading,  and  working  at  some  improvements  in  fortification  and
Semaphore  telegraphy,  which  he  thought  would  be  of  value.  The  hallucinations  were
wholly  visual,  I  understood,  not  aural ;  though  he  used  to  be  heard  hailing  them,  and
what  he  called  '  conversing  ' ;  yet  the  conversation  was  in  his  usual  style  of  pure  mono-
logue. He  was  always  quite  sane — as  have  been  all  his  children  and  grandchildren.  His
son,  Charles,  was  a  civilian  in  the  E.I.C.  Service,  and,  whilst  a  student  at  Haileybury


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  199

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  two  percipients  were  widely  separated,
which  excludes  the  idea  of  joint  illusion  or  of  verbal  suggestion  ;
and  the  case  forms  a  parallel,  among  sensory  phantasms,  to  that
given  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  240,  where  the  common  experience  was  of  an  ideal
and  emotional  kind.

In  the  next  example  the  percipients,  though  near  together,  were
not  actually  in  one  another's  company.  The  case  is  of  special  interest,
inasmuch  as  the  two  percepts  were  slightly  different, — the  figure
being  seen  by  one  observer  with  a  hat  on,  and  by  the  other  without,
and  the  difference  corresponding  with  the  associations  natural  to  each
in  their  respective  positions.  A  clergyman  writing  to  us  from
Lincoln,  on  April  29th,  1885,  describes  an  afternoon  call  of  the
preceding  January.

(319)  "I  was  ushered  into  the  drawing-room,  and  was  asked  to  take
a  low  arm-chair  in  the  middle  of  the  room  ;  but  I  preferred  sitting  on  a
couch  drawn  up  at  right  angles  to  the  side  of  the  fireplace,  where  I  could
command  a  view,  through  the  window,  of  the  garden.  Facing  me,  with
her  back  to  this  window,  sat  one  lady ;  to  my  left,  seated  not  far  from  the
arm-chair  mentioned,  was  another  lady,  fronting  the  hearth.  While  we
sat  chatting  upon  the  subject  of  my  visit,  an  old  man,  of  somewhat  sad
appearance,  dressed  in  a  dark  blue  over-coat — somewhat  shabby — and
with  a  flat-topped  felt  hat,  and  remarkable  for  a  white  beard,  passed  the
window ;  and  immediately  after  the  front  door  bell  rang.  The  lady  of  the
house  was  expecting  a  visit  from  some  lady  friend,   and  remarked    '  This

must  be .'     I  said,  '  No,  it's  an  old  man  with  a    white  beard.'     At

which  both  ladies  present  expressed  surprise,  and  began  wondering  who  it
could  be.  Just  then  the  door  of  the  room  opened,  and  in  walked  a  well-
known  local  practitioner.  As  soon  as  he  had  shaken  hands  all  round,  the
lady  of  the  house  said,  '  But  where  is  the  old  man  with  the  white  beard  ? '
To  which  the  doctor  replied,  '  Yes  ;  where  is  he  ? '

"  Our  friend,  the  doctor,  had  happened  to  be  passing  the  gate  a  short
time  before,  and  had,  without  premeditation  as  he  says,  suddenly  turned
in,  struck  with  the  idea  of  paying  an  afternoon  call.  He  came  up  the  walk
towards  the  hall  door,  and,  in  passing  the  window  mentioned,  looked  into  the

College,  was  a  constant  visitor  at  our  house  in  Keppel  Street,  and  also  in  Essex.  He  was
the  only  one  of  the  family  who  inherited  his  father's  peculiarity,  which  they  both
considered  to  be  an  hereditary  racial  disease,  or  rather  mental  malformation,  of  no
practical  importance  for  good  or  harm,  when  once  so  understood  by  the  afflicted  person .

"  Shortly  before  my  cousin  went  to  India  [where  he  was  killed  in  a  mutiny]  when  I
was  quite  a  child,  he  slept  a  night  at  my  father's  in  Keppel  Street ;  and  while  going  to
bed  he  saw  a  man  Avith  a  face  he  did  not  recognise,  dressed  in  an  old-fashioned  Spanish
costume.  He  was  not  alarmed,  or  particularly  interested  ;  but  as  a  matter  of  chit-chat,
mentioned  it  in  a  letter  to  his  father  at  Exeter,  who  answered  by  return  of  post  that,  at
the  same  time,  he  had  seen  an  exactly  similar  figure,  in  the  same  strange  dress .  I  was  too
young  at  the  time  to  be  safely  told  ghost-stories  ;  but  my  father  and  mother  often  detailed
the  circumstances  as  a  singular  instance  of  coincidence.  I  should  explain  it  by  the  fact
that  both  my  uncle  and  cousin  were  at  home  in  Devon,  and  fond  of  history.  Both  would
be  likely  to  have  a  store  of  half  remembered  dates  relating  to  the  defeat  of  the  Arniada
and  Spanish  affairs,  and  the  day  may  have  suggested  the  forgotten  date,  and  clothed  it  in
appropriate  costume.  "T.  K.  Chambees."


200  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

room  where  we  were  sitting,  and  saw,  seated  in  the  low  arm-chair,  an  old  man
exactly  answering  to  the  description  of  the  old  man  I  had  seen  passing
the  window  (doubtless  when  the  doctor  passed),  with  this  exception,  that
the  person  he  saw  had,  of  course,  no  hat  on.  The  doctor  was  surprised  not
to  find  the  old  gentleman  in  the  room  ;  hence  his  strange  reply  to  the  lady's
question.

"  Now  observe  :  /  saw  the  old  man  exactly  at  the  time  the  doctor  was
passing  the  window.  I  did  not  see  the  doctor,  whom  I  know  well,  who  is
much  shorter  than  the  figure  I  saw,  and  who  wore  a  brown  top-coat,  a  silk
hat,  and  no  beard.  And  the  doctor  saw  the  figure  in  the  room,  sitting
down  and  without  a  hat.

"  I  am  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  subject  to  similar  hallucinations,  if  the
afiair  may  be  rightly  so-called."

Dr.  Cant  writes  to  us  as  follows  : —

"  Silver  Street,  Lincoln.

"May  7th,  1885.

"  I  have  seen  Mr. [the  clergyman],  and  quite  agree  with  all  he

said.  The  old  man  was  sitting  down  in  the  room,  and  I  felt  certain  of  his
presence,  and  was  greatly  astonished  not  to  find  him  in  the  room.  The
reports  we  have  given  are  absolutely  true,  without  any  doubts  in  either  of
our  minds.  u  -yy-    ip    Cant."

Dr.  Cant  was  asked  whether  he  had  ever  had  any  other  hallucinations  ;
and  also  whether  he  would  have  been  certain  to  see  any  real  person
occupying  the  position  where  the  clergyman  saw  the  figure.  He  replied  : —

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  these  phenomena  are  quite  new  to  me,  and
I  never  remember  having  one  of  the  sort  before.     It  was  quite  im2J0Ssible

for  the  figure  that  Mr.  saw  to  have  been  there,  as  I  must  have  seen

it  when  passing,  and  he  only  saw  one  figure,  and  did  not  see  me  at  all."

The  next  two  cases  resemble  the  last,  in  the  point  that  the
two  percipients  do  not  seem  to  have  seen  exactly  the  same  thing.
Surgeon-Major  Samuel  Smith,  of  Wyndham  House,  E^ngsdown
Parade,  Bristol,  sent  the  following  account  to  the  Western  Daily
Press  (Nov.  30,  1881),  and  has  since  confirmed  it  to  us.

(320)  "  I  solemnly  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the  statement  made.  I  will
add  that  I  have  been,  although  not  a  professed  teetotaller,  a  total  abstainer
from  stimulants  for  the  past  10  years,  and  that  I  am  not  a  believer  in
Spiritualism  as  it  exists  in  the  present  day.

"  About  20  minutes  past  1 1  o'clock  on  the  night  of  the  20th  of  April
last,  I  was  engaged  with  my  wife's  mother  in  playing  a  selection  from
'  La  Figlia  del  Reggimento '  for  the  flute  and  piano.  We  were  seated
in  the  drawing-room,  which  was  brilliantly  lighted  by  three  large  gas-
lights burning  in  globes  which  hung  from  the  centre  of  the  ceiling,  the
only  other  occupants  of  the  room  being  my  wife,  who  had  fallen  asleep
upon  the  couch,  and  the  baby  asleep  in  the  cradle.  My  wife's  brother,
who  had  been  with  us,  left  the  room  at  11  o'clock,  and  retired  to  rest.
The  room  itself  is  spacious,  lofty,  and  parallelogram-shaped,  the  piano
occupying  a  position  immediately  opposite  to  the  only  door  of  entrance  in


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  201

the  middle  of  the  corresponding  long  side,  so  that  in  playing  we  sat  with
our  backs  to  the  door,  which  was  closed.

"  I  was  thoroughly  intent  upon  the  music,  which  was  new  to  me,  and
difficult  to  read,  so  far  as  the  flute  was  concerned,  owing  to  the  small  size  of
the  notes  ;  when  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  performance,  a  strange  feeling
of  mingled  awe  and  fear  came  over  me,  and  I  distinctly  felt  the  approach
of  someone,  or  rather  of  something,  coming  behind  me,  and  this  although
I  was  so  engrossed  with  playing  ;  and  in  my  mind  I  seemed  to  perceive
the  shape.  As  it  approached  nearer,  I  turned  my  head  to  the  right,  and
distinctly  perceived  a  shade  of  a  greyish  colour  standing  by  me  upon  my
right  hand,  a  little  in  advance  of  me.  I  did  not  see  the  whole  figure,  but
what  I  saw  was  part  of  a  shadowy  face,  the  outline  of  the  forehead,  nose,
mouth,  chin,  and  a  part  of  the  neck  being  visible.  Strange  to  say,  I
do  not  remember  seeing  the  eye,  but  the  figure  appeared  to  have  a  top  hat
upon  its  head.  As  I  gazed  upon  it,  it  vanished,  and  with  it  the  feelings,
to  a  great  extent,  to  which  it  gave  rise.  Of  the  mingled  feelings  which  its
presence  raised  in  my  mind,  I  should  say  that  awe  predominated.

"  I  did  not  cease  playing,  and  subsequently  played  other  pieces  by  the
old  masters,  sang  some  songs,  and  finally  went  to  bed,  and  slept  well.  Nor
did  I  mention  the  matter  to  my  wife's  mother  that  night,  either  at  the
time  of  the  occurrence,  or  before  retiring  to  rest.  Now,  however,  comes
the  most  remarkable  part  of  the  matter.  At  or  about  11,30  a.m.  on  the
following  day,  my  wife's  mother  came  into  the  private  room,  and  suddenly
said,  '  Did  you  see  something  when  you  turned  your  head  last  night,  when
you  were  playing  ? '  I  did  not  immediately  reply,  but  the  strange  event  of
the  preceding  night  flashed  across  my  mind  instantly.  I  was,  indeed,  too
greatly  surprised  to  reply  at  once,  for  I  did  not  believe  at  the  time  that
she  had  noticed  the  action  upon  my  part ;  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  I
had  not  mentioned  the  matter  to  her,  or  even  hinted  at  it.

"  '  Why  do  you  ask  ? '  I  replied.

"  '  Because  I  thought  you  did.'

"  '  Did  you  see  anything'? '  I  asked.

"  '  Yes,  I  believed  that  someone  had  come  into  the  room,  as  I  felt  that
someone  had  come  in.'

"  '  Did  you  think  it  was  a  man  or  a  woman  1 '

'"I  felt  that  it  was  a  man,  and  at  first  believed  it  to  be  James'  (my
wife's  brother),  '  who  had  come  down,  and  I  wondered  how  he  could  come
in  without  my  hearing  him.'

"  '  Did  you  see  anything  ? '  I  asked.

"  '  Yes,  I  saw  the  back  and  shoulders  of  the  form  of  a  man  ;  it  passed
across  like  a  shadow  behind  you,  stood  to  your  right  hand,  and  then
disappeared.     I  was  not  alarmed,  but  surprised.

"So  ends  the  narrative.  In  no  way  can  I  explain  the  cause,  or
sequence  of  events.     As  they  occurred,  so  I  present  them."

Surgeon-Major  Smith  (January  15th,  1886),  in  sending  his  mother-in-
law's  confirmation,  adds  : —

"  In  speaking  of  the  matter  to-day  she  said  she  felt  the  presence  of  the
visitor  in  her  mind  before  she  saw  it ;  and  this  is  my  experience  of  it.  I
felt  its  presence  before  I  saw  it."^

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  483,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  2.


202  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  [chap.

"  Wyndham  House,  Kingsdown,  Bristol,

"January  15th,  1886.

"  Agreeably  to  the  request  of  Mr.  Gurney,  I  write,  but  have  nothing
to  add  to  the  statement  of  my  experience  of  the  strange  visitation
described  in  the  Western  Daily  Press  in  November,  1881  ;  the  facts  being
as  therein  stated.  "  Hannah  Robinson."

Mr.  Smith  has  repeated  the  account  to  me  on  the  spot ;  and  it  then
became  evident  that  Mrs.  Robinson,  turning  her  head  the  instant  after  he
did  the  same,  would  have  seen  any  flesh-and-blood  figure  rather  miorefull-
face  than  he  did ;  instead  of  which  she  saw  the  hack.  The  extremely
distinct  and  startling  character  of  the  experience  came  out  more  impres-
sively in  conversation  than  in  the  written  account.  Neither  percipient
can  recall  having  had  anything  like  a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.

The  following  account  is  from  the  Rev.  D.  W.  G.  Gwynne,  M.D.,
Neuaddvach,  Pontardulais,  South  Wales.     He  first  describes  how   he

took  up  his  abode   at  P House,  near   Taunton,  in  1853,  and

how  both  he  and  his  wife  were  made    uncomfortable    by  auditory
experiences  to  which  they  could  find  no  clue.     He  proceeds  : —

fi  iiz^  (321)"I  now  come  to  the  mutual  experience  of  something  that  is  as  fresh

^^.-z  in  its  impression  as  if  it  were  the  occurrence  of  yesterday.  During  the
^1-..  night  I  became  aware  of  a  draped  figure  passing  across  the  foot  of  the  bed
-«t4  t^  towards  the  fire-place.  I  had  the  impression  that  the  arm  was  raised,
^Z^'"' "'"pointing  with  the  hand  towards  the  mantel-piece,  on  which  a  night-light
^•"■'  was  burning.  Mrs.  Gwynne  at  this  moment  seized  my  arm,  and  the  light
***  \,,w  '^<^*^  extingttished.     Notwithstanding,  I  distinctly  saw  the  figure  returning


the  door  locked,  as  usual,   that    I  was  painfully  impressed.     I  need  hardly

J  say  that  Mrs.  Gwynne  was  in  a  very  nervous  state.     She  asked    me   what

^v  I  had  seen,  and    I    told  her.     She  had  seen    the    same  figure,  but  her

.         impression  was  that  the  figure  placed  its  hand  over  the  night-light  and

extinguished  it.

"  The  night-light  in  question  was  relit  and  placed  in  a  toilette  basin,
and  burned  naturally.  I  tried  to  convince  myself  that  it  might  have  been
a  gust  of  wind  down  the  chimney  that  put  the  light  out ;  but  that  will  not
account  for  the  spectral  appearance,  which  remains  a  mystery.

"  D,  W.  G.  Gwynne."
Mrs.  Gwynne  writes,  on  April  15,  1884  : —

"  In  addition  to  my  husband's  statement,  which  I  read,  I  can  only  say
that  the  account  he  has  given  you  accords  with  my  remembrance  of  the
'  unearthly  vision,'  but  I  distinctly  saw  the  hand  of  the  phantom  placed
over  the  night-light,  which  was  at  once  extinguished.  I  tried  to  cling  to
Dr.  Gwynne,  but  he  leapt  out  of  bed  with  a  view,  as  he  afterwards  said,  of
intercepting  some  supposed  intruder.  The  door  was  locked  as  usual,  and
was  so  when  he  tried  it.  He  lit  a  candle  at  once,  and  looked  under  the
bed,  and  into  a  closet,  but  saw  nothing.     The  night-light  was   also  relit,


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  203

which  was  placed  on  the  wash-stand,  and  together  with  the  candle,
remained  burning  all  night.  I  must  observe  that  I  had  never  taken  to  use
night-lights  before  we  lived  there,  and  only  did  so  when  I  had  been  so
often  disturbed  and  alarmed  by  sighs  and  heavy  breathing  close  to  my  side
of  the  bed.  Dr.  Gwynne,  on  the  appearance  of  the  phantom,  in  order  to
calm  my  agitated  state,  tried  to  reason  with  me,  and  to  persuade  me  that
it  might  have  been  the  effects  of  the  moonlight  and  clouds  passing  over  the
openings  of  the  shutter,  and  possibly  that  a  gust  of  wind  might  have
extinguished  the  light,  but  I  knew  differently.  When  we  had  both  been
awakened  at  the  same  moment  apparently,  and  together  saw  that  unpleasant
figure,  tall  and  as  it  were  draped  like  a  nun,  deliberately  walk  up  to  the
mantel-piece  and  put  out  the  light  with  the  right  hand,  there  could  be  no
mistake  about  it ;  and  I  distinctly  heard  the  rustling  sound  of  garments  as
the  figure  turned  and  left  through  the  door,  after  my  husband's  attempt  to
stop  it  with  his  open  arms.  The  moonlight  was  very  clear  and  the  white
dimity  curtains  only  partly  closed.  "Mary  Gwynne."

[As  telling  against  the  purely  subjective  origin  of  this  experience,  I
ought  to  mention  that  there  was  distinct  evidence  of  others'  having
observed  unaccountable  phenomena  in  the  house,  though  this  was  not
known  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Gwynne  till  after  their  own  observation.  They
soon  afterwards  gave  up  the  house.]

In  the  next  case  the  difference  is  still  more  marked,  the  percept
being  visual  to  one  person  and  auditory  to  the  other ;  while  at  the
same  time  something  of  the  same  idea  seems  to  have  been  suggested
to  both.  For  the  purpose  in  view,  the  case  (in  spite  of  certain  dis-
crepancies in  the  two  accounts)  is,  perhaps,  stronger  than  it  looks.
For  the  fact  that  the  visual  and  the  auditory  experience  were  both
unshared,  is  a  decided  indication  that  they  were  neither  of  them  due
to  a  real  external  cause  ;  and  if  they  were  hallucinations,  then  (since
no  words  passed  till  after  both  had  been  experienced)  it  seems  at  any
rate  very  possible  that  one  of  them  produced  the  other  by  thought-
transference.     Lady  C.  writes,  on  Oct.  13,  1884  : —

(322)  "In  October,  1879,  I  was  staying  at  Bishopthorpe,  near  York,
with  the  Archbishop  of  York.  I  was  sleeping  with  Miss  Z.  T.,  when  I
suddenly  saw  a  white  figure  fly  through  the  room  from  the  door  to  the
window.  It  was  only  a  shadowy  form,  and  passed  in  a  moment.  I  felt
utterly  terrified  and  called  out  at  once,  '  Did  you  see  that  V  and  at  the
same  moment  Miss  Z,  T.  exclaimed,  '  Did  you  hear  that  ? '  Then  I  said,
instantly,  '  I  saw  an  angel  fly  through  the  room,'  and  she  said,  *  I  heard  an
angel  singing.'

"  We  were  both  very  much  frightened  for  a  little  while,  but  said
nothing  about  it  to  any  one.  "  K.  C."

Miss  T.  writes  : —

"December  19th,  1884.

"  Late  one  night,  about  October  17th,  1879,  Lady  C.  (then  Lady  K.  L.).


.Jl/*-^


204  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

•-^  f^"    and  I  were  preparing  to  go  to  sleep,  after  talking  some  time,  when  I  heard

]f/^  >        something  like  very  faint  music,  and  seemed  to  feel  what  people  call  '  a

1^..      presence.'    I  put  out  my  hand  and  touched  Lady  C,  saying,  '  Did  you  hear

^  o        that  % '     She    said,  '  Oh,  don't  !     Just  now  I  saw  something  going  across

the  room  ! '     We  were  both  a  good  deal  frightened,  and  tried  to  go  to  sleep

as  soon  as  we  could.     But  I  remember  asking  Lady  C.  exactly  what  she

had  seen,  and  she  said,  '  A  sort  of  white  shadow,  like  a  spirit.'    The  above

occurred  at  Bishopthorpe,  York.  "  Z.  J.  T."

In  the  next  two  examples  (in  which  the  figure  was  unrecognised)
no  difference  seems  to  have  been  noted  in  the  impressions  of  the  two
percipients.  Mr.  Bettany,  of  2,  Eckington  Villas,  Ashbourne  Grove,
Dulwich,  S.E.,  writes  : —

"]Srovember,  1884.

(323)  "  One  night,  early  this  year,  I  became  conscious  of  a  figure  in
my  bedroom.  It  was  a  crouching  figure  of  a  woman,  enveloped  in  a  black
cloak  and  hood.  My  impression  was  that  the  woman  was  old,  but  I  did
not  see  a  face.  This  figure  slowly  and  stealthily  advanced  from  the  bed-
room door  to  a  wardrobe  on  the  same  side  of  the  room.  It  then  suddenly
and  entirely  disappeared,  and,  from  the  sudden  shock,  I  gave  a  sharp  loud
cry.  I  never  saw  such  an  appearance  before  or  since.  I  consider  myself
unusually  unlikely  to  see  apparitions.  This  figure  and  cii'cumstance  were
like  no  dream,  but  were  to  me  real  and  evident,  and  there  appeared  to  be
no  transition  between  waking  and  sleeping.  I  was  convinced  that  what  I
saw  was  a  waking  sight.  I  have  no  idea  whom  the  figure  represented.  I
had  then  occupied  this  house  nearly  three  years,  and  I  know  nothing  of
former  occupants.

"No  light  was  carried  nor  was  any  light  burning  in  the  room.  The
figure  was  visible  and  the  wardrobe  was  visible ;  but  when  the  figure
disappeared  darkness  was  complete. ^     The  door  was  found  locked.

"  G.  T.  Bettany."

Mrs.  Bettany  (the  narrator  of  cases  20  and  309)  writes  : —

^^^l^iu,  "  On  the  night  referred  to,  I  woke  suddenly,  I  know  not  from  what
x,^^,j^^  •  cause.  My  husband  was  leaning  on  his  elbow,  looking  intently  at  a  strange
iZt^i  woman  whom  I  saw  crouching  by  the  wardrobe.  I  believed  it  to  be  a  real
^'  ^  person.  It,  however,  suddenly  disappeared.  My  husband  then  gave  a  cry
as  he  describes.  He  then  told  me  what  he  had  seen.  I  tried  the  door  and
found  it  locked.

"  The  thought  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  may  have  seen  this  by  sympa-
thetic transference  from  my  husband  ;  but,  against  this,  I  am  much  more
likely  to  see  something  of  this  kind  than  he.

"  Without  having  mentioned  this  apparition  to  my  servants,  the  nurse-
maid told  me,  next  day,  that  Muriel  (a  child  of  three  years)  had  woke
her  in  the  night,  saying,  without  any  fear  in  her  voice,  '  Clara,  Clara,
there  is  an  old  woman  in  the  room.'  The  nurse  herself  saw  nothing.  I
may  add  that  my  cook  has  on  several  occasions  asked  me  if  I  had  entered

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  205

her  room  during  the  night,  on  occasions  when  I  had  certainly  not  done  so.
She  appeared  much  mystified  on  learning  this.

"  Jeanie  Gwynne  Bettany."

The  narrator  of  the  next  experience  requests  that  her  name  may

not  appear.

"  February  17th,  1884.         s)  ^  •  *V

(324)   "  Shortly  after  my  marriage,  about  the  year  1847, 1  went  to  stay     j^.<^/L
at  my  father's  house.     I  had  at  that  time  two  sisters  at  home,  unmarried.    ^  ,,..;  •■-i
The  elder  of  the  two  was  nearly  two  years  younger  than  myself,  and  would    i, ,;  ,
therefore  be  about  22  years  of  age  at  the  time  I  speak  of.     The  other
sister  was  much  younger  than  us  both,  and  at  this  time  was  about  14  years
old.     My  two  sisters  slept  together  in  a  room  adjoining  mine.

"  One  morning,  on  my  going  down  to  breakfast,  my  elder  sister  said  to
me,  '  Sarah,  such  a  strange  thing  happened  in  the  night.  I  was  sleeping
outside  (the  other  side  of  the  bed  was  against  the  wall),  and  I  was  awoke
by  a  feeling  of  oppression  at  my  chest,  as  though  there  was  a  weight  there,
and  I  could  not  breathe.  On  opening  my  eyes  I  was  startled  to  see  a  veiled
figure  bending  over  me.  While  I  looked,  I  felt  Anna's  arm  come  round
me.  After  what  seemed  to  me  a  few  minutes  the  form  disappeared.
Then  Anna  whispered,  'Oh  Lizzie,  I  thought  it  was  going  to  take  you  away.'  "

"  This  was  my  sister's  account.  I  took  an  opportunity,  when  my
younger  sister  and  T  were  alone,  to  ask  her  what  that  was  that  she  and
Lizzie  had  seen.  She  said  she  was  awoke  by  a  feeling  of  oppression,  as
though  she  could  not  breathe,  and  on  opening  her  eyes,  in  the  dim  light  of
the  room  (the  blind  was  down,  but  there  was  a  gas  lamp  in  front  of  the
house,  which  gave  some  light  to  the  room),  she  saw  a  veiled  figure  bending
over  Lizzie,  and  she  put  her  arm  round  her,  as  she  thought  it  had  come  to
take  her  away.

"  My  father  and  his  family  shortly  after  moved  into  another  house,  my
sisters  still  occupying  a  room  together.  They  assured  me  that  once  in  this
other  house  they  were  visited  by  the  same  appearance^  but  this  time  it  was
over  Anna.     She  only  lived  a  short  time  after,  dying  at  sixteen  and  a-half .

"  On  sending  this  account  to  my  sister,  in  case  I  might,  through  lapse
of  time,  have  altered  the  matter,  she  assures  me  that  it  is  substantially
cornet,  and  adds  that  the  form  was  grey,  darker  and  thicker  in  the  middle  ;
she  also  adds  that  the  feeling  of  horror  was  intense.  "L.  S.  B."

[Unfortunately  the  sister's  letter  was  destroyed.]

The  following  case  is  a  very  singular  one.  The  phenomenon  of
mutual  hypnotisation  (or  rather  of  hypnotisation  of  one  person  through
the  process  of  hypnotising  another)  is  one  of  which  we  have  other
examples.  But  I  have  met  with  no  other  instance  of  genuine  transfer
of  a  hallucination  between  two  hypnotised  persons;  and,  if  this
instance  is  a  genuine  one,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that
it  depended  on  the  peculiar  condition  established — the  two  not  being
"  subjects"  influenced  in  common  by  a  third  person,  but  the  originator
of  the  hallucination,  whichever  of  the  two  it  was,  having  exerted  an


206  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

active  influence  on  the  other,  and  presumably  established  the  sort  of
rapport  which  is  so  common  a  feature  of  hypnotism.  It  could  of  course
only  be  by  the  rarest  accident  that  an  operator  who  had  established
such  a  rai^port  should  then  and  there  become  the  victim  of  a  sensory
hallucination,  which  would  thus  have  a  chance  of  being  transferred  ;
and  the  accident  in  this  case  was  the  fact  that  the  operator  herself
fell  into  an  abnormal  condition.  I  do  not  number  the  narrative,  as  it
is  impossible  to  be  quite  certain  that  some  unconscious  look  or  gesture
on  the  part  of  one  percipient  did  not  evoke  the  image  in  the  other's
mind  ;  for  though  the  hypnotic  state  in  itself  has  no  special  tendency
to  promote  hallucinations,  except  such  as  are  suggested  and  impressed
in  the  plainest  manner,  in  the  present  instance  there  seems  to  have
been  a  certain  amount  of  expectancy,  which  probably  facilitated  the
affection  in  both  the  persons  concerned.  The  case  was  received  from
Miss  Becket,  of  Hotel  Vendome,  Boston,  U.S.A.,  an  Associate  of  the
S.P.R.,  who  wrote  on  January  25,  1886.

Miss  Becket  begins  by  describing  how  on  one  occasion  she  attempted
to  hypnotise  a  friend  who  was  standing  two  or  three  yards  from  her.  She
made  slow  downward  passes  till  her  friend  "  shivered  with  cold."  She
then  reversed  the  passes,  but  soon  herself  became  rigid,  with  outstretched
arms.  "  Both  the  lady  and  myself  turned  our  heads,  and  seemed  to
follow  with  our  eyes  the  movements  of  some  invisible  body  around  the
room.  We  seemed  to  see  the  same  horrible  something  in  the  same  part  of
the  room,  for  our  faces  had  an  expression  of  unutterable  horror.  Some-
times we  looked  behind  this  one  object,  as  at  something  following  its
progress  round  the  room,  but  our  eyes  instantly  returned  to  the  greater
attraction,  and  at  last  our  faces  seemed  so  frozen  in  an  agony  of  fear  that
the  gentleman  sprang  towards  his  wife,  and  dragged  her  to  a  seat,  and  used
oreat  physical  force  before  he  could  rouse  her  from  the  terrible  spell.  I
seemed  to  be  in  part  liberated  with  her,  but  it  was  a  long  time  before  we
were  really  free  from  the  strange  influence  we  had  fallen  under.

"  When  we  could  talk,  we  found  that  we  had  each  seen  the  same  vision,
in  every  detail  alike.  I  have  always  had  a  strong  faith  in  religion.  My
friends  were  too  philosophical  to  admit  dogmas  into  their  minds.  But  the
one  horrible  central  figure  in  our  visions,  it  seems,  must  have  originated  in
my  brain,  from  its  resemblance  to  my  idea  of  a  personal  devil.  At  all
events,  we  both  saw,  suddenly  take  form  out  of  empty  space,  the  giant
fio-ure  of  a  man.  His  face  expressed  fiendish  cruelty  and  wickedness,  and
we  felt  ourselves  in  part  in  his  power,  and  knew  that  he  was  exulting  in
this  power.  He  seemed  to  be  followed  by  a  great  many  pigmy  figures,
that  danced  about  the  room  and  made  ugly  faces  at  us,  but  dared  not  do
more  in  the  presence  of  this  master  spirit.  It  was  when  the  supernatural
malignancy  of  this  frightful  creature  had  almost  overpowered  us  with  fear
and  horror,  that  our  faces  expressed  such  torture  as  to  cause  the  gentleman
to  interfere,  and  try  to  rouse  us  from  the  spell.

"  As  I  have  said,  it  was  entirely  out  of  our  plan  that  /  should  share  in


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  207

the  vision.  I  had  counted  on  watching  the  effects  of  my  passes  on  my
friend  ;  and  the  shock  of  this  unwelcome  surprise  put  an  end  to  any
further  experiments  in  future.  a  m^m^  j.  q,  Becket."

The  following  is  an  independent  and  very  different  description,  from
Mrs.  Frederic  D.  Williams,  the  lady  who  shared  in  the  experience  : —

"  35^^^  Rue  de  Fleurus,  Paris.

"March  24th,  1886.
She  first  narrates  how  Miss  Becket  and  she  used  to  try  on  each  other,
standing  some  distance  apart,  the  effect  of  "  magnetic  passes,"  and  how
she  herself  used  to  feel  a  hot  current  of  air,  and  Miss  Becket  a  cool  one  ;^
and  continues  : — "  I  cannot  remember  who  [^.e.,  which  of  us]  acted  as
magnetiser  on  the  particular  occasion  to  which  Miss  Becket  alludes  :  the
chief  feature  of  it  I,  however,  do  recollect.  This  was  seeing  a  strange
something — an  appearance  of  a  shadowy,  transparent  film,  or  veil,  or  sheet
of  thinnest  vapour,^  float  slowly  upward  between  Miss  Becket  and  myself,
but  (as  it  appeared  to  me)  nearer  her.  Any  possible  doubt,  if  not  of  the
object  itself,  at  least  of  our  perception  of  something  unusual,  should  be
disproved  by  the  fact  of  our  exclaiming  simultaneously,  '  Did  you  see
that ! ' — or  words  to  that  effect.  I  hesitate  to  say  anything  of  the  truth
of  which  I  am  not  absolutely  sure ;  but  I  have  an  impression  amounting
to  certainty  that  it  was  upon  the  reverse  passes  being  made  that  the  above
incident  happened.      [This  detail  agrees  with  Miss  Becket's  statement.]

"  L.  L.  W."

On  receiving  this  account,  I  told  Mrs.  Williams  what  Miss  Becket's
version  was,  and  also  asked  whether  Mr.  Williams  remembered  the  incident.
She  replied  that  Mr.  Williams  could  corroborate  her  statement  as  being
the  same  that  she  made  to  him  at  the  time,  but  does  not  remember  having  U
been  present,  though  he  admits  that  he  may  have  been.  She  remembers
that  her  experience  differed  from  Miss  Becket's  in  not  being  alarming,  and
that  Miss  Becket  described  hers  as  "  infernal."  What  she  saw  had  the  same
sort  of  shape  as  a  veil  falling  around  a  human  form,  and  changed  like  a
cloud  while  being  watched.  She  concludes  : — "  I  had  forgotten  that  Miss
Becket  became  rigid,  but  now  remember  the  circumstance,  and  this  fact,
that  I  was  very  much  alarmed,  not  at  what  I  saw  (although  it  is  quite
true  we  opened  our  eyes  very  wide  at  that),  but  at  the  state  into  which
Miss  Becket  was  thrown,  and  also  at  the  possibility  of  having  done  her
some  serious  harm  through  my  inexperience  in  such  matters  ;  which  would
seem  to  decide,  at  least  in  my  own  mind,  a  point  on  which  Miss  Becket
and  I  seem  to  be  at  variance,  namely,  that  it  was  I  who  was  '  magnetis-
ing,' and  not  she.  I  do  not  know,  however,  that  this  is  of  any  importance."

[Memory  is  clearly  more  likely  to  have  erred  as  to   the  resemblance
than  as  to  the  difference  of  the  two  visions.     But  even  if  we  only  had  Mrs.
Williams's  account,  some  germ  of  thought-transference  would  be  strongly  ^  ^
suggested  by  the  sudden  and  simultaneous  occurrence  of  two  such  singular
experiences.]  ^^  ^^  ^

^  From  this  it  would  appear  that  Miss  Becket  confounded  her  friend's  temperature-  ' .      ^.  i^tV*
sensations  with  her  own.     It  seems  to  be  an  accident  whether  such  subjective  impressions     "'''■'
take  the  form  of  heat  or  cold.  l^C^  >

J  This  rudimentary  sort  of  appearance,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  well  established  form  of
subjective  hallucination  (see,  e.g.,  p.  73,  note).


208  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  chap.

I  now   come    to    cases  where   the  figure   was  recognised.     The

following  transitional  instance,  of  semi-recognition,  is  from  Captain

Cecil  Norton,  late  of  the  5th  Lancers,  who  tells  us  that  he  has  had

no  other  hallucination  of  the  senses.

"  5,  Queen's  Gate,  S.W.

"  December  20th,  1885.

(325)  "  About  Christmastime  1875  or  1876,  being  officer  on  duty,  I  was
seated  at  the  mess  table  of  the  5th  Lancers,  in  the  West  Cavalry  Barracks,
at  Aldershot.  There  were  10  or  12  other  officers  present,  and  amongst
them  Mr.  John  Atkinson  (now  of  Erchfont  Manor,  near  Devizes,  Wilts),
the  Surgeon-Major  of  the  regiment,  who  sat  on  my  right,  but  at  the  end
of  the  table  furthest  from  me  and  next  to  Mr.  Russell.  [Captain  Norton
was  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  table  and  directly  facing  the  window.]  At
about  8,45  p.m.  Atkinson  suddenly  glared  at  the  window  to  his  right,
thereby  attracting  the  notice  of  Russell,  who,  seizing  his  arm,  said,  '  Good
gracious.  Doctor,  what's  the  matter  with  you  1 '  This  caused  me  to  look  in
the  direction  in  which  I  saw  Atkinson  looking,  viz.,  at  the  window
opposite,  and  I  there  saw  (for  the  curtains  were  looped  up,  although  the
room  was  lighted  by  a  powerful  central  gas  light  in  the  roof  and  by
candles  on  the  table)  a  young  woman,  in  what  appeared  a  soiled  or
somewhat  worn  bridal  dress,  walk  or  glide  slowly  past  the  window  from
east  to  west.  She  was  about  at  the  centre  of  the  window  when  I  observed
her,  and  outside  the  window.  No  person  could  have  actually  been  in  the
position  where  she  appeared,  as  the  window  in  question  is  about  30  feet
above  the  ground.

"  The  nearest  buildings  to  the  window  referred  to  are  the  Infantry
Barracks  opposite,  about  300  yards  distant.  Behind  where  I  sat  is  a  con-
servatory, which  was  examined  by  me,  as  well  as  the  front  window,
immediately  after  the  occurrence.  There  was  no  person  in  the  conserva-
tory. [It  was  unused  in  the  winter.]  The  nearest  buildings  to  it  are
the  officers'  stables,  over  which  are  the  staff  sergeants'  quarters,  about  50
yards  distant.

"  The  occurrence  made  little  if  any  impression  upon  me,  though  it
impressed  others  who  were  in  the  room.  All  present  had  been  drinking
very  little  wine ;  and  the  dinner  had  been  very  quiet.

"  It  has  just  occurred  to  me  that  I  may  be  wrong  as  to  the  time  of
year  and  that  the  occurrence  may  have  taken  place  about  15th  October  or
about  15th  March.  u  Qg^iL  Norton."

Mr.  Atkinson  writes  : —

"  Erchfont  Manor,  Devizes.

"August  31st,  1885.

"  The  appearance  of  a  woman  which  I  saw  pass  the  mess-room  window
at  Aldershot  seemed  to  be  outside,  and  it  passed  from  east  to  west.  The
mess-room  is  on  the  first  floor,  so  the  woman  would  have  been  walking  in
the  air.  There  has  been  a  very  nice  story  made  out  of  it — like  most  other
ghost-stories,  founded  on  an  optical  illusion."

[Captain  Norton's  vivd  voce  account  made  it  tolerably  clear,  in  my
opinion,    that   the    case    was    one    of   hallucination,    not    illusion.      He


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  209

further  mentions  that  both  Mr.  Atkinson  and  he  were  "satisfied  that  the
face  and  form  of  the  woman  seen  were  familiar,"  though  they  could  not  at  the
moment  identify  the  person.  Captain  Norton  afterwards  felt  sure  that
the  likeness  was  to  a  photograph  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  seeing  in
the  room  of  the  veterinary  surgeon  of  the  regiment,  representing  the
surgeon's  deceased  wife  in  bridal  dress.  Oddly  enough,  this  man  was  at
the  time,  unknown  to  his  friends,  actually  dying  or  within  a  day  or  two  of
death,  in  the  same  building.  But  Mr,  Atkinson  recalls  nothing  about  the
photograph  ;  and  the  coincidence  is  not  one  to  which  we  can  attach  weight.]

The  next  instance  must  be  reckoned  as  "  ambiguous  "  in  origin  ;  as,
though  the  person  whose  form  was  seen  was  in  an  abnormal  state,  this
had  been  to  some  extent  chronic,  and  no  reason  is  known  why  he  should
have  exercised  a  telepathic  agency  on  the  day  in  question  more  than
on  any  other.     The  narrator  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  printed.

"October  28th,  1885.

(326)  "  In  the  month  of  November,  1843,  myself,  my  eldest  sister,  and
the  man-servant  were  driving  home  from  a  small  town  to  our  parsonage  in
the  country.  The  time  might  be  about  half  past  4  or  5  p.m.  As  we  came
slowly  up  the  hill  by  the  churchyard  wall,  we  saw  a  gentleman  in  walking-
costume  going  into  the  vestry  door.  We  both  exclaimed,  '  That's  papa,'
and  the  man  George  said  at  the  same  moment,  'Why  there's  the  master.'
My  father  was  then  ill,  and  away  from  home  many  miles  away.  He  died
the  following  January  23rd,  1844.  He  wore  a  particular  long  cloak  which
I  should  have  recognised  anywhere,  and  which  he  had  many  years,  and
wore  as  a  loose  wrap.  [What  is  meant  clearly  is  that  the  cloak  in  which
the  figure  appeared  to  be  dressed  exactly  resembled  that  of  the  narrator's
father.]  He  looked  exactly  like  himself,  and  was  going  in  by  the  small
vestry  door  he  used  to  enter  the  church  by  when  going  to  take  duty.  I  do
not  think  he  looked  at  us,  but  seemed  intent  on  entering  the  church,  and
disappeared  inside.  We  were  all  much  frightened,  and  searched  round
the  house  and  church  but  could  see  no  one,  and  no  one  had  been  seen
about.  I  recollect  the  occurrence  as  if  it  had  been  yesterday,  and,  as  I  write,
see  all  distinctly  in  my  mind's  eye.

"  The  man-servant  is  dead  ;  my  sister  begs  to  corroborate  my  account.

"S.  R."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  R.  says  : —

"  My  sister  has  always,  when  I  have  talked  of  the  vision,  said  she  saw
it  so  likewise,  and  she  reiterated  that  only  last  summer,  but  she  is  not
equal  to  write  about  it.  I  quite  see  the  weak  point,  if  the  church  was  not
searched  inside.  I  can't  say  it  tvas,  nor  can  I  say  it  was  not.  Old  George,
the  man,  was  most  fond  of  his  master,  and  may  have  gone  into  the  church;
but  I  can't  say.  I  only  know  we  were  all  so  terribly  frightened.  The
vision  was  sudden,  so  true  to  life,  and  even  to  the  particular  long  cloak,
all  gathered  in  to  a  collar  clasped  at  the  throat.  I  ought  to  have  said  that
the  figure  seemed  in  the  act  of  going  in  by  the  vestry  door  :  we  did  not  see
him  enter,  as  we  drove  on  in  great  fright  to  the  house.  My  father  was
then  under  medical  treatment  at  Northampton."

Mrs.  R.  gives  details,  showing  the  absolute  impossibility  that  her  father

VOL.    II.  P


210  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

could  really  have  "  left  Northampton,  being  a  dying  man,  so  to  speak,
when  admitted,"  and  come  to  the  spot  where  he  was  seen,  unknown  to  all
his  friends.  "  Then,  again,"  she  adds,  "  the  church  was  always  kept  locked,
the  keys  at  the  parsonage,  supposing  for  a  moment  that  we  saw  a  living
figure.  I  recollect  that  inquiry  was  made  of  the  villagers  as  to  any  strange
gentleman  having  been  seen  about,  and  the  answer  was  '  No.' "

Asked  whether  she  or  her  sister  have  ever  had  a  hallucination  of  the
senses  on  any  other  occasion,  Mrs.  R.  says,  "  I  can  emphatically  answer
'No,'  for  both  of  us."  Her  sister  was  about  19  at  the  time,  and  she
herself  11 — -"a  fresh  young  child  with  perfect  nerves."

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Moberley,  of  Tynwald,  Hythe.

"May  9th,  1884.
Jj.fi*^-^ '  (327)  "  The  case  of  hallucination  shared  by  myself  and  a  friend  was
rather  odd.  We  were  both  convinced  we  saw  one  afternoon  a  friend  pass
before  the  window  in  which  we  stood,  and  enter  the  garden.  We  both  bowed
to  him,  and  believed  he  returned  the  greeting.  He  was  in  sight  for  some  short
time  ;  quite  long  enough  to  allow  of  a  distinct  recognition,  and  the  road
along  which  he  passed  was  near  to  the  window  at  which  we  stood.  A  quiet
country  road,  we  knew  every  passer-by  by  sight  and  name,  and  our  friend
was  a  remarkable  man  in  some  ways,  not  one  to  be  easily  confounded  with
other  people — a  short,  brisk,  alert,  foreign-looking  man,  with  jet  black
hair  and  white  whiskers,  a  decidedly  un-English  overcoat,  and  a  salute
peculiar  to  himself,  a  wave  of  the  hat  and  a  low  bow,  with  which  he  never
failed  to  greet  us.  We  waited  to  hear  him  announced  in  vain.  On  her
way  home  my  friend  met  his  son,  who  was  exti-emely  perplexed  at  hearing
that  his  father  had  been  to  our  house.  He  had  been  intending  to  come,
but  finding  that  he  should  be  engaged  had  sent  his  son  instead.  Of  course
when  we  all  met,  the  mystery  was  exhaustively  discvissed,  and  dismissed  as
a  mystery.  "  Fras.  Moberley."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Moberley  says  that  the  date  was  1863;
that  she  was  1 9,  and  in  good  health ;  and  that  she  has  never  had  any
other  hallucination.  The  lady  who  shared  the  experience  with  her  declines
to  answer  any  questions,  saying  that  "it  is  a  question  of  principle."
Mrs.  Moberley  adds,  "  She  has  not  forgotten  the  circumstance  :  she  would
have  been  only  too  glad  to  say  so."

Bearing  in  mind  the  "  arrival "  cases  of  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7,  we
cannot  here  assume  it  as  quite  certain  that  the  direction  of  the  absent
person's  thoughts  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  appearance;  but  if  to
this  extent  "  ambiguous,"  the  case  seems  at  any  rate  one  of  collective
\M"^  •  hallucination.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  next  example — from
Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  of  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St.  Heliers,  Jersey.

"1882.
(328)   "  Another  odd  appearance  ^  was  that  of   my  elder  daughter,  a
bright  lively  girl  of   fifteen.       I  had  placed  her  at  a  finishing  school  in

1  Some  apparently  veridical  cases  from  the  same  informant  will  be  found  below—
Nos.  408,  553,  554,  650.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  211

Edinburgh,  and  returned  to  my  cottage,  in  M.  Next  morning  at  break-
fast, I  suddenly  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  saw  her  quite  distinctly
coming  in  at  the  garden  gate,  in  pork-pie  hat,  grey  dress  looped  up  over  a
red  petticoat,  just  as  she  had  been  the  day  before.  Not  a  word  said  I,  but
M.,  my  second  daughter  [since  deceased],  exclaimed  joyously  and  wonder-
ingly,  '  There  is  B  !  '  For  the  few  seconds  the  vision  lasted,  I  saw  her,  as
if  stooping  to  undo  the  latch  of  the  gate.  Afterwards  she  told  me  how
unhappy  she  had  been  for  the  first  day  in  school,  and  what  an  intense
longing  had  seized  her  to  return  to  us.  No  doubt  both  her  sister  and
myself  were  thinking  of  her,  at  the  same  time."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  can  be  quite  certain  that  the
figure  seen  was  not  that  of  a  stranger  bearing  some  resemblance  to  her
daughter,  Mrs.  Hunter  replies  : —

"  Your  supposition  amuses  me.  The  figure  melted  away,  in  the  act  of
seemingly  stooping  to  undo  the  latch  of  our  little  gate.  It  was  a  bright
autumn  morning.  We  were  seated  at  breakfast,  the  table  close  to  a  bow-
window,  overlooking  a  strip  of  garden,  belonging  to  a  cottage  at  Melrose  :
the  gate  being  a  low  wooden  gate,  and  no  house  near.  It  was  my
daughter's  face,  figure,  and  dress,  just  as  she  had  appeared  the  day
before,  when  I  took  her  to  school  at  Edinburgh.  My  daughter  was
distinguished-looking,  and  no  one  in  that  neighbourhood  could  at  all  be
mistaken  for  her.  Our  sight  was  quite  good,  and  neither  short-sighted.
In  short,  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  some  mysterious  way  her  longing  and
our  thinking  [of  her]  brought  about  this  appearance.  Another  explana-
tion might  be  that  our  imaginations  might  at  the  same  moment  have  called
up  the  figure."

[The  facts  that  the  phantasm  presented  exactly  the  aspect  of  the  real
figure  so  recently  seen,  and  that  Mrs.  Hunter's  thoughts  were  much
occupied  with  her  absent  daughter,  and  further  that  she  had  previously
had  a  subjective  "  after-image  "  of  this  very  daughter  (Chap.  XII.,  §  4),
decidedly  favour  the  supposition  that  her  experience  on  this  occasion  was
also  of  that  character.  And  if  so,  the  case  seems  clearly  to  be  one  where  h-  <^  ■
a  purely  subjective  hallucination  has  been  transferred.]     "  ■<  y^c-Ti

In  the  next  example,  the  apparition  seems  more  definitely
independent  of  any  conscious  mental  action  on  the  part  of  the  absent
person;  for  it  would  be  hard  to  attribute  a  special  telepathic  influence
to  some  casual  image  of  his  usual  resort  that  may  have  flitted  across
his  mind,  at  the  same  time  that  his  form  appeared.  The  two
percipients  were  at  the  time  secretaries  to  societies  of  which  the
ofiices  were  in  the  same  building.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  R.  Mouat,
of  60,  Huntingdon  Street,  Barnsbury,  N.  His  account,  which
was  written  down  soon  after  the  occurrence,  has  been  slightly
condensed.

(329)   "On    Thursday,  the  5th  of  September,  1867,  about  the  hour  of    ^^  ^  •
10.45  a.m.,  on  entering  my  office,  I  found  my  clerk  in  conversation  with  the
porter,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  H.  standing  at  the  clerk's  back.      I  was  just  on
the  point  of  asking  Mr.  H.  what  had  brought  him  in  so  early  (he  worked

VOL.    II.  P    2


212  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

in  the  same  room  as  myself,  but  was  not  in  the  habit  of  coming  till  about
mid-day)  when  my  clerk  began  questioning  me  about  a  telegram  which  had
missed  me.  The  conversation  lasted  some  minutes,  and  in  the  midst  of  it
the  porter  gave  me  a  letter  which  explained  by  whom  the  telegram  had
been  sent.  During  this  scene  Mr.  R.,  from  an  office  upstairs,  came  in  and
listened  to  what  was  going  on.  On  opening  the  letter,  I  immediately
made  known  its  purport,  and  looked  Mr.  H.  full  in  the  face  as  I  spoke.  I
was  much  struck  by  the  melancholy  look  he  had,  and  observed  that  he  was
without  his  neck-tie.  At  this  juncture  Mr.  E,.  and  the  porter  left  the  room.
I  spoke  to  Mr.  H.,  saying,  '  Well,  what's  the  matter  with  you  ?  You  look
so  sour.'  He  made  no  answer,  but  continued  looking  fixedly  at  me.  I  took
up  an  enclosure  which  had  accompanied  the  letter  and  read  it  through,  still
seeing  Mr.  H.  standing  opposite  to  me  at  the  corner  of  the  table.  As  I
laid  the  papers  down,  my  clerk  said,'  Here,  sir,  is  a  letter  come  from  Mr.  H.'
No  sooner  had  he  pronounced  the  name  than  Mr.  H.  disappeared  in  a
second.  I  was  for  a  time  quite  dumbfounded,  which  astonished  my  clerk,
who  (it  now  turned  out)  had  not  seen  Mr.  H.,  and  absolutely  denied  that
he  had  been  in  the  ofiice  that  morning.  The  purport  of  the  letter  from
Mr.  H.,  which  my  clerk  gave  me,  and  which  had  been  written  on  the
previous  day,  was  that,  feeling  unwell,  he  should  not  come  to  the  office
that  Thursday,  but  requested  me  to  forward  his  letters  to  him  at  his  house.
"  The  next  day  (Friday),  about  noon,  Mr.  H.  entered  the  office ;  and
when  I  asked  him  where  he  was  on  the  Thursday  about  10.45,  he  replied
that  he  had  just  finished  breakfast,  was  in  the  company  of  his  wife,  and  had
never  left  his  house  during  the  day.  I  felt  shy  of  mentioning  the  subject
to  Mr.  R.,  but  on  the  Monday  following  I  could  not  refrain  from  asking
him  if  he  remembered  looking  in  on  Thursday  morning.  '  Perfectly,'  he
replied  ;  '  you  were  having  a  long  confab  with  your  clerk  about  a  telegram,
which  you  subsequently  discovered  came  from  Mr.  C  On  my  asking  him
if  he  remembered  who  were  present,  he  answered,  '  The  clerk,  the  porter,
you  and  H.'  On  my  asking  him  further,  he  said,  'He  was  standing  at
the  corner  of  the  table,  opposite  you.  I  addressed  him,  but  he  made  no
reply,  only  took  up  a  book  and  began  reading.  I  could  not  help  looking
at  him,  as  the  first  thing  that  struck  me  was  his  being  at  the  office  so  early,
and  the  next  his  melancholy  look,  so  difierent  from  his  usual  manner ;  but
that  I  attributed  to  his  being  annoyed  about  the  discussion  going  on.  I
left  him  standing  in  the  same  position  when  I  went  out,  followed  by  the
porter.'  On  my  making  known  to  Mr.  R.  that  Mr.  H.  was  14  miles  off  the
whole  of  that  day  he  grew  quite  indignant  at  my  doubting  the  evidence
of  his  eyesight,  and  insisted  on  the  porter  being  called  up  and  interrogated.
The  porter  however,  like  the  clerk,  had  not  seen  the  figure."

Mr.  R.  has  supplied  independent  and  precise  corroboration  of  these
facts,  so  far  as  he  was  a  party  to  them — the  one  insignificant  difference
being  that  he  says  he  did  not  sjoeak  to  Mr.  H.,  but  "  gesticulated  in  fun  to
him,  pointing  to  Mr.  M.  and  the  clerk,  who  were  having  an  altercation
about  a  telegram  ;  but  my  fun  did  not  seem  at  all  catching,  Mr.  H.
apparently  not  being  inclined,  as  he  often  was,  to  make  fun  out  of
surrounding  circumstances."  He  adds  that  he  has  never  experienced  any
other  hallucination  of  the  senses ;  and  Mr.  Mouat  made  a  similar  state-
ment vivd  voce  to  the  present  writer.


-^  ;-C-<fc'>^'-


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  213

Cases  of  this  type  naturally  suggest  the  question  whether  they
may  not  be  parallel  to  those  cases  of  casual  agency  (Chap.  XIV.,  §  5),
where  the  same  person  has  on  several  occasions,  unconnected  with  any
crisis,  been  the  source  of  hallucination,  now  to  one  friend  now  to
another.  But  even  supposing  such  an  impression  as  the  above,  of  an
absent  person  who  is  in  a  normal  state,  to  be  telepathic  and  not  purely
subjective  in  its  inception,  no  one  on  reflection  will  maintain  that  by
pure  accident  two  percipients  were  casually  affected  in  this  extremely
rare  way  at  the  same  'moment.  And  if  not,  then  something  took  place
between  them ;  which — if  what  one  saw  was  not  suggested  to  the
other  by  verbal  or  physical  signs — must  be  of  the  nature  of  thought-
transference.

The  next  narrative  is  from  Mr.  James  Cowley,  who  wrote  from
32,  Langton  Street,  Cathay,  Bristol,  on  Jan.  7,  1884: —

(330)  "  My  eldest  son  is  a  twin.  The  night  after  his  dear  mother  was
laid  in  the  grave  at  the  Highgate  Cemetery  (1845)  I  had  him  in  bed  with
me.  (I  was  then  residing  at  39,  Charlotte  Terrace,  Islington.)  Something
causing  me  to  start  from  my  sleep,  I  saw,  with  all  the  distinctness  possible
to  visual  power,  my  dearest  angel  receding,  in  a  bent  position,  as  if  she  had
been  blessing  one  or  both  of  us,  with  a  kiss.  At  the  same  instant  the
child,  only  two  years  and  five  months  old,  exclaimed,  '  There's  mother  ! '
You  will  hardly  wonder  that,  after  the  night  had  passed  away,  I  was
perplexed  to  know  whether  I  had  only  dreamt  it,  or  whether  it  was  real.
But  the  reference  made  to  the  matter  by  my  dear  little  motherless  one,  the
moment  he  awoke,  removed  all  possibility  of  doubt."

The  next  account  is  from  Mr.  Charles  A.  W.  Lett,  of  the  Military

and  Royal  Naval  Club,  Albemarle  Street,  W.

"December  3rd,  1885.       ^-A,--'

(331)  "On  the  5th  April,  1873,  my  wife's  father.  Captain  Towns,  /IJUm**^
died  at  his  residence,  Cranbrook,  Rose  Bay,  near  Sydney,  N.  S.  Wales.  7."i^f  r^  /«
About  6  weeks  after  his  death,  my  wife  had  occasion,  one  evening  about  ,"/

9  o'clock,  to  go  to  one  of  the  bedrooms  in  the  house.     She  was  accompanied  /7

by  a  young  lady,  Miss  Berthon,  and  as  they  entered  the  room— the  gas  ifU*4^*r,
was  burning  all  the  time — they  were  amazed  to  see,  reflected  as  it  were  *'^j^  ^^
on  the  polished  surface  of  the  wardrobe,  the  image  of  Captain  Towns.     It  -^

was  barely  half  figure,^  the  head,  shoulders,  and  part  of  the  arms  only
showing — in  fact,  it  was  like  an  ordinary  medallion  portrait,  but  life-size.
The  face  appeared  wan  and  pale,  as  it  did  before  his  death ;  and  he  wore
a  kind  of  grey  flannel  jacket,  in  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  sleep.
Surprised  and  half  alarmed  at  what  they  saw,  their  first  idea  was  that  a
portrait  had  been  hung  in  the  room,  and  that  what  they  saw  was  its  refiec-
tion — but  there  was  no  picture  of  the  kind.

"  Whilst  they  were  looking  and  wondering,  my  wife's  sister.  Miss
Towns,  came  into  the  room,  and  before  either  of  the  others  had
time    to  speak    she    exclaimed,   '  Good    gracious  !       Do  you    see   papa  ? '

^  See  p.  33.  note.


214  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

One  of  the  housemaids  happened  to  be  passing  down  stairs  at  the
moment,  and  she  was  called  in,  and  asked  if  she  saw  anything,  and  her  reply
was,  '  Oh,  miss  !  the  master.'  Graham — Captain  Towns'  old  body  servant
— was  then  sent  for,  and  he  also  immediately  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  Lord  save  us  !
Mrs.  Lett,  it's  the  Captain  ! '  The  butler  was  called,  and  then  Mrs.  Crane,
my  wife's  nurse,  and  they  both  said  what  they  saw.  Finally,  Mrs.  Towns
was  sent  for,  and,  seeing  the  apparition,  she  advanced  towards  it  with  her
arm  extended  as  if  to  touch  it,  and  as  she  passed  her  hand  over  the  panel
of  the  wardrobe  the  figure  gradually  faded  away,  and  never  again  appeared,
though  the  room  was  regularly  occupied  for  a  long  time  after.

"  These  are  the  simple  facts  of  the  case,  and  they  admit  of  no  doubt ;
no  kind  of  intimation  was  given  to  any  of  the  witnesses ;  the  same
question  was  put  to  each  one  as  they  came  into  the  room,  and  the  reply
was  given  without  hesitation  by  each.  It  was  by  the  merest  accident
that  I  did  not  see  the  apparition.  I  was  in  the  house  at  the  time,  but
did  not  hear  when  I  was  called.  "  C.  A.   W.  Lett."

"  We,  the  undersigned,  having  read  the  above  statement,  certify  that
it  is  strictly  accurate,  as  we  both  were  witnesses  of  the  apparition.

"  Sara  Lett.
"  SiBBiE  Smyth  [nee  Towns)."

Mrs.  Lett  assures  me  that  neither  she  nor  her  sister  ever  experienced
a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.  She  is  positive
that  the  recognition  of  the  appearance  on  the  part  of  each  of  the  later
witnesses  was  independent,  and  not  due  to  any  suggestion  from  the
persons  already  in  the  room.

[We  hope  in  time  to  receive  the  corroboration  of  Miss  Berthon,  and
of  Mrs.  Crane,  Mrs.   Lett's  nurse,]

These  last  are  cases  where  the  distinction  to  which  I  have  called
attention  (pp.  190-2)  must  be  specially  borne  in  mind.  My  central
object  being  to  prove  that  ideas  may  be  transferred  from  mind  to
mind  without  words  or  physical  signs,  I  am  presenting  certain
collective  sensory  experiences  which  I  think  may  constitute  one  type
of  such  transference.  Now  believers  in  communications  with  the
departed  will  probably  need  so  little  convincing  as  to  the  general
theory  of  the  far  less  startling  transferences  between  living  persons,
that  on  them  I  am  not  concerned  to  press  the  evidence  of  this  particular
type.  But  of  the  rest  of  my  readers  I  would  ask — supposing  the  above
and  similar  occurrences  to  be  truly  described — on  what  hypothesis,
other  than  that  of  the  transferability  of  hallucinations  as  such,  they
would  explain  them.

I  pass  by  some  other  examples  of  the  same  kind  ;  as  no  insistance
on  my  point  of  view  in  quoting  them  would  prevent  my  seeming  to
some  to  be  explaining  away  veritable  manifestations  as  subjective
delusions,  and  to  others  to  be  introducing  "  ghosts  "  by  a  side-wind.
But  I  give  the  following  as  a  further  interesting  case  of  impressions


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  215

which,  though  probably  simultaneous,  were  not  similar.  The
narrative  was  originally  printed  in  July,  1883,  in  an  account  of  the
Orphanage  where  it  occurred,  entitled  The  Orphanage  and  Home,
Aberlour,  Graigellachie,  &c.  (pp.  44-5).  The  narrator  throughout
is  the  Rev.  C.  Jupp,  Warden  of  the  Orphanage.

(332)  "In  1875,  a  man  died  leaving  a  widow  and  six  orphan  children.
The  3  eldest  were  admitted  into  the  Orphanage.  Three  years  afterwards
the  widow  died,  and  friends  succeeded  in  getting  funds  to  send  the  rest
here,  the  youngest  being  about  4  years  of  age.  [Late  one  evening,  about
6  months  after  the  admission  of  the  younger  children,  some  visitors  arrived
unexpectedly  ;  and]  the  Warden  agreed  to  take  a  bed  in  the  little  ones'
dormitory,  which  contained  10  beds,  9  occupied.

"  In  the  morning,  at  breakfast,  the  Warden  made  the  following
statement: — 'As  near  as  I  can  tell  I  fell  asleep  about  11  o'clock,  and
slept  very  soundly  for  some  time.  I  suddenly  woke  without  any  apparent
reason,  and  felt  an  impulse  to  turn  round,  my  face  being  towards  the
wall,  from  the  children.  Before  turning,  I  looked  up  and  saw  a  soft
light  in  the  room.  The  gas  was  burning  low  in  the  hall,  and  the
dormitory  door  being  open,  I  thought  it  probable  that  the  light  came
from  that  source.  It  was  soon  evident,  however,  that  such  was  not
the  case.  I  turned  round,  and  then  a  wonderful  vision  met  my  gaze.
Over  the  second  bed  from  mine,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  room,
there  was  floating  a  small  cloud  of  light,  forming  a  halo  of  the  bright-
ness of  the  moon  on  an  ordinary  moonlight  night.

"  '  I  sat  upright  in  bed,  looking  at  this  strange  appearance,  took  up
my  watch  and  found  the  hands  pointing  to  5  minutes  to  1.  Every-
thing was  quiet,  and  all  the  children  sleeping  soundly.  In  the  bed,
over  which  the  light  seemed  to  float,  slept  the  youngest  of  the  6  children
mentioned  above.

"  '  I  asked  myself,  "  Am  I  dreaming  ? "  No  !  I  was  wide  awake.  I  was
seized  with  a  strong  impulse  to  rise  and  touch  the  substance,  or  whatever
it  might  be  (for  it  was  about  5  feet  high),  and  was  getting  up  when  some-
thing seemed  to  hold  me  back.  I  am  certain  I  heard  nothing,  yet  I  felt
and  perfectly  understood  the  words — "  No,  lie  down,  it  won't  hurt  you."  I
at  once  did  what  I  felt  I  was  told  to  do.  I  fell  asleep  shortly  afterwards
and  rose  at  half -past  5,  that  being  my  usual  time.

" '  At  6  o'clock  I  began  dressing  the  children,  beginning  at  the  bed
furthest  from  the  one  in  which  I  slept.  Presently  I  came  to  the  bed  over
which  I  had  seen  the  light  hovering.  I  took  the  little  boy  out,  placed  him
on  my  knee,  and  put  on  some  of  his  clothes.  The  child  had  been  talking
with  the  others  ;  suddenly  he  was  silent.  And  then,  looking  me  hard  in
the  face  with  an  extraordinary  expression,  he  said,  "Oh,  Mr.  Jupp,  my
mother  came  to  me  last  night.  Did  you  see  her  ?  "  For  a  moment  I  could
not  answer  the  child.  I  then  thought  it  better  to  pass  it  ofi",  and  said,
"  Come,  we  must  make  haste,  or  we  shall  be  late  for  breakfast." '

"  The  child  never  afterwards  referred  to  the  matter,  we  are  told,  nor
has  it  since  ever  been  mentioned  to  him.  The  Warden  says  it  is  a  mystery
to  him ;  he  simply  states  the  fact  and  there  leaves  the  matter,  being
perfectly  satisfied  that  he  was  mistaken  in  no  one  particular."


216  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  Rev.  C.  Jupp  writes  to  us  : —

"  The  Orphanage  and  Convalescent  Home,  Aberlour,  Craigellachie.

"November  13th,  1883.

"  I  fear  anything  the  little  boy  might  now  say  would  be  unreliable,  or
I  would  at  once  question  him.  Although  the  matter  was  fully  discussed
at  the  time,  it  was  never  mentioned  in  the  hearing  of  the  child ;  and  yet,
when  at  the  request  of  friends,  the  account  was  published  in  our  little
magazine,  and  the  child  read  it,  his  countenance  changed,  and  looking  up,
he  said,  '  Mr.  Jupp,  that  is  me.'  1  said,  'Yes,  that  is  what  we  saw.'  He
said,  '  Yes,'  and  then  seemed  to  fall  into  deep  thought,  evidently  with
pleasant  remembrances,  for  he  smiled  so  sweetly  to  himself,  and  seemed  to
forget  I  was  present.

"  I  much  regret  now  that  I  did  not  learn  something  from  the  child  at
the  time.  "  Chas.  Jupp."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jupp  says  that  he  has  never  had  any
other  hallucination  of  the  senses ;  and  adds,  "  My  wife  was  the  only
person  of  adult  age  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  circumstance  at  the  time.
Shortly  after,  I  mentioned  it  to  our  Bishop  and  Primus."

Mrs.  Jupp  writes,  from  the  Orphanage,  on  June  23,  1886  : —

"  This  is  to  certify  that  the  account  of  the  light  seen  by  the  Warden
of  this  establishment  is  correct,  and  was  mentioned  to  me  at  the  time  " —
i.e.,  next  morning.

It  is  possible  that  the  child's  experience  here  was  a  dream  ;  if  so,
the  case  might  be  taken  as  a  link  between  the  two  classes  of
phenomena — collective  hallucinations  and  simultaneous  dreams —
which  I  have  referred  to  as  so  closely  related  (p.  171).-^

I  will  give  one  more  "  recognised "  case,  which  presents  the
curious   feature   that  the  figure  seen  was  that  of  one  of  the   per-

1  In  the  Life  and  Con-espondence  of  Charles  Matheivs,  by  Mrs.  Mathews,  pjp.  94,  95,
a  case  is  recorded  which  again  illustrates  this  relation.  One  night,  when  Mr.  and
the  future  Mrs.  Mathews  were  intimate  acquaintances,  but  without  any  intention
of  marrying,  and  when  they  were  at  a  distance  from  one  another,  they  had  a  precisely
similar  vision,  which  so  violently  affected  both  of  them  that  they  fell  out  of  their
respective  beds,  and  were  found  on  their  respective  floors ;  Mr.  Mathews  was  so  much
affected  as  to  be  extremely  ill  for  a  day  afterwards.  The  experiences  were  independently
described  long  before  they  were  compared.  The  joint  vision  was  one  of  which  the
substance  might  have  been  easily  suggested  to  either  of  the  parties  by  a  recent  incident ;
it  was  in  fact  the  apparition  of  Mr.  Mathews'  former  wife,  who,  before  her  death,  had
tried  to  make  them  promise  to  marry  one  another ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  it
was  by  accident  that  experiences  so  unique  as  those  described  corrresponded  and
coincided.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  incident  was  telepathic,  and  one  experience  was  the
cause  or  the  condition  of  the  other,  it  is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  visions  in  fact  much
more  resembled  waking  hallucinations  than  genuine  dreams  ;  for  Mrs.  Mathews  especially
records  that  both  she  and  Mr.  Mathews  had  been  unable  to  sleep  through  restlessness.

The  following  case  is  interesting  enough  to  deserve  quotation,  though  not  ostensibly
"collective, "  and  possibly  no  more  than  a  single  subjective  hallucination.  We  received
it  from  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bellamy,  of  Publow  Vicarage,  Bristol,  in  February,  1886  ;  but
the  particulars  were  first  published  in  1878.

'•When  a  girl  at  school  my  wife  made  an  agreement  with  a  fellow  pupil,  Miss
W.,  that  the  one  of  them  who  died  first  should,  if  Divinely  permitted,  appear  after  her
decease  to  the  survivor.  In  1874  my  wife,  who  had  not  seen  or  heard  anything  of  her
former  school-friend  for  some  years,  casually  heard  of  her  death.  The  news  reminded
her  of  her  former  agreement,  and  then,  becoming  nervous,  she  told  me  of  it.  I  knew  of
my  wife's  compact,  but  I  had  never  seen  a  photograph  of  her  friend,  or  heard  any
description  of  her.  [Mr.  Bellamy  told  the  present  writer,  in  conversation,  that  his  mind
had  not  been  in  the  least  dwelling  on  the  compact.]


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  217

cipients.  I  have  spoken  before  (Chap.  XII.,  §  8,  first  note)  of  a  form
of  hallucination,  as  I  hold  it,  which  consists  in  seeming  to  see  oneself
as  a  person  outside  one  ;  and  I  have  also  pointed  out  (p.  85,  note)  that
one  of  our  informants  who  has  had  an  experience  of  the  sort  is  also
one  of  the  few  persons  who  have  given  us  evidence  of  what  I  have
called  casual  agency,  exercised  in  the  midst  of  quite  ordinary  life.
Now  the  fact  that  a  person  who  has,  so  to  speak,  casually  impressed
herself,  has  at  other  times  casually  impressed  others,  is  in  itself  of
great  interest  ;  but  it  leads  us  on  to  the  following  still  more  interest-
ing case,  where  the  "  double  "  was  seen  by  its  original  and  by  others
at  the  same  time.  The  account  is  from  Mrs.  Hall,  of  The  Yews,
Gretton,  near  Kettering,  and  was  received  in  December,  1883.  -••

(3.33)  "In   the  autumn  of  1863,  I  was  living  with  my  husband  and  ^"^J^
first  baby,   a   child    of  8  months,  in  a  lone  house,  called  Sibberton,  near
Wansford,  Northamptonshire,  which  in  by-gone  days  had  been   a  church.
As  the  weather  became   more  wintry,  a  married   cousin  and  her  husband

"A  night  or  two  afterwards  as  I  was  sleeping  with  my  wife,  a  fire  brightly  burning  in  *<-c
the  room  and  a  candle  alight,  I  suddenly  awoke,  and  saw  a  lady  sitting  by  the  side  of  the
bed  where  my  wife  was  sleeping  soundly.  At  once  I  sat  up  in  the  bed,  and  gazed  so
intently  that  even  now  I  can  recall  her  form  and  features.  Had  I  the  jDencil  and  the  brush
of  a  Millais,  I  could  transfer  to  canvas  an  exact  likeness  of  the  ghostly  visitant.  I
remember  that  I  was  much  struck,  as  I  looked  intently  at  her,  with  the  careful  arrange-
ment of  her  coiffure,  every  single  hair  being  most  carefully  brushed  down.  How  long  I
sat  and  gazed  I  cannot  say,  but  directly  the  apparition  ceased  to  be,  I  got  out  of  bed  to
see  if  any  of  my  wife's  garments  had  by  any  means  optically  deluded  me.  I  found
nothing  in  the  line  of  vision  but  a  bare  wall.  Hallucination  on  my  part  I  rejected  as  out
of  the  question,  and  I  doubted  not  that  I  had  really  seen  an  apparition.  Returning  to
bed,  I  lay  till  my  wife  some  hours  after  awoke  and  then  I  gave  her  an  account  of  her
friend's  appearance.  I  described  her  colour,  form,  &c.,  all  of  which  exactly  tallied  with
my  wife's  recollection  of  Miss  W.  Finally  I  asked,  '  But  was  there  any  special  point  to
strike  one  in  her  appearance  ?'  '  Yes, '  my  wife  promptly  replied  ;  '  we  girls  used  to  tease
her  at  school  for  devoting  so  much  time  to  the  arrangement  of  her  hair.'  This  was  the
very  thing  which  I  have  said  so  much  struck  me.    Such  are  the  simple  facts.

"I  will  only  add  that  till  1874  I  had  never  seen  an  apparition,  and  that  I  have  not
seen  one  since.  "  Arthur  Bellamy."

We  have  also  seen  an  account  written  by  Mrs.  Bellamy  in  May,  1879,  which  entirely
agrees  with  the  above,  except  that  she  "  thinks  it  was  a  fortnight  after  the  death  "  that
the  vision  occurred,  and  that  the  light  was  "the  dim  light  of  a  night-lamp."  She
says,  "  The  description  accorded  in  all  points  with  my  deceased  friend."  In  conversation
Mr.  Bellamy  described  the  form  as  seen  in  a  very  clear  light  (see  Vol  i.,  pp.  550-1) ;  and
this  may  account  for  his  idea  that  the  room  itself  was  lighted  by  fire  and  candle.

This  experience,  as  I  have  said,  may  have  been  purely  subjective  ;  and  identification
of  a  person's  appearance  by  mere  description  is  generally  to  be  regarded  with  great  doubt.
But  in  view  of  the  circumstances,  and  especially  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Bellamy  has  never
had  any  other  hallucination,  two  alternative  hypotheses  seem  at  least  worth  suggesting.
(1)  Believers  in  telepathic  phantasms  may  suspect  Mr.  Bellamy's  experience  to  have  been
conditioned  by  his  wife's  state  of  mind — possibly  even  by  a  dream,  forgotten  on  waking,
in  which  her  friend  figured.  (2)  Believers  in  the  possibility  of  post-mortem  communica-
tions, if  they  believe  that  this  was  one  of  them,  might  further  suppose  that  Mr.  Bellamy's
experience  depended  on  a  psychical  influence  exercised  in  the  first  instance  on  Mrs.
Bellamy,  though  acting  below  the  level  of  her  normal  consciousness — which  would  make
the  case  parallel  to  Nos.  242  and  355.  To  me,  I  confess,  this  appears  a  more  reasonable
supposition  than  that  a  direct  influence  (so  to  speak)  missed  its  mark,  and  was  exercised
on  Mr.  Bellamy  by  a  stranger  who  cared  nothing  about  him.

I  may  mention  that  we  have  another  first-hand  case  of  just  the  same  type,  where  the
percipient  was  unaware  of  any  compact,  and  was  quite  unoccupied  with  the  thought  of
the  dead  person.  She  was,  however,  a  young  child  at  the  time,  and  I  therefore  do  not
quote  the  account.


218  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

came  on  a  visit.  One  night,  when  we  were  having  supper,  an  apparition
stood  at  the  end  of  the  sideboard.  We  four  sat  at  the  dining-table  ;  and  yet,
with  great  inconsistency,  /  stood  as  this  ghostly  visitor  again,  in  a  spotted,
light  muslin  summer  dress,  and  without  any  terrible  peculiarities  of  air
or  manner.  We  all  four  saw  it,  my  husband  having  attracted  our
attention  to  it,  saying,  '  It  is  Sarah,'  in  a  tone  of  recognition,  meaning
me.  It  at  once  disappeared.  None  of  us  felt  any  fear,  it  seemed  too
natural  and  familiar.

"  The  apparition  seemed  utterly  apart  from  myself  and  my  feelings,  as
a  picture  or  statue.  My  three  relatives,  who,  with  me,  saw  the
apparition,  are  all  dead ;  they  died  in  about  the  years  1868-69.

"Sarah  Jane  Hall."

The  dress  in  which  the  figure  appeared  was  not  like  any  that  Mrs.  Hall

had  at  the  time,  though  she  wore  one  like  it  nearly  two  years  afterwards.

1      Mrs.  Hall  has  had  other  visual  hallucinations,  which  were  all  connected

with  ill-health  or  nervous  shock  ;  one  which  occurred  a  few  months  before

that  here  described  had  represented  herself  as  if  "  laid  out."

I  now  pass  to  auditory  cases,  I  have  spoken  of  the  caution
which  these  require ;  ^  but  the  following  instances  must,  I  think,
have  been  more  than  mere  misinterpretations  of  real  sounds.

The  first  account  is  from  a  lady  of  unimpeachable  veracity ;  and
the  account,  though  written  in  the  third  person,  is  first-hand.

"  November,  1884.
\j}^  (334)   "  Some  20  years  ago,  Miss  G.  [the  narrator]  was  recovering  from

/        a  severe  illness,  and  it  was   of  the  utmost  importance  for  her  to  have  a

1  Even  the  sound  of  the  human  voice — though  ordinarily  so  distinctive — may  be
illusory.  For  example,  we  should  hardly,  I  think,  be  justified  in  regarding  the  two
following  cases  as  other  than  joint  illusions,  due  to  some  undiscovered  source  of  sound  in
the  house.     Mr.  Gascoigne  Bevan,  of  the  Bank  House,  Sudbury,  wr-ites,  in  1884 : —

"  Some  few  years  ago  and  since,  I  have  been  living  in  this  house,  and  manager  of  the
bank.  I  returned  home  one  evening  in  the  summer  time  with  a  friend.  On  entering  by
the  garden  door,  we  were  both  greeted  with  the  sounds  of  children's  laughter,  peal  after
peal,  all  over  the  house.  '  Why, '  says  my  friend,  '  I  did  not  know  you  had  children  in
the  house,  or  I  would  not  have  come.'  I  don't  know  why  I  answered,  but  I  did  so:
'Hush,  don't  say  anything  ;  you  will  frighten  Mrs.  Springett,  my  housekeeper.'  Iran
all  over  the  house,  looking  in  all  the  rooms,  in  vain,  for  an  explanation.  I  knoio  there  was
no  one  in  the  house  except  Mrs.  Springett,  her  old  husband  and  an  under  servant."

[Mr.  Bevan  believes  that  the  friend  who  shared  this  experience  has  recently  died  in
Africa.]

Miss  Twynam,  of  1,  Waterloo  Place,  Southampton,  writes,  on  Nov.  12,  1885 : —

"I  had  myself  repeatedly  heard  the  voice  calling  my  name,  'Ellen,'  at  various
intervals,  extending  over  some  months,  and  had  mentioned  the  fact  to  the  different
members  of  the  family,  but  never  to  my  knowledge  in  the  presence  of  the  servants.  I
have  always  been  laughed  at,  and  told  it  was  only  my  fancy,  and  no  one  then  had  heard
it  but  myself.  On  one  occasion,  I  and  my  sister  were  in  the  drawing-room,  and  my
mother  and  aunt,  who  were  both  invalids,  were  in  their  respective  bedrooms  upstairs,  on
opposite  sides  of  the  house  ;,  while  my  brother  was  in  another  sitting-room  downstairs,  on
the  other  side  of  the  hall :  and  the  servants  were  both  in  the  kitchen,  which  was  an
underground  one.  I  and  my  sister  heard  the  voice  distinctly  call  '  Ellen,  Ellen  ! ' — a
clear,  high,  refined  woman's  voice,  but  with  something  strange  and  unusual  about  it.
My  sister  at  once  noticed  it,  turning  to  me  and  saying,  '  There,  I  have  heard  it  myself
this  time. '  I  still,  however,  thought  it  might  really  be  someone,  so  went  to  my  mother,
asking  whether  she  had  called.  She  said,  'No,' but  she  had  heard  someone  calling  me,
and  thought  it  was  my  aunt.  I  went  to  her,  and  she  said  exactly  the  same,  only  thought
it  was  my  mother.     I  then  went  to  my  brother.     He  said,  '  No  ; '  but  had  heard  someone


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  219

good  night,  in  order  to  wind  her  up  for  a  journey  to  Edinburgh  next  day.  '*^^
All  the  house  was  sent  to  bed  early,  and  the  utmost  quiet  enjoined  upon
everybody.  A  devoted  friend,  whose  name  was  Louisa,  went  to  bed  with
her,  in  order  to  be  close  at  hand  if  anything  should  be  wanted.  About  an
hour  after  she  had  lain  down  she  was  startled  by  a  loud  outcry,  '  Louie,
Louie  ! '  as  if  someone  was  in  urgent  want  of  assistance.  Miss  G-.  thought
that  probably  someone  had  slipped  and  was  hanging  over  the  banisters ;
she  anxiously  turned  to  her  friend  trying  to  rouse  her.  Her  friend  made
no  offer  to  rise,  but  said,  in  a  very  marked  way,  '  Did  you  hear  that
voice  ?  It  was  my  mother ;  I  hear  it  constantly.'  Next  morning  every
inquiry  was  made  ;  but  no  call  whatever  had  been  made."

I  have  already  mentioned  that  the  hearing  of  the  name,  in  the  tones
of  a  familiar  voice,  is  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  recurrent  forms
of  subjective  hallucination  ;  but  whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  origin
of  the  friend's  impression,  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  it  was
through  her  that  it  was  communicated  to  Miss  G.   ^.U^ aJ(.^'^^'^^  ^  r^f'

The  next  example  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  George  Saxon,  of  Park-
lands,  Bruton,  Somersetshire,  who  completely  confirms  the  narrative
as  far  as  he  was  concerned.     The  following  is  his  wife's  account : — -

"February  26th,  1885.
(335)  "On  first  coming  to  this  house  to   reside,  in   September,  1879,
myself  and  two  servants  were  in  the  kitchen    talking  one    evening   at
about  10.30  ;  and  we  all  three  distinctly  heard  a  voice  coming  from  the         ,_
next  room,   or  the  passage  that   leads   from    the  kitchen  to  this  room,  n^^^''^
saying  three  times,  '  Are  you  coming  ? '  On  the  first  occasion  I  answered     ?*'>•<.■«.
and  said,    '  I  am  coming,  dear,'  thinking  it  was  my  husband  calling,  whom
I  supposed  to  be  in  the  next  room.     The  voice  again  said  the   second
time,  '  Are  you  coming  1 '  and  one  of   the  servants  said,    '  You  had  better
go  ;  master  is  calling.'     The  voice  again  said  the  third  time,    '  Are  you

call  quite  plainly.  I  then  went  dowzi  to  the  servants,  and  asked  whether  they  had  heard
anyone  calling.  They  said,  '  Yes  ;'  they  thought  it  was  mistress.  But  there  was  nothing
about  them  to  lead  me  to  think  they  were  playing  any  trick,  and  they  had  never  any  idea
that  I  had  heard  this  voice  before.  The  voice  sounded  to  me  as  though  it  were  above  me,
and  yet  very  close  to  me,  and  it  gave  me  a  strange  uncomfortable  feeling.  I  do  not  think
it  was  the  servants,  as  they  answered  so  naturally,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  it  was  their
mistress  who  had  called.  Our  house  stood  in  a  garden  near  the  village,  but  I  am  sure  it
was  no  one  from  outside,  as  the  voice  was  so  decidedly  in  the  house,  and  apparently  close
to  us.  "  Ellen  B.  Twtnam."

Miss  Twynam's  sister  says  : —

"I  perfectly  remember  the  occurrence  alluded  to  by  my  sister.  I  distinctly  heard
the  voice  calling  her  name,  and  noticed  at  the  time  that  it  was  very  clear,  and  resembled
a  woman's  voice,  but  with  a  strangely  unnatural  sound  which  attracted  my  attention.
I  remember  turning  to  her  and  saying,  '  I  have  heard  it  for  myself  this  time,'  as  she  had
mentioned  the  fact  of  repeatedly  hearing  her  name  called,  but  I  had  never  heard  it,
though  other  people  had  done  so  before ;  but  on  this  occasion  everybody  in  the  house
heard  it  at  the  same  time,  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  voice  came  from  no  one  in
the  house.  "Maeia  Twynam."

I  have  carefully  questioned  these  informants,  and  believe  that  the  account  is  accurate.
But  it  seems  possible  to  suppose  that  some  peculiar  sound  in  the  house  was  interpreted
in  the  way  which  Miss  E.  B.  Twynam's  description  of  her  own  experience  had
suggested.

It  is  curious  that  we  have  another  case  w^here  an  unaccountable  sound,  heard  several
times  by  two  persons  in  the  same  house,  was  the  call  "Ellen,  Ellen,"  which  was  the  name
of  one  of  them.  Perhaps  there  is  something  in  the  sound  which  renders  it  easily  simulated.


220  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

coming  1 '  I  then  went  through  the  passage  before  mentioned,  to  the
next  room,  where  I  thought  to  find  my  husband,  there  being  no  one  else
in  the  house  except  three  children,  who  were  upstairs  fast  asleep.  On
going  through  the  passage  into  the  next  room,  I  found  no  one  there,
and  no  light,  it  being  quite  dark.  I  then  returned  to  the  kitchen  and
obtained  a  light,  and  went  through  the  said  room  into  the  room  beyond,
where  I  found  my  husband,  who  was  busy  writing  letters,  and  he  had  not
called  or  spoken.  This  room  he  was  in  had  the  door  shut.  "We  all  thought
it  very  strange,  and  went  up  to  see  the  children,  who  were  all  fast
asleep.  One  of  the  servants  before  mentioned,  I  should  say,  had  left
my  service  and  had  only  come  down  by  train  (10  miles)  for  the  day,
and  was  to  return  [arriving  home  at  8  p.m.]  by  the  last  train,  which  she
missed  and  had  to  stay  the  night.  She  had  a  daughter-in-law  expecting
to  be  confined,  to  whom  she  was  going  back.  She  was  an  elderly  person,
had  lost  a  son  not  long  before,  and  used  to  see  at  times  '  ghosts,'  or  what
appeared  human  beings,  but  disappeared  suddenly  and  mysteriously.

"  Caroline  Augusta  Saxon."

Mr.  Saxon  adds  :  —

"  The  house  is  quite  an  isolated  one,  standing  in  gardens  away  from  a
road,  and  about  half-a-mile  from  the  town.  The  doors  and  windows  were
closed.  The  voice  was  evidently  within  the  house  ;  and  could  not  have
come  from  anyone  in  the  house.  Our  children's  ages  were  respectively
9  years,  7  years,  5  years  and  7  months.  We  were  sure  they  were  all
asleep  at  the  time,  as  we  went  up  at  once  to  see.  I  asked  them  the  next
day ;  besides,  it  was  not  the  voice  of  the  children,  but  seemed  a  low
plaintive  voice.  Notwithstanding,  my  wife  and  the  two  servants  thought
it  must  have  been  myself  calling  from  the  next  room,  I  being  the  only
other  being  about."

I  have  examined  the  localities,  and  saw  how  natural  it  was  that  Mrs.
Saxon  should  imagine  her  husband  to  be  calling  from  the  nearer  room.  She
describes  the  voice  as  very  distinct  and  startling.  She  has  occasionally
had  the  hallucination  of  hearing  her  own  name  called,  when  overtired  ;
but  never  of  anything  else.

Here,  as  m  the  last  example,  we  have  to  note  a  slight  tendency
to  subjective  hallucination,  which  in  the  servant's  case  may  have  been
intensified  by  recent  trouble;  and,  without  absolutely  excluding
the  hypothesis  of  telepathic  influence  from  her  daughter-in-law,^  I
still  think  it  more  probable  that  a  purely  subjective  hallucination
on  her  part,  easily  referable  to  her  anxiety  about  her  daughter-in-
law's  condition,  was  psychically  transferred  to  her  two  companions.

The  next  example  is  from  the  Eev.  W.  Rajrmond,  Rector  of  Bally-
heigue,  Co.  Kerry.  I  need  not  repeat  with  regard  to  it  the
comments  made  on  cases  330  and  331.  Whatever  view  be  taken  as
to  the  origin  of  the  sound,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  it  was  by
accident  that  the  two  identical  impressions  so  exactly  coincided,

1  The  repetition  of  the  experience  somewhat  favours  this  hypothesis  (see  p.  105).


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  221

"  December  18th,  1884.

(336)  "  About  30  years  ago,  Miss  Mildred  Nash,  my  mother's  aunt,  died  |!
in  my  mother's  house,  at  the  advanced  age  of  82  years.  She  had  been  blind
for  some  years,  and  an  orphan  cousin  of  mine  had  been  much  in  attendance
on  her.  My  aunt  lived  and  died  in  a  room  on  the  ground  floor  in  the  front
of  our  house,  which  was  situated  in  a  retired  street  of  Tralee.  A  few  days
after  her  death,  my  cousin  and  I  were  sitting,  on  a  summer  evening,  at  the
window  of  the  room  over  the  room  in  which  my  aunt  had  died.  I  heard
distinctly  the  words  '  Rosy,  Rosy  '  (my  cousin's  name),  apparently  from  the
room  beneath,  and  in  my  aunt's  voice  ;  then  I  heard  my  cousin  answer
to  the  call ;  she  also  heard  the  voice.  I,  struck  with  the  strangeness  of  the
circumstance,  at  once  threw  up  the  window  to  see  if  it  were  a  voice  from
the  street,  but  there  was  no  one  visible,  and  there  could  be  no  one  there
without  being  seen.  I  then  searched  the  house  all  around,  but  there  was
nobody  near  except  ourselves — my  cousin  and  myself.  The  tale  ends  there ;
nothing  afterwards  happened  in  connection  ; — merely  the  unaccountable
fact  that  two  persons  did  independently  hear  such  a  voice  as  I  have
mentioned.     I  heard  both  the  name  called  and  the  answer.

"  Wm.  Raymond."

Writing  on  January  9th,  1885,  Mr.  Raymond  says  : —

"  I  send  you,  as  soon  as  I  was  able  to  get  it,  the  enclosed  statement  in
corroboration,  sent  me  by  my  cousin.  She  mentioned  an  item  that  helped
to  fix  the  facts  in  her  memory  (and  which  shows  the  superstition  of  the
people  here),  that  her  neighbours  all  said  she  should  not  have  answered,
but,  as  she  says,  no  harm  came  of  it.  This  was  my  only  experience  of
auditory  hallucination."

The  enclosed  statement  was  as  follows  : —

"Tralee,  January  8th,  1885.

"  My  cousin.  Rev.  William  Raymond,  has  asked  me  if  I  remember
about  the  voice  we  heard  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  old  Miss  Nash,  his
aunt.  I  do  remember  that  a  few  days  after  her  death  he  and  I  were
sitting,  one  summer  evening,  in  the  room  over  the  room  where  she  died,
that  I  heard  my  name  called,  apparently  from  that  room  and  in  her  voice,
and  that  I  answered  the  call,  and  that  we  searched  and  could  find  no  one
about  who  could  have  spoken.  "  Rose  Raymond."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry.  Miss  Raymond  states  that  this  is  her  sole
experience  of  an  auditory  hallucination.

It  remains  to  illustrate  the  musical  type  of  collective  hallucina-
tion. The  following  account  is  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sewell,  of  Eden
Villas,  Albert  Park,  Didsbury.  The  latter  (writing  on  March  25th,
1885)  tells  us  that  in  the  spring  of  1863,  a  little  girl  of  theirs,  called
Lilly,  was  ill.  ',^«^■»^♦■

(337)  "  My  husband  came  home  about  3  o'clock,  and,  to  please  Lilly,

said  he  would  have  his  dinner  in  the  bedroom  with  her.  I  sat  beside  the  bed    ^^        . '
with  one  of  Lilly's  hands  in  mine,  my  husband  was  eating  his  dinner,  and    '^**'^^/
one  little  boy  was  talking  to  Lilly,  and   all  were  quietly  trying  to  amuse
the  patient,  when  our  attention  was  roused  by  sounds  of  the  music  of  an
-^olian  harp,  which  pi-oceeded  from  a  corner  cupboard  in  one  corner  of


222  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

the  room.  All  was  hushed,  and  I  said,  'Lilly,  do  you  hear  that  pretty
music  1 '  and  she  said,  '  No,'  at  which  I  was  much  surprised,  for  she  was  a
great  lover  of  music.  The  sounds  increased  until  the  room  was  full  of
melody,  when  it  gradually  and  slowly  seemed  to  pass  down  the  stairs  and
ceased.  The  servant,  who  was  occupied  in  the  kitchen,  two  stories  below,
heard  the  sounds,  and  our  eldest  daughter,  who  was  going  into  the  larder,
stopped  in  the  passage  to  listen  and  wonder  where  the  music  came  from,
and  the  servant  called  to  her,  '  Do  you  hear  that  music  1 '  It  was  then  a
few  moments  past  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

"  The  next  day  (Sunday)  my  old  nurse  and  aunt  came  up  to  see  how
Lilly  was,  and  were,  with  my  husband,  all  in  the  room  with  the  child.
I  had  gone  down  into  the  kitchen  to  prepare  some  little  dainty  milk-food
for  her,  when  the  same  sounds  of  ^olian  music  were  heard  by  all  three
in  the  room,  and  I  heard  the  same  in  the  kitchen.  Monday  passed,  but
we  had  no  repetition.  On  Tuesday,  at  the  same  hour,  we  [i.e.,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Sewell]  once  more  heard  the  same  wailing  ^olian  music  from  the
same  part  of  the  room ;  again  it  increased  in  volume,  until  the  room  was
full  of  wailing  melody ;  and  again  did  the  sounds  appear  to  pass  through
the  door,  down  the  stairs,  and  out  at  the  front  door.  Now,  this  music
was  heard  three  different  days,  at  the  same  time  each  day,  and  not  only  by
those  in  the  room  with  the  child,  but  by  myself,  my  daughter,  and  the
servant,  two  flights  of  stairs  below  the  room  the  child  was  in ;  and  on
the  second  day  by  my  aunt  and  nurse  and  the  children,  who  were  in  the
dining-room.

"  One  circumstance,  I  think,  was  very  remarkable  :  the  child  herself,
who  had  a  perfect  passion  for  music,  never  heard  a  sound.  There  cannot
be  any  mistake  in  the  sounds,  for  no  instrument  played  by  human  hands
can  make  the  same  sounds  as  the  wailing  ^olian  harp.  We  had  lived  in
the  same  bouse  6  years,  and  remained  in  it  12  years  more,  and  we  never
heard  similar  music  either  before  or  after.  "  Sarah  A.  Sewell."

Mr.  Sewell  says  :-  "April,  1885.

"  The  only  confirmation  which  is  now  available  is  that  of  myself.  I
can  speak  with  all  sincerity.  I  heard  the  sweet  music  identically  with
my  wife.  The  music  was  heard  on  Saturday,  2nd  of  May,  a  little  before
4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  also  on  the  next  day  at  about  the  same  time,
and  also  on  the  following  Tuesday  at  about  the  same  hour.  Those  who
heard  the  music  were  my  wife,  myself,  my  wife's  aunt,  the  nurse,  our  son
E/ichard,  aged  7  ;  our  son  Thomas,  aged  9  (the  last  four  all  dead),  our
eldest  daughter,  aged  11,  and  our  servant,  who  shortly  left  us  and  went
to  Ireland  to  her  husband,  who  was  a  soldier,  and  was  soon  lost  sight  of.
Our  eldest  daughter  is  now  in  New  York,  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  that
she  will  rem.ember  the  circumstance.  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  the  music
heard  was  not  produced  by  someone  at  a  distance,  for  our  house  was  then
situated  in  a  long  garden,  some  50  yards  distant  from  the  public  road,  and
the  adjoining  house  to  ours  was  unoccupied  at  the  time.  The  sound  was
not  a  muffled  sound  at  all,  but  the  soft,  wild  notes  of  an  ^olian  harp,  which
rose  and  fell  distinctly,  and  increased  gradually,  until  the  room  was  full
of  sound,  as  loud  as  the  full  swell  of  an  organ,  and  it  rolled  slowly  down
the  stairs,  dying  softly  on  the  ear  in  weird  cadences.  I  am  certain  it  was
not  produced  by  human  fingers.  "  Mathew  Sewell."


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  223

I  have  copied  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Sewell
by  his  daughter,  Mrs.  Lee,  and  dated  July  20th,  1885.

"  Williams  Bridge,  New  York.
"  I  do  distinctly  remember  hearing  the  music  before    Lilly's  death,
and  also  remember  the  impression  it  made  on  us  children  at  the  time,  the
feeling  of  terror  and  fear  we  had,  at  not  understanding   where  the  music
came  from  and  what  kind  of  music  it  was."

[A  personal  interview  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sewell  has  made  evident  to
me  how  uniquely  impressive  to  them  this  incident  was.  The  music  ap-
peared to  issue  from  a  particular  corner  of  the  room,  which  was  not  one
formed  by  external  walls ;  and  the  nature  of  the  sound  makes  it  hard  to
explain  as  an  objective  efiect,  due  to  air  or  water ;  while  the  fact  that
one  person  present,  with  sensitive  ears,  did  not  share  the  experience  seems
almost  fatal  to  such  an  explanation.  The  sound  lasted  on  each  occasion
not  more  than  half  a  minute.  The  little  girl  died  on  the  Tuesday  evening,  j
If  the  hallucination  be  connected  with  her  abnormal  condition,  the  incident
(like  case  335  above)  would  belong  to  the  succeeding  section.]

A  further  example  of  the  musical  class,  with  even  more  complete
attestation,  has  on  account  of  its  length  been  placed  in  the
Supplement  (p.  639) :  the  following  shorter  specimen  may  be  given
here.  The  late  Mrs.  Yates,  of  54,  Columbia  Square,  E.,  wrote  in  1884: — ■

(338)  "In  1870  I  lost  a  dearly  loved  daughter,  21  years  old  ;  she  died  h*^L^
at  noonday,  of  aneurism.  At  night,  my  only  other  daughter  was  with  me,
when  all  at  once  we  both  assumed  a  listening  attitude,  and  we  both  heard
the  sweetest  of  spiritual  music,  although  it  seemed  so  remote,  my  ears  were
hurt  listening  so  intently.  Till  some  hours  after,  my  dear  girl  and  I  were
afraid  to  inquire  of  each  other  had  we  heard  it,  for  fear  we  were  deluded,  but
we  found  both  had  been  so  privileged  and  blessed."

To  our  request  for  Mr.  Yates's  testimony,  Mrs.  Yates  replied  : — ■

"  Mr.  Yates  perfectly  well  remembers  how  myself  and  the  daughter
who  is  now  living  were  affected  by  hearing  music  that  night,  such  as
mortals  never  sang ;  but  I  have  to  write  for  him,  he  being  troubled  by  inca-
pacity of  his  right  hand."  (Signed  as  correct)   "  George  Yates."

The  daughter  wrote  as  follows,  on  Oct.  9,  1884  : —

"31,  St.  John's  Street  Road,  Clerkenwell,  E.G.

"  I  can  speak  with  certainty  respecting  the  beautiful  music  my  dear
mother  and  I  heard  on  the  26th  November,  1870.  I  shall  never  forget  it;
we  were  both  afraid  to  speak,  it  was  so  exquisite.  "  A.  Beilby."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Beilby  adds  : —

"  We  were  living  at  3,  Henry  Street,  Pentonville.  The  two  windows
in  the  room  were  shut  tight  and  fastened ;  and  as  near  as  I  can  remember,
it  must  have  been  between  2  and  3  in  the  morning.  The  music  lasted
several  minutes."  She  further  says  that,  when  the  sounds  began,  her
mother  exclaimed,  "Anne,  do  you  hear  that  ?  " — so  that  her  niother's  state-
ment is  not  quite  exact ;  but  she  confirms  the  fact  that  some  hours  passed
before  they  ventured  to  describe  their  impressions  to  one  another.


224  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

The  foregoing  instances  may  perhaps  suffice  to  show  that  a  purely
psychical  account  of  these  joint  experiences — as  due  either  partly  or
wholly  to  a  thought-transference  between  the  percipients — ^is  at  all
events  possible  ;  and  that  acceptance  of  the  phenomena  as  genuine,  i.e.,
as  percepts  truly  described,  does  not  imply  any  materiahstic  theory  of
phantasmal  beings  who  travel  about  through  space  (sometimes  in
their  carriages)  on  their  own  account.  And  possibly  a  certain  number
of  my  readers  may  further  agree  with  me  in  supposing  some,  at  any
rate,  of  these  cases  to  have  been  in  their  inception  purely  subjective,
and  will  not  feel  the  need  of  invoking  for  them  an  unknown  or
'post-mortem  "agency,"  however  little  disposed  to  rule  the  possibility
of  such  agency  out  of  court.  I  cannot,  indeed,  deny  a  certain
force  to  an  objection  which  Mr.  Myers  urges,^  that  we  know  of
no  instances  where  a  hallucination  which  can  be  connected  with
insanity  or  other  distinctly  morbid  conditions  in  the  person  im-
pressed, and  which  is  thus  quite  clearly  proved  to  be  purely
subjective,  has  become  collective  in  the  way  supposed.  But  then
neither  do  we  know  of  instances  where  a  person  in  one  of  these
morbid  conditions  has  exercised  any  other  form  of  telepathic  in-
fluence. We  have  no  instances  of  telepathic  impressions  of  the
deaths  of  dying  lunatics.  The  ultimate  conditions  of  telepathic
agency  are  as  little  known  to  us  as  the  ultimate  conditions  of  telepathic
percipience  ;  and  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  such  as  those  of
the  preceding  examples,  differ  so  greatly  in  their  nature  and  ostensible
conditions  from  the  types  of  hallucination  to  which  Mr.  Myers  points
as  never  transferred,  that  it  seems  rash  to  assume  that  they  may  not
differ  also  in  the  particular  point  of  transferability.  At  any  rate,
whatever  the  difficulties  of  that  view,  it  is  one  that  may  be
provisionally  entertained  by  those  who  see  equal  difficulties  in  any
other  ;  and  whatever  my  own  surmises  as  to  future  discovery  may  be,
in  the  present  state  of  the  evidence  I  feel  as  much  bound  here  to
press  the  theory  of  thought-transference,  before  admitting  causes  of
an  obscurer  kind,  as  in  a  former  chapter  to  press  the  theory  of
unconscious  physical  indications  before  admitting  the  reality  of
thought-transference.

The  degree  in  which  the  infectious  character  may  exist  is  very  hard
indeed  to  determine ;  for  the  majority  of  hallucinations  (purely  sub-
jective and  telepathic  alike)  occur  to  persons  who  are  alone — silence
and  recueillement  being  apparently  favourable  conditions;    and  we

1  See  pp.  280-2.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  225.

have  no  means  of  knowing  how  many  of  these  hallucinations  might
have  been  shared  by  some  one  else,  if  some  one  else  had  happened  to
be  present  at  the  time.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that,  taking  the
whole  class  of  transient  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  the  cases  where  the
experience  has  been  shared  by  a  second  person  appear  to  be  more
numerous  than  those  where  a  second  person  has  been  present,  awake,
and  rightly  situated,  and  has  not  shared  the  experience.  Nor,  again,
can  I  at  all  adequately  explain  why  these  phenomena  should  be  a  form
of  mental  impression  specially  liable  to  spread  to  neighbouring  minds.
That  those  of  them  which  are  telepathically  produced  in  the  first
instance  should  have  a  tendency  to  spread  in  this  way  may  appear,
perhaps,  less  remarkable,  if  we  remember  that  a  telepathic  impulse,  as
such,  seems  sometimes  to  have  very  distinct  and  peculiar  physiological
effects ;  witness  Mrs.  Newnham's  exhaustion  (Vol.  I.,  p.  64)  in  experi-
ments where  the  ideas  conveyed  were  in  themselves  of  a  quite
unexciting  sort.  But  as  regards  the  transference  in  purely  subjective
cases,  all  I  can  suggest  is  that  sensory  hallucinations,  and  especially  the
occasional  hallucinations  of  sane  and  healthy  people,  are  to  begin  with
and  in  themselves  very  peculiar  things  ;  and  that  a  fresh  peculiarity,
meeting  us  in  something  that  we  do  not  completely  see  round
or  understand,  is  less  staggering  than  if  it  met  us  in  something
of  which  we  have  held  our  knowledge  to  be  complete.  At  any
rate  the  fact,  if  admitted,  that  purely  subjective  hallucinations  may
spontaneously  become  collective,  greatly  simplifies  the  consideration
of  the  collective  cases  whose  origin  is  traceable  to  an  external  "  agent."
The  appearance  of  an  absent  person's  figure  to  several  spectators  at
once  has  had  in  it  something  specially  startling ;  and  when
associated  with  the  idea  of  death,  it  has  almost  inevitably  sug-
gested a  material  or  "  etherial "  spirit — an  independent  travel-
ling ghost.  But  as  soon  as  the  experience  is  analysed,  it  is  found
to  involve  nothing  new  or  antagonistic  to  scientific  conceptions.
In  being  connected  with  the  absent  person,  it  is  merely  on  a  par  with
other  specimens  of  telepathy — e.g.,  many  of  those  cited  in  the
preceding  chapters  :  in  being  collective,  it  is  merely  on  a  par  with
other  specimens  of  hallucination — e.g.,  some  of  those  already  cited  in
this  chapter.  Still,  though  a  telepathic  impulse  from  an  absent
person  may  not  be  an  essential  condition,  it  may  be,  and  I  believe  is,
an  exceptionally  favourable  condition,  for  a  collective  hallucination.
And  I  now  proceed  to  the  final  group  of  examples,  of  which  that
condition  is  the  distinguishing  mark.

VOL.    II.  Q


226  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

§  6.  I  will  begin  the  list  with  the  auditory  class.     The  following

account  is    from  Mr.  J.  Wood  Beilby,  of  Redbank  Cottage,  Elgin

Road,  Beechworth,  Victoria.

"October  17th,  1883.

(339)  "  A  young  lady,  a  friend  of  my  wife's,  staying  with  us  in  the  bush,
had  gone  some  hours,  on  horseback,  to  our  post-town — some  eight  miles  dis-
tant— when  my  wife  and  I  in  the  house,  a  servant-man  and  woman  and  my
adopted  son,  a  youth,  in  an  outside  kitchen,  heard  this  young  lady  scream,
and  call  out,  '  Oh,  Johnnie  !  Johnnie  ! ' — that  being  my  boy's  name,  he
being  a  usual  attendant  to  the  fair  equestrian.  All  simultaneously  rushed
out ;  but  nothing  further  could  be  heard  or  seen  of  the  exclaimant  for
nearly  an  hour,  when  she  arrived,  and  informed  us  that  at  a  spot  between
four  and  five  miles  distant  she  had  to  open  a  gate.  Trying  to  do  this
without  dismounting,  she  leaned  over  it  from  her  side-saddle  to  undo  a
sort  of  hasp.  Her  horse  took  fright  at  something  and  bounded  aside,
leaving  her,  happily,  detached  from  him,  hanging  over  the  gate.  She  said
she  shrieked  for  help,  and  fancied  '  Johnnie '  was  behind,  but  got  extri-
cated— I  forget  how — and  her  horse  caught.  She  remounted,  and  came
on  to  us  without  injury  but  the  fright.  It  was  absolutely  impossible  her
natural  voice  could  have  been  heard  over  a  forest  country  intervening  for
even  one-third  of  the  distance.  The  strange  thing  to  me  is  that  others,  not
so  specially  gifted  with  magnetic  impressions  as  I  am,  should  have
simultaneously  and  distinctly  heard  the  ejaculation.  All  instantly  acted
a  reply,  going  out  of  the  several  houses  which  they  were  in  at  the  time,
and  making  for  an  entrance  gate,  expecting  to  find  the  lady  in  some
difiiculty  close  at  hand ;  and  all  were  astonished  that  she  was  not  even
in  view  upon  an  extensive  plain,  skirted  by  the  forest-land  she  had
to  traverse.  "  J.  Wood  Beilby."

Mrs.  Beilby  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  I  perfectly  recollect  the  voice  being  heard,  as  narrated  above  by  my
husband.     I  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  the  narration.

"  Catherine  W.  Beilby."

In  another  account,  written  on  January  28fch,  1886,  and  signed  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beilby,  it  is  more  clearly  brought  out  that  the  young  lady.
Miss  Snell,  actually  called  out  the  name,  "  Johnnie,  Johnnie."  The  only
point  of  difference  between  the  two  accounts  is  that  the  second,  instead  of
saying  that  all  four  persons  rushed  out  simultaneously,  states  that  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Beilby  went  out  and  called  to  the  servants  that  Miss  Snell  had
returned,  and  that  "  they  said  they  heard  her  call,  and  immediately  went
to  the  gate  of  entrance  to  the  homestead,"  but  found  no  one  there.

Mr.  Beilby  further  adds  : —

"  The  homestead  is  isolated  from  any  other  residence,  some  3  miles ;
and  no  one  was  about  at  the  time,  except  the  servants  and  the  employers
in  separate  but  closely  adjacent  buildings."  He  implies  that  he  has  had  no
other  auditory  hallucination.

The  next  account,  which  was  first  received  by  the  Rev.  W.
Stainton  Moses  from  an  intimate  friend  of  the  agent's,  was  revised


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  227

by  his  parents,  the  percipients,  who  have  since  again  read  it  over  and

pronounced  it  correct.

"1881.

(340)  "  About  two  years  ago  W.  L.  left  England  for  America.  IS^ine
months  since,  he  married,  and  hoped  to  bring  his  wife  home  to  see  his
mother,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached.  On  February  4th,  however,
he  was  taken  with  sudden  illness,  which  terminated  fatally  on  the  12th,
about  8  p.m.  On  that  night,  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after  the
parents  of  W.  L.  had  retired  to  rest  in  England,  the  mother  heard  the
clear  voice  of  her  son  speaking.  Her  husband  who  also  heard  it,  asked
his  wife  if  it  was  she  who  was  speaking.  Neither  of  them  had  been  asleep,
and  she  replied,  '  No  !  Keep  quiet ! '  The  voice  continued,  '  As  I  cannot
come  to  England,  mother,  I  have  come  now  to  see  you.'  At  this  time
both  parents  believed  their  son  to  be  in  perfect  health  in  America,  and
were  daily  expecting  a  letter  to  announce  his  return  home.  A  note  was
made  of  this  very  startling  occurrence  ;  and  when  a  fortnight  since  news  of
the  son's  death  arrived,  it  was  found  to  correspond  with  the  date  on  which
the  spirit-voice  ^  had  announced  his  presence  in  England.  The  widow  said
that  the  preparations  for  departure  had  nearly  been  completed,  and  that
her  husband  showed  much  anxiety  to  get  to  England  and  see  his  inother.^^

[Unfortunately  the  percipients  in  this  case  dislike  the  subject,  and  it
has  been  thought  better  not  to  press  them  with  further  inquiries.  Other-
wise we  should  of  course  have  ascertained  whether  or  not  they  had  ever
had  other  hallucinations.]

The  next  account  is  from  Commander  T.  W.  Aylesbury  (late  of

the  Indian  Navy),  of  Sutton,  Surrey.     The  case,  at  first  sight,  may

seem  as  if  it  belonged   to   the  reciprocal  class  ;  but  Commander

Aylesbury's  vision  did   not   include   enough   detail  to  justify  us  in

regarding  it  as  other  than  subjective,  the  scene  being  apparently  such

as  he  might  naturally  have  conjured  up.

"December,  1882.

(341)  "The  writer,  when  13  years  of  age,  was  capsized  in  a  boat,  when
landing  on  the  Island  of  Bally,  east  of  Java,  and  was  nearly  drowned.
On  coming  to  the  surface,  after  being  repeatedly  submerged,  the  boy  called
his  mother.  This  amused  the  boat's  crew,  who  spoke  of  it  afterwards,  and
jeered  him  a  good  deal  about  it.  Months  after,  on  arrival  in  England,  the
boy  went  to  his  home,  and  while  telling  his  mother  of  his  narrow  escape,
he  said,  '  While  I  was  under  water,  I  saw  you  all  sitting  in  this  room  ;  you
were  working  something  white.  I  saw  you  all — mother,  Emily,  Eliza,  and
Ellen.'  His  mother  at  once  said,  '  Why  yes,  and  I  heard  you  cry  out  for
me,  and  I  sent  Emily  to  look  out  of  the  window,  for  I  remarked  that
something  had  happened  to  that  poor  boy.'  The  time,  owing  to  the
diiference  of  E.  longitude,  corresponded  with  the  time  when  the  voice  was
heard."

Commander  Aylesbury  adds  in  another  letter  : —

"  I  saw  their  features  (my  mother's  and  sisters'),  the  room   and  the

See  p.  48,  note.
VOL.    II.  Q    2


228  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

furniture,  particularly  the  old-fashioned  Venetian  blinds.  My  eldest  sister
was  seated  next  to  my  mother."

Asked  as  to  the  time  of  the  accident,  Commander  Aylesbury  says  : —

"  I  think  the  time  must  have  been  very  early  in  the  morning.
I  remember  a  boat  capsized  the  day  before,  and  washed  up.  The  mate  said
we  would  go  and  bring  her  off  in  the  morning,  but  the  exact  time  I  cannot
remember.  It  was  a  terrible  position,  and  the  surf  was  awful.  We  were
knocked  end  over  end,  and  it  was  the  most  narrow  escape  I  ever  had — and
I  have  had  many ;  but  this  one  was  so  impressed  on  my  mind  with  the
circumstances — the  remarks  and  jeers  of  the  men, —  '  Boy,  what  was  you
calling  for  your  mother  for'?  Do  you  think  she  could  pull  you  out  of
Davey  Jones'  locker,'  &c.,  with  other  language  I  cannot  use."

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  written  to  Commander
Aylesbury  by  one  of  his  sisters,  and  forwarded  to  us,  in  1883  : —

"  I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  you  mention  in  your  letter  (the
voice  calling  '  Mother '  )  ;  it  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind,  I  shall
never  forget  it.  We  were  sitting  quietly  at  work  one  evening ;  it  was
about  9  o'clock.  I  think  it  must  have  been  late  in  the  summer  as  we  had
left  the  street  door  open.  We  first  heard  a  faint  cry  of  '  Mother';  we  all
looked  up,  and  said  to  one  another,  '  Did  you  hear  that  ?  Someone  cried
out  "  Mother." '  We  had  scarcely  finished  speaking,  when  the  voice  again
called,  '  Mother '  twice  in  quick  succession,  the  last  cry  a  frightened,
agonising  cry.  We  all  started  up,  and  mother  said  to  me,  '  Go  to  the  door
and  see  what  is  the  matter.'  I  ran  directly  into  the  street  and  stood  some
few  minutes,  but  all  was  silent  and  not  a  person  to  be  seen  ;  it  was  a  lovely
evening,  not  a  breath  of  air.  Mother  was  sadly  upset  about  it.  I
remember  she  paced  the  room,  and  feared  that  something  had  happened
to  you.  She  wrote  down  the  date  the  next  day,  and  when  you  came  home
and  told  us  how  near  you  had  been  drowned,  and  the  time  of  day,  father
said  it  would  be  about  the  time  9  o'clock  would  be  with  us.  I  know  the
date  and  the  time  corresponded."

[The  difierence  of  time  at  the  two  places  is  a  little  more  than
7  hours  ;  consequently  9  in  the  evening  in  England  would  correspond
with  "  very  early  in  the  morning  "  of  the  next  day  at  the  scene  of  the
accident.  But  the  incident  happened  too  long  ago  for  memory  to  be
trusted  as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.]

In  the  next  case,  though  the  sound  heard  was  apparently  vocal,
it  was  not  articulate ;  and  it  can  scarcely  be  pronounced  impossible
that  such  an  effect  might  be  produced  by  bubbling  air,  or  some  other
local  cause.  The  coincidence,  however,  appears  to  have  been  very
close,  though  perhaps  not  so  absolutely  precise  as  is  alleged ;  and  the
form  of  impression  is  not  without  analogy  (see  e.g.,  case  288  above).
The  account  is  signed  by  one  of  the  percipients,  but  is  in  the  words  of
her  son,  Mr.  W.  R.  Weyer,  of  7,  Willis  Street,  St.  Paul's,  Norwich.

"June,  1883.
(342)   "  At  the  time  that  this  occurrence  took  place,  my  mother's  brother


xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  229

was  lying  in  a  dangerous  condition,  suffering  from  a  complication  of
disorders,  together  with  an  old  wound  received  in  the  Crimea  some  time
previous ;  consequently  at  that  time  my  parents'  minds  were  in  a  great  state
of  anxiety.  It  was  on  the  night  of  July  6th,  1865  ;  my  parents  were  retir-  V
ing  to  rest  at  a  somewhat  late  hour,  when  they  were  both  suddenly  startled  -h
by  a  sound  of  three  distinct  sobs  as  (according  to  my  mother's  experience)
of  a  person  dying.  My  father  immediately  arose,  procured  a  light,  and  a
thorough  search  was  made,  but  with  no  success.  On  again  retiring,  the
sobs  were  again  repeated,  this  time  in  a  perfectly  clear  and  distinct
manner.^  My  mother  then  noted  the  time,  which  was  then  10.50  p.m.,
remarking  at  the  same  time  that  we  should  hear  bad  news.  After  making
another  search  they  again  retired  to  rest,  the  sobs  being  heard  no  more.

"  On  the  next  day  my  mother  received  a  letter  bearing  the  Chatham
post-mark,  stating  that  her  brother,  David  Mackenzie  Annison,  had  died  at
Chatham  Hospital  on  the  night  of  July  the  5th,  at  10.50,  being  the  exact
time  that  the  sobs  were  heard  by  my  parents.

"William  E,obt.  Wbyer."
[Signed  as  correct  by  Mrs.  Weyer,  the  surviving  witness]

"Maria  E.  Wbyer."

Mr.  Weyer,  the  father,  died  a  year  after  the  occurrence.  In  answer
to  inquiries,  Mr.  W.  R.  Weyer  adds  : —

"  My  parents  informed  my  cousin  and  aunt  (who  is  now  deceased)  of
the  circumstance,  before  she  received  the  letter;  and  my  aunt,  who  is  just
dead,  remembered  the  circumstance  quite  well.  My  grandmother  often
used  to  mention  it.  I  have  appealed  to  my  cousin  to  write  her  recollection
of  the  incident,  but  I  cannot  at  present  persuade  her  to  do  so."

In  conversation  Mrs.  Weyer  stated  that  there  were  no  water-pipes
near  the  room,  and  that  the  sound  seemed  startlingly  near — close  to  the
head  of  the  bed.  She  is  not  at  all  predisposed  to  alarms  or  fancies,  and
has  never  had  any  other  hallucination — unless  we  are  to  reckon  as  such  a
startling  sound  of  knocks  which  others  also  heard,  and  for  which  no
external  cause  could  be  discovered.  The  idea  which  she  expressed  that
the  sounds  in  the  present  case  were  premonitory  of  bad  news,  since  it  was
not  founded  on  any  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  evidence  for  telepathic
occurrences  as  facts  in  Nature,  indicates,  no  doubt,  an  uncritical  acceptance
of  marvels.  But  the  only  question  for  us  is  how  far  such  a  habit  of  mind  ,
may  have  affected  the  evidence  to  the  facts  ;  and  my  strong  impression  is  ,
that  it  has  not  appreciably  affected  it.  We  may  regard  it  as  probable,
however,  that  the  sobs  were  not  described  as  like  those  "  of  a  person
dying "  until  after  the  fact  of  the  death  was  realised.

The  following  is  the  result  of  an  independent  inquiry  as  to  the  time  of
death.

1  As  regards  the  repetition,  see  p.  105.  As  to  the  three  sobs,  in  examining  a  large
mass  of  evidence  respecting  abnormal  phenomena  (and  especially  second-hand  accounts),
one  finds  this  number  recurring  with  somewhat  noticeable  frequency — which  at  any  rate
suggests  unconscious  modification  of  the  facts.  Nor  need  we  assume  any  specially
superstitious  habit  of  mind  on  the  part  of  the  witness,  to  find  it  natural  that,  at  the
points  where  memory  is  hazy,  slight  resulting  errors  should  take  lines  which  are  (so
to  speak)  marked  out  for  them  by  literary  or  religious  associations.


230  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

"  Melville  Hospital,  Chatham.
"July  18th,  1885.

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  asking  to  be  informed  of  the  exact  hour  of  the
death  of  David  Mackenzie  Annison,  I  beg  to  state  that  there  was  a  David
Annison,  chief  stoker,  aged  38,  admitted  into  this  hospital  26th  June,
1865,  from  H.M.S.  '  Cumberland.'  He  was  suffering  from  chronic  liver
disease  and  jaundice.  He  died  at  11.35  p.m.,  on  the  5th  July,  1865,  and
his  friends  took  his  body  away  to  Sheerness.

"  In  case  of  a  death  in  this  establishment,  the  body  is  seen  by  the
medical  ofl&cer  on  duty,  who  Aimse//' notifies  on  the  man's  ticket  the  hour
and  minute  of  his  decease.  It  was  from  this  document  I  gathered  the
information  you  required.  u  Belgrave  Ninnis,  M.D.

"(Deputy  Inspector-General.)"

With  respect  to  this  point,  Mr.  Weyer  writes,  on  August  7th,  1885  : —

"  In  reference  to  the  mistake  regarding  the  time,  I  have  consulted  my
mother  upon  that  point,  and  she  asserts  that  she  might  possibly  be
mistaken,  but  of  this  fact  she  is  most  positive,  viz.,  that  the  time  she  noted
on  that  night  exactly  corresponded  with  the  time  given  in  the  message  which
arrived  next  day  ;  this,  she  says,  there  is  no  mistake  about.  My  mother
felt  almost  certain  that  the  time  was  10.50,  but  as  it  occurred  so  long  ago
she  is  not  likely  to  have  it  on  record  ;  therefore  she  thinks  that  the  medical
official  report  would  be  the  most  reliable."

The  percipients  here  are  described  as  having  been  in  great  anxiety.
We  have  seen  grounds  for  rejecting  from  the  telepathic  evidence
instances  where  this  condition  has  existed  on  the  part  of  a  single
percipient  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  508-9) ;  but  where  two  are  affected  the  case  is
different.  For,  even  if  the  experience  of  one  was  purely  subjective
in  origin,  it  would  be  extravagant  to  suppose  that  of  the  other  to  have
taken  place  by  accident  at  the  same  moment ;  so  that  there  would  at
least  have  been  a  "  psychical "  phenomenon — a  transferred  hallucina-
tion. But  in  the  present  instance  there  is  some  reason  for  going
beyond  this,  and  supposing  a  telepathic  origin  to  the  experience.
For  the  sort  of  sound  heard  is  scarcely  a  likely  one  for  anxiety  to
suggest;  and,  moreover, in  no  case  could  the  hypothesis  of  a  joint
rapport  of  the  agent  with  two  percipients  seem  more  in  place  than
where  the  two  are  his  near  relatives,  whose  minds  are  already  similarly
and  fully  occupied  with  him.

I  will  add  a  couple  of  specimens  of  the  non- vocal  type.  In  the
first,  the  hallucination  presents  a  curiously  close  connection  with  the
probable  idea  of  the  agent  at  the  moment.     The  account  is  from  Mrs.

Paget,  of  Famham,  Surrey.

"June  5th,  1884.
(343)   "  A  man-servant,  who  had  lived  with  us  from  a  child,  and  who
was  a  real  friend,  fell  into  a  consumption,  and  thinking  that  the  climate


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  231

of  Ventnor  might  prolong  his  life  for  some  months,  we  sent  him  to  St.
Catharine's  Home  in  September,  1880.  On  the  8th  of  October,  I  received
a  letter  from  the  Sister-in-charge,  saying  that  Arthur  Dunn  was  decidedly-
worse,  but  that  the  doctor  thought  there  was  no  immediate  danger,  and
therefore  she  did  not  think  I  need  go  to  Ventnor  at  once.  I  therefore
wrote  to  say  I  would  be  there  on  the  following  Monday,  when  I  hoped  to
be  able  to  stay  with  him  to  the  last.  That  morning  I  said  to  my  girls,
'  I  really  must  remember  to  speak  to  the  new  servant  about  putting  out
the  gas  upstairs  at  half -past  10,  for  since  poor  Arthur  left  us,  it  has  not
been  put  out  punctually,  and  even  some  nights  the  burner  close  to  my
bedroom  and  my  eldest  girl's  dressing-room  has  been  alight  all  night.'

"  That  same  evening  was  very  warm,  and  my  daughter  and  myself  both
left  our  doors  open,  in  order  to  be  able  to  talk  after  we  went  upstairs  (the
gas-burner  being  close  to  our  rooms).  Whilst  we  were  both  saying  our
prayers,  the  clock  struck  half-past  10,  and  at  that  moment  we  heard  a
man's  heavy  step  along  the  passage,  which  stopped  at  the  gas-burner,  and
then  we  heard  the  footsteps  retiring.  Almost  at  the  same  moment  my
daughter  and  myself  came  to  our  respective  doors  and  exclaimed,  '  Why,
the  man  did  not  put  out  the  gas  after  all.  How  like  his  step  sounded  to
poor  Arthur's  heavy  tread.'

"  The  next  morning  I  received  a  telegram  from  the  Sister-in-charge  at
St.  Catharine's  Home,  saying,  '  All  was  over  last  night.'  I  went  down  to
Yentnor  at  once  to  make  arrangements,  and  in  telling  Sister  Mary  Martha
how  I  grieved  that  I  had  not  started  for  Yentnor  before,  she  remarked,
'We  did  not  think  there  was  immediate  danger,  and  his  mind  was
wandering  so  much  that  day  that  he  was  hardly  conscious.  It  was  curious
to  see  what  form  his  wandering  took,  for,  after  he  had  been  very  silent
for  some  hours,  the  clock  struck  half -past  10,  when  he  raised  himself  in
bed  and  said  distinctly,  *  The  clock  has  struck,  I  must  go  and  put  out  the
gas,'  and  fell  back  and  died  immediately.

"  I  ought  to  mention  that  punctuality  had  been  a  perfect  mania  with
him.  He  was  never,  as  far  as  I  can  remember,  three  minutes  late  for  any-
thing he  was  ordered  to  do,  and  he  was  most  devotedly  attached  to  us  and
our  home.  "  Frances  Paget."

Miss  Paget  (now  Mrs.  P.  Hanham)  wrote  as  follows,  on  June  11, 1884: — ■

"  I  can  only  most  emphatically  confirm  my  mother's  statement.  I
distinctly  heard  the  '  footsteps '  as  described  by  her,  and  it  happened  at
half-past  10  at  night,  the  exact  time,  as  we  heard  afterwards,  that  our
poor  man-servant  died.  I  may  mention  that  I  questioned  our  new  man-
servant in  the  morning  as  to  whether  he  had  not  been  upstairs  on  the
previous  night ;  but  it  turned  out  that  he  had  forgotten  the  orders  given
him  to  turn  out  the  gas,  and  had  not  been  upstairs.  The  footsteps,  as  I
remarked  at  the  time,  were  exactly  similar  to  those  of  poor  Arthur  Dunn,
and  you  may  judge  of  my  surprise  when,  on  my  mother's  return  from  the
funeral,  she  told  us  about  her  conversation  with  the  Sister,  who  was  with
him  at  the  last,  and  his  last  words  having  been,  '  The  clock  has  struck,  I
must  go  and  put  out  the  gas.'

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  : —

(1)  "The  occurrence  happened  here,  and  it  was  on  October  8th,  1880,
as  I  have  since  found  on  referring  to  a  diary.


232  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

(2)  "  Neither  my  mother  nor  myself  ever  remember  to  have  had  any
hallucinations  of  any  sort,  before  or  since.  "  Gertrude  F.  Paget."

[The  diary,  which  I  have  seen,  gives  the  date  of  the  death  only.  Miss
Paget's  meaning  was  that  this  was  fixed  on  their  minds  next  day  as
having  happened  on  October  8th,  on  which  day — as  they  could  not  then
be  mistaken  in  recollecting — the  sounds  had  been  heard.]

To  a  suggestion  that  the  steps  might  have  been  those  of  a  heavy-footed
housemaid,  Mrs.  Paget  replied  : —

"  I  can  positively  affirm  that  the  housemaid  did  not  come  upstairs  on
the  night  of  my  servant's  death  ;  for  that  point  was  inquired  into  at  the
time."

The  Sister-in-charge  at  St.  Catharine's  Home,  Yentnor,  writes  as
follows,  on  March  6,  1885  :—

"Arthur  Dunn  died  at  10.30  p.m.  on  the  8th  of  October,  1880.  I
was  with  him  when  he  died ;  he  was  only  with  us  eight  days.

"Matilda  S.  S.  S.  M."

Mrs.  Paget's  account  having  been  sent  to  Sister  Matilda,  she  replied  as
follows,  on  March  9,   1885  :—

"  Arthur  John  Dunn  was  only  here  eight  days  before  his  death.  I
nursed  him,  and  was  with  him  when  he  died  on  October  8th.  I  do  not
recollect  what  Mrs.  Paget  says  at  all ;  all  I  can  remember  was  that  he
was  in  bed  three  days  ;  his  breathing  was  very  laboured ;  he  had  a  weak
heart ;  he  was  not  unconscious  at  all ;  he  was  a  very  silent  man,  and
seldom  spoke,  except  to  answer  any  question  asked.  Just  before  he  died
he  asked  me  the  time  ;  it  was  half -past  10  ;  his  words  were  :  '  What  is  the
time  V  I  do  not  think  he  spoke  after.  There  was  nothing  about  the  gas.
He  could  not  hear  any  clock  strike,  for  there  is  not  one  in  the  ward  or
near  it.  Sister  Mary  Martha  was  in  charge  of  the  house  at  the  time,  and
I  had  the  nursing  of  the  men."

Sister  Mary  Martha  writes  from  St.  Margaret's,  East  Grinstead,  on
March  17,  1885  :—

"  I  regret  that  I  am  quite  unable  to  recall  any  particulars  of  Arthur
Dunn's  death.  I  remember  the  young  man  perfectly  well ;  he  was  at  the
Home  only  about  eight  days,  and  died  almost  suddenly.  He  suffered  from
heart  disease  as  well  as  consumption.  He  was  a  very  nice  fellow,  and  we
all  liked  him  much.  Mrs.  Paget,  I  remember,  spoke  in  the  highest  terms
of  him.  My  impression  is  that  his  end  was  very  sudden — too  much  so  for
any  last  words.  u  Sister  Mary  Martha."

[It  will  be  observed  that  there  are  two  discrepancies  between  Mrs.
Paget's  and  the  Sisters'  account.  The  point  as  to  the  way  in  which  the
man  ascertained  the  time — whether  by  hearing  the  clock  strike  or  by  in
quiry  of  the  Sister — is  not  in  itself  important :  the  point  about  his
mention  of  the  gas,  though  not  vital,  has  more  importance.  I  have
thoroughly  talked  over  the  matter  with  Mrs.  Paget  and  her  daughter.
Mrs.  Paget  is  quite  clear  in  her  recollection  of  Sister  Mary  Martha's
statement ;  but  she  does  not  recollect  having  heard  or  realised  who  it  was  to
whom  the  man  made  the  remark.  The  daughter  is  equally  clear  about  her
mother's  mention  of  this  detail  at  the  time.     Had  there  been  a   consider-


xviii.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  233

able  interval  between  Mrs.  Paget's  conversation  with  the  Sister  and  her
narration  of  it  to  someone  else,  it  would  not  be  hard  to  suppose  that  the
incident  of  the  man's  asking  the  hour,  combined  with  her  own  and  her
daughter's  experience  at  that  exact  time,  had  gradually  led  to  her
imagining  the  crowning  detail  of  his  mentioning  the  gas ;  but  that  this
detail,  if  it  was  not  reported  to  her,  should  have  got  immediately  im-  ^  .
pressed  upon  her  mind  as  though  it  had  been  reported,  seems  decidedly  ' ;
less  likely  than  that  it  has  slipped  from  the  memory  of  the  Sisters,  for
whom  it  would  have  no  special  interest,  since  Mrs.  Paget  did  not  tell  them
what  had  occurred  at  home.  And  there  is  a  further  point  which  tells,  I
think,  decidedly  in  favour  of  this  view.  On  the  supposition  that  the  man
made  the  remark  about  the  gas,  it  is  very  easy  to  see  how  Mrs.  Paget
may  have  made  the  mistake  about  his  hearing  the  clock  strike ;  for  the
remark  would  become  the  fact  of  interest,  and  the  manner  in  which  the
man  ascertained  the  time  would  retain  no  significance.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  the  only  thing  reported  to  Mrs.  Paget  had  been  that  the  man  asked
and  was  told  what  the  time  was,  that  would  have  served  completely  to
stamp  the  coincidence,  and  to  suggest  the  direction  of  the  man's  thoughts,
and  would  thus  have  given  a  quite  sufficient  impressiveness  and  complete-
ness to  the  story.  Briefly,  the  introduction  of  the  clock,  on  the  first
hypothesis,  seems  more  easily  comprehensible  than  the  introduction  of  the
gas,  on  the  second.

Mrs.  Paget  showed  me   the   scene   of  the  incident.     The  gas  burner
is  at  the  end    of    a  long  passage,  just  outside  her    and    her    daughter's
rooms.     The  house  is  a  very  quiet  one,  standing  in    grounds    far    back
from    the  road ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  imagine    any  sort    of    real    sound
that  could  possibly  have  been  mistaken  for    heavy  steps   twice   traversing
the  length  of  the  passage,  the  doors  of  both  hearers  (it  will  be  remembered)
being  open.     Mrs.  Paget  says,  moreover,  that  Arthur   Dunn's  tread  was
decidedly  peculiar.     That  the  steps  were  not  those  of   the  man-servant  for  ij^^a^
the  time  being  was  practically  proved  (apart  from  his  own  assertion  next     «^  ^
day)  by  the  fact  that  the  gas   was  not  turned   ofi";  for   he  could    have   no    j^,*^^^^
possible  duty  in  that  corner  of  the  house  at  night,   except  to  turn  it  off* ;    «.  ^
and  there  was  no  other  man  in  the  house.     Mrs.  Paget  and  her  daughter     7*^  ^.
both  confirmed  the  statement  that  they  have  had  no  other  hallucinations.    ■^'"A''
They  are  far  from  being    credulous  or  superstitious    witnesses ;  but  the
strangeness  of  this  incident  made  an  extremely  strong  impression  upon
them.]

In  the  next  case  the  coincidence  seems  again  to  have  been  close  %  Uff  i.
to  within  a  very  few  minutes  ;  but  the  form  which  the  hallucination  fr^^^
(if  it  was  one)  took  had  no  special  connection  with  anything  that  we
can  conceive  to  have  been  present  to  the  agent's  mind.  Bells  are,
however,  a  not  uncommon  form  of  purely  subjective  impression.^  And
if  the  principle  of  telepathic  hallucinations  be  granted,  one  would
naturally  expect  that  the  rudimentary  specimens  of  that  class —
specimens  which  do  not  suggest  any  conscious  idea  of  the  agent,  but

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  503,  and  above,  p.  127,  note.


234  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

are  projected,  as  it  were,  blindly  under  the  telepathic  impulse — should
follow  the  ordinary  lines  of  hallucinations  in  general.  The  account  is
from  the  Misses  Lafone,  of  Hanworth  Park,  Feltham.

"January,   1884.

(344)  "  My  sister  and  I  were  both  much  astonished  at  hearing  our  church
'  bell  ring  in  a  loud  and  hurried  manner,  at  a  few  minutes  before  7.30,  one
evening,  when  we  knew  no  service  was  to  take  place.  Our  church  is
within  5  minutes'  walk  across  fields,  and  all  the  neighbouring  churches  a
jnile  or  more  ofi".  We  talked  together  of  the  occurrence,  and  mentioned  it
at  dinner,  but  did  not  connect  it  with  anyone  in  particular.  The  next  day
we  heard  an  aunt  had  died  at  7.20  the  evening  before,  but  did  not  connect
I  the  two  facts  until  a  few  days  afterwards,  when  we  made  inquiries,  and
found  no  one  had  been  in  the  church  at  the  time  we  imagined  the  bell  to
be  ringing.  This  took  place  19th  September,  1883.  No  one  else  in  the
house  heard  the  bell."

The  Times  obituary  confirms  Sept.  19,  1883,  as  the  date  of  death.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Lafone  adds  : —

"  There  was  no  particular  bond  of  sympathy  betwqen  my  aunt  and  my
sister  and  myself,  although  we  knew  her  very  well.  We  were  aware  she
was  seriously  ill,  but  being  very  much  occupied  with  another  subject
the  evening  she  died,  had  hardly  thought  of  her  at  all.  We  are  not
conscious  of  ever  before  experiencing  '  auditory  hallucinations.'

"Mary  E.  Lafone."
"March  18th,  1884.

"  My  sister's  account  of  the  bells  we  heard  is  perfectly  correct.  We
were  dressing  for  dinner  at  7.30,  in  difierent  rooms,  when  I  was  attracted
by  the  sound  of  the  bells,  as  I  supposed  from  our  church,  ringing  in  a  most
eccentric  way,  and  having  called  to  my  sister  found  that  she  heard  them
too.  We  discussed  the  possibility  of  someone  being  shut  in,  as  there  was
no  service,  and  the  sounds  were  too  irregular  and  too  quick  to  be  tolling  for
a  death.  We  mentioned  the  subject  downstairs,  and  then  forgot  it,  until
having  heard  the  following  day  that  our  aunt  had  died  at  7.20,  just  at  the
time  we  were  listening  to  the  bells.  We  made  inquiries  as  to  whether
anyone  had  been  in  the  church  at  the  time,  but  could  not  find  that  anyone
had,  or  that  the  bells  were  heard  by  anyone  besides  ourselves.

"Jenny  Lafone."

[I  have  been  to  Hanworth,  and  realised  the  relation  of  the  house  to  the
village  church,  and  also  to  Feltham  Church.  There  seems  to  be  no
possibility  whatever  that  the  sound  heard  could  have  proceeded  from  the
latter,  or  any  more  distant  edifice.  Feltham  Church  lies  more  than
a  mile  to  the  back  of  the  house  ;  the  intervening  space  is  thickly  clothed
with  trees  ;  and  the  Misses  Lafone's  windows  look  out  in  the  directly
opposite  direction.  Miss  Lafone  does  not  recall  that  she  has  ever  so  much
as  heard  the  Feltham  bell,  even  faintly ;  whereas  the  sounds  on  this
occasion  appeared  louder  even  than  those  which  the  neighbouring  church-
bell  usually  produced.  It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  this  neighbouring
bell  should  have  been  rung  at  this  time  (on  a  week-day  evening  when  there
is  never  any  service),   and   in  this  eccentric  way ;  and  it  is  even  more


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  235

unlikely  that,  if  so  rung,  it  should  have  been  unobserved  by  others.  The
result  of  my  visit  is  that  I  find  it  all  but  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  case
"was  one  of  collective  hallucination — whether  connected  with  the  death  of
the  aunt  or  not  is  of  course  a  different  question.]

I  now  come  to  cases  where  the  sense  of  sight  was  involved.  And
I  may  begin  with  a  few  specimens  where  the  experiences  of  the
several  percipients  were  either  not  exactly  simultaneous  or  not
exactly  similar,  and  where,  therefore,  the  theory  that  they  were
severally  derived  from  the  agent  receives  some  slight  support.  (Com-
pare in  this  respect  the  auditory  case,  No.  36.)

In  the  following  example  the  experience  of  the  second  percipient

included   an   auditory  as   well  as    a    visual    impression,    and   was,

moreover,  separated  by  an    interval   of    3  hours   from  that  of  the

first.     The  narrator   is   Mrs.    Cox,   who   wrote   from  Summer  Hill,

Queenstown,  Ireland.

"December  26th,  1883.  ♦<

(345)  "  On  the  night  of  the  21st  August,  1869,  between  the  hours  of  ,,
8  and  9  o'clock,  I  was  sitting  in  my  bedroom  in  my  mother's  house  at
Devonport,  my  nephew,  a  boy  aged  seven  years,  being  in  bed  in  the  next
room,  when  I  was  startled  by  his  suddenly  running  into  my  room,  and
exclaiming  in  a  frightened  tone,  '  Oh,  auntie,  I  have  just  seen  my  father
walking  around  my  bed.'  I  replied,  '  Nonsense,  you  must  have  been
dreaming.'  He  said,  '  ISTo,  I  have  not,'  and  refused  to  return  to  the  room.
Finding  that  I  was  unable  to  persuade  him  to  go  back,  I  put  him  in  my
own  bed.  Between  10  and  111  myself  retired  to  rest.  I  think  about
an  hour  afterwards,  on  looking  towards  the  fireplace,  I  distinctly  saw,  to  i"
my  astonishment,  the  form  of  my  brother  seated  in  a  chair,  and  what
particularly  struck  me  was  the  deathly  pallor  of  his  face.  (My  nephew
was  at  this  time  fast  asleep.)  I  was  so  frightened,  knowing  that  at  this
time  my  brother  was  in  Hong  Kong,  China,  that  I  put  my  head  under  the
bed  clothes.  Soon  after  this  I  plainly  heard  his  voice  calling  me  by
name  ;  my  name  was  repeated  three  times.  The  next  time  I  looked,  he
was  gone.  The  following  morning  I  told  my  mother  and  sister  what  had
occurred,  and  said  I  should  raake  a  note  of  it,  which  I  did.  The  next
mail  from  China  brought  us  the  sad  intelligence  of  my  brother's  death,
which  took  place  on  the  21st  August,  1869,  in  the  Harbour  of  Hong
Kong,  suddenly,  [of  heat-apoplexy].  :"  Minnie  Cox."

We  have  received  from  the  Admiralty  an  official  confirmation  of  the
date  of  the  death.

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,   Mr.   Cox  (at  present  Secretary  to  the
Naval  Commander-in-Chief  at  Devonport)  wrote  : —

"February  21st,  1884.
"  As  my  wife  is  too  unwell  to  reply  to  your  letter  she  has  asked  me  to
state  with  reference  to  your  question  on  the  subject  of  the  appearance  of
her  brother  to  her,  that : —

"  As  she  has  no  note  now  in  her  possession,   and  as  her  mother  is


236  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

dead,  she  cannot  be  positive  as  to  the  hour  at  which  her  brother  died.
The  circumstance  happened  about  15  years  ago — both  the  persons  she
mentioned  it  to  are  dead.  All  that  she  can  now  state  positively  is  that
she  now  believes  it  must  have  been  after  midnight  when  she  saw  the  ap-
pearance, but  at  the  same  time  she  is  quite  certain  that  her  little  nephew
came  into  her  room  before  midnight.  She  is  sure  that  afterwards,  when
the  news  came  from  China,  the  time  corresponded,  but  has  nothing  to
prove  it.  I  fear  that  she  has  not  sufficient  evidence,  or  in  fact  any
evidence  now  ;  but  it  is  an  old  story  she  has  often  told  me,  and  I  have  not
the  slightest  doubt  that  she  did  see  the  appearance.  "  James  Cox."

In  conversation  Mrs.  Cox  told  me  that  she  was  quite  certain  of  having
put  down  the  date,  and  compared  it  with  the  date  in  the  letter.  She  has
never  had  the  slightest  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  The  child
was  not  in  the  least  given  to  frights,  and  had  no  dread  of  the  dark.

[If  the  time  either  of  Mrs.  Cox's  or  of  her  nephew's  impression
coincided  with  that  of  the  death,  the  first  date  in  the  account  is  of  course
given  wrongly,  as  9  p.m.  in  England  would  correspond  with  about  5  a.m.
of  the  next  day  at  Hong  Kong.  If  the  first  date  is  right,  then  the  per-
cipients' experiences  must  have  followed  the  death  by  some  hours.  It
might  be  suggested  that  Mrs.  Cox's  experience  was  due  to  suggestion
from  her  nephew.  But  it  is  scarcely  probable  that  a  person  who  has  no
tendency  to  hallucinations  should  evolve  one  from  what  she  took  to  be  the
dream  of  a  frightened  child.]

In  the  next  case,  the  difference  between  the  several  impressions
was  perhaps  rather  one  of  degree  than  of  kind.  The  account  is  from
Mr.  T.  N.  Deane,  of  University  Club,  3,  Upper  Merrion  Street,
Dublin,  and  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  the  E,ev.  J.  N.

Hoare,  now  vicar  of  Keswick.

"  1882.
(346)  "  In  the  year  1851,  on  the  4th  of  June,  I  was  in  a  large  bedroom
of  a  country  house  in  the  County  Cork.  The  wiadows  of  the  room  faced  the
River  Lee  ;  both  were  open.  The  air  was  sultry  and  still ;  all  the  inmates
of  the  house  were  out,  with  the  exception  of  my  wife  and  an  intimate
friend  (now  dead),  who  were  with  me  in  the  room.  We  sat  on  three  chairs
near  one  of  the  open  windows,  and  talked  on  ordinary  subjects.  The
old-fashioned  four-post  bed  occupied  the  side  of  the  room  to  my  right,  and
the  only  door  (which  was  open)  was  on  my  left.  We  sat  into  the  twilight,
but  there  was  still  sufficient  light  to  recognise  each  other,  and  see  objects
pretty  clearly.  A  figure  approached  me  from  the  side  of  the  room  occupied
by  the  large  bed,  and  apparently  from  the  side  of  it,  moved  directly
towards  me,  and  placed  its  hand  on  my  shoulder.  It  was  a  female  figure,
but  I  could  not  recognise  the  features.  I  followed  it  to  the  lobby,  but  did
not  see  it  again.  I  returned  to  my  companions,  and  asked  them  had  they
seen  it.  They  replied  in  the  affirmative.  I  said,  '  If  ever  there  was  a
ghost,  that  was  one.'  That  evening  my  mother  was  seized  with  fatal  illness.
Next  morning  I  got  a  telegram  stating  that  she  was  in  extremis,  and  for
hours  before  was  asking  for  me  to  be  sent  for.  On  receipt  of  the  telegram
I  started  for  Dublin,  and  was  just  in  time  to  see  my  mother  before  her


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  237

death.     The  first  person  I  met  was  Mr.  Hoare's  father  [deceased],  to  whom
I  said,  '  My  mother  will  die  !  I  saw  her  last  night.'     "  Thos.  N.  Dbane."

We  find  from  the  obituary  in  the  Freeman's  Journal  that  Lady  Deane
died  on  June  5,  1851,  at  Dublin.

Mrs.  Deane  writes  on  March  7,  1883  : —

"  I  must  say  I  felt  the  presence  more  than  saw  it,  and  it  certainly  came
up  to  where  we  (three  friends)  were  sitting,  All  saw  it  or  felt  it ;  in  fact,
it  was  both,  for  I  could  describe  it  as  a  misty  shadow  passing  through  the
chamber,  and  went  out  silently.  Of  course  we  did  not  turn  round  until
we  all  three  said,  '  Was  not  there  some  one  near  the  chair  who  is  gone
from  the  room  1 '  Then  one  of  our  number  got  up  and  inquired  had  any
one  been  in,  and  all  were  absent  from  where  we  were — some  downstairs  in
other  sitting-rooms  reading,  others  in  the  garden,  and  the  servants  at  tea
in  their  kitchen  ;  then  it  appeared  doubly  odd,  and  it  seized  hold  of  one's
mind  there  had  been  an  apparition  or  vision.  We  had  been  talking  of  the  1 1
lady  at  the  time  she  appeared  to  us.  "  Henrietta  Deane."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Deane  says,   "  Neither  my  wife  nor  I  ever
saw  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  since."

Here  the  vaguer  form  of  Mrs.  Deane's  impression,  as  compared
to  that  of  her  husband,  seems  a  good  example  of  rudimentary  or
arrested  development  (see  p.  73,  note).

The  following  case  is  one  that  would  not  have  been  included
here,  but  for  the  favourable  opinion  which  our  colleague,  Mr.  Richard
Hodgson,  formed  of  the  principal  witness.  The  account  was  written
down  by  Miss  Atkinson,  of  Park  Head,  Jesmond  Dene,  Newcastle-on-
Tjrne,  and  is  signed  by  Mrs.  Reed,  of  7,  Miller's  Lane,  Byker  Hill,  New-
castle-on-Tyne,  the  younger  of  the  two  percipients ;  the  other  is  dead.

"July,  1884.

(347)  "  It  was  at  Christmas  time.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Adams  and  their
daughter  Annie  had  been  spending  the  evening  with  some  friends,  not  far
from  home.  Annie  (a  girl  of  12  at  the  time),  along  with  another  girl,  was  j|.
sent  home  to  fetch  something  that  had  been  forgotten.  On  entering  the
kitchen,  Annie  said  to  the  other  girl,  '  See,  there's  a  man  sitting  by  the
fireside.'  The  other  girl  said  there  was  nobody  there.  The  two  went  up-
stairs to  get  what  they  had  been  sent  for,  when  Annie  said  '  There's  the
man  again.' i  The  other  girl  persisted  that  there  was  nobody  there.
Having  got  what  was  wanted,  they  returned  to  the  friend's  house.  On
coming  home  late  at  night,  Mrs.  Adams  said  to  her  husband — '  There's  my
brother  standing  beside  that  house  ;  don't  you  see  him,  all  in  white  1 '
Mr.  Adams  did  not  see  him.  A  day  or  two  afterwards  she  received  a
letter  to  say  that  her  brother  was  killed  down  the  pit,  the  night  and  the
hour  corresponding  with  the  time  that  Annie  saw  the  man  (as  she  said)

1  For  the  feature  of  repetition  in  visual  hallucinations,  see  cases  159,  160,  184,  213,
240,  503,  519,  540.  In  Vol.  i.,  p.  414,  second  note,  I  mentioned  an  example  in  my  collec-
tion of  subjective  cases,  for  which  I  am  now  allowed  to  name  Mr.  J.  Champ,  of  High
Street,  Chelmsford,  as  my  authority.  What  he  saw  (after  a  fatiguing  march)  was  a  gro-
tesque, parti-coloured  figure,  about  as  wide  as  high,  which  appeared  on  the  wall  of  the
room,  disappeared,  and  re-appeared  after  an  interval  of  a  few  minutes.


238  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

sitting  by  her  mother's  hearth.  Annie  had  never  seen  her  uncle,  as  she
had  always  travelled  from  place  to  place  with  the  regiment,  and  had  never
been  taken  to  the  colliery  village  where  her  mother's  family  lived.

"  This  is  a  correct  statement.  "Annie  Reed."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  Reed's  uncle  was
crushed  by  a  fall  of  stone  in  the  Washington  coal  mine  on  December  29,
1862  ;  which  confirms  the  first  words  of  the  account.

Miss  Atkinson  tells  us  that  Mrs.  Adams,  unlike  her  husband,  was  of  a
superstitious  turn  of  mind.     She  adds  on  July  31,  1884  ; —

"  I  have  been  to  see  Mrs.  Reed,  but  cannot  say  I  have  gained  much
information.  She  says  that  the  figure  she  saw  upstairs  was  the  same  as
she  had  seen  sitting  by  the  fireside  downstairs.  She  cannot  give  any
definite  information  about  the  girl  who  was  with  her,  except  that  her  name
was  Sophie  Arnup,  and  that  she  belonged  to  Norwich,  where  the  incident
occurred.  Mrs.  Reed  does  not  know  whether  she  is  living  or  dead,  or
whether  married.  Mrs.  Reed  cannot  remember  that  there  were  any
differences  noted  when  she  and  her  mother  talked  about  what  they  had
seen.  She  mentioned  about  the  man  in  white  sitting  by  the  fireside,  as
soon  as  she  reached  the  friend's  house  where  her  mother  was,  and  before
her  mother  returned.  She  cannot  remember  any  details  about  face  or
dress,  except  that  the  dress  was  white  ;  she  was  too  frightened  to  observe
carefully,  and  I  am  glad  to  find  she  is  too  truthful  to  set  her  imagination
to  work,  and  fancy  she  remembers  what  she  does  not.  This  is  the  only
hallucination  that  she  ever  had.  "  E.   E.   Atkinson."

Mr.  Hodgson  writes  in  September,  1884  : —

"I  have  talked  with  Mr.  Adams  [now  resident  at  144,  High  Street,
Jarrow-on-Tyne],  who  told  me  the  story  as  given  above.  The  pit  where
the  brother  was  killed  was  in  the  Durham  district ;  the  figure  was  seen
at  Norwich.  I  have  also  seen  Mrs.  Reed,  who  first  saw  the  figure,  and
who  also  told  the  story  as  given  above.  She  impressed  me  as  being
exceptionally  truthful."

[We  might  conceive  that  Mrs.  Adams'  hallucination  was  due  to
apprehensions  caused  by  her  daughter's  account.  But  it  will  be  observed
that  there  had  been  nothing  in  the  daughter's  account  to  suggest  Mrs.
Adams'  brother ;  the  point  therefore  that  Mrs.  Adams  mentioned  her
brother  (which  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt)  is  important.  And  even  if  we
suppose  that  she  was  given  to  apprehensions  about  this  relative,  which  may
have  taken  a  superstitious  colour,  this  would  not  explain  the  other  hal-
lucination, unique  in  her  daughter's  experience,  occurring  on  the  same
evening.  That  the  impressions  were  hallucinations  and  not  illusions,  is
strongly  indicated  by  the  fact  that  neither  of  them  was  shared  by  a
second  person  whose  attention  was  drawn  to  the  appearance  (p.  105,
second  note).]

In  the  remaining  visual  cases,  the  impression  seems  to  have  been
distinct  and  identical  to  all  the  percipients.  I  will  begin  with  a  case
where  it  is  a  question  whether  a  distant  agent  was  or  was  not  the
source  of  the  phenomenon  ;  but  where  the  flashing  of  the  hallucina-
tion from  one  of  the  percipients  to  the  other  seems  specially  well


L


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  239

illustrated,  since  the  figure  which  appeared  was  one  which  the
second  percipient  had  never  seen  in  the  flesh.  The  account  is  first-
hand, though  written  in  the  third  person.  It  is  from  Mrs.  Elgee,
of  18,  Woburn  Road,  Bedford.

"March  1st,  1885.

(348)  "In  the  month  of  November,  1864,  being  detained  in  Cairo,  on
my  way  out  to  India,  the  following  curious  circumstance  occurred  to  me  :-

"  Owing  to  an  unusual  influx  of  travellers,  I,  with  the  young  lady  under  ■!^'-
my  charge  (whom  we  will  call  D.)  and  some  other  passengers  of  the  outward-  ^^  *""  ^j
bound  mail  to  India,  had  to  take  up  our  abode  in  a  somewhat  unfrequented  "^^^
hotel.  The  room  shared  by  Miss  D.  and  myself  was  large,  lofty,  and  ^'S  ■yt-''^
gloomy ;  the  furniture  of  the  scantiest,  consisting  of  two  small  beds,
placed  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  room  and  not  touching  the  walls  at
all,  two  or  three  rush-bottomed  chairs,  a  veiy  small  washing-stand,  and  a
large  old-fashioned  sofa  of  the  settee-sort,  which  was  placed  against  one-
half  of  the  large  folding-doors  which  gave  entrance  to  the  room.  This
settee  was  far  too  heavy  to  be  removed,  unless  by  two  or  three  people.
The  other  half  of  the  door  was  used  for  entrance,  and  faced  the  two  beds.
Eeeling  rather  desolate  and  strange,  and  Miss  D.  being  a  nervous  person,
I  locked  the  door,  and,  taking  out  the  key,  put  it  under  my  pillow  ;  but
on  Miss  D.  remarking  that  there  might  be  a  duplicate  which  could  open
the  door  from  outside,  I  put  a  chair  against  the  door,  with  my  travelling-
bag  on  it,  so  arranged  that,  on  any  pressure  outside,  one  or  both  must  fall
on  the  bare  floor,  and  make  noise  enough  to  rouse  me.  We  then
proceeded  to  retire  to  bed,  the  one  I  had  chosen  being  near  the  only
window  in  the  room,  which  opened  with  two  glazed  doors,  almost  to  the
floor.  These  doors,  on  account  of  the  heat,  I  left  open,  first  assuring
myself  that  no  communication  from  the  outside  could  be  obtained.  The
window  led  on  to  a  small  balcony,  which  was  isolated,  and  was  three
stories  above  the  ground.

"  I  suddenly  woke  from  a  sound  sleep  with  the  impression  that
somebody  had  called  me,  and,  sitting  up  in  bed,  to  my  unbounded
astonishment,  by  the  clear  light  of  early  dawn  coming  in  through  the
large  window  before-mentioned,  I  beheld  the  figure  of  an  old  and  very
valued  friend  whom  I  knew  to  be  in  England.  He  appeared  as  if  most
eager  to  speak  to  me,  and  I  addressed  him  with,  '  Good  gracious  !  how
did  you  come  here? '  So  clear  was  the  figure,  that  I  noted  every  detail
of  his  dress,  even  to  three  onyx  shirt  studs  which  he  always  wore.  He
seemed  to  come  a  step  nearer  to  me,  when  he  suddenly  pointed  across  the
room,  and  on  my  looking  round,  I  saw  Miss  D.  sitting  up  in  her  bed,
gazing  at  the  figure  with  every  expression  of  terror.  On  looking  back,
my  friend  seemed  to  shake  his  head,  and  retreated  step  by  step,  slowly,
till  he  seemed  to  sink  through  that  portion  of  the  door  where  the  settee
stood.  I  never  knew  what  happened  to  me  after  this  ;  but  my  next
remembrance  is  of  bright  sunshine  pouring  through  the  window.  Gradually
the  remembrance  of  what  had  happened  came  back  to  me,  and  the  question
arose  in  my  mind,  had  I  been  dreaming,  or  had  I  seen  a  visitant  from
another  world  1 — the  bodily  presence  of  my  friend  being  utterly  impossible.


240  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

Remembering  that  Miss  D.  had  seemed  aware  of  the  figure  as  well  as
myself,  I  determined  to  allow  the  test  of  my  dream  or  vision  to  be
whatever  she  said  to  me  upon  the  subject,  I  intending  to  say  nothing  to
her  unless  she  spoke  to  me.  As  she  seemed  still  asleep,  I  got  out  of  bed,
examined  the  door  carefully,  and  found  the  chair  and  my  bag  untouched,
and  the  key  under  my  pillow ;  the  settee  had  not  been  touched,  nor  had
that  portion  of  the  door  against  which  it  was  placed  any  appearance  of
being  opened  for  years.

"  Presently,  on  Miss  D.  waking  up,  she  looked  about  the  room,  and,
noticing  the  chair  and  bag,  made  some  remark  as  to  their  not  having
been  much  use.  I  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  1 '  and  then  she  said,
'  Why,  that  man  who  was  in  the  room  this  morning  must  have  got
in  somehow.'  She  then  proceeded  to  describe  to  me  exactly  what  I
myself  had  seen.  Without  giving  any  satisfactory  answer  as  to  what  I
had  seen,  I  made  her  rather  angry  by  affecting  to  treat  the  matter  as  a
fancy  on  her  part,  and  showed  her  the  key  still  under  my  pillow,  and  the
chair  and  bag  untouched.  I  then  asked  her,  if  she  was  so  sure  that  she
had  seen  somebody  in  the  room,  did  not  she  know  who  it  was  ?  '  No,'
said  she,  '  I  have  never  seen  him  before,  nor  anyone  like  him.'  I  said,
'  Have  you  ever  seen  a  photograph  of  him  1 '  She  said,  '  No.'  This  lady
never  was  told  what  1  saw,  and  yet  described  exactly  to  a  third  person
what  we  both  had  seen.

"Of  course,  I  was  under  the  impression  my  friend  was  dead.  Such,
however,  was  not  the  case ;  and  I  met  him  some  four  years  later,
when,  without  telling  him  anything  of  my  experience  in  Cairo,  I  asked
him,  in  a  joking  way,  could  he  remember  what  he  was  doing  on  a
certain  night  in  November,  1864.  '  Well,'  he  said,  '  you  require  me  to
have  a  good  memory ; '  but  after  a  little  reflection  he  replied,  '  Why  that
was  the  time  I  was  so  harassed  with  trying  to  decide  for  or  against  the
appointment  which  was  ofiered  me,  and  I  so  much  wished  you  could  have
been  with  me  to  talk  the  matter  over.  I  sat  over  the  fire  quite  late,
trying  to  think  what  you  would  have  advised  me  to  do.'  A  little  cross-
questioning  and  comparing  of  dates  brought  out  the  curious  fact  that,
allowing  for  the  difierence  of  time  between  England  and  Cairo,  his
meditations  over  the  fire  and  my  experience  were  simultaneous.  Having
told  him  the  circumstances  above  narrated,  I  asked  him  had  he  been  aware
of  any  peculiar  or  unusual  sensation.  He  said  none,  only  that  he  had
wanted  to  see  me  very  much.

"  E.  H.  Elgee."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Elgee  says  : —

"  I  fear  it  is  quite  impossible  to  get  any  information  from  Miss  D.
She  married  soon  after  we  reached  India,  and  I  never  met  her  since,  nor
do  I  know  where  she  is,  if  alive.  I  quite  understand  the  value  of  her
corroboration;  and  at  the  time  she  told  the  whole  circumstance  to  a  fellow-
traveller,  who  repeated  it  to  me,  and  her  story  and  mine  agreed  in  every
particular,  save  that  to  her  the  visitant  was  a  complete  stranger  ;  and  her
tale  was  quite  unbiassed  by  mine,  as  I  always  treated  hers  as  a  fancy,  and
never  acknowledged  I  had  been  aware  of  anything  unusual  having  taken
place  in  our  room  at  Cairo.  I  never  have  seen,  or  fancied  I  saw,  any  one
before  or  since.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  241

"  My  visitant,  also,  is  dead,  or  he  would,  I  know,  have  added  his
testimony,  small  as  it  was,  to  mine.  He  was  a  very  calm,  quiet,  clever,
scientific  man,  not  given  to  vain  fancies  on  any  subject,  and  certainly  was
not  aware  of  any  desire  of  appearing  to  me."

[This  seems  at  any  rate  an  interesting  example  of  collective  hallucina-
tion ;  though  as  regards  its  supposed  origination  in  the  thoughts  of  Mrs.
Elgee's  friend  in  England,  one  may  doubt  whether,  after  a  lapse  of  4  years,
complete  certainty  as  to  the  identity  of  dates  was  attainable.  If  there
has  been  an  error  on  this  point,  the  case  would  properly  belong  to  the
preceding  section.]

The  next  account  (which  has  been  very  slightly  condensed)  was
written  down  for  us,  in  1883,  by  the  late  Miss  Katherine  M.  Weld,
one  of  the  two  percipients,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  James  Britten,  of
Isleworth.  It  proves  to  be  identical  with  a  former  account,  as  to
which  Miss  Weld  wrote  to  Mr.  Wilfrid  Ward,  of  Sherborne  House,
Basingstoke,  on  May  19,  1883,  as  follows : —

"The  account  was  written  about  15  years  ago;  it  was  an  account
which  appeared  in  a  book  and  in  the  newspapers  at  that  time,  and  which
I,  at  the  request  of  friends,  revised  and  corrected.  I  believe  every  word
of  the  account  to  be  perfectly  true,  as  such  things  become  impressed  on
one's  mind ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  account
was  not  written  at  the  time,  but  many  years  afterwards.  Therefore  I  can
only  say  that  as  far  as  I  remember  every  detail  is  exact."

"  The  Lodge,  Lymington.

(349)  "  Philip  Weld  was  the  youngest  son  of  Mr.  James  Weld,  of
Archers  Lodge,  near  Southampton,  and  a  nephew  of  the  late  Cardinal  Weld.
He  was  sent  by  his  father,  in  1842,  to  St.  Edmund's  College,  near  Ware,  in
Hertfordshire,  for  his  education.  He  was  a  well  conducted,  amiable  boy,
and  much  beloved  by  his  masters  and  fellow-students.  In  the  afternoon  of
April  16th,  1845,  Philip,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  masters  and  some  of
his  companions,  went  to  boat  on  the  river,  which  was  a  sport  he  enjoyed
much.  When  one  of  the  masters  remarked  that  it  was  time  to  return  to
the  college,  Philip  begged  to  have  one  row  more ;  the  master  consented
and  they  rowed  to  the  accustomed  turning  point.  On  arriving  there,  in
turning  the  boat,  Philip  accidentally  fell  out  into  a  very  deep  part  of  the
river,  and,  notwithstanding  every  effort  that  was  made  to  save  him,  was
drowned.

"  His  corpse  was  brought  back  to  the  college,  and  the  Very  Rev.  Dr.
Cox  (the  president)  was  immensely  shocked  and  grieved.  He  made  up
his  mind  to  go  himself  to  Mr.  Weld,  at  Southampton.  He  set  off  the
same  afternoon,  and  passing  through  London,  reached  Southampton  the
next  day,  and  drove  from  thence  to  Archers  Lodge,  the  residence  of  Mr.
Weld ;  but  before  entering  the  grounds  he  saw  Mr.  Weld  at  a  short
distance  from  his  gate,  walking  towards  the  town.  Dr.  Cox  immediately
stopped  the  carriage,  alighted,  and  was  about  to  address  Mr.  Weld,  when
he  prevented  him  by  saying  : —

" '  You   need   not  say  one   word,    for   I   know  that   Philip   is  dead.

VOL.    II.  K


242  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

Yesterday  afternoon  I  was  walking  with  my  daughter,  Katherine,  and  we
suddenly  saw  him.  He  was  standing  on  the  path,  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  turnpike  road,  between  two  persons,  one  of  whom  was  a  youth  dressed
in  a  black  robe.  My  daughter  was  the  first  to  perceive  them  and
exclaimed,  "  Oh,  papa  !  did  you  ever  see  anything  so  like  Philip  as  that  is  ? "
"  Like  him,"  I  answered,  "  why  it  is  he."  Strange  to  say,  my  daughter
'  thought  nothing  of  the  circumstance,  beyond  that  we  had  seen  an  extra-
ordinary likeness  of  her  brother.  We  walked  on  towards  these  three
figures.  Philip  was  looking,  with  a  smiling,  happy  expression  of  counte-
n\  .  .  nance,  at  the  young  man  in  a  black  robe,  who  was  shorter  than
ti  h^  ^  ^himself.  Suddenly  they  all  seemed  to  me  to  have  vanished  ;  I  saw  nothing
lA.  f/*"''^  'but  a  countryman,  whom  I  had  before  seen  through  the  three  figures,
which  gave  me  the  impression  that  they  were  spirits.  I,  however,  said
nothing  to  anyone,  as  I  was  fearful  of  alarming  my  wife.  I  looked
out  anxiously  for  the  post  the  following  morning.  To  my  delight,  no  letter
came.  I  forgot  that  letters  from  Ware  came  in  the  afternoon,  and  my
fears  were  quieted,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  extraordinary  circum-
stance until  I  saw  you  in  the  carriage  outside  my  gate.  Then  everything
returned  to  my  mind,  and  I  could  not  feel  a  doubt  that  you  came  to  tell
me  of  the  death  of  my  dear  boy.'

"  The  reader  may  imagine  how  inexpressibly  astonished  Dr.  Cox  was
at  these  words.  He  asked  Mr.  Weld  if  he  had  ever  before  seen  the  young
man  in  the  black  robe,  at  whom  Philip  was  looking  with  such  a  happy
smile.  Mr.  Weld  answered  that  he  had  never  before  seen  him,  but
that  his  countenance  was  so  indelibly  impressed  on  his  mind  that  he
was  certain  he  should  know  him  at  once  anywhere.  Dr.  Cox  then
related  to  the  afflicted  father  all  the  circumstances  of  his  son's  death,
which  had  taken  place  at  the  very  hour  in  which  he  appeared  to  his  father
and  sister.  Mr.  Weld  went  to  the  funeral  of  his  son,  and  as  he  left  the
church,  after  the  sad  ceremony,  looked  round  to  see  if  any  of  the  religious
at  all  resembled  the  young  man  he  had  seen  with  Philip,  but  he  could  not
trace  the  slightest  likeness  in  any  of  them.  About  four  months  after,  he
and  his  family  paid  a  visit  to  his  brother,  Mr.  George  Weld,  at  Seagram
Hall,  in  Lancashire.  One  day  he  walked  with  his  daughter  Katherine  to
the  neighbouring  village  of  Chipping,  and  after  attending  a  service  at  the
church  called  on  the  priest.  It  was  a  little  time  before  the  rev.  father
was  at  leisure  to  come  to  them,  and  they  amused  themselves  meantime  by
examining  the  prints  hanging  on  the  walls  of  the  room.  Suddenly  Mr.
Weld  stopped  before  a  picture  which  had  no  name,  that  you  could  see,
written  under  it  (as  the  frame  covered  the  bottom),  and  exclaimed  '  That  is
the  person  whom  I  saw  with  Philip  ;  I  do  not  know  whose  likeness  this  print
is,  but  I  am  certain  that  it  was  that  person  whom  I  saw  with  Philip.'
The  priest  entered  the  room  a  few  moments  afterwards,  and  was  im-
mediately questioned  by  Mr.  Weld  concerning  the  print.  He  answered
that  it  was  a  print  of  St.  Stanislaus  Kostka,  and  supposed  to  be  a  very
good  likeness  of  the  young  saint.

*'  Mr.  Weld  was  much  moved  at  hearing  this ;  for  St.  Stanislaus  was  a
Jesuit,  who  died  when  quite  young,  and  Mr.  Weld's  father  having  been  a
great  benefactor  to  that  Order,  his  family  were  supposed  to  be  under  the
particular  protection  of  the  Jesuit  saints  ;  also,  Philip  had  been  led  of  late,
by    various    circumstances,  to    a    particular  devotion    to    St.  Stanislaus.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  243

Moreover,  St.  Stanislaus  is  supposed  to  be  the  special  advocate  of  drowned
men,  as  is  mentioned  in  his  life.  The  rev.  father  instantly  presented  the
picture  to  Mr.  Weld,  who,  of  course,  received  it  with  the  greatest
veneration,  and  kept  it  until  his  death.  His  wife  valued  it  equally,  and
at  her  death  it  passed  into  the  possession  of  the  daughter  [the  narrator],
who  saw  the  apparition  at  the  same  time  he  did,  and  it  is  now  in  her
possession."

In  answer  to  some  questions  put  by  Mr.  Ward,  Miss  Weld  wrote  on
June  20th,  1883  :—

"  I  will  repeat  the  questions  you  ask,  to  make  the  answers  more  clear.

"'Did  you  as  well  as  your  father,  think  the  disappearance  strange?' —
No  ;  I  thought  no  more  about  it.  i

'"Did  your  father,  before  Dr.  Cox  spoke  to  him,  look  upon  the
apparition  as  significant  of  some  mishap  to  his  son  V — Yes  ;  he  thought
much  about  it,  and  was  very  anxious  for  the  arrival  of  the  letters  the  next
morning ;  but  he  did  not  speak  of  the  matter  until  afterwards.  He  had
frightened  my  mother  so  much  on  a  former  occasion  that  he  had  promised
never  to  speak  of  such  things  again."

Miss  Weld  adds  in  another  letter  : —

"  When  I  saw  Philip,  I  thought  no  more  of  it  than  one  does  in  seeing
a  great  and  unexpected  likeness  in  a  stranger  to  some  absent  friend.  The
matter  passed  out  of  my  mind  so  completely  that  I  never  felt  a  sensation  of
uneasiness.  I  did  not  remember  the  circumstance  until  the  arrival  of
Dr.  Cox,  and  the  announcement  of  my  brother's  death.  I  saw  that  two
persons  were  walking  with  the  young  lad  who  so  closely  resembled  my
brother.  He  looked  happy  and  smiling  ;  but  I  neither  remarked  their
countenance  nor  dress ;  consequently  I  did  not  recognise  the  print  in  the
parlour  of  the  priest."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  this  was  her  only  experience  of
a  sensory  hallucination.  Miss  Weld  adds  :  "I  never  before  or  since  the
event  have  seen  anything  from  the  other  world.  "^

The  apparition  of  St.  Stanislaus  is  quite  consistent  with  the  tele-
pathic hypothesis,  since  we  can  conceive  that  the  idea  of  his  favourite
saint  may  have  been  actually  present  to  the  mind  of  the  drowning
boy ;  but  we  have  no  explanation  of  the  third  phantasmal  figure.
This,  from  its   irrelevance,  is  an  unlikely  feature  to  have  crept  into

1  See  p.  48,  note.

The  following  version  of  the  same  incident,  which  we  have  received  from  a  Fellow
of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,  is  useful  as  illustrating  the  slight  inaccuracies  which
may  creep  into  a  narrative,  without  the  least  affecting  the  essential  point  : —

"I  was  mentioning  this  \i.e.,  a  similar  case]  to  Baron  French,  or  rather  we  were  talk-
ing over  the  incidents  connected  with  it,  when  he  told  me  of  a  strange  occurrence  which
happened  at  the  school  where  he  was,  near  Ware,  in  England,  a  Catholic  college, — presi-
dent, a  Dr.  Cox.  There  was  a  boy  there  of  the  name  of  Weld,  a  very  well-known  Catholic
family.  This  boy  was  accidentally  drowned.  The  father  and  mother  were  at  the  time  at
Southampton,  and  on  the  day  in  question  were  walking  on  the  quay  near  the  shipping.
They  suddenly  saw  the  said  boy  approaching,  and  hurried  to  meet  him,  but  immediately
he  appeared  to  fade  away,  so  that  they  could  see  the  masts  of  the  ships,  and  through  what
had  seemed  to  be  his  body.  The  next  day,  or  the  day  following,  Dr.  Cox  called  on  them,
when  Mr.  Weld  said,  '  I  know  why  you  are  here,  it  is  to  tell  me  that  my  son  is  dead.  I
saw  him  yesterday,  and  knew  then  that  he  had  departed.'  "

VOL.    II.  R    2


244  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

the  memory,  if  not  really  observed  ;  but  it  also  makes  the  hypothesis
of  mistaken  identity  less  improbable  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  As
against  that  hypothesis  we  have  the  fact  that  the  figures  were  seen  in
daylight,  only  a  few  yards  off;  that  their  disappearance  seems  to
have  been  strangely  sudden  ;  and  that,  if  the  narrator's  memory  may
be  trusted  as  to  Mr.  Weld's  spontaneous  recognition  of  the  picture,
the  mistake  on  his  part  would  have  been  a  double  one.  Moreover
it  must  be  observed  that  even  if  the  case  was  one  of  mistaken
identity — of  illusion  and  not  hallucination — the  coincidence  remains
to  be  accounted  for.  If  we  suppose — as  according  to  the  account  I
think  we  may — that  the  eyes  of  the  two  percipients  were  indepen-
dently deluded,  and  that  Mr.  Weld's  delusion  was  not  merely
conjured  up  by  his  daughter's  remark,  we  cannot  ignore  the
improbability  of  two  persons  making  a  mistake  of  the  sort  on  the
very  afternoon  that  the  relative  whom  they  seem  to  see  is  drowned.
How  prodigious  this  improbability  is  may  be  realised  from  a  simple
computation.  Let  us  suppose — surely  a  liberal  estimate — that  it  is
a  common  thing,  which  one  may  suppose  to  have  happened  to  each  of
.  the  percipients,  to  make  in  the  course  of  life  50  equally  remarkable
mistakes  of  identity,  in  an  equally  good  light  and  when  equally
near  to  the  figure  observed ;  and  also  that  the  probability  that  one
particular  relative  of  most  familiar  aspect  will  be  the  subject  of  the
Y^'  mistake  on  any  one  of  these  occasions  amounts  to  ^ — which  is
/'  again  an  extravagant  allowance.  Let  us  further  suppose  that  the
adult  life  of  each  percipient  amounted  to  35  years,  or  12,775  days.
Then,  for  each  percipient,  the  probability  of  making  one  of  the
mistakes  of  identity  on  the  particular  day  that  the  subject  of  the
mistake  dies  is  -^o^f^ ;  and  the  probability  of  the  supposed  combi-
nation of  coincident  mistakes  is  sAo^ .  In  other  words,  the  odds
against  the  occurrence  by  accident  of  the  incident  above  related  are
more  than  26  millions  to  1.  If,  therefore,  the  experiences  were
illusions,  they  may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  been  telepathic
illusions  (see  pp.  62-3.)

We  owe  the  next  account  in  the  first  instance  to  Mrs.  Willink,  of
Lindale  Parsonage,  Grange-over-Sands.  The  three  first-hand  witnesses
all  appear  to  be  persons  of  good  sense  and  of  some  education.  Mrs.
Willink  writes,  on  Sept.  9,  1884  : —

(350)  "  One  night  (Friday)  my  nurse,  Jane,  came  to  tell  me  that  they
had  been  startled  by  seeing  a  ghastly  face  at  the  kitchen  window.  The
servants  had  been  annoyed  for  some  time  previously  by  some  young  men


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  245

coming  to  the  kitchen  window,  and  making  a  noise  on  the  glass,  and
trying  to  look  in.  The  flower  bed  under  the  window  had  been  freshly  dug
up  and  tidied,  and  they  were  hoping  the  visits  had  ceased.  The  dog,
whose  kennel  was  close  to  the  window,  and  who  had  been  put  on  a  long
chain  to  keep  away  these  visitors,  began  to  how],  and  Helen  (now  Mrs.
Robinson),  who  was  sitting  so  as  to  see  through  the  edge  of  the  blind,
looked  up,  and  seeing  a  ghastly  face,  which  she  recognised  as  Mrs.
Robinson's,  told  the  others,  who  got  up  and  drew  the  blind  on  one  side,
and  so  saw  the  face  distinctly.  Their  account  was  that  it  gradually  faded
away  below  the  bottom  of  the  window.  Jane  and  Aggie  then  went  to  the
door,  but  though  the  dog  continued  howling  (as  he  always  does  when  a
death  in  the  village  takes  place),  they  could  see  nothing.

"  I  doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  statement  that  the  apparition  looked  at
Helen  rather  than  at  the  others  ;  she  sat  where  she  could  see  through  the
space  between  the  blind  and  the  edge  of  the  window,  so  naturally  saw  it  first.
Jane  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Robinson,  but  some  time  after,  on  looking  through
a  photograph-book  in  the  village,  she  recognised  the  face,  and  was  then
told  to  whom  it  belonged.  When  she  told  me  on  the  Friday  evening  of
what  they  had  seen,  I  rather  pooh-poohed  the  story,  as  I  found  that  the '
dog's  howling  was  beginning  to  make  them  always  nervous  ;  and  it  was  not  '
until  after  service  on  Sunday  that  I  was  told  how  Mrs.  Robinson  had  been
persuaded  to  go  to  Leeds  to  the  hospital  there,  and  to  undergo  an  opera-
tion, under  which  she  died  on  Friday  afternoon,  I  think,  between  2  and  3.
The  appearance  would  be  between  8  and  9.  Mrs.  Robinson  had  been
servant  to  the  clergyman  here  before  she  married  ;  she  had  been  away
from  the  village  some  time  before  her  death ;  was  always  an  invalid,  but
none  of  us  knew  of  her  being  more  ill  than  usual.

"Margaret  Willink."

We  learn  from  the  clerk  at  Finsthwaite,  where  Mrs.  Robinson  was
buried,  that  she  died  at  the  Leeds  Infirmary  on  March  25th,  1882,  and
a  neighbour  thinks  that  the  hour  was  between  8  and  9  in  the  morning.
Friday  was  the  24th,  not  the  25th ;  and  the  coincidence  was  thus  not  so
close  as  Mrs.  Willink  supposes ;  but  the  interval  probably  did  not  exceed
12  hours.

Mary  Jane  Farrand  says  : —

"  It  was  a  Friday  evening,  of  the  exact  time  I  am  not  sure,  but  it  was
between  half-past  8  and  9  o'clock.  The  other  two  maids,  with  myself,
were  sitting  at  supper  in  the  kitchen,  close  to  the  window,  when  we  all
became  conscious  of  being  watched  by  a  woman  from  the  outside,  whom
the  other  two  immediately  recognised  as  a  person  whom  they  both  knew
as  Mrs.  Robinson.  Before  her  marriage,  she  lived  at  the  parsonage  for
some  time  as  housemaid.  She  looked  intently  upon  each  one,  and  then
turned  her  face  quite  to  the  cook,  looking  slightly  reproachful,  then
pleadingly.  They  asked  one  of  the  other  where  she  could  be  staying,  and
they  said  it  was  strange  for  her  to  be  out  (as  it  rained  heavily)  without
her  bonnet.  One  was  just  about  to  go  and  ask  her  in,  when  we  saw  a
great  change  come  over  the  face,  and  it  looked  like  that  of  a  corpse,  then
disappeared  altogether.  I  never  saw  the  person  previously,  or  remember
ever  hearing  of  her,  however  indirectly.  The  following  Sunday  morning  I
heard  that  she  was  dead  from  Mrs.  Willink.     The  cook,  whom  we  called


246  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

Nell,  was  married  to  John  Robinson  about  two  years  afterwards.  As  we
sat  at  the  table  I  had  such  an  impression  of  the  face,  eyes,  and  front  of  the
hair  as  to  be  able  to  recognise  the  photograph  a  few  months  afterwards,
without  the  least  trouble,  or  being  told.  "  Mary  Jane  Farrand."

A.  Nicholson  (now  Mrs.  Capstick,  of  Silverdale,  Carnforth,)  writes  to
Mary  Jane  Farrand,  on  September  4th,  1884  : —

"  Woodwell.

"  In  answer  to  your  letter  about  the  face  at  the  window,  I  cannot
remember  much  about  it,  except  that  we  were  sitting  at  supper,  and  Nell
happened  to  look  up  at  the  window,  and  said  some  one  was  looking  in,  then
told  us  to  come  and  look.  It  was  like  the  face  of  a  skeleton,  and  we
looked,  and  it  was  a  very  thin  face,  with  large  staring  eyes.  We  still
thought  it  was  some  one  till  you  and  I  went  to  the  door,  but  could  see
nothing.  Nell  was  in  the  kitchen,  and  it  never  moved,  but  was  still  there
when  we  got  back.  It  seemed  to  gradually  fade  out  of  sight.  I  don't
remember  who  passed  the  remark  that  it  was  like  Mrs.  Robinson.

"  A.  NicHOLSOisr."

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Capstick  stated  that  she  has  never  had  any  other
experience  of  a  hallucination.

Mrs.  Willink  writes,  on  September  18th,  1884  : —

"  In  answer  to  your  question  as  to  when  the  servants  told  me  it  was
Mrs.  Robinson's  face  they  saw,  as  far  as  I  recollect  it  was  that  same
evening.  Helen  knew  (as  we  all  did)  that  Mrs.  Robinson  was  ill,  and  had
been  so  for  years  with  an  internal  complaint,  from  which  she  never  could
recover  ;  but  she  did  not  know  that  she  was  any  worse  than  she  had  been
before  she  left  the  village  some  months  before.

"  They  went  out  next  morning  to  look  for  footmarks  on  the  flower  bed,
which  would  have  been  disturbed  by  any  one  standing  at  the  window,  but
there  were  no  traces  of  any."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mary  Jane  Farrand  writes,  on  September
24th,  1884:—

"  When  I  recognised  Mrs.  Robinson's  photograph  I  was  staying  at
Arnside  with  Mrs.  Willink's  children,  and  went  to  visit  a  person  who  had
lived  near  Lindale  and  had  not  long  been  married,  and  she  it  was  who  when
showing  me  the  different  things  in  her  house,  quite  by  chance  took  up  her
album,  and  showed  me  the  photos  of  her  friends,  amongst  them  Mrs.  Robin-
son. I  cannot  quite  remember  whether  or  not  I  told  her  that  I  recognised
the  face ;  for  it  seems  so  long  ago  to  remember  each  fact,  and  I  should  not
like  to  assert  what  I  did  not  feel  confident  about,  but  you  certainly  may
write  to  her  to  ask  her.

"  Never  before  had  I  seen  anything  of  the  kind,  although  I  had  heard
of  similar  events,  but  was  greatly  wanting  in  faith  with  regard  to  such
things  happening,  and  thought  it  but  a  fancy  in  others,  until  I  saw  Mrs.
Robinson  [i.e.,  the  photograph]."

She  mentions,  however,  that  she  has  had  two  subjective  hallucinations,
which  fell  within  a  few  days  of  one  another — one  representing  Mrs.  Willink,
and  the  other  a  fellow-servant.

Mrs.  Jackson  Thompson,  of  Ashmeadow  Lodge,  Arnside,  Grange-over-
Sands,  writes,  in  February,  1886  : —


XVIII.]     .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  247

"  The  only  remark  I  remember  Mary  Jane  Farrand  making  on  the
late  Mrs.  John  Robinson's  photograph  was  that  it  resembled  the  face
which  appeared  at  the  Lindale  Parsonage  kitchen  window.

"  Charlotte  Thompson."

[The  evidence  of  "  ISTell "  (now  Mrs.  Robinson),  the  third  witness,  will
be  found  in  the  "  Additions  and  Corrections "  at  the  beginning  of  this
volume.]

The  next  account  is  from  Mrs.  Bennett,  of  Edward  Street,  Stone.

"March,  1882.

(351)  "My  daughter,  Annie,  and  I  had  been  drinking  tea  with  the  late
Mrs.  Smith  and  Miss  Moore,  and  talking  about  their  brother  Preston  being
very  ill  and  not  expected  to  recover,  and  were  returning  home  in  the
evening,  when  between  the  little  wicket  which  opens  out  of  the  Vicarage
field  and  Mrs.  Newbold's  house  we  met  the  identical  man  in  face,  form,  and
figure,  dressed  as  he  was  always  wont ;  slouched  hat,  old  frock  coat,  open
in  front,  knee-breeches  and  gaiters,  with  a  long  stick.  He  passed  so  near
us  that  we  shrank  aside  to  make  way  for  him.  As  soon  as  we  got  to  Mrs.
Newbold's  she  exclaimed,  '  So  Preston  Moore  is  dead  ! '  when  we  both
answered  in  a  breath,  '  Oh,  no,  we  have  just  seen  him  ! '

"We  found,  in  fact,  that  he  had  died  about  half  an  hour  before  he
appeared  to  us.  "J.  Bennett."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bennett  adds,  on  Dec.  19,  1883  : —

"  We  cannot  call  to  mind  anyone  at  all  resembling  the  individual  in
question ;  his  appearance,  dress  and  gait  were  utterly  unlike  anyone  else
residing  in  or  about  the  neighbourhood."

We  learn  from  the  Rev.  A.  J.  Wright,  Vicar  of  Stone,  that  the  death
occurred  on  April  13th,  1860.

The  Rev.  Samuel  Plant  writes  to  us  from  Weston  Vicarage,  Stafibrd  : —

"July  8th,  1885.

"  I  know  very  well  the  lady  who,  with  her  daughter,  saw  the
apparition  of  Moore  on  the  day  of  his  death,  and  I  have  every  reason  to
believe  that  she  would  not  deviate  from  the  truth  in  any  respect.  I  have
several  times  heard  her  account  of  it."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes,  on  December  17,  1883  : —

"  This  afternoon  Professor  Sidgwick  and  I  called  on  Mrs.  Bennett.  She
told  us  the  story  as  in  her  letter,  and  her  daughter,  afterwards  called  in,
confirmed  it.  They  do  not  remember  when  it  happened,  probably  12  or
more  years  ago.  She  remembers  distinctly,  and  so  does  her  daughter,  that
it  was  in  the  summer,  and  that  it  was  light  enough  to  see  things  quite  dis-
tinctly— though  they  are  not  sure  of  the  hour.'  They  had  been  having  tea
with  Mrs.  Smith  (Preston  Moore's  sister,  a  farmer's  widow,  retired  and
with  means),  and  were  on  their  way  to  call  on  Mrs.  Newbold,  now  dead.
About  3  yards  from  Mrs.  Newbold's  gate  they  saw  Preston  Moore
coming  towards  them ;  they  came  round  a  slight  bend  in  the  road,  and  saw
him  first  (Mrs.  Bennett  said),  about  the  distance  across  Edward  Street
from  them.     He  and  they  were  both  walking  on  the  road  close  to  the

1  This  statement  is  not  incompatible  with  the  fact  that  the  season  was  really  the
middle  of  April ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  the  "  12  or  more  years  "  are  really  more  than  23.


248  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

causeway,  and  they  got  on  to  the  causeway  and  let  him  pass.  He  did  not
greet  them  in  any  way,  but  though  he  did  generally  touch  his  hat,  and
say  '  Good-day,'  he  did  not  then.  His  not  doing  so  did  not  seem  to  them
odd ;  the  only  thing  that  did  was  that  a  man  who  they  had  just  heard
was  not  expected  to  recover  should  be  out  at  all.  Mrs.  Bennett  has  often
wondered  since  that  she  did  not  turn  her  head  to  look  after  him,  but  she
did  not ;  and  they  do  not  remember  saying  anything  to  each  other  about
him,  during  the  few  seconds  that  elapsed  before  they  got  to  Mrs.  New-
bold's  door.  It  was  a  natural  enough  place  to  meet  him.  There  is  no
doubt  that  they  both  saw  him,  and  that  neither  doubted  at  the  time  that
what  they  saw  was  Preston  Moore  in  the  flesh.  They  say  he  was  a
peculiar-looking  man — very  plain,  and  with  an  eye  chronically  inflamed ;
wore  habitually  a  white  hat  on  one  side  of  his  head,  a  loose  shabby  long
coat,  open  down  the  front,  and  carried  a  long,  hooked,  heavy  stick ;  and
all  these  marks  they  seem  to  recognise  him  by.  They  took  no  particular
interest  in  him,  just  knew  him.  There  was  something  forbidding  about
him,  and  he  was  very  odd  ;  in  fact  I  suppose  mad  at  times.  The  people
called  him  '  moonstruck  ; '  his  sister.  Miss  Moore,  was  odd  too.  He  seems
to  have  had  a  sort  of  interest  in  Mrs.  Bennett,  for  once  he  brought  her
pansies,  stolen  from  a  neighbouring  gentleman's  garden,  and  another  time
cauliflowers — equally  illegitimately  acquired.  But  he  used  to  take  stolen
gifts  to  others  in  the  same  way.  Both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Bennett  disclaim
being  superstitious  or  nervous,  and  neither  has  had  any  other  visual  hallu-
cination. Mrs.  Bennett  has  had  an  auditory  hallucination  of  music,  and
also  what  may  have  been  a  hallucination  of  raps  and  noises."

[In  this  case,   we   certainly   cannot  suppose  that  a  purely  subjective

hallucination   was    independently    and    simultaneously    caused   in    both

percipients  by  their  previous  talk  about  the  man,  in  whom  they  were  not

specially  interested.     The  alternative  is,  therefore,  between  telepathy  and

mistaken  identity.     It  was  remarked  in  a  former  case  that  recollections  as

to  details  of  appearance  are  often  untrustworthy,  as  it  is  easy   to  imagine

that  one  has  distinctly  seen  some  familiar  figure,  when  in  reality  one  has

assumed  its  presence  on  the  strength   of  the  slightest   and  most  general

glance.     But  this  criticism  scarcely  applies  here.     Preston  Moore  was  the

Y><  t'^     last  person  whom  the  percipients  would  at  that  moment  have  expected  to

U.  .^«f'^*meet  out  of  doors ;  and  they  were,  therefore,  very  unlikely  to  assume  that

( the  figure  was  he,  without  looking  at  him  attentively.]

The  following  case  is  from  Mr.    S.   S.  Falkinburg,  of  Uniontown,

Ky.,  U.S.A.,  decorator  and  house  painter.

"Sept.  12th,  1884.

(352)  "  The  following  circumstance  is  impressed  upon  my  mind  in  a
manner  which  will  preclude  its  ever  being  forgotten  by  me  or  the  members
of  my  family  interested.  My  little  son,  Arthur,  who  was  then  five  years
old,  and  the  pet  of  his  grandpapa,  was  playing  on  the  floor,  when  I  entered
the  house  a  quarter  to  7  o'clock,  Friday  evening,  July  11th,  1879.  I  was
very  tired,  having  been  receiving  and  paying  for  staves  all  day,  and  it
being  an  exceedingly  sultry  evening,  I  lay  down  by  Artie  on  the  carpet,
and  entered  into  conversation  with  my  wife — not,  however,  in  regard  to
my  parents.  Artie,  as  usually  was  the  case,  came  and  lay  down  with  his
little  head  upon  my  left  arm,  when  all  at   once  he   exclaimed,  '  Papa  !


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  249

papa  !  Grandpa  ! '  I  cast  my  eyes  towards  the  ceiling,  or  opened  my  eyes,
I  am  not  sure  which,  when,  between  me  and  the  joists  (it  was  an  old-
fashioned  log-cabin),  I  saw  the  face  of  my  father  as  plainly  as  ever  I
saw  him  in  my  life.^  He  appeared  to  me  to  be  very  pale,  and  looked  sad,
as  I  had  seen  him  upon  my  last  visit  to  him  three  months  previous.  I
immediately  spoke  to  my  wife,  who  was  sitting  within  a  few  feet  of  me,
and  said,  '  Clara,  there  is  something  wrong  at  home ;  father  is  either  dead
or  very  sick.'  She  tried  to  persuade  me  that  it  was  my  imagination,  but
I  could  not  help  feeling  that  something  was  wrong.  Being  very  tired,  we
soon  after  retired,  and  about  10  o'clock  Artie  woke  me  up  repeating,
'  Papa,  grandpa  is  here.'  I  looked,  and  believe,  if  I  remember  right,
got  up,  at  any  rate  to  get  the  child  warm,  as  he  complained  of  coldness,  ^
and  it  was  very  sultry  weather.  Next  morning  I  expressed  my  determina-
tion to  go  at  once  to  Indianapolis.  My  wife  made  light  of  it  and  over-
persuaded  me,  and  I  did  not  go  until  Monday  morning,  and  upon  arriving
at  home  (my  father's),  I  found  that  he  had  been  buried  the  day  before,
Sunday,  July  13th.

"  Now  comes  the  mysterious  part  to  me.  After  I  had  told  my  mother
and  brother  of  my  vision,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been,  they  told  me  the
following  : —

"  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  July,  the  day  of  his  death,  he  arose
early  and  expressed  himself  as  feeling  unusually  well,  and  ate  a  hearty
breakfast.  He  took  the  Bible  (he  was  a  Methodist  minister),  and  went
and  remained  until  near  noon.  He  ate  a  hearty  dinner,  and  went  to  the
front  gate,  and,  looking  up  and  down  the  street,  remarked  that  he  could
not,  or  at  least  would  not  be  disappointed,  some  one  was  surely  coming.
During  the  afternoon  and  evening  he  seemed  restless,  and  went  to  the
gate,  looking  down  street,  frequently.  At  last,  about  time  for  supper,  he
mentioned  my  name,  and  expressed  his  conviction  that  Grod,  in  His  own
good  time,  would  answer  his  prayers  in  my  behalf,  I  being  at  that  time
very  wild.  Mother  going  into  the  kitchen  to  prepare  supper,  he  fol-
lowed her  and  continued  talking  to  her  about  myself  and  family,  and
especially  Arthur,  my  son.  Supper  being  over,  he  moved  his  chair  near
the  door,  and  was  conversing  about  me  at  the  time  he  died.  The  last
words  were  about  me,  and  were  spoken,  by  mother's  clock,  14  minutes  of
7.     He  did  not  fall,  but  just  quit  talking  and  was  dead.

"  In  answer  to  my  inquiries,  my  son  Arthur  says  he  remembers  the
circumstances,  and  the  impression  he  received  upon  that  occasion  is
ineffaceable.  "  Samuel  S.  Falkinburg."

We  have  procured  a  certificate  of  death  from  the  Indianapolis  Board
of  Health,  which  confirms  the  date  given.

Mrs.  Falkinburg  writes  to  us,  on  Sept.  12,  1884  : —

"In  answer  to  your  request,  I  will  say  that  I  cheerfully  give  my
recollection  of  the  circumstance  to  which  you  refer.

"  We  were  living  in  Brown  County,  Indiana,  50  miles  south  of
Indianapolis,  in  the  summer  of  1879.  My  husband  (Mr.  S.  S.  Falkinburg)
was  in  the  employ  of  one  John  Ayers,  buying  staves.

1  For  phantasms  seen  in  positions  which  would  in  reality  be  impossible  compare
cases  203,  204,  and  205.

2  See  p.  37,  note.


250  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

'On  the  evening  of  July  11th,  about  6.30  o'clock,  he  came  into  the
room  where  I  was  sitting,  and  lay  down  on  the  carpet  with  my  little  boy
Arthur,  complaining  of  being  very  tired  and  warm.  Entering  into
conversation  on  some  unimportant  matter,  Arthur  went  to  him  and  lay
down  by  his  side.  In  a  few  moments  my  notice  was  attracted  by  hearing
Arthur  exclaim  :  '  Oh,  papa,  grandpa,  grandpa,  papa,'  at  the  same  time
pointing  with  his  little  hand  toward  the  ceiling.  I  looked  in  the  direction
he  was  pointing,  but  saw  nothing.  My  husband,  however,  said  :  '  Clara,
there  is  something  wrong  at  home  ;  father  is  either  dead  or  very  sick.'  I
tried  to  laugh  him  out  of  what  I  thought  an  idle  fancy ;  but  he  insisted
that  he  saw  the  face  of  his  father  looking  at  him  from  near  the  ceiling,
and  Arthur  said,  '  Grandpa  was  come,  for  he  saw  him.'  That  night  we
were  awakened  by  Artie  again  calling  his  papa  to  see  '  grandpa.'

"  A  short  time  after  my  husband  started  (Monday)  to  go  to  Indiana-
polis, I  received  a  letter  calling  him  to  the  burial  of  his  father ;  and  some
time  after,  in  conversation  with  his  mother,  it  transpired  that  the  time  he
and  Artie  saw  the  vision  was  within  two  or  three  minutes  of  the  time
his  father  died.  "  Clara  T.  Falkinburg."

Asked  whether  this  was  his  sole  experience  of  a  visual  hallucination,
Mr.  Falkinburg  replied  that  it  was.  Occasionally,  however,  since  that
time,  he  has  had  auditory  impressions  suggestive  of  his  father's  presence.

Here  it  may  perhaps  be  suggested  that  Mr.  Falkinburg's  hallu-
cination was  due  to  the  child's  remark.  But  I  know  of  no  evidence
to  support  such  a  hypothesis.  Where  sensory  hallucinations  have
been  traceable  to  verbal  suggestion,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,
(p.  188),  there  has  either  been  a  previous  abnormal  dominance  of
one  person  by  another,  or  the  effect  has  been  worked  up  among  a
considerable  number  of  people,  in  an  atmosphere  of  emotion  and
excitement.  Till  evidence  is  brought,  we  must,  I  think,  decline  to
credit  the  words  of  a  child  of  five  with  such  magic  sway  over  its
father's  mind  as  is  exercised  by  a  practised  mesmerist  over  the
"  subject "  whose  will  he  has  annulled,  or  as  causes  the  visions  of  a
hysterical  fanatic  to  spread  to  her  like-minded  companions.

The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Fairman,  of  43,  Clifton  Hill,  N.W.  She
has  given  us  in  confidence  the  names  of  the  persons  concerned,  who
are  all  dead.  The  first  account  sent  to  us  was  written  on  December  29,
1884  ;  but  I  quote  the  following  slightly  fuller  one,  which  was  sent
after  a  search  had  been  made  for  the  letter  therein  mentioned.  The
sentence  between  brackets  is  taken  from  the  former  account.

"December  4th,  1885.

(.353)  "  I  much  regret  that  the  search  I  have  made  through  my  sister's

letters  has  proved  useless.     You  see,  the  letter  relating  to  the  circumstance

was  addressed  to  my  mother,  and  has   been   destroyed  long  ago.     In  that

letter,  my  sister  related  the  circumstance  of  both  herself  and  her  husband


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  251

seeing  what  he  imagined,  to  be  his  brother — ^the  exact  likeness  to  him
being  apparent — passing  the  breakfast-room  .window ;  so  much  so  that  he
spontaneously  jumped  up  to  go  to  the  hall  to  meet  him,  but  on  arriving
did  not  see  him.  (They  were  at  the  time — as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  in
1844 — living  in  the  Highlands,  and  he  had  parted  from  his  brother,  who
was  living  in  Nottinghamshire,  on  very  unfriendly  terms.)  After  a  fruitless
search  in  the  grounds,  he  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  post-bag,  which
contained  a  letter  requesting  him  to  start  at  once  :  his  brother,  whom  he
had  not  seen  for  15  years,  being  in  a  dying  state.  He  did  so  ;  and  found
on  arrival  that  he  died  at  the  exact  time  he  had  seen  him  pass  the  window.

It  was  on  his  immediate  departure  that  Mrs. wrote  home  to  us,  and

before  she  had  received  tidings  from  her  husband  of  his  brother's  death.
He  repeated  this  statement  to  me  some  few  years  after,  and  said  how
convinced  he  was  at  the  time  that  his  brother  had  arrived,  and  how  kind,
he  considered  it  that  he  should  make  the  first  advances  towards  a
reconciliation.  "  Catherine  A.  Fairman."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on
May  2,  1841,  the  cause  being  "efiusion  on  the  brain."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  she  is  certain  that  her  sister  saw  the
figure,  Mrs.  Fairman  replies  : —

"  I  feel  sure  that  my  sister  saw  a  figure  pass  the  window  at  the  same
time  as  her  husband  did  ;  bnt  as  she  had.  never  seen  her  brother-in-law,
she  could  not  say,  '  There's  Edward.'  I  remember  perfectly  her  letter  at
the  time  mentioning  that  she  saw  a  someone  go  by."

[In  conversation,  Mrs.  Fairman  told  me  that  she  saw,  immediately  on
its  arrival,  the  account  written  to  her  mother  by  her  sister  on  the  day  of
the  occurrence ;  and  if  this  was  so,  her  evidence  is  that  of  a  person
who  was  made  aware  of  the  percipient's  experience  before  the  event  with
which  it  corresponded  was  known  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).  But  after  an  interval
of  more  than  40  years,  no  memory  can  be  trusted  as  to  details  of  this  sort.
ISTor,  taking  the  evidence  as  it  stands,  can  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken
identity  be  absolutely  excluded.  Still  a  mistake  of  the  kind  is  far  more
unlikely  in  a  country  place — where  the  aspect  of  persons  who  come  to  the
house  is  usually  familiar,  and  where  the  sudden  disappearance  of  an
approaching  visitor  would  be  very  unlikely — than  in  a  crowded  street.
See  also  above,  pp.  62-3.]

The  next  account  is  from  the  late  Surgeon-Major  Armand  Leslie,
and  was  first  published  in  the  Daily  Telegraph.  That  newspaper,
during  the  autumn  of  1881,  contained  a  good  deal  of  correspondence
of  this  sort ;  and  Dr.  Leslie  was  one  of  the  few  contributors  who
had  the  good  sense  and  courage  to  sign  his  name,  and  thus  to  make
his  record  available  as  evidence.  We  have  ascertained  from  four
different  sources  that  he  used  to  live  at  5,  Tavistock  Place,  W.C.  He
afterwards  served  through  the  Russo-Turkish  war  with  the  Turkish
army ;  was  one  of  the  twelve  doctors  sent  out  to  Egypt  at  the  time
of  the  cholera ;  was  chief  of  the  medical  department  of  Baker's  staff ;


252  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Teb.  Unfortunately,  we  failed  to
identify  him  till  too  late,  and  I  can  only  quote  the  account  as  originally
given.  Confirmation  might  perhaps  be  obtained  from  his  family,  but
our  efforts  to  trace  them  have  been,  so  far,  unavailing.  Not  having
communicated  with  the  narrator,  we  cannot  vouch  for  the  hona  fides
of  the  account,  the  very  startling  incidents  of  which,  and  especially
the  detail  of  the  goloshes,  are  suggestive  of  a  hoax  ;  and  I  therefore
do  not  give  the  case  an  evidential  number.  On  the  other  hand,  it
seems  unlikely  that  a  medical  man  of  repute,  even  if  he  took  the  trouble
to  invent  such  a  story,  would  allow  his  name  to  appear  as  the  authority
for  it  in  a  prominent  newspaper.  If  the  story  was  invented,  its  final
sentence,  which  introduces  the  writer's  true  place  of  residence,  is  a
clever  touch  of  realism,  and  the  point  made  at  the  end  of  the  second
paragraph  is  a  master-stroke.

"October,  1881.

"  In  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  of  '78,  between  half-past  3  and  4  in
the  morning,  I  was  leisurely  walking  home  from  the  house  of  a  sick  friend.
A  middle-aged  woman,  apparently  a  nurse,  was  slowly  following,  going  in
the  same  direction.  We  crossed  Tavistock  Square  together,  and  emerged
simultaneously  into  Tavistock  Place.  The  streets  and  square  were  deserted,
the  morning  bright  and  calm,  my  health  excellent,  nor  did  I  suffer  from
anxiety  or  fatigue.

"  The  following  scene  was  now  enacted  :  A  man  suddenly  appeared,
striding  up  Tavistock  Place,  coming  towards  me,  and  going  in  a  direction
opposite  to  mine.  When  first  seen,  he  was  standing  exactly  in  front  of  my
own  door.  Young,  and  ghastly  pale,  he  was  dressed  in  evening  clothes,
evidently  made  by  a  foreign  tailor.  Tall  and  slim,  he  walked  with  long
measured  strides,  noiselessly,  without  a  sound^ — a  tall  white  hat,  covered
thickly  with  black  crape,  and  an  eye-glass,  completed  the  costume  of  this
strange  form.  The  moonbeams,  ^  falling  on  the  corpse-like  features,  revealed
a  face  well  known  to  me — that  of  a  friend  and  relative.  The  sole  and  only
other  person  in  the  street,  beyond  myself  and  this  being,  was  the  woman
already  alluded  to.  She  stopped  abruptly,  as  if  spellbound,  then  rushing
towards  the  man,  she  gazed  intently  and  with  horror  unmistakeable  on  his
face,  which  was  now  upturned  towards  the  heavens,  and  smiling  ghastly.
She  indulged  in  her  strange  contemplation  but  during  very  few  seconds,
and  with  extraordinary  and  unexpected  speed  for  her  age  and  weight,  she
ran  away  with  a  terrific  shriek  and  yells.  This  woman  never  have  I  seen
or  heard  of  since,  and  but  for  her  presence  I  could  have  explained  the
incident — called  it,  say,  subjection  of  the  mental  powers  to  the  domination
of  physical  reflex  action — and  the  man's  presence  would  have  been  termed
a  false  impression  on  the  retina.

"  A  week  after   the   above  event,    news    of    this  very  friend's  death

1  As  regards  this  point,  see  p.  68,  note.

2  The  "  moonbeams  "  and  the  "  morning  bright  and  cahn  "  do  not  go  well  together;
and  I  certainly  shall  not  argue  that  a  hoaxer  would  have  been  careful  to  avoid  the
discrepancy.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  253

reached  me.  It  had  occurred  on  the  morning  in  question.  From  the  family
I  ascertained  that,  according  to  the  rites  of  the  Greek  Church,  and  to  the
custom  of  the  country  he  had  resided  in,  he  was  buried  in  his  evening
clothes,  made  abroad  by  a  foreign  tailor,  and,  strange  to  say,  he  wore
goloshes  or  indiarubber  shoes  over  his  boots,  according  also  to  the  custom
of  the  country  he  died  in  ;  these  deaden  completely  the  sound  of  the
heaviest  footstep.  I  never  had  seen  my  friend  wear  an  eye-glass.  He  did
so,  however,  whilst  abroad,  and  began  the  practice  some  months  before  his
death.  When  in  England  he  lived  in  Tavistock  Place,  and  occupied  my
rooms  during  my  absence.  "  Armand  Leslie."

[Supposing  this  to  be  a  genuine  case,  it  is  still  highly  probable  that
some  of  the  detail  of  the  apparition  was  read  back  into  it,  after  the  real
facts  were  known.]

The  lady  who  sends  us  the  following  narrative  occupies  a  position
of  great  responsibility,  and  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  pub-  ^^

lished  ;  but  it  may  be  given  to  inquirers.  j/o  ^^

"1883.  t.

(354)   "  When  I  was  eight  months  old,  my  mother's  younger  sister,  Mercy       '^  -
Cox,    came  to  reside  with  us,  and  to  take   charge  of  me.     My   father's  ^

position  at  the  Belgian  Court,  as  portrait  painter,  obliged  him  to  be  much  5^"^
abroad,  and  I  was  left  almost  wholly  to  the  care  of  my  very  beautiful  aunt.
The  affection  that  subsisted  between  us  amounted  almost  to  idolatry,  and
my  poor  mother  wept  many  bitter  tears  when  she  came  home,  to  see  how
little  I  cared  for  anyone  else.  My  aunt  took  cold,  and  for  three  years
lingered  in  decline.  I  was  a  quick  child,  and  could  read  well  and  even
play  prettily,  so  that  I  was  her  constant  companion  day  and  night.  Our
doctor,  Mr.  Field,  of  the  Charter  House,  greatly  disapproved  of  this  close
contact,  and  urged  my  parents  to  send  me  quite  away.  This  was  a
difficult  feat  to  accomplish,  the  bare  mention  of  the  thing  throwing  my
aunt  into  faintings.  At  last  Mr.  Cumberland  (the  theatrical  publisher)
suggested  that  I  should  join  his  two  daughters,  Caroline,  aged  16,  and
Lavinia,  younger,  at  Mrs.  Hewetson's,  the  widow  of  a  clergyman  resident  at
Stourpaine,  in  Dorsetshire,  who  only  took  four  young  ladies.  This  was
represented  to  my  aunt  as  something  so  wonderfully  nice  and  advantageous
to  me,  that  she  consented  to  part  with  me.  My  portrait  was  painted,  and
placed  by  her  bed,  and  I  remember  how  constantly  she  talked  to  me  about
our  separation.  She  knew  she  should  be  dead  before  the  year  of  my
absence  would  be  ended.  She  talked  to  me  of  this,  and  of  how  soon  I
should  forget  her;  but  she  vehemently  protested  that  she  would  come  to
me  there.  Sometimes  it  was  to  be  as  an  applewoman  for  me  to  buy  fruit
of,  sometimes  as  a  maid  wanting  a  place,  always  she  would  know  me,  but
I  should  not  know  her,  till  I  cried  and  implored  to  know  her.

"  I  was  but  nine  when  they  sent  me  away,  and  coach  travelling  was  very  //
slow  in  those  days.  Letters,  too,  were  dear,  and  I  very  rarely  had  one.
My  parents  had  sickness  and  troubles,  and  they  believed  the  reports  that
I  was  well  and  happy,  but  I  was  a  very  miserable,  illtreated  little  girl.
One  morning,  at  break  of  day — it  was  New  Year's  Day — I  was  sleeping
beside  Lavinia.  We  two  shared  one  little  white  tester  bed,  with  curtains,
while  Caroline — upon  whom  I  looked   with  awe,  she  being  16,  slept  in


254  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

another  similar  bed  at  the  other  end  of  a  long  narrow  room,  the  beds
being  placed  so  that  the  feet  faced  each  other,  and  two  white  curtains  hung
down  at  the  sides  of  the  head.  This  New  Year's  morning,  I  was  roughly-
waked  by  Lavinia  shaking  me  and  exclaiming,  '  Oh  look  there !  there's
your  aunt  in  bed  with  Caroline.'  Seeing  two  persons  asleep  in  the  bed,  I
jumped  out,  and  ran  to  the  right  side  of  it.  There  lay  my  aunt,  a  little  on
her  right  side,  fast  asleep,  with  her  mouth  a  little  open.  I  recognised  her
worked  night-gown  and  cap.  I  stood  bewildered,  with  a  childish  sort  of
wonder  as  to  when  she  could  have  come  ;  it  must  have  been  after  I  went
to  bed  at  night.  Lavinia's  cries  awakened  Caroline,  who  as  soon  as  she
could  understand,  caught  the  curtains  on  each  side  and  pulled  them
together  over  her.  I  tore  them  open,  but  only  Caroline  lay  there,  almost
fainting  from  fright.  This  lady.  Miss  Cumberland,  afterwards  became  Mrs.
Part,  wife  of  a  celebrated  doctor  at  Camden  Terrace,  [and  now  deceased.]

"  I  never  talked  of  what  had  occurred,  but  one  day,  after  I  had  long
returned  home,  I  said  to  my  mother,  '  Do  you  know,  mamma,  I  saw  auntie
when  I  was  at  school  % '  This  led  to  an  explanation,  but  my  mother,
instead  of  commenting  upon  it,  went  and  fetched  her  mother,  saying  to
her,  '  Listen  to  what  this  child  says.'  Young  as  I  was,  I  saw  they  were
greatly  shocked,  but  they  would  tell  me  nothing  except  that  when  I  was
older  I  should  know  all.  The  day  came  when  I  learned  that  my  dear
aunt  suffered  dreadfully  from  the  noise  of  St.  Bride's  bells,  ringing  in  the
New  Year.  My  father  tried  to  get  them  stopped,  but  could  not.  Towards
morning  she  became  insensible ;  my  mother  and  grandmother  seated  on
either  side  of  her,  and  holding  her  hands,  she  awoke  and  said  to  my
mother,  'Now  I  shall  die  happy,  Anna,  I  have  seen  my  dear  child.'
They  were  her  last  words.  "  D.  E.  W."

No  general  register  of  deaths  was  kept  at  the  time  of  the  incident
here  related  ;  and  we  have  exhausted  every  means  to  discover  a  notice
of  the  death,  without  success.  But  we  have  procured  a  certificate  of
Mercy  Cox's  burial,  which  took  place  on  January  11,  1829.  This  is  quite
compatible  with  the  statement  that  the  death  was  on  January  1  (though
such  an  interval,  even  in  winter,  is  no  doubt  unusual),  as  the  lady  was
buried  in  a  family  vault,  and  probably  a  lead  coffin  had  to  be  made.
January  1  would  be,  at  the  very  least,  a  day  of  very  critical  illness.  As
to  the  date  of  the  apparition,  the  marked  character  of  New  Year's
Day  decidedly  favours  the  probability  that  Miss  "W.'s  memory  is  correct.

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  W.  says  : —

"I  was  born  in  1819.  The  death  of  my  aunt  took  place  in  1829.
Though  to  my  most  intimate  friends — as  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  the  late
Earl  and  Countesses  (2)  of  Dunraven,i  I  have  often  mentioned  the
event,  (and  to  Judge  Halliburton,)  I  think  I  never  wrote  it  fully  except
for  Lord  Dunraven  and  his  mother,  in  1850,  who  were  very  desirous  to
publish  it,  but  I  declined.  I  think  that  a  great  reason  I  have  always  had
for  not  talking  of  it  was  the  awe  with  which  it  inspired  my  mother,  and
her  strict  commands  that  '  I  should  not  mention  it  to  anybody.'  Then,
too,  I  went  to  school  and  lost  sight  of  Lavinia  Cumberland,  and  I  shrank
from  the  comments  of  strangers."

1  The  present  Lord  Dunraven  tells  us  that  he  does  not  remember  to  have  heard  his
father  mention  the  circumstance.


XVIII  ]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  255

In  conversation  Miss  W.  added  that  she  had  never  experienced  any
other  hallucination ;  also  that  the  Cumberland  girls  had  visited  her  home,
and  seen  her  aunt — which  accounts  for  Lavinia's  recognition  of  the  figure.

[We  learn,  through  a  relative  of  Miss  Lavinia  Cumberland  (now  Mrs.
Monarch,  of  16,  Regent's  Park  Road,  N.W.),  that  she  herself  does  not
recall  the  incident ;  but  that  she  remembers  several  times  hearing  her
sister,  Mrs.  Part,  speak  of  a  "  ghost  case  "  in  which  they  had  both  been
somehow  concerned.]

a.

This  case,  depending  on  the  narrator's  memoryat  31  of  what  occurred
when  she  was  under  10,  is  not,  of  course,  a  strong  one  evidentially.
But  the  very  fact  that  the  experience  recorded  is  of  so  striking  a
kind  makes  it  more  probable  that  it  was  remembered  than  that  it
was  unconsciously  invented.  The  very  odd  detail  of  Lavinia's
being  the  first  to  see  the  figure  seems  peculiarly  unlikely  to  have
been  wrongly  imagined  afterwards ;  for  it  is  a  feature  that  would
have  had  no  natural  part  in  any  sentimental  idea  of  the  child's  about
her  aunt's  visiting  her,  and  could  only  tend  to  detract  in  her  mind
from  the  emotional  significance  of  the  visit.  We  have,  moreover,  the
tolerably  complete  assurance  that  the  incident  deeply  impressed  our
informant's  mother  at  the  time  ;  for  this  attitude  of  a  third  person,
and  the  injunction  of  silence  to  which  it  led,  are  even  more  unlikely  f^^
than  the  original  experience  to  have  been  the  product  of  the  child's
fancy.  It  must,  however,  be  observed  that  the  second  hallucina-
tion may  have  been  due  to  Lavinia's  verbal  suggestion ;  and  that
the  minute  details  of  the  appearance  (which  could  hardly  have
been  so  suggested)  may  have  been  subsequently  imagined.  It  is
possible,  therefore,  that  the  case,  though  telepathic,  may  not  have
been  truly  collective.  It  cannot  with  any  certainty  be  reckoned
as  reciprocal,  as  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  aunt's  "  seeing  of  her
dear  child "  was  more  than  a  dream  or  a  subjective  impression
(see  p.  156).

In  Dr.  Leslie's  case  (supposing  the  account  to  be  substantially  true)  ;,',  .<
one  of  the  percipients  was  presumably  a  total  stranger  to  the  agent.
In  No.  354,  the  one  of  the  two  persons  present  who  was  least
intimately  connected  with  the  agent  was  the  first  to  see  the
phantasm ;  but  equally  in  this  as  in  the  former  case,  I  should  regard
her  experience  as  dependent  on  the  presence  of  the  more  nearly
connected  person  (see  §  7  below).  In  the  next  example  there  is  a
yet  further  step  ;  and  of  the  two  persons  present,  one  of  whom  was  son,
and  the  other  a  stranger,  to  the  agent,  the  stranger  alone  saw  the


256  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

phantasm,  though  both  seem  to  have  shared  in  a  singular  auditory
experience  which  they  connected  with  it.  The  incident  thus  closely
resembles  that  described  in  case  242,  where  the  phantasm  appeared
not  to  the  dying  man's  sister,  but  to  a  servant  who  was  with  her.  The
narrative  was  copied  by  the  present  writer  from  a  note-book  of  the
Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  formerly  of  Manchester,  and  now  of  Rhyl.

(355)  "On  August  13tli,  1879,  I  sailed  to  Hamburg  with  Captain
1  Ayre,  of  the  ss.  '  Berlin,'  of  Goole,  who  related  to  me  that,  about  25  years
before,  he  was  staying  with  a  friend  named  Hunt,  at  a  small  farmhouse  at
Arming  Grange,  about  21  miles  from  Goole.  On  a  summer  evening,  about  9
o'clock,  Captain  Ayre  and  his  companion  went  to  their  bedroom,  when  they
both  heard  a  noise  at  the  side  of  the  house,  and  both  went  to  the  window  to
see  what  was  the  matter.  The  captain  distinctly  saw  a  man  walking  outside,
but  Hunt  could  see  nothing  there,  though  he  had  heard  the  tramp  of  feet
as  well  as  the  captain.  Being  astonished  that  Hunt  could  not  see  the  man,
Captain  Ayre  proceeded  to  describe  him.  He  was  a  man  of  short  stature,
with  a  stoop,  and  wore  knee  breeches,  a  red-fronted  waistcoat  with  sleeves,
and  a  little  black  hat.  Hunt  instantly  identified  the  description  as
answering  exactly  to  his  own  father.  Captain  Ayre  assured  me  he  had
never  seen  Hunt's  father.  After  this  the  men  went  to  bed,  and  both  now
heard  a  noise  as  if  the  end  of  the  bedstead  had  been  wrenched,  which
continued  until  about  midnight,  when  Hunt's  brother  arrived  on  horseback
from  Gilberdyke  with  the  news  of  their  father's  death,  which  occurred
about  three  hours  earlier  that  evening.    The  noises  then  ceased."

Mr.  Macdonald  adds  : —

"  This  was  taken  down  by  me  in  pencil  from  Captain  Ay  re's  own  lips,
and  transcribed  when  I  returned  from  the  voyage.  The  pencil  account
was  read  over  to  Captain  Ayre,  and  pronounced  by  him  to  be  perfectly
correct.  I  cross-examined  him  carefully  on  every  point.  He  specially
described  the  lonely  position  of  the  house,  and  the  unlikelihood  of  any
stranger  moving  about  in  the  vicinity  or  creating  a  disturbance  in  the
bedroom.  "James  Alex.  Macdonald."

This  account  was  sent  to  Captain  Ayre,  who  replied  : —

"  SS.  '  Dresden,'  Goole.

"November  4th,  1884.
"  I  have  carefully  read  over  the  narrative,  as  given  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Macdonald  ;  but  it  is  so  accurate  in  every  detail  that  I  fail  to  be  able  to
add  anything  thereto.  "  Chas.  Ayre."

[Our  efforts  to  trace  Mr.  Hunt  have  been  unsuccessful.  Captain  Ayre
has  not  heard  of  him  for  some  time.]

In  the  next  case  the  agent  was  not  dying,  but  was  in  a  somewhat
alarming  fainting-fit.  We  have  had  several  other  similar  cases  {e.g.,
Nos.  20  and  110)  ;  they  recall  what  was  said  above  (p.  26)  as  to  the
number  of  the  death-cases  where  the  mode  of  death  has  been  drowning.
The  narrator  is  Mr.  H.  G.  Barwell,  of  33,  Surrey  Street,  Norwich.


xviil]  collective  CASES.  257

"1883.

(356)  "  During  the  last  week  of  July,  1882,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  "W.  and  family  '
had  settled  themselves  comfortably  in  a  house  they  had  hired  at  the  Lizard,
Cornwall;  and  a  few  days  later  Mr.  Cox,  an  amateur  artist  from  Liverpool,
joined  them.  Mr.  Barwell  arranged  to  meet  Mr.  Earle,  an  artist  residing
in  London  (both  of  whose  names  are  appended),  on  Monday,  7th  August,
1882,  dine  with  him  and  together  take  the  night  mail  at  Paddington,
booking  for  Penryn,  Cornwall,  the  station  from  whence  conveyances  take
passengers  to  Helston,  and  thence  to  the  Lizard,  whither  they  were  going
to  join  Mr.  W.  and  family,  as  on  many  former  occasions.

"  Barwell  and  Earle  therefore  started  according  to  arrangement  by  the
8.10  p.m.  mail  train  from  Paddington,  on  the  evening  of  Bank  Holiday,
Monday,  7th  August,  1882.  They  travelled  all  night;  the  train  on
arrival  at  Penryn  was  a  little  more  than  15  minutes  late,  reaching  there
on  Tuesday  morning,  8th  August,  1882,  at  7.23  a.m.  No  other  passengers
alighted  there  from  that  train.  They  had  some  difl&culty  in  getting  a
porter  to  convey  their  luggage  to  the  omnibus  standing  at  the  station,  the
driver  of  which  announced  that  if  they  could  not  come  at  once,  he  must
start  without  them.  Passengers  were  nothing  to  him,  he  had  to  take
charge  of  and  deliver  the  mail  bags  at  various  villages  on  his  route.  They
roused  up  the  porter  and  insisted  on  his  attention  ;  in  the  meantime  their
train  had  departed  and  another  train,  from  Falmouth  to  London,  ran  into
the  station  (due  7.24  a.m.)  Their  luggage  was  being  placed  on  the
omnibus;  Earle  had  already  climbed  to  his  seat  next  the  driver,  and
Barwell,  having  now  seen  all  their  luggage  safely  deposited  on  the  vehicle,
was  climbing  up  next  him,  when  Earle  exclaimed  :  '  Why,  look  there  ! '
And  on  Barwell  looking  up,  he  saw  in  the  train,  just  leaving  the
station  for  London,  their  friend  W.  from  the  Lizard,  waving  his  hand  to
them  while  eagerly  stretching  his  head  out  of  the  window  to  ascertain,
apparently,  if  they  had  arrived.  They  both  cordially  returned  the  salute
and  the  train  disappeared  round  a  curve,  W.  still  looking  out  of  the  window
waving  his  hand.

"  The  two  friends  now  made  various  conjectures  as  to  the  why  and
wherefore  of  W.'s  departure  on  the  very  morning  of  their  arrival ;  they
considered  it  very  disappointing  that  he  should  thus  be  obliged  to  leave,  on
the  day  our  friendly  party  was  about  to  be  reunited.  Earle  was  greatly
depressed  about  it,  and  wished  to  leave  all  further  discussion  on  the  subject
until  they  should  ascertain  from  Mrs.  W.  the  cause  for  his  leaving  the
Lizard  just  before  their  arrival.  Amongst  the  surmises  which  they  made
for  W.  being  in  the  train  which  came  from  Falmouth,  and  not  from  the
Lizard  where  he  was  staying,  was  this  ;  that  he  had  probably  received  at
the  Lizard,  on  Monday,  the  7th  August,  a  telegram  requiring  his  immediate
attendance  in  London  or  elsewhere,  and  that  to  prevent  a  very  early  start
by  trap  on  Tuesday  morning  from  the  Lizard  to  catch  the  7.30  a.m.  train
to  London  at  Penryn,  he  had  made  use  of  a  return  Bank  Holiday  excur-
sion steamer  from  Falmouth  to  the  Lizard  ;  sleeping  at  Falmouth,  and
starting  by  train  from  there  at  7.15  a.m.  for  London,  namely,  the  train
they  saw  him  in.

"  They  arrived  in  due  course  at  Helston,  had  breakfast,  and  sauntered
about  the  old  town  tiL  the  next  coach  started  for  the  Lizard  at  1 1  o'clock
a.m.     On  nearing  the  Lizard,  they  were  anxiously  on  the  look-out  for  the

VOL.  II.  S


258  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

children  of  Mrs.  W.,  to  receive  their  usual  hearty  and  sincere  welcome  on
arrival  of  the  coach,  and  to  learn  from  them  where  their  respective  domiciles
in  the  village  had  been  chosen.  The  coach  arrived,  but  none  of  the  W.
family  were  to  be  seen.

"  The  luggage  was  taken  off  the  coach  and  left  on  the  village  green  in
front  of  the  hotel,  till  information  could  be  obtained  as  to  where  rooms  had
been  engaged.  The  two  friends  strolled  away,  but  soon  met  W.'stwo  boys,
who  on  being  asked  why  their  father  had  gone  away,  seemed  somewhat
surprised  at  the  question,  and  replied  that  their  father  was  lying  ill  at  his
lodgings,  and  that  their  mother  was  also  at  home  and  very  anxious  about
him.  The  boys  accompanied  Earle  and  Barwell  to  their  father's  house  in
the  village,  when  Mrs.  W.  came  out  and  greeted  them  cordially,  telling
them  briefly  that  Mr.  W.  had  had  a  serious  fainting  fit  that  morning,  and
that  she  was  watching  him  with  considerable  anxiety.

"  Mr.  Cox  now  came  in  from  his  morning's  work,  and  after  the
exchange  of  salutations  with  Earle  and  Barwell,  related  to  them  the
following  details  of  Mr.  W.'s  fainting  fit :  That  he,  Mr.  W.,  and  his  two
boys  started  from  the  Lizard  village  to  Housel  Cove  to  bathe,  at  7  o'clock
that  morning,  a  distance  a  little  over  half  a  mile.  When  W.  came  out  of
the  sea,  and  was  leaning  against  a  rock,  in  a  sitting  posture,  he  fainted
quite  away.  Cox  was  dreadfully  shocked  and  alarmed,  for  at  one  time  he
could  discover  no  action  of  the  heart,  and  he  feared  he  might  be  dead  or
dying.  He  used  all  the  means  he  could  think  of,  and  placed  W.  in  a  more
recumbent  position,  which  seemed  a  more  favourable  one,  for  pulsation
was  then  discernible,  and  W.  partially  recovered,  but  was  too  weak  to
move  for  a  long  time.  Mrs.  W  was  fetched,  and  then  breakfast  was  taken
down  to  the  Cove,  and  when  vitality  and  strength  had  sufficiently  returned
to  enable  W.  to  climb  the  steep  ascent  with  assistance,  they  started  home.

"  The  fainting  of  W.  occurred  at  7.30  a.m.  at  Housel  Cove,  the  Lizard,
at  the  precise  time  when  Earle  and  Barwell  saw  W.  waving  his  hand  to
them  from  the  train  at  Penryn.

"  The  question  has  been  put  to  Mr.  W.  whether  he  thought  of  or  saw
Earle  or  Barwell,  either  just  before  or  during  his  seizure,  but  he  remembers
nothing  of  the  kind.

r  "Charles    Eaele,  9,    Duke    street,    Portland  Place,
^^  /^.^      IN     J  London.

\    &       )     I   "  H.  G.  Barwell,  Surrey  Street,  Norwich.

y  "  Charles  H.  Cox,  Shrewsbury  Road,  N.,  Birkenhead."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barwell  says,  "  Both  Earle  and  I  have
very  good  sight.  My  impression  is  that  the  person  I  saw  looking  from  the
traiji  window  wore  a  soft,  flexible,  round  hat."  He  can  recall  no  other
experience  of  hallucination,  except  one  which  occurred  many  years  ago,  at
a  time  when  he  was  not  yet  fully  recovered  from  a  severe  fever.

Mr.  Cox  writes,  on  January  2nd,  1885  : —

"  I  was  at  the  Lizard,  in  Cornwall,  when  my  friends,  Earle  and
Barwell,  saw  (as  they  believed)  the  '  double '  of  my  friend  W.,  whom,  at
the  time,  1  was  instrumental  in  bringing  round  after  his  attack  of  illness.
My  part  in  the  affair  was  simply  resuscitating  Mr.  W.  from  a  very  serious
condition.  "  C.  H.  Cox."


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  259

[Here,  again,  mistaken  identity  must  be  recognised  as  a  possibility ;
but  there  are  several  points  which  combine  to  make  it  improbable.  The
fact  which  the  appearance  forced  on  the  minds  of  the  two  friends — namely,
W.'s  departure — was  so  little  in  accordance  with  their  expectations  that  it
distinctly  surprised  them ;  they  were  thus  in  a  wholly  different  attitude
from  that  (say)  of  awaiting  a  friend's  arrival,  when  the  senses  are  on  the
alert  for  anything  at  all  resembling  him.  Again,  the  figure  seen  seems  to
have  given  unmistakeable  signs  of  friendly  recognition  ;  so  that  we  should
not  only  have  to  suppose  that  the  percipients  mistook  someone  for  their
friend,  but  that  they  mistook  for  him  someone  who  was  known  to  them,  or
at  any  rate  to  one  of  them — clearly  a  much  more  unlikely  occurrence.  It
will  be  observed,  moreover,  that  the  difficulties  of  assuming  a  mistake  as  to
identity  are  immensely  increased  where  two  persons  with  good  sight  would
have  had  to  share  in  it  (see  p.  244).  Still,  it  is  conceivable — though
scarcely  compatible  with  the  account — that  the  first  sign  of  recognition
was  given  by  Mr.  Earle ;  and  that  a  stranger,  seeing  this  sign,  returned  it,
either  in  joke,  or  imagining  that  the  giver  of  it  must  be  some  one  that  he
had  known  and  ought  to  recognise.]

I  will  conclude  with  a  case  which  is  probably  the  best-known
specimen  of  the  sort  on  record,  and  on  that  very  account  may
naturally  be  mistrusted,  as  having  "  won  its  way  to  the  mythical."
The  following  presentation  of  it  is,  however,  very  much  more
complete  than  any  that  has  yet  been  published,  and  is  of  a  better
quality  than  is  often  procurable  for  so  remote  an  incident.  It  is  true
that,  of  the  two  percipients,  we  have  the  evidence  of  one  only  at
second-hand,  and  of  the  other  at  third-hand ;  but  we  have  the  first-
hand evidence  of  a  person  who  was  informed  of  their  experience
immediately  on  its  occurrence,  and  long  before  the  news  of  the  agent's
death  arrived.

(357)  The  following  memorandum  made  by  General  Birch  Reynardson,
of  the  account  given  him  by  one  of  the  percipients,  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.
Wm.  Wynyard,  of  Northend  House,  Hursley,  Winchester.  He  believed
the  original  document  to  be  in  the  library  of  Mr.  Chas.  Reynardson,  of
Holywell  Hall,  Stamford,  who,  however,  has  looked  for  it  without  success.
A  copy^  was  made  on  June  20,  1864,  by  Mr.  Wynyard's  father,  General
E.  B.  Wynyard  (a  brother  of  George  Wynyard,  the  co-percipient,)  who
says  that  the  writer  of  the  memorandum  put  it  on  paper  as  soon  as  he  had
an  opportunity  after  the  conversation  recorded  therein.  General  E.  B.
Wynyard  has  headed  the  paper  : —

"  Memorandum  of  a  conversation  between  the  late  General  Birch
Reynardson,  and  Colonel,  afterwards  Sir  John,  Sherbrooke."

"  In  the  month  of  November,  Sir  John  Sherbrooke  and  General  Wyn-

1  This  copy  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  to  Colonel  F,  Clinton,  of  Clinton  Ashley,  Lyming-
ton,  Hants.  We  have  not  actually  inspected  it ;  but  Colonel  Clinton's  daughter  transcribed
it  for  General  E.  B.  Wynyard's  son,  Mr.  W.  W.  Wynyard,  who  kindly  sent  us  the  book
in  which  he  in  turn  had  copied  it.  It  is  curious  that  General  E.  B.  Wynyard  seems  never
to  have  heard  the  narrative  first-hand  from  his  brother.

VOL.    II.  s    2


260  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

yard^  were  sitting  before  dinner  (between  5  and  6  o'clock)  in  their  barrack-
room  at  Sydney  Cove,  in  America.  It  was  duskish,  and  a  candle  placed  on
the  table  at  a  little  distance.  A  figure,  dressed  in  plain  clothes  and  a  good
round  hat  ^  on,  passed  gently  between  the  above  people  and  the  fire.
While  passing.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  exclaimed,  '  God  bless  my  soul,  who's
that  ? '  Almost  at  the  same  moment  Colonel  W.  said,  '  That's  my  brother,
John  Wynyard,^  and  I  am  quite  certain  he  is  dead.'  Colonel  W.  was
much  agitated,  and  cried  and  sobbed  a  great  deal.  Sir  John  said,  '  The
fellow  has  got  a  devilish  good  hat,  I  wish  I  had  it.'  *  They  immediately
got  up  (Sir  John  was  on  crutches,  having  broken  his  leg),  took  a  candle,
and  went  into  the  bedroom,  into  which  the  figure  had  entered  :  they
searched  the  bed  and  every  corner  of  the  room  to  no  effect ;  the  windows
were  fastened  up  with  mortar.  Mr.  Stuart,  the  paymaster  of  the  regiment,
noted  the  circumstance  at  the  time.  Sir  John  told  me  that  Colonel  W,
for  two  or  three  days  was  a  good  deal  distressed  and  uneasy,  but  remained
most  perfectly  convinced  of  the  death  of  his  brother.

"  They  received  no  communication  from  England  for  about  five  months,
when  a  letter  from  Mr.  Rush,^  the  surgeon,  announced  the  death  of  John
Wynyard  at  the  moment,  as  near  as  could  be  ascertained,  when  the  figure
appeared.  In  addition  to  this  extraordinary  circumstance.  Sir  John  told
me  that  two  and  a-half  years  afterwards  he  was  walking  with  Lilly  "Wyn-
yard ^  in  London,  and  seeing  somebody  on  the  other  side  of  the  way,  he
recognised,  he  thought,  the  person  who  had  appeared  to  him  and  Colonel
Wynyard  in  America.  Lilly  Wynyard  said  that  the  person  he  pointed
out  was  a  Mr.  Eyre  ;'^  that  he  had  always  been  considered  so  like  John
Wynyard  that  they  were  frequently  mistaken  for  each  other ;  and  that
money  had  actually  been  paid  to  this  Mr.  Eyre  in  mistake."

The  following  account  appeared  in  Notes  and  Queries  for  July  2nd,
1859,  in  a  letter  signed  "Eric."

"On  the  23rd  of  October,  1823,  a  party  of  distinguished  hig-wigs  were
dining  with  the  late  Chief  Justice  Sewell,  at  his  house  on  the  esplanade  in
Quebec,  when  the  story  in  question  became  a  subject  of  conversation.
Among  the  guests  was  Sir  John  Harvey,  Adjutant-General  of  the  forces
in  Canada,  who  stated  that  there  was  then  in  the  garrison  an  officer  who
knew  all  the  circumstances,  and  who,  probably,  would  not  object  to  answer
a  few  queries  about  them.  Sir  John  immediately  wrote  five  queries,
leaving  a  space  opposite  to  each  one  for  an  answer,  and  sent  them  to
Colonel  Gore,  who,  if  my  memory  serves  me  rightly,  was  at  the  head  of

1  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  Colonel  W.  and  Colonel  S.,  then  serving  in  the  23rd
[?  33rd]  Regiment  as  Captains.  (?)  Oct.  15th,  1785."  We  learn  from  General  Edward
Wynyard,  another  son  of  General  E.  B.  Wynyard,  that  George  Wynyard  died  in  1809,  as
Lieut-Colonel.

2  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  article  of  apparel  may  be  the  progenitor  of  the  very
suspicious  hat  of  the  Warren  Hastings  legend,  criticised  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  152.  The  two
narratives  have  been  probably  often  told  in  juxtaposition.

3  General  Edward  Wynyard  tells  us  that  John  Wynyard  was  a  subaltern  in  the  3rd
Guards.

^  Note  by  the  Rev.  J.  Birch  Reynardson,  son  of  the  writer  of  the  memorandum,  and
brother-in-law  of  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  He  told  my  father  that  he  made  this  remark,  as
hats  were  not  to  begot  there,  and  theirs  were  worn  out."

^  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.     "  Surgeon  of  the  Coldstream  Guards."

8  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.  "  L.  W.  was  brother  of  Colonel  W.,  and  died  in  the
West  Indies,  Adjutant  of  the  20th  Regiment."

T  Note  by  Mr.  W.  Wynyard.     "(?)  Hay."


xviil]  collective  CASES.  261

either  the  Ordnance  or  the  Royal  Engineer  department.  The  following  is
a  copy  of  both  the  queries  and  the  answers,  which  were  returned  to  Sir
John  before  he  and  the  other  guests  had  left  the  Chief  Justice's  house  : —

'"My  dear  Gore,

"  '  Do  me  the  favour  to  answer  the  following  : —

'  Queries.

"  '  1.  Was  you  with  the  33rd  Regiment  when  Captains  Wynyard  and
Sherbrooke  believed  that  they  saw  the  apparition  of  the  brother  of  the
former  officer  pass  through  the  room  in  which  they  were  sitting  ?

"  '  2.  Was  you  not  one  of  the  first  persons  who  entered  the  room,  and
assisted  in  the  search  for  the  ghost  1

'"3.  Was  you  not  the  person  who  made  a  memorandum  in  writing  of
the  circumstances,  by  which  the  singular  fact  of  the  death  of  Wynyard's
brother,  at  or  about  the  time  when  the  apparition  was  seen,  was
established  1

"  '  4.  With  the  exception  of  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke,  do  you  not  consider  your-
self almost  the  only  surviving  evidence  of  this  extraordinary  occurrence  ?

"  '  5.  When,  where,  and  in  what  kind  of  building  did  it  take  place  ?

,,  ,  rri        1  •  '  (Signed)    J.  Harvey.

"  '  ihursday  morning,  ^    °       '

"  '  23rd  October,  1823.'

'  Answers.

"  '  1.  Yes,  I  was.  It  occurred  at  Sydney,  in  the  Island  of  Cape  Breton,
in  the  latter  end  of  1785  or  6,  between  8  and  9  in  the  evening.  We  were
then  blocked  up  by  the  ice,  and  had  no  communication  with  any  other  part
of  the  world.  '  R.G.

"  '  2.  Yes.  The  ghost  passed  them  as  they  were  sitting  before  the  fire
at  cofiee,  and  went  into  G.  Wynyard's  bed-closet,  the  window  of  which
was  putted  (sic)  down.^  '  R.G.

" '  3.  I  did  not  make  the  memorandum  in  writing  myself,  but  I
suggested  it  the  next  day  to  Sherbrooke,  and  he  made  the  memorandum.
I  remembered  the  date,  and  on  the  6th  June  our  first  letters  from  England
brought  the  account  of  John  Wynyard's  death  on  the  very  night  they  saw
his  apparition.  '  R.G.

" '  4.  I  believe  all  are  dead,  except  Colonel  Yorke,  who  then  com-
manded the  regiment,  and  is  Deputy-Lieutenant  of  the  Tower, — and  I
believe  Jones  Pan  ton,  then  an  ensign  in  the  regiment.  '  R.G.

"  '  5.  It  was  in  the  new  barracks  at  Sydney,  built  the  preceding
summer,  one  of  the  first  erections  in  the  settlement.

'  (Signed)  Ralph  Gore.

"  '  Sherbrooke  had  never  seen  John  Wynyard  alive ;  but  soon  after
returning  to  England,  the  following  year,  when  walking  in  Bond  Street
with  Wm.  Wynyard,  late  D.  A.  General,  and  just  after  telling  him  the
story  of  the  ghost,  [he]  exclaimed  "My  God/"  and  pointed  out  a  person — -
a  gentleman — as  [being]  exactly  like  the  apparition  in  person  and  dress.
This  gentleman  was  so  like  J.  Wynyard  as  often  to  be  spoken  to  for  him,
and  afiected  to  dress  like  him.     I  think  his  name  was  Hayman.

"  '  I  have  heard  Wm.  Wynyard  mention  the  above  circumstance,  and
declare  that  he  then  believed  the  story  of  the  ghost.     '  (Signed)       R.G.'

"  The  above  is  taken  from  a  copy  made  from  the  original  queries  and

1  "  Query,  puttied  down,  to  exclude  the  cold  ?  "


262  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

answers,  and  given  to  me,  only  a  few  weeks  after  the  date  affixed  to  the
queries ;  and  to  it  is  added,  in  the  handwriting  of  the  copyist,  the
following  : —

"  '  A  true  copy  from  the  original.  The  queries  are  written  in  black  ink
in  the  handwriting  of  Sir  John  Harvey,  Deputy  Adjutant-General  of
British  America,  and  signed  by  him  ;  the  answers  are  in  red  ink,  written
and  signed  by  Colonel  Gore.  The  original  paper  belongs  to  Chief  Justice
Sewell.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  was  lately  Governor-General  of  Lower  Canada.^
It  is  said  that  Sir  John  Sherbrooke  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  subject
spoken  of.'

"The  copyist  was  a  near  relative  of  the  Chief  Justice,  and  died  in
1832.     He  was  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends."

[There  is  a  discrepancy  between  Colonel  Gore's  and  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's
accounts,  as  to  which  of  the  Wynyard  brothers  accompanied  Sir  J.  Sher-
brooke in  Bond  Street.  The  detail  as  to  the  Bond  Street  incident  following
immediately  on  a  narration  of  the  story  looks  like  an  unfortunate  addition,
the  only  effect  of  which  is  to  inspire  distrust,  probably  quite  undeserved,  of
the  rest  of  the  statement.]

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  gentleman  who  sent  this  account
to  Notes  and  Queries  did  not  sign  his  name.  It  is,  however,  highly
improbable  that  Colonel  Gore's  statements  are  forgeries ;  and  we  are
justified,  I  think,  in  regarding  them  as  genuine  by  the  following  account,
received  from  a  niece  of  his.  Miss  Langmead,  of  Belmont,  Torre,  Torquay.

"  September  3rd,  1883.

"  Colonel  Gore,  of  the  33rd,  married  my  mother's  sister,  and  he
narrated  the  story  to  my  mother  and  to  my  elder  sister  himself,  most
emphatically.  I  have  heard  it  from  them  both,  over  and  over  again,  and
my  sister  wrote  the  account  some  years  ago.  She  heard  Colonel  Gore  tell
it  more  than  once,  and  always  with  strong  feeling,  which  impressed  every
word  on  her  memory.  I  have  not  got  her  paper  now,  but  I  knew  it
perfectly  by  heart.  I  have  often  heard  my  sister  say  that  no  one  who
heard  Colonel  Gore  tell  the  story  could  doubt  the  powerful  impression
made  on  him  at  any  rate.

"  There  were  other  little  particulars,  such  as  the  impossibility  of  hiding
in  the  barrack  rooms,  which  were  two  above  and  two  below,  and  so
slightly  built  that  every  sound  was  heard,  but  I  have  not  enlarged  more
than  I  could  help.  The  story  has  been  printed  with  variations  in  many
books  of  collected  ghost^stories,  but  not  always  correctly.  It  is  usually
said  that  it  was  a  twin  brother  who  was  met  in  Bond  Street,  but  that  was
not  the  case.

"  It  was  in  the  time  of  the  American  war,  and  some  of  our  troops  were
in  winter  quarters  at  Cape  Breton.  The  weather  was  very  severe  and  the
harbour  frozen  over.  The  ships  expected  from  England  had  not  arrived,
and  the  supplies  had  run  short,  especially  the  allowance  of  wine.  Four
officers,  afterwards  entitled  General  [mistake  for  Colonel]  Wynyard,  Sir
John  Sherbrooke,  Sir  Hildebrand  Oakes,  and  Colonel  Gore,  of  the  23rd
[?  33rd]  Regiment,  were  in  barracks  at  the  top  of  a  steep  ascent,  guarded
by  a  sentry  below.  They  had  dined  together  and  then  separated,  two  of
them  being  engaged  upstairs  in  looking  over  maps  and  plans  of  the  seat

1  "  From  July,  1816,  to  July,  1818."


XVIII.]  .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  363

of  war.     The  other  two,  General  Wynyard  and  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke,  remained
in  the  inner  room.

"  Suddenly  an  exclamation  from  General  Wynyard  startled  the  two
above,  who  ran  downstairs,  expecting  that  the  ice  had  broken  and  the
looked-for  ships  arrived.  They  found  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  alone,  standing
amazed,  and  in  answer  to  their  eager  inquiry  as  to  what  had  happened,  he
said  that  a  gentleman,  a  stranger  to  him,  had  come  in  at  the  door,  looked
fixedly  at  General  W.,  and  passed  into  the  inner  room.  General  W.  exclaimd
aloud,  '  Good  God,  my  brother  Jack ! '  and  followed  him  into  the  bed-
room, from  which  there  was  no  outlet.  He  presently  returned,  much
agitated,  having  found  no  one.  Colonel  Gore  took  out  his  watch  and
marked  the  time,  while  another  of  the  party  ran  down  to  the  sentinel,  who
declared  no  person  had  passed.  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke  described  the  figure  as
dressed  in  a  hunting  costume,  such  as  he  had  never  seen,  with  a  hunting-
whip  in  his  hand.  Days  went  on,  the  ice  broke  up,  news  came  from
England  to  General  W.  of  his  brother's  death,  who  was  killed  in  the
hunting-field  at  the  very  time  in  which  the  figure  appeared  in  the  barrack-
room.  Papers  also  came  out,  containing  the  fashions,  one  being  the
hunting  suit  with  a  particularly  shaped  boot,  such  as  the  figure  had  worn.
After  the  peace,  and  the  troops  had  returned  to  England,  Sir  John  Sher-
brooke was  walking  through  Bond  Street  with  Colonel  Gore,  when  he
stopped  and  said,  pointing  to  a  man  who  was  coming  towards  him,  '  There
is  the  figure  I  saw  at  Cape  Breton.'  Colonel  Gore  replied,  '  That  man  was
called  Jack  Wynyard's  double,  he  was  so  very  like  him.'

"  Before  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's  death,  long  afterwards,  he  was  asked  by  a
friend  what  he  then  thought  of  the  apparition  at  Cape  Breton.  He  replied
that  he  could  not  explain  it,  but  that  every  detail  was  true.

"  M.  E.  L."

[Here  the  hunting-dress,  and  the  corresponding  detail  about  the
hunting-field,  may  almost  certainly  be  referred  to  a  transformative  process
in  Colonel  Gore's  mind.  The  peculiar  boot  may  probably  be  a  degenerate
representative  of  the  spruce  hat  in  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke's  account.  It  would
further  be  a  very  natural  mistake  on  the  part  of  Colonel  Gore's  niece  to
imagine  that  he  was  Sherbrooke's  companion  in  the  walk  in  Bond  Street.]

Next  come  two  items  of  evidence,  for  which  George  Wynyard,  the  co-
percipient,  was  the  original  authority.

General  Edward  Wynyard,  of  5,  Portman  Street,  W.,  writing  to  us  on
April  7,  1885,  tells  us  that  the  incident  was  narrated  to  him  by  his  aunt,
Mrs.  Wright,  who  "  had  often  heard  the  story  "  from  her  brother,  George
Wynyard.  He  observes  that  her  narrative  corresponded  in  nearly  every
particular  with  the  account  given  in  Chamnbers'  Book  of  Days,  Vol.  II.,
p.  448.  The  said  account  (the  authority  for  which  is  not  given,  save  in  so
far  that  a  relative  of  George  Wynyard  had  pronounced  it  substantially
true,)  agrees  in  the  essential  points  with  Colonel  Gore's  -^  but  differs  in
stating  that  the  subsequent  recognition  took  place  when  Sherbrooke  was

1  Miss  Browne  wrote  to  us  on  Jan.  18,  1884,  from  Farnham  Castle,  Surrey,  to  the
effect  that  she  too  had  heard  the  incident  described  by  Mrs.  Wright,  and  also  by  "  General
Sir  George  Nugent,  who  was  in  the  garrison  at  the  time  "  ;  and  that  the  details  were  very
similar  to  those  in  Miss  Langmead's  account.


264  .  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

■walking  with  two  gentlemen,  in  Piccadilly,  and  that  he  actually  accosted
the  gentleman,  who  told  him  that  he  was  Wynyard's  twin-hr other.  These
are  precisely  the  sort  of  inaccuracies  most  likely  to  creep  into  a  story  in
its  passage  from  mouth  to  mouth.

The  Rev.  O.  H.  Gary,  of  Tresham  Vicarage,  Chudleigh,  wrote  to  our
friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  on  April  3,  1882  :—

"  The  story,  as  my  mother,  who  heard  it  from  Wynyard  himself,  used
to  tell  it,  was  as  follows  : — General  Sherbrooke  and  Mr.  (or  General)
Wynyard  were  sitting  together  in  a  hut  in  Canada  (or  Nova  Scotia  or
elsewhere  in  North  America)  when  a  figure  entered  the  tent  and  passed
through  into  an  inner  apartment,  whence  there  was  no  means  of  exit  except
where  they  were  sitting.  Wynyard  recognised  the  figure  as  that  of  his
brother,  but  thought  someone  was  playing  practical  jokes,  as  he  knew
his  brother  to  be  in  England  at  the  time.  On  searching  the  inner  room
the  figure  was  found  to  have  disappeared.

"  They  had  both  seen  the  figure.  The  brother  died  at  that  time.  Some
years  afterwards,  the  same  two  officers  were  walking  together  in  London,
when  Sherbrooke  saw  a  man  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street,  and  said,
'  Look,  there  is  the  man  that  we  saw  in  the  tent.'  Wynyard  replied,  '  No,
that  is  not  my  brother,  but  he  is  so  like  him  that  my  brother  was  once
arrested  for  debt  in  mistake  for  him.'  "

[Here  again  we  have  characteristic  illustrations  of  the  way  in  which
narratives  become  modified  in  transmission.  "The  same  two  ofiicers"is
of  course  neater  and  easier  to  remember  than  "  one  of  the  same  officers
and  a  brother  of  the  other  "  ;  and  the  "  arrest  for  debt  "  seems  to  be  an
oddly  inverted  reminiscence  of  the  detail  mentioned  by  Sir  J.  Sherbrooke,
that  "  money  had  been  paid  to  one  in  mistake  "  for  the  other.]

In  conclusion,  the  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  of
October  20,  1881:—

"  Sir, — In  reference  to  the  circumstances  related  as  occurring  in  Sir
John  Sherbrooke's  tent,  in  North  America,  permit  me  to  add  that  I  heard
an  exactly  similar  account  of  it  in  Dublin  about  the  year  1837,  by
General  D'Aguilar,  then  on  the  stafi",  and  who,  I  think,  had  been  one  of
the  occupants  of  the  tent.^  Colonel  '  Wynyard's  '  name,  who  was  on  the
Dublin  stafi"  at  the  time,  was  also  mentioned. — Yours  truly,

"  G.  Ceichton,  M.D."

I  7.  The  cases  of  the  preceding  section,  and  of  §  2,  though  not
evidentially  among  the  strongest  in  our  collection,  are  sufficient,  I
think,  to  establish  a  strong  presumption  for  the  genuineness  of  this
collective  type  of  telepathic  hallucination.  But  the  establishment  of
facts,  in  "  psychical  "  as  in  other  departments  of  Nature,  may  far  out-
strip our  power  of  satisfactorily  accounting  for  them  ;  and  such
account  as  I  can  render  of  these  phenomena  is  here  put  forward  rather
as  a  suggestion  or  adumbration  than  as  a  final  view.

1  This  does  not  appear  in  any  other  account.  Complete  information  as  to  various
details  could  only  be  obtained  by  a  search  in  the  archives  of  the  War  Office.  It  is  hoped
that  in  course  of  time  this  search  may  be  authorised.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  265

To  begin  with,  it  would,  I  think,  be  irrational  not  to  recognise  a
special  significance  in  the  fact  that  in  all  the  cases  of  §  6,  and  most
of  those  of  §  5,  the  several  percipients  were  together :  to  that  extent,
at  all  events,  conditions  of  place  seem  to  enter  vitally  into  the  pheno-
mena. But  there  is  nothing  in  this  that  need  drive  us  for  a  moment  off
idealistic  or  "  psychical  "  ground.  I  have  spoken  often,  throughout  the
book,  of  a  rapport  between  the  parties  concerned  in  a  psychical  trans-
ference— meaning  by  the  word  simply  some  pre-existing  psychical
approximation  which  conditions  the  transference.  The  rapport  has
usually  been  that  of  kinship  or  affection.  But  I  regard  these
collective  cases  as  strongly  indicative  of  a  rapport  of  a  different  sort
— consisting  not  in  old-established  sympathy,  but  in  similarity  of
immediate  mental  occupation.  I  suspect  that  such  a  rapport  might
be  induced  by  a  common  environment — by  partnership  in  that
particular  piece  of  the  "  life  of  relation  "  within  which  the  hallucina-
tion happens  to  fall.  That  is  to  say,  I  should  regard  the  fact  that
B's  hallucination  spreads  to  C,  when  B  and  C  are  in  the  same  place,
as  possibly  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  a  very  important  part  of  the
contents  of  B's  and  C's  minds  is — and  has  been  for  some  hours,
minutes,  or  moments  preceding — identical.  The  local  condition  would
be,  not  any  physical  presence  or  centre  of  influence  in  the  circle  of
space  outside  them,  but  the  community  of  scene,  and  of  other
objective  impressions,  in  the  two  parallel  currents  of  ideas  which  are
their  real  two  existences.^  It  must  be  remembered  that  we  have  no
d  priori  means  of  knowing  what  the  mental  conditions  that  favour
telepathy  are  likely  to  be.  And  I  venture  to  think  that  if,  by  some
process  of  psychical  chemistry,  the  elements  and  affinities  of  different
minds  at  particular  moments  could  be  analysed  and  estimated,  mere
community  of  scene  and  of  immediate  sensory  impression  might  count
for  more — might  prove,  that  is,  to  involve  a  larger  amount  of  real
correspondence  or  identity — than  the  external  and  accidental
character  of  such  passing  experience  might  have  led  us  to  expect.

But  this  idea,  if  tenable,  seems  capable  of  being  extended.  If
community  of  environment  opens  a  channel  of  supersensuous  com-
munication between  B  and  C,  we  come  to  conceive  a  greater  fluidity
(so  to  speak)  in   the    directions  of  telepathic  transference  than  the

1  A  similar  explanation  may  be  suggested  for  the  fact  that  thought-transference
experiments  rarely  succeed  when  agent  and  percipient  are  so  far  withdrawn  from^  one
another  as  to  have  quite  different  environments.  This  fact  would  otherwise  seem
explicable  only  by  some  hypothesis  of  "  brain- waves  "  diminishing  in  strength  with  the
increase  of  the  distance  between  the  parties — a  hypothesis  which  has  the  disadvantage  of
being  quite  inapplicable  to  many  of  the  facts  of  spontaneous  telepathy  (Vol.  i.,  p.  112).


266  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

more  usual  cases  of  a  distant  agent  and  a  single  percipient  could
reveal.  And  this  brings  me  to  what  I  suspect  to  be  a  more  correct
account  of  the  collective  telepathic  cases  that  have  been  passed  in
review.

In  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,  I  consulted  clearness  by  keeping
separate  the  hypothesis  (1)  of  joint  and  independent  affection  of  B  and
C  by  A,  and  the  hypothesis  (2)  of  C's  affection  by  B  who  alone  is
directly  affected  by  A.  Now  looking  back  at  these  hypotheses  in  the
light  of  the  evidence,  the  objections  (see  §  2)  to  the  assumption  of
independent  psychical  affection  of  B  and  C  by  A  come  back  on  us
with  only  increased  force.  As  long  as  telepathic  hallucinations  are
rare,  and  lead  by  their  rarity  to  the  conclusion  that  they  generally
require  not  only  an  abnormal  condition  of  the  agent,  but  specific
susceptibility  in  the  percipient,  nothing  can  make  it  seem  otherwise
than  astonishing  that  two  closely  similar  specimens  of  them,  in  con-
nection with  the  same  agent,  should  independently  concern  two
percipients  at  the  same  moment.  One  might  admit  such  an
astonishing  coincidence  once  or  twice — I  have  suggested  its  applica-
tion to  a  few  cases  in  §  2  above  ;  ^  but  it  seems  impossible  to  lay  it
down  as  a  principle  of  explanation,  by  which  any  number  of
collective  hallucinations  may  be  accounted  for.  No  view  which
shrinks  from  assuming  a  local  and  physical  presence  of  A,  and  at
the  same  time  rejects  every  sort  of  direct  transference  between  B  and
C,  can  avoid  this  difficulty ;  and  the  consideration  seems  to  me  of
such  weight  as  to  exclude  hypothesis  (1)  in  the  form  stated.  I  feel
absolutely  driven  to  suppose  that  where  C's  experience  resembles  B's,
it  is  in  some  direct  way  connected  with  B's  ;  this  is  the  only  alter-
native that  I  can  see  to  admitting  a  physical  basis  to  the  percept.
But  this  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  adoption  of  hypothesis  (2)  in
its  crudest  and  most  obvious  form ;  the  "  direct  way "  need  not,  I
conceive,  be  a  transfer  between  B  and  C  wholly  unconnected  with  A
— a  transfer,  that  is  to  say,  which  must  have  equally  taken  place  had
B's  hallucination  been  purely  subjective.  Though  the  evidence  in
§  5  above  inclines  me  strongly  to  the  opinion  that  sensory  hallucina-
tions, as  such,  are  transferable  things,  I  do  not  believe  this  to  be  the
complete  explanation  of  the  later  telepathic  cases.  And  I  now
venture  to  suggest  that  with  slight  modification  the  two  hypotheses
— of  joint  affection  by  A,  and  of  direct  transference  between  B  and  C

1  In  all  of  these,  however,  where  the  two  percipients  were  near  together  and  had  been
sharing  the  same  life,  I  think  it  probable  that  the  experiences  were  not  truly  independent.


xviil]  collective  CASES.  267

— may  be  amalgamated  ;  and  that  the  amalgamation  is  really  more
probable  than  either  hypothesis  in  its  isolated  form.

Where  A,  the  distant  agent,  is  in  rapport  both  with  B  and  C,
it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  B  and  C  are  jointly  and  independently
impressed  by  A,  though  the  particular  form — the  hallucination — in
which  they  simultaneously  embody  their  impression  is  still  an  effect
of  B's  mind  on  C's,  or  of  C's  on  B's.  The  joint  impression  from  A
may  be  conceived  as  having  in  itself  a  tendency  to  facilitate  this
farther  effect — that  is  to  say,  psychical  communication  between  B  and
C  may  find  a  readier  and  wider  channel  at  the  exceptional  moments
when  they  are  attuned  by  a  common  telepathic  influence  than,  e.g.,
when  one  of  them  is  staring  at  a  card  and  the  other  is  endeavouring
to  guess  it.  But  even  for  these  cases,  I  think  it  so  dangerous,
in  view  of  the  apparent  rarity  of  "  psychical "  affections,  to  assume
any  sort  of  independent  psychical  affection  of  different  minds  at
the  same  moment,  that  I  should  prefer  to  regard  A's  influence  on
C  as  derived  through  B.  And  this  certainly  commends  itself  as  the
process  where  C  is  a  stranger  to  A,  or  not  a  person  whom  it  would
have  seemed  natural  that  A's  vicissitudes  should  in  any  way  affect.^
In  such  cases  I  conceive  that,  while  C's  experience  depends  on  B's
presence  or  existence,  and  even  probably  on  the  form  of  B's  experience
when  the  two  are  similar,  yet  A's  influence  may  really  and  truly
extend  to  C ;  that  in  fact  there  is  a  rapport  between  A  and  C,
established  ad  hoc  by  the  rapport  of  both  of  them  with  B.  B  would
be  thus  not  the  instigator,  or  not  solely  the  instigator,  but  the  channel,
of  C's  percipience — the  assumption  being  that  a  mind  in  which  B
holds  a  prominent  place,  such  as  C's,  may  be  abnormally  susceptible
to  an  influence  which  abnormally  impresses  B.  Especially  would  this
conception  relieve  the  difiiculty  of  such  extreme  cases  as  Nos.  242  and
355,  above  ;  where  B's  part  in  the  occurrence  was  to  all  appearance
suppressed,  and  C,  a  stranger  to  A,  was  the  sole  percipient.^  We  can
scarcely  doubt  that  the  presence  of  B,  the  near  relative  of  the  supposed
agent,  was  a  condition  of  C's  percipience  ;  while  at  the  same  time  it
seems  absurd  to  suppose  that  B  infects  C  with  a  sensory  hallucination
which  he  himself  does  not  experience.  We  seem  driven,  then,  to
regard  B  as  a  mere  channel  of  influence  ;  and  that  is  a  part  which
there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  to  be  played  unconsciously.     For

1  E.g.,  cases  169,  264,  279,  339,  348,  350,  353,  354,  357.

2  See  also  case  307,  where  A's  bond,  such  as  it  was,  was  with  B  and  not  with  O ;  and
compare  case  311.


268  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  [chap.

the  better  established  facts  of  telepathy  have  familiarised  us  with
both  unconscious  reception  and  unconscious  propagation  of  telepathic
impulses ;  and  however  unexpected,  it  is  at  least  quite  conceivable
that  the  two  events  should  take  place  as  part  of  a  single  process —
which  is  all  that  the  transmission  of  an  impulse  from  A  to  C  through
the  unwitting  B  implies.

The  above  view,  of  rapport  through  community  of  mental  occupa-
tion, may  likewise  afford  some  explanation  of  the  otherwise  puzzling
cases  where  the  telepathic  influence  exercised  by  A  seems  itself  to
have  depended  rather  on  local  than  on  personal  reasons  ;  as  in  case  29
in  Chap.  Y.,  where  the  agent's  form  was  seen  by  a  person  only
slightly  connected  with  her,  in  a  spot  in  which  she  was  known
to  have  been  considerably  interested ;  ^  or  in  cases  where  the
actual  percipient  had  little  or  no  connection  with  the  agent,  but  was
situated  in  a  place  where  the  agent  might  naturally  conceive  some
other  and  nearly-connected  person  to  be  ;  ^  or  in  cases  where  a  dying
person's  form  is  alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  strangers  in  that  person's
old  homef  or  in  a  converse  case  in  Chap.  III.  of  the  Supplement,
§  3 — Miss  G.'s  veridical  dream  of  the  death  of  a  comparative  stranger
in  her  own  old  home.  It  is  not  necessary  that  two  persons
should  know  one  another,  for  certain  daily  scenes  and  local  impressions
to  be  deeply  stamped  in  common  on  their  two  minds ;  and  in  this
way  locality  might  constitute  an  ideal  bond  between  A  and  B  who
are  apart,  as  we  conceived  that  it  might  do  between  B  and  C  who  are
together.

An  even  further  extension  could  be  given  to  this  idea,  if  we  admit
the  supposition  that  A's  own  susceptibility  may  be  quickened,  in  the
way  that  was  so  strongly  suggested  by  some  of  the  reciprocal  cases  in
the  preceding  chapter.  I  there  pointed  out  (pp.  161-2  and  164)  the
indications  afforded  of  a  special  sort  of  clairvoyance  ;  telepathic,  in  the
sense  that  it  depends  on  B's  living  presence  in  the  scene  which  A
perceives  ;  but  independent  in  the  sense  that  B  and  his  surroundings
are  perceived  while  B's  own  state  is  not  critical  but  normal — the
abnormality  of  state  being  confined  to  A,  whose  extension  of  faculty
in  trance  or  at  death  makes  him  percipient  of  B,  as  well  as  the  agent
of  B's  percipience.  A  view  akin  to  this  has  been  developed  by  Mr.
Myers,  in  the  Note  that  follows  a  few  pages  further  on ;  and  the

1  It  is  probable  that  a  local  explanation  would  apply  to  cases  239,  248,  313,  343,  350,
589.

2  E.g.,  Nos.  192,  225,  660,  as  well  as  No.  242  just  mentioned ;  and  compare  No.  307.
*  E.g.,  case  666.


XVIII.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  269

temptation  to  apply  it  to  the  collective  cases  is  considerable,  since  it
enables  us  to  conceive  the  scene,  and  the  sense  of  being  present  there,
as  common  to  the  minds  of  A,  B,  and  C  alike ;  and  so  far  as  such
community  is  a  favourable  condition  for  telepathic  affection,  it  would
explain  A's  power  to  affect  the  other  two.^  To  some  joint  hallucina-
tions, however,  {e.g.,  cases  327,  328,  329,  and  perhaps  348,  where  A,
the  original  of  the  phantasm,  has  been  in  a  normal  waking  state  at
the  time,  such  an  explanation  seems  quite  irrelevant ;  and  its  admis-
sibility elsewhere  must,  I  think,  depend  on  our  obtaining  more  proof
than  we  yet  have  of  A's  reciprocal  percipience,  in  collective  cases
which  are  clearly  due  to  his  agency.  The  reciprocal  type  having
seemed,  on  the  evidence,  to  be  a  rare  if  not  a  doubtful  one,  we  ought
to  be  doubly  cautious  of  making  it  the  ground  of  explanation  for
further  and  more  perplexing  phenomena.

1  I  do  not  think — herein  differing  from  Mr.  Myers — that  the  mere  fact  of  A's  clair-
voyant perception  of  the  scene,  even  if  established,  would  account  for  the  similarity  and
simultaneity  of  the  two  resulting  affections,  so  as  to  enable  us  to  dispense  with  the
hypothesis  of  a  direct  dependence  of  one  of  them  on  the  other.  Strong  evidence  seems
needed,  before  we  can  assume  the  particular  mental  events  involved  in  A's  clairvoyant
perception  to  be  more  calculated  than  any  other  abnormal  events  of  his  experience — such
as  simply  dying  in  his  bed  at  home — to  impose  a  particular  hallucination  on  several  minds
at  once.  However  much  his  clairvoyant  perception  of  B  and  C  and  their  surroundings
may  be  supposed  to  facilitate  his  impressing  them,  why  should  the  two  independent
impressions,  which  according  to  telepathic  analogy  might  take  many  different  forms,  be
projected  by  B  and  C  in  the  same  form  ?

While  therefore  I  can  accept,  for  certain  cases  at  any  rate,  Mr.  Myers'  description  of
the  appearance  of  A  to  B  as  proximately  dependent  on  A's  "perception  of  his  own
presence"  in,  or  his  "psychical  translation"  to,  the  scene  where  his  phantasm  is
observed — for  this  is  practically  identical  with  the  suggestion  made  above  (p.  162)  that  an
"extension  of  A's  susceptibility  in  a  certain  direction  has  involved  the  power  to  act
abnormally  in  the  same  direction  " — I  cannot  go  on  to  admit  that  it  is  "  a  subsidiary
question,"  depending  on  varying  degrees  of  susceptibility  to  telepathic  impressions,
whether  the  phantasm  is  seen  by  B  only,  or  by  a  whole  group  of  persons.  To  do  this
would  seem  to  me  to  be  transferring  to  the  terms  "perception  of  presence  "  and  "  psychical
translation  "  some  of  the  connotation  of  physical  presence  and  translation.

Mr.  Myers  would  obviate  this  objection  by  the  further  supposition  that  the  aspect  of
A  which  B  and  C  perceive  is  derived  in  detail  from  his  mind  and  not  theirs — which  would
no  doubt  be  a  convenient  way  of  accounting  for  the  similarity  of  their  hallucinations.  But
in  the  first  place,  I  fail  to  see  any  ground  for  connecting  this  suijjjosition  (as  Mr.  Myers
connects  it)  with  the  previous  hypothesis  of  A's  clairvoyant  presence  at  the  place  where  B
and  C  are.  The  supposed  derivation  would  clearly  have  to  be  from  an  unconscious  or
sub-conscious  iiart  of  A's  mind ;  for  there  is  no  more  reason  for  supposing  his  conscious
thoughts  to  be  concentrated  on  his  own  aspect  when  he  is  clairvoyantly  perceiving  a
scene,  than  when  he  is  consciously  lying  in  bed  and  perceiving  his  normal  surroundings  in
a  normal  way.  And  so  far  as  any  conscious  occupation  of  the  mind  may  be  supposed
to  throw  into  abeyance  any  assumed  mental  activities  of  a  more  latent  kind,  one  would
expect  that  A's  interest  in  the  friend  or  friends  whom  he  is  psychically  visiting  would  be
specially  calculated  to  thrust  into  the  background  his  sub-conscious  sense  of  his  own
aspect ;  so  that  the  difficulties  (Chap,  iii.,  §  9,  and  Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  which  in  any  case  are
involved  in  the  hypothesis  that  A's  mind  transfers  to  B  the  detailed  image  of  his  aspect,
are  rather  increased  than  relieved  by  supposing  him  clairvoyant  at  the  time.

And,  in  the  second  place,  this  hypothesis  of  detailed  derivation  from  the  agent's
mind,  as  applied  to  collective  cases,  seems  to  me  in  itself  open  to  grave  doubt.  We  have
encountered,  no  doubt,  an  important  group  of  cases  (Chap,  xii.,  §  8)  in  which  certain
details  of  a  phantasmal  appearance  did  seem  to  be  literally  derived  from  the  agent's
mind,  and  not  simply  projected  by  the  percipient  from  his  own  resources.  But  those
who  admit  the  psychological  continuity  of  dreams  and  hallucinations  on  which  I  have
laid   so  much  stress,    and   who  have  marked  at  every   stage  the  ways  in    which    the


270  COLLECTIVE  CASES.

And  indeed  any  conjectural  explanations  of  these  more  outlying
telepathic  phenomena  have,  I  am  well  aware,  an  air  of  rashness  and
unsoundness.  This  may  very  likely  be  due  to  their  being  really
rash  and  unsound ;  but  it  may  also  possibly  be  due  to  the  fact  that
our  view  of  the  field  before  us  is  still  very  partial  and  dim.  The  duty
of  caution  in  all  evidential  matters  does  not  exclude  the  duty  of
keeping  the  mind  open  to  new  conceptions  on  this  threshold  of  new
knowledge,  and  not  allowing  any  h3rpothesis  that  has  provisionally
commended  itself  to  become  a  rigid  barrier,  within  which  further
facts  must  be  forced  or  else  disallowed.  And  if  our  central  thesis
stands — if  "  psychical  "  transferences  from  mind  to  mind  be  admitted
as  in  rerum  naturd — the  rashness,  I  think,  would  be  in  attempting
to  set  a  limit  to  the  possible  implications  of  this  admission.  Its
tendency,  at  any  rate,  is  to  give  a  tangible  meaning  to  that  solidarity
of  life  which  Idealism  proclaims  ;  to  lead  us  to  regard  individual
minds,  not  as  isolated  units,  but  as  all  in  potential  unity — as  entering
into  a  scheme  whose  relation  to  the  telergic  influence  somewhat
resembles  that  of  the  physical  world  to  electricity.  And  in  such  a
scheme  we  need  not  be  surprised  if  the  manifestations  of  action  and
affinity  between  the  parts  are  as  sudden  and  shifting,  and  to  the
superficial  view  as  isolated,  as  in  the  physical  world  those  of  electrical
relations  between  different  pieces  of  matter.  But  a  far  larger  basis  of
well-attested  cases  is,  no  doubt,  needed  before  reflections  of  this  sort
can  be  profitably  pursued ;  ^nd  I  will  not  further  run  the  risk  of
inverting  the  relation  of  speculation  to  evidence  which  it  has  been
throughout  my  endeavour  to  maintain.


percipient's  mind  seems  independently  to  react  upon  and  develop  the  telepathic  impres-
sion, may  incline  to  regard  these  literal  representations  as  the  exception  rather  than  the
rule  ;  and  may  hesitate  to  extend  the  hypothesis  of  visual  images  transferred  (so  to  speak)
in  a  full-fledged  condition,  to  cases  where  the  percept  included  nothing  that  the  percipient's
memory  or  imagination  might  not  well  have  supplied.  Moreover,  in  some  of  the  collective
cases  themselves,  the  evidence  of  dissimilarity  in  the  percepts  seem  sufficient  to  show  that
the  percipient  minds  were  no  mere  tabulce  rasoe  for  a  foreign  image.  But  a  much  more  im-
portant observation  with  respect  to  the  "  collective  "  evidence  here  presented  is  this — that
(putting  aside  the  second-hand  record,  No.  670,  where  the  description  of  details  cannot
be  safely  relied  on)  in  not  a  single  case  have  any  such  special  features  of  dress  or  aspect
as  must  perforce  be  derived  from  the  mind  of  the  distant  A  been  simiiltaneously  perceived
by  B  and  G.  It  is  only  in  case  653,  and  in  the  dubious  narrative  quoted  on  p.  252,  that
such  features  are  alleged  to  have  been  perceived  even  by  B  ;  and  there  is  no  proof  what-
ever that  C  on  those  occasions  was  aware  of  them.  This,  in  my  view,  is  just  what  was  to
be  expected.  For  if  it  is  indicated,  as  the  general  result  of  the  telepathic  evidence,  that
the  most  dominant  form  of  agency  and  the  most  definite  and  detailed  form  of  transfer  are
extreme  rather  than  normal  forms,  it  would  scarcely  be  conceivable  that  in  case  after  case
a  double  exhibition  of  them  should  occur,  and  A's  sub-conscious  sense  of  his  own  aspect,  by
two  independent  manifestations,  be  reflected  in  a  faithful  picture  of  him  before  the  eyes
of  two  persons  at  once.


CONCLUSION.

§  1.  In  bringing  to  a  close  the  principal  division  of  this  work — the
presentation  of  the  case  for  spontaneous  telepathy  as  supported  by
a  considerable  body  of  first-hand  records — it  will  scarcely,  I  think,  be
necessary  to  attempt  anything  like  a  summary  of  the  foregoing
chapters.  It  is  indeed  impossible  effectively  to  summarise  facts  the
whole  force  of  which  lies  in  their  cumulation.  One  point  only  I
would  once  again  emphasise — the  one  with  which  I  started — to  wit,
that  radical  connection  between  experimental  and  spontaneous
telepathy,  the  importance  of  which  in  my  own  view  I  may  best
express  by  saying  that  I  am  unable  even  to  guess  what  effect  the
body  of  testimony  to  the  latter  class  of  cases  would  have  on  me,  were
I  not  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  former.  This  being  understood,  so
far  as  the  evidential  position  of  the  subject  admits  of  a  brief  connected
statement,  I  have  endeavoured  to  state  it  in  the  closing  pages  of  the
fourth  chapter.  Neither  there  nor  subsequently  have  I  extenuated  the
evidential  shortcomings  of  many  of  the  spontaneous  cases  ;  but  for  the
evidence  taken  as  a  whole,  it  may  be  claimed  that  it  resembles  not  so
much  a  shifting  shadow,  which  may  be  left  to  individual  taste  or
temperament  to  interpret,  as  a  solid  mass  seen  in  twilight,  which  it
may  be  easy  indeed  to  avoid  stumbling  over,  but  only  by  resolutely
walking  away  from  it.  The  temptation  to  walk  away  from  it — to
dismiss  it  with  a  hasty  glance— will  be  very  strong.  The  matter
presented  is  from  a  literary  point  of  view  monotonously  dull,  from  a
scientific  point  of  view  confusingly  inexact :  the  study  of  it  in  detail
is  hard  work,  while  at  the  same  time  it  is  work  which  affords  none  of
the  stimulus  of  high  intellectual  activity.  Yet  it  is  only  by  detailed
study  that  my  colleagues  and  I  have  arrived  at  our  own  view ;  and  so
far  are  we  from  putting  ourselves  into  antagonism  to  the  sceptical
attitude  of  Science,  that  we  should  regard  any  conclusion  formed
without  such  study  as  premature.     On  this  still  dubious  territory,  a


272  CONCLUSION,

number  of  direct  and  independent  attestations,  which  would  be  utterly-
superfluous  elsewhere,  will  be — or  ought  to  be — demanded  ;  and
others  will  need,  as  we  have  done,  to  have  the  true  nature  and  amount
of  the  evidence  far  more  distinctly  brought  home  to  them  than  is
necessary  in  realms  already  mastered  by  specialists  to  whose  dicta
they  may  defer.

But  in  point  of  fact,  the  dulness  of  the  work  in  detail  scarcely
needs  apology ;  for  it  would  never  be  specially  remarked  except  in
connection  with  that  totally  unscientific  view  on  which  I  commented
at  the  very  opening  of  the  treatise.  The  whole  subject  of  psychical
influences  has  been  mixed  up  in  the  public  mind  with  ideas  of  the
supernatural  or  uncanny— with  nervous  thrills  and  spurious  excite-
ments. When  such  associations  are  carefully  excluded,  the  details  of
the  inquiry  cannot  be  expected  to  have  more,  and  may  perhaps  have
not  much  less,  attraction  than  those  of  the  recognised  physical
sciences.  And  so  far  as  the  unexciting  character  of  the  present
collection — poor  in  thrills,  but  tolerably  rich  in  verified  dates
— tends  to  make  this  sober  view  prevail,  it  will  be  a  direct
advantage.  For,  exactly  like  the  physical  sciences,  the  research
has  to  go  on,  methodically,  not  sensationally  ;  and  it  has  only  just
begun  to  be  methodised.  The  present  instalment  of  facts,  though
probably  solid  enough  to  surfeit  those  who  are  not  troubled  by
d  priori  difficulties,  and  to  repel  the  mere  seeker  after  marvels,
cannot  be  expected  to  convince  every  reasonable  searcher  after
truth ;  and  no  one  (as  I  have  remarked  before)  can  fix  the  precise
amount  of  testimony  which  a  candid  mind  is  bound  to  regard  as
adequate.  And  we  accept  this  view  of  the  position  rather  as  an
incentive  than  as  a  discouragement.  For  we  are  fortified  by  the
belief  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  necessary  material,  as  the  combined
effort  to  render  it  available,  that  has  hitherto  been  lacking.  Even  the
record  now  presented,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  is  drawn  from  the  com-
paratively small  number  of  persons  who  have  heard  of  our  existence,
and  much  of  it  from  the  limited  circle  of  our  own  acquaintance.  We
are  justified,  therefore,  in  regarding  the  area  hitherto  explored  as  but  a
comer  of  a  very  much  larger  field,  which  may  be  gradually  swept ;
and  the  very  flaws  in  the  present  collection  will  have  had  their  use,  if
they  direct  attention  to  the  true  standard  of  evidential  requirements,
and  if  through  them  future  telepathic  incidents  stand  a  better  chance
of  being  caught  at  the  critical  moment,  while  the  opportunities  for
investigation  are  complete.


conclusion:  273

§  2,  The  commoner  difficulties  which  hamper  progress  may,  more-
over, be  expected  largely  to  disappear,  as  time  goes  on.  As  the  idea  of
Telepathy  becomes  understood,  the  difference  will  be  more  and  more
realised  between  facts  which  make  for  it  and  facts  which  do  not ;
aid  towards  the  establishment  of  some  strong  item  of  proof  will  not
so  often  be  refused  on  the  ground  that  no  proof  is  needed — that  every-
body has  had  presentiments  fulfilled,  or  has  occasionally  guessed  what
his  friend  was  thinking  of ;  and  efforts  will  be  more  profitably  directed
through  the  mere  existence  of  a  scheme  into  which  the  results  may  fall.
And  further,  a  rational  public  spirit  in  the  matter  may  be  trusted  to
develop.  The  reluctance  to  give  any  prominence  to  what  are  often
legitimately  regarded  as  very  private  experiences  will  gradually  give
way,  when  it  is  recognised  that  the  significance  of  each  item  of
evidence,  even  as  matter  for  private  contemplation,  depends  on  the
combination  of  many  items ;  and  among  those  who  take  this  wider
view,  fewer  will  shrink  from  the  direct  attestation  which  alone  can
ensure  the  result  that  they  profess  to  desire,  and  which  they  would
readily  give  to  any  other  sort  of  fact  in  heaven  or  earth  that  they  truly
believed  in.  As  for  the  merely  negative  difficulties — the  general
grounds  of  objection  to  our  work — we  see  them  already  diminishing
from  the  mere  spirit  of  the  age.  The  set  of  that  spirit  is  very  observably
towards  a  wider  tolerance — a  distrust  of  finalities  and  restrictions,
by  whatever  party  imposed,  and  a  faith  in  free  inquiry,  wherever  it
may  lead.  Men  are  already  ceasing  to  argue  that  the  alleged  facts
did  not  happen  because  they  could  not  happen ;  or  that  telepathy
is  perhaps  not  true,  and,  therefore,  if  true,  is  not  important ;  or
that  the  recognised  paths  of  labour,  along  which  steady  progress  is
being  made  and  may  still  be  made  to  an  unpredictable  extent,  are
so  various  and  abundant  that  it  is  mere  trifling  to  desert  them  for  a
dubious  track,  where  progress,  even  could  it  be  supposed  possible,
would  still  be  a  useless  anachronism.

§  3.  But  though  "psychical  research"  is  certain  in  time  to  surmount
ridicule  and  prejudice,  and  to  clear  for  itself  a  firm  path  between  easy
credulity  on  the  one  side  and  easy  incredulity  on  the  other,  the  rate  of
its  advance  must  depend  on  the  amount  of  sym.pathy  and  support  that
it  can  command  from  the  general  mass  of  educated  men  and  women.  In
no  department  should  the  democratic  spirit  of  modern  science  find  so
free  a  scope:  it  is  for  the  public  here  to  be,  not — as  in  anthropological
researches — the  passive  material  of  investigation,  but  the  active  partici-

VOL.    II.  T


274  CONCLUSION.

pators  in  it.  We  acknowledge  with  warm  gratitude  the  amount  of
patient  assistance  that  we  have  received — how  patient  and  forbearing  in
many  instances,  none  can  judge  who  have  not  tried,  as  private
individuals,  to  conduct  a  system  of  strict  cross-examination  on  a  wide
scale.  But  unless  this  assistance  is  largely  supplemented,  our  under-
taking can  scarcely  hold  its  ground.  Its  interest  must  not  for  a  moment
be  supposed  to  be  of  the  merely  curious  sort,  sufficiently  illustrated  in  a
loose  batch  of  more  or  less  surprising  facts  ;  indeed,  so  far  as  the  facts
excite  surprise,  it  is  a  proof  that  the  work  is  only  beginning.  If  the
natural  system  includes  telepathy.  Nature  has  certainly  not  exhausted
herself  in  our  few  hundreds  of  instances  :  that  these  facts  should  be
genuine  would  be  almost  inconceivable  if  she  had  not  plenty  more
like  them  in  reserve.  And  here  is  the  practically  interesting  point  ;
for,  till  the  general  fact  is  universally  admitted,  the  several  items  of
proof  must  ever  tend  to  lose  their  effect  as  they  recede  further  into  the
past.  This  peculiarity  of  the  subject  cannot  be  gainsaid,  and  must  be
boldly  faced.  For  aught  I  can  tell,  the  hundreds  of  instances  may
have  to  be  made  thousands.  If  the  phenomena  cannot  be  com-
manded at  will,  the  stricter  must  be  the  search  for  them  :  if  they  are
exceptionally  transient  and  elusive,  all  the  greater  is  the  importance
of  strong  contemporary  evidence.  The  experimental  work  needs  to
be,  and  easily  might  be,  enormously  extended  :  for  many  a  year  to
come  the  spontaneous  phenomena  must  be  as  diligently  watched  for
and  recorded  as  if  each  case  stood  alone  in  its  generation.  And
whatever  the  defects  of  the  present  attempt,  so  far  as  it  supplies  an
impulse  or  lends  an  aid  in  either  of  these  directions,  it  will  not
have  failed  in  its  object.


*jf*  I  should  be  glad  to  extend  my  statistics  of  sensory  hallucinations  in
general,  by  canvassing  another  known  number  of  persons  taken  at  random.  (See
Chap.  XIII.)  Readers  who  may  feel  disposed  to  help  me  in  this  matter,  and
who  will  write  to  14,  Dean's  Yard,  S.W.,  will  receive  the  necessary  forms  and
instructions.  But  apart  from  a  special  census,  I  should  be  grateful  for  accounts
of  such  phenomena  from  any  persons  who  have  themselves  had  experience  of
them.  The  assurance  that  they  are  not  things  to  be  troubled  about,  and  are
compatible  with  perfect  bodily  and  mental  health,  may  perhaps  remove  any  dis-
inclination that  might  be  felt  to  recording  instances.  The  names  of  informants
will,  of  course,  be  held  private.


VOL.     II.  T    2


NOTE,   BY  MR.  MYERS,  ON  A   SUGGESTED   MODE
OF  PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.

§  1.  It  is  with  some  hesitation  that  I  lay  before  the  public  the
speculations  contained  in  the  following  essay.  They  may  seem,  I  fear,
both  over-bold  and  over-complex  ;  and  even  the  reader  who  follows  them
with  a  provisional  adhesion  will  find  that  if  he  gains  in  width,  he  will  lose
in  clearness  of  vision ;  while  the  conception  of  telepathy  as  a  relatively-
simple  mode  of  colligating  certain  obscure  phenomena  will  give  place  to  a
view  in  which  the  old  problems  loom  larger  than  ever,  though,  perhaps,
with  some  inter-relations  made  manifest  which  have  not  hitherto  been
observed.

But  in  reply  to  the  objection  of  rashness  I  must  ask  my  readers  to
distinguish  between  results  unanimously  arrived  at,  on  the  strength  of
definite  experiment  and  explicit  testimony,  by  a  group  of  painstaking
persons,  and  the  speculations  of  one  of  their  number,  to  which  the  rest
stand  uncommitted,  and  which  he  ofiers  tentatively,  as  the  mere  prelimi-
naries of  what  may  in  time  become  a  surer  view.  And  to  the  objection
of  complexity  I  answer  that  my  hypothesis  is  free  at  least  from  the  one
unpardonable  sin  of  hypotheses  :  it  is  not  certainly  unverifiable, — at  least
it  may  prompt  experiment  and  direct  observation.

I  shall  assume  in  the  following  pages  that  the  reader  has  already
mastered  the  general  drift  and  purport  of  these  volumes.  And,  perhaps,
I  can  best  introduce  my  own  view  by  dwelling  first  on  a  difficulty  in  our
recorded  evidence  which  drove  my  own  mind  to  seek  for  some  wider
solution.

§  2.  The  reader,  then,  is  aware  that  veridical  phantasms— sounds  or
sights,  that  is  to  say,  coincident  with  some  death  or  crisis — hcve  been
treated  in  this  work  on  the  analogy  of  experimental  thought-transference,
as  probably  being  in  efiect  the  externalisation  of  a  telepathic  impression, —
the  hallucinatory  forms  in  which  a  feeling  or  idea  transferred  from  the  mind
of  a  distant  person  embodies  itself  to  the  percipient's  senses.  In  dealing
with  the  simpler  forms  of  phantasmal  sight,  sound,  or  other  impression,
this  analogy  seemed  to  hold  good ;  and  we   found,    moreover,  enough    of


278  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

parallelism  between  telepathic  hallucinations  and  the  apparently  casual
and  meaningless  hallucinations  of  sane  persons  to  suggest  that  telepathic
phantasms  were  at  least  shaped  by  the  percipient's  mind,  in  the  same
manner  as  those  delusive  phantasms  which  the  mind  not  only  shapes,  but
presumably  originates  altogether.

All  this,  however,  referred  to  phantasms  perceived  by  one  person  only.
On  such  a  theory  one  would  hardly  expect  that  a  phantasm  would  ever  be
perceptible  to  several  persons  at  once ;  but  rather  that  strangers  in  the
company  of  the  percipient  would  neither  hear  nor  see  anything, — would
not  be  involved,  at  any  rate,  by  mere  local  proximity  in  that  message
between  according  minds.

It  was  plain,  however,  that  this  question  could  not  be  answered
d,  priori.  It  needed  what  had  not  hitherto  been  forthcoming,  namely,  a
collection  of  observed  instances  large  enough  to  allow  of  a  tolerably  wide
induction.  And  the  collection  offered  in  these  volumes — though  it  might
with  advantage  be  tenfold  larger — does  in  fact  offer  some  interesting
statistical  results  which  bear  on  this  problem.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  great  majority  of  phantasms
occur  to  a  percipient  who  is  alone.  And  this  fact  accords  well  with  our
view  that  the  subsidence  of  ordinary  stimuli  facilitates  the  development  of
the  telepathic  impression.

But  when  we  come  to  the  small  residue  of  cases  where  several  persons
have  been  together  when  the  phantasm  occurred,  we  find  a  result  equally
unexpected  and  perplexing.  For  it  will  be  found  that  in  nearly  two  cases
out  of  three  the  phantasm  is  perceived  by  all  or  most  of  the  persons  so
situated  that  they  would  have  perceived  it  had  it  been  an  objective  reality.
In  about  one  case  out  of  three  it  is  perceived  by  one  only  of  the  persons
present.  And,  as  a  further  complication,  when  perceived  by  more  persons
than  one,  it  is  sometimes  perceived  more  fully  by  some  than  by  others  ; —
both  heard  and  seen,  perhaps,  by  one,  and  only  heard  by  another.

§3.  Now  this  result  seems  at  first  sight  equally  inconsistent  with
the  theory  of  the  telepathic  impulse  as  generating  these  hallucinations,
and  with  the  crude  popular  credence  which  attributes  to  "  ghosts  "  some
sort  of  tenuous  materiality.  For  in  the  one  case  we  might  expect  that  the
phantasm  would  rarely  be  perceptible  to  more  than  one  person ;  in  the
other  case  that  it  would  always  be  perceptible  to  all  the  persons  present.
The  popular  view — to  take  that  first — lies  so  far  outside  the  pale
of  any  recognised  scientific  conceptions  that  strong  evidence  indeed
would  be  needed  to  reconcile  us  to  it.  We  are  sometimes  asked  to
believe  that  this  body  of  ours — with  its  digestive  system,  &c.,  and  all
its    traces    of     physical    evolution — is    interpenetrated    with    a    "  meta-


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  279

organism  "  of  identical  shape  and  structure,  and  capable  sometimes  of
detaching  itself  from  the  solid  flesh  and  producing  measurable  efiects  on
the  material  world.  Now  that  material  eifects  should  be  produced  by
something  which  (like  our  own  will),  is  only  cognisable  by  us  on  its
psychical  side  is  not  in  itself  an  absurd  supposition,  though  we  have  little
evidence  which  goes  to  support  it.  But  this  hypothesis  of  a  connate
molecular  "  meta-organism  "  is  at  once  grotesque  and  entirely  insufficient.
For  it  is  precisely  against  this  form  of  the  ghost-hypothesis  that  the
difficulty  as  to  the  ghosts  of  clothes  has  overwhelming  weight.  The  appari-
tion that  stands  before  us,  on  this  theory,  is  an  objective  thing  ;  it  has
grown  with  our  friend's  growth,  it  is  organic  with  his  deathless  vitality.
Are,  then,  his  dead  habiliments  alive  also  in  the  spirit  1  or  how  has  the
meta-organism  accreted  to  itself  a  meta-coat  and  meta-trousers  ?

§  4.  But  if  we  thus  rule  out  of  court  the  crudest  explanation  of  a
collectively-witnessed  apparition,  our  next  attempt  must  plainly  be  to
explain  it  on  the  lines  of  telepathy,  by  extending  in  some  way  our
hypothesis  of  a  phantasmogenetic  impulse  conveyed  directly  from  mind  to
mind.  Now  if  A's  phantom  is  witnessed  by  B  and  0  together — and
witnessed,  as  we  are  assuming  throughout,  without  intimation  thereof
from  one  to  the  other  by  look  or  word — then  it  might  seem  simplest  to
assume  that  a  separate  telepathic  impression  passed  from  A  to  B,  and  from
A  to  C,  and  was  externalised  by  each  of  the  percipients  as  a  phantom  of
his  own  shaping.  It  has  been  shown,  however,  in  Chap.  XVIII.,  that
the  recorded  cases  will  not  always  admit  of  this  hypothesis.  C  is  some-
times a  stranger  to  A,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  to  suppose  that,  had  it
not  been  for  B's  presence,  he  would  have  witnessed  the  phantom  at  all.
In  this  difficulty,  Mr.  Gurney  inclines  to  the  view  that  in  such  a  case
the  telepathic  impression  is  primarily  communicated  from  A  to  B,  and
gives  rise  to  a  hallucination  in  B's  mind  ;  and  that  this  hallucination  is
then  telepathically  communicated  from  B  to  the  other  person  or  persons
present.  And  this  explanation,  if  we  can  accept  it,  seems  to  have  the
advantage  of  introducing  as  little  as  possible  of  fresh  hypothesis  into  the
psychic  field.

§  5.  I  do  not,  however,  think  that  the  evidence  warrants  us  in  pushing
our  theory  quite  so  far  in  this  direction.  I  do  not  feel  justified  in  assuming
that  a  mere  hallucination — telepathically  originated  in  the  mind  of  B,  the
primary  percipient — will  be  thus  readily  communicable,  by  a  fresh  tele-
pathic transfer,  to  the  minds  of  other  persons  in  local  proximity.  Hallu-
cinations, however  caused,  are  in  themselves  a  tolerably  distinct  class  of
phenomena ;  and,  since  we  know  of  several  kinds  that  are  not  telepathic


280  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

in  origin,  we  shall  do  well  to  inquire  whether  these  have  shown  themselves
communicable  from  the  hallucine  to  his  neighbours,  without  speech  or
suggestion  of  any  kind.  And  it  so  happens  that  a  good  deal  of  competent
observation  has  already  been  directed  to  this  point.  Folie  a  deux — -the
communicability  of  insane  delusions  ^ — has  been  for  the  last  quarter  of  a
century  a  favourite  topic  of  medical  discussion.^  Now  in  order  that  folie
a  deux  should  present  a  true  parallel  to  the  suggested  infectiousness  of
telepathic  hallucinations,  which  we  are  here  discussing,  it  would
be  necessary  to  find  cases  where  some  vision  or  voice  had  been
propagated  from  one  mind  to  another  without  any  verbal  suggestion
whatever.  No  such  case,  so  far  as  I  can  find,  is  anywhere  recorded  ;  and
no  such  case  is  reported  to  me  by  medical  friends.  ^  The  nearest  case  is
that  of  the  Lochin  family  (see  the  first  note  below),  but  there  the  attack
of  hallucinations  was  plainly  of  toxic  origin,  and  though  it  ran  much  the
same  course  with  each  of  the  poisoned  persons,  there  is  even  here  no  proof
that  any  one  of  them  caught  a  definite  hallucination  from  his  neighbour's
mind.

§  6.  It  may,  however,  be  suggested  that  medical  writers,  not  being
alive  to  the  possibility  of  an  unsuggested,  or  telepathic,  infection,  may
have  neglected  to  observe  it,  and  that  therefore  some  part  of  the  infection
for  which  they  assume  speech  as  of  course  the  medium  may  in  reality  have
taken  place  without  speech,  by  telepathic  transfer.  To  meet  this
point,  let  us  consider  what  are  the  habitual  conditions  of  the  contagion
du  delire,^  as  the  French  somewhat  loosely  term  it.

According  to  Lasegue  and  Falret  (with  whom  the  other  authorities
virtually  concur),  the  person  thus  infected  (if  not  already  a  lunatic)  must
be  inferior  in  intelligence  to  the  original  lunatic,  must  generally  be  a
woman  or  a  child,  and  must  live  long  with  the  lunatic,  apart  from  external
influences.     Moreover,  the  character  of  the  delusion  must  itself  be  more  or


1  Besides  some  references  given  by  Mr.  Gurney,  Vol.  i.,  p.  458,  see  Brunet  (Ann.  Med.-
Psych.,  1875,  Vol.  xiv.,  pp.  337-357),  and  the  specially  interesting  case  of  the  Lochin  family
(Ann.  Med.-Psych.,  1882,  Vol.  ii.),  reported  by  Dr.  Reverchon;  " Les  uns  voient  des  fantomes,
des  chats  noirs  et  blancs,  des  serpents;  Us  les  montrent  aux  autrcs  effares."  See  also  Dr. Savage's
"  Cases  of  Contagiousness  of  Delusions  "  (Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1880-1,  Vol.  xxvi.,
p.  563),  and  Dr.  Kiernam  (Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Disease,  October,  1880),  for  the
communication  of  ideas  of  grandeur  in  asylums.  I  omit  many  minor  references.  In  Dr.
Jaccoud's  Diet,  encycl.  des  sciences  mSdioales  the  reader  is  significantly  referred  from  Folie
a  deux  to  Persecutions — the  character  of  the  great  majority  of  these  cases  being  thus
indicated.  On  the  v^hole,  Lasfegue  and  Falret's  essay  (CEuvres  de  Lasegue,  Vol.  i.,  p.  732)
summarises  the  subject  very  completely.  The  latest  work,  Chpolianski's  Analogies  entre
la  folie  a  deux  et  la  suicide  a  deux,  (Paris,  1885,)  accords  vi'ith  what  has  been  here  said.

2  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson  has  kindly  made  inquiry  for  me  from  some  specialist
friends  ;  and  neither  he  nor  they  are  cognisant  of  any  such  case.  Nor  are  the  authorities
at  Bethlem  ;  as,  indeed.  Dr.  Savage's  essay^  above  referred  to,  plainly  indicates.

3  The  word  contagion  reminds  us  of  the  old  stories  of  second-sight,  communicable  by
the  touch  of  the  seer  (see  p.  189,  note).


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  281

less  reasonable  ;  it  must  rest  on  real  facts  in  the  past,  or  intelligible  fears
or  hopes  for  the  future.  The  idea  that  a  legacy  has  accrued,  the  idea  that
neighbours  are  malignant,  is  gradually  instilled  into  a  sane  mind  by  the
constant  repetition  of  an  untrue,  but  not  conspicuously-absurd  assertion.
But  even  where  this  delusion  includes  some  sensory  elements,  I  can  find,
as  I  have  already  said,  no  evidence  that  any  hallucinatory  sight  or  sound
has  ever  been  described  independently  by  two  persons  as  occurring  at
the  same  moment.  If,  then,  with  all  the  predisposition  that  close  relation-
ship can  give,  with  all  the  dominance  of  the  hallucination  in  the  affected
mind,  not  even  one  other  person  seems  ever  to  be  telepathically
impressed  thereby,  we  may  hesitate  to  assume  that  a  veridical  hallucina-
tion should  be  capable  of  telepathic  transference  to  several  bystanders.

Neither  in  duration  nor  in  apparent  intensity  can  the  veridical
hallucination  claim  to  equal  some  of  the  morbid  varieties.  There  are
instances  where  the  same  illusory  figure  has  persisted  for  months  or  years.
Take,  for  instance,  "Mr.  G-abbage  "—the persistent  visionary  tyrant  of  an
unhappy  American  gentleman,  who  was,  at  any  rate  at  first,  in  a  state  of
undoubted  sanity. ^  Constantly  though  he  appeared,  distinctly  though  he
spoke,  "  Mr.  Gabbage "  was  never  seen  or  heard  by  anyone  save  the
original  sufferer.

Again,  it  is  probable  that  no  other  hallucinations  can  rival  in  sheer
intensity  those  which  sometimes  accompany  the  onset  of  an  epileptiform
attack.  When  the  patient  rushes  furious  through  the  room,  which  he  sees
full  of  flames,  striking  at  the  imaginary  demons  who  bar  his  passage,  then
surely,  if  ever,  the  phantasies  of  the  tumultuous  brain  might  be  expected
to  imprint  themselves  on  the  bystander.  But  although  the  shock  of
witnessing  an  epileptic  fit  will  sometimes  bring  on  a  similar  fit  in  patients
thereto  disposed,  there  is,  I  believe,  no  evidence  whatever  that  the  specific
hallucination  of  the  first  sufierer  ever  communicates  itself  either  to  stable
or  to  unstable  brains.

Once  more ;  there  is  a  species  of  hallucination  somewhat  akin  to
telepathic  hallucinations — nay,  which  is  itself  sometimes  induced  tele-
pathically. I  mean  the  hallucinations  generated  by  the  mesmeriser  in  the
mind  of  his  subject.  Popular  credence,  as  Mr.  Gurney  and  I  have  else-
where shown, 2  has  much  exaggerated  the  mesmerist's  power  of  influencing
his  subject  without  verbal  suggestion.  But  in  a  few  cases — Mr.  H.  S.
Thompson's  and  Dr.  Pierre  Janet's,^  for  instance — an  eff'ect  seems  to  have

1  Sec  M.  Ribot's  comments  on  this  case  of  M.  Ball's,  Maladies  de  la  Personnalite,
p.  111.

2  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E,.,  Vol.  iii.,  p.  416.

3  See  the  Additional  Chapter  at  the  end  of  this  volume.  In  the  strange  and  remote
case  of  Councillor  Wesermann  (Vol.  i.,  p.  102)  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  distant  "wilier"
was  thinking  at  the  time  of  both  the  persons  to  whom  the  phantasm  of  his  creating  appeared.


282  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

been  produced  on  a  subject  at  a  distance  without  previous  suggestion ;  an
action  prompted  or  a  hallucination  provoked.  Now,  in  no  one  instance
does  it  appear  that  the  effect  thus  telepathically  produced  has  extended
itself  from  the  immediate  subject  to  any  other  person.

§  7.  The  analogies  of  morbid  and  of  mesmeric  hallucination  are,  then,  as
it  seems,  decidedly  against  its  communicability.  But  these  analogies  are  not
in  themselves  conclusive.  Apart  from  the  distinctively  morbid  hallucina-
tions of  madness  or  epilepsy — on  which  physicians  have  almost  exclusively
dwelt — there  are  occasional  cases  of  isolated  hallucinations  occurring  in
the  experience  of  sane  and  healthy  persons.  It  may  be  said  that  these
afford  a  closer  parallel  to  our  telepathic  hallucinations.  If  it  can  be
shown  that  these  are  communicable,  there  will  be  some  presumption  that
our  veridical  phantoms  may  be  propagated  by  psychical  infection  too.

Now,  Mr.  Gurney  has  made  a  collection,  far  larger  than  had  been
previously  attempted,  of  these  casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane.  His
collection  of  nearly  600  cases  of  this  kind  (exclusive,  of  course,  of  the
telepathic  evidence  in  this  book),  when  analysed  with  care,  affords  a
basis  of  induction  on  which  a  few  broad  conclusions,  at  least,  may  safely
be  founded.  All,  however,  that  I  mean  to  do  here  is  to  take  one  obvious
empirical  division.  Some  of  these  casual  hallucinations  resemble  veridical
hallucinations  and  some  do  not.  In  this  latter  class  are  included  a
number  of  purely  fantastic  or  truncated  visions  of  human  or  animal  forms
or  faces,  and  visions  of  inanimate  objects,  patterns,  &c.  In  the  former
class  come  visions  of  persons  known  or  unknown,  voices,  lights,  &c.

Now  it  appears  that  the  great  majority  of  these  casual  hallucinations
are  witnessed  by  one  person  only,  other  persons,  if  present,  perceiving
nothing.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  several  persons  have  shared  the
impression,  and  some  of  these  cases  Mr.  Gurney  has  set  forth  in
Chap.   XVIII.     What  lessons  do  they  teach  ?

The  most  important  characteristic  that  I  see  in  them  is  this.  They
all  of  them  belong  to  that  class  of  casual  hallucinations  which  at  any  rate
resemble  the  telepathic  cases.  There  are  no  collective  hallucinations  of
truncated  forms,  of  definite  inanimate  objects,  or  of  patterns.  They
all  represent  persons  known  or  unknown,  lights,  or  voices.

I  will  defer  for  the  moment  the  consideration  of  some  of  these  figures
or  voices  which  are  referred  to  dead  persons.  Taking  those  only  which
are  conceivably,  though  not  provably,  referable  to  persons  living  or  in  the
act  of  death,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  have  here  just  that  kind  of  fringe  of
ambiguous  cases  which  we  should  expect  to  find  surrounding  the  cases
where  some  distant  agency  is  more  clearly  proved.

For  if  such  a  phenomenon  as  telepathy,  such  a   cause  or  agency  as


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  283

telergy,  exists  at  all,  we  may  surely  suppose  that  it  exists  in  many  forms,
and  manifests  itself  in  many  operations,  of  which  we  have  not  at  present
any  inkling  whatever.  While  we  may  be  able  to  reach  a  substantial
agreement  as  to  what  phenomena  may  be  regarded  as  almost  certainly  due
to  telepathy,  we  have  no  means  at  present  of  deciding  positively  what
phenomena  are  not  so  due.

This,  therefore,  is  a  case  where  the  evidential  and  the  theoretical
treatment  of  our  subject  cannot  be  made  precisely  to  coincide.  Mr.
Gurney's  primary  object  has  been,  and  rightly,  to  treat  the  evidential  case
for  telepathy  with  scrupulous  fairness,  to  allow  to  chance-coincidence  or  to
mere  subjective  hallucination  every  incident  which  cannot  establish  a
strong  claim  to  a  supernormal  character.  So  long  as  we  are  arguing  the
question  whether  telepathy  exists  or  no,  this  rigid  method  is  plainly
needful.  We  must  rest  our  argument  on  instances  for  which,  taken
cumulatively,  any  explanation  except  telepathy  is  conspicuously
improbable.

But  supposing  the  evidential  point  established,  and  that  it  is  now  not
the  mere  existence,  but  the  nature  and  limits,  of  telepathy  which  we  are
seeking  to  determine,  we  shall  need  to  scrutinize  our  narratives  in  a  some-
what different  way.  We  shall  have  to  consider  not  only  whether  there  is
overwhelmivg  probability  that  any  given  case  is  telepathic,  but  also  whether
there  is  sufficient  probability  to  oblige  us  to  keep  that  explanation  in  view,
and  to  refrain  from  using  the  case  in  support  of  other  theories.  Thus  (to
make  my  meaning  clearer  by  an  analogy)  if  it  were  our  business  to  prove
the  existence  of  volcanic  islets,  we  should  not  be  entitled  to  base  that  proof
on  such  doubtful  instances  as  the  much-debated  islets  of  St.  Paul.  But,
the  existence  of  volcanic  islets  once  established,  we  must  not  hastily
exclude  this  dubious  case  from  our  category,  or  we  may  find  that  we  are
committing  ourselves  to  a  far  more  questionable  theory^ — that  of  a  lost
Atlantis.  ISTow  the  cases  cited  by  Mr.  Gurney  as  probably  mere  subjective
hallucinations  shared  by  several  persons  are  assuredly  not  cases  from  which
any  argument  for  the  operation  of  distant  agency  could  be  drawn.  But
if  such  agency  be  once  admitted  as  a  vera  causa,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  safer
to  ascribe  these  cases  to  its  untraced  and,  so  to  say,  casual  operation,  than
to  support  by  them  a  theory  of  collective  hallucination  which  may  easily
be — and  in  other  hands  has  been — pushed  to  a  point  at  which  it  comes
into  real  collision  with  ordinary  experience,  and  needlessly  confuses  the
canons  of  testimony.

We  must  remember  that  these  phantasms  do  not  occur  to  please  us,  or
to  satisfy  our  expectations,  but  rather  (so  far  as  we  can  tell)  in  accordance
with  some  law  affecting  the  psychical  energies  of  the  dying  person.  We
need  not,  therefore,  assume  that  our  phantasmal  visitors   will  always  be


284  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

familiar  or  interesting  figures.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that  persons  may
appear  to  us  whom  we  have  wholly  forgotten  ;  and  in  fact  in  some  of  the
cases  in  this  book  the  identification  of  the  figure  has  only  followed  upon
subsequent  information  and  reflection.  Again,  if,  as  certain  cases  seem  to
indicate,  locality  goes  for  a  great  deal  in  attracting  or  manifesting  the
phantasm,  then  figures  may  appear  to  us  which  we  have,  never  seen,  but
which  represent  some  dying  person  who  is  attached  to  the  house  in  which
we  live.  And  suggestions  such  as  these,  though  at  present  merely  specula-
tive, seem  to  me  to  form  an  explanation  of  Mr.  Gurney's  cases  less  violent
than  that  which  calls  on  us  to  suppose  that  a  mere  casual  subjective
hallucination  has  a  self-propagating  power  which  hallucinations  of  an
intenser  and  more  lasting  order  do  not  appear  to  possess.

§  8.  Another  class  of  cases  which  Mr.  Gurney  has  advanced  as  illustrat-
ing the  transferability  of  hallucinations  consists  of  the  occurrence  to  two
or  more  persons  of  phantasms  ostensibly  connecting  themselves  with  some
person  who  is  actually  dead.  I  do  not  wish  here  to  give  any  positive
opinion  as  to  the  origin  of  such  appearances.  The  question  of  phantasms
of  the  dead  introduces  a  whole  series  of  evidential  and  metaphysical
difiiculties  with  which  I  am  not  here  prepared  to  deal.  But  since  we  have
expressly  excluded  such  problems  from  the  scope  of  this  work,  have
expressly  stated  that  our  evidence  is  at  present  insufiicient  to  guide  us  to  a
distinct  opinion  thereon,  I  cannot  admit  that  any  selection  from  these
narratives  can  at  present  add  force  to  the  contention  that  purely  illusory
hallucinations,  corresponding  in  no  way  to  any  reality  outside  the  primary
percipient,  are  readily  communicable  to  the  other  persons  present.

Since,  then,  an  inquiry  so  widely-reaching  as  Mr.  Gurney's  collection
of  hallucinations  has  failed,  in  my  view,  to  produce  any  clear  cases  of  the
communicability  of  illusory  (or  falsidical )  hallucinations  with  which  to
supply  the  absence  of  any  evidence  thereof  in  previous  records,  I  am
driven  to  doubt  whether  such  communicability  can  be  safely  assumed  as  a
probable  explanation  of  our  cases  where  a  veridical  phantasm  has  been
seen  or  heard  by  several  persons  at  the  same  time.

§  9.  And  having  thus  criticised  my  colleague's  suggestions,  I  feel  bound
to  produce  a  theory  of  my  own,  which,  though  confessedly  unproven,  may
have  the  advantage  of  directing  attention  towards  what  seems  to  me  the
nodus  of  our  present  inquiry,  and  of  suggesting  experiments  which  may
help  us  to  a  truer  solution.  I  begin  by  following  a  clue  which  suggests
itself  at  a  very  early  stage  of  the  experimental  investigation.

Take  the  simplest  possible  case  of  thought-transference.  A  thinks  of
the  word  "  cat  "  and  B  divines  it.     Now,  here  our  habit  is  to  call  A  the


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  285

agent  and  B  the  percipient ;  terras  which  are  practically  the  simplest,  but
which  may  have  seemed  to  imply  that  all  the  activity  involved  in  the
phenomenon  lay  in  A's  tension  of  thought  in  keeping  "  cat "  before  his
mind,  and  that  B's  role  was  a  mere  passive  waiting  for  the  telepathic
impulse  which  carries  the  word  or  idea  from  A's  mind  into  his  own.  And
as  we  extend  our  series  from  the  trivial  experimental  instances  to  the
massive  spontaneous  instances  of  telepathy,  we  find  the  exhibition  of
energy  on  the  agent's  part — the  receptive  tranquillity  on  the  percipient's
part — becoming  more  and  more  conspicuous.  When  A,  for  example,  is
dying  in  battle,  and  B  is  asleep  and  dreams  that  he  sees  A  dying,  the
psychical  activity  of  the  one,  the  psychical  passivity  of  the  other,  seem  to
reach  their  maximum.

Let  us  try,  however,  to  look  a  little  deeper  beneath  the  surface.
When  A  thinks  of  cat  and  B  guesses  the  word  "  out  of  A's  mind,"  with-
out the  help  of  speech  or  gesture,  then  B,  whether  passive  or  not,  is  at
any  rate  playing  the  part  which  requires  the  rarer  qualifications.  In  a
sense,  no  doubt,  he  is  merely  perceiving,  but  I  need  not  say  that  percep-
tion itself  is  a  form  of  activity.  If  we  perceive  more  things  than  an
oyster  perceives,  it  is  not  because  we  are  more  passive  than  the  oyster,  but
more  active ;  because  activities  of  our  ancestors'  and  our  own  have
developed  in  us  eyes  which  now  discern  distant  objects  with  an  efibrt  so
slight  that  we  are  scarcely  aware  of  it.  Similarly  with  the  telepathic
experiment.  When  B  discerns  the  word  cat,  which  most  of  us,  with  only
his  opportunities,  could  not  discern  by  any  amount  of  waiting  and
passivity,  we  must  surely  conclude  that  B  is  exercising  some  kind  of
capacity  which  we  cannot  exercise.  This  power,  plainly,  is  not  of  what
we  term  a  voluntary  kind  ;  it  is  not  guided  by  B's  normal  or  primary
stream  of  consciousness.  But  (as  I  have  tried  elsewhere  to  show)  there
is  reason  to  suppose  that  our  normal  consciousness  represents  no  more
than  a  slice  of  our  whole  being.  We  all  know  that  there  exist  sztft-conscious
and  unconscious  operations  of  many  kinds ;  both  organic,  as  secretion,
circulation,  &c.,  which  are  in  a  sense  below  the  operations  to  which  our
minds  attend ;  and  also  mental,  as  the  recall  of  names,  the  development
of  ideas,  &c.,  which  are  on  much  the  same  level  as  the  operations  to  which
our  minds  attend,  but  which  for  various  reasons  remain  in  the  background
of  our  mental  prospect.  Well,  besides  these  sub-conscious  and  unconscious
operations,  I  believe  that  super-conscious  operations  also  are  going  on  within
us  ;  operations,  that  is  to  say,  which  transcend  the  limitations  of  ordinary
faculties  of  cognition,  and  which  yet  remain — not  below  the  threshold — but
rather  above  the  upper  horizon  of  consciousness,  and  illumine  our  normal
experience  only  in  transient  and  clouded  gleams.

This  is  not  the  place  to  marshal  the   arguments  which   support  this


286  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

thesis.  But  the  thesis  itself  seems  almost  implied  in  the  very  conception
of  thought-transference.  For  in  thought-transference  we  have  two
psychical  phenomena,  connected  by  an  unknown  chain  of  causation,  which
is  certainly  supernormal  in  character,  and  which  contains  at  least  some
unconscious  links.

§  10.  Let  us,  then,  pursue  this  notion  of  some  supernormal  activity  on
the  percipient's  part.  Let  us  treat  it  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  treated
the  notion  of  the  supernormal  activity  of  the  agent.  We  have  credited
the  agent.  A,  in  the  "  cat  "  experiment,  with  a  certain  power  of  impressing
his  thought  on  other  minds.  And  we  have  proceeded  to  inquire  how  far
— in  voluntary  experiment  or  in  spontaneous  emergence — this  power  can
be  found  to  go, — how  complex  the  transmitted  image  may  be.  So
far  as  voluntary  experiment  went,  the  answer  has  been  somewhat
doubtful,  for  self-transmissive  projections  of  a  hallucinatory  image  of
oneself — such  as  those  recorded  in  Vol.  I.,  Chap.  III. — have  always,
as  it  would  seem,  taken  place  during  the  agent's  trance  or  slumber.
The  spontaneous  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  very  numerous ;
cases,  that  is  to  say,  where  A,  undergoing  some  shock  or  crisis,  acts
psychically  in  such  a  manner  as  to  impress  his  presence  on  the  minds
of  distant  men.

Let  us,  then,  ask  similar  questions  with  regard  to  the  supernormal
activity  of  the  percipient.  We  have  seen  him  thus  far  divining  a  word
on  which  the  agent's  thought  was  concentrated,  guessing  a  card  on  which
the  agent's  eyes  were  fixed.  Are  there  cases,  experimental  or  spontaneous,
where  we  find  him  doing  more  than  this  1  sharing  not  a  single  idea  only
but  a  whole  complex  of  ideas  and  perceptions  in  another  man's  mind  1  or
supernormally  recognising  an  object  on  which  no  "  agent's "  eyes  are
lookincf  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  would  involve  the  whole  evidence
for  induced  or  spontaneous  clairvoyance.  For  the  word  clairvoyance  may
be  used  to  indicate  many  forms  of  supersensory  perception ;  of  which  one
is  what  we  may  call  telepathic  clairvoyance,  where  the  clairvoyant  seems
to  be  seeing  with  the  eyes,  perceiving  with  the  senses,  recalling  with  the
memory,  of  another  person ;  and  another  is  what  we  may  call  independent
clairvoyance,  where  the  clairvoyant  seems  to  visit  scenes,  or  to  discern
objects,  without  needing  that  those  scenes  or  objects  should  form  part  of
the  perception  or  memory  of  any  known  mind.

The  topic  of  clairvoyance,  though  unavoidable  in  the  present  discus-
sion, is  open  to  serious  objections  from  which  telepathy,  in  our  view,  is  free.
For  we  have  not  ourselves  succeeded  in  making  any  experiments  which
corroborate  that  induction  of  clairvoyance  in  sensitive  subjects  which
many   writers    have  alleged.     And  the  light  which   our  new  knowledge


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  287

of  telepathy  throws  on  that  testimony  must  doubtless  modify  it  greatly — ■
must  reduce  the  scattered  testimony  which  exists  for  independent  clair-
voyance to  a  bulk  much  smaller  than  its  advocates  have  claimed.  But,
nevertheless,  speaking  not  for  my  colleagues  but  for  myself,  I  do  consider
the  evidence  for  clairvoyance,  both  telepathic  and  independent,  both
induced  and  spontaneous,  to  be  adequate  to  justify  belief ;  ^  and,  holding
this  view,  I  feel  bound  to  take  clairvoyance  into  account  in  any  theoretic
discussion  of  supernormal  phenomena.

§  11.  And  if  we  thus  take  into  account  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance,
we  find  a  stream  of  new  light  let  in  on  our  conception  of  the  modus
operandi  of  telepathic  perception.  For  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  clair-
voyant power  that  it  is  generally  exercised  when  the  normal  powers  of
sensory  percipience  are  in  abeyance,  during  natural  somnambulism,  during
morbid  conditions  of  trance,  or  during  the  sleep- waking  state  induced  by
mesmeric  passes.  It  seems  as  though  this  supersensory  faculty  assumed
activity  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  the  activities  of  common  life.

Nor  is  this  the  only  instructive  analogy  which  the  records  of  clairvoy-
ance suggest.  The  mesmeric  process,  which  appears  to  be  the  most  effective
way  of  inducing  the  clairvoyant  state,  does  not  consist  of  a  mere  inhibition
of  ordinary  psychical  activities.  Whatever  may  be  its  true  nature,  it  in-
volves, at  any  rate,  a  rapport  between  the  operator  and  the  subject,  a
specialised  relation  between  two  minds,  which  sometimes  seems  to  serve  as
the  starting-point  for  a  supernormal  percipience  on  the  part  of  the
mesmerised  subject  which  presently  transcends  the  scope  or  content  of  the
interrogator's  mind  altogether.

Let  us  return,  then,  to  the  consideration  of  our  veridical  hallucinations,
bearing  in  mind  these  two  peculiarities  of  clairvoyant  perception ;  its
exercise  in  apparently  inverse  ratio  to  the  activity  of  normal  faculties,  and
its  capacity  for  being  stimulated  or  evoked  by  some  kind  of  psychical
influence  directed  towards  the  clairvoyant  subject  from  another  mind.

§  12.  And  we  shall,  perhaps,first  observe  how  much  of  illumination  is  thus
cast  upon  a  large  and  perplexing  class  of  telepathic  dreams,  those,  namely,
in  which  B  is  made  aware  of  A's  state,  not  as  if  by  an  entry  of  A's
phantom  into  his  bedchamber,  but  as  if  by  an  excursion  of  his  own  into
the  room  where  A  is  actually  dying.

Dreams,  as  Mr.  Gurney  has  amply  explained,  form  only  a  very  sub-
sidiary part  of  the  evidential  case  which  we  put   forward.     Taken   alone,

1  In  the  present  state  of  the  subject,  I  hold  that  a  writer  avowing  such  beHef  is
bound  to  show  cause  for  his  apparent  credulity  ;  and  this  I  shall  hope  to  do  on  the
earliest  practicable  occasion.


288  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

they  could  hardly  prove  telepathy  ;  rather  they  are  themselves  shown  to
be  telepathic  by  the  analogies  of  the  more  cogent  evidence  drawn  from
waking  hours.  But  though  evidentially  a  minor  branch  of  our  subject,
they  are,  nevertheless,  among  th.e  most  instructive  of  psychical  phenomena.
They  show  us  phantasms  in  the  making  ;  they  initiate  us  into  sub-conscious
processes  of  which  waking  hallucinations  are,  as  it  were,  the  final  output  or
manufactured  result.

But  when  we  come  to  scrutinize  the  details  of  veridical  dreams  we. find
that  amongst  many  where  fantastic  elements  are  commingled  with  the
true,  as  though  a  central  conception  were  embodying  itself  in  the  imagery
which  it  found  readiest  to  hand,  there  are  some  dreams  where  the  scene
seems  to  be  described  without  such  admixture,  and  much  as  it  might  have
appeared  to  a  real  spectator.

Dr.  A.  K.  Young's  dream  (case  142)  is  closely  analogous  to  a  case  of
so-called  "  travelling  clairvoyance."  Locality,  personages,  and  actions
seem  to  have  been  completely  realised,  and  the  violent  blows  delivered  by
Dr.  Young  as  he  lay  asleep  in  bed  are  the  precise  parallel  of  the  shivering,
sweating,  &c.,  frequently  recorded  of  clairvoyants  who  are  witnessing
distant  scenes  of  heat  or  cold.  Noteworthy  in  the  same  sense  is  Mrs.
Green's  dream  (case  138),  where  it  seems  as  though  the  link  of  kinship,
though  without  personal  acquaintance,  had  directed  the  sleeper's
clairvoyant  vision  to  the  scene  of  sudden  death.  In  these  cases  it
seems  to  me  that  to  talk  of  the  drowning  women  as  the  agents  who  afiected
Mrs.  Green,  the  wounded  tenant  as  the  agent  who  afiected  Dr.  A.  K.
Young,  tends  to  obscure  the  real  nature  of  the  occurrence ;  the  deeper
view  being  that  the  so-called  percipient  was  in  fact  the  agent  or  active
personage,  too  ;  and  that  the  concurrent  crisis  of  danger  or  death  did  but
determine  the  direction,  or  the  remembrance,  of  activities  which  the
sleeper's  unconscious  self  was  exercising  in  the  abeyance  of  waking
function.

And  if  we  follow  up  this  hint,  we  shall  note  that  in  most  cases  where
even  a  waking  percipient  is  conscious  of  a  distant  scene,  the  sensation  is
accompanied  by  something  like  a  momentary  abstractedness,  or  even
actual  somnolence.'  In  Canon  Warburton's  case  (No.  108)  the  sudden  percep-
tion of  a  distant  crisis,  apparently  occurring  at  that  moment,  wakes  the
sleeper  from  his  doze  And  if  the  various  expressions  used  by  the  percipients
of  these  clairvoyantly  witnessed  scenes,  whether  we  have  classed  them  as
awake  or  asleep  at  the  time,  be  compared  together,  we  shall  find  that  they
agree  in  describing  the  experience  as  something  unlike  either  dream-
presence  or  waking  presence  in  the  suddenly-revealed  locality,  as  giving  a

1  See,  for  instance,  eases  24,  63,  109.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  289

sense  of  a  translation  of  the  centre  of  consciousness,  of  a  psychical
excursion  into  a  definite  region  of  space.

Such  expressions  need  imply  nothing  more  than  the  manner  in  which
this  sudden  extension  of  the  psychical  purview  represents  itself  in  the
forms  of  ordinary  thought.  But  they  may  aid  in  putting  us  on  the  track
of  a  question  which  is,  in  my  view,  of  profound  importance.  Is  there
evidence  of  any  percipience  on  the  part  of  others  which  corresponds  to
the  clairvoyant's  own  sense  of  presence  and  action  in  the  scene  which  is
common  to  his  mind  and  theirs  ?  Readers  of  Chap.  XVII.  will  have
perceived  that  there  is  such  evidence  ;  and  although  the  cases  there  given
are  not  numerous,  there  are  reasons  (as  I  hope  presently  to  show)  why
but  a  very  small  fraction  of  such  experiences  is  ever  likely  to  come  to  our
knowledge.

Meantime,  we  must  observe  that  in  these  reciprocal  cases  the  condi-
tion and  sensations  of  the  percipient,  who  thus  becomes  an  agent  also — the
clairvoyant  who  is  himself  discerned  as  a  phantom  in  the  scene  where  he
conceives  himself  to  be — are  precisely  similar  to  the  condition  and  sensa-
tions of  the  clairvoyant  whose  vision  affects  no  second  person.  Our  agent,
too,  is  in  a  fit  of  abstraction,  or  dreaming,  or  plunged  in  stupor  as  death
draws  nigh,  when  he  produces  on  others  the  impression  correlative  to  the
impression  which  is  being  produced  on  himself.

§  13.  Correspondently  with  clairvoyant  perception  there  may  he  phantas-
mogenetic  efficacy  : — this,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  sound  induction  from  our
recorded  cases,  and  an  induction  which,  if  thoroughly  grasped,  will  modify
profoundly  our  comprehension  and  classification  of  the  evidence  before  us.
For,  speaking  broadly,  our  "phantasms  of  the  living"  will  consequently
tend  to  arrange  themselves  into  two  main  classes,  classes  which  are  them-
selves linked  in  more  ways  than  one ;  namely,  the  class  in  which  the
phantasm  may  be  considered  as  the  emergence  or  externalisation,  in  and  by
the  percipient's  mind,  of  an  impression  transmitted  from  a  distant  agent,
and  the  class  in  which  the  phantasm  may  be  considered  as  corresponding  to
the  conception  in  the  mind  of  a  clairvoyant  percipient, — who  is  thus  also  an
agent, — of  his  own  presence  and  action  in  a  scene  which  he  shares  with  the
persons  who  are  corporeally  present  therein.

§  14.  And  thus  we  have  reached  a  point  at  which  what  seemed  the
unique  difficulty  involved  in  collective  hallucinations  is  not  indeed
explained,  but  is  seen  as  merely  a  special  case  which  we  can  subsume  under
a  higher  generalisation.  What  I  mean  is  this ;  that  if  the  appearance,  say,
of  Mr.  Newnham  to  Mrs.  Newnham  (case  35)  or  of  Mrs.  Smith  to  her  friend
(case  306)  is  held  proximately  to  depend  on  their  own  perception  of  their
VOL.    II.  u


290  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

own  presence  in  the  scene  where  their  phantasm  is  observed,  it  becomes
then  a  subsidiary  question  whether  only  one,  or  some,  or  the  whole  group
of  the  persons  of  whose  consciousness  that  scene  forms  a  part,  perceive
such  phantasm  or  no.  And  this  subsidiary  question,  again,  resolves  itself
into  a  special  case  of  the  larger  question  which  meets  us  throughout  the
whole  inquiry, — the  question  as  to  the  causes  of  varying  idiosyncratic
receptiveness  of  phantasmal  impressions.  There  will  be  no  need  to
assume,  as  Mr.  Gumey  is  inclined  to  do,  a  direct  infection  of  hallucination
from  one  primary  percipient  to  neighbouring  minds.  Still  less  shall  we
need  to  explain  such  cases  as  Nos.  242  and  355  by  the  strange  hypothesis
that  an  idea,  partly  or  altogether  latent  and  undeveloped  in  the  mind
of  the  primary  percipient,  did  nevertheless  propagate  itself  from
thence  and  emerge  into  full  externalisation  for  a  person  to  whom  the
distant  agent  was  wholly  unknown.  For  we  shall  be  able  to  conceive  it  as
possible  that  all  the  persons  in  the  room  may  be  equally  favourably
situated  for  the  discernment  of  that  phantasmal  correlate  which  repre-
sents or  accompanies,  in  some  way  unknown  to  us,  the  clairvoyant
percipience  of  the  distant  and  dying  man.

§  15.  At  the  cost  of  some  cumbrousness  of  language,  I  have  been
careful  to  express  my  hypothesis  in  exclusively  psychical — as  opposed  to
physical — terms.  I  desire  that  the  reader  should  clearly  distinguish  it  from
any  view  which  implies  a  material  or  objective  presence,  of  however
tenuous  a  kind.  I  shall  not,  indeed,  commit  myself  to  the  assertion  that
any  such  presence  is  impossible;  or  that  there  may  not  be  some  intermediate
view  between  what  seems  to  me  the  gross  conception  of  a  molecular  meta-
organism,  already  alluded  to,  and  the  purely  psychical  agency  which  is
all  that  I  postulate  here.  The  line  between  the  "material"  and  the
"  immaterial,"  as  these  words  are  commonly  used,  means  little  more  than
the  line  between  the  phenomena  which  our  senses  or  our  instruments  can
detect  or  register,  and  the  phenomena  which  they  can  not.  And  the  whole
problem  of  the  relation  of  the  psychical  to  the  physical — of  thought
and  will  to  space  and  matter — is  forced  upon  our  attention  with  startling
vividness  from  the  very  beginning  of  this  inquiry.  At  every  step  we
find  that  familiar  speculative  difficulties  assume  a  new  reality ;  and  that
dilemmas  which  the  metaphysician  can  evade,  and  the  physicist  ignore,
present  to  the  psychical  researcher  an  imperative  choice  of  one  or  the
other  horn.

In  the  present  discussion,  however,  such  difficulties  can  still  be
postponed.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  pointing  out  that  since  some  even  of
the  phantasms  which  are  perceived  by  more  than  one  person  escape  the
perception  of  one  or  more  of  the  bystanders,  they  cannot  be  objective  in


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  291

any  ordinary  sense.  And  while  they  are  regarded  as  entirely  psychical
incidents,  the  differentia  of  the  view  here  advanced  is  still,  I  think,
sufficiently  plain.  I  treat  the  respective  hallucinations  of  each  member
of  the  affected  group  as  each  and  all  directly  generated  by  a  conception  in
a  distant  mind — a  conception  which  presents  itself  to  that  mind  as
though  its  centre  of  activity  were  translated  to  the  scene  where  the  group
are  sitting,  and  which  presents  itself  to  each  member  of  that  group  as
though  their  hallucinations  did  not  come  to  them  incoherently  or
independently,  but  were  diffused  from  a  "  radiant  point,"  or  phantasmo-
genetic  focus,  corresponding  with  that  region  of  space  where  the
distant  agent  conceives  himself  to  be  exercising  his  supernormal
perception.

§46.  This  view  is  at  any  rate  definite  enough  to  suggest  certain
experiments  which  might  test  its  probability  in  comparison  with  the  view
which  assumes  one  primary  percipient  and  a  transference  of  hallucination,
as  though  by  a  second  telepathic  process,  from  that  primary  percipient
to  his  neighbours  in  space.

The  most  important  experiment  would  be  one  which  there  is
perhaps  small  chance  of  making  ;  for  it  depends  on  the  coolness  and
preparedness  of  several  persons  collectively  witnessing  a  veridical
hallucination.  It  might,  for  instance,  have  been  carried  out  by  Mrs.
Elgee  and  Miss  D.  in  the  case  (No.  348)  which  Mr.  Gumey  cites  as  one
where  "the  flashing  of  the  hallucination  from  one  of  the  percipients
to  the  other  seems  specially  well  illustrated,  since  the  figure  which
appeared  was  one  which  the  second  percipient  had  never  seen  in  the
flesh."  In  that  case  we  have  no  independent  account  from  Miss  D.,
and  the  details  are  insufficient  to  show  the  relation  between  the
hallucinations  of  the  two  persons.  But  let  us  assume,  for  the  sake  of
argument,  that  a  similar  incident  occurs  to  persons  prepared  to  analyse
it ;  that  A's  phantom  appears  to  B,  who  knows  him,  and  also  to  0,  who
is  in  the  room  with  B,  but  never  saw  A.

I  will  arrange  an  account  of  the  imaginary  scene  in  two  ways  ;  flrst,
so  as  to  illustrate  Mr.  Gurney's  "  flashing  of  the  hallucination  from  one  of
the  percipients  to  the  other  "  ;  and,  secondly,  so  as  to  illustrate  my  own
view  of  the  diffusion  of  the  hallucination  to  both  minds  similarly,  in  a
manner  conditioned  by  the  agent's  conception  of  himself  as  present  in  a
scene  in  which  the  two  percipients  are  sitting.

(1)  B  sees  the  figure  first,  and  thus  develops  the  hallucinatory  figure  of

A,  clothing  it  with  the  dress  in  which  he  has  most  frequently  seen  A.     C

discerns  the  figure  after  B  has  done  so,  and  either  more  vaguely  or  in  the  same

garb  in  which  B  discerns  it,   or  with  peculiarities  which  may  be  traced  to

VOL.    II.  U   2


292  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

O's  own  mind ;  at  any  rate,  not  inti^oducing  true  points  of  resemblance
to  A,  which  have  not  been  observed  by  B.  Moreover,  if  B's  hallucination
represents  A  as  facing  him,  C's  hallucination  takes  a  similar  attitude,
although  C  may  be  so  placed  with  reference  to  the  figure  that,  had  it  been
A  in  proprid  persond,  G  would  have  seen,  not  A's  full  face,  but  his
profile  or  back.  There  is  no  distinct  agreement  between  B  and  0  as  to
the  point  of  space  which  the  phantom  seemed  to  occupy,  or  as  to  its
successive  movements,  or  the  time  and  mode  of  its  disappearance.  Such
details  as  these,  if  occurring  in  the  manner  here  suggested,  would  favour
the  supposition  that  C's  hallucination  was  not  the  result  of  any  direct
transfer  from  A,  but  rather  of  a  transfer  from  B  of  the  hallucination
to  which  B's   mind  had  given  shape.

(2)  'Now  let  us  suppose  that  these  little  incidents  occur  in  just  the
opposite  manner.  C  perceives  the  phantom  before  B  does,  and  perceives  it
with  characteristic  details  of  garb  and  appearance,  some  of  which  B  fails  to
note.  Moreover,  when  B  and  C  are  so  placed  that  0  would  see  the
phantom's  back,  and  B  the  phantom's  face,  were  the  phantom  a  real  person
in  the  place  where  B  sees  it,  then  they  do  see  difierent  aspects  of  the
phantom  accordingly.  And  they  agree  as  to  every  detail  of  its  garb,  so
far  as  observed,  and  as  to  its  apparent  position  in  space,  its  movements,
and  the  mode  of  its  disappearance.  If  the  details  of  the  hallucination  were
found  to  follow  this  type,  there  would  seem  to  be  strong  reason  for  suppos-
ing that  the  impression  on  C  's  mind  was  not  (so  to  say)  reflected  from
B's,  but  that  both  alike  corresponded  to  a  more  or  less  detailed,  definite,
and  persistent  conception  on  A's  own  part  of  his  presence  and  action  in
the  scene  where  his  friend  and  the  stranger  were  sitting.  In  that  case
the  manner  or  distinctness  with  which  the  phantom  was  discerned  by  B
and  C  respectively  would  depend  on  their  relative  power  of  supernormal
percipience, — their  psychical  permeability, — though  it  will  still  be  presum-
able that  B's  previous  rapport  with  A,  which  has  probably  determined  the
direction  which  A's  clairvoyant  perception  has  taken,  may  also  predispose
or  enable  B  to  discern  the  phantom  on  some  occasions  when  C  cannot
do  so.  On  the  other  hand,  if  C's  power  of  supernormal  percipience  greatly
exceed  B's,  0  may  discern  the  phantom,  though  of  a  stranger,  when  B  fails
to  discern  it,  though  of  a  friend,  as  in  cases  242  and  355,  above
mentioned.

§  17.  The  occasions  on  which  such  observations  as  these  are  possible
are  likely  to  be  almost  as  rare  as  ecliiDses.  But,  in  the  meantime,  we  may,
at  any  rate,  practise  (so  to  say)  with  smoked  glass.  We  have  now  the
means  of  actually  producing  hallucinations  at  will  in  certain  subjects  by
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  a  careful  arrargement  of  conditions  may  throw


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  293

light  on  the  modes  of  communicability  of  hallucination  from  one  mind  to
another.

I  will  take  first  the  simplest  case,  and  will  suppose  that  I  am  communi-
cating a  hallucination  to  several  hypnotised  subjects  by  direct  suggestion.
I  say  to  the  first :  "  There  is  a  playbill  on  the  wall ;  write  down  the
name  of  the  play  advertised,  but  do  not  show  it  to  anyone."  He  sees  the
imaginary  playbill  at  my  suggestion,  and  his  own  mind  supplies  the  title
of  the  play — say  Hamlet.  I  simultaneously,  or  just  afterwards,  make  the
same  suggestion  to  other  subjects.  Now  if  all  of  them  see  Hamlet
advertised,  the  special  form  in  which  the  first  subject  shaped  his  hallu-
cination has  probably  influenced  the  rest.  Even  if  they  see  Othello,
Macbeth,  &c.,  there  has  perhaps  been  a  communication  of  the  idea  of
Shakespeare.  But  if  they  see  Our  Boys,  The  Private  Secretary,  &c.,  then
the  specific  form  which  the  first  subject's  hallucination  assumed  has  not
exercised  a  shaping  power  over  the  impulses  to  hallucination  which  I  have
communicated  to  the  other  subjects.

Again,  take  a  case  of  deferred  hallucination,  as  when  Professor  Beaunis
of  Nancy  told  Mdlle.  A.,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  that  she  would  see
him  call  on  her  on  January  1st  at  10  a.m.  Let  a  similar  anticipatory  idea
be  again  impressed  on  Mdlle.  A,  and  let  it  be  provided  that  other  persons,
known  to  be  susceptible,  shall  be  in  Mdlle.  A's  company  when  the  hallu-
cination falls  due.  It  can  then  be  seen  whether  they  "  catch  it  from  her,"
so  to  say,  by  telepathic  infection.  Or  if  they  fail  to  do  so,  the  trans-
ference might  be  facilitated  as  follows.  Mdlle.  A  might  be  led  to  expect
Professor  Beaunis'  visit  in  a  special  dress,  carefully  impressed  on  her.  The
others  might  simply  be  told  that  the  Professor  would  call  at  the  hour
determined.  It  might  then  be  seen  whether  the  hallucination  which
had  been  suggested  to  them  in  a  comparatively  vague  form  were
rendered  definite  by  infection  from  Mdlle.  A's  clearer  perception  of  the
phantasmal  visitant,  so  that  all  alike  saw  him  in  the  dress  announced
to  Mdlle.  A.

The  subjects  on  whom  such  experiments  as  these  can  be  attempted
with  success  are  at  present  few  in  number,  and  almost  exclusively  French.
But  the  methodical  zeal  with  which  a  group  of  French  physicians  are  now
pursuing  this  form  of  research  renders  it  likely  that  fresh  light  will  soon
be  shed  on  the  genesis  and  development  of  hallucinatory  percepts.  Such
theorising,  therefore,  as  I  am  here  attempting  need  not  be  premature,  if
it  serves  to  suggest  experiment,  and  to  guide  observation.

§  18.  But  those  who  have  followed  me  thus  far  will  find  that  a  further
reflection  is  here  naturally  suggested.  If  in  cases  of  collective  hallucination
we  have  seen  reason  to  conjecture  that  there  has  been,  not  a  mere  series  of


294  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

telepathic  transferences  of  impression,  but  a  presentation  as  a  quasi-
percept  to  several  minds  of  a  distant  agent's  conception  of  himself  as
present  among  them  by  a  kind  of  psychical  translation,  then  we  can
hardly  suppose  that  this  explanation  is  applicable  to  collective  cases  alone.
The  accident  that  some  indifferent  person  shared  with  the  primary  friend
the  perception  of  the  phantasm  may  enlighten  us  as  to  the  mode  in  which
that  phantasm  was  generated,  but  cannot  have  itself  determined  that  mode.
Can  we  decide,  then,  for  which  of  the  apparitions  seen  by  one  person
only  our  newly-suggested  method  of  origination  may  most  plausibly  be
invoked  ?

Much,  I  think,  might  be  learnt  from  reviewing  the  whole  series  of  our
phantasms,  while  keeping  in  view  the  analogy  of  the  alleged  cases  of
experimental  clairvoyance  in  the  same  way  as  the  analogy  of  experimental
telepathy  has  been  kept  in  view  in  the  preceding  chapters.  But  such  a
task  must  be  postponed  till  the  evidence  for  clairvoyance  itself  shall  have
been  subjected  to  a  searching  analysis.  All  that  I  can  attempt  here  is
to  draw  attention  to  two  problems,  already  repeatedly  touched  on  by  Mr.
Gurney,  but  capable  of  being  discussed  with  profit  from  several  points  of
view.  I  speak  of  the  apparent  garb  and  symbolism  of  phantasms,  and  of
their  attraction  to  special  localities.

§  19.  The  question  of  the  clothes  of  ghosts — or  the  ghosts  of  clothes —
is  one  which  presents  the  relation  between  the  material  and  the  immaterial
under  a  specially  grotesque  aspect.  Theories  which  attribute  any  kind  of
materiality  to  the  "White  Lady  "  or  "  Grey  Lady  "  herself,  are  apt  to  get
inextricably  entangled  in  her  shadowy  muslin.  And  apart  from  any  definite
theorising,  the  frock-coat  or  the  flowered  dressing-gown  of  the  "  spiritual
visitant,"  has  seemed  to  many  minds  to  destroy  his  dignity  and  interest —
to  be  painfully  incongruous  with  pure  existences  and  a  noumenal  world.
On  the  other  hand,  I  need  hardly,  at  this  point,  explain  that  on  the  hy-
pothesis advanced  in  this  book,  this  very  mundaneness  of  the  apparition
is  precisely  what  was  to  be  expected.  For  veridical  hallucinations — like
morbid  hallucinations,  though  in  a  different  sense — are  the  outcome  of
human  minds  ;  the  form  in  which  my  friend's  phantasm  presents  itself
to  me  has  been  stamped  thereon  either  by  my  friend's  mind  or  my  own.
And  it  therefore  would  be  strange  if  I  phantasmally  saw  the  dying
man  unclothed, — as  I  have  never  seen  him  in  life ;  if  he,  in  his  last
moments,  pictured  himself  as  he  has  never  hitherto  pictured  himself  in
colloquy  with  his  friends.

But  granting  the  almost  unavoidable  supposition  that  the  phantom  will
appear  clothed — and  clothed  in  some  such  way  as  either  agent's  or  perci-
pient's mind  can  suggest — questions  remain  which  are  among  the   most


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  295

important  and  the  most  difficult  with  which  we  have  to  deal.  The  clothes
of  apparitions  are  like  the  cartouches  of  Egyptian  kings — they  are  hiero-
glyphs, in  part  seemingly  arbitrary,  in  part  obviously  symbolical,  which
we  must  compare  and  decipher  before  we  can  arrange  our  processional
figures  by  date  and  dynasty.  For  the  most  part  these  phantoms  remain  but
for  a  moment,  and  are  gone  without  speech  or  action  before  their  astonished
spectator  has  recovered  from  the  shock  of  their  approach.  Sometimes
their  faces  present  some  change  or  particularity,  as  of  hair  or  beard,  of
pallor  or  injury,  which  in  some  degree  identifies  the  moment  of  time,
past  or  present,  which  that  phantasmal  visage  tends  to  reproduce.  But
often  such  traces  fail  us.  The  witness  gazes,  not  on  some  scarred  and
mangled  form — Priamiden  laniatum  corpore  toto — but  on  the  unchanged
aspect  of  a  familiar  friend.  For  most  observers  such  recognition  is  enough,
as  it  is  enough  for  the  devout  worshipper  to  recognise  in  a  picture  the
Madonna's  face.  Too  soon  the  vision  disappears — iterum  crudelia  retro
Fata  vacant — and  what  is  left  is  the  shock  of  loss,  the  memory  of  consola-
tion. It  is  from  no  want  of  sympathy  with  those  primary  emotions  that
we  must  urge  on  the  readers  of  this  book  the  imperative  need,  should
occasion  be  ofiered  to  them,  of  a  minuter  and  calmer  observation.  Every
detail  of  the  phantasmal  appearance  has  some  meaning  •  and  the  points
which  the  spectator  accepts  as  subordinate  and  unimpressive  may  contain
clues  sought  elsewhere  in  vain.  Thus — to  come  at  once  to  my  present  pur-
pose— it  is  usual  for  a  witness  to  say  "he  appeared  to  me  in  the  dress  he
habitually  wore,  and  in  which  I  knew  him."  In  one  sense  these  two
clauses  mean  the  same  thing.  But  which  of  them  is  the  really  efiective
one  ?  If  A's  phantom  wears  a  black  coat,  is  that  because  A  wore  a  black
coat,  or  because  B  was  accustomed  to  see  him  in  one  ?  If  A  had  taken
to  wearing  a  brown  coat  since  B  saw  him  in  the  flesh,  would  A's  phantom
wear  to  B's  eyes  a  black  coat  or  a  brown  ?  Or  would  the  dress  which  A
actually  wore  at  the  moment  of  death  dominate,  as  it  were,  and  supplant
phantasmally  the  costumes  of  his  ordinary  days  ?

Those  who  have  followed  the  cases  cited  in  this  book,  and  Mr.  Gurney's
comments  thereon,  will  know  that  the  answer  to  these  questions  is  neither
uniform  nor  clear.  It  is  seldom  that  we  can  trust  the  percipient's  memory
of  the  details  of  his  vision,  and  even  when  these  details  have  been  carefully
noted  their  lesson  is  not  easy  to  decipher.

We  have,  of  course,  as  a  starting  point,  the  known  fact  that  a  man
may  have  a  purely  subjective  hallucination,  and  may  clothe  it  in  almost
any  fashion, — introducing  items  of  dress  which  have  never  been
consciously  familiar  to  his  mind.  We  may  naturally  begin,  then^  by
assuming  that,  unless  evidence  to  the  contrary  be  forthcoming,  it  is  from
the  percipient's  mind  that  the  dress  or  other  imagery  of  the  phantom  is


296  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

drawn.     Let  us  see  whether  there  are  any  cases  where  this  seems  clearly
indicated  by  the  particulars  of  the  dress  itself.

Suppose  that  the  dying  A  appears  to  B,  habited  in  hat  and  coat,
though  in  point  of  fact  he  is  in  bed  at  the  time.  Must  we  not  here  say
that  B's  mind  has  furnished  the  setting  of  the  figure,  and  that  nothing
beyond  the  mere  impression  of  a  personality  comes  from  A  himself?

No ;  this  deduction  would  be  insecure.  For  it  assumes  that  if  the
agent  projects  a  developed  phantom  of  himself, — a  conception  of  himself,
that  is  to  say,  which  B's  mind  externalises  as  a  phantom, — he  will
necessarily  project  it  as  though  clad  in  the  garments  which  he  is  wearing
at  the  time.  But  we  have  no  grounds  for  assuming  this.  Just  as  B  may
imagine  A  as  wearing  a  familiar  greatcoat,  so  may  A  imagine  himself  as
wearing  that  coat,  whatever  be  his  actual  dress  at  the  time.

Suppose  that  we  dream  of  calling  on  a  friend.  In  most  cases  we
dream  of  ourselves  as  in  ordinary  walking  attire.  It  is  only  rarely  that
we  dream  of  entering  a  drawing-room  in  tiefem  neglige,  as  the  Germans
put  it, — an  obscure  sense  of  one's  actual  condition  entering,  with
disastrous  incoherence,  into  the  feebly  co-ordinated  story  of  one's
dream.

Now,  if  we  are  comparing  these  veridical  hallucinations  to
objectified  dreams,  we  must  at  least  allow  for  the  chance  of  the  dream
being  the  agent's  own ;  we  must  not  assume  that  it  is  always— so  to  say —
dreamt  for  him  by  the  person  to  whom  he  appears.  Whatever  the  agent's
actual  dress  at  the  time,  all  the  cases  where  he  appears  merely  in  his
usual  costume  must  be  set  aside  as  neutral.  We  cannot  press  them  to
prove  the  origin  of  the  figure  in  either  the  one  or  the  other  mind.

Is  there,  then,  any  feature  to  which  we  can  point  as  undoubtedly  due
to  the  workings  of  the  percipient's  mind  ?  anything  in  the  associations  of
the  dress  ?  or  in  the  special  symbolism  of  the  apparition  ?  It  is  plain  that
associations  attaching  to  A's  dress  must  be  common  to  A  as  well  as  to  B.
Suppose  that  B  saw  the  dying  A  habited  in  a  coat  which  A  wore  at  B's
wedding,  or  at  some  other  epochal  moment  in  B's  life.  It  must  still  be
remembered  that  that  same  moment  was  epochal  to  A  also,  in  so  far  as  his
relation  to  B  was  concerned,  and  that  its  conscious  or  unconscious  memory
may  influence  A's  conception  of  himself  as  bidding  B  a  last  farewell.
Similarly,  a  man  who  recalls  his  acts  of  homage  to  Royalty  vaguely  feels
himself  in  Court  dress  ;  a  man  who  imagines  himself  talking  to  a  hunting
acquaintance  has  a  slight  sense — what  is  called  a  "  phantom  "  sense — of
being  on  horseback.

And  this  ambiguity,  I  think,  attaches  to  the  few  cases  in  which,  as
Mr.  Grurney  urges,  the  "  ghosts  of  old  clothes,"  in  which  the  phantom
appears,  indicate  the  percipient's  memory  as  the  source  of  that  investiture.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  297

In  Colonel  and  Mrs.  BoUand's  case  (201),  a  scrutiny  of  the  dates  and  facts
given  will  show  that  we  have  no  reason  to  regard  Ramsay's  clothes  as  old, —
as  otherwise  than  still  the  suit  in  which  he  would  be  likely  to  imagine
himself  as  calling  on  a  former  mistress.  In  case  200,  a  brother  delirious
in  Australia,  and  fancying  himself  at  home,  appears  to  his  sister
on  the  lawn,  "  dressed  as  he  usually  was  when  he  came  home  from
London,  not  as  he  was  when  he  left  home,  nor  as  he  could  be  in  Australia,
nor  as  I  had  ever  seen  him  when  walking  in  the  garden."  Surely  all  that
this  dress  implied  was  the  idea  of  a  traveller's  home-coming,  which  was  at
any  rate  the  dominant  one  in  the  brother's  ravings.  Had  it  been  his
wonted  garden  costume,  tlien  to  my  mind  the  dress,  though  still
ambiguous,  would  have  looked  more  probably  referable  to  the  sister's
shaping  imagination.

In  a  third  and  fourth  case,  (No.  202,  and  p.  546,  second  note,)  there
is  an  admixture  of  unexplained  grotesqueness,  (the  lady  in  a  carriage,  the
boy  "  enclosed,  as  it  were,  in  a  dark  cellar "),  which  seems  to  remove
these  eases  into  the  category  next  to  be  considered,  namely,  where  the
phantasmal  figure  is  accompanied  by  symbolism,,  whose  origin  we  have  to
ascribe  to  one  or  the  other  mind.  Such  symbolism,  as  Mr.  Gurney  has
pointed  out,  is  usually  referable  to  some  "mental  habit  or  tradition,"
which  is  probably  common  to  both  the  minds  concerned.  One  can,  of
course,  imagine  a  case  where  the  symbolism  should  be  such  as  the
percipient's  mind  alone  would  be  likely  to  think  of ;  as  if,  for  instance,  the
"  thousands  of  angels  as  tight  as  they  could  be  packed,"  which  (in  case
207)  are  seen  surrounding  a  departed  Christian  friend,  had  formed  the
symbolic  escort  of  a  pronounced  Agnostic.

§  20.  But  in  default  of  such  narratives  as  this,  the  cases  where  the  in-
fluence of  the  percipient's  idiosyncrasy  seems  most  marked  are  those  where
the  same  percipient  has  a  recurrent  symbolical  dream,  coincident  on  each
occasion  with  a  death  or  other  marked  occurrence.  We  have  a  few  such
cases,  but  in  the  most  remarkable  of  them  (No.  131)  the  form  of  the  dream
is  not  exactly  idiosyncratic,  but  rather  takes  on  a  form  with  which  students
of  folk-lore  are  already  familiar.  The  traditions  of  folk-lore,  it  may
be  remarked,  form  a  kind  of  endemic  symbolism,  in  which  both  morbid  and
veridical  hallucinations  tend  to  clothe  themselves.  In  some  cases  we  have
found  a  community  of  Celtic  fishermen,  or  the  like,  so  deeply  impregnated
with  traditions  of  this  kind  that  we  cannot  accept  their  accounts  of  corpse-
candles,  &c.,  though  supported  by  apparent  coincidences  of  fact,  as  of  real
evidential  value.  We  are  obliged,  that  is  to  say,  to  treat  such  a  community
as  subject  to  casual  hallucinations,  which  detract  from  the  importance  of
such  coincidences  with  objective  fact  as  do  from  time  to  time  occur.     It  is


298  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

only  in  some  of  the  remoter  regions  of  Wales  and  Scotland  that  we  have
found  superstitions  of  this  sort  active  and  definite.  But  the  tendency  to  the
recurrence  of  some  special  symbolism — symbolism  of  which  the  percipient
may  never  remember  to  have  heard — among  the  dreams  of  educated
persons,  reminds  us  sometimes  of  the  sporadic  endemicity  of  certain
traditions  of  folk-lore,  of  which  this  very  tendency  may  be  itself  the
proximate  cause.

In  our  present  collection,  however,  we  have  included  very  little  of  such
symbolism,  and  to  what  there  is  we  can  assign  no  certain  origin  in  agent's
or  percipient's  mind.

§  21.  On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  that  we  have  few  indications  in  the
dress  or  other  surroundings  of  fully-developed  veridical  phantoms  which
point  conclusively  to  an  origin  in  the  percipient's  mind.  Are  there  instances,
on  the  other  hand,  which  yield  the  reverse  indication  1  that  is,  where  the
dress  or  imagery  seems  manifestly  traceable  to  the  mind  of  the  agent
himself  ?

Such  indication  may  conceivably  be  given  in  two  main  ways.  The
agent's  dress  or  aspect  at  the  moment  may  be  phantasmally  repro-
duced ;  or  there  may  be  symbolism,  not  vague  or  traditional  in  character,
but  plainly  adapted  to  communicate  some  information  known  to  the  agent
alone.

Of  the  first  of  these  classes  the  reader  will  have  observed  a  good  many
examples.  There  are,  first  of  all,  the  phantoms  in  night-dress.  In  one  or
two  cases  {e.g.,  No.  563,)  these  are  apparitions  of  persons  whom  the
percipient  knows  to  be  dying,  and  the  white  dress  might,  therefore,  be
suggested  by  the  percipient's  mind.  But  in  other  cases  (see  especially  No.
214)  there  is  no  expectation  of  the  agent's  death,  and  the  dress  astonishes
the  percipient  by  its  incongruity.

Still  more  remarkable  are  the  cases  where  the  dying  man  appears  in  a
dress  which  he  is  actually  wearing  at  the  moment,  although  it  is  not  such
as  is  usually  associated  with  death-beds.  The  case  of  Dr.  Bowstead  (No.
212),  commented  on  by  Mr.  Gurney,  may  serve  as  a  type  of  this  class.  In
such  a  case  as  that  (to  anyone  who  believes  that  more  than  mere  chance  is
involved),  it  must  surely  seem  more  probable  that  the  dress  of  the  phantom
was  the  creation  of  the  dying  man's  mind  rather  than  of  the  mind  of  the
boy  to  whom  that  phantom  appeared.  And  it  is  observable  that  while
such  evidence  as  points  to  the  percipient's  part  in  shaping  these  figures  is
indirect  and  inferential,  the  evidence  which  points  to  their  full-blown
projection  from  the  agent's  mind  is  often  as  direct  and  unmistakeable  as
any  evidence  on  such  a  point  can  be  expected  to  be.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  299

§  22.  Next  as  regards  the  symbolism  which  accompanies  the  figure.
The  commonest  case  of  symbolism — if  such  it  is  to  be  called — consists  in
the  wet  clothes  of  the  apparition  of  a  drowned  man.  There  is  possibly
something  in  death  by  asphyxiation  which  (as  it  seems  to  revive  past
memories  with  unusual  vividness)  predisposes  also  to  telepathic  action.
At  any  rate,  we  have  a  good  many  of  such  cases,  and  there  seems  almost
always  to  be  some  specific  indication  of  the  manner  of  death,  "  Dripping
with  water,"  "his  hair  wet,"  "pale,  sad,  and  wet,"  "looking  half-
drowned,"  such  are  the  phrases  which  recur.  The  distinctive  mark  here
is  very  simple — it  may  be  said  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  translation  into
visibility  of  the  idea  "  He  is  drowning."  We  might,  therefore,  suppose
that  it  had  perhaps  originated  in  the  percipient's  mind.  But  this  view  is
rendered  less  plausible  by  the  cases  where  the  apparition  presents  more
detailed  marks  of  accident,  change,  or  disease,  as  the  wound  on  the  chest
in  case  210,  the  trembling  and  pallor  in  case  527,  the  grey  hair  in  case  194,
and  the  complex  and  partly  symbolical  aspect  of  the  phantom  in  case  25.
It  is  worth  remarking  that  "  IST.  J.  S.  "  (case  28),  who  looked  carefully  at
the  details  of  his  apparition,  is  of  opinion  that  the  walking-stick  which  his
friend  held  (but  which  "  N.  J.  S."  never  remembered  to  have  seen  him
using)  was  symbolical,  and  meant  to  imply  departure  and  a  farewell.  The
case  (No.  514)  of  the  lady  seen  with  a  lock  of  hair  cut  off  and  a  "  peculiar
light  upon  her,"  presents  a  somewhat  similar  mixture  of  true  reproduction
and  symbolism  ;  and  the  extraordinary  narrative  of  Sengireef  (No.  449),
which  throughout  resembles  an  extravagant  dream,  shows  that  the
phantom  presented  some  details  (of  beard,  &c.)  which  were  true  and
unknown  to  the  percipient.  My  view  in  that  instance  is  that  the  dream
in  reality  was  not  Madame  Aksakoff's,  but  Sengireef 's  ;  that  its  insane
strangeness  was  the  reflection  of  the  confused  clairvoyance  of  a  delirious
monomaniac.  With  this  last  case  I  should  compare  No.  349  :  the  diff"erence
being  that  here,  instead  of  the  sombre  wildness  of  the  fanatic,  we  have  the
devout  aspiration  of  the  Catholic  boy.  I  should  explain,  that  is  to  say,  the
figure  of  St.  Stanislaus  as  the  reflected  embodiment  of  a  dying  dream.

I  have  said  enough,  perhaps,  to  enable  the  reader  to  form  his  own
judgment  on  this  point  from  the  cases  recorded  in  these  volumes.  On  the
one  hand,  if  he  accepts  our  general  argument  as  to  the  connection  of  purely
subjective  and  veridical  hallucinations,  he  will  recognise  that  there  is  a
certain  a  priori  likelihood  that  the  details  of  the  hallucination  will  be
found  to  emanate  from  the  loercipient' s  mind.  And  he  may  be  disposed
to  follow  Mr.  Gurney  in  classing  dubious  cases  by  this  presumption ;  in
ranking  as  exceptional  the  narratives  where  the  details  seem  plainly
derived  from  the  mind  of  the  agent.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  views  the
cases  which  I  have  mentioned  (and  many  others  which  resemble  them)  in


300  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

the  light  in  which  I  have  tried  to  place  them,  he  may  recognise  that  when
the  apparition  does  present  any  distinct  details,  these  are  almost  always
such  as  the  agent's  mind  might  most  naturally  have  supplied ;  and  that
this  fact  suggests  a  doubt  as  to  whether  there  may  not  be  something
more  than  a  simple  telepathic  impulse  involved ; — whether  the  obscurer
agency  of  clairvoyance  must  not  here  be  invoked ; — an  analogy
suggesting  that  certain  modes  of  supernormal  percipience  and  self-
realisation  in  a  distant  scene  may  produce  upon  the  persons  placed  in  that
scene  an  impression  as  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  clairvoyant  among  them,
in  a  manner  corresponding  to  his  own  momentary  conception  of  himself,

§  23.  Connected,  in  a  certain  way,  with  the  symbolism  of  which  we
have  been  speaking,  is  another  point  of  interest  in  these  phantasmal
appearances.  I  mean  the  difficulty  which  is  sometimes  felt  in  recognising
them.

To  begin  with,  it  is  no  doubt  possible  to  suppose  that  the  percipient's
mind  builds  up  the  hallucination,  so  to  say,  from  some  unconscious
stratum,  so  that  the  conscious  self  does  not  at  the  first  moment  understand
the  figure  presented.  This  would  be  a  form  of  gradual  development  of
the  quasi-percept  which  could  be  paralleled  both  from  ordinary  dreams  and
from  automatic  writing.  I  cannot,  indeed,  find  that  purely  subjective
hallucinations  ever  develop  themselves  in  this  way.  Yet  I  should  myself
see  no  real  difficulty  in  applying  this  explanation  even  to  cases  where  the
recognition  wholly  fails  at  the  time,  and  is  only  effected  afterwards  by
conscious  reflection.  Such  a  case  would  resemble  the  anagrams  which  an
automatic  writer  will  sometimes  commit  to  paper,  i  without  understanding
at  the  time  what  are  the  words  which  his  unconscious  self  has  thus
concealed  in  a  meaningless  group  of  letters.

But,  nevertheless,  some  of  the  recorded  particulars  seem  to  point  to  the
simpler  explanation — namely,  that  the  phantom's  details  were  developed
independently  of  the  percipient's  mind,  and  that  the  figure  merely  failed
in  making  itself  known  to  him.  Sometimes,  for  example,  the  percipient
looks  attentively  at  the  figure,  but  mistakes  it  for  some  one  who
resembles  the  person  whom  the  figure  is  afterwards  found  to  represent.^
Sometimes  the  phantom  which  the  percipient  fails  to  recognise  represents
a  person  whom  he  might  equally  have  failed  to  recognise  in  the  flesh.  ^
Sometimes  a  call  is  re2oeated,  as  if  in  insistant  appeal.*  And  there  are
a  few  cases, — we  could  not  expect  many, — where  a  percipient  has  seen  a
figure  wholly  unknown  to  him,  but  which  he  has  afterwards  been  able  to
identify  by  circumstantial  evidence.     Such  are  cases  544  and  215.    Under

1  See  Proceedings,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  ii.,  p.  226,  &c.  2  gge  cases  170  and  171.

3  See  cases  189  and  241.  ^  gee  especially  case  508.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  301

this  category,   too,   comes  the  singular  apparition   detailed    in    case   30,
whatever  explanation  we  may  prefer  to  give  to  it.

Cases  like  these  incline  me  to  think  that  we  are  still  in  danger  of  an
old  error  in  a  modified  form, — the  error  of  attributing  too  much
importance  to  the  person  who  sees  the  phantom,  because  his  account  of
the  matter  is  the  only  one  which  we  can  get.  We  are,  indeed,  no  longer
aflTected  by  the  crude  emotional  form  of  this  mistake, — as  when  the
percipient  considers  the  apparition  to  be  a  breach  of  natural  laws
permitted  expressly  in  favour  of  himself.  But  our  own  conception  of  the
apparition  as  the  result  of  a  telepathic  transference  of  impression  from
the  one  to  the  other  mind  is  apt,  I  think,  to  obscure  the  possibility  of
generative  causes  quite  apart  from  any  pre-existing  rapport  between  the
two  persons.

§  24.  Thus,  to  proceed  to  the  next  point  which  I  had  selected  for
notice,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  attraction  which  determines  the  phantasmal
presence  is  sometimes  local  rather  than  personal.  This  apparent  in-
fluence of  a  certain  locality  may  be  observed  in  several  different  stages.
In  some  cases  the  phantasmal  visitor  appears  to  an  acquaintance  with
whom  he  has  some  slight  link,  and  who  is  also  in  a  spot  to  which  the
dying  man  is  attached.  Here  the  telepathic  impulse  may  have  been
facilitated  by  the  familiar  locality.  But  in  a  few  cases,  as  already
mentioned,  the  dying  man  appears  to  persons  with  whom  he  is  in  no  way
acquainted.  And  I  believe  that  in  every  clear  instance  of  this  kind  there
has  been  a  local  attraction,  a  reason  which  draws  the  dying  person  to  that
house  or  field,  irrespective  of  the  living  persons  who  may  be  there  at  the
moment.

Case  666  is  a  good  example  of  what  I  mean.i  But  at  the  same  time  it
warns  me  to  press  my  argument  no  further.  For  just  as  in  certain  dreams,
already  mentioned,  we  discerned  the  point  of  contact  between  thought-
transference  and  clairvoyance,  so  in  this  appearance,  (as  it  may  seem  to
have  been,)  of  a  dying  person  to  the  casual  inhabitants  of  her  former  home
we  have  the  point  of  contact  between  the  topic  of  this  work  and  the
evidence  which  bears  on  the  haunting  of  particular  spots.  To  the  clair-
voyance, when  thus  confronted  with  it,  I  felt  able  to  express  a  distinct
adhesion.     But  as  to  the  haunting  I  have  no  equally  clear  opinion.

Now  it  is  probable  that  what  appears  to  us  as  local  attraction  may
sometimes  be  a  mere  phase  of  psychical  rapport.      To  explain  my  meaning,

1  See  also  case  29,  where  the  phantom  would  appear  to  have  been  more  probably-
interested  in  a  tomb  round  which  the  dying  person's  eccentric  thoughts  had  so  often
revolved,  than  in  the  ex-gardener  who  chanced  to  pass  through  the  familiar  church-
yard ;  and  case  211,  where  the  dying  man  seems  to  have  been  wishing  to  see  Mr.  L.,  in
whose  drawin-groom  the  phantom  appeared,  not  Miss  L.,  who  chanced  to  be  present
there.     Case  192  is  similar.


302  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

let  us  assume  that  all  minds  whatsoever  are  telepathically  connected,m  such
a  manner  that  the  existence  of  any  given  conception  in  any  mind  throws
that  mind  into  connection  with  every  other  mind  in  which  that  conception
exists  at  the  moment.  Let  us  further  suppose  that  at  the  hour  of  death
this  faint  potential  rapport  is  quickened  in  the  same  way  as  the  more
permanent  and  individual  forms  of  rapport  with  which  we  have  mainly
had  to  deal.  Then  when  a  man  dies  et  dulcis  moriens  reminiscitur  Argos,
this  remembrance  of  his  early  home  may  bring  him  into  telepathic  relation
with  the  stranger  now  living  there,  and  that  stranger  may  discern  the
dying  man's  phantom  merely  because  the  two  minds  are  simultaneously
occupied  with  an  identical  conception.

This  view,  which  is  practically  held  by  Mr.  Gurney,  seems  to  me  to
express  what  is  probably  some  part  of  the  truth.  I  conceive  that,  if
telepathy  be  a  fact,  something  of  diffused  telepathic  percolation  is  pro-
bably always  taking  place.  This  at  least  is  what  the  analogy  of  the
limitless  and  continuous  action  of  physical  forces  would  suggest.  If  I  lift
my  little  finger  I  affect,  like  Zeno's  sage,  the  whole  universe  by  my  act.
I  apply  a  vis  a  tergo  to  atoms  which,  for  aught  I  know,  may  send  my  push
rolling  on  to  the  Pleiades.  Or  again,  the  heat,  part  of  which  I  can  by  an
effort  concentrate  on  an  apple  in  my  hand,  is  in  fact  radiating  continuously
from  all  my  organism,  and  fastest  in  the  direction  of  readiest  conduction.
And  similarly  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  same  telergy
which  is  directed  in  a  moment  of  crisis  towards  a  man's  dearest  friend,  may
be  radiating  from  him  always  towards  all  other  minds,  and  chiefly  towards
the  minds  which  have  most  in  common  with  his  own.

Yet  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  not  enough  wholly  to  explain  our  cases
of  local  attraction.  Before  we  can  assume  that  any  perceptible  telepathic
impact  can  follow  the  lines  of  so  transitory  and  contingent  a  rapport  as
that  implied,  for  instance,  by  Mr.  Bard's  presence  in  Hinxton  Churchyard,
in  case  29,  we  ought,  I  think,  to  have  some  case  where  a  phantom
has  appeared  to  B  without  previous  acquaintance,  on  the  ground
of  some  community  of  ideas  and  interest  between  the  two,  unconnected
with  any  special  locality.  Now,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  not,  among  our
cases  recognised  as  telepathic,  a  single  incident  of  this  kind.

§  25.  Here,  then,  we  are  again  met  by  this  perplexing  problem  of  the
relation  of  psychical  operations  to  space ;  and  although,  as  already  said,
I  shall  avoid  any  attempt  at  its  discussion  in  this  work,  the  reader  will
probably  recognise  that  some  such  hypothesis  as  that  of  an  independent
clairvoyant  perception  of  the  dying  man's,  reflected  in  a  correspondingly-
localised  hallucination  for  other  minds,  is  strongly  suggested  by  such
narratives  as  these.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  303

There  is,  however,  an  obvious  difficulty  in  this  view  which  must  be
discussed  before  we  go  further.  I  have  spoken  repeatedly  of  acts  of
clairvoyant  percipience  on  the  dying  man's  part,  corresponding  to  the
location  and  movement  of  the  apparition  which  the  distant  friend  discerns.
But  where  is  the  evidence  of  this  clairvoyant  percipience  1  Ought  we  not
to  have  the  dying  man's  testimony  that  he  saw  his  friend  as  well  as  the
friend's  testimony  that  he  saw  the  dying  man  1  Ought  not  the  mass  of
our  cases,  in  this  view,  to  be  reciprocal  ?  and  is  not  that  type,  in  fact,  of
very  rare  occurrence  in  our  collection  ?

The  difficulty  seems  formidable  ;  but  there  is,  I  think,  a  sufficient  and
an  instructive  reply.  To  put  it  in  a  sentence,  the  recollection  of  an  act
of  clairvoyance  is  itself  an  occurrence  as  rare  as  is  the  perception  of  an
apparition ;  it  involves  the  same  difficult  translation  of  a  quasi-percept
from  the  supernormal  to  the  normal  consciousness.  The  very  act  of
claii'voyance  presupposes  a  psychical  condition  as  far  removed  as  may  be
from  the  stream  of  every-day  sensation.  The  clairvoyance  alleged  to  have
been  induced  by  direct  experiment,  as  by  mesmeric  passes  and  the  like
seems  hardly  ever  to  have  been  remembered  by  the  subject  on  wakino-.
So  also  the  clairvoyance,  on  a  smaller  scale  and  more  resembling
hypersesthesia,  which  has  shown  itself  in  certain  cases  of  spontaneous
somnambulism,  seems  rarely  to  persist  into  the  normal  memory.  And
speaking  generally,  all  supernormal  operation  (so  far  as  we  can  at  present
tell)  tends  to  form  a  secondary  memory  of  its  own,  alternating  with,  or
apart  from,  the  memory  of  common  life.

In  order,  then,  that  a  "  reciprocal "  case  may  occur — a  case  in  which
A  remembers  to  have  had  a  clairvoyant  perception  of  B  and  B's  environ-
ment, while  B  also  has  perceived  A's  phantasm  at  approximately  the  same
time — two  chances  have  to  concur,  two  difficulties  to  be  surmounted, — the
difficulty  on  A's  part  of  recollecting  his  clairvoyant  percipience,  and  the
difficulty  on  B's  part  of  externalising  into  memorable  distinctness  the
corresponding  impression  conveyed  to  him.  And  we  may  expect  that  it
will  be  hard  to  get  a  complete  or  stable  account  of  so  hazardous  a
transmission  as  this, — a  kind  of  signalling  between  boats  one  of  which
expects  no  signal,  and  which  come  in  sight  of  each  other  only  when
they  both  chance  to  be  riding  for  a  moment  on  the  crest  of  a  wave.

§  26.  Nay,  more ;  in  most  cases  the  signalling  boat  can  only  produce  a
momentary  flash,  and  sinks  to  the  bottom  directly  after.  In  other  words,
the  agent  dies ;  and  if  indeed  he  has  enjoyed  a  clairvoyant  percipience
of  B  (who  saw  his  phantom),  he  at  any  rate  cannot  return  and  tell  us.
The  great  bulk  of  what  might  have  been  evidence  to  the  reciprocality  of
supernormal  percipience  is  thus  destroyed  at  a  blow.


304  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

Not  even  here,  however,  need  we  abandon  all  hope  of  getting  at  some
fragments  of  evidence.  The  last  words,  the  last  gestures  of  dying  men,
which  have  been  noted  so  eagerly  by  many  a  religious,  and  many  a  self-
seeking  bystander,  may  have  for  us  an  interest  unconnected  either  with
their  form  of  creed  or  with  their  testamentary  dispositions.  Nothing,
perhaps,  has  been  so  little  looked  for  at  death-beds  as  the  special  indica-
tions which  we  desire, — indications  not  of  a  first  perception  of  another
world,  but  of  a  last  of  this.  Yet  there  are  scattered  tokens  of  some  such
supernormal  percipience  on  the  part  of  dying  men,  which  carry  us  from
mere  vague  expressions  to  distinct  statements  as  to  the  distant  person  who
has  been  clairvoyantly  seen.  Thus  in  case  309  the  dying  woman's  state-
ment is  merely  to  be  noted  in  connection  with  others  of  more  weight.
Case  296  must  either  be  dismissed  as  a  mere  coincidence,  of  a  very
extraordinary  kind,  or  accepted  as  an  almost  typical  instance  of  what
might,  on  my  hypothesis,  be  expected  to  occur.  Case  303  points  in  the
same  direction.  Case  683,  though  well  attested,  is  one  whose  bizarrerie  may
disincline  the  reader  to  attach  to  it  the  weight  which  I  think  that  it  ought
to  carry.  On  looking  closer  the  reader  will  see  that  there  are  other  features
in  that  account  besides  mere  grotesqueness ;  features  which  are  very
unlikely  to  depend  upon  any  failure,  or  any  embellishment,  of  memory.
And  if,  as  I  am  disposed  to  believe,  what  is  there  implied  did  actually
occur,  few  words  of  men  momentarily  recalled  from  death  have  had  a
stranger  significance.

Then  we  come  to  cases  where  there  is  a  distinct  statement  of  the
dying  person's.  In  this  connection,  case  354  seems  to  me  important.  It
is  remote,  no  doubt ;  but  Miss  W.  has  herself  told  me,  with  an  earnestness
that  I  cannot  doubt,  that  it  was,  in  a  sense,  the  turning  incident  of  her
life,  having  excited  a  very  marked  influence  on  her  character.  Then  there
is  case  612,  and  the  parallel  example  given  in  the  note  on  that  case.
Now  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  impossible  that  any  one  of  these  cases  may
have  been  merely  subjective  on  the  one  part,  though  veridical  on  the
other  3  so  that  Miss  Ws.  dying  aunt,  for  instance,  only  fancied  that  she
saw  her  niece,  while  the  niece  did  actually  behold  a  phantom  of  her  aunt
at  a  corresponding  time.  But  I  doubt  whether  many  minds  will  rest  at
this  point  precisely.  Those  who  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  one  experi-
ence will  probably  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  other;  remembering  that
a  dying  person's  object  is  not  to  collect  evidence,  and  that  it  must  be  a
mere  chance  whether  he  mentions  any  incident  which  can  vouch  to  others
for  the  genuineness  of  his  clairvoyant  perception.

I  will  conclude  this  section  with  a  narrative  whose  accuracy  there  is
no  reason  to  doubt,  though,  on  the  other  hand,  it  contains  no  complete  proof
of  anything  beyond  a  mere  subjective  hallucination.     It  finds  therefore,  no


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  305

place  in  our  array  of  evidence ;  but  it  will  have  an  intei'est  to  those  who
have  followed  the  present  argument,  as  illustrating  an  occurrence  which,
in  my  view,  must  probably  often  take  place,  though  it  can  seldom  leave
any  record  behind  it.  For  here  we  have  an  account  of  that  side  only  of
the  reciprocal  incident  which  is  usually  lost  to  human  knowledge
altogether ; — I  mean  of  the  supernormal  percipience  of  a  man  in  the  very
article  of  death  ;  while  there  is  no  record  of  any  corresponding  sound  or
vision  as  experienced  by  those  to  whom  he  seemed  to  pay  his  visit  of
farewell.

Dr.  Ormsby  writes  as  follows  from  Murphysborough,  Illinois.

"April  22nd,  1884.

"I  received  my  degree  from  Rush  Medical  College,  Chicago,  111.,
at  the  close  of  the  session  1857-8,  and  having  said  so  much  will  pro-
ceed to  give  you  as  clear  and  complete  a  statement  of  the  occurrence  to
which  you  allude  as  I  can.  Early  in  February,  1862,  the  18th  Regiment
Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  of  which  I  was  Assistant-Surgeon,  was
ordered  from  Cairo  to  join  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Henry.  The  surgeon
went  with  the  regiment,  and  left  me  with  the  sick  in  the  Regimental
Hospital — about  30 — among  whom  was  Albert  Adams,  sergeant-major
of  the  regiment.  He  was  an  intelligent  and  estimable  young  man,  who
had  recently  been  in  attendance,  and  I  think  graduated  at  a  Literary
College.  I  had  removed  young  Adams  from  the  hospital  proper
to  a  room  in  a  private  house — one  that  had  been  quite  large —
but  a  smaller  room  had  been  partitioned  off  at  one  end  with  a
board  partition,  which  was,  I  think,  canvassed  and  papered ;  and  in
the  smaller  room  so  partitioned  off  was  my  wife,  who  is  now,  besides
myself,  the  only  person  who  heard  the  speaking  whose  whereabouts
I  know.  Seeing  the  young  man  would  die,  I  had  telegraphed,  and
his  father  came  at  4  or  5  p.m.  During  all  the  afternoon  he  could
only  speak  in  whispers,  and  at  11  p.m.  he  to  all  appearance  died.
I  was  standing  beside  his  father  by  the  bed,  and  when  we  thought
him  dead  the  old  man  put  forth  his  hand  and  closed  the  mouth  of
the  corpse  (?),  and  I,  thinking  he  might  faint  in  the  keenness  of  his
grief,  said  'Don't  do  that!  perhaps  he  will  breathe  again,'  and  im-
mediately led  him  to  a  chair  in  the  back  part  of  the  room,  and  returned,
intending  to  bind  up  the  fallen  jaw  and  close  the  eyes  myself.  As  I
reached  the  bedside  the  supposed  dead  man  looked  suddenly  up  in  my  face
and  said,  '  Doctor,  what  day  of  the  month  is  it  1 '  I  told  him  the  day  of
the  month,  and  he  answered,  '  That  is  the  day  I  died.'  His  father  had
sprung  to  the  bedside,  and  turning  his  eyes  on  him,  he  said,  '  Father,  our
boys  have  taken  Fort  Henry,  and  Charlie  '  (his  brother)  *  isn't  hurt.  I've
seen  mother  and  the  children,  and  they  are  well.'     He  then  gave  quite

VOL.    II.  X


306  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

comprehensive  directions  regarding  his  funeral,  speaking  of  the  corpse  as
''  my  body,'  and  occupying,  I  should  think,  as  much  as  five  minutes.  He
then  turned  towards  me,  and  again  said,  '  Doctor,  what  day  of  the  month
is  it  ? '  and  when  I  answered  him  as  before,  he  again  repeated,  '  That's
the  day  I  died,'  and  instantly  was  dead.  His  tones  were  quite  full  and
distinct,  and  so  loud  as  to  be  readily  heard  in  the  adjoining  room,  and
were  so  heard  by  Mrs.  Ormsby.  Now,  this  is  very  remarkable,  but
perhaps  little  more  so  than  the  fact  (which  is  true)  that  I  have  forgotten
the  day  of  the  month  on  which  it  occurred.

(Signed)  "  O.  B.  Ormsby,  M.D."

In  reply  to  some  questions  referring  to   a  briefer  account  first  given.
Dr.  Ormsby  writes  on  December  28th,  1883  : — •

"  The  fort  was  taken  and  the  brother  uninjured,  as  I  learned  when  a
few  days  afterward  I  went  forward  to  the  regiment.  I  never  learned
whether  or  not  that  which  was  said  of  the  family  was  correct.  The  name
of  the  soldier  was  Albert  Adams,  a  young  man  of  unexceptionable  moral
character  and  good  education.  He  was  then  sergeant-major  of  his
regiment.  I  understand  that  his  father  has  been  dead  several  years.  I
do  not  now  recollect  what  other  parties  were  present  in  the  room  besides
myself  and  the  young  man's  father,  though  there  were  several,  but  as  we
were  almost  strangers  to  each  other,  and  soon  separated,  I  could  not  expect
to  be  able  to  trace  them.  The  young  man  occupied  a  room,  not  in  the
hospital  proper,  which  was  crowded,  but  in  a  private  dwelling  where  he
could  have  the  entire  room.  The  next  room,  communicating  with  this  by
a  door,  I  occupied  as  a  sleeping  room,  and  my  wife,  who  was  then  on  a
visit,  was  in  that  room,  with  the  door  closed.  I  have  just  asked  her
whether  she  heard  the  words  of  the  dying  soldier,  and  she  answers  that
she  did,  informing  me  that  the  partition  between  the  rooms  was  of  boards,
papered,  and  that  young  Adams,  instead  of  saying  '  Our  forces,'  &c.,  said
'  Our  boys.'     I  learned  nothing  of  any  wraith  or  appearance  to  anyone.

(Signed)  "  O.  B.  Ormsby,  M.D."

§  27.  But  apart  from  these  cases  where  the  evidence  is  barred  by  death,
there  are  many  others,  as  I  have  already  implied,  where  the  agent-
percipient — the  man  whose  clairvoyant  perception  has  given  rise  to  a
corresponding  hallucination  in  other  minds — seems  to  be  unable  to  recount
his  side  of  the  experience  simply  because  in  his  normal  state  he  has  for-
gotten it.  In  our  rare  narratives  of  a  voluntary  self -projection,  this
seems  to  have  been  the  case  on  each  occasion.  The  friend  of  the  Rev.  W.
S.  Moses,  who  appeared  to  him,  (case  13,)  had  no  recollection  of  the  fact,
but  an  unaccustomed  headache  may  have  been  a  trace  of  some  forgotten
psychical  efibrt.      In   Mr.    S.   H.  B.'s  cases   (Nos.   14,   15,  and   16,)  the


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  307

projection  of  the  phantom  was  unremembered,  and  could  only  be  effected
during  slumber,  or  if  it  was  attempted  during  waking  hours,  the
concentration  of  mind  which  was  needed  seemed  to  induce  slumber.  ^

§  28.  Passing  from  these  voluntary  cases  to  the  spontaneous  cases,  I
would  ask  the  reader's  attention,  for  instance,  to  case  100.  From  an
evidential  point  of  view,  I  agree  with  Mr.  Gurney  that,  while  regarding
the  case  as  a  well-marked  dream  of  telepathic  origin,  we  cannot  press  the
details — the  memory  of  the  hotel-passages  and  of  Lieutenant  O.'s  bed-
chamber. What  entitles  the  narrative  to  a  place  in  this  book  is  the
striking  time-coincidence — not  the  details,  which  might  have  been  "  read
back "  into  the  half-recollected  vision.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the
incident  were  telepathic  at  all,  there  must  have  been  some  modus  operandi  ;
Mr.  AUbree's  dream  must  have  had  some  sort  of  content ;  Lieutenant
O.'s  psychical  appeal  must  have  taken  effect  in  some  particular  way.  And
if  any  hypothesis  at  all  is  to  be  formed  on  the  matter,  are  not  the  recorded
facts  best  met  by  the  hypothesis  that  Lieutenant  O.'s  crisis  evoked  a
clairvoyant  percipience  in  Mr.  Allbree  just  as  the  mesmeriser  is  said  to
evoke  it  in  the  sleep-waking  subject  1  and  that  Mr.  Allbree  seemed  to  him-
self to  pass  through  the  surroundings  and  into  the  presence  of  his  friend  1
and  that  on  waking  the  memory  of  all  this  was  gone  from  him,  though  it
was  afterwards  revived  by  the  bodily  sight  of  the  scene  which  he  had
already  supernormally  discerned  ?

Let  us  see,  however,  what  kind  of  probability  is  given  to  this  view  by
the  records  of  cases  where  something  of  the  invaded  scene  has  remained
in  the  recollection  of  the  invader.  I  am  forced,  for  clearness'  sake,  to  use
this  new  metaphorical  term,  since  the  words  agent  and  percipient  are  no
longer  sufficiently  distinctive,  the  agent  in  these  cases  being,  in  my  view,
the  primary  percipient  also.  The  metaphor  of  invasion  may  be  justified
by  the  fact  that  in  these  reciprocal  cases  A  and  B  always  agree  as  to  the
scene  where  the  apparition  occurred.  It  is  never  (with  one  or  two
dubious  exceptions)  the  case  that  A  thinks  that  he  discerned  B  in  B's
house,  while  B  thinks  that  he,  on  his  part,  was  transported  to  A's  house
and  saw  A  there.  On  the  contrary,  if  A  fixes  the  scene  as  in  B's  house,
there  does  B  fix  it  too,  a  fact  which  is  just  what  the  present  hypothesis
would  lead  us  to  expect.  This  apparent  localisation  in  one  or  the  other
entourage  is  all  that  my  metaphor  of  invasion  is  here  intended  to  suggest.

Let  us  briefly  consider  the  amount  of  subsequent  memory  shown  in
a  few  instances  by  a  waking,  a  sleejnng,  and  an  entranced  invader.

§  29.  First,  as  regards  the  cases  of  invasion  by  a  waking  agent.     These,

1  See  case  215  (Vol.  i.,  p.  567),  where  Mrs.  W.'s  "trance-state  "  was  semi-voluntary.
VOL.    II.  X    2


308  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

in  my  view,  are  likely  to  be  scanty  and  incomplete.  I  conceive  that  it  is
seldom  that  the  sense  of  transference  to  a  distant  locality  can  be  strong-
enough  in  waking  life  to  give  rise  to  the  correspondent  impression  in  other
minds.  And  in  this  group  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  find  the  confused
or  inchoate  reciprocity — if  such  indeed  it  were — of  case  304.  But  we
have  also  case  307,  where  Mr.  L.  seems  to  have  fallen  into  a  deep  reverie
resembling  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s  (Nos.  14,  15,  and  16),  though  in  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s
case  the  reverie  passed  on  into  sleep.  Case  617,  again,  perhaps  supplies  a
kind  of  faint  or  transitional  instance,  which  may  indicate  the  way  in
which  the  occupation  of  two  persons  with  the  idea  of  each  other  may  pass
into  something  like  a  reciprocal  hallucination.

Here  too,  if  anywhere,  must  be  placed  the  anomalous  case  No.  642 — •
recalling,  on  the  one  hand,  the  most  recent  experiments  of  the  communica-
tion of  hallucinations  to  hypnotised  subjects  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  old
accounts  of  so-called  "  obsession."

§  30.  More  numerous  are  the  cases  where  a  sleeping  person's  clair-
voyant vision  of  a  distant  scene  has  evoked  a  corresponding  impression  of
his  own  presence  in  the  minds  of  persons  situated  in  that  scene,  and  has
also  persisted  into  his  own  waking  memory.  Two  striking  cases  have
been  quoted,  Nos.  35  and  306.  In  these  cases  not  only  is  the  dream  (so
to  say)  acted  out,  but  the  clairvoyant  retains  a  memory  of  actual  circum-
stances, of  the  true  positions  and  actions  of  the  persons  clairvoyantly
discerned.  In  some  other  cases, — -Nos.  94  and  301, — the  incidents,  as
recollected  on  both  sides,  are  dreamlike,  but  the  locality  of  the  visionary
incident  is  agreed  on  by  both  persons  concerned.  We  seem,  therefore,  to
have  here  another  transitional  case,  a  transition  between  mere  simultaneous
dreams  and  the  kind  of  clairvoyant  invasion  with  which  I  am  now  concerned.
Again,  case  271,  which  touches  the  very  nadir  of  triviality,  seems  to  me
on  that  account  all  the  more  instructive.  I  cannot  think  that  a  mere
dream  on  Mr.  Pike's  part  that  he  was  calling  for  hot  water, — a  condition  as
far  removed  from  "  death  or  crisis  "  as  can  well  be  conceived, — would  so
strongly  have  afliected  the  servant  in  his  distant  home.  I  conceive  that  the
efficacy  of  the  dream  depended  on  his  conception  of  himself  as  actually
standing  at  his  bedroom  door ;  so  that  this,  too,  was  a  case  of  clairvoyant
invasion,  though  the  scene  invaded  was  so  commonplace  that  it  left  with
the  dreamer  no  memory  of  anything  otherwise  unknown.  And  this
example,  in  its  turn,  may  throw  light  on  some  less-developed  clairvoyant
dreams, — as  for  instance  case  412, — where  the  dreamer's  invasion  was  not
manifested  by  any  phantasmal  sight  or  sound,  though  the  trivial  scene  was
recollected  on  awakening


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  309

§  31.  Still  more  propitious,  in  my  view,  to  this  mode  of  psychical
interaction  is  a  state  of  trance,  or  even  of  delirium,  on  the  part  of  the
percipient-agent,  though  here  the  profoundly  abnormal  state  must  usually
preclude  all  recollection.  Specially  instructive  in  this  connection  is
case  308,  where  the  boy  whose  call  was  heard  in  the  place  where  he
feverishly  conceived  himself  to  be, — or  at  least  in  the  field  of  his
clairvoyant  perception, — was  afterwards  entirely  oblivious  of  that
momentary  rajjport  with  his  distant  sister  and  friend.  It  is  observable
that  the  evidential  value  of  this  case  depends  on  the  accident  that  a
watcher  was  present  with  the  boy,  and  noted  the  almost  automatic
exclamation  which  his  sudden  vision  evoked.  Had  there  been  no  one
thus  present  with  him,  the  call  of  "  Connie  !  Margaret !  "  would  have
ranked  as  a  well-marked  collective  hallucination  of  a  purely  subjective
kind.  To  this  class  also  belong  Mr.  Cromwell  Varley's  singular  narratives
(Nos.  84  and  305),  which  again,  bring  us  round  to  the  cases  where  the  clair-
voyant invasion  is  apparently  facilitated  by  the  hour  of  dissolution  itself.

Lastly,  while  these  pages  are  passing  through  the  press,  we  have
received  a  striking  case  where  memory  of  what  was  perceived  in  the
hypnotic  trance  persisted  into  normal  consciousness  ; — namely,  Mr.  Cleave's
narrative  (case  685,  in  the  Additional  Chapter)  of  his  attempts  first  to
see,  and  then  to  be  seen  by  a  distant  friend.  The  sequence  of  incidents
is  curiously  concordant  with  the  theory  which  has  been  expressed  above.
First,  the  steady  gaze  of  the  friend  who  operated  threw  Mr.  Cleave  into
unconsciousness.  Then  a  new  consciousness  showed  him  the  face  of  the
distant  lady,  "  which  gradually  became  plainer  and  plainer  until  I  seemed
to  be  in  another  room  altogether,  and  could  detail  minutely  all  the  sur-
roundings."

This  process  was  several  times  repeated  :  and  he  at  last  succeeded,  (as
he,  at  least,  conceives  the  occurrence,)  "in  making  himself  seen  by  "  the
lady  in  question.  Twice  she  saw  him  ;  and  on  the  second  occasion,  at  least,
he  perceived  that  she  saw  him,  and  noted  where  she  was,  and  in  what
company.!  Now  there  will  probably  be  some  readers  who,  even  after  all
the  evidence  which  these  volumes  contain,  will  set  aside  Mr.  Cleave's
narrative  as  merely  incredible.  But  among  those  who  are  by  this  time
prepared  to  accept  it  as  an  honest  and  careful  record  of  fact  and  impres-
sion, few,  I  think,  will  argue  that  Mr.  Cleave's  own  impressions  were
purely  subjective,  though  the  lady's  were  veridical ; — that  she  genuinely
saw  his  phantasm  in  the  place  from  which  he  imagined  himself  to  be  look-
ing at  her,  while  yet  this  imagination  of  his  was  merely  fanciful,  and  his
supposed  perception  of  her  amid  her  actual  surroundings  of  the  moment,  a

1  The  boy  who  was  with  her  seems  to  have  seen  nothing ;  but  this  fact  is  quite  con-
sistent with  my  view.     (See  p.  290.)


310        NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

mere  chance  coincidence.  Rather  they  will  hold  that  he  saw  her  before
she  saw  him ;  that  it  was  because  his  centre  of  observation  was  in  some
sense  transferred  to  the  Wandsworth  dining-room  that  she  saw  his  phantasm
standing  in  that  dining-room  ; — that,  in  short,  as  I  have  already  expressed
it,  "  correspondently  with  clairvoyant  perception  there  was  phantas-
mogenetic  efficacy."

§  32.  I  do  not  propose  to  enter  here  into  a  detailed  criticism  of  the
mass  of  narratives  which  this  book  contains.  Many  of  them,  I  think,
need,  for  the  purpose  of  any  instructive  analysis,  an  experience  of
these  phenomena  far  wider  than  we  as  yet  possess.  But  I  have
said,  perhaps,  enough  to  enable  the  reader  to  detect  for  himself,
in  many  other  cases,  indications  of  some  such  clairvoyant  invasion
as  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe.  The  cases  which  I  have  selected
for  notice  have  some  of  them  been  of  strange  and  aberrant  types ;
but  I  wished  to  show  that  the  scheme  of  psychical  interaction  here
suggested  does  at  any  rate  offer  an  appropriate  niche  to  nearly  every  well-
attested  phenomenon  which  our  collection  includes.  It  may  at  least  be
useful  to  have,  as  it  were,  a  Linncean  system  under  which  all  our  cases
can  be  conveniently  docketed,  even  though  we  may  as  yet  be  far  enough
from  discerning  their  "  natural  order  "  or  truest  affinity.

For  clearness'  sake,  1  will  briefly  trace  the  steps  by  which,  as  I
conceive  the  matter,  our  veridical  phantasms  gradually  approach  that
reciprocal  character  which  forms  their  complete  or  ultimate  form.

First  come  the  numerous  cases  which  are  too  faintly  defined  for
specification — cases  where  the  impression  transferred  retains  a  frankly
psychical  character,  where  neither  is  a  distant  scene  supernormally
discerned,  nor  does  anyone  amid  his  ordinary  surroundings  discern  a
phantasmal  visitant.  There  is  here  no  illusion  of  space-relations, —
merely  an  emotional  or  ideational  affection  of  the  percipient's  con-
sciousness. In  most  of  these  cases  all  that  we  can  say  is  that
some  telepathic  action  has  taken  place.  And  the  terms  agent  and
percipient  serve  to  express  all  that  we  know  of  the  process ;  namely,  that
on  one  side  there  is  either  death,  or  some  crisis,  or  at  least  some  concentra-
tion of  thought ;  while  on  the  other  side  something  is  felt  or  perceived
which  corresponds  in  some  way  with  the  agent's  unusual  agitation.

But  now  let  us  go  on  to  cases  which  have  reached  a  further  stage  of
development.  After  passing  through  certain  intermediate  stages, — visions
in  the  mind's  eye,  ifec, — we  arrive  at  cases  where  a  spatial  element  is
apparently  introduced ;  that  is  to  say,  the  phenomenon,  whatever  it  is,
bears  reference  to  a  special  scene  ;  and  when  this  scene  is  well-defined,  and
the  two  or  more  persons  concerned  retain  a  memory  of  the  incident,  it


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  311

is  found  that  they  all  agree  as  to  what  the  scene  was.  It  is  rarely,  how-
ever, that  a  reciprocity  of  impression  can  be  satisfactorily  attested  ;  one
or  the  other  side  of  that  phenomenon  is  usually  aborted  or  absent.  And
according  as  the  one  or  the  other  side  emerges  into  normal  consciousness
we  regard  the  incident  as  belonging  to  one  of  two  main  classes ;  it  may
be  a  perception  of  the  scene  by  a  distant  person,  or  it  may  be  the  perception
of  a  distant  person  as  forming  a  part  of  that  scene.

And  as  the  terms  agent  and  percipient  now  become  inadequate,
I  am  forced  to  use  an  avowed  metaphor,  and  to  speak  of  the  person  who
discerns  the  distant  scene  as  the  clairvoyant  invader,  whose  figure  is  some-
times discerned  in  the  invaded  scene.  Now  the  clairvoyant  invader  must
be  regarded  as  primarily  a  percipient ;  for  his  first  function,  so  to  say,  is  to
discern  the  distant  scene.  But  this  discernment  of  his  may  fail  to  subsist
into  his  waking  or  normal  memory,  or  instant  death  may  intercept  his
recital  thereof,  so  that  there  may  be  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  was
clairvoyant  at  all.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  since  his  clairvoyant  percep-
tion is  sometimes  accompanied  with  a  corresponding  phantasmogenetic
efficacy, — since  his  supernormal  invasion  of  the  scene  may  generate  in  the
denizens  of  that  scene  a  hallucinatory  perception  of  a  supernormal  in-
vader,— we  have  cases  in  which  this  invader,  (though  on  my  theory  primarily
a  percipient,)  appears  in  our  evidence  purely  as  an  agent :  so  that  A  dies
and  A's  phantom  appears  to  B,  and  A  is  set  down  simply  as  an  agent,
and  B  is  set  down  as  the  only  percipient  concerned.  But  in  such  cases  I
hold  that  A  is  quite  as  truly  a  percipient  as  B  is ;  but  that  the  shifting
of  the  threshold  of  consciousness  which  accompanied  his  perception, —
whether  that  shift  were  from  waking  to  sleep -waking  or  from  life  to
death, — prevents  him,  even  if  his  consciousness  is  shifted  back  again,  from
recalling  or  recording  that  perception  as  a  link  in  his  chain  of  normal
memories.

§  33.  Now  let  us  turn  our  attention  for  a  moment  to  the  other  person
concerned  in  the  phenomenon  ;  to  the  denizen,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  invaded
scene.  He  is  (it  is  plain)  frequently  a  percipient ;  unless  he  perceived  the
phantasmal  invader  we  should  often  be  ignorant  that  any  invasion  had
taken  place.  But  is  he  ever  to  be  considered  as  an  agent  too  ?  Yes,  I
hold  that  in  certain  cases  he  is  an  agent  in  somewhat  the  same  sense  as  a
mesmerist  is  an  agent  when  he  induces  clairvoyance  in  a  subject.  In  that
case  I  hold  that  a  certain  influence  (I  know  not  what)  from  the  mesmerist
evokes  or  disengages  in  the  subject  a  pre-existent  but  non-manifest  capacity
of  supernormal  percipience,  which  first  places  that  subject  in  rapport  with
the  ideas  or  sensations  of  the  mesmerist  himself  (as  in  experiments  of  our
own,  and  other  cases,  to  be  found  especially  in  Supplement,  Chap.  I.),  but


312  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF

which  ultimately,  in  some  few  well-attested  cases,  does  actually  extend
tlie  subject's  percipience  beyond  the  range  either  of  his  own  or  of  his
mesmeriser's  normal  powers  of  sense.  And  somewhat  similarly,  1  hold
that  if  a  man  is  dying  or  deeply  agitated,  and  his  friend,  gifted  with  much
latent  capacity  of  supernormal  percipience,  is  asleep  at  a  distance,  then
some  influence  from  the  dying  man  may  evoke  or  direct  that  percipience
in  the  friend,  so  that  he  becomes  cognisant  first,  perhaps,  of  the  deathbed
scene  as  realised  by  the  dying  man  himself,  but  ultimately  of  that  scene
as  it  might  be  realised  by  an  independent  entrant,  including  casual  denizens
unnoticed  by  the  dying  man,  but  who  may  perhaps,  on  their  part,  discern
the  friend's  phantasmal  invasion,  and  thus  be  percipients  without  being-
agents  (as  in  case  30) ;  while  perhaps  the  dying  man,  who  is  in  reality  the
determining  cause  of  that  phantasmal  invasion,  may  attain  to  no  per-
ception of  it  whatever.

§  34.  "  But,"  someone  will  say,  "  are  you  not  here  introducing  a  cross-
division  1  You  have  spoken  hitherto  of  A  as  enabled  by  his  own  death
to  make  a  clairvoyant  invasion  of  the  scene  where  B  sits  in  a  normal
condition.  You  now  speak  of  A  as  enabled  by  B's  death  to  make  a
similar  invasion  of  the  scene  where  B  lies  dying.  You  are  thus
classing  the  dying  man  alternately  as  the  invader  and  as  the  invaded ;
and  yet  surely  he  who  is  undergoing  this  profoundest  of  all  crises  ought
always  to  be  ranged  on  the  same  side  in  whatsoever  psychical  interaction
you  are  assuming ;  there  cannot  be  other  psychical  conditions  more  marked
and  determinant  than  his."  I  have  led  up  to  a  statement  of  this  difiiculty
because  I  believe  that  the  answer,  if  we  ever  attain  to  more  than
a  glimpse  of  it,  will  involve  that  true  principle  of  classification  which  we
are  still  seeking.  And  as  a  hint  towards  such  reply  I  will  repeat  what
has  been  already  suggested,  namely,  that  the  right  way  of  regarding  these
startling  incidents  is  not  as  isolated  psychical  operations,  but  rather  as
emergent  manifestations  of  psychical  operations  which  are  continuous,
though  latent ;  and  which  belong,  not  so  much  to  the  self  of  which  we
are  habitually  conscious,  as  to  a  hidden  chain  of  mentation,  which,
for  aught  we  know,  may  comprise  a  continuity  of  supernormal  per-
cipience or  activity.  When  therefore,  B  is  dying  and  A  has  a  clairvoyant
dream,  as  of  presence  at  the  deathbed,  the  relation  between  B  and  A  with
which  we  have  to  deal  is  not  the  mere  external  relation  between  agony  on
the  one  side  and  repose  on  the  other.  It  is  a  relation  between  that
specific  supernormal  activity  which  accompanies  death  and  that  specific
supernormal  activity  which  accompanies  slumber.  And  though  the  death
is  still  the  prime  factor  in  the  resultant  interactions,  we  cannot  say
a  priori  what  the  scene  of  interaction  in  any  given  case  will  be ; — whether


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.  313

there  will  be  an  invasion  by  the  dying  man  of  the  sleeper's  chamber,  or  by
the  sleeper  of  the  dying  man's.

I  will  illustrate  my  meaning  by  a  modification  of  an  analogy  which  I
have  elsewhere  employed.  I  compare  our  conscious  existence  to  a  barge
floating  down  the  Arve,  where  it  flows  side  by  side,  but  as  yet  unmingled
with  the  Rhone ;  the  water  round  our  keel  is  habitually  turbid  and
opaque,  but  occasionally  an  inequality  of  river-bed,  a  clash  of  currents,
swings  us  for  a  moment  into  the  more  pellucid  Rhone.  The  Rhone — our
unconscious  self — flows  on  as  continuously  as  the  Arve,  but  the  barge  enters
it  only  by  moments,  and  those  moments  may  be  determined  by  changes  in
the  Rhone's  bed  as  well  as  in  the  Arve's.  For  the  most  part,  the  reef
which  raises  breakers  in  the  one  stream  will  raise  them  in  the  other  also ;
and  imminent  death,  for  instance,  may  jerk  us  into  clairvoyance  by  a
shock  communicated  at  once  to  our  conscious  and  to  our  unconscious
being.  But  there  may  also  be  crises  which  involve  not  so  much  a  con-
fusion of  the  normal  life  as  an  expansion  or  liberation  of  the  supernormal;
and  when  we  become  clairvoyant  in  deep  sleep  or  the  mesmeric  trance
this  is  because  the  turbid  waters  are  running  in  a  narrower  channel,  and
the  barge  sways  into  the  broadening  current  of  the  pellucid  stream.
Again,  there  may  be  crises  which  are  merely  dissociative  or  disintegrant ;
where  the  barge  poises  on  the  very  boundary  line  between  the  two  currents,
and  both  streams  of  personality  are  manifested  at  once.  It  is  thus  that
I  explain  Mrs.  Newnham's  case  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  63-9),  where  the  intelligence
which  wrote  the  replies  to  unseen  questions  would  seem  to  have  consisted
of  an  unconscious  current  of  Mrs.  Newnham's  own  existence,  exercising
supernormal  percipience,  but  dreamlike  and  incomplete  in  co-ordinating
power.  And  with  Mrs.  JSTewnham's  case  I  should  compare  certain  cases
which  bear,  indeed,  no  plain  resemblance  thereto,  and  which  Mr.  Gurney
has  treated  as  almost  obviously  morbid  and  delusive, — cases  wherw  the
"  double  "  of  a  living  person  has  been  seen  together  with  that  person  him-
self. Take  the  most  bizarre  of  these  cases,  that  of  Mrs.  Hall,  (No.  333,)
where,  as  a  lady  sits  at  table  with  three  friends,  her  phantom  semblance  is
seen  by  herself  and  by  all  present,  standing  at  the  end  of  the  sideboard.
Now  the  analogy  between  Mrs.  Newnham  and  Mrs.  Hall  seems  to  me  to  be
this  ;  that  in  the  compound  personality  of  each  of  them  the  "  critical
point "  of  dissociation  was  reached  (so  to  say)  at  a  very  low  temperature.^
In  Mrs.  Newnham's  case,  her  unconscious  self  exercised  supernormal  per-
cipience, and  manifested  itself  by  controlling  her  motor  system,  while  her
conscious  self  maintained  its  ordinary  way.  In  Mrs.  Hall's  case,  her  un-
conscious self,  assuming  a  too  facile  independence,  and  possibly  exercising  a

1  I  should  explain  in  the  same  way  cases  327,  328,  329,  348.  Note  that  the  girl  seen
in  case  329  had  previously  been  phantasmally  seen,  (like  Mrs.  Stone,)  in  the  same
apparently  casual  way.


314  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE  OF'

supernormal  percipience,  manifested  itself  by  its  phantasmogenetic  efficacy-
while  her  conscious  self  was  unaware  of  any  inward  excitement  or  "shearing
stress."  I  venture,  however,  to  surmise  that  had  Mrs.  Hall  been  thrown
into  a  mesmeric  trance  directly  after  her  "  double  "  had  shown  itself,  she
might  have  remembered  contemplating  the  room  as  though  from  the
position  which  the  "  double  "  appeared  to  occupy.

§  35.  There  is  thus  a  point  of  view  from  which  these  "  apparitions  of  the
double"  represent  the  most  developed  type  to  which  our  veridical
phantasms  can  attain.  But  in  the  process  of  development  their  veridicality,
so  to  say,  has  become  a  quite  subsidiary  thing.  Mrs.  Stone's  double  ^  was,
I  believe,  veridical,  in  the  sense  that  it  announced  the  fact  of  an  exception-
ally easy  dissociation  between  the  currents  of  her  being.  But  this  was  not
a  fact  of  evidential  value — it  was  not  supported,  as  our  cases  in  general
are,  by  any  coincidence  with  an  external  and  objective  incident.

Our  preferable  type,  therefore,  of  a  fully-developed  veridical  hallucina-
tion,— the  "perfect  flower"  to  which  we  may,for  clearness'  sake, suppose  that
so  many  rudimentary  or  partially-aborted  psychical  efflorescences  are  tend-
ing to  conform  themselves, — will  be  a  complete  case  of  reciprocal  percipience,
where  the  dying  A  clairvoyantly  perceives  B  in  B's  entourage,  and  narrates
that  experience,  while  at  the  same  time  B  discerns  A's  phantasmal  figure
in  a  place  corresponding  to  that  from  which  A  conceives  himself  to  be
exercising  his  supernormal  vision.  In  such  a  type  as  this,  I  conceive,
the  phenomena  which  we  investigate  separately  under  the  titles  of  thought-
transference,  clairvoyance,  apparitions,  mix  and  meet ;  and  though  their
very  juxtaposition  suggests  fresh  difficulties,  these,  as  I  claim,  are  not  im-
ported by  any  theorising  of  mine,  but  are  inherent  in  all  attempts  to  corre-
late tilings  psychical  with  physical  things.  As  regards  the  relation  of  this
clairvoyant  perception,  this  phantasmogenetic  energy,  to  space  and  matter,
the  theory  here  advanced  leaves  us  entirely  uncommitted.  This  book,  indeed,
contains  no  evidence  of  any  real  or  registrable  action  of  psychical  energy
on  molecular  matter ;  and  much  evidence  that  an  apparent  action  on
matter  may  turn  out  to  be  of  a  quite  hallucinatory  kind.  And  as  regards
sjjace  we  are  left  equally  at  liberty  to  suppose  that  the  psychical  energy
here  attributed  to  our  own  being,  or  to  a  part  of  our  own  being,  operates
in  ordinary  three-dimensional  space,  or  in  four-dimensional  space  (if  that
exists),  or  that  it  does  not  really  operate  in  space  at  all,  though  its
effects  be  necessarily  apprehended  as  in  space  by  the  normal  consciousness.

§  36.  Such  emphatic  expressions  of  ignorance  as  these  must  go  hand  in

1  See  p.  85.  Observe  that  in  one  of  Mrs.  Stone's  cases  her  consciousness  seemed
for  the  moment  to  become  external  to  her  ordinary  self, — the  barge,  floating  on  the
dividing  line  between  the  two  currents,  swayed  momentarily  into  the  Rhone.


PSYCHICAL  INTERACTION.     "  315

hand  with  any  attempt  at  positive  theorising.  Our  endeavour  must  be  to
give  to  our  strange  and  scattered  phenomena  enough  of  coherence  and
co-ordination  to  enable  the  reader's  mind  to  grasp  them  and  work
upon  them,  while  we  expi'essly  avoid  any  such  self-committal  to  any  one
hypothesis  as  may  constrain  rather  than  guide  inquiry.  In  so  new  a
subject,  if  the  need  of  this  resolute  open-mindedness  be  recognised  from
the  first,  there  should  be  little  difficulty  in  maintaining  it.  The  mere
popular  prepossessions  which  encumber  the  outset  of  our  inquiry  may
readily  be  swept  aside  ;  and  we  must  then  watch  that  no  dogmatic
statement,  unprovable  by  the  evidence,  be  raised  into  authority  in  their
room.  Thus  the  writers  who  speak  of  a  "  force  neurique  rayonnante,"  of
"  brain- waves,"  of  '''  ondulationnisme,"  of  a  "  mentiferous  ether,"  as  if  these
were  more  than  purely  metaphorical  expressions,  seem  to  me  to  be  falling
into  the  same  error  which  has  encumbered  hypnotic  experiment  with  the
question-begging  terms  of  "  animal  magnetism  "  and  "  electro-biology."
Let  us  use  every  analogy  which  helps  us,  but  let  us  recognise  that  nothing
has  been  discovered  which  shows  that  thought-transference  has  anything
to  do  with  ether  or  with  vibrations.  Everything  in  the  universe  may  be
reducible  to  vibrations,  for  aught  we  know ;  but  until  some  definite
experiment,  as  of  reflection,  interference,  or  the  like,  can  be  brought
forward  to  connect  telepathy  with  ether-waves,  it  is  surely  safer  to  avoid
using  that  analogy  in  a  way  which  suggests  that  it  has  a  prior  right  over
many  others  which  might  be  proposed.

For  our  own  part,  though  obliged  by  the  very  structure  of  language  to
make  frequent  use  of  terms  which  are  primarily  of  physical  import,  we
have  kept  as  much  as  possible  to  the  simplest,  and  have  spoken  of  the
telepathic  impulse  or  impact  for  sheer  lack  of  expressions  more  abstract
still.  We  have  varied  the  metaphor  by  suggesting  that  the  brief  energy
of  the  psychical  element  in  man  which  seems  to  accompany  physical  dis-
solution recalled  the  momentary  energy  of  combination  possessed,  say,  by
"nascent  hydrogen,"  hydrogen  just  released  from  union  with  some  pther
element.  Electrical  action,  too — itself  so  unexplained — -has  furnished  us
with  several  parallels,  and  Mr.  Gurney  (p.  270)  has  especially  pointed  to
its  latent  pervasiveness,  its  seemingly  accidental  manifestations.

And  yet  again,  the  views  suggested  in  this  paper  lead  us  on  to  a
novel  range  of  analogy.  The  conception  of  a  percipient  reciprocity,  the
hints  which  have  seemed  to  come  to  us  of  the  perpetual  but  unmanifested
operation  of  an  unconscious  element  in  our  own  being ; — these  notions  lift
us  above  the  conception  of  mere  mechanical  interforces,  and  suggest
a  more  vital  communication.  In  the  relation  of  the  cell  to  the  complex
organism, — in  the  relation  of  the  diffused  and  multiplex  "colonial  con-
sciousness "  of  the  sponge  or  the  hydrozoon  to  the  concentrated  conscious-


316  NOTE  ON  A  SUGGESTED  MODE,  ETC.

ness  of  man  ; — here,  it  may  be,  are  analogies  which  have  a  psychical
counterpart  behind  the  scenes  of  sense.  When  from  these  dim  and
incoordinated  beginnings  the  individuation  of  the  human  animal  has
risen  complete  ;  when  the  hierarchy  of  his  nervous  centres  has  led  up  to
highest  centres  which  represent  and  govern  his  entire  organism  at
once ; — then  we  are  accustomed  to  start,  as  it  were,  afresh,  and
to  conceive  his  hardly-won  unity  as  an  elemental  unit  in  a  larger
integration.  We  speak  of  him  as  a  (Siov  irokiriKov,  as  a  "  member
of  the  body  politic,"  as  a  component  item  in  that  Leviathan  whose
monstrous  semblance,  in  Hobbes'  frontispiece,  is  packed  together  from
a  myi-iad  visages  of  men.  But  the  growth  of  the  social  organism  is
rather  a  psychical  than  a  physical  thing.  It  may  take  outward  form  in
railway  or  telegraph,  but  its  vitality  lies  in  the  inter-connection  of  cognate
minds,  in  the  differentiations  and  integrations  of  the  thought  and  emotion
of  speaking  men.  A  common  interest,  a  common  passion,  is  the  vein  or
nerve  which  interlinks  and  modifies  the  monotonous  isolation  of  individual
lives.  Is  it  not,  then,  conceivable  that  in  these  direct  telepathic  trans-
ferences between  mind  and  mind — these  associations  which  seem  to  effect
themselves  beyond  our  threshold  of  consciousness,  and  only  to  startle  us  by
their  occasional  intrusion  into  the  field  of  sense — we  may  be  gaining  a  first
glimpse  of  a  process  of  psychical  evolution,  as  true  and  actual  as  any  in
the  physical  world  ?  of  some  incipient  organic  solidarity  between  the
psychical  units  which  we  call  man  and  man  1  Perhaps  beneath  the  body
politic  a  soul  politic  is  integrating  itself  unseen  ;—

totamque  infusa  per  artus
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.

Let  this  analogy  take  its  place  with  the  rest.  It  is  too  soon,  indeed,  to
detect  the  law  of  these  operations,  but  not  too  soon  to  affirm  confi-
dently tliat  these  operations  obey  their  certain  law ;  it  is  too  soon  to
discern  in  this  inextricabilis  error  the  path  by  which  Evolution  seeks  its
goal,  but  not  too  soon  to  be  assured  that  it  is  the  principle  of  Evolution
itself  which,  like  Daedalus,  cceca  regens  filo  vestigia,  will  in  its  own  time
unlock  the  labyrinth  which  its  own  magic  force  has  made ;  will  conduct
us  from  physical  to  psychical,  perhaps  from  terrene  to  transcendent  things.

F.  W.  H.  M.


SUPPLEMENT.

*^*  The  Supplement  does  not  include  the  Additional  Chapter
at  the  end  of  the  volume,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  belonging
to  the  main  body  of  the  work.


SUPPLEMENT.

INTRODUCTION.

§  1.  The  supplementary  evidence  now  to  be  presented,  like  the
larger  body  of  the  work,  consists  of  two  parts,  pertaining  respectively
to  experimental  and  to  spontaneous  telepathy.

The  experimental  cases,  which  will  be  given  in  the  first  chapter,,
are  all  connected  with  a  more  or  less  abnormal  state  of  the  per-
cipient ;  and  they  belong  for  the  most  part  to  the  transitional  class,^
where  the  mind  of  the  agent  is  fixed  on  the  sensation  or  idea  which
he  desires  to  transfer,  but  the  percipient  is  not  aware  that  any
experiment  is  being  tried.  Some  of  the  cases  are  even  spontaneous,
in  so  far  as  the  agent  himself  was  not  at  the  moment  concentrating
his  attention  on  the  effect  to  be  produced  ;  but  they  are  experimental
in  the  sense  that  they  have  belonged  to  a  course  of  hypnotic  treat-
ment, deliberately  pursued  during  a  considerable  period.

The  subsequent  chapters  will  be  devoted  to  spontaneous  phe-
nomena, belonging  to  the  various  groups  which  have  been  already
passed  in  review.  And  in  relation  to  this  branch  of  the  subject,  I
must  ask  the  reader  throughout  to  bear  in  mind  what  the  Supplement
professes,  or  rather  what  it  does  not  profess,  to  be,

§  2.  It  does  not  constitute  a  case  on  which  we  should  have  felt
that  the  reality  of  telepathy  could  be  safely  based.

It  includes,  in  the  first  place,  a  large  number  of  first-hand
narratives  where,  for  various  reasons,  the  chance  of  error  in  some  vital
point  seems  less  improbable  than  in  those  hitherto  quoted.  A
detailed  preliminary  survey  of  these  various  reasons  is  scarcely
necessary ;  the  reader  of  the  4th  chapter  of  the  preceding  volume  will
readily  picture  them,  and  they  will  be  abundantly  noted  in  connection
with  the   testimony  to  which  they  apply.      The  chief    points  are

^  To  such  cases  I  have  attached  numbers,  they  being  parallel  to  the  cases  in
Vol.  i.,  Chap,  iii.,  where  the  numbering  of  examples  began.  The  cases  where  the  perci-
pient was  (certainly  or  possibly)  aware  of  being  the  subject  of  an  experiment,  are  given
without  numbers — not  as  an  indication  of  evidential  inferiority,  but  because  of  practical
difficulties,  a  whole  series  of  experiments  having  often  been  made  on  a  single  occasion.

VOL.    II.  Y


322  SUPPLEMENT.

naturally  those  which  introduce  a  doubt  as  to  the  closeness  of  the
alleged  coincidence,  or  as  to  the  unique  or  highly  exceptional
character  of  the  percipient's  impression.

In  the  second  place,  a  large  number  of  the  included  narratives  are
second-hand.     They  are  of  a  good  type,  no  doubt ;  being  received  not
from  persons  who  have   only  casually  heard  the   first-hand  account
without  any  opportunities  of  judging  of  its  correctness,   but  from
persons   for  the  most  part    intimately  connected  with  the   original
witness,  and  well  assured  at  any  rate  of  his  conviction  as  to  the  truth
of  what  he  told,  and  of  the  impression  which  the  experience  had  made
on  him.^     Of  the  majority  of  these  narratives,  we  think  that  the  fair
conclusion  would  be  that,  though  possibly  or  probably  inaccurate  in
minor  points,  they  faithfully  present  the  essential  point  which  bears
on  the  telepathic  theory.     But  I  cannot  make  the  justice  of  this  view
evident ;  no  such  defence  of  it  can  be  given  as  was  attempted  in
Chapter  IV.  of  the  first  volume,  in  respect  of  the  first-hand  testimony.
It  is  an  instinct,  rather  than  a  logically-grounded  opinion — and  is,  in
fact,  the  slowly-formed  result  of  a  very  large  amount  of  labour  in  the
sifting  and  comparing  of  records,  and  in  the  examination  of  witnesses.
But  though  the  view  cannot  be  proved  correct,  I  may  remind  the
reader  that  we  who   hold  it  have  had  exceptional  opportunities  of
appreciating  to  the  full  the  dangers  which  truth  runs  in  passing  from
mouth  to  mouth  ;  that  we  believe  we  do  appreciate  those  dangers  to
the  full ;  and  that  signs  of  this  have  not  been  lacking  in  the  course  of
the  work.     And  it  may,  I  think,  be  taken  as  a  further  sign  of  such
appreciation  that  we  feel  ourselves  unable  to  regard  the  immense
number  of  bond  fide  records  that  remain  to  be  presented,  as  amount-
ing to  any  sort  of  independent  proof  of  our  case.

§  3.  But  in  saying  that  our  case  could  not  be  properly  regarded
as  'proved  by  the  Supplement  alone,  I  am  far  from  saying  that  it  is
not  supported.  If  the  existence  of  spontaneous  telepathy  were  a
certainty,  many  of  the  experiences  which  follow  might  almost  certainly
be  referred  to  it ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  existence  of  spontaneous
telepathy  is  probable,  may  they  with  probability  be  referred  to  it.
The  bond  fide  evidence  for  them  exists,  and  has  to  be  accounted  for ;
and  to  us  it  seems  just  of  the  sort  that  we  should  expect  to  find,  and
exhibits  just  the  sort  of  shortcomings  that  we  should  expect  to  find,  on
the  hypothesis  that  telepathy  is  really  a  fact  in  Nature.     This  state-

1  As  an  illustration  of  the  difference,  see  Colonel  V.'s  case  below,  Chap,  v.,  §  3,  and
the  note  thereon.


INTRODUCTION.  323

ment  will  of  course  not  have  any  weight  with  those  who  differ  from
us,  on  a  priori  grounds,  from  the  very  outset.     Such  persons  may,
and  indeed  almost  must,  affirm  that  the  far  stronger  body  of  evidence
which  has  been  already  passed  in  review  is  just  what  they  would
expect  to  find,  on  the  hypothesis  that  telepathy  is  not  a  fact  in
Nature.     Their  position  here  would  perhaps  be  stronger  if  they  had
actually  made  this  affirmation  before  the  body  of  evidence  was  there.
It  at  any  rate  does  not  seem  certain  that  those  who  have  dogmatically
asserted  that  there  are  no  sober  first-hand  accounts  of,  e.^.,  apparitions
at  death  from  educated  and  unhysterical  witnesses — or  that  there  are
not  more  than  the  very  few  which  the  doctrine  of  chances  will  at  once
account  for — would  have  been  ready,  when  our  inquiry  was  taken
up,  to  contradict  themselves  by  predicting  that  many  scores  of  such
accounts  could  be  had  for  the  asking.     But  however  that  may  be,
my  remarks  are  addressed  only  to  those  who  would  admit  that  the
evidence  already  presented  constitutes  at  least  a  solid  argument  for
the  reality  of  spontaneous  telepathy.    And  these  persons  will  probably
agree,  if  a  considerable  number  of  cases  are  so  attested  that  the
rejection  of  the  telepathic  explanation  of  them  would  involve  great
improbabilities,  that  then  (1)  it  is  natural  that  a  considerable  number
of  cases  should  also  be  so  attested  that  the  rejection  of  the  telepathic
explanation    of  them   would    involve    less,   but    still    considerable,
improbabilities;  (2)  the  more  completely  evidenced  cases  establish
a  presumption  that  some,  at  any  rate,  of  the  less  completely  evi-
denced  cases   are   genuine ;  and  (3)  the  general   objection   to   the
reality  of  the  class  of  phenomena,  as  out  of  relation  to  the  general
experience  of  mankind,  is  legitimately  diminished   by  taking  into
account  all  the  cases  which,  if  the  cause  that  we  suggest  be  a  reality,
would  more  reasonably  be  referred  to  it  than  to  any  other  cause.
These  last  words  of  course   involve   the  whole  judgment  of  what
follows ;  and  I  hope  that,  on  the  whole,  they  will  seem  defensible.
In  this,  that,  or  the  other  case,  a  mistake  may  be  easily  imaginable.
But  here,  as  before,  it  may  be  represented  that  the   argument  is
cumulative  ;  that  the  body  of  narratives,  as  it  stands,  is  harmonious
and  sober  in    character ;  that  they   introduce  none   of  the  obvious
marvels  which  popular  superstition  is  so  ready  to  supply  (Vol.  I.,
p.  165) ;  that  they  never  pass  the  line  up  to  which  the  more  com-
pletely evidenced  cases  have  carried  us ; — and  that  such  are  not  the
natural  results  of  unconscious  invention  or  exaggeration,  playing  at
random  over  hundreds  of  disconnected  instances.

VOL.    II.  Y   2


[chap.


CHAPTER  I.

FUKTHER  EXAMPLES  OF  THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE,  PRINCIPALLY
IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.

§  1.  This  chapter  will  contain  some  specimens  of  the  older  observa-
tions in  "thought-transference"  referred  to  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  12  ;  and
also  a  few  more  recent  instances.

I  will  take  first  the  most  rudimentary  transferences — those  of
tastes  and  pains.

Mr.  Esdaile,  for  many  years  Presidency  Surgeon  in  Calcutta^
whose  observations  on  hypnotic  phenomena  now  form  an  accepted
part  of  physiological  science,  gives  the  following  case  of  transference
of  taste  between  himself  and  a  patient  whom  he  had  mesmerised
(Practical  MesTnerism,  p.  125).  The  subject  was  a  young  Hindoo,
Baboo  Mohun  Mittre,  who  had  been  operated  upon  painlessly  whilst
in  the  mesmeric  trance.

"  One  day  that  the  Baboo  came  to  the  hospital  to  pay  his  respects,
after  getting  well,  I  took  him  into  a  side  room,  and  mesmerising  him  till
he  could  not  open  his  eyes,  I  went  out  and  desired  my  assistant  surgeon
to  procure  me  some  salt,  a  slice  of  lime,  a  piece  of  gentian,  and  some
brandy,  and  to  give  them  to  me  in  any  order  he  pleased,  when  I  opened
my  mouth.  We  returned,  and  blindfolding  Lallee  Mohun,  I  took  hold  of
both  his  hands  :  and,  opening  my  mouth,  had  a  slice  of  half-rotten  lime
put  into  it  by  my  assistant.  Having  chewed  it,  I  asked,  '  Do  you  taste
anything  ? '  '  Yes,  I  taste  a  nasty  old  lime ' :  and  he  made  wry  faces  in
correspondence.  He  was  equally  correct  with  all  the  other  substances,
calling  the  gentian  by  its  native  name,  cheretta  ;  and  when  I  tasted  the
brandy,  he  said  it  was  Shrdh  (the  general  name  for  wine  and  spirits).
Being  asked  what  kind,  he  said,  '  What  I  used  to  drink — brandy.'  For  I
am  happy  to  say  he  is  cured  of  his  drunken  habits  (formerly  drinking
two  bottles  of  brandy  a  day)  as  well  as  of  his  disease."

The  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend,  in  his  Facts  in  Mesmerism,  gives
several  examples.  (See  especially  pp.  68,  72,  76,  122,  150,  151,  184.)
The  following   experiments  were  made  on  a  servant  of  his  own,  in.


I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      325

whom  he  had  produced  the  trance- condition  ;  but  it  cannot  be  held
impossible,  from  his  description,  that  the  results  should  have  been  due
to  an  acute  sense  of  smell,  combined  with  a  certain  amount  of  luck.

"  Wine,  water,  and  coffee  were  handed  to  me  successively,  in  such  a  way
as  to  prevent  the  patient  from  perceiving,  by  any  usual  means,  what  the
liquors  were.  He,  however,  correctly  named  them  in  order.  The  order
was  then  changed,  and  the  results  of  the  experiments  were  the  same.
Flowers  were  given  me  to  smell.  I  was  holding  the  patient  by  one  hand  at
the  time,  but  turning  altogether  away  from  him  to  a  table,  over  which  I
bent,  so  as  to  interpose  myself  between  him  and  anything  that  might  be
handed  to  me.  He,  however,  when  I  smelt  of  the  flowers,  imitated  the
action,  and  on  my  asking  him  what  he  perceived,  replied  without  hesita-
tion, '  Flowers.'  Upon  this,  one  of  the  party  silently  changed  the  flowers
for  a  bottle  of  eau  de  Cologne,  when  he  observed,  '  That  is  not  the  same
smell ;  it  is  eau  de  Cologne.'  With  the  manner  of  conducting  this
experiment  and  its  results,  all  who  were  present  declared  themselves
perfectly  satisfied."

"  Three  of  my  sleep-wakers,"  Mr.  Townshend  says  in  another
place,  "  could  in  no  way  distinguish  substances  when  placed  in  their
own  mouths,  nor  discriminate  between  a  piece  of  apple  and  a  piece
of  cheese ;  but  the  moment  that  I  was  eating,  they,  seeming  to  eat
also,  could  tell  me  what  I  had  in  my  mouth."

The  next  case  is  also  one  of  Mr.  Townshend's.

(358)  "  Did  any  one  strike  or  hurt  me  in  any  part  of  the  body  when
Anna  M.  was  in  sleep-waking,  she  immediately  carried  her  hand  to  a
corresponding  part  of  her  own  person.  Then  she  would  rub  her  own
shoulder  when  mine  was  smarting  with  a  blow,  manifesting  that  the
actual  nerves  of  that  part  were,  pro  tempore,  restored  to  their  functions.
Once  an  incredulous  person  came  near  me  unawares,  and  trod  upon  my
foot,  which  was  quite  hidden  under  a  chair.  The  sleep-waker  instantly
darted  down  her  hand  and  rubbed  her  own  foot  with  an  expression  of
pain.  Again,  if  my  hair  was  pulled  from  behind,  Anna  directly  raised
her  hand  to  the  back  of  her  head.  A  pin  thrust  into  my  hand  elicited
an  equal  demonstration  of  sympathy."

Stimulated  by  Mr.  Townshend's  experiments,  the  Rev.  A.  Gilmour,
of  Greenock,  made  some  experiments  on  one  of  his  servants.  He
described  the  results  in  a  letter  to  Professor  Gregory  (quoted  in
AniTnal  Magnetiswi,  p.  211),  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs : —

"  I  could  throw  her  into  the  mesmeric  sleep  in  40  seconds.  She  is  able
to  tell  what  I  taste,  such  as  soda,  salt,  sugar,  milk,  water,  tfec,  though  not
in  the  same  room  with  me.  When  my  foot  is  pricked,  or  my  hair  pulled,
or  any  part  of  my  person  pinched,  she  feels  it,  and  describes  it  unerringly."

Professor  Gregory  himself  says  (Ani'nial  Magnetism,  p.  23) : —
"  I  have  seen  and  tested  the  fact  of   community  of  sensation  in  so
many  cases  that  I  regard  it  as  firmly  established.     No  one  who  has  had


326  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

opportunities  of  observing  this  beautiful  phenomenon  can  long  hesitate  as
to  its  entire  truth — such  is  the  expression  of  genuine  sensation  in  the  face
and  gesture,  besides  the  distinct  statements  made  by  the  sleeper."

I  need  hardly  say  that  a  single  carefully  recorded  experiment  would
be  worth  more  than  any  number  of  such  general  assertions  as  this.

The   following   account  is  given  by  Dr.  Elliotson  in  the  Zoist,

Vol.  v.,  pp.  242-5.

(359)  "  I  requested  my  butler  to  enclose,  in  five  difierent  packets  of
blotting-paper,  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,  ginger,  and  pepper.  These  were
wrapped  in  one  common  cover  when  given  to  me,  and  I  handed  them
over  to  Mr.  Scarlett,  the  eldest  son  of  Lord  Abinger,  who  gave  me  one
packet  after  another,  any  that  he  chose,  as  each  was  done  with  by  me.
The  Archbishop  of  Dublin  and  several  clergymen  and  other  friends  were
present.

"  When  I  put  each  into  my  mouth,  I  was  ignorant  of  its  contents,  and

learnt  its  nature  as  the  paper  became  moistened  and  gave  way.     The  first

was  salt,  and  I  stood  with  it  in  my  mouth  at  Mrs.  Snewing's  side,  and

rather  behind   her,  saying  nothing.       Before  a  minute  had  elapsed   she

moved  her  lips,  made  a  face,  and  said,  '  Oh,  that's  nasty  enough.'     '  What

do  you  mean  ? '     '  Why  you've  put  salt  into  my  mouth,  you  needn't  have

done    that.'      I    removed   the   packet  of   salt,   and   took  another,  which

proved  to  be  cinnamon.     Presently  she  said,  '  Well  that  is  odd ;  I  never

heard  of  such  a  thing ;    to  put  such  things  together  into  one's  mouth  ! '

'  Why  what  do  you  mean  ? '     '  Why  now  you've  given  me  something  nice

and  warm,  very  pleasant,  but  you've  mixed  salt  with  it.'     The  impression

of  the  salt  thus  still  remained.     '  What  is  it  ? '    'I  don't  know  the  name  of

it,  but  it's  very  nice  ;  it's  what  we  put  into  puddings ;  brown,  and  in  sticks.'

She  puzzled  a  long  while  and  then  on  my  asking  if  it  was  cinnamon,  '  Yes,

that's  it,'  she  replied,  '  How  odd  that  I  shouldn't  recollect  the  name.'     I

then  removed  it,  and  took  into  my  mouth  another  packet,  which  proved

to  be  sugar,  and  I  observed  that  Mr.  Scarlett  very  properly  peeped  into  it,

before  he  gave  it  to  me.     After  a  minute  or  two  she  began,  '  Oh,  that's

very  sweet ;   I  like  that  ;  it's  sugar.'     I  removed  it  from  my  mouth  and

took  another  packet,  which  proved  to  be  ginger.     After  a  minute  or  two

she  exclaimed,  '  Well,  this  is  the  funniest  thing  I  ever  heard  of,  to  mix

salt,  and  cinnamon,  and  sugar,  and  now  to  give  me  something  else  hot.'

'  What  is  it  ? '     'I  don't  know ;  but  this  is  very  hot  too.     It  sets  all  my

mouth    on   fire.'     In    fact    I    felt  my  mouth   burning  hot.     After  some

difficulty,  for  she  was  puzzled  between  these  conflicting  impressions,  she

said  it  must  be  ginger,  and  went  on  complaining  of  the  heat  of  the  mouth,

I  took  a  glass  of  cold  water,  and  she  instantly  said,  smiling,  '  That  isn't

hot,  that's  nice  and  cool,  it  makes  my  mouth  quite  comfortable.'     '  What

is  it  ? '     '  Why  it's  water  ;  what  else  can  it  be  ? '     The  last  packet  was

now  put  into  my  mouth,  and  proved  to  be  pepper.     She  cried  out,  '  Why

you're  putting  hot  things  again  into  my  mouth.     It  gets  down  my  throat,

and  up  my  nose ;    it's  burning  me,'  and  she  soon  declared  it  was  pepper.

I  could  scarcely  endure  it,  and  took  a  draught  of  water.    She  was  instantly

relieved,  and  said,  '  How  cool  and  nice  that  is.'      She  could  not  have  seen

what  I  was  doing  had  her  eyes  been  open.


I.]        THOUGHT-TBANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     327

"  A  gentleman  now  came  beside  me  and  pricked  one  of  my  fingers  with
a  pin.  She  took  no  notice  of  it  at  first,  but,  after  a  few  minutes,  slowly
began  to  rub  the  fingers  of  her  corresponding  hand,  and  at  last  rubbed
one  only,  that  corresponding  with  my  finger  which  had  been  pricked,  and
complained  that  someone  had  pricked  it.  The  back  of  one  of  my  hands
was  now  pricked.  She  made  no  remark  but  remained  in  quiet  sleep.
The  pricking  was  at  length  repeated  at  the  same  spot,  and  pretty  sharply,
in  silence.  Still  she  made  no  remark.  We  gave  it  up,  and  my  other
hand  was  pricked  in  silence.  After  a  little  time  she  began  to  rub  her
hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine  which  was  the  first  pricked,  and
complained  of  its  having  been  pricked  at  the  very  same  spot  as  mine.
Gradually  she  ceased  to  complain,  and  was  still  again.  After  the  lapse
of  another  minute  or  two,  all  the  party  observing  silence,  she  complained
that  the  other  hand,  corresponding  with  that  of  mine  last  pricked,  was
pricked,  and  wondered  that  any  person  should  do  so.  This  is  a  most
remarkable  circumstance ;  perfectly  corresponding  to  the  phenomena  of
sympathetic  movement  in  the  Okeys,  which  often  came  out  so  long
after  the  movement  of  the  operator  had  been  made.  Indeed,  after  he,
in  despair  of  any  effect,  had  made  another  motion  for  them  to  imitate,
and  when  he  was  expecting  the  latter,  the  first  would  take  place.^  It
shows  how  easily  persons  ignorant  of  the  subject  and  unqualified  to  make
experiments  may  come  to  false  conclusions,  and  set  themselves  up  as  the
discoverers  of  failures  and  imposition.  In  my  patients  the  movement
given  for  sympathy  and  not  productive  of  apparent  efiect  has  often  come
out  again  in  a  subsequent  sleep-waking,  the  impression  remaining  uncon-
sciously in  the  brain.  The  heat  and  taste  of  the  pepper  still  remained  in
Mrs.  Snewing's  mouth,  and  she  went  on  good-naturedly,  as  always,  com-
plaining of  it.  While  she  was  complaining,  I  suddenly  awoke  her,  and
asked  what  she  tasted  and  whether  her  mouth  was  hot.  She  looked  sur-
prised, and  said  she  '  tasted  nothing '  and  her  '  mouth  was  not  hot ' ;  and
she  smiled  at  the  question.

"  A  few  weeks  afterwards,  I  repeated  these  experiments  with  all  the
same  precautions,  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson  and  Mr.
Chandler,  who  are  very  accurate  observers,  Mrs.  Thompson  and  a  few  other
friends.  I  stood  quite  behind  her  large  high-backed  leather  chair.  Mr.
Chandler  gave  me  the  packets  at  his  own  pleasure,  and,  on  tasting  each,  I
wrote  on  a  slip  of  paper  what  I  tasted,  and  held  up  the  slip  at  a  distance
behind  her,  that  all  might  judge  of  her  accuracy  and  my  truth.  These  were
the  same  articles  as  in  the  former  experiments  ;  but,  as  they  were  on  both
occasions  taken  at  random,  the  order,  of  course,  turned  out  to  be  difierent.
In  addition,  Mr.  Chandler  gave  me  a  piece  of  dried  orange-peel  from  his
pocket ;  and  I  tasted  water  and  wine.  She  named  each  article  with  per-
fect accuracy,  and  readily  ;  remarking  that  it  was  very  strange  she  once
could  not  recollect  the  name  of  cinnamon.  Indeed,  on  the  first  occasion,
she  described  the  taste  and  the  external  character  and  uses  of  the  various
articles  with  perfect  accuracy,  but  hesitated  in  giving  the  names  of  the
cinnamon  and  ginger  and  pepper;  a  fact  showing  that  the  sleepi-
ness   extended   a   little   more   over  the  mental  powers  than  one  might

1  Compare  Vol.  i.,  p.  56.  I  may  once  more  remind  the  reader  of  the  interest  of  such
facts,  in  connection  with  the  "  deferred  impressions  "  of  spontaneous  telepathy.


328  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

imagine.  In  a  note  sent  me  lately  by  Mr.  Thompson  are  the  following
remarks  : —

" '  The  patient's  lips  moved,  and  in  a  very  short  time  after  you  had
detected  its  nature,  she  appeared  to  taste  it  as  well  as  yourself  ;  and  when
it  was  anything  disagreeable,  begged  you  would  not  put  the  nasty  stuff  into
her  mouth  in  this  way.  She  told,  without  the  slightest  mistake,  every-
thing you  tasted  :  salt,  sugar,  cinnamon,  pepper,  ginger,  orange-peel,  wine,
and  some  others.  Not  a  word  was  spoken  by  any  of  the  party  to  each
other,  and  the  only  question  that  was  asked  the  patient  was,  what  she  had
in  her  mouth  that  she  complained  of.  After  the  spices,  when  you  drank
water,  she  seemed  to  enjoy  it  much,  saying  it  cooled  her  mouth  ;  but  at
other  times  as  you  drank  it  very  freely,  she  requested  that  you  would  not
give  her  any  more  water  for  that  so  much  water  was  disagreeable  to  her.
There  were  present,  Mr.  Chandler,  Lord  Adare,  Baron  Osten,  a  friend  of
his,  whose  name  I  do  not  know,  myself,  and  my  wife.  "We  were  all
perfectly  satisfied  with  the  entire  success  of  the  experiments.'

"  I  then  smelt  eau  de  Cologne,  without  any  noise.  She  presently  said,
*  How  nice  ;  what  a  nice  thing  you've  given  me  to  smell.'  But  she  could
not  tell  what  it  was ;  when  I  mentioned  its  name,  she  recognised  it.  I  did
the  same  with  water.  She  made  no  remark.  I  asked  her  if  she  smelt
anything.  She  replied,  '  No,  I  don't  smell  anything;  what  should  I  smell?'

"  I  put  snuff  to  my  nostrils ;  she  almost  immediately  complained  of
snuff  being  given  to  her.

The  next  account  was  sent  to  us  by  the  late  Professor  J,  Smith,

of  the  University  of  Sydney.

"September  3rd,  1884.

(360)  "  The  experiments  [in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.  P.  R.]  on  transfer-
ence of  tastes  brought  to  my  mind  a  very  interesting  case  which  occurred
to  me  more  than  40  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  medical  student.  I  have  never
seen  a  similar  case  in  print,  and  therefore  I  am  tempted  to  relate  it,
although  possibly  it  may  be  quite  familiar  to  you.  When  my  attention
was  first  drawn  to  mesmerism,  I  got  hold  of  an  errand  boy,  12  or  13  years
old,  who  turned  out  a  most  sensitive  '  subject.'  Among  many  other  things
that  I  tried  upon  him,  while  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  was  the  transference
of  taste.  The  boy  could  describe  the  taste  of  anything  I  put  into  my
mouth,  although  no  sound  was  uttered  to  guide  him,  and  I  myself  did
not  know  what  the  substances  were  until  I  put  them  into  my  mouth.  I
stood  behind  the  boy's  chair,  holding  one  of  his  hands  in  mine,  and  put
my  other  hand  behind  me  for  the  different  articles,  which  were  supplied  to
me  successively  by  a  druggist,  in  the  back  room  of  whose  shop  we  happened
to  be.

"  One  of  the  things  he  gave  me  was  a  glass  of  whisky,  and  a  mouthful
of  this  strong  spirit  taken  unexpectedly  gave  me  a  choking  sensation.
The  boy  writhed  on  his  chair,  and  gasped  for  breath.  Becoming  alarmed
I  asked  my  friend  to  run  for  a  glass  of  water,  intending  to  give  it  to  the
boy.  On  receiving  it,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  best  way  of  relieving  the
boy  would  be  to  drink  the  water  myself.  I  did  so,  at  the  same  time
watching  his  throat.  Being  a  medical  student,  I  knew  something  of  the
mechanism  of  deglutition,  and  was  aware  that  the  act  of  swallowing,
shown  externally  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  the    '  pomum  Adami,'  cannot  be


I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      329

performed  without  something  to  swallow,  and  that  a  person  cannot  repeat
the  act  voluntarily  more  than  once,  or  at  the  most  twice  consecutively,
unless  something  is  put  into  the  mouth.  I  therefore  watched  the  boy's
throat  while  I  drank  the  water.  His  '  pomum  Adami '  moved  up  and
down  regularly  with  mine,  and  he  was  immediately  relieved.^

"J.  Smith."

The  next  extract  is  from  Animal  Magnetism,  (1866,)  by  Edwin
Lee,  M.D.,  p.  127.

(361)  "  On  one  occasion  I  tested  the  community  of  feeling  upon  the
celebrated  somnambulist  Alexis,  who  had  not  been  previously  subjected  to
a  trial  of  this  kind.  His  magnetiser,  M.  Marcillet,  being  behind,  and
quite  out  of  sight  of  Alexis,  whose  eyes,  moreover,  were  bandaged,  I
suddenly  pricked  his  left  elbow,  upon  which  Alexis  put  his  hand  to  his
left  elbow  complaining  of  pain  there.  I  then  pinched  the  magnetiser's
right  little  finger,  and  Alexis  felt  his  right  little  finger  pinched.  There
could  be  no  collusion  or  mistake  here,  as  neither  of  them  knew  of  my
intention,  which  indeed  was  unpremeditated  on  my  part,  the  thought
arising  in  my  mind  at  the  time."

The  following  case  is  of  a  different  character,  but  may  be  inserted
in  connection  with  the  last,  as  it  concerns  the  same  percipient,  and
was  also  observed  by  Dr.  E.  Lee.  It  serves  to  show  how  much  which
has  been  represented  as  independent  clairvoyance  may  really  be
explained  by  thought-transference.

Miss  Curtis  writes  from  15,  Parade  Villas,  Heme  Bay,  Kent: —

"November  12th,  1886.

"  About  the  year  1847  or  1848,  the  Dr.  Lee  who  wrote  a  book  on  the
German  Baths,  made  an  arrangement  with  Alexis  Didier,  a  clairvoyant
at  Paris,  and  M.  Marcillet,  his  mesmeriser,  to  come  to  Brighton.  There
was  to  be  no  public  exhibition,  but  only  seances  at  private  houses,  and
about  12  persons  to  be  present,  and  each  to  have  an  opportunity  of  trying
Alexis  in  the  manner  he  or  she  wished.

"  I  was  at  Brighton  at  the  time,  and  before  going  to  see  Alexis,  wrote
his  name  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and  doubled  it  three  or  four  times,  and  then
put  it  in  a  box  that  had  held  steel  pens,  and  tied  it  up.  When  my  turn
came,  I  gave  the  box  to  Alexis,  and  he  began  reading  the  letters  on  the
outside.  I  told  him  there  was  a  paper  inside  I  wanted  him  to  read,  and
Dr.  Lee  asked  me  to  give  my  hand  to  Alexis,  and  think  of  the  words.
Alexis  then  said,  '  The  first  letter  is  A.  the  second,  L.'  I  answered  '  Yes' ;
and  he  turned  the  box,  and  wrote  Alexis  Didier  on  the  back.  Before  I
saw  him  the  second  time,  I  took  a  small  smelling  bottle  out  of  its  leather
case,  put  two  seals  inside — one  seal  was  in  the  form  of  a  basket.  I  gave
the  case  to  Alexis,  and  asked  him  how  many  things  were  inside,  and  he
said  two,  and  they  were  seals  ;  he  took  a  pencil  and  paper  and  drew  them;
they  were  then  taken  out,  and  the  drawings  exactly  resembled  them.
Some  one  asked  if  Alexis  could  read  what  was  on  one  of  the  seals ;  he
said  he  could  not,  because  it  was  written  backwards.     Dr.  Lee  asked  me

1  An  apparent  instance  of  telepathic  imitation  of  a  less  abnormal  sort  is  recorded  in
Townshend's  Mesmerism  Proved  True,  p.  65.


330  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

to  give  my  hand;  I  thought  of  the  word,  and  Alexis  directly  said,
'  Croyez,'  which  was  correct.  [This,  however,  is  no  test ;  as  we  find  on
inquiry,  that  Alexis  had  taken  the  seals  into  his  hand,  and  had  had  an
opportunity  of  reading  the  word.]  I  then  asked  him  two  or  three
questions  about  the  persons  who  had  given  me  the  seals,  and  he  made  a
mistake,  and  said  the  lady  who  had  given  me  one  was  in  England,  whereas
she  was  in  Africa.  Alexis  was  unequal,  some  days  telling  almost  every-
thing, and  other  days  failing  in  several  things.  The  notes  Dr.  Lee  made
were  printed,  and  I  had  a  copy,  but  gave  it  away.     "  Selina  Curtis."

[The  first  of  these  results  is  rendered  inconclusive  by  the  fact  of  the
contact.  Still  it  is  unlikely  that  Miss  Curtis  unconsciously  drew  on
Alexis'  hand  forms  sufficiently  distinctive  to  be  recognised  as  A  L.  The
rest  of  the  name  may,  of  course,  have  been  a  guess  on  his  part — though
(as  Miss  Curtis  reminds  me)  he  was  not  often  called  by  the  double  name
which  she  wrote.  Dr.  Lee  mentions  this  first  experiment,  without  details,
in  his  book,  but  not  the  second.]

Corresponding  to  the  cases  where  the  hypnotic  "  subject "  has
shown  sensibility  to  the  hypnotiser's  pain,  instances  are  recorded
where  the  hypnotiser  has  become  sensitive  to  the  "  subject's  "  pain.
In  Lausanne's  book,  Des  Principes  et  des  Precedes  du  Magnetisme
Animal  (Paris,  1819),  the  following  paragraphs  occur  : —

"  Les  personnes  sensibles  et  bien  en  rapport  ressentent-elles,  comme  je
I'ai  dit,  une  grande  partie  des  effets  que  produit  le  travail  de  la  nature
renforcee  de  son  action.  C'est  ainsi  que  je  ressens  interieurement  des
pesanteurs  de  tete,  des  tiraillemens,  des  douleurs  a  I'estomac,  au  foie,  a  la
rate,  aux  reins,  a  la  tete,  et  dans  toutes  les  parties  de  mon  corps
correspondantes  aux  parties  qui  travaillent  dans  le  corps  de  la  personne
que  je  magnetise.  Mes  sensations  ne  sont  jamais  aussi  vives  que  celles  du
malade,  mais  quelquefois  elles  le  sont  assez  pour  m'§tre  incommodes.  II
y  a  des  jours  oil  ma  sensibilite  est  telle,  que  des  mouvemens  fugitifs  et
legers  dans  la  personne  malade  me  deviennent  distincts.  11  se  presente
dans  ces  sensations  quelques  phenomenes  sur  lesquels  je  vais  exposer  mes
conjectures.

"  Lorsque  je  suis  pres  et  vis-a-vis  le  malade,  je  sens  la  reaction  de  son
travail  dans  la  partie  opposee  ;  de  sorte  qu'une  douleur  au  foie  se  fait  sentir
a  ma  rate  ou  dans  les  parties  adjacentes,  et  celle  de  la  rate  se  fait  sentir
a  mon  foie.  Une  douleur  ou  un  tiraillement  a  Fepaule  ou  a  la  jambe  droite
m'est  sensible  a  I'epaule  ou  a  la  jambe  gauche.  Les  reins  font  le  meme
efiet.  Observez  que  je  ne  parle  que  de  parties  opposdes  les  unes  aux
autres,  comme  les  tempes,  les  yeux,  les  oreilles,  &c.  Lorsque  toute  la  tete
est  affectde,  la  mienne  s'en  ressent,  et  I'estomac  repond  a  mon  estomac.
Les  memes  efiets  ont  lieu  lorsque  je  suis  proche  du  malade,  et  assis  a  son
cot^.  J'ai  ete  quelquefois  obligt^  de  changer  de  place  a  I'orchestre  de  nos
spectacles,  parce  que  je  me  trouvais  incommode  d'un  mal  de  tete,  de  foie,
ou  de  rate  d'un  de  mes  voisins.  Ces  sensations  desagrdables  se  dissipaient
par  I'eloignement  et  par  la  distraction.

"J'ai  remarque  que  je  ne  recevais  de  ces  impressions  distinctes  que  de  la
part  des  personnes  dont  je  m'occupais,  soit  par  la  conversation,  soit  par
d'autres  rapports.    II  ne  faut  pas  croire  que  dans  de  pareilles  circonstances


I.]         THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     331

un  mal  leger  ou  une  douleur  passagere  puisse  porter  des  impressions
sensibles ;  elles  ne  le  deviennent  que  lorsque  le  mal  est  considerable.  Je
ne  me  suis  aperQu  de  ces  effets  que  depuis  que  je  magnetise,  apparemment
parceque  je  suis  habitue  a  porter  mon  attention  sur  mes  sensations  internes.

"  II  m'est  arrive  tres-souvent  de  m'occuper  fortement  de  quelques
personnes  avec  lesquelles  j'avais  de  grands  rapports.  Ma  pensee  se
dirigeant  vers  les  principales  parties  de  leur  corps,  leur  reaction  me  faisait
sentir  trfes-distinctement  dans  les  parties  correspondantes  du  mien,  les
differentes  sensations  que  ces  personnes  ^prouveraient  dans  ce  moment.
Faits  tres-certains  pour  moi,  et  pour  les  personnes  a  qui  je  I'ecrivais,  en
leur  detaillant  les  sensations  qu'elles  avaient  eprouvees,  les  places  et
I'heure  precise.  Ce  que  je  viens  de  rapporter  m'a  prouve  que  la  pensee
produisait  une  action  tres-vive,  dont  la  reaction  portait  sur  nos  sens  des
impressions  tres-distinctes.

"  Je  ne  parle  point  icide  plusieurs  personnes  que  j'ai  mises  en  somnam-
bulisme,  ou  que  j'ai  tirees  de  cet  etat  a  un  eloignement  assez  grand."

Such  general  descriptions  are  very  far  from  convincing ;  ^  and
Lausanne  gives  the  details  of  only  one  success,  which,  though  certainly
striking,  may  have  been  accidental.  I  may  add,  for  comparison,  a
statement  made  to  me  by  an  amateur  hypnotist,  Mr.  J.  H.  Fash,  in
whose  good  faith  I  have  every  confidence,  but  who  has  again  failed
to  make  the  detailed  notes  without  which  such  observations,  in  what-
ever quantity  accumulated,  will  never  make  a  chapter  of  science.  It
is  possible  that  the  mention  of  the  type  here  may  serve  to  elicit

further  instances.

"  9,  Commerce  Street,  Glasgow.

"July  28th,  1885.
"  Instead  of  impressing  my  '  subjects '  they  seem  to  impress  me ;  and
should  they  chance  to  have  any  soreness  or  pain  in  any  part  of  the  body,
I  feel  it  in  a  corresponding  part  of  mine  as  soon  as  I  have  commenced
mesmerising  them  ;  and  it  sometimes  remains  with  me  for  a  considerable
time  after.  In  this  way  I  am  often  able  to  discern  aches  or  pains  in
various  persons,  who  have  afterwards  stated  that  they  felt  relieved.  Just
this  moment  as  I  write,  I  am  suffering  from  a  severe  soreness  in  the  region
of  the  spleen,  and  a  feeling  as  of  dyspepsia  or  indigestion  at  the  stomach,
and  on  making  remarks  to  the  sensitive  a  few  minutes  since  that  I  felt
this,  he  replied,  '  I  felt  that  way  before  you  mesmerised  me  but  I  am  all
right  now.' "

§  2.  The  following  examples  of  the  silent  power  of  the  will  in

producing  the  hypnotic  condition,  or  in  evoking  particular  actions  on

1  The  author  of  Reflexions  Impartiales  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  (1784)  says  that  he
witnessed  similar  phenomena  several  times  at  Lyons:  "Les  differentes  somnambules
qui  ont  servi  aux  experiences  sont  des  fiUes  du  peuple.  On  leur  a  pr^sent^,  des  sujets
malades  qui  leur  etaient  inconnus.  Elles  ont  indiqu^  avec  la  plus  grande  exactitude  les
maux  dont  elles  Etaient  affect^s  :  je  les  ai  vues  ressentir  vivement  les  maux  de  ceux  qu'elles
magnetisaient,  et  les  manif ester  en  portant  les  mains  sur  elles  aux  memes  parties."
Bertrand  remarks  on  the  similarity  of  Carr^  de  Montgeron's  account  of  the  St.  M^dard
"  convulsionnaires."  But  the  lack  of  detail  and  corroboration  must  of  course  prevent  such
evidence  from  having  any  independent  weight.


332  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

the  part  of  hypnotised  persons,  are  analogous  to  those  recorded  in
Vol.  I.,  pp.  88-94.  The  first  account  is  taken  from  the  Traite  du
Somnambulisme,  (Paris,  1823,  pp.  246-7)  of  Dr.  Alexandre  Bertrand,
a  physician  of  repute,  whose  works  give  the  impression  of  having
been  written  in  a  spirit  of  rational  scepticism.

"  J'avais  coutume  de  faire  sortir  une  malade  du  somnambulisme  en  lui
faisant  de  legeres  frictions  sur  les  bras  ;  et  cette  manoeuvre,  qui  ne  I'eveil-
lait  pas  daus  le  courant  de  la  seance,  ne  manquait  jamais  de  produire  cet
effet  a  la  fin,  quand  j'avais  riutention  de  la  faire  sortir  du  sommeil.  Un
jour  je  fis,  a  la  fin  de  la  seance,  mes  frictions  accoutumees,  en  lui  disant,
'  Aliens,  allons,  ^veillez-vous ' — et  pendant  ce  temps  j'avais  la  ferme  volonte
de  ne  pas  I'eveiller.  La  malade  parut  d'abord  visiblement  trouble,  puis
tout-a-coup  son  visage  rougit  beaucoup,  ses  traits  s'altererent,  et  elle  eut
quelques  mouvements  convulsifs,  sans  sortir  pourtant  de  I'etat  de  somnam-
bulisme. J'employai  alors  toute  ma  volonte  a  la  calmer ;  et  quand  je  la
vis  enfin  rede  venue  tranquille,  '  Qu'avez  vous  done,'  lui  dis-je,  '  qui  vous
a  fait  avoir  des  convulsions  ? '  '  Comment,'  me  repondit-elle,  '  vous  me
dites  de  7n'eveiller,  et  vous  ne  voulez  pas  que  je  ru'eveille.'  "

Bertrand,  whose  treatment  of  the  subject  is  thoroughly  cautious
and  sensible,  records  (p.  280),  a  more  ordinary  case  of  thought-
transference,  in  which  the  "subject"  and  the  agent  were  both  known
to  him,  on  the  authority  of  the  latter,  who  had  his  complete  con-
fidence ;  but  he  declines  to  commit  himself  to  results  which  he  had
witnessed  without  having  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  persons
concerned.

The  next  case  was  reported  by  Mr,  Charles  Richet  to  the  Soci^td
de  Psychologic  Physiologique,  and  appeared  in  the  Revue  Philo-
sophique  for  February,  1886,  p.  199.

(362)  M.  Richet  begins  by  saying  that,  in  spite  of  repeated  trials,  he
has  only  on  one  occasion  obtained  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  induction  of
hypnotic  trance  at  a  distance.  This  was  in  1873,  when  he  was  "  interne  "
at  the  Beaujon  Hospital.  The  "subject"  was  a  woman  whom  he  had
frequently  hypnotised.

"  D'abord  je  I'endormais  par  des  passes  ;  puis,  plus  tard,  en  lui  touchant
la  main ;  puis  enfin,  simplement,  en  entrant  dans  la  salle.

"  Le  matin,  quand  j'entrais  dans  la  salle  avec  mon  chef  de  service,  M.  le
professeur  Le  Fort,  je  la  voyais  aussitot,  dans  le  fond  de  la  salle  ou  elle
etait,  s'endormir.  Mais,  comme  je  ne  voulais  pas  qu'elle  fut  dans  cet  etat
au  moment  oil  M.  Le  Fort  serait  a  cote  d'elle  je  faisais  tout  mes  efforts
pour  la  reveiller  mentalement ;  et,  de  fait,  elle  se  reveillait  toujours
quelques  instants  avant  que  M.  Le  Fort  arrivat  au  lit  No.  11.

"  S'agissait-il  rdellement  d'un  acte  de  volonte  de  ma  part,  soit  pour  la
reveiller,  soit  pour  I'endormir ;  ou  bien  s'endormait-elle  et  se  rdveillait-
elle  spontan^ment?  C'est  la  un  point  que  je  n'ai  jamais  pu  bien  etablir.
Et  si,  comme  je  vais  le  raconter,  I'exp^rience  n'avait  pas  et^  fait  d'une
autre  maniere,  ce  sommeil  et  ce  reveil  ne  prouveraient  absolument  rien.


I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.       333

"  Un  jour,  etant  avec  mes  collegues,  a  la  salle  de  garde,  a  dejeuner —
notre  confrere  M.  Landouzy,  alors  interne  comme  moi  a  I'hopital  Beaujon,
^tait  present — j'assurai  que  je  pouvais  endorinir  cette  malade  a  distance,
et  que  je  la  ferais  venir,  a  la  salle  de  garde  ou  nous  etions,  rien  que  par  un
acte  de  ma  volonte.  Mais  au  bout  de  dix  minutes  personne  n'etant  venu,
I'experience  fut  consideree  comme  ayant  echoue.

"  En  realite  Texperience  n'avait  pas  echoue  ;  car  quelque  temps  apres,
on  vint  me  prevenir  que  la  malade  se  promenait  dans  les  couloirs,  endormie,
cherchant  a  me  parler  et  ne  me  trouvant  pas  ;  et,  en  effet,  il  en  etait  ainsi,
sans  que  je  puisse  de  sa  part  obtenir  d'autre  reponse  pour  expliquer  son
sommeil  et  cette  promenade  vagabonde,  sinon  qu'elle  desirait  me  parler.

"  Une  autre  fois,  j'ai  repete  cette  experience  en  la  variant  de  la  maniere
suivante.  Je  priai  deux  de  mes  collegues  de  se  rendre  dans  la  salle,  sous
le  pretexte  d'examiner  une  malade  quelconque  ;  en  realite  afin  d'observer
comment  se  comporterait  le  No.  11,  que  j'aurais,  a  ce  moment,  I'intention
d'endormir.  Quelque  temps  apres  ils  vinrent  me  dire  que  I'experience
avait  echoue.  Oependant,  cette  fois  encore,  elle  avait  reussi.  Car  on
s'etait  trompe  en  designant  a  la  place  du  No.  11  la  malade  voisine,  qui
naturellement  etait  restee  parfaitement  eveillee,  tandis  que  le  No.  11
s'etait  effectivement  endormie.

"  J'aurais  du  sans  doute  repeter  et  varier  avec  plus  de  precision  cette
experience  interessante  ;  mais  en  pareille  matiere  on  ne  fait  pas  tout  ce
qu'on  desire  faire,  et  ceux-la  seuls  qui  ont  expdrimente  peuvent  savoir
quelles  difficultes  de  toute  sortes,  morales  et  autres,  empechent  la
poursuite  methodique  de  I'experimentation.

"  Quelques  semaines  apres,  la  malade  retourna  dans  son  pays,  a
Beziers,  je  crois,  et  je  n'ai  plus  entendu  parler  d'elle.        <c  Qjj   Richet  "

The  next  example,  from  Professer  Beaunis,  of  Nancy,  is  published
in  the  same  number  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  p.  204.  The
concluding  sentences  of  his  account,  as  the  admission  of  a  physiologist
of  high  repute,  are  of  good  omen  for  the  future  of  our  subject  in
France.  The  experiment  was  made  in  conjunction  with  our  friend,
Dr.  Liebeault.

(363)  "  Le  sujet  est  un  jeune  homme,  tres  bon  somnambule,  bien
portant,  un  peu  timide.  II  accompagnait  chez  M.  Liebeault  sa  cousine,
tres  bonne  somnambule  aussi,  et  qui  est  traitee  par  I'hypnotisme  pour  des
accidents  nerveux.

"  M.  Liebeault  endort  le  sujet  et  lui  dit  pendant  son  sommeil  :  '  A
votre  reveil  vous  executerez  I'acte  qui  vous  sera  ordonne  mentalement  par
les  personnes  presentes.'  J'ecris  alors  au  crayon  sur  un  papier  ces  mots  :
'  Embrasser  sa  cousine.'  Ces  mots  ecrits,  je  montre  le  papier  au  Dr.
Liebeault  et  aux  quelques  personnes  pre'sentes,  en  leur  recommandant  de  le
lire  des  yeux  seulement,  et  sans  prononcer  meme  des  levres  une  seule  des
paroles  qui  s'y  trouve,  et  j'ajoute  :  '  A  son  reveil,  vous  penserez  fortement
a  I'acte  qu'il  doit  executer,  sans  rien  dire  et  sans  faire  aucun  signe  qui
puisse  le  mettre  sur  la  voie.'  On  reveille  alors  le  sujet  et  nous  attendons
tous  le  resultat  de  I'experience.  Peu  apres  son  reveil,  nous  le  voyons  rire
et  se  cacher  la  figure  dans  ses  mains,  et  ce  manege  continue  quelque  temps


334  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

sans  autre  resultat.  Je  lui  demande  alors  :  '  Qu'avez-vous  1 '  '  Rien.'  '  A
quoi  pensez  vous  ? '  Pas  de  reponse.  'Vous  savez,'  lui  dis-je,  'que  vous
devez  faire  quelque  chose  a  quoi  nous  pensions.  Si  vous  ne  voulez  pas  le
faire,  dites-nous  au  moins  a  quoi  vous  pensez.'  '  Non.'  Alors  je  lui  dis  :
'  Si  vous  ne  voulez  pas  le  dire  tout  haut,  dites-le-moi  bas  a  I'oreille,'  et  je
m'approche  de  lui.  '  A  embrasser  ma  cousine,'  me  dit-il.  Une  fois  le
premier  pas  fait,  le  reste  de  la  suggestion  mentale  s'accomplit  de  bonne  grace.
"  Y  a-t-il  eu  simple  coincidence  ?  Ce  serait  bien  ^tonnant.  A-t-il  pu,
pendant  son  sommeil,  reconnaltre  le  sens  des  paroles  que  j'dcrivais  a  la
facon  dont  je  les  ecrivais  sur  le  papier,  ou  a-t-il  pu  les  voir'?  C'est  bien
peu  supposable.  Enfin  je  suis  sur  qu'aucune  des  personnes  presentes  n'a
pu  le  mettre  d'une  fagon  quelconque  sur  la  voie  de  Facte  qu'il  devait
accomplir.  II  y  a  la  evidemment  quelque  chose  qui  bouleverse  toutes  les
idees  regues  sur  les  fonctions  du  cerveau,  et  pour  ma  part,  jusqu'  a  ces
derniers  temps,  j'etais  parfaitement  incr^dule  sur  les  faits  de  ce  genre.
Aujourd'hui  j 'arrive  a  cette  conviction  qu'il  ne  faut  pas  les  repousser,  les
cas  de  reussite,  quoique  rares,  etant  trop  nombreux  pour  etre  un  simple
effet  de  hasard.  "  jj_  Beaunis."

§  3.  To  pass  now  to  transferences  of  ideas  unconnected  with
movement  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  94-6),  the  next  two  incidents  are  again  reported
by  a  French  physician  of  high  standing — not,  however,  as  personal
observations,  but  apparently  as  attested  by  another  medical  man.
They  occur  in  Dr.  Macario's  work,  Du  Som'meil,  des  Reves,  et  du
Somnambulisme  (Lyons,  1857),  pp.  185-6.

(364  and  365)  "  Un  soir  le  docteur  Gromier,  apres  avoir  endormi  par  la
magnetisation  une  femme  hysterique,  demanda  au  mari  de  cette  femme  la
permission  de  faire  une  experience,  et  voici  ce  qui  se  passa.  Sans  mot  dire,  il
la  conduisit  en  pleine  mer,  mentalement,  bien  entendu;  la  malade  fut  tran-
quille  tant  que  le  calme  dura  sur  les  eaux  ;  mais  bientot  le  magnetiseur
souleva  dans  sa  pensee  une  efFroyable  tempete,  et  la  malade  se  mit  aussitot
a  pousser  des  cris  pergants,  et  a  se  cramponner  aux  objets  environnants ;
sa  voix,  ses  larmes,  I'expression  de  sa  physionomie  indiquaient  une  frayeur
terrible.  Alors  il  ramena  successivement,  et  toujours  par  la  pensee,  les
vagues  dans  les  limites  raisonnables.  EUes  cesserent  d'agiter  le  navire,  et
suivant  le  progres  de  leur  abaissement,  le  calme  rentra  dans  I'esprit  de  la
somnambule,  quoiqu'  elle  conservat  encore  une  respiration  haletante  et  un
tremblement  nerveux  dans  tons  ses  membres.  '  Ne  me  ramenez  jamais  en
mer,'  s'ecria-t-elle  un  instant  apres,  avec  transport;  'j'ai  trop  peur,  et  ce
miserable  de  capitaine  qui  ne  voulait  pas  nous  laisser  monter  sur  le  pont !'
'Cette  exclamation  nous  bouleversa  d'autant  plus,'  dit  M.  Gromier,  '  que  je
n'avais  pas  prononc^  une  seule  parole  qui  put  lui  indiquer  la  nature  de
I'exp^rience  que  j 'avals  I'intention  de  faire.'

"  Une  autre  fois,  cette  meme  malade  etait  en  proie  a  un  profond  deses-
poir.  Voici  ce  que  son  medecin,  le  docteur  Gromier,  imagina  pour  ranimer
son  courage.  Elle  dormait  d'un  sommeil  magn^tique.  Poux^quoi,  lui  dit-il
mentalement,  perdre  ainsi  I'esperance  ?  Vous  etes  pieuse,  la  sainte  Vierge
viendra  a  votre  secours,  et  vous  guerirez,  soyez-en-sure.  Puis  il  decouvrit,
par  sa  pensee,  le  toit  de  la  maison ;  dans  les  angles  il  groupa  des  images


I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      335

portant  des  cherubins,  et  au  milieu  il  fit  descendre  dans  un  globe  de
lumiere  la  sainte  Vierge,  dans  toute  la  splendeur  de  sa  magnificence.  La
somnambule  tomba  aussitot  dans  le  ravissement,  dans  I'extase,  se  prosterna
a  terre,  et  s'ecria  dans  le  plus  grand  transport,  '  Ah !  mon  Dieu,  depuis
si  longtemps  que  je  prie  la  Vierge  Marie,  voila  la  premiere  fois  qu'elle
vient  a  mon  secours. '  "

[If  correctly  reported,  these  results  seem  to  go  beyond  what  can  reason-
ably be  attributed  to  unconscious  physical  indications  on  the  experimenter's
part.]

Quite  parallel  to  such  cases  as  these  is  the  form  of  experimental
telepathy  for  which  there  is  perhaps  most  evidence  in  the  older
records — though  it  is  one  which  we  have  never  personally  encountered
— that  where  some  place  or  scene,  familiar  to  someone  present,  has
been  accurately  described  by  a  hypnotised  "  subject  "  who  had  no
previous  knowledge  of  it.  The  phenomenon  has  been  almost  always
set  down  to  independent  clairvoyance — an  explanation  for  which
there  has,  in  most  cases,  been  little  or  no  warrant.  A  single  instance
must  suffice,  and  I  select  one  from  the  late  Sergeant  Cox's  Mechanisrn
of  Man  (Vol  II.,  p.  220).

"  One  instance,  within  my  personal  experience,  will  suffice  to  give  the
reader  a  clear  conception  of  the  character  of  this  very  curious  psychological
phenomenon.  The  somnambule  was  a  little  girl,  aged  only  1 0  years.  She
was  invited  to  go  (mentally)  with  me  to  Somersetshire.  She  described
accurately  my  father's  house  there — the  verandah  and  the  glass  doors
opening  to  the  garden.  Asked  if  she  could  see  anything  in  the  room  1
'  Oh,  yes  ! '  she  said,  '  such  a  funny  chair,  it  rolls  about.'  (It  was  an
American  rocking-chair.)  '  Anything  more  ? '  '  Yes — pictures.'  '  Tell
me  what  they  are  about.'  '  One  is  a  house  pulled  to  pieces.'  (There  was
a  drawing  on  the  wall  of  the  ruins  of  an  abbey.)  'Any  more?'  '  Yes  ;
the  sky  is  on  fire  ;  horses  are  jumping  about.'  (It  was  a  large  painting  of
a  storm,  and  horses  struck  by  lightning.)  '  Anything  more  ? '  'A  river
runs  by  the  side  of  the  house.'  (Right.)  I  should  state  that  the  child
had  never  been  out  of  London.

"  A  friend  who  was  present  accidentally,  then  asked  to  be  allowed  to
question  her.  He  was  placed  en  rapport  with  her  simply  by  my
removing  my  hand  and  giving  her  hand  to  him.  Re-establishment
of  this  relationship  was  essential  to  the  production  of  the  phenomena.^
As  I  had  never  seen  my  friend's  house,  I  cannot  vouch  for  her
accuracy  with  him  as  with  myself;  but  I  had  his  assurance  that  it
was  equally  correct.  I  should  state  that  neither  of  us  gave  the  child
the  slightest  intimation  by  word  or  look ;  indeed,  we  did  nothing  but
put  questions.  My  friend's  house  was  at  Dover.  She  described  some
of  the  way  down — such  as  the  tunnel  and  the  cliffs.  '  Now,'  she  said,
'  I  see  a  row  of  houses,  and  such  a  lot  of  steps  to  get  to  them.'     '  Go  with

1  In  such  a  case  as  this,  contact  cannot  be  held  to  give  an  opportunity  for  information
by  unconscious  physical  signs.  Whether  the  effect  that  it  has  consists  in  more  tlian
symbolising  to  the  "subject"  a  condition  of  confidence  and  rapport,  is  a  doubtful  and
interesting  question.


336     .  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

me  up  the  steps  of  the  third  house.'  '  Yes.'  '  Now  we  go  in  ;  what  do
you  see  there  ? '  '  Something  like  a  monkey  and  some  horns.'  (Right.)
'  Now  go  into  the  room  on  the  left.'  '  Yes  ;  such  a  lot  of  books  about ;
there  is  a  horrid  thing  on  the  chimney-piece.'  (It  was  a  skull.)  '  There's
a  portrait  of  a  gentleman's  head  over  it.'  (It  was  a  portrait.)  '  Now
we  will  go  upstairs.'  What  a  beautiful  room,  and  oh !  what  a  beautiful
lady.'  '  What  is  she  doing  ] '  '  Oh,  no ;  it's  a  picture,  I  mean,  with
such  a  beautiful  dress,  and  she  has  a  hat  on ;  how  funny.'  (It  was  the
full  length  portrait  of  a  lady  in  a  riding-habit.)  She  stated  much  besides,
which  my  friend  stated  to  be  correct.  Then  she  added,  '  There's  a  young
lady  with  long  yellow  curls  looking  out  of  window.'  He  whispered  to  me,
'  She  is  wrong  there.  I  have  a  niece  with  such  hair,  but  she  is  from
home.  She  reads  the  picture  in  my  mind.'  My  friend  returned  to
Dover  the  next  day,  and  the  following  post  brought  me  a  letter  stating
that  he  was  surprised  to  find  that  his  niece  had  returned  unexpectedly,
and  was  in  the  drawing-room  as  described,  but  she  believes  she  was  not
at  the  window."

I  will  now  give  a  case — rather  remote  in  time,  but  resting  on  the
first-hand  testimony  of  living  witnesses — which  is  remarkable  for  the
long  continuance  of  the  telepathic  susceptibility.  The  narrator  is
Mrs.  Pinhey,  of  18,  Bassett  Road,  Ladbroke  Grove  Road,  W.  ;  her
record,  written  out  for  us  in  1883,  is  at  any  rate  given  under  a  strong
sense  of  responsibility.

(366)  "  I  have  been  asked  to  write  down  what  I  can  remember  of  a
very  curious  experience  in  mesmeric  or  animal  magnetism,  which  I  under-
took and  carried  on  for  many  months,  more  than  30  years  ago.

"  The  difficulty  of  doing  this  accurately  after  so  great  a  lapse  of  time  is,
I  am  aware,  very  great ;  and  unfortunately,  the  diary  which  I  kept  for  the
greater  part  of  the  time  is  of  the  most  meagre  description,  and  can  scarcely
be  said  to  do  more  than  record  the  fact  of  the  seances  having  been  carried
on  daily  with  little  intermission  from  the  beginning  of  March,  1850,  all
through  the  summer  of  that  year,  until  the  end  of  October,  when  I  left
home  for  several  weeks.  On  my  return  they  were  recommenced,  and  it
was  during  that  winter  that  the  most  remarkable  thought-reading  pheno-
mena occurred  ;  but  I  seem,  meanwhile,  to  have  discontinued  my  diary
altogether,  so  that,  though  the  main  facts  are  so  impressed  on  my  memory
that  I  cannot  forget  them,  I  feel  the  necessity  for  extreme  caution  in  re-
lating them,  having  nothing  but  my  memory  on  which  to  depend — not
even  the  occasional  hints  which,  in  the  diary  of  the  previous  summer,  have
helped  to  bring  back  some  circumstances  to  my  mind,  to  fix  the  dates  of
others,  and  to  show  the  general  rate  of  progress  in  the  experiments,  which
I  had  imagined  to  be  much  less  gradual  than  it  really  was.

[The  writer  then  describes  how,  having  in  1849  heard  a  lecture  on
mesmerism  as  applied  to  disease,  she  resolved  to  try  to  influence  a  relative
of  her  own,  who  was  suffering  from  epilepsy.  She  failed  and  was  consider-
ably discouraged  ;  but  determined  to  make  one  more  attempt  with  another
"  subject."]

"  Miss  M.  N.  was  a  parishioner  of  my  father's.     She  and  her  sister  lived


l]        thought-transference  in  hypnotic  cases.      337

together  on  very  small  means,  their  circumstances  having  been  much
reduced  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  their  parents,  and  M.  was  dreadfully
afflicted  with  a  chronic  kind  of  St.  Vitus'  dance,  besides  other  ailments.
I  visited  her  frequently,  and  as  I  looked  on  at  her  never-ceasing  movement,
her  mouth  and  eyes  twitching  and  her  whole  body  jerking  up  and  down
from  morning  till  night,  to  such  an  extent  that  she  could  not  even  feed
herself,  it  occurred  to  me  that  hers  was  a  fitting  subject  for  mesmerism.
What  a  boon  would  an  hour  or  two  of  perfect  rest  be  to  such  a  person  !
At  any  rate,  I  would  talk  to  her  about  it,  and  make  my  next  attempt  on
her,  if  she  would  consent  to  my  doing  so.

"  She  had  become  very  fond  of  me  during  our  intercourse,  and  I  had  no
difficulty  in  persuading  her  to  allow  me  to  do  anything  I  liked  to  her  •  but
some  of  her  friends  objected  at  first,  having  a  sort  of  idea  that  mesmerism
was  a  '  black  art,'  and  not  to  be  meddled  with.  My  father's  opinion,
however,  as  clergyman  of  the  parish,  and  my  own  reputation  as  the  clergy-
man's daughter,  prevailed  so  far  that  I  was  allowed  to  proceed  without
active  opposition.

"  At  this  time  I  had  no  expectation  of  any  marvellous  results.  I  did
hope  that  I  might  succeed  in  quieting  her  nerves  and  muscles,  and  giving
rest,  if  not  sleep,  for  a  few  hours  every  day,  and  that  this  rest  might  have
a  beneficial  efiect  upon  my  patient's  health.  But  though  I  expected
nothing,  I  was  prepared  for  anything,  i.e.,  I  was  fully  impressed  with  the
necessity  of  keeping  my  own  nerves  quiet  and  unmoved  under  any  circum-
stances. I  rather  dreaded  than  hoped  that  things  might  happen  to
'  astonish  me ' ;  but,  if  they  did,  I  was  prepared  to  look  at  them  with
as  much  calmness  and  philosophy  as  I  could  command.

"  I  think  it  was  on  the  second  occasion,  that,  viz.,  of  March  5th,  noted
in  my  journal,  that  I  succeeded  in  inducing  the  mesmeric  sleep,  a  state  at
that  time  of  perfect  repose,  not  unlike  natural  sleep — except  that  the
muscles  remained  rigid  enough  to  keep  iny  patient  sitting  upright  leaning
back  in  the  chair.  She  showed  no  disposition  to  lie  down.  In  this
condition  I  left  her,  at  first  with  directions  to  her  sister  not  to  touch  or
disturb  her  until  she  awoke  of  herself,  which  she  did  in  about  an  hour.
As  time  went  on,  however,  and  the  mesmeric  influence  gained  greater
power  over  her,  I  found  it  better  to  stay  with  her  for  an  hour  or  two,  and
wake  her  before  I  left.  Otherwise  she  seemed  never  to  awake  quite
perfectly,  but  remained  for  some  hours  in  a  dreamy  state  after  the  actual
sleep  had  left  her.

"  I  cannot  recollect,  however,  exactly  the  time  when  this  change  was
made,  but  it  must  have  been  very  early  in  the  course  of  the  stances,  because
on  the  13th,  after  a  week  in  which  I  had  visited  her  every  day,  I  find,  in
additit)n  to  the  usual  entry,  '  Mesmerised  M.  N.,'  the  word  '  Discoveries,'
and  that  my  mother  was  present,  so  that  I  must  then  have  remained  with
her  during  the  sleep.

"The  'Discoveries'  and  'New  Discoveries'  entered  on  the  14th,
referred  to  phenomena  which,  happening  to  myself  in  this  way,  with  every
possible  guarantee  for  their  perfect  truth  and  reality,  necessarily  made  a
great  impression  on  all  our  minds.  They  were,  it  is  true,  only  the  intro-
duction to  a  series  of  much  greater  wonders,  but,  being  the  first,  they
surprised  and  startled  us  almost  more  than  those  which  came  after.

"  The  first  unusual  appearance  that  presented   itself  was  a   sort   of

VOL.  II.  z


338  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

magnetic  attraction  towards  myself.  I  noticed  that  whenever  I  moved
about  the  room  to  fetch  a  book  or  my  knitting,  or  perhaps  to  eat  some
biscuits  or  sandwiches  (for  I  often  took  my  luncheon  with  me  to  save
time),  her  face  turned  towards  me.  I  tried,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  get
quite  behind  the  chair  on  which  she  sat,  with  her  eyes  closed  and  quite
still  up  to  this  time ;  but  she  shuffled  about  in  her  seat  and  made  every
effort  to  turn  round  so  as  to  face  me.  Presently  her  arm  stretched  itself
out  with  a  mechanical  kind  of  motion  and  pointed  at  me  wherever  I  moved.
About  this  time,  too,  she  began  to  talk.

"  Her  voice  and  manner  of  speaking  when  asleep  were  much  more
animated  and  decided  than  when  awake.  Instead  of  a  poor,  weak,  invalid
kind  of  creature,  she  became  quite  a  clever,  animated  talker.  Instead  of
the  humility  and  self-depreciation  of  her  waking  hours,  she  appeared  quite
pleased  with  herself  and  confident  in  her  own  opinions.  It  was  very
curious  to  watch  her,  with  her  eyes  always  shut,  and  her  forehead  rather
pressed  forward,  as  if  that  were  the  seat  and  medium  of  both  sight  and
understanding.  Sometimes  she  nipped  her  brows  and  a  puzzled  look  came
over  her  face,  and  then  a  bright  smile  seemed  to  show  that  all  was  clear
again.  But  this  is  rather  anticipating,  for  at  first  she  spoke  little  and
rather  hesitatingly,  except  in  answer  to  questions  which  I  soon  began  to
put  to  her.

"  '  Why  do  you  point  at  me,  Mary  1 '

"  Mary  :  '  O,  I  don't  know,  but  I  feel  as  if  I  wanted — wanted  to  get
near  you.  It  is  very  funny,  such  a  funny  feeling.  I  can't  help  it.  Now,
you  are  not  angry,  are  you  ? '

"  The  last  sentence  she  very  often  used  with  a  deprecating  air  and  voice.

"  Meanwhile  the  attraction  became  stronger  every  day  till  it  caused  her
to  stand  upright  and  walk  after  me ;  a  thing  she  could  not  do  when  awake,
and  had  not  done  for  many  months  or  even  years.

"All  this,  of  course,  interested  me  extremely,  and  my  mother  and
father  occasionally  went  with  me  to  see  the  marvels  I  reported,  and  satisfy
themselves  of  their  reality.  I  thought,  however,  that  all  this  walking
about  and  general  excitement  might  not  be  so  good  for  my  patient  as  a
quieter  rest  would  be.  Besides,  the  clinging  to  me  was  rather  troublesome
and  difficult  to  arrange  for;  so  when  her  attentions  in  this  way  became  too
pressing,  I  told  her  rather  peremptorily  to  go  back  to  her  chair  and
sit  down,  which,  with  some  difficulty  and  exertion,  she  at  last  managed  to
do — sighing  a  little  and  begging  me  not  to  be  angry  with  her,  as  she
would  do  always  what  I  wished  if  she  possibly  could,  but  it  was  very
hard,  &c.

"  After  that  I  found  that  she  would  always  obey  any  command  I  gave
her ;  and  though  I  never  tried  her  to  that  extent,  I  believe  she  would
have  hopped  on  one  leg  if  I  had  ordered  her  to  do  so.

"  By  degrees,  as  time  went  on,  I  noticed  that  the  attraction  became
fainter.  I  cannot  now  remember  how  much  time  elapsed  before  a  new
phase  of  the  mesmeric  state  began  to  show  itself.  I  notice  that  on  the
30th  March  my  father  went  with  me  'to  see  the  wonders  I  reported,'
and  on  the  7th  April  the  seance  is  marked  as  'very  successful,'  but  I
think  that  both  these  entries  must  refer  to  the  first  phase,  viz.,  the
attraction  already  described.


I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      339

"  It  was,  however,  about  this  time  or  a  little  later  that,  after  a  few
quiet  uneventful  clays,  as  I  was  sitting  at  work  or  reading  in  the  same  room
with  her,  I  observed  that  any  little  movement  of  my  hands  or  feet  was
being  repeated  in  a  mechanical  kind  of  way  by  my  patient.  As  I  worked,
her  right  hand  went  up  and  down  as  if  using  her  needle.  If  I  moved  my
finger  or  thumb,  hers  moved  too.  If  I  lifted  my  hand  to  my  face  hers
attempted  immediately  to  follow  the  motion  ;  and  she  then  began  also  to
associate  herself  with  me  in  her  speech — '  This  work  tires  us  very  much,
doesn't  it,  dear  1 ' — or  if  I  wagged  my  finger  experimentally  and  well  out  of
her  sight  (supposing  she  could  see),  she  would  say,  '  Well !  I  don't  know
why  we  should  make  this  poor  finger  work  so  hard,  wag,  wag,  it  is  quite
laughable.'

"  This  sort  of  thing,  which  I  shall  call  '  sympathy,'  went  on  for  some
time,  increasing  in  intensity  as  the  '  attraction  '  had  done,  and  then  slowly
dying  out  as  before,  till  it  gave  place  to  new  and  still  more  wonderful
phenomena.  That  is  to  say,  the  mere  outward  mechanical  expression  of
sympathy  wore  out ;  but  all  the  succeeding  phenomena  may  be  classed
under  the  same  head.  The  influence  only  went  deeper  and  afiected  by
degrees  more  important  organs,  the  senses,  and  finally  the  brain  itself.

"  It  was  some  time  in  that  summer  that  I  was  sitting  or  standing  near
the  window  of  her  room,  eating  the  cake  or  sandwich  or  whatever  my
lunch  consisted  of  that  day.  '  M.'  was  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  but  had
been  less  interesting  than  usual  for  some  days.  I  was  not  watching  her
particularly,  when  rather  a  curious  sound  attracted  my  attention.  I
looked  at  her,  and  saw  that  she  was  apparently  eating  something  very  nice,
munching  away  and  enjoying  the  taste  extremely.

"  '  What  have  you  got  there,  Mary  1 '  I  said.

'"  Oh  !  Why  of  course  you  know.  We — we  are  eating  our  lunch,  and
it  is  very  nice.     We  have  got  some  cake  to-day,  and  it  is  very  good.'

"  '  That  is  right ;  then  we  will  have  some  more.'  So  saying,  I  went  to
the  little  corner  cupboard  where  I  always  deposited  my  luncheon  and
took,  not  cake  this  time,  but  a  piece  of  dry  bread.

"  '  Well,  yes,  bread  is  very  good,  but  it  is  not  so  nice  as  the  cake.  We
must  not  be  discontented ;  but  there  is  plenty  more  cake — why  don't  we
eat  it  1  Ah,  I  know,'  with  a  laugh  of  triumph,  '  you  think  I  can't  taste  it,
but  that  is  nonsense.  Of  course  we  eat  together,'  and  so  on.  I  tried  her
in  all  kinds  of  ways,  tasted  salt  and  then  sugar,  then  pepper,  and  did  my
best  to  puzzle  her,  but  she  never  hesitated  or  made  a  mistake.

"  I  find  in  my  journal  various  entries  during  the  summer,  showing  the
names  of  several  persons  who  witnessed  the  facts  I  am  relating.  Amongst
them,  on  May  21st,  is  that  of  Dr.  H.,  a  local  celebrity,  who  lived  next
door  to  us,  and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  my  father's.  He  had  formerly,
at  the  request  of  the  latter,  seen  '  M.  N.'  more  than  once,  and  now,  on  the
20th,  he  had  been  brought  by  my  father  to  visit  her  again,  and  had  con-
fessed, though  much  prejudiced  against  mesmerism,  that  her  health  was
certainly  improved.

"  The  next  day,  however,  when  he  came  on  purpose  to  see  the  wonders
my  father  had  described  to  him,  the  seance  was  a  failure.  The  sleep  took
place  as  usual,  but  the  patient  remained  apparently  dumb.  Whether  the
fact  of  his  incredulity  had,  or  could  have  any  direct  efiect  upon  the
patient,  I  cannot,  with  my  limited  experience,  decide ;  but  I  am  inclined
VOL.    II.  z    2


340  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

to  suspect  that  the  failure  was  clue  to  my  nerves  being  upset  by  the  know-
ledge that  the  doctor  had  come  on  purpose  to  criticise.  I  know  that  I
was  extremely  anxious  that  he  should  see  the  things  which  I  saw  day
after  day,  and  be  convinced  that  at  any  rate  I  and  my  whole  family  were
not  the  credulous  fools  he  secretly  suspected  us  of  being,  but  that
appearances,  at  any  rate,  justified  our  belief.  This  anxiety,  and  the
nervousness  produced  by  it,  were,  I  believe,  the  sole  cause  of  failure.

"  JSTo  one  (except  perhaps  my  mother,  who  went  very  often)  ever  saw
my  patient  at  her  best ;  the  same  cause  operating,  only  in  a  less  degree,
whenever  the  seance  was  in  any  way  made  a  medium  of  sight-seeing.  And
this  leads  me  to  remark  that  when  these  results  are  produced  by  trickery,
or  mechanism,  they  can  be  repeated  any  number  of  times  with  perfect
precision  and  regularity ;  but  when  they  come  to  us  as  the  effect  of
experiments  having  to  do  with  unknown  or  unexplained  forces,  we  must
expect  to  be  often  baffled,  not  knowing  fully  the  conditions  under  which
those  forces  act.

"  With  occasional  interruptions,  varying  from  a  day  or  two  to  a  week
or  two,  the  seances  were  continued  daily  all  through  the  summer,  and
were  witnessed  by  several  persons  at  different  times,  besides  the  members
of  my  own  family.  I  find  the  names  of  seven  people,  many  of  whom  are
still  living,  who  were  present — some  of  them  more  than  once — either  in
that  summer  or  the  winter  following.

"  I  cannot  now  remember  whether  any  real  '  thought-reading '  had
begun  before  I  left  home  for  several  weeks  on  October  24th.  That  it  did
so  very  shortly  after  my  return  is  certain,  from  the  following  circum-
stances, which,  though  of  a  private  nature,  must  be  mentioned  in  order  to
make  the  rest  of  my  story  intelligible.

"  It  was  during  this  absence  that  I  became  engaged  to  be  married  to
a  gentleman  belonging  to  the  Indian  Civil  Service.  Circumstances  made
it  expedient  at  the  time  to  keep  the  matter  quiet,  and  it  was  known  only
to  my  parents  and  immediate  relations.  The  gentleman  had  gone  to
India  immediately  after  our  engagement,  and  I  returned  home  to  my
usual  occupations  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  No  one  in  the  town
knew  anything  about  it  then,  or  till  some  weeks  afterwards,  yet  I  had  no
sooner  magnetised  my  patient  than  she  began  talking  as  if  all  the  facts
were  perfectly  familiar  to  her.  '  India  is  a  long  way  ofi",  isn't  it,  dear  ?
I  wish  we  could  be  nearer  home,  but,  of  course,  if  he  is  there  we  must
go  too.'  In  fact  for  months  she  could  talk  of  little  else  when  mesmerised,
and  knew  my  husband's  name,  age,  and  appearance,  but  was  as  ignorant
as  the  rest  of  the  world  when  in  her  natural  state.

"  Gradually  this  knowledge  of  all  that  I  knew  became  more  and  more
complete,  and,  accustomed  as  I  was  by  this  time  to  such  marvels,  she
sometimes  fairly  astonished  me.  One  day  she  suddenly  burst  out  laugh-
ing. '  Oh,  what  a  hurry  we  were  in,  how  we  did  fly  down  the  stairs  ! '  I
looked  up,  '  What  are  you  talking  about  1  When  do  you  mean  "^ '  '  Why,
you  know,  this  morning,  and  dear  papa  was  waiting ;  he  doesn't  like  us
to  be  late  for  prayers.  But  we  only  just  wanted  to  finish  that  sentence.'
My  curiosity  was  thoroughly  aroused  now,  and  I  inquired,  'What
sentence  1 '  '  Why,  the  German  book — Schiller,  wasn't  it  ■? '  It  was  per-
fectly true,  though  the  fact  had  made  but  a  slight  impression  iipon  me,
and  I  had  certainly  not  thought  of  it  again  until  thus  reminded  of  it,


I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      341

that  I  had  been  reading  German  upstairs  that  morning  until  the  prayer
bell  rang,  and  then,  lingering  for  a  moment  to  finish  a  sentence,  I  had
rushed  hastily  downstairs  to  avoid  being  late.

"This  and  other  phenomena  of  the  same  kind  puzzled  me  a  great
deal ;  not  the  fact  of  her  knowing  what  I  knew,  for  with  that  idea  I
was  by  this  time  familiar ;  but  the  thing  which  I  could  not  understand
was  her  brain  being  acted  upon  by  such  apparently  trifling  occurrences.
I  could  perceive  that  things  which  had  greatly  impressed  my  brain  might
be  repeated  in  hers,  as  the  deflections  of  one  needle  are  repeated  by
another  at  the  opposite  pole  of  the  electric  current.  When  I  asked  her  a
question,  my  brain  probably  gave  the  answer  which  hers  repeated,  but
why  did  she  spontaneously  drag  up  little  things  which  I  had  forgotten  ?
Sometimes  she  even  introduced  little  conversations  between  my  father
and  mother  which  had  taken  place  in  my  presence.  '  Dear  mamma  was
vexed,'  she  began  one  day,  and  then  came  particulars  of  some  little
argument  between  my  father  and  mother,  which  I  had  heard  at  the  time
but  had  never  thought  of  again,  and  certainly  never  repeated.^  I  have
often  thought  over  this  difiiculty  since,  but  cannot  in  the  least  explain  it
except  upon  the  supposition  that  certain  things  do  impress  our  brains
more  strongly  than  others,  although  we  may  be  unconscious  of  the  fact.
It  is  a  line  of  inquiry  which  I  should  think  might  be  worth  pursuing  in
the  interests  of  physical  science,  if  any  physician  of  note  could  so  far  shake
ofi"  all  prejudice  as  to  make  experiments  for  himself.

"  I  have  only  a  few  more  wonders  to  relate,  and  they  are  all  of  the
same  kind.  One  day,  during  the  winter,  I  was  sitting  by  the  fire  opposite
to  my  patient,  and,  to  pass  the  time,  instead  of  working  on  this  occasion,
I  had  a  book.  I  have  forgotten  what  it  was  except  that  it  was  a  novel,
one  of  Dickens'  I  think.  Suddenly  she  began  to  laugh.  I  looked  up,
and  saw  her  with  her  eyes  shut  as  usual,  but  her  head  mo^ving  as  if
reading  with  her  forehead,  and  her  mouth  smiling.  '  What  are  you
laughing  af?'  'Why  at  the  story,  of  course.'  'What  story?'  And  she
told  me  what  I  was  reading  about,  making  her  comments  on  the
characters,  and  expressing  her  amusement  at  some  passages,  and  her  sorrow
at  anything  pathetic  which  I  came  to  in  the  course  of  my  reading.  ^  I
asked  her  the  page  and  she  told  me.  I  asked  her  whereabouts  in  the
page  certain  passages  were,  and  she  told  me  that  also.  I  tried  her  with
written  letters  and  figures,  and  put  her  power  to  all  kinds  of  tests,  and  the
result  always  was  that  she  knew  what  I  knew  but  nothing  beyond.  She
was  never  what  is  popularly  known  as  '  clairvoyante.'

"  I  mention  this  particularly,  because  it  was  a  point  which  I  took
great  pains  to  ascertain ;  and  several  times  when  I  asked  her  questions
about  people  and  things  at  a  distance,  her  answers  were  so  decided,  and
her  knowledge  apparently  so  minute  and  circumstantial  that  I  was  very
nearly  deceived  into  believing  it  to  be  true.  But  on  every  occasion  of  the
sort,  I  found,  on  inquiry,  that  truth  and  fiction  were  mixed  up  together.
Everything  which  I   knew  myself  was  true.      But   the  particular  facts

1  This  phenomenon  is  equally  interesting  whether  it  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  an
impression  deferred  for  some  time  before  emerging  into  the  percipient's  consciousness,
or  as  an  impression  derived  at  the  moment  from  an  unconscious  or  sub-conscious  stratum
of  the  agent's  mind.

2  Gf.  cases  149  and  407.


342  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

■which  were  happening  at  the  moment,  and  which  she  described  as  if  she
saw  them,  were  purely  imaginary.

"  One  remarkable  instance  in  illustration  of  this  I  will  relate.  It
happened  during  the  summer,  or  early  spring,  of  1851.  My  married  sister,
with  her  husband  and  children,  were  expected  at  a  vicarage  9  or  10  miles
ofij  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  father.  I  knew  this,  and  was,  therefore,  not
surprised  when  she  began  to  talk  about  it.  Here,  I  thought,  is  a  good
opportunity  to  test  her  clairvoyance,  so  I  said,  '  Oh,  yes,  we  knew  they
were  to  come  to-day,  but  have  they  arrived  1  Look  and  tell  me  % '  After  a
short  pause  she  began  in  rather  an  excited  way,  '  Yes,  yes,  I  see  them  all
just  getting  out  of  the  carriage.'     '  Whom  do  you  see  1 '  I  asked.      'I  see

Mr. and  Mrs. and  the  nurse,  and  so  many  children.     They  are

going  into  the  house,  into  the  drawing-room  on  the  left  of  the  hall.'  She
then  described  the  vicarage,  the  drive  up  to  it,  and  many  other  particulars
with  what  I  knew  to  be  perfect  accuracy,  and  her  whole  story  was  so
likely,  so  much  what  I  expected  to  happen,  that  I  was  quite  prepared  to
have  the  whole  confirmed  on  inquiry.  But  it  was  not  so.  In  the  first
place,  the  train  had  been  late,  and  the  party  did  not  arrive  until  an  hour
or  two  later ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  my  brother-in-law  was  detained  at
his  own  vicarage,  many  miles  away,  and  never  arrived  at  all  at  that  time.

"  On  another  occasion,  some  information  she  gave  me  about  Mr. ,

in  India,  though  very  likely  and  plausible,  turned  out  to  be  incorrect.

"  Her  thought-reading  was  always  perfect,  but  the  clairvoyance  always
failed  when  accurately  tested;  and  though  I  know  how  fallacious  an
opinion  based  on  one  experiment  must  often  be,  and  also  that  there  is
plenty  of  good  evidence  for  the  truth  of  clairvoyance,  I  have  sometimes
speculated  whether,  if  any  apparent  case  of  clairvoyance  were  accurately
inquired  into,  it  would  not  often  be  found  to  have  its  origin  in  '  thought-
reading.'     [See  above,  pp.  329  and  335.]

"  Towards  the  end  of  the  summer  of  1851,  I  gave  up  magnetising  '  M.'
as  a  regular  thing.  Her  health  was  much  improved,  and  she  lived  for
many  years  afterwards,  only  occasionally  troubled  with  the  St.  Vitus'
dance,  at  which  times  my  mother  or  one  of  my  sisters  took  my  place,  and
generally  succeeded  in  quieting  her.

"  It  was  rather  a  trouble  to  me  that  after  the  first  few  weeks  I  scarcely
saw  '  M. '  in  her  natural  state.  She  was  so  sensitive  to  my  presence  that
before  I  entered  her  room  she  was  already  half  gone,  and  it  was  only  at
the  end  of  each  seance,  when,  with  much  difficulty,  by  means  of  upward
passes,  fanning,  and  other  expedients  I  had  succeeded  in  waking  her,  that
I  could  communicate  with  her  real  self.  I  hoped  that  my  long  absence  in
India,  eight  years,  would  have  worn  out  this  influence  ;  but  when  at  last
I  returned  home  and  went  to  see  her,  I  found  her  already  lapsing  into  the
trance,  and  had  great  difiiculty  in  keeping  her  out  of  it  during  my  visit.  I
believe  that  a  more  experienced  and  skilful  operator  could  have  prevented
this  in  the  beginning,  and  throughout  the  course  it  was  always  a  subject  of
regret  to  me.  "  M.  A.  P."

Two  other  witnesses  of  this  percipient's  powers  have  supplied  the
following  testimony.     Mrs.  D'Oyly  writes  on  Nov.  24,  1885  : —

"  24,  Westbourne  Terrace,  W.
"  Dear    Sir, — My  sister,   Mrs.   Pinhey,    has  to-day  forwarded  me  a


I.]        THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.     343

letter  of  yours  of  July  SOtli.  I  had  not  seen  her  article  [i.e.,  the  account
just  quoted],  nor  did  I  know  till  to-day  that  she  had  written  one.  It  is
difficult  to  know  what  corroborative  evidence  is  required,  but  my  own
personal  experience  with  Mary  ISTaylor,  my  sister's  patient,  is  curious  and
interesting,  and  I  fancy  almost  identically  the  same  as  my  sister's.  On
Mrs.  Pinhey  leaving  England,  I  took  up  the  case  just  where  she  left  it.
In  every  respect  the  same  phenomena  occurred  with  me  as  a  mesmeriser  as
when  my  sister  operated.  My  patient  knew  the  contents  of  my  letters,  every
thought  of  my  mind  ;  she  would  discuss  the  theatre,  or  the  ball,  or  party,
or  church  I  might  have  been  at  since  I  had  last  visited  her,  and  talked  it
all  over  as  if  she  had  been  present ;  but  sometimes,  if  a  third  person
happened  to  be  present,  I  would  be  a  little  nervous  lest  something  should
come  out  which  I  did  not  wish  mentioned,  but  my  inward  fear  would
immediately  make  her  cautious,  and  she  would  say,  '  Oh,  we  must  not  talk
about  such-and-such  things  to-day,  must  we?'  Sometimes  during  the
seance  she  would  complain  of  hunger.  I  would  go  to  the  cupboard,  turn  my
back  to  prevent  her  seeing,  and  taste  different  things ;  she  could  always
tell  what  particular  thing  I  was  eating,  liked  and  disliked  what  /  liked
and  disliked,  and  when  I  had  had  enough  her  appetite  was  satisfied.  Mrs.
Pinhey  was  totally  unprepared  for  everything  that  happened,  and  each
new  phenomenon  astonished  her  quite  as  much  as  it  did  outsiders.

"  Her  '  clairvoyance '  was  limited  to  this  :  that  she  knew  any  and
every  thing  her  mesmeriser  knew,  but  no  more.  For  instance,  we  would
ask  her  for  particulars  of  an  absent  sailor  brother ;  her  answer  would  be
vague  and  '  guessing,'  and  always  turned  out  to  be  merely  the  reflections
of  our  own  minds.

"  As  Mrs.  Pinhey  and  I  have  had  no  communication  on  this  topic,  I
hope  my  observations  may  be  considered  '  corroborative  evidence.' — Believe
me,  yours  faithfully,  "  Emma  S.  D'Oyly."

Mrs.  Ogle  writes  on  the  same  date  : —

"  Sedgeford  Yicarage,  King's  Lynn.

"  Sir, — I  have  been  asked  by  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Pinhey,  if  I  remember
seeing  a  girl,  Mary  Naylor  (at  Bury  St.  Edmunds),  who  was  very  ill  of  St.
Yitus'  Dance,  and  whom  she  mesmerised  daily.  As  this  was  more  than
30  years  ago,  I  cannot  recollect  all  I  saw  and  heard ;  but  one  fact
was  deeply  impressed  on  my  mind,  and  I  have  often  mentioned  it  since.
Mrs.  Pinhey  had  that  morning  received  a  letter  from  India,  and  after  she
had  sent  M.  Naylor  ofi"  to  sleep,  she  held  it  up,  without  unfolding  it,  and
made  the  girl  tell  her  who  and  where  it  came  from  and  certain  par-
ticulars mentioned  in  the  letter,  known  only  to  herself.  This  M.  Naylor
did  with  great  reluctance,  as  she  was  overpowered  with  sleep,  and  begged
to  be  let  alone,  and  it  required  great  firmness  on  Mrs.  Pinhey's  part  to
make  the  girl  answer  her  questions.  Mrs.  Pinhey  knew  that  I  did  not  be-
lieve in  mesmerism,  and  she  was  anxious  that  I  should  see  the  power  she
had  over  M.  Naylor.  "  I  am,  Sir,  faithfully  yours,

"  Henrietta  A.  Ogle."

The  following  passages,  bearing  on  telepathy,  are  extracted  from
some  "  Notes  on  Mesmerism,"  kept  at  intervals  during  the  last  few
years,  concurrently  with    the  experiments    which    they   record,  by


344  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Captain  Battersby,  E,.A.,  F.RA.S.,  of  Ordnance  House,  Enniskillen.
Both  he  and  his  mother-in-law,  the  percipient,  Mrs.  John  Evens,  of
Old  Bank,  Enniskillen,  have  been  mentioned  before  (case  311).  The
immediate  object  of  the  hypnotic  treatment  was  simply  the  relief  of
pain.  The  extracts  comprise  phenomena  of  various  sorts.  To  some
of  them  the  initials  of  independent  observers  were  appended — to  para-
graphs A,  B,  and  C,  those  of  Miss  J.  A.  Evens,  Miss  M.  L.  Evens,
and  Mrs.  Battersby,  and  to  paragraph  D  those  of  Mrs.  Battersby
— with  the  remark  :  "  We  certify  that  we  were  eye-witnesses  of  the
occurrences  to  which  our  initials  are  appended,  and  that  they  are
correctly  described."

(367)  "To  a  question  asked  in  a  foreign  language,  the  patient  usually
replied  in  the  same,  provided  that  I  could  myself  have  done  so.  Asking
her,  however,  a  question  in  German,  the  answer  to  which  I  could  not  my-
self have  translated  into  that  language,  she  (though  herself  a  good  German
scholar)  answered  only — '  Your  mouth  is  shut.'  Asked  the  same  question
when  awake,  she  could  answer  in  the  language  at  once.

(A)  "  As  a  rule  she  would,  when  asleep,  translate  short  sentences  of
Greek,  Latin,  or  Irish,  all  quite  unknown  tongues  to  her,  provided  I  knew
the  translation,  but  not  otherwise.  Now  and  then,  however,  this  experi-
ment failed.

"  She  could  generally  tell  the  time  by  a  watch  placed  in  her  hand,  the
name  of  a  book,  the  original  of  a  photograph,  &c.,  provided  all  these  were
known  to  me. "

[After  describing  an  unusual  trance  which  he  observed  in  Mrs.  Evens
at  the  time  of  a  distant  thunder-storm,  the  narrator  goes  on  : — ]

"  The  electrical  fluid  in  the  air  seemed  to  have  excited  Mrs.  E.  to  a
very  high  state  of  thought-reading,  as  she  now  began,  for  the  first  and
only  time  I  observed  such  a  phenomenon,  to  speak  of  her  own  accord,
unquestioned,  and  to  follow  the  course  of  my  thoughts  aloud  now  and
then.

(B)  "  During  the  trance  there  was  apparently  transference  of  sensa-
tion, as  a  hair  tickling  my  forehead,  a  handkerchief  dipped  in  eau-de-
Cologne  and  applied  to  my  face,  &c.,  &c.,  all  produced  in  her  the  correspond-
ing sensations.  She  could  also  taste  what  I  was  eating  or  drinking.  On
one  occasion  strong  smelling-salts  applied  to  her  nose  produced  no  effect,
but  when  applied  to  mine  she  started  at  once.

"  On  one  or  two  occasions  I  mesmerised  her  from  a  distance,  when
in  my  quarters,  half-a-mile  off.  On  such  occasions  she  was  able  to  tell  what
I  had  been  doing,  and  would  generally  go  to  sleep.  The  sensation  she
described  was  that  of  a  hand  pressed  on  her  forehead.  Though  able
thus  to  send  her  to  sleep,  I  was  unable  to  keep  her  so,  as  she  would  waken
again  the  moment  }ny  attention  wavered.  The  means  used  were  stretching
out  my  hand  towards  her  house,  and  bringing  my  will  sharply  to  bear,
just  as  described  in  Robert  Browning's  fine  poem  on  '  Mesmerism.'

(C)  "After  an  absence  of  about  9  weeks  I  was  curious  to  see  whether


I.]         THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.      345

the  force  still  existed  unaltered,  and  accordingly  tried  the  experiment,
when  Mrs.  E.  was  playing  a  duet  on  the  piano,  with  her  back  towards  me,
of  willing  her  strongly  to  sleep.  Almost  at  once  she  began  to  play  false
notes,  and  soon  gave  up  playing,  saying  she  felt  tired  and  the  piece  was  a
sleepy  one.  I  then  ceased  my  influence,  as  I  did  not  wish  her  to  fall
asleep.

(D)  "  I  established  the  fact  that  Mrs.  E.  could  be  mesmerised  by  me
without  her  knowledge,  and  awoke  again  so  that  she  would  have  no  idea
that  she  had  been  in  the  mesmeric  sleep,  but  would  merely  think  that  she
had  dozed  for  awhile.  The  incapability  of  rising  by  herself,  however,  which
was  always  present  after  the  sleep,  would  soon  inform  her  of  the  truth.

"  When  partially  awakened  by  the  above  means  [reverse  passes],  how-
ever, the  operation  could  be  completed  by  a  mere  effort  of  will  on  my  part,
and  this  whether  I  was  in  the  same  room  or  no,  Mrs.  E.  being  at  once
conscious  of  this  exertion  of  will."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Captain  Battersby  says  : —

"January  20th,  1886.

"  On  various  occasions,  separated  sometimes  by  months  from  each
other,  I  tried  to  mesmerise  Mrs.  E.  from  a  distance ;  and  in  a  large
percentage  of  the  cases  she  inquired  of  me,  when  she  next  saw  or  wrote  to
me,  whether  I  had  not  done  so  at  such  and  such  a  day  or  hour.
At  any  time  when  in  the  trance,  the  act  of  looking  at  Mrs.  E.,  or  willing
her  to  open  her  eyes,  will  cause  her  to  do  so."

In  a  later  letter  he  adds  : —

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  can  give  you  no  corroborative  evidence  of  the
mesmerism  from  a  distance,  as  it  was  not  often  tried  by  me  (for  fear  of
causing  Mrs.  E.  annoyance) ;  and  I  do  not  think  anyone  was  present  with
her  on  the  occasions.  She  certainly  was  able  to  tell  when  I  had  been
attempting  to  mesmerise  her ;  but  beyond  that  I  cannot  personally
speak."

To  these  hypnotic  cases,  I  will  add  a  couple  of  instances  of
thought-transference  where  disease  seems  to  have  produced  an
equally  abnormal  condition  in  the  percipient.  The  following  account
is  extracted  from  a  very  remarkable  record  in  Petetin's  ElectriciU
Animale  (Paris,  1808).  Dr.  P^tetin  had  been  for  some  time  attending
a  lady  who  suffered  (among  other  things)  from  attacks  of  catalepsy.
He  says  (pp.  55-7)  : —

"  Je  m'annon9ai,  comme  j'avais  coutume  de  le  faire,  en  lui  parlant  sur
le  bout  des  doigts.  Elle  me  repondit,  '  Vous  etes  paresseux  ce  matin,  M.
le  Docteur.'  '  Cela  est  vrai,  madame  ;  si  vous  en  saviez  la  cause,  vous  ne
me  feriez  pas  ce  reproche.'  '  Eh  !  je  la  vois  ;  vous  avez  la  migraine  depuis
quatre  heures,  elle  ne  cessera  qu'a  six,  et  vous  avez  raison  de  ne  rien  faire
pour  cette  maladie,  que  toutes  les  puissances  humaines  ne  peuvent
empecher  d'avoir  son  cours.'  '  Depuis  quand  etes- vous  devenu  medecin  ? '
'  Depuis  que  j'ai  les  yeux  d' Argus.'     '  Pourriez-vous  me  dire  de  quel   cot^


346  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

est  ma  douleur  ? '  '  Sur  I'oeil  droit,  la  tempe  et  les  dents  ;  je  vous  previens
qu'elle  passera  a  I'oeil  gauche,  que  vous  souffrirez  beaucoup  entre  trois
et  quatre  heures,  et  qu'a  six  vous  aurez  la  tete  parfaitement  libre.'  '  Si
vous  voulez  que  je  vous  croie,  il  faut  que  vous  me  disiez  ce  que  je  tiens
dans  la  main.'  Je  I'appuyai  aussitot  sur  son  estomac,  et  la  maladie,  sans
hesiter,  me  repondit,  '  Je  vols  a  travers  votre  main  une  medaille  antique.'
J'ouvre  la  main  tout  interdit ;  la  belle-sceur  jeta  les  yeux  sur  la  mddaille,
palit  et  se  trouva  mal.  Revenue  a  elle-meme,  elle  renferma  dans  une
bonbonniere  brune  et  a  demi  transparente  un  chiffon  de  papier,  me  donna
la  boite  derriere  le  fauteuil  de  sa  sceur ;  je  I'enveloppai  de  ma  main,  et  la
presentai  a  I'estomac  de  la  cataleptique,  sans  lui  parler.  '  Je  vois  dans
votre  main  une  boite,  et  dans  cette  boite  une  lettre  a  mon  adresse.'  La
belle-soeur,  epouvantee,  tremblait  sur  ses  jambes  ;  je  me  hatai  d'ouvrir  la
boite ;  j'en  tirai  une  lettre  pliee  en  quatre,  a  I'adresse  de  la  malade,  et
timbree  de  Geneve.

"  L'etonnement  ou  me  jeta  cette  decouverte  suspendit  quelques
instans  ma  douleur,  et  m'ota  toute  reflexion.  Je  trouvai  le  tremble-
ment  de  la  belle-soeur  tres-naturel ;  elle  aurait  pu  se  trouver  plus  mal,
que  je  n'  aurais  pas  songe  a  lui  donner  le  moindre  secours,  et  je  restai
stupefait  plus  d'un  quart  d'heure.  En  revenant  a  moi,  je  demandai  a  la
belle-sceur,  comment  elle  s'etait  procure  la  lettre  qu'elle  avait  renfermee
dans  la  bonbonniere  ?  Elle  me  repondit  que  cette  lettre  s'etait  trouvee
dans  la  livre  qu'elle  lisait,  en  attendant  ma  visite  ;  qu'elle  I'avait  pris  dans
la  bibliotheque  de  la  malade,  et  qu'en  I'ouvrant  elle  etait  tombee  a  ses
pieds  ;  qu'elle  I'avait  relevee  et  mise  dans  sa  poche  pour  la  lui  rendre,  aussitot
qu'elle  serait  eveill^e.  Je  pris  le  livre  et  I'examinai,  comme  si  j'eusse  du  y
trouver  I'empreinte  de  la  lettre,  tant  ce  nouveau  prodige  me  paraissait
incroyable ;  mais  me  convenait-il  bien  d'en  douter,  d'apres  ma  propre
experience  ?  Etait-ce  un  autre  qui  avait  mis  dans  ma  main  la  mddaille
antique  dont  j'etais  muni,  avec  le  dessein  de  profiter  de  la  premiere
occasion  pour  la  placer  sur  I'estomac  de  la  malade,  et  voir  si  elle  la
signalerait,  comme  d'autres  objets  que  je  lui  avals  present^s?"

In  the  evening.  Dr.  Petetin  revisited  his  patient.  He  continues
(pp.  62-5) :-

(368)  "  Avant  de  sortir,  je  plagai,  a  tout  evenement,  une  petite  lettre
sur  le  haut  de  ma  poi trine  ;  je  m'enveloppai  de  mon  manteau,  et  n'arrivai
qu'  a  six  heures  et  demie.

"  Au  coup  de  sept  heures,  la  malade,  tres-attentive,  anim^e  par  sa
gaiety  naturelle,  eprouva  deux  secousses  dans  les  bras  ;  et  dans  ce  court
espace  de  temps,  ses  yeux  se  fermerent,  sa  physionomie  exprima  l'etonne-
ment, ses  couleurs  disparurent,  et  la  catalepsie  la  transforma  en  statue  qui
ecoute.

"  J'avangai  mon  fauteuil  pour  etre  plus  pres  de  la  malade.  Sa  tete,
toujours  tournee  du  meme  c6te,  ne  m'offrait  que  son  profil ;  je  developpai
mon  manteau,  pour  mettre  le  haut  de  mon  corps  a  decouvert.  '  Eh !
depuis  quand,  M.  le  Docteur,  la  mode  est-elle  venue  de  porter  ses  lettres
sur  la  poitrine  ? '  J'alongeai  le  bras  pour  atteindre  du  bout  du  doigt  le
creux  de  I'estomac  de  ma  cataleptique  ;  et  en  reunissant  les  doigiis  de  mon
autre  main,  je  lui  repondis  a  voix  ordinaire,  '  Madame,  vous  pourriez  vous
tromper.'     '  Non,  je  suis  sure  de  ce  que  je  vois.     Vous  avez  sur  la  poitrine


I.]       THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE  IN  HYPNOTIC  CASES.       347

une  lettre  qui  n'est  pas  plus  grande  que  cela — qu'on  Fapplique  alamesure.'
En  proferant  ces  paroles,  elle  donna  une  autre  position  a  sa  tete,  qu'elle
dirigea  de  mon  cot^  ;  elle  avan9a  les  deux  bras,  alongea  I'index  de  la  main
gauche,  et  avec  celui  de  la  droite  qu'elle  posa  dessus,  determina  dans  la  plus
grande  precision  la  place  qu'elle  devait  occuper.  Tous  les  regards  tom-
berent  sur  moi.  J'^cartai  me  veste,  on  vit  la  lettre ;  I'ami  s'en  empara
pour  I'appliquer  sur  le  doigt  qui  I'attendait ;  elle  ne  I'eut  pas  plutot  touclie,
que  la  malade  ajouta,  '  Si  je  n^etais  pas  discrete,  je  pourrais  en  dire  le
Gontenu  ;  mais  pour  prouver  que  je  Vai  hien  lue,  il  n^y  a  que  deux  lignes  et
demie,  tres-ininutees.'  Apres  avoir  obtenu  la  permission  de  I'ouvrir,
chacun  vit  que  le  billet  ne  renfermait  que  deux  lignes  et  demie,  dont  les
caracteres  ^taient  menus.  L'ami  passant  tout-a-coup  du  plus  haut  degre
d'etonnement  a  celui  de  la  plus  grande  defiance,  tira  de  sa  poclie  une
bourse,  la  mit  sur  ma  poitrine,  croisa  ma  veste,  et  me  poussa  du  cote  de  la
malade.  '  M.  le  Docteur,  ne  vous  genez  pas  ;  vous  avez,  dans  ce  monient,
SUA'  la  poitrine,  lafiloche  de  M.  B.  ;  il  y  a  tant  de  louis  d'un  cote  et  d^ argent
hlanc  de  V autre ;  mais  que  personne  ne  se  derange,  je  vais  dire  ce  que
chacun  a  de  j^lus  remarquahle  dans  ses  poches.^  "    She  fulfilled  this  promise.

Many  other  incidents  are  recorded  in  this  case.  Pdtdtin  himself
regards  them  all  as  clairvoyant  in  character ;  but  the  hypothesis
of  thought-transference  was  never  excluded  by  the  conditions  (see
pp.  329,  335,  342).

The  final  instance  is  another  extract  from  the  Mechanism  of  Man
(Vol.  II.,  pp.  175-7).  This  case,  like  the  two  last  quoted,  was
observed  during  a  considerable  period.     Serjeant  Cox  says  : —

(369)  "  The  patient  was  my  sister,  a  girl  of  15,  of  hysterical  tempera-
ment and  somewhat  deficient  in  intelligence.  I  was  6  years  her  senior.  I
had  then  no  knowledge  of  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism,  beyond  the  uses
made  of  it  by  the  novelist  and  the  dramatist.  I  had  never  even  heard  of
mesmerism.     I  was,  therefore,  a  perfectly  unprejudiced  witness.

[The  writer  then  describes  cataleptic  fits,  from  which  his  sister
sufiered,  and  which  used  to  pass  ofi",  leaving  her  in  a  semi-conscious,  trance-
like state.]

"  If,  as  she  lay  upon  the  sofa,  her  eyes  firmly  closed,  I  opened  a  book
having  pictures  in  it,  and  sat  behind  her  in  a  position  where  it  was
physically  impossible  that  she  could  see  what  I  was  doing,  and  I  looked  at
one  of  the  pictures,  she  forthwith  exhibited,  in  pantomimic  action,  the
posture  of  each  person  there  depicted.  It  was  perfectly  manifest  that  she
had  the  image  of  the  engraving  impressed  upon  her  mind,  as  distinctly  as
if  it  had  been  conveyed  to  it  by  the  sense  of  sight.  Nor  is  it  to  be
explained  by  the  suggestion  that  the  engravings  were  familiar  to  her,  and
that  she  guessed  upon  which  of  them  I  was  looking ;  for  it  was  the  same
with  books  and  pictures  purposely  tried  which  she  had  never  seen.  But
whether  that  impression  was  obtained  through  my  mind,  in  which  the
image  also  was,  or  that  her  mind  perceived  the  picture  itself  directly,
although  out  of  the  range  of  vision,  is  the  problem  to  be  solved.  If  the
servant  who  attended  her,  obedient  to  her  signalled  desire,  went  to  her


348  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

bedroom  on  the  floor  above  the  room  in  which  she  was  lying  entranced,  she
expressed  the  most  obvious  signs  of  annoyance  if  the  servant  above  touched
the  wrong  thing,  and  of  satisfaction  when  she  touched  the  right  one,
precisely  as  if  the  search  had  been  made  in  the  same  room  and  she  saw
what  was  going  on.  The  experiment  was  purposely  tried  many  times,
with  various  tests,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  fact  upon  any  member  of
the  family  who  witnessed  it.

"  It  should  be  stated  that  when  a  part  of  the  picture  was  covered,  so
that  I  could  see  but  a  part,  her  perceptions  were  limited  to  the  part  seen
by  me.  I  was,  indeed,  unable  to  trace  any  power  of  perception  of  any-
thing not  seen  by  the  person  with  whom  her  mind  was  at  the  time
associated.  She  perceived  behind  her  so  much  of  the  picture  as  was  seen
by  me  and  impressed  on  my  mind.  She  perceived  the  objects  seen  and
touched  by  her  servant  upstairs  and  so  impressed  upon  her  mind.

"  These  phenomena  continued  for  nearly  2  years,  so  that  there  was
ample  opportunity  for  observing  them.  Imposture  was  out  of  the  question.
Delusion  was  impossible.  The  occurrence  was  in  a  private  family,  and
witnessed  by  none  but  themselves  and  the  attendant  physician,  whose
sagacious  explanation  of  it  I  have  narrated."  [The  explanation  referred
to  was  that  it  was  a  case  of  hysteria  "and  in  hysteria  people  can  do
anything."]


II.]


CHAPTEE  II.

IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.

§  1.  The  present  chapter  will  contain  instances  parallel  to  those
given  in  Chapters  VI.  and  VII.  of  Vol.  I.,  arranged  as  far  as  possible
in  the  same  order.  These  accounts,  and  the  dream-cases  of  the
succeeding  chapter,  belong  (as  pointed  out  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  234)  to  the
weakest  evidential  classes ;  and  I  should  have  been  glad  to  present
them  in  a  more  condensed  shape.  But  I  found  on  making  the
attempt,  that  such  force  as  they  possess,  and — what  it  is  equally  a
duty  to  bring  out — their  evidential  defects,  were  apt  to  disappear
when  their  form  was  altered.

I  will  begin  with  cases  where  the  transference  of  an  idea  seems
to  have  been  of  a  tolerably  definite  and  literal  kind.

The  first  five  cases  (taken  in  connection  with  others)^  form  a
group  which  strongly  suggests  that  a  fugitive  faculty  of  percipience
may  be  developed  by  an  abnormal  condition  of  mind  and  body.

(370)  From  Mrs.  Mainwaring,  Knowles,  Ardingly,  Hayward's  Heath.

"March  14th,  1885.

"  During  the  Mutiny,  I  was  staying  with  a  friend,  dreadfully  ill — too
ill  to  be  told  what  was  going  on.  A  baby  was  born,  and  a  day  or  two
after,  my  friend's  wife,  sitting  on  my  bed,  received  a  letter.  I  said,
'  You  need  not  read  it,  I  know  every  word,'  and  I  told  her.  It  was  to  say
she  must  not  drive  that  afternoon  to  the  Fort  as  usual,  for  some  men  were
going  to  be  hanged  on  the  road.  1  had  not  heard  a  word  of  the  discovery
of  the  plot,  or  of  the  plot,  or  of  what  was  to  be  ;  but  I  said  every  word
in  the  letter,  and  I  remember  my  friend's  face  of  astonishment,  as  she
said,  '  Why,  how  did  you  know  it  ? '     It  didn't  seem  at  all  odd  to  me.

"  E.  L.  Mainwaring."

Subsequently  Mrs.  Mainwaring  wrote  : —

"June  18th,  1885.

"  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  wrote  to  my  old  friend,  but  I
have  not  had  a  line  in  reply.  I  do  not  know  what  can  have  become  of
her,  as  it  would  have  been  very  little  trouble  to  say  if  she  recollected  the

1  See  the  list  in  p.  162,  first  note,  as  well  as  the  cases  of  the  preceding  chapter.


350  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

facts  I  told  you  of.     I  do  not  like  to  write  again,  and  I  am  sorry,  there-
fore, I  cannot  add  her  testipaony."

[In  cases  belonging  to  a  weak  class — •i.e.,  a  class  where  the  experience
of  the  percipient  is  not  of  a  sujQ&ciently  strongly-marked  type  to  make  it
violently  improbable  that  it  would  be  afterwards  imagined  or  modified  in
memory — absence  of  corroboration  is  of  course  a  doubly  important  defect.
This  remark  applies  to  a  good  many  of  the  examples  that  follow.]

In  the  following  case,  again,  the  percipient  was  in  a  state  of
serious  illness,

(371)  From  Mr.  E.  Chapman,   (wood-carver)  Windsor  Hall,    Brighton.

"1884.

"My  father,  when  a  young  man,  entered  the  service  of  Sir  Charles
Dymoke;  estate,  Scrivelsby  Hall,  Lincolnshire.  He  rose  rapidly  to
become  almost  constant  companion."  Mr.  Chapman  then  describes  how
his  father  on  one  occasion  saved  the  coachman  of  Sir  C.  Dymoke  from
very  serious  danger  and  disgrace,  for  which  the  coachman  said  that  "  he
would  thank  him  with  his  dying  breath."

"Many  years  after  this  happened,  my  father  was  lying  very  ill;  so
much  so  he  could  not  help  himself  in  any  way.  My  mother  had  just  made
him  as  comfortable  as  possible,  (he  was  perfectly  helpless,)  and  she  had
gone  downstairs  to  attend  to  her  household  affairs,  when  she  heard  a
loud  knocking,  and  going  upstairs,  found  my  father  sitting  bolt  upright
in  bed.  On  asking  him  how  he  came  in  that  position,  he  exclaimed,
'  O  mother,'  (they  always  called  each  other  mother  and  father),  '  what  is
the  time  1 '  (being  told),  '  What  is  it  to-day  1 '  (Thursday),  '  And  the  day  of
the  month  ?     Now  write  it  all  down  at  once.'

"  Being  asked  why  he  wished  it  to  be  written,  he  answered  '  So-and-so,'
naming  the  aforesaid  coachman,  '  is  dead.'  '  How  do  you  know  that,
father  1 '  '  Don't  ask  me.  You  will  have  a  letter  in  two  or  three  days.'
On  the  third  day  from  that  time  the  letter  came  announcing  the  death  of
the  said  coachman,  somewhere  in  Norfolk — so  that  he  and  my  father  must
have  been  50  miles  apart  at  the  time.  My  father,  on  sinking  down  to  his
former  helpless  condition,  exclaimed,  '  O  how  cold  it  was.'  We  never  could
get  a  further  explanation  from  him,  but  for  a  long  time  after,  when
anyone  offered  to  shake  hands  with  him  in  their  shirt-sleeves,  or  had  a
light  coat  on,  he  would  shudder  and  sometimes  say,  '  How  cold.'

"  Edward  Chapman."

[The  last  words  suggest  some  sort  of  sensory  impression  made  on  the
percipient ;  but  the  evidence  for  this  is  insufiicient.]

In  the  next  example  the  percipient  was  not  only  ill,  but  closely-
approaching  death.

(372)  From  the  Metnoi/rs  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Buckminster,  D.D.,  and
of  his  son,  the  Rev.  J.  S.  Buckminster,  by  Eliza  Buckminster  Lee,  Dr.
Buckminster's  daughter,  (Boston,  U.S.A.,  1851),  pp.  464  and  476-7.  Both
father  and  son  were  noted  preachers.  The  "Mrs.  Buckminster  "  mentioned
was  the  father's  third  wife.

"  On  Tuesday  evening,  June  9th,  he  (the  son)  expired

When   his    [Dr.    Buckminster's]   wife    entered    his   [Dr.    Buckminster's]


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  GASES.  351

chamber  the  next  morning  he  said  to  her,  with  perfect  composure,  '  My
son  Joseph  is  dead.'  Mrs.  Buck  minster,  supposing  that  he  had  slept  and
dreamed  that  his  son  was  dead,  although  no  news  of  his  illness  had
reached  him,  assured  him  that  it  was  a  dream.  '  No,'  he  replied,  '  I  have
not  slept  nor  dreamed  ;  he  is  dead  ! '  This  incident  is  related  as  received
from  the  lips  of  her  to  whom  the  words  were  spoken,  and  there  can  be  no
shadow  of  doubt  of  their  truth."

The  particulars  of  dates,  &c.,  are  as  follows  : —

Dr.  Joseph  Buckminster  was  living  at  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire,
where  he  had  been  for  many  years  pastor  of  a  church.  On  the  1st  or
2nd  of  June,  1812,  he  left  Portsmouth  intending  to  travel  for  his  health.
He  reached  Peedsborough,  a  little  village,  on  the  9th  of  June,  and  died  there
the  following  morning.  The  Rev.  J.  S.  Buckminster  (the  son)  was  living
at  Boston  in  delicate  health.  He  was  taken  suddenly  ill  on  June  3,  and
died  on  June  9th,  24  hours  before  the  death  of  his  father.  Dr.  Buckminster
must  have  been  aware  of  his  son's  delicate  state  of  health,  but  no  one  seems
to  have  expected  his  death  to  occur  when  it  did.  There  is  no  mention  of
letters  being  sent  to  warn  Dr.  Buckminster,  nor  do  the  family  seem  to  have
been  aware  of  the  son's  illness  until  after  the  father's  death.  Indeed  Dr.
Buckminster  had  intended  to  visit  his  son  and  daughter  at  Boston,  on  his
return  from  the  expedition  which  was  cut  short  by  his  own  death.

The  next  example  exhibits  the  faculty  in  a  less  fugitive  form,  and
in  connection  with  more  chronic  disease.

(373)  From  the  Zoist,  Vol.  V.,  p.  311.

Dr.  EUiotson  writes  : — "The  following  particulars  were  sent  to  me  by
a  medical  gentleman,  who  has  already  contributed  with  his  name  to  the
Zoist,  but  begs  his  name  not  to  be  disclosed  on  the  present  occasion,
though  I  am  at  liberty  to  mention  it  to  any  person  privately.

"  John  Elliotson."

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  some  personal  analogous  experience.  It  is  nearly
nine  years  since  I  took  the  immediate  charge  of  a  gentleman  of  deranged
intellect,  with  whom  I  reside  in  intimate  association  as  friend.  I  have
often,  particularly  in  the  earlier  years  of  my  charge,  been  thoroughly
puzzled  to  account  for  his  knowledge  of  circumstances,  perhaps  mere
trifles,  with  which  we  did  not  wish  him  to  become  acquainted.  I  did  not
deem  them  worthy  of  note  at  the  time,  that  is,  I  did  not  make  any
memorandum  of  them,  and  would  not  now  like  to  trust  to  my  memory  as
to  the  particulars,  nor  would  they  be  clearly  apprehended  without  entering
into  tedious  prosy  details.  Suffice  it  that  long  before  I  read  the  Zoist,  I
had  expressed  to  the  able  medical  gentleman  who  regularly  visits  us  an
opinion  that  '  our  friend  seemed  to  know  things  as  if  a  spiritual  intelli-
gence was  at  his  elbow  and  whispered  in  his  ear ' ;  '  formerly  they  would
have  said  he  had  a  familiar  spirit ' ;  '  know,  he  certainly  does,  but  how  I
can't  make  out ' ;  and  such  like  remarks,  showing  my  impression  at  the
time.

"  Our  patient's  mental  condition  has  greatly  improved,  and  I  do  not
now  often  observe  these  curious  perceptions,  or  they  are  not  so  singular  or


352  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

strongly  marked  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  their  being  matters  of
accidental  coincidence.

"  About  three  years  since,  for  a  few  evenings,  this  perceptive  power
was  wonderfully  acute ;  he  was  in  an  argumentative  and  quarrelsome
humour  at  the  time.  We  sat  together  by  the  fireside,  while  our  tea  was
infusing,  seemingly  both  engaged  in  thought,  when  my  friend  exclaimed,
'  I  don't  think  that,  sir ;  I  don't  think  that.     1  don't  believe  it.     I  say  I

don't  believe  it.'     I  replied  quietly,  '  Don't  believe  what,  Mr. ?     I

have  not  spoken  ;  what  do  you  allude  to  ? '  He  immediately,  without
noticing  my  remark  that  I  had  not  spoken,  referred  to  the  precise  subject
of  which  I  had  just  been  thinking,  and  began  to  contradict  me  respecting
it.  Had  this  occurred  but  once,  it  might  be  said  I  was  '  unconsciously
thinking  aloud,'  but  several  similar  manifestations  of  perceptive  power
took  place  about  this  time  ;  and,  as  I  was  on  my  guard,  I  can  certainly
state,  with  as  firm  a  conviction  of  the  truth  of  my  averment  as  any  one
who  confides  in  his  senses  and  memory  can  feel,  that  I  did  not  speak  my
thoughts,  but  that  there  was  a  clairvoyant  perception  of  them,  or  percep-
tion in  some  unaccountable  manner.

"  Another  instance  is  well-marked,  and  caused  us  much  interest  and
wonder  at  the  time.     Four-and-a-half  years  since,  it  became  necessary  that

M ,  our  house-steward  and  butler,  should  be  discharged.     As  he  was

an  old  family  servant,  and  his  dismissal  might  irritate  our  patient,  it  was
deemed  advisable  that  we  should  pay  a  visit  to  the  seaside  for  a  month,  and
his  removal  be  efiected  during  our  absence.  Without  tedious  explanation
I  cannot  convey  the  grounds  of  my  conviction,  but  surely  convinced  am  I
that  our  poor  friend  neither  did  nor  could  know  anything  of  the  contem-
plated change,  until  the  day  preceding  that  of  our  return  home.     He  was

then  informed  by  letter  that   M had,  for  certain  reasons,  been  sent

away,   and  a  very  comfortable,   respectable  elderly  person,   Mrs.  T ,

installed  in  his  place.  .  .  .  Next  morning  we  started  for  home,  a
distance  of  60  miles.     Whilst  the  horses  were  being  changed   for  the  last

stage,     ...     I   explained  that   Mrs.  T would  take  care  to  make

us  comfortable  ;  that  she  was  a  very  respectable  person  ;  that  we  would  not
consider  her  a  common  servant,  but  call  her  our  lady  housekeeper,  &c.,  &c.,
in  the  same  strain,  trying  to  impress  that  she  was  a  very  superior  person
to  the  one  she  had  succeeded.  As  I  finished,  we  started.  My  friend  threw
himself  back  in  the  carriage,   and  did  not  speak  for  8  or  10  minutes,

and  then  said,  'I  don't  see  that,  Mr. '  (addressing  me),  '  I  don't  see

that ;  I  don't  believe  it.     M kept  a  grocer's   shop '  (Mrs.  T kept

a  grocer's  shop  before  she  came)  '  before  he  came ;  one  grocer  is  as  good  as
another  ;  both  shopkeepers  ;  no  difierence  in  respectability,  I  think.'  This
was  strictly  true  ;  and  the  inquiries  which  I  made  to  discover  how  our
friend  knew  it  only  tended  to  puzzle  me,  as  the  attendants,  whose  casual
remarks  might  have  been  overheard,  declared  that  they  did  not  know  Mrs.

-  T was  a  grocer  until  I  named  it ;  and  other  sources  of  information

there  were  not."^

1  While  this  chapter  is  passmg  through  the  press,  I  have  received,  from  Mr.  W.  H.
Dayman,  of  E,edbridge,  Southampton,  an  account  of  Mrs.  Occomore,  a  bed-ridden  old  woman
in  his  village,  blind  and  a  little  deaf,  and  living  a  completely  isolated  life,  who  seems  some-
times to  have  an  abnormal  intuition  of  what  is  passing  in  other  minds.  From  among  other
less  distinct  instances,  I  select  the  two  following.  I  should  premise  that  Mrs.  Occomore,
her  daughter,  Mrs.  Tutcher,  and  a  grand-daughter,  are  the  only  occupants  of  the  house.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  353

If  the  following  case  is  accurately  reported,  the  percipient  must
again  have  been  in  a  very  abnormal  condition  ;  as  people  do  not
usually  commit  suicide  because  their  fathers  die.  It  is  probable  that,
though  both  deaths  occurred,  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence  may
have  been  exaggerated ;  and  the  scene  on  ship-board  has  very  likely
become,  in  recollection  and  transmission,  more  picturesque  and
dramatic  than  it  reall}^  was.

(374)  From  Mr.  Nicholas  Heald,  Bowdon-by-Altrincham,  Cheshire.

"July  7th,  1884.

"  The  late  John  Gisborne  [the  narrator's  brother-in-law],  who  was  an
officer  in  the  naval  service  of  the  old  East  India  Company,  often  during
his  life  told  the  following  incident  : —

"  One  Saturday  evening,  when  it  was  the  sailors'  custom,  among  other
toasts,  always  to  give  '  Sweethearts  and  Wives,'  followed  by  others,  and
when  the  ship  *was  thousands  of  miles  distant  from  England,  one  of  his
brother  officers  who  was  silent,  gloomy,  and  depressed,  was  urged  to  give
his  toast,  but  made  no  reply.  At  length,  after  constant  pressure,  he  stood
up  and  said,  looking  sternly  around  on  his  merry  companions,  '  Well,  fill
your  glasses,'  and  followed  this  up  by  saying,  '  I  give  you  the  memory  of
my  dead  father.'  Shocked  at  this,  his  brother  officers  hesitated,  when  he
again  sternly  repeated,  '  I  give  you  the  memory  of  my  dead  father.'  He
then  left  the  table,  went  upon  deck  and  was  seen  no  more,  having,  it  is
supposed,  thrown  himself  overboard.

"On  the  ship's  arrival  in  the  Thames,  Gisborne,  after  reporting  himself
at  the  India  House,  went  to  the  house  of  the  young  man's  father,  some
short  distance  in  the  suburbs,  to  communicate  to  the  family  his  death.
He  asked  to  see  the  father,  and  on  the  servant  saying  he  was  dead,  found,
in  answer  to  his  inquiries,  that  he  died  the  very  same  day  that  his  son
drowned  himself.  "  Nicholas  Heald."

Mr.  Gisborne's  daughter  (Loventor  House,  Berry  Pomeroy,  Totnes)
writes  : —

"  I  recollect  very  well,  and  have  often  repeated  it  to  others,  what  dear
papa  related,  which  was  that  at  the  mess  table  the  officer  suddenly  drank
to  his  just  deceased  father's  memory,  and  immediately  left  and  threw  him-
self overboard,  and  on  arrival  in  England,  papa  found  the  date  and  hour
exactly  corresponded  with  the  father's  death.  I  don't  know  the  ship  or
officer's  name."

(1)  "  On  the  22nd  March,  Mrs.  F.,  who  had  been  some  time  undecided  as  to  giving
notice  to  leave  the  house  they  all  live  in,  vi'hich  she  rents,  finally  decided  to  do  so,  and
sent  Mrs.  T.  [her  daughter]  to  Winchester  to  give  notice  to  the  proper  authorities.  On
that  day  Mrs.  O.,  who  of  course  knew  nothing  about  it,  began  declaring  that  they
were  all  going  to  leave  the  house  and  that  she  must  be  packing  up  her  things.  So  the
whole  of  the  day  she  was  busy  with  her  hands  fumbling  about  the  bed-clothes,  fancying
she  was  packing  things.     For  two  days  she  kept  on  like  this.

(2)  "  On  March  26th,  Mrs.  F.  went  out  into  her  yard  to  clean  up  some  straw  which
was  littered  about  there.  She  was  called  off  her  work  to  attend  to  her  mother  (Mrs.  O. ).
Upon  getting  into  her  room,  Mrs.  O.  at  once  began  telling  her  to  sweep  up  the  straw
which  she  declared  was  strewn  all  over  the  room,  and  no  assurances  to  the  contrary  would
convince  her  that  there  was  no  straw  there,  till  finally,  to  satisfy  her,  Mrs.  F.  got  the
broom  and  pretended  to  sweep  it  up.

VOL.    II.  2    A


354  •  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Mr.  Grisborne's  widow  says  that  she  thinks  the  young  officer's  name  was
Hunter.

[Such  an  incident  as  the  suicide  would  probably  be  recorded  in  the  log,
and  a  laborious  search  has  therefore  been  made  at  the  India  Office,  in  order
to  ascertain  the  name  of  the  ship  ;  but  without  success.]

(375)  From  Miss  Butler,  Priestown,  Co.  Meath.

December  18th,  1885.

Miss  Butler  begins  by  describing  her  unusually  strong  friendship  with
a  Madame  H.,  head  of  a  finishing  establishment  for  young  ladies  at  F.,  in
Germany,  with  whom  she  lived  for  some  time.  Mrs.  H.  having  gone  to
Paris  for  a  few  weeks,  to  engage  a  French  governess.  Miss  Butler  spent
this  period  at  her  own  home,  and  the  greater  part  of  it  in  bed,  as  she  was
still  suffering  from  the  effects  of  an  illness.  Here  she  had  a  vivid  sense
of  accompanying  Madame  H.  on  her  search  through  the  different  convents
of  Paris.  She  finally  insisted  on  returning  to  F.,  being  sure  that  Madame
H.  would  be  back  before  the  appointed  time,  which  proved  to  be  the  case.

"  I  told  her  how  I  had  followed  all  her  movements ;  I  described  the
different  convents  ;  described  the  room  in  the  Sacre  Cceur,  I  think  it  was,  in
which  she  saw  the  young  woman  she  actually  engaged ;  described  the  Mother
Superior ;  told  her  the  young  lady's  name,  Mdlle.  F.,  which  of  course
I  had  never  heard,  and  told  her  the  terms  on  which  she  had  engaged
her.  She  was  astonished.  There  was  a  kind  of  superior  housekeeper,  a
Frau  M.,  who  was  much  in  Madame's  confidence ;  she  was  present  while  I
told  my  tale  and  Madame  said  it  was  all  true.  I  told  her  I  remembered
many  other  things,  the  particulars  of  which  have  escaped  my  memory,  as
they  had  no  interest  for  me  save  as  they  concerned  my  Madame.  Amongst
others,  I  described  her  meeting  with  a  French  gentleman  who  used  to  visit
her  at  F.,  and  mentioned  the  subject  of  conversation.  Mademoiselle  came
over  with  her ;  she  made  me  describe  to  her  the  room  at  the  convent,  the
conversation,  &c.,  and  the  poor  girl  said  she  was  frightened  of  me,  she  was
sure  1  was  not  all  right,  and  I  don't  think  she  ever  got  over  the  feeling  of
constraint,  shall  I  call  it,  to  the  end  of  our  connection.

"Isabella  Butler."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Butler  writes  : —

"  It  must  have  been  in  the  year  1849  or  1850.  I  have  never  had  any
further  experience — at  least  nothing  of  the  same  kind  that  I  could  detail
in  as  circumstantial  a  manner."  She  has  long  lost  sight  of  Madame  H.  ;
and  Mdlle.  F.  and  Frau  M.  are  dead.

In  the  next  few  cases  the  percipient  was  apparently  in  a
perfectly  normal  state.

(376)  The  following  incident  is  recorded  in  All  the  Year  Round  for  May
6,  1859,  by  a  physician  who  does  not  give  his  name,  but  who  says  that  it  was
described  to  him  as  a  personal  experience  by  Prof.  Wilson,  of  Edinburgh.
The  physician  himself  writes  sensibly,  and  much  of  his  paper  is  devoted  to
explaining  the  purely  subjective  nature  of  many  of  the  hallucinations
which  have  been  marvelled  at  as  "  apparitions."

Prof.  Wilson  (as  reported)  begins  by  describing  a  picnic  party,  to
which  he  went  with  some  friends  in  Ireland  : —


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  355

"The  thick  of  the  dinner  being  over,  we  strolled  out,  or  lolled,  in  that
pleasant  prolongation  of  a  repast,  which  is  the  best  part  of  a  thing  of  that
sort ;  but  as  we  knew  that,  according  to  the  programme,  our  time  was
limited,  on  account  of  some  other  spots  which  we  had  yet  to  visit,  I  was
deputed  to  see,  by  a  reference  to  my  watch,  that  we  did  not  overstay  the
hour.  Accordingly,  I  had  placed  my  watch — a  fine  old  silver  warming-
pan,  the  paternal  gift — on  a  low  fragment  of  ruin  that  was  just  opposite  to
me,  and  in  the  intervals  of  conversation  I  looked  at  it,  though  indeed  not
quite  so  often  as  at  the  face  of  Mary  M.  Suddenly — I  perfectly  remem-
ber the  hands  were  pointing  to  twenty  minutes  past  two  in  the  sunshine —
the  watch  arrested  miy  gaze,  while  a  remarkable  feeling  passed  over  me.
I  said  to  myself,  but  to  this  hour  I  know  not  why,  '  At  this  exact  time  my
brother  R.  is  dying  in  India.'  The  sensation  came  and  went  with  the
rapidity  of  those  unaccountable  impressions

'  Which  make  the  present,  while  the  flash  doth  last,
Seem  but  the  semblance  of  an  unknown  past. '

Yet,  so  much  was  I  struck  with  the  incident,  that  taking  out  my  pocket-
book,  saying  nothing,  however,  to  anybody  as  to  why  I  did  so,  I  noted
down  the  day  and  hour  of  this  strange  visitation  of  thought.  I  did  not
exactly  place  confidence  in  the  prevision,  yet  I  could  not  shake  off  an
unpleasant  feeling  about  it.  At  length  the  incident  became  merged  in  the
frequent  repetition  to  myself  that  it  was  '  all  fudge,'  and  I  might  call  it
forgotten  (there  was  plenty  of  time  for  this,  for  it  was  not  in  the  days  of
steam),  when  a  letter  from  India  brought  our  family  the  startling  intelli-
gence that  my  brother  had  actually  died  there  on  the  very  day  when  I  had
made  the  entry  in  my  pocket-book,  and  at  an  hour  which,  by  allowance
for  latitude  [no  dou,bt  a  slip  of  the  writer's  own],  corresponded  exactly  with
that  marked  by  my  watch  when  I  had  my  eyes  on  it.  Our  correspondent
also  informed  us  that  ray  brother  had,  in  his  last  moments,  mentioned  me."^

1  The  following  narrative  is  very  similar,  and  in  detail  also  closely  resembles  case  72.  I
do  not  give  it  an  evidential  number,  as  it  is  not  certain  that  the  witness  was  cognisant  of
the  percipient's  impression  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived.  Mrs.  Harper,  of
Gotham,  Bristol,  narrates  : —  "1884.

"  My  father-in-law,  Mr.  A.  Harper,  told  me  that  at  one  time  of  his  life  he  was  in  the
Spanish  wool  trade,  and  that  it  necessitated  one  of  the  partners  residing  in  Spain,  and  in
consequence  his  cousin,  Mr.  James  B.,  went  to  Spain.  Before  leaving  Bristol  he  became
engaged  to  a  Miss  B.  Some  time  after  his  departure,  Miss  B.  was  at  a  large  party,  seated
at  the  piano,  when  she  suddenly  withdrew  her  hands,  sobbing  hysterically,  saying,
'  James  B.  is  dead  ;  James  B.  is  dead. '  She  could  not  explain  how  she  knew  it,  but  had
a  most  convincing  consciousness  that  it  was  so,  and  he  really  had  died  in  Spain  at  the
time  of  Miss  B.'s  distress.  "S.  J.  Harper."

Mrs.  Hellier,  of  Headingly  College,  Leeds,  writes  on  April  7,  1885  : —

"  My  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Harper,  of  Bristol,  has  forwarded  to  me  your  letter  of  the
4th,  asking  for  further  information  regarding  an  incident  related  to  her  by  my  late  father,
Mr.  A.  Harper.  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  inform  you  on  the  point  you  name,  viz.,  my
father  being  present  when  it  occurred.  The  probability  is  that  he  was  not,  but  that  he
heard  it  next  day  from  those  who  were.  He  was  then  in  the  employ  of  his  uncle,  Mr.  B.
(a  Spanish  wool  merchant),  and  consequently  in  daily  intercourse  wdth  him  and  his  other
sons,  all  of  whom  are  dead.

"  I  well  remember  hearing  my  father  and  mother  talk  of  the  incident  in  question,  but
being  a  mere  child  at  the  time  (7  or  8  years  of  age)  did  not  take  much  interest  in  the
conversation.  "Jane  E.  Hellier."

I  will  add  a  parallel  case  in  which  the  incidents  are  so  simple  that  even  a  third-hand
account  is  of  some  evidential  force.

Mrs.  Michael  Smith,  of  27,  Perham  Road,  S.  W.,  narrates  :—  "  June,  1884.

"  My  grandfather,  Mr.  John  Syme,  of  Ryedale,  Dumfriesshire,  the  friend  and  patron
VOL.    II.  2   A    2


356  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(377)  From  Mrs.  Gierke,  Clifton  Lodge,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Nor-
wood, S.E.,  the  narrator  of  case  242.  u  ]S[ovember  18th,  1885.

"My  two  boys  returned  to  school  on  the  18th  September.  They
intended  to  try  the  route  via  Swindon  and  Andover,  on  account  of  the
trains  being  more  convenient,  instead  of  going  by  Paddington.

"  They  left  home  about  3  o'clock,  and  I  heard  no  more  about  them
until  the  Monday  following,  but  I  was  very  uneasy  all  the  evening,  and
about  9.30  I  remarked  to  my  daughter,  'I  am  perfectly  convinced  that
those  boys  have  never  got  to  Marlborough  ;  I  am  quite  sure  they  are
walking  about  the  roads  this  minute.'  She  said,  '  What  nonsense  !  of
course  they  are  all  right.  Gus '  (the  youngest),  '  is  so  sensible,  he  never
would  make  a  mistake.'  I  said,  '  I  don't  know,  but  I  feel  quite  sure  they
have  missed  one  train  after  another,  and  have  never  got  there.'  On  the
Monday  following  I  heard  from  them.  They  had  missed  the  train  at
Waterloo,  had  then  gone  to  Paddington,  missed  the  special  there,  and  had
gone  by  a  later,  which,  by  a  curious  combination  of  circumstances,  had
landed  them  at  Woodhorough.  They  got  out,  mistaking  it  in  the  dark  for
Marlborough,  and  only  found  out  their  mistake  too  late,  and  had  walked
11  miles  on  a  road  unknown  to  them,  and  got  to  their  school  at  1  o'clock
in  the  morning.  They  managed  to  scale  the  walls,  and  found  a  class-room
open,  where  they  got  what  sleep  they  could — very  little,    u  ^   Clerke."

Miss  Clerke  corroborates  as  follows  : —         "November  30th   1885.

"  I  remember  distinctly,  when  my  brothers  returned  to  school,  that  my
mother  remarked  several  times  to  me  that  she  felt  quite  sure  that  they
were  walking  about  the  roads  somewhere.  We  found  out  afterwards  that
it  was  just  as  my  mother  said,  and,  at  the  time  she  spoke,  they  actually
were  walking  to  Marlborough.  a  jj_  y.  B.  Cleeke."

[In  describing  the  incident  to  me,  Mrs.  Clerke,  who  is  the  reverse
of  a  nervous  or  fanciful  person,  especially  dwelt  on  her  impression  that
her  sons  were  wandering  on  roads.  This  particular  idea  seems  a  far  less
likely  one  to  have  been  purely  subjectively  caused,  through  maternal
apprehension,  than  that  of  some  calamity,  such  as  a  railway  accident.
It  was  also  a  very  unlikely  thing  to  occur  in  reality.  At  the  same  time,
it  may  be  conceived  that  the  mention  of  the  projected  novel  route  had  led
to  some  passing  remark — such  as,  "  Don't  blunder  about  your  trains,  or
you'll  have  to  walk,"  and  that  the  odd  impression  had  its  origin  in  this
forgotten  suggestion.]

(378)  Mr.  J.  W.  Stillman,  the  well-known  American  writer,  gives  the

of  Burns,  was  a  remarkable  man.  Two  of  his  sons  were  abroad,  one  in  the  army  in  India,
one  commanding  a  sliip  of  his  own  in  the  merchant  navy,  at  the  West  Indies.  One  day
my  grandfather  entered  the  room  where  my  aunt,  his  only  daughter,  was  sitting,  and  said
to  her,  '  Harriet,  your  brother  John  is  dead.'  Afterwards  it  was  proved  that  he  had  died
on  that  day  in  India.  My  aunt  noted  the  day,  and  six  months  later  came  the  news  of  his
death.  Another  time  he  came  to  his  daughter,  and,  in  exactly  the  same  way ,^  stood  m  the
doorway,  delivered  his  speech,  and  went  away— '  Harriet,  Richard  is  dead,'— and  subse-
sequently  word  came  that  he  had  died  on  that  day.

"This  was  told  to  me  by  an  uncle,  since  dead.  I  have  no  means  of  corroborating
this,  though  I  know  it  to  be  literally  true,  as  my  grandfather  died  more  than  50  years  ago,
and  was  then  past  70.  I  never  saw  him.  He  was  with  Burns,  crossing  a  moor  m  a
thunderstorm,  when  Burns  was  inspired  by  '  Scots  wha  hae. '  "  o     •  i

The  Harriet  of  the  narrative  (Mrs.  Smith's  aunt)  is  also  dead.  Mrs.  Smith  never
heard  how  the  warning  was  given  ;  she  believes  that  her  grandfather  never  told  anyone.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  357

following  account  of  his  experiences  in  connection  with  two  friends.  Of
the  first  he  says  : —

"  She  had  never  been  subject  to  visions  or  hallucinations,  had  no
tendency  to  hysteria,  and  was  gifted  with  great  common-sense  in  practical
matters.  She  was  the  wife  of  a  physician,  and  mother  of  several
children.  But  she  had  a  psychological  power  which  is  in  my  experience
unique,  and  between  herself  and  any  very  intimate  friend  there  was  a
mental  sympathy  almost  amounting  on  her  part  to  clairvoyance.  Between
her  and  myself  there  was  especially  a  sympathy  so  distinct  that  I  could
generally,  by  excluding  physical  objects  of  attention,  perceive  her  mental,
sometimes  physical,  condition,  and  she  on  her  part  had  generally  a  pre-
sentiment of  my  visits.

"  She  passed  a  great  deal  of  her  time  at  the  house  of  a  married
daughter  in  Brooklyn,  my  residence  being  in  New  York.  On  one  occasion,
while  staying  at  her  daughter's,  she  was  visited  by  what  the  Germans  call
the  Doppel-gdnger  of  myself.  Entering  the  room  where  she  sat  sewing
at  a  window,  looking  out  on  the  street,  at  an  hour  in  the  afternoon  when
she  had  no  reason  to  expect  a  visit,  she  remarked  at  once,  '  I  knew  you
were  coming  for  I  saw  you  pass  the  window  10  minutes  ago.  You  were
looking  just  as  you  now  look,  and  dressed  in  precisely  the  same  manner.
I  waited  for  you  to  ring  the  bell,  and  when  after  some  time  no  ring  came,
I  said  to  myself  "  Stillman  is  coming." '  I  had  not  previously  passed  the
house,  but  came  straight  from  the  ferry,  and  when  I  came  in  sight,  came
from  the  same  direction  as  the  Doppel-gdnger,  between  which  and  myself,
she  said,  there  was  no  visible  difference.  [This,  however,  may  have  been
a  case  of  mistaken  identity.]

"  If  she  ever  desired  to  see  me  urgently,  I  felt  the  impression  of  her
mind  so  strongly  that  I  invariably,  when  not  urgently  occupied,  went  to
her  at  once.  Some  years  after  I  knew  her,  she  went  to  California,  in  the
hope  of  throwing  ofi"  the  pulmonary  disease  of  which  she  died,  and  during
her  absence  we  corresponded  regularly.  One  day,  during  the  voyage,  I
had  a  sudden  and  vivid  impression  that  she  was  dying,  and  noted  it  in
my  diary.  The  impression  passed  away,  however,  and  was  not  renewed.
On  getting  the  letter  which  announced  her  safe  arrival  I  found  recorded
that,  on  the  day  I  had  noted  in  my  diary,  she  had  been  completely  over-
come by  the  intense  heat,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  steamer's  fortunate
arrival  the  same  day  at  Acapulco,  where  ice  and  lemon  were  instantly
procured  from  the  shore,  in  her  own  opinion  and  that  of  the  surgeon  she
would  probably  have  died  that  day.

"  One  day,  while  working  quietly  in  my  studio  at  New  York,  not  know-
ing where  she  was,  nor  having  had  any  recent  communication  from  her,  I
had  stiddenly  a  vivid  perception  that  she  wanted  the  help  of  Sara  [her
daughter].  I  crossed  the  ferry  at  once  to  Brooklyn,  took  a  carriage  and
drove  to  her  daughter's  house,  saying  to  her  that  her  mother  wanted  her,  saw
her  in  the  carriage,  and  on  her  way,  and  then  went  back  to  my  studio.
The  next  day  I  learned  that  [Mrs.  M.  had  been  suddenly  forced  to  partici-
pate in  a  most  distressing  and  agitating]  scene,  during  which  her  daughter
arrived,  finding  her  mother  completely  prostrated  and  fainting,  and  carried
her  off  to  her  own  house.

"  One  of  the  most  intimate  mutual  friends  of  Mrs.  M.  and  myself  was  a
Mrs.  B.,  wife  of  a  well-known  American  sculptor.     Between  Mrs.  B.  and


358  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

myself  there  was  a  mental  sympathy,  even  stronger  than  that  with
Mrs.  M.,  though  difi'erent  in  kind.  Like  Mrs.  M.,  she  was  much  my
senior,  and  like  her,  too,  was  a  victim  to  an  over-developed  nervous
system,  though  rarely  ill — of  uncommon  intellectual  gifts,  and  the  friend
of  many  of  the  best  minds  of  that  day  in  America.  But,  like  Socrates,
she  heard  a  voice  which  warned,  counselled,  and  answered  her  at  all
times,  and  whose  admonitions  neither  she  nor  her  husband  ever  hesi-
tated to  obey.  She  had  Zschokke's  gift  ^  of  seeing  events  in  the  past  life
of  people  with  whom  she  was  en  rapport,  and  I  remember  W.  C.  Bryant
saying  one  day  that  she  had  told  him  of  events  of  the  gravest  importance
in  his  life,  known  to  no  one  then  living  but  himself.  In  her  normal  con-
dition she  read  the  thoughts  of  any  one  with  whom  she  was  intimate,  and
answered  mental  questions,  or  described  mental  conditions  with  no  hesita-
tion, and  the  greatest  fulness  and  clearness.  Her  gifts  were  carefully
limited  in  their  manifestation,  or  as  subjects  of  conversation,  to  her  circle
of  intimate  friends,  with  occasional  admission  of  one  of  their  friends  with
a  genuine  interest  in  this  class  of  mental  phenomena ;  nor  should  I  now
make  them  the  subject  of  any  relation,  but  that  she  is  dead.  There  are
still  many  of  her  circle  living  who  can  attest  the  truth  of  what  I  say  ;  but
she  would  never  submit  to  any  examination  by  sceptical  inquirers,  and
never  made  any  attempt  to  induce  belief  in  her  powers,  of  which,  no  more,
did  she  attempt  explanation.  Her  '  occult '  powers  varied  greatly,  and
sometimes  seemed  entirely  suspended,  as  well  as  affected  by  the  influence
of  people  around  her.  Between  her  and  myself  there  was  always  a
complete  confidence,  and  I  found  it  quite  impossible  to  think  in  her
presence  and  keep  my  thoughts  from  her ;  and  her  feeling  for  me  was  that
of  an  elder  sister,  so  that  I  willingly  submitted  my  mind  to  her  scrutiny ;
nor  did  I  ever  find  her  perceptions  unfounded,  although,  in  some  cases,  it
was  several  years  before  I  found  out  the  basis  of  her  impressions.

"W.  J.  Stillman."

(379)  From  a  lady  who  desires  that  names  may  not  be  mentioned,
owing  to  the  painful  nature  of  one  of  the  facts  recorded.

"Sept.  1st,  1886.

"  In  the  spring  of  this  year,  while  my  mother  was  suffering  from  a
serious  illness,  a  gentleman  in  the  neighbourhood  committed  suicide  by
shooting  himself  in  the  mouth,  between  4  and  5  in  the  morning,  dying
about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards.  Early  in  the  morning  of  the
occurrence,  [while  the  narrator  was  nursing  her,]  she  mentioned  him
several  times,  saying  he  '  kept  flitting  about  her  room  and  did  so  bother
her,  she  wished  he  would  go.'  After  this  she  addressed  the  supposed
intruder,  saying,  '  Go  !  I  wish  you  would  go.  Why  do  you  come  here  ?  I
don't  want  you.'  He  was  a  man  with  whom  she  was  on  terms  of  civility,
but  had  never  cordially  liked,  as  she  considered  he  had  done  her  an
injury.      This  led  her  to    add,  '  I  forgive  you,   I  hope  God  will.      Go  ! '

[This  incident  alone  could  have   no  weight,  as  in   her  illness    Mrs.

had  seemed  to  see  other  absent  persons  in  her  room.]  She  did  not  allude
to  him  again,  and  was  not  quite  so  restless.  The  doctor  called  at  half-
past  10  ;  and  when  I  went  back  to  her  room  after  he  had  gone,  I  found  her
in  a  very   excited  condition.      She   said,   '  Dr.    S.  has  made  me  feel  so

1  For  Zschokke's  description  of  his  gift,  see  Eine  Selbstschau,  (Aarau,  1843)  pp.  227-9.


11.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  359

strange — I  never  had  such  peculiar  sensations  before  ;  I  wish  he  had  never
come.^  My  head  is  so  bad,  I  don't  know  how  it  is,  perhaps  I  shall  be  able
to  explain  it  all  to  you  when  I  am  well.'

"  She  was  very  restless  all  the  morning.  At  1  o'clock  my  sister  came
to  relieve  me,  and  tried  to  fan  her  to  sleep.  Her  efforts  were  unavailing,
and  at  last  my  mother  seized  her  hands,  saying,  '  It  is  of  no  use,  you  cannot
send  me  to  sleep  while  my  head  is  so  queer.'  '  How  queer  V  'I  don't
know,  but  ever  since  Dr.  S.  came  and  sat  by  me,  I  have  felt  so  strange.
When  he  took  my  hand,  there  was  a  shot,  a  pistol  went  off,  and  then  all
was  confusion.^  But  I  do  not  see  the  blood  ;  was  there  any  blood  ? '  After
which  she  added,  '  I  dare  say  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  you  more  about  it  when
my  head  is  better  ;  I  cannot  explain  how  I  feel  now,  I  have  never  been
like  this  before — it  is  my  brain.'  Later  on  in  the  afternoon,  she  mentioned
a  friend,  saying,  '  Poor  T.  has  to  be  shot  in  the  back  so  often  before  I  can
be  well.  I  am  very  sorry ;  it  is  a  shame  to  shoot  a  nice  fellow  like  him,
but  they  say  "  Shoot  him,  shoot  him."  '  And  again,  complaining  of  her
head,  she  said,  '  What  is  all  this  murdering  %  I  have  never  been  amongst
shooting  and  murdering,  have  I  ?  There  is  a  pistol — it  went  off  first  when
Dr.  S  came,  and  it  has  been  going  on  through  my  head  ever  since,  and  the
bed  is  covered  with  them.'  She  continued  in  this  excited  state  all  the
afternoon,  and  could  not  be  persuaded  to  sleep.  My  sister  went  to  the
doctor,  and  he  sent  something  which  soothed  her  a  little  ;  but  she  did  not
seem  to  be  really  herself  again  until  the  next  morning.

"  We  heard  from  the  doctor  that  he  had  been  to  the  house  where  the
suicide  had  been  committed,  before  calling  to  see  my  mother,  and  that  he
had  held  the  pistol  in  the  same  hand  with  which  he  touched  her.  She  was
not  told  of  the  gentleman's  death  until  3  weeks  afterwards ;  but  she  fre-
quently alluded  to  Mr. [the  deceased]  and  his  family — which  appeared

strange,  as  they  were  persons  with  whom  she  held  very  little  intercourse.
She  once  remarked  that  they  had  quite  haunted  her  ever  since  that  day
she  was  so  ill  and  heard  the  pistols.  Her  friend  T.,  whom  she  had
imagined  to  be  shot,  had  heard  early  of  the  suicide,  and  been  engaged  in
communicating  the  fact  to  relatives  of  the  deceased  gentleman."

Dr.  S.  confirmed  these  facts  to  me,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned.     Mrs.

had  never  had  any  connection  with  pistols  or  shooting.     The  suicide

was  known  of  in  the  house  before  the   doctor's  visit ;  but  it  was  clear  to

me  from  Miss 's  viva  voce  description  that  no  remarks  on  the  subject

could  have  penetrated  to  Mrs. 's  ears  ;  and,  moreover,  she  was  quite

enough  herself  to  understand  the  news,  and  comment  on  it,  had  it  come  to
her  knowledge  in  a  normal  way.

(380)  From  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bryce,  The  Manse,  Moffat.  To  my  great
disappointment,  I  am  obliged  to  give  a  second-hand  version  of  this  case.

1  His  visits,  as  I  learnt  both  from  himself  and  from  the  narrator,  had  always,  except
on  this  occasion,  been  grateful  and  soothing  to  the  patient ;  and  he  had  regarded  her  as
convalescent.

2  An  account  of  this  occurrence,  which  was  sent  without  authority  to  a  London  news-
paper, affords  a  good  instance  of  the  way  in  which  a  story  may  get  rounded  off  and
beautified  in  transmission.  After  exclaiming  that  a  gun  had  gone  off,  the  lady  is  made  to
look  wildly  round,  and  to  cry  "  Oh,  I  see  Mr.  B.  floating  about  the  room," — the  vision  of
the  deceased  being  thus  brought  into  connection  with  the  sound  of  the  shot,  through  the
juxtaposition  of  events  which  were  separated  by  several  hours  ;  and  the  fact  of  the  other
visual  hallucinations  being  of  course  omitted.


360  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

On  Oct.  1,  1886,  Mr.  Bryce  gave  me  viva  voce  a  detailed  account,  which
I  omitted  to  commit  at  once  to  paper,  relying  on  his  promise  to  write  it
out  and  send  it  to  me  immediately.  Not  ha-\dng  received  it  (Oct.  12),
I  am  reduced  to  giving  my  present  recollections,  the  accuracy  of  which,
however,  so  far  as  they  go,  I  think  I  can  guarantee.

Some  years  ago,  when  Mr.  Bryce  was  a  student  at  Edinburgh  Univer-
sity, he  was  called  away  for  a  time  to  attend  an  elder  brother  who
was  much  attached  to  him,  and  who  was  seriously  ill.  His  brother's
health  seemed  to  be  improving ;  and  there  being  no  immediate  anxiety,
Mr.  Bryce  left  him  (I  think  at  Lockerbie)  in  order  to  take  part  in  an
evening  debate  at  Edinburgh.  He  was  delivering  the  speech  which  he
had  prepared,  and  was  completely  intent  on  the  matter  in  hand,  when  he
was  suddenly  arrested  by  what,  from  his  description,  I  should  judge  to
have  been  an  extremely  vivid  "mind's  eye"  vision,  bordering  on  halluci-
nation, and  representing  his  brother.  The  room  and  everything  in  it
seemed  blotted  out,  and  the  single  image  of  his  brother  seemed  to  absorb
his  whole  consciousness.  He  says  that  he  has  never  had  such  an
experience,  or  anything  in  the  least  resembling  it,  on  any  other  occasion.
I  do  not  recollect  how  far  his  peculiar  condition  excited  the  attention  of
his  companions  •  but  he  himself  felt  at  once  convinced  that  his  brother
had  died,  noted  the  time,  and,  when  he  returned  to  his  lodgings,  mentioned
his  conviction  to  the  housekeeper,  Mrs.  Fenton.  (He  promised  to  trace
out  Mrs.  Fenton,  who,  he  is  certain,  would  corroborate  him  on  this  point.)
His  brother  died,  as  he  learnt  next  day,  at  the  exact  time — he  believes  to
the  very  minute — of  his  own  experience.

[Mr.  Bryce  is  sure  that  he  was  not  appreciably  anxious  about  his
brother's  condition,  and  he  was  certainly  not  thinking  of  him  at  the
moment.  Still,  as  he  had  just  left  him,  after  being  constantly  with  him
for  some  time,  and  with  a  mind  influenced  perhaps  more  than  he  himself
knew  by  his  recent  cares  and  duties,  it  would  be  difficult  to  argue
that  his  experience  was  telepathic,  rather  than  purely  subjective,  but  for
the  alleged  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  And  we  may  fairly  suppose,
I  think,  that  the  coincidence  was  at  any  rate  a  very  close  one  ;  since  Mr.
Bryce  was  not  led  to  consider  the  time  of  his  experience  by  learning  the
fact  of  the  death,  but  noted  the  time  of  his  experience  under  a  con-
viction that  the  death  had  at  that  moment  taken  place,  and  was  specially
interested  in  finding  out,  next  day,  whether  his  conviction  had  been
justified.]

(381)  From  Miss  Caulfield,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  N.W.

"December  8th,  1883.

"  Many  years  ago,  when  staying  with  my  father  at  Beckford  House,
Bath,  I  awoke  one  morning  painfully  impressed  by  the  idea  that  some-
thing was  amiss  at  my  sister's  (in  Ireland) ;  could  not  guess  what  it  was
— whether  illness,  danger,  or  accident.  So  being  exceedingly  uneasy,  and
convinced  that  something  had  happened,  I  wrote  at  once  to  inquire  whether
all  were  well.  A  letter  from  her  crossed  mine,  telling  me  that  she  had
had  a  great  alarm,  and  had  been  in  danger  on  that  night ;  for  that  a  beam
of  wood — connected  with  the  nursery  fireplace  and  the  floor — had  become
ignited,  and  unknown  to  anyone  had  been  smouldering  for  some  hours  ;
and  had  it  proceeded  any  further  unseen,  they  might  not  have  been  able  to
save  the   house,  nor  perhaps   even  themselves.     The  house  being  in  the


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  361

country,  at  a  considerable  distance  from  any  other  dwelling,  a  fire,  at  night
more  especially,  would  have  proved  calamitous  in  the  extreme.

"  Sophia  F.  A.  Caulpield."

After  writing  to  her  sister  on  the  subject.  Miss  Caulfield  adds  : —

"  My  sister  remembers  the  incident,  but  has  only  a  faint  recollection  of
my  letter  having  crossed  hers."

[Asked  if  this  was  a  unique  experience,  or  whether  she  had  had  similar
impressions  which  had  not  corresponded  with  reality,  Miss  C.  replied  that
she  had  had  only  one  similar  experience,  and  that  there  her  impression  was
correct.  (This  other  experience  was  a  presentiment,  and  has  no  relation
to  the  above.)  And  though  impressions  of  the  sort  which  are  not  stamped
by  a  coincidence  may  easily  fade  from  the  memory,  it  may  be  assumed
that  a  person  who  remembers  none  has  not  experienced  many  so  strong  as
to  have  prompted  her  to  write  a  letter.]

The  following  are  instances  where  the  impression  seems  to  have
been  of  a  decidedly  pictorial  kind,  as  in  the  scene-cases  at  the  close
of  Chap.  yi.  in  the  preceding  volume.  The  account  is  unfortunately
anonymous,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  its  hona  fides.
The  mental  condition  of  the  percipient  recalls  case  373.

(382  and  383)  From  the  Zoist,  Vol.  V.,  p.  30,  sent  by  Mr.  Clark,
Surgeon,  of  York  Place,  Kingsland  Road,  E.,  who  had  received  it  from
a  lady  of  his  acquaintance.  "  July  Hth    1846.

"In  the  years  1841-2,  my  dear  respected  father  was  frequently
attacked  with  mental  derangement,  originating  greatly,  I  believe,  from
the  knowledge  of  the  unfortunate  circumstances  in  which  I,  his  beloved
daughter,  was  placed,  owing  to  the  sudden  death  of  my  husband.

"  The  various  scenes  of  mental  delusion  I  was  called  to  witness  are
not  uncommon  to  gentlemen  of  your  profession ;  I  therefore  pass  them
over  simply  to  relate  his  strange  knowledge  of  events.

"  My  attention  was  first  excited  by  the  following  incident.  So  soon
as  the  meat  for  dinner  was  brought  from  the  butcher's,  of  which  he  could
have  no  possible  knowledge,  being  confined  to  his  bed,  and  out  of  reach  of
either  seeing  or  hearing,  he  exclaimed  (pointing  to  the  floor  underneath,
which  was  the  room  it  was  in),  '  What  a  nice  rump-steak  ;  I  will  have
some.'  Struck  with  his  manner,  and  also  knowing  that  it  was  not  our  in-
tended dinner,  I  replied,  '  No,  father,  there  is  no  rump-steak ;  we  are  going
to  have  mutton-chops  ' ;  he  went  into  a  great  passion,  declared  that  there
was  rump-steak,  that  he  could  see  it,  and  described  the  dish.  I  went
downstairs,  and  to  my  utter  astonishment  beheld  it  as  he  related.

"  In  the  morning,  without  making  known  my  intention,  I  took  a
basket  and  went  into  the  garden,  to  cut  some  cabbages  and  gather  straw-
berries. The  garden  being  at  the  side  of  the  house,  where  there  was  no
window  to  look  into  it,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  see  me  by  ordinary
vision.  However,  he  turned  to  my  sister,  saying,  'That  basket  into  which
Betsey  is  putting  the  cabbages  and  strawberries  had  better  be  moved
out  of  the  sun,  or  the  fruit  will  be  spoiled ;  tell  her  she  is  not  gathering
strawberries  from  the  best  bed,  she  had  better  go  to  the  other.'  When  I
was  told  of  it,  I  was  completely  puzzled.  During  the  time  of  my  visit,
wherever  I  went,  whatever  I  did  or  thought  of,  was  open  to  his  view.


362  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  My  sister  afterwards  informed  me  that  his  medical  attendant  lent
her  some  books  for  her  perusal.  One  morning  my  father  said  to  her,
'  The  doctor  sends  his  respects,  and  will  be  obliged  for  the  books.'  Sup-
posing some  message  had  been  sent,  my  sister  replied,  '  Very  well.'  In
the  course  of  a  short  time  after,  the  doctor's  boy  arrived  with  his  master's
respects  and  request  for  the  books.  On  inquiry,  she  found  no  previous
message  had  been  sent,  nor  inquiry  made  for  them.  We  have  both  come  to
the  conclusion  that  he  must  mentally  have  travelled  to  the  doctor's  and
heard  the  message ;  I  should  think  the  distance  three-quarters  of  a  mile.

"  Another  time  he  said  to  my  sister,  '  There  is  a  handsome  young  man
and  an  old  woman,  coming  by  the  coach  this  afternoon  to  see  me.'  Sure
enough,  to  her  surprise,  when  the  coach  arrived,  it  brought  my  brother
and  a  nurse  for  my  father.  No  one  had  any  knowledge  of  my  brother's
coming,  or  of  his  bringing  a  nurse  with  him.  The  distance  from  whence
they  came  was  1 1  miles.  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the  circum-
stance that  here  he  did  not  recognise  the  parties,  though  both  were  well-
known  to  him ;  calling  my  brother  a  young  man  and  the  nurse  an  old
woman,  instead  of  mentioning  their  names.

"When  in  his  senses,  he  knew  nothing  of  what  had  transpired,  and
had  no  recollection  of  my  coming  to  see  him.  He  wasted  away  to  a  skeleton
and  died,  midsummer,  1842,  in  the  64th  year  of  his  age.  He  never,  until
the  time  stated,  had  any  mental  derangement,  though  he  certainly  was
for  years  very  nervous.  At  the  time,  I  knew  nothing  of  phrenology,  so
cannot  give  his  development.  I  know  he  was  a  talented  and  very
active  man,  a  kind  and  affectionate  father.

"  My  second  case,  that  of  my  eldest  sister,  though  in  priority  of  time
before  my  father,  is  yet  not  so  interesting.  She  was  in  a  bad  state  of
health  some  years — I  suppose  what  might  be  called  nervous.  The  circum-
stances I  am  about  to  relate  occurred  during  a  severe  illness,  in  which
mental  derangement  took  place.  At  one  time  she  would  take  no  food,
at  another  eat  most  voraciously.  One  day  we  had  ribs  of  beef  for  dinner.
How  it  came  to  her  knowledge,  I  could  never  ascertain,  but  so  it  did,
and  she  insisted  on  having  some  for  her  dinner.  I  gave  her  some ;  she
wanted  more.  Fearing  to  make  her  worse  I  would  not  give  it  her ;  she
declared  she  should  have  it,  but  soon  after  went  to  sleep.  I  went  quietly
downstairs,  took  the  meat  out  of  the  kitchen,  carried  it  down  through  the
beer-cellar  into  the  wine-cellar,  covered  it  over  with  a  tub,  put  a  weight  on
it,  went  up  and  found  her  just  as  I  left  her.  During  the  night,
through  fatigue,  I  fell  asleep,  and  was  awakend  by  her  calling  to  me.
What  was  my  astonishment  when  I  beheld  her  sitting  in  bed  with  a
slice  of  this  l3eef  cut  the  whole  length  of  the  ribs,  devouring  it  like  a
savage.  I  asked  her  how  she  obtained  it,  and  she  positively  declared  that
she  fetched  it  herself  while  I  slept ;  that  while  lying  in  bed  she  saw  me
go  down,  take  the  meat,  and  she  described  every  particular.  I  believe
she  never  left  her  bed  when  I  hid  it ;  and  had  she,  there  were  three  doors
which  I  closed  after  me,  and  I  must  have  seen  her.  When  she  recovered
she  knew  nothing  about  it,  but  on  a  relapse  told  me  all  the  circumstances
again,  laughing  heartily  at  the  trick  she  had  played  on  me."

Here,  again,  it  will  be  seen,  the  clairvoyance  recorded  does  not
pass  beyond  the  telepathic  type  where  what  is  perceived  is  within


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  363

the  view  or  knowledge  of  persons  connected  with  the  percipient.^
(Vol.  I,  pp.  266,  378-9.)

§  2.  The  next  two  examples  are  parallel  to  the  arrival  cases  in
Chap.  VI.  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  252-4).

(384)  From  Mrs.  Gibbes,  Alverton  House,  Croydon  Road,  S.E.

"  September,  1884.

"  My  son  was  in  Mexico  and  I  had  no  reason  to  expect  his  return.  He
had  been  absent  for  four  years.

"In  December,  1883,  an  impression  came  upon  me  that  he  would  be
soon  home,  and  I  could  not  get  rid  of  it.  My  daughters  laughed  at  me,
but  my  feeling  of  it  grew  so  strong  that  I  determined  to  prepare  a  room
for  him.  I  began  quietly  one  evening,  and  got  up  early  next  morning  to
clean  out  a  study  for  him  myself,  not  letting  the  others  know  that  I  was
doing  it.  Whilst  I  was  on  the  step,  dusting  the  birdcases,  a  telegram
arrived  to  say  he  would  be  home  in  the  evening.

"He  had  had  an  attack  of  yellow  fever,  and  had  come  by  sea  to  New
York.  His  uncle  persuaded  him  not  to  telegraph  from  there,  but  to  come
as  a  surprise.

"  I  have  had  impressions  of  misfortunes,  and  have  noted  down  the
dates,  but  nothing  has  happened.  "  Kate  Gibbes."

Mr.  Gibbes  writes  : —

"  I  find  the  statements  correct  as  far  as  my  memory  is  concerned.

"  W.  R.  Gibbes  (M.R.C.S.E.,  &c.) "

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Gibbes  stated  that  her  son's  letters  had  con-
tained no  hint  of  his  return,  which  would  not  have  occurred  but  for  his
attack  of  yellow  fever.  Her  daughters  bore  witness  to  her  state  of  excited
expectation.

[Here  the  impression  at  any  rate  produced  a  definite  act  of  a  very
unlikely  kind.  The  final  sentence  in  Mrs.  Gibbes's  account  of  course
detracts  somewhat  from  the  force  of  the  coincidence  ;  but,  though  I  am
bound  to  print  that  sentence,  she  herself  (in  August,  1886)  doubts  its
correctness,  and  cannot  recall  to  what  it  referred.]

1  The  same  remark  applies  to  an  interesting  case  in  tlie  Correspondence  de  Mme.  la
Duchesse  d'Orleans  (Paris,  1857),  Vol,  i.,  pp.  112-3,  to  which  our  attention  was  called  by
M.  GuiUaume  Guizot.  ^  « Versailles,  2  mars,  1709.

"II  y  a  dix  ans  qu'un  gentilhomme  frangais,  qui  a  ^t^  page  du  mar^chal  d'Humiferes,
et  qui  a  epous^  une  de  mes  dam.es  d'atour,  amena  avec  lui  un  sauvage  [du  Canada]
en  France.  Un  jour  qu'on  ^tait  k  table,  le  sauvage  se  mit  k  pleurer  et  h  faire  des
grimaces.  Longueil  (ainsi  s'appelait  le  gentilhomme)  lui  demanda  ce  qu'il  avait,  et  s'il
souffrait.  Le  sauvage  ne  iit  que  pleurer  plus  amferement.  Longueil  insistant  vivement,
le  sauvage  lui  dit  :  '  Ne  me  force  pas  h,  le  dire,  car  c'est  toi  que  cela  concerne,  et  non  pas
moi.'  _  Presse  plus  que  jamais,  il  finit  par  dire  :  '  J'ai  vu  par  la  fenetre  que  ton  frere  ^tait
assassin^  en  tel  endroit  du  Canada'  par  telle  personne  qu'il  lui  nomma.  Longueil  se  mit
k  rire,  et  lui  dit :  '  Tu  es  devenu  f ou. '  Le  sauvage  r^pondit :  '  Je  ne  suis  point  du  tout
fou;  mets  par  ecrit  ce  que  je  t'annonce,  et  tu  verras  si  je  me  trompe.'  Longueil  ecrivit,
et  six  mqis  aprfes,  quand  les  navires  du  Canada  arrivferent,  il  apprit  que  la  mort  de  son
frfere  ^tait  arrivee  au  moment  exact  et  h.  I'endroit  oti  le  sauvage  I'avait  vu  en  I'air  psiv  la
fenetre.     C'est  une  histoire  trfes  vraie."

We  cannot  be  sure  that  this  incident  was  told  to  the  Duchess  d'Orl^ans  by  any  one
who  was  cognisant  of  the  experience  before  the  news  which  confirmed  it  arrived.  But
supposing  the  report  to  be  substantially  correct,  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  percipient
was  acquainted  with  the  man  whose  death  he  seemed  to  behold ;  though  it  is  still  probable
that  the  presence  with  him  at  the  time  of  that  man's  brother  was  to  some  extent  a
condition  of  the  percipience,  as  in  cases  242  and  355  above.  I  have  drawn  attention
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  156-7)  to  the  suspicious  exactitude  of  coincidence  which  characterises
second  and  third-hand  narratives  of  this  type.


364  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  next  narrative,  though  worth  quoting,  can  hardly  receive  an
evidential  number ;  for  its  incidents  could  only  be  attributed  to
thought-transference  by  assuming — what  is  not  proved — that  the
visits  were  already  intended,  at  the  time  that  the  impressions  were
felt ;  and,  moreover,  in  the  absence  of  an  accurate  written  record,
every  allowance  must  be  made  for  the  liability  in  such  matters  to
note  successes  and  not  failures.

From  Mr.  Robert  Gribson,  Mulgrave  Cottage,  Limerick.

"January  18th,  1884.

"  Scores  of  times,  when  I  would  be  going  down  to  my  office,  after
breakfast,  my  wife  [who  was  in  delicate  health,  and  is  since  deceased]
would  say  to  me,  '  Miss  So-and-so  or  Mrs.  So-and-so  will  be  here  to-day ;
don't  let  them  come  up  to  the  house ;  say  I  am  not  able  to  see  them ' ;  or
'  So-and-so  will  be  here  to-day,  let  them  come  in.'

"I  used  to  laugh,  and  say,  'Humbug,  how  do  you  know  they  are
coming  ! '  and  she  would  reply,  '  I  feel  that  they  are,  and  be  sure  you  leave
word  with  some  of  the  men  if  you  are  going  out.'

"  With  only  one  exception  was  she  ever  wrong,  to  my  memory ;  that
was  one  Friday.  She  said,  '  The  Miss  Mercers  are  coming  to-day.'  I
happened  to  be  in  my  office  the  whole  day ;  and  they  did  not  come ;  so
at  length  I  laughed,  and  said,  '  Well,  my  love,  you  were  wrong,  the  Miss
Mercers  did  not  come.'  She  asked  me,  '  Are  you  sure  % '  '  Quite,'  I
replied,  '  I  never  left  the  place  all  day.'  '  Well,'  she  said,  '  I  am  positive
they  were  coming.'  Of  course  I  laughed  at  her,  and  told  her  it  was  stupid
to  be  positive  about  what  was  not  so.

"  You  may  guess  my  surprise  if  you  can,  when  on  the  next  Sunday,
coming  out  of  church.  Miss  Mercer  came  up  to  me,  and  said,  '  Please  tell
Mrs.  Gibson  that  Nan '  (her  sister)  '  and  I  were  coming  to  see  her  on
Friday,  when  Nan  remembered  a  book  she  had  promised  to  take  Mrs,
Gibson  and  ran  back  for  it,  leaving  me  walking  up  and  down  the  street.
I  waited  fully  20  minutes,  and  then  went  in  and  found  Miss  Nan  sitting
by  the  fire,  cloakless  and  hatless,  with  a  book  in  her  hand.  She  could  not
find  the  book  she  was  looking  for,  and  after  looking  for  it  for  ever  so  long,
thought  I  had  gone  on,  and  that  there  would  be  no  chance  of  overtakmg
me,  so  took  off  her  hat  and  cloak,  and  sat  down  to  read.' "

To  these  I  may  add  two  more  cases  in  which  the  chief  feature
is  a  sense  of  someone's  proximity,  but  in  which  the  fact  of  that
proximity  was  already  known  to  a  third  person,  who  may  have  been
the  agent.

(385)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  W.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be
published.  u  1884.

"In  the  autumn  of  1860,  I  was  staying  in  London  with  my  husband
[since  deceased]  for  a  short  time,  and  one  Saturday  evening  was  alone  in
my  bedroom  dressing  to  go  to  the  opera,  when  suddenly  something  seemed
to  say  to  me,  '  Shut  and  lock  your  door,  there  is  a  madman  in  the  house.'
So  strong  was    this    impression    that  I  searclied  all   over  the  room  and


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  365

locked  the  door.  I  dressed  hurriedly,  rushed  downstairs,  and  told  my
husband,  who  was  very  much  amused,  and  laughed  at  me  !  The  next  even-
ing (Sunday)  we  sent  the  servant  on  a  little  errand  for  us ;  she  was  about
an  hour  away.  When  she  came  in,  she  said  she  was  very  sorry  she  had
been  so  long,  but  she  had  to  wait  for  the  mistress's  return,  who  had  been
taking  her  husband  back  to  the  lunatic  asylum,  for  when  he  was  not
violent  she  had  him  home  from  Saturday  until  Sunday  night.

"  My  husband  was  very  much  startled,  and  we  left  the  next  day."

Mr.  Podmore  says  : —

"  In  conversation,  Mrs.  W.  explained  that  she  had  imagined  her  land-
lady to  be  a  widow,  and  had  not  had  the  least  suspicion  of  the  true  state
of  the  case.  She  told  me  that  she  has  on  one  or  two  other  occasions  had
strong  impressions  of  this  kind,  but  never  so  marked  as  in  this  instance.
She  had  no  recollection  of  any  impression  of  the  kind  which  had  not  'come
true.' "

(386)  From  Mr.  James  Cowley,  who  wrote  from  32,  Langton  Street,
Cathay,  Bristol.  "January  8th,  1884.

"  Some  two  years  ago,  in  the  Hereford  Cathedral,  at  an  evening-
service,  I  became  oppressed  with  the  feeling  that  a  certain  person  (I  must
'  withhold  the  name),  whose  contact  would  have  been  most  painful  to  me,
must  necessarily  have  been  near  me.  I  had  not  seen  that  person  for  5
years.  More  than  once  I  turned  my  head  to  take  a  look  round.  But  there
was  no  sign  of  him.  Next  morning  I  learned  that  he  had  been  in  Here-
ford on  the  day  before  (Saturday),  and  that  a  person  sitting  next  to  me,  in
the  cathedral,  on  my  left-hand,  had  been  for  some  hours  in  his  company."

Asked  if  he  mentioned  the  incident  at  the  time,  and  if  he  could  refer
me  to  the  person  who  was  sitting  near  him,  Mr.  Cowley  replies  that :

"  The  Hereford  Cathedral  affair  did  not  (from  the  nature  of  the  cir-
cumstances rendering  the  sensation  so  distressing)  admit  of  my  referring
to  it.  It  was  only  when  asked  by  a  tradesman,  brother-in-law  of  the
person  whose  fancied  proximity  distressed  me,  '  Did  you  see  So-and-so  on
Saturday  1 '  that  to  him  alone  I  mentioned  the  occurrence."

§  3.  I  will  insert  next  a  curious  little  group  of  cases  in  which  it
is  difficult  or  impossible  to  assign  the  impression  to  the  "agency  "  of
any  particular  person,  and  which  recall  the  Greek  notion  of  <fn[>-ri —
the  rumour  which  spreads  from  some  unknown  source,  and  far
outstrips  all  known  means  of  transport.^     The  type  is  one  where  the

1  Something  of  this  sort  has  been  occasionally  observed  in  outbreaks  of  religious
hysteria.  For  example,  the  Rev.  P.  Barrow  Matthews,  rector  of  San  Salvador,  writes  as
follows  of  a  recent  case  in  the  Bahamas  : —

"  When  the  girls  came  to  [after  their  fits],  they  gave  very  detailed  accounts  of  the
visions  they  had  seen.  A  great  deal  of  these  visions  was,  of  course,  nonsense,  but  one
thing  was  remarkable — they  spoke  of  people  doing  things  many  miles  away  from  the  place.
Upon  inquiry  it  was  found  in  some  cases  that  what  they  had  seen  corresponded  exactly
Avith  the  events.  One  most  remarkable  feature  in  this  outbreak  was  that  it  was  not  con-
fined to  one  spot.  Almost  simultaneously  in  every  settlement  on  the  island  (the  island  is
42  miles  long  and  12  broad  in  places)  similar  outbreaks  occurred.  G-irls  living  at  distances
of  5  or  10  miles  from  the  scene  of  the  '  shouting  meetings, '  as  they  were  called,  would  be
seized.  Being  seized  by  a  kind  of  frenzy,  they  would  run,  as  if  by  inspiration,  to  the
spot  where  the  rest  were  assembled,  no  matter  how  far. "


366  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

scope  of  accident  is  so  hard  to  estimate,  and  which  is  so  distinct  from
that  of  the  remainder  of  our  telepathic  evidence,  that  I  quote  most  of
the  accounts  without  evidential  numbers.  They  may  possibly  serve
to  elicit  further  instances.

Mr.  E..  Stuart  Poole  writes  from  the  British  Museum  on  Aug.  1, 1884  : —

"  My  recollection  of  the  story  of  my  brother's  impression  of  the  Duke
of  Cambridge's  death  was  this.  He  was  sitting  with  one  or  more  of  his
relations  one  evening,  and  suddenly  took  out  his  watch,  and  said,  '  Note
the  time,  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  is  dead.'  The  time  proved  to  be  correct.
My  brother  had  no  acquaintance  with  the  Duke,  and  no  reason  for  any
interest  in  him.  He  was  a  very  clear-headed  official  man,  without  what
is  called  superstition.  "  Reginald  Stuart  Poole."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Poole  writes  :  —

"I  do  not  recollect  being  present  when  my  brother  had  the  monition,
but  my  recollection  is  that  he  told  me  himself,  or  that  it  was  told  me  by
someone  present.     It  made  a  strong  impression  on  me  at  the  time."

We  find  from  the  Times  that  the  late  Duke  of  Cambridge  died,  some-
what suddenly,  at  9.40  p.m.,  on  July  9th,  1850;  but  bulletins  as  to  his
health  had  been  published  in  the  last  week  of  June,  and  on  the  day  before
his  death.

Though  the  case  is  undoubtedly  weakened  by  the  fact  that  the
person  who  died  was  old,  and  in  failing  health,  such  a  coincidence —
when  backed  by  others  of  the  same  type — seems  to  claim  attention  ;
at  any  rate  till  one  hears  of  a  good  many  cases  where  similarly  posi-
tive statements  have  been  made  by  clear-headed  practical  men,  as  to
similar  matters  of  which  they  could  know  nothing  by  normal  means,
and  have  proved  incorrect.  Yet  to  suppose  a  direct  telepathic  transfer
from  the  dying  man  to  a  total  stranger  would  seem  extravagant ;  and
hardly  less  extravagant  may  seem  the  only  alternative  that  it  is  easy
to  imagine — namely,  that  the  "  agency "  was  of  a  collective  kind,
and  consisted  in  a  certain  shock  of  interest  in  the  minds  of  a  con-
siderable number  of  persons  who  had  already  heard  the  news,

I  give  three  more  examples — of  which  two  are  properly  "  border-
land "  cases,  but  are  best  presented  in  this  connection.  It  is  a
rather  quaint  accident  that  the  honour  of  occasioning  such  psychical
storms  should  (so  far  as  these  instances  go)  seem  reserved  for  persons
of  ducal  or  imperial  rank.

Mr.  Gervase  Marson,  of  Birk  Crag,  Higher  Broughton,  Manchester,
writes,  on  Dec.  6,  1883  : —

"  On  the  morning  of  December  6th,  1879,  I  suddenly  awoke,  and  sat
up  in  the  bed,  as  if  startled.  To  my  great  surprise  I  found  myself  utter-
ing the  words,  '  Portland,  Portland.'     The  next  day  I  read  in  the  papers


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  367

of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Portland,  which  I  believe  took  place  about
the  time  when  I  was  involuntarily  uttering  his  name.

"  I  cannot  account  for  this  experience  at  all.  No  conversation
respecting  the  Duke  of  Portland  had  taken  place  the  evening  previously  ;
I  did  not  know  he  was  ill ;  never  saw  him  in  my  life  ;  had  never  been  at
any  of  his  residences  ;  and,  in  fact,  neither  knew  nor  cared  anything
about  him.  1  was  not  dreaming  just  before  I  awoke,  but  believe  I  was
sleeping,  as  is  ray  wont,  quite  soundly.  "  G.  Marson."

[The  Daily  Telegraph  of  Dec.  8,  1879,  states  that  the  late  Duke  of
Portland  died  at  5  a.ra.  on  Saturday,  Dec.  6.]

Mr.  G.  W.  Waddington,  of  26,  Bagdale,  Whitby,  Yorkshire,  writes,  on
Aug.  5,  1884  :—

"  When  a  passenger  on  board  the  '  Satellite  '  in  the  Pacific,  on  a  voyage
from  San  Francisco  to  Callao,  Peru,  I  was  awoke  about  4  a.m.  of  the  14th
of  September,  1852,  by  the  noise  of  one  who  jumped  on  deck  and  called
out  at  the  cabin  door,  'The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  dead.'  The  occurrence
was  the  subject  of  conversation  at  breakfast,  and  being  noted,  it  was
inquired  if  such  an  event  had  taken  place  from  the  captain  of  the  port,
before  any  communication  took  place  with  any  other  person  coming  on
board.  I  had  seen  the  Duke  but  once,  and  that  on  the  occasion  of  an
inspection  of  troops  before  the  Horse  Guards,  on  the  Queen's  anniversary
coronation  day  of  June  28th,  1842.  "  G.  W.  Waddington."

Mr.  Waddington  admits  that  the  noise  of  the  jumping  may  have  been
a  real  sound,  but  says,  as  regards  the  voice,  "  I  do  not  think  anyone  on
board  could  have  invented  any  such  means  of  trying  one's  credulity."

[The  Duke  of  Wellington  died  on  September  14th,  1852,  at  3.15  p.m.
Consequently,  if  the  hour  of  the  experience  is  correctly  remembered,  it
preceded  the  death  by  at  least  3  hours,  and  probably  by  more.]

Madame  NovikofF  writes,  on  Aug.  7,  1884  : —

"  A  friend  of  mine,  whose  accuracy  seems  to  me  undeniable,  gave  me
the  following  account : —

"  On  the  night  when  the  late  Empress  Maria  Alexandrovna  died,  my
friend  awoke  her  husband,  exclaiming,  '  The  Empress  is  dead.'  It  was  not
a  dream,  but  a  spontaneous  impression.  She  added  that  she  had  had
several  experiences  of  a  similar  kind.  Her  husband  disliking  this  subject
I  do  not  wish  to  apply  to  her  on  the  matter.  "  O.   K."

[We  find  from  the  Times  that  the  Empress  died  at  8  a.m.,  on  June  3,
1880.     She  had  been  known  for  some  months  to  be  in  a  critical  state.]

Comparable  with  these  cases^  are  the  two  following,  which,  if  more

1  The  following  narrative  is  too  amusing  not  to  be  quoted.  It  is  from  A  Memoir  of
G.  Mayne  Young,  tvith  Extracts  from  his  Son's  Journal,  by  the  Rev.  Julian  C.  Young,
pp.  337-340.  After  describing  his  liability,  when  over-fatigued,  to  persistent  inward
impressions  of  words,  amounting  perhaps  to  a  low  stage  of  auditory  hallucination,  Mr.
Young  continues : —

' '  On  waking  on  Monday  night  last,  I  was  possessed,  as  it  were,  by  four  mystic
words,  each  of  one  syllable,  conveying  no  more  idea  to  my  mind  than  if  they  were
gibberish,  and  yet  delivered  with  as  much  solemnity  of  tone,  deliberation  of  manner,  and
pertinacity  of  sequence,  as  if  they  were  meant  to  convey  to  me  some  momentous  intima-
tion.    They  were  all  the   more  exciting   that  they  were   unintelligible,  and  apparently


368  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

than  accidental  coincidences,  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact
that  the  idea  was  "  in  the  air."  The  hypothesis  is  here,  perhaps,  a
little  less  difficult,  as  the  original  impression  was  of  a  sort  which
affected  numbers  vividly  and  simultaneously.

(387)  From  Mr.  J.  A.  Edmonds,  16,  Waterloo  Road  South,
Wolverhampton.  "1883.

"  At  a  period  during  the  formation  of  the  Thames  Tunnel,  the  date  of
which  I  cannot  recall  without  reference  to  the  daily  papers,  my  brother,
Cyrus  Read  Edmonds,  was  head-master  of  the  Leicestershire  Proprietary
Grammar  School,  at  Leicester,  and  lived  almost  close  to  the  school
buildings.

"  On  one  occasion,  when  he  was  in  bed,  his  wife  was  awoke  (I  think,  at
somewhere  about  5  or  6  ^  in  the  morning)  by  a  loud  exclamation  of  terror
from  my  brother.  She  inquired  the  cause,  and  he,  in  a  state  of  horror,  said
that  he  had  seen  the  Thames  Tunnel  break  through,  that  the  workmen
rushed  to  the  staircases  or  ladders,  the  means  of  exit,  but  one  poor  fellow
(less  active  than  the  others  who  escaped)  was  overtaken  by  the  rush  of
water  and  perished.  My  brother  was  in  a  state  of  tremor  and  distress,
such  as  a  humane  man  might  be  supposed  to  sujQfer  as  a  witness  of  such  a
scene.  He  begged  his  wife  not  to  sleep,  but  to  converse  until  it  should  be
time  to  rise.  She  urged  that  it  was  but  a  dream,  and  that  the  effect  would
pass  off  if  he  could  get  a  little  sleep.  '  A  dream,'  he  said,  'it  is  no  dream.
I  distinctly  saw  all  that  I  have  described.'

"  On  the  day  in  the  early  morning  of  which  this  vision  occurred,  my

could  not  serve  any  ostensible  purpose.  I  could  not  exclude  them  by  putting  cotton  wool
in  my  ears,  for  they  came  from  within  and  not  from  without.  To  try  to  supplant  them  by
encouraging  a  fresh  train  of  ideas  was  hopeless:  my  will  and  my  reason  were  alike
subservient  to  some  irresistible  occult  force.  The  words  which  beset  me  were  'dowd,'
'swell,'  'pull,'  'court,'  and  they  were  separated  as  I  have  written  them  into  mono-
syllables, and' were  repeated  with  an  incisive  distinctness  and  monotonous  precision  which
was  quite  maddening.  I  sat  up  in  my  bed  and  struck  a  light  to  make  sure  that  I  was
awake  and  not  dreaming.  All  the  while  were  reiterated,  as  if  in  a  circle,  the  same
wild  words  :  'Dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court.'  I  lay  down  again  and  put  out  my  candle,
'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court.'  I  turned  on  my  left  side,  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'
'court.''  I  turned  on  my  right,  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'i^ull,'  'court.'  I  endeavoured  as  a
means' of  dispersing  these  evil  spirits— for  they  began  to  assume  the  importance  of  spirits
in  my  heated  brain — to  count  sheep  over  a  stile,  but  still  'dowd,'  'swell,'  'pull,'  'court,'
rang  in  my  ears  and  reverberated  through  my  mind."

After  many  vain  efforts,  Mr.  Young  at  last  fell  asleep.  He  mentioned  his  experience
next  day  to  his  father  and  to  some  friends,  the  Misses  Smith.  On  the  following
Thursday,  he  says  :—

"I  walked  into  Folthorp's  Library  to  read  the  papers;  and,  as  usual,  ran  my  eye
down  the  births,  marriages,  and  deaths  in  the  Times.  As  I  came  to  the  obituary  the
following  notice  caught  my  sight  :—

'"On  Tuesday  night,  November  11th,  John  E.  Dowdswell,  of  Pull  Court,  Tewkes-
bury.' \W&  have  verified  this  notice  in  the  Times  for  November  13th,  1851.  The  name
is  Dowdeswell.]  So  that  probably,  on  the  self-same  night,  at  the  very  time  when  this
gentleman's  name  and  residence  were  so  unaccountably  and  painfully  present  to  my
mind  he  was  actually  dying."  [This  last  expression  is  misleading,  as  the  death  did  not
take  place  till  the  following  night.]

Mr.  Myers  says  : —

"  I  have  siDoken  to  the  Misses  Smith  as  to  this  occurrence,  which  they  distinctly
remember.  They  were  slightly  acquainted  with  Mr.  Dowdeswell,  but  Mr.  Young  was  a
stranger  to  him  entirely."

1  I  don't  assert  this. — J.  A.  E.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  369

brother  and  his  wife  were  engaged  to  a  dinner-party  at  the  house  of  a
gentleman,  whose  name,  I.  believe,  was  Whetstone.  Before  they  left  the
drawing-room  for  the  dining-room,  his  host  said  to  my  brother,  '  Have
you  heard  the  sad  news  from  London  ? '  He  said,  '  No,  what  is  it  ? '  He
replied,  '  The  Thames  Tunnel  has  broken  in.  All  the  people  in  the  works
escaped,  except  one  poor  fellow  who  was  overwhelmed.'  ^  My  brother
thought  that  his  wife  might  have  told  their  host,  and  that  they  would
rally  him  out  of  his  depression.  But  on  looking  at  her,  the  look  of
astonishment  quite  precluded  this  notion.  He  asked  his  host  if  he  were
joking,  at  which  he  was  much  surprised,  and  asked  how  a  joke  could
possibly  be  elicited  from  such  an  occurrence.

"  My  brother  then  said,  '  I  saw  it  happen,  just  as  you  have  related  it,  so
my  wife  will  assure  you,  and  I  am  yet  suffering  from  the  exhaustion  and
depression  produced.'     He  then  told  the  company  what  I  have  related  above.

"  I  heard  the  whole  relation  both  from  him  [by  letter  at  the  time,  and
viva  voce  some  weeks  afterwards]  and  his  wife  [both  now  dead],  and  many
of  our  friends  were  acquainted  with  the  history.

"J.  Augustus  Edmonds."
The  construction  of  the  Thames  Tunnel  lasted  from  1825  to  1843.
During  this  period  there  were  five  irruptions  of  the  water  of  more  or  less
importance.  The  fourth  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  one  man  was
drowned.  The  Times  of  ISTov.  4th,  1837,  records  that  at  a  few  minutes
before  4  o'clock  on  that  morning,  a  sudden  irruption  of  the  river  took  place
and  filled  the  tunnel.  J.  Francis,  engineer  on  duty  at  the  time  of  the  acci-
dent, stated  that,  on  discovering  the  water  was  beginning  to  overflow  he
"  immediately  gave  the  alarm  for  all  hands  to  run,  and  from  that  time
the  filling  of  the  tunnel  occupied  less  than  five  minutes.  We  then  ran
with  all  speed  to  the  shaft."  The  water  lulled  slightly,  and  he  in  company
with  two  other  men  "  went  down  the  archway  about  200  feet,  and  saw  the
water  rolling  up  the  roadway  with  a  terrific  appearance.  We  then  ran  to
the  staircase,  and  finally  ascended  to  the  top  of  the  shaft.  The  water
arrived  a  few  seconds  after  us.  I  then  had  all  the  names  called  over,  and
found  only  one  missing.  Garland,  an  old  man,  a  miner."

(388)  From  a  book  called  Pith  (Triibner  and  Co.,  1881),  by  Newton
Crosland,  pp.  63-4.

"In  October,  1857,  about  1  o'clock  in  the  day,  I  was  going  from  my
office  to  sign  an  export  bond  at  the  Custom  House,  Lower  Thames  Street,
a  distance  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  I  was  in  my  usual  satisfactory
state  of  health  ;  my  mind  was  occupied  with  merely  common-place  ideas  ;
the  traffic  in  the  streets  was  going  on  with  ordinary  monotonous  activity,
and  nothing  was  apparent  there  to  wake  in  me  the  slightest  trepidation,
when,  just  as  I  was  crossing  Great  Tower  Street,  I  was  seized  with  an  un-
accountable panic.  I  conceived  a  dread  that  I  might  be  attacked  by  a
tiger,  and  the  idea  of  this  horrible  fate  so  haunted  me  that  I  absolutely
began  running  in  hot  haste,  and  I  did  not  stop  until  I  found  myself  safe
inside  the  walls  of  the  Custom  House.  Anything  more  contemptibly
absurd  than  this  apparently  caiiseless  fear  could  scarcely  be  imagined — a

1  We  have  ascertained  from  the  Post  Office  that  at  that  time  the  London  mail-coach
would  reach  Leicester  about  6  p.m.  ;  so  that  the  report  may  easily  have  arrived  before
dinner-time.

VOL.    II.  2    B


370  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

merchant  in  the  streets  of  London  in  danger  of  a  wild  beast !  The  possi-
bility of  such  a  disaster  seemed  to  me  to  be  so  ridiculous,  the  moment  I
thought  about  it,  that  I  laughed  at  myself  for  allowing  so  foolish  and  morbid
a  fancy  to  take  possession  of  my  mind,  and  I  really  considered  that  I  must
be  fast  becoming  stupidly  nervous.  The  feeling  of  apprehension  soon,
however,  passed  away,  and  wonder  at  my  own  weakness  became  predomi-
nant. The  next  morning  I  took  up  the  Times  newspaper,  when  to  my
utter  astonishment,  I  read  that  at  precisely  the  same  time  when  I  felt  the
crazy  fear,  a  tiger  had  actually  escaped  from  its  cage  while  it  was  being
conveyed  from  the  London  Docks,  seriously  injured  two  children,  and  had,
to  the  terror  of  every  observer,  ferociously  misconducted  himself  in  the
public  street  of  Wapping — about  a  mile,  as  the  crow  flies,  from  the  spot
where  I  was  passing."

The  following  passage  occurs  in  the  Times  on  Oct.  27,  1857  : —
"  Frightful  Occurrence. — Yesterday    afternoon,    about    1     o'clock,  as
a    cattle    van    was    conveying  from   London   Docks   a   Bengal  tiger,  the
door  gave  way  and  the  animal  bounded  into  the  road,  encountered  a  little
boy,  spi'ang  upon  him,  lacerating  him  in  a  frightful  manner,"  &c.

A  subsequent  report,  October  30th,  states  that  two  boys  were  injured.

Mr.  Crosland  writes  to  us,  on  June  7,  1884 : —

"42,  Crutched  Friars,  London.

"  I  am  afraid  I  cannot  help  you  much  in  your  attempt  to  strengthen
my  evidence  respecting  '  the  tiger  story.'  When  on  my  way  to  the  Custom
House  I  felt  the  dread  of  a  tiger  in  the  streets,  which  impelled  me  to  run
to  a  refuge.  I  was  not  so  much  disturbed  as  to  exhibit  any  signs  of  alarm.
After  I  reached  the  Custom  House,  I  soon  recovered  my  composure,  and
thought  my  fear  was  so  causeless  and  silly  that  I  did  not  mention  the  cir-
cumstance to  anyone.  I  considered  that  to  do  so  would  be  to  make  myself
a,ppear  ridiculous.  "  Newton  Crosland."

In  another  letter  he  says,  "  I  am  quite  certain  that  my  sensations  were
felt  at  the  precise  tim,e  when  the  incident  occurred  at  Wapping."

I  4.  We  come  now  to  a  group  where  the  impression,  though
indefinite  in  character,  recalling  the  purely  emotional  cases  of
Vol.  1.,  Chap.  VII,,  had  reference  to  a  particular  individual  known
to  the  percipient,  as  in  case  86.

(389)  From  a  clergyman,  who  desires  that  his  name  may  not  be
published.     He  writes  as  follows  to  his  daughter  : —  a  1882.

"When  your  brother  E.  was  at  Winchester  College  (about  1856  or
1857),  on  going  to  bed  one  Saturday  night,  I  could  not  sleep.  When  your
miother  came  into  the  room,  she  found  me  restless  and  uneasy.  I  told  her
that  a  strong  impression  had  seized  me  that  something  had  happened  to
your  brother.  The  next  day,  your  mother,  on  writing  to  E.,  asked  me  if
I  had  any  message  for  him,  when  I  replied  :  '  Tell  him  I  particularly  want
to  know  if  anything  happened  to  him  yesterday.'  Your  mother  laughed,
and  made  the  remark  that  I  should  be  frightened  if  a  letter  in  Dr.
Moberly's  handwriting  reached  us  on  Monday.  I  replied,  '  I  should  be
afraid  to  open  it.'     On  the  Monday  morning  a  letter  did  come  from  Dr.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  371

Moberly,  to  tell  me  that  E.  had  met  with  an  accident,  that  one  of  his
schoolfellows  had  thrown  a  piecs  of  cheese  at  him  which  had  struck  one  of
his  eyes  ;  and  that  the  medical  man,  Mr.  Wickham,  thought  I  had  better
come  down  immediately  and  take  your  brother  to  a  London  oculist."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  writes  to  us,  on  March  13,  1885 : —

"  The  impression,  with  regard  to  my  son,  was  on  a  Saturday.  The
accident  had  occurred  on  the  Thursday  previously,  but  Dr.  Moberly  did
not  write  to  inform  me  of  it  till  Saturday,  when  the  Winchester  medical
man  had  ordered  that  a  London  oculist  should  be  consulted.

"I  cannot  call  to  mind  any  occasion  on  which  I  received  a  like
impression  which  was  not  verified.  There  is  one  which  occurred  in  former
years,  which  I  call  to  mind.  When  at  school  and  saying  my  prayers  one
evening,  I  was  impressed  with  the  idea  that  my  eldest  brother  was  dying,
and  this  was  the  case,  as  I  was  informed  the  day  following.  I  did  not
know  at  the  time  that  he  was  ill."

[The  first  of  these  cases  could  hardly  have  been  presented  alone,  owing  to
the  lack  of  precision  in  the  coincidence.  But  its  interest  is  increased  by  the
occurrence  of  the  other  more  precise  experience  to  the  same  person.]

(390)  From  Mrs.  Brandon,  resident  in  Canada,  who  wrote  from  Farm-
hill,  Donegal,  Ireland.  "January,  1884.

"  The  steamship  '  Canadian,'  in  which  Mr.  Brandon  was  sailing  to
England,  was  shipwrecked  in  the  Atlantic,  east  of  the  straits  of  Belleisle,
on  the  4th  of  June,  1861.  She  foundered  in  the  ice,  and  38  lives  were  lost.
In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  Mr.  James  Patton,  a  merchant  in  Montreal
(where  we  were  then  living),  was  teaching  Mr.  Brandon's  Tuesday
evening  class  in  Great  St.  James'  Street  Methodist  Church,  I  being  present
at  the  time.  Mr.  Patton  said,  '  This  day  my  mind  was  urgently  impressed
with  the  necessity  to  pray  for  Mr.  Brandon — so  much  so,  particularly  at
the  hour  of  noon,  that  I  had  to  leave  oflT  writing  about  my  business  in  my
ofiice,  and  retire  to  a  private  place,  and  pour  out  my  soul  in  prayer  to  God
for  Mr.  Brandon.'  We  could  not  understand  at  the  time  the  meaning  of
the  mysterious  circumstance  ;  but  10  days  afterwards  we  understood  it  all.
At  the  very  hour  when  Mr.  Patton  was  engaged  in  prayer  for  Mr.  Brandon,
he  (Mr.  B.)  was  standing  on  the  wreck  of  a  sinking  ship,  and  was
miraculously  saved  from  a  watery  grave."

[Mr.  Brandon  has  sent  us  an  account  of  the  foundering  of  the  ship,
and  the  loss  of  38  men.     Mr.  Patton  is  deceased.]

(391)  From  a  letter  entitled  "  Brain  Waves — a  Theory,"  written  by
Mr.  James  Knowles,  which  appeared  in  the  Spectator,  30th  January,  1869.

"  Mr.  Woolner,  the  sculptor,  tells  me  the  following  story  of  two  young
men — one  of  them  a  personal  friend  of  his  own  now  living.  These  two
men  lived  for  very  long  as  great  friends,  but  ultimately  quarrelled,  shortly
before  the  departure  of  one  of  them  for  New  Zealand.  The  emigrant  had
been  absent  for  many  years,  and  his  friend  at  home  (Mr.  Woolner's
informant)  never  having  kept  up  correspondence  with  him,  naturally  almost
lost  the  habit  of  thinking  of  him  or  his  affairs.  One  day,  however,  as  he
sat  in  his  rooms  in  a  street  near  Oxford  Street,  the  thought  of  his  friend
came  suddenly  upon  him,  accompanied  by  a  most  restless  and  undefinable
discomfort.  He  could  by  no  means  account  for  it,  but,  finding  the  feeling
VOL.    II.  2    B   2


372  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

grew  more  and  more  oppressive,  tried  to  throw  it  off  by  change  of  occupa-
tion. Still  the  discomfort  grew,  until  it  amounted  to  a  sort  of  strange
horror.  He  thought  he  must  be  sickening  for  a  bad  illness,  and  at  leng-th,
being  unable  to  do  anything  else,  went  out  of  doors  and  walked  up  and
down  the  busiest  streets,  hoping  by  the  sight  and  sound  of  multitudes  of
men  and  ordinary  things  to  dissipate  his  strange  misery.  Not,  however,
until  he  had  wandered  to  and  fro  in  the  most  wretched  state  of  feeling  for
more  than  two  hours,  utterly  unable  to  shake  off  a  sort  of  vague  conscious-
ness of  his  friend,  did  the  impression  leave  him,  and  his  usual  frame  of
mind  return.  So  greatly  was  he  struck  and  puzzled  by  all  this,  that  he
wrote  down  the  precise  date  of  the  day  and  hour  of  the  occurrence,  fully
expecting  to  have  news  shortly  of  or  from  his  friend.  And,  surely,  when
the  next  mail  or  the  next  but  one  arrived,  there  came  the  horrible  news
that  at  that  very  day  and  hour  (allowance  being  made  for  latitude  and
longitude)  his  friend  had  been  made  a  prisoner  by  the  natives  of  New
Zealand,  and  put  to  a  slow  death  with  the  most  frightful  tortures."

Mr.  Woolner,  in  writing  to  us  in  August,  1883,  after  making  some
trifling  corrections,  says  : —

"  Mr.  Knowles  has  told  the  story  accurately;  and  having  told  him  only
once,  I  am  surprised  that  he  should  have  been  so  faithful  in  his  narrative.
I  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  the  person  for  many  years,  and  know  not  the
least  where  to  find  him.     I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  help  you  any  further."

The  name  of  the  man  who  was  killed  was  Cooke,  or  Cook.  Mr.
Woolner  has  given  us  the  name  of  his  informant,  but  desires  that  it  may
not  be  published.  We  have  tried  to  trace  him  without  success.  Mr.
Woolner  says  :  "I  believe  he  was  perfectly  sincere  when  he  told  me  the
story  in  or  about  1850  "  ;  and  adds  that  the  incident  occurred  some  time
between  1842  and  1846.

Of  the  three  hupressions  in  the  following  account  two  were  con-
nected at  the  moment  with  a  particular  individual.  The  three,
though  each  alone  might  easily  have  been  accidental,  are  worth
presenting  as  having  occurred  in  the  experience  of  a  single  person  ;
and  they  find  their  most  convenient  place  here,  though  two  of  them
seem  to  have  been  of  the  "  borderland "  class.  In  the  second  case,
the  narrator's  experience  followed  the  death  (she  thinks)  by  perhaps
a  day  or  two  ;  nor  can  she  be  certain  that  the  coincidence  in  the  first
case  was  closer  than  this,  though  it  may  have  been  closer.

(392)  Miss  Loveday,  of  Arlescote,  Banbury,  enclosed  to  us,  on
February  14,  1884,  the  following  letter  from  her  sister,  who  desires  that
her  own  name  should  not  be  published.  In  conversation  she  described
herself  as  a  matter-of-fact  person  ;  and  she  is  certain  that  she  has  never  on
other  occasions  had  impressions  at  all  resembling  those  described.

"  I  have  had  three  different  intimations  of  death — ^on  Uncle  William's
death,  on  Henry  H.'s  [a  brother-in-law's]  death,  and  on  B.'s.  The  two
first  were  more  sensations  than  anything  else.  It  is  a  thing  hardly  to  be
described.  It  is  like  nothing  else.  Not  alarming ;  rather  like  one's  idea
of  the  severance  of  nerves  ;  of  something  cut  off,  that  is,  and  lost  to  your-


11.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  373

self,  of  a  want,  a  something  gone  from  you.  On  the  occasion  of  Henry's
death,  I  did  not  know  who  was  gone.  I  was  away  in  Germany ;  but  I
awoke  with  the  sensation,  and  I  told  my  children,  '  I  have  had  that  feeling
that  I  have  had  before  on  the  loss  of  a  relation.  I  do  not  know  who  is
gone  ;  but  someone  seems  gone  ;  perhaps  it  is  Aunt  Edward.'  Then  in  a
day  or  so  came  the  news  of  Henry's  death.  [The  narrator  was  warmly
attached  to  both  her  uncle  and  her  brother-in-law.]

"  The  last  occasion  {i.e.,  of  B.'s  death)  it  was  the  most  distinct  of  all.
[Miss  Loveday  says,  "  B.  was  an  old  servant  of  our  family,  who  was  very  dear
to  us  all."]  It  was  in  1880,  in  the  autumn.  I  was  in  Germany.  I  had  gone
to  lie  down  after  the  early  dinner  on  Sunday,  to  rest  before  the  long  walk
to  church  ;  and  I  fell  asleep.  I  had  the  most  calm  and  delightful  awaking
— no  actual  words,  but  a  happy  feeling  that  B.  was  passing  away  to
Heaven  peacefully,  and  that  I  was  intended  to  know  it.  If  I  put  into
words  what  my  impression  was,  it  was  this — '  As  if  some  spirit  had  gently
touched  me  and  said,  "  B.  is  passing  away,  rise  up  and  pray."  '  I  at  once
rose  up  and  went  into  the  next  room,  and  told  my  boys  '  I  have  had  an  inti-
mation that  B.  is  dying  ;  remember  it.  I  shall  hear.'  I  then  went  back  to
my  bedside  to  kneel  in  prayer.  The  happiness  and  peace  of  the  few
minutes  was  intense.  I  had  longed  to  see  him  once  again  before  he  died,
and  had  feared  I  should  not  be  in  England  in  time,  though  I  was  going  in
a  few  days,  as  I  knew  his  end  was  near ;  but  being  led  to  know  the  day
and  hour  was  to  me  like  a  leave-taking  and  a  good-bye  from  himself,  and
I  felt  it  was  permitted  to  assure  and  comfort  me.  Two  or  three  days  later
I  heard  it  was  that  very  day  he  died ;  and  when  I  got  to  England  and  saw
his  wife.  Oath,  I  found  it  was  the  same  time,  allowing  for  my  being  nearly
40  minutes  to  the  eastward  on  the  globe.  The  two  first  intimations,
though  not  alarming,  were  not  of  the  comforting,  reassuring,  and  happy
feeling  of  the  last."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  B.  died  on  October  10,  1880,
The  two  previous  deaths  took  place  on  April  2,  1875,  and  January  21,  1878,
respectively.

One  of  the  narrator's  sons  writes  on  Jan.  28,  1886  : —

"I  distinctly  remember  that  one  afternoon  (I  think  Wednesday),
about  two  weeks  before  we  came  away  from  Germany,  mother  was  lying
down,  and  suddenly  she  said  to  me  that  she  felt  as  if  a  friend,  someone
whom  she  had  known  for  a  very  long  time,  was  at  that  moment  dying.
She  did  not  think  it  was  a  relation,  because  the  feeling  was  not  the  same
as  when  Uncle  Henry  died.  She  thought  it  was  very  probably  B.,  but  did
not  say  that  she  felt  as  if  it  was  of  necessity  B.  who  was  dying.  I  did
not  feel  surprised,  because  almost  exactly  the  same  had  happened  when
Uncle  Henry  died,  and  yet  I  felt  equally  sure  that  it  was  correct.

"  About  three  days  afterwards  we  got  a  letter  to  say  that  B.  had
died  on  the  very  afternoon  in  question,  at  about  the  same  time  as  events
above  recorded,  i.e.,  at  about  3.30  p.m.,  as  nearly  as  I  can  recollect."

The  other  son  writes  from  Cambridge,  on  Jan.  26,  1886  : —

"  I  shall  be  happy  to  testify  to  the  fact  of  my  mother  having
mentioned  to  me  that  she  had  a  presentiment  that  '  B.'  was  passing  away
and  that  thi-s  was  anterior  to  any  communication  even  of  an  illness."

[The  force  of  the  last  coincidence  is  of  course  greatly  diminished  by  the
fact  of  the  percipient's  having  known  that  B.'s  "  end  was  near."     The


374  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

narrator  thinks  that  she  was  aware  of  her  uncle's  being  rather  seriously
ill ;  but  she  had  no  similar  knowledge  in  the  case  of  her  brother-in-law,
whose  death  was  quite  unexpected.]

(393)  E.  M.  Arndt,  a  well-known  writer  on  political  and  social
questions,  in  his  Schriften  fur  and  an  seine  Liehen  Deutschen  (Leipzig,
1845),  Yol.  III.,  pp.  523-4,  records  two  telepathic  experiences  of  the
emotional  sort  which  befell  the  same  person.

The  first  occurred  when  Arndt  was  under  the  tuition  (apparently)  of
Dr.  Masius,  at  Barth.  One  of  his  fellow-pupils,  while  at  play,  had  broken
an  arm.  Just  as  a  messenger  was  starting  to  convey  the  news  to  the
boy's  mother,  who  lived  at  some  miles'  distance,  she  herself  rushed  in,  ex-
claiming, "My  son,  my  son !  What  accident  has  befallen  him'?"  From  Arndt's
description,  it  seems  certain  that  he  was  himself  present  on  the  occasion.

The  same  lady,  Arndt  continues  (but  without  naming  his  authority),
was  one  day  calling  at  a  neighbour's  house,  when  suddenly  she  started  up
and  called  for  her  carriage,  under  an  impulse  of  uncontrollable  appre-
hension, and  found,  on  arriving  at  her  home,  that  an  accident  had
occurred  by  which  her  youngest  child  had  been  scalded  to  death.

§  5.  This  last  incident  leads  us  on  to  the  next  group,  where
the  emotional  impression  was  not  connected,  when  felt,  with  the
person  to  whom  (if  telepathic)  it  was  due.  The  following  case
exhibits  the  element  of  actual  physical  discomfort  on  the  percipient's
part,  as  in  Nos.  22,  70,  and  76,  and  notably  in  391  above.

(394)  From  Mr.  Frederick  H.  Poole,  Sneyd  Park,  Durdham  Down,
^ris^ol.  "June  10th,  1884.

"  Upwards  of  40  years  ago,  when  I  was  about  12  years  of  age,  I  was
visiting  at  my  uncle's  vicarage  in  Gloucestershire.  I  had  been  there  for
a  month  previously,  and  was  one  afternoon  sketching  in  the  neighbour-
hood, in  good  health  and  sjairits,  when  suddenly  I  became  very  depressed
and  ill,  which  induced  me  to  return  to  the  house.  I  told  my  uncle  my
symptoms,  and  expressed  my  belief  that  I  should  die,^  and  asked  his  per-
mission for  me  to  return  home  that  afternoon,  for  I  should  like  to  bid
farewell  to  all  at  home,  especially  to  my  mother,  to  whom  I  was  very
devotedly  attached.  Nothing  he  said  in  reply  would  pacify  me,  until  he
promised  I  might  return  on  the  morrow  if  I  felt  no  better.  After  a
restless  night,  I  felt  worn  and  weary — as  one  would  naturally  feel  after
unusual  excitement — but  my  intense  longing  to  return  home  had  subsided,
and  I  consented  to  remain.  By  that  afternoon's  post  a  letter  reached  my  uncle
from  my  home,  announcing  the  death  of  my  mother  on  the  previous  afternoon.

"  Having  given  above  the  unvarnished  fact,  I  am  disposed  to  leave  the
subject  without  comment.

"  I  will  only  add  that  I  had  no  knowledge  of  my  mother's  illness  at
the  date  of  aforesaid  '  incident.'  We  heard  a  few  days  previously  that  she
was  progressing  favourably  after  her  recent  confinement.

"  Frederick  H.  Poole."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Poole  says  : —

1  Precisely  this  experience  is  recorded  in  cases  22  and  76.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  375

"  I  never  had,  excepting  on  the  occasion  named  in  my  last  letter,  the
unaccountable  sort  of  depression  mentioned  therein."

(395)  From  Mrs.  Herbert  Davy,  of  Burdon  Place,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,
the  narrator  of  the  more  definite  case  No.  45.  a  December   1883

"  It  was  in  August,  a  few  years  ago — my  husband  was  at  the  moors.
I  drove  to  a  nursery  garden  to  procure  some  flowers.  I  waited  outside  the
gate  under  the  shelter  of  some  trees,  sending  the  groom  in  for  the  flowers.

"It  was  one  of  the  hottest  afternoons  I  ever  experienced.  My  ponies,
usually  restive,  stood  perfectly  still.  Before  I  had  waited  there  many
minutes,  an  unaccountable  feeling  took  possession  of  me  as  though  I  fore-
saw and  recognised  the  shadow  of  a  coming  sorrow.  I  immediately
associated  it  with  my  husband — that  some  accident  had  befallen  him.
With  this  miserable  apprehension  upon  me,  I  got  through  the  rest  of  the
day  and  evening  as  best  I  could,  but  weighed  down  by  the  shadow,  though
I  spoke  of  it  that  night  to  no  one.

"  ISTothing  had  happened  to  my  husband.  But  a  little  child — a  relation,
who  had  lived  with  us  and  been  almost  as  our  own — had  died  that  day
rather  suddenly  in  Kent,  where  she  was  then  visiting  her  parents.  I  had
thought  a  good  deal  of  little  Ada,  as  I  sat  waiting  in  the  phaeton  that
summer  afternoon — had  pictured  her  reaching  out  her  hands  to  me  ;  but
the  great  apprehension  I  felt  was  for  my  husband,  not  for  the  child."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  child  died  on  Aug.  14, 1875.

A  friend  who  was  with  Mrs.  Davy  writes  : —

"Newcastle,  January  5th,  1884.

"  I  was  driving  with  Mrs.  Davy  on  the  day  she  had  the  strange  pre-
sentiment, while  waiting  outside  the  nursery  gardens.  She  spoke  of  it  at
the  time,  and  was  quite  depressed  and  unlike  herself.  Mr.  Davy  being  from
home,  she  feared  something  had  happened  to  him.  "Amy  Grace."

After  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Davy  on  April  15th,  1884,  Professor
Sidgwick  writes  : —

"  She  affirmed  unhesitatingly  that  the  feeling  was  a  sudden  unique
shock  of  sadness,  quite  unlike  any  depression  of  spirits  which  she  had  ever
felt  at  any  other  time — she  had  had  experiences  of  such  depressions.  The
girl,  Ada,  was  likely  to  be  thinking  of  her."

(396)  From  Mr.  S.  N.  Wilkinson,  J.P.,  Apsley  Cottage,  Stockport.

"  1884.
"  I  was  at  Blackpool  in  the  March  of  1881,  and  about  tea  time  I  felt
a  strong  conviction  of  some  unknown  evil  which  made  me  perfectly  rest-
less. Next  morning,  a  letter  came  from  the  manager  of  my  works  in
Stockport,  reporting  that  the  day  before  he  had  to  stop  the  mill  in
consequence  of  the  breaking  down  of  the  main  driving  wheel.  My  niece
remarked  that  this  was  an  explanation  of  my  restlessness,  but  I  was  not
satisfied  with  the  explanation,  and  said  to  her,  '  That  is  not  it,  it  is  some-
thing worse.'  On  arriving  at  home,  the  day  following,  I  found  two  tele-
grams, one  announcing  the  death  of  one  of  my  most  intimate  friends,  the
other  inviting  me  to  the  funeral.  He  died  at  Aberdeen.  At  the  time  of
my  uneasiness  I  was  not  aware  of  his  illness.  I  attended  his  funeral
there.  This  was  not  the  only  case  in  which  I  had  presentiments,  but  it
is  the  most  remarkable  that  I  have  experienced.     "  S.  N.  Wilkinson."


376  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

We  asked  Mr.  Wilkinson  if  he  would  procure  for  us  his  niece's
corroboration  ;  but  he  said  that  he  did  not  feel  disposed  to  take  any
further  trouble  in  the  matter.  In  conversation  he  described  the  impression
as  quite  unique  in  its  strength,  preventing  him  from  settling  to  anything ;
and  he  entirely  disclaimed  any  tendency  to  nervousness  or  unaccountable
fancies.

§  6.  I  turn  now  to  the  production  of  motor  effects — sometimes
of  a  blind  sort,  sometimes  under  a  sense  of  being  wanted — which
must  be  understood  in  the  sense  explained  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  292.

(397)  From  Mr.  F.  Morgan,  of  Nugent  Hill,  Bristol.

"  July  11th,  1883.

"  On  Monday,  February  14th,  1853,  I  was  listening  to  a  lecture  by
the  late  Geo.  Dawson,  of  Birmingham,  in  the  Broadmead  Rooms  in
Bristol.  I  frequently  spent  my  evenings  at  lectures,  concerts,  &c.,  and
often  took  a  little  walk  afterwards  on  my  way  home.  I  had  lived  nearly
all  my  life  (27  years)  at  home  with  my  mother,  whom  I  strongly  resemble  in
face  and  in  many  characteristics.     We  were  much  attached  to  each  other.

"  I  was  thoroughly  interested  in  the  lecture,  and  had  so  little  intention
of  leaving  before  its  conclusion,  that  I  remember  noticing  a  friend  among  the
audience,  and  making  up  my  mind  for  a  walk  with  him  on  my  way  home.

"  The  lecture  must  have  been  more  than  half  through — I  was  not
tired,  and  had  no  reason  to  move — when  I  noticed,  at  the  side  of  the
platform  farthest  from  the  back  entrance  to  the  hall,  a  door  which  I  had
never  seen  before,  flush  with  the  panels,  and  it  suddenly  became  the  most
natural  thing  that  I  should  walk  half  the  length  of  the  room,  and  away
from  the  main  entrance,  in  order  to  see  if  this  door  would  open.  I  turned
the  handle,  passed  through,  closed  the  door  gently  behind  me,  and  found
myself  in  the  dark  among  the  wooden  supports  of  the  platform.

"  I  clambered  along  towards  a  glimmer  of  light  at  the  other  end,
passed  round  a  side  passage,  crossed  the  end  of  the  hall  to  the  main
entrance,  without  any  thought  of  the  lecture  which  was  still  going  on,
and  walked  home  quietly,  without  excitement  or  '  impression '  of  any  kind,
and   quite  unconscious,  till  long  after,  that  I  had  done  anything  unusual.

"  On  opening  my  door  with  a  latch-key,  I  smelt  fire,  and  found  my
mother  in  great  alarm.  She  had  also  noticed  the  strong  burning  smell,
had  been  over  the  house  with  her  servant,  and  was  longing  for  my
return.  On  going  upstairs,  I  saw  flames  issuing  from  a  back  window  of  the
next  house,  immediately  gave  the  alarm,  removed  my  mother  to  a  safe
distance,  and  then  had  two  or  three  hours'  struggle  with  the  flames.  The
adjoining  house  was  destroyed,  but  mine  only  slightly  damaged.

"  The  point  which  has  seemed  to  me  most  striking,  whenever  I  have
recalled  this  occurrence,  is  the  entire  absence  of  any  presentiment  or
impression  on  my  mind.  I  should  probably  have  shaken  ofi"  anything  of
the  kind  had  I  been  aware  of  it,  and  refused  obedience.  Neither  was
there  on  my  mother's  part  any  intentional  exertion  of  her  will  upon  me,
only  a  strong  wish  for  my  presence,  which  must  have  begun  about  the
time  I  left  my  seat.  "  Fredk.  Morgan."

Mr.  Morgan  adds,  in  reply  to  our  regular  inquiry,  that  he  has  never
done  anything  similar  to  what  is   here  described  on  any  other  occasion.


II.]  IDEAL,  EMOTIONAL,  AND  MOTOR  CASES.  377

He  also  sends  a  plan  of  the  lecture-room,  which  shows  that  he  walked
in  a  dark  passage  round  nearly  three  sides  of  the  hall.  "  But  going
home,"  he  adds,  "  was  not  in  my  thoughts  when  I  moved."  He  told  his
mother  of  his  experience  next  day.

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  the  fire  in  the  B7'istol  Times.  The
account  there  given  states  that  Mr.  Morgan's  house,  though  only  slightly
damaged,  was  "  in  great  danger,  and  only  escaped  destruction  by  the  in-
tervention of  strong  party-walls."

(398)  The  following  passage,  in  the  original,  is  a  continuation  of  that
quoted  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  274,  from  Der  Sogenannte  Lehens-Magnetismus  oder
Hyjynotismus,  by  Dr.  E.  L.  Fischer,  of  Wiirzburg,  a  book  the  reverse  of
credulous  in  its  general  tone.

"  I  had  accepted  an  invitation  to  a  jubilee,  and  went  to  the  place  in
the  afternoon.  I  had  not  been  .at  table  more  than  an  hour,  when  I  was
seized  with  a  peculiar  feeling  that  I  must  leave — that  someone  was
waiting  for  me.  I  had  no  more  peace  ;  I  was  expecting  every  moment
to  be  summoned  away.  I  remained  half-an-hour  under  the  continuous
pressure  of  the  feeling  that  someone  was  most  strongly  desiring  my
presence.  Then  I  got  up  and  went  home  to  bed,  in  the  confident
expectation  of  being  called  ofi"  to  someone  at  a  distance  in  the  course  of
the  night.  It  was  quite  impossible  to  go  to  sleep,  for  every  two  minutes
1  was  raising  my  head,  to  listen  whether  there  was  not  a  pull  at  the  house-
bell.  In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  there  was  really  a  ring.  I  sprang  out  of
bed  with  one  bound,  and  was  told  that  I  must  come  to  a  sick  woman  at  a
village  about  a  couple  of  miles  off.  On  my  arrival  I  found  the  patient  in
a  piteous  condition.  She  could  neither  speak  nor  move  her  limbs,  though
still  able  to  see,  hear,  and  feel.  I  did  all  I  could,  and  departed,  with  the
promise  to  come  again  later.  On  the  second  occasion,  I  found  her  much
better,  and  she  now  told  me  how  earnestly  she  had  been  longing  for  me  to
come  on  the  previous  afternoon  and  evening.  Her  husband  had  not  re-
turned home  till  late  in  the  evening,  and  had  then  lost  no  time  in  sending
for  me.     So  the  matter  was  explained.

"  These  two  incidents  \i.  e.,  this  and  the  one  already  quoted]  prove  to
my  satisfaction  that  there  are  such  things  as  sympathetic  divinations
(Ahnungen) ;  and  I  could  supply  other  instances,  though  of  a  less  striking
character,  from  my  own  experience,  besides  similar  experiences  which
have  been  reported  to  me  by  my  friends."

[I  have  sufficiently  expressed  dissent  from  Dr.  Fischer's  view  that
telepathy  can  be  demonstrated  from  a  few  instances.]

(399)  From  Mr.  William  Blakeway  (a  bricklayer),  of  New  Ross,
Rowley  Regis,  near  Dudley.  a  igg^

"  I  was  in  my  usual  place  at  chapel  on  the  Sunday  afternoon,  in  May,
1876,  when  all  at  once  I  thought  I  must  go  home.  Seemingly  against  my
wish,  I  took  my  hat.  When  reaching  the  chapel  gates,  I  felt  an  impulse
that  I  must  hasten  home  as  quick  as  possible,  and  I  ran  with  all  my  might
without  stopping  to  take  breath.  Meeting  a  friend,  who  asked  why  I
hurried  so,  I  passed  him  almost  without  notice.  When  I  reached  home
I  found  the  house  full  of  smoke,  and  my  little  boy,  3  years  old,  all  on  fire,
alone  in  the  house.  I  at  once  tore  the  burning  clothes  from  off  him,  and
was  just  in  time  to  save  his  life.     It  has  always  been  a  mystery  to  me,  as


378  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

no  person  whispered  a  word  to  me,  and  no  one  knew  anything  about  the
fire  till  after  I  made  the  alarm  at  home,  which  was  more  than  a  quarter
of  a  mile  from  the  chapel.     This  is  a  true  statement.

"  William  Blakeway."

Mr.  0.  Smith,  of  12,  Short  Street,  Black  Heath,  near  Dudley,  writes  : —

"  I  beg  to  say  I  heard  of  the  incident  from  Mr.  Blakeway  himself  in  a
few  days  after  the  occurrence,  and  never  forgot  it,  as  I  thought  it  very
remarkable.  "  C.  Smith."

Mr.  Blakeway  went  through  the  account  to  me  viva  voce  in  such  a  way
that  I  could  not  doubt  the  vividness  of  the  experience  ;  he  has  never  had
any  other  at  all  resembling  it.  The  friend  whom  he  hurried  by  was  one
to  whom  he  invariably  talked  for  some  minutes  when  he  met  him.  He
tliinks  that  he  probably  took  about  a  minute  and  a  half  in  getting  home,
and  that  his  first  impression  may  quite  have  coincided  with  the  accident
to  the  child,  who  was  alone  in  the  house  and  caught  fire  in  reaching  for
something.

(400)  From  Herr  Heinrich  von  Struve,  procured  through  the  kindness
of  Mr.  J.  B.  Johnston,  M.A.,  of  17,  Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh.  The
original  was  in  German.  u  25,  Pilrig  Street,  Edinburgh.

"July  10th,  1885.

"  It  was  in  the  night  between  the  9th  and  10th  of  November,  1835,
that  I  felt  a  sudden  and  peculiar  yearning,  which  laid  hold  of  me  with
great  intensity,  for  my  dear  mother,  who  lived  in  Carlsruhe,  in  the
Grand  Duchy  of  Baden.  I  myself  was  living  with  my  elder  brother  in
Poland,  and  intended  to  pass  the  winter  with  him.  This  yearning  affected
me  so  strongly  that  I  resolved  to  move  to  Carlsruhe  without  delay,  which
I  explained  to  my  brother  at  breakfast,  after  I  had  informed  him  of  my
sudden  feeling.  It  was  no  small  and  insignificant  journey  in  those  days  and
at  that  advanced  season  of  the  year.  Carlsruhe  was  over  130  German  miles
from  where  I  was  living.  I  passed  [on  horseback]  through  the  province
of  Posen,  through  Silesia,  Saxony,  and,  after  crossing  the  Erz  Mountains
and  Thuringia  in  deep  snow,  through  Bavaria.  At  Jena,  where  an  aunt
lived  who  had  always  been  in  the  most  intimate  relations  with  my  mother,
I  intended  to  rest  for  a  few  days.  But  as  she  told  me  that  she  had
received  very  sad  news  from  Carlsruhe,  according  to  which  her  dear  friend
had  been  attacked  by  nervous  fever  and  given  up  by  the  doctors,  I  could
not  rest,  and  in  the  greatest  consternation  and  anxiety  recommenced  my
journey,  and  reached  Carlsruhe  on  the  4th  of  December.

"  With  sinking  heart  I  betook  myself  first  to  my  brother,  who  was
attached  to  the  Russian  Embassy  at  the  Court  of  Baden,  and  rushed  up
the  steps,  where  my  brother  received  me  with  great  astonishment.  On  my
eager  inquiry  after  my  mother's  health,  he  told  me  that  the  danger  had
passed  oflP,  and  that  she  was  recovering.  Then  I  hurried  swiftly  to  my
mother's  house,  where  my  sisters  lived  with  hei',  and  they  confirmed  the
happy  news.  As  I  then  learnt  from  my  eldest  sister,  the  chief  crisis  of
the  illness  occurred  on  the  night  between  the  9th  and  10th  of  November,
when  my  beloved  mother,  in  her  delirium,  continually  spoke  with  intense
love   and  care  for  her  youngest  son,  called  me  and  longed  for  me.

"  H.  VON  Struve."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Herr  von  Struve  says,   "  I  have  never  on  any


II.]  IDEAL,   EMOTIONAL,   AND  MOTOR   CASES.  379

other  occasion  experienced  an  affection  of  the  same  sort,  and  naturally
therefore  have  never  had  occasion  to  take    action  on  one."

[This  case  is  very  remote  ;  but  the  narrator  is  not  likely  to  be  wrong
in  remembering  that  he  undertook  a  long  and  arduous  journey  in  conse-
quence of  his  impression.]

I  will  conclude  with  the  only  pendant  that  we  have  to  M.
Li^beault's  remarkable  case  at  the  end  of  Chap.  VII.  in  the  preceding
volume.  But  a  second-hand  account  of  so  exceptional  an  occurrence,
received  from  a  person  who  himself  only  heard  of  it  some  years  after
it  took  place,  cannot  of  course  carry  much  weight,  at  any  rate  as  far
as  details  are  concerned.

(401)  From  Mr.  S.  Jennings,  of  Westbury  House,  Denmark  Hill,  S.E.

"  March  24th,  1885.

"  In  reply  to  your  note,  the  occurrence  [which  is  narrated  below]  was
related  to  me  by  Mr.  Nelson  himself,  since  dead.  He  told  me,  as  nearly  as
I  can  remember,  in  the  year  1868,  but  the  event  itself  must  have  taken
place  four  or  five  years  before.

"  At  the  time  he  told  me  he  was  frequently  in  the  habit  of  thus
writing  under  some  external  influences,  some  of  which  he  describes  as
agreeable,  and  others  very  much  the  reverse.  He  showed  me  a  book
in  which  these  writings  were  made,  and  I  was  much  surprised  at  the
singular  differences  in  the  apparently  various  handwritings.

"  I  never  had  any  reason  to  do  otherwise  than  believe  what  he  said,
particularly  as  he  was  always  very  reticent  on  the  subject,  which  he
said  concerned  nobody  but  himself.  "  Samuel  Jennings."

The  following  is  from  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  Jennings  to  Professor
Barrett,  on  September  26th,  1882.  After  describing  Mr.  Nelson's
automatic  writing,  and  his  inability  to  get  rid  of  the  consciousness  of  some
external  presence  or  influence  "  without  providing  writing  materials,"  the
account  continues  : —

"On  one  occasion  this  feeling  seized  him  in  the  train  when  travelling
from  Raneegunge  to  Calcutta,  and  he  tore  a  leaf  out  of  a  book,  and  laid
it  on  the  seat  of  the  carriage,  his  hand  grasping  a  pencil  resting  upon
it.  Ordinarily,  to  write  under  such  conditions  would  be  impossible  in
a  train  rushing  along  ;  the  motion  would  efiectually  prevent  it.  Never-
theless, a  long  communication  was  made  purporting  to  be  from  his
daughter,  who  was  at  school  in  England.  It  contained  a  simple  account
of  her  illness  and  death,  described  the  circumstances  under  which  it
occurred,  and  the  persons  who  were  present,  adding  that  she  wished  to
say  good-bye  to  her  father  before  leaving.  This  threw  Mr.  N.  into  a
state  of  great  excitement,  for  he  did  not  even  know  of  his  daughter's
illness.  He  went  home  and  said  he  was  very  uneasy  about  Bessie  in
England.  Finally,  he  gave  this  note  to  his  married  daughter,  Mrs.  R.,
to  keep  till  they  could  hear  by  the  ordinary  post.  The  child  had  in
reality  died  that  very  day,  and  under  the  very  circumstances  thus
mysteriously  communicated  to  Mr.  N.  I  have  subsequently  received
some  corroborative  evidence  regarding  this  young  lady's  death  from  an
entire  stranger  to  the  family."


[chap.


CHAPTER   III.

DREAMS.

§  1.  The  cases  to  be  now  presented  are  supplementary  to  those  of
Vol.  I.,  Chap.  VIII.;  and  will  be  arranged,  as  far  as  possible,  in  similar
groups.

The  first  group  is  that  of  simultaneous  dreams  which  correspond
in  content.

(402)  From  Mr.  A.  A.  Watts,  19,  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  S.W.

"  1883.
"When  I  was  a  young  child,  about  the  year  1830,  my  father  had  been
called  out  of  town  by  business  ;  and  my  mother  took  me  into  her  room  to
sleep.  She  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  or  early  morning,  out  of  a
dream  in  which  it  had  appeared  to  her  that  the  servant  was  attempting  to
murder  her  with  a  knife.  I  had  awakened  at  the  same  time,  and  was
sobbing  in  my  crib  by  her  bedside.  Upon  her  inquiring  what  was  amiss
with  me,  I  replied  that  I  had  dreamt  that  John  was  murdering  her  with  a
knife.  She  always  affirmed  that,  to  the  best  of  her  knowledge,  I  had  at
that  time  never  heard  the  word  murder.  She  rang  up  the  servants  ;  and
wrote  immediately  to  her  husband,  who  returned  to  town  at  once,  and
discharged  the  man  without  more  ado.  My  mother  had  had  no  previous
antipathy  to  the  man,  rather  the  contrary,  for  he  was  a  very  clever  and
handy  servant,  and  had  been  a  sailor.  We  had  never  heard  then  nor  did
we  hear  subsequently  anything  to  his  disadvantage."

[This  evidence  cannot  rank  as  better  than  second-hand.]

(403)  The  following  letter  appeared  in  the  Nation  for  November  26th,
1885  :—

"  Sir, — I  have  been  much  interested  in  the  cases  of  telepathy  reported
in  the  Nation,  and  give  the  following,  which  happened  here  last  week.
Mrs.  P.  dreamed  her  watch  was  broken,  and  was  greatly  afflicted  to  see  it
all  in  pieces,  and  in  her  distress  awoke.  Feeling  very  ill,  she  awakened
her  husband  to  go  for  a  physician.  His  first  words  on  awaking  were,
'  Who  broke  your  watch  1 '

"  M.  E.  W.

"Dover,  N.  H.,  November  16th,  1885."


III.]  DREAMS.  381

The  writer  of  this  letter,  Dr.  Mary  E.  "Webb,  was  applied  to  for  details,
and  wrote  to  us  as  follows  : —

"  37,  Trowbridge  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

"February  3rd,  1886.

"  Near  midnight,  Mrs.  Flynn  dreamed  her  watch  was  broken.  She
saw  the  crystal  and  all  the  works  crushed  to  fragments.  She  awoke  in
some  pain,  and  aroused  her  husband  from  a  sound  sleep,  and  his  first
words,  according  to  her  report,  were,  '  Who  broke  your  watch  ?  How  did
your  watch  get  broken  ? '  &c.  Then  she  told  me  she  laughed  in  spite  of
the  pain,  and  told  him  that  was  just  what  she  had  dreamed  before  the  pain
had  awakened  her  ;  then  they  found  their  dreams  coincided  exactly  as  to
the  manner  in  which  the  watch  was  broken ;  and  that  the  watch  was  got
and  examined,  to  make  sure  it  was  not  as  they  had  dreamed.

"  This  they  related  to  me  the  same  night,  as  something  worth  the
telling.  They  thought  it  singular  and  interesting.  I  asked  them  what
they  had  said  about  the  watch  before  going  to  bed,  and  they  said
'  Nothing  ' ;  that  they  had  not  thought  of  it  at  all.

"  Mary  E.  Webb."

In  the  next  three  cases,  the  telepathic  influence  of  a  distant  agent
seems  to  be  involved,  and  may  have  acted  independently  on  the
dreamers  (c/.  case  127,  and  see  Chap.  XII.,  §  2) ;  or  one  dreamer,
so  influenced,  may  have  infected  the  others.

(404)  From  the  Rev.  P.  T.  Drayton,  Undercliff,  Portishead.

"January,  1884.

"  When  a  child  in  the  West  Indies,  there  was  an  old  African  woman
who  had  great  attractions  for  me.  She  was  full  of  ghost  stories,  and,
though  a  Christian,  had  not,  I  fear,  discarded  obeah  ideas  altogether.
Sometimes  she  would  come  in  to  show  us  how  she  would  look  dressed
in  her  grave  clothes,  which  she  kept  by  her,  and  we  would  make  merry
over  it.  Well !  several  years  afterwards  I  saw  in  my  dreams  her  figure
by  my  bedside  in  full  grave-costume ;  it  was  very  vivid,  and  I  awoke  with
a  determination  that  I  would  eat  no  more  late  suppers.

"  At  breakfast,  next  morning,  my  sister  told  us  that  she  had  had  much
the  same  dream,  but  as  she  had  never  seen  the  old  woman  masquerading
in  her  shroud,  as  I  had,  it  made  more  impression.  Some  time  afterwards
we  had  a  letter  from  W.  I.  mentioning  the  old  woman's  death  on  the  day
on  which  these  dreams  occurred.

"  This  occurred  some  45  years  ago,  and  I  cannot  be  responsible  for  its
strict  accuracy.

"  P.  T.  Drayton."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Drayton  says  : —

"  Taking  your  queries  seriatim  I  would  reply,  first,  that  my  sister  has
been  dead  over  30  years.  Second,  that  my  sister  and  self  had  the  dream  on
the  same  night,  without  having  been  either  talking  or  thinking  of  the  old
woman.  Third,  that  to  the  best  of  my  recollection  the  tidings  of  the  old
woman's  death  arrived  shortly  after."


382  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

A  lady,  a  connection  of  Mr.  Drayton's,  through  whom  we  procured
this  narrative,  says,  "  All  the  family  knew  of  these  dreams."

(405)  From  Fynes  Moryson's  Itinerary  (London,  1617),  Part  I.,
Chap.  II.,  p.  19.

"  I  may  la^vfully  swear  that  which  my  kinsmen  have  heard  witnessed
by  my  brother  Henry  whilst  he  lived,  that  in  my  youth  at  Cambridge  I
had  the  like  dreame  of  my  mother's  death,  where,  my  brother  Henry  lying
with  me,  early  in  the  morning  I  dreamed  that  my  mother  passed  by  with
sad  countenance,  and  told  me  that  she  could  not  come  to  my  commence-
ment ;  I  being  within  five  months  to  proceed  Master  of  Arts,  and  she
having  promised  at  that  time  to  come  to  Cambridge  :  and  when  I  related
this  dreame  to  my  brother,  both  of  us  awaking  together  in  a  sweat,  he
protested  to  me  that  he  had  dreamed  the  very  same,  and  when  he  had  not
the  least  knowledge  of  our  mother's  sicknesse,  neither  in  our  youthfull
afiections  were  in  any  affected  by  the  strangeness  of  this  dreame,  yet  the
next  carrier  brought  us  word  of  our  mother's  death."

(406)  From  Mr.  Swithinbank,  Ormleigh,  Mowbray  Road,  Upper
Norwood,  S.E.

"May  26th,  1883.

"  During  the  Peninsular  War,  my  father  and  his  two  brothers,  William
and  John,  were  quartered  at  Dover.  They  were  natives  of  Bradford,  and
had  there  living  their  father,  mother,  and  the  rest  of  their  family.  On
one  special  night  my  father  had  a  dream  that  his  mother  was  dead ;  the
dream  was  most  vivid,  and  in  his  waking  moments  the  dream  kept  con-
tinually recurring  to  him,  and  he  could  not  shake  ofi"  the  impression  of
sadness  it  brought  upon  him.  The  other  brothers  each  slept  at  different
parts  of  the  garrison,  and  they  only  met  each  other  on  parade.  The
morning  following  the  dream,  and  after  the  parade  was  over,  my  father
ran  hurriedly  on  to  meet  his  brothers,  and  as  he  approached  them  they
each  appeared  as  anxious  to  meet  him  as  he  was  to  meet  them ;  in  a  tone
of  breathless  anxiety  my  father  said,  '  Oh,  William,  I  have  had  a  queer
dream.'  '  So  have  I,'  replied  his  brother,  when,  to  the  astonishment  of
both,  the  other  brother,  John,  said,  '  I  have  had  a  queer  dream,  as  well.  I
dreamt  that  my  mother  was  dead.'  '  So  did  I,'  said  each  of  the  other
brothers.  It  was  true  that  each  brother  dreamt  during  the  same  night
that  their  mother  was  dead ;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  in  the  course  of  a
few  days  (for  the  posts  then  were  seldom  for  such  long  distances)  they
heard  from  home  that  during  the  night  of  their  dream  their  mother,  who
had  had  no  previous  illness  of  which  her  sons  knew  anything,  had  quietly
passed  away.  u  George  Edwin  Swithinbank."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Swithinbank  adds  : —
"  I  heard  it  over  and   over  again  from  my  father  and  the  two  brothers
concerned."

A  sister  of  Mr.  Swithinbank's  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  Farnley,  near  Leeds.

"  October  20th,  1883.
"  I  fully  confirm  this  statement,  as  the  only  surviving  daughter  of  the


III.]  DREAMS.  383

younger  of  the  three  brothers.  The  last  time  I  saw  my  uncle  William,
shortly  before  my  father's  death,  he  specially  named  the  circumstance  to
me,  and  I  had  heard  it  from  my  early  infancy  repeatedly  from  the  lips  of
my  father  and  his  other  brothers.

"  R.  M.  Hudson,  {nee  Swithinbank)."

§  2.  Next  comes  a  group  in  which  some  thought  on  the  part  of  a
waking  agent  seems  to  have  been  represented  in  the  dream.

The  following  case  strongly  recalls  No,  149,  where  the  percipient
seemed  to  catch  the  idea  of  a  scene  about  which  the  agent  was
silently  reading.

(407)  From  Miss  Julia  Wedgwood,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W.

"March,  1886.

"  My  dream  was  that  I  was  hurrying  along  the  street  somehow  in
company  with  a  little  girl  of  about  10,  who  was  telling  me  of  her  life  in
Florence,  where  she  had  been  brought  up.  I  was  listening  to  her  with
great  interest,  and  I  remember  in  my  dream  being  surprised  that  I  could
feel  interest  in  the  conversation  of  a  child  of  that  age.  One  odd  thing
was  that  she  was  telling  me  about  building,  and  that  we  wandered  into
some  grand  new  structure,  where  I  had  never  been  before.

"  In  the  morning  I  took  up  the  novel  Marian  had  been  reading  before
she  went  to  bed,  sitting  close  to  me.  I  will  copy  the  passages  which  made
me  feel  that  her  interest  in  the  book  must  somehow  have  been  transferred
to  my  mind.  My  building  was  not  a  cathedral,  and  what  the  child  said
about  building  had  the  absurdity  of  a  dream,  so  my  dream  was  not  exact.
The  little  girl  in  the  novel  has  been  brought  up  in  Florence.

"  Julia  Wedgwood."

The  extracts,  from  a  novel  called  Clarissa's  Tangled  Web,  are  as
follows : —

"Thus  wandering,  she  passed  to  the  east  end  of  the  north  aisle,  much
secluded  from  view  by  the  back  of  the  great  organ  and  the  pulpit,  and  so
alone  had  she  felt  that  she  started  when  she  saw  a  little  girl  seated  on  a
stone  step,  the  first  of  three  leading  up  to  an  old  oaken  door  filling
a  low  narrow  doorway  in  the  wall.  .  .  .  She  noticed  too  that  the
little  girl  looked  towards  her,  and  closed  her  book,  and  now  appeared
rather  to  invite  than  to  deprecate  conversation.  So  she  drew  nearer,  and
said  in  the  peculiarly  pleasant  voice  which  generally  prepossessed  strangers,
and  not  seldom  drew  forth  unexpected  confidences,  '  You  enjoy,  my  dear,
being  in  this  cathedral  ? '  Irene  rose.  '  Yes,  ma'am,'  she  said,  '  I  do.  I  have
seen  many  much  finer  cathedrals  and  churches  [having  been  brought  up
in  Florence],  but  this  is  a  good  building  in  many  respects,  and  I  do  like
being  here  very  much.'

"  Mrs.  Weatherill  felt  rather  amused  by  the  air  of  experienced  judg-
ment and  critical  discernment  assumed  by  this  very  young  connoisseur ;
but  she  said  pleasantly,  '  You  know  the  building  much  more  familiarly  than
I  do,  I  have  no  doubt.'  '  I  have  read  about  it,  ma'am,  and  have  observed
for  myself,'  Irene  said,  quite  willing  to  impart  information  and  give  her
own  impressions.     '  You  see  the  vaulting  of  the  roof,  how  it  is  filled  in


384  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

and  held  up  by  those  arches,  so  many  intersections  and  changing  lines —
that  is  quite  a  unique  arrangement,  but  /  think  it  is  beautiful !  And  then,
ma'am,  .  .  .  you  see  that  the  height  of  the  vaulting  in  the  two  side
aisles  and  the  middle  aisle  is  exactly  the  same,"  &c.


In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Wedgwood  says  : —

"T  n.m   nni+,p>  snrp.  thai-,  IVTarian   TTno'VifiS  rAn.rl   r\r\\


"  I  am  quite  sure  that  Marian  Hughes  read  not  a  word  aloud,  and  did
not  mention  to  me  any  of  the  circumstances  which  reproduced  themselves
with  the  grotesque  triviality  of  such  things  in  my  dream,  and  that  I  did
not  know  anything  of  the  contents  of  the  book.

"  It  was  one  of  a  number  sent  me  to  review  (I  leave  it  with  you,  with
the  relevant  passages  marked),  and  Marian  being  very  unwell,  I  advised
her  to  look  through  the  heap  instead  of  doing  anything  else.  She  sat  by
me  all  the  evening  reading  this  novel.  I  was  busy  with  something  else,
and  we  hardly  exchanged  a  word.  We  went  to  bed  at  the  same  time,
and  I  had  a  vivid  dream  of  meeting  two  children  in  the  street  (there  is
only  one  in  the  book),  and  getting  into  a  conversation  with  the  girl  about
building.  The  only  sentence  which  remains  with  me  is  the  absurd  one,
'  What !  don't  you  know  that  all  the  heart  of  oak  used  in  England  comes
from  Florence  ? '  where  she  told  me  she  had  lived  all  her  life.  I  had  a
vivid  sense  in  my  dream  of  the  intelligence  and  rare  knowledge  of  the
little  girl,  and  when  I  opened  the  book  at  p.  38  it  came  to  me  with  an
almost  startling  sense  of  familiarity.  I  think  I  mentioned  that  I  was
wandering  with  my  little  girl  in  a  curious  new  building,  and  noticed  the
ceiling,  but  it  was  not  a  cathedral,  so  that  again  was  only  partly  like,  but
it  was,  I  remember,  a  curiously  low  roof.  There  was  a  sense  of  rather
dramatic  interest  in  the  little  girl  which  the  story  reproduces,  and  which
is  very  rare  in  dreams,  but  I  can  remember  no  words  to  help  it  out.  I
think  the  child  was  10,  but  the  sense  of  premature  cleverness  and  of
surprise  at  myself  in  being  interested  in  a  child's  talk  about  buildings  is
what  remains  with  me."

Miss  Wedgwood  adds  : —

"  The  dream  corresponded  with  her  [Marian's]  inaccurate  recollection
of  the  fiction  more  than  with  the  fi.ction  itself.  She  fancied  that  the
incident  was  supposed  to  occur  as  in  my  dream — a  grown  person  walking
with  a  little  girl  in  the  street.  It  is  one  of  several  faint  coincidences  of
the  same  kind,  but  most  are  so  uninteresting  that  we  forget  them.

"  Another  little  case  of  thought-reading  between  us  may  have  interest
for  you.  I  should  premise  that  M.  H.  is  my  most  intimate  friend  as  well
as  my  maid — copies  all  my  writings  for  me,  and  shares  all  my  interests.

"  In  the  year  1 880,  I  was  troubled  by  some  circumstances  which  I
carefully  concealed  from  her.  I  thought  that  some  actions  of  mine  might
have  caused  annoyance  to  a  friend  long  dead,  if  he  had  been  still  among
us,  and  the  doubt  stirred  up  much  speculation  in  my  mind  as  to  the
possible  feeling  in  those  who  are  gone.  On  the  morning  after  I  had  been
dwelling  on  this  (which  I  did  with  a  sense  of  vivid  anxiety),  M.  H.  said
to  me,  '  Oh,  I  had  such  a  strange  dream  last  night.  I  thought  I  saw
Mr.  A.  come  alive  in  his  picture  in  the  wall,  and  stand  out  of  the  picture,
and  look  down  with  sorrow  and  grief,  as  if  he  were  much  hurt ! '  I  felt
she  had   exactly  read  my   anxious  feelings,  all  sign  of  which  had  been


III.]  DREAMS.  385

carefully  concealed  fram  her.     She  had  never  seen  the  picture  which  was
very  familiar  to  me."

(408)  From  Mrs.  Hunter,  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St.  Helier's,  Jersey.

"January  8th,  1884.

"  The  following  happened  in  India  some  13  years  ago.  My  second
daughter  had  been  with  me,  while  I  was  preparing  for  bed  one  night.  Our
talk  was  merry,  and  only  gossip.  At  last  she  left  me  for  her  own  room.
In  the  middle  of  the  night  I  awoke  in  an  agony  of  grief,  and  sat  up  in  bed,
sobbing  and  trembling.  In  vain  I  reasoned  and  tried  to  believe  '  it  was
only  a  dream.'  For  a  time  I  could  not ;  it  was  so  real.  My  dream  was
that  a  cobra  di  capello  had  bitten  my  daughter,  and  she  raised  a  blanched,
pinched  face  to  mine,  and  said,  '  Must  I  die,  mamma  % '  and  I  had  replied,
in  agony,  '  You  must,  darling.'

"  Next  morning,  my  dream  hardly  remembered,  I  was  dressing,  when
she,  as  usual,  came  to  me.  Her  first  words  were,  '  Oh,  mamma,  I  had
such  a  horrid  feeling  last  night  while  I  was  undressing.  I  felt  sure  there
was  a  snake  in  my  room,  and  had  such  a  hunt  before  I  got  into  bed  ;
indeed,  I  feel  sure  the  wretch  is  there  still,  and  I  have  ordered  the  hammal
(male  housemaid)  to  turn  my  bathroom  upside  down.  It  was  a  horrid
feeling.'

"  No  snake  was  ever  seen  in  her  room.

"  Even  in  those  days,  before  one  had  heard  of  thought-transference,  I
explained  it  to  myself  in  some  such  way,  viz.,  that  her  waking  terror  had
communicated  itself  to  me  in  sleep,  and  caused  my  dream.

"H.  E.  Hunter."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hunter  adds  : —

"  No,  we  never  had  dreams  nor  apprehensions,  nor  talks  about  snakes.
At  hill  stations,  where  they  may  be  seen,  we  have,  of  course,  talked  of
them  (glad  to  have  any  subject  for  talk  !),  but  at  the  time  of  my  dream  we
were  living  in  a  large  house  close  to  the  sea,  and  where  snakes  were  almost
unknown.  As  to  the  seeming  discrepancy  in  time,  it  can  be  removed  in
this  way.  /  got  into  bed  directly  she  left  me,  and  in  India,  when  in
health,  I  generally  went  to  sleep  at  once.  She  was  given  to  sit  up  reading,
and  it  was  while  undressing  the  panic  began  ;  then  followed  the  hunt,  and
we  may  feel  sure  that  even  after  she  got  into  bed  sleep  might  not  come  all
at  once.  M-j  feeling  when  I  awoke  was  as  if  it  were  the  middle  of  the
night,  but  it  might  really  have  been  only  an  hour-  or  two.  I  never  looked
at  the  time."

[We  of  course  cannot  assume  that  the  coincidence  was  exact.]

(409)  From  Mrs.  Sibley,  6,  Radipole  Road,  Fulham,  S.W.

"January  26th,  1884.
"The  following  occurred  about  May,  1859.  I  believed  my  son  to  be
away  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  I  had  no  reason  to  believe  he  would  come
home  for  a  year  or  two,  when  one  night  I  dreamt  that  I  had  a  letter,  and
all  that  was  written  on  it  and  inside  it  was  '  Woolwich,'  '  Woolwich,'
'  Woolwich.'  I  awoke  with  the  belief  that  I  must  be  going  to  hear  from
him  ;  it  was  then  about  6.30.  I  could  not  sleep  any  more,  and  when  I
heard  the  postman's  knock  at  the  door,  I  sent  immediately  for  the  letters.
Only  one  was  brought  to  me,  and  that  had  for  its  postmark  '  Woolwich
VOL.  II.  2  c


386  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Dockyard,'  and  it  was  from  my  son,  telling  me  of  the  safe  arrival,  the
night  before,  of  the  ship  he  was  on.  My  son  was  in  the  navy,  and  I  am
perfectly  certain  that  the  idea  of  his  speedy  return  had  never  crossed  my
mind  ;  for  aught  I  knew  he  might  be  several  years  away.  This  dream  is
unique  in  my  experience,  in  the  strength  of  the  conviction  it  produced  that
it  must  correspond  with  reality.

"  I  mentioned  this  dream  immediately  on  waking  to  a  daughter  (since
deceased),  who  was  sleeping  with  me.  u  Katherine  Sibley."

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  wife  of  the  present  writer,  a
younger  daughter  of  Mrs.  Sibley's  : —

"26,  Montpelier  Square,  S.W.

"Jan.  26,  1884.

"  I  remember  the  news  of  this  incident  spreading  through  the  house
before  breakfast,  and  our  rushing  to  my  mother's  room— when  we  were
shown  the  letter,  and  told  the  dream.

"Kate  S.  Gurney."

(410)  From  Mr.  E.  C.  Trevilian,  3,  Petersham  Terrace,  S.W.

"February  2nd,  1884.

"The  following  occurrence  took  place  some  12  or  14  years  ago.  I
was  unmarried,  and  my  house  in  Somerset  had  no  establishment  in  it —
merely  an  old  housekeeper  and  a  maid-servant.  I  lived  more  than  half
the  year  in  chambers  in  London,  and  when  I  went  alone  down  to  the
country,  I  never  gave  notice  of  my  coming.

"  On  the  day  in  question  I  walked  up  from  the  station,  leaving  my
luggage  to  follow,  and  rang — as  usual — at  the  side  door.  The  maid-
servant unlocked  and  opened  it,  paused  a  moment  while  a  look  of  terror
came  over  her  face,  and  fled  in  much  confusion.  I  walked  in  slowly,  and
instead  of  turning  towards  my  study,  marched  straight  to  the  servants'
hall.  The  old  housekeeper  was  by  the  fire,  and  as  I  approached  her,
walking  up  one  side  of  the  long  table,  she  rushed  down  the  other,  and  out
of  the  room.  I  retreated  to  my  study,  and  in  about  half  an  hour  rang
the  bell.  The  old  woman  was  still  a  little  shaky,  but  was  able  to  explain
that  the  two  had  so  entirely  made  up  their  minds  that  I  was  dead,  that  on
my  appearance  just  now  they  had  taken  me  for  my  ghost.  The  maid-
servant had  dreamed,  some  10  days  before,  that  I  was  out  shooting,  that
my  gun  had  burst,  and  that  I  had  been  killed  on  the  spot.  They  had
mentioned  this  to  several  people — among  them  to  the  clergyman  and  to
my  agent — but  without  producing  much  effect.  The  girl  had  been  so
positive,  that  she,  the  old  woman,  had  come  to  feel  equally  sure  of  my
death.

"  Now  on  the  day  of  the  dream  it  is  a  fact  that  my  gun  had  hurst —
that  is,  it  had  gone  in  two  at  the  breach,  and  no  harm  had  been  done.  It
was  at  a  country  house  in  Oxfordshire,  and  I  was  using  sawdust  powder,
then  a  new  invention,  and  several  accidents  had  occurred  with  it  about
that  time,  and  some  had  been  mentioned  in  the  newspapers.  This,  how-
ever, I  well  recollect.  My  host  and  I,  then  and  there,  standing  among  the
beaters,  decided  that  the  accident  should  not  be  mentioned,  and  we  looked
regularly  and  found  no  notice  of  it  in  the  local   or   London  papers ;  nor


III.]  DREAMS.  387

could  I  find  out  that  any  mention  of  it  had  been  seen  in  any  of  the
Somerset  local  papers,  though  it  was  chiefly  by  inquiry  and  not  by  myself
examining  the  files  that  I  went  to  work.

"  I  have  quite  lost  sight  of  the  servant-maid — the  old  woman  was  still
in  existence  in  the  neighbourhood  some  months  ago.

"  E.  C.  Treviliaj^."

(411)  From  Miss  Augusta  Gould  (now  Mrs.  Temple,  and  resident  in
India).

"Sunny bank,  Ealing  Dean,  W.

"December  19th,  1883.

"  When  my  brother  was  in  Glasgow,  I  told  his  son  I  had  had  a  curious
dream  of  an  unwieldy  chair  coming  to  me  as  a  present  from  his
father.  As  I  was  only  residing  in  his  house,  I  had  no  idea  or  need  of
receiving  a  chair.

"The  next  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  him,  saying  he  had  bought
me  such  a  curious  American  revolving  chair,  which  was  unwieldy  when  it
came,  the  heavy  pedestal  and  legs  giving  us  difficulty  in  moving  it  from
one  place  to  another.

"  I  have  had  other  curious  unexpected  events  occur  after  dreams
foreshadowing  them,  but  will  not  burden  you  with  more  particulars.
Surely  the  afikir  of  the  chair  was  a  curious  case  of  rapport  between  my
brother's  spirit  and  mine.  As  he  never  retired  to  rest  till  very  late,  and
then  was  sleepless,  he  might  have  been  thinking  of  his  present  to  me  when
I  was  dreaming  of  it.  ««  Augusta  Gould."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Gould  added  : —

"  I  send  my  nephew's  corroboration  of  the  dream  as  to  the  chair.  I
may  mention  that  my  nephew  is  26  years  old  and  clear  in  memory  usually,
but  he  forgets  that  my  brother  was  in  Glasgow  at  the  time.  As  to  one
of  your  questions,  I  dream  always  in  sleep,  either  by  day  or  night.  When-
ever I  wake  a  dream  is  broken  into ;  so  I  often  dj:-eam  things  which  do
not  come  to  pass,  though  often  a  foreshadowing  of  events  does  come  to  be
realised."

The  following  is  from  a  postcard  written  to  Miss  Gould  by  her
nephew,  from  6,  Ellison  Place,  ISTewcastle-on-Tyne,  and  forwarded  to  us  : —

"January  2,  1884.

"  I  remember  perfectly  about  the  chair ;  it  was  one  time  when  my
father  was  south  that  you  had  the  dream,  and  when  he  came  back  he
brought  the  chair  with  him.  I  have  told  several  people  about  the  circum-
stance.— Alex.  G."

Where  the  subject  of  the  dream  is  as  odd  and  unlikely  as  in  this
case  and  the  next,  its  triviality  can  scarcely  be  held  to  diminish  the
force  of  the  coincidence.

(412)  Erom  a  letter  written  on  June  27,  1875,  by  Mr.  J.  L.  O'Sullivan,
then  United  States  Minister  at  Lisbon,  to  the  late  Serjeant  Cox,  as
President  of  the  Psychological  Society,  and  handed  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  K.
Munton,  who  was  Secretary  of  that  Society.

Mr.  O'Sullivan  was  engaged  to  dine,  one  evening  in  1858,  with  his
VOL.  II.  2  0  2


388  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

British  colleague,  Mr.  (now  Sir  Henry)  Howard.  By  an  accident,  he  was
obliged  to  present  himself  in  a  pair  of  wet,  muddy,  and  broken  boots,  which
he  sedulously  kept  concealed  during  the  evening,  taking  care  to  arrive  after
the  dinner  had  begun,  and  to  play  cards  afterwards,  instead  of  resorting
to  the  drawing-room.

"The  next  morning  I  went  as  usual  to  the  bedside  of  my  invalid
mother,  who  for  years  had  not  been  able  even  to  turn  over  in  bed.  After
a  little  while  she  said,  '  My  son,  I  had  such  a  queer  dream  about  you
last  night.  I  saw  you  at  Mrs.  Howard's  party,  and  you  were  in  such  a
comical  but  annojdng  predicament.  I  thought  you  had  on  a  pair  of  wet
and  muddy  and  broken  hoots,  and  you  were  keeping  your  feet  hidden  under
the  table.'    And  she  laughed  over  the  recollection  of  such  an  absurd  dream.

"  I  ascertained  that  my  servant  had  not  become  afterwards  conscious
of  his  omission,  and  that  no  human  being  under  my  roof  knew  that  night
of  what  had  indeed  been  my  queer  predicament."

(413)  From  Mrs.  Barr,  Apsley  Town,  East  Grinstead.

"Dec.  11,  1883.

"  When  in  England  some  years  ago,  I  had  a  very  bad  cough,  for  which
a  blister  was  ordered  by  my  medical  man,  but  being  improperly  applied  it
left  a  very  ugly  mark,  like  the  print  of  a  horse's  shoe.  I  was  then  prepar-
ing to  rejoin  my  husband  [the  late  General  Barr]  in  India,  and  carefully
avoided  mentioning  the  circumstance  to  him.

"  On  my  way  out  to  Bombay  I  was  taken  seriously  ill,  and  was  so
weak  on  my  arrival  that  I  had  to  be  carried  on  shore.  As  our  own  house
was  some  miles  from  the  place  of  landing  we  rested  half  way  at  my  father-
in-law's  house.  Whilst  there  my  husband's  mother  said  to  him,  '  Does
Lizzie  look  at  all  as  you  saw  her  in  your  dream  % '  Upon  which  my  husband
turned  to  me  and  said,  '  I  had  such  a  horrid  dream  about  you  the  other
night.  I  saw  you  looking  pale  and  ill,  as  you  do  now,  but  you  had  a
dreadful  mark  like  a  horse  shoe  upon  your  chest.'  Being  ill,  I  had  landed
in  a  white  muslin  dressing-gown,  and  I  slightly  parted  it  in  front  and
showed  him  the  mark.  He  was  much  astonished  and  said,  '  How  did  you
get  that  1     It  is  exactly  the  mark  I  saw  in  my  dream.'

"  Elizabeth  H.  A.  Bare."

(414)  From  a  narrator,  Mr.  B.,  whose  name  and  address  (though  he
made  no  stipulation  on  the  subject)  it  seems  right  to  suppress.

"January  16th,  1885.
"In  March,  1880,  our  servant  A.  had  been  with  us  a  few  months,
was  well  recommended  by  people  we  knew,  and  for  the  time  she  had
been  with  us  proved  trustworthy,  and  as  good  as  we  could  expect  a
servant  to  be.  The  dream  Mrs.  B.  had  respecting  her  happened  in  the
early  morning.  She  dreamt  that  the  maid  came  into  the  dining-room,  sat
down  by  her  (a  strange  proceeding),  and  said  she  had  something  on  her
mind  to  tell  her  mistress.  It  was  that  she  had  a  boy  of  three  years  old,
whose  name  was  Bertie.  When  Mrs.  B.  got  up,  which  she  did  after
breakfasting  in  bed  as  usual,  she  went  out  into  the  orchard  where  A.
was  hanging  the  clothes.  Mrs.  B.  told  her  her  dream,  and  A.  made  no
reply,  but  looked  very  pale  and  peculiar.  Mrs.  B.  left  her  under  the
impression  that  she  had  offended   her.     Some  time  after,  Mrs.  B.  found


iii.J  DREAMS.  389

A.  in  the  kitchen,  crying  bitterly.  On  inquiring  what  was  the  matter,
whether  she  was  offended,  she  replied,  '  Oh,  no  !  ma'am,  your  dream  is  quite
true  in  all  respects,  even  the  name.'

"  It  seems  that  A.  had  had  it  on  her  mind  to  tell  Mrs.  B.  about
this  child  from  the  first,  and  her  mother  had  pressed  her  to  tell  Mrs.  B.
about  it.  Mrs.  B.  says  she  had  not  the  least  suspicion  of  this  matter,
not  even  after  the  dream.

"  The  servant  A.  and  her  mistress  had  a  great  liking  for  each  other,
more  than  is  usual  with  servant  and  mistress,  and  A.  had  never  been  so
happy  in  a  situation  before.

"  A.'s  age  at  the  time  was  23  years.
IP  "  [A  year  subsequently,]  when  in  London,  visiting  her  relatives,  Mrs.

B.  dreamed  that  her  servant,  A.,  whom  she  had  left  at  home,  was  in
dreadfiil  trouble — could  see  her  in  tears  ;  all  night  Mrs.  B.  was  continually
dreaming  of  her.  Next  morning  Mrs.  B.  determined  upon  returning  home,
although  it  was  arranged  for  a  longer  stay.  On  her  arrival,  A.  opened  the
door,  and  at  once  burst  into  a  paroxysm  of  grief,  saying  that  '  Bertie  was
dying,'  that  she  had  been  praying  for  him  and  for  Mrs.  B.'s  return,  and
crying  all  the  previous  night,  and  wished  to  go  to  him  at  once.  (It  should
have  been  mentioned  that  the  child,  Bertie,  was  living  with  A.'s  mother.)

"  Mrs.  B.  is  not  remarkable  for  many  dreams."

Mrs.  B.  writes  : —

"  I  certify  that  the  foregoing  statement  is  quite  correct.

"  Ellen  B."

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  the  first  dream,  Mr.  B.  says  that  his  wife
did  not  mention  it  to  him  till  some  time  afterwards,  but  then  could  refrain
no  longer.  In  conversation  Mrs.  B.  told  me  that  she  was  quite  confident
that  the  detail  of  the  name  occurred  in  the  dream,  and  was  not  subse-
quently read  back  into  it ;  and  also  that  she  had  had  no  idea  whatever  of
A.'s  history.     The  dreams  were  exceptionally  vivid  in  detail.

(415)  From  Miss  A.  J.  Middleton,  20,  Stanley  Gardens,  Kensington
Park  Road,  W.

"  1884.

"  Some  years  ago,  I  was  staying  with  friends,  and  came  down  one  day,
saying  I  had  had  such  a  dreadful  dream,  that  my  youngest  brother  was
drowned ;  the  impression  was  so  vivid  I  could  not  forget  it.  When  the
second  post  letters  came,  at  about  2.30,  I  heard  that  a  man  who  was  boat-
ing with  this  brother  had  slipped  getting  into  the  boat,  and  was  drowned,
and  my  brother  was  in  great  distress  about  it ;  the  man  I  never  saw,  and
did  not  know  his  name.  When  I  read  the  letter,  my  friends  said,  '  How
odd  that  you  should  have  dreamed  your  brother  was  drowned ;  we  should
have  said  you  had  made  it  up  had  you  not  told  us  first.'

"  A.  J.  Middleton."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Middleton  adds  : —

"  I  send  you  the  card  to-day  I  received  from  my  friend  confirming  my
first  dream.  I  fancy  I  stayed  with  them  about  a  week.  This  is  the  only
occasion  on  which  I  have  had  a  very  distressing  dream  of  death  which
left  a  vivid  and  lasting  impression."

The  card  is  as  follows  : —


390  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap,

"  Kirkbright  Yicarage.

"  March,   1884.
"  Yes,  I  quite  well  remember  your  telling  us  about  your  dream,  and
your  hearing  the  news  the  next  morning.     Thanks  to  our  visitors'  list  I  can
tell  you  the  date  of  your  coming  to  us,  January  21st,   1881.

"M.  CoPE."i

The  dream  in  this  case,  if  telepathic,  was  probably  due  to  the  idea
in  the  brother's  mind.  The  next  case  might  be  explained  in  a  similar
way,  by  reference  to  what  was  filling  the  minds  of  those  who
surrounded  the  percipient  ;  but  it  might  also  be  regarded  as  a  case
of  direct  impression  from  the  drowning  man ;  and  the  mis-recognition
would  then  be  very  similar  to  what  has  been  observed  in  other
examples  (Nos.  170,  171,  249,  and  cf.  455  below).  The  case  may
further  illustrate  that  development  of  the  percipient  faculty  in
illness,  which  was  noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter  (p.  349).

(416)  From  Miss  Copeman,  St.  Stephen's  House,  Norwich.

"  March  2nd,   1884.

"  My  mother  nursed  my  grandmother  all  through  her  last  illness,  and
a  few  days  before  she  died  they  received  the  intelligence  of  the  sudden
death  by  drowning  of  the  eldest  son  of  the  family.  It  was  not
referred  to  in  the  presence  of  my  grandmother,  but  that  day  or  the
next,  awaking  from  a  sleep,  she  said,  '  I  have  just  seen  John  in  the
water  ;  has  anything  happened  to  him  1 '  Joseph  was  the  name  of  the  one
drowned,  and  they  were  able  to  say  that  John.,  another  son,  was  quite
well,  and  she  was  quieted.  It  was  thought  she  meant  Joseph  at  the  time,
but  in  her  feebleness  did  not  remember  the  right  name.  She  died  a  day
or  two  after.

"  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  repeat  this,  as  a  remarkable  coinci-
dence not  to  be  explained."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  Copeman  writes  : —

"  May  13th,  1884.

"  I  fear  I  cannot  give  all  the  particulars  you  msh  to  have  ;  the  coinci-
dence is  one  not  easy  to  relate  clearly,  for  no  one  is  living  now  who
remembers  anything  definite  about  it.  I  only  know  of  it  as  I  heard
it  from  my  own  mother's  lips,  and  it  is  3  years  since  her  death.
I  have  ascertained  from  another  member  of  my  family  that  the  two
deaths  occurred  in  the  year  1844,  with  an  interval  of  about  a  week
between  them.  My  grandmother's  name  was  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Buck,
of  East  Dereham,  Norfolk.

"  My  father  and  sister  confirm  my  statement,  as  they,  too,  have  more
than  once  heard  my  mother  speak  of  it.  "Lucy  A  Copeman  "

1  We  have  received  a  parallel  case  to  this  from  Miss  M.  J.  Potter,  of  42,  Northumber-
land Avenue,  Kingstown,  who  tells  us  that  in  1860  she  dreamt  very  vividly  that  a  cousin
was  drowned  in  a  deep  pond,  on  the  night  after  the  drowning  in  a  mill-pond  of  another
cousin  who  was  living  in  the  same  house  as  the  one  dreamt  of.  The  news  of  the  accident
arrived  before  Miss  Potter  left  her  room  next  morning,  and  before  she  had  an  opportunity
of  mentioning  her  dream.


III.]  DREAMS.  391

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Joseph  Buck  was
drowned  at  Sproughton  on  the  9th  of  August,  1844,  and  that  his  mother
died  on  the  17th.

[In  cases  like  this  it  is  impossible  to  be  absolutely  certain  that  the
news  did  not  become  known  to  the  sick  person  through  a  whisper,  or  a
reference  made  to  it  when  she  was  supposed  to  be  asleep,  which  may  have
acted  as  the  nucleus  of  a  dream.]

It  occasionally  happens  that  a  mene  seems  to  have  been  telepathi-
cally  represented  at  a  time  when  it  was  not  occupying  the  agent's
senses,  though  it  may  have  been  consciously  occupying  his  mind  (c/.
Miss  Wilkinson's  case  below,  Chap.  IV.,  §  2).

(417)  From  the  Rev.  W.  Champneys,  Haslingden  Vicarage,  Man-
chester. ^

"September  3rd,  1884.

"  The  incident  to  which  I  imagine  you  allude  happened  to  my  father,
the  late  Dean  of  Lichfield.     I  have  often  heard  him  tell  the  story.

"  One  of  his  brothers  was  secretary  of  the  Church  Pastoral  Aid  Society,
and  in  that  capacity  was  often  travelling  about  the  country,  preaching
sermons  and  attending  meetings.  He  was  in  precarious  health,  having
once  had  rheumatic  fever,  which  had  left  behind  it  heart-complaint.  One
night  my  father  dreamed  that  he  was  walking  through  the  street  of  a
village  where  he  had  never  been  before.  The  whole  scene  was  entirely
new,  and  impressed  itself  strongly  on  his  memory.  Coming  to  the  village
inn,  he  walked  up  to  the  door  to  inquire  after  his  brother,  who  had  started
off  on  one  of  his  journeys  a  few  days  before,  in  his  usual  health.  The  land-
lady, of  whom  he  made  the  inquiry,  returned  an  evasive  answer,  and  then
he  asked  if  his  brother's  wife  was  there  :  to  which  she  replied,  '  Not  his
wife^  sir,  but  his  widow : '  and  with  the  shock  of  these  words  he  awoke.

"  As  soon  as  a  message  could  reach  him  the  next  day  (it  was  before  the
days  of  telegraphs),  he  heard  that  his  brother  had  been  taken  ill  on  his
journey  the  day  before ;  that  trying  to  reach  the  town,  where  he  was  ex-
pected, they  had  been  obliged  to  put  up  at  a  village  inn  on  the  way,  and
that  there,  after  a  very  short  illness,  he  had  died ;  and  when  my  father  went
to  the  place  that  day,  which  was  one  he  had  never  been  to  before,  or  even
heard  of,  the  whole  scene  was  exactly  the  same  that  had  been  before  him
in  his  dream — street,  houses,  country,  everything  was  the  same,  and  at  the
very  inn  where  he  dreamed  he  had  inquired  for  his  brother,  he  found  his
brother's  body  lying.  u  Weldon  Champneys."

Through  the  kindness  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Church  Pastoral  Aid
Society,  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain  that  the  death  of  the  Rev.  E.  T.
Champneys  occurred  on  June  16,  1845,  at  Caxton.

[The  essential  point  of  such  a  narrative  as  this  is  of  course  inde-
pendent of  the  alleged  correspondence  of  detail,  which  is  likely  to  seem
in  memory  more  exact  than  it  really  was.]

1  A  not  quite  correct  version  of  this  narrative,  without  names,  is  given  by  the  Rev.  J.
S.  Pollock.  Incumbent  of  St.  Alban  the  Martyr,  Birmingham,  in  Bead  and  Gone,  p.  30.


392  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  next  case  may  possibly  be  of  the  same  kind;  but  we  have  no
proof  that  the  scene  was  more  than  an  imaginary  setting  supplied  by
the  dreamer  (as  in  several  of  the  cases  in  |  4  below).  The  percipient
did  not  himself  believe  that  he  had  been  asleep ;  but  without  external
evidence  that  he  was  awake,  we  can  hardly  regard  otherwise  than  as
a  dream  an  experience  in  which  he  appears  to  himself  to  be  acting  a
part,  during  a  time  much  longer  than  the  actual  duration  of  the
impression.

(418)  From  Mr.  Adrian  Stokes,  M.R.C.S.,  16,  Howell  Road,  St.
Davids,  Exeter.  The  account  was  originally  published  in  the  Spiritual
Magazine^  in  December,  1867.

"  My  uncle,  the  late  Adrian  Stokes,  Esq.,  of  Thornbury,  near  Bristol,
was  living  at  his  villa  in  that  little  town,  in  the  year  1842,  and  on  the
evening  of  a  certain  day  in  November  had  retired  to  bed,  in  his  usual
health,  at  his  customary  hour.  Contrary  to  his  habit,  however,  he  could
not  sleep,  but  lay  awake  counting  the  hours  until  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,
when  suddenly  he  found  himself  in  a  country  whose  features  were  quite
strange  to  him.  He  became  aware  that  he  was  in  the  Neilgherrie  hill
country  of  India,  where  his  brother  Sam  was  on  invalid  furlough.  It
appeared  to  him  that  he  remained  three  months  there  with  Sam,  that  he
attended  him  during  his  illness,  and  that  finally  Sam  died,  when  the  vision
faded,  and  he  found  himself  again  in  his  bed.^  He  was  now  satisfied
that  this  vision  had  revealed  a  certainty  to  him,  turned  round  and  fell
asleep,  and  in  the  morning  he  told  my  aunt  all  about  it.  He  has  mentioned
this  matter  to  me  several  times,  and  always  expressed  his  belief  that  he
was  broad  awake  while  he  saw  the  vision,  which  he  thought  must  have
passed  with  the  rapidity  of  '  thought,'  and  was  quite  sure  it  was  no
dream.

"  In  due  course  my  uncle  received  from  his  brother's  agents  at  Madras
a  letter  containing  information  of  Sam's  death  at  such  and  such  a  place
in  the  Neilgherrie  Hills,  at  the  precise  day  and  hour  that  my  uncle  saw
the  vision  in  his  bed  at  Thornbury.  '  It  was  no  news  to  me,'  said  my  uncle
to  me  when  telling  me  of  the  circumstance  ;  '  I  knew  poor  Sam  was  gone
several  months  before.'

"  Adrian  Stokes,"

We  find  from  the  Indian  Service  Register  that  the  death  took  place
on   November  12th,   1843  (not  1842),  at  Ootacamund.

In  answer  to  a  question,  Mr.  Stokes  tells  us  that  he  was  not  told  of
this  vision  till  several  years  after  its  occurrence.

The  following  example  might  be  referred  to  the  same  type,  if  we

1  We  have  a  similar  case — first-hand,  but  remote  and  from  an  uneducated  witness —
where  the  dreamer  saw  her  brother,  a  carpenter's  mate,  fall  from  a  yard  and  break  his
leg,  and  then  nursed  him  till  his  death.  She  says  that  she  marked  the  day,  as  it  happened
to  be  his  birthday,  and  afterwards  learnt  from  one  of  his  shipmates  that  he  had  died  on
the  date  of  her  dream,  having  broken  his  leg  by  a  fall  three  days  previously.


III.]  DREAMS.  393

could  be  quite  sure  that  the  details  following  the  accident  really
figured  in  the  dream  ;  but  they  may  easily  have  been  "  read  back  "
into  it ;   and  the  case  is  again  second-hand  and  remote.

(419)  From  Mr.  A.  W.  Orr,  Kingston  Road,    Didsbury,  near  Man-

"January  2nd,   1885.

"  Some  40  years  ago,  my  father  was  house-surgeon  at  the  City  o£
Dublin  Hospital,  and  one  day  a  young  man,  a  sailor,  was  brought  in  who
had  fallen  from  one  of  the  yards  of  the  vessel  on  which  he  served.  He
was  badly  injured,  and  in  about  three  days  he  died.  Late  in  the  afternoon
of  the  day  on  which  the  man  died,  an  old  woman,  very  poor  and  fagged,
came  up  to  the  hospital  and  asked  to  see  the  surgeon.  My  father  saw  her,
and  inquired  what  he  could  do  for  her  ;  when  she  inquired  whether  a
young  sailor  had  been  brought  to  that  institution,  and  if  so,  could  she  see
him  1  My  father  told  her  of  the  man  above  mentioned,  and  that  he  had
died  that  morning.

"  It  turned  out  that  the  old  woman  was  the  young  man's  mother,
that  she  lived  in  the  Co.  Carlow,  and  that  three  nights  previously  she
had  dreamt  that  her  son  had  fallen  from  the  rigging  of  the  vessel,  and  had
been  taken  to  an  hospital.  So  vivid  was  the  dream  that  she  could  not
rest  till  she  got  to  Dublin  (where  she  had  never  been  before),  and  the
moment  she  saw  the  hospital,  she  recognised  it  as  the  building  she  had
seen  in  her  dream.  Her  dream  was  only  too  true,  for  she  found  that  her
son  had  died  from  the  eflfects  of  injuries  occasioned  by  a  fall  just  as
appeared  in  her  dream.

"  The  old  woman  had  walked  a  distance  of  over  60  miles,  and  entered
the  city  by  the  road  which  passed  the  front  of  the  hospital.

"  A.  W.  Orr."

In  a  second  letter  Mr.  Orr  says  : —

"  You  may  rely  upon  the  facts  being  as  I  have  stated  them,  as  I  have
frequently  spoken  to  my  father  on  the  subject,  the  case  being  of  such  a
very  remarkable  character."

§  3.  These  last  cases  form  a  transition  to  the  next  class,  which  is
distinguished  by  the  direct  correspondence  of  the  dream  with  a  real
event  that  befell  the  agent  ;  but  many  of  the  dreams  may  still,  as
before,  be  regarded  as  literal  representations  of  the  agent's  thought.
The  prominent  event,  as  usual,  is  death.

(420)  The  Rev.  W.  B.  B.  having  communicated  to  me  the  fact
that  some  time  ago,  he  had  had  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream — which
haunted  him  for  a  portion  of  two  days — of  the  death  of  an  acquaintance,
and  that  the  death  had  happened  coincidently  with  the  dream,  the
usual  questions  were  asked.     He  replied  as  follows  : —

"  The  Vicarage,  .

"December  9th,  1884.
"  In  reference  to  the  subject  of  your  note,  I  am  able  to  say  that  I  had


394  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

no  means  of  knowing  that  the  lady  in  question  was  ailing  or  even  in
delicate  health.  She  was  the  wife  of  a  cousin  from  whom  or  of  whom  I
do  not  think  I  had  heard  for  some  months.  I  have  so  much  to  do  in  my
parish  that  I  have  little  time  for  correspondence,  but  in  consequence  of
what  I  dreamed  I  at  once  wrote  to  the  son  of  the  lady  referred  to,  having
previously,  on  awaking,  mentioned    the    matter  to    my  own    wife.     My

remark  to  her  was,  '  We  shall  hear  some  bad  news,  I  fear,   from  E, '

(the  residence  of  my  cousin),  and  I  then  repeated  the  dream.  Within
another  post  I  heard  that  Mrs.  B.  had  died  on  that  night."  [The  narrator
goes  on  to  say  that  a  very  near  relative  of  his  had  three  times  had  exactly
similar  intimations.     See  p.   132,  note.]

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on
Sept.  2,  1866.

The  following  is  the  corroboration  of  the  narrator's  wife  : —

"December  11th,   1884.

"  Mrs.  B.  has  much  pleasure  in  confirming  the  statement  made  by  her
husband  as  to  his  having  communicated  to  her  the  substance  of  his  dream
boding  something  very  serious  to  his  cousin's  family.  We  had  had  no
intimation  of  the  illness.  The  family  lives  in  Ireland,  and  the  news  of
the  death  did  not  reach  us  until  two  days  after."

[The  slight  discrepancy  as  to  when  the  news  arrived  does  not  seem
important.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  dream  was  impressive  enough  to
cause  a  busy  man  to  write  a  letter.]

(421)  From  Miss  C.  D.  Garnett,  Furze  Hill  Lodge,  Brighton.

"December  18th,  1883.

"  On  the  13th  of  February,  1883,  when  at  Biarritz,  I  dreamt  that  a
relative,  whom  we  had  left  in  perfect  health  in  England,  and  between
whom  and  myself  there  was  a  strong  afiinity,  was  dying,  and  that  we  had
to  leave  Biarritz  sooner  than  we  intended.  The  dream  haunted  me
throughout  the  following  morning,  and  in  the  evening  we  received  a  tele-
gram summoning  us  home  at  once.  She  died  as  we  reached  England.  I
may  mention  that  this  event  was  entirely  unlooked  for.

"C.  D.  Garnett."

We  find  from  the  Liverpool  Daily  Post  that  the  death  occurred  on
Feb.  15,  1883.

Miss  Garnett  adds  :—

"March  3rd,  1885.

"  In  reply  to  your  questions  respecting  the  dream  I  had  at  Biarritz  :
1 .  What  was  the  state  of  the  dying  person  at  the  time  of  the  dream? — She
was  unconscious.^  2.  What  was  the  character  of  the  dream  1 — I  dreamt
that  we  were  summoned  home  suddenly  (we  had  then  been  a  week  in
Biarritz,  and  intended  remaining  two  months),  that  we  received  a  telegram
announcing  the  sad  state  of  my  relative ;  and  the  dream  was  all  concerning
her — and  a  very  troublesome  one.  Jt  wasn't  an  ordinary  dream.  I  felt
greatly  disturbed  throughout  the  day  following,  and  in  the  evening,  about
dinner  time,  the  telegram  came."

1  See  Chap,  v.,  §  10,  and  Vol.  i.,  p.  563,  note.


III.]  DREAMS.  395

Miss  M.  Garnett  writes,  on  December  30,  1883  : —

"  I  understand  from  my  sister  that  you  desire  a  corroboration  of  her
remarkable  dream  at  Biarritz.  She  mentioned  it  to  me  the  following
morning.     She  was  much  attached  to  the  relative  dreamt  of.

"  MiLLiCENT  Garnett."

(422)  From  Colonel  V.,  who  says  that  the  case  "  was  written  from
memory,  and  dates  in  my  diary."

"  March  11th,  1886.

"On  Sunday  night,  25th  May,  1884,  I  had  a  most  extraordinary
dream.  I  dreamt  that  my  son  A.,  a  young  officer  in  a  regiment  at
Gibraltar,  was  lying  very  ill  there  with  fever,  and  was  calling  out  to  me,
'  Father,  father,  come  over  and  let  me  see  you  or  my  mother.'  The  next
morning  I  went  to  see  the  Rev.  G.,  the  well-known  coach,  living  near  me.
On  entering  his  room,  he  exclaimed, '  Do  you  believe  in  "  dream-waves"  ?'
I  replied,  No,  I  did  not.  He  remarked  that  just  as  I  was  entering  the
room,  ne  was  on  the  point  of  sitting  down  before  his  desk  and  commencing
a  letter  to  me,  asking  me  to  come  over  and  see  him.  I  then  said,  '  I  had  a
curious  dream  last  night.  I  saw  before  me  my  son  A.  down  with  fever  at
Gibraltar,  imploring  me  to  come  over  and  see  him.'  As  I  had  that  morning
a  letter  from  him,  written  in  good  spirits,  I  thought  it  curious,  and  gave
the  dream  no  further  thought.

"  On  Tuesday,  the  27th  May,  I  went  to  Ramsgate  with  my  second  son,
for  change.  On  the  29th  May,  one  of  my  family  here  wired  to  me  to
return  home,  as  news  had  arrived  from  Gibraltar  that  my  son  A.  was  very
ill  with  Rock  fever.  I  returned  in  a  few  hours.  I  read  over  my  letters
from  Gibraltar.  It  appears  that  on  the  17th  May  my  son  fell  ill,  and  was
placed  on  the  sick  list.  The  attack  turned  out  to  be  Rock  fever.  He
gradually  got  worse ;  on  the  24th  he  was  delirious,  and  on  the  25th  his
brother  officers  had  to  get  a  nurse,  Mrs.  S.,  to  take  charge  of  the  patient.
On  the  23rd  a  second  doctor  was  called  in  consultation.  So  bad  was  the
news  that  I  received  from  Gibraltar  by  letter  and  telegrams,  that  I  left
London  on  the  4th  June,  and  reached  it  on  the  9th.  I  found  the
patient  doing  well,  but  very  weak.  I  had  to  remain  there  till  the
3rd  July,  the  attack  of  fever  continuing,  and  we  both  returned  home  on
the  8th  July.

"  I  mentioned  to  the  nurse  my  curious  dream  of  the  25th  May.  She
said  she  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  patient  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day.
He  was  very  delirious  all  that  night,  and  was  constantly  calling  out,  '  Oh,
mother,  mother,  do  come  over  to  see  me ' ;  and  as  he  probably  remembered
how  delicate  she  was,  and  that  she  could  not  take  a  sea  voyage  across  the
Bay  of  Biscay,  he  also  called  out,  '  Father,  father,  come  and  comfort  me,
and  let  me  see  you  again.'

"  It  was  months  after  our  return  home  before  the  fever  left  him,  and
he  did  not  quite  get  rid  of  it  till  November,  1884."

In  conversation.  Colonel  V.  informed  me  that  he  dreams  very  little,
and  scarcely  ever  has  distressing  dreams  ;  and  that,  quite  apart  from  the
confirmation,  this  dream  would  have  been  very  exceptional  in  its  character.
Mrs.  S.,  who  was  an  excellent  nurse,  and  whom  he  regards  as  entirely
trustworthy,  has  left  Gibraltar,  and  gone,  he  thinks,  to  Morocco.


396  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  Rev.  H.  P.  Gurney,  to  whom  Colonel  V.  described  his  dream  next
morning,  writes  from  2,  Powis  Square,  W.,  on  March  22,  1886  : —

"I  do  not  remember  any  particulars  of  Colonel  V.'s  dream.  It
occurred  nearly  two  years  ago,  and  at  a  time  when  I  am  particularly  busy.
I  only  recollect  that  he  told  me  that  he  had  had  a  curious  dream  about  his
son  at  Gibraltar,  who  is  one  of  our  former  pupils.  I  cannot  recall  any
particulars,  but  I  think  that  his  son  called  to  him  to  come  and  visit  him.
I  know  that  he  afterwards  found  out  that  he  was  seriously  ill  with  fever,
and  had  to  go  out  to  bring  him  home.

"  H.  P.  Gurney."

Mrs.  Thrupp,  of  67,  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  W.,  writing  to  us  on
April  2nd,  1886,  says  that  she  called  at  Colonel  V.'s  house  when  he  was
on  the  point  of  starting  for  Gibraltar  to  see  his  son,  and  that  he  then  told
her  "  all  about  his  dream."

(423)  From  Mrs.  S.  (the  narrator  of  case  74),  who  is  willing  that  her
name  should  be  given  to  any  one  genuinely  interested  in  this  case.

"  October  27th,  1885.

"  In  1871,  I  was  staying  at  Diisseldorf  with  my  daughter,  who  had
just  been  to  an  eminent  doctor  in  Bonn  ta  have  an  operation  performed  on
the  throat.  My  mother-in-law  was  also  in  Bonn,  and,  after  the  operation,
had  run  after  the  cab  containing  my  daughter  and  myself,  and  had  given
the  former  (who  was  a  child  at  the  time)  a  ten-thaler  note,  as  a  reward  for
the  brave  manner  in  which  she  had  submitted  to  the  operation.  She  was
in  excellent  spirits,  and  laughed  and  joked  with  us  before  parting.  A  day
or  two  afterwards  I  awoke,  and  said  to  my  daughter,  who  slept  in  the  same

room,    '  O  M ,  I   have   had  such  a  dreadful  dream.     I  dreamt  your

grandmother  was  dead.'  The  terror  caused  by  the  dream  was  so  great  that
I  felt  compelled  to  wake  my  daughter,  though  I  knew  that  in  her  con-
dition this  was  most  unwise,  as  she  was  still  suffering  from  the  effects
of  the  operation.  I  felt  I  must  tell  someone.  My  daughter  said  it  was
'  only  a  dream,'  and  told  me  to  go  to  sleep.  I  asked  how  her  throat  was,
and  she  said  it  was  better.  I  pulled  out  my  watch  from  under  the  pillow,
and  found  it  was  between  3  and  4  a.m.

"  The  following  morning,  at  10  o'clock,  I  received  a  telegram,  telling
me  to  meet  my  mother-in-law's  sister  at  Cologne  Station.  I  did  so,  and
they  broke  to  me  the  news  of  my  mother-in-law's  death,  which  had  taken
place  the  previous  night.  I  had  been  in  no  sort  of  anxiety  about  her,
and  I  was  only  told  afterwards  that  she  had  been  suffering  for  many
years  from  some  internal  complaint,  for  which  she  had  been  operated  on
on  the  day  following  that  on  which  I  last  saw  her.  I  was  totally  ignorant
that  this  was  going  to  be  done.

"  This  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  remember  having  had  a  vivid
and  distressing  dream  of  death.  ^^  lyr   o  »

[Mrs.  S.'s  daughter  "  thinks  her  testimony  would  be  of  little  use,  as  she
was  quite  young  at  the  time,  and  her  memory  is  not  quite  clear  on  several
points."]

(424)  A  lady  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  published,
having  been  asked  (by  Miss  Bryce,  of  35,  Bryanston  Square,  W.)  whether


III.]  DREAMS.  397

since  January   1st,  1874,   she  had  had  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream  of
the  death  of  some  person  known  to  her,  answered  : —  ^j  -^gg^

"Yes,  on  August  13th,  1877.  I  was  27,  and  in  excellent  health,  as
I  was  on  my  way  home  from  a  month's  stay  in  Switzerland.  The  impres-
sion lasted  for  some  hours  after  I  rose.  In  the  night  it  was  so  distressing
as  to  wake  me.  The  person  of  whose  death  I  dreamt  was  my  oldest  and
dearly-beloved  brother,  a  young  man  of  26.  He  died  at  Blackheath  just
at  the  same  time,  i.e.,  between  12  and  3  in  the  early  morning.  I  had
heard  the  day  before  that  he  was  unwell,  but  no  fatal  consequences  were
thought  of."

In  answer  to  further  inquiries,  our  informant  writes  on  May  17,  1884  : — .

"My  brother  was  a  young  man  of  fine  physical  frame,  in  vigorous
health,  going  daily  to  the  City  from  his  home  with  my  parents  at  Black-
heath.  He  had,  however,  a  constitutional  weakness  in  the  '  hsemorrhagic
diathesis,'  which  was  not  appreciated  by  me  as  in  the  least  likely  to
shorten  his  life.

"  At  the  time  in  question  he  had  taken  a  fortnight's  holiday  at
Maidenhead,  chiefly  spent  in  rowing,  at  which  he  was  an  adept.  After
his  return  he  fainted,  one  morning,  and  a  bruise  was  found  on  his  left
shoulder.  The  letter  that  I  received  told  me  of  this,  adding  that  the
doctor  had  seen  him,  that  some  anxiety  had  been  excited,  but  that  he  was
better.

"  Had  there  been  any  apprehension  of  fatal  consequences,  or  even  of  a
serious  illness,  I  should  have  left  Boulogne  on  the  day  I  received  the  news
(Sunday).  But  I  remained  there  with  my  husband,  and,  as  I  said,  in  the
night  between  Sunday  and  Monday,  I  had  the  terrible  impression — the
chill  horror  of  which  I  cannot  forget.

"  On  reaching  London  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day  (Monday),  I
learnt  that  he  had  died  suddenly  at  the  time  of  my  distress ;  the  cause
being  internal  haemorrhage  from  the  lacerated  muscle.  He  had  never  had
internal  haemorrhage  before.  He  had  only  been  unwell  three  or  four  days."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  the  death  in  the  Times  obituary.

[Mrs.  W.'s  husband  prefers  not  to  state  positively  whether  it  was
after  or  before  the  news  of  the  death  that  he  first  heard  of  the  dream.
On  the  supposition  that  latent  anxiety  may  possibly  have  been  the
source  of  the  dream,  the  case  is  excluded  from  the  group  used  in  the
calculation  in  Yol.  I.,  Chap.  YIII.,  §  4.]

(425)  From  Mr.  T.  J.  Norris,  Dalkey,  Ireland.  The  account  was
written  many  years  ago.

"  In  the  year  1839,  Mrs.  Norris,  of  Mohill,  Co.  Leitrim,  accompanied
by  her  two  daughters  (now  Mrs.  West,  the  Asylum,  Omagh,  and  Mrs.
Crofton,  Portnashangan  Rectory,  Mullingar)  and  by  Mrs.  Draper  (now
Mrs.  Simonet,  St.  Helier's,  Jersey),i  went  to  Lausanne  for  the  benefit
of  the  health  of  one  of  her  girls,  and  remained  there  for  a  couple  of
years.  Mr.  Norris  being  an  extensive  land  agent,  could  not  remain  with
them,  but  paid  them  a  visit  each  summer.  While  there  in  1840,  and  just
before  the  day  fixed  for  his  return  home,  Mrs.  Draper,  at  breakfast,   in-

1  Since  deceased.


398  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

formed  all  present  that  a  Mrs.  Wilson,  of  St.  Heller's,  a  friend  of  them
all,  had  died  the  evening  before,  at  such  an  hour  and  under  such-and-such
circumstances,  and  asked  Mr.  Norris  to  write  to  Jersey  about  it.  He  first
entered  all  the  circumstances  minutely  in  his  pocket-book,  and  then  wrote
over  as  requested,  desiring  the  answer  to  be  directed  to  him  in  Mohill,  to
which  he  was  about  to  return.  I,  his  only  son,  was  with  him  one  day,
when  the  post  came  in,  bringing  him  a  letter  from  Jersey.  He  opened
and  read  it,  and  then  gave  me  his  keys  and  desired  me  to  bring  him  down
his  pocket-book,  to  open  it  at  a  certain  date,  and  see  how  far  his  memo-
randum agreed  with  the  information  contained  in  the  letter.  In  substance
they  were  identical,  except  that  it  ajypeared  that  Mrs.  Wilson  did  not  die
until  more  than  half-an-hour  after  her  appearance  to  Mrs.  Draper.  I
suggested  that  this  could  be  accounted  for  by  the  difference  of  longitude,
and  on  calculating  this  it  just  made  up  for  the  seeming  discrepancy.

"Thomas  J.  Norris."

Mrs.  West,  of  Sion  Cottage,  Sion  Mills,  Co.  Tyrone,  writes  : —

"  December  7th,  1882.

"I  am  not  sure  whether  it  was  a  dreain  or  that  Mrs.  Draper  thought
she  saw  Mrs.  Wilson  ;  but  if  the  former,  Mrs.  Draper  must  have  awoke
at  once,  as  I  know  she  looked  at  her  watch  and  remarked  the  hour,  and
afterwards,  when  she  heard  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  death,  she  inquired  par-
ticularly at  what  hour  she  died.  We  at  first  thought  the  time  was
different,  till  we  calculated  the  difference  of  Lausanne  and  Jersey  time.

"A.  M.  West."

Mr.  Norris  has  given  us  his  reasons  for  fixing  the  year  as  1840;  but
we  cannot  find  the  death  in  the  Jersey  Register  for  that  year.  Registra-
tion had  been  then  only  recently  introduced,  and  had  perhaps  not  become
universal.

[This  case  is  very  remote ;  but  the  incident  which  Mr.  Norris  relates
was  such  as  would  be  likely  to  impress  the  facts  on  his  memory,  at  any
rate  to  a  greater  extent  than  if  he  had  merely  been  told  the  story.]

(426)  From  Miss  Churchill,  9,  Eversley  Park,  Chester.

"August  13th,  1884.

[A  few  words  are  added  from  a  second  account  written  on  November
18th,  1885.]

"About  the  month  of  August,  1877,  I  dreamt  most  vividly  of  the
death  of  a  gentleman,  a  friend  of  the  family,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for
some  years.  I  fancy  I  saw  him  in  the  dream,  but  cannot  distinctly
remember.  I  had  not  heard  of  his  illness,  or  anything  of  him  at  the  time
of  my  dream.  But  the  next  day  I  heard  of  his  death  having  taken  place ;
I  do  not  remember  the  hour,  but  as  far  as  I  can  say  I  believe  he  must  have
been  dead  at  the  time  of  my  dream,  or  dying.

"  I  cannot  positively  say  whether  I  mentioned  my  dream  before  hearing
of  his  death  ;  I  think  I  did.  "  Emily  Churchill."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry.  Miss  Churchill  replies  : —

"I  do  not  remember  (with  this  exception)  dreaming  vividly  of  a
death,  and  believe  the  one  referred  to  to  be  the  only  one.

One  of  Miss  Churchill's  sisters  says  : —

"  I  can  perfectly  well  remember  hearing  the  dream  before  we  heard  of


III.]  DREAMS.  399

the  death.  As  he  was  a  strong  man,  and  as  far  as  we  knew  in  excellent
health,  we .  did  not  for  a  moment  suppose  it  was  true.  If  I  remember
rightly,  he  was  only  ill  three  or  four  hours."

Another  sister  writes : —  ,,  .  .    too^

"August,  1884.

"It  is  so  long  ago  that  we  have  rather  forgotten.  My  own  impression
was  that  Emily  told  us  her  dream  at  breakfast,  and  that  we  heard  of  the
death  in  the  evening, — that  the  gentleman  concerned  had  died  the  day
before.  I  know  I  was  much  impressed  at  the  time,  but  I  couldn't  declare
that  she  told  us  in  the  morning.  I  know  directly  Lizzie  told  us  of  the
death  (she  had  not  been  at  home  in  the  morning)  Emily  exclaimed  to  her,
'  I  dreamt  last  night  that  he  was  dead.'  "

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on
July  19th,  1877.

In  conversation,  Miss  Churchill  mentioned — as  showing  how  sudden
the  death  was — that  the  daughters  of  the  gentleman  who  died  had  just
gone  on  a  visit,  and  had  to  be  telegraphed  for.  The  two  families  lived
in  the  same  town  ;  but  the  interest  of  the  Misses  Churchill  was  in  the
daughters ;  they  rarely  saw  the  father,  and  had  not  seen  him  for  a  con-
siderable time  before  his  death.

The  following  is  a  similar  case,  where  the  death  of  a  person  not
closely  connected  with  the  dreamer  was  dreamt  of  vividly,  but  not  in
a  specially  pictorial  way.

(427)  From  Miss  C,  whose  mother  sent  us  the  main  facts  of  the
case  in  1883,  and  who  herself  wrote  a  fuller  account  on  January  12,  1886.

In  November,  1880,  Miss  G.,  the  daughter  of  a  country  rector,
was  staying  in  her  father's  former  parish  in  London.  The  vicar  of
this  parish  had  exchanged  livings  with  her  father,  and  was  thus
associated  in  her  mind  with  both  her  homes,  though  she  only  knew  him
slightly.  One  Saturday  night  she  dreamt  that  he  was  dead.  There  was  an
odd  confusion  in  the  dream,  as  her  father's  death  was  also  suggested.  She
felt  it  was  something  to  do  with  both  parishes.  On  entering  the  break-
fast-room, she  learnt  from  the  friend  with  whom  she  was  staying  that
the  vicar  had  died  in  the  night.  She  had  heard  some  days  before  that
he  had  a  cold  ;  but,  as  she  remarks,  "  colds  in  November  are  anything
but  uncommon,"  and  she  had  thought  no  more  about  it.  "He had  said,
the  Thursday  before,  that  he  was  feeling  so  much  better  that  he  hoped  to
be  able  to  take  his  Sunday  duty ;  but  on  the  Saturday  he  had  grown
suddenly  worse,  and  died  that  evening."  Miss  G.  does  not  remember  to
have  dreamt  of  death  on  any  other  occasion.

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  on
November  13,  1880.

The  friend  with  whom  Miss  G.  was  staying  writes  to  her  (in  February,
1886),  "  I  am  afraid  I  do  not  remember  about  your  dream  at  the  time  it
happened  ;  but  I  quite  well  remember  your  telling  me  some  time  after-
wards you  had  dreamed  a  dream  which  I  ought  to  have  remembered."
Miss  G.  is  confident  that  she  mentioned  the  dream  before  sitting  down  to
breakfast.


400  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(428)  From  a  most  trusted  and  valued  servant  of  the  present  writer's
— now  Mrs.  Humphry,  residing  at  Hiley  Lodge,  Kensal  Green — who  wrote,
in  the  week  following  the  dream  : —

"  On  Tuesday  night  [March  24th,  1885],  or  rather  Wednesday  morning,
I  dreamt  that  Fenning,  a  milkman  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  John  Jarvis  [of
Dale  Hill  Farm,  Ticehurst],  formerly  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Thos.  Jarvis,
my  late  master,  said  to  me,  '  He's  gone  at  last.'  I  said,  '  Who  ? '  He  said,
'  Why,  Mr.  John  Jarvis  is  dead.'  On  Wednesday  morning,  when  I  saw
my  fellow-servant.  Rose,  I  told  her  my  dream."  [This  was  confirmed  in
writing,  at  the  same  time  as  the  account  was  written,  by  Rose  Wade.]

On  March  30th,  the  news  of  the  death  arrived,  and  Mrs.
Humphry  at  once  mentioned  the  coincidence  to  her  mistress.  She  was
told  to  ask  the  day  and  hour  of  his  death,  and  the  following  is  a  copy  of
her  brother's  reply  : —

"  Piatt  Cottage,  Ticehurst.

"March  31st,  1885.

"  Just  a  line  to  let  you  know  that  Mr.  Jarvis  passed  away  on  the
25th — that  was  last  Wednesday  morning  as  near  as  I  can  tell  you
at  2  o'clock.  "William  Vidler."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  by  the  Register  of  Deaths.

Mrs.  Humphry  told  the  present  writer  that  the  dream  was  quite
unique  in  her  experience,  for  its  vividness  and  the  distress  that  it  caused
her.

(429)  From  Fynes  Moryson's  Itinerary.     (See  above,  p.  382.)

"  Whilst  I  lived  at  Prage,  and  one  night  had  sat  up  very  late  drinking
at  a  feast,  early  in  the  morning,  the  sunne  beams  glancing  on  my  face  as
I  lay  in  bed,  I  dreamed  that  a  shadow  passing  by  told  me  that  my  father
was  dead  ;  at  which  awaking  all  in  a  sweat,  and  afifected  with  this  dreame,
I  rose  and  wrote  the  day,  the  houre,  and  all  things  connected  therewith
in  a  paper  booke,  which  Booke  with  many  other  things  I  put  into  a
pouch,  and  sent  it  from  Prage  to  Stode,  thence  to  be  convoyed  into  Eng-
land. And  now  being  at  Nurnberg,  a  merchant  of  a  noble  family,  well
acquainted  with  me  and  my  friends,  arrived  there,  who  told  me  that  my
father  died  some  two  months  past.  I  list  not  write  any  lies,  but  that
which  I  write  is  as  true  as  strange.  When  I  returned  into  England  some
four  years  after,  I  would  not  open  the  pouch  I  sent  from  Prage,  nor  looke
in  the  paper  booke  in  which  I  had  written  this  dreame,  till  I  had  called
my  sisters  and  some  friends  to  be  witnesses,  when  my  selfe  and  they
were  astonished  to  see  my  written  dreame  answer  the  very  day  of  my
father's  death."

(430)  From  the  Rev.  F.  R.  Harbaugh  (Pastor  of  Presbyterian
Church),  Red  Bank,  Monmouth  County,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

"February  7th,  1884.
"  In  the  afternoon  of  January  29th,  1881,  between  the  hours  of  2  and
4  o'clock,  while  asleep  (in  ordinary  good  health),  and  with  no  conscious  or
immediate  procuring  cause  for  the  same,  I  had  a  '  dream '  charged  with
every  element  of  the  horrible  and  distressing.  I  awoke  greatly  confused
in  mind,  but  with  these  very  distinct  impressions  : — first,  that  some  tragedy


III.]  DREAMS.  401

had  occurred ;  and  second,  that  some  relative  was  implicated  in  it.  The
dream,  for  the  while,  very  greatly  affected  me,  so  much  so  as  to  seriously
disqualify  me  for  my  Sabbath  services  the  day  following.

"  Within  a  few  days  after  this  dream  I  received  a  letter  from  my
father,  which  began  something  like  this  : —

"  '  You  will  be  shocked  to  hear  that  your  cousin ,  on  last ,

(the  same  day  on  which  I  had  my  dream),  '  took  the  life  of  his  wife  and
babe,  and  then  killed  himself.'

"  It  is  not  necessary  to  give  the  details  of  the  crime.  My  reply  to  my
father's  letter  contained  the  following  : —

"  '  Shocked  I  certainly  was  by  the  intelligence  in  your  last  letter,  but

hardly  surprised  ;  for  ever  since  last afternoon  I  have  been  oppressed,

because  of  a  dream,  with  an  impression  that  something  of  the  kind  had
occurred.'

"  From  his  letter  in  reply,  I  found  that  my  dream  was  coincident  (how
exactly  I  do  not  remember)  with  the  tragedy.  "With  regard  to  the  person
who  committed  the  crime,  I  had  neither  seen  him  nor  had  any  communica-
tion with  him,  nor,  indeed,  any  information  about  him,  since  we  separated,
in  our  early  boyhood.  No  acquaintance  of  mine  of  so  long  a  time  could
have  been  more  absent  from  my  mind  than  he.  Nothing  proximate  to  the
tragedy  had  transpired  to  recall  or  suggest  him.  I  have  never  been  able
to  detect  what  it  was,  or  might  be,  that  brought  him  to  my  knowledge.
The  absence  of  anxiety,  or  anything  like  it,  may  be  seen  in  my  almost  utter
forgetfulness  of  him.  Indeed,  for  20  years  I  did  not  know  whether  he  was
living  or  dead."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Harbaugh  says  : —  '

"  Horrifying  dreams  are  exceedingly  rare  with  me.  The  doubt  on  my
mind  as  to  the  coincidence  of  time  (as  I  now  recall  the  occurrence)  is  as  to
the  hour.  The  day  of  the  tragedy  and  of  my  dream  were  the  same."  He
adds  : —

"  A  clergyman  residing  in  the  place  where  the  crime  was  committed
writes,  '  I  am  going  to  see  the  man  who  was  the  first  in  the  house  after  the
deed  was  done,  and  ask  him  for  the  exact  hour.'  Later  he  writes,  '  I
find  it  was  on  Saturday  evening,  January  29th,  at  just  about  7.30  p.m.
The  town  marshal  fixes  the  time  at  the  same  hour.'  My  recollection  of
the  day  of  the  week  and  the  time  of  the  day  on  which  I  had  the  dream  is
very  distinct — as  well  as  the  recollection  of  the  letter  I  received  from  my
father,  telling  me  of  it,  and  of  my  reply."

[If  this  case  was  telepathic,  the  idea  of  the  deed  must  have  been
present  to  the  perpetrator's  mind  4  hours  before  it  was  acted  on — which
seems  a  reasonable  supposition.  The  telepathic  explanation  is  of  course
rendered  less  probable  by  the  absence  of  intimacy  or  affection  between
the  parties  ;  but  we  have  had  indications  that  mere  kinship  may  supply
the  adequate  condition  (see,  e.g.,  case  244).]

§  4.  Coming  now  to  the  class  of  more  distinctly  pictorial
dreams,  corresponding  with  some  critical  situation  of  the  agent,  but
not  a  mere  reflection  of  his  conscious  thought,  I  will  begin  with  cases
where  what  is  seen  is  a  tolerably  simple  embodiment  of  the  idea

VOL.    II.  2    D


402  SUPPLEAfENT.  [chap.

supposed  to  have  been  transferred,  and  then  pass  on  to  cases  where  the
dreamer  invests  the  idea  with  fresh  elements  and  imagery  of  his  own.
The  following  four  cases  are  of  the  simplest  possible  type.  The
first  of  them  resembles  the  last  quoted,  in  the  fact  that  there  was
no  bond  of  friendship  between  agent  and  percipient ;  but  the
proximity  to  the  latter  of  a  third  person — her  father — who  was
connected  both  with  her  and  with  the  agent,  suggests  that  though  the
impression  did  not  affect  his  consciousness,  it  still  reached  her  in
some  sense  through  him  (p.  267).

(431)  From  Mr.  Gr.  J.  Davis,  St.  Chloe  Endowed  School,  Amberley,
near  Stroud.     (The  account  is  slightly  condensed.)

After  mentioning  that  about  1848,  he  had  served  under  a  certain
clergyman,  Mr.  S.,  Mr.  Davis  continues  : —

"About  1860,  I  married  my  present  wife,  and  she  did  not,  nor  my
children,  know  anything  of  Mr.  S.,  and,  consequently,  took  little  interest
in  hearing  about  him.  We  seldom  or  never  spoke  about  him,  except
perhaps  when  a  letter  came  from  him,  and  I  might  mention  the  fact.

"  One  Saturday  morning,  as  I  was  reading  the  Standard  after  break-
fast, my  daughter,  aged  about  1 9,  suddenly  broke  the  silence  thus  : —

"  '  Papa,  have  you  heard  from  Mr.  S.  lately  "? '

"  '  No,  I  have  not,'  I  replied  ;  '  in  fact,  it  is  my  turn  to  write.  He  wrote
about  three  months  ago ;  but  I  have  not  written  since.   "Why  do  you  ask  1 '

"  '  Because  I  dreamt  about  him  last  night.  I  dreamt  he  had  lost  the
use  of  his  side '  (here  she  made  a  motion  with  her  hand  down  her  side)  ;
'  paralysed,  don't  you  call  it  1 '

"  She  spoke  very  earnestly,  I  noticed ;  but  I  merely  replied,  '  How
strange,'  and  went  on  reading  my  Standard.  This  was  on  Saturday
morning,  you  will  observe.

"  Well,  the  next  day  was  Sunday,  and  we  always  made  it  a  point  to
call  at  the  post-office  for  our  letters  on   Sundays.     We  did  so  on  this

Sunday.     Among  them  was  a  C newspaper,     I  noticed  the  address

was  not  in  Mr.  S.'s  handwriting ;  this  moved  my  curiosity,  and  there
being  no  folk  about,  I  opened  the  paper,  and  what  was  my  surprise  to  find
a  paragraph  marked,  announcing,  '  That  their  respected  neighbour,  the
Rev.  E.  H.  S.,  had  been  seized  with  paralysis.'  Certain  persons  were
with  him — doctors,  &c., — and  they  hoped  he  would  get  better,  &c.,  &c.
Of  course,  I  was  very  much  surprised,  and  when  we  got  home,  I  said,
'  Sissy,  do  you  remember  anything  more  about  your  dream  1 '  (after  read-
ing the  paragraph,  and  saying  how  strange  it  was,  &C.)

"  '  No,'  she  said,  '  but  the  dream  made  such  an  impression  upon  my
mind  that  I  lay  awake  thinking  about  it,  and  wondering  how  I  knew  he
was  paralysed,  for  he  didn't  tell  me,  and  I  saw  no  one  else  but  himself
lying  ill  in  bed.'

"  This  is  all  literally  true.  "Gboege  Jesson  Davis."

In  reply  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Davis  wrote  that  the  date  of  Mr.  S.'s
seizure  was  Nov.  8,  1878.  We  have  verified  the  occurrence  and
the  date  in  the  local  newspaper  of  Nov.  16.  It  would  appear,  therefore,
that  the  dream  must  have  been  on  the  night  of  Nov.  15 — i.e.,  a  week  after


III.]  DREAMS.  403

the  actual  seizure — though  while  its  effects  were  continuing.  This
extension  of  time  of  course  extends  the  scope  for  accidental  coincidence,
and  so  far  weakens  the  case ;  on  the  other  hand  there  is  the  strong  point
of  a  double  correspondence,  the  right  person  being  associated  with  the
right  complaint,  though  neither  one  nor  the  other  had  been  in  the  least
degree  occupying  the  dreamer's  waking  thoughts.  Mr.  S.  never  recovered
from  the  attack,  and  died  some  months  afterwards.

In  conversation  Mr.  Davis  stated  that  his  daughter  was  not  in  the
habit  of  having  vivid  dreams,  and  that  her  mention  of  this  one  was
exceptional ;  and  that  by  temperament  she  is  the  very  reverse  of  gushing
or  visionary.

(432)  From  Mrs.  Jennings  Bramly,  Strathmore,  Killiney.

"  February  3rd,   1886.

"  I  am  happy  to  give  you  an  exact  account  of  the  dream  which  I  had
about  my  brother.  Professor  of  Greek  in  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  I  cannot
fix  the  exact  time ;  it  was  probably  two  and  a-half  or  three  and  a-half
years  ago.  It  was  simply  a  vivid  dream  ;  I  by  no  means  saw  an  exact  enact-
ment of  what  was  going  on.  I  dreamed  (being  at  home  in  my  own  house
in  Killiney,  my  brother  being  in  his,  in  Dublin)  that  I  saw  my  brother
covered  with  blood,  and  that  I  threw  my  arms  round  him  and  implored
him  not  to  die,  and  that  Ifelt  the  blood  touch  me,  and  saw  it  drip  on  me.
I  awoke  in  great  distress,  and  remained  awake  lest  I  should  dream  it
again.  In  the  morning  I  told  my  husband  I  had  had  a  fearful  dream.  I
did  not  in  the  least  think  it  was  true,  but  it  was  very  real,  and  it  frightened
me.  In  spite  of  daylight,  and  companions  around  me,  I  still  felt  a  vague
uneasiness,  and  in  order  to  dispel  the  feeling  by  seeing  my  brother  in
perfect  health  (as  I  quite  expected  I  should),  I  went  into  Dublin  by  train,
and  to  his  rooms  in  College  to  see  him.  I  found  him  sitting  by  the  fire,  and
I  asked  him  if  he  would  come  to  us  next  day  and  play  tennis.  He  replied,
'  that  he  should  not  be  able  to  play  tennis  for  many  a  day,'  and  then  told
me  '  he  had  had  an  accident  the  evening  before ;  he  was  in  the  garden
with  his  children,  and  one  of  them  had  got  up  on  the  roof  of  a  small  tool-
house,  which  had  a  glass  window  in  the  roof ;  the  child  was  frightened,  and
my  brother  went  up  the  ladder  to  lift  him  down ;  he  put  one  foot  on  the
window  and  reached  forward  for  the  child,  when  the  glass  broke  and  my
brother's  leg  went  through,  cutting  a  vein  in  the  leg ;  it  bled  -profusely  for
a  couple  of  hours  before  a  doctor  could  be  found  to  bandage  it  up.  This
accident  took  place  early  in  the  evening  ;  I,  probably,  was  not  in  bed  until
after  the  bleeding  had  been  stopped.

"  My  brother  noticed  how  white  I  had  become  while  he  was  telling  me
of  his  accident.  I  told  him  my  dream,  and  he  agreed  with  me  in  thinking
it  a  very  remarkable  coincidence.  He  evidently  had  not  thought  of  me  the
previous  night,  or  he  would  have  said  so.  My  attachment  for  him  is,  I
believe,  unusually  strong,  and  my  sympathy  in  all  his  pursuits  extreme.
It  is  right  to  mention  that  in  1879  he  had  had  a  much  more  serious
accident,  about  which  I  had  no  dream.       "  M.  Geealdine  J.  Bramly."

Mr.  Bramly  writes  on  Feb.  3,  1886  : —

"  I  recollect  my  wife  telling  me  her  dream,  as  above  narrated,  on  the
following  morning.     She  has  a  very  accurate  memory.

Professor  Tyrrell  writes,  on  Feb.  5,  1886  :—         "  ^-  ^-  Bbamly."

VOL.    II.  2    D    2


404  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  I  remember  the  incident  communicated  to  you  by  my  sister,  Mrs.
Bramly.  The  details  are  accurate.  She  told  me  of  her  dream  when  she
called  on  me  in  College  the  following  morning."     Later  he  adds  : —

"  I  should  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  I  look  on  the  dream  and  the
accident  as  mere  coincidence.^  The  accident  was  slight,  but  there  was
considerable  effusion  of  blood.  ««  !{,,  Y.  Tyreell."     '

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Bramly  says  :

"  I  am  a  very  restless,  uneasy  sleeper,  and  every  night  dream  the
wildest  dreams  possible.  I  have  never,  however,  except  in  this  instance,
dreamed  of  any  accident  to  anyone,  or  of  the  death  of  anyone."

(433)  From  Mr.  Durell,  Wrenthorpe,  The  Thicket,  Southsea.

"April  1,  1886.

"  On  the  night  of  the  4th  May,  1863,  when  I  was  in  Australia,^  I
dreamed  that  a  postman  handed  me  a  letter  with  a  deep  black  border.
The  purport  of  the  letter  was  to  announce  the  death  of  an  uncle  in
England,  and  that  he  had  left  me  some  property  which  would  necessitate
my  immediate  return  to  England.

"  When  I  awoke,  the  dream  still  haunted  me,  and  I  made  a  note  of  it,
and  mentioned  it  to  several  of  my  friends,  feeling  sure  I  should  hear  of  my
uncle's  death.

"  I  could  not  do  so  by  the  next  mail,  but  the  one  after  that  brought
me  the  intelligence  of  his  death  on  the  4th  of  May,  the  day  of  my  dream,
and  he  had  left  me  property  which  required  my  return  to  England.

"I  had  no  idea  of  my  uncle's  illness,  and  still  less  that  he  was  going  to
leave  me  any  property.  "  F.  T.  D.  Durell."

The  Times  obituary  confirms  May  4,  1863,  as  the  date  of  death.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Durell  writes  :

(1)  "I  do  not  recollect  ever  having  had  a  dream  about  death,
certainly  none  that  ever  impressed  me  as  this  did ;  and  I  am  not  in  the
habit  of  having  distressing  dreams.

(2)  "I  did  make  a  note  at  the  time  of  my  dream ;  unfortunately  the
diary  I  had  of  that  year,  1863,  I  lost.

(3)  "  The  two  friends  who  were  with  me  at  the  time  of  the  dream,
and  to  whom  I  mentioned  it,  are  both  dead."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Durell  distinctly  confirmed  the  fact  that  the
date  in  the  letter  was  compared  with  that  in  his  diary,  and  found  to  be
the  same  ;  he  does  not  know  what  was  the  hour  of  death.  He  is  not,  and
was  not,  at  all  in  the  habit  of  having  vivid  dreams  :  this  one  made  an
extraordinarily  strong  impression  on  him  before  the  receipt  of  the  news.
Mrs.  Durell  well  remembers  hearing  the  account  very  soon  after  Mr.
Durell's  return  to  England.

(434)  From  a  gentleman,  resident  at  Widnes,  who  prefers  that  his  full
name  should  not  be  published.     The  account  is  dated  Dec.  12,  1882.  ■■':'■-'

"I  was  about  14  years  old,  and  at  school  at  Southport,  a  town  about
30  miles  from  my  house.  One  night  I  dreamed  in  a  most  vivid  manner
that  I  saw  my  mother  dead.     Next  morning  I  was  oppressed  with  the  firm

^  Professor  Tyrrell  clearly  means  accidental  coincidence.  A  similar  remark  might  be
made,  as  I  have  again  and  again  pointed  out,  about  almost  every  isolated  case ;  yet  no
one,  on  reflection,  will  maintain  that  the  cases  to  which  it  would  apply  have  therefore  no
legitimate  place  in  a  cumulative  argument.


in.]  DREAMS.  405

conviction  that  my  mother  had  died,  and  though  we  happened  to  have  a
half  holiday  that  morning,  I  could  not  throw  off  the  feeling.  While  we
were  playing  some  game  in  our  cricket  field,  a  messenger  came  to  say  that
my  master  wanted  to  see  me  at  once.  I  felt  that  I  knew  what  he  had  to
say,  and  I  suppose  that  my  face  must  have  shown  some  signs  of  my
trouble,  as,  before  telling  me  that  my  mother  had  died  during  the
previous  night,  he  asked  me  some  kindly  questions  as  to  whether  I
felt  ill.  I  have  never  had  any  similar  kind  of  dream  since  (indeed,
I  very  rarely  dream),  but  I  can  never  forget  the  impression  made  on
me  by  this  dream.  "  H.  W.  D."

[The  memory  of  the  subsequent  incidents  in  this  case  to  some  extent
confirms  the  coincidence.  In  conversation,  I  found  the  narrator  very  far
from  disposed  to  attach  significance  to  an  isolated  case  of  the  sort,  though
the  impression  made  upon  him  was  very  strong.]

In  the  following  case,  though  remote  in  date,  there  is  no  reason
to  doubt  that  the  facts  are  correctly  recorded.  It  is  at  any  rate  a
point  in  favour  of  that  view — and  one  rarely  met  with  in  second-hand
narratives  of  the  sort — that  the  degree  of  closeness  in  the  coincidence
is  left  uncertain.

(435)  From  Mrs.  A.  L.  Udny,  61,  Westbourne  Park  Villas,  W.

"My  father-in-law,  G-eorge  Udny,  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service,  at  one
time  Member  of  Council  there,  and  a  great  friend  of  Lord  Wellesley  when
he  was  Governor-G-eneral,  was  a  man  of  deep  religious  feeling  and  high
honour,  but  I  imagine  not  the  least  disposed  to  believe  in  any  superstitions
or  marvels  ;  so  I  think  his  narrative  may  be  depended  on,  and  this  was  his
account.

"  He  was  residing  at  Maldah,  in  India,  in  1794,^  and  his  only  brother,
Robert,  to  whom  he  was  much  attached,  was  living  in  Calcutta,  with  his
wife  Anne.  Mr.  Udny  dreamed  one  night  that  he  saw  his  brother  and  his
wife  struggling  in  the  water,  which  distressing  dream  awoke  him.  He  was
about  200  miles  from  Calcutta,  and  very  shortly  received  by  dak-post  a
letter  informing  him  that  his  brother  and  his  wife  had  been  drowned  in
the  Hooghly  shortly  before,  I  do  not  know  exactly  how  long.  Robert  and
Anne  Udny  had  been  to  pay  a  visit  at  Howrah  on  the  other  side  of  the
Hooghly,  and  not  returning  at  night  to  their  own  house,  the  servants  had
supposed  that  they  had  been  induced  to  stay  all  night,  and  it  was  only  the
next  day  found  that  they  had  left  their  friends  and  had  embarked  in  a
Boleah  (a  large  river  pleasure  boat),  to  return — which  had  got  foul  of,  and
been  overturned  by,  the  cable  of  a  vessel  lying  at  anchor  in  the  river,  and
the  current  had  carried  away  their  bodies  some  distance  down  the  stream,
where  they  were  found  locked  in  each  other's  arms."

In  a  letter  which  accompanied  the  account,  dated  25th  July,  1883,  Mrs.
Udny  writes  : —

"  I  had  always  heard  that  the  dream  was  three  times  repeated,  ^  but
the  story  as  I  have  it,  written  down  from  my  husband's  dictation,^  is  as

1  From  The  Life  and  Times  of  Carey,  Marshman,  and  Ward,  the  Serampore  Missionaries,
we  have  been  able  to  fix  the  incident  as  in  January  or  February,  1794.

2  As  regards  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  number  three  in  narratives  of  this  sort,
see  p.  229,  note.

3  The  account  was  only  in  part  dictated,  but  was  throughout  revised  by  Mr.  Udny,
on  April  27, 1861.


406  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap,

above ;  and  I  believe  he  was  afraid  to  add  more  particulars,  as  he  was  a
most  exact  man,  and  would  rather  understate  than  exaggerate,  even
undesignedly,  any  story."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Udny  adds  that  her  husband  was  not
born  till  1802,  and  therefore  cannot  have  heard  of  this  incident  till  a
good  many  years  after  its  occurrence;  "but  his  father  lived  till  1830,  and
it  must  have  been  often  talked  of  after  my  husband  had  grown  up."

In  the  next  case,  it  seems  possible  that  the  dreamer  was
impressed  by  some  one  known  to  her  on  board  the  ship  (she  knew
Captain  King,  the  commander),  and  that  she  embodied  the  idea  of
wreck  in  a  simple  manner.

(436)  From  Mr.  E.  Gardner  Colton,  Southampton  Buildings,  W.C.

"July  31st,  1883.

"  Some  years  ago  we  were  living  in  Derby  Lane,  Stoney croft,  Liver-
pool. I  remember  one  morning,  early,  a  Mrs.  Tate,  a  friend  of  my  mother's
(and  who  lived  at  Iquique,  Peru,  but  was  stopping  with  her  father  in
England),  came  to  our  house  and  informed  us  she  had  had  a  very  strange
dream  that  morning  early,  in  which  she  saw  the  steamer  '  Santiago,'  of
the  Pacific  Company,  strike  on  a  rock  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  through
which  she  [Mrs.  Tate]  had  many  times  passed,  and  founder.

"  Now,  the  extraordinary  news  came  several  weeks  later  that  the
steamer  had  that  night  or  time  run  on  that  very  rock.

"I  well  remember  Mrs.  Tate's  vivid  description  of  it.

"  E.  Gardner  Colton."

We  have  written  to  Mrs.  Tate,  at  Iquique,  but  have  received  no  reply.

Mr.  Colton's  mother  writes,  from  61,  Park  Street,  Southend-on-Sea : — •

"  I  remember  this  also,  and  it  is  quite  correct.  And  Mrs.  Tate  was
so  strongly  impressed  by  the  dream  that  she  noted  the  time  by  her  watch,
and,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  it  agreed  with  the  time."

We  learn  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Pacific  Steam  Navigation  Company
that  the  "  Santiago "  was  lost  in  the  Straits  of  Magellan  on  25th
January,  1869.

[The  Times  of  March  19th,  1869,  says  that  the  ship  "struck  on  a
sunken  reef,  not  shown  in  the  charts."  This  shows  that  the  accuracy  of
the  dream  has  been  to  some  extent  exaggerated.  We  have  no  reason  to
doubt  its  exceptional  vividness ;  but  the  case  is  clearly  not  one  that  would
deserve  attention,  so  long  as  the  reality  of  telepathy  was  doubtful.]

In  the  next  case,  which  is  recent  and  corroborated,  the  death-
scene  is  still  just  such  as  the  dreamer  might  most  naturally  conjure  up.

(437)  Letter  to  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  now  of  Rhyl,  from  Mrs.
Harrison,  of  Park  View,  Queen's  Park,  Manchester.

"September  2nd,  1885.
"  I  had  a  dear  uncle,  John  Moore,  St.  John's,  Isle  of  Man.  I  knew
he  had  failed  in  health  and  strength  during  the  winter  of  1883  and  1884,
but  was  not  aware  that  he  was  really  ill,  or  worse,  so  had  not  been
thinking  of  him  more  than  usual,  nor  anticipating  a  change  ;  on  the
contrary,  I  was  rather  sanguine  that,  with  the  return  of  spring,  his  strength


III.]  DREAMS.  407

would  revive,  knowing  that  he  had  only  two  years  before  recovered  from
a  severe  illness,  his  constitution  being  so  excellent,  though  he  was  85
years  old  when  he  was  taken  away.  But  on  the  night  of  March  1st,
or  very  early  in  the  morning  of  the  2nd,  1884  (I  did  not  ascertain  the
time,  but  I  had  retired  to  rest  very  late  and  seemed  to  have  slept  two  or
three  hours),  I  awoke  crying,  and  with  the  agitating  scenes  of  my  dream
clear  before  me.  It  was  that  I  stood  in  the  bedroom  of  my  uncle,  that  he
lay  there  dying,  his  remaining  family  near  him,  I  just  a  short  distance
from  the  bed,  looking  on.  When  I  joined  my  husband  and  daughter  at
the  fireside,  on  coming  downstairs  in  the  morning,  I  told  them  my  dream,
and  then  thought  no  more  about  it  till  two  days  later,  4th  March,  when
a  letter  arrived,  saying  that  my  uncle  had  passed  away  at  2  o'clock  on  the
morning  of  the  2nd.  "  R.  J.  Harrison."

Mrs.  Harrison  can  recall  no  other  dream  of  death.

We  find  from  the  Isle  of  Man  Register  that  the  date  of  the  death  was
March  2,  1884.

Mr.  Harrison  corroborates  as  follows  : —       "September  2nd   1885

"  I  distinctly  remember  my  wife  telling  me  the  above  dream  on  the
Sunday  morning,  2nd  March,  1884,  and  it  has  often  been  spoken  of  in  the
family  since.  The  letter  acquainting  us  of  Mr.  Moore's  death  arrived
at  Manchester,  from  the  Isle  of  Man,  two  days  after,  viz.,  Tuesday,
4th  March,  1884.  "J.  P.  Harrison."

[In  conversation  I  learnt  that  Mr.  Moore's  son  and  daughter,  who
appeared  in  the  dream,  were  the  relatives  likely  to  be  present  ;  so  that
point  goes  for  nothing.  But  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  exceptional
character  of  the  dream.  On  account  of  the  age  and  infirmity  of  the  person
who  died,  this  instance  has  not  been  included  in  the  special  group,  used  in
the  calculation  in  Vol.  I.,  Chap  VIII.,  §  4.]

In  the  next  two  cases,  again,  the  death  is  represented  in  a
completely  natural  way.

(438)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Denroche,  of  1,  Berkeley  Villas,  Pittville,
Cheltenham,  who  said  that  she  had  "  never  had  any  distressing  or  remark-
able dream  save  this  one."  "February  23rd    1885.

"  On  the  Easter  morning  [1843],  about  6  o'clock,  I  dreamt  that  I  was
looking  out  of  my  bedroom  window,  and  that  I  saw  Mr.  R.  walking  up  the
avenue,  and  that,  knowing  him  to  be  in  Australia,  I  felt  so  surprised  and
pleased  that  I  ran  down  to  meet  him  at  the  glass  portico.  When  I  put
out  my  hand,  I  said,  '  Oh,  how  glad  I  am  to  see  you  again.'  He  looked  so
sad  and  said,  '  You  will  not  be  glad,  as  I  bring  you  sad  news.  Your
brother  Stephen  is  dead.'  I  awoke  at  the  moment,  and  it  seemed  as
though  the  words  were  sounding  in  my  ears.  When  the  servant  came  to
assist  me  to  dress,  I  told  her  my  dream,  and  to  comfort  me  she  said  that
dreams  always  went  by  contraries,  '  and  that  he  was  most  likely  being
married,'  but  said  I  must  not  tell  this  dream  to  my  mother  or  to  any  one
who  might  do  so,  as  my  brother  writing  so  seldom  always  made  her  so
anxious  and  unhappy  ;  and  so  acting  upon  her  advice,  I  did  not  speak  of
it,  but  the  thought  of  it  constantly  recurred  during  the  four  months  that
intervened  between  the  Easter  and  a  visit  to  Bangor,  in  Wales,  where  a
letter  from  Mr.  R.,  dated  Easter  Sunday,  was  forwarded  to  me.     He  wrote


408  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

to  me  for  the  reason  that  he  thought  I  could  more  gently  break  the  sad  news
to  my  dear  mother,  and  his  letter  commenced  almost  with  the  same  words
that  I  had  heard  in  the  dream.  He  told  how  that,  a  fortnight  before  his
death,  my  brother  had  reached  his  house  sadly  out  of  health,  and  worn  with
the  toilsome  journey.  At  once  he  became  too  ill  to  write,  and  continued
so  till  he  died  on  Easter  Sunday  morning.         "  Olivia  A.  Denrochb."

[The  death  must  have  preceded  the  dream  by  a  good  many  hours.
The  case  is  remote ;  but  the  fact  that  Easter  Sunday  is  so  marked  a  day
makes  it  fairly  probable  that  the  coincidence  was  rightly  remembered.
Australian  newspapers  have  been  searched,  as  well  as  the  most  likely
English  obituaries,  for  a  notice  of  the  death,  but  without  success,]

(439  and  440)  From  La  Chance  et  la  Destinee  (1876),  by  Foissac,  p.  599.
Recit  de  M.  Longet,  membre  de  I'lnstitut,  professeur  de  physiologie  a  la
Faculte  de  Medecine  de  Paris.

"  Notre  savant  confrere  (M.  Jules  Cloquet,  membre  de  I'lnstitut,  profes-
seur de  Clinique  Chirurgicale)  nous  a  raconte  que  sortant  fort  avant  dans
la  nuit  d'une  soirde  chez  M.  Chomel,  et  s'etant  endormi,  il  vit  en  songe  un
fant6me  qui  lui  repr^sentait  son  f rere  Hippolyte.  II  portait  sur  son  dos  una
grande  liane  de  papiers  qu'il  jeta  au  milieu  de  la  chambre,  en  lui  disant,
'  Maintenant  je  n'ai  2^lus  besoin  de  rien,'  et  il  disparut.  A  son  reveil  M.
Cloquet  raconta  ce  songe  aux  personnes  de  son  entourage  sans  en  etre
autrement  impressionne.  II  se  rendit  a  I'hopital,  fit  sa  leQon  de  clinique
comme  a  I'ordinaire,  puis  M.  Giron  de  Busarainque  lui  dit,  en  lui  prenant
le  bras  :  '  Ton  frere  Hippolyte  est  malade.'  '  AUons  le  voir,'  repondit
M.  Cloquet.  Chemin  faisant,  M.  Giron  de  Busarainque  lui  apprit
qu'Hippolyte  Cloquet  ^tait  mort  dans  la  nuit  d'une  attaque  d'apoplexie.

"  Le  songe  qui  me  concerne  est  plus  explicite  encore.  Lorsque  j'etais
^tudiant  en  medecine,  et  interne  de  Dupuytren,  je  revai  que  je  voyais  mon
pere  atteint  d'une  maladie  qui  le  conduisait  au  tombeau.  Je  m'eveillai
dans  un  grand  trouble  que  je  cherchais  a  dominer  en  me  disant  que  j 'avals
quittd  mon  pere  le  dimanche  d'auparavant  en  parfaite  santd ;  nous  dtions
au  mercredi.  Je  me  representai  que  c'^tait  une  grande  faiblesse  de
m'inquieter  d'un  songe,  et  je  resolus  de  n'en  tenir  aucun  compte.  Mais
I'image  de  mon  pere  mourant  etait  sans  cesse  presente  a  ma  pensee,  et
pour  echapper  a  cette  obsession,  quoique  honteux  de  ma  faiblesse,  je
partis  pour  St.  Germain,  ou  je  trouvai  mon  pere  atteint  d'une  fluxion  de
poitrine  qui  I'enleva  en  cinq  jours."

[This  second  case  would  more  properly  belong  to  the  preceding
section.]

Similarly  in  the  next  case,  the  agent's  actual  thought  may  have
been  the  nucleus  of  a  dream  to  which  the  dreamer  supplied  a
setting.

(441)  From  Mr.  Alexander  G.  Sparrow,  Derwent  Square,  Liverpool.

"  1882.

"  About  23  years  ago,  my  youngest  sister  was  visiting  my  then
bachelor  quarters ;  there  was  then  residing  in  Liverpool  an  old  friend  of
mine,  D.  L.,  a  bachelor  past  40,  and  who  was  considered  by  his  friends
most  unlikely  to  marry.  One  morning  at  breakfast  I  related  to  my  sister
a  very  vivid  dream.     I  was  in  the  Old  Exchange  room ;  not  being  the


III.]  '  DREAMS.  409

'Change  time,  it  was  nearly  empty.  I  was  leaning  against  a  sort  of
counter  under  the  clock.  D.  L.  was  sauntering  up  the  middle  of  the  long
narrow  room  ;  and  when  he  caught  sight  of  me  he  quickened  his  step,  and
smiling  put  out  his  hand,  saying,  '  Sparrow,  congratulate  me ;  I  am
engaged  to  be  married,  and  am  as  spooney  as  I  was  at  one-and-twenty.'
I  did  offer  him  my  congratulations,  and  asked  who  the  lady  was,  to  which
he  replied,  '  She  is  an  Irish  girl ;  I  met  her  at  Kingstown  Regatta.'

"My  eldest  sister  was,  at  that  time,  living  with  her  husband  in  Ireland.
When  I  returned  from  business  that  evening,  my  sister  said,  '  Your  dream
has  come  true,  even  the  very  words.'  She  put  a  letter  from  my  eldest  sister
into  my  hand,  and  I  read,  '  Tell  Alick  his  friend  D.  L.  is  engaged  to  one
of  the  daughters  of  our  rector.     He  met  her  at  Kingstown  Regatta.'

"  Alex.  G.  Spareow."

The  sister  to  whom  the  dream  was  told  vaguely  remembers  the  main
fact  of  the  occurrence.

[In  conversation,  Mr.  Sparrow  told  Mr.  Myers  that  he  did  not  know
his  friend  to  be  in  Ireland,  though  he  may  have  noticed  that  he  was  not
on  'Change  as  usual ;  that  there  was  nothing  to  connect  his  friend  with
Kingstown  Regatta;  that  he  had  thought  him  a  "  regular  old  bachelor  "  ;
and  that  the  words  used  in  the  letter  were  the  exact  words  used  in  his
dream.  But  after  so  long  an  interval  of  time,  memory  cannot  be  implicitly
trusted  for  such  details.]

The  next  dream  presents  an  interesting  mixture  of  right  and
wrong  detail.  If  telepathic,  and  not  accidental,  it  probably  fell  on
the  night  following  the  event,  and  would  then  seem  more  naturally
referable  to  the  agent's  subsequent  picturing  of  the  scene  than  to  an
immediate  "  clairvoyant  "  impression  whose  development  had  been
deferred.  The  dream,  as  so  often  in  these  coincident  cases,  produced
a  quite  exceptional  impression  of  reality.

(442)  From  Mrs.  Saxby,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.

"January  31st,  1883.

Mrs.  Saxby  begins  by  saying  that  her  husband  was  on  the  Continent
at  the  outbreak  of  the  Franco-German  war,  and  that  in  one  of  her  letters
to  him  she  copied  out  the  famous  "  draft  treaty."

"  One  night,  not  long  after  this,  I  saw  in  a  kind  of  dream  that  my
husband  was  walking  on  a  high  road,  under  the  shade  of  broad  spreading
trees.  I  was  charmed  with  the  brilliancy  of  the  green  of  their  translucent
leaves,  through  which  the  sunlight  streamed  overhead.

"  I  noticed  that  a  country  cart  with  three  men  in  it  passed  him,  and
that  one  of  the  men  had  remarkably  bushy  black  whiskers.  They  were  all
dressed  in  blouses,  and  had  a  very  peculiar  kind  of  cap  on  their  heads.
These  caps  had  peaks  to  them.  Presently  the  cart  halted,  and  the  men  had
some  communication  with  my  husband,  in  which  the  man  with  the  black
whiskers  took  a  prominent  part.  I  noticed  that  the  men  got  out  and  in
of  the  cart,  and  stood  up  and  spoke  for  some  time.  There  was  evidently
something  going  on,  and  it  ended  in  one  of  the  men  going  one  way,  on
foot,  while  the  other  men  jogged  away  in  the  cart  in  the  contrary  direction,
and  all,  including  my  husband,  passed  away.


410  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  I  cannot  state  why  I  knew  that  this  was  one  of  my  mysterious  kind
of  dreams,  but  I  did,  and  I  felt  sure  that  something  had  happened  to  my
husband ;  so  I  sat  down  and  wrote  to  him  directly,  telling  him  my  dream,
and  describing  the  scene  and  the  circumstances  that  occurred  in  it,
describing  also  the  men  and  the  cart  as  exactly  as  I  could.  I  even  etched
with  my  pen  a  picture  of  the  man  with  the  black  whiskers,  and  I  asked
my  husband  what  kind  of  trees  they  were  with  the  very  bright  translucent
leaves,  and  what  had  happened  to  him  under  them.  On  August  2nd,  1870,
dating  from  Luxembourg,  my  husband  wrote  to  me  : —

"  '  My  Dearest  Effie, — 1  write  a  line  from  this  station,  while  waiting
for  the  train,  to  say  that  all  is  right.

"  '  This  will  be  posted  somewhere  on  the  way  up  the  line,  and  will  very
likely  not  get  to  you  much  before  I  am  coming  in  sight  of  England,  only
it  is  better  you  should  hear  from  me  before  any  chance  story  appears  in
the  papers  (should  it  so  appear)  of  my  having  been  taken  prisoner  by  the
Prussians  yesterday  (August  1st).

"  '  I  was  simply  at  Wasserbillig,  the  pretty  frontier  station  of  the
Luxembourg  Duchy,  and  instead  of  roasting  on  the  bridge  over  the  little
stream  which  here  joins  the  Moselle,  and  marks  the  Prussian  boundary,  I
strolled  leisurely  along  in  the  deep  shade  of  the  walnut-trees  by  the
river-bank,  intending  to  turn  back  as  soon  as  I  should  see  the  Prussian
sentries.

"  '  I  had  not  gone  far  before  I  met  a  cart,  with  four  sturdy  peasants  in
blouses.  As  soon  as  they  had  passed  me,  they  stopped  the  cart.  One  of
them  sprang  out  to  cut  off  my  retreat,  and  the  rest  took  me  prisoner.
They  were  soldiers  in  disguise,  all  signs  of  douanes  or  frontier-guard
having  been  done  away  in  order  to  entrap  spies,  the  patrols  going  about  in
blouses,  with  revolvers  underneath,  and  short  swords  tucked  away  in
their  trousers,   I  think.

"  'They  took  me  to  Izel,  near  Treves,  the  nearest  outpost,  first  possess-
ing themselves  of  all  letters  and  papers  out  of  my  pouch,  and  the  having
upon  me  a  MS.  draft  of  the  proposed  treaty  for  the  French  acquisition  of
Belgium,  written  in  French,  while  I  asserted  myself  to  be  an  Englishman,
made  a  fine  point  against  me.

"  '  The  Major  in  command  of  the  post  was,  luckily,  a  gentleman,
though  very  strict  in  his  examination,  and  the  thing  ended  in  my  being
released,  and  sent  back  to  the  Duchy  under  guard,  but  I  was  within  an
ace  of  being  sent  into  the  interior,  to  headquarters,  for  adjudication  as
a  spy.

"  '  You  did  not  imagine  what  your  diligence  was  putting  in  pickle  for
me,  in  copying  the  treaty,  did  you  ?  Good-bye. — Ever  your  afiectionate
husband,  "  '  S.  H.  S  '

"  After  this  my  husband  told  me  that  the  sergeant  who  took  him
prisoner  had  bushy  black  whiskers,  and  answered  to  the  description  I  had
given  of  one  of  the  men  whom  I  saw  in  the  cart.  He  also  told  me  that
the  soldiers,  disguised  as  peasants,  did  not  wear  the  caps  with  peaks,
which  I  had  drawn  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  I  had  drawn  the  common  foraging
cap  of  the  Prussian  soldier,  I  not  knowing  what  those  soldiers  wore.

"  He  also  told  me  that  when  I  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  draft  treaty  it
had  not  appeared  in  any  of  the  Belgian  papers.


III.]  BBEAMS.  411

"  If  I  recollect  right,  our  letters  crossed  in  reaching  us.

"  J.  E.  Saxby."

Writing  on  March  25,  1886,  Mrs.  Saxby  adds  :—

"  The  only  hitch  about  it  is  that  according  to  my  calculations  I  saw  the
whole  thing  happen  before  it  did  happen,  but  I  cannot  help  guessing  that,
because  of  the  uncertainty  of  letters  at  the  time  of  the  war,  I  made  a
mistake  as  to  dates.  All  I  am  quite  sure  there  could  be  no  mistake
about  is,  that  my  husband's  letter  about  the  event  and  mine  telling
him  what  I  had  seen,  crossed  on  the  road.  I  have  got  his  letter  to  me,
and  he  brought  home  mine  to  him  with  the  picture  on  it;  but  he
subsequently  burnt  it,  so  my  date  was  lost."

In  the  next  case,  a  feature  is  introduced  into  the  dream  which
happened  to  be  impossible,  but  was  in  no  way  fantastic  or  symbolic.

(443)  From  Mr.  J.  D.  Best,  70,  Meldon  Street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

"December  23rd,  1885.

"  The  experience  that  you  refer  to  took  place  just  four  years  ago.  My
age  was  almost  1 9,  and  at  the  time  I  was  in  perfect  health  mentally,  though
physically  rather  fagged.  The  particulars,  as  far  as  I  remember  them,
were  as  follows  : —

"  I  had  spent  the  evening  of  December  5th  in  close  study  at  Greek
grammar.  About  11  o'clock  I  stopped,  and  sat  down  by  the  fire  to  read
Manon  Lescaut.  Some  time  afterwards  I  fell  asleep,  and  it  was  then  that
the  idea  of  my  grandmother's  illness  or  death  (I  am  uncertain  which)  first
came  to  me.  On  wakening,  about  12.30, 1  found  my  dictionary  under  the
bars,  and  my  anxiety  for  that  made  me,  for  the  moment,  forget  my  dream.
Carelessly  leaving  the  gas  burning,  I  went  to  bed  ;  and  all  I  remember  is
that  every  particular  of  the  room  which  I  saw  was  strongly  impressed
upon  me ;  that  the  old  lady  was  breathing  very  heavily  ;  and,  strangest  of
all,  my  mother,  who  was  and  is  in  Australia,  seemed  in  the  room.  She,  as
I  thought,  turned  to  me,  saying,  '  I  fear,  Duncan,  she  is  dying ! '  How
long  it  was  before  I  wakened  I  cannot  say  ;  but  every  fact  was  strangely
distinct,  for  I  seem  to  remember  even  the  ticking  of  the  clock.  The  gas
being  quite  bright  when  I  awoke,  I  rose  to  extinguish  it,  and  quite
accidentally  noticed  the  time.

"  On  receiving  the  intimation  of  her  death,  on  the  morning  of  December
7th  (Wednesday),  the  time,  I  noticed  after  my  surprise  had  passed  away,
was  between  4  and  5  a.m.  On  further  inquiry,  my  aunt  said  that  it  was
between  half-past  4  and  5  o'clock.  The  time  I  had  noticed  was  5.30.  I
did  not  know  that  my  relative  was  ill  until  I  heard  the  news  of  her  death.
She  was  no  great  friend  to  me,  and  consequently  I  rarely  troubled  her,  or
thought  of  her.  I  had  received  a  letter  a  week  before,  saying  that  she
was  not  very  well ;  but  as  she  was  a  woman  of  about  76  years,  I  took  but
little  notice  of  this,  and  had  thought  no  more  about  it.

"  You  ask  if  I  have  ever  had  other  dreams  of  death,  which  did  not
correspond  with  the  reality.     I  think  I  can  honestly  answer  '  No.'

"  John  D.  Best."

[Mr.  Best  has  gone  to  Australia,  which  prevents  us  for  the  time  from
obtaining  further  details.]


412  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  next  case  introduces  a  distinctly  bizarre  element — the
percipient's  imagination  reacting  in  a  typically  dreamlike  fashion
on  the  telepathic  impression.

(444)  From  Miss  Hutchinson,  3,  Bagdale,  Whitby.

"December  6th,  1885.

"On  the  morning  of  the  15th  February,  1864 — the  day  after  Valen-
tine's Day,  which  impressed  it  on  my  mind — my  father  told  me  he  had  had
that  night  a  most  painful  and  vivid  dream,  begging  me  not  to  mention  it
to  our  mother.  The  dream  was  this.  Our  dear  E.  clinging  to  him  wet
and  naked,  and  begg-ing  him  to  save  him,  for  he  was  drowning  ;  but  the
form  was  not  that  of  a  man  of  22,  but  what  he  was  as  a  baby.

"  Early  in  March  we  received  the  sad  intelligence  that  E.  was  drowned
off  the  Cape,  on  the  14th  February,  through  the  swamping  of  a  boat.  He
and  one  of  his  brother  officers  were  caught  in  a  squall  when  returning  to
H.M.S.  '  Tartar,'  after  a  few  hours  leave.     These  are  the  plain  facts.

"  Elizabeth  L.  Hutchinson."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Hutchinson  adds  : —

"Both  my  father  and  mother  are  dead,  and  i/* my  father  made  any
note  of  the  dream  at  the  time,  it  has  been  destroyed.  It  was  natural  for
him  to  tell  me,  being  the  eldest  in  the  family,  six  years  older  than  my
naval  brother.  It  was  on  the  morning  of  the  \bth  that  he  told  me  of  his
dream.  A  fortnight  later,  the  Cape  mail  brought  the  sad  news.  An
apparently  foolish  and  trivial  thing  impressed  the  date  on  my  memory  at
the  time  that  it  was  told  me,  the  day  after  Valentine's  Day."

We  find  from  the  Admiralty  that  Lieut.  A.  E.  Hutchinson's  death
occurred  on  Feb.  14,  1865  ;  and  Miss  Hutchinson  has  kindly  sent  us  a
photograph  of  a  tablet,  erected  to  his  memory,  which  records  that  he  was
drowned  in  Simon's  Bay  on  the  night  of  that  day,  by  the  swamping  of  a
boat.  The  difference  of  time  between  England  and  the  Cape  is  not  much
over  an  hour.

In  the  following  case  the  brightness  of  the  figure,  and  its  gesture,
were  imagery  sufficiently  appropriate  to  the  circumstances.  We
should  hardly  be  justified  in  treating  the  experience  as  other  than  a
dream ;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  form  of  the  vision — a  single
figure  appearing  in  the  room  where  the  percipient  knows  himself  to
be — is  very  unlike  ordinary  dreaming  (see  cases  527  and  545).

(445)  From  the  Rev.  John  Mathwin,  Vicar  of  West  Pelton,  Co.
Durham.  "December  19th,  1884.

"  Forty  years  ago,  or  thereabouts,  when  I  was  about  20  years  of  age,
a  lady  friend  of  mine,  a  distant  relative  by  marriage — age  between  40  and
,50 — had  for  some  time  been  in  a  delicate  state  of  health,  though  not
confined  to  the  house.  We  frequently  had  quiet  conversations  together
on  religious  matters.  Neither  of  us  was  of  an  excitable  turn  of  mind.
As  well  as  I  can  now  recollect,  I  last  saw  my  friend  ahve  about  a  fort-
niirht  before  her  death.     She  did  not  seem  at  that  time  to  be  worse  than


III.]  DREAMS.  413

usual,  and  apparently  might  have  lived  at  any  rate  for  a  few  years.
However,  one  night  when  I  was  in  bed — say  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing— I  had  what  I  may  call  a  vision.  A  figure  appeared  before  me  neatly
draped,  and  a  certain  brightness  about  it  seemed  to  awake  me.  I  at  once
felt  conscious  that  someone  was  near  me  who  wished  to  make  a  communi-
cation to  me.  I  soon  recognised  the  face  of  my  invalid  friend.  She
seemed  to  wish  to  give  me  tune  to  collect  myself — evidently  intimating
that  there  was  no  cause  why  I  should  be  afraid.  As  a  matter  of  fact  I
had  no  fear  at  all.  My  then  feelings  may  perhaps  be  best  described  as
partaking  both  of  wonder  (or  expectation)  and  pleasure.  When,  ap-
parently, the  figure  had  convinced  herself  that  I  recognised  her,  and  that
I  had  satisfied  myself  that  I  was  under  no  delusion,  she  seemed  to  beckon
me  cheeringly  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  her  right  hand,  and  to  say  to
me,  '  It's  all  right ;  come  on.'  She  then  vanished,  and  I  neither  saw  nor
heard  anything  more.

"  Though  there  was  no  injunction  given  to  me  not  to  tell  what  I  had
seen,  I  yet  felt  that  the  communication  was  of  too  solemn  a  nature  to
allow  me  at  once  to  talk  of  it  openly.  But  I  said  to  my  brother  at
breakfast,  about  8  o'clock  that  morning,  that  I  had  dreamt  in  the  night
that  Mrs.  So-and-so  was  dead,  and  it  turned  out,  as  we  heard  about
10  o'clock,  that  our  friend  had  died  during  the  night.  For  some  years  I
never  mentioned  this  experience  to  anyone,  but  afterwards  I  felt  no
hesitation  in  talking  about  it  to  intimate  friends."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Math  win  writes  on  Feb.  17th,  1885  : —

"  To  my  brother  I  spoke  of  what  I  call  the  vision  as  if  it  had  been
a  dream ;  but  this  was  because  I  did  not  wish  to  draw  his  attention
very  specially  to  it,  although  I  felt  constrained  to  mention  it  to  him  in
some  way.

"  He  tells  me  now  that  he  has  no  recollection  of  my  having  spoken  to
him  about  it,  as  I  did  at  breakfast,  on  the  morning  of  the  death,  but
before  we  knew  of  the  death  having  taken  place.  I  am  not,  however,
surprised  that  my  brother  should  not  now  recollect  the  remark  I  made  to
him  at  that  time.

"  I  never  had  any  similar  experience  before,  neither  have  I  had  since.
I  had  no  reason  to  expect  any  communication  of  the  kind  at  any  time.

"  John  Mathwin."

[In  an  uncorroborated  case  of  so  remote  a  date,  it  is  of  course  im-
possible to  be  certain  that  the  coincidence  was  as  exact  as  in  memory  it
appears  to  have  been.]

The  next  case  is  very  similar,  though  it  was  possibly  not  the
dying  person  who  was  the  agent.

(446)  From  Mrs.  Penny,  The  Cottage,  CuUompton.

"November  30th,  1882.

"One  day  I  slept  late,  having  a  bad  headache,  and  dreamed  that  I  was
in  a  wonderfully  beautiful  garden,  and  while  I  walked  along  its  alleys  a
friend  of  one  of  my  sisters,  F.  H.,  came  smiling  towards  me,  dressed  in
white,  and  looking  radiant  with  joy.     She  said,  '  I  am  here  now,'  and  it  is


414  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

always  so  lovely.'  On  waking,  I  found  breakfast  and  letters  brought  up,
and  one  open  on  my  pillow  to  my  sister  from  the  sister  of  F.  H.,  telling
her  that  she  had  died  after  a  very  short  illness.

"Now,  as  this  poor  F.  H.,  who  seldom  had  a  day's  happiness,  was  to
me  only  an  acquaintance,  I  conclude  that  the  aura  of  her  sister  conveyed
to  my  higher  consciousness  the  fact  of  which  she  was  full,  and  in  the
momentary  duration  of  a  dream  this  fact  got  translated  into  the  adjacent
ideas  of  life  in  Paradise.

"  Yery  likely  the  consciousness  of  my  two  sisters  did  affect  my
dreaming  brain  by  some  wave  of  new  and  energetic  impulse ;  but  I
know  there  had  been  no  possibility  of  talking  in  my  room  that  morning.
Though  it  all  happened  years  ago,  I  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  my
memory.  I  cannot  be  sure  whether  it  was  in  1852  or  a  year  or  two
later.  "A.  J.  Penny."

We  find  from  a  notice  in  the  Gentleman^s  Magazine  that  F,  H.  died
on  June  6,  1852.

(447)  From  a  German  nurse  who  has  been  for  22  years  in  the  service
of  Mrs.  Balgarnie,  of  9,  Filey  Road,  Scarborough.

"July  9th,  1885.

"  In  February,  1871,  I  dreamed  one  night  that  I  received  a  letter,  on
the  envelope  of  which  was  written  in  my  father's  handwriting,  '  0  Death,
where  is  thy  sting  ?  '

"  Next  morning  I  went  in  great  trouble  to  my  mistress,  saying  I  felt
perfectly  sure  my  father  must  be  dead,  and  related  my  dream.  This
fact  was  immediately  written  down,  but  the  paper  cannot  now  be  found.
Three  days  after  the  news  came  that  my  father  had  died  that  Sunday
night,  quite  suddenly.  During  the  day  of  the  night  on  which  he  died  he
had  evidently  wished  to  tell  me  something,  for  he  twice  said,  '  Tell  Marie,
tell  Marie  !'  He  soon  became  unconscious,  and  died  in  his  sleep.  I  had
not  seen  him  for  eight  years,  and  though  I  knew  he  was  not  well,  I  had  no
idea  that  death  was  expected.  My  father  lived  and  died  in  Germany,
while  I  was,  and  am,  in  England.  "  Marie  Lautier."

Miss  Balgarnie,  writing  on  December  11th,  1884,  gave  us  a  precisely
similar  account,  saying,  "  the  date  and  circumstances  were  put  down  by
us  immediately  "  on  the  narration  of  the  dream.

Mrs.  Balgarnie  writes  on  July  28,  1885  : —

In  answer  to  yours,  I  can  only  say  that  the  nurse  told  me  her  dream,
on  my  entering  the  nursery  one  morning,  adding,  '  I  am  sure  my  father  is
dead.'  And  so  it  proved ;  in  three  days  the  letter  announced  the  fact,  and
that  he  died  with  her  name  on  his  lips.

"  I  do  not  think  I  can  give  you  any  more  particulars.  I  can't  find  the
memorandum  of  the  incident.  "  M.  Balgarnie."

[The  narrator's  father,  it  appears,  had  been  ill  for  3  or  4  months ;  and
she  states  that,  though  she  had  not  heard  of  his  being  worse,  her  thoughts
had  been  a  good  deal  occupied  with  him.  Mrs.  Balgarnie,  however,  thinks
that  she  now  rather  exaggerates  the  extent  to  which  this  was  the  case,
from  an  objection  to  having  her  experience  regarded  as  of  any  special
interest.]


III.]  DREAMS.  415

In  the  next  case,  the  imagery  is  again  distinctly  suggestive  of
death,  and  fantastically  represents  the  popular  conception  of  "  spirit "
as  a  tenuous  form  of  matter,  but  has  no  emotional  character.

(448)  From  Mr.  W.  Brooks,  Brooksby  House,  87,  Petherton  Road
Highbury  New  Park,  N.  u  j^^y  27th,  1885.

"On  the  15th  November,  1875,  at  5,  Wallace  Road,  N.,  at  7.45  a.m.,
or  thereabouts,  I  saw  my  late  brother  as  a  spirit,  but  when  I  spoke  to
'him,'  he  gradually  disappeared.     I  then  woke  up.

"  On  arriving  at  Hastings  the  following  morning,  I  learnt  from  my
sister  that  the  above  was  the  time  my  brother  died  there.  This  was  the
only  time  I  ever  saw  him  in  the  form  of  a  '  ghost.'    a  ^    jj_  Brooks."

"We  find  the  date  and  place  of   death  confirmed  in  the  Times  obituary.

The  following  is  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  dream  : —

"  The  '  appearance '  was :  There  was  a  long  room  or  gallery,  and
several  of  my  friends  there,  including  my  brother.  He  was  like  '  Pepper's
Grhost '  as  regards  substance,  or  rather  want  of  substance.  None  of  the
other  friends  had  a  hazy  appearance.  They  were  in  ordinary  attire,  as  I
should  see  them  in  a  room.  My  brother  was  the  only  '  ghostly '  figure.
He  advanced  gradually  towards  me,  which  made  me  feel  a  little  nervous,
and  looked  kindly  at  me.  I  advanced  a  little  and  said,  'James,  why  do
you  not  speak  % '  which  utterance  seemed  to  make  him  recede.  He  retired
a  little  down  the  room,  and  gradually  became  more  indistinct,  and  disap-
peared. None  of  the  friends  seemed  to  take  any  decided  notice,  and  did
not  speak.  I  then  woke.  My  forcing  or  insisting  upon  a  reply  seemed  to
be  the  cause  of  my  waking,  and  I  had  to  look  round  to  gather  myself
together  and  ascertain  that  I  was  in  bed  when  I  so  awoke.

"  I  do  not  think  I  can  afford  any  corroboration.  On  the  afternoon  of
the  same  day,  I  mentioned  the  matter  to  my  aunt  and  her  husband.  She
is  now  dead,  and  I  do  not  think  my  uncle  would  recollect  the  account.  I
did  not  make  much  of  it,  as  1  was  a  disbeliever  in  ghosts.  I  dared  not
mention  the  occurrence  to  my  mother,  as  she  would  have  grieved  all  day
about  my  brother  if  I  had.

"  I  have  never  had  any  other  similar  instance.  I  have  had  relations
die,  but  have  been  near  them  at  the  time  of  death,     u  -^    jj    Brooks  "

In  later  letters  Mr.  Brooks  writes  : —

"  I  have  communicated  with  my  uncle  as  I  promised,  but  he  does  not
recollect  any  of  the  circumstances.

"  In  reply  to  your  further  queries  : —

1.  "The  dream  did  not  make  Sb  particularly  unpleasant  impression  ;  it
was  certainly  unpleasant  and  unusual,  and  on  waking  I  felt  nervous,  but
the  occurrence  faded  from  my  memory  slowly,  so  far  as  the  sharp  impres-
sion was  concerned,  All  day  Sunday,  however,  I  was  wondering  how  my
brother  was,  and  when  I  saw  my  sister  on  the  Monday  I  thought  of  the
strange  coincidence.

2.  "  My  sister  recollects  when  she  informed  me  (of  the  '  time '  of  the
death)  on  the  Monday  that  I  remarked,  '  How  strange  !  that  is  the  time  I
saw  James  at  my  bedside.'


416  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

3.  "  I  had  no  reason  to  expect  my  brother's  death  at  the  time  it  did
take  place,  except  an  expectation  that  one's  worst  fears  might  at  any  time
be  realised  in  a  case  where  consumption  had  taken  hold."

The  following  is  from  Mr.  Brooks'  sister,  Mrs.  Plaistowe  : —

"  Brooksby  House,  August  4th,  1885.

"  In  answer  to  your  letter,  I  have  to  state  that  my  brother  William,
on  his  arriving  at  Hastings  in  November,  1875,  and  being  informed  by  me
of  the  hour  of  my  late  brother  James's  death  (viz.,  a  quarter  to  8  a.m.),
said  that  it  exactly  coincided  with  the  time  that  he,  my  brother  William,
saw  James  in  a  spirit  or  vision.  [In  conversation,  Mrs.  Plaistowe  stated
that  Mr.  Brooks  came  down  on  the  Monday  afternoon,  and,  on  hearing
the  hour  of  his  brother's  death,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  dream  was
exactly  coincident.]

"  I  may  remark  that  the  death  was  unexpected  by  the  members  of
the  family,  as  James  was  away  from  home  with  me  at  Hastings ;  and
although  he  had  been  suffering  from  consumption  for  three  or  four  years,
no  intimation  of  his  becoming  worse  had  been  received  by  any  one  in
the  family,  so  that  my  brother's  statement  to  you  is  corroborated  by  me.

"M.  Plaistowe."

On  examination  it  turned  out  that  Mr.  Brooks'  strong  impression  is
that  his  dream  occurred  on  a  Sunday  morning — in  which  case  it  preceded
the  death  by  some  24  hours,  though  of  course  falling  at  a  time  of  critical
illness.  This  view  accords  with  his  recollection  of  mentioning  the  dream
to  his  uncle  and  aunt  in  the  afternoon ;  but  is  opposed  to  his  recollection
(which  Mrs.  Plaistowe  supports)  of  noticing  at  the  time  that  the
coincidence  was  exact.  There  being  a  doubt  on  the  matter,  the  case
must  not  be  included  in  the  special  group  of  death-dreams  dealt  with
in  Vol.  I.,  p.  307.

(449)  The  journal  Psychische  Studien  (Leipzig)  for  March,  1874,
contains  a  long  and  interesting  account,  written  down  for  the  late
Professor  Perty,  of  Berne,  by  the  wife  of  the  Russian  Imperial  Councillor,
M.  Alex.  Aksakof,  who  says  that  he  has  frequently  heard  all  the
particulars.

Madame  Aksakof  was  19  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and
says  that  she  "had  no  ideas  about  Spiritualism,  and  no  tendency  to
enthusiasm  or  mysticism."  The  principal  incidents  were  that  Madame
Aksakof's  brother-in-law,  Dr.  A.  F.  Sengireef,  from  whom  she  had  parted
about  half  a  year  previously  with  some  coldness,  appeared  to  her,  on  the
night  of  May  12th,  1855,  in  what  seems  to  have  been  a  very  prolonged
and  feverish  vision,  in  which  she  must  have  been  partially  awake,  as  in
the  course  of  it  she  heard  the  clock  strike  3,  and  her  child  and  its  nurse
move.  The  figure  in  the  vision  held  his  cold  hand  on  her  mouth,  and
repeatedly  bade  her  kiss  it ;  and  then,  after  spreading  out  a  roll  of
parchment  beside  her,  recited  a  prayer  in  front  of  a  crucifix,  and  finally
disappeared,  to  the  sound  of  sacred  music  and  in  a  blaze  of  light.  She
noticed  his  "long  black  hair  hanging  down  on  his  shoulders,  and  a  large
round  beard  such  as  I  had  never  seen  him  wear.  The  day  after  this
terrible  event,"  she  continues,  "we  received  the  news  of  the  illness  of  my
brother-in-law,  Sengireef,  and  about  a  fortnight  later,  tidings  of  his  death,


HI.]  DREAMS.  417

which  took  place  in  that  night  of  the  12th-13th  of  May,  about  5  o'clock
in  the  morning.  The  following  is  noteworthy.  When  my  sister-in-law,
a  few  weeks  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  came  to  live  with  us  at
Romanoff-Borissogiiebsk,  she  mentioned  incidentally  to  a  lady  in  my
presence  that  her  late  husband  had  been  buried  with  long  hair  hanging
down  to  his  shoulders,  and  with  a  large  curious-looking  beard  which  had
grown  during  his  illness."

M.  Aksakof  suggests  that  the  parchment  in  the  vision  may  have
represented  a  "  sin-remission  chart "  which  it  is  a  Russian  custom  to  place
in  coffins.

I  will  now  give  a  group  of  cases  where  death  is  symbolised  in
some  more  mundane  and  gloomy  manner.

(450)  From  a  lady  whose  name  I  am  at  liberty  to  mention,  but  not  to
print.

"March  5th,  1885.

"  Two  friends  of  ours,  Mr.  X.  [name  given  in  confidence]  and  Mr.  Y.,
lived  together  till  the  marriage  of  Mr.  X.,  and  were,  therefore,  intimately
associated  in  our  minds.

"  It  happened  that  though  Mrs.  X.  and  I  had  exchanged  cards  we  had
not  met,  and  I  merely  knew  her  by  sight  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Y.  also
married.  But  as  I  had  found  Mrs.  Y.  at  home,  I  was  slightly  acquainted
with  her.

"  It  was  a  few  months  after  Mr.  Y.'s  marriage,  on  the  night  of
May  14th,  1879,  when  my  dream  occurred.  I  was  staying  at  Bristol
at  the  time.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  making  my  first  call  on  Mrs.  Y.,
and  that  she  proceeded  to  show  me  her  trousseau — a  thing  that  would
never  have  occurred  to  her  in  actual  life,  or  to  any  but  very  intimate
friends.  A  variety  of  dresses  were  displayed,  and  as  I  was  looking  at  a
black-net  evening  dress,  with  crimson  trimmings,  thinking  it  was  very  like
one  of  my  own,  a  sudden  transformation  took  place.  Mrs.  Y.  had  changed
into  Mrs.  X.,  and  the  dress  was  a  widow's  dress  complete.  I  woke  very
strongly  impressed  with  the  dream,  and  mentioned  it  to  my  father  the  next
morning.  It  haunted  me  till,  on  May  15th  or  16th,  I  saw  the  Times
announcement  of  Mr.  X.'s  death.

"  Afterwards  I  learnt  that,  on  the  afternoon  preceding  my  dream,
Mr.  X.  had  returned  home,  apparently  in  his  usual  good  health,  only
rather  tired,  but  within-half-an-hour  had  died  of  quite  unsuspected  heart
disease.

"  My  father  was  ill  at  the  time  of  my  dream,  and  does  not  remember
the  circumstance.  But  my  sister  remembers  it  clearly,  and  testifies  to  the
fact  [by  her  initials].  "  A    E.  R.

"J.T.  R."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  of  May  16,  1879,  that  the  death
took  place  on  May  14.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  R.  says  : —

"  My  sister  was  not  with  me,  so  I  could  not  speak  about  it  to  her.  I  can-
not find  any  of  my  letters  written  after  May  14th,  so  do  not  know  if  I  wrote

VOL.    11.  2    B


418  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

to  her  on  the  15th  or  not.  But  she  came  to  me  (as  my  father  was  taken
seriously  ill  about  that  date)  and  heard  of  the  dream  and  of  the  death
at  the  time  [■i.e.,  she  heard  of  the  dream  at  the  same  time  as  she  heard  of
the  death].  I  am  quite  certain  that  the  dream  was  on  the  night  of  the  day
of  death,  May  14th."

Fortunately  Miss  R.  has  been  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of  a  letter  (post
mark,  Bristol,  May  17,  1879),  which  she  wrote  to  a  friend  3  days  after
her  dream  ;  in  which  the  following  words  occur  : —

"  Poor  Mr.  X.  died  on  Wednesday  ;  I  do  not  know  of  what.

"  On  Wednesday  night  [May  14th]  (having  heard  nothing  of  them,  Mr.
and  Mrs.  X.,  for  months,  since  I  saw  them  looking  well  and  happy
together),  I  dreamed  Mrs.  X.  was  showing  me  her  trousseau,  and  that  she
called  special  attention  to  an  elaborately  made  shroud.  She  said  that
Scotch  people  always  considered  these  the  most  necessary  part  of  a
trousseau.  The  one  I  saw  was  her  husband's ;  hers  changed  to  simply  a
black  dress,  as  I  looked  at  it.  It  was  a  very  vivid  dream  and  impressed
me.     Last  night  we  saw  the  death  in  the  Times,  May  14th."

Referring  to  the  account  above  quoted,  Miss  R.  adds  : —
"  I  do  not  know  why  I  should  have  forgotten  about  the  shroud ;  this
must  have  been    one  of  the  many  dresses  I   saw  before  the  change  took
place.     My  friend  did  not  know  the  Y.'s,  and  did  not  know  Mr.   X.,
so  that  I  left  out  any  superfluous  matter."

(451)  From  a  niece  of  the  late  Rev.  G.  L.  Foote,  Rector  of  Christ's
Church,  Roxbury,  Litchfield  Co.,  Conn.,  U.S.A.  <«18ft4.

"  In  1848,  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote  drove  with  his  family  to  Windham,
Greene  Co.,  N.Y.,  to  visit  Mrs.  Foote's  mother.  At  this  time,  his
youngest  brother,  Henry,  afterwards  Dr.  H.  H.  Foote,  of  Newtown,  Fair-
field Co.,  Ct.,  was  studying  medicine  in  Durham,  about  10  miles  from
Windham,  and  living  with  an  aunt  who  resided  there.  Mr.  Foote,  with
his  family,  arrived  in  Windham  on  Friday,  and  it  was  his  intention  to  start
on  his  return  to  Roxbury  on  Monday,  deferring  his  visit  to  his  brother
and  aunt  until  his  return  for  his  family  a  few  weeks  later.  On  Friday
night  he  dreamed  that  he  was  taking  the  body  of  his  brother  home  to
Newtown  in  a  metallic  coffin,  and  that  he  had  died  of  small-pox.  He
thought  not  enough  of  the  dream  the  next  day  to  speak  of  it,  but  on
Saturday  night  he  dreamed  the  same  dream  in  every  particular  twice,  ^  and
it  so  impressed  him  that  he  was  unable  to  keep  it  out  of  his  mind.

"  The  clergyman  of  the  place  desired  him  to  preach  for  him  on  Sunday,
and  he  consented ;  but  during  the  whole  of  the  service  and  the  sermon,  the
recollection  of  the  dream  continually  intruded  itself  upon  his  thoughts.
After  service  he  told  his  brother-in-law,  O.  S.  Tuttle,  now  of  Minneapolis,
Minn.,  that  it  was  impressed  upon  his  mind  that  something  was  wrong  at
Durham,  and  he  wished  he  would  harness  his  horse  and  drive  him  over
there.  He  accordingly  did  so,  and  as  they  drove  up  in  front  of  the  house
of  his  aunt,  she  came  out  upon  the  porch,  and  holding  up  her  hands,
exclaimed,    '  George    Foote  !    What   has    sent   you  here  ?      I    have   just

1  As  to  the  repetition,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  357,  445,  and  c/.  case  213,  and  cases  457
and  484  below.


III.]  DREAMS.  419

persuaded  Henry  to  let  me  write  to  ask  you  to  come  and  take  care  of  him  ;
he  is  sick  with  small-pox.'  Although  she  had  had  the  disease  and  conse-
quently was  not  afraid  of  it,  she  knew  she  could  not  alone  take  care  of  him,
and  that  of  all  the  relatives  George  was  the  only  one  who  could  with
perfect  safety  attend  him,  as,  while  in  Trinity  College,  Hartford,  he  had
varioloid,  in  consequence  of  taking  care  of  a  room-mate  who  had  the  same
disease.  Mr.  Tuttle  returned  to  Windham,  leaving  Mr.  Foote  to  nurse
his  brother  through  the  sickness,  which  was  so  terrible  that  very  few  have
ever  been  so  low  and  have  been  raised  again  to  health  and  strength.

"  Mr.  Foote  used  often  to  say  that,  if  anyone  had  been  nursing  his
brother  who  had  no  special  interest  in  him,  he  had  no  doubt  he  would  have
been  buried  ;  for  at  three  different  times  he  himself  thought  the  last  breath
had  been  drawn,  but  he  persevered  in  the  use  of  restoratives,  and  by  the
most  assiduous  care  helped  fan  to  a  flame  the  apparently  dying  spark."

Mr.  H.  L.  Foote,  son  of  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote  in  the  narrative,
writes  : —

"  The  above  account  is  given  by  the  niece  of  the  Rev.  George  L.  Foote,
and  is  substantially  the  same  that  I  have  heard  spoken  of  by  the  members
of  my  family."

The  Rev.  R.  Whittingham,  of  Pikesville,  Maryland,  U.S.A.,  a  Corre-
sponding Member  of  the  S.P.R.,  writes  on  September  9,  1884  : —

"  Several  years  ago  I  heard  the  Rev.  Mr.  G.  L.  Foote  allude  to  this
dream  as  having  saved  his  brother's  life,  according  to  his  belief.  He  was
ignorant  of  any  existence  of  small-pox  [at  this  place]  as  it  had  not  been
prevalent ;  nor  did  it  become  epidemic,  although  there  were  three  or  four
other  cases  at  the  time."  [This  last  point  is  from  a  reply  of  the  Rev.  G,
L.  Foote  himself  to  an  inquiry  which  had  been  specially  addressed  to  him
on  the  subject.]

(452)  From  Miss  Tracy,  Mawson  Road,  St.  Barnabas,  Cambridge  (now
Mrs.  William  Tracy).  ,<  December,  1885.

"  My  mother  died  on  the  11th  of  February,  1882,  about  8.30  p.m.,  on
a  Saturday,  at  Beccles,  Suffolk.  At  that  time,  my  youngest  brother,  who
is  blind,  was  (and  is  still)  at  the  Blind  College,  Worcester.  On  the
evening  above  mentioned,  he  went  to  bed  as  usual,  and,  I  believe,  to
sleep.  Rather  later  in  the  evening,  one  of  the  masters  went  into  the  room
where  my  brother  was,  to  see  if  all  was  right.  When  there,  he  heard  one
of  the  boys  crying,  and  found  it  was  my  brother,  who  said  his  mother  had
come  to  him  to  say  good-bye,  as  she  was  going  away,  &c.  It  was  some
time  before  he  coulcl  be  quieted.  He  did  not  hear  of  his  mother's  death
until  the  Monday  following.     He  was  at  the  time  9  years  old.

"  This  is  as  nearly  as  possible  what  I  was  told  nearly  four  years  ago.
If  the  master  who  heard  him  was  found  out,  he  would  be  able  to  give  it
more  correctly.  "  E.  M.  Tracy."

In  conversation  with  a  friend  of  ours,  who  made  inquiries  on  our
behalf,  Miss  Tracy  said  that  her  mother  had  died  very  suddenly.  She
had  complained  of  a  slight  headache  about  5  o'clock,  and  died  between  8
and  8.30.  She  was  unconscious  for  some  time  before  she  died  ;  therefore
it  would  have  been  impossible  to  tell  the  exact  moment  of  her  death ;
VOL.  II.  2    E    2


420  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

and  in  the  consternation  of  the  moment  they  did  not  look  at  the  time.
The  boy  said  that  he  had  seen  his  mother  (it  appears  that  he  always  speaks
of  seeing  people,  though  quite  blind)  ;  that  he  had  tried  to  hold  her,  but
that  she  had  slipped  away  from  him.  He  did  not  refer  to  the  vision  the
next  morning,  nor  has  he  ever  alluded  to  it  since ;  and  they  do  not  wish
him  to  be  reminded  of  the  circumstance."

The  Times  obituary  confirms  the  date  given,  and  the  fact  that  the
death  was  sudden.

The  following  letter  is  from  the  Rev.  S.  G.  Forster,  Head-Master  of
the  Blind  College,  Worcester.  ,  December  17th,  1885.

"  The  facts  of  the  boy  Tracy's  dream,  as  elicited  from  himself,  are  that
he  dreamed  on  the  Saturday  night,  during  the  night  (and  did  not  wake  up
till  7  a.m.  next  morning),  that  his  mother  was  dead,  and  was  being  buried
in  part  of  our  old  place  called  The  Swings.  His  mother,  as  I  understand
(but  Miss  Tracy  could  clear  this  up),  died  at  8  p.m.  on  Saturday  night.
Tracy  would  go  to  bed  at  9  or  9.15,  an  hour  or  so  after  the  occurrence.
Owing  to  the  surprise  and  trouble  at  home,  we  did  not  hear  of  it  by  letter
till  the  Monday  after.  "  S.  Gl.  Forstee."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Forster  writes  on  January  5,  1886  : —
"  I  do  not  remember  who  the  particular  person  was  to  whom  he  told
his  dream,  but  I  can  distinctly  state  we  all  knew  of  it,  and  that  the  dream
was  described  before  the  fact  was  known."

Mr.  Forster  subsequently  ascertained  that  the  dream  was  first  related,
not  to  a  master,  but  to  Mr.  L.  G.  Sandford,  one  of  his  pupils,  who  has
written  to  us  as  follows  : —

"  Icomb  Rectory,  Stow-on-the-Wold.

"  February  12th,  1886.
"  I  regret  that,  at  this  distance,  I  cannot  give  you  dates.  As  far  as  my
recollections  go,  Tracy  told  me  of  his  dream  on  the  morning  following  the
night  on  which  he  had  it.  It  was  simply  that  his  mother  had  died.
Beyond  this,  it  was  mixed  up  with  all  the  inconsistencies  and  absurdities
common  to  dreams,  and  which  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  mention,
unless  you  particularly  wish  to  hear  them.  The  news  of  his  mother's
death  reached  him  on  the  day  after  he  told  me  of  his  dream,  her  death
having  happened  on  the  same  clay — that  is,  the  day  on  which  he  told  me.
I  believe  she  died  late  in  the  afternoon,  but  of  this  I  am  not  sure.

«  L.  G.  Sandford."
(453)  From  a  lady  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  appear.

"  My  father  was  one  of  a  family  of  21  children,  between  many  of
whom  naturally  little  or  no  communication  was  kept  up  in  after  years.
Among  them  was  an  uncle  living  at  Blackheath,  whose  wife  I  had  never
seen,  and  all  I  knew  of  her  was  that  she  was  sufiering  from  a  mortal
disease,  but  of  her  prospects  of  a  more  or  less  prolonged  life  I  had  heard
nothing,  nor  had  my  thoughts  been  in  any  way  turned  towards  her — when
one  Sunday  night,  while  I  was  on  a  visit  to  an  aunt  in  Hampshire,  I
dreamt  that  I  had  a  letter  from  my  aunt  at  Blackheath,  urgently  pressing
me  to  come  and  see  her.  Accordingly  in  my  dream  I  set  out,  and
travelling  all  night,  arrived  at  Blackheath  on  Monday  morning.     I  was


III.]  DREAMS,  421

shown  up  to  my  aunt's  room,  who  lamented  to  me  that  she  had  been  so
much  estranged  from  our  branch  of  the  family,  and  after  talking  for  a
while,  she  looked  at  her  watch  and  said,  'It  is  a  quarter  past  8,  now  you
must  go ' ;  telling  me  to  go  down  to  the  others.  I  had  great  difficulty  in
finding  my  way  in  an  unknown  house,  and  was  a  long  time  about  it,  but
at  last,  when  I  saw  by  my  watch  that  it  was  a  quarter  to  9,  I  reached
the  dining-room,  and  found  there  a  number  of  my  relations  in  mourning,
who  explained  it  by  saying  that  my  aunt  was  dead.

"  In  the  morning  I  had  a  very  vivid  impression  of  my  dream,  which
I  told  to  my  relations  with  whom  I  was  staying ;  and  I  had  so  strong  a
feeling  of  the  reality  of  the  intimation,  that  I  wrote  privately  to  my
dressmaker  to  countermand  a  pink  silk  dress  that  I  had  ordered.  The
next  day,  when  a  mourning  letter  arrived,  I  said,  '  Now  you  will  see  that
Aunt  Eliza  is  dead.'  And  so  it  proved  to  be  the  case,  my  aunt  having
died  at  8.30  on  Monday  morning,  midway  between  the  time  at  which  she
had  told  me  in  my  dream  that  I  must  go,  and  the  time  I  reached  the
dining-room  where  her  relations  told  me  that  she  was  dead.  It  will  be
observed  that  my  dream  was  several  hours  before  the  actual  death."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on
February  2,  1869,  which  was  a  Monday.

[The  countermanding  of  the  pink  dress  may  certainly  be  taken  as  a
sign  that  the  dream  produced  an  exceptional  impression.  The  narrator  is
out  of  England,  ancl  we  have  been  unable  to  obtain  the  corroboration  of
her  relatives.]

(454)  From  Mr.  Richard  Mountjoy  Gardiner  (Solicitor),  8,  Bath
Terrace,  Blyth,  and  13,  Groat  Market,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

"  February  6th,  1884.

"In  1875  I  was  in  a  sailing  ship  bound  for  Australia.  Amongst  the
officers  on  board  was  one  of  my  dearest  friends ;  he  was  third  mate,
and  had  to  keep  watch  from  8  to  12  on  the  forecastle.  I  invariably
made  it  a  rule  to  stay  with  him  during  his  watch.  One  night,  after  his
duty  was  over,  instead  of  staying  for  an  hour  and  smoking  a  pipe  as  was
his  general  custom,  he  '  turned  in.'  I  remained  smoking  and  talking  to
the  sailors.  About  1.15  my  friend  came  up  to  me  in  a  very  excited
manner  and  said,  '  I  am  sure  that  the  Major  '  (who  was  his  father)  '  is  dead,
as  I  dreamt  I  saw  him  put  in  his  coffin.'  I  tried  to  calm  him  as  much  as
I  could,  and  told  him  it  was  nonsense.  However,  he  would  not  go  back
to  his  cabin  that  night,  so  we  remained  on  deck  until  morning.  With
the  return  of  daylight  he  recovered  his  spirits,  and  felt  inclined  to  laugh
at  his  dream.  In  the  evening  he  kept  watch  as  usual,  but  again  turned
in  a  few  minutes  past  12.  I  remained  on  deck;  about  1.10  he  came
rushing  up  and  said  he  knew  his  father  was  dead  as  he  had  seen  the  coffin
put  into  the  hearse,  and  had  followed  it  to  Kensal  Green  Cemetery,  and
had  seen  it  lowered  into  the  grave.  I  took  him  into  my  cabin  and  made
him  sleep  in  my  bunk.  He  was  very  quiet  for  a  few  days  after,  and  could
not  bear  to  have  the  subject  mentioned.  However,  he  shortly  recovered
his  usual  good  spirits.  [On  their  arrival  at  Melbourne,  a  letter  conveying
the  news  of  his  father's  death  was  found  there.]  After  a  few  weeks  he
was  able  to  calmly  talk  the  matter  over,  and  on  our  consulting  our  diaries,
we  found  that  his  father  had  died  on  the  same  night  as  his  first  dream,  and


422  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

was  buried  on  the  second.  On  our  return  to  England,  we  ascertained
(after  calculating  the  difference  of  time)  that  his  father  died  and  was
buried  at  the  exact  tiine  that  he  dreamed  it.  The  most  curious  thing  was
that  he  died  at  an  hotel  in  Harley  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  London,  of
dropsy,  and  the  proprietress — for  the  convenience  of  her  visitors —
requested  that  he  might  be  buried  the  day  after  he  died,  which  was  done.
There  are  others  besides  myself  who  can  vouch  that  the  whole  of  what  I
have  written  is  true.

"Another  curious  fact  about  my  friend's  dream  was  that  he  dreamed
his  father  was  buried  at  Kensal  Green,  which  was  the  fact,  though  his
family  vault  is  at  Brompton  Cemetery,  but  for  some  reason  there  was  not
time  to  go  through  the  necessary  formalities  to  have  it  opened.

"  Richard  Mountjoy  Gardiner."

[We  hope  in  time  to  receive  an  account  of  this  incident  from  the
dreamer  himself,  Mr.  C,  who  is  now  on  distant  service.  Inquiries  have
been  made  at  every  lodging-house  and  private  hotel  in  Harley  Street,  but
most  of  them  have  changed  hands  since  1875,  and  we  could  obtain  no
record  of  the  death.  There  is  probably  some  mistake  as  to  the  Kensal  Green
Cemetery;  for  we  find  that  no  Major  G.  was  buried  there  in  1875.
But  apart  from  this,  it  is  difiicult  to  see  how  the  statement  as  to  the
second  dream  can  possibly  be  correct.  For  since  the  letter  had
time  to  outstrip  Mr.  Gardiner's  ship,  that  ship  must  have  been  quite  6
weeks'  sail  from  Australia  at  the  time  of  death,  and  probably  not  far
east  of  long.  0°.  To  have  exactly  coincided,  therefore,  with  the  second
dream,  the  funeral  would  have  had  to  take  place  at  midnight.  It  will  be
observed  that  the  second  dream,  while  difficult  to  account  for  by  telepathy,
would  be  a  very  natural  sequel  to  the  first.     Cf.  case  468  below.]

(455)  From  Mr.  G.  H.  F.  Prynne,  10,  Torrington  Square,  W.C,  who
wrote  the  following  letter  to  his  mother,  from  Australia,  in  the  autumn
of  1874:—

"I  was  extremely  sorry  to  hear  [in  a  letter  from  his  mother]  of  the
sad  death  of  poor  Miss  E.  I  remember  her  very  well,  and  have  her  name
in  my  diary  for  1871  mentioned  several  times,  and  it  is  a  most  extra-
ordinary thing  that  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  April  (or  8th),  I  am
not  quite  certain  which,  I  had  an  extraordinary  dream.

"  I  dreamt  I  was  walking  along  some  road  with  dear  Ted,  and  that  I
met  two  people,  carrying  a  box.  We  both  asked  to  see  the  contents.  These
gloomy  personages  stood  still,  put  the  box  on  the  road,  and  then  ran  off".
I  came  and  opened  the  box,  which  I  had  no  sooner  done  than  a  dead  hand
of  a  corpse  fell  on  to  mine.  I  can  well  remember  the  feeling  of  horror
that  came  over  me,  and  I  ran  back,  saying  I  would  not  examine  the  box
further.  The  face  seemed  to  me  like  that  of  Edith  L.  Eddie  said  he
would  see  who  it  was,  and  on  returning  I  found  it  to  be  the  corpse  of
some  well-known  person,  which  in  the  latter  part  of  the  dream  I  recognised
to  be  that  of  Miss  E.  i

"  The  dream  seemed  so  much  out  of  the  ordinary  that  I  told  it  fully
to  H.  and  two  other  friends  at  breakfast,  and  also  to  the  W.'s  two  days
afterwards."

1  As  regards  the  particular  form  of  delayed  recognition,  this  case  resembles  No.  249
and  once  more  exemplifies  the  parallelism  of  dreams  and  waking  hallucinations.


III.]  DREAMS.  423

Colonel  B.,  father  of  the  Miss  E.  referred  to,  writes  that  Mr.  Prynne
had  met  his  daughter  a  few  times,  in  1871,  when  she  was  about
14|-  years  old;  and  that  she  died  on  April  8th,  1874.  From  the  Times
obituary,  we  find  that  she  died  in  the  morning  of  that  day.  Thus  whether
the  dream  in  Australia  was  on  the  night  of  the  7th  or  of  the  8th,  it  may
very  well  have  been  within  12  hours  of  the  death.

[Mr.  Prynne  has  tried  to  procure  corroborative  testimony  to  his
immediate  mention  of  the  dream  ;  but  his  friends  have  moved,  and  he  has
not  yet  succeeded.  He  is  certain  that  his  dream  was  on  one  of  the  nights
mentioned,  though  he  does  not  now  recall  what  enabled  him  to  fix  it  so
accurately  some  months  afterwards.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  doubt
which  he  felt  between  two  nights  is  a  strong  indication  that  he  had  some
independent  means  of  narrowing  down  the  time  to  that  extent.  He  believes
that  he  mentioned  his  dream  in  a  letter  to  his  mother  at  the  time,  before
hearing  of  the  death ;  but  no  such  letter  can  now  be  found.]

(456)  From  Mrs.  Mogridge,  of  137,  Cowbridge  Road,  Canton,  Cardiff.

"January  3rd,  1884.

"  My  little  girl,  aged  7,  came  into  my  room  on  the  morning  of  the  25th
of  December,  1882.  She  said,  '  Oh,  mamma,  I  have  had  such  a  dream  :  I
saw  baby  Harris  in  a  little  box  on  the  table  downstairs,  and  her  hands
were  crossed ;  and  she  looked  so  white.'  [Mr.  Mogridge  tells  us  that
the  Harrises  were  acquaintances  in  a  distant  part  of  the  town.]  I  am
certain  she  had  not  seen  the  child,  nor  had  she  heard  us  speak  of  it  or  the
family,  and  I  do  not  think  she  had  seen  it  more  than  once  during  the  four
months  of  its  life.

"  On  the  evening  of  the  25th  or  26th,  my  daughter,  aged  17,  told  me
of  the  death  of  the  child,  which  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  24th.  And
a  day  or  two  after,  the  mother  took  my  little  girl  into  her  house,  and
showed  her  the  child  in  the  cofiin  on  the  table  (where  it  had  been  placed
for  the  convenience  of  the  inquest),  exactly  as  she  had  described  it  to  me
in  her  dream.  c.j^  j^  Mogeidge."

The  death  was  caused  suddenly  by  an  accident ;  and  the  Register  of
Deaths  confirms  the  date  given.

[We  should  not  be  disposed  to  lay  stress  on  the  correspondence  here,
beyond  the  simple  coincidence  of  the  death.  The  details  were  not  written
down,  and  may  have  crept  in  afterwards ;  and  in  any  case  the  cofiin,  as  we
have  found,  is  a  very  common  dream-symbol.  The  case  is  one  of  those  where
personal  knowledge  of  the  witness  has  been  a  specially  important  element
in  our  judgment.]

(457)  From  a  lady  whose  friends  would  prefer  that  her  name  should
not  appear.  u  1334.

"I  had  a  dear  friend  at  Ilfracombe — the  wife  of  the  incumbent,  the
Rev.  W.  M.  We  did  not  correspond  much,  and  I  had  not  seen  her  for
some  months.  I  went  down  to  Plymouth,  and  the  first  night,  as  the
rooms  we  took  were  not  quite  ready  for  us,  my  friend.  Miss  P.,  slept  with
me.     I  awoke  frightened  and  sad,  having  dreamt  thus  : —

"  I  sat  in  a  wide  hall  in  some  unknown  house.  Mrs.  M.  entered  and
walked  slowly  towards  me  dressed  in  white,  with  a  long  dark  cloak  over


424  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

her  snowy  robes.  As  she  neared  me  she  uncovered  her  arm,  and  I  saw-
that  she  was  carrying  a  little  dead  baby.  As  I  looked  at  her,  I  felt  that
she  was  mad,  and  yet  dead,  too  !  Mr.  M.  followed  her,  and  signed  to  me
that  her  mind  was  gone.  It  was  her  pallor  that  made  me  feel  she  was  a
spirit ;  the  expression  in  her  eyes  told  me  she  was  insane,  or  delirious.
Mrs.  M.,  after  showing  me  the  dead  child,  turned  silently  away  and  went
up  a  staircase  on  to  the  roof,  which  was  a  flat  roof.  Mr.  M.  and  I
followed  her.  She  dug  with  her  hands  at  this  roof,  and  earth  seemed  to
come  up.  She  buried  the  baby  in  this  earth,  then  lying  down  upon  this
strange  grave  she  sank  through  it,  and  disappeared  from  sight.  I  awoke,
and  woke  Miss  P.,  and  related  my  dream.  She  soothed  my  alarm,  and,
being  very  tired,  I  fell  asleep.  The  dream  was  repeated,  and  before
morning  I  had  dreamt  it  three  times,  ^  and  knew,  instinctively,  it  was  in
some  way  true.

"  Throughout  the  day  I  was  restless  and  unhappy.  The  next  morning
a  deeply-edged  letter  came,  and  as  I  saw  the  black-rimmed  envelope
I  cried  out,  '  Oh,  my  dream,  my  dream !  Mrs.  M.  is  dead  ! '  And  so
it  was.  She  had  been  prematurely  confined  of  a  dead  child  ;  had  delirium
and  fever,  and  died  unconscious,  or  rather,  insane,  on  the  night  of  my
dream."

We  find  from  a  notice  in  the  Western  Times  that  the  death  occurred
on  Nov.  13,  1862.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : —

"  My  friend  Miss  P.,  who  was  with  me  that  night,  I  have  lost  sight
of  for  years.  Yes,  I  often  dream,  but  I  have  not  realised  a  death  in
an  illustrated  form  except  that  once."

[One  rather  distrusts  this  amount  of  detail,  remembered  after  a  lapse
of  a  good  many  years ;  but  some  kind  of  death-imagery  was  probably  a
feature  in  the  dream.]

(458)  Prom  Mrs.  Williams,  1,  Wilmington  Place,  Clerkenwell,  W.C.
A  shorter  account  was  given  in  writing  to  our  friend,  the  Rev.  A.  T.
Fryer,  in  February,  1883,  immediately  after  the  receipt  of  news  of  the

^®^*^-  "January  1st,  1886.

"I  had  an  uncle,  father's  brother,  living  in  Birmingham.  On  the  night
of  the  21st  December,  1882,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  him  standing  by  my
bedside.  I  saw  him  quite  plainly,  and  he  said,  '  If  you  wish  to  see  me,  you
must  come  at  once.'  Afterwards  I  saw  him  in  a  cart,  laid  in  a  coffin.  I
woke  my  husband  and  told  him  about  it — said  that  I  felt  sure  something
had  happened.  He  said  it  was  only  fancy,  and  told  me  to  go  to  sleep.  In
the  morning  we  talked  about  it  again.  The  22nd  December  was  the  anni-
versary of  our  wedding,  and  that  fixed  the  date  of  the  dream  in  our  minds.
We  heard  nothing  about  the  death  until  February  9th,  1883,  when,  in
answer  to  a  letter  from  my  husband,  the  enclosed  card  and  letter  came
from  my  aunt  in  Birmingham.  The  impression  on  my  mind  was  certainly
that  something  had  happened  to  my  uncle.  The  dream  must  have  been
within  a  few  hours,  as  he  died  at  5  a.m.  22nd  December,  and  it  was  in  the
night  of  the  21st-22nd  that  I  had  the  dream  and  woke  my  husband."

1  See  p.  418,  note ;  also  p.  229,  note,  as  to  the  number  three.


III.]  DREAMS.  425

The  following  is  an  extract,  copied  by  the  present  writer,  from  the
letter  written  to  Mrs.  Williams  by  her  aunt  : —

"February  8th,  1883.

"  I  have  lost  my  poor  brother.  He  went  to  bed  on  the  20th  December ;
on  the  2 1  st  I  found  him,  at  9  o'clock  in  the  morning,  in  a  fit.  I  sent  [for]
a  doctor.  He  never  spoke,  and  died  the  next  morning  at  5  o'clock — on
the  22nd.     Poor  fellow  !     Now  I  am  left  without  anyone."

The  enclosed  mourning-card  contains  these  words  : — "  In  afiectionate
remembrance  of  David  Gillan,  who  departed  this  life  December  22nd,  1882,
aged  64  years.     Interred  at  Witton  Cemetery,  December  28th."

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Williams  told  me  that  she  did  not  remember
having  dreamt  of  death,  or  of  her  uncle,  on  any  other  occasion.  Her
husband  stated  to  me  that  his  wife  woke  him  immediately  after  her  dream,
and  that  she  told  him  the  details  of  it  next  morning,  and  that  they  noted
the  date  as  being  the  anniversary  of  their  wedding.  I  asked  to  see  their
marriage-certificate,  and  found  that  it  was  for  Dec.  22,  1872.  Mrs.
Williams  was  not  aware  of  anything  being  amiss  with  her  uncle,  nor
had  she  for  a  long  time  previously  heard  of  his  being  ill  in  any  way  at
all.     His  death  was  sudden.

The  next  case  is,  of  all  the  dreams  included  in  this  book,  the  one
least  easy  to  harmonise  with  the  view  of  telepathy  that  the  great
bulk  of  our  evidence  supports,  owing  to  the  absence  of  any  perceptible
link  between  agent  and  percipient.  If  we  could  suppose  that  we  had
lighted  on  the  one  death-dream  (of  those  occurring  during  the  last
12  years,  within  our  circle  of  inquiry)  which  by  the  doctrine  of
chances  might  probably  have  coincided  with  reality  hy  accident
(Vol.  I.,  p.  306),  this  would  be  the  one  to  select.  But  though  the
ty^e  is  abnormal  we  should  not  be  justified  in  suppressing  examples
of  it  on  that  account ;  and  the  "  borderland  "  cases,  Nos.  490  and  506,
of  the  next  chapter,  might  be  adduced  as  somewhat  similar.^

(459)  From  Miss  E.  F.  How,  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  E.

"April,  1884.

"  Date  of  dream,  night  between  June  20th  and  21st,  1883.  Age  28.
Health  perfect.  [The  form  of  these  sentences  is  due  to  the  fact  that
the  information  was  filled  in  on  a  census-form  (Yol.  I.,  p.  304).]
The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  I  described  the  details  to  my  mother  ;
it  was  of  a  child  being  buried  alive  by  two  men  servants.  I  asked
its  name,  and  was  told  it  was  a  Fitzgerald,  infant  son  of  the  Knight
of  Kerry.  The  impression  was  most  distressing,  and  remained  all  day,  and
returned  in  a  less  degree  whenever  anything  recalled  the  dream.      At  the

1  Mrs.  Alfred  Wedgwood,  of  20,  Shornclifle  Road,  Folkestone,  dreamt  that  she  heard
of  the  deaths  of  Mr.  Hayward  and  M.  Rouher  the  night  before  she  saw  the  announcement
of  them.  The  names  were  in  the  papers  of  the  day  before  she  had  her  dream,  but  she  is
confident  that  she  had  not  seen  them.  If  telepathic  impressions,  caught  from  an  idea
which  is  abroad,  are  possible  (p.  365),  this  might  be  a  specimen.  On  the  other  hand,  it
may  only  illustrate  the  indefinite  scope  for  accident  that  dreams  afford.


426  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

time  I  knew  absolutely  nothing  about  the  Knight  of  Kerry  :  I  did  not
even  know  whether  he  was  a  married  man.

"  On  June  25th,  I  saw  in  the  paper  an  announcement  of  the  death  of
the  only  child  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry,  on  June  21st.  [We  have  verified
the  date  in  the  Times  and  in  Burke's  Peerage.^  This  at  once  recalled  the
dream,  which  I  had  entirely  forgotten.

"  I  accounted  for  this  coincidence  by  imagining  my  eye  had  uncon-
sciously fallen  upon  some  paragraph  mentioning  the  illness  of  the  child,
but  I  am  told  there  never  was  any  announcement  of  the  kind.

"  All  the  details  of  the  dream  were  wrong.  "  E.  F.  How."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  How  adds  : —

"  The  whole  of  the  dream,  with  many  details  now  faded  from  my
memory,  was  told  to  my  mother  on  the  morning  of  June  21st.  She
laughed  at  the  dream,  but  on  June  26th  she  greeted  me  with  :  '  I  have
seen  in  a  paper  that  the  Knight  of  Kerry  did  lose  a  child  the  night^  of  your
dream  ;  you  must  have  seen  that  it  was  ill.'  I  had  then  also  seen  the
announcement  in  the  paper.

"  This  winter  I  met  some  friends  of  the  present  Knight  of  Kerry,  and
from  them  heard  that  there  had  been  no  notice  in  the  paper  excepting  of
the  birth  of  the  child."

Asked  whether  she  had  previously  known  that  the  family  name  of  the
Knight  of  Kerry  was  Fitzgerald,  Miss  How  replies  that  she  had,  having
once  met  a  member  of  the  family  abroad.

The  following  is  from  Mrs.  How  : —

"  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  London,  E.

"April  25th,  1884.

"On  the  morning  of  June  21st,  1883,  my  daughter  related  to  me,  in
detail,  a  vivid  dream  she  had  the  night  before.

"  I  remember  perfectly  that  when  she  came  down  in  the  morning  she
said  she  dreamt  that  the  infant  son  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry,  a  little  Fitz-
gerald, was  being  buried  alive ;  that  she  struggled  to  save  it,  but  felt  no
surprise  at  the  people  trying  to  bury  it  alive.  A  few  days  afterwards  I
saw  the  death  of  a  young  son  of  the  Knight  of  Kerry  in  the  paper,  the
date  being  June  21st.  "  Frances  A.  How."

[The  accuracy  of  Mrs.  How's  recollection  is  shown  by  her  further
mention  of  some  details  of  the  dream,  which  Miss  How  had  previously
communicated  to  us,  but  had  not  in  any  way  recalled  to  her  mother's
memory.]

In  connection  with  death-imagery  of  a  gloomy  kind,  I  may  remind
the  reader  of  the  passage  in  Guerzoni's  Garibaldi  (Florence,  1882,
Vol.  I.,  pp.  398-9),  in  which  Garibaldi  describes  his  dream  of  a  funeral
procession,  of  a  corpse  with  his  mother's  face  laid  down  beside  him,
and  of  his  impression  of  an  ice-cold  hand,  remaining  even  after  he
was  awake.  "  On  that  day,"  he  continues,  "  and  in  that  hour,  I  lost
my  parent,  the  best  of  mothers."     The  dream  occurred  on  March  19,

1  We  cannot  discover  that  it  was  mentioned  in  the  papers  that  the  death  took  place
in  the  night.


in.]  DREAMS.  427

1852,  when  Garibaldi  was  on  a  voyage  to  China  ;  and  there  is  nothing
to  suggest  that  he  knew  his  mother's  death  to  be  impending.

I  will  conclude  the  list  of  symbolic  dreams  with  the  example
mentioned  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  368,  where  a  particular  dream,  not  in  itself
suggestive  of  death,  has  on  a  noticeable  number  of  occasions  more  or
less  nearly  coincided  with  deaths  affecting  the  dreamer.  I  need  not
repeat  the  remarks  already  made  as  to  the  total  inconclusiveness  of
most  alleged  specimens  of  this  class,  and  the  proneness  of  mankind
in  general  to  remark  and  record  the  few  hits,  and  not  the  thousands
of  misses.

(460)  From  Mrs.  Burton,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury,

"  February,  1883.

"  I  am  a  healthy  woman,  in  a  responsible  position,  neither  dyspeptic,
hysterical,  nor  morbid,  and  my  mind  is  chiefly  occupied  with  matters  of
business.     I  am  41  years  of  age,  and  a  grandmother.

"  Ever  since  I  was  21,  the  following  dream  has  occurred  with  certain
varieties : — In  my  sleep  I  see  suddenly,  by  a  brilliant  light,  a  naked
infant,  either  lying  in  or  falling  into  a  bath.  Sometimes  I  see  a  person
standing  by  the  bath  whom  I  recognise,  which  gives  me  a  clue  on  waking,
by  which  I  know  in  what  family  the  death  is  likely  to  take  place  ;  at  other
times  I  only  see  the  infant  and  the  bath  ;  then  I  know  I  shall  hear  of  a
death  within  12  hours,  and  I  suffer  anxious  suspense  until  I  hear  the  news.

"  I  should  weary  you  if  I  related  all  the  strange  fulfilments  of  this
dream,  but  am  willing  to  send  you  a  few  instances  with  dates,  &c.,  if  you
wish  it.

(1)  "  On  the  night  of  the  29th  of  January,  1873,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw
a  baby  in  a  bath.  When  the  postbag  came  in  the  morning,  I  said  to  my
husband,  '  Please  don't  open  it  yet,  I  am  sure  there  will  be  news  of  a
death  in  it,  but  I  can't  tell  whose  ;  none  of  our  friends  are  ill,  and  the
dream  was  so  vague.'  He  laughed,  and  proceeded  to  open  the  bag  ;  it
contained  a  letter  from  the  Rev.  S.  A.,  announcing  the  death  of  his  only  boy.
[Here  the  dreamer  had  no  knowledge  of  the  illness  of  the  person  who  died.]

(2)  "  On  the  night  of  April  24th,  1877,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  an  infant
in  a  bath.  On  the  25th,  I  heard  that  my  cousin,  B.  C,  had  died  on  the
24th.  [Here  the  dreamer  had  no  knowledge  of  the  illness  of  the  person
who  died.]

(3)  "  On  June  11th,  1877,  while  asleep  in  a  chair,  I  dreamt  that  I
saw  my  husband's  aunt,  Mrs.  B.,  looking  at  an  infant  in  a  bath  ;  she  was
dressed  in  white,  with  a  strong  light  round  her.  She  died  in  the  evening
of  that  day.    [Here  the  dreamer  knew  of  the  illness  of  the  person  who  died.]

(4)  "  Before  my  husband's  death  on  November  17th,  1880,  I  had  my
warning  dream.  I  seemed  to  stand  in  deep  mourning  watching  an  infant
in  a  bath.  [Here  the  dream  preceded  the  death  by  more  than  a  day.
The  husband  had  been  long  ill,  but  his  immediate  death  was  not  expected.]

"  C.  S.  Burton."

We  find  the  above  dates  of  death  in  cases  1,  3,  and  4,  confirmed  by
the  Times  obituary,  and  that  in  case  2  by  the  Register  of  Deaths.


428  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

[Mrs.  B.  has  kept  a  diary  of  her  dreams,  which  shows  that  she  has
had  several  dreams  of  accidents  which  have  never  taken  place.  She
thought  that  she  had  never  had  the  dream  of  a  baby  in  a  bath  without
receiving  news — usually  within  1 2  hours  or  thereabouts,  and  never  later
than  2  days  after — of  the  death  of  a  relative,  friend,  or  at  least  acquaint-
ance or  servant  ;  but  on  more  minute  inquiry,  it  proved  that  in  one  case
there  had  been  an  interval  of  as  many  as  11  days.  She  promised  to  keep
in  future  a  more  carefully  written  record  ;  but  writing  in  March,  1886,  she
says  that  she  now  seldom  dreams,  and  seems  to  be  losing  her  sensitiveness.
She  has  no  idea  why  the  telepathic  impressions  of  death  (if  such  they  could
be  considered)  should  associate  themselves  in  her  mind  with  these  particular
images.]

§  5.  I  now  come  to  the  large  class  of  "  clairvoyant  "  dreams — this
word  being  used  in  the  restricted  sense  explained  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  368-9.
The  perception  still  varies  greatly  both  in  clearness  and  amount,  and
often  foreign  elements  are  introduced  ;  so  that  this  class  differs  rather
in  degree  than  in  kind  from  the  last.  The  cases  are  so  numerous  that  I
must  present  some  of  them  in  an  abridged  form  ;  but  I  shall  suppress
no  item  which  could  be  regarded  as  a  weak  point  in  the  evidence.

I  will  first  give  a  case  which,  though  second-hand,  rests  on  the
authority  of  two  persons  to  whom  the  dream  was  narrated  before
the  reality  was  known.  The  whole  labour  bestowed  on  the  present
work  would  be  amply  repaid  if  by  its  means  half-a-dozen  such
incidents,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  left  to  float,  like  this  one,
on  the  uncertain  tide  of  human  memory,  obtained  immediately  and
for  ever  the  security  of  a  written  record.

(461)  From  the  Bishop  of  Bedford,  who,  in  January,  1883,  corrected  for
us  the  account  that  appeared  in  the  Spectator  for  Sept.  9,  1882,  after  com-
paring it  with  the  written  record.  The  account  was  written  down,  he
says,  "not  less  than  from  20  to  25  years  after  the  occurrence,  probably  a
few  years  later  still.  I  asked  my  father  and  aunt  to  verify  and  correct
my  account,  which  they  did."

"  Stainforth  House,  Upper  Clapton,  E.

"  January,  1883.
"  When  my  father,  Mr.  W.  Wybergh  How,  was  a  young  man,  he  left
his  home,  which  was  at  Isell,  near  Cockermouth,  to  settle  in  Shrewsbury
as  a  solicitor.  In  the  year  1819  he  revisited  Cumberland,  staying  of
course  with  his  father,  the  Vicar  of  Isell.  He  and  his  sister.  Miss  Christian
How,  who  was  to  return  with  him  to  Shrewsbury,  had  arranged  to  leave
on  a  certain  Monday,  and  to  spend  that  night  with  a  former  governess,
who  was  married  to  a  Mr.  Forrest,  and  lived  at  Everton.  On  the  Sunday,
after  church,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wybergh,  my  father's  uncle  and  aunt,  who
lived  at  Isell  Hall,  told  them  they  had  invited  a  party  of  young  people
for  the  Monday  night,  and  would  not  hear  of  their  leaving  that  day.
They  were  persuaded  to  stay,  and  wrote  to  Mrs.  Forrest,  although  fearing


III.]  DREAMS.  429

there  was  no  post  which  would  reach  her  sooner  than  they  themselves
would  on  Tuesday  night.  The  party  was  a  very  merry  one,  a  large
number  of  their  old  friends  being  there.  The  only  fact  I  need  name  at
present  is  that  a  Miss  Harriet  Fenton,  a  young  lady  who  had  lately  lost
her  brother  and  was  in  deep  mourning,  sat  most  of  the  evening  alone  upon
a  sofa,  not  joining  in  the  amusements  of  the  rest.

"  My  father  and  his  sister  reached  Everton  by  the  coach  on  Tuesday
night ;  and  when  they  explained  the  reason  of  their  delay  Mrs.  Forrest  told
them,  when  the  coach  had  come  in  the  night  before  without  them,  she  had
gone  to  bed,  and  had  dreamed  it  was  a  party  for  which  they  had  stayed,  and
that  she  had  dreamt  of  being  there.  A  little  later,  while  they  were  at
supper,  she  said  she  must  tell  them  her  dream,  as  it  was  so  wonderfully
vivid  ;  and  first  of  all,  she  told  them  who  were  there.  As  she  had  been
governess  at  the  vicarage,  and  knew  all  the  neighbours,  this  excited  little
surprise.  She  then,  however,  went  on  to  describe  the  most  minute  cir-
cumstances of  the  evening,  saying  she  had  seen  some  of  them  dressed  up
in  fancy  dresses  and  dancing  about  in  them ;  that  they  had  got  a  dirty
round  table,  which  she  had  never  seen  before,  into  the  drawing-room,  and
were  eating  something  out  of  a  bowl  upon  it  (they  had  a  syllabub,  and
someone  saying  it  must  be  eaten  from  a  round  table,  one  was  sent  for  from
the  kitchen)  ;  that  old  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wybergh  and  old  Mr.  and  Mrs.  How,
who  were  playing  at  Boston  in  the  inner  drawing-room,  came  in  and  asked
what  they  were  doing,  finding  fault  with  them  for  having  brought  in  the
dirty  kitchen  table  ;  that  the  old  people  were  not  allowed  to  come  to  the
round  table,  but  were  told  they  might  taste  what  was  in  the  bowl ;  with
other  minute  details.  Mrs.  Forrest  had  told  her  husband  the  dream  early
in  the  morning  in  bed,  and  had  afterwards  told  her  children,  one  of  whom
corrected  her  in  her  narrative,  saying,  '  Oh,  mamma,  you  told  us  so-and-so
this  morning,'  the  correction  being  the  true  version  of  what  had  occurred.
My  father  and  his  sister  were  very  greatly  startled  and  astounded  as  Mrs.
Forrest  went  on,  but  were  still  more  so  when  she  ended  by  saying,  '  And
I  was  sitting  all  the  evening  on  the  sofa,  by  the  side  of  a  young  widow
lady  ! '  This  was  the  only  mistake  ;  but  years  afterwards  I  met  this  lady
(then  Miss  Fenton),  and  we  spoke  of  this  wonderful  dream ;  and  she  told
me  it  was  not  so  very  far  from  being  all  true,  for  she  was  at  the  time
engaged  to  be  married,  and  did  marry  very  shortly,  and  her  husband  died
on  their  way  out  to  India  directly  afterwards.

"  I  have  only  to  add  that  the  letter  written  to  Mrs.  Forrest  arrived  the
morning  after,  i.e.,  on  the  "Wednesday.  The  narrative  was  (with  the  one
singular  exception  mentioned)  a  perfectly  accurate  account  of  all  that  took
place  to  the  minutest  details,  and  the  dream  appears  to  have  been  dreamt
at  Everton  at  the  very  time  of  the  occurrence  of  the  events  at  Isell.  My
father  and  my  aunt,  before  their  death,  verified  and  vouched  for  the  above

^*<^^y-  "  W.  Walsham  Bedfoed,

"  Bishop  Suffragan  for  East  London."

(462)  From  Mr.  J.  Ridley,  19,  Belsize  Park,  N.W.,  who  tells  us  that
he  has  had  no  other  impressive  dream  of  death.

"  March  5th,  1885.

"  Whilst  staying  at  Mrs.  M.'s  in  June,  1867,  on  the  night  either  of
June  3rd  or  4th,  I  had  a  vivid  dream  that  I  saw  an  old  friend  [name


430  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

given  in  confidence]  lying  dead  with  a  wound  in  his  head — noting  the
colour  of  his  hair  and  other  particulars.  I  told  Mrs.  M.  of  this  dream,
and  later  in  the  day  we  heard  that  the  friend  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  had
actually  been  killed  by  a  blow  on  the  head,  in  a  fall  from  a  conveyance,
on  the  night  before  the  dream.  The  wound  was  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  head  from  that  seen  in  my  dream.

"  The  scene  of  the  accident  was  some  miles  from  the  house  where  I
was  staying.  "  J.  R."

Mrs.  Mawson,  of  Ashfield,  G-ateshead,  with  whom  Mr.  Ridley  was
staying  at  the  time  of  the  dream,  was  asked  by  Mr.  Ridley's  daughter,
at  our  request,  if  she  remembered  anything  of  the  dream.  She  replied  on
March  3rd,   1885  :—

"  I  remember  very  distinctly  Mr.  Ridley  telling  me  his  dream,  and
how  strongly  it  impressed  me  at  the  time.  I  remember  that  your  papa
had  the  dream,  and  spoke  of  it  before  the  news  of  J.  M.'s  death  reached
him,  but  I  cannot  call  to  mind  exactly  what  was  the  cause  of  death — in
the  dream,  I  mean ;  but  I  think  your  papa  thought  he  saw  him  injured  by
a  fall  from  his  horse  or  conveyance.  I  think  he  told  me  that  he  saw  him
lying  on  the  ground  injured,  and  his  wife  mourning  and  weeping  over
him,  but  I  cannot  be  certain  of  the  exact  particulars,  only  I  know  that
the  dream  was  singularly  like  what  in  reality  took  place  on  the  very
same  night.  '  "  E.  M."

Miss  C,  a  resident  in  the  village  where  J.  M.  lived,  was  asked  if  she
could  discover  the  exact  date  of  J.  M.'s  death.     She  replied  : —

"  West  Boldon.

"  March  4th,   1885.

"  To-day  I  saw  E.  M.  (now  Mrs.  H.,  the  daughter  of  J.  M.).  Her
father  died  on  June  4th,  1867.  On  the  morning  of  that  day,  as  Mrs.
M.  M.  was  on  her  way  to  Hylton,  she  found  him  lying  insensible  at  a
turn  of  the  road.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  driving  furiously.  It  was  sup-
posed that  in  the  dark  he  had  not  managed  the  corner,  and  so  was  thrown
out.     He  never  recovered  consciousness.  "  A.  C."

[If  Mr.  Ridley's  dream  was  on  the  night  of  the  3rd,  it  must  have  been
within  a  few  hours  of  the  accident ;  if  it  was  on  the  night  of  the  4th,  it
may  still  have  been  within  12  hours  of  the  death.]

(463)  From  Miss  Augusta  Gould  (now  Mrs.  Temple),  the  narrator
of  case  441,  above.  "December  19th,  1883.

"  When  a  child,  I  dreamed  of  places  I  was  not  likely  to  see,  and
when  by  chance  I  did  see  them  they  were  exactly  as  my  dream  foretold.  ^

"  A  curious  dream  happened  one  night,  I  believe  in  the  spring  of  1880.
I  saw  the  bedroom  of  an  old  lady  friend,  with  blood  ^  all  about  the  floor  and
the  window  broken.  I  told  my  brother  I  was  afraid  there  might  be
murder  for  the  sake  of  money.  He  laughed  at  my  fears,  but  the  next
Sunday,  on  his   return  from   taking  service   at  Lord  H.'s  private  chapel,

1  This  experience  has  pretty  often  been  described  ;  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  attach
any  importance  to  it,  unless  the  dream  had  been  written  down  or  described  in  detail
before  the  reality  was  seen.

2  Compare  cases  135,  221,  432,  466,  467.


III.]  DREAMS  431

near  the  home  of  the  lady,  he  informed  me  of  a  great  alarm  her  friends
had  had.  They  found  her  insensible  in  bed,  one  day,  covered  with  blood,
as  was  the  floor  of  the  room,  and  the  window  broken.  Afterwards,  she
related  that  she  had  awaked  in  the  night,  finding  her  face  and  chest
streamed  over  with  blood,  and  a  suffocation  oppressing  her ;  had  got  out
and  tried  to  open  the  window,  but  being  faint  and  unsteady  had  run  her
hand  through  the  small  panes,  then  turned  and  fainted  before  she  could
get  into  bed  again,  and  after  doing  so  knew  nothing  more.  I  may  add
that  the  doctor  said  this  serious  attack  had  saved  her  from  apoplexy."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Gould  wrote: —

"January  3rd,  1884.

"  I  cannot  remember  if  the  accident  to  the  old  lady  was  on  the  same
night  as  my  dream  of  it ;  but  certainly  the  dream  was  two  or  three  nights
before  I  heard  of  the  accident.

"  My  brother,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  dream  beforehand  [■i.e.,  before
the  news  of  the  event],  died  in  1881."

(464)  From  Miss  Barr,  Apsley  Town,  East  Grinstead,  the  narrator  of
case  111.  "April,  1884.

"When  I  was  in  Singhur,  in  186-,  I  had  a  very  strange  dream.  I
saw,  as  in  a  small  disc  of  lighti — something  like  a  magic-lantern  picture,
only  in  small — the  following  scene  : — The  inside  of  a  small  hill  tent,
lighted  (from  above,  apparently — the  whole  scene  was  in  vivid  light)  on
the  floor,  close  beside  a  dhurrie  (a  small  Indian  carpet),  and,  between  that
and  the  door,  a  very  large  black  scorpion,  and  entering  by  the  door  the
figure  of  a  man,  an  intimate  friend,  now  dead.  The  vision  was  apparently
of  but  momentary  duration,  and  disappeared  before  I  could  see  more.  I
made  a  note  of  the  fact,  with  the  date,  in  my  diary.  On  the  return  of  this
friend,  a  few  weeks  afterwards,  from  his  hunting  expedition,  he  volunteered
the  information  that  they  had  been  much  pestered  by  insects  of  all  kinds,
and  added  that  one  night  he  had  gone  into  his  tent  and  found  there  '  a
whopping  big  black  scorpion.'  The  hlack  scorpion  is  not  quite  so  common
as  the  ordinary  or  pink  scorpion.

"  I  asked  him  what  that  night  was,  and  he  told  me.  I  remember  that
he  fixed  the  exact  date,  either  from  having  made  a  note  of  it,  or  from  some
other  incident  having  occurred  on  that  same  day.  I  never  told  him  of  my
dream."

[Miss  Barr  stated  in  conversation  that  she  and  her  sisters  had  satisfied
themselves  at  the  time  that  the  days  corresponded.]

(465)  From  Mr.  J.  W.  Beilby,  of  Beechworth,  Victoria  (mentioned
above,  p.  226),  son  of  Dr.  Wm.  Beilby,  well  known  in  Edinburgh  forty
years  ago.  The  account  was  first  printed  in  the  Harbinger  of  Light,
Melbourne,  August,  1879.

"In  1849,  I  was  on  a  certain  night  sleeping  at  an  inn  in  the  Portland
district,  being  there  mustering  stray  cattle  to  deliver,  with  miy  station
sold,  when  intending  to  return  to  Scotland.  I  dreamt  I  was,  with  other
members  of  my  family,  at  my  father's  death-bed  in  Edinburgh.  Every-
thing said  and  done  was  vividly  represented,  but  I  wondered  that  my
father  was  not  in  his  usual  bedroom.     Several  months  afterwards  news  of

1  Cf.  case  220,  and  the  remark  which  follows  it.


432  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

my  father's  death,  on  that  very  night,  reached  me ;  but  it  was  not  until  a
sister  arrived  in  the  colony,  later,  that  every  minute  particular  was
corroborated,  and  I  learned  the  reason  for  his  occupying  the  bed  I  saw
him  die  in,  in  his  dressing-room.^ "

Mr.  Beilby  tells  us  that  he  seemed,  as  if  in  a  vision,  one  of  those  around
his  father's  bed;  and  that  the  night  was  May  30th.  We  find,  however,  from
the  Edinburgh  Courant  that  Dr.  Beilby  died  on  June  7,  1849.

[Such  an  error  of  date  is  not  important,  in  a  case  where  the  narrator
has  no  sejmrate  recollection  of  the  date  of  his  own  experience.  But  at
this  distance  of  time  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  degree  of
coincidence  was  accurately  ascertained,  or  that  it  has  not  become  more
exact  in  memory.  To  our  request  for  corroboration,  Mr.  Beilby  replies  : — -
"  My  sister  is  too  remote  to  refer  to  as  to  facts  stated  in  my  last  letter."
This  is  not  the  only  instance  in  which  the  idea  of  writing  a  letter  to  a
distant  country  has  seemed  to  paralyse  an  informant's  power  of  assistance.]

(466)  From  Mr.  B.  Lomax,  Curator  of  the  Brighton  Free  Library  and
Museum.  "January,  1883.

"  In  1860,  I  took  my  newly  married  wife  to  live  on  the  Fryer's  Creek
Diggings.  Her  mother,  Mrs.  F.,  lived  in  Melbourne,  so  that  mother  and
daughter  were  73  miles  apart.  After  a  few  weeks,  having  to  attend  at
the  Survey  Department,  I  returned  alone  to  Melbourne,  intending  to  pass
a  week  at  my  father-in-law's  house.  On  the  third  day,  Mrs.  F.  (who,  by
the  way,  was  a  cousin  of  the  late  John  Oxenford)  came  to  me  in  tears,
and  entreated  me  to  return,  as  she  had  last  night  dreamed  that  she  had
seen  her  daughter  covered  with  blood,  and  led  to  bed  by  two  women.
Moved  by  her  anxiety,  I  returned  that  night,  and  found  the  fact  as  she
had  stated.  A  sudden  fright,  caused  by  the  violent  entry  of  a  drunken
woman,  had  brought  on  a  miscarriage,  and  she  had  been  assisted  and
tenderly  nursed  by  two  neighbours.  «  Benjamin  Lomax."

With  this  dream  may  be  compared  the  following  hypnotic  vision.

(467)  From  Beitrdge  zu  den  durch  Animalischen  Magnetismus  zeither
bewirkten  Erscheinungen,  by  W.  Arndt  (Leipzig,  (1818),  pp.  76-9,
Arndt  held  a  post  to  the  name  of  which  the  nearest  English  equivalent
is  Secretaryship  to  the  Royal  Prussian  Superior  County  Court.  The
percipient  was  a  Madame  S.,  19  years  of  age,  who  had  been  suffering
from  hysterical  attacks,  and  was  hypnotised  by  Arndt  during  a  period  of
some  months,  in  1812.

"  During  a  magnetic  stance,  the  sleeping  patient,  who  had  just  before
been  quite  gay,  all  at  once  began,  without  any  perceptible  cause,  to  utter
lamentations,  to  wring  her  hands,  and  to  weep.  When  I  asked  her  the
reason,  she  said,  <  Ah,  God  !  Ah,  God  !  my  father  ;  my  good  father  !  he  is
dying.'     '  How  do  you  know  that  ? '     '  Ah,   God  !  don't  I  see  it !    he  is

1  We  have  a  very  similar  case  from  Mr.  Alex.  B.  Burton,  of  4,  Baronsfield  Road,  St.
Margaret's,  Twickenham,  who,  on  January  7th,  1880,  dreamt  very  vividly  of  his  father's
death  as  taking  place  in  a  room  quite  different  from  that  which  he  believed  him  to  be
occupying  at  the  exact  hour.  He  got  out  of  bed,  and  marked  the  time  by  his  watch  as
a  little  past  4.30.  The  facts  and  the  time  of  the  death  exactly  corresponded ;  and  Mr.
Burton's  mother  testifies  that  the  dream  was  described  to  her  before  she  mentioned  the
actual  change  of  room.  The  death  of  the  father  was,  however,  known  to  be  imminent ;
and  the  case  is  therefore  not  numbered  as  evidential.


III.]  DREAMS.  433

losing  a  terrible  amount  of  blood  !  Ah,  he  is  dying,  dying ! '  After
trying  in  vain  to  pacify  her  and  rid  her  of  this  fancy,  I  woke  her.  She
opened  her  eyes  with  the  brightest  smile,  and  all  gloomy  thoughts  had
vanished.  To  divert  her  still  more,  I  conversed  with  her  on  various
subjects  •  then,  as  I  had  broken  into  her  sleep,  I  hypnotised  her  again.
Before  long  the  disquieting  picture  again  appeared  to  her.  To  put  an  end
to  her  grief,  I  again  woke  her.  Her  joyous  look  on  waking  showed  that
she  was  quite  unaware  of  what  she  had  just  been  describing."

On  her  being  put  to  sleep  a  third  time,  the  vision  was  repeated,  and
her  lamentations  were  heart-rending ;  but  this  time  she  was  allowed  to
sleep,  and  she  gradually  became  more  composed.  She  woke  at  last  with
the  exclamation,  "  Alas !  "  For  the  rest  of  the  afternoon  she  was  very
melancholy,  without  being  able  to  say  why ;  and  neither  Arndt  nor  her
husband  (the  only  two  persons  who  had  been  present)  revealed  to  her
what  had  passed.     Next  day  she  had  recovered  her  spirits.

Her  father  was  at  the  time  70  German  miles  away.  His  last  letters
had  assured  her  that  he  was  well ;  nor  had  she  the  slightest  cause  for
anxiety  on  his  account.  But  some  weeks  later  Arndt  found  her  much
cast  down  ;  and  on  inquiring  the  cause,  was  told  that  at  about  3  p.m.  on
the  day  of  her  strange  experience  (which  Arndt  says  that  he  had  noted),
her  father  had  slipped  while  descending  into  the  cellar,  and  the  cellar  door
had  fallen  on  his  breast,  which  caused  violent  hsemorrhage,  and  very  nearly
cost  him  his  life.  "  So  the  fact  which  could  not  by  any  possibility  have
been  suspected,  actually  happened,  at  the  very  hour  at  which  the  patient
at  a  distance  perceived  it."

(468)  From  the  Rev.  F.  Teasdale  Reed  (Unitarian  Minister),  Cole-
hill,  Tamworth.  "October,  1884.

"  I  had  an  uncle  who,  after  spending  33  years  on  board  ship,  left  the
sea,  got  married,  and  settled  down  near  London.  His  only  son.  Jack,
and  myself  were  constant  playmates,  and  for  a  short  time  school-fellows
also.  [Jack  ran  away  to  sea.]  Months  passed  by  and  no  news  came.  At
length — perhaps  it  was  12  or  18  months  afterwards — my  thoughts  were
again  directed  to  my  missing  cousin.     It  was  in  this  way,

"  One  Sunday  morning,  my  father  invited  me  to  go  with  him  to  see  my
uncle  and  aunt.  On  the  road  he  told  me  that  during  the  night  he  had  had
a  most  remarkable  dream,  and  he  wished  to  test  it  as  far  as  he  could,  for
he  was  strongly  persuaded  that  it  would  be  fulfilled.  At  the  same  time  he
urged  me  to  notice  the  date,  and  preserve  in  my  memory  the  details  as  far
as  possible.  I  may  just  say,  in  parenthesis,  that  we  continued  our  journey,
paid  the  visit,  but  found  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  my  cousin.  The
dream,  so  far  as  I  can  recollect  it  at  this  distance  of  time,  was  somewhat
as  follows : — The  scene  is  in  a  foreign  port  (guessed  at  the  time  to  be
Spanish).  On  board  a  British  man-of-war  that  is  anchored  there  a  young
man  (my  cousin  Jack)  is  giving  instructions  to  some  men  at  work  in  the
rigging.  He  is  apparently  dissatisfied  with  what  they  are  doing,  for  he
hurries  up,  makes  some  slight  alteration,  and  then  descends.  A  rung  of
the  rope  ladder  gives  way  as  his  foot  touches  it,  he  falls  backward,  head
first,  and  dies  instantly.  The  surgeon  hurries  to  the  spot,  examines  the
body,  but  leaves  it,  as  he  can  do  nothing  there.  Then  arrangements  are
made  for  the  burial.     The  coffin  is  taken  on  shore,  some  of  the  officers  and

VOL,    II,  2   P


434  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

men  accompany  it,  and  it  is  solemnly  lowered  into  the  grave.     There  the
dream  ended.

"  Some  time  after,  my  father  (he  had  already  ascertained  the  time  it
"would  take  for  a  letter  to  come  from  the  Spanish  coast  to  England)  asked
me  one  morning  if  I  still  remembered  his  strange  dream.  He  then  made
me  repeat  it  to  him.  After  that  he  said  :  '  Well,  if  there  is  anything  in  it
your  uncle  will  have  heard  something  about  it  by  this  time,  let  us  go
and  see  him.'  When  we  reached  the  house  we  could  see  at  a  glance
that  something  had  happened.  My  father  at  once  asked  if  there  was
any  news  yet  of  Jack.  Yes,  that  morning's  post  had  brought  a  large
envelope  bearing  the  Lisbon  post-mark.  It  was  written  by  one  of  the
officers  of  a  man-of-war  that  was  then  anchored  at  Lisbon,  and  its
purpose  was  to  make  known  the  death  of  my  cousin.  After  a  very  kind
and  favourable  notice  of  Jack's  general  conduct  and  abilities,  it  gave
full  details  of  his  death  and  burial.  Those  details  tallied  exactly  with
the  details  given  in  my  father's  dream,  and  it  occurred  the  very  date
of  the  dream.  I  was  perfectly  amazed.  I  inspected  the  letter  and  could
not  see  any  point  in  which  there  was  the  slightest  contradiction  or  even
divergence.     Of  course  my  uncle  was  then  informed  of  the  dream.

"  F.  T.  R."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Reed  adds  on  October  28,  1884 : —

"  I  can  quite  understand  your  desire  to  verify,  as  far  as  possible,  every
statement  made,  but  unfortunately  I  shall  not  be  able  to  furnish  much
corroboration.  I  have  just  a  little ;  what  there  is  I  will  place  before
you.  I  found  the  enclosed  '  inspector's  certificate.'  I  see  it  corrects  my
story  in  one  point,  and  confirms  it  in  another.  I  said  that  the  event
happened  about  32  years  ago  ;  this  document  is  dated  1847,  i.e.,  37  years
ago.  At  the  time  of  writing  the  paper  I  did  not  sufficiently  think  over
the  question  of  time.  I  would  add  that  the  family  consisted  of  my  uncle,
aunt — who  are  both  dead — my  cousin  John  (of  whom  I  have  written),  and
his  sister,  who  is  still  alive  in  Australia.  She  may  be  able  to  furnish
more  particulars.  [We  have  written  several  letters  to  this  lady,  which  have
not  been  answered.]  However  weak  it  may  be  in  collateral  evidence,  I  am
positive  as  to  the  fact  of  the  dream,  and  that  I  have  fairly  represented
it  in  its  essential  points."

The  inspector's  certificate  shows  that  John  Tabner,  seaman,  died  at  sea,
on  board  H.M.S.  "  Canopus,"  on  the  24th  of  April,  1847.  In  the  Navy
List  for  June,  1847,  we  find  the  ship  reported  as  "  off  the  coast  of
Portugal."

[In  the  absence  of  an  independent  account  of  the  details  of  the
death,  and  of  written  notes  of  the  dream,  we  cannot  assume  that  the
coincidence  of  detail  was  so  close  as  seems  to  be  remembered.  Clearly
there  would  be  a  difficulty  in  explaining  the  closing  scene  of  the  dream
as  telepathically  produced,  though  the  dream  may  naturally  enough  have
taken  that  course.  Mr.  Reed  mentioned  in  conversation  that  there  had
been  a  very  strong  bond  of  afiection  between  his  father  and  Jack.  He
was  himself  1 1  years  old  at  the  time.]

(469)  From  Mr.  W.  Noble,  J.P.,  Forest  Lodge,  Maresfield,  Uckfield.

"  September  8th,  1882.

"  The  Baroness  van    Lynden  (my  mother-in-law)    had   a    maid   who


in.]  DREAMS.  435

subsequently  lived  with  Mrs.  Noble  and  myself  as  housekeeper,  and  died
in  this  house  after  35  years'  consecutive  service  in  the  family;  her  name
was  Elizabeth  Gowling,  and  she  came  of  a  most  respectable  stock  of  the
farming  class  from  Appleby,  in  Westmoreland.  She  left  Westmoreland
when  she  was  young,  and  had  not  been  near  it  for  a  good  many  years,
when  the  very  curious  event  occurred  which  I  am  about  to  relate.

"  I  must  say  here,  that  when  living  in  Appleby,  Gowling  had  known  a
woman,  by  sight,  whose  name,  I  regret  to  say,  I  have  forgotten,  but  who
lived  in  a  suburb  called  Bongate.  They  had  in  no  sense  ever  been  friends,
nor  had  any  communication  passed  between  them,  or  any  mention  of  the
woman's  name  ever  been  made  to  Gowling  by  any  one,  after  she  left  her
native  county.

"Well,  one  morning  she  came  down,  as  usual,  to  dress  her  mistress,
and,  in  obviously  a  very  nervous  and  excited  state,  told  her  that  she  had
just  had  such  a  terrible  dream  that  she  could  not  get  it  out  of  her  mind.
She  had,  she  said,  dreamed  that  this  Bongate  woman  had  gone  to  a  drawer,
taken  out  a  piece  of  rope,  proceeded  to  an  outhouse,  and  hanged  herself,
and  that  her  daughter  had  come  into  the  outhouse  and  cut  her  mother
down.  My  mother-in-law,  of  course,  pooh-pooh'd  the  whole  affair,  told
Gowling  not  to  be  silly,  that  dreams  were  all  nonsense,  &c.,  &c.  But  a
week  or  two  afterwards  Gowling  received  a  local  newspaper  from  some  one
of  her  Westmoreland  friends,  which  contained,  inter  alia,  an  account  of  an
inquest  on  this  very  woman  ;  who,  on  the  night  in  which  the  dream
happened,  had  proceeded  to  an  outhouse  and  hanged  herself,  and  had  been
cut  down  by  her  daughter.  «  William  Noble."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Noble  says  : —

"  It  was  some  considerable  time  after  it  happened  that  I  first  heard  of
it ;  but  I  have  done  so,  without  the  smallest  variation,  repeatedly,  both
from  my  mother-in-law  and  from  Gowling  herself."

In  conversation  with  Mr.  Podmore,  Mrs.  Noble  gave  an  account  which
precisely  corresponded  with  her  husband's,  and  stated  that  she  herself —
then  a  young  girl — had  heard  Gowling  describe  the  dream  on  the  morning
after  its  occurrence.

From  the  Coroner  of  the  district,  who  has  kindly  made  inquiries,  we
have  learnt  the  name  of  the  woman  who  committed  suicide,  and  the  fact
that  the  occurrence  took  place  about  40  years  ago ;  but  his  and  our
endeavours  to  trace  the  exact  date  have  failed.

(470)   From  Mr.  Henry  Maitland,  Balmungo,  St.  Andrews.

"December  28,  1885.

"  On  the  16th  of  August,  1820 — it  was  the  anniversary  of  his  wedding
- — my  father  took  my  mother  and  eldest  sister  to  dine  and  spend  the  night
at  the  country  house  of  an  uncle  a  few  miles  off.  I  can  see  the  trio  now,
through  the  long  vista  of  years,  starting  for  Lathrisk  on  the  Irish  car,  my
father  in  high  spirits,  and  seemingly  in  perfect  health.

"  That  night,  my  two  sisters,  who  were  left  at  home,  one  20  and  the
other  21  years  of  age,  slept  together;  and  early  next  morning  the  younger
one  awakened  her  companion,  to  tell  her  she  had  had  a  strange,  unhappy
dream.  She  dreamed  she  was  at  Lathrisk  with  her  father  and  mother ;
the  family  party  were  at  dinner,  and  all  went  well  till  the  servants  had
VOL.    II.  2    F    2


436  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

cleared  the  table  and  withdrawn.  My  father,  she  said,  then  suddenly  rose
and  walked  to  the  window,  which  he  opened  as  if  for  air.  She,  in  her
dream,  went  round  and  set  a  chair  for  him,  putting  her  arm  round  his
shoulders  to  support  him  in  what  seemed  a  sudden  faintness.  My  uncle
then  came  and  supported  my  father,  and  the  doctor  soon  arrived ;  but
before  then  my  father  had  breathed  his  last.  Dreams,  however  impressive
to  the  dreamer,  do  not  sound  equally  so  in  other  ears,  and  this  one  was  no
exception  to  the  rule ;  the  elder  sister  made  no  account  of  it,  and  no  more
was  said  on  the  subject.

"  A  few  hours  later,  a  messenger  from  Lathrisk  brought  the  sad  news
of  my  father's  death,  and  the  whole  details  of  the  closing  scene  were
strictly  and  literally  identical  with  those  of  the  dream,  excepting  only
that  my  eldest  sister,  who  went  with  her  parents,  was  the  actor,  in  place  of
the  dreamer,  who  remained  at  home.

"  My  father  was  in  his  50th  year,  full  of  health  five  minutes  before  he
died ;  and  the  mental  condition  of  the  family  was  that  of  joy  and  hope-
fulness."

We  find  from  the  Edinburgh  C  our  ant  that  Mr.  Maitland's  father  died
on  August  25th  (not  16th),  1820.  Mr.  Maitland  explains  that  he  knew  his
father's  wedding  day  to  have  been  August  16,  from  an  entry  in  a  family
Bible,  and  that  he  was  either  told  that  the  day  of  the  death  was  the  same,
or  has  himself,  in  memory,  modified  close  proximity  into  identity.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  he  adds,  on  Jan.  3,  1886  : —

"  I  am  the  sole  survivor  of  my  family.  I  was  not  told  of  the  dream  at
the  time  ;  my  age  (7  years)  precluded  this.  Let  me  give  you  the  assurance
that  both  sisters  concerned  were  women  in  whom,  perhaps  above  most
persons,  the  precious  quality  of  conscientiousness  formed  the  basis  of
character.  In  50  years'  close  relationship  to  them,  I  never  heard  them
speak  of  a  dream  but  the  one  in  question ;  and  I  don't  believe  either  of
them  was,  either  literally  or  metaphorically,  a  '  dreamer.'

"  Henry  Maitland."

In  conversation  Mrs.  Maitland  told  me  that  she  also  had  heard  the
incident  described  by  the  dreamer,  her  sister-in-law.

[It  is  needless  to  observe  that  no  amount  of  scrupulousness  on  the
part  of  a  witness  can  sufficiently  guarantee  unwritten  recollections  of  a
long-past  incident,  involving  some  amount  of  detail.  But  the  quality  of
the  evidence  in  this  case  is  at  any  rate  good  second-hand ;  and  one  can
hardly  doubt  that  a  coincidence  of  a  striking  kind  occurred.]

(471)  From  Mrs.  Sykes,  who  at  the  time  to  which  the  narrative  refers,
was  residing  with  her  brother-in-law,  the  late  Dr.  Symonds,  of  Clifton
Hill  House,  Clifton,  Bristol.  "  1883.

"  On  the  6th  of  November,  1854,  I  want  to  see  a  poor  woman  named
Scott,  living  in  St.  Michael's  parish,  Bristol.  She  had  a  son  in  the  army,
and  his  regiment  was  serving  in  the  Crimea.  As  soon  as  she  saw  me,  she
said,  '  I  know  my  dear  boy  is  dead.'  On  my  asking  what  made  her  think
so,  she  said,  '  Yesterday  morning  I  saw  him  quite  plainly.  He  and  others
were  fighting  and  I  saw  him  fall ;  the  men  seemed  in  disorder  and  were
all  in  their  shirt-sleeves.  I  saw  Willie  as  plainly  as  I  see  you  now.'  I
tried  to  comfort  her,  saying  how  improbable  it  was  they  should  be  fighting


III.]  DREAMS.  437

in  their  shirt-sleeves.  '  It  is  true,'  she  said.  '  I  know  he  is  gone,  and  I
shall  always  know  the  day  and  time,  Sunday  morning,  November  5th,  for
I  awoke  from  the  sight  of  this  battle  as  the  8  o'clock  bells  rang  out  from
St.  Michael's  Church.'

"  Quite  late  that  day  (the  6th)  we  heard  of  the  battle  of  Inkermann
and  that  the  soldiers  were  surprised  early  on  the  5th,  and  had  not  time  to
dress  entirely,  but  fought  in  their  shirt-sleeves.  Young  Scott's  regiment
was  there  (I  forget  which).  This  poor  woman  never  heard  of  her  son's
death  till  some  time  afterwards,  when  the  list  of  killed  came  out ;  but
so  convinced  was  she  of  the  fact  that  she  wrote  his  name  and  the  date
of  his  death  on  a  tracing  (life  size)  of  her  soldier  son,  that  she  and  her
other  son  had  drawn  on  the  wall,  before  he  went  to  the  Crimea.  This
rude  drawing  I  saw."  ^  "  M.  A.  Sykes."

[The  Christian  name  William  is  probably  incorrect ;  among  the  non-
commissioned officers  and  privates  mentioned  by  the  London  Gazette
in  the  list  of  Inkermann  casualties,  as  killed  in  the  battle  or  dying
of  wounds  very  shortly  afterwards,  are  three  Scotts — John,  Henry,  and
Peter.  The  detail  of  the  shirt-sleeves  cannot  be  pressed ;  but  the  sense
of  reality  must  have  been  strong,  to  prompt  the  writing  of  the  name  and
date.]

(472)  From  Miss  Weale,  Nepaul,  Croft  Road,  Torquay.

"January  26th,  1884.

"  My  mother  was  tired,  and  went  to  lie  down,  and  fell  asleep  and
dreamt  that  her  younger  half-brother,  Godin  Ellis,  had  died  in  India,
and  she  heard  in  her  dream  hurried  remarks  about  it,  and  heard  some
one  speak  the  name  of  the  officer  standing  by.  She  awoke  with  such  a
deep  sense  of  its  reality  that,  when  my  father  came  up  to  dress  for
dinner,  she  proceeded  to  ask  him  to  kneel  down  and  say  the  prayers  from
the  Burial   Service,  for  that  Godin  was  dead.     She  proceeded  to  tell  him

1  In  connection  with  this  case,  I  may  quote  a  narrative  which  I  refrained  from  giving  as
evidence  in  the  last  chapter,  on  account  of  the  pre-occupation  of  the  percipient's  mind  with
her  absent  son.  It  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  a  Cambridge  friend,  Mrs.  B.,
whose  sister,  Mrs.  G-.,  is  the  narrator.

"  The  following  narrative  was  told  to  me  by  my  aunt,  Mrs.  B.  ;  the  son  to  whom  it
relates  is  F.  G.  B.  (68th  Regiment),  who  fell  at  Inkermann  on  Sunday,  November  5th,
1854.  The  narrative  was  told  to  me  on  Sunday  afternoon,  September  2nd,  1883,  and
written  down  at  the  time.  She  had  told  me  substantially  the  same  narrative  many  years
before,  though  she  did  not  like  talking  of  it.  My  son,  who  was  also  present  when  the
story  was  told,  read  over  my  account,  and  pronounced  it  correct.  I  do  not  believe  that  my
aunt  ever  experienced  any  similar  impression.  I  have  known  her  intimately  all  my  life,  and
stayed  with  her  for  months  together,  and  never  heard  her  mention  anything  of  the  kind.
She  had  always  prayed  that  she  might  know  at  the  moment  if  he  were  kUled  or
badly  wounded.  The  5th  November  was  a  Sunday.  She  was  at  E-uscombe  Church,  and
early  in  the  service  (while  kneeling  in  the  Confession)  she  had  a  sudden  sensation ;  she
saw  nothing,  but  felt  sure  something  was  by  her,  and  that  it  was  her  son.  Her  husband
asked  her  what  was  the  matter,  but  she  kept  up,  and  did  not  leave  the  church.  On
returning  home,  she  said  she  was  sure  they  would  hear  bad  news.  When  the  news  did
arrive,  some  days  later,  they  found  he  was  shot  at  the  very  hour  when  she  felt  his  presence
in  Ruscombe  Church."

Professor  Sidgwick  writes  on  September  5th,  1883  : —

"Mrs.  B.,  who  knew  her  aunt  well,  has  just  told  me  that  she  never  heard  of  her
having  any  similar  impression."

It  is  probable,  from  Kinglake's  and  Russell's  accounts,  that  Lieutenant  B.  was  killed
in  the  morning  ;  but  at  what  hour  is  not  known.  For  the  form  of  the  experience,  compare
the  subjective  impressions  described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  483.  The  case  is  eminently  one  where,
after  the  receipt  of  the  news,  the  impression  would  be  likely  to  assume  in  memory  a
definiteness  and  uniqueness  that  did  not  really  belong  to  it.


438  SUPPLEMENT,  [chap.

the  name  o£  the  place,  and  the  hour,  and  the  name  of  an  officer  standing
by.  She  insisted  on  my  father  writing  down  the  particulars,  and  he,  to
quiet  her,  complied,  and  also  joined  her  in  saying  the  prayers ;  but  he
would  not  allow  her  to  go  into  mourning,  and  disbelieved  that  it  would  be
found  correct,  because  Godin  had  not  intended  going  into  the  Madras
Presidency.

"  In  due  course  of  time  the  news  came,  and  full  written  particulars
from  the  officer  whose  name  she  had  heard ;  and  it  had  happened  at  the
hour  and  day  (allowing  for  reckoning),  and  in  the  little  place,  and  as  she
described  it — an  accident  with  a  gun.  He  had  only  known  the  officer  for
a  few  days,  and  the  name  was  one  unknown  to  my  parents.  My  mother
had  been  certain  her  dream  was,  as  she  termed  it,  a  vision  of  the  true.
She  was  a  very  healthy,  sensible,  calm-minded  woman.

"  C  J.   DORATEA  WeALE."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Miss  Weale  wrote  : —

"  My  mother  scarcely  ever  had  a  dream.  The  dream  took  place  as  far
back  as  in  1837,  I  think,  but  that  very  day  she  told  us.  All  were  told  in
the  house,  and  she  was  vexed  because  my  father  would  not  let  her  go  into
mourning.  The  relatives  who  know,  with  me,  of  my  mother's  true  dream
are  foreigners,  and  scattered  about  the  world,  and  I  rarely  write  to  them.
But  it  was  all  written  down,  and  given  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Neale  at  the
time."

[Here,  again,  the  occurrence  is  far  too  remote  for  certainty  as  to  the
details  of  the  dream.  But  some  of  the  collateral  incidents,  e.g.,  about  the
mourning,  are  such  as  would  be  likely  to  impress  themselves  on  the
daughter's  mind.  We  have  done  our  utmost  to  trace  the  exact  date  of  the
death,  but  without  success.]

(473)  From  a  lady  who  scruples  for  the  present  to  allow  the  publica-
tion of  her  name,  as  a  near  relative  has  an  abhorrence  of  the  subject.

"May  26th,  1884.

"  I  cannot  fix  the  date — it  may  have  been  about  18  years  after  my
mother's  marriage — one  morning  at  breakfast  my  mother  told  us  she  had
had  a  very  strange  dream.  She  had  dreamed  of  Mrs.  W.,  [a  lady  whose
house  had  been  a  home  to  her  in  youth,  but  whom  she  had  not  heard  of
for  years,]  and  Mrs.  W.  wanted  to  kiss  her.  My  mother  did  her  utmost  to
prevent  it,  using  all  her  force  to  push  Mrs.  W.  away,  and  the  strangest
thing  of  all  was  that  she  saw  the  inside  of  Mrs.  W.'s  throat,  and  saw  it
most  distinctly,  and  it  was  as  black  as  coal.  That  was  the  entire  dream.
About  a  week  or  10  days  after  the  dream  (I  cannot  be  sure  of  the
interval),  a  mutual  friend  sent  us  news  of  Mrs.  W.'s  serious  illness,  told  us
that  she  was  confined  to  bed,  and  sufiering  from  a  very  uncommon  disease
which  had  attacked  her  throat.  After  hearing  this  report  there  were  many
talks  of  Mrs.  W.,  but  no  way  of  gaining  further  information  about  her  was
found.

"  After  another  short  interval,  my  mother  told  us  she  had  dreamed
again.  Mrs.  W.  was  dead,  everything  about  her  was  white,  and  there  was
an  immense  amount  of  the  colour  somehow,  but  she  was  not  in  her
own  room,  neither  did  my  mother  recognise  the  room  she  was  in  as  like
any  of  the  bedrooms  in  the  house.      In  two  days  the  post  brought  us  an


III.]  DREAMS.  439

intimation  of  Mrs.  W.'s  death,  which  had  happened  during  the  night,  on
the  precise  date  of  my  mother's  dream.

"  About  three  months  afterwards,  we  had  a  visit  from  a  niece  of  Mrs.
W.,  a  lady  who  had  nursed  her  aunt  during  her  last  illness,  and  who  called
to  deliver  a  message  sent  to  my  mother  from  her  friend  before  her  death.
My  mother  told  this  lady  of  her  two  dreams,  when  the  following  explana-
tions were  given  us  : — Mrs.  W.'s  illness  was  entirely  in  her  throat,  and  its
most  distressing  symptom  was  an  extreme  difficulty  of  breathing,  necessi-
tating having  both  windows  and  door  continually  wide  open,  as  the  only
means  of  alleviation,  the  weather  at  the  time  being  bitterly  cold.  Immedi-
ately after  Mrs.  W.'s  death,  a  daughter-in-law,  a  somewhat  eccentric
person,  arranged  all  details  herself.  For  some  unexplained  reason  she
caused  the  body  to  be  moved  immediately  to  a  parlour  downstairs.  The
table  in  the  room  was  covered  with  a  white  linen  tablecloth,  and  the  body
draped  in  white  placed  on  it ;  a  sofa  in  the  room  was  covered  with  a  white
sheet,  and  every  chair,  and  also  every  picture  in  the  room  was  treated  in
a  similar  manner.  My  mother  said,  '  I  know  the  room — that  was  the
room  I  saw  in  my  dream.'  "

[This  incident  happened  about  30  years  ago,  but  the  narrator  has  a
very  clear  recollection  of  it.  She  says  that  her  mother  dreamt  a  good
deal,  and  that  many  other  singular  coincidences  had  been  noticed,  but  that
most  of  them  were  of  a  more  trivial  nature.  Of  course  the  second
dream  can  only  be  explained  telepathically  by  supposing  (in  accordance
with  Chap.  XVIII.,  §  7)  that  a  common  interest  in  the  dead  woman
established  a  line  of  communication  between  persons  who  were  strangers  to
one  another ;  and  it  is  not  an  example  on  which  we  should  be  disposed  to
lay  any  stress.  The  first  experience  is  more  striking,  as  the  detail  about
the  throat  (both  in  the  dream  and  in  the  reality)  would  be  likely  to  be
remembered,  and  not  likely  to  be  unconsciously  imagined.]

(474)  From  Des  Hallucinations,  by  Dr.  Brierre  de  Boismont  (Paris,
1862),  pp.  285-6.  It  is  to  be  presumed  that  he  received  the  account  from
the  dreamer  herself,  as  otherwise  his  prefatory  remark  would  have  no
force  ;  and  in  an  English  translation  of  another  edition  of  the  work,  the
narrative  is  followed  by  the  words,  "  This  statement  was  made  to  us  by
the  lady  herself,  in  whom  we  place  the  most  perfect  confidence."

"  Le  fait  suivant  est  un  de  ceux  qui  nous  ont  le  plus  frapp^  parceque
la  dame  de  qui  nous  le  tenons  etait  un  de  ces  esprits  senses  et  respectables
dont  les  paroles  meritent  toute  confiance.

"Mile.  R.,  douee  d'un  excellent  jugement,  religieuse  sans  bigoterie,
habitait,  avant  d'etre  marine,  la  maison  de  son  oncle,  Desessants,  medecin
celebre,  membre  de  I'lnstitut.  Elle  dtait  alors  separee  de  sa  mere,  atteinte,
en  province,  d'une  maladie  assez  grave.  Une  nuit,  cette  jeune  personne
reva  qu'elle  I'apercevait  devant  elle,  pale,  defiguree,  prete  a  rendre  le
dernier  soupir,  et  temoignant  surtout  un  vif  chagrin  de  ne  pas  etre  entouree
de  ses  enfants,  dont  I'un,  cure  d'une  des  paroisses  de  Paris,  avait  emigre  en
Espagne,  et  dont  I'autre  etait  a  Paris.  Bientot  elle  I'entendit  I'appeler
plusieurs  f ois  par  son  nom  de  bapteme ;  elle  vit,  dans  son  reve,  les
personnes  qui  entouraient  sa  mere,  s'imaginant  qu'elle  demandait  sa  petite-
fille,  portant  le  meme  nom,  aller  la  chercher  dans  la  piece  voisine ;  un
signe  de  la  malade  leur  apprit  que  ce  n' etait  point  elle,  mais  sa  fiUe  qui


440  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

habitait  Paris,  qu'elle  desirait  voir.  Sa  figure  exprimait  la  douleur  qu'elle
eprouvait  de  son  absence ;  tout-a-coup  ses  traits  se  decomposerent,  se
couvrirent  de  la  paleur  de  la  mort,  elle  retomba  sans  vie  sur  son  lit.

"  Le  lendemain  Mile.  R.  parut  fort  triste  devant  Desessants,  qui  la
pria  de  lui  faire  connaitre  la  cause  de  son  chagrin ;  elle  lui  raconta  dans
tous  ses  details  le  songe  qui  I'avait  si  fortement  tourmentee.  Desessants,
la  trouvant  dans  cette  disposition  d'esprit,  la  pressa  contre  son  coeur  en
lui  avouant  que  la  nouvelle  n'etait  que  trop  vraie,  que  sa  mere  venait  de
mourir ;  il  n'entra  point  dans  d'autres  explications.

"Plusieurs  mois  apres.  Mile.  R.  profitant  de  I'absence  de  son  oncle
pour  mettre  en  ordre  ses  papiers  auxquels  il  n'aimait  pas  qu'on  touchat,
trouva  une  lettre  qui  avait  ete  jetee  dans  un  coin.  Quelle  ne  fut  pas  sa
surprise  en  y  lisant  toutes  les  particularites  de  son  reve  que  Desessants
avait  passees  sous  silence,  ne  voulant  pas  produire  une  emotion  trop  forte
sur  un  esprit  deja  si  vivement  impressionne."

(475)  From  Mrs.  Hebert,  16,  Monmouth  Road,  Bayswater,  W.

"December  26th,  1883.

"  I  shall  relate  to  you  a  dream  which  happened  to  me  several  years
ago.  I  was  then  in  Germany  at  Mayence,  learning  German  in  a  school,
where  I  was  employed  as  a  teacher  of  the  French  language.

"  One  night  I  went  to  bed,  very  tired  but  without  any  particular
anxiety.  I  fell  into  a  heavy  slumber  and  dreamt  of  my  mother.  She  was
in  bed,  lying  ill,  and  thin  ;  her  hands,  almost  transparent,  were  stretched
convulsively  as  if  seeking  for  some  object,  whilst  she  moaned  most
piteously  in  calling  me  by  my  name.  In  fact,  she  looked  as  if  she  were
dying.  I  recognised  perfectly  her  bedroom,  the  furniture,  &c.  ;  it  was
dimly  lighted  by  a  candle,  and  close  to  the  head  of  the  bed,  in  a  green
arm-chair,  slept  an  old  woman.  I  knew  her  also  as  a  charwoman,  who,  as
it  seemed,  was  acting  as  nurse.  My  mother  in  her  desperate  motions
succeeded  in  touching  the  shoulder  of  the  old  woman,  who  awoke  with  a
start,  and  asked  her  crossly  what  she  wanted.

"  'My  scissors,'  said  my  mother  in  a  feeble  voice.

'"What  for  r

"  'To  cut  some  of  my  hair.  You  shall  give  it  to  my  daughter  in
remembrance  of  me.'

"  '  She  does  not  want  it,  go  to  sleep,'  answered  the  old  woman,  angry
at  being  disturbed.  She  pushed  back  my  mother  on  the  pillow  and  went
to  sleep  again,  without  noticing  her  agony,  her  prayer,  to  have  some  of
her  hair  cut.  I  could  hear  distinctly  the  voice  of  my  mother  becoming
weaker  and  weaker,  but  always  plaintive,  and  supplicating  the  old  woman
for  her  scissors.  At  last  I  heard  nothing.  I  awoke  in  a  frightful  agitation ;
it  was  2  o'clock  after  midnight.  I  told  my  dream  to  some  people.  They
advised  me  not  to  think  of  it,  as  they  said  that  dreams  generally  go  by
contraries.  But  a  few  days  after,  I  received  the  news  of  my  mother's
death  ;  it  had  happened  just  at  the  time  of  my  dream.

"  Louise  Hebeet."

Mrs.  Hubert  returned  to  France  in  a  few  weeks,  and,  on  seeing  the
nurse,  reproached  her  with  her  conduct,  and  was  convinced  by  her  manner
that  the  charge  was  true ;  but  there  was  no  further  evidence.     In  con-


III.]  •  DREAMS.  441

versation,  she  told  me  that  she  had  no  idea  of  her  mother  being  ill ;
that  the  dream  was  quite  unique  in  her  experience  ;  and  that  the  effect
on  her  was  so  strong  that  the  persons  she  was  living  with  had  great
difficulty  in  persuading  her  not  to  start  home  at  once.  The  incident
happened  more  than  20  years  ago,  and  she  has  lost  connection  with  her
native  place  in  Lorraine.

[The  case  is  first-hand,  from  a  witness  who,  I  am  sure,  desires  to  be
accurate  ;  but  again  the  remoteness  of  date  and  lack  of  corroboration  are
most  serious  defects,  and  the  correctness  of  the  details  in  the  dream  is
mere  conjecture.]

(476)  From  Mrs.  Drummond  Smithers,  Bridge  House,  Crookham,
Farnham,  Hants.

"  November  22nd,  1884.

"  My  father  [Mr.  Thomas  Pickerden]  was  an  architect  and  builder,
which  obliged  him  to  be  about  very  early  of  mornings;  and  on  Monday,
the  19th  January,  1857,  at  7  a.m.,  whilst  on  his  way  to  see  some  of  his
men,  he  fell,  in  a  fit  of  some  kind.  That  same  morning  I  perfectly  well
remember  not  falling  asleep  until  after  2  a.m.,  having  counted  the  clock
up  till  that  hour,  and  wondering  why  I  could  not  sleep,  as  I  always  slept
well  at  that  time.  As  we  breakfasted  at  10  a.m.  in  those  days,  we  were
not  early  risers,  so  probably  it  might  have  been  8  or  9  o'clock  before  I
woke.  I  cannot  make  a  nearer  statement,  as  I  am  not  positive  as  to  the
time  ;  but  my  dream  was  between  the  hours  mentioned.  It  was  that  my
father  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill  in  the  streets  of  Hastings,  that  he  was
put  into  a  fly  by  two  men,  and  taken  home — when  I  woke.  The  dream
seemed  to  impress  me  very  much.  I  tried  not  to  think  seriously  of  it ;
having  dressed  and  breakfasted,  still  the  dream  haunted  me.  I  could  not
shake  it  off.  When  I  spoke  to  my  sisters-in-law,  with  whom  I  was  stay-
ing (my  then  husband  was  their  brother),  they  advised  me  to  tell  him,
which  I  did,  and  he  at  once  granted  my  request  of  going  on  to  Hastings.
He  left  me  at  Etchingham  Station,  and  going  direct  to  our  home.  Hawk-
hurst,  he  found  a  telegram  there  to  the  effect  that  my  father  was  ill,  and
that  I  was  to  go  at  once.  I  had  by  this  time  reached  Hastings  and
found  my  dream  verified.

"  The  event  occurring  so  many  years  back,  not  one  witness  is  living.

"Annie  Smithers."

In  the  same  letter  Mrs.  Smithers  says,  "  The  dream  preceded  my
father's  sudden  illness  some  few  hours  ;  "  but  the  account  shows  that  there
is  no  reason  to  suppose  this.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : —

"29th  December,  1884.

"  In  my  dream  I  did  not  actually  see  my  father  fall,  but  was  at  the
spot  just  as  the  fly  was  going  off,  and  saw  distinctly  there  were  two  persons
inside  the  fly,  but  the  back  of  one  man  who  was  holding  my  father  pre-
vented my  recognising  him ;  the  man  on  the  box  I  distinctly  saw,  and
knew  him  as  a  flyman  of  Hastings,  and  he  was  the  man  who  drove  my
father  on  that  fatal  morning — for  so  it  proved,  as  he  never  rallied  from
that  illness,  never  was  out  of  his  bed  more  than  to  have  it  made  a  few
times.     He  died  5th  March,  1857.     I  never  knew  him  to  have  an  illness


442  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

previous  to  that,  nor  fit  of  any  kind ;  he  always  appeared  a  healthy  strong
man.  I  am  generally  so  free  from  dreaming  that  this  one  made  a  great
impression  upon  me  at  the  time."

The  Hastings  News  confirms  March  5,  1857,  as  the  date  of  the  death.

[This  case  again  is  remote  in  date  and  uncorroborated;  but  the
narrator  is  not  likely  to  be  wrong  as  to  the  fact  of  her  taking  a  journey
on  the  strength  of  her  dream,  and  finding  it  confirmed.]

(477)  From  Miss  Morse,  Northfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.,  who  was  the
percipient  in  case  41.

"May,  1884.

"  Often  impressions  of  persons  and  places  have  come  to  me  while
asleep,  or  when  I  seemeo^  to  be  dreaming.  For  example:  When  our  civil
war  was  in  progress  I  corresponded  with  several  soldiers.  One  of  my
correspondents  was  Captain  Fischer,  a  Dane,  who  had  formerly  been  a
sailor,  and  roamed  the  world  over.  While  the  army  of  the  Potomac  was
lying  idle,  I  dreamed  of  a  strange  place.  The  moon  shone  brightly  on
newly-made  streets,  dotted  with  small  white  houses,  arranged  to  impart  on
the  whole  scene  a  picturesque  daintiness.  One  of  the  little  dwellings
especially  won  my  attention.  I  stopped  before  it,  exclaiming,  '  How
beautiful !  I  never  saw  anything  like  it.  I  wonder  what  it  can  be.'  A
voice,  which  I  did  not  recognise,  replied,  'It  is  a  Grecian  temple.'  '  Am
I,  then,  in  Greece  1 '  '  No,  this  is  an  imitation  of  such  temples  as  one
sees  in  Greece.'  I  awoke,  and  in  a  moment  the  clock  struck  12.  I  could
not  rid  myself  of  the  feeling  that  I  had  been  to  a  new  place,  and  seen
something  real.

"  A  few  days  after,  a  letter  came  from  Captain  Fischer,  in  which  he
minutely  described  the  place  I  saw  in  my  dream,  explaining  that  the
soldiers,  to  pass  the  time,  had  laid  out  streets  and  avenues,  and  by  many
ingenious  devices  had  contrived  to  make  their  tents  resemble  houses.  His
own  tent,  which  was  much  admired,  he  had  converted  into  quite  a  clever
model  of  a  Greek  temple,  &c.  Near  the  close  he  alluded  to  the  brilliant
moonlight,  and  added  :  '  It  is  near  midnight,  and  my  men  are  asleep  all
around  me.'  Comparing  dates,  I  found  I  dreamed  of  the  scene  while  his
pen  was  describing  it."

In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Morse  says  : —

"  The  date  of  the  dream  was  firmly  fixed  in  my  mind,  because  it  came
the  one  night  that  I  passed  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Paine's  father.  I  well
remember  telling  Mrs.  Paine  the  dream  in  the  morning.  When  I  saw  her
again  I  told  her  of  Captain  Fischer's  letter,  which  was  received  after  I
returned  to  W.  H.  Junction.  Had  the  dream  occurred  at  home  I  could
not  have  been  so  sure  of  the  time."

Mrs.  Paine,  Northfield,  Vermont,  writes  as  follows  : —

"May  24th,  1884.

"  My  testimony  in  regard  to  Miss  Morse's  dream  in  connection  with
Captain  Fischer,  whom  I  know  well,  is  a  mere  mite.  I  well  recollect  her
telling  me  the  dream,  which  occurred  while  she  was  on  a  visit  at  my
father's,  but  whether  she  related  it  to  me  the  next  morning  or  later,  I
cannot  remember.     She  says  she  told  me  the  dream  at  the  time,  and  its


III.  DREAMS.  443

singular  verification  afterwards,  as  she  did  not  receive  the  letter  from
Captain  Fischer  until  after  she  returned  to  her  home  at  White  River
Junction — but  so  many  years  have  elapsed  that  they  are  inseparably
connected  in  my  mind.  I  only  remember  it  in  connection  with  the  letter,
although  I  presume  she  is  correct.

"  Lucia  A.  Paine."

(478)  From  Mr.  Latimer  H.  Saunders,  St.  Helens,  near  Hyde,  who
was  concerned  in  case  44.

"April  26th,  1884.

"  While  at  school,  I  had  a  remarkably  vivid  dream  of  a  fire,  in  which
it  appeared  my  father's  offices  were  destroyed,  entailing  upon  him  heavy
loss.  So  realistic  did  it  seem  to  me  that  I  related  it  to  one  of  my  school-
fellows (George  A.)  before  rising.  [This  gentleman,  however,  cannot
recall  the  circumstance.]  He  told  me  in  his  quaint  way  that  I  was  very
fooKsh  to  repeat  a  dream  before  getting  up  unless  I  wished  it  to  come
true ;  at  which  superstitious  fancy  I  laughed,  and  told  him  there  was  no
fear  of  such  happening  in  this  case,  as  the  fire  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  was
not  at  my  father's  offices,  16,  Mincing  Lane,  to  which  I  had  been  in  the
holidays,  but  at  Messrs.  Bailey  and  Co.'s  offices,  a  large  block  of  buildings,
No.  1,  Mincing  Lane  Buildings,  situate  some  distance  away,  and  the  only
thing  connecting  them  with  my  father  was  that  in  my  dream  I  saw  his
name-plate  on  the  entrance  instead  of  theirs.  A  few  days  after,  I  heard
from  my  mother  that  my  father's  offices  had  been  burnt  to  the  ground,
and  that  unfortunately  he  was  not  insured,  having  only  just  removed  into
new  offices.  I  afterwards  learnt  that  it  was  the  block  of  buildings  I  had
seen  in  my  dream  that  was  burnt  down  on  the  same  night ;  and  stranger
still,  that  my  father  had  taken  the  very  offices  occupied  by  the  firm  I
mentioned,  the  only  knowledge  of  whom  that  I  could  have  had  was  from
seeing  their  name  on  the  building,  in  passing  to  my  father's  offices  when
I  visited  the  City.  u  Latimee  H.  Saunders."

Mr.  Saunders's  father  says,  "  The  date  [of  the  fire]  was,  I  think,
November,  or  early  in  December,  1862."  We  find  from  the  Times  that
the  fire  took  place  on  Dec.  9,  1862,  breaking  out  shortly  after  midnight,  in
Mincing  Lane  Chambers,  and  thence  extending  to  other  buildings.

[Mr.  Saunders  tells  me  that  one  of  his  brothers  (Mr.  Harris  Saunders,
of  Leacroft  House,  Staines)  was,  he  believes,  at  the  fire — which  would  be
in  favour  of  the  telepathic  explanation  ;  but  Mr.  H.  Saunders  declines  to
tell  us  whether  he  actually  was  present.  The  case  is  too  remote  for  any
certainty  as  to  the  exact  correspondence  of  date  and  detail.]

(479  and  480)  Mr.  Rowland  Rowlands,  of  Bryncethin,  Bridgend,  has
given  us  the  following  dream-cases  out  of  many  impressions  which  he
believes  to  have  been  veridical.  (See  also  Yol.  I.,  pp.  252,  291.)  He
was  until  recently  manager  of  the  Pen-y-graig  Collieries.

"July  2nd,  1884.

"About    23    years   ago,  when    I  was   taking  a  little  rest,  about  40

or  50  miles  distance  from  Pen-y-graig,  I   saw  a  man  named  Edwin  Gay

falling  down  from  a  slope  on  the  surface  to  an  old  pit,  which  was  covered

with  old  timber  and  full  of  water.      But  the  timber  protected   him.     I


444  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

instantly  wrote  a  letter  to  caution  them  to  take  care,  but  when  the  letter
reached,  it  was  too  late,  because  the  man  had  fallen,  very  likely  at  the  very
moment  I  saw  him  going.  I  met  Mr.  Gay  [within]  the  last  fortnight,  and
went  over  the  facts  with  him.

"  On  one  occasion,  about  1868,  when  at  the  Pen-y-graig  Collieries,  I
had  come  from  the  works  to  my  house,  about  dinner-time,  1  p.m.,  and
having  been  up  all  night  had  got  into  bed — when,  just  as  I  was  dropping
off  to  sleep,  and  still  between  sleeping  and  waking,  I  saw  the  roof  of  the
stall  belonging  to  a  man  named  William  Thomas  moving,  and  the  timbers
which  supported  it  bending  and  breaking.  I  got  up  at  once  and  ran  off
to  the  colliery,  just  in  time  to  meet  William  Thomas  coming  out  of  the
works,  the  roof  of  his  stall  having  fallen  in,  just  as  I  had  seen  it.  My
vision  must  have  taken  place  at  the  very  moment  of  the  accident.  William
Thomas  is  now  dead.

"  On  another  occasion,  when  in  bed,  between  1  and  2  a.m.,  I  dreamed
that  I  saw  the  colliers,  who  should  have  stayed  in  the  works  until  5  a.m.,
putting  away  their  tools  and  making  ready  to  go.  I  hurried  on  my
clothes,  told  my  wife  what  I  had  dreamed,  and  ran  off  to  the  works.  I
found  that  the  men  were  just  about  to  leave,  but  had  hurried  back  on
seeing  the  approach  of  my  light.  They  wondered  much  how  I  had  dis-
covered the  trick  which  they  had  intended  to  play."

[This  last  case  may  probably  have  been  due  to  some  latent  idea  in
the  dreamer's  mind.]

I  append  some  specimens  of  a  rather  numerous  class  in  which
letters  are  alleged  to  have  been  perceived  shortly  before  their
arrival.  The  following  are  instances  which  there  is  no  difficulty  in
accounting  for  telepathically.  (See  also  cases  409,  433,  447,  above ;
and  cases  136,  137.)

(481)  From  Mr.  Conquest,  Mead  House,  Biggleswade.

"December,  1884.

"  It  was,  I  think,  in  October,  1869,  that  I  dreamed  that  I  received  a
letter  from  an  old  friend.  Rev.  S.  H.  Ireson,  then  a  curate  of  St.  Thomas'
Church,  Liverpool,  and  residing  in  Birkenhead,  from  whom  I  had  not  heard
for  12  months  or  more.  His  handwriting  was  very  distinct,  and  it
stood  out  very  clearly  before  me,  as  I  read  that  his  wife  had  presented  him
with  another  little  daughter.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  page,  I  tried
to  turn  over  the  leaf,  but  could  not,  and  the  effort  awoke  me.  The  vivid-
ness of  the  dream  was  such  that  on  coming  down  to  breakfast  in  the
morning,  I  said  to  my  sister  (now  Mrs.  Daniel,  of  The  Elms,  Biggleswade),
'  I  expect  to  hear  from  Ireson  this  morning,  for  I  dreamed  last  night  that
I  received  one  announcing  the  birth  of  a  daughter.'  In  a  few  minutes
the  postman  came,  but  there  was  no  letter  from  Ireson,  It  came,  how-
ever, the  following  day,  and  the  first  page  seemed  to  be  identical  with  the
one  I  had  read  in  my  dream.  Towards  the  end  of  December,  in  the  same
year,  I  think,  I  visited  Ireson  at  Birkenhead,  and,  one  day,  happening  to
mention  the  above  circumstance  to  him,  he  said,  '  I  distinctly  remember
writing  you  that  letter — it  was  between  1  and  2  (or  2  and  3)  o'clock  in
the  morning,  and  after  I  had  written  the  first  page,   I  went  to  bed  and


in.]  DREAMS.  445

finished  the  letter  next  day.'  Ireson  afterwards  became  Vicar  of  Barnolds-
wick,  and  died  a  few  years  ago.  u  ^u^t,.  W.  Conquest."

Mrs.  Daniel  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  The  Elms,  Biggleswade.

"December  17th,  1884.
"  I   perfectly    recollect    Mr.   F.  Conquest    telling  me  of    his  dream,
respecting  the  birth  of  Mr.  Ireson's  daughter,  previous  to  our  receiving
information  of  the  event,  and  have  pleasure  in  adding  my  testimony  in
confirmation  of  it.  "  T.  F.  Daniel."

Mr.  Conquest  has  antedated  his  experience  by  some  months,  as  we
find  from  the  Register  of  Births  that  his  friend's  daughter  was  born  on
July  9,  1870.  In  conversation  he  informed  me  that  he  had  had  no  idea
of  the  impending  event ;  and  also  that  he  does  not  dream  much.  Mrs.
Daniel  described  to  me  the  place  where  she  and  her  brother  were  standing
when  he  told  her  of  the  dream,  and  the  arrival  of  the  post  immediately
afterwards.

(482)  From  Mrs.  Paramore,  43,  Shaftesbury  Road,  W.

"March,  1884.

"  On  the  night  of  the  21st  March,  1871,  I  woke  from  some  distressing
dream,  sobbing.  My  husband  [since  deceased]  inquired  what  was  the
matter.  I  told  him  I  had  had  such  a  dreadful  dream,  something  about  my
Aunt  Baker,  but  I  could  not  remember  any  particulars.  Towards  morn-
ing, I  think  about  5  o'clock,  I  woke  up  again  in  great  distress  from  a
similar,  though  more  vivid,  dream — -something  still  connected  with  my
Aunt  Baker  ;  but  I  told  my  husband  I  had  received  two  letters,  black-
bordered.  When  I  got  up,  I  felt  unusually  depressed,  and  kept  saying  to
my  husband  I  could  not  shake  ofi"  a  dreadful  feeling  of  wretchedness ;  as  I
was  nearly  always  in  excellent  spirits,  he  was  surprised,  but  our  astonish-
ment was  inexpressible  when  the  post  brought  me  two  black-edged  letters,
both  in  the  handwriting  of  my  Uncle  Hubert  Hutchings,  my  Aunt
Baker's  brother.  The  envelopes  were  numbered  1  and  2 — the  latter  I
have  found  with  the  letters  amongst  my  papers.  No.  1  contained  the
intelligence  of  my  aunt's  illness,  of  which  until  then  I  was  unaware.  The
other  one,  written  shortly  after,  told  me  of  her  death.  My  husband  and
myself  were  greatly  impressed  with  this  extraordinary  circumstance — for
I  never  attached  the  slightest  importance  to  dreams ;  but  this  was  un-
deniably a  mysterious  coincidence."

Mrs.  Paramore  sent  the  two  letters — ^concerning  respectively  the  ill-
ness and  death — for  our  inspection.  Both  were  dated  the  same  day,  21st
March,  1871,  and  the  black-edged  cover  in  which  one  of  them  was  enclosed
bore  a  dated  stamp-impression  of  that  day.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Paramore  writes  on  March  23,  1884  : —
"  I  do  not  at  this  distant  date  actually  remember  as  to  whether  the  two
letters  were  black-bordered  or  not,  but  I  distinctly  dreamt  they  had
reference  to  my  aunt,  whose  illness  and  death  were  announced  the  follow-
ing morning  in  the  two  letters  I  sent  you.  Whilst  dressing,  I  frequently
remarked  (before  the  post  came  in)  to  my  husband  how  wretched  I  felt
about  my  dream,  and  that  it  was  something  about  my  Aunt  Baker.     I  do


446  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

not  remember  any  other  very   distressing  dreams  that  have  or  have  not
come  true.  "Leonoea  E.  Paramoee."

In  conversation  Mrs.  Paramore  dwelt  on  the  quite  unique  feeling  of
distress  which  followed  the  dream.  As  to  the  particular  feature  of  repeti-
tion, see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  357-8,  and  below  pp.  700-1.

(483)  From  Mr.  E.  W.  Phibbs,  84,  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.

"February  10th,  1885.

"  In  1856,  living  in  Manchester,  where  I  carried  on  the  business  of  silk
and  cotton  manufacturer,  I  dreamed  one  night  I  saw  a  sheet  of  paper  with
a  written  order  upon  it,  unimportant  in  itself,  from  a  house  which  was  in
the  daily  habit  of  sending  me  orders— A.  and  S.  Henry  and  Co.  As  I
saw  it,  it  looked  like  a  sheet  of  wet  paper  without  any  surroundings,
covered  with  writing.  When  I  got  to  my  place  of  business,  about  half-
past  9,  my  partner,  who  was  always  there  before  me,  remarked  that  he
had  a  curious  (from  its  insignificance)  order  from  A.  and  S.  Henry  and
Co.  I  said,  '  Before  showing  it  me,  give  me  a  sheet  of  paper,'  on  which  I
wrote  out  a  part  of  the  order — the  upper  portion — and  remarked,  '  I  can't
repeat  what  is  below,  because  it  is  smeared  in  the  copying-press.'  He
looked  at  me  very  much  surprised,  and  produced  the  original,  showing  that
it  was  identical  with  my  description.

"  Thinking  over  the  matter  for  some  weeks,  a  difficulty  presented  itself
in  the  thought  that,  at  the  moment  when  I  dreamed  I  saw  it,  the  order
would  be  folded  in  an  envelope,  and  not  be  an  open  sheet.  Also,  why
should  the  sheet  appear  wet  ?  At  last  I  questioned  the  writer  of  the  order,
without  giving  him  any  reasons,  and  on  asking  him  to  describe  the  daily
procedure  of  the  business  of  writing  such  orders  out,  he  answered  that,
when  he  had  written  a  number  of  such  orders  the  last  thing  at  night,  he  gave
them  to  the  copying  clerk,  who  was  in  the  unusual  practice  of  leaving  all
these  orders  in  the  copying-book  in  the  press  all  night.  The  first  thing  the
following  morning,  these  would  be  put  in  envelopes  and  distributed  through
the  town.     This  at  once  explains  the  open  and  damp  sheet  of  my  dream.

"  The  order  began  in  the  ordinary  form — '  Order  for  (500)  pieces,'  &c.
The  words  written  down  (before  seeing  the  actual  order)  contained  all
that  was  extraordinary  in  it.  The  smeared  portion  only  contained  further
particulars.  "  E.  W.  Phibbs."

Mr.  Phibbs'  partner  is  dead.  But  Mr.  Phibbs  has  forwarded  to  us  a
letter,  written  to  him  on  Feb.  18,  1886,  by  Mr.  Fitzgerald,  of  34,  Marble
Street,  Manchester,  who  heard  of  the  occurrence  at  the  time,  completely
confirming  the  above  account ;  and  Mr.  J.  Lang  writes,  from  the  Man-
chester Examiner  and  Times  office,  to  the  same  efiect.

In  August,  1883,  Mr.  Phibbs  had  another  curious  dream,  of  seeing  his
dog,  who  was  not  with  him  where  he  was  staying,  dying  under  a  wall ;
and  Mrs.  Phibbs  confirms  the  fact  that  this  dream  was  narrated  to  her
immediately.  It  turned  out  that  the  event  had  taken  place,  and  that  the
dog  was  buried,  by  persons  who  were  in  some  degree  responsible  for
the  accident  that  led  to  its  death,  at  (apparently)  the  hour  of  the  dream.
But  the  dog  was  fond  of  climbing,  and  the  case  can  hardly  be  numbered
as  evidential.

I  may  conclude,  in  this  connection,  with  the  following  complicated


III.]  DREAMS.  447

case,  the  value  of  which  it  is  difficult  to  estimate,  but  which  at
least  has  a  decided  suggestion  of  genuine  telepathy  for  anyone  who
believes  in  the  reality  of  that  influence.

(484)  From  a  lady  who  thinks  that  to  allow  the  publication  of  her
name  would  involve  a  breach  of  confidence.  She  is  a  scrupulously  con-
scientious witness.  .^^.

"1884.

"I  make  the  following  story  as  short  as  possible,  suppressing  many
details,  and,  of  course,  entirely  changing  the  names  of  those  concerned.
Miss  Black,  with  whom  I  have  been  most  intimate  for  many  years,  became
much  interested  in  a  Mrs.  Gray.  Although  Miss  Black  and  I  are  so  in
sympathy  that  I  may  call  our  interests  mutual,  I,  from  the  first,  took  an
unaccountable  dislike  to  this  particular  friendship ;  so  much  so  that,
although  I  was  always  told  when  the  friends  met,  no  personal  details  were
ever  told  me.     I  never  heard  Mrs.  Gray  or  her  husband  described ;    I

never  saw  her  writing.    I  believed  her  name  to  be ,  which  is  that  of

her  daughter.

"At  the  end  of  nearly  three  years  I  received  an  anonymous  letter,
written  in  a  hand  evidently  meant  to  be  disguised,  asking  me  to  give  the
writer  some  particulars  of  the  disposal  of  Miss  Black's  property.  The
reply  was  to  be  addressed  to  certain  initials  at  a  Post-office.  I  did
not  reply.     A  short  time  a^fter,  I  dreamt  that  I  stood  looking  over  the

shoulder  of  a  lady  writing  a  letter,  and  that  she  signed  herself  '

Gray.'  The  room  door  opened  and  a  tall  old  man  came  in,  and  the  writer
hastily  put  the  letter  away.  Two  days  after,  I  received  a  second  anony-
mous letter  of  the  same  purport,  which  I  did  not  answer.  I  dreamt  the
same  thing  again.  Soon  after  (I  forget  how  many  days),  a  third  letter
reached  me,  begging  that  I  would  never  let  Miss  Black  know  what  had
passed.  I  then  wrote,  saying  the  letters  were  destroyed,  and  that  from
me  Miss  B.  would  never  hear  of  the  matter.  A  month  or  two  after  this,
while  staying  at  my  home,  Miss  B.  and  I  were  at  church.  An  old  man
sat  near  us  who  struck  me  as  extremely  like  the  figure  I  had  seen  in  my
dreams.  Miss  B.  whispered,  '  That  is  so  like  Major  Gray.'  This  impressed
me  very  much,  and  I   afterwards  found  out  that  Mrs.  Gray's  name  is

,  not  ,  as  I  had  supposed  ;  also  that  she    has    a  great  quantity

of  almost  white  hair,  which  I  have  omitted  to  say  was  the  only  thing
I  very  distinctly  saw  about  my  dream-lady,  as  her  face  was  hidden  from  me.

"  In  the  course  of  her  visit.  Miss  Black  said,  '  It  seems  to  me  your
dislike  to  Mrs.  Gray  has  taken  a  more  definite  form ;  you  know  something
about  her.'  I  denied  the  knowledge,  all  being  surmise,  and  I  being  most
anxious  that  Miss  B.  should  not  be  wounded  by  the  feeling  that  anyone
was  speculating  on  what  would  happen  in  the  event  of  her  death,  specially
as  she  is  in  delicate  health.  The  subject  was  then  dropped  between  us ;
but  when,  on  a  visit  to  her,  we  had  been  sitting  alone  and  silent  for  some
time,  her  hand  being  on  my  shoulder,  she  exclaimed,  suddenly,  '  It  is
something  about  my  will  that  makes  you  dislike  Mrs.  G.  so  much.'  In
point  of  fact,  I  had  at  the  time  been  thinking  over  the  whole  matter.  I
then  told  her  all,  and  it  is  now  a  matter  of  great  regret  I  did  not  at  once
send  Miss  B.  the  letters,  as  things  then  might  have  been  cleared  up.  It
has  been  a  cause  of  distress  to  Miss  B.  and  myself,  as  it  has  made  a  breach


448  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

in  her  friendship  with  Mrs.  Gray,  who  denies  all  knowledge  of  the  letters,
but  refuses  to  meet  me  and  discuss  the  affair.  I  need  trouble  you  no
further,  nothing  more  of  interest,  from  a  psychological  point,  having
occurred."

Referring  to  the  above  account,  "  Miss  Black  "  writes,  on  October  5,
1886  : — "  I  can  corroborate  the  facts  therein  contained."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  says  : —

1.  "After  receiving  the  first  anonymous  letter  I  did  suspect  its  author
to  be  Mrs.  Gray.  Before  this  I  never  had  the  least  suspicion  that  her
interest  in  Miss  Black  was  a  mercenary  one,  and  I  have  been  at  a  loss  to
account  for  feeling  so  assured  she  was  the  writer,  without  there  being  any
evidence  to  favour  the  idea.

2.  "  I  am  quite  sure  I  recognised  the  old  man  in  church  as  being  like
the  man  in  my  dream  before  Miss  B.  spoke  of  the  resemblance  to  Major  Gray.

3.  "  I  am  quite  sure  I  never  saw  Major  G.,  and  I  have  not  the  shghtest
remembrance  of  having  heard  any  description  of  him.

4.  "Previous  to  Miss  Black  'reading'  what  certainly  were  my  thoughts
about  Mrs.  Gray,  we  had  made  some  very  small  experiments  in  thought-
transference,  with,  however,  too  slight  results  to  submit  to  the  S.P.R.  In
these  experiments  I  was  the  percipient ;  my  '  willing '  had  no  effect  what-
ever on  Miss  Black.  We  discontinued  our  experimenting  as  I  found  it
exhausting.  I  think  it  is  clear  that  a  'sympathetic  rapport'  exists
between  us,  as  once  it  was  '  borne  in  upon  me '  with  inexpressible  power
that  she  was  in  some  distress.  The  impression  seized  me  suddenly  at  a
certain  hour,  and  no  effort  would  dispel  it.  The  news  reached  me  next  day
that  Miss  B.'s  sister  had  been  taken  worse  at  the  time,  and  was  dying.
She  had  been  ill,  but  not  seriously  so,  and  the  last  account  I  had  received
was  very  good.  When  we  are  together  we  have  often  answered  unexpressed
thoughts.

5.  "I  am  very  sorry  I  made  no  notes  whatever  of  the  incident,  never
having  been  in  the  habit  of  keeping  a  diary,  and  I  cannot  be  at  all  accurate
as  to  dates.  [The  narrator  has  however  told  us  privately  what  were  the
months  in  which  the  various  incidents  occurred.  The  first  was  less  than  4
years  ago.]

6.  "I  do  not  remember  ever  having  dreamt  more  than  once  \i.e.,  having
had  repeated  i]  a  dream  in  which  any  one  besides  myself  has  appeared.

"  Not  having  any  idea  that  Mrs.  Gray's  name  is ,  in  fact  being

impressed  with  the  idea  that  it  was ,  does  it  not  strike  you  as  a  very

curious  coincidence  that  I  should  have  dreamt  that  I  saw  the  true  signa-
ture ?  The  real  name  [communicated  in  confidence]  is  a  rather  uncommon
one.     I  have  never  known  more  than  one  person  bearing  the  same.

"  I  quite  forgot  to  say  that  Miss  Black  writes  that  she  does  not
remember  her  hand  being  on  my  shoulder,  but  that  I  was  sitting  so  near
as  to  touch  her ;  my  own  impression  still  is  that  it  was  so."

In  conversation  the  narrator  told  Mr.  Podmore  that,  when  she  told  the
whole  story  to  Miss  Black,  the  latter  brought  down  a  bundle  containing
many  letters  from  various  persons,  and  that  she  (the  narrator)  without
difficulty  picked  out  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Gray's,  from  the  resemblance  of  the
writing  to  that  seen  in  the  dream.

1  See  p.  418,  note.


IV,]


CHAPTER    IV.

"  BORDERLAND  "     CASES.

I  1,  The  most  convenient  mode  of  arranging  the  cases  in  the  present
chapter  will  be,  not  by  the  character  of  the  experience  narrated —
visual,  auditory,  and  so  on — for  it  happens  that  a  large  majority  are
visual ;  ^  but  by  the  character  of  the  evidence — first-hand  or  second-
hand, recent  or  remote.

I  will  begin  with  some  cases,  first-hand  or  on  a  par  with  first-hand
(Vol.  I,,  p.  148),  to  which  the  chief  objection,  from  an  evidential  point
of  view,  is  their  remoteness  of  date.

(485)  From  the  late  Mr.  Robert  Henry  Dix,  63,  Lanark  Villas,  Maida
Vale,  London,  W.  u  February  2nd,  1884.

"In  1836,  when  a  very  young  man,  I  had  become  engaged  to  a
young  lady ;  but  I  decided  to  leave  England  and  try  my  fortune  elsewhere,
and  wait  until  I  should  be  able  to  establish  myself,  and  could  then  send
for  my  intended  and  be  united.  Of  course  we  were  to  keep  up  a  regular
correspondence.

"I  left  England  and  went  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  I  had  some
friends,  and  very  soon  after  my  arrival  there  I  got  an  appointment  on
an  estate  in  the  South  of  Russia,  belonging  to  a  rich  and  influential
nobleman.  In  the  course  of  a  year  I  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  very
good  position,  and  could  fairly  hope  to  be  enabled  to  marry  in  the  course
of  the  next  spring.  In  the  meantime,  the  correspondence  with  my  in-
tended continued  very  regularly.  All  at  once  it  ceased,  and  for  some  time
I  had  received  no  letters  from  her.  I  wrote  to  one  of  her  family,  and
was  informed  that  my  intended  was  taken  seriously  ill,  and  had  gone  to
Jersey  to  some  friends  there,  hoping  that  the  sea  air  and  change  of
climate  might  be  beneficial  to  her.  This  naturally  unsettled  me  very
much,  and  I  became  depressed  and  low-spirited  in  consequence.  One  day
I  remember  I  was  particularly  so.  I  had  been  very  much  occupied  during
the  day,  and  towards  the  evening  threw  myself  on  the  sofa  in  my  sitting-
room,  and  dropped  ofi"  to  sleep.  It  might  have  been  an  hour  or  so  that  I
had  been  asleep,  when,  suddenly  awaking,  I  observed  at  the  foot  of  the

1  The  cases  which  were  exclusively  auditory  are  Nos.  496,  497,  506,  507  538 ;  and
an  auditory  impression  was  a  prominent  element  in  cases  489,  495,  498,  508,  509,  513,  519,
520,  522,  526,  527,  528,  539,  540,  547.

VOL.    II.  2    G


450  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

couch  a  sort  of  bluish  vapour,^  which  seemed  to  fill  up  the  end  of  the
room,  and  what  seemed  to  me  a  shadowy  form  appeared  to  come  out  of  it,
which  gradually  took  the  form  of  a  female ;  the  features  bore  the  exact
likeness  of  my  intended.  I  was  now  fully  awake.  I  raised  myself  on
the  sofa,  and  exclaimed,  '  Louisa,  is  that  really  you  ?  What  has
happened  1 '  I  received  no  answer,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the  apparition
was  gone,  and  seemed  to  melt  away  into  the  vapour,  which  also  dis-
appeared. I  still  supposed  that  I  had  been  dreaming,  but  I  could  not
shake  off  the  impression  this  apparition  had  made  upon  me.

"  I  wrote  to  my  friends  in  England,  saying  that  I  feared  my  intended
was  dying  or  dead.  I  received  in  answer  that  my  fears  were  too  well
founded,  and  that  the  poor  girl  had  died  of  inflammation  of  the  brain,  on
the  same  day,  and  about  the  same  time,  as  I  mentioned  having  seen  the
apparition.  "  R-  H.  D."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Dix  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  he  could
not  give  the  precise  date  of  the  apparition ;  it  occurred  some  time  in  the
autumn  of  1837,  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  when  it  was  dusk,  but  not  yet
fully  dark.  He  made  no  written  memorandum  of  the  occurrence,  but  told
one  or  two  friends  in  Russia  on  the  following  day.  When  he  received  the
letter  announcing  the  death,  he  noted  that  it  took  place  on  the  same  day
as  the  vision,  but  he  never  learned  whether  the  hour  exactly  corresponded,
only  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  afternoon.

All  those  who  could  give  corroborative  evidence  in  this  case  are
either  dead  or  dispersed,  so  that  they  cannot  be  traced.  ISTone  of  the
letters  are  preserved,  and  no  one  is  Living  of  Mr.  Dix's  own  relations  who
could  attest  the  receipt  of  his  letters.

Mr.  Dix  was  certain  that  he  had  never  had  any  other  experience  of
hallucination.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  noted  that  he  was  at  the
time  in  a  state  of  distinct  anxiety  respecting  his  fiancee.

We  have  more  to  rely  on  here  than  the  mere  recollection  of  the
experience ;  this  receives,  so  to  speak,  a  -point  d'appiii  in  the
recollection  that  a  letter  was  written  in  consequence.  Similarly,  in
the  next  two  cases,  and  in  others  that  follow,  we  have  the  recollection
that  the  phantasm  was  immediately  described  and  commented  on.
In  respect  of  many  of  these  borderland  visions,  I  may  remind  the
reader  that  the  percipient's  certainty  of  having  been  completely  awake
at  the  time,  though  not  conclusive  as  to  the  fact,  is  in  itself  quite
sufficient  to  distinguish  the  experience  from  an  ordinary  dream.

(486)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Lever,  of  Culcheth  Hall,  Bowdon,  wife  of  Mr.
Ellis  Lever,  well  known  in  Manchester.

"May  14th,  1884.

"  When  at  Ashton-under-Lyne,  in  my  father's  house,  and  being  about
14  years  of  age,  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed,  and  my  sister,  Anne,  sleeping
by  my  side.  It  was  nearing  the  dawn  at  morning,  when  I  saw  my  cousin,
Mary  Tinker,   come  to  my  bedside,   and  she  laid  one  hand  on  the  pillow

1  Compare  cases  193  and  194,  and  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  note.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  451

near  my  sister's  head,  while  her  eyes  were  uplifted,  as  if  in  prayer.  (My
cousin  Mary  was  particularly  attached  to  my  sister  Anne.)  She  was  in  her
nightdress,  which  was  frilled  down  the  front,  and  a  nightcap,  also  frilled  ;
and  I  saw  her  dark-brown  eyes  as  distinctly  as  possible.  I  was  so  afraid
that  I  shrank  under  the  clothes ;  but  then,  reflecting  that  I  had  done
nothing  to  grieve  her,  and  no  reason  to  be  afraid,  I  resolved  to  speak  to
her.  But  on  removing  the  clothes,  she  was  gone,  and  not  knowing  where
she  could  have  gone  to,  I  concluded  that  it  must  have  been  her  spirit.^  At
breakfast,  the  same  morning,  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen  to  my  father
and  brothers,  and  to  my  sister  Anne.  They  said  I  must  have  been
dreaming,  but  I  was  quite  awake,  and  assured  them  that  this  was  the  case.

"  The  next  day  a  letter  came  stating  that  my  cousin  Mary  had  died,
and  it  was  ascertained  that  her  death  occurred  at  the  very  time  at  which  I
had  seen  her  apparition.  This  coincidence  convinced  the  members  of  my
family  that  I  had  seen  my  cousin,  as  I  assured  them  I  had.

"  Catherine  Lever."

Mrs.  Lever's  daughter  writes,  from  Cambridge  House,  Monmouth  : —

"June  4th,  1884.

"  I  am  staying  with  my  mother's  sister  [Anne],  who  distinctly
remembers  about  her  cousin  Mary.  "Ada  Lever."

Mrs.  Lever,  herself,  however,  says,  "  My  sister  only  just  remembers
my  mentioning  Cousin  Mary,  and  she  cannot  give  me  the  date."

(487)  From  a  lady,  Mrs,  H.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not
be  published.  u  ig83

"  When  I  was  a  child  of  11  years  of  age,  a  very  singular  thing
happened  to  me,  which  is  well-known  to  my  family,  and  impressed  itself  so
vividly  on  my  memory  that  I  can  still,  though  now  a  grandmother,  recall
every  circumstance.

"  One  night  I  awoke  in  a  great  state  of  fright,  thinking  someone  had
touched  me.  I  saw  distinctly,  standing  by  my  bedside,  my  brother,  but  I
was  terrified  to  see  that  he  looked  very  terribly  strange  and  altered,  as  it
struck  me,  like  a  dead  person,  though  at  that  time  I  had  never  seen
anyone  dead.  I  was  also  very  astonished  at  seeing  that  he  seemed
dripping  wet,  his  clothes  wet  and  stained,  his  hair  dripping,  and  he  stood
with  his  eyes  fixed  on  me.  In  my  terror  I  called  out  '  Alick  ! '  (his  name),
when  the  figure  immediately  vanished.^  I  jumped  out  of  bed,  running
through  the  door,  which  was  always  left  open,  into  the  next  room,  my
governess's,  telling  her  of  what  I  had  seen,  and  in  my  alarm,  getting  into
her  bed,  where  I  remained  that  night.  She  tried  to  laugh  away  my  fears,
saying  I  must  have  eaten  something  that  had  disagreed  with  me,  and  that
what  had  passed  was  a  nightmare,  and  forbidding  me  to  mention  it  to  my
grandmother,  under  whose  care  I  was  living,  she  being  an  old  Scotch  lady,
and  superstitious,  and  that  it  might  upset  her.  Nothing,  therefore,  regard-
ing the  circumstance  was  in  any  way  placed  on  record.

"  About  three  months  afterwards,  as  I  was  reading  aloud  to  my
governess  in  the  same  sitting-room  with  my  grandmother,  the  Indian  post
arrived.     She  made  the  remark,   '  How  singular  !   No  letters,  only  a  news-

1  See  p.  48,  note.

2  As  to  the  sudden  disappearance  on  speech,  compare  case  540,  and  see  p.  91,  note.

VOL.    II,  2    G    2


452  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

paper,'  which  she  began  reading.  After  a  little  while  she  dropped  the
paper  with  the  exclamation,  '  Oh,  my  God  ! '  My  governess  ran  to  her,
and  presently  read  my  brother's  death  by  drowning  in  a  quicksand  in  the
River  Sone,  near  Sonepore,  in  Bengal.  He  was  marching  with  his  regiment ;
they  were  encamped  on  one  side  of  the  river  bank,  another  regiment  on
the  opposite  side.  This  regiment,  in  which  my  brother  had  a  young  friend,
had  asked  him  to  early  breakfast,  about  5  or  6  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  and
the  native  who  was  showing  him  the  way  across  afterwards  deposed  he
heard  a  struggling  all  of  a  sudden,  looked  back,  and  saw  my  brother  and
his  pony  floundering  in  the  quicksand,  with  which  the  river  is  full,  and  of
which  it  is  supposed  the  coolie  had  forgotten  to  warn  him.  Instead  of
throwing  my  brother  a  rope  or  stick  to  catch  hold  of,  the  man,  in  a  great
state  of  fright,  ran  back  to  the  camp  to  give  the  news ;  but  by  the  time
help  arrived  it  was  too  late,  and  my  brother  was  quite  dead  when  the  body
was  recovered.^  This  happened  March  21st,  1845.  In  Bengal  by  that
month  the  sun  is  well  risen  by  5  o'clock,  or  at  all  events  quite  broad  light,
and  being  in  advance  of  us  some  six  hours,  the  time  at  which  he  was
drowned  would  tally  with  my  seeing  him  during  the  night  at  home.

"  M.  C.  H."

From  the  only  public  notice  of  the  death  that  we  have  been  able  to
discover — a  letter  quoted  by  Allen' s  Indian  Mail  ivovn  th.Q  Bengal  Hurkaru
of  March  4,  1845 — it  appears  that  Mrs.  H.'s  brother  was  drowned  in
the  Sone  when  returning  one  morning  to  his  regiment,  having  spent  the
night  with  another  regiment  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  that  he
was  buried  on  Feb.  23.  It  is  thus  likely  enough  that  the  accident  occurred
on  Feb.  21.     The  March  21,  in  Mrs.  H.'s  account,  cannot  be  correct.

Mrs.  H.  adds  the  following  incident,  which  is  perhaps  worth  giving
in  connection  with  the  former  one ;  but  it  is  possible  that  the  daughter
who  was  in  the  same  room  with  her  called  out  in  her  sleep.

"  My  eldest  daughter  had  come  out  to  us  to  Calcutta,  and  she  happened
for  the  time  to  be  sleeping  in  my  bedroom.  Early  one  morning,  December,
1870,  a  few  days  after  her  arrival,  I  woke  suddenly,  hearing  her,  as  I
thought,  calling  out,  '  Mamma,  mamma,'  in  a  very  strained  sort  of  voice,
but,  to  my  surprise,  found  she  was  sound  asleep.  About  24  days  after-
wards, we  got  the  news  that  my  second  daughter,  a  girl  just  14,  then  at
Dover  w;ith  a  relative,  had  scarlet  fever  very  badly,  and  in  the  delirium
attending  kept  only  calling  out,  '  Mamma,  mamma.'  She  recovered ;  so
this  shows,  as  so  many  cases  of  the  same  kind  do,  that  it  is  not  only  at  the
moment  of  the  spirit's  departure  these  manifestations  occur  ;  but  I  think
they  only  do  so  in  cases  where  either  very  strong  attachment  exists,  or  to
people  whose  temperament  is  of  the  rather  nervously  sensitive  breed,  and
I  am  so  in  many  ways  ;  for  instance,  I  have  the  most  extraordinarily  keen
hearing."

The  narrator  states  that  she  has  never  experienced  any  hallucination
of  a  purely  subjective  kind.

(488)  From  Mr.  William  Garlick,  F.R.C.S.,  33,  Great  James  Street,
Bloomsbury,  W.C.

"Between  6  and  7  in  the  morning  of  August  29,  1832,  when  lying  in

1  This  chapter  and  the  next  contain  a  good  many  cases  where  the  death  of  the  agent
was  by  drowning.     See  p.  26.


IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  463

bed,  half  asleep  and  half  awake,  I  was  suddenly  startled  by  perceiving  the
form  of  my  brother  George,  then  absent  from  home,  standing  beside  me.
The  room  was  quite  light,  and  my  recognition  of  the  figure  was  complete
and  clear.  He  looked  at  me,  and  then  seemed  to  fade  slowly  away.^  My
brother,  who  had  a  specially  warm  affection  for  me,  was  at  that  time  a
sailor  on  board  the  merchant  ship,  '  Eliza,'  bound  for  the  East  Indies.  I
had  no  reason  to  suppose  anything  was  wrong  with  him,  nor  was  he
specially  in  my  thoughts.  The  vision,  for  I  felt  certain  that  I  was  awake
and  not  dreaming,  made  a  very  strong  and  painful  impression  upon  me,
so  much  so  that  the  family  where  I  was  staying  asked  the  cause  of  my
troubled  looks.  I  told  them  what  I  had  seen,  and  at  my  hostess's  (after-
wards my  mother-in-law)  request  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence.

"  Months  afterwards  we  received  the  intelligence  that  my  brother
had  died  at  Baroda,  of  dysentery.  The  date  and  hour  ^  of  his  death,  as
nearly  as  could  be  calculated,  coincided  exactly  with  that  of  his  appear-
ance to  me  at  Stroud  (Gloucester).  I  am  of  a  calm  and  unimaginative
temperament,  and  have  never  had  any  similar  experience  before  or  since.
The  coincidence  was  well-known  to  various  members  of  my  family,  but
I  do  not  now  remember  that  I  mentioned  the  matter  to  anyone  else  at
the  time.  "  Wm.  Garlick."

Mrs.  Garlick  writes,  on  Nov.  18,  1884  : —

"  I  was  present  at  the  breakfast  table  on  the  29th  August,  1832,  when
my  mother,  Mrs.  Humpage,  questioned  Mr.  Garlick  on  the  cause  of  his
unusual  gloom  and  quietness.  He  then  told  us  that  he  had  seen  his
brother — who  was  at  that  time  at  sea — in  his  bedroom  an  hour  or  two
before.  My  mother  answered,  '  You  will  be  sure  to  hear  something,  so
note  the  date.'

"  Some  months  afterwards  I  remember  that  a  letter  came  for  Mr.
Garlick,  forwarded  from  his  mother,  announcing  the  death  of  this  brother
on  that  day,  the  29th  August.  I  heard  of  this,  of  course,  as  soon  as  the
letter  was  received.  "  L.  Garlick."

Mr.  Garlick  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination.  In  conversation,
he  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  the  figure  remained  in  his  sight,
apparently,  for  about  10  minutes;  but  the  length  of  time,  in  such  circum-
stances, is  apt  to  be  greatly  exaggerated.  He  has  a  very  vivid  recollection
of  the  features,  but  cannot  recall  the  dress.  He  infers  from  this  that  the
dress  was  that  which  his  brother  usually  wore,  as  he  would  certainly  have
noticed  and  remembered  any  unusual  detail  in  the  costume.  He  was  about
18  years  old  at  the  time.  The  "  note  "  referred  to  was  a  mental  note  only,
but  he  is  confident  of  the  accuracy  of  his  memory.  He  showed  Mr.  Pod-
more  the  entry  of  the  death,  with  the  date,  in  his  family  Bible.

We  have  not  been  able  to  verify  the  date  of  death,  as  it  has  been
impossible  to  trace  the  "  Eliza."

(489)  From  Mrs.  Nind,  Midleton  House,  Westcombe  Park,  Blackheath.

"May  14th,  1883.
"  On  a  Good  Friday  morning,  many  years  ago,  I  had  been  awake  early,

1  See  p.  97,  first  note.

2  This  word,  as  Mr.  Garlick  has  subsequently  explained,  is  a  slip.  The  hour  of  death
was  not  mentioned  in  the  letter  which  conveyed  the  news  ;  so  that  no  calculation  could
establish  a  precise  coincidence.


454  SUPPLEMENT.      .  [chap.

and  finding  it  too  soon  to  get  up,  was  lying  in  bed,  not  asleep,  when  a
figure  stood  by  my  bedside,  in  fact,  my  father-in-law,  an  old  captain  in
the  Royal  Navy  ;  he  spoke  to  me  a  few  words  ^  and  disappeared.  I  was  so
startled  that  I  called  my  husband  (since  dead),  who  was  asleep,  and  told
him  what  was  said.  I  immediately  got  up  and  told  my  mother  and  sister
[since  deceased],  who  chanced  to  be  staying  with  us.  Now,  what  makes
this  story  seem  strange  was  that  my  father-in-law  had  died  the  night
before,  suddenly.  We  did  not  get  the  news  before  the  afternoon  of
Good  Friday,  as  he  was  residing  at  Bridgnorth,  in  Shropshire,  16  miles
from  a  railway.  I  saw  him  in  the  early  morning,  I  count  about  8  hours
after  his  death.  The  case  was  no  dream ;  and  the  fact  of  my  having
mentioned  it  before  I  heard  of  the  death  of  my  dear  father-in-law  made  a
strong  impression  on  all  the  family."

Asked  if  this  was  her  sole  experience  of  a  hallucination  of  the  senses,
Mrs.  Nind  replied  in  the  afiirmative.

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Commander  Philip  Nind
died  of  heart  disease  on  March  25,  1853 — which  was  Good  Friday,  not
the  day  before  it.  Probably  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  morning,
and  the  coincidence  was  closer  than  Mrs.  Nind  supposed.

(490)  From  Mr.  Harold  Lafone,  Hanworth  Park,  Middlesex,  a  cousin

of  the  percipient.  Lady  C g,  who  endorses  the  account.

"  1884.

"  About    the  year    1849,  an  apparition  was   seen  by  Lady   C g,

then  Miss  Gale,  under  the  following  circumstances  : —

"  She  was  living  at  the  time  in  her  father's  house  at  Grately,  in
Hampshire.  One  night,  on  awaking  suddenly  from  sleep,  she  saw  the
figure  of  a  young  man,  apparently  attired  in  his  night  shirt,  standing  at
the  foot  of  her  bed.  She  was  naturally  much  surprised,  and  inquired  who
he  was,  and  what  he  wanted  ?     He  replied  that  he  was  the  ghost  of  John

Dowling,  and  Lady  C g  states  that,  as  he  spoke,  she  distinctly  saw  the

initials  J.  D.  marked  on  the  edge  of  his  nightgown.  At  this  distance  of
time  she  will  not  venture  to  give  the  exact  words  of  the  conversation
between  them,  nor  to  describe  the  exact  appearance  of  the  figure  or  its
manner  of  departure.  It  disappeared,  however,  immediately  after  reveal-
ing its  name.

"  She  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  family  at  breakfast  the  next
morning,  but  was  inclined  to  regard  it  merely  as  a  strange  and  very  vivid
dream,  until,  on  driving  the  same  afternoon  to  the  neighbouring  town  of
Andover,  she  heard  there  for  the  first  time  that  Mr.  John  Dowling,  a
young  solicitor  of  the  town,  had  died  on  the  previous  night,  as  far  as  she
could  judge  about  the  time  when  the  apparition  was    seen  by  herself.

Lady    C g  knew  Mr.   John   Dowling  by   name  and    sight,   and  had

recognised  the  likeness  of  the  apparition  to  him,  but  she  had  never
met  or  exchanged  a  word  with  him,  nor  had  she  the  faintest  idea  that  he
was  ill."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  some
years  earlier  than  Lady  C g  supposed,  on  Nov.  3,  1845.

1  The  words  were,  "  Aggy,  there  will  be  a  child  in  the  family  before  this  day  12
months."  This  event  actually  happened,  rather  unexpectedly  ;  but  the  idea  of  it  may
probably  have  been  latent  in  the  mind  either  of  Mrs,  Nind  herself  or  of  her  father-in-law.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  455

[I  have  seen  a  letter,  dated  Dec.  19th,  1873,  from  Lady  C.  to  Mr.  H.
Lafone,  in  which  she  says  that  her  husband  objects  to  her  signing  the
account.  She  says,  "It  is  all  true  as  far  as  I  can  remember  at  this
remote  period,"  but  adds  that  she  has  a  certain  dread  and  dislike  of  the
subject.]

(491)  The  following  two  letters  were  written  by  the  late  Mrs.  Clarke,
wife  of  the  late  Mr.  Thomas  Clarke,  of  Bishopton  Close,  Ripon,  to  her
stepson,  Mr.  William  Fowler  Stephenson.  He  gave  them  to  his  cousin,
the  Rev.  J.  T.  Fowler,  of  Bishop  Hatfield's  Hall,  Durham,  who  handed
them  on  to  us.  u  October  1 7th,  1 872.

"  On  the  morning  of  my  father's  death,  between  4  and  5  o'clock,  I  saw
a  sort  of  shadowy  light  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  half  arose  to  look  at  it.
I  distinctly  saw  my  father's  face,  smiling  at  me.^  I  drew  the  curtains
apart,  and  still  saw  him  looking  fijsedly  at  me.  I  awoke  the  girl  who  was
sleeping  with  me,  and  asked  her  to  draw  up  the  window  blind.  I  then
asked  her  if  she  saw  anything.  She  said,  '  Nothing.  It  is  too  dark.'  I
fancy  I  saw  the  vision  for  fully  five  minutes,  and  then  all  was  dark  again.  ^
The  face  was  bound  under  the  chin,  as  usual  in  death,  and  the  cloth  seemed
stained,  but  not  so  deep  as  iron-mould  quite.  On  looking  at  my  father's
corpse,  after  returning  to  Hull,  I  told  an  old  friend,  who  was  with  me,
that  it  was  just  so  he  looked  at  me,  except  that  the  cloth  was  discoloured.
She  at  once  said  :  '  Then  he  did  come  to  you,  that's  certain,  for  the  cloth
was  stained,  and  I  changed  it  after  daylight.'  It  was  within  a  few  minutes
of  his  death  that  I  saw  him,  and  he  was  asking  God  to  bless  me.  He  was
asking  for  me  continually.  "  M.  C."

In  reply  to  a  request  of  Mr.  Stephenson's  for  more  particular  informa-
tion on  certain  points,  Mrs.  Clarke  wrote  : —

"October  19th,  1872.

"  I  had  been  in  Harrogate  for  some  weeks,  and  was  confined  to  my
room  from  a  feverish  cold  ^  which  caused  restless  nights.  It  was  thought
necessary  for  one  of  the  maids  to  sleep  with  me,  so  I  asked  her  to  draw  up
the  blinds.  This  was  a  little  after  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  11th  of
November,  1846.  On  that  same  day,  about  9  o'clock,  by  post,  I  received
the  enclosed  letter,  being  the  first  intimation  I  had  of  my  father's  illness.
He  was  taken  ill  on  the  Sunday ;  they  wrote  to  me  on  the  Monday,  and
he  died  on  Tuesday  morning.  I  was  then  23  years  of  age.  My  sister,
Christiana,  and  a  woman-servant  attended  to  my  father.  A  faithful  old
friend,  Mrs.  Dible,  came  as  soon  as  possible  to  do  what  was  necessary  on
such  occasions,  and  it  was  to  her  that  I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen.  She
explained  that,  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  they  had  used  what  had
been  the  bottom  of  an  old  blind,  which,  as  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  she
saw  was  stained,  and  changed  it  herself.  I  can  never  explain  what  I  felt
on  that  day,  if  it  can  be  called  feeling.  They  said  I  was  like  marble  to
look  at,  and  like  ice  to  touch."

The  letter  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Clarke,  announcing  the  illness  of  her
father,  was  enclosed.     Two  persons  had  written  to  her  on  the  same  sheet —

1  Cf.  case  315,  where  an  appearance  of  bright  vapour  preceded  the  more  definite
impression.     The  expression  "  shadowy  light  "  recalls  the  "  bright  shadow  "  of  case  251.

2  See  p.  459,  note.

3  See  p.  162,  first  note.


456  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Mr.  Jubb,  a  friend  of  the  family,  and  her  brother,  Mr.  J.  Rollit,  a  solici-
tor in  Hull.     Mr.  Jubb's  letter  runs  : —

"  Hull,  November  10th,  1846.

"  My  Dear  Matilda, — If  you  wish  to  see  your  dear  father  alive,  you
must  come  immediately  you  receive  this  ;  he  is  not  likely  to  survive  long.
— Yours  truly,  "  Wm.  Jubb."

We  find  from  the  Hull  Advertiser  that  the  death  took  place  on
Nov.  11,  1846,  as  Mrs.  Clarke  asserts.  She  made  a  mistake  (of  no  im-
portance) as  to  the  days  of  the  week.  The  11th  was  a  Wednesday,  and
the  letter  to  her  was  written  on  Tuesday.

(492)  From  Mrs.  George  G-rant  Gordon,  Milton  of  Kikaroch,   Nairn,

^•^-^  "  April  17,  1886.

"  I  am  most  happy  to  accede  to  your  request,  and  send  you  an  account
of  what  I  experienced  at  the  time  of  my  father's  [Colonel  Sibbald's]  death.

I  remember  it  as  clearly  as  if  it  happened  only  yesterday.  It  was  early
on  the  morning  of  the  31st  May,  1857,  while  I  was  lying  perfectly  awake
in  bed,  that  I  saw  my  father  suddenly  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  I
recognised  him  immediately  from  his  likenesses.  [He  had  been  for  years
in  India.]  He  was  dressed  in  regimentals,  stanching  a  wound  in  his
breast  with  a  pocket-handkerchief.  Two  other  of&cers  in  regimentals
were  beside  him,  whom  I  did  not  recognise.^  I  did  not  reveal  this  vision,
or  whatever  it  can  be  called,  for  some  time  to  the  friends  who  had  charge
of  me  [Dr.  and  Mrs.  McBeth],  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at  [for]  what  they
always  termed  my  '  fancies ' ;  but  when  they  did  hear  of  it,  they  noted  it
down.

"  For  3  months  we  received  no  news  from  India,  owing  to  the  dis-
turbed state  of  the  country ;  but  when  the  letters  did  arrive,  the  news
tallied  exactly  with  what  I  had  seen.  It  was  on  that  very  day  my  father
had  been  shot  twice,  on  his  way  to  the  parade-ground.  On  being  missed,
two  officers  went  in  search  for  him,  and  found  him  lying  wounded.

"  E.  T.  Gordon."

Colonel  and  Brigadier  Hugh  Sibbald,  C.B.,  was  almost  the  first  victim
of  the  Indian  Mutiny  ;  and  at  the  date  of  his  death  there  had  been  not  the
slightest  anxiety  on  his  account  in  England.  We  find  from  Allen's  Indian
Mail  that  the  rising  at  Bareilly,  where  he  was  in  command,  took  place  at

II  a.m.  on  May  31,  1857,  and  that  he  was  shot  in  the  chest  by  one  of  his
orderlies,  while  riding  to  the  parade-ground,  and  shortly  afterwards
dropped  dead  from  his  horse.  Allowing  for  longitude,  it  will  be  seen  that
the  coincidence  was  probably  extremely  close.

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  ever  had  a  hallucination  of
the  senses  on  any  other  occasion,  and  to  other  inquiries,  Mrs.  Gordon
writes : —

"  I  cannot  remember  having  actually  seen  anything  else,  though  I
have  always  had  strange  presentiments.  The  friends  who  had  charge  of
me  in  those  days  are  both  dead,  and  they  are  about  the  only  persons  I

1  This  case  was  procured  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  who  gave  a
fairly  correct,  though  fourth-hand,  version  of  it  in  his  article  on  "Apparitions,"  in  the
Encycloxxedia  Brittanica.

^  As  to  the  appearance  of  more  than  one  figure,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  545-6.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND''  GASES.  457

can  remember  who  could  have  known  of  the  vision  before  the  sad
news  arrived.  I  was  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  date  ;  as  the  previoios  day
I  had  been  to  a  pic-nic ;  and  that  date  they  all  remembered  being  the
30th  of  May  [a  Saturday].  It  was  the  following  morning  I  saw  my
father.  The  first  news  of  the  Mutiny  that  reached  us  must  have  been
much  later.  I  had  no  reason  whatever  to  feel  the  least  anxious  about  my
father."

We  have  received  an  account  which  substantially  agrees  with  the  above
(but  omits  the  detail  of  the  two  other  officers),  from  Miss  Lang,  of  Hugh-
enden  Cottage,  High  Wycombe,  Bucks,  to  whom  the  occurrence  was
described  in  1868,  by  an  aunt  of  Mrs.  Gordon  and  sister  of  Colonel  Sibbald.

We  cannot  assume  here  that  the  experience  was  in  any  degree  a
clairvoyant  vision  of  the  scene,  or  that  the  two  strangers  who  appeared
were  anything  more  than  a  subjective  addition  of  the  percipient's.
For  there  is  nothing  in  the  contemporary  account  to  suggest  that
Colonel  Sibbald  was  not  riding  alone  ;  and  if  he  dropped  from  his
horse,  as  described,  he  must  have  been  lying  dead,  not  merely
wounded,  when  others  approached.

(493)  From  Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  14,  Windsor  Terrace,  Kingstown,  Ireland.

"January  22nd,  1884.

"  More  than  25  years  have  elapsed  since  the  memorable  event
occurred,  which  stands  out  as  a  landmark  in  my  memory.  My  husband,
David  Fitzgerald,  and  myself  were  later  than  usual  in  retiring  to  rest  on
the  night  in  question.  After  leaving  my  dressing-room,  in  getting  into
bed,  I  found  my  husband  firm  asleep,  so  crept  in  quietly.  It  was  then
near  12  o'clock.  I  did  not  sleep  for  some  time.  Between  that  and  3
o'clock  my  husband  awoke  me,  saying,  '  Sarah,  stop  Fred,  don't  let  him
go.'  I  immediately  got  up,  went  round  to  the  door  of  the  dressing-room
to  close  it,  as  I  firmly  believed  there  was  someone  in  the  room,  but  found
it  closed.  On  lighting  the  candles,  my  husband  was  sitting  up  in  the  bed
greatly  disturbed,  saying,  '  Did  you  not  see  Fred  1 '  In  order  to  make
light  of  the  matter  I  said  '  It  was  only  a  dream.'  He  looked  at  me,  not
as  if  he  were  convinced  with  what  I  said.  Next  day  I  drove  to  town,  to
know  what  time  Fred  last  wrote  to  his  brother,  never  saying  a  word  of
what  had  occurred  the  night  before.  Time  passed  ;  on  the  arrival  of  the
news  of  the  death  of  poor  Fred  I  was  so  thrown  off  my  usual  discretion
that  I  exclaimed  to  his  brother  William,  '  Oh,  I  know  when  he  died,  for
he  was  with  his  father  that  night.'  "S.  M.  Fitzgerald."

Mrs.  McKern,  of  53,  George  Street,  Limerick,  writes  as  follows : —

"January,  1884.

"  About  25  years  ago,  David  Fitzgerald,  Land  Agent,  of  Limerick  (my
grandfather),  at  that  time  between  65  and  70  years  of  age,  was  residing
at  Richmond,  his  private  dwelling,  about  half-a-mile  outside  the  city.
The  other  occupants  of  the  house  were  his  second  wife,  Sarah  Fitzgerald,
and    his    step  daughter,    Mary  Hunt.^     He  had,  besides,  many  sons  and

1  Since  married  to  a  Mr.  French,  R.M. ;  but  we  learn  from  Mr.  McKern  that  she  was
away  at  school  at  the  time.


458  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

daughters,  the  youngest  of  the  former  having  gone  to  Australia.  One
night  (hour  not  known  to  narrator)  he  was  awakened  from  sleep  by  the
howling  in  front  of  the  house  of  a  favourite  dog — spaniel  or  retriever — of
the  absent  son,  Frederick.  (Note,  in  Ireland,  the  howling  of  a  dog  is
looked  upon  as  a  sure  sign  of  death  in  the  immediate  locality.)  He  awoke
his  sleeping  partner,  and  said,  '  I  am  sure  there  is  something  wrong  with
Freddy  ;  do  you  not  hear  the  way  the  dog  is  howling  ? '  She  endeavoured
to  soothe  the  old  man,  and  went  to  sleep  again,  when  she  was  again  awoke
by  him  in  a  sudden,  not  to  say  violent,  manner.  He  was  in  a  highly
excited  state,  exclaiming,  '  I  saw  Freddy  !  I  saw  Freddy  !  He  stood  at
the  bottom  of  the  bed,  with  the  curtains  drawn  aside,  and  looked  at  me.'
The  next  morning  a  note  was  made  of  the  occurrence,  and  the  following
mail  from  Australia  brought  news  of  the  lad's  death,  which  the  narrator
believes  to  have  corresponded  with  the  father's  vision.

"S.  E.  McKeen."
In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  McKern  adds  : —

"  I  could  not  possibly  recollect  from  whom  I  first  heard  of  the
occurrence,  as  I  was  very  young  at  the  time ;  but  I  have  often  heard  it
spoken  of  by  different  members  of  the  family.  I  do  not  remember  having
had  any  conversation  on  the  subject  with  Mrs.  Fitzgerald."

[The  incident  of  the  dog's  howling  seems  not  unlikely  to  have  been
imported  into  the  story ;  and  it  will  be  observed  that  neither  it,  nor  the
dramatic  repetition  of  the  experience,  occurs  in  the  more  authentic
account.  We  do  not  know  that  the  coincidence  of  day  was  anything
more   than  a  conjecture.]

(494)  From  Mr.  H.  Atkins,  Office-keeper  at  the  Royal  Marine  Office,
40,  Spring  Gardens,  S.W.  (originally  published,  with  a  nom  de  plume,  in
the  Daily  Telegraph,  for  October  20,  1881).

"  In  the  year  1849,  I  was  serving  in  H.M.S.  '  Geyser,'  on  the  east  coast
of  Africa,  and  in  company  with  H.M.S.  '  Brilliant,'  anchored  in  Tamatave
Roads,  Madagascar.  The  following  facts  I  can  vouch  for.  Some  of  our
officers  were  dining  on  board  the  '  Brilliant.'  A  boat's  crew  were  ordered
to  be  ready  at  six  bells  (11  p.m.)  to  fetch  them  on  board.  The  lights  were
out  on  the  lower  deck,  and  everything  quiet.  A  messmate  (T.  Parker)  and
I,  belonging  to  the  boat,  were  sitting  in  the  mess,  abreast  of  the  cook's
galley,  and  opposite  each  other,  he  with  his  arms  on  the  table,  and  face
resting  on  them,  and,  as  I  thought,  fast  asleep — when  all  at  once  he
jumped  to  his  feet,  declaring  that  he  saw  his  mother  cross  the  deck  in
front  of  the  galley,  and  was  very  much  excited.  I  pointed  out  to  him
that  it  was  quite  impossible,  as  his  face  was  towards  the  table,  at  the  same
time  laughing  heartily  at  him  for  being  so  foolish.  Our  schoolmaster,  Mr.
T.  Salsbury,  was  lying  awake  in  his  hammock  close  by,  and  in  the  morning
he  made  a  note  of  the  circumstances,  putting  down  time  and  date.  On
our  arrival  at  the  Isle  of  France,  some  time  after,  Parker  received  a  letter
from  home,  stating  that  his  mother  died  that  very  night.  I  am  no  believer
in  ghosts,  but  think  this  a  very  remarkable  coincidence."

Mr.  Atkins,  from  whom  we  first  heard  on  February  12th,  1884,  has
added  the  following  additional  information  : —

"It  is  quite  possible  that  Parker  may  have  raised  his  head  from  the


IV.]  '^  BORDERLAND"  CASES.  459

table,  in  which  case  he  would  have  a  clear  view  of  the  spot  over  which  the
apparition  was  said  to  walk.  It  was  very  dark,  and  a  real  person  walking
in  the  same  place  would  have  been  unrecognisable.  ^  There  was  not  the
slightest  doubt,  apparently,  in  Parker's  mind  ;  for  he  did  not  examine  the
figure,  but  called  instantly  that  he  saw  his  mother,  and  then  commenced
sobbing  and  crying.  These  sounds  drew  the  attention  of  Mr.  Salsbury,
the  schoolmaster,  and  caused  him  to  note  the  time  of  the  circumstance.
For  the  three  or  four  months  that  elapsed  before  the  Isle  of  France  was
reached,  Parker  '  moped  about,'  and  would  not  be  cheered.  In  comparing
the  date  of  the  death  with  that  of  the  apparition,  allowance  was  made  for
the  difference  in  time,  and  the  two  events  were  found  to  exactly  corre-
spond by  the  schoolmaster."

[It  would  be  a  quite  impossible  task,  Mr.  Atkins  says,  to  hunt  up  any
of  his  old  shipmates,  but  if  he  should  meet  with  anyone  who  can  corrobo-
rate his  account,  he  has  promised  to  communicate  with  us.  The  school-
master and  Parker  are  dead.]

(495)  From  Mr.  George  Waddington,  of  26,  Bagdale,  Whitby,  men-
tioned above  (p.  366).

"Passing  the  night  at  an  inn  in  Nevada  City,  California,  I  dreamt,  or
awoke,  by  the  door  of  room  where  I  was  sleeping  being  opened,  and  the
figure  of  my  great-aunt,  Mrs.  Beaumont,  of  Wetherby,  Yorkshire,  observed
standing  in  what  was  her  usual  dress,  as  worn  in  1842,  and  heard  to  say,
'  George,  George.'  A  note  was  made  at  the  time,  the  date  being  the  28th
July,  1851.     She  died  early  that  morning.

"  She  had  the  night  before  been  the  subject  of  my  thought,  on  travelling
late  in  the  dense  darkness  of  the  forest.  "  G.  W.  Waddington."

We  find  the  date  of  death  confirmed  by  the  Leeds  Mercury.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Waddington  says  that  he  had  last  seen  his
aunt  in  February,  1842  ;  and  that  the  dress  of  the  apparition  was  "out-
door walking  costume,  the  bonnet  being  a  prominent  part  of  it."  He
adds  : — "  The  note  was  made  on  the  back  of  a  letter,  and  used  for  reference
when  the  news  arrived ;  but  this  was  not  kept."

The  letter  announcing  the  death  is  missing ;  but  at  our  request
Mr.  Waddington  applied  to  his  mother,  and  she  informed  him  that
she  arrived  at  Wetherby,  in  response  to  a  summons,  at  2  p.m.  on
July  28th,  and  found  that  Mrs.  Beaumont  had  died  at  noon,  which
would  be  4  a.m.  in  California.  Mr.  Waddington's  experience  took  place,
he  tells  us,  "  about  dawn  " ;  and  the  coincidence  was  thus  probably  very
close,  though  he  himself,  through  not  allowing  for  longitude,  had  imagined
that  there  was  an  interval  of  about  8  hours.  He  adds  that  the  halluci-
nation is  unique  in  his  experience.

[This  is  a  case  in  which  it  seems  probable  that  the  percipient  projected
the  image  in  the  dress  which  had  remained  associated  in  his  mind  with
the  original.     See  Yol.  I.,  p.  546.]

(496)  From  the  late  Mr,  G.  Wadsworth,  Aston,  Birmingham.

"October  21st,  1882.

"  About  30  years  since,  I  became  acquainted  with  a  young  lady  residing

1 1  have  mentioned  (Vol.  i.,  p.  551)  that  visual  phantasms  of  both  the  subjective  and
the  telepathic  class  are  often  more  clearly  seen  than  a  real  figure  could  have  been  in  the
same  circumstances.     Compare  case  250,  and  the  note  thereon  (p.  72).


460  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

at  Shrewsbury.  This  friendship  continued  for  many  years,  although  for
a  long  time  we  saw  each  other  but  rarely,  her  health  gradually  failing.
One  morning  early  I  was  startled  by  hearing  the  stairfoot  door  open,  and
Maria  called  me  distinctly  twice,  '  George,  George  ! '  So  plain  was  this
that  I  at  once  answered,  '  Yes,  Maria,  what  is  it  ? '  and  went  down  to  the
sitting-room  to  her,  only  to  find  the  whole  a  dream  or  an  illusion.  Next
day  I  received  a  letter  informing  me  of  her  death  that  morning.

"  G.  Wadsworth."
[Mr.  Wadsworth's  death,  which  took  place  soon  after  this  account  was
written,  has  prevented  us  from  obtaining  further  information.]

(497)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton  Abbot.       «<  1882
"Early   in   the  year  1857 — I  think  in  the  month  of  April — I  was

awakened  one  morning  by  my  sister  (whom  I  supposed  to  be  some
hundreds  of  miles  away)  sorrowfully  saying,  '  Oh,  Sally,  Sally  ! '  Thinking
she  must  have  arrived  unexpectedly  by  dak,  and  had  met  with  some  great
trouble  on  her  journey,  I  turned  and  spoke  to  her,  but  she  was  gone.
Rousing  my  husband,  I  asked  him  to  go  and  see  what  was  the  matter,  but
she  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  That  morning,  at  that  hour,  my  sister
received  the  news  of  the  sudden  death  of  her  eldest  boy  at  school,  and  she
wrote  and  told  me  that  her  first  words  were,  '  Oh  !  Sally,  Sally,  wishing
you  were  here !  '  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having  heard  the  voice  of
any  other  one,  not  actually  present — certainly  never  before  this.

"Sarah  H.  Fagan."
We  find  from  a  notice  in  Allen's  Indian  Mail  that  the  death  occurred
on  April  18,  1857.     The  sister's  letter  is  unfortunately  lost ;  and  she  can-
not trust  her  memory  sufiiciently  to  corroborate  the  account.

The  next  case  is  an  interesting  example  of  death-imagery,
occurring  in  what  is  represented  as  a  waking  experience  (Vol.  I.,
pp.  539,  547 ;  and  compare  case  404).

(498)  From  Mrs.  Chermside,  Regia  House,  Teignmouth.

"  August,  1884.

"  E.  B.  was  engaged  to  be  married  to  H.  A.  D.  He  was  a  surgeon  in
the  army.  Want  of  means  on  both  sides  delayed  the  marriage,  and  he
suddenly  came  to  her  one  day  to  say  '  good-bye,'  as  he  was  ordered  to  take
troops  to  Canada.  He  sailed,  and  she  heard  of  his  safe  arrival.  He  spoke
of  his  return  in  the  following  spring.  One  night,  being  28th  December,
she  saw  him  enter  her  room  about  midnight.  A  light  seemed  to  shine
about  him;i  but  he  was  clothed  completely  in  grave  clothes.  She  sat
up  in  bed  and  said,  'Oh !  H.,  why  are  you  so  strangely  dressed  ? '  He  said,
'Do  not  laugh;  this  is  my  new  uniform.' ^     He  then  departed  as  he  came.

"  She  lay  trembling  all  night,  and  weeping  sadly.  Next  morning  she
refrained  from  telling  her  family,  as  they  were  opposed  to  her  marriage ;
she,  however,  unburdened  herself  to  me.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  it  was
only  a  silly  dream ;  however,  the  idea  that  her  lover  was  dead  was  most
firmly  fixed  in  her  mind.     A  month  after,   she  received  the  news  of  his

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1.

2  Compare  cases  547,  568,  639,  654.  The  complex  form  of  hallucination  in  which
there  is  an  interchange  of  remarks  with  the  phantasmal  figure  occurs  equally  in  purely
subjective  cases.     See  Vol.  i.,  p.  476,  and  compare  p.  588  below.


IV.]  "BORDERLAND''  CASES.  461

death  on  that  very  night,  and  that  the  last  word  he  uttered  was  her  name.
The  whole  thing  took  such  possession  of  her  that  she  slowly  faded  away,
and  died  about  two  years  afterwards."

The  following  addition  is  from  the  notes  taken  by  Professor  Sidgwick
during  two  interviews  with  Mrs.  Chermside  in  September,  1884  : —

The  occurrence  was  in  the  winter  of  1845.  It  was  on  the  next
morning  that  E.  B.  told  Mrs.  Chermside  of  the  appearance.  She  (E.  B.)
was  quite  sure  that  it  was  not  a  dream  ;  and  had  no  doubt  that  her  fiance
was  dead.  She  heard  the  details  of  his  death  within  a  month  or  so — as
soon  as  letters  then  came  from  Canada — from  one  of  his  brother  officers,
and  also  from  his  sisters  ;  and  then  wrote  to  tell  Mrs.  Chermside  that  he
had  died  the  night  that  she  saw  the  apparition.

[We  have  exhausted  every  means  open  to  us  to  discover  an  official  or
newspaper  record  of  the  death  in  this  case.  We  do  not  know  how  to
explain  this  failure ;  as  Mrs.  Chermside  is  certain  that  she  has  given
us  Mr.  D.'s  name  correctly,  and  she  can  hardly  have  been  mistaken
as  to  his  profession.  Possibly  he  had  not  an  official  connection  with
the  army.]

§  2.  The  next  group  of  cases  are  more  recent ;  but  some  of  them
lack  corroboration ;  and  some  are  weakened,  as  evidence  for  telepathy,
by  the  fact  that  the  percipient  was  in  more  or  less  anxiety  as  to  the
condition  of  the  absent  person,  or  by  an  absence  of  definiteness  in  the
coincidence.

(499)  From  the  Rev.  W.  B.  Lindesay,  LL.D.,  The  Abbey,  Tipperary.

"  August  30th,  1884.

"In  1877  I  was  living  in  Dublin,  and  very  anxious  about  my  father,
who  was  dangerously  ill  with  congested  lungs,  in  Wales.

"  Awaking  suddenly  one  night  I  distinctly  saw  him  sitting  on  a  chair
near  me,  with  his  face  covered  by  his  hands.  When  I  jumped  out  of
bed  he  vanished.  So  startled  was  I  that,  next  day,  I  crossed  to  Wales,
and  found  that  he  had  been  delirious  for  two  days.

"  When  I  entered  his  room  he  at  once  said  he  had  gone  the  day  before
to  tell  me  where  he  had  left  a  top-coat  that  I  knew  he  had  lost  some
time  previous  to  his  illness.  I  went  to  the  house  he  named  in  Dublin,
and  found  the  coat  there.  "  W.  B.  Lindesay."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lindesay  says  : —

"  So  far  as  I  can  remember,  my  father  was  still  delii'ious  at  the  time
he  said  he  had  gone  to  see  me.

"  I  told  no  one  of  the  experience  at  the  time,  for  I  was  living  by
myself.  I  have  never,  that  I  can  recollect,  had  any  other  experience  of
the  kind,  and  am  not  subject  to  any  '  hallucination  of  the  senses.'

"  I  am  bound  in  fairness  to  tell  you  that  I  am  an  entire  disbeliever  in
the  supernaturalness  of  such  experiences.  This  infidelity  may  be  due  to
my  never  having  heard  of  any  such  experiences  which  could  not  be
explained  on  the  coincidence  principle."

[Mr.  Lindesay  is  of  course  right  in  his  disbelief  of  the  "  super-
naturalness"    of    such  phenomena;  but  it  has  not  struck  him  that  the


462  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

alternative  to  supposing  them  supernatural  is  not  necessarily  to  suppose
them  accidental.  His  concluding  comment  reproduces  the  remarks  of  Lord
Brougham,  as  to  which  see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  396-7.  I  need  hardly  point  out  again
that  every  isolated  case  of  coincidence  might  be  accidental,  and  that  the
argument  for  telepathy  is  essentially  cumulative.  This  case  may  perhaps
have  been  reciprocal ;  but  we  clearly  have  no  proof  that  the  father's  expe-
rience was  anything  more  than  a  purely  subjective  impression  or  dream.]

(500)  From  a  lady  occupying  a  responsible  position,  which  obliges  her,
out  of  regard  to  others,  to  withhold  her  name  from  publication.  Her
viva  voce  account,  given  to  me  in  the  room  where  the  experience  occurred,
made  it  almost  certain  that  she  was  in  a  state  of  normal  wakefulness  at
the  time  ;  still,  as  she  had  been  in  bed  for  some  little  time,  I  have  placed
the  case  in  this  chapter  rather  than  the  next.  '<  ]yfay  2nd,  1886.

"On  the  night  of  the  18th  December,  1872,  I  had  retired  to  bed  about
11  o'clock.  The  bed,  I  may  mention,  is  so  placed  that  any  person  entering
the  room,  must  pass  quite  round  it  before  reaching  the  side  on  which  I  lay.
I  had  perhaps  been  in  bed  20  minutes,  and  had  been  thinking  over  the
events  of  the  evening,  a  pupils'  concert,  when  suddenly  I  saw  my  husband
by  the  door  ;  he  moved  swiftly  round  the  bed  till  he  came  close  to  me,
when  he  as  suddenly  disappeared.  So  astonished  was  T,  that  involuntarily
I  called  him  by  name.  The  gas  was  alight,  as  usual,  in  the  room  ;  and  as
I  knew  that  I  had  not  been  asleep,  and  had  not  heard  a  sound  to  alarm
me,  I  had  not  a  doubt,  any  more  than  I  have  at  this  moment,  that  the
vision  was  that  of  my  absent  husband.  On  the  30th  December  of  the
same  year,  I  received  a  letter  by  the  Australian  mail,  from  a  gentleman,
telling  me  that  my  husband  had  met  with  a  serious  accident,  and  on  the
4th  of  March  in  the  following  year,  I  had  a  letter  from  the  same  friend,
informing  me  of  his  death,  and  stating  that  it  took  place  on  the  18th
December,   1872.

"  I  had  spoken  of  the  incident  of  the  night  of  the  18th  to  my  children
as  a  dream,  but  to  two  ladies  I  related  the  fact  as  it  occurred  ;  it  was  then
a  week  afterwards,  ^  and  when  they  knew  that  my  husband  was  dead,  each
lady,  though  neither  knew  the  other,  reminded  me  of  the  incident,  and
told  me  the  relation  of  it  had  strangely  impressed  her."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  the  obituary  of  the  Daily
Telegraph.

In  conversation,  the  narrator  informed  me  that  she  has  never  had  any
other  visual  hallucination.  She  described  her  experience  to  her  children,
at  breakfast  next  morning,  as  a  dream,  in  order  not  to  alarm  them.  She
herself  felt  no  alarm  or  apprehension  whatever.  Of  the  two  friends  whom
she  mentions,  one  has  recently  died,  and  she  has  lost  sight  of  the  other.
Her  husband  had  been  an  invalid  for  years,  and  as  far  as  she  knew  was  as
well  as  usual.

The  narrator's  daughter  writes,  on  May  13,  1886  : —

"  I  have  searched  everywhere  I  can  think  of,  but  without  success,  in
finding  the  programme  of  the  Pupils'  Concert ;  but  my  sister  and  self  both
agreed  as  to  being  .swre  the  day  was  Dec.  18,  1872,  and  we  believe  it  fell  on
a  Wednesday.     [Dec.  18  was  a  Wednesday.]     We  also  remember  perfectly

1  This  refers  to  the  mention  of  the  matter  to  the  second  friend  ;  to  the  other  the  expe-
rience was  described  (the  narrator  informs  me)  on  the  day  following  its  occurrence.


IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  463

our  mother  relating  the  next  day  what  she  called  a  strange  dream  she  had
had  the  night  previously  ;  and  have  frequently  since  heard  her  speak  of
the  same  as  a  vision."

[The  Australian  letter,  which  the  narrator  has  preserved,  states  that
the  hour  of  the  death  was  about  4.30  p.m.,  which  would  correspond  with
about  6.30  a.m.  in  England.  If,  therefore,  the  vision  occurred  on  the
night  of  that  day,  it  followed  the  death  by  more  than  12  hours.  But  the
narrator  (without  my  having  suggested  this  point)  wrote,  on  May  14,  1886,
to  say  that  a  daughter,  who  slept  with  her  on  the  night  of  the  vision,  re-
minds her  that  on  concert  nights  they  always  sat  up  late,  and  that  pro-
bably they  did  not  go  upstairs  till  nearly  2.  Now  this  fact  would  very
probably  be  in  the  percipient's  memory  at  the  time  that  the  news  of  the
death  arrived,  and  its  connection  with  the  vision  was  surmised ;  and  as
she  is  very  positive  that  the  dates  coincided,  it  seems  at  any  rate  possible
that  the  concert  was,  after  all,  on  the  17th,  and  that  her  vision  took  place
at  2.30  a.m.  on  the  18th.  As  against  this  hypothesis,  however,  I  should
mention  a  recollection  which  she  has  that,  when  talking  over  the  matter
with  one  of  the  friends  mentioned,  she  remarked  on  an  apparent  dis-
crepancy of  hours,  and  the  friend  (she  believes)  pointed  out  that,  longi-
tude being  allowed  for,  the  hours  agreed  ;  which  is  just  what  would  seem
to  be  the  case  if  the  vision  was  at  2.30  a.m.  on  the  19th,  and  the  10  hours'
difference  of  time  was  reckoned  (as  so  often  happens)  the  wrong  way.  It
is  worth  noting  that  even  supposing  our  arbitrary  1 2  hours'  limit  to  have
been  exceeded,  the  vision  still  fell  at  what  was  probably  the  first  season  of
silence  and  recueillement  that  had  presented  itself  since  the  hour  when  the
death  occurred.     See  Yol.  I.,  pp.  201,  329.]

(501)  From  the  Rev.  H.  N.  B.  and  his  sister-in-law.  Miss  Fagg.  The
percipient,  Mrs.  B.,  is  out  of  health,  and  must  not  be  troubled  for  an
account.     The  following  is  a  letter  from  Mr.  B.  to  his  daughter : —

"December  5th,  1883.

"  I  was  at  Langtoft,  but  E.  (i.e.,  Mrs.  B.)  and  Miss  Fagg  had  returned
with  Ernie  to  Deal,  as  he  was  ordered  to  go  to  the  sea.  There  were  two  rooms
at  Deal  intercommunicating,  the  inner  being  only  approached  through  the
first  room.  In  the  inner  room  the  nurse  (Alice)  and  the  baby  were  sleep-
ing ;  in  the  outer  one,  E.j  Miss  Fagg  was  sleeping  downstairs.  The  bed
was  curtained.  In  the  night  E.  was  awoke  by,  as  she  thought,  the  nurse
standing  by  her  bed.  Half  asleep,  without  moving,  she  said,  '  What  is  it,
Alice  1 '  but  there  was  no  answer.  She  said  again,  '  What  is  it  1  is  there
anything  the  matter  with  baby  *? '  Still  there  was  no  answer.  She  then
roused  herself,  and  saying  sharply,  '  Why  do  you  not  speak,  Alice  ? '  she
put  back  the'  curtain,  and  saw  your  aunt  standing  there.  She  was
so  terrified  that  she  jumped  out  of  bed  and  ran  straight  down,  as  she
was,  to  Nelly  [Miss  Fagg].  The  next  day  I,  at  Langtoft,  had  a  letter
saying  your  aunt  had  died  very  unexpectedly,  at  Broxbourne.  We  did
not  know  she  was  seriously  ill,  as  she  had  gone  to  Broxbourne  on  a  visit.
I  could  not  identify  the  time ;  but,  as  far  as  I  could  make  out,  the  (sup-
posed) appearance  took  place  some  hours  after  your  aunt's  death."

Miss  Fagg  writes,  from  Ripple  Rectory,  Deal,  on  Aug.  28,  1884  : —

"  One  night,  about  2  o'clock,  I  believe,  my  sister,  Mrs.  B.,  came  into
my  room  saying  she  had  seen  Miss  Grace  B.,  and  she  was  sure  something


464  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

had  happened.  She  told  me  she  saw  someone  in  her  room,  and  thought  it
was  the  nurse  come  about  the  baby.  The  figure  was  turned  towards  the
window  where  the  food  was  kept ;  and  had  on  a  grey  waterproof  like  the
nurse.  My  sister  spoke  to  the  figure,  and  said,  '  Why  are  you  getting  the
food  so  soon  1  '  My  sister  was  not  then  frightened,  as  she  quite  thought
it  was  the  nurse.  But  the  figure  then  turned  round,  and  it  was  the  face
of  Miss  Grace  B.,  looking  full  at  my  sister,  but  a  dead  face,  with  a  some-
thing white  round  the  head,  but  curls  just  like  Miss  Grace  B.  used  to  wear.
My  sister  after  that  came  down  to  me,  and  I  went  into  her  room,  but
nothing  more  was  seen.  After  that  we  heard  that  Miss  Grace  B.  was
dead.  "Ellen  E.  Fagg."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Fagg  adds  : —

"The  date  of  Miss  Grace  B.'s  death  was  August  3rd,  1868;  the  time,
I  think,  between  5  to  6  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  1  fancy  she  must  have,
as  it  seemed,  appeared  to  my  sister  the  same  night  after  she  was  dead.
We  knew  Miss  Grace  B.  was  ailing ;  she  was,  in  fact,  on  a  visit  at  the
time  of  her  death  ;  but  there  was  no  thought  of  her  dying.  My  sister  had
had  no  communication  with  her  previously.  I  am  nearly  sure  that  Miss  B.
must  have  appeared  to  my  sister  the  same  night  that  she  died.

"  My  sister  always  has  seemed  to  know  things  difierent  to  other  people.
She  seems  to  know  when  any  one  has  died  in  any  room.  She  seems
either  to  feel,  hear,  or  see  the  people.  On  one  occasion  we  lived  in  an  old
house  in  Eastry,  near  here,  and  she  saw,  as  it  seemed,  an  old  woman
looking  at  her.  The  next  morning  when  she  described  it  to  our  cook
who  had  been  taking  care  of  the  house  before  we  went  into  it,  she  said,
'  Yes,  that  old  woman  once  lived  here.'  "  [This,  of  course,  may  have  been
a  purely  subjective  hallucination.]

P.S.  by  the  Bev.  H.  N.  B. — "There  is  no  doubt  that  the  appearance
(so-called)  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  day  on  the  afternoon  of  which
Miss  G.  B.  died."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  the  death  by  the  Register  of  Deaths.

[This  is  apparently  a  case  of  delayed  recognition,  similar  to  those  given
in  Chap.  XII.,  §  3.]

The  next  account  belongs  to  the  interesting  class  which  suggests
a  peculiar  susceptibility  in  certain  persons  to  spontaneous  telepathic
impressions.  (See  p.  77,  and  cases  513,  514,  515,  below.)  One  of  the
three  experiences  recorded  was  a  dream,  but  I  give  it  here  in  order
not  to  break  up  the  series.

(502)  From  Mrs.  W.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  published.

"Oxford,  1884.

(A)  "In  1874  I  was  in  England,  ill  in  bed  ;  and  I  distinctly  saw  my
dear  mother,  who  was  at  that  time  at  Nice,  come  up  to  the  foot  of  my  bed,
and  look  earnestly  and  sorrowfully  at  me ;  it  was  broad  daylight,  and  I
noticed  the  shawl  she  wore,  one  I  had  not  seen  her  wear  for  many  years.i
I  started  up,  and  she  was  gone.^  I  then  knew  that  her  last  illness  must
have  come,  though  I  was  kept  in  ignorance  of  it,  as  I  was  so  dangerously

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  540.

2  See  p.  91,  second  note.


IV.]  '' BORDERLAND"  CASES.  465

ill  myself.  I  wrote  to  her,  and  her  answer  told  me  what  I  dreaded  was
true.  I  was  allowed  to  recover  sufficiently  to  go  out  to  Nice,  and  be  with
her  to  the  end.  Also,  I  ought  to  say,  that  the  morning  her  dear  image
appeared  to  me,  a  doctor  arrived  from  London  whom  she  had  sent  to  me  by
telegraphing  to  him  from  Nice,  and  this  doctor  was  the  means  of  saving  my
life,  as  I  was  at  that  time  so  ill  that  he  said  I  could  not  have  lived  more
than  four  hours  longer.

(B)  "When  I  was  in  the  South  of  France,  in  1878,  I  had  a  dream
that  a  sister,  who  is  especially  dear  to  me,  was  in  a  carriage  accident,  and
in  my  dream  I  saw  her  killed,  but  on  reaching  her  I  found  her  unhurt  and
as  she  smiled  at  me  I  dreamed  I  was  dying  of  the  agony  of  mind  I  had
gone  through.  I  never  can  forget  the  dream,  the  suffering  was  so  intense.
I  awoke  with  pain  in  my  heart  and  faintness,  and  woke  my  husband  and
told  him.  (I  think  my  cries  in  my  sleep  awoke  him.)  I  wrote  to  my
sister,  and  when  her  answer  arrived  she  gave  me  in  it  the  account  of  the
danger  she  had  passed  through.

(C)  "  One  night  I  was  awakened  out  of  my  sound  sleep  by  a  voice
close  to  my  ear,  saying,  '  Rise,  you  have  no  time  to  lose,'  and  words  to
the  effect  that  the  child  ^  of  this  very  dear  sister  was  dying,  and  that  she
needed  my  prayers.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  words,  but  I  felt  it  was
conveyed  to  me  that  /  had  to  help  her  with  all  the  earnestness  I  could,
and  there  was  an  awe  about  it  I  cannot  describe.  Afterwards  I  found
that  at  this  very  time  on  that  night  her  most  beloved  child  had  passed
through  the  crisis  in  diphtheria.

"  Nothing  of  importance  ever  happened  to  any  one  very  dear  to  me
without  my  feeling  it,  though  I  may  be  far  from  them.        "  C.  M.  W."

Replying  to  our  inquiries,  Mrs.  W.'s  daughter,  Miss  E.  M.  W.,  writes
(on  Jan.  23,  1885),  in  reference  to  (A),  that  her  mother  "  does  not  know
anything  about  the  shawl  forming  part  of  my  grandmother's  dress  at  the
time  she  saw  the  apparition."  She  has  had  no  other  hallucinations  ;  and
she  had  no  reason  to  suspect  her  mother's  illness.  Miss  W.'s  own
testimony  is  as  follows  : —

"I  clearly  remember,  in  1874,  my  mother  in  her  dangerous  illness
seeing  my  dear  grandmother  come  up  to  the  foot  of  the  bed.  My  mother
has  often  told  me  since  that  her  mother  was  wearing  a  certain  crimson
shawl  she  was  very  fond  of,  that  her  spectacles  had  dropped,  and  she
looked  over  them  at  my  mother,  with  sad  inquiring  eyes.  My  mother
gazed  at  her  for  a  minute,  and  then  cried  out  when  the  apparition
vanished  ;  and  when  the  nurse  came  in,  having  heard  her  cry,  my  mother
insisted  on  being  told  the  truth  about  her  mother ;  for  she  said  she  knew
that  she  had  come  to  tell  her  she  was  dying,  which  was  indeed  the  fact,
though  she  lived  long  enough  to  enable  my  mother  to  see  her  before  she
died."

In  reference  to  (B)  and  (C),  Mrs.  W.'s  sister  writes  : —

"  On  one  occasion  I  received  an  anxious  letter  from  my  sister  inquir-
ing if  anything  had  happened  to  me,  as  she  had  dreamed  of  a  serious
carriage-accident  in  which  I  was  in  danger.  This  letter  was  received  by
me  before  I  had  informed  her  of  the  danger  in  which  I  had  been  placed,

1  This  slightly  differs  from  the  version  given  at  the  top  of  the  next  page,  where
there  is  no  mention  of  the  special  person  who  was  in  need.

VOL.    II.  2   H


466  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

and  the  serious  consequences  which  }nercifully  were  averted  by  the  presence
of  mind  of  my  coachman.

"  On  another  occasion  my  sister  was  awakened  by  a  voice  which  said
distinctly,  '  Rise  at  once.  You  have  no  time  to  lose.  One  you  love  is  in
sore  need.'  She  did  rise  from  her  bed  to  pray  for  me,  and  afterwards
knew  that  my  child  had  passed  through  the  crisis  of  diphtheria  at  that
very  time,  and  that  her  life  was  in  imminent  danger.  "  Bessie  S."

Miss  E.  M.  W.  writes  :—

"  I  perfectly  remember  both  these  dreams  of  my  mother's,  as  she
related  them  to  me  before  receiving  the  answers  to  her  letters  to  my  aunt."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : —

"January  23rd,  1885.

"Mother  is  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  of  accidents,  and  as  far  as  she
can  remember  it  was  the  only  time  she  has  ever  dreamt  of  an  accident.
The  carriage  did  not  upset.  The  facts  are  as  follows : — My  aunt  has  a
very  light  cab  built  by  my  uncle  especially  for  her,  and  on  one  occasion  my
aunt  was  driving  along  a  narrow  road,  when  her  coachman  whipped  up
the  horses,  and  began  driving  at  a  furious  pace.  My  aunt,  alarmed,  looked
through  the  little  window  at  the  back  of  the  carriage,  and  saw  a  great
dray  with  a  runaway  horse  tearing  after  the  carriage.  Just  as  it  must
have  run  into  it  and  smashed  it,  the  coachman  turned  the  cab  into  an
opening  in  the  road.  It  was  the  only  place  in  the  road  where  the  cab
could  have  stopped,  and  it  was  the  coachman's  only  hope  to  reach  it,  and
the  dray  rushed  by,  leaving  the  cab  unharmed.  It  did  a  great  deal  of
damage,  and  the  driver  was  killed.  You  see  mother  did  not  dream  exactly
the  facts  of  the  case,  but  only  that  my  aunt  was  nearly  killed  by  a
carriage  accident.

"  As  to  the  '  other  intimations  of  danger,'  &c.,  they  are  this,  that
whenever  anything  happens  to  those  dear  to  her  she  always  knows  there  is
something  happening.  For  instance,  I  was  laid  up  with  a  very  bad  cough
and  cold  when  away  from  her  last  year,  and  she  wrote  me  an  anxious
letter,  saying,  she  knew  I  was  ill,  for  she  had  an  idea  I  had  inflammation
of  the  lungs.  Last  month  I  was  suffering  dreadfully  from  toothache,  and
determined  I  would  go  and  have  two  teeth  out  without  saying  anything  to
mother,  for  fear  of  worrying  her  ;  she  thought  I  was  going  for  a  walk,  but
all  the  time  I  was  gone  she  was  so  unhappy  about  me,  and  S.  told  me
when  I  had  come  back  that  mother  had  cried  and  been  wretched  all  the
time.  You  see  the  things  are  not  big  enough  to  attract  much  attention,
but  we  in  the  house  know  them  to  be  true."

[It  is  not  quite  clear  how  far  the  vision  (A)  coincided  with  a  sudden
and  marked  change  in  the  state  of  the  agent.  Also  it  is  possible  that  the
doctor's  visit,  or  the  expectation  of  it,  may  have  called  up  her  mother's
image  to  Mrs.  W.'s  mind,  and  that  her  illness  may  have  rendered  her
specially  liable  to  hallucination.  It  would  remain  noteworthy  (unless
there  was  special  reason  to  fear  the  attack  of  fatal  illness)  that  the
apparition  produced  a  true  conviction  in  Mrs.  W.'s  mind  as  to  what  was
occurring  to  her  mother.

As  to  (B),  we  have  no  evidence  that  the  dream  took  place  on  the
night  of  the  day  on  which  the  accident  occurred  ;  but  to  anyone
who  accepts  the   general    fact   of    telepathic    communication,    it  will    at


IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  467

least  seem  reasonable  to  surmise  that  the  coincidence  was  not  a  merely
accidental  one.  The  impression  of  the  child's  illness  (C)  is,  however,
more  important,  both  because  it  was  more  than  a  dream,  and  because
the  time-coincidence  seems  in  tliis  case  to  have  been  ascertained  to  be
exact.

With  regard  to  the  less  definite  impressions  it  would  be  difficult  to
assign  them  an  evidential  value  without  constant  and  careful  notes,
because  of  the  double  indefiniteness — the  difficulty  (1)  of  deciding  what
events  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  affiard  a  prima  facie  presumption
that  the  coincident  experiences  are  telepathically  connected  with  them,
and  (2)  of  distinguishing  clearly  a  peculiar  feeling  that  something  is
happening  from  vague  anxiety  about  absent  friends.  ^  If  persons  who
show  signs  of  this  susceptibility  would  continuously,  for  some  little  time
make  a  note  in  writing,  with  as  much  detail  as  possible,  whenever  a
feeling  of  this  kind  occurred,  and  afterwards  record  the  confirmation  or
absence  of  confirmation,  interesting  light  might  be  thrown  on  the  subject.]

(503)  Obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Miss  0.  D.  Garnett,  of  Furze
Hill  Lodge,  Brighton,  from  a  cousin,  Mrs.  D.,  who  prefers  that  her  own
name  should  not  be  printed.     Miss  Garnett  says  : —

"  I  may  safely  say  she  never  before  or  since  had  such  a  vision.  She  is
thoroughly  practical  and  unimaginative,  not  in  the  least  excitable,  and  I
remember  well  how  puzzled  slie  was  for  a  long  time  after.  When  she  came
to  me  some  time  after,  she  was  full  of  it,  and  described  it  to  me  most
graphically.  She  is  almost  like  a  sister  to  us,  and  I  think  discussed  this
affair  more  with  us  than  with  her  own  people.  Her  sister  thought  she
was  dreaming,  but  her  father  was  rather  astonished  when  she  told  him  of
the  "vision  the  next  morning."

"September  15th,  1885.

"  Some  few  years  ago  the  occurrence  took  place  which  I  am  about  to
relate.  I  was  lying  awake  one  night,  my  thoughts  fixed  on  no  particular
subject,  when  before  me  seemed  to  rise  the  vision  of  the  interior  of  a
cathedral ;  the  details  which  marked  it  from  an  ordinary  church  being
clearly  defined.  In  the  open  space  before  the  chancel  lay  a  coffin  enveloped
in  its  heavy  black  pall.  After  a  few  moments  (as  it  seemed  to  me)  it  faded
gradually  away.^  I  sat  up  and  roused '  myself,  as  the  whole  scene  was  so
real  and  strange,  and  I  was  convinced  I  had  not  been  asleep.  I  had  not
lain  down  long  before  the  same  scene  again  repeated  itself  upon  my  brain,
in  every  detail  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  before.^  The  repetition  of  the  vision
(for  such  I  firmly  believed  it  was)  filled  me  with  presentiments  of  trouble,
and  rousing  my  sister,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  I  told  her  what
I  had  seen  ;  but  as  was  natural,  she  concluded  I  had  been  dreaming.  Next
morning  at  breakfast  I  related  what  had  occurred,  and  it  was  remarked  that
we  knew  no  one  in  England  whose  funeral  service  would  be  likely  to  take
place  in  a  cathedral.  Shortly  after,  we  received  news  by  telegram  of  the
sudden  death  of  my  brother  in  the  West  Indies,  and  the  day  coincided
with  that  on  which  I  had  seen  the  vision  as  related.     When  the  letters

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  270,  505  ;  and  above,  pp.  26-7.

2  See  p.  97,  first  note.

3  See  p.  237,  note.

VOL.    II.  2   H    2


468  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

containing  all  details  arrived,  we  learnt  that  he  was  buried  the  same  day
that  he  died,  in  the  evening,  the  funeral  service  taking  place  in  the  Colonial
Cathedral.  Allowing  for  the  difference  in  time,  it  appears  to  have  been  as
near  as  possible  the  same  time  as  I  in  England  saw  the  whole  scene
represented,  the  remembrance  of  which  has  remained  indelibly  printed  on


my  memory.


J.  D.


In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  D.  says  : —

"  The  date  of  my  brother's  death  was  February  21st,  and  as  far  as  I  can
remember  I  had  the  dream  that  evening,  but  it  is  so  long  since  that  as
regards  dates  I  do  not  like  to  be  too  certain.  As  regards  the  leng-th  of
time  between  the  death  and  funeral,  it  was,  I  believe,  only  a  few  hours,
certainly  less  than  12.  The  news  of  his  death  reached  us  by  telegram  on
February  28th,  about  a  week  later.  I  have  never  had  anything  in  the
way  of  a  vision  either  before  or  since.  I  enclose  the  few  lines  from  my
sister  on  the  subject,  after  having  told  her  that  I  had  written  you  an
account."     The  sister's  words  are  : —

"I  corroborate  the  statement  of  my  sister's  dream  of  February,  1879,
which  she  narrated  to  me  the  morning  after  it  occurred.       a  g_  q."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  the  death  took  place  at  George
Town,  Demerara,  on  February  21st,  1879.

[Without  more  details  as  to  the  supposed  resemblance  between  the  place
seen  in  the  vision  and  the  real  place  of  the  funeral,  no  stress  ought,  I
think,  to  be  laid  on  this  point ;  which  is  one,  it  will  be  seen,  that  telepathy
could  not  satisfactorily  account  for.]

(504)  Received  on  Oct.  28,  1884,  from  a  gentleman  occupying  a  high
public  position,  who  does  not  wish  to  give  his  name  or  to  procure  other
attestations.  He  writes,  it  will  be  seen,  in  the  third  person.  French  is
not  his  native  language.

The  account  begins  with  an   experience  which  M.  had  during

his  father's  last  illness,  while  taking  a  brief  sleep,  after  long  nursing.

"Pendant  le  plus  fort  de  son  sommeil,  M. se  sentit  comme  tres

fortement  secoue  et  appele  par  son  nom.  II  se  rdveilla  en  sursaut,  tout
efi'raye,  sauta  de  son  lit,  se  dirigeant  vers  la  porte,  ayant  devant  lui  comme
une  ombre,  qui  disparu  des  qu'il  fut  dans  I'entree.  II  traversa  le  grand
salon,  et  tout  I'appartement  attenant.  Arrive  a  la  chambre  de  son  pere,  il
trouva  la  garde-malade  debout  sur  le  seuil  de  la  porte,  lui  barrant  le
passage.     Son  pere  venait  d'expirer  au  moment  meme.

"  L'impression  de  ce  re  veil  est  reste  tellement  vive  dans  I'esprit  de

M. qu'il  n'en  a  jamais  parle  sans  aj outer,   '  Ce  n'etait  certainement

pas  la  rdaHt^,  mais  pour  sur  c'etait  plus  qu'un  reve.'  "

This    case  alone  could    not    have  found  a  place  in  our    evidence,  as

M.  was  aware  of   his  father's  critical  condition,  and  was  in  a  highly

anxious  and  overstrained  state.     But  he  continues  : —

"  Quatre  ans  plus  tard,  en  Tannine  1849,  M.  habitait  Constanti-
nople ;  il  etait  proscrit  et  I'entree  de  son  pays  lui  etait  interdite.  Sa  mere,
qui  ^tait  a  Bucarest,  s' etait  decidee  d'aller  s'etablir  auprfes  de  lui  ;  elle
n'attendait  plus  que  I'ouverture  de  la  navigation  du  Danube,  qui  a  lieu
gdndralement  vers  le  mois  de  Mars.     Elle  avait  deja  annonc^  a   son  fils  le


IV.]  "BORDERLAND"   CASES.  469

nom  du  bateau  de  la  Compagnie  du  Loyd  Autrichien  ser  lequel  elle  devait
s'embarquer  a  Galatz,  et  le  8  Avril  elle  devait  arriver  a  Constantinople.
Ces  bateaux  arrivaient  toujours  dans  la  Corne-d'or  les  mardis,  vers  les  six
heures  du  matin.

"  Le  7  Avril  M.  passa  la  soiree  avec  deux  de  ses   amis  et  parents,

et  Ton  decida  que  le  lendemain  les  deux  amis  viendraient  le  chercher
pour  aller  tous  les  trois  recevoir  la  dame  a  bord.  Les  deux  amis  arriverent

le  matin   a  I'heure  convenue  chez  M. .  Grand   fut  leur  ^tonnement

lorsque  celui-ci  leur  dit  qu'il  etait  inutile  d'aller  au  bateau,  parceque  sa
mere  venait  de  mourir.  Ses  amis  crurent  d'abord  qu'il  avait  regu  des
nouvelles,  mais  ayant  reflechi  qu'il  n'y  avait  pas  pu  avoir  eu  des  lettres
depuis  une  semaine,  car  il  n'y  avait  eu  depuis  aucun  arrivage — a  cette
^poque  le  tdlegraphe  etait  chose  completement  inconnue  dans  ces  parages — -
ils  furent  inquiets  sur  I'etat  de  I'esprit  de  leur  ami,  qui  persistait  a  leur
dire  avec  la  plus  grande  assurance  que  sa  mere  etait  morte  dans  la  nuit

meme.     M. venait  d'avoir,    apres  s'etre    endormi,    le  meme    reveil,

precisement  avec  les  memes  circonstances,  que  dans  la  nuit  du  26  au  27
Novembre,  1844,  lors  de  la  mort  de  son  pere.

"  Le  bateau  suivant,  arrivd  le  15  Avril,  apportait  des  lettres  annon9ant

que  la  mere  de  M.  avait  succomb^  dans  la  nuit  du  7  au  8  Avril  a  la

suite  d'un  acc^s  de  fievre  bilieuse,  apres  une  courte  maladie  de  deux  jours."

The  narrator  stated  in  conversation  that  he  had  never  had  any  sub-
jective experience  of  the  sort.

[The  particular  form  of  the  second  experience  may  perhaps  have  been
due  to  the  effect  of  the  former  one  on  M. 's  mind.]

(505)  From  Miss  Henrietta  Wilkinson,  Enniscorthy,  Ireland.

"January,  1884.

"  I  live  in  Ireland,  my  nephew  in  London.  At  the  end  of  October  or
beginning  of  November,  1881,  when  he  was  8  years  old,  he  went  one  day
with  his  mother  and  sister  to  Kensington  Gardens.  While  playing  there
he  had  a  severe  fall  on  his  back ;  his  mother  had  to  call  a  cab  and  take
him  home,  then  send  for  the  doctor.  He  was  very  ill  for  three  or  four
days,  lying  in  a  dark  room  and  kept  perfectly  quiet.  The  accident
happened  on  a  Saturday,  I  think.  On  the  Sunday  his  mother  wrote  to
tell  me  of  it,  which  letter  I  received  on  Tu,  sday.  On  the  Monday  night
I  was  in  bed,  dropping  off  to  sleep,  when  I  opened  my  eyes  with  a  start,
and  saw,  quite  distinctly,  a  London  street,  leading  from  Kensington
Gardens  to  my  nephew's  home.  All  the  people,  cabs,  and  horses  were
running  very  fast  in  one  direction,  towards  my  sister's  house.  Amongst
them  were  my  sister  and  her  two  children,  also  running.  They  stopped
a  cab,  got  in,  and  arrived  at  their  own  house.  I  saw  no  more  but
exclaimed  '  Maurice  is  hurt  ! '  why,  I  do  not  know,  as  my  nephew
looked  all  right  in  the  street.  It  all  seemed  to  come  from  outside
myself.  I  thought  it  very  strange,  and  told  it  to  my  family  next  morning,
before  my  sister's  letter  arrived.  I  am  not  perfectly  sure  of  the  day  of
the  week,  but  know  it  was  the  day  after  the  accident  my  sister  wrote,  and
that  it  was  the  night  of  the  day  after  she  wrote  that  I  saw  what  I  tell  you.

"  I  think  it  was  my  nephew's  thoughts  of  me  that  gave  me  the  vision,
I  being  the  person  he  would  think  of,  next  to  his  father  and  mother.

"  Henrietta  Wilkinson."


470  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Asked  whether  she  had  ever,  on  any  other  occasion,  had  a  dream  of
death  or  accident  which  had  impressed  her,  she  says  : — "  No,  I  remember
none.  It  was  quite  unique.  But  why  call  it  a  dream  when  I  was  wide
awake  1  Had  it  been  a  dream  I  don't  think  it  would  have  made  the  same
impression  on  me."

Miss  Wilkinson's  sister  writes  on  Jan.  8,  1884,  from  Castle  Hill,
Enniscorthy : —

"  I  distinctly  remember  my  sister  relating  to  us  (myself  and  another
sister)  her  vision  or  dream  before  she  got  any  letter.  It  made  a  great
impression  on  her,  and  she  told  us  with  surprise  and  a  little  alarm.  She
told  us  on  Tuesday  morning,  and  the  letter  telling  of  the  accident  arrived
soon  after.  "  Martha  Wilkinson."

The  interval  between  the  accident  and  Miss  Wilkinson's  ex-
perience is  too  long  for  the  case  to  be  treated  as  one  of  deferred  de-
velopment (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  511);  but  the  vision,  which  seems  clearly  to
have  been  of  a  very  unusual  kind,  may  conceivably  have  been  due  to
a  half  delirious  recrudescence  of  the  agitated  scene  in  the  mind  of  the
little  invalid.  The  confused  and  inaccurate  character  of  the  vision
might  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  in  this  way ;  but  might  also  be
construed  as  the  transforming  and  dream-like  investiture  which  tele-
pathic percipients  have  so  often  seemed  to  supply.

The  next  case  is  a  singular  one,  as,  supposing  it  to  have  been  tele-
pathic, there  was  no  personal  bond  between  the  agent  and  percipient.
In  this  respect  it  recalls  cases  459  and  490  ;  but  in  the  present  case
there  was  local  proximity  between  the  parties.

(506)  From  a  lady  whose  family  object  to  the  publication  of  her  name.

"May  24th,  1884.

"  Somewhere  about  three  years  ago,  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance,  I
was  suddenly  awoke  in  the  night  by  hearing  what  seemed  to  me  a  voice
saying,  '  You  had  better  get  up,  someone  is  dying.'  I  went  to  my  father's
door,  but  finding  all  right,  returned  to  bed,  but  could  not  sleep  again  all
the  rest  of  the  night.  The  next  day  one  of  my  servants  told  me  the
gentleman  next  door  had  died  in  the  night.  I  was  not  aware  he  was  likely
to  die,  indeed  I  knew  nothing  of  him,  and  he  never  entered  my  thoughts.
He  had  been  delicate  or  an  invalid  ever  since  we  had  lived  here.  I  did
not  mention  this  dream  at  the  time,  not  supposing  it  would  interest  my
father.     I  have  always  been  a  great  dreamer."

We  fijad  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on
March  19th,  1881,  at  the  house  next  Miss  L.'s.

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Miss  L.  writes  on  June  28,  1884  : —
"  I  have  heard,  or  seem  to  have  heard,  voices  at  other  times,  both
by  day  and  night,  and  I  think  they  have  invariably  had  some  meaning,
except  in  cases  where  I  have  accounted  for  them  in  consequence  of  my
sufiering  from  overstrained  nerves  or  illness.  I  do  not  remember  ever
being  awoke  by  a  voice  in  this  way  at  any  other  time,  though  I  have  some-


IV.]  "BORDERLAND"  CASES.  471

times  awoke  suddenly  thinking  someone  called  me  by  name.     This  is  the
only  case  I  have  experienced  of  being  awakened  by  a  remarhr

[In  an  interview  with  Miss  L.,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  that  she  had  fixed
the  time  of  her  impression  by  hearing  the  clock  strike  3  soon  afterwards.
The  servant,  from  whom  Miss  L.  heard  of  the  death  next  morning,  thinks
she  was  told  by  a  servant  next  door  that  it  took  place  at  4  a.m.,  and  is
certain  it  was  "  in  the  morning."  After  hearing  of  the  death.  Miss  L.
wrote  and  told  her  sister  of  her  experience  ;  the  sister  confirmed  this.  The
wall  between  the  two  houses  is  too  thick  to  permit  the  sound  of  conversa-
tion to  pass.]

(507)  From  Mr.  Francis  A.  Suttaby,  2,  Amen  Corner,  E.G.,  and  48,
Redclifi'e  Square,  S.W.  u  March  3rd,  1884.

'•'■En  route  home,  in  July  last,  when  about  in  mid- Atlantic,  on  a  certain
evening  I  retired  in  due  course  to  rest,  and  in  my  sleep  was  suddenly
disturbed  by  a  voice  (impetuous)  calling  aloud,  '  Frank  !  Frank  ! '  (I  was
alone,  as  I  had  a  berth  entirely  to  myself.)  So  suddenly  did  I  spring  up
out  of  my  heavy  sleep,  that  I  nearly  knocked  my  head  against  the  berth
that  was  over  mine.  I  replied,  '  Yes,  yes,  what  ? '  No  answer  coming,
I  spoke  again,  hastily,  '  I  am  here — what's  the  matter  % — who  called  % '
No  answer  being  vouchsafed,  and  supposing  there  was  some  mistake  on
my  part,  as  poor  little  disturbed  Samuel  might  have  done,  I  addressed
myself  aloud,  'Francis  Arthur,  go  to  sleep — some  mistake.'  Of  course,
the  next  morning,  at  the  breakfast  table — the  captain  had  invited  me
to  his  table — I  made  much  amusement  for  him  and  the  ladies  and  a
certain  Major  Jones,  of  Kingston,  Ontario.  I  must  admit  Major  Jones
seemed  more  concerned  than  I  allowed  myself  to  be.  In  fact,  I  tried  to
put  away  the  thought,  and  made  light  of  it.  Within  an  hour  of  my
reaching  my  dear  old  uncle's  house  at  Putney  (my  wife  and  family  being
then  in  France),  my  aunt  informed  me  of  the  sudden  death  of  my  cousin
Nora  [Mrs.  R.],  which  was  most  touching  to  me ;  and  when  I  ascertained
the  day  the  poor  soul  died,  '  Why,'  I  said,  '  that's  the  very  morning  I  was
disturbed  in  my  sleep,'  telling  her  what  I  have  already  described  to  you.
Subsequently,  I  gathered  the  hour  my  cousin  died,  and  that  the  strange
cry  of  '  Frank,  Frank,'  as  for  help,  which  startled  me  out  of  my  sleep,  was
at  the  very  hour  when  Nora  was  really,  but  apparently  unconsciously,
passing  from  this  lower  world  ;  for  the  difference  in  time  between  here  and
where  I  was  would  bring  the  hour  of  her  flight  and  evident  call  to  one  and
the  same.

"  Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  feature  connected  with  the  voice  is,
that  not  till  I  saw  her  brother  Ernest,  in  Torquay,  did  anyone  think  to  ask
me,  as  he  did,  '  But  whose  voice  do  you  suppose  it  was  1 '  Immediately  it
dawned  on  me,  '  Why,  your  sister's — Nora's,  without  a  doubt.'  Then  he
asked.  Why  1  thought  it  was  her  voice  1  '  Because  I  can  now  distinguish
it  as  her  voice.  It  was  hastily  spoken,  impetuous,  as  you  know  she  could
be.'  "Eras.  A.  Suttaby."

Mr.  Suttaby  fixed  the  date  of  the  voice  by  its  occurring  in  the  night
(or  very  early  morning),  after  the  onli/  storm  which  they  had  on  the
voyage,  this  storm  being  noted  in  his  diary.  He  kindly  sent  us  an  extract
from  the  diary,  which  showed  that  the  weather  from  July  4,  when  the
"  Bothnia  "  left  New  York,  to  July  8  was  fine.  The  extracts  for  the  next
3  days  are  as  follow  :  —


472  SUPPLEMENT.  .  [chap.

"  9th. — Fine,  but  rough.  Ended  with  a  storm,  and  retired  early,
whilst  I  could  stand.

"  10th. — Fine  and  bright  all  day,  but  very  stormy.  Remained  in  bed
all  day.

"  11th. — In  my  seat  at  breakfast.     Pleasant  day,  and  played  'shuiB.es.'"

Mr.  Suttaby  continues  : —

"The  memorial-card  of  my  cousin  states  that  she  died  suddenly  July
10th.  I  cannot  now  be  certain  as  to  when  I  heard  my  name  called —
whether  on  morning  of  10th  or  11th.  All  I  know  is  that  when  informed
of  the  death  of  my  cousin,  each  day  then  being  fresh  in  my  memory,  I
fixed  it  as  an  unquestionable  fact,  not  supposing  I  should  ever  be  questioned
again  as  to  details,  and  having  no  reasons,  no  motives  whatsoever,  for
fixing  the  cry  of  '  Frank,  Frank '  to  the  day  of  my  cousin's  death.

"  What  I  stated  did  occur,  and  no  one's  voice  but  that  of  Nora
resembled  the  twice-repeated  impetuous  cry."

We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Scotsman  that  Mrs.  R.  died  suddenly
on  July  10,  1883.  She  had  no  relatives  with  her  when  she  died.  In
conversation  with  the  present  writer,  Mr.  Suttaby  mentioned  that  he  was
the  person  who,  from  circumstances,  had  had  most  to  do  with  her  and  her
afiairs  of  late  years,  and  he  thus  regards  it  as  natural  that  her  thoughts
should  have  turned  specially  to  him.     Her  death  was  very  sudden.

Mr.  Suttaby  tells  us  that  he  has  on  one  other  occasion  experienced  a
hallucination,  which  again  consisted  in  hearing  his  name  called  ;  but  as
this  took  place  at  a  large  railway  station,  it  was  possibly  a  real  call.  With
regard  to  the  present  case  he  says  : — -

"  I  do  not  admit  what  I  heard  was  hallucination.  I  was  fast  asleep
in  my  bed,  and  I  was  suddenly  awaked  ;  I  sat  up  quickly,  and  said,  '  Yes,
yes  !  I  am  here.  What '?  —  Who  called  ? ' — or  words  to  that  eft'ect.  I
never  lost  the  firm  conviction  that  I  was  really  called — that  a  real  voice,
as  if  needing  my  protection  and  assistance,  called  to  me."

We  have  ascertained  from  Capt.  McKay  that  he  does  not  (in  April,
1886)  recall  Mr.  Suttaby's  mention  of  the  incident.  Major  Jones  writes,
on  April  6,  1886,  from  the  Army  and  Navy  Club,  S.W.  : —

"  I  cannot  tell  you  more  than  the  fact  that  one  day  Mr.  Suttaby  stated
he  had  awoke  in  the  night  hearing  a  child  call,  and  that  he  thought  it
must  be  a  niece  (I  think)  who  had  died."  This  last  detail  cannot  weigh
against  Mr.  Suttaby's  distinct  recollection  that  the  voice  at  the  time  was
not  distinctly  associated  with  his  cousin.

[Whether  the  experience  was  on  the  10th  or  11th,  it  is  possible,
though  not  certain,  that  it  fell  within  12  hours  of  the  death.]

(508)  From  Mrs.  Hancock,  Penarth  Lodge,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol,  a
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends.

"April  14th,  1884.

"  In  my  Northern-Irish  home,,  I  received  a  letter  on  the  7th  November,
1865,  from  my  brother  in  Warwickshire,  saying  that  my  mother  was  ill,
and  he  wished  I  would  go  and  see  her.  I  started  the  same  evening  by
Belfast  and  Fleetwood.  I  had  been  several  hours  in  my  berth,  on  the
Irish  Channel,  and  was  half  asleep,  when  I  was  startled  by  feeling  a  hand
grasp  my  shoulder  and  a  voice  say,  in  a  loud  whisper,    '  Come  quickly.'     I


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  473

rose  up  and  sat  looking  round  the  cabin,  but  could  see  no  one.  I  called
to  the  stewardess,  but  she  was  fast  asleep,  and  so  were  all  the  other  ladies.
I  again  lay  down,  but  not  to  sleep,  and  in  a  very  short  time,  not  20
minutes  afterwards,  the  same  pressure  was  put  on  my  shoulder  and  the
same  words  were  distinctly  uttered  close  to  my  ear,  '  Come  quickly.'  ^  I
again  called  loudly  to  the  stewardess  and  told  her  to  light  the  lamp,  for  I
was  sure  some  one  must  have  been  standing  by  me.  She  declared  that  no
one  had  been  in  the  cabin,  and  all  around  was  so  still  and  quiet.  I
reached  the  station  at  half -past  12  at  noon,  when  my  brother  met  me.  He
said,  'All  is  over,  my  mother  passed  away  at  4  this  morning.'

"  I  ought  to  have  stated  that  when  I  called  to  the  stewardess  and
made  her  light  the  lamp,  immediately  after  I  heard  the  voice  and  felt  the
hand  on  my  shoulder  the  second  time,  I  then  asked  her  to  tell  me
what  o'clock  it  was,  and  she  said,  '  Four  o'clock.'  I  looked  at  my  own
watch  and  it  was  the  same.  I  being  an  only  daughter  and  my  mother
having  been  a  widow  the  last  five  years  of  her  life,  she  was  much  wrapped
up  in  me  and  in  my  children,  and  the  tie  between  us  was  of  no  ordinary
kind.  I  have  always  looked  upon  this  as  a  direct  voice  from  herself,  just
as  she  was  dying  and  passing  into  the  spiritual  world.

"Lucy  Hancock."

We  find  from  the  Coventry  Herald  that  the  death  took  place  on  Nov.
9,  1865.  Mrs.  Hancock  can  hardly  be  mistaken  as  to  having  heard  the
news  from  her  brother  on  her  arrival,  i.e.,  on  the  day  following  that  on
which  she  started.  We  may  conclude  therefore  that  the  7th  in  the  first
line  of  her  account  is  a  mistake  for  8th.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hancock  adds  ; —

"  In  reply  to  your  question,  whether  I  have  at  any  other  time,  besides
the  one  described,  '  had  an  experience  of  the  kind,  i.e.,  fancied  I  heard  or
felt  a  human  presence  when  no  one  was  present,'  I  have  to  say  that  I
never  did.

"  My  brother  has  just  been  here,  and  says  he  recollects  saying  to  me
'  all  was  over  at  4  o'clock  this  morning,'  on  the  day  he  met  me  at  the
station,  November  9th,  1865  ;  but  he  does  not  recollect  the  particulars  of
what  happened  to  me  on  board  the  steamer.  He  has  at  any  rate  a  very
bad  memory,  whereas  I  have  the  reputation  of  having  an  unusually  good
one ;  and  to  my  mind  that  pressure  on  my  arm,  twice,  and  the  words
'  Come  quickly  '  are  as  vivid  now  as  if  all  had  happened  last  week,  instead
of  19  years  ago."

[The  weak  point  in  this  case  is  of  course  the  state  of  anxiety  which
preceded  the  experience ;  the  strong  point,  if  correctly  remembered,  is  the
exactitude  of  the  coincidence.  Mrs.  Hancock  had  no  previous  belief  in
anything  like  telepathy,  and  takes  no  special  interest  in  the  subject.]

(509)  From  Mrs.  Sprague,  Sunnyside,  275,  Coldharbour  Lane,  Brixton,
S.W.,  who  says  that  "the  particulars  are  plain  unvarnished  truth."

"Aug.  25th,  1886.

[The  narrator's  mother,  Mrs.  Green,  to  whom  she  was  deeply  attached,
had  promised  that,  if  she  died  when  they  were  apart,  she  would  let  her
daughter  "  know  that  she  was   quitting  this  world."  ^      Soon  after  Mrs.

1  As  to  repetition  after  a  short  interval,  see  p.  105,  first  note.

2  See  p.  66,  note.


474  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Sprague's  marriage,  her  mother  went  to  keep  house  for  a  son,  at  Major's
Creek,  Braidwood,  N.S.  Wales,  and  the  two  had  not  met  for  12  years.  In
the  summer  of  1868,  Mrs.  Sprague,  who  had  been  in  New  Zealand,  was  on
her  way  to  pay  her  mother  a  visit.]  "  She  was  expecting  me ;  and  the
last  letter  was  cheerful  and  happy,  intensely  expectant  of  my  visit ;  also
she  was,  she  said,  quite  well.

"On  Sunday  night,  the  14th  of  June,  1868,  I  retired  to  bed  about
11.30,  and  slept  soundly  until  3  o'clock,  when  I  suddenly  woke  hearing  my
mother's  voice.  She  stood  at  the  foot  of  my  bed.  She  said,  '  Oh,  come  !  I
want  you  !  '  The  moon  was  at  the  full ;  and  the  room  as  light  as  day.  I
threw  myself  out  of  bed  instantly.  She  was  gone.  I  then  realised  how
far  away  she  was  :  and  a  strange  supernatural  feeling,  a  feeling  impossible
to  describe,  took  possession  of  me :  like  lightning  the  compact  made  in
England  many  years  before  returned  to  my  mind,  and  I  knew  with
certainty  that  she  was  dying.  I  looked  at  my  watch  ;  it  was  3  o'clock.  I
lay  awake  till  the  morning  dawned,  and  at  12  o'clock  that  day  I  had  a
telegram  from  my  brother,  asking  me  to  come  on  quickly  as  she  had  had  a
fit  [late  on  the  Saturday  night]  and  could  not  live.  This  was  Monday.  I
could  not  leave  Melbourne  till  the  following  Thursday,  there  being  only
steamers  twice  a  week,  so  on  the  Wednesday  [corrected  in  conversation
to  Thursday]  I  received  another  telegram  saying  she  was  dead.  Her
body  was  kept  for  10  days  that  I  might  attend  the  funeral,  which  I  did,
travelling  post  all  the  time.

"  On  questioning  the  nurse  who  attended  her,  she  said,  '  Your  mother
ceased  to  breathe  on  Wednesday,  June  17th,  but  the  last  sign  of  life  she
gave  was  on  the  Sunday  night,  or  morning,  when  at  about  3  o'clock,
appearing  still  insensible,  she  rose  up  and  attempted  to  stand,  but  fell
heavily  forward.  With  assistance  I  replaced  her  in  the  bed,  and  she
remained  motionless  till  she  ceased  to  breathe.'  This  was  the  exact
moment  that  her  spirit  appeared  and  called  me."^

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Sprague  stated  that  not  only  her  child,  but  also  her
landlady,  Mrs.  Bellman,  was  sleeping  with  her  on  the  night  of  the  vision.
We  are  endeavouring  to  trace  Mrs.  Bellman.  The  brother  and  the  nurse
are  dead.  Miss  Alice  Sprague  stated  independently  that  she  distinctly
remembers  being  woke  by  her  mother's  exclamation ;  and  she  also  remem-
bers Mrs.  Bellman's  remonstrating  with  Mrs.  Sprague  for  disturbing  her  ;
but  Miss  Sprague  has  no  recollection  of  being  told  at  the  time  what  her
mother  had  seen.

Mrs.  Sprague  has  had  only  one  other  hallucination  in  her  life,  which
followed  the  above  by  nearly  7  years  :  it  was  again  of  the  "  borderland  "
type,  and  represented  her  deceased  mother.

[The  fact  that  the  percipient's  mind  had  no  doubt  been  considerably
occupied  with  the  thought  of  her  approaching  meeting  with  her  mother,
somewhat  weakens  the  case ;  but  I  know  of  no  other  instance  where
the  idea  of  a  happy  meeting  has  originated  so  abnormal  an  experience.]

§  3.  The  next  little  group  are  first-hand  cases  which  have  already
been  published.

(510)  From  the  Memoir  of  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Power-le-Poer  Trench,
last  Archbishop  of  Tuam    (1845),    by  the    Rev.   J.   D'Arcy    Sirr,    D.D.,

^  See  p.  48,  note.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND''  GASES.  475

pp.  762-3.  The  account  is  part  of  a  letter  written  by  the  Rev.  Samuel
Medlicott,  from  Pau.  Our  attention  was  called  to  it  by  the  Rev.  Canon
Eyre,  of  Bray,  a  very  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Medlicott,  who  adds  that  Mr
Medlicott  had  been  enabled  to  go  to  Pau  for  his  health  through  the  kind-
ness of  the  Archbishop  of  Tuam.

"An  interesting  circumstance  connected  with  the  death  of  the  dear
servant  of  God,  our  late  venerated  and  truly  beloved  Archbishop,  I  will
simply  relate  as  follows.  I  was  at  my  brother's  house  in  Wiltshire,
whither  I  made  my  first  move  in  search  of  health  early  in  March  last  year.
There  at  a  very  early  hour  on  Monday,  (I  think  4  o'clock,)  the  dear  Arch-
bishop (I  shall  never  forget  his  sweet  face),  though  pale  as  death,  stood  at
the  foot  of  my  bed  and  said,  '  I  am  tired  of,  and  I  will  leave  (or  I  have  left)
Tuam,  and  will  never  return  there.'  This  greatly  distressed  me,  and  of
course  roused  me.  I  thought  I  had,  as  it  were,  seen  a  vision,  and  men-
tioned what  I  did  hear  to  Mrs.  Medlicott  as  soon  as  she  awoke.  But  how
was  I  disturbed  !  how  painfully  cut  down,  when,  in  due  course  of  time,
the  heartrending  tidings  reached  me  that  on  that  very  day,  and  at  that
very  hour,  his  Grace  had  departed  this  life."

We  find  from  the  Memoir  that  the  Archbishop  died  at  Tuam,  of
typhoid  fever,  on  March  26,  1839,  at  3.10  a.m. ;  the  coincidence  was
therefore  probably  close  to  within  an  hour.

(511)  TvshQ.&l-AtedivoTo. Schriften  fiir  und  an  seine  Liehen  Deutschen,  by
E.  M.  Arndt  (Leipzig,  1845),  Vol.  III.,  pp.  524-5.     (See  case  467.)

Arndt  describes  how,  in  the  winter  of  1811,  when  staying  in  a  friend's
house,  he  was  sitting  up  working  one  night,  after  a  fatiguing  day,  and  was
half  asleep  in  his  chair — "  when  lo  !  my  dear  old  Aunt  Sophia,  my  second
mother,  stood  before  me  with  a  kind  smile,  holding  on  each  arm  a  little
boy.  They  were  children  whom  I  dearly  loved.  She  held  them  out  to
me  with  a  gesture  which  seemed  to  say  '  Take  the  children  to  your  care.'  "
The  next  day  at  noon,  while  Arndt  was  sitting  talking  with  his  friends,
"  the  carriage  of  my  brother  William  drove  up  with  a  letter,  saying,
'  Brother,  come  back  at  once  in  the  carriage ;  we  must  cross  the  water
to  Buchholz  to-morrow,  and  bury  our  dear  old  Aunt  Sophia,  who  died  last
night.' "

(512)  From  Works  of  the  Rev.  John  Wesley.  A.M.  (Edition  of  1856),
Vol.  II..  pp.  350-1.  The  account,  on  the  face  of  it,  is  in  the  words  of  the
percipient ;  but  we  cannot  be  absolutely  sure  of  this.

The  passage  is  from  Wesley's  Journal  for  Thursday,  June  3rd,  1756.

"  I  received  a  remarkable  letter  from  a  clergyman  with  whom  I  had
been  a  day  or  two  before  ;  part  of  it  ran  thus  :  '  I  had  the  following  accovmt
from  the  gentlewoman  herself,  a  person  of  piety  and  veracity.  She  is  now
the  wife  of  Mr.  J.  B.,  silversmith  in  Cork.'

"  '  "  About  30  years  ago,  I  was  addressed,  by  way  of  marriage,  by  Mr.
Richard  Mercier,  then  a  volunteer  in  the  army.  The  young  gentleman
was  quartered  at  that  time  in  Charleville,  where  my  father  lived,  who
approved  of  his  addresses,  and  directed  me  to  look  upon  him  as  my  future
husband.  When  the  regiment  left  the  town,  he  promised  to  return  in  two
months  and  marry  me.  From  Charleville  he  went  to  Dublin,  thence  to
his  father's,  and  from  thence  to  England ;  where,  his  father  having  bought
him  a  cornetcy  of  horse,   he  purchased  many  ornaments  for  the  wedding,


476  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

and  returning  to  Ireland,  let  us  know  that  he  would  be  at  our  house  in
Charleville  in  a  few  days.  On  this  the  family  was  busied  to  prepare  for
his  reception,  and  the  ensuing  marriage,  when,  one  night,  my  sister  Mary
and  I  being  asleep  in  our  bed,  I  was  awaked  by  the  sudden  opening  of  the
side  curtains,  and  starting  up,  saw  Mr.  Mercier  standing  by  the  bedside.
He  was  wrapped  up  in  a  loose  sheet,  and  had  a  napkin,  folded  like  a
nightcap,  on  his  head.  He  looked  at  me  very  earnestly,  and  lifting  up  the
napkin,  which  much  shaded  his  face,  showed  me  the  left  side  of  his  head,
all  bloody,  and  covered  with  his  brains  ;  ^  the  room,  meantime,  was  quite
light.2  My  terror  was  excessive,  which  was  increased  by  his  stooping  over
the  bed,  and  embracing  me  in  his  arms.  My  cries  alarmed  the  whole
family,  who  came  crowding  into  the  room.  Upon  their  entrance,  he
gently  withdrew  his  arms  and  ascended,  as  it  were,  through  the  ceiling.^  I
continued  for  some  time  in  strong  fits.  When  I  could  speak  I  told  them
what  I  had  seen.

"  '  "  One  of  them  a  day  or  two  after,  going  to  the  postman  for  letters,
found  him  reading  the  newspapers,  in  which  was  an  account  that  Cornet
Mercier,  going  into  Christ  Church  belfry,  in  Dublin,  just  after  the  bells
had  been  ringing,  and  standing  under  the  bells,  one  of  them,  which  was
turned  bottom  upwards,  suddenly  turned  again,  struck  one  side  of  his
head,  and  killed  him  on  the  spot.  On  further  inquiry,  he  found  he  was
struck  on  the  left  side  of  his  head." ' "

[The  death  of  Mr.  Mercier  does  not  appear  in  the  Dublin  Gazette,  which
is  the  only  Dublin  paper  of  that  date  that  we  can  obtain ;  and  we  know
of  no  other  publication  where  it  would  be  likely  to  be  mentioned.]

The  remarkable  narrative  of  Elizabeth  Hobson,  of  Sunderland,
given  by  Wesley  in  his  diary,  under  date  May  25,  1768,  is  too  long
to  quote  in  full.  It  is  complicated  by  matter  which  does  not  belong
to  the  subject  of  this  book,  and  by  much  that  looks  like  subjective
hallucination.  But  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  cases  were  given  in
good  faith  by  a  witness  of  good  character.  The  apparently  telepathic
incidents  (which  I  include  under  a  single  evidential  number),  taken
down  by  Wesley  from  E.  Hobson's  lips,  are  as  follows  : —

(513)  (1)  "John  Simpson,  one  of  our  neighbours,  a  man  that  truly
feared  God,  and  one  with  whom  I  was  particularly  acquainted,  went  to  sea,
as  usual.  He  sailed  out  on  a  Tuesday,  The  Friday  night  following,
between  11  and  12  o'clock,  I  heard  someone  walking  in  my  room,  and
every  step  sounded  as  if  it  were  stepping  in  water.  He  then  came  to  the
bedside  in  his  sea-jacket,  all  wet,  and  stretched  his  hand  over  me.  Three
drops  of  water  fell  on  my  head,  and  felt  as  cold  as  ice.  I  strove  to  wake
his  wife — who  lay  with  me ;  but  I  could  not  any  more  than  if  she  were
dead.     Afterwards  I  heard  that  he  was  cast  away  that  night.

(2)  "  A  little  before  Michaelmas,  1763,  my  brother  George,  who  was  a
good  young  man,  went  to   sea.     The  day  after  Michaelmas  Day,   about

1  These  details  of  the  vision  are,  no  doubt,  difficiolt  to  account  for  telepathically.  It
is  possible  that  they  were  "  read  back  "  after  the  reality  was  known  (see  the  remarks  on
case  25,  Vol.  i.,  p.  206)  ;  but  compare  cases  130  and  134.

2  See  the  two  following  pages,  and  Vol.  i.,  pp.  437,  550-1.

3  Compare  cases  203,  204,  205.


IV.]  '^ BORDERLAND''    CASES'.  477

midnight,  I  saw  him  standing  by  my  bedside,  surrounded  with  a  glorious
light,  1  and  looking  earnestly  at  me.  He  was  wet  all  over.  That  night
the  ship  in  which  he  sailed  split  upon  a  rock,  and  all  the  crew  were
drowned.

(3)  "On  April  9th,  1767,  about  midnight  I  was  lying  awake,  and  I
saw  my  brother  John  standing  by  my  bedside.  Just  at  that  time  he  died
in  Jamaica.

(4)  "On  Friday,  July  3rd,  [1  1767),  I  was  sitting  at  dinner,  when  I
thought  I  heard  someone  coming  along  the  passage.  I  looked  about,  and
saw  my  aunt,  Margaret  Scot,  of  Newcastle,  standing  at  my  back.  On
Saturday,  I  had  a  letter  informing  me  that  she  died  on  that  day.

(5)  "When  I  was  about  16,  my  uncle  fell  ill,  and  grew  worse  and
worse  for  three  months.  One  day,  having  been  sent  out  on  an  errand,  I
was  coming  home  through  a  lane  when  I  saw  him  in  the  field  coming
swiftly  towards  me.  I  ran  to  meet  him,  but  he  was  gone.  When  I  came
home,  I  found  him  calling  for  me.  As  soon  as  I  came  to  his  bedside,  he
clasped  his  arms  round  my  neck,  and  bursting  into  tears,  .  .  .  kept
his  hold  till  he  sunk  down  and  died  ;  and  even  then  they  could  hardly
unclasp  his  fingers.  I  would  fain  have  died  with  him,  and  wished  to  be
buried  with  him,  dead  or  alive."

§  4.  The  remaining  cases  are  second-hand.  I  will  first  give  a
considerable  group  where  the  narrators  are  very  near  relatives  of  the
first-hand  witnesses,  and  have  no  sort  of  doubt  that  what  is  recorded
is  the  genuine  experience  of  their  respective  informants.

(514  and  515)  From  Lieut.-Colonel  Fane  Sewell,  care  of  Messrs.  H.  S.
King  and  Co.,  45,  Pall  Mall,  S.W.         "Wolfelee,  Hawick,  N.B.

"August  4th,  1885.

"  My  mother  and  Anne  Hervey  were  schoolfellows  together  at  a
Madame  Audibert's,  in  Kensington,  and  they  were  bosom  friends  ;  and,  as
was  not  unusual  in  those  days  with  young  girls,  they  exchanged  rings,  with
the  promise  that  whichever  of  the  two  died  first  she  was  to  send  back  to
the  other  her  ring.^

"  During  the  following  holidays,  for  which  my  mother  went  to  her
home,  North  Berwick,  Anne  Hervey  remaining  at  Madame  Audibert's  in
Kensington,  the  following  incident  occurred  : —

"  My  mother  suddenly  awoke  in  the  night,  to  find  Anne  Hervey
standing  by  her  bedside,  holding  out  the  ring  she  had  given  her.  The
apparition  lasted  a  few  seconds,  and  then  faded  away.  My  mother  was
much  frightened,  and  in  the  morning  told  her  mother  what  had  happened
to  her  in  the  night,  adding  that  she  was  quite  convinced  Anne  Hervey
was  dead,  although  she  had  left  her  perfectly  well  a  fortnight  before  at
Madame  Audibert's.

"  The  event  proved  my  mother  to  be  right,  for  in  course  of  post  (not
so  rapid  as  in  these  days)  a  letter  reached  her  from  Madame  Audibert
telling  her  of  Anne  Hervey's  death  from  scarlet  fever,  and  enclosing
the  ring  which  she  said  Anne  Hervey  had  begged,  on  her  deathbed,
might  be  sent  to  my  mother.

1  Compare  the  last  case  and  case  205.

2  As  to  compacts  of  this  sort,  see  p.  66.


478  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  The  above  is  exactly  as  I  have  received  it  from  my  mother's  lips.
The  ring  referred  to  was  in  my  own  possession  for  many  years.

"My  mother,  when  at  Bangalore,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember
about  the  year  1845,  was  one  night  awakened  by  the  feeling  of  something
unusual  happening,  and  saw  as  she  thought  a  very  favourite  sister  of
my  father's,  my  Aunt  Fanny  (Mrs.  John  Hamilton  Gray),  standing  in
her  night-dress  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  with  her  hair  falling  loosely
round  her.  There  was  a  peculiar  light  upon  her,  though  no  light  of  any
kind  in  the  room.^  Another  peculiarity  about  my  aunt  that  my  mother
noticed  was,  that  a  large  lock  of  my  aunt's  hair  had  been  cut  straight
off  close  to  the  temple.^  The  apparition  appeared  to  gaze  steadily  at
my  mother  for  some  little  time,  and  then  gradually  disappeared.

"My  mother,  to  whom  such  appearances  were  not  altogether  unknown,
felt  so  convinced  something  serious  had  happened  to  my  Aunt  Fanny,
that,  fearing  a  shock  to  my  father,  she  took  measures  to  intercept  the
letters  to  my  father  which  she  was  satisfied  must  bring  him  sad  news
of  some  sort  relating  to  my  aunt.  The  event  proved  her  right,  for  in
due  course  of  post  from  home  came  the  letter  bearing  intelligence  of  my
aunt's  unexpected  death  at  sea  (Mrs.  Gray  was  journeying  from  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  England  when  she  died),  on  the  night  above
mentioned,  and  in  the  letter  was  enclosed  a  large  lock  of  my  Aunt  Fanny's
hair  which  had  been  cut  ofi"  to  send  to  my  father.

"  I  was  a  child  of  5  or  6  years  of  age  when  the  above  took  place,  and
I  remember  the  circumstance  distinctly,  though  not  the  particulars,  which
are,  however,  exactly  as  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  relate  them  to
different  people.  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  relate  both  these
experiences,  as  nearly  as  my  memory  will  serve  me,  in  the  exact  words  I
have  used.  "  Fane  Sewell."

In  a  later  letter  Colonel  Sewell  says  that  he  has  failed  to  get  the  exact
dates,  and  adds  : —

"  In  writing  out  the  two  accounts  I  sent  you,  I  purposely  excluded
from  the  second  anything  of  my  own  personal  recollections  of  the  occur-
rence, which  took  place  at  Bangalore,  that  you  might  have  the  story
exactly  as  related  to  me  by  my  mother.

"Let  me  reply  to  your  questions  as  given.

"  (1)  '  Did  my  mother  always  speak  of  the  incidents  as  waking  experi-
ences, not  mere  dreams "? '

"  My  mother  never  spoke  of  either  but  as  '  waking  experiences.'  She
was  very  distinct  upon  that  point.  She  was  quite  sure  of  having  been,  in
both  cases,  wide  awake  when  she  saw  what  she  described.

"  (2)  '  Was  I  old  enough  to  recollect  whether  I  heard  of  the  second
experience  before  the  news  of  death  arrived  1 '

"  I  have  a  distinct  recollection  (for  the  scenes  made  a  great  impression
upon  me)  of  the  news  of  my  Aunt  Fanny's  death  being  taken  and  broken
to  my  father  by  my  mother ;  his  great  grief ;  and  of  my  mother's  anxiety
before  and  about  the  coming  of  the  letters,  and  of  her  depression  (she  was
naturally  of  a  bright,  cheerful  disposition)  before  the  letters  came,  which  I
could  not  at  the  time  understand,  but  which  I  have  since  felt  was  due  to

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1.

2  Compare  cases  194,  449,  and  see  Vol.  i,,  p.  555,


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  479

her  anticipation  of  coming  sorrow.  I  was  seldom  away  from  either  my
father's  or  mother's  side  in  those  days,  and  must  have  been  about  5  years
old,  and  could  well  recollect  things  of  a  striking  character  which  took
place  then.  My  earliest  recollection  is  of  the  death  of  my  eldest,  and,
then,  only  sister,  which  took  place  when  I  was  a  child  of  between  2  and  3
years  of  age.  Of  this  I  can  of  course  only  dimly  remember  the  circum-
stances, and  merely  mention  it  here  to  show  that  I  was  very  impressionable
as  a  child,  and  began  to  remember  much  earlier  than  the  date  of  my  Aunt
Fanny's  death.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own  mind,  therefore,  of  the
phenomenon  having  occurred  to  my  mother  as  described  by  her.

"  (3)  '  (a)  Am  I  aware  as  to  whether  my  mother  was  in  the  habit  of
having  similar  visitations  or  visions  which  did  not  correspond  with  any-
thing 1  or  (6),  of  her  being  subject  to  hallucinations  ? '

"  (a)  I  am  not  aware  of  any  such.  I  do  know,  however,  of  one  occur-
rence which  took  place  in  February  or  March,  1857,  whilst  I  was  staying,
en  route  to  India,   with  my  father  and  mother  at  Pisa.

"  I  remember  my  mother  came  down  to  breakfast  one  morning  greatly
agitated,  and  told  us  (my  father  and  me)  that  she  had  been  awakened
during  the  night  by  something  uniisual  occurring,  and  saw  distinctly  a
curious  flame-like  light^  at  the  end  of  her  bed,  which  took  no  definite  shape
but  faded  away  and  left  the  room  again  dark.  She  said  she  was  quite
sure  that  something  had  happened  to  a  near  relative  who  was  then  in
London.  My  father  tried  to  reassure  my  mother,  but  she  was  not  to  be
dissuaded  from  her  presentiment  of  evil.  A  few  days  afterwards
we  received  letters  from  England  informing  us  that  the  relative  in
question  had  had  a  sudden  and  dangerous  illness — in  fact,  a  dangerous
miscarriage — on  the  night  in  question.

"  (6)  I  never  heard  of  any  other  case  of  vision,  or  otherwise,  occurring
to  my  mother,  nor  am  I  aware  of  my  mother  having  been  subject  in  any
way  to  hallucinations  of  the  senses.

"  The  occurrences  I  have  mentioned  were  wide  apart  as  regards  time.
The  first  when  my  mother  was  a  girl  about  16  or  17 ;  next,  as  a
woman  of  about  33  ;  and  last  when  she  was  47  years  of  age."^

Before  this  account  was  received,  the  second  of  the  two  incidents  had
been  described  to  us  by  a  clergyman,  distantly  connected  with  Lady
Sewell,  who  had  heard  her  narrate  it,  and  had  himself  seen  the  lock  of
hair.  Though  correct  as  to  the  main  fact,  his  version,  when  compared
with  the  above,  illustrates  the  difference  which  intimate  connection  with
the  original  witness  makes  in  the  value  of  second-hand  testimony  (see  pp.
322  and  539,  note).  The  figure  is  represented  as  having  appeared  "in  her
shroud,  dripping  wet,  and  with  her  black  hair  cut  quite  short  "  ;  and  "  on
allowing  for  difierence  of  longitude,  it  was  found  that  the  hour  of  the
vision  corresponded  with  the  hour  of  the  death."  Colonel  Fane  Sewell's
account,  it  will  be  observed,  merely  states  that  the  night  corresponded.

(516)  From  the  Rev.  H.  C.  D.  Chandler,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,
Cambridge.  His  sister,  whose  experience  is  recorded,  is  out  of  health,
and  he  would  prefer  not  to  have  her  troubled  for  a  first-hand  account.

1  Compare  cases  253  and  553,    and  see  pp.  193-4.

2  With  respect  to  the  occurrence  of  several  telepathic  experiences  to  the  same
percipient — exemplified  in  E.  Hobson's  and  Colonel  Fane  Sewell's  cases — see  p.  22,  note,
and  p.  77.


480  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  1883.

"  The  following  occurred  about  5  o'clock  a.m.,  on  October  28th,  1853.
My  sister,  then  Eliza  Chandler,  was  visiting  friends  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Killarney,  County  Kerry,  Ireland.  Her  mind  was  quite  composed,  and
her  health  perfectly  good.  She  was  surrounded  by  kind  friends  and  was
of  a  gay  and  bright  disposition,  not  in  the  least  inclined  to  morbidness.
She  had  known  that  her  mother  was  in  declining  health  generally.

"  She  retired  to  rest  on  the  Thursday  evening  as  usual.  About  5
o'clock  on  Friday  morning  she  awoke  suddenly,  and  as  it  seemed  without
cause,  when  she  immediately  became  conscious  of  her  mother's  form  at  the
foot  of  her  bed.  She  sat  up  and  gazed  intently.  She  describes  her
mother's  form  as  though  she  had  risen  from  her  couch,  and  the  face  was
fixed  with  an  earnest  and  loving  gaze  upon  her  child.  The  length  of  time
the  form  remained  I  do  not  remember,  or  whether  that  time  was
mentioned  I  do  not  remember.  My  sister  could  not  rest,  but  rose
and  dressed,  greatly  agitated.  She  at  once  wrote  to  inquire  if  all  was
well,  and  begging  to  hear  from  us.

"  At  the  hour  above  named,  I  was  watching  by  my  mother's  bedside
[at  Bristol],  she  having  been  seized  with  hernia  during  a  severe  fit  of
coughing.  My  mother  had  sunk  rapidly,  and  a  letter  of  mine,  stating  the
nature  of  the  illness  and  its  probable  issue,  had  crossed  my  sister's  letter
to  me.  At  the  hour  of  5  o'clock,  I  was  struck  with  the  change  of  my
mother's  appearance,  and  ran  to  call  a  sister,  who  was  sleeping  near.  On
applying  a  glass  to  the  mouth,  we  found  that  the  breathing  had  ceased,
and  our  mother  was  gone  to  her  rest.  The  same  morning  I  wrote  to
Ireland  telling  the  sad  news,  receiving  the  next  day  my  sister's  letter  telling
of  the  strange  apparition  she  had  seen.

"  My  sister  is  married  and  settled  in  Australia  ;  but  she  could  add
but  little  more  to  the  above  account,  for  each  particular  was  written
indelibly  on  my  memory.  "  H.  C.  D.  Chandleb."

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  whether  he  was  certain  that  the
apparition  had  preceded  the  arrival  of  his  letter  announcing  his  mother's
critical  condition,  he  replied  : —

"  Our  letters  crossed — mine  containing  the  details  of  my  mother's  last
days,  and  my  sister's  telling  the  story  of  the  apparition.  Her  letter  must
have  been  written — as  far  as  we  could  calculate,  I  remember — the  morning-
after  my  mother's  death,  and  solely  in  consequence  of  the  apparition."

The  Bristol  Times  confirms  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Chandler  died  on  Friday,
Oct.  28,  1853.

(517)  From  Lady  Miles,  Leigh  Court,  Bristol.

"August  1st,  1885.

"  My  mother.  Lady  Roche  (wife  of  the  late  Sir  David  Roche,  of  Carap
Croom,  County  of  Limerick,  Ireland)  was  very  much  beloved  by  her  cousin,
the  [Right]  Hon.  John  Vandeleur,  and  at  the  moment  of  his  death  he
came  to  say  good-bye  to  her.  She  woke  from  sleep  at  4  a.m.,  and  saw  him,
wrapped  up  in  something  black,  standing  near  the  lower  curtain  of  her
bed.  She  woke  her  husband,  and  said,  '  Why,  there  is  the  Hon.  John  at
the  bottom  of  the  bed  ! '  Sir  David  told  her  she  was  dreaming,  and  to  rub
her  eyes  ;  but,  as  she  still  afiirmed  it,  he  got  up  and  pulled  the  curtain
away,  lit  the  candles,  and  stood  where  she  said  the  appearance  was.     She


IV.]  ''  BORDERLAND"    CASES.  481

said,  '  I  see  him  now,  standing  next  you,  waving  his  hand  in  farewell  to
me.'  He  faded  away,  and  disappeared.  It  was  afterwards  known  that
this  gentlemen  died  50  miles  off,  of  a  paralytic  seizure.

"  A  brother  of  this  lady,  Mr.  George  Vandeleur,  of  Ballynamona,
Co.  Clare,  also  saw  his  servant  at  the  moment  of  his  death.  The  man  was
sent  to  Limerick  on  an  errand,  got  drunk,  and  fell  off  a  cart,  the  wheel  of
which  passed  over  his  throat.

"  These  two  cases  are  quite  authentic,  and  known  to  many  people.

"  F.  E.  Miles."

We  find  the  date  of  Mr.  J.  Vandeleur's  death  given  in  Saunders'
Newsletter  as  November  9,  1828.

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Lady  Miles  says  : —

"  With  regard  to  my  mother  seeing  the  Hon.  John  Yandeleur.  She
saw  him  a  few  minutes  after  his  death.  She  was  living  at  a  house  in
Limerick,  and  he  died  at  Kilrush.  I  heard  the  account  from  my  father
and  mother  dozens  of  times  when  a  girl.  My  mother  was  not  an
imaginative  woman,  or  inventive.  She  died  in  1841.  I  have  been  living
over  30  years  in  England,  and  have  a  good  deal  lost  sight  of  anyone  who
could  authenticate  all  this,  though  everyone  knew  about  it  at  the  time.

"  My  uncle  who  saw  his  servant  is  dead.  It  happened  at  Carap,
Oo.  Limerick,  about  the  year  1836."

In  conversation.  Lady  Miles  told  me  that  her  uncle  was  dressing  in  the
morning,  when,  looking  round,  he  saw  the  figure  of  his  servant,  with  blood
about  it,  and  addressed  it,  thinking  it  was  the  man  himself.  She  was  in  the
house  at  the  time,  and  later  she  heard  the  account  from  her  uncle's  own  lips.

(518)  From  Mme.  Vavin,  nee  Girard,  a  relative  of  our  friend,  M.  Ch,
Richet,  who  copied  the  account  from  a  letter  addressed  to  himself.

"  1885.

"  Ma  mere,  etant  veuve,  avait  ete  tres  aimee  et  demandee  en  mariage
par  un  jeune  professeur  de  Caen.  Ayant  quitte  la  ville  et  epouse  M.
Caillaux,  elle  avait  cesse  toute  relation  avec  M.  Roger,  et  n'en  entendit
plus  parler  depuis  trois  ou  quatre  ans.  Une  nuit,  ^tant  absolument
dveillde,  elle  vit  une  forme  blanchatre,  comme  une  vapeur,^  se  pencher  trois^
fois  sur  son  lit,  comme  pour  lui  dire  adieu.  Elle  eut  alors,  sans  pouvoir
s'en  rendre  bien  compte,  le  sentiment  que  c'etait  M.  Roger  qui  lui  disait
adieu.  Tres  emue,  elle  ne  parla  de  la  chose  a  personne  ;  mais,  une
huitaine  de  jours  apres,  elle  apprit  la  mort  de  M.  Roger,  mort  survenue  la
nuit  m^me  ou  elle  avait  eu  cette  apparition.     Elle  ne  le  savait  pas  malade."

Mme.  Vavin  adds  the  following  experience  of  her  own  : —

"  Pour  moi,  mes  souvenirs  sont  plus  vagues,  ^tant  plus  lointains.
Mon  pere  est  mort  a  pen  pres  subitement.  Je  I'avais  quitte  la  veille,  au  soir,
gai  et  bien  portant.  Dans  la  nuit  une  voix,  comme  un  soufile,  et  pour
ainsi  dire  sans  parole,  ^  me  fit  comprendre  que  mon  pere  etait  mort  Le
lendemain,  lorsque  on  entra  dans  ma  chambre,  je  me  jetai  en  pleurant  dans
les  bras  de  ma  bonne  en  lui  disant,  '  Je  sais  que  papa  est  mort.'  Je
n'avais  vu  ni  forme,  ni  apparition  d'aucune  sorte.     J'avais  neuf  ans.

"  Marguerite  Vavin."

^  See  case  193,  and  the  first  note  thereto.  ^  gee  p.  229,  note.

^  This  was  probably  an  instance  of  the  inward  and  soundless  form  of  hallucination
described  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  480.

VOL.  II.  2    I


482  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(519)  From  Miss  Osborne,  10a,  Cunningham  Place,  N.W.    u  1883.

"  This  story  I  have  heard  my  mother  relate,  but  as  she  and  my  aunt
(to  whom  this  incident  occurred)  are  both  dead,  I  can  only  tell  it  as  I
remember  it.  I  was  a  child  when  it  happened.  My  aunt,  Mrs.  Fairman,
was  living  in  Portugal,  and  had  not  been  in  London  for  some  years.  Her
half-sister  (with  whom  she  had  no  especial  sympathy)  married  a  Mr.
Moore,  whom  Mrs.  Fairman  had  never  seen.  About  a  year  after  that
marriage,  Mrs.  Fairman  was  making  arrangements  to  give  a  party.  One
night  she  awoke,  and  saw  her  sister  sitting  by  her  bedside,  and  a  gentle-
man standing  by  her.^  She  heard  her  sister  say,  'I  shall  die,  I  shall  die  !  '
She  woke  her  husband,  and  told  him  what  she  had  seen.  He,  angry  at
being  disturbed,  said  it  was  all  nonsense.  At  last  she  slept,  but  woke  again,
seeing  the  same  thing.  ^  She  again  woke  her  husband,  who  used  stronger
language  than  before.  So  impressed  was  Mrs.  Fairman  with  the  feeling  she
should  hear  of  the  death  of  her  sister,  that  she  ordered  all  arrangements
for  the  proposed  party  to  be  stopped;  and  in  the  time  a  letter  could  reach
her,  one  came  to  say  Mrs.  Moore  had  died  at  the  time  she  had  seen  her.

"  I  think  it  was  about  two  years  after  this,  Mrs.  Fairman  returned  to
England.  She  had  never  seen  any  portrait  of  Mr.  Moore,  who  was  a
very  ordinary  person,  with  no  marked  characteristics.  She  was  walking
with  my  mother  in  Oxford  Street,  when  she  suddenly  said,  '  Mary,  that  is
the  man  I  saw  with  Julia  at  my  bedside.'     It  was  really  Mr.  Moore."

[The  final  incident  here  recalls  the  conclusion  of  the  Wynyard  case
(No.  357),  where  there  is  some  doubt  what  the  exact  facts  were ;  but  the
point  is  not  one  likely  to  have  crept  into  either  narrative  without  some
foundation.  The  fact  that  Miss  Osborne's  mother  was  a  witness  of  the
recognition  makes  the  account  a  second-hand  (not  a  third-hand)  one,  as
far  as  that  item  is  concerned.]

(520)  From  a  lady,  known  to  the  present  writer,  who  prefers  that  her
own  name  should  not  be  printed.  The  evidence  is  on  a  par  with  second-
hand (Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note).  "Aug.  25th,  1886.

"  My  father  was  a  marine  officer  on  board  his  Majesty's  ship .

Crossing  the  Atlantic,  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  the  medical  gentleman
told  him  that  his  mother  had  appeared  to  him  and  distinctly  said,
*  Andrew,  Andrew,  mend  your  ways,  or  you  will  never  be  where  I  am.'
Sir  James  Malcolm  [the  narrator's  father]  advised  him  to  write  down  the
date  and  hour,  which  Dr.  Douglas  ^  did,  and  afterwards  wrote  that  his
mother  had  died  the  day  and  hour  precisely  as  she  appeared  to  him.  I
have  often  heard  my  father  mention  the  circumstance."

Another  daughter  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm's  writes  (Sept.  23,  1886),  "I
have  often  heard  the  story  of  Dr.  Campbell's  vision — it  was  not  a
dream — told  to  Sir  J.  in  the  morning,  who  advised  him  to  note  it  down."
She  thinks  that  the  incident  took  place  in  the  West  Indies,  in  1806  or
not  long  after,  and  gives  the  name  of  the  ship  as  the  "  Canopus."  We  have
ascertained  from  the  Record  Office  that  the  "  Canopus  "  was  in  the  West

1  As  to  the  appearance  of  the  second  figure,  compare  case  511  above,  and  see  Vol.  i.,
pp.  545-6.

2  Compare  case  503,  and  see  p.  237,  note.

3  The  name  seems  to  have  been  Campbell.  The  mistake  is  due  to  the  fact  that  Sir
J.  Malcolm  had  another  medical  friend,  named  Douglas,  to  whom  this  incident  was  knowm.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"    CASES.  483

Indies  at  that  time,  but  that  no  doctor  of  the  name  of  Campbell  was
officially  attached  to  her  during  the  years  1806-12.

[We  may  charitably  hope  that  the  words  heard  were  a  contribution  of
the  percipient's  own  mind,  and  merely  betokened  a  wholesome  sense  of
parental  superiority.  I  have  drawn  attention  to  the  suspicious  exactitude
of  the  coincidence  in  many  of  the  second-hand  cases.]

From  Mr.  Edward  Butler,  7,  Park  Square,  Leeds.  I  do  not  number
the  case,  as  the  evidence  is  possibly  third-hand.  "  June  21st,  1884.

"  The  enclosed  account  of  my  brother's  apparition  has  been  read  by  my
cousin  Fanny,  a  lady  of  singular  accuracy  of  mind  and  entire  trust-
worthiness, who  was  one  of  the  first  (if  not  the  first)  to  hear  the  tale,  from
my  mother  herself,  I  think.  It  exactly  agrees  with  her  recollection,  and
may,  I  fully  believe,  be  relied  on  as  accurate.

"  In  the  year  1857,  my  brother  was  in  the  Civil  Service  of  India,  and
was  stationed  in  Bengal  as  a  judge  or  magistrate  and  collector.  For
anything  we  knew  he  was  perfectly  well,  and  had  very  good  prospects  in
his  profession.  One  morning  early — it  was  the  height  of  summer — my
mother  was  lying  awake,  and  it  was  clear  dawn.  She  saw  my  brother  stand
at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  There  was  nothing  noticeable  in  his  dress.  His
face  wore  an  exceedingly  tranquil  and  pleasant  expression,  and  my  mother
felt  no  fear.  I  do  not  know  how  long  the  vision  lasted.  When  it  dis-
appeared my  mother  woke  my  father,  and  said,  'I  have  seen  Wells.'  They
made  a  note  of  the  day  and  hour.  There  was  no  Indian  telegraph  in  those
days,  and  some  weeks  elapsed  before  they  received  from  an  official  source
in  India  news  of  my  brother's  sudden  death,  which  must  have  taken  place
just  about  the  time  of  the  apparition.  My  brother's  appearance  was
always  regarded  by  my  mother  as  a  merciful  and  kindly  thing.  It  pre-
pared her  for  the  news,  and  broke  the  shock.

"  I  think  my  mother  was  by  organisation  open  to  delicate  impulses  or
impacts  from  subtle  exterior  agencies,  if  such  there  be ;  for  I  remember
her  telling  me,  amongst  other  things  now  forgotten,  that  once  she  had  an
unaccountable  conviction  that  she  ought  to  go  and  see  an  old  schoolfellow,
who  had  been  long  separated  from  her,  and  whose  very  name,  indeed,  she
had  almost  ceased  to  recall.  She  subsequently  heard  that  this  old  school-
fellow had  died  about  that  time,  and  on  her  deathbed  had  said,  '  Oh,  I  wish

I  could  see  Anne ,'  naming  my  mother's  maiden  name.

"  Edwaed  Butler."

We  find  from  the  East  India  Service  Register  and  from  Allen^s  Indian
Mail,  that  Mr.  Wells  Butler  died  on  June  20,  1859  (not  1857)— which
accords  with  the  above  statement  that  the  time  was  "  the  height  of  summer."

Miss  Frances  Butler,  of  11,  Gloucester  Road,  Teignmouth,  on  being
asked  whether  she  heard  the  account  from  the  percipient's,  Mrs.  H.  Butler's,
own  lips,  replied  (on  April  19,  1886)  that  she  could  not  recollect  whether
she  heard  it  from  Mrs.  H.  Butler  or  from  her  own  mother,  Mrs.  H.
Butler's  sister.  A  sister  of  Mr.  Butler's  tells  Professor  Barrett  that  she
remembers  being  told  of  this  incident  shortly  after  it  took  place.  Mr.  Butler
regrets  not  having  questioned  his  mother  on  the  subject,  but  he  feared  to
make  her  uncomfortable.

(521)  From  Mr.  David  Crombie,  2,  Breakspear  Road,  St.  John's,  S.E.
VOL.   IL  2   I   2


484  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  1884.

"  My  eldest  brother,  John,  left  home  when  I  was  very  young,  to  become
an  apprentice  to  Captain  Wallace,  trading  to  the  East  Indies.  [He  had
been  away  for  about  three  years,  but  was  returning,  and  was  daily  expected,
when]  my  mother  had  a  vision  in  which  she  saw  him,  wearing  a  most  careworn
and  anxious  look,  enter  the  bedroom,  and  so  distinct  was  the  vision  that
she  awoke  my  father,  who  was  sleeping  at  her  side,  exclaiming,  '  John,'
(my  father's  name),  '  there's  Johnnie.'  He  immediately  sat  up,  and
subsequently  got  out  of  bed,  and  went  out  on  to  the  landing  to  see  if  his
boy  had  really  arrived  ;  finding  all  quiet,  and  having  gone  downstairs  to
see  if  the  front  door  were  fastened,  he  returned  to  bed,  not  over  well
pleased  at  having  been  sent  on  this  wild-goose-chase.

"  Next  night,  about  the  same  time,  my  mother  declared  she  again  saw
Johnnie,  looking  so  flushed  and  ill,  and  again  called  my  father's  attention
to  the  apparition,  which,  however,  he  did  not  see,^  and  on  this  occasion  he
did  not  leave  his  bed.  On  the  third  night  she  again  saw  the  apparition,
this  time  as  white  as  a  sheet ;  it  smiled  and  passed  away.
My  father  saw  what  a  deep  impression  these  visions  had  made  on  her
mind  ;  and,  without  her  knowing  it,  he  made  an  entry  in  cypher  on  the  fly-
leaf of  the  old  folio  family  Bible,  to  see  if  it  were  possible  that  his  death
could  have  been  foretold  in  this  extraordinary  way.

"  The  visions  had  indeed  made  an  indelible  and  sorrowful  impression  on
my  mother's  mind,  and,  as  the  saying  goes,  she  was  full  of  it ;  and  to  her
immediate  and  most  intimate  friends  she  had  related  all  the  circumstances,
and  her  own  fears  in  connection  with  them.  Of  those  to  whom  she  had
communicated  the  facts  were  Mrs.  and  Miss  Wallace,  mother  and  sister
respectively  of  the  captain  with  whom  my  brother  sailed  ;  Misses  Jarvis,
two  maiden  aunts ;  Miss  Bartlett  and  Mrs.  Lowe,  widow  of  a  sea-captain.

"  As  time  wore  on  the  vessel  at  length  arrived,  and  shortly  thereafter
a  letter  was  delivered  with  a  black  seal,  announcing  my  brother's  illness
and  death,  which,  on  reference  to  the  memorandum,  occurred  at  the  very
time  the  dreams  were  dreamed.  The  captain,  in  writing,  gave  an  extract
from  the  entry  in  the  log.  Then  my  father,  who  had  no  faith  in  dreams,
for  the  first  time  in  his  life  was  compelled  to  admit  that  in  this  case  there
seemed  to  be  good  grounds  for  believing  in  them.

"  On  the  morning  following  the  announcement  of  my  brother's  death,
I  was  requested  to  deliver  a  number  of  notes  with  intimation  of  his  death
to  many  of  our  personal  friends  ;  amongst  them  were  those  whose  names  I
have  given  above.  On  my  return  home,  I  was  naturally  asked  what  they
had  said  after  reading  the  notes.  Mrs.  Wallace  said,  '  Dear  me,  then
Elfie's '  (my  mother's  name)  '  dream  has  come  true.'  A  similar  remark
was  made  by  her  aunts,  the  Misses  Jarvis.  Mrs.  Lowe  sent  condolences,
and  said  my  mother's  fears  had  been  too  well  founded.

"  As  I  did  not  understand  what  they  referred  to  I  asked  what  they
meant,  and  for  the  first  time  I  learned  all  the  particulars  ;  and  although  I
could  only  have  been  between  6  and  7  years  old,  [55  years  ago]  the
facts  left  an  impression  on  my  mind  that  time  has  not  effaced.  Of
course,  the  story  was  often  repeated  in  my  presence  afterwards,  thereby
keeping  it  fresh  in  my  memory,  and  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  the
details  so  far  as   came  under  my  personal  knowledge.  "  D.  C."

^  See  p.  105,  second  note.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  485

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Crombie  says  : —

"  The  parties  named  are  dead  from  25  to  40  years  ago.  My  brother
died  of  scarlet  fever,  which  ran  its  course  with  remarkable  swiftness.
The  death  occurred  on  the  day  my  mother  had  the  third  dream."

[In  conversation  on  July  28th,  1884,  Mr.  Crombie  told  me  that  he
remembers  seeing  the  entry  in  the  Bible,  after  the  news  arrived,
and  that  it  was  pointed  to  as  proof  of  the  correspondence  of  dates.  He
describes  his  mother  as  the  very  opposite  of  a  visionary.  The  visions  were
naturally  enough  regarded  as  dreams  by  the  persons  to  whom  they  were
told  ;  but  Mr.  Crombie  is  convinced  that  his  mother  was  awake,  and  points
to  his  father's  conduct,  on  being  woke,  as  evidence  of  this.  I  must  point
out  that  a  repetition  of  the  sort  here  described,  on  three  successive  nights,
has  not  been  alleged  in  any  of  our  first-hand  telepathic  cases  ;  ^  and  it  is
the  kind  of  detail  that  may  very  naturally  have  got  imported  into  the
narrative  (see  p.  229,  note;  but  see  also  p.  237,  note).  But  it  is  not,  of
course,  vital  to  the  evidence.]

(522)  From  Miss  J.  Connolly,  of  21,  Wickham  Road,  New  Cross,
S.E.,  head-mistress  of  a  high  school  for  girls.  u  ^pj-ij  4^}^   1885

"  One  Christmas  my  father  was  invited  to  spend  his  college  vacation
with  a  very  dear  and  valued  friend,  a  Mrs.  Brown.  However,  as  he  was
also  invited  by  my  grandfather,  he  preferred  to  accept  that  invitation,
glad  of  the  opportunity  of  meeting  my  mother.  The  house  was  a  large
one,  and  full  of  Christmas  guests.  One  night  there  was  a  dinner-party  of
friends  from  the  neighbourhood.  After  dinner  such  a  storm  arose  that  my
grandmother  found  herself  obliged  to  provide  everyone  with  beds  for  the
night.  .  .  .  My  grandmother,  to  arrange  for  her  unexpected  company,
gave  up  the  young  men's  bedrooms  to  the  ladies,  and  turned  the  library
into  a  sort  of  barrack  room  for  the  night.

"At  3  o'clock,  my  Uncle  William  spoke  to  my  father,  who  was  sleeping
near  him,  and  said,  '  James,  who  are  you  talking  to  ;  what  are  you  saying  ? '
My  father  raised  himself  up,  looked  at  his  watch,  and  replied,  'I
have  seen  a  vision.  Mrs.  Brown  has  been  standing  at  my  feet,  and  she
said,  "  Good-bye,  James !  I  wished  greatly  to  see  you,  to  say  good-bye
to  you  before  I  left  this  world,  and  I  have  now  come  to  you.  Serve  God
and  be  a  good  man,  and  He  will  prosper  and  bless  you.  I  have  loved
you  so  dearly  from  the  time  you  were  a  boy,  that  I  had  to  say  good-bye.
But  let  us  meet  again."     She  waved  her  hand  and  disappeared.'

"  Both  the  young  men  were  much  impressed,  and  in  the  morning  my
father  told  my  grandmother  of  the  dream  or  vision.  She  advised  him  to
write  an  ordinary  letter,  just  inquiring  about  Mrs.  Brown  and  her
daughters.     Letters  then  cost  tenpence,   and  were  not  written  on  slight

1  Since  this  was  written,  however,  I  have  received  an  account  from  Mrs.  Perryn,  of
27,  Adrian  Square,  Westgate-on-Sea,  in  which  she  states  that,  when  crossing  the  Atlantic
in  November,  1863,  she  dreamt  with  unusual  vividness,  on  three  successive  nights,  that  a
fire  broke  out  in  the  cellar  of  her  brother's  house,  and  that  he  was  wrapped  in  flames — the
fact  being  that  on  the  first  of  the  three  nights  he  was  fearfully  injured  by  an  explosion  of
some  chemicals  with  which  he  was  experimenting  in  his  cellar.  Mrs.  Perryn  did  not  know
that  he  experimented  with  chemicals  ;  can  recall  no  other  instance  of  dreams  repeated  on
successive  nights  ;  is  not  in  the  habit  of  having  distressing  dreams  ;  and  described  the
accident  in  writing  to  her  sisters  "  exactly  as  it  happened,"  before  hearing  the  news.  But
a  dream-experience  is,  as  we  have  seen,  indefinitely  weaker  evidence  than  an  analogous
case  of  the  "borderland "  or  the  waking  class.


486  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

occasions.  My  father  did  write,  but  a  letter  crossed  his,  saying  that  at  3
o'clock  on  the  very  night  of  his  dream,  Mrs.  Brown  had  died,  and  her
last  conscious  words  were  regrets  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  see  him
to  say  good-bye.

"  My  father  never  much  liked  telling  this  story.  He  firmly  believed
he  had  seen  a  vision.  I  have  heard  it  from  his  lips,  and  I  have  seen  the
two  letters  which  crossed  each  other  in  the  post.  My  father  was  the
Rev.  James  Campbell  Connolly,  Chaplain  of  Woolwich  Dockyard."

In  reply  to  inquiries.  Miss  Connolly  writes,  on  April  9,  1885  : —

(1)  "  The  two  letters  that  crossed  in  the  post  were  among  my  mother's
papers,  and  I  have  failed  to  find  them.  She  died  when  I  was  quite  a
child,  and  I  heard  her  tell  the  story  and  show  the  letters,  not  thinking  that
I  was  listening.  My  dear  father  died  just  two  years  ago,  in  the  full
possession  of  his  faculties,  and  I  heard  it  twice  from  his  own  lips.

(2)  "  The  date  is  difiicult.  My  father  married  in  1840,  and  I  should
say,  judging  from  his  ordination,  &c.,  that  it  must  have  been  between
1830  and  1835.  Mrs.  Brown's  daughters  are  both  dead — Mrs.  Daly,  who
married  the  last  Warden  of  Galway,  and  Mrs.  Foley.  Both  these  ladies
told  me  the  story.     They  were  present  at  their  mother's  deathbed.

(3)  "  I  am  certain  my  father  described  the  apparition  as  speaking
directly  to  him."

[In  no  first-hand  case  has  the  sensory  impression  included  so  long  a
remark  as  that  here  recorded.  If  accurately  remembered,  it  probably
indicates  that  the  percipient  was  more  asleep  than  awake ;  but  his  experi-
ence must  apparently  have  been  very  unlike  an  ordinary  dream.]

(523)  From  Mrs.  B.,  an  Associate  of  the  S.P.R.,  whose  full  name  we
are  at  liberty  to  mention,  but  not  to  print.  u  October  30th   1884

"When  I  was  about  16  years  old,  my  father  came  down  to  breakfast
one  morning,   and,  after  saying  he  had  been  awake  a  long  time,  he  said,

'  and  about  5  or  6  '  (I  forget  the  exact  time)    '  I  saw  old  Mr.  ;  he

came  and  stood  by  the  bed  a  minute  or  two,  and  then  went.'  In  the
course  of  the  day  we  heard  of  the  death  of  this  old  gentleman,  of  whose
illness  we  had  previously  known,  but  whose  death  we  had  not  anticipated,
as  it  was  not  thought  his  complaint  was  one  likely  to  cause  death.  On
inquiry,  we  learnt  that  he  had  died  at  the  hour  that  my  father  had  said
he  had  had  a  visit  from  him.

"  My  father  was  a  merry,  strong-minded  man,  with  a  scientific  turn  of
mind  and  a  great  scorn  of  superstition.  He  is,  alas  !  now  dead  some  years,
and  I  don't  think  we  any  of  us  thought  more  of  the  circumstance  than  that
it  was  odd,  but  I  remembered  it."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  died  on  January

10th,  1866,  aged  58,  the  cause  of  death  being  a  contused  wound  on  the
skin,  which  brought  on  erysipelas.

(524)  From  Mrs.  Field,  16,  Clifton  Road,  Brighton.  Her  mother
being  old,  we  did  not  press  for  a  first-hand  account.  "June   1884

"In  the  year  1840,  my  grandfather,  Sir  L.  S.,  was  appointed  Gover-
nor of  the  Island  of  Mauritius ;  and  my  mother  went  to  see  him  and  take
leave  of  him.     My  grandfather  was  getting  old,  and  my  mother  was  in  a


IV.]  "BOBDEBLAND"   CASES.  487

very  delicate  and  precarious   state  of  health,  so  the  probabilities  were
strong  that  she  would  never  see  her  father  again,  and  so  it  turned  out.

"  My  mother  [who  was  living  at  Cheltenham]  had  been  sitting  up  late
one  night,  writing  her  Indian  letters,  intently  finishing  one  to  her  husband,
which  for  some  reason  she  had  rather  delayed  finishing,  and  which,  as
next  day  was  mail-day,  must  be  finished  that  night.  It  was  winter  time,
and  the  fire  was  burning  quite  brightly  in  the  grate  for  some  little  time
after  my  mother  went  to  bed,  which,  on  account  of  her  Indian  letter,  she
had  not  been  able  to  do  till  past  12  o'clock.  She  was  lying  broad  awake,
and  the  room  was  lighted  quite  well  by  the  firelight.  She  had  not  been
thinking  of  anything  but  her  Indian  letter,  and  she  could  not  have  had  the
least  notion  or  fear  her  father  was  dead,  as  he  had  died  suddenly,  after  a
kind  of  seizure,  from  which  he  only  recovered  to  speak  a  few  articulate
words — but  the  fact  that  he  had  been  ill  never  reached  England  until  the
public  official  news  arrived  giving  the  news  of  his  death,  together  with  the
usual  private  letters  giving  all  the  details.  My  mother  was  wide  awake.
The  bed — an  old-fashioned  fourpost — faced  the  fireplace,  and  on  the  side
next  the  window  the  curtains  were  closely  drawn.  Suddenly  my  mother
saw  a  very  tall  figure  of  a  man  (my  grandfather  was  unusually  tall)  pass  the
foot  of  her  bed  slowly.  She  called  out,  '  Who's  there  ? '  in  great  fright,  and
as  she  called  a  hand  opened  the  curtains  on  the  side  where  they  closed,  and
the  same  figure  was  there.  My  mother  sprang  out  of  bed  and  ran  into  the
next  room,  where  the  dear  old  '  C  [a  head-nurse]  slept  with  my  two  little
sisters,  almost  babies.  One  of  these  little  sisters  had  given  the  old  faith-
ful servant  the  name  of  '  Tootoo.'  My  mother  rushed  into  the  babies'
room  calling  out,  'Tootoo,  there's  a  man  in  my  room,  please  get  up  and  call
the  servants.     There  are  robbers  in  the  house.'

"  After  going  back  with  her  mistress,  and  putting  her  to  bed,  the  nurse
got  a  scrap  of  paper,  and  wrote  down  the  hour  and  minute  my  mother  had
rushed  into  the  night-nursery — she,  '  Tootoo,'  feeling  some  bad  news  was
coming,  and  that  my  mother  had  seen  no  living  man.  The  very  next
Mauritius  mails  brought  the  public  papers,  stating  that  at  such  a  time,
giving  the  minutes  even,  the  guns  from  the  fort  gave  notice  to  the  Island
that  the  Governor's  late  illness  had  ended  fatally.  It  appeared  that  his  last
words  had  been  of  his  daughter.  The  time  noted  down  by  '  Tootoo  '  and
the  official  announcement  of  his  death  exactly  agreed.

"  Charlotte  E.  Field."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Field  says  : —

"1.  I  have  often  heard  my  mother's  experience  from  her  own  lips;  but
I  was  only  a  child  at  the  time,  and  she  went  back  to  India  about  three
years  after,  to  rejoin  my  father,  who  was  a  Bombay  Civilian,  and  I  did  not
hear  her  speak  of  this  experience  of  hers  till  she  came  home  again.  This
would  be  in  all  quite  10  years  after  my  grandfather's  death,  but  '  Tootoo  '
used  often  to  talk  to  me  about  it,  when  she  was  with  us,  as  I  have  men-
tioned in  the  account  I  sent  you.  I  never  saw  the  entry  of  date.  '  Tootoo  '
used  often  to  say  to  me  it  was  a  pity  perhaps  she  had  not  kept  it.  She
did  keep  it  for  some  little  while,  but  in  moving  house  she  lost  it.  It  was
just  hastily  pencilled  down  on  a  morsel  of  paper.

"2.  The  difference  of  longitude  was  carefully  accounted  for.  My
mother's  'apparition,'  or  whatever  it  was,  came  to  her  between  12  and  1
at  night — nearer  1  than  12.


488  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  3.  No,  I  have  never  heard  that  my  mother  ever  saw  any  other  vision.
She  is,  I  should  say,  not  an  imaginative  person,  and,  besides,  as  she  had  no
idea  her  father  was  even  ill,  she  could  not  have  imagined  she  saw  him,  and
no  one  ever  mentioned  to  her  the  fact  of  '  Tootoo's  '  entry  of  date  till  the
official  date  came  home  in  the  public  papers  ;  and  then  my  mother  remarked
to  'Tootoo,'  who  often  told  me  what  she  had  said,  'Oh,  then,  'Tootoo,'  that
must  have  been  my  father  I  saw  that  night  I  was  so  frightened — not  a
robber  as  I  thought.'  My  mother  has  often  told  us  she  had  made  this
remark  to  '  Tootoo.'  "

The  Army  List  confirms  the  date  of  Sir  L.  S.'s  appointment,  and  gives
January  2nd,  1842,  as  the  date  of  his  death.  The  Mauritius  Register  and
the  Times  add  that  he  died  suddenly.

(525)  Mr.  Thomas  Young,  of  Elsinore  House,  Robert  Road,  Hands-
worth,  Birmingham,  sent  us  an  account  of  the  following  incident,  as
"often  related"  to  him  by  his  mother  (resident  at  71,  Highbury  Hill,  N.).
We  asked  him  to  apply  to  her  for  a  first-hand  account,  which  she  gave
in  the  following  letter  to  him,  and  afterwards  viva  voce  to  the  present
writer.  Her  version,  which  was  given  independently,  corresponds  exactly
with  his ;  which  is  some  proof  that  the  facts  have  not  been  distorted,  in
recent  years  at  any  rate,  through  lapse  of  memory.

"January  10th,  1885.

"  My  Dear  Son, — You  ask  me  to  relate  Aunt  Lucy's  dream  %  it  was
not  a  dream,  but  a  reality.  You  must  know  that  Uncle  Bennet  was  a
small  farmer,  with  a  large  family  of  12  children,  consequently  some  had  to
go  away  from  home.  They  lived  in  a  small  village,  Trelyon,  near  St.
Ives,  Cornwall.  Now,  what  I  am  going  to  relate  is  about  their  daughter
Betsy,  who  had  taken  a  situation — I  think  at  St.  Ives.  One  morning
aunt  woke  up  and  saw,  standing  by  her  bedside,  this  daughter,  with  her
hair  streaming  all  over  her  face,  dripping  wet,  and  she,  poor  thing,  look-
ing half  drowned.  Aunt  said,  '  Betsy,  where  have  you  come  from  ? '  The
weather  being  frightfully  bad,  she  thought  she  had  walked  home  through
the  wet.  She  told  her  to  go  and  dry  herself,  but  she  vanished  away.
Poor  aunt  was  dreadfully  alarmed.  They  sent  to  her  place,  and  it  appears
she  would  go  to  Plymouth,  and  went  in  a  little  saiKng-vessel,  and  that
very  morning  the  vessel  was  lost  and  all  hands  perished.  Now,  my  dear
son,  I  can  vouch  for  every  word  being  true,  for  aunt  was  a  true  Christian
woman.  I  was  a  girl  when  she  told  me  the  unhappy  incident,  but  it
always  made  a  most  vivid  impression  on  me. — Believe  me,  dear  son,  your
loving  mother,  "C.Young."

In  conversation  Mrs.  Young  mentioned  that  she  heard  of  this  inci-
dent within  a  day  or  two  of  its  occurrence,  and  that  from  her  aunt's
manner  it  made  a  very  strong  impression  on  her.  She  was  about  14  at
the  time,  which  would  make  the  date  about  1825.  Her  aunt  was  a  busy,
practical  woman,  with  no  turn  and  no  time  for  fancies.  The  cause  of  the
girl's  sudden  departure,  Mrs.  Young  thinks,  was  not  known.  We  have
endeavoured  to  find  a  record  of  the  accident,  but  have  failed,  not  knowing
the  name  of  the  vessel.

(526)  From  Miss  Caulfield,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  N.W.  Her  father
was  Commander  Edwin  T.  Caulfield,  of  Raheendufie,  Queen's  Co.,  and  of
Beckford  House,  Bath.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"    CASES.  489

"December  8th,  1883.

"When  my  father  was  at  sea  in  H.M.S.  '  Lavinia,'  he  was  very
intimate  with  two  midshipmen,  John  Frederick  J.,  and  T.  [The  full
names  were  given  in  confidence.]  They  had  as  yet  formed  but  few
opinions  as  to  the  truth  of  Divine  Revelation ;  although  all  more  or  less
religiously  disposed,  and  anxious  to  learn.  The  fact  of  there  being  a
future  state,  and  that  one  of  probation  or  retribution,  was  more  especially
under  discussion  between  them.  To  solve  this  mystery  for  the  survivors,
they  pledged  themselves  to  one  another,  that  were  it  permitted  to  give  an
intimation  of  the  reality  of  an  existence  after  death,  the  man  that  died
first  should  show  himself  to  the  others.^

"  My  father  was  taken  prisoner,  and  was  by  great  interest  placed  on
his  parole,  during  two  years  in  France  ;  and  one  night, — whether  waking
or  sleeping,  he  said  he  could  not  tell — he  saw  T.  appear.  At  once  he
realised  the  fact  that  he  was  dead,  and  that  he  had  come  to  redeem  his
promise.  He  asked  him  whether  he  was  happy  ;  to  which  the  apparition
replied  by  slowly  swaying  his  head  to  and  fro,  with  a  sad  expression,  and
a  sound  as  of  the  clanking  of  chains  accompanied  the  gesture.  He  then
vanished.  How  soon  afterwards  my  father  received  news  of  his  friend,  I
am  unable  to  say ;  but  he  was  informed  of  his  having  been  killed  on  board
ship  by  the  fall  of  a  '  block '  from  the  rigging  (I  think  during  action),
which  caused  instantaneous  death.

"  John  Frederick  J.  had  passed  his  examination,  and  was  a
lieutenant  at  the  time  of  his  death.  My  father  was  again  in  bed —
whether  awake,  in  a  trance,  or  sleeping,  he  could  not  say ;  he  believed  he
was  dreaming,  but  it  seemed  like  being  awake.  His  friend  and  shipmate
J.  appeared  to  him.  At  once  recognising  the  fulfilment  of  the  agree-
ment made  between  them,  he  knew  that  he  was  dead ;  and  asked  him  the
same  question  as  he  did  his  friend  T. ;  to  which  an  exactly  similar
reply  was  made,  i.e.,  by  the  slow  swaying  of  the  head,  accompanied  by  the
sound  as  of  the  clanking  of  chains.  In  due  time  my  father  was  apprised  of
the  death  of  this  friend  also  ;  who  had  had  his  arm  and  shoulder  blade  torn
away  by  a  cannon  ball,  at  the  storming  of  Algiers.  My  sister  and  I  both
perfectly  recollect  hearing  this  story  from  our  father  on  several  occasions.

"  S.  F.  A.  C."

Miss  Caulfield's  sister  also  signs  her  initials,  "  L.  L.  A."

From  an  examination  of  the  ship's  books  of  H.M.S.  "  Lavinia,"  at  the
Record  Office,  we  find  that  "  T."  joined  that  vessel  in  the  same  year  as
Miss  Caulfield's  father,  1806,  and  that  he  was  killed  by  the  fall  of  a  top-
rail  on  July  14,  1808.  "J."  has  also  been  traced  on  the  books  of  the
"  Lavinia,"  and  seems  to  have  left  that  ship  in  1810.  We  have  received
from  the  Record  Office  a  certificate  to  the  efiect  that  he  was  dangerously
wounded  in  the  attack  on  Algiers  on  Aug.  27,  1816,  and  that  his  "  left
arm  was  removed  at  the  shoulder-joint."  We  find  from  the  Gentleman^ s
Magazine  that  his  death  followed  on  Oct.  3.

If  the  clanking  of  chains  ^  really  formed  a  feature  in  both  these

1  As  to  compacts  of  this  sort,  see  p.  66.  On  the  telepathic  theory,  the  apparent  fulfil-
ment of  the  compact  is  of  course  due  to  a  telepathic  impulse  transmitted  before,  not  after,
death.

2 1  must  point  out  that  this  sound,  being  a  common  feature  in  ghostly  legends,  is  one
not  unlikely  to  get  imported  into  a  second-hand  version  even  of  a  genuine  telepathic  case
See  the  remark  on  the  prevalence  of  the  number  three,  p.  229,  note.


490  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

experiences,  it  seems  an  excellent  instance  of  the  percipient's  investi-
ture of  the  telepathic  impression  with  his  own  dream-imagery
(YoLL,  p.  539).

The  next  case  ought  perhaps  to  be  classed  as  a  dream.  But  the
sense  of  someone's  entrance  into  the  room,  and  presence  by  the  bed
which  the  perceiver  is  conscious  of  actually  occupying,  is  very
characteristic  of  a  semi- waking  state,  and  is  not,  I  think,  a  common
feature  in  dreams  which  are  afterwards  distinctly  recognised  as  such.

(527)  From  the  Rev.  S.  W.  Hanks  (District  Secretary  of  the  American
Seamen's  Friend  Society,  and  well  known  to  Professor  William  James,  of
Harvard,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  S.P.R.).

"  Congregational  House,  Boston.

"April  25th,  1884.

"  Two  of  my  three  brothers  were  sailors.  The  eldest  (D wight)  went  to
sea  when  he  was  1 1  years  old,  and  was  at  sea  most  of  the  time  until  his
death,  at  the  age  of  25  years.  On  one  of  his  voyages  he  was  wrecked,  and
remained  on  the  wreck  nine  days  without  food  or  drink.  After  this  my
mother  never  saw  him,  though  by  a  letter  from  him  to  my  other  brother
she  had  heard  the  particulars  about  the  wreck,  from  which  he  was  taken
off  by  a  passing  vessel.  On  the  night  of  December  5th,  1829,  my  mother
dreamed  that  he  was  dead.  When  she  arose  in  the  morning  she  was
much  affected,  and  during  the  day  she  was  weeping  nearly  all  the  time.
When  asked  what  made  her  think  that  Dwight  was  dead,  she  said  that
in  the  night  he  came  into  her  room,  trembhng,  and  looking  very  pale,
and  said,  '  Mother.''  She  said,  '  Dwight,  what  is  the  matter  "?  I  will  get  up,
and  do  you  come  and  lie  down  upon  my  bed.'  He  rephed,  '  No,  mother,'
and  walked  out  of  the  room.  From  that  time  she  always  spoke  of  his
death  with  the  utmost  confidence.

"In  July,  1830,  my  other  sailor  brother  was  in  New  York,  where  he
was  met  by  a  stranger  who  asked  him  if  he  knew  a  sailor  of  the  name  of
Dwight  Hanhs .?  He  replied,  '  I  have  a  brother  of  that  name  from  whom
I  have  not  heard  for  a  long  time.'  The  stranger  then  said  to  him  that  a
man  by  the  name  of  Dwight  Hanks,  about  25  years  old,  a  little  shorter
than  himself,  and  a  little  lame  from  having  broken  one  of  his  legs  when  he
was  a  boy,  as  he  said,  was  killed  on  board  the  barque,  '  Four  Sons,'  of  a  fall
from  aloft  during  a  storm,  on  the  night  of  December  5th,  1829.  'The
vessel  is  now  in  port,  and  if  you  will  go  with  me  on  board  I  will  tell  you
just  where  he  fell.  We  buried  him  at  sea,  and  his  chest  is  on  board  the
vessel.'  My  brother  went  on  board  and  found  the  statement  of  the
stranger  corroborated.  When  my  mother  heard  of  it  she  said,  '  This  is  no
news  to  me.  I  have  never  had  a  moment's  doubt  about  Dwight's  death
since  the  time  of  my  dream.'

"  These  facts  are  well  remembered  by  myself  and  my  sister,  now  80
years  old.  "  S.  W.  Hanks."

Mr.  Hanks  writes  to  us  on  March  27th,  1885  : —

"  I  inquired  of  my  sister  if  any  memorandum  of  the  date  of  my
mothers's  dream  was  made  at  the   time.     She  informs    me  that  none  has


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  491

been  preserved.  She  informs  me  that  a  cousin  of  ours  was  visiting  the
family  at  the  time,  who  said  of  the  dream  :  '  This  is  so  remarkable  that  I
will  make  a  memorandum  of  it.'  He  did  so.  He  is  now  dead,  and  the
memorandum  is  lost.  My  sister  is  very  confident  about  the  date,  as  she
has  letters  which  she  thinks  fix  it.  She  is  now  in  such  a  state  of  health
that  she  cannot  attend  to  the  matter.  /  did  not  keep  the  date,  but
distinctly  remember  theyac^."

(528)  From  Mrs.  Monteith  Brown,  Oak  Cottage,  Hythe.

"  1884.

"  The  following  is  an  account  told  me  by  my  aunt,  then  Mary  Noble,
of  the  appearance  of  her  brother,  Edward  Meadows  Noble,  at  the  time  of
his  death.  It  took  place  in  the  night,  and  she  was  awoke  by  the
sound  of  water  dripping,  ^  and  saw,  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  her  fourth
brother,  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy,  and  then  serving  in  China.  She  sprang
up  exclaiming,  '  Ned,  what  are  you  doing  here  1 '  when  the  figure  vanished.
In  due  course  of  time,  the  news  came  of  his  having  been  drowned  ofi"
Amoy,  in  China,  about  the  time  of  the  appearance.

"  E.  Adela  Beown."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Brown  adds  : —

"  I  heard  the  story  direct  from  my  aunt,  who  is  since  dead.  On  referring
to  a  naval  biography,  I  find  the  date  of  my  uncle's  death  was  January  22nd,
1843."     This  date  is  confirmed  by  the  United  Service   Magazine.

[This  is  perhaps  a  case  of  hereditary  susceptibility  (see  p.  137,  note)  ;'
for  Mrs.  Brown  tells  us  that  her  grandfather,  Admiral  Noble,  when
flag-lieutenant  to  Lord  Nelson,  had  a  vision,  coinciding  with  death,  of  his
cousin,  Jefiery  Wheelock,  who  was  serving  with  the  Duke  of  York  in
1794.     But  this  is  only  family  tradition.]

(529)  From  Mrs.  Martin,  housekeeper  to  Miss  Anna  Swanwick,  23,
Cumberland  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  N.W.,  who  considers  that  her
memory  is  accurate  and  trustworthy,  in  spite  of  advanced  age.

"  January,  1884.

"When  I  was  about  seven  years  old  [about  1807],  my  cousin,  Joseph
Newton,  a  youth  of  about  17  years  of  age,  whose  mother  and  stepfather
occupied  a  farm  near  Ha  warden,  and  were  tenants  of  Sir  Stephen  Glynn,
came  to  visit  my  mother  in  Liverpool.  He  was  so  delighted  with  the
shipping  that  he  left  the  farm  and  entered  the  establishment  of  a  shipwright.
About  two  years  later,  his  mother,  who  rarely  left  home,  presented  herself
at  my  mother's  house  and  said,  '  I  shall  never  again  see  Joseph.  As  I
lay  awake  last  night,  he  appeared  to  me  naked  and  dripping  with  water.
I  know  that  he  is  drowned.'  This  proved  to  be  the  case.  He  had  gone
with  a  companion  to  bathe  in  the  Mersey,  and  had  been  carried  away  by
the  current.  Seven  or  eight  days  afterwards  his  body  was  seen  floating
in  the  water,  and  was  picked  up  by  a  packet.

"  I  remember  my  aunt's  visit,  and  I  remember  attending  my  cousin's
funeral.  I  cannot  say  that  I  actually  heard  my  aunt  relate  her  dream,
but  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  tell  the  story.  My  mother  and  aunt
are  both  dead.  I  never  heard  that  my  aunt  had  any  similar  dream  at
any  other  time.  "  Susan  Maetin."

1  Compare  the  next  case,  and  cases  513,  535,  537  ;  and  see  p.  26.


492  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Mrs.  Martin  further  states  that  this  was  the  only  occasion  on  which
her  aunt  visited  Liverpool.

It  has  been  impossible  to  trace  the  date  of  this  death,  as  it  occurred
before  the  days  of  registration.

[If  the  narrator  has  really  a  recollection  of  her  aunt's  visit,  which  both
preceded  the  news  of  the  death  and  was  a  consequence  of  the  vision,  her
evidence  is  not  very  far  from  being  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).]

(530)  From  Miss  Jameson,  6,  Leamington  Villas,  Acton.  She  is  the
youngest  daughter  referred  to  in  the  narrative,  being  at  the  time  (1839)
10  years  of  age.     Her  father  was  residing  in  Norfolk.

"  April  30th,  1884.

"  On  a  bright  moonlight  night  in  January,  1839,  an  elderly  gentleman
was  lying  dangerously  ill.  He  was  being  carefully  watched  that  night  by
a  daughter.  During  the  hours  of  from  1 2  midnight  to  2  o'clock,  so  peculiar
were  his  symptoms,  the  daughter  thought  her  father  dying  or  dead,  and
yet  there  seemed  anguish.  In  the  morning,  about  10  o'clock,  the  gentle-
man came  downstairs.  His  youngest  daughter  was  frightened  to  see  her
father  so  altered,  and  well  remembers  his  resting  his  elbow  upon  the
mantelpiece,  with  his  forehead  on  his  hand,  and  also  saying,  '  May  my
Lord  and  Almighty  Father  in  His  Infinite  mercy  grant  that  I  never  may
pass  through  another  such  night.'

"  On  the  same  evening  in  Boulogne,  the  eldest  son  of  the  above  thought
he  would  go  home  early  that  night ;  bright  and  moonlight  ;  retired  to  rest
(but  not  to  sleep)  shortly  after  12  ;  the  room  quite  light.  Not  feehng
sleepy,  he  half  reclined,  resting  his  head  upon  one  hand.  Presently  he
saw  his  bedroom  door  gently  open.  He  roused  himself  to  look  and  see
who  could  be  coming  so  quietly  into  his  bedroom,  when  he  saw  his  father
in  his  night-dress,  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  which  he  distinctly  recognised,
bound  round  his  head.  His  father  came  to  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  stood
and  gazed  at  his  son,  who  steadily  looked  at  him,  pained  to  see  his  father
looking  so  ill.  The  father  quietly  withdrew,  the  door  closed,  the  son
jumped  out  of  bed,  and  dressed  himself  quickly,  walked  about  the  streets
of  Boulogne  with  the  watchman,  to  whom  he  related  occurrence,  at  6  a.m.  re-
turned home,  and  wrote  immediately  to  his  sisters  to  inquire  how  his  father
and  all  at  home  were.  The  letter  caused  great  surprise,  as  it  was  an  unusual
one.  Some  months  after,  he  came  home  upon  a  visit,  when  he  alluded  to
letter,  related  above  incident,  and  said  '  Wait  one  minute.  Just  recollect
which  silk  handkerchief  father  had  round  his  head.  I  will  tell  you  which
I  saw,  and  then  you  will  see  if  I  am  right.'  And  he  was  right.  My
father  was  never  told  of  it.     My  brother  died  over  10  years  since."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Jameson  wrote  : —

"  The  handkerchief  which  was  round  my  father's  head  was,  as  well  as
I  can  describe  it,  of  an  undecided  pattern — colours  blended — scarcely  a
scroll,  and  yet  a  scroll  pattern  is  the  best  name  I  can  give  ;  an  Indian
style  ;  a  border  round,  with  the  colours  less  mixed  ;  red  and  yellow,  but
not  glaring  ;  it  had  been  given  him  at  High  "Wycombe.  No  two  handker-
chiefs the  same  pattern.  I  remember  two  others  very  well  ;  both  larger
in  size  ;  one  used  to  be  called  brindled ;  no  decided  pattern,  but  the  colours
woven  in  ;  a  lady  would  understand  by  my  saying  something  of  a  Paisley


IV.]  '' BORDERLAND"    CASES.  493

shawl  pattern ;  perhaps  you  will  understand  me  better  if  I  say  the  colours
were  so  mixed  as  to  somewhat  resemble  the  tapestry  curtains  of  the
present  day — where  there  is  not  a  decided  pattern.

"E.  M.  Jameson."

In  conversation  Miss  Jameson  told  me  that  she  distinctly  remembers
the  arrival  of  this  letter,  and  the  sensation  it  caused.  It  was  the  fact  of
its  arrival  that  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  family  the  coincidence  of  the
father's  distress  and  the  brother's  anxiety.  Miss  Jameson  gave  a  vivid
description  of  her  father's  aspect  and  words.

Miss  Jameson  has  forwarded  to  us  the  following  letter  from  her  sister,
Mrs.  Large.  ,,  Grange  Cottage,  Taplow.

"November  15th,  1884.

"  In  answer  to  your  request  about  dear  father  and  William,  it  was
this,  as  near  as  I  can  remember.  One  night  William  woke  up,  whether
from  any  noise  or  influence  I  do  not  know,  and  saw  a  figure  at  the  foot  of
his  bed,  like  father,  with  a  countenance  of  extreme  misery.  He  was
frightened,  and  covered  himself  up  with  bedclothes  till  daylight ;  whether
he  slept  or  not  I  know  not.  Upon  comparing  notes  when  he  wrote  to
know  how  we  all  were,  it  seems  that  night  was  the  one  father  suffered  so
intensely  with  the  abscess,  and  thought  he  should  not  live.  I  remember
when  he  came  down  in  the  morning  how  haggard  he  looked  ;  he  quite  up-
set us.  But  he  roused  no  one  in  the  night — why  I  do  not  know.  From
a  remark  he  made,  he  was  thinking  of  William  during  the  night.  That  is
all  I  know.  u  ^    Large."

Miss  Jameson  adds  : —

"  I  think  my  own  version  is  correct,  for  I  am  singularly  correct  in  all
things  bearing  upon  events  of  my  childhood.  I  was  10,  my  sister  18.  I
think  the  impression  made  upon  my  mind  was  more  unmixed,  as  my
brother  was  anything  but  timid ;  the  covering  himself  up,  I  think,  is  mixed
with  another  matter.  "  E.  M.  J."

(531)  From  Mrs.  Harvey,   1,  Rochester  Road,  Camden  Road,  N.W.

"February  26th,  1884.

"  On  February  8th,  1882,  my  eldest  brother  died  at  Croydon,  at  a
quarter  past  6  in  the  morning.  About  6  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  received
notice  of  his  death.  I  wrote  that  same  evening  to  my  aunt  and  uncle,  at
Billericay,  in  Essex.  My  letter  was  received  by  them  the  next  day.  In
the  following  July,  I  visited  my  aunt,  and  on  speaking  of  my  brother's
death  she  said  : —

"  '  On  the  morning  before  I  received  your  letter  I  was  lying  awake,
when  I  distinctly  saw  the  form  of  a  tall  man  appear  at  my  bedside,  and
slightly  bend  over  it.'  I  said,  '  Did  you  really  ? '  She  said,  '  That  I
certainly  did,  and  I  awoke  your  uncle,  and  told  him  ;  I  could  not  discern
features,  but  I  saw  the  form  of  a  man  as  plain  as  could  be.  I  did  not
know  what  to  think  it  meant.'  My  aunt  had  not  heard  of  his  illness,  for
it  was  not  made  known  to  even  his  wife  that  it  was  so  serious ;  his  death
was  therefore  unexpected.  "  M.  Harvey."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  and  place  of  death  by  the  Register  of
Deaths.


494  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

We  are  requested  not  to  publish  the  aunt's  name.  Mrs.  Harvey,  at
my  request,  wrote  to  ask  her  some  questions,  and  I  have  seen  the  reply,
in  which  Mrs.  Harvey's  uncle,  speaking  of  his  wife,  says,  "  All  she  can  say
is  that  it  was  so  "  ;  but  he  expresses  the  strongest  dread  and  dislike  of  the
whole  subject.

(532)  Prom  the  late  Mr.  G.  Wadsworth,  the  narrator  of  case  496  above.i

"  October  21st,  1882.

"In  1837  my  uncle  was  living  in  Birmingham.  My  father,  then
living  in  Jersey,  one  morning  got  up  in  great  perturbation,  having  seen
his  brother  dying,  and  said  to  my  mother  that  he  must  go  at  once  to
Birmingham.  Communication  was  at  that  time  not  very  convenient,  and,
moreover,  expensive,  so  that  my  mother  naturally  dissuaded  a  journey
upon  such  an  extraordinary  assumption ;  but  so  convinced  was  my  father
of  the  force  of  his  vision,  that  he  packed  up  his  portmanteau  ready  for  the
summons  which  he  felt  certain  to  receive ;  and  when  a  few  days  after  he
got  a  letter  from  me,  and  a  parcel  from  the  executor  notifying  the  death,
he  at  once  started  by  return  steamer.

"  My  uncle  at  the  time,  and  for  some  short  time  previously,  was
known  to  be  ailing — not  what  could  be  called  really  dangerously.  The
cause  of  his  death  occurred  after  I  left  him  in  the  evening,  and  before  my
calling  in  the  morning,  so  that  he  may  be  said  to  have  died  suddenly,  so
far  as  was  known  in  Jersey."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place,  very
suddenly,  on  July  29,  1837.

[Here  again  it  is  possible  that  the  experience  was  a  dream  ;  but  the
impression  made  by  it  seems  to  have  been  of  a  very  unusual  kind.]

(533)  From  Mrs.  Harnett,  a  near  relative  of  our  friend.  Miss  Porter,
who  thinks  that  her  memory  may  be  fully  trusted ;  but  the  case  is  very
remote.  «  HoUybank,  Kenley,  Surrey.

"December,  1884.

"  Having  been  requested  to  write  down  the  particulars  of  an  event
which  occurred  in  the  lives  of  my  parents,  I  do  so.

"In  1820,  my  father  and  mother,  both  being  under  50  years  of  age,
and  in  perfect  health,  were  staying  in  Liverpool  (their  residence  being  at
Whitehaven,  in  Cumberland),  names,  Joseph  and  Ann  Mondel.

"  One  night,  the  latter,  sleeping  peacefully,  was  awoke  by  the  former
calling  out : —

"  '  Ann,  I  feel  sure  Anthony  Mathers  is  dead.'

"  '  What  makes  you  think  so  *? '

"  '  He  has  just  been  at  the  bedside,  and  laid  an  icy -cold  hand  on  my
cheek.'

"  '  You  must  have  been  dreaming.'

"  '  Oh,  but  my  cheek  is  still  cold.'

"  The  old  and  much-esteemed  friend  was,  at  the  time,  sojourning  in
one  of  the  West  Indian  islands.  The  season  was  known  to  be  more  than
usually  sickly,  so  the  thought  of  his  danger  might  have  engendered  morbid

1  These  two  cases  perhaps  afford  an  example  of  family  susceptibility  (p.  132,  note).


IV.]  '^  BORDERLAND''  CASES.  495

feelings.  My  father,  as  well  as  my  mother,  was  content  to  rest  in  that
hope,  during  the  weeks  that  must  elapse  ere  the  news  of  that  night's
occurrences  in  Jamaica  could  reach  England.  News  did  arrive,  and
stated  that  on  the  night  referred  to  Mr.  Mathers  succumbed  to  a  sudden
and  most  severe  attack  of  yellow  or  other  West  Indian  fever.

"  As  a  child  I  first  heard  the  tale,  but  often  in  my  presence  was  it
repeated  or  referred  to,  later  in  life,  without  any  change  or  amplification
of  detail.  "  Janet  Harnett."

[We  have  failed  to  trace  the  exact  date  of  the  death.]

(534)  From  Miss  Crommelin,  1,  Edinburgh  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,
S.W.  u  ^prii^  1883.

"  My  brother,  when  at  school,  having  gone  to  bed  one  summer's  night  in

a  dormitory  with  several  other  boys,   heard  young  C ,  who  slept  next

to  him,  call  out,  '  Crommelin  !  Look,  there  is  my  sister  standing  at  the
foot  of  my  bed — see  ! '  My  brother  saw  nothing,  though  he  sat  up.^  It  was
after  nine,  but  still  light,  if  I  remember  rightly.  Young  C still  per-
sisted he  had  seen  her,  in  white.  Next  day  came  a  telegram  :  the  child  in
question  had  died  of  heart  disease,  whilst  saying  her  prayers  at  that  very
hour — she  had  presumably  also  been  wearing  her  white  night-gown.  As
my  brother  is  now  dead,  and  as  we  have  no  knowledge  of  the  schoolfellow
in  question,  this  cannot  be  more  fully  authenticated.

"May  Crommelin."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  that  the  boy's  name  was  Close,
but  Miss  Crommelin  does  not  know  to  what  family  of  Closes  he  belonged.
The  incident  took  place  in  1858,  or  about  that  date,  when  her  brother
was  12  years  old,  and  she  a  little  younger.  She  heard  of  it  from  her
brother  soon  after  the  event.

(535)  From  Mr.  Arthur  Bedford,  Ant's  Hill,  Laugharne,  St.  Clears,
S.  Wales.  This  account  might  have  been  included  with  the  first-hand
evidence,  but  is  placed  here  on  account  of  its  resemblance  to  the  last.

"March  10th,  1884.
"  At  a  large  public  school,  one  winter's  morning,  about  dawn,  all  in  our
dormitory  were  roused  up  by  a  fearful  cry  from  one  of  my  schoolfellows,
who  declared  that  his  father,  dressed  in  a  pea  coat,  with  high  boots  on,  had
appeared  at  his  bedside,  dripping  wet.  Some  days  afterwards  an  account
of  the  foundering  of  the  vessel  he  commanded  in  Yarmouth  Roads  reached
him,  and,  as  well  as  could  be  ascertained,  the  time  of  the  loss  of  the  vessel
corresponded  with  the  appearance  of  this  double  of  my  schoolfellow's
father  at  his  bedside.  The  body  was  recovered  and  found  to  be  dressed  as
described.  I  would  like  to  give  name  and  other  circumstances,  but  the
widow  of  my  schoolfellow  is  alive,  and  I  do  not  know  her  present  residence,
to  ask  permission  for  disclosing  it.  "  Arthur  Bedford."

(536)  From  Mrs.  Gardiner,  30,  Skene  Street,  Macdufi",  N.B.,  who
heard  of  the  incident  from  her  sister  soon  after  its  occurrence.  The
account  was  written  in  1883.  After  narrating  that  about  40  years  before,
when  her  father  was  tenant  of  Mill  of  Boyndie,  a  large  farm  about  two
miles  west  of  Banfi",  three  men  who  had  left  his  service  one  morning  got

1  See  p.  105,  second  note.


496  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

drunk,  pushed  out  to  sea  in  a  boat,  and  were  drowned,  Mrs.  G-ardiner
continues  : —

"  In  the  meantime  nothing  whatever  of  the  movements  of  these  men
was  known  at  the  Mill  of  Boyndie  ;  but  all  the  household  retired  to  rest
at  the  usual  hour.  My  sister,  as  was  her  custom,  locked  all  the  doors,
and  placed  the  keys  on  a  table  beside  her  bed.  She  was  awakened  in  the
middle  of  the  night  by  one  of  the  domestics  coming  to  her,  and  asking  for
the  key  of  the  kitchen  door,  as  two  of  the  three  lads  who  had  left  in  the
morning  had  just  looked  in  at  her  bedroom  window,  as  if  they  were  in
want  of  something.  She  said  she  had  asked  them  what  they  required,
but  they  had  returned  no  answer,  and  having  slowly  moved  down,  left  the
back  of  the  house,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  third  one.  [The  premises
were  searched  without  result.]  A  messenger  arrived  early  next  morning,
saying  that  the  three  young  men  had  been  drowned.  My  sister  is  now
dead,  but  I  am  certain,  if  she  had  been  alive,  she  would  have  corroborated
the  whole  of  the  foregoing  statement."

[The  evidence  here  of  course  depends,  not  on  the  mere  tale  of  a
frightened  servant,  but  on  the  assurance  of  Mrs.  Gardiner's  sister  that  the
fright  related  to  the  apparition  of  certain  persons  whose  death  was  not
known  of  till  next  day.  A  mistake  of  identity  seems  improbable ;  as
though  a  servant,  startled  from  sleep  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  would  be
likely  enough  to  mistake  friends  seeking  admittance  for  tramps  or  burglars,
she  would  not  be  likely  to  mistake  tramps  or  burglars  for  friends.  It
must  be  observed,  however,  that  a  joint  apparition  of  three  persons  who  were
all  dying  at  the  same  time  is  not  a  type  of  which  we  have  any  first-hand
specimens ;  and  though  such  an  event  would  quite  admit  of  a  telepathic
explanation,  it  suggests  a  certain  infusion  of  the  mythical  element.
Clearly,  a  genuine  telepathic  incident  may  be  unconsciously  exaggerated
and  improved,  just  as  much  as  a  spurious  one.]

§  5.  The  remaining  second-hand  cases  are  from  narrators  who  were
not  relatives  of  the  original  witnesses,  but  for  the  most  part  were
thoroughly  intimate  with  them.  None  of  the  cases  are  the  mere
recitals  of  stories  casually  picked  up  without  any  warranty  as  to
their  bona  jides}

(537)  Mr.  Colchester,  of  Bushey  Heath,  Herts,  sends  us  the  following  case
from  a  MS.  work  entitled  Reminiscences  of  the  Bermudas,  written  by  his
late  father,  who  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  narrated  was  assistant-
surgeon  in  the  Royal  Artillery.     The  names  of  the  two  officers.  Lieutenants

1  At  the  same  time,  these  are  specially  the  cases  in  respect  of  which  the  drawbacks
to  transmitted  evidence,  which  were  described  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  149-57,  must  be  carefully  borne
in  mind.  For  example,  the  narrator  of  the  last  case  described  to  us  how  a  friend  of
hers,  the  late  Dr.  Smith,  of  Banff,  when  a  medical  student,  woke  and  "distinctly
saw 'a  brother,"  who,  it  proved,  died  at  the  time.  But  we  afterwards  obtained
an  accoimt  from  Mrs.  Findlater,  of  Dufftown,  N.B.,  a  daughter  of  the  percipient,  in
which  it  was  stated  that  he  always  expressly  denied  having  seen  any  apparition,  or
recognisable  form.  He  was  only  conscious  of  his  bed-curtains  shaking,  and  of  a
shadow  passing  before  him.  The  point  remains  that  a  strong  impression  of  his  brother's
death  was  conveyed  to  him  (though  the  death  was  quite  unexpected),  and  that  he  rose
and  marked  the  time  in  vvTiting,  and  next  day  mentioned  his  experience  to  a  friend,
Mr.  Falconer.  Still  the  case,  already  second-hand  and  remote,  is  so  much  weakened  by
the  correction  that  we  do  not  include  it  in  our  evidence.


IV.]  '^ BORDERLAND"  CASES.  497

Creagh  and  Liston,  were  given  in  initial  in  the  MS.  The  author  heard
of  the  occurrence  from  Lieutenant  Creagh  (whom  he  describes  as  "a
highly  honourable  man  "),  and  made  a  written  note  of  it,  some  months,  or
perhaps  a  year,  after  it  happened.     The  account  is  somewhat  abridged.

"  The  passage  from  Bermuda  to  Halifax  is  in  certain  seasons  hazardous,
and  in  1830  a  transport,  containing  over  200  men,  foundered  at  sea
between  these  two  ports.  Two  officers  of  the  regiment  to  which  the
detachment  had  belonged  had,  in  a  half -jesting  way,  made  a  sort  of  promise
that  whoever  died  first  should  come  back  if  he  could,  and  let  the  other
know  whether  there  was  another  world.^  This  conversation  was  heard  by
the  narrator,  as  it  took  place  in  his  presence,  perhaps  a  year  before  the
events  happened,  though  not  remembered  till  afterwards.  Liston  embarked
in  charge  of  the  detachment,  and  had  been  gone  about  a  fortnight,  when
Creagh,  who  had  one  night  left  the  mess  early  and  had  retired  to  bed,  and
was  beginning  to  close  his  eyes,  saw  his  door  open  and  Liston  enter.
Forgetting  his  absence,  and  thinking  he  had  come  to  pull  him  out  of  bed
(for  practical  joking  was  then  more  common   in  the  army  than  it  is  now),

he  cried,  '  No,  no  ;  d n  it,  Liston,  don't,  old  fellow  !      I'm  tired  !     Be

off ! '  But  the  vision  came  nearer  the  bed  foot,  and  Creagh  then  saw  that
Liston  looked  as  if  very  ill  (for  it  was  bright  moonlight),  and  that  his  hair
seemed  wet,  and  hung  down  over  his  face  like  a  drowned  man's.  The
apparition  moved  its  head  mournfully  ;  and  when  Creagh  in  surprise  sat
up,  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  looked  again,  it  was  gone.  Still  Creagh  avers
that  all  this  time  he  had  no  idea  of  its  being  a  spectre,  and  believing  that
he  had  seen  Liston  himself,  he  went  to  sleep.  In  the  morning  he  related
the  occurrence,  when  he  recollected,  but  not  till  then,  Liston's  absence  on
duty  from  the  island.  He  asserts  he  had  not  lately  been  thinking  of
Liston  ;  neither  had  the  vessel  been  away  long  enough,  nor  had  bad
weather  occurred  to  cause  fears  for  her  loss  to  be  entertained.  That  he
was  wide  awake,  or  at  least  not  dreaming,  is  shown  by  his  sitting  up  and
addressing  the  apparition."

We  find  from  the  Army  List  that  Lieut.  Liston  was  "  lost  on  passage
home  from  Bermuda,  on  board  the  brig  '  Bulow,'  April,  1831,"  not  1830.

[It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  vision  occurred  at  the  hour,  or
even  on  the  day,  that  the  transport  foundered.]

(538)  From  Miss  Ann  Hunt  (a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends),
9,  Brunswick  Square,  Bristol.

"May  15th,  1884.

"At  the  time  of  Joan  Pince's  death,  her  son  was  in  the  employ  of
Philip  D.  Tuckett,  of  Frenchay.  I  well  remember  hearing  this  son,  John
Pince,  relate  how  he  had  been  aroused  by  the  sound  of  his  mother's  voice,
calling  him  by  name.  It  was  early  in  the  morning,  but  so  strong  was  his
impression  that  his  mother's  decease  was  thus  notified  to  him,  that  he  got
up  and  went  into  his  employer's  room,  saying  that  his  mother  was  dead,  and
that  he  must  go  at  once  to  her  home.  At  first  endeavours  were  used  to
dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  but  finding  how  strong  an  impression  had
been  made  on  his  mind,  P.  D.  Tuckett  kindly  acceded,  and  John  Pince
set  off"  for  his  mother's  residence,  which  was,  I  believe,  in  Devonshire.
On  arriving,  he  found  the  event  had  taken  place  as  he  apprehended.     I

1  See  p.  66,  and  p.  489,  first  note.
VOL.    II.  2    K


498  -  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

hoped  to  procure  a  written  account  of  this  circumstance,  as  a  grand-
daughter of  his,  now  living  in  Bristol,  thought  she  had  it  in  the  hand-
writing of  her  mother,  who  is  lately  deceased.  She  has  been  unable  to
find  it,  but  fully  confirmed  the  particulars  I  have  given.

"  John  Pince  died  in  1854,  aged  87  years ;  and  it  may  have  been  7,  or
possibly  10,  years  before  that  I  heard  him  relate  the  occurrence" — at
which  time,  as  Miss  Hunt  has  stated  in  conversation,  he  was  in  complete
vigour,  with  senses  unimpaired,  and  an  excellent  memory.

The  following  account  of  the  same  incident  is  from  Miss  Bowden,  a
cousin  of  Miss  Hunt's.

"  One  night  in  March,  1793,  my  grandfather,  John  Pince,  was  awoke
by  a  voice,  which  he  believed  to  be  his  mother's,  calling  him  by  name,
'  John,  John  ! '  He  was  so  impressed  by  the  feeling  that  his  mother,  Joan
Pince,  whom  he  dearly  loved,  was  ill  or  dying,  that  he  immediately  arose
and  went  to  the  Friend  with  whom  he  lived,  and  told  him  he  must  at  once
set  out  for  home,  stating  his  reason  for  doing  so.  On  reaching  Newton
Bushel,  he  found  that  his  mother  had  departed  this  life  after  a  few  hours'
illness,  at  the  time  which  he  had  heard  her  call.

"  These  few  particulars  are  all  I  know  about  the  occurrence,  but  I
believe  them  to  be  correct,  having  heard  them  from  my  mother  and  aunt,
daughters  of  John  Pince.  «« E.  Bowden."

Miss  Bowden  has  in  her  possession  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Tuckett  by  a
friend  of  Joan  Pince's,  describing  her  short  illness,  and  requesting  that
her  son's  mind  may  be  prepared  for  the  intelligence  of  her  death.  It  is
thus  evident  that  he  was  not  aware  of  her  danger.

(539)  From  the  Rev.  Chas.  C.  Starbuck,  M.  A.,  Andover,  Mass.,  U.S.A.,
who  wrote  in  January,  1884.  The  account  was  communicated  to  him
by  the  late  Hon.  Richard  Hill,  of  Jamaica,  a  Privy  Councillor  of  the
island,  the  most  eminent  naturalist  of  the  West  Indies.  Mr.  Starbuck
mentions  Mr.  Hill's  having  quoted  to  him,  with  just  gratification,  a
sentence  from  a  letter  which  he  had  received  from  Charles  Darwin — "  you
are  an  observer  after  my  own  heart."

"  When  Mr.  Hill  was  yet  young,  he  began  to  work  against  African
slavery,  the  curse  of  his  native  West  Indies.  Among  others  he  visited  the
Duke  of  Kent,  in  the  hope  of  securing  his  influence ;  and  I  may  remark
that  he  lived  to  receive  from  the  Duke's  daughter,  as  his  sovereign,  the
Companionship  of  the  Bath,  as  a  token  of  appreciation  of  his  many  and
signal  services  both  to  science  and  humanity.

"  Being  a  Jamaican  born,  and  of  mixed  blood  besides,  he  soon  found
that  it  would  be  as  much  as  his  life  was  worth  to  return  to  his  native
island.  For  a  number  of  years  he  was  an  exile.  White  Englishmen,
however,  though  zealous  abolitionists,  though  liable  to  much  persecution,
and  sometimes  in  considerable  danger,  could  manage  somewhat  better  to
keep  their  hold  in  the  island.  There  was  one  friend  and  colleague  of  Hill,
an  Englishman,  I  believe,  named  Lundy,i  who  was  working  in  Jamaica,
when  his  friend  started  from  England  in  a  sailing  vessel  for   St.   Thomas,

1  I  may  remark  that,  as  it  is  easier  to  be  sure  of  facts  than  names,  I  give  the  latter
only  as  they  lie  in  my  memory. — C.  C.  S.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  499

intending  to  proceed  to  Hayti.  Hill  and  the  captain  occupied  the  main
cabin  together,  having  their  state-rooms  on  each  side  of  it.  One  evening
when  the  vessel  was  about  in  the  latitude  of  the  Azores,  the  captain  and
he  were  both  in  their  state-rooms,  while  a  large  globe-lamp,  swinging  over
the  table,  partially  lighted  each.  Hill  was  lying  still  awake,  when  he
heard  a  step  in  the  cabin,  which,  he  told  us,  he  recognised  the  instant  he
heard  it.  It  passed  through  the  cabin,  and  his  friend  Lundy  appearing  in
the  door  of  his  state-room,  came  up  to  the  berth,  and  leaning  on  it,  said  :
'  Well,  Hill,  I  have  served  the  cause  as  long  as  I  could  be  useful ;  and
now  it  has  pleased  God  to  take  me.'  He  remarked  that  the  words  sank
ineffaceably  into  his  mind,  and  the  more  so  as  they  afforded  so  pleasing  an
evidence  of  Lundy's  readiness  to  go.  The  next  morning  the  captain  said
to  him  :  '  Why,  Hill,  you  look  as  if  you  had  had  a  day's  hard  raking.'
But  his  passenger  kept  his  counsel.

"  Just  as  they  landed  at  St.  Thomas,  a  vessel  came  in  from  Kingston,
and  a  young  friend  of  Hill's  sprang  ashore.  Saluting  him,  Hill  said  :
'  I  need  not  ask  how  Lundy  is,  for  I  know  he  is  dead.'  '  Why,'  exclaimed
his  friend,  in  astonishment,  '  how  could  you  know  that  ?  I  had  but  time  to
see  the  funeral  company  into  the  church,  and  as  the  wind  was  fair,  I  was
obliged  to  hasten  off  to  the  vessel  without  going  in.'  '  No  matter  how  I
know  it,'  replied  Hill,  '  you  see  I  know  it.'  They  soon  parted,  and  Hill,
having  completed  his  visit  to  Hayti,  returned  to  England.

"  Some  two  years  later,  Mr.  Hill  met  in  England  a  gentleman  who  first
had  been  a  missionary  in  Jamaica,  and  subsequently  in  Africa.  They  fell
into  talk  about  Lundy,  and  this  gentleman  remarked,  '  I  was  with  Lundy
when  he  died ;  and  I  remember  that  his  last  words  were  :  "  The  only  wish
I  have  left  is,  that  I  might  be  permitted  to  see  Hill  once  more,  and  say  to
him — '  Well,  Hill,  I  have  served  the  cause  as  long  as  I  could  be  useful ;
and  now  it  has  pleased  God  to  take  me.'  "  '  ^  It  seems  that  his  wish  was
granted,  and  that  he  was  permitted  to  go  to  Heaven  by  way  of  the  Azores."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Starbuck  writes  to  us  : —

"  Feb.  22,   1884.

"  The  narratives  [this  and  another]  are  throughout  communications
made  to  me  directly  by  Mr.  Hill.  And  I  saw  him  so  frequently  and  so
familiarly  during  my  10  years'  stay  in  Jamaica  that  they  may  be  relied  on
as  thoroughly  accurate  reports.  a  Chaeles  C.  Starbuck,

"  Ten  years  missionary  in  Jamaica  in  connection
with  the  American  Missionary  Association."

(540)  From  Mr.  F.  J.  Jones,  Civil  Engineer,  Heath  Bank,  Mossley
Road,  Ashton-under-Lyne.  "March    1884.

"  The  following  story  was  told  me  by  an  old  friend  [name  given],  to
whom  it  happened  when  an  undergraduate  of  Peterhouse  College,  Cam-
bridge.    I  will  try  and  put  it  in  his  own  words  as  nearly  as  possible.

"  '  I  had  arranged  to  stay  up  part  of  the  long  vacation  to  grind  in
quiet,  and  to  make  the  best  of  lost  time.

"  'The  event  occurred  on  a  Tuesday,  in  1843,  and  I  well  remember

1  It  will  be  observed  that  the  evidence  for  this  remark  of  the  dying  man  is  third-
hand  ;  arid  the  exact  correspondence  of  part  of  it  with  what  Mr.  Hill  heard  is  the  sort  of
point  which  is  very  likely  to  creep  into  a  story  of  this  class  as  it  passes  from  mouth  to
moi^th.

VOL.    II.  2    K    2


500  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

feeling  very  lonely  and  wretclied.,  for  the  weather  was  miserably  wet,  and
all  friends  had  gone  down  the  day  before.  My  greatest  chum,  a  man
named  Bohun,  I  had  seen  off  by  the  London  coach,  on  his  way  to  Dover,
from  whence  he  was  to  cross  the  Channel,  to  visit  the  friends  of  the  girl
to  whom  he  was  engaged.  When  saying  good-bye,  I  little  thought  we
should  never  meet  again,  at  all  events  in  the  flesh.  The  first  24  hours  of
my  solitude  passed  well  enough,  for  I  had  a  lot  of  lost  time  to  make  up.
The  evenings,  however,  hung  very  heavily  on  my  hands.

"  '  On  the  second  (Tuesday)  evening,  I  turned  in  about  10  o'clock,
meaning  to  get  up  early  to  work  the  next  morning.  Instead  of  undress-
ing, I  threw  myself  down  on  my  bed  in  my  clothes,  and  soon  fell  asleep.
How  long  it  lasted  I  don't  know,  but  before  very  long  I  woke  with  a
sudden  sense  of  chilliness,^  and  was  startled  to  hear  a  sort  of  choking  sound
at  my  back.  Turning  round  quickly,  I  was  surprised  to  see,  by  the  light
of  the  reading  lamp,  my  friend  Bohun,  half  sitting  up  in  my  arm-chair
beside  the  bed,  and  apparently  gasping  for  breath.  For  a  few  seconds  I
looked  at  him  in  bewilderment,  and  then  called  him  by  name.  In  an
instant  the  chair  was  vacant,  and  jumping  off  the  bed  I  found  the  door
locked,  and  the  oak  sported,  as  I  left  them.

"  '  Thinking  it  only  a  dream,  though  even  then  I  must  confess  I  was
considerably  startled  by  the  vividness  of  it  all,  I  undressed  and  got  into
bed,  dozing  ofi"  again  in  a  few  minutes.  My  sleep  cannot,  however,  have
been  of  long  duration,  and  a  second  time  I  woke  with  the  same  curious
sensation,  and  again  saw  Bohun  gasping  in  the  chair  beside  my  bed.^
Moving  cautiously  to  that  side  of  the  bed,  I  made  a  sudden  dash — at
nothing  :  for  a  second  time  he  was  gone.

"  '  Now  thoroughly  awake,  and,  I  must  confess,  not  liking  it  all,  I
left  my  room,  and  calling  the  porter,  we  went  through  the  empty  place,
only  to  find  everything  right  and  secure.  The  man  seemed  to  think  I  had
been  taking  rather  more  than  perhaps  was  wise,  and,  much  to  my  disgust,
hinted  it  rather  plainly ;  so  in  him  I  found  only  a  Job's  comforter.  Being
unable  to  sleep  any  more  that  night,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  read  for  the
remaining  hours  before  daylight.

"  '  The  next  day  nothing  transpired,  and  I  began  to  feel  I  had  rather
made  a  fool  of  myself,  and  did  not  at  all  relish  the  porter's  inquiries  after
my  health.  Wednesday  passed,  and  a  lot  of  reading  was  accomplished,
and  on  Thursday  I  walked  out  a  short  distance  to  meet  the  London  coach,
which  brought  my  weekly  papers.  After  a  short  chat  the  driver  suddenly
said  "  Have  you  heard,  sir,  of  poor  Mr.  Bohun's  sad  death  1  As  he  was
going  on  board  the  packet  at  Dover  he  slipped  on  the  gangway,  falling  into
the  water,  and  was  never  seen  again."

"  '  The  shock  to  me  was  so  great  that  for  several  weeks  I  was  laid  up
in  my  room,  and  in  my  delirium  I  was  afterwards  told  I  was  always  raving
about  my  poor  friend  and  his  mysterious  visit  to  my  rooms.'

"  F.  J.  J."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jones  says  : —

"  My  friend  about  whom  you  ask  has  been  dead  now  about  nine  years.
He  first  told  us  the  story  in  the  year  1867,    and  has  since  often  alluded

1  See  p.  37,  first  note.

2  Compare  cases  503  and  519,  and  see  p.  237,  note.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  501

to  it."  In  conversation  I  learnt  that  this  friend  was  Mr.  Jones's  tutor,
living  in  the  same  house,  for  several  years,  and  was  most  deeply  respected
by  him.  We  have  ascertained  that  he  was  at  Peterhouse  in  1843  ;  but  the
name  Bohun  does  not  appear  in  the  Cambridge  Calendar  of  that  date,  and
is  probably  a  mistake.  We  have  not  been  able  to  discover  any  public
notice  of  the  accident,  and  the  death  was  probably  not  registered.

[It  ought  to  be  observed  that  the  percipient  was  probably  falling  ill
at  the  time  of  his  vision ;  and  that  in  his  subsequent  delirium  the  order
of  events  may  have  become  confused.  Still,  it  seems  unlikely  that  his
recollection  of  the  anxiety  that  succeeded  the  vision  and  preceded  the
arrival  of  the  news  is  a  piece  of  pure  imagination.]

(541)  Erom  Mr.  George  M.  Barker,  Brynderw,  Dolgelly.

"July,  1884.

"  Travelling  by  train  from  London  to  Brighton  in  company  with  my
tutor,  we  sat  opposite  an  elderly  lady,  who  seemed  to  doze.  About  half-
way, she  awoke  with  a  cry,  and  was  much  agitated.  My  tutor  soothed  her,
and  asked  her  what  was  the  matter.  She  stated  that  she  had  seen  her  son
(who  was  in  the  navy)  drowning  before  her  eyes,  and  that  it  was  so
horribly  real,  even  to  the  minutest  detail  of  dress,  &c.,  that  she  could  not
believe  that  she  was  travelling  in  a  railway  carriage.  She  vowed  that  she
had  not  been  to  sleep.  My  tutor,  with  her  permission,  called  upon  her
next  day,  and  an  acquaintance  struck  up,  which  lasted  for  some  time.
About  a  fortnight  after  the  scene  in  the  carriage,  news  duly  arrived  of  the
death  of  the  son  at  sea,  while  rowing  from  the  ship  to  the  shore.  This
event  occui'red  in  the  year  1870  or  1871.

"  George  M.  Barker."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barker  says  : —

"  I  am  unable  to  furnish  you  with  the  address  of  my  old  tutor.  His
name  was  Alfred  Downes,  64,  Upper  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton,  but  I
have  heard  recently  that  he  has  left  Brighton.  The  name  of  the  old  lady
I  heard  mentioned  by  my  tutor  years  ago,  but  I  have  no  recollection  of
what  it  was,  or  where,  exactly,  she  lived.  The  bald  facts  are,  therefore,
all  that  I  can  give  you.  To  me,  at  the  time,  this  event  was  of  consider-
able interest.  I  may  mention  that  I  am  a  thorough  disbeliever  in  every-
thing unnatural  and  ghostly.

"  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  time  was  exactly  the  same,  and  for  this
reason  :  my  tutor  and  I  were  travelling  by  a  very  fast  train  between
London  and  Brighton,  the  total  journey  only  occupying  Ihr.  lOmin.  ;  we
were  just  passing,  or  had  just  passed  (I  really  forget  which)  Redhill
Station,  which  is  about  half  way,  so  that  we  could  easily  fix  the  time.  My
tutor,  seeing  the  condition  of  the  poor  lady,  asked,  and  was  allowed,  to
call  upon  her  to  inquire  after  her  state,  and  it  was  during  one  of  these  calls
that  the  news  was  confirmed.  The  time  of  the  upset  of  the  boat  was,  allow-
ing for  the  change  between  the  two  distances,  as  nearly  corresponding  as
possible."

We  cannot  trace  Mr.  Downes ;  the  postmaster  at  Brighton  has  no
later  address  than  that  given.

(542)  From  Mr.  S.  Alfred  Steinthal,  The  Lunes,  Nelson  Street,
Manchester.


502  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"March  21st,  1884.

"  A  lady  of  my  acquaintance,  Mrs.  Ashton,  now  deceased,  the  wife  of
Mr.  Alderman  Ashton,  of  this  city,  had  a  son  who  was  the  Unitarian
minister  at  Glossop,  in  Derbyshire.  One  night  she  distinctly  saw  her  son
in  his  night-dress  in  her  room  (she  lived  then  at  Cheetham  Hill,  Man-
chester), and  woke  her  husband,  telling  him  what  had  occurred.  Neither
she  nor  her  husband  knew  of  anything  being  wrong  with  their  son,  but
next  morning  they  were  informed  that  he  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill,
and  had  died  at  the  time  when  Mrs.  Ashton  saw  the  appearance  she
described.     Neither  Mr.  Ashton  nor  Mrs.  Ashton  were  Spiritualists.

"S.  Alfred  Steinthal."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Steinthal  adds  : —      u  _^pril  1st   1884.

"  Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ashton  are  now  deceased.  I  heard  the  story,  a
short  time  after  the  death,  from  Mrs.  Ashton.  It  was  told  me  in  the
presence  of  her  husband,  who  confirmed  the  part  of  the  story  that  she  had
awakened  him,  and  had  told  him  of  the  appearance  she  had  seen.  Mr.
Ashton  died  about  seven  years  ago,  but  I  cannot  give  you  the  exact  date.
I  am  sorry  I  cannot  be  more  definite."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  Rev.  Frederick  Ashton
died  at  Glossop  on  April  15,  1878.

(543)  From  the  late  Mr.  Myddleton,  Leasingham  Hall,  Sleaford.

"September  1st,  1884.

"Mrs.  Onslow  was  suddenly  awakened  one  night  by  her  son,  who  was
in  the  Royal  Marines,  and  afloat  on  board  a  man-of-war.  She  awoke
suddenly  and  saw  her  son  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.     She  exclaimed

to   her   husband,    '  Oh !  Onslow,   here  is   '   (the  son's  name)    '  come

back.'  Onslow  awoke,  but  the  son  (or  vision)  had  disappeared.  They
noted  the  exact  hour,  &c.,  and  when  time  allowed  them  to  hear  from  him
(his  ship  was  off  Madeira  or  St.  Helena)  a  letter  arrived  saying  he  was
dead,  and  had  died  at  the  very  time  he  had  appeared  to  his  mother.

"  This  is  to  certify  that  the  above  is  a  perfectly  correct  account,  as  I
have  heard  Mrs.  Onslow  often  relate;  but  alas!  both  she  and  her  husband
have  long  been  dead,  and  I  cannot  ask  for  a  written  confirmation.

"  Rd.  Wharton  Myddleton."

(544)  From  Mrs.  Bryant,  Ladymeade,  Tyndall's  Park,  Bristol.  The
evidence  is  of  the  sort  which  may  be  regarded  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand
(Vol.  I.,  p.  148) ;  but  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  certain  that  the  figure  seen
represented  the  supposed  agent.  a  iggl.

"  One  morning  one  of  the  upper  servants  came  to  my  father.  Captain
Beadon,  R.N.,  and  in  my  presence  said  that  she  felt  sure  he  would  soon
hear  of  a  death  in  the  family,  for  in  the  night  she  awoke  to  find  an  old
lady  standing  by  her  bedside,  and  gazing  steadfastly  at  her.  She  was
dressed  in  her  shroud,  and  Stapleton  (the  maid)  especially  noticed  the  fine
old  lace  on  her  cap.  My  father  laughed  at  her,  and  jokingly  asked  a
description  of  her  features,  which  Stapleton  gave.  I  said,  '  That  is  so  like
Aunt  F.'  (Stapleton  had  never  seen  Mrs.  F.)  The  maid  said  at  first  she
was  frightened,  and  covered  her  head  with  the  bedclothes  ;  but  she  was  a
religious  woman,  and  prayed  for  courage  to  ask  the  spirit  what  it  wanted.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  503

On  looking  again,  she  found  the  old  lady  still  there.  Stapleton  spoke  to
her,  and  gradually  and  slowly  the  figure  faded  away.  The  next  day's  post
brought  news  of  the  death  of  my  father's  aunt,  Mrs.  F.

In  May,  1884,  Mrs.  Bryant  writes  :—  "  <^eorgina  Bryant."

"  I  have  sent  my  father  your  letter,  and  asked  him  to  write  out  the
story,  and  see  if  I  have  remembered  it  correctly.  I  have  not  compared
notes  with  him  in  any  way.  I  don't  think  it  is  worth  much  in  point  of
evidence — however,  what  there  is  is  to  be  relied  on.

"  In  answer  to  your  questions  : —

"  (1)  The  date  would  be  nearly  40  years  ago.

"  (2)  I  do  not  at  all  know  if  the  servant  is  living.

"  (3)  I  do  not  know  if  she  had  ever  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before.

"  (4)  She  said  :  'A  noble-looking  old  lady  with  her  night-dress  on  and
beautiful  lace  on  her  cap.'  "

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mrs.  Franklin  died  on
March  8,  1846.

On  May  26th,  1884,  Captain  Beadon  wrote  to  Mrs.  Bryant  as
loliows  :  u  Creechbarrow,  Taunton.

"  Dear  Georgina, — When  we  lived  at  No.  8,  Pavilion  Place,  Battersea
Fields,  Sarah  Stapleton,  who  lived  with  us  as  housemaid,  informed  your
mother  and  me  that  an  old  lady  was  sitting  on  her  box  in  her  bedroom
when  she  was  getting  out  of  bed  in  the  morning,  about  7  a.m.

"  The  apparition  remained  some  time,  and  did  not  disappear  until  she
addressed  it  in  the  name  of  the  '  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.'  She  said
she  did  not  know  any  person  like  the  apparition,  but,  from  her  exact
description  I  said  it  was  my  aunt,  Mrs.  F.,  whom  I  then  supposed  to  be
living  at  No.  5,  Hammett  Street,  Taunton.

"  The  next  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  my  cousin,  Robert  Beadon,
stating  that  Mrs.  F.  had  died  about  the  time  of  Stapleton's  vision.  I  do
not  remember  the  exact  date  of  Mrs.  F.'s  death.  Stapleton  was  a  very
respectable,  steady  young  woman — a  Wesleyan.  Your  mother  often  said
after,  she  was  the  best  servant  she  ever  had ;  she  married  a  young  artificer,
then  employed  at  Woolwich  Dockyard,  in  1845  or  1846.  I  have  never
heard  of,  or  from,  her  since.

"  I  lived  some  two  years  with  my  aunt. — I  am,  your  afiectionate
father,  "  George  Beadon."

[If  the  death  was  on  the  night  preceding  the  apparition,  as  Captain
Beadon  stated  in  conversation  that  he  believed  it  was,  the  news  probably
arrived  not  by  the  "  next  post,"  but  (as  Mrs.  Bryant  says)  by  "next  day's
post "  ;  but  Captain  Beadon  cannot  be  absolutely  certain  that  it  did  not
occur  before  night  on  the  preceding  day.]

As  to  the  next  case,  see  the  remark  which  prefaces  case  527  above.
The  standing  "  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  " — it  will  have  been  observed —
is  a  point  which  occurs  in  a  large  number  of  these  borderland  cases.

(545)  From  Mrs.  Harper,  Cotham,  Bristol.

"December,  1883.
"  I  was  at  school  at  Miss  Smith's,  Portland  Street,  Kingstown,  with  the


504  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

daughters  of  the  Hon.  James  P.,  of  Jamaica.  He  was  expected  home,
and  a  house  in  Gotham  Park,  just  opposite  my  present  residence,  was  being
prepared  for  him.  One  night,  Hannah  P.  woke  screaming,  saying  her
father  was  dead.  Miss  Smith  asked  her  why  she  said  so,  and  she  stated
that  her  father  had  come  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  and  then  went
and  looked  at  her  sister  Isabel  in  another  bed.  The  father  died  at  that
time,  and  it  seems  he  had  a  presentiment  that  he  should  not  live  to  return,
and  had  ordered  a  quantity  of  rum  to  be  put  on  board  to  preserve  his  body
in  if  he  should  die  on  the  way."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Harper  adds  : —

"  I  was  at  school  with  Hannah  P.,  but  not  at  the  time  the
occurrence  took  place  to  which  you  allude,  so  of  course  was  not  in  the
room.  I  heard  of  it  afterwards  from  a  young  lady  that  was  in  the  room,
and  saw  her  distress  ;  she  was  a  proud  reserved  girl,  about  17,  and  very
unlikely  to  make  a  display  of  feeling  unless  greatly  moved.  The  younger
girl  sleeping  in  the  same  room  did  not  see  her  father,  although  Hannah
said  that  he  went  from  her  to  look  at  Isabella.  I  cannot  say  how  long  it
was  after  she  went  that  I  heard  of  it ;  it  might  have  been  a  year.  We  were
not  allowed  to  speak  of  it  to  Hannah.  "  S.  J.  Harper."

We  find  from  the  Gentleman' s  Magazine  that  the  death  occurred  on
Sept.  4,  1825,  after  a  4  days'  illness.

(546)  From  Mr.  E.  Keep,  who  first  wrote  from  abroad,  and  later  from
25,  Phillimore  Gardens,  W.  We  owe  the  case  in  the  first  instance  to  the
Oxford  Phasmatological  Society.  u  j^gQ

"  Some  years  ago,  Mr.  Charles  F.  Smith,  a  gentleman  living  in
Melbourne,  became  very  unwell,  and  was  recommended  to  go  on  a  sea
voyage.  A  captain  of  a  merchant  vessel  going  to  Java  ofiered  him  a
berth  upon  the  ship  on  very  moderate  terms  ;  but  Mr.  Smith's  finances
being  at  a  very  low  ebb,  a  few  of  his  friends  clubbed  together  and
presented  him  with  £100,  and  Mr.  Smith  started  on  his  voyage.

"  One  of  the  friends  subscribing  to  the  fund  was  a  Mr.  Bowman,  a  very
old  friend  of  Mr.  Smith,  and  some  time  after  Mr.  Smith's  departure,  Mr.
Bowman  met  me  in  the  street,  and  said,  '  Oh,  Mr.  Keep,  I  saw  Charley
Smith  either  last  night  or  the  night  before ;  he  appeared  at  the  foot  of  my
bed  dressed  in  a  long  black  robe  ;  and  bursting  into  tears  vanished.'  I
said,  '  Are  you  joking  1  One  reads  of  these  things  in  the  Night  Side  of
Nature,  and  such  rubbish,  but  one  doesn't  expect  to  hear  of  them  in
actual  life.'  '  Oh,'  said  Mr.  Bowman,  '  these  things  are  often  occurring  to
me — you  will  find  Mr.  Smith  died  last  night.'  I  stepped  into  my  ofiice,
and  made  a  note  of  the  conversation  and  date,  and  said  that  Mr.  Bowman
was  not  certain  if  his  dream  were  last  night  or  the  night  before.

"  In  about  a  month  the  steamship  '  Hero  '  arrived  at  Sydney  from  Java,
and  reported  that  a  passenger,  Mr.  Charles  F.  Smith,  of  Melbourne,  had
died  at  sea  on  one  of  the  dates  specified  by  Mr.  Bowman.

"  Edward  Keep."

At  our  request  Mr.  Keep  wrote  to  Melbourne,  to  get  confirmation  of
this  narrative;  but  he  found  that  the  diary  in  which  he  noted  the  incident
had  been  burnt,  and  his  friends  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  Bowman,  He  adds
that  he  thinks  the  occurrence  was  in  1869.


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  505

We  have  received  the  following  letter  from  Messrs.  Gibbs,  Bright  and
Co.,  of  Melbourne  :—  "April  28th,  1886.

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  20th  Feb.,  we  have  interviewed  Capt.
Logan,  who  was  commander  of  the  s.s.  '  Hero  '  at  the  time  of  the  death
of  Mr.  C.  F.  Smith ;  and  he  advises  us  that,  as  well  as  he  can  remember,
Mr.  Smith  died  on  the  day  after  leaving  Batavia,  in  Dec,  1886," — •
apparently  a  slip  for  1868,  in  which  year,  as  we  have  ascertained
by  a  search  in  Sydney  papers,  the  "Hero"  was  trading  from
that  place.

(547)  From  Mademoiselle  Glinka,  1,  Rue  Lincoln,  Champs  Elysees,
Paris.  *  "1884.

"  My  brother  had  the  habit,  when  he  went  to  Wiesbaden,  to  visit  an
old  servant  maid,  who  had  been  for  15  years  in  our  family,  when  we  were
children,  and  who  now  lives  on  a  pension.  She  is  very  much  attached  to
our  family.  Lately  she  had  met  with  an  accident,  having  fallen  from  a
staircase,  and  was  laid  up  in  her  bed  for  several  weeks,  with  compresses
on  her  face.  She  knew  of  my  brother's  last  illness,  but  was  not  aware  of
its  gravity.

"  One  day,  when  lying  in  her  bed  in  a  half  doze,  she  saw  my  brother
enter  her  room,  clad  in  his  grey  coat  as  usually.  Quite  confused  that
he  should  see  her  in  that  state,  she  exclaimed,  '  Why,  Excellency,  I  am
ashamed  that  you  have  come  into  my  room  to  find  me  here  in  my  bed.'
He  answered,  '  Do  not  mind  it,  Bienchen '  (the  name  we  called  her  by),
'  have  you  not  been  sitting  at  my  bedside  hundreds  of  times  when  I  was  a
boy  1 '  She  begged  him  to  be  seated.^  Then  he  looked  at  her  with  a  long,
fixed  gaze,  and  disappeared  at  the  door.  Frightened  and  amazed,  she
rang  for  her  landlady,  and  asked  her  why  she  had  let  Mr.  G.  enter
without  announcing  him.  The  woman  protested  that  nobody  could  have
entered  without  her  knowledge,  as  she  had  been  on  the  ground  floor,  and
that  she  had  not  seen  his  Excellency  or  anybody  else.  A  few  days  later
she  heard  of  his  death.  But  the  day  and  hour  she  had  seen  him,  and
talked  with  him,  my  brother  had  had  his  arm  amputated,  being
chloroformed.  "  J.  G."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Mademoiselle  Glinka  adds  on  March  7th,
1886:—

"  Jacobina  Riekes  told  me  of  this  experience  within  a  week  after  its
occurrence.  It  had  greatly  astonished  her,  as  she  had  never  had  any
hallucination  in  her  life.  She  was  certainly  awake,  as  she  was  in  the  act
of  altering  the  arrangement  of  some  compresses  on  her  face.  She  told  the
landlady  of  her  experience  immediately  after  it  occurred  ;  but  I  did  not
myself  speak  to  the  landlady  on  the  subject.  My  brother  died  two  days
after  the  operation.  The  event  occurred  at  Easter,  1884.  My  brother
was  in  Frankfort."

This  case  is  the  only  one  in  our  collection  where  the  supposed
agent  was  under  the  influence  of  an  anaesthetic ;  but  it  may  be
compared  to  cases  where  the  condition  has  been  fainting  or  coma
(see  Vol.  I,,  p.  563,  note).

^  See  p.  460,  second  note.


506  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  next  case  resembles  No.  505,  above,  in  representing  a  complete
scene  which  seems  to  have  been  conveyed  to  the  percipient's  mind
some  little  time  after  its  occurrence,  but  at  a  time  when  the  agent's
thoughts  (certainly  in  this  case,  and  presumably  in  the  other)  were
directed  to  the  percipient,  and  also  occupied  with  a  mental  renewal  of
the  scene  itself.  In  the  present  case,  however,  the  interval  between
the  enactment  of  the  scene  and  the  percipient's  experience  was
probably  little,  if  at  all,  more  than  12  hours ;  and  it  would  be
quite  possible  to  regard  the  case  as  one  of  deferred  development
(Vol.  I.,  pp.  139,  511).

(548)  Slightly  abridged  from  the  account  of  Miss  Millicent  A.  Page,
sent  to  us  by  her  brother,  the  Rev.  A.  Shaw  Page,  Vicar  of  Selsley,  Stone-
house,  Gloucestershire

"  1  was  staying  with  my  mother's  cousin,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Broughton,
wife  of  Mr.  Edward  Broughton,  Edinburgh,  and  daughter  of  the  late
Colonel  Blanckley,  in  the  year  1844,  and  she  told  me  the  following
strange  story  : — •

"  She  awoke  one  night  and  aroused  her  husband,  telling  him  that
something  dreadful  had  happened  in  France.  He  begged  her  to  go  to
sleep  again  and  not  to  trouble  him.  She  assured  him  that  she  was  not
asleep  when  she  saw  what  she  insisted  on  then  telling  him — what  she  saw
in  fact.  First  a  carriage-accident,  which  she  did  not  actually  see,  but
what  she  saw  was  the  result,  a  broken  carriage,  a  crowd  collected,  a  figure
gently  raised  and  carried  into  the  nearest  house,  and  then  a  figure  lying
on  a  bed,  which  she  then  recognised  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  Gradually
friends  collecting  round  the  bed,  among  them  several  members  of  the
French  Royal  family — the  Queen,  then  the  King — all  silently,  tearfully
watching  the  evidently  dying  Duke.  One  man  (she  could  see  his  back,  but
did  not  know  who  he  was)  was  a  doctor.  He  stood  bending  over  the
Duke,  feeling  his  pulse,  his  watch  in  his  other  hand.  And  then  all  passed
away  :  she  saw  no  more.  As  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  she  wrote  down  in
her  journal  all  she  had  seen.  From  that  journal  she  read  this  to  me.  It
was  before  the  days  of  electric  telegraph,  and  two  or  more  days  passed
before  the  Times  announced  '  The  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.'
[Visiting  Paris  a  short  time  afterwards,  she  saw  and  recognised  the  place
of  the  accident,  and  received  the  explanation  of  her  impression.  The
doctor  who  attended  the  dying  Duke  was  an  old  friend  of  hers  ;  and  as  he
watched  by  the  bed,  his  mind  had  been  constantly  occupied  with  her  and
her  family.  The  reason  of  this  was  an  extraordinary  likeness — a  likeness
which  had  often  led  to  amusing  incidents — between  several  members  of  the
Broughton  family  and  members  of  the  French  Royal  family  who  were
present  in  the  room.]  '  I  spoke  of  you  and  yours  when  I  got  home,'  said
the  doctor,  '  and  thought  of  you  many  times  that  evening.  The  likeness
between  yourselves  and  the  Royal  family  was,  perhaps,  never  so  strong  as
that  day  when  they  stood  there  in  their  sorrow,  all  so  natural ;  father,
mother,  brothers,  sisters,  watching  the  dying  son  and  brother.  Here  was
the  link  between  us,  you  see.


)  >■>


IV.]  ''BORDERLAND"  CASES.  507

The  detailed  account  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  was  in  the
Times  of  July  15,  1842.  The  carriage  accident  took  place  at  12.30  p.m.,
on  July  13.  The  Duke  was  carried  into  the  nearest  house,  and  attended
by  Dr.  Bawnes  and  Dr.  Pasquier.  The  King,  Queen,  and  Due  d'Aumale
arrived  at  the  spot  almost  immediately  ;  and  the  account  in  Galignani's
Messenger  for  July  14  shows  that  other  members  of  the  Royal  family  and
officials  of  distinction  were  present.  The  death  occurred  shortly  after
3  p.m.

[This  case  is  so  exceptional  in  character  as  to  excite  some  mistrust.  It
seems  very  possible  that  the  scene  has  assumed  a  more  dramatic  complete-
ness in  the  narrator's  memory  than  the  original  description  would  warrant ;
but  if,  as  alleged,  the  record  was  immediately  made  in  the  percipient's
diary,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  correspondence  was  of
a  very  striking  kind.]

(549)  In  Recollections,  Political,  dsc,  of  the  last  Half  Century  by  the
Rev.  J.  Richardson,  LL.B.  (1856),  Yol.  I.,  pp.  65-8,  there  is  a  circum-
stantial account  of  the  appearance  of  Mr.  John  Palmer  (an  actor,  who
died  suddenly  on  the  stage  at  Liverpool,  on  the  2nd  August,  1798),  on  the
night  of  his  death  to  a  person  in  London,  named  Tucker.  Tucker  was  a
hall-porter,  and  habitually  slept  on  a  couch  in  the  hall  which  Mr.  Palmer
passed  at  night,  when  he  let  himself  in  with  a  latch-key.  The  account  was
given  by  Tucker  himself  to  Mr.  Richardson,  who,  though  a  gossiping  writer,
does  not  seem  to  be  an  inaccurate  one.

"  The  fact  of  his  absence  from  London  was  known  to  Tucker,  but  he
was  not  aware  about  his  arrangement  for  his  return.  On  the  night  just
mentioned.  Tucker  had  retired  at  an  earlier  hour  than  usual ;  but  the
company  in  the  drawing-room  were  numerous,  and  the  sound  of  their
merriment  prevented  him  from  falling  asleep  ;  he  was  in  a  state  of  morbid
drowsiness,  produced  by  weariness,  but  continually  interrupted  by  noise.
As  he  described  the  scene,  he  was  sitting  half  upright  in  his  bed,  when  he
saw  the  figure  of  a  man  coming  from  a  passage  which  led  from  the  door  of
the  house  to  the  hall.  The  figure  paused  in  its  transit  for  a  moment  at  the
foot  of  the  couch,  and  looked  him  full  in  the  face ;  there  was  nothing-
spectral  or  like  the  inhabitant  of  the  world  of  spirits  in  the  countenance
or  the  outline  of  the  figure,  which  passed  on,  and  apparently  went  up  the
staircase.  Tucker  felt  no  alarm  whatever  ;  he  recognised  in  the  figure  the
features,  gait,  dress,  and  general  appearance  of  John  Palmer,  who  he
supposed  had  returned  from  Liverpool,  and  having  the  entree  of  the  house,
had,  as  usual,  availed  himself  of  his  latch-key.  .  .  .  Next  morning,
in  the  course  of  some  casual  conversation,  he  informed  Mrs.  Vernon  that
he  had  seen  Mr.  Palmer  pass  through  the  hall,  and  expressed  a  hope  that
his  trip  to  Liverpool  had  agreed  with  his  health.  The  lady  stared  at  him
incredulously,  said  he  must  have  been  dreaming,  or  drinking,  or  out  of  his
senses,  as  no  Mr.  Palmer  had  joined  the  festivities  in  the  drawing-room.
His  delusion,  if  delusion  it  were,  was  made  a  source  of  mirth  to  the  people
who  called  in  the  course  of  the  day.  He  however  persisted  in  his  assertion
of  having  seen  Mr.  Palmer,  and  on  the  arrival  of  the  post  from  Liverpool
on  the  day  after  he  had  first  made  it,  laughter  was  turned  into  mourning,
and  most  of  the  guests  were  inclined  to  think  there  was  more  in  it  than
they  were  willing  to  confess."


508  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  following  case  is  perhaps  worth  quoting,  as  parallel,  in  the  form
of  the  impression,  to  Nos.  175,  176,  and  190 ;  but  it  cannot  receive
an  evidential  number,  being  third-hand,  and  handed  down  by  persons
not  likely  to  feel  any  special  sense  of  responsibility  with  respect  to  it.

From  Letters  and  Journals  of  Lord  Byron,  with  Notices  of  his  Wife,
by  Thomas  Moore  (1830),  Vol.  I.,  p.  193.

"  Lord  Byron  used  sometimes  to  mention  a  strange  story,  which  the
commander  of  the  packet,  Captain  Kidd,  related  to  him  on  the  passage  [to
Lisbon,  in  1809].  This  officer  stated  that,  being  asleep  one  night  in  his
berth,  he  was  awakened  by  the  pressure  of  something  heavy  on  his  limbs,
and  there  being  a  faint  light  in  the  room,  could  see,  as  he  thought,
distinctly,  the  figure  of  his  brother,  who  was  at  the  time  in  the  Naval
Service  in  the  East  Indies,  dressed  in  his  uniform  and  stretched  across  the
bed.  Concluding  it  to  be  an  illusion  of  the  senses,  he  shut  his  eyes  and
made  an  effort  to  sleep.  But  still  the  pressure  continued,  and  still  as  often
as  he  ventured  to  take  another  look  he  saw  the  figure  lying  across  him  in
the  same  position.  To  add  to  the  wonder,  on  putting  his  hand  forth  to
touch  this  form,  he  found  the  uniform  in  which  it  appeared  to  be  dressed
dripping  wet.  On  the  entrance  of  one  of  his  brother  officers,  to  whom  he
called  in  alarm,  the  apparition  vanished ;  but  in  a  few  months  afterwards
he  received  the  startling  intelligence  that  on  that  night  his  brother  had
been  drowned  in  the  Indian  Seas."

[The  alleged  touching  of  the  clothes  and  feeling  them  to  be  wet  is  just
one  of  those  details  which  are  met  with  in  traditional  narratives  of  the
kind,  and  for  which  we  have  no  first-hand  evidence.]

I  append  a  translation  of  a  narrative  which  occurs  in  a  Russian
work,  "  Prostaia  Rietch  o  Moudrionnykh  Viestchakh,"  or  Simple  Dis-
course on  DiffijCult  Subjects,  (Moscow,  1875),  by  the  late  Professor
Pogodine,  of  Moscow,  a  well-known  historian.  It  is  given  as  from
certain  "  memoirs  "  of  Kelsieff,  a  Russian  man  of  letters  ;  but  as  the
exact  title  of  the  original  work  is  not  mentioned,  and  the  account  is
professedly  abridgecl,  I  do  not  number  it  as  evidence.

"  Many  years  ago  I  was  a  pupil  of  the  School  of  Commerce  (St.
Petersburg),  and  lived  near  it.  My  father  with  my  mother  and  other
children  lived  at  Yasilievney  Ostrov.  He  was  a  man  of  business,  and
very  much  occupied,  and  his  visits  to  me  were  very  rare.  One  evening  I
was  lying  on  my  bed,  reading  a  book.  Suddenly  my  door  opened,  and  I
saw  my  father,  pale  and  triste,  enter  my  chamber,  and  approach  my  bed
saying  to  me,  '  God  bless  you,  my  son  !  Don't  forget  this  ! '  And  by  the
same  way  he  went  out.  I  was  not  in  the  least  surprised,  for  I  was  sure
that  it  was  really  my  father  who  came  to  me.  In  a  short  time  I  locked
the  door  and  went  to  bed.  Soon  I  heard  a  knock  at  my  door.  I  opened  it
and  saw  my  father's  coachman  ;  he  told  me  that  my  father  had  expired
about  an  hour  before.     It  was  at  the  time  when  I  saw  him  visit  me."


v.]


CHAPTER  V.

VISUAL  CASES.

§  1.  I  WILL  again  begin  with  evidence  which  is  first-hand  or  on  a  par
with  first-hand.     The  following  is  a  group  of  death-cases.

(550)  From  Mr.  Joseph  A.  Chamberlain,  High  Garrett,  Braintree,
Essex.

"December,  1884.

"  About  12  or  14  years  ago,  a  little  scholar  in  my  school,  named  James
Harrington,  was  very  ill  with  diphtheria.  I  had  been  to  a  village  about  three
miles  off,  to  give  a  lesson  on  the  pianoforte,  and  was  returning  on  a  dark
night,  about  7  o'clock.  I  was  walking  in  a  narrow  footpath  between  two
hedges,  and  on  coming  to  a  stile,  I  saw  a  luminous  figure  float  over  the
stile,!  meeting  me,  and  gradually  disappear  at  my  left  hand.  I  started,  and
said  to  myself,  'That's  Jimmie,'  then  stamped  my  foot  on  the  ground  and
said,  '  How  foolish  I  am  to-night.'  I  reached  home  about  7.30  to  attend
to  my  evening  school,  and  judge  of  my  surprise,  on  entering  the  school,  the
caretaker  met  me  at  the  door,  saying,  'Jimmie  is  dead.'  'When?'  I  said.
He  answered,   '  About  half-an-hour  ago.' "

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  rather
longer  ago  than  Mr.  Chamberlain  imagined — on  Oct.  28,  1867.

In  answer  to  questions,  Mr.  Chamberlain  says  : —

"(1)  The  vision  in  a  general  way  resembled  James,  especially  as  to
size.  The  features  were  not  clearly  defined,  but  more  like  a  magic-lantern
view  not  properly  focussed.

"  (2)  I  knew  that  he  was  ill,  but  not  that  he  was  likely  to  die.

"  (3)  I  was  attached  to  him,  but  I  cannot  say  I  was  particularly
anxious  about  him.  As  far  as  I  remember,  I  went  to  the  house  every
evening,  as  his  father  and  mother  kept  the  coffee-room  of  which  I  had  the
superintendence  ;  so  my  mind  was  occupied  with  his  condition  ;  but  he  was
not  in  my  thoughts  before  I  saw  the  luminous  figure.

"  (4)  I  did  mention  it  to  our  minister,  the  Rev.  A.  Macdougall,  but  I
cannot  say  whether  it  [i.e.,  the  mention]  was  at  the  time  or  near  the  time
— certainly  not  on  the  same  evening.  The  fact  is,  I  was  rather  afraid  of
being  laughed  at.

"  I  only  wish  I  had  been  more  careful  in  recording  the  facts.     I  shall

1  As  regards  the  movement,  compare  cases  203,  204,  512  ;  as  regards  the  luminosity,
see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  550-1.


510  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

never  forget  the  shock  I  received  on  entering  my  evening  school  half-an-
hour  afterwards,  and  learning  from  the  caretaker  that  James  had  died
about  half-an-hour  before."

Mr.  Chamberlain  mentions  that  he  has  had  one  other  visual  hallucina-
tion in  his  life  ;  but  this  was  much  less  distinct,  and  occurred  at  a  time
when  he  was  "  unstrung  by  constant  nursing  and  watching."

[Here  the  coincidence  seems  to  have  been  very  exact ;  but  we  cannot
with  certainty  exclude  the  supposition  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to
the  observer's  anxiety  as  to  his  pupil's  condition.]

(551)  From  the  Rev.  C.  C.  Wambey,  now  of  Paragon,  Wilton  Road,
Salisbury,  the  narrator  of  case  129.

"April,  1884.

"  My  father,  who  was  an  Indian  officer,  retired  from  the  service  at  an
early  age,  owing  to  partial  loss  of  sight,  which  eventuated  in  total
blindness.  He  was  somewhat  eccentric.  Among  other  things,  he  was
in  the  habit  of  frequently  sitting  up  all  night,  retiring  to  bed  when  the
servants  came  down  in  the  morning.

"  We,  that  is  my  father,  mother,  and  their  six  children,  were  living  at
Crossway  Green,  in  the  parish  of  H.,  12  miles  from  the  city  of  W.  One
morning, — how  well  I  remember  it !  I  was  but  a  young  child  then, — a
neighbouring  farmer  called  at  our  house,  and  requested  to  see  Mrs.  W.
immediately.  He  was  shown  into  the  drawing-room  and,  when  my
mother  joined  him,  he  mysteriously  closed  the  door,  and  in  an  excited
manner  asked  if  it  were  all  well  with  the  '  Captain.'  My  mother  replied
that  he  was  quite  well  when  her  eldest  son,  who  had  been  reading  the
newspaper  to  him  in  his  room,  left  him  about  half-an-hour  ago.  The
farmer  shook  his  head  incredulously,  and  took  his  departure.  Shortly
after  this,  one  of  the  servants  having  been  guilty  of  misconduct,  my
mother,  taking  me  with  her,  went  to  my  father's  room  to  acquaint  him
with  the  matter.     As  soon  as  she  had  opened  the  door,  she   started  back

in  horror,  saying  to  me,   '  My ,  here  is  your  father.'     Stretched  on  the

floor,  his  head  against  the  bedstead,  there  he  lay,  dead  !

"  He  was  evidently  in  the  act  of  preparing  to  dress  (for  a  stocking
was  firmly  grasped  in  his  hand),  when  he  was  seized  with  a  fit  of
apoplexy,  death  apparently  having  been  instantaneous.

"  After  the  funeral,  the  farmer  disclosed  to  my  mother  this  start-
ling event,  which  from  motives  of  delicacy,  he  forbore  to  mention  to  her
sooner  : —

"  On  the  morning  of  his  visit,  he  and  his  carter  were  with  a  waggon
and  team  of  horses  crossing  the  common.  Suddenly  my  father,  his  hand
pointing  to  our  house,  appeared  in  front  of  the  horses  (which  commenced
snorting  and  plunging  furiously),  and  as  suddenly  disappeared.  When
the  horses  had  been  calmed,  the  farmer,  leaving  them  in  charge  of  the
carter,  hastened  to  our  house,  and,  as  already  related,  requested  to  see  my
mother  instantly.

"  Cornelius  C.  Wambey."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wambey  says  : —

"  My  father's  death  occurred  when  I  was  in  my  seventh  year.  It  was
the  subject  of  conversation  between  my  mother  and  myself  from  time  to


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  511

time  till  her  death  in  1866,  so  that  the  apparition  was  no  mere  dream  of
childhood.

"  I  saw  the  farmer  come  into  the  house,  and  am  under  the  impression
that  I  was  present  at  the  interview  between  my  mother  and  him,  but
am  uncertain  on  this  point.  However,  my  mother  forthwith  mentioned
to  the  elder  children  the  purport  of  the  farmer's  visit ;  but  at  the  time  she
did  not  attach  importance  to  it,  as  my  father  was  in  his  usual  health
when  my  eldest  brother  left  him,  about  half-an-hour  previously.

"  All  my  brothers  and  sisters  are  dead,  except  one  sister  whom  I  have
not  seen,  and  from  whom  I  have  not  heard,  for  a  long  time."

[Though  the  percipient  here  did  not  actually  describe  his  experience
before  he  heard  of  the  death,  Mr.  Wambey's  remembrance  of  his  strange
visit  assimilates  the  case  to  those  reckoned  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand.
(Vol.  I.,  p.  148).  In  conversation  he  mentioned  his  very  strong  impression
that  he  was  himself  in  the  room  during  this  visit.]

(552)  From  Mrs.  Rooke,  Rawdon  College,  near  Leeds.

On  September  28,  1884,  Mrs.  Rooke  wrote  that,  "About  October,
1882,  at  9  p.m.,"  she  had  had  "a  visual  impression  of  an  intimate  friend
who  was  dead,  though  at  the  time  the  fact  was  unknown  to  me."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  she  adds  : — •

"  Our  dear  friend  had  only  died  within  a  very  short  time  of  my  seeing
him.  He  was  in  Australia,  and  we  heard  of  his  death  a  few  days  over
six  weeks  after  I  saw  him.  He  went  there  for  his  health,  but  the  last
news  we  had  of  him  was  so  good  that  we  were  not  at  all  anxious .  I  was
sorry  afterwards  that  I  had  not  kept  a  note  of  the  exact  day,  but  I  had
always  so  scoffed  at  ghost  tales  and  such  like  things,  that  I  was  most  un-
willing to  believe  I  had  seen  him.  The  gas  was  full  on  at  the  time  ;  there
was  no  light  about  the  figure ;  he  was  as  natural  as  in  life,  but  as  I  came
near  to  him  vanished.  I  was  going  down  a  corridor,  and  the  vision  was
certainly  'external  and  palpable.'  I  should  think  I  saw  him  for  half  a
minute  quite,  and  expected  him  to  come  forward  and  speak.  He  was  very
much  attached  to  us,  as  we  were  to  him.  u  Amelia  M.  Rooke  "

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Rooke  adds  : —

"  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  did  not  mention  the  subject  of  the  apparition
to  any  one  at  the  time  I  saw  it ;  indeed,  not  till  many  months  ^  after  our
friend's  death.  There  is  nothing  at  all  inconsistent  with  the  supposition
that  the  time  of  the  '  vision '  corresponded  with  the  time  of  death.  I
always  thought  it  probably  did  so.  The  dress  was  a  suit  and  cap  I  knew
well,i  but  he  died  in  bed.     I  have  never  had  a  hallucination."

[Here  the  coincidence  is  of  course  doubtful.  It  would  remain  a
remarkable  one,  even  if  the  interval  exceeded  the  1 2  hours'  limit  laid  down
for  the  cases  in  this  book.]

(553  and  554)  From  Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  2,  Victoria  Crescent,  St.
Helier's,  Jersey,  who  sent  us  the  accounts  in  1882.

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  540.

2  This  seems  to  be  a  mistake  :  see  the  "Additions  and  Corrections  "  at  the  beginning
of  the  volume.


512  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Mrs.  Hunter  had  had  a  friend  from  whom  she  had  parted  in  coldness,
and  whom  she  had  not  since  seen  or  corresponded  with.  "  Poor  Z."  (the
real  name  was  privately  given)  "  was  very  far  from  my  thoughts,  when
one  night,  in  the  winter  of  1862  or  spring  of  1863,  I  had  just  got  into
bed.  The  fire  burned  brightly,  and  there  was  my  usual  night  light.  I
was  placing  my  head  on  the  pillows,  when  I  beheld,  close  to  the  side  of
the  bed,  and  on  a  level  with  it,  Z.'s  head,  and  the  same  wistful  look  on
his  face  which  it  had  worn  when  we  had  parted  years  before.  Starting
up,  I  cried  out,  "What  do  you  want*?"  I  did  not  fear;  anger  was
my  feeling.  Slowly  it  retreated,  and  just  as  it  disappeared  in  the  shadow
of  the  wall,  a  bright  spark  of  light  shone  for  a  few  seconds,  and  slowly
expired.^

"A  few  days  after,  my  sister  wrote,  'You  will  have  heard  of  poor  Z.'s
death  on  his  way  to  the  South  of  France.'  I  had  heard  nothing  about
him  for  years.  Special  reasons  prevented  my  inquiring  particularly  into
the  precise  moment  of  his  death.  Strange  to  say  my  bedfellow  was  his
great  pet  among  my  children  ;  she,  however,  slept  through  this  strange
interview."

We  find  from  the  Medical  Register  and  the  Scotsman  that  "  Z."  died
at  Hyeres,  on  Nov.  17,  1862.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Hunter  adds  : —

"  At  Melrose,  where  I  was  a  stranger,  I  could  not  have  mentioned  such
a  thing ;  but  my  sister  paid  me  a  visit  about  Easter,  and  I  told  her.  No
doubt  she  will  confirm  ;  but  I  would  rather  not  recall  the  event."

"  A  daughter  of  mine  in  India  was  expecting  her  confinement  to  happen
at  the  end  of  November,  1872.  I  was  not  anxious  about  her ;  indeed
other  important  family  events  were  occupying  all  my  thoughts.  On  the
23rd  of  October,  at  noon,  I  was  alone.  All  at  once,  a  cold  shivering  feel-
ing came  over  me,  and  I  turned  suddenly,  and  beheld  a  slight  bending
figure,  standing  near  the  closed  door,  covered  over  with  a  loose  glistening
robe  or  sheet  of  an  ash  grey  colour.  It  looked  such  a  sad  little  drooping
figure,  and  the  attitude  and  outline  were  strangely  familiar  to  me ;  yet  I
never  thought  of  her  in  connection  with  it.  On  the  1 9th  November  we
had  the  startling  news  that  she  had  died  (eight  days  after  giving  birth  to
a  son)  on  the  23rd  of  October,  at  5  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  It  was  not
for  some  days  after  that  I  thought  of  what  I  had  seen  in  London  at  that
hour  on  that  day  ;  I  have  never  since  for  a  moment  doubted  that  it  was
she.  I  was  in  London,  and  she  in  India  ;  our  noon  was  the  afternoon  there,
and  her  appearance  must  have  been  at  the  moment  of  dissolution."

We  have  confirmed  the  date  of  death  in  Allen's  Indian  Mail.

[In  both  cases  the  degree  of  exactitude  in  the  coincidence  must  be
regarded  as  uncertain,  in  the  absence  of  proof  that  the  date  of  the  vision
was  accurately  noted  at  the  time.  Mrs.  Hunter  has  had  at  least  one,  and
possibly  a  second,  purely  subjective  hallucination  of  vision  (Yol\  I.,  p.  535,
and  p.  211,  above).]

1  As  regards  the  truncated  appearance — a  head  only — see  p.  33,  note,  and  compare  case
.572  below.  As  regards  the  light,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  .550-1,  and  p.  479  above ;  and  as  regards
the  gradual  disapijearance,  see  p.  97,  second  note.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  513

(555)  From  Mrs.  Perryn,  27,  Adrian  Square,  Westgate-on-Sea.

"April  1st,  1885.
"In  1870  my  mother  was  dangerously  ill,  but  just  before  her  death
seemed  to  be  rallying.  I  was  aware  of  the  improvement.  One  evening,
on  retiring  to  bed,  about  10  o'clock,  I  was  astonished  to  see  the  figure  of
my  mother  just  beside  my  bedroom  door.  I  immediately  told  my  husband
about  it,  and  he  made  a  note  of  the  date  (September  22nd).  My  mother
died  in  Canada  early  on  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  September.  The  figure
looked  as  though  enveloped  in  a  faint  smoke.  ^  It  was  not  recognisable
in  feature ;  but  I  immediately  identified  it  as  the  appearance  of  my
mother.  The  attire  was  the  same  in  which  I  had  last  seen  her  several
years  before.2  up    ^    Pbeeyn."

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  hallu-
cination of  the  senses,  Mrs.  Perryn  replies,  "  This  experience  is  quite  unique
in  my  life."    She  adds,  "  I  have  looked  for  the  note  but  cannot  find  it."

Mr.  Perryn  writes  : — •

"  At  this  length  of  time  I  cannot  feel  justified  in  corroborating  the
above  circumstance.  I  cannot  find  any  note  of  the  event,  though  I  think
one  was  made.  u  j^  g.  Perryn."

(556)  From  Mrs.  Richards,  Spring  Wood,  Godalming.

"  July  3rd,  1883.

"  About  the  year  1834  or  1835,  I  was  in  a  boarding  school  at  Cadogan
Place,  Chelsea,  kept  by  ladies  named  Horn,  where,  amongst  other  pupils,
there  were  two  sisters  with  whom  I  was  very  intimate.  These  girls  came
from  a  distance,  their  home  being  in  the  North  of  England,  I  believe ;
and  travelling  then  being  very  difierent  to  what  it  is  in  these  days  of  rail-
ways, they  did  not  always  go  home  for  their  holidays,  and  consequently
were  not  impressed  by  the  critical  state  of  their  mother's  health.

"  We  slept  in  a  large  dormitory  in  which  were  several  beds,  the  two
sisters  occupying  a  double  bed.  On  a  certain  night,  most  of  the  girls
were  asleep,  and  myself  in  the  next  bed  to  one  of  the  sisters,  who  was
already  in  bed,  and,  like  myself,  anxious  to  be  quiet  and  allowed  to  go  to
sleep  ;  but  we  were  hindered  by  the  frolicksomeness  of  the  younger  sister,
who  sat  outside  the  bed  and  facing  the  door  at  the  end  of  the  room,  which,
I  remember,  was  not  quite  dark,  either  owing  to  moonlight  or  the  time  of
year.  As  the  elder  sister  was  urging  her  to  be  quiet  and  to  get  into  bed,
the  younger  one  suddenly  exclaimed,  and  putting  her  hands  over  her  face,
seemed  greatly  agitated.  As  there  seemed  no  cause  for  this  sudden  excite-
ment, we,  thinking  it  was  only  another  form  of  her  nonsense,  and  fearing
the  noise  would  bring  up  the  governess,  who  also  slept  in  the  room,
scolded  her  well,  upon  which  she  got  into  bed.  Turning  again  to  look
towards  the  door,  she  uttered  another  cry,  directing  her  sister's  attention
to  the  door  ;  but  she  saw  nothing,  ^  and  still  thought  the  younger  one  was
joking.  But  the  latter  buried  her  head  under  the  clothes,  and  I,  being
very  tired,  went  to  sleep  and  thought  no  more  about  this  disturbance.

1  Cf.  case  210,  where  the  lEigure  was  "  surrounded  by  a  light  sort  of  phosphorescen.
mist ;  "  arid  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  first  note.

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  546.

3  See  p.  105,  second  note.

VOL.    II.  '  2    L


514  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  Next  morning  no  notice  was  taken  of  it,  and  no  impression  seems  to
have  been  made  on  my  mind  or  that  of  the  other  girls  ;  probably,  as  I
now  think,  owing  to  our  being  accustomed  to  the  volatile  disposition  of
the  younger  sister.  However,  about  two  days  afterwards,  the  sisters  were
summoned  into  the  room  of  the  ladies  of  the  school  to  receive  letters.
Shortly  after,  I  was  sent  for,  and  found  them  in  floods  of  tears,  having
just  heard  the  news  of  their  mother's  death.  Being  their  chief  friend,  I
was  excused  from  lessons  that  I  might  be  with  them,  and  try  to  console
them.  As  we  were  approaching  our  room,  the  younger  sister  stopped  us
suddenly,  and  grasping  my  arm  with  violence,  she  said,  '  Oh,  do  you  re-
member the  other  night  when  I  was  frightened  %  I  believe  it  was  dear
mamma  that  I  saw.  Let  us  go  back  and  ask  more  about  it,'  or  words  to
that  effect.  We  went  back  to  Miss  Horn's  apartment,  and  on  referring
to  the  letter,  we  found  that  their  mother  had  died,  as  nearly  as  we  could
calculate,  at  the  same  hour  that  the  incident  in  the  dormitory  occurred.

"This  is  what  the  girl  said  she  saw:  A  tall,  slight  figure  in  white,
resembling  her  mother,  as  she  now  thought,  though  she  did  not  recognise
features,  who,  with  outstretched  arms,  seemed  to  beckon  to  her.

"  Talking  it  over  on  the  same  day,  she  remarked,  '  Ah,  I  think  I  see
now  why  dear  mamma  appeared  to  me.  She  had  often  reproved  me  for
my  giddiness,  and  as  she  was  dying,  she  wished  to  give  me  one  more  look
and  reproof.  1  will  try  and  be  very  different.  I  shall  never  forget  her
warning,'  &c.  She  appeared  deeply  impressed,  but  as  the  sisters  and  I
were  soon  parted,  and  did  not  correspond,  I  lost  sight  of  them.

"  This  is  a  true  account,  and  I  believe  clearly  remembered  by  me,
though  so  many  years  ago.  Neither  I  nor  the  sister  saw  the  appearance,
but  witnessed  the  effect  on  the  girl  who  did  see  it,  both  being  quite  awake."

We  find  from  Boyle's  Court  Guide  that  Mrs.  and  the  Misses  Horn
lived  at  41,  Cadogan  Place,  Chelsea,  from  1836-8.  Mrs.  Richards  has
therefore  antedated  the  incident  by  a  year  or  two.

[The  case  is  remote ;  but  when  the  central  fact,  narrated  by  an  eye-
vntness  of  the  scene,  is  so  precisely  like  that  of  numbers  of  more  recent
and  corroborated  cases,  the  hypothesis  that  it  has  been  unconsciously
invented  does  not  seem  specially  probable.]

(557)  The  narrator  of  the  next  case  objects  to  publicity,   and  takes

no  interest  in  the  subject.  ^.^  ,       /,,,     mrv^

"^  "November  6th,  1884.

"When  I  was  about  10  or  12  years  old,  I  was  sitting  one  evening,
towards  dusk,  at  the  piano  practising,  when  I  saw  an  old  lady,  the  grand-
mother of  one  of  my  schoolfellows,  enter  the  room.  I  was  in  the  habit  of
seeing  her  frequently,  and  recognised  her  perfectly.  She  was  very  old,
and  to  the  best  of  my  belief  had  never  entered  our  house  at  all,  so  that  I
was  greatly  surprised  to  see  her.  I  heard  the  next  day  she  had  died  on
the  evening  I  saw  her.     I  never  had  any  other  hallucination.

"  Mary  C."

In  conversation.  Miss  C.  explained  to  Mr.  Podmore  that  she  did  not
actually  see  the  figure  enter  the  room.  She  looked  up  suddenly,  and
found  it  standing  by  her  side.  The  figure  was  in  ordinary  indoor  dress,
with,  as  she  particularly  noticed,  a  large  white  cap,  of  muslin  and  lace,
such  as  the  old  lady  usually  wore.     The  figure  vanished  suddenly  as  she


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  515

looked  at  it.  The  room,  though  dusk,  was  not  dark,  and  she  was  able
distinctly  to  recognise  the  features.

She  cannot  be  certain  whether  she  told  anyone  of  what  she  had  seen.
She  probably  told  the  friend  (the  granddaughter  of  the  lady  who  died)
from  whom  she  heard  the  news  of  the  death  next  day.  The  time  of  the
death  she  does  not  remember.

She  knew  the  old  lady  well,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  running  in  to
see  her  nearly  every  day.  But  at  this  distance  of  time  she  cannot  recol-
lect whether  the  death  was  regarded  as  imminent.

She  has  lost  sight  of  her  friend,  and  can  get  no  further  particulars.
The  incident  occurred  about  1852;  but  the  name  of  the  lady  who  died
being  a  very  common  one,  our  efforts  to  obtain  the  exact  date  have  failed.

The  next  case  seems  to  illustrate  the  heightening  of  the  per-
cipient's susceptibility  at  the  approach  of  death.  It  is,  of  course,
very  rarely  that  there  is  a  chance  for  this  to  be  observed ;  as  it  can
only  comparatively  rarely  happen  that  death  (or  some  event  of  critical
interest)  happens  to  A's  friend  or  relative  at  a  distance,  at  the  par-
ticular time  that  A  is  dying.      But  I  may  refer  to  cases  372  and  416.

(558)  From  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald,  formerly  of  Manchester,  and
now  of  Rhyl.  The  evidence  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  first-hand  from
the  percipient's  daughter.

"September,  1878.

"  During  the  last  illness  of  Mr.  William  Jackson,  of  Otley,  who  for  50
years  had  been  a  consistent  member  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church,
the  little  son  of  his  daughter  sickened  and  died.  Wishing  not  unneces-
sarily to  disquiet  the  good  man,  this  sad  event  was  withheld  from  him.  He
was  full  of  holy  joy,  and  recognised  the  presence  in  his  chamber  of  a
number  of  his  relatives  who  had  departed  this  life  in  the  triumph  of  faith.
He  pointed  them  out  in  succession — this  is  so-and-so,  and  there  such
another.  In  the  course  of  this  proceeding  he  suddenly  started  with  sur-
prise, for  he  discovered  his  grandson  also  among  the  heavenly  company.
Then  turning  to  his  daughter,  he  said,  '  Well,  never  mind,  he  is  all  right.'

"  His  daughter,  Miss  Jane  Jackson,  certifies  this.  She  says,  '  It  is
perfectly  true  ;  I  was  in  the  room  with  my  lamented  father  at  the  time.' "

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Macdonald  writes  : —

"  As  to  the  case  of  William  Jackson,  his  daughter  did  endorse  it  to  me
as  noted  in  the  quotation  marks,  but  I  destroyed  her  letter,  never  dream-
ing of  a  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  I  do  not  know  now  where  to
find  her.  The  family  evidently  knew  that  the  grandson  had  died,  but  kept
that  knowledge  from  the  dying  man.  The  information  I  received  from  the
wife  of  Mr.  Town  Councillor  Myers,  of  Hull."  Miss  Jackson  is  since
deceased.     We  learn  that  Mr.  Jackson  died  on  Jan.  12,  1876.

[The  central  incident  in  a  case  of  this  type  seems  reasonably  explicable
by  thought-transference  from  one  of  the  bystanders  (cf.  case  379) — though
many  would  of  course  be  unwilling  to  regard  the  vision  of  the  other  relatives  ■
as  purely  subjective.  I  have  referred  more  than  once  to  the  difiiculty  of
making  quite  sure  that  a  piece  of  important  news,  which  is  abroad  in  a
household,  has  not  reached  ears  for  which  it  was  not  intended.]

VOL.    II.  2   L   2


516  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(559  and  560)  From  Mr.  Hickman  Heather,  Postmaster  of  Retford.
The  evidence  in  the  first  case  is  second-hand,  but  in  the  second  is  on  a  par
with  first-hand  (Vol.  L,  p.  148).  ,,  February  18th,  1885.

"  In  my  early  boyhood  I  have  frequently  heard  the  following  story
from  both  my  parents.  I  may  preface  the  story  by  saying  that,  in  1835,
my  father,  Thomas  Heather,  was  a  miller,  occupying  a  windmill  in  West-
thorpe  Fields,  in  the  parish  of  Southwell,  his  house  being  at  Westthorpe,
about  one  mile  distant  from  the  mill.  My  grandfather,  John  Heather,
occupied  a  farm  under  the  late  Sir  Richard  Sutton,  at  Goverton,  in  the
parish  of  Bleasby,  about  3  miles  distant.  My  father,  who  had  been  work-
ing his  mill  until  past  midnight,  locked  up  his  mill  and  went  home.  On
his  way  the  apparition  of  his  mother  crossed  his  path,  and  was  so  clearly
seen  that  he  marked  the  dress,  one  which  had  been  commonly  worn,  and
on  his  arrival  at  home  he  at  once  reported  the  circumstance  to  [his  wife]
my  mother,  saying  that  '  he  had  never  seen  his  mother  more  plainly  in  his
life.'  Early  next  morning,  a  man  rode  in  with  the  sad  news  that  my
grandmother  had  been  found  dead  in  her  bed.

"  A  second  case  occurred  under  my  own  notice,  although  the  apparition
was  not  seen  by  me.  In  the  year  1854,  my  father,  who  then  lived  at
Goverton,  Bleasby,  was  building  a  house  and  a  yard  for  pigs.  The  build-
ing and  the  yard  were  on  a  slope.  My  father  was  standing  at  the  lower
end  with  his  arms  resting  upon  the  wall ;  the  entrance  to  the  house  from
the  yard  was  directly  opposite,  and  was  open,  the  door  not  having  been
hung.  I  was  in  the  farmyard  at  some  little  distance,  but  having  a  clear
full  view  of  my  father  and  the  building,  when  I  was  startled  by  my  father
exclaiming,  '  Jack,  just  see  what  your  Uncle  Ned  is  doing  in  the  pigsty.'
I  at  once  went,  although  I  knew  it  to  be  impossible  that  my  Uncle  Ned
could  be  there,  he  being  seriously  ill  at  the  time.  Having  searched  the
place,  my  father  told  me  that  he  had  distinctly  seen  my  uncle  cross  the
doorway,  and  would  scarcely  believe  that  he  was  not  to  be  found  inside.
In  about  a  couple  of  hours,  a  messenger  brought  the  tidings  that  my
uncle  had  died.

"  I  beg  to  add  that  in  the  case  of  my  grandmother  there  was  no
previous  illness,  she  having  gone  to  bed  in  apparently  perfect  health.

"John  Hickman  Heather."

We  have  procured  a  copy  of  an  inscription  of  a  tombstone  at  Bleasby,
which  confirms  the  fact  that  Mrs.  John  Heather  died  in  1835  (May  2).

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Edward  Heather  died
on  Nov.  28,  1853,  not  1854.

Mr.  Heather's  wife  writes  on  May  22,  1886,  to  confirm  these  accounts,
which  she  herself  "  heard  from  the  lips  of  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thomas
Heather."

The  narrator  of  the  following  cases  is  the  brother  of  the  narrator
of  No.  232  ;  it  is  possible  therefore  to  suppose  some  degree  of  family-
susceptibility  (p.  132,  note).  The  first  case  may  have  been  an  illusion,
and  I  give  it  no  separate  evidential  number.

(561)  From  the  Rev.  H.  A.  H.,  The  Vicarage .


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  517

"  December  19th,  1885.

"  The  following  occurrences  took  place  three  years  ago,  and  had
reference  to  parishioners  here  who  were  much  on  my  mind,  and  whom  I
was  visiting  in  their  last  illnesses.

"  One  was  a  farmer's  wife  who  was  much  afraid  of  giving  me  trouble.
I  had  given  her  the  Holy  Communion  during  the  afternoon,  and  when  I
left,  promised  to  come  again  next  day.  She  said  she  should  be  very  glad
to  see  me,  but  did  not  like  to  be  such  a  trouble,  as  it  was  some  distance
and  I  was  going  every  day.  I  said  it  was  no  trouble,  but  the  reason  why
I  was  here,  and  I  should  be  sure  to  come.

"  That  evening  I  had  a  mission  service,  2  miles  away,  in  quite  another
direction.  Mrs.  H.  was  with  me.  We  were  walking  home  together,  and
had  joked  about  not  meeting  anyone  on  the  road.  I  said,  '  You  see  if  you
had  been  alone,  you  would  actually  have  met  no  one  to  alarm  you.'  It
was  rather  dark,  but  you  could  see  a  form  15  or  20  yards  away.  We
walked  on,  talking  about  various  things,  and  then  I  saw  someone  coming.
I  said  '  Here  we  meet  someone  at  last.'  She  said,  '  I  don't  see  anyone.'
'  There,'  I  said  ;  '  look,  there  comes  an  old  woman,  and  she  is  twisting  her
shawl  round  her  neck.'  My  wife,  however,  could  see  nothing,^  but  I
thought  to  myself  she  will  see  her  plainly  enough  directly.  However,  it
melted  away.  There  was  no  one.  I  said,  '  It  is  very  odd ;  I  certainly  did
see  an  old  woman.  Let  us  go  into  C.'s  house'  (the  village  carpenter's)  '  and
see  if  there  is  anyone  dead.'  We  went  in,  and  he  said,  '  I  have  just  got
orders  to  make  a  coffin.'  I  looked  at  Mrs.  H.  and  said,  '  Indeed,  who  is  it
for?'  He  said,  'For Mrs.  B.,'  naming  the  farmer's  wife  I  had  seen  that
very  afternoon.  I  said,  '  There  must  be  some  mistake.  I  only  left  her  at
4  o'clock,  and  there  were  no  signs  of  immediate  death.'  '  No,'  he  said,  '  it
is  so.'  I  went  next  day,  and  found  she  had  died  from  a  sudden  stoppage
of  the  heart,  about  half-past  8,  and  that  almost  the  last  words  were,  '  I  am
sorry  to  give  Mr.  H.  the  trouble  of  coming  again  to-morrow.'

"  The  other  occasion  was  about  two  or  three  months  afterwards.  A
very  respectable  young  farmer  broke  a  bloodvessel  on  the  brain,  and  I
visited  him  some  three  or  four  times.  The  last  time  he  was  quite
unconscious,  and  evidently  could  not  live  long.  He  was  very  anxious  to
see  me  as  much  as  possible  before  becoming  unconscious,  often  saying,
'  Send  for  the  vicar.'  On  the  morning  that  he  died,  I  was  awoke  by  what
I  thought  was  Mrs.  H.  in  her  white  dressing-gown.  We  were  sleeping,  for
some  reason,  in  separate  rooms  that  night.  I  was  very  sleepy  when  awoke,
and  said,  '  Is  it  time  to  get  up  ?  I  must  have  another  10  minutes,'  and
fell  asleep  again.  I  did  not  look  at  the  face  of  the  form,  being  very  sleepy
and  feeling  sure  it  was  Mrs.  H.  However,  by-and-bye,  Mrs.  H.  did  come
in,  and  said,  '  Young  R.  is  dead  ;  the  girl  who  brings  the  milk  brought
word.'  I  said,  'Is  it  very  long  since  jom first  woke  me?'  Then  she
assured  me  it  was  the  first  time  she  had  been  in  the  room.  He  had  died
about  5  that  very  morning,  just  as  I  fancied  I  had  been  called  by  Mrs.  H.
My  regret  is,  I  did  not  look  at  the  face,  but,  being  tired  and  sleepy  I  only
saw  the  figure  up  to  the  waist,  and  went  ofi"  to  sleep  with  it  standing  there,
never  imagining  it  was  not  my  wife.  This  is  my  last  hallucination.  I
have  visited  scores  of  deathbeds  since,  but  have  had  no  further  visions.

^  See  p.  105,  second  note.


518  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  I  may  add  I  am  in  no  way  nervous,  but  a  strong,  middle-aged  man,
in  excellent  health,  and  very  temperate  in  eating  as  well  as  drinking.  I
don't  quite  know  how  to  account  for  these  things,  except  that  both  these
people  were  much  in  my  mind,  and  both  of  them  people  for  whom  I  had
much  respect  and  sympathy.  "  H.  A.  H."

In  conversation,  Mr.  H.  mentioned  that  he  has  had  two  experiences  of
apparently  subjective  visual  hallucination  ;  but  these  both  occurred  when
he  was  a  boy.     He  adds  in  subsequent  letters  : —

"  I  may  add,  as  regards  the  first  of  the  two  curious  visions,  that  I  was
very  constantly  walking  that  road  at  that  hour,  as  I  had  a  weekly  service  ;
but  that  was  the  only  occasion  my  eyes  misled  me.  When  I  first  saw  the
figure,  it  appeared  to  be  crossing  the  road,  but  in  our  direction,  like  a  person
changing  from  the  footpath  to  the  middle  of  the  road.  It  was,  of  course,
somewhat  shadowy,  as  a  person  is  in  the  dusk.  Still,  it  had  the  look  of  an
old  woman  ;  I  could  distinguish  the  sex.  The  road  is  a  country  one,  but  on
nearing  the  village  there  are  some  lamp-posts,  but  we  were  some  distance
from  them.  It  was  a  cloudy  and  rather  windy  night,  and  there  were,  of
course,  shadows  from  clouds  and  trees  cast  about ;  it  was  not  deej>  dark,
but  more  than  dusk.  I  am  so  accustomed  to  these  walks  that  it  would  be
difficult  for  any  natural  object  to  have  caused  such  an  illusion.  I  was  quite
sure  that  an  old  woman  was  there,  in  the  middle  of  the  road — so  sure  that
I  did  not  keep  my  eye  upon  her,  and  as  we  came  up  she  was  gone.  Mrs.  H.
has  ordinary  eyesight,  much  like  my  own,  neither  remarkable  for  great
acuteness  of  vision  nor  the  reverse.

"  I  may  add,  too,  regarding  the  second  case,  that  I  was  fully  awake,
though  heavy  with  sleep,  and  did  not  dream  Mrs.  H.  awoke  me.  I  am
personally  convinced  of  this,  for  I  wondered,  as  I  went  ofi"  to  sleep  again,
that  Mrs.  H.  did  not  go,  and  thought  she  would  tell  me  in  another  minute
or  two  that  I  really  must  get  up.  I  fell  asleep  with  the  sensation  of  her
presence  after  my  eyes  were  closed  again."

Mrs.  H.  writes  :—  a  December  23rd,  1885.

"  As  you  wish  to  have  some  corroboration  of  two  curious  statements
of  facts  made  to  you  by  my  husband,  I  write  a  few  lines  to  tell  you  my
remembrance  of  the  occasions.  We  were  walking  home  from  a  week-night
service,  from  a  hamlet  some  distance  from  here,  when  I  remarked  I  would
not  walk  here  alone  for  anything.  Mr.  H.  said,  '  It  is  curious  we  have
never  met  anyone.'  Not  long  afterwards,  as  we  were  nearing  the  village,
he  said,  '  Well,  here  comes  someone  at  last ;  who  is  it  ? '  I  said,  '  I  don't
see  anyone.'  He  said,  '  Oh  you  must,  by  the  lamp-post '  [there  is  a
discrepancy  here  from  Mr.  H.'s  account]  ;  '  she  is  putting  a  shawl  over
her  head,  and  coming  to  meet  us.  Do  you  know  her  % '  I  said,  '  Certainly
not,  for  there  isn't  anyone.'  He  said,  '  Anyhow  she  is  coming  quickly
towards  us;  then  you  must  see.'  In  another  minute  we  were  both  sure
it  must  have  been  some  appearance,  and  went  into  the  carpenter's  close  by
to  see  if  we  could  hear  anything,  and  his  first  words  were,  '  Well,  sir,  I
have  orders  for  a  coffin  for  Mrs.  B.'  We  both  said,  '  Impossible  !  she
seemed  nicely  this  afternoon.'  I  know  she  was  anxious  to  spare  my
husband  any  trouble,  as  it  was  a  long  walk,  and  we  naturally  connected  it
with  this.

"  As  regards  the  young  farmer,  he  had  been  much  on  our  minds,  as  it


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  519

was  a  distressing  case  in  many  ways.  Word  was  brought  early  in  the
morning  that  he  was  dead ;  but  owing  to  one  of  the  children  not  being
well,  and  having  to  be  in  my  room,  Mr.  H.  was  in  an  adjoining  one,  and
I  would  not  disturb  him  until  later.  When  I  went  in  I  said,  '  Well,  poor
J.  R.  is  gone.'  He  said,  '  I  knew  he  would  be  ;  but  why  didn't  you  tell
me  when  you  came  in  before  1 '  I  said,  '  I  have  not  been  in  before.'  He
said,  '  Yes,  when  you  came  in  to  wake  me,  and  I  begged  for  at  all  events
10  minutes  more.'  He  then  told  me  what  he  had  said  to  me — as  he
thought,  and  he  was  surprised  I  did  not  answer.  It  must  be  three  or  four
years  ago,  but  I  remember  these  facts  distinctly.  "  E.  H."

[Neither  of  these  cases  would  be  very  striking  alone,  but  they  are  of
interest  as  occurring  to  the  same  percipient.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt
that  the  experience  in  the  second  instance  was  a  hallucination,  not  an
illusion ;  and  the  same  account  of  the  first  experience  is  rendered  to  some
extent  probable  by  the  fact  that  Mrs.  H.  did  not  share  it,  though  any
moving  object  should  have  been  as  visible  to  her  as  her  husband.  And  if
the  experiences  were  hallucinations,  the  improbability  that  Mr.  H.  should
subjectively  evolve  the  only  two  hallucinations  of  his  adult  life  at  those  par-
ticular moments  remains  enormous,  however  much  allowance  be  made  for
the  fact  that  he  was  aware  that  his  two  parishioners  were  in  a  dying  state.]

In  the  following  case  the  percipient  was  a  young  child.  It  is  a
phantasmal  case  which  may  be  compared  to  the  merely  impressional
cases,  Nos.  47  and  48,  and  the  dream-case,  No.  456.  See  also  cases
345,  352,  607,  634,  652.

(562)  From  Mrs.   Skyring,  Admiralty  Offices,  Spring  Gardens,  S.W.
The   account    was    procured    for  us    by  Mr.    A.  W.    Lafone,    M.P.,    o
Hatton,  Bedfont.  ,j^^^^  jgg3

"In  or  about  the  year  1832,  my  husband,  Captain  Skyring,  R.IST.,
left  England  on  a  surveying  expedition  in  command  of  H.M.S.  '  Etna' ;
our  little  son,  Willie,  was  about  2  years  old  at  the  tune  of  his  departure.
The  child  was  very  fond  of  carrying  about  a  miniature  portrait  of  his
father,  and  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1833,  the  child  being  about  3  years
old,  he  was  playing  in  a  curtained  recess  in  the  nursery  when  I  heard  him
call  out  in  an  excited  tone  '  Papa,  papa,  come  to  me.'  On  my  questioning
him  he  declared  he  had  seen  his  father,  and  was  so  agitated  that  I  was
afraid  to  allude  to  the  subject  again.  Shortly  afterwards  I  received  news
from  the  Admiralty  that  Captain  Skyring  had  been  murdered  by  the
natives  at  Cape  Roxo  on  the  day  in  question.  My  son,  who  is  now  dead,
lived  to  be  a  man,  but  had  no  recollection  of  this  episode.

"I  may  add  that  Captain  Skyring,  when  lieutenant  of  H.M.S.
'  Beagle,'  related  that  his  mother  appeared  to  him  as  he  was  lying  in  his
cot,  and  that  he  entered  the  occurrence  in  his  log-book  at  the  time  ;  and
discovered,  on  his  return  to  England,  that  she  had  died  on  the  date  of  the
apparition.  "S.  L.  Skyring."

[This  case  is  again  very  remote  ;  it  is,  moreover,  impossible  to  be  sure
that  independent  note  was  taken  of  the  date  of  the  cry.  But  the  incident
of  the  child's  agitation  is  not  likely  to  have  been  unconsciously  imagined


520  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

and  the  coincidence  must  have  been,  at  any  rate,  close  enough  to  excite
remark.  The  last  paragraph  in  the  account  once  more  suggests  that  the
capacity  of  percipience  was  hereditary ;  but  the  detail  as  to  the  log-book  is
not  one  that  can  be  relied  on  (Vol.  I.,  p.  161,  note).]

(563)  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood  took  down  the  following  deposition,
in  September,  1876,  from  Jane  Barford,  the  confidential  servant  (since
deceased)  of  a  friend.  Miss  Stephen.

"My  father  died  the  11th  January,  1848.  My  mother  had  sent  me
away  to  an  aunt,  who  lived  about  two  miles  off,  in  order  to  be  out  of  the
way  while  my  father  was  so  ill.  On  the  morning  of  his  death  I  was
called  at  6  o'clock,  intending,  as  usual,  to  help  my  cousins  in  the  dairy.
About  a  quarter  before  7,  I  was  going  downstairs  with  my  candle  in  my
hand,  when  I  met  my  father  in  his  night-shirt  coming  up.  He  put  out
his  hand,  as  if  to  take  the  candlestick,  which  I  dropped  in  my  fright,  and
was  left  alone  in  the  dark.  I  knew  it  could  not  be  my  living  father,  and
was  convinced  that  he  was  dead,  and  had  come  to  bid  me  good-bye.  I
told  my  cousins  what  had  happened,  and  said  that  I  must  immediately  go
home.  They  tried  to  persuade  me  to  stay  till  after  breakfast,  saying  it
was  only  my  fancy,  but  I  set  off  at  once,  and  on  my  way  I  met  my  aunt,
who  had  been  sitting  up  with  my  father,  and  was  coming  back  to  tell  me
of  his  death,  which  had  taken  place  just  at  a  quarter  before  7.

"  Jane  Barford."

[The  cousins  cannot  now  be  traced  ;  and  as  Miss  Stephen  has  no  clue
to  Jane  Barford's  family,  the  date  of  the  death  cannot  be  independently
verified.  The  case  is  one  which  could  have  had  little  force,  since  the
percipient  had  no  doubt  been  in  anxiety  about  her  father  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509),
but  for  the  extreme  closeness  of  the  alleged  concidence.]

(564)  From  Mrs.  Poulter,  wife  of  a  retired  Baptist  minister  at  Leeds.

"1883.

"  When  I  was  a  young  woman,  I  lived  for  some  time  at  Sevenoaks,  and
attended  a  Wesleyan  class  conducted  by  an  elderly  lady  to  whom  I  became
warmly  attached.  After  that  (in  1835)  I  went  to  live  at  Bourne,  in
Lincolnshire,  and  one  day,  while  sitting  in  my  front  room,  I  was  startled
at  seeing  my  dear  old  friend  from  Sevenoaks  pass  the  window,  and  go
towards  the  front  door.  I  hastened  to  receive  her,  but  on  opening  the
front  door  there  was  no  one  to  be  seen  in  the  whole  length  of  the  quiet
street.     I  afterwards  learnt  that  at  that  hour  my  friend  died."

Mrs.  Boulter's  son-in-law,  Mr.  J.  L.  Cherry,  of  Rowley  Park,  Stafford,
writes  to  Professor  Barrett : — "  It  is  some  20  years  since  Mrs.  Poulter
first  told  me  the  story,  and  since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you,  she  has
certified  to  the  accuracy  of  the  draft  which  I  submitted  to  her."

[The  account  is  very  incomplete ;  but  Mrs.  Poulter  is  old,  and  must
not  be  troubled  further.]

(565)  From  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  3,  Bouverie  Square,  Folkestone.

"  October  8th,  1883.
"In  1854  we  resided  in  Hanau.    We  kept  two  servants.     One  winter's


v.]  VISUAL  CASUS.  621

evening,  just  before  going  to  bed,  Gretchen  came  pouncing  into  the
dining-room  where  we  were  sitting,  in  great  excitement,  declaring  that
her  father,  whom  she  had  left  in  good  health  at  Gelhihausen,  had  just
appeared  to  her  with  such  dejection  in  his  countenance  that  she  must  go  to
him  that  moment ;  and  off  she  started  in  the  snow,  and  reached  Gelln-
hausen  in  time  to  close  her  parent's  breaking  eyes.  I  cannot  procure
further  evidence."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lyons  says  : —

"  It  made  a  deep  impression  on  me,  and  is  now  quite  fresh  on  my
mind.  I  certainly  was  in  the  room,  and  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in
my  mind."

(566)  From  Mrs.  Morris,  Pentrabach,  Trecastle,  Breconshire.

"  September  l7th,  1884.

"  Early  in  1881,  I  had  just  returned  from  a  drive  with  my  aunt,  whom
I  had  seen  off  by  train  to  what  we  felt  sure  was  the  death-bed  of  a  little
cousin.  It  must  have  been  about  6  in  the  evening.  I  was  standing  at
my  dressing-table  taking  off  my  hat,  when  I  heard  someone  try  my^  door.
I  crossed  the  room  and  opened  the  door  at  once  and  saw,  standing  in  the
doorway,  the  figure  of  little  G.,  looking  very,  very  white,  and  dressed  in
a  white  night-dress.  What  struck  me  most  was  that  his  hands  were  crossed,
and  in  the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  were  two  lilies  and  a  leaf.  The  face
smiled  at  me  ;  and,  as  I  stood  looking,  the  figure  disappeared.

"  The  following  day  I  went  up  to  join  my  aunt,  and  heard  that  G.  had
died  about  4  o'clock  the  afternoon  before,  and  that  she  had  seen  him  soon
after  her  arrival.  I  immediately  asked  if  he  had  lilies  of  the  valley  in  his
hand,  and  she  said,  '  Yes.'  I  then  described  his  figure,  as  I  had  seen  it,
and  she  said  it  was  precisely  as  he  looked  and  was  lying  at  the  time  ;  that
his  sister  had  bought  him,  at  a  florist's,  the  lilies,  and  sent  them  up  to  him  ;
that  he  had  been  delighted  with  them,  and  had  held  them  until  he  died  ;
and  that  they  were  now  in  his  hand.

"  Of  course,  my  mind  was  full  of  him,  and  wondering  whether  my  aunt
would  find  him  alive,  &c.  But  if  that  would  have  made  me  imagine  I  saw
him,  why  should  it  have  caused  me  to  imagine  lilies  of  the  valley  in  depth
of  winter  (it  was  the  time  of  the  deep  snow),  and  of  which  I  had  not
heard  1  "  Mary  Ethel  Morris."

We  find  from  two  obituary  notices  that  the  child  died  on  Jan.  26,  1881,
aged  7  years.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Morris  writes,  on  October  22,  1884  : —

"  I  will  write  to  my  aunt  and  ask  her  to  confirm  my  account  of  my
little  cousin's  appearance,  as  I  feel  sure  she  will  not  hesitate  to  do  so.

"  I  did  distinctly  see  lilies  of  the  valley  in  the  child's  hand."

Mrs.  Morris's  aunt  writes,  in  a  portion  of  a  letter  enclosed  to  us  on
Nov.  7,   1884  :—

"  As  regards  poor  little  G.,  I  quite  remember  your  saying  that  you
saw  him  outside  your  door,  and  I  do  remember  something  about  your
saying  you  saw  him  with  the  lilies.  I  have  an  idea  you  said  so,  but  it  was
such  a  sad  thing  altogether  that  things  are  misty,    u  ]\^ary  Selwood."

Mrs.  Morris  adds,  on  Jan.  26,   1886  : —


522  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  As  far  as  I  can  recollect  I  did  not  mention  my  seeing  my  cousin  at
the  time.  I  was  alone  in  the  house  with  two  very  nervous  servants,
so  that  I  hardly  think  it  likely  I  should  speak  to  them  about  anything
'  ghostly.'  But  I  told  my  aunt,  describing  the  child's  appearance,  before
she  had  told  me  any  particulars  of  the  death,  the  flowers,  &c."

Mrs.  Morris  has  had  two  other  hallucinations  representing  a  figure,
which  in  both  instances  was  unrecognised  ;  one  of  these  occurred  at  the
moment  of  waking ;  the  second  may  have  been  due  to  nervousness  or
expectancy,  as  another  member  of  the  household  had  been  similarly
affected  just  before.  But  Mrs.  Morris  is  certainly  not  of  a  nervous
or  fanciful  temperament.

[It  is  no  doubt  possible  that  the  hallucination  in  this  case  was  purely
subjective,  and  connected  with  anxiety  on  the  child's  account ;  but  it  is
difiicult  to  believe  that  the  correspondence  of  the  lilies  was  accidental.
Mrs.  Morris  is  certain  that  there  was  no  association  in  her  mind  between
the  child  and  this  particular  flower  ;  and  the  idea  of  getting  the  lilies  for
him  had  been  a  sudden  one.]

(567)  From  the  late  Mrs.  Amos,  Hythe.  "October    1884

"  I  was  living  at  Faversham  at  the  time  when  my  mother  was  taken
ill,  who  lived  at  Hythe,  Kent.  I  went  to  see  her  on  a  Friday  and  returned
home  on  Tuesday.  On  Thursday  I  retired  to  rest  at  about  10  o'clock,
when,  on  looking  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  I  saw  my  mother  standing  dressed
in  white  ;  her  features  were  very  distinct.  I  spoke  to  my  husband  and
asked  him  to  look  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  as  mother  stood  looking  at  me.
He  said,  '  I  don't  see  her  ;  can  you  see  her  now  1 '  ^  My  reply  was,  '  Yes.'
After  that  she  vanished  slowly  away.  My  husband  said  it  was  very  odd,
and  at  breakfast  he  asked  me  if  I  was  afraid  to  be  alone.  My  reply  was,
I  would  rather  be  by  myself.  The  next  day  we  had  a  letter  to  say  my
dear  mother  was  at  rest.  I  can  still  see  her  as  plain  as  at  that  time.  The
date  was  November,  1846.  I  have  never  had  another  vision  but  this
one.  u  Sar;^h  Amos."

We  find  from  the  obituaries  in  two  Dover  papers  that  Mrs.  Amos'
mother,  Mrs.  Wiles,  died  on  ISTov.  21,   1846.

Our  friend.  Miss  Porter,  who  knew  and  questioned  Mrs.  Amos,  says  : —

"  I  am  quite  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  her  statement.  In  describing
the  apparition  to  me,  she  told  me  that  the  room  was  quite  dark,  but  that
there  seemed  to  be  a  sort  of  cloud  of  light  behind  the  figure  which  enabled
her  to  see  it  distinctly.^  She  was  very  particular  in  telling  me  that  it
remained  all  the  time  she  was  talking  to  her  husband,  and  that  she  looked
at  it  fixedly  the  whole  time.  She  thinks  that  it  must  have  remained
several  minutes."

[The  percipient's  previous  state  of  anxiety  has  again  to  be  noted,  as
possibly  the  cause  of  the  hallucination.]

(568)  Quoted  "  from  the  Memoirs  of  F.  Th.  Engelhardt"  in  the  work
of  Professor  Pogodine,  of  Moscow,  Simple  Discourse  on  Difficult  Subjects,

1  See  p.  105,  second  note.

2  See  p.  459,  note,  and  compare  case  210.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  523

mentioned  on  p.  508.  We  have  been  unable  to  procure  the  original
Memoirs  ;  and  Mr.  T.  Bruhns,  of  Simferopol,  a  Corresponding  Member  of
the  S.P.R.,  who  has  translated  the  passage,  has  been  equally  unsuccessful.
"  In  1858,  I  lived  in  Moscow,  and  was  ordered  to  go  for  some  time  to
Arkhangelsk.  On  February  (5th-17th,)  before  leaving,  I  wrote  a  con-
gratulatory letter  to  my  mother  in  Petersburg,  who  was  about  to  celebrate
(on  February  8th-20th)  the  80th  anniversary  of  her  birthday.  I  congratu-
lated my  dear  mother,  and  entreated  her  to  bless  me  for  my  long  journey.
Without  her  blessing  I  feared  that  my  journey  would  be  unhappy.  I  sent
my  letter  and  departed.  Up  to  laroslavsk  the  road  was  tolerably  good.
In  this  town  I  spent  a  day.  But  from  laroslavsk  to  Vologda  the  road
became  so  terribly  bad  that  I  was  obliged  to  stop  at  one  station,  to  rest  till
the  morning.  Having  taken  out  my  pelisse,  I  lay  dressed  on  the  sofa.  I
don't  belong  to  that  happy  class  of  men  who  fall  asleep  as  soon  as  they  lie
down.  I  took  a  book  and  tried  to  read,  but  my  fatigue  was  so  great  that
I  could  not  read.  I  rose  from  the  sofa  and  extinguished  the  candle,
thinking  that  in  darkness  I  should  fall  asleep  more  quickly.  Scarcely  had  I
again  reached  my  bed  when  I  saw,  to  my  great  astonishment,  my  mother
with  her  sister,  who  had  died  in  1846,^  standing  a  few  feet  from  me.
Vividly  impressed  by  this  extraordinary  vision,  I  looked,  motionless,  at
these  dear  ones.  My  mother  was  standing  before  me  as  though  alive,  and
she  blessed  me  with  a  sign  of  the  cross.  But  her  sister,  though  perfectly
recognisable,  had,  so  to  speak,  a  more  light,  ethereal  aspect.  I  took  the
matches  and  lighted  the  candle — but  the  apparitions  had  already  faded
away.  This  incident  took  place  in  the  night  of  12th-24th,  13th-25th
February,  1 858,  between  2  and  3  o'clock  in  the  morning.  About  a  week  after
my  arrival  at  Arkhangelsk,  I  was  informed  by  my  brother-in-law  that  my
mother  expired  in  the  night  of  12th-13th  February."

I  2.  In  the  next  group  of  cases,  first-hand  or  on  a  par  with  first-
hand, the  conditioning  event  or  state  on  the  agent's  side  was  some-
thing other  than  death,  though  in  two  of  them  death  was  rapidly-
approaching.

(569)  From  Mr.  Algernon  Joy,   20,  Wilton  Place,  S.W.

"August  16th,  1883.

"  About  1862,  I  was  walking  in  a  country  lane  near  Cardiff  by  myself,
when  I  was  overtaken  by  two  young  colliers,  who  suddenly  attacked  me.
One  of  them  gave  me  a  violent  blow  on  the  eye,  which  knocked  me  down,  half
stunned.  I  distinctly  remembered  afterwards  all  that  I  had  been  thinking
about,  both  immediately  prior  to  the  attack,  and  for  some  time  after  it.
Up  to  the  moment  of  the  attack,  and  for  some  time  previously,
I  was  absorbed  in  a  calculation,  connected  with  the  Penarth  Docks,  then
in  construction,  on  which  I  was  employed.  My  train  of  thought  was
interrupted  for  a  moment  by  the  sound  of  footsteps  behind  me.  I  looked
back,  and  saw  the  two  young  men,  but  thought  no  more  of  them,  and  im-
mediately returned  to  my  calculations.  On  receiving  the  blow,  I  began
speculating  on  their  object,  what  they  were  going  to  do  next,  how  I  could
best  defend  myself,  or  escape  from  them  ;  and  when  they  ran  away,  and  I

1  As  to  the  appearance  of  a  second  figure,  see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  545-6.


524  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

had  picked  myself  up,  I  thought  of  trying  to  identify  them,  and  of
denouncing  them  at  the  police-station,  to  which  I  proceeded,  after  follow-
ing them  till  I  lost  sight  of  them.  In  short  I  am  positive  that  for  about
half  an  hour  preAdous  to  the  attack,  and  for  an  hour  or  two  after  it,  there
was  no  connection  whatever,  direct  or  indirect,  between  my  thoughts  and
a  person  at  that  moment  in  London,  and  whom  I  will  call  '  A.'  Two  days
afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  '  A,'  written  on  the  day  after  the
assault,  asking  me  what  I  had  been  doing  and  thinking  about  at  half-past
4  p.m.,  on  the  day  previous  to  that  on  which  he  was  writing.  He  con-
tinued :  '  I  had  just  passed  your  club,  and  was  thinking  of  you,  when  I
recognised  your  footstep  behind  me.  You  laid  your  hand  heavily  on  my
shoulder.  I  turned,  and  saw  you  as  distinctly  as  I  ever  saw  you  in  my  life.
You  looked  distressed,  and,  in  answer  to  my  greeting  and  inquiry,  "  What's
the  matter  1 "  you  said,  "  Go  home,  old  fellow,  I've  been  hurt.  You  wiU
get  a  letter  from  me  in  the  morning  telling  you  all  about  it."  You  then
vanished  instantaneously.'

"  The  assault  took  place  as  near  half -past  4  as  possible,  certainly
between  4.15  and  4.45.  I  wrote  an  account  of  it  to  '  A  '  on  the  following
day,  so  that  our  letters  crossed,  he  receiving  mine,  not  the  next  morning,
as  my  double  had  promised,  but  on  the  succeeding  one,  at  about  the  same
time  as  I  received  his.  '  A '  solemnly  assured  me  that  he  knew  no  one  in
or  near  Cardiff,  and  that  my  account  was  the  only  one  that  he  received  of
the  incident.  From  my  intimate  personal  knowledge  of  him,  I  am  certain
that  he  is  incapable  of  uttering  an  untruth.  But  there  are  reasons  why  I
cannot  give  his  name,  even    in    confidence.^

"  Algernon  Joy."

[Mr.  Joy  having  received  an  account  of  the  phantasm  written  before
the  news  of  his  accident  reached  the  percipient,  his  evidence  is  on  a  par
with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,  p.  148).]

(570)  From  Mrs.  McMuUin,  formerly  Miss  HammiU  (now  in  India).

"  9,  South  wick  Place,  Hyde  Park,  W.

"  1883.
"  Many  years  ago  an  old  nurse,  Mary  Vivian,  who  was  living  with  us,
thought  she  saw  one  of  the  De  Lancys,  whom  she  had  lived  with,  walk
through  our  nursery.  She  was  so  certain  she  had  seen  him  that  she  was
quite  overcome,  and  said  she  was  sure  some  harm  had  befallen  him.  Some
time  after,  she  heard  that  on  his  way  to  the  Crimea  (I  think,  but  am  not
quite  sure  when  it  was,)  this  young  De  Lancy  had  jumped  overboard  to
save  the  life  of  a  soldier  who  had  fallen  overboard,  and  had  been  nearly
drowned,  the  very  same  evening  she  thought  she  saw  him  in  our  nursery ;
and  he  told  her  he  had  thought  of  his  old  nurse  when  he  was  in  the  water."

Mrs.  McMuUin  adds,    "  I  know  it  was  told  me  at  the  time."
Lady  Bates,  of  2,  Sussex  Place,  Hyde  Park,  writes  : —

"  March  14th,  1885.
"  Twenty-eight  years  ago  an  elderly  woman,  named  Vivian,  lived   as
nurse  in  the  service  of  Mr.   Hammill,   police  magistrate,    at   34,   Sussex
Gardens,   Hyde   Park.     She  had  previously  been  for  many  years  in  the

1  These  reasons  have  been  privately  communicated.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  525

family  of  Colonel  De  Lancy,  one  of  whose  sons  in  May,  1857,  was  on  his
voyage  to  India  with  his  regiment,  the  22nd.  One  evening,  towards  the
end  of  that  month,  Yivian  told  Miss  Constance  Hammill  (then  about  18)
that  when  sitting  in  the  nursery,  between  6  and  7  p.m.,  she  had  seen
Oliver  De  Lancy  enter  and  pass  through  the  room,  and  that  she  felt  sure
that  some  misfortune  had  happened  to  him.  I  heard  of  the  occurrence
the  next  day,  and  well  remember,  even  at  this  distance  of  time,  the  words
in  which  it  was  related  to  me  : — '  Yivian  has  seen  a  ghost  in  the  nursery,
and  it  has  made  her  so  ill  that  she  is  not  able  to  do  her  work  and  has  gone
to  bed.'  Some  weeks  after,  Mr.  Priaulx,  young  De  Lancy's  uncle,  called
to  tell  Yivian  that  a  letter  had  been  received  from  him,  in  which  he  said
that  he  had  nearly  lost  his  life  in  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  rescue  a
private  soldier  of  the  22nd,  who  had  fallen  overboard  between  Gibraltar
and  Malta,  adding  : — '  When  I  was  in  the  water  I  thought  of  old  Yivian.'
He  gave  no  date,  but  Mr.  Priaulx,  at  Yivian's  request,  inquired  at  the
War  Office,  and  found  that  the  man  had  been  drowned  on  the  27th  of
May — the  day  on  which,  according  to  a  note  made  at  the  time,  she  had
seen  the  apparition.

"  Captain  De  Lancy  and  Yivian  have  been  long  dead ;  and  Miss
Constance  Hammill  is  married  now  in  India  ;  but  I  have  written  down
the  story  exactly  as  I  remember  to  have  heard  it.  ^'■M..  M.  Bates."

The  following  notice  is  from  Hart's  Army  List  for  1865  : —

"  Captain  Oliver  De  Lancy  received  the  medal  of  the  Royal  Humane
Society  for  gallant  conduct  in  endeavouring  to  save  the  life  of  Private
Dempsey,  of  the  22nd  Regiment,  who  fell  overboard  between  Gibraltar  and
Malta,  on  the  night  of  May  27th,  1857."

Miss  Ewart,  of  3,  Morpeth  Terrace,  Yictoria  Street,  tells  us  that  when
Lady  Bates  related  this  incident  to  her,  near  the  time  when  it  occurred,
she  mentioned  that  Yivian  had  gone  to  make  inquiries  of  Mr.  Priaulx  the
day  after  her  vision,  having  received  special  permission  from  Mrs.  Ham-
mill to  do  so.  But  Lady  Bates,  though  she  says  this  may  probably  have
been  so,  does  not  now  remember  it.

Dr.  Scott,  late  headmaster  of  Westminster  School,  who  heard  of  the
incident  soon  after  its  occurrence,  has  given  us  an  independent  and
substantially  concordant  account  of  it.

(571)  From  Mr.  H.  Wooderson,  2,  Little  Queen's  Road,  Teddington.

"1881.

"  Like  the  rest  of  my  brothers  and  sisters,  I  have  always  had  the
capacity  of  seeing  spirits  in  a  clairvoyant  way.^  When  I  was  a  youth  of
14,  I  ran  away  from  Hampton  Court,  where  my  parents  lived,  and  I  went
into  service  as  under-gardener  with  Captain  Emmett,  Ditton  House,  the
next  estate  to  Lord  St.  Leonards',  at  Long  Ditton  on  the  othei'  side  of
the  river.  One  night,  about  1857,  when  it  was  my  turn  to  look  after  the
fires  in  the  hot^house,  just  as  I  was  going  down  into  the  stoke-hole,  I  saw
my  mother  standing  on  the  top  of  the  stoke-hole  in  her  night-dress,  and

1  Mr.  Wooderson  explains  these  "spirits"  to  be  hallucinations  representing  living
persons,  which  he  has  regarded  as  premonitory  of  their  actual  approach.  His  wife  confirms
the  fact  that  his  prognostications  of  this  kind  have  often  been  fulfilled  ;  but  no  accurate
record  has  been  kept.


526  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

her  head  bound  up  as  in  a  turban,  as  if  she  was  ill,  which  much  frightened
me  ;  and  on  joining  the  foreman  of  the  houses,  a  Scotchman,  he  said,  '  You
look  frightened.'  I  told  him  I  had  seen  my  mother ;  he  remarked  that  I
had  seen  her  wraith,  and  ought  to  go  home,  to  which  I  agreed.  It  was
then  about  half -past  1  o'clock.  We  used  the  Captain's  boat  that  was  in
the  boathouse  to  set  me  over  the  river,  and  I  ran  home.  I  arrived  at
home  at  2  o'clock,  and  found  my  mother  lying  in  bed  just  as  I  had  seen
her  in  my  vision.  She  said,  '  I  knew  I  should  bring  you.'  She  recovered
from  her  illness.

"  Some  time  after  this,  I  was  employed  as  guard  on  the  G.  E.  Railway,
and  I  and  my  mate,  who  worked  the  down  train  while  I  took  the  up  train,
shared  the  same  lodgings  at  Selby  Street,  Waterloo  Town,  Bethnal  Green.
We  used  to  cross  each  other  at  Bishop's  Stortford,  where  we  would
exchange  a  few  words.  One  night  I  felt  very  heavy  as  if  some  misfortune
was  about  to  happen  to  my  family.  I  spoke  to  my  companion  when  I  met
him  at  Bishop's  Stortford,  and  said  I  was  sure  that  something  was  wrong
with  my  mother.  My  companion  made  light  of  it,  and  said  I  should  be  all
right  when  I  went  to  work.  The  impression,  however,  remained  with  me,
and  when  I  saw  my  companion  at  night  he  told  me  there  was  a  telegram
waiting  at  home  for  me  from  Hampton  Court.  The  telegram  was  to  warn
me  that  if  I  wished  to  see  my  mother  alive,  I  must  set  off  at  once.  I
started  as  soon  as  I  could,  after  showing  the  railway  authorities  the
telegram,  and  taking  the  first  train  to  Hampton  Court,  I  arrived  about
12  o'clock,  and  found  my  mother  awaking  from  half-an-hour's  sleep,  which
she  had  had  after  long  wakefulness  from  fever.  When  she  saw  me  she  said,
'  I  could  not  depart  till  I  had  seen  you,  but  now  it  is  all  right.'  She  then
lay  down  and  passed  away  during  the  day  without  any  trouble.  This  was
in  the  summer  of  1866.  "  H.  Wooderson."

We  find  from  a  newspaper  obituary  that  Mrs.  Wooderson  died  on
Aug.  20,  1868  (not  1866).

[As  Mr.  Wooderson  recollects  the  turban  as  the  special  feature  in  his
vision  which  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  illness,  it  is  not  so  easy  as  it
would  otherwise  be  to  suppose  that  he  wrongly  read  back  the  turban  into
the  vision  after  he  had  seen  it  in  reality  ;  and  the  case  may  be  compared
to  those  in  Chap.  XII.,  §  8,  where  some  real  feature  of  the  agent's  aspect
seems  to  be  conveyed.  The  case,  however,  besides  lacking  corroboration,
is  of  course  much  weakened,  from  an  evidential  point  of  view,  by  its
opening  sentence.]

(572)  From  a  lady  who  has  a  dread  of  publicity.

"September,   1884.

"In  1857,  during  church  service,  I  had  an  impression  of  something
being  close  to  my  face.  I  opened  my  eyes,  and  saw  distinctly  the  face  of
a  friend.^  It  appeared  quite  solid,  and  I  could  recognise  all  the  markings
in  the  face.  Being  startled,  I  closed  my  eyes,  when  it  was  no  longer
visible  ;  on  re-opening  them  it  was  still  present.  I  cannot  now  remember
whether  the  news  of  my  friend's  death  reached  us  that  evening,  or  early
the  following  morning.  He  died  during  the  day  (Sunday)  on  which  I
had  the  vision  ;  but  I  never  heard  the  exact  hour.  "  H.   C."

1  Compare  case  553,  and  see  p.  33,  note.


v.]  VISUAL    CASES.  527

On  being  interrogated  by  our  friend,  Miss  Porter,  of  16,  Russell
Square,  Miss  C.  added  that  when  she  was  first  aware  of  something  being
near  her  and  opened  her  eyes,  the  vision  was  within  an  inch  or  two  of
her  face,  too  close  for  recognition  till  she  drew  back  a  little.^  It  seemed
to  remain  stationary.  She  cannot  say  how  long  it  remained,  but  described
how  a  feeling  of  horror  came  over  her  that  it  would  always  be  there  be-
fore her  eyes.  It  was  also  long  enough  for  her  to  make  up  her  mind
that  her  friend  was  dead,  and  she  was  not  at  all  surprised  when  the
news  came.  It  disappeared  suddenly — did  not  fade,  but  was  there  one
moment  and  gone  the  next.

On  inquiry.  Miss  C.  told  the  present  writer  that  she  knew  her  friend
to  be  ill,  but  was  in  no  apprehension  of  his  death.  She  preferred  not  to
give  his  name,  but  undertook  herself  to  ascertain  from  the  Times  obituary
whether  she  was  right  in  her  recollection  that  he  died  on  a  Sunday.  The
result  showed  that  she  was  not,  and  that  he  died  on  a  Wednesday.  ^  He
had  however  been  very  ill,  and  delirious,  for  3  or  4  days  previously  ;  and
as  she  has  never  had  a  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion,  a  remarkable
coincidence  remains.

(573)  From  Mrs.  Beaumont,  1,  Crescent  Road,  S.  Norwood.

"  February  24th,  1885.

"  One  day  in  the  '40s,  when  I  was  living  in  the  Rectory  at  Marlborough,
my  father's  house,  my  mother  and  sister  had  gone  out,  and  I  was  lying
on  a  sofa  in  the  drawing-room;  at  about  3  p.m.  I  was  reading  a  book,  when
the  light  seemed  to  be  slightly  darkened,  and  looking  up  I  saw,  leaning  in
at  the  window  farthest  from  me,  about  three  feet  from  the  ground,  and
beckoning,  a  gentleman  whom  I  had  only  seen  once,  about  a  fortnight  or
three  weeks  previously.  Supposing  that  my  father  wanted  me  to  sign  my
name  (as  a  witness  to  a  lease,  or  something  of  that  kind),  I  got  up,  went
out  of  the  window  (which  led  down  into  the  garden),  and  passed  along  in
front  of  the  house,  and  up  six  steps  into  my  father's  study,  which  was
empty.  I  then  went  into  the  yard  and  garden,  but  found  nobody ;  so  I
returned  to  my  sofa  and  my  books.  When  father  came  in,  two  hours
afterwards,  I  said,  'Why  did  you  send  Mr.  H.  to  call  me,  and  then  go
away  *? '  My  father  replied,  '  What  are  you  talking  about  1  H.  is  down
in  Wales.'  Nothing  more  was  said.  I  did  not  like  to  dwell  on  the  subject
to  either  of  my  parents,  and  I  did  not  mention  the  occurrence  to  any  one
for  several  years.  About  a  fortnight  afterwards,  I  was  told  by  my  mother
that  Mr.  H.  had  written,  proposing  for  my  hand  (some  property  of  his
adjoined  some  property  of  my  father's  in  Wales).  I  cannot  fix  exactly  how
close  the  coincidence  was  ;  but  my  strong  impression  is  that  the  letter  was
received  within  24  hours  of  my  experience.  Before  I  was  told  of  the
contents  of  the  letter,  I  remember  that  I  found  the  blue  envelope  of  Mr.
H.'s  letter  (with  T.  H.  on  the  corner,  and  with  the  coat-of-arms  on  his
seal,  and  with  the  postmark  Llandilo)  on  the  floor  in  my  father's  study.
When  the  news  was  told  me,  I  seemed  to  receive  some  explanation  of  my
vision.

1  See  Vol.  L,  p.  522,  note.

2  As  regards  the  liability  to  exaggerate  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence,  see  Vol.  i.,
pp.  140-6,  and  the  examples  given  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  Ixxv-vii.


528  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  I  have  never  had  any  hallucination  or  vision  at  any  other  time,  except
when  I  saw  the  '  little  brown  lady  '  at  Kintbury.i  "  C.  Beaumont."

[Here  we  have  the  points  that  the  hallucinatory  vision  of  a  recognised
figure  was  unique  in  the  percipient's  experience ;  and  that  the  supposed
agent's  thoughts  must  have  been  much  occupied  with  her  at  the  time.  But
we  have  no  proof  that,  on  his  side,  the  particular  time  at  which  the  phan-
tasm was  seen  stood  out  in  any  way  from  the  hours  and  days  that  preceded
and  followed  it ;  and  the  coincidence  therefore  lacks  precision.]

(574)  From  Mr.  J.  H.  Jevons,  182,  Elm  Grove,  Brighton.

"  August,  1884.

"  Whilst  I  was  dressing,  the  other  morning,  the  form  of  a  friend
passed  amongst  some  trees  opposite  to  my  house,  and  so  little  doubt  had  I
as  to  the  form  being  his,  as  he  looked  up  to  my  window,  that  I  waved  my
hand  to  him  to  'go  on'  up  the  road  where  we  frequently  walked.  I  followed
in  a  minute  or  two,  but  only  to  find  that  I  could  not  find  him,  high  or  low,
up  or  down  that  road,  or  along  any  of  three  others.  At  length  I  went
along  an  accustomed  road,  to  a  point  in  the  town  where  we  not  infrequently
met,  or  separated,  as  the  case  might  be.  But  non  est  inventus.  Subse-
quently I  called  at  his  house,  and  found  him  very  ill  indeed,  as  he  still
remains."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Jevons  says  : —

"  September  8th,  1884.

"I  think  that  in  cases  of  this  sort  one  cannot  be  too  careful  as  to  identity,
because  I  know  practically  how  apt  the  imagination  is  to  outrun  the
judgment.  But  of  this  particular  instance  under  notice,  the  most  I  can
say  is,  that  if  it  was  one  of  self-deception  or  mere  subjectiveness,  I
was  most  completely  deceived  indeed.  Certainly  I  had  reason  to  expect
my  friend,  as  he  came  past  my  place  nearly  every  morning  at  about
1 1  o'clock,  looked  up  at  my  window,  and  when  I  saw  him,  I  waved  my  hand
in  the  direction  in  which  I  implied  I  would  follow  him.  As  I  did  so  on
the  morning  to  which  I  am  referring,  I  saw  him  and  nodded  to  him  two  or
three  times,  never  for  an  instant  doubting  that  the  figure  was  his.  I  saw,
through  the  leaves  and  branches  of  the  trees,  on  the  walk  opposite  to  my
house,  his  white  hat,  silver-rimmed  spectacles  and  dark  grey  beard,  as  well
as  his  peculiar  contour  and  gait.  He  is  72  years  of  age,  tall,  slow  of  move-
ment, and  not  very  quick  of  sight ;  and  as  he  appeared  at  first  to  hesitate,
I  waved  my  hand  again,  when  he  indicated,  by  his  head,  in  his  usual  way,
that  he  understood  me,  and  then  he  walked  on.  I  was  but  a  few  minutes
in  my  effort  to  join  him  ;  and  it  was  when  I  found  I  could  not  see  him,  or
anybody  like  him,  in  any  direction,  that  I  was  struck  with  the  remark-
ableness  of  the  occurrence,  and  I  stood  fairly  puzzled,  as  I  must  have
shown,  for  I  noticed  a  passer-by  looking  at  me  in  a  sort  of  wondering  way.

"  The  illness  was  quite  sudden,  and  neither  my  friend  nor  myself  had
any  reason,  prior  to  his  seizure,  to  suppose  that  we  should  not  meet,  as
customary,  on  the  morning  mentioned.  The  case  has  been  my  only  experi-
ence of  a  visual  hallucination,  with  the  exception  of  one  (of  a  difierent
character)  I  had  in  my  very  youthful  days.  "  John  H.  Jevons."

1  This  was  an  apparition  frequently  seen  by  the  residents  in  a  particular  house.


v.]  VISUAL  CASUS.  529

[It  is  against  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken  identity,  that  Mr.  Jevons
remembers  that  the  figure  seemed  distinctly  to  recognise  his  greeting.
Still  it  may  have  been  a  hallucination  due  to  expectancy.  See  Yol.  I.,
p.  516.]

(575)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  W.,  who  desires  that  her  name  and  address
may  not  be  published,  as  she  has  a  near  relation  who  would  much  object
to  their  appearance.  u  February  20th,  1885.

"  When  a  resident  near  Portsmouth,  during  a  visit  made  by  my  late
mother  to  London  in  the  summer  of  1858,  the  year  preceding  her  death,
I  distinctly  saw  her  walking  in  the  back  garden  at  noon-day.  I  was  not
at  the  time  thinking  of  her,  but  happening  to  look  from  my  chamber
window,  I  beheld  this  figure,  which,  but  for  my  parent's  absence  from
home,  I  should  have  supposed  her  veritable  self.  This  incident  led  me  to
conjecture  something  was  amiss  ;  and  this  idea  was  confirmed  when  the
next  morning's  post  brought  me  information  that  my  mother  had  sustained
a  severe  fall,  and  was  so  badly  hurt  that  at  first  fatal  results  was  feared  ;
and  at  the  moment  I  fancied  I  saw  her,  her  thoughts  were  bent  on
telegraphing  for  me  to  go  to  her."

The  following  incident  is  perhaps  worth  quoting,  as  having  occurred  to
the  same  person  : —

"  A  few  years  prior  to  this,  when  a  girl  of  16,  an  engagement  was
formed  between  myself  and  a  young  naval  officer,  about  to  sail  for  the
African  coast.  He  had  promised  my  mother  and  self  that  he  would  write
us  from  Ascension.  It  chanced,  some  time  after  his  departure,  I  accom-
panied a  friend  in  a  long  country  walk,  when  all  at  once  a  strange  feeling
possessed  me  that  this  young  officer  was  near.  I  seemed  to  feel  the
clasp  of  his  hand  upon  my  wrist,  yet  I  saw  nothing,  I  had  only /elf  a
presence.  My  companion  asked  why  I  looked  so  pale.  I  made  an  evasive
reply,  and  on  returning  home  told  my  mother  that  '  Tom  was  dead  ! '  She
tried  to  laugh  away  my  fancy ;  nevertheless,  she  noted  the  date  of  the
occurrence ;  and  when  a  brother  of  my  own,  then  homeward  bound  from
the  coast  of  Africa,  arrived,  the  first  words  he  spoke,  after  an  exchange  of
greetings,  were,  '  Oh,  that  poor  fellow  you  sent  letters  by  for  me  is  dead  !
He  died  three  days'  sail  from  Ascension,  and  is  buried  on  the  island.'

"  M.  W."

We  learn  from  Mrs.  W.  that  she  has  not  had  any  hallucinations  which
there  is  reason  to  regard  as  merely  subjective.     She  adds  : —

"  I  cannot,  owing  to  the  many  years  that  have  passed  since  the
occurrences  mentioned,  furnish  any  dates ;  my  mother  calculated  that
the  singular  impression  I  received  was  as  near  as  possible  to  the  time  of
our  young  friend's  death.  My  brother  who  brought  the  tidings  has  been
deceased  several  years."

(576)  Obtained  through  Mrs.  Pears,  of  Walton,  Clevedon.  The  narrative
was  written  down  from  the  dictation  of  Mrs.  C. — a  relative  of  Mrs.  Pears,
a  daughter  of  the  well-known  Mrs.  Fry,  and  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends — who  will  not  allow  her  name  to  be  published,  and  entirely  declines
to  be  further  questioned  on  the  subject.  u  ]\/[arch  10th   1884

"  On  14th  November,  1837,  or  about  that  time,  Mrs.  C.  was  lyipg  on  a

VOL.    II.  2    M


530  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

sofa  in  her  drawing-room,  reading  attentively  ;  the  sofa  was  facing  the
light.  Suddenly  lifting  her  eyes  from  the  book,  she  saw  distinctly,  standing
at  the  foot  of  the  sofa,  the  figure  of  a  person  whom  Mrs.  C.  knew  by
sight,  though  she  was  not  personally  acquainted  with  him.  She  observed
how  the  figure  was  dressed,  and  even  counted  the  buttons  on  his  great-
coat ;  five  were  visible  above  the  rather  high  end  of  the  sofa.  The  figure
was  opaque  ;  Mrs.  C.  noticed  that  she  could  not  see  the  piano  through  it.
After  a  few  seconds,  the  figure  disappeared   as  suddenly  as  it  had  come.

"  A  quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards,  Mrs.  C.  received  a  visit  from  one
of  the  clergymen  of  the  town,  who  came  to  tell  her  of  the  death,  by
drowning  at  sea,  of  the  person  whose  apparition  she  had  just  seen.  The
clergyman  had  left  the  widow's  house  to  come  straight  to  Mrs.  C,  and
at  the  moment  the  apparition  was  present  with  Mrs.  C,  had  been  listening
to  the  widow's  request  that  he  would  enlist  her  sympathy  on  behalf  of
herself  and  her  children."

[The  remoteness  of  the  case  is  again  a  serious  weakness  ;  and  the  coin-
cidence is  of  a  very  singular  type.  At  the  same  time  the  fact  of  the
news  following  immediately  on  the  apparition  is  a  striking  one,  hardly
likely  to  have  been  unconsciously  imported  into  the  narrative.]

The  two  following  cases  seem  to  fall  into  the  class  illustrated  in
Chap.  XIV.,  §  7,  where  persons  are  phantasmally  seen  or  heard  very
soon  before  their  actual  appearance  in  the  flesh.  I  have  explained
(p.  96)  that  it  is  to  some  extent  uncertain  whether  this  is  a  genuine
telepathic  type ;  but  the  examples  are  worth  recording  ;  and  doubly
so  where  the  time-coincidence  is  fortified  (as  here  and  in  case  262)
by  the  further  point  that  odd  or  unfamiliar  details  of  appearance  are
alleged  to  have  been  noted,  and  have  proved  to  correspond  with
reality.

(577)  From  Dr.  Campbell  Morfit,  1  32,  Alexandra  Road,  N.W.

Writing  on  July  4th,  1885,  Dr.  Morfit  first  describes  a  couple  of
business  visits  which  he  received  at  New  York,  in  the  year  1859  or
thereabouts,  from  a  gentleman  named  Metarko,  who  then  departed  to  his
home  in  the  West.

"  For  a  time  that  disappearance  took  him  entirely  out  of  my  world  ;
but  one  evening,  nearly  two  years  subsequently,  I  had  been  passing  an
hour  or  two  at  a  friend's,  listening  to  some  fine  music.  On  my  return,
in  good  health  and  spirits,  I  felt  unusually  wide  awake,  as  recurs  to  mind
even  at  this  moment,  and  in  fact  quite  free  from  any  susceptibility  to
hallucination.  Nevertheless,  scarcely  had  I  got  into  bed  than  there,  at
the  side,  stood  Metarko,  looking  as  when  he  last  was  with  me,  but  having
two  new  features,  one  a  kind  of  excrescence  on  the  cheek,  and  the  other
a  necktie  of  striking  pattern.  At  first  this  sudden  presence  amused  me
as  a  freak  of  the  imagination,  but  became  an  annoyance  when  it  would
not  leave  on  my  trying  to  dismiss  it.  The  good  part  done  him  forbade
the  idea  that  he  had  come  to  haunt  me  reproachfully,  yet  I  was  somewhat
disquieted  ;  and  as  my  brother  slept  in  a  distant  room  upon  the  same  floor,
I  called  to  him  through  the  open  doors  of  the  intermediate  sitting-room,


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  531

without  receiving  any  answer.  The  apparition  persisted,  and  I  turned
ray  face  from  it  to  the  wall,  by  way  of  exorcism ;  and  a  few  minutes
later,  seemingly,  though  actually  perhaps  only  seconds,  found  that  it  had
vanished.

"  Seeking  an  explanation  of  the  occurrence  by  reflecting  upon  it,  I
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Metarko  had  died  that  night  at  his  distant
home,  and  the  apparition  was  a  psychological  incident  to  announce  the
fact  to  me,  though  for  what  reason  was  beyond  my  imagination.  The
circumstance,  however,  so  absorbed  my  thoughts  all  the  next  day,  that
when  evening  set  in,  I  felt  the  need  of  diverting  influences,  and  went
out  visiting.  On  re-entering,  about  bedtime,  I  was  greeted  by  my  house-
keeper with  the  information  that  a  stranger  gentleman  had  called  in  my
absence,  to  request  that  I  would  allow  him  a  consultation  at  9  o'clock  the
following  morning.  His  name,  she  said,  was  on  the  slate,  and  there  I
found  it — - — to  be  that  of  Metarko  ! — in  his  own  unmistakeable  hand-
writing. This  fact,  astounding  for  the  moment,  recalled,  vividly,  the
apparition  of  the  previous  evening,  so  as  to  render  me  impatient  for  the
actual  interview ;  and  when,  at  the  appointed  hour  next  day,  he  came  in
the  flesh,  profound  was  my  astonishment  to  find  him  then  exactly  as  he
appeared  in  the  vision  34  hours  previously.

"  After  listening  to  the  statement  of  his  case,  I  asked  him  to  call
again  in  the  evening.  He  agreed  to  this  arrangement,  and  left,  but  did
not  return  as  promised ;  and  from  that  moment  to  the  present  I  have  never
seen  or  heard  of  him.       Heralded  by  a  spectre  like  itself,  he  departed.

"The  incident  noted  was  the  only  one  of  a  'psychical'  character
that  ever  occurred  to  me.

"  My  brother  being  an  unimpressionable  man,  and  not  sharing  my
interest  in  the  matter,  has  forgotten,  most  probably,  all  that  I  may  have
told  him  about  it  at  the  time.  But  my  housekeeper,  a  woman  of  con-
siderable intelligence  and  sympathetic  nature,  might  remember.  She  was
even  then,  however,  20  years  my  senior,  and  if  not  now  dead  is  a  very  old
woman,  whose  whereabouts  has  dropped  out  of  my  knowledge,  and  it
would  be  difiicult  to  find  her  at  present.  «  Campbell  Morfit."

(578)  From  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Pigott-Carleton,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchfield,
Hants.  The  percipient.  Lord  Dorchester,  is  deceased ;  but  we  have  his
daughter's  evidence  to  the  fact  that  the  anxiety  which  his  experience
produced  was   obvious  before  he  heard  what  her  experience  had  been.

"July  5th,  1883.

"Early  in  September,  1872,  I  was  with  my  father  and  husband  at  the
former's  shooting  lodge  in  Co.  Tyrone.  An  old  friend,  Captain  M.,  was
also  staying  there,  and  one  afternoon  it  was  arranged  that  I  should
accompany  this  gentleman  and  a  keeper  on  a  fishing  expedition.  My
husband  had  some  engagement,  but  my  father  walked  a  short  way  with
us.  He  never  cared  to  have  me  long  away  from  him,  and,  upon  turning
back,  remarked,  as  he  left  me,  '  Don't  get  too  far  from  home.'

"It  was  a  brilliantly  fine  day;  I  had  a  book  with  me,  and  often  sat
down  to  read  while  the  others  fished.  We  were  about  four  miles  down  the
river,  when,  chancing  to  look  up  from  my  novel,  I  perceived  a  heavy  cloud
rising  into  sight  above  the  mountains  opposite.  I  saw  we  were  '  in  for  '  a
drenching,  thought  how  it  would  fidget  my   father,  and  wished  myself  at

VOL.  IL  2  M  2


532  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

home  with  all  my  heart.  In  a  few  minutes  the  storm  burst  upon  us.
Shelter  there  was  next  to  none,  and  as  soon  as  the  deluge  had  somewhat
abated,  we  made  for  the  lodge,  looking  as  though  we  had  all  been  barely-
rescued  from  a  watery  grave.  When  nearly  home,  we  were  met  by  my
father,  my  husband,  and  several  men  employed  about  the  place.  It  seemed
to  me  singular,  not  to  say  absurd,  that  my  father  should  have  turned  him-
self and  party  out  in  such  weather.  Still  more  to  my  surprise,  my  father
evidently  could  not  get  over  his  disturbance,  spoke  little  that  evening,  and
went  off  to  bed  earlier  than  usual.

"  The  next  day  he  told  me  that  some  little  time  after  his  return  from
the  river,  he  sat  down  to  read,  with  his  back  to  the  (western)  window  ;
that  suddenly  a  shadow  fell  across  the  -page  ;  that,  turning  his  head,  he  saw
me  standing  at  the  half  open  window,  my  arms  resting  upon  the  push-down
sash  ;  that  he  said,  '  Hallo  !  Back  already  ! '  that  I  made  no  reply,  but
apparently  stepped  down  off  the  low  outer  window  sill  and  disappeared  ;
that  he  put  a  mark  in  his  book,  got  up,  and  looked  ovit  of  the  window  ;
that,  not  seeing  me,  he  first  went  to  the  servants  and  asked  if  I  had  come
in  at  the  back  door  ;  and  then  went  out  on  to  the  Kttle  terrace  before  the
lodge  and  looked  around  for  me  ;  that  he  suddenly  caught  sight  of  the
coming  storm-cloud  ;  that  his  bewilderment  changed  to  uneasiness,  and
that  my  husband  just  then  coming  in  they  speedily  started  in  search.

"  Henrietta  Pigott-Oableton."

[This  may,  of  course,  have  been  a  purely  subjective  experience  ;  but  it
cannot  well  be  attributed  to  any  special  expectation  in  the  percipient's
mind  ;  and  its  coincidence  with  his  daughter's  thought  of  him,  and  desire
to  be  at  home,  is  at  any  rate  striking.  If  the  detail  of  the  shadow  on  the
page  is  correctly  reported,  the  case  well  exemplifies  the  development  of
a  phantasm  in  two  stages  (Vol.  I.,  p.  520).]

§.  3.  A  large  group  of  second-hand  cases  remains.  For  convenience,
I  will  again  divide  them  into  accounts  received  from  near  relatives
of  the  percipients,  and  from  others.

(579)  From  Mr.  J.  N.  Maskelyne,  originally  printed  as  part  of  a
letter  in  the  Daily  Telegraph.

"  Egyptian  Hall.

"October  21st,  1881.

"  Sir, — Having  for  many  years  been  recognised  by  the  public  as  an
anti-Spiritualist  and  exposer  of  the  frauds  practised  by  spirit  media,  it
may  surprise  some  of  your  readers  to  learn  that  I  am  a  believer  in  appari-
tions. Several  similar  occurrences  to  those  described  by  many  of  your
correspondents  have  taken  place  in  my  own  family,  and  in  the  families  of
near  friends  and  relatives.  The  most  remarkable  one  happened  to  my
wife's  mother  some  years  ago.  Late  one  evening,  whilst  sitting  alone
busily  occupied  with  her  needle,  a  strange  sensation  came  over  her,  and
upon  looking  up  she  distinctly  saw  her  aged  mother  standing  at  the  end
of  the  room.  She  rubbed  her  weary  eyes  and  looked  again,  but  the
spectre  had  vanished.  She  concluded  it  was  imagination,  and  retired  to
rest,  thinking  nothing  more  of  the  vision,  until  the  next  day  brought  the


v.]         ^  VISUAL  CASES.  533

news  that  her  mother,  at  about  the  same  time  the  apparition  had  appeared,

had  fallen  down  in  a  fit  and  expired.  ,,  -r         ^.-r  -.^  „

^  "  John  Nevil  Maskelyne.

In  answer  to  our  inquiries,  Mr.  Maskelyne  writes  that  he  regrets  not
to  be  able  to  get  this  case  from  his  wife's  mother  in  her  own  words.  "  She
was  a  little  vexed  with  me,"  he  says,  "  for  giving  publicity  to  the  circum-
stance.     I  have  written  it  exactly  as  I  have  often  heard  her  relate  it."

(580)  From  a  gentleman  who  prefers  that  his  name  should  not  appear.

"October  31st,  1884.

"  An  occurrence  which  happened  to  my  father,  and  which  I  have
several  times  heard  him  mention  circumstantially,  was  as  follows  : —

"  My  father.  Lieutenant  W.  C.  B.,  was  in  command  of  a  gunbrig
stationed  to  keep  off  slavers  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  in  1834.  In  the
October  of  that  year,  he  was  alone  in  his  cabin  when  he  noted  distinctly,
as  he  thought,  my  mother  appear  to  him.  He  noted  down  the  circum-
stance in  his  logbook,^  giving  time  and  date  ;  but  the  effect  on  his  mind
was  so  great  that  on  his  return  to  England  at  the  close  of  the  year  from
ill-health,  he  called  for  a  file  of  the  Times  directly  he  landed  in  Portsmouth,
and  looked  to  the  month  in  question,  and  there  found  that  my  mother  had
died  that  very  night  that  the  appearance  came  to  him,  but  which  he  had
no  means  of  learning  earlier,  owing  to  the  difiiculty  of  communication  by
letter  in  those  days."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  our  informant's  mother  died  on
October  11,  1834.

(581)  From  Mr.  E.  Stephenson,  School  House,  Market  Weighton,
Yorkshire.  His  mother's  signature,  attached  since  the  account  was  placed
in  its  present  position,  makes  it  really  first-hand.

"November  25th,  1884.

"  I  am  master  of  the  boys'  school  and  organist  of  the  parish  church  at
Weighton.  My  mother's  maiden  name  was  Jane  Cooling.  Several  years
ago  (about  10  or  12)  she  told  me  a  remarkable  story  which  sank  deeply
into  my  mind.  I  got  her  to  tell  me  the  whole  of  her  story  again,  and  it
was  exactly  the  same  as  that  she  had  told  years  before.  I  cross-questioned
her,  but  always  got  the  same  answers.  My  mother  is  65  years  of  age.
Her  mind  is  quite  clear  and  her  memory  very  good.  The  affair  happened
when  she  was  about  16  or  17  years  old,  and  she  maintains  that  even
yet  she  can  see  (in  imagination)  her  brother  as  fairly  as  she  saw  him
then.

"  The  following  is  the  story,  which  I  have  recently  taken  down  care-
fully from  her  own  lips.  Having  subjected  my  mother  to  some  very  close
questioning,  I  feel  sure  that  you  may  depend  upon  the  statements  being
trustworthy.

"  Henry  Cooling,  the  brother  of  Jane  Cooling,  was  a  sailor,  and  had
gone  on  a  long  voyage.  Jane  was  living  in  Hull  in  the  house  of  Mr.
Kitching,  Mytongate.  There  was  a  large  cupboard  in  the  house,  which
was  on  a  kind  of  landing,  approached  by  two  or  three  steps.  Just  as  she
was  about  to  go  up  to  it,  she  saw  distinctly,  about  5  p.m.,  her  brother

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  161,  note.


534  SUPPLEMENT.  '  [chap.

Henry  standing  in  front  of  the  door.  His  eyes  were  fixed  on  her  for  a
short  time,  and  then  he  disappeared  towards  the  left.  He  was  dressed  in
his  seaman's  drawers  and  shirt.  The  strings  of  his  drawers  were  loose ;  his
feet  were  bare  ;  his  hair  was  untidy ;  and  his  whole  appearance  was  like
that  of  one  roused  suddenly  from  sleep.

"  After  the  vision  had  vanished,  as  soon  as  she  recovered  herself,  she
went  home  to  her  father,  and  told  him  what  she  had  seen.  He  said  it  was
all  nonsense,  and  told  her  to  take  no  notice  of  it.  However,  some  days
later,  a  letter  came  from  the  captain  of  the  ship,  stating  that  Henry
Cooling  had  been  washed  overboard  during  a  gale  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay,
just  as  he  was  called  on  deck  to  assist  in  working  the  ship,  and  the  time
he  gave  as  about  the  time  of  the  accident  corresponded  approximately  to
that  at  which  my  mother  saw  the  vision.

"  Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  found  the  exact  date  of  my
uncle's  death — March  27th,  1836.  My  mother  would,  therefore,  be  17
within  a  few  days.  u  ^    g_"

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Stephenson  writes,  on  Dec.  2,  1884  : —

"  I  remember  my  mother  telling  us  the  story  several  years  ago,  while
her  father  was  living  in  our  house,  and  I  have  no  recollection  of  anything
but  his  fullest  assent  to  what  she  told.  You  will  remember  that  in  my
previous  letter,  I  stated  that  she  told  her  father  what  she  had  seen,  several
days  before  they  knew  what  had  happened.  I  could  almost  swear  that  I
have  heard  him  affirm,  but  will  not  do  so  as  I  do  not  exactly  recollect  the
occasion,  and  do  not  wish  to  give  you  anything  but  the  purest  evidence  in
such  a  matter.

"  My  mother  confidently  affirms  that  she  saw  the  vision  at  that  hour,
5  p.m.,  and,  as  far  as  she  can  remember,  the  letter  from  the  captain  of  the
vessel  several  days  afterwards  confirmed  her  statement  as  to  the  time,  and
the  being  called  from  his  berth.     We  cannot  find  the  captain's  letter.

"  My  mother  has  not,  when  completely  awake,  had  any  other  appari-
tion or  hallucination,  except  the  one  furnished  you."  [The  words  "  when
completely  awake  "  simply  reproduce  the  form  in  which  the  question  was
asked.]  u  (Signed  as  correct)     Jane  Stephenson."

(582)  From  Mrs.  Ricardo,  8,  Chesham  Street,  S.W.

"April  6th,  1885.

"  I  can  only  recollect  the  story  rather  imperfectly,  though  I  have  often
heard  my  father,  the  late  Colonel  Campbell,  of  Skipness,  tell  it.

"  On  a  fine  summer's  evening,  between  8  and  9  o'clock  (still  quite  light
in  the  Highlands),  about  40  years  ago  or  more,  my  father  was  walking  to
the  old  ruined  castle  of  Skipness,  which  was  a  short  distance  from  the
more  modern  house.  He  had  fitted  up  a  turning  lathe  and  workshop  in
one  of  the  old  rooms,  and  was  going  to  fetch  some  tool  which  he  had  for-
gotten in  the  day.  As  he  approached  the  gate  of  the  courtyard  he  saw
two  of  the  fishermen  (brothers),  Walter  and  John  Cook,  leaning  against
the  wall  rather  stiffly.  Being  in  a  hurry  he  merely  nodded,  said  something
about  its  being  a  fine  evening  and  went  on.  He  was  surprised  that  they
did  not  answer  him,  which  was  very  unlike  their  usual  custom,  but  being
in  a  hurry  did  not  think  much  of  it,  and  when  he  returned,  they  were  gone.
That  night  a  sudden  gale  sprang  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night.     Next


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  535

morning,  when  my  father  went  out  to  see  what  damage  had  been  done,  he
met  some  fishermen  carrying  up  a  dead  body  from  the  beach.  He  inquired,
'  Who  is  it  ? '  They  said,  '  Walter  Cook,  and  they  are  just  bringing  his
brother  John's  body  too.  Their  boat  capsized  when  they  were  out  with
the  herring  fleet  last  night,  and  they  were  both  drowned.'  My  father  said,
'  It  can't  be,  they  never  went  to  the  fishing,  for  I  saw  them  and  spoke  to
them  between  8  and  9  last  night.  '  '  Impossible,  laird  !  for  they  both  sailed
with  the  rest  of  the  fleet  between  3  and  4  in  the  afternoon,  and  never
returned.'  My  father  never  believed  in  second-sight  or  wraiths,  but  said
this  completely  puzzled  him.  It  must  have  been  second-sight,  as  the  men
were  not  yet  dead  when  he  saw  them,i  though  it  was  absolutely  impossible
that  they  could  have  been  on  land  at  the  time.  This,  as  far  as  I
can  remember,  is  the  story,  but  I  cannot  be  quite  exact  as  to  date  and
hours,  "Annette  Ricardo."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Ricardo  writes  ; —

1.  "  Colonel  Campbell  never  had  any  other  experiences  of  the  kind,
and  always  laughed  at  any  superstitions  or  fancies  of  the  kind.

2.  "  His  sight  was  remarkably  keen  and  long  ;  a  splendid  shot,  &c.
[He  was  known  as  a  spirited  writer  on  Indian  field  sports.]

3.  "  He  was  always  quite  certain  that  the  men  were  the  Cooks,  and
recognised  and  spoke  to  them  by  name.

4.  "  It  was  well  known  that  the  Cooks  went  with  the  rest  between
3  and  4  o'clock  ;  every  boat  is  seen  and  recognised  as  it  leaves  the  bay,
and  they  could  not  possibly  return  without  its  being  also  known.

5.  "  The  place  was  not  a  usual  one  for  the  fishermen  to  lounge,  being  the
walls  of  our  old  castle,  in  the  grounds,  and  the  men's  attitude  was  so  stifi"
that  Colonel  Campbell  imagined  they  had  been  drinking.

"  I  have  just  been  talking  to  an  elder  relation  of  the  family,  who  had
heard  my  father  tell  the  story,  and  he  corroborates  these  facts,  only  not

1  If  the  men  were  in  a  perfectly  normal  state  when  the  phantasms  were  seen,  the
incident  could  not  be  properly  included  among  the  telepathic  cases  in  this  book  (Vol.  i.,
p.  140).  But  the  evidence  is  quite  uncertain  as  to  hours ;  and  there  seems  at  any  rate  an
appreciable  probability  that  the  deaths  coincided  with  or  preceded  Colonel  Campbell's
experience.

This  suggests  a  more  general  remark.  In  Vol.  i.,  p.  122,  when  contrasting  telepathy
with  various  beliefs  which  have  been,  or  still  are,  popular  superstitions,  I  included  among
these  the  belief  in  the  prophetic  gift  of  "second-sight."  But  a  careful  study  of  the
recorded  cases  will  show  that  the  p)rophetic  character  which  popularly  attached  to  them
was  not  infrequently  a  pure  assumption.  The  time  of  the  occurrence  of  distant  events
was  apt  to  be  confused  with  the  time  of  hearing  of  them  ;  and  visions  and  impressions  are
described  as  having  preceded,  and  been  fulfilled  by,  events  which,  for  aught  that
appears,  they  may  have  coincided  with  or  shortly  followed.  (See,  e.g.,  the  narratives
given  in  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  by  Walter  G-regor,
p.  205  ;  in  Howells'  Cambrian  Svperstitions,  p.  57  ;  and  in  the  Treatise  on  Second  Sight,  by
Theophilus  Insulanus  (1763),  p.  60  ;  and  see  also  p.  59.)  In  days  when  no  distinct  con-
ception of  psychical  transference  had  been  formed,  and  when  supersensuous  influences
were  regarded  as  necessarily  supernatural,  it  is  not  surprising  that  effects  p)roduced
backivards,  so  to  speak,  by  events  still  to  come,  should  have  been  as  readily  accepted  as
the  coincidental  impressions  of  what  we  should  now  call  spontaneous  telepathy :  _  if
the  prophetic  idea  seemed  the  more  marvellous,  that  would  only  be  an  inducement  to  give
it  the  most  extensive  application.  Not  that  I  would  attempt  to  save  the  credit  of  these
cases  by  representing  any  of  them  as  conclusively  telepathic ;  as  a  rule,  the  reports  on
which  they  rest  have  had  too  many  chances  of  being  distorted  and  exaggerated  to  serve
any  evidential  purpose  whatever.  But  it  is  of  interest  to  note  here  (as  before  in  some  of
the  alleged  incidents  connected  with  witchcraft,  Vol.  i.,  p.  119)  that  the  residue  of  fact
which  might  remain,  after  exaggeration,  baseless  assumption,  and  wrong  inference  had
been  allowed  for,  is  such  as  the  telepathic  explanation  would  go  far  to  cover.


536  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

quite  sure  whether  the  fleet  went  at  3  or  4,  and  thinks  the  apparition  was
seen  about  9  in  the  evening.

"  My  brother-in-law  (Captain  Macneal,  of  Ugadale,  Losset  Park,
Campbeltown,  Argyllshire)  encloses  his  statement.  There  are  many  others
who  have  heard  the  story  from  Colonel  Campbell.  I  do  not  know  if  the
accident  was  seen  to  happen,  or  if  only  the  boat  and  dead  bodies  were
found.  I  have  always  believed  that  the  accident  occurred  between  1 2  and
1,  or  1   and  2  in  the  morning."

Captain  Macneal  writes,  on  April  18,   1885  : —

"  I  have  heard  Colonel  Campbell  frequently  relate  the  story  regarding
the  Channel  fishermen,  just  as  his  daughter  has  related  it  to  you.

"H.  Macneal."

[We  have  received  two  other  independent  accounts  of  this  occurrence
from  persons  who  had  heard  Colonel  Campbell  narrate  it.  These  agree
with  the  above  in  the  fundamental  point  of  the  apparition  of  the  fishermen
occurring  at  or  near  the  time  of  their  death  ;  but  one  of  them  difiers  in
a  good  many  details,  and  adds  an  incident  which,  from  the  fact  that  we
have  never  met  with  it  in  first-hand  narratives,  we  should  judge  to
be  improbable — namely,  that  the  apparition  was  seen  again  at  the  same
spot  after  a  considerable  interval — when  Colonel  Campbell  was  returning
home.  If  this  really  occurred,  it  would  suggest  that  either  the  real  men
were  seen,  (which  however  is  impossible,  if  the  hours  are  correctly
stated  by  Mrs.  Ricardo,)  or  that  a  real  object  was  mistaken  for  them.
The  phantasmal  representation  of  several  dying  persons  is  unexampled
in  our  first-hand  evidence  ;  but  see  case  536.  As  might  be  expected,
it  is  a  feature  that  is  met  with  in  the  more  legendary  records  ;  see,  e.g.,
Sacheverell's  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  (1702),  p.  14.]

(583)  From  Dr.  Frank  Comer,   79,  Queen's  Gate,  South  Kensington,

^•W-  "October  5th,  1885.

"In  the  year  1820  or  1821,  my  grandfather,  Geo.  Miller,  M.D.,  who
was  a  physician  practising  in  Newry,  Ireland,  emigrated  with  his  family
to  Canada  and  settled  in  the  town  of  Niagara,  Upper  Canada.  On  their
way  to  Niagara  from  Quebec,  having  reached  the  town  of  Prescott,  which
is  above  all  the  rapids  of  the  St.  Lawrence  River,  they  then  embarked  on
a  sailing  vessel  commanded  by  a  Captain  Patterson.  As  the  voyage  from
Prescott  to  Niagara  in  those  days  would  probably  occupy  about  a  week,
the  passengers  would  undoubtedly  become  pretty  well  acquainted  with  the
captain  of  the  little  vessel.  About  6  or  8  weeks  after  the  arrival  of  my
grandfather  and  his  family  in  Niagara,  my  grandmother  (who,  by  the  way,
was  a  lady  of  more  than  ordinary  sound  practical  common-sense,  and  not
at  all  visionary)  was  walking  in  an  orchard  at  the  back  of  her  house,  about
3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  Captain  Patterson  passed  close  by  her
and  looked  straight  in  her  face.  At  first  she  was  dumbfounded,  not
having  heard  his  footsteps,  but  recovering  from  her  surprise  she  extended
her  hand  to  shake  hands  with  him  ;  but  he  merely  smiled  and  passed  out  of
sight  behind  a  small  out-building.

"  Upon  my  grandfather's  return  home,  my  grandmother  told  him  of  the
occurrence,  but  he  smiled  and  said  she  must  have  been  dreaming,  as
Captain  Patterson  and  his  vessel  were  then  at  the  other  end  of  the  Lake
(Ontario)  ;  but  she  insisted  that  she  was  wide  awake,  that  it  was  a  clear


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  537

bright  afternoon,  and  that  she  certainly  had  seen  him  or  his  apparition.
A  few  days  later  the  vessel  arrived  in  Niagara,  and  the  mate  who  was  in
charge  reported  that  the  Captain  (Patterson)  had  been  washed  overboard
during  a  gale  at  the  lower  end  of  the  Lake.  Upon  inquiry  it  turned  out
that  it  was  the  same  day,  and  (as  nearly  as  could  be  judged)  the  very  same
hour,  that  grandmother  Miller  had  seen  his  apparition  in  the  garden.  My
mother,  Mrs.  J.  F.  R.  Comer,  was  a  girl  of  10  or  11  years  at  the  time,
and  remembers  her  mother  and  others  talking  about  the  occurrence  at  the
time  and  afterwards,  and  she  herself  still  remembers  Captain  Patterson.
She  is  now  in  her  76th  year,  and  is  again  living  in  Niagara,  Ontario,
Canada.  "Frank  Comer."

Dr.  Comer  sent  us  the  original  of  the  following  extract  from  a  letter
written  by  his  mother  : —

"  In  one  of  my  letters  I  gave  Frank  an  account  of  the  drowning
of  Captain  Patterson,  on  his  second  voyage  up  from  Prescott,  in  a  storm,
and  of  my  mother  seeing  him  pass  near  the  black  cherry-tree.  It  was
written  on  a  separate  sheet  of  paper.  Did  you  not  get  it  ?  I  mean  the
second  voyage  after  he  brought  my  father's  family  from  Prescott  to
Niagara."

(584)  From  Mr.  T.  L.  Moore,  6,  Downshire  Hill,  Hampstead.

"  September,  1884.

"  My  father,  Major-General  George  Frederick  Moore,  whose  death  took
place  on  the  8th  of  this  month,  has  frequently  related  to  me  and  to  others
the  following  incident.  When  in  India,  in  the  year  1848,  very  shortly
before  the  siege  of  Mooltan,  he  occupied  a  bungalow  at  some  place  in  that
neighbourhood  (the  name  of  which  I  cannot  give  with  certainty),  and  had
a  household  consisting  of  the  usual  number  of  native  servants.  Among
these  was  a  woman  who  was  a  laundress,  and  part  of  whose  weekly  duty
was  to  bring  my  father's  clean  linen  to  the  bungalow,  and  deposit  it  in
his  bedroom  for  use.

"  This  woman  met  with  an  accident,  which  ended  in  tetanus.  One
day,  it  being  fully  light,  my  father  was  lying  on  a  sofa  in  his  sitting-
room,  the  woman  being  somewhere  in  the  compound,  and  in  extremis,  as
he  knew,  from  lockjaw.  The  door  was  open,  and,  as  he  lay  on  the  sofa,  he
could  see  down  a  passage,  which  ended  in  another  door  (also  open),  leading
to  the  compound.  This  latter  was  the  main  entrance  to  the  bungalow,
and  anyone  coming  up  the  passage  would  go  either  into  the  sitting-room,
or,  turning  at  right  angles,  down  another  passage  which  led  to  the  bed-
room and  adjoining  bathroom.  While  lying  on  the  sofa,  in  full  view  of
the  entrance-passage,  my  father  was  astonished  to  see  his  laundress  enter
from  the  compound,  pass  up  the  passage,  carrying,  as  was  her  custom,  his
clean  linen.  ^  Upon  reaching  the  sitting-room  door  she  turned  down  the
corridor,  leading,  as  before  explained,  to  the  bedroom.  He  immediately
rose  and  followed  her,  knowing  that  she  must  be  in  either  the  bed  or  the
bath  room,  from  which  there  was  no  exit  save  by  the  way  she  had  come,
but  no  one  was  to  be  seen.  Much  perplexed,  he  repaired  to  the  compound
and  found  her  lying  dead,  having  at  that  moment  expired.  My  father
described  her  appearance  as  perfectly  definite  in  every  way,  wearing  the
same  clothes  and  bangle  ornaments  which  she  used  to  do  when  alive  ;  and

1  As  to  the  projection  of  the  hallucinatory  figure  with  familiar  dress  or  appurtenances,
see  Vol.  i.,  pp.  539-40.


538  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

her  apparition  was  so  palpable  that  it  was  the  knowledge  of  her  impending
death  which  caused  him  to  follow  her  into  the  bedroom  and  bathroom.

"  That  this  appearance  was  not  that  of  any  living  person  is  proved  by
the  fact  of  there  being  no  exit  from  these  two  rooms  save  by  the  passage
down  which  the  apparition  walked.  "  Temple  L.  Mooke."

Mr.  Arthur  G.  Hill,  of  47,  Belsize  Avenue,  Hampstead,  writes  : —

"  September,  1884.

"  The  late  General  Moore  narrated  the  above  account  to  me  in  the
presence  of  his  son  a  few  weeks  ago,  very  shortly  before  his  death,  and
had  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  reality  of  the  '  wraith.'  He  had  intended
to  dictate  an  account,  at  my  request,  specially  for  the  S.P.R.  He  was
the  most  unimaginative  and  strong-minded  man  imaginable."

[Mr.  Hill  mentions  that  this  was  not  General  Moore's  solitary  experi-
ence of  hallucination,  as  he  had  once  seen  the  figure  of  his  brother,  two
days  after  his  brother's  death.]

(585)  From  Mr.  H.,  a  journalist,  who  desires  that  names  may  not  be
published.  The  account  has  been  submitted  to  the  first-hand  witness,  who
is  perfectly  willing  that  it  should  appear,  and  may  be  taken  to  admit  its
correctness.  u  November  1 2th,  1 883.

"  Many  years  ago,  my  father  had  an  intimate  and  dear  friend,  a  doctor,
who  had  to  pass  every  winter  in  Madeira.  One  night  my  father  was  going
to  his  rooms,  in  the  Strand,  when,  on  the  stairs,  coming  down,  he  met,  as
he  thought,  poor  Dr.  G.  So  vivid  was  the  illusion,  that  he  held  out  his
hand,  and,  I  believe,  spoke.  Of  that  I  am  not  certain.  The  ghost,  or
whatever  it  might  have  been,  looked  at  my  father,  and  passed  down  the
stairs.  Some  little  time  afterwards,  my  father  received  news  of  his  friend's
death.  It  happened,  I  believe,  on  the  very  day  my  father  met  with  his
little  adventure.     This  is  the  story  as  I  have  heard  my  parent  tell  it.

"  Visitations  or  warnings  of  this  kind  are  common  enough,  and  I
remember  perfectly  well  that  the  afiair,  hallucination  or  not,  impressed
my  father  very  much — not  that  he  is  by  any  means  a  superstitious  man."

[The  percipient  cannot  remember  the  precise  date  of  the  occurrence,
which  took  place  more  than  30  years  ago.]

(586)  From  Colonel  Y.,  who  writes,  in  a  letter  dated  March  11,  1886,
"  The  account  was  written  by  me  from  a  statement  made  to  me  by  my
father,  the  late  Capt.  J.  H.  Y.,  in  1864.  The  words  are  my  father's,  and
I  wrote  them  as  he  related  them  to  me."  Names  were  given  in  confidence.

"  One  of  my  [-i.e.,  Colonel  Y.'s,  not  his  father's]  grand-aunts  was  Mrs.
F.,  married  to  an  ofiicer,  Major  or  Colonel  F.,  of  the  Dragoons,  serving  in
George  III.'s  time  in  America.  He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga.
My  aunt  lived  at  the  time  in  Portland  Place,  W.,  and  was  entertaining  a
large  party  one  evening.  Suddenly  they  remarked  she  seemed  to  be  in  great
pain  and  agony,  exclaiming  quite  aloud  to  her  guests,  '  Oh,  do  go  home.  I
have  seen  a  most  fearful  sight,  and  am  compelled  to  break  up  the  party.'
Some  of  her  most  intimate  friends  asked  her  what  she  had  seen.  She
replied  that  she  was  certain  '  her  husband  F.  had  been  killed  in  a  battle,
and  that  she  most  distinctly  saw  his  body  being  carried  to  the  rear  by  his
soldiers.'  She  remained  in  great  anxiety  for  weeks,  when  the  sad  news
confirming  her  vision  arrived  from  America,  and  that  at  the  hour  she
made  the   exclamation  to  her  guests,  her  husband,  F.,  of  the   Dragoons


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  539

(allowing  for  clifFerence  of  longitude),  was  killed  in  an  attack  made  on  the
enemy  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga."

Colonel  Y.  adds,  "An  aunt  now  deceased,  told  me  she  was,  when  a  girl,
present  at  the  time  when  [her  aunt]  Mrs.  F.  called  out  '  that  F.  had  been
shot,  and  that  she  saw  his  body  being  carried  off  the  field  of  battle.' "

We  find  from  Burgoyne's  Campaign,  by  Charles  ISTeilson  (Albany,
1844),  that  Brigadier-General  F.  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga,
at  2  p.m.  on  Oct.  7,  1777,  but  did  not  die  till  8  a.m.  on  Oct.  8.  From
Letters  and  Memoirs  relating  to  the  American  War  of  Independence,  by
Madame  Riedesel  (Translation,  New  York,  1827),  we  learn  that  he  was
carried  to  Madame  Riedesel's  hut  at  about  3  p.m.,  which  would  correspond
with  about  8  p.m.  in  London ;  and  that  during  the  afternoon,  while  he
was  lying  mortally  wounded,  he  frequently  uttered  his  wife's  name.^

[We  have  no  means  of  judging  whether  the  vision  of  the  soldiers  carry-
ing the  body  was  of  the  clairvoyant  type,  or  whether  the  scene  was  merely  a
setting  supjDlied  by  the  percipient's  own  mind.  Nor  can  we  judge  how  far
the  experience  was  an  externahsed  hallucination.  (See  Yol.  I.,  p.  545,  note.)]

(587)  From  Mrs.  Hackett,  10,  Steele's  Road,  Haverstock  Hill,   N.W.

"September  26th,  1883.

"  The  incident  which  I  have  often  heard  my  father  [James  Dawson]
speak  about  was  that  one  of  the  men  on  board  my  grandfather's  ship  was
ill,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  eat  anything.  He  said  if  he  could  have  a
piece  of  game-pie,  he  thought  he  could  eat  that.  When  grandfather  got
home  (the  ship  was  then  in  dock  in  London),  he  found  a  hamper  had
arrived  from  Yorkshire  and  in  it  was  a  game-pie.  My  father  at  once
begged  to  take  a  piece  to  the  man.  He  had  it  tied  up  in  a  cloth,  to  be
able  to  hold  it  more  securely  in  going  up  the  side  of  the  ship.  When
nearly  at  the  top  of  the  ladder,  he  said  he  distinctly  saw  his  sister  dressed
in  white.  It  so  unnerved  him  that  he  dropped  the  pie  into  the  water.
His  sister  was  living  in  Yorkshire,  near  Flamborough  Head.  As  soon  as  a
letter  could  be  had  in  those  days,  they  heard  this  sister  [Jane  Foster]  died
at  that  time,  and  he  was  the  person  she  spoke  of  last.  I  never  heard  my  father
say  he  had  seen  anything  of  the  kind  before  or  afterwards.

"C.  J.  Hackett."

1 1  append  the  following  version  of  the  same  incident  (received  from  a  lady  of  sense
and  great  practical  ability),  as  illustrating  what  I  have  before  emphasised  (Vol.  i.,  p.  149) —
the  difference  in  evidential  value  between  a  record  given  by  a  person  nearly  connected  with
the  original  witness,  and  having  command  of  the  circumstances,  and  a  story  casually
picked  up  from  an  acquaintance.  The  essential  point  of  a  telepathic  vision  remains  ;  but
almost  every  detail  is  altered  ;  and,  as  so  frequently  happens  in  such  cases,  the  chain  of
evidence  is  shortened,  and  the  narrator's  informant  is  represented  as  the  person  to  whom
the  experience  occurred.     She  was  really  the  "  aunt  now  deceased  "  of  Colonel  V.

"  March  14,  1884.  _

"  Mrs.  v.,  whose  husband  was  in  the  Artillery  in  India,  told  me  the  following
occurred  to  herself.  The  story  is  well  known  in  her  family.  She  has  been  dead  some
years,  and  it  occurred  when  she  was  comparatively  a  young  woman.  I  heard  it  from  her
23  years  ago  last  Christmas,  at  Southampton.  One  evening,  sitting  in  her  drawing-room,
she  saw  distinctly  a  military  funeral  procession  pass  at  the  further  end  of  the  room.  The
coffin  borne  on  a  gun-carriage ;  the  men  with  arms  reversed.  Directly  it  passed  away,  she
noted  the  circumstance,  writing  it  down,  and  passed  some  months  in  the  greatest  anxiety.
It  was  before  the  days  of  overland  route.  She  heard  of  her  husband's  death,  which  had
occurred  that  day,  and  allowing  for  the  difference  of  time,  the  funeral  had  taken  place  at
the  moment  she  had  seen  the  vision,  death  and  burial  following  each  other  within  a  few
hours  in  India."  The  "arms  reversed,"  the  "overland  route,"  and  the  remark  about
"  death  and  burial,"  show  that  a  report  is  not  more  likely  to  be  accurate  for  being  circum-
stantial.


540  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

[No  one,  perhaps,  will  imagine  that  a  fictitious  narrative  would  take
such  a  form  as  this — the  apparition  coming  in  as  a  mere  episode  in  the
pie's  history.  But  the  incident  is  remote,  having  occurred,  Mrs.  Hackett
thinks,  before  1830.  She  last  heard  the  account  from  her  father  about
1850.  She  told  Mr.  Podmore  on  April  18,  1886,  that  a  surviving  aunt  of
hers  remembers  hearing  the  account  from  Mr.  Dawson,  but  is  too  old  to
be  applied  to  for  dates,  &c.]

(588)  From  Mr.  J.  H.  Redfern,  20,  Great  Ancoats  Street,  Manchester,
the  narrator  of  case  214.  ^^ ,  009

"  The  following  narrative  I  give  you  as  I  have  had  it  often  from  the
lips  of  my  wife.  The  circumstance  took  place  a  number  of  years  ago.
She  repeated  it  often.  I  have  ridiculed  it,  made  fun  of  it,  &c.  It  had
no  efiect  upon  her.  She  was  a  quiet,  thoughtful,  upright  woman  ;  and
so  far  as  the  thing  appeared  to  her,  all  who  knew  her  would  be  satisfied
as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  statement  as  given  by  her.  She  was  a  native  of
Worksop,  Notts.  A  Mr.  Drobble,  an  old  friend  of  her  father's,  residing
not  far  away,  was  fond  of  her  even  as  a  child,  and  as  she  grew  up,  petted
and  made  much  of  her ;  this  continued,  and  she  always  regarded  him  as
an  intimate  and  dear  friend.  In  winter,  or  at  any  time  going  from  home,
he  wore  an  old-fashioned  great-coat  of  drab  cloth.  I  mention  this  as  it
was  of  peculiar  make,  and  the  only  one  of  the  kind  about  that  part  of  the
country.  [She  left  home,  and  was  staying  at  Stockport.]  In  that  town,  in
a  street  called  Underbank,  is  an  old-fashioned  mansion  with  a  large  court-
yard in  the  front.  It  was  (and  is  now)  a  branch  of  the  Manchester  and
Liverpool  District  Bank.  Being  one  day  about  noon  there,  and  chancing
to  look  through  a  window  into  the  street,  she  saw  on  the  footpath
opposite  the  bank,  and  looking  up  at  the  building,  Mr.  Drobble.  He  had
on  his  drab  overcoat,  and  appeared  as  if  he  was  upon  the  point  of  coming
through  the  gateway  into  the  courtyard.  She  saw  him  (she  said)  face  to
face.  She  instantly  stepped  out  of  the  bank,  across  the  courtyard —
expecting  to  meet  him — into  the  street.  He  had  disappeared.  On  each
side  of  the  bank  were  shops.  She  fancied  that  he  must  have  gone  into
some  of  them.  She  followed,  as  she  thought,  but  could  see  nothing  of
him.  She  felt  much  disappointed ;  but  gradually  the  thing  was  in  a  great
measure  forgotten.

"  Fifteen  or  eighteen  months  after,  she  went  home  to  Worksop.  After
some  days,  incidentally  she  asked  her  mother  how  Mr.  Drobble  was.  Her
mother  stared  at  her  at  first,  and  then  asked  her  what  ever  she  was  talk-
ing about  %  Mr.  Drobble  had  been  dead  for  more  than  1 2  months.  My
wife,  in  her  turn,  protested  that  she  saw  him,  face  to  face,  in  broad  day-
light ;  that  it  was  impossible  that  she  could  be  mistaken  in  the  matter  ;
and  to  this  she  adhered  to  her  dying  day.

"  Upon  further  inquiry  it  appeared  that  Mr.  Drobble  had  died  at
about  the  time  of  the  day  when  she  believed  that  she  saw  him,  and  so  near
as  they  could  get  at  it,  on  the  same  day ;  and  that  he  had  been  confined
to  bed  for  something  like  9  or  10  months  previous  to  his  death.

"  It  appeared  also  that  they  had  never  sent  word  of  his  death,  and
she  had  never  learned  it  until  in  the  way,  and  at  the  time,  here  told."

Mrs,  Hannah  Lees,  of  Clifton  Crescent,  Rotherham,  writes  to  us  : —


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  541

"I  can  confirm  the  truth  o£  Mr.  Drobble's  death  when  sister  Redfern
was  away.  I  was  with  her  at  home,  when,  as  described  by  Mr.  Redfern,
she  asked  about  him,  and  only  then  learned  of  his  death.  Nothing  could
shake  her  belief  in  the  fact  of  her  having  seen  him  at  the  time,  and  in  the
manner  described."

[Mr.  Redfern  assures  us  that  he  had  not  exchanged  a  word  on  the
subject  with  Mrs.  Lees  for  years,  and  that  her  testimony  has  been  given
without  his  having  in  any  way  refreshed  her  memory.  But  the  degree  of
closeness  in  the  coincidence  is  uncertain ;  and  the  case  may  possibly  have
been  one  of  mistaken  identity.]

The  next  case  is  perhaps  an  example  of  the  rare  type  where  the
operative  idea  in  the  agent's  mind  was  of  the  place  in  which  (rather
than  of  the  person  by  whom)  the  phantasm  is  seen.    (Vol.  I.,  p.  268.)

(589)  From  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Grignon,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Kent.

"  24th  October,  1882.

"  The  date  was  between  1820  and  1830.  My  father  made  a  journey
from  Montego  Bay  to  Spanish  Town,  to  attend  the  session  of  the  '  House
of  Assembly '  of  Jamaica,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  and  passed  a  night
en  route  at  the  house  of  a  friend  whose  name  I  cannot  now  remember.
The  family  consisted  of  his  friend,  his  friend's  wife,  and  the  wife's  sister,  a
Miss  R.  (we  will  call  her  so ;  I  know  the  name  but  have  perhaps  no  right
to  give  it).  This  young  lady  was  out  of  health,  and  in  a  very  depressed
state.  After  dinner  the  ladies  left  the  room,  and  my  father  shortly  after
strolled  out  of  doors  in  the  very  brief  twilight  of  a  tropical  day.  To  his
surprise  he  saw  Miss  R.  going  along  a  path  from  the  house  towards  a
clump  of  trees  not  far  from  it ;  he  was  not  very  near  her,  but  called  out  to
her.  She  proceeded  on  her  way  without  taking  any  notice  of  him  ;
supposing  that  she  wished  to  be  alone,  he  turned  off  in  another  direction,
and  shortly  after  returned  to  the  house.  On  entering  the  drawing-room
he  found  his  friend  and  his  wife  there,  and  Miss  R.  also  there,  reclining
on  a  sofa.  When  he  came  in  she  rose  and  left  the  room.  He  said  to
his  friend's  wife,  '  Do  you  think  it  safe  for  your  sister  to  go  out  of
doors  so  late,  with  a  heavy  dew  falling  ?  I  met  her  outside  a  few  minutes
ago.'  '  You  must  be  mistaken ;  she  came  in  here  with  me  from  the
dining-room,  lay  down  on  the  sofa,  and  I  am  quite  certain,  did  not  leave
it  till  just  now  on  your  entrance.  I  have  been  here  the  whole  time.'
They  were  all  puzzled  by  his  certainty  that  he  had  seen  Miss  R.,  and
some  time  having  passed  without  her  returning  to  the  room,  she  was
looked  for  and  not  found  in  the  house.  On  further  search  outside,  she
was  found  dead,  having  hanged  herself  on  one  of  the  trees  in  the  clump
towards  which  my  father  had  seen  her,  or  the  appearance  of  her,
moving.

"  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  servants  about  the  place  were  all
negroes  or  brown  people.  Had  such  a  thing  happened  in  England  it  might
be  thought  that  some  female  servant,  sufliciently  like  Miss  R.  in  figure  to
be  taken  for  her  at  a  little  distance,  had  been  seen.  There  this  could  not
have  been.     Probably  the  poor  girl   was,    while    reclining  on   the   sofa.


542  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

thinking,  with  an  intentness  which  the  sane  mind  cannot  easily  conceive,
of  her  purpose  of  suicide  and  the  place  she  had  chosen  for  it.  Could  this
have  had  the  eifect  of  visibly  projecting  the  appearance  of  her  form
towards  the  place?

"W.  S.  Grignon."

[In  spite  of  the  special  reason  suggested  for  rejecting  the  hypothesis
of  mistaken  identity,  we  can  scarcely  feel,  in  so  remote  a  case,  that  we
realise  the  circumstances  with  sufficient  completeness  to  justify  confidence
on  that  point.  If  the  vision  was  not  flesh  and  blood,  it  is  certainly
difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  it  was  of  telepathic  origin.]

(590)  From  a  teacher  in  the  Gymnasium  of  Tver,  Russia,  whose  name
we  are  asked  not  to  print.  The  first-hand  account  was  sent  by  Mr.
Yladislavlefi",  of  Tver,  to  Mr.  Bruhns,  who  translated  it  for  us.

"  1883.

The  narrator  begins  by  saying  that  about  1856,  when  a  boy  of  12,  he
was  a  collegian  of  the  first  Moscow  Gymnasium,  and  that  his  parents  lived
about  250  miles  from  Moscow.  "  One  morning  in  the  beginning  of  April,  I
went  as  usual  to  the  Arkhangelsk  Cathedral  in  the  Kremlin.  The  liturgy
had  already  commenced.  The  church  was,  as  usual,  full  of  worshippers.  At
the  beginning  of  the  liturgy  I  accidentally  turned  my  head,  and  to  my
greatest  surprise  saw  in  the  crowd  of  worshippers  my  mother,  praying,  and
with  her  eyes  directed  to  the  holy  images,  like  other  worshippers  round  her.
She  was  dressed  in  her  usual  dress.  My  astonishment  was  very  great,  for
I  knew  very  well  that  my  parents  were  then  at  home.  I  spent  the  whole
liturgy  in  looking  at  her,  and  in  thinking  of  the  incident.  Meanwhile  the
liturgy  had  come  to  an  end,  and  the  worshippers  began  to  kiss  the  cross.
Among  others,  my  mother  approached  the  priest.  Fearing  to  lose  sight  of
her,  I  went  through  the  crowd  of  worshippers  which  surrounded  the  priest
with  the  cross,  and  when  she,  after  having  kissed  the  cross,  went  to  the
door,  I  went  after  her.  She  went  out  of  the  door,  advanced  some  feet,  and
then  stopped  at  the  corner,  formed  by  the  wall  of  the  cathedral  itself  and
the  wall  of  the  altar,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  her  face  turned  towards
the  crowd  which  was  passing  by  her.  Going  after  the  worshippers,  I
approached  her.  I  saw  her  looking  at  me  and  weeping,  her  tears  flowing
down  her  cheeks.  I  stopped  momentarily,  but  the  crowd  continued  to  pass
by  us,  and  I  all  at  once  understood  that  I  saw  before  me  something
extraordinary — something  that  was  visible  to  me  alone.  An  inexpressible
terror  seized  me,  and  I  cannot  remember  how  I  reached  our  lodging.  But
I  told  nobody  of  the  incident.

"  The  summer  came.  We  went  home  to  our  parents.  When  we
arrived,  we  heard  of  our  mother's  death  :  she  died  precisely  at  the
beginning  of  April.  Our  father  did  not  inform  us  about  this  death  fearing
the  sorrowful  news  might  disturb  our  May  examinations  in  the  University
and  in  the  Gymnasium."

[If  this  report  is  accurate,  the  case  does  not  look  like  one  of  mistaken
identity.  But  the  extraordinarily  prolonged  character  of  the  apparition
suggests  exaggeration  (compare  case  300)  ;  and  the  more  so  when  the  youth
of  the  percipient  is  remembered.]


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  543

§  4.  The  cases  in  this  section  are  narrated  by  persons  not  closely
related  to  the  respective  percipients.

(591)  From  Dr.  de  Wolf,  Providence,  R.I., — a  letter  to  Professor
Barrett.  "August  28th,  1884.

"  I  have  been  for  many  years  a  practitioner  of  medicine  in  this  city ;
my  birthplace  was  the  town  of  Bristol,  some  15  miles  distant,  where  I
resided  for  more  than  30  years,  and  for  the  greater  part  of  that  time  was
a  next-door  neighbour  of  Right  Rev.  A.  Y.  Eriswold,  Bishop  of  the
Eastern  Diocese  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  and  who  died  some
40  years  ago.  He  was,  as  all  Churchmen  in  this  country  know,  greatly
esteemed  for  his  talents  and  piety.

"  For  what  follows  the  Bishop  himself  was  my  informant.  He  told  it
to  others,  and  I  heard  it  frequently  spoken  of  by  different  members  of
the  family.

"  One  afternoon,  while  standing  at  his  desk  writing  in  his  study,  a
door  opened^  from  an  adjoining  room,  and  Mr.  Collins,  his  son-in-law,
entered,  and  passed  slowly  through  the  room  and  out  of  another  door  ;
the  Bishop  said  he  had  not  been  thinking  or  talking  of  Mr.  Collins,  and
had  not  heard  from  him  for  some  time.  He  knew  that  he  could  not  be
within  a  thousand  miles  of  him,  and  yet  he  had  distinctly  seen  him  pass
through  the  room.  This  of  itself  was  a  very  remarkable  occurrence,  but
what  follows  renders  it  still  more  so.

"  When  the  mail  from  Charleston  arrived  some  3  or  4  days  after
(there  were  no  telegraphs  or  railroads  at  that  time),  a  letter  was  received
announcing  the  death  of  Mr.  Collins,  on  the  very  day  and  hour  when  the
Bishop  saw  him  apparently  pass  through  his  study.

"  The  good  Bishop  (who  was  no  believer  in  ghosts,  necromancy,  or
anything  of  the  sort)  said  it  was  a  most  remarkable  and  singular  circum-
stance, the  coincidence  rendering  it  still  more  remarkable,  and  he  could
not  account  for  it,  but  supposed  it  must  be  some  sort  of  a  hallucination ;
for,  as  he  was  standing  at  a  high  desk,  he  could  hardly  have  been
dreaming.  "John  J.  de  Wolf,  M.D."

Dr.  de  Wolf  has  kindly  inspected  the  tombstone  of  Mr.  Collins,  which
shows  that  he  died  on  July  4th,  1807.  Dr.  de  Wolf  has  also  endeavoured  to
find  some  other  person  who  has  heard  the  account  direct  from  the  Bishop  ;
but  in  this  he  has  failed.  The  Bishop's  grandchildren  have  all  heard  of
the  occurrence,  but  not  at  first  hand.  One  of  them  told  Dr.  de  Wolf  that
the  Bishop  himself  was  disposed  to  say  very  little  about  it.

(592)  Copy  of  part  of  a  letter  from  Miss  M.  A.  Ewart,  of  3,  Morpeth
Terrace,  Victoria  Street,  S.W.,  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  dated  April  4,  1886.

"  I  waited  to  write  until  I  had  seen  Mr.  Henry  Clarke,  who  was
brother-in-law  to  Mr.  Guthrie,  Vicar  of  Calne,  in  Wilts,  who  told  me  at
dinner  at  Bo  wood,  about  1860,  of  the  apparition  of  Lord  Kerry,  as  I
described  it  to  you.  Mr.  Clarke  had  no  recollection  of  having  heard  Mr.
Guthrie  tell  the  story,  and  did  not  know  it  ;  but  he  said  that  Mr.  Guthrie
was  greatly  attached  to  Lord  Kerry,  who  was  his    pupil,    and  that  Lady

1  Compare  cases  530  and  537.  This  form  of  hallucination  is  met  with  also  in  purely
subjective  cases.


544  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Lansdowne  was  always  very  grateful  to  Mr.  Guthrie  for  the  influence  he
had  over  her  son.  Lord  Kerry  died  in  1836.  Mr.  Clarke  could  not  say
that  he  died   at  Bowood.

"  It  was  in  the  beech  avenue,  approaching  the  house  at  Bowood,  that
Mr.  Guthrie  told  me  he  met  Lord  Kerry,  when  he  was  going  to  the  house
to  see  him,  knowing  him  to  be  unwell  and  shut  up.  When  he  reached  the
house,  the  servant  told  him  that  Lord  Kerry  had  died  a  few  minutes
before,  and,  as  Mr.  Guthrie  believed,  at  the  moment  he  had  met  him,
walking  briskly,  and  surprising  him  so  much  that  he  did  not  attempt  to
stop  him.  Lord  and  Lady  Kerry  lived  in  a  house  I  know  well,  close  to
Bowood  (where  Mr.  Clarke's  sister,  Mrs.  Warren,  now  lives),  but  Mr.
Clarke  says  that  they  may  have  been  at  Bowood  at  the  time  of  his  death.
Mr.  Clarke  was  then  in  China.     I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  tell  you  more.

«  M.  A.  EWART."

[This  narrative  belongs,  no  doubt,  to  a  type  which  as  a  rule  is  untrust-
worthy— having  been  told  to  our  informant  by  an  acquaintance,  not  a
relative  or  intimate  friend,  and  on  one  occasion  only.  But  the  facts,  it
will  be  seen,  are  of  the  very  simplest  kind,  and  are  presented  without  any
attempt  at  ornament  or  detail ;  and  Miss  Ewart's  acquaintance  with  the
locality  would  naturally  tend  to  fix  the  simple  lines  of  the  picture  in  her
mind.]

(593)  From  Mr.  P.  H.  Berthon,  F.R.G.S.,  20,  Margaret  Street,  W.
The  narrative  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  in  1875.

"  Some  years  ago,  when  residing  at  Walthamstow,  in  Essex,  my  wife
and  self  became  intimate  with  a  lady  and  gentleman  who  had  become
temporarily  our  near  neighbours.  On  one  occasion,  when  they  were  dining
with  us  quite  ew/amiZ^e,  my  friend  and  I,  on  repairing  to  the  drawing-
room,  not  long  after  the  ladies  had  left  us,  were  surprised  to  find  that  his
wife  had  been  suddenly  taken  with  a  kind  of  fainting  fit,  and  had  been
obliged  to  return  home  accompanied  by  one  of  our  female  servants.  My
wife,  as  a  matter  of  course,  went  the  next  day  to  inquire  after  her  friend,
who  then  told  her  that  the  cause  of  her  sudden  indisposition  had  been
the  appearance,  as  if  in  her  actual  person  standing  before  her,  of  one  of
her  two  sisters,  who  were  then  residing  with  their  mother  at  Beyrout,  in
Syria,  which  had  greatly  alarmed  her.  Communication  by  telegraph  had
not  then  been  established,  and  by  post  it  was  much  slower  than  at
present.  Many  days  had  therefore  elapsed  before  the  lady  received  letters
from  Beyrout,  but  on  their  arrival  they  conveyed  the  intelligence  that
her  sister  had  died  on  the  day  and,  allowing  for  the  difierence  in  the
time,  at  about  the  hour  of  her  appearance  to  our  friend."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Berthon  told  the  present  writer  that  the  lady,
Mrs.  de  Salom^,  was  playing  the  piano  when  she  saw  her  sister's  figure
at  her  side.  Mr.  Berthon  did  not  hear  of  the  incident  from  Mrs.  de
Salome  herself,  but  was  at  once  told  of  it  by  his  wife,  and  was  also  told  at
once  of  the  arrival  oi  the  news.  He  frequently  saw  Mrs.  de  Salom^  during
the  interval.  He  says  also  that  his  daughter,  who  was  12-  at  the  time,
distinctly  remembers  hearing  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time.  Mrs.  de
Salome  died  soon  after  the  occurrence,  which  took  place  in  the  autumn
of  1853.     Mrs.  Berthon  is  also  deceased.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  545

(594)  From  Dr.  H.  T.  Berry,  29,  Pembridge  Crescent,  Bayswater.

"  December  29th,  1884.

"  Although  living  now  at  Bayswater,  I  have  been  in  practice  in  the
North  of  London  for  nearly  40  years.  The  following  account  I  can  vouch
for  in  every  particular,  but  remember  I  draw  no  inference  from  it.

"  Some  five  or  six  years  since,  I  was  attending  Mrs.  A.,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Gray's  Inn  Road.  The  lady  became  so  ill  that  she  sent  for
her  mother,  residing  nearly  one  hundred  miles  from  town,  to  nurse  her.  Some
eight  or  ten  days  after,  I  made  my  usual  morning  call,  and  found  Mrs.  A.
improving,  and  her  mother  quite  well.  About  3  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
of  the  same  day,  I  was  hastily  summoned  to  Mrs.  A.'s  house.  When  I
arrived,  Mrs.  A.  was  no  worse,  but  her  mother  had  suddenly  dropped  down
dead  in  a  fit.  I  telegraphed  to  the  husband  [Mrs.  A.'s  father]  to  come  to
town  directly,  not  telling  him  of  his  wife's  death,  fearing  to  alarm  him  too
suddenly.  When  the  husband  came  up  (he  was  a  very  intelligent  man,
about  70)  he  told  me  he  was  not  surprised  to  find  his  wife  dead  when  he
arrived  in  town.  For,  about  the  time  of  her  death,  he  was  returning  to  his
home,  through  a  field,  when  he  distinctly  saw  his  wife  cross  the  field  a  few
yards  from  him.  As  he  went  home  he  called  at  a  friend's  house,  and  said,
'  I  am  sure  my  wife  is  dead.  When  I  reached  home  I  found  the  telegram
asking  me  to  come  up  directly  ;  but  I  felt  certain  my  poor  wife  was  dead.'
As  I  said  in  my  note,  I  make  no  theory  to  explain  the  above.  The  facts  I
know  of  my  own  personal  knowledge.

"  H.  T.  Berey."

In  a  subsequent  letter.  Dr.  Berry  says,  "  The  old  man  told  me  him-
self, within  24  hours  of  the  vision.  I  don't  think  he  is  living  now."
He  adds  that  the  incident  occurred  in  the  summer  of  1880  ;  and  that
he  attended  the  inquest.

He  has  given  us,  in  confidence,  the  name  and  address  of  his  patient,
but  does  not  allow  us  to  apply  to  her.  As  he  does  not  remember  her
mother's  name,  we  have  had  some  diificulty  in  obtaining  confirmation  of
his  account.  We  applied  to  the  coroner  of  the  district,  who  found  no
inquest  recorded  in  his  books  ;  but  he  kindly  inquired  of  a  grandson  of
the  deceased  lady,  from  whom  he  learnt  that  she  had  died  in  the  summer
of  1880,  and  that  there  was  no  formal  inquest.  No  doubt  (as  the
coroner  suggests)  Dr.  Berry  used  the  word  "  inquest "  for  the  informal
consultation  at  which  he  assigned  the  cause  of  death.

(595)  From  Miss  Eliza  Mortlock,  Tivoli  Lodge,  Clevedon,  who  does  not
remember  when  it  was  that  the  account  was  written.

"  At  Wiesbaden  we  were  acquainted  with  a  clever  good  man.  Professor
Ebenau,  whose  old  sister  kept  his  house,  &c.  He  told  us  he  had  a  friend
residing  40  or  50  miles  off" — likewise  a  professor — who  was  very  poor,  and
had  a  large  family.  On  hearing  that  the  wife  was  dying,  Mr.  E.  went  to
see  them,  and  brought  back  their  eldest  boy,  for  whom  a  little  bed  was  put
up  in  Mr.  E.'s  room.

"  One  morning,  about  10  days  after,  Mr.  E.  called  and  asked  me,  '  Do
you  believe  that  at  the  moment  of  death,  you  may  appear  to  one  whom
you  love  ? '  I  replied,  '  Yes,  I  do.'  '  Well,'  he  said,  '  we  shall  see.  I
have  noted  the  day  and  the  hour  ;  for  last  night  after  I  went  up  to  bed,  the

VOL.    II.  2  N


546  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

child  said  sweetly  (in  German),  "  Yes,  dear  mamma,  I  see  you."  To  which
I  replied,  "  No,  dear  boy,  it  is  I,  I  am  come  to  bed."  "  No,  he  said,  "  it  is
dear  mamma,  she  is  standing  there  smiling  at  me,"  pointing  to  the  side  of
the  bed.'  On  his  next  visit,  Mr.  Ebenau  told  us  that  he  had  received  a
letter  saying  that  at  that  time,  and  on  that  evening,  the  wife  had  breathed

^^^  l^s*-  "  Eliza  Moetlock."

[This  event  happened  in  the  spring  of  1854,  and  Miss  Mortlock  has
lost  sight  of  Professor  Ebenau  ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  she  herself  was
informed  of  the  vision  before  the  death  was  known.  The  boy  seems  to  have
been  sufficiently  awake  at  any  rate  to  understand  and  reply  to  Professor
Ebenau's  remark,  and  Miss  Mortlock  is  sure  that  the  Professor  believed
him  to  have  been  awake.  But  he  may  have  been  in  a  state  favourable  to
subjective  hallucination,  from  knowledge  of  his  mother's  critical  condition.]

(596)  From  Mr.  Wicks  (a  Temperance  Missionary),  87,  Southfields,
Leicester.

"July,   1884.

"  In  Devonport,  in  the  year  1884,  I  was  acquainted  with  a  Mrs.
Flaherty,  an  Irish  widow,  who  occupied  two  rooms  in  a  house  which
accommodated  several  poor  families.  She  had  three  sons,  the  eldest  of
whom.  Garland,  a  lad  of  about  17,  who  was  steward  on  board  one  of  Her
Majesty's  ships,  was  her  main  support.  This  lad  had  been  ashore  on  leave,
and  had  bade  his  mother  farewell  to  return  to  his  duty.  She,  soon  after
parting  with  him,  set  about  cleaning  the  doorway  of  the  house.  Looking
up  from  this  occupation,  she  saw  him  returning  up  the  street,  and  she
exclaimed,  '  Why,  goodness  !  he  has  lost  the  boat.  Whatever  will  he  do  ? '
She  rose  up  and  surveyed  him  as  he  approached  her,  identifying  his  face,
hair,  figure,  gait,  dress,  and  even  the  bundle  of  clothes  he  had  carried
away.  She  called  out  to  him,  but  he  made  no  answer,  walked  past  her
into  the  house,  and  went  up  into  her  rooms.  She  followed,  but  finding
nobody  there,  she  called  out  chidingly,  '  Garland,  don't  play  with  me.  Tell
me,  why  haven't  you  gone  aboard  ? '  Her  excitement  brought  in  her
neighbours,  who  asked  what  was  the  matter ;  to  which  inquiry  she
responded,  '  Indeed,  I  don't  know.  By  the  Holy  Mother,  I  never  saw
Garland  in  my  life  if  I  didn't  see  him  just  now  come  in  at  the  door  and  go
upstairs  before  me.'  '  Are  you  sure,  now,  he  is  not  hiding  in  some  of  your
rooms  1 '  They  soon  satisfied  themselves  by  search  that  this  was  not  the
case,  and  told  Mrs.  Flaherty  she  must  have  been  mistaken.  To  this  she
answered  positively,  '  Don't  I  know  my  own  boy — my  own  Garland  ?  bless
him  !  and  didn't  I  see  him  come  up  the  street,  and  come  into  this  house  ■?
Yes,  and  up  over  the  stairs  :  and  didn't  he  pass  me  without  speaking  ?  the
likes  of  which  he  never  did  before  at  all,  at  all.  Something  must  be  the
matter  with  him.'

"  In  this  she  was  right.  It  turned  out  that  in  trying  to  get  from  the  boat
on  to  the  ladder  lying  over  the  ship's  side  he  missed  his  foothold,  fell  into
the  sea,  and  was  drowned.  This  happened  at  the  very  time  his  mother
saw  his  apparition.

"  I  had  this  story,  as  it  is  here  given,  from  Mrs.  Flaherty's  own  lips,  and
have  frequently  since  heard  it  from  her  second  son,  John  Garland  Flaherty,
who  was  my  companion  for  over  10  years.

"  William  Wicks."


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  547

(597)  From  the  late  Miss  Elizabeth  Jacob,  who  wrote  clown  the
account,  some  years  ago,  for  Mrs.  Saxby,  of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.  The
elate  of  the  incident  is  now  irrecoverable;  Mrs.  Saxby,  writing  on
March  11,  1886,  says  that  she  thinks  it  "must  have  occurred  full  20
years  ago."

The  narrative  begins  by  describing  how  one  John  Miller,  an  old  blind
man  whom  Miss  Jacob  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  E-ussell,  used  to  visit  in
London,  died  unexpectedly  at  a  time  when  his  son-in-law  was  seeking
employment  in  the  country.  "  The  second  night  after  the  death,  Mrs.
Miller  and  her  daughter  had  gone  to  bed,  but  they  were  unable  to  sleep
for  thinking  of  him,  when,  to  use  her  own  words,  '  I  heard  something
strike  against  the  window,  ma'am,  and  I  started  up  and  found  that  it  was
someone  throwing  up  stones  against  it.  So  I  jumps  up,  throws  my  flannel
petticoat  over  my  shoulders,  and  opens  the  window.  "  Who's  there  '?"  says
I.  "It  is  I,  mother,"  says  Jem,  "come  home."  "Oh,  Jem,"  says  I,  "father's
dead."  Says  he,  "  I  knowed  it,  and  that's  why  I  come  home."  So,  ma'am
I  was  struck  all  of  a  heap,  as  you  may  guess,  and  I  whipped  on  my  clothes
and  let  Jem  in,  and  then  he  told  us  all  how  it  was.'  He  had  been  in
Buckinghamshire,  towards  Oxford,  and  he  was  walking  by  a  ploughed  field
in  a  country  place,  when,  looking  up,  he  saw  his  father  [in-law]  coming
towards  him.  He  was  quite  sure  it  was  his  father  [in-law].  He  felt  startled,
but  was  just  going  up  to  speak  to  him  when  he  passed  away  over  the
ploughed  field  without  turning,  or  speaking,  or  looking  at  him.  Jem  felt
so  awe  struck  that  he  could  neither  move  nor  do  anything,  but  he  thought
directly  that  it  was  a  sign  that  something  was  wrong,  so  he  turned  and
walked  back  to  London  as  soon  as  he  could,  and  very  footsore  and  tired
he  was  when  he  arrived."

Mrs.  Saxby  tells  us  that  Miss  Jacob  heard  old  Mrs.  Miller  relate  this
incident  a  few  days  after  Jem's  return  ;  and  adds,  "  They  found  that  it
was  exactly  at  the  same  hour  that  the  old  man  died,  that  his  son-in-law
saw  him  glide  past  him  in  the  ploughed  field."

[This  case  depends  on  the  evidence  of  respectable,  though  uneducated,
witnesses  ;  and  the  fact  of  the  son-in-law's  return,  and  the  reason  he  alleged
for  it,  are  not  matters  on  which  memory  would  become  untrustworthy  in  a
few  days.  At  the  same  time,  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence  may  easily
have  been  exaggerated.  As  Mrs.  Miller  was  cognisant  of  Jem's  unexpected
return  before  he  heard  of  the  death,  and  must  have  heard  of  the  vision
that  caused  his  return  in  almost  the  same  breath  as  he  heard  of  the  death,
her  evidence  may  perhaps  be  reckoned  as  on  a  par  with  first-hand  (Vol.  I.,
p.  148).]

(598)  The  late  General  Campbell,  of  Gwalior  House,  Southgate,  in-
formed us  that  a  relative  of  his.  Major  Hasell,  had  seen  the  apparition  of
a  brother  at  the  time  of  the  latter's  death,  and  that  the  only  authority  whom
he  was  at  liberty  to  quote  was  a  common  relative  of  his  own  and  of  Major
Hasell's — General  Orchard.  At  our  request  he  wrote  to  General  Orchard,
who  replied  as  follows  : —

"  Woodville  Gardens,  Barnes,  S.W.,  Surrey.

"May  17th,  1884.
^        "The  event  took  place   during  June,  1849  (the  precise  date  I  cannot
say)  ;  it  took  place  on  his  voyage  home,  on  medical  leave.     Hasell  (48th
VOL.  II.  2  N  2


548  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Ben.  IST.I.)  told  me  it  was  in  the  Red  Sea  that  his  brother  died,  on  the  way
to  Suez.  Hasell  further  stated  that  on  seeing  his  brother's  apparition
he  looked  at  his  watch,  and  noted  down  the  date  and  time  his  brother
appeared  to  him,  and  by  his  calculations  it  was  exactly  the  time  intimated
as  to  his  demise,  which  he  afterwards  received.  The  name  of  the  ship  I  do
not  know  ;  however,  that  can  be  easily  ascertained  from  the  India  Office,
as  well  as  the  actual  date  and  where  he  died.  The  particulars  that  I  have
not  been  able  to  give  have  quite  escaped  my  memory,  although  at  the  time
they  must  have  been  mentioned  to  me.

"  Hasell  was  in  India  with  his  regiment,  and  his  brother  going  to
England  on  medical  leave  at  that  time.  u  j   -yy^  Orchard."

General  Orchard  writes  to  us  on  May  24,  1884  : —

"  I  cannot  bring  to  mind  when  Major  Hasell  told  me  of  the  occurrence.

"  The  apparition  appeared  in  the  afternoon,  but  the  hour  has  escaped
my  memory.  It  showed  itself  to  Major  Hasell,  and  he  told  me  it  was
visible  for  a  second  or  two,  and  then  faded  away.  He  made  the  calcula-
tion as  to  the  time,  which  agreed  with  that  of  his  brother's  death."

General  Campbell  says  that  Major  Hasell  struck  him  "  as  being  a
very  straightforward,  practical  sort  of  man."

We  learn  from  the  India  Office  that  Captain  William  Lowther  Hasell,
attached  to  the  44th  Bengal  Native  Infantry,  died  at  Cairo,  on  his  way
home,  on  the  13th  June,  1849.  The  vessel  in  which  he  embarked  from
India  was  the  P.  and  O.  steamship    "  Oriental,"  Captain  Powell.

(599)  The  following  narrative,  received  from  an  intimate  friend  of
Mr.  Myers  and  the  present  writer,  is  third-hand,  and  is  admitted  only  by
special  exception  (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note).

"  1883.

"  My  grandfather.  Sir  J.  Y.,  was  drowned  by  the  upsetting  of  a  boat
in  the  Solent,  in  or  about  the  year  1830.

"  On  the  day  of  his  death  Miss  Manningham,  a  great  friend  and  con-
nection of  his,  was  at  one  of  the  Ancient  Concerts  in  Hanover  Square-
Rooms.  During  the  performance  she  fainted  away,  and  when  she  came  to,,
declared  that  she  had  seen  a  corpse  lying  at  her  feet,  and  though  the  face
was  turned  away,  she  knew  the  figure  to  be  that  of  my  grandfather.
Communication  in  those  days  was  not  of  course  as  easy  as  now,  and  her
fears  were  not  verified  till  some  days  after  the  event.  ^  Such  is  the  family
story,  which  I  heard  often  from  my  father,  and  had  verified  by  my  mother
when  last  I  saw  her."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  the  narrator  adds,  "  I  have  always  under-
stood that  my  father  heard  it  from  Miss  Manningham  ;  my  mother  heard
it  from  my  father."

The  following  account  of  the  same  incident  occurs  in  A  Portion  of  the
Journcd  ke-pt  hy  T.  Raikes,  Esq.,  from  1831  to  1847,  Vol.  I.,  p.  131  : —

"Wednesday,  26th,  December,  1832.^ — Captain recounted  a  curious

anecdote  that  happened  in  his  own  family.  He  told  it  in  the  following
words  : — It  is  now  about   15   months  ago  that  Miss  M.,  a  connection  of

1  The  journey  from  Southampton  to  London  only  took  one  day  at  that  time ;  but
Miss  Manningham  may  not  have  been  immediately  informed  of  the  news.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  549

my  family,  went  with  a  party  of  friends  to  a  concert  at  the  Argyll  Rooms.
She  appeared  there  to  be  suddenly  seized  with  indisposition,  and  though
she  persisted  for  some  time  to  struggle  against  what  seemed  a  violent
nervous  affection,  it  became  at  last  so  oppressive  that  they  were  obliged
to  send  for  their  carriage  and  conduct  her  home.  She  was  for  a  long  while
unwilling  to  say  what  was  the  cause  of  her  indisposition ;  but  on  being
more  earnestly  questioned,  she  at  length  confessed  that  she  had,
immediately  on  arriving  at  the  concert-room,  been  terrified  by  a  horrible
vision  which  unceasingly  presented  itself  to  her  sight.  It  seemed  to  her
as  though  a  naked  corpse  was  lying  on  the  floor  at  her  feet ;  the  features
of  the  face  were  partly  covered  by  a  cloth  mantle,  but  enough  was
apparent  to  convince  her  that  the  body  was  that  of  Sir  J.  Y.  Every
effort  was  made  by  her  friends  at  the  time  to  tranquillise  her  mind  by
representing  the  folly  of  allowing  such  delusions  to  prey  upon  her  spirits,
and  she  thus  retired  to  bed  ;  but  on  the  following  day  the  family  received
the  tidings  of  Sir  J.  Y.  having  been  drowned  in  Southampton  River  that
very  night  by  the  oversetting  of  his  boat,  and  the  body  was  afterwards
found  entangled  in  a  hoat-cloak.  Here  is  an  authentic  case  of  second-sight,
and  of  very  recent  date."

We  find  fi-om  the  Hampshire  Telegraph  that  the  fatal  accident  occurred
at  about  4  p.m.,  on  May  5,  1831.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  accounts  present  a  discrepancy  in  the  name
of  the  building  where  the  vision  was  seen — the  "  Argyll  Rooms,"
according  to  the  older  version,  the  "  Hanover  Square  Rooms  "  according
to  the  later.  We  find  from  the  advertisements  of  the  Morning  Post  that
"  the  celebrated  Russian  Band  "  was  that  week  giving  daily  concerts,  at
3  p.m.,  at  the  Argyll  Rooms;  and  from  Crickley's  Picture  of  London  (1831),
p.  93,  we  learn  that  "the  Argyll  Rooms,  Regent  Street,  burnt  down  in  the
early  part  of  last  year,  have  been  again  restored  to  their  former  splendour.
They  are  devoted  to  concerts,  balls,  and  exhibitions,  and  are  much
frequented  by  persons  of  rank  and  fashion."  It  is  therefore  probable  that
Miss  Manningham  was  present  at  the  afternoon  concert  at  these  Rooms.
The  Hanover  Square  Rooms  were  also  used  for  concerts  at  that  time  ;  and
as  the  title  "  Argyll  Rooms  "  has  long  ceased  to  suggest  a  high-class
concert-hall,  one  easily  sees  how  it  may  have  been  unconsciously  replaced
in  the  mind  of  our  friend's  parents  by  the  more  apparently  suitable
appellation.

The  newspaper-account  shows  that  the  bodies  of  Sir  J.  Y.,  and  of  two
friends  who  were  drowned  with  him,  were  "  completely  enveloped  in  their
cloaks  and  greatcoats  " ;  and  therefore  the  detail  of  the  boat-cloak  in  the
vision,  if  correct,  is  interesting ;  but  as  we  do  not  know  at  what  hand  the
older  account  is  given,  it  is  impossible  to  rely  on  such  a  point.

(600)  From  Mr.  James  Cox,  (mentioned  above,  p.  235).

"  Admiralty  House,  Queenstown.

"March  18th,  1884.
"When  I  was  serving  in  China  in  1860,  during  the  war,  a  military
officer,  who  was  serving  there  at  the  same  time,  while  crossing  Talienwhau
Bay,  was  capsized  and  drowned.  One  of  his  brother  officers  informed
me  that  at  the  time  of  the  accident  he  distinctly  saw  his  apparition  while
riding  across  the  country.


550  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  I  cannot  now  remember  the  names  of  these  officers,  as  this  happened
more  than  20  years  ago.  "  James  Cox."

In  reply  to  the  question  whether  he  heard  of  the  event  immediately
after  its  occurrence,  Mr.  Cox  says  : —  "March  25th   1884.

"  The  fact  of  the  officer  in  question  having  been  capsized  and  drowned
was  known  to  us  all,  I  think,  on  the  day  the  sad  event  happened  ;  as  the
fleet  was  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Talienwhau,  and  the  troops  were
encamped  on  the  shores  of  the  Bay,  so  that  the  army  and  navy  were  in
constant  communication.  But  the  next  day,  I  believe,  while  I  was
returning  from  the  camp,  where  I  had  been  on  a  visit,  the  military  officer
who  had  seen  the  apparition  spoke  to  me  of  it."

We  find  from  Mr.  R.  Swinhoe's  A  Narrative  of  the  North  China
Campaign  in  1860,  that  the  officer  who  was  drowned,  as  described,  was
Lieutenant  H.  L.  G.  Gordon,  of  the  Madras  Engineers.  His  death  took
place  on  July  11th,  1860.

Sir  Peter  Lumsden,  K.C.B.,  who  was  in  the  boat  with  Gordon,  and
Colonel  W.  H.  Edgcome,  R.E.,  who  was  in  the  Madras  Engineers  in  China
at  the  time,  tell  us  that  they  never  heard  of  the  apparition.

[Mr.  Cox  is  a  careful  informant ;  and  the  fact  that  he  was  on  the  spot,
and  heard  of  the  incident  immediately  on  its  occurrence,  seems  to  justify
an  exception  to  the  rule  of  not  admitting  accounts  from  persons  who  had
only  a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  original  witness.]

(601)  Mr.  F.  L.  Brine,  Finsbury  Distillery,  E.C.,  sent  us  a  letter  from
his  sister,  Mrs.  F.,  containing  the  following  passage  : —

"February  29th,  1884.
"  I  remember,  as  if  it  were  only  yesterday,  staying  at  the  Miltons.  It
was  Mr.  Milton's  custom  to  go  into  the  cellar,  to  turn  the  gas  off  at  the
meter.  When  he  came  up  he  was  looking  unusually  pale,  and  he  said,
'  Where  is  the  scoundrel  ? '  Of  course  it  frightened  us,  as  we  thought  he
meant  a  burglar ;  and  he  would  not  believe,  for  some  time,  that  his  son,
Harry,  was  not  having  a  game  with  him  ;  as  he  saw  him  quite  plainly  in
the  cellar.  A  few  weeks  after,  they  had  a  letter  from  the  captain  of  the
ship,  to  say  he  died  in  Hobart  Town  Hospital,  on  the  very  night  he
appeared  to  his  father.  "  g.  f."

[Mrs.  F.  dislikes  the  subject,  and  we  can  obtain  no  further  details  from
her.  We  have  written  to  Hobart  Town,  to  obtain  a  certificate  of  the
death,  but  have  not  received  it  in  time  for  insertion  here.]

(602)  From  an  article  in  Church  Bells  for  March  20th,  1885,  by  the
Rev.  J.  Foxley,  Yicar  of  Market  Weighton,  Yorkshire.

"  There  is  now  living  in  the  parish  where  we  write — she  was  at  church
last  Sunday — a  widow  now  in  her  78th  year,  but  in  full  possession  of  all
her  faculties,  who  has  more  than  once  told  us,  with  all  the  fulness
of  detail,  and  subject  to  all  the  cross-questioning  which  we  could  devise,
how  she  was  at  service  some  miles  from  home  during  her  father's  last
illness,  and  that  one  Thursday  she  felt  unable  to  go  on  with  her  work,  and
after  a  while,  about  1  o'clock,  saw  a  vision  of  her  father  ;  that  it  turned
out  afterwards  that  her  father  died  at  that  very  time,  and  that  just  before
his  death  he  had  been  speaking  of  her ;  that  a  letter  sent  to  inform  her
of  his  being  worse  failed  to  reach  her  ;  and  that  though  she  knew  he  was


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  551

ill,  she  was  not  aware  that  he  was  in  immediate  danger ;  but  that  she  was
so  impressed  with  her  vision  that  she  set  off  home  the  Saturday  following,
and  learnt^  on  the  way  that  her  father  was  dead,  and  that  his  funeral  was
to  take  place  that  very  day,  so  that  she  arrived  only  just  in  time.  We
have  verified  one  subordinate  part  of  the  above  narrative ;  for  by
reference  to  the  parish  register  we  find  that  the  burial  took  place  on  the
31st  of  May,  1823  ;  and  as  the  Sunday  letter  for  that  year  was  E,  which  is
the  letter  for  the  1st  of  June,  the  burial  turns  out  to  have  been,  as  stated,
on  a  Saturday.  Our  informant  was  then,  as  shown  by  the  register  of  her
baptism,  25  years  old."

In  sending  the  above,  Mr.  Foxley  writes,  October  24th,  1884  : —
"  The  enclosed  cutting  from  Clnirch  Bells  has  the  advantage  of  having
been  read  over  to  Mrs.  Pollard,  and  accepted  by  her  as  a  faithful  state-
ment of  what  occurred  to  her.  She  was  buried  here,  February  14th,  1884.
She  could  read  well.  The  '  1  o'clock  '  mentioned  was  in  the  day-trme.  I
recollect  her  mentioning  dinner-tune.  The  place  was  some  out-building,
I  think  a  summer-house,  but  of  that  I  am  not  certain.  She  always
told  the  story  under  the  impression  that  she  was  wide  awake."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Foxley  adds  : —

"  I  cannot  recollect  whether  she  said  she  mentioned  the  apparition  to
anyone  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived.  But  she  told  me  that  the
apparition  was  one  cause,  if  not  the  cause,  of  her  asking  leave  to  go  home
to  see  her  father.     I  cannot  say  in  whose  service  she  was.

"  All  I  can  add  is,  that  I  cross-questioned  Mrs.  Pollard  repeatedly,  in
every  way  I  could  think  of,  and  that  I  could  not  shake  her  story.  But
then  she  may  have  told  it  so  many  times  that  it  had  become  truth  to  her,
like  George  the  Fourth's  presence  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo."

[Here  the  impression  seems  !o  have  been  so  vivid  as  to  prompt  a  very
decided  line  of  action.  But  on  the  other  hand,  the  percipient  was  probably
in  anxiety  as  to  her  father's  condition,  which  diminishes  the  improbability
that  her  hallucination  was  purely  subjective.]

(603)  From  Mr.  Norris,  (Barrister),  Dalkey,  Ireland.  The  account
was  written  down  before  1868  :  we  received  it  in  1882.

"In  or  about  1850,  and  for  some  years  previous  and  subsequent,  there
lived  at  Hampton  Court,  near  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man,  a  gentleman  named
Abbott  with  a  family,  consisting  of  Mrs.  Abbott,  five  daughters,  and  one
son.  Mr.  Abbott  being  fond  of  the  sea,  kept  a  small  yacht,  but  particu-
larly desired  his  son  never  to  go  out  in  it  without  his  permission.  About
the  time  above  mentioned,  while  he  was  himself  absent  in  Dublin,  his  son  ob-
tained his  mother's  permission,  and  with  two  young  companions  crossed  the
Channel  to  Kirkcudbright  on  the  opposite  Scottisla  shore.  On  Mr.  Abbott's
return,  he  was  annoyed  to  find  the  boys  had  gone  out  without  taking  a
sailor  with  them,  and  this  annoyance  was  not  lessened  by  the  receipt  of  a
letter  saying  they  could  not  return  until  they  received  a  remittance.  Mr.
Abbott  at  once  went  into  Douglas,  a  distance  of  four  or  five  miles,  and
posted  a  letter  to  his  son  with  the  necessary  enclosure.  He  had  scarcely
done  so  when,  turning  round,  he  saw  his  son  at  the  opposite  side  of  the

1  At  a  wayside  inn,  now  a  cottage,  at  Arras,  on  the  Beverley-road,  about  three  miles
from  Market  Weighton,  but  in  the  parish. — J.  F.


552  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

narrow  street,  looking  at  him  with  a  very  sorrowful  expression.  Just  at  that
moment  he  was  too  much  annoyed  to  speak  to  him,  so  he  went  home  and
told  Mrs.  Abbott  that  he  had  had  all  his  trouble  for  nothing  as  John  was
in  Douglas.  He  added  that  he  was  too  much  annoyed  to  take  any  notice
of  him,  but  he  supposed  he  would  be  in  for  dinner.  In  vain  they  waited.
At  the  very  time,  his  father  (from  whose  lips  I  had  the  story)  saw  him  in
Douglas  he  was  drowned  in  Kirkcudbright  Bay  by  the  upsetting  of  his
boat.  This  was  about  noon  or  a  little  earlier.  I  know  not  whether  Mr.
Abbott  be  now  alive,  nor  can  I  give  the  address  of  any  of  his  family ;  but
he  told  me  the  story  as  I  have  stated  it,  with  his  own  lips.

"Thomas   J.  Norms."

Mrs.  Tandy,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Norris,  writes  to  us  from  1,  Tempe
Terrace,  Dalkey,  Ireland,  that  she  was  14  at  the  time  of  this  occurrence,
and  perfectly  remembers  hearing  Mr.  Abbott's  account  of  it.  She  then
narrates  it  just  as  it  is  given  above.

[We  have  failed  to  find  any  newspaper-account  of  this  accident ;  and
the  death  was  not  registered — registration  in  those  days  not  being  com-
pulsory. But  we  learn  from  the  collector  of  H.M.  Customs  at  Douglas,
and  from  the  sexton  at  Kirkcudbright,  that  several  residents  at  these
places  remember  the  event.]

(604)  From  the  Rev.  R.  L.  Loughborough,  Pirton  Vicarage,  Hitchin.

"January  25th,  1884.

"  I  was  visiting  a  poor  woman,  Mrs.  Abbiss,  far  gone  in  consumption,
and  wishing  to  draw  her  thoughts  to  the  certainty  of  approaching  death,
I  asked  her  certain  questions  about  her  relations  and  her  mother.  I  had
no  sooner  named  her  mother  than  she  exclaimed,  '  Ah,  sir,  there  was  a
strange  thing  happened  at  the  time  of  mother's  death ;  but  I'm  thinking
you  would  hardly  believe  me  if  I  were  to  tell  it  ye.'  'I  do  not  know,'  I
said,  '  I  hear  of  too  many  strange  things  to  be  much  surprised  at  what
you  could  tell  me,  or  to  doubt  the  truth  of  what  you  may  say.'  'Well,
sir,  the  truth  of  it  was  this.  I  was  but  a  girl  at  the  time,  and  mother
being  very  ill,  suffering  from  the  same  complaint  as  mine,  we  had  a
woman  to  help  me.  Mother  kept  her  bed.  And  one  morning  when  we
had  made  her  comfortable  and  given  her  her  breakfast,  we  thought  she
seemed  a  little  better,  and  came  down  stairs  to  have  our  breakfast ;  but,
sir,  we  hadn't  sat  very  long  before  the  door  opened,  and  in  came  father
looking  all  skeered  like,  and  sat  himself  down  in  that  very  chair  where
you  are  now  sitting.  "  Oh,  father,"  I  said,  "  how  jom  fritted  me,  what's
the  matter?"  "How's  mother?"  he  said.  "Why,  we  gave  her  her
breakfast,  and  she  seemed  quite  comfortable  like  when  we  left  her  not
many  minutes  since."  "  Then  run  and  see  how  she  is  now."  I  went  up,
and  would  you  believe  it,  sir,  we  found  mother  was  dead  1  When  I  asked
father  what  made  him  come  up  in  that  frightened  way,  he  said,   "  Why,  I

was  hoeing  in  Mr.  W.'s  field,  and  just  as   S clock  was  striking  9,   I

see  your  mother  standing  at  the  end  of  my  hoe.  I  was  struck  all  of  a
heap  like,  and  threw  down  my  hoe,  and  ran  home  as  fast  as  I  could."  '

"  The  father's  name  was  John  Wilson.  You  may  place  the  fullest
reliance  on  the  narrative,  as  my  impression  is  still  most  vivid  as  to  the
whole  circumstance  of  the  relation.  The  poor  woman  was  well  known  to  me
from  my  frequent  visits.     She  was  too  simple-minded  to  romance  upon


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  553

the  matter,  and  there  was  a  sort  of  dramatic  earnestness  in  her  manner  as
she  told  me,  which  convinced  me  that  she  realised  again  the  strange  look
of  her  father  when  he  returned  to  inquire  about  his  wife.

"  R.  Lindsay  Loughborough."

Mr.  Loughborough  has  ascertained  from  the  Register  that  Mrs.  Wil-
son died  in  January,  1850,  aged  41  ;  her  husband  in  January,  1853,
aged  48  ;  and  Mrs.  Abbiss  in  September,  1856,  aged  32.  He  thinks  it
most  probable  that  Mrs.  Abbiss  gave  him  the  account  in  the  early  summer
of  1856.  She  must  have  been  at  least  25  (though  she  says  "  but  a  girl  ")
at  the  time  of  the  incident.

[The  evidence  is  of  the  same  class  as  in  case  597,  Mrs.  Abbiss  having
been  a  witness  of  the  unusual  demeanour  of  her  father,  due  to  the
vision — though  she  did  not  actually  hear  the  vision  described — before  the
fact  of  the  death  was  known  to  him.]

(605)  From  Mrs.  Laurie,  Fiesole,  Bathwick  Hill,  Bath.  We  owe  this
case,  in  the  first  instance,  to  Mr.  G.  J.  Romanes,  F.R.S.,  who  sent  us  a
letter  containing  an  account  which  Mrs.  Laurie  had  dictated  in  June,
1883  ;  but  the  following  account,  dictated  in  1885  to  Mr.  L.  G.  Fry,  of
Goldney  House,  Clifton,  is  a  little  fuller.

"  General  Kennett  was  travelling  home  to  his  wife,  who  was  staying
in  some  part  of  India,  from  Bombay,  and  was  intending  to  break  the
journey  for  a  week  at  my  husband's  (Mr.  Laurie)  house  at  Baroda.  He
declined  to  sleep  in  the  house,  saying  that  he  would  have  his  tent  pitched
near,  and  preferred  it,  as  cooler.  Next  morning,  however,  he  came  in  in  a
very  agitated  state,  saying  that  he  hoped  we  would  excuse  him,  and  that
he  had  ordered  his  tent  to  be  struck,  as  he  intended  to  resume  his  journey
immediately  When  we  asked  what  was  the  matter,  he  replied  that  his
wife  had  appeared  to  him,  saying  that  if  he  did  not  return  home  im-
mediately he  would  never  see  her  alive.  I  suggested  that  it  was  a
dream,  but  he  said  '  No,'  he  had  really  seen  her.  My  husband  said  '  Well,
General,  I  am  sorry  you're  going,  I  hope  you'll  find  her  quite  well.'
General  Kennett  started  immediately,  and  on  arriving  home  he  wrote  to
us  stating  that  she  was  dead,  and  that  he  found  her  in  the  dress  in  which
he  had  seen  her  in  his  tent  She  died  a  few  minutes  before  his  arrival,  and
therefore  four  or  five  days  after  the  vision — as  he  had  a  long  distance  to
travel.  When  he  had  left  his  wife,  she  appeared  in  good  health,  and  he
had  no  message  to  say  she  was  ill.  The  fact  that  he  found  her  dressed
would  seem  to  suggest  that  she  died  very  suddenly.

"  Caroline  Emma  Laurie."

General  Kennett  and  Mr.  Laurie  are  both  deceased.

[This  is,  of  course,  a  very  inconclusive  case ;  for  the  dress  may  probably
have  been  a  familiar  one ;  and  if  the  death  was  so  sudden  that  no
premonitory  symptoms  had  been  felt  four  or  five  days  before,  there
would  be  no  strong  reason  for  regarding  the  vision  as  telepathic  rather
than  as  a  purely  subjective  hallucination.  But  the  death  was  not  by  an
accident— it  at  any  rate  took  place  from  some  morbid  physical  cause ;
and  it'  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  approach  of  death  from  such  a
cause  may  conceivably  be  discerned  in  a  way  which  is  out  of  the  range
of  consciousness  as  we  understand  it.     (See  Vol.  I.,  p.  231.)  ]


554  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(606)  The  following  letter  was  published  in  the  Banner  of  Light  of
January,  1878.  We  wrote  to  make  inquiries  of  the  writer,  Mr.  Alwis,
but  have  since  been  informed  by  the  Colonial  Office  that  he  died  in  1878.

"Colombo,  Ceylon.
"It  was  a  fine,  clear  evening,  many  years  ago,  a  day  after  I  had
gone  to  Negombo,  to  act  for  Mr.  John  Selby  as  District  Judge  of  that
place,  that  I  joined  that  gentleman  at  a  game  of  cricket.  We  finished
our  game,  and  were,  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  coming  to  the  Govern-
ment House,  where  we  all  lived,  when  Mr.  Selby,  who  was  behind  us,
came  rushing  past  us,  and  beckoned  me  to  come  fast.  He  was  rather
excited,  and  desired  me  to  be  good  enough  to  consult  my  watch  and  tell
him  the  time.  I  did  so.  He  then  sat  down  at  my  writing-table,  took  a
sheet  of  note-paper,  and  wrote  down,  'My  wife  died  IS  minutes  to  6  o'clock '
(month,  (fee,  which  I  forget).  This  slip  of  paper  he  put  into  an  envelope,
sealed  it,  and  got  me  and  another  gentleman  then  present  to  put  our
signatures  to  the  fact  therein  stated.  We  did  so.  And  he  then  explained
to  us  that  his  wife,  who  had  been  long  ill  in  England,  had  appeared  to
him  at  the  time  above  indicated,  under  the  shadow  of  the  big  banian,  and
that  he  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  she  had  died  at  that  hour,  and
that  it  was  her  spirit  ^  which  he  had  seen.  In  consequence  of  this  per-
suasion, Mr.  Selby,  who  was  to  leave  Ceylon  in  a  few  days  for  England,
postponed  his  trip  for  a  short  time.  And  when  the  mail  had  arrived,  a
month  or  more  after  the  date  above  given,  he  showed  me  his  private
letters,  and  they  fully  confirmed  the  prediction  of  his  wife's  death,  within
a  few  hours,  as  I  remember,  of  the  time  he  stated  he  had  seen  his  wife
under  the  tree.  u  j^j^j^s  Alwis."

Mr.  S.  C.  Obeyesekere  writes  to  us  from  Colombo,  on  July  18,  1885: —

"  You  are  correctly  informed  as  to  my  being  a  son-in-law  of  the  late
Hon.  James  Alwis.  On  inquiry  from  Mrs.  Alwis  and  several  of  his
friends,  I  learn  that  the  extract  from  the  report  appearing  in  the  Banner
of  Light  forwarded  to  me  is  substantially  correct,  and  accords  with  their
recollection  of  Mr.  Alwis'  account  to  them  of  the  incident  referred  to  in  it.

"  Both  Mr.  John  Selby  and  his  brother,  Henry  Collingwood,  who  was
Queen's  Advocate  of  Ceylon,  are  dead,  and  I  do  not  know  whether  there
are  any  relations  of  theirs  in  the  Island,  except  a  son-in-law  of  Thos.  H.
C.  Selby — Mr.  Frank  Byrde,  of  Avissawelle.  Mrs.  Selby  [i.e.,  Mrs.  H.  C.
Selby].  I  believe,  is  still  alive  at  Bath,  in  England,  and  you  might  get  some
information  from  her  about  what  you  refer  to.  The  other  gentleman
who,  with  Mr.  Alwis,  witnessed  Mr.  Selby's  memoranda,  I  am  informed,
was  a  Mr.  Macartney,  of  the  Police,  who  is  also  dead.

"  Mr.  Alwis  acted  for  Mr.  Selby  as  District  Judge  of  Negombo  from
13th  April  to  24th  May,  1863.  [We  have  received  confirmation  of  this
fact  from  the  Colonial  Office.]

"  I  have  not  succeeded  in  tracing  out  any  written  memoranda  of  the
event  at  the  time  of  Mr.  Alwis  ;  if  I  do  succeed  in  tracing  them  out,  I
shall  with  pleasure  forward  you  their  copy.  <<  g    q    Obeyesekbee."

^  As  regards  this  word,  which  occurs  again  in  the  introductory  paragraph  to  the  fol-
lowing case,  see  p.  48,  note.


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  555

Mrs.  H.  C.  Selby  writes  to  us,  from  2,  Yale  Yiew,  London  Road,  Bath,
on  May  28,  1886  :—

"  We  have  heard  of  the  circumstances  to  which  you  refer,  with  regard
to  Mr.  John  Selby  ;  but  not  having  seen  him  when  he  was  in  England,
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  we  are  unable  to  give  you  any  information."

Mr.  Frank  Byrde  has  kindly  written  to  us,  saying  that  the  account  given
"  substantially  agrees  "  with  what  he  had  heard  before,  but  that  he  has  no
written  record  of  the  incident.  He  has  also  given  us  the  means  of  tracing-
Mrs.  John  Selby's  death,  which  took  place,  as  the  Register  shows,  on
May  14,  1864.  The  month,  it  will  be  seen,  agrees  with  the  above  evidence ;
but  the  year  there  given  is  1863.  The  mistake,  if  it  be  one,  probably
occurs  in  some  record  to  which  Mr.  Obeyesekere  and  the  officials  of  the
Colonial  Office  both  had  access  ;  but  possibly  Mr.  Alwis  acted  as  sub-
stitute for  Mr.  J.  Selby  more  than  once.

(607)  The  following  case  was  reported  by  the  late  Serjeant  Cox  to  the
Psychological  Society,  in  February,  1879,  on  the  authority  of  Surgeon
Harris,  of  the  Royal  Artillery ;  who,  with  two  of  his  daughters  (one  of
whom  became  Serjeant  Cox's  wife),  was  a  witness  of  the  occurrence.
The  narrative  has  been  already  published  in  a  book  called  Spirits  before  our
Eyes,  by  W.  H.   Harrison,  pp.  64-5.

"  A  party  of  children,  sons  and  daughters  of  the  officers  of  Artillery
stationed  at  Woolwich,  were  playing  in  the  garden.  Suddenly  a  little
girl  screamed,  and  stood  staring  with  an  aspect  of  terror  at  a  willow  tree
there.  Her  companions  gathered  round,  asking  what  ailed  her.  '  Oh  ! '
she  said,  '  there — there.  Don't  you  see.  There's  papa  lying  on  the  ground,
and  the  blood  running  from  a  big  wound.'  All  assured  her  that  they  could
see  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  she  persisted,  describing  the  wound  and  the
position  of  the  body,  still  expressing  her  surprise  that  they  did  not  see
what  she  saw  so  plainly.  Two  of  her  companions  were  daughters  of  my
informant  (one  of  the  surgeons  of  the  regiment),  whose  house  adjoined  the
garden.  They  called  their  father,  who  at  once  came  to  the  spot.  He
found  the  child  in  a  state  of  extreme  terror  and  agony,  took  her  into  his
house,  assuring  her  that  it  was  only  a  '  fancy,'  and  having  given  her  resto-
ratives, sent  her  home.  The  incident  was  treated  by  all  as  what  the  doctor
had  called  it,  and  no  more  was  thought  of  it.  News  from  India,  where
the  child's  father  was  stationed,  was  in  those  days  slow  in  coming.  But
the  arrival  of  the  mail  in  due  course  brought  the  information  that  the
father  of  the  child  had  been  killed  by  a  shot,  and  died  under  a  tree.
Making  allowance  for  difference  in  the  counting  of  time,  it  was  found  to
have  been  about  the  moment  when  the  daughter  had  the  vision  at
Woolwich."

[If  here,  as  in  so  many  other  of  the  second-hand  cases,  the  details
and  the  alleged  accuracy  of  the  coincidence  must  be  doubted,  the  main
fact  of  a  striking  coincidence  of  the  sort  alleged  may  still  be  reasonably
accepted  as  probable.]

I  have  more  than  once  spoken  of  nautical  evidence  as  likely  to
be  coloured  by  superstition,  or  modified  and  exaggerated  in  the  way
natural  to  oft-repeated  "  yarns."  But  it  may  be  reasonably  supposed
that  the  first-hand  witnesses  in  the  two  following  cases  really  had


556  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

some  such  experience  as  is  described,  and  that  the  coincidence  was
not  a  pure  invention.

(608  and  609)  From  Mr.  William  Dunlop,  Engineer,  care  of  Messrs.
Windsor,   Redlock,  and  Co.,  Bangkok,  Siam.

"Feb.  17th,  1883.

"  A  relation  of  mine,  named  Richard  Jones,  was  apprentice  pilot  in  the
Mersey.  One  day  he  boarded  an  inward  bound  vessel,  and  took  charge.
The  captain  of  the  vessel  was  sick,  and  the  mate  had  command ;  he  seemed
to  be  very  low-spirited,  and  would  hardly  answer  my  cousin  when  he  spoke
to  him.  They  walked  the  deck  in  silence  for  a  long  time,  when  at  last  the
mate  suddenly  asked  my  cousin  what  sort  of  weather  they  had  had  about
the  coast  for  the  last  month  or  so.  My  cousin  said  the  weather  had
been  very  bad.  The  mate  then  asked  if  my  cousin  knew  anything  about  a
certain  brig ;  he  answered  that  he  did,  but  that  he  wished  to  know  why
the  question  was  put.  The  mate  then  said  :  '  My  brother  was  captain  of
that  vessel,  and  I'm  uneasy  about  him,  because,  as  we  were  coming  down
the  Mediterranean  this  trip,  I  saw  my  brother  aboard  of  this  craft.  At
8  bells  (noon)  I  went  below  to  dinner ;  when  I  came  on  deck  again  I  took
a  look  up  to  windward  to  see  what  the  weather  was  like,  and,  standing
close  against  the  bulwarks  I  saw  my  brother.  I  went  over  to  him,  but  as
I  got  close  to  him  he  disappeared.  I  turned  round  and  saw  him  on  the
other  side  of  the  deck  ;  I  went  towards  him  with  my  arms  stretched  out ;
when  I  got  near  him  I  made  a  sudden  clasp  at  him,  but  he  disappeared
again.'  My  cousin  asked  the  mate  to  give  him  the  date  of  this  appearance  ;
the  mate  did  so,  and  my  cousin  answered,  '  On  that  day,  and  as  near  as  I
can  judge,  at  the  same  hour,  your  brother's  brig  was  lost  with  all  hands.'  "

[We  discovered  a  recent  address  of  Mr.  (now  Captain)  Richard  Jones ;
but  he  had  left,  and  we  have  been  unable  to  trace  him.]

"From  the  7th  of  October,  1867,  till  the  14th  April,  1871,  I  was
shipmate  with  Mr.  F.  L.  Murphy,  aboard  the  ss.  '  Riga,'  of  Leith,  of
which  vessel  he  was  second  oificer.  Mr.  Murphy,  in  spite  of  his  name,  was
an  Englishman  ;  he  belonged  to  the  middle  class,  was  very  well  educated,
but  very  superstitious.  Never  mind  that,  he  was  as  truthful  as  man  could
be,  hated  lies  and  liars,  and  no  man  could  be  braver.  His  death  showed
what  manner  of  man  he  was,  for  when  the  ss.  '  Hong  Kong  '  was  lost  in
the  Red  Sea  about  8  years  ago,  he  gave  his  place  in  the  boat  to
another  man  and  stayed  on  the  wreck,  well  knowing  that  it  was  death
to  do  so.  The  other  man  had  a  family.  Murphy  had  none,  so  he  sacrificed
himself.

"I  think  it  was  somewhere  about  the  year  1863,  that  Murphy  was
before  the  mast  on  board  the  '  Sultana '  of  South  Shields,  on  the  run  home
from  Bombay  to  England.  Ofi'  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  they  were  running
with  dirty  weather,  and  towards  nightfall  it  looked  very  nasty,  so  the
captain  determined  to  heave  to.  At  8  bells  it  was  all  hands  to  close
reef  the  main  topsail.  Now  when  a  man  is  bearing  a  hand  to  reef  a  main
topsail,  with  something  like  a  gale  of  wind  blowing,  he  has  not  much
chance  to  fall  a-dreaming.  If  you  have  been  to  sea  you  know  what  it  is ;
if  you  have  not,  just  fancy  yourself  some  70  or  80  feet  up  in  the  air,  swung
from  port  to  starboard,  from  starboard  to  port  like  a  stone  in  a  sling,  with


v.]  VISUAL  CASES.  557

the  great  sail  slatting  and  thundering  below  you.  Well,  Murphy  was  aloft
fisting  the  sail,  when  he  happened  to  look  forward,  and  saw  someone  on
the  fore  topsail  yard.  He  shouted  to  the  man  next  him,  '  Who's  that  on
the  fore  topsail  yard  % '  His  mate  gave  a  look  forward  and  answered,
'  Why,  there's  no  one  there,  we're  all  on  the  yard  here.'  Murphy  looked
along  the  main  topsail  yard  and  counted  the  hands ;  sure  enough  they
were  all  there.  He  looked  forward  again,  and  saw  that  the  man  on  the
fore  topsail  yard  was  his  cousin  Stevens,  who  was  in  England  at  the  time.
When  the  ship  was  brought  to  the  wind.  Murphy,  before  turning  in,
entered  in  his  private  log  the  date  and  hour  of  the  apparition.

"  On  arriving  in  England  he  found  that  his  cousin  had  died  on  the
same  day  he  appeared  aboard  the  '  Sultana,'  but  between  the  hour  of  his
death  and  the  hour  of  the  apparition,  there  was  a  difference  for  which  the
longitude  did  not  account."

[The  last  sentence  may  be  taken  as  in  some  measure  an  indication  of
accuracy  in  the  narrative.]

(610)  From  Mr.  Francis  Dart  Fenton,  formerly  in  the  native  depart-
ment of  the  Government,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.  He  gave  the  account
in  writing  to  his  friend.  Captain  J.  H.  Crosse,  of  Monkstown,  Cork,  from
whom  we  received  it.  In  1852,  when  the  incident  occurred,  Mr.
Fenton  was  "  engaged  in  forming  a  settlement  on  the  banks  of  the
Waikato."

"March  25th,  1860.

"  Two  sawyers,  Frank  Philps  and  Jack  Mulholland,  were  engaged
cutting  timber  for  the  Rev.  R.  Maunsell,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Awaroa
creek,  a  very  lonely  place,  a  vast  swamp,  no  people  within  miles  of  them.
As  usual  they  had  a  Maori  with  them  to  assist  in  felling  trees.  He  came
from  Tihorewam,  a  village  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  about  6  miles  off.
As  Frank  and  the  native  were  cross-cutting  a  tree,  the  native  stopped
suddenly  and  said,  '  What  are  you  come  for  % '  looking  in  the  direction  of
Frank.  Frank  replied,  '  What  do  you  mean  *? '  He  said,  '  I  am  not  speaking
to  you  5  I  am  speaking  to  my  brother.'  Frank  said,  '  Where  is  he  ? '  The
native  replied,  '  Behind  you.  What  do  you  want  1 '  (to  the  other  Maori).
Frank  looked  round  and  saw  nobody  ;  the  native  no  longer  saw  anyone,
but  laid  down  the  saw  and  said,  '  I  shall  go  across  the  river  ;  my  brother
is  dead.'  Frank  laughed  at  him  and  reminded  him  that  he  had  left  him
quite  well  on  Sunday  (five  days  before),  and  there  had  been  no  communi-
cation since.  The  Maori  spoke  no  more,  but  got  into  his  canoe  and  pulled
across.  When  he  arrived  at  the  landing-place,  he  met  people  coming  to
fetch  him.     His  brother  had  just  died  ;  I  knew  him  well."

In  answer  to  inquiries  as  to  his  authority  for  this  narrative,  Mr.
Fenton  writes  to  us  :

"December  18th,  1883.
"  I  knew  all  the  parties  concerned  well,  and  it  is  quite  true,  valeat
quantum,  as  the  lawyers  say.     Incidents  of  this  sort  are  not  infrequent
among  the  Maoris.

"F.  D.  Fenton,

"  Late  Chief  Judge,  Native  Law  Court  of  New  Zealand."
This    case,    if"   faithfully    reported,  is     an    interesting    example,


558  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

vouched  for  by  an  educated  European,  of  telepathy  occurring  among
an  uncivilised  people.

§  5.  I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  three  cases,  which  are
respectively  one,  two,  and  three  centuries  old,  but  of  which  the  first
and  second,  at  any  rate,  may  fairly  receive  an  evidential  number.

(611)  From  the  Life  of  Mrs.  Mary  Fletcher,  by  Henry  Moore  (1818),
Vol.  I.,  pp.  208-209 — an  extract  from  Mrs.  Fletcher's  diary.

"  October,  1784. — As  I  was  retired  this  morning  at  my  10  o'clock
hour,  I  was  called  down  to  Mary  G.  She  gave  me  a  strange  account
which  I  shall  insert  as  she  related  it : — A  short  time  ago,  she  said,  she
was  one  day  going  out  to  work  in  the  fields,  but  thought  she  would  first
go  upstairs  to  prayer.  While  on  her  knees,  praising  God  for  the  care  He
had  taken  of  her  children,  she  was  amazed  to  see  her  eldest  son,  about  21
years  of  age,  standing  before  her  !  She  started  up — but  thought,  '  Maybe
it  is  the  enemy  to  affright  me  from  prayer.'  Casting  her  eyes  up  again  to
the  same  spot,  she  still  saw  him  there  ;  on  which  she  ran  down  into  the
kitchen,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Still,  wherever  she  looked,
she  saw  him  standing  before  her,  pale,  and  as  if  covered  with  dirt.  Con-
cluding from  this  that  he  was  killed,  she  ran  to  her  mother,  who,  on
hearing  the  account,  went  directly  to  the  pit,  determined  to  have  him  home
if  alive.  On  her  drawing  near  the  pit,  she  heard  a  great  tumult ;  for  the
earth  had  fallen  in  on  him  and  two  other  men,  and  the  people  were
striving  to  dig  them  out.  At  length  he  was  got  up  alive  and  well,  and
came  home  to  his  mother  pale  and  dirty,  just  as  she  had  seen  him  !  She
then  fell  on  her  knees,  and  began  praising  that  God  who  hears  and
answers  prayer."

(612)  From  The  World  of  Spirits,  by  R.  Baxter  (1691),  pp.  147-151.
Abridgment  of  a  letter  to  Baxter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Tilson,  Minister  of
Ay les worth,  in  Kent.^

"July  6th,  1691.

"  Mary,  the  wife  of  John  Goffe,  of  Rochester,  being  afflicted  with  a  long
illness,  removed  to  her  father's  house  at  West  Mulling,  which  was  about  9
miles  distant  from  her  own;  there  she  died,  June  4th,  1691.

"  The  day  before  her  departure  she  grew  impatiently  desirous  to  see
her  two  children,  whom  she  had  left  at  home,  to  the  care  of  a  nurse.  She
prayed  her  husband  to  hire  a  horse,  for  she  must  go  home  to  die  with  her
children.

"  Between  1  and  2  o'clock  in  the  morning  she  fell  into  a  trance.  One
widow  Turner,  who  watched  with  her  that  night,  says  that  her  eyes  were
open  and  fixed,  and  her  jaw  fallen ;  she  put  her  hand  on  her  mouth  and
nostrils,  but  coukl  perceive  no  breath  ;  she  thought  her  to  be  in  a  fit,  and
doubted  whether  she  was  alive  or  dead.  The  next  day  this  dying  woman
told  her  mother  that  she  had  been  at  home  with  her  children.     '  That  is

'  -:^  This  letter,  which  must  be  presumed  to  be  correctly  quoted,  cannot  be  impugned
on  the  ground  of  Baxter's  own  credulity  and  prejudice  in  respect  of  many  of  the  matters
dealt  with  in  his  book  ;  as  to  which  see  Hutchinson's  excellent  remarks,  historical  Essay
concerning  Witchcraft  (London,  1720),  pp.  79-101.


v.]  VISUAL  GASES.  559

impossible,'  said  the  mother,  '  for  you  have  been  here  in  bed  all  the  while.'
'  Yes,'  replied  the  other,  '  but  I  was  with  them  last  night  while  I  was
asleep.'

"  The  nurse  at  Rochester,  widow  Alexander  by  name,  affirms  and  says
she  will  take  her  oath  of  it,  before  a  magistrate,  and  receive  the  sacrament
upon  it,  that  a  little  before  2  o'clock  that  morning  she  saw  the  likeness  of
the  said  Mary  Goffe  come  out  of  the  next  chamber  (where  the  elder  child  lay
in  a  bed  by  itself,  the  door  being  left  open),  and  stood  by  her  bedside  for
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  the  younger  child  was  there  lying  by  her  ;  her
eyes  moved,  and  her  mouth  went,  but  she  said  nothing.  The  nurse,  more-
over, says  that  she  was  perfectly  awake ;  it  was  then  daylight,  being  one
of  the  longest  days  in  the  year.  She  sat  up  in  her  bed,  and  looked
steadfastly  upon  the  apparition ;  at  that  time  she  heard  the  bridge  clock
strike  2,  and  a  while  after  said,  '  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Ghost,  what  art  thou  ? '  Thereupon  the  appearance  removed  and
went  away  ;  she  slipped  on  her  clothes  and  followed,  but  what  became
of  it  she  cannot  tell.  Then,  and  not  before,  she  began  to  be  grievously
affrighted,  and  went  out  of  doors,  and  walked  upon  the  wharf  (the  house
is  just  by  the  river-side)  for  some  hours,  only  going  in  now  and  then  to
look  at  the  children.  At  5  o'clock  she  went  to  a  neighbour's  and  knocked
at  the  door,  but  they  would  not  rise ;  at  6  she  went  again,  then  they  rose
and  let  her  in.  She  related  to  them  all  that  had  passed ;  they  would
persuade  her  she  was  mistaken,  or  dreamt ;  but  she  confidently  affirmed,
'  If  ever  I  saw  her  in  all  my  life,  I  saw  her  this  night.'

"  One  of  those  to  whom  she  made  the  relation  (Mary,  the  wife  of  J.
Sweet)  had  a  messenger  who  came  from  Mulling  that  forenoon,  to  let  her
know  her  neighbour  Goffe  was  dying,  and  desired  to  speak  with  her  ;  she
went  over  the  same  day,  and  found  her  just  departing.  The  mother,
amongst  other  discourses,  related  to  her  how  much  her  daughter  had
longed  to  see  her  children,  and  said  she  had  seen  them.  This  brought  to
Mrs.  Sweet's  mind  what  the  nurse  had  told  her  that  morning ;  for,  till
then,  she  had  not  thought  fit  to  mention  it,  but  disguised  it  rather,  as  the
woman's  disturbed  imagination.

"  The  substance  of  this  I  had  related  to  me  by  John  Carpenter,  the
father  of  the  deceased,  the  next  day  after  the  burial — July  2.  I  fully
discoursed  the  matter  with  the  nurse  and  two  neighbours,  to  whose  house
she  went  that  morning.

"  Two  days  after,  I  had  it  from  the  mother,  the  minister  that  was  with
her  in  the  evening,  and  the  woman  who  sat  up  with  her  last  that  night.
They  all  agree  in  the  same  story,  and  every  one  helps  to  strengthen  the
other's  testimony.

"  They  all  appear  to  be  sober,  intelligent  persons,  far  enough  off  from
designing  to  impose  a  cheat  upon  the  world,  or  to  manage  a  lie  ;  and  what
temptation  they  should  lie  under  for  so  doing  I  cannot  conceive.

"Thomas  Tilson."

[This  case  may  possibly  have  been  reciprocal ;  but  proof  is  lacking  that
the  dying  woman's  sense  of  having  seen  her  children  was  anything  but
purely  subjective.^     See  p.  1  56.]

1  Mr.  Tilson's  case  finds  a  curiously  close  parallel  in  the  following  narrative,  abridged
from  the  words  of  the  late  Mrs.  Charles  Fox,  of  Trebah,  Falmouth,  (a  lady  well  known
to  Mr.  Myers,)  who  had  heard  the  account  from  one  of  the  percipients.     The  Fox  family


560  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

Theodore  A.  D'Aubigne,  in  his  Histoire  Universelle  (1616-20),  Vol.  II.,
p.  143,  relates  the  following  incident,  as  told  to  him  privately  by  the  King
of  Navarre.

"  Le  Roi  estant  en  Avignon,  le  23  Decembre,  1574,  y  mourut  Charles,
Cardinal  de  Lorraine.  .  .  .  J'afferme  sur  la  parole  du  Roi  le  second
prodige  [the  first  was  a  violent  storm].  .  .  .  c'est  que  la  Roine
[Catherine  di  Medici]  s'estait  mise  au  lit  de  meilleure  heure  que  de  cous-
tume,  aiant  a  son  coucher  entr'  autres  personnes  de  marque  le  Roi  de
Navarre,  I'Archevesque  de  Lyon,  les  Dames  de  Rets,  de  Lignerolles  et  de
Saunes,  deux  desquelles  ont  confirm^  ce  discours ;  comme  elle  estait  pressee
de  donner  le  bon  soir,  elle  se  jetta  d'un  tressaut  sur  son  chenet,  met  les
mains  audevant  de  son  visage,  et  avec  un  cri  violent  appella  a  son  secours
ceux  qui  I'assistoient,  leur  voulant  monstrer  au  pied  du  lit  le  Cardinal,  qui
lui  tendoit  la  main,  elle  s'escriant  plusieurs  fois,  '  Monsieur  le  Cardinal,  je
n'ai  que  faire  avec  vous ' ;  le  Roi  de  Navarre  envoie  au  mesme  temps  un  de
ses  gentils  hommes  au  logis  du  Cardinal,  qui  rapporta  comment  il  avoit
expir^  au  mesme  point."

[The  Queen  was  probably  aware  that  the  Cardinal's  death,  of  which
she  had  been  very  desirous,  was  imminent.]


was  one  in  which  such  a  tradition  as  this  would  be  likely  to  be  soberly  preserved  ;  but  the
youth  of  the  original  witness,  and  the  loss  of  the  contemporary  records,  make  it  impossible
to  reckon  the  case  as  evidence.

"  In  1739  Mrs.  Birkbeck,  wife  of  William  Birkbeck,  banker,  of  Settle,  and  a  member
of  the  Society  of  Friends,  was  taken  ill  and  died  at  Cockermouth,  while  returning  from  a
journey  to  Scotland,  which  she  had  undertaken  alone — her  husband  and  three  children,
aged  seven,  five,  and  four  years  respectively,  remaining  at  Settle.  The  friends  at  whose
house  the  death  occurred  made  notes  of  every  circumstance  attending  Mrs.  Birkbeck's  last
hours,  so  that  the  accuracy  of  the  several  statements  as  to  time  as  well  as  place  was  beyond
the  doubtfulness  of  man's  memory,  or  of  any  even  unconscious  attempt  to  bring  them  into
agreement  with  each  other.

"  One  morning,  between  7  and  8  o'clock,  the  relation  to  whom  the  care  of  the  children
of  Settle  had  been  entrusted,  and  who  kept  a  minute  journal  of  all  that  concerned  them,
went  into  their  bedroom  as  usual,  and  found  them  all  sitting  up  in  their  beds  in  great
excitement  and  delight.  '  Mamma  has  been  here  ! '  they  cried,  and  the  little  one  said,
'  She  called,  "  Come  Esther  !  "  '  Nothing  could  make  them  doubt  the  fact,  and  it  was
carefully  noted  down,  to  entertain  the  mother  on  her  return  home.  That  same  morning,
as  their  mother  lay  on  her  dying  bed  at  Cockermouth,  she  said,  '  I  should  be  ready  to  go
if  I  could  but  see  my  children.'  She  then  closed  her  eyes,  to  reopen  them,  as  they  thought,
no  more.  But  after  10  minutes  of  perfect  stillness  she  looked  up  brightly  and  said,  '  I  am
ready  now  ;  I  have  been  with  my  children  ' ;  and  then  at  once  peacefully  passed  away.
When  the  notes  taken  at  the  two  places  were  compared,  the  day,  hour,  and  minutes  were
the  same.

"  One  of  the  three  children  was  my  grandmother,  nee  Sarah  Birkbeck,  afterwards  the
wife  of  Dr.  Fell,  of  Ulverston.  From  her  lips  I  heard  the  above  almost  literally  as  I
have  repeated  it.  The  eldest  was  Morris  Birkbeck,  afterwards  of  Guildford.  Both  these
lived  to  old  age,  and  retained  to  the  last  so  solemn  and  reverential  a  remembrance  of  the
circumstance  that  they  rarely  would  speak  of  it.  Esther,  the  youngest,  died  soon  after.
Her  brother  and  sister  heard  the  child  say  that  her  mother  called  her,  but  could  not  speak
with  any  certainty  of  having  themselves  heard  the  words,  nor  were  sensible  of  more  than
their  mother's  standing  there  and  looking  on  them."


VI.]


CHAPTER   VI.

AUDITOKY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.

§  1.  Most  of  the  following  cases  are  on  jfirst-hand  testimony ;
but  some  of  them  are  remote  in  date  ;  in  some  a  certain  amount
of  anxiety  may  have  predisposed  the  percipient  to  hallucination ;
and  in  others  the  degree  of  exactitude  in  the  coincidence  is  not
certainly  established.  I  will  give  first  a  group  where  the  impression
was  of  distinct  words.

(613)  From  Mr.  M.  P.  Stephenson,  8,  Southfield  Road,  Gotham,
Bristol.

"January  31st,  1884.

"  On  or  about  the  11th  November,  1882,  I  was  awakened  by  two  or
three  knocks  at  my  bedroom  door,i  and  a  voice  called,  '  Pa  !  pa !  '  I
called  out,  '  Who's  there  1 '  but  no  answer  came.  (I  was  sleeping  alone,
as  my  wife  was  ill,  and  slept  in  an  adjoining  room  with  a  daughter.)  At
breakfast  I  inquired  if  either  of  them  had  called  me ;  they  had  not  done
so.  '  Then,'  said  I  '  someone  else  did,  and  I  fear  we  shall  have  bad  news
from  New  Zealand,'  where  our  two  sons  were  living.

"  I  awaited  anxiously  the  arrival  of  the  next  mail,  which  came  in  the
middle  of  December,  and  then  we  had  what  I  believed  to  be  the  solving
of  the  mystery.  Our  eldest  son,  on  the  21st  October,  1882,  was  going  to
see  his  son  at  Pahnerston,  a  town  some  60  or  70  miles  from  Dunedin,  and
midway  the  train  got  off  the  line  ;  some  carriages  were  smashed.  He  was
severely  shaken,  but  felt  nothing  seriously  the  matter  until  two  days  after
the  mishap,  on  his  return  home.  He  was  taken  with  cold  shivering,  and
the  doctors  said  they  were  afraid  of  erysipelas  and  blood-poisoning  setting
in.  Such  was  the  account  of  the  case  in  our  first  letter.  We  looked
with  great  concern  for  the  next  mail  which  was  due  on  the  2nd  January,
1883,  although  in  my  own  mind  I  seemed  sure  he  was  dead;  and  on
Christmas  Day  I  said  to  a  friend,  who  dined  with  us,  that  I  believed  he
had  been  in  his  grave  six  weeks,  which  was  the  fact.  The  news  came  that
our  son  died  on  the  11th  of  November  and  was  buried  on  the  14th.

"  M.  P.  Stephenson."

1  Where  the  rousing  from  sleep  is  as  sudden  as  this,  an  impression  which  follows  it
may  perhaps  fairly  be  reckoned  a  waking  experience.

VOL.    II.  2    o


562  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Bristol  Mercury  and  Daily  Post  that
Mr.  Stephenson's  son  died  in  New  Zealand  on  November  11,  1882.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Stephenson  adds  : —

"  I  have  been  very  sorry  that  I  did  not  make  a  note  of  the  exact  time
of  the  voice  and  raps  at  my  bedroom  door.  I  have  been  trying  to
calculate  it  exactly,  but  my  experience  of  memory  is  that  in  old  age  we
can  recollect  things  that  occurred  50  or  60  years  ago  more  distinctly  than
events  which  happened  two  or  three  months  back.  My  firm  impression  is
that  what  I  heard  was  about  6  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  11th
November,  and  his  death  took  place  at  11  or  12  o'clock  on  the  11th,  New
Zealand  time.  I  have  searched  for  the  letter  which  stated  the  time,  but
have  not  been  able  to  find  it."

[If  Mr.  Stephen-son  is  right  as  to  the  day  of  his  experience,  and  as  to
the  hour  of  the  death,  the  sounds  followed  the  death  by  5  or  6  hours.  In
an  interview  with  Mr.  Podmore,  he  stated  that  both  his  wife  and  daughter
clearly  remember  the  incident ;  but  on  religious  grounds  they  decline  to
give  written  testimony.]

(614)  From  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roberts,  of  New  Berlin,  Chenango  Co.,  New
York.  "  March,  1884.

"  During  the  Civil  War  in  America  a  young  man  of  the  name  of
George  Roberts  enlisted  on  the  Union  side.  He  was  with  those  troops
when  Port  Hudson,  Louisiana,  was  attacked,  and  in  an  assault  made  upon
that  place  on  Sunday,  June  14th,  1863,  he  was  killed.  He  fell  about  10
o'clock  that  morning.

"  His  parents,  living  in  Chenango  Co.,  State  of  New  York,  knew  that
he  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Port  Hudson,  and  that  there  might  be  a
battle  some  time,  but  nothing  more.

"  On  Sunday,  June  14th,  1863,  Mrs.  Roberts  was  getting  ready  for
church,  and  the  first  bell  that  rings  a  quarter  before  10  had  just  ceased,
when  Mrs.  R.  heard  George's  voice  calling  to  her,  '  Mother !  Mother !  '
It  was  perfectly  distinct  and  clear,  as  though  in  the  room.  The  fright
and  conviction  of  her  son's  death  afiected  her  so  much  that  she
became  ill.

"  Shortly  after  this,  came  the  news  of  the  death  of  George  before  Port
Hudson,  at  the  very  hour  that  his  mother  heard  his  voice  in  her  room
calling  her.

"These  statements  are  correct,  as  they  occurred,  June  14th,  1863.

"Jonathan  Roberts.
"  Martha  Roberts."

The  Rev.  R.  Whittingham,  of  Pikesville,  Maryland,  a  Corresponding
Member  of  the  S.P.R.,  who  procured  this  narrative  for  us,  vouches  for
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roberts  as  "  extremely  respectable,  worthy,  well-to-do
people  "  ;  and  says  : —

"  I  know  Mr.  Roberts  said  that  his  son  was  shot  just  at  10  o'clock ;
for  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  having  a  strange  feeling  of  someone  being  behind
hira  in  the  church  tower  as  he  was  ringing  the  first  bell  at,  or  for,  10
o'clock,  and  he  said  that  was  the  hour  that  George  was  shot.     This  being


VI.]  AUDITORY  AFD  TACTILE  CASES.  563

only  a  feeling,  or  impression,  on  his  part,  I  did  not  think  it  worth  mention-
ing, as  it  could  be  easily  imagined  afterward ;  but  it  fixed  the  time  of
George's  death  on  my  memory.  That  was  the  solitary  instance  of  halluci-
nation that  they  have  ever  experienced.  They  are  by  no  means  imagi-
native or  credulous  in  temperament  or  habit."

[If  the  coincidence  here  was  as  close  as  is  alleged,  the  case  is  of  some
weight,  even  though  the  mother's  mind  may  have  been  to  some  extent  pre-
occupied with  the  thought  of  her  son.]

(615)  Extract  from  a  paragraph  in  the  Times  of  Sept.  11,  1876,  which
recorded  the  funeral,  at  Aleppo,  of  Mr.  George  Smith,  the  eminent
Assyriologist.

"  A  most  striking  coincidence  may  here  be  mentioned  without  com-
ment. A  young  German  Assyriologist  of  the  highest  promise.  Dr.
Friedrich  Delitzsch,  is  now,  for  the  second  time,  in  this  country,  having
been  sent,  as  on  his  former  visit,  by  the  King  of  Saxony  to  study  the
arrow-headed  inscriptions  in  the  British  Museum.  During  his  former  stay
here  last  year,  which  was  noticed  at  the  time  in  our  columns,  Dr.  Delitzsch
and  Mr.  George  Smith  naturally  became  fast  friends,  and  the  Leipzig
savant  and  his  brother  Hermann  were  chosen  by  Mr.  Smith  to  introduce  to
German  readers  his  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,  which  has  accordingly
just  been  published  at  Leipzig  under  their  joint  editorship.

"  On  the  19th  ult.,  the  day  of  Mr.  George  Smith's  death.  Dr.  Delitzsch
was  on  his  way  to  the  house  of  Mr.  William  St.  Chad  Boscawen,  who  is
also  a  rising  Assyriologist.  Mr.  Boscawen  resides  in  Kentish  Town,  and
in  passing  the  end  of  Crogsland  Road,  in  which  Mr.  George  Smith  lived,
and  within  about  a  stone's  throw  of  the  house,  his  German  friend  said  he
suddenly  heard  a  most  piercing  cry,  which  thrilled  him  to  the  marrow,
'  Herr  Dr.  Delitzsch.'  The  time — for  as  soon  as  he  got  over  the  shock  he
looked  at  his  watch— was  between  6.45  and  7  p.m.,  and  Mr.  Parsons  gives
the  hour  of  Mr.  Smith's  death  at  6  p.m.  Dr.  Delitzsch,  who  strongly  dis-
avows any  superstitious  leanings,  was  ashamed  to  mention  the  circumstance
to  Mr.  Boscawen  on  reaching  that  gentleman's  house,  although  on  his  return
home  he  owns  that  his  nervous  apprehensions  of  some  mournful  event
in  his  own  family  found  relief  in  tears,  and  that  he  recorded  all  the  facts
in  his  note-book  that  same  night.  Dr.  Delitzsch  told  the  story  at  our
informant's  breakfast-table,  with  all  the  circumstances  mentioned  above,
including  the  hour  at  which  he  heard  the  shrill  cry.  He  distinctly  denied
having  been  thinking  of  Mr.  George  Smith  at  the  time."

In  January,  1885,  (having  failed  to  elicit  from  Herr  Delitzsch  any
reply  to  several  previous  applications,)  we  sent  him  a  copy  of  this  extract,
telling  him  that  we  proposed  to  state,  in  reprinting  it,  that  it  had  been
first  forwarded  to  him,  with  a  request  that  he  would  contradict  it  if  it  did
not  truthfully  represent  the  facts.  No  reply  has  been  received  ;  and
Mr.  Gortz,  of  the  British  Museum,  tells  us  that  Herr  Delitzsch  expressed
to  him  a  reluctance  to  write  on  the  subject.  We  may  presume,  how-
ever, that,  had  the  statement  been  substantially  inaccurate,  he  would  have
said  so.

[If  the  hours  are  correctly  given,  the  cry  was  heard  about  3|  hours
after  the  death.]  l'^^^;-  'v:;,P;J^_^

VOL.  II.  2  o  2


664  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(616)  From  Miss  Bushell,  Hythe,  Kent.  u  X885.

"On  the  evening  of  Feb.  18,  1863,  I  distinctly  heard  myself  called,
and  recognised  the  voice  as  that  of  Dr.  Harding,  a  retired  physician,  who
lived  in  the  same  town  [Ramsgate,  and  in  the  next  street].  The  voice
seemed  to  come  from  the  staircase.  I  was  walking  along  a  passage,  and
turned  towards  the  stairs,  so  real  did  it  appear ;  though  I  could  hardly
imagine  Dr.  Harding  to  be  in  the  house.  I  knew  him  slightly.  He  was  a
kind,  friendly  man,  and  he  always  spoke  to  me  if  we  met  in  the  streets,
addressing  me  as  '  Bushell ' — which  is  the  name  I  heard  that  evening.  The
next  day,  I  heard  that  Dr.  Harding  had  died  the  preceding  afternoon  or
evening.  I  cannot  fix  the  precise  hour.  Though  out  of  health,  he  was
not  confined  to  the  house,  and  I  had  met  him  out  of  doors  about  three  days
before  the  occurrence,  so  that  I  was  not  by  any  means  expecting  his  death.

"This  is  the  only  hallucination  of  the  senses  that  I  have  ever  ex-
perienced. "  Matilda  Bushell."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Dr.  Harding  died  (aged  50)
on  Feb.  20,  1863.  Miss  Bushell  is  certain  (and  this  is  a  point  which
would  be  likely  to  be  rightly  observed  at  the  time)  that  her  experience  was
on  the  evening  before  the  morning  on  which  she  heard  of  the  death — that
no  longer  interval  elapsed  ;  and  she  has  no  separate  recollection  of  the  date
of  her  experience.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  "  18th"  in  the  first
line  of  the  account  is  wrong,  and  that  the  coincidence  was  a  close  one.
Not,  however,  so  close  as  was  at  first  represented  ;  for  Miss  Bushell's  later
impression  is  that  the  death  took  place  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning —
i.e.,  some  hours  after  her  evening  experience  of  (presumably)  Feb.  19.  In
answer  to  an  inquiry,  she  says  that  she  did  not  mention  what  she  had  heard
to  anyone  before  the  death  was  known.

(617)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Elfanwalt,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton   Abbot.

"1883.

"  I  was  residing  in  England,  while  my  son  [who  was  one  of  the
percipients  in  case  310]  was  a  chaplain  in  India.  I  one  day  experienced
a  prayerful  and  earnest  desire,  in  going  up  to  the  altar  one  Easter  Day,  that
somehow,  I  knew  not  how,  my  son  might  be  permitted  to  communicate
me ;  and  as  I  received  without  raising  my  eyes  to  the  celebrant,  I  felt
my  desire  granted.  In  due  course  of  post,  my  son  asked  me  if  I  could
explain  what  had  occurred  to  him  at  about  the  time  when  he  knew  I  must
have  been  making  my  Easter  Communion.  While  preparing  for  the
evening  service,  and  not  thinking  of  me  or  home,  he  heard  me  call  him  by
name,  not  as  though  in  any  distress,  but  with  a  tone  of  great  urgency.
Instantly  remembering  how  I  was  then  occupied,  he  was  with  me  in  spirit,
and,  though  unconsciously,  was  permitted  to  satisfy  my  longing.  After
this,  though  he  knew  there  was  no  one  in  the  house,  he  made  diligent
search  to  prove  to  others  that  it  was  no  delusion.  The  fact  that  Cardinal
Borromeo,  while  preaching  elsewhere,  had  communicated  the  dying  Pope
was  not  known  to  me  for  many  years  after."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mrs.  Fagan  says  that  she  made  her  Easter
Communion  between  noon  and  1  p.m.;  which  would  synchronise  with  6-7
p.m.  in  the  place  where  her  son  was.     The  year,  she  thinks,  was  1874.

[This  clearly  must  not  be  reckoned  as  a  reciprocal  case,  since  there  is
no  reason  to  suppose  Mrs.  Fagan's  own  impression  to  have  been  anything


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  565

but  subjective.  That  impression  is,  however,  of  importance,  as  indicating
the  intensity  of  her  feeling  at  the  moment.  Her  son  has  occasionally  had
subjective  auditory  hallucinations,  but  not  sufficiently  often  to  diminish
appreciably  the  force  (such  as  it  is)  of  the  present  coincidence.  The  case
is  of  course  not  one  on  which  much  stress  can  be  laid.]

In  the  following  example,  the  fact  of  non-recognition  tells  against
the  supposition  that  the  hallucination  was  due  to  anxiety.  As  for  the
sense  oi  feeling  someone's  presence,  I  have  already  pointed  out  that
a  faint  auditory  impression  is  sufficient  to  account  for  it  ;^  and  even
the  "  feeling  someone  stooping  over  "  (which  occurs  again  in  the  next
case)  need  not  imply  any  distinct  hallucination  of  touch.

(618)  From  Miss  Summerbell,  140,  Kensington  Park  Road,  W.  (men-
tioned in  Yol.  I.,  p.  507).  As  the  more  distinct  part  of  the  impression
seems  to  have  been  received  after  she  had  not  only  been  woke,  but  had
herself  uttered  a  couple  of  sentences,  the  case  may  be  fairly  reckoned  in
the  waking  class.  "1882.

"  A  lady,  to  whom  I  was  much  attached,  and  who  had  had  partial  care
of  me  during  some  part  of  my  early  youth,  had  for  some  years  suffered
from  a  complaint  which  at  last  necessitated  a  surgical  operation.  This
operation  was  performed  early  in  August,  1877,  by  Dr.  Spencer  Wells ;
my  friend  was  in  a  house,  chosen  by  Dr.  Wells  for  the  purpose,  in  Seymour
Street.  The  operation  was  successful,  and  we  had  the  assurance  of  Dr.
Wells,  and  of  the  other  doctor  who  attended  her,  that  she  was  doing  well.
I  was  staying  with  her  nephew,  at  Weybridge,  at  the  time.  Every  day
we  heard  better  accounts  of  the  patient.  On  Saturday  evening,  Mr.  T.,
with  whom  I  was  staying,  received  a  letter  saying  that  his  aunt  was  out
of  danger,  and  appointing  the  following  Tuesday  for  him  and  me  to  go  and
see  her.

"  We  went  to  bed  in  excellent  spirits,  and  I  slept  at  once.  I  was
awakened,  in  the  dim  dawn,  by  feeling  someone  stooping  over  me.
Thinking  it  was  Mrs.  T.  who  had  come  into  the  room  for  some  purpose,  I
said,  aloud,  '  Is  that  you,  Annie  1 '  I  received  no  answer,  but  I  felt,
though  I  could  not  see,  someone  close  to  me.  I  spoke  again,  and  I
distinctly  heard  a  voice  whisper,  '  Soon  will  you  and  I  be  lying.  Each
within  our  narrow  bed.'  I  was  terrified.  I  looked  at  my  watch  to  see  if
it  was  nearly  time  for  people  to  be  moving  about.  It  was  4  o'clock.  I
could  not  sleep.  I  felt  horrified  and  miserable,  but  oddly,  I  never  thought
of  my  friend.  When  I  went  down  in  the  morning,  my  friends  remarked
that  I  was  silent  and  dull.  I  said  I  was  sure  something  was  going  to  take
place,  and  at  length  I  told  them  what  had  happened.  Of  course  they
laughed.  I  went  to  church  with  Mr.  T.,  and  the  first  hymn  sung  was  the
one  I  had  fancied  I  heard  in  the  night,  beginning  '  Days  and  moments
quickly  flying.'  This  made  me  more  depressed,  but  I  still  did  not  think
of  my  friend.

"  On  Monday  we  went  on  the  river  in  a  small  boat,  and  I  told  Mr.
T.    I    knew  we  should  be  drowned    because  of  my    presentiment.      We

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  528  second  note ;  and  compare  case  172.


566  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

however,  arrived  safe  at  home  at  7  p.m.,  when  Mr.  T.  found  a  letter,
saying  that  at  10  on  Saturday  night,  his  aunt  had  suddenly  exhibited
bad  symptoms,  and  that  she  died  at  4  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning.

"L.    D     SUMMERBELL."

[The  Times  obituary  records  that  the  death  took  place,  in  Somerset
Street  (not  Seymour  Street),  on  Aug.  4,  1877.  This  was  a  Saturday,  not
a  Sunday ;  therefore,  if  Miss  Summerbell  is  correct  as  to  the  hour  of  her
impression,  the  coincidence  was  less  close  than  she  represents,  as  the  death
must  have  taken  place  before  midnight.

We  cannot  obtain  Mr.  T.'s  corroboration,  as  he  died  in  the  year
following  the  occurrence.]

The  next  two  records  seem  to  illustrate  the  occurrence  of  several
similar  telepathic  experiences  to  the  same  percipient  (compare
No.  279).  The  cases  not  being  strong  ones,  I  have  included  each
set  under  a  single  evidential  number.

(619)  From  Mrs.  E.  M.  Maunsell,  Ballywilliam,  Rathkeale,  Ireland,
who  says  of  herself,  "  I  am  neither  nervous  nor  superstitious,  but  a  very
matter-of-fact  person."  "  October  27th,  1884.

"  My  eldest  sister  was  paying  us  a  visit,  when  she  was  taken  ill  with
internal  cramp  ;  she  called  to  me  in  a  peculiar  choking  voice ;  we  used
remedies,  and  she  soon  recovered.  About  a  year  afterwards,  she  was
staying  with  another  sister,  when  one  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  distinct
impression  of  my  sister  stooping  over  me,  and  calling  '  Eliza  '  in  the  same
choking  voice.  I  sleep  very  soundly,  but  I  started  up  wide  awake,  and
again  the  voice  seemed  to  call  me  from  the  open  window,  faint  and  choking,
'  Eliza.'  I  am  a  rather  stoical  person  in  times  of  danger  or  fright,  so  I
merely  said  to  myself  '  Isabella  is  ill,'  and  was  soon  again  fast  asleep.
The  next  time  I  saw  my  sister,  she  told  me  that  the  very  night  I  had
heard  her  call,  and  nearly  to  the  hour,  (for  I  had  heard  the  clock  strike
12)  she  had  been  taken  ill,  and  had  been  only  able  to  stagger  out  of  bed
to  call  for  help.  This  was  my  first  experience  of  this  kind,  that  I  can
remember ;  I  was  then  a  young  girl.  I  was  not  particularly  attached  to
my  sister,  for  she  had  married  young  and  left  home  ;  but  she  always  looked
up  to  me  and  considered  me  a  great  authority  on  most  points.

"  The  second  instance  also  concerned  my  eldest  sister.  My  father,  at
the  time  of  which  I  write,  was  living  in  Limerick,  as  did  also  my  sister.
One  evening  about  8,  I  left  the  room  to  make  the  tea  ;  passing  the  foot  of
the  staircase,  I  heard  my  sister's  voice,  hushed  and  distinct,  call  '  Eliza.'  I
listened,  but  the  call  was  not  repeated.  I  thought  at  once,  '  Isabella  is  ill,
and  will  send  for  me.'  I  hurried,  and  prepared  tea,  and  I  well  remember
taking  a  second  slice  of  bread,  for,  I  thought,  I  may  be  up  with  her  all
night.  Less  than  half  an  hour  after  a  note  was  brought  my  father,  I
watched  him,  and  when  he  had  read  it  asked,  '  Is  Isabella  ill  ■? '  '  Yes,'
my  father  replied,  '  she  is  very  ill,  and  is  calling  for  you.'  My  father,  who
was  a  doctor,  accompanied  me  to  her  house ;  we  doctored  her,  and  she
recovered  after  an  illness  of  four  or  five  days.

"  My  father  is  long  dead  ;  so  is  my  eldest  sister.  The  events  occurred
over  20  years  ago,  many  years  before  my  marriage."


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  567

On  Dec.  19,  1885,  Mrs.  Maunsell  wrote  :—

"  On  another  occasion,  when  living  with  my  father  and  mother,  I
heard  my  mother  call  me  ;  I  found  her  ghastly  pale,  and  very  ill ;  but  she
assured  me  she  had  not  called  me ;  as  indeed,  she  was  too  faint  to  raise
her  voice.  On  another  occasion,  my  brother-in-law,  who  had  gone  to
London,  and  was  very  ill,  though  it  was  kept  a  secret,  had  returned  on  his
way  home,  as  far  as  Dublin.  I  was  not  thinking  at  all  about  him  ;  but,
one  day  in  this  house,  I  was  walking  from  the  office  to  the  back  door  of
the  dining-room  (mid-day),  when  I  heard  him  call  loudly  his  wife's  name,
'  Martha.'  I  wrote  at  once  to  her  (she  had  not  accompanied  him)  to  make
inquiries.  She  had  received  a  letter  that  morning,  [to  the  effect  that]  he
would  return  next  evening,  Saturday,  and  was  quite  strong  after  his  trip.
The  following  Tuesday  I  received  a  letter  from  my  cousin  saying  that  Mr,
Caswell  [the  brother-in-law]  was  found  dead  in  his  armchair,  partly
dressed,  at  his  lodgings  in  Dublin,  on  Sunday  morning.  I  had  not  known
he  was  ill  at  all.  "  Eliza  Maunsell."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mrs.  Maunsell  states  positively  that  she  has
never  had  any  hallucination  of  the  sort  except  on  these  four  occasions,  (and
possibly  one  other,  when  what  she  heard  may  have  been  a  real  call).  She
adds : —

"  I  regret  extremely  that  I  can  procure  for  you  no  corroborative
evidence  about  my  brother-in-law.  My  sister  is  far  too  nervous  a  person
for  me  to  have  told  her  at  the  time.  The  event  [i.e.,  the  death]  occurred
on  the  9th  of  August,  1874."

[We  have  verified  this  date  in  the  FreemarCs  Journal,  which  describes
the  death  as  having  been  rather  sudden.  Mrs.  Maunsell  heard  the  voice
3  or  4  days  before ;  and  though  her  brother-in-law  was  probably  at  that
time  in  a  somewhat  abnormal  state,  the  accuracy  of  coincidence  which
(if  correctly  remembered)  would  justify  us  in  regarding  the  former
experiences  as  very  probably  telepathic,  is  lacking  to  this  one.]

(620)  From  Mr.  J.  Augustus  Edmonds,  16,  Waterloo  Road  South,
Wolverhampton.  The  evidence  is  third-hand,  and  is  admitted  by  special
exception  (Vol.  I.,  p.  158,  note).  Mr.  Edmonds  received  the  account  of
the  second  of  the  two  incidents  narrated  from  both  his  father  and  brother.

1883.

Mr.  Edmonds  j&rst  describes  a  very  serious  illness  which  attacked  his
father  (the  Rev.  T.  0.  Edmonds,  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church,  St.
Andrew's  Street,  Cambridge,)  in  the  year  1831.  During  the  illness  a
letter  was  received  from  a  friend  of  his  father's,  the  Rev.  Josiah  Wilkinson,
of  Saffron  Walden,  Essex.

"  It  was  to  this  effect.  I  don't  vouch  for  the  perfect  verbal  accuracy.
It  was  addressed  to  my  mother.

"  '  I  have  been  made  aware  ^  of  the  alarming  illness  of  your  dear
husband,  but  I  have  the  happiness  to  assure  you  that  his  sickness  is  not
unto  death.'     The  note  concluded  with  a  message  of  love,  when  my  father

1  Mr.  Edmonds  does  not  know  whether  Mr.  Wilkinson  had  heard  of  the  illness  in
any  normal  way,  or  whether  the  first  intimation  of  this  fact,  as  well  as  the  assurance  of
recovery,  was  communicated  in  the  abnormal  manner  afterwards  described.  The
assurance  of  recovery  may  easily,  of  course,  have  been  subjectively  imagined,  and  in  no
way  concerns  us  here.


568  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

should  be  able  to  receive  it,  and  of  sympathy  to  herself.  This  note  arrived
when  my  father  was  to  all  appearances  as  near  his  end  as  at  any  period  of
his  illness.

"  When  my  father  was  able  to  see  a  few  friends,  Mr.  Wilkinson  came
over  and  urged  him,  as  soon  as  he  was  permitted  to  move,  to  come  with
my  brother  Cyrus,  his  second  son,  and  visit  him,  which  they  did.  These
three  being  alone,  my  father  mentioned  this  note  and  said  it  very  much
surprised  him,  on  account  of  the  singularly  confident  manner  in  which  his
recovery  was  spoken  of.  To  which  Mr.  Wilkinson  replied  that  in  several
instances  he  had  been  told  by  an  audible  voice  of  some  fact  specially
concerning  his  interests  or  welfare,  a  voice  which  none  but  himself  heard,
and  there  was  no  visible  presence.  These  intimations,  he  said,  had  always
been  made  to  him  during  his  family  worship,  and  (I  believe  I  am  right  in
saying)  that  they  had  never  been  mentioned  out  of  his  own  family.  He
said,  however,  '  I  will  relate  one  such  case.

"  '  I  was  kneeling  at  prayer  one  morning  with  my  family,  when  a  voice
said,  "  Your  brother  is  dead."^  I  had  but  one  brother,  to  whom  I  was  greatly
attached,  who  lived  at  the  West  End  of  London.  The  shock  was  so  great
that  I  sank  on  the  floor  in  a  swoon.  On  recovery  I  desired  my  wife  to  put
the  needful  things  into  my  portmanteau,  and  send  to  stop  the  Cambridge
coach  to  London,  a  short  distance  from  the  house,  telling  her  that  my
brother  was  dead,  and  that  I  must  go  to  London.  On  arrival  I  drove  to
the  house,  found  the  blinds  closely  drawn,  and  on  coming  to  the  door  the
servant  expressed  great  relief  at  seeing  me,  saying  that  his  master  had
died  suddenly  in  the  night  and  his  mistress  was  in  a  most  sad  condition.

"  'Now,'  Mr.  Wilkinson  said,  '  on  the  morning  on  which  I  wrote  that
note  to  your  wife,  at  morning  prayer  with  the  family,  a  voice  said,  "  Your
dearest  friend  is  very  ill,  but  his  sickness  is  not  unto  death."  I  heard  no
more,  but  as  soon  as  our  worship  was  concluded  I  wrote  that  note.'

"J.  A.  Edmonds."

§  2.  In  the  next  two  cases,  the  impression,  if  really  a  hallucina-
tion, seems  to  have  represented  a  sound  which  was  actually  in  the
agent's  ears  at  the  time.

(621)  From  Mrs.  Malcolm,  Wribbenhall,  Bewdley,  (mentioned  above,
p.  79).  "August  5th,  1885.

"During  the  commencement  of  the  year  1849  (I  being  then  a  young
girl),  I  had  a  tedious  illness.  On  one  occasion,  to  relieve  a  congested  lung,
I  had  a  blister  applied,  and,  in  consequence,  was  prevented  on  that  night
from  obtaining  sleep.  One  of  my  brothers  was  with  the  army  in  the
Punjaub  at  that  time,  and  my  thoughts  were  constantly  with  him,  and
doubtless  I  followed  the  events  of  the  war  with  intense  interest.  On  the
night  in  question,  being,  as  I  have  said,  wide  awake,  I  was  astonished  by
hearing  the  report  of  big  guns.  I  raised  myself  in  bed  with  some  difficulty,
and  then  continued  to  hear  the  distant  firing  of  cannon,  sometimes  nearer,
sometimes  remote.  At  length  the  guns  ceased,  but  were  succeeded  by  a
sharp  and  rapid  discharge  of  musketry.  The  sounds  lasted  altogether
about  four  hours.  My  great  anxiety  was  that  some  one  should  hear  these
strange  sounds  of  battle  as  well  as  myself  ;  but  I  was  forbidden  at  the  time

1  Compare  cases  153  and  284.


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  569

to  leave  my  room,  and  hearing  my  father  coughing  in  his  bedroom  opposite,
I  pacified  myself  with  the  assurance  that  he  must  be  awake  and  would
hear  what  I  heard.  Great  was  my  mortification  in  the  morning  to  find
that  neither  he  nor  my  mother  were  aware  of  anything  unusual  having
occurred  in  the  night  past.  Then  my  old  friend  the  doctor  came  in,
inquiring  laughingly  whether  I  was  growing  fanciful  (having  been  told  my
story).  I  also  laughed  and  replied,  '  You  shall  know  if  my  battle  is  mere
fancy  when  the  next  news  comes  from  the  seat  of  war  in  India.'

"  Whether  this  was  my  first  connecting  of  the  sounds  I  had  listened  to
with  an  Indian  battle,  or  whether  I  had  done  so  during  the  continuance
of  those  sounds,  is  a  point  I  am  not  now  clear  upon.  But  although  the
doctor,  when  out  of  my  hearing,  desired  that  I  might  not  again  be  left
alone  at  night,  it  is  observable  that  neither  then  nor  at  any  later  time  was
I  rendered  the  least  nervous  by  my  strange  experience,  nor  did  I  appre-
hend evil  to  the  brother  engaged  in  the  campaign.  In  due  time,  tidings  of
the  severe  battle  at  Goojerat  reached  us — the  day  on  which  it  was  fought,
and  hours,  allowing  for  difierence  of  time,  exactly  coinciding  with  the  date
of  my  prophetic  ^  battle.  My  brother  was  in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  but
escaped  unhurt.  "  G-eorgina  Malcolm."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Malcolm  says  : —

"I  send  you  a  written  testimony  from  one  of  my  sisters,  as  to  my
having  spoken  of  hearing  the  battle  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence.  The
hours  during  which  the  sounds  continued  were  from  1  to  5  o'clock  a.m.  in
the  morning  as  far  as  my  recollection  serves.  At  the  time  of  the  occurrence
I  was  living  in  ray  father's  house  in  a  very  remote  part  of  Warwickshire.
The  nearest  soldiers'  quarters  to  us  would  be  at  Coventry  or  Birmingham,
at  a  distance  of  between  30  and  40  miles."

The  sister's  corroboration,  dated  October  9,  1885,  is  as  follows  : —

"  I  remember  the  incident  about  the  battle  of  Goojerat.  You  were  ill
at  the  time,  and  in  the  morning  you  told  us  you  felt  as  if  you  had  been  in
a  battle,  as  you  had  heard  continual  firing  and  report  of  cannon  for  a  long
time.     I  cannot  say  what  time  of  the  night  it  was  when  you  heard  it.

"  I  think  you  made  a  note  of  it,  and  we  heard  afterwards  from  Frank
that  the  battle  began  on  the  following  morning.  a  Lu^y  Dickins  "

From  the  London  Gazette  for  April  19th,  1849,  it  appears  that  the
battle,  which  took  place  on  Feb.  21,  lasted  from  8.30  until  midday,  after
which  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  commenced,  lasting  until  dusk.  8.30  a.m.
at  Goojerat  would  correspond  to  about  3.30  a.m.  in  England.

Mrs.  Malcolm  nas  experienced  no  other  auditory  hallucination,  except
that  twice,  when  overstrained  by  nursing  a  relative  in  a  fatal  illness,  she
had  the  impression  of  hearing  her  name  called.

[The  fact  that  the  sounds  were  not  heard  by  others,  though  at  least
one  other  person  seems  to  have  been  awake  at  the  time,  is  rather  a  strong-
proof  that  the  experience  was  a  hallucination ;  and  if  so,  there  is  at  least
an  appreciable  chance  that  it  was  telepathic.  I  have  mentioned  a  case  of
subjective  hallucination  of  the  same  character  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  494,  second
note.  The  long  duration  of  the  impression  is,  owing  to  its  "rudimentary"
character,  less  remarkable  than  that  alleged  in  cases  300  and  590.]

1  As  to  the  tendency  to  regard  impressions  corresponding  with  unknown  reality  as
prophetic,  see  p.  535,  note.


570  SUPPLEMENT.


CHAP.


(622)  From  a  lady,  Mrs.  M.,  whose  name  and  address  it  seems  right
to  suppress,  though  she  made  no  stipulation  on  the  subject.  The  account
was  received  in  August,  1884.

Mrs.  M.  describes  how,  in  July,  1874,  while  spending  her  holiday  hap-
pily in  the  vale  of  Leven,  and  in  perfect  health,  she  "  was  awakened  sud-
denly with  a  cry  of  distress  ringing  in  my  ears,  and  it  was  twice  repeated
after  I  became  wide  awake.  The  last  time  it  seemed  partly  suppressed
and  further  away.  It  seemed  very  near  at  first,  and  I  recognised  the
voice  as  poor  little  Tom's.  [Tom  was  a  child  between  2  and  3  years  of
age,  one  of  several  of  whom  she  had  been  in  charge,  and  whom  she  had
known  to  be  considerably  ill-used  by  the  lady  who  was  acting  as  his
guardian.]  I  sprang  out  of  bed  and  looked  out.  It  was  a  lovely  still
night,  not  a  movement  nor  a  sound  disturbed  the  air,  and  it  was  so  light
that  I  could  see  the  time  on  a  small  silver  watch  which  was  lying  on  the
table.     It  was  12.45."

The  efiect  on  Mrs.  M.  was  so  great  that  she  mentioned  the  experience
next  morning  to  the  aunt  with  whom  she  was  staying,  and  resolved
to  return  at  once  to  the  scene  of  her  duties,  but  was  prevented  by  a
telegram  giving  her  other  instructions.  When  she  did  return,  she  learnt
from  the  servants  that,  on  the  Sunday  night  when  she  had  heard  the  cries,
Tom's  guardian  had  had  him  in  her  room  all  night ;  and  that  they  "  heard
cries  and  moans  until  they  fell  asleep,  and  at  midnight  were  awakened  by
three  successive  cries  that  rang  through  the  house — the  last  a  suppressed
echo  of  the  others."  Next  morning  the  servants  found  marks  of  cruel  ill-
usage  on  the  child,  which  Mrs.  M.  found  still  very  apparent.

[We  have  not  received  the  aunt's  corroboration,  though  Mrs.  M.
promised  to  try  to  obtain  it  for  us.  The  correspondence  of  the  three  cries
is  a  detail  not  unlikely  to  have  been  subsequently  imagined.  See  p.  229,
note.]

§  8.  The   following  is   a   group  of  non-vocal  cases,  of  an  entirely
rudimentary  type  (see  above,  pp.  125-82).

(623)  From  a  gentleman  who  does  not  feel  justified  in  allowing  his
brother's,  the  agent's,  name  to  appear,  and  is  therefore  obliged  to  with-
hold his  own  from  publication.  The  percipient  has  died  since  1883,  when
the  account  was  written.

In  the  autumn  of  1874,  the  narrator's  brother,  W.  M.,  a  resident  in
Edinburgh,  was  staying,  with  a  sister,  some  18  miles  from  that  place.
"  He  had  been  subject,  at  irregular  intervals,  to  attacks  of  illness  of  a
severe  character,  but,  at  this  date,  was  in  fair  health,  and  attending  to
business.

"  Two  or  three  days  after  his  arrival  at  our  sister's  house  he  was  quite
unexpectedly  seized,  late  one  evening,  with  serious  illness,  hematemesis
supervened,  and  within  two  or  three  hours  from  the  first  seizure  he  was  a
corpse.  The  late  hour,  and  distance  from  the  railway  station,  prevented
any  communication  during  the  night  with  our  household  in  Edinburgh.

"Between  11  and  12  o'clock  that  night,  my  mother,  aged  then  72,  but
active  and  vigorous  in  body  and  mind,  as  indeed  she  is  still,  was  alone  in
her  bedroom  and  in  the  act  of  undressing.  She  occupied  this  room  alone,
and  it  was  the  only  sleeping  apartment  on  the  dining-room  flat  which  wa


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  571

in  use  that  night,  the  only  other  bedroom  there  being  the  adjoining  room,
then  untenanted,  owing  to  my  own  absence  in  the  North.  My  father,
eldest  brother,  and  sister-in-law  occupied  rooms  on  the  flat  above.  The
servants'  accommodation  was  in  the  under  or  sunk  flat  beneath,  shut  off
from  the  upper  by  a  swing  door  at  the  foot  of  a  flight  of  steps.  A  small
dog,  the  only  other  inmate  of  the  house,  slept  that  night,  and  indeed
always,  in  the  kitchen.  My  mother  was  in  her  usual  good  health,  her
faculties  perfectly  preserved,  and  her  mind  untroubled  with  any  apprehen-
sions of  evil  tidings.  She  had  read,  as  usual,  a  portion  of  her  Bible,  and
was  in  the  act  of  undressing,  when  she  was  suddenly  startled  by  a  most
extraordinary  noise  at  the  door  of  her  room,  which  opened  directly  into
the  inner  lobby.  It  was  as  if  made  by  a  person  standing  directly  outside
and  close  to  the  door,  but  it  was  utterly  unlike  any  ordinary  summons  or
alarm.  In  her  own  words,  it  was  like  nothing  so  much  as  the  noise  of
someone  hastily  and  imperiously  lashing  the  door  with  a  heavy  riding  whip,
demanding  admittance.  It  was  loud,  and  repeated  three  or  four  times,
as  if  insisting  on  attention,  with  brief  intervals  between.     Then  it  ceased.

"  My  mother,  though  possessed  of  considerable  coolness,  was  startled  ;
but  with  a  resolution  which  many  might  envy,  she  proceeded  to  light  a
candle,  knowing  the  hall  lights  were  extinguished,  the  whole  of  the
inmates  having  before  retired  for  the  night,  and  went  to  the  door.  '  I
knew,'  she  said,  '  that  it  was  no  one  in  the  house  seeking  admission.  8uch
an  imperative  summons  would  never  have  been  made  at  my  door.'  On
opening  it,  nothing  was  visible,  the  various  doors  opening  on  the  lobby
were  closed,  and  the  fastenings  of  the  front  door  undisturbed.  Much
surprised,  though  retaining  self-possession,  my  mother  debated  with  herself
as  to  rousing  the  other  members  of  the  family,  but  ultimately  resolved  not
to  do  so  unless  the  sound  was  repeated,  which  it  was  not.  It  was  about
midnight,  but  my  mother  did  not  note  the  precise  hour  and  minute.  Early
next  forenoon,  my  father  and  sister-in-law  having  left,  the  news  came
that  my  brother  had  expired  at  midnight,  18  miles  off  by  road  from
Edinburgh.

"  It  may  be  noted  that  nothing  in  or  near  the  door  could  possibly  have
occasioned  the  noise  in  question,  the  material  being  old,  well-seasoned
timber,  not  liable  to  warp  or  crack.  It  afterwards  appeared  that  the  noise
in  question  had  not  been  heard  by  anyone  in  the  house  save  by  my  mother,
which  no  one  will  wonder  at  who  knows  how  perfectly  '  deafened '  old-
fashioned  stone  houses  in  Edinburgh  invariably  are.

"  Speaking  for  my  own  part,  I  would  not  have  placed  so  much  reliance
on  the  narrative  which  I  have  from  my  mother's  own  lips,  had  it  come
from  any  other  person  in  the  house.  The  others  might  have  been
imaginative  or  nervous,  or  wise  after  the  event,  or  possibly  wholly
mistaken.  But  with  my  mother's  clear  and  balanced  judgment,  little
affected  by  matters  which  powerfully  sway  others,  I  have  no  room  for
hesitation  whatsoever.  I  believe,  as  firmly  as  I  believe  in  the  fact  of  my
own  existence,  that  the  circumstances  happened  exactly  as  she  narrated
them."

[The  entry  in  the  Register  of  Deaths,  which  is  probably  correct,  shows
that  the  death  occurred  on  September  2,  1875  (not  1874),  at  4.50  a.m.,  not
at  midnight.  The  coincidence  was  therefore  not  so  exact  as  the  narrator
imagined.     Still,  if  the  mother's  experience  was  a  hallucination — and  it


572  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

certainly  does  not  seem  easy  to  explain  it  otherwise — the  identity  of  night
makes  the  case  a  striking  sample  of  its  kind.]

(624)  From  Mrs.  Callin,  of  whom  her  mistress,  Miss  Rosenberg,  of
Gabarrie  Yilla,  Sarsfield  Road,  Balham,  says  : —

"  I  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  and  trustworthiness  of  Mrs.  Callin,
the  narrator  of  the  incident  described."

"December,  1882.

"  Mr.  J.,  employed  as  agent  by  my  mistress^  Miss  C,  resident  in  the
Royal  Avenue,  Chelsea,  had  long  suffered  severely  from  asthma,  and  on
Miss  C.  going  to  see  him  one  day,  when  he  had  been  unable  to  go  out  for
many  weeks,  some  time  in  November,  1879,  he  remarked  he  should  go  to
see  her  on  her  birthday  (having  always  done  so  for  many  years),  if  he  had
to  take  a  cab  for  it ;  his  wife  rejoined,  '  I  do  not  think  you  will,'  meaning
his  state  of  health  would  not  allow  him  to  do  so,  and  he  replied  to  her,
'  Yes,  I  will:

"  Miss  C.  retired  to  bed  as  usual  on  the  night  of  December  7th.  I
slept  in  the  same  room,  which  was  the  front  one  on  the  first  floor,  with
folding  doors  into  the  small  dressing-room  behind,  no  other  person  being
in  the  house.  In  the  early  morning  of  next  day  (8th,  and  her  birthday)
Miss  C.  was  awoke  by  a  loud  knock  at  the  folding-door,  and,  listening,  it
was  repeated  :  she  then  called  me,  but  before  she  could  rouse  me,  heard
it  again,  the  third  time.^  I  then  got  up,  and  looked  outside  both  the
doors  with  a  light,  and  could  see  no  one ;  I  also  looked  at  the  time,  which
was  a  quarter  past  ybwr.  We  then  both  went  to  sleep  again,  I  thinking
my  mistress  had  dreamt  this,  but  she  always  persisted  she  heard  the
knocks  distinctly.

"  After  breakfast  we  heard  that  Mr.  J.  had  died  at  four  that  morn-
ing, and  Miss  C.  said  to  me  that  he  came  to  tell  her,  having  so  certainly
promised  to  go  to  her  on  that  day.

"  Miss  C.  died  the  following  March,  aged  94,  but  having  all  her
faculties  clear  to  the  last,  and  often  alluding  to  Mr.  J.'s  visit  on  her
birthday.  His  age  was  about  60  only,  and  he  had  frequently  said  he
should  die  before  her,  and  she  used  to  reply  '  Don't  wait  for  me  out  of
politeness,'  being  always  ready  with  a  joke.  "  M.  Callin."

We  find  from  the  Times  obituary  that  Mr.  J.  died  on  December  8,  1879.

[It  may  be  conceived  that  Mr.  J.'s  previous  promise  of  a  visit  on  that
day  worked  itself  out  in  the  percipient's  mind,  when  the  day  arrived,  in  the
form  of  a  hallucination  ;  but  such  accurately-timed  development  is,  as  far
as  I  know,  quite  unexampled,  except  in  some  rare  hypnotic  cases  of
commands  and  promises  a  longue  echeance.^

The  following  experiences — if  hallucinations,  and  not  due  to  some
undiscovered  physical  cause — are  of  interest  as  having  taken  precisely
the  same  form.^  It  is  one  that  is  likely  to  raise  a  smile  ;  but
I  must  repeat  that  it  is  quite  open  to  hallucinations  of  the  senses  to
take  peculiar  forms,  and  that  there  is  no  reason  why  telepathic  speci-
mens should  have  an  immunity  in  this  respect  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  503,  547).
Moreover,  the  particular  form  here  described  may  without  improba-
1  See  p.  229,  note.     2  gee  p.  35.


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  573

bility  be  traced  to  early  associations  in  the  percipient's  mind.  The
grounds  for  doubting  the  telepathic  origin  of  the  impressions  are,  not
their  oddness  or  triviality,  but  (1)  the  fact  that  they  did  not  in  any  way
suggest  the  supposed  agent,  Avhich  always  greatly  diminishes  the
force  of  the  time-coincidence  ;  and  (2)  in  one  case  the  lack  of  precision
in  the  time-coincidence  itself  The  narrator,  Miss  H.,  is,  in  her  own
words,  "  of  a  matter-of-fact  disposition,  and  not  a  believer  in  things
out  of  the  way,"  and  she  attaches  no  importance  whatever  to  these
incidents.  She  withholds  her  name  from  publication  out  of  defer-
ence to  what  she  thinks  would  be  the  vdshes  of  her  relatives,

"N Yicarage,  October  26th,  1884.

(625)  "A  few  years  ago  [in  1874]  I  was  staying  with  some  relatives
at  Folkestone,  who  had  taken  a  house  there  for  a  few  weeks  and  had
occupied  it  all  the  previous  summer.  We  were  a  merry  party,  with  young
people  and  children.  I  slept  in  a  large  room  on  the  first  floor.  I  was
awakened  one  night  by  the  sound  of  many  mice  pattering  over  the  floor  ;
they  appeared  to  be  running  swiftly  and  then  out  at  the  door.  Much
astonished,  I  looked  around  to  see  where  they  could  have  come  from,  but
no  trace  appeared.  In  the  morning  I  inquired  of  the  nurse,  who  came  to
call  me,  if  she  had  heard  anything,  '  No,'  was  the  reply.  I  foolishly  said,
'  Well,  I  do  not  mind  mice,  but  in  our  family  the  sound  of  them  means
death  or  ill  luck.'  I  complained  to  the  landlady,  who  said  '  she  had  never
seen  a  mouse  in  her  house  ' ;  she  sent  in  a  new  trap,  but  nothing  more  was
heard  of  the  intruders.  Three  or  four  days  after  this,  came  the  sad  news
of  the  death  of  a  very  dear  relative  from  an  accident,  whilst  abroad.
The  event  happened  a  few  minutes  before  the  noise  of  the  mice  had
disturbed  me.

"  In  December,  three  years  after  this,  I  was  at  St.  Leonards-on-Sea,
with  a  relative  who  had  been  seriously  ill,  and  on  the  night  of  the  31st
December  I  sat  up  in  my  own  room  at  the  top  of  the  house,  to  see  the  old
year  out  and  the  new  one  in.  I  have  referred  to  a  diary  kept  by  my  sister,
and  I  find  I  had  spent  a  most  quiet  day.  I  was  in  good  spirits,  for  my
invalid  was  much  better,  the  fire  in  the  room  was  bright,  and  I  certainly
was  not  thinking  of  mice  ;  but  just  before  1 2  o'clock  came  the  sound  of
many  mice  sweeping  over  the  floor.  I  heard  it  distinctly  and  with  some
trepidation,  but  no  one  dear  to  me  was  ill.  I  noted  down  the  fact,  and,
having  relatives  abroad,  awaited  with  some  impatience  the  colonial  mail.
I  received  the  following  notetfrom  my  brother  : —

" '  Dear  L., — I  write  to  tell  you  a  piece  of  sad  news.  Whilst  you
were  probably  welcoming  the  new  year,  a  few  minutes  before  it  arrived  I
went  down  my  garden,  to  receive  the  corpse  of  my  eldest  son ;  he  had
broken  his  neck  by  a  fall  from  his  horse  three  hours  before.'

"  I  had  been  in  the  house  where  this  occurred  several  times  before,
and  have  stayed  there  several  times  since,  but  I  have  never  seen  or  heard
real  mice  there.

"  I  may  add  that  my  mother  regarded  the  sound  of  mice  as  an  omen
of  disaster,  but  she  never  would  tell  me  why,  looking  upon  it  probably  as
a  superstition  she  wished  her  children  to  be  free  from."


574  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

In  answer  to  a  request  for  her  sister's  corroboration,  Miss  H.  replies  : —

"  I  regret  to  say  that  on  religious  grounds  Mrs.  L.  will  not  write  a
confirmatory  note ;  of  course  she  says  she  perfectly  remembers  the  circum-
stances, and  that  a  mouse-trap  was  immediately  purchased  for  my  room.
That's  practical."

In  conversation,  Miss  H.  informed  me  that  she  has  had  no  other
hallucination,  unless  hearing  some  unaccountable  knocks  on  one  occasion,
when  others  heard  them,  be  so  counted.  On  the  first  occasion,  in  a
lodging,  the  boards  were  bare  to  a  great  extent.  The  second  time  the  room
was  carpeted.  The  noise  was  loud  as  well  as  distinct.  Miss  H.  has  since
heard  real  mice,  and  was  glad  to  identify  the  sound  again.  Her  mother's
superstition  as  to  mice  foreboding  trouble  had  been  constantly  brought
before  her  mind,  during  her  mother's  life  :  it  was  much  on  her  mother's
brain,  so  to  speak.

The  Army  List  shows  that  the  death  in  the  first  case  took  place  on
July  22,  1874.

We  find  the  accident  in  the  second  case  described  in  a  local  paper  for
January  3,  1877,  as  having  taken  place  on  December  31 ;  and  the  death
is  reported  as  having  taken  place  "  about  midnight " — i.e.,  allowing
for  longitude,  nearly  12  hours  before  Miss  H.'s  impression.  Without-
extenuating  this  element  of  weakness  in  the  case,  I  may  remind  the
reader  how  frequently  the  emergence  of  telepathic  percipience  seems  to
be  deferred  until  a  season  of  solitary  recueillement  (Vol.  I.,  p.   201).

I  4.  The  following  are  tactile  cases,

(626)  From  Mr.  W.  B.  Clegram,  Saul  Lodge,  Stonehouse,  Gloucester-
shire. "January  15th,  1884.

"  I  well  remember  a  singular  circumstance  I  have  often  heard  my
father  (one  of  the  early  civil  engineers  of  this  country)  relate,  which
occurred  to  himself.  He  was  a  man  of  very  strong  mind,  and  more  free
from  fancies  and  superstitions  than  most  people.  At  the  time  of  the
occurrence  he  was  about  30  years  of  age.

"  He  was  in  the  habit  of  lying  with  his  right  hand  extended  out  of  bed,
and  one  morning,  about  5  o'clock,  when  wide  awake,  he  felt  a  firm  hand
grasp  his,  so  much  like  the  grasp  of  his  father's  hand  that  he  immediately
told  my  mother  'that  his  father  had  taken  his  hand  as  he  usually  did
when  saying  "  good-bye." '  His  father  died  at  that  time  that  morning,
somewhat  suddenly.  My  father  did  not  know  he  was  ill.  His  father
died  near  Sunderland ;  my  father  at  that  time  was  living  in  Sussex.

"W.  B.  Clegram."

Mr.  Clegram  mentioned  in  conversation  that  his  grandfather  had  a
particularly  firm  and  strong  clasp  of  the  hand,  which  was  also  a  charac-
teristic of  his  father,  the  percipient.  The  latter  was  a  strong,  practical
man,  as  far  removed  as  possible  from  superstition.  The  incident  made  a
deep  and  lasting  impression  upon  him.

(627)  From  Lady  Belcher,  25,  Cumberland  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,
N.W.  "April,  1884.

"  During  the  great  French  war,  when  Napoleon  I.  was  overrunning


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  575

Holland,  and  after  the  unfortunate  Walcheren  expedition,  our  fleet  was
ordered  to  the  Scheldt,  I  believe  in  the  severe  winter  of  1813.  The
sailo  rs  and  marines  from  the  various  ships  were  landed  in  parties  to  man
and  defend  the  dykes.  So  severe  was  the  cold  that  long  wooden  sheds
were  erected,  and  large  fires  kept  up  for  the  watch  parties.  All  the
officers  in  turn  landed  to  keep  the  men  to  their  posts.

"  On  one  night  when  my  father.  Captain  Peter  Heywood,  landed  with
his  men  from  the  '  Montague,'  the  line  of  battle  ship  he  commanded,  and
the  watch  had  been  set,  the  officers  stretched  themselves  down  on  some
mattresses,  the  first  lieutenant  near  him,  then  the  Master  of  Marines.  All
was  quiet,  when  the  last  mentioned  officer  cried  out  that  some  one  had
laid  a  cold  hand  on  his  cheek !  Silence  was  ordered.  Again  in  a  few
minutes  he  made  the  same  complaint  and  challenged  the  lieutenant,  who
peremptorily  ordered  silence.  A  third  time  he  made  the  same  outcry,
jumped  up  and  rushed  from  the  spot  in  terror.  The  whole  party  were
thoroughly  roused,  and  my  father  considered  the  circumstance  so
peculiar  that  he  noted  it  with  the  date  and  the  precise  hour  at  which  it
had  occurred.

'*  Weeks  after,  when  the  despatches  and  letters  arrived  from  England,
the  Master  of  Marines  received  the  news  of  his  father's  death  and  the
hour  of  his  departure,  which  tallied  exactly  with  the  note  which  Captain
Heywood  had  made.  Up  to  the  period  of  my  dear  father's  death  I  have
heard  him  mention  the  fact,  but  never  reasoned  on  it.  He  possessed  a
calm  judgment  and  a  very  religious  mind.  u  Dj^jja  Belcher  "

We  learn  from  the  Admiralty  that  Captain  Peter  Heywood  was  in
command  of  the  "Montague"  from  July,  1813,  to  March,  1814  ;  also  that
there  is  no  such  officer  as  "  Master  of  Marines,"  but  that  the  Masters  (now
styled  Stafi'-Commissioners  or  Navigating  Lieutenants)  were  George  Dunn
and  J.  Sanford.

[This  case  is  very  remote ;  and  even  if  correct  in  the  central  fact,
cannot  be  relied  on  in  details — e.g.,  as  to  the  absolute  exactitude  of  the
coincidence,  and  as  to  the  three  occurrences  of  the  sensation,  the  favourite
legendary  number  (p.  229,  note).]

(628)  From  Mrs.  Spenser,  36,  Portland  Street,  Southport,  a  member
of  the  Society  of  Friends.  September  1st,  1871.

"  I  formerly  had  two  aunts.  One,  my  aunt  De  Mierre,  residing  at
Putney,  had  been  confined  three  weeks.  My  aunt,  Mrs.  Williams  [who
lived  in  London],  being  an  invalid,  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  a  warm  bath
at  night.  When  her  maid  had  placed  her  in  it,  she  retired,  until  the  time
appointed  for  leaving  her  had  expired ;  but  one  night,  soon  after  she  had
left,  she  was  much  alarmed  by  sounds  of  great  distress  from  her  mistress,
which  led  her  hastily  to  ring  for  assistance  and  summon  her  master,  for
her  mistress's  weeping  and  agitation  were  uncontrollable.  As  soon  as  her
husband  entered  the  room,  Mrs.  Williams  exclaimed,  '  Susan  is  dead.  She
has  been  to  take  leave  of  me.  Her  kiss  was  like  a  waft  of  cold  air  upon
my  cheek.'  Her  husband  did  his  best  to  allay  her  agitation,  telling  her
she  had  fallen  asleep  in  the  bath  and  dreamt  it.  He  also  told  her  that  he
had,  that  afternoon,  seen  one  of  her  brothers  who  had  told  him  that  her
sister  was  so  remarkably  well  that  her  husband  was  going  to  the  play  that


576  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

night,  with  other  members  of  her  family.     But  nothing  soothed  her  until
he  promised  to  send  to  Putney  the  next  morning  to  inquire.

"  The  groom  received  orders  to  leave  by  6  o'clock,  so  as  to  bring  the
answer  back  by  8  o'clock.  When  the  groom  arrived  at  the  house  the
servant  said,  '  My  mistress  is  dead.  She  was  taken  suddenly  ill  while
sitting  up,  and  was  dead  before  my  master  got  home.  She  died  at  half-
past  10  o'clock' — the  exact  time  that  her  sister  was  thrown  into  such
distress  by  her  appearing  to  take  leave  of  her.  I  remember  the  occurrence
well.  "Lucy  Spenser."

Mrs.  Spenser  writes  on  March  18,  1886  :  "  I  think  my  aunt  died  about
1804.  I  am  the  only  one  living  who  heard  the  fact  related  at  the  time;
and  often,  in  after  years,  without  any  variation."  And  later,  "  I  remember
with  unclouded  clearness  the  particulars  respecting  my  aunt's  death — the
first  in  the  family  that  I  knew  of  and  cared  about.  It  was  a  great  event
in  the  family,  and  the  impression  made  on  my  mind  was  indelible."  We
have  failed  to  discover  the  exact  date  of  the  death  :  Mrs.  de  Mierre  does
not  seem  to  have  been  buried  at  Putney.  In  conversation  Mrs.  Spenser
stated  that  she  thinks  that  there  was  an  appearance,  as  well  as  the  sensa-
tion of  the  kiss.

[The  narrator,  who  wrote  the  above  15  years  ago,  shows  even  now  no
sign  of  impaired  memory  ;  but  the  case  is  again  far  too  remote  for  details
to  be  trusted.]

(629)  From  the  Rev.  George  Brett,  The  College,  Weston-super-Mare,
who  heard  the  account  from  the  percipient,  a  very  near  relative  of  his  own.

"January  26th,  1885.

"  About  40  or  45  years  ago,  a  Miss  Sophia  Wallace  was  engaged  to  a
Mr.  Wilson.  They  were  much  attached  to  each  other,  and  he  seems  to
have  been  a  man  whose  mental  constitution  was  of  a  kind  to  make  him
capable  of  exerting  a  very  real  influence  upon  those  among  whom  he  was
known.  He  died  of  consumption  before  the  time  proposed  for  their
marriage ;  naturally,  his  fiancee  was  very  anxious,  and  much  saddened
when  it  became  evident  that  he  would  not  live.  On  the  evening  of  his
death  she  was  passing  along  a  darkened  passage  in  a  house  where  she  was
staying,  not  more  than  2  or  3  miles  (perhaps  less  than  2)  from  the
house  of  Mr.  Wilson,  when  she  felt  a  cold  hand  clasp  hers.  Upon
comparison  of  time  afterwards,  she  found  this  had  occurred  at  the  time  of
Mr.  Wilson's  death.  "  Geo.  Brett."

[The  anxiety  here,  of  course,  allows  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  ex-
perience was  purely  subjective  (Vol.  I.,  p.  509).]

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  which  suggests  the  same
sympathy  of  physical  condition  as  we  have  encountered  in  certain
hypnotic  cases  (see  above,  pp.  330-1),  where  the  transference  is  from  the
"  subject "  to  the  operator.  The  exceptional  rapport  (established
or  increased  by  a  course  of  hypnotism)  which  existed  between  the
two  persons  concerned  has  been  mentioned  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  316,  and
must  be  borne   in  mind  in  the  judging  of  the  present  incident,

(630)  From  Mr.  F.  Corder,  46,  Charlwood  Street,  S.W.


VI.]  AUDITORY  AND  TACTILE  CASES.  577

"December,  1882.

"On  July  8,  1882,  my  wife  went  to  London  to  have  an  operation
(which  we  both  believed  to  be  a  slight  one)  performed  on  her  eyes  by  the
late  Mr.  Oritchett.  The  appointment  was  for  1.30  ;  and,  knowing  from
long  previous  experience  the  close  sympathy  of  our  minds,  about  that  time
I,  at  Brighton,  got  rather  fidgety,  and  was  much  relieved — and  perhaps  a
little  surprised  and  disappointed — at  not  feeling  any  decided  sensation
which  I  could  construe  as  sympathetic.  Taking  it  therefore  for  granted
that  all  was  well,  I  went  out  at  2.45  to  conduct  my  concert  at  the
Aquarium,  expecting  to  find  there  a  telegram,  as  had  been  arranged,  to
say  that  all  was  well.  On  my  way  I  stopped,  as  usual,  to  compare  my
watch  with  the  big  clock  outside  Lawsons'  the  clockmakers.  At  that
instant  I  felt  my  eyes  flooded  with  water,  just  as  when  a  chill  wind  gives
one  a  sudden  cold  in  the  eyes,  though  it  was  a  hot,  still  summer's  day.
The  afiection  was  so  unusual  and  startling  that  my  attention  could  not
but  be  strongly  directed  to  it ;  yet,  the  time  being  then  1 1  minutes  to
3,  I  was  sure  it  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  my  wife's  operation,  and,
as  it  continued  for  some  little  time,  thought  I  must  have  taken  cold.
However,  it  passed  off,  and  the  concert  immediately  afterwards  put  it  out
of  my  mind.

"  At  4.0  I  received  a  telegram  from  my  wife  '  All  well  over.  A  great
success,'  and  this  quite  took  away  all  anxiety.  But  on  going  to  town  in
the  evening,  I  found  her  in  a  terrible  state  of  nervous  prostration ;  and  it
appeared  that  the  operation,  though  marvellously  successful,  had  been  of
a  very  severe  character.  Quite  accidentally  it  came  out  that  it  was  not
till  2.30  that  Mrs.  Corder  entered  the  operating-room,  and  that  the
operation  commenced,  after  the  due  administration  of  an  anaesthetic,  at
about  10  minutes  to  3,  as  near  as  we  could  calculate.

"F.    CORDEE."

[If  telepathy  is  a  reality,  there  seems  at  any  rate  a  fair  probability
that  this  incident  was  telepathic.  But  it  is  no  doubt  possible  to  suppose
that  the  occupation  of  Mr.  Corder's  thoughts  with  his  wife's  condition  had
induced  a  sympathetic  liability  to  the  peculiar  affection  recorded,  and  that
the  reason  why  it  came  to  a  head  at  that  particular  time  was  simply  the
change  of  physical  condition  involved  in  going  out  into  the  open  air.  It
will  be  observed,  however,  that  the  day  was  hot,  which  rather  tells  against
this  hypothesis.]


VOL.    II.  2    p


CHAP,


CHAPTER  VII.

CASES  AFFECTING  MORE  THAN  ONE  OF  THE  PERCIPIENT'S  SENSES.

This  chapter   contains  some   further   cases  in  which   the  senses  of
sight  and  hearing  were  both  affected.

(631)  From  the  Story  of  my  Life,  by  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor,
Vol.  II.,  pp.  32-33.

"  This  determination  [to  live  unmarried]  was  the  result  of  a  very
curious  and  strange  incident  that  befell  me  during  one  of  my  marches  to
Hyderabad.  I  have  never  forgotten  it,  and  it  returns  to  this  day  to  my
memory  with  a  strangely  vivid  effect  that  I  can  neither  repel  nor  explain.
I  purposely  withhold  the  date  of  the  year.  In  my  very  early  life,  I  had
been  deeply  and  devotedly  attached  to  one  in  England,  and  only
relinquished  the  hope  of  some  day  winning  her  when  the  terrible  order
came  out  that  no  furlough  to  Europe  would  be  granted.  One  evening  I
was  at  the  village  of  Dewas  Kudea,  after  a  very  long  afternoon  and
evening  march  from  Muktul,  and  I  lay  down  very  weary  ;  but  the  barking
of  village  dogs,  and  the  baying  of  jackals,  and  over-fatigue  and  heat,
prevented  sleep,  and  I  was  wide  awake  and  restless.  Suddenly,  for  my
tent  door  was  wide  open,  I  saw  the  face  and  figure  so  familiar  to  me,  but
looking  older,  and  with  a  sad  and  troubled  expression ;  the  dress  was
white,  and  seemed  covered  with  a  profusion  of  lace,  and  glistened  in  the
bright  moonlight.  The  arms  were  stretched  out,  and  a  low  plaintive  cry
of  '  Do  not  let  me  go  ;  do  not  let  me  go  ! '  reached  me.  I  sprang  forward,
but  the  figure  receded,  growing  fainter  and  fainter  till  I  could  see  it  no
longer,  but  the  low  sad  tones  still  sounded.  I  had  run  barefooted  across
the  open  space,  where  my  tents  were  pitched,  very  much  to  the  astonish-
ment of  the  sentry  on  guard,  but  I  returned  to  my  tent  without  speaking
to  him.

"  I  wrote  to  my  father,  I  wished  to  know  whether  there  was  any  hope
for  me.  He  wrote  back  to  me  these  words  :  '  Too  late,  my  dear  son — on
the  very  day  of  the  vision  you  describe  to  me,  A.  was  married.' "

Miss  Meadows  Taylor,  the  editor  of  the  book  from  which  this  passage
is  quoted,  writes  to  us  : —

"  6,  Phillimore  Terrace,  Kensington,  W.

"December  5th,  1883.
"  I  have  received  your  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  vision  mentioned  in


VII.]      CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      579

my  father's,  Colonel  Meadows  Taylor's,  '  Life.'  I  have  heard  him  mention
it  very  often,  and  he  always  related  the  incident  precisely  in  the  same
manner,  and  exactly  as  it  is  in  the  book.  I  can  throw  no  further  light
upon  it ;  nor  can  I  add  any  further  particulars.  The  lady  is  dead,  and  I
am  not  aware  that  she  ever  knew  of  the  circumstance.

"  Alice  Meadows  Taylor."

[We  have  discovered  a  certain  amount  of  inaccuracy  in  another  narrative
told  in  the  same  book;  otherwise  the  present  one  would  not  have  been
relegated  to  the  Supplement.  Miss  Meadows  Taylor's  remarks  show,  how-
ever, that  the  experience  was  distinctly  imprinted  on  her  father's  memory.
The  detail  as  to  the  lace,  it  will  be  observed,  is  of  a  sort  very  likely  to  have
been  "  read  back  "  into  the  vision  after  the  news  arrived  which  would  seem
to  make  it  appropriate.]

(632)  From  the  Rev.  J.  Hotham  (Congregational  Minister),  Port  Elliot,
South  Australia,  who  told  us  (in  1884)  that  the  account  was  given  to  him
by  some  friends,  Mrs.  Leaworthy  and  her  daughters,  and  was  written  out
by  him  the  same  evening  "  in  nearly  the  same  language  in  which  it  was
given,  and  submitted  to  Mrs.  Leaworthy,  who  corrected  it."  It  may  there-
foi-e  be  taken  as  her  account.  Mr.  Hotham  has  since  died,  and  his  son
says  that  no  more  information  can  be  obtained.

The  account  first  describes  the  rescue,  in  1841,  of  the  crew  of  the
French  ship,  "  L'Orient,"  oif  the  coast  of  Devon,  mainly  by  the  exertions
of  Mr.  Leaworthy.

"  The  captain,  during  his  stay  in  the  neighbourhood,  was  a  constant
visitor  at  our  house,  and  became  quite  a  favourite.  After  he  had  recovered
from  his  cold  and  wetting,  he  told  us  that  he  was  sure  something  serious
had  happened  at  home.  When  asked  why  he  thought  so,  he  said  that
just  before  the  storm  came  on,  he- had  seen  his  wife  standing  close  beside
him,  and  that  she  had  said  :  '  Do  not  grieve  for  me.'  Well,  we  all  tried
to  put  this  melancholy  idea  out  of  his  head.  We  told  him  he  was  low-
spirited  at  the  loss  of  his  ship,  and  that  nothing  but  imagination  had
made  him  fancy  this  thing.

"  Of  course  the  captain  wrote  directly  home,  giving  an  account  of  the
loss  of  his  ship  and  cargo,  and  anxiously  awaited  a  reply.  He  was
detained  some  weeks  among  us,  and  during  that  time  we  became  very
intimate.  In  due  time  he  received  a  letter  informing  him  that  his  wife
had  been  confined,  and  mother  and  child  were  both  doing  well.  We  then
joked  him  about  his  fears,  and  congratulated  him  upon  the  good  news  he
had  received.  During  the  weeks  he  further  remained  with  us,  we  set  to
and  made  up  a  box  of  presents — small  things,  »fec.,  for  the  baby.  After
completing  all  his  arrangements,  he  bid  us  good-bye,  and  started  for  home.
A  letter  from  him,  however,  informed  us  that  the  presentiment  was  too
truly  fulfilled.  His  wife  died  on  that  night ;  but  when  his  friends
received  his  letter  mournfully  detailing  the  loss  of  his  vessel,  they  were
afraid  to  send  him  word  about  the  loss  of  his  wife,  and  so  replied  as  we
have  said."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hotham  added : —

"  Mrs.  Leaworthy,  senior,  has  recently  died.  Her  daughters  are  still
living — one,  Mrs.  Lindsay,  only  a  short  distance  from  me  ;  and  the  other,

VOL.  II.  2  p  2


580  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

who  married  Mr.  John  Hindmarsh,  only  son  of  our  first  Colonial  Governor,
has  removed  to  New  Zealand.

"In  answer  to  your  questions — (1)  The  account  was  given  me  at  the
house  of  Mr.  Jno.  Hindmarsh,  near  Port  Elliot,  South  Australia.  (2)
Yes.  By  '  died  on  that  night '  I  mean  on  the  night  he  saw  the  apparition
— the  night  the  storm  began.  "  Jno.  Hotham."

(633)  From  the  late  General  Craigie,  who  told  us  (March  11,  1883)

that  he  had  heard  the  facts  from  Colonel  and  Mrs. ,  the  parents  of  the

percipient.

General    Craigie   began    by    describing    how,     in     1868,     he    became

acquainted  with  Colonel and  his  family,  resident  at  Mussoorie,  and

at  their  house  saw  a  good  deal  of  some  relatives  of  his  own,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  B.

"The  year  1868  had  come  to  a  close.  With  the  termination  of  the
season,  of  course  all  European  visitors  had  returned  to  their  homes  in  the
plains.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  relief,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to
Cawnpore,  and  from  that  time  I  lost  sight  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.,  whom
I  left  behind  at  Meerut.  I  cannot,  without  referring  to  friends  at  a
distance,  give  the  dates  of  what  follows  ;  but  I  believe  that  it  was  in
the  beginning  of  1869  that  society  was  shocked  by  hearing  that  Mr.  B.
had  [in  consequence  of  domestic  unhappiness  due  to  his  own  conduct]  shot
himself.     He  shot  himself  at  Meerut,  at  about  8  o'clock  in  the  evening.

"  On  that  night  Colonel 's  wife  and  daughter  were  together  in  a

bedroom  at  10  p.m.  The  former  had  already  got  into  bed  ;  the  latter
was  brushing  out  her  hair  by  her  cheval-glass,  and  in  her  night  attire.
Suddenly  the  girl  exclaimed  :  '  Oh,  mamma,  there's  Mr.  B  ! '  '  "Where  1 '
cried  the  scandalised  mother,  clutching  and  pulling  up  the  bed-clothes.  ^
'  There,  mamma  !  Do  you  not  see  him  1  There — he  says  :  "  Good-bye,
Sissy — good-bye  !  "  There,  now  he's  going — now  he's  gone  ! '  An  immediate
alarm  was  given  ;  the  room,  the  house,  the  garden  were  carefully  searched,
without  obtaining  any  satisfactory   clue  to  so  extraordinary  a   scene  in

a  lady's    bedchamber.     Colonel closely    questioned    the    girl,    who

not  only  positively  adhered  to  her  previous  declarations,  but  now  detailed
the  clothes  worn  by  Mr.  B.  as  he  appeared  to  her.

"  Two  days  afterwards,  the  post,  and  newspapers,  brought  to  Mussoorie
the  news  of  the  suicide  of  Mr.  B.  Colonel and  his  wife  did  not  com-
municate the  fact  to  their  daughter  for  some  days,  as  they  thought
that  since  the  night  when  she  seemed  to  have  seen  Mr.  B.  she  had  been
strangely  depressed.  When  the  fact  was  gently  broken  to  her,  it  had  such
an  efiect  that  never  from  that  day  was  any  allusion  ever  made  to  the
occurrence.                                                           "  H.  C.  Craigie,

"  Major-General."

We  find  from  the  East  India  Company's  Register  that  Lieut.  B.'s
death  took  place  on  Nov.  6,  1868,  at  Meerut.

[Colonel is  dead.     We  have  applied  to  his  widow  for  her  recol-

1  This  is  almost  certainly  an  illustration  of  that  unfortunate  tendency  to  give
spurious  vividness  to  a  scene,  by  virhich  second-hand  evidence  is  so  apt  to  be  disfigured.
But  it  is  often  rather  in  adding  details  than  in  altering  essential  points  that  this
dramatising  tendency  finds  its  chance ;  and  thus  the  distrust  which  it  excites,  though
legitimate,  may  easily  extend  too  far.


VII.]      C^^^.S'  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      581

lections  of  the  incident,  but  have  not  as  yet  received  a  reply.     We  have
ascertained  that  Colonel was  on  furlough  in  1868.]

(634)  Dr.  Spencer  T.  Hall,  a  well-known  writer  on  forestry,  &c.,  in
his  Days  in  Derbyshire  (1863),  pp.  85-6,  relates  as  follows  : —

"  Philip  and  his  first  wife,  Martha,  who  was  a  cousin  of  mine,  having
no  children  of  their  own,  adopted  the  little  daughter  of  a  young  woman,
who  went  to  live  at  Derby.  The  child  called  them  father  and  mother  as
soon  as  she  could  speak,  not  remembering  her  own  parents,  not  even  her
mother.  While  yet  very  young,  she  one  day  began  to  cry  out  that  there
was  a  young  woman  looking  at  her,  and  wanting  to  come  to  her,  and,
according  to  her  description  of  the  person,  it  must  have  been  her  mother.
As  no  one  else  saw  the  apparition,  and  the  child  continued  for  more  than
half  an  hour  to  be  very  excited,  Philip  took  her  out  of  the  house  to  that  of
a  neighbour ;  but  the  apparition  kept  them  company,  talking  by  the  way.
They  then  went  to  another  house,  where  it  accompanied  them  still,  and
seemed  as  though  it  wanted  to  embrace  the  child  :  but  at  last  vanished  in
the  direction  of  Derby — as  the  little  girl,  now  a  young  woman,  describes  it
— in  a  flash  of  fire.

"  Derby  is  about  14  miles  distant  from  Holloway,  and  as  in  that  day
there  was  neither  railway  nor  telegraph,  communication  between  them
was  much  slower  than  at  present.  As  soon,  however,  as  it  was  possible
for  intelligence  to  come,  the  news  arrived  that  the  poor  child's  mother  had
been  burnt  to  death ;  that  it  happened  about  the  time  when  it  saw  her
apparition ;  and,  in  short,  that  she  was  sorrowing  and  crying  to  be  taken
to  the  child  during  the  whole  of  the  time  between  being  burnt  and  her
expiration.

"  This  is  no  '  idle  ghost  story,'  but  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  to  which
not  only  Philip,  but  all  his  old  neighbours  can  testify  ;  and  the  young
woman  has  not  only  related  it  more  than  once  to  me,  but  she  told  it  in
the  same  artless  and  earnest  manner  to  my  friend,  the  late  Dr.  Samuel
Brown,  of  Edinburgh,  who  once  called  at  the  cottage  with  me,  repeating  it
still  more  clearly  to  Messrs.  Fowler  and  Wells,  on  our  recent  visit."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  the  narrator  (since  deceased)  wrote  to  us  : —
"  1,  Leopold  Grove,  Blackpool.

"  November  14th,  1884.

"It  is  now  a  generation  since  I  resided  in  Derby,  and  most  of  those
known  to  me  there  are  now  dead  or  the  addresses  forgotten.  Philip
Spencer,  my  cousin,  died  long  ago,  and  his  second  wife  too.  I  have
forgotten  the  young  woman's  name,  but  she  may  be  married,  or  have  left
the  neighbourhood.  My  poor  dear  friend.  Dr.  Samuel  Brown,  is  dead.
If  anybody  is  living  at  Holloway  likely  to  remember  all  the  particulars  of
the  case  you  mention,  my  cousin,  Mrs.  Sarah  Buckle,  may,  but  I  cannot
tell.  [We  wrote ;  but  the  lady  appears  to  have  left  the  place,  and  our
letter  was  returned.]  You  may,  however,  refer  to  me  as  to  the  accuracy
of  the  narrative  in  my  book.  Anything  more  carefully  or  clearly  attested
than  what  is  written  I  never  heard,  and  I  could  have  had  no  motive  for
inaccuracy.  u  Spencer  T.  Hall."

[One  may  surmise  that  this  was  very  possibly  a  case  of  telepathic
hallucination,  without  placing  reliance  on  the  details.]


582  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

(635)  From  Mrs.  Walsh,  of  The  Priory,  Lincoln.  The  percipient  re-
fuses a  first-hand  and  signed  account;  she  has  risen  in  life,  and  is  very-
sensitive  as  to  anything  which  may  recall  her  former  dependent  position.
The  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  who  procured  the  narrative  for  us,  tells  us  that  he
first  heard  it  in  the  lifetime  of  Mr.  Walsh,  who  "  was  by  no  means  a
credulous  man,  but  a  man  of  the  world."

"  February  18th,  1884.

"  Some  time  in  the  year  1862  (I  think)  I  was  living  with  my  husband
and  family  of  little  children,  accompanied  by  our  English  nurse,  in  apart-
ments in  the  city  of  Brussels.  The  house  we  occupied  was  a  large  one,
and  we  rented  the  drawing-room  and  the  floor  above.  The  ground  floor
was  occupied  by  the  owner  of  the  house,  a  Belgian,  and  his  wife  and  little
children.  We  had  no  intercourse  with  this  family ;  we  had  our  own
kitchen  on  the  drawing-room  floor,  and  the  upper  floor  consisted  of  nursery,
with  nursery  bedroom  opening  from  it.  We  had  a  Flemish  general  ser-
vant, who  went  home  about  9  every  night.  Our  English  nurse  was  a
very  clever  girl,  about  22  or  23  years  of  age.  She  read  a  good  deal,
and  taught  herself  French.  She  was  very  matter-of-fact,  and  handy  and
useful  in  every  way.  She  had  been  with  me  5  or  6  years.  Her  parents
were  labouring  people  in  the  neighbourhood  of  London,  and  by  reading
and  culture  she  had  raised  herself  a  good  deal  out  of  their  sphere.  We
had  been  about  12  months  away  from  England,  when  the  circumstance
I  write  of  happened.  M.'s  mother,  after  having  a  large  family — the
youngest  being  about  9  or  10 — did  not  tell  M.,  nor  did  any  of  the  family,
that  she  was  again  expecting  an  addition.  The  wife  of  our  landlord  had
been  confined  two  days,  so  was  in  her  own  room,  on  the  ground  floor  of
the  house  we  lived  in.

"One  night  my  husband  and  myself  had  been  out  to  dinner.  On
returning,  a  little  after  10  o'clock,  my  husband  was  amazed  to  find  our
apartments  in  darkness,  and  he  ran  up  to  the  nursery  floor  to  complain  to
M.  of  her  inattention ;  as  the  other  servant  had  gone  home  it  was  her
place  to  light  our  room.  My  husband  found  the  nursery  lighted,  but
empty,  and  going  towards  the  children's  room  he  met  M.  coming  out.  She
began,  '  Oh  !  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you ;  I  have  been  so  frightened  that  I
was  obliged  to  sit  on  Willie's  bed  till  you  carae  in.'  I  was  in  the  room  by
this  time,  and  inquiring  into  the  cause  of  fear.  M.  said,  'After  I  put  the
children  to  bed  I  sat  down  in  the  nursery  to  my  work,  when  I  heard  some-
one coming  up  the  stairs.  I  went  to  the  door,  and  on  the  first  landing  by
your  room,  I  saw,  as  I  thought,  Madame  N.  carrying  something  heavy.
I  felt  that  she  ought  not  to  be  out  of  her  bed,  and  I  called  to  her  in
French  :  "  Je  viendrai  vous  aider,"  running  down  the  stairs  to  where  I
supposed  she  was.  When  I  got  there  it  gave  me  a  queer  sensation  to  find
no  one.  However,  I  said  to  myself,  it  was  a  shadow,  and  made  myself  go
back  to  my  work.  I  had  scarcely  seated  myself  when  a  voice  called  :
"  May,  May,  May  "  (the  name  my  children  called  her).  I  got  up,  went  to
the  door,  and  seeing  someone,  ran  halfway  down  the  stairs  to  meet  the
woman,  when  a  terrible  dread  came  upon  me,  and  I  rushed  back  to  the
nursery  and  sat  on  one  of  the  little  beds,  feeling  that  being  with  even  a
sleeping  child  was  better  than  being  alone.'  My  husband  laughed  at  her,
told  her  the  vin  ordinaire  was  too  strong  ;  that  she  had  been  dreaming,
&c.     We  none  of  us  thought  much   of  it,  till  the  first  post  from  England


VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.       583

brought  M.  a  letter  to  say  her  mother  had  been  confined,  and  she  and  the
child  had  died  within  an  hour  after.  Then  we  all  felt  convinced  that  M.'s
mother  had  been  able  to  come  and  see  her  daughter.^

"  Harriet  Walsh."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Walsh  says  : —

"  At  the  time,  I  am  sure  she  did  not  connect  the  appearance  with  her
own  mother,  nor  did  she  recognise  the  voice.  All  she  told  us  was  that
she  thought  it  was  Madame  Nyo.  May's  mother  was  very  much  the  same
sort  of  person  in  appearance  as  Madame  Nyo,^  without  there  being  any
likeness  ;  they  were  about  the  same  age,  figure,  and  position  in  life.  We
only  connected  May's  story  with  her  night  of  terror,  when  she  received  the
news  from  England."

[We  cannot  now  ascertain  the  exact  times  of  the  apparition  and  of
the  death  ;  but  they  probably  occurred  within  a  few  hours  of  each  other.
If,  as  seems  nearly  certain,  the  call  of  the  Christian  name,  as  well  as  the
visual  experience,  was  a  hallucination,  that  point  is  decidedly  in  favour  of
the  telepathic  explanation  of  the  case.]

(636)  From  Mr.  Louis  Lyons,  3,  Bouverie  Square,  Folkestone.

"  1882.
"  Madame  Laramea  Esperon,  of  Nantes,  since  dead,  told  me  the
following  some  16  or  1 7  years  ago.  She  had  an  only  son,  fond  of  fishing,
which  recreation  he  indulged  in  during  the  forenoon,  and  had  been  for
some  years  most  punctual  to  be  home  for  dinner  at  12  o'clock.  One  day
he  did  not  make  his  appearance  at  the  usual  hour.  His  mother  opened
the  window  to  look  out  for  him,  when  she  heard  him  call  her  several  times,
and  on  turning  round  she  saw  her  son  coming  through  the  wall,  and
making  his  exit  through  the  opposite  wall.^  An  hour  or  so  afterwards,  a
message  was  brought  to  her,  that  her  son  fell  over  the  pier  an  hour  ago,
and  was  drowned.  Madame  Esperon  was  a  most  worthy  woman,  and  told
me  her  story  bathed  in  tears.  A  mother  weeping  for  her  only  son  tells
no  lies."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Lyons  adds  : —

"  Madame  Esperon  was  in  mourning  for  her  son  when  she  told  me  the
sad  story.  I  was  very  intimate  with  her,  and  my  daughter,  who  went
with  me  to  Nantes,  was  a  frequent  visitor  at  her  house."

(637)  From  Mr.  John  Williams,  99,  Wellington  Road,  Dudley.

"April  7,  1884.
"On  December  3rd,  1849,  my  mother  died,  between  the  hours  of
9  and  10  p.m.  Her  sister,  living  from  3  to  4  miles  away,  saw  her  on  the
top  of  the  staircase,  she  having  just  gone  to  bed,  at  the  same  time  that
mother  expired.  Such  was  the  effect,  that  she  sent  a  messenger  next
morning  to  see  if  her  sister  was  really  dead."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Williams  states  that  his  mother  died  at
The  Hays,  Old  Swinford,  Worcestershire.     His  aunt  (Sarah  Piper,  formerly

1  See  p.  48,  note.

2  As  to  the  mis-recognition,  compare  cases  170,  171,  and  676.

3  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  432  (note)  and  573.


584  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

of  JSTetherton,  Dudley)  is  now  deceased.  He  heard  of  her  experience
from  his  sister,  Mrs.  Raybould,  of  Stourbridge  (aged  14  at  the  time),  who,
he  says,  "  well  remembers  aunt  coming  in  the  afternoon,  after  the  return
of  the  messenger,  and  telling  father  and  her  as  to  seeing  her  sister  at  the
top  of  the  staircase.  I  was  not  at  home  when  she  (aunt)  called,  so  I  heard  it
from  my  sister,  or  father,  when  I  got  home  the  same  evening  of  aunt's
visit.  My  sister  well  remembers  what  her  aunt  said,  and  to-day
(February  16,  1886)  she  told  me  that  aunt  said,  mother  called  her  by
name  (Sarah)  3  times  -^  so  she  not  only  saw,  but  heard  her.

"J.  W."

The  Register  of  Deaths  confirms  Dec.  3,  1849,  as  the  date.

Mrs.  Raybould  writes,  on  April  7,  1886  : —

"  I  remember  well  the  night  of  December  3,  1849,  it  being  the  night
of  my  dear  mother's  death,  which  happened  about  9.40  p.m.  On  the
following  day  my  aunt,  mother's  sister,  Sarah  Piper,  came  to  our  house  in
the  afternoon,  and  said  she  knew  that  my  mother  was  dead,  for  she  saw
her  at  the  top  of  the  stairs  in  her  bedroom,  and  heard  her  call  '  Sarah,'
3  times.  This,  from  the  time  she  stated  as  having  seen  and  heard  her,  was
as  near  the  time  mother  died  as  possible.

"Maey  Raybould."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Williams  says  that  his  aunt  knew
nothing  of  her  sister's  illness — puerperal  fever  after  a  premature  confine-
ment— "  so  could  not  be  expecting  her  death."

(638)  From  Mrs.  Say  Thomson,  47,  Albany  Villas,  Brighton.^

"February,  1886.

"  I  will  relate  the  incident  that  occurred  to  my  late  husband,  Colonel
Thomson,  as  I  was  with  him  at  Brussels  at  the  time.  Colonel  Thomson
was  with  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  at  Brussels,  and  his  brother,  the  Count
de  Flandres — and,  I  believe,  very  few  others  in  the  room.  He  was  writing
down  instructions  from  the  king  about  the  volunteers  that  Lord  Heaton
and  he  had  brought  over.  Someone  leant  over  him,  and  said,  'Your
brother  wants  you ' ;  he  answered,  '  Tell  him  I  am  now  engaged  with  the
king,  and  impossible  to  leave  him  ;  but  ask  him  to  wait.'  Being  very
much  engaged  writing  down  the  king's  directions,  he  said  he  half  looked
round,  and  saw  a  man  in  his  volunteer  uniform ;  he  hardly  gave  him  a
glance,  but  said  he  would  come  as  soon  as  he  could.  Directly  he  was
disengaged,  he  went  into  the  ante-room,  and  asked  the  many  he  knew
there  if  they  had  heard  anyone  asking  for  him,  as  he  heard  his  brother  had
arrived  in  Brussels.  Of  course  all  questions  were  asked,  privately,  and  on
parade,  but  all  wearing  his  uniform  denied  having  called  him.  More-
over, the  two  sentries  who  were  on  guard,  outside  the  room  the  king
was  in,  said  it  was  impossible  that  any  volunteer  had  passed  in  without
their  knowledge.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days  he  heard  of  his  brother's
death.

"  I   cannot  tell  you   day  and  date  of  Mr.   John  Sinclair  Thomson's

1  See  p.  229,  note.

2  A  very  incorrect  version  of  this  occurrence  was  given  in  No.  13  of  "  Volunteering,
Past  and  Present,"  by  "  Ancient,"  in  the  Volunteer  Service  Review,  July  1st,  1882.


VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.      585

death,  but  I  have  no  doubt  my  sister-in-law  can  supply  you  with  correct
information  on  that  point.  Colonel  Thomson  was  commanding  the  Tower
Hamlets  Rifle  Brigade,  consisting  of  three  corps  ;  but  at  Brussels  Lord
Heaton  and  he  took  over,  I  think,  at  least  800  volunteers  to  Belgium.
Colonel  Thomson  died  the  next  year,  June  8th,  1870.  He  was  at  Brussels
in  August  or  September  the  year  before.  I  never  heard  of  my  husband
seeing  or  hearing  anything  supernatural  ^  before.

"  W.  S.  Thomson."
In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Thomson  writes  on  March  7th,  1886  : —
"  The  hour  my  husband  heard  the  voice,  telling  him  his  brother  waited
for  him,  was  noon.  The  news  of  his  brother's  death  did  not  come  until
the  next  day.  But  whether  the  hours  of  hearing  the  voice  and  the  death
occurred  at  the  same  time  I  am  unable  to  say.  We  hardly  ever  spoke  of
it,  as  it  was  not  a  subject  Colonel  Thomson  cared  to  discuss."

We  learn  from  Miss  Kate  Thomson,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  John  S.
Thomson,  that  her  father  died  at  about  8  p.m.,  on  Saturday,  Sept.  11th,
1869,  at  Aitechuan  House,  Ardrishaig,  Argyleshire ;  and  we  have
verified  the  date  by  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Scotsman.

Mr.  Podmore  writes,  February  9th,  1886  : —

"  I  called  on  Mrs.  John  Sinclair  Thomson,  of  18,  Gloucester  Walk,
Campden  Hill,  W.,  on  the  9th  February,  and  heard  the  narrative,  as  here
given,  from  her.  Her  husband's  death  was  quite  unexpected, — the  illness
being  only  a  sudden  attack  of  gout ;  and  she  thinks  it  is  certain  that
Colonel  Thomson  did  not  even  know  that  his  brother  was  ill.  She  herself
did  not  see  Colonel  Thomson  in  the  interval  before  his  own  death  in  the
following  June  ;  but  shortly  after  that  event  she  heard,  for  the  first  time,
of  the  above  occurrence  from  a  Dr.  Walker,  of  Peterborough,  who  had
received  an  account  of  it  from  Colonel  Thomson  himself.  She  has  sub-
sequently heard  the  full  details  from  Mrs.  Say  Thomson."

[If  the  letter  announcing  the  death  really  arrived  at  Brussels,  from
Scotland,  on  the  day  following  Colonel  Thomson's  experience,  the  death
must  clearly  have  preceded  that  experience  by  more  than  12  hours.  But
Mrs.  Thomson  admits  that  she  has  no  distinct  recollection  of  the  interval
that  elapsed  before  the  arrival  of  the  letter,  and  indeed  spoke  of  it,  in  the
first  letter  in  which  she  mentioned  the  occurrence  to  us,  as  "  a  few  days  "  ;
and  though  her  son,  Mr.  J.  F.  Alison  Thomson,  of  Croxton  Lodge,
Clarendon  Street,  Leamington,  mentions  having  heard  from  his  father
that  the  letter  arrived  "on  the  following  morning  after  the  warning,"  he
adds  a  sentence  showing  that  he  conceives  this  to  be  tantamount  to  saying
that  the  days  of  the  death  and  of  his  father's  experience  were  the  same  ;
and  his  evidence,  therefore,  cannot  be  held  to  decide  the  point.]

(639)  From  Mr.  Williams,  Summerfield,  Rhyl.

"November  23,  1885.

"  About  46  years  ago  my  father  went  to  a  place  near  XJtica,  in  America,
leaving  my  mother  with  myself,  then  six  years  of  age,  a  younger  brother,
and  a  baby   sister  at  home  at  Bontuchel,  in  North  Wales.     In  his  corre-

1  See  p.  48,  note.


586  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap-

spondence  with  my  mother  he  described  the  country  to  which  he  had  gone,
and  intimated  his  purpose  to  return  home  and  sell  his  property  at  Bontu-
chel,  and  take  us  all  out  to  live  there.  We  all  slept  in  a  two-bedded  room,
with  windows  facing  each  other.  My  brother  and  I  were  together  in  one
of  the  beds,  asleep,  before  my  mother  came  to  bed  with  the  baby.  After
putting  the  lights  out  she  heard  a  noise  resembling  the  flapping  of  a  bird's
wing  against  the  windows.  It  was  a  moonlight  night.  She  got  up  and
looked  out  of  the  window,  but  seeing  nothing  returned  to  bed.  Immediately
after  this  she  saw  my  father  standing  in  the  room,  dressed  in  his  usual
clothes,  and  looking  at  her  and  at  the  child  lying  beside  her.  As  soon  as
she  caught  his  eye  he  turned  his  back  upon  them,  and  looked  at  us  as  we
lay  in  the  other  bed.  My  mother  called  him  by  his  name,  and  got  out  of
bed  to  go  to  him,  fully  believing  that  it  was  he,  but  he  instantly  vanished.
So  terrified  was  she  now  that  she  left  the  house  the  next  day,  and  went  to
her  parents,  who  lived  at  Ruthin,  taking  us  with  her.  About  six  weeks
after  this  removal,  a  letter  came  sealed  with  black,  written  by  a  friend  of
my  father's,  detailing  the  circumstances  of  his  illness,  of  his  death  and
burial,  and  specifying  the  time  of  his  demise.  My  mother  had  carefully
recorded  the  time  of  her  vision,  and  now  found  that,  allowing  for  difference
of  longitude,  it  corresponded  exactly  to  that  of  his  death.  I  remember  my
mother's  sudden  removal  from  Bontuchel  to  Ruthin,  and  heard  her
repeatedly  relate  the  particulars  here  given.  I  cannot  say  that  I  heard
her  relate  the  particulars  before  she  received  the  letter ;  but  I  remember
distinctly  that  she  said  she  gave  them  to  her  parents,  at  the  time  of  her
removal,  as  the  reason  why  she  came  to  them  so  suddenly.  My  brother  and
sister,  still  living,  can  corroborate  this  testimony.

"  W.  Williams."
[The  brother's  and  sister's  corroboration  has  not  been  received  in  time
for  insertion.]

The  following  is  the  only  instance  known  to  me  in  which
telepathy  seems  actually  to  have  aided  the  course  of  the  law.  The
story  is  remote,  but  we  have  the  contemporary  evidence  ;  and  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  a  coincidence  of  the  kind  alleged  took
place.

(640)  The  Buckingham,  Bedford,  and  Hertford  Chronicle  for  Nov.  1,
1828,  states  that  on  Saturday,  Oct.  25,  1828,  William  Edden,  market
gardener  (called  Noble  Edden),  was  found  dead  on  the  road  between
Aylesbury  and  Thame,  with  several  ribs  broken.  He  was  discovered  by
Mr.  Taylor,  miller,  who  was  returning  from  Aylesbury,  and  gave  the  alarm.
At  the  adjourned  inquest,  on  Nov.  5,  a  verdict  of  murder  was  returned
against  some  person  unknown.

The  Buckingham  Gazette  of  August  22,  1829,  gives  an  account  of  the
apprehension  of  a  man  named  Sewell,  who  had  stated  in  a  letter  to  his
father  that  he  knew  who  had  killed  Edden.  He  accused  a  man  named
Tyler,  and  both  were  tried  at  the  Aylesbury  Petty  Sessions,  August  22,
before  Lord  Nugent,  Sir  J.  D.  King,  R.  Browne,  Esq.,  and  others.  On
the  first  day  of  the  examination,  Mrs.  Edden,  wife  of  the  murdered  man,
gave  the  following  evidence  : — "  After  my  husband's  corpse  was  brought
home,  I  sent  to  Tyler,  for  some  reasons  I  had,  to  come  and  see  the  corpse.


VII.]     CASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND  HEARING.       587

I  sent  for  him  five  or  six  times.  I  had  some  particular  reason  for  sending
for  him  which  I  never  did  divulge.  ...  I  will  tell  my  reasons  if  you
gentlemen  ask  me,  in  the  face  of  Tyler,  even  if  my  life  should  be  in  danger
for  it.  When  I  was  ironing  a  shirt,  on  the  Saturday  night  my  husband
was  murdered,  something  came  over  me — something  rushed  over  me — and
I  thought  my  husband  came  by  me.  I  looked  up,  and  I  thought  I  heard
the  voice  of  my  husband  come  from  near  my  mahogany  table,  as  I  turned
from  my  ironing.  I  ran  out  and  said,  '  Oh,  dear  God  !  my  husband  is
murdered,  and  his  ribs  are  broken.'  I  told  this  to  several  of  my  neigh-
bours. Mrs.  Chester  was  the  first  to  whom  I  told  it.  I  mentioned  it  also
at  the  Saracen's  Head."

Sir  J.  D.  King  :  "  Have  you  any  objection  to  say  why  you  thought
your  husband  had  been  mui"dered  '?  "  "  No  !  I  thought  I  saw  my  husband's
apparition  and  the  man  that  had  done  it,  and  that  man  was  Tyler,  and
that  was  the  reason  I  sent  for  him.  .  .  .  When  my  neighbours  asked
me  what  was  the  matter  when  I  ran  out,  I  told  them  that  I  had  seen  my
husband's  apparition.  .  .  .  When  I  mentioned  it  to  Mrs.  Chester  I
said  :  '  My  husband  is  murdered,  and  his  ribs  are  broken  ;  I  have  seen  him
by  the  mahogany  table.'  I  did  not  tell  her  who  did  it.  Mrs.  Chester
answered,  I  was  always  frightened,  since  my  husband  had  been  stopped
on  the  road.  [The  deceased  Edden  had  once  before  been  waylaid,  but  was
then  too  powerful  for  his  assailants.]  In  consequence  of  what  I  saw,  I
went  in  search  of  my  husband,  until  I  was  taken  so  ill  I  could  go  no
further."

Lord  Nugent  :  "  What  made  you  think  your  husband's  ribs  were
broken  ?"  "  He  held  up  his  hand  like  this  "  (holds  up  her  arm),  "  and  I
saw  a  hammer,  or  something  like  a  hammer,  and  it  came  into  my  mind
that  his  ribs  were  broken."

Sewell  stated  that  the  murder  was  accomplished  by  means  of  a  hammer.
The  examination  was  continued  on  August  31  and  September  13;  and
finally  both  prisoners  were  discharged  for  want  of  sufficient  evidence.
Sewell  declared  that  he  had  only  been  a  looker-on,  and  his  accusations
against  Tyler  were  so  full  of  prevarications  that  they  were  not  held
sufficient  to  incriminate  him.  The  inquiry  was  again  resumed  on  February
11,  1830,  and  Sewell,  Tyler,  and  a  man  named  Gardner  were  committed
for  trial.

The  trial  (see  Buckingham  Gazette,  March  13,  1830,)  took  place  at  the
Buckingham  Lent  Assizes,  March  5,  1830,  before  Mr.  Baron  Yaughan,
and  a  Grand  Jury  ;  but  in  the  report  of  Mrs.  Edden's  evidence,  no  mention
is  made  of  the  vision.

Sewell  and  Tyler  were  found  guilty,  and  were  executed,  protesting  their
innocence,  on  March  8,  1830.

Miss  Browne,  writing  to  us  from  Farnham  Castle,  in  January,  1884,
gives  an  account  of  the  vision  which  substantially  accords  with  that  here
recorded,  adding : —

"  The  wife  persisted  in  her  account  of  the  vision  ;  consequently,  the
accused  was  taken  up,  and,  with  some  circumstantial  evidence  in  addition
to  the  woman's  story,  committed  for  trial  by  two  magistrates,  my  father
Colonel  Robert  Browne,  and  the  Rev.  Charles  Ackfield.  The  murderer
was  tried  and  convicted  at  the  Assizes,  and  hanged  at  Aylesbury.


588  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  It  may  be  added  that  Colonel  Browne  was  remarkably  free  from
superstition,  and  was  a  thorough  disbeliever  in  '  ghost  stories/  He  came
home,  and  said,  laughing,  '  We  have  had  a  ghost  called  in,  in  court  to-day.
We  shall  see  how  the  story  is  confirmed  ! '  "

The  following  narrative  may  be  compared  to  the  arrival  examples
in  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7.  But  if  we  found  a  difficulty,  in  any  case,  in
regarding  the  mere  fact  of  impending  arrival  as  the  occasioning  con-
dition of  a  telepathic  transference  (p.  96),  the  difficulty  is  intensi-
fied when  the  arrival  is  of  someone  with  whom  the  percipient  is
in  daily  association,  and  who  has  only  been  away  an  hour  or  two
on  ordinary  business.  I  think,  therefore,  that  the  chance  that  the
experience  here  described  was  purely  subjective  is  too  appreciable
to  allow  the  account  to  be  numbered  as  evidence.

A  letter  written  to  the  Spectator  'by  the  late  Rev.  W.  L.  Clay,  of
Rainhill  Vicarage,  under  date  Feb.  9,  1869.

"  On  a  Sunday  afternoon,  about  30  years  ago  (the  precise  date  I  cannot
recollect),  my  mother  and  eldest  sister,  then  about  8  years  old,  were
sitting  together  in  the  dining-room.  No  one  else  was  in  the  house  except
a  younger  child  and  his  nurse,  and  another  servant ;  all  the  rest  of  the
family  were  ...  at  church,  and  my  father,  John  Clay,  of  Preston,
was  at  the  gaol.  He  was  due  home  in  about  half  an-hour,  it  then  being
nearly  4  o'clock.  The  afternoon  was  very  wet,  but  very  still,  the  rain
pouring  in  torrents,  but  with  an  even,  steady  downpour.  While  sitting
thus  my  mother  heard  footsteps  approach,  and  presently  some  one  opened
and  passed  through  the  yard-door.  (This  yard-door  faced  on  the  road.
The  nearest  house  was  full  500  yards  distant,  and  any  one
going  to  the  front  door  would  have  to  pass  this  yard-door,  the  dining-
room  windows,  another  window,  and  then  turn  round  the  corner  of  the
house,  through  a  gate  in  the  garden.)  She  was  a  good  deal  startled,  more
especially  as  this  door,  according  to  domestic  regulations,  ought  to  have
been  locked.  She  roused  herself  to  listen  with  all  her  might,  and  heard
distinctly — all  the  more  distinctly  as  the  house  was  so  quiet — the  person
who  had  opened  the  yard-door  enter  the  house  by  the  back  door,  traverse
a  passage  in  the  basement  storey,  open  the  door  at  the  foot  of  the  back
stairs,  mount  the  back  stairs,  and  enter  the  front  hall.  But  by  this
time  she  was  completely  reassured,  for  she  had  recognised  my  father's
footsteps.  He  put  his  umbrella  into  the  stand,  with  a  rattling  noise,  took
off  his  top-coat  and  shook  it,  and  then  came  through  the  inner  hall  into
the  dining-room.  The  hall-door  and  dining-room  door  were  both  ajar,  so
she  easily  heard  all  this.  He  went  up  to  the  fire,  and  resting  his  elbow  on
the  mantel-piece,  and  one  foot  on  the  fender,  stood  there  for  a  few
moments  drying  himself.  At  length  she  said,  '  You  must  be  very  wet ;
had  you  not  better  go  and  change  your  clothes  at  once  ? '  '  Yes,'  he  re-
plied, '  I  think  I  had  better  do  so,'i  and  so  he  turned,  left  the  room,  and
went  upstairs  to  his  dressing-room.

"  As  he  did  not  come  down    again  for    more  than    half -an-hour,  my

^  See  p.  460,  second  note.


VII.]    GASES  AFFECTING  BOTH  SIGHT  AND   HEARING.     589

mother  followed  him  to  see  what  was  the  cause  of  his  delay.  To  her
astonishment,  she  found  his  room  empty,  and  no  sign  of  his  having  been
there.  She  searched  all  through  the  rooms  on  the  same  landing,  but
could  not  find  him,  and  at  length  came  down  puzzled  and  frightened ;  but
trying  to  calm  herself  with  the  supposition  that,  although  she  had  not
noticed  his  departure,  he  must  have  left  the  house  again  for  some  purpose
or  other.  But  while  she  sat  there,  still  flurried  and  uneasy,  she  heard
again  the  same  footsteps  approaching,  the  same  opening  of  the  yard-door,
the  same  entrance  by  the  back  door,  the  same  traversing  of  the  passage
downstairs,  and  mounting  by  the  back  stairs  into  the  hall,  the  same
putting  down  of  the  umbrella,  and  shaking  of  the  coat,  and  then  my
father  came  into  the  room,  walked  up  to  the  fire,  and  placed  his  elbow
on  the  mantel-piece,  and  foot  on  the  fender,  just  as  he  had  done  before.
'  Why,  where  have  you  been  ? '  exclaimed  my  mother,  as  soon  as  she  could
speak  after  the  first  gasp  of  amazement.  '  Been  ? '  he  said,  turning
round  and  noticing  for  the  first  time  her  excitement  and  distress,  '  I  have
been  to  the  gaol  as  usual.'  '  Oh  !  you  know  that's  not  what  I  mean.  I
mean  where  have  you  been  since  you  came  in  by  the  back  door  just  as
you  have  done  just  now,  rather  more  than  half-an-hour  ago  ? '  'I  don't
understand  you  at  all ;  I  have  come  straight  from  the  gaol  and  have  never
been  in  the  house  since  I  left  this  morning.'  '  Oh,  it's  too  bad  playing
jokes  like  this  to  frighten  me,  when  you  know  I  am  not  well.'  (My
mother  was  in  delicate  health  at  the  time.)  And  then,  in  answer  to  his
amazed  questions,  she  poured  out  the  story  I  have  told  you.

"  I  believe  the  incident  happened  exactly  as  I  have  narrated.  I  have
heard  my  father  tell  the  story  repeatedly,  and  he  was  singularly  accurate
and  truthful.  My  mother's  account,  too,  tallies  precisely  with  his.  My
sister  cannot  now,  I  think,  distinguish  between  what  she  recollects
and  what  she  has  so  often  heard  related.  But  my  father  at  the  time
questioned  her  as  to  what  she  had  heard  and  seen,  and  her  account
was  that  '  I  saw  mamma  get  up  suddenly,  and  go  into  papa's  dressing-room,
and  then  she  went  into  all  the  rooms  upstairs  as  if  she  was  looking  for
something,  and  then  she  came  down  and  looked  as  if  something  was  the
matter,  but  she  wouldn't  answer  me  when  I  asked  her  what  it  was.'

"  When  my  mother  told  her  story  my  father  instantly  recollected  that
as  he  left  the  gaol  the  thought  occurred  to  him,  when  he  saw  how  heavy
the  rain  was,  that  if  he  found  the  yard-door  unlocked  he  would  go  in  that
way — a  thing  that  he  very  seldom  did — to  avoid  going  round  the  corner  to
the  front  door,  and  the  thought  having  once  occurred  he  mentally
rehearsed  the  circumstances  of  his  entrance — doing  in  spirit  precisely  what
he  afterwards  did  in  the  body.  The  distance  from  the  gaol  to  our  house
at  East  Cliff"  was  rather  more  than  two  miles,  and  .  .  .  this  corresponds
with  my  mother's  '  rather  more  than  half-an-hour.'

"W.  L.  Clay."

Mrs.  Clay,  widow  of  the  Rev.  W.  L.  Clay,  and  a  friend  of  Professo
Barrett's,  writes  on  24th  September,  1883  : —

"  I  have  more  than  once  heard  the  story  related  and  discussed  in  my
mother-in-law's  presence  by  her  husband.  There  is  no  doubt  she  firmly
believed  in  the  vision.  My  impression  is  that  he  thought  it  had  been
a  very  vivid  dream.  u  -^    j    Clay  "


CHAP.


CHAPTER  VIII.

RECIPROCAL  CASES.

The  following  specimens,  or  possible  specimens,  of  this  rare  type
seem  worth  presenting,  though  for  the  most  part  far  from  complete
from  an  evidential  point  of  view.

(641)  From  a  clergyman  in  Yorkshire,  who  desires  that  his  name  may
not  be  published.

"January,  1885.

"  The  following  experience  took  place  nearly  25  years  ago,  but  there
is  no  doubt  of  its  correctness  in  every  detail.  I  became  acquainted  with
a  young  lady  in  London,  who,  I  may  say  without  vanity,  fell  violently  in
love  with  me.  There  was  a  strange  fascination  about  her  which  attracted
me  to  her,  but,  although  very  young,  I  was  far  from  reciprocating  her
affection.  By  degrees  I  discovered  that  she  had  the  power  of  influencing
me  when  I  was  away  from  her,  making  me  seem  to  realise  her  presence
about  me  when  I  knew  that  she  was  some  distance  away ;  and  then  that
she  was  able,  when  I  saw  her,  to  tell  me  where  I  had  been  and  what  I
had  been  doing  at  certain  times.  At  first  I  thought  that  this  was  merely
the  result  of  accident — that  some  one  had  seen  me  and  reported  to  her —
until  one  day  she  told  me  that  at  a  certain  hour  of  the  day  I  had  been
in  a  drawing-room,  which  she  described,  when  I  knew  there  had  been
no  chance  of  collusion,  and  that  no  one  could  have  told  her  of  my  visit
to  the  house.

"  She  then  told  me  that  when  she  began  intently  to  fix  her  mind  on
me,  she  seemed  to  be  able  to  see  me  and  all  my  surroundings.^  At  first
she  fancied  it  was  only  imagination,  until  she  saw  by  my  manner  that
what  she  described  had  really  taken  place.  I  had  several  opportunities
afterwards  of  testing  this  power,  and  found  she  was  correct  in  every
instance.

"  I  need  scarcely  say  that  when  I  had  satisfied  myself  of  this,  I  kept
out  of  the  way  of  such  a  dangerous  acquaintance.  We  did  not  meet
for  about  10  years,  and  had  drifted  so  widely  apart  as  to  lose  sight  of
each  other.  One  day  I  was  walking  with  my  wife  on  the  West  Cliff  at
Ramsgate,  when  a  strange  feeling  of  oppression  came  over  me,  and  I  was
compelled  to  sit  down.  A  few  minutes  afterwards  my  old  acquaintance
stood  before  me,  introducing  me  to  her  husband  and  asking  to  be  intro-
duced to  my  wife.

1  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  268.


VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  591

"  We  met  several  times  while  they  stayed  at  Ramsgate,  and  I  learned
that  she  had  been  married  for  some  years,  and  had  several  children  ;  but
I  have  seen  nothing  of  them  since,  and  have  no  wish,  even  if  I  had  the
opportunity,  of  renewing  the  acquaintance.  No  reference  whatever  was
made  to  the  past,  and  I  did  not  learn  whether  she  had  still  the  strange
power  she  formerly  possessed."

This  may  probably  have  been  a  reciprocal  case,  though  we  cannot
now  ascertain  whether  the  impressions  which  suggested  to  each  .of
the  two  parties  the  other's  presence  were  simultaneous.  The  only
other  case  in  our  collection  where  a  prolonged  course  of  reciprocal
action  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  is  the  following.

(642)  From  Miss  L.  A.  W.  (the  narrator  of  case  140),  whose  only
reason  for  withholding  her  name  from  publication  is  that  she  is  sure  that
her  family  would  object  to  its  appearance.

She  begins  by  saying  that  when  she  was  19  or  20,  she  had  a  spell  of
indifferent  health,  caused,  it  was  thought,  by  over-study.  During  this
time,  from  March  in  one  year  till  June  in  the  next,  she  was  much  troubled
at  intervals  by  singular  dreams,  which  she  recorded  in  a  note-book,  and
also  described  to  one  of  her  sisters.  The  main  feature  in  these  dreams
was  the  appearance  of  a  particidar  person.  "  I  was  not  in  love,  nor  indeed
had  I  been ;  and  certainly  no  feeling  but  that  of  a  mysterious  repugnance
(and  at  the  same  time  an  inability  to  avoid  or  escape  from  the
influence  of  the  person  of  whom  I  dreamt)  actuated  me.  He  was
someone  I  had  never  in  all  my  life  wittingly  seen,  though  I  had  reason  to
think  afterwards  that  he  had  seen  me  at  a  Birmingham  musical  festival.
On  that  occasion  I  had  apparently  fainted,  and  it  was  attributed  to  the
heat  and  the  excitement  of  the  music.  I  hardly  knew  if  it  were  or  not.
I  only  knew  I  felt  all  my  pulses  stop,  and  a  burning  and  singing  in  my
head,  and  that  I  was  perfectly  conscious  of  those  around  me,  but  unable  to
speak  and  tell  them  so.  To  return  to  my  dreams.  I  always  knew  as  I  slept
when  the  influence  was  coming  over  me,  and  often  in  my  dream  I  com-
menced it  by  thinking,  '  Here  it  is,  or  here  he  comes  again.'  They  were
not  always  disagreeable  dreams  in  themselves,  but  the  fascination  was
always  dreadful  to  me,  and  a  kind  of  struggle  between  two  natures  within
me  seemed  to  drag  my  powers  of  mind  and  body  two  ways.  I  used  to
.awake  as  cold  as  a  stone  in  the  hottest  nights,  my  head  having  the  queer
feeling  of  a  hot  iron  pressing  somewhere  in  its  inside.  I  would  shiver  and
my  teeth  chatter  with  a  terror  which  seemed  unreasonable,  for  there  was,
even  in  the  subjects  of  my  dreams,  seldom  anything  wicked  or  terrifying."

The  dreams  ceased  after  a  course  of  medical  treatment.  In  the  next
year  but  one  Miss  W.  was  visiting  in  Liverpool.  "  I  had  enjoyed  two  or
three  good  dances,  and  was  sitting  out  one,  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  when
not  suddenly,  but  by  degrees,  I  felt  myself  turning  cold  and  stony,  and  the
peculiar  burning  in  my  head.  If  I  could  have  spoken  I  would  have  said,
'  My  dreams  !  my  dreams  !  '  but  I  only  shivered,  which  attracted  the
notice  of  my  companion,  who  exclaimed,  '  You  are  ill,  my  dear.  Come  for
some  wine,  or  hot  coffee.'  I  rose,  knowing  what  I  was  going  to  see,  and
as  I  turned,  I  looked  straight  into  the  eyes  of  the  fac-simile  of  the  being


592  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

who  had  been  present  to  my  sleeping  thoughts  for  so  long,  and  the  next
moment  he  stepped  forward  from  the  pillar  against  which  he  was  leaning
behind  the  lace  curtain,  and  shook  hands  with  my  companion.  He
accompanied  us  to  the  refreshment  room,  attended  to  my  wants,  and  was
introduced  to  me.  I  declined  dancing,  but  could  not  avoid  conversation.
His  first  remark  was,  '  We  are  not  strangers  to  each  other.  Where  have
we  met  ? '  I  fear  I  shall  scarcely  be  believed  when  I  say,  that  (setting
my  teeth,  and  nerving  myself  to  meet  what  I  felt  would  conquer  me,  if  I
once  submitted  in  even  the  slightest  degree)  I  answered  that  I  never
remembered  meeting  him  before,  and  to  all  his  questionings  returned  the
most  reserved  answers.  He  seemed  much  annoyed  and  puzzled,  but  on
that  occasion  did  not  mention  dreams.

"  I  took  an  opportunity  of  asking  my  sister  if  she  remembered  my
description  of  the  man  of  my  dreams,  and  upon  her  answering  '  Yes,'
asked  her  to  look  round  the  rooms  and  see  if  any  one  there  resembled  him,
and  half-an-hour  later  she  came  up,  saying,  '  There  is  the  man,  he  has.
even  the  mole  on  the  left  side  of  his  mouth.' "

Miss  W.  subsequently  met  this  gentleman  at  almost  every  party  she
went  to.  "  He  was  sometimes  so  gloomy  and  fierce  at  my  determined
avoidance  of  any  but  the  most  ordinary  conversation,  that  I  felt  quite  a.
terror  of  meeting  him.  He  frequently  asked  if  I  believed  in  dreams  ;  if  I
could  relate  any  to  him  ;  if  I  had  never  seen  him  before ;  and  would  say,
after  my  persistent  avoidance  of  the  subject,  '  I  can  do  nothing,  so  long
as  you  will  not  trust  me. '  "

Miss  W.  says  that  she  has  several  pages,  in  her  note-book,  of  entries  of
dreams  in  which  she  seemed  to  be  accompanying  her  visitor  in  a  flight,
through  the  world.

"  When  conversing  with  him  in  the  flesh,  he  asked  me  if  I  had  '  ever
travelled.'  I  said  '  No.'  He  showed  surprise,  and  began  to  dilate  on  the
wonders  of  such  and  such  a  place  or  scene,  all  of  which  I  felt  sure  I  had.
seen  with  him,  and  entered  in  my  note-book.  It  was  deeply  interesting,
and  I  was  totally  absorbed  in  his  recitals,  time  after  time,  when  he-
abruptly  stopped,  saying,  '  But  have  you  never  had  scenes  such  as  these
before  you  ? '  and  I  replied,  '  Yes,  in  my  dreams  I  have.'  Such,  or  similar
remarks,  I  know  I  have  noted  down,  and  his  eagerness  to  make  me  admit,
similar  experiences  was  at  times  almost  fierce.  I  had  a  great  longing  at
times  to  tell  him  everything,  but  an  innate  sense  that  by  so  doing  I  should,
be  as  completely  his  slave  and  tool  as  I  had  been  in  dreams,  always
stopped  me."

The  efibrt  of  these  conversations  was  so  exhausting  to  Miss  W.  that,
she  wrote  home  to  get  herself  recalled — a  fact  which  her  strange  acquaint-
ance seems  to  have  intuitively  divined,  and  for  which  he  bitterly
reproached  her.  She  has  never  seen  him  since.  She  says,  in  answer  to-
inquiries  : — "  You  are  right  in  your  conjecture  that  he  inferred  [  ?  implied]
he  had  seen  me  in  dreams.  He  often  talked  as  if  he  were  perfectly  aware
that  I  knew  it,  but  that  I  would  not  go  beyond  a  certain  limit  in
admitting  anything."  She  adds  that  her  sister  remembers  all  the  circum-
stances— the  dreams,  their  frequency,  and  the  correct  description  of  the'
man  subsequently  met ;  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  procure  the  sister's
written  confirmation.  Miss  W.  says  that  she  cannot  spare  the  time  to.
make  extracts  from  her  diary  for  publication.


VIII.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES.  593

[I£  the  details  here  are  quite  accurate,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  explain
the  case  telepathically.  But  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  the  dream-
figure  assumed  the  distinctness  which  made  it  seem  the  counterpart  of  the
real  figure,  only  after  the  real  one  was  seen  ;  and  that  Miss  W.  herself  led
the  conversations  in  the  directions  where  they  seemed  to  confirm  her
dream-experiences.  Without  an  independent  account  from  the  gentleman
himself,  the  interpretation  of  the  case  must  remain  dubious  ;  and  as  Miss
W.  is  unwilling  to  mention  his  name,  no  more  can  be  done.  Should  the
account  ever  meet  his  eye,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  communicate
with  us.]

In  the  next  case  it  is  impossible  to  tell  how  closely  the  two
experiences  coincided.

(643)  From  Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  31,  Queen  Anne  Street,  W.

"  February  10th,  1886.

"  I  send  you  a  well-authenticated  dream  of  my  daughter-in-law,  Mrs.
Alfred  Wedgwood,  with  the  vouchers.  You  will  see  that  she  told  it
immediately  after  the  occurrence  to  Mrs.  K.,  and  to  me  a  day  or  two  after-
wards, on  her  return  to  Queen  Anne  Street.  I  have  a  strong  recollection
that  it  was  on  that  occasion  that  she  explained  her  noticing  the  ring,  by
saying  that  in  her  dream  the  stranger  leant  his  hand  on  the  bedside  as  he
stooped  over  her.  She  expressed  great  confidence  that  she  should  know  him
again  if  ever  she  saw  him,  and  I  told  her  to  let  me  know  if  ever  she  did.
However,  she  never  mentioned  to  me  the  fact  of  her  having  fallen  in  with
him  that  autumn,  and  she  only  mentioned  it  incidentally,  when  she  was
with  me  last  Christmas,  as  a  matter  well-known  to  me.

"  If  I  had  known  it  at  the  time,  we  might  perhaps  have  been  able  to
ascertain  how  far  the  dreams  were  synchronous.  It  is  not  likely  that  they
were  absolutely  so,  as  hers  was  in  the  afternoon.

"  H.  Wedgwood."

"  In  June,  '84,  I  went  to  Folkestone  to  look  out  for  a  house,  and  slept
for  a  night  or  two  at  the  West  Cliff  Hotel.  The  second  day  I  was  there,
being  a  good  deal  tired,  I  went  up  in  the  afternoon  to  my  room,  locked
the  door  and  fell  asleep  upon  my  bed,  having  undressed  myself  and  merely
covered  myself  with  the  sheet,  it  being  a  warm  day.  After  a  while,  I  was
startled  out  of  sleep  by  dreaming  in  a  very  lively  way  that  a  gentle-
man, whom  I  had  never  seen  before,  was  stooping  over  me.  He  was
dressed  in  a  dark  grey  tweed  suit ;  he  wore  on  his  little  finger  a  cornelian
ring,  and  a  small  cameo  pin  which  was  a  veiled  figure.  I  observed  that  one
of  his  eyes  drooped  a  little.  There  were  a  number  of  Zulus  standing
behind  him.  When  he  bent  down  towards  me  he  put  out  his  hand  and
said,  '  Poor  thing,  you  seem  tired.'

"  The  impression  was  so  vivid  that  I  jumped  ofi"  the  bed  to  see  whether
the  door  could  have  come  open,  but  I  found  that  it  was  locked  as  I  had  left  it.
I  got  up  and  dressed,  and  went  to  tea  with  Mrs.  K.;  I  told  her  my  dream,
saying  I  was  sure  I  should  recognise  the  man  if  ever  I  saw  him.  Having
found  a  suitable  house,  I  returned  to  my  father-in-law's  in  Queen  Anne
Street,  and  told  him  my  dream,  as  I  had  done  to  Mrs.  K.     In  the  middle

VOL.  II.  2    Q


594  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

of  August  we  moved  to  Folkestone,  and  not  many  weeks  afterwards,  as  I
was  going  down  the  Military  Hill  leading  from  the  camp  to  Sandgate,  I
met  the  gentleman  whom  I  had  seen  in  my  dream,  wearing  the  same
clothes.  He  stopped,  and  looked  at  me,  and  said,  '  I  think  we  must  have
met  before.'  I  said,  '  Yes  ' ;  then  introduced  myself,  and  told  him  of  my
dream.  He  wore  the  same  pin,  but  not  the  ring.  I  called  his  attention
to  it.  He  said  he  had  not  worn  the  cornelian  ring  for  some  years,  as
he  preferred  his  brother's,  but  that  he  had  been  looking  at  his  old  ring.
He  had  dreamt  of  seeing  me  lying  down  in  a  white  gown.  The  day  he  met
me,  I  had  on  a  white  dress.  He  also  told  me  he  had  been  at  the  Cape,  and
once  belonged  to  the  Mounted  Rifles  when  first  established.

"  M.  R.  Wedgwood."

"  I  believe  I  did  not  hear  of  my  wife's  dream  until  after  she  had  met
with  the  gentleman  she  had  seen  in  her  dream.  Very  soon  after  that
meeting  I  was  told  the  story.  u  ^  j^  Wedgwood."

Thinking  it  possible  that  Major  M.  had  unconsciously  noticed  Mrs.  A.
Wedgwood's  appearance  during  the  days  when  she  was  in  Folkestone  in
June,  I  asked  her  how  she  was  dressed  during  that  short  stay.  She
replied  : —

"  At  the  time  I  was  down  here  for  the  two  days,  I  wore  a  black  silk
gown,  as  I  well  remember  my  friend  Mrs.  K.  admiring  it  when  I  went
and  drank  tea  with  her.     I  told  her  of  my  dream  at  the  same  time."

Mrs.  K.  writes  : —

"December  28th,  1885.

"  I  remember  quite  well  the  circumstance  you  allude  to.  Mrs.  Alfred
Wedgwood  told  me  about  it  the  same  evening,  when  she  was  sitting  with
me  at  Meadowbank,  but  I  think  she  said  she  saw  this  vision  of  a  man
looking  at  her,  not  in  a  dream,  but  on  suddenly  awaking  from  sleep,  and
that  he  vanished  as  she  looked  at  him.  She  told  me  that  she  particularly
noticed  a  stud  or  breast-pin  he  was  wearing,  and  that  during  the  short
time  the  figure  was  visible  she  saw  other  figures  in  the  background,  like
Zulus  with  their  spears  passing  behind  him.  This,  at  the  time,  made  us
wonder  if  the  room  at  the  West  CliflT  Hotel  she  was  then  using  had  been
at  any  time  occupied  by  someone  who  had  died  in  the  Zulu  War.  Some-
time after  this,  Mrs.  Alfred  told  me  she  had  seen  an  officer  at  Shornclifie
who  resembled  the  man  of  her  vision,  and  that  he  was  wearing  a  pin
just  like  the  one  she  had  observed,  and  she  wondered  who  he  was.
I  do  not  remember  that  after  this  we  ever  spoke  of  the  matter  again ;  and
I  never  heard  that  she  had  afterwards  met  him  to  speak  to,  or  that  he  had
told  her  that  he  had  had  a  corresponding  vision  or  dream  of  her.

"  M.  A.  K."

The  following  account  is  from  Major  F,  F.  M.  : —

"February,  1886.

"  As  nearly  as  I  can  recollect,  some  time  in  June,  1884,^  I  met  Mrs.
Wedgwood  coming  down  the  Military  Road  from  Shornclifie  Camp.    I  had

1  Mr.  Wedgwood  says,  "  It  must  have  been  in  August  or  September.


VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  595

a  confused  idea  that  I  had  met  the  lady  before,  and  therefore  turned  to
look  at  her.  Mrs.  Wedgwood  asked  me  some  question,  and  inti-oduced
herself,  when,  in  conversation,  I  remarked  that  some  time  previously  I  had
dreamed  I  had  seen  her,  and  that  she  was  dressed  in  a  white  gown.

"  Mrs.  Wedgwood  replied  that  she  also  had  dreamed  she  had  seen  my-
self, and  described  the  dress  I  wore,  and  also  a  scarf-pin  and  ring  that  I
possess.  The  latter  she  could  not  possibly  have  seen,  as  I  had  not  worn  it
for  some  years,  and  consequently  it  was  locked  up  in  a  secret  drawer  in  my
chest.  The  accurate  description  of  the  ring  and  pin  seemed  to  me  to  be
very  remarkable.  '<  p'.  jf.  ]\/[."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Major  M.  writes,  on  Feb.  18,  1886  :-^

(1)  "I  feel  sure  I  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Alfred  Wedgwood  before  I
met  her  coming  from  Shorncliffe  Camp,  after  the  dream  you  refer  to,
and  I  had  no  reason  for  connecting  the  dream  with  her  [i.e.,  at  the  time
that  it  was  dreamt].

(2)  "  I  do  not  think  my  dream  was  sufficiently  vivid  to  enable  me  to
recognise  the  features  of  the  lady.

(3)  "  The  dream  occurred,  I  believe,  in  the  second  week  in  June,  1884.
"  I  may  say  that  I  did  not  look  upon  my  dream  as  at  all  peculiar,  and

should  have  thought  no  more  of  the  circumstance  had  not  Mrs.  Wedgwood
informed  me  of  her  dream,  which  I  thought  very  remarkable,  inasmuch
as  she  described  accurately  some  articles  of  jewellery  belonging  to  me,  which
she  could  not  possibly  have  previously  seen."

He  adds  that  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  was  correct  in  saying  that  he  had
served  for  many  years  in  South  Africa  ;  but  that  he  had  not  recently
returned  from  that  country.

Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedg^wood  writes  on  Feb.  2,  1886  : —

"  Major  M.  says  that  when  he  saw  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  in  her  white
gown,  he  instantly  recognised  her  by  her  figure.  The  date  of  her  dream  was
the  13th  June,  which  she  fixes  by  something  about  a  photograph."

[It  is  iiTQpossible  here  to  be  sure  that  Major  M.'s  sense  of  having  seen
Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood  before  he  met  her  was  really  due  to  his  dream.  But
if  the  case  is  not  reciprocal,  it  is  at  any  rate  strongly  suggestive  of
telepathic  clairvoyance  on  Mrs.  A.  Wedgwood's  part.]

The  next  example  may,  no  doubt,  have  been  an  accidental  coinci-
dence ;  but  both  experiences  seem  .to  have  been  of  an  unusual  kind,
unlike  ordinary  dreams.  If  telepathic  in  character,  the  case  may
not  improbably  have  been  reciprocal,  without — it  will  be  observed —
suggesting  anything  of  the  nature  of  clairvoyance.  Each  percipient
has  the  impression  of  the  other  as  present  in  the  percipient's  own
environment.

(644)  From  Mrs.  White,  10,  Hope  Terrace,  Walham  Green,  S.W.

"  1883.
"  On  one  occasion  my  husband  [since  deceased — for  many  years    con-
VOL.    II.  2    Q    2


596  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

ductor  of  the  Bcdlymena  Observer]  complained  of  a  slight  indisposition  ;
but  being  very  averse  always  to  the  attendance  of  a  doctor,  he  desired
me  to  see  that  some  cooling  drink  was  left  in  his  bedroom,  and  that  we
should  all  retire  as  usual.  I  occupied  a  room  on  the  floor  above  him,  and
after  seeing  that  everything  necessary  was  left  on  his  dressing-table,  and
everything  comfortable  and  as  he  wished,  I,  at  his  urgent  request,  went  to
bed,  and  being  particularly  fatigued  fell  into  a  deep  sleep ;  in  which  state  I
became  acutely  conscious  of  the  condition  I  had  left  my  husband  in,  and
mindful  of  my  own  secret  resolve  to  visit  him  during  the  night  and  see  if
he  had  taken  his  drink  or  if  he  slept,  &c.,  though  I  had  studiously  avoided
telling  him  so,  lest  he  should  think  I  was  making  a  fuss.  I  was  quite
conscious  *of  all  this  in  that  peculiar  way  we  see  and  know  during  sleep.
I  also  seemed  to  know  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  and  I  longed  to  burst  my
bonds  and  carry  out  my  intention.  Simultaneously  with  this  wish,  I  now
became  aware  of  my  husband's  presence  at  the  door  of  my  room,  then  of
his  presence  filling  the  chamber  and  slowly  and  solemnly  crossing  to  the
bed  where  I  lay.  In  that  flash  of  conscious  thought  which  made  me
aware  of  this,  I  thought  he  must  be  very  ill  and  come  to  reprove  me  for
this  torpor  of  sleep  that  still  so  enchained  me  that  I  couldn't  speak  to  him,
though  longing  with  all  my  heart  and  soul  to  do  so.  This  all,  swift  as
thought,  passed  while  he  seemed  to  bend  over  me  as  if'  to  find  did  I  sleep  ;
then  with  the  same  slow,  solemn  presence  filling  the  room,  again  he  passed
away.  Then,  with  one  shrill  cry,  I  burst  the  sufibcating  bonds  that  held
me,  and  my  maid,  who  slept  in  the  next  room,  was  beside  me  at  once.
She  asked,  was  I  frightened  1  I  said  not  at  all,  but  to  follow  me  to  her
master's  room  ;  that  I  had  intended  seeing  to  him  through  the  night,  but
had  fallen  fast  asleep    and  neglected  to  do  so.

"When  I  cautiously  entered  his  room,  the  maid  behind  me,  I  found
him  awake  and  a  keen,  almost  reproachful  look  on  his  face.  I  dismissed
the  maid,  and  then  explained  what  a  heavy  sleep  I  had  just  awoke  from,
which  had  prevented  me  coming  sooner,  &c.  '  Will  you  tell  me,'  he  now
inquired,  '  what  object  you  have  in  trying  to  conceal  from  me  that  you
were  here  a  few  moments  ago '? '  I  then  fell  on  my  knees,  and  assured  him
that  I  had  not  risen  from  my  bed  until  this  present  moment,  and  that  it
was  owing  to  a  strange,  silent,  and  secret  visit  from  him  that  so  disturbed
and  alarmed  me,  that  I  was  there  now.  '  Ah,'  he  said,  '  something  like
this  happened  to  me  before,  but  this  is  the  most  remarkable  experience  of
all — because  happening  to  each  of  us  at  the  same  time.'  He  then  narrated
how,  a  few  minutes  before,  I  had  stolen,  as  it  were,  up  to  his  side,  arranged
the  clothes,  kissed  him  on  brow  and  cheek,  and  then  glided  away  ;  that
my  visit  had  a  soothing  efi'ect,  and  that  he  was  consequently  irritated  at
my  appearing  to    forget  it,  when  I  came  the  second  time."

[In  conversation,  Mrs.  White  particularly  described  to  me  the  sense  of
entrance  and  of  the  movement  of  the  presence.  There  was  light  enough  for
her  to  have  seen  any  visible  figure,  but  she  saw  nothing.  She  also  described
the  effect  upon  herself,  before  she  reached  his  room,  as  very  overpowering,
depriving  her  of  the  power  of  speech.  Her  viva  voce  account  agreed  in
every  detail  with  the  above  account  which  had  been  written  about  a  year
previously  ;  and  she  gave  me  an  impression  of  accuracy.  As  an  instance
of  her  unwillingness  to  believe  marvels,  she  told  me  how  incredulous  she


VIII.]  RECIPROCAL  CASES.  597

had  been  as  to  the  genuineness  of  experiments  in  hypnotism  which  her
husband  used  sometimes  to  carry  out.]

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  two  cases  which,  as  reported,
seem  to  have  been  collective  as  well  as  reciprocal.

(645)  From  Mrs.  T.,  who  does  not  wish  her  name  to  be  published.
The  account  was  written  in  January,  1879.

"  I  have  myself  had  an  exceedingly  interesting  experience  of  the
apparition  of  the  living,  viz.,  my  own  appearance  at  the  supposed  death-
bed of  my  sister,  when  we  were  3,000  miles  apart.  She  was  attended  on
this  particular  night  by  another  sister,  who  distinctly  saw  me  go  into  the
room,  and  lean  over  my  darling  young  sister.  The  latter  was  too  ill  to
speak,  but  she  whispered,  '  Mary  is  here ;  now  I  am  happy.'  I  ought  to
mention  that  my  elder  sister  is  not  given  to  vision,  and  is,  indeed,  a  very
practical,  matter-of-fact  person  ;  but  she  has  always  declared  that  she  saw
me  from  my  knees  up,  ^  and  that  the  very  dress  was  plain  to  her,  too.

"  At  this  time  I  was  just  recovering  from  my  confinement  with  my  son,
who  is  nearly  17.  He  was  between  four  and  five  weeks  old,  when,  one
night,  I  fell  asleep  thinking  how  much  I  should  like  to  see  this  sister.  I
knew  of  her  illness,  and  that  she  was  not  likely  to  recover,  and  of  her
intense  desire  to  see  me.  Between  us  the  most  tender  attachment  had
always  existed,  and  it  was  thought  that  her  illness  was  much  increased
through  her  grief  at  our  separation.

"  On  the  night  referred  to,  I  had  a  most  vivid  dream  of  seeing  her,  in
a  bed  not  in  her  own  room,  and  of  seeing  my  other  sister  in  attendance.
I  leaned  over  her  and  said,  as  I  thought,  '  Emma,  you  will  recover.'  I
told  my  husband  that  I  had  been  home  when  I  woke,  and  my  impression
that  she  would  recover.  This  dream  comforted  me  very  much,  and  from
this  night  there  was  a  change  for  the  better  in  my  sister,  and  she  gradually
recovered  from  what  was  supposed  to  be  an  incurable  illness.  When  we
came  to  compare  dates,  we  found  that  my  dream,  and  my  appearance  to
my  two  sisters,  occurred  at  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same  time.  I  was  so
life-like  to  my  younger  sister  that  she  thought  I  had  really  arrived  on  a
visit ;  but,  as  I  said  before,  to  my  eldest  sister  I  was  shadowy  below  my
knees,  but  perfectly  natural  in  appearance.  She  afterwards  remembered
that  I  did  not  notice  her  as  I  passed  into  the  inner  room,  although  in  my
dream  I  saw  her,  nor  did  I  seem  to  see  anything  but  the  one  object  of  my
love."

Mrs.  T.  wrote  to  us,  on  Oct.  3,  1883  :—

"  Neither  of  my  sisters  wrote  me,  but  a  member  of  the  family  to  whom
the  occurrence  was  told  on  the  following  morning.  Unfortunately  I  have
not  kept  this  letter,  and  cannot  date  the  time,  except  from  my  son's  birth,
which  took  place  on  the  4th  March,  1862.  I  changed  my  bed,  still
keeping  the  same  room,  when  he  was  a  month  old,  and  it  was  within  a
night  or  two  of  making  this  change  that  I  had  my  dream.  When  the
letter  came,  which  was  like  a  repetition  of  my  dream,  I  went  back  in  my
mind  to  the  time  (not  more  than  three  weeks  before),  and  was  myself
satisfied  that  the  times  were  coincident.     It  was  nearly  10  years  after,

^  See  p.  33,  note.


598  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

before  I  had  an  opportunity  of  talking  with  my  sister  of  the  occurrence,
which  was  only  one  of  several  very  startling  things  connected  with  my
younger  sister's  illness,  and  I  found  we  agreed  in  all  substantial  things.  I
found  them  both  disinclined  to  talk  of  what  had  happened  during  Emma's
illness,  and,  indeed,  their  memory  of  all  the  circumstances  of  my  manifes-
tation was  less  clear  than  mine."

Mrs.  T.  is  unable  to  communicate  with  her  family  respecting  this  case,
as  they  all  have  an  extreme  dislike  to  the  subject.  In  conversation,  she
explained  that  she  had  left  America  about  nine  months  at  the  time  of  this
vision,  and  that  her  sister  recognised  her  as  wearing  a  print  dress  of  a  very
decided  blue,  which  she  had  left  behind  her  in  America.

She  has  further  answered  the  following  questions  : —

Did  Mrs.  T.  dream  of  herself  as  in  the  blue  dress  ?

"  I  cannot  now  remember.  My  impression  is  that  I  did  not  recollect
my  dress  on  waking."

Had  the  sisters  ever  seen  the  blue  dress  1

"  Yes.  I  had  worn  the  dress  in  the  morning  during  the  previous  early
summer  time."  ^

Was  the  invalid  sister  really  in  a  room  not  her  own .?  And  if  so  was  its
arrangement,  "  inner  room,"  &c.,  really  represented  in  the  dream  ?

"  My  sister  was  not  in  her  own  room,  but  in  a  room  on  the  ground  floor
(an  inner  room),  exactly  as  I  had  seen  her  in  my  dream."  ^

Had  Mrs.  T.  ever  seen  the  room  before  ?

"  Yes."

Mr.  T.  cannot  remember  any  of  his  wife's  experiences  in  detail ;  he


"  I  am  unable  to  recall  the  particular  circumstance  to  which  you  refer.
This  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  for  several  years  previous  to,  and  since,
the  date  referred  to,  my  wife  has  related  to  me  numerous  remarkable
incidents  in  her  experiences,  together  with  their  subsequent  verification.

"  W.  T."

[It  is  unfortunate  that  the  evidence  here  is  second-hand  from  the  side
on  which  the  more  striking  experience  occurred.  If  that  experience  is
correctly  recorded,  the  fact  that  two  percipients  shared  in  it  is  a  strong
indication  that  it  was  telepathically  produced.  The  proof  of  the
reciprocality  of  the  case  depends  greatly  on  the  detail  in  the  dream  as  to
the  changed  room,  on  which  it  is  impossible  entirely  to  rely,  in  the  absence
of  a  written  note  made  before  the  actual  fact  was  known.]

(646)  From   Mr.   J.    Cotter  Morison,    30,    Fitzjohn's  Avenue,    JST.W.

"June  18th,  1883.

"  My  mother  and  grandmother  were  together  in  the  dining-room  of
their  house  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  occupied  on  some  domestic  matter  which
made  the  exclusion  of  chance  visitors  desirable.  A  sudden  knock  at  the
door  caused  my  grandmother  to  hasten   to  it  with  a  view  to  taking  the

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  540-6,  and  569-70.  The  dress,  it  will  be  seen,  was  one  which  the
sisters  in  America  would  be  specially  likely  to  associate  with  Mrs.  T.  's  aspect,  since  she
had  worn  it  a  good  deal  when  she  was  last  with  them ;  while  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  it  had  any  prominence  in  her  memory.

2  Compare  case  465,


viii.]  RECIPROCAL    CASES.  599

stranger  into  the  drawing-room.  The  knock  was  heard  by  both  mother
and  daughter.  On  opening  the  door  with  the  least  loss  of  time  possible,
my  grandmother  was  surprised  to  find  not  only  no  one  there  but  no  one
even  in  the  long  corridor  which  led  to  the  dining-room.  My  mother  dis-
tinctly remembered  the  look  of  astonishment  in  her  mother's  face  as  she
returned  from  the  door.  Nothing  more  was  said  on  the  subject,  but  in  a
short  time  afterwards  a  letter  was  received  from  London  from  my  grand-
mother's sister,  or  rather  her  family,  saying  that  she  (the  sister)  had  been
most  seriously  ill,  at  death's  door  indeed,  but  was  now  a  little  better,  and
wished  my  grandmother  to  come  and  see  her.  The  latter  went  up  to  town
and  found  her  sister  still  very  ill,  but  slowly  recovering.  After  the
mutual  endearments  natural  to  such  an  occasion,  my  grandmother  said  : —

"  Do  you  know,  such  a  strange  thing  occurred,  exactly  at  the  time,  it
seems,  when  you  were  supposed  to  be  dead  or  dying.'

"  '  I  know  what  you  are  going  to  say,'  said  the  other.  '  When  I  was
in  the  trance  which  was  mistaken  for  death,  I  thought  I  went  to  your
house  in  the  Isle  of  "Wight  and  knocked  at  your  dining-room  door.  You
opened  it  instantly  and  looked  much  affrighted  at  not  seeing  me  or  any
one,  though  I  saw  you.'

"  The  singular  point  in  the  story  is  the  anticipation  by  the  one  sister  of
what  the  other  sister  was  going  to  say.

"  No  theory  or  inference  was  ever  deduced  by  my  relations  from  the
circumstance,  and  it  was  only  mentioned  as  an  odd  coincidence  by  them
and  their  friends,  who,  as  well  as  my  mother,  have  often  told  me  the  story.

"  Jas.  Cotter  Morison."

Mr.  Morison  writes  of  his  grandmother  : —

"She was  a  person  of  a  strong  understanding,  as  I  have  often  heard
from  people  who  knew  her  personally.  She  had  an  aversion  to  what  she
called  superstition,  belief  in  ghosts,  &c. ;  so  the  facts  of  the  story  were
unwelcome  to  her  rather  than  otherwise."

Though  the  sound  here  seems  to  have  corresponded  with  a
distinct  impression  of  the  agent's,  there  is  no  conclusive  jproof  of
reciprocality,  as  her  sense  of  visiting  her  relatives'  house  may  have
been  purely  subjective.  At  the  same  time,  the  idea  of  knocking  at  a
door  and  having  it  opened,  yet  being  oneself  invisible  to  the  person
who  opens  it,  appears  so  unlikely  a  one  to  occur  even  to  a  dreaming
mind,  that  the  hypothesis  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  on  the  agent's
part  seems  (as  the  facts  stand)  eminently  defensible.  It  must  be
noted,  however,  that  the  description  of  this  side  of  the  occurrence
comes  to  us  at  third  hand.


CHAP.


CHAPTER    IX.

COLLECTIVE  CASES.

§  1.  Of  the  collective  cases  which  remain  to  be  presented,  the  large
majority,  like  the  cases  in  Chap.  XVIII.  above,  are  waking  aflFections
of  sight  and  hearing.  I  will  begin,  however,  with  three  outlying
instances,  of  which  the  first  had  no  sensory  element  at  all,  the  second
is  a  dream-case,  and  the  third  concerned  the  sense  of  touch  only.
They  agree  in  the  fact  that  the  two  percipients  were  not  in  each
other's  company  at  the  time  of  the  experience  (see  Chap.  XVIII.,  §  2).

(647)  From  Mr.  Charles  Ede,  Wonersh  Lodge,  Guildford,  a  medical
man,  to  whom  the  incident  was  related  by  both  the  percipients.  The
account  was  sent  to  Professor  Barrett  on  Aug.  29,  1877.

"  Lady  G.  and  her  sister  had  been  spending  the  evening  with  their
mother,  who  was  in  her  usual  health  and  spirits  when  they  left  her.  In
the  middle  of  the  night  the  sister  awoke  in  a  fright,  and  said  to  her
husband,  '  I  must  go  to  my  mother  at  once  ;  do  order  the  carriage.  I  am
sure  she  is  taken  ill.'  The  husband,  after  trying  in  vain  to  convince  hia
wife  that  it  was  only  a  fancy,  ordered  the  carriage.  As  she  was  approach-
ing her  mother's  house,  where  two  roads  meet,  she  saw  Lady  G.'s  carriage.
When  they  met,  each  asked  the  other  why  she  was  there.  The  same
reply  was  made  by  both.  '  I  could  not  sleep,  feeling  sure  my  mother  was
ill,  and  so  I  came  to  see.'  As  they  came  in  sight  of  the  house,  they  saw
their  mother's  confidential  maid  at  the  door,  who  told  them,  when  they
arrived,  that  their  mother  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill,  and  was  dying,  and
had  expressed  an  earnest  wish  to  see  her  daughters.

"  The  foregoing  incident  was  told  me  as  a  simple  narrative  of  what
happened,  both  by  Lady  G.  and  her  sister.  The  mother  was  a  lady  of
strong  will,  and  always  had  great  influence  over  her  daughters.

"  Charles  Ede."

Writing  on  June  25,  1884,  Mr.  Ede  says,  "Both  Lady  G.  and  her
sister  are  dead,  although  at  the  time  of  my  writing  the  account  the  former
was  living."  He  cannot  fix  the  date  of  the  occurrence.  He  communicated
the  names  in  confidence.

(648)  From  Mr.  R.  S.  Pengelly,  33,  Ingestre  Road,  Stafi'ord,  who
first  published  the  narrative  in  a  magazine.  On  Feb.  26,  1884,  he
wrote    to    us   to   confirm    it,   and  to  supply  the  names  of    the    parties.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  601

Mr.  Pengelly  narrates  that,  some  time  in  the  years  1863-1866,  his
father,  then  unmarried,  went  on  a  voyage  to  Colombo  as  mate  of  the
'  Adela,'  belonging  to  Messrs.  Cobbold  and  Co.,  of  Ipswich.  Some  weeks
after  his  departure,  his  fiancee,  Anne  Symons,  who  had  been  looking  out
for  a  letter  from  him,  had  a  vivid  dream  of  an  Eastern  seaport.  Lying  to
the  left  of  the  picture  she  was  startled  to  see  a  vessel,  which  she  instantly
recognised  as  the  '  Adela,'  of  which  her  father  was  captain,  and  which  she
knew  well.  There  on  deck  were  several  Orientals,  lightly  clad,  at  work,
and  by  their  side  was  James  Pengelly.  Suddenly  she  saw  him  walk  a  step
forward,  and  the  next  moment  he  was  struggling  in  the  waters.  She  was
in  agony,  but  strange  to  say,  the  excitement  did  not  at  once  awake  her,
and  she  saw  him  throw  up  his  hands  and  sink,  and  he  appeared  no  more.
At  this  point  she  awoke,  deeply  impressed  with  the  realistic  nature  of  her
vision.  Strange  to  relate,  however,  the  next  night  she  went  through  the
same  series  of  mental  tortures,  her  lover  fell,  struggled  wildly,  but  was
drowned.  When  she  arose  that  morning,  she  confided  her  dreams,  and  the
anxieties  they  had  aroused  in  her  breast,  to  her  aunt.

"  Several  days  later,  Anne  received  a  letter  from  her  lover's  mother,
who,  it  happened,  was  also  her  aunt,  and  who,  with  her  husband,  lived
about  130  miles  away,  in  another  part  of  the  country.  The  letter,  to  her
intense  surprise,  asked  whether  any  news  had  been  received  of  the  arrival
of  the  '  Adela  '  at  Colombo,  the  writer  giving  as  a  reason  for  her  solicitude
for  her  son  a  dream  which  she  had  had  a  few  days  before  (giving  the  date).
She  also  had  dreamed  on  two  consecutive  nights  that  she  had  seen  her  son
fall  overboard  and  rise  no  more,  and  so  powerfully  had  she  been  affected
by  the  visions  that  after  the  repetition  she  had  the  next  morning  written
the  letter  received.  The  days  upon  which  Mrs.  Pengelly  had  dreamt  of
her  son's  death  were  the  very  ones  upon  which  Anne  herself  had  been  so
agitated.  They  could  only  wait  and  pray,  and  after  some  weeks  their
anxiety  was  relieved,  and  their  prayers  rewarded,  by  the  receipt  of  a  letter
from  James,  announcing  his  arrival  at  Colombo  a  few  days  before  the  date
of  the  letter,  after  a  long  and  tempestuous  passage.  He  went  on  to  tell,
to  Anne's  great  astonishment,  how  narrow  an  escape  he  had  recently  had
from  drowning.  'The  day  after  our  arrival,'  he  wrote,  '  I  was  standing  on
a  plank  from  the  hatchway  to  the  bulwarks,  watching  the  coolies  discharg-
ing her.  While  so  standing  I  almost  unconsciously  stepped  forward,  and
the  plank,  one  end  of  which  was  resting  on  the  bulwarks,  at  once  tipped
up,  and  I  was  in  the  water.  Being  unable  to  swim,  my  danger  was  great,
and  I  had  sunk  once  before  the  boatswain  with  a  boathook  caught  me,  and
held  me  up  till  they  brought  the  boat  around.'  Most  wonderful  to  relate,
a  comparison  of  dates  showed  Anne  that  it  was  on  the  very  day  of  her
first  dream  that  her  lover's  life  was  so  nearly  lost,  and  his  mother  was  no
less  surprised  than  Anne.  However,  '  all's  well  that  ends  well.'  James
came  home,  and  he  and  his  cousin  were  married."

Mrs.  Pengelly,  the  mother  of  James  Pengelly,  writes  : —
"10,  Gloucester  Place,  Littlehampton.

"April  19th,  1886.
"  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  date  of  the   dream
only  that,  as  near  as  I  can  recollect,  it  was  in  or  near  1864.     My  son  was


602  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

then  mate  in  the  '  Adela,'  the  ship  of  his  uncle,  whose  daughter  he  after-
wards married.  She  dreamt,  one  night,  that  her  cousin  was  climbing
from  a  boat  into  the  ship,  when  he  slipped  his  foot  and  fell  in  under  the
ship ;  when  they  took  him  up,  he  was  nearly  dead.  She  wrote  to  tell  me
her  dream,  and  by  that  I  found  she  had  dreamt  the  same  dream  the  same
night  as  I  had.  When  my  son  came  home,  upon  questioning  him,  I  found
that  he  had  fallen  into  the  water  at  Colombo,  and,  as  near  as  he  could  tell,
the  same  day  as  I  dreamt  he  did.  My  daughter-in-law,  I  am  sorry  to  say,
is  now  dead ;  if  she  were  living  she  would  be  able  to  tell  you  more  particulars.

"E.  Pengelly."

[Mr.  Pengelly  justly  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  dream  due  to
apprehensions  of  danger  and  disaster  would  not  be  very  likely  to  take  the
form  of  "drowning  in  a  quiet  harbour  "  ;  but  the  amount  of  detail  in  his
narrative  is  more  than  can  be  safely  relied  on,  in  the  absence  of  written
notes.  It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Pengelly  senior's  account  of  her  daughter-
in-law's  dream  does  not  exactly  agree  with  Mr.  Pengelly's.  Mr.  Pengelly
kindly  tried  to  obtain  for  us  an  account  of  the  accident  from  his  father,
but  found  that  "he,  a  plain  sea-captain,  had  little  recollection  of  what
happened  20  years  ago,  during  his  absence."]

(649)  From  the  papers  of  the  late  Psychological  Society.  The  original
document  is  in  the  handwriting  of  the  late  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.  No  names
are  given,  and  the  MS.  bears  no  date.

"  The  following  remarkable  case  is  taken  from  the  lips  of  the  parties
to  whom  it  occurred,  and  for  whose  veracity  I  can  vouch.

"J.  P.,  wife  of  Colonel  P.,  says :  'In  July,  1871,  I  was  at  Weymouth,
sleeping  with  my  daughter.  I  was  wakened  in  the  night  by  a  cold  kiss
upon  my  lips.  I  concluded  that  my  daughter  had  kissed  me,  and  wondered
much  why  her  lips  were  so  corpse-like.  I  fell  asleep  again,  and  on  the
following  morning,  on  awaking,  I  asked  my  daughter  why  she  had  kissed
me,  and  what  made  her  lips  so  cold.  She  said  that  she  had  not  done  so.
Soon  after  this  conversation  a  messenger  arrived  to  say  that  my  mother,
who  was  in  another  house  in  Weymouth,  was  very  ill,  and  requested  my
immediate  attendance.  I  had  left  her  on  the  previous  evening  in  perfect
health,  so  that  I  had  no  sense  of  alarm  for  her  to  account  for  a  mental
impression.     I  found  her  seriously  ill,  and  she  died  in  three  weeks.

"  '  Two  days  before  her  death,  I  received  a  letter  from  my  sister,  Mrs.
C,  who  was  on  a  voyage  to  America,  written  from  the  ship,  then  off
Halifax,  dated  the  day  after  the  night  on  which  I  had  felt  the  cold  kiss,
in  which  she  said,  "  I  am  sure  there  is  something  wrong  with  mother ;  she
is  either  dead  or  ill ;  for  last  night  I  felt  a  cold  kiss  on  my  lips,  as  I  lay  in
my  berth."  As  far  as  we  could  afterwards  trace,  this  had  occurred  to  both
of  us  almost  at  the  same  moment.  My  mother  and  sister  had  been  ex-
tremely attached.     They  were  then  parted  for  the  first  time.'

"This  narrative  of  Mrs.  P.  was  confirmed  to  me  by  her  daughter,  who
was  sleeping  with  her  on  the  night  in  question,  to  whom  she  had  made  the
inquiry  why  she  had  kissed  her,  and  what  had  made  her  lips  so  cold.

"Edw.  W.  Cox."

[If  this  record  is  accurate,  and  the  coincidence  was  more  than  a  very
curious  accident,  there  still  would  be  a  doubt  as  to  the  agency.  It  seems
so    improbable    that    hallucinations,    originating    in  a  telepathic  impulse


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  603

from  the  mother,  should  independently  take  the  same  very  rare  form  in
each  daughter's  experience,  that  I  should  certainly  prefer  to  suppose  one
of  these  experiences  to  have  been  in  some  measure  the  source  of  the  other.
It  is  eminently  a  case  where  it  is  difficult  to  derive  the  form  of  the  impres-
sion from  the  original  agent's  (the  mother's)  mind,  as  even  if  she  thought
of  kissing  her  daughters,  she  would  not  think  of  the  kisses  as  cold  or
corpse-like.     See  Vol.  I.,  pp.  539-40.]

§  2.  To  pass  now  to  the  visual  examples — I  will  first  cite  cases
where  there  is  ground  for  supposing  the  hallucination,  in  its  inception,
to  have  been  more  than  subjective,  and  due  to  the  unusual  condition
of  an  absent  person.  And  in  accordance  with  the  order  adopted
before,  in  Chap.  XVIII.,  I  will  begin  with  the  few  remaining  cases
where  the  percipients  were  not  in  each  other's  company  at  the  time
of  their  experience.

(650)  From  Mrs.  Forsyth  Hunter,  the  narrator  of  cases  553  and  554.

"1882.
Mrs.  Hunter's  husband  had  had  a  Scotch  wet-nurse  of  the  old-
fashioned  sort,  more  devoted  to  him  than  even  to  her  own  children.  Soon
after  her  marriage,  Mrs.  Hunter  made  acquaintance  with  this  nurse,  Mrs.
Macfarlane,  who  paid  her  several  visits  during  Mr.  Hunter's  absence  in
India.  In  June,  1857,  Mrs.  Hunter,  who  was  travelling  to  a  health-
resort,  confided  to  Mrs.  Macfarlane's  keeping  a  box  of  valuables.  One
evening  in  the  following  August,  Mrs.  Hunter  was  entertaining  some
friends  ;  but  having  occasion  to  return  to  the  dining-room  for  a  moment,
she  passed  the  open  door  of  her  bedroom,  and  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to
look  in  ;  and  there  on  the  bed  was  a  large  coffin,  ^  and  sitting  at  the  foot  of
it  was  a  tall  old  woman  steadfastly  regarding  it.  "Returning  to  my
friends,  I  announced  the  vision,  which  was  received  with  shouts  of  laughter,
in  which,  after  a  time,  I  joined.  However,  I  had  seen  what  I  have  de-
scribed, and,  moreover,  could  have  told  the  very  dress  the  old  woman  wore.
"When  my  friends  left,  and  I  had  paid  my  usual  last  visit  to  the
nursery,  my  nurse  looked  odd  and  distraite,  and  to  my  astonishment
followed  me  on  to  the  landing.  '  O  ma'am,'  she  began,  '  I  feel  so  queer,
such  a  strange  thing  happened.  At  7  o'clock  I  went  to  the  kitchen  for
hot  water,  and  when  I  came  out  I  saw  a  tall  old  woman  coming  down-
stairs, and  I  stopped  to  let  her  pass,  but,  ma'am,  there  was  something
strange  about  her,  so  I  turned  to  look  after  her.  The  hall  door  was  wide
open,  and  she  was  making  for  it,  when  in  a  moment  she  melted  away.  I
can  swear  I  saw  her,  and  can  tell  you  her  very  dress,  a  big,  black  poke
bonnet  and  a  checked  black-and-white  shawl.'  "  This  description  of  the
dress  exactly  corresponded  with  what  Mrs.  Hunter  had  herself  seen.

Mrs.  Hunter  laughed  the  matter  off,  and  did  not  even  think  of
connecting  her  own  vision  with  the  nurse's.  About  half  an  hour  after-
wards, when  in  bed,  she  heard  a  piercing  scream  from  her  little  daughter,
aged  5,  followed  by  loud,  frightened  tones,  and  she  then  heard  the  nurse

1  As  usual,  the  form  of  the  hallucination  can  be  paralleled  in  the  purely  subjective
class  ;  see  Vol.  i. ,  p.  503.


604  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

soothing  the  child,  "  Next  morning  little  E.  was  full  o£  her  wrongs.
She  said  that  '  a  naughty  old  woman  was  sitting  at  the  table  and  staring
at  her,  and  that  made  her  scream.'  Nurse  told  me  that  she  found  the
child  wide  awake,  sitting  up  in  bed,  pointing  to  the  table,  and  crying  out,
'  Go  away,  go  away,  naughty  old  woman ! '  There  was  no  one  there.
Nurse  had  been  in  bed  some  time,  and  the  door  was  locked.

"  My  child's  Adsion  I  treated  as  I  did  her  nurse's,  and  dosed  both.
However,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Mac-
farlane's  son,  announcing  her  death,  and  telling  me  how  her  last  hours
were  disturbed  by  anxiety  for  my  husband  and  his  family.  My  nurse,  on
being  told  the  news,  exclaimed,  '  Good  Lord,  it  was  her  I  saw  that  night,
and  her  very  dress  ! '  I  never  ascertained  the  exact  hour  of  her  death.
My  letter  of  inquiry  and  condolence  was  never  answered,  though  my  box
was  duly  sent  to  me."

Mrs.  Hunter  writes  to  us  that,  after  reading  this  account  in  the
Fortnightly  Review  (where  it  was  first  published),  the  "  little  E."  of  the
story  wrote  to  her,  "  I  well  remember  my  part  of  that  story."  Mrs.
Hunter  adds,  "  I  can  truly  say  that  she  had  never  been  spoken  to  about  it
all  these,  years."

We  find  from  the  obituary  of  the  Glasgow  Herald  that  Mrs.  Macfarlane
died  on  August  31,  1857.

(651)  From  the  late  Mr.  B.  Coleman,  who  wrote  as  follows  to  the
Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Magazine : —

"  48,  Pembridge  Villas,  Bayswater.

"January  14th,  1861.

"I  was  recently  staying  at  the  Victoria  Hotel,  Southport,  kept  by
Mr.  Salthouse,  an  old  and  respectable  inhabitant  of  that  town.  [I  learnt
that]  Mr.  Salthouse  was  a  firm  believer  in  apparitions,  founded  on  an
incident  which  occurred  in  his  own  family.  I  accordingly  asked  Mr.
Salthouse  to  tell  me  the  particulars,  and  he  related  the  following  story  : —

"  '  Some  years  ago  my  eldest  son,  Thomas,  shipped  as  a  sailor  on  a
voyage  to  India.  After  he  had  been  absent  a  month  or  two,  I  was  sur-
prised one  summer  morning  to  see  him  standing  by  my  bedside  in  his
sailor's  dress.  I  extended  my  hand  to  greet  him,  and  inquired  the  cause
of  his  unexpected  return.  The  figure  remained  for  an  instant  mute  and
immoveable,  and  vanished  from  my  sight.

"  '  Excited  and  perplexed  by  this  unlooked-for  incident,  I  rose  and
prepared  to  make  my  usual  visit  to  my  farm,  which  is  two  miles  distant
from  Southport,  reasoning  myself  into  the  belief  that  I  had  been  under  a
delusion.  On  reaching  the  farm  my  servant,  William  Ball,  who  still
resides  there,  asked  me  if  Master  Tom  had  returned  home.  I  said,  "  No ;
why  do  you  ask  ? "  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  certainly  saw  him  cross  the
farmyard  early  this  morning.  I  ran  to  open  the  gate  and  could  not  see
where  he  had  gone,  but  I  am  as  sure  as  I  live  that  I  saw  him  in  his
sailor's  dress."  This  statement  corroborating  my  own  experience  of  the
morning,  I  made  sure  that  some  disaster  had  befallen  my  son,  and  in  due
time  this  proved  to  be  the  case.  He  had  died  that  very  day  and  hour,  of
dysentery,  on  board  ship,  before  reaching  Bombay.'

"  Benjamin  Coleman."


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  606

A  son  of  Mr.  Salthouse,  to  whom  we  sent  the  account,  writes  to  us
as  follows  :—  «  91^  Railway  Street,  Southport.

"June  12th,  1884.

"  From  what  I  can  remember  I  believe  the  account  is  correct.  I
showed  this  paper  to  my  brother-in-law,  and  he  told  me  that  my  father
always  said  so.  ^  I  have  heard  Ball  [now  deceased]  tell  the  tale  many
times.  "John  Salthouse."

Later,  Mr.  Salthouse  writes  to  us  that  he  finds  that  Mr.  Thomas  Salt-
house's  ship  left  Liverpool  on  June  3,  1846,  and  that  he  was  taken  ill
between  Bombay  and  Hong  Kong,  on  Nov.  23.  We  learn  from  the
General  Register  of  Shipping  and  Seamen  that  he  served  as  third  mate  on
the  ship  "  Inglewood,"  of  Liverpool,  from  June  3  to  Dec.  13,  1846,  on
which  latter  date  he  died  at  sea.  The  words  "  summer  morning "  and
"  before  reaching  Bombay  "  in  the  above  account  are  therefore  incorrect.

The  following  case  is  a  sort  of  comedy  of  errors.  Only  two  of  the
four  hallucinations  which  it  includes  represented  the  absent  agent ;
as  to  the  two  which  did  not,  I  shall  hazard  no  further  supposition
than  that  their  coincidence  with  the  others  was  not  accidental.

(652)  From  Mrs.  Fagan,  Bovey  Tracey,  Newton  Abbot,  the  narrator
of  case  617.  "1883

"  Captain  Robert  Fagan,  late  of  the  Bengal  Artillery,  while  in  charge
of  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Lahore,  was  in  the  district  on  the  river  collecting
boats.  One  morning,  during  his  absence  from  home,  his  eldest  boy,  of
about  6  years  old,  seeing  his  mother  just  dressed  for  breakfast  in  a
coloured  muslin,  begged  her  to  take  it  off  and  put  on  a  black  dress,  saying,
'  Because  papa  is  dead.'  The  mother,  after  diverting  his  thoughts  for  a
short  time,  said,  '  Shall  I  put  on  a  black  dress  now,  Charlie  1 '  '  Oh,  no,'
he  answered,  '  papa  is  not  dead  now,'  and  ran  away.

"  On  leaving  her  room,  she  was  met  by  the  head  nurse,  a  Scotch-
woman, with  the  inquiry  if  she  had  heard  from  the  master  that  morning.
When  told  his  usual  letter  had  not  come,  she  said,  '  Something  very  un-
canny has  happened  to  him,  for  looking  out  of  the  window  just  now,  I  saw
Annie,  the  under-nurse,  and  the  gardener  go  up  to  master's  favourite  rose-
tree  and  gather  a  flower,  and  before  she  could  have  got  in  from  the  garden,
I  found  her  in  the  night  nursery,  which  she  had  never  left,  finishing
bathing  the  children.'

"Not  thinking  much  of  this,  Mrs.  Fagan  passed  on  to  the  breakfast-
room,  where  she  expected  to  find  her  visitors.  Captain  and  Mrs.  Reveley.
Not  doing  so,  she  went  to  Mrs.  R.'s  room,  whom  she  found  still  at  her
toilet,  for  which  unpunctuality  Mrs.  R.  apologised,  saying  she  had  had  a
dreadful  fright,  having  seen  Mrs.  Fagan  standing  in  front  of  the  chest  of
drawers,  who,  when  asked  how  she  had  come  unobserved  into  the  room,
turned  round  and  then  deliberately  vanished  through  the  chest  of  drawers
and  the  door  behind  it.^

1  The  form  of  expression  here  would  convey  the  idea  that  Mr.  J.  Salthouse  had  not
himself  heard  of  the  incident  from  his  father.  But  in  conversation  I  learnt  from  him  that
he  had  heard  his  father  mention  it  several  times,  in  a  manner  vs^hich  showed  him  to  have
been  much  impressed  by  it.

2  See  Vol.  i.,  p.  432,  note.     The  present  case  is  not  one  of  those  there  referred  to.


606  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

"  This  third  strange  remark  led  Mrs.  Fagan  to  relate  all  three  at  the
breakfast-table  to  Captain  Reveley.  She  could  not  help  observing  how
unlike  his  usual  manner  was  his  brusqueness  in  cutting  short  the  conver-
sation, as  soon  as  he  had  heard  all  particulars.  Five  days  passed  without
any  information — private  or  ofl&cial — from  Captain  Fagan ;  but  at  the  end
of  that  time  he  arrived  home  looking  ill,  and  saying  that,  on  the  morning
of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  he  was  with  difficulty  resuscitated  from
drowning,  the  boat  in  which  he  was  having  capsized.  This  was  naturally
taken  as  the  solution  of  the  mystery.  Captain  Reveley,  turning  to  Mrs.
Fagan,  said,  '  I  must  apologise  for  my  brusqueness  of  manner  that  morn-
ing, but  I  feared  to  alarm  you  by  seeming  to  attach  any  importance
to  what  had  happened,  and  lest  I  should  be  induced  to  tell  you  of  the
greater  fright  I  had  myself  had  than  any  of  you.  For,  Fagan,'  addressing
the  Captain,  '  as  I  passed  from  your  office,  where  I  had  been  reading  with
the  Moonshee,  and  going  through  the  drawing-room,  I  distinctly  saw  you
sitting  in  your  usual  chair.'  "

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Fagan  adds  : —

"As  to  the  story  of  those  who  saw  my  husband  and  me  and  had
impressions  that  he  was  in  danger,  it  is  now  so  long  ago  that  my  son
could  hardly  remember  it.  Captain  Reveley,  of  the  Bengal  Infantry,  who
saw  him,  his  wife,  who  saw  me,  and  the  two  women,  the  Scotchwoman,  by
name  Ann  Kenny,  and  the  Irishwoman,  by  name  Annie  Robertson,  both
then  wives  of  privates  in  the  Bengal  Artillery,  I  fear,  could  hardly  be
traced  as  witnesses ;  but  I  give  you  their  names.

"It  occurred  at  Anarkullie,  Lahore,  Punjaub,  about  the  year  1850."
In  conversation  v^dth  Mrs.  Fagan,  Professor  Sidgwick  learnt  that  Mrs.
Reveley  did  not  connect  the  apparition  of  Mrs.  Fagan  with  Captain  Fagan.
Mrs.  Reveley,  who  is  now  living  near  Montreal,  has  been  lately  applied  to
for  an  independent  account ;  but  no  answer  has  been  received  up  to  the
time  of  going  to  press.

(653)  From  Mrs.  Heckford,  6,  The  Crescent,  Minories,  E.

"1884.

"  When  I  was  a  child  6  years  old,  my  mother  died  after  a  short  illness,
in  Germany,  and  one  of  her  two  unmarried  sisters  came  from  Ireland  to
take  charge  of  my  two  elder  sisters  and  of  me,  leaving  my  other  aunt  in
the  country  house  which  had  for  years  been  their  home.  Within  a
few  days  of  a  year  from  the  death  of  my  mother,  my  eldest  sister,  a  re-
markably healthy  child,  died  of  scarlatina,  also  in  Germany.  When  I
was  a  girl  in  my  teens,  my  surviving  sister  and  I  were  one  day  talking
about  apparitions,  in  the  spirit  of  absolute  disbelief  in  such  appearances
which  had  been  carefully  fostered  by  those  who  educated  us,  including
my  aunt ;  when,  somewhat  to  my  astonishment,  she  recounted  to  us  the
following  story.

"  One  night,  she  said,  about  the  time  of  my  mother's  death,  she  had
retired  to  rest,  but  was  not  asleep,  when  suddenly  she  saw  the  figure  of
my  mother,  attired  in  her  usual  white  dressing-gown,  sitting  at  the  foot
of  her  bed  and  gazing  steadfastly  at  her.  My  aunt  said  that  she  was
aware  that,  owing  to  the  fact  of  my  mother  being  delicate,  and  no  letter
having  arrived  very  lately  from  Germany,  she  was  anxious  about  her,  and


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  607

that  hence,  on  seeing  the  figure,  she  decided  that  it  was  the  result  of
some  mental  disorder,  and  resolutely  closed  her  eyes  so  as  to  avoid  any
further  delusion.  After  keeping  them  shut  for  some  time,  she  re-opened
them,  and  found  that  the  figure  had  disappeared.  She  said  that  having  a
horror  of  encouraging  superstitious  fancies,  she  took  no  note  of  the  day
or  hour,  and  having  resolved  not  to  tell  the  sister  who  then  lived  with
her,  so  as  not  to  excite  or  frighten  her,  had  never  broken  her  resolution.
She  admitted,  however,  that  when  she  heard  of  my  mother's  death  a
short  time  after,  it  struck  her  that  the  coincidence  was  remarkable.

-  "  Many  years  after  this  conversation,  when  my  aunt  had  passed  away,
and  we  two  girls  were  living  with  her  sister,  the  conversation  turned  upon
'  ghosts.'  The  company  consisted  of  my  Aunt  S.,  her  adopted  daughter
(a  cousin  of  ours),  and  myself.  After  remarking  that  she  did  not  believe
in  ghosts,  my  Aunt  S.  told  us  she  would  recount  to  us  a  very  remarkable
experience  she  had  once  had.  She  said  that  one  night,  about  the  time  of
my  mother's  death,  she  had  retired  to  rest,  but  was  not  asleep,  when
suddenly  she  saw  my  mother,  in  her  usual  white  dressing-gown,  sitting  at
the  foot  of  her  bed ;  that  she  said  to  the  figure,  '  Oh,  M.,  how  are  you  1 '
(or  words  to  that  effect)  and  that  the  figure  replied,  '  Quite  well,  but  I
shall  come  back  for  Jane.'i  The  figure  then  disappeared.  My  Aunt  S.
said  that  she  resolved  not  to  tell  her  sister,  for  fear  of  exciting  her,  and
that  she  had  taken  no  note  of  the  day  or  hour,  not  wishing  to  encourage
a  superstitious  feeling ;  but  that  on  hearing  of  my  mother's  death,  she  had
been  struck  by  the  strangeness  of  the  coincidence.  Even  then,  she  said,
the  words  regarding  my  sister  Jane  appeared  unmeaning,  but  were  start-
lingly  explained  when  the  child  soon  followed  her  mother.

"  My  Aunt  S.  never  recounted  this  experience  to  her  sister,  who  thus
passed  away  in  ignorance  of  the  phenomenon  of  a  double  apparition.
Years  passed  without  any  allusion  to  these  singular  recitals  between  my
sister,  my  cousin,  and  myself;  we  were  thoroughly  incredulous  of  the
possibility  of  '  ghosts '  in  general  when  we  heard  them,  and  Spiritualism
was  to  us,  for  long  afterwards,  a  subject  merely  for  mirth  ;  neither  does
either  my  sister  or  my  cousin  profess  a  belief  in  Spiritualism  now ;  yet
they  are  both  ready  to  attest  the  truth  of  my  version  of  a  story,  the
principal  witnesses  to  the  veracity  of  which  have  passed  beyond  the  reach
of  inquiry.

"  Saeah  Heckford.

"  A.  GoPF  [her  sister,  of  22,  Palace  Road,  Upper  Norwood].

"  S.  C.  Eland  [her  cousin]."
Mrs.  Goff  tells  us  that  the  occurrence  took  place  at  Christmas,  1845.
Her  impression  had  been  that  the  words  heard  were  in  answer  to  a  direct
question  of  her  aunt  about  the  children.

§  3.  In  the  following  far  larger  group  the  percipients  were
together.

(654)  From  Professor  J.  E.  Carpenter,  Leathes  House,  Fitzjohn's
Avenue,  IST.W.,  an  Associate  of  the  S. P.E,.  "April  6th   1884.

"I  do  not  know  that  my  story  is  likely  to  be  very  satisfactory  to  you

1  As  to  the  interchange  of  remarks,  see  p.  460,  second  note.


608  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

because  I  am  unable  to  give  precise  dates,  and  have  no  means  of  access  to
any  memorandum  made  at  the  time.  It  is  possible  that  an  account  which
I  wrote  soon  after  the  occurrence  may  be  preserved  [see  below],  and  if  you
should  desire  further  particulars  I  may  be  able  to  procure  them  for  you.

"  The  manifestation  took  place  in  the  early  summer  of  1868  or  1869,
but  I  cannot  now  recall  which.  I  lived  then  in  lodgings  in  Clifton.  The
mistress  of  the  house  was  a  nervous,  highly  excitable  woman,  lame,  having
one  leg  shorter  than  the  other.  One  morning,  after  breakfast,  she  ap-
peared much  excited,  and  then  informed  me  that  the  evening  before  she
had  seen  a  ghost.  The  circumstances,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  were  these.
Miss  Reed  (the  landlady)  was  standing  about  7.30  in  the  kitchen  (lighted
by  a  mndow  opening  into  a  small  area),  in  front  of  the  kitchen  fire.  The
maidservant  was  standing  at  the  table  with  her  back  to  the  window,
peeling  some  onions  for  my  fellow-lodger's  supper.  Suddenly,  Miss
Reed  said  to  the  girl,  'Oh,  Eliza,  what's  that?  The  girl  replied,
'  Please'm,  I  saw  a  man  go  round  the  table  and  out  through  the  door.'
Just  then  the  street-door  bell  rang.  The  kitchen  door  was  closed,  and  had
not  been  opened.  The  girl's  statement  expressed  exactly  what  Miss  Reed
herself  had  seen.  When  the  bell  rang  the  girl  exclaimed,  '  Please,  miss,
I'm  so  frightened,  I  daren't  go  upstairs.'  The  landlady  went  up,  and
on  coming  down  again  questioned  the  girl  about  the  figure.  They  had
both  seen  only  the  upper  part,  above  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  it  was
naked.  I  asked  Miss  Reed  if  it  resembled  anyone  she  knew.  '  I
should  have  said  it  was  like  my  uncle,'  she  answered,  '  but  he  is  a  very
stout  man,  and  this  was  very  thin.'  She  then  detailed  to  me  another
curious  incident  in  her  own  life,  of  which  I  have  now  forgotten  the
particulars  ;  but  I  got  the  impression  that  she  was  too  excited  to  give
me  precise  facts  about  remote  events,  though  her  story  about  the  night
before  was  quite  coherent  and  distinct.

"The  sequel  was  curious.  Either  that  day,  or  very  shortly  after-
wards, she  was  telegraphed  for  to  go  to  her  uncle,  who  was  dangerously
ill  and  had  been  repeatedly  calling  for  her.  At  the  time  of  the  mani-
festation she  had  no  idea  that  he  was  in  any  but  his  usual  health.
He  lived,  I  think,  at  Berkeley,  in  Gloucestershire.  She  went  imme-
diately, and  on  her  return  a  few  days  after  told  me  what  a  shock  she  had
felt,  on  going  into  the  sick  room,  at  seeing  her  uncle  reduced  to  the
attenuated  form  of  the  man  who  had  presented  himself  in  the  kitchen.  ^

"  I  have  been  sorry  since  that  I  did  not  separately  question  the  servant,
but  I  had  reason  to  think  her  so  little  sensible  that  it  did  not  seem  worth
while.  It  was  only  after  Miss  Reed's  return  from  her  uncle's  sick  bed
that  the  incident  seemed  to  have  any  importance.

"J.  EsTLiN  Carpenter."

In  a  subsequent  letter.  Professor  Carpenter  says  : —

"  Unfortunately  no  letter  can  be  found  with  any  account  of  the  actual
incident.  All  that  has  been  discovered  I  have  transcribed  on  the  opposite
page.  The  details  I  had  quite  forgotten.  The  passage  does  not  say  that
Miss  Reed  went  to  her  uncle's  house,  but  I  feel  sure  that  she  was  sum-

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  554-6.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  609

moned  thither ;  indeed,  the  particulars  here  recorded  could  hardly  have
been  learned  by  her  anywhere  else.  I  fear  this  is  a  lame  and  impotent
conclusion.

[Copy.]

"  '  Clifton,  March  12th,  1869.
"  '  I  send  you  the  sequel  of  my  ghost  story — if  it  is  to  be
considered  as  a  sequel  at  all.  I  don't  know  whether  I  told  you  that  I
asked  Miss  R.  if  her  ghostly  visitor  resembled  anyone  she  knew,  and  she
said  the  only  one  she  could  think  of  whom  he  was  like  was  her  uncle,  but
he  was  stout  and  the  appearance  was  thin.  At  the  end  of  last  week  she
heard,  unexpectedly,  that  her  uncle  a  few  weeks  before  had  been  taken
seriously  ill,  that  he  had  been  exceedingly  reduced,  and  that  he  was  then
lying  at  death's  door.  (To-day  I  hear  that  he  is  dead.)  Further,  some
small  property  that  he  had  he  had  formerly  left  to  Miss  Reed.  Some
little  while  ago,  however,  an  aunt  of  Miss  R.'s  came  to  "  take  care  of  him,"
and  induced  him  to  alter  his  will  in  her  favour,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  life
interest  was  concerned.  When  he  fell  ill,  he  became  much  agitated  at  the
injustice  he  thought  he  had  done  Miss  R.,  and  expressed  himself  with
strong  self-accusation,  though,  like  many  weak  people,  he  put  off  a  second
alteration  from  day  to  day.  Whether  one  of  these  fits  of  distress  took
place  at  the  time  of  the  so-called  appearance,  and  there  was  really,  any
connection  between  them,  cannot  now  be  traced,  and  the  story  must  be
left  with  its  possibilities  unsolved.'

"P.S. — Miss  Reed  gave  up  her  house  some  10  years  ago  or  more.  She
was  afterwards  reduced  to  considerable  distress  by  sickness,  &c.  I  have
certainly  heard  nothing  of  her  for  8  years,  and  have  quite  lost  all  trace  of
her."

(655)  From  Mrs.  Mainwaring,  of  Knowles,  Ardingly,  Hayward's
Heath,  (the  narrator  of  case  370,)  who  sent  us  a  less  detailed  account  in
August,  1884.  "March  14th,  1885.

"  My  aunt,  Margaret  Saulez,  and  my  mother,  then  Mary  Saulez,  slept
together ;  and  the  rules  of  the  house  were  strict.  One  most  forbidden
thing  was  noise  in  bedrooms,  or  talking  after  going  to  bed.  But  the  two
young  girls  one  night  went  on  chattering  and  laughing  after  they  were  in
bed,  and  suddenly  the  door  opened  and  my  grandmother  came  in.  She
just  came  and  looked  at  them  sorrowfully,  as  if  she  was  vexed,  and  without
speaking  left  the  room.  I  do  not  remember,  at  this  moment,  whether  they
spoke  to  her  then ;  however,  they  felt  so  grieved  at  her  look  and  silence
that  they  both  jumped  out  of  bed  and  followed  her  quickly  to  her  door,
but  found  it  locked,  and  she  would  not  answer — as  they  thought — when
they  begged  her  to  forgive  them.  My  grandfather  woke,  and  found  her
by  his  side  in  a  deep  swoon.i  They  sent  for  the  doctor,  and  he  said  that
he  was  only  just  in  time  to  save  her  life,  as  she  had  evidently  been  in  that
state  some  time  ;  and  a  few  hours  after  a  child  was  born.

"  This  is  the  story  familiar  to  me  from  my  mother's  lips  since  my  child-
hood, and  I  am  as  sure  of  its  truth  as  one  can  be  of  anything  one  does  not
know  oneself.     The  elder  sister,  my  aunt,  died  soon  after.

"E.  L.  Mainwaring."

1  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  230-1  and  563,  note.
VOL.   II.  2   E


610  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

[Special  circumstances,  which  Mrs.  Main  waring  has  explained  to  us,
prevent  our  applying  to  her  mother  for  a  first-hand  account.]

(656)  Received  through  the  kindness  of  the  Rev.  Prebendary  Sadler,
Rector  of  Honiton.  The  ladies  concerned  in  the  case  were  his  great-aunt
and  her  daughter  (who  died  in  April,  1885).     Writing  in  1883,  Mr.  Sadler

says,  "  I  took  the  story  from  Miss  F n's  own  lips,  questioning  her  closely

upon  it.  She  is  as  clear  and  fresh  in  mind  as  myself.  She  has  a  very
accurate  and  retentive  memory.  I  cannot  say  when  I  first  heard  the
account — very  many  years  ago."  In  April,  1884,  he  added  that  the
account  was  taken  down  in  writing  "  several  years  since."

"In  the  year  1819,  Mrs.  S r  and  [her  daughter]  MissF n  were

going  into  Leeds,    down  St.   Peter's   Hill,   when  Mrs.    S r  suddenly

stopped,   and  pointed   out  to  Miss  F n  a  man  on  horseback,  riding

quickly,  a  little  way  before  them,  up  the  hill.  She  exclaimed,  '  There  is
Jonah  S.  !  How  strange  he  looks  !  He  looks  like  a  corpse.  Ah,  to  think
of  his  riding  out  now,  when  we  heard  yesterday  that  he  was  dying  of
fever  !  '  The  man  then  passed  them  on  horseback  without  noticing  them,
though  he  was  well  acquainted  with  them.  They  stood  still,  and  looked
at  him  as  he  passed.  His  eyes  looked  fixed,  as  if,  though  open,  they  were
not  looking  at  anything.  He  was  riding  quickly.  They  followed  him
with  their  eyes,  till  they  lost  him  at  the  turn  of  the  hill  some  little  way
behind   them.     He   had   on  a   light-coloured    drab   greatcoat,    which   he

usually  wore.     Miss  F n  thinks  that  he  had  no  hat  on,  but  is  not

perfectly  sure  about  that.  They  did  not  see  him  till  he  was  nearly  up  to
them.

"  They  went  into  the  town  to  Mr.   S r's  warehouse.     Mr.   S r

met  them   at   the  door,  and  before  they  could  say  anything  to  him,  said,

'  I  have  just  heard  that  Jonah  S.  died  at  2  o'clock  to-day.'     Mrs.   S r

looked  at  her  watch,  and  calculated  that  it  was  just  at  that  time  they  saw
him  pass."

We  requested  the  parish  clerk  at  Leeds  to  search  for  the  date  of  the
death ;  he  wrote  back  implying  that  he  had  done  so,  but  refused  to  send
the  result  except  in  combination  with  other  information,  ofiered  on  terms
which,  though  not  unreasonable  from  his  point  of  view,  we  could  not  accept.

[The  case  is  too  remote  for  reliance  to  be  placed  on  details ;  but  the
fact  (if  correctly  remembered)  that  the  ladies  were  astonished  at  seeing
this  particular  person  out  riding,  tells  against  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken
identity,  in  So  far  as  it  implies  that  they  gave  him  more  than  a  hasty
glance.]

(657)  From  Mr.  Leonard  E.  Thomas,  Derrie  Downs,  St.  Mary  Cray.

"December  17th,  1883.

"  A  landlady  of  mine,  Mrs.  R.,  with  whom  I  lived  for  years,  and  who
was  one  of  the  kindest  of  women — a  thoroughly  God-fearing  woman,  who,
I  firmly  believe,  would  scorn  to  invent  or  concoct  any  tale — related  to  me,
among  other  very  peculiar  experiences,  the  following  : —

"  She  was  a  little  girl  of  about  1 1  years,  when  her  grandfather,  who
lived  a  few  streets  away  from  them,  was  taken  ill  (I  believe  she  said  with
scarlet  fever),  and  she  was  not  allowed  to  go  near  the  house.  One  after-
noon her  grandfather  (who  was  very  fond  of  the  child)  wished  to  see  her


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  611

very  much,  and  she  was  taken  to  him.  That  night  she  was  lying  by  her
mother's  side  in  bed,  and  the  door  stood  ajar  with  a  light  on  the  landing.
She  was  lying  awake,  when  she  heard  the  pat,  pat,  peculiar  to  a  naked
foot,  ascending  the  stairs.  The  form  of  her  grandfather  entered  the  room,
advanced  to  the  bed,  drew  the  curtain,  and  looked  at  them,  and  was  gone.
She  was  trembling  violently,  and  clung  to  her  mother,"  who  had  seen  it
too,  and  who  said,  '  Hush,  child !  it  is  only  your  grandfather.'  Her
mother  then  got  up  and  struck  a  light,  and  dressed,  saying,  '  I  fear  some-
thing must  have  happened  to  your  grandfather ;  I  had  better  go  round
and  see.'  But  the  child  begged  her  not  to,  as  she  would  be  frightened  to
death.  They  waited,  and  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards  a
messenger  came  round  to  bear  the  news  of  her  grandfather's  death,  which
had  taken  place  at  that  precise  time."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Thomas  adds  : —

"  I  found  out  the  present  address  of  Mrs.  R.,  and  wrote  to  her,  asking
her  to  be  good  enough  to  write  me  out  an  account  of  what  she  had  once
related  to  me,  at  the  same  time  stating  for  what  purpose  I  wished  it.  I
extract  from  her  reply  that  part  of  it  which  refers  to  the  subject,  and
which  runs  as  follows  : —

"  '  I  do  not  care  in  any  way  to  enter  into  such  matters.  What  I  told
you,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  is  true,  but  undoubtedly  the  impression
then  made  has  been  deepened  by  hearing  mother  speak  of  it ;  and  I  always
think  such  things  that  we  cannot  account  for  in  any  way  or  understand
are  best  let  alone.'  "

[Details  again  cannot  be  relied  on,  the  narrator  having  been  so  young
at  the  time.  But  the  fact  of  the  mother's  subsequent  references  to  the
incident  favours  the  supposition  that  she  herself  shared  the  experience,
and  that  it  was  not  a  mere  frightened  dream  of  the  child's.]

(658)  From  Mrs.  Spenser  (mentioned  above,  p.  575).  The  account
was  copied  for  us  by  Mrs.  Saxby,  of  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon,  from  a
private  letter.  a  97^  Railway  Street,  Southport.

"September  1st,  1871.

"  My  sister  Elizabeth  had  a  young  friend  staying  with  her,  who  shared
the  same  bed.  They  had  ceased  chatting,  and  were  preparing  for  sleep,
when  Elizabeth  touched  Henriette,  saying,  '  Look  at  that  beautiful  light !  '
Henriette  exclaimed,  '  Very  beautiful,  but  what  is  it  ? '  Elizabeth  re-
plied, '  Oh,  it  is  little  Mary  Stanger  !  How  exquisitely  beautiful.  She  is
floating  away,'  and  the  vision  passed.

"  Early  the  next  morning,  she  sent  to  Mr.  Stanger's  house,  and  learnt
that  the  dear  child  had  died  at  the  exact  time  she  had  seen  the  vision,
about  11  o'clock  the  previous  night.

"  The  appearance  was  of  the  perfect  child,  enveloped  in  a  soft  cloud  of
the  faintest  bluish  light  •}  so  clear,  and  emitting  or  reflecting  a  light  which
illuminated  the  whole  exquisitely  beautiful  little  vision ;  but  Elizabeth
did  not  seem  to  know  whether  the  light  originated  in  the  cloud  or  in  the
lovely  little  figure.     Henriette  saw  the  light  clearly,  as  well  as  Elizabeth.

"  Lucy  Spenser."

1  Compare  eases  210,  311,  315,  and  see  Vol.  i.,  p.  526,  first  note.
VOL.    IL  2    R    2


612  ■       SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

An  inscription  on  a  tombstone  at  Keswick  shows  that  Mary  Stanger
died  on  May  24,  1829,  aged  3  years  and  8  months.

Mrs.  Saxby  tells  us  that  the  two  percipients  were  the  most  intimate
friends  of  the  child's  mother.  The  child  was  a  cousin  of  the  lady — Mrs.
Browne,  of  Tallantire  Hall,  near  Cockermouth — to  whom  Mrs.  Spenser's
letter  was  written.  In  conversation  with  Mrs.  Spenser,  I  learnt  that  she
herself  heard  of  the  vision  on  the  morning  after  its  occurrence  ;  also  that
the  child  had  been  playing  about  the  day  before,  and  that  its  death  was
due  to  loss  of  blood  after  an  incision  necessitated  by  a  sudden  attack  of  croup.

[We  might  suppose  Henriette's  experience  to  have  been  due  simply  to
Elizabeth's  suggestion — which  may  have  been  the  reason  why  Henriette
saw  the  light  and  not  the  figure.  But  if  she  really  "saw  the  light  clearly,"
we  should  thus  be  crediting  verbal  suggestion  with  a  larger  power  of
evoking  sensory  hallucination  in  non-hypnotised  persons  than  the  evidence
on  the  subject  seems  at  all  to  warrant  (see  p.  188,  and  Vol.  I.,  pp.  512-3).]

(659)  From  the  Theory  of  Pneumatology,  by  Dr.  Johann  H.  Jung
Stilling  (translated  by  S.  Jackson,  1851),  pp.  271-272.  Stilling  knew  the
family  of  the  narrator  well,  and  vouches  in  strong  terms  for  their  truth-
fulness and  probity.

"  My  brother  J.  H.  C.  was  placed  by  a  certain  reigning  prince  as
doctor  of  medicine  in  A.,  and,  on  account  of  his  peculiar  abilities,  the  title
of  Aulic  Councillor  was  conferred  on  him.  He  resided  there  about  four
years,  towards  the  close  of  which  he  resolved,  at  the  request  of  my  late
father,  to  return  to  H.  .  .  .  We  ardently  looked  for  his  arrival.  .  .  .
I  dreamt  one  night  that  I  saw  my  brother  on  horseback,  who  said  to  me
that  he  was  on  a  journey  ;  he  would  therefore  give  me  several  commis-
sions to  my  parents.  I  observed  that  his  expression  of  countenance
appeared  very  strange,  and  asked  him  why  he  looked  so  blue-black  in  his
face  ?  on  which  he  made  answer  that  it  was  occasioned  by  the  new  cloak
he  had  put  on,  which  was  dyed  with  indigo.  On  this  he  reached  me  his
hand,  but  whilst  giving  him  mine,  his  horse  began  to  plunge,  which
terrified  me,  and  I  awoke.  Not  long  after  awaking,  the  door  of  my  room
opened,  someone  came  to  my  bedside,  and  drew  aside  the  curtains,  when  I
perceived  the  natural  figure  of  my  brother  in  his  night-gown.  After
standing  there  a  few  minutes,  he  went  to  the  table,  took  up  the  snuffers,
and  let  them  fall,  and  then  shut  the  room  door  again. ^  Fear,  apprehension,
and  terror  overpowered  me  to  such  a  degree  that  I  could  not  stay  in  bed
any  longer.  I  begged  my  eldest  sister,  who  also  witnessed  this  scene,  to
accompany  me  to  my  parents.  On  entering  the  chamber  of  the  latter,  my
father  was  astonished,  and  asked  me  the  reason  of  my  nocturnal  coming.
I  besought  him  to  spare  me  the  answer  till  the  morrow,  and  only  permit
me  to  pass  the  night  in  his  room,  to  which  he  assented.

"As  soon  as  I  awoke  in  the  morning,  I  was  called  upon  by  my  parents
to  relate  what  had  happened,  which  my  eldest  sister  confirmed.  The
circumstance  seemed  so  remarkable  to  my  father  that  he  noted  down  the
night  and  the  hour.  About  three  weeks  afterwards  my  father  received
the  melancholy  intelligence  of  my  brother's  decease;  when  it  appeared

1  There  is,  of  course,  no  reason  to  suppose  the  impression  that  the  door  and  the
snuffers  were  moved  to  have  been  anything  but  part  of  the  hallucination.  Cf.  cases  659,
670,  676,  696,  698.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  613

that  he  had  died  the  same  night,  and  the  same  hour,  of  an  epidemic
disorder,  in  which  he  had  been  suffocated,  and  his  face  had  become  quite
black.  In  the  last  days  of  his  illness  he  had  spoken  continually  of  his
family,  and  had  wished  for  nothing  more  ardently  than  to  be  able  to  speak
once  more  with  me."

[If  the  singular  blue-black  appearance  of  the  face  was  really  a  feature
of  the  dream,  and  was  not  "  read  back  "  into  it  after  the  truth  was  known,
the  details  about  the  dyed  cloak  well  illustrate  the  subjective  and  falla-
cious embodiment  which  a  percipient  may  supply  to  a  telepathic  impres-
sion. Another  instance  of  a  waking  hallucination  following  at  some
interval  after  a  dream  is  case  701.]

(660)  From  Mr.  Alfred  W.  Hobson,  who  sent  the  account  from  Cam-
bridge, under  date  March  22,  1864,  to  the  Editor  of  the  Spiritual  Maga-
zine. Dr.  Parkinson,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  told  us  that  he
remembered  Mr.  Hobson,  a  graduate  of  that  College,  as  a  sensible  man.
The  incident  was  related,  in  Mr.  Hobson's  presence,  to  the  late  Dr.  Elliot-
son,  by  Mr.  Joseph  C.  Robertson,  Editor  of  the  Mechanics^  Magazine,  who
died,  we  find,  in  1852.     We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  his  family.

"The  two  brothers  [i.e.,  Mr.  Robertson  and  a  brother],  both  very
young  at  the  time — I  forget  their  exact  ages — were  in  bed  together  at
their  father's  house,  when  they  both  saw  the  apparition  of  a  lady  to  whom
their  father  (a  widower)  was  engaged  to  be  married.  She  died  suddenly
that  same  night.  The  father  was  away  from  home,  and  not  with  the  boys.
In  this  case  it  seems  as  if  the  dying  lady  had  been  desirous  of  appearing
to  the  father,  and  had  come  to  his  usual  dwelling  in  the  expectation  of
seeing  him  ;  but  was  disappointed,  finding  only  his  sons  instead.^

"It  so  happened  that  Mr.  Robertson  himself  died  a  few  months  after
the  above  dialogue,  and  the  brother  referred  to  in  it  was  with  me  in  the
same  mourning  coach  at  the  funeral,  and  confirmed  the  story  as  told  by
his  deceased  brother.  The  elder  brother  was,  I  believe,  more  alarmed  at
the  apparition  than  the  younger."

(661)  From  a  relative  of  our  energetic  friend  and  helper,  Miss  Frances
M.  Peard,  of  Torquay,  who  procured  us  the  account.  She  says  that  the
narrator  (whose  name  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  publish)  "  is  a  remarkably
shrewd,  sensible  person."  "  1883.

"In  the  decade  of  184 — ,  one  of  Her  Majesty's  Regiments  was  lying
in  a  small  town,  well  up  in  Upper  Canada  then,  now  Ontario.  An
ofl&cer  in  that  regiment,  a  captain,  had  from  the  first  shown  a  great  regard
for  me,  and  had  always  been  very  devoted  in  his  attentions  ;  but  though  I
liked  him  much,  I  could  not  say  that  I  would  accept  him.  In  the  spring
of  184 — ,  April,  there  were  steeplechases  got  up  by  the  garrison.     Captain

,  who  was  a  splendid  horseman  in  every  way,  entered  his  horse.     I

must  mention  that  three  or  four  years  before,  he  had  met  with  an  accident
whilst  riding    a    race,  and    winning.     A    man    rode    across    the    course.

Captain  with    his  horse    ran    against    him,  was  thrown,   his  horse

injured,  and  his  own  leg  broken,  which  caused  him  to  have  a  limp  or  halt
in  his  walk ;  but  it  did  not  prevent  him  being  a  beautiful  waltzer,  and  a
perfect  rider.  He  and  I  rode  together  continually,  and  he  made  me  the
good  horsewoman  I  was.

1  See  p.  268.


614  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

The  day  before    the  steeplechases    above   mentioned,  Captain


again  spoke  to  me  about  my  coldness,  and  told  me  he  put  his  fate  on  this
race.  If  he  won,  would  I  say  '  yes  ' ;  and  if  I  decided  thus,  would  I  give
him  a  rose  I  had  been  nursing  for  this  occasion  ?  I  had  not  answered
then ;  but  if  I  wore  my  rose,  and  afterwards  gave  it  to  him  whether  he
won  the  race  or  not,  it  would  be  a  reply  to  him.  Well,  I  wore  my  rose.
The  day  was  lovely.  He  won  his  race  and  rose  and  my  acceptance ;  for  I
was  one  of  a  large  family  of  daughters  and  my  father  not  young,  and  I
really  liked  no  one  better.     Of  course  he  was  delighted.     My  mother  gave

a  dance  that  evening  to  all  our  world.     Captain engaged  me  for  the

first  three  waltzes,  in  fact  for  several  dances,  and  he  was  to  be  there  early.
The  dance  began,  and  the  dances,  but  my  partner  did  not  appear.  I  began
to  feel  annoyed ;  and  several  of  his  brother  ofiicers  looked  at  each  other
smiling  and  began  making  jokes,  &c.  I  said  to  mamma,  '  How  odd  it  is  ;
he  has  never  done  such  a  thing  before,'  when  I  saw  him  walk  into  the
drawing-room,  which  was  the  ball-room,  in  his  shell-jacket.  The  other
officers  were  in  full  dress  as  usual  for  balls,  but  he  appeared  in  his  usual
shell-jacket,  mess-dress,  with  my  rose  in  his  buttonhole.  He  walked  across
the  room.  I  looking  at  him,  he  gave  me  a  serious,  earnest,  yet  devoted
and  constant  regard.  He  walked  across  the  room  in  front  of  me,  went
towards  the  window,  and  turned  and  went  back  out  of  the  door,  always
the  limp,  and  the  earnest  steady  regard.  A  waltz  then  began.  I  waited
for  him ;  he  never  came.  Mamma  said,  '  How  strange.'  I  went  to  the
other  rooms.  No  partner  there ;  he  was  not  to  be  seen  anywhere.  One
or  two  others  saw.  Colonel  W.,  Colonel  T.,i  and  one  or  two  of  his  brother
officers.  It  spoiled  my  evening.  Somehow  I  cared  not  to  dance,  and  felt
low  and  depressed  and  hurt.

"  Next  morning,  whilst  we  were  at  breakfast,  papa  came  rushing  in,
looking  anxious  and  alarmed.  He  turned  to  me  and  said,  '  S.,  did  you  not
say  Captain — ■ —  was  here  last  night  1  You  saw  him.'  Mamma  and  I
both  said,  '  Yes,  certainly.  He  came  into  the  drawing-room,  walked  across
to  the  window,  his  usual  limp,  and  gave  me  such  a  serious  look.'  We
sprang  up  and  said,  '  Why  do  you  ask  ? '  I  knew  something  had  happened.
Papa  said,  '  He  has  not  been  in  barracks  all  night.     He  rode  out  towards

B bridge  to  a  farm  about  5  p.m.    His  horse  came  back  about  12  p.m.,

saddle  soaked,  and  horse  terrified.'  Of  course  the  whole  garrison  turned
out,  and  a  general  search  was  made.  He  was  not  found  until  the  second
day,  in  the  river.  The  flap  of  an  overcoat  showed  where  the  body  was.
He  had  put  on  his  shell-jacket  before  starting,  intending  to  return  late  for
mess.  My  rose  was  still  in  his  buttonhole,  and  it  was  buried  with  him.
He  came  home,  or  intended  doing  so,  by  a  deep  ford,  but  the  river  had
risen  suddenly,  as  it  sometimes  did.  He  was  very  late,  and  he  tried  no
doubt  to  swim  the  river,  but  did  not  succeed.  It  was  supposed  the  horse
became  frightened  and  knocked  him  on  the  forehead,  as  there  was  a  mark.
His  watch  had  stopped  at  about  10.15  p.m.  Our  parties  began  always
at  9  p.m.,  and  closed  at  1.30  a.m.  He  came,  I  seriously  believe,  to  keep
his  engagement  to  me,  and  to  have  his  last  long  look  of  one  he  so  loved ;
for  he  did  so  far  more  than  I  deserved.

^  These  gentlemen  are  now  dead.  Their  names  were  communicated  to  us,  and  we
have  traced  them  in  the  Army  List.  The  former  was  Deputy- Adjutant  General  in
Canada  from  1843  onwards.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  615

"  This  is,  I  am  glad  to  say,  the  only  ghostly  adventure  I  have  ever  had.
I  am  most  matter-of-fact,  and  by  no  means  subject  to  hallucinations  of  any
kind.  On  the  contrary,  I  do  not  easily  believe  anything.  That  was  the
only  time  in  all  my  life  that  I  ever  had  such  a  vision ;  and  nothing  on
earth  will  ever  make  me  believe  that  his  spirit  ^  did  not  come  to  see  me
that  evening  and  to  keep  his  engagement  with  me — the  peculiar  limp,  the
sad  expression  he  rather  had  at  all  times,  and  the  little  crimson  monthly  rose.

"  My  sister  A.  remembers  it.  My  mother  always  said  how  odd  and
unaccountable  it  was.  Colonel  T.,  who  is  dead,  never  got  over  it.  It  gave
him  a  shudder  even  to  speak  of  it.  '  Bedad !  I  don't  like  ghosts ! '  he  often
said."

We  have  obtained  from  the  Chief  Librarian  of  the  Toronto  Public
Library  a  certified  extract  from  the  Toronto  Examiner  oi  May  26,  1841,
giving  an  account  of  Lieut,  (not  Capt.)^  W.'s  death  which  differs  from  the
above  in  stating  that  his  horse  and  dog  returned  to  a  farm-house  near  the
river  "  about  20  minutes  after  "  5  o'clock,  when  he  had  been  last  seen,
and  "  were  brought  into  the  town  next  day."  He  must  therefore  have
been  drowned  soon  after  5.  The  detail  about  his  watch  stopping  at  10.15
is  thus  probably  incorrect,  and  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  has  been


(662)  From  an  informant  who  desires  that  her  name  may  be  sup-
pressed, on  account  of  the  painful  nature  of  the  main  incident.  She  is  a
very  reasonable  and  respectable  woman,  who  expresses  a  strong  contempt
for  superstition,  and  is  very  sensible  of  the  exaggeration  and  delusion
which  enter  into  the  vulgar  iDeliefs  in  "  supernatural  "  occurrences.

"  1883.

"  When  I  was  a  young  girl,  I  resided  with  my  father,  mother,  sister
(named  Ellen),  and  brother,  at  Clapham.  My  sister  was  in  love  with  a
man,  but  my  father  and  mother  disapproved  of  the  attachment,  and  sent
her  to  a  friend  in  Brighton,  to  be  out  of  the  way.  One  evening  during
her  absence,  between  6  and  7  o'clock,  my  mother  and  brother  were  talking
in  the  garden,  at  the  back  of  the  house.  There  was  a  wall  at  the  bottom
of  the  garden,  and  a  gate,  leading  into  a  large  enclosed  space  used  for
drilling,  &c. ;  this  enclosure  was  locked  in  the  evening,  and  was  certainly
locked  at  the  time  in  question.  It  was  dusk,  but  not  dark.  My  brother
John  (a  very  active  boy,  but  who  happened  to  have  just  sprained  his
ankle)  looked  over  the  wall,  and  suddenly  exclaimed,  '  Mother,  there's
Ellen  !  '  My  mother  looked,  saw,  and  recognised  the  figure  of  my  sister,
and  said,  '  John,  go  quick,  and  tell  her  to  come  in.  Don't  say  anything
to  your  father.'  John  replied,  '  I  can't  because  of  my  foot ;  call  Mary.'
Mother  then  called  me,  and  whispered,  '  There's  Ellen ;  go  and  tell  her  to
come  in  ;  her  father  shall  not  know  anything  about  her  coming  back.'
My  mother's  idea  was  to  get  her  quietly  into  the  house,  and  send  her
away  again  next  day.  I  at  once  went  through  the  garden-gate,  and  gave
her  the  message.  I  particularly  noticed  her  dress,  a  dark  blue  pelisse,
buttoned,  and  the  ribbon  on  her  bonnet.  A  path  led  through  the  enclosure
to  the  outside  gate,  and  she  kept  receding  from  me  along  this  path,  while

^  See  p.  48,  note.

2  The  Chief  Librarian  writes  (Aug.  26,  1886),  "  Captain  is  so  common  an  appellation
in  the  country  parts  that  the  officer  would  most  likely  be  addressed  and  known  as  such
among  the  ordinary  people."


616  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

I  followed  more  and  more  quickly,  my  mother  and  John  watching  us.
There  was  a  deep  dip  in  the  path,  and  here  I  overtook  her  and  tried  to
catch  hold  of  her,  but  seemed  to  catch  nothing.  She  still  receded,  and  at
last  stood  by  the  watch-box,  close  to  the  gate ;  and  here  I  repeated  the
message  to  her,  but  as  she  made  no  answer,  I  went  back.^  My  mother
said,  '  Why,  where's  Ellen  1 '  I  said,  '  I  left  her  by  the  gate.'  My
mother  replied,  'But  you  caught  hold  of  her.'  'Yes,'  I  said,  'but  I  did
not  seem  to  feel  anything  in  my  hand.'

"  My  mother  turned  very  pale,  and  went  into  the  house  and  told  my
father,  and  both  of  them  felt  a  conviction  that  some  calamity  had
happened.  The  next  day  the  news  came  that  my  sister  had  thrown
herself  into  the  sea  and  been  drowned  a  little  before  7  o'clock  on  the
preceding  evening.  This  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have  ever  seen
an  apparition."

[This  is  a  case  where  it  is  specially  important  to  distinguish  the
central  fact  of  a  coincidence,  which  may  be  regarded  as  probably  tele-
pathic, from  the  details  which  may  have  been  subsequently  imagined  or
exaggerated.  Even  if  the  report  is  substantially  correct,  we  have  no  proof
that  the  hallucination  was  spontaneously  collective  ;  in  the  uncertain  light,
it  may  possibly  have  been  produced  in  the  second  and  third  percipients  by
the  suggestion  of  the  first.]

(663)  From  Mr.  C.  Colchester,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.

"1882.

"  Forty-two  or  three  years  ago,  my  father  was  with  a  detachment  of  his
regiment,  the  Royal  Artillery,  stationed  at  Montreal,  Canada.  He  had
left  his  mother  some  months  before  in  England,  in  an  indifferent  state  of
health.  One  evening  he  was  sitting  at  his  desk,  writing  to  her,  when  my
mother,  looking  up  from  her  work,  was  startled  to  see  his  mother  looking
over  his  shoulder,  seemingly  intent  on  the  letter.  My  mother  gave  a  cry
of  alarm,  and  on  my  father  turning  round  the  apparition  vanished.^  On
the  same  evening  I  and  my  brother  (aged  about  6  and  5  years)  were  in
bed,  watching  the  bright  moonlight,  when  suddenly  we  saw  a  figure,  a
lady  with  her  hands  folded  on  her  breast — neither  looking  to  right  nor
left,  but  with  her  eyes  cast  down  in  meditation,  the  head  slightly  bent
forward — walking  slowly  between  the  bed  and  the  window,  backwards  and
forwards.  She  wore  a  cap  with  a  frill  tied  under  her  chin,  and  a  dressing-
gown  of  the  appearance  of  white  flannel,  her  white  hair  being  neatly
arranged.  She  continued  to  walk,  it  seemed  to  me,  fully  5  minutes,  and
then  was  gone.  We  did  not  cry  out,  and  were  not  even  alarmed,  but
after  her  disappearance  we  said  to  each  other,  '  What  a  nice  kind  lady  ! '
and  then  went  to  sleep."

The  children  mentioned  what  they  had  seen  to  their  mother  next
morning,  but  were  told  not  to  talk  about  it.  The  news  of  their  grand-
mother's death  on  that  same  evening  arrived  a  few  weeks  afterwards.

"  I  may    add,"  Mr.    Colchester    concludes,   "  that    neither    I  nor  my

^  This  long  pursuit  of  the  phantasmal  figure  has  occasional  parallels  in  cases  of  purely
subjective  hallucination.     See,  e.g.,  Vol.  i.,  p.  499,  note  ;  and  compare  the  case  on  p.  630.

2  Seep.  91,  second  note.  Mr.  Colchester  believes,  however,  that  his  father  saw  the
apparition.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  617

brother  had  ever  seen  our  grandmother  until  that  evening,  nor  knew  of
what  my  mother  had  seen  till  years  after.  The  apparition  I  saw  is  as
palpably  before  me  now  as  it  was  40  years  since."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on
March  31,   1840.

[Mr.  Colchester  tells  us,  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  believes
his  own  remembrance  to  have  been  unbroken,  that  "the  occurrence  was
not  wholly  or  even  partially  revived  by  my  mother  "  ;  and  that  the  vision
is  unique  in  his  experience.  But  his  extreme  youth  at  the  time  makes
his  first-hand  recollection  extremely  doubtful.  This  objection  does  not
apply  to  his  evidence  as  to  his  parents'  share  in  the  afiair.  If  the  facts
are  correctly  reported,  this  case  belongs  to  the  former  group,  of  cases  where
the  percipients  were  apart,  as  much  as  to  the  present  one.]

(664)  From  Mr.  E.  Butler,  7,  Park  Square,  Leeds.

"October,  1884.

"  During  my  clerkship  I  resided  in  lodgings,  with  a  kind-hearted
Christian  woman  of  great  simplicity  of  character  and  reliable  veracity.  I
heard  from  her  this  story.

"  Her  brother  was  engaged  in  the  wine  trade,  and  spent  a  great  part
of  his  time  in  Portugal  and  Spain.  His  two  children  were  left  in  Leeds.
I  am  not  sure  whether  their  mother  was  living,  but  they  were  frequently,
if  not  altogether,  at  their  aunt's.  One  day  the  two  children  were  in  the
back  sitting-room  along  with  their  aunt,  and  one  or  two  besides  (I  believe
their  cousins).  It  is  the  room  I  very  shortly  afterwards  lived  in.  The
children  simultaneously  cried  out,  '  Oh !  there's  papa !  gone  upstairs.'
They  were  laughed  at,  and  chidden,  but  persisted,  and  the  search  had  to
be  made.  Nothing  was  discovered.  It  was  afterwards  found  by  the  testi-
mony of  the  papa  himself,  that  exactly  at  that  time  when  the  children  saw
him  he  had  fallen  into  the  Douro,  and  was  in  that  stage  of  singular
experience  before  death  by  drowning  when  '  all  the  life  seems  mapped  out
before  the  spirit,'  and  the  soul  is  just  on  the  point  of  parting  from  the
body.  I  do  not  recollect  whether  he  said  that  he  had  specially  thought  of
his  children  in  that  supreme  moment.  Insensibility  followed  ;  but  he  was
rescued,  not  too  late  for  restoration.  a  Edward  Butler  "

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Butler  says  : —

"  With  regard  to  your  inquiry,  I  fear  I  should  have  some  difficulty
now  in  getting  any  corroboration  of  my  communication  respecting  my  old
landlady,  though  my  own  remembrance  of  her  communication  is  too  vivid
to  admit  of  the  possibility  of  mistake.  It  was  told  me  in  the  room,  my
own  room,  where  it  occurred,  with  finger  pointing  to  the  passage  and
staircase.  Her  name  was  Mrs.  Booth  ;  the  house,  No.  7,  Grove  Terrace,
Leeds  :  the  absentee  in  Spain,  her  own  brother,  William  Wild ;  of  the
children,  his  daughters,  every  one  I  believe  is  dead.  The  daughters  left
Leeds  many  years  ago,  and  I  believe  I  am  right  that  they  are  neither  of
them  living."

(665)  From  Mr.  Beresford  Christmas,  Carrara,  Italy.

"November  30th,  1885.
"  My  father,  George  Beresford  Christmas,  was  a  cavalry  officer  in  the
Danish  service  ;  his  elder  and  only  brother,   John   Christmas,  an  admiral


618  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

in  the  same  service.  The  latter's  only  son,  Walter  Christmas,  was,  and
is  still  for  aught  I  know  to  the  contrary,  one  of  the  gentlemen  of  the
bed-chamber  to  the  King  of  Denmark.  The  circumstance  I  am  about  to
relate  took  place  before  my  father's  marriage,  when  he  was  yet  a  young
man  and  living  with  my  grandfather  in  Copenhagen — it  must  have  been
somewhere  about  1825.  Admiral  C.  had  sailed  for  St.  Thomas,  and  my
father  accompanied  him,  leaving  my  grandfather  in  his  usual  health  in
Denmark.  The  two  brothers  occupied  the  same  cabin,  across  wliich,  for
the  sake  of  coolness  on  entering  the  tropics,  a  couple  of  cots  had  been
slung  parallel  to  each  other.  They  were  within  a  few  days'  sail  of  the
island ;  the  sea  calm,  the  sky  clear,  and,  on  the  night  in  question,  a  bright
moonlight  pouring  in  through  the  widely-opened  cabin  windows,  lighting
up  all  within  with  almost  the  distinctness  of  daylight.  Both  brothers  must
have  been  awaked  suddenly  and  simultaneously — by  what,  they  never
knew — by  some  irresistible  and  unknown  power — waked  to  see  standing
between  their  cots  the  figure  of  their  father.  Both  gazed  in  mute  amaze-
ment :  there  it  stood,  motionless  for  a  moment,  which  seemed  a  century  ;
then  it  raised  one  hand  and  pointed  to  its  own  eyes.  They  were  closed.
My  father  started  up  in  bed,  and  as  he  did  so  the  form  vanished.  So
much  was  my  uncle  impressed  with  the  fact  that  he  at  once  entered  it,
with  date  and  moment  of  appearance,  in  the  log-book ;  while  naturally  the
circumstance  became  the  all-absorbing  topic  of  conversation  and  specula-
tion to  all  on  board.

"  When  later  letters  reached  them  in  the  West  Indies,  the  hour  and
minute,  allowing  of  course  for  difference  of  time,  were  found  to  coincide
exactly  with  those  in  which  my  grandfather  had  died.

"  In  due  time  the  circumstance  was  known  to  all  Copenhagen.
Neither  my  uncle  nor  father  ever  liked  to  speak  about  it.  I  have  had  the
fact  from  the  lips  of  both.  Both  firmly  believed  in  the  reality  of  the
vision,  and  neither  of  them  was  the  man  to  give  heed  or  credence  to  an
idle  delusion.  I  remember  both,  in  answer  to  a  question  of  mine,  declaring
to  having  felt  no  fear,  or  even  awe  :  sudden  wonder  and  an  unaccountable
chill,  as  of  an  icy  atmosphere,  ^  was  the  predominating  impression.  It  was
only  when  the  figure  pointed  to  its  own  closed  eyes,  that  a  dumb  dread  of
impending  bereavement  awoke.  My  father,  as  also  my  uncle,  used  to
affirm  that  neither  on  the  evening  in  question  nor  upon  any  of  the
previous  days  had  their  father  been  particularly  the  subject  of  either  their
conversation  or  thoughts.  There  was  no  preparation,  so  to  say,  on  their
part  for  the  apparition ;  at  the  same  instant  both  were  suddenly  awoke
from  sleep  by  some  mysterious  and  irresistible  will,  when  both  beheld  the
identical  form  standing  within  arm's  length  of  them.

"  I  have  no  doubt,  if  you  have  among  your  correspondents  or  members
anyone  in  Copenhagen  willing  to  take  the  trouble,  you  might  be  able  to
get  at  the  entry  made  in  the  log-book. ^  My  uncle  was  on  active  service
till  his  death  almost,  which  took  place  only  a  few  years  ago,  and  there
could  be  no  difficulty  in  tracing  back  the  vessels  he  commanded.

"  Beresford  Christmas."

1  See  p.  37,  note.

2  Unfortunately  we  have  no  Danish  members.  I  have  mentioned  (in  Vol.  i.,  p.  161)
the  great  tendency  of  log-hooks  to  creep  unauthorised  into  second-hand  narratives  of  this
sort  ;  but  the  essential  trustworthiness  of  the  account  does  not,  of  course,  depend  on  that
detail.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  619

The  next  case,  if  telepathically  originated,  is  an  interesting  in-
stance of  the  appearance  of  a  phantasm  to  certain  percipients  on  local,
not  personal,  grounds  (p.  268).

(666)  From  Miss  Edith  Farquharson,  sent  to  us  by  her  relative,  Mrs.
Murray  Aynsley,  of  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.

"June,  1885.

"In  the  year  1868,  No.  9,  Drummond  Place,  Edinburgh,  was  in  the
occupation  of  Mr.  Farquharson,  formerly  a  Judge  of  the  High  Court  in
Jamaica.  On  the  night  of  Good  Friday  in  that  year,  two  of  his
daughters.  Miss  Edith  Farquharson,  her  sister  Marianne  [now  Mrs.  Henry
Murray],  and  a  little  cousin,  Agnes  Spalding,  aged  6  years,  were  sleeping
in  a  room  at  the  top  of  the  house.  About  11.45  p.m.,  the  two  sisters  were
awakened  by  hearing  loud  screams  from  the  child,  who  was  sleeping  on  a
mattress  placed  on  the  iloor  beside  their  bed.  The  mattress  was  against
the  door  leading  into  a  dressing-room ;  this  door  was  locked  and  sealed
with  white  tapes  and  black  wax ;  it  had  been  thus  closed  by  a  member  of
the  family  to  whom  the  house  belonged  before  Mr.  Farquharson  entered
upon  his  tenancy.  The  death  of  the  head  of  the  family,  and  the  delicacy
of  health  of  one  of  the  daughters,  had  caused  them  to  wish  to  leave  Edin-
burgh, and  spend  the  winter  in  Torquay.

"  On  hearing  the  child's  screams  of  terror,  Miss  M.  F.  touched  her
sister  and  said,  '  Do  you  hear  the  child  screaming  1 '  Miss  E.  F.  replied
that  she  did,  and  turned  her  head  round  to  listen  better.  When  the
child  was  asked  what  she  was  screaming  about,  she  said,  'I  am  wide  awake,
and  I  have  seen  a  figure  which  was  leaning  over  me,'  and  when  further
questioned  where  the  figure  went  to,  said,  '  Round  the  side  of  your  bed.'

"  Miss  E.  F.,  when  she  turned  round,  saw  a  figure  slide  from  near  the
child's  bed  and  pass  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  whereon  she  and  her  sister
were.  (At  the  first  moment  she  thought  it  was  a  thief.)  The  latter,  on
hearing  her  say  in  French  '■  II  y  a  quelqu'un,^  was  so  terrified  that  she  hid
her  head  under  the  bedclothes.

"Miss  E.  F.  describes  the  figure  as  being  dressed  in  a  rough  brown
shawl  held  tightly  round  the  bust,  a  wide  brimmed  hat,  and  a  veil.  Wlien
the  child  was  questioned  afterwards  she  gave  the  same  account  of  the
costume.

"  Miss  E.  F.  says  that  after  passing  along  the  foot  of  the  bed  with  a
noiseless  gliding  motion,  the  figure  disappeared  into  the  darkness.

"  Except  the  door  which  was  locked  and  sealed,  the  only  door  of  exit
to  the  room  was  one  which  was  quite  close  to  the  bed  ;  at  right  angles
with  the  door  and  with  the  head  of  the  bed  was  a  large  hanging  cupboard.

"  Both  the  ladies  got  up  instantly.  They  found  the  door  of  their  room
closed,  as  they  had  left  it.  Their  brother's  room  was  next  to  theirs  ;  they
knocked  at  his  door  to  rouse  him,  at  the  same  time  keeping  a  sharp  look-
out on  the  door  of  their  own  room  to  see  that  no  one  escaped.  The  whole
party  then  made  a  thorough  search  in  the  room  and  cupboard,  found
nothing  disturbed,  and  once  more  retired  to  rest.  The  next  morning  the
page-boy  said  that  he  had  been  unable  to  sleep  all  night  on  account  of  the
sounds  he  heard  of  someone  scratching  at  his  window.  He  declared  that
he  had  shied  all  his  boots  and  everything  he  could  lay  hold  of  in  the
direction  whence  the  noise  came,  but  without  effect.     He  could  stand  it


620  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

no  longer,  and  went  to  the  room  where  some  of  the  women-servants  slept,
begging  to  be  let  in.  They  had  heard  nothing,  however,  though  they,  like
himself,  slept  in  the  basement  of  the  house.

"  The  whole  family  were  hardly  assembled  on  the  Saturday  morning,
when  the  son-in-law  of  the  late  owner  of  the  house  arrived,  and  asked  to
see  Mr.  Farquharson.  He  wished  particularly  to  know  exactly  what  day
this  gentleman  and  his  family  intended  leaving  the  house,  (their  term
would  expire  the  following  week,)  for  he  had  just  received  a  telegram  in-
forming him  that  his  sister-in-law  had  died  that  night,  and  they  were
anxious  to  bring  her  body  there  immediately  for  burial."

(With  respect  to  this  last  paragraph,  the  narrator's  father  writes  : —

"  The  above  is  a  correct  statement  of  the  occurrence.

"C.  M.  Faequhaeson.")

Miss  Farquharson  continues  : —

"  The  possible  solution  of  what  we  presume  to  have  been  an  apparition
of  this  lady  is,  that  the  bedroom  occupied  by  the  Misses  Farquharson  being
the  one  she  habitually  used,  in  her  dying  moments  she  desired  to  visit  it
once  more,  or  else  that  there  was  something  in  the  dressing-room  which
she  particularly  wished  for.  "  Edith  A.  Faequhaeson."

The  following  independent  account  is  from  Mrs.  Murray  : —

"  Cobo,  Guernsey.

"June  24th,  1885.

"Our  home  was  in  Perthshire ;  but  in  the  winter  of  1868  my  father
took  a  house  for  four  months  in  Drummond  Place,  No.  8,  p  9]  in  Edin-
burgh, in  order  to  give  us  a  change.  The  house  belonged  to  General
Stewart,  who  had  a  delicate  daughter,  and  he  let  it,  to  take  the  daughter
to  Torquay  for  the  winter.  We  did  not  know  the  Stewarts,  so  our
imagination  could  not  have  assisted  in  any  way  to  account  for  the
curious  apparition  that  was  seen.  I  myself  did  not  see  it,i  but  I  was  in
the  room  with  my  sister  and  little  cousin,  who  both  did.  My  belief  is  that
Providence  prevented  my  seeing  it,  as  I  am  of  a  very  nervous  tempera-
ment, and  it  might  have  had  a  very  bad  effect  on  me  if  I  had.  Well,  the
apparition  took  place  on  Good  Friday  night,  at  about  12  o'clock.  This
little  cousin,  who  was  only  about  6  years  old,  had  come  into  town  from  the
country,  and  as  our  house  was  very  full  she  had  a  shake-down  beside  our
bed  on  my  side.  I  was  the  first  to  be  awakened  by  hearing  her  calling  out
in  a  frightened  way.  So  I  said,  '  What  is  the  matter,  Addie  1 '  '  Oh,'  she
said,  '  Cousin  Marianne,  I  am  so  frightened.  A  figure  has  been  leaning
over  me,  and  whenever  I  put  out  my  hands  to  push  it  off  it  leant  back  on
your  bed  ! '  At  this  I  was  alarmed  and  awoke  my  sister,  who  lifted  her
head  from  her  pillow  and  looked  up,  when  she  saw  a  figure  gliding  across
the  foot  of  our  bed  wrapped  in  a  shawl,  with  a  hat  and  veil  on.  She
whispered  to  me  in  French  '■  II  y  a  quelqu'un,''  thinking  it  was  a  thief,
whereat  we  both  jumped  out  of  bed  together  and  went  to  the  next  room
to  get  our  brother.  Captain  Farquharson.  His  bedroom  door  had  a  shaky
lock  which  made  a  noise,  so  he  had  barricaded  it  with  a  portmanteau.
While  he  was  coming  to  our  help,  we  kept  our  eyes  fixed  on  our  door  in
case  anyone  should  have  escaped,  but  we  saw  nothing,  and  after  our  all

1  Compare  case  684,  and  see  p.  105,  second  note.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  621

searching  every  corner  of  the  bedroom  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  no
one  had  been  there,  for  everything  was  intact.  We  then  questioned  little
Addie  as  to  what  she  had  seen  and  what  the  figure  was  like.  She  described
it  as  that  of  a  lady  with  a  shawl  on  and  a  hat,  and  a  veil  over  her  face,
and  said  that  as  I  spoke  she  had  gone  across  the  foot  of  the  bed  in  the
same  direction  that  my  sister  had  seen  her  go.  This  child,  I  must  tell  you,
had  been  most  carefully  brought  up  by  her  mother,  and  was  not  allowed  to
read  even  fairy  tales  for  fear  of  having  foolish  ideas  in  her  head,  which
makes  the  thing  more  remarkable,  for  she  had  certainly  never  heard  of  a
ghost.  I  don't  know  even  now  whether  she  knows  anything  about  it,  for
we  had  to  pretend  that  it  must  have  been  my  eldest  sister  who  had  come
in  to  play  us  a  trick,  for  fear  of  frightening  her.

"  Then  the  next  morning  we  were  relating  our  adventures,  when  a  ring
came  to  the  door,  and  the  servant  said  a  gentleman  wanted  to  speak  to
my  father.  This  gentleman  was  a  Mr.  Findlay,  who  had  married  a  Miss
Stewart.  He  came  to  ask  when  we  were  to  leave,  for  he  knew  it  was  about
the  time,  as  he  had  received  a  telegram  that  morning  to  say  that  Miss
Stewart  had  died  in  Torquay  during  the  night,  and  they  wanted  to  bring
her  body  to  Edinburgh.  We  heard  afterwards  from  friends  of  the
Stewarts  that  the  bedroom  we  had  had  been  hers.  I  forgot  to  mention
that  the  child's  bed  lay  across  the  door  of  a  small  room  which  had  been
locked  up  by  the  Stewarts,  and  they  had  put  tapes  across  and  sealed  them
with  black  wax.

"  We  have  none  of  us  ever  had  any  hallucinations  either  before  or  after
this  strange  affair.  u  Marianne  Mubray."

We  find  from  the  Scotsman  and  the  Edinburgh  Courant  that  Miss
Stewart  died  on  April  11,  1868,  the  day  following  Good  Friday.  If  the
death  took  place  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  after  midnight,  "  during  the
night "  would  of  course  be  the  natural  expression.

Mrs.  Brietzcke,  of  72,  Sterndale  Road,  W.,  after  reading  this  account
in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  wrote  to  us  as  follows,  on  Sept.  29,  1885  : —

"  I  was  very  intimate  with  two  Misses  Myers  ;  and  within  a  day  or
two  of  their  cousins',  the  Misses  Farquharson,  having  the  experience
related,  they  (the  Misses  Myers)  told  me  the  affair,  just  as  related  in  the
Journal ;  and  they  also,  I  understood,  had  seen  Boyd  (2,  York  Place,
Edinburgh),  the  house-agent,  and  heard  that  the  description  of  the  lady
in  the  large  hat  and  veil  was  exactly  like  the  lady  to  whom  the  house
belonged.  The  Misses  Myers  were  much  impressed.  The  elder  is  dead  ;
the  other  married  a  Mr.  Dunlop,  and  went  to  India  ;  I  have  lost  sight  of
lier.  "  H.  K.  Brietzcke."

Mrs.  Murray  confirms  the  fact  that  her  cousins,  the  Misses  Myers,
were  informed  of  the  vision  very  soon  after  its  occurrence,  and  adds  : —
"  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  mentioned  it  to  Mr.  Boyd  ;  he  may  have  heard
it  from  someone  else,  for  it  caused  quite  a  sensation  in  Edinburgh.  I  have
no  reason  to  believe  that  the  dress  of  the  figure  was  in  any  way  character-
istic of  Miss  Stewart."  ^

1  A  narrative  somewhat  resembling  this  was  given  in  Tinsley's  Magazine  for  December,
1873,  in  connection  with  a  family  named  Fitzgerald,  alleged  to  have  resided  at  Ballyreina,
in  Ireland.  We  have  not  been  able  to  trace  the  virriter  of  this  paper,  or  to  discover  any
place  called  Ballyreina.  There  is  a  village  in  Ireland  called  Ballyraine ;  but  we  cannot
find  that  any  family  of  the  name  of  Fitzgerald  has  been  connected  with  it.


622  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

[The  resemblance  of  the  figure  seen  to  the  lady  who  died  is  entirely
problematic.  It  might  almost  have  been  foretold  as  certain  that  the
resemblance  would  form  a  prominent  item  in  any  third-hand  version  of
the  occurrence.]

(667)  From  the  Methodist  Magazine  for  March,  1819,  p.  208, — a  letter
to  the  Editor.  "  Rochester,  February  4th,  1818.

"Sir, — At  the  Sheffield  Conference  of  1817,  when  examining  the
young  men  in  the  public  congregation,  I  was  greatly  surprised  by  the
extraordinary  declaration  of  one  of  the  preachers.  The  efiect  his  narrative
produced  upon  the  audience  induced  me  to  request  him  to  commit  to  paper
what  he  had  so  distinctly  detailed.  As  it  contains  a  well-authenticated
account  of  what  infidelity  has  afiected  to  deny,  and  many  well-informed
Christians  receive  with  suspicion  and  doubt,  your  insertion  of  his  letter  to
me  will  at  least  afibrd  some  further  eAddence  on  a  question  which  is  of
such  high  interest  and  importance  to  the  world.  "  j.  Gaulter."

"  Sheffield.

"  8th  August,  1817.

"  Mr.  President, — Hon.  Sir, — According  to  your  desire  I  take  up  my
pen,  to  give  you  the  particulars  of  a  solemn  fact,  which  was  the  first  grand
means  of  leading  my  mind  seriously  to  think  of  those  solemn  realities —
death,  judgment,  and  eternity.

I  j  "A  sister  being  married  to  a  gentleman  in  the  army,  we  received
intelligence  that  the  regiment  to  which  he  belonged  had  orders  for  one  of
the  Spanish  Isles  (Minorca).  One  night  (16  years  back)  about  10  o'clock,
as  his  wife,  his  child,  an  elder  sister,  and  myself  (a  boy  of  nine  years)  were
sitting  in  a  back  room,  the  shutters  were  closed,  bolted,  and  barred,  the
yard-door  locked,  when  suddenly  a  light  shone  through  the  window,  the
shutters,  the  bars,  illumined  the  room  we  sat  in.^  We  looked — started —
and  beheld  the  spirit  '^  of  a  raurdered  brother  ;  his  eye  was  fixed  on  his  wife
and  child  alternately ;  he  waved  his  hand,  smiled,  continued  about  half  a
minute,  then  vanished  from  our  sight.  The  moment  before  the  spirit
disappeared,  my  sister  cried,  '  He's  dead  ;  he's  dead ' ;  and  fainted  away.
Her  little  boy  ran  to  his  father's  spirit,  and  wept  because  it  would  not
stay.  A  short  time  after  this,  we  received  a  letter  from  the  colonel  of
the  regiment  sealed  with  black  (the  dark  emblem  of  mortality),  bearing
the  doleful  but  expected  news,  that  on  such  a  night  (the  same  on  which
we  saw  his  spirit)  my  brother-in-law  was  found  weltering  in  his  blood  (in
returning  from  the  mess-room)  ;  the  spark  of  life  was  not  quite  out.  The
last  wish  he  was  heard  to  breathe  was  to  see  his  wife  and  child ;  it  was
granted  him  in  a  certain  sense,  for  the  very  hour  he  died  in  the  Island  of
Minorca,  that  same  hour  (according  to  the  very  little  difference  of  clocks)
his  spirit  appeared  to  his  wife,  his  child,  an  elder  sister,  and  myself,  in
Doncaster.     ...  "I  am,  Sir,  yours  obediently,

"  Thos.  Savage."

1  This  case  should  be  added  to  the  list  given  in  Vol.  i.,  p.  551,  second  note,  of
examples  where  the  phantasm  has  included  a  marked  appearance  of  luminosity.

2  See  p.  48,  note.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  623

"  P.S. — My  sister,  from  the  night  she  saw  the  spirit  of  her  husband,
mov/rned  him  as  dead,  nor  could  my  father  prevent  it  by  any  argument.
He  endeavoured  to  persuade  us  we  were  all  deceived,  yet  he  acknowledged
the  testimony  which  the  child  gave  staggered  him  ;  but  when  the  letter
arrived  from  the  colonel  of  the  regiment,  with  the  awful  tidings,  he  was
struck  dumb.  My  two  sisters  are  yet  living  and  can  testify  to  the  truth
of  this  account,  and  at  least  one  hundred  persons  beside  our  own  family
can  prove  our  mentioning  the  hour  the  spirit  appeared,  several  weeks  before
we  received  the  melancholy  letter,  and  that  the  letter  mentioned  the  hour
and  night  he  died  as  the  same  in  which  we  beheld  his  spirit.      "  T.  S."

Mr.  Savage  wrote  a  precisely  concordant  account  ^  (of  which  we  have
a  copy)  for  the  Rev.  R.  Filter,  whose  daughter  writes  as  follows  on  the
subject  to  our  friend,  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Macdonald  : —

"  Doncaster.

"December  17th,  1885.

"  Dear  Mr.  Macdonald, — My  father,  the  Rev.  R.  Filter,  heard  Mr.
Savage  relate  a  curious  fact  at  the  Conference  when  he  was  received  into
'  full  connexion.'  Mr.  Savage  said  that  as  a  youth  he  had  been  sceptically
inclined,  ^  but  that  the  circumstance  related  had  led  to  his  conversion.
My  father  was  so  much  interested  that  he  requested  Mr.  Savage  to  write
down  the  narrative  for  him.  He  did  so.  The  paper  which  you  have
accurately  copied  was  the  result ;  it  was  carefully  preserved,  and  fell  into
my  hands  at  my  father's  death.

"  The  Rev.  H.  Hastling,  who  lived  in  Doncaster  50  years  ago,  remem-
bers the  tale  very  well.  His  recollection  agrees  exactly  with  the  narrative
you  have  copied.  The  sister's  husband  was  supposed  to  have  been  mur-
dered in  mistake  for  somebody  else,  or  else  by  someone  who  had  a  grudge
against  him.  Mr.  Hastling  says  the  scene  was  a  house  in  St.  George's
Gate,  pulled  down  a  few  years  ago.

"  Yours  very  truly,  "J.   M.  Filter."

§  4,  In  the  following  group  of  cases,  it  is  more  doubtful  whether
the  experience  recorded  should  be  ascribed  to  the  agency  of  the
person  whom  the  phantasm  represented.  If  not,  they  are  simply
examples  of  transferred  hallucinations  of  subjective  origin,  and  as
such  their  position  in  this  book  has  been  sufficiently  explained  (pp.
183,  189-92).  The  first  three  examples  are  (except  in  the  fact  of
being  collective)  parallel  to  the  "  arrival  cases  "  of  Chap.  XIV.,  §  7.

(668)  From  The  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  for  April,  1880,  p.  151.
The  editor  writes,  on  Feb.  12,  1880  :—

"  We  have  received  the  following  letter  from  a  physician,  narrating
two   psychological  experiences,  in  one  of  which  another  element  enters,

1  This  account  adds  the  detail  that  the  name  of  the  colonel  of  the  regiment  was  Heb-
born.  We  cannot  verify  this  detail  without  a  more  extensive  search  than  the  War  Office
authorities  will  permit.  The  English  withdrew  from  Minorca  in  1802,  having  been  in
occupation  there  for  a  few  years.     This  agrees  with  Mr.  Savage's  statement.

2  As  Mr.  Savage  was  only  9  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  he  probably  did  not  use
exactly  this  phrase.


624  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

namely,  an  external  event  coincident  with  the  subjective  impression.
Had  our  correspondent  been  expected  by  his  family  at  the  time,  the
explanation  of  '  expectant  attention '  in  an  abnormal  condition  of  the
nervous  system  might  have  sufficed,  if  it  be  admitted  that  two  persons
can,  through  this  cause,  have  optical  illusions  at  the  same  moment.
"Whether  in  such  cases  mere  coincidence  is  a  sufficient  solution,  or  whether
the  two  circumstances  stand  in  any  causal  relation,  must  be  decided  by
such  an  accumulation  of  evidence  as  would  render  the  first  hypothesis
untenable."  "February  12th,  1880.

"  My  dear  Dr.  Tuke, — Although  the  following  circumstance  is  not
exactly  similar  in  kind  to  that  related  by  Dr.  Jessopp,  you  may  like  to
make  use  of  it.  At  any  rate,  it  is  at  your  service,  and  you  may  rely
upon  its  being  quite  accurate.  One  day,  some  years  ago,  two  of  my
female  relations  were  looking  out  of  a  window  in  Greenwich  just  opposite
the  hospital,  and  both  saw,  or  thought  they  saw,  me  pass  and  look  in.
One  of  them  ran  immediately  to  the  door,  but  to  her  astonishment  could
see  no  one  either  up  or  down  the  street.  At  this  time  I  was  not
expected,  being,  as  all  my  family  supposed,  in  Paris.  But  within  a
quarter  of  an  hour  I  arrived  at  Greenwich.  When  I  did  enter,  I  was
called  to  account  for  the  practical  joke  I  was  supposed  to  have  played
upon  my  relations,  by  peeping  in  at  the  window  and  then  concealing
myself,  and  it  was  with  some  difficulty  I  convinced  them  that  I  had  come
straight  to  the  house.

"  Some  years  after  this,  my  wife  and  daughter  (not  the  relations
referred  to  previously)  were  sitting  in  the  dining-room,  when  they  both
saw  an  old  lady  enter  at  the  gate,  and  walk  up  the  steps  leading  to  the
front  door  of  the  house.  My  wife  said  to  her  daughter,  '  What  can  bring
old  Mrs.  C.  out  in  such  a  flood  of  rain?  Run  and  open  the  door,  that
she  may  not  have  to  wait  for  the  servant  to  answer  the  bell.'  On  opening
the  door,  there  was  no  one  there,  nor  in  the  garden.  Some  other  curious
things  of  the  same  character  have  occurred  ;  but  as  the  illusion  afiected
only  a  single  person,  I  refrain  from  mentioning  them,  as  they  might  arise
from  the  physical  condition  of  the  parties  concerned,  which  could  hardly,
I  think,  be  the  case  with  the  others. — Very  sincerely  yours,

"M.  D."

In  answer  to  inquiries.  Dr.  Hack  Tuke  writes  to  us  : —

"  Lyndon  Lodge,  Hanwell,  W.

"January  29th,  1885.

" '  M.  D.'  died  some  while  ago.  His  name  was  Dr.  Boase,  long  re-
spected as  a  physician  at  Falmouth.  He  retired  to  Plymouth,  where  he
took  an  active  part  in  the  Irvingite  Church  to  which  he  belonged.

"  He  was  altogether  reliable,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  cor-
rectness of  the  facts  narrated.  ««  j)_  jj_  Tuke."

[These  incidents,  if  correctly  recorded,  do  not  look  like  mistakes  of
identity.  If  (as  may  be  guessed  from  "  M.D.'s "  final  sentence)  either
of  the  percipients  in  the  second  case  had  on  other  occasions  experienced
purely  subjective  hallucinations,  the  fact  would  be  of  interest  as  favouring
the  view  that  the  vision  of  Mrs.  C.  originated  subjectively  in  one  of  the
two  minds.]


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  625

(669)  From  Mrs.  Sturge,  2,  Midland  Road,  Gloucester.

"  Nov.  26,  1884.

"  When  residing  in  Montserrat,  West  Indies,  in  or  about  the  year
1858,  I  was  on  a  visit  to  some  friends  in  the  principal  town  of  Antigua.
One  evening  Mr.  George  Habershon,  a  gentleman  who  boarded  with  the
family,  but  lodged  in  another  part  of  the  town,  remained  rather  late  ;
Mrs.  Burns,  the  lady  of  the  house,  retired,  leaving  her  daughters,  to
one  of  whom  Mr.  Habershon  was  engaged,  and  a  young  lady  named
Minnie  Anderson,  and  myself  downstairs.  The  evening  was  a  beautiful
moonlight  one.  As  soon  as  Mr.  Habershon  left,  a  servant  passed  through
the  room  in  which  we  were  sitting  and  fastened  the  outer  door,  leading
from  the  verandah  into  the  street,  passing  into  the  house  after  he  had
done  so.  Soon  after  Minnie  uttered  an  exclamation.  I  looked  up  and  saw
Mr.  H.,  or  what  appeared  to  be  him,  entering  the  room  from  the
verandah,  and  I  said,  '  Mr.  Habershon  ! '  Minnie  said,  '  Yes.'  None  of  the
others  in  the  room  saw  him.  The  apparition  disappeared  almost  immedi-
ately. We  were  somewhat  startled  at  his  unexpected  reappearance,  and
searched  about  and  looked  down  the  road  (it  was  bright  moonlight,  as
mentioned  before),  but  could  see  no  one,  nor  could  we  understand  how  he
could  have  got  in,  as  the  outer  door  was  locked.

"  When  our  hostess  heard  of  the  matter  in  the  morning  she  was  much
annoyed,  and  on  Mr.  Habershon's  arrival  to  breakfast,  she  spoke  to  him
about  having  come  back,  frightening  the  girls.  He  declared  he  had  not
done  so,  but  said  that  on  his  way  home  he  had  thought  of  returning  to
ask  for  a  piece  of  meat  for  the  dogs,  a  thing  which  he  had  done  more  than
once  before,  and  that  he  stood  in  the  road  considering  whether  or  no  he
should  do  so,  deciding  in  the  negative  because  he  thought  we  should  laugh
at  him,  as  he  often  did  come  back.  I  suppose  he  appeared  to  Minnie  and
myself  at  the  time  he  was  considering  whether  or  no  he  should  return.

"  I  regret  to  say  most  of  those  who  were  present  in  that  room,  as
well  as  Mr.  Habershon,  are  now  no  more,  but  I  believe  I  have  correctly
narrated  the  facts.  The  only  survivor  is  now  the  wife  of  Justice  Semper,
a  judge  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Leeward  Isles.  I  may  add  that
Mr.  Habershon  was  a  much  esteemed  young  Englishman,  whose  veracity
could  be  entirely  depended  upon.  "Annie  Sturge."

Mrs.  Semper  sends  us  the  following  independent  account,  from  which
it  appears  that  she  was  not  herself  present  at  the  time.

"  St.  Kitts.

"  20th  April,  1886.

"  The  incident  to  which  you  refer  took  place  in  the  house  of  my  father,
Mr.  Burns.  I  was  not  present,  but  the  strange  tale  was  told  to  me,  and
I  am  very  pleased  to  tell  you  all  I  know  about  it,  in  accordance  with
your  request.  The  facts,  as  well  as  I  can  call  them  to  mind,  are  these.
Mr.  George  Habershon  spent  the  evening  with  my  family.  On  his  leaving,
all  the  members  of  it  retired  to  rest  with  the  exception  of  my  sister  (since
dead)  and  her  friend  Mrs.  Sturge  ;  the  two  girls  remained  in  the  drawing-
room,  which  was  still  brightly  lighted.  To  their  surprise  they  became
aware  that  Mr.  Habershon  had  come  back,  and  was  standing  at  one  of
the  entrance  doors,  gazing  at  them.  They  pretended  not  to  see  him  ;  but
on  his  keeping  his  statue-like  position,  they  got  so  curious  to  know  why
VOL.    II.  2   s


626  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

he  had  returned  that  one  of  them  asked  what  he  wanted.  They  received  no
reply,  and  on  advancing  to  where  he  stood,  he  disappeared.  Imagining
he  was  playing  them  a  trick,  they  searched  about  the  verandah  ;  they
then  watched  the  street  up  which  he  had  to  go  to  get  to  his  lodgings — and
it  being  a  bright,  moonlight  night,  every  object  would  be  seen  distinctly.
He,  however,  was  not  there.

"  Next  day,  on  their  asking  Mr.  Habershon  how  he  managed  to  elude
them,  he  professed  perfect  ignorance  of  what  they  were  talking  about.
Later  on,  my  mother,  who  thought  he  had  mystified  the  girls  enough,
privately  asked  him  to  set  the  matter  at  rest  by  explaining  it.  Mr.
Habershon  assured  her  that  he  had  not  come  back.  He  said  he  had  had
a  strong  and  almost  irresistible  wish  to  do  so,  that  he  had  turned  and
walked  a  few  steps,  and  then,  thinking  by  that  time  the  door  would  be
shut,  he  retraced  his  steps  and  went  home.  Mr  Habershon's  denial  could
not  be  doubted  by  any  one  who  knew  him.

"  I  may  as  well  mention  that  Mr.  Habershon  was  engaged  to  be
married  to  my  sister,  and  the  reason  he  wished  to  return  to  the  house  was
that  he  had  not  quite  understood  something  she  wished  done.

"  Minnie  Semper  \nee  Burns]."

[It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Semper  represents  her  sister,  and  not
Minnie  Anderson,  as  the  second  percipient.'  After  a  conversation  with
Mrs.  Sturge,  I  feel  no  doubt  that  her  version  is  the  correct  one.  The
discrepancies  between  the  two  accounts  can  scarcely  be  held  to  afiect  the
central  fact  described.]

(670)  From  Dr.  Wyld,  41,  Courtfield  Road,  S.W.

"December,  1882.

"Miss  L.  and  her  mother  were  for  15  years  my  most  intimate
friends ;  they  were  ladies  of  the  highest  intelligence,  and  perfectly
truthful,  and  their  story  was  confirmed  by  one  of  the  servants ;  the  other
servant  I  could  not  trace.

"Miss  L.,  some  years  before  I  made  her  acquaintance,  occupied
much  of  her  time  in  visiting  the  poor.  One  day,  as  she  walked  home-
wards, she  felt  cold  and  tired,  and  longed  to  be  at  home,  warming  herself
at  the  kitchen  fire.  At  or  about  the  minute  corresponding  to  this  wish,
the  two  servants  being  in  the  kitchen,  the  door-handle  was  seen  to  turn,
the  door  opened,^  and  in  walked  Miss  L.,  and  going  up  to  the  fire  she
held  out  her  hands  and  warmed  herself,  and  the  servants  saw  she  had  a
pair  of  green  kid  gloves  on  her  hands.  She  suddenly  disappeared  before
their  eyes,  and  the  two  servants  in  great  alarm  went  upstairs  aod  told
the  mother  what  they  had  seen,  including  the  green  kid  gloves.  The
mother  feared  something  was  wrong,  but  she  attempted  to  quiet  the
servants  by  reminding  them  that  Miss  L.  always  wore  black  and  never
green  gloves,  and  that  therefore  the  '  ghost '  could  not  have  been  that
of  her  daughter.

"  In  about  half-an-hour  the  veritable  Miss  L.  entered  the  house,  and
going  into  the  kitchen  warmed  herself  by  the  fire  ;  and  she  had  on  a  pair
of  green  kid  gloves  which  she  had  bought  on  her  way  home,  not  being  able
to  get  a  suitable  black  pair.  uq._  "Wyld   M.D."

The  Hev.  W.  Stainton  Moses  writes  : —

^  See  p.  612,  note.


ix.j  COLLECTIVE  CASES,  627

"  21,  Birchington  Road,  KW.,  January  31st,  1883.

"  I  have  heard  the  story  of  Miss  L.  from  her  mother.  It  is,  as
far  as  my  memory  serves,  recounted  here  with  perfect  accuracy.  Both  the
ladies  mentioned  were  intimately  known  to  me,  and  entirely  to  be  trusted.

"  W.  Stainton  Moses."

[This  case,  it  will  be  seen,  does  not  depend  on  the  testimony  of  the
servants,  but  on  that  of  Mrs.  L.,  whose  character  for  truthfulness  is  vouched
for  by  two  gentlemen  who  knew  her  intimately.  The  point  as  to  the  longing
to  be  "  warming  herself  at  the  kitchen  iire  "  is,  however,  one  very  likely  to
have  been  imagined  or  exaggerated  ;  even  supposing  that  it  was  genuinely
remembered,  the  "  minute  corresponding  "  to  it  is  not  likely  to  have  been
afterwards  ascertainable,  though  very  likely  indeed  to  be  inferred  as  that
of  the  apparition  ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  green  gloves
were  mentioned  before  the  reality  of  their  existence  was  known ;  so  that
Miss  L.'s  agency  cannot  be  confidently  assumed.]

The  next  two  cases  resemble  Nos.  328  and  329,  the  state  of  the
person  whose  phantasm  appeared  presenting  nothing  which  could
be  supposed  to  be  a  distinctive  condition  of  telepathic  agency.

(671)  From  Dr.  Buchanan  (late  H.E.I. C.S.  Bengal  Establishment),  12^
Rutland  Square,  Edinburgh.  All  the  percipients  are  dead,  except  one,
who  is  inaccessible.  Among  them  were  Dr.  Buchanan's  late  wife,  and
her  parents.

"The  following  circumstance  took  place  at  a  villa  about  one  and  a-half
miles  from  Glasgow,  and  was  told  me  by  my  wife.  Of  its  truth  I  am  as
certain  as  if  I  had  been  a  witness.  The  house  had  a  lawn  in  front,  of
about  three  or  four  acres  in  extent,  with  a  lodge  at  the  gate  very  distinctly
seen  from  the  house,  which  was  about  80  yards  distant.  Two  of  the
family  were  going  to  visit  a  friend  seven  miles  distant,  and  on  the  previous
day  it  had  been  arranged  to  take  a  lady,  Miss  W.,  with  them,  who  was  to
be  in  waiting  at  a  place  about  a  mile  distant.  Three  of  the  family  and  a
lady  visitor  were  standing  at  one  of  the  dining-room  windows  waiting  for
the  carriage,  when  they,  including  my  wife,  saw  Miss  W.  open  the  gate  at
the  lodge.  The  wind  had  disarranged  the  front  of  a  pelisse  which  she
wore,  which  they  distinctly  saw  her  adjust.  She  wore  a  light  grey-
coloured  beaver  hat,  and  had  a  handkerchief  at  her  mouth ;  it  was
supposed  that  she  was  suffering  from  toothache,  to  which  she  was  subject.
She  entered  the  lodge,  to  the  surprise  of  her  friends,  and  as  she  did  not
leave  it,  a  servant  was  sent  to  ask  her  to  join  the  family ;  but  she  was
informed  that  Miss  W.  had  not  been  there,  and  it  was  afterwards
ascertained  that  no  one,  except  the  woman's  husband,  had  been  in  the
lodge  that  morning.

"The  carriage  arrived  at  the  house  about  10  a.m.,  and  Miss  W.  was
found  at  the  place  agreed  upon  in  the  dress  in  which  she  appeared  at  the
lodge,  and  sufiering  from  toothache.  As  she  was  a  nervous  person,  nothing
was  said  to  her  of  her  appearance  at  the  gate.  She  died  nine  years
afterwards.  "Wm.  M.  Buchanan,  M.D."

Dr.  Buchanan  wrote,  on  30th  Oct.,  1883,  to  say  that  he  had  just  been
staying  with  relatives  of  his  late  wife,  who  had  often  heard  the  story
from  her,  and  confirmed  it  in  every  detail,  except  that  it  was  a  ^vhite
VOL.  II.  2  s  2


628  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

beaver  hat.  He  adds  that  "  those  who  witnessed  the  fact  are  quite  matter-
of-fact  people,  not  in  the  slightest  degree  excitable,  and  most  certainly
not  nervous."

[The  fact  of  the  figure's  seeming  to  enter  the  lodge,  as  to  which  Dr.
Buchanan  is  quite  positive,  favours  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination,  as
against  that  of  mistaken  identity.]

(672)  From  Mrs.  Bevan,  Plumpton  House,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.

"  1884.

"In  the  month  of  July,  1855,  I  was  spending  a  week  with  my
brother,  the  Rector  of  Chedburgh,  and  his  sweet  young  wife,  when  one
evening,  after  the  children  had  gone  to  bed,  and  we  were  all  three  sitting
together,  my  brother  said,  '  Cecilia  and  I  have  often  wanted  to  ask  you
whether  you  were  thinking  of  us  in  any  special  way  on  the  15th  of  last
November  '? '

"  After  a  few  minutes'  consideration,  I  could  only  say  that  I  remem-
bered nothing  of  the  sort,  as  there  was  no  special  cause  for  it  at  that  time,
and  begged  to  know  why  they  asked.

"  My  brother  then  said  that  on  the  morning  of  that  day,  which  of
course  they  specially  noted,  he  awoke  while  the  night-light  was  still
burning,  between  6  and  7  o'clock,  and  opening  his  eyes,  he  distinctly  saw
me  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  on  his  wife's  side  of  it.  After
watching  me  for  a  short  time  with  some  wonder,  but  with  no  sensation  of
fear,  he  reached  out  his  hand  and  touched  his  wife,  saying,  '  Cecilia,  are
you  awake?'  'Yes,  I  have  been  awake  some  minutes.'  'Do  you  see
anything  ?  '  '  Yes,  I  see  Sarah  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.'  '  How
very  strange  ! '  and  while  they  spoke  to  each  other,  the  furniture  of  the
room  was  seen  through  my  figure,  which  soon  entirely  disappeared.^

"  We  were  at  the  time  living  only  14  miles  ofi*,  and  I  was  in  a  delicate
state  of  health.  They  came  down  to  breakfast  quite  expecting  that  the
post  would  bring  some  bad  news  of  me,  and  all  day  looked  for  a
messenger  from  Sudbury,  and  made  an  early  reason  for  driving  over,  to
find  all  as  usual.  Thinking  that  such  a  strange  circumstance  might  make
me  nervous,  they  kept  it  to  themselves  until  time  had  proved  that,  what-
ever it  was,  no  harm  had  come  to  me.  They  asked  each  other  whether  it
could  possibly  have  been  our  mother  who  was  then  living  near  Norwich,
and  who  died  there  in  February,  1855,  but  they  were  quite  agreed  that  it
was  no  one  but  me.  I  certainly  knew  nothing  about  it,  either  at  the
time  or  afterwards  ;  nor  did  it  make  me  feel  the  least  nervous.

"  My  dear  brother  and  his  wife  also  are  passed  to  the  other  world ;
she  in  1862,  he  in  1864.  "  Sarah    Bevan."

[I  have  pointed  out,  on  p.  83,  that  a  person  whose  phantasm  has  ap-
peared to  others,  and  who  has  been  informed  of  the  fact,  is  in  rather  a
difierent  position  from  an  ordinary  second-hand  witness.]

In  the  next  two  cases  the  originating  agency  of  an  absent   living

person  seems   out    of  the    question ;  and  for   the    first    of  them,  at

any  rate,  there  would,  in  my  view,  be  no   difficulty  in    supposing    a

purely  subjective  origin  in    one    mind,  (perhaps    that    of  the    dying

woman,)  and  a  transference  thence  to  the  other.

1  See  p.  38,  note,  and  p.  97,  first  note.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  629

(673)  From  Miss  J.  E.  Walker,  48,  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
She  heard  the  account  from  a  cousin,  of  whom  she  writes,  on  Feb.  6,  1883 : —

"  Cousin  Emmeline  was  old  Squire  Bingley's  youngest  daughter ;  she
was  sincere  and  fearlessly  true,  but  she  had  no  poetic  and  scarcely  any
imaginative  faculty.  I  should  have  cited  her  as  a  good  specimen  any-
where of  the  matter-of-fact  and  common-place  woman,  which  perhaps
gives  a  somewhat  additional  weight  to  her  narrative  which  she  confided
to  me  many  years  ago.  She  died  about  6  years  since."  Later  Miss
Walker  adds: — "The  event  narrated  took  place  when  she  was
about  20,  and  must  have  happened  in  (I  think)  1844  or  1845.  She
told  me  her  story  very  simply  and  vivd  voce.  She  also  told  it  separately
to  my  elder  sister  in  precisely  the  same  terms.  It  was  /  who  threw  it,
for  brevity's  sake,  into  the  narrative  form  "  [and  into  the  first  person].

"  My  father  and  mother  had  many  children ;  most  of  us  died  in
infancy ;  Susanna  survived,  and  Charlotte  and  myself.  Father's  was  an
entailed  estate,  and  the  deaths  of  two  sons,  William,  who  died  in  boyhood,
and  John,  who  died  in  infancy,  had  been  the  great  disappointment  of  his
life.  Susanna  remembered  both  the  boys,  but  William  was  born  and  died
long  before  my  time,  and  John  died  at  about  two  years  old,  when  I  was  the
baby.  Of  William  there  was  no  likeness,  but  you  know  John's  picture
well,  a  well-painted  full-length  oil  picture  representing  a  toddling  babe  in
white  frock  and  blue  shoes,  one  of  my  father's  prize  greyhounds  crouching
beside  him,  and  an  orange  rolling  at  his  feet.

"  I  was  grown  up,  about  20,  Susanna  was  40,  and  Charlotte  about  30
years  old.  Father  was  declining,  and  we  lived  together,  contented  and
united,  in  a  pleasant  house  on  the  borders  of  Harrogate  Common.  On
the  day  about  which  I  am  writing,  Charlotte  was  unwell ;  she  had  com-
plained of  a  chill,  and  the  doctor  recommended  her  to  keep  in  bed.  She
was  sleeping  quietly  that  afternoon,  and  Susanna  sat  on  one  side  of  her
bed  and  I  sat  on  the  other ;  the  afternoon  sun  was  waning,  and  it  began  to
grow  dusky,  but  not  dark.  I  do  not  know  how  long  we  had  been  sitting
there,  but  by  chance  I  raised  my  head  and  I  saw  a  golden  light  above
Charlotte's  bed,  and  within  the  light  were  enfolded  two  cherubs'  faces
gazing  intently  upon  her.  1  was  fascinated  and  did  not  stir,  neither  did
the  vision  fade  for  a  little  while.  At  last  I  put  my  hand  across  the  bed
to  Susanna,  and  I  only  said  this  word,  '  Susanna,  look  up  ! '  She  did  so,
and  at  once  her  countenance  changed,  'Oh,  Emmeline,'  she  said,  'they  are
William  and  John.'  Then  both  of  us  watched  on  till  all  faded  away  like
a  washed-out  picture  ;  and  in  a  few  hours  Charlotte  died  of  sudden  inflam-
mation."

In  conversation,  Miss  Walker  told  me  that  she  is  certain  that  her
cousin  drew  the  other  sister's  attention  to  the  vision  without  mentioning
what  she  herself  saw  ;  also  that  she  was  singularly  precise  in  statement
and  incapable  of  exaggeration.

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Miss  Charlotte  Bingley  died
at  Harrogate,  on  June  8,  1843.

The  next  account  is  one  of  the  puzzling  carriage-cases  mentioned
on  p.  195.     Here  there  was  a  local  tradition  of  a  phantasm  carriage.


630  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

due  to  sounds,  frequently  heard,  which  were  probably  not  hallucina-
tions but  illusions ;  and  this  may  possibly  have  acted  as  a  favourable
condition  to  a  visual  hallucination  of  the  sort  described ;  but  it  will
not  in  the  least  account  for  the  correspondence  and  coincidence  of
the  two  hallucinations,  which  yet  can  hardly  have  been  accidental.
I  do  not  give  the  case  an  evidential  number,  because  the  written
account  does  not  make  it  appear  as  impossible  as  to  the  witnesses
on  the  spot  it  certainly  did  appear,  that  the  carriage  should  have
been  a  real  one.     The  narrator  is  Mr.  Paul  Bird,  Strand,  Calcutta.

"July  25tli,  1884.
"  One  evening,  just  at  dusk,  I  was  returning  home  from  office  in  my
buggy,  with  lamps  lighted.  It  was  dusk,  but  under  the  shadow  of  the
trees  which  overhang  the  avenue  it  was  pretty  dark.  I  was  driving
pretty  fast,  when  I  heard  what  appeared  to  be  a  runaway  gharrie  coming
from  the  house  towards  me.  I  immediately  checked  my  horse  and  peered
ahead  to  see  how  to  avoid  the  coming  danger,  but  as  the  noise  did  not
appear  to  get  any  nearer,  I  cautiously  proceeded,  and  when  about  100
yards  from  the  house,  distinctly  saw  the  reflection  of  my  lamps  on  the
panels  of  a  carriage  in  front  of  me,  proceeding  the  same  way,  viz.,  to
Hastings  House  [in  the  suburb  of  Alipore].  I  kept  my  eyes  on  the  panels,
so  as  not  to  run  into  them.  The  gharrie  turned  to  the  left  to  go  under
the  portico,  followed  by  me,'^  but  when  I  arrived  there,  there  was  no  gharrie;
it  had  disappeared.  I  was  very  much  puzzled  at  this,  but  should  probably
have  thought  nothing  more  about  it,  had-  not  my  wife,  who  was  watching
for  my  arrival  from  an  upper  window,  asked  me  at  once,  '  What  gharrie
was  that  just  ahead  of  you  ? '  This,  you  will  admit,  was  curious,  and  I
oflfer  no  theory  about  it.  <t  Paul  Bird."

Mrs.  Bird  writes,  on  July  26,  1884  : —

"  I  cannot  add  anything  further  to  my  husband's  description  about  the
gharrie  at  Hastings  House,  except  that  I  also  saw  the  outline  of  the
gharrie  as  it  came  up  the  avenue  in  front  of  my  husband's  buggy,  with
his  lamps  shining  on  it  so  as  to  define  the  outline  ;  and  I  was  at  a  window
upstairs  watching  for  my  husband's  return,  so  that  we  saw  the  apparition
from  totally  difierent  points  of  view,  and  without,  of  course,  holding  any
communication.  I  suddenly  lost  sight  of  the  fictitious  gharrie,  and  did  not
trace  it  right  up  to  the  portico.  It  turned  oif,  I  thought,  from  the  direct
road  ;  certainly,  it  disappeared.  I  may  further  state  that  I  heard  no
sound  of  a  second  vehicle,  but  only  that  made  by  my  husband's  horse  and
buggy  ;  but  I  was  aware  of  his  checking  his  horse,  as  if  he  saw  something
ahead,  and  this  action  of  his  may  have  been  the  cause  of  conjuring  up  in
my  vision  the  supposed  gharrie.  We  have  always  spoken  very  sceptically
of  this  circumstance,  although  feeling  in  our  inner  consciousness  that  there
was  something  not  utterly  to  be  disregarded  in  the  occurrence.

"Gertrude  Bird."

1  See  p.  616,  first  note.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  631

§  5.  The  remaining  cases  are  auditory.  In  the  following  group
the  impression  was  of  a  recognised  voice.

(674)  From  Mr.  C.  F.  H.  Froehnert,  (Bandmaster  of  the  Royal
Marines,)  3,  Yictoria  Place,  Stonehouse,  Plymouth,  who  wrote  as  follows
to  the  Daily  Telegraph,  on  October  15,  1881.

"  SiR^ — Returning  from  India  in  1854,  I  resided  for  a  few  months  at
Diisseldorf,  and  there  made  the  acquaintance  of  two  well-known  families —
Haskal  and  Focke.  Mr.  Haskal,  a  gentleman  well  known  as  the  author
of  several  works  on  Oriental  botany,  held  a  high  appointment  under
the  Dutch  Government  in  Batavia;  and  his  family,  consisting  of  Mrs.
Haskal,  several  daughters,  and  Miss  Focke  as  companion,  had  engaged
passage  out  in  a  large  Dutch  vessel,  and  sailed  from  Amsterdam.  One
evening,  soon  afterwards,  when  Mrsi  Focke,  with  the  rest  of  her  family,
were  at  tea,  they  all  heard  a  loud  cry  of  '  Mother !  '  outside  the  window.
They  all  recognised  at  once  the  voice  of  the  eldest  daughter,  Anna,  who
had  sailed  with  the  Haskals.  They  rushed  to  the  window,  but  saw
nothing.  Scarcely  had  they  taken  their  seats  again,  when  a  most
agonising  shriek  was  heard,  and  twice  '  Mother,  mother,'  in  the  same
voice.  A  few  days  later  a  report  came  that  a  large  Dutch  vessel  had
been  wrecked.  I  had  left  for  England,  and  was  written  to  and  asked  to
make  inquiries  at  Lloyd's  if  there  was  truth  in  this  report.  The  answer
I  received  was  that  on  that  particular  evening  this  vessel  was  lost  with
every  soul  on  board.— Yours  truly,  "  C.  F.  H.  Froehneet."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Froehnert  wrote  to  us,  on  June  11,
1883  :—

"The  Fockes  were  old  and .  well-known  residents  of  Diisseldorf  ;  but
no  doubt  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Focke  are  dead  by  this  time ;  but  there  was
another  daughter — sister  of  the  one  lost — but  I  dare  say  she  has  been
married  long  since,  and  would  go  under  another  name.  Diisseldorf  being
near  Holland,  the  news  of  a  large  Dutch  vessel  having  been  lost  soon
reached  that  town,  especially  as  it  was  reported  that  among  the  effects
washed  on  shore  many  things  were  recognised  as  having  belonged  to  the
family,  Haskal,  such  as  some  valuable  pictures,  &c.,  &c.

"  Mrs.  Ifjen,  a  friend  of  mine  and  the  Haskals,  wrote  to  me,^  telling
me  of  the  hearing  of  the  voice  on  that  particular  evening,  and  of  the
rumour  of  the  stranding  of  the  vessel,  requesting  me  to  ascertain  at
Lloyd's  if  a  vessel  had  been  lost ;  the  answer  was  as  I  stated,  the  ship
had  been  lost  that  very  night.

"  Mrs.  Haskal  and  her  children  had  also  resided  at  Diisseldorf  until
they  departed.

"  At  the  time  when  this  happened  I  was  Bandmaster  of  the  2nd  Life
Guards  at  London."

Mr.  Froehnert  adds,  on  April  1,  1885  : —

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  regarding  the  Focke  case  at  Diisseldorf,  I  am
sorry  I  cannot  recollect  the  house  they  were  living  in  at  the  time  ;  it  is  so
long  ago.  But  I  quite  remember  that  it  was  in  a  quiet  locality  ;  and  the
voice  came  from  the  back  of  the  house,  which  in  most  German  houses  is
called  '  Der  Hof ,'  and  which  is  usually  not  frequented  in  the  evening  by

1  Unfortunately  this  letter  has  not  been  preserved.


632  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

the    occupants  of  the  houses ;    the  voice    came    distinctly    through    the
window,  which  was  open."

In  the  next  case,  the  two  persons  affected  were  widely  separated,
and  their  impressions  differed.

(675)  From  Mr.  Thomas  Young,  Elsinore  House,  Robert  Road,  Hands-
worth,  Birmingham.  u  gig^  December,  1884.

"  One  evening— ten  years  ago  about — I  was  sitting  at  tea  with  my  wife
and  children,  when  my  wife  suddenly  said,  '  What  a  noise  there  is
upstairs,'  asking  me  if  I  heard  it.  I  said  '  No.'  She,  however,  insisted
that  there  was,  and  insisted  upon  going  upstairs  to  investigate.  She  could
hear  the  windows  rattled  as  if  by  the  wind.  I  accompanied  her  upstairs,
and  as  she  went  she  suddenly  felt  a  wind  rush  by  her.  I  felt  no  rush  of
wind,  nor  were  the  windows  rattling.  The  night  was  calm.  After
investigating  the  room  from  whence  the  wind  was  supposed  to  proceed,
and  finding  nothing  out  of  the  common,  we  returned  to  the  parlour,  my
wife  much  agitated,  and  I  was  also  agitated.  When  next  she  heard  from
home,  it  was  a  letter  conveying  the  sad  intelligence  of  her  father's  death  by
drowning,  which  took  place  about  the  time  she  felt  the  physical  influence.
But  what  is  still  more  strange,  her  brother,  who  was  captain  of  a  small
vessel,  and  at  sea  on  the  same  evening  of  his  poor  father's  death,  heard
his  name  called.  He  was  in  the  cabin  at  the  time.  He  immediately  went
on  deck,  asking  who  called.  '  No  one,'  was  the  reply.  He  went  into  his
cabin,  and  again  he  heard  his  name,  and  again  he  went  on  deck,  thinking
a  trick  was  being  played.  Once  more  all  denied  having  called  him.  He
thereupon  re-entered  his  cabin,  only  to  hear  his  name  called  again,  and  on
demanding  sternly  who  called,  and  receiving  the  same  answer,  '  No  one,'
he  said  he  felt  very  queer. i  u  Thomas  Young."

[Mrs.  Young's  experience  could  not  be  presented  as  telepathic  evidence
on  its  own  account,  the  impression  having  been  so  vague.  But  she  is
not  a  nervous  or  fanciful  person,  and  is  certain  that  she  has  never  had  any
similar  experience — while  the  fact  that  her  husband  did  not  hear  or  feel
what  she  heard  and  felt  decidedly  supports  the  view  that  the  experience
was  hallucination ;  and  if  so,  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  it  fell  on  the
night  which  was  marked  not  only  by  her  father's  death,  but  by  her
brother's  far  more  distinct  hallucination  of  the  recognised  voice.]

Captain  Adams  writes: —

"  62,  Commercial  Road,  Newport,  Monmouthshire.

"November  13th,  1885.

"  In  answer  to  your  letter  in  reference  to  my  father's  death,  I  will
endeavour  in  a  few  lines  to  give  you  the  information  you  want.

"As  the  ship  was  lying  in  the  port  of  St.  Malo,  in  France,  on  the
15th  December,  1871,  I  was  lying  in  my  berth  at  4  o'clock  in  the
afternoon.  I  heard  a  voice.  I  knew  the  voice  at  once  to  be  my  father's,
calling  '  Jim,  Jim,  Jim.'  It  was  not  a  dream,  for  I  was  awake  and
getting  up.     I  asked  the  men  on  board  whether  they  heard  anyone  calling.

1  Here  again  we  have  an  account  of  three  separate  calls — the  favourite  legendary
number  (p.  229,  note).  In  the  first-hand  version  which  follows,  it  will  be  seen  that  there
is  no  mention  of  any  repetition  of  the  call,  though  it  is  represented  as  having  consisted  of
three  utterances  of  the  name.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  633

They  said,  '  No.'  I  said  to  them,  '  My  father  is  dead.'  When  I  arrived
at  Jersey  (Island),  my  wife  said  to  me,  '  There  is  bad  news  for  you.'  I
said,  'Yes,  I  know  ;  my  father  is  dead.'  This  was  about  nine  days  after
my  father  was  lost  in  Burnham  (Essex).  When  I  read  the  news  of  his
death,  [I  found  that]  it  was  at  the  same  hour  I  heard  his  voice.

"  James  Adams."

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  this  was  his  sole  experience  of
a  hallucination.  Captain  Adams  adds  : —

"  You  wish  to  know  whether  it  is  the  only  time  I  have  heard  anything
of  the  kind.     Yes,  it  is  the  only  time."

Mrs.  Adams  writes  for  her  husband,  on  January  19th,   1886  : —

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  November  17th,  in  which  you  ask  a  few
more  questions  :

"  First.- — -You  ask  my  husband  whether  he  made  a  note  of  it.  He
did  not  ;  but  he  always  remembered  the  date,  for  he  has  a  very  good
memory.

"  Secondly. — It  is  impossible  to  find  any  of  the  men  who  were  with
him  at  the  time.  Some  are  dead.  The  others,  I  do  not  know  where  they  are.

"  S.  E.  Adams."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  father  of  Mrs.  Young
and  Captain  Adams  was  drowned  in  the  River  Crouch  on  Dec.  15,  1871.

In  the  next  case,  the  agency  is  doubtful,  as,  though  a  near  relative
of  one  of  the  percipients  died  at  the  time,  the  voice  heard  was  taken
to  be  that  of  his  brother.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  two  men's
voices  resembled  one  another's  :  compare  the  cases  of  mis-recogni-
tion, Nos.  170  and  171.  The  account  is  first-hand  ;  but  we  do  not
know  how  long  a  period  had  elapsed  after  the  occurrence,  before  it
was  recorded  in  writing.

(676)  From  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1752,  Yol.  XXII., pp.  173-4.
The  editor  states  the  writer  (who  signs  himself  "A.  B.")  to  be  "  a  man  of
great  veracity,"  and  the  communication  to  be  "  a  piece  of  his  own  private
history."

"On  the  23rd  August,  1736,  at  noon,  standing  at  the  shop  door  with
my  mistress  and  maid-servant  and  Mr.  Bloxham,  then  rider  to  Mr.  Oakes
and  Co.  (who  now  lives  and  follows  the  haberdashery  trade  in  Cateaton
Street),  we  were  choosing  figured  ribbons  and  other  millinery  goods,  when
I  heard  my  father's  voice  call  '  Charles,'  very  audibly.  As  accustomed,  I
answered,  '  Coming,  sir.'  Being  intent  on  viewing  the  patterns,  I  stayed
about  four  minutes,  when  I  heard  a  voice  a  second  time  call  '  Charles.'
The  maid  heard  it  then  as  well  as  myself,  and  answered,  '  He  is  coming,
Mr.  W — m — n.'  But  the  pattern  book  not  being  gone  through  with,  I
was  impatient  to  see  the  end,  and  being  also  unwilling  to  detain  the  gentle-
man, I  still  tarried.  Then  I  saw  the  door  open,i  heard  my  father  call  a
third  time,  in  a  strong,  emphatic,  angry  tone,  and  shutting  the  door  I  heard

1  Compare  cases  659  and  670.  I  have  mentioned  that  this  form  of  hallucination  is  one
that  occurs  also  in  purely  subjective  cases.


634  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

its  sound.  Both  my  mistress  and  the  maid  heard  this  last  call,  on  which
she  pushed  me  out  of  the  shop  with,  '  Sirrah,  get  you  gone,  your  father  is
quite  angry  at  your  stay.'  I  ran  over,  lifted  up  the  latch,  but  found  the
gate  locked.  Then  going  in  at  the  back  gate  saw  my  mother-in-law  in  the
yard.  .  .  .  I  immediately  went  in,  when  I  found  no  father  nor  any
appearance  of  dinner.     Returning,  I  inquired  of  her  for  my  father ;  she

said  he  was  not  come  home,  nor  would  dine  at  home  that  day

I  then  went  back  to  the  company,  whose  consternation  was  as  great  as  my

own Whether  all  this  was  the  force  of  imagination  I  cannot

say,  I  believe  it  may.  I  will  not  argue  to  the  contrary,  though  two  senses
of  two  persons  besides  myself  could  not,  probably,  be  so  liable  to  deception.
My  mind  and  disposition  from  that  hour  received  a  new  turn.  I  became
another  creature     ....

"It  is  very  remarkable  that  I  had  an  only  uncle  (who  was  gunner
of  the  '  Biddeford,'  then  stationed  at  Leith),  that  died  there  that  same
day  and  about  the  same  hour."

"We  learn  from  the  Admiralty  that  H.M.S.  "  Biddeford  "  was  at  Leith
Road  on  August  23,   1736.

The  following  case  is  an  exact  parallel  to  No.  336,  and  should  be
read  in  connection  with  the  remarks  on  pp.  190-2.

(677)  From  Mr.  Emmerson,  Cullercoats,  near  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

"January  9th,   1885.

"  In  the  summer  of  1849,  I  was  sitting  in  my  studio  painting,  about
noon,  three  days  after  my  mother  was  buried.  (In  this  locality  people
were  dying  by  hundreds  of  cholera — of  which  she  died.)  I  distinctly
heard  her  call  my  name,  '  Harry,'  in  a  very  loud  voice,  which  made  me
start  to  my  feet.  My  father,  who  was  in  another  room,  rushed  into  my
studio,  terrified,  and  asked  me  if  I  had  heard  my  mother  calling  me.  My
mother,  who  was  deaf,  had  a  very  shrill  voice,  that  there  was  no
mistaking  it.

"  This  is  the  only  experience  of  the  kind  that  I  have  ever  met  with,
but  which  made  a  lasting  impression  on  my  mind.

"  H.  H.  Emmerson."

Mr.  Emmerson's  father  is  dead.  Mrs.  Emmerson  writes  to  us  on
January  21st,   1886  : —

"  I  wish  to  write  a  few  lines  to  inform  you  that  I  frequently  heard  my
husband  and  his  father  talking  about  both  of  them  hearing  the  mother
calling  him  by  name.  They  were  both  Tuost  positive  about  it ;  and  it  left
quite  an  impression  upon  their  minds.  I  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this
statement.  u  Mart  Emmerson."

In  conversation,  I  learnt  from  Mr.  Emmerson  that  he  and  his  father
were  the  only  persons  in  the  house  at  the  time  that  the  voice  was  heard  ;
he  had  no  sisters  living  at  home,  and  the  household  had  been  disorganised
owing  to  the  cholera.  Mr.  Emmerson  is  very  far  from  inclined  to  believe
in  marvels,  and  the  above  has  simply  remained  in  his  mind  as  a  unique
and  inexplicable  fact,  which  at  the  time  was  evidently  of  the  most  startling
kind.  The  conditions  were  of  course  favourable  to  subjective  hallucina-
tion ;  but,  equally  of  course,  this  will  not  explain  the  double  experience.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE    CASES.  635

§  6.  In  the  next  and  final  group,  no  articulate  sounds  were  heard ;
and  in  most  of  the  cases  the  impression  was  of  a  mere  noise.

The  following  two  cases  are  too  remote  for  details  to  be  relied
on  ;  and  the  nature  of  the  sounds  may  very  likely  have  become
more  precise  in  recollection  after  the  coincident  facts  were  known.
Still  it  may  be  surmised  that  the  experiences  described  were,  at  any
rate,  collective  hallucinations.

(678)  From  Mr.  M.  P.  Stephenson,  the  narrator  of  case  613.
"  8,  Southfield  Road,  Gotham,  Bristol.

"January  31st,  1884.

"  The  case  I  am  going  to  relate  happened  more  than  50  years  ago.
Myself  and  wife  had  been  to  her  brother's  to  see  their  little  daughter,  aged
about  two  years,  wlio  was  thought  to  be  dying.  It  was  evident  when  we
saw  her  that  she  could  not  last  long.  We  left  about  10  o'clock  at  night,
and  retired  to  bed,  and  settled  quietly  to  go  to  sleep.  But  before  we  could
do  so  we  heard  a  startling  scream — a  sort  of  death-scream  i — on  the  pillow
between  us.  We  each  thought  the  other  was  taken  ill,  and  turned  in
alarm,  and  found  that  the  noise  was  not  aroused  by  either  of  us.  I  turned
the  matter  off  as  best  I  could,  not  to  alarm  my  wife.  In  the  morning  she
said  to  me,  '  That  was  a  curious  noise  we  heard  last  night  ;  what  could  it
have  been  ? '  I  said,  '  Little  Mary  died  last  night  at  that  time,  and  that
was  the  noise  she  made  before  she  died,'  which  proved  to  be  the  fact.  I
imitated  the  noise  the  same  evening,  and  the  child's  mother  exclaimed,
'  How  strange !  that  was  the  exact  scream  made  by  my  child  before  she  died.'

"  These  things,  when  they  occur,  take  a  deep  hold  on  us,  and  although
it  happened  more  than  52  years  ago,  we  both  of  us  remember  it  as  freshly
as  if  it  were  but  a  year  ago."

In  answer  to  inquiry,  Mr.  Stephenson  adds  : —

"  The  death-cry  of  the  child  was  heard  by  us  at  the  precise  time  of  her
death,  and  the  mother  (who  has  been  dead  more  than  30  years)  recognised
the  cry  I  imitated  as  the  last  cry  of  her  dear  child."

To  a  request  for  his  wife's  written  corroboration,  Mr.  Stephenson
replies  : —

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  cannot  comply  with  your  request.  My  dear  wife
is  a  confirmed  invalid  and  cannot  be  persuaded  to  do  what  you  wish.  You
are  not  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  the  truth  of  what  I  related
to  you."

(679)  From  the  mother  of  a  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,
who  desires  that  her  name  may  not  be  published.  ft  1884.

"  On  the  15th  of  May,  1829,  my  mother,  myself,  and  a  servant  were  in
the  hall,  when  we  heard  a  loud  groan.  We  were  somewhat  startled,  and
a  short  time  after  we  heard  the  groan  repeated,  but  louder.  We  then
looked  about  the  garden  and  in  the  street,  but  could  see  nothing.  We  had
just  returned  to  the  house,  when  a  third  time  ^  the  groan  was  repeated,  but
still  louder.     We  were  much  startled,  and  again  looked  about  to  find  the

1  It  is  very  doubtful,  of  course,  whether  this  particular  description  woidd  have  been
given  but  for  the  fact  of  the  death,  which  was  afterwards  ascertained.

2  See  p.  229,  note.


636  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap,

cause,  but  to  no  purpose.  Shortly  after,  my  brother  came  in,  in  breath-
less haste,  to  tell  his  mother  that  his  grandfather  was  thrown  from  his
horse,  and  nearly  killed.     The  dear  old  man  died  the  same  night."

We  find  from  a  copy  of  a  tombstone  in  Loughton  churchyard,  that  the
death  occurred  on  May  16th  (not  15th),  1829.  The  parish-clerk  tells  us
that  the  accident  took  place  about  100  yards  from  his  house.

(680)  From  Mr.  Charles  H.  Kallensee,  Croan  House,  Sladesbridge,
Cornwall.

"  December  30th,  1882.

"  In  the  year  1841,  an  elder  brother  of  mine  died,  at  Princess  Street,
Devonport.  When  I  returned  from  school  on  the  day  of  his  death,  I  was
told  to  go  to  his  room,  as  he  had  inquired  for  me.  On  entering  the  room,
I  found  a  great  change  in  him  since  the  morning,  and  I,  who  had  never
seen  death,  yet  knew  that  he  was  dying.  In  the  room  were  my  father  and
mother  ;  my  father  standing  at  the  side  of  my  brother's  bed,  while  my  dear
mother  sat  weeping  near  the  foot.     I  took  a  seat  near  my  mother's  side.

"  It  might  have  been  an  hour  or  more  that  we  remained  thus,  listening
to  the  breathing  of  my  brother,  expecting  each  breath  to  be  the  last.  I
remember  it  was  a  beautiful  afternoon,  and  the  sun  shone  into  the  room
and  across  my  brother's  bed.  Suddenly  there  were  three  violent  blows  or
concussions,  so  violent  that  I  felt  the  room  shake.  My  mother  sprang  to
her  feet,  and  with  excitement  exclaimed,  '  There  it  is  again ' ;  at  the  same
time  I  saw  my  father  stooping  down  and  turning  back  the  carpet  that
went  round  the  bed.  My  own  feeling  was  one  of  wonder  and  curiosity,
and  on  looking  at  my  brother,  I  saw  he  was  dead.  My  father's  stooping
down  and  examining  the  carpet  was  explained  by  him,  after  he  had  felt  the
third  blow  strike  him  at  the  bottom  of  his  foot ;  while  my  mother's  excla-
mation, '  There  it  is  again,'  was  because  she  had  heard  similar  manifesta-
tions at  the  death  of  other  members  of  her  family.  I  know  nothing  of
Spiritualism  per  se ;  I  never  attended  any  meeting  or  seances  on  the
subject,  therefore  cannot  say  whether  the  knocking  I  heard  was  of  that
character ;  but  of  this  I  am  quite  certain,  that  no  known  power  produced
the  noise.  "  Charles  H.  Kallensee."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  occurred  on
October  21,  1841.

In  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  he  had  ever  experienced  hallucina-
tions of  the  senses  on  other  occasions,  Mr.  Kallensee  replied  : —

"  I  have  not  met  with  any  similar  manifestations.  I  can  scarcely  call
it  a  '  knocking,'  as  it  seemed  to  fill, and  even  shake,  the  room.  The  sound  was
as  of  a  stick  being  broken,  but  much  louder,and  powerful.  My  father  felt  the
last  blow  at  the  bottom  of  his  foot,  and  almost  the  first  thing  I  remember,
after  my  wonder  had  passed,  was  seeing  him  stooping  down  and  examining
the  carpet  under  his  feet.  My  mother  told  us  children  afterwards,  on
several  occasions,  that  she  had  heard  similar  noises  at  the  death  of
her  father  and  brother.  My  mother  was  an  educated  woman,  and  far
from  superstitious  ;  and  yet  she  could  not  but  believe  in  this."

(681)  From  Mr.  H.  C.  Hurry,  C.E.,  60,  Lawford  Road,  Kentish
Town,  N.W.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  637

"January  4th,  1884.
"  Many  years  ago  I  lodged  with  an  old  lady,  her  son  and  daughter,  of
the  name  of  Spencer,  in  Manchester.  In  conversation  they  frequently
told  me  that  on  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  any  member  of  their  family,
one  or  more  of  them  invariably  had  some  monition  of  it.  This  I  treated
with  a  considerable  amount  of  scepticism.  One  morning  they  received
a  letter  from  Ormskirk,  near  Liverpool,  informing  them  that  the  young
people's  aunt  was  very  ill.  The  son  at  once  went  off  to  see  her.  That
night  I  had  gone  upstairs  to  bed,  my  room  being  up  one  flight,  and
immediately  opposite  to  the  front  door  ;  whilst  I  was  undressing  I  heard
a  very  loud  knock,  as  though  given  with  the  hand,  not  the  knocker.
Miss  Spencer  immediately  came  out  of  the  sitting-room,  and  called,  saying,
'  Mr.  Hurry,  did  you  knock  down  ? '  I  answered,  '  No,  it  was  at  the  hall-
door.'  She  went  and  opened  it,  and  at  once  said,  on  finding  no  one  there,
'  Good  God  !  my  aunt's  dead.'  Without  saying  anything  to  them,  I  wrote
down  the  exact  time,  about  11  p.m.,  so  far  as  I  can  remember.  By  the
first  post  possible,  they  received  a  letter  from  young  Spencer,  informing
them  the  aunt  had  died  exactly  at  the  time  I  had  noted,  allowing  for  the
difference  of  mean-time,  by  which  watches  were  then  regulated.  I  should
add  that  I  was  in  no  way  related  to  the  Spencers."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hurry  says  : —

"  I  do  not  know  of  any  of  the  Spencer  family  ;  the  old  lady,  her  son  and
daughter,  I  mentioned,  having  long  been  dead.  The  circumstance  I  named
occurred  in  the  year  1841,  but  as  I  was  a  party  to  it  I  consider  my  evidence
first-hand.  You  next  ask  me  whether  I  have  had  '  any  auditory
hallucinations.'     I  cannot  remember  any  but  the  one  I  give  you."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  a  Mrs.  Spencer,  who  is  pro-
bably the  person  mentioned  in  this  case,  died  at  Ormskirk  in  1841.

[This  case  could,  of  course,  have  no  claim  at  all  to  attention,  but  for
its  analogy  to  others,  as  there  is  no  sufficient  proof  that  the  sound  was  not
a  real  knock.  If  it  was  a  hallucination,  Mr.  Hurry's  share  in  the
experience  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  the  subjective  effect  of  strain  and
anxiety.]

(682)  From  Mr.  W.  Hillstead,  a  teacher  of  music,  who,  at  the  time
when  he  gave  us  the  account,  in  1884,  was  acting  as  care-taker  in  a  large
house  at  Cambridge.

"  In  October,  1848,  I  was  sitting  with  my  mother  in  8,  Suffolk  Place,
Pall  Mall  East.  The  house  was  empty  except  for  ourselves.  The  room
was  mainly  lighted  by  a  large  skylight.  The  house  was  quite  quiet.  It
was  rather  dark  on  an  October  day.  Suddenly  we  were  both  startled  by  a
terrifying  noise,  as  if  a  cartload  of  gravel  had  been  shot  down  from  a
height  on  to  the  skylight.  I  jumped  up  in  startled  alarm,  thinking  that
the  skylight  was,  of  course,  smashed  to  pieces  by  the  stones  which  I  had
actually  heard  falling  on  it.  There  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  anything
unusual.  My  mother,  who  had  had  many  warnings  of  different  kinds,  was
less  alarmed.  She  took  for  granted  that  someone  was  dead,  but  we  could
neither  of  us  think  who  it  could  be,  as  we  knew  of  no  one  who  was  ill.

"  Some  days  afterwards,  a  cousin  of  mine  called,  and  told  us  that  his


638  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

brother  Richard  was  dead.  "We  asked  when  he  died,  and  found  that  it  was
at  dusk  on  the  very  afternoon  on  which  we  heard  the  crash.  My  mother
had  been  very  fond  of  the  young  man,  and  so  was  I.  Of  late  he  had  gone
wrong,  and  we  had  seen  less  of  him.  "  William  Hillstead."

[Unfortunately  the  information  necessary  to  enable  us  to  verify  the
death  was  not  asked  for  at  the  time  ;  nor  was  an  address  obtained  to  which
we  might  subsequently  write.  The  narrative  was  certainly  given  in  good
faith ;  but  its  only  force,  again,  depends  on  its  analogy  to  other  cases.]

As  regards  the  curious  form  of  the  impression  in  the  following
case,  see  the  remarks  on  case  625,  pp.  572-3.

(683)  From  Mrs.  Windridge,  Sutton  Villa,  99,  Albert  Road,  Dalston,  E.

"November  9th,  1882.

"In  or  about  the  year  1861,  I,  being  weary  and  worn,  first  through
the  long  illness  and  then  the  depression  and  inertness  of  my  husband,
complained  to  a  lady  friend,  Mrs.  H.,  whose  husband  had  frequently
remonstrated  with  mine  for  what  appeared  to  be  his  laziness.  My  friend,
having  a  strong  sympathy  for  me,  urged  her  husband  to  obtain  a  situation
for  him.  He  said,  '  I  will  kill  him  for  her  ' ;  and  procured  my  husband
work  which  he  believed  would  place  his  life  in  danger.

"  Three  years  after,  Mr.  H.  lay  dangerously  ill ;  at  his  request  I  had
gone  over  to  see  him,  and  found  him  in  a  most  excited  state ;  he  entreated
me  to  use  all  my  influence  to  induce  my  husband  to  leave  the  situation  he
had  procured,  as  he  feared  it  would  ultimately  cause  his  death.

"  Some  weeks  afterwards  my  husband  and  I  were  awoke  by  the  noise,
apparently,  of  someone  endeavouring  to  open  our  bedroom  door.  The
noise  was  quite  loud,  as  if  the  intruder  could  not  open  it  readily,  and  did
not  care  who  heard  him.  My  husband  listened  for  a  while,  and  then
opened  the  door  with  a  light  in  his  hand.  There  was  nothing  there,  but
immediately  there  was  the  sound  of  a  large  dog  entering,  and  scratching
on  the  floor  at  his  feet.  My  husband  searched  the  house,  but  we  could
find  nothing.  It  was  just  2  a.m.  A  day  or  two  afterwards  I  heard  of
his  death  that  night.  The  widow,  whom  I  went  to  see,  told  me  that,  in
her  own  words,  he  '  died  twice.'  When,  as  they  thought,  already  dead, —
they  began  to  lay  him  out, — he  opened  his  eyes,  and  muttered  something
about  '  Windridge.'  '  What  time  was  this  ? '  I  asked.   '  Just  2  a.m.,'  she  said.

"E.  Windridge."

Mr.  Windridge  corroborates  as  follows  : —

"  One  night,  having  retired  in  the  ordinary  way,  we  were  aroused  by
a  shaking  and  scratching  at  the  bedroom  door,  so  distinct  and  impressive
that  we  began  to  be  alarmed,  and  I  arose,  and  striking  a  light,  went  to
the  door,  and  opened  it.  With  an  exclamation  I  started  back.  Something
touched  my  feet.  Something  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  be  grovelling  at  my
feet,  but  I  could  see  nothing.  I  then  searched  the  house  and  found  all
undisturbed,  as  we  left  it.  I  looked  at  the  time  ;  it  was  2  o'clock.  I  could
not  sleep  any  more  that  night.

"  The  next  day  I  heard  that  a  man,  who  had  expressed  to  my  wife  that
he  would  do  a  great  wrong  to  me,  had  died.  I  informed  my  wife,  and  she
said  she  would    visit  the  widow.     She  went,  and  Mrs.  H.,  in  relating  the


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  639

incidents  most  remarkable  in  her  husband's  death,  informed  her  that  he
had  died,  as  it  were,  twice ;  for  after  he  was  pronounced  dead,  and  the
nurse  was  laying  him  out,  he  seemed  to  return  to  life,  and  murmured  the
name  '  Windridge.'  Life  was  not  extinct  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after
this.  Mrs.  H.  informed  my  wife  that  her  husband  died  at  2  o'clock,  the
time  I  looked  at  my  watch.  a  -q  Windridge."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  the  death  took  place  on
September  14,  1863.

In  conversation,  Mr.  Windridge  informed  Mr.  Podmore  that  he  had
never  experienced  any  other  hallucination.  Mrs.  Windridge  has  experi-
enced one  other,  which  was  of  a  singular  kind,  and  is  described  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.,  p.  89.

Mr.  Windridge  could  not  clearly  remember  having  been  touched,  as  he
puts  it  in  his  letter  ;  he  can  only  be  sure  that  he  had  the  impression  of
something  grovelling  at  his  feet.  That  impression  may,  however,  have
been  conveyed  by  sound  only.  Mrs.  Windridge  states  that  he  told  her  at
the  time  that  he  had  been  touched.

The  following  is  a  further  specimen  of  the  musical  class,^  parallel
to  No.  388.  With  respect  to  its  place  in  the  present  collection,  I
must  again  refer  to  pp.  190-2,

(684)  A  gentleman  who  is  a  master  at  Eton  College  wrote  to  us,  on
Feb.  3,  1884  :—

"  I  enclose  a  copy  of  a  memorandum  made  a  few  days  after  the  event
referred  to.  My  memorandum  has  been  copied  for  me  by  Miss  H.,  whose
name  occurs  in  it.  She  is  my  matron  ;  a  sensible,  middle-aged,  active,  and
experienced  woman.  None  of  the  people  concerned  were  young,  flighty,  or
fanciful.  I  have  the  doctor's  letter  ;  his  name  is  G-.,  and  he  still  resides
here.  Miss  H.  only  wishes  to  add  that  it  must  have  occurred  from  20
minutes  to  perhaps  30  after  dissolution,  and  she  says  that  she  has  never
heard  anything  like  the  extreme  sweetness  of  the  sound.

"H.  E.L."

The  memorandum  is  as  follows  : —

"  Eton  College.

"August  6th,  1881.

"  I  wish  to  write  down,  before  there  is  time  for  confusion,  the  follow-
ing fact,  occurring  on  Thursday  morning,  July  28,  1881,  when  my  dear
mother  died,  whom  G-od  rest !  After  all  was  over.  Miss  E.  I.,  Eliza  W.,
Dr.  Gr.,   and  myself  being  in  the  room,  Miss  I.  heard  a  sound  of  '  very

1  In  a  case  which  E.  M.  Arndt  (Schriften  fiir  und  an  seine  Lichen  Deutschen,  1845,
Vol.  iii.,  pp.  525-6)  records,  with  names  and  details,  on  the  first-hand  authority  of  a  family
whom  he  highly  esteemed,  the  music  of  a  guitar  was  heard,  first  by  two  daughters  of  the
house,  and  then  by  their  father  and  a  large  group  of  persons,  at  the  time  of  the  death  in
battle  of  an  officer  who  had  been  staying  with  the  family  a  little  time  before,  and  had
delighted  them  by  his  performances  on  that  instrument.  But  there  is  no  sufficient  state-
ment of  the  grounds  on  which  the  hearers  were  convinced  (as  they  undoubtedly  were)
that  the  sounds  were  not  due  to  any  objective  cause  in  the  vicinity.  The  house  was
searched  ;  but  there  is  no  mention  of  inquiries  in  the  environs.


640  SUPPLEMENT.  [chap.

low,  soft  music,  exceedingly  sweet,  as  if  of  three  girls'  voices,  passing
by  the  house.'  She  described  further  the  sound  as  if  girls  were  going
home  singing,  only  strangely  low  and  sweet ;  it  seemed  to  come  from  the
street,  past  the  house  towards  the  College  buildings  (the  road  ends
there  in  a  cul-de-sac),  and  so  passed  away.  She  looked  to  call  my
attention,  and  thought  I  perceived  it.  She  noticed  that  the  doctor
heard  it,  and  that  he  went  to  the  window  to  look  out.  The  window
faces  S.E.  Eliza  W.  being  in  the  room  at  the  same  time  heard  a  sound
of  very  low,  sweet  singing.  She  recognised  the  tune  and  words  of  the
hymn.  '  The  strife  is  o'er,  the  battle  done.'  Miss  I.  recognised  no  tune,
but  felt  'that  the  music  sounded,  as  it  were,  familiar.'  As  a  very
accomplished  musician,  especially  remarkable  for  her  quick  memory  of
music,  had  words  or  air  been  those  of  a  well-known  hymn,  she  would
almost  certainly  have  remembered  it.  These  two  spoke  to  each  other
when  alone  about  what  they  had  heard.  Miss  I.  gives  the  time  at  about
10  minutes  after  my  dear  mother  expired.  They  were  then  unaware  of
this  additional  circumstance.  Miss  H.  had  left  the  room,  and  had  sum-
moned Charlotte  C,  with  whom  she  had  procured  something  required  for
laying  out  the  body.  As  the  two  returned  upstairs  they  heard  a  sound  of
music,  and  both  stopped.  Charlotte  said  to  Miss  H.,  '  What  is  this  1 '
After  a  pause  she  said,  '  It  must  be  Miss  I.  singing  to  comfort  master.'
They  afterwards  entered  the  room,  of  which  the  door  had  been  shut  all
along.  Charlotte  further  described  the  sound  as  very  sweet  and  low,
seeming  to  pass  by  them.  She  felt  as.  if,  had  she  only  been  able  to  listen,
she  could  have  distinguished  the  words.  It  did  not  occur  to  her  that  her
description  was  most  incongruous  ;  she  could  not  listen  attentively,  but
felt  '  as  if  rapture  were  all  around  her.'  It  was  not  until  afterwards,  when
she  mentioned  to  Eliza  having  heard  Miss  I.  singing,  and  how  strangely  it
sounded,  that  they  found  that  each  had  heard  the  sound.  Miss  H.
described  the  sound  as  very  peculiar  and  sweet,  seeming  to  pass  by  them
and  pass  away,  as  they  both  stopped  on  the  stairs.  All  the  staircase
windows  give  north-west.  I  heard  nothing,  ^  and  I  should  have  given  no
weight  to  a  sound  heard  or  described  by  these  women  in  the  room  after
communicating  with  each  other,  or  by  these  women  out  of  the  room
respectively;  but  the  coincidence  of  each  party  hearing  it  separately  and
independently  without  previous  communication,  as  well  as  the  matter-of-
fact  explanation  suggested  for  it  by  one  of  them  seeming  to  imply  that
their  thoughts  were  not  dwelling  on  the  supernatural,  added  so  much  weight
to  this  account  that  I  wrote  to  the  doctor,  who  answers  : — '  I  quite
remember  hearing  the  singing  you  mention  ;  it  was  so  peculiar  that  I
went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  but  although  quite  light  I  could  see  no
one,  and  cannot  therefore  account  for  it.'  The  time  must  have  been  about
2  a.m.  on  July  28th,  1881."

Miss  I.  writes  : —

"13,  Park  Street,  Windsor.

"  February  22nd,  1884.
"  I  will  copy  the  memorandum  which  I  made  in  my  diary  just  after  the
death  of  my  dear  friend  and  connection,  Mrs.  L.

1  Comijare  case  666,  and  see  p.  105,  second  note.


IX.]  COLLECTIVE  CASES.  641

"July  28th,  1881.

"  Just  after  dear  Mrs.  L.'s  death  between  2  and  3  a.m.,  I  heard
a  most  sweet  and  singular  strain  of  singing  outside  the  windows  ;  it  died
away  after  passing  the  house.  All  in  the  room  heard  it,  and  the  medical
attendant,  who  was  still  with  us,  went  to  the  window  as  I  did,  and  looked
out,  but  there  was  nobody.  It  was  a  bright  and  beautiful  night.  It  was
as  if  several  voices  were  singing  in  perfect  unison  a  most  sweet  melody,
which  died  away  in  the  distance.  Two  persons  had  gone  from  the  room
to  fetch  something,  and  were  coming  upstairs  at  the  hach  of  the  house,  and
heard  the  singing  and  stopped,  saying,  '  What  is  that  singing  ? '  They
could  not  naturally  have  heard  any  sound  outside  the  windows  in  the
front  of  the  house  from  where  they  were.  I  cannot  think  that  any
explanation  can  be  given  to  this — as  I  think — supernatural  singing  ;  but
it  would  be  very  interesting  to  me  to  know  what  is  said  by  those  who
have  made  such  matters  a  subject  of  study.

"B.  I."

Dr.  G.  writes  in  1884  :—

"Eton,  Windsor.

"  I  remember  the  circumstance  perfectly.  Poor  Mrs.  L.  died  on
July  28th,  1881.  I  was  sent  for  at  about  midnight,  and  remained  until
her  death  at  about  2.30  a.m.  As  there  was  no  qualified  nurse  present,  I
remained  and  assisted  the  friends  to  '  lay  out '  the  body.  Four  or  five  of
us  assisted,  and  at  my  request  the  matron  of  Mr.  L.'s  house  and  a  servant
went  to  the  kitchen  department  to  find  a  shutter  or  flat  board  upon  which
to  place  the  body.  Soon  after  their  departure,  and  whilst  we  were  waiting
for  their  return,  we  distinctly  heard  a  few  bars  of  lovely  music — not  unlike
that  from  an  ^olian  harp — which  seemed  to  fill  the  air  for  a  few  seconds.
I  went  to  the  window  and  looked  out,  thinking  there  must  be  someone
outside,  but  could  see  no  one,  although  it  was  quite  light  and  clear.
Strangely  enough,  those  who  went  to  the  kitchen  heard  the  same  sounds
as  they  were  coming  upstairs,  quite  at  the  other  side  of  the  door.  These
are  the  facts,  and  I  think  it  right  to  tell  you  that  I  have  not  the  slightest
belief  in  the  supernatural,  Spiritualism,  &c.,  &c.

«  J.  W.  G."

[The  fact  that  Mr.  L.  did  not  share  the  experience  is  strong  evidence
that  the  sounds  were  not  objectively  caused  by  persons  singing  outside  the
house  ;  and  this  is  further  confirmed  by  the  slight  difference  which  there
appears  to  have  been  between  the  impressions  received.]


END    OP    THE    SUPPLEMENT.


VOL.    II.  2  T


ADDITIONAL    CHAPTER

OF    CASES   RECEIVED    TOO    LATE    FOR    INSERTION    IN    THEIR

PROPER  PLACES.

I  1.  The  printing  and  revision  of  these  volumes  have  occupied  a
considerable  time ;  and  meanwhile  several  items  of  evidence  have
been  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  the  chapters  to  which  they
properly  belong.  They  fall  under  the  three  classes,  already  distin-
guished, of  experimental,  transitional,  and  spontaneous  cases.  I
will  begin  with  some  cases  of  the  first  class,  which  sufficiently  show
that  the  experiments  described  at  the  opening  of  the  treatise  admit
of  being  repeated  and  varied  with  success.

The  following  results  were  sent  to  us  at  the  close  of  last  year,  by
Herr  Max  Dessoir,  of  27,  Kothener-Strasse,  Berlin.  He  has  devoted
a  good  deal  of  time  to  experimenting  with  a  few  friends,  he  himself
almost  always  acting  as  percipient.  He  began  with  trials  of  the
"willing-game"  type,  and  soon  convinced  himself  that  slight  muscular
hints  were  the  full  and  sufficient  explanation  of  all  the  ordinary
"  thought-reading  "  exhibitions.  He  then  introduced  forms  of  experi-
ment which  offered  no  opportunity  for  unconscious  guidance  on  the
agent's  part — such  as  the  guessing  of  numbers,  words,  and  cards,
without  any  contact  between  agent  and  percipient.  These  trials,
though  the  amount  of  success  was  above  what  could  with  probability
be  ascribed  to  chance,  were  not  numerous  enough  to  justify  any
definite  conclusion.  But  a  series  of  trials  in  the  reproduction  of
diagrams  affords  an  interesting  parallel  to  those  described  in  Vol.  I.,
pp.  37-51.  The  agent  was  in  some  cases  Herr  E,  Weiss,  of
28,  Wilhelm-Strasse,  Berlin  (a  fellow-student  with  Herr  Dessoir  at  the
Berlin  University);  in  others  Herr  H.  Biltz,  of  14,  Schelling-Strasse,
Berlin ;  and  in  one  case  (No.  7)  Herr  W.  Sachse,  of  2,  Kirchbach-
Strasse,  Berlin.  (Herr  Weiss  and  Herr  Biltz  are  known  to  us,  through
correspondence,  independently  of  these  experiments.)  All  three
gentlemen  have  sent  us  certificates  of  the  accuracy  of  the  record  of
the  experiments  in  which  they  were  respectively  concerned.


ADDITIONAL  CHAPTER.  643

Herr  Dessoir  thus  describes  the  conditions  of  the  trials : —

"  While  the  agent  drew  the  original,  I  was  almost  always  out  of  the
room,  to  avoid  being  influenced  by  the  sound  of  the  drawing.  When  the
agent  called  out  '  Ready,'  I  came  in,  with  eyes  closely  bandaged — the
bandage  being  made  to  cover  the  ears,  so  as  to  shut  out  casual  sounds.  I
set  myself  at  the  table,  and  in  many  instances  placed  my  hands  on  the
table,  and  the  agent  placed  his  hands  on  mine  :  the  hands  lay  quite  still  on
one  another.!  When  an  image  presented  itself  in  my  mind,  the  hands
were  removed,  the  original  drawing  [on  which  the  agent  bad  been  fixing
his  eyes]  was  turned  over,  or  covered  with  a  book,  and  I  took  ofi"  the
bandage  and  drew  my  figure.  Many  of  the  experiments  were  made
without  contact,  even  though  no  note  to  that  effect  was  made."

As  regards  the  cases  where  there  were  two  or  three  attempts  at
reproduction,  Herr  Dessoir  says,  that  after  he  had  had  a  clear  image  in
his  mind,  and  had  removed  the  bandage,  the  image  would  sometimes
lose  its  clearness,  and  that  he  was  sensible  that  the  figures  which  he
produced  did  not  correspond  with  it,  and  so  tried  again.  Still,  as  no
doubt  the  agent  would  have  told  him  if  the  earlier  attempt  had  been
successful,  and  he  would  not  then  have  made  another,  every  incorrect
attempt  must  count  as  simply  a  failure.

The  following  woodcuts,  which  have  been  very  carefully  copied
from  the  original  sheets,  include  all  the  trials  in  which  Herr  Dessoir
was  himself  the  percipient,  with  the  exception  of  two,  (one,  to  the
eye,  a  success,  and  the  other  a  failure,)  omitted  on  account  of  some
uncertainty  as  to  the  conditions.  Nos.  iii.,  vi.,  and  x.,  in  which  Herr
H.  Biltz  was  the  percipient,  must  be  set  against  three  complete
failures  on  his  part.  The  series  given  contains  a  considerable  pro-
portion of  failure ;  but  if  the  reader  will  draw  19  figures  of  about
an  equal  degree  of  complexity,  and  get  a  friend  to  do  the  same,  and
will  then  compare  each  figure  of  one  series  with  the  corresponding
one  of  the  other,  he  will  realise  the  improbability  of  obtaining  by
mere  chance,  in  so  short  a  set,  9  resemblances  as  close  as  those  in
Nos.  i.,  iv.,  vi.,  vii,,  xi.,  xiii.,  xv.,  xvii.  and  xviii.,  below.

^  It  is  important  to  observe  the  fundamental  difference  between  contact  which
continues  while  the  writing  or  dratuing  is  going  on  (as  in  the  writing  of  the  figures  of  bank-
notes, which  is  a  favourite  trick  in  the  public  "thought-reading"  exhibitions),  where
what  the  performer  receives  from  the  innocent  "  wilier  "  is  delicate  muscular  guidance
from  moment  to  moment ;  and  contact  which  ceases  before  the  attempt  at  reproduction
commences,  and  which  could  only  betray  the  required  figure  if  the  hand  of  the  agent  (which
seems  both  to  himself  and  to  the  percipient  to  be  perfectly  still)  were  moved  on  that  of
the  percipient  in  such  a  way  as  to  draio  the  required  shape.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that
certain  figures  may  be  thus  indicated  without  the  agent's  consciousness  ;  but  it  seems  to
me  unlikely  that  they  could  be  unconsciously  perceived — at  any  rate  by  an  observer  who,
like  Herr  Dessoir,  has  devoted  special  pains  to  analysing  his  impressions  and  discovering
their  source.

VOL.  II.  2  T  2


644


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION


Oeiginal.


Reproduction.


Agent :  H.  B.


II.


Rep.  2.


Oeig.


Rep.  1.


Agent :  H.  B.


III.


Rep.


Oeig.


Agent's  name  omitted.


It  appears  here  that  the  agent's
image  included  an  impression  of  the
left  part  of  the  frame.     M.  D.


IN  THEIR  PROPER   PLACES.


645


IV.


Oeig


Rbp.


Agent :  H.  B.


Okig.


Agent :  H.  B.


Hep.  1.


Rep.  2.  Rep.  4.

Rep.  3.


N


646


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION


Agent :  M.  D.


VII.


Obig


Rep,  1.


Rep.  2.


<


While  the  second  reproduction  was  proceeding,
an  interruption  occurred  which  prevented  its
completion.


Agent:   W.  S.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.


647


Rep.  1.


Agent :  H.  B.
Rep.  2.  Rep.  3.


Rep.  4.


\


Y


A


IX.


Oeig.


Rep.  1.  Rep.  2.


Rep.  3.


The  percipient  said,  "  It  looks  like  a  window."


Agent :  H.  B.


Oeig.


Rep.  3.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


rsT7i


\iii


Agent :  M.  D


648


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR   INSERTION


XI.


Oeig.


Agent :  H.  B.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  3.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.


649


Agent :  H.  B.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


XIII.


Oeig.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


Agent :  E.  W.


The  percipient  said,  "  It  looks  like  a  window."


650


GASES   TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION


Orig.


Aeent :  E.  W.


XIV.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  3.


n


A


Obig.


Agent :  E.  W.


Oeig,


XV.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  3,


The  arst  attempt  at  reproduction  appears  to  have
been  a  failure.


XVI.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.  Rep.  3.


L


Agent :  E.  W.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.


661


Obig.


Rep.  2.


Agent:  E.  W.


Obig.


Rep.  2.


<a>


Agent :  E.  W,


The  percipient  said,  "I  see  two  bright  triangles,  but
I  cannot  tell  exactly  how  the  second  is  situated."


Obig.


XIX.
Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


Rep.  3.


Agent :  E.  W.


The  following  shorter  record  is  taken  from  the  monthly  journal
Sphinx  (Leipzig),  for  June,  1886,  and  we  have  not  seen  the  original
diagrams.  The  experiments  were  made  at  the  house  of  Baron  Dr.  von
Ravensburg,  whose  wife  was  the  percipient.  Herr  Max  Dessoir  drew
the  originals  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  out  of  the  Baroness  von
Ravensburg's  sight,  and  taking  care  that  his  pencil  should  move
noiselessly.  He  and  the  Baron  then  concentrated  their  attention  on
the  figure,  which  the  Baroness,  sitting  at  another  table,  endeavoured
to  reproduce,  after  a  time  varying  fi:om  20  to  45  seconds.  (The  Baron
did  not  take  part  in  the  first  experiment,  which,  it  will  be  seen,  was  a
failure.)


652


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


II.


Orig.


Rep.  1.


Rep.  2.


III.


Oris.


Rep.


The  correction  was  made  by    the

percipient  before  the  original  was

shown  to  her.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.
Oeig.  IV.  Rep.


653


Rep.


Oeig.


The  percipient  said,  "  It  is  a  circle  outside,  and  there  is  something  else  inside  it ;  "
then,  after  a  pause,  "  A  triangle."  She  then  drew  the  reproduction,  and  added  that  the
circle  was  an  imperfect  one.

With  respect  to  these  experiments,  the  Baron  and  Baroness  von
Ravensburg  have  sent  a  note  of  corroboration,  of  which  the  following  is
a  translation : —

"18,  Zietenstrasse,  Berlin,  W.

"July  9,  1886.
"We   certify  that  the  report  of   our  sitting  for  a  trial  of  thought-
transference,  which  appeared  in  the  sixth  number  of  Sphinx,  is  throughout
in  correspondence  with  the  facts,  and  has  been  drawn  up  with  complete
accuracy.  "  Feeiherr  Goeler  von  Ravensburg.

"Elizabeth,  Freiprau  Goeler  von  Ravensburg."

The  following  is  a  set  of  400  trials,  made  in  batches  of  40  or  50
at  a  time,  in  June,  1886,  by  the  Misses  Wingfield,  whose  former
experiments  have  been  described  in  Yol.  I.,  p.  34.  The  ninety  num-
bers which  contain  two  digits  were  inscribed  on  ninety  slips  of  paper,
and  placed  in  a  bowl.  Miss  M.  Wingfield,  sitting  six  feet  behind  the
percipient,  drew  a  slip  at  random,  and  fixed  her  attention  on  the  num-
ber which  it  bore ;  Miss  K.  Wingfield  made  a  guess  at  the  number,
and  the  real  number  and  the  guess  made  were  at  once  recorded  in  the
Table.  The  slip  of  paper  was  then  replaced,  the  contents  of  the  bowl
shufiled,  and  another  draw  made  at  hap-hazard.  The  most  probable
number  of   right  guesses  for  accident  to  bring  about  in  the  400


654


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION


trials  was  4.  The  actual  number  of  completely  right  guesses  was
27;  in  21  other  cases  the  two  right  digits  were  given  in  reverse  order:
and  in  162  others,  one  of  the  digits  was  given  rightly  in  its  right
place.  The  probability  which  this  result  affords  for  a  cause  other  than
chance  is  represented  by  47  nines  and  a  5  following  a  decimal  point ;
i.e.,  the  odds  are  nearly  two  hundred  thousand  million  trillions  of
trillions  to  1.  It  would  be  a  very  inadequate  statement  of  the  case
to  say  that,  if  the  waking  hours  of  the  whole  population  of  the
world  were  for  the  future  continuously  devoted  to  making  similar
trials,  life  on  this  planet  would  come  to  an  end  without  such  an  amount
of  success,  or  anything  like  it,  having  been  accidentally  obtained.


K.
M.

82

39

go
41

6/

60

4^

2\

84
65

23
33

52
28

72

27

81
56

48
23

J6
14

2n

31

48
71

64

n

25

49
39

94
86

18
17

71
29

S2

S6

K.

M.

45
45

30
67

55
88

J4
^4

21

91

77
S3

91

21

14

12

60
51

48
28

17
S5

29
67

34
77

S7
21

65  90

2S     90

30
3?

77
65

42
82

50
67

25
97

K.
M.

97

55

49
82

(>3
76

52
25

14
40

39
59

21

8\

12

16

42
27

39

49

28
82

II

88

24
24

41
il

64
S5

10
16

7^
g8

32

72

74
44

K.
M.

89

99

33
75

24
23

42

55

80
67

73
80

17
19

35
35

19
17

56
S3

65
65

48
78

34
22

91
15

44
66

32

3S

79
^9

40

64

S3
23

36
31

K.
M.

69

55

45
76

36
63

SO

56

21

Si

42
41

13
64

51
71

65
18

65
56

J6
21

68
28

51
S3

45
79

34
51

65

68

JO

20

n

45

32
27

43
63

K.
M.

45  \  4^
69  1^8

^3
47

36
33

IJ
15

go

21

40    48

60    46

72\59
53\29

72

32

30
6g

75
SS

21

44

80179
8o!j9

30
12

53
41

60
36

79
29

K.
M.

57
42

28
/8

76

42
27

19
15

48

37
23

7^

12

6j

64

98
89

46
14

51
51

41
20

39
66

80

39
29

19
91

24
46

32

30

87
86

K.
M.

71

23

98
98

46
4^

33
33

60
70

4S  ^I5
97\5o

49
32

64
46

90
9/

72
3S

T-4
12

24
27

93

S3

65
65

II

47

8g
52

70

68

49
59

84
J?

K.
M.

8/

86

70
79

80
42

97
63

99
91

o7

Si

41

41

4S

ss

77
31

^4
8g

24
23

3S
55

91

49

18
18

75
65

So\77
93^  14

60
62

46
76

3S
59

K.

M.

JO

80

27
67

79
84

13
13

62
26

73
88

40
91

JI

51

70

80

43
37

64
14

go
29

81
18

61
61

go
79

21
42

^3
5S

40
g8

17

15

J6

66

K.
M.

99
97

35

65

75
21

A2

40

24
62

35
19

74
35

14
26

85

99
go

71
86

49
42

81
18

86
79

44
62

36
37

68
16

24
S5

49
23

62

67

K.
M.

36
28

44
44

36
56

49
91

IS

12

n
65

24
29

18
31

5^

S2

36
78

81
8j

40
60

80
49

92

32

49
50

24
29

li

IS

56
56

40
20

71
18

K.
M.

45
12

80
86

13
92

13
43

26
2J

88
/8

84
66

92
29

49
41

60
3S

70
70

32
62

44    19
24    85

3S
^5

40
68

21

91

JO

50

99
32

4^
68

K.
M.

30
71

98
89

65
26

34
14

33
33

16

87

48
42

3S
65

59
II

86
S3

17  64
19  51

86
68

37
39

18

53

80
80

71
97

23

44

23

15

S3
63

K.
M.

8z
Z2

97
97

18
85

36
60

12
ll

3S
55

93

78

42
91

84
14

25
32

71
17

37
49

72

14

19
71

42

43

84
85

36
93

71    2S

44    23

67
67

K.
M.

41
36

7J-
3S

42
26

17
11

43
94

i8
ij

60
48

70
40

36

25

77
43

g8
86

40
13

86
86

31
40

27
50

91
35

48
47

64
26

64
59

28
48

K.
M.

33
3^

37
32

41
14

68
67

46
17

49
36

28

48

16  56

24   57

39
42

66
67

48
70

19

S5

V

10

25
19

71
40

66
60

60

67

76
49

92
82

K.
M.

^3
33

A8
4^

94\32
70  '43

28
6g

44
32

67
76

41
41

30

80

24

n

36
41

37
6?

98
99

73
37

41
41

37
56

^9

69

44
70

81
32

80
88

K.
M.

40    14
68    7/

36
32

go
71

SO
S3

46
40

80
20

48
57

3S
14

6j

55

23
28

37
37

49
5S

45
21

i8

15

73
80

82
67

^3
23

61
70

48
49

K.
M.

28
29

i8
19

go
42

3l\15
67  •  la

34
34

72
35

86
41

12

10

19
68

53

43

70  16
50  19

SS
S7

g6
3S

43
g6

lo   54
'jg    60

62
73

^4
18

IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  655

The  next  account  is  from  the  Rev.  Canon  Lefroy,  Incumbent  of  St

Andrew's,  Liverpool.  The  percipient,  Miss ,  is  known  to  Mr.  Myers

and  the  present  writer.  Her  bona  fides  is  above  suspicion;  but  her
state  of  health  has  unfortunately  prevented  further  experimentation.

"1885.

"Early  in  September,  1884,  in  Zermatt,  I  was,  through  the  kindness

■of  Miss  ,  permitted  to  have  an  opportunity  of  testing,  by  personal

observation,  experience,  and  evidence,  the  reality  or  otherwise  of  what  is,
I  believe,  called  telepathy.  I  am  bound  to  say  that  when  I  was  informed,
and  most  kindly  informed,  of  what  was  proposed  to  be  done,  the  innate
scepticism  of  my  nature  rose  to  its  highest.

"  I  was  informed  that  the  eyes  of  Miss would  be  tightly  bandaged,

and  I  saw  them  bandaged  ;  that  in  this  darkened  state,  mental  or  ocular
perception — probably  the  latter  ^ — would,  nevertheless,  enable  her  to  read
any  word  written  by  me  on  a  slip  of  paper.  There  might  be  mistake  ;  there
might  be  literal  transposition  [?  transposition  of  letters]  ;  there  might  be
-delay ;  but,  speaking  broadly,  I  was  assured  that  the  word  could  be
discerned.  We  sat  at  opposite  sides  of  the  table.  I  was  desired  to  hold
the  lady's  hand.  I  did  so,  and  while  so  doing  1  exerted  my  will  to  the
utmost,  and  to  the  intent  that,  if  possible,  the  conflict  of  wills  should
result  in  favour  of  my  scepticism.  I  must,  with  shame  and  humiliation,
.confess  that  my  incredulity  and  volitional  resistance  did  not  hesitate  to
select  a  word  which  my  gifted  antagonist  probably  never  heard  of  ;  and
accordingly  I  defiantly,  confidently,  and  I  will  add,  mercilessly,  wrote  the
name  of  Terence's  old  play — Heautontimoruvienos.  The  completion  of  my
word  was  followed  by  a  prolonged  pause.  I  felt  as  if  breathing  was  an
intrusion,  and  not  a  sound  was  heard.  At  last  the  blinded,  and  I  thought
the  wearied,  or  at  least  strained,  interpreter  said,  'What  a  long  word ! '
Then  a  pause.  Then  as  follows  :  'Why — two,  four,  six,  eight — there  are
.eighteen  letters  in  that  word ! '

"  Unconsciously  my  resisting  power  became  less  than  it  was,  and  it
■decreased  from  the  moment  Miss said,  'What  a  long  word  ! '  Never-
theless, the  long  pause  seemed  to  give  me  a  chance,  and  again  I  gathered
up  my  mind  to  resolve  that  detection  should  be  arrested.  But  very  soon
this  purpose  was  foiled  ;  the  lady  calmly  said,  '  That  word  has  two  m's  to
it ;  it  begins  with  an  h  ;  and  I  never  saw  that  word  before.'  I  felt  very
guilty  as  I  observed  what  I  thought  were  signs  of  fatigue,  and  then
(declared  the  word  was  unusual — ill-known,  and  asked  that  the  bandage
might  be  removed.

"  In  a  few  moments  I  was  allowed  to  try  with  simpler  words.  Again
the  bandage  was  applied,  the  word  was  written,  and  our  hands  were
clasped.  I  wrote  the  word  ink.  In  about  one  minute  the  word  was  read,
-thus,  'k,  n,  i  ;  your  word  is  inh.'

"Again  I  was  most  kindly  allowed  to  try  another  word.  I  wrote
,toy.     In  a  minute  the  word  was  read  thus,   '  y,  o,  t ;  your  word  is   toy.''^

^  See  p.  48,  note.

2  The  following  note,  by  Mr.  Myers,  of  a  trial  made  in  1884,  with  the  same  percipient,
lexhibits  the  same  curious  reversal  of  letters  ;  which  mi^ht  be  compared  with  the  production
of  anagrams,  and  of  independent  and  phonetic  spelling,  in  automatic  writing  (Vol.  i.,
]pp.  76'8,  and  below,  p.  665).    "  I  asked  Miss to  try  some  experiments  in  thought-trans-


656        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

The  experience  then  closed,  so  far  as  this  species  of  discovery  was
concerned.  "William  Lefroy,  M.A."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Canon  Lefroy  writes,  on  June  17,  1886  : —

"  Abercromby  Square,  Liverpool.

"  I    believe  I  wrote   the  letters  under    the  cover  of    my  left    hand.

Miss could  not  possibly  descry  them.     My  own  inflexible  scepticism

respecting  her  power  provided,  I  can  assure  you,  a  ready  safeguard  against
anything  she  might  have  been  disposed  to  do  under  the  peculiar  circum-
stances of  the  experiment.  I  am,  to  this  hour,  a  most  unwilling  believer
in  her  possession  of  some  force  which  revealed  what  she  could  not  see,  and
which  disclosed  what  I  resolved  should  be  impenetrable."

Miss  Hamilton,  of  47,  Albert  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  W.,  a
Member  of  the  S.P.R.,' sends  (in  June,  1886,)  the  following  record  of
an  impromptu  trial,  of  the  sort  which  we  wish  we  could  persuade
more  people  to  make.  In  such  a  case  as  this,  contact,  though  better
avoided,  can  scarcely  be  held  to  afford  the  opportunity  for  unconscious
physical  hints.  One  reservation  unfortunately  must  be  made :  the
record  was  not  drawn  up  in  writing  at  the  time.  But  Miss  Hamilton
tells  us  that  the  details  were  then  and  there  carefully  gone  over,  with  a
view  to  the  present  report ;  and  we  have  several  memories  to  rely  on.

"  Experiment  between  Miss  Leila  Melvill  [now  Mrs.  Lewis  Hamilton]
and  Mr.  Lewis  Hamilton,  September,  1885.

"  Miss  L.  M.,  eyes  lightly  bandaged  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  was
'  willed '  by  Mr.  Hamilton.  He  placed  his  hands  on  her  forehead,  and
willed  intently  that  she  should  read  the  [printed]  words,  A  Sermon,  at
which  he  gazed  steadily  all  the  time  he  willed.  She  said,  slowly,  A ;  then
spelled  the  first  few  letters  of  '  Sermon,'  and  then  said  the  whole  word.

"The  same  evening  she  read  in  the  same  manner  these  words,
County  Families.  Later  on,  in  November,  the  same  experiment  was
tried,  and  she  read  the  unusual  words,  Chatto  and  Windus.  Each  experi-
ment took  about  three  minutes.      Amongst  the  witnesses  present  were  : —

"Mary  C.  D.  Hamilton.
"  A.  Melvill  [sister  of  the  percipient].
"  LiLLiAS  Hamilton."

The  agent  and  percipient  also  sign  the  account.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Hamilton  writes,  on  June  25,  1886  : —
"Lansdowne,  Farquhar  Road,  Upper  Norwood.

(1)  "Had  the  subject's  eyes  been  unbandaged,  she  could  have  un-
doubtedly seen  the  words  ;  but  not  only  were  they  tightly  bandaged,  but
my  fingers  were  placed  on  her  closed  eyelids,  so  that  she  could  not  even

f  erence  with  her  sister.  She  soon  told  me  that  the  experiments  had  succeeded,  but  with  this
strange  peculiarity,  that,  when  the  sister  fixed  her  eyes  on  some  word,  Miss  K.  saw  its
letters  appear  in  her  field  of  mental  vision  in  reverse  order.  Miss  K.  was,  unfortunately,
very  liable  to  headache,  which  these  experiments  quickly  induced,  and  I  was  only  allowed
one  short  series  of  trials.  I  placed  the  word  NET  behind  her,  and  looked  fixedly  at  the
letters.  She  said  that  she  saw  successively  the  letters  T,  E,  N.  I  next  chose  SEA,  and
she  saw  A,  E,  S.  I  chose  a  third  word,  but  she  saw  no  mental  image,  and  headache
stopped  the  experiments."


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  657

have  opened  them,  had  there  been  no  bandage.  On  one  occasion  the
words  she  read  were  held  above  the  subject's  head,  so  that  she  could  not
in  any  case  have  seen.  [Miss  Hamilton  independently  confirms  this.]  I
may  say,  however,  that  in  no  single  case  was  there  any  possibility  of  her
having  seen  the  words.  The  words,  and  book,  or  pamphlet,  from  which
they  were  read,  were  chosen  after  her  eyes  were  bandaged,  and  out  of
her  sight,  and  they  were  not  whispered  from  one  witness  to  the  other,  but
shown  round.

(2)  "  In  no  instance  did  she  fail  with  me,  but  when  Mr.  Hope  tried
her  one  evening,  she  failed,  and  on  another  occasion  (one)  she  said  almost
at  once  she  could  not  do  it  that  evening.  The  experiment  was  tried  a
good  many  times,  and  except  for  the  above,  always  succeeded.

(3)  "  For  about  six  months  we  did  not  try  again,  and  on  the  two
occasions  we  have  tried  lately,  she  has  said  she  could  not  do  it.  We,
however,  do  intend  to  try  again.  »  Lewis  Hamilton."

The  following  records  of  experiments  have  been  sent  to  us  by  our
friend  Dr.  Liebeault,  of  Nancy,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the
S.P.R.

"  Oompte-rendu  des  experiences  de  transmission  de  pensees,  faites  le  10
Decembre,  1885,  de  3  heures  a  4  heures  et  demie  du  soir,  chez  M.  le  Dr.
Liebeault,  en  presence  de  M.  le  Dr.  Liebeault,  de  Madame  S.,  et  de  M.  le
Dr.  Brullard.  Operateur,  M.  le  Professeur  Li^geois ;  sujet,  Mile.  M.,
20  ans.

"1.  Mile.  M.,  tres  intelligente  et  impressionable,  est  habitude  a  etre
endormie  et  entre  tres  vite  en  etat  de  somnambulisme,  pendant  lequel  elle
est  en  rapport  avec  tous  les  assistants.

"  M.  le  Professeur  Liegeois  la  met  en  ^tat  de  somnambulisme
hypnotique,  et  lui  suggere  de  n'etre  en  rapport  qu'avec  lui  seul ;  il  lui
donne  du  papier  et  un  crayon,  et  lui  commande  de  faire  la  meme  chose  que
lui.  Alors  il  se  rend  a  une  table  voisine  et  dessine  un  triangle  sur  un
registre,  dont  la  couverture  relevee  forme  un  ^cran  entre  lui  et  le  sujet,
et  intercepte  toute  communication  visuelle.  Aussit6t  Mile.  M.  ecrit  de  son
c6te,  '  Les  grands  hommes.'     Le  r^sultat  est  done  nul.

"2.  En  second  lieu  M.  Liegeois  dit  au  sujet,  toujours  en  somnambulisme,
'  Je  dessine  un  objet,'  et  dans  les  memes  conditions  que  precedemment,  il
dessine  une  carafe.  Le  sujet  dit  aussitot,  '  C'est  un  vase,'  et  elle  dessine
un  vase  de  forme  carree.  '  Ce  n'est  pas  cela,'  dit  M.  Liegeois.  Alors
Mile.  M.  dessine  un  objet  de  meme  forme  que  la  carafe,  mais  difibrme,  vu
qu'ayant  les  yeux  fermes  elle  pla9ait  ses  traits  au  juger.  Le  resultat  est
done  exact. ^

"  3.  En  troisieme  lieu,  '  Je  dessine  quelque  chose,'  dit  M.  Liegeois,
et  il  figure  un  bonhomme.  Le  sujet,  dans  le  meme  etat  passif,  dit
successivement,  '  C'est  un  dessin  d'ornement,'  et  elle  commence  a  tracer
quelques  traits ;  puis  sur  une  reponse  negative,  '  On  croirait  une
boussole — un  arbre — une  maison.'  Resultat  nul.  A  ce  moment  M.
Liegeois  reveille  Mile.  M.  avec  la  suggestion  de  tres  bien  voir  a  son  reveil

1  The  drawings  have  been  sent  to  us,  and  entirely  accord  with  Dr.  Li^beault's
description.


VOL.    II.


2    U


658  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

le  dernier  objet  dessine,  et  des  ce  moment  elle  est  en  communication  avec
les  assistants.  '  Je  ne  sais  pas,'  dit  Mile.  M.,  et  aprfes  quelques  minutes,
'  C'est  une  tete,'  que  sur  demande  elle  figure  de  profil.  Alors  on  lui  dit
que  c'etait  un  bonhomme.  'Eh  bien ! '  repondelle,  'ma  premiere  im-
pression a  etd  de  faire  un  bonhomme,  mais  j'ai  craint  que  Ton  ne  se
moquat  de  moi.'

"4.  Mile.  M.  restant  r^veillde,  M.  Li^geois  retourne  a  sa  table  et
dessine  une  table  carree  vue  en  perspective,  avec  un  tiroir  et  son  bouton ;
puis,  apres  avoir  montre  silencieusement  son  dessin  a  chaque  assistant  en
particulier,  il  place  ses  deux  mains  sur  la  tete  du  sujet  et  lui  dit,
'  Maintenant  vous  allez  deviner  ce  que  je  viens  de  faire.'  Apres  moins
de  deux  minutes  de  reflexion,  '  C'est  une  table,'  dit-elle ;  '  elle  est  ronde
— pas  tout-a-fait.'  Sur  demande  de  la  dessiner,  elle  dessine  peu-a-peu  une
table  exactement  semblable  et  dans  la  meme  position,  avec  le  tiroir  et  son
bouton.     Resultat  exact.

"  5.  Mile.  M.,  qui,  conime  aucun  assistant,  n'a  vu  le  dessin,  est  en
rapport  avec  M.  Liegeois  seul.  M.  Liegeois  dessine  un  cube.  Mile.  M.  dit
spontanement,  '  C'est  une  lampe.'  M.  Liegeois  lui  met  les  mains
sur  la  tete.  '  C'est  une  chaise,'  dit-elle.  M.  Liegeois  lui  fixe  les  yeux  sur
les  siens  et  lui  tient  la  main.  'Je  ne  sais  pas.'  Alors  le  dessin  est
montre  aux  assistants.  '  C'est  un  chapeau,'  dit-elle.  Mile.  M.  est  mise
de  nouveau  en  somnambulisme.  '  Je  veux  que  vous  voyiez  le  dessin,'  dit
M.  Liegeois.  '  C'est  un  petit  bureau.'  '  ISTon.'  '  Oh,  il  y  a  des  carres —
oui,'  et  elle  dessine  deux  carres,  I'un  audessous  de  1' autre.  '  Oe  n'est
pas  cela,'  et  comme  elle  ne  trouve  pas,  apres  quelques  minutes,  '  Quel
est  I'objet  ou  il  y  a  des  carres  r  '  Je  ne  sais  pas.'  '  C'est  un  cube. '  'Ah,
c'est  vrai ;  je  voulais  le  faire.'  Pendant  I'experience,  M.  le  Dr.  Liebeault
avait  ajoute  des  points  figurant  un  de.     Done  resultat  mediocre.

"  6.  Mile.  M.,  etant  toujours  en  etat  de  sommeil  hypnotique,  M.
Liegeois  dessine  une  croix.  'II  y  a  un  carre,'  dit  Mile.  M.  (C'etait  vrai ;
la  croix  etait  dessinee  dans  un  carre.)  'Mais  qu'y  a-t-il  dedans?'
demande  M.  Liegeois.  '  C'est  un  verre — non — une  etoile — non — un
triangle.  Cependant  il  y  a  trois  traits.'  Enfin  elle  figure  successivement
un  angle,  puis  une  croix  de  S.  Andre,  quand  on  lui  eut  dit  de  laisser
aller  son  crayon  sans  s'en  occuper.     Resultat  a  peu  pres  nul.

"7.  M.  Liegeois  ecrit  le  mot  manage.  Mile.  M.  ecrit  de  suite,
'  Monsieur.'  Puis  elle  dit,  '  Carafe — non — tableau — non.'  '  Quelle  est  la
lettre  ? '  '  C'est  un  <!— non,  c'est  un  m.'  Puis,  apres  quelques  minutes  de
reflexion,  '  II  y  a  dans  le  mot  un — i — un  a  apres  I'm — un  g — un  autre
a — un  e — il  y  a  six  lettres — non — sept.'  Quand  elle  eut  trouve  toutes  les
lettres  et  leur  places,  ma  iage,  elle  ne  put  d^couvrir  la  lettre  r.  Ce  n'est
qu'apres  plusieurs  minutes  qu'on  lui  dit  d'essayer  les  combinaisons  avec
les  diflferens  consonnes,  et  enfin  elle  ^crit  mariage.     Resultat  mediocre."

"  Proces- verbal  relatant  trois  faits  dtonnants  de  suggestion  mentale,
obtenus  par  MM.  Liebeault  et  De  Guaita,  au  domicile  du  Dr.  Liebeault  (4,
rue  Belle  vue,  Nancy),  le  9  Janvier,  1886.

"Nous  soussignes  Liebeault  (Ambroise),  docteur  en  medecine,  et  De
Guaita  (Stanislas),  horame  de  lettres,  tous  deux  demeurant  actuellement  a
Nancy,  attestons  et  certifions  avoir  obtenus  les  resultats  suivants.

"  1.  Mile.  Louise  L.,  endormie  du   sommeil  magnetique,  fut  informee


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  659

qu'elle  allait  avoir  a  repondre  a  une  question  qui  lui  serait  faite  mentale-
ment  sans  I'intervention  d'aucune  parole  ni  d'aucun  signe.  Le  Dr.
Liebeault,  la  main  appuyee  au  front  du  sujet,  se  recueillit  un  instant,
concentrant  sa  propre  attention  sur  la  demande,  Quand  serez-vous  guerie  ?
qu'il  avait  la  volonte  de  faire.  Les  levres  de  la  somnambule  remuerent
soudain  :  '  Bientot,'  raurmura-t-elle  distinctement.  On  Tin  vita  alors  a
rep^ter  devant  toutes  les  personnes  presentes,  la  question  qu'elle  avait
intuitivement  pergue.  Elle  la  redit  dans  les  termes  memes,  ou  elle  avait
ete  formulae  dans  I'esprit  de  I'experimentateur.  Oette  premiere  experience,
entreprise  par  le  Dr.  Liebeault,  a  I'instigation  de  M.  de  Guaita,  reussit
done  pleinement.  Une  seconde  epreuve  donna  des  resultats  moins
rigoureux  mais  plus  curieux  peut-etre  encore,  ainsi  qu'on  va  voir.

"  2.  M.  de  Gruaita,  s'etant  mis  en  rapport  avec  la  magnetisde,  lui  posa
mentalement  une  autre  question,  Reviendrez-vous  la  semaine  prochaine  ?  ^
'  Peut-etre,'  fut  la  reponse  du  sujet ;  mais  invite  a  communiquer  aux
personnes  presentes  la  question  mentale,  elle  repondit,  '  Yous  m'avez
demande  si  vous  reviendrez  la  semaine  prochaine.'  Oette  confusion,  portant
sur  un  mot  de  la  phrase,  est  tres  significative.  On  dirait  que  la  jeune  fiUe
a  '  bronche '  en  lisant  dans  le  cerveau  du  magnetiseur,

"  3.  Le  Dr.  Liebeault,  afin  qu'aucune  phrase  indicative  ne  fut
prononcee,  meme  a  voix  basse,  ecrivit  sur  un  billet,  '  Mademoiselle,  en  se
reveillant,  verra  son  chapeau  noir  transforme  en  chapeau  rouge.'  Le  billet
fut  passe  d'avance  a  tous  les  temoins,  puis  MM.  Liebeault  et  de  Guaita
poserent,  en  silence,  leur  main  sur  le  front  du  sujet,  en  formulant  mentale-
ment la  phrase  con  venue.  Alors  la  jeune  fille,  instruite  qu'elle  verrait  dans
la  piece  quelque  chose  d'insolite,  fut  reveill^e.  Sans  une  hesitation
elle  fixa  aussitot  son  chapeau,  et,  avec  un  grand  eclat  de  rire,  se  recria,
'  Ce  n'etait  pas  son  chapeau ;  elle  n'en  voulait  pas.  II  avait  bien  la
meme  forme  ;  mais  cette  plaisanterie  avait  assez  dur^  ;  il  fallait  lui  rendre
son  bien.'  '  Mais  enfin,  qu'y  voyez-vous  de  change  1 '  '  Vous  savez  de
reste.  Vous  avez  des  yeux  comme  moi.'  '  Mais  encore  1 '  On  dut  insister
tres  longtemps  pour  qu'elle  consentit  a  dire  en  quoi  son  chapeau  etait
change  ;  on  voulait  se  moquer  d'elle.  Pressee  de  questions  elle  dit  enfin,
'  Vous  voyez  bien  qu'il  est  tout  rouge.'  Comme  elle  refusait  de  la  reprendre,
force  fut  de  mettre  fin  a  son  hallucination,  en  lui  aflirmant  qu'il  allait
revenir  a  sa  couleur  premiere.  Le  docteur  souffla  sur  le  chapeau,  et,
redevenu  le  sien  a  ses  yeux,  elle  consentit  a  le  reprendre.^

"  Tels  sont  les  resultats  que  nous  certifions  avoir  obtenus  de  concert.
En  foi  de  quoi,  nous  avons  redige  le  present  proces-verbal.

"Nancy,  ce  9  Janvier,  1886,  fait  en  double.

"  A.  A.  Liebeault.
"Stanislas  de  Guaita."

"Nous  avons  dte,  une  fois,  tres  heureux  avec  une  jeune  fille  de  15  ans,
Mile.  Camille  Simon,  et  cela  en  presence  de  M.  Brullard  et  de  quelques
autres  personnes.^  Je  lui  ai  suggere  mentalement  qu'a  son  reveil  elle
verrait  son  chapeau,  qui  est  brun,  transform^  en  chapeau  jaune  ;  puis  je

1  The  questions  were  not  committed  to  paper  till  after  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting,
which  is  unfortunate,  as  everything  depends  on  their  exact  wording.

2  Et  la  somnambule,  immddiatement  aprfes,  ne  se  souvient  plus  de  son  hallucination.

3  Moi  seul  ai  touch^  la  somnambule. — A.  A.  L.

VOL.  II.  2  u  2


660         GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

I'ai  mise  en  rapport  avec  tout  le  monde,  et  j'ai  fait  circuler,  sous  les  yeux
de  chacun,  un  billet  indiquant  ma  suggestion,  avec  recommandation  de
penser  comme  moi.  Mais,  par  une  distraction  dont  je  suis  coutumier,  je
n'ai  plus  songe  a  la  fin  a  la  couleur  que  j 'avals  designee  ant^rieurement  par
dcrit ;  j'ai  eu  I'idde  bien  arretee  qu'elle  verrait  son  chapeau  teint  en  rouge.
Et,  en  la  reveillant,  je  lui  ai  affirm^  qu'elle  verrait  quelque  ciiose
representant  notre  pensee  commune.  Cette  jeune  fille,  eveill^e,  n'a  plus
reconnu  la  couleur  de  son  chapeau.  '  II  etait  brun,'  a-t-elle  dit.  Apres
I'avoir  longtemps  considere,  elle  a  assure  que  r^ellement  il  n'avait  plus  le
meme  aspect,  qu'elle  n'en  pouvait  pas  trop  en  definer  la  couleur,  mais  que
toutefois  il  lui  paraissait  d'unjaMwe-roit^et^ire.  Alors  je  me  suis  souvenu
de  ma  distraction.  Au  cas  present  les  temoins  avaient  pense  jaune  et  moi
rouge  ;  par  suite,  I'objet  a  paru  jaune  et  rouge  a  la  somnambule  reveillde  ;
ce  qui  est  la  preuve  qu'une  suggestion  mentale  peut  etre  I'echo  de  plusieurs
cerveaux  pensants."  ^

The  following  experiment,  made  with  the  same  "  subject,"  and  sent
to  us  by  Dr.  Liebeault  on  June  3,  1886,  is  an  interesting  example  of
temporary  latency  of  the  telepathic  impression.

"  J'avais,  a  cette  jeune  fille,  fait  suggerer  par  plusieurs  personnes,  et
mentalement,  qu'apres  la  sortie  de  son  sommeil  elle  verrait  un  coq  noir
se  promenant  sur  le  plancher  de  I'appartement.  Au  reveil  et  long-
temps  apres  (a  peu  pres  une  demie  heure)  elle  ne  voit  absolument  rien,
quoique  je  lui  eusse  annonce  qu'elle  devait  apercevoir  quelque  chose.  O'est
alors  (au  bout  d'une  demie  heure)  que  cette  jeune  fille  etant  alle  au  jardin,
et  ayant  considere  ma  petite  basse  cour,  par  hasard,  elle  revint  tout
courant  nous  dire  :  '  Ah  !  je  sais  ce  que  je  devais  voir  ;  c'est  un  coq  noir.
Cette  idee  m'est  venue  en  regardant  votre  coq.'  Mon  coq  est  moitie  d'un
noir  verditre  sur  les  ailes,  la  queue,  et  le  ventre,  et  partout  ailleurs  il  est
d'un  blanc  jaunatre.  Ainsi  voila  une  association  d'une  idee  se  transmettant
de  la  vue  d'un  etre  reel,  a  une  idee  fictive  transmise  suggestivement  et
mentalement  par  les  personnes  presentes."

The  following  record  of  experiments  was  kindly  sent  to  us,  on
April  27,  1886,  by  Dr.  Jules  Ochorowicz,  ex-Professor  Agrege  of  the
University  of  Lemberg,  now  residing  at  24,  Boulevard  St.  Germain,
Paris.'  It  is  to  be  wished  that  the  original  notes  had  included  a  very
much  more  detailed  description  of  the  conditions ;  ^  but  as  corrobora-
tive of  the  parallel  but  more  striking  results  recorded  in  Vol.  I.,
Chap.  IL,  the  present  set  deserves  attention.

^  The  reader  may  recall  Prof.  Lodge's  experiment  as  to  the  combination  of  tele-
pathically  transferred  impressions  from  two  different  agents  (Vol.  i.,  p.  50 ;  see  also
p.  80).  Mr.  Myers  and  I  were  witnesses  of  a  similar  confluence  of  suggestions  verhally
given  at  Dr.  Liebeault's  house,  on  Aug.  31,  1885.  Mr.  Myers  hypnotised  a  "subject,"
and  told  her  that  on  awaking  she  would  see  a  baby  on  his  knees.  I  told  her  that  she
would  see  a  cat  there.  When  she  awoke  she  gazed  at  a  hat  which  was  on  Mr.  Myers'
knee,  and  exclaimed,  "  C'est  ni  chat  ni  enfant!"  and  the  mixed  hallucination  inspired
a  terror  and  disgust  which  lasted  for  three  or  four  minutes.

"^  Possibly  Dr.  Ochorowicz  will  to  some  extent  repair  this  omission  in  his  forthcoming
book,  Le  Frobleme  de  la  Suggestion  Mentale,  in  which  this  record  will  be  embodied.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  661

The  first  experiments,  with  cards,  were  of  the  type  described  in
Vol.  I.,  pp.  31-3;  but  though  the  success  obtained  told  slightly  in  favour
of  a  cause  other  than  chance,  the  series  was  too  short  to  have  any
independent  value.  The  complete  record  of  the  next  set  of  trials  is  as
follows.  The  percipient  was  throughout  in  a  normal  waking  state.
(Complete  successes  are  marked  *,  partial  successes  \,  first  guesses
only  being  counted.)

Madame  D.,  agee  70  ans,  forte,  robuste,  tres  intelligente.  Rheumatisme
articulaire  chronique.  Experience  hypnotique ;  lourdeur,  paralysie,
analgesie,  dans  le  doigt.  Deux  personnes  imaginent  un  objet,  Madame
D.  le  devine.     Elle  ne  peut  pas  nous  voir.

Premiere  Serie,  le  2  Avril,  1885.

{a)  Une  Carte  de  Jeu.

OBJET  PENSE.  OBJET  DEVINE.

1.  Six  de  pique     "Sixnoir."f

2.  Dix  de  pique "  Rouge  ;  un  roi ;  un  dix."

3.  Valet  de  ccBur "  Rouge  ;t  un  roi ;  une  dame  ? "

{b)  Une  Couleur.

4.  Bleue         "  Bleue."*

5.  Jaune        "  Jaune."*

6.  Noire        "Noire."*

(c)  Un  Objet  Quelconque.

7.  Une  lampe  "  Un  iivre  ;  un  cigare  ;  un  papier."

8.  Un  chapeau  de  sole,  noir        ...       "  Quel  que  chose  de  bleu  ;  chaise."

9.  Un  fauteuil      "  Une    sucriere  j  une   armoire  ;    un

meuble."

10.  Lesel        "  Un  gout  de  sel."*

{d)  Une  LEtTRE.

11.  z         "i,  r,  s."

Une  Personne  Connue.

12.  Valentine "Valentine."*

13.  M'^  0 "M^-  D.  ?  M^-  Z.  ?"

Un  Portrait  de  la  Salle.^

14.  D'un  eveque     "  C'est  I'eveque."  *

Un  Chippre.

15.  8        "7,  5,  2,  8."

1  It  ought  to  be  made  a  rule  that  the  object  chosen  is  not  anythmg  visible  in  the
room ;  as  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  it  was  not  indicated  to  the  guesser  by  the  attitude
or  glance  of  some  one  present.  It  ought  to  have  been  stated  in  many  cases  whether  the
object  or  colour  was  looked  at,  or  merely  imagined,  by  the  agents.


662        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

Une  Impression,
objet  pense.  objet  devine.

16.  Gaie "Triste."

Une  Figure  Quelconque.

17.  Une  croix  noire        "  Un  arbre — branches  croisees."

18.  Un  vieillard  a  longue  barbe    ...      "Un       homme,       barbu  ;      barbe

blanche."*

Une  Photographie  sur  Sept.

19.  D'un  gar9on     "  Une  jeune  fiUe  ;  des  enfants."

Un  Nom  Quelconque.

20.  Marie        "Marie."*

21.  Adam        "  Jean,  Gustave,  Charles."

Un  Nombre  Quelconque.

22.  Dix "  Six,  douze,  neuf,  dix."

Un  Objet  Quelconque.

23.  Un  livre  bleu,  satin "  Couleur  violette — rose."

24.  Un    crayon  d'or    pose  sur   un

fond  bleu "  Quelque  chose  de  noir  sur  du  bleu,  "f

25.  As  de  pique  sur  un  fond  noir ...      "  Quelque  chose  de  noir — bleu  ;  une

carte  ;  Fas  de  trefle."

Un  Instrument.

26.  Un  clairon       "Unviolon."

Un  Chifpre.

27.  3        "2,  5."

Un  Objet  de  la  Salle.

28.  Une  assiette  avec  un  image    ...       " L'assiette  avec  I'image."*

Un  Got)^T.

29.  Du  sel       "Aigre — amer."

30.  Sucre         "Doux."t

31.  Des  f  raises        "  D'une    pomme — du    raisin;     des

f  raises."

Deuxi^ime  S^rie,  le  2  Mai,  1885.

Un  Objet  Quelconque.

32.  Un  buste  de  M.  N.  "  Un  portrait — d'un   homme  ;t  un

buste."

33.  Un  eventail      "  Quelque  chose  de  rond."

34.  Une  clef "  Quelque      chose    en     plomb — en

bronze — en  fer."

35.  Une  main  portant  une  bague...       "Quelque      chose    qui     brille — un

diamant — une  bague."


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.


663


"  Quelque  chose  d'  irregulier."
"  Un  triangle — un  cercle."


Un  GotTT.

OBJET  PENSE.  OBJET  DEVINE.

"Doux."

Une  Forme.

Un  carre

Un  cercle

Une  Lbttee.
"  M."*
"  D."*
"J."*

"  A,  X,  R,  B."
"  W,  A— non,  c'est  un  0."
"J"  (Continuez),   "Jan."*

Troisi^me  Serie,  le  6  Mai,  1885.
Le  sujet,  nous  tournant  le  dos,  tient  un  crayon  et  ecrit  ce  qui  lui
vient  dans  la  pensde.  Nous  lui  touchons  le  dos  legerement  d'un  doigt,
en  regardant  les  lettres  ecrites  par  nous.  Yingt-deux  experiences  ^  ont
ete  faites  sans  etre  notees  exactement ;  c'etaient  pour  la  plupart  des
echecs.     Suit  une  serie  de  succes  dtonnants.

66.  Brabant    "Bra — "  (je  m'eflforce  mentalement

a   aider    le  sujet,    sans    rien  dire)
"bant."*


36.  Acide


37.

38.


39.  M

40.  D

41.  J

42.  B

43.  O

44.  Jan


67.  Paris "P

68.  Telephone "T

QuATRiBMB  Serie,  le  8  Mai,  1885,
Une  Lettre.

69.  Z       "L,  P,  K,T."


.     .     Telephone."*
(MtMEs  Conditions.)


70.

B       ...

71.

F       ...

72.

n

73.

P       ...

74.

Y      ...

75.

e

76.

Gustave

77.

Duch

78.

ba      ...

79.

N  0...

80.

44     ...

81.

2

"  B."*
"  S,  T.  F."
«  M,  N."
"  P,  Z,  A."
"  V,  Y."


"F,  T,  Gabriel."
"  C,  0."
"  B,  A."t
"  F,  K,  O."

Un  Nombre.

.     ...      "6,8,12."

.     ...      "7,5,9."

(J'engage  men  aide  a  se  representer  la  forme  ecrite  et  non  les  sons
des  nombres.)

82.  3        "8,  3."

83.  7       "7."*

84.8        "  8— non,  0,  6,  9."t

^  Dr.   Oehorowicz  speaks   of  22  experiments  between  44  and  66,  but  only  allows
for  21.


664


CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION


Suivent   13  experiences  sur  les  formes  dessin^es,  phantastiques,  parnii
lesquelles  cinq  seulement  presentaient  une  certaine  analogie.

Une  Personne  Connue.
objet  pense.  objet  devine.

98.  Le  sujet  lui-meme    "  M.  0. — non,  c'est  moi."


99.  M.  D.


«  M.  D."*


Un  Image  Quelconque.
100.  Nous  nous  representons  la  lune      "  Je  vois  les  nuages,  qui  filent.   Une
croissant — M^-    P.  (mon    aide)      lumiere.     C'est  la  lune."*


sur   un  fond    de  nuages,    moi


dans  un  ciel  bleu  fonce.
The  following  is  a  tabular  view  of  the  results  of  this  series  : —


1

■ai
11

•31

03

s

s
V.

I.  Visual — Diagrams,  with  contact

II.   Imagined  objects,  various,  with  contact     ...

without  contact

III.  Imagined    numbers,     letters,     and     names,

without  contact

IV.  Visual  numbers    and    names    and    letters,

with  contact

V.  Abstract  ideas

VI.  Tastes

13
3

27

12

41
1
4

0

2
8

5

6

0

0
0

4

0
2

1

13

1

15

7

33
1
3

101

21

7

73

It  will  be  seen  that  the  majority  both  of  complete  and  partial
successes  occur  in  the  first  44  trials,  in  which  there  was  no  contact.

A  third  set  of  trials,  made  with  a  hj^notised  "  subject,"  gave  8
complete  and  7  partial  successes,  and  II  failures.  But  here,  though
contact  was  avoided,  the  form  of  experiment — involving  movement  of
the  limbs,  and  sometimes  actual  movement  about  the  room, — is  open
to  grave  objection ;  as  it  can  never  be  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of
persons  not  present  that  guidance  of  some  sort  was  not  afforded  by
unconscious  physical  signs.

The  following  case  of  the  transference  of  a  name  is  recorded  by
M.  Ch.  Richet.  It  is  one  of  the  sporadic  instances  which  occurred
before  the  time  was  ripe  for  placing  telepathy  on  a  firm  evidential
basis.  In  future,  we  may  hope  that  similar  casual  instances  will,  as  a
matter  of  course,  be  recorded  at  the  moment,  (especially  by  medical


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  665

and  scientific  observers,)  and  forwarded  to  our  London  headquarters,
or  to  those  of  the  SocieU  de  Psychologie  Physiologique  in  Paris.

"Octobre  30,  1885.

"  Je  n'ai  obtenu  qu'une  seule  fois  dans  de  nombreuses  recherches  sur
la  lucidite  des  personnes  mesmerisees,  un  resultat  satisfaisant.  C'est  pre-
cisement  dans  une  de  mes  premieres  experiences,  et  elle  est  remarquable,
car  je  ne  I'ai  jamais  pu  repeter,  meme  avec  une  approximation  moindre.
Une  jeune  fiUe,  convalescente,  fut  mise  dans  le  sommeil  magn^tique,  en
Novembre,  1872,  par  moi,  a  I'Hotel-Dieu.  Un  jour,  vers  4  heure  de  I'apres-
midi,  j'amenai  avec  moi  un  jeune  etudiant  Americain  de  mes  amis,  M.
Hearn.  M.  Hearn  n'avait  jamais  vu  cette  jeune  fille.  Lorsque  elle  fut
endormie,  je  dis  a  mon  sujet  magnetique:  '  Oonnaissez-vous  le  nom  de  mon
ami?'  ( J'etais  sur  de  ne  pas  avoir  prononce  son  nom.)  Elle  se  mit  k
sourire.  'Non,' me  dit-elle.  Puis,  comme  j'insistais,  elle  ajouta  :  'Jene
le  vois  pas.'  J'insiste  encore,  et  elle  me  dit  :  '  U  y  a  cinq  lettres.'  '  Eh
bien  ! '  dis-je  alors,  '  quelle  est  la  premiere  lettre  1 '  Alors  elle,  a  voix
tres  basse,  me  dit,  'H.'  '  Quelle  est  la  seconde  lettre  ? '  dis-je.  '  E.'  '  Et
la  troisieme? '  '  Je  ne  la  vois  pas.'  Oomme  elle  cherchait  inutilement,  je
dis,  '  Passons  a  la  quatrieme.'     '  R.'  '  Puis  la  cinquieme.'     'N.'

"  J'ai  essay^  le  lendemain  d'autres  experiences  analogues  avec  le  meme
sujet,  mais  sans  succes.  De  meme  plus  tard,  sans  succes,  avec  d'autres
personnes.

"  C'est  pour  cela  que  je  ne  I'avais  pas  publiee  ;  mais  maintenant  que  le
fait  de  cette  thought-transference  semble  bien  prouv^,  je  me  crois  autoris^
a  le  donner;  car  il  rentre  dans  un  ensemble  de  faits  qui  paraissent
demontr^s,  et  j'en  ai  etd  tellement  frappe  que  je  me  souviens  avec  une
precision  absolue  de  toutes  les  circonstances  qui  Font  accompagne."

The  next  case  is  from  Dr.  A.  M.  Chiltoff,  of  Kharkoff,  and  is
parallel  to  those  described  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  82-3.

"  University  of  Kharkoff.

"  May,  1886.
"On  Jan.  31,  1886,  in  Petersburg,  in  the  lodging  of  M.  Greshner,  I,
in  3  minutes,  and  at  a  distance  of  4  feet,  plunged  into  sleep  M.
Drobiazguin,  an  officer  of  the  Russian  navy.  The  experiment  was  made  in
the  presence  of  M.  Toumas,  M.D.  (now  Professor  at  the  University  of
Warsaw),  and  of  many  other  witnesses.  When  the  '  subject '  fell  asleep,
one  of  the  witnesses  wrote  on  a  sheet  of  paper  the  (Russian)  word  '  Bog '
(God).  Then  I  took  this  sheet  of  paper  and  put  it  on  the  forehead  of  my
'  subject.'  To  my  question  whether  he  can  read  the  word  written  on  the
paper,  M.  Drobiazguin  gave  an  affirmative  answer,  and  then  proceeded  to
pronounce  in  a  dead  voice  the  letters.  The  first  two  were  read  correctly,
but  in  lieu  of  '  g '  he  said  '  tch.'  When  I  remarked  to  him  that  the  last
letter  is  guessed  incorrectly,  he  immediately  said  the  true  letter.  In  my
opinion  this  experiment  cannot  be  explained  by  '  mental  suggestion,'  for
those  present  expected  that  the  '  subject '  would  pronounce  the  right  letter,
'g,'  and  he  nevertheless  pronounced  'tch.'"

[There  is  no  Russian  word  "  botch."  As  regards  peculiarities  of
spelling,  see  Yol.  I.,  pp.  76-8.     The  independent  action  of  the  percipient's


666  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION

mind  which  such  peculiarities  indicate  affords,  according  to  the  reasoning
in  this  book,  no  ground  at  all  for  doubting  that  the  idea  was  telepathi-
cally  transferred  from  one  mind  to  the  other.]

We  owe  the  following  accounts  of  some  experiments  in  hypnotic
rapport  to  Mr.  C.  Kegan  Paul,  who  states  that  he  has  known  the
phenomenon  of  "  community  of  taste  in  the  mesmeric  sleep  "  to  have
occurred  several  times  in  the  case  of  this  "  subject."  Mr.  Paul  writes: —

"May  27th,  1884.

"I  lived  at  Great  Tew,  in  Oxfordshire,  from  March,  1851,  to  May,
1852.  When  there,  the  following  circumstance  occurred,  but  I  am  not
able  to  fix  the  month,  further  than  to  say  that  I  think  it  was  in  the  late
summer  of  1851.     (No.     I  am  now  convinced  that  it  was  in  April,  1852.)

"  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  frequently  Mr.  Walter  Francis
Short,  then  an  undergraduate  scholar  of  New  College,  who  was,  without
any  single  exception,  the  most  '  sensitive '  person  of  either  sex  I  have  ever
known.  He  usually  became  what  is  called  clairvoyant,  but  this  always
tired  him,  and  I  seldom  made  protracted  experiments  in  this  direction.
On  several  occasions  I  found  that  a  community  of  taste  was  established
between  us,  but  only  once  made  any  experiment  with  more  than  one
substance,  such  as  a  biscuit,  or  glass  of  water.

"  At  Great  Tew,  with  his  consent,  my  two  sisters  alone  being  present
besides  ourselves,  I  carried  the  matter  further.  We  had  dined  in  my  only
sitting-room,  and  the  dessert  was  still  on  the  table.  (I  think  I  am  right,
though  my  sister  F.  doubts.)  I  put  Short  to  sleep  in  an  arm-chair,  which  I
turned  with  its  back  to  the  table,  and  Short's  face  to  the  wall.  There
was  no  mirror  in  the  room.  I  asked  Short,  taking  his  hand,  if  he  thought
he  could  taste  what  I  took  in  my  mouth,  and  he  said  he  thought  that  he
could.  I,  still  holding  his  hand,  shut  my  own  eyes,  and  my  sisters  put
into  my  mouth  various  things  which  were  on  the  table.  I  remember  only
raisins,  but  there  were  four  or  five  various  substances  tasted.  These  were
all  quite  correctly  described,  except  that  I  think  there  was  an  uncertainty
about  the  kind  of  wine.  Short,  however,  had  of  course  been  aware  of  what
was  on  the  table,  but  he  could  not  know,  nor  did  I  know,  the  order  in
which  I  was  to  be  fed  with  these  things.

"  To  carry  the  experiment  further,  one  of  my  sisters  left  the  room,
bringing  back  various  things  wholly  unknown  to  me,  which  she  ad-
ministered to  me  having  my  eyes  shut.  I  remember  spices,  black  pepper,
salt,  raw  rice,  and  finally  soap,  all  of  which  Short  recognised,  and  the  last
of  which  he  rejected  with  a  splutter  of  great  disgust.  The  experiment
only  ended  when  we  could  think  of  nothing  more  to  taste.

"  I  had  at  that  time  already  left  Oxford ;  Short  did  so  soon  after,  and
our  various  occupations  seldom  allowed  our  meeting.  His  conviction  of
my  power  over  him  was  such  that  he  begged  that  I  would  never  attempt
to  place  him  under  mesmeric  influence  when  I  was  at  a  distance  from  him,
on  the  ground  that,  as  he  was  rowing  in  the  Oxford  boat,  I  might  do  so
when  he  was  on  the  river.  I  had  once  afiected  him  at  a  distance,  under
rather  singular  circumstances,  and  of  course  willingly  gave  the  promise.

"  C.  Kegan  Paul.


IN  THEIR  PBOPEB  PLACES.  667

''  My  sister  F.  is  right  in  remarking  that  our  four  selves  were  the
only  persons  in  the  house.  My  only  servant  was  a  woman  in  the  village,
who  lived  close  by,  and  came  and  went  at  fixed  hours,  like  an  Oxford
scout."

This  account  was  sent  by  Mr.  Paul  to  his  sister,  Miss  Paul,  with  the
following  letter  : —

"  In  talking  with  my  friend  Henry  Sidgwick  over  my  experiments  in
mesmerism  many  years  ago,  I  mentioned  one  with  Short  at  Tew,  when  you
and  M.  were  present.  He  has  asked  me  to  write  it  down,  and  get  if
possible  your  recollections  on  it.

"  The  particular  experiment  was  one  in  which  Short,  being  in  the
mesmeric  sleep,  was  able  to  taste  what  was  put  into  my  mouth.  If  you
recollect  the  circumstance  at  all,  I  want  you,  before  reading  what  I  have
said,  enclosed  in  another  envelope,  to  write  down  a  statement  of  what  you
remember  as  much  in  detail  as  possible — time,  place,  persons  present,
things  tasted,  &c. ;  then  to  read  my  narrative,  and  to  write  also  how  far
your  recollection,  thus  refreshed,  tallies  with  mine,  and  preserve  both
accounts,  even  if  you  find  them  contradictory  ;  then  to  send  my  account
and  your  account  and  remarks  enclosed  to  M.,  together  with  this  note,
asking  her  to  follow  exactly  the  same  plan,  and  return  my  statement,
yours,  and  her  own  to  me,  together  with  this  note.

"  I  should  like  you  also  to  say  that  you  have  observed  my  order  of
proceeding  as  indicated  above.  ««  C  Kegan  Paul."

Miss  Paul  replied  as  follows,  on  May  27  : —

"  On  Thursday,  April  29th,  1852,  my  sister  and  I  went  to  stay  with
my  brother  at  Great  Tew,  in  Oxfordshire,  and  Mr.  Short  joined  us  at
Oxford,  and  went  with  us  to  Tew.  As  he  returned  to  Oxford  on  Saturday,
May  1st,  the  mesmeric  experiments,  which  I  well  remember,  must  have
been  on  Friday,  April  30th,  and  they  were  after  dinner  in  the  evening.
My  brother  mesmerised  Mr.  Short,  and  when  he  was  quite  asleep  he  tried
some  experiments.

"  My  brother  drank  some  wine  (I  think  it  was  port),  and  we  saw  Mr.
Short's  lips  and  throat  moving  as  if  he  was  swallowing  it,  and  on  my
brother  asking  him  what  he  was  drinking,  he  at  once  said  what  it  was.
The  wine  had  been  taken  from  a  cupboard  and  poured  out,  where,  even
had  he  been  awake,  Mr.  Short  could  not  have  seen  what  it  was  before
tasting  it."

"  [I  think  my  own  account  is  the  more  correct. — C.  K.  P.]  "

"  My  sister  then  got  some  black  pepper  from  the  kitchen  and  put  it  in
my  brother's  hand,  and  on  his  putting  some  in  his  own  mouth,  Mr.  Short
at  once  tasted  it,  and  on  my  brother  asking  him  what  he  had  in  his  mouth,
he  said  it  was  very  hot  and  unpleasant,  but  was  not  quite  sure  what  it
was.     My  brother  held  Mr.  Short's  hand  all  the  time.

"  The  only  other  thing  I  remember  is  that  on  my  brother  removing  his
hand  after,  and  substituting  my  sister's,  Mr.  Short  looked  as  if  in  pain,  and
said  the  change  was  unpleasant.

"  No  one  else  was  in  the  little  cottage  at  the  time.

"F.  K.  Paul.


668  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION

"  P.S. — Since  writing  my  account  I  have  read  my  brother's,  and  think
it  very  accurate,  as,  now  I  am  reminded  of  the  soap,  &c.,  I  can  faintly
recollect  it,  but  not  clearly,  as  I  do  the  things  I  have  written  down.

"  Also  I  think  the  dessert  had  been  put  away,  and  the  wine  taken  out
again  on  purpose.

"I  remember  the  date,  as  I  have  always  written  down  very  shortly  the
events  of  each  day."

Mr.  Paul's  other  sister,  Mrs.  P.,  writes,  on  May  29,  1884  :—

"In  the  year  1852  or  1853,  I  believe  at  Bloxham  [certainly  Tew. —
C.  K.  P.],  I  remember  my  brother  trying  experiments  on  a  friend,  Mr.
Short,  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  mesmerising.  One  evening,  I  saw  him
mesmerise  Mr.  Short,  and  while  he  was  in  that  state  my  brother  asked  for
a  glass  of  water  or  wine,  and  drank  it.  Mr.  Short  appeared  as  if  he  was
drinking,  and  swallowed,  and  made  a  reply  when  asked  what  it  was ;  but
the  experiment  I  remember  best  was,  after  my  getting  some  pepper,  and
giving  it  to  my  brother,  he  put  some  into  his  mouth,  and  Mr.  Short
looked  as  if  in  pain,  and  said,  '  Hot.'  Then  I  took  his  hand,  and  his  face
changed,  and  I  think  he  said,  '  Nasty.'  I  know  he  seemed  to  dislike  the
change  from  my  brother's  touch  ;  but  although  I  know  there  were  other
experiments,  it  is  so  long  ago  that  I  cannot  quite  recall  them.

"M.  E.  P.

"  P.S. — Since  writing  the  above  I  have  read  my  brother's  narrative,
which  is,  I  think,  substantially  correct."

The  Rev.  W.  F.  Short  writes  to  Mr.  Podmore  : —

"  The  Rectory,  Donhead  St.   Mary,  Salisbury.

"June  12th,  1884.

"Dear  Sir, — Stock  tells  me  you  would  like  my  account  of  some
mesmeric  experiences  of  mine  at  Great  Tew  in  the  year  '52.  You  are  very
welcome,  but  32  years  may  have  impaired  my  memory  for  the  details,  and
I  should  like  Kegan  Paul  to  see  the  account  before  any  use  is  made  of  it.

"I  had  come  up  to  New  College  by  accident  a  week  before  the  time,
and  finding  college  empty  accepted  an  invitation  to  pay  Paul,  then  curate
of  Great  Tew,  a  visit.  One  night,  I  think  the  Thursday  following,  he
mesmerised  me,  and  made,  I  believe,  some  successful  experiments  in  the
'  transference  of  taste  ' ;  but  of  these,  as  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  I  can  say
nothing.  When  I  was  in  due  time  awakened,  he  said,  '  We  tried  to  get
you  to  visit  New  College,  but  you  said  it  was  all  a  guess,  and  would  tell  us
nothing.'  I  answered,  '  I  seem  to  have  dreamt  of  New  College  Junior
Common-room,  and  to  have  seen  B.  and  G.  sitting  at  a  small  round  table
drawn  near  the  fire,  with  the  lamp  on  the  large  table  near  them,  playing
at  cards.'  It  was  agreed  that  I  should  test  the  truth  of  this  on  my  return
to  Oxford  on  Friday  (one  day  before  men  in  general  came  up).  On  entering
college  I  met  B.,  and  said,  'You  up?  Are  there  any  other  men  come?'
'  Oh,  yes  ;  half-a-dozen.  G.  and  so-and-so,'  &c.  'Were  you  in  the  Common-
room  last  night  at  10  (?)  ? '  'Yes.'  'Who  else  was  there?'  'Oh,  the
whole  lot  of  us.  No,  by  10  everyone  was  gone  but  I  and  G.'  'Where
were  you  sitting  ? '     '  At  a  small  table   close  to  the  fire,  it  was  so  cold.'


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  669

'With  the  lamp  on  the  big  table  near  you?'  'Yes,  drawn  close  to  us.'
'  Then  I  will  tell  you  what  you  were  doing.  You  were  playing  cards.'  'How
odd  !  We  weren't  playing  cards,  but  Gr.  was  showing  me  tricks  on  the
cards.'

"  I  have  always  thought  this  a  thoroughly  good  case,  too  exact  to  be  a
mere  coincidence,  and  I  think  tolerably  accurate  even  in  the  words  used,
but  those  who  do  not,  like  myself,  believe  in  clairvoyance  ^  will  probably
set  it  down  to  a  happy  guess.

"  I  have  not  for  many  years  had  any  experience  of  mesmerism,  but
after  this,  for  some  years,  I  saw  a  great  deal  of  it,  and  have  no  more  doubt
of  its  reality,  even  in  its  higher  phases  of  inducing  clairvoyance,  &c.,  than
I  have  of  my  own  existence.

"  I  doubt  whether  B.  would  remember  this  (I  don't  think  G.  ever  heard
of  it),  but  I  would  write  to  him  if  you  like  it,  only  I  am  rather  overworked
just  now. — Believe  me,  yours  very  truly,

"W.  F.  Short."

Mr.  Short  writes,  on  Feb.  18,  1886  :—

"  My  friend  B.  remembered  nothing  of  the  circumstances  (naturally
enough),  though  I  feel  perfectly  sure  it  took  place."

Mr.  C.  Kegan  Paul  writes,  on  June  16,  1884  : —

"  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  do  not  remember  much  about  the  clairvoyance
part  of  the  experiment  with  Walter  Short,  though  I  remember  the  com-
munity of  taste  vividly,  and  have  described  it  to  Mr.  Sidgwick.

"  Short  became  clairvoyant  on  several  occasions  under  my  mesmerism,
but  I  do  not  recall  the  details  with  certainty.  On  the  evening  in  question
I  only  remember  that  on  trying  some  experiments  Short  said  he  was  tired,
and  wished  to  be  wakened.  I  do  not  remember  his  mentioning  his  '  dream  '
or  that  I  heard  afterwards  how  nearly  correct  it  had  been.  It  is  probable
that  he  did  mention  the  dream,  but  that  I  paid  little  attention  to  it,  being
full  of  the  first  experiment,  and  that  as  I  only  saw  him  occasionally,  and
we  did  not  exchange  letters,  I  never  heard  the  verification."

In  the  following  cases,  though  they  are  in  a  sense  experimental,  the
experiment  was  not  directed  to  the  particular  result  obtained.  They
are  parallel  to  those  recorded  in  Vol.  I.,  pp.  78  and  84 ;  they  illustrate
thought-transference  of  the  "  underground "  sort,  both  agent  and
percipient  being  unconscious  of  the  idea  which  nevertheless  is  pretty
clearly  shown  to  have  passed  from  one  mind  to  the  other  otherwise
than  through  the  recognised  sensory  channels.  We  have  reason  to
think  that  this  form  of  transference  is  not  extremely  uncommon  ;  and
these  specimens  may  serve  to  elicit  further  records.

Mrs.  Wingfield  (mother  of  the  ladies  mentioned  above,  p.  653)
writes  as  follows  : —

1  This  may  very  probably  have  been  a  case  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  (Vol.  i.,  pp.  368-9),
conditioned  by  the  hypnotic  trance,  but  also  by  the  pre-existing  relation  between  Mr.
Short  and  the  friends  whom  he  saw  (p.  162).


670        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

"34,  Ennismore  Gardens,  S.W.

"April  2nd,  1886.

"On  the  evening  of  Jan.  13,  1886,  Mr.  Tatham  [of  2,  Cambridge
Gate,  W.]  was  writing  automatically,  but  not  very  legibly.  He  wrote  a
word  twice,  which  some  of  us  tried  to  read,  but  could  not.  He  said  he
thought  it  was  Phoebe,  or  something  like  it.  Some  minutes  afterwards  Miss
Wingfield,  who  was  sitting  at  the  other  side  of  the  room,  wrote  automati-
cally, '  Who  is  G.  Norby  1 '  We  none  of  us  knew  this  name,  and  asked
why  the  question  was  written.  We  were  told  '  because  he  wanted  to
tell  something  about  an  accident,'  or  words  to  that  effect.  The  subject
then  dropped,  and  the  writing  was  at  an  end.

"  Some  half-hour  or  more  afterwards,  Mr.  M.  W.  took  up  Mr.  Tatham's
paper  and  looked  at  it,  and  said,  '  Why  !  this  is  G.  Norby.'  And  when
we  examined  the  letters  carefully  we  found  it  was  so.  Therefore  Mr.
Tatham  and  Miss  W.  were  both  influenced  to  write  the  same  name
independently  of  each  other,  ^  as  at  the  time  Miss  W.  wrote,  '  Who  is  G.
Norby  ? '  she  had  not  seen  what  Mr.  Tatham  wrote,  and  we  none  of  us
had  any  idea  of  such  a  name.  There  were  six  persons  present  beside  Mr.
T.  and  Miss  W.,  none  of  whom  had  ever  heard  the  name.

"  E.  A.  Wingfield,
"Percy  Tatham."

The  next  record  is  from  Miss  Birrell  and  Mrs.  Medley,  near,
relatives  of  the  present  writer,  who  entertains  little  doubt  that  the
facts,    though    somewhat    remote,    are    recorded    with    substantial

accuracy.

"  37,  Addison  Gardens,  North  Kensington,  W.

"October,  1885.
"I  was  playing  at  table-turning  in  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1863,
with  a  party  of  six  or  seven.  At  last  the  table  rapped  a  name  we  none
of  us  knew.  We  thought  there  was  a  mistake.  A  lady  in  the  room,  but
not  at  the  table,  turned  round  and  identified  it  as  the  name  of  some  rela-
tion— I  think  her  sister's  son.  We  asked  the  table  to  rap  three  times  if
it  wished  her  to  come,  which  it  did.  She  came  and  put  her  hands  on  the
table  but  no  distinct  message  followed.  The  name  was  new  to  me.  I
said,  '  Was  there  really  such  a  person  ? '  The  lady,  who  was  a  good  deal
distressed,  answered,  '  Oh  yes  ! '  and  mentioned  one  or  two  facts  about
him,  turning  round  to  another  lady  of  her  own  age,  in  the  room  hut  not  at
the  tahle^  for  further  confirmation.  She  did  this  as  we  were  too  young  to
remember  the  dead  person.

'^  Olive  Birrell."

"  Walden  House,  All  Saints  Street,  Nottingham.

"  October  30th,  1886.

"  I  was  seated  with   a  party  of  six  or  eight  round   a  table  with   our

hands  placed  upon  it,  and  it  rapped  in  reply  to  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.

Several  names  were  spelt  out  and  various  broken  sentences.     The  table

at   length    spelt    the  name    'William   Smallshaw.'     We  replied,    'There

1  If  this  were  certainly  the  case,  the  incident  could  not  have  been  included  in  the
present  work.  But  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  Miss  Wingfield's  production  of  the  name
was  due  to  its  latent  existence  in  Mr.  Tatham's  mind.


IN  THE  IB  PROPER  PLACES.  671

never  was  such  a  person,'  and  one  gentleman  laughed  and  said,  'You  have
made  a  mistake,  try  again.'  The  table  continued  to  rap  and  then  a  lady  in
another  part  of  the  room,  away  from  our  party  altogether,  said  very
nervously,  ^  I  had  a  brother,  William  Smallshaw.'  The  table  continued  to
rap  and  we  asked  if  Miss  Smallshaw  should  join  us.  It  replied,  '  Fes,'  and
she  came.     No  sentence  of  any  value  or  sense  was  made  out  after  this.

"Emily  G.  Medley."

Miss  Birrell  is  tolerably  confident  that  the  surname  was  not  Smallshaw,
but  Lyon,  which  was  Miss  Smallshaw's  married  sister's  name.

Mr.  Augustine  Birrell,  who  was  present,  says  that  the  expression  of
Miss  Smallshaw's  face,  as  she  came  across  the  room,  is  fixed  in  his
memory  ;  but  he  cannot  recall  what  followed,  when  she  put  her  hands  on
the  table,  or  the  reason  of  her  being  summoned  to  the  table.

[The  state  of  Miss  Smallshaw's  health  has  prevented  us  from  applying
for  her  recollections.]

§  2.  The  following  is  a  transitional  case,  akin  to  those  recorded
in  Yol.  I,,  pp.  103-9 ;  but  it  differs  from  that  group  in  the  fact  that
the  agent  remembers  his  own  direct  share  in  the  occurrence,  and
appears  to  have  been  reciprocally  affected.  We  owe  the  case  to  Mr.
H.  P.  Sparks  (of  Overbeck  Villa,  Woodstone,  near  Southampton,)  and
Mr.  A.  H.  W.  Cleave  (of  28,  Vardens  Road,  New  Wandsworth,  S.W.,)
who  at  the  time  were  fellow-students  of  naval  engineering  at  Ports-
mouth. Personal  acquaintance  has  completely  confirmed  the
impression  made  on  me  by  the  letters  of  these  gentlemen,  that
they  had  observed  the  phenomena,  which  were  a  complete  surprise  to
them,  with  intelligence  and  care.  They  were  unaware  of  the
remarkable  interest  of  their  results ;  and  Mr.  Sparks  addressed  me
in  the  first  instance,  not  so  much  to  supply  information  which,  for
aught  he  knew,  might  be  of  a  common  enough  type,  as  to  ask  for
advice  about  hypnotic  experimentation  in  general.  He  did  not  know
to  what  address  to  write ;  but  acting  on  a  dim  recollection  of  a
newspaper  notice  of  our  objects,  he  boldly  launched  a  letter  into
space,  which  by  good  luck  reached  me  after  a  certain  amount  of
peregrination.  His  account,  received  in  January,  1886,  is  as  follows  : —

"  H.M.S.  '  Marlborough',  Portsmouth.
(685)  "  For  the  last  year,  or  for  about  the  last  15  months,  I  have  been
in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  a  fellow-student  of  mine.  The  way  1  did  it
was  by  simply  looking  into  his  eyes  as  he  lay  in  an  easy  position  on  a  bed.
This  produced  sleep.  After  a  few  times  I  found  that  this  sleep  was
deepened  by  making  long  passes  after  the  patient  was  ofi".  ^     Then  comes

1  In  conversation,  I  learnt  (as  I  expected)  that  during  the  trance  Mr.  Cleave  was  to
a  considerable  degree  insensitive  to  pain,  and  that,  on  waking,  he  had  no  memory  of  any
actions  that  he  had  been  made  to  perform,  or  of  what  had  passed  around  him.


672  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

the  remarkable  part  of  this  sort  of  mesmerism.  [Mr.  Sparks  then
describes  his  '  subject's  '  ability  to  see,  in  the  trance,  places  in  which  he
was  interested,  if  he  resolved  to  see  them  before  he  was  hypnotised ;  but
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  these  visions  were  anything  but  purely
subjective.]  However,  it  has  been  during  the  last  week  or  so  I  have  been
so  surprised  and  startled  by  an  extraordinary  affair.  Last  Friday
evening  (January  15th,  1886)  he  expressed  his  wish  to  see  a  young  lady
living  in  Wandsworth,  and  he  also  said  he  would  try  to  make  himself
seen  by  her.  I  accordingly  mesmerised  him,  and  continued  the  long
passes  for  about  20  minutes,  concentrating  my  will  on  his  idea.  When  he
came  round  (I  brought  him  round  by  just  touching  his  hand  and  willing
him,  after  1  hour  and  20  minutes'  trance)  he  said  he  had  seen  her  in  the
dining-room,  and  that  after  a  time  she  grew  restless,  and  then  suddenly
looked  straight  at  him  and  then  covered  her  eyes  with  her  hands.  Just
after  this  he  came  round.  Last  Monday  evening  (January  18th,  1886)  we
did  the  same  thing,  and  this  time  he  said  he  thought  he  had  frightened
her,  as  after  she  had  looked  at  him  for  a  few  minutes  she  fell  back  in  her
chair  in  a  sort  of  faint.  Her  little  brother  was  in  the  room  at  the  time.  Of
course,  after  this  we  expected  a  letter  if  the  vision  was  real;  and  on  Wed-
nesday morning  he  received  a  letter  from  this  young  lady  asking  whether
anything  had  happened  to  him,  as  on  Friday  evening  she  was  startled  by
seeing  him  standing  at  the  door  of  the  room.  After  a  minute  he  disappeared,
and  she  thought  that  it  might  have  been  fancy;  but  on  the  Monday  evening
she  was  still  more  startled  by  seeing  him  again,  and  this  time  much
clearer,  and  it  so  frightened  her  that  she  nearly  fainted.

"  This  account  I  send  you  is  perfectly  true,  I  will  vouch,  for  I  have  two
independent  witnesses  who  were  in  the  dormitory  at  the  time  when  he
was  mesmerised,  and  when  he  came  round.  My  patient's  name  is  Arthur
H.  W.  Cleave,  and  his  age  is  18  years.  My  own  is  19  years.  A.  0.
Darley  and  A.  S.  Thurgood,  fellow-students,  are  the  two  witnesses  I
mentioned.  "H.  Percy  Sparks."

Mr.  Cleave  writes,  on  March  15,  1886  : —

"H.M.S.   'Marlborough,'  Portsmouth.

"Sparks  and  myself  have,  for  the  past  18  months,  been  in  the  habit
of  holding  mesmeric  seances  in  our  dormitories.  For  the  first  month  or
two  we  got  no  very  satisfactory  results,  but  after  that  we  succeeded  in
sending  one  another  to  sleep.  I  could  never  get  Sparks  further  than  the
sleeping  state,  but  he  could  make  me  do  anything  he  liked  whilst  I  was
under  the  influence ;  so  I  gave  up  trying  to  send  him  off,  and  all  our
efforts  were  made  towards  my  being  mesmerised.  After  a  short  time  we
got  on  so  well  that  Sparks  had  three  or  four  other  fellows  in  the  dormitory
to  witness  what  I  did.  I  was  quite  insensible  to  all  pain,  as  the  fellows
have  repeatedly  pinched  my  hands  and  legs  without  my  feeling  it.  About
6  months  ago  I  tried  my  power  of  will  in  order,  while  under  the  influence,
to  see  persons  to  whom  I  was  strongly  attached.  For  some  time  I  was
entirely  unsuccessful,  although  I  once  thought  that  I  saw  my  brother  (who
is  in  Australia),  but  had  no  opportunity  of  verifying  the  vision.

"  A  short  time  ago,  I  tried  to  see  a  young  lady  whom  I  know  very
well,  and  was   perfectly  surprised    at    my  success.     I    could    see   her  as


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  673

plainly  as  I  can  see  now,  but  I  could  not  make  myself  seen  by  her,
although  I  had  often  tried  to.  After  I  had  done  this  several  times,  I
determined  to  try  and  make  myself  seen  by  her,  and  told  Sparks  of  my
idea,  which  he  approved.  Well,  we  tried  this  for  five  nights  running
without  any  more  success.  We  then  suspended  our  endeavours  for  a
night  or  two,  as  I  was  rather  over-exerted  by  the  continued  efibrts  and
got  severe  headaches.  We  then  tried  again  (on,  I  think  it  was,  a  Friday,
but  am  not  certain),  and  were,  I  thought,  successful ;  but  as  the  young
lady  did  not  write  to  me  about  it,  I  thought  I  must  have  been  mistaken,  so
I  told  Sparks  that  we  had  better  give  up  trying.  But  he  begged  me  to
try  once  more,  which  we  did  on  the  following  Monday,  when  we  were
successful  to  such  an  extent  that  I  felt  rather  alarmed.  (I  must  tell  you
that  I  am  in  the  habit  of  writing  to  the  young  lady  every  Sunday,  but  I  did
not  write  that  week,  in  order  to  make  her  think  about  me.)  This  took
place  between  9.30  p.m.  and  10  p.m.  Monday  night,  and  on  the  following
Wednesday  morning  I  got  the  letter  which  I  have  enclosed.  I,  of  course,
then  knew  I  had  been  successful.  I  went  home  about  a  fortnight  after
this,  when  I  saw  the  young  lady,  who  seemed  very  frightened  in  spite  of
my  explanations,  and  begged  me  never  to  try  it  again,  and  I  promised  her
that  I  would  not.

"  I  must  now  tell  you  our  method  of  mesmerism.  I  lay  on  my  bed,
with  my  head  raised  on  two  pillows,  and  Sparks  sat  facing  me  about  three
feet  olF  on  a  chair.  The  lights  were  made  low,  and  then  I  watched  his
eyes  intently,  thinking  in  the  meantime  of  the  young  lady  whom  I  wanted
to  see.  After  a  short  time  (about  7  minutes)  my  sense  of  hearing  left
me,  and  I  could  see  nothing  but  two  eyes,  which  after  a  short  time
disappeared,  and  I  then  became  senseless.  (When  we  first  experimented
I  could  never  get  farther  than  this  state,  and  it  was  only  after  repeatedly
trying  that  I  did  so.)  I  then  seemed  to  see  (indistinctly  at  first)  her  face,
which  gradually  became  plainer  and  plainer  until  I  seemed  to  be  in  another
room  altogether,  and  could  detail  minutely  all  the  surroundings.  I  told
Sparks,  when  I  came  round,  what  I  saw,  who  was  with  the  young  lady,
and  what  she  was  doing,  all  of  which  were  verified  in  her  letter.

"A.  H.  W.  Cleave."

The  two  witnesses  of  the  experiment  last  described  write  as  follows  : —

"  I  have  seen  Mr.  Cleave's  account  of  his  mesmeric  experiment,  and
can  fully  vouch  for  the  truth  thereof.

"  A.  C.  Daeley."

"  I  have  read  Mr.  Cleave's  statement,  and  can  vouch  for  the  truth  of
it,  as  I  was  present  when  he  was  mesmerised  and  heard  his  statement
after  he  revived.

"A.  E.  S.  Thurgood."

The  following  is  a  copy,  made  by  the  present  writer,  of  the  letter  in
which  the  young  lady.  Miss  A. ,  described  her  side  of  the  afiair.

The  envelope  bore  the  postmarks,  "Wandsworth,  Jan.  19,  1886,"
"Portsmouth,  Jan.  20,  1886,"  and  the  address,  "  Mr.  A.  H.  W.  Cleave,
H.M.S.  '  Marlborough,'  Portsmouth."

VOL    n.  2  X


674        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

"  Wandsworth.

"Tuesday  morning.

"  Dear  Arthur, — Has  anything  happened  to  you  ?  Please  write  and
let  me  know  at  once,  for  I  have  been  so  frightened.

"  Last  Tuesday  evening,  I  was  sitting  in  the  dining  [room]  reading,
when  I  happened  to  look  up,  and  could  have  declared  I  saw  you  standing
at  the  door  looking  at  me.  I  put  my  handkerchief  to  my  eyes,  and  when
I  looked  again,  you  were  gone.  I  thought  it  must  have  been  only  my
fancy,  but  last  night  (Monday),  while  I  was  at  supper,  I  saw  you  again,
just  as  before,  and  was  so  frightened  that  I  nearly  fainted.  Luckily  only
my  brother  was  there,  or  it  would  have  attracted  attention.  Now  do
write  at  once  and  tell  me  how  you  are.  I  really  cannot  write  any
more  now."

[Signature  of  Christian  name.]

It  will  be  seen  that  Miss mentions  Tuesday  as  the  day  of

her  first  hallucination ;  whereas  both  Mr.  Sparks  and  Mr.  Cleave
mention  Friday  as  the  day  on  which  he  first  seemed  to  obtain  a
vision  of  the  room  where  she  was ;  and  though,  in  a  letter  written  on
March  21st,  Mr.  Cleave  expresses  uncertainty  on  this  point,  and
inclines  to  the  view  that  his  first  vision  of  the  room  occurred  on  the
Tuesday,  "  as  I  waited  for  a  day  or  two  to  see  if  I  should  get  a  letter
before  I  tried  again  "  on  the  following  Monday,  it  is  impossible  to  set
aside  the  earlier  statement.  But  in  conversation,  both  he  and  Mr.
Sparks  expressed  their  decided  opinion — which  accords  with  what
would  be  naturally  inferred  from  their  letters — that  Tuesday  must  at
any  rate  have  fallen  within  the  five  days  running  on  which  trials
were  made,  before  the  break ;  and  the  first  incident  therefore  gives
valuable  confirmation  to  the  second.  Mr.  Cleave's  omission  to  write  as

usual  to  Miss on  the  Sunday  was  perhaps  an  error  of  judgment ;

as  it  leaves  it  open  to  the  objector  to  say  that  the  non-receipt  of  a
letter  on  Monday  morning  so  wrought  on  her  mind  as  to  conjure  up  a
spectral  illusion,  to  which  she  had  become  predisposed  by  her  experi-
ence of  the  previous  week.

Mr.  Cleave  explains  that  though  he  might  naturally  enough  have

imagined  Miss  to   be   in   the   dining-room   at   that  hour,    it

would  have  seemed  to  him  more  probable,  had  he  made  a  guess
at  the  scene,  that  other  elder  members  of  the  family  should  also
be  present,  than  that  she  should  have  been  alone  with  her  little
brother — which  is  so  far  an  argument  for  supposing  his  vision
to  have  been  of  the  telepathically  clairvoyant  sort,  and  not  a  mere
subjective  picture.     But  the  nature  of  his  percipience  is,  of  course,


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  675

a  separate  question  ;  -^  the  prime  fact  in  the  case  is  the  halhicination

produced  by  his  agency.     Miss ,  it  will  be  seen,  was  so  seriously

disturbed  by  what  occurred  that  she  has  requested  him  not  to  repeat
the  experiment.  Her  feeling  is  natural  enough — it  is  just  one  of  the
natural  conditions  that  "  psychical  research "  has  to  reckon  with.
Every  department  in  the  exploration  of  Nature  has  difficulties  of  its
own ;  and  it  would  be  strange  if  a  study  that  deals  with  living  human
material  were  an  exception.  That  the  particular  form  of  obstacle
here  again  encountered  (see  Vol  I.,  p.  109)  may  make  the  accumula-
tion of  evidence  for  the  rarer  psychical  phenomena  a  slow  process  is
probable  enough;  but  that  the  prolongation  of  our  search  should  have
already  brought  us  a  single  fresh  instance  of  this  rarest  type  is  really  a
fact  of  the  most  hopeful  significance,  and  one  which  would  alone  amply
vindicate  the  plan  of  wide  and  public  inquiry  that  we  have  adopted.

The  next  account  is  perhaps  even  more  remarkable,  as  the  agent
was  in  a  normal  state.  We  owe  it  to  Mrs.  Russell,  of  Belgaum,  India,
wife  of  Mr.  H.  R  Russell,  Educational    Inspector  in  the  Bombay

Presidency.

"June  8th,  1886.
(686)  "  As  desired,  I  write  down  the  following  facts,  as  well  as  1  can  re-
call them.  I  was  living  in  Scotland,  my  mother  and  sisters  in  Germany.  I
lived  with  a  very  dear  friend  of  mine,  and  went  to  Germany  every  year  to
see  my  people.  It  had  so  happened  that  I  could  not  go  home  as  usual  for
two  years,  when  on  a  sudden  I  made  up  my  mind  to  go  and  see  my  family.
They  knew  nothing  of  my  intention ;  I  had  never  gone  in  early  spring
before  ;  and  1  had  no  time  to  let  them  know  by  letter  that  1  was  going  to
set  off.  I  did  not  like  to  send  a  telegram,  for  fear  of  frightening  my  mother.
The  thought  came  to  me  to  will  with  all  my  might  to  appear  to  one  of  my
sisters,  never  mind  which  of  them,  in  order  to  give  them  a  warning  of  my
coming.  I  only  thought  most  intensely  for  a  few  minutes  of  them,  wish-
ing with  all  my  might  to  be  seen  by  one  of  them — half  present  myself,  in
vision,  at  home.^  I  did  not  take  more  than  ten  minutes,  1  think.  I
started  by  Leith  steamer  on  a  Saturday  night,  end  of  April,  1859.  I
wished  to  appear  at  home  about  6  o'clock  p.m.  that  same  Saturday.
I  arrived  at  home  about  6  o'clock  on  the  Tuesday  morning  following.  I
entered  the  house  without  anyone  seeing  me,  the  hall  being  cleaned  and
the  front  door  open.  I  walked  into  the  room.  One  of  my  sisters  stood
with  her  back  to  the  door ;  she  turned  round  when  she  heard  the  door
opening,  and,  on  seeing  me,  stared  at  me,  turning  deadly  pale  and  letting
what  she  had  in  her  hand  fall.  1  had  been  silent.  Then  I  spoke,  and  said,
'  It  is  I.  Why  do  you  look  so  frightened  ? '  when  she  answered,  '  I  thought
I  saw  you  again  as  Stinchen '  (another  sister)  '  saw  you  on  Saturday.'

1  If  the  case  was  truly  reciprocal,  it  seems  clearly  to  exemplify  the  connection  of  the
power  to  act  telepathically  with  an  abnormal  extension  of  the  agent's  own  susceptibility.
See  pp.  161-2  and  309-10.

2  Note  by  Mr.  Russell : — "I.e.,  she  was  at  home,  and  saw  her  people,  in  thought."

VOL.  II.  2x2


676  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

"  "When  I  inquired,  she  told  me  that  on  the  Saturday  evening,  about
6  o'clock,  ray  sister  saw  me  quite  clearly  entering  the  room  in  which  she
was  by  one  door,  passing  through  it,  opening  the  door  of  another  room
where  my  mother  was,  and  shutting  the  door  behind  me.  She  rushed  after
what  she  thought  was  I,  calling  out  my  name,  and  was  quite  stupefied  when
she  did  not  see  me  with  my  mother.  My  mother  could  not  understand  my
sister's  excitement.  They  looked  everywhere  for  me,  but  of  course  did  not
find  me.     My  mother  was  very  miserable  ;  she  thought  I  might  be  dying.

"  My  sister  who  had  seen  me  {i.e.,  my  apparition)  was  out  that  morning
when  I  arrived.  I  sat  down  on  the  stairs,  to  watch,  when  she  came  in,  the
effect  of  my  real  appearance  on  her.  When  she  looked  up  and  saw  me,
sitting  motionless,  she  called  out  my  name,  and  nearly  fainted.  My  sister
has  never  seen  anything  unearthly  either  before  that  or  afterwards ;  and  I
have  never  made  any  such  experiments  again — nor  will  I,  as  the  sister
that  saw  me  first  when  I  really  came  home  had  a  very  severe  illness  after-
wards, caused  by  the  shock  to  her  nerves.  "  J.  M.  Russell."

Mrs.  Russell  wrote  to  ask  her  sister  (Fraulein  Hoist,  of  7,  Wohler's
Allee,  Altona,  Holstein)  if  she  recollected  the  occurrence,  and  has  copied
an  extract  from  her  sister's  reply,  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation : —

"  Of  course  I  remember  the  matter  as  well  as  if  it  had  happened  to-day.
Pray  don't  come  appearing  to  me  again  ! "  Fraulein  Hoist  declines,
however,  to  give  an  independent  account,  on  the  ground  of  dislike  to
the  subject.

I  proceed  to  some  more  hypnotic  cases.  The  following  is  an  appa-
rently genuine,  though  isolated,  case  of  the  telepathic  influence  of
will  on  a  hypnotic  "  subject,"  who  however  was  at  the  time  in  a  normal
state.  {Gf.  Vol.  I.,  pp.  89-94.)  The  further  experiment  with  the
same  "subject"  recalls  the  cases  in  Vol.  I.,  p.  96,  and  above,  pp.
334-6.      We  received  the  account  in  May,   1886,  from  Mr.  E.  M.

Clissold,  of  3,  Oxford  Square,  W.

"  United  University  Club,

"  Pall  Mall  East,  S.W.
c  (687)  "  In  the  year  1878  (I  believe),  there  was  a  carpenter  (Gannaway)

''^  ^  employed  by  me  to  mend  a  gate  in  my  kitchen  garden,  when  a  friend  of
mine  (Moens)  called  upon  me,  and  the  conversation  turning  on  mesmerism,
he  asked  me  if  I  knew  anything  about  it  myself.  On  my  replying  in  the
affirmative,  he  said,  '  Can  you  mesmerise  anyone  at  a  distance  ? '  I  said
that  I  had  never  tried  to  do  so,  but  that  there  was  a  man  now  in  the
garden  upon  whom  I  could  easily  operate,  and  that  I  would  try  the
experiment  with  this  man,  if  he  (Moens)  would  tell  me  what  to  do.  He
then  said,  '  Form  an  impression  of  the  man  whom  you  intend  mesmerising
in  your  mind,  and  then  wish  him  strongly  to  come  to  you.'  I  very  much
doubted  the  success  of  the  enterprise,  but  I  followed  out  the  suggestion  of
my  friend,  and  1  was  extremely  astonished  to  hear  the  steps  of  the  man, whom
I  wished  to  appear,  running  after  me;  he  came  right  up  to  me  and  asked  me
what  1  wanted  with  him.  I  must  explain  that  my  friend  was  walking
with  me  previously  in  the  garden,  and  that  we  had  seen  and  talked  to  the


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PEACES.  677

man  whom  I  subsequently  mesmerised,  but  that  when  I  wished  him
to  come  to  me  I  was  out  of  his  sight,  behind  the  garden  wall,  some  100
yards  distant,  and  that  I  had  neither  by  conversation  nor  otherwise  led  him
to  believe  that  I  proposed  to  mesmerise  him.

"  My  friend  (Moens)  is  dead ;  the  man  Gannaway  I  have  not  heard
of  for  more  than  seven  years ;  but  I  have  this  day  written  to  him,  and
asked  him,  if  he  remembers  the  incident  alluded  to,  to  write  to  me,  and  in
his  own  language  describe  the  scene.  I  may  tell  you  that  I  have  not
supplied  him  with  any  of  the  above  details,  but  have  left  him  (if  he  can)
to  tell  his  own  story.

"E.  M.  Olissold."

Mr.  Gannaway  writes  back,  in  a  letter  which  Mr.  Clissold  has
forwarded  to  us,  that  he  remembers  being  often  mesmerised  by  Mr.
Clissold,  and  he  recalls  some  incidents  of  his  experiences ;  but  he  does  not
recollect  this  particular  occasion.  One  sentence  of  his  letter  is  as
follows  : — "  I  remember,  in  the  dining-room,  when  you  made  me  think  the
same  as  you  were  thinking  about,  and  I  told  you  what  you  were  thinking
of."  Mr.  Olissold  explains  that  this  was  an  occasion  when  the  Hon.
Auberon  Herbert  was  present,  and  he  thus  describes  it : —

"June  1,  1886.

"  Gannaway  was  mesmerised,  and  stood  in  one  corner  of  my  dining-
room.  Herbert  sat  at  the  table,  and  wrote  on  a  paper  a  subject  on  which
he  wished  me  to  think.  Gannaway  instantly  told  me,  when  I  asked  him,
what  the  thought  was  about.     Herbert  wrote  ; —

"  '  1.  I  see  a  house  in  flames.

"  '  2.  I  see  a  woman  looking  out  of  a  window.

"  '  3.  She  has  a  child  in  her  arms.

"  '  4.   She  throws  it  out  of  the  window.

"  '  5.  Is  it  hurt  ? '  &c.,  &c.

"  Gannaway  became  much  excited,  as  he  appeared  to  witness  these
scenes  acted  before  him.  I  am  conscious  that  if  there  had  been
mala  fides  on  my  part,  there  was  nothing  in  the  experiment ;  but  it  was
quite  honestly  conducted,  and  we  were  all  of  us  very  much  surprised  at
the  wonderful  accuracy  with  which  Gannaway  interpreted  my  thoughts."

I  wrote  to  Mr.  Auberon  Herbert,  asking  him  if  he  remembered
participating  in  an  experiment  in  thought-transference,  made  with  Mr.
Clissold's  "  subject,"  Gannaway,  in  which  the  ideas  transferred  related  to
a  conflagration.     He  replied  : —

"  Ashley  Arnewood  Farm,  Lymington.

"June  22nd,  1886.

"  My  recollection  is  as  follows ;  some  of  the  details  have  escaped  me.
I  thought  of  a  house  on  fire.  Gannaway  (a  carpenter,  I  think),  on  my
asking  him  what  I  saw,  answered  quite  rightly.  I  then  asked  him  again
what  I  saw,  and  he  answered  quite  rightly,  '  Fire-engine  coming  up.'
Then  the  conversation  went  on  (I  have  shortened  it).  I.  '  Ah  !  some-
thing has  happened  !  what  is  it  ? '  G.  '  A  horse,  belonging  to  the  fire-
engine,  has  fallen  down.'  (Quite  right.)  My  memory  is  quite  distinct  up
to  this  point  as  to  the  questions  and  answers,  though  I  cannot  exactly
remember  the  part  Gannaway    and    Mr.   Olissold    took  respectively.     I


678        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

remember  very  distinctly  I  thought  of  and  asked  these  questions,  and  I
believe  it  was  Gannaway  himself  who  answered  them  directly  to  me.  The
next  point  was  that,  in  answer  to  what  I  saw,  he  said  they  were  throwing
feather-beds  out  of  a  top-storey  window — this  also  was  perfectly  right —
but  on  this  point  my  memory  is  not  so  clear  as  on  the  first  three  points.
I  have  as  clear  and  positive  a  memory  as  a  man  could  have  about  the
three  first  points,  (1)  fire,  (2)  fire-engine,  (3)  horse  falling  down.  They
were  all  quite  fairly  asked,  and  quite  fairly  answered ;  and  I  believe  I
might  add  to  them  the  fourth  point,  '  the  feather  bed,'  but  I  cannot  speak
positively  on  this.  Then  comes  a  curious  point.  I  imagined  an  entirely
difierent  scene — I  cannot  recall  it,  but  it  was  to  do  with  a  wood^ — and  his
power  seemed  to  fail  entirely.  He  made  quite  wrong  answers.  I  have  no
doubt  about  the  truthfulness  of  the  whole  proceedings.  One  night  I  had
mesmerised  him,  and  told  him  he  was  in  a  boat,  and  attacked  by  a  shark.
If  I  had  allowed  it,  he  would  have  almost  battered  himself  to  pieces  in
striking  with  both  arms  upon  the  floor,  where  he  thought  the  shark  was.^
He  was  an  extraordinary  man.  It  was  enough,  when  you  knew  him,  to
look  in  his  eyes  to  have  influence  over  him.  Kindly  tell  Mr.  Clissold  I
most  fully  corroborate  his  statement  as  far  as  I  know  it.

"  AuBERON  Herbert."

Another  gentleman  who  was  present  on  this  occasion  was  Mr.  A.  T.
T.  Peterson,  of  Arnewood  Towers,  Lymington,  who  believes  that  it  was
he  who  drew  up  the  programme  of  the  experiment.  His  account  is  as
follows  : —

"June  24th,  1886.

"I  drew  out  a  programme  in  writing  of  what  I  wished  the  operator
to  think  without  speaking,  in  order  to  try  the  mere  power  of  the  operator
over  the  patient.  On  this  occasion  Herbert  was  the  operator,  Gannaway
the  patient.  Programme. — A  fire-engine  with  two  horses  galloping  on  a
public  road.  One  of  the  horses  falls  down  ;  gets  up  again,  and  on  they  go.
A  house  on  a  rising  ground  on  the  left  on  fire.  A  woman  in  her  night-
dress, with  a  baby  in  her  arms,  imploring  for  help  from  the  first  floor.
People  are  throwing  beds  out  of  some  of  the  windows  of  the  rooms,
which  are  taken  to  opposite  where  the  lady  was.  The  child  is  thrown  out
and  caught  all  right.     The  woman  jumps  out,  and  is  caught  and  saved.

"  This  paper  I  handed  to  Herbert,  requesting  him  not  to  say  a  word,
which  request  he  obeyed.  He  put  Gannaway  into  trance,  and  Gannaway
acted  the  part  [of  spectator,  presumably,]  to  the  very  letter.

"  A.  T.  T.  Peterson."

[Mr.  Peterson  goes  on  to  describe  another  equally  successful  experi-
ment where  the  picture  transferred  was  a  fishing-scene.  Possibly  this
preceded  the  failure  which  Mr.  Herbert  mentions.]

It  is  in  connection  with  hypnotism  that  the  most  striking
telepathic  results  have  been  obtained,  in  the  recent  rapid  develop-
ment of  "  psychical  research  "  among  French  men  of  science.     The

1  It  is  of  course  important  to  distinguish  this  phenomenon  (which  is  of  a  very  ordinary
type,  and  is  merely  of  interest  here  as  indicating  the  reality  of  the  hypnotic  state, )  from
the  telepathic  result  before  described.


IN-  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  679

cases  here  given  were  reported  to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie
Physiologique  towards  the  close  of  last  year,  and  were  published
in  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  February  and  for  April,  1886.
The  observations  themselves,  and  the  circumstances  of  their
publication,  mark  a  distinct  step  in  the  scientific  recognition  of
telepathic  phenomena  on  the  Continent.  The  first  report — Note  sur
quelques  Phenomenes  de  Somnambulisme — is  from  Professor  Pierre
Janet,  of  Havre,  a  Corresponding  Member  of  the  S.P.P.

(688)  "  Grace  a  I'obligeance  d'un  medecin  bien  connu  de  la  ville  du
Havre,  M.  le  docteur  Gibert,  j'ai  pu  pendant  une  quinzaine  de  jours
observer  certains  phenomenes  curieux  de  somnambulisme.     .     .

"  Le  sujet  sur  lequel  ces  experiences  ont  ete  faites  est  une  brave  femme
de  la  campagne,  que  nous  designerons  sous  le  nom  de  Mme.  B.  Elle  a
toujours  eu,  autant  du  moins  que  Ton  pent  le  savoir,  une  tres  bonne  sante,
et  en  particulier  elle  ne  presents  a  I'etat  normal  aucun  des  signes  de
I'hysterie.  Elle  est  seulement  sujette  depuis  son  enfance  a  des  acces  de
somnambulisme  naturel,  pendant  lesquels  elle  pent  parler  et  decrire  les
singuli^res  hallucinations  qu'elle  parait  eprouver.  Son  caractere  pendant
sa  vie  ordinaire  est  tres  honnete,  tres  simple  et  surtout  tres  timide ;
quoique  son  intelligence  paraisse  fort  juste,  Mme.  B.  n'a  re^u  aucune
instruction,  elle  ne  salt  pas  ecrire  et  epelle  k  peine  quelques  lettres.
Plusieurs  medecins  ont  deja,  parait-il,  voulu  faire  sur  elle  quelques  experi-
ences, mais  elle  a  toujours  refuse  leurs  propositions.  Ce  n'est  que  sur  la
demande  de  M.  Gibert  qu'elle  a  consent!  a  venir  passer  quelques  jours  au
Havre,  du  24  septembre  au  14  octobre  1885,  et  c'est  pendant  ce  court
sejour  que  nous  avons  eu  I'occasion  de  I'observer.

"  II  est  assez  facile  de  mettre  Mme.  B.  en  etat  de  somnambulisme  arti-
ficiel ;  il  suffit  pour  cela  de  lui  tenir  la  main  en  la  serrant  legerement  pen-
dant quelques  instants."

The  usual  symptoms  of  deep  hypnotic  trance  presented  themselves,
including  complete  insensibility  to  light,  sound,  and  pain.

"  Neanmoins  il  est  un  genre  d'excitation  auquel  Mme.  B.  reste  sensible
pendant  ce  sommeil.  Celui  qui  I'a  endormie,  et  celui-la  seul,  a  le  pouvoir
de  provoquer  a  volonte  une  contracture  partielle  ou  generale.  II  suifit,
par  exemple,  qu'il  place  un  doigt  dans  I'extension  forcee  pour  qu'il  reste
raide  comme  un  morceau  de  bois,  et  une  personne  etrangere  ne  parvient
pas  a  le  flechir.  Si  a  ce  moment  le  magnetiseur  touche  meme  legerement
le  doigt  contracture,  il  s'assouplit  instantanement.  Pour  provoquer  la
contracture  generale,  il  suffit  que  le  magnetiseur  place  sa  main  etendue  k
une  petite  distance  au-devant  du  corps."

Other  persons  could  not  produce  these  effects  in  the  slightest  degree ;
and  in  several  other  ways  the  person  who  had  hypnotised  the  subject
retained,  during  her  trance,  a  quite  peculiar  influence  over  her.

After  about  10  minutes  of  deep  sleep,  Mme.  B.  would  wake  into  a
somnambulic  state,  in  which  she  was  completely  sensible  to  impressions,
and  could  answer  questions.


680  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

"  Mais  le  caractere,  ainsi  qu'on  I'a  frequemment  remarque,  n'est  plus
du  tout  le  meme  qu'a  I'etat  de  veille.  Au  lieu  d'etre  simple  et  timide,
Mme.  B.  est  devenue  subitement  tres  hardie,  tres  vive,  pleine  de  caprices
et  toute  disposee  a  se  moquer  de  tout  le  monde,  quelquefois  avec  esprit."

From  this  stage  she  could  be  wakened  to  the  normal  state  by  the
person  who  had  hypnotised  her,  but  hy  no  one  else  (see  "Vol.  I.,  p.  88,
note);  if  not  wakened  she  soon  relapsed  again  into  the  state  of  deep  sleep.

The  first  phenomena  suggestive  of  "  psychical  "  influence  presented
themselves  in  the  process  of  hypnotisation.

"  M.  Gibert  tenait  un  jour  la  main  de  Mme.  B.  pour  I'endormir ;  mais
il  etait  visiblement  preoccupe  et  songeait  a  autre  chose  qu'a  ce  qu'il
faisait :  le  sommeil  ne  se  produisit  pas  du  tout.  Cette  experience  repetee
par  moi  de  diverses  manieres  nous  a  prouve  que  pour  endormir  Mme.  B.
il  fallait  concentrer  fortement  sa  pensee  sur  I'ordre  du  sommeil  qu'on  lui
donnait,  et  que  plus  la  pensee  de  I'operateur  etait  distraite,  plus  le
sommeil  etait  difiicile  a  provoquer.  Cette  influence  de  la  pensee  de
I'operateur,  quelque  extraordinaire  que  cela  paraisse,  est  ici  tout  k  fait
preponderante,  a  un  tel  point  qu'elle  peut  remplacer  toutes  les  autres.  Si
on  presse  la  main  de  Mme.  B.  sans  songer  a  I'endormir,  on  n'arrive  pas  a
provoquer  le  sommeil ;  au  contraire,  si  Ton  songe  a  I'endormir  sans  lui
presser  la  main,  on  y  reussit  parfaitement."

Experiments  of  this  sort  were  often  repeated  ;  but  it  is  impossible,  as  M,
Janet  fully  recognises,  absolutely  to  exclude  the  hypothesis  that  the
hypnotisation  was  due  to  some  suggestion  of  the  purpose  in  view,  uncon-
sciously conveyed  by  gesture,  or  attitude,  or  mere  silence  and  appearance
of  expectation.  This  objection  would  not  apply  to  other  cases  in  which
M.  Gibert,  without  warning,  and  at  a  moment  then  and  there  fixed  on  by
M.  Janet  or  another  friend,  produced  a  distinct  effect  on  the  subject  from
another  part  of  the  town — the  fact  being  immediately  verified  by  M.
Janet ;  who  on  one  occasion  found  that  the  "  subject,"  on  feeling  the
impulse  to  sleep,  had  only  prevented  herself  from  yielding  to  it  by  putting
her  hands  in  cold  water  ;  and  on  two  others,  found  her  in  a  deep  trance
from  which  only  M.  Gibert  could  wake  her.  On  the  last  of  these  occasions,
M.  Gibert,  at  a  distance,  further  willed  three  times,  at  intervals  of  5
minutes,  the  performance  of  certain  actions  during  the  trance,  which  the
entranced  "  subject"  began  to  execute,  though  obviously  rebelling  against
the  impulse,  and  ending  with  a  laugh,  "  Vous  ne  pouvez  pas  .
si  peu,  si  peu  que  vous  soyez  distrait,  je  me  rattrape."

"  Mais  les  suggestions  mentales,  car  ce  mot  me  parait  ici  bien  a  sa
place,  peuvent  etre  faites  sur  Mme.  B.  d'une  autre  maniere  et  avoir  un
tout  autre  succes.  On  reussit  peu,  comme  nous  I'avons  dit,  quand  on  lui
commande  d'executer  I'ordre  immddiatement  pendant  le  sommeil ;  on
reussit  beaucoup  mieux  quand  on  lui  commande  mentalement  une  action  a
executer  plus  tard  quelque  temps  apres  le  reveil.  Le  8  octobre  M.  Gibert
fit  une  suggestion  de  ce  genre  :  sans  prononcer  aucun  mot  il  approcha  son
front  de  celui  de  Mme.  B.  pendant  le  sommeil  lethargique,  et  pendant
quelques  instants  concentra  sa  pensee  sur  I'ordre  qu'il  lui  donnait.
Mme.  B.  parut  ressentir  une  impression  penible  et  poussa  un  gemissement ;
d'ailleurs  le  sommeil  ne  parut  pas  du  tout  §tre  derange.     M.  Gibert  ne  dit


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  681

a  personne  I'ordre  qu'il  avait  donn^  et  se  contenta  de  I'ecrire  sur  un  papier
qu'il  mit  sous  enveloppe.  Le  lendemain  je  revins  aupres  de  Mme.  B.  pour
voir  I'effet  de  cette  suggestion  qui  devait  s'executer  entre  11  heures  et
midi.  All  heures  1/2  cette  femme  manifeste  la  plus  grande  agitation,
quitte  la  cuisine  ou  elle  etait,  et  va  dans  une  chambre  prendre  un  verre
qu'elle  emporte ;  puis,  surmontant  sa  timidite,  se  decide  a  entrer  dans  le
salon  ou  je  me  trouvais,  et  toute  emue  demande  si  on  ne  I'a  pas  appelee  ;
sur  ma  reponse  negative  elle  sort  et  continue  plusieurs  fois  a  monter  de  la
cuisine  au  salon  sans  rien  apporter  d'ailleurs.  Elle  ne  fit  rien  de  plus  ce
jour-la,  car  bientot  elle  tomba  endormie  a  distance  par  M.  Gibert.  Yoici
ce  qu'elle  raconta  pendant  son  sommeil :  '  Je  tremblais  quand  je  suis
venue  vous  demander  si  on  m'avait  appelee — il  fallaitqueje  vienne —
c'etait  pas  commode  de  venir  avec  ce  plateau — pourquoi  veut-on  me  faire
porter  des  verres — qu'est-ce  que  j'allais  dire,  n'est-ce  pas — je  ne  veux  pas
que  vous  fassiez  cela — ^il  fallait  bien  que  je  dise  quelque  chose  en  venant.'
En  ouvrant  I'enveloppe,  je  vis  que  M.  Gibert  avait  commande  hier  a
Mme.  B.  'd'ofirir  un  verre  d'eau  a  chacun  de  ces  messieurs.'  Ici  encore  il
faut  reconnaitre  que  I'experience  n'avait  pas  entierement  reussi,  la  sugges-
tion n'avait  pas  ete  executee ;  peut-on  nier  du  moins  qu'elle  n'ait  ete
comprise  1

"  Voici  maintenant  une  experience  plus  significative.  Le  10  octobre,
nous  convenons,  M.  Gibert  et  moi,  de  faire  la  suggestion  suivante :
'  Demain  a  midi  fermer  a  clef  les  portes  de  la  maison.'  J'inscrivis  la
suggestion  sur  un  papier  que  je  gardais  sur  moi  et  que  je  ne  voulus
communiquer  a  personne.  M.  Gibert  fit  la  suggestion  comme  precedem-
ment  en  approchant  son  front  de  celui  de  Mme.  B.  Le  lendemain  quand
j'arrivai  a  midi  moins  un  quart  je  trouvai  la  maison  barricad^e  et  la  porte
fermee  a  clef.  Renseignements  pris,  c'etait  Mme.  B.  qui  venait  de  la
fermer  ;  quand  je  lui  demandai  pourquoi  elle  avait  fait  cet  acte  singulier,
elle  me  repondit :  '  Je  me  sentais  tres  fatiguee,  et  je  ne  voulais  pas  que
vous  puissiez  entrer  pour  m'endormir.'  M.  Bernheim  et  M.  Richet  ont
deja  parle  de  ces  personnes  qui  inventent  des  raisons  pour  s'expliquer  a
elles-memes  un  acte  qu'elles  font  ne'cessairement  sous  I'influence  d'une
suggestion.  Mme.  B.  etait  a  ce  moment  tres  agitee  ;  elle  continua  a  errer
dans  le  jardin,  et  je  la  vis  cueillir  une  rose  et  aller  visiter  la  bolte  aux
lettres  placee  pres  de  la  porte  d'entree.  Ces  actes  sont  sans  importance,
mais  il  est  curieux  de  remarquer  que  c'etait  precisement  les  actes  que  nous
avions  un  moment  songe  a  lui  commander  la  veille.  Nous  nous  etions
decides  a  en  ordonner  un  autre,  celui  de  fermer  les  portes,  mais  la  pensee
des  premiers  avait  sans  doute  occupe  I'esprit  de  M.  Gibert  pendant  qu'il
commandait,  et  elle  avait  eu  aussi  son  influence.

"  Voici  une  troisieme  experience  qui  ne  meriterait  pas  d'etre  racontee,
car  elle  reussit  moins  bien  que  la  precedente,  mais  elle  est  interessante
cependant,  car  elle  montre  combien  le  sujet  peut  resister  a  ces  suggestions
mentales.  Le  13  octobre,  M.  Gibert  lui  ordonne  toujours  par  la  pensee
d'ouvrir  un  parapluie  le  lendemain  a  midi  et  de  faire  deux  fois  le  tour  du
jardin.  Le  lendemain  elle  fut  tres  agitde  a  midi,  fit  deux  fois  le  tour  du
jardin,  mais  n'ouvrit  pas  de  parapluie.  Je  I'endormis  peu  de  temps  apres
pour  calmer  une  agitation  qui  devenait  de  plus  en  plus  grande.  Ses
premiers  mots  furent  ceux-ci :  '  Pourquoi  m'avez-vous  fait  marcher  tout


682        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

autour  du  jardin — j'avais  I'air  bete — encore  s'il  avait  fait  le  temps  d'hier
par  example — mais  aujourd'hui  j'aurais  ete  tout  a  fait  ridicule.'  Ce
jour-la  il  faisait  fort  beau  et  la  veille  ii  pleuvait  beaucoup  :  elle  n'avait
pas  voulu  ouvrir  un  parapluie  par  un  beau  temps  de  peur  de  paraitre
ridicule.  La  suggestion  avait  au  moins  ete  comprise  si  elle  n'avait  pas  ete
ex^cutee  entierement."

In  April,  1886,  Mr.  Myers  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  had  the  opportunity
of  witnessing  some  further  experiments  made  with  this  "  subject."  ^
The  times  at  which  the  trials  were  made  were  always  chosen  without
premeditation.  It  is  true  that  Mme.  B.  had  come  to  Havre  for  a  few
weeks  for  the  purpose  of  hypnotic  experiments,  and  may  therefore  have
had  a  general  idea  that  attempts  to  influence  her  from  a  distance
were  likely  to  be  made ;  but  the  closeness  of  the  coincidences,  coupled
with  the  fact  that  she  is  not  liable  to  go  into  spontaneous  trances  at
other  times,  makes  it  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  the
results  were  due  to  accident.

(1)  "  In  the  evening  of  April  22,  1886,"  says  Mr.  Myers,  "  we  dined  at
M.  Gibert's,  and  in  the  evening  M.  Gibert  made  an  attempt  to  put
Mme.  B.  to  sleep  at  a  distance  (from  his  house  in  the  Rue  Sery  to  the
Pavilion,  Rue  de  la  Ferme),  and  to  bring  her  to  his  own  house  by  force  of
will.  At  8.55  he  retired  to  his  study  ;  and  MM.  Ochorowicz,  Marillier,
Janet,  and  A.  T.  Myers  went  to  the  Pavilion,  where  Mme.  B.  was  staying,
and  waited  outside  in  the  street.  At  9.22  Dr.  Myers  observed  Mme.  B.
coming  half-way  out  of  the  garden-gate,  and  again  retreating.  Those  who
saw  her  more  closely  observed  that  she  was  plainly  in  the  somnambulic
state,  and  was  wandering  about  and  muttering.  At  9.25  she  came
out  (with  eyes  persistently  closed,  so  far  as  could  be  seen),  walked
quickly  past  MM.  Janet  and  Marillier,  without  noticing  them,  and  made
for  M.  Gibert's  house,  though  not  by  the  usual  or  shortest  route.  (It
appeared  afterwards  that  the  honne  had  seen  her  go  into  the  salon  at  8.45,
and  issue  thence  asleep  at  9.15  :  had  not  looked  in  between  those  times.)
She  avoided  lamp-posts,  vehicles,  &c.,  but  crossed  and  re-crossed  the  street
repeatedly.  No  one  went  in  front  of  her  or  spoke  to  her.  After  eight  or
ten  minutes  she  grew  much  more  uncertain  in  gait,  and  paused  as  though
she  would  fall.  Dr.  Myers  noted  the  moment  in  the  Rue  Paure ;  it
was  9.35.  At  about  9.40  she  grew  bolder,  at  9.45  reached  the  street  in
front  of  M.  Gibert's  house.  There  she  met  him,  but  did  not  notice  him,
and  walked  into  his  house,  where  she  rushed  hurriedly  from  room  to  room
on  the  ground-floor.  M.  Gibert  had  to  take  her  hand  before  she  recognised
him.     She  then  grew  calm.

"  M.  Gibert,  before  hearing  Dr.  Myers'  statement,  said  that  from  8.55
to  9.20  he  thought  intently  about  her  ;  from  9.20  to  9.35  he  thought  more
feebly;  at  9.35  he  gave  the  experiment  up,  and  began  to  play  billiards;
but  in  a  few  minutes  began  to  will  her  again.  It  thus  appeared  that  his
visit  to  the  billiard-room  had  coincided  with  her  hesitation  and  stumbling

1  A  fuller  account  of  these  experiments  will  be  found  in  Part  X.  of  the  Proceedings
of  the  S.P.R.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  683

in  the  street.     She  may,  however,  have  hesitated  merely  because  she  was
not  sure  of  the  way.

(2)  "  On  April  23,  M.  Janet  lunched  in  our  company,  and  retired  to
his  own  house  at  4.30  (a  time  chosen  by  lot)  to  try  to  put  her  to  sleep
from  thence.  At  5.5  we  all  entered  the  salon  of  the  Pavilion,  and  found
her  asleep  with  shut  eyes,  but  sewing  vigorously  (being  in  that  stage  in
which  movements  once  suggested  are  automatically  continued).  Passing
into  the  talkative  state,  she  said  to  M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  fait
dormir  a  quatre  heures  et  demi.'  The  impression  as  to  the  hour  may  have
been  a  suggestion  received  from  M.  Janet's  mind.  We  tried  to  make  her
believe  that  it  was  M.  Gibert  who  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  but  she  main-
tained that  she  had  felt  that  it  was  M.  Janet.

(3)  "On  April  24  the  whole  party  chanced  to  meet  at  M.  Janet's
house  at  3  p.m.,  and  he  then,  at  my  suggestion,  entered  his  study  to  will
that  Mme.  B.  should  sleep.  We  waited  in  his  garden,  and  at  3.20  pro-
ceeded together  to  the  Pavilion,  which  I  entered  first  at  3.30,  and  found
Mme.  B.  profoundly  asleep  over  her  sewing,  having  ceased  to  sew.
Becoming  talkative,  she  said  to  M.  Janet,  '  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez
commandee.'     She  said  that  she  fell  asleep  at  3.5  p.m."

Writing  from  Havre  on  June  18,  1886,  M.  Janet  gives  the  following
brief  summary  of  the  results  obtained  in  the  particular  experiment  of
inducing  "  sommeil  a  distance,"  during  this  visit  of  Mme.  B.  to  Havre  : —

"  ISTe  parlons  pas  des  suggestions  de  sommeil  faites  par  la  pensee  en  se
tenant  devant  le  sujet,  ou  meme  dans  une  autre  piece  de  la  maison  ;  on
n'est  jamais  assez  certain  que  le  sujet  ne  soit  pas  du  tout  prevenu.  II  ne
s'agit  ici  que  des  experiences  tenfcees  de  loin,  de  chez  M.  Gibert  ou  de  chez
moi,  c'est-a-dire,  a  500  metres  au  moins  du  pavilion  ou  se  trouvait  Mme.
B.  Les  experiences  faites  dans  ces  conditions,  soit  par  M.  Gibert,  soit  par
moi,  sont  aii  nombre  de  21  pendant  ce  second  sejour  de  Mme.  B.  au
Havre.  Je  ne  compte  pas  un  essai  fait  au  milieu  de  la  nuit  dans  des
conditions  deplorables.  Considerons  comme  echecs  toutes  les  experiences
dans  lesquelles  le  sujet  n'a  pas  ete  trouve  endormi  quand  on  entrait  dans
le  pavilion,  ou  meme  celles  dans  lesquelles  le  sujet  a  mis  plus  d'un
quart  d'heure  a  s'endormir  apres  I'instant  de  la  suggestion  mentale.
Le  nombre  de  ces  insucces  a  ete  de  6,  et  chacun  d'eux  peut  avoir  une  ex-
plication precise.  II  reste  a  retenir  15  succes  precis  et  complets,  ou  15
coincidences  extraordinaires,  suivant  que  I'on  voudra  les  comprendre  d'une
maniere  ou  d'une  autre."

The  next  record  is  from  M.  J.  Hericourt,  of  50,  Rue  de  Miromenil,
Paris.

(689)  "  L'observation  que  je  rapporte  ici  date  de  I'annee  1878,  epoque  a
laquelle  je  I'ai  communiquee  a  mon  ami  M.  Charles  Richet,  qui  I'a  gardee
fidelement  et  prudemment  dans  ses  cartons,  pour  des  raisons  faciles  a
comprendre.

"  II  s'agit  d'une  jeune  femme  de  vingt-quatre  ans,  d'origine  espagnole,
veuve  et  mere  d'une  petite  fille  de  cinq  ans.  .  .  .  L'examen  le  plus
minutieux  n'a  pu  faire  decouvrir  chez  elle  aucune  tare  hysterique,
personnelle  ou  hereditaire."

M.  Hericourt  easily  succeeded  in  hypnotising  Mme.  D.  on  the  first  trial.


684  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

"  J'endormais  Mme.  D.  avec  une  facilite  chaque  jour  plus  grande.  En
efFet,  apres  quinze  jours  environ  de  cet  entrainement  special,  je  n'avais
plus  besoin  pour  obtenir  ce  resultat  ni  du  contact  ni  du  regard  :  il  me
sufiisait  de  vouloir,  tout  en  m'abstenant  de  toute  espece  de  geste  qui  put
traliir  mon  intention.  Etait-elle  en  conversation  animee  au  milieu  de
plusieurs  personnes,  tandis  que  je  me  tenais  dans  quelque  coin  dans
Tattitude  de  la  plus  complete  indifference,  que  je  la  voyais  bientot,  a  mon
gre,  lutter  contre  le  sommeil  qui  I'envahissait,  et  le  subir  d^finitivement,
ou  reprendre  le  cours  de  ses  idees,  selon  que  moi-meme  je  continuais  ou
cessais  d'appliquer  ma  pensee  au  resultat  a  obtenir.

"  Et  meme  je  pouvais  regarder  fixement  mon  sujet,  lui  serrer  les  pouces
ou  les  poignets,  et  faire  toutes  les  passes  imaginables  des  magnetiseurs  de
profession ;  si  ma  volonte  n'etait  pas  de  I'endormir,  il  restait  parfaitement
^veille,  et  convaincu  de  mon  impuissance.

"  Mais  bientot,  ce  ne  fut  plus  seulement  d'une  extremite  a  I'autre  d'une
chambre  que  je  songeai  a  exercer  mon  action ;  d'une  piece  a  une  autre,
d'une  maison  a  une  autre  maison,  situee  dans  une  rue  plus  ou  moins
<^loignee,  le  meme  resultat  fut  encore  obtenu.

"  Les  circonstances  dans  lesquelles  j'exergai  ainsi  pour  la  premiere  fois
cette  action  a  longue  distance  meritent  d'etre  rapportees  avec  quelques
details.  Etant  un  jour  dans  mon  cabinet  (j'habitais  alors  Perpignan),
I'idee  me  vint  d'essayer  d'endormir  Mme.  D.,  que  j'avais  tout  lieu  de  croire
chez  elle,  et  qui  habitait  dans  une  rue  distante  environ  de  300  metres  de
la  mienne.  J'etais  d'ailleurs  Men  eloigne  de  croire  au  succes  d'une  pareille
experience.  II  dtait  trois  heures  de  I'apres-midi,  je  me  mis  a  me  promener
de  long  en  large,  en  pensant  tres  vivement  au  resultat  que  je  voulais
obtenir ;  et  j'etais  absorbe  par  cet  exercice,  quand  on  vint  me  chercher
pour  voir  des  malades.  Les  cas  etant  pressants,  j'oubliai  momentanement
Mme.  D.  que  je  devais  d'ailleurs  rencontrer  vers  quatre  heures  et  demie
sur  une  promenade  publique.  M'y  etant  rendu  a  cette  heure,  je  fus  tres
etonne  de  ne  I'y  point  voir,  mais  je  pensai  qu'apres  tout,  mon  experience
avait  bien  pu  reussir ;  aussi,  vers  cinq  heures,  pour  ne  rien  compromettre
et  retablir  les  choses  en  leur  etat  normal,  dans  le  cas  ou  cet  etat  eut  et^
eifectivement  trouble,  par  acquit  de  conscience,  je  songeai  a  reveiller  mon
sujet,  aussi  vigoureusement  que  tout  a  I'heure  j'avais  songe  a  I'endormir.

"  Or,  ayant  eu  I'occasion  de  voir  Mme.  D.  dans  la  soiree,  voici  ce
qu'elle  me  raconta,  d'une  maniere  absolument  spontanee,  et  sans  que  j'eusse
fait  la  moindre  allusion  a  son  absence  de  la  promenade.  Vers  trois  heures,
comme  elle  etait  dans  sa  chambre  a  coucher,  elle  avait  ete  prise  subitement
d'une  envie  invincible  de  dormir  ;  ses  paupieres  se  faisaient  de  plomb,  et
ses  jambes  se  d^robaient — jamais  elle  ne  dormait  dans  la  journee — au  point
qu'elle  avait  eu  a  peine  la  force  de  passer  dans  son  salon,  pour  s'y  laisser
tomber  sur  un  canape.  Sa  domestique  etant  alors  entree  pour  lui  parler,
I'avait  trouvee,  comme  elle  le  lui  raconta  plus  tard,  pale,  la  peau  froide,
sans  mouvement,  comme  morte,  selon  ses  expressions.  Justement  effray^e,
elle  s'etait  mise  a  la  secouer  vigoureusement,  mais  sans  parvenir  cependant
a  autre  chose  qu'a  lui  faire  ouvrir  les  yeux.  A  ce  moment,  Mme.  D.  me
dit  qu'elle  n'avait  eu  conscience  que  d'eprouver  un  violent  mal  de  tete  qui,
parait-il,  avait  disparu  subitement  vers  cinq  heures.  O'etait  pr^cisement
le  moment  ou  j'avais  pense  a  la  reveiller.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  685

"  Oe  recit  ay  ant  ete  spontane,  je  le  repete,  il  n'y  avait  plus  de  doute  a
conserver  :  ma  tentative  avait  certainement  reussi.  Afin  de  pouvoir  la
renouveler  dans  des  conditions  aussi  probantes  que  possible,  je  ne  mis  pas
Mme.  D.  au  courant  de  ce  que  j 'avals  fait,  et  j'entrepris  toute  une  serie
d'experiences  dont  je  rendis  temoins  nombre  de  personnes,  qui  voulurent
bien  en  fixer  les  conditions  et  contrdler  les  resultats.  Parmi  ces
personnes,  je  citerai  le  medecin-major  et  un  capitaine  du  bataillon  de
chasseurs  dont  j'etais  alors  I'aide-major.  Toutes  ces  experiences  se
ramenent  en  somme  au  type  suivant.

"  Etant  dans  un  salon  avec  Mme.  D.,  je  lui  disais  que  j'allais  essayer
de  I'endormir  d'une  piece  voisine,  les  portes  etant  fermees.  Je  passais
alors  dans  cette  piece,  ou  je  restais  quelques  minutes  avec  la  pensee
bien  nette  de  la  laisser  eveillee.  Quand  je  revenais,  je  trouvais  en
efiet  Mme.  D.  dans  son  etat  normal,  et  se  moquant  de  mon  insucces.  Un
instant  plus  tard,  ou  un  autre  jour,  je  passais  dans  la  meme  piece  voisine
sous  un  pretexte  quelconque,  mais  cette  fois  avec  I'intention  bien  arretee
de  produire  le  sommeil,  et  apres  une  minute  a  peine,  le  resultat  le  plus
complet  etait  obtenu.  On  n'invoquera  ici  aucune  suggestion  autre  que  la
suggestion  mentale,  puisque  V attention  expectante,  mise  en  jeu  dans  toute  sa
force,  lors  de  I'experience  precedente,  avait  ete  absolument  sans  action.
Les  conditions  de  ces  experiences,  qui  se  contr61ent  reciproquement,  sont
d'une  simplicite  et  d'une  valeur  sur  lesquelles  j 'attire  I'attention,  parce
qu'elles  constituent  une  sorte  de  schema  a  suivre  pour  la  demonstration.

"  Mme.  D.  pretendait  que,  toutes  les  fois  que  je  pensais  a  elle,  elle
ressentait  une  vive  douleur  dans  la  region  precordiale  ;  c'etait  d'ailleurs
cette  meme  douleur  qu'elle  eprouvait  encore  quand  les  seances  de  somnam-
bulisme  se  prolongeaient,  et  qui  me  determinait  a  y  mettre  fin.  De  fait,
apres  convention  prealable,  si  je  voulais  que  Mme.  D.  descendit  de  chez
elle,  je  n'avais  qu'a  m'arreter  dans  une  rue  voisine  de  la  sienne,  et  a  lui  en
donner  I'ordre  mentalement.  Je  ne  tardais  pas  a  la  voir  arriver,  et
toujours  elle  me  disait  que  sa  dotdeur  au  coeur  lui  avait  indique  ma
presence."

The  next  account,  from  Dr.  E.  Gley,  of  37,  Rue  Claude  Bernard,
Paris,  records  some  observations  of  his  friend,  Dr.  Dusart,  (published
in  the  Tribune  Medicate  in  May,  1875),  on  a  girl  of  14,  whom  he
found  suffering  from  obstinate  hysterical  attacks,  and  for  whom  he
easily  procured  sleep  by  a  simple  hypnotic  process.

(690)  "  J'avais  observe  que,  quand,  en  faisant  des  passes,  je  me  laissais
distraire  par  la  conversation  des  parents,  je  ne  parvenais  jamais  a
produire  un  sommeil  suffisant,  meme  apres  un  long  espace  de  temps.  II
fallait  done  faire  une  large  part  a  I'intervention  de  ma  volonte.  Mais
celle-ci  suffirait-elle  sans  le  secours  d'aucune  manifestation  exterieure?
Voila  ce  que  je  voulus  savoir.

"  A  cet  efiet  j'arrive  un  jour  avant  I'heure  fixee  la  veille  pour  le
reveil,  et,  sans  regarder  la  malade,  sans  faire  un  geste,  je  lui  donne
mentalement  I'ordre  de  s'eveiller  :  je  suis  aussitdt  obei.  A  ma  volonte,  le
delire  et  les  cris  eommencent.  Je  m'assieds  alors  devant  le  feu,  le  dos  au
lit  de  la  malade,  laquclle  avait  la  face  tournee  vers  la  porte  de  la  chambre,


686  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

je  cause  avec  les  personnes  presentes,  sans  paraitre  m'occuper  des  cris  de
Mile.  J.,  puis,  a  un  moment  donne,  sans  que  personne  se  fut  apergu  de  ce
qui  se  passait  en  moi,  je  donne  Yordre  mental  du  sommeil,  et  celui-ci  se
produit.  Plus  de  cent  fois  I'experience  fut  faite  et  variee  de  diverses
faQons  :  I'ordre  mental  ^tait  donne  sur  un  signe  que  me  faisait  le  Dr.  X.,
et  toujours  I'effet  se  produisait.  Un  jour,  j 'arrive  lorsque  la  malade  etait
eveillee  et  en  plein  delire  ;  elle  continue,  malgre  ma  presence,  a  crier  et
s'agiter,  je  m'assieds  et  j 'attends  que  le  Dr.  X.  me  donne  le  signal.
Aussitdt  celui-ci  donne  et  I'ordre  mental  formule,  la  malade  se  tait  et
s'endort.  'Yous  saviez  que  j'etais  la  depuis  quelque  temps?'  'Non,
monsieur ;  je  ne  me  suis  apergue  de  votre  presence  qu'en  sentant  le
sommeil  me  gagner ;  j'ai  eu  alors  conscience  que  vous  ^tiez  assis  devant
le  feu.'

"  Je  donnais  chaque  jour,  avant  de  partir,  I'ordre  de  dormir  jusqu' au
lendemain  a  une  heure  determin^e.  tin  jour,  je  pars,  oubliant  cette
precaution;  j'etais  a  700  metres  quand  je  m'en  apergus.  Ne  pouvant
retourner  sur  mes  pas,  je  me  dis  que  peut-etre  mon  ordre  serait
entendu,  malgre  la  distance,  puisque  a  1  ou  a  2  metres  un  ordre  mental
etait  execute.  En  consequence,  je  formule  I'ordre  de  dormir  jusqu'au
lendemain  8  heures,  et  je  poursuis  mon  chemin.  Le  lendemain,  j'arrive  a
7  heures  et  demie  ;  la  malade  dormait.  '  Comment  se  fait-il  que  vous
dormiez  encore?'  'Mais,  monsieur,  je  vous  obeis.'  'Vous  vous  trompez  ;  je
suis  parti  sans  vous  donner  aucun  ordre.'  '  C'est  vrai  ;  mais  cinq  minutes
apres,  je  vous  ai  parfaitement  entendu  me  dire  de  dormir  jusqu'a  8  heures.
Or  il  n'est  pas  encore  8  heures.'  Oette  derniere  heure  etant  celle  que
j'indiquais  ordinairement,  il  etait  possible  que  I'habitude  fut  la  cause  d'une
illusion  et  qu'il  n'y  eut  ici  qu'une  simple  coincidence.  Pour  en  avoir  le
coeur  net  et  ne  laisser  prise  a  aucun  doute,  je  commandai  a  la  malade  de
dormir  jusqu'a  ce  qu'elle  regut  I'ordre  de  s'eveiller.

"  Dans  la  journee,  ayant  trouvd  un  intervalle  libre,  je  resolus  de  com-
pleter I'experience.  Je  pars  de  chez  moi  (7  kilometres  de  distance),  en
donnant  I'ordre  du  reveil.  Je  constate  qu'il  est  2  heures.  J'arrive  et
trouve  la  malade  eveillee  :  les  parents,  sur  ma  recommandation,  avaient
note  I'heure  exacte  du  reveil.  C'etait  rigour eusement  celle  a  laquelle
j 'avals  donn^  I'ordre.  Cette  experience,  plusieurs  fois  renouvelee,  a  des
heures  difFe rentes,  eut  toujours  le  meme  resultat.

"  Mais  voici  qui  paraitra  plus  concluant  encore.

"  Le  1^^  Janvier,  je  suspendis  mes  visites  et  cessai  toute  relation  avec
la  famille.  Je  n'en  avals  plus  entendu  parler,  lorsque  le  12,  faisant  des
courses  dans  une  direction  opposee  et  me  trouvant  a  10  kilometres  de  la
malade,  je  me  demandai  si,  malgre  la  distance,  la  cessation  de  tous
rapports  et  I'intervention  d'une  tierce  personne  (le  pere  magn^tisant
desormais  sa  fille),  il  me  serait  encore  possible  de  me  faire  obeir.  Je
defends  a  la  malade  de  se  laisser  endormir ;  puis,  une  demi-heure  apres,
reflechissant  que  si,  par  extraordinaire,  j'etais  obdi,  cela  pourrait  causer
prejudice  a  cette  malheureuse  jeune  fille,  je  leve  la  defense  et  cesse
d'y  penser.

"  Je  fus  fort  surpris,  lorsque  le  lendemain,  a  6  heures  du  matin,  je
vis  arriver  chez  moi  un  expres  portant  une  lettre  du  p^re  de  Mile.  J.
Celui-ci    me   disait  que    la   veille,  12,    a  10   heures   du  matin,  il  n'etait


IN  THEIR  PBOPER  PLACES.  687

arrive  a  endormir  sa  fille  qu'apres  une  lutte  prolongee  et  tres  douloureuse.
La  malade,  une  fois  endormie,  avait  declare  que,  si  elle  avait  resiste,  c'etait
sur  mon  ordre,  et  qu'elle  ne  s'etait  endormie  que  quand  je  I'avais  permis.

"Oes  declarations  avaient  ^te  faites  vis-a-vis  de  temoins  auxquels  le  pere
avait  fait  signer  les  notes  qui  les  contenaient.     J'ai  conserve  cette  lettre,

dont  M. me  confirma  plus  tard  le  contenu,  en  ajoutant  quelques  details

circonstancies."

I  3.     I  come  now  to  the  spontaneous  cases.     The  following  seems

to  be  an  instance  of  casual  spontaneous  transference  of  an  idea ;  and

strikingly  exemplifies  the  latency  of  the  impression,  and  its  emergence

after  several  hours,  which  has  been  so  frequently  noted  in  the  course

of  this  work.     Mrs.  Lethbridge,  of  Tregeare,  Launceston,  Cornwall,

writes  : —

"  Bella  Yista,  Corsier,  Yevey,  Switzerland.

"  April  10th,  1886.

(691)  "In  December,  1881,  my  husband  was  slowly  recovering  from  a
severe  illness  :  and  one  afternoon,  about  5  o'clock,  I  went  into  his  study,
where  he  had  gone  for  2  or  3  hours,  to  see  if  he  wanted  anything.  Find-
ing him  asleep  in  his  armchair,  I  left  him,  and  having  some  village
lending-library  books  to  sort,  I  went  into  the  small  room  where  they
were  kept,  called  the  '  box-room '  (in  a  distant  part  of  the  house),  to  do  so.
There,  to  my  surprise,  I  saw  our  gamekeeper's  dog,  Vic,  curled  up.  On
seeing  me  she  rose,  wagged  her  tail,  turned  half  round  and  lay  down  again.
This  dog  had  never  been  inside  the  house  before,  which  was  the  reason  of
my  surprise  at  seeing  her  where  she  was.  However,  I  turned  her  out
of  doors,  and  there  I  thought  the  matter  ended.  I  am  quite  sure  I  did  not
mention  the  matter  to  my  husband.

"  He  went  to  bed  very  early  that  evening,  and  had  a  most  restless
night,  talking  a  great  deal  in  his  sleep.  While  fast  asleep  he  related  the
whole  occurrence  of  '  Hawke's  dog,  Yic,'  actually  being  found  in  the
box-room,  even  describing  the  animal's  behaviour,  rising,  turning  half
round  and  lying  down  again.  Next  morning  I  asked  my  husband  if  he
had  dreamt  1  '  No,  not  that  he  knew  of.'  If  he  had  not  dreamt  of  Vic  ?
'  No,  why  of  Vic  1 '  Then  I  asked  him  if  by  any  chance  he  had  heard
where  Vic  had  been  found  the  previous  evening  ?  '  No.  Where  ? '  And
when  I  told  him,  he  was  extremely  astonished,  just  because  the  dog  had
never  been  known  inside  the  house  before,  and  the  box-room  was  on  an
upper  landing.  Subsequently  I  related  to  him  what  he  had  said  in  his
sleep,  but  he  evidently  had  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  it.

"MiLLICBNT     G.    LeTHBEIDGB."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Lethbridge  adds  : —

"I  am  glad  my  account  interested  you,  and  regret  extremely  that  it
cannot  be  corroborated,  for  I  ftdly  understand  the  necessity  in  investi-
gations such  as  yours  to  obtain  perfectly  trustworthy  evidence,  and  free
from  intentional  or  unintentional  exaggerations  or  inaccuracies.  My  dear
husband  died  about  16  months  ago.  On  receiving  your  letter  I  tried  to
find  out  whether  he  mentioned  the  occurrence  in  his  diary,  but  un-
fortunately the  diary  of  that  year  (1881)  was  left  behind  in  England.


688        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION

"  From  mine,  which  I  succeeded  in  finding,  written  at  the  time,  I  copy
out  the  following  brief  notice,  dated  Dec.  14th,  1881.  'Baron  talked  a
great  deal  in  his  sleep  last  night,  and  curiously  enough  he  described  how
the  terrier  was  found  curled  up  on  the  mat  in  the  box-room,  which
actually  happened  yesterday,  probably  for  the  first  time  in  the  terrier's
life,  for  I  was  so  amazed  at  finding  the  dog  in  so  unusual  a  place  that  I
called  the  children  to  see  it.  But  the  strange  part  is  this.  Baron  was
asleep  in  the  study  at  the  time,  and  no  one  had  told  him  of  the  occurrence.
Of  this  I  am  quite  sure.^

"  I  mentioned  the  occurrence  to  several  people  at  the  time,  but  as  it
happened  5  years  ago,  I  doubt  if  any  of  them  would  recall  it  quite
accurately."

[Mr.  Lethbridge's  complete  forgetfulness  is  clearly  a  strong  indication
that  the  news  of  the  occurrence  had  not  reached  him  in  any  normal  way —
e.g.,  by  overhearing  the  children  speaking  of  it.]

The  following  experiences  belong  to  a  class  whose  force,  in  the
cumulative  proof  of  telepathy,  is  comparatively  small — the  class  of
mere  impressions,  without  any  sensory  affection;  but  they  are  in
themselves  well-evidenced  cases,  the  records  of  the  impressions  having
been  carefully  written  down  before  the  news  of  the  corresponding
event  arrived.  The  narrator  is  Mr.  J.  C.  Grant,  of  98,  Cornwall
Gardens,  S.W. ;  from  whose  very  full  journal  they  were  copied  by  the
present  writer.  Mr.  Grant  desires  that  the  names  of  the  persons
mentioned  shall  not  be  printed;  but  says  that  "the  fullest  information
is  open  to  private  inquiry."  The  instance  which  was  second  in  date
is  given  before  the  earlier  one,  as  being  more  complete,  and  is  the
only  one  to  which  I  have  attached  an  evidential  number.

(692)  Entry  in  diary  for  April  11,  1882.

"  A  very  strange  thing  happened  to  me  last  night.  It  has  happened
once  before.  After  being  asleep  some  little  time,  I  was  wakened  up,  quite
quietly  and  with  no  dread  or  horror,  but  with  the  absolute  and  certain
knowledge  that  there  was  a  '  presence  '  in  my  room.  I  looked  everywhere
into  the  darkness,  implored  it  to  appear,  but  to  no  efiect ;  for  though  I  have
the  gift  of  '  feeling,'  I  have  not  that  of  '  sight.'  I  felt  certain,  in  fact  was
told  by  it,  that  it  was  to  do  with  Bruce  [Christian  name].  I  thought  it
was  his  father — I  was  sure  it  was  :  I  thought  he  must  be  dead.  ^  All  this
took  place  in  about  a  couple  of  minutes  or  so  ;  and  as  I  saw  I  could  see
nothing,  I  got  up,  struck  a  match,  lighted  the  candle  at  my  bedside,  and
looked  at  my  watch.  It  was  just  14  minutes  past  12  o'clock.  I  then  put
out  the  candle  ;  but  all  feeling  of  the  presence  had  gone.  It  had  spoken
as  only  a  spirit  2  can  speak,  and  then  had  passed  away.  I  did  not  get  to
sleep  for  a  long  time,  and  was  very  unhappy  for  poor  Bruce.     ...     I

1  Mr.  Grant  explains  this  sentence  as  follows  : — "I  knew  his  father  to  be  very
seriously  ill,  which  no  doubt  was  the  reason  why  my  thoughts  took  this  direction."

2  See  p.  48,  note.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  689

have  been  quite  out  of  sorts  all  day  for  poor  old  Bruce,  to  whom  I  wrote
this  morning.    Told  M.  and  R.  of  my  feeling  and  experiences  of  the  night."

[The  entry  for  April  12  mentions  a  conversation  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M.,
in  which  Mr.  Grant  remembers  that  he  described  the  occurrence.]

Entry  for  April  13.

"  In  afternoon  went  over  to  my  aunt  M.'s,  had  a  long  talk  with  her,
told  her  and  J.  and  others  all  about  my  presentiment.  I  have  not  heard
from  poor  Bruce  yet."

Entry  for  April  14.

"  Up  early,  at  half -past  seven — expecting  a  letter.  The  letter  has
come,  as  I  expected — deep  black  edge  ;  but  it  is  not  his  father,  but  his
brother,  that  has  died,  poor  old  E.,  date  and  all,  on  Tuesday.  ...  I
wrote  to  him  this  morning.  I  will  not  tell  him  of  my  strange  meeting  of
Tuesday  morning  or  Monday  night.  .  .  .  Witnesses  to  this  strange
pre-knowledge  of  mine  :  Mrs.  R.,  my  housekeeper  ;  Mrs.  C,  my  aunt  ;  J.,
my  cousin  (Captain  C.) ;  other  cousins,  Mrs.  M.  and  Mr.  M.,  Mr.  H.  R.,
and  Mme.  G.  So  you  see  ^  I  am  not  without  my  authorities,  besides  my
written  journal."

Entry  for  April  15.

"  Wrote  a  long  letter  to  my  father,  giving  him  what  news  there  was,
and  telling  him  about  my  queer  experience."

The  following  is  a  copy,  made  by  the  present  writer,  of  a  letter  written
to  Mr.  Grant  by  Mr.  M.,  on  June  3,  1886  :—

"  We  distinctly  remember  your  telling  us  about  the  strange  circum-
stance that  took  place  before  ^  the  death  of  one  of  your  friends.  The
details  have  escaped  our  memory,  but  we  remember  that  it  was  a  case  of
premonition,  which  was  afterwards  verified.  "  C  W.  M."

The  date  of  death  appears  in  the  Times  obituary  as  April  10,  1882.
This  was  Monday,  not  Tuesday ;  and  probably  Mr.  Grant  assumed  that
the  day  on  which  his  friend  heard  of  the  death  was  the  day  of  the  death
itself.  The  death,  which  took  place  in  China,  can  only  have  fallen  within
12  hours  of  his  experience  if  it  occurred  in  the  few  hours  preceding
midnight.

Mr.  E.  T.  R.,  who  died,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Grant's,  but
not  so  intimate  as  his  brother  Bruce.

Entry  in  diary  for  Wednesday,  Dec.  10,  1879.  (Mr.  Grant  was  at
the  time  in  Southern  India.)

"  Yesterday  I  had  a  peculiar  sensation.  When  I  say  yesterday,  I
mean  last  night.  ...  I  have  as  it  were  an  inner  eye  opened.  I  had
a  sort  of  unconscious  feeling  that,  if  I  were  to  wish  it,  I  could  see  some
strange  visitant  in  the  chamber  with  me — someone  disembodied.      [Here

1  The  journal,  though  a  private  one,  is  in  many  parts  WTitten  as  if  addressed  to  an
imaginary  reader.

2  The  wording  of  this  letter,  and  Mr.  Grant's  expressions  above,  illustrate  what  I
have  more  than  once  remarked  on — the  common  tendency  to  describe  what  are  really
telepathic  impressions,  coinciding  with  or  closely  following  real  events,  as  prophetic  and
premonitory.     See  p.  535,  note,  and  p.  569.

VOL.    II,  2    Y


690  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

follow  some  words  of  description  which,  though  general  and  not  distinctive,
apply  perfectly  to  the  particular  person  who,  as  it  turned  out,  died  at
the  time,  and  would  have  applied  equally  naturally  to  only  a  small
group  of  persons.  Mr.  G-rant  has  what  appear  to  me  valid  reasons  for
withholding  the  clause  from  publication.]  I  forced  the  idea  from  me,  and
fell  into  a  troubled  sleep."

Entry  for  Dec.  11.

"  Went  in  afternoon  to  the  library  ;  thence  to  C.'s.  Hear  by  telegram,
while  there,  of  the  death  of  my  uncle,  Mr.  C,  on  Tuesday.  Wonder  if
that  had  anything  to  do  with  my  feelings  the  night  before  last."

We  find  in  the  obituary  of  a  leading  newspaper  that  the  death  took
place  on  Dec.  9,  1879.

Mr.  Grant  states  that  he  had  had  no  idea  that  anything  was  the  matter
with  his  uncle.

I  have  studied  in  Mr.  Grant's  diary  the  full  record  of  a  third  case,
Tvhich  was  even  more  remarkable  than  the  first,  as  it  included  the  peculi-
arity that,  for  some  time  after  his  first  impression,  he  felt  forcibly  impelled
to  draw  the  figure  of  the  person  who  died.  The  case  was  made  the  more
striking  to  me  by  the  fact  that  Mr.  Grant  was  so  certain  that  the  death
(the  time  of  which  he  had  only  very  vaguely  learnt)  must  have  coincided
in  date  with  his  impression,  that  he  had  actually  not  taken  the  trouble  to
verify  the  coincidence.  He  left  it  to  me  to  find  in  the  Times  obituary — as
he  confidently  foretold  that  I  would — that  the  death  (which  was  quite  unex-
pected) occurred,  thousands  of  miles  from  the  place  where  he  was,  on  the
day  preceding  that  on  which  the  entry  in  his  diary,  relating  his  impression
of  the  previous  night,  was  written.  The  impression  of  that  night  did  not,
however,  bear  distinct  reference  to  the  particular  person  who  died,  but  was
a  more  general  sense  of  calamity  in  the  family.  Certain  reasons  which
at  present  make  it  desirable  not  to  publish  the  details  of  this  case  may  in
time  cease  to  exist.

Mr.  Grant  writes,  on  May  31,  1886  :—

"  Except  on  these  three  occasions,  I  have  never,  to  the  best  of  my
recollection,  had  any  feeling  in  the  least  resembling  those  described."

To  pass  now  to  examples  where  the  senses  were  concerned — the
following  is  an  auditory  death-case  of  the  ordinary  type.  The
narrator  is  Mrs.  Evens,  mentioned  above  (pp.  176  and  344).

(693)  In  1885,  Mrs.  Evens  filled  up  a  census-form  (p.  7)  with  the  in-
formation that  about  September,  1858,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  night,  she
experienced  an  auditory  hallucination  representing  the  voice  of  a  "  most
intimate  and  deeply  attached  friend.  She  died  suddenly  that  night.  The
lady  was  French.  We  had  been  very  intimate,  and  she  had  frequently
mesmerised  me  for  neuralgia.  We  had  been  parted  for  more  than  a
year — she  in  France  and  I  in  England.  I  had  been  to  sleep,  but  woke
as  if  I  were  called.  I  sat  up,  saw  nothing,  but  heard  distinctly,  in  the
well-known  and  beloved  voice,  '  Adieu,  ma  cherie '  (her  name  for  me).


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  691

It  was  not  till  a  week  after  that  I  heard  of  her  sudden  and  quite  unex-
pected death  (she  not  having  been  ill)  on  that  night.  At  the  time,  I  had
no  feeling  of  surprise  or  fear.  I  may  mention  that  only  during  the  last
year  I  heard,  in  an  indirect  manner,  that,  under  the  pressure  of  great
horror,  she  was  supposed  to  have  committed  suicide."

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Evens  writes  : —

"  Oldbank,  Enniskillen.

"December,  1885.

"  I  was  staying  in  a  country  house,  but  not  with  (at  that  time)  very
intimate  freinds,  and  1  cannot  feel  sure  that  I  mentioned  the  circumstance.
I  shall  be  writing  to  one  of  them  soon,  and  will  ask  if  she  remembers  my
speaking  of  it  at  all.  The  recollection,  except  as  to  precise  date,  is  as
vivid  in  my  mind  as  ever — the  tone  of  the  voice,  as  of  one  not  stationary,
but  leaving  the  room  by  the  door,i  which  was  on  the  left  side  and  near  the
head  of  my  bed  ;  and  likewise  the  words,  distinctly  spoken.  I  left  France
in  1857,  and  my  friend  died  in  1858.  It  was  the  year  before  my  marriage,
and  I  was  then  a  girl  of  20.  I  had  no  terror,  or  even  surprise  ;  but
equally  little  when  I  heard  of  her  sudden  death,  which  I  seemed  to  have
foreknown.  As  to  the  hour,  I  gathered  that  it  must  have  been  tolerably
simultaneous  with  the  death.  We  did  not  go  to  our  rooms  till  11  ever  in
that  house.  I  had  the  sensation  of  being  awoke  out  of  my  first  sleep.
My  friend  was  found  dead  and  cold  (in  her  house  in  Alsace)  between  4
and  5  in  the  morning.  Having  led  a  wandering  life  since  my  marriage,  I
have  kept  no  letters  of  so  long  ago.  The  circumstances  of  the  loss  of  my
beloved  friend,  and  my  jirin  belief  in  her  desire  to  take  leave  of  me,  are
both  indelibly  impressed  on  my  memory.  I  wish,  for  the  sake  of  science,
my  details  were  more  satisfactory.

"  I  was  a  parlour  boarder  from  '55  to  '57  (inclusive)  at  the  Chateau
Giron,  then  a  large  and  well-known  school.  Mme.  H.  was  one  of  the
principals  ;  the  friendship  between  us  was  of  a  very  close  and  unusual
kind.  She  was  just  the  sort  of  woman  whose  '  will '  once  more  to  see  a
dear  friend  would  triumph  over  almost  any  difficulties,  as  I  always
believe  it  did.  a  Agnes  Evens."

In  reply  to  further  inquiries,  Mrs.  Evens  adds  : —

"  In  my  own  mind  I  always  associate  the  hearing  of  the  voice  with  a
Sunday  night.  You  will  say  this  is  unreliable,  and  so  it  is,  but  I  find
that  in  the  recollection  of  my  domestic  events,  births,  deaths,  &c.,  my
recollection  of  the  day  of  the  week,  with  its  associations,  is  more  reliable
than  that  of  the  date.

"  As  to  any  other  [auditory]  hallucinations,  the  only  one  I  can  remember
is  the  sound  of  music  unusual  in  character,  &c.,  but  it  took  place  when  I
was  worn  out  with  nursing  and  grief,  and  I  have  always  assigned  it  to  an
abnormal  condition  of  the  nervous  system,  associated  with  a  time  of
such  sorrow  that  I  can  hardly  bear  to  go  back  upon  it.

"  I  seemed  not  so  much  to  be  awoke  hy  the  voice  as  to  wake  to  hear
it.  I  had  no  doubt  as  to  whose  it  was  ;  it  produced  the  effect  of  a  passing,
not  stationary,  voice  ;  the  words,  distinctly  uttered,  were  '  adieu,  ma
cherie.'     I  heard  yesterday  from  the   friend  with  whom  I  was  staying  at

1  I  have  mentioned  (Vol.  i.,  p.  573)  how  frequently  visual  hallucinations,  alike  of  t
subjective  and  the  telepathic  class,  present  this  feature  of  movement.

VOL.  II.  2  V  2


692        CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERT lOF

the  time.  She  says,  '  We  both'  (herself  and  sister)  '  well  remember  about
your  friend  Mme  H.,  and  what  a  terrible  attack  of  neuralgia  you  had
just  at  the  time  when  she  died.'  I  had  forgotten  this  latter  circumstance.
It  would  account  in  some  measure  for  the  want  of  distinctness  in  my
recollections."

We  have  procured  from  the  Registrar  at  Rappoltsweiler  an  official
certificate  of  the  death,  which  states  that  it  occurred  at  2  p.m.,  on  Sept.  5th,
1858.  This  was  a  Sunday — which  confirms  Mrs.  Evens'  recollection.  The
death  must  have  preceded  her  experience  by  at  least  10  hours.

The  next  case,  also  auditory,  is  apparently  one  of  direct  repro-
duction of  the  agent's  sensation.  (See  cases  267-270.)  It  is  from
Mr.  J.  G,  F.  Russell,  of  Aden,  Aberdeenshire  (the  narrator  of
case  196).  The  agent  was  a  near  relative  who  had  been  making  a
long  stay  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Russell.

"  32,  Upper  Brook   Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  W.

"December  18th,  1885.

(694)  "  On  Wednesday,  December  2nd,  1885,  I  was  woke  up  at  night,
between  12  p.m.  and  2  a.m.  (as  far  as  I  can  recollect),  by  hearing  myself
distinctly  called  from  a  small  passage  outside  my  bedroom  door  ;  the  voice
seemed  to  come  from  just  outside  the  door  itself.  I  got  up,  fearing  Mrs.
Waller,  in  the  adjoining  room,  was  ill,  but,  as  the  calling  of  my  name  was
no  longer  repeated,  I  did  not  then  disturb  her.  (There  is  no  door  of
communication  between  the  rooms,  the  wall  is  solid,  and  a  gigantic
wardrobe  is  against  it.)  Next  morning  I  asked  her  if  she  had  called  me
during  the  night  ;  but  she  declared  she  had  slept  '  like  a  top,'  and  had
never  thought  of  me  or  anyone  else.  I  did  not  mention  the  incident  to
her  sister  (who  had  just  left  us  after  a  long  visit),  but  she  (Mrs.  Waller)
did,  on  returning  to  the  country.  I  enclose  what  Miss  Young  wrote  to
me,  solely  from  her  sister  mentioning  to  her  my  having  questioned  her.
The  dates  correspond  exactly  ;  it  was  the  first  night  of  Mrs.  W^aller's  visit.

"  J.  G.  F.  Russell."

The  following  is  the  extract  from  Miss  Young's  letter  to  Mr.  Russell  : —

"  I  will  tell  you  something  that  has  struck  me  rather.  The  two  nights
my  sister  was  with  you  in  London  were  very  disturbed  nights  to  me ;  you
were  continually  in  my  dreams,  and  one  of  those  nights  I  found  myself
sitting  up  in  bed,  having  woke  myself  up  by  calling  you  loudly  by  name.
When  she  came  back  she  told  me  you  had  asked  her  one  morning  whether
she  had  called  you  in  the  night,  as  you  had  distinctly  heard  your  name.
I  wish  I  could  remember  which  night  it  was.  I  have  an  impression  it  was
the  first.  u  Blanche  Young."

Mr.  Russell  (who  gave  me  the  account  viva  voce  on  December  16th,
a  fortnight  after  the  occurrence,)  has  explained  that  the  wall  between  his
room  and  the  next  is  so  thick  that  even  a  very  loud  cry  in  one  would  be
almost  inaudible  in  the  other.  He  has  never  had  such  a  hallucination
on  any  other  occasion.


IF  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  693

The  following  cases  are  visual.     The  first  is  from  Mr.  Teale,  of

50,  Hawley  Road,  Kentish  Town,  N.W.

"June,  1886.

(695)  "  In  1884,  my  son  Walter  was  serving  in  the  3rd.  King's  Royal
Rifles  Regiment,  in  the  Soudan.  The  last  we  had  heard  from  him  was  a
letter  informing  us  that  he  was  about  to  return  to  England,  which  he
expected  would  be  about  Christmas  time.  Things  were  in  this  position  on
the  24th  October,  1884,  when  on  returning  home  in  the  evening,  I  said,
(noticing  my  wife  looking  very  white,)  '  Whatever  is  the  matter  with
you  1 '  and  she  said  she  had  seen  Walter,  and  he  had  stooped  down  to  kiss
her,  but  owing  to  her  starting  he — like — was  gone,  so  she  did  not  receive
the  kiss.

"  After  that  we  had  a  letter  from  the  lady  nurse  at  Raraleh
Hospital  to  say  that  the  poor  boy  had  a  third  relapse  of  enteric  fever ;
they  thought  he  would  have  pulled  through,  but  he  had  been  taken,  and
when  we  had  that  letter,  it  was  a  week  after  he  died.  But  the  date  when
the  letter  was  written  corresponded  with  the  date  of  the  day  when  Walter
appeared,  which  was  on  the  24th  October,  1884.

[When  Mr.  Teale  used  these  words,  he  had  not  referred  to  the  letter,
and  was  under  the  impression  that  it  had  been  written  on  the  very  day
of  the  death,  which  (as  will  be  seen  below)  was  October  24.]

"  My  son  Frederick,  Selina,  and  Nelly  were  in  the  room,  but  none  of
them  saw  Walter ;  only  Fred  heard  his  mother  scream,  '  Oh  ! '  and  Fred
asked  her  what  was  the  matter.  I  thought,  having  heard  many  tales  of
this  kind,  I  would  set  it  down ;  so  I  put  the  date  on  a  slip  of  paper.  He
was  in  his  regimentals,  and  she  thought  he  had  come  on  furlough  to  take
her  by  surprise — knowing  the  back  way  ;  but  when  she  saw  he  was  gone,
and  the  door  not  open,  she  got  dreadfully  frightened.

"Feed.  J.  Teale."

Mrs.  Teale  herself  died  in  April,  1886,  after  an  illness  due  in  great
measure  to  the  shock  of  the  bereavement.

Mr.  Teale  has  shown  me  the  letters  which  were  received  during  August,
September  and  October,  1884,  respecting  his  son's  condition.  A  letter,
dated  August  20,  which  the  son  dictated  and  signed,  states  that  he  is  in
hospital,  down  with  enteric  fever.  The  next  letter,  dated  September  7,
which  was  similarly  dictated  and  signed,  states  that  he  has  had  a  very
serious  illness,  but  is  much  better,  and  hopes  soon  to  be  home.  The  next
letter,  dated  October  12,  from  Sister  Thomas,  states  that  he  had  had  a
bad  relapse  a  fortnight  previously,  but  "  is  getting  on  very  nicely  now."
This  was  the  last  letter  received  before  October  24.  In  a  letter  dated
October  52,  Lieutenant  W.  H.  Kennedy  states  that  the  death  had  taken
place  on  the  preceding  day ;  and  in  a  letter  dated  October  28,  Sister
Thomas  states  that  the  death  occurred  about  2  o'clock  p.m.,  on  Friday,
October  24.  This  date  has  been  confirmed  to  us  by  an  ofiicial  communica-
tion from  the  Depot  at  Winchester.

In  conversation,  Mr.  Teale  explained  to  me  that  his  wife's  experience
took  place  between  7  and  8  in  the  evening — which  would  be  between  7
and  8  hours  after  the  death.  She  was  at  the  time  sitting  at  the  table,
talking.     The  son  who  was  present  is  at  a  distance ;    but  Miss  Teale


694         CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION

showed  me  how  the  persons  in  the  room  were  placed,  and  described
to  me  how  she  saw  her  mother  start,  and  heard  her  exclamation.
Mr.  Teale  is  certain  that  his  wife  never  experienced  any  other  visual
hallucination  ;  and  he  says  that  she  was  of  anything  but  a  brooding  tem-
perament, and  was  not  at  the  time  anxious  about  her  son.  His  note  of
the  date  of  the  vision  was  on  the  back  of  an  envelope,  which  he  carried
in  his  pocket-book.  He  thought  that  this  envelope  was  lost ;  but  was
kind  enough,  at  my  request,  to  make  a  search,  which  brought  it  to  light.
The  envelope,  which  lies  before  me,  bears  his  address,  and  the  post-mark
London,  N.,  Feb.  22,  84 ;  the  pencil  note  on  the  back  of  it  is  24-10-84.

The    next    case   is    from    the    Erev.   R.    Markham    Hill,    of   St.

Catherine's,  Lincoln.

"June  17,   1886.

(696)  "  On  the  evening  of  Easter  Sunday,  about  8  or  9  years  ago,  I
think,  I  was  just  beginning  my  supper,  feeling  very  tired  after  the  day's
work,  when  I  saw  the  door  opening  behind  me.^  I  was  sitting  with  my
back  to  the  door,  but  could  just  see  it  over  my  shoulder.  I  may  also
have  heard  the  opening,  but  cannot  speak  with  certainty  upon  this  point.
I  turned  half  round,  and  just  had  time  to  see  the  figure  of  a  tall  man
rushing  hastily  into  the  room,  as  if  to  attack  me.  I  sprang  up  at  once,
turned  round,  and  threw  the  glass,  which  I  held  in  my  hand,  at  the  spot
where  I  had  seen  the  figure,  which  had  disappeared  in  the  act  of  my
rising.  The  disappearance  had,  however,  been  too  sudden  to  arrest  the
act  of  throwing.  I  then  realised  that  I  had  seen  an  apparition,  and  I
immediately  connected  it  with  one  of  my  uncles,  whom  I  knew  to  be
seriously  ill.  Moreover,  the  figure  which  I  saw  resembled  my  uncle  in
stature.  Mr.  Adcock  came  in,  and  found  me  quite  unnerved  by  the
occurrence ;  and  to  him  I  related  the  circumstances.  I  don't  remember
telling  him  that  I  connected  the  vision  with  my  uncle.  The  next  day  a
telegram  came  announcing  my  uncle's  death  on  the  Sunday.  My  father
was  summoned  to  my  uncle's  death-bed  unexpectedly,  on  the  Sunday
evening  as  he  was  sitting  at  supper,  and  the  death  must  have  coincided  in
time  with  what  I  saw.  u  ^    Maekham  Hill."

The  E,ev.  H.  Adcock,  of  Lincoln,  writes: —  u  j^j^g  \Q     1886

"  I  called  on  my  friend,  the  Rev.  Markham  Hill,  one  evening,  and
found  him  apparently  in  an  exhausted  condition  in  an  arm-chair ;  he  told
me,  before  I  could  ask  for  any  explanation,  that  he  had  just  seen  the  figure
of  his  uncle  standing  opposite  to  him  against  the  wall,  behind  a  piano ;  that
he  lifted  up  a  glass  from  the  table,  and  was  about  to  throw  it  at  him,  when
the  figure  vanished.  He  said  he  felt  convinced  that  he  should  very  shortly
hear  of  his  uncle's  death.  It  was  only  the  following  day,  or  the  day  after,
that  he  showed  me  a  letter  received  that  morning  informing  him  that  his
uncle  had  died  on  the  day  when  the  appearance  took  place."

In  conversation,  Mr.  Podmore  learnt  from  Mr.  Hill  that  he  was  alone
at  the  time.  He  has  had  no  other  visual  hallucination  in  his  life,  unless
it  were  an  experience  which  impressed  him  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as
this  one,  but  which  may  well  have  been  merely  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.

^  See  p.  612,  note.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  695

Mr.  Adcock  explained  that  the  above  incident  must  have  occurred
about  12  years  ago.,  He  cannot  remember  whether  it  was  a  Sunday-
evening.

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Mr.  Hill's  uncle  died  on
April  5,  1874,  which  was  Easter  Sunday.

[It  would  be  diificult  to  account  for  the  hallucination  here  as  due  to
anxiety  respecting  the  uncle's  condition.  If  a  person's  mind,  from  brooding
over  the  condition  of  a  sick  relative,  is  led  to  evolve  a  phantasm  of  that
relative,  we  should  certainly  expect  the  appearance  to  be  recognised  ;  and
we  should  not  expect  its  character  to  be  at  once  unfamiliar  and  formidable.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  two  accounts  difier  as  to  whether  the  glass  was
actually  thrown.]

The  next  example  belongs  to  the  "  borderland"  class.  It  is  one  of
the  cases  where  the  agent's  bond  of  connection  has  apparently  been
with  someone  who  was  in  the  percipient's  company  at  the  time  of  the
experience,  rather  than  with  the  actual  percipient.  {Cf.  Nos.  242  and
355.)  The  narrator  desires  that  his  name  may  not  appear,  as  the
family  of  the  agent,  whom  he  has  already  assisted  liberally,  might
base  on  the  incident  described  a  sentimental  claim  to  further  favours.

"June  12,  1886.
(697)  "  There  can  be  no   doubt  whatever  that  there  is  some  trans-
mission for  which  no  explanation  has  yet  been  given  by  the  savants.

"  I  am  a  practical  business  man,  and  look  upon  all  theories  of
Spiritualism,  tfec,  as  so  much  humbug  that  only  deludes  weak-minded
people.  But  at  the  same  time,  I  recently  had  an  experience  of  a  most
extraordinary  character,  which  I  should  scarcely  have  believed  if  related  to
me  of  anyone  else,  and  the  plain  facts  of  which  I  will  give  as  they  actually
occurred.

"  I  had  in  my  employ  a  clerk  who  contracted  an  illness  which
incapacitated  him  from  regular  attendance  at  his  duties.  He  was  absent
about  six  months  in  1884,  and,  on  leaving  the  hospital,  as  I  found  that  he
was  unable  to  resume  his  regular  work,  I  agreed  with  him  that  he  should
come  to  the  office  whenever  he  felt  able  to  do  so,  and  that  I  would  pay
him  for  the  work  so  done.  This  arrangement  continued  for  some  months  ;
then,  at  the  beginning  of  April,  1885,  he  had  to  stay  away  altogether  for
two  or  three  weeks.  He  seemed  in  fair  general  health,  but  he  was
troubled  with  a  diseased  ankle-joint,  which  prevented  him  from  getting
about.  I  was  in  no  anxiety  on  his  account,  however,  and  had  no
apprehension  of  any  serious  illness.  My  wife,  who  knew  Mr.  Z.  from
seeing  him  occasionally  at  my  private  house,  did  not  even  know  that  he
was  absent  from  the  office  at  this  time.

"  On  the  night  of  the  27th-28th  April,  I  was  wakened  by  my  wife
calling  out  convulsively,  '  There  is  someone  looking  at  you.'  Though  by
no  means  timid  as  a  rule — a  practical  woman,  not  subject  to  nervous
fancies  of  any  kind — she  was  much  disturbed  and  terrified.  She  jumped
out  of  bed,  and  turned  up  the  gas.  Finding  no  intruder  in  the  room,  and
all  the  doors  locked,  she  got  back  into  bed ;  but  she  was  shivering  all  over.


696         CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

and  it  was  some  time  before  I  succeeded,  in  quieting  her.  The  clock  in
the  hall  struck  1  during  this  disturbance.

"  In  the  morning  we  referred  to  the  incident,  and  I  told  my  wife  she
must  have  been  suffering  from  nightmare.

"  Later  on  that  day,  news  was  brought  to  my  office  that  poor  Z.  had
passed  away  in  the  night.  When  I  got  home  in  the  evening,  my  wife  met
me  as  usual  at  the  door,  and  I  said  to  her,  '  I  have  some  sad  news  to  tell
you.'  Before  I  could  say  more  she  replied,  '  I  know  what  it  is  ;  poor  Z.  is
dead.     It  was  his  face  which  I  saw  looking  at  you  last  night.'

"  I  afterwards  learnt,  from  a  man  who  lodged  in  Mrs.  Z.'s  house,  that
he  had  died  just  at  1  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  28th,  and  that  in  the
delirium  which  preceded  his  death,  he  called  upon  me  to  look  after  his
wife  and  children  when  he  was  gone."

Mrs.  B.,  the  percipient,  writes  : —

"  I  have  read  this  paper  through,  and  the  contents  correctly  describe
what  transpired.  I  was  awake,  when  I  saw  the  face.  I  have  never
experienced  any  similar  occurrence."

[The  last  sentence  is  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  had
experienced  a  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other  occasion.]

We  have  verified  in  the  Times  obituary  the  fact  that  Z.  died  on
April  28,  1885.

Mr.  Podmore  has  examined  the  clerk  whom  Mr.  B.  despatched  to  make
inquiries  of  the  widow  on  hearing  of  the  death, — i.e.,  on  the  afternoon  of
April  28 — and  who  has  since  heard  Mrs.  B.  narrate  her  experience.  So
far  as  he  could  recollect,  Mrs.  Z.  told  him  that  Z.  died  about  1.30  a.m.,
certainly  at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning.  He  did  not  remember  to  have
heard  anything  about  the  dying  words,  &c.

The  following  is  a  "  borderland  "  case  of  the  ordinary  type.  The
percipient,  Emma  Burger,  has  been  for  6  years  in  the  service  of  our
friend  and  colleague,  M.  Ch.  Richet,  and  has  his  most  complete  con-
fidence.    Mr.  Richet  writes  : —

"Mars,  1886.

(698)  "Emma  Burger,  agee  de  24  ans,  nee  aMalsch,  pres  de  Radstadt,
avait  ete  fiancee  a  Paris  avec  M.  Charles  Br.  Le  mariage  etait  convenu.
Emma  B.  partit  le  1  aout  a  Usrel  (Correze),  chez  Madame  d'U.,  ou  elle
etait  alors  en  service.  La  sante  de  M.  Charles  Br.  etait  bonne,  ou  du
moins  il  avait  toutes  les  apparences  de  la  sant^.  En  tout  cas  le  mariage
^tait  decide,  et  Emma  B.  n'avait  aucune  inquietude  sur  I'etat  de  la  sante
de  son  fianc^.

"  Quelques  jours  apres  son  arrivee  a  Usrel,  le  7  ou  8  aout,  Emma  B.
regut  une  lettre  de  Charles,  lui  apprenant  que  pour  affaires  de  famille  il
quittait  Paris,  et  allait  passer  quelques  jours  dans  les  Ardennes.

"  Le  15  aout,  jour  de  la  fete  de  Sainte  Yierge,  Emma  B.,  quoique
n'^tant  pas  devote,  se  sentit  prise  d'une  grande  tristesse  et  pleura  abon-
damment  au  pelerinage  qui  avait  lieu  alors  a  Usrel.

"  Le  soir  de  ce  meme  jour,  15  aout,  E.  couchait  comme  d'habitude
dans  un  cabinet  de  toilette  contigu  a  la  chambre  de  Madame  d'U.  A
cotd  de  son  lit  etait  la  petite  porte  d'un  escalier  de  service,  porte  masquee
par  le  rideau  du  lit,  de  sorte  qu'une  personne  qui  etait  dans  de  lit  devait  se


.  IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  697

lever  et  ecarter  le  rideau  du  bas  du  lit  pour  voir  qui  entrait  par  I'escalier.
"Voici  le  recit  que  m'a  fait  E.

"  '  Vers  onze  heures  et  demie  du  soir  je  venais  de  me  mettre  au  lit ;  les
domestiques  n'etaient  pas  encore  couches  tous,  parcequ'on  entendait  encore
du  bruit  dans  la  maison.  Madame  d'U.  etait  couchee  dans  la  chambre
voisine,  dont  la  porte  de  communication  etait  ouverte.  J'ai  alors  entendu
un  leger  bruit,  comme  si  la  porte  du  petit  escalier  s'ouvrait.  Je  me  suis
mise  a  genoux  sur  mon  lit  pour  soulever  le  rideau  et  prevenir  la  personne
qui  entrait  que  Madame  d'lJ.  etant  couchee,  il  ne  fallait  pas  faire  de  bruit,
ni  passer  par  sa  chambre.  C'est  alors  que  j'ai  apergu  distinctement  la
personne  de  Charles  Br.  II  etait  debout,  son  chapeau  et  sa  canne  a  la
main  droite,  de  la  main  gauche  tenant  la  porte  entr'ouverte,  et  restant
dans  I'entrebaillement  de  la  porte.  II  avait  un  costume  de  voyage — son
costume  habituel.  II  y  avait  une  veilleuse  dans  la  chambre,  mais  j'etais
tellement  surprise  que  je  ne  me  suis  pas  demande  si  la  clart^  de  la  veilleuse
suffisait  pour  expliquer  I'extreme  nettete  avec  laquelle  j'ai  apergu  tous  ses
traits,  sa  physionomie,  et  le  detail  de  son  costume.  II  avait  une  figure
souriante,  et  il  m'a  regardee  sans  rien  dire,  en  s'arretant  dans  la  porte.
Alors  je  lui  ai  dit  avec  severite,  ne  pouvant,  quel  que  invraisemblable
que  fut  son  arrivee  soudaine  a  Usrel,  pas  supposer  que  ce  ne  fut  pas
Charles  Br.  lui-meme,  "  Mais  que  venez-vous  faire  ici  1  Madame  d'U.  est
la.  Partez  !  partez  done  !  "  Puis,  comme  il  ne  disait  rien,  j'ai  repris  de
nouveau,  "  Qu'est-ce  que  vous  me  voulez  ?  Partez,  partez  done  !  "  Alors  il
m'a  repondu,  en  souriant  et  avec  une  grande  tranquillite,  "  Je  viens  vous
faire  mes  adieux ;  je  pars  en  voyage.  Adieu  !  "  C'est  a  ce  moment  que
Madame  d'U.,  qui  dtait  dans  la  chambre  voisine,  et  qui,  n'dtant  pas
endormie  encore,  lisait  dans  son  lit,  m'ayant  entendu  parler  tout  haut,  me
dit,  "  Mais  qu'avez-vous  done,  E.  ?  vous  revez  !  "  Mais  moi,  au  lieu  de  lui
repondre,  croyant  toujours  que  Charles  Br.  etait  reellement  devant  moi,  je
lui  dis,  et  cette  fois  a  voix  plus  basse,  "  Mais  partez  done,  partez  done."  Et
alors  il  disparut,  non  pas  subitement  mais  comme  quelqu'un  qui  ferme  une
porte  et  qui  s'en  va.^  C'est  alors  seulement  que,  sur  une  nouvelle  demande
plus  pressante  de  Madame  d'U.,  je  lui  repondis,  "  Mais  oui,  madame,
j'ai  eu  un  cauchemar."

"  '  J'etais  parfaitement  eveillee,  puisque  je  ne  m'etais  pas  endormie,  et
que  je  venais  a  peine  de  me  coucher.  Je  pensai  alors,  restant  encore
quelque  temps  eveillee,  que  Charles  Br.  etait  venu  me  surprendre,  et  je  me
mis  a  regretter  de  ne  pas  lui  avoir  demande  ou  il  allait  en  voyage.  Mais
je  ne  m'en  preoccupai  pas  outre  mesure,  et  au  bout  d'un  certain  temps  je
m'endormis  tres  tranquillement,  sans  supposer  le  moins  du  monde  qu'il  ne
s'agissait  pas  de  la  presence  formelle,  en  chair  et  en  os,  de  Charles  Br.  a  la
porte  de  ma  chambre.

"  '  Le  lendemain  matin  je  fus  fort  etonnee  de  ne  pas  entendre  parler  de
Charles  Br.  Je  crus  qu'on  jouait  avec  moi  une  sorte  de  comedie ;  enfin  je
me  decidai  a  demander  si  on  n'avait  pas  fait  venir  quelqu'un  dans  ma
chambre.  On  m'assura  que  non  ;  on  me  plaisanta  de  mes  reves,  et  je  fijiis
par  croire  que  j'avais   rev^,   ou  plutot,  par  une  sorte  d'inconsequence,  je

1  This  way  of  describing  the  sense  of  a  door  closing  is  of  interest,  suggesting  a  vaguer
form  of  what  in  other  cases  has  appeared  as  a  distinct  part  of  the  hallucination.  See
p.  612,  note ;  and  compare  case  696.


698  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

n'arretai  pas  ma  pensee  sur  les  invraisemblances  accumulees  de  cette  visite.
Je  saurai  bien  la  verite,  me  disais-je,  quand  il  ecrira.

"  '  Le  lendemain,  18  aout,  vers  neu£  heures  du  matin,  je  regus  la  lettre
suivante  : —

'""Mademoiselle, — Monsieur  C.  vient  de  recevoir  par  depeche  tele-
graphique  la  nouvelle  de  la  mort  de  M.  Charles  Br.  II  estmort  le  16  du
courant.     Nous  nous  joignons  a  vous  pour  le  regretter.

"  '  "  Perrin,  Concierge.

"  '"  26,  Rue  Marignan,  Paris.
'"  "le  18  aout."'i

[M.  Richet  has  seen  and  transcribed  this  letter.]

"'On  jugera  de  ma  stupeur  quand  je  regus  cette  lettre.  Depuis  j'ai
appris  que  Charles  Br.  etait  mort  dans  la  nuit  du  15  au  16  aout,  d'une
maladie  du  coeur  que  tout  le  monde  ignorait,  et  qui  ne  s'^tait  anterieure-
ment  traduite  par  aucun  symptome.' "

We  have  made  repeated  and  urgent  applications  to  the  Maire  of  the
commune  where  the  death  occurred,  for  a  copy  of  the  Acte  de  Deces,  but
have  received  no  reply.

The  Vicomtesse  d'Ussel  wrote  to  us  on  April  1,  1886,  that  Emma
Burger  was  in  her  service  in  the  summer  of  1875,  at  Correze,  and  slept  in
a  room  adjoining  her  own ;  but  she  does  not  remember  hearing  of  the
incident.  She  remembers  noticing,  however,  towards  the  end  of  the
stay,  that  Emma  Burger  was  in  distress,  and  learning  afterwards  that  this
was  due  to  the  death  of  some  one  about  whom  Emma  had  never  told  her.

The  percipient  has  had  in  her  life  two  hallucinations  representing  a
person  whom  she  knew  to  be  dead.  But  the  first  of  these  did  not  occur
till  9  years  after  the  incident  above  described ;  and  they  can  scarcely
therefore  be  regarded  as  diminishing  the  force  of  the  coincidence.

The  following  is  a  copy  made  by  M.  Richet  of  a  letter  written  to
Emma  Burger  by  a  friend,  Madame  Aurousseaux,  who  heard  from  her  of
the  vision  before  the  news  of  the  death  arrived.

"  Vous  me  demandez  si  je  me  souviens  de  votre  reve.  Je  m'en  souviens
comme  si  c'etait  d'aujourd'hui.  Je  me  rappelle  parfaitement  de  notre
pelerinage  a  la  Vierge,  et  de  tout  ce  que  vous  m'avez  raconte  au  sujet  de
votre  reve,  et  aussi  de  votre  fiance."

On  May  13,  1886,  M.  Richet  writes  :—

"  Pour  ce  qui  concerne  le  cas  de  Charles  Br.  je  puis  vous  donner
d'interessants  details.  J'ai  pu  faire  venir  chez  moi  la  personne  qui  a  eu
la  confidence  de  Emma  Burger  avant  que  la  mort  de  Charles  Br.  soit
connue,  et  voici  ce  qu'elle  m'a  raconte.  'Le  15  aout,  jour  de  la  fete  de  la
Vierge,  Emma  n'dtait  pas  comme  d'ordinaire.  Elle  etait  triste  et
cherchait  a  s'egayer ;  elle  etait  a  peu  pres  comme  foUe  ce  jour-la.  Le  soir
il  y  a  eu  un  grand  diner,  mais,  comme  Emma  etait  la  bonne  d'un  enfant,
elle  a  dine  dans  la  chambre  de  I'enfant  avec  moi,  qui  etais  alors  nourrice.
Puis,  vers  dix  heures  nous  nous  sommes  couchees,  chacune  dans  notre
chambre,  mon  nourisson  dormant  avec  moi  dans  ma  chambre,  Emma
couchant  seule  dans  une  petite  chambre  contigue  a  la  grande  chambre  de
Madame   d'U.     Le   lendemain   matin,   elle  a  dit  a  Jeanne,  la  femme-de-

^  II  y  a  une  erreur ;  c'est  le  17  aolit  que  la  lettre  a  ^t^  Verite.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  699

chambre  de  la  Comtesse  d'U.,  "  Vous  m'avez  done  envoye  quelqu'un  cette
nuit."  Jeanne  s'est  mise  a  rire,  et  alors  Emma  m'a  raconte  qu'elle  avait
fait  un  reve  tres  heureux,  qu'elle  avait  vu  son  fiance  dans  sa  chambre,  puis
quand  elle  s'est  reveille  qu'elle  s'est  sentie  tres  triste,  et  qu'elle  n'a  pu
dormir  le  reste  de  la  nuit.  Alors  je  lui  ai  dit,  "  Taisez-vous  done,  vous
etes  foUe,"  et  nous  nous  sommes  toutes  moquees  d'elle.  Mais  elle  dit,
"  Je  suis  sur  que  c'est  lui  qui  est  venu,et  on  ne  m'otera  pas  de  I'idee  que  c'est
vrai.  Vous  pouvez  vous  moquer  de  moi,  mais  je  crois  bien  que  c'est  vrai."  '
"  '  Jeanne  Aurousseaux,  a  Tragny,  Nievre.'

"  P.S. — Je  viens  de  montrer  a  Emma  Burger  la  lettre  que  je  vous
ecris,  car  j'ai  interroge  Aurousseaux  hors  la  presence  d'Emma.  Elle
I'approuve  completement,  mais  dit  seulement  qu'au  lieu  de  se  croire
heureuse  elle  etait  tres  ennuy^e,  sans  etre  inquiete,  et  que  e'etait  par  suite
des  moqueries  dont  on  I'avait  assaillie  qu'elle  avait  repondu,  '  Eh  bien  oui  !
j'^tais  tres  contente  de  voir  mon  fiance.'  "

The  following  is  a  collective  case.     It  will  be  seen  that  we  have

no   proof  that  the  second  witness  independently  recognised  the  figure  ;

at  the    same    time,  the   way   in  which  the   figure    disappeared,    if

correctly    remembered,    tells    strongly    against    the    hypothesis    of

mistaken  identity.     The  narrator  is  Mr.  Amos  Beardsley,  M.R.C.S.,  of

Grange-over-Sands,   Lancashire.     He  had  sent  us  a  shorter  account

in  1883.

"June  28th,  1886.

(699)  "From  1845  to  '50  I  lived  between  the  villages  of  H and

L ,  in  Derbyshire.     The  landlord  of  the  chief  hotel  in  L had  a

farm  just  opposite  my  house,  from  which  I  used  to  get  my  supplies  of
milk  and  other  dairy  produce.  I  had  also  been  called  in  on  one  occasion
to  attend  his  wife  in  illness.  One  evening,  probably  in  August  or
September,  I  had  been  out  with  my  boy,  John  Howitt — a  connection  of
the  poet,  William  Howitt — hunting  for  moths,  and  was  returning  home
about  9  p.m.,  as  far  as  I  can  remember.  We  had  just  passed  a  railway
cutting  which  crossed  the  road,  or  rather  which  was  intended  to  cross  the
road;  for  the  cutting — 16  or  20  feet  deep — had  been  brought  within  a
few  yards  of  the  roadway  on  either  side,  but  had  not  yet  been  carried
through  it.  Just  after  passing  this  part  I  turned  round,  and  saw,  as  I
thought,  E.,  the  owner  of  the  farm  referred  to,  crossing  the  road — having
apparently  just  come  in  by  a  footpath  on  the  right — in  the  direction  of  a
corresponding  footpath  a  little  lower  down  on  the  left.  I  had  noticed  that
the  cutting  had  been  carried  right  through  the  footpath,  so  that  passengers
would  have  to  make  a  detour,  and  thinking  that  E.  was  probably  not
aware  of  this,  and  might  run  some  risk  of  falling  down  the  embankment,
I  sent  the  lad  after  him,  to  warn  him  of  the  danger.  The  lad  ran  ofi"  at
once  ;  the  distance  was  not  more  than  100  yards  or  so;  but  when  he  got
to  the  stile,  the  man  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  He  could  not  have  got  clear
away  in  that  short  interval ;  but  we  searched  the  cutting  to  see  if  he  had
by  any  ill-chance  fallen  down  there.  There  was  nothing  to  be  seen  ;  and
after  spending  about  half  an  hour  in  a  fruitless  search,  we  returned  home.


700  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

Next  morning,  Howitt  came  to  me  with  a  scared  face  to  tell  me  that  E.
had  fallen  down  dead  the  night  before,  about  9  p.m.,  just  after  he  had
offered  to  make  a  blasphemous  wager.

"  That  is  all  the  story.  I  could  not,  and  did  not,  for  a  moment  doubt
my  recognition  of  E.'s  figure.  My  eyesight  is  good,  and  I  think  it  hardly
possible  that  I  could  have  been  mistaken.  Why  the  apparition  should
have  come  to  me  I  cannot  say,  unless,  perhaps,  the  dying  man's  thoughts
turned  instinctively  towards  me  as  a  doctor.  I  have  never  had  any  hallu-
cination of  the  senses, — unless  this  apparition  was  one."

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  E.  was  found  dead  in  his
bed,  from  heart-disease,  on  July  25,  1847.  Dr.  Beardsley  does  not  prof  ess
to  have  gathered  the  circumstances  of  his  death  from  eye-witnesses  ;  and
the  imagination  of  neighbours  would  be  likely  to  exaggerate  the  suddenness
with  which  the  supposed  punishment  followed  on  the  transgression.

Mr.  Podmore  has  questioned  Mr.  John  Howitt,  now  butler  at  the  Ship-
Building  Yard  Board  Rooms,  Barrow.  He  has  no  real  independent  memory
of  the  incident,  though  when  Mr.  Podmore  repeated  Dr.  Beardsley's
account,  he  said,  "  Now  you  seem  to  bring  it  all  back  to  me."  He  was
only  14  at  the  time.

Dreams,  as  has  been  so  often  pointed  out,  being  a  specially  weak
class  of  evidence,  it  was  not  my  intention  to  give  any  further
specimens  in  this  chapter ;  but  at  the  last  moment  some  records  have
been  received  which  claim  admittance.  The  force  of  cases  where  a
dream  exactly  reproduces  the  thoughts  of  a  person  in  the  dreamer's
vicinity  is  so  much  increased  by  their  multiplication  in  the  experience
of  the  same  two  persons,  that  the  following  additional  instance,  from  the
narrators  of  case  90,  needs  no  apology.  Mrs.  Fielding  writes : —
"  Yarling^on  Rectory,  Bath,  19th  May,  1886.
(700)  "  I  sleep  badly,  and  on  Monday  night  it  was  2  o'clock  when  I
slept.  I  had,  for  half-an-hour  before  going  off,  fixed  my  mind  upon  every
turn  and  corner  of  my  girlhood's  home  (where  I  have  not  been  for  above  20
years)  in  Scotland.  My  father,  a  squire,  had  a  neighbour  squire,  called
Harvey  Brown.  In  my  whiling  away  the  night,  I  dwelt  upon  him,  and  his
house  and  family,  particularly.  My  husband  knew  him  only  by  name,
but  of  course,  knew  my  home,  and  loves  it  as  much  as  I  do.  He  and  I
awoke  at  6.  Before  a  word  of  any  kind  was  said,  he  said  to  me,  '  I  have
had  such  a  strange  dream  about  Harvey  Brown,  and  been  at  the  old  home,
wandering  about  it.'  What  made  it  seem  stranger  is  that  Harvey  Brown
is  a  man  we  never  spoke  of  in  our  lives,  or  for  20  years  have  ever  thought
of,  till  Monday  night  in  idleness  I  went  over  old  meetings  with  him  ;  and
I  was  wide  awake  and  my  husband  asleep  ;  he  had  slept  heavily  all  the
night  after  a  1 2  mile  walk ;  so  there  was  no  possibility  of  my  leading  his
mind  near  Scotland,  in  any  conversation  even,  before  he  slept.

"  Jean  Eleanora  Fielding.
"J.  M.  Fielding."

The  chief  interest  of  the  next  case  depends  on  the  repetition  of  the
dream.  I  have  implied  (Vol.  I.,  p.  358,  note)  that  distinct  repetition  on


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  701

several  successive  nights,  though  by  no  means  unexampled,  is  very
decidedly  rare,  in  dreams  of  purely  subjective  origin  ;  and  the  repeti-
tion in  a  case  of  telepathic  origin  may  fairly  be  taken  as  an  indication
of  that  special  intensity  which  is  shown  also  in  other  ways — notably
often  by  the  exceptional  sense  of  reality  surviving  into  waking  hours
(see  case  482).  I  do  not,  however,  number  the  account,  as  the  close-
ness of  the  coincidence  cannot  be  completely  determined.  The
narrator  is  Dr.  Gibert,  the  leading  physician  at  Havre,  who  was
concerned  in  case  688.

"  Rue  Sery,  le  Havre.

"  19  Mai,  1886.

"La  scene  se  passait  en  1849,  au  printemps.  Un  vieillard  age  de
84  ans,  du  nom  de  Borel,  grand-oncle  de  ma  mere,  demeurant  pres  Geneve,
au  petit  Sacconex,  vint  un  samedi  dejeuner  a  la  maison.  Nous  demeurions
a  la  Monnaie,  campagne  aux  portes  de  Geneve,  a  une  distance  de
4  kilometres  de  la  demeure  du  vieillard.  II  etait  parfaitement  portant.
Deux  jours  apres  sa  visite,  dans  la  nuit  de  dimanche  au  lundi,  a  deux
heures  du  matin,  au  milieu  de  son  sommeil,  ma  mere  se  reveille  en  criant,
'  L'oncle  est  mort ;  je  le  vois  a  terre,  les  bras  etendus  ! '  Mon  pere  chercha
a  la  rassurer,  mais  la  nuit  fut  sans  sommeil.

"  Le  lundi,  mon  pere  nous  raconta  le  reve  de  ma  mere,  et  nous  en
rimes,  lui  disant  que  si  l'oncle  etait  mort  on  serait  venir  nous  prevenir.
Dans  la  nuit  de  lundi  au  mardi,  a  la  meme  heure,  nouveau  reveil  de  ma
mere,  qui  crie  de  meme,  '  L'oncle  est  mort ! '  Enfin,  dans  la  nuit  de  mardi
au  mercredi,  meme  scene.

"  Le  mercredi,  mon  pere,  qui  ^tait  juge  de  paix,  me  pria  de  I'accom-
pagner  au  petit  Sacconex,  aiin  de  convaincre  ma  mere  que  son  reve,  repete
trois  fois,  n'etait  qu'un  reve.  A  peine  arrive  a  la  demeure  de  nom  oncle,
on  nous  dit  que  le  vieillard  n'avait  pas  paru  depuis  trois  jours.  La  petite
maison  isolee  etait  close  de  toutes  parts.  Mon  pere  fit  sauter  un  volet,  et
nous  vimes  dans  la  cuisine  le  vieillard  etendu.  Nous  penetrames  par
I'ecurie,  et  j'allais  relever  le  malheureux,  qui  etait  mort,  la  tete  dans  le
foyer,  face  contre  terre,  les  bras  Etendus,  quand  mon  pere  me  fit  remarquer
que  le  crane  etait  fracasse.  II  avait  ete  assassine.  L'assassin  fut  pris,
condamne  a  mort,  et  execute.  II  avoua  tout  apres  sa  condamnation.  II
avait  tue  le  vieillard  le  dimanche,  entre  midi  et  une  heure.  Le  reve  de
ma  mere  avait  done  eu  lieu  douze  ou  treize  heures  apres  le  crime.

"  Dr.  Gibert."

We  have  procured  from  the  Departement  de  Justice  et  Police,  at
Geneva,  a  copy  of  the  Proces-verbal  made  by  the  ofiicial  who  inspected
the  scene  of  the  crime  immediately  after  the  murder  was  discovered,  and
who  received  on  the  spot  the  evidence  of  M.  Gibert  j>jere.  This  document
completely  confirms  Dr.  Gibert's  account  of  the  murder,  and  of  the  dis-
covery of  the  body  lying  face  downwards  on  the  hearth — the  arms
however,  not  "  etendus,"  but  "raccourcis  sous  I'estomac  ";  but  it  shows
that  his  recollection  is  not  correct  as  to  dates  and  days.  The  murder
was  discovered  about  6  p.m.  on  Thursday,  November  9,  1848;  and  M.
Gibert  pere  stated  that  he  had  made  the  visit  to  the  house,  which  led  to


702        GASES  TOO  LATE  FOR  INSERTION

the  discovery,  on  hearing  that  his  uncle  had  not  been  seen  by  the  neigh-
bours since  the  Tuesday  evening.  It  seems  probable  therefore  that  the
murder  was  committed  on  the  Tuesday  night.  ^  It  may  fairly  be  supposed
that  Dr.  Gibert  is  at  least  as  likely  to  be  right  in  his  statement  that  the
dreams  fell  on  the  nights  immediately  preceding  the  discovery,  as  in  his
statement  of  the  particular  days  of  the  week  on  which  they  fell — since  his
recollection  of  the  days  of  the  week  is  connected  with  his  recollection,
proved  incorrect,  as  to  the  day  on  which  the  murder  fell ;  and  this
hypothesis  is  somewhat  favoured  by  his  recollection  that  there  was  an  in-
terval of  more  than  a  day  between  the  last  visit  of  M.  Borel  to  the
Giberts'  house  and  the  first  dream.  It  is  not  improbable,  therefore,
that  one  of  the  dreams  very  closely  coincided  with  the  murder.  But
after  this  dream  there  would  be  room  for  only  a  single  repetition — on
the  Wednesday  night.

The  next  two  cases  illustrate  the  point  so  often  emphasised — the
psychological  identity  of  dreams  and  waking  phantasms — in  a  rare
and  interesting  way ;  a  telepathic  impression  taking  effect  first
as  a  dream,  and  afterwards  as  a  hallucination.  In  the  first  of  the
two  cases  there  was  an  interval  of  a  good  many  hours  between  the
two  experiences.^  In  the  second  case,  the  visual  hallucination  was
apparently  a  prolongation  of  the  dream-image  into  waking  moments
(see  Vol.  I.,  pp.  390-1) ;  but  the  waking  experience  included  a
further  feature — a  hallucination  of  hearing.

The  following  account  was  obtained  through    the    kindness    of

Mrs.  Walwyn,  of  9,   Sion  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol,  who  has  known  the

narrator  from  a  boy.

"February  24th,  1886.

(701)  "'I  dreamed  that  Maggie,  my  sister-in-law,  had  been  taken
seriously  ill.  The  next  evening,  when  I  went  into  the  dining-room  to  have
my  usual  smoke  previous  to  going  to  bed,  just  after  I  entered  the  room,
Maggie  suddenly  appeared,  dressed  in  white,  with  a  most  heavenly
expression  on  her  face.  She  fixed  her  eyes  on  me,  walked  round  the
room,  and  disappeared  through  the  door  which  leads  into  the  garden.  I
felt  I  could  not  speak  ;  but  followed  her.  On  opening  the  door  and
outside  shutter  nothing  was  to  be  seen.     I  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this.

'"H.  E.  M.'"

Mr.  M.'s  mother  writes  to  Mrs.  Walwyn  : —

"  H.  and  his  wife  were  in  England  in  the  autumn,  and  returned  on  the
9th  November.  They  had  been  visiting  the  parents  in  L. — General  and
Mrs.  R.  They  left  the  next  younger  sister  apparently  in  her  usual  health.
On  Friday,  the  20th,  she  was  at  the  theatre  with  friends.     At  1  a.m.  she

1  If,  as  Dr.  Gibert  says,  the  murderer  made  a  full  confession,  it  is  probable  that  some
record  of  the  hour  of  the  murder  exists.  But  we  cannot  obtain  any  information  as  to
such  a  confession,  either  from  official  sources  or  from  the  leading  Geneva  newspaper  ;  and
the  Secretary  of  the  Departement  de  Justice  tells  us  that  the  man  always  persisted  in  his
denial,  and  that  the  hour  remained  doubtful.  He  adds,  "  On  a  suppost^  que  c'etaitle  soir."

-  Compare  case  659  ;  and  also  case  283,  where  the  hallucination  preceded  the  dream.
For  cases  where  a  hallucination  has  been  itself  repeated  after  an  interval,  see  p.  237,  note.


IN  THEIR  PROPER  PLACES.  703

was  seized  with  violent  internal  pains  ;  these  continued  all  day,  but  no
danger  was  apprehended  till  4.45  p.m.,  when  she  became  insensible,  and
at  5.15  all  was  over.  The  cause  of  death,  'perforation  of  the  stomach.'
On  the  Saturday  night  H.  dreamt  that  Maggie  had  been  taken  dangerously
ill ;  the  next  evening  when  he  went  into  the  dining-room  as  usual  to
have  his  smoke  previous  to  going  to  bed,  just  after  he  entered  the
room  Maggie  suddenly  appeared  to  him.  [Mrs.  M.'s  description  of  the
appearance  exactly  coincides  with  her  son's  account.]

"  He  told  me  in  the  morning  what  had  happened.  I  tried  to  persuade
him  it  was  only  an  optical  delusion,  but  he  knew  better.  Why  the
apparition  should  have  come  to  H.  is  most  extraordinary,  for  he  was  not
in  the  least  superstitious,  nervous,  or  fanciful.  The  only  way  we  can
account  for  it  is  that  the  telegram  which  the  G-eneral  sent  off  on  Sunday
never  reached  us,  and  it  was  actually  Wednesday,  the  day  of  the  funeral,
before  we  heard  the  sad  news,  and  she  might  have  known  this  and  come
to  tell  us  that  she  was  gone.  "  R.  L.  M."

We  find  from  an  obituary  in  the  Leamington  News  that  Miss  R.  died
on  21st  November,  1885,  and  that  she  "remained  perfectly  conscious
until  5  o'clock,  when  she  suddenly  collapsed  and  died  in  a  quarter  of  an
hour."

The  final  case  is  from  Mr.  M.  S.  Griffin,  of  San  Remo,  Wey-
mouth.

"May,  1886.

(702)  "  I  have  been  requested  to  give  an  account  of  an  odd  coincidence
which  occurred  some  three  years  since.  (I  am  no  believer  in  spirits,  and
believe  the  following  was  the  result  of  illness.)  I  was  in  the  tropics,  and,  at
the  time  I  mention,  laid  up  with  fever,  when  one  night  I  had  a  dream  about
an  old  lady  friend  of  mine.  I  woke  up  suddenly,  and  thought  I  saw  her
at  the  foot  of  my  bed,  and  the  strange  part  was  I  thought  I  heard  her
speak.  She  seemed  to  be  dressed  in  white.  I  told  this  to  a  friend,  who
only  laughed  at  me  and  said  I  was  ill,  but  at  the  same  time,  he  put  down
the  date  and  hour.  A  few  mails  after,  I  heard  of  the  old  lady's  death,  at
the  same  date  and  hour.  I  have  no  belief  in  spirits  whatever,  but  this
was  a  fact."

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Griffin  supplied  the  following  fuller
account.

"June  15,  1886.

"At  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  June,  1882,  I  had  been  in  Jamaica
for  about  18  months.  I  had  been  ill  with  country  fever,  but  was
convalescent,  though  still  very  weak.  I  was  sleeping  in  a  room  next  that
of  a  friend,  with  the  door  open  between.  I  had  a  dream,  in  which  my
mind  went  back  to  old  times  when  I  had  seen  much  of  the  lady
I  mentioned;  and  then  I  became  aware  that  she  was  dead,  in
a  room  which  seemed  to  be  near  me,  and  that  I  wanted  to  get  to  her  \
and  as  this  thought  flashed  across  me,  I  seemed  to  see  her.  Then  I  woke
with  a  sudden  start,  and  distinctly  saw  her  standing  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,
dressed  in  white,  and  with  the  hands  by  her  side.  The  face  was  extremely
distinct,  and  quite  unmistakeable.  Had  a  real  person  been  standing  in
that  place,  I  certainly  could  not  have  distinguished  the  features,  as  it  was


704  CASES  TOO  LATE  FOB  INSERTION

a  dark  night.^  The  figure  plainly  pronounced  my  name,  '  Marcus,'  once,
and  then  gradually  disappeared  as  I  watched  it.  It  remained  visible  a
sufficient  number  of  seconds  for  me  to  be  keenly  aware  that  I  was  awake  ;
I  felt  quite  clearly,  the  former  experience  was  a  dream,  then  I  woke,  and
now  this  is  a  waking  reality.  After  the  disappearance,  I  called  out,  and
my  friend  came  in.  I  described  the  whole  experience  to  him,  and  he
was  sufficiently  impressed  with  it  to  notice  the  time — which  was  a  few
minutes  past  midnight,  June  11th — and  to  note  the  occurrence  at  once  in  his
diary.  The  next  morning  he  and  others  laughed  at  the  matter,  but  could
not  but  be  impressed  by  its  reality  to  me.

"About  three  weeks  afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  daughter  of
my  friend,  informing  me  of  her  mother's  death  in  England,  on  June  11th,
soon  after  5  a.m.  My  friend  and  I  calculated  the  difference  of  longitude,
and  the  hours  corresponded  to  within  a  few  minutes.  I  had  no  idea  of
the  lady's  being  ill,  and  had  neither  been  anxious  about  her  nor  thinking
about  her.  In  conversation  with  the  family,  two  years  later,  they  told  me
that  a  few  minutes  before  her  death  she  said,  '  Tell  Marcus  I  thought  of
him.'  I  may  mention  that  this  lady  had,  three  years  before,  nursed  me
through  a  dangerous  illness ;  and  I  had  a  warm  affection  for  her.

"  I  do  not  recollect  on  any  other  occasion  in  my  life  experiencing
the  continuation  of  a  dream-image  into  waking  moments ;  nor  have  I  ever
had  a  hallucination  either  of  sight  or  hearing.

"Marcus  Southwell  Griffin."

Mr.  Griffin  kindly  allowed  me  to  copy  the  following  sentence  from  the
letter  which  announced  the  death  : —

"  Alphington.

"June  17,  1882.

"  Mother  died  on  St.  Barnabas'  Day  [i.e.,  June  11],  at  5.20,  and  was
buried  on  the  Thursday  following,  June  15th,  1882."

We  have  verified  the  date  of  death  in  the  Register  of  Deaths.

The  next  letter  that  Mr.  Griffin  received  made  it  quite  clear  that  the
5.20  was  A.M. ;  and  in  conversation  with  the  family  since,  the  death  was
described  to  him  as  having  taken  place  before  breakfast.

[Mr.  Griffin  has  now  no  separate  recollection  of  the  date  of  his  vision.
He  had  an  idea  that  the  death  had  been  on  June  1 5,  not  having  looked  for
some  time  at  the  letter  in  which  it  was  announced,  where  it  will  be  seen
that  June  15  (the  day  of  the  funeral)  is  the  only  day  of  the  month
mentioned,  the  day  of  the  death  being  otherwise  described.  The
"June  11  "  in  the  foregoing  account  was  added  after  he  had  referred  to
this  letter.  But  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  he  is
justified  in  his  conviction  that  his  vision  took  place  on  June  11.  He  can
hardly  be  wrong  in  his  recollection  that  he  and  his  friend  made  a  careful
computation  of  the  longitude,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining  how  close  the
coincidence  was ;  and  that  they  specially  noticed  a  slight  discrepancy.
(The  difference  of  longitude  being  about  73|°,  the  time  of  the  death  would
correspond  with  about  12.30  a.m.,  not  12.10  a.m. ;  so  that  if  the  two  times
are  quite  accurately  given,  Mr.  Griffin's  experience  preceded  the  death  by
about  20  minutes.)  Now  persons  who  took  this  amount  of  trouble  with  regard

'  See  Vol.  i.,  pp.  462  (note)  and  551 ;  and  compare  case  698,  above.


IF  THEIR  PROPER  PLAGES.  705

to  the  hours,  may  fairly  be  assumed  not  to  have  made  a  gross  blunder
as  to  the  identity  of  day ;  even  if  Mr.  Griffin  is  mistaken  (which
there  is  no  reason  for  supposing)  in  his  recollection  that  the  means  for
establishing  the  identity  of  day  were  there  in  black  and  white  before
them.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  diary  has  been  preserved,  and  that
the  evidence  will  in  time  be  completed  by  our  obtaining  the  entry.
The  friend  who  made  it  is  at  present  in  America,  and  Mr.  Griffin  has
written  to  him,  but  doubts  whether  the  last  address  given  will  now
find  him.  He  is  sure,  he  thinks,  to  have  news  of  him  before  very  long.  I
may  mention  that  Mr.  Griffin's  mother  told  me  that  her  son  gave  her  a  full
description  of  the  occurrence  on  his  return  to  England,  not  very  long  after
it  took  place.]

I  naturally  cannot  convey  to  others  the  full  effect  of  Mr.  Griffin's
viva  voce  description.  Though  he  had  not  attributed  any  scientific
importance  to  the  incident,  he  impressed  on  me  that  his  own
experience,  taken  alone,  and  quite  apart  from  the  facts  which
he  learnt  afterwards,  was  to  him  absolutely  unique — by  far  the
strangest  and  most  perplexing  thing  that  had  ever  happened  to  him.
It  gave  him  precisely  the  same  vivid  feeling  of  astonishment  that  the
sanest  of  my  readers  would  receive  if  they  looked  up  from  this  page,
and  saw  a  friend  standing  palpably  before  them,  who  gazed  at  them,
addressed  them,  and  then  vanished  into  air.  As  regards  the  coinci-
dence, Mr.  Griffin  will  allow  me  to  add  that  the  view  expressed  in
his  first  account — namely,  that  his  own  illness  was  a  sufficient
explanation  of  his  experience,  and  that  the  coincidence  therefore  was
accidental — is  not  that  which  he  now  holds.  I  pointed  out  to  him
(as  so  often  in  the  course  of  these  pages)  that  the  theory  of  accident
which  would  be  the  reasonable  one  if  the  particular  experience
in  question  stood  alone  or  nearly  alone  in  our  generation,  becomes
unreasonable  when  the  case  is  only  one  of  a  large  class ;  and  I  can
only  hope  that  others  may  agree  with  him  in  finding  this  argument
as  just  as  it  is  obvious.

Here  I  must  stop.  Cases  continue  to  reach  us  which  may  claim  a
place  in  a  future  collection ;  but  time  is  needed  for  inquiry  into  their
details  ;  and  the  limits  of  space  proposed  for  the  present  work  have
already  been  overpassed.  To  those  whom  it  may  have  interested,  its
last  word  must  be  a  reminder  that  to  them  we  look  for  vigorous  aid
in  the  accumulation  of  further  facts,  which  may  confirm  or  modify  our
conclusions.


VOL.   II.  2  z


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


IN  COLUMN  IV.


Auditory.

Dream.

Emotional.

Gustatory.

Ideational.


M

=

Motor.

O

—

Olfactory,

H

=

Sensation  of  pain

&c.

T

=:

Tactile.

V

=

Visual.

,UMI

sT  V.

w

=

Wife.

m

—

Mother.

d

=

Daughter.

s

=

Sister.

a

=

Aunt.

n

;=

Niece.

c

=::

Cousin  (female).

g

=

Grandmother  or

Granddaughter.

ST

^

Strangers.

H     =     Husband.

F     =     Father.

S      =     Son.

B      =     Brother.

U     =     Uncle.

N     =     Nephew.

C      =     Cousin  (male).

G     =     Grandfather  or  Grandson.

FR  =     Friends.  1

AC  =    Acquaintances.!

In  column  V.,  the  first  letter  indicates  the  percipient,  the  second  the  agent,
indicating  females  are  in  small  type.

The  large  majority  of  the  names,  of  which  only  the  initials  are  here  given,  appear  in
full  at  the  pages  indicated.


Letters


NO.

PAGE.

Vol.
I.

88

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.

NATURE  OF
IMPRESSION

RELATIONSHIP
OP  P.  TO  A.

1

Blind  Man  —  Dr.  E

Hypnotic

sleep

M

AC

2

89

Miss  C.  —  Rev.  J.  L.  S.

aC

3

90

Patient  —  Mr.  B.

M

aC

4

90

Mr.  N.  D.  —  Mesmerist

M

AC

5

90

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T.

M

f  R

6

91

Miss  L.  F.  C.  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T.

M

cC

7

93

Miss  V.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B.

M

f  R

8

94

E.  C  — Rev.  L.  L.

I

aC

9

96

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  A.  S.

lorV

aC

10

98

Friends  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T.

S

FFR

11

98

Girl  —  Son  of  Rev.  L.  L.

I

aC

12

99

Friends  —  Mr.  H.  S.  T.

I

FFR

13

103

Rev.  W.  S.  M.  —  Friend

VA

Fr

14

104

MissL.    S.  V.\         Mv    C!     TT     PI

MissE.  C.V.j-^'^-^-^-^-

V

ffR

15

106

Mrs.  L.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B

VT

aC

16

108

Miss  V.  —  Mr.  S.  H.  B.

VT

f  R

17

188

Mrs.  A.  S.  —  Mr.  A.  S.

S

wH

18

190

Mrs.  N.  —  Rev.  P.  H.  N.

0

wH

19

191

Rev.  J.  D.  —  Miss  J.  W.

I

Fr

20

194

Mrs.  B.  —  Mrs.  G.

lorV

d  m

21

196

Mr.  K.  —  Mrs.  K.

I

Hw

22

197

Miss  M.  —Mrs.  K.

E

c  e

23

199

Mr.  F.  W.  —  Mr.  R.  W.  B.

D

BB

24

202

Mrs.  W.  —  Sir  J.  C.       ...

D

dF

]  It  has  not  been  possible  to  draw  the  line  between  acquaintance  and  friendship  with
precision.  The  percipient  and  agent  have  been  classed  as  friends  in  cases  where  the
account  indicates  some  strength  of  attachment  on  both  sides  or  on  one  side.  Where  there
is  no  clear  sign  of  such  attachment,  the  more  general  designation  of  acquaintances  has
been  adopted.

VOL.  II.  '  2  z  2


708


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


PAGE.

NATUEE  OP

RELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
I.

PERCIPIENT  AND    AGENT.

IMPRESSION

OP  P.  TO  A.

25

204

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C

V

mS

26

207

Mr.  G.  M.  —  Mr.  R.  K

V

CC

27

209

Mr.  R.  R.  —  Mr.  X.

lorV

FR

28

210

Mr.  N.  J.  S.  —  Mr.  F.  L

V

FR

29

212

Mr.  A.  B.  —  Mrs.  F

V

Ac

30

214

F.  R.  —  Mrs.  A.  (?)

A  V

st

31

216

Capt.  J.  C.  —  Mr.  J

V

N  U

32

218

Rev.  R.  B.  —  Mrs.  B

V

Sm

33

221

MissS.  —Capt.  J.  B

A

f  R

34

222

Mt.  A.  Z. —Mr.  S.  B

A

FR

35

225

Mrs.  N.  —  Rev.  P.  H.  N

AT.  D

f  R

36

227

Mr.    J.    D.\      ^      -g

Miss  R.    S./      ^'^--^

A

Ffr

37

234

Col.  L.  A.  —  SirL.  G

I

FR

38

235

Mr.  K.  —  HerrS

I

FR

39

236

MissB.  — Mrs.  B

I

dm

40

236

Count  G.  —Mr.  R.  B

I

ST

41

237

Miss  C.  B.  M.  —  Jeweller

E

s  T

42

239

Miss  C.  E.  S.  —  Mr.  W.  B.  S

I

sB  (?)

43

240

|-}        Miss

/E

s  s

s  s

44

242

Mrs  W  S'}  ~  ^^^^  ^-  ^-  ^^  ^^-  ^-  ^•
Mrs.' H.' D.' —  Mr.  C ...

I

Ff  Rr

45

243

I

aC

46

244

Miss  A.  S.  J.  -  Miss  M.  L.  J

I

s  s

47

245

Mr.  M.       Miss  J

I

Cc

48

246

Miss  A.  0.  —  Mr.  D.  A

I

cC

49

247

Mrs.  A.  —  Rev.  A.  W.  A

I  A

wH

50

247

BishopW.  —  Son

I

FS

51

249

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  T.  W.  S

I

wH

52

249

Mme.  0.  —  Mons.  0

I

wH

53

251

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  G

lorV

mS

54

253

Miss  M.  E.  P.  —  Mr.  J

I

f  R

55

253

Mr.  R.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C.

I

BB

56

255

Mr.  J.  G.  K.  —Mother-in-law

lorV

Fr

57

256

Miss  M.  E.  P.  —  Sister

I

s  s

58

257

Mr.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.  or  Miss  H

lorV

S  m  or  B  s

59

258

Miss  G.  —  Mr.  H.  G

lorV

sB

60

260

Mrs.  J.  —  Mr.  W.  R

lorV

sB

61

261

Mr.  J.  A.  W.  —  Mr.  T.  W.  or  Mr.  G.  W.    ...

lor  V

BB

62

262

Mr.s.  L.  —  Mr.  A

lorV

f  R

63

263

Mrs.  B.  —Friend

lorV

f  R

64

264

Lady  L.  —  Sir  B.  L

lorV

wH

65

265

Miss  L.  —  Mr.

TorV

fR

66

267

"F.R.C.  P.  "  —  Landlord

lorV

AC

67

271

Mr.  A.  C.  —Sister

E

Bs

68

271

Hon.  Mrs.  P.  —  Sister

{—  Brother^

E

s  s
fBB

69

272

Mr.  J.  D.  H.  4  —  Uncle     \

!  —  Mother  I

E

4NU
tSm

70

273

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  S.  R

E

wH

71

274

Dr.  E.  L.  F.  —  Grandmother

E

Gg

72

275

Mrs.  B.  —  Rev.  J.  J

E

dF

73

276

Mr. Mrs.

E

Hw

74

277

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S

E

wH

75

278

Dr.  J.  D.  —  Father

ED

SF

76

280

Rev.  J.  M.  W.  —Twin  brother

E

BB

77

281

Mr.  J.  C.  —  Twin  brother

E

BB

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


709


PAGE.

Vol.
I.


78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126

127

128
129
130
131
132
133
134


283

283

284

285

286

287

288

288

291

293

314

315

315

316

316

317

318

321

322

322

324

325

327

328

329

330

331

333

335

336

338

339

339

342

342

343

345

346

347

349

350

350

352

353

355

355

357

358

359

362

363
364
365
366
366
369
370


PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


Mr.  A.  J.  M.  —  Twin  brother ...
Rev.  E.  D.  M.  —  Father

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  C

Mr.  A.  S.  —  Mrs.  S

Mrs.  W.  —  Father

Mr.  P. —Father

Mrs.  v.— Mr.  V

Major  K.  —  Father

Mr.  R.  R.  —  Rev.  T.  H.

MdUe.  B.  —  Mdlle.  M

Mr.  E.  P.  T.  —  Mrs.  T.
Rev.  J.  P.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.
Mr.  J.  M.  F.  —Mrs.  F.

Mr.  M.  —Mrs.  M

Mr.  W.  —  Mrs.  W

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  C

Miss  C.  S.  B.  -  Miss  K.  E.     ...

Mr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C

Mr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C

M.  H. -MissM.  M

Mr.  D.  B.  W.  S.  —  Father       ...
Mr.  T.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  W.

Mr.  J.  A.  —Lieut.  O

Mrs.  M.  —Mr.  M.  ?

Mrs.  L.  —  Mr.  J.  C

Coriolanus  —  Mr.  E.  C.  B.
Miss  E.  J.  M.  —  Rev.  A.  B.  M.

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  H.  H

Mrs.  S.  —  Son

Mr.  A.  A.  —  Son

Rev.  Canon  W.  —  Mr.  A.  W. ...

Mrs.  F.  —Mr.  F

Mrs.  C.  L.  —Mother

Miss  B.  —  Navvy

Mr.  G.  G.  —  Mrs.  S

Mrs.  G.— Son

Rev.  W.  D.  W.  R.  —  W.  E.    ...

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  C.  F

Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  C.  R.  S.

Herr  von  R.  —  Capt.  von  P.    . . .

Miss  L.  K.  D.  —  Friend

MissK.  G.  —Mr.  M

Mrs.  J.  —  Mr.  G.  J.  H.

Mr.  E.  J.  H.  —  Father

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  F

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  F.  E.  F

Miss  C.  A.  —  Mr.  L.  (?)

Mr.  J.  W.  —Mrs.  W

Mrs.  H.  B.  —  Colonel  F.

Mrs.  M.     ^       ,^       .

MissV.      }-Mrs.A

Brigade  Surgeon  W.  —  Mother
Rev.  C.  C.  W.  —  Mr.  W.

Mrs.  M.  —  Mr.  W

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  M

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  G

Miss  R.  H.  B

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  H


NATURE  OP

RELATIONSHIP

IMPRESSION

OP  P.  TO  A.

E

BB

M

SF

M

wH

M

Hw

M

dF

M

SF

M

wH

M

SF

M

FR

M

f  r

D

H  w  or  w  H

D

Hw

D

H  w  or  w  H

D

Hw

D

Hw

D

wH

D  (?)

f  r

D

Hw

D

Hw

D

f  r

D

SF

D

Fr

DI

FR

D

wH(?)

D

fR

D

FR

D

cC

D

mS

D

mS

D

FS

D

BB

D

wH

D

d  m

D

f  R

D

Ac

D

mS

D

FR

D

niS

D

fr

D

AC

D

f  R

D

aC

D

f  R

D

SF

D

wH

D

mS

D

a  C

D

Sm

D

aC

[1

ffr

D

Sm

D

FR

D

sB

D

sT

D

aC

D

1

D

sB

710


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


PAGE.

NATURE  OF

RELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
I.

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.

IMPRESSION

OF   P.    TO   A.

135

373

MissP.  — Mr.  J.  T.  M.  P

D

sB

136

374

Mrs.  M.  M. —Major  P.

D

fR

137

375

Mrs.  M.  M.— Friend

D

f  r

138

375

Mrs.  G.  — Miss  A

D

a  n

139

377

MissS.  S.  P.  — W.  T

D

aC

140

378

Miss  L.  A.  W.  —  Brother

D

sB

141

380

Mrs.  H.  —  Sister-in-law

D

f  r

142

381

Dr.  Y.  —  Tenants

D

AC

143

383

Mrs.  M.  —  Dr.  H

D

nU

144

383

S^A}-M—

/AD

FR
sB

145

386

Mrs.V.  S.  — Son

D

mS

146

395

LordB.  —  G

V

FR

147

397

Mrs.  K.  —  Mr.  E.  K

M

mS

148

399

Dr.  E,. — Grandmother

M

Gg

149

400

Mr.  W.  D.  —  MissD.

D(?)

Fd

150

403

Lord  L.  —  Brother

A

BB

151

404

Mrs.  P.  —  Brother

A

sB

152

406

Mrs.  R.  —  Son

A

mS

153

407

Rev.  A.  J.  —  Mrs.  M.  J

A

Fr

154

408

MissT.  —  Mr.HS

A

f  R

155

409

Mr.  E.  —  Mrs.  E

A

S  m

156

410

Mr. —Father

A

SF

157

411

Mr.  H.  C.  F.  —  Mrs.  F

A

Sm

L58

413

Mrs.  S.  — E.M

A

fr

159

414

Archdeacon  F.  —  Friend

V

FR

160

415

Major  M.  —  Miss  S.  M.

V

Bs

161

416

Miss  B.  —  Captain  C.  M

V

cC

162

416

Mr.J.A.  S.— Dr.  M

V

AC

163

417

Rev.W.  J.  B.  — Mr.  R.  D

V

FR

164

418

Rev.C.  C.  W.  —Mr.  B

V

FR

165

419

Mrs. CaptainP.

V

f  R

166

420

mSI}- captain  W

rDV

wH

sT

167

424

Mr.  W.  de  G.  —  Mr.  H.  de  G

V

BB

168

425

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  N

V

fR

169

427

Miss  T.J.  C.\      ^„

Mr.  C.B.         /      ^^^^-

sT
FR

170

428

Mrs.  S.  —  Aunt

V

n  a

171

429

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  F

V

aN

172

430

Mrs.  D.  —  Miss  G

V

fr

173

431

Mrs.  B.  —  Captain  G

V

f  R

174

431

MissC.  P.  —Major  G

V

aC

175

433

Mr.  T.  R.  —  Mr.  J.  H.  H

D  V

FR

176

434

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W

TV

wH

177

435

Mrs.  B.  —  Brother

VT

sB

178

436

Miss  E.  A.  S.  —  Mr.  S

VT

dF

179

437

Mr.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  B

TV

FR

180

439

Mr.  G.  J.  C.  —  Mrs.  R

T  V

Na

181

440

Mrs.  W.  —  F.  W

T  A

mS

182

441

MissK.  J. —  Miss  B

A  V

fr

183

443

Mrs.  R.  —  General  R

VA

wH

184

444

Mr.  J.  G.  K.  -I.  K

AV

FS

185

445

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S.  P

TVA

sB

186

447

Miss  B.  —  Grandfather

VA

gG

187

448

MissH.  —  R

VA

f  r

188

449

Mrs.  P.  —  M.  P

VA

mS

189

451

Mrs.  W.— Mrs.  H

AV

fr

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES,


711


PAGE.

NATURE    OP

BELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
I.

PEKCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.

IMPEESSION

OF  p.   TO  A.

190

453

Mrs.  L.  — Mrs.  E

A  V

f  r

191

523

Mr.  T.  W.  G.  —  Mrs. ...

V

Fr

192

524

Mr.  B.  —  Mrs.  R

V

Ac

193

525

Canon Mr.

V

FR

194

527

Miss  R.  —  Captain  W.

V

f  R

195

528

MissR.  —  Mrs.  M

V

gg

196

530

Mr.  J.  G.  F.  R.       Mrs.

V

N  a

197

531

Miss  B. -J.N.

VA

f  R

198

532

Mrs.  S.       B

AV

fR

199

534

Mr.  B.  —  Friend

AV

Fr

200

540

Miss  C.  —  Mr.  T.  C

V

sB

201

542

Mrs.  B.  —  R

V

fR

202

544

MissS.  —  Mrs.  A

V

fr

203

548

Mrs.  A.  —  Mrs.  C

V

d  m

204

549

Mrs.  C.  —  Mrs.

V

f  r

205

549

LadyC.  —  Father  H

V

fR

206

551

Colonel  J.  —  Miss  J

V

Bs

207

552

Mrs.  L.  —  A.  C.

AV

fr

208

553

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  E.  R

A

wH

210^

556

Captain  C.  —  Lieut.  0.  C.

V

BB

211

559

Miss  L.  —  Great  Uncle

V

nU^

212

560

Dr.  B.  —  Mr.  J.  M

V

BB

213

561

Mr.  J.  H.  —  Mrs.  P

V

Ac

214

563

Mrs.  J.— Mrs.  R

V

a  n

215

566

Mr.  J.  R.  —  Mrs.  W

V

Fr

216

567

Mrs.  P.  —  Brother

V

sB

217

568

Mr.  T.  C.  —  Rev.  J.  C.

V

SF

Vol.

II.

218

30

Mr.  H.  H.  H.  —  Great  Uncle

lorV

NU^

219

31

Mr.  A.  —Mrs.  A

V

Hw

220

31

Mr.  F.  G.  —  Mr.  C.  T.

V

FR

221

34

LadyC. —  Mrs.  L

V

d  m

222

35

Mr.  R.  S.  —  Mrs.  S

V

Hw

223

37

Mrs.  T.  —  Mr.  W

V

nU

224

38

Mdme.  B.  —  Mons.  d'E.

V

fR

225

40

Mrs.  R.  —Miss  L.  B

V

a  c

226

41

General  H.  —  Miss  H

V

Bs

227

42

M.  —  Friend

V

Fr

228

44

Rev.  F.  B.  —  Aunt

V

Na

229

45

General  F.  —  Friend

V

FR

230

46

Mr.  J.  E.  —  Twin  brother

V

BB

231

47

Mr.  S.  S.  —  Hon.  R.  G.

V

FR

232

49

Miss  E.  H.  H.  —  Mrs.  W.       ...

V

f  r

233

50

Mrs.  G.  —Brother

V

sB

234

51

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  H.  S

V

mS  .

235

51

Col.  S.  —  Lieut.  J.  D.  S.

V

BB

236

52

MissB.  —Mr.  W.  B

V

sB

237

54

E.  M.  G.  —  Friend

V

fr

238

55

Mrs.  D.  —  D.  D

V

wH

239

57

J.  M.  —  Mr.  W

V

FR

240

59

Mrs.  E.  -  Mr.  J.  S

V

f  R

241

59

Mr.  S.  J.  M.  —  Friend

V

Fr

1  The  number  209  has  been  accidentally  omitted.
2  Great  Uncle,


712


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


61
63
66

67
68
69

70
71

72
74
75
76

78

80

81

f  82

\  82

[82

83


85
85
85

f86
88

j  88

j  89

Uo

91
92

93
94
96

97

100
100
102
103
104
105
105
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115


Mrs.  H.


Nurse  — Mr.  J.  B.
Chevalier  S.  F.  —  Mr.  C.  F.
Major  O.  —  Mr.  J.  E.  H.
Rev.  W.  E.  D.  —  Friend
Mr.  A.  I.  —Mr.  E.  P.   ...

Mrs. Son

Mr.  A.  L.  —  Professor  C.

Mr.  T.  H.  C.  —  Mr.  X....

Mr.  R.  S.  —  M.  M.

Mrs.  W.  —  F.  W.

Rev.  J.  W.  —  Pupil      ...

Mr.  S.  M.  S.  —  Nurse  S.

Miss  D.  \

Mrs.  M.  /

Caroline  —  Mrs.  H.

Mr.  E.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.      ...

Mrs.  W.  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W.

Miss  W.  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W.

Parishioner  —  Rev.  T.  L.  W,

Four  Friends  —  Miss  H.

Sister-in-law  —  Mrs.  S.
Miss  J.  S.  —  Mrs.  S.     ...
Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  S.
Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  B.
MissS.  —  Mr.  B,
Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  B.

Sis.R}-^^-B-    -

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  B.
Capt.  B.  —  Mrs.  B.
Capt.  B.  —  Mrs.  B.

E.  B.  —  Mrs.  B

Mrs.  B.  —  Mrs.  G.

Col.  B.  —  Col.  R.

J.  C.  —  Twin  Brother    ...

Rev.  W.  M.  N

Mr.  C.  I

Mrs.  C.  (  ~

Miss  C.         J

Mr.  J.  S.  —  Mr.  D.  S.

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  S.  R.

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S.

Mr.  R.  F.  —  Mr.  J.  T,

Dr. Brother

Miss  G Sister

Servant  —  Mr.  J.  P

Mr.  L.  T.  —  Son

Mr.  G.  A.  W.  —  Brother

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S

Mr.  W.  T.  B.  —  Mr.  B

Mrs.  H.  —Mr.  H

Miss  B.  —Mrs.  B

Mrs.  W.  —Sister

Mrs.  W.  —  Mother,  and  (?)  other  relatives.
Mr.  G.  —  Miss


Mr.  R.  C.  or  Mrs.  R.  C.


F.


NATURE  OP

RELATIONSHIP

IMPRESSION

OF  p.  TO  A.

V

sT

E  V

BB

V

CC

V

FR

V

FR

V

m  S

V

AC

V

FR

V

Ac

V

m  d

V

FR

V

Fr

V

c  c  c

V

a  c

V

Sm

V

wH

V

dF

V

f  R

(^

a  c

Jv

Fr

r

fr

(v

a  c

V

f  r

V

n  a

V

f  r

I

f  R

TVA

f  R

V

f  R

V

FfR

V

f  R

V

Hw

V

Fr

V

ac

V

fr

V

FR

V

BB

A

BB

A

mS

A

mS

A

BB

A

BB

A

S  S

A

aC

A

FS

A

BB

A

mS

A

SF

A

wH

A

d  m

A

s  S

A

d  m

A

Fr

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


713


PAGE.

Vol.
11.


116
116
117
119
120
122
123
124
127
130
132
134
135
136
137
139
141
143
144
146
147
149

154
156
158
159
162
164

173

174

176

178


PEECIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


313

179

314

181

315

182

316

193

317

196

318

198

319

199

320

200

321

202

Mrs.  W.  —  Cousin
Mrs.  W.  —  E.      ...
Miss  H.  —  Mrs.  H.
Rev.  R.  H.  K.  —  "Etta"
Count  G.  —  Mr.  V.

Rev. Friend

Dr.  J.  S.  —  J.  G.  (?)
Mr.  B.  —  Mrs.  B.

Mr. Friend

Miss  V.  —  Mrs.  D.

Mrs. Mr.  J

Mrs.  H.  —  Captain  W

J.  G.  —  Mrs.  G.
Rev.  P.  H.  N.  —  W.  B.
Mrs.  R.  L.  —  Mr.  R.  L.
Rev.  J.  A.  H.  —  Mrs.  P.
Miss  P.  —  Mr.  M.  P.     ...
Mrs.  B.  —  Friend

D.  B.  —  W.  H.  P.  (?)    ...

E.  S.  —Father

Mr.  H.  O.  —  Miss  K.  A.  O.

^^•H-BG.|_R,,.T.H.
and  others  J

Mr.  J.  H.  W.  —  Mrs.  W.

Miss  M.  —  Mr.  J.  T.  M.  P.

Miss Mr.  V.

MissB Mrs.  S.     ...

Mrs.  P.  —  Mr.  L.

Mrs.  S.  \

Mrs.  R.j"

Captain  B.  /

Mrs.P.   |_Mrs.G

Servant  )

Mrfk.  }-®^^^^

Mrs.  C.      ^

Mrs.  B.       V— Mrs.  W.

Mrs. J

Mr.  deG.\_jyr-  .  (.
Mrs.  E.  /  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^•
Mrs.  W.  \

Mr.  E.  M.  W.J

Miss  V.  M.

Miss  S.  M.

C.

Lord  C.  \

LadyC.J

Rev. \

Dr.  C.       /
Surgeon-Major  S.  \
Mrs.  R.  j"

Rev.  D.  W.  G.\
Mrs.  G.  /


Mr.  E.  W.
J.


NATURE   OF

RELATIONSHIP

IMPRESSION

OP  P.  TO  A.

A

cC

A

fr

AD

d  m

I  or  A

Fd

I  or  A

S  T

SI

FR

A

AC

A

S  m

E  A

Fr

A

f  r

S

mS

T

nU

T  A

Sm

T  A

FR

AT  V

f  R

A  V

Fr

VA

sB

AV

f  R

VA

FR

VA

SF

VA

Bs

rv,  A

FR

sssT

D.  D  (?)

Gg

V.  (?V)

fR

D.  D

f  R

VT  A.  D

fr

V.  I

aC

{ij.IorV

/s  B
\f  R

[l

St

st

[i

FR

FR

(1

sT

SF

{^

f  r

a  c

r  E

\AVT

Ac

f  r

rv

f  r

1^

a  n

Iv

s  s

\V(?D)

Bs

s  s

{^

1

fV

1^

1

Iv

{^

1

{^

?

{IT

?

1^

•>

\v

714


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


322
323


334
335
336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344
345

346
347


PAGE.

Vol.
II.


203
204


218
219
220

221

223

226

227

227

228

230

234
235

236

237


PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


324

205

325

208

326

209

327

210

328

210

329

211

330

213

331

213

332

215

333

217

Rev.


(?)


Lady  C.\
Miss  T.  /
Mr.    B.
Mrs.  B.
Miss  B.
Mrs.  B.
Sister    /    "
Capt.  N.  \
Mr.  J.  A./
Mrs.  R.     \
and  others/

Snf}-Mr.— (^)

m£m.H.}    -MissH.  (?),

Mr.-R    }    -Rev.Mr.H.a).
Mr.  J.  C.  \

Son  /  '  •

Mr.  L.  \
and  others  /
Rev.  C.  J.  1

ChUd         /

Mrs.  H.

Mr.  H. \  —  Mrs.  H.  (?)

and  others
Miss  G.

Miss  L. /

Mrs.  S.  \

Two  servants/     ■"

Rev.  W.  R. )

MissR.        /

Mr.  S.        1

Mrs.  S.        y

and  others  J
MrsY.  \

Mrs.  B.  /

Mr.  B.         ^

Mrs.  B.        V—  Miss  S.

and  others  J

Mr.  L.   ^       „.   T

Mrs.  L.j-W-I^

Mrs   A  1

TheMisses  AJ-  Commander  A.

Mr;.W.}-D.M.A.

Mrs.  P.    \       A    T)

Miss  P.  J~^-  ^

Miss  L.        1        ■      ,
Miss  J.  L./-^^^t

Child  — Mr.

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.

Mr.  T.  D.  ^

Mrs.  T.  D,  [—  Mrs.  D.

Friend        J

Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.

Mrs.  A. —  Mr.


NATURE  OP
IMPRESSION


,A
V
V
V

sV(?)

V

{^
{^

{d(?)

V
V
V
A

\A

{i

{i

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A


ii}

m


RELATIONSHIP
OF  P.   TO   A.


ddF

AC

ffR

m  d

s  s

FFR


FFFffr

FS
mS
m  S
sss  B
FR
sB

ffR


V

SF

VA

sB

VT

Sm

V

fr

V

Fr

V

nU

V

sB

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


715


PAGE.

Vol.
II.


239
241

244
247
248
250
253
256
257
259


PEBCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


Mrs.  E.\_j^


Mr.  W.         \

Miss  K.  W.  j
M.  J.  F.


P.  W.


Kev,  F.


and  2  others)"  ^^^-  ^'

m£a.b.}-M'-P-M.

A.  F.  \

Mr.  S.  S.  F./"

Captain  A.  \  _  jyj-j.  jj


Mr.  H.
Mr.  B.\
Mr.  E.j

Sir  J.  S.      \
Colonel  W.  J


Mr.  W.


Mr.  J.  W.


NATURE  OF
IMPRESSION


rvD
\v

{I

/AV
I  A

{^}


RELATIONSHIP
OF  P.  TO  A.


f  R
sT

FS
s  B
st
ffr

a  a  C

GG

SF
sT
B  B

n  a
ac

ST

SF

FFR

ST
BB


CASES  IN  THE  SUPPLEMENT.


NO.

PAGE.

Vol.
11.

PERCIPIENT   AND  AGENT.

NATURE   OF
IMPRESSION

relationship

OF   p.   TO  A.

358

325

A.  M.  —  Rev.  C.  H.  T

TS

aC

359

326

Mrs.  S.  —  Dr.  E

GTO

aC

360

328

Boy  —  Professor  J.  S

G

AC

361

329

A.  D.  —  Mons.  M

S

FR

362

332

Patient  —  Mons.  C.  R.

M

aC

363

333

Patient  —  Professor  B.

I

AC

364

334

Patient  — Dr.  G

IE

aC

365

334

Patient  — Dr.  G

I

aC

366

336

Miss  M.  N.  —  Mrs.  P

IGTE

fr

367

344

Mrs.  J.  E.  —  Captain  B

ITOG

fR

368

346

Patient  — Dr.  P

I

f  R

369

347

Miss  C.  —  Serjeant  C.  and  others

I

s  B,  &c.

370

349

Mrs.  M.— Mrs. — -

I

fr

371

350

Mr.  C. — Coachman

I  (?)

FR

372

350

Rev.  J.  B.  —  Rev.  J.  S.  B

I

FS

373

351

Mr.                Dr.

I

FR

374

353

Mr.  H.— Father

I

S  F

375

354

Miss  B. — Madame  H.

I

Fr

376

354

Prof  essor  W.  —  Mr.  R.  W

I

BB

577

356

Mrs.  C.  —  G.  C.  or  Brother    —

I

mS

J78

356

Mr.  J.  W.  S.       Mrs.

E

Fr

579

358

Mrs.                Dr.  S

I

f  R

J80

360

Rev.  Mr.  B.  —  Brother

lorV

BB

716


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


PAGE.

NATURE     OF

RELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
11.

PEECIPIENT  AND    AGENT.

IMPRESSION

OF  P.   TO  A.

381

360

Miss  C.  -  Mrs.

E

s  s

382

361

Mr. Miss  E and  others

F  d,  &c.

383

362

Miss Miss  E

s  s

384

363

Mrs.  G.  —  Mr.  G

mS

385

364

Mrs.  W.  —  Insane  patient  (?)

sT

386

364

Mr.J.  C.        Mr.

A  C

387

368

Mr.  J.A.  E.  —  ?

IE

?

388

369

Mr.  N.  C.  —  ?

IE

9

389

370

Rev. Son

E

f's

390

371

Mr.  J.  P.— Mr.  B

I

FR

391

371

Mr.               Mr.  C

E

FR

392

372

Mrs. —  Mr. and  others

E

n  U,  n  U,
f  R

393

373

Mrs. Sons

E

niS,  mS

394

374

Mr.  F.  H.  P.  —Mrs.  P

E

Sm

395

374

Mrs.  D  — Ada

E

fr

396

375

Mr.  S.N.  W.       Mr.

E

FR

397

376

Mr.  F.  M.  —Mrs.  M

M

Sm

398

377

Dr.  E.  L.  F.  —  Patient

M

Ac

399

377

Mr.  W.  B.  —  Son

M

FS

400

378

Herr  von  S.  —  Frau  von  S

M

Sm

401

379

Mr.  N.— Miss  N

M

Fd

402

380

Mr.  A.  A.  W.  —  Mrs.  W

D

Sm

403

380

Mr.  F.  —  Mrs.  F

D

Hw

404

381

Kev.  P.  T.  D.|      J.

MissD.            j— degress

{S}

A  ac

405

382

Mr.  F.  M.  I      ^      ^

Brother       /~  ^^^-  ^

Mr.  S.        1

PI

SSm

406

382

Mr.  W.  S.  V— Mrs.  S

Mr.  J.  S.  J

fe

SSSm

407

383

Miss  J.  W.  —  M.  H

D

fr

408

385

Mrs.  H.— Miss  H

D

m  d

409

385

Mrs.  S.  —  Mr.  S

D

mS

410

386

Servant  —  Mr.  E.  C.  T

D

aC

411

387

Miss  A.  G.  —  Mr.  G

D

sB

412

387

Mrs.  O'S.  —  Hon.  J.  L.  O'S

D

mS

413

388

General  B.  —  Mrs.  B

D

Hw

414

388

Mrs.  B.  —  Servant

D

fr

415

389

Miss  A.  J.  M.  —  Mr.  M

D

sB

416

390

Mrs.  B.  -  Mr.  J.  B

D

mS

417

391

Dean  C.  -  Rev.  E.  T.  C

D

BB

418

392

Mr.  A.  S.  —Mr.  S.  S

D

BB

419

393

Mrs. Mr.

D

mS

420

393

Rev.  W.  B.  B.  —  Mrs.  B

D

Fr

421

394

Miss  C.  D.  G.  —  Mrs.  G

D

gg

422

395

Colonel  V.  —  Mr.  A.  V

D

F  S

423

396

Mrs.  S.  -  Frau  S

D

f  r

424

396

Mrs.  W.  — Mr.

D

sB

425

397

Mrs.  D.  —  Mrs  W

D

fr

426

398

Miss  C.  —  Mr.

D

f  R

427

399

Miss  G.  —  Rev.

D

aC

428

400

Mrs.  H.  —Mr.  J.  J

D

aC

429

400

Mr.  F.  M.  —  Mr.  M

D

SF

430

400

Rev.  F.  R.  H.        Mr.

D

CO

431

402

Miss  D.  -  Rev.  S

D

sT

432

403

Mrs.  B  Professor  T

D

sB

433

404

Mr.  F.  T.  D.  —  Mr.

D

NU

TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


717


PAGE.

NATURE   OP

RELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
II.

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.

IMPRESSION

OP  P.  TO  A.

434

404

Mr.  H.  W.  D.  -  Mrs.  D

D      ,

Sm

435

405

Mr.  G.  U.  —  Mr.  R.  U.

D

BB

436

406

Mrs.  T.  —  ?

D

9

437

406

Mrs.  H.  —  Mr.  J.  M

D

n'u

438

407

Mrs.  D.— Mr.

D

sB

439

408

Mons.  J.  C.  —  Mens.  H.  C.     ..

D

BB

440

408

Mons.  L. — Mons.  L

D

SF

441

408

Mr.  A.  G.  S.  —  Mr.  D.  L.

D

FR

442

409

Mrs.  S.  —  Rev.  S.  H.  S.

D

wH

443

411

Mr.  J.  D.  B.       Mrs.

D

Gg

444

412

Mr.  H.  -  Lieut.  A.  E.  H.

D

FS

445

412

Rev.  J.  M.  —  Mrs.

D(?)

Fr

446

413

Mrs.  P.  —  Miss

D

ss  ?

447

414

Fraulein  M.  L.  —  Herr  L.

D

dF

448

415

Mr.  W.  B.  —  Mr.  J.  B.

D

BB

449

416

Mme.  A.  —  Dr.  A.  F.  S.

D(?)

fR

450

417

Miss  A.  E.  R.  —  Mr.  X.

D

f  R

451

418

Rev.  G.  L.  F.  —Dr.  H.  H.  F.

D

BB

452

419

Mr.  T.  —  Mrs.  T

D

Sm

453

420

Miss Mr.

D

nU

454

421

Mr. Major

D

SF

455

422

Mr.  G.  H.  F.  P.  —  Miss  E.  B.

D

Ac

456

423

Miss  M.  —  K.  A.  H.  (?)

D

St

457

423

Mrs. Mrs.  M

D

fr

458

424

Mrs.  W.  —Mr.  W.  G

D

nU

459

425

Miss  E.  F.  H.  —  (?)

D

?

460

427

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  B.  C.  and  others

D

c  C,  f  R,
f  r,  wH

461

428

Mrs.  F.  —  Mr.  W.  H.  or  Miss  H.

D

f  R  or  f  r

462

429

Mr.  J.  R.  —  Mr.  J.  M

D

FR

463

430

Miss  A.  G.  —  Mrs.

D

f  r

464

431

MissB.  —  Mr.

D

f  R

465

431

Mr.  J.  W.  B.  —  Dr.  B

D

SF

466

432

Mrs.  F.— Mrs.  L

D

m  d

467

432

Mme.  S.  (hypnotised)  —  Father

D

dF

468

433

Mr.  R.  —  J.  R.  T

D

UN

469

434

E.G. —Woman

D

a  c

470

435

Miss  M.  —Mr.  M

D

dF

471

436

Mrs.  S.  —  W.  S.

D

mS

472

437

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  G.  E

D

sB

473

438

Mrs. Mrs.  W

D

f  r

474

439

Mdlle.  R.  —Mme.  R

D

d  m

475

440

Mrs.  H. — Mme.

D

d  m

476

441

Mrs.  D.  S.  —  Mr.  T.  P

D

dF

477

442

Miss  M.  —  Capt.  F

D

f  R

478

443

Mr.  L.  H.  S.  —Mr.  H.  S.  (?)   ..

D

BB(?)

479

443

Mr.  R.  R.  —  E.  G

D

AC

480

444

Mr.  R.  R.  —  W.  T

D

AC

481

444

Mr.  C.  —  Rev.  S.  H.  I

D

FR

482

445

Mrs.  P.  —Mrs.  B

D

n  a

483

446

Mr.  E.  W.  P.  —  Clerk  (?)

D

ST(?)

484

447

Miss Mrs.  G^

D

st

485

449

Mr.  R.  H.  D.       Miss

V

Fr

486

450

Mrs.  L.  —  M.  T

V

c  c

487

451

Mrs.  H.— Mr.  A

V

sB

488

452

Mr.  W.  G.  —  Mr.  G

V

BB

489

453

Mrs.  N.  —  Capt.  N.        ,

VA

fR

490

454  J

Lady  C.  —  Mr.  J.  D

VA

sT

718


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


PAGE.

NO.

Vol.
II.

PERCIPIENT  AND  AUENT.

NATURE  OP

RELATIONSHIP

IMPRESSION

OF  P.    TO  A.

491

455

Mrs.  C— Mr.  R

V

dF

492

456

Mrs.  G.  G.  —  Col.  S

V

dF

493

457

Mr.  F.  —  Mr.  F.  F

V

FS

494

458

T.  P.  -  Mrs.  P

V

Sm

495

459

Mr.  G.  W.  —  Mrs.  B

VA

Nai

496

459

Mr.  G.  W.  —  Miss  M. ...

A

Fr

497

460

Mrs.  F.  —  Mrs.

A

s  s

49S

460

Miss  E.  B.  —  Mr.  H.  A.  D.      ...

VA

f  R

499

461

Rev.  W.  B.  L.  —  Mr.  L.

V

SF

500

462

Mrs. Mr.

V

wH

501

463

Mrs.  B.  —  Miss  G.  B

V

f  r

502

464

Mrs.  W.  —  Mother  and  others...

V,  D,  A

d  m,  s  s,  s  s

503

467

Mrs.  D.  —  Mr.

V

sB

504

468

Mons.  M.  —  Mons.  M.,  Mme.  M.

TAV

SF,  Sm

505

469

Miss  H.  W.  —  Maurice ...

V

aN

506

470

MissL.  —  Mr.

A

sT

507

471

Mr.  F.  A.  S.  —  Mrs.  R.

A

Cc

508

473

Mrs.  H. — Mrs.

T  A

d  m

509

473

Mrs.  S.— Mrs.  G

A  V

d  m

510

474

Rev.  S.  M.  —  Archbishop  of  T.

V  A

FR

511

475

Herr  A. — Frau

V

Na

512

475

Mrs.  J.  B.  —  Mr.  R.  M.

VT

f  R

513

476

E.  H.  —  J.  S.  and  others

AVT,&c.

/  f  R,  s  B,

\s  B,  na,  n  U

514

477

Mrs.  S.  —  Miss  A.  H

V

f  r

515

477

Mrs.  S.  —  Mrs.  G

V

s  s

516

479

Miss  E.  C.  —  Mrs.  C

V

d  m

517

480

LadyR.  —Hon.  J.  V

V

cC

518

481

Mme.  C.  —  Mons.  R

Mme.  V.  —  Mons.  G

VA
A

f  R
dF

519

482

Mrs.  F.  — Mrs.  M

r

VA

s  s

520

482

Dr.  C.  —  Mrs.  C

VA

Sm

521

483

Mrs.  C.  —  Mr.  J.  C

V

mS

522

485

Rev.  J.  C.  —Mrs.  B

VA

Fr

523

486

Mr.  B.  —  Mr.

V

AC

524

486

Miss  S.  —  Sir  L.  S

V

dF

525

488

Mrs.  B.  —  Miss  B.  B

V

m  d

526

488

Commander  C.  —  J.  F.  J.
Commander  C.  —  T

VA
VA

FR
FR

527

490

Mrs.  H.  —  D.  H

V  A(?  D )

mS

528

491

Miss  M.  N.  —  Lieut.  E.  M.  N.

AV

sB

529

491

Mrs.  N.  — J.N

V

mS

530

492

Mr.  W.J. —  Mr.  J

V

SF

531

493

Mrs. Mr.

V

aN

532

494

Mr.  W.  —  Mr.  W

V

BB

533

494

Mr.  J.  M.  —  Mr.  A.  M

VT

FR

534

495

Mr.  C  — Miss  C

V

Bs

535

495

Mr. Father

V

SF

536

495

Servant  —  Farm  Lads

V

aC

537

496

Lieut.  C.  —  Lieut.  L

V

FR

538

497

J.  P.  —Mrs.  P.  ...         :

A

S  m

539

498

Hon.  R.  H.  —  Mr.  L

A  V

FR

540

499

Mr. Mr.  B

AV

FR

541

501

Mrs. Son

lorV

mS

1  Great  Aunt.


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


719


PAGE.

Vol.
II.

502
502
502
503
504
505
506
507
509
510
511
511
512
513
513
514
515
515
516
516
517
519
520
520
520
521
522
522
523
524
/525
1526
526
527
528
529
529
530
531
532
533
533
534
536
537
538
538
539
540
541
542
543
543
544
545
545
546


PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


Mrs.  A.  —  Rev.  F.  A.  ...
Mrs.  O.  —  Mr.  0.

S.  S.  —Mrs.  F

Miss  H.  P.  —  Hon.  J.  P.
Mr.  B.  —Mr.  C.  F.  S.  ...
J.  R.  —  Mons.  G.

Mrs.  B.  — Dr.

T.  —  Mr.  J.  P

Mr.  J.  A.  C.  —  J.  H.  ...
Farmer  —  Capt.  W.

Mrs.  R.— Mr.

Mrs.  H.  —  Z.

Mrs.  H.  —  Mrs. ...

Mrs.  P.  —  Mother

Miss Mrs. ...

Miss  M.  C.  —  Mrs.  S.  ...
Rev.  W.  J.  —  Daughter  (?)
Mr.  T.  H.  —  Mrs.  H.  ...
Mr.  T.  H.  —Mr.  E.  H....
Rev.  H.  A.  H.  —  Mrs.  B.
Rev.  H.  A.  H.  —  Mr.  R.
W.  S.  —  Capt.  S.

J.  B.— Father

Mrs.  P.  —Mrs. ...

G.  — Father

Mrs.  M.  —  G

Mrs.  A.  —Mrs.  W.
Mr.  V.  T.  E.  —Mrs.  E.

.4. —  Mr.  A.  J

M.  V.  —  Capt.  de  L.  ...
Mr.  H.  W.  —Mrs.  W.  ...
Mr.  H.  W.  —  Mrs.  W.  ...

MissH.  C.  —Mr. ...

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  H.

Mr.  J.  H.  J.  —  Mr.

Mrs.  W.  —  Mrs. ...

Mrs.  C.  —Mrs. (?)...

Dr.  C.  M.  —  Mr.  M.  ...
LordD.  —Mrs.  P.  C.    ...

Mrs. Mrs. ...

Lieut.  W.  C.  B.  —  Mrs.  B.
Miss  J.  C.  —  H.  C.
Col.  C.  —  W.  C.  or  J.  C.
Mrs.  M.  —  Capt.  P.
General  M.  —  Laundress
Mr.  H.  —  Dr.  G.
Mrs.  F.  -General  F.    ...
Mr.    J.  D.  —Mrs.  F.     ...
Mrs.  R.  —  Mr.  D.
Mr.  G.— Miss  R.

Mr. Mrs.  ...

Bishop  E.  —  Mr.  C.
Rev.  G.  —  Lord  K.
Mrs.  deS.  —  Sister

Mr. Mrs. — -     ...

Child  — Frau  ■

Mrs.  W.  —  G.  W.


NATURE  OF

RELATIONSHIP

IMPRESSION

OF  p.   TO   A.

V

mS

V

mS

V

st

V

dF

V

FR

VA

f  R

lor  V

f  R

V

AC

V

FR

V

AC

V

f  R

V

f  R

V

m  d

V

d  m

V

d  m

V

a  c

V

Fd

V

Sm

V

BB

V

Fr

V

FR

V

SF

V

dF

V

fr

V

dF

V

cC

V

d  m

V

Sm

AT  V

FR

V

fR

V

Sm

E

Sm

V

f  R

V

aC

V

FR

V

d  m

V

a  c

V

AC

V

Fd

V

d  m

V

Sm

V

sB

V

AC

V

f  R

V

Ac

V

FR

V

wH

V

Bs

V

f  R

V

Ac

V

Sm

V

FR

V

FR

V

s  s

V

Hw

V

Sm

V

mS

720


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.


597
598
599
600
601
602
603
604
605
606
607
608
609
610
611
612
613
614
615
616
617
618

619

620
621
622
623
624

625

626
627
628
629
630
631
632
633
634
635
636
637
638
639
640
641
642
643
644

645
646
647
648


PAGE,

Vol.
II.


547
547
548
549
550
550
551
552
553
553
555
556
556
557
558
558
561
562
563
564
564
565

566

567
568
570
570
572
/573
1573
574
574
575
576
576
578
579
580
581
582
583
583
584
585
586
590
591
593
595

597
598
600
600


PEKCIPIENT   AND    AGENT.


J. J.  M.

Major  H.  —  Capt.  H

Miss  M.  —  Sir  J.  Y

Officer  —  Lieut.  G

Mr.  M.  —  H.  M

Mrs.  P.  —Mr.

Mr.  A.  —J.  A

Mr.  J.  W.  —Mrs.  W

General  K.  —  Mrs.  K

Mr.  J.  S.  —  Mrs.  S

Child  — Officer

Mate  — Brother  ...

Mr.  F.  L.  M.  —  Mr.  S

Maori  —  Brother...

Mrs.  G.— Son

Mrs.  A.— Mrs.  G

Mr.  M.  P.  S.  —  Mr.  S

Mrs.  R.  —  G.  K

Herr  D.  —  Mr.  G.  S

MissB.  —  Dr.  H

Rev.  C.  C.  F.  —  Mrs.  F.
MissS.  —  Mrs.

Mrs.  M.  —  Sister  and  mother  . . .

Rev.  J.  W.  —  Rev.  T.  C.  E.    ...

Mrs.  M.  —Mr.

Mrs.  M.  —  Tom ■

Mrs.  M.  —  W.  M

MissC.  —  Mr.  J

Miss  H. — Nephew

Miss  H.  —  Nephew

Mr.  C.  —  Mr.  C

"Master  of  Marines  '"  —  Father

Mrs.  W.  —  Mrs.  De  M

MissS.  W.  —  Mr.  W

Mr.  F.  C.  —  Mrs.  C

Colonel  M.  T.  —  Miss  —      . . .

Capt. Mme.

Miss Lieut.  B

Child  — Mother

M. Mrs.

Mme.  E.  —  Mons.  E

MissS.  P.  —Mrs.  W

Colonel  T.  —  Mr.  J.  T

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W

Mrs.  E.  —  W.  E

Miss Rev. ...

Mr. Miss  L.  A.  W.       ...

Mrs.  A.  W.  —  Major  F.  M.  M.

Mrs.  W.  —  Mr.  W

Miss )

Miss  E. /

Mrs.  M.  -1     ^j^^3_


—  Mrs.  T.


NATURE     OF
IMPKESSION


Mrs. /

Lady  G.  \

Sister      /
Miss  S.~\
Mrs.  P./   ""


Mr.  J.  P.


V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
A
A
A
A
A
A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

T

T
VT

T

S
VA
VA

V  A

V  A
A  V
A  V
VA
A  V
A  V
VA

I  or  V.  I

D.  D

D.  D

D.  VT

/E
IE


RELATIONSHIP
OF   P.   TO  A.


FR
BB
f  R

AC
FS
dF
FS
Hw
Hw
H  w
dF
BB
C  C
BB
mS
a  c
FS
mS
FR
aC
Sm
f  r

ss,  ss,  dm

FR
s  B
f  R
mS
f  R
aN
aN
SF
SF
s  s
f  R
Hw
Fr
Hw
f  R
d  m
d  m
mS
s  s
BB
wH
wH
f  R
St
sT
wH

s  s  s

n  a

s  s

d  d  m

cC
mS


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED   CASES.


721


PAGE.

Vol.
II.


PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


NATURE  OP
IMPRESSION


RELATIONSHIP
OF  P.  TO  A.


602
603
604

605

606
607
609
610
610
611
612
613

613
615

616

617
617

619

622
623

625
626
627


Mrs.


Mrs.  M.


Mr.  T.  S.


—  Capt.  F.


Mrs.


—  Mr.


[  —  Mrs.  S.
Mr.  J.  S.   .


Mrs.  P.\

Mrs.  C.j
Mrs.  H.

Nurse
Miss  E.  H.
Mr.  S.  \
W.  B.  /  ~
C.  F.        ^
Nurse       I
Mrs.  R.     (
Capt.  R.  j
Miss  S.  —
Miss  J.  —
Miss  R.  \
Servant/
Miss  S.
Miss  M.  S
Mrs.  S.  \
Miss  F.J
Mrs.  R.
Mrs
Miss  E.
Miss  H,
Herr  C.
Fraulein  C.  /
Mr.  R.  1

Mr.  J.  C.  R.  J

Miss ]

Colonel  W.   [

and  others  J
Mrs.  -
Mary
John  -
Mr.  C
Mrs.  C.

and  2  Children
Miss  W.      \
Miss  — W./~
Admiral  C.     \
Mr.  G.  B.  C.  /
Miss  A.  S.^
Miss  E.  F.  V  —
Page  J

Mr.  T.  S.  ^
Mrs.
Child

Miss  S.      J
Two  Ladies  i  —  Dr,

£i:}-M-c.
m£b:}-"'-g.h.

2  servants  —  Miss  L.
Mrs.  B.  and\
3  others    /


-  a  lady
Capt.  —


—  Ellen


Mrs.  C.


Mr.  W.
—Mr.  C.


Miss  S.


Mr.


B.


Miss  W.


d  m
d  m
fr
a  c

a  c
FS
AC
SF
aC
f  R
FR
s  s
s  s
aN
sT
d  m
d  m
aC
aC

dF(?)

f  r

fr

BB

sB

Ac

Ac

f  R

FR
FFf  R

m  d

s  s

Bb

Sm

f  r
GGg

ddF

S  SF

st
st
St
FR
wH
SF
f  R


ff

f  f  R

a  a  c

Ff  f  f  r


1  Described  by  the  agent  as  "  relations  "  simply.


3   A


722


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED   CASES.


PAGE.

NATURE  OP

RELATIONSHIP

NO.

Vol.
II.

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.

IMPRESSION

OP  P.  TO  A.

672

628

£.           }-Mrs.B.a)         ...

{I

Bs

fr

673

629

Miss  E.  B.  \       ^.      n   B   /,^

MissS.  B.  /-^^-^issu  b.{.)

V

s  s  s

674

631

"^In/othersl-Mi-F

/A
lA

m  d

s  s

675

632

^5t.l}-Mr.A

/A  T
I   A

dF

SF

676

633

"A.  B."         \       ^
and  others  /       ^^^-

{i

NU
s  s  T  (?)

677

634

Mr.  H.  H.  E.  \       ,

Mr.  E.             J

{i

?

678

635

Mr.  M.  P.  S.  \       pj  ., .

Mrs.  S.            |-Uiild

ii

Fr
a  n

679

635

Mrs.  \  _  Mr

and  others  /

lA

d  F,  g  G,
a  C

Mr.  C.  H.  K.^

f^

BB

680

636

Mr.  K.              V  — Mr.  K

1^

FS

Mrs.  K.           J

A

mS

681

636

K.°' =•}-«-■  s

11

St
a  n

682

636

MnW.H.|  _„,.«_

{i

CC

aN(?)

683

638

Mrs.  W.  \       j^     jj

\AT(?)

f  R
AC

684

639

and  others  /

lA

Sm
Fffffr

CASES  IN  THE  ADDITIONAL  CHAPTER.


685
686
687


689
690


PAGE.

Vol.


671
675
676
679

683

685


691  687
692


693

690

694

692

695

693

696

694

697

695

698

696

699

699

700

700

701

702

702

703

PERCIPIENT  AND  AGENT.


NATURE  OP
IMPRESSION


Miss Mr.  A.  H.  W.  C.

Fraulein  H.  —  Mrs.  R.  ...
G.  —  Mr.  E.  M.  C.
Mme.  B.  —Mens.  G.     ...

Mme.  D.  —  Mons.  J.  H.


Mile.  J.


Dr.  D.


Mr.  L.  —Mrs.  L.

Mr.  G.  —Mr.  E.  T.  R....

Mrs.  E.  —Mme.  H.

Mr.  J.  G.  F.  R.  —  Miss  Y.

Mrs.  T.  —Mr.  W.  T.    ...

Rev.  R.  M.  H.  —  Uncle

Mrs.  B.  —  Mr.  Z.

E.  B.  —  C.  Br

Dr.  A.  B.  \       T.

J.  H.         j-^-

Mr.  J.  M.  F.  —  Mrs.  F.

Mr.  H.  E.  M.  —  Miss  R.

Mr.  M.  S.  G.  —  Mrs.


V.  V

V

M.  I

Hypnotic

sleep,  &c.
Hypnotic
sleep,  &c.
Hypnotic
sleep,  &c.

I

I

A

A

V
(A?)  V

V
V  A

fV

\v

D
D,  V
D  V  A


RELATIONSHIP
OP  P.   TO  A.


f  R

s  s
FR

aC

aC

aC
Hw
FR
f  r
Fr
mS
NU
a  C
f  R

AAC

Hw
Fr
Fr


TABLE  OF  NUMBERED  CASES.  723

An  analysis  of  the  above  table  shows  that  of  882  ^  percipients,  370,
or  42  per  cent.,  were  males,  and  512,  or  58  per  cent.,  females.  Of  708^
agents,  448,  or  63*3  per  cent.,  were  males,  and  260,  or  36"7  per  cent.,
females.  The  preponderance  of  female  percipients  cannot  be  assumed  to
indicate  any  superior  susceptibility  in  that  sex  to  telepathic  impressions
(see  above,  p.  3,  last  sentence  of  first  note).  The  preponderance  of  male
agents  is  probably  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  men  are  more
liable  than  women  to  accidents  and  to  violent  deaths,  and  that  a  larger
proportion  of  them  die  at  a  distance  from  their  nearest  relatives  and
friends.

Analysing  the  results  of  column  V,  we  find  that,  out  of  830  cases,  the
agent  stood  to  the  percipient  in  the  relation  of

Parent  or  child  in  193  cases,  or  23*3  per  cent.


Brother  or  sister  „

122

,    14-7

Husband  or  wife  „

52

,      6-3

Cousin,  uncle,  &c.

75

,      9-0

Friend                    ,,

263

,    31-7

Acquaintance        ,,

89

,    10-7

Stranger                 „

36

,      4-3

It  will  be  seen  that  only  in  47  per  cent,  of  the  cases  is  any  blood-
relationship  known  to  have  existed  between  the  parties  ;  and  since  in
many  cases  the  relatives  of  the  percipient  will  have  naturally  belonged
also  to  the  circle  of  his  intimate  friends,  it  seems  reasonable  to  conclude
that  consanguinity,  as  such,  has  little  if  any  predisposing  influence  in  the
transmission  of  telepathic  impressions.  It  may  be  suggested  that  the
comparative  infrequency  of  such  transmissions  between  husbands  and
wives  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  it  is  commoner  for  married  persons
than  for  blood-relations  to  be  together,  when  one  of  the  two  dies.

It  is  noteworthy  that,  out  of  36  cases  in  which  the  agent  was  a
stranger  to  the  percipient,  no  less  than  15  are  collective  cases  in  which  an
intimate  friend  of  the  agent  was  one  of  the  co-percipients,  and  may  be
held  to  have  constituted  the  link  between  the  agent  and  the  stranger
percipient.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the  examples  that  have
been  given  of  telepathic  afiection  by  strangers  show  somewhat  less
than  the  true  proportion ;  as  there  may  be  cases  belonging  to  this
category  which  for  evidential  purposes  must  be  dismissed,  the  fact  of
coincidence,  which  alone  could  distinguish  them  from  purely  subjective
hallucinations,  having  been  unsuspected  and  unknown.

^  Where  the  same  person  has  been  concerned  on  more  than  one  occasion  as  percipient
or  agent,  each  such  experience  has  been  reckoned  for  the  purpose  of  the  calculation  as  a
distinct  case.  Cases  88  and  90  have  been  omitted  in  reckoning  the  percipients,  it  being
doubtful  which  of  the  two  persons  concerned  was  the  percipient,  and  which  the  agent ;
and  cases  44,  88^  90,  133,  264,  316-325,  330-338,  387,  388,  436,459,  461,668,  and 677  have  beeu
omitted  in  reckoning  the  agents.

3  A  2


INDEX.


IsT.B.  For  many  topics,  the  Synopsis  at  the  beginning  of  each  volume
forms  (with  the  clue  which  the  titles  of  the  Chapters  ajfford)  a  ready  means
of  reference  ;  and  these  are,  for  the  most  part,  not  included  in  the  present
Index.

The  page-numbers  of  the  second  volume  are  printed  in  italics.

PAGE

Abbrckombie,   Dr.,   Case  described  by,   of  hallucinations  voluntarily

originated         ......  Ixxxi

After-images  ......  489-91,  502,  505

Agency,  telepathic,  Various  conditions  of,  in  spontaneous  cases  .  229

Anonymous  testimony,  Worthlessness  of  ....       167-9

Anxiety,  Effect  of,  m  producing  hallucinations    ....       506-9

"  Arrival  Cases  "  .  .         251-4,517-8,   96-100,   36S-4,  530-2,  588-9,   623-7

Auditory  hallucinations.  Different  proportion  of  to  visual,  in  the  purely

subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  .         22-3

- — ■ Numerical  estimate  relating  to,  in  the  two  classes  .  .         12-6

of  an  internal  sort  .....     480-2,  119-20

non-verbal  and  rudimentary  .     222-5,   403-5,  502-3,  125-32,   568-74

due  to  anxiety        .......     509-10

due  to  expectancy  ......  514

Automatic  actions  telepathically  produced  (See  Unconscious  percipience)

Awe,  Effect  of,  in  producing  hallucinations  ....       510-2

Baillarger,  Dr.,  on  "  psycho-sensorial "  hallucinations  .  .       461-2

Defects  of  his  view  ......       465-6

Ball,  Prof.,  on  various  points  connected  with  hallucinations        467,  470,  479-80

Case  recorded  by  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  476

Barrett,  Prof.  W.  F. ,  Paper  of,  read  before  the  British  Association  in  1876      13

Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  .  .  20-9,  59-61

Bemheim,  Dr.,  Experiments  of,  in  hypnotic  hallucinations        .  469-70,  472

Bell-sounds,  Hallucinations  of     .  .  .  .  502-3,  127-9,  233-5

Binet,  A.,  on  certain  hypnotic  hallucinations      ....      468-70
Binsfeld,  Tractainhs  de  Sortilegiis  .....  175,  183

Blood,  a  prominent  feature  in  the  telepathic  percept   373,  34,  403,  430,  433,  481
Bodin,  Demonomanie        .....    173,  177,  180,  182,  478


726


INDEX.


PAGE

Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers         .....     178,  180,  183
Boismont,  Dr.    Brierre  de,  Spurious  cases  of  collective  hallucination

recorded  by      .  .  .  .  .  .  .       186-7


"  Borderland  "  hallucinations,  Various  sorts  of

Importance  of  distinguishing  from  dreams

Brewster's  view  of  visual  hallucinations

Brougham,  Lord,  Remarks  of,  on  his  own  experience


389-92

393-7

465

396-7


Cakdan,  De  Varietate  Berum       .  .  .  .  .

Cards  and  other  objects,  Experimental  transferences  of  ideas  of


Casaubon,  Meric,  Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity
Casual  experiments
Census  of  dreams  of  death
of  sensory  hallucinations  .


479,  555
21-9,  31-5,

37,  661-4

184

81-85,  655-7,  665

.     303-10

6-S4.


pported  by  telepathic


570-1

Ixxiv-v

198-9


Centrifugal  origin  of  hallucinations,  strongly  su

examples
Cevennes,  Spurious  marvels  in  the
Chambers,   Dr.   T.   King,   Case  of  simultaneous  hallucinations

recorded  by

Chance,  how  far  an  explanation  of  the  facts  adduced     (See  Probabilities)
Charcot,  Dr.,  Form  of  unilateral  hallucination  recorded  by         .  .       471-2

Children,  Percipience  of,  ("collective"  cases  not  included)  245,  246,  235,  2^8-9,

423,  519,  555,  581
Chntoff,  Dr.  A.  M. ,  Experiment  of,  in  thought-transference       .  .  665

Clairvoyance  ......         266-7,  555-6,  286-7

Difference  between  telepathic  and  independent    .  .  368-9,  669

Telepathic,  in  reciprocal  cases        .  .  .  161-2,  289,  303-10

Independent,  often  assumed  without  any  sufl&cient  warrant     329-30,  335

Relation  of  to  collective  cases         ....         269,  289-90

alleged  of  Swedenborg        ......      xlviii

Cloudy  or  misty  appearance  of  visual  phantasms     521,  526,  527,  557,  xxii,  182,

450,  481,  513
Coincidences,  apt  to  be  regarded  as  either  accidental  or  supernatural  397,  4^1-^

significant  in  virtue  of  frequency,  not  of  oddness  .  .  2

Tendency  to  exaggerate  the  closeness  of  .  .     Ixxv-vii,  144-5,  156-7

Cold,  Sensation  of,  at  the  time  of  a  telepathic  affection  .  .      210,  527,  37,

122,  150,  180,  249,  500
Collectivity  of  percipience,  in  what  sense  a  proof  of  objectivity  in

the  percept      .  .  .  .  .  .      168-70,  190-2

Collusion,  Hypothesis  of,  in  experiments  in  thought-transference  .       18-20
Necessity  of,  if  experiments  in  thought-transference  are  to  be

explained  as  tricks       ......         22-3

Community  of  sensation,  first  noticed  in  connection  with  the  hypnotic  state     11

shown  in  experiments  in  the  transference  of  tastes  and  of  pains        51-8,

324-31,  339,  344,  666-8
Compact,  previous,  between  agent  and  percipient.  Possibly  effect  of  .  66
Instances  of             .           •  .           •  .    395,  419,  427,   527,  63,  477,  489,  497


INDEX.  ■    727

PAGE

Contact,  the  essential  condition  for  muscular  guidance,  all  possibility

of  which  must  be  precluded  in  experiments  in  thought-transference         17-8
Contact,  Alleged  effect  of,  in  certain  cases  of  hallucination         .  .  iS9,  S59

Contemporary  evidence,  Importance  of   .  .  .  .  .    13,  21  Jf.

Cotta,  T/ie  Infallible,  True  and  Assured  Witch  ....  120,  182
Creery  family,  Esperiments  with  the       .....        20-31

'Dagoi!!:et,  Dr.,  Les  Maladies  Mentales  ....  476,480,484
D' Autun,  L' Incredulite  Scavante  .....  180,  184

Dead,  Phantasms  of  the,  how  connected  with  the  present  inquiry        190-2,  214

^ Evidence  for,  inconclusive       .  .  .  512

Death-cases,  Large  proportion  of  ....  303,  25-6

Deferment  or  latency  of  telepathic  impressions  .  56,  70-1,  201-2,  265,  519

De  I'Ancre,  TaUeati  de  I'  Inconstance  des  mauvais  Anges  et  Demons  117,  173
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicce  ....  179,  180,  181,  182
Dessoir,  Max,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  .  .      642-58

Development  of    hallucinations.    Gradual,  in    the    purely    subjective

class     ........        520-2

in  the  telepathic  class  .  .     522-34

Diagrams,  Experiments  in  the  reproduction  of    .  .  .      35-51,  642-53

Disappearance  of   visual  phantasms.   Gradual,   a  feature   common   to

purely  subjective  and  to  telepathic  specimens  .  .    573,  97

Instances  of  .    444,  446,  454,  521,  527,  552,  96,  176,  182,

214,  ^46,  453,  467,  503,  512,  522,  628,  629

Special  modes  of   ....  432,  559,  573,  239,  605

on  sudden  speech  or  movement,  a  feature  common  to  purely

subjective  and  to  telepathic  specimens  .  .  .    573,  91

Instances  of  .     207,  414,  417,  436,  530,  542,  564,  60,  91,

451,  461,  464,  491,  500,  616

Door  opening  or  shutting.  Hallucination  of         .      214,  454,  532,  4^9,  492,  497,
. -n,.  'g-i^oa  543,  612,  626,  633,  694,  697

"  Double  Consciousness  "  ......        69-70

Dreams,  Relation  of,  to  waking  hallucinations    .  .  296-7,  484-5,  539,  547

Evidential  weakness  of,  as  a  class  ....        298-9

of  death.  Census  and  computation  relating  to     .  .  .      303-10

Dress  and  appurtenances  of  visual  phantasms     .  540-6,  669-70,  90-6,  294-7

Drowning-cases,  Large  proportion  of        .  .  .  .  .  26

Edgeworth,   F.  Y.,   his  remarks  on   the   application   of    the  theory

of  probabilities  to  certain  experimental  results  .  .  26

and  to  certain  spontaneous  results  ....  xxi

Emotional  impressions,  Evidential  weakness  of,  as  a  class  .  .      269-70

Error,  Possibility  and  effects  of,  in  observation  ....        123-5

125-6

126-9

.      129-31

.  12-3,  88

.    19,  274

in  spontaneous

114-5


in  inference

in  narration

in  memory

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Importance  of  his  testimony
Evidence,  experimental,  Necessity  of  accumulating

Difference  in  the  nature  of,  in  experimental  and

cases    .


728  INDEX.


PAGE

Evidence,  for  telepathy,  contrasted  with  that  for  other  alleged  marvels  115-22
for  phantasms  of  the  living,  contrasted  with  that  for

phantasms  of  the  dead  .  .  .  Ixiii-iv,  121-2, 512

Points  of,  required  in  a  typical  case  of  spontaneous  telepathy    .  131

of  the  percipient  as  to  facts          .....  133-8

as  to  dates            .....  140-6

Description   of    the,    admitted  to  this  book  :    its   cumulative

strength           .......  158-66

its  deficiencies         ......  167-9


Expectancy,  Effect  of,  in  producing  hallucinations  .  .  .        512-7

Experimental  and  spontaneous  telepathy.  Connection  between  110-3,  171-2,  27 1
Experiments  (See  under  various  headings — Community  of   sensation.

Cards,  Diagrams,  &c.)
Externalisation  of  hallucinations.  Various  degrees  in  the  .        480-3,  29-S8

"Faces  in  the  dark"   ......     473,  479,  492

Falck,  De  Doemonologid  recentiorum  Autorum     .  .  .  462,   168

Fechner,  Experiment  of,  in  hallucination  of  colour         .  .  .        462-3

1  ere.  Dr. ,  Experiments  of,  in  certain  cases  of  hypnotic  hallucination  .  468

Folie  a  deux  .  ...  .  .  .  .  458,  S80

Fragmentary  appearances  .  .  416,  504,  xxv,  33-4,  59,  512,  526


Galton,  F.,  on  the  sympathy  of  twins  .
Gifford,  G.,  Dialogue  concerning  Witches
Discourse  of  Subtill  Practices


279
176
179
118,  174,  178-81,  184
175,  179


Glanvil,  Sadducismus  Triumphatus
Godelmaiui,  Tractatus  de  Magiis
Griesinger,  Die  Pathologic  und  Therapie  der  Psychischen  Kranhheiten    461,  467,

477,  494
Guthrie,  M.,  Experiments  organised  by  .  .  .  .        36-58

Hallucinations  of  the  Senses

— Census  of  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6-24,  133-4

Proportion   of    various  types  of,    in    the    subjective    and   the

telepathic  classes         ......         22-5

Psychological  identity  of  with  dreams     .  .      484-5,  539,  547,  702

Resemblances  between  subjective  and  telepathic  specimens  of       496-500

572-3,  xxii

how  far  transferable  from  one  person  to  another  183,  224-5,  279-82

Epidemic  ........  187

Hypnotic  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .        187-8

Traditional  .......  189

"  Particular,"  i.e., unshared  by  persons  present  with  the    perci-
pient, frequent  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  .  573,  i  05

Visual  instances  of    210,  218,  552,  560,  42,  43,  61,  163,  212,  237,

256,  455,  484,  495,  513,  517,  522,  542,  555,  557

Auditory  instances  of        .       223,  452,  100,  104,  106,  109,  222,

485,  568,  569,  580,  581,  584
Hartmann,  E.  von.,  on  Spi/ritism  .....  184


INDEX.  729

PAGE

Hereditary  or  family  susceptibility  to  telepathic  influence              .  573,  1S2

Herschell,  Sir  J.  F.  W.,  Experience  of,  in  hallucinations             .  465,  472,  487

Holland,  A  Treatise  against  Witchcraft      ....  175,  179

Holland,  Sir  H. ,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by          .             .  479,481

Hutchinson,  F.,  Historical  Essay  concerning  Witchcraft         174,  175,  176,  177,

180,  184

Hypnotic  effects.  Telepathic  production  of  .  88-91,  332-S,  3U,  676-87

Hypnotism,  Importance  of,  in  psychical  inquiries  .  .  .    xlii-iii

Ideas,    Experimental  transference   of,  involving  more

than  a  single  image  or  word      .  .  .82,  94-5,  340-3,  345-8

Illness,  Possible  effect  of,    in  heightening  telepathic  susceptibility         360,  397,

424,  147,  162,  164,  176,  345-53,  358,  390,  464-5,515,  703

Illusions,  Collective,  distinguished  from  hallucinations      .  .  .     184-6

"Hypnagogic" 390,400-1,473-4

Telepathic,  quite  conceivable  .....       6^-3

Imagery  and  symbolism  of  telepathic  percepts        341-68,  539-54,  298-9,  412-27,

'497,  612-3

Inhibition  of  utterance  or  of  particular  movements  in  another  person,

by  the  power  of  the  will  .  .  .  .  •    58-62

Jolly,  Prof.  F.  ,  Experiments  of,  in  auditory  hallucinations       .  .    470-1

Kahlbaxjm,    Types  of  hallucination  observed  by        472,   476,   490,   491,   495
Kandinsky,  View  of,  on  hallucinations  .  .  .  .  ■       494

Koppe,  on  auditory  hallucinations  .  .  467,  471,  475,  480,  495

Kraepelin,  Ueber  Trugwahrnehmungen         ....  490,  495

Krafft-Ebing,  Die  Sinnesdelirien       ....        467,  476,  487,  502

Lang,  A. ,  on  popular  superstitions  ....  122,  550

Lawson,  D.,   Tryals  of  the  New  England  Witches  .  .  477,  508

Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  on  witchcraft       .....    177-9,183-5
Liebeault,  Dr. ,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference     .  .  657-60

Light  (See  Luminosity)        .......

Limitation,  Arbitrary,  of  the  interval  of  time  in  spontaneous  tele-
pathic cases  to  12  hours  ....  139-40,  511
Locality,  Occasional  influence  of  .  .  .  .  .  368,  301-2
Loudun,  Hysterical  epidemic  at  .  .  .  .  •  •  119
Lowell,  J.  RusseU,  Features  of  subjective  hallucination  described  by  .  xxii
Luminosity,    a  frequent   feature  of    visual    hallucinations,   both  in  the

subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class   ....  550-1

Examples  of  417,  436,  437,  444,  550,  557,  561,  31,  46,  72,  76,  176,

181,   182,   204,   215,   4I6,   455,   459,   460,  4'^5,  4'^^,  4'^8,  509,  512,

522,   611,  622,  629,  703-4

Lyall,  Sir  A.  C. ,  Asiatic  Studies       ......      183

Mayo,  De,.,  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Superstitions  .  .  8

McGraw,  Dr.,  Observations  of,  on  some  rare  features  in  the  "  willing-
game  "     .  .  .  .  .  •  •  .15


730


INDEX.


Mackenzie,  Sir  Gr. ,  Tlie,  Laws  and  Customs  of  Scotland
Magnan,  Dr.,  Record  of  dramatic  hallucinations  by
Malleus  Maleficarum  ....

Marillier,  L.,  Record  of  subjective  hallucinations  by
Marshall,  Prof.  A. ,  on  probabilities
Mather,    Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World
Maudsley,  Dr. ,  on  certain  alcoholic  hallucinations
Maury,  Record  of  an  illusion  hypnagogique  by
Mazzini,  Case  of  collective  hallucination  described  by
Mesmerism,  Early  connection  of  thought-transference  with

Erroneous  ideas  of  the  power  of

(See  Hypnotic  effects)
Mickle,  Dr.  W.  J. ,  on  the  cerebral  seat  of  hallucinations
Misrecognition  on  the  percipient's  part    .


PAGE

.  177,  183

.       477-8

116,  118,  173

521,  32,  73,  99

181,  184,  477
390
390
188
11-3
87,  92-3

488-9


.       428,  429,  390,  ^22-3,
582-3,  633-4
Mistakes    of  identity,  how   far   an   explanation   of    alleged  telepathic

phantasms        ......  62-3,  243-4

More,  Gr.,  A  True  Discourse  against  S.  Harsnet  .  .  .       119,  181,  182

Motor-form  of  thought-transference.  Experiments  in  the  .         62-81,  89-94

Movement,  a  frequent  feature  of  visual  phantasms,  both  of  the  purely

subjective  and  of  the  telepathic  class  .  .  432,  573

Musical  hallucinations       .....  503,  221-3,  639-41


Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H.,  Record  of  experiments  by

Subjective  hallucinations  described  by

Nicolai's  hallucinations      ....
Numbers,  Experimental  transference  of  ideas  of


.       63-70

475,  481,  492,  72

458-9,  492

25,  34,  653-4,  661-4


OcHOROWicz,  Dr.  J.,  Experiments  of,  in  thought-transference  .

Pain,  Experimental  transferences  of  (See  Community  of  sensation)

Spontaneous  transferences  of,  rare

Parant,  Dr.  V.,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by

Paterson,  Cases  of  hallucination  recorded  by       .

Paul,  C.  Kegan,  Experiments  of,  in  community  of  sensation,  &c.

Percipience,  telepathic.  Various  types  of,  in  spontaneous  cases  .

Physical  basis  for  telepathic  phenomena  very  hard  to  conceive


660-4


discomfort  on  the  percipient's  part


Pick,  Dr.  A. ,  Records  of  hallucinations  by

Pitcaim,  Criminal  Trials  of  Scotland        .  .  .  .

Pollock,  W.  H. ,  Case  of  collective  illusion  recorded  by

Porta,  J.    Baptista,  Magia  Naturalis       .  .  .  .

Prediction,  Power  of,  how  far  a  test  of  scientific  achievement    .

Presence,  Alleged  feeling  of,  actual  or  potential  hallucination    .

Probabilities,     Theory     of,     applied     to     experiments     in

thought-transference  .  .  .  26,
applied  to  spontaneous  telepathic  occurrences


.      189-90
.  476,  490
474,  38,  133
666-9
186-7
111-13,  314-5
197,  273,  280,  371,  374
472,  487
176,  177
185
lib
1-4
483-4,  528,  138


31-5,  73-6,  653-4
303-10,  12-21


INDEX.


731


Psychical  aspect  of  telepathic   phenomena,  that  to  which  this    work
is  confined       .......


Specialised  meaning  of  the  term  .

Research,  its  peculiar  difficulties  and  obligations


Society  for
American  Society  for


4-6,  130,

6


Psychologie  Physiologique,  Societe  de         .

"  Psycho-sensorial "  hallucinations

Common  misunderstanding  of  the  term


113
5

167-9,

-8,  273

vii-x

35,    51

?-5,  679

461-4

479


Rapp,  Die  Sexenprocesse  .  .  .  .  .  .  .176

Eapport,  Different  sorts  of  .....  •        265-9

Reciprocal  telepathic  affections    ......  227,  153

often  assumed  on  quite  inadequate  grounds  .  .  15 4

Apparent  rarity  of,  how  explicable     ,  .  .  167,  303

Recognised    phantasms,    Different    proportion   of  to  unrecognised,  in

the  purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class        .  ,  24-5

Recognition,  Absence   of,  generally  but  not  always  an

evidential  defect  ....
of  a  phantasm  sometimes  delayed   .


220,  117,  137,  565

520-7,  71,  82,  464

467

552-3,  414


Regis,  Dr. ,  on  unilateral  hallucinations   .

Religious  investiture  of  telepathic  impressions

Remarks,  Interchange  of,  with  hallucinatory  figure     476,  4^0,  505,  524,  584,  607

Remy,  Doemonolatria        .....  175,  180,  181,  182

Repeated  apparition  of  the  same  person  ....        77-90

occurrence  of  a  telepathic  experience  to  the  same  person         .  196

22,  77
Repetition  of  telepathic  dreams  after  an  interval  .  .  .  367-8
Instances  of            330,    340,    343,  357,  365,  4I8,  424,  447,  701

of  telepathic  hallucinations  after  an  interval  .  .  414-5,  106

Visual  instances  of  414,  415,  445,  59,  467,  482,  500

Auditory  instances  of  409,  100,  113,  120,  123,  228,  229,

473,  631,  633-4,  635
Reuss,  La  Sorcellerie  au  16me  et  17 me  Siede
Richet,  Dr.  C,  his  experiments  in  thought-transference

L'Homme  et  V Intelligence

Rink,  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo
Rudimentary  hallucinations,  visual  .

auditory

Rumour,  Possible  telepathic  spread  of

St.  Medard,  The  Cmivulsionnaires  of
Scot,  R.,  The  Discovery  of  Witchcraft
Second-hand  evidence,  Defects  and  errors  of

Sort  of,  admitted  to  the  Supplement

"  Second  sight,"  Remarks  on       ,


,

176

,  183

31-3,  72-81,  664-5

.  118,

173,

462
550

73-6

125-32,  570-6,  635-9

■

365

120

175

Ixxvii,  148-57,

496,

539

322
535

732


INDEX.


PAGE

Sensation,  Community  of  (see  Community)

Telepathic  production  of  by  will         .  .  .      97-109,  611-6

Sensory  and  non-sensoiy  telepathic  effects  distinguished  .  .        186-7

Sidgwick,  Prof.,  on  the  moral  factor  in  experiments        .  .  .        19-20

Sikes,  Wirt,  British  Goblins  .....  Ixxx,  547

Simon,  Dr.  Max,  on  a  peculiar  type  of  hallucination       ,  .  .  481

Solidity,  apparent.  Presence  or  absence  of,  in  visual  hallucinations        .         37-8
Spee,  Cautio  Crimincdis    .......  176

Spina,  Quoestio  de  Strigibiis  .  .  .  .  .  174,  175

Sully,  J. ,  on  a  particular  type  of  hallucination     ....  477

Supernormal  and  supersensuous.  Meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  words     xlvi,  7
Supplement,  Position  of  the,  in  the  evidential  case  for  .telepathy  .       321-3

Tactile  cases,  hard  to  establish   ......  225

hallucinations.  Rarity  of  .  .  .  .  .  .        133-4

Taine,  his  special  use  of  the  word  hallucination  .  ...  459

Tamburini,  on  the  physiology  of  hallucinations   ....  487

Tartarotti,  Del  Gongresso  Nocturno  delle  Lamie    ....        175-6
Taste,  Experimental  transferences  of  (see  Community  of  Sensation)
Telepathy,    Two  distinct  branches  of — the  experimental   and    the

spontaneous     .......  8-9

Important    differences  between  them,  evidentially,  and

theoretically    ......        110-3,  114-5

171-2


—  their  true  theoretic  connection

-  Spontaneous,  two  great  divisions  of — the  sensory  and  the  noyi-

sensory  class — which  are  further  subdivided   .
-Relation  of,  to  religious  and  to  materialistic  conceptions


186-7
1-lvii
xlvii
14-5,  17
10-1
11,  63


Theosophy,  so-called.  Exposure  of  ...  .
"  Thought-reading, "  Spurious  exhibitions  of
Thought-transference,  a  preferable  term  to  "  thought-reading"
— —  a  less  wide  term  than  telepathy

Conditions    of  satisfactory  experiments  in,  and

importance  of  a  cumulative  proof  .  .  .  17-9,    85

Three,  Prevalence  of  the  number,  in  accounts  of  abnormal  phenomena  229

Transitional  cases,    (or   experiments  to   which   the   percipient  is


not  knowingly  a  party)
Importance  of
Difficulty  of  obtaining  accounts  of


Tuke,  Dr.  Hack,  Case  of  collective  illusion  recorded  by

Tunes,  Possible  telepathic  transference  of

Twins,  Telepathic  transferences  between

Two   (or  more)  phantasmal   figures,    Proportion  of    appearances


86, 110, 67i-S7
171
109,  675
185
.       233-4
279-83,  370,  Jf6
of,


about   equal   in  hallucinations    of    the    purely    subjective

and  of  the  telepathic  class       .  .  .  .  .  546

.  Instances  of  .  '  450,  499,  529,  535,  544,  98,  lU,  456,

469,  475,  482,  496,  506,  523,  534,  629

Two  or  three  senses,  Different  proportion  of  hallucinations  affecting,  in

the  purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class         .  .         23-4


INDEX.


733


Unconscious  agency  in  experimental  cases

percipience

intelligence


PAGE

.  78-9,  84,  670-1
62-81,  84,  293,  379,  670-1
Ixii,  69-70,  230-1,  313-4


Unconsciousness  of  the  agent,  Frequent,  at  the  time  when  a  spontaneous

transference  takes  place        .  .  .  .  .  230-1

Instances  of,  (swoon,  coma,  &c.)  .     194,  406,  435,  545,  548,  563,

569,  lis,  394,  419,  517,    609

Unrecognised  phantasms.  Different  proportion  of  to  recognised,  in  the

purely  subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class  .  .  S4-6

figures  218,  427,  452,  530,  xxi,  61,  236,  256,  468-9,  493,  502,  517,

619,  694

voices  uttering  words  227,  409,  553,  100,  114,  115,  116,  117,  119,

120,  122,  123,  137,  164,  470,  473,  561,  563,  565,  568,  584,  692


Visual  hallucinations.  Different  proportion  of  to  auditory,  in  the  purely
subjective  and  in  the  telepathic  class

Numerical  estimate  relating  to,  in  the  two  classes

due  to  anxiety     .

due  to  awe

due  to  expectancy

— — Rudimentary


Voisin,  Dr. ,  on  various  types  of  hallucination

Wagstaffe,  Tlie  Questioyi  of  Witchcraft  debated

Webster,  on  "  possession  "

Wier,  De  Proestigiis  Dcemonum  .

Will,  Relation  of,  to'  telepathic  experiments

Experiments  in  the  sUent  exercise  of


16-20
506-9
510-2
512-4

73-6,  192-4
465,  473,  495


.    183,  184
182

175,  179,  180,  181,  183

92-3

58-62,    89-91,  93-4,  676-7


Effect  of,  in  the  production  of  the  hypnotic  state  88,  332-3,  679-87

"Willing-game,"  Results  obtained  at  the,  due  to  the  interpretation

of  slight  physical  signs  ....  14-5,   642

Occasional  hints  of  some  further  cause  ....  15

Witchcraft,  Lack  of  evidence  for  the  spurious  marvels  of        Ixxiii,  116-8,  172-7

Mr.  Lecky's  treatment  of  ....  .  177-9

Certain  genuine  phenomena  of,  how  explicable  .  .        179-83

Words  and  names.  Experimental  transferences  of  .    23-5,  27-9,  64,  66,  69,

74-9,  82-4,  655-7,    665

Wundt,  on  "  psychical  energy "  .....  xli-ii
on  hallucinations            ....    461,  474,  476,  487,  38


PROCEEDINGS     OF

THE    SOCIETY    FOR    PSYCHICAL    RESEARCH.

The  price  of  each  volume  is  half-a-guinea ;  the  Parts  can  be  obtained  separately.

VOLUME     I.
Containing  Parts  I.— IV.

Objects  of  the  Society.

Address  by  the  President  at  the  first  General   Meeting.

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Reading.

Note  on  Thought-Reading.     By  Professor  Balfour  Stewart.

Note  on  Thought-Reading.     By  Rev.  A.  M.  Creery.

Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Thought-Reading.     By  PROFESSOR  W.  F.  Barrett.


Address  by  the  President  at  the  second  General  Meeting.

Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  (ivith  Illustrations).

Preliminary  Report  of  the  ' '  Reichenbach  "  Committee.

First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  ' '  Haunted  Houses. "

First  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee.

On  "  Clairvoyance,"  by  G.  Wyld,  M.D.  (Abstract).


Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference  {vdth  Illustrations).
First  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism.
First  Report  of  the  "  Reichenbach  "  Committee.

On  Some  Phenomena  Associated    with    Abnormal     Conditions     of    Mind.       By
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.


Address  by  the  President  at  the  fourth  General  Meeting.

Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism.

Record  of   Experiments  in    Thought-Transference   at   Liverpool.      By  MALCOLM

Guthrie,  J. P.,  and  James  Birchall.
Appendix  to  the  Report  on  Mesmerism.
Note  on  Muscle-Reading.     By  the  Rev.  E.  H.  Sugden.
Constitution  and  Rules  of  the  Society.


VOLUME     II.

Containing  Parts  V.— VII.

Fourth  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Thought-Transference.

Third  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Mesmerism.

An  Account  of   some  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  {with  Illustrations).

By  Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.  P.
Second  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee.

Note  on  the  Existence  of  a  "Magnetic  Sense."  By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.
The  Stages  of  Hypnotism.     By  Edmund  Gurney.
Report  on  Wells  Sunk  at  Locking,  Somerset,   to  Test  the  Alleged  Power  of  the

Divining  Rod.     By  Professor  W.  J.  Sollas,  M.A.,  D.Sc.
The  Divining  Rod.     By  Edward  R.  Pease.
Appendix  I.     Tabular  Abstract   of   Evidence  on  the  Divining  Rod,   collected  by

Mr.  E.  Vaughan  Jenkins.
Appendix  II.     Selected  Cases  from  the  same.


Third  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee — ^A  Theory  of  Apparitions.  Part  I.
Second  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Haunted  Houses,  &c.
Opening  Address  at  the  eighth  General  Meeting.     By  the  President.
Fourth  Report  of  the  Literary  Committee — A  Theory  of  Apparitions.  Part  II.


Opening  Address    at   the   ninth    General    Meeting.     By  Professor   Balfour

Stewart,  F.R.S.
An  Account  of  some    Experiments    in    Thought-Transference.     By  Professor

Oliver  J.  Lodge,  D.Sc.
An  Account  of  some  Experiments  in  Mesmerism.     By  Edmund  Gurney.
Diagrams  Illustrative  of  Thought-Transference.


Automatic  Writing.  I.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.

Abstract  of  the  President's  Opening  Address  at  the  eleventh  General  Meeting.

Account  and  Criticism  of  M.  Richet's  recent  Researches  in  Thought-
Transference.  By  Edmund  Gurney.  With  a  Note  by  Professor  0.  J
Lodge  and  Alfred  Lodge.

The  Problems  of  Hypnotism.     By  Edmund  Gurney.

VOLUME   III.
Containing  Parts  VIII.  and  IX.
Automatic  Writing.  II.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
Opening  Address   at  the  thirteenth  General  Meeting.     By  PROFESSOR  BALFOUR

Stewart,  F.R.S.
Notes  on  the  Evidence,  collected  by  the  Society,    for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.
Hallucinations.    By  Edmund  Gurney.
The   Calculus  of    Probabilities    applied  to  Psychical    Research. — I.     By    F.    Y.

Edgeworth.


Report  on  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy

(1)  Statement  and  Conclusions  of  the  Committee.

(2)  Account  of    Personal  Investigations    in    India,    and   Discussion   of  the

Authorship  of  the    "Koot  Hoomi"   Letters  (with  Appendices).     By
Richard  Hodgson.

(3)  Report    of    Mr.     F.    G.    Netherclift     on    the    Blavatsky-Coulomb

Correspondence.

(4)  Note    on    Certain    Phenomena    not     dealt    with    in    Mr.     Hodgson's

Account.     By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.-

(5)  Details    of   the    Evidence    referred   to    on    page    207.     Contents  of  the

Above  Report.
Some  Higher  Aspects   of   Mesmerism.      By   Edmund   Gurney  and  Frederic

W.  H.  Myers.
Further    Report    on    Experiments    in    Thought-Transference    at    Liverpool.     By

Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.  P.
Local  Ansesthesia  induced  in  the  Normal  State  by  Mesmeric  Passes.
Report  on  an  alleged  Physical  Phenomenon.
Catalogue  of  the  Library  (Abridged).

PART    X.

Human  Personality  in  the  light  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion.    By  Frederic  W.  H.

Myers.
On  some  Physical  Phenomena   commonly  called  Spiritualistic,  witnessed  by  the

Author.    By  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett.
Results  of    a    Personal     Investigation     into    the     "Physical    Phenomena"    of

Spiritualism,     with    some    critical     remarks     on     the    Evidence    for  the

genuineness  of  such  phenomena.     By  Mrs.  H.  SiDGWiCK.
The  Possibilities  of  Mai -observation  in  relation  to  Evidence  for  the  phenomena

of  Spiritualism.     By  Charles  C.  Massey.
Note  on  Mr.  Massey's  Paper.    By  Professor  H.  Sidgwick.
Experiments  in  Muscle-Reading  and  Thought-Transference.     By  MAX  Dessoir.
On    Telepathic    Hypnotism,     and    its    relation     to     other    forms     of    Hypnotic

Suggestion.     By  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.
The  Calculus    of    Probabilities  applied  to   Psychical  Research. — II.     By  F.  Y.

Edgeworth.


mimi


'mM


^M^t:


.ft


mm^


■f^m^'^m:


'''^iMB
