A Sketch of Morality Independent of Obligation or Sanction
Jean-Marie Guyau (Gertrude Kapteyn, trans.) (1898)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Jean-Marie Guyau's Esquisse d'une morale sans obligation ni sanction (1884) — morality without obligation or sanction: the French ethics of life. Gertrude Kapteyn's 1898 translation.

========================================================================

A SKETCH OF MORALITY
INDEPENDENT  OF

OBLIGATION OR SANCTION.


A  SKETCH  OF  MORALITY

INDEPENDENT  OF

OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.


BY

M.  GUYAU.


Translated  from  the  French  (Second  Edition)  by
GERTRUDE  KAPTEYN.


LONDON :
WATTS  &  CO.,  17,  JOHNSON'S  COURT,  FLEET  ST.

1898.


CONTENTS.


I'AGt

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE  .  .  .  .  vii

PREFACE  .  i


INTRODUCTION.

Criticism  of  the  Different  Attempts  to  Justify  Obligation  from  the
Physical  Point  of  View.

1*1 CHAPTER  I. — The  Morality  of  Metaphysical  Dogmatism  . 7

i. — The  Hypothesis  of  Optimism . .  .8

r" ii. — The  Hypothesis  of  Pessimism . .  .26

iii. — The  Hypothesis  of  the  Indifference  of  Nature  . 38

S  „ II.

i. — Morality  of  Practical  Certitude  . .  -45

ii. — Morality  of  Faith . . .  52

$O »'• — Morality  of  Doubt .  -64

ts-

t

FIRST  BOOK.

On  the  Motive  Force  of  Morality  from  a  Scientific  Point  of  View.
First  Equivalents  of  Duty.

CHAPTER  I. — Intensity  of  Life  is  the  Motive  Force  of  Action  .  71
,,  II. — The  Highest  Intensity  of  Life  has  for  its  Necessary

Correlative  the  Greatest  Expansion  .  .81

„  III. — To  what  Extent  Inward  Power  creates  a  Sort  of

Obligation.  Power  and  Duty  .  .  .89

,,  IV. — The  Sentiment  of  Obligation  from  the  Point  of

View of Mental Dynamics as Impulsive  or

Repressive  Force  .  .  .  -98


284219


vi  CONTENTS.

PACE

SECOND  BOOK.
Last  Possible  Equivalents  of  Ditty  for  the  Maintenance  of  Morality.

CIIAITEK  I.— Fourth  Equivalent  of  Duty  Derived  from  Love  of

Risk  and  of  Struggle .  .  .  .116

„ II. — Fifth Equivalent of  Duty, Derived  from Meta-
physical Risk. The  Hypothesis.

i. — Metaphysical  Risk  in  Speculation  .  . 135

ii. — Metaphysical  Risk  in  Action .  .  147


THIRD  BOOK.
TTie  Idea  of  Sanction.

CHAPTER  I. — Criticism of Natural Sanction and of Moral

Sanction  .  .  .  .  152

i. — Natural  Sanction  .  .  .  154

ii. — Moral  Sanction  and  Distributive  Justice  .  158

,, II. — The Principle  of  Penal or Defensive  Justice  in

Society .  .  .  .  .  .  169

,, III. — Criticism  of  Inward  Sanction  and  of  Remorse .  186
,, IV. — Criticism  of  Religious  and  Metaphysical  Sanction.

i. — Religious  Sanction ....  193

ii. — The  Sanction  of  Love  and  of  Fraternity  .  197

iii. — Conclusion ....  208


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.


THERE  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  present  moment  offers  a
fit  opportunity  for  introducing  to  a  large  circle  of  English
readers  this  book  of  Guyau's,  which,  in  his  own  country,
is  rightly  considered  his  masterpiece.  Guyau  is  already
known  in  England  by  his  remarkable  and  suggestive  work
on  Education  and  Heredity  and  The  Irreligion  of  the  Future;
and  another  work  from  him,  on  so  important  a  subject
as  Morality,  may  furnish  a  much-needed  source  of  inspira-
tion and  encouragement,  at  a  time  when  moral  science  is
evidently  entering  upon  a  period  of  renewed  energy  and
wider  interest.

Stimulated  by  the  great  difficulties  of  an  ever-increasing
complexity  of  life,  under  circumstances  which  render  many
of  the  old  creeds  and  religions  incompetent  to  grapple  with
the  problems  demanding  solution  ;  distressed  by  a  mental
chaos  which  threatens  to  retard  all  progressive  efforts  by
fitful  reactions  :  the  lovers  of  freedom  and  social  ameliora-
tion turn  to  Morality  for  the  support  and  the  strength-
giving  quality  without  which  life  is  doomed  to  decay  and
destruction.

But,  in  order  to  make  the  influence  of  morality  a  living
reality,  instead  of  a  shadowy  and  conventional  dogma,  the
study  of  its  principles  should  be  approached  with  a  deep


viii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

reverence  for  human  nature  and  truth,  and  a  broad-minded
sympathy,  which  alone  can  achieve  success  in  so  arduous  an
undertaking.

In  this  sphere  of  moral  science,  which  includes  all  that  is
of  most  vital  importance  to  man,  the  author  of  Morality
Independent  of  Sanction  or  Obligation  is  a  master-spirit.
He  merits  the  study  of  all  men  and  women  who  look  for
the  development  of  the  highest  and  best  from  germs  which
lie  hidden  in  the  human  breast  itself.

That  Guyau  is  one  of  ourselves,  born  in  the  central  life
of  the  nineteenth  century,  gives  all  the  more  significance
and  actuality  to  his  thoughts,  and  fills  his  writings  with  a
convincing  interest  which  the  utterances  of  authors  belonging
to  earlier  times  cannot  possess  in  the  same  degree  and
intensity.  For  to  each  generation  the  hope  and  the  light
of  the  future  must  necessarily  spring  from  its  own  present.
The  past  may  give  us  the  eternal  essence  of  human  thought,
which  has  an  historical  and  unquestionable  value  ;  but  the
present  alone  can  fully  express  its  own  needs,  capacities,
and  forces.  The  present  must  work  out  its  own  salvation.

Neither  Socrates  nor  Christ,  neither  Aristotle  nor  Buddha,
neither  Luther  nor  Kant,  can  give  us  the  keys  to  the
problems  of  an  age  which  was  unknown  to  them.  Our
springs  of  life,  the  energies  of  our  new  birth,  take  their
rise  in  the  most  highly-gifted  minds  of  our  own  era.  And
among  these  finely-organized  and  superior  natures  Guyau
stands  one  of  the  foremost.

Born  in  1856,  a  typical  offspring  of  the  second  part  of
our  century,  we  find  in  him  a  personality  specially  endued
with  a  genius  for  reflecting  the  intellectual  and  moral  evolu-
tion of  the  age.  His  are  the  very  doubts  and  negations
which  we  experience,  and  his  are  the  very  hopes  and  ideals


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  ix

which  shall  lift  us  out  of  the  depths  of  mechanical  materialism.
Exclusive  attention  to  physical  and  external  phenomena  has
occupied  our  minds,  and  shut  us  out  from  the  sphere  of
reflective  and  emotional  activity,  which  is  none  other  than
the  sphere  of  morality.

Guyau,  in  no  way  hampered  by  an  antiquated  education,
found  himself,  from  the  very 'beginning  of  his  intellectual
life,  at  the  point  which  even  now  a  great  many  enlightened
minds  only  reach  after  a  severe  struggle.  He  possessed  the
great  advantage  of  which  Emerson  speaks  in  his  essay  on
"Worship  ":  "  For  a  great  nature  it  is  a  happiness  to  escape
a  religious  training — religion  of  character  is  so  apt  to  be
invaded."  We  should  like  to  add  :  Religion  of  thought —
that  is  to  say,  the  loyalty  to  truth — is  so  apt  to  be  lost.
From  this  danger  Guyau  escaped,  his  first  and  only
religion  having  been  the  idealism  of  a  Plato  and  a  Kant.
These  were  the  masters  from  whose  lofty  conceptions  he
gradually  evolved  the  standpoint  whence  the  royal  road  to
human  self-direction  lies  open  before  his  vision  and  his
efforts.  And  his  nature  was  such  as  to  unite  the  qualities
of  the  thinker  and  moralist  with  those  of  the  artist  and
poet.  While  acting  as  the  mirror  of  all  the  conflicting  ten-
dencies and  characteristics  of  his  age,  it  remained  a  witness
to  the  higher  unity  which  underlies  all  existence.

The  great  discoveries  of  modern  science,  the  works  of
Darwin  and  Spencer,  only  half  understood  or  wrongly
applied  by  many  of  their  would-be  followers,  found  in
Guyau  an  intelligence  capable  of  recognising  their  golden
grains  of  truth,  a  mind  open  to  accept  some  of  their  funda-
mental verities,  but  also  a  mind  aware  of  their  limitations
and  shortcomings.  It  was  given  to  this  young  and  aspiring
poet-philosopher  to  add  to  the  sound  and  healthy  naturalism


X  TRANSLATOR  S PREFACE.

of  his  day  an  idealism  without  which  moral  evolution  lacks
its  vital  spring  and  its  fullest  meaning.  In  him  lived,  from
him  went  forth,  an  idealism  which,  while  rooted  firmly  in
nature,  could  nevertheless  soar  upwards  into  the  higher
regions  of  thought  and  imagination.  He  believed  in  the
doing  of  goodness  for  its  own  sake  ;  in  virtue  free  from  any
material  or  outward  obligation  or  sanction  ;  in  duty  relying
solely  upon  its  own  incentives  and  forces ;  in  a  morality
living  and  growing  from  its  own  seeds.  This  belief  was
inspired  by  the  expansion  and  development  of  life  itself.
This  new  faith,  freed  from  the  bonds  and  chains  which  but
too  often  doom  lower  conceptions  of  morality  or  religion
to  sterility,  opened  up  the  prospect  of  a  future  in  which  it
should  become  possible  to  realize  the  ideal  of  a  sane,  healthy,
and  strong  race  directing  its  powers  and  capacities  to  their
highest  use.  Instead  of  the  external  authority  of  a  God,
or  the  equally  external  authority  of  categorical  imperatives
imposed  upon  our  freedom  (as  even  the  great  Immanuel
Kant  still  more  or  less  conceived  morality),  Guyau  con-
structed a  kind  of  natural  determinism  of  impulses  and
sentiments,  which,  disciplined  through  reflection  and  expe-
rience, are  a  law  unto  themselves.

Morality  is  thus  conceived  as  a  natural,  internal  energy
for  good,  translating  itself  into  action  by  its  own  exuberance
of  vitality.  It  is  an  abundance  of  force  in  natural  overflow,
and  thus  the  life  of  a  moral  agent  is  mingled  with  that  of  its
fellow-creatures.  Instead  of  an  outer  law  of  restraint,  which
incessantly  struggles  with  an  unwilling  individual  (and  it  is
this  which  forms  the  basis  of  ordinary  morals),  we  here
find  a  moral  power,  which  may  be  so  trained  and  increased
as  to  subdue  evil  tendencies  far  more  successfully  than  is
possible  under  categorical  imperatives  or  apodictic  rules.


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.  xi

The  great  merit  of  the  book  is  that  it  unfolds  this
ideal  of  the  loveliness  of  the  natural  moral  ideal,  and  renders
it  so  vivid  as  to  create  the  desire  for  its  realization.  The
display  of  this  ideal  as  a  possibility  is  an  invaluable
service  in  a  period  which  is  threatened  on  the  one  side  by
moral  dissolution,  and  on  the  other  by  a  return  to  mental
chaos  and  superstition.  Guyau  perceived  that  the  situation
was  critical.  Morality  must  justify  itself,  or  it  must  cease
to  exist.  The  latter  alternative  was  not  possible  to  a  soul
such  as  his,  which  loved  virtue,  and  therefore  already
believed  in  it,  and  in  the  possibility  of  its  realization  on
earth.

If  no  ready-made  theory,  no  system,  no  dogmas,  can  be
got  out  of  this  book,  there  remains  the  great  merit  of  its
bringing  home  to  us  the  conviction  that  to  our  time
belongs  the  task  of  creating  a  new  mental  and  moral
guidance,  which  shall  enable  the  individual  and  the  race  to
steer  a  happier  course.

"  This  is  a  great  task,  and  it  is  our  task."  So  ends
a  book  which  gives  to  the  serious  and  open-minded
student  many  suggestions  as  to  the  best  way  of  fulfilling  this
task.  It  is  thus  both  a  call  and  a  sign-post.  Guyau  threw
light  on  whatever  problem  he  touched,  and,  by  virtue  of  his
large-hearted  sympathy  and  singularly  gifted  nature,  his  soul
realized  the  possibility  of  ultimate  harmony  and  peace
between  those  conflicting  tendencies  in  human  nature  which
give  rise  to  the  riddles  of  existence.

As  an  artist  he  felt,  as  a  thinker  he  discovered,  as  a
moralist  he  taught,  that  only  the  harmonizing  of  the
different  spheres  of  human  thought,  emotion,  and  will
could  banish  sorrow  and  pain.  In  him  the  aesthetic  and
moral  qualities  were  so  mixed  that  his  conception  of


xii  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

morality  was  lit  up  by  the  ardour  and  enthusiasm  of  art,  and
his  conception  of  art  was  strengthened  by  steadfast  moral
aspiration.  The  intensity  of  his  life-impulse  and  force  drove
his  nature  to  go  out  towards  others,  thus  exemplifying  that
action  and  re-action  of  the  individual  and  his  surroundings
which  may  solve  the  problem  of  conflicting  altruism  and
egoism.

No  nobler  task  than  the  one  set  by  Guyau  could  be  given
to  the  twentieth  century ;  and  to  those  who  believe  in  its
mission  he  should  no  longer  be  a  stranger.  In  Guyau,  who
has  not  unjustly  been  called  "  the  Spinoza  of  France,"  they
will  find  the  inspiration  needed  for  the  carrying  on  of  all
social  efforts  and  reforms.  His  high-souled  sincerity  and
his  ceaseless  striving  after  truth  and  virtue  mark  him  out  as
a  standard-bearer  in  the  struggle  for  the  emancipation  of
humanity.

GERTRUDE  KAPTEYN.


ERRATA.


Page  44  ;  six  lines  from  bottom. For  "antagnostic  "  read  "  antago-
nistic."

Page  135  ;  middle  of  page. For  "  KivSvrjos"  read  "
Page  172  ;  eleven  lines  from  top. Delete  "guilty."


MORALITY INDEPENDENT OF
OBLIGATION OR  SANCTION.


PREFACE.

AN  ingenious  thinker  has  said  that  the  aim  of  education
was  to  give  to  man  "a  bias  towards  goodness."*  This
saying  clearly  shows  the  foundation  of  morality  as
generally  accepted.  To  the  philosopher,  on  the  contrary,
there  may  not  be  in  conduct  one  single  element  for  the
presence  of  which  the  mind  cannot  account,  one  obligation
which  does  not  explain  itself,  one  duty  the  necessity  for
which  is  not  clearly  shown.

We  intend,  therefore,  to  investigate  the  character  and
extent  of  a  conception  of  morality  in  which  "  bias "
should  have  no  part ;  in  which  everything  would  be  sup-
ported by  reason,  and  appreciated  at  its  true  value,  whether
with  regard  to  certainties  or  with  regard  to  merely  probable
opinions  and  hypotheses.  If  the  majority  of  philosophers
— even  those  of  the  utilitarian,  evolutionist,  and  positive
schools — have  not  completely  succeeded  in  their  task,  this
is  because  they  wanted  J:o  put  forward  their  rational  moral
philosophy  as  nearly  adequate  to  the  ordinary  moral  philo-
sophy, as  having  the  same  scope,  and  also  pretending
to  have  rendered  it  as  imperative  in  its  precepts.  This  is  not

*  "  Le  prijugt  du  bien  "  (Vinet).


2 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

possible. When Science has  overthrown the  dogmas  of
the  different  religions,  she  has  not pretended  to  replace
them  all,  nor  to  immediately  supply  a  distinct  object,  a
definite food,  for the religious  need; her position with
regard  to  morality  is  the  same  as  with  regard  to  religion.
Nothing  indicates  that  a  conception  of  morality  which  is
purely  scientific — that  is  to  say,  based  solely  on  that  which  is
known — must  agree  with  the  general  conception  of  morality,
composed  for  the  most  part  of  feelings  and  prejudices. To
make  these  two  conceptions  of  morality  coincide,  Bentham
and  his  followers  have  too  often  violated  facts. They  were
wrong. One  can,  moreover,  understand  very  well  that  the
sphere  of  intellectual  demonstration  does  not  equal  in  range
the  sphere  of  moral  action,  and  that  there  are  cases  in  which
a  definite  and  rational  rule  happens  to  fail. Till  now,  in
cases  of  that  kind,  habit,  instinct,  sentiment,  have  guided
man  ;  these  may  still  be  followed  in  the  future,  provided  it
is  done  with  clear  knowledge,  and  that,  in  following  them,
one  is  conscious  of  obeying,  not  some  mysterious  obligation,
but  the  most  generous  impulses  of  human  nature,  together
with  the  most  just  necessities  of  social  life.

One  does  not  undermine  the  truth  of  a  science — for
instance,  of  moral  science — by  showing  that  its  object  as  a
science  is  limited.  On  the  contrary,  to  limit  a  science  is
often  to  give  a  greater  stamp  of  certitude ;  chemistry  is  but
alchemy  limited  to  observable  facts.  Likewise  we  believe
that  a  purely  scientific  morality  should  not  pretend  to
embrace  everything,  and  that,  far  from  wanting  to  exag-
gerate the  extent  of  her  domain,  it  should  endeavour  to
settle  its  limits  itself.  It  must  consent  to  say,  frankly :
In  such  and  such  a  case  I  am  unable  to  prescribe  impera-
tively in  the  name  of  duty.  Thus  the  sense  of  obligation


PREFACE.  3

and  of  sanction  can  no  longer  exist.  Consult  your  deepest
instincts,  your  most  vivid  sympathies,  your  most  normal  and
most  human  aversions ;  after  that  you  may  make  meta-
physical hypotheses  about  the  foundation  of  things,  about
your  own  destiny,  and  that  of  your  fellow-creatures.
Starting  from  this  precise  point,  you  are  left  to  yourself —
in  other  words,  to  your  "  self-government."  This  is  freedom
in  morals — consisting,  not  in  absence  of  rule,  but  in  absence
of  scientific  rule,  wherever  such  cannot  justify  itself  with
sufficient  rigour.  Here  begins  in  morality  the  part  of  philo-
sophic speculation  which  positive  science  can  neither  suppress
nor  entirely  replace.  In  climbing  a  mountain  there  comes
a  certain  moment  when  we  are  wrapped  in  clouds,  which
hide  the  summit ;  we  are  lost  in  darkness.  It  is  the  same
on  the  heights  of  thought :  one  part  of  morality,  which  is
mingled  with  metaphysics,  may  be  forever  hidden  in  clouds,
but  there  must  also  be  a  solid  basis,  and  we  must  know  with
precision  the  points  where  man  should  resign  himself  to
enter  cloudland.

Among  recent  works  on  morality,  the  three  which,  for
different  reasons,  have  appeared  to  us  to  be  the  most
important  are:  in  England,  "The  Data  of  Ethics,"  by
Spencer  ;  in  Germany,  "  The  Phenomenology  of  the  Moral
Conscience,"  by  Hartmann  ;  in  France,  "  The  Criticism  of
Contemporary  Moral  Systems,"  by  M.  Alfred  Fouillee.  It
seems  to  us  that  by  the  reading  of  these  works,  so  different
in  character,  two  points  are  brought  forward  at  the  same
time.  On  the  one  hand,  the  conception  of  morality  of  the
Naturalist  and  Positivist  schools  furnishes  no  unchangeable
principles,  either  in  the  way  of  obligation  or  in  the  way  of
sanction ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  an  idealistic  conception  of
morality  can  provide  any,  it  is  of  a  purely  hypothetical  and


4 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

not  of  an  assertive  nature.  In  other  words,  what  comes
within  the  order  of  facts  is  not  universal,  and  whatever  is
universal  is  a  speculative  hypothesis.  The  result  is  that  the
imperative,  in  so  far  as  it  is  absolute  and  categorical,  dis-
appears on  both  sides.  We  accept,  on  our  own  account,
this  disappearance  ;  and,  instead  of  regretting  the  moral
variability,  which  is  the  result  of  it  within  certain  limits,  we
consider  it,  on  the  contrary,  as  the  characteristic  of  the
future  conception  of  morality.  In  many  respects  this  con-
ception will  not  only  be  "  autonomous,"  but  "  anomos."  In
contrast  with  the  transcendent  speculations  of  M.  de
Hartmann  on  the  folly  of  the  will  to  live  and  on  the  nirvana
imposed  logically  by  reason  as  a  duty,  we  admit,  with
Spencer,  that  conduct  has  for  motive  power  the  most
intense,  the  fullest,  the  most  varied  life ;  whereas  our  con-
ception of  the  conciliation  of  individual  and  social  life  is
other  than  of  Spencer.  On  the  other  hand,  we  recognise,
with  the  author  of  the  "  Critique  des  Systemes  de  Morale
Contemporains "  (M.  Alfred  Fouillee),  that  the  English
school  and  the  Positivist  school,  which  admit  an  "  unknow-
able," have  been  wrong  in  expelling  every  individual  hypo-
thesis from  this  subject ;  but  we  do  not  think,  as  does  this
author,  that  the  unknowable  itself  can  contribute  a
"  principle  practically  limiting  and  restricting  conduct,"  a
principle  of  mere  justice,  which  would  be,  as  it  were,  a
medium  between  the  categorical  imperative  of  Kant  and
the  free  metaphysical  hypothesis.  The  only  admissible
"  equivalents  "  or  "  substitutes  "  of  duty,  to  use  the  same
language  as  the  author  of  "  La  Liberte"  et  le  Determinisme,"
appear  to  us  to  be  : —

i.  The  consciousness  of  our  inward  and  superior  power,
to  which  we  see  duty  practically  reduced.


PREFACE.  5

2.  The  influence  exercised  by  ideas  over  actions.

3.  The increasing fusion of the sensibilities,  and the
increasingly  social  character  of  our  pleasures  and  sorrows.

4.  The  love  of  risk  in  action,  of  which  we  will  show  the
importance  hitherto  ignored.

5.  The  love  of  metaphysical  hypothesis,  which  is  a  sort
of  risk  in  thought.

These  different  incentives  combined  are,  for  us,  all  that  a
conception  of  morality,  reduced  to  facts  only  and  to  hypo-
theses founded  upon  them,  would  be  able  to  offer  in  the
place  of  the  categorical  obligation  of  past  times.  As  to  the
moral  sanction,  so  called,  distinct  from  social  sanctions,  it
will  be  seen  that  we  purely  and  simply  suppress  it,  because
as  "  atonement "  it  is  fundamentally  immoral.  Our  book
should,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  an  attempt  to  determine
the  compass,  the  extent,  and  also  the  limits  of  an  exclusively
scientific  conception  of  morality.  Its  value,  therefore,  exists
independently  of  any  opinions  which  may  be  held  as  to  the
absolute  and  metaphysical  basis  of  morality.


INTRODUCTION.


CRITICISM  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  ATTEMPTS  TO
JUSTIFY  OBLIGATION  FROM  THE  META-
PHYSICAL POINT  OF  VIEW.


CHAPTER  I.

The  Morality  of  Metaphysical  Dogmatism.  I.— The  Hypo-
thesis of  Optimism.  II.— The  Hypothesis  of  Pessimism.
III.— The  Hypothesis  of  the  Indifference  of  Nature.

THE  morality  of  realistic  metaphysics  admits  a  "good
in  itself"  (un  bien  en  soi),  a  natural  good  distinct  from
pleasure  and  from  happiness,  a  possible  hierarchy  of  what
is  good  in  nature,  and,  for  that  very  reason,  a  hierarchy
of  the  different  beings.  It  returns  to  the  old  maxim,  "  To
conform  one's  self  to  nature."  Is  it  not  illusive  thus  to  seek
in  nature  a  type  of  good  to  be  realized  by  us,  and  to  which
we  are  under  obligation  ?  Is  it  possible  to  know  the  basis
of  things,  and  the  true  meaning  of  nature,  so  as  to  work  in
the  same  direction  ?  Has  nature,  scientifically  considered,
any  meaning  at  all  ?  There  are  three  hypotheses  before
us — optimism,  pessimism,  the  indifference  of  nature.  Let  us
examine  them  in  turn,  to  see  if  they,  from  the  point  of
view  of  metaphysics,  justify  the  absolute,  imperative,  and
categorical  obligation  of  moral  philosophy  as  ordinarily
accepted.


8 MORALITY INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.


THE HYPOTHESIS OF OPTIMISM. — PROVIDENCE AND IMMOR-
TALITY.

i.  Such  men  as  Plato,  Aristotle,  Zeno,  Spinoza,  Leibnitz,
have  supported  optimism,  and  have  tried  to  found  an
objective  morality  in  conformity  with  this  conception  of
the  world.  One  knows  all  the  objections  to  which  this
system  has  given  rise.  In  reality,  absolute  optimism  is
rather  immoral  than  moral,  for  it  involves  the  negation  of
progress.  When  once  it  has  penetrated  the  mind,  it  pro-
duces, as  correspondent  sentiment,  satisfaction  with  things
as  they  are :  from  the  moral  point  of  view,  justification  of
everything ;  from  the  political  point  of  view,  respect  for  all
authority,  passive  resignation,  voluntary  stifling  of  every
feeling  of  right,  and  consequently  of  every  feeling  of  duty.
If  all  that  exists  is  good,  no  change  is  wanted  ;  there  must
be  no  interference  with  the  work  of  God — that  great  artist.
Likewise,  everything  that  happens  is  equally  good ;  every
event  justifies  itself,  since  it  is  part  of  a  divine  work,  com-
plete in  all  its  details.  In  the  end  this  brings  about,  not
only  the  exculpation,  but  the  deification,  of  all  injustice.
To-day  we  are  astonished  at  the  temples  which  the  ancients
raised  to  men  such  as  Nero  and  Domitian ;  not  only  did
they  refuse  to  understand  crime,  but  they  adored  it.  Are
we  doing  anything  else,  if  we  shut  our  eyes  to  the  reality  of
evil  here  below  in  order  afterwards  to  declare  this  world
divine  and  bless  its  author?  The  worshipping  of  the
Caesars  was  with  the  Romans  the  sign  of  an  inferior  moral
state ;  reacting  on  that  very  state,  it  debased  and  degraded
it  still  more.  As  much  can  be  said  of  the  worship  of  a
creative  god,  who  should  be  responsible  for  everything,  and
who,  in  reality,  is  irresponsibility  itself.  Devout  optimism
is  a  state  analogous  to  that  of  the  slave,  who  is  happy — of
the  sick  man,  who  is  not  conscious  of  his  illness  ;  the  latter,
at  least,  does  not  attribute  a  divine  character  to  his  illness.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM PROVIDENCE.  9

Charity  itself,  in  order  to  exist,  needs  to  believe  in  the
reality  and  indignity  of  the  miseries  which  it  relieves.  If
poverty,  if  sorrow,  if  ignorance  (blessed  are  the  poor  in
spirit !),  if  all  the  evils  in  this  world  are  not  real  evils,  and
are,  at  bottom,  wrongs  and  absurdities  of  nature,  how  will
charity  be  able  to  keep  the  rational  character  which  is  the
condition  of  existence  of  every  virtue  ?  And  if  charity,  like
a  flame  without  food,  is  extinguished,  what  will  be  the  value
of  your  world,  which  you  imagine  as  a  work  of  absolute
charity,  of  absolute  and  all-powerful  goodness  ?

Even'  pessimism  can  often  be  superior  in  moral  value  to
exaggerated  optimism  :  it  does  not  always  fetter  effort  in  the
direction  of  progress ;  if  it  is  painful  to  see  everything  in
black,  it  is  sometimes  more  useful  than  to  see  everything  in
rose  colour.  Pessimism  may  be  the  symptom  of  an  un-
healthy over-excitement  of  the  moral  sense  greatly  hurt  by
the  evils  of  this  world ;  optimism,  on  the  contrary,  too  often
indicates  an  apathy,  a  numbness  of  all  moral  feeling.  Who-
ever does  not  reflect,  and  is  actuated  merely  by  habit,  has  a
strong  tendency  to  optimism ;  the  people,  being  ignorant,
taken  in  a  mass,  are — especially  in  the  country — pretty
nearly  satisfied  with  the  present  state  of  things ;  they  live
by  routine  ;  the  greatest  evil  in  their  eyes  is  change.  The
more  inferior  a  population  is,  the  more  blindly  conservative
it  is  :  this  is  the  political  form  of  optimism.  Nothing  is
more  dangerous  than  the  desire  to  give  to  optimism  a
religious  and  moral  sanction — to  thus  make  it  a  guiding
principle  of  thought  and  of  conduct ;  the  human  mind  may
thus  be  paralyzed  in  all  its  activities — man  may  be  demora-
lized by  his  God.  Permit  me  to  relate  a  dream.  One  night
— had  some  angel  or  seraph  taken  me  on  his  wings  to
transport  me  to  the  paradise  of  the  Gospels,  near  the
"  Creator  "  ? — one  night  I  felt  myself  soaring  in  heaven,  far
above  the  earth.  As  I  rose  higher  and  higher,  I  heard  a
sad  and  weary  sound  ascending  from  the  earth,  a  sound
similar  to  the  monotonous  song  of  the  torrents  heard  amid


10 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

the  solitude  and  silence  of  the  mountain  summits.  I  dis-
tinguished human  voices — sobs,  mingled  with  thanksgiving ;
groans,  interrupted  by  benedictions ;  I  heard  despairing
supplications,  the  sighs  of  the  dying,  rising  with  the  fumes
of  incense.  All  this  melted  into  one  intense  groan — into  a
symphony  so  heart-rending  that  my  soul  filled  with  pity.
The  sky  seemed  obscured  by  it,  and  I  no  longer  saw  the
sun,  nor  the  joy  of  the  earth.  I  turned  round  to  him  who
was  with  me.  "Do  you  not  hear?"  I  asked  him.  The
angel  looked  at  me  with  a  serene  and  peaceful  look.
"  These  are,"  he  said,  "  the  prayers  of  men,  ascending  from
the  earth  to  God."  While  he  spoke,  his  white  wing  glittered
in  the  sun  ;  but  it  seemed  to  me  quite  black,  and  full  of
horror.  "  What  tears  I  should  shed  were  I  that  God  !"  I
exclaimed  ;  and  I  began,  indeed,  to  cry  like  a  child.  I
loosened  the  hand  of  the  angel,  and  let  myself  fall  down
again  to  the  earth,  thinking  there  remained  in  me  too  much
humanity  to  make  it  possible  for  me  to  live  in  heaven.

If  optimism,  instead  of  considering  the  world  as  actually
good,  tried  to  re-establish  the  notion  of  a  continual  progress,
regulated  by  a  Divine  law,  would  it  succeed  better  in  solving
the  problems  of  this  world,  and  in  laying  the  foundation  of
human  morality  ?  We  do  not  believe  it.

If,  with  the  optimists,  one  postulates  a  remote  aim,  which
should  be  the  same  for  all  beings,  the  means  of  attaining
this  aim  are  so  opposite  in  character  that  the  moralist  will
be  unable  to  deduce  from  the  knowledge  of  the  aim  a
practical  rule  of  conduct.  All  roads  lead  to  Rome;
perhaps  many  roads  lead  to  the  universal  aim,  and  injustice
may  serve  the  same  purpose  as  justice.  Even  for  humanity
strife  is  sometimes  as  sure  a  means  of  progress  as  agree-
ment ;  and,  from  a  universally  optimistic  point  of  view,  it  is
not  evident  why  the  human  good  will  should  be  more  con-
formable than  the  evil  will  to  the  hidden  ends  of  nature  or
of  God.  All  conscious  will  is  often  even  useless,  and  good
seems  to  be  able  to  work  itself  out — at  least  partially —


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM— PROVIDENCE.  II

without  the  intervention  of  man.  A  rock  on  which  a  child
has  just  split  its  forehead  may  be  of  more  service  to  the
future  well-being  of  this  globe  than  that  child,  since  the
rock  has  been  concentrating  in  itself,  during  thousands  of
years,  a  portion  of  the  solar  heat,  and  thus  helps  in  some
degree  to  retard  the  cooling  of  the  earth.

The  morality  of  optimist  dogmatism  commands  us
to  contribute  to  the  good  of  the  whole ;  but  there
are  too  many  possible  ways.  Everything  can  be  useful.
The  teacher  of  gymnastics,  who  placed  in  the  same  room  a
portrait  of  Jesus  Christ  and  of  himself,  believed  that  he
was  doing  as  much  as  Jesus  for  humanity.  Perhaps  he  was
not  wrong  with  regard  to  universal  and  providential  evolu-
tion. The  greatest  nations  have  been  those  whose  people
were  strongest  and  had  the  most  robust  appetite.  The
Romans  astonished  the  world  by  their  gluttony  ;  the  English,
the  Germans,  the  Russians  (who  will  have  so  very  important
a  part  to  play  in  the  future),  are  great  eaters  ;  even  the  egoist
himself  can  work  for  universal  perfection — he  can  produce
a  healthy,  vigorous,  hardy  generation.  Egoism  has  made
the  English  race  great.  In  many  respects  Erasmus  Darwin
was  a  naive  egoist — the  genius  of  his  grandson  has  justified
it.  Everything  becomes  merely  relative,  when  viewed  with
regard  to  the  total  results  for  the  whole  universe.  Which
point  of  the  Christian  teaching  do  travellers  tell  us  has  most
strongly  impressed  the  minds  of  the  negroes  ?  The  religious
law,  with  which  one  wanted  to  inspire  them  ?  No ;  but  the
propriety  of  the  Sunday.  And  the  African  and  Asiatic  people,
what  did  they  adopt  from  Mohammedanism  ?  The  drinking
of  water.

In  the  great  organism  of  the  universe  the  microbe  of
typhoid  fever  and  cholera  has  a  duty  to  perform,  which  it
cannot,  and  dare  not,  cease  to  perform;  man,  also,  has
special  functions — the  man  of  evil  as  well  as  the  man  of
good.  Seen  from  a  certain  distance,  good  comes  out  of
evil.  It  is  thus  that  great  defects,  great  sacrifices  of  men,


12 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

are  often  useful  to  a  nation.  It  is  told  that  Spinoza,  when
ill,  laughed  at  the  sight  of  his  favourite  spider  devouring
the  flies  which  he  threw  at  him.  Perhaps  then,  applying  it
to  himself,  he  thought  of  the  internal  complaint  which  was
destroying  him ;  perhaps  he  smiled  to  feel  himself  likewise
enveloped  in  some  invisible  spider's  web,  which  paralysed
his  will,  silently  devoured  by  a  multitude  of  infinitely  small
monsters.

Once  more,  in  the  immensity  of  the  universe,  the  paths
and  roads  followed  by  each  being,  instead  of  running  parallel
or  of  being  concentric,  cross  one  another — intersect  in
every  way.  He  who  finds  himself,  by  chance,  at  the  point
of  intersection  is  naturally  bruised.  Thus  there  is  at  the
root  of  nature — which  it  is  pretended  is  "  as  good  as
possible  "—a  fundamental  immorality,  which  is  caused  by
the  opposition  of  functions  between  living  beings,  by  the
quality  of  space  and  matter.  In  absolute  optimism  the
universal  good  is  an  end  which  employs  and  justifies  all
means.

Moreover,  nothing  tells  us  that  the  line  which  leads  to
this  universal  good  passes  directly  through  humanity,  and
demands  of  all  individuals  that  devotion  to  humanity  usually
considered  by  moralists  as  the  practical  foundation  of  moral
obligation.  If  a  tiger  believed  that,  by  saving  one  of  his
fellow  tigers,  he  was  working  for  the  advancement  of  the
univeisal  good,  he  might  be  mistaken ;  it  is  better  for  all
that  tigers  do  not  spare  each  other.  Thus,  everything
blends  and  grows  smooth,  viewed  from  the  heights  of
metaphysical  contemplation ;  good  and  evil,  individuals
and  species,  species  and  environment.  Nothing  base  is
left,  as  Spinoza,  the  optimist,  said,  "  in  the  house  of
Jupiter."

A  last  hypothesis  has  been  tried  to,  in  a  measure,  save
optimism,  to  excuse  the  creating  cause  or  the  eternal  sub-
stance, without  compromising  the  moral  sense  and  the
instinct  of  progress.  An  effort  has  been  made  to  point


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  13

out  in  physical  evil  (suffering)  and  in  intellectual  evil  (error,
doubt,  ignorance)  a  condition  sine  qua  non  of  moral  good.
In  this  way  an  attempt  is  made  to  justify  them.  It  is  said
that  the  purpose  of  the  universe  is  not  outside  the  human
will.  The  purpose  of  the  universe  is  morality  ;  but  morality
presupposes  choice  and  struggle — that  is  to  say,  it  pre-
supposes the  reality  of  evil,  physical  or  intellectual,  and
the  possibility  of  moral  evil.  From  this  it  follows  that  all  the
evil  so  liberally  diffused  in  this  world  has  but  one  object —
to  place  an  alternative  before  man.  According  to  that
doctrine,  in  which  Platonism  is  blended  with  Kantism,  the
world  itself  should  be  nothing  but  a  sort  of  living  formula
of  the  moral  problem.  Vega  in  the  Lyre  or  Arcturus,  all
the  suns,  the  stars,  and  their  satellites  might  roll  for  ever  in
space,  in  order  that  here  below,  on  some  one  day,  in  one
hour  (which,  perhaps,  has  never  yet  come,  according  to
Kant),  a  small  impulse  of  disinterestedness  might  be  pro-
duced, or  that  a  glass  of  water  might  be  given,  with  truly
kind  intention,  to  some  one  who  is  thirsty.  That  is  beauti-
ful ;  but  how  to  deduce  "  a  categorical  duty  "  from  an  hypo-
thesis so  uncertain,  so  contrary,  it  seems,  to  facts  ?  If  the
universe  has  value  only  as  a  simple  opportunity  for  charity,
its  existence  seems  difficult  to  justify,  and  the  ways  of  God
are  very  tortuous.

The  hypothesis  which  we  are  examining  presupposes
the  existence  of  freewill,  of  a  power  of  choice  (at  least,
noumenal).  Without  absolute  liberty  there  is  no  absolute
responsibility  ;  neither  is  there  merit  or  demerit.  Let  us
accept,  without  examination,  all  these  notions.  Even  then
we  can  prove  to  their  partisans  that  this  world,  made
according  to  their  opinion  with  a  view  to  morality,  is  far  from
being  the  best  possible  world  even  in  this  respect.  Indeed,
if  merit  stood  in  direct  ratio  to  suffering,  I  can  very  well
imagine  a  world  where  the  suffering  would  be  still  much
more  intense  than  in  this  one  ;  where  the  contest  between
right  and  wrong  would  be  much  more  heartrending ;  where


14 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

duty,  meeting  more  obstacles,  would  be  more  meritorious.
Let  us  even  suppose  that  the  Creator  heaps  up  so  many
obstacles  for  his  creature  that  it  becomes  very  difficult  for
him  not  to  give  in — not  to  be  carried  away  by  evil.  The
merit  of  the  creature,  if  he  triumphs  in  a  supreme  effort,  will
be  infinitely  greater.  If  that  which  is  most  beautiful  to
God  in  the  world  is  the  resignation  of  Job  or  the  devotion
of  Regulus,  why  are  the  occasions  for  those  high  virtues  so
rare,  and  why  does  progress  make  them,  day  by  day,  still
more  rare  ?  In  our  century  a  general  of  an  army  who
behaved  like  Decius  would  not  in  the  least  assist  the  victory
of  his  soldiers ;  on  the  contrary,  his  heroism  would  be  a
mistake  in  tactics.  The  level  of  virtue  falls  every  day.
We  do  not,  in  these  days,  experience  those  powerful
temptations  which  made  the  vigorous  bodies  of  St.  Jerome
and  St.  Antoine  tremble.  Progress  most  frequently  runs
counter  to  the  development  of  true  morality — that  morality
which  is  not  born  ready  made,  but  makes  itself.  Perhaps  I
have  in  me  an  energy  of  will  which,  fifteen  centuries  ago,
might  have  transformed  me  into  a  martyr.  In  our  days  I
remain  willingly  or  unwillingly  an  ordinary  mortal,  for  want
of  hangmen.  In  short,  how  poor  is  our  age  in  true  merit ;
what  decline  in  the  eyes  of  a  partisan  of  liberty  and  of
absolute  morality  !  If  the  only  aim  of  the  world  is  to  put
the  moral  problem  before  us,  we  must  admit  that  barbarism
puts  it  much  more  forcibly  than  civilization.  We  are  too
happy  to-day  to  be  deeply  moral.  We  are  generally  able
to  satisfy  our  desires  so  easily  while  doing  good  that  it  is
hardly  any  longer  worth  while  to  commit  evil — at  least,
not  on  a  large  scale.  When  Christ  was  tempted,  it  was
in  a  desert,  on  the  mountain;  he  was  almost  naked,
exhausted  by  fasting.  In  these  days,  when  the  majority
of  people  are  well  dressed  and  do  not  fast  any  more,  the
devil  is  not  seen  from  so  near;  but  then,  if  there  is
no  longer  a  tempter,  there  is  no  longer  a  Christ.  To
explain  the  world,  you  establish  a  sort  of  contradiction


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM PROVIDENCE.  15

between  perceptible  happiness  and  virtue.  You  say,  the
world  is  all  the  more  perfect  as  it  is  less  happy,  while
perfection  lies  in  the  will  triumphing  over  grief  and
desire.*  Well,  exactly  in  the  terms  of  this  same  con-
tradiction it  is  possible  to  condemn  the  world.  Each
of  its  steps  towards  progress  may  be  considered  as  a
step  backward.  Every  hereditary  quality  which  we  acquire
in  course  of  time  suppresses  something  of  the  absolute
character  of  the  primitive  will.  For  every  other  being  but
God  the  only  means  of  approaching  the  Absolute  is  poverty,
grief,  and  labour ;  all  that  which  limits  externally  the  power
of  a  being  enables  him  more  successfully  to  unfold  it
inwardly.  The  Stoics  liked  to  repeat  that  Eurystheus  had
not  been  the  enemy  of  Hercules,  neither  had  he  envied
him ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  had  been  his  friend  and
benefactor.  They  said  that  every  one  of  us  has  also  a
divine  Eurystheus,  who  trains  us  continuously  in  the  contest ;
they  represented  the  whole  world,  the  great  living  Being,  as
a  sort  of  Alcides  in  labour.  It  may  be  so ;  but,  I  repeat
once  more,  our  Eurystheus  is  not  very  ingenious  in  multi-
plying our  trials  and  labours.  Fate  spoils  us  to-day,  as  the
grandparents  of  a  family  spoil  their  grandchildren.  We  live
in  an  environment  too  large,  too  expansive;  and  the  per-
petual growth  of  our  intelligence  gradually  chokes  our  will.
You  must  be  logical ;  you  can  only  justify  the  world  by
placing  the  good,  or  the  condition  of  good,  exactly  in  that
which  till  now  everybody  has  considered  an  evil.  The  con-
sequence is  that  all  creatures,  labouring  to  avoid  what  they
consider  as  an  evil,  are  labouring  at  the  same  time  against
your  theory,  and  the  evolution  of  the  universe  goes  on  in  a
direction  diametrically  opposed  to  your  pretended  good.
Thus  you  condemn  the  very  work  which  you  wanted  to
exculpate.  Everyone  is  free  to  find  the  good  where  he  under-
stands it ;  but,  in  whatever  way  he  understands  it,  he  cannot

*  See  those  ideas  summed  up  in  Vallier's  De  F  intention  Morale.
(G.  Bailliere  ;  1882.)


1 6 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

make  this  world  truly  good.  We  cannot  even  console  our-
selves by  thinking  that  it  is  the  worst  possible  of  worlds,
and  that  it  therefore  constitutes  the  supreme  trial  to  our
will.  The  universe  is  not  an  extreme,  either  for  evil  or  for
good ;  it  would  be  something  to  be  absolutely  bad — but  the
absolute  is  not  of  this  world.  Nothing  here  below  causes
us  to  experience  that  satisfaction  of  seeing  an  aim  pursued
and  gained.  It  is  impossible  to  trace  a  plan  in  the  universe
— not  even  that  of  abandoning  all  to  the  meritorious  sponta-
neity of  created  beings.  The  world  has  not  its  end  in  us,
any  more  than  we  have  our  end  in  the  world  fixed  for  us
beforehand.  Nothing  is  fixed,  arranged,  or  pre-determined ;
there  is  no  primitive  and  preconceived  mutual  adaptation
of  things.  That  adaptation  would  suppose — firstly,  a
world  of  ideas  pre-existent  to  the  real  world ;  secondly,  a
demiurge,  arranging  things  according  to  the  given  plan,  as  an
architect  does.  The  universe  would  then  resemble  certain
exhibition  buildings,  of  which  all  parts  are  constructed
separately,  so  that  afterwards  they  need  only  to  be  adjusted
to  each  other.  But  no  ;  it  is  more  like  one  of  those  strange
buildings  for  the  construction  of  which  everybody  works  in
his  own  way,  without  considering  the  whole ;  there  are  as
many  ends  and  plans  as  there  are  workmen.  It  is  a  superb
disorder;  but  such  a  work  lacks  too  much  unity  to  be
either  absolutely  blamed  or  praised.  To  look  upon  it  as
the  complete  realization  of  an  ideal  of  any  sort  is  to  lower
our  ideal — consequently  to  lower  ourselves;  it  is  an  error
which  may  become  a  grave  mistake.  Whoever  believes  in
a  God  ought  to  respect  him  too  highly  to  make  him  Creator
of  the  world.

2.  The  refuge  of  optimism  is  personal  immortality,  which
would  be  the  great  excuse  of  God.  The  belief  in  immor-
tality suppresses  all  definite  sacrifice,  or  at  least  reduces  that
sacrifice  to  very  little.  Before  the  infinity  of  duration
suffering  does  not  seem  more  than  a  point,  and  the  whole
actual  life  diminishes  strangely  in  value.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  17

The  idea  of  absolute  duty  and  that  of  immortality  are
intimately  connected  ;  the  consciousness  of  duty  constitutes
for  the  spiritualists  the  distinctive  mark  of  the  individual  in
the  flux  of  animal  generations,  his  seal  of  sovereignty,  his
title  to  a  place  apart  in  the  "  kingdom  of  ends."  If,  on  the
contrary,  absolute  duty  is  brought  back  to  an  illusion,
immortality  loses  its  principal  claim  to  existence ;  man
becomes  a  being  like  any  other — his  head  is  no  longer
enveloped  in  a  mystic  light,  like  Christ  on  the  mountain,
who  was  transfigured  in  ascending,  and  seemed  on  a  level
with  the  divine  prophets  soaring  in  heaven.  Besides,
immortality  has  always  been  the  principal  problem  in  the
conception  of  morality,  as  well  as  in  that  of  religion.
Hitherto  it  has  been  badly  presented,  being  confused  with  the
problem  of  the  existence  of  God.  In  reality,  humanity
cares  little  enough  about  God  ;  not  one  martyr  would  have
sacrificed  himself  for  that  recluse  of  the  skies.  What  was
looked  for  in  him  was  the  power  to  make  us  immortal.
Man  has  always  been  wanting  to  scale  the  heavens,  and  he
cannot  do  it  quite  alone.  He  has  invented  God  in  order
that  God  may  stretch  out  a  hand  to  him ;  next  he  attached
himself  in  love  to  this  divine  Saviour.  But  if  to-morrow  one
were  to  say  to  the  four  hundred  millions  of  Christians,
"  There  is  no  God  ;  there  is  only  a  paradise,  a  man-Christ,
a  virgin  mother,  and  saints,"  they  would  very  quickly  be
consoled.

In  reality,  immortality  is  enough  for  us.  As  to  myself,  I
do  not  ask  for  a  "reward."  I  do  not  beg  to  be  united
with  those  I  have  loved — the  eternity  of  love,  of  friendship,
of  disinterestedness  !  I  remember  my  great  despair  one
day  when,  for  the  first  time,  it  came  into  my  head  that
death  might  be  the  loss  of  love,  a  separation  of  hearts,  an
eternal  coldness  ;  that  the  cemetery',  with  its  tombstones
and  its  four  walls,  might  be  the  truth ;  that,  from  day  to  day,
those  who  were  to  me  like  my  moral  life  would  be  taken
from  me,  or  that  I  should  be  taken  away  from  them,  and

c


1 8 MORALITY INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

that  we  should  never  be  given  back  to  one  another.  There
are  certain  cruelties  which  we  do  not  believe  because  they
surpass  our  understanding.  We  say  to  ourselves,  "  It  is
impossible,"  because  inwardly  we  think,  "  How  could  I  do
that  ?"  Nature  becomes  a  personality  to  us ;  her  light
seems  a  favour  especially  extended  to  us;  there  is  in  all
her  creatures  such  a  superabundance  of  youth  and  hope
that  we,  even  we,  also  are  dazed  by  this  flood  of  universal
life.  Thus  the  ancient  form  of  the  religious  and  moral
problem  of  the  existence  of  God  is  brought  back  to  this  new
form — immortality.  This  problem,  in  its  turn,  comes  back
to  the  question  whether  from  this  moment  I  exist  myself,  or
whether  my  personality  is  an  illusion,  and  if,  instead  of
saying  me,  I  ought  to  say  we — the  world.  In  the  case  of
there  being  in  nature  a  single  creature,  however  mean  in
appearance,  who  could  say,  "I  exist,"  without  doubt  he
would  be  eternal.  Here  we  are  face  to  face  with  two  great
hypotheses.  First,  real  fusion  of  all  apparent  selves  one  with
the  other;  real  penetrability  of  all  that  which  possesses
consciousness  in  nature  ;  reduction  of  all  units  supposed  to
be  substantial  to  phenomenal  multiplicities ;  never-ending
vistas,  in  which  the  eye  loses  itself,  opened  within  ourselves
as  well  as  outside  ourselves.  Instead  of  this,  there  is
another  hypothesis — nature  having  an  end,  the  individual.
Like  an  immense  tree,  the  sap  of  which  is  finally  concen-
trated in  a  few  kernels,  perhaps  also  the  sap  of  nature
collects  together  at  one  point,  so  as  to  expand  later  on.  In
that  case,  individuals  would  form  lasting  groups.  Are  there
not  also  islets  in  the  ocean  ?  What  is  more,  some  of  these
individuals  would  keep  together,  would  get  so  much
attached  to  one  another  as  never  to  separate.  If  only  to
love  were  sufficient  reason  for  union,  such  union  would  be
eternity.  Love  would  make  us  eternal.

Unfortunately  there  are  many  objections  to  immortality.
The  first,  and  one  of  the  most  serious,  may  be  deduced
from  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  The  character  of  all


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  19

integration,  of  all  individuation,  must  be  provisional,  serving
only  to  prepare  a  larger  integration,  an  individuation  more
rich.  For  nature  an  individual  is  nothing  but  a  phase  of
halting,  a  pause,  which  cannot  be  definitive,  without  which
nature  would  be  arrested  in  her  course.  The  ancients,  who
with  Plato  imagined  nature  to  be  dominated  by  immovable
types  to  which  she  eternally  conforms  her  creations,  were
able  to  suppose  that  those  works  in  which  she  had  succeeded
most,  and  which  came  nearest  to  the  eternal  type,  partici-
pated in  eternity;  if  nature  operated  according  to  types,
species,  ideas,  we  might  hope,  by  fashioning  ourselves
according  to  these  ideas,  also  to  become  immortal.  But  in
our  days  a  very  different  conception  prevails.  In  the
beginning  of  this  century  it  was  still  possible  to  believe  that
the  immobility  of  the  animal  species  points  to  the  existence
of  a  preconceived  plan — an  idea  for  ever  after  imposed  upon
living  nature.  Since  Darwin  we  see  in  the  species  them-
selves transitory  types,  which  nature  transforms  through
the  ages,  moulds  which  she  herself  accidentally  casts,  and
which  she  does  not  hesitate  to  destroy  one  after  the  other.
If  the  species  is  provisional,  what  then  is  the  individual  ?
There  is  between  the  individual  and  the  species  a  solidarity
which  has  not  always  been  understood.  It  has  been
incessantly  repeated  that  the  individual  and  the  species
have  contrary  interests,  that  Nature  sacrifices  one  to  the
other.  Would  it  not  be  equally  and  more  true  to  say  that
she  sacrifices  both,  and  that  whatever  condemns  the
individual  is  precisely  the  condemnation  of  his  species  ?  If
the  species  were  immovable,  we  might  hope  to  be  saved  by
our  conformity  to  it.  But  no ;  everything  is  swept  away  by
the  same  whirlwind,  species  and  individuals  ;  all  passes  away,
rolling  on  towards  infinity.  The  individual  is  a  compound
of  a  certain  number  of  thoughts,  of  remembrances,  of  wills
corresponding  one  to  the  other,  and  of  forces  in  equilibrium.
This  equilibrium  can  only  exist  in  a  certain  intellectual
and  physical  environment  which  is  favourable  to  it.  Now,


20 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

this  environment  can  only  be  supplied  during  a  certain
time.  Man,  as  he  is  constituted,  cannot  predict  eternity.
There  is  no  indefinite  progress  in  every  sense,  either
for  the  individual  or  for  the  species ;  individual  and
species  are  only  middle  terms  between  past  and  future.
The  complete  triumph  of  the  future  requires  their  dis-
appearance.

Let  us  pass  on  to  a  second  objection  which  can  be  made
to  immortality.  If  thought,  if  will  were  immortal,  they
would  possess  a  power  superior  to  nature,  capable  of  ruling
and  subjugating  it.  According  to  this  hypothesis,  life
becomes  a  sort  of  struggle  of  the  spirit  against  nature ;
death  would  be  victory.  But  why,  then,  do  these  trium-
phant souls  stand  aside,  far  from  the  eternal  battle,  which
continues  to  be  fought  without  them?  Why  do  they
forsake  us?  And  while  their  power  cannot  be  diminished
by  death,  why  do  they  not  use  that  power  in  serving  man,
their  brother?  How  profound,  although  to  themselves
unconsciously  so,  was  that  belief  of  the  ancients,  who  saw
the  souls  of  their  forefathers  move  and  act  everywhere
around  them  ;  who  felt  the  dead  revive  at  their  sides ;  who
peopled  the  world  with  spirits,  and  endowed  these  spirits
with  a  more  than  human  power !  If  thought  conquers
death,  it  should  become  a  providence  to  others.  It  seems
that  humanity  would  have  the  right  to  count  upon  her  dead
as  she  counts  upon  her  heroes,  her  geniuses,  upon  all  those
who  lead  the  others.  If  there  are  immortals,  they  ought  to
stretch  out  a  hand  to  support  and  to  protect  us.  Why  do
they  hide  themselves  from  us?  What  strength  would  it
not  give  to  humanity  to  be,  like  the  armies  of  Homer,
conscious  of  a  race  of  gods,  ready  to  fight  on  her  side?
And  these  gods  would  be  their  sons,  their  own  sons  conse-
crated by  death  ;  their  number  would  continually  increase —
for  the  fertile  earth  never  ceases  to  produce  life — and  life
would  blend  with  immortality.  Nature  would  thus  create
beings  intended  to  become  a  providence  over  her  own  self.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  21

That  conception  is  perhaps  the  most  primitive,  and,  at  the
same  time,  the  most  attractive  which  has  ever  tempted  the
human  mind.  According  to  our  view,  it  is  impossible  to
separate  it  from  the  conception  of  immortality.  If  death
kills  not,  it  releases ;  it  cannot  throw  the  soul  into  in-
difference or  impotence.  Hence,  according  to  ancient
belief,  there  must  be  spirits  scattered  everywhere — active,
powerful,  and  providential.  The  mythology  of  the  ancients
and  savages,  the  superstitions  of  our  country  people,  must
be  true.  Who,  nevertheless,  would  dare  to  affirm  it  to-day,
or  even  to  consider  the  thing  as  probable  ?  Science  has
never  once  proved  the  existence  of  a  good  or  bad  intention
behind  one  phenomenon  of  nature.  It  tends  to  the  negation
of  spirits,  of  souls,  and  consequently  of  immortal  life.  To
believe  in  science  seems  to  be  to  believe  in  death.

There  is  a  third  objection — that  illusive  thing,  the  familiar
induction  of  life  : — I  am  ;  therefore  I  shall  be.  This  illusion
is  not  less  natural.  Even  to-day  there  are  tribes  found  in
Africa  who  do  not  seem  able  to  conceive  that  it  is  absolutely
necessary  for  man  to  die.  Among  this  people  the  induction
based  on  life  still  outweighs  that  based  on  death.  We
civilized  people  are  no  longer  at  that  stage.  We  know  that
our  present  life  has  an  end.  We  nevertheless  always  hope
that  it  will  be  resumed  in  another  form.  Life  feels  repug-
nance in  representing  and  acknowledging  death.  Youth
is  full  of  hope.  It  is  difficult  for  an  overflowing  and
vigorous  existence  to  believe  in  non-existence.  Whoever
feels  in  himself  treasures  of  energy  and  activity,  an  ac-
cumulation of  living  forces,  is  inclined  to  consider  that
treasure  as  inexhaustible.  Many  men  are  like  children;
they  have  not  yet  felt  the  limit  of  their  forces.  A  child
said  to  me — seeing  a  horse  gallop  in  a  cloud  of  dust :  "  I
could  run  as  fast  if  I  liked  ";  and  he  believed  it.  A  child
understands  with  difficulty  that  what  we  wish  to  do  with
all  our  heart  we,  however,  cannot  do.  Astonished  at  the
things  he  does,  he  concludes  that  he  can  do  everything.


22 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

There  is  nothing  so  rare  as  the  right  understanding  of  what
is  possible.  Yet  every  man,  when  he  comes  to  grapple
with  certain  events  of  life,  feels  himself  suddenly  so
dominated,  so  subjugated,  that  he  loses  even  the  con-
sciousness of  struggle.  Can  our  fight  be  against  the  earth,
which  carries  us  round  the  sun  ?  It  is  thus  that  he  who
approaches  death  feels  himself  reduced  to  nought — -becomes
the  toy  of  a  power  incommensurate  with  his  own.  His  will,
the  strongest  force  in  him,  resists  no  more,  collapses  like  a
broken  bow,  dissolves  gradually,  and  slips  away  from  him.
To  understand  how  weak  life  is  in  face  of  death,  we  must
have  passed,  not  through  those  violent  and  brutal  illnesses
which  stun  like  a  heavy  blow,  but  through  those  recurrent
maladies,  which  do  not  directly  attack  consciousness,  which
advance  with  slow  and  measured  progress,  and  follow  a  sort
of  rhythm,  seem  sometimes  to  retire,  allowing  us  to  renew
our  acquaintance  with  life  in  apparent  health,  but  again
throw  themselves  upon  us  and  hold  us  fast.  In  this  way
the  patient  successively  undergoes  the  impressions  of  one
who  is  born  into  life,  and  of  one  who  goes  to  meet  death.
He  has,  for  a  time,  the  ardour  of  youth,  followed  by  the
exhaustion  and  prostration  of  an  old  man.  And  while  he
is  young,  he  feels  full  of  faith  in  himself,  and  in  the  power  of
his  will.  He  thinks  himself  capable  of  ruling  the  future,
ready  to  conquer  in  the  struggle  of  life.  His  heart  over-
flows with  hopefulness,  which  is  diffused  over  all  things  ;
everything  smiles  upon  him — from  the  rays  of  the  sun  to
the  foliage  of  the  trees,  to  the  face  of  men.  He  sees  in
Nature  the  Indifferent,  only  a  friend,  an  ally,  a  mysterious
will  in  harmony  with  his  own.  He  believes  no  longer  in
death,  for  complete  death  would  be  a  kind  of  failure  of  the
will ;  and  a  will  truly  strong  believes  it  cannot  fail.  Thus
it  seems  to  him  that,  through  force  of  will,  he  will  be  able
to  conquer  eternity.  Then,  without  his  clearly  perceiving
it,  that  fulness  of  life  and  youth,  which  was  his  hope,
gradually  expends  itself,  subsides,  disappears  like  water  in


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  23

a  vase,  which  continually  gets  lower  without  our  knowing
whither  it  goes.  At  the  same  time,  his  faith  in  the  future
grows  weaker  and  becomes  dim.  He  asks  himself  if  faith
and  hope  may  not  be  the  fugitive  consciousness  of  an
activity,  powerful  for  the  moment,  but  all  too  quickly
subjugated  by  superior  forces.  His  will  then  awakens,
vainly  makes  an  effort  to  rise  up  again,  but  falls  back  ere
long  with  all  its  weight,  giving  way  under  the  ruined  con-
stitution like  a  broken-down  horse  under  its  harness.  Then
the  mind  darkens.  A  kind  of  twilight  seems  to  descend
and  to  spread  over  all  our  thoughts  ;  evening  is  coming.
The  slow,  sad  labour  of  dissolution,  which  necessarily
follows  evolution  has  set  in.  Life  relaxes,  and  disappears
by  degrees.  The  unity  of  life  is  destroyed.  The  will
vainly  exhausts  itself,  trying  to  re-combine,  to  maintain
under  the  same  law  that  bundle  of  life  which  is  being
divided,  the  union  of  which  constituted  the  individual.
Everything  is  loosened,  is  dissolved  into  dust.  Then,  at
last,  death  becomes  less  improbable,  less  inconceivable  to
the  mind.  The  eye  gets  used  to  it,  as  it  does  to  the
darkness,  which  descends  when  the  sun  has  set  below
the  horizon.

Death  appears  only  as  it  really  is — an  extinction  of  vitality,
a  drying  up  of  the  internal  energy.  And  death,  thus  con-
ceived, leaves  less  hope.  We  recover  from  an  accidental
stupor ;  but  how  is  it  possible  to  recover  from  complete
exhaustion  ?  If  the  agony  is  long  enough,  it  will  be  sufficient
to  make  us  understand  that  death  is  eternal.  A  torch  burnt
to  its  very  end  cannot  be  re-lighted.  That  is  really  what  is
most  sad  in  those  slow  diseases  which  leave  us  conscious  to
the  end — it  is  that  they  first  take  away  all  hope ;  that  we
feel  existence  undermined  in  its  very  depth;  it  is  that  we
feel  like  a  tree  seeing  its  very  roots  torn  to  pieces— like  a
mountain  assisting  at  its  own  overthrow.  In  this  way  one
acquires  a  sort  of  experience  of  death ;  one  approaches  it
near  enough  by  this  '•'•passage a  la  limite"  familiar  to  mathe-


24 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

maticians,  to  obtain  an  approximate  knowledge.  Annihila-
tion— or,  at  least,  dispersion,  dissolution — if  that  is  the
secret  of  death,  it  is,  no  doubt,  heart-rending  to  know  it;
but,  still,  it  is  better  to  become  aware  of  it !

Truly  eternal  life  would  be  that  which  should  not  need
to  disunite  itself  in  order  to  pass  through  the  divisions  of
time,  which  would  be  in  evidence  at  all  the  points  of  duration,
and  could  with  one  stroke  embrace  all  the  differences  which,
for  us,  constitute  that  very  duration.  We  should  then  be
able  to  imagine  a  class  of  beings,  immovable,  yet  constantly
changing,  in  the  same  way  as,  on  a  meteorological  chart,
we  prognosticate,  and  we  represent  by  fixed  lines  the  cyclone
of  the  passing  storm.  But  this  eternal  life,  now  thought
enviable,  would,  perhaps,  constitute  our  greatest  sorrow  ;  for
the  contrast  between  ourselves  and  our  surroundings  would
be  greater — the  anguish  would  be  perpetual.  Everything
would  fly  before  we  could  attach  ourselves  to  it.  The  God
of  religions — who,  himself  eternal,  imagines  human  beings
swept  away  by  time — could  be  nothing  else  but  supreme
indifference  or  supreme  despair,  the  realization  of  moral
monstrosity  or  unhappiness.

Notwithstanding  all  the  objections  of  philosophers,  man
will  ever  aspire,  if  not  to  an  eternity  without  limit,  at  least
to  one  of  indefinite  duration.  The  sadness  caused  by  the
idea  of  time  will  always  exist : — to  lose  one's  self,  to  forget
one's  self,  to  leave  something  behind  along  the  road,
as  the  sheep  leave  their  tufts  of  wool  in  the  bushes.
To  feel  that  all  one's  possessions  are  passing  away
is  despair,  said  Pascal.  Turning  and  looking  back,  the
heart  breaks,  like  that  of  the  traveller  carried  off  upon  a
never-ending  voyage,  who  watches  the  coasts  of  his  native
country  disappear.  Poets  have  felt  this  hundreds  of  times.
It  is  not  a  selfish  despair  ;  it  concerns  the  whole  of  humanity.
The  desire  for  immortality  is  merely  the  consequence  of
memory ;  life,  being  apprehended  by  the  power  of  memory,
instinctively  projects  itself  into  the  future.  We  want  to


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  OPTIMISM — PROVIDENCE.  25

find  ourselves  again,  and  to  meet  again  those  whom  we
have  lost ;  we  want  to  make  up  for  lost  time.  In  the  tombs
of  the  ancients  everything  dear  to  the  dead  was  gathered
together — his  arms,  his  dogs,  his  wives.  Even  his  friends
committed  suicide  on  his  grave  ;  they  would  not  allow  that
affection  could  be  broken  off  like  bonds.  Man  becomes
attached  to  all  his  surroundings — to  his  house,  to  a  piece  of
land  ;  he  attaches  himself  to  living  persons — he  loves  them.
Time  robs  him  of  all  this,  thereby  cutting  him  to  the  quick.
And,  whereas  life  continues  its  course,  healing  his  wounds,
as  the  sap  of  the  tree  repairs  the  ravages  of  the  axe,  memory,
working  in  the  contrary  direction — memory,  that  thing  which,
unknown  throughout  the  whole  material  universe,  preserves
his  bleeding  wounds,  and  from  time  to  time  renews  them.

In  the  end  this  remembrance  of  past  efforts  and  their
uselessness  makes  us  dizzy.  Pessimism  then  succeeds
optimism.  Pessimism  leads  back  to  a  feeling  of  impotence,
and  time  gives  us,  at  last,  that  feeling.  Life,  the  Stoics
pretended,  is  a  great  feast.  If  that  is  the  case,  answers  the
pessimist,  a  human  feast  lasts  but  a  day,  and  the  universe  is
eternal.  It  is,  after  all,  a  sad  thing  to  imagine  an  everlasting
feast,  an  everlasting  game,  an  everlasting  dance  like  that  of
the  spheres.  That  which  was  at  first  a  joy  and  a  reason  for
hope  becomes  at  last  a  burden  ;  great  fatigue  overpowers
us  ;  we  should  like  to  step  aside — to  be  at  peace  ;  we  can
go  on  no  longer.  Yet  we  must  live.  Who  knows  that
death  even  means  repose  ?  We  are  hurried  on  in  the  great
machine,  carried  away  by  the  universal  movement,  like
those  foolhardy  persons  who  entered  the  mysterious  circle
formed  by  the  Korigans.  A  great  ring  entwined  them,
entranced  them,  fascinated  them;  so  that,  panting,  they
whirled  round  and  round,  until  both  life  and  death  failed
them.  But  the  ring  was  not  broken.  It  formed  itself  again
more  quickly ;  and  the  unhappy  creatures,  while  dying,  still
saw  through  the  veil  of  death  the  everlasting  ring  whirling
them  round.


26 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

It  is  easy  to  understand  how  excessive  optimism  has
produced  the  reaction  tending  towards  pessimism.  The
germ  of  pessimism  is  in  every  man ;  to  know  and  to  esti-
mate life  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  lived  long — it  is  sufficient
to  have  suffered  much.


ii.

THE HYPOTHESIS OF PESSIMISM.

PESSIMISM  is  equally  difficult  to  prove  as  optimism  ;  it  is
equally  impossible  to  base  a  sound  and  objective  conception
of  morality  on  the  one  system  as  on  the  other.  Pes-
simism has  as  its  principle  the  possibility  of  scientific
comparison  between  pain  and  pleasure — a  comparison  in
which  pain  would  turn  the  scale.  This  system  can  be
expressed  thus  :  the  sum  of  sufferings  in  the  whole  of
human  life  forms  a  total  higher  than  that  of  its  pleasures —
whence  is  deduced  the  moral  philosophy  of  nirvana.  But
this  formula,  which  pretends  to  be  scientific,  has  hardly  any
sense.  Should  one  compare  the  pains  and  pleasures  with
respect  to  their  duration,  this  reckoning  would  evidently  be
against  the  pessimists  ;  for,  in  a  healthy  organism,  suffering
is  generally  short.  Should  one  compare  pain  and  pleasure
with  regard  to  intensity  ?  But  these  are  not  fixed  values  of
the  same  kind — one  positive,  the  other  negative ;  one  expres-
sible by  the  sign  + ,  the  other  by  the  sign  - .

It  is  all  the  more  impossible  to  establish  an  arithmetical
balance  between  such-and-such  a  particular  pleasure  and
such-and-such  a  pain ;  since  pleasure,  varying  in  function
with  the  intensity  of  desire,  is  never  the  same  for  two
moments  of  life,  and  since  pain  varies  equally  according  to
the  resistance  of  the  will.  Besides,  when  we  recall  a  past
sorrow  or  pleasure — the  only  ones  of  which  we  have  had


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  PESSIMISM.  27

experience — we  can  only  do  it  with  all  kinds  of  alterations,
and  with  countless  psychological  illusions.

In  general,  pessimists  are  inclined  to  compare  these  two
extremes — pleasure  (volupte)  and  pain  ;  hence  the  predomi-
nance which  this  latter  takes  in  their  eyes.  Pleasure,
properly  speaking,  is  after  all  a  rarity  and  a  luxury  ;  many
people  prefer  to  do  without  it,  and  thus  to  avoid  suffering.
The  refined  enjoyment  of  drinking  out  of  a  crystal  cup
cannot  be  compared  with  the  pain  of  thirst.

But  a  pessimistic  conception  of  morality  takes  no  account
of  the  permanent  and  spontaneous  pleasure  of  living  ;  that  is
because  this  pleasure,  being  continuous,  shrinks,  is  reduced
in  remembrance.  It  is  a  law  of  memory  that  sensations
and  emotions  of  the  same  nature  blend  confusedly,  collect
into  a  vague  mass,  and  at  last  become  nothing  but  an
imperceptible  point.  I  live,  I  enjoy ;  and  this  enjoyment
of  living  appears  to  me,  at  the  actual  moment,  worth  the
price.  But,  if  I  go  back  in  memory,  the  indefinite  series  of
pleasant  moments  forming  the  thread  of  life  become  mixed,
reduced  to  insignificance,  because  they  are  all  alike  uninter-
rupted. On  the  other  hand,  in  contrast  with  these,  the
moments  of  intense  pleasure  and  pain  increase  in  signi-
ficance ;  they  seem  isolated,  and  stand  out  prominently  from
the  uniform  line  of  existence.

But  intense  pleasure,  thus  detached  from  the  general
pleasure  of  living,  is  not  in  my  remembrance  sufficient  to
counterbalance  suffering ;  this  is  also  proved  by  other
psychological  laws.

Intense  pleasure  very  soon  weakens  in  remembrance
(above  all,  if  it  no  longer  awakens  the  desire,  which  forms  a
part  of  every  sensation  and  pleasant  experience).  On  the
contrary,  there  is  in  pain  an  element  which  does  not  weaken
with  time,  and  often  grows  stronger — that  is,  what  is  called
the  sentiment  of  intolerability.  A  violent  pain  which,  after
cessation,  is  proved  to  have  been  bearable,  may  be  abso-
lutely unbearable  in  remembrance,  and  so  much  so  that,  at


28 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

the  cost  of  that  pain,  all  preceding  and  ensuing  pleasures
lose  their  value ;  hence  a  new  optical  illusion  which  has  to
be  taken  into  consideration.  Pain  produces  a  sort  of
anguish  of  the  whole  organism,  an  instinctive  feeling  of
danger,  which  re-awakens  at  the  least  remembrance.  Even
a  vague  representation  of  pain  will,  therefore,  always  affect
the  organism  more  deeply  than  a  picture  of  intense  pleasure
not  actually  desired.  Fear  is  in  general  more  easily  roused
than  desire,  and  in  some  temperaments  fear  is  so  powerful
that  some  people  have  preferred  death  to  a  painful  opera-
tion. This  preference  did  assuredly  not  arise  from  contempt
of  life,  but  from  the  fact  that  pain  sometimes  seems  un-
bearable, and  beyond  human  strength  to  endure  ;  in  other
respects  simply  a  sign  of  weakness  of  character,  of  cowardice.
Even  in  a  brave  man  the  anticipation  or  the  memory  of
intense  pain  will  re-echo  more  strongly  than  that  of  pleasure.
A  soldier,  recalling  his  sensations  in  cold  blood,  will  picture
to  himself  with  far  more  lively  emotion  the  internal  lacera-
tion of  a  sword-cut  than  any  great  pleasure  in  his  life ;  yet
in  the  midst  of  action  the  wound  may  have  seemed  scarcely
noticeable,  compared  to  the  joy  of  victory.  But  the  joy  of
victory  was  connected  with  an  excitation  of  mind,  which  has
disappeared  ;  whereas  the  thought  of  his  wound  still  makes
him  tremble  even  to-day.  We  are  always  prepared  to  suffer  ;
whereas  enjoyment  demands  conditions  so  much  more
complex  that  we  can  only  with  difficulty  recall  them  to  our
mind.  In  remembrance,  therefore,  pleasure  and  pain  are
not  equal.

We  must  mention  another  cause  of  error  in  the  com-
parison of  happy  and  unhappy  times  of  life.  It  is  this,  that
the  happy  days  are  those  which  seem  shortest  and  pass
most  quickly ;  the  unhappy  days,  on  the  contrary,  lengthen,
so  to  speak,  and  thus  occupy  a  larger  place  in  our  memory.
Pessimism,  after  all,  explains  itself  by  psychological  laws.
Some  of  these  laws  make  past  pleasures,  with  which  we  are
satiated,  seem  of  less  significance  than  the  pains  endured.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  PESSIMISM.  29

There  are  others,  however,  according  to  which  future
pleasures  always  seem  to  have  a  value  superior  to  the
pains  which  we  shall  have  to  endure  to  attain  them.
These  laws  balance  one  another.  This  explains  the  fact
that  mankind  in  general  are  not  at  all  pessimistic,  and  that
the  most  convinced  pessimists  rarely  commit  suicide.  We
always  hope  something  from  the  future,  even  when  contem-
plation of  the  past  impels  us  to  despair.  There  is  a  pleasure
which  dies,  so  to  speak,  after  every  accomplished  action,
which  vanishes  without  leaving  a  trace  in  the  memory ;  yet
it  is  nevertheless  the  pre-eminently  fundamental  pleasure —
it  is  the  very  pleasure  of  action.  It  constitutes  in  great
measure  the  attraction  of  all  objects  desired  by  man,  only
this  attraction  withdraws  itself  when  once  ends  are  attained,
when  once  the  action  is  accomplished.  Hence,  the
astonishment  of  him  who  tries  to  judge  life  by  his
recollections,  and  who  does  not  find  in  his  past  pleasures
a  cause  sufficient  to  justify  his  efforts  and  his  trouble.  It  is
in  life  itself,  in  the  nature  of  our  activity,  that  we  must  look
for  the  justification  of  our  efforts.  The  rain-drops  of  a  cloud
do  not  all  fall  into  the  calyx  of  a  rose.  Our  actions  do  not
all  lead  to  definite  and  attainable  pleasure  ;  but  we  act  for
the  sake  of  action,  like  the  raindrop  falls  by  its  own  weight ;
the  raindrop  itself,  if  it  were  conscious,  would  experience  a
kind  of  intense  pleasure  in  going  through  space,  to  glide
into  the  vast  unknown.  This  pleasure  lies  at  the  root  of
life,  only  it  disappears  from  memory,  which  is  no  longer  the
unknown,  but  the  known,  and  which  altogether  offers  us
only  what  is  past  and  passive.

The  pessimistic  conception  of  morality  rests,  therefore,  not
on  scientific  reasoning,  but  on  a  purely  individual  apprecia-
tion, in  which  may  enter  many  elements  of  error.  We
perpetually  exchange  pains  for  pleasures,  and  pleasures  for
pains ;  but,  in  this  exchange,  the  only  rule  as  to  value  is
that  of  demand  and  supply,  and  we  can  rarely  say  a  priori
such-and-such  pains  are  greater  than  such-and-such  plea-


30 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

sures — those  of  love,  wealth,  glory,  etc.  There  is  no  end
to  the  number  of  people  offering  themselves  to  undergo
suffering  and  pain,  even  without  being  urged  thereto  by  the
necessities  of  life.  We  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  suffering
is  not  the  evil  most  dreaded  by  man — that  inaction  is  often
still  worse ;  that  there  is,  moreover,  a  particular  kind  of
pleasure  which  springs  from  conquered  sorrow,  and,  in
general,  from  every  expended  energy.

Unhappiness,  like  happiness,  is,  in  a  great  measure,  an
afterthought.  We  should  therefore  equally  mistrust  those
who  boast  of  having  been  perfectly  happy,  and  those
who  maintain  that  they  have  been  absolutely  unhappy.
Complete  happiness  is  formed  by  memory  and  desire ;
absolute  unhappiness  is  formed  by  memory  and  fear.  We
rarely  ever,  consciously,  have  been  perfectly  happy,  and
yet  we  remember  having  been  so.  Where,  then,  is  absolute
happiness  to  be  found  if  it  is  not  in  our  own  consciousness?
Nowhere  ;  it  is  a  dream  in  which  we  dress  up  reality ;  it  is
the  embellishment  of  memory,  as  absolute  unhappiness  is
the  darkening  of  memory.  Happiness,  unhappiness  is
merely  the  past — that  is  to  say,  that  which  cannot  return.
It  is  also  everlasting  desire,  which  will  never  be  satisfied,
or  fear  ever  ready  to  reappear  at  the  slightest  thrill  of  alarm.

Hence,  happiness  or  unhappiness,  in  the  accepted  sense
of  the  words,  results  from  a  comprehensive  view  of  life,
which  is  often  an  optical  illusion.  Certain  rivers  of  America
seem  to  roll  along  a  mass  of  black  water,  and  yet,  if  one
takes  some  of  this  water  in  the  hollow  of  the  hand,  it  is
clear  as  crystal.  Its  blackness,  which  almost  looked  appal-
ling, was  an  effect  due  to  the  mass  of  water  and  the  bed
in  which  the  river  runs.  In  the  same  way,  each  moment
of  our  life,  taken  separately,  may  have  this  pleasant  lack  of
cohesion,  this  fluidity,  which  scarcely  leaves  a  perceptible
trace  in  the  memory.  Yet  the  whole  seems  gloomy  because
of  certain  luminous  hours  which  seem  to  penetrate  all  the
others.


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  PESSIMISM.  31

In  all  these  questions  we  are  thus  surrounded  by  in-
numerable illusions.  Nothing  is  real  and  absolutely  certain
except  the  sensation  of  the  moment.  We  should  compare
only  simultaneous  sensations  of  pleasure  and  pain;  but
each  time  that  the  comparison  bears  upon  past  or  future
sensations,  it  implies  error.  The  preponderance  of  pain
over  pleasure  cannot  therefore  be  proved  either  by  experi-
ence or  by  calculation ;  on  the  contrary,  experience  is  against
the  pessimists,  for  humanity  incessantly  proves  a  posteriori
the  value  of  life,  because  it  incessantly  is  looking  for  it.

Does  the  pessimist  conception  of  morality  attempt  to
prove  its  principle  by  some  argument  drawn,  not  from
mathematical  calculation,  but  from  the  very  nature  of
pleasure  itself?  One  of  the  theses  of  pessimism  is  that,
pleasure  presupposing  desire,  and  desire  springing  chiefly
from  want  and  consequently  from  suffering,  pleasure  thus
implies  suffering,  and  is  nothing  but  a  fugitive  moment
between  two  painful  situations.  Hence  that  condemnation
of  pleasure  which  we  find  again  and  again,  ever  since  the
time  of  Buddha,  in  the  conception  of  morality.  But  it  is
very  incorrect  to  represent  pleasure  as  thus  connected  with
pain,  because  it  is  connected  with  desire,  and  even  with
want.  It  is  only  up  to  a  certain  point  that  want  becomes
suffering.  Hunger,  for  instance,  is  painful,  but  appetite
may  be  a  very  pleasant  sensation.  The  spur  of  want  is,
then,  no  more  than  a  kind  of  pleasant  irritation.  The
general  law  is  this — want  becomes  pleasant  to  every  intelli-
gent being,  when  it  is  not  too  violent,  and  when  there  is
the  certainty  or  the  hope  of  its  near  satisfaction.  It  is  then
accompanied  by  the  anticipation  of  enjoyment.  Certain
so-called  sufferings,  preceding  pleasure — like  hunger,  thirst,
the  thrill  of  passion — enter  as  elements  into  the  idea  formed
by  us  of  pleasure ;  without  them  the  enjoyment  is  incom-
plete. Nay,  more ;  taken  by  themselves,  they  are  accom-
panied by  a  certain  enjoyment,  provided  they  do  not  last
too  long.  Where  the  lover  recalls  his  impressions,  the


32 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

moments  of  desire  seem  pleasant  to  the  very  highest  degree.
They  encircle  the  moment  of  keenest  pleasure,  which,  with-
out them,  would  be  much  too  short  and  too  fugitive.

Plato  was  right  in  saying  that  pain  can  enter  into  the
composition  of  pleasure;  but  pleasure,  on  the  contrary,
does  not  enter  into  the  composition  of  pain.  The  loathing
which  follows  the  abuse  of  certain  pleasures  is  not  at  all
inseparable  from  their  use  ;  it  does  not  appear  as  an  element
in  the  conception  we  form  of  them.  Pleasure,  therefore,
has  this  superiority  over  pain — that  it  not  always  produces
the  latter ;  whereas  pain,  at  least  physical  pain,  by  its  mere
disappearance,  cannot  fail  to  give  rise  to  pleasure,  and,
indeed,  sometimes  is  so  associated  with  pleasure  that  it
represents  in  itself  an  agreeable  moment.

Sufferings  of  intellectual  origin  are  not  themselves  abso-
lutely incompatible  with  intellectual  pleasures.  When  not
very  vivid,  they  mingle.  The  former  give  only  the  latter
less  striking  colours — make  them  paler,  so  to  speak —
which  is  not  unbecoming  to  them.  Melancholy  may  make
certain  enjoyments  keener.  From  all  sides,  therefore,  not-
withstanding gloomy  moralists,  pleasure  surrounds  pain,  and
even  mingles  therewith.

Besides,  those  pleasures  which  rarely  correspond  to  any
painful  need— i.e.,  aesthetic  and  intellectual  pleasures —
develop,  and  become  more  and  more  an  important  element
in  our  lives,  the  longer  we  live.  Art  is,  in  modern  life,  a
considerable  source  of  enjoyment,  which  has,  so  to  speak,
no  counter-weight  in  pain.  Its  aim  is  to  succeed  in  filling
with  pleasure  the  dullest  moments  of  life — that  is  to  say,
those  in  which  we  rest  from  action  ;  it  is  the  great  consola-
tion of  the  idler.  Between  two  expenditures  of  physical
force,  the  civilized  man — instead  of  sleeping,  like  the  savage
does — can  enjoy  himself  in  an  intellectual  and  aesthetic
manner.  And  this  enjoyment  can  be  prolonged  more  than
any  other.  We  hear,  inwardly,  certain  symphonies  of
Beethoven  a  long  time  after  having  heard  them  with  our


THE HYPOTHESIS OF PESSIMISM.  33

ears.  We  enjoy  them  beforehand  by  anticipation ;  we
enjoy  them  at  the  moment,  and  afterwards  as  well.

In  order  to  solve  (if  this  be  possible)  the  question
posed  by  pessimistic  morality,  we  believe  that  we  must
address  ourselves  not  only  to  psychology,  but  to  biology,
and  find  out  whether  the  actual  laws  of  life  do  not
imply  a  surplus  value  of  welfare  over  pain.  In  this  case
the  positive  morality  which  we  uphold  would  be  right  in
wanting  to  conform  human  actions  to  the  laws  of  life,
instead  of  aiming  at  final  annihilation  of  life,  and  of  the
desire  to  live,  as  pessimistic  morality  does.

In  the  first  place,  how  are  the  different  senses  affected
by  pain  ?  The  sense  of  sight  is  hardly  affected  at  all  by  it.
So  also  with  the  sense  of  hearing,  for  the  discords  which
reach  the  ear,  and  all  the  ugliness  which  hurts  the  eye,
are  slight  mortifications,  which  we  cannot  possibly  weigh
against  the  keen  enjoyments  of  harmony  and  beauty.
Pleasure  also  predominates  very  largely  in  the  sensations
springing  from  taste  and  smell,  as  we  generally  eat  that
which  pleases  these  two  senses  ;  and,  as  we  must  eat  in
order  to  live,  the  very  conservation  of  life  presupposes  a
periodical  satisfaction  of  the  organs  of  taste  and  of  smell— the
two  being  intimately  connected.  Lastly,  very  few  real
sufferings  are  caused  by  the  sense  of  touch,  if  we  localize
that  sense  in  the  hand.  All,  or  nearly  all,  our  physical  pain,
therefore,  originates  in  our  tactile  feeling,  or  in  our  internal
sensibility.  Even  when  more  pain  than  joy  comes  to  us  from
both  these  sources,  we  may  still  ask  ourselves  if  the  suffering
would  counterbalance  the  pleasures  of  all  kinds  given  us
by  our  other  senses.  But  the  question  arises  from  a
biological  standpoint :  Is  it  possible,  with  respect  to  internal
sensibility,  that  the  feelings  of  discomfort  and  suffering,  on
an  average,  preponderate  over  those  of  comfort  and  well-
being  ?

We  believe  it  is  possible  to  give  a  decisive  answer  to  this
question.  If,  in  living  beings,  the  feelings  of  discomfort


34 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

really  prevailed  over  those  of  comfort,  life  would  be  impossible.
In  fact,  our  vital  power  does  but  translate  into  the  language
of  consciousness  that  which  takes  place  in  our  organs.
The  subjective  discomfort  of  suffering  is  only  a  symptom  of
a  wrong  objective  state  of  disorder,  of  the  beginning  of  an
illness :  it  is  the  translation  of  some  functional  or  organic
trouble.  On  the  contrary,  the  feeling  of  well-being  is  like  the
subjective  aspect  of  a  right  objective  state.  In  the  rhythm
of  existence  well-being  thus  corresponds  to  evolution  of
life,  pain  to  dissolution.  Not  only  is  pain  the  consciousness
of  a  vital  trouble,  but  it  tends  to  increase  that  very  trouble.
In  illness  it  is  not  good  to  feel  our  ailment  too  deeply,  or
the  sensation  exaggerates  it.  Pain  may  be  regarded  as  the
echo  of  mischief  in  the  brain.  A  sympathetic  trouble  carried
into  the  brain  itself  is  then  a  fresh  evil  added  to  the  first,
re-acting  on  it,  and  finally  increasing  it.  In  this  way  pain,
which  just  before  appeared  only  as  the  consciousness  of
partial  disintegration,  now  herself  appears  as  an  agent  of
disintegration.  Excess  of  pain  over  pleasure  is,  therefore,
incompatible  with  the  conservation  of  the  species.  When
with  certain  individuals  the  balance  of  suffering  and  enjoy-
ment is  upset,  and  the  former  prevails,  this  is  an  anomaly,
which  usually  causes  death  to  the  individual  without  delay.
A  being  who  suffers  too  much  is  unfit  for  life.  It  is  neces-
sary for  the  existence  of  an  organism  that,  taken  as  a  whole,
it  should  keep  up  a  certain  regularity  in  its  functions  ;  pain
should  be  banished,  or,  at  least,  be  reduced  to  the  lowest
degree.  Besides,  the  more  natural  selection  works  without
restraint,  the  more  does  it  tend  to  eliminate  the  sufferers ;  in
killing  the  diseased  it  also  stamps  out  the  disease.  If  in
these  days  philanthropy  succeeds  in  saving  a  certain  number
of  invalids,  it  has  not  yet  been  able  to  save  their  race,  which
generally  extinguishes  itself.  Let  us  imagine  a  ship  in  a
storm,  rising  and  falling  on  the  crest  of  the  waves.  The  line
it  follows  may  be  indicated  by  a  series  of  curves,  of  which
one  bend  marks  the  direction  of  the  trough,  the  other  that


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  PESSIMISM.  35

of  the  surface  of  the  water.  If  at  one  moment  of  the  passage
the  descending  curve  bears  the  ship  down,  and  she  does  not
rise  again,  it  would  be  a  sign  that  she  is  sinking  deeper  and
deeper,  and  beginning  to  founder.  Even  so  is  it  with  life,
tossed  about  on  waves  of  pleasure  and  of  pain  :  if  one
marks  these  undulations  with  lines,  and  if  the  line  of  pain
lengthens  more  than  the  other,  it  means  that  we  are  going
down.  The  outline  stamped  on  our  consciousness  by
sensation  is  only  a  figure  representing  the  very  course  of
our  life ;  and  life,  in  order  to  exist,  needs  to  be  a  perpetual
victor)7  of  pleasure  over  pain.

What  we  here  say  of  physical  life,  as  revealed  by  our
inner  sense,  is  also  true  of  moral  life.  In  moral  as  well
as  in  physical  life  suffering  always  marks  a  tendency  to
dissolution — a  partial  death.  For  example,  to  lose  a
beloved  one  is  to  lose  something  of  one's  self,  to  begin
dying  oneself.  Moral  suffering,  if  really  triumphant,  kills
morally — crushes  the  intelligence  and  the  will.  Besides,
he  who,  after  some  violent  moral  crisis,  continues  to  think,
to  will,  to  act  in  every  sense,  may  indeed  suffer,  but  his
suffering  will  soon  be  counterbalanced — will  gradually  be
stifled.  Life  will  prevail  over  the  dissolving  tendencies.

In  moral  as  in  physical  life  the  superior  being  is  he  who
unites  the  most  delicate  sensibility  with  the  strongest  will.
In  him,  no  doubt,  suffering  is  very  vivid,  but  it  provokes  a
still  more  vivid  reaction  of  the  will.  He  suffers  much,  but
he  acts  the  more ;  and  as  action  is  always  a  joy,  his  joy
generally  exceeds  his  pain.  Excess  of  suffering  over
pleasure  indicates  weakness  or  exhaustion  of  the  will,
consequently  of  life  itself.  The  reaction  within  no  longer
responds  to  the  outward  action.  All  sensation  is  a  sort  of
demand  addressed  to  each  sentient  being.  Will  you  be
happy  or  unhappy  ?  Will  you  accept  or  reject  me  ?  It  is
the  will  which  must  answer ;  and  the  will  which  gives  way
to  weakness  condemns  itself — begins  a  sort  of  suicide.

In  moral  suffering  one must  distinguish between the


36 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

purely  affective  and  the  purely  intellectual.  One  must
distinguish  between  those  who  are  pessimists  upon  system—
e.g.,  Schopenhauer — and  those  who  are  pessimists  owing  to
heartrending  anguish.  The  life  of  the  first-named  may
resemble  that  of  us  all,  and  they  may  after  all  be  very
happy ;  for  it  is  possible  to  be  sad  intellectually  without
being  so  in  the  very  depths  of  our  heart.  No  tragedy  goes
on  in  the  intellect  only  ;  or,  if  for  some  hours  it  is  acted
there,  it  is  not  long  ere  the  curtain  falls  softly  of  itself,  as
it  were,  on  this  scene  still  too  entirely  outside  our  real
selves,  and  we  go  back  into  ordinary  life  which  generally
has  nothing  so  dramatic  to  offer.  The  pessimists  upon
system  may  therefore  live  long  and  have  a  long  posterity  ;
that  is  because  they  are,  so  to  speak,  happy  in  spite  of
themselves.  But  it  is  not  the  same  with  those  who  find
the  world  miserable  because  they  are  really  miserable — with
those  whose  pessimism  is  only  an  abstract  of  their  own
sufferings ;  these  deserve  the  most  pity.  But  they  are
condemned  beforehand  by  nature,  and,  so  to  say,  by  them-
selves. The  full  consciousness  of  their  unhappiness  is  but
the  vague  consciousness  of  their  unfitness  for  life.  All
physical  or  moral  sufferings,  hypochondria,  disappointed
ambitions,  broken  affections,  are  like  an  atmosphere  more  or
less  unfit  for  respiration.  Those  who  are  greatly  distressed,
the  sufferers  from  spleen,  from  true  melancholy  (many
people  are  melancholy  only  as  a  matter  of  pose  or  system),
have  neither  lived  nor  taken  firm  root  in  life.  They  are
sensitivists  injured  by  a  slight  shock.  .

The  artists  of  suffering,  like  de  Musset,  Chopin,  Leopardi,
Shelley,  Byron,  Lenau,  were  not  made  for  life;  and  their
sorrows,  which  have  given  us  their  masterpieces,  were  but
the  result  of  a  bad  adaptation  to  environment,  of  an  almost
factitious  existence,  which  could  maintain  itself  for  a  certain
time,  but  which  could  not  last  long.  It  is  possible  to  lend
a  kind  of  artificial  life  to  the  head  of  a  decapitated  man.
If  in  such  a  case  the  mouth  could  open  and  articulate


THE  HYPOTHESIS  OF  PESSIMISM.  37

sounds,  surely  these  would  be  only  screams  of  pain.  In
our  society  there  is  a  certain  number  of  people  in  whom
the  nervous  system  predominates  to  such  a  degree  that
they  are,  so  to  speak,  brains,  heads,  without  body.  Such
beings  live  only  by  deception,  by  artifice.  They  can  speak
only  to  lament,  sing  only  to  sigh,  and  their  wailing  is  so
sincere  that  it  goes  straight  to  our  heart.

Yet  we  cannot  judge  humanity  by  such  as  these — •
humanity,  which  is  full  of  life,  and  from  which  the  future
will  come  forth.  Their  shrieks  of  pain  are  but  the  beginning
of  the  pangs  of  death.

We  come  to  this  conclusion — that  a  certain  amount  of
happiness  is  a  necessary  condition  of  existence.  M.  von
Hartmann  supposes  that,  if  pessimistic  morality  one
day  triumphs  among  mankind,  all  people  will  agree  to
return  to  nothingness  of  their  own  will.  A  universal
suicide  will  put  an  end  to  life.  This  naive  conception,
however,  encloses  this  truth,  that  if  pessimism  planted  itself
deeply  enough  in  the  human  heart,  it  would,  by  degrees,
diminish  its  vitality  and  lead,  not  to  the  rather  burlesque
theatrical  event  of  which  von  Hartmann  speaks,  but  to  a
slow  and  continuous  subsidence  of  life — a  race  of  pessimists
actually  realizing  its  pessimism— that  is  to  say,  increasing
the  sum  of  its  woes  by  imagination  ;  such  a  race  could  not
survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  If  the  human  race
and  the  other  animal  species  survive,  it  is  precisely  because
life  is  not  too  bad  for  them.  This  world  is  not  the  worst
of  all  possible  worlds,  since  definitively  it  exists  and  remains
in  existence.  A  moral  philosophy  of  annihilation,  to  what-
ever living  being  it  is  proposed,  is  like  a  contradiction.
In  reality,  it  is  the  same  reason  which  makes  existence
possible  and  which  makes  it  desirable.


38 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

III.
HYPOTHESIS OF THE INDIFFERENCE OF NATURE.

IF  dogmatic  moral  philosophy  searches  for  the  most  probable
hypothesis  in  the  present  state  of  science,  it  will  find  that  it
is  neither  optimism  nor  pessimism  ;  it  is  that  of  the  indiffer-
ence of  nature.  This  nature — to  whose  end  dogmatism  wishes
us  to  conform — shows,  in  fact,  an  absolute  indifference  :
(i)  with  regard  to  sensibility;  (2)  with  regard  to  the  pos-
sible directions  of  the  human  will.

The  optimist  and  the  pessimist,  instead  of  simply  trying  to
understand,  feel  like  poets — are  moved,  grow  angry,  rejoice,
attribute  to  nature  good  or  ill,  beauty  or  ugliness — qualities,
in  short.  Listen,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  man  of  science ;
for  him  there  are  only  quantities,  always  equivalent.  Nature,
from  her  standpoint,  is  neutral — as  unconscious  of  pleasure
as  of  suffering,  of  good  as  of  evil.

The  indifference  of  nature  to  our  pains  or  our  pleasures
is,  for  the  moralist,  an  hypothesis  not  to  be  taken  into
account,  because  it  is  without  practical  effect.  The  absence
of  a  Providence  relieving  our  suffering  will  change  nothing
in  our  moral  conduct,  once  we  have  admitted  that  the  pains
of  life,  taken  on  an  average,  do  not  exceed  the  joys,  and
that  existence  in  itself  remains  desirable  for  every  living
being.  But  it  is  the  indifference  of  nature  to  good  or  to
evil  which  is  of  interest  to  morality.  Now,  a  great  many
reasons  can  be  given  for  this  indifference.  The  first  is
the  powerlessness  of  the  human  will  with  regard  to  the
whole  universe — the  direction  of  which  it  cannot  change  in
any  appreciable  way.  What  will  be  the  result  to  the  universe
of  such-and-such  a  human  action  ?  We  do  not  know.
Good  and  evil  do  not  appear  to  nature  to  be  more
essentially  opposed  to  one  another  than  cold  and  heat
to  tne  student  of  physical  science ;  they  are  degrees  of
moral  temperature,  and  it  is,  perhaps,  necessary  that,  like
heat  and  cold,  they  should  balance  each  other  in  the


HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  INDIFFERENCE  OF  NATURE. 39

universe.  Perhaps  good  and  evil  neutralize  each  other  in
the  world  at  the  end  of  a  certain  time,  as  in  the  ocean  the
different  movements  of  the  waves  neutralize  each  other.
Each  one  of  us  makes  his  own  track,  but  nature  little  heeds  the
direction  of  that  track ;  it  is  destined  to  be  effaced,  to  dis-
appear rapidly  in  the  great,  aimless  tumult  of  the  universe.
Is  it  really  true  that  the  sea  still  heaves  with  the  wash  of
Pompey's  ship  ?  Has  the  ocean  itself  one  more  wave  to-day
than  of  yore,  in  spite  of  all  the  ships  which  now  travel  over
its  waves  ?  Is  it  certain  that  the  consequences  of  a  good
action,  or  of  a  crime  committed  a  hundred  thousand  years
ago  by  a  man  of  the  tertiary  age,  can  have  modified  the
world  in  any  single  respect  ?  Confucius,  Buddha,  or  Jesus
Christ — will  they  have  any  effect  on  nature  after  a  thousand
million  years  ?  Let  us  imagine  the  good  deed  of  an
ephemera ;  it  dies,  together  with  the  insect,  in  a  ray  of  the
sun.  Can  the  good  deed  retard  for  the  millionth  part  of  a
second  the  coming  of  the  night  which  will  kill  the  insect  ?

Once  there  was  a  woman  whose  harmless  madness  was  to
believe  herself  to  be  a  bride,  and  on  the  eve  of  her  wedding.
Waking  up  in  the  morning,  she  asked  for  a  white  dress,  and
a  bride's  crown  ;  smiling,  she  adorned  herself.  "  To-day
he  will  come,"  she  said.  In  the  evening  sadness  over-
mastered her,  after  the  idle  waiting ;  she  then  took  off  her
white  dress.  But  the  following  morning,  with  the  dawn,  her
confidence  returned.  "  It  is  for  to-day,"  she  said.  And  her
life  passed  in  this  tenacious,  although  ever-deceiving,  certi-
tude— taking  off  her  gown  of  hope,  only  to  put  it  on  again.
Humanity  resembles  this  woman,  oblivious  of  all  deception  ;
it  awaits  each  day  the  coming  of  its  ideal.  Probably  it  has
said,  for  hundreds  of  centuries  :  "  To-morrow  it  will  come."
Every  generation  in  turn  puts  on  its  white  dress.  Faith  is
eternal,  like  the  spring  and  the  flowers.  The  whole  of
nature  has,  perhaps,  such  a  faith — at  least,  the  whole  of  con-
scious and  intelligent  nature.  Perhaps,  an  infinite  number  of
centuries  ago,  on  some  now  dissolved  planet,  the  mystical


40 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

bridegroom  was  already  expected.  Eternity,  in  whatever
way  it  be  conceived,  seems  to  be  an  everlasting  deception.
It  matters  not;  faith  bridges  the  infinite  chasm.  Between
the  two  gulfs  of  the  past  and  the  future  it  ceases  not  to
delight  in  its  dream  ;  it  sings  always  the  same  hymn  of  joy
and  of  appeal,  believing  it  new  each  time,  although  it  has
lost  itself  already  so  many  times  without  being  heard.  It
continues  to  stretch  its  arms  towards  the  ideal,  which  is  all
the  more  attractive  because  it  is  vague ;  and  it  puts  on  its
forehead  its  crown  of  flowers  without  noticing  that  it  has
been  faded  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years.

M.  Renan  has  said  :  "  In  the  pyramid  of  goodness  raised
by  the  successive  efforts  of  living  beings  every  stone  counts."
The  Egyptian  of  the  time  of  Khephren  still  exists  by  means
of  the  stone  he  laid.  Where  does  he  exist  ?  In  a
desert,  in  the  midst  of  which  his  work  is  reared,  as  useless
in  its  hugeness  as  the  smallest  grain  of  sand  at  its  base.
Will  not  the  "  pyramid  of  goodness  "  undergo  the  same
fate  ?  Our  earth  is  lost  in  the  desert  of  the  skies  ;  humanity
itself  becomes  lost  on  earth ;  our  individual  action  is  lost  in
humanity.  How  shall  we  give  unity  to  this  universal  effort,
how  concentrate  the  infinite  radiation  of  life  towards  the
same  point  ?  Each  work  is  isolated ;  there  is  an  infinite
number  of  small,  microscopic  pyramids,  of  solitary  crystal-
lizations of  Lilliputian  monuments,  which  cannot  form  them-
selves into  a  whole.  Probably  the  just  man  and  the  unjust
man  weigh  neither  one  more  than  the  other  on  this  terrestrial
globe,  which  pursues  its  way  through  the  ether.  The  par-
ticular exercise  of  their  will  can  no  more  affect  the  whole  of
nature  than  the  beating  of  the  wings  of  a  bird  soaring  above
a  cloud  can  refresh  my  forehead.  The  celebrated  formula,
ignorabimus,  may  be  transformed  into  this  one — illudemur  ;
humanity  speeds  on,  enveloped  in  the  inviolable  veil  of  its
illusions.

A  second  reason  which  "  indifferentism "  can  oppose  to
optimism  is  that  the  great  whole,  whose  direction  we  are


HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  INDIFFERENCE  OF  NATURE.  41

unable  to  change,  has  itself  no  moral  direction — there  is
absence  of  aim,  complete  non-morality  of  nature,  neutrality
of  the  infinite  mechanism.  Indeed,  the  life  of  the  universe
shows  very  little  signs  of  regular  labour  with  an  aim.  Long
ago  Heraclitus  compared  it  with  a  game.  This  game  is  that
of  the  see-saw,  which  calls  forth  such  shouts  of  laughter  from
children.  Each  being  counterbalances  another.  My  part  in
the  universe  is  to  paralyze  someone  whom  I  do  not  know —
to  prevent  him  from  ascending  too  high,  or  descending  too
low.  None  of  us  will  carry  away  the  world ;  its  tranquillity
is  assured  by  our  tumult.

At  the  basis  of  the  universal  mechanism  we  may
imagine  a  sort  of  moral  atomism,  an  infinite  number  of
egoisms  set  to  struggle  each  against  the  other.  There  might
be  thus  in  nature  as  many  centres  as  there  are  atoms,  as
many  aims  as  individuals,  or  at  least  as  many  ends  as  there
are  conscious  groups  or  societies  ;  and  these  ends  might
be  opposed.  Egoism  would  be  the  essential  and  universal
law  of  nature.  In  other  words,  there  would  be  coincidence
between  what  we  call  the  immoral  will  in  man  and  the
normal  will  of  every  being.  This,  perhaps,  would  be  the
deepest  moral  scepticism.  Each  individual  would  then  be
no  more,  and  worth  no  more,  than  a  soap-bubble.
All  the  difference  between  the  you  and  me  would  be
that  in  the  first  case  we  are  outside  the  bubble,  in  the
second  case  inside  it.  Personal  interest  would  only  be  a
point  of  view ;  right  would  be  another ;  but  it  is  natural
to  prefer  the  point  of  view  within  our  compass  to  that  which
is  not.  My  soap-bubble  is  my  fatherland  ;  why  should  I
destroy  it?

The  love  of  every  limited  being  would  be,  according  to
this  doctrine,  as  illusive  as  the  love  of  self  may  be.
Rationally,  love  has  no  more  value  than  egoism.  The
egoist,  in  fact,  deceives  himself  as  to  his  own  importance,
which  he  exaggerates ;  the  lover  or  the  friend  as  to  that  of
the  beloved  one.  Again,  from  this  point  of  view,  moral


42 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

good  and  evil  remain  for  "  the  indifferentist  "  things  quite
human,  quite  subjective,  without  fixed  relation  to  the  whole
of  the  universe.

Perhaps  there  is  nothing  which  offers  to  the  eye  and  the
mind  a  more  complete  and  more  sorrowful  representation  of
the  world  than  the  sea.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  picture  of
force  in  its  wildest  and  most  unconquerable  form ;  it  is  a
display,  a  luxury  of  power,  of  which  nothing  else  can  give
an  idea  ;  and  it  lives,  moves,  tosses,  everlastingly  without
aim.  Sometimes  we  might  say  that  the  sea  is  animated,
that  it  palpitates  and  breathes,  that  it  is  an  immense  heart,
whose  powerful  and  tumultuous  heaving  we  see  ;  but  what
makes  us  despair  here  is  that  all  this  effort,  this  ardent  life,
is  spent  to  no  purpose.  This  heart  of  the  world  beats
without  hope;  from  all  this  rocking,  all  this  collision  of
the  waves,  there  results  only  a  little  foam  stripped  off  by
the  wind.

I  remember  that,  sitting  on  the  beach  once,  I  watched
the  serried  waves  rolling  towards  me.  They  came  without
interruption  from  the  expanse  of  the  sea,  roaring  and  white.
Behind  the  one  dying  at  my  feet  I  noticed  another ;  and
further  behind  that  one,  another ;  and  further  still,  another
and  another — a  multitude.  At  last,  as  far  as  I  could  see,
the  whole  horizon  seemed  to  rise  and  roll  on  towards  me.
There  was  a  reservoir  of  infinite,  inexhaustible  forces  there.
How  deeply  I  felt  the  impotency  of  man  to  arrest  the  effort
of  that  whole  ocean  in  movement !  A  dike  might  break
one  of  these  waves ;  it  could  break  hundreds  and  thousands
of  them ;  but  would  not  the  immense  and  indefatigable
ocean  gain  the  victory  ?

And  this  rising  tide  seemed  to  me  the  image  of  the  whole
of  nature  assailing  humanity,  which  vainly  wishes  to  direct  its
course,  to  dam  it  in,  to  master  it.  Man  struggles  bravely  ;
he  multiplies  his  efforts.  Sometimes  he  believes  himself  to
be  the  conqueror ;  that  is  because  he  does  not  look  far
enough  ahead,  and  because  he  does  not  notice  far  out  on


HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  INDIFFERENCE  OF  NATURE. 43

the  horizon  the  great  waves  which,  sooner  or  later,  must
destroy  his  work  and  carry  himself  away.  In  this  universe,
where  worlds  rise  and  fall  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  are  we
not  surrounded,  unceasingly  assailed,  by  the  multitude  of
beings  ?  Life  whirls  round  us,  envelopes  us,  submerges  us.
We  speak  of  immortality,  of  eternity ;  but  only  that  is  eternal
which  is  inexhaustible,  that  which  is  blind  enough  and  rich
enough  to  be  always  giving  without  measure.  That  man
becomes  acquainted  with  death  who  feels  the  need  of  rest,
who  after  work  lets  his  hands  fall  in  his  lap,  for  the  first
time  learns  that  his  strength  has  a  limit.  Only  nature  is
so  untiring  as  to  be  eternal.  We  speak  in  the  same  way  of
an  ideal ;  we  believe  that  Nature  has  an  aim,  that  she  is
going  somewhere ;  that  is  because  we  do  not  understand
her.  We  take  her  for  a  stream  which  flows  towards  its
mouth,  and  will  arrive  there  some  day  ;  but  nature  is  like
the  ocean.  To  give  an  aim  to  Nature  would  be  to  narrow
her ;  for  an  aim  means  an  end.  That  which  is  immense
has  no  aim.  It  is  often  said  that  "  nothing  exists  in
vain."  That  is  true  in  detail.  A  grain  of  corn  is
made  to  produce  other  grains  of  corn.  We  cannot
imagine  ci  field  which  should  not  be  fertile.  But  nature,  as
a  whole,  is  not  compelled  to  be  fertile.  It  is  the  great
balance  between  life  and  death.  Perhaps  its  grandest
poetry  lies  in  its  superb  sterility.  A  field  of  corn  does  not
equal  the  ocean.  The  ocean  neither  works  nor  produces ;
it  moves.  It  does  not  give  life ;  it  contains  it,  or  rather  it
gives  and  takes  it  with  the  same  indifference.  It  is  the
grand,  eternal  cradle  rocking  its  creatures.  If  we  look
down  into  its  fathoms,  we  see  its  swarming  life.  There  is
not  one  of  its  drops  of  water  which  does  not  hold  living
creatures,  and  all  fight  one  another,  persecute  one  another,
avoid  and  devour  one  another.  What  does  it  matter  to  the
whole,  of  what  consequence  to  the  deep  ocean,  are  these
inhabitants,  wandering  at  random  in  its  briny  waves  ?  The
ocean  itself  gives  us  the  spectacle  of  a  war,  a  struggle


44 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

without  truce  ;  its  breakers,  the  strongest  of  which  cover
over  and  sweep  away  the  weaker  ones,  represent  to  us  the
abridged  history  of  the  worlds,  the  history  of  the  earth  and
of  humanity.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  the  universe  become  trans-
parent to  our  eyes.  This  tempest  of  the  water  is  but  the
continuation,  the  consequence,  of  the  tempest  of  the  air  ;  is
it  not  the  shudder  of  the  winds  which  communicates  itself
to  the  sea  ?  The  air-waves  in  their  turn  find  the  explana-
tion of  their  movements  in  the  undulations  of  light  and  of
heat.  If  our  eyes  could  embrace  the  immensity  of  the
ether,  we  should  see  everywhere  nothing  but  an  amazing
clash  of  waves,  a  struggle  without  end,  because  it  is  without
reason — a  war  of  all  against  all.  There  is  nothing  which  is
not  carried  away  by  this  whirlpool.  Earth  itself,  man,
human  intelligence,  nothing  can  offer  us  anything  fixed  to
which  it  would  be  possible  to  hold  on — all  these  are  swept
away  in  slower,  but  not  less  irresistible,  undulations  ;  ever-
lasting war  also  reigns  there,  and  the  right  of  the  strongest.
As  I  thus  reflect,  the  ocean  seems  to  rise  around  me,  to
invade  all,  to  sweep  away  all ;  it  seems  that  I  am  no  longer
myself,  but  part  of  the  waves,  a  drop  of  the  water  of  those
waves  ;  that  the  earth  has  disappeared,  that  man  has  dis-
appeared, and  that  there  remains  only  nature  with  its  endless
undulations,  its  ebb  and  flow,  its  perpetual  changes  of  surface,
which  hide  its  deep  and  monotonous  uniformity.

Between,  the  three  hypotheses  of  a  benevolent  nature,
an  antag/rkjstic  nature,  or  an  indifferent  nature,  how  can  one
choose  ana  decide  ?  It  is  an  idle  fancy  to  give  man  the  law  :
Conform  to  nature.  We  do  not  know  what  this  nature
is.  Kant  was  right,  therefore,  in  saying  that  we  must
not  ask  dogmatic  metaphysics  to  give  us  a  sure  law  of
conduct.


CHAPTER  II.

Morality  of  Practical  Certitude. Morality  of  Faith.
Morality  of  Doubt.


MORALITY OF PRACTICAL CERTITUDE.

THE  morality  of  practical  certitude  is  that  which  admits
that  we  are  in  possession  of  a  positive,  absolute,  apodictic,
and  imperative  moral  law.  Some  represent  this  law  to
themselves  as  containing  a  substance — a  good  in  itself —
which  we  grasp  by  intuition,  and  whose  value  to  our  mind
is  superior  to  everything  else.  Others,  with  Kant,  represent
this  law  to  themselves  as  purely  formal,  and  as  not  con-
taining in  itself  any  matter,  any  good,  any  definite  end;
but  only  bearing  a  character  of  universality,  which  makes  it
possible  to  distinguish  the  ends  as  conformable  or  non-
conformable  to  the  law.  Thus,  according  to  the  intuitionists,
we  discern,  by  immediate  intuition,  the  worth  and  the
dignity  of  actions,  faculties,  virtues — such  as  temperance,
purity,  etc.  According  to  the  followers  of  Kant,  on  the
contrary,  the  moral  character  of  a  deed  is  only  proved  if  we
can  generalize  the  principle  of  that  deed,  and  thus  show  it
to  be  disinterested  in  its  nature.

Against  the  first  conception  of  the  morality  of  certitude
stands,  above  all,  the  old  sceptical  argument  of  the  contra-
dictions of  the  moral  judgment — of  its  relativeness  and  its
uncertainty.  This  argument  has  a  dissolvent  influence  on
the  conception  of  the  law  itself,  so  far  as  it  imposes  in  an
absolute  way  such  or  such  deeds,  such  or  such  virtues.  It
is  difficult  to  remain  faithful  to  the  rites  of  an  absolutist


46 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

religion  if  these  rites  begin  to  appear  supremely  indifferent,
and  if  you  no  longer  believe  in  the  particular  god  which  is
worshipped  by  them.

The  problem  put  by  Darwin  on  the  changeableness  of
duty  does  not  cease,  therefore,  to  be  alarming  to  anyone
admitting  an  absolute,  imperative,  certain,  universal  good-
Would  the  formula  of  duty  change  totally  for  us  if  we  were
descendants  of  the  bees  ?

There  is  in  every  society  work  of  different  kinds
to  be  done,  which  implies,  in  general,  division  of  the
common  task — of  the  labour  of  the  community.  Now,  the
duties  of  one  class  of  workers  will  surely  differ  from  those
of  another  class,  and  may  become  as  strange  as  the  morals
of  men-bees  would  be.  Even  in  our  present  society  there
are  neutrals,  as  in  the  society  of  the  bees  and  ants.  These
are  the  monks,  whose  morals  were  not  in  the  Middle  Ages,
nor  are  yet  to-day,  perhaps,  the  same  as  those  of  the  rest  of
society.  Under  Charles  VII.  an  act  was  committed  which
is  the  counterpart  of  the  extermination  of  the  males  after
fecundation.  Companies  of  mercenaries,  become  useless,
were  exterminated  ;  it  was  believed  to  be  a  righteous  act.
Corporations  might  exist  on  the  planet  Mars  quite  different
from  ours ;  they  might  have  mutual  duties  very  contrary  to
ours,  but  imposed  by  an  obligation  quite  as  categorical  in
form.  On  our  planet — on  the  earth  even — we  sometimes
see  conscience  change  the  character  of  its  guidance.  There
.are  cases  in  which  the  individual  feels  an  obligation  in  a
wrong  way — an  obligation  to  commit  deeds  usually  con-
sidered to  be  immoral.

Let  us  name,  among  many  other  examples,  that  fact
related  by  Darwin  of  the  conception  of  certain  duties  in
Australia.  The  people  in  Australia  attribute  the  death  of
their  kinsmen  to  a  spell  cast  by  some  neighbouring  tribe ;
they  consider  it,  moreover,  a  sacred  duty  to  avenge  the
death  of  any  relative  by  killing  a  member  of  one  of
.the  neighbouring  tribes.  Dr.  Landor,  a  magistrate  in


MORALITY  OF  PRACTICAL  CERTITUDE.  47

Western  Australia,  relates  that  a  native  employed  on  his
farm  lost  one  of  his  wives  through  illness.  He  announced
to  the  doctor  his  intention  to  start  on  a  journey,  in  order  to
go  and  kill  the  wife  of  a  man  belonging  to  a  far  distant
tribe.  "  I  answered  him  that,  if  he  committed  such  an  act,
I  would  put  him  in  prison  for  the  rest  of  his  life."  There-
upon he  did  not  depart,  but  remained  on  the  farm.  But,
from  month  to  month,  he  wasted  away;  remorse
consumed  him.  He  could  neither  eat  nor  sleep  ;  the
spirit  of  his  wife  haunted  him — reproached  him  for  his
neglect.  One  day  he  disappeared.  At  the  end  of  a  year
he  returned,  in  perfect  health  ;  he  had  fulfilled  his  duty.
Thus  one  sees  that  a  sentiment  more  or  less  similar  to  moral
obligation  serves  as  an  incentive  to  evil,  or  purely  instinctive
acts.  Thieves  and  murderers  may  possess  the  sentiment  of
professional  duty  ;  animals  may  vaguely  feel  it.  The  feeling
of  having  to  do  a  thing  penetrates  the  whole  of  creation,  as
far  as  consciousness  and  voluntary  movement  penetrate.

We  know  what  happened  to  Alfred  de  Musset  when  he
was  young  (the  same  fact  is  told  of  Merimee).  Once,  being
very  much  scolded  for  a  childish  freak,  he  went  away  in
tears,  deeply  penitent,  when  he  heard  his  parents  say,  after
the  door  was  shut :  "  Poor  boy,  he  thinks  himself  quite  a
criminal !"  The  thought  that  his  misdeed  was  not  so  very
serious,  and  that  his  repentance  was  mere  childishness,
wounded  him  deeply.  This  small  matter  remained  engraved
on  his  memory  for  ever.  The  same  thing  is  happening  to
humanity  to-day.  If  it  comes  to  imagine  that  its  moral
ideal  is  a  childish  ideal — changeable,  according  to  the  whim
of  custom ;  that  the  end  and  reason  of  many  duties  are
puerile,  superstitious,  humanity  will  become  inclined  to
smile  at  itself,  to  bring  no  longer  into  its  actions  that
seriousness  without  which  absolute  duty  disappears.  This
is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  sentiment  of  obligation  is
now  losing  its  sacred  character.  We  find  it  brought  to  bear
on  too  many  objects  ;  we  hear  it  applied  to  too  many  worth-


48 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OK  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

less  creatures  (sometimes  even  to  animals).  This  variability
in  the  objects  of  duty  proves  the  error  of  all  intuitionist
morality,  which  pretends  to  be  in  absolute  possession  of  an
unchanging  reason  for  good.  This  moral  philosophy,  for-
merly adopted  by  V.  Cousin,  by  the  Scotch,  and  the  Eclectics>
maybe  considered  as  untenable  in  the  present  state  of  science.

There  remains  the  formal  and  subjective  moral  philosophy
of  the  followers  of  Kant,  which  admits  as  absolute  only  the
imperative,  and  considers  as  secondary  the  idea  formed
of  its  object  and  application.  Against  a  morality  of
that  sort  every  objection  drawn  from  facts  seems  to  lose
its  worth  ;  for  is  it  not  always  possible  to  find  an  answer  by
making  a  distinction  between  the  intention  and  the  act  ?
If  the  act  is  practically  harmful,  the  intention  may  have
been  morally  disinterested,  and  that  is  all  that  the  moral
philosophy  of  Kant  demands.  But  a  new  problem  presents
itself.  Is  there  attached  to  the  good  intention  a  feeling  of
obligation  truly  supra-sensible  and  supra-intellectual,  as
Kant  will  have  it  ?

The  feeling  of  obligation,  if  exclusively  considered  from
the  point  of  view  of  mental  dynamics,  is  brought  back  to
a  feeling  of  resistance,  felt  each  time  that  one  wants  to
take  such  or  such  a  course.  This  resistance,  being  of  such
a  nature  as  to  be  apprehended  by  the  senses,  cannot  arise
from  our  relation  to  a  moral  law,  which  hypothetically  would
be  quite  intelligible  and  independent  of  time.  It  arises
from  our  relation  to  natural  and  empiric  laws.

The  feeling  of  obligation,  therefore,  is,  properly  speaking,
not  moral ;  it  is  sensible.  Even  Kant  himself  is  obliged  to
acknowledge  that  the  moral  sentiment  is,  like  any  other,
pathological;  only  he  believes  this  sentiment  to  be
roused  by  the  mere  form  of  the  moral  law,  without  regard
to  its  subject-matter.  There  results  from  this,  in  his  eyes,
a  mystery,  which  he  avows — an  intelligible  and  supra-
natural  law,  which,  however,  produces  a  pathological  and
natural  sentiment,  respect.


MORALITY  OF  PRACTICAL  CERTITUDE.  49

"  It  is  absolutely  impossible  to  understand  a  priori  how
a  pure  idea,  not  containing  in  itself  anything  sensible,  pro-
duces a  sensation  of  pleasure  or  of  pain We  are  abso-
lutely unable  to  explain  why  and  how  the  universality  of  a
maxim  as  such,  and,  consequently,  why  morality  interests
us."  There  is  somewhat  of  a  mystery  here.  The  projection
of  morality  into  the  domain  of  sensibility  under  the  form
of  moral  sentiment  would  be  possible  without  a  "  why,"
and  Kant  nevertheless  asserts  it  to  be  evident  a  priori.
"  We  are  obliged,"  he  says,  "  to  be  content  with  thus  clearly
seeing  a  priori  that  this  sentiment  (produced  by  a  pure
idea)  is  inseparably  united  to  the  representation  of  the
moral  law  in  every  reasonable  finite  creature."  The  truth
is,  we  believe,  that  we  really  do  not  see  at  all  any  reason
a  priori  to  join  sensible  pleasure  or  pain  to  a  law  which,
hypothetically,  would  be  supra-sensible  and  heterogeneous
to  nature.  Moral  sentiment  cannot  be  explained  rationally
and  a  priori.  Besides,  it  is  impossible  to  prove  by  fact  in
the  human  conscience  the  act  of  respect  for  a  pure  form.
In  the  first  place,  an  unapplied  and  purely  formal  duty
does  not  exist.  The  sentiment  of  obligation,  it  is  clear,
can  only  be  seen  to  arise  when  there  is  some  subject-
matter  given  for  duty,  and  even  the  followers  of  Kant
are  obliged  to  acknowledge  this.  Hence  duty  is  never
grasped  by  consciousness,  except  as  having  relation  to
certain  contents  from  which  it  cannot  be  detached.  There
is  no  duty  independently  of  the  thing  we  have  to  do,  of  the
doing  of  the  act.  Moreover,  there  is  no  duty  unless  it  be
towards  somebody.  The  theologians  were  only  half  wrong
in  representing  duty  as  addressing  itself  to  the  divine  will ;
there,  at  least,  was  some  one  behind  the  obligation.  Now,  in
this  synthesis  of  the  real  indissolubility  of  matter  and  form,
is  the  sentiment  of  obligation  still  only  formal?  We
believe,  from  experience,  that  the  sentiment  of  obligation
is  not  connected  with  the  representation  of  law  as  formal
law,  but  is  connected  with  law  by  reason  of  its  evident


50 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

subject-matter  and  of  its  aim.  Law  as  law  can  only  be
grasped  by  our  mind  through  its  universality  ;  but  to  this
precept,  "  Act  in  such  a  way  that  your  maxim  may  become
a  universal  law,"  no  sentiment  of  obligation  whatever  will
attach  itself,  so  long  as  there  is  no  question  of  social  life
and  the  deep  inclinations  awakened  by  it,  so  long
as  we  do  not  conceive  the  universality  of  something,
some  end,  some  good,  which  may  be  the  object  of  a
sentiment.

The  universal,  as  universal,  can  but  produce  a  logical
satisfaction,  which  itself  is  still  a  satisfaction  of  the  logical
instinct  in  man  ;  and  this  logical  instinct  is  a  natural  ten-
dency, an  expression  of  life  in  its  higher  form,  which  is
intelligent,  favourable  to  order,  to  symmetry,  to  similitude,
to  unity  in  variety,  to  law,  therefore  of  universality.  Will
it  be  said  that  the  universal  law  itself  contains  at  bottom
will — pure  will  ?  The  reduction  of  duty  to  the  will  of  law,
which  itself  would  still  be  a  purely  formal  will,  far  from
building  up  morality,  seems  to  us  to  produce  a  dissolvent
effect  on  the  will  itself.  The  will  to  do  a  certain  deed
cannot  be  based  on  any  law  which  is  not  founded  on  the
practical  and  logical  value  of  the  deed  itself.  The  old
doctrine  of  Ariston,  for  instance,  did  not  admit  any  differ-
ence of  worth,  any  degree  between  things ;  but  a  human
being  will  never  be  content  to  pursue  his  aim,  saying  that
the  aim  is  entirely  indifferent,  that  its  moral  value  lies  only
in  his  will  to  pursue  it.  This  will  would  at  once  give  way,
and  indifference  would  pass  from  the  object  to  himself.
Man  needs  to  believe  always  that  there  is  something  good
not  only  in  the  intention,  but  also  in  the  act.  The  con-
ception of  a  morality  exclusively  formal,  independent  of
everything  else,  is  a  demoralizing  one ;  it  is  the  analogy  of
the  labour  which  the  prisoners  in  English  prisons  are
obliged  to  do,  and  which  is  without  aim — to  turn  a  handle
merely  for  the  sake  of  turning  it !  No  one  can  be  resigned
to  this.  It  is  necessary  that  the  intelligence  should  approve


MORALITY  OF  PRACTICAL  CERTITUDE.  51

of  the  imperative,  and  that  a  feeling  should  attach  itself  to
its  object.

The  other  day  a  little  girl,  whose  mother  had  entrusted
her  with  a  penny  for  some  small  purchase,  was  crushed  in
the  streets.  She  did  not  drop  the  penny.  Recovering  from
a  fainting  fit,  dying,  she  opened  her  firmly-closed  fist,  and
handed  her  mother  the  humble  penny,  whose  small  value
she  did  not  realize,  saying  to  her,  "  I  have  not  lost  it."
There  is  something  sublime  in  this  bit  of  childishness ;  for
this  little  one  life  was  of  less  importance  than  the  penny
which  had  been  entrusted  to  her  care.  Well,  whatever
may  be  the  moral  merit  which  a  stoic  or  a  follower  of
Kant  can  reasonably  discover  in  this  fact,  he  would  be
absolutely  incapable  of  imitating  it — he,  the  philosopher,
knowing  the  worth  of  a  penny.  Faith  would  fail  him,
perhaps  not  the  faith  in  his  own  possible  merit,  but  faith
in  the  penny.

Hence  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  where  the  question  of
moral  merit  is  concerned,  to  transfigure  in  one's  own  eyes  the
subject-matter  of  the  meritorious  act,  and  often  to  attribute  a
value  superior  to  its  real  one.  A  comparison  is  necessary,  not
only  between  the  will  and  the  law,  but  also  between  the
moral  effort  and  the  value  of  the  object  pursued.  If  the
merit  itself  still  seems  good,  whatever  the  object,  it  is
because  we  recognise  in  it  a  power  capable  of  being  trans-
ferred to  a  superior  object,  because  we  see  in  it  a  reservoir
of  living  force,  which  is  always  precious,  even  although  this
force  in  a  particular  case  may  be  wrongfully  used.  It  is,
therefore,  the  possible  use  which  we  approve  of  in  the  actual
use ;  but  it  is  always  its  use,  and  not  the  power  in  itself,  the
will  in  itself,  which  we  approve.  The  eagle,  soaring  upwards
to  the  sun,  finally  sees  all  things  on  the  earth  on  a  level.
Let  us  suppose  that  we,  from  a  sufficiently  high  point  of
view,  could  see  all  our  actions  become  level  as  far  as  the
universe  is  concerned  :  a  good  many  human  interests  and
acts  of  disinterestedness  would  then  appear  to  us  equally


52 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

simple  ;  their  object  would  not  seem  to  us  superior  to  the
penny  of  the  child.  In  spite  of  Zeno  and  Kant,  we  should
then  no  longer  have  courage  to  will  and  to  merit :  we  do
not  use  our  will  for  the  mere  sake  of  willing.

It  is,  therefore,  very  difficult  to  admit  that  duty,  variable
and  uncertain  in  all  its  applications,  remains  certain  and
apodictical  in  its  law,  in  universality  for  the  sake  of  univer-
sality, or,  if  one  prefers  it,  in  the  will  for  the  will's  sake  only,
as  an  end  in  itself.  The  sentiment  which,  according  to
Kant,  is  attached  either  to  pure  reason  or  to  pure  will  is
the  quite  natural  interest  we  experience  in  our  superior  facul-
ties or  functions,  in  our  intellectual  life.  We  cannot  be  in-
different to  the  rational  exercise  of  our  reason,  which,  after
all,  is  a  more  complex  instinct,  nor  to  the  exercise  of  the
ze'/y/,  which,  indeed,  is  a  fuller  force  and  a  potentiality  of
effects  anticipated  in  their  cause.  The  tree  is  valuable  to  us,
because  we  think  of  the  many  fruits  of  the  tree — at  least,
if  the  tree  does  not  already  seem  to  us  beautiful  in  itself;
but  even  then  the  tree  itself  appears  to  be  a  production,  a
work,  a  living  fruit ;  it  satisfies  certain  of  our  tendencies,
our  love  of  "unity  in  variety,"  our  aesthetic  instinct.  In
the  impression  produced  by  "  pure  reason  "  or  "  pure  will "
are  found  all  these  elements  of  pleasure,  use,  and  beauty.

If  the  pureness  were  pushed  to  its  utmost  limit,  the  result
would  be  the  indifference  of  the  senses  and  the  intellect,
and  not  at  all  that  definite  state  of  the  intelligence  and  the
senses  which  is  called  the  affirmation  of  a  law  and  the
respect  of  a  law.  There  would  be  nothing  for  our  judgment
and  our  sentiment  to  work  upon.


ii.

MORALITY OF FAITH.


NEXT  to  the  moral  dogmatism  of  Kant,  for  whom  the  form
of  the  law  in  itself  is  apodictically  positive  and  practical,  we
find  a  somewhat  altered  Kantism,  which  makes  of  duty


MORALITY OF FAITH.  53

itself  an  object  of  moral  faith,  no  longer  an  object  of
certitude.  Kant  made  faith  begin  only  with  the  postulates
following  the  positive  affirmation  of  duty.  To-day  faith  has
itself  been  magnified  into  duty.

If,  in  these  days,  religious  faith,  properly  so-called,  has  a
tendency  to  disappear,  it  is  replaced  in  a  great  many  minds
by  moral  faith.  The  absolute  has  changed  its  abode ;  it
has  passed  from  the  domain  of  religion  to  that  of  ethics ;
but  it  still  has  lost  nothing  of  the  power  which  it
exercises  over  the  human  mind.  It  has  remained  capable
of  raising  the  masses ;  an  example  of  this  is  found  in  the
French  Revolution.  It  can  call  forth  the  most  generous
enthusiasm  ;  it  may  also  produce  a  certain  kind  of  fanaticism,
much  less  dangerous  than  religious  fanaticism,  but  not  without
its  inconveniences.  Fundamentally,  there  is  no  essential
difference  between  moral  faith  and  religious  faith.  They  each
contain  the  other ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  presumption  to  the  con-
trary, still  too  prevalent  in  these  days,  moral  faith  has  a  more
primitive  and  more  universal  character  than  the  other.  If  the
idea  of  God  has  ever  had  a  metaphysical  value  and  a  practical
utility,  it  is  in  so  far  as  it  appeared  to  unite  the  ideas  of
power  and  justice.  In  reality,  the  following  affirmation  was
contained  in  the  deliberate  affirmation  of  the  divinity :  The
highest  force  is  moral  force.  If  we  no  longer  adore  the
gods  of  our  ancestors — Jupiter,  Jehovah,  even  Christ — it  is
because,  among  other  reasons,  we  find  ourselves  in  many
respects  morally  above  them.  We  judge  our  gods,  and,  in
denying  them,  we  often  do  no  more  than  condemn  them
morally.  The  "irreligion"  which  seems  to  predominate
to-day  is,  therefore,  in  many  respects  at  least,  the  provisional
triumph  of  a  purer  faith,  of  a  religion  more  worthy  of  the
name.  In  becoming  exclusively  moral,  faith  does  not  alter ;
on  the  contrary,  it  casts  off  all  foreign  elements.  The  old
religions  appealed  not  only  to  inward  faith,  they  invoked
fear,  the  misleading  evidence  of  miracles  and  of  revelation  ;
they  pretended  to  rest  in  something  positive,  plain,  tangible.


54 MORALITV  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

All  these  means  of  gaining,  of  "  cadging  "  for  confidence
("piper "  la  confiance,  as  Montaigne  would  say),  have  now
become  useless.  Everything  becomes  simpler.  The  formula
which  has  had  so  much  influence  in  the  world,  "  It  is  a
duty  to  believe  in  God,"  resolves  itself  into  this,  which  it
presupposed  :  It  is  a  duty  to  believe  in  duty.  The  simple
and  -definite  expression  of  faith  is  thus  formulated,  and,  at
the  same  time,  a  new  religion  is  founded.  The  temples
having  lost  their  idols,  the  law  takes  refuge  in  the  "  sanctuary
of  conscience."  The  great  Pan,  the  nature-god,  is  dead ;
Jesus,  the  humanity-god,  is  dead.  There  remains  the
inward  and  ideal  god,  Duty,  whose  destiny  it  is,  perhaps,
also  to  die  some  day.

If  we  seek  to  analyze  this  faith  in  duty  as  it  is  presented
by  the  followers  of  Kant,  and  even  by  those  of  Jouffroy,  we
observe  in  it  several  assertions  which  differ  widely,  although
connected  with  one  another,  and  which  are  to  be  found,
moreover,  in  every  sort  of  faith,  forming  the  distinctive
character  of  religion  as  compared  with  science — (i)  full  and
complete  affirmation  of  a  thing  which  cannot  be  positively
proved — duty,  with  its  principle  of  modern  freedom,  and  all
its  consequences  ;  (2)  another  assertion  confirming  the  first :
namely,  that  it  is  better  morally  to  believe  this  thing  rather  than
any  other,  or  than  not  to  believe  at  all ;  (3)  a  fresh  assertion
by  which  belief  is  placed  above  discussion,  for  it  would  be
immoral  to  hesitate  for  a  moment  between  the  better  and
the  less  good.  At  the  same  time,  one's  faith  is  declared  to
be  immovable,  because  it  is  above  all  discussion.  Moral
faith,  thus  defined,  rests  on  this  postulate  :  there  are  prin-
ciples which  must  be  asserted,  not  because  they  are  logically
demonstrated  or  materially  evident,  but  because  they  are
morally  good  ;  in  other  words,  goodness  is  a  criterion  of
objective  truth.  Such  is  the  postulate  contained  fundamen-
tally in  the  moral  philosophy  of  neo-Kantians  like  MM.
Renouvier  and  Secretan.

To  justify  this  postulate  it  should  be  noted  that  it  is


MORALITY  OF  FAITH.  55

characteristic  of  goodness  to  appear  as  inviolable,  not  only
in  act,  but  even  in  thought.  Is  it  not  injustice,  not  only  to
do  evil,  but  even  to  think  it  ?  Now,  evil  is  in  our  thought
the  moment  we  doubt  the  good.  We  must,  therefore,
believe  in  what  is  good  more  than  in  anything  else;
not  because  it  is  more  evident  than  anything  else,  but
because  not  to  believe  in  it  would  be  to  commit  evil.
Between  a  simply  logical  proposition  and  its  opposite  there
is  always  an  alternative  ;  the  mind  remains  free  between  the
two  and  chooses.  In  this  case  the  alternative  is  suppressed  ;
choice  would  be  wrong.  The  truth  can  no  longer  be  sought
on  either  side.  All  problem  disappears,  for  a  problem  would
imply  many  different  solutions  calling  for  verification  ;  so
one  does  not  verify  duty ;  there  are  questions  which  we
may  not  address  even  to  ourselves ;  there  are  questions  we
must  not  raise.  What  becomes,  for  example,  of  the
doctrines  of  the  utilitarian  moralists,  of  the  evolutionists,
of  the  partizans  of  Darwin,  in  the  presence  of  the  belief  in
absolute  duty  ?  They  are  rejected  with  the  greatest  pos-
sible energy — sometimes  without  having  been  seriously
examined.  Moral  consciousness  always  takes  that  side ;  it
represents  in  the  human  soul  the  blindly  conservative  part.
A  convinced  believer  will  never  ask  himself  the  question  :  Is
not  duty  merely  an  empirical  generalization  ?  It  would  seem
to  him  that  such  a  question  would  cast  a  doubt  on  his  "con-
scienceas  an  honest  man  ";  before  doing  this,  he  will  declare
science  incapable  of  treating  this  problem.  The  scientific
spirit — which  is  always  ready  to  examine  the  For  and  Against,
which  sees  everywhere  a  twofold  way,  a  double  issue  for  the
mind — has  thus,  in  the  case  of  the  believer,  to  give  way  to
quite  another  spirit ;  for  him  duty  in  itself  is  sacred,  and
commands  with  so  much  force  that  even  the  thinker  himself,
face  to  face  with  it,  can  but  obey.  The  belief  in  duty  is,
therefore,  placed  once  more  above  the  region  in  which  science,
and  even  nature,  moves.  He  who  believes  in  duty  is  always
such  as  Horace  sang  of,  Impavidum  ferient  mince.  Moral


56 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

faith  would  in  this  way  find  itself  guarded  by  its  very
essence,  which  is  to  compel  the  individual  to  bow  before  it.

The  belief  in  duty,  however,  when  attacked,  seeks  support
on  various  grounds.  The  most  superficial  minds  invoke  a
sort  of  internal  evidence,  others  moral  duty,  others  a  social
necessity.

i.  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  internal  evidence —
the  "  oracle  "  of  our  conscience — which  will  allow  no  reply
or  hesitation.  We  hear  duty  speak  within  us  with  a  voice ;
we  believe  in  duty  as  in  something  which  lives  and  palpitates
in  us  as  a  part  of  ourselves ;  even  more,  as  that  which
is  highest  in  us.  The  Scotch  and  the  Eclectics  tried
only  a  few  years  ago  to  found  a  philosophy  on  common
sense — that  is,  in  fact,  on  prejudice.  This  unscientific
philosophy  has  been  opposed  with  energy  by  the  neo-
Kantians ;  and  yet  their  system  is  also  founded  on
a  simple  fact  of  common  sense,  on  the  simple  belief  that
the  impulse  called  duty  is  of  quite  another  order  than  all  the
natural  impulses.  These  sentences  recurring  so  often  in
Cousin  and  his  followers,  and  at  which  to-day  we  are  inclined
to  smile — "conscience  proclaims,"  "evidence  proves,"
"common  sense  requires  " — are  they  much  less  convincing,
each  in  themselves,  or  in  their  generality,  than  these :
"  duty  commands,"  "  the  moral  law  demands,"  etc.  ?  This
inner  evidence  of  duty  proves  nothing.  Evidence  is  a  sub-
jective state,  for  which  one  may  often  account  by  subjective
reasons.  Truth  is  not  only  that  which  is  felt  and  seen,  but
that  which  is  explained  and  connected.  Truth  is  a  synthesis ;
therein  lies  its  distinction  from  sensation — from  brute  fact.
Truth  is  a  bundle  of  facts.  It  does  not  draw  its  evidence
and  its  proof  from  a  simple  state  of  conscience,  but  from
the  whole  of  the  phenomena  which  hold  and  support  each
other.  One  stone  does  not  make  an  arch,  nor  do  two  nor
three  stones ;  all  are  wanted.  They  have  to  rest  the  one
on  the  other.  Even  when  the  arch  is  constructed,  it  will
fall  to  pieces  completely  if  a  few  stones  are  taken  away.  It


MORALITY  OF  FAITH.  57

is  the  same  with  truth  ;  it  consists  in  a  solidarity  of  all
things.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  thing  should  be  evident ;
it  must  be  explicable,  so  as  to  acquire  a  truly  scientific
character.

2.  As  for  the  "duty  to  believe  in  duty,"  this  is  a  pure
tautology,  or  vicious  circle.  It  might  be  said  as  well :  It  is
religious  to  believe  in  religion,  moral  to  believe  in  morality,
etc.  Very  well ;  but  what  is  understood  by  duty,  by
morality,  by  religion  ?  Is  it  all  true — that  is,  does  it  all
correspond  with  reality  ?  That  is  the  question  ;  and  we
must  examine  it,  for  fear  of  turning  everlastingly  in  the
same  circle.  While  I  believe  it  to  be  my  sovereign  and  self-
governed  liberty,  commanding  me  to  do  such  and  such  an
act,  what  if  it  were  hereditary  instinct,  habit,  education,
urging  me  to  the  pretended  duty?  Am  I,  according  to
Darwin's  remark,  only  a  hunting-dog,  chasing  the  game
instead  of  arresting  it?  Has  duty,  to  which  I  attach  so
much  importance,  after  all  only  so  much  value  as  the
duty  of  the  dog  who  fetches,  or  gives  a  paw  ?  Can  you  be
indifferent  to  the  analysis  which  science  makes  of  the  object
of  your  faith  ?

Perhaps  science  has  difficulty  in  founding  an  ethical  creed
on  its  own  account,  strictly  speaking ;  but  science  can
destroy  every  moral  creed  which  believes  itself  to  be  positive
and  absolute.  Science  has  an  incalculable  power  for  destruc-
tion, although  it  is  not  always  sufficiently  able  to  recon-
struct. The  believers  in  moral  faith  would  not  even
prove  their  thesis  if  they  succeeded  in  proving  that  their
ethical  creed  is  the  most  complete,  is  that  which  responds
best  to  all  interrogations  of  the  moral  agent,  that  which
has  least  to  fear  from  the  exceptions  and  subtleties  of
casuistry,  which  may  push  the  moral  agent,  without  re-
sistance, to  the  extreme  of  absolute  devotion.

When  the  believers  in  the  moral  creed  shall  have  proved
all  this,  they  will  still  have  done  nothing — no  more  than  the
believers  in  such  and  such  a  religion,  if  they  could  prove


60 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

selves  there  are  likewise  similar  perspectives  which  may  be
so  only  in  appearance.  As  to  social  life,  it  rests  for  the
most  part  on  artifice ;  and  by  artifice  we  do  not  mean
anything  opposed  to  nature.  Not  at  all ;  nothing  deceives
us  better  than  nature.  There  we  find  the  great  art — that  is
to  say,  the  deception,  the  innocent  conspiracy  of  all  against
one.  The  relations  between  different  beings  are  a  series  of
illusions  ;  the  eyes,  the  ears,  deceive  us — why  should  the
heart  alone  not  deceive  us  ?  Moral  philosophy,  which  tries
to  formulate  the  most  manifold  and  complex  relations  exist-
ing between  the  creatures  of  nature,  is,  perhaps,  also  founded
on  the  greatest  number  of  errors.  Many  beliefs  related  by
history,  which  have  inspired  to  self-sacrifice,  may  be  com-
pared with  those  magnificent  mausoleums  erected  in  honour
of  a  name.  If  these  mausoleums  are  opened,  nothing  is
found  ;  they  are  empty.  But  their  beauty  alone  is  sufficient
to  justify  their  existence,  and,  in  passing,  you  bow  before
them.  You  do  not  ask  if  the  unknown  dead  is  worth  these
honours  ;  you  think  that  he  was  loved,  and  that  this  love
is  the  real'  object  of  our  respect.  It  is  the  same  with  the
heroes  whom  faith  often  urged  to  great  deeds  for  small
causes.  They  are  sublime  spendthrifts.  These  prodigalities
have  undoubtedly  been  one  of  the  indispensable  elements
of  progress.

The  social  necessity  for  morals  and  for  faith,  the  sceptics
will  add,  can  only  be  provisional.  There  was  a  time  when
religion  was  absolutely  necessary.  It  is  no  longer  so — at
least  for  a  very  great  number  of  people.  God  has  become,
and  will  become  more  and  more,  useless.  Who  knows  if  it
will  not  be  the  same  with  the  categorical  imperative  ?  The
first  religions  have  been  imperative,  despotic,  hard,  inflexible.
They  were  systems  of  iron  discipline.  God  was  a  violent
and  cruel  chief,  checking  his  subjects  by  iron  and  fire.
People  bowed  and  trembled  before  him.  At  the  present
time  religions  are  growing  milder.  Who  believes  very
much  in  these  days  in  hell  ?  That  is  a  worn-out  scarecrow.


MORALITY  OF  FAITH.  6 1

Likewise  the  different  conceptions  of  moralities  are  softening
down.  Even  disinterestedness  will  perhaps  not  always  have
the  character  of  social  necessity  which  it  seems  to  have
to-day.  Long  ago  it  was  remarked  that  there  existed
illusions  which  were  provisionally  useful.  If  Decius  had
not  been  as  superstitious  as  his  soldiers,  if  Codrus  had  been
a  freethinker,  Athens  and  Rome  would  probably  have  been
conquered.  Religions  which,  to  the  philosopher,  are  only
a  collection  of  organized  and  systematized  superstitions,  are
also  made  for  a  time,  for  an  epoch.  Their  gods  are  but
various  forms  of  that  Greek  divinity,  Kairos,  to  serve  the
purpose  of  the  moment.  Humanity  needs  to  adore  some-
thing, then  to  burn  that  which  it  has  adored.  At  present
the  most  elevated  minds  among  us  adore  duty.  Will  not
this  latest  religion,  this  last  superstition,  disappear  like  the
others  ?

The  brass  idol  to  which  the  Carthaginians  sacrificed
their  children  is  for  us  an  object  of  horror.  Perhaps  we
have  kept  in  our  hearts  some  brass  idol  from  whose
dominion  our  descendants  will  escape.  Already  "our
rights  "  have  become  very  much  a  matter  of  suspicion  in
this  century.  The  socialists  have  maintained  that  there  is
no  right  over  against  pity,  and  "  rights "  can  hardly  be
maintained,  except  on  condition  of  giving  them  a  new
extension,  and  nearly  blending  them  with  the  principle  of
brotherhood.  Perhaps,  by  contrary  evolution,  duty  will
have  to  transform  itself  and  to  blend  itself  more  and  more
with  normal  and  regular  development  of  self.  Do  we  not
still  conceive  duty  in  the  image  of  our  imperfect  society  ?
We  picture  it  stained  with  blood  and  tears.  This  still
barbaric  notion,  necessary  in  our  days,  is  perhaps  destined
to  disappear.  Duty  will  then  be  equivalent  to  an  epoch
of  transition.

Such  are  the  doubts  which  a  complete  scepticism  may
oppose  to  this  half-scepticism  hidden  under  the  faith  which
invokes  social  necessities.  The  question  remains  undecided,


62 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

and  faith  cannot  get  out  of  it  otherwise  than  by  a  kind  of
wager.  In  fact,  the  doctrine  of  moral  faith — of  duty  freely
accepted  by  the  will,  of  incertitude  decided  by  an  act  of
inward  energy — recalls  to  our  mind,  as  has  been  said,  the
wager  of  Pascal.  But  this  wager  can  no  longer  have  motives
such  as  those  of  Pascal.  We  are  certain,  in  these  days,
that  God,  if  he  exists,  is  not  at  all  the  vindictive  and  cruel
being  which  Port  Royal  imagined  him  to  be.  His  existence
would  necessarily  be  an  advantage  to  me,  and  I  wish  for
it  with  all  my  heart,  while  wagering  against  it.  Although
improbable  in  my  eyes,  it  remains  infinitely  desirable.
This  is  not  a  reason  for  sacrificing  my  whole  life  to  him.

Doubt  has  long  enough  been  accused  of  immorality,  but
the  immorality  of  dogmatic  faith  can  be  equally  maintained.
To  believe  is  to  assert  as  real  to  myself  that  which  I  simply
conceive  as  possible  in  itself,  sometimes  as  impossible.
This  is  seeking  to  build  up  an  artificial  truth,  a  merely
apparent  truth.  At  the  same  it  is  shutting  one's  eyes  to
the  objective  truth,  thrusting  it  aside  beforehand  without
knowing  anything  about  it.  The  greatest  enemy  of  human
progress  is  the  presupposition.  To  reject  not  only  the
more  or  less  doubtful  solutions,  which  everyone  may
bring  forward,  but  the  problems  themselves — that  is  flatly
arresting  the  forward  movement.  Faith  from  that  point  of
view  becomes  indolence  of  thought.

Indifference  even  is  often  superior  to  dogmatic  faith.
One  who  is  indifferent  says  :  "  I  do  not  care  to  know."  But
he  adds :  "  I  will  not  believe."  The  believer  wants  to
believe  without  knowing.  The  first  remains  at  least  per-
fectly sincere  towards  himself,  while  the  other  tries  to
ensnare  himself.  Therefore,  whatever  may  be  the  question,
doubt  is  better  than  the  perpetual  affirmation,  better  than  the
renunciation  of  all  personal  initiative,  which  is  called  faith.
This  kind  of  intellectual  suicide  is  inexcusable,  and  that
which  is  still  more  strange  is  the  pretension  to  justify  it,
as  is  constantly  done,  by  invoking  moral  reasons.  Morality


MORALITY  OF  FAITH.  63

should  command  the  mind  to  search  without  resting — that
is  to  say,  precisely  to  guard  itself  against  faith.  "  The  dignity
of  believing  !"  you  reply.  Man  has  too  often,  all  through
history,  rested  his  dignity  upon  errors,  and  truth  has  at  first
appeared  to  him  to  be  a  lessening  of  himself.  The  truth  is
not  always  so  fair  as  the  dream,  but  its  advantage  is  that
it  is  true.  In  the  domain  of  thought  there  is  nothing  more
moral  than  truth  ;  and  when  truth  cannot  be  secured  through
positive  knowledge,  nothing  is  more  moral  than  doubt.
Doubt  is  dignity  of  mind.  We  must  therefore  drive  out  of
ourselves  the  blind  respect  for  certain  principles,  for  certain
beliefs.  We  must  be  able  to  question,  scrutinize,  penetrate
everything.  Intelligence  should  not  cast  down  its  eyes
even  before  the  object  of  its  adoration.  A  tomb  in  Geneva
bears  this  inscription:  "Truth  has  a  face  of  brass,  and  those
who  have  loved  truth  will  have  faces  of  brass  like  her."  But,
it  will  be  said,  if  it  is  irrational  to  affirm  in  our  thoughts
as  true  that  which  is  doubtful,  still  it  will  sometimes
have  to  be  affirmed  in  action.  May  be ;  but  it  is  always
a  provisional  situation  and  a  conditional  affirmation :
I  do  this,  supposing  it  to  be  my  duty,  even  supposing
that  I  can  have  an  absolute  duty.  A  thousand  acts  of  that
kind  cannot  establish  a  truth.  A  great  number  of  martyrs
have  made  Christianity  triumph  ;  a  little  reason  may  be
sufficient  to  overthrow  it.  Besides,  how  much  humanity
would  gain  if  all  self-sacrifice  were  done  out  of  regard
for  science,  and  not  for  faith — if  one  died  not  to  defend  a
belief,  but  to  discover  a  truth,  however  small  it  might  be.
That  was  what  Empedocles  and  Pliny  did,  and  what  in
our  time  men  of  science,  physicians,  explorers  do.  How
many  lives  were  lost  of  old  to  assert  objects  of  an  unsound
faith,  which  might  have  been  utilized  for  humanity  and
science !


62 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

and  faith  cannot  get  out  of  it  otherwise  than  by  a  kind  of
wager.  In  fact,  the  doctrine  of  moral  faith- — of  duty  freely
accepted  by  the  will,  of  incertitude  decided  by  an  act  of
inward  energy — recalls  to  our  mind,  as  has  been  said,  the
wager  of  Pascal.  But  this  wager  can  no  longer  have  motives
such  as  those  of  Pascal.  We  are  certain,  in  these  days,
that  God,  if  he  exists,  is  not  at  all  the  vindictive  and  cruel
being  which  Port  Royal  imagined  him  to  be.  His  existence
would  necessarily  be  an  advantage  to  me,  and  I  wish  for
it  with  all  my  heart,  while  wagering  against  it.  Although
improbable  in  my  eyes,  it  remains  infinitely  desirable.
This  is  not  a  reason  for  sacrificing  my  whole  life  to  him.

Doubt  has  long  enough  been  accused  of  immorality,  but
the  immorality  of  dogmatic  faith  can  be  equally  maintained.
To  believe  is  to  assert  as  real  to  myself  that  which  I  simply
conceive  as  possible  in  itself,  sometimes  as  impossible.
This  is  seeking  to  build  up  an  artificial  truth,  a  merely
apparent  truth.  At  the  same  it  is  shutting  one's  eyes  to
the  objective  truth,  thrusting  it  aside  beforehand  without
knowing  anything  about  it.  The  greatest  enemy  of  human
progress  is  the  presupposition.  To  reject  not  only  the
more  or  less  doubtful  solutions,  which  everyone  may
bring  forward,  but  the  problems  themselves — that  is  flatly
arresting  the  forward  movement.  Faith  from  that  point  of
view  becomes  indolence  of  thought.

Indifference  even  is  often  superior  to  dogmatic  faith.
One  who  is  indifferent  says  :  "  I  do  not  care  to  know."  But
he  adds :  "  I  will  not  believe."  The  believer  wants  to
believe  without  knowing.  The  first  remains  at  least  per-
fectly sincere  towards  himself,  while  the  other  tries  to
ensnare  himself.  Therefore,  whatever  may  be  the  question,
doubt  is  better  than  the  perpetual  affirmation,  better  than  the
renunciation  of  all  personal  initiative,  which  is  called  faith.
This  kind  of  intellectual  suicide  is  inexcusable,  and  that
which  is  still  more  strange  is  the  pretension  to  justify  it,
as  is  constantly  done,  by  invoking  moral  reasons.  Morality


MORALITY  OF  FAITH.  63

should  command  the  mind  to  search  without  resting — that
is  to  say,  precisely  to  guard  itself  against  faith.  "  The  dignity
of  believing  !"  you  reply.  Man  has  too  often,  all  through
history,  rested  his  dignity  upon  errors,  and  truth  has  at  first
appeared  to  him  to  be  a  lessening  of  himself.  The  truth  is
not  always  so  fair  as  the  dream,  but  its  advantage  is  that
it  is  true.  In  the  domain  of  thought  there  is  nothing  more
moral  than  truth  ;  and  when  truth  cannot  be  secured  through
positive  knowledge,  nothing  is  more  moral  than  doubt.
Doubt  is  dignity  of  mind.  We  must  therefore  drive  out  of
ourselves  the  blind  respect  for  certain  principles,  for  certain
beliefs.  We  must  be  able  to  question,  scrutinize,  penetrate
everything.  Intelligence  should  not  cast  down  its  eyes
even  before  the  object  of  its  adoration.  A  tomb  in  Geneva
bears  this  inscription:  "Truth  has  a  face  of  brass,  and  those
who  have  loved  truth  will  have  faces  of  brass  like  her."  But,
it  will  be  said,  if  it  is  irrational  to  affirm  in  our  thoughts
as  true  that  which  is  doubtful,  still  it  will  sometimes
have  to  be  affirmed  in  action.  May  be  ;  but  it  is  always
a  provisional  situation  and  a  conditional  affirmation :
I  do  this,  supposing  it  to  be  my  duty,  even  supposing
that  I  can  have  an  absolute  duty.  A  thousand  acts  of  that
kind  cannot  establish  a  truth.  A  great  number  of  martyrs
have  made  Christianity  triumph  ;  a  little  reason  may  be
sufficient  to  overthrow  it.  Besides,  how  much  humanity
would  gain  if  all  self-sacrifice  were  done  out  of  regard
for  science,  and  not  for  faith — if  one  died  not  to  defend  a
belief,  but  to  discover  a  truth,  however  small  it  might  be.
That  was  what  Empedocles  and  Pliny  did,  and  what  in
our  time  men  of  science,  physicians,  explorers  do.  How
many  lives  were  lost  of  old  to  assert  objects  of  an  unsound
faith,  which  might  have  been  utilized  for  humanity  and
science !


64 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.


III.
MORALITY OF DOUBT.

WE  have  seen  the  certitude  of  duty,  as  admitted  by  Kant,
resolve  itself  into  faith,  even  with  the  followers  of  Kant,  and
faith  itself  become  a  doubt  which  will  not  declare  itself.
Very  well ;  there  remains  a  third  attitude  of  mind,  this  time
absolutely  sincere  with  itself  and  with  others  ;  it  consists  in
replacing  the  morality  of  certitude  and  the  morality  of  faith
by  the  morality  of  doubt — in  founding  morality  partly  on  the
very  consciousness  of  our  metaphysical  ignorance,  joined  to
that  which  we  have  learned  from  positive  science.

This  attitude  of  mind  has  lately  been  analyzed  and  put
forward  as  the  best  (see  "La  Critique  des  Systemes  de
Morale,"  par  A.  Fouillee,  conclusion  and  preface).

The  author  of  "  1'  Idee  Moderne  du  Droit,"  and  of  the
"  Critique  des  Systemes  de  Morale  Contemporaine,"  has
tried  to  unite  in  one  synthesis  the  legitimate  results  of  the
philosophy  of  evolution  and  of  the  philosophy  of  criticism.
Its  point  of  experimental  departure,  which  no  doctrine  can
deny,  is  the  fact  that  we  have  consciousness.  This  fact,
rightly  interpreted,  is,  according  to  him,  the  first  foundation
of  right  and  the  duty  of  justice.  What,  in  reality,  is  the  object
of  consciousness  in  its  widest  sense,  and  what  is  its  limit  ?
It  realizes  itself,  realizes  the  consciousness  of  others,  realizes
the  whole  world  ;  in  consequence  it  has  both  "an  individual
character  and  an  universal  range  ";  it  does  not  assume  its
own  consciousness  without  assuming  the  consciousness  of
others  similar  to  its  own ;  it  does  not  grasp  itself  but  in
association  with  others.  By  this  very  fact,  consciousness
"  comprehends  its  own  limitation,  its  own  relativity,  as  a
means  of  knowledge,"  for  it  cannot  completely  explain  itself,
"  either  its  own  nature  as  a  thinking  subject,  or  the  nature  of
the  object  which  it  realizes,  or  the  transition  of  the  subjective
to  the  objective."  From  this  springs  the  principle  of  the


MORALITY  OF  DOUBT.  65

"relativity  of  knowledge,''1  which  is  of  a  moral  import
hitherto  disregarded.

"  A  true  positivist,  like  a  true  critic  and  a  true  sceptic,
must  keep  in  the  depth  of  his  mind  a  '  what  do  I  know  T

and  a  'perhaps? He  must  not  assert  that  science  or  his

brain  is  adequate  to  comprehend  reality,  but  only  that  they
are  adequate  to  comprehend  reality  so  far  as  it  is  known.
Our  very  experience  teaches  us  that  our  mind  is  not  made
so  as  to  always  represent  all  things  as  they  are,  indepen-
dently of  that  mind On  the  one  hand,  therefore,  the

object,  as  felt  and  pictured,  is  not  conceived  as  capable  of
being  entirely  penetrated  by  science,  or  by  the  feeling  and
thinking  subject ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  subject  is,  perhaps,
in  his  turn,  not  wholly  penetrable  to  himself."

This  principle  of  the  relativity  of  all  knowledge,  built  up
by  the  ideas  of  our  consciousness,  is  the  preliminary  condition
of  right,  as  of  the  duty  of  justice.  In  fact,  such  a  principle
is,  in  the  first  place,  "  limitative  and  restrictive  of  theoretical
egoism,"  which  is  intolerant  dogmatism  ;  moreover,  it  is  "  re-
strictive of  practical  egoism,"  which  is  injustice.  To  make
of  one's  egoism  and  of  one's  self  an  absolute  formula  is  to
dogmatize  in  action  as  well  as  in  thought ;  it  is  to  act  as  if
one  possessed  the  absolute  formula  of  being  ;  it  is  as  much
as  to  say  :  "  The  world  mechanically  knowable  is  all ;  force
is  all ;  self-interest  is  all.  Injustice,  therefore,  is  absolutism

in  action,  and  hurtful  to  others Now,  there  will  always

remain  something  which  cannot  be  explained  mechanically,
if  it  were  only  movement  and  sensation,  the  element  of
consciousness.  Joined  to  all  the  other  considerations,  the
idea  of  that  something  irreducible  which  constitutes  our
consciousness,  while  restricting  the  knowledge  gained  by
means  of  our  senses  ( ' connaissance  sensible),  also  imposes  on
us  rationally  the  limitation  of  our  motives  derived  from  the
senses  (mobiles  sensibles),  and  that  with  regard  to  others,
and  with  regard  to  everything.  Solipsism,  as  the  English
say,  is  no  more  to  be  admitted  in  morality  than  in  meta-


66 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

physics,  although  it  is,  perhaps,  logically  irrefutable  in  both
spheres."

This  doctrine,  we  must  own,  contains  a  great  deal  of
truth.  But  it  is  necessary  to  exactly  calculate  to  what  point
this  morality  leads  us,  and  also  where  it  leaves  us.  It  is  an
attempt  to  found  a  primary  equivalent  to  obligation  upon
doubt  itself,  or  at  least  upon  the  relativity  of  human  know-
ledge, and  to  rid  the  assertion  of  moral  justice  of  a  certain
metaphysical  scepticism.  In  the  first  place,  we  must  agree
that  the  practical  formula  of  doubt  is  really  abstinence.  It
is  from  action  in  general,  not  only  from  injustice,  that
complete  doubt  would  have  to  abstain.  All  action  is  an
affirmation  ;  it  is  also  a  kind  of  choice,  of  election.  While
acting,  I  always  seize  something  from  the  midst  of  the  meta-
physical mist,  from  the  thick  cloud  which  envelopes  the
world  and  myself.  The  perfect  equilibrium  of  doubt  is,
therefore,  rather  an  ideal  than  a  real  state— an  almost  imper-
ceptible moment  of  transition.  If  there  is  no  true  morality
but  in  action,  and  if  to  abstain  is  still  to  act,  that  is,  by  this
very  reason,  departure  from  equilibrium.  Besides,  metaphysi-
cal doubt  is  in  most  concrete  cases  not  an  entire  and  thorough
doubt,  a  perfect  equivalent  created  in  the  mind  by  different
possibilities  which  counterbalance  one  another ;  it  most
often  envelopes  a  vague  belief,  which  is  unconscious  of  itself,
or,  as  M.  Fouillee  owns,  at  least  one  or  more  hypotheses ;
hence  it  can  have  a  practical  influence.  Man,  placed
between  the  different  hypotheses  concerning  the  world,  has
always  some  instinctive  preference  for  a  certain  one  among
them;  he  does  not  remain  hanging  in  the  «?ox>)  of
Pyrrho — he  chooses  according  to  his  own  habits  of  thought.
These  vary  in  different  individuals,  according  to  their  creeds
and  hopes,  not  according  to  their  doubts.

But,  it  will  be  said,  there  is  in  all  sincere  doubt  a  precise
and  lasting  element ;  it  is  the  consciousness  of  our  ignorance
of  the  foundation  of  things  ;  it  is  the  conception  of  a  simply
possible  reality,  which  goes  beyond  our  thought,  a  wholly


MORALITY  OF  DOUBT.  67

negative  and  restrictive  conception,  being  nevertheless  of
sovereign  importance  in  restricting  our  "  intellectual  pride."
Quite  so ;  but  the  question  is  to  know  if  this  conception
is  of  the  same  importance  in  restricting  our  conduct.  In
the  first  place,  be  it  noted  that  this  conception  could  not
produce  an  imperative,  and  this  is  shown  by  the  very  author
of  the  theory  which  we  are  examining.  That  which  is  in
itself  indeterminable  cannot  determine  and  regulate  conduct
by  a  law  which  commands  ;  an  order  and  a  rule  are  a
determination.  The  unknowable  cannot  even  limit  conduct
in  a  categorical  manner  ;  a  limitative  principle,  as  such,
cannot  have  an  absolute  character — at  least  not  unless  an
absolute  behind  the  limit  be  presupposed.

But  let  us  go  further.  Would  doubt,  with  regard  to  the
unknowable,  in  itse//a.nd  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  mere  suspension
of  judgment,  be  able  to  limit  conduct  in  any  way  ?  A  limit
cannot,  it  seems,  have  practical  influence  on  us  as  long  as  we
move  inside  this  limit.  Now,  we  are  unable  to  move  out-
side phenomena.  The  glass  of  a  bowl  has  no  direct  effect
on  the  conduct  of  the  fish,  so  long  as  the  fish  does  not
hurt  itself  against  the  side  of  the  bowl.  Even  the  future
has  influence  on  me  only  in  two  ways :  firstly,  in  so  far  as  I
pictured  to  myself  in  my  mind  in  pure  supposition;  secondly,
in  so  far  as  by  my  acts  I  produce,  or  help  to  produce,  01
believe  to  produce,  the  future.  So  long  as  the  future  is  not,
in  some  form  or  other,  represented  in  my  imagination,  it
remains  strange  to  me,  and  cannot  in  any  way  modify  my
conduct.  It  is  in  the  same  way  necessary,  we  believe —
and  M.  Fouillee  undoubtedly  admits  this  also — that,  if
the  unknowable  is  to  have  a  positive  and  determined
effect  on  our  conduct,  it  should  not  only  be  conceived  as
possible,  but  be  represented  under  some  form  or  other  in  its
relation  to  my  act,  and  under  forms  which  do  not  contradict
or  destroy  each  other.  It  is,  moreover,  necessary  that  I
imagine  I  can  exercise  some  influence  on  the  unknow-
able and  its  realization  ;  in  short,  it  is  necessary  that  it


68 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

becomes,  as  M.  Fouillee  says,  an  "  ideal "  more  or  less
determinable  for  me,  a  future  which  I  am  more  or  less  able
to  realize.  The  idea  of  a  moral  rule,  even  of  a  restrictive
one,  presupposes,  therefore,  as  positive  principle,  not  the
mere  conception  or  the  possibility  of  the  unknowable,  but  a
representation  of  its  nature,  an  imaginary  determination  of  its
nature ;  and,  lastly,  it  presupposes  the  belief  in  a  possible
influence  of  the  will  on  it,  and  on  its  realization  in  the
future.*  And  once  it  is  clearly  shown  that  these  are  so
many  hypotheses,  morality — justice  and  right  even  included
— appears  metaphysically  hypothetical,  considerations  drawn
from  positive  science,  evolution,  happiness,  utility,  etc.,  being
omitted.

The  theory  of  doubt  as  limiting  egoism  corresponds  to  a
somewhat  subtle  point  which  thought  and  act  pass  by
without  stopping  at.  Surely  it  is  important  to  deter-
mine this  point,  to  make  room  in  morality  for  our  posi-
tive ignorance,  our  positive  doubt,  and,  so  to  speak,  for
the  certainty  of  our  incertitude.  This  M.  Fouillee  has
done.  While  waiting  till  he  has  developed  the  positive  part
of  his  doctrine,  we  must  allow  that  he  has  logically  reduced
the  idea  of  the  imperative  to  its  true  value.  Kant,  we  have
said,  saw  in  it  a  certainty;  his  followers  raised  it  to  an
object  of  faith  ;  now  it  is  reduced  to  a  formula  of  our  doubt,
to  a  limitation  of  our  conduct  by  a  limitation  of  our  thought.
After  having  been  an  imperative  order,  the  unknowable  is
nothing  but  an  interrogation.  This  interrogation  presents
itself  to  each  one  of  us  ;  but  the  answer  which  each  one  of
us  can  give  to  it  varies  with  individuals,  and  is  left  to  their
own  initiative.  One  remembers  the  plank  of  safety  of
which  Cicero  speaks,  upon  which  a  man  walks  trying
to  save  himself.  Metaphysical  doubt  alone  would  be  of
little  use  to  prevent  me  taking,  if  I  can,  the  place  of  that

*  Besides,  the  author  of  the  "  Critique  des  Systemes  de  Morale  "
himself  makes  of  the  ideal  "  a  hypothetical  formula  of  the  unknowable"
— an  ideal  which  itself  can  only  have  a  conditional  influence.


MORALITY  OF DOUBT.  69

man.  The  unknowable,  in  the  midst  of  which  we  live  and
breathe,  and  which  envelopes  us,  so  to  speak,  intellectually,  is
very  much  like  the  empty  space  which  surrounds  us  physically.
Now,  the  empty  space  means  for  us  absolute  freedom  of
direction.  It  can  only  act  on  us  and  rule  our  course  by  the
bodies  it  contains,  which  are  revealed  to  us  by  our  senses.
For  him  who  believes  the  depth  of  things  to  be  inaccessible
to  our  thought  it  will  always  be  doubtful  if  it  be  accessible
to  our  acts.  The  supreme  unknowable  can,  therefore,
in  relation  to  our  own  will,  remain  without  contradiction
supreme  indifference,  as  long  as  it  remains  for  our
intelligence  a  mere  object  of  doubt  and  of  suspension  of
judgment.

The  theory  sketched  in  the  "  Critique  des  Systemes  de
Morale"  will  only  become  sufficiently  clear  and  fruitful
when  its  author  shall  have  succeeded  in  drawing,  as  he
intends  to  do,  a  restrictive  rule,  and,  above  all,  a  "per-
suasive ideal  " — not  out  of  our  doubts  about  the  unknowable
(mere  "  preliminary  condition  "  of  morality),  but  out  of  our
knowledge  itself,  and  out  of  "  the  known  depth  of  human
consciousness."  According  to  his  own  words,  we  must  be
able  to  make  the  moral  ideal  "  immanent,"  and  to  show  that
it  is  derived  from  experience  itself.

That  is,  moreover,  what  he  already  tries  to  do  in  one  of
the  important  pages  of  his  work  (Preface,  ix.).

In  his  opinion,  there  exists,  in  the  very  constitution
of  the  intelligence,  a  kind  of  altruism,  which  explains
and  justifies  altruism,  in  conduct.  There  is,  he  says,
an  "intellectual  altruism,  an  intellectual  disinterested-
ness, which  makes  us  able  to  understand  others — to  put
ourselves  in  their  place ;  to  put  ourselves  into  them  by
thought.  Consciousness,  projecting  itself  in  this  way  into
other  beings,  and  into  the  whole,  is  joined  to  others,  and  to
the  whole,  by  an  idea,  which  is  at  the  same  time  a  force."
We  believe,  in  fact,  that  a  sort  of  "  intellectual  altruism  "
does  exist ;  only,  in  our  opinion,  this  disinterestedness  of


70 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

the  intelligence  is  only  one  of  the  aspects  of  moral  altruism,
instead  of  being  its  main  principle.  To  be  able  to  conceive
the  consciousness  of  others  well — to  put  ourselves  in  their
place,  and  enter  into  their  consciousness,  so  to  speak — we
must,  above  all,  be  in  sympathy  with  them ;  sympathy  of
feeling  is  the  germ  of  the  extension  of  consciousness.  To
understand  is  really  to  feel ;  to  understand  others  is  to  feel
ourselves  in  harmony  with  others.  This  communicability
of  emotions  and  of  thoughts — which,  on  its  psychological
side,  is  a  phenomenon  of  nervous  contagion — is  explained
to  a  great  extent  by  the  fecundity  of  life,  the  expansion  of
which  is  almost  in  direct  ratio  to  its-  intensity.  It  is  from
life  that  we  will  demand  the  principle  of  morality.


FIRST BOOK.


ON  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  MORALITY  FROM  A

SCIENTIFIC  POINT  OF  VIEW. FIRST

EQUIVALENTS  OF  DUTY.


CHAPTER  I.
Intensity  of  Life  is  the  Motive  Force  of  Action.

BY  no  means  do  we  reject  the  part  of  metaphysical  specula-
tion in  moral  philosophy,  provided  that  it  presents  itself  as
it  really  is — i.e.,  as  speculation,  and  the  importance  of  it  we
ourselves  will  show  later  on.  But  a  strict  method  obliges
us  to  examine  first  what  a  moral  philosophy  may  be  which
is  founded  exclusively  on  farts,  and  which  in  consequence
does  not  start  from  an  a  priori  thesis,  nor  from  an  a
priori  law,  which  itself  would  be  a  metaphysical  thesis.
The  question  which  we  have  to  examine  is  :  Which  is  the
point  of  departure  and  the  goal,  and  what  is  the  exact
domain  of  science  in  moral  philosophy  ?

A  moral  philosophy  which  only  invokes  facts  cannot
from  the  very  beginning  represent  to  the  individual,  as  first
spring  of  action,  ^the  good  or  the  happiness  of  society,  for
the  happiness  of  society  is  often  in  opposition  to  that  of
the  individual.  In  these  cases  of  opposition  social  happi-
ness, as  such,  can  only  become  for  the  individual  a  thought-
out  end  by  virtue  of  pure  disinterestedness ;  but  it  is
impossible  to  prove  this  pure  disinterestedness  as  fact,
and  its  existence  has  always  been  a  subject  of  contro-
versy. Besides,  scientific  morality,  in  order  not  to  include


72 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

from  its  very  beginning  an  inverifiable  postulate,  must  be
first  individualistic.  It  should  preoccupy  itself  with  the
destiny  of  society  only  in  so  far  as  it  more  or  less  includes
that  of  the  individual.  The  first  mistake  of  utilitarians
like  Stuart  Mill,  and  even  of  evolutionists,  has  been  to
confuse  the  social  aspect  and  the  individualistic  aspect  of
the  moral  problem.

It  is  important  to  add  that  an  individualistic  morality,
founded  on  facts,  is  not  the  negation  of  a  metaphysical
or  religious  morality,  founded,  for  example,  on  some  im-
personal ideal ;  it  does  not  exclude  this  latter — it  is  simply
constructed  in  a  different  sphere.  It  is  a  small  house,
built  at  the  foot  of  the  Tower  of  Babel.  It  does  not  in  the
least  prevent  the  Tower  of  Babel  raising  itself  to  heaven,  if
it  can.  Nay,  more ;  who  knows  if  the  small  house  will  not
in  the  end  need  shelter  itself  under  the  shadow  of  the
tower?  Therefore  we  will  not  try  either  to  deny  or  to
exclude  any  of  the  ends  put  forward  as  desirable  by  meta-
physicians ;  but  we  will  at  present  leave  alone  the  notion
of  the  desirable,  and  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  first  showing
what  in  reality  is  desired*  Before  introducing  metaphysical
speculation  into  moral  philosophy  it  is,  in  fact,  essential  to
determine  first  precisely  how  far  an  exclusively  scientific
conception  of  morality  can  go.  This  is  what  we  now  pro-
pose to  do.

The  ends  pursued  in  reality  by  mankind  and  by  all  living
creatures  are  extremely  numerous.  However,  in  the  same
way  as  life  everywhere  shows  characters  in  common,  and  of
a  similar  type  of  organization,  it  is  probable  that  the  ends
sought  by  different  individuals  can  be  in  reality  more  or  less
led  back  to  unity.  This  unique  and  profound  goal  of  action
could  not  be  the  good — a  vague  conception,  which,  when
one  wants  to  determine  it,  dissolves  in  metaphysical  hypo-

*  On  the  distinction  of  the  desired  and  desirable  see  our  "  English
Contemporary  Moral  Philosophy,"  second  edition,  part  ii.,  "  De  la
Methode  Morale."


INTENSITY  OF  LIFE  IS  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACTION. 73

theses — nor  duty,  which  none  the  more  appears  to  science
as  a  primitive  and  irreducible  principle  ;  nor,  perhaps,  hap-
piness in  the  fullest  meaning  of  the  word,  which  Volney  has
called  an  object  of  luxury,  and  the  conception  of  which
presupposes,  moreover,  a  very  advanced  development  of  the
intelligent  being.

What,  then,  will  be  the  natural  aim  of  human  actions  ?
When  a  marksman  has  for  a  long  time  practised  shooting  at
a  target,  one  sees,  in  looking  at-  the  numerous  holes  which
he  has  made  in  the  piece  of  cardboard,  that  these  holes  are
distributed  pretty  uniformly  round  the  white  at  which  he
aimed.  Not  one  of  these  balls,  perhaps,  will  have  hit  the
geometrical  centre  of  the  circle  of  the  target,  and  some  will
be  grouped  round  this  centre,  according  to  a  very  regular  law,
which  Quetelet  has  ascertained  and  named  "the  binomial  law."
Even  without  knowing  this  law,  one  would  not  be  deceived
by  the  mere  aspect  of  the  holes  ;  one  would  put  a  finger  in
the  centre  of  the  place  where  these  holes  are  most  frequent,
and  one  would  say  :  "  That  is  the  point  of  the  target  aimed
at."  This  searching  for  the  point  aimed  at  by  the  marks-
man may  be  compared  to  that  which  the  purely  positive
science  of  morals  undertakes  when  it  endeavours  to  deter-
mine the  ordinary  aim  of  human  conduct.  Which  is  the
target  constantly  aimed  at  by  humanity,  and  which  must
also  have  been  the  target  for  all  human  beings,  for  to-day
man  is  no  longer  regarded  by  science  as  a  being  separate
from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  the  laws  of  life  are  the  same,
from  the  top  downwards,  on  the  ladder  of  animal  life  ?
Where  is  the  centre  of  the  universal  effort  of  beings  towards
which  the  strokes  of  the  great  hazard  of  things  have  been
directed,  perhaps  without  one  perfectly  exact  stroke,  without
the  aim  having  ever  been  fully  attained  ?

According  to  the  "  Hedonists,"  the  natural  direction  of
every  act  would  be  the  minimum  of  pain  and  the  maximum
of  pleasure  ;  in  its  evolution  "  conscious  life  always  follows
the  line  of  the  least  suffering."  Hardly  anyone  can  dispute


74 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

this  direction  of  our  desire,  and  we,  for  our  part,  admit  it ;
but  the  preceding  definition  is  too  narrow,  for  it  can  only  be
applied  to  the  conscious  and  more  or  less  voluntary  acts,  and
not  to  the  unconscious  and  automatic  acts,  which  are  simply
accomplished  according  to  the  line  of  the  least  resistance.
Now,  to  believe  that  most  of  our  movements  spring  from
consciousness,  and  that  a  scientific  analysis  of  the  springs  of
conduct  has  only  to  reckon  with  conscious  motives,  would
undoubtedly  mean  being  dupe  of  an  illusion.  For  Dr.
Maudsley  and  Professor  Huxley  consciousness  is,  in  life,  but
an  epi-phenomenon,  in  the  absence  of  which  everything  would
go  on  in  the  same  way.  Without  wishing  to  solve,  or  even
to  raise,  this  question — which  in  England,  as  well  as  in
France,  is  a  great  point  of  controversy — we  must  own  that
consciousness  embraces  a  rather  restricted  portion  of  life
and  action.  Even  those  acts  achieved  in  full  conscious-
ness have  generally  their  beginning  and  first  origin  in  dumb
instincts  and  reflex  movements.  Consciousness  is,  therefore,
only  a  luminous  point  in  the  great  obscure  sphere  of  life ;
it  is  a  small  lens,  gathering  in  bundles  some  rays  of  the
sun,  and  imagining  too  readily  that  its  focus  is  the
very  focus  from  which  the  rays  start.  The  natural  spring
of  action,  before  appearing  in  consciousness,  must  have
already  acted  from  underneath  in  the  obscure  region  of  the
instincts.  The  constant  end  of  action  must  primarily  have
been  a  constant  cause  of  more  or  less  unconscious  move-
ments. In  reality,  the  ends  are  but  habitual  motive
causes  become  conscious  of  themselves.  Every  movement  of
the  will  has  begun  by  being  a  spontaneous  movement  blindly
executed  because  it  presented  less  resistance.  Every  con-
scious desire,  therefore,  has  first  been  an  instinct.  The
sphere  of  finality  coincides,  at  least  in  its  centre,  with  the
sphere  of  causality  (even  if,  with  the  metaphysicians,  one
regards  finality  as  primitive).  The  problem  :  What  is  the
end,  the  constant  target,  of  action?  becomes,  therefore,
from  another  point  of  view,  this  problem  :  What  is  the


INTENSITY  OF  LIFE  IS  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACTION. 75

constant  cause  of  action  ?  In  the  circle  of  life  the  point
aimed  at  blends  with  the  very  point  from  which  the  action
springs.

We  believe  that  an  exclusively  scientific  morality
must,  to  be  complete,  admit  that  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  is
only  itself  the  consequence  of  the  instinctive  effort  to
maintain  and  enlarge  life.  The  aim  which,  in  fact,
determines  every  conscious  action  is  also  the  cause  which
produces  every  unconscious  action.  It  is,  then,  life  itself —
life  in  its  most  intense  and,  at  the  same  time,  its  most  varied
forms.  From  the  first  bound  of  the  embryo  in  the  womb
of  its  mother,  to  the  last  convulsion  of  old  age,  every  move-
ment of  the  creature  has,  as  cause,  life  in  its  evolution.  This
universal  cause  of  our  acts  is,  from  another  point  of  view,
its  constant  effect  and  end.

The  preceding  analysis  agrees  in  its  result  with  the
analysis  of  the  evolutionist  school,  which  we  will  not  re-
produce here  (see  our  "  Morale  Anglaise  Contemporaine,"
second  edition).

Life,  as  the  motive  underlying  all  our  actions,  is  even
admitted  by  the  mystics,  for  they  generally  suppose  a  pro-
longation of  existence  beyond  this  world ;  and  timeless
existence  itself  is  but  life  concentrated  in  a  punctum  stans.
The  tendency  to  persist  in  life  is  the  necessary  law  of  life,
not  only  for  man,  but  for  all  living  creatures — perhaps  even
for  the  last  atom  of  ether ;  for  force  is  probably  only  an
abstract  of  life.  This  tendency  is  undoubtedly,  as  it  were,
the  residuum  of  the  universal  consciousnesss,  the  more  so
because  it  goes  beyond  and  envelopes  consciousness  itself-
It  is,  therefore,  both  the  most  radical  of  realities  and  the
inevitable  ideal.

The part of morality founded solely and systema-  .,
tically on positive facts may be thus defined  : the
science  which  has  for  object  all  the  means  si  preserving
and  enlarging  material  and  intellectual  life. The  supreme
laws  of  this  morality  will  be  identical  with  the  deepest  laws


76 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION"  OR  SANCTION.

of  life  itself,  and  in  some  of  its  most  general  theorems,  this  con-
ception of  morality  will  be  of  value  for  all  living  creatures.

If  it  be  said  that  the  means  of  preserving  physical  life
belong  to  hygiene  more  than  to  morality,  we  answer  that
temperance,  which  for  a  long  time  has  been  placed  among
the  virtues,  is  practically  an  application  of  hygiene ;  and
that,  moreover,  an  exclusively  scientific  conception  of
morality  can,  in  its  physical  aspect,  oblivious  of  all  other
aspects,  hardly  differ  from  an  enlarged  hygiene.

If  we  are  asked  what  to  increase  the  intensity  of  life
means,  we  reply  that  it  is  to  enlarge  the  range  of  activity
under  all  its  forms  (in  such  a  measure  as  is  compatible  with
the  renewal  of  force).

The  inferior  creatures  act  only  in  a  certain  direction,
after  which  they  rest  and  sink  into  absolute  inertia  ;  as,  for
example,  the  hunting  dog,  which  goes  to  sleep  until  the
very  moment  when  he  will  again  begin  to  hunt.  The
superior  being,  on  the  contrary,  rests  by  variety  of  action,
like  a  field  by  variety  of  production.  The  aim  pursued  in
the  culture  of  human  activity  is,  therefore,  the  reduction  to
the  strict  limits  of  necessity  of  what  might  be  called  the
periods  of  lying  falloiv.  To  act  is  to  live ;  to  increase
action  is  to  increase  the  fire  of  inward  life.  The  worst  of
vices  would  be,  from  that  point  of  view,  laziness,  inertia.
The  moral  ideal  will  be  activity  in  all  its  variety  of  mani-
festations— at  least,  of  those  which  do  not  contradict  each
other,  or  which  do  not  produce  a  permanent  loss  of  force-
To  take  an  example  :  thought  is  one  of  the  principal  forms
of  human  activity,  not,  as  Aristotle  believed,  because
thought  would  be  action  when  pure  and  detached  from  all
matter  (an  unverifiable  hypothesis),  but  because  thought  is,
so  to  speak,  condensed  action  and  life  at  its  maximum
development.

It  is  the  same  with  love.

After  having  stated  in  very  general  terms  the  foundations
of  a  moral  philosophy  of  life,  let  us  see  what  place  it  allows


INTENSITY  OF  LIFE  IS  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACTION. 77

within  its  range  to  hedonism,  or  to  the  moral  philosophy  of
pleasure.

Pleasure  is  a  state  of  consciousness  which,  according  to
psychologists  and  physiologists,  is  connected  with  an
increase  of  life  (physical  or  intellectual),  from  which  it
follows  that  the  precept,  "  Persistently  increase  the  inten-
sity of  your  life,"  will  finally  be  confounded  with  this:
"  Persistently  increase  the  intensity  of  your  pleasure."
Hedonism,  therefore,  may  stand,  but  in  the  second  place,
and  more  as  consequence  than  as  principle.  All  the
English  moralists  say,  "Pleasure  is  the  only  lever  by
which  people  can  be  moved."  Let  us  understand  one
another.  There  are  two  kinds  of  pleasure.  At  one  time  •
pleasure  corresponds  with  a  particular  and  superficial  form
of  activity  (the  pleasure  of  eating,  drinking,  etc.) ;  at  another
time  it  is  connected  with  the  very  root  of  that  activity  (the_  i
pleasure  of  living,  of  willing,  of  thinking,  etc.).  In  the  one
case,  it  is  purely  a  pleasure  of  the  senses  ;  in  the  other,  it
is  more  deeply  vital,  more  independent  of  exterior  objects —
it  is  one  with  the  very  consciousness  of  life.  The  utilitarians
or  the  hedonists  take  too  great  a  delight  in  considering  the
first  sort  of  pleasure ;  the  other  kind  has  a  greater  impor-
tance. One  does  not  always  act  with  the  view  of  seeking  a
particular  pleasure — limited  and  exterior  to  the  act  itself.
Sometimes  we  act  for  the  pleasure  of  acting ;  we  live  for
the  pleasure  of  living  ;  we  think  for  the  pleasure  of  thinking.
There  is  in  us  accumulated  force  which  demands  to  be
used.  If  its  expenditure  is  impeded,  this  force  becomes
desire  or  aversion:  if  the  desire  is  satisfied,  there  is  pleasure;
if  it  is  opposed,  there  is  pain.  But  it  does  not  follow  from
this  that  the  stored-up  activity  unfolds  itself  solely  for  the
sake  of  pleasure — with  pleasure  as  motive.  Life  unfolds
and  expresses  itself  in  activity  because  it  is  life.  In  all
creatures  pleasure  accompanies,  much  more  than  it  pro-
vokes, the  search  after  life.  Before  all  we  must  live ;  enjoy-
ment comes  after.


78 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

For  a  long  time  it  was  believed  that  the  organ  created  the
function  ;  it  was  also  believed  that  the  pleasure  created  the
function.  "  A  creature  goes,"  said  Epicurus,  "  where  his
pleasure  calls  him."  These  words,  according  to  modern
science,  contain  a  very  incomplete  truth,  and  are  mingled  with
error.  In  the  beginning  the  creature  did  not  possess  any
organ  already  complete  ;  neither  did  he  possess,  in  any  way,
a  fully-developed  pleasure.  He  himself,  by  -action,  has
created  his  organ  and  his  pleasure.  The  pleasure,  as  well
as  the  organ,  proceeds  from  the  function.  Moreover,
afterwards,  like  the  organ  itself,  it  reacts  on  the  function.
Finally,  one  acts  in  such-and-such  a  way  because  one  has
an  organ  developed  after  such  a  fashion,  and  because  one
finds  pleasure  in  going  in  such  a  direction.  But  the
pleasure  does  not  come  first ;  that  which  is  first  and  last  is
the  function,  is  life.  If,  for  the  direction  of  nature,  it  is  not
necessary  to  appeal  to  an  impulse  which  is  foreign  or
superior  to  her ;  if  nature  is,  so  to  speak,  self-moved  and
self-governed,  neither  is  it  any  the  more  necessary  to  appeal
to  an  inferior  and  particular  motive,  such  as  any  special
pleasure.

The  point  on  which  we  can  agree  with  the  Hedonists
is  that  consciousness  could  not  exist  without  some  vague
pleasure  or  pain.  Pleasure  and  pain  might  be  considered
as  the  very  principle  of  consciousness  ;  on  the  other  hand,
consciousness  is  the  lever  necessary  to  produce  all  action
other  than  purely  reflex  action.  The  English  theory  is,
therefore,  true  in  this  sense,  that  every  voluntary  action,
being,  so  to  speak,  always  obliged  to  pass  through  conscious-
ness, necessarily  becomes  impressed  with  either  a  pleasant
or  an  unpleasant  character.  To  act  and  react  is  always  to
enjoy  or  to  suffer ;  it  is,  moreover,  always  to  desire  or  to
fear.

But  this  pleasant  or  unpleasant  character  of  action  is  not
sufficient  to  completely  explain  it.  Enjoyment,  instead  of
.being  the  deliberate  end  of  action,  is  often,  like  conscious-


INTENSITY  OF  LIFE  IS  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACTION. 79

ness  itself,  only  an  attribute  of  it. Action  springs  naturally
from  the  working  of  life,  which  is,  to  a  considerable  extent,
unconscious. It  enters  immediately  into  the  domain  of
consciousness  and  enjoyment,  but  it  does  not  spring  from
it. The  tendency  of  the  creature  to  continue  in  existence
is  at  the  root  of  all  desire,  without  forming  in  itself  a  deter-
minate desire. A  body  in motion,  carried  on  through
space,  ignores  its  direction,  and  yet  it  possesses  an  acquired
speed,  ready  to  transform  itself  into  heat,  and  even  into
light,  according  to  the  resistant  medium  through  which  it
passes. It  is  thus  that  life  becomes  desire  or  fear,  pain  or
pleasure,  precisely  in  virtue  of  its  acquired  force,  and  of  the
primitive  directions  in  which  evolution  has  flung  it. If  the
intensity  of  life  in  a  being,  having  different  issues  open  to
its  activity,  is  once  fully  known,  one  can  predict  the  direc-
tion which  this  being  will  feel  itself  inwardly  obliged  to
take. It  is  as  if  an  astronomer  could  predict  the  course  of
a  star  merely  by  the  knowledge  of  its  bulk,  its  speed,  and
of  the  action  of  the  other  stars.

One  sees  now  the  only  position  which  can  be  taken  up
by  a  science  of  morals  without  metaphysics  in  the  question
of  the  moral  end,  independent  of  all  the  hypotheses  which
metaphysics  could  add  later  on.  Given  on  the  one  hand
the  unconscious  sphere  of  instincts,  habits,  and  dumb
perceptions,  on  the  other  hand  the  conscious  sphere  of
reasoning  and  of  thoughtful  will,  morality  is  placed  on  the
limit  of  these  two  spheres.  It  is  the  only  science  thus
having  for  its  object  neither  facts  purely  unconscious  nor
facts  purely  conscious.  It  must,  therefore,  search  for  a
tendency  which  should  be  common  to  these  two  orders
of  facts,  and  which  might  be  able  to  connect  the  two
spheres.

Classical  psychology  was  always  restricted  to  conscious
phenomena,  leaving  alone  the  study  of  pure  mechanism.
It  was  the  same  with  classical  moral  philosophy.  But  both
supposed  it  to  be  proved  that  mechanical  life  does  not  act


8o MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

upon  the  conscious  region  of  mind  (or  thought),  does  not
give  rise  sometimes  in  that  region  to  more  or  less  inexplicable
disturbances.  To  suppose  that  the  independence  of  the
conscious  with  regard  to  the  unconscious  was  thus  demon-
strated, was  to  begin  with  a  postulate  which  is  sanctioned
by  nothing.  We  believe  that,  in  order  to  avoid  this  postu-
late, scientific  morality  must  look  for  a  spring  of  action
which  should  be  able  to  work  at  the  same  time  in  the  two
spheres,  and  move  in  us  both  the  unconscious  and  the
conscious  being.  The  object  of  the  science  of  morals  is
to  show  how  action,  produced  by  the  mere  effort  of  life,
springs  incessantly  from  the  unconscious  depths  of  being,
to  enter  into  the  domain  of  consciousness ;  and  how,  next,
action  may  be  weakened  in  this  new  sphere,  often  even  be
suspended ;  for  example,  when  there  is  struggle  between
the  instinct  of  life  and  such  or  such  a  belief  in  the  rational
order.  In  that  case,  the  sphere  of  consciousness  may  furnish
a  new  source  of  actions,  which  in  their  turn  may  become
principles  of  habit  or  instincts,  and  thus  re-enter  the  uncon-
scious depth  of  the  creature,  there  to  undergo  numberless
alterations.  Instinct  deviates  in  becoming  consciousness
and  thought ;  thought  deviates  in  becoming  action  and  the
germ  of  instinct.  Moral  science  has  to  reckon  with  all
these  deviations.  It  looks  for  the  meeting  point  where
the  two  great  forces  of  our  being,  instinct  and  reason,
touch  and  mutually  transform  themselves  without  ceasing.
Moral  science  has  to  study  the  action  of  these  two  forces
on  each  other,  to  regulate  the  double  influence  of  instinct
on  thought,  of  thought  and  of  mind  on  instinctive  and
reflex  actions.  We  shall  see  how  life,  by  becoming
conscious  of  itself,  and  without  rationally  contradicting
itself,  may  give  rise  to  an  indefinite  variety  of  motives
derived  from  it.  The  universal  instinct  of  life — now  uncon-
scious, now  conscious — in  the  different  aspects  in  which  we
shall  see  it  clothed,  supplies  moral  science  with  the  only
positive  end ;  which,  moreover,  does  not  mean  that  no  other


INTENSITY  OF  LIFE  IS  THE  MOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACTION. 8 1

end  is  possible,  or  that  our  experience  is  adequate  to  every
imaginable  reality.  The  moral  philosophy,  founded  on
facts,  let  it  be  said  once  more,  can  but  "  show  "  one  thing—
that  is,  that  life  has  a  tendency  to  maintain  itself,  and  to
increase  among  all  beings,  first  unconsciously,  and  later
with  the  help  of  spontaneous  and  thinking  consciousness ;
that  life  is  thus,  in  fact,  the  primitive  and  universal  form  of
every  good  thing  which  is  desired.  It  does  not  follow  that
the  desire  of  life  absolutely  exhausts  the  idea  of  the  desirable,
with  all  the  metaphysical,  and  even  mystical,  notions  which
can  be  attached  to  it.  It  is  a  reserved  question,  which  will
no  longer  be  properly  an  object  of  positive  affirmation,  but
of  metaphysical  hypothesis.  It  is  important  for  science  to
mark  the  exact  point  of  separation  of  the  certain  and  the
uncertain,  in  moral  philosophy  as  well  as  in  other  branches
of  science.  Certitude  has  never  injured  speculation,  nor
even  dreams  ;  neither  has  the  knowledge  of  the  real  facts
injured  the  impulse  towards  the  ideal,  nor  has  science
injured  metaphysics.  The  reaper,  carefully  gathering
together  into  his  barn  sheaves  which  he  has  himself
collected  and  counted,  has  never  prevented  the  sower
going  round  with  open  hands,  his  eyes  fixed  on  far-off
harvests,  throwing  out  to  the  winds  the  present— the  known
—so  as  to  see  a  future  germinate  which  he  knows  not,  but
hopes  for.


CHAPTER II.

The  Highest  Intensity  of  Life  has  for  its  Necessary
Correlative  the  Greatest  Expansion.

FROM  the  physiological  point  of  view,  existence  and  life
imply  nutrition,  consequently  appropriation,  transformation
for  itself  of  the  forces  of  nature.  Life  is  a  kind  of  gravita-
tion upon  itself.  But  a  being  always  needs  to  accumulate  a

G


82 MORALITY INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

surplus  of  force  to  ensure  the  amount  necessary  to  maintain
life.  Thrift  is  a  very  law  of  nature.  What  will  become  of
this  surplus  of  force  which  is  accumulated  by  every  healthy
being,  of  this  superabundance  which  nature  succeeds  in
producing  ?

In  the  first  place,  it  will  be  able  to  expend  itself  in
generation,  which  is  simply  a  case  of  nutrition.  "  Repro-
duction," says  Haeckel,  "  is  an  excess  of  nutrition  and  of
growth,  in  consequence  of  which  a  part  of  the  individual
is  created  independent  in  everything "  ("  Morphologic,"
ii.  1 6).  In  the  elementary  cellule  generation  takes  the
form  of  simple  division.  Later,  a  kind  of  distribution  of
labour  takes  place,  and  reproduction  becomes  a  special
function,  carried  out  by  the  germ-cells  ;  this  is  sporogony.
Finally,  later,  two  cells — one  ovular,  the  other  spermatic —
unite  and  blend  together  to  form  a  new  individual.  There
is  nothing  mysterious  in  this  conjunction  of  two  cells.  The
muscular  tissue  and  the  nervous  tissue  result,  to  a  great
extent,  from  these  cellular  fusions.  Nevertheless,  with  this
sexual  generation  or  amphigony  begins,  we  may  say,  a  new
moral  phase  for  the  world.  The  individual  organism  ceases
to  be  isolated,  its  centre  of  gravity  changes  its  place  by
degrees,  and  it  will  change  its  place  more  and  more.

Sexuality  is  of  capital  importance  in  moral  life.  If  against
all  possibility  a  non-sexual  generation  had  been  prevalent
among  the  animal  species,  and  finally  among  human
beings,  society  would  hardly  exist.  It  was  noticed  long
since  that  spinsters,  bachelors,  and  eunuchs  fall  into  the
habit  of  being  more  selfish.  Their  centre  has  always
remained  in  the  depths  of  themselves  without  ever  fluc-
tuating. Children  also  are  selfish ;  they  do  not  yet  possess
a  surplus  of  life  to  pour  forth  from  themselves ;  it  is  about
the  period  of  puberty  that  their  characters  transform  them-
selves. The  young  man  is  full  of  enthusiasm ;  he  is  ready
for  every  sacrifice  because,  in  point  of  fact,  it  is  necessary
that  he  should  sacrifice  something  of  himself — that  he


THE  HIGHEST  INTENSITY  OF  LIFE.

should  diminish  himself  to  a  certain  extent ;  he  is  too  full
of  life  to  live  only  for  himself. The  period  of  generation  is
also  that  of  generosity. The  old  man,  on  the  contrary,  is
often  inclined  to  become  selfish  again. People  who  are  ill
have  the  same  tendency. Each  time  that  the  fount  of  1
is  diminished  a  need  is  felt  in  the  whole  of  ones  being  t<
save-to  spare  one's  self. One  hesitates  to  allow  one  drop
of  internal  sap  to  filter  through.  .

The  first  effect  of  generation  is  to  produce  a  grouping  o
organisms,  to  create  the  family,  and,  through  the  family,  tc
create  society;  but  this  is  only  one  of  its  most  visible  and
most  evident  effects. The  sexual  instinct,  as  we  have
seen,  is  a  superior  but  particular  form  of  the  genera  need
of  fecundity. Now,  this  need,  symptom  of  a  surplus  oi
force,  does  not  only  act  on  the  special  organs  of  generation
-it  acts  on  the  whole  organism. It  exercises  a  kind  of
pressure  on  our  being,  the  different  forms  of  which  we  are
going  to  enumerate.

i  Intellectual  Fecundity. -K  is  not  without  reason  that
the  works  of  a  thinker  have  been  compared  to  his  children.
The  artist  also  is,  by  an  inward  force,  driven  to  cast  forth
his  inmost  self,  to  give  us  of  his  innermost,  like  Mussets

pelican.

Let  it  be  added  that  this  fecundity  is  somewhat  in  oppo:
tion  to  physical  generation.  The  organism  cannot,  without
suffering,  accomplish  this  double  expenditure.  It  seems
that  in  the  animal  species  also,  physical  fecundity  decreases
with  the  development  of  the  brain.  Very  great  geniuses
have  generally  had  children  only  under  the  average,  whose
race  was  soon  exterminated.  These  geniuses  undoubtedly
still  live  by  their  ideas  in  the  minds  of  the  human  race,  but
their  blood  could  not  mingle  with  that  of  mankind.

Intellectual  fecundity  also  admits  of  a  kind  of  debauchery.
The  mind  can  be  abused.  The  young  man  is  sometimes
exhausted  for  the  whole  of  his  life  by  premature  excess  of
intellectual  labour.  The  American  girl  may,  in  the  same


84 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

way,  imperil  her  future  maternity,  or  the  fate  of  the  genera-
tion which  she  will  bring  into  the  world.  It  is  the  duty  of
morality  to  restrain  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  instinct  of  pro-
duction. As  a  general  rule,  we  may  say  that  the  expenditure
should  only  be  an  excitation  and  not  an  exhaustion  of  life.
Be  that  as  it  may,  the  need  of  intellectual  fecundity,  more
even  than  of  sexual  fecundity,  deeply  modifies  the  condi-
tions of  life  in  humanity.  Thought,  in  fact,  is  impersonal
and  disinterested.

2.  Fecundity  of  Emotion  and  of  Sensibility. — Sensibility
must  be  exercised  as  well  as  intelligence.  Of  ourselves,  we
are  not  sufficient  for  ourselves.  We  have  more  tears  than
are  wanted  for  our  own  sufferings,  more  joys  in  reserve  than
our  own  happiness  would  justify.  We  really  need  to  go  out
of  ourselves  to  others ;  we  want  to  multiply  ourselves  by
communion  of  thoughts  and  sentiments.

Hence  the  kind  of  unrest  in  a  too  solitary  creature,  an
unsatisfied  desire.  If,  for  instance,  we  feel  some  artistic
pleasure,  we  would  rather  not  enjoy  it  alone.  We  like
others  to  know  that  we  exist,  feel,  suffer,  love.  We  would
like  to  tear  the  veil  of  individuality.  Vanity  ?  No  ;  vanity
is  far  from  our  thought.  It  is  rather  the  antithesis  of  egoism.
Very  inferior  pleasures  are  sometimes  selfish.  If  there  is
only  one  cake,  the  child  wants  to  be  the  only  one  to  eat  it.
But  the  true  artist  does  not  wish  to  be  alone  in  seeing  some-
thing beautiful,  in  discovering  something  true,  in  feeling  a
generous  sentiment.*  There  is  in  these  higher  pleasures  a
force  of  expansion,  ever  ready  to  burst  the  narrow  shell  of
self.  In  face  of  these  we  are  not  sufficient  to  ourselves ;
we  are  only  made  to  transfer  them,  like  the  vibrating  atom
of  ether  transfers  from  place  to  place  the  sideral  beam  of

*  One  has,  however,  here  to  distinguish  between  the  enjoyment  of
the  artist — which  is  always  fruitful,  consequently  generous — and  the
enjoyment  of  the  amateur  in  art,  which  can  be  narrow  and  selfish,
because  it  is  always  barren.  See  our  "  Problems  of  Contemporary
Esthetics."


THE  HIGHEST  INTENSITY  OF  LIFE.

light  whJf  traverses  it,  and  of  which  it  retains  nothing  but
the  momentary  thrill.

Yet  here,  also,  we  have  to  avoid  an  exaggerated  expans
of  life,  a  kind  of  altruistic  debauchery. There  are  people,
although  rare,  who  have  lived  too  much  for  others,  who
have not retained enough of themselves; the English
moralists  blame  these  with  some  reason. Is  it  quite  certain
that  a  great  man  always  has  the  right  to  risk  his  life  to  save
that  of  an  imbecile  ? The  woman-a  mother-who  forget
herself  too  much  may,  in  advance,  condemn  the  child  she
is  bearing  to  a  sickly  and  ailing  life. The  father  of  a  family
who  submits  himself  and  his  family  to  daily  privations  m
order  to  leave  the  children  some  small  competency  will,  ir
the  end,  really  only  succeed  in  leaving  a  small  sum  to  b
ill-born,  and  without  value  to  the  species.

3 Fecundity  of  Will—  We  need  to  bring  forth  and  to
impress  the  form  of  our  activity  upon  the  world. Action
has  become  a  necessity  for  the  greater  part  of  mankind.
The  most  constant  and  the  most  regular  form  of  action  is
-mark,  with  the  attention  which  it  demands. The  savage  i
incapable  of  true  work-all  the  more  incapable  as  he  is
more  degraded. These  organisms  among  us  which  are
still  living  fragments  of  ancient  man-the  criminals-have
generally,  as  a  distinctive  feature,  a  horror  of  work. icy
2o  not  get  tired  of  doing  nothing. We  may  say  that  enn^
is,  in  man,  a  sign  of  superiority-of  fecundity  of  will.
nation  which  has  known -the  spleen"  is  the  most  active


o  will  in  time  become  more  and  more  necessary
for  mankind.  Now,  work  is  at  the  same  time  the  most
economical  and  the  most  moral  phenomenon,  in  which
.egoism  and  altruism  are  most  easily  reconciled.  To  work
is  to  produce,  and  to  produce  is  to  be  useful  both  to  one  s
self  and  to  others.  Work  can  only  become  dangerous  by
its  accumulation  in  the  form  of  capital  ;  it  may  then  take  a
frankly  selfish  character,  and,  by  virtue  of  an  inherent  con-


86 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

tradiction,  may  tend  to  its  own  suppression  by  the  very
idleness  which  it  allows.  But,  in  its  living  form,  work  is
always  good.  It  belongs  to  the  domain  of  social  laws  to
prevent  the  bad  results  of  the  accumulation  of  work — excess
of  idleness  for  oneself  and  excess  of  power  over  others — as
one  takes  care  to  isolate  batteries  which  are  too  powerful.

It  is  necessary  for  us  to  will  and  work,  not  only  for  our-
/selves,  but  also  for  others.  We  want  to  help  others,  to  give
a  lift  to  the  coach  which  toilsomely  draws  humanity  along  ;
in  any  case,  we  buzz  round  it.  One  of  the  inferior  forms  of
this  need_is  "  ambition,"  which  must  be  recognised,  not
merely  as  a  desire  for  honours  and  for  fame,  but  as  a  thing
which  is  also  and  before  all  else  a  need  of  action  or  of
speech,  an  abundance  of  life  under  its  rather  coarse  form
of  motive  power,  of  material  activity,  of  nervous  tension.

Certain  characters  have,  above  all,  this  fecundity  of  will ;
.^-for  example,  Napoleon  I.  They  upset  the  surface  of  the
world,  with  the  object  of  impressing  their  mark  upon  it.
They  want  to  substitute  their  will  for  that  of  others,  but
they  possess  a  poor  sensibility — an  intelligence  incapable  of
creating,  in  the  largest  sense  of  the  word;  an  intelligence
which  is  worth  nothing  in  itself,  which  does  not  think  for
the  sake  of  thinking,  and  which  they  make  the  passive
instrument  of  their  ambition.  Others,  on  the  contrary,
have  a  highly-developed  sensibility,  like  women  (who  have
played  so  great  a  part  in  human  evolution  and  in  the
founding  of  morality) ;  but  in  these  intelligence  and  will
are  too  often  lacking.

Finally,  life  has  two  aspects. According  to  the  one,  it  is
**•  jnutrition  and  assimilation ;  according  to  the  other,  produc-

tion  and  fecundity. The  more  it  takes  in,  the  more  it  needs

to  give  out;  that  is  its  law.  Expenditure  is  not  an  evil
physiologically  ;  it  is  one  of  the  conditions  of  life.  It  is
expiration  following  inspiration.

Thus,  the  expenditure  for  others  which  social  life  demands
is  not — everything  taken  into  account — a  loss  for  the  indi-


THE  HIGHEST  INTENSITY  OF  LIFE.


vidual;  it  is  a  desirable  enlargement,  and  even  a  necessity.
Man  wishes  to  become  a  social  and  moral  being  ;  he  remains
constantly agitated  by  that idea. The  delicate  cells  of
his  mind  and  his  heart  aspire  to  live  and  to  develop  in  tl
same  way  as  those  "homunculi"  of  which  M.  Renan  some-
where speaks  ;  every  one  of  us  feels  in  himself  a  kind  of
pushing  of  moral  life,  like  that  of  the  physical  sap. l^.
fecundity,  and,  reciprocally,  fecundity  is  abundance  <
that  is  true  existence.

There  is  a  certain  generosity  which  is  inseparable  1
existence,  and  without  which  we  die-we  shrivel  up  inter-
nally We  must  put  forth  blossoms  ;  morality,  disinterest
ness  is  the  flower  of  human  life. Charity  has  always  been
represented  under  the  guise  of  a  mother,  holding ;  out :  to -her
children her breast, overflowing with milk lhat  is  sc
because, in reality, charity is but one with overflowmg
fecundity;  it  is  like  a  maternity  too  large  to  be  confined
within  thye'  family. The  mother's  breast  needs  life  eager  to
empty  it;  the  heart  of  the  truly  humane  creature  needs  to
^gentle  and  helpful  to  all. Within  the  benefactor  himself
dwells  the  incentive  towards  those  who  suffer

We  have  verified,  even  in  the  life  of  the  blind  cell,  a  pnn-
ciple  of  expansion,  which  prevents  the  individual  being  suffi-
c  ent  unto  himself ;  the  richest  life  is  found  to  be  that  which
mos  "ends  to  spend  itself  lavishly,  to  sacrifice  itself  wrthin
TrSin  limits,  toshare  itself  with  other, Whence  it  follows
thai  the  mos perfect  organism  will  be  also  the  most  sociable,
and "at  the  id'eal  of  individual  life  is  the  life  in  common
Thus  we  find  replaced  in  the  very  depths  of  our  being  that
spring of  all  these instincts  of  sympathy  and  sociability
which  the  English  school  has  too  often  shown  us  as  more  or
as artificially  acquired  in  the  course  of  evolution,  and  m
sequencers more or  less  adventitious. We  are  far
dS  f  om  Bentham  and  the  utilitarians,  who  everywhere
*yTavoid  pain,  who  see  in  pain  the  irreconcilab  e  enemy ;
is  as  if  one  would  not  breathe  too  strongly,  for  fear  of  t


88 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

great  expenditure.  Even  in  Spencer  there  is  still  too  much
utilitarianism.  Besides,  he  too  often  looks  at  things  from  the
outside,  and  does  not  see  in  the  unselfish  instincts  anything
but  a  product  of  society.  There  is,  we  believe,  in  the  heart
of  individual  life  itself  an  evolution  corresponding  to  the
evolution  of  social  life,  which  makes  the  latter  possible,  and
which  is  the  cause  of  it,  instead  of  the  result.*

*  "The  objection  has  been  made  to  us  that  the  fecundity  of  our
different  inward  forces  could  find  its  satisfaction  as  well  in  the  disagree-
ment as  in  the  agreement  with  others,  in  the  crushing  of  other  per-
sonalities as  well  as  in  the  raising  of  them.  But,  in  the  first  place,  one
forgets  that  the  others  do  not  let  themselves  be  so  easily  crushed  ;  the
will  which  seeks  to  impose  itself  necessarily  meets  the  resistance  of
others.  Even  if  it  conquers  this  resistance,  it  cannot  conquer  it  quite
alone — it  must  lean  on  its  allies,  and  in  this  way  re-constitute  a  social
group,  and  impose  on  it,  with  regard  to  this  friendly  group,  the
very  servitudes  from  which  it  tried  to  get  free  with  regard  to  the  other
men,  its  natural  allies.  Therefore  all  struggle  always  in  the  end  exter-
nally limits  the  will ;  in  the  second  place,  it  changes  it  internally.  The
violent  man  stifles  the  whole  sympathetic  and  intellectual  part  of  his
being — that  is  to  say,  that  in  him  which  is  most  complex  and  most
elevated  from  the  point  of  view  of  evolution.  By  brutalizing  others  he
more  or  less  brutalizes  himself.  Violence,  which  thus  seemed  a
victorious  expansion  of  internal  power,  becomes  in  the  end  a  restriction
of  this  power  ;  to  make  the  humiliation  of  others  the  object  of  one's
will  is  to  give  it  an  inadequate  aim,  and  to  impoverish  one's  self.  At  last,
by  a  final  and  deeper  disorganization,  the  will  itself  loses  its  equilibrium
completely  by  the  use  of  violence  ;  if  the  will  has  become  used  to  meet
no  obstacle  whatever  from  outside,  as  happens  with  despots,  every  one
of  its  impulses  becomes  irresistible  ;  the  most  contradictory  inclinations
succeed  each  other ;  it  is  a  complete  ataxy.  The  despot  becomes  a
child  again ;  he  is  given  up  to  contradictory  whims,  and  his  objective
omnipotence  ends  in  bringing  about  a  real  subjective  impotency"
("  Education  and  Heredity,"  p.  58).


THE  CREATION  OF  OBLIGATION.


89


CHAPTER III.

To  what  Extent  Inward  Power  creates  a  Sort  of  Obli-
gation. Power and Duty. (I "  can,"  therefore
"must.")  \

AFTER  having  established  this  principle  of  moral  fecundity^
which  to  us  seems  essential,  there  remains  for  us  to  s
what manner, and under what psychological form,
manifests  itself. Is  a  creature  impelled,  by  its  very  nature
and  the  normal  expansion  of  its  will,  to  spend  itself  foi
others?  or  is  it  simply  prompted  thereto  by  the  attract
of  a  special  pleasure-the  pleasure  of  sympathy,  of  praise,
etc  ? We see that here,  also,  the study of "mental
dynamics"  in  the  English  and  Positivist  schools  has  ol
been  elementary  and  incomplete.

Kantism  has  this  great  merit,  which  no  naturalistic  theory
would  be  able  to  dispute,  of  having  considered  the  primitive
impulse,  which  constitutes  one  of  the  essential  elements  of
duty,  as  anterior  to  all  philosophical  reasomng  on  goodr
in  fact,  no  demonstrative reason  could  suddenly  change
either  the  direction  or  the  intensity  of  this  spontaneous
impulse. The  theory  of  the  categorical  imperative  is  there-
fore psychologically  exact  and  deep,  as  the  expression  of  ,
fact  of  consciousness; only  Kant  had  no  right,  without
proof,  to  consider  this  imperative  as  transcendental. A
practical  internal  necessity"  can  be  a  more  or  less  instinc-
tive and  even  mechanical  necessity. In  morality,  as  in
eenius,  there  can  exist  a  kind  of  natural  power,  preceding
knowledge-a  power  which  impels  us  to  act  and  to  produce.
Is  it  not  precisely  the  characteristic  of  natural  inclinations,
habits,  customs,  to  command  the  individual  without  giving
any  reason? Custom  is  respected  in  individual  conscious-
ness or  in  the  state,  as  Pascal  has  said,  "for  this  one  reason,  j
that  it  is  accepted."
'  The  authority  of  the  law  is  sometimes  "  entirely  based  upo!


90 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

itself,"  without  attaching  itself  to  any  principle.  "The  law
is  law,  and  nothing  more."  In  the  presence  of  every  power
which  is  anterior  to  it,  of  every  force  which  is  not  that  of
rational  ideas,  the  understanding  always  plays  the  secondary
part,  as  Kant's  philosophy  has  so  well  shown.  It  feels
itself  in  the  presence  of  a  mystery.  Yet  it  does  not  follow
that  the  understanding  gives  up  trying  to  explain  this  mystery,
even  in  a  somewhat  superficial  way.  On  the  contrary,
there  is  nothing  for  which  human  intelligence  finds  so  many
explanations  as  for  a  thing  which  is  for  it  inexplicable.  How
many  theories  on  goodness  !  How  many  reasons  given  for
this  irrational  affirmation :  /  must,  or,  as  the  ancients  used
to  put  it,  //  must  be — Set  /

In  reality,  reason  in  the  abstract  is  incapable  of  ex-
plaining a  power,  an  instinct,  of  accounting  for  a  force
which  is  infra-rational  in  its  very  principle.  Observation,
experience,  is  necessary.  The  fact  of  duty  imposing  itself
on  consciousness  as  a  superior  force  once  being  admitted
with  Kant,  let  us  try  to  clearly  show  this  fact  in  its  essential
variations,  and  in  its  relations  with  the  other  similar  facts  of
consciousness.  We  will  afterwards  see  if  to  us  it  seems  to
offer  anything  supernatural.  Kant  himself  has  stated  the

problem  in  the  celebrated  prosopopoeia — "  Duty  ! where

is  the  root  of  thy  noble  stem  to  be  found  which  proudly
repudiates  all  alliance  with  the  inclinations  ?"  Kant,
however,  has  not  really  answered  this  question  ;  he  has  not
discovered  what  bond  of  relationship  might,  in  spite  of
appearances,  connect  this  "  noble  "  and  "  proud  "  duty  with
the  other  inclinations.

"  The  law  of  duty,"  Confucius  has  also  said  in  a  sense
quite  like  that  of  Kant,  "  is  a  shoreless  ocean ;  the  world
cannot  hold  it."  But  sometimes  a  distance  of  three
hours  from  the  shore  gives  a  lesser  mass  of  water  the
appearance  of  an  ocean.  Sailing  on  the  river  of  the
Amazon,  one  believes  oneself  on  the  sea.  To  distinguish
the  river  from  the  sea,  we  must  not  try  to  look  into  the


THE  CREATION  OF  OBLIGATION.

distance-we must bend over the water and taste it
Inward  analysis  is  also  the  only  way  to  appreciate
or  imaginary  infinity  of  our  moral  horizon.

We  will  place  ourselves  successively  at  the  three  points  o:
view  of  the  will,  the  intelligence,  and  the  sensibility.

x The  existence  of  a  certain  impersonal  duty  is  created  by
the  power-of-acting  itself. First  equivalent  of 'duty. -Firstly,
how  to  move  the  will  without  appealing  either  to  a  myst
duty,  or  to  such-and-such  a  particular  pleasure  ? tt  hatever
is  true  and  deep  in  the  badly  elucidated  notion  of  moral
dutv  can,  we  believe,  subsist even  after  the  purification
which it has  undergone by  the theory  sketched  above.
Duty  will  be  reduced  to  the  consciousness  of  a
inward  power,  by  nature  superior  to  all  other  powers, Ip
feel  inwardly  the  greatest  that  one  is  capable  of  doing  is
really  the  first  consciousness  of  what  it  is  one's  duty  to  do.
Duty,  from  the  point  of  view  of  facts-metaphysical  notions
being  left  on  one  side-is  a  superabundance  of  life  which
demands  to  exercise,  to  impart  itself. Duty  has  been  too
much  interpreted  until  now  as  the  sentiment  of  a  necessity
or  compulsion. It  is,  above  all,  the  sentiment  of  a  power.
Every  force  which  accumulates  creates  a  pressure  on  t
obstacles placed before it. Every  ability (power), con-
sidered separately,  produces  a  kind  of  obligation  which  is
proportionate  to  itself. To  have  the  power  to  act  is  to  t
obliged  to  act. Among  inferior  beings,  whose  intellect
life  is  fettered  and  smothered,  there  are  few  duties  ;  b
this  means  that  there  is  little  power. Civilized  man  has
countless  duties,  because  he  possesses  a  very  rich  activity
to  be  expended  in  a  thousand  ways. From  this  point  of
view which is in no  way  mystical, moral obligation  is
reduced  to  this  great  law  of  nature  :  life  can  maintain  itself
only  on  the  condition  of  diffusing  itself. It  is  impossible  to
compass  one's  aim  with  certainty  unless  one  has  the  power
to  go  beyond  it ;  and  if  one  holds  that  the  self  is,  in  itself,
its  own  aim,  this  is  still  a  reason  why  it  cannot  suffice  for


92 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

itself.  The  plant  cannot  prevent  itself  from  flowering.
Sometimes  to  flower  means  for  it  to  die.  No  matter,  the
sap  still  rises.  Nature  does  not  look  back  to  see  what  it
abandons  ;  it  goes  its  way,  always  forward,  always  upward.

2 .  The  existence  of  a  certain  impersonal  duty  is  created  by  the
conception-of-action  itself.  Second  equivalent  of  duty. — In
the  same  way  as  the  power  of  activity  creates  a  kind  of
natural  obligation  or  imperative  impulse,  so  intelligence
has,  in  itself,  a  motive-power.

If  we  raise  ourselves  high  enough,  we  may  find  incentives
to  action  which  do  not  only  work  as  springs  of  action,  but
which  are,  in  and  through  themselves,  without  direct  inter-
vention of  the  sentiments,  the  moving  power  of  activity  and
of  life.  Here  again  may  be  applied  that  important  theory
of  ideas  as  forces  (les  idees  forces)  which  a  contemporary
philosopher  has  broached.*

Intelligence  and  activity  seem  no  longer  separated  by
an  abyss.  To  understand  is  already  the  beginning  in  us
of  the  realization  of  that  which  we  understand.  To  con-
ceive something  better  than  that  which  exists  is  the  first  labour
in  realizing  it.  Action  is  but  the  extension  of  the  idea.
Thought  is  almost  a  word  ;  we  are  urged  with  so  much
force  to  express  what  we  think  that  the  child  and  the  old
man,  less  capable  of  resisting  this  compulsion,  think  aloud ;
the  brain  naturally  makes  the  lips  move.  In  the  same  way,
the  mind  will  make  the  arms  and  the  whole  body  work  and
move ;  it  will  direct  life.  Conception  of  aim,  effort  to
attain-^hese  are  not  two  things.  The  conception  itself,
let  us  repeat  it,  is  a  first  effort.  We  think,  we  feel,  and
action  follows.  Hence,  there  is  no  need  whatever  to  call
for  the  intermediate  agent  of  outward  pleasure,  no  need  of
a  middle  term  or  bridge  to  pass  from  one  of  these  two

*  See  M.  Alfred  FouilleVs  "  La  Liberte  et  le  Determinisme  "  (2nd
edition),  and  "  La  Critique  des  Systemes  de  Morale  Contem-
poraine."


THE  CREATION  OF  OBLIGATION.  /,, 93

things to the  other. Thought,  action— they  are funda-
mentally identical.

That  which  is  called  obligation  or  moral  restraint  is,  in
the sphere  of"  intelligence,  the  sentiment  of  this  radical
identity. Obligatiojijs_jin_jn^ejna!^^
complete  our  ideas  by  converting  them  into  action. -
who  does  not  act  as  he  thinks,  thinks  incompletely. '  He
feels,  moreover,  that  something  fails  him ;  he  is  not  com-
plete; he is not himself. Immorality is an internal-
mutilation. Every  movement  of  the  mind  lifts  the  body
up. Not  to  act  in  accordance  with  that  which  we  believe
to  be  the  best  is  to  be  like  one  who  can  neither  laugh
when  he  is  joyful,  nor  weep  when  he  is  sad ;  who,  in  shortv
can  neither  outwardly  express  nor  translate  anything  of  that
which  he  feels. That  would  be  supreme  torture.

The  distinction  between  thejwill  and  themtelligence  has
been  made  too  great,  and  has~"been  of  sucTTTkind  as  to
immediately  bring  into  evidence  the  need  of  moving  the
will  exclusively  by  means  of  motives  of  sentiment  or  feeling.
But  exterior  motives  need  not  be  called  in  so  long  as  the
inner  mechanism  of  thought  and  of  life  is  sufficient.  It
may  be  said  that  will  is  but  a  superior  degree  of  intelligence,  \
and  that  action  is  but  a  superior  degree  of  will.

From  that  moment  morality  is  nothing  else  than  mi^LOi
being.  Immorality,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  dividing  into  two
C^rT  opposition  of  different  faculties,  which  limit  each
other.  Hypocrisy  consists  in  checking  the  natural  expres-
sion of  thought,  and  in  substituting  a  contrary  expression
for  it ;  in  this  sense  it  could  be  said  that,  in  essence,  immo-
rality'is  hypocrisy,  and,  consequently,  a  check  on  the
development  of  the  being.*

3. The  existence  of  a  certain  impersonal  duty  created  by  the

*  This  theory  has  been  completed  by  important  passages  in  "  Educa-
tion and  Heredity,"  translated  by  W.  J.  Greenstreet,  M.A and  put
lished  in  the  Contemporary  Science  Series. (See  pp.  75-79-)


94 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

growing  fusion  of  the  sensibilities,  and  by  the  more  sociable
character  of  the  higher  pleasures.  Third  equivalent  of  duty.
— A  new  kind  of  obligation  is  derived  from  the  very  nature
of  sensibility,  which  tends  to  transform  itself  by  the  effect
of  evolution.  The  superior  pleasures  which  daily  form  a
greater  part  of  human  life — pleasures  of  art,  pleasures  of
reasoning,  of  learning,  and  of  understanding,  of  rinding  out
things,  etc. — require  far  less,  as  regards  external  conditions,
and  are  much  more  accessible  to  all,  than  the  really  selfish
pleasures.  The  happiness  of  a  thinker  or  of  an  artist  is  a
happiness  which  costs  little.  With  a  piece  of  bread,  a  book,
or  a  landscape,  you  may  taste  a  pleasure  infinitely  superior
to  that  of  an  imbecile  in  a  carriage  with  armorial  bearings,
drawn  by  four  horses.  The  superior  pleasures  are,  therefore,
both  more  intimate,  deeper,  and  more  free  of  expense
(without  always  being  completely  so).  They  tend  to  separate
beings  far  less  than  do  the  inferior  pleasures.

Thus,  by  a  natural  evolution,  the  origin  of  a  great  many
•of  our  pleasures  seems  to  ascend  from  the  outward  to  the
inward.  The  man  of  feeling  possesses,  in  his  own  activity,
.a  source  of  very  varied  enjoyment,  and  that  sometimes
independently  of  outward  things.  Does  it  follow  from  this
that  he  will  shut  himself  up  in  himself,  and  will  suffice  unto
himself,  like  the  stoic  sage  ?  Far  from  it ;  intellectual
pleasures  have  this  remarkable  characteristic — that  they  are
both  the  most  inward  and  the  most  communicative,  the  most
individual  and  the  most  social,  pleasures  of  our  being.
Bring  together  thinkers,  or  lovers  of  the  beautiful  (as  long
as  there  is  no  personal  rivalry  between  them) ;  they  will  like
each  other  more  quickly,  and  in  any  case  more  truly,  than
other  people  ;  they  will  at  once  recognise  that  they  live
in  the  same  sphere — that  of  thought ;  they  will  feel  them-
selves as  of  the  same  country.  This  bond  which  will  be
established  between  them  will  also  link  their  conduct,  and
will  impose  on  them,  in  their  mutual  relations,  a  particular
kind  of  obligation  ;  it  is  an  emotional  bond — a  union


THE  CREATION  OF  OBLIGATION.  95

produced  by  the  complete,  or  partial,  harmony  of  sentiments
and  of  thoughts.

The  higher  we  rise  in  the  scale  of  evolution,  the  more  do
the  pleasures  of  mankind  seem  to  partake  of  a  social  and
sociable  character. The  idea  becomes  one  of  the  essential
sources  of  pleasure. Now,  the  idea  is  a  kind  of  contingent
common  to  all  human  brains ;  it  is  a  universal  conscious-
ness, more  or  less  made  up  of  individual  consciousness. As
the  part  played  by  ideas  in  the  life  of  every  one  of  us
increases,  we  find  that  the  part  of  the  universal  increases
also,  and  tends  to  predominate  over  the  individual. Con-
sciousness then  becomes  more  easy  of  penetration. He  who
is  born  to-day  is  meant  for  a  much  more  intensely  intel-
lectual life  than  he  who  was  born  a  hundred  thousand  years
ago  ;  and  yet,  notwithstanding  the  intensity  of  his  individual
life,  his  intelligence  will  be  found  to  be,  so  to  speak,  much
more  socialized; precisely  because  of  its  being  so  much
richer,  it  will  possess  much  less  for  itself  alone. It  is  the
same  with  sensibility. We have already  asked, in  com-
menting on  Epicurus,  what,  after  all,  would  a  purely  personal
and  selfish  pleasure  be  ? Do  pleasures  of  that  kind  exist,
and  what  share  in  life  do  they  have  ? To  this  ever-present
question  we  answer,  as  we  did  before  :  We  see,  in  descending
the  scale  of  beings,  that  the  sphere  in  which  each  of  them
moves  is  small,  and  almost  shut  off;  if,  on  the  contrary,  we
ascend  towards  superior  beings,  we  see  their  sphere  of  action
open  out,  become  larger,  lose  itself  in  the  sphere  of  action
of  other  beings. The  self  distinguishes  itself  less  and  less
from  the  other  selves— or,  rather,  it  has  more  and  more  need
of  them,  in  order  to  form  itself  and  exist. Now,  this  sort
of  scale,  along  which  human  thought  moves,  has  already  been
partly  travelled  over  by  the  human  species  in  its  evolution.
Its  point  of  departure  was,  it  is  true,  selfishness  ;  but  selfish-
ness, by  virtue  of  the  very  fecundity  of  all  life,  was  obliged
to  enlarge  itself,  to  create  outside  of  itself  new  centres  for
its  own  action. At  the  same  time,  sentiments  correlative  to


96 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

this  centrifugal  tendency  are  born  from  time  to  time,  and,
so  to  speak,  overlap  the  selfish  sentiments  which  served
them  as  principles.  We  are  on  the  way  to  an  epoch  in
which  primitive  selfishness  will  recede  more  and  more,  be
driven  back,  and  become  more  and  more  unknown  to  us.

In  this  ideal  era  a  being  will,  so  to  speak,  no  longer  be
able  to  enjoy  himself  alone ;  his  pleasure  will  be  like  a
concert,  in  which  the  pleasure  of  others  must  form  a.  part,
by  virtue  of  its  being  a  necessary  element ;  and  is  it  not
already  so  in  many  cases  at  present  ?  If,  in  life  generally,
the  part  left  to  mere  selfishness  is  compared  with  that  which
belongs  to  "  altruism,"  it  will  be  seen  how  relatively  small
the  first  is ;  even  the  most  selfish  pleasures,  being  entirely
physical — such  as  the  pleasure  of  eating  and  drinking —
acquire  their  full  charm  only  when  we  share  them  with
others.  We  shall  find  this  predominant  part  played  by  the
social  sentiments  in  all  our  enjoyments  and  all  our  pains.
Moreover,  pure  selfishness  would  not  only  be,  as  we  have
shown,  a  kind  of  self-mutilation  ;  it  would  be  an  impossibility.
Neither  my  sufferings  nor  my  pleasures  are  absolutely  my
own.  The  thorny  leaves  of  the  aloe,  before  being  fully
developed  and  spread  out  in  enormous  bands,  remain  for  a
long  while  folded  one  over  the  other,  forming,  as  it  were,
one  single  heart.  In  that  stage  the  thorns  of  every  leaf  are
imprinted  on  the  neighbouring  leaf.  Later  on  all  these
leaves  grow  freely,  and  spread  themselves  out ;  yet  this  mark
remains,  and  even  grows  with  their  growth.  It  is  a  seal  of  /
pain,  stamped  upon  them  for  life.  The  same  thing  happens
in  our  heart,  in  which  all  the  joys  and  pains  of  mankind
are  imprinted  from  the  very  moment  of  its  birth.  On  each
one  of  us,  whatever  we  may  do,  this  mark  remains  stamped.
In  the  same  way,  in  short,  as  the  self  is,  for  contemporary
psychology,  an  illusion  ;  as  there  is  no  separate  personality ;
and  as  we  are  composed  of  an  infinite  number  of  beings,
and  of  small  consciences  and  states  of  consciousness;  so
selfish  pleasure  may  be  said  to  be  an  illusion.  My  own


CREATION  OF  OBLIGATION.  97

pleasure  does  not  exist  without  the  pleasure  of  others ;  I
feel  that  the  whole  community  has,  more  or  less,  to  con-
tribute to  it,  from  the  small  family  circle  which  surrounds  us
to  the  large  community  in  which  I  live.*

Thus,  then,  a  truly  positive  moral  science  may,  to  a  certain
extent,  'speak  of  obligation ;  and  that,  on  the  one  hand,
without  intervention  of  any  mystical  idea,  and  on  the  other
without  appealing  (as  Bain  does)  to  an  exterior  and  social
compulsion,  or  to  an  inward  "fear."  No  ;  it  is  sufficient  t<
consider  the  normal  directions  of  psychic  life.  There  will
always  be  found  a  kind  of  inner  pressure  exercised  by  the
activity  itself  in  these  directions ;  the  moral  agent  will,
by  a  both  natural  and  rational  inclination,  feel  itself  driven
in  that  sense,  and  it  will  recognise  that  it  has  to  make  a
kind  of  inner  coup  Mtat  to  escape  that  pressure.  It  is  this
coup  d'etat  which  we  call  fault,  or  crime.  In  committing  i
the  individual  does  wrong  to  himself;  he  decreases  and
voluntarily  extinguishes  something  of  his  physical  or  mental

life.

Moral  obligation,  which  has  its  root  in  the  very  function-)
of  life,  therefore  happens  to  come  in  principle  before  thinking
consciousness,  and  springs  from  the  obscure  and  unconscious
depths  of  our  being-or,  if  one  prefers  to  put  it  so,  from
the  sphere  of  spontaneous  and  synthetical  consciousness.
The  sentiment  of  natural  obligation  may,  in  a  great  measure,
be  brought  back  to  this  formula  :  I  ascertain  in  myself,  by
means  of  reflective  consciousness,  certain  powers  and  modi-
fications, which,  however,  do  not  spring  therefrom,  but
which  spring  from  unconscious  and  sub-conscious  depths  ir
myself  and  which  urge  me  in  a  certain  fixed  direction.
Thus  across  the  luminous  sphere  of  consciousness  are
flashing  rays  of  heat  from  that  obscure  fire  which  constitute
the  inner  life.

*  See  our  "  Morale  d'Epicure"  (second  edition),  p.  288.


H


98 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.


CHAPTER IV.

The  Sentiment  of  Obligation  from  the  Point  of  View  of
Mental  Dynamics  as  Impulsive  OP  Repressive  Force.

IN  whatever  manner  duty  may  be  metaphysically  or  morally
represented,  it  is  not,  with  regard  to  other  motives  and
springs  of  action,  without  a  certain  psycho-mechanical
power.  Dynamically  considered,  the  sentiment  of  obliga-
tion is  a  force  acting  in  time  according  to  a  determinate
direction  with  more  or  less  intensity.  We,  therefore,  have
to  find  out  how  these  powers  of  action  have  been  born
in  us — these  impulsive  forces  which  are,  at  the  same  time,
ideas  and  sentiments.  We  should  like  to  sketch  here  the
dynamic  genesis  of  the  sentiment  of  obligation  and  of  its
dynamic  action,  so  that  in  future  we  may  look  upon  it,
not  as  a  limitation  or  restriction  of  activity,  but  as  the  very
consequence  of  its  expansion.  A  man  celebrated  for  his
courage  and  integrity  (Daumesnil)  said,  one  day,  to  a
minister  of  Charles  X. :  "I  do  not  follow  my  conscience  ;  I
am  driven  by  it."  According  to  this  very  delicate  distinction,
the  impulses  of  the  moral  and  social  order  may  be  divided
into  two  classes.  By  the  one,  we  are  literally  driven  forward
by  the  sentiment  of  duty  without  having  time  to  discuss,
to  deliberate,  to  reason  ;  by  the  other,  we  allow  ourselves
to  be  dragged  along  in  its  course  with  a  more  precise
consciousness  of  a  possible  and  already  real  resistance  of  a
certain  independence.

A  characteristic  example  of  impulsive  and  spontaneous
sentiment  is  given  us  by  some  poor  labourers  in  a
lime-kiln  in  the  Pyrenees.  One  of  them,  having  to
descend  into  the  kiln  to  look  after  something  which
had  gone  wrong,  fell  down  suffocated.  Another,  hurry-
ing to  his  assistance,  also  fell.  A  woman,  witnessing  the
accident,  called  for  help.  Other  labourers  hastened  to
the  spot.  For  the  third  time  a  man  went  into  the  burning


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.  99

kiln  and  immediately  succumbed. A  fourth,  a  fifth  man
jumped  into  it,  and  succumbed. Only  one  man  remained  ;
he  approached,  and  was  ready  to  jump,  when  the  woman
who™  standing  on  the  spot,  clutched ^him  *****
and half  mad  with  terror,  kept  him  back  on  the  edge
\Le  later,  when  the  magistrates  arrived  at  the  place  of
fh leaded to hold  an inquest,  the only  survivor  was
questioned  on  his  thoughtless  self-sacrifice,  and  one  of
magistrates  began  very  gravely  to  point out  to him  the
irrationality  of  his  conduct. The  man  gave  this  admirable
answer-  "My  comrades  were  dying;  I  felt  driven  to  go
In Th  s'  example  the sentiment  of moral obligation  and
human  solidarity  had,  in  appearance,  lost  its  rational  basis.
It  was,  however,  still  sufficiently  powerful  to  successively
drive  five  men  to  the  useless  sacrifice  of  their  lives It  wiU
not  be  disputed  that,  in  this  case,  the  sentiment  of  duty
appeared  more  in  the  form  of  a  spontaneous  impulse-of  a
Sudden  overflow  of  inward  life  towards  others,  than  in  the
form  of  a  deliberate  respect  for  an  abstract  "moral  law or
of  a  search  for  "pleasure" or  "utility" Moreover let  it
be  noted  that,  with  the  development  of  human  ^teffig*K*
and  sentiment,  it  is  impossible  to  discover  the  moral  ft£to
in  an  almost  reflex  state  without  there  being  mixed  up  with
it  general  and  generous,  even  metaphysical,  ideas.

\t  other  times  the  spontaneous  sentiment  of  duty  instead
of  inciting  to  action,  stops  it  suddenly.  Then  may  develop
what  Messrs.  Maudsley  and  Ribot,  with  the  physiologists,
would  call  a  power  of  suspension  or  of  "inhibition"  not  les
sudden  and  violent  than  the  power  of  impulse.  I  was
still  a  little  fellow  in  skirts,"  the  American  preacher  Parker,
tells  us,  "  and  only  four  years  old.  I  had  never  killed  the
smallest  creature;  yet  I  had  seen  other  &**"£*
themselves  by  killing  birds,  squirrels,  and  other  htt

animals One day I discovered, m a ^.^^

pond,  a  small  speckled  tortoise  warming  itself  in  the  sun.
I  lifted  my  stick  to  give  it  a  knock Suddenly  something


100 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

held  back  my  arm,  and  I  heard  a  strong,  clear  voice  within
me  saying,  That  is  wicked  !  Quite  surprised  at  this  new
sensation,  this  unknown  power  which  in  me,  and  in  spite
of  me,  opposed  my  actions,  I  kept  my  stick  lifted  up  in  the

air  until  I  had  lost  sight  of  the  tortoise I  must  own  that

no  other  event  of  my  life  has  left  such  a  deep  and  lasting
impression  upon  me."  In  this  second  example  the  sudden
action  of  feeling  is  still  more  remarkable  than  in  the  pre-
ceding one,  because  it  suspends  action  already  begun,  and
opposes  a  sudden  obstacle  to  the  nervous  discharge  ready
to  be  sent  forth.  It  is  a  coup  de  theatre,  a  sudden  revela-
tion. The  power  of  the  sentiment  is  made  more  evident
by  suspension  than  by  impulsion ;  by  prohibition  rather
than  by  command.  Moreover,  after  an  experience  of  that
kind,  the  sentiment  of  what  must  be  done  may,  to  the
thoughtful  conscience,  at  once  assume  a  mystic  character
which  it  does  not  always  have  in  other  cases.  When  the
intelligence  is,  in  so  sudden  a  way,  confronted  with  a  deep,
strong  instinct,  it  tends  towards  a  kind  of  religious  respect.
Thus,  from  the  restricted  point  of  view  of  pure  mental
dynamics  which  we  adopt,  duty  can  already  produce  a
sentiment  of  respect  which  it  owes,  partly  to  its  great  power
of  arrest,  partly  to  its  mysterious  origin.

The  force  of  the  moral  sentiment  acquires  a  more  and
more  remarkable  character,  if  it  shows  itself  in  the  form,
not  of  sudden  impulse  or  repression,  but  as  an  inward
pressure,  a  constant  tension.  In  most  cases,  and  with
most  people,  the  sentiment  of  what  must  be  done  is  not
violent,  but  it  is  durable.  In  default  of  intensity,  it  has
its  advantage  in  time,  which  is  as  yet  the  most  powerful  of
factors.

A  tension  not  very  strong,  but  acting  continuously  and
always  in  the  same  direction,  must  necessarily  conquer
resistances  which  are  much  stronger,  but  which  neutralize
each  other.  When,  for  the  first  time,  the  idea  of  helping
France  entered  the  soul  of  Joan  of  Arc,  this  idea  did  not


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.


2


—  .  -  —  '


A


102 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

of  an  impersonal  and  generous  inclination,  the  experience  of
its  indestructibility"  There  is,  moreover,  no  distinct  con-
sciousness of  the  bonds  of  obligation  until  there  has  been
more  or  less  a  feeling  of  remorse — that  is  to  say,  persistence
of  the  instinct  in  spite  of  its  violation.  Mistake  is  a
necessary  element  in  the  formation  of  thoughtful  moral
consciousness.  In  reality,  it  is  the  idea  of  time  which
begins  to  give  its  particular  character  to  that  instinct  of
duty  in  which  Kant  saw  only  the  manifestation  of  the
intemporal.  Under  the  sway  of  passion  the  actual  intensity
of  the  inclinations  alone  enters  into  the  sum  of  forces  which
act  on  the  mind.  The  future  and  the  past  have  no  influence.
Now,  the  past  and  the  future,  remembered  or  foreshadowed,
are  a  condition  of  morality.  The  pressure  of  the  great
instincts,  useful  to  the  species,  grows  infinitely  greater  and
greater  if  in  our  imagination  it  becomes  multiplied  by
every  moment  of  time.  A  being  to  become  moral  must
possess  consciousness  of  the  duration  of  time.

One  knows  the  examples  by  which  Darwin  shows  that,  if
animals  had  our  intelligence,  their  instinct  would  be  replaced
by  a  sentiment  of  obligation.  This  sentiment  of  obligation
— feeling — from  the  point  of  view  of  dynamics,  is  inde-
pendent of  effectively  moral  or  non-moral  direction  of  the
instinct ;  it  depends  solely  on  its  intensity,  its  duration,  and
on  the  resistance  or  assistance  which  it  meets  in  its  environ-
ment. "  Let  us  suppose,"  Darwin  says,  "  to  take  an  extreme
case,  that,  if  men  had  been  born  under  the  same  conditions
of  life  as  the  bees,  without  doubt  our  non-married  females,
following  the  example  of  the  work-bees,  would  consider  it
their  sacred  duty  to  kill  their  brothers,  and  the  mothers
would  try  to  kill  their  pregnant  daughters,  without  anyone
interfering."*

*  See  "The  Descent  of  Man  "  and  our  "  Morale  Anglaise  Con  tern -
poraine."  An  empirical  verification  of  these  theories  on  the  relation
of  instinct  and  of  obligation  may  be  sought.  To  accomplish  this  it
would  be  necessary-  to  continue  in  a  methodical  way  the  experiments


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.  IO3

Now,  why  is  it  impossible  to  satisfy  the  moral  instinct—
which  in  man  is  found  to  really  coincide  with  the  social
and  humanitarian  instinct — and  why  does  it  not  take  the
periodical  form  of  the  other  instincts  ?  There  are  two
sorts  of  instincts— the  one  tends  to  repair  the  expenditure
of  force,  the  other  to  produce  this  expenditure.  The  first
are  limited  by  their  very  object ;  they  disappear  when  once
the  want  is  satisfied  ;  they  are  periodical  and  non-continuous.
Polyphagy,  for  instance,  is  rare.  The  others  tend  very  often

commenced  by  Messrs.  Charcot  and  Richet,  on  what  we  will  call  moral
S2iggestions,  made  in  a  state  of  somnambulism.  According  to  these
experiments,  a  command  given  to  someone  in  a  state  of  somnambulism
during  his  sleep  is  executed  by  the  person,  sooner  or  later,  when  he
wakes  up,  without  his  being  able  to  himself  interpret  the  reasons  which
have  urged  him  to  do  the  action.  The  magnetizer  thus  seems  to  have
been  able  to  create  at  all  points  an  inward  tendency,  an  inclination
persistent  in  the  background,  and  imposing  itself  on  the  will  of  the
patient.  In  these  curious  examples  the  dream  of  the  somnambulist
still  dominates  and  directs  his  life  after  his  awakening  ;  it  is  like  an
artificial  instinct  in  its  birth.  Here  is,  for  instance,  a  curious  case
observed  by  Mr.  Richet.  It  deals  with  a  woman  who  had  the  mania
of  not  taking  sufficient  food.  One  day,  during  her  sleep,  Mr.  Richet
told  her  that  she  ought  to  eat  a  good  deal.  When  awakened,  she  had
completely  forgotten  the  injunction.  However,  one  of  the  following
days,  the  nursing  sister  of  the  hospital  took  Mr.  Richet  aside,  to  tell
him  that  she  could  not  make  out  the  change  which  had  taken  place  in
the  patient.  "  She  now  always  asks  for  more  food  than  I  give  her,"  the
sister  said.  If  these  facts  were  carefully  observed,  we  have  here,  not
only  the  execution  of  a  particular  order,  but  unconscious  impulse,
approaching  very  closely  to  natural  instinct.  In  short,  every  natural  or
moral  instinct  is  derived,  as  Cuvier  remarks,  from  a  sort  of  somnam-
bulism, because  it  gives  us  an  order  of  which  we  ignore  the  reason  ;  we
hear  the  "  voice  of  conscience  "  without  knowing  whence  it  comes.  To
vary  the  experiment,  one  ought  to  order  the  patient,  not  only  to  eat,  but,
for  instance,  to  get  up  early  every  day,  to  work  steadily.  One  might  in
this  way  succeed  in  modifying  the  moral  character  of  persons  by  degrees,
and  the  state  of  somnambulism  might  become  important  as  a  means
of  action  in  the  moral  hygiene  of  some  sick  people.  If  it  were  possible
thus  to  create  an  artificial  instinct,  undoubtedly  a  kind  of  mystical
obligation  would  attach  to  it— provided  it  did  not  meet  with  resistance


104 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

to  become  continuous  and  unsatisfied.  Thus,  in  certain
depraved  organisms  the  sexual  instinct  may  lose  its  habitual
character  of  periodicity  and  regularity,  to  become  nympho-
mania  or  satyriasis.  Every  instinct  urging  to  an  expen-
diture of  force  may  thus  become  insatiable — intel-
lectual debauch,  love  of  money,  -  of  play,  of  fighting,  of
travel,  etc.  We  have  to  distinguish,  therefore,  between
instincts  demanding  varied  expenditure  of  force  and  those

from  other  pre-existent  and  more  vivid  inclinations.  An  inverse  experi-
ment might  also  be  made,  to  see  if  it  would  not  be  possible  to  annul,
by  a  repeated  series  of  orders,  such  or  such  a  natural  instinct.  It  is
said  that  a  somnambulist  can  be  made  to  lose  his  memory,  for  instance,
with  regard  to  names  ;  he  can  even  be  made  to  lose  his  whole  memory,
according  to  Mr.  Richet  (Rev.  Pkzlos.,  October  8th,  1880).  He  adds:
"  This  experiment  must  only  be  attempted  with  the  utmost  prudence  ;
I  have,  in  such  a  case,  seen  so  great  a  terror  and  such  a  disorder  of  the
intelligence  caused,  persisting  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  that  I
should  not  like  to  re-commence  this  dangerous  attempt  often."  If  one
identifies  memory,  as  most  of  the  psychologists  do,  with  habit  and  instinct,
one  would  think  it  would  be  also  possible  in  a  somnambulist  to  provision
ally  annihilate,  or  at  least  weaken,  instincts  even  of  the  most  fundamental
or  most  obligatory  kind,  such  as  the  maternal  instinct,  modesty,  etc.
It  remains  to  be  known  if  this  suppression  of  instinct  would  not  leave
some  traces  after  the  awakening.  Then  the  power  of  resistance  of
diverse  instincts  might  be  tested — for  instance,  of  the  moral  instincts  ;
and  it  might  be  shown  which  are  the  deepest  and  most  tenacious,  the
selfish  or  the  altruistic  impulses.  Anyway,  the  experiment  of  destroying
bad  habits  or  hereditary  manias  might  be  attempted  ;  it  might  be  seen
if  a  series  of  orders  or  advice  often  repeated  during  sleep  could,  for
instance,  lessen  delusions  of  grandeur  and  persecutions.  The  madman,
believing  himself  to  be  an  object  of  hatred,  could  be  commanded  to
love  his  enemies  ;  prayer  might  be  forbidden  to  the  madman  who
believed  he  was  thus  entering  into  direct  communication  with  God,  etc.
In  other  words,  one  would  try  to  counterbalance  a  natural  mania  by  an
artificial  impulse,  created  during  sleep.  Somnambulism  would  thus  be
found  to  be  a  subject  of  richer  psychological  and  moral  observation  than
insanity.  Both  are  derangements  of  the  mental  mechanism ;  but  in
the  state  of  somnambulism  this  derangement  can  be  calculated  and
regulated  by  the  magnetizer.  Since  the  first  edition  of  this  book  many
experiments  of  this  kind  have  been  made,  and  with  success .


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.

demanding  always  the  same  expenditure. Jho-  jhfch
belone  to  one  particular  organ  are  very  easily  exhau,
Those which include a series of indefinite tendencies
(as  for  instance,  love  of  exercise,  of  movement,  of  action)
can  naumlly  be  satisfied  less  easily,  because  the  variety  of
xpenditureygives  a  kind  of  res, ?*%**£*££
nstinct  belongs,  as  mental  force,  to  this  land  ;  it  is  ther.
"those  which  easi!y  become  insatiabl,  .and  I  continuous
What  happens  if  some  instinct  or  other  has  *"*  *£>™
insatiable  /Every  time  an  instinct  is  exercised  which  is  b
Me  vatd  in  its  manifestations  there  follows  such  an  exhaus-
tion of  the  organism  that  it  is  unable  to  repair  the  expend*
The  nymphomaniac  has  no  children.  A  too  great  expenditure
oTbra  n-Le  also  checks  fecundity-even  causes  untimely
death. The  exaggerated  love  of  danger  and  of  war  rnul-
tiplies  the  risks  and  diminishes  the  chances  of  life. But
there  are  some  rare  tendencies  which  may  become  insatiable
without  checking  the  multiplication  of  the  species  but,  ^on
the  contrary,  favouring  it. First  m  the  list  ™^™[
the  altruistic  sentiment-that  is,  the  one  which  could
produce  a  strong  feeling  which  persists  after  a  %***£
fication. Even  from  the  physiological  point  of  view,  it  is
pTssMe  to  thus  show  the  necessary  formation  of  the  soc,al


Tht  instinct,  which  prompts  the  artist  to  seek
beautiful  forms,  to  act  according  to  a  certain  order  and
niure  to  perfect  everything  he  does-this  mstmct  is  very
mu"h  like  moral  inclinations,  and,  like  these  ,  «n  g«
to  a  certain  sentiment  of  rudimentary  obligation  The  artist
feels  inwardly  obliged  to  produce,  to  ^'  and  '^J*
harmonious  works  j  he  is  as  vividly  wounded  by  an

aste  as  many  conscientious  people  by  a  mistake
conduct he  incessantly  feels,  with  regard  to  forms  and

"o  the  moral  judgment. Even  the  artizan,  the  skilled  work-


106 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

man,  does  whatever  he  works  at  with  satisfaction  ;  loves  his
work;  cannot  consent  to  let  it  remain  unfinished  and
unpolished.  This  instinct,  which  is  to  be  traced  even
in  the  bird  building  its  nest,  and  which  has  burst  forth  with
extraordinary  power  in  certain  artistic  temperaments,  might
undoubtedly,  in  a  people  like  the  Greeks,  in  its  development,
give  rise  to  an  (esthetic  obligation  similar  to  moral  obligation  ;
but  the  aesthetic  instinct  was  only  indirectly  connected  with
the  propagation  of  the  species ;  for  this  reason  it  has  neither
become  sufficiently  general,  nor  has  it  acquired  sufficient
intensity.  It  has  only  become  of  real  importance  where  it
was  in  touch  with  sexual  selection.  In  the  relation  of  the
sexes  the  aesthetic  inclination  becomes  something  like  a
moral  bond ;  the  aversion,  if  violated,  ends  in  a  kind  of
remorse.  The  aesthetic  aversion  which  an  individual  feels
with  regard  to  certain  individuals  of  the  other  sex  is  noticed
even  among  animals  ;  it  is  known  that  a  stallion  will  disdain
to  be  coupled  with  too  coarse  mares.

In  man  we  find  that  this  same  sentiment — connected,
moreover,  with  many  others,  social  or  moral — will  produce
far  more  marked  effects.  The  negro  women — whom  their
masters  want  to  pair  like  animals,  and  so  marry  by  force
to  the  males  chosen  for  them — have  even  gone  so  far  as  to
strangle  the  children  of  this  enforced  union  (and  yet  pro-
miscuousness  is  frequent  among  negroes).  A  man  who
tries  to  gratify  his  brutal  desire  with  a  woman  physically
and  aesthetically  too  much  below  him  feels  afterwards  an
inward  shame ;  he  has  the  feeling  of  it  being  a  degradation
of  the  race.  The  young  girl  who,  in  obedience  to  her
parents,  marries  a  man  who  displeases  her,  may  afterwards
feel  a  disgust  strong  enough,  near  enough  to  moral  remorse,
to  throw  herself  out  of  the  window  of  the  nuptial  chamber.
In  all  these  instances  the  aesthetic  sentiment  produces  the
same  effect  as  the  moral  sentiment.  Genius  and  beauty
bring  obligations.  Like  every  power  discovered  in  our-
selves, they  clothe  us  in  our  own  eyes  with  a  certain  dignity,


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.  I°7

and  they  impose  on  us  a  duty. If  genius  were  absolutely
necessary  to  every  individual  in  order  to  conquer  in  t
struggle  for  life,  it  would  undoubtedly  have  become  general.
Art  would  be  to-day  a  groundwork  common  to  man


no those  instincts  which,  apart  from  the  moral  and
esthetic  instinct,  has  been  able  to  so  sufficiently  develop
itself  in  certain  individuals  as  to  make  it  possible  for
English  school  to  regard  it  as  an  analogue  to  the  sentiment
of  obligation  is  the  inclination  so  often  given  as  an  mstan.
by  this'  school-viz,  avarice. But,  even  from  this  narrow
and  still  gross  point  of  view  which  we  here  take,  let  us
nodce  J  inferiority  of  this  impulse  in  «««£°"*
the  moral  instinct. Avarice,  while  diminishing  the  comfc
of  life,  has  the  same  effect  as  poverty  ;  it  does  not  promote
fecundity,  for  the  miser  is  afraid  of  having  children. Besides
inTe  ch  Id,  whose  development  has  been  cramped  by  the
paternal  Avarice,  a  reaction  is  very  often  produced  which
™ompt *t  to  prodigality. In  short-and  this  is  a  decisive
^son-lricl  no?  having  any  social  utility,  £  not  b-
encouraged  by  opinion. Let  us  imagine  a  society  of  misers
EvTy  one  of  them  will  have  but  one  aim-to  transform  hi
neighbour  into  a  spendthrift,  so  as  to  be  able  to  lay  hand
on  his  gold. If,  nevertheless,  against  all  possibility,  miser
could  five  with  perfect  mutual  understanding  and  mutual
ncitement  to  avarice,  it  would  not  be  long  bete  we  s  .  uld
see  a  «  duty  of  parsimony  "  spring  up-a  sentiment  as


for  having  Wrf  in  this  obligation  than  in  e,ther  of  the
the  foregoing  it  may  already  be  concluded,  inde-


108 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

pendently  of  many  other  considerations,  that  it  is  impossible
that  the  different  moral  duties,  divers  forms  of  the  social  or
altruistic  instinct,  should  not  be  born ;  and  hardly  any
others  could  spring  up.  A  fresh  reason,  which  ought  to
assure  the  triumph  of  the  moral  instinct,  is  the  impossi-
bility of  satisfying  remorse,  of  satisfying  it  by  a  good  action
— as  one  satisfies  hunger.  When  once  hunger  is  stilled,
the  pain  felt  becomes  but  a  vague  remembrance,  which  we
at  last  completely  lose.  It  is  not  the  same  with  remorse  ;
the  past  seems  indelible,  and  is  ever  smarting.  For  the  rest,
no  wants  which  are  not  too  merely  animal  admit  of  such
compensations  as  hunger  and  thirst  allow.  Thus  it  is  with
love.  You  may  everlastingly  regret  the  supreme  hour  of
love  which  the  beloved  woman  offered  you,  and  which  you
allowed  to  slip  away,  without  having  ever  been  able  to  win
it  back  again.  The  lover  cannot,  as  in  a  comedy  of  Shake-
speare, replace  one  woman  by  another.

"  Je  ne  vis  qu'elle  etait  belle

Qu'en  sortant  des  grands  bois  sourds

Soit,  n'y  pensons  plus,  dit-elle,
Et  mot,  fypense  tonjours"

In  short,  the  most  considerable  advantage  of  the  moral
instincts,  as  instincts,  is  that  to  them  belongs  the  last  word.
If  I  have  sacrificed  myself,  I  am  either  dead,  or  I  survive
with  the  satisfaction  of  duty  fulfilled.  The  selfish  instincts
are  those  which  are  always  thwarted  in  their  triumph.  To
enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  fulfilled  duty  is  to  forget  the  trouble
we  took  in  fulfilling  it.  On  the  contrary,  the  thought  that
we  have  failed  in  our  duty  somehow  embitters  even  our
pleasure.  In  general  the  remembrance  of  work,  of  strain,
of  effort  employed  for  the  satisfaction  of  any  instinct,  is
soon  effaced ;  but  the  remembrance  of  the  unsatisfied
instinct  persists  as  long  as  the  instinct  itself.  Leander
soon  forgot  with  Hero  the  great  effort  made  in  crossing  the
Hellespont ;  he  would  not  have  been  able  to  forget  Hero
in  the  embrace  of  another  lover.


THE  SENTIMENT  OF  OBLIGATION.

The  moral  instinct  being  once  established  in  its  generality
with  its  power  in  constant  application,  in  what  order  has  it
riven  rise  to  the  different  particular  moral  mstmcts,  the


inward  dignity  ;  next,  they  place  the  duties  of  justice  befoi


social  and  derived  virtues. Temperance for

by  means  of  sexual  ^  selecuo  imdenttnd them

lTa  ni,  be  reduced  to  duties  towards


HO MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

obligatory  character.  To  throw  one's  self  into  a  fight  to
help  a  comrade  will  seem  to  a  savage  (and  to  many  civilized
men)  more  obligatory  and  more  honourable  than  to  abstain
from  robbing  him  of  his  wife.  The  people  in  Australia,
Cunningham  says,  think  no  more  of  the  life  of  a  man  than
of  that  of  a  butterfly ;  they  are,  for  all  that,  none  the  less
susceptible,  when  the  moment  comes,  of  charity,  or  even  of
heroism.  The  Polynesians  commit  child-murder  without  a
shadow  of  remorse  ;  but  they  can  very  tenderly  love  the
children  whom  they  thought  fit  to  spare.  There  is,  in  the
effort  demanded  by  abstention,  an  often  greater  working  of
the  will  than  in  acting,  only  it  is  less  visible  ;  hence  moralists
have  been  inclined  to  attribute  a  secondary  importance  to
abstention.  One  does  not  see  the  effort  of  Hercules  in
lifting  up  a  heavy  burden  with  outstretched  arm,  precisely
because  the  arm  is  motionless,  and  does  not  tremble  ;  but
this  immobility  costs  more  inward  energy  than  many  move-
ments.

to  this  point  we  have  considered  the  moral  sentiment
only  as  a  sentiment  conscious  of  its  relations  to  the  other
sentiments  of  the  human  soul,  but  unconscious  of  its  source
and  its  hidden  causes — as  non-philosophic,  in  short.  What
is  going  to  happen  when  the  sentiment  becomes  reflective,
rational — when  the  moral  man  wants  to  explain  the
causes  of  its  action  and  to  justify  it  ?  If  we  must  believe
Mr.  Spencer,  moral  obligation,  which  implies  resistance  and
effort,  must  some  day  disappear  to  make  room  for  a  kind
of-flaoral  spontaneousness.  The  altruistic  instinct  will  be
so  incomparably  strong  that  without  struggle  it  will  bear
us  along.  We  shall  not  even  estimate  its  power,  because
we  shall  not  feel  tempted  to  resist  it.  We  might  say  that
at  that  time  the  force  of  tension  which  the  idea  of  duty
possesses  will  transform  itself  into  a  living  force  as  soon  as
there  shall  be  an  opportunity,  and  we  shall,  so  to  speak,
only  become  conscious  of  it  as  a  living  force.  Mr.  Spencer
even  says  the  day  will  come  when  the  altruistic  instinct


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.  HI

will  be  so  powerful  that  men  will  vie  with  each  other  in
finding  opportunities  of  exercising  it- opportunities  of  self-
sacrifice  and  death. Mr.  Spencer  goes  too  far. He  forgets
that  while civilization  tends to indefinitely  develop the
altruistic  instinct, while it gradually  changes the  higher
rules  of morality  into  mere  rules  of social  propriety,  of
civility almost,  on the other hand civilization infinitely
developes thoughtful intelligence, habits of  inward and
outward  observation— the  scientific  spirit,  in  short.  _ Now,
the  scientific  spirit  is  the  great  enemy  of  all  instinct;  it
is  the  dissolving force  par  excellence  of all that which
Nature  herself  has  bound. It  is  the  revolutionary  spirit
It  incessantly  struggles  against  the  spint^authority  which
is  at  the  root  of  societies  ;  it  will  also  struggle  against  the
authority  in  the  depths  of  conscience. Whatever  .origin
one  attributes  to  the  impulse  of  duty,  if  this  impulse  is  not
iustified  by  reason  it  will  find  itself  seriously  modified  by
the  continuous  development  of  reason  in  man. Hum^
nature,  said a Chinese sceptic to Mencius,  *e  farthfa
disciple of Confucius, is so  pliant and  so  flexible  that
it  resembles  the  branch  of  the  willow. Equity  and  justice
are  like  the  basket  woven  out  of  this  willow But  the
moral  being  needs  to  believe  himself  an  oak  with  a  sound
heart,  needs  to  feel  himself  not  giving  way  like  the  willow
to  the  chance  stroke  of  the  hand  which  touches  him. If
his  conscience  is but a basket  woven by  instinct  with
bending  branches,  reflection  might  easily  undo  what  instinct
had  done. The  moral  sense  will  then  lose  all  its  resistance
and  all  its  solidity. We  believe  it  is  possible  to  scientifically
prove  the  following  law:  "  Ever^Jm^ncLtend^Jo  its  <
destruction  when  it  becomes  conscious?*

*  See  our  "Morale  Anglaise  Contemporaine »  (part  ii.,  book  in,).
This* wha M.  Ribot  concedes  to  us  («'  L'Heredite  Psychology
Edition p 342); but  he  adds: "Instinct only  disappears
?  a form'  of mental activity, which takes its place  by  doing
...Intelligence  could  only  kill  the  moral  sentiment  by  finding


112 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

In  France,  as  well  as  in  England,  a  certain  number  of
objections  have  been  brought  forward  against  us,  which  tend
to  make  out  that  moral  theories  are  without  influence  in
practical  life.  We  had  shown  that  the  moral  sense,  if  hypo-
thetically  it  is  robbed  of  all  truly  rational  authority,  finds
itself  reduced  to  the  role  of  a  constant  obsession,  or  halluci-
nation. The  answer  was  made  to  us  that  the  moral  sense
has  nothing  in  common  with  hallucination  ;  for  it  is  in  no
sense  a  judgment,  neither  is  it  an  opinion.  "  Conscience
does  not  affirm,  it  commands-;  and  a  command  may  be  wise
or  foolish,  but  not  true  or  false."*  But  we,  in  our  turn,
say  that  what  precisely  constitutes  the  dogmatic  character
of  a  command  is  that  it  does  not  explain  itself  at  all  by
plausible  reasons — that  is  to  say,  that  it  corresponds  with  a
false  view  of  the  reality.  Every  command  thus  includes  an
"affirmation,"  and  implies,  not  only  "foolishness"  or
"wisdom,"  but  error  or  truth.  In  the  same  way,  every
affirmation  implicitly  includes  a  rule  of  conduct.  A  mad
person  is  not  only  "  deceived  "  by  the  ideas  which  possess
him — he  is  directed  by  them ;  our  illusions  command  and
rule  us.  The  moral  sentiment  which  keeps  me  from  killing
acts  on  me  as  a  sentiment,  by  means  of  the  same  springs  as
the  immoral  impulse  which  urges  a  maniac  to  kill ;  we  are
both  moved  in  the  same  way,  but  according  to  opposite
motives  or  springs.  One  has,  therefore,  always  to  examine
if  this,  my  motive,  possesses  more  rational  value  than  that

something  better."  Assuredly,  on  the  condition  that  the  word  better
be  taken  in  quite  a  physical  and  mechanical  sense.  For  example,  it  is
better — it  is  preferable — for  the  cuckoo  to  lay  her  eggs  in  the  nest  of
other  birds ;  but  this  does  not  seem  to  be  better,  speaking  absolutely,
nor,  above  all,  does  it  seem  so  for  the  other  birds.  An  amelioration
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  individual,  and  even  of  the  species,  might
therefore  not  always  be  identical  with  what  we  call  "  moral  ameliora-
tion." There  is  here,  at  least,  a  question  which  deserves  to  be
examined  ;  it  is  precisely  this  question  which  we  examine  in  this
volume.

*  Mr.  Pollock,  in  Mind(\v\.  iv.,  p.  446).


THE SENTIMENT OF OBLIGATION.  113

of  the  murderer.  That  is  the  question.  If,  now,  to
appreciate  the  rational  value  of  motives,  one  trusts  to  a
purely  positive  and  scientific  criterion,  a  certain  number  of
conflicts  will  be  produced  between  public  utility  and  per-
sonal utility — conflicts  which  it  is  right  to  foresee.  As  to
the  hope  that  instinct  will  be  able  to  decide  in  these  con-
flicts quite  alone,  we  do  not  believe  in  it ;  on  the  contrary,
instinct  will  be  more  and  more  altered  in  man  by  the
progress  of  reflection.

We  should  not,  therefore,  be  able  to  agree  with  our
English  critics  on  this  essential  point.  Has  the  science  of
ethics,  which  is  a  systematization  of  moral  evolution  in
humanity,  no  influence  on  this  very  evolution;  and  is  it
unable  to  modify  its  meaning  in  any  important  way  ?  In
more  general  words,  does  not  every  phenomenon,  in  becom-
ing conscious  of  itself,  change  under  the  very  influence  of
this  consciousness  ?  Elsewhere  we  have  made  the  remark
that  the  instinct  of  suckling,  so  important  in  mammifers,
to-day  tends  to  disappear  in  many  women.  There  is  a  still
much  more  essential  phenomenon — the  most  essential  of
all — that  of  generation,  which  tends  to  modify  itself  accord-
ing to  the  same  law.  In  France  (where  the  majority  of  the
people  are  not  held  back  by  religious  considerations)  the
personal  will  becomes,  in  the  sexual  act,  a  partial  substitute
for  the  instinct  of  reproduction.  Hence,  in  our  country,
the  very  slow  increase  in  population,  which  causes  both
numeral  inferiority  to  the  other  continental  nations  and
our  economic  superiority  (very  provisional,  however,  and
already  compromised).  Here,  then,  is  a  striking  instance
of  the  intervention  of  the  will  in  the  sphere  of  instinct.
Instinct,  being  no  longer  protected  by  a  religious  or  moral
creed,  becomes  powerless  to  furnish  a  rule  of  conduct.  The
rule  is  borrowed  from  purely  rational  considerations,  and
generally  from  considerations  of  mere  personal  utility — by
no  means  of  social  utility.  Yet  the  most  important  duty  of
the  individual  is  generation,  which  assures  the  duration  of

i


114 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

the  race.  Likewise,  in  many  of  the  animal  species,  the
individual  lives  only  to  breed,  and  death  follows  imme-
diately on  fecundity.  To-day  this  duty,  first  in  the  animal
scale,  finds  itself  consigned  to  the  lowest  rank  in  the  French
nation,  which,  with  deliberate  purpose,  seems  to  follow  the
maxim  of  in-fecundity.  This  is  not  the  place  to  blame,  but
merely  to  state.  The  gradual  and  necessary  disappearance
of  religion  and  absolute  morality  has  many  such  surprises
in  store  for  us.  If  there  is  nothing  in  this  to  terrify  us,  at
least  we  must  try  to  foresee  them  in  the  interest  of  science.

Another  remark.  The  mere  excess  of  scruples  may  go  so
far  as  to  dissolve  the  moral  instinct  in  the  case  of  confessors
and  their  penitents.  Bagehot  remarks  also  that  in  reasoning
excessively  about  modesty  one  may  weaken,  and  even
gradually  lose,  that  very  sentiment.  Every  time  that
reflection  is  steadily  fixed  on  an  instinct,  on  a  spontaneous
impulse,  it  tends  to  alter  the  same.  This  fact  might,  perhaps,
be  physiologically  explained  by  the  moderating  action  of  the
grey  matter  of  the  brain  on  the  secondary  nervous  centres,
and  on  every  reflex  action.  For  instance,  if  a  pianist  plays
by  heart  a  piece  studied  mechanically,  it  is  necessary  that  he
should  play  with  confidence  and  smoothness,  without  paying
too  close  an  attention  to  himself,  and  without  wanting  to
account  for  the  instinctive  movement  of  his  fingers.  To
reason  about  a  system  of  reflex  actions  or  habits  always
means  to  upset  them.*

The  moral  instinct,  which  evolution  tends  to  strengthen
in  so  many  ways,  might,  therefore,  undergo  some  alteration
by  the  excessive  development  of  thoughtful  intelligence.
Undoubtedly  one  has  to  carefully  distinguish,  in  moral
philosophy,  between  metaphysical  theories  and  practical
morality.  We  have  ourselves  elsewhere  made  this  distinc-
tion ;  but  we  cannot  agree  with  the  English  philosophers

*  See  on  this  point  the  "Problemes  de  1'Esthetique  Contemporaine,"
P-  137.


THE  SENTIMENT  OF  OBLIGATION.


that  theories  never  influence  practice,  or  at  least  influence
it  as  little  as  they  maintain  is  the  case. Messrs.  Pollock  and
Leslie  Stephen  compare  moral  philosophy  with  geometry.  The
hypotheses  relative  to  the  reality  of  duty,  Mr.  Pollock  tells  us,
have  no  more  influence  on  conduct  than  the  hypotheses
relative  to  the  reality  of  space  and  its  dimensions. Messrs.
Pollock  and  Leslie  Stephen  forget  that,  if  space  has  four
dimensions instead  of  three,  this  is  of  no  interest  either
to  my  legs  or  to  my  arms,  which  will  always  move  within
the  three  known  dimensions. If, on  the  contrary,  there
exists  for  me  the  means  to  move  according  to  new  dimen-
sions, and  if  that  might  be  an  advantage  to  me  in  some  way
or  other,  I  should  hasten  to  try,  and  I  should  work  with  all
my strength  to  destroy  my  primitive intuition of  space.
This  is  precisely what happens in moral  philosophy;  a
whole  field  of  activity,  closed  until  now  by  the  phantom
of  the  idea  of  duty,  sometimes  opens before  me. If  I
notice  that  there  is  no  real  harm  in  my  exercising  myself
freely  in  it,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  beneficial
to  me,  how  should  I  not  take  advantage  of  it? The  differ-
ence between  ordinary  scientific  speculations  and  speculations
in  moral  philosophy  is,  that  the  first  indicate  mere  alternatives
for  thought,  while  the  second  indicate,  at  the  same  time
alternatives  for  action. All  the  possibilities  discovered  by
science  can  be  here  realized  for  ourselves. It  is  for  me  to
realize  the  hyperspace.

The  result  predicted  to  us  by  Mr.  Spencer—  gradual  dis-
appearance of  the  sentiment  of  obligation—  could,  therefore,
be  obtained  in  a  way  quite  other  than  the  one  of  which  he
speaks.  MralcadQJy_disaPr(aar'  rmt_becaus.e  y


_

moral  instmctTwould  liave  become  irresistible,  but,  on  the
contrary,  because  man,  no  longer  taking  into  account
any  instinct,  would  absolutely  conform  his  conduct  to
reason—  would  unfold  his  life  like  a  series  of  theorems.  It
may  be  said  that  for  Vincent  de  Paul  moral  obligation,
in  so  far  as  it  is  painful  and  austere,  had  disappeared.  He


Il6 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

was  spontaneously  good ;  but  it  may  also  be  said  that  for
Spinoza  it  had  equally  disappeared.  He  had  forced  himself
to  combat  every  moral  prejudice ;  he  did  not  obey  any
instinct  unless  he  could  accept  it  after  deliberate  reasoning.
He  was  more  of  a  rational  than  a  moral  being.  He  sub-
mitted, not  to  the  constantly  obscure,  and,  so  to  speak,
opaque  obligation  springing  from  his  moral  nature,  but  to
the  clear  and  transparent  obligation  springing  from  his
reason.  And  where  this  obligation  imposed  on  him  any
kind  of  suffering,  he  must  have  experienced  that  stoic
sentiment  of  intellectual  origin — resignation — rather  than  the
Christian  sentiment  of  mystic  origin,  the  overflowing  joy  of
duty  accomplished.

Anyone  analyzing  himself  to  excess  is  necessarily  unhappy.
Therefore,  if  it  is  possible  that  the  analytical  spirit  be  one
day  used  by  some  at  the  cost  of  their  morality,  it  will,  at
at  the  same  time,  cost  them  their  happiness.  These  are
sacrifices  too  great  ever  to  tempt  a  great  many  people.
Yet  it  is  the  task  of  the  philosopher  to  examine  even  his
instincts  ;  he  must  endeavour  to  justify  obligation,  although
the  very  effort  to  justify  the  moral  sentiment  risks  its  impair-
ment by  making  the  instinct  conscious  of  itself,  by  making
deliberate  that  which  was  spontaneous.

Let  us  search  in  the  domain  of  facts,  to  which  we  have
methodically  confined  ourselves,  for  all  the  forces  which
would  contend  against  moral  dissolution,  and  thus  supply
the  obligation  absolute  of  the  ancient  moralists.*


*  As  complement  of  the  above  chapters,  it  is  necessary  to  read  the
parallel  chapters  in  "  Education  and  Heredity  "  (by  Guyau)  on  the
"Genesis  of  the  Moral  Instinct."


SECOND BOOK.


LAST  POSSIBLE  EQUIVALENTS  OF  DUTY  FOR THE
MAINTENANCE  OF  MORALITY.


CHAPTER  I.

Fourth  Equivalent  of  Duty  Derived  from  Love  of  Risk
and  of  Struggle.


THE PROBLEM.


LET  us  recall  the  chief  problem  which  presents  itself  to
every  exclusively scientific  conception of morality. To  .
how  great  an  extent  can  deliberate  consciousness  feel  itself  S
bound  by  an  impulse,  by  an  inward  pressure  which  has,/
hypothetically,  only  a  natural  character — not  a  mystical  nor
even  a  metaphysical  one — and  which,  moreover,  is  not  com-
pleted by  the  prospect  of  any  extra- social  sanction  ? To
what  extent  must  deliberate  consciousness  rationally  obey
an  "  obligation  "  of  this  sort  ?

A  positive  and  scientific  morality,  we  have  said,  can  give
the  individual  this  commandment  only  :  Develop  your  life
in  all  directions,  be  an  "  individual "  as  rich  as  possible  in
intensive  and  extensive  energy  ;  therefore  be  the  most  social
and  sociable  being.  In  the  name  of  this  general  rule,  which
is  the  scientific  equivalent  of  the  imperative,  a  positive
morality  can  enjoin  upon  the  individual  certain  partial  and
moderate  sacrifices  ;  it  can  formulate  the  whole  series  of


Il8 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

average  duties  to  which  ordinary  life  is  confined.  In  all
this,  be  it  understood,  there  is  nothing  categorical,  nothing
absolute,  only  excellent  hypothetical  advice.  If  you  pursue
this  aim — ihe-Jiighest  intensity  of  life — then  do  this  ;  in
short,  it  is  a  good  average In  oral  ity.

How  will  this  morality  manage  to  obtain  from  the
individual,  in  certain  cases,  a  definite  sacrifice — not  a
mere  partial  and  provisional  one  ?  Charity  urges  us
to  forget  that  which  the  right  hand  has  given— excellent ;
but  reason  advises  us  to  watch  well  what  we  give.  The
altruistic  instincts  invoked  by  the  English  school  are  open
to  all  sort  of  restrictions  and  alterations ;  to  rely  solely  on
them  for  securing  disinterestedness  is  to  introduce  a  kind
of  struggle  between  them  and  the  selfish  impulses.  Now,
the  latter  are  sure  to  get  the  best  of  the  majority  of  people,
because  they  have  a  visible  and  tangible  root ;  while  the
others  appear  to  the  individual  reason  as  a  result  of
hereditary  influences  by  which  the  race  tries  to  make  the
individual  its  dupe.  Selfish  reasoning  is  always  ready  to
intervene,  and  to  paralyze  the  first  spontaneous  movements
of  the  social  instinct.

It  belongs  really  to  the  part  of  the  superior  nerve-centres
to  moderate  the  action  of  the  inferior  centres — to  regulate
the  instinctive  movements.  If  I  walk  along  a  mountain-
path  at  the  top  of  a  precipice,  and  a  noise  or  a  sudden
fear  makes  me  start,  the  mere  reflex  action  will  urge  me  to
fling  myself  again  to  the  other  side ;  but  then  reason  will
moderate  my  movement  by  warning  me  that  there  is  a
precipice  near.  The  hedonist  finds  himself  in  a  somewhat
similar  situation,  when  it  is  a  question  of  throwing  himself
blindly  into  some  sort  of  self-sacrifice.  It  is  reason's  part
to  show  him  the  abyss,  to  prevent  him  throwing  himself
down  without  due  consideration  under  the  impulse  of  the
first  instinctive  movement ;  and  the  "  preventive  action  "
of  reason  will  be,  in  that  case,  as  logical,  as  powerful,  with
regard  to  the  altruistic  impulses  as  it  can  be  with  regard  to


EQUIVALENT OF DUTY.  1 19

the  merely  reflex  action. That  is  what  we  have  elsewhere
raised  as  an  objection  to  the  English  school.

The  self  and  the  not-self,  therefore,  are  both  present.
They  seem,  indeed,  to  be  two  values  without  a  common
measure. There is  in the  self  something  sui  generis—
irreducible. If the world  is, for  the hedonist, superior
in quantity to his  self, his self must always  seem  to
him  superior  in  quality  to  the  world— the  quality  resting
for him in the enjoyment. "I am," he says, "and
you  exist  for  me  only  in  so  far  as  I  exist  and  as  I  main-
tain my  existence ;  this  is  the  principle  which  dominates
both  the  reason  and  the  senses." So  long,  therefore,  as
one  keeps  to  hedonism,  one  cannot  logically  be  obliged
to  detach  one's  interest  from  one's  self. Now, hedonism
in  its  fundamental  principle,  which  is  the  obstinate  con-
servation of  self,  cannot  be  refuted  from  the  point  of  view
of  facts. Only  the  metaphysical  hypothesis  may  attempt
to  make  the  will  overcome  the  transition  of  the  self  to  the
non-self. From  the  positive  point  of  view,  and with  all
hypothesis  left  aside,  the problem which we have just
presented  seems,  at  first,  theoretically  insoluble. And  yet
this  problem  can  receive,  in  practice,  at  least  an  approxi-
mate solution.


n.

FOURTH  EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY,  DERIVED  FROM  THE  LOVE  OF
RISK  AND  OF  STRUGGLE.

IT  is  rare  that  real  sacrifices  present  themselves  in  life  as
certain.  The  soldier,  for  instance,  is  not  certain  of  falling
in  the  fight ;  far  from  it :  there  is  here  only  a  mere  possibility.
In  other  words,  there  is  danger.  Now,  it  is  necessary  to
see  if  danger,  even  independently  of  all  idea  of  moral
obligation,  is  not  a  medium  useful  for  the  development  of
life  itself— a  powerful  stimulant  of  all  the  faculties,  capable


120 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

of  carrying  them  to  their  maximum  of  energy,  and  capable
also  of  producing  a  maximum  of  pleasure.

Primitive  humanity  lived  in  the  midst  of  danger,  hence
there  must  still  exist  in  many  people  a  natural  predisposition
to  face  it.  Danger  was,  so  to  speak,  the  sport  of  primitive
men,  as  sport  is  to-day,  for  many  people,  a  kind  of  sham
danger.  This  taste  for  peril,  faced  for  its  own  sake,  is  to
be  met  with  even  among  animals.  We  find  on  this  subject  a
curious  tale  of  a  traveller  in  Cambodia.

As  soon  as  a  troup  of  monkeys  notice  a  crocodile  with  its
body  sunk  in  the  water,  its  mouth  wide  open,  so  as  to
seize  anything  which  may  pass  within  reach,  they  seem  to
plan  together,  approach  little  by  little,  and  begin  their  sport,
being  by  turns  actors  and  spectators.  One  of  the  most
agile,  or  of  the  most  imprudent,  passes  from  branch  to
branch,  to  within  a  respectful  distance  of  the  crocodile,
suspends  himself  by  a  paw,  and  with  the  dexterity  of  his
race  advances,  goes  back,  now  striking  its  adversary  with
its  paw,  now  merely  pretending  to  hit  him.  Some  of  the
others,  amused  by  this  game,  want  to  be  of  the  party ;  but,
the  other  branches  being  too  high,  they  form  a  chain  by
holding  one  another  hanging  by  their  paws.  They  balance
themselves  in  that  way,  while  he  who  is  nearest  the
amphibious  animal  torments  it  as  much  as  possible.
Sometimes  the  dreadful  jaw  shuts  itself,  but  without
catching  the  audacious  monkey.  There  are  screams  of  joy
and  merry  antics ;  but  sometimes  also  a  paw  is  caught  in
the  vice,  and  the  leaping  monkey  is  drawn  down  under
water  with  the  quickness  of  lightning.  The  whole  troup
then  disperses  moaning  and  howling,  which,  however,  does
not  prevent  them  beginning  again  the  same  sport  several
days,  perhaps  even  several  hours,  later."*

The  pleasure  of  danger  is  derived  chiefly  from  the  pleasure
of  victory.  One  likes  to  conquer,  no  matter  whom,  even  an

*  Mouhot,  "  Voyage  dans  le  Royaume  de  Siam  et  de  Cambodge."


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.  121

animal. We  like  to prove to  ourselves our superiority.
Baldwin,  an  Englishman,  who  went  to  Africa  only  with  the
intention  of  shooting,  one  day  put  this  problem  to  himself,
after  having been  very nearly  felled by  a  lion: "Why
does man risk his life without having any interest in
doing so?" "It  is  a  question  which  I  will  not  try  to
solve,"  he  answered. "  All  I  can  say  is  that  in  victory  one
finds  an  inward  satisfaction  for  which  it  is  worth  while  to  run
a risk,  even  if  there  is  nobody  to  applaud." Moreover,
even  after  having  lost  the  hope  of  conquest,  one  obstinately
goes  on  struggling. Whosoever  may  be  the  adversary,  every
fight  degenerates  into  a  desperate  duel. Bombonnel,  having
rolled  with  a  panther  close  to  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  pulled
his  head  out  of  the  open  mouth  of  the  animal,  and  threw  him,
by  a  stupendous  effort,  into  the  ravine. He  lifted  himself
up,  blinded,  spitting  quantities  of  blood,  not  being  able  to
account  clearly  for  the  situation. He  thought  only  of  one
thing— namely,  that  probably  he  must  die  from  his  wounds,
and that before dying  he must  revenge  himself  on  the
panther. "  I  did  not  think  of  my  pain. Being  completely
carried  away  by  fury,  I  pulled  out  my  hunting-knife,  and,
not  knowing  what  had  become  of  the  animal,  I  looked  for
it  everywhere  to  begin  the  struggle  over  again. It  was  in
this  condition  that  the  Arabs  found  me  when  they  arrived."
This  need  of  danger  and  of  victory,  which  carries  away
the  soldier  and  the  huntsman,  is  found  also  in  the  traveller,
the colonist, the engineer. A French manufacturer of
dynamite,  not  long  ago,  sent  an  engineer  to  Panama  ;  he
died  on  arriving  there. Another  engineer  went,  arrived  safely,
but  died  eight  days  after. A  third  immediately  set  sail.
Most  professions,  like  that  of  medicine,  would  furnish  a
great  many  instances  of  the  same  kind. The invincible
attraction  of  the  sea  lies,  to  a  great  extent,  in  the  constant
danger  which it presents. It tempts  in  succession  each
generation which is born on its shores, and if the
English  nation  has  acquired  an  intensity  of  life  and  force


122 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

of  expansion  so  great  that  it  has  spread  itself  over  the
whole  world,  we  may  say  that  this  is  due  to  its  education  by
the  sea — that  is  to  say,  to  its  education  by  danger.

Let  us  note  that  the  pleasure  of  contest  alters  its  form  with-
out disappearing,  be  it  in  the  struggle  with  an  animated  being
(war  or  chase),  or  in  the  struggle  with  visible  obstacles
(sea,  mountain),  or  in  the  struggle  with  invisible  things
(illness  to  be  cured,  difficulties  of  all  sorts  to  be  conquered).
The  struggle  always  partakes  of  the  same  character — that
of  a  passionate  duel.  In  truth,  the  doctor  who  starts  for
Senegal  has  decided  upon  a  kind  of  duel  with  the  yellow
fever.  The  struggle  passes  from  the  domain  of  things
physical  to  the  intellectual  domain,  without  losing  anything
of  its  ardour  or  of  its  fascination.  The  struggle  may  also
pass  into  the  special  domain  of  morals.  There  is  an  inward
struggle  between  the  will  and  the  passions,  as  captivating  as
any  other,  and  in  which  the  victory  brings  an  infinite  joy,  as
was  well  understood  by  Corneille.

In  short,  man  needs  to  feel  himself  great,  in  order  now  and
again  to  have  full  consciousness  of  the  sublimity  of  his  will.
This  consciousness  he  gets  in  struggle — struggle  with  him-
self, with  his  passions,  or  with  material  and  intellectual
obstacles.  Now,  this  struggle  to  satisfy  our  reason  must
have  an  aim.  Man  is  too  rational  a  being  to  fully  approve
of  the  monkeys  of  Cambodia  playing  for  fun  with  the  jaws
of  the  crocodile,  or  of  the  Englishman  Baldwin  going  into  the
heart  of  Africa  for  the  pleasure  of  hunting.  The  intoxication
of  danger  exists  at  times  in  everyone  of  us,  even  in  the
most  timid ;  but  this  instinct  of  danger  requires  to  be  more
reasonably  exercised.  Although,  in  many  cases,  there
is  only  a  superficial  difference  between  temerity  and  courage,
he  who,  for  instance,  dies  for  his  country  is  conscious  of  not
having  accomplished  an  idle  deed.  The  need  of  danger
and  of  struggle,  on  condition  of  it  being  thus  directed  and
utilized  by  reason,  assumes  a  moral  importance  all  the
greater,  as  it  is  one  of  the  rare  instincts  which  have  no  fixed


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.  I23

direction. It  may  be  used  without  resistance  for  any  social

end.  . ,

There  was,  therefore,  in  Pascal's  bet  an  element  which  h
did  not  bring  to  light. He  saw  only  the  fear  of  risk  ;  he
did  not  see  the  pleasure  of  risk. To  well  understand
attraction  of  risk, even  when  the  chances  of misfortu
are  very  numerous,  many  psychological  considerations
be  brought  forward.

i.  In  calculating  we  must  not  take  into  account  only  tl
good  and  bad  chances,  but  also  the  pleasure  of  running
these  chances— the  pleasure  of  adventure.

2 A  pain  simply  possible  and  far  distant,  and,  above  all,
when  it  has  never  yet  been  felt,  corresponds  to  a  state  quite
other  than  that  in  which  we  actually  are,  while  a  desired
pleasure  is  more  in  harmony  with  our  present  state,  and
thus  acquires,  in  our  imagination,  a  considerable  value. In
so  far  as  the  remembrance  of  pain  may  be  painful  to  certain
characters,  so  far  may  the  vague  and  indeterminate  possi-
bility of  pain  leave  them  indifferent. It  is  also  rare  (above
all  in  youth— that  optimistic  age  par  excellence)  that he
chance  of  pain  seems  to  us  equivalent  to  the  chance  .
great  pleasure. This  explains,  for  instance,  the  fearlessness
which  lovers  have  at  all times  shown  in  confronting  a
kinds  of  peril  in  order  to  meet  again. One  finds  this  te
lessness  also  among  animals. Pain  seen  from  afar,  above
all  when  it  has  not  yet  been  repeatedly  experienced,  s«
generally negative and abstract to us; pleasure seems
positive  and  palpable. Besides,  every  time  that  pleasure
responds  to  a  want,  the  representation  of  future  enjoyment  i
accompanied  by  the  sensation  of  an  actual  pain ;  the  enjoy-
ment seems  then  not  merely  a  kind  of  superfluity,  but  a  reh«
from  real  pain,  and  its  value  still  increases. These  psycho-
logical laws  are  the  very  condition  of  life  and  activity. As
most  actions  bring  both  a  chance  of  pain  and  a  chance  c
pleasure,  it  is,  from  a  purely  mathematical  point  of  view,
abstention  which  ought  most  often  to  prevail ;  but  in  reality


124 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

it  is  action  and  hope  which  prevail — all  the  more  so  as  the
action  itself  is  the  foundation  of  pleasure.

3.  Another  psychological  fact  is :  He  who  has  twenty
times  escaped  a  danger — for  instance,  a  bullet — concludes
that  he  will  go  on  escaping  it.  In  this  way  a  habit  of  dis-
regarding danger  is  produced  which  the  calculation  of
probabilities  could  not  justify,  and  which  nevertheless
forms  an  element  in  the  bravery  of  veterans.  Moreover,
the  habit  of  disregarding  danger  induces  a  habit  of  dis-
regarding death  itself — a  sort  of  admirable  familiarity  with
this  neighbour  who  has  been  seen,  as  the  saying  is,  "  very
close  at  hand."*

To  the  pleasure  of  risk  is  often  added  that  of  responsi-
bility. One  likes  to  be  responsible  not  only  for  one's  own
destiny,  but  for  that  of  others — to  manage  the  world  on
one's  own  account.  This  intoxication  of  danger  mixed  with
the  joy  of  commanding,  this  intensity  of  physical  and  intel-
lectual life  exaggerated  by  the  very  presence  of  death,  has
been  expressed  with  mystic  barbarity  by  a  German  marshal,
von  Manteuffel,  in  a  speech  made  in  Alsace-Lorraine :
"  War !  yes,  gentlemen.  I  am  a  soldier.  War  is  the
element  of  the  soldier,  and  I  should  like  to  taste  it.
That  elevated  sentiment  of  commanding  in  battle,  of
knowing  that  the  bullet  of  the  enemy  may  call  you  any
moment  before  God's  tribunal,  of  knowing  that  the  fate
of  the  battle,  and  consequently  the  destiny  of  your  country,
may  depend  on  the  orders  which  you  give — this  tension  of
mind  and  of  feelings  is  divinely  great !"

The  love  of  danger  and  of  risk  plays  its  part,  more  or  less
degenerated,  in  a  great  many  social  circumstances.  It  is
of  considerable  importance  in  the  economic  sphere.
Capitalists  who  risked  their  savings  in  the  enterprise  of

*  Even  in  the  heart  of  most  criminals  may  be  traced  an  instinct  of
importance,  from  a  social  point  of  view,  and  which  should  be  utilized —
the  instinct  of  adventure.  That  instinct  might  find  its  use  in  the
colonies,  in  the  return  to  savage  life.


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.  125

the  Suez  Canal  imitated,  in  their  way,  the  engineers  who
risked  their  lives  in  it.  Speculation  has  its  dangers,  and
in  these  very  dangers  lies  its  fascination.  The  simple  trade
of  the  shopkeeper  at  the  corner  of  the  street  still  admits  of
a  certain  amount  of  risk.  If  we  compare  the  number  of
failures  (bankruptcies)  with  the  number  of  establishments,  we
shall  find  that  this  risk  is  of  importance.  Moreover,  danger
in  endless  shades  and  degrees — from  the  danger  of  losing
one's  life  to  the  danger  of  losing  one's  money — remains  one
of  the  important  features  of  social  existence.  There  is  not
a  movement  in  the  social  body  which  does  not  imply  a  risk.
And  intelligent  boldness  to  run  this  risk  identifies  itself  up
to  a  certain  point  with  the  very  instinct  of  progress,  and
liberalism  ;  while  the  fear  of  danger  identifies  itself  with
the  conservative  instinct,  which,  after  all,  is  always  doomed
to  be  beaten  as  long  as  the  world  exists  and  progresses.
Thus,  in  the  danger  incurred  on  behalf  of  somebody
(myself  or  some  one  else),  there  is  nothing  contrary  to
the  deep  instincts  and  laws  of  life.  Far  from  it ;  to  expose
one's  self  to  danger  is  something  normal  in  a  morally  well-
constituted  individual ;  to  expose  one's  self  to  danger  for
the  sake  of  others  is  but  going  a  step  further  on  the
same  road.

From  this  side  self-sacrifice  again  takes  its  place  among  the
general  laws  of  life,  from  which  it  at  first  seemed  to  com-
pletely escape.  The  peril  confronted  for  oneself  or  for
others — intrepidity  or  self-sacrifice — is  not  a  mere  negation
of  self  and  of  personal  life ;  it  is  this  life  itself  raised  into
sublimity.  The  sublime  in  ethics,  as  well  as  in  aesthetics,  at
first  seems  to  be  in  contradiction  to  the  order  constituting
the  beautiful ;  but  this  is  only  a  superficial  contradiction.
The  roots  of  the  sublime  and  the  beautiful  are  the  same,
and  the  intensity  of  feeling  which  it  pre-supposes  does  not
prevent  a  certain  inward  rationality.

When  we  accept  risk  we  have  also  accepted  possible
death.  In  every  lottery  one  has  to  take  the  bad  numbers


126 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

as  well  as  the  others.  Moreover,  he  who  under  such  circum-
stances sees  death  approaching  feels  himself,  so  to  speak,
linked  to  it.  He  had  foreseen  and  willed  it,  although
hoping  to  escape  it ;  he  will,  therefore,  not  retreat  except
from  inconsistency,  from  weakness  of  character — to  which  is
generally  given  the  name  of  cowardice.  Undoubtedly  he
who  has  left  his  country  to  escape  military  service  will  not
necessarily  be  an  object  of  horror  to  every  one  (we  must
state  it,  while  regretting  it) ;  but  he  who,  having  agreed  to
become  a  soldier — who,  having  accepted  his  task,  flees  from
danger  and  turns  his  back  on  it  at  the  supreme  moment —
he  will  be  called  a  coward  and  a  worthless  wretch.  With  all
the  more  reason  the  same  will  be  said  of  the  officer  who  had
consented,  not  only  to  meet  death  face  to  face,  but  to  be
the  first  to  march  towards  it,  to  set  the  example.  In  the
same  way,  no  doctor  can  morally  refuse  his  services  in  an
epidemic.  Moral  obligation  takes  the  form  of  a  professional
obligation,  of  a  contract  freely  undertaken,  with  all  the  con-
sequences and  all  the  risks  which  it  implies.*  The  further
we  advance,  the  more  will  political  economy  and  sociology
be  brought  back  to  the  science  of  risks,  and  of  the  means  of
compensating  them — in  other  words,  to  the  science  of
assurance.  And  the  more  will  social  morality  be  brought
back  to  the  art  of  using  to  advantage,  and  for  the  good  of
all,  this  need  of  "  risking  one's  self"  which  is  experienced  by
every  individual  life  with  any  power  at  all.  In  other  words,  we
shall  endeavour  to  make  those  who  are  economic  of  themselves
feel  assured  and  undisturbed,  and  to  make  those  who  are,  so
to  speak,  prodigal  of  themselves  useful.


*  The  risks  can  be  multiplied  incessantly  in  this  way,  and  may
surround  one  with  an  even  tighter  ring,  from  which  one  can  neither
logically  nor  morally  retreat.  "The  exaltation  of  sentiments  of  anger
and  of  generosity  increases  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  danger,"
rightly  remarks  M.  Espinas  in  the  objections  which  he  has  addressed  to
us  without  knowing  that  we  were  fundamentally  of  the  same  opinion  on
all  these  points  (Revue  Philosophique,  1882,  vol.  ii.).


EQUIVALENT OF DUTY.  I27

But  let  us  go  further. The  moral  agent  may  be  placed
not  face  to  face  with  mere  risk,  but  before  the  certitude  of
definite  sacrifice.

^  In  certain  countries,  if  the  labourer  wants  to  fertilize  his
fields,  he  sometimes  uses  very  energetic  means  ;  he  takes
his  horse, opens  his  veins,  and,  whip  in  hand,  drives  him
into  the  furrows. The  bleeding  horse  drags  himself  across
the  field which lies  under his tottering  legs ; the  earth
ecomes  red  as  he  passes,  each  furrow  drinking  its  share  of
the  blood. When,  exhausted,  he  falls  down with  rattling
throat  he  is  still  forced  to  get  up  again,  to  give  the  last  drop
of  his  blood  to  the  greedy  earth. At  last  he  sinks  down
he  is  buried  in  the  field,  which  is  still  red;  his  whole  life'
his  whole  being,  passes  to  the  revived  earth. This  sowing
with  blood  becomes  a  source  of  wealth;  the  field  thus  fed
will  yield  corn  in  abundance-a  great  benefit  to  the  labourer
Things  do  not  happen  differently  in  the  history  of  humanity
The  legion  of  the  great  unfortunate  ones,  of  the  unknown
martyrs-all  these  men,  whose  very  misfortune  has  conduced
to  the  welfare  of  others;  all  those  who  have  been  forced  to
self-sacrifice, or have freely sought it; all have passed
through  the  world  sowing  their  lives,  shedding  their  blood
They  have  made the  future pregnant. Often  they  have
been  mistaken,  and the cause  defended  was  not  always
worth  their  sacrifices ;  nothing  so  sad  as  to  die  in  vain
But  to  him  who  considers  the  mass,  and  not  the  individuals
self-sacrifice is one of  the  most  precious  and the  most
powerful  forces  in  history. To  make  humanity-this  great
indolent body-progress  one  step,  there  has  always  been
needed a shock  which has crushed individuals The
humblest,  the  most  ordinary  of  men,  may,  therefore,  find
himself  placed  before  the  alternative  of  the  certain  sacrifice
his  life  or  of  an  obligation  to  be  fulfilled. He  may  be
not  only  soldier,  but  policeman, fireman,  etc.;  and  these
callings,  which  we  designate  as  humble,  are  of  the  kind  which
sometimes demand sublime  actions. Now,  how  can  we


128 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

demand  from  anyone  the  sacrifice  of  his  life,  if  morality  is
based  only  on  the  regular  development  of  this  very  life?
There  is  contradiction  in  the  terms.  It  is  the  chief  objection
which  we  have  elsewhere  made  to  all  naturalistic  moral
philosophy,  and  to  which  the  necessity  of  things  has  again
brought  us.

From  the  naturalistic  point  of  view  at  which  we  place
ourselves,  even  the  act  of  merely  watching  over  the  interests
of  others  is  superior  to  the  act  of  watching  our  own  interests
only  in  so  far  as  it  indicates  a  greater  moral  capacity,  a
surplus  of  inward  life.  In  any  other  sense  it  would  only  be
a  kind  of  monstrosity,  as  in  those  plants  which  have  hardly
any  leaves  or  roots — nothing  but  a  flower.  To  be  at  all
able  to  command  self-sacrifice,  something  more  precious
than  life  must  be  found.  Now,  empirically  speaking,  there
is  nothing  more  precious ;  nothing  else  has  the  same  value
as  life ;  everything  else  acknowledges  this,  and  borrows  its
value  from  it.  It  is  impossible  to  convince  the  English
utilitarian  that  morality,  maintained  by  the  sacrifice  of  life,
is  not  analogous  to  a  miser  dying  to  save  his  treasure.
Nothing  more  natural  than  to  ask  a  person  to  die  for  you,  or
for  an  idea,  when  he  has  entire  faith  in  immortality,  and
already  feels  the  growing  of  his  angel's  wings ;  but  what  if
he  does  not  believe  this  ?  If  we  had  faith,  there  would  be  no
difficulty ;  it  is  so  easy  to  be  blindfolded  !  A  man  exclaims  :
"  I  see,  I  know,  I  believe."  He  sees  nothing — he  knows
still  less ;  but  he  has  the  faith  which  takes  the  place  of  it
all.  He  does  what  faith  commands;  he  goes  to  the
sacrifice,  looking  up  to  heaven.  Cheerfully  he  lets  oneself
be  crushed  by  the  wheels  of  the  big  social  machine — and
sometimes  even  without  distinct  aim — for  a  dream,  for  an
error,  as  the  Hindus  did,  who  threw  themselves  at  full
length  under  the  bloody  wheels  of  the  sacred  chariot,  happy
to  die  under  the  weight  of  their  gigantic  and  empty  idols.
But  how,  not  having  faith,  can  we  demand  from  the  indi-
vidual a  definite  sacrifice,  without  basing  this  demand  on


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.  I2Q

some  principle  other  than  the  development  of  this  very  life
which  is  to  be  wholly  or  partly  sacrificed  ?

Let  us  begin  by  recognising  that  in  some  extreme  cases
-moreover,  very  rare  ones-this  problem  has  no  rational
and  scientific  solution. In  those  cases  in  which  morality  is
impotent  morality  must  leave  it  wholly  to  the  spontaneity
of he  individual. The  fault  of  the  Jesuits  is  not  so  much
their  having  wanted to  enlarge morality as  their  having
brought  in  the  detestable  element  of  hypocrisy. Before  all
one  has  to  be  frank  with  one's  self,  and  with  others-  a
paradox  is  not  dangerous  if  it  presents  itself  boldly  to 'all
eyes Every  action  may  be  considered  as  an  equation  to
e  solved. Now,  there  are  always,  in  a  practical  decision
nown  terms  and  unknown  terms,  which  have  to  be  found  •
t  scientific morality  cannot  always find these. Some
equations,  therefore,  are  insoluble-or,  at  least,  do  not  allow
01  an  undeniable  and  categorical  solution. The  mistake
of  moralists  is  to  pretend  to  solve  in  a  definite  and  universal
way problems which may have a  great many peculiar
solutions. Let  us  add  that  the  fundamental  unknown  some-
ung,  the  x,  to  be  sought  in  a  certain  number  of  problems
is  death. The  solution  of  the  equation  presented  depends
therefore,  on  the  variable  value  attached  to  the  other  terms
which  are-(i) physical life to be sacrificed; (2)  some
moral  act  to  be  accomplished.
Let  us  examine  these  two  terms.

The  solution  depends  chiefly,  let  us  say,  on  the  value
attached  to  life.  Undoubtedly  life  is  for  everyone  the  most
precious  of  all  blessings,  because  it  is  the  condition  of  all
others;  nevertheless,  if  the  others  are  reduced  almost  to
naught,  life  itself  loses  its  value— it  then  becomes  a  con-
temptible thing.  If  there  are  two  individuals,  the  one
having  lost  those  he  loved,  the  other  having  a  large  family
whose  welfare  depends  on  him,  these  two  are  not  equal
before  death.

To  fairly  present  this  great  problem  of  contempt  of  life,


130 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

it  must  be  compared  with  another  important  consideration.
Self-sacrifice  presents,  in  more  than  one  point,  an  analogy  with
"suicide,  since  in  both  cases  death  is  consented  to,  and  even
desired,  by  the  will  of  an  individual  who  knows  what  life  means.
To  explain  suicide,  we  must  admit  that  the  duration  of  the
average  enjoyments  of  life  is  of  little  value  compared  to
the  intensity  of  certain  sufferings  ;  and  the  converse  will  be
equally  true — viz.,  that  the  intensity  of  certain  enjoyments
seems  preferable  to  the  whole  duration  of  life.  Berlioz
represents  an  artist  who  kills  himself  after  having  known
the  highest  aesthetic  joy  which  he  thinks  it  possible  to  feel
once  in  his  life.  This  is  not  so  mad  an  action  as  one  might
think.  Suppose  it  were  granted  to  you  to  be  for  an  instant
a  Newton  discovering  his  law,  or  a  Jesus  preaching  love  on
the  mountain — the  rest  of  your  life  will  then  seem  colourless
and  empty ;  you  would  purchase  this  instant  at  the  price  of
all  the  rest.  Give  anyone  the  choice  between  living  over
again  the  monotonous  round  of  his  whole  life,  or  living
over  again  the  small  number  of  hours  which  he  remembers
as  having  been  perfectly  happy  ;  few  people  will  hesitate.
Let  us  extend  the  question  to  the  present  and  the  future.
There  are  hours  in  which  the  intensity  of  life  is  so  great
that,  placed  in  balance  with  the  whole  possible  series  of
years,  these  hours  will  turn  the  scale.  One  passes  three
days  in  climbing  to  a  high  summit  of  the  Alps  ;  one  finds
that  the  short  moment  passed  on  the  white  summit,  in  the
great  calm  of  the  sky,  is  worth  these  three  days  of  fatigue.
There  are  also  moments  in  life  when  we  seem  to  be  on  a
mountain-top — when  we  soar;  compared  with  these  moments,
everything  else  becomes  indifferent.

Life,  therefore,  even  from  the  positive  point  of  view  at
which  we  now  place  ourselves,  has  not  that  measureless
value  which  at  first  it  seemed  to  have.  Sometimes,  without
being  irrational,  the  totality  of  existence  may  be  sacrificed
for  one  of  its  moments,  as  one  single  verse  may  be  preferred
to  the  whole  poem.


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.  j^!

So  long  as  suicide  persists  among  men,  it  would  be
inexplicable  that  there  should  not  be  self-sacrifice  definite
and  without  hope.  Only  one  thing  is  to  be  regretted ;  that
is,  that  society  should  not  try  to  transform  suicide  into
self-sacrifice  as  much  as  possible.*

A  certain  number  of  perilous  enterprise^_ou^t^w^yiJa--v44^
be  offered  to  those  who  are  discouraged  with  life. Human
progress  will  always  need  for  its  fulfilment  so  many  indi-
vidual lives  that  watch  should  be  kept  that  no  one  might
lose  it  in  vain. In  the  philanthropic  institution  called  the
Dams  du Calvaire widows devote themselves to the
nursing  of  repugnant  and  contagious  illnesses. This  use,
for  the  advantage  of  society— of  lives  more  or  less  broken
and  become  useless  by  widowhood— is  an  instance  of  what
might  be  done,  of  what  certainly  will  be  done  in  the  society
of  the  future. There  are  thousands  of  persons  for  whom
life  has  lost  its  greatest  value. These  persons  could  find  a
true  consolation  in  self-sacrifice;  use  should  be  made  of
them. In  the  same  way,  all  capacities  should  be  employed.
Now, there are special capacities for  perilous and dis-
interested occupations,  temperaments  born  to  self-forgetful-
ness  and  always  ready  to  risk  themselves. This  capacity
for  self-sacrifice  has  its  source  in  a  superabundance  of  moral
life. Every  time  that  the moral  life  of  an  individual  is  ,
checked  or  repressed  by  its  environment,  another  environ-  ^
ment  must  be  discovered  for  it  in  which  it  may  recover  the
possibility  of  its  unlimited  extension,  and  of  its  untiring
employment  in  the  service  of  humanity.

Besides,  life  not  always  being  an  object  of  preference,  it

*  Lately,  on  the  Place  des  Invalides,  at  the  very  moment  when  a
mad  dog  was  about  to  attack  some  children,  a  man  ran  up  to  him
knocked  him  down,  broke  his  backbone,  and  threw  him  into  the  Seine'
As  people  wanted  this  man  to  have  the  many  wounds  which  he  had
received  attended  to,  he  escaped  from  the  crowd,  saying  that  he  wished
to  die  because  "  his  wife  had  broken  his  heart."  There  ought  to  be  no
other  kind  of  suicide.


132 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

may  become,  in  certain  cases,  an  object  of  disgjtst  and  of
horror.  There  is  a  sentiment  peculiar  to  man  which  has
hitherto  not  been  well  analyzed.  We  have  already  called  it
the  sentiment  of  intolerability.  Through  the  influence  of
attention  and  of  reflection,  certain  physical,  and,  above  all,
certain  moral  sufferings,  increase  in  our  consciousness  to
such  a  degree  as  to  obscure  everything  else.  One  single
pain  is  sufficient  to  efface  all  the  many  pleasures  of  life.
Probably  man  has  this  privilege  of  being  able,  if  he  chooses,
to  be  the  most  unhappy  animal  in  creation,  because  of  the
tenacity  he  can  communicate  to  his  pains.  Now,  one  of
the  sentiments  which  possesses  to  the  highest  degree  this
character  of  intolerability  is  that  of  shame,  of  moral
failure.  Life,  for  instance,  bought  at  the  cost  of  shame
may  seem  unbearable.  The  objection  will  be  made  that
a  truly  epicurean  or  utilitarian  philosopher  can  afford
to  look  with  a  certain  disdain  at  those  sentiments  of  moral
shame  which  are  always  rather  conventional.  But  we  would
reply  that  they  are  far  less  conventional  than  a  great  many
others — for  instance,  the  lust  of  money.  Daily  you  see
ruined  people  to  whom  life  becomes  unbearable,  and
philosophy  is  of  small  service  to  them.  Besides,  there  is
a  kind  of  moral  ruin  far  more  terrible  in  every  way  than
the  other.  That  which  is  merely  pleasant  as  this  or  that
pleasure  of  life,  and  even  as  the  sum  of  life's  pleasures,  can
never  compensate  for  that  which  rightly  or  wrongly  seems
to  be  intolerable.

Certain  particular  spheres  of  activity  become  finally  so
important  in  life  that  they  cannot  be  attacked  without
touching  life  at  its  very  source.  We  cannot  imagine  Chopin
without  his  piano  ;  to  have  forbidden  him  music  would  have
meant  killing  him.  Likewise,  existence  would  probably
not  have  been  bearable  for  Raphael  without  forms,  colours,
and  a  brush  to  reproduce  them.  If  art  becomes  in  this
way  as  important  as  life  itself,  it  need  not  astonish  that
morality  should  have,  in  the  eyes  of  man,  a  still  higher  value.


EQUIVALENT  OF  DUTY.


Here  there  is  really  a  still  wider-reaching  sphere  of  activity
than  in  art. If  the  sceptic  finds  some  vanity  and  illusion
m the moral sentiment, he will find yet more in the
artistic  sentiment. Those  whom  art  has  killed  are  more
completely  dead  than  if  they  had  died  for  humanity,  and
nevertheless  those  whom  art  has  killed  and  will  yet  kill  are
many. There  ought  to  be  a  greater  number  of  those  who
sacrifice  themselves  for  a  moral  ideal. Let  us  suppose  a
tree,  a  branch  of  which  becomes  enormously  developed,
and  even  takes  root  in  the  surrounding  earth—  as  happens
m  the  case  of  the  giant  tree  of  India. In  the  long  run,  the
branch  will  even hide  the  very  trunk  ; it  is  the  branch
which  seems  to  support  and  to  sustain  the  trunk. Likewise
the  moral  and  intellectual  life  is  a  kind  of  shoot,  a  powerful
branch  of  the  physical  life. It  developes  to  such  an  extent
in  the  social  environment  that  an  individual  killed,  so  to
speak,  in  his  moral  life  seems  by  that  to  be  more  com-
pletely crushed  ;  it  is  like  a  trunk  having  lost  all  its  strength
and  foliage—  a  true  corpse. "To  lose,  in order  to  live,
the very motives of life!" The lines of  Juvenal are
eternally  true  even  for  him  who  rejects  the  stoic  doctrines.  •
The  most  disabused  sceptic  still  imposes  on  himself  a  cer-
tain rule  of  conduct  which  dominates  his  life—  at  any  rate  a
practical  ideal. Life  at  certain  moments  may  not  seem  to
him  worthy  of  being  preserved  by  the  renunciation  of  this
last  trace  of  the  ideal.

If  m  no  single  doctrine  the  moral  sentiment,  in  itself
alone,  can  give  true  positive  happiness  to  our  sensibility,  it  is
nevertheless  capable  of  making  happiness  without  it  impos-
sible, and  this  is  practically  sufficient.  For  beings  who  have
arrived  at  a  certain  degree  of  moral  evolution  happiness  is
no  longer  desirable  outside  the  sphere  of  their  ideal.

Therefore,  the  moral  sentiment  has  still  greater  value  by
reason  of  its  destructive  than  of  its  creative  power.
It  may  be  compared  with  a  great  love  extinguishing  all  other
passions  ;  without  this  love  life  is  intolerable  and  impossible


134 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OK  SANCTION.

to  us.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  it  will  not  be
returned,  neither  can  it  be,  nor  should  it  be  so.  It  is
customary  to  pity  those  who  in  their  hearts  feel  such  love —
a  love  without  hope,  which  nothing  can  satisfy ;  and  yet  we
all  cherish  quite  as  powerful  a  love  for  our  moral  ideal,  from
which  we  cannot  rationally  expect  any  sanction.  This  love
will  always  seem  vain,  from  an  utilitarian  point  of  view,
since  it  must  not  hope  for  satisfaction,  for  reward  ;  but,
from  a  higher  point  of  view,  these  satisfactions  and  pre-
tended compensations  may,  in  their  turn,  disappear  as  mere
vanity.

To  sum  up,  the  value  of  life  is  something  quite  variable,
which may sometimes be reduced to nought — to less
v/ J  than  nought. Moral  action,  on  the  contrary,  has  always  a
*  certain  value. It  is  rare  that  a  being  falls  low  enough  to

,  do,  for  instance,  an  act  of  cowardice  with  perfect  indifference,

\or  even  with  pleasure.

Now,  to  form  an  idea  of  the  value  which  the  moral  act
may  acquire  in  certain  cases,  we  must  remember  that  man
is  a  thinking  animal — or,  as  we  have  said  before,  a  philosophic
animal.  Positive  morality  cannot  take  into  account  all  the
metaphysical  hypotheses  which  it  pleases  man  to  make  on
the  basis  of  things.  Moreover,  an  exclusively  scientific
moral  philosophy  cannot  give  a  definite  and  complete
solution  of  moral  obligation.  One  has  always  to  get  beyond
mere  experience.  The  luminous  vibrations  of  the  ether  pass
from  Sirius  to  my  eye,  that  is  a  fact ;  but  have  I  to  open  my
eye  or  to  shut  it  to  receive  them  ?  Simply  to  open  it
will  not  reveal  the  law  of  the  vibrations  of  light.  In
the  same  way,  my  consciousness  gets  to  understand
that  of  others ;  but  have  I  to  completely  open  myself  to
others,  or  have  I  to  keep  myself  partly  shut  up?  This  is
a  problem,  the  practical  solution  of  which  will  depend  on
the  personal  hypothesis  which  I  shall  have  made  of  the
universe,  and  of  my  relation  to  other  beings.  Only  these
hypotheses  must  remain  absolutely  free  and  personal,  and


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  135

it  is  impossible  to  systematize  them  into  a  metaphysical
doctrine,  which  would  impose  itself  universally  on  human
reason.  We  will  see  how,  thanks  to  the  strength  of  the
individual  hypothesis,  there  is  no  absolute  sacrifice  which
may  not  become,  not  only  possible,  but,  in  certain  cases,
almost  easy.


CHAPTER  II.

Fifth  Equivalent  of  Duty,  derived  from  Metaphysical
Risk. The  Hypothesis.


METAPHYSICAL RISK IN SPECULATION.

have  shown  the  considerable  practical  influence  which
the  pleasure  of  danger  or  risk  has  ;  there  remains  for  us  to
see  the  influence,  no  less  great,  of  that  which  Plato  called  the
KaXos  KivSuJjiRs,  of  the  great  metaphysical  risk  in  which  the
mind  loves  to  disport  itself.

In  order  that  I  may  reason  out  to  the  very  end  certain
moral  acts  which  go  beyond  the  average  and  scientific
morality,  in  order  that  I  may  strictly  deduct  them  from
philosophical  or  religious  principles,  these  principles  them-
selves should  be  settled  and  determined.  But  this  can  only
be  done  by  hypothesis ;  therefore,  I  myself  must  establish
the  metaphysical  reasons  of  my  actions.  Given  the  un-
knowable, the  x  of  the  essence  of  things,  I  must  represent
this  to  myself  in  some  way,  and  conceive  it  according  to
the  image  of  the  act  which  I  wish  to  accomplish.  If,  for
instance,  I  want  to  do  an  act  of  pure  and  definite  charity,
and  if  I  should  wish  to  justify  this  act  rationally,  I  must
imagine  an  eternal  charity  inherent  in  the  very  heart  of
things,  and  of  myself;  I  must  render  the  sentiment  which


136 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

induces  me  to  act  objective.  The  moral  agent  here  plays
the  same  part  as  the  artist ;  he  must  convey  to  others  the
tendencies  which  he  inwardly  feels,  and,  out  of  his  love,
create  a  metaphysical  poem.  The  unknowable  and  neutral
x  is  the  counterpart  of  the  marble  shaped  by  the  sculptor,
of  the  inert  words  which,  in  the  poet's  stanza,  are  arranged,
and  become  alive.  The  artist  shapes  but  the  form  of
things  ;  the  moral  being — which  is  always  a  metaphysician,
either  spontaneous  or  deliberate — shapes  the  very  essence  of
things,  builds  up  eternity  upon  the  model  of  his  conception
of  the  act  of  one  day,  and  gives  to  this  act,  which  otherwise
would  seem  to  hang  in  the  air,  a  root  in  the  world  of
thought.

The  noumenon,  in  the  moral  and  not  purely  negative
sense,  we  ourselves  make  ;  it  acquires  a  moral  value  only
by  virtue  of  the  type  according  to  which  we  represent  it  to
ourselves  ;  it  is  a  construction  of  our  mind — of  our  meta-
physical imagination.

Will  it  be  said  that  there  is  something  like  child's  play  in
this  effort  to  give  type  and  form  to  that  which  is  essentially
without  form  or  hold  ?  From  a  narrowly  scientific  point  of
view  this  is  possible.  In  heroism  there  is  always  a  kind  of
simple  and  grand  artlessness.  Every  human  action  contains
an  element  of  error,  of  illusion.  Perhaps  this  element
increases  in  proportion  as  the  action  rises  above  the  average.
The  most  loving  hearts  are  those  which  have  been  most
deceived  ;  the  greatest  geniuses  are  those  which  exhibit  the
most  inconsistencies.  The  martyrs  were  often  sublime
children.  What  childishness  in  the  ideas  of  the  alchemists,
who  nevertheless,  in  the  end,  created  a  science  !  It  was  partly
in  consequence  of  an  error  that  Christopher  Columbus
discovered  America.  Metaphysical  theories  must  not  be
judged  according  to  their  absolute  truth,  which  can  never
be  verified  ;  but  one  of  the  ways  of  judging  them  is  to
appreciate  their  fecundity.  Do  not,  therefore,  ask  them  to
be  true  independently  of  ourselves  and  our  actions,  but  to


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  137

become  true.  A  fertile  error  may,  in  this  sense,  be  more
true  from  the  point  of  view  of  universal  evolution  than  a
top  narrow  and  barren  truth.  It  is  sad,  says  M.  Renan,  to
think  that  M.  Homais  is  right,  and  that  he  has  recognised
the  truth  from  the  very  beginning,  without  effort  and  without
merit,  by  simply  looking  at  his  feet.  Well,  no  ;  M.  Homais
is  not  right,  shut  up  as  he  is  in  his  small  circle  of  positive
verities.  He  may  have  been  quite  able  to  cultiver  son
jardin,  but  he  looked  upon  his  garden  as  the  world,  and  he
was  mistaken.  It  would  perhaps  have  been  much  better
for  him  if  he  had  fallen  in  love  with  a  star,  or  been
haunted  by  some  kind  of  absolutely  visionary  chimera—
which,  at  least,  would  have  made  him  realize  something
great.  Undoubtedly  Vincent  de  Paul  had  his  mind  filled
with  more  idle  dreams  than  M.  Homais ;  but  it  has  been
found  that  the  small  portion  of  truth  contained  in  his
dreams  was  more  fruitful  than  the  number  of  common-sense
truths  apprehended  by  M.  Homais.

Metaphysics  is,  in  the  domain  of  thought,  what  luxury
and  outlay  are,  with  regard  to  art,  in  the  domain  of
economics.  It  is  a  thing  all  the  more  useful,  as  it  seems  at  first
less  necessary.  We  might  do  without  it,  but  we  should  lose
much  by  it.  We  do  not  know  exactly  where  it  begins,  still  less
do  we  know  where  it  ends ;  and  yet  humanity  will  always
move  in  that  direction  along  an  irresistible  and  easy  slope.
Moreover,  there  are  certain  cases,  as  economists  have  shown,
in  which  luxury  suddenly  becomes  a  necessity ;  in  which  we
need,  in  order  to  face  life,  that  which  before  was  super-
fluous. Similarly,  there  are  circumstances  in  which  practice
suddenly  needs  metaphysics.  We  can  neither  live,  nor,
above  all,  die  without  it.  Reason  gives  us  glimpses  of  two
different  worlds— the  real  world,  in  which  we  live,  and
a  certain  ideal  world,  in  which  we  also  live,  in  which  our
mind  incessantly  acquires  new  vigour,  and  which  it  is
impossible  not  to  take  into  account.  Only,  in  regard  to  the
ideal  world  people  no  longer  agree  ;  everyone  has  his  own


138 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

conception  of  it ;  some  deny  it  altogether.  Yet  on  the
conception  we  have  of  the  metaphysical  essence  of  things
depends  the  way  in  which  we  compel  ourselves  to  act.
In  fact,  a  great  number  of  the  most  noble  human  actions
have  been  accomplished  in  the  name  of  religious  or  meta-
physical morality.  It  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  neglect
this  very  fruitful  source  of  activity.  But  it  is  none  the
less  impossible  to  impose  upon  activity  a  fixed  rule  derived
from  one  single  doctrine  ;  instead  of  absolutely  regulating  the
application  of  metaphysical  ideas,  it  is  only  of  importance
to  fix  their  boundaries,  to  assign  to  them  their  legitimate
sphere,  without  allowing  any  encroachment  upon  that  of
positive  morality.  In  moral  philosophy  it  is  necessary
to  reckon  with  metaphysical  speculation,  as  it  is  necessary  in
politics  and  sociology  to  take  economical  speculation  into
account.  Only  it  is,  in  the  first  place,  necessary  to  be  quite
certain  that  its  domain  is  that  of  sacrifice,  practically  unpro-
ductive for  the  individual,  of  absolute  devotion,  from  an
earthly  point  of  view.  The  domain  of  economic  speculation
is,  on  the  contrary,  that  of  reproductive  sacrifice  of  risk  run
with  some  interest  as  its  aim.  In  the  second  place,  it  is
necessary  to  leave  it  its  hypothetical  character.  In  fact,
I  know  a  thing  by  hypothesis,  and  according  to  a  personal
calculation  of  probability  I  infer  from  it  another  thing — for
instance,  that  disinterestedness  is  the  root  of  my  being,  and
selfishness  merely  the  surface,  or  vice  versa.  By  deduction
I  derive  from  this  a  rational  law  of  conduct.  This  law  is  a
simple  consequence  of  my  hypothesis,  and  I  feel  rationally
obliged  to  follow  it,  only  as  long  as  the  hypothesis  seems
to  me  the  most  probable,  the  most  true  for  me.  In  this
way  a  kind  of  rational  and  non-categorical  imperative  is
obtained,  dependent  on  an  hypothesis.

In  the  third  place,  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  hypo-
thesis may  vary  according  to  individuals  and  to  intellectual
temperaments.  It  is  the  absence  of  fixed  law  which  may  be
designated  by  the  word  anotny,  in  opposition  to  the  autonomy


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  139

of  the  followers  of  Kant.  By  the  suppression  of  the  cate-
gorical imperative,  disinterestedness  and  self-sacrifice  are
not  suppressed  ;  but  their  object  will  vary.  One  person
will  devote  himself  to  this  cause,  another  to  a  different  one.
Bentham  devoted  his  whole  life  to  the  idea  of  self-interest ;
that  is  one  way  of  devoting  one's  self.  He  subordinated
all  his  faculties  to  the  study  of  that  which  was  useful  to
himself,  and  necessarily  also  useful  to  others.  The  result  is
that  he  has  been  really  very  useful — as  useful,  and  even
more  so,  than  many  an  apostle  of  disinterestedness,  such  as
St.  Theresa.

Hypothesis  produces  practically  the  same  effect  as  faith
— even  gives  rise  to  a  subsequent  faith  ;  which,  however,  is
not  affirmative  and  dogmatic  like  the  other.  Moral  philo-
sophy, which  at  its  bases  is  naturalistic  and  positive,  rises
at  its  summit  into  the  sphere  of  free  metaphysic.  There  is
one  unchangeable  moral  philosophy — that  of  facts  ;  and,  to
complete  it,  when  it  is  not  sufficient,  there  is  a  variable  and
individual  moral  philosophy — that  of  hypotheses.

Thus  the  old  apodictic  law  is  shaken.  Man,  freed  by  the
doubt  of  all  absolute  obligation,  partly  recovers  his  liberty.,
Kant  began  a  revolution  in  moral  philosophy  when  he
wanted  to  make  the  will  "  autonomous,"  instead  of  making  it
bow  before  a  law  exterior  to  itself ;  but  he  stopped  halfway.
He  believed  that  the  individual  liberty  of  the  moral  agent
could  be  reconciled  with  the  universality  of  the  law ;  that
everyone  must  conform  to  a  fixed  type;  that  the  ideal
"  reign "  of  liberty  would  be  a  regular  and  methodical
government.  But  in  the  "  reign  of  liberty  "  good  order  is
maintained,  simply  because  no  order  is  imposed  beforehand,
nor  any  preconceived  arrangement.  Consequently,  starting
from  the  point  where  positive  moral  philosophy  stops,  there
may  be  the  greatest  possible  diversity  of  action  and  the
greatest  variety  of  ideals  pursued.  The  true  "  autonomy  "
must  produce  individual  originality,  and  not  universal
uniformity.  If  everyone  establishes  a  law  for  himself,  why


140 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

should  there  not  be  several  laws  possible — for  instance,  that
of  Bentham  and  that  of  Kant  ?*

The  greater  the  number  of  different  doctrines  which  offer
themselves  to  the  choice  of  humanity,  the  greater  will  be
the  value  of  the  future  and  final  agreement.  The  evolution
of  mind,  as  well  as  material  evolution,  is  always  a  transition
from  the  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous.  If  the  intelli-
gence is  reduced  to  complete  uniformity,  the  intelligence
itself  will  be  annihilated.  Shape  all  minds  in  the  same
rpould,  give  them  the  same  creeds,  the  same  religion,  the
same  metaphysics,  pull  the  human  brain  by  a  string,  and  you
will  go  precisely  against  the  essential  tendency  of  progress.
Nothing  is  more  monotonous  and  insipid  than  a  town  with
all  its  streets  alike,  and  laid  out  in  straight  lines ;  and  those
who  imagine  the  intellectual  city  to  be  of  that  type  suffer
from  a  misconception.  It  is  said  :  "  Truth  is  one  ;  the  ideal
of  thought  is  this  very  unity,  this  uniformity"  Absolute
truth  is  an  abstraction,  like  the  perfect  triangle  or  the
perfect  circle  of  the  mathematicians.  In  reality,  everything
is  infinitely  multiplex.  Besides,  the  greater  the  number  of
people  who  think  differently,  the  greater  is  the  sum  of  truth

v -  which  they  finally  will  apprehend,  and  over  which  they  will

at  last  be  reconciled  to  one  another.  Diversity  of  opinion
must  not  be  feared,  therefore ;  on  the  contrary,  itlhust  be
encouraged.  Two  men  have  a  different  way  of  thinking,
perhaps ;  all  the  better,  they  are  much  nearer  to  truth  than
if  they  both  thought  the  same.  If  several  persons  want  to
see  the  whole  of  a  landscape,  there  is  only  one  way,  and

*  Let  it  be  well  understood  that  we  have  never  dreamed  of  con-
sidering, as  Messrs.  Boirac,  Lauret,  and  other  critics  have  reproached
us  for  doing,  all  metaphysical  hypotheses  as  equal  for  human  thought.
There  is  an  abstract  logic  of  the  hypotheses  from  which  point  of  view
they  may  be  classified  or  arranged  according  to  the  scale  of  probabili-
ties. All  the  same,  their  practical  force  will  not,  for  a  long  time  to
come,  correspond  exactly  with  their  theoretical  value.  (See  the  chapter
on  "  The  Progress  of  Metaphysical  Hypotheses "  in  our  volume,
"  L'Irreligion  de  1'Avenir.")


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  141

that  is,  to  turn  their  back  to  one  another.  If  soldiers  are  sent
out  as  scouts,  and  all  turn  the  same  way,  observing  only
one  point  of  the  horizon,  they  will  most  likely  return  without
having  discovered  anything.

JTruth  is  like  light.  It  does  not  come  to  us  from  one
point ;  it  is  reflected  by  all  objects  at  the  same  time ;  it
strikes  us  from  every  direction,  and  in  a  thousand  ways.
We  should  want  a  hundred  eyes  to  catch  all  its  beams.

Humanity  as  a  whole  has  millions  of  eyes  and  ears. Do
not  advise  it  to  shut  them,  or  to  listen  on  one  side  only.
It  must  open  them  all  at  the  same  time — turn  them  in  all
directions. The  infinity of  the  points  of  view  ought  to
correspond with  the infinity of  things. The variety  of
doctrines  proves  the wealth and the power of  thought.
Moreover, this variety, far from decreasing with time,
must increase  in  details, so that  it may  end in chords
of harmony. Division of thought and diversity of
intellectual labour are as necessary as division and
diversity  of  manual  work. This  division of  labour  is  the
condition  of  all wealth. In bygone times thought was
infinitely  less  divided  than  in  our  days;  all  had  imbibed
the  same  superstitions,  the  same  dogmas,  the  same  false-
hoods. If  one  met  an  individual,  one  could  beforehand,
and, without  knowing  it,  say:  "Such  is  his  creed;"  one
could  count  up  the  absurdities  of  his  brain,  draw  up  the
balance-sheet  of  his  mind. Even  in  our  days  many  people,
both of  the inferior and  superior  classes, have not  got
beyond  this ;  their  intelligence  is  of  the  conventional  type.
Happily,  the  number  of  these minds,  inert  and without
spring, diminishes daily; the role played by initiative
increases ;  almost  everyone  shows  a  tendency  to  make  his
own  law  and  his  own  creed. If  only  we  could  once  get  so
far  as  that,  there  would  no  longer  be  any  orthodoxy  what-
ever— I  mean  no  general  faith,  lumping  all  minds  together.
Oh, that faith might become wholly individual — that
heterodoxy  might  become  the  true  and  universal  religion  I


142 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

Religious  society  (and  every  absolute  moral  philosophy
seems  to  be  the  last  form  of  religion) — this  society,  united
solely  by  community  of  superstitions,  is  a  social  form
belonging  to  ancient  times,  which  tends  to  disappear,  and
which  it  would  be  strange  to  take  as  ideal.  Kings  are  dis-
appearing ;  and  priests  go  also.  Theocracy  may  well  try  to
bring  about  some  compromise  with  the  new  order  of  things —
to  establish  concordats  of  some  other  kind  :  constitutional
theocracy  can  no  more  definitely  satisfy  reason  than  consti-
tutional monarchy.  The  French  spirit,  above  all,  is  not
easily  satisfied  with  arrangements  of  compromise,  with  half-
measures,  with  anything  which  is  but  partially  just  and
true.  In  any  case,  it  will  not  look  in  that  direction  for  its
ideal.  With  regard  to  religion  and  to  metaphysics,  the  true
ideal  is  absolute  independence  of  mind  and  free  diversity
of  doctrines.

To  wish  to  rule  minds  is  still  worse  than  to  wish  to  rule
bodies  ;  we  must  shun  every  kind  of  "  authority  over  con-
,-gcien.ce  "  or  "  authority  over  thought "  as  a  veritable~curse.
Authoritative  metaphysics  and  religions  are  leading-strings
fit  for  childish  people.  It  is  time  that  we  should  walk  alone,
that  we  should  have  a  horror  of  sham  apostles,  of  mis-
sionaries, of  preachers  of  all  kinds  ;  it  is  time  that  we  should
be  our  own  guides,  and  that  we  should  look  for  "  revelation  "
within  ourselves.  There  is  no  Christ  now.  Let  every  one
of  us  be  his  own  Christ,  bind  himself  to  God  according  to
his  own  choice  and  abilities,  or  even  deny  God.  Let  every
one  conceive  the  universe  according  to  a  type  which  appears
to  him  the  most  probable — monarchy,  oligarchy,  republic,
or  chaos.  All  these  hypotheses  can  be  maintained,  therefore
they  must  be  maintained.  It  is  not  absolutely  impossible
that  one  of  them  will  some  day  collect  together  on  its  side
the  greatest  probabilities,  and,  by  means  of  them,  turn  the
scale  in  the  most  cultivated  human  minds ;  it  is  not  impos-
sible that  this  privileged  doctrine  should  be  a  doctrine  of
negation.  But  we  must  not  encroach  upon  so  problematic


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  143

a  future,  and believe  that,  by  doing  away with revealed
ehgion or categorical duty, humanity will be suddenly
thrown  into  atheism  and  moral  scepticism.

In  the  intellectual  order  there  can  be  no  violent  and
sudden  revolution,  but  only  an  evolution,  more  accentuated
every  year. It  is  just  this  slowness  of  the  mind  in  running
through  the  whole  chain  of  reasoning  from  one -end  to  the
other  which,  in  the  social  order,  makes  too  sudden  revolu-
tions come  to  nothing. Likewise,  when  it  concerns  pure
speculation,  the  men  whom  we  have  to  fear  least,  and  who
are  most  useful,  are  the  most  revolutionary— those  whose
thoughts  are  boldest. We  ought  to  admire  them  without
dread ;  they  can  do  so  little  ! The  storm  which  they  raise
in  a  small  corner  of  the  ocean  will  hardly produce  any
perceptible  undulation  on  the  immense  mass. On  the  other
hand,  in  practical  matters  the  revolutionary  spirits  always
make  mistakes,  because  they  always  believe  truth  to  be  too
simple,  because  they  are  too  confident  of  themselves,  and
imagine  that  they  have  found  and  fixed  the  end  and  aim  of
human  progress. Whereas  real  progress  is  to  have  no  end;
is  to  reach  those  ends  which  one  has  put  before  one's  self
only  to  transform  them  ;  to  solve  problems  only  by  changing
their  given  terms.

Happy,  therefore,  are  those  to-day  to  whom  a  Christ
would  say,  "Oh,  ye  of  little  faith  !"  if  that  means  sincere
men  who  do  not  want  to  allure  their  reason  and  debase
their  dignity  as  intelligent  beings  ;  men  of  a  truly  scientific
and  philosophic  mind,  who  distrust  appearances,  who  distrust
their  eyes  and  their  minds,  who  incessantly  begin  over  again
to  test  their  sensations  and  to  examine  their  reasonings  ;  the
only  people  who  might  possess  some  particle  of  the  eternal
truth,  precisely  because  they  never  imagine  they  have  the
whole  truth  ;  people  who  have  sufficient  real/a//^  to  always
go  on  searching,  instead  of  resting  and  exclaiming,  "I
have  found  it !"  brave  people,  who  walk  on  when  others
stop  or  go  to  sleep.  It  is  such  as  these  who  have  the  future


144 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

before  them  ;  it  is  they  who  will  mould  the  humanity  of
the  ages  to  come.

The  morality  of  to-day  understands  its  partial  impo-
tence to  rule  the  whole  of  human  life  absolutely,  and  in
advance ;  it  leaves  a  larger  sphere  to  individual  liberty ;  it
does  not  threaten  except  in  a  sufficiently  rare  number  of
cases,  and  only  when  the  absolutely  necessary  conditions  of
all  social  life  are  concerned.  Philosophers  no  longer  agree
with  the  rigorous  moral  philosophy  of  Kant,  who  regulated
everything  by  the  tribunal  of  conscience,  who  forbade  every
transgression,  every  free  interpretation  of  moral  command-
ments. It  was  a  moral  philosophy  similar  to  the  ritualist
religions,  which  count  any  failure  in  ceremonial  as  a
sacrilege,  and  which  forget  the  essence  for  the  sake  of  the
form ;  it  was  a  kind  of  moral  despotism,  creeping  every-
where, wanting  to  rule  everything.

At  present  the  rigorous  law  of  Kant's  philosophy  still
reigns  in  many  minds,  but  no  longer  makes  itself  felt
in  details ;  it  is  recognised  in  theory,  but  in  practice  it  is
often  necessary  to  deviate  from  it.  It  is  no  longer  the
Jupiter  whose  frown  was  sufficient  to  move  the  world  ;  it  is
a  liberal  prince,  whom  we  may  disobey  without  much
danger.  Is  there  not  something  higher  than  this  mock
royalty,  and  must  not  man,  when  he  reaches  the  borders  of
moral  philosophy  and  of  metaphysics,  reject  all  absolute
supremacy,  in  order  to  frankly  approach  individual  specu-
lation ?

The  coarser  a  mechanism,  the  greater  the  need  of  a
violent  and  coarse  motive-power  to  set  it  in  motion ;  in  a
more  delicate  mechanism  the  finger-tip  is  sufficient  to
produce  considerable  effect.  It  is  the  same  with  humanity.
To  make  the  ancient  nations  move,  enormous  promises  had
at  first  to  be  made  by  religion,  and  the  veracity  of  these
promises  had  to  be  guaranteed.  It  spoke  to  them  of
mountains  of  gold,  and  streams  of  milk  and  honey.  Would
Ferdinand  Cortez  have  conquered  Mexico  if  he  had  not


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  SPECULATION.  145

believed  he  should  see  the  glitter  of  the  supposed  golden
domes  of  Mexico  in  the  distance  ?  In  order  to  excite
people,  brilliant  images,  glittering  colours,  were  dangled
before  their  eyes,  as  scarlet  is  held  out  before  a  bull.  At
that  time  a  robust  faith  was  needed  to  conquer  the  natural
inertia.

Something  certain  was  wanted.  One  touched  one's  god
with  one's  ringer;  one  ate,  one  drank  him.  Then  one
could  quietly  die  for  him,  and  with  him.  Later  on,  duty
seemed,  and  still  seems  to  many,  a  divine  thing — a  voice
from  heaven,  which  is  heard  within  us,  which  speaks  to  us,
commands  us.  The  Scotch  even  talked  of  moral  "sense"
of  moral  "  tact"  This  coarse  conception  was  still  needed
to  conquer  coarse  instincts.  To-day  a  mere  hypothesis,  a
simple  possibility,  is  sufficient  to  attract  and  fascinate  us.
The  martyr  no  longer  requires  to  know  if  he  will  receive
palms  in  heaven,  or  if  a  categorical  law  commands  his
self-sacrifice.  One  dies,  not  to  conquer  the  whole  truth,  but
the  least  of  its  elements  ;  a  man  of  science  sacrifices  himself
for  a  calculation.  Ardour  in  research  supplies  the  place  of
certainty  in  the  object  sought ;  enthusiasm  takes  the  place
of  religious  faith  and  moral  law.

The  loftiness  of  the  ideal  which  we  want  to  realize
supersedes  the  energy  of  faith  in  its  immediate  reality.
If  we  hope  for  something  very  great,  we  derive  from  the
beauty  of  the  aim  the  courage  to  defy  obstacles;  if  the
chances  of  its  attainment  decrease,  the  desire  to  do  so
increases  in  proportion.  The  further  the  ideal  is  removed
from  reality,  the  more  desirable  it  seems  ;  and,  as  the  desire
itself  is  the  supreme  force,  it  has  command  over  the
maximum  of  force.

The  vulgar  gifts  of  life  are  worth  so  little  that,  in
comparison  with  these,  the  conceived  ideal  must  seem
immense ;  all  our  little  enjoyments  become  as  nothing
before  the  supreme  one  of  realizing  a  noble  thought.  This
thought,  even  if  it  has  no  meaning  with  regard  to  nature  or


146 MORALITY INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

science,  may  mean  everything  with  regard  to  ourselves  ;  it
is  the  farthing  of  the  poor.  "  To__search_for  Truth  " — this
action  no  longer  contains  anything  conditional,  doubtful,  or
fragile.  We  have  got  hold  of  something,  not  of  the  truth
itself,  undoubtedly  (who  will  ever  get  hold  of  it  completely  ?),
but  at  least  of  the  spirit  which  enables  us  to  discover  it.
If  we  obstinately  stop  at  some  doctrine,  which  is  always  too
narrow,  it  is  like  a  shadow,  disappearing  with  every  change
of  light ;  but  always  to  advance  steadily,  always  to  search,
always  hope — this  alone  is  no  mere  shadow.  The  truth  is
to  be  found  by  moving  forward,  by  hoping ;  and  it  is  not
without  reason  that  a  "  philosophy  of  hope "  has  been
suggested  as  a  complement  to  positive  moral  philosophy.*

A  child  saw  a  blue  butterfly  resting  on  a  blade  of  grass ;
the  butterfly  was  benumbed  by  the  north  wind.  The  child
picked  the  blade  of  grass,  and  the  living  flower  at  the  end
of  it,  still  benumbed,  could  not  fly  away.  The  child
returned,  holding  up  its  chance  prize.  A  sunbeam  touched
the  wing  of  the  butterfly,  and  suddenly,  revived  and  gay,  the
living  blossom  flew  away  towards  the  light.  We  all,  seekers
and  workers — we  are  like  the  butterfly  :  our  strength  is  made
only  of  a  ray  of  light ;  nay,  only  of  the  hope  of  a  ray  of
light.  We  must,  therefore,  know  how  to  hope  ;  hope  is  the
force  which  bears  us  upward  and  forward.  But  it  is  an
illusion  !  How  do  we  know  that  ?  Must  we  not  move
a  step,  for  fear  that  some  day  the  earth  will  disappear  from
under  our  feet?  It  is  not  sufficient  to  look  far  into  the
future,  or  into  the  past ;  we  must  look  into  ourselves.  We
must  note  there  the  vital  forces  which  demand  to  be  spent ;
and  we  must  act.


See  M.  Fouillee,  "  La  Science  Sociale  Contemporaine,"  livre  v.


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  ACTION.

II.
METAPHYSICAL RISK IN ACTION.


of  (-!,„ j -ff  .  J  'Tt  Ulju  it  aiso

f  our  actions are  in  accordance  with our
uugms,  \ve  may  also  say  that our  thought*;
exactly  to  the  expansion  of  our  activity. The  most  abstr^
metaphysical  systems  are  themselves  but  formulas  of  feeling
and  feeling  corresponds  to  the  greater  or  lesser  tension  of
inward  activity. There  is  a  middle  term  between  doubt  and
faith,  between  incertitude  and  categorical  affirmation-it  is
By  it  only  can  the  uncertain realize itself  and

ideal;  I  ask  you  to  work  towards  its  realization  ^it'hou"
believing  m  it,  so  as  to  believe  in  it.  You  will  believe™
it  if  you  have  striven  to  produce  it.

b  Ineam  of dem  reHgi°nS  haVC  Wanted  to  make  us  believe
God  in  flesh  and  bone.  Saint  Thomas  ami  thaTresemWi^

him  have  touched  him  with  their  fingers,  and  they  have  been
convinced  In  these  days  we  can  no  longer  be  convincedln

his  way.  We  should  look,  we  should  listen,  we  should  even
touch  with  our  finger,  only  to  deny  yet  more  obstinately  One

s  not  convinced  of  an  impossible  thing  because  one  thinks
one  sees  or  touches  it.  Our  reason  is  now  strong  enough
to  scoff  at  the  need  to  actually  see  things  ;  and^iracfes
no  longer  convince  anybody.  Therefore,  a  new  way  of
persuasion  is  wanted,  which  even  religions  have  already
used  to  their  benefit.  This  way  is  action;  you  believe  in
proportion  as  you  work.  But  action  must  not  consist  of
outward  practices  and  coarse  rites;  it  must  have  a  wholly
inward  source;  then  only  will  Our  faith  come  truly  from
withm-not  from  without.  Its  symbol  will  be  not  the
routine  of  a  rite,  but  the  infinite  variety  of  invention,  of

dividual  and  spontaneous  creation.

Humanity  has  lon^aheTfoTcod  to  appear,  and  when


148 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

at  last  he  appeared  it  was  not  God.  The  time  of  waiting
is  over  ;  now  is  the  time  for  work.  If  the  idea  is  not  ready
built  like  a  house,  it  depends  on  us  to  labour  together
towards  its  construction.

Religions  all  say  :  "  I  hope  because  I  believe,  and  because
I  believe  in  an  external  revelation."  We  must  say:  I  believe
because  I  hope,  and  I  hope  because  I  feel  in  myself  a
wholly  internal  energy,  which  will  have  to  be  taken  into
account  in  the  problem.  Why  look  only  at  one  side  of
the  question  ?  If  there  is  the  unknown  world,  there  is
the  known  self.  I  do  not  know  what  I  am  capable  of
with  regard  to  outward  things,  and  I  have  received  no
revelation  whatever.  I  hear  no  "  word "  echoing  in  the
deep  silence  of  things,  but  I  do  know  that  which  I
inwardly  will,  and  it  is  my  will  which  constitutes  my  power.
It  is  action  alone  which  gives  us  confidence  in  ourselves,
in  others,  and  in  the  world.  Abstract  meditation,  solitary
thought,  in  the  end  weaken  the  vital  forces.  If  we  remain
too  long  on  the  mountain-tops,  a  kind  of  fever  of  infinite
weariness  takes  hold  of  us  ;  we  wish  never  to  descend  again,
we  wish  to  stop  where  we  are,  to  rest.  The  eyelids  droop  ;
but,  if  we  give  way  to  sleepiness,  we  cannot  easily  wake
up  again.  The  penetrating  cold  of  the  summits  freezes  the
very  marrow  of  our  bones.  The  indolent  and  painful
ecstasy  which  threatened  to  take  possession  of  us  was  really
the  beginning  of  death.

Action  is  the  true  remedy  for  a  pessimism,  which  may,  after
all,  have  its  share  of  truth  and  utility,  if  taken  in  the  highest
sense  of  the  word.  Pessimism,  in  reality,  consists  of  com-
plaining, not  so  much  of  what  life  is,  as  of  what  life  is
not.  That  which  exists  in  life  but  rarely  constitutes  the
principal  object  of  human  sorrow,  and  life  in  itself  is  not
an  evil.  As  to  death,  it  is  simply  the  negation  of
life.  It  is  not  death  itself  that  men  would  ever  desire,
either  for  themselves  or  those  dear  to  them ;  but  through
death  they  seek  after  truth,  and  to  see  God,  etc.  The


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  ACTION.  I49

child wishing to reach the moon cries for a quarter-
af-an-hour, and then consoles itself. Man,  wishing to
sess  eternity,  cries  also— at  least,  inwardly  ;  if  he  is  a
philosopher  he  writes  a  big  book  ;  if  he  is  a  poet,  he  writes
a  poem ;  if  he  is  incapable,  he  does  nothing  at  all. At  last
ie  consoles  himself,  and  begins  life  once  more,  indifferent  to
everything. Indifferent— no,  for  he  cares  for  life  ;  after  all,
is  in  the  main  pleasant. True  pessimism  is  really  but
the  desire  for  the  infinite ;  noble  despair  is  but  infinite  hope  ;
is  precisely  because  it is  infinite and inextinguishable
that  it  changes  into  despair. What  does  the  consciousness
>f  suffering  for  the  most  part  amount  to  in  the  end  ? To
the  thought  that  it  will  be  possible  to  escape  from  it  •  to  the
conception  of  a  better  state  of  things— that  is  to 'say  to
a  kind  of  ideal. Evil is the feeling of  impotence. It
would  prove  the  impotence  of God if  one granted  the
existence  of God  ; but,  with  regard  to  man,  it,  on the •
Contrary,  proves  his relative power. Suffering becomes
the  mark  of  a  kind  of  superiority. The  only  being  who
speaks  and  thinks  is  also  the  only  one  capable  of  crying
A  poet  has  said  « the  ideal  takes  its  rise  among  those  who
suffer." May  it  not  be  this  very  ideal  which  gives  rise  to
moral  suffering,  which  gives  man full  consciousness  of  his
Brings? In fact, certain sufferings are a mark of
superiority ;  it  is  not  everyone  who  is  thus  able  to  suffer
Great  souls  with  broken  hearts  resemble  the  bird  struck  by
an  arrow  in  its  highest  flight. It  gives  a  shriek  which  fills
the  skies ;  it  is  dying,  and  yet  it  soars. Leopardi,  Heine,  or
Lenau  would  probably  not  have  exchanged  those  hours  of
anguish  in  which  they  composed  their  finest  songs  for  the
greatest  possible  enjoyment. Dante  suffered,  as  much  as  it
is  possible  to  suffer,  from  pity,  when  he  wrote  these  lines  on
Francesca  de  Rimini. Which  of  us  would  not  undergo  a
similar suffering? Some heartaches  are  infinitely  sweet
There is likewise  a  point  at  which keen  pain  and  keen
pleasure  seem  to  mingle. The  spasms  of  agony  and  those


150 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

of  love  are  not  without  analogy.  The  heart  breaks  with  joy
as  well  as  with  pain.  Sufferings  productive  of  good  are  accom-
panied by  ineffable  joy ;  they  resemble  those  sobs  which,
rendered  by  the  music  of  a  master,  become  harmony.  To
suffer  and  to  create  is  to  feel  in  one's  self  a  new  power
called  forth  by  pain.  It  is  like  the  Aurora  sculptured  by
Michael-Angelo  which,  opening  its  eyes  filled  with  tears,
seems  but  to  see  the  light  through  its  tears.  Yes ;  but  this
light  of  sorrowful  days  is  yet  light ;  it  is  worth  being  looked
at.

Action,  in  its  productiveness,  is  also  a  remedy  for  scep-
ticism ;  it  forms  in  itself,  as  we  have  seen,  its  own  inward
certitude.  How  do  I  know  if  I  shall  be  alive  to-morrow,  if
I  shall  be  alive  within  an  hour,  if  my  hand  will  be  able  to
finish  this  line  which  I  begin  ?  Life  from  all  sides  is  sur-
rounded by  the  unknown.  Nevertheless,  I  act,  I  work,  I
undertake ;  and  in  all  my  acts,  in  all  my  thoughts,  I  pre-
suppose that  future  upon  which  nothing  gives  me  a  right  to
count.  My  activity  extends  every  minute  beyond  the
present  instant — projects  into  the  future.  I  expend  my
energy  without  fearing  that  this  expenditure  may  be  pure
loss ;  I  impose  privations  on  myself,  counting  on  the  future
to  compensate  me  for  them  ;  I  go  my  way.  This  incertitude,
which  is  pressing  on  me  equally  from  all  sides,  is,  for  me,
equivalent  to  a  certitude,  and  makes  my  liberty  possible ;  it
is  one  of  the  foundations  of  speculative  moral  philosophy*
with  all  its  risks.  My  thought  goes  before  it,  so  does  my
activity  ;  it  sets  the  world  to  rights,  disposes  of  the  future.
It  seems  to  make  me  master  of  the  infinite,  because  my
power  has  no  equivalent  in  any  other  fixed  quantity  ;  the
more  I  achieve,  the  more  I  hope.  Action,  in  order  to
possess  the  advantages  which  we  have  just  attributed  to  it,
should  undertake  some  precise  work,  and,  to  a  certain
extent,  some  work  which  lies  near  at  hand.

To  do  good,  not  so  much  to  the  whole  world  or  the  world
of  humanity,  as  to  certain  definite  people ;  to  relieve  actual


METAPHYSICAL  RISK  IN  ACTION.


misery,  to  lighten  someone's  burden—  such  things  cannot
deceive.  We  know  what  we  are  doing;  we  know  that  the  aim
will  be  worth  our  efforts-not  in  the  sense  that  the  result
obtained  will  be  of  considerable  importance  in  the  mighty
stream  of  things,  but  in  the  sense  that  there  certainly  will  be  a
result,  and  a  good  result  ;  that  our  action  will  not  be  lost  in
the  infinite,  like  a  small  cloud  in  the  monotonous  blue  of  the
atmosphere.  To  do  away  with  some  suffering,  that  is  in
itself  a  sufficient  aim  for  a  human  being.  By  so  doing  we
change  an  infinitesimal  part  of  the  total  sum  of  pain  in
the  universe.  Pity  remains—  inherent  in  the  heart  of  man,
vibrating  in  his  deepest  instincts—  even  when  purely  rational
justice  and  universalized  charity  sometimes  seem  to  lose
their  foundations.  Even  while  doubting,  one  may  love  •
even  in  the  intellectual  night,  which  prevents  our  pursuing
any  far-reaching  aim,  we  may  stretch  out  a  helping  hand  to
those  around  us  who  suffer.


THIRD BOOK.


THE  IDEA  OF  SANCTION.


CHAPTER  I.
Criticism  of  Natural  Sanction  and  of  Moral  Sanction.

HUMANITY  has  nearly  always  considered  the  moral  law  as
inseparable  from  its  sanction.  In  the  eyes  of  most  moralists
vice  rationally  brings  in  its  train  suffering  ;  virtue  constitutes
a  kind  of  right,  or  happiness.  The  idea  of  sanction,  more-
over, has,  till  now,  been  one  of  the  primitive  and  essential
notions  of  all  morality.  According  to  the  Stoics  and  the
followers  of  Kant,  sanction,  it  is  true,  does  not  by  any
means  serve  to  lay  down  the  law ;  nevertheless,  it  is  the
necessary  complement  of  the  law.  According  to  Kant,
every  reason,  being  a  priori,  unites  by  synthetic  judgment
misfortune  to  vice,  and  happiness  to  virtue.  Such  is,  in  the
opinion  of  Kant,  the  force  and  the  legitimacy  of  this  judg-
ment that,  if  human  society  dissolved  itself  of  its  own  free
will,  it  would  first,  before  the  dispersion  of  its  members,
have  to  execute  the  last  criminal  shut  up  in  its  prisons.  It
ought  to  pay  off  this  debt  of  punishment,  which  is  firstly
its  own  debt  and  afterwards  that  of  God.  Even  certain
determinist  moralists,  while  in  the  main  denying  merit  and
demerit,  seem  still  to  see  a  legitimate  intellectual  need  in
this  tendency  of  humanity  to  consider  every  act  as  followed
by  sanction.  Lastly,  the  utilitarians — for  instance,  Mr.
Sidgwick — also  seem  to  admit  some  mystical  link  between
such  and  such  a  kind  of  conduct  and  such  or  such  a  happy,


THE  IDEA  OF  SANCTION.


or  unhappy,  state  of  sensibility.  Mr.  Sidgwick  believes  it
possible,  in  the  name  of  utilitarianism,  to  make  an  appeal
to  the  pains  and  rewards  of  a  future  life.  Moral  law,  without
definite  sanction,  would  seem  to  him  to  end  in  a  "  funda-
mental contradiction."*

As  the  idea  of  sanction  is  one  of  the  principles  of  human
morality,  it  is  also  to  be  found  in  the  essence  of  every
religion—  Christian, Pagan, or Buddhist. There is no
ehgion  which  has  not  a  Providence;  and  a  Providence  is
but  a  kind  of  distributive  justice,  which,  after  having  acted
incompletely  in  this  world,  takes  its  revenge  in  another  !
^^distributive  justice  is  what  the  moralists  understand  by
sanction. It  may  be  said  that  religion  consists  essentially
this  belief—  that  it  is  a  sanction  metaphysically  linked  to
every moral act; in other terms, that  in the profound
order  of  things  there  must  exist  a  proportion  between  the
good  or  bad  state  of  will  and  the  good  or  bad  state  of  the
sensibility. On  this  point,  therefore,  religion  and  morality
seem  to  coincide—  their  mutual  demands  seem  to  agree;
and,  moreover,  morality  seems  to  be  completed  by  religion.'
The  idea  of  distributive  justice  and  of  sanction,  generally
given the  first  place in our moral  conceptions,  in fact
naturally  appeals,  under  one  form  or  another,  to  a  divine
justice.

We  wish  to  sketch  here  a  criticism  of  this  important  idea
of  sanction,  so  as  to  purify  it  of  any  kind  of  mystical  alliance.
Is  it  true  that  there  exists  a  natural  and  rational  link  between
the  morality  of  the  will  and  a  reward  or  a  su/ering  caused
to  the  sensibility?  In  other  terms,  is  it  right  to  associate
merit  with  enjoyment,  demerit  with  suffering  ?  This  is  the
problem,  which  can  be  also  put  in  the  form  of  an  example,
if  we  ask  :  Does  there  exist  any  sort  of  reason  (exclusive
of  social  considerations)  that  the  greatest  criminal  should
receive,  because  of  his  crime,  a  simple  pin-prick,  and  the

*  See  our  "  Morale  Anglaise  Contemporaine  "  (second  edition).


154 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

virtuous  man  a  prize  for  his  virtue  ?  Has  the  moral  agent
itself  the  right  (exclusive  of  questions  of  utility  or  moral
hygiene),  having  regard  to  itself,  to  punish  for  the  sake  of
punishing,  or  to  reward  for  the  sake  of  rewarding  1  We
should  like  to  show  how  morally  condemnable  is  the  idea
which  ordinary  morality  and  religion  give  of  sanction.
From  the  social  point  of  view,  the  truly  rational  sanction  of
a  law  could  only  be  a  defence  of  this  law,  and  this  defence,
useless  with  regard  to  every  past  act,  we  shall  find  bears
only  on  the  future.  From  the  moral  point  of  view,  sanction
seems  simply  to  mean,  according  to  its  actual  etymology,
consecration,  sanctification.  Now,  if  for  those  who  admit  a
moral  law  it  is  really  the  holy  and  sacred  character  of  the
law  which  gives  it  force  as  law,  this  must  imply,  according
to  the  idea  which  we  have  to  day  of  holiness  and  of  ideal
divinity,  a  sort  of  supreme  renunciation  and  of  disinterested-
ness. The  more  sacred  the  law,  the  more  disarmed  it
must  be  ;  so  that,  taken  in  the  absolute  and  apart  from
social  conventions,  true  sanction  must  seem  to  be  the
complete  impunity  of  the  thing  done.  We  shall  also  see
that  all  penal  justice,  properly  so  called,  is  unjust.  More-
over, all  distributive  justice  has  an  exclusively  social  char-
acter, and  can  only  be  justified  from  the  point  of  view  of
society.  In  a  general  way,  that  which  we  call  justice  is  a
completely  human  and  relative  notion  ;  only  charity  or  pity
(without  the  pessimistic  significance  which  Schopenhauer
gives  it)  is  a  truly  universal  idea  which  nothing  can  limit  or
restrict.


i.

NATURAL SANCTION.


THE  classic  moralists  are  accustomed  to  see  in  natural
sanction  an  idea  of  the  same  order  as  that  of  expiation  ;
nature  begins,  according  to  them,  that  which  human  con-


NATURAL SANCTION.


155


science  and  God  have  to  continue.  Whosoever  violates
natural  laws,  therefore,  finds  himself  already  punished  in  a
way,  if  we  may  believe  them,  which  forewarns  of,  and  pre-
pares, the  punishment  resulting  from  moral  laws.

In  our  eyes  nothing  is  more  inexact  than  this  conception.
Nature punishes no one  (in  the  sense  in  which classic
moral  philosophy  uses  this  word),  and  nature  has  nobody
to  punish,  for  the  reason  that  nobody  is  truly  guilty  with
respect  to  nature. One  does  not  violate  a  natural  law,  or  it
would  not  be,  in  that  case,  any  longer  a  natural  law. The
pretended  violation  of  a  natural  law  is  never  anything  else
but a verification, a visible demonstration. Nature  is  a
great mechanism  which  always  goes  on, and which the
will  of  the  individual  is  unable  to  impede  for  a  moment.
She  calmly  crushes  him  who  falls  between  her  cog-wheels.
To  be,  or  not  to  be— she  hardly  knows  any  other  punishment
or  any  other  reward. If  we  attempt  to  violate  the  law  of
gravity  while  bending  too  far over on  the  tower of  St.
Jacques,  we  shall  at  once  give  the  painful  verification  of
this  law  by  falling  down  with  broken bones. If,  like  a
certain  personage  of  a  modern  novelist,  we  wish  to  stop  a
locomotive  at  its  highest  speed  by  holding  an  iron  spear  in
front  of  it,  we  shall  prove,  at  our  own  expense,  the  inferiority
of  human  force  to  that  of  steam.

In  the  same  way,  the  indigestion  of  a  glutton  and  the
drunkenness  of  a  tippler  have  by  nature  no  kind  of  moral
and  penal  character  whatever ;  they  simply  allow  the  patient
to  calculate  the  force  of  resistance  which  his  stomach  or  his
brain  can  offer  to  the  hurtful  influence  of  a  certain  mass  of
food  or  a  certain  quantity  of  alcohol.  It  is  still  a  mathe-
matical equation,  this  time  a  more  complicated  one,  which
serves  as  verification  for  the  general  theorems  of  hygiene
and  of  physiology.  Besides,  this  force  of  the  resistance  of
the  digestion  or  the  brain  varies  a  great  deal  according  to
individuals.  Our  drinker  will  learn  that  he  is  not  able  to
drink  like  Socrates,  and  our  glutton  that  he  has  not  the


156 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

digestion  of  the  Emperor  Maximin.  Let  us  note  that  the
natural  consequences  of  an  act  are  never  linked  to  the
intention  which  dictated  the  act ;  if  you  throw  yourself  into
the  water  without  knowing  how  to  swim,  whether  it  be  from
self-sacrifice  or  merely  from  despair,  you  will  be  drowned
equally  quickly.  If  you  have  a  good  digestion  and  no  dis-
position to  gout,  you  will  be  able  to  eat  to  excess  almost
with  impunity  ;  on  the  contrary,  if  you  are  dyspeptic,  you
will  be  condemned  to  incessantly  undergo  the  torment  of
comparative  starvation.  Another  example  :  you  have  given
way  to  a  fit  of  intemperance,  you  are  awaiting  with  anxiety  the
"  sanction  of  nature " ;  some  drops  of  a  medical  mixture
will  turn  it  off  by  changing  the  terms  of  the  equation  put
before  your  organism  to  solve.  The  justice  of  things,  there-
fore, is  at  the  same  time  absolutely  inflexible  from  a  mathe-
matical point  of  view,  and  absolutely  corruptible  from  the
moral  point  of  view.

To  better  express  it,  the  laws  of  nature,  as  such,  are
immoral — or,  if  you  like,  a-moral — precisely  because  they
are  necessary ;  they  are  the  less  holy  and  sacred,  they  have
the  less  veritable  sanction,  as  they  are  really  the  more
inviolable.  Man  sees  in  them  only  a  movable  fetter  which
he  tries  to  remove.  All  these  bold  acts  against  nature  are
but  happy  or  unhappy  experiments,  and  the  result  of  these
experiments  has  a  scientific,  but  by  no  means  a  moral,
value.

The  attempt  has,  nevertheless,  been  made  to  maintain
natural  sanction  by  establishing  a  kind  of  secret  harmony
made  visible  by  aesthetics,  between  the  course  of  nature  and
that  of  the  moral  will.  Morality  necessarily  imparts  to  those
who  possess  it  a  superiority  even  in  the  order  of  nature.
"  Experience,  it  has  been  said,  shows  such  a  dependency
between  the  morally  and  the  physically  good,  between  the
beautiful  and  the  ugly  expressed  materially,  and  between
the  beautiful  and  the  ugly  in  the  sphere  of  passions  and
ideas ;  one  sees  the  organs  become  so  distinctly  modified


NATURAL SANCTION.


and  modelled  according  to  their  habitual  functions,  that
there  is  little  doubt  that  prolonged  human  life  (if  it  could
only  be  sufficiently  prolonged)  would  show  us,  in  the  long  run,
on  the  one  side  monsters,  on  the  other  true  human  beings  •
and  this,  according  to  the  more  and  more  instinctive  aban-
donment of  certain  people  to  every  vice,  and  the  acquired
domination  of  certain  others,  or  according  to  their  faculties
turned  to  right  purposes."*

First  of  all let it be noted  that  this  law  of  harmony
between nature and morality, to establish which such
strenuous  efforts  have  been  made,  is  certainly  more  valid  for
the  species  than  for  individual  life,  even  if  that  were  pro-
longed. A  succession  of  generations  and  of  specific  modifi-
cations is  wanted  for  a  moral  quality  to  express  itself  by  a
physical  quality,  and  a  defect  by  some  deformity. More-
over, the  believers  in  aesthetic  sanction  seem  to entirely
confound  immorality  with  what  may  be  called  animalism—
that  is  to  say,  the  Absolute  abandonment  to  the  coarser ^
instincts,  the  absence  of  any  elevated  idea,  of  any  subtle
reasoning. Immorality  is  not  necessarily  like  this  ;  it  may
coincide  with  refinement  of  mind,  and  it  does  not  always
lower  the  intelligence. Now,  what  is  expressed  by  means  of
the  body  is  rather  more  the  lowering  of  the  intelligence  than
the  degradation  of  the  will. A  Cleopatra  and  a  Don  Juan
do  not  necessarily  cease  to  be  types  of  physical  beauty,  nor
would  they  even  if  their  existence  were  prolonged. The
instincts  of  cunning, anger, and  revenge  which we find
among  the  Italians  of  the  South  have  in  no  wise  changed
the  rare  beauty  of  their  race. Besides,  many  of  the  types
of  conduct  which  to  us,  in  our  advanced  social  state,  seem
vices  are  virtues  in  the  state  of  nature. No  really  shocking
ugliness, no marked  alteration of  the human type,  can
therefore  be  the  consequence  of  it. On  the  contrary,  the
qualities,  and  sometimes  the  virtues,  of  civilization,  if  carried

*  M.  Renouvier,  "Science  de  la  Morale,"  i.  289.


158 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

to  excess,  may  easily  become  physical  monstrosities.  It  is
clear  on  how  frail  a  basis  is  built  the  attempt  to  deduce
moral  and  religious  sanction  from  natural  sanction.*


n.

MORAL SANCTION AND DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE.

BENTHAM,  Mill,  MM.  Maudsley,  Fouillee,  and  Lombroso
have  already  grappled  with  the  idea  of  moral  punishment ;
they  wanted  to  take  away  from  pain  all  character  of  expia-
tion, and  have  reduced  it  to  a  simple  means  of  social  repres-
sion and  compensation.  To  reach  this  conclusion  they
have,  in  general,  relied  on  determinist  and  materialistic
doctrines,  which  are  still  under  discussion.  M.  Janet,  also,
in  the  name  of  classical  spiritualism,  has,  notwithstanding  all
this,  thought  it  to  be  his  duty  to  maintain,  in  his  last  work,
the  principle  of  redemptory  atonement  of  freely-committed
crimes.  "  Punishment,"  he  says,  "  must  not  only  be  a  threat,
which  assures  the  execution  of  the  law,  but  a  reparation,  or
an  expiation,  which  serves  as  a  corrective  to  the  violation  of
the  law.  The  order,  upset  by  a  rebellious  will,  is  re-
established by  the  suffering  which  is  the  consequence  of  the
fault  committed.''!

*  M.  Renouvier,  for  instance:  "It  is  permissible  to  see  in  future
reward  a  natural  prolongation  of  the  series  of  phenomena  which,  from
this  very  moment,  make  the  fundamental  conditions,  and  even  the
physical  conditions  of  happiness,  depend  on  morality"  ("Science  de
la  Morale,"  p.  290).

t  M.  Janet,  "Traitede  Philosophic"  (p.  707):  "The  first  law  of  order,
V.  Cousin  has  said,  is  to  be  faithful  to  virtue  ;  if  one  fails  in  this,  the

second  law  of  order  is  to  expiate  one's  fault  by  punishment In  the

intelligence  the  idea  of  pain  corresponds  to  that  of  injustice."  Two  of
the  philosophers  who  have  in  France  most  strongly  protested  against
the  doctrine  that  social  laws  should  be  laws  of  expiation  instead  of  laws
of  defence,  MM.  Franck  and  Renouvier,  seem  nevertheless  to  admit
as  evident  the  principle  of  remuneration  as  attached  to  the  moral  law.


MORAL  SANCTION  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE.  159

^nct^M  H-atr  *re  mr

p.  ,„). ..It  is  .  ^  **£,  ,^ons de
the  condmon  of  ^^  being  attached  ,o  its  vSion
VV fr""  aKttaChed  '°  the  Care  take"  to  ^serve  *  "

all  That  ofT  th!S  d°Ctrine  °f  ta^ibk  -ward-above
all,  that  of  atonement,  is  untenable-frora  whatever  point  of
v.ew  ,t  ,s  regarded,  even  from  the  point  of  view
posing  -.  moral  law,,  (0  fixist  J  y'erd

Hsef  to bangs  gifted  with  freedom It  is
t^^  °PP°Sed  t0  "*  «
Let  us  free  from  all  prejudice,  from  all


evident  a  ^^;  we  a
before  a  grossly  empirical  and  physical  deduction
fr  the  pnnciple  of  well-undersJod


deserved  a  punishment,"  and  thenceforth  expresses  a  sLte
-en.  made  by  the  inner  nature  to  the  worl/ouSe ?Ws"


Droit


and  t


160 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

sudden  passing  from  the  moral  to  the  visible,  from  the
depth  of  our  being  to  the  outside,  seems  to  us  unjustifiable.
It  is  still  more  so  in  the  hypothesis  of  freewill  than  in  the
others.  According  to  that  hypothesis,  the  different  faculties
of  man  are,  in  fact,  not  truly  linked  together  and  mutually
defined.  The  will  is  not  the  pure  product  of  the  intelligence,
itself  sprung  from  the  sensibility.  Sensibility  is,  then,  no
longer  the  true  centre  of  our  being,  and  it  becomes  difficult
to  understand  how  it  can  be  responsible  for  the  will.  If
the  will  has  freely  wanted  to  commit  the  evil,  it  is  not
the  fault  of  the  sensibility,  which  has  only  played  the
part  of  mover,  and  not  of  cause.  Join  the  tangible  evil
of  the  punishment  to  the  moral  evil  of  the  fault,  under
pretext  of  expiation,  and  you  will  have  doubled  the  sum  of
evils  without  mending  anything.  You  will  be  like  the  doctor
in  Moliere  who,  called  in  to  cure  a  diseased  arm,  would
have  cut  off  his  patient's  other  arm.  Without  the  grounds  of
social  defence  (of  which  we  shall  speak  later  on)  the  punish-
ment would  be  as  blameworthy  as  the  crime,  and  the  prison
would  be  f\o  better  than  those  who  live  in  it.  Let  us  say
further  that  the  lawgivers  and  the  judges,  by  deliberately
condemning  the  guilty  to  punishment,  would  become  their
fellows.

Theoretically  speaking — that  is,  putting  aside  the  social
utility — what  difference  will  there  be  between  the  murder
committed  by  the  murderer  and  the  murder  committed
by  the  executioner  ?  The  last-named  crime  has  not
even,  as  an  extenuating  circumstance,  some  reason  or  other
of  personal  interest  or  revenge  ;  the  legal  murder  becomes
more  wholly  absurd  than  the  illegal  murder.  The  executioner
imitates  the  murderer ;  other  murderers  will  imitate  him ;
submitting,  in  their  turn,  to  that  kind  of  fascination  which
murder  exercises,  and  which  practically  makes  the  scaffold
a  school  of  crime.  It  is  impossible  to  see  in  the  "  sanction
of  expiation  "  anything  resembling  a  rational  consequence  of
the  fault.  It  is  simply  a  mechanical  sequence,  or,  better,  a


MORAL  SANCTION  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE.  l6l

material  repetition,  and  imitation,  the  model  for  which  is  the
fault  itself.

2.  Shall  we,  with  V.  Cousin  and  M.  Janet,  invoke  this
strange  principle  of  order  which  a  "  rebellious  will  "  disturbs,
and  which  only  suffering  can  re-establish  ?  Here  the  distinc-
tion between  the  social  and  the  moral  question  is  forgotten.

Social  order  has  been  really  the  historical  origin  of  punish-
ment, and/a/«  was  at  first,  as  Littre  has  shown,  but  a  com-
pensation— a  material  indemnity — demanded  by  the  victim
or  by  his  relatives;  but  when  we  place  ourselves  at  the
social  point  of  view,  can  pain  really  compensate  anything  ?
It  would  be  too  convenient  if  a  crime  could  be  physically
redeemed  by  punishment,  and  if  it  were  possible  to  pay  the
penalty  for  a  bad  act  by  a  certain  amount  of  physical
suffering,  as  the  indulgences  of  the  Church  may  be  bought
for  chinking  crowns.  No;  that  which  is  done  remains
done.  The  moral  evil  persists,  notwithstanding  all  the
physical  evil  which  is  added  to  it.  It  would  be  as  rational
to  attempt,  with  the  Determinists,  the  cure  of  the  criminal
as  it  is  irrational  to  look  for  punishment  or  compensation  of
his  crime.  This  idea  is  the  result  of  a  kind  of  childish
mathematics  and  infantile  judgment.  "  An  eye  for  an  eye,
a  tooth  for  a  tooth."*

*  M.  Renouvier,  one  of  the  principal  representatives  in  France  of
the  moral  philosophy  of  duty,  after  having  himself  severely  criticised
the  vulgar  idea  of  punishment,  has  yet  made  great  efforts  to  save  the
principle  of  retaliation  by  interpreting  it  in  a  better  sense.  "  Taken  by
itself,  and  as  an  expression  of  a  sentiment  of  the  soul  with  regard  to
crime,  retaliation  would  be  far  from  deserving  the  disgust  or  the  indig-
nation with  which  the  publicists  regard  it,  whose  penal  theories  are
often  worse  founded  upon  the  basis  of  strict  justice"  ("Science  de  la
Morale,"  vol.  ii.,  p.  296).  According  to  M.  Renouvier,  it  would  not  be
undesirable  that  the  guilty  should  undergo  the  effect  of  this  maxim  if
turned  into  a  general  rule ;  that  which  is  impracticable  is  the  mathe-
matical equivalence  which  retaliation  supposes  between  the  suffering
and  the  wrong  done.  But,  will  be  our  reply,  if  this  equivalence  were
realizable,  the  retaliation  would  not,  therefore,  be  more  just ;  for  we
cannot,  whatever  M.  Renouvier  may  say,  convert  into  a  general  law  the

M


1 62 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

For  him  who  admits  the  hypothesis  of  free-will,  one  of  the
scales  of  the  balance  is  in  the  moral  world,  the  other  in  the
visible  world ;  the  one  in  heaven,  the  other  on  earth.  In
the  first  is  a  free  will,  in  the  second  a  wholly  limited  sensi-
bility. How  is  equilibrium  to  be  established  between  them  ?
Free-will,  if  it  exists,  is  quite  intangible  to  us ;  it  is  some-
thing absolute,  and  we  have  no  hold  on  the  absolute.  Its
resolutions  are,  therefore,  in  themselves  irreparable,  inex-
piable. They  have  been  compared  with  flashes  of  lightning ;
and,  in  fact,  they  dazzle  us  for  a  moment,  and  disappear.
The  good  or  evil  act  mysteriously  descends  from  the  will
into  the  sphere  of  the  senses ;  but,  after  that,  it  is  impos-
sible to  re-ascend  from  this  sphere  into  that  of  free-will,  so
as  to  get  hold  of  it  and  punish  it.  The  flash  of  lightning
descends,  but  does  not  re-ascend.  Between  free-will  and
the  objects  of  the  visible  world  there  does  not  exist  any  other
rational  link  than  the  will  itself  of  the  agent.  Therefore  it

maxim  and  the  immoral  intention  of  him  who  has  provoked  the  retalia-
tion ;  neither  can  we  convert  into  a  general  law  the  maxim  of  revenge,
which  gives  back  the  blows  received — we  can  only  generalize  the  physical
evil  and  the  painful  effect.  But  the  generalization  of  an  evil  is  morally
an  evil  in  itself ;  therefore  only  personal  or  social  reasons  of  defence
remain — reasons  of  precaution,  of  utility.  According  to  M.  Renouvier,
retaliation,  once  purified,  may  be  expressed  in  this  formula,  which  he
declares  to  be  acceptable  :  "  Whosoever  has  violated  the  freedom  of
others  has  deserved  to  suffer  in  his  own."  But  this  very  formula  is,  in
oUr  opinion,  not  admissible  from  the  point  of  view  taken  by  Kant  and
his  followers  with  regard  to  intention.  The  guilty  one  must  neither  be
made  to  suffer,  nor  be  restricted  in  his  liberty,  in  so  far  as  he  has  in  the
past  violated  the  freedom  of  others,  but  in  so  far  as  he  is  capable  of
violating  it  again.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  said  that  no  act  of  the  past
whatever  deserves  suffering,  and  pain  is  never  justified  but  by  the  antici-
pation of  similar  acts  in  the  future.  It  does  not  cling  to  realities,  but
to  simple  possibilities,  which  it  tries  to  modify.  If  the  guilty  person
went  by  his  own  free  will  into  exile  to  a  desert  island,  from  which
return  would  be  impossible,  human  society  (and,  in  general,  every
society  of  moral  beings)  would  find  itself  disarmed  ;  no  moral  law
would  then  possibly  demand  that,  having  violated  the  freedom  of  others,
he  should  suffer  in  his  own.


MORAL  SANCTION  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE.  163

is  necessary,  so  as  to  make  punishment  possible,  that  free-
itself  should  desire  punishment;  and  it  can  only  desire
t  when  an  already  sufficiently  deep  improvement  has  taken
place, which, in  its  turn, renders  the  punishment  partly
undeserved.  *

Such  is  the  antinomy  in  which  the  doctrine  of  expia-
ends  if  it  undertakes,  not  only  to  simply  correct  but
to  punish. As  long  as  a  criminal  remains  really  criminal
this  very  tact  places  him  below  any  moral  sanction He
ought  to  be  converted  before  being  struck ;  and,  if  he  is
converted,  what  reason  is  there  for  striking  ? Guilty  or  not
the  will  endowed  with  freedom  would  at  this  point  go  so  far
beyond  the  visible  world  that  the  only  way  of  behaving  in
regard  to  it  would  be  to  bow  down  to  it. A  will  of  this
kind  is  an  irresponsible  Caesar,  whom  it  is  well  enough  to
condemn  and  to  execute  in  effigy,  so  as  to  satisfy  popular
passion, but who really escapes every external action
During  the  «  Terreur  blanche"  live  eagles  were  burned  in
efault  of  him  whom  they  symbolized. Human  judges  in
their  hypothesis  of  an  expiation  to  be  inflicted  on  free-will
do  nought  else;  their  cruelty  is  as  vain  and  as  irrational'
^hile  the  innocent  body  of  the  accused  struggles  in  their
hands,  his  will,  which  is  the  real  eagle,  the  supreme  eagle
free  in  flight,  soars  out  of  their  reach  high  above  them

3-  If  one  tries  to  investigate  this  naive  or  cruel  principle
of  order  brought  forward  by  the  spiritualists,  which  reminds
us  a  little  too  much  of  the  order  reigning  at  Warsaw  it
becomes  transformed  into  that  of  a  pretended  distri-
butive justice.  "To  everyone  according  to  his  works"
-such  is  the  social  ideal  of  St.  Simon;  such  is  also  the
moral  ideal  according  to  M.  Janet  ("La  Morale?  p  c77)
Sanction  in  this  case  is  merely  a  question  of  the  general
proportion  fixed  between  all  labour  and  its  remuneration  •

(1)  he  who  does  a  great  deal  must  receive  a  great  deal  •

(2)  he  who  does  but  little  must  receive  little  ;  (3)  he  who
commits  evil  must  receive  evil. Let  it  first  be  noted  that


164 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

this  last  principle  can  in  no  way  be  deduced  from  the
two  preceding  ones.  If  a  smaller  benefit  seems  to  call  for
smaller  recompense,  it  does  not  follow  that  an  offence
should  call  for  revenge.  Besides,  the  two  other  principles
seem  to  us  to  be  open  to  controversy — at  least  in  so  far  as
they  pretend  to  be  formulas  of  the  moral  ideal.

Here,  again,  the  two  points  of  views — the  one  moral,  the
other  social — are  confounded  with  one  another.  The  prin-
ciple, " To  each  one  according  to  his  works"  is  a  purely
economic  principle.  It  sums  up  well  enough  the  ideal  of
equal  exchange  and  of  social  contracts,  but  not  at  all  that
of  an  absolute  justice  which  should  give  to  everyone
according  to  his  moral  intention.  It  means  only  this :
independently  of  intention,  the  objects  exchanged  in  society
ought  to  be  of  the  same  value,  and  an  individual  who
produces  a  thing  of  considerable  value  must  not  receive
in  exchange  an  insignificant  recompense.  This  is  the  rule
of  exchange ;  it  is  that  of  all  self-interested  labour ;  it  is
not  the  rule  of  disinterested  effort,  which  virtue  should
hypothetically  demand.  There  is,  and  must  be,  in  social
relations  a  certain  tariff  of  the  actions,  not  of  the  intentions.
We  all  watch  that  this  tariff  may  be  duly  observed  ;  that  a
merchant  who  gives  sham  goods,  or  a  citizen  who  does
not  fulfil  his  civic  duty,  may  not  receive  in  exchange  the
normal  quantity  of  money  or  of  reputation.  Nothing  can
be  better  ;  but  what  tariff  can  be  put  on  virtue,  which  should
be  truly  "  moral  "?  Where  economic  contracts  and  material
exchanges  are  no  longer  under  consideration,  but  the  will
itself,  this  law  loses  all  its  worth.  Distributive  justice,  so  far
as  it  is  plausible,  is  therefere  a  purely  social,  purely  utilitarian
rule,  which  has  no  longer  any  sense  outside  some  sort  of
society.  Society  rests  entirely  on  the  principle  of  reciprocity
— that  is  to  say,  if  one  produces  that  which  is  good  and
useful,  one  expects  good  in  exchange ;  and  if  one  produces
what  is  harmful,  one  expects  something  harmful.  From  this
entirely  mechanical  reciprocity,  which  we  find  in  the  social


MORAL  SANCTION  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE.  165

body,  as  in  all  other  organisms,  results  a  rough  proportion
etween  the  visible  welfare  of  one  individual  and  the  visible
welfare  of  the  others,  a  mutual  solidarity  which  takes  the  form
>f  a  sort  of  distributive  justice. But,  once  more,  this  is  a
natural  equilibrium,  rather  than  a  moral  equity  of  distribution.
The  unrewarded  righteous  act,  which  is,  so  to  speak,  not
valued  at  its  right  worth,  the  evil  which  is  not  punished,
simply  shocks  us  as  an  anti-social  occurrence,  as  an  economic
and  political  monstrosity,  as  a  relation  between  individuals
which  is  harmful ;  but,  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  this  is
no  longer  so. The  principle—"  to  everyone  according  to  his
works  "—is,  in  fact,  an  excellent  form  of  social  encourage-
ment for  the  worker  or  the  moral  agent. It  imposes  on
him,  as  his  ideal,  a  kind  of  "piece-work,"  which  is  always
much  more  productive  than "day-work,"  and,  above  all,
more  productive  than  work  for  "a  sum  down." It  is  pre-
eminently a  practical  rule,  not  a  sanction. The  essential
characteristic  of  a  true  moral  sanction  should  really  be  never
to  become  a  fixed  end  or  aim  in  itself. The  child  who
says  his  lessons  correctly  merely  for  the  sake  of  afterwards
receiving  some  sweets,  no  longer  deserves  these  sweets  from
the moral point  of  view, exactly  because  he has made
them his  aim. The  sanction  must,  therefore,  be  found
entirely  outside  the  regions  of  finality,  and  with  still  more
reason  outside  the  regions  of  utility. Its  claim  is  to  reach
the  will,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  cause,  without  wishing  to  direct
it  with  reference  to  an  aim. Nor  can  any  contrivance  alter
the  practical  principle  of  social  justice,  "  Expect  to  receive
from  men  in  proportion  to  what  you  will  give  to  them,"  into
this  metaphysical  principle  :  "  If  the  mysterious  cause  acting
within  you  is  good  in  itself  and  by  itself,  a  pleasant  effect
will  be  produced  on  your  sensibility. If  it  is  bad,  your
sensibility  will  be  made  to  suffer."

The  first  formula— proportion  in  exchange— was  rational,
because  it  formed  a  practical  motive  for  the  will,  and  con-
cerned the  Juture.  The  second,  which  does  not  contain


1 66 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

any  motive  for  action,  and  which,  by  a  retro-active  effect,
bears  on  the  past,  instead  of  modifying  the  future,  is  prac-
tically barren  and  morally  empty.  The  idea  of  distributive
justice  is,  therefore,  only  valuable  in  so  far  as  it  expresses
an  entirely  social  ideal,  the  economic  laws  of  which  them-
selves tend  to  bring  about  its  realization.  It  becomes  an
immoral  idea  if,  by  giving  it  an  absolute  and  metaphysical
character,  one  wants  to  turn  it  into  a  principle  of  punishment
or  reward.

There  certainly  is  nothing  more  rational  than  that  the
moral  judgment  of  every  being  should  be  in  favour  of  virtue
and  be  opposed  to  crime  ;  but  this  judgment  cannot  pass  the
limits  of  the  moral  world  to  be  transformed  into  the  least  kind

O><  *

of  coercive  and  penal  action.  This  affirmation — "  You  a*e
good,  you  are  bad  " — ought  never  to  become  this  :  "You  must
be  made  to  enjoy  or  to  suffer."  The  guilty  should  not  be
allowed  the  privilege  of  forcing  the  righteous  man  to  do  him
harm.  Both  vice  and  virtue  are  therefore,  responsible  only  to
themselves,  and,  in  many  cases,  only  to  the  conscience  of
others.  After  all,  vice  and  virtue  are  but  forms  of  the  will,  and
under  these  forms  the  will  itself  continues  to  exist,  whose
nature  it  seems  to  be  to  aspire  to  happiness.  We  do  not
see  why  this  eternal  desire  should  not,  in  all  of  us,  find
satisfaction.  The  human  wild  beasts  must  be,  in  the
absolute,  treated  with  indulgence  and  pity,  like  other
beings.  It  matters  little  if  their  ferocity  be  considered  as
fatal  or  free ;  they  are  morally  always  to  be  pitied.  Why
should  one  want  them  to  become  physically  pitiful  also  ?  A
little  girl  was  once  shown  a  large  coloured  picture  representing
martyrs.  In  the  arena  lions  and  tigers  were  feasting  on  Chris-
tian blood.  On  one  side  another  tiger  was  left  locked  up  in
its  cage,  and  looked  on  with  a  woeful  air.  The  child  was
asked  :  "  Dont  you  pity  these  unhappy  martyrs  ?"  She
answered  :  "  And  what  about  the  poor  tiger  which  has  no
Christian  to  eat !"  A  sage,  free  from  all  prejudice,  would
surely  have  pitied  the  martyrs ;  but  this  would  not  have


MORAL  SANCTION  AND  DISTRIBUTIVE  JUSTICE.  167

prevented  him  likewise  pitying  the  starving  tiger.  We  re-
member the  Hindoo  legend  which  tells  us  how  Buddha  gave
his  own  body  to  a  wild  animal  dying  of  hunger.  This  is
the  supreme  pity,  the  only  one  which  does  not  conceal  some
hidden  injustice.  Such  conduct,  absurd  from  the  practical
and  social  standpoint,  is  the  only  legitimate  one  from  the
standpoint  of  pure  morality.

For  the  narrow  and  entirely  human  justice  which  refuses
kindness  to  him  who  is  already  unhappy  enough  to  be
guilty  must  be  substituted  another  larger  justice,  which
gives  kindness  to  all— a  justice  which  not  only  ignores  the
hand  with  which  it  gives,  but  will  not  even  know  the  hand
which  receives  it.

This  kind  of  claim  to  a  happiness  which  is  reserved  for  the
good  man  only,  and  to  which  should  correspond  a  veritable
right  to  unhappiness  among  all  inferior  individuals,  is  the
relic  (in  the  etymological  sense  of  the  word)  of  ancient
aristocratic  prejudices.  Reason  may  please  itself  by  sup-
posing a  certain  relation  between  sensibility  and  happiness ;
for  every  sentient  being,  by  its  very  nature  and  definition,'
desires  enjoyment  and  hates  pain.  Reason  may  also  suppose
a  relation  between  all  will  and  happiness,  for  every  being
susceptible  of  will  spontaneously  aspires  to  feel  itself  happy.
The  differences  in  will  show  themselves  only  when  there  is
a  question  of  choosing  the  ways  and  means  of  arriving  at
happiness.  Some  people  believe  their  happiness  to  be
incompatible  with  that  of  others,  some  try  to  find  their
happiness  in  that  of  others ;  this  it  is  which  distinguishes
good  men  from  bad  men.

To  this  difference  in  direction  of  such  or  such  a  will
would  correspond,  according  to  orthodox  morality,  an
essential  difference  in  its  very  nature,  in  the  deep  and
independent  cause  which  it  manifests  outwardly.  It  may
be  so ;  but  this  difference  cannot  do  away  with  the  per-
manent relation  between  the  will  and  happiness.  Even
now,  under  our  present  laws,  criminals  retain  a  certain


1 68 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

number  of  rights ;  they  maintain  all  these  rights  in  the
absolute  (for  him  who  admits  an  absolute).  In  the  same
way  that  a  man  cannot  sell  himself  as  a  slave,  so  he  cannot
take  away  from  himself  this  kind  of  natural  title  to  ultimate
happiness  which  every  sentient  being  believes  himself  to
possess.  So  long  as  beings,  evil  by  deliberate  choice  or
forced  to  it  by  necessity,  will  persevere  in  wishing  for  hap-
piness, I  see  no  reason  which  can  be  urged  for  withholding
it  from  them.

There  is,  you  will  say,  this  reason — sufficient  in  itself —
that  they  are  bad.  Is  it,  then,  only  to  make  them  better
•^  that  you  have  recourse  to  pain  ?  No  ;  that  is  for  you  but  a
secondary  aim,  which  might  be  attained  by  other  means.
Your  principal  aim  is  to  produce  expiation  in  them — that  is
to  say,  unhappiness,  without  utility  and  without  object.  As
if  it  were  not  enough  for  them  to  be  wicked  !  Our  moralists
have  not  yet  got  beyond  the  arbitrary  distribution  which  the
Gospel  seems  to  admit :  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given  ;
to  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he
hath."  The  Christian  idea  of  grace  would,  however,  be
acceptable  on  one  condition — that  of  its  being  universal,
given  to  all  men  and  all  beings.  In  this  way  it  would
become,  instead  of  a  grafe,  a  kind  of  divine  debt.  That
which  is  deeply  shocking  in  all  morality  that  is  more  or
less  borrowed  from  Christianity,  is  the  idea  of  election — of
choice,  of  favour,  of  a  distribution  of  grace.  A  god  ought
not  to  choose  between  beings,  to  see  which  he  will  in  the
end  make  happy.  Even  a  human  legislator,  if  he  pretended
to  give  an  absolute  and  truly  divine  worth  to  his  laws,  would
be  forced  to  renounce  everything  which  would  indicate  any
"  election  "  or  "  preference,"  any  pretended  distribution  and
sanction.  Every  partial  gift  is  necessarily  also  biassed,  and
neither  on  earth  nor  in  heaven  ought  there  to  be  such  a
thing  as  favour.


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  169

CHAPTER  II.

The  Principle  of  Penal  or  Defensive  Justice  in  Society.
OUR  present  society  can  surely  not  realize  the  far  distant
ideal  of  universal  forbearance,  but  it  can  far  less  take
as  its  type  of  conduct  quite  the  opposite  ideal  of  orthodox
morality— namely,  the  distribution  of  happiness  and  unhap-
piness,  according  to  merit  and  demerit.  As  we  have  seen,
there  is  no  purely  moral  reason  whatever  to  suppose  any
distribution  of  pain  to  vice  and  of  reward  to  virtue.  We  have
to  acknowledge  with  even  greater  reason  that,  taken  as  a
pure  question  of  right,  there  is  no  social  sanction,  and  that
the  facts  called  by  this  name  are  mere  phenomena  of  social
defence.*

Now,  we  have  to  come  down  from  the  purely  theoretical
standpoint  at  which  we  have  hitherto  placed  ourselves,  to
the  more  confused  sphere  of  sentiments  and  the  association
of  ideas,  where  our  opponents  may  be  able  to  again  take
advantage  of  us.  The  majority  of  mankind  does  not  at  all
agree  with  the  ideas  of  the  Hindus,  and  of  every  true  philo-
sopher, about  absolute  justice  being  identical  with  universal
charity.  It  has  strong  prejudices  against  the  starving  tiger
for  which  Buddha  sacrificed  himself;  it  has  natural  pre-
ferences with  regard  to  sheep.  It  does  not  seem  satisfactory
to  them  that  the  wrong  action  should  not  be  punished,  and
virtue  be  quite  gratuitous.  Mankind  is  like  those  children
•who  do  not  like  stories  in  which  the  good  little  boys  are

*  Doubtless  the  old  objection  will  be  made  :  "  If  punishments  were,
on  the  part  of  society,  only  a  means  of  defence,  they  would  be  blows,
not  punishments"  (M.  Janet,  "  Cours  de  Philosophic,"  p.  30).  On
the  contrary,  when  punishments  do  not  find  their  justification  in
defence,  it  is  precisely  these  punishments  which  are  the  real  blows,
by  whatever  euphemism  they  may  be  called.  Outside  the  reasons,
of  social  defence,  for  instance,  the  act  of  administering  a  hundred
strokes  of  a  stick  on  the  soles  of  the  feet  as  punishment  to  a  thief  will
never  be  transformed  into  a  moral  act.


170 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

eaten  up  by  wolves,  and  who,  on  the  contrary,  would  like  to
hear  that  the  wolves  were  eaten  up.  Even  on  the  stage  the
general  demand  is  that  virtue  should  be  rewarded,  vice
punished  ;  and  if  this  is  not  the  case  the  spectators  go  away
discontented,  with  a  feeling  of  disappointed  expectation.
Why  this  tenacious  sentiment,  this  persistent  need  of  sanction,
in  the  sociable  being — this  psychological  impossibility  of
being  reconciled  to  the  idea  of  unpunished  evil  ?

In  the  first  place,  it  is  because  man  is  an  essentially
practical  and  active  being,  who  tends  to  deduce  a  rule  of
action  from  all  he  sees,  and  for  whom  the  life  of  others  is
a  perpetual  moral  lesson  given  in  examples.  Withthat
wonderful  social  instinct  which  man  possesses,  he  feels
directly  that  an  unpunished  crime  is  an  element  of  social
destruction ;  he  feels  a  presentiment  of  danger,  both  to
himself  and  all  others,  such  as  a  citizen  feels  in  a  besieged
town  when  he  discovers  an  open  breach.

In  the  second  place,  this  bad  example  is  like  a  kind  of
personal  exhortation  to  evil,  whispered  in  his  ear,  against
which  his  highest  instincts  revolt.  This  is  due  to  the  popular
common  sense,  which  always  believes  sanction  to  enter  into
the  very  formula  of  the  law,  and  regards  reward  and  punish-
ment as  motive  forces.  Human  law  has  the  double  character
of  being  utilitarian  and  obligatory,  which  is  exactly  the
opposite  of  a  moral  law  commanding  a  free-will  without
a  motive  power.

There  is  a  third  and  still  more  profound  reason  for  the  in-
dignation with  which  impunity  is  met.  Human  intelligence
finds  it  difficult  to  stop  at  the  idea  of  moral  evil ;  it  is  re-
volted by  it  to  a  far  higher  degree  than  is  possible  by  a  want  of
material  symmetry  or  mathematical  exactitude.  Man,  being
essentially  a  sociable  animal,  "  Zwov  iroXiriKov"  cannot  resign
himself  to  the  definite  success  of  anti-social  actions,  when  such
actions  seem,  humanly  speaking,  to  be  successful.  The  very
nature  of  man's  mind  urges  him  to  turn  to  the  superhuman,
to  demand  reparation  and  compensation.  If  bees,  suddenly


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  171

chained,  were  to  see  the  order  of  their  cells  destroyed  before
their  very  eyes,  without  any  hope  of  ever  being  able  to  set
them  right  again,  their  consternation  would  be  extreme,  and
they  would  instinctively  expect  some  intervention  or  other
to  re-establish  that  order,  which  is  to  them  as  immutable
and  sacred  as  that  of  the  stars  would  be  to  a  higher
intelligence.  The  very  soul  of  man  is  penetrated  by  the
idea  of  sociability.  We  think,  so  to  speak,  within  the  limit
of  society,  as  within  that  of  time  and  space.

Man,  by  his  moral  nature  ("^h  as  J5-trammittcd  to  him
by  heredity),  is  thus  induced  to  believe  that  the  last  word
in  the  universe  cannot  remain  with  the  wicked.  He  is
always  indignant  at  the  triumph  of  evil  and  of  injustice.
This  indignation  manifests  itself  in  children  even  before  they
can  properly  talk,  and  numerous  traces  may  be  found  of  it
even  among  animals.  The  logical  result  of  this  protest
against  evil  is  the  refusal  to  believe  in  the  definitive  char-
acter of  its  triumph.  Completely  dominated  by  the  ideal
of  progress,  it  cannot  allow  any  being  to  remain  for  any  length
of  time  arrested  in  its  onward  course.

Finally,  we  have  also  to  estimate  the  work  of  those
aesthetic  considerations  which  are  inseparable  from  social
and  moral  reasons.  An  immoral  being  possesses  an  ugliness
which  is  much  more  repulsive  than  physical  ugliness,  and  on
which  our  eye  does  not  care  to  dwell.  We,  therefore,  want
to  correct,  to  remove,  to  improve,  or  to  suppress  it.  Let  us
recall  the  precarious  position  of  the  leper  and  the  unclean
in  ancient  society.  They  were  treated  as  we  in  these  days
treat  criminals.  Novelists  and  dramatic  authors  do  not
generally  leave  crime  too  evidently  unpunished,  neither  do
they  as  a  rule,  be  it  here  noted,  represent  their  principal
personages,  above  all  their  heroines,  as  entirely  ugly  (with
goitre,  hump-backed,  or  one-eyed,  etc.).  If  they  sometimes
do  so,  as  Victor  Hugo  in  his  Quasimodo,  their  aim  in
that  case  is  to  make  us  forget  the  deformity  during  all  the
rest  of  the  work,  or  to  make  use  of  it  as  an  antithesis.  Most


172 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

often,  the  novel  ends  with  a  transformation  of  the  hero  or
the  heroine  (as  in  Petite  Fadette  or  Jane  Eyre).  Ugliness,
therefore,  produces  with  certainty,  although  in  a  less  degree,
the  same  effect  as  immorality,  and  we  feel  the  need  to
correct  the  one  as  the  other  ;  but  how  are  we  to  correct
immorality  from  outside  ?  The  idea  of  pain  inflicted  as  a
re-agent  at  once  presents  itself  to  the  mind.  Punishment
is  one  of  those  old  popular  remedies,  like  the  boiling  oil  into
which,  before  the  time  of  Ambroise  Pare",  the  limbs  of  the
wounded  were  plunged.  Really  the  desire  to  see  the  guilty
gniky  one  punished  comes  from  good  nature.  It  is  chiefly
explained  by  the  impossibility  for  man  to  remain  inactive,
indifferent  in  the  presence  of  any  kind  of  evil.  He  wants  to
try  and  do  something,  to  touch  the  wound,  either  to  heal
it  or  to  apply  a  revulsive ;  and  his  intelligence  is  enticed
by  the  apparent  symmetry  offered  by  the  proportionality  of
moral  and  physical  evil.  He  does  not  know  that  there  are
certain  things  which  it  is  better  not  to  touch  at  all.  The
first  people  who  made  excavations  in  Italy,  and  who  found
statues  of  Venus  with  an  arm  or  a  leg  wanting,  felt  the  same
indignation  which  we  still  feel  in  these  days  in  presence
of  a  badly-balanced  will.  They  wanted  to  mend  the  evil,
to  put  back  an  arm  borrowed  from  elsewhere,  to  put  on
Another  leg.  Now,  more  resigned  and  more  timid,  we  leave
the  masterpieces  as  we  find  them,  superbly  mutilated.  Our
very  admiration  for  the  great  works  of  art  is,  in  that  case,
not  without  some  pain  ;  but  we  prefer  to  suffer,  rather  than
commit  an  act  of  profanation.  This  suffering,  when  we  are
brought  face  to  face  with  evil,  this  sentiment  of  the
irreparable,  we  feel  far  more  deeply  still  in  the  presence  of
moral  evil.  The^  inward  will  can  be  efficaciously  corrected
only  by  its  own  self,  just  as  it  is  only  the  long-departed
creators  of  the  marble  statues  who  can  mend  these
smooth,  white,  broken  limbs.  We  are  thus  reduced  to  that
which  is  hardest  for  man — to  await  the  future.  Real
progress  can  only  spring  from  the  inner  nature  of  the


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  173

individual.  The  only  means  which  we  can  use  are  all  in-
direct—education, for  instance.  As  to  the  will  itself,  it
ought  to  be  sacred  precisely  to  those  who  consider  it  free,
or  at  least  spontaneous ;  they  cannot,  without  contradiction
and  injustice,  attempt  to  lay  hold  of  it.

^  Thus  the  feeling  which  urges  us  to  desire  a  sanction  is
partly  immoral.  Like  many  other  sentiments,  it  has  a  very
legitimate  principle  and  wrong  applications.  Between  human
instinct  and  the  scientific  theory  of  morality  exists,  therefore,
a  certain  opposition.  We  are  going  to  show  that  this  oppo-
sition is  provisional,  and  that  instinct  will,  in  the  end,  be
conformable  to  scientific  truth.  With  this  object  we  will  try
to  analyse  still  more  deeply  than  we  have  hitherto  done
that  psychological  want  of  sanction  which  we  find  in  the
being  living  in  society.  We  will  sketch  the  genesis  of  this
want,  and  we  shall  see  how  it  is  produced,  in  the  first  place,
by  a  natural  and  legitimate  instinct,  and  then  tends  to  restrict
and  limit  itself  more  and  more  as  the  course  of  human  evo-
lution continues.

If  there  is  any  general  law  of  life,  it  is  the  following :  _
Every animal (we might extend the law even to  the
vegetable kingdom) answers  to an  attack  by  a  defence,
which  is  itself  most  often  an  attack  in  answer,  a  kind  of
shock  in  return. This  is  a  primitive instinct,  which has
its source in  the  reflex movement,  in  the  irritability  of
living  tissues,  and  without  which  life  would  be  impossible.
Do  not  even  animals,  deprived  of  their  brain,  still  try  to
bite  him  who  pinches  them  ? Those  beings  in  which  this-
instinct  was  keenest  and  most  developed  have  more  easily
survived,  like  the  rose-trees  provided  with  thorns. Among
the  superior  animals  such  as  man  this  instinct  is  modified,
but  continues  to  exist. In  us  there  is  a  spring  ready  U>
unbend against him who touches it,  as  in  those  plants-
which throw darts. This was originally a mechanical,
unconscious  phenomenon  ; but  this  instinct  does  not,  like
so  many  others,  weaken  when  it  becomes  conscious. (See


174 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

on  this  point  "La  Morale  Anglaise  Contemporaine"  part  ii.,
sec.  Hi.).  It  is,  in  fact,  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  individual.
In  every  primitive  society  one  must  be  able,  in  order  to  live,
to  bite  when  bitten,  to  strike  when  struck.  And  to-day  a
child  is  discontented  when  he  has  received  a  blow,  even
in  play,  which  he  cannot  return  ;  he  has  a  feeling  of
inferiority.  On  the  contrary,  when  he  has  returned  the
blow,  with  even  additional  energy,  he  is  satisfied.  He  feels
no  longer  inferior,  no  longer  unequal  to  the  struggle  for  life.
We  find  the  same  feeling  among  animals.  When  we  play
with  a  dog,  we  must  from  time  to  time  let  him  take  our
Tiand  in  his  mouth,  if  we  do  not  want  him  to  take  it  in  anger.
In  the  games  of  grown-up  men  we  also  find  the  same
need  of  a  certain  equalization  of  chances,  the  players  always
desiring,  according  to  the  popular  expression,  to  find  them-
selves even.  Undoubtedly, 'with  man  new  sentiments  inter-
vene, and  are  added  to  the  primitive  instinct — self-love,
vanity,  care  about  the  good  opinion  of  others.  It  does  not
much  matter  what  is  underneath  all  this ;  something  deeper
may  be  perceived — the  sentiment  of  the  necessities  of  life.
—  In  uncivilized  society  a  being  who  is  not  capable  of
returning  the  evil  done  to  him,  and  of  even  more  than  that,
is  a  being  badly  equipped  for  existence,  meant  to  disappear
sooner  or  later.  Life  itself  is,  in  its  essence,  a  revenge — a
permanent  revenge — for  the  obstacles  which  fetter  it.
Revenge  is,  moreover,  a  physiological  necessity  for  all  living
beings,  so  deeply  rooted  in  them  that  the  brutal  instinct
remains  until  the  moment  of  death.  There  is  a  well-
known  story  of  a  Swiss  who,  mortally  wounded,  seeing  an
Austrian  chief  pass  near  him,  found  strength  to  catch  hold
of  a  piece  of  rock,  and  to  knock  his  brains  out,  killing  him-
self by  this  last  effort.  A  great  many  more  facts  of  this
kind  could  be  related,  in  which  revenge  is  no  longer  justified
by  personal  defence,  and,  so  to  speak,  extends  beyond  the
question  of  life,  by  one  of  those  numerous  and  sometimes
fruitful  contradictions  which  produce  in  the  social  being


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  175

wrongful  sentiments,  like  avarice,  or  useful  sentiments,  like
the  love  of  glory.

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  moral  notion  of  justice  or  of
merit  is  still  unknown  throughout  this  whole  mechanism. If
an  animal  without  its  brain  bites  him  who  hurts  it,  there  is
here  no  idea  of  sanction. If  you  ask  a  child  or  an  uncul-
tured man  why  he  strikes  someone,  he  will  think  himself
fully  justified  when  he  tells  you  that  he  himself  was  first
struck. Ask  him  no more. Really, for  him  who  only
considers  the  general  laws  of  life,  this  is  a  sufficient  reason.
We  are  here  at  the  very  origin,  and  almost  at  the  point
'f  physical emergence, of  this  pretended  moral  need  of
sanction,  which  so  far  does  not  offer  us  anything  moral,  but
which  will  soon  modify  itself. Let  us  suppose  a  man  who,
instead  of  being  himself  the  object  of  an  attack,  is  simply
the onlooker. He sees the  aggressor vigorously driven
back ;  he  cannot  fail to applaud,  for  in his  thought  he
will  put  himself  in  the  place  of  the  one  who  defends  himself,
and,  as  the  English  school  has  demonstrated,  he  will  sym-
pathize with  him. Every  blow  given  to  the  aggressor  will,
therefore,  seem  a  just  compensation,  a  legitimate  revenge,
a  sanction.*

*  Why  does  he  put  himself  in  the  place  of  him  who  defends  himself
and  not  in  the  place  of  the  other? For  several  reasons,  which  yet  do
t  imply  that  sentiment  of  justice  which  has  to  be  explained  •  (i)
Because  the  attacked  and  abused  man  is  always  in an unfortunate
position,  more  fit  to  excite  interest  and  pity. If  we  are  present  at  a
struggle,  do  we  not  always  take  the  side  of  the  weakest,  even  without
nowmg  if  it  is  he  who  is  in  the  right? (2) The  situation of  the
aggressor  is  anti-social,  contrary  to  the  mutual  security  which  all  asso-
ciation allows  ;  and,  as  we  always  are  part  of  some  society  or  other,  we
sympathize  all  the  more  with  the  one  of  the  two  adversaries  who  is  in
ie  most  similar  situation  to  our  own— the  most  social. But  let  us
suppose  that  the  society  of  which  a  man  is  a  part  may  not  be  the  great
human  association,  and  happens  to  be,  for  instance,  an  association  of

In  that  case  rather  strange  facts  will  arise  in  his  conscience

-e  will  approve  of  a  thief  defending  himself  against  another  thief  and

hmg  him  ;  but  he  will  not  approve  of  a  policeman  defending  him-


176 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

Stuart  Mill  is,  therefore,  right  in  thinking  that  the  desire
to  see  every  attack  on  the  individual  punished  comes  back
to  the  mere  instinct  of  personal  defence ;  only  he  has  too
decidedly  confounded  defence  with  revenge,  and  he  has  not
shown  that  this  very  instinct  is  reduced  to  a  reflex  action,
called  forth  either  directly  or  sympathetically.  If  this  reflex
action  is  roused  by  sympathy,  it  seems  to  adopt  a  moral
character  by  taking  a  disinterested  character.  That  which
we  call  penal  sanction  is  therefore  fundamentally  only  a
defence  exercised  by  individuals  in  whose  place  we  can  put
ourselves  in  thought,  a  defence  against  others  in  whose  place
we  do  not  want  to  put  ourselves.

The  physical  and  social  need  of  sanction  bears  a  double
aspect — since  sanction  is  at  one  time  punishment,  at  another
reward.  If  reward  seems  as  natural  as  pain,  this  is  because
it  has  its  origin  also  in  a  reflex  action,  in  a  primitive  instinct
of  life.  Every  caress  calls  for  and  expects  another  caress  in
response  ;  every  expression  of  kindness  calls  forth  in  others
a  similar  expression.  This  is  true  all  up  the  scale  of  animal
life.  A  dog  which  comes  softly  forward,  wagging  its  tail,  to

self  against  a  thief  in  the  name  of  society  at  large.  He  will  feel  an
invincible  repugnance  to  put  himself  in  the  place  of  the  policeman,  and
to  sympathize  with  him,  for  that  will  falsify  his  moral  judgments.  It  is
in  this  way  that  the  people  of  the  lower  classes  take  sides  against  the
police  in  ever}-  squabble,  without  even  inquiring  what  is  going  on ;  and  in
foreign  lands  Frenchmen  would  feel  inclined  to  take  the  side  of  the
French,  etc.  Conscience  is  full  of  phenomena  of  this  kind,  complex  to  the
very  point  of  contradiction — which,  however,  fall  under  the  one  law.
Sanction  is  essentially  the  conclusion  of  a  struggle  which  we  witness  as
spectators,  and  in  which  we  take  the  part  of  one  or  other  of  the  oppo-
nents. If  we  are  a  policeman  or  quiet  citizen,  we  shall  approve  of
the  handcuffs,  the  prison,  if  need  be  of  the  gallows.  If  we  are  a  thief
or  lazzaroni,  or,  perhaps,  simply  one  of  the  common  people,  we  shall
approve  of  the  pistol-shot  fired  from  behind  a  bush,  of  the  dagger
mysteriously  thrust  into  the  back  of  the  carabinieri.  The  only
thing  that  remains  identical  in  all  these  moral  or  immoral  judgments  is
the  statement  of  this  fact  of  experience.  He  who  strikes  must
naturally  and  socially  expect  to  be  struck  in  his  turn.


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  177

lick  his  mate  is  indignant  if  he  finds  himself  received  with
a  growl,  just  as  a  good  man  is  indignant  when  he  receives
evil  in  return  for  his  benefactions. By  means  of  sympathy
xtend  and  generalize  this  impression,  which  was  at  first
entirely  personal,  and  you  will  arrive  at  this  theory  •  it  is
natural  that  every  being  working  for  the  happiness  of  his
ellow-creatures  should  receive,  in  exchange,  the  means  of
>eing  happy. Considering  ourselves  mutually  responsible
we  feel  ourselves  bound  by  a  kind  of  debt  with  regard  to
every  benefactor  of  society. To  the  natural  determinism
which  connects  benefit  with  benefit is  therefore  added  a
*lmg  of  sympathy,  and even of  gratitude,  towards  the
benefactor. Now,  in  virtue  of  an  inevitable  illusion,  hap-
piness seems  to  us  always  to  be  more  deserved  by  those
with  whom  we  are  in  sympathy.*

After  this  rapid  glance  at  the  genesis  of  the  sentiments
aroused  in  man  by  the  punishment  of  evil  or  the  reward  of
goodness,  we  can  understand  how  the  notion  of  a  distributive
and  inflexible  justice  was  formed-a  justice  which  propor-
tions good  to  good  and  evil  to  evil.  It  is  but  the  meta-
physical symbol  of  a  deep-rooted  physical  instinct,  which  in
reality  is  part  of  the  instinct  of  the  preservation  of  life.t

*  Will  some  pessimist,  perhaps,  deny  this  natural  instinct  of  gratitude
and  object  that,  on  the  contrary,  man  is  by  nature  ungrateful? Nothing
B  more  inaccurate. Man  ^forgetful;  that  is  all. Children  and  animal!
are  still  more  forgetful. There  is  a  great  difference  between  these  two
things. The  instinct  of  gratitude  exists  in  all  beings,  and  subsists  as
long  as  the  remembrance  of  the  benefit  remains  vivid  and  intact But
this  remembrance  changes  very  rapidly. Far  stronger  instincts,  such  as
personal  interest,  pride,  etc.,  fight  against  it. It  is  for  this  reason  that
if  we  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  others,  we  are  so  shocked  not  to  see
a  good  action  rewarded ;  whereas  we  often  feel  as  little  remorse  when
we  ourselves  forget  to  respond  to  some  kind  action. The  sentiment  of
gratitude  is  one  of  those  natural  altruistic  sentiments  which,  finding
themselves  in  opposition  to  an  equally  strong  selfishness,  are  stronger
when  the  appreciation  of  somebody  else's  conduct,  and  not  the  ruling
of  our  own,  is  concerned.

t  This  instinct,  after  having  created  the  complex  system  of  social


178 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

It  remains  for  us  to  see  how,  in  the  partly  artificial  environ-
ments of  human  society,  this  instinct  gradually  becomes
modified  in  such  a  way  that  one  day  the  notion  of  distri-
butive justice  will  lose  even  the  practical  support  which  it
still  derives  from  popular  sentiment.

Let  us,  in  fact,  follow  the  course  of  penal  sanction,
together  with  the  evolution  of  societies.  Originally  punish-
ment was  much  greater  than  the  fault ;  the  defence  was  in
excess  of  the  attack.  If  you  provoke  a  wild  animal,  it  will
tear  you  to  pieces ;  if  you  attack  a  man  of  the  world,  he
will  answer  you  humorously;  if  you  offend  a  philosopher,
he  will  not  answer  at  all.  It  is  the  law  of  economy  of  force

punishments  and  rewards,  has  been  fortified  by  the  very  existence  of
this  system  of  protection.  We  have  not  been  long  in  recognising
that,  if  we  should  injure  somebody  in  any  way,  we  must  expect  a
more  or  less  quick  repression.  In  this  way  a  natural  and  rational
association  is  established  (already  pointed  out  by  the  English  school)
between  a  certain  kind  of  conduct  and  a  certain  punishment.  We
find  in  the  Revue  Philosophique  a  curious  instance  of  a  dawning
association  of  this  kind  in  an  animal.  "  I  have  not,"  says  M.  Delbceuf,
"  ever  seen  an  account  of  any  fact  so  significant  in  its  meaning.  The
hero  is  a  small  dog,  a  cross  between  a  wolf-dog  and  a  spaniel.  He  was
at  the  age  when,  among  his  species,  the  serious  duties  of  social  life  begin.
As  he  was  allowed  to  choose  my  study  as  a  favourite  resting-place,  he  often
misbehaved  himself  there.  Being  a  very  strict  master,  I  made  him  feel
each  time  the  horrors  of  his  behaviour,  and  carried  him  quickly  into  the
court-yard  and  made  him  sit  up  in  a  corner.  After  making  him  stop  there
for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  according  to  the  importance  of  the  offence,  I
allowed  him  to  come  back.  This  education  made  him  pretty  quickly
understand  certain  articles  of  the  code  of  canine  civility — little  rascal  as
he  was  ;  so  that  at  last  I  believed  him  to  be  quite  cured  of  his
tendency  to  forget  the  rules  of  propriety.  Oh  deception  !  One  day,
coming  into  my  study,  I  found  myself  face  to  face  with  a  fresh
instance  of  his  wrongdoing.  I  looked  for  my  dog  to  make  him  feel
all  the  shame  of  his  relapse  ;  he  was  not  there.  I  called  him,  but  he

did  not  appear. I  went  down  to  the  court -yard there  he  was,  sitting

in  the  corner,  holding  his  front  paws  pitifully  over  his  chest,  looking
distressed,  ashamed,  and  full  of  repentance.  I  was  disarmed "
(Revtie  Philosophique,  April,  1881).  See  also  in  Romanes  more  or
less  similar  facts.


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY  I?9


*


-ore  recognised  tha, re  are
•nnocent  :  (t)  ,o  strike  him


o  , 0


l8o MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

images  for  him  immediately  associates  the  action  of  the
throwing  of  the  stone  with  the  thought  of  the  child ;  which
causes  the  dog  to  be  angry,  and  to  grind  his  teeth.  Hatred
has,  therefore,  had  its  utility,  and  is  rationally  justifiable  in
a  state  of  society  which  is  but  little  advanced.  It  was  a
valuable  stimulant  to  the  nervous  system,  and,  through  it,  to
the  muscular  system.  In  the  superior  social  state,  in  which
the  individual  no  longer  needs  to  defend  himself,  hatred  has
no  longer  any  sense.

If  one  is  robbed,  one  complains  to  the  police  ;  if  one
is  struck,  one  asks  for  damages  and  costs.  Already,  in
our  own  time,  only  an  ambitious  or  an  ignorant  man,  or  a
fool,  feels  hatred.  The  duel — that  piece  of  absurdity — will
disappear ;  moreover,  it  is  at  present  treated  in  its  details
like  the  visit  of  an  official,  and  very  often  the  fighting  is
mere  form.  Capital  punishment  will  either  disappear,  or  be
only  maintained  as  a  means  of  prevention,  for  the  purpose
of  mechanically  frightening  hereditary  criminals,  or  habitual
criminals.  Prisons  and  gallows  will  probably  be  demolished,
to  be  replaced  by  transportation,  which  is  elimination  in  its
simplest  form  ;  even  the  rigour  of  prison-life  has  already
been  mitigated.*

More  air  and  light  are  allowed  to  enter  into  the  prison.
The  iron  bars,  which  confine  the  prisoner  without  shutting
out  the  rays  of  sunlight  too  much,  symbolically  represent
the  ideal  of  penal  justice,  which  may  be  expressed  by  this

*  For  all  offences  which  do  not  entail  transportation  M.  Le  Bon  has
rightly  proposed  a.  fine,  or  compulsory  labour  (industrial  or  agricultural),
or,  finally,  forced  military  service  under  severe  discipline  {Revue
Philos.,  May,  1881).  It  is  known  that  our  prisons  are  rather  places  of
perversion  than  of  conversion.  They  are  places  of  reunion  and  of
association  for  the  evil-doers — "  anti-social  clubs."  One  of  the  presi-
dents of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  M.  Beranger,  wrote  that  every  year  a
hundred  thousand  individuals  "  there  (in  prison)  plunge  deeper  into
crime."  It  may  be  a  million  in  ten  years.  Hence  the  considerable
increase  of  relapses.  (This  increase  is,  on  an  average,  over  two  thousand
per  annum. )


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  i8l

scientific  formula—  The  maximum  of  social  defence  with  the
minimum  of  individual  suffering.

In  this  way,  the  more  we  progress  the  more  the  theoretical
truth  imposes  itself  even  on  the  masses,  and  lessens  the
popular need of punishment. If, in these  days,  society
punishes,  it  is  never  on  account  of  the  deed  which  has  been
committed;  it  is  because  of  those  which  the  evil-doer  or
Jthers  following his example,  may  commit  in  the  future
/JBancfaon  has  value  only  as  a  promise  or  a  threat  preceding
the  act,  and  tending  mechanically  to  produce  it If  this
act  is  accomplished,  it  entirely  loses  its  value. It  is  simply
a  shield  or  a  simple,  deterministic  spring,  and  nothing  more
It  is  really  for  this  reason  that,  for  instance,  madmen  are  no
longer  punished. The  punishment  was  given  up,  after  it  had
been  recognised  that  the  fear  of  punishment  had  no  appre-
ciable effect  upon  them. It  was  barely  a  century  before  the
time  of  Pmel  that  popular  instinct  wanted  to  punish  mad
people  like  all  other  criminals  ;  which proves  how  vague
the ideas  of  responsibility or irresponsibility are in  the
vulgar  and  utilitarian  conception  of  social  sanction. When
in  bygone  times,  the  people  demanded  cruel  punishments
in harmony  with  the morals  of  their day,  they did  so
not  in  the  name  of  metaphysical  ideas,  but  rather  in  the
xiame  of  social  interest. Neither  ought  our  legislators,  who
in  the  present day  are  labouring  to  reduce  pain  to  the
strictly  necessary  amount,  to  put  forward  these  metaphysical
ideas  any  more. «  Free-will  '•  and  «  absolute  responsibility  "
in themselves, no more  justify social punishment  than
metaphysical  irresponsibility  and  metaphysical  determinism
That  which  alone  justifies  pain  is  its  efficacy,  from  the  point
of  view  of  social  defence.*

*  We  must,  therefore,  approve  of  the  new  school  of  jurists,  which  is
particularly  numerous  and  brilliant  in  Italy,  and  which  endeavours  to
place  penal  right  outside  all  moral  and  metaphysical  considerations
Let  us  however,  remark  that  this  school  is  wrong  when,  after  having
put  aside  every  idea  of  metaphysical  responsibility,  it  considers  itself


1 82 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

In  the  same  way  as  social  punishments  are  in  our  time
being  reduced  to  that  which  is  strictly  necessary,  social
rewards  (titles  of  nobility,  honorary  posts,  etc.)  also  become

obliged  by  its  own  principles  to  equally  put  aside  "  the  intentional  and
voluntary  element."  According  to  Messrs.  Lombroso,  E.  Ferri,  and
Garofalo,  legal  judgment  must  only  bear  upon  the  action,  and  the
social  or  anti-social  motives  which  produced  it,  without  even  pretending
to  appreciate  the  greater  or  lesser  power  and  the  intrinsic  quality  of  the
will.  Messrs.  Garofalo  and  Ferri  bring  forward  an  example  which
argues  against  them  ;  they  quote  the  article  of  the  Italian  and  French
codes  which  punishes  "  murder,  involuntary  blows,  and  wounds"  with
imprisonment  and  fines  (Garofalo,  "  Di  un  Criterio  Positive  della
Penalita,"  Naples,  1880 ;  E.  Ferri,  "  II  Diritto  di  Punire,"  Turin,
1882).  According  to  them,  this  article  of  the  law,  not  taking  into
account  the  will  of  the  criminal,  considers  the  brutal  act  as  entirely
detached  from  the  intention  which  dictated  it.  This  law,  in  their  eyes,
is  one  of  the  types  with  which  the  laws  of  the  future  should  conform.
But  it  is  a  great  omission  that  the  article  in  question  should  take  no  account
of  the  will  of  the  criminal.  If  the  blows  and  the  wounds  said  to  be
involuntary  (or,  rather,  said  to  be  committed  by  imprudence)  were
absolutely  so,  they  would  not  be  punished,  because  the  punishment
would  be  ineffective.  The  truth  is  that  they  are  caused  by  lack  of
attention.  Now,  attention,  being  an  act  of  the  will,  can  be  mechani-
cally roused  or  sustained  by  the  fear  of  pain,  and  that  is  why  pain
intervenes.  Social  life  demands  precisely  from  man,  over  and  above  all
other  qualities,  a  certain  amount  of  attention,  a  power  and  stability  of
will,  of  which  the  savage,  for  instance,  is  incapable.  It  is  the  aim  of
penal  law,  among  other  things,  to  develop  the  will  in  this  direction.
It  is,  therefore,  also  wrong  that  Messrs.  Carrara  and  E.  Ferri  do  not
find  ' '  any  social  responsibility "  in  him  who  has  committed  a  crime,
not  on  his  own  initiative  or  from  an  anti-social  motive,  but  because
somebody  else  has  forced  him  to  strike  with  a  dagger  or  give  the  poison.
Such  a  man,  whatever  modern  Italian  jurists  may  think,  constitutes  a
certain  danger  to  society  undoubtedly,  not  because  of  his  passions,  or
even  of  his  personal  actions,  but  simply  because  of  his  weakness  of  will.
He  is  an  instrument  instead  of  being  a  person.  Now,  it  is  always
dangerous  in  a  State  to  have  instruments  instead  of  citizens.  Some-
thing anti-social  may  exist,  not  only  in  the  exterior  motives  which  act
on  the  will,  but  even  in  the  nature  of  this  will.  Now,  in  all  cases  in
which  something  anti-social  may  be  found  there  is  cause  for  legal
sanction.  Human  penal  law,  therefore,  must  not  be  considered  as-
being  absolutely  of  the  same  order  as  the  pretended  natural  sanction


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  183

much  more  rare  and  more  exceptional.  Formerly,  if  a
general  was  conquered,  he  was  sentenced  to  death  ;  he  was
even  crucified  sometimes.  If  he  was  the  conqueror,  he  was

which  deduces  the  consequences  of  a  given  act— for  instance,  that  of
ilhng  into  the  water— without  ever  concerning  itself  about  the  will  and
intention  which  preceded  the  act  (E.  Ferri,  «  II  Diritto  di  Punire,"
p. 25). No, the inward determinism of  the  individual  should not
entirely  escape  legal  appreciation  ;  and,  because  a  judge  is  not  compelled
to  ask  himself  if  an  act  is  morally  or  metaphysically  free,  it  does  not
follow  that  he  is  in  any  case  whatever  right  to  neglect  to  examine  the
amount  of  attention  and  intention— m  short,  the  degree  of  conscious
will-with  which  this  act  was  accomplished. By  degrees  punishment
has  now-a-days  become  only  a  measure  of  social  precaution  ;  but  this
precaution  must  aim,  not  only  at  the  act  and  its  motives,  but  also  at  the
will  which  is  hidden  behind  these. This  will,  whatever  may  be  its
ultimate  and  metaphysical  nature,  is  mechanically  a  force  the  greater  or
less  intensity  of  which  must  be  reckoned  with  in  social  calculations It
would  be  absurd  for  an  engineer,  wanting  to  dam  in  a  river,  to  consider
only  the  volume  of  its  water,  without  taking  into  account  the  force  of
the  current  sweeping  it  along. Let  it  be  well  understood,  however,  that
we  in  no  sense  make  the  «  will  "  a  mysterious  faculty  placed  behind  the
motives. The  will  of  which  I  wished  to  speak  is  for  us  simply  character
-the  system  of  tendencies  of  all  kinds  which  the  individual  is  accus-
tomed to  obey,  and  which  constitute  his  moral  self;  in  short,  the  greater
or  lesser  resistance  which  this  fund  of  inward  energy  is  able  to  present  to
anti-social  motives. We  believe  that  the  appreciation  of  the  courts  of
justice  will  always  take  into  consideration,  not  only  the  statement  of  the
determinating  motives  of  *  given  act,  but  also  the  person  himself,  and
the  character  of  the  accused. Not only  will  the motives  and
springs  of  action  have  to  be  more  or  less  judged,  but  the  persons  (who
are  themselves  but  complicated  systems  of  motives  and  springs,  which
counterbalance  each  other,  and  form  a  living  equilibrium). In  other
terms,  there  exists  only  a  social  responsibility,  not  in  any  sense  a  moral
one  ;  but  I  may  add  that  the  individual  is  not  only  responsible  for  such  or
such  an  anti-social  act  and  passing  motives  which  may  have  urged  him
to  this  act :  he  is  responsible  for  his  very  character ;  and  it  is,  above
all,  this  character  which  penal  law  must  try  to  reform. The  jurymen
always  want  to  judge  the  person,  and  allow  themselves  to  be  influenced
by  good  or  bad  antecedents. They  often  carry  this  to  excess  ;  but  I
•eheve  they  are  not  wrong  in  principle,  because  an  act  is  never  isolated,
but  is  simply  a  symptom  ;  and,  therefore,  social  sanction  ought  to  bear
on  the  individual  as  a  whole.


184 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

called  imperator,  and  carried  about  in  triumph.  In  our
days  a  general  need  not  expect  either  such  honours  or  so
lamentable  an  end.  Society  is  based  on  a  system  of  exchange.
He  who  renders  a  service  counts  upon  receiving,  by  virtue
of  economic  laws,  not  a  sanction,  but  simply  another  service ;
an  honorarium,  or  salary,  takes  the  place  of  the  reward,
properly  so  called.  One  good  deed  calls  forth  another  by
a  kind  of  natural  equilibrium.  In  reality,  reward — as  it
existed,  and  still  exists  to-day,  in  non-democratic  societies —
always  leads  to  privilege.  The  author,  for  instance,  formerly
chosen  by  the  king  to  receive  a  pension,  was  surely  a
privileged  writer  ;  while  now-a-days  the  author  whose  books
sell  is  simply  a  writer  who  is  read.  Reward  was  formerly
considered  so  entirely  as  a  privilege  that  it  very  often
became  hereditary,  like  fiefs  or  titles.  In  this  way  pre-
tended distributive  justice  really  produces  most  shocking
injustice.  Moreover,  the  very  man  who  was  rewarded  lost
thereby  in  moral  dignity ;  for  that  which  he  received
appeared  to  himself  only  as  a  gift,  instead  of  being  a
legitimate  possession.  It  is  a  remarkable  thing  that  the
economic  system  which  tends  to  predominate  among  us
has,  in  some  respects,  a  much  more  moral  aspect .  than  the
system  of  pretended  distributive  justice ;  for,  instead  of
making  us  liegemen,  it  makes  us  legitimate  and  absolute
possessors  of  all  which  we  earn  by  our  works  and  our
labour.  Everything  which  in  the  past  was  obtained  by
reward  or  by  favour  will  be  obtained  more  and  more  by
competition.  Competition,  in  which  M.  Renan  sees  a
degrading  agent  in  modern  society  to-day,  allows  the  man  of
talent  to  create  his  own  position,  and  to  own  the  place  which
he  attains  to  his  own  efforts.  Now,  competition  is  a  means  of
superseding  reward  and  largess  by  payment  due.  The  further
we  go,  the  more  everyone  is  conscious  of  what  is  due  to  him,
and  claims  it ;  but  that  which  is  due  to  everyone  loses  more
and  more  the  character  of  a  sanction,  and  takes  that  of  an
engagement  binding  both  on  society  and  on  the  individual.


PENAL  OR  DEFENSIVE  JUSTICE  IN  SOCIETY.  185

In  the same way  as  certain  social rewards,  which we
mentioned  just  now,  so  the  other  more  vague  rewards  of
public  esteem  and of  popularity, also tend to  lose  their
importance as civilization goes on. Among savages  a
popular man is a god,  or  at least very nearly one-
Among  partly-civilized  peoples  he  still  is  a  man  of  super-
human form,  "  an  instrument  of  Providence." In  time  he
will  become,  in  the  eyes  of  all,  a  man  and  nothing  more.
The  infatuation  of  nations  for  Caesars  and  Napoleons  will
gradually  pass. Already,  in  these  days,  the  only  truly  great
and  durable  fame  seems  to  be  that  of  the  men  of  science  ;
and,  these  being,  above  all,  admired  by  people  who  under-
stand them,  who  are  but  a  very  small  number,  their  glory
will  always  be  limited  to  a  small  circle. Lost  in  the  rising
tide  of  human  heads,  men  of  talent  or  of  genius  will,  there-
fore, get  accustomed  to  need  only  their  own  esteem  and
that  of  a  small  number  to  sustain  them  in  their labours.
They  will  pave  the  way  in  the  world  for  themselves  and  for
humanity,  urged  onward  more  by  inward  force  than  by  the
attraction  of  rewards. The  further  we  go,  the  more  we  feel

that  the  name  of  a  man  comes  to  be  of  little  importance

we  still  cling  to  it  from  a  kind  of  conscious  childishness  ;

but  the  deed,  for  ourselves  as  well  as  for  all  others,  is  the

essential thing. The  people of high  intelligence,  while

working  almost  silently  in  loftier  spheres,  must  rejoice  to

see  the  small  ones,  the  lowest,  those  who  are  without  name

or  merit, take a growing  part  in the  pre-occupations  of

humanity. In  these  days  many  more  efforts  are  made  to

alleviate  the  fate  of  those  who  are  unhappy,  or  even  guilty,

than  to  overwhelm  with  benefactions  those  who  are  happy

enough  to  be  on  the  top  rung  of  the  human  ladder. For

instance,  a  new  law  concerning  the  masses  or  the  poor  has

more  interest  for  us  than  any  event  which  may  happen  to

some  high  personage ;  in  the  past  it  was  just  the  contrary.

Personal questions  will  be  effaced  to  leave  room  for  the

abstract  ideas  of  science,  or  for  the  concrete  sentiment  of


1 86 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

pity  and  philanthropy.  The  misery  of  a  social  group  will
more  invincibly  attract  attention  and  kind  deeds  than  the
merit  of  a  certain  individual.  We  shall  wish  more  to
help  those  who  suffer  than  to  reward  in  a  brilliant  and  super-
ficial way  those  who  have  acted  well.  For  distributive
justice,  which  is  an  entirely  individual  and  personal  justice,
a  justice  of  privilege  (if  such  words  are  not  a  paradox),  must,
therefore,  be  substituted  a  justice  of  a  more  absolute  char-
acter, and  which  at  bottom  is  really  charity.  Charity  for  all
men,  whatever  may  be  their  moral,  intellectual,  or  physical
worth,  should  be  the  final  aim  to  be  pursued  even  by
public  opinion.


CHAPTER  III.
Criticism  of  Inward  Sanction  and  of  Remorse.

EVERY  exterior  sanction,  punishment,  or  reward,  has
appeared  to  us  sometimes  as  a  cruelty,  sometimes  as  a
privilege.  If  there  is  no  purely  moral  reason  for  thus
establishing  outside  the  individual  an  absolute  proportion
between  happiness  and  virtue,  is  there  a  moral  reason  for
seeing  this  proportion  realized  within  the  individual  through
his  sensibility  ?  In  other  words,  must  there  and  can  there
exist  in  conscience,  to  use  the  words  of  Kant,  a  pathological
state  of  pleasure  or  pain,  a  kind  of  moral  pathology  which
sanctions  the  moral  law  ;  and  must  morality  a  priori  have
consequences  in  which  the  passions  play  a  large  part  ?
Let  us  imagine,  by  hypothesis,  a  virtue  so  heterogeneous
to  nature  that  it  would  neither  have  any  perceptible  character,
nor  find  itself  in  conformity  with  any  social  or  personal
instinct,  or  with  any  natural  passion,  any  7ra#os,  but  only
with  pure  reason.  Let  us  imagine,  on  the  other  hand,  an
immoral  direction  of  the  will  which,  while  being  the
negation  of  the  "laws  of  pure  practical  reason,"  would,  at
the  same  time,  not  meet  with  resistance  from  any  natural


CRITICISM  OF  INWARD  SANCTION  AND  OF  REMORSE. 187

impulse,  any  natural  passion  (not  even,  hypothetical!*  the
natural  pleasure  of  exact  reasoning,  the  pleasant  feeling  of
logical  exercise  according  to  rule).  Would  it,  in  this
case  (which,  after  all,  is  not  to  be  found  in  humanity),  be
rational  that  to  a  merit  and  a  demerit  having  no  relation
to  the  visible  should  be  added  perceptible  pain  or  pleasure
-a  pathology  1  Moral  satisfaction  and  remorse  also  as
much  as  pleasure,  pain,  and  the  passions-that  is  to  say,
as  much  as  all  the  simple  phenomena  of  sensation-seem
Kant  not  less  inexplicable  than  the  idea  of  duty  itself.
He  sees  in  it  a  mystery.*

But  this  mystery  resolves  itself  into  an  impossibility If
moral  merit  were  pure  conformity  to  rational  law  as  such
pure  rationality,  pure  formalism,  and  if  it  were  the  deed  of
pure  transcendental  liberty  foreign  to  every  natural  impulse
it  would  produce  no  joy  in  the  order  of  nature,  no  expansion
living  being,  no  inward  warmth,  no  throbbing  of  the
heart. In  the  same  way, if  the  evil  will,  the  source  of
dement,  could  hypothetically  find  itself,  at  the  same  time
not  contrary  to  any  of  the  natural  impulses  of  our  being
but was serving them all, it could not produce any
suffering. Demerit  would,  in  that  case,  naturally  have  to
end  m  perfect  happiness  of  the  senses  and  of  the  passions
ihat  this  does  not  happen  is  because  the  moral  or  immoral
act,  even  when  one  supposes  it  to  be  intentionally  supra-
sensible, still  meets  aids  or  obstacles  in  our  pathological
nature. If  we  enjoy  or  suffer,  it  is  no  longer  in  so  far  as


Lnt.de  la  Aaison  Pratique,  tr.  Barni,  p.  121. M.  Janet,  inspired

without doubt by Kant, and perhaps by the theologians, also

:cts  to  deducing  the  sentiment  of  remorse  from  immorality. He

eei^!-  1°  ^t6  m  "  the  pr°°f  °f  a  kind  of  mysterious  harmony  pre-
established  between  nature  and  the  moral  law.  "Remorse,"  he  says  ''is
the  smarting  pain,  the  sting  which  tortures  the  heart  after  a  guilty  deed
This  suffering  has  not  any  moral  character,  and  must  be  considered  as  a
kind  rf punishment  inflicted  upon  crime  by  nature  herself"  (Tr  de
Pntlos.,  p.  673).


1 88 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

our  intention  is  conformable  or  contrary  to  a  rationally
fixed  law,  to  a  law  of  supranatural  liberty,  but  in  so  far  as  it
finds  itself,  at  the  same  time,  conformable  or  contrary  to  our
always  more  or  less  variable  sense-nature.

In  other  words,  moral  satisfaction  or  remorse  does  not
proceed  entirely  a  priori  from  our  relation  to  a  moral  law,
but  from  our  relation  to  the  natural  and  empirical  laws.

Even  the  mere  pleasure  of  reasoning,  which  we  may
feel  in  generalizing  a  maxim  of  conduct,  can  yet  only  be
explained  by  the  natural  tendency  of  the  mind  to  go
beyond  every  personal  limit,  and,  in  a  general  way,  by
the  tendency  of  all  activity  to  everlastingly  continue  a
movement  once  begun.  If  empirical  considerations  are
not  made  to  intervene,  all  moral,  or  even  rational,  or  even
purely  logical  enjoyment  will  not  only  become  unexplain-
able,  but  a  priori  impossible.  A  superiority  of  the  order
of  reason  over  that  of  sensation  and  of  nature  might  well
enough  be  admitted,  but  not  a  possible  echo  of  these  two
orders,  the  one  mingling  with  the  other  echo,  which  is
entirely  a  posteriori.

To  render  inward  sanction  truly  moral,  it  should  have
naught  of  the  sensible  or  the  pathological — that  is  to  say,  it
should  have  nothing  which  is  pleasant  and  nothing  which
is  painful  to  the  passions.  It  should  be  like  the  apathy  of
the  Stoics,  which  means  a  perfect  serenity,  an  ataraxy,  a
supra-sensible  and  supra-passionate  satisfaction.  It  should
be,  with  regard  to  this  world,  the  nirvana  of  the  Buddhists,
the  complete  detachment  from  all  7ra0os.  It  should,
therefore,  lose  all  character  of  sensible  sanction.  A
supra-sensible  law  can  only  have  a  supra-sensible  sanction,
which  is  consequently  unknown  to  that  which  is  called
natural  pleasure  and  pain  ;  and  this  sanction  is  as  indeter-
minate for  us  as  the  supra-sensible  order  itself.

The  sanction  called  moral  and  truly  sensible  is  really
a  particular  case  of  that  natural  law  according  to  which
every  development  of  activity  is  accompanied  by  pleasure.  This


CRITICISM  OF  INWARD  SANCTION  AND  OF  REMORSE. 189

pleasure  diminishes,  disappears,  or  gives  place  to  suffering,
according  to  the  inward  or  outward  resistances  which  the
activity  meets. In  the  inward  self  of  the  individual  the
activity  may  meet  this resistance  either  in  the  nature  of
the  mind  and  the  intellectual  temperament,  or  in  the  character
and  the  moral  temperament. Evidently  the  aptitudes  of  the
mind differ according to the individual. It will be
difficult  for  a  poet  to  be  a  good  lawyer ;  and  one  under-
stands the  sufferings  of  Alfred  de  Musset  as  a  clerk  in  an
office. It  will  be  also  difficult  for  an  imaginative  poet  to  be
a  mathematician  ;  and  one  understands  the  protestations  of
Victor Hugo against  the "torture  of  the X's  and  Y's."
Every  intelligence  seems  to  have  a  certain  number  of  direc-
tions, in  which  hereditary  habit  pushes  it  by  preference. If  it
deviates  from  these  directions,  it  suffers.  This  suffering  may,
in certain cases, become truly  heartrending,  and  very
nearly  "  moral "  remorse. Let  us,  for  example,  think  of  an
artist  who feels genius  stirring  in  him,  and  who  is  con-
demned to  manual  labour  for  the  whole  of  his  life. This
feeling  of  a  lost  life,  of  an  unfulfilled  task,  of  an  unrealized
ideal,  will  beset  and  haunt  his  sensibility  more  or  less  in
the  same  way  as  would  the  consciousness  of  a  moral  failure.
Here,  therefore,  we  have  an  instance  of  the  pleasure  or  pain
which  attends  every  development  of  activity  in  any  environ-
ment whatever. Let  us  now  pass  on  from  the  intellectual
temperament  to  the  moral  temperament. Here,  again,  we
are  in  the  presence  of  a  great  many  instinctive  impulses,
which  will  produce  joy  or  pain,  according  as  the  will  is
obedient  or  resistant— impulses  of  avarice, of  charity,  of
theft,  of  sociability,  of  savagery,  of  pity,  etc. Such  diverse
impulses  may  exist  in  one  and  the  same  character,  and  pull
it  about  first  in  one  direction,  then  in  another. The  joy
which the righteous man feels in following his social
instincts  will,  therefore,  find  its  counterpart  in  the  joy  which
the  evil  man  feels  in  following  his  anti-social  instincts. The
saying  of  the  young  evil-doer,  whom  Maudsley  mentions,


1 90 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

is  well  known  :  "  By  Jove  !  how  nice  it  is  to  steal !  Even  if
I  had  millions,  I  should  still  want  to  steal !"  When  this  joy
in  evil-doing  is  not  compensated  by  any  subsequent  regret
or  remorse  (and  this  is  what  would  happen,  according  to  the
writers  on  criminal  law,  to  nine-tenths  of  the  criminals  by
heredity),  a  complete  derangement  follows  in  the  direction
of  conscience,  similar  to  that  which  is  produced  in  the
magnetic  needle.  The  evil  instincts  stifling  all  the  others,
it  is  almost  entirely  from  these  alone  that  the  pathological
sanction  comes.  If  the  young  thief,  of  whom  Maudsley
speaks,  had  missed  an  opportunity  for  theft,  he  would
certainly  have  suffered  inwardly  ;  he  would  have  had  a
twinge  of  remorse.

The  pathological  phenomenon  designated  by  the  name
of  inward  sanction  may,  therefore,  be  considered  as  in  itself
indifferent  to  the  moral  quality  of  actions.  Sensibility,  in
which  phenomena  of  this  kind  happen,  has  by  no  means
the  stability  of  reason ;  it  belongs  to  those  things,  "ambiguous
and  of  double  usage,"  of  which  Plato  speaks.  It  may
befriend  evil  as  well  as  good.  Our  instincts,  our  impulses,
our  passions,  do  not  know  what  they  want — they  must  be
guided  by  reason  ;  and  the  joy  or  suffering  which  they  may
cause  us  hardly  ever  arises  from  their  conformity  with  the
end  which  reason  proposes  to  them,  but  from  their  con-
formity with  the  end  towards  which  they  themselves  would
naturally  turn.  In  other  words,  the  joy  in  well-doing  and
the  remorse  for  evil-doing  are  never  proportional  in  us  to
the  triumph  of  the  moral  good  or  evil,  but  to  the  struggle
which  they  have  had  in  fighting  against  the  impulses  of  our
physical  and  psychical  temperament.

Although  the  elements  of  remorse  and  of  inward  joy  thus
springing  from  the  sensibility  are  generally  variable,  there  is,
however,  one  which  presents  a  certain  fixity,  and  which  may
exist  in  all  elevated  minds  ;  we  mean  that  satisfaction  which
an  individual  always  feels  in  being  classed  with  superior  beings
— beings  conformable  with  the  normal  type  of  his  species,  and


CRITICISM  OF  INWARD  SANCTION  AND  OF  REMORSE. 191

adapted,  so  to  speak,  to  his  own  ideal. This  satisfaction
corresponds  to  the  intellectual  pain  of  feeling  himself  fallen
from  his  rank  and  his  species,  sunk  to  the  level  of  inferior
Unfortunately,  this  kind  of  satisfaction  and this
kind  of  intellectual  remorse  only  clearly  manifest  themselves
m  philosophic  minds. Moreover,  this  sanction,  limited  to
a  small number of moral  beings, admits of a certain
provisional antinomy. In fact, the  pain  caused  by  the
contrast between our  ideal and our real  state  must  be
all  the  greater  to  us,  as  we  are  more  fully  conscious  of  the
ideal ;  for  in  that  case  we  get  a  clearer  perception  of  the
distance  separating  us  from  it. Susceptibility  of  conscience,
therefore, increases  in  proportion to  the  development  of
conscience,  and  the  vividness  of  remorse  is  a  measure  of
our  very  efforts towards  morality. In  the  same way,  as
superior  organisms  are  always  more  sensitive  to  all  kinds'  of
pain  coming  from  outside,  and  as,  on  the  average,  a  white
man,  for  instance,  suffers  in  his  life  more  than  a  negro,  so  i

the  more  highly  organized  beings  are  morally  more  exposed
than  others  to  that  suffering  arising  from  inward  causes
whose  cause  is  always  in  action— the  suffering  from  the
unrealized  ideal.  True  remorse,  with  its  subtlety,  its  painful
scruples,  its  inward  tortures,  may  strike  men,  not  in  inverse
but  in  direct,  ratio  to  their  perfection.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  popular  morality,  and  even  morality  as
understood  by  Kant,  tend  to  turn  remorse  into  expiation,  a
mysterious  and  inexplicable  relation  between  moral  will  and
nature.  They  tend,  in  the  same  way,  to  find  a  reward  in
moral  satisfaction.  As  to  ourselves,  we  have  tried  to  bring
back  sensible  remorse  to  a  simple  natural  resistance  of  the
deepest  impulses  of  our  being,  and  sensible  satisfaction  to  a
natural  sentiment  of  facility,  of  ease,  of  liberty,  which  we
experience  when  yielding  to  these  impulses.  If  there  is  a
supra-sensible  sanction,  it  must  be— let  us  repeat  it,  it  must
be— unknown  to  the  senses  properly  so-called,  to  the  passions,
to  the  7TO00S.  All  the  same,  we  are  far  from  denying  the


I Q2 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

practical  utility  of  what  are  called  moral  pleasures  and  moral
sufferings. Suffering,  for  instance,  if  not  justifiable  as  penal
law,  is  very  often  justifiable  as  utility. Remorse  becomes
valuable  if  it  can  serve  some  definite  purpose,  if  it  is  the
consciousness  of  some  remaining  imperfection,  whether  in
its  causes  or  its  effects,  of  which  the  past  act  was  simply  the
sign. It  does  not  then  bear  upon  the  act  itself,  but  upon
the  imperfection  revealed  by  the  act,  or  upon  the  conse-
quences following  in  its  train  ;  it  is  an  incentive  urging  us
forward. From  this  point  of  view,  which  is  not  that  of
sanction  in  the  proper  sense,  the  suffering  caused  by  remorse,
even  all  suffering  in  general,  and  every  austerity,  acquires  a
moral  value  which  must  not  be  neglected,  and  which  has
but  too  often  been  neglected  by  pure  utilitarians. Bentham's
horror  of  anything  reminding  him  of  the  "  ascetic  principle,"
or  of  anything  which  seemed  to  him  the  least  sacrifice  of
pleasure,  is  well  known. He  was  wrong. Suffering  may
sometimes be morally like bitter medicine — a powerful
tonic. The  patient  himself  feels  the  need  of  it. He  who
has  abused  pleasure  is  the  first  to  wish  for,  and  to  relish,
pain. It  is  for  a  similar  reason  that,  after  having  made
undue  use  of  sweets,  one  comes  to  relish  an  infusion  of
quinine. The  vicious  man  will  not  only  get  to  hate  his  vice,
but  also  the  very  enjoyments  it  yielded  him ;  he  despises
them  so  deeply  that,  in  order  to  give  himself  evidence  of
this,  he  likes  to  feel  himself  in  pain. Every  stain  needs  a
kind  of  biting  remedy  to  efface  it. Pain  can  be  this  biting
remedy. If  it  can  never  constitute  a  moral  sanction — patho-
logical evil  and  moral  evil  being  heterogeneous — it may
sometimes  become  a  useful  caustic. Under  this  new  aspect
sanction  has  an  unquestionable  remedial  value  ;  but  first,  for
it  to  be  truly  moral,  the  individual  himself  must  consent  to
it — must  demand  it. Moreover,  it  must  be  remembered  that
remedial  treatment  should  neither  last  too  long  nor,  above
all,  be  eternal. All  religions  and  classic  morality  h*ave  under-
stood the  value  of  pain,  but  they  have  abused  it. They
have  acted  like  surgeons  who,  wonder-struck  at  the  results


RELIGIOUS SANCTION.  193

of  their  operations,  ask  nothing  but  to  cut  off  arms  and
legs.  "  Cutting  off"  should  never  be  an  aim  in  itself;  and
to  "  sew  up  again  "  should  be  the  very  last  resource  of  all.
Remorse  is  only  of  value  in  so  far  as  it  leads  more  surely  to
definitely  good  resolution.

We  have  shown  that  remorse  may  be  considered  under
two  aspects — sometimes  as  the  painful  and  relatively  passive
statement  of  a  fact  (disobedience  to  a  more  or  less  deeply-
rooted  impulse  of  our  being,  a  falling  below  the  ideal  of  the
individual,  either  with  relation  to  the  species  or  to  his  own
conception),  sometimes  as  an  effort  still  more  or  less  painful,
but  active  and  energetic,  an  effort  to  rise  out  of  this  state  of
failure. Under  its  first  aspect  remorse  may  be  logically  and
physically  necessary ;  but  it  only  becomes  morally  good  by
assuming  its  second  character. Remorse,  therefore,  is  the
more  moral  the  less  it  resembles  true  sanction. There  are
temperaments  in  which  the  two  kinds  of  remorse  are  clearly
enough  divided. There  are  some  which  feel  a  very  stinging,
and  yet  a  perfectly  useless,  pain;  there  are  others  which
(reason  and  will  being  predominant  in  them)  need  no  very
acute  pain to recognise  their  evil-doing,  and to impose
reparation  on  themselves. These  latter  are  superior  from  a
moral  point  of  view,  which  proves  that  the  so-called  inward
sanction,  like  all  others,  justifies  itself  only  in  so  far  as  it  is
a  means  of  action.


CHAPTER  IV.
Criticism  of  Religious  and  Metaphysical  Sanction.


RELIGIOUS SANCTION.

THE  further  we  advance  in  this  criticism,  the  more  does
sanction,  properly  so-called— that  is  to  say,  moral  "pathology  "
—seem  to  us  a  kind  of  fence,  being  of  use  only  when
there  is  a  path  marked  out,  and  someone  walking  in  it.

o


194 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

Beyond  life,  in  the  eternal  void,  the  fences  become  entirely
superfluous.  If  once  the  probation  of  life  is  ended,
there  is  no  coming  back  to  it,  unless  it  be,  let  it  be  well
understood,  for  the  sake  of  deriving  experience  and  wise
lessons  from  it,  in  the  case  of  our  having  to  begin  fresh
trials.  Such  is  not  the  idea  of  the  principal  human  religions.
Religions,  in  so  far  as  they  command  a  certain  rule  of
conduct,  obedience  to  certain  rites,  faith  in  such  and  such  a
dogma,  all  need  a  sanction  to  strengthen  their  commands.
They  all  agree  in  calling  upon  the  most  formidable  sanction
imaginable ;  to  those  who  have  transgressed  their  orders,  in
one  way  or  another,  they  promise  eternal  suffering,  and
threaten  them  with  horrors  far  beyond  any  which  the  imagi-
nation of  the  most  furious  man  dreams  of  inflicting  upon
his  most  deadly  enemy.  In  this,  as  in  many  other  points,
religions  are  in  total  disagreement  with  the  spirit  of  our
time ;  but  it  is  strange  to  think  that  they  are  still  followed
by  a  great  many  philosophers  and  metaphysicians.  Imagining
God  as  the  most  terrible  of  all  powers,  one  comes  to  the
conclusion  that,  in  his  anger,  he  must  inflict  the  most  terrible
of  punishments.  One  forgets  that  God — this  supreme  ideal
— should  simply  be  incapable  of  hurting  anyone,  and,  with
still  more  reason,  be  unable  to  return  evil  for  evil.  Precisely
because  God  is  conceived  as  the  maximum  of  power,  he
should  be  able  to  inflict  only  the  minimum  of  pain  ;  for  the
greater  the  force  over  which  one  has  command,  the  less
need  is  there  to  use  it  to  obtain  a  certain  effect.  Besides,
as  he  is  believed  to  be  the  highest  goodness,  it  is  impos-
sibile  to  picture  him  inflicting  even  this  minimum  of  pain.
The  "  Heavenly  Father "  should  at  least  have  this  supe-
riority over  earthly  fathers,  of  not  flogging  his  children.
Finally,  as  he  is  hypothetically  the  supreme  intelligence,  we
cannot  believe  that  he  would  do  anything  unreasonable.
Now,  for  what  reason  would  he  cause  the  evil-doer  to  surfer  ?
God  is  above  all  insult,  and  need  not  defend  himself;
therefore  he  should  not  strike.


RELIGIOUS SANCTION.


Religious  systems  always  have  a  tendency  to  represent  the
bad  man  as  a  Titan  engaged  in  a  struggle  against  God  him-
self. It is quite natural that  Jupiter, once being the
conqueror,  should  in  future  guard  himself,  and  crush  his
opponent  under  a  mountain. But  it  is  a  strange  idea  to
imagine  God  as  being  thus  materially  able  to  fight  evil-
doers, without  losing  his  majesty  and  his  sanctity. From
the moment when the  personified "Moral Law" thus
undertakes  a  physical  struggle  with  evil-doers,  it  inevitably
loses  its  character  of  law,  it  lowers  itself  to  the  level  of  its
victim—  it fails. A  god cannot fight  with a man  • he
exposes  himself to  being  overthrown,  like  the  angel by
Jacob. Either  God,  this  living  law,  is  all-powerful—  and
then  we  cannot  truly  offend  him,  nor  should  hejunisA  us-
er we  really  can  offend  him  ;  but  in  that  case  we  in  some
way  influence  him,  and  he  is  not  all-powerful,  not  "the
absolute," not God. The founders of religions have
imagined  that  the  most  sacred  law  should  be  also  the  strongest
law  ;  it  is  absolutely  the  reverse. The  idea  of  force  logically
resolves  itself  into  the  relation  between  power  and  resist-
ance ;  every  physical  force  is,  therefore,  morally  a  weakness.
What  a  strange  and  very  anthropomorphic  conception  to
imagine  God  as  keeping  a  gaol,  or  a  "hell,"  and  having  for
his  servant  and  gaol-keeper  the  Devil  ! In  fact,  the  Devil  is
more  responsible  for  hell  than  the  executioner  is  for  the
instruments  of  torture  which  are  put  into  his  hands  ;  maybe
he  should  even  be  very  much  pitied  for  the  sort  of  work  he
is  made  to  do. The  real  responsibility  is  not  his. He  is
only  the  executioner  of  high  and  divine  works  ;  and  a  philo-
sopher might  maintain,  not  without  likelihood,  that  the  true
Devil  here  is  God. If  a  human  law,  if  a  civil  law,  cannot  do
without  physical  sanction,  the  reason  is—  as  we  have  seen—
precisely  because  it  is  civil  and  human. It  is  not  the  same
with  the  "  Moral  Law,"  which  is  supposed  to  protect  only  a
principle,  and  which  is  represented  as  immovable,  eternal
to  a  certain  extent  passive;  it  is  impossible  to  be  moved


196 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

before  an  immovable  law.  Force  being  powerless  in  the
presence  of  it,  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  law  should  answer
by  force.  He  who  thinks  to  have  overthrown  moral  law
will  always  find  it  confronting  him  again,  as  Hercules  saw
the  giant,  whom  he  thought  he  had  finally  felled  to  the
ground,  rise  up  time  after  time  from  under  his  grip.  To
be  eternal,  that  is  the  only  possible  revenge  of  goodness
with  regard  to  those  who  violate  it.

If  God  had  created  beings  with  natures  so  perverse  as  to
always  act  contrary  to  his  commands,  he  would,  in  their
presence,  be  reduced  to  impotence.  He  could  only  pity
them,  and  pity  himself  for  having  created  them.  His  duty
would  not  be  to  strike  them,  but  to  alleviate  their  mis-
fortune as  much  as  possible ;  to  show  himself  all  the  more
gentle  and  better,  in  proportion  as  they  were  worse.  Those
who  are  doomed,  if  they  were  really  incurable,  would,  after
all,  be  more  in  need  of  the  delights  of  heaven  than  the
chosen  ones  themselves.  One  of  two  things  :  either  the
evil-doers  may  be  converted  to  goodness — in  that  case  the
so-called  hell  will  only  be  a  school  on  a  very  large  scale,  in
which  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  open  the  eyes  of  all  the
outcasts,  and  to  enable  them  to  ascend  to  heaven  as  quickly
as  possible ;  or  the  evil-doers  are  beyond  cure,  like  incurable
maniacs  (which  is  absurd)  ;  in  that  case  they  also  will  be
everlastingly  pitiful,  and  a  supreme  goodness  must  try
to  compensate  them  for  their  misery  by  all  imaginable
means,  by  the  sum  of  all  possible  happiness.  In  whatever
manner  it  be  understood,  the  dogma  of  hell  thus  appears  the
very  reverse  of  truth.

Besides,  by  damning  a  soul — that  is  to  say,  by  turning
it  away  for  ever  from  his  presence,  or,  in  less  mysterious
words,  by  shutting  it  out  for  ever  from  the  truth — God
would  turn  himself  away  from  his  soul,  would  limit  his  own
power,  and  would,  so  to  say,  damn  himself  also  to  a  certain
extent.  The  pain  of  damnation  recoils  on  him  who  inflicts
it.  As  to  the  physical  suffering  singled  out  by  theologians,


THE  SANCTIOX  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  197

it  is  evidently  far  less bearable  when taken  in a meta-

ncal  sense. Instead  of  damning  those  who  have  gone

wrong  God  should  only  everlastingly  call  them  back  to  him.

We  should  say,  with  Michael  Angelo,  it  is,  above  all  for


S°  ***y  on  the


smhf  e

symbol  of  the  cross. We  picture  him  as  looking  on  every.

thing  from  so  great  a  height  that  in  his  eyes  outcasts  are
never  anythlng  but fortunate, ^  JJ  ^  ^ *  e

are  unhappy,  as  such,  if  not  from  all  other  standpoints,  be
the  favountes  of  the  infinite  goodness  ?


ii.

THE SANCTION OF LOVE AND OF FRATERNITY.

THUS  far  we  have  considered  the  two  aspects  of  sanction
-pumshment and reward-** if  bound together
perhaps, it is possible to consider them"  sep^ate^'
Certain philosophers, for  instance, seemed disposed to
reject  reward  properly  so-called,  and  the  right  to  reward
to  admit  pumshment  only  as  being  legitimate  *

can  bd  IT  P°Siti0n  iS'  WC  bdieVe'  th"G  m°St  dfficult  which
be  taken  up  m  examining  the  question. There  i-

^±^±2^  t0  *  Whichanoth-  philosopher

s  taken  up,  and  which,  in  order  to  be  thorough,  we  also

must  examine. It  is  to  entirely  reject  punis^lutlo

try,  nevertheless,  to maintain  a  rational  relation  between


is  its  own


198 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

merit  and  happiness.  (M.  Fouillee,  "La  Liberte  et  le  Deter-
minisme.")

This  doctrine  renounces  the  idea  of  Kant,  which  makes
merit  conform  to  an  entirely  formal  law.  The  universe
is  represented  as  an  immense  community,  in  which  all  duty
is  always  a  duty  towards  an  active,  a  living  being.  In  this
community  "  he  who  loves  must  be  loved ";  what  is
more  natural  ?  To  say  that  the  virtuous  man  deserves
happiness  "  is  to  say  that  everybody  with  a  good  will
wishes  to  do  good  to  him  in  return  for  the  good  which  he

has  tried  to  do The  relation  of  merit  to  happiness  thus

becomes  a  relation  of  will  to  will,  of  person  to  person,  a
relation  of  gratitude,  and  consequently  of  fraternity  and
moral  love "  (ibid).  The  link  sought  for  between  good
actions  and  happiness  would  thus  be  found  in  the  idea
of  return  and  gratitude.  Loving-kindness  would  be  the
new  principle  of  sanction — a  principle  which,  while  ex-
cluding punishment,  would  be  sufficient  to  justify  a  kind
of  reward,  non-material,  but  moral.  Let  us  note  that  this
sanction  is  not  valid  for  an  individual,  who,  hypothetically,
might  be  considered  absolutely  solitary.  But,  according
to  the  doctrine  we  are  examining,  there  nowhere  exists
such  an  individual.  One  cannot  get  outside  society,
because  one  cannot  get  outside  the  universe.  Moral  law  is,
therefore,  fundamentally  only  a  social  law,  and  that  which  we
have  said  with  respect  to  the  actual  relations  between  men
holds  good  also  for  the  ideal  relations  of  all  beings  one  with
another.  From  this  point  of  view,  reward  becomes  a
kind  of  "  response  "  of  love.  Every  good  action  is  like
an  "  appeal "  addressed  to  all  beings  of  the  vast  universe.
It  seems  against  all  law  that  this  appeal  should  not  be
listened  to,  and  that  love  should  not  produce  gratitude.
Love  presupposes  mutuality  of  love,  consequently  co-opera-
tion and  helpfulness,  consequently  satisfaction  of  desire  and
happiness.  As  to  the  evident  unhappiness  of  any  one
person,  it  would  be  explained  in  accordance  with  this


THE  SANCTION  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  199

doctrine  by  the  presence  of  some  blind  will  opposing  him
from the  midst  of  nature,  from  the midst of  universal
society. Now,  if,  hypothetically,  a  being  is  truly  loving,  he
will  become  lovable  not  only  in  the  eyes  of  men,  but  in  the
eyes  of  all  the  elementary  wills  which  make  up  nature. It
will  thus  acquire  a  kind  of  ideal  right  to  be  respected  and
assisted by  them— consequently to be made happy by
them. All  tangible  evils— pain,  illness,  death— may  be  con-
sidered as  being  brought  about  by  a  kind  of  war  and  blind
hatred  of  inferior  wills. If  this  will  takes  for  its  victim  love
itself,  we  become  indignant,  and  what  could  be  more  just  ?
If  the  love  of  others  can  be  requited  only  with  love,  we
at  least  have  the  consciousness  that  this  must  be  done  with
the  love  of  the  whole  of  nature,  not  only  with  the  love  of
such or  such  an  individual. This  love  of  the  whole  of
nature  thus  generalized  may  become happiness for him
who  receives  it,  outward happiness included. The  link
between  goodwill  and  happiness,  which  we  desired  to  break,
will  be  re-established.

This  hypothesis,  we  admit,  is  the  last  and  only  resource
for  metaphysically  justifying  that  empirical  sentiment
of  indignation  which  pain  produces  in  us  if  it  accom-
panies goodwill.  Only  let  us  note  well  what  the  hypothesis
involves.

In  this  doctrine  it  will  finally  have  to  be  admitted,  without
proof,  that  all  the  wills  constituting  nature  are  analogous  in
essence  and  direction,  in  such  a  way  as  to  converge  towards
the  same  point.  If,  for  instance,  the  good  pursued  by  a
society  of  wolves  were  fundamentally  as  different  from  the
good  pursued  by  human  society  as  it  apparently  seems  to  be,
the  goodness  of  a  man  would  rationally  have  no  connection
with  that  of  a  wolf,  nor  the  goodness  of  a  wolf  with  that  of
a  man.  The  preceding  hypothesis  must,  therefore,  be  com-
pleted by  this  other  very  seductive  and  hazardous  one,  which
we  ourselves  have  elsewhere  defined  as  possible.  "  Is  there
not  a  tendency,  an  inward  aspiration,  eternally  the  same,  and


200 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

at  work  in  all  beings,  which  corresponds  with  that  exterior
evolution,  of  which  the  forms  are  so  varied  ?  Should  there
not  be  between  them  a  connection  of  tendencies  and  efforts
similar  to  the  anatomical  connection  in  organisms  pointed
out  by  G.  Saint-Hilaire  ?"  (see  our  "  Morale  Anglaise  Con-
temporaine,"  p.  370,  and  M.  Fouillee,  "  La  Science  Sociale
Contemporaine,"  book  v.).

According  to  this  doctrine,  the  idea  of  sanction  becomes
blended  with  the  moral  idea  of  "  co-operation."  He  who
does  good  universally  labours  at  so  great  a  task  that  he  has
ideally  a  right  to  the  co-operation  of  all  beings,  since
they  are  members  of  the  same  whole,  from  the  first  cell
.  to  the  grey  brain-matter  of  the  highest  organism.  He,
on  the  contrary,  who  commits  evil  ought  to  receive  from  all
a  "  refusal  of  co-operation,"  which  would  be  a  kind  of
negative  punishment ;  he  ought  to  find  himself  morally
isolated,  whereas  the  other  should  be  in  communion  with
the  universe.

Thus — restricted,  purified,  saved  by  metaphysics — this
idea  of  final  harmony  between  the  morally  good  and  hap-
piness certainly  becomes  admissible.  But,  in  the  first  place,
it  is  no  longer  truly  the  sanction  of  a  formal  law  ;  all  that
remains  of  the  ideas  of  necessary  or  imperative  law,  of
equally  necessary  sanction,  properly  so-called,  has  dis-
appeared. It  is  no  longer  even  the  formal  law  of  Kant,
nor  the  synthetical  a  priori  judgment  by  which  legality
should  be  united  to  happiness  as  reward.  In  one  word,  it
is  no  longer  a  system  of  legislation,  nor,  consequently,  of
true  sanction.  We  can  even  say  that  we  are  here  transported
to  a  sphere  higher  than  that  of  justice,  properly  so-called  ;
it  is  the  sphere  of  brotherhood.  It  is  no  longer  the  justice
of  equal  exchange,  for  the  idea  of  brotherhood  excludes
that  of  mathematical  exchange,  of  a  balance  of  services
exactly  measurable,  and  equal  in  quantity.  Goodwill  does
not  measure  its  return  according  to  what  it  has  received ;  it
returns  two,  and  even  tenfold,  for  one.  It  is  no  longer  even


THE  SANCTION  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  2OI

distributive  justice  in  its  exact  sense,  for  the  idea  of  an
exact,  or  even  moral,  distribution  is  no  longer  that  of
brotherhood.  The  prodigal  son  might  be  received  even
more  warmly  than  the  good  son.  An  evil-doer  might  be
loved,  and  perhaps  the  evil-doer  may  need  to  be  loved,
more  than  any  other.  I  have  two  hands — one  to  clasp  the
hand  of  those  with  whom  I  go  through  life,  the  other  to
raise  those  who  fall.  To  the  latter  I  might  even  stretch  forth
both  my  hands  together.

Thus,  in  this  sphere,  purely  rational  relations,  purely
intellectual  harmonies,  and — with  even  greater  reason — legal
relations  seem  to  disappear ;  thus  even  the  truly  rational,
logical,  and  even  quantitative  relation  vanishes,  which  should
bind  the  good  will  to  a  certain  proportion  of  outward  good
and  of  inward  love.  From  this  results  a  kind  of  antinomy.
Love  is  either  a  particular  grace,  and  an  election,  which
bears  hardly  any  resemblance  to  sanction,  or  it  is  a  kind  of
general  grace,  and  an  ideal,  far-reaching  equality  between
all  beings,  which  even  less  resembles  sanction.  If  I  love
one  man  better  than  another,  it  is  not  certain  that  my  love
must  be  in  direct  ratio  to  his  merit ;  and  if  I  love  all  men
for  their  humanity — if  I  love  them  universally,  equally —
the  proportion  between  merit  and  love  seems  still  more  to
disappear.  Besides,  men  of  "  goodwill "  would  undoubtedly
themselves  dislike,  according  to  ideal  justice,  to  be  the  object
•of  any  mark  of  preference  ;  the  voluntary  victims  of  love
would  not  consent  to  be  placed  in  any  way  before  others  in
the  case  of  any  redistribution  of  material  goods.  They
would  object  that,  after  all,  voluntary  suffering  is  less  to  be
pitied  than  imposed  suffering ;  to  him  who  admits  the
superiority  of  the  ideal  over  the  real,  the  good  man  is  the
rich  one,  even  when  this  supra-sensible  wealth  has  given
him  material  inconvenience  and  suffering.

Such  are  the  difficulties  to  which  we  believe  this  theory
will  give  rise.  These  difficulties  are,  perhaps,  not  insoluble  ;
but  their  solution  will  surely  mean  a  thorough  modification


202 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

of  the  traditional  idea  of  sanction — for,  as  far  as  pain  goes,
punishment  will  have  disappeared  ;  and,  as  to  reward,  the
compensation  belonging  to  pure  justice  will  seem  to  vanish
before  more  elevated  relations  of  brotherhood,  which  shall
be  free  from  precise  limitations.  On  the  one  hand,  physical
suffering  (death  included)  always  rouses  indignation  morally,
whatever  may  be  the  good  or  bad  character  of  the  will
which  causes  it.  Suffering  shocks  us  in  itself,  independently
of  its  point  of  application  ;  a  distribution  of  suffering  is,
therefore,  morally  unintelligible.  On  the  other  hand,  as  to
happiness — we  want  all  to  be  happy.  These  notions  cause
great  trouble  in  the  balance  of  sanction.  Proportionality,
rationality,  law,  vo/zos  (derived  from  vf/tw,  to  allot),  are  only
applicable  to  the  relations  of  social  order  and  utility,  of
defence  and  of  exchange,  of  commutation  and  of  mathe-
matical distribution.  Sanction,  properly  so-called,  is  there-
fore an  entirely  human  idea,  which  enters  as  a  necessary
element  into  the  conception  of  our  society,  but  which  might
be  expelled  without  contradiction  from  a  highly-elevated
society  composed  of  sages  like  Buddha  and  Jesus.

In  short,  the  utilitarians  and  the  followers  of  Kant,  placed
at  the  two  opposite  poles  of  moral  philosophy,  are  never-
theless victims  of  the  same  error.  The  utilitarian,  who
sacrifices  as  little  as  may  be  of  his  existence  in  the  hope  that
this  sacrifice  will  bring  him  something  in  return  in  the  life
beyond,  reckons  irrationally  from  his  point  of  view ;  for,  in
the  absolute,  nothing  more  is  due  to  him  for  his  interested
sacrifice  than  would  be  due  to  him  for  an  evil  act  of  self-
interest.  On  the  other  hand,  the  disciple  of  Kant  who
sacrifices  himself,  with  his  eyes  shut,  for  the  sake  of  the  law
only,  without  calculating,  without  demanding  anything,  has
none  the  more  any  veritable  right  to  compensation  or
indemnity.  Of  course,  if  we  have  no  aim  in  view,  we  should
give  up  all  reference  to  aim,  and  the  disciple  of  Kant  does  not
aim  at  happiness.  It  may  be  objected  that,  if  the  moral  law
constrains  us,  it  is  itself  bound  to  do  something  for  us.  It


THE  SANCTION  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  203

may  be  said  that  there  may  be  an  "  appeal  from  the  agent
to  the  law;  that  if,  for  instance,  the  law  demands  the
annihilation  of  self  without  compensation,  this  is  supreme
cruelty ;  and  is  a  cruel  law  just  ?"  (M.  Janet,  "  La  Morale,"
p.  582).  We  answer  that  it  is  here  necessary  to  distinguish
between  two  things— the  fatal  circumstances  of  life,  and  the
law  which  rules  our  conduct  under  these  circumstances.
The  fatal  situations  of  life  may  be  cruel  ;  let  nature  be
accused  of  this ;  but  a  law  can  never  appear  cruel  to  him
who  believes  in  its  legitimacy.  He  who  considers  every
stain  a  crime  cannot  feel  it  cruel  to  remain  chaste.  For  him
who  believes  in  a  "  moral  law  "  it  is  impossible  to  judge
this  law,  while  regarding  it  from  a  human  point  of  view,
because  this  law  is  hypothetically  unconditional,  irrespon-
sible, and  is  believed  to  be  speaking  to  us  from  the  very
depths  of  the  absolute.  It  makes  no  contract  with  us,  the
clauses  of  which  we  might  quietly  debate,  weighing  the
advantages  and  disadvantages.  At  bottom — even  in  the
moral  philosophy  of  Kant — sanction  is  really  only  a  supreme
expedient  to  rationally  and  materially  justify  the  formal
law  of  sacrifice,  the  moral  law.  Sanction  is  added  to  the
law  to  render  it  legitimate.*

This  question-begging,  disguised  under  the  name  of  postulate,
is  really  still  more  evident  in  those  systems  of  morality  which  try  more
openly  to  keep  the  mean  between  egoistic  utilitarianism  and  the
absolute  disinterestedness  of  Stoicism.  The  moral  philosophy  of  M.
Renouvier  in  France,  and  of  Sidgwick  in  England,  seems  to  be  of
this  kind.  "  Reason"  says  M.  Renouvier  (and  the  English  moralist
entirely  agrees  on  this  point),  "  is  only  of  value  and  makes  itself  only
known  in  so  far  as  it  is  supposed  to  be  conformable  with  the  final  cause,

the  principle  of  the  passions,  and  happiness The  postulate  of  a  final

conformity of  the  moral  law with happiness  is  the induction, the

proper  hypothesis  of  moral  philosophy. Is  this  postulate  denied?

Then  the  moral  agent  might  oppose  to  the  obligation  of  justice  another
obligation — that  of  his  own  preservation,  and  to  duty  the  idea  of  in-
terest such  as  he  represents  it  to  himself. In  the  name  of  -what  shall

we  urge  him  to  make  choice  of  duty?"  ("Science  de  Morale,"  vol.  i.,
p.  17).  M.  Renouvier,  very  cautious  and  circumspect,  tries  afterwards


204 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

The  doctrine  of  the  disciples  of  Kant,  even  more  than
that  of  the  utilitarians,  if  pushed  to  extremes,  would  logically
end  in  a  complete  antinomy  between  the  purely  "  moral
merit"  and  the  idea  of  a  reward,  or  even  of  some  sort  of
tangible  hope.  It  might  be  summed  up  in  the  story  of  an
Eastern  woman,  told  us  by  the  Sieur  de  Joinville  : — Yves,
a  preaching  friar,  one  day  saw  at  Damascus  an  old  woman

to  somewhat  diminish  the  importance  of  this  acknowledgment  by  a
scholastic  distinction.  Sanction,  he  says,  is  less  a  postulate  of  moral
philosophy  than  a  postulate  of  the  passions  ' '  necessary  to  legitimatize
them  and  to  make  them  enter  the  sphere  of  science."  Unfortunately,
he  happens  to  recognise  that  there  cannot  exist  a  moral  science
independently  of  the  passions,  and  that  the  obligation  of  self-interest
is  a  power  logically  equivalent  to  moral  obligation.  If  the  passions
postulate  a  sanction,  on  the  other  hand  moral  philosophy  postulates
the  passions  ;  it  is  a  circle.  In  moral  philosophy  thus  conceived,  duty
finds  itself,  at  least  from  the  logical  point  of  view,  put  on  equal  footing
with  self-interest.  Bentham  and  Kant  are  placed  on  the  same  level ;  it  is
owned  that  both  are  right,  and  it  is  made  to  appear  as  if  they  want  the
same  things  in  the  name  of  contrary  principles.  Sanction  serves  as  their
common  meeting-ground,  and  the  supreme  principle  of  remuneration  as
magistrate.  It  is  not  for  us  here  to  appreciate  the  value  of  these  moral
systems.  We  only  state  that  the  formal  law  of  Kant  has  disappeared
in  this  arrangement  ;  that  "  the  obligation  of  doing  one's  duty  solely
from  duty "  no  longer  exists,  and  is  considered  as  a  mere  paradox
("  Science  de  la  Morale,"  vol.  i.,  p.  178)  ;  that  sanction  is  no  longer  a
consequence  of  duty,  but  simply  a  condition.  In  that  case  this  idea
entirely  changes  its  aspect.  Punishment  and  reward  are  no  longer
considered  as  bound  to  moral  conduct  by  an  a  priori  synthetic
judgment  ;  but  they  are  demanded  beforehand  by  the  agents,  so  as
to  justify  the  commandment  of  the  "law"  from  the  reasonable  point
of  view.  The  moral  act  no  longer  constitutes  in  and  for  itself  a
right  to  happiness  ;  but  every  sensible  being  is  considered  as  having
naturally  a  right  to  hope  for  happiness,  and  as  unwilling  to  renounce
it  in  the  moral  act.  M.  Renouvier  and  Mr.  Sidgwick,  no  longer
maintaining  that  duty  deserves  a  reward,  simply  say  that  the  moral
agent,  expecting  a  reward,  would  be  duped  if  one  day  it  was  not
rewarded.  They  invoke,  so  to  speak,  as  their  only  argument,  the
veracity  of  the  desire,  in  the  same  way  as  Descartes  invoked  the
veiacity  of  God  ;  but  the  one,  as  well  as  the  other,  may  with  good
right  be  suspected  by  every  truly  scientific  moral  philosopher.


THE  SANCTION  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  205

carrying  in  her  right  hand  a  brazier  containing  fire,  and  in
her  left  a  phial  of  water.  Yves  asked  her  :  "  What  are
you  going  to  do?"  She  answered  that  with  the  fire  she
wanted  to  burn  paradise,  and  with  the  water  to  extin-
guish hell.  And  he  asked  her :  "  Why  do  you  want  to  do
this  ?"  "  Because  I  do  not  want  anybody  ever  to  do  good
for  the  sake  of  gaining  paradise  as  a  reward,  nor  for  fear  of
hell,  but  simply  for  love  of  God."

One  thing  would  seem  to  reconcile  everything ;  this
would  be  to  demonstrate  that,  analytically,  happiness  lies
enfolded  in  virtue  ;  that  to  choose  between  it  and  pleasure
is  still  to  choose  between  two  joys — the  one  inferior,  the
other  superior.  The  Stoics  believed  this;  Stuart  Mill
also ;  and  even  Epicurus  himself.  This  hypothesis  may
undoubtedly  prove  true  fora  small  number  of  elevated  souls,
but  its  complete  realization  is  indeed  "  not  of  this  world."
Virtue  itself  is  by  no  means,  here  on  earth  and  in  itself,
a  perfect  tangible  reward,  a  full  compensation  (prcemium  ipsa
virtus).  There  is  little  likelihood  that  a  soldier,  standing  at
the  outpost  and  struck  down  by  a  bullet,  would  experience,  in
the  sentiment  of  duty  fulfilled,  a  sum  of  enjoyment  equivalent
to  the  happiness  of  a  whole  life.  Let  us,  therefore,  acknow-
ledge it — virtue  is  not  tangible  happiness.  Nay,  more ;
there  is  no  natural  reason,  nor  any  purely  moral  reason,
that  it  should  ever  become  so.  Besides,  when  certain  alter-
natives arise,  the  moral  being  has  the  feeling  of  being  caught
in  a  snare ;  he  is  bound,  he  is  confined,  by  "  duty."  He
cannot  free  himself,  and  can  but  await  the  working  of  the
great  social  or  natural  mechanism  which  must  crush  him.
He  gives  way — while,  perhaps,  regretting  that  he  should
have  been  the  victim  chosen.  The  necessity  of  self-sacrifice
is,  in  a  good  many  cases,  the  drawing  of  a  bad  lot.  Never-
theless, one  draws  it,  binds  it  on  one's  brow — not  without
some  pride— and  departs.  Duty,  in  its  acute  state,  forms  parts
of  the  tragic  events  which  burst  on  life.  There  are  lives  which
very  nearly  escape  it ;  they  are  generally  considered  happy.


2O6 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

If  duty  can  thus  make  real  victims,  do  these  victims
acquire  exceptional  rights  to  a  material  compensation,  rights
to  a  material  happiness,  superior  to  that  of  other  unfor-
tunates, of  other  martyrs  of  life  ?  It  does  not  appear  to  be
so.  All  suffering,  involuntary  or  voluntary r,  always  appears
to  us  as  demanding  an  ideal  compensation,  and  this  solely
because  it  is  suffering.  Compensation — that  is  to  say,  a
balancing — is  a  word  which  indicates  an  entirely  logical  and
material,  but  in  no  sense  a  moral,  relation.  It  is  the  same
with  the  words  "  reward  "  and  "  punishment,"  which  have
the  same  sense.  They  are  terms  which  belong  to  the
sphere  of  the  passions,  and  are  wrongly  transferred  to
moral  language.  The  ideal  compensation  of  material  benefits
and  evils  is  all  that  one  can  observe  in  the  popular  ideas
of  punishment  and  reward.  We  must  remember  that  the
ancient  Nemesis  punished,  not  only  the  wicked,  but  also
those  who  were  happy — those  who  had  had  more  than  their
share  of  enjoyment.  In  the  same  way,  Christianity,  in
primitive  times,  considered  the  poor,  the  weak  in  mind  or
body,  as  having  the  best  chance  of  one  day  being  the  chosen
ones.  The  rich  man  of  the  Gospel  is  threatened  with  hell,
without  any  other  apparent  reason  than  his  very  wealth.
The  first  shall  be  last.  Even  in  the  present  day  the  pair-
of-scales  method  seems  to  us  desirable  for  this  world  of
ours.  The  ideal  seems  to  be  absolute  equality  of  happiness
for  all  beings,  whatsoever  they  may  be ;  life,  on  the  contrary,
is  a  perpetual  consecration  of  inequality.  The  majority  of
living  beings,  good  or  evil,  might,  therefore,  ideally  pretend
to  a  reparation — a  sort  of  balance  of  joys,  a  universal  level-
ling. The  ocean  of  things  would  have  to  be  levelled.  No
induction  whatever  drawn  from  nature  leads  us  to  suppose
that  this  would  ever  happen — quite  the  contrary ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  from  no  moral  system  whatever  can  one
strictly  deduce  recognition  of  a  true  moral  right  to  any
definite  compensation  for  actual  suffering.  This  compensa-
tion, desired  by  the  senses,  is  by  no  means  demanded  by


THE  SANCTION  OF  LOVE  AND  OF  FRATERNITY.  207

reason. It  is  entirely  doubtful,  as  far  as  science  is  concerned
— perhaps  even  impossible.*

*  "We  do  not  think  that  the  belief  in  religious  sanction  works  any
great  change  in  the  aspect  which  a  being,  morally  unsound,  pre-
sents to  every  healthy  being.  Crime  can  offer  man  but  one  single  attrac-
tion— that  of  having  the  chance  of  procuring  wealth  for  himself.  But
wealth,  whatever  may  be  its  popular  value,  is  nevertheless  not  without
common  measure  as  regards  everything  else.  Propose  to  a  poor  man
to  make  him  a  millionaire,  at  the  same  time  inflicting  gout  upon  him,
and  he  will  refuse,  if  he  has  any  shadow  of  common  sense.  Propose
to  him  to  be  rich  upon  condition  of  being  bandy-legged  or  hump-backed,
and  he  will  probably  refuse  this  also,  especially  if  he  is  young ;  every
woman  would  refuse.  The  difficulty  experienced  in  filling  certain  posts,
even  well  paid — posts  such  as  that  of  executioner — still  shows  that,  in
the  popular  judgment,  money  is  not  everything.  If  it  were  everything,
no  religious  threats  could  ever  prevent  a  universal  assault  upon  riches.
I  know  women,  and  men  also,  who  would  refuse  a  fortune  if  it  had  to
be  gained  by  becoming  a  butcher  ;  so  strong  are  certain  aversions,  even
purely  sentimental  and  aesthetic  ones.  The  moral  horror  of  crime —
more  powerful  in  most  hearts  than  any  other  aversion — will,  therefore,
always  drive  us  away  from  criminals,  whatever  may  be  the  prospects  of
life  hereafter.  This  horror  will  only  become  stronger  when,  for  the
usual  sentiments  of  hatred,  anger,  and  revenge,  which  the  presence  of
a  criminal  causes  us,  there  will,  by  degrees,  be  substituted  the  sentiment
of  pity — of  that  pity  which  we  feel  for  inferior  or  ill-born  beings,  for
the  involuntary  monstrosities  of  nature.  The  only  enduring  element
worthy  of  respect  in  the  idea  of  sanction  is  neither  the  notion  of  pain
nor  that  of  reward  ;  it  is  the  conception  of  the  ideal  good,  as  neces-
sarily having  a  sufficient  force  of  realization  to  impose  itself  on  nature,
to  invade  the  whole  world.  It  would  seem  to  us  right  that  the  just
and  gentle  man  should  one  day  have  the  last  word  in  the  universe.
But  this  reign  of  goodness  dreamt  of  by  humanity  does  not  need  the
operations  of  human  legislature  in  order  to  establish  itself.  The  moral
sentiment  may  consider  itself  as  being  of  necessity  the  great  force  and
the  mainspring  of  the  universe.  This  ambition  of  morality  to  progres-
sively invade  nature,  through  the  medium  of  humanity,  is  the  highest
thing  in  the  domain  of  philosophy  ;  it  is  also  that  which  is  most  fit  to
foster  the  missionary  spirit.  No  myth  whatever  is  here  necessary
to  arouse  the  ardour  for  goodness  and  the  sentiment  of  universal
fraternity.  That  which  is  great  and  beautiful  suffices  in  itself— carries
in  itself  its  light  and  its  flame"  ("  L'Irreligion  de  1'Avenir,"  p.  358).


208 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.


CONCLUSION.


IN  conclusion,  it  will  not  be  without  value  to  sum  up  the
principal  ideas  which  we  have  developed  in  this  work.

Our  aim  was  to  find  out  what  a  moral  philosophy  would  be
without  any  absolute  obligation,  and  without  any  absolute
sanction ;  how  far  positive  science  can  go  in  this  direction,
and  where  does  the  sphere  of  metaphysical  speculations
begin  ?

Systematically  putting  aside  every  law  anterior  or  superior
to  the  facts,  consequently  a  priori  and  categorical,  we  have
had  to  start  from  the  facts  themselves  in  order  to  deduce  a
law;  to  start  from  reality,  to  build  up  an  ideal,  and  to  extract
a  moral  philosophy  from  nature.  Now,  the  essential  and
constitutive  fact  of  our  nature  is  that  we  are  living,  feeling,
and  thinking  beings.  It  is  from  life,  both  in  its  physical
and  moral  form,  that  we  have  had  to  demand  a  principle  of
conduct.

It  is  indispensable  that  this  principle  should  present  a
double  character,  for  life,  so  to  speak,  divides  itself  into
two  parts  in  man — into  unconscious  and  conscious  life.
Most  moralists  see  only  the  sphere  of  conscious  life.
It  is,  nevertheless,  the  unconscious  or  sub-conscious  life
which  is  the  true  source  of  activity.  Conscious  life,  it  is
true,  may,  in  the  long  run,  react  upon  and  gradually
destroy,  by  the  acuteness  of  its  analysis,  that  which  the
obscure  synthesis  of  heredity  has  accumulated  among
individuals  or  nations.  Consciousness  has  a  dissolving  force,
which  the  utilitarian  and  even  the  evolutionist  school
has  not  taken  sufficiently  into  account.  Hence  the
necessity  of  re-establishing  the  harmony  between  the
reflection  of  consciousness  and  the  spontaneity  of  the
unconscious  instinct.  A  principle  of  action  must  be  found
wnich  shall  be  common  to  the  two  spheres,  and  which,


CONCLUSION.  209

consequently,  while  becoming  conscious  of  itself,  tends  more
to  fortify  than  to  destroy  itself.  This  principle  we  believe  to
have  found  in  life  the  most  intensive  and  the  most  extensive
possible,  with  regard  to  its  physical  and  mental  manifestations.
Life,  in  becoming  conscious  of  itself,  of  its  intensity  and  its
extension,  does  not  tend  to  its  own  destruction  ;  it  but
increases  its  own  force.

However,  there  are  also  antinomies  in  the  sphere  of
life  which  are  produced  by  the  struggle  between  in-
dividualities, by  the  competition  of  all  beings  for  happi-
ness, and  sometimes  for  existence.  In  nature  the  anti-
nomy of  the  struggle  for  life  is  nowhere  solved ;  it  is  the
dream  of  the  moralist  to  solve  it— or,  at  least,  to  reduce  it
as  much  as  possible.  For  this  reason  the  moralist  is  tempted
to  appeal  to  a  law  superior  to  life  itself— an  intelligible,
eternal,  supernatural  law.  We  have  given  up  appealing
to  this  law— at  least  as  law.  We  have  relegated  the  intelli-
gible world  to  the  region  of  hypothesis,  and  a  law  cannot
spring  from  an  hypothesis.  Once  more,  therefore,  we  are
obliged  to  appeal  to  life  to  regulate  life.  But  then  it  is  a
more  complete,  a  larger  life,  which  is  able  to  regulate  a  less
complete  and  smaller  life.  Such,  in  fact,  is  the  only  possible
rule  for  an  exclusively  scientific  moral  philosophy.

The  characteristic  of  life  which  has  enabled  us  to  unite,
to  a  certain  extent,  egoism  and  altruism — a  union  which  is  the
philosopher's  stone  of  morality— is  that  which  we  have
called  moral  fecundity.  The  individual  life  should  diffuse
itself  for  others,  in  others,  and,  if  necessary,  should
yield  itself  up ;  and  this  expansion  is  not  contrary  to
its  nature ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  in  accordance  with  its
nature;  nay,  more,  it  is  the  very  condition  of  true  life.
The  utilitarian  school  has  been  obliged  to  stop  short  with
more  or  less  hesitation  before  this  perpetual  antithesis  of  Me
and  Thee,  of  Mine  and  Thine,  of  personal  interest  and  general
interest.  But  living  nature  does  not  stop  short  at  this  cut-
and-dried,  this  logically  inflexible  division.  Individual  life


210 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

is  expansive  for  others  because  it  is  fruitful,  and  it  is
fruitful  by  the  very  reason  that  it  is  life.  We  have  seen,  with
regard  to  physical  life,  that  it  is  the  need  of  each  individual
to  beget  another  individual  ;  so  much  so  that  this  other
becomes  a  necessary  condition  of  our  being.  Life,  like  fire,
only  maintains  itself  by  communicating  itself ;  and  this  is
none  the  less  true  with  regard  to  the  intelligence  than
with  regard  to  the  body.  It  is  as  impossible  to  shut  up  the
intelligence  as  to  shut  up  flame  ;  it  exists  in  order  to  radiate.
We  find  the  same  force  of  expansion  in  sensibility.  We
need  to  share  our  joy  ;  we  need  to  share  our  sorrow.  It  is
our  whole  nature  which  is  sociable.  Life  does  not  know  the
absolute  classifications  and  divisions  of  the  logicians  and  the
metaphysicians ;  it  cannot  be  entirely  selfish,  even  if  it  wished
to  be.  We  are  open  on  all  sides,  on  all  sides  encroaching
and  encroached  upon.  This  springs  from  the  fundamental
law  which  biology  teaches  us :  Life  is  not  only  nutrition  ;  it  is
production  and  fecundity.  To  live  is  to  spend  as  well  as  to  gain.
After  having  stated  this  general  law  of  physical  and
psychical  life,  we  have  tried  to  find  out  how  some  sort  of
equivalent  to  obligation  might  be  derived  therefrom.  What
does  obligation  actually  mean  to  him  who  does  not  admit
either  an  absolute  imperative  or  a  transcendental  law  ?  A
certain  form  of  impulsion.  In  fact,  analyse  "  moral  obliga-
tion," "  duty,"  "  the  moral  law  "  :  that  which  gives  them
their  character  of  action  is  the  impulsion  which  is  inseparable
from  it ;  it  is  the  force  demanding  exercise.  Well,  it  is  this
impulsive  force  which  has  appeared  to  us  to  be  the  first
natural  equivalent  of  supernatural  duty.  The  utilitarians  are
still  too  much  absorbed  by  considerations  of  finality.  They
think  of  nothing  but  the  aim,  which  to  them  is  utility,  itself
reducible  to  pleasure.  They  are  Hedonists — that  is  to  say,
they  make  of  pleasure,  be  it  in  a  selfish  or  sympathetic  form,
the  great  spring  of  mental  life.  We,  on  the  contrary,  place
ourselves  at  the  point  of  view  of  efficient  causality,  and  not
of  finality.  We  declare  that  there  is  a  cause  in  us  which


CONCLUSION.  211

operates  as  an  aim,  even  before  any  attraction  of  pleasure ;
this  cause  is  life,  tending  by  its  very  nature  to  grow  and  to
diffuse  itself,  thus  finding  pleasure  as  consequence,  but  not
necessarily  taking  it  as  an  end  in  itself.  The  living  being  is
not  purely  and  simply  a  calculation  a  la  Bentham,  a  banker
putting  down  in  his  big  book  the  balance  of  profit  and  loss.
To  live  is  not  to  calculate,  it  is  to  act.  There  is  in  the  living
being  an  accumulation  of  force,  a  reserve  of  activity,  which
spends  itself  not  for  the  pleasure  of  spending  itself,  but
because  spending  is  a  necessity  of  its  very  existence.  It  is
impossible  that  a  cause  should  not  produce  its  effects,  even
if  there  be  no  consideration  of  aim  or  object.

We  have  thus  reached  our  fundamental  formula.  Duty
is  but  an  expression  detached  from  the  power  which  neces-
sarily tends  to  pass  into  action.  By  duty  we  do  but  desig-
nate that  power  which,  passing  beyond  reality,  becomes  with
respect  to  it  an  ideal ;  becomes  that  which  it  ought  to  be,
because  it  is  that  which  it  can  be,  because  it  is  the  germ  of
the  future  already  bursting  forth  in  the  present.  There  is
no  supernatural  principle  whatever  in  our  morality ;  it  is
from  life  itself,  and  from  the  force  inherent  in  life,  that  it  all
springs.  Life  makes  its  own  law  by  its  aspiration  towards
incessant  development ;  it  makes  its  own  obligation  to  act
by  its  very  power  of  action.

As  we  have  already  explained,  instead  of  saying,  /  must,
therefore  lean,  it  is  more  true  to  say,  I  can,  therefore  I  must.
Hence  a  certain  impersonal  duty  is  created  by  the  very  power  to
act.  Such  is  the  first  natural  equivalent  of  the  mystical  and
transcendental  duty.

The  second  equivalent  we  have  found  in  the  theory  of  the
idea-forces  upheld  by  a  contemporary  philosopher  (Fouillee).
The  very  idea  of  the  superior  action,  as  that  of  every  action,  is
a  force  tending  to  its  realization.  The  idea  itself  is  already  the
commenced  realization  of  the  superior  action.  Obligation
is,  from  this  point  of  view,  but  the  sense  of  the  profound
identity  which  exists  between  thought  and  action.  It  is,  for


212 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

this  very  reason,  the  sense  of  the  unity  of  being,  of  the  unity
of  life.  He  who  does  not,  by  his  action,  conform  to  his
highest  thought  is  at  war  with  himself,  is  inwardly  divided
against  himself.  Here,  again,  we  have  got  beyond  Hedonism.
It  is  not  a  question  of  calculating  pleasures,  of  making  up
accounts,  and  of  finality.  It  is  a  question  of  being  and  of
living,  of  feeling  oneself  be,  of  feeling  oneself  live  ;  to  act
as  we  are  and  as  we  live  ;  to  be,  not  a  sort  of  lie  in  action,
but  a  truth  in  action.

A  third  equivalent  of  duty  is  borrowed  from  the  sensi-
bility ;  not,  like  the  preceding  ones,  from  the  intelligence
and  the  activity.  It  is  from  the  growing  fusion  of  sensibili-
ties, and  from  the  increasingly  sociable  character  of  elevated
pleasures,  that  a  kind  of  duty  or  superior  necessity  springs,
which  moves  us,  quite  naturally  and  rationally,  towards  others.
By  virtue  of  evolution  our  pleasures  become  wider  and
more  and  more  impersonal.  We  cannot  enjoy  ourselves
in  ourselves  as  on  an  isolated  island.  Our  environment,
to  which  we  better  adapt  ourselves  every  day,  is  human
society,  and  we  can  no  more  be  happy  outside  this  environ-
ment than  we  can  breathe  beyond  the  atmosphere  of  the
earth.  The  purely  selfish  happiness  of  certain  epicureans
is  an  idle  fancy,  an  abstraction,  an  impossibility.  The
truly  human  pleasures  are  all,  more  or  less,  social.  Pure
selfishness,  as  we  have  said,  instead  of  being  a  real  affirma-
tion of  self,  is  a  mutilation  of  self.  Thus,  in  ^>nr__actiyity,
in  our  intelligence,  in  our  sensibility,  there  is  a  pressure
which  exercises  itself  in  the  altruistic  sense.  There  is  a
force  of  expansion  as  powerful  as  the  one  which  acts  on
the  stars ;  and  it  is  this  force  of  expansion  which,  becoming
conscious  of  its  power,  gives  to  itself  the  name  of  duty.
This,  then,  is  the  treasure  of  natural  spontaneousness,  which
is  life,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  creates  moral  wealth.

But,  as  we  have  seen,  reflection  may  find  itself  in  anti-
thesis with  natural  spontaneousness  ;  it  may  work  in  such  a
way  as  to  restrain  both  the  power  and  the  duty  of  sociability,


CONCLUSION.  213

when  by  chance  the  force  of  expansion  towards  others  finds
itself  in  opposition  to  the  force  of  gravitation  to  self.  The
struggle  for  life  may  be  diminished  by  the  progress  of  evo-
lution; it  re-appears  under  certain  circumstances,  which
are  still  frequent  in  our  day.  In  such  case,  without  impera-
tive law,  what  will  urge  the  individual  to  definite  dis-
interestedness, and  sometimes  to  self-sacrifice?

Besides  these  motives,  which  we  have  previously  examined,
and  which,  under  normal  conditions,  are  constantly  being
brought  into  action,  we  have  found  others,  which  we  called
the  love  of  "physical  risk  "  and  the  love  of  "  moral  risk."
Man  is  a  being  fond  of  speculation — not  only  in  theory,  but  in
practice.  Neither  his  thought  nor  his  action  stops  at  the  point
where  his  certitude  ends.  A  purely  speculative  hypothesis
can,  without  danger,  be  substituted  for  the  categorical  law ;
in  the  same  way,  a  mere  hope  can  be  substituted  for  dog-  ~"
matic  faith,  and  action  for  affirmation.  The  speculative
hypothesis  is  a  risk  of  the  mind  ;  the  action  which  conforms
to  this  hypothesis  is  a  risk  of  the  will.  The  superior  being
is  he  who  undertakes  and  risks  the  most,  either  by  his
thought  or  by  his  actions.  This  superiority  springs  from  a
greater  treasure  of  inward  force ;  he  has  more  power.  For
this  very  reason,  he  has  a  higher  duty.

Even  the  sacrifice  of  life  may  still  be,  in  certain  cases,  an
expansion  of  life,  which  has  become  sufficiently  intense  to
prefer  an  impulse  of  sublime  exaltation  to  years  of  mere
grovelling  existence.  There  are  hours,  as  we  have  seen,
in  which  it  is  possible  to  say  at  one  and  the  same  time:  "  I
live;  I  have  lived."

If  certain  physical  and  moral  agonies  last  for  years,
and  if  one  can,  so  to  speak,  die  to  self  during  a  whole
existence,  the  reverse  is  also  true,  and  it  is  possible  to  con-
centrate a  whole  life  into  one  moment  of  love  and  sacrifice,  j

Lastly,  in  the  same  way  that  life  creates  its  obligation  to
act  by  its  very  power  to  act,  it  also  creates  its  sanction  by
its  very  action ;  for,  in  acting,  it  takes  joy  in  its  own  capacity.


214 MORALITY  INDEPENDENT  OF  OBLIGATION  OR  SANCTION.

Acting  less,  it  finds  less  enjoyment ;  acting  more,  it  enjoys
more.  Even  in  sacrificing  itself  life  finds  itself  again  ;  even
in  dying  it  is  conscious  of  its  plenitude,  which  will  reappear
elsewhere,  indestructible  under  other  forms,  since  nothing
in  the  world  is  lost.

To  sum  up,  it  is  action  and  the  power  of  life  which  alone
can  solve — if  not  entirely,  at  least  partially — those  problems
to  which  abstract  thought  gives  rise.  The  sceptic,  in
morality  as  well  as  in  metaphysics,  believes  that  he  deceives
himself  and  all  others  ;  believes  that  humanity  will  always
deceive  itself;  that  the  pretended  progress  is  merely  a  "mark-
ing-time." He  is  wrong.  He  does  not  see  that  our  fathers
have  spared  us  the  very  errors  into  which  they  fell,  and  that
we  will  spare  those  who  follow  us  our  own  errors  ;  he  does
not  see  that,  after  all,  in  all  grrors^  there  is  some  truth,  and
that  this  particle  of  truth  graduany~~gTDWs~an6^confirms
itself.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who  has  a  dogmatic  faith
believes  that  he  possesses,  to  the  exclusion  of  allotriervthe
whole  definite  and  imperative  truth.  He  is  wrong.  He
does  not  see  that  errors  mingle  with  every  truth,  that  there
is  nothing  as  yet  in  the  thought  of  man  which  is  perfect
enough  to  be  final.  The  first  believes  that  humanity  does
not  advance ;  the  second,  that  it  has  already  arrived  at  its
goal.  There  is  a  mean  between  these  two  hypotheses  :  we
must  say  to  ourselves  that  humanity  is  marching  forward,
and  we  must  march  forward  ourselves.  Work,  as  has  been
said,  is  as  good  as  prayer.  It  is  even  better  than  prayer ;
or,  rather,  it  is  the  true  prayer — the  true  human  providence.
Let  us  act  instead  of  praying.  Let  us  have  hope  only  in  our-
selves and  in  other  men  ;  let  us  count  on  ourselves.  Hope,
like  Providence,  sees  sometimes  far  ahead  (providere).  The
difference  between  supernatural  Providence  and  natural
hope  is  that  the  one  pretends  to  directly  modify  nature  by
supernatural  means,  like  itself;  while  the  other  from  the  first
modifies  only  ourselves.  It  is  a  force  which  is  not  superior
to  us,  but  interior ;  it  is  we  ourselves  whom  it  carries


CONCLUSION.  215

onward.  It  remains  to  be  seen  if  we  are  going  alone,  if
the  world  is  following  us,  if  thought  will  ever  be  able  to
carry  nature  along.  Let  us  go  on  all  the  same.

We  stand  as  if  upon  the  deck  of  some  great  vessel,  whose
rudder  had  been  torn  away  by  a  wave,  and  whose  mast  had
been  broken  by  the  wind.  It  had  been  lost  on  the  sea,  as  our
planet  was  in  space.  It  went  on  thus  at  random,  driven  on
by  the  storm,  like  a  great  wreck  carrying  people ;  never-
theless, it  arrived  at  its  destination.  Perhaps  our  planet,
perhaps  humanity,  will  also  arrive  at  an  unknown  goal,
which  it  will  have  created  for  itself.  No  hand  directs  us,  no
eye  looks  out  for  us.  The  rudder  has  long  since  been
broken — or,  rather,  there  never  was  one ;  it  has  to  be  made.
This  is  a  great  task,  and  it  is  our  task.


UNIVrn<4IIV  OF  ILLINOIS  URBANA


30112062911422
