Charles F. Haanel, The Master Key System (1912)
==========================================================================
Haanel's 24-part correspondence course in mental science — the systematic New Thought classic on concentration, visualization, and the creative power of thought. A foundational text of the mind-power canon. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

Library
Brigham  Young  University


"  jbrary


'^HIS  little  book  is  a  master-
key  which  can  unlock  the
secret  chambers  of  success  ;
can  throw  wide  the  doors
which  seem  to  bar  men  from
the  treasure-house  of  nature,
and  bids  those  enter  and  par-
take who  are  wise  enoug^h  to
understand  and  broad  enoug,h
to  weig,h  the  evidence ;  firm
enoug,h  to  follow  their  own
judgment  and  strong  enoug,h
to  make  the  sacrifice  exacted.


CHARLES    F.  HAANEL


Chicago,  111.,
April  Li,  191  <).

Mr.  ChQii.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel

You  probably  know,  from  the  editorial
]n  the  eJanuary  issue  of  the  Golden  Eule,
copy  of  which  ray  Secretary  sent  to  you!
that  1  began  twenty-tv/o  yenrs  a^^'o  as  a
coal  miner  at  a  dollar  a  day.

I  have  just  been  retained  by  a
million  dollar  corporation  at  a  salary  of
$105,200.00  a  year,  for  a  portion  of  mv
time  only,  it  having  been  agreed  that  "^l
shall  continue  as  editor  of  the  Hill's
Golden  Rule.

I  believe  in  giving  credit  where  it  is
due,  therefore  I  believe  I  ought  to  inform
you  that  my  present  success  and  the  suc-
cess which  has  followed  my  work  as  Presi-
dent of  the  Napoleon  Hill  Institute  is  due
largely  to  the  principles  laid  doAvn  in
the  Master-Key  System.

You  are  doing  a  good  woric  by  helping
people  to  realize  that  nothing  is  impost
sible  of  accomplishment  which  a  man  ?an
create  in  his  imagination.  Surely  my  own
experience  proves  this.

I  shall  co-operate  with  you  in  getting
your  course  into  the  hands  of  the  many
who  so  greatly  need  your  message.
Cordially  and  sincerely,

NAPOLEON  HILL,

Editor.


PREFACE


The  Master  Key  System  is  concerned  with  causes
rather  than  effects,  demonstrations  rather  than
theory,  the  practical  rather  than  the  abstract.

It  is  rapidly  growing  in  favor  by  reason  of  its
great  simplicity  and  because  it  furnishes  an  explan-
ation for  many  hitherto  unknown  facts  and  a  con-
ceivable explanation  for  many  more.

It  is  a  force  which  is  gaining  momentum  wiLh  a
rapidity  and  certainty  that  is  the  despair  of  the  de-
fenders of  tradition  and  reaction.

This  is  largely  true  because  it  avoids  theory,  specu-
lation and  abstractions  of  all  kinds,  and  confines  it-
self to  the  operation  of  natural  laws.

These  laws  operate  with  scientific  exactitude,  and
those  who  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  working
knowledge  of  them  are  enabled  to  break  the  bonds
of  environment,  control  elementary  forces  and  utilize
the  potentialities  of  Infinity.

For  many  years  little  or  nothing  was  permitted  to
be  revealed  to  the  general  public  concerning  the
esoteric  teachings,  but  within  the  last  twenty-five
years,  there  has  been  greater  freedom  in  this  respect,
until  now  they  form  an  important  part  of  nearly  all
teachings  where  ultimate  truth  is  an  objective.

Vaguely,  throughout  the  world,  the  idea  has  been
diffused  that  there  was  some  process  of  study  which
men  here  and  there  did  follow,  and  which  lead  to  the
acquisition  of  a  higher  kind  of  knowledge  than
that  taught  in  books  or  by  public  teachera.


But  it  was  invariably  found  that  this  knowledge
was  jealously  guarded,  and  the  student  was  hound
to  the  most  inviolable  secrecy  as  to  everything  con-
nected with  his  progress,  so  that  it  was  impossible
to  imagine  anything  more  improbable  than  the  un-
authorized revelation  of  such  information  by  any
student  of  the  great  schools  of  esoteric  philosophy.

This  was  true,  because  those  in  authority  were
afraid  of  the  result  of  premature  disclosure  of  these
important  principles.  They  feared  that  an  unpre-
pared public  mind  might  not  be  ready  to  make
proper  use  of  the  extraordinary  power  which  the  ap-
plication of  these  principles  disclosed.

But  the  approaches  to  scientific  understanding  are
open  to  all  and  persistent  study  has  revealed  hid-
den passages  which  lead  to  the  grandest  imaginable
realms  of  enlightenment.

For  a  time  it  was  possible  to  delude  the  general
public  witli  the  idea  that  transmutation  was  on  the
plane  of  matter  alone,  and  they  continued  to  remain
in  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  this  was  but  a  corre-
spondence and  that  the  higher  forms  of  alchemy
takes  place  in  Mental  and  Spiritual  realms.

It  is  in  these  realms  that  the  practical  art  of
manipulating  the  forces  of  Nature  was  discovered,
and  the  application  of  this  knowledge  to  matters
of  daily  life  invests  the  student  with  such  extra-
ordinary power  that  the  results  seem  altogether
miraculous.


Austin,  Minn.,  May  3,  1919.

Mr.  Charlet  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

Dear  Sir:

Permit  me  a  word  of  appreciation  for  you/*
wonderful  Master-Key  System.

I  have  been  for  years  a  devout  searcher
for  the  Holy  Grail  or  Royal  Arcana,  which
would  prove  the  key  which  would  unlock  the
"Hidden  treasure."  I  have  studied  philosophy,
ancient  and  modern;  you  have  synthesized  the
wisdom  of  the  East  and  West  and  given  it  in
a  manner  so  logical  and  penetrating  that  by
its  aid  one  is  able  to  distinguish  wisdom  from
sophistry,  truth  from  delusion,  spiritual  ex-
pression from  psychic  vageries  and  the  sub-
lime operations  of  spiritual  insight  and  in-
tuition from  deceptive  visions  and  false  revela-
tions.

Also  I  have  been  a  student  of  Mythology  and
have  viewed  the  Myths  of  all  ancient  races  or
sacred  allegories  of  the  deepest  spiritual  in-
sight from  which  to  gather  by  symbol,  meta-
phor and  parable  the  cosmic  history  of  the  uni-
verse and  the  soul  history  of  mankind;  but
your  metaphysical  elucidation  and  application
have  made  substance  of  the  shadow.

Again  I  have  studied  the  Mystics  from  the
great  teachers  whose  message  has  heen  of
universal  import  and  transcendental  signifi-
cance; but  found  your  system  to  be  free  from
any  craving  for  sensational  phenomena,  im-
position on  the  credulous  or  material  occult-
ism. You  seek  the  deeper  mysteries  of  mind
an-d  soul,  rather  than  those  of  the  astral  or


—5—


material  realms.  You  are  arousing  the  dor-
mant higher  mind  and  making  a  clear  way
to  the  inner  sanctuary.

In  religion  also  you  have  the  kernel  or  spirit
of  all  religions  as  taught  by  their  founders,  for
the  ultimate  aim  of  all  religious  effort  and
instruction  should  be  the  education  and  re-
integration of  the  human  soul,  which  was  made
in  the  image  of  God;  but  has  traveled  for  ex-
perience into  the  "Par  country"  of  natural
forces  and  well  nigh  forgotten  its  parentage.

The  Mystic  says,  "Knowledge  is  the  sum  of
facts  and  truths  and  nothing  but  them,  gleaned
from  experience,  education  or  comprehension,
without  prejudice  as  to  the  channel  through
which  the  influx  of  knowledge  may  come,  the
source  of  the  education,  its  nativity  or  the
objectivity  of  the  comprehension."

Y'^u  have  successful./  taken  the  mystery  out
of  Mysticism  and  placed  all  propositions  in  the
clear  light,  so  that,  "He  who  runs  may  read."

I  consider  you  a  true  benefactor  to  the  world.

Use  this  letter  or  any  portion  of  it  that
may  be  serviceable.
C.  H.  GIBBONS,
407  Winona,  W,


THE  MASTER  KEY


PART  I.

Before  any  environment,  successful  or  other-
wise, can  be  created,  action  of  some  kind  is
necessary,  and  before  any  action  is  possible,
there  must  be  thought  of  some  kind,  either
conscious  or  unconscious,  and  as  thought  is  a
product  of  mind,  it  becomes  evident  that  Mind
is  the  creative  center  from  which  all  activities
proceed.

It  is  not  exi)ected  that  any  of  the  inherent
laws  which  govern  the  modern  business  world
as  it  is  at  present  constituted  can  be  suspended
or  repealed  by  any  force  on  the  same  plane,  but
it  is  axiomatic  that  a  higher  law  may  overcome
a  lower  one.  Tree  life  causes  the  sap  to  ascend,
not  by  repealing  the  law  of  gravity  but  by  sur-
mounting it.

To  control  circumstances  a  knowledge  of
certain  scientific  principles  of  mind-action  is
required.  Such  knowledge  is  a  most  valuable
asset.  It  may  be  gained  by  degrees  and  put
into  practice  as  fast  as  learned.  Power  over
circumstances  is  one  of  its  fruits;  health,  har-
mony and  prosperity  are  assets  upon  its  bal-
ance sheet.  It  costs  only  the  labor  of  harvest-
ing its  great  resources.

The  naturalist  who  spends  much  of  his
time  in  observing  visible  phenomena  is  con-
stantly creating  power  in  that  portion  of
his  brain  set  apart  for  observation.  The  re-
sult is  that  he  becomes  very  much  more  ex-
pert and  skillful  in  knowing  what  he  sees,  and
grasping  an  i]]finite  num])er  of  details  at  a
glance,  than  does  his  unobserving  friend.  He


-7-


has  reached  this  facility  by  exercise  of  his
brain.  lie  deliberately  chose  to  enlarge  his
brain  power  in  tlie  line  of  observation,  so  he
deliberately  exercised  that  special  faculty,  over
and  over,  with  increasing  attention  and  con-
centration. Now  we  have  the  result — a  man
learned  in  the  lore  of  observation  far  above  his
fellows.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  one  can,  by
stolid  inaction,  allow  the  delicate  brain  mat-
ter to  harden  and  ossify  until  his  whole  life
is  barren  and  fruitless.

Every  thought  tends  to  become  a  material
thing.  Our  desires  are  seed  thoughts  that  have
a  tendency  to  sprout  and  grow  and  blossom
and  bear  fruit.  We  are  sowing  these  seeds
every  day.  What  shall  the  harvest  be?  Each
of  us  today  is  the  result  of  his  past  thinking.
Later  we  shall  be  the  result  of  what  we  are
now  thinking.  We  create  our  own  character,
personality  and  environment  by  the  thought
which  we  originate,  or  entertain.  Thought
seeks  its  own.  The  law  of  mental  attraction  is
an  exact  parallel  to  the  law  of  atomic  affmity.
Mental  currents  are  as  real  as  electric,  magnetic
or  heat  currents.  We  attract  the  currents  with
which  we  are  in  harmonj^ — are  we  selecting
those  which  will  be  conducive  to  our  success?
This  is  the  important  question.

Lines  of  least  resistance  are  formed  by  the
constant  action  of  the  mind.  The  activity  of
the  brain  reacts  upon  the  particular  faculty  of
the  brain  employed.  The  latent  power  of  the
mind  is  developed  by  constant  exercise.  Each
form  of  its  activity  becomes  more  perfect  by
practice.  Exercises  for  the  development  of  the
mind  present  a  variety  of  motives  for  consid-
eration. Tlipy  involve  the  development  of  the
perceptive  faculties,  the  cultivation  of  the  emo-
tions, the  quickening  of  the  imagination,  the


symmetrical  unfoldment  of  the  intuitive  facul-
ty, which  without  being  able  to  give  a  reason
frequently  impels  or  prohibits  choice,  and  final-
ly the  power  of  the  mind  may  be  cultivated  by
the  development  of  the  moral  character.

^'The  greatest  man,"  said  Seneca,  *'is  he
who  chooses  right  with  invincible  determina-
tion." The  greatest  power  of  the  mind,  then,
depends  upon  its  exercise  in  moral  channels,
and  therefore  requires  that  every  conscious
mental  effort  should  involve  a  moral  end.  A
developed  moral  consciousness  modifies  con-
sideration of  motives,  and.  increases  the  force
and  continuity  of  actions;  consequently  the
well  developed  symmetrica]  character  neces-
sitates good  physical,  mental  and  moral  health,
and  tliis  combination  creates  initiative,  power,
resistless  force,  and  necessarily  success.

It  will  be  found  that  Nature  is  constantly
seeking  to  express  Harmony  in  all  things,  is  for-
ever trying  to  bring  about  an  harmonious  ad-
justment, for  every  discord,  every  wound,  ev-
ery difficulty,  therefore  when  thought  is  har-
monious, nature  begins  to  create  the  material
conditions,  the  possession  of  which  are  neces-
sary in  order  to  make  up  an  harmonious  en-
v^ironment.

"When  we  understand  that  mind  is  the  great
creative  power,  what  does  not  become  possible  ?
With  Desire  as  the  great  creative  energ3%  can
we  not  see  why  Desire  should  be  cultivated,
controlled  and  directed  in  our  lives  and  desti-
nies? Men  and  women  of  strong  mentality,
who  dominate  those  around  them,  and  often
those  far  removed  from  them,  really  emanate
currents  charged  with  power  which,  coming  in
contact  with  the  minds  of  others,  causes  the
desires  of  the  latter  to  be  in  accord  with  the
m'ilid  of  the  strong  individuality.    GV^fSt  mas-


ters  of  meu  possess  this  power  to  a  marked
degree.  Their  influence  is  felt  far  and  near.,
and  they  secure  compliance  with  their  wishes-
by  making  others  'Svant"  to  act  in  accord  w^ith
them.  In  this  way  men  of  strong  Desire  and.
Imagination  may  and  do  exert  powerful  in-
fluence over  the  minds  of  others,  leading  the-
latter  in  the  way  desired.  The  magnetic  per-
sons attract,  allure  and  draw.  They  are  emo-
tional, and  capture  the  will  of  others.

No  man  is  ever  created  without  the  inherent
power  in  himself  to  help  himself.  The  person-
ality that  understands  its  own  inteUectual  and
moral  power  of  conquest  w^ll  certainly  assert
itself.  It  is  this  truth  which  an  en'famined
world  craves  today.  The  possibility^  of  assent-
ing a  slumbering  intellectual  courage  that
clearly  discerns,  and  a  moral  courage  that
grandly  undertakes  is  open  to  all.  There  is  8^
divine  potency  in  every  human  being.

We  speak  of  the  sun  as  "rising"  and  ''set-
ting," though  we  know  that  this  is  simply  am
appearance  of  motion.  To  our  senses  the  earth-
is  apparently  standing  still,  and  yet  Ave  know-
it  is  revolving  rapidly.  We  speak  of  a  bell  as-^
a  "sounding  body,"  yet  we  know  that  all  that,
the  bell  can  do  is  to  produce  vibrations  in  the
air.  When  these  vibrations  come  at  the  rate
of  16  a  second  they  cause  a  sound  to  be  heard
in  the  mind.  It  is  possible  for  the  mind  to  hear
vibrations  up  to  the  rate  of  38,000  a  second.
When  the  number  increases  beyond  this  all  is
silence  again ;  so  that  we  know  that  the  sound
is  not  in  the  bell;  it  is  in  our  own  mind.

We  speak  and  even  think  of  the  sun  as  ' '  giv-
ing light,"  yet  we  knoAv  it  is  simply  giving
forth  energy  which  produces  vibrations  in  the
ether  at  the  rate  of  four  hundred  trillion  a
second,  causing  what  are  termed  light  \Y«iyes,


—10—


so  that  we  know  that  what  we  call  light
simply  a  mode  of  motion,  and  the  only  light
that  there  is,  is  the  sensation  caused  in  the
mind  by  the  motion  of  these  waves.  When  the
number  of  vibrations  increases,  the  light
changes  in  color,  each  change  in  color  being
caused  by  shorter  and  more  rapid  vibrations;
so  that  although  we  speak  of  the  rose  as  being
red,  the  grass  as  being  gr^en,  or  the  sky  as
being  blue,  we  know  that  these  ijolors  exist  only
in  our  minds,  and  are  the  sensati'oji  experienced
by  us  as  the  result  of  the  vibrations  of  light.
When  the  vibrations  are  redticed  below  four
hundred  trillion  a  second,  tliey  no  loiig'^r  affect
us  as  light  but  we  experience  the  tkjnsatipn  of
heat.

So  we  have  come  to  know  that  appearances.'
exist  for  us  only  in  our  consciousness.  Even'
time  and  space  become  annihilated,  time  being;
only  the  experience  of  succession,  there  being;
no  past  or  future  except  as  a  thought  relation
to  the  present.  In  the  last  aua lysis,  there-
fore, we  know  that  one  principle  go  verm  and
controls  all  there  is.  Every  atom  is  iomv^^
conserved ;  whatever  is  parted  with  must  m\'
evitably  be  received  somewhere.  It  canno*t
perish  and  it  only  exists  for  use.  It  can  gc»
only  where  it  is  attracted,  and  therefore  re  -
quired. We  can  receive  only  what  we  give, ,
and  we  may  give  only  to  those  who  can  re-  •
ceive ;  and  it  remains  Avitli  us  to  determine  our
rate  of  growth  and  the  degree  of  harmony  that
we  shall  express.

The  laws  under  which  we  live  are  designed
solely  for  our  advantage.  These  laws  are  im-
mutable and  we  cannot  escape  from  their  op-
eration. All  the  great  eternal  forces  act  in
solemn  silence,  but  it  is  in  our  power  to  place
purselves  in  harmony  with  them  and  thus  ex-


press  a  life  of  comparative  peace  and  happi-
ness.

Difficulties,  inliarmonies,  obstacles,  indicate
that  we  are  either  refusing  to  give  out  what
we  no  longer  need,  or  refusing  to  accept  what
we  require.  Growth  is  attained  through  an
exchange  of  the  old  for  the  new,  of  the  good
for  the  better;  it  is  a  conditional  or  reciprocal
action,  for  each  of  us  is  a  complete  thought
entity  and  the  completeness  makes  it  possible
for  us  to  receive  only  as  we  give.  We  cannot
obtain  what  we  lack  if  we  tenaciously  cling  to
what  we  have.

The  Principle  of  Attraction  operates  to  bring
to  us  only  what  may  be  to  our  advantage.  We
are  able  to  consciously  control  our  conditions
as  we  come  to  sense  the  purpose  of  what  we
attract,  and  are  able  to  extract  from  each  ex-
perience only  what  we  require  for  our  further
growth.  Our  ability  to  do  this  determines  the
degree  of  harmony  or  happiness  we  attain.

The  ability  to  appropriate  v/hat  we  require
for  our  growth  continually  increases  as  we
reach  higher  planes  and  broader  visions,  and
the  greater  our  ability  to  know  what  we  re-
quire, the  more  certain  we  shall  be  to  discern
its  presence,  to  attract  it  and  to  absorb  it.
Nothing  may  reach  us  except  what  is  neces-
sary for  our  growth.  All  conditions  and  ex-
periences that  come  to  us  do  so  for  our  benefit.
Difficulties  and  obstacles  will  continue  to  come
until  we  absorb  their  wisdom  and  gather  from
them  the  essentials  of  further  growth.  That
we  reap  what  we  sow,  is  mathematically  exact.
We  gain  permanent  strength  exactly  to  the  ex-
tent of  the  effort  required  to  overcome  our  dif-
ficulties.

The  inexorr.ble  requirements  of  growth  de-
mand that  we  exert  the  greatest  d^grere  of  at-


—12—


traction  for  what  is  perfectly  in  accord  with
us.  Our  highest  happiness  will  be  best  at-
tained through  our  understanding  of  and  con-
scious co-operation  with  natural  laws.

Our  mind-forces  are  often  bound  by  the  jjara-
lyzing  suggestions  that  come  to  us  from  the
crude  thinking  of  the  race,  and  which  are  ac-
cepted and  acted  upon  without  question.  Im-
pressions of  fear,  of  worry,  of  disability  and
of  inferiority  are  given  us  daily.  These  aie
sufiicicnt  reasons  in  themselves  why  men
achieve  so  little — why  the  lives  of  multitudes
are  so  barren  of  results,  when  all  the  time  there
are  possibilities  within  them  which  need  only
the  liberating  touch  of  appreciation  and  whole-
some ambition  to  expand  into  real  greatness.

Women,  perhaps  even  more  than  men,  have
been  subject  to  these  conditions.  This  is  true
because  of  their  finer  susceptibilities  making
them  more  open  to  thought-vibrations  from
other  minds,  and  because  the  flood  of  negative
and  repressive  thoughts  has  been  aimed  more
especially  at  them.

But  it  is  being  overcome.  Florence  Nightin-
gale overcame  it  when  she  rose  in  the  Crimea
to  heights  of  tender  sympathy  and  executive
ability  before  unkno^vn  among  women.  Clara
Barton,  the  head  of  the  Red  Cross,  overcame  it
when  she  wrought  a  similar  work  in  the  armies
of  the  Union.  Jenny  Lind  overcame  it  when
she  showed  her  ability  to  command  enormous
financial  rewards  while  at  the  same  time  grati-
fying the  passionate  desire  of  her  nature  and
reaching  the  front  rank  of  her  day  in  musical
art.  And  there  is  a  long  list  of  women  singers,
philanthropists,  writers  and  actresses  who  have
proved  themselves  capable  of  reaching  tlie
greatest  literary,  dramatic,  artistic  and  socio-
logical achievement.


—13—


Women  as  well  as  men  are  beginning  to  ho
their  own  thinking.  They  have  awakened  to
some  conception  of  their  possibilities.  They
demand  that  if  life  holds  any  secrets,  these
shall  be  disclosed.  At  no  pre^aous  time  has
the  influence  and  potency  of  thought  received
such  careful  and  discriminating  investigation.
While  a  few  seers  have  grasped  the  great  fact
that  mind  is  the  universal  substance,  the  basis
of  all  things,  never  before  has  this  vital  truth
penetrated  the  more  general  consciousness.
Many  minds  are  now  striving  to  give  this  won-
derful truth  definite  utterance.  Modern  science
has  taught  us  that  light  and  sound  are  simply
different  intensities  of  motion,  and  this  may
lead  to  discoveries  of  forces  within  man  that
could  not  have  been  conceived  of  until  this
revelation  was  made. .

A  new  century  has  dawned,  and  now,  stand-
ing in  its  light,  man  sees  something  of  the  vast-
ness  of  the  meaning  of  life — something  of  its
grandeur.  Within  that  life  is  the  germ  of  in-
finite potencies.  One  feels  convinced  that  man's
possibility  of  attainment  cannot  be  measured,
that  boundary  lines  to  his  onward  march  are
unthinkable.  Standing  on  this  height  he  finds
that  he  can  draw  new  power  to  himself  from
the  infinite  energy  of  which  he  is  a  part.


—14—


26  E.  26th  i^t,
New  York  City,  N.  Y.,
October  2,  1918.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

The  majorty  of  people  are  struggling  to  make
a  living  as  they  say  and  are  persecuted,  as  a
rule,  by  what  they  call  ''Bad  Luck."  Why?
Because  they  are  not  ready  in  their  thought
world  for  ideal  conditions — harmony  would
create  discord  in  their  consciousness.

They  have  not  developed  an  interior  self,  an
inner  consciousness  which  would  ej^ablc  them
to  enter  into  and  enjoy  ideal  conditions.  The
majority  of  people  have  not  3'et  learned  that
the  ''world  without"  is  a  reflection  of  the
^' world  within."

Thej^  have  not  yet  learned  that  all  posses-
sion is  based  on  consciousness  and  that  they
themselves  are  creating  their  environment  and
are  continually  setting  the  causes  in  motion
which  bring  about  the  effects  of  poverty,  dis-
ease and  lack  of  any  kind.  Right  here  I  wish
to  say  that  I  consider  money  as  a  comparatively
small  part  of  real  wealth.  It  is  health,  cour-
age, peace,  power,  strength,  poise,  harmony,
etc.,  which  bring  one  in  tune  with  the  infinite
and  make  one  smile  at  that  which  the  world
calls  fate.

To  show  men  and  womeji  how  to  help  them-
jise^jres  is  one  of  the  greatest  things  anyone  can
do.  And  this  is  what  the  "Master-Key  Sys-
tem does.  It  is  tlie  Master  Key  to  the  pow-
erhouse of  universal  abundance.  It  ought  to
be  in  the  possession  of  every  ambitious  soul.
To  deprive  one's  self  of  the  possession  of  this
most  remarkable  system  m.eans  to  separate
one's  self  from  the  joy  of  living.

Sincerely  yours,

E.  FLOOD.


—15—


Arrny  Supply  Base,
Y.  M.  C.  A.,  Hut  No.  2,
Norfolk,  Va.,
March  3,  1919.
Mr.  uiiarles  F.  Haariel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Herewith,  I  am  sending  3^ou  my  answers  to
the  questions  in  Part  24  of  the  Master-Key
lessons.  To  say  that  I  have  enjoyed  this  re-
markable course  of  study  would  be  stating  the
truth  very  mildly,  indeed.  In  fact,  the  lessons
will  now  be  a  constant  companion  to  be  studied
over  and  over.  The  study  of  the  course  that
is  now  ending  is  just  the  beginning,  a  begin-
ning, too,  in  which,  from  the  nature  of  my
work,  I  was  not  able  to  do  anything  like  full
justice  to  the  lessons.

As  for  the  help  that  your  system  has  al-
ready been  to  me — that  has  been  incalculable
and  actually  revolutionary.  The  World  With-
in, which,  I  must  admit,  has  always  beckoned
me,  has  now  become,  through  the  aid  of  your
lessons,  a  much  clearer  reality  and  a  retreat
of  constant  inspiration,  assurance  and  joy.  I
have  realized  improvement  along  all  lines  per-
taining to  my  personal  welfare  and  have  in-
creased in  power  and  service  to  others.  My
environment  becomes  more  and  more  har-
monious because  of  the  increasing  harmony
within  which  I  have  learned  to  cultivate.

I  realize  as  never  before  how  largely  my
destiny  is  in  my  own  hands  and  how  that
destiny  can  be  successfully  worked  out.

Again  acknowledging  my  indebtedness  to
you,  I  remaiii,

Very  sincerely  yours,

A.  T.  CLARKE.


-16—


THE  MASTER  KEY


PART  II.

Some  men  seem  to  attract  success,  power,
wealth,  attainment,  with  very  little  conscious
effort ;  others  conquer  with  great  difficulty ;
still  others  fail  altogether  to  reach  tlieir  ambi-
tions, desires  and  ideals.  Why  is  this  so?
Why  should  some  men  realize  tiieir  ambi-
tions easily,  others  with  difiiculty,  and  still
others  not  at  all?  The  cause  cannot  be  phy-
sical, else  the  most  perfect  men,  physically,
would  be  the  most  successful.  The  difference,
therefore,  must  be  mental — must  be  in  the
mind;  hence  mind  must  be  the  creative  force,
must  constitute  the  sole  difference  between
men.  It  is  mind,  therefore,  which  overcomes
environment  and  every  other  obstacle  in  the
path  of  men.

It  is  the  actualizing  of  interior  quality
through  the  creative  power  of  thought  whicli
has  given  us  great  leaders  like  Alexander,
Napoleon,  Cromwell  and  our  own  Washington ;
captains  of  industry  like  Carnegie,  Moi-gan,
Rockefeller  and  Harriman;  inventors  like
Stevenson,  Morse,  Marconi,  Edison,  Tesla,  and
hosts  of  others.  If,  then,  the  only  difference
between  men  lies  in  their  ability  to  thinli,  to
use  and  control  their  thought,  to  develop  it — if
the  secret  of  all  success,  all  power,  all  attain-
ment is  the  creative  powder  of  mind,  the  force
of  thought — surely  the  ability  to  think  cor-
rectly should  become  the  paramount  object  of
every  man.

When  the  creative  powder  of  thought  is  fully
understool,  its  effect  wdll  be  seen  to  be  mar-


-17—


vcious.  But  isucli  rcsiiits  cannot  be  secured
without  proper  application,  diligence  and  con-
centration. I'iie  biuuent  will  linu  that  the  laws
goveiiiiiig  in  tile  mental  and  siJirituai  woilu  are
as  nxed  and  intaliibie  as  in  tlie  maieriai  worid.
To  secure  the  desired  results,  tiien,  it  is  neces-
sary to  know  the  law  and  to  comply  with  u.
A  proper  conipiiance  with  the  law  will  be
iound  10  produce  the  desired  result  w^ith  in-
variable exactitude.  The  student  who  learns
liiat  power  comes  from  within,  that  he  is  weak
only  because  he  has  depended  on  neip  irom
outside,  and  who  unhesitatingly  throws  him-
self on  his  own  thought,  instantly  rights  him-
self, stands  erect,  assumes  a  dominant  attitude,
and  works  miracles.

Scientists  tell  us  that  we  live  in  the  universal
ether.  This  is  formless,  of  itself,  but  it  is
pliable,  and  forms  about  us,  in  us  and  around
us,  according  to  our  thought  and  word.  We
set  It  into  activity  by  that  which  we  think.
I'hen  that  w^hich  manifests  to  us  objectively  is
tiiat  we  have  thought  or  said.

Thought  is  governed  by  law.  The  reason  we
have  not  manifested  more  faith  is  because  of
lack  of  understanding.  We  have  not  under-
stood that  everything  works  in  exact  accord-
ance with  dehnite  law.  The  law  of  thought  is
as  definite  as  the  law  of  mathematics,  or  the
law  of  chemistry,  or  the  law  of  electricity,  or
the  law  of  gravitation.  When  w^e  begin  to  un-
aerstand  that  happmess,  health,  success,  pros-
perity and  every  other  condition  or  environ-
ment are  results,  and  that  these  results  are
created  by  right  thinking,  either  consciously
or  unconsciously,  we  shall  realize  the  impor-
tance of  a  working  knowledge  of  the  laws  gov-
erning thought.


—18—


Those  (i()i))'\-i'S  into  li  (ioiiscioiis  roalizatiou  of
t])o  X)OW('r  oL  liiou^rlit  find  Ihrinsclves  in  pos-
&ession  of  the  best  tliat  life  cun  g'ive ;  substan-
tial things  of  a  i  '  •  order  become  theirs,  and
t.]:rse  sublime  ;  are  so  constituted  that

r.hoy  ean  be  made  tangible  i)arts  of  daily  per-
sonal life.  They  realize  a  world  of  liigher
power,  and  keep  that  power  constantly  work-
ing. This  power  is  inexhaustible,  limitless,  and
they  are  therefore  carried  forward  from  vic-
tory to  victory.  Obstacles  that  seem  insur-
mountable are  overcome.  Enemies  are  changed
to  friends,  conditions  are  overcome,  elements
transformed,  fate  is  conquered.

The  supply  of  good  is  inexhaustible,  and  the
demand  can  be  made  along  whatever  lines  we
may  desire.  This  is  the  mental  law  of  demand
and  supply.

Our  circumstaiices  and  environment  are
formed  by  our  thouglits.  We  have,  i)erbaps,
been  creating  these  conditions  unconsciously,
[f  they  are  unsatisfactory,  the  remedy  is  to
'consciously  alter  our  mental  attitude  and  see
our  circumstances  adjust  themselves  to  the  new
mental  condition.  There  is  nothing  strange  or
supernatural  about  this;  it  is  simply  the  Law
of  Being.  The  thoughts  which  take  root  in
{he  mind  will  certainly  produce  fruit  after
their  kind.  The  greatest  schemer  cannot
"gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles."
To  improve  our  conditions  we  must  first  im-
prove ourselves.  Our  thoughts  and  desires  will
be  the  first  to  show  improvement.

To  be  in  ignorance  of  the  laws  governing  in
the  mental  world,  is  to  be  like  a  child  i)laying
with  fire,  or  a  man  manipulating  powerful
chemicals  without  a  knowledge  of  their  nature
and  rolations.  This  is  universally  tvuf  ,  l,vM'ar<j.e


Mind  is  tlie  one  great  cause  which  produces  all
conditions  in  the  lives  of  men  and  Avomen.

Admitting  that  you  agree  with  everything
that  has  been  stated,  thus  far,  and  most  per-
sons will  take  no  exception  to  anything  that
has  been  said,  it  still  remains  to  make  a  prac-
tical application  of  the  law.

In  order  to  take  advantage  of  this  law,  and
put  ourselves  into  harmonious  relationship
with  it,  so  that  the  benefit  may  be  made  mani-
fest in  our  lives,  it  is  necessary  to  see  that  the
conditions  are  all  met  for  its  proper  operation.
We  may  know  the  laws  governing  eletricity,
we  may  have  all  the  proper  mechanism,  the
lights,  globes,  the  wires,  the  buttons,  and  w^e
may  even  know  how  to  generate  the  power,
but  if  the  connections  are  not  properly  made,
we  can  push  the  button  till  doomsday  and  no
light  will  appear;  so  with  the  law  of  attrac-
tion— it  is  in  operation  all  the  time,  every-
where, something  is  constantly  being  created,
something  is  appearing,  everything  is  contin-
ually changing,  but  to  take  advantage  of  this
process,  it  is  just  as  necessary  to  comply  with
the  law  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  electricity  or
gravitation.

Mind  is  creative  and  operates  through  the  law
of  attraction.  We  are  not  to  try  to  influence
any  to  do  what  we  think  they  should  do.
Each  individual  has  a  right  to  choose  for  him-
self, but  aside  from  this  we  would  be  operat-
ing under  the  laws  of  force,  which  is  destruct-
ive in  its  nature  und  just  the  opposite  of  the
law  of  attraction.  A  little  reflection  will  con-
vince you  that  all  of  the  great  laws  of  nature
operate  in  silence  and  that  the  underlying
principle  is  the  lav/  of  attraction.  It  is  only
destructive  processes  such  as  earthquakes  and


—20—


catastropliies,  that  employ  force.  Nothing
good  is  ever  accomplished  in  that  way.

To  be  successful,  attention  must  invariably
be  directed  to  the  creative  plane ;  it  must  never
be  competitive.  You  do  not  wish  to  take  any-
thing away  from  any  one  else,  you  want  to
create  something  for  yourself,  and  what  you
want  for  yourself  you  are  perfectly  willing  that
everyone  else  should  have.

You  know  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  take
from  one  to  give  to  another,  but  that  the
supply  for  all  is  abundant.  Nature's  store-
house of  wealth  is  inexhaustible  and  if  there
seems  to  be  a  lack  of  supply  anywhere  it  is
only  because  the  channels  of  distribution  are
as  yet  imperfect.

Abundance  is  a  natural  law  of  the  universe.
The  evidence  of  this  law  is  conclusive;  we  see
it  on  every  hand.  Everywhere  Nature  is  lav-
ish— wasteful,  extravagant.  Nowhere  is  econ-
omy observed  in  any  created  thing.  Profusion
is  manifested  in  everything.  The  millions  and
millions  of  trees  and  flowers  and  plants  and
animals  and  the  vast  scheme  of  reproduction
where  the  process  of  creating  and  recreating  is
forever  going  on,  all  indicates  the  lavishness
with  which  Nature  has  made  provision  for
man.  That  there  is  an  abundance  for  every-
one is  evident,  but  that  many  seem  to  have
been  separated  from  this  supply  is  also  evi-
dent; they  have  not  yet  come  into  a  realiza-
tion of  the  Universality  of  all  substance,  and
that  mind  is  the  active  principle  which  starts
causes  in  motion  whereby  we  are  related  to
the  things  we  desire.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  he  who  fails  to
fully  investigate  and  take  advantage  of  the
wonderful  progress  which  is  being  made,  in  this
last  and  greatest  science,  will  soon  be  as  far


—21—


behind  as  the  man  who  would  refuse  to  ac-
knowledge and  accept  the  benefits  which  have
accrued  to  mankind  through  an  unclerstandin-^
of  the  laws  of  electricity.

Of  course,  mind  creates  negative  conditions
just  as  readily  as  favorable  conditions,  and
when  we  consciously  or  unconsciously  visualize
every  kind  of  lack,  limitation  and  discord,  we
create  these  conditions;  tliis  is  what  many  are
unconsciously  doing  all  the  time.

This  law  as  well  as  every  oilier  law  is  no
respecter  of  persons,  but  is  in  constant  opera-
tion and  is  relentlessly  bringing  to  each  indi-
vidual exactly  wliat  he  has  created;  in  othi-r
words,  "Wliatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall
he  also  reap."

Abundance,  tlierefore,  depends  upon  a  rec-
ognition of  tbe  laws  of  Abundance,  and  the
fact  that  Mind  is  not  only  the  creator,  but  the
OTdy  creator  of  all  tliere  is.  Certainly  nothing
can  be  created,  before  we  know  that  it  can  be
created  and  tlien  make  the  proper  effort.  There
is  n.o  moi  e  Electricity  in  tlie  world  today  than
there  was  fifty  years  ago,  but  until  someone
recognized  the  law  by  which  it  could  be  made
of  service,  we  received  no  benefit;  now  that
the  law  is  understood,  practically  the  whole
world  is  lit  by  it.  So  with  the  law  of  Abun-
dance ;  it  is  only  those  who  recognize  the  law
and  place  themselves  in  harmony  with  it,  who
share  in  its  benefits.

A  recognition  of  the  law  of  abunflance  devel-
ops certain  Tiiental  and  moral  qualities,  among
which  are  Courage,  Loyalty,  Tact,  Sagacity,
Trulividufilitv  and  Conslructiveness.  These  are
all  modes  of  thonrrht,  and  ?s  all  thoucrht  is
creative,  they  manifest  in  objeetive^  conditions
corresponding  with  the  mental  condition.  This
is  necessarily  true  because  the  ability  of  the


individual  to  think  is  his  ability  to  act  upon  the
CJniveisal  mind  and  bring  it  into  manifestation,
it  is  the  process  whereby  the  individual  be-
eonies  a  channel  for  the  differentiation  of  the
Universal.  Every  thoug'lit  is  a  cause  and  every
condition  an  effect.

This  principle  endows  the  individual  with
seemingly  transcendental  possibilities,  among
which  is  the  mastery  of  conditions  through  the
creation  and  recof>*nition  of  opportunities.  This
creation  of  opportunity  implies  the  existence
or  creation  of  the  necessary  qualities  ov  talents
which  are  tboujiht  forces  and  which  result  in  a
consciousness  of  power  whicli  future  events
can  not  disturb.  It  is  this  organization  of  vic-
tory or  success  within  the  mijid,  this  conscious-
ness of  })0wer  witliin  wliich  constitutes  the
responsive  harmonious  action  whereby  we  are
related  to  tlie  objects  and  purposes  which  we
seek.  This  is  the  lav/  of  attraction  in  action;
this  law  beings  the  common  property  of  all,
can  be  exercised  by  any  one  having  sufficient
knovrledge  of  its  operation.

Courage  is  that  power  of  the  mind  which
manifests  in  the  love  of  mental  conflict;  it  is
a  noble  and  lofty  sentiment,  it  is  equally  fitted
to  comtnaud  or  obey,  both  require  courage.  It
often  has  a  tendency  to  conceal  itself.  There
are  men  and  women,  too,  who  apparently  exist
only  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to  others,  but  when
the  time  comes  and  the  latent  will  is  revealed,
we  find  under  the  velvet  glove  an  iron  hand —
and  no  mistake  about  it.  True  courage  is  cool,
calm  and  collected,  and  is  never  fool-hardy,
quarrelsome,  ill-natured  or  contentious.

^Accumulation  is  the  power  to  reserve  and
presei've  a  part  of  the  supply  which  we  are
coristantly  reeeivi'.ig,  so  as  to  be  in  position  to
take  advantage  of  the  larger  opportunities


—23—


wliicli  will  come  as  soon  as  we  are  ready  for
them.  Has  it  not  been  said,  *'To  him  that  hath
shall  be  given."  All  successful  business  men
have  this  quality  well  developed.  James  J.
Rill,  who  recently  died  leaving  an  estate  of
over  fifty-two  million  dollars,  said:  "If  you
want  to  know  whether  you  are  destined  to  be
a  success  or  a  failure  in  life,  you  can  easil}>
f.nd  out.  The  test  is  simple  and  it  is  infallible :
Are  you  able  to  save  money  ?  if  not,  drop  out.
You  Vx'ill  lose.  You  may  think  not,  but  you
will  lose  as  sure  as  you  live.  The  seed  of
success  is  not  in  you."  This  is  very  good  so
far  as  it  goes,  but  any  one  who  knows  the
biography  of  James  J.  Hill,  knows  that  he  ac-
quired his  fifty  million  dollars  by  following  the
exact  m.ethods  we  have  given.  In  the  first
place,  he  started  with  nothing;  he  had  to  use
his  imagination  to  idealize  the  vast  railroad
which  he  projected  across  the  western  prairies.
He  then  had  to  come  into  a  recognition  of  the
law  of  abundance  in  order  to  provide  the  ways
and  means  for  materializing  it;  unless  he  had
followed  out  this  program  he  would  never  have
had  anything  to  save,

Accumulativeness  acquires  momentum;  the
more  you  accumulate  the  more  you  desire  and
the  more  you  desire  the  more  you  accumulate,
so  that  it  is  but  a  short  time  until  the  action
and  reaction  acquire  a  momentum  that  cannot
be  stopped.  It  must,  however,  never  be  con-
founded v.'ith  selfislmess,  miserliness  or  penuri-
ousness ;  tney  are  perversions  and  will  make
any  true  progress  impossible.

Constructiveness  is  the  creative  instinct  of
the  mind.  It  will  be  readily  seen  that  every
successful  business  man  must  be  able  to  plan,
develop  or  construct.  In  the  business  world
it  is  usualiy  referred  to  as  initiative.   It  is  not


—  24—


enough  to  go  along  in  the  beaten  path.  New
ideas  must  be  developed,  new  ways  of  doing
things.  It  manifests  in  building,  designing,
planning,  inventing,  discovering,  improving.  It
is  a  most  valuable  quality  and  must  be  con-
stantly encouraged  and  developed.  Every  in-
dividual possesses  it  in  some  degree,  because
he  is  a  center  of  consciousness  in  that  Infinite
and  Eternal  Energy  from  which  all  things  pro-
ceed.

Water  manifests  on  three  planes,  as  ice,  as
water  and  as  steam;  it  is  all  the  same  com-
pound, the  only  difference  is  the  temperature,
but  no  one  would  try  to  drive  an  engine  with
ice;  convert  it  into  steam  and  it  easily  takes
up  the  load.  So  with  your  energy ;  if  you  want
it  to  act  on  the  creative  plane,  you  will  have
to  begin  by  melting  the  ice  with  the  fire  of
imagination,  and  you  will  find  that  the  strong-
er the  fire,  and  the  more  ice  you  melt,  the  more
powerful  your  thought  w411  become,  and  the
easier  it  will  be  for  you  to  materialize  your
desire.

Sagacity  is  the  ability  to  perceive  and  co-
operate with  Natural  Law.  True  Sagacity
avoids  trickery  and  deceit  as  it  would  the  lep-
rosy; it  is  the  product  of  that  deep  insight
which  enables  one  to  penetrate  into  the  heart
of  things  and  understand  how  to  set  causes
in  motion  which  will  inevitably  create  success-
ful conditions.

Tact  is  a  very  subtle  and  at  the  same  time  a
very  important  factor  in  business  success.  It
is  very  similar  to  intuition.  To  possess  tact
one  must  have  a  fine  feeling,  must  instinctively
know  what  to  saj^  or  what  to  do.  In  order  to
be  tactful  one  must  possess  Sympathy  and  Un
derstanding,  that  understanding  which  is  so
rare,  for  all  men  see  and  hear  and  feel,  but


—25—


how  desperately  few  ''uiidei'stand."  Tact  en-
ables one  to  foresee  what  is  about  to  happen
and  calculate  the  result  of  actions.  Tact  en-
ables us  to  feel  wJien  we  are  in  the  presence  of
physical,  mental  and  inoral  cleanliness,  for
these  are  today  invariably  demanded  as  the
price  of  success.

Loyalty  is  one  of  the  strongest  links  which
bind  men  of  strength  and  character.  It  is  one
which  can  never  be  broken  with  impunity.  The
man  who  Avould  lose  liis  right  liaiul  rather  than
beti'a}^  a  friend  will  never  lack  friends.  The
man  who  will  stand  in  silent  guard,  until  death,
if  need  be,  beside  the  shrine  of  confidence  or
friendship  of  those  who  have  allowed  him  to
enter  will  find  hiniseli  linked  with  a  current  of
cosmic  power  whicli  will  attract  desirable  con-
ditions only.  It  is  inconceivable  that  such  a
one  sh.ould  ever  meet  with  lack  of  any  kind.

Individuality  is  the  pov/er  to  unfold  our  own
latent  ])ossibilities,  to  be  a  lav/  unto  ourselves,
to  be  interested  in  the  race  rather  than  the  goal.
Strong  men  care  nothing  for  the  flock  of  imi-
tr<tors  Vv'ho  trot  complacently  behind  them.
They  derive  no  satisfaction,  in  the  mere  lead-
iu:^  of  large  numbers,  or  the  plaudits  of  the
mob.  This  pleases  o?!ly  T)etty  natures  and  in-
ferior minds.  Individuality  glories  more  in
t  he  I' n  Told  in 'J  r>t;  the  power  vrithin  than  in  the
jiPrviiitA''  of  the  weaklinjLr.

Individuality  is  a  real  power  inherent  in  all
and  the  development  and  consequent  expres-
sion of  this  power  enables  one  to  assume  the
rer,T:>onr;;l);lity  of  directing  his  own  footsteps
rather  than  stampeding  after  some  self-as-
sertive bell-wether.

Truth  i^;  ihe  imperativf^  co'?rliti^Ti  of  nil  wp]1
being.  To  be  sijtc,  to  knov/  Ihe  truth  Mud  to
stai:(l  "oiifidc'iily  on  it  is  a  satisfaction  beside


which  no  other  is  comparable.  Truth  is  the
uiKierlyiijg  verity,  the  condition  precedent  to
every  husiuess  oi"  social  relation.  Truth  is  tlie
only  solid  ground  in  a  world  of  conflict  doubt
and  danger.  ♦

Every  act  not  in  harmony  with  Truth,
whether  throu<^h  ignorance  or  design,  cuts  the
ground  from  under  our  feet,  leads  to  discord
inevitable  loss,  and  confusion,  for  while
the  humblest  mind  can  accurately  fore-
tell the  J'csnlt  of  eveiy  coi-rect  actioii,  tiie  ^rrcjit-
est,  most  profound  and  penetrating  mind  loses
its  ^vay  liopcM'ssly  and  can  form  no  conception
of  the  results  due  to  a  departure  from  correct
prirj(ri[)]t'S.

Those  wlio  establish  within  tluMnselves  the
requisite  elements  of  true  success  have  estab-
lished confitlence,  organized  victory,  and  it
only  remains  for  them  to  take  such  steps  from
time  to  time  as  the  newly-awakened  thought
force  will  direct,  and  hereiii  rests  the  mag-
ical seci'et  of  fdl  ])ower.

Less  than  10  per  cent  of  our  mental  proces-
ses is  conscious,  the  other  90  per  cent  is  sub-
conscious and  unconscious,  so  that  he  who
would  depend  upon  his  conscious  thought
alone  for  results  is  less  than  10  per  cent  effi-
cient. Those  who  are  accomplishing  anything
worth  while  are  those  who  are  enabled  to
take  advantage  of  this  greater  store  house  of
mental  wealth.  It  is  in  the  vast  domain  of
the  sub-conscious  mind  that  great  truths  are
hidden,  and  it  is  here  that  thought  finds  its
creative  power,  its  powder  to  correlate  with  its
object,  to  brine:  out  of  the  unseen  the  seen.

Those  f^imiliar  with  the  laws  of  Electricity
understand  the  principle  that  electricity  must
always  pass  from  a  higher  to  a  loAver  poten-
tiality and  can  therefore  make  whatever  ap-


plication  of  the  povrer  tliey  desire.  Those  not
i'ainiliar  with  tliis  law  can  effect  nothing;  and
so  with  the  law  governing  in  the  Mental  World,
those  who  understand  that  IMind  penetrates  all
things,  is  Omnipresent  and  is  responsive  to
every  demand,  can  make  use  of  the  law  and
can  control  conditions,  circumstances  and  en-
vironment; the  uninformed  cannot  use  it  be-
cause they  do  not  know  it.

The  fruit  of  this  knowledge  is,  as  it  were,  a
a  gift  of  the  Gods;  it  is  the  ''truth"  that  makes
men  free,  not  only  free  from  every  lack  and
limitation,  but  free  from  sorrow,  worry  and
care,  and,  is  it  not  wonderful  to  realize  that
this  law  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  that  it
makes  no  difference  what  your  habit  of  thought
may  be  the  way  has  been  prepared.

With  the  realization  that  this  mental  power
controls  and  directs  every  other  power  which
exists,  that  it  can  be  cultivated  and  developed,
that  no  limitation  can  be  placed  upon  its  ac-
tivity, it  will  become  apparent  that  it  is  the
greatest  fact  in  the  world,  the  remedy  for  every
ill,  the  solution  for  every  difficulty,  the  gratifi-
cation of  every  desire,  in  fact  that  it  is  the
Creator's  magnificent  provision  for  human
emancipation.


Seattle,  Wash.,
April  28,  1919.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,
419  Granite  Building,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  am  writing  this  letter  in  the  hope  that
some  one  may,  through  reading  it,  be  en-
couraged to  make  a  practical  application
of  the  ' 'Master-Key."

If  one-half  of  the  population  of  our
country  could  be  induced  to  study,  ac-
cept and  practice  the  "Master-Key"  les-
sons, the  millenium  would  be  here  and  the
United  States  of  America  would  be  a
paradise.

The  study  and  application  of  the  Mas-
ter-Key  has  removed  all  fear,  worry  and
distress  from  my  life.  It  has  placed  my
feet  upon  a  rock.  I  have  read  statistics
to  the  eftect  that  it  is  only  one  man  in
fifty  thousand  who,  when  down  and  out
at  the  age  of  fifty,  ever  rises.

I  wish  to  testify  that  not  only  I,  but
any  man  at  any  age,  can  rise  to  a  posi-
tion of  honor,  respectability  and  affluent
comfort  by  application  of  the  principle
outlined  in  the  "Master-Key."  Indeed,
I  can  say  that  my  latter  days  are  more
blessed  than  the  former.

Trusting  and  hoping  I  may  continue  to
be  a  lielp  to  ethers  through  your  glorious
teachings,

Sincerely,
HARRY  ^Y.  APPLETON.


—29—


VA  Paso,  Texas,  Ocl,  1,  lOi?.

Clias.  Y.  Haaiiei,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Ilaanel :

Tlie  value  of  an  idea  is  determined  by  its
ajjplication.  Pragmatism  has  long  since  spread
beyond  the  conlines  of  Missouri — the  world
today  insists  on  being  shown.

The  iasii  of  circumstance  and  the  logic  of
events  are,  more  than  ever,  impelling  men  to
think.  Whether  an  idea  be  a  new  process  for
l)ickling  cabbages  or  an  old  process  for  pre-
serving kings,  w^e  are  from  Missouri.

A  philosophy  of  life  having  as  its  basis  blind
optimism;  a  religion  that  won't  work  seven
days  a  week  or  a  proposition  that  isn't  prac-
tical appeals  to  the  intelligent  not  at  all.  It  is
results  that  we  want  and  to  all  such  the  acid
test  is:  AVill  it  work?

The  Master-Key  qualifies.  It  is  the  most
lucidly  scientific  statement  of  "Truth"  tlmt  1
iiave  seen.  It  reconciles  rationalism  and  re-
ligion; illumines  economic  determinism  and
the  materialistic  conception  of  history  and  is
an  infallible  guide  to  understanding.  It  con-
tains in  condensed  form  the  substance  of  an
entire  library  on  modern  constructive  thought.
Us  teaching,  if  consistently  applied,  will  make
any  man,  healthy,  wealthy  and  wise.  Its  dis-
tribution is  super-missionary  work  in  excelsis.
Tliose  who  wish  to  think  intelligently  will  find
it  invaluable.

Intelligence  rules.  Thought  intelligently  di-
rected is  a  creative  force  which  automatically
causes  its  object  to  manifest  on  a  material
plane.  Let  him  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  hear.

CHAS.  A.  HEARD.


—30-


The  Master  Key  System


The  scientific  spirit  nov/  doiniiuiieri  every
field  of  effort,  relatioii.s  oi*  cause  and  eftect  are
no  longer  ignored.

The  discovery  of  a  reign  of  law  marked  an
epoch  in  human  progress.  It  eliminated  the
element  of  uncertainty  and  caprice  from  men's
lives,  and  substituted  law,  reason  and  cer-
titude.

Men  now  understand  that  for  every  result
there  is  an  adequate  and  definite  cause,  so  that
when  a  given  result  is  desired,  they  seek  the
condition  by  which  alone  this  result  may  be
attained.

The  basis  upon  v.diich  all  law  rests  wns  dis-
covered by  inductive  reasoniiig  v/hich  consists
of  comparing  a  number  of  separate  instances
with  one  another  until  tlie  common  factor
which  gives  rise  to  them  all  is  seen.

It  is  this  metliod  of  study  to  wjiicii  the
civilized  nations  ov.'e  tlie  greater  part  of  tlieir
prosperity  and  the  more  valuable  part  of  tlieir
knowledge,  it  lias  lengthened  life,  it  has  mit-
igated pain,  it  has  spanned  rivers,  it  has
brightened  night  with  the  splendor  of  day,  it
extended  the  rai^ge  of  vision,  accelerated
motion,  annihilated  distance,  facilitated
intercourse,  and  enabled  men  to  descend  into
the  sea  and  to  soar  in  the  air,  w'lri  wcnder
then  that  meji  soon  endeavored  to  extr-»ifi  ihe
blessings  of  this  system  of  stii'.iy  to  tlieir  vx\f-.\h-
od  of  thiiiking,  so  that  M'hen  it  became  plaiui\


-31—


evident  that  certain  results  followed  a  par-
ticular metliod  ot  tiiiniiiiig  it  only  remained  to
classify  tliese  resuiis.

This  method  is  seientiiie  and  it  is  the
only  method  by  whicii  we  hiiiiii  ue  permitted
to  retain  that  degree  of  liberty  and  free-
dom which  we  have  been  accustomed  to
look  upon  as  an  inalienable  right,  because  aa
Prof.  A.  h\  Lange,  director  of  the  (Jalifornia
University  School  of  Education,  says:  "De-
mocracy is  safe  at  home  and  in  the  world  only
if  national  preparedness  means  such  things
as  growing  surplus  of  health,  accumulated
eliiciency  in  public  and  private  business  of
whatever  sort,  continuous  advance  in  the
science  and  art  of  acting  together,  and  the
increasingly  dominant  endeavor  to  make  all
of  these  and  all  other  aspects  of  national  de-
velopment center  and  revolve  about  ascending
life,  single  and  collective,  for  which  sciem:e,
art  and  ethics  furnish  guidance  and  control-
ling motives."

The  Master-Key  System  is  based  on  ab-
solute scientific  truth  and  wall  unfold  tJie
possibilities  that  lie  dormant  in  the  individual,
and  teach  how  they  may  be  brought  into  pow-
erful action,  to  increase  the  person's  effective
capacity,  bringing  added  energy,  discernment,
vigor  and  mental  elasticity .  The  student  who
gains  an  understanding  of  the  mental  law^s
which  are  unfolded  will  come  into  the  posses-
sion of  an  ability  to  secure  results  hitherto
undreamed  of,  and  which  has  rewards  hardly
to  be  expressed  in  words.

It  explains  the  correct  use  of  both  the  re-
ceptive and  active  elements  of  the  mental  na-


—32—


ture,  and  instructs  the  student  in  the  recogni-
tion of  opportunity;  it  strengthens  the  will
and  reasoning  powers,  and  teaches  the  cultiva-
tion and  best  uses  of  imagination,  desire,  the
emotions  and  the  intuitional  faculty.  It
gives  initiative,  tenacity  of  purpose,  wisdom
of  choice,  intelligent  sympathy  and  a  thor-
ough enjoyment  of  life  on  its  higher  planes.

The  Master-Key  Systein  teaches  the  use  of
Mind  Power,  true  Mind  Power,  not  any  of
the  substitutes  and  perversions ;  it  has  nothing
to  do  with  Hypnotism,  Magic  or  any  of  the
more  or  less  fascinating  deceptions  by  which
many  are  led  to  think  that  something  can  be
had  for  nothing.

The  Master-Key  System  cultivates  and  de-
velops the  understanding  which  will  enable
you  to  control  the  body  and  thereby  the
health.  It  imj^roves  and  strengthens  the
Memory.  It  developes  Insight,  the  kind  of
Insight  which  is  so  rare,  the  kind  wliich  is  the
distinguishing  characteristic  of  every  success-
ful business  man,  the  kind  which  enables  men
to  see  the  possibilities  as  well  as  the  difficulties
in  every  situation,  the  kind,  which  enables  men
to  discern  opportunity  close  at  hand,  for  thou-
sands fail  to  see  opportunities  almost  within
their  grasp  while  they  are  industriously  work-
ing with  situations  which  under  no  possibility
can  be  made  to  realize  any  substantial  return.

The  Master-Key  System  develops  Mental
Power  which  means  that  others  will  instinct-
ively recognize  that  you  are  a  person  of  force,
of  character — that  they  will  want  to  do  wdiat
you  want  them  to  do;  it  means  that  you  will
attract  men  and  things  to  you;  that  you  will


—33-.


be  what  some  people  call  lucky,"  that
"things"  will  come  your  way;  that  you  have
come  into  an  understanding  of  the  funda-
mental laws  of  Nature,  and  have  put  yourself
in  harmony  with  them ;  that  you  are  in  tune
with  the  Infinite;  that  you  understand  the
law  of  attraction,  the  Natural  lavv^s  of  growth,
and  the  Psychological  laws  on  Avhich  all  ad-
vantages in  the  social  and  business  world
rest.

Mental  Power  is  creative  power,  it  gives
you  the  ability  to  create  for  yourself;  it  does
not  mean  the  ability  to  take  something  away
from  some  one  else.  Nature  never  does  things
that  way.  Nature  makes  two  blades  of  grass
grow  where  one  grew  before,  and  Mind  Power
enables  men  to  do  the  same  thing.

The  Master-Key  System  develops  insight
and  sagacity,  increased  independence,  the
ability  and  disposition  to  be  helpful;  it  de-
stroys distrust,  depression,  fear,  melancholia,
and  every  form  of  lack,  limitation  and  weak-
ness, including  pain  and  disease;  it  awakens
buried  talents,  supplies  initiative,  force,  ener-
gy, vitality — it  awakens'an  appreciation  of  the
beautiful  in  Art,  Literature  and  Science.

It  has  changed  the  lives  of  thousands  of
men  and  women,  by  substituting  definite
principles  for  uncertain  and  hazy  methods —
and  principles  are  the  foundation  upon  which
every  system  of  efficiency  must  rest.

Elbert  H.  Gary,  the  chairman  of  the  United
States  Steel  Corporation  said:  ''The  services
of  advisors,  instructors,  efficiency  experts  in
successful  management  are  indispensable  to
most  business  enterprises  of  magnitude,  but


i  deem  tlie  recognition  and  adoption  of  right
principles  of  vastly  more  importance."  The
Alaster-Key  System  teaches  right  principles,
and  snggests  methods  for  making  a  practical
application  of  the  principles;  in  that  it  differs
from  every  other  course  of  study,  it  teaches
that  the  only  possible  value  which  can  attach
to  any  principle  is  in  its  application,  many
read  books,  take  home  study  courses,  at-
tend lectures  all  their  lives  without  ever  mak-
ing any  progress  in  demonstrating  the  value
of  the  principles  involved.  The  Mastey-Key
System  suggests  methods  by  which  the
value  of  the  principles  taught  may  be  demon-
strated and  put  in  actual  practice  in  the  daily
experience.

There  is  a  change  in  the  thought  of  the  world.
This  change  is  silently  transpiring  in  our  midst,
and  is  more  important  than  any  which  the
world  has  undergone  since  the  downfall  of
Paganism.

The  present  revoluition  in  the  opinions  of
all  classes  of  men,  the  highest  and  most  cul-
tured of  men  as  well  as  those  of  the  laboring
class,  stands  unparalelled  in  the  history  of
the  world.

Science  has  of  late  made  such  vast  discov-
eries, has  revealed  such  an  infinity  of  resources,
has  unveiled  such  enormous  possibilities  and
such  unsuspected  forces,  that  scientific  men
more  and  more  hesitate  to  affirm  certain
theories  as  established  and  indubitable  or  to
deny  certain  other  theories  as  absurd  or  im-
possible, and  so  a  new  civilizaztion  is  being
born ;  customs,  creeds,  and  cruelty  are  passing ;
vision,  faith  and  service  are  taking  their  place.
The  fetters  of  tradition  are  being  melted  off


-  85  -


from  humanity,  and  as  the  dross  of  jnaterialism
is  hcijiji'  consumed,  tliought  is  being  liberated
and  truth  is  rising  full  orbed  before  an  aston-
ished multitude.

The  whole  world  is  on  tlie  eve  of  a  new  con-
sciousness, a  new  power  and  a  new  realization
of  the  resources  vrithin  the  self.  The  last  cen-
tury saw  the  most  magnificent  material  pro-
gress in  history.  The  new^  century  will  pro-
duce the  greatest  progress  in  mental  and  spir-
itual power.

Physical  Science  has  resolved  matter  into
molecules,  molecules  into  atoms,  atoms  into
energy,  and  it  has  remained  for  Mr.  J.  A.
Fleming,  in  an  address  before  the  Royal  In-
stitution, to  resolve  this  energy  into  mind.
He  says:  "In  its  ultimate  essence,  energy  may
be  incomprehensible  by  us  except  as  an  ex-
hibition of  the  direct  operation  of  that  which
we  call  Mind  or  Will."

Let  us  see  what  are  the  most  powerful  forces
in  Nature.  In  the  mineral  world  everything
is  solid  and  fixed.  In  the  animal  and  vegetable
kingdom  it  is  in  a  state  of  flux,  forever  chang-
ing, always  being  created  and  recreated.  In  the
atmosphere  we  find  heat,  light  and  energy.
Each  realm  becomes  finer  and  more  spiritual
as  w^e  pass  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,
from  the  coarse  to  the  fine,  from  the  low  po-
tentiality to  high  potentiality.  When  w^e  reach
the  invisible  w^e  find  energy  in  its  purest  and
most  volatile  state.

And  as  the  most  powerful  forces  of  Nature
are  the  invisible  forces,  so  we  find  that  the
most  powerful  forces  of  man  are  his  invisible
forces,  his  spiritual  force,  and  the  only  way  in
which  the  spiritual  force  can  manifest  is
through  the  process  of  thinking.  Thinking  is


—36—


the  only  activity  which  the  spirit  possesses,  and
thought  is  the  only  product  of  thinking.

Addition  and  subtraction  are  therefore  spirit-
ual transactions;  reasoning  is  a  spiritual  pro-
cess; ideas  are  spiritual  conceptioiis ;  questions
are  spiritual  searchlights  and  logic,  argument
and  philosophy  is  spiritual  machinery.

Every  thought  brings  into  action  certain
physical  tissue,  parts  of  the  brain,  nerve  or
muscle.  This  produces  an  actual  physical
change  in  the  construction  of  the  tissue.  There-
fore it  is  only  necessary  to  have  a  certain  num-
ber of  thoughts  on  a  given  subject  in  order  to
bring  about  a  complete  change  in  the  physical
organization  of  a  man.

This  is  the  process  by  which  failure  is
changed  to  success.  Thoughts  of  courage,  pow-
er, inspiration,  harmony,  are  substituted  for
thoughts  of  failure,  despair,  lack,  limitation
and  discord,  and  as  these  thoughts  take  root,
the  physical  tissue  is  changed  and  the  individu-
al sees  life  in  a  new  light,  old  things  have  actu-
ally passed  away,  all  things  have  become  new,
he  is  born  again,  this  time  born  of  the  spirit,
life  has  a  nevv^  meaning  for  him,  he  is  recon-
structed and  is  filled  vrith  joy,  confidence,  hope,
energy.  He  sees  opportunities  for  success  to
which  he  Avas  heretofore  blind.  He  recognizes
possibilities  which  before  had  no  meaning  for
him.  The  thoughts  of  success  with  which  he
has  been  impregnated  are  radiated  to  those
around  him,  and  they  in  turn  help  him  onward
and  upward;  he  attracts  to  him  new  and  suc-
cessful associates,  and  this  in  turn  changes  his
environment ;  so  that  by  this  simple  exercise  of
thought,  a  man  changes  not  only  himself,  but
his  environment,  circumstances  and  conditions.

You  will  see,  you  must  see,  that  we  are  at


—37—


the  dawn  of  a  new  day;  that  the  possibilities
are  so  wonderful,  so  fascinating,  so  limitless  as
to  be  almost  bewildering.  A  century  ago  any
man  with  an  aeroplane  or  even  a  Gatling  gun
could  have  annihilated  a  whole  army  equipped
with  the  implements  of  warfare  then  in  use.  So
it  is  at  present.  Any  man  with  a  knowledge  of
the  possibilities  contained  in  the  Master-Key
has  an  inconceivable  advantage  over  the  mul-
titude.

The  Master-Key  System  comes  in  twenty-
four  parts,  one  part  is  mailed  each  week.  Each
part  has  a  series  of  questions  by  which  your
understanding  of  the  lesson  is  tested.  You  are
invited  and  urged  to  ask  any  and  all  questions
that  may  occur  to  you  concerning  the  lesson  or
the  application  of  the  principles  in  question  to
your  own  particular  problem.

Many  have  found  this  privilege  worth  many
times  the  cost  of  the  entire  service.  Many
have  stated  that  the  advice  received  in  this
way  was  invaluable.


*    *    *  *


Oakland,  Calif.,  March  13,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
419  Granite  Building,
St.  Louis,  Missouri.

My  dear  Friend:

In  sending  you  my  answers  to  Part  Twenty-
four,  I  feel  not  unlike  one  who  has  just  com-
pleted a  most  interesting  voyage  of  discovery
in  uncharted  seas,  under  the  able  leadership
of  an  intrepid  commander  endov/ed  with  pro-
phetic vision.

Have  I  enjoyed  this  course  of  study,  you  ask;
I  have  simply  devoured  it.    To  me  it  has  been


—38—


a  revelation.  No  man  who  has  been  a  mate-
rialist all  his  life,  can  so  continue  after  he
becomes  interested  in  these  lessons.  I  was  a
materialist;  but  I  have  become  an  idealist
since  re?.ding  the  first  three  parts.

To  me  the  chamber  of  life's  mysteries  has
been  opened.  The  shackles  of  fear  and  super-
stition are  broken.  No  longer  do  I  dread  what
may  come  to  me  with  the  passing  years.  For
I  know  that  I  can  be  the  architect  of  my  own
destiny — that  I  am  master  of  my  own  career.

Has  the  course  been  of  assistance  to  me?  I
can  not  conceive  of  any  sane  person  who  could
truthfully  answer  this  question  other  than
affirmative  after  completing  it.  It  has  been
and  is  of  the  greatest  help  to  me  in  my  pro-
fession, and  in  my  social  duties.  In  every
man's  life  there  are  low  spots  as  well  as  high
spots.  I  believe  I  have  had  as  many  of  the
former  as  the  average  man,  and  peevishness
was  all  too  fast  becoming  one  of  my  leading
features.  But  it  is  different  now.  The  low
spots  are  mostly  high  ones.

It  seems  to  me  I  could  write  a  book  on  the
"wonders  of  visualization."  But  I  will  not  at-
tempt it  here.  And  then  think  of  the  uplift
one  gets  by  using  constructive  thoughts  to
banish  vicious  or  destructive  thoughts.  With
each  victory  you  can  feel  yourself  growing
stronger  along  mental,  moral  and  spiritual
lines.  And  what  can  be  more  inspiring  than
to  come  into  a  full  realization  of  the  great
truth  that  one  is  a  spirit  with  a  body  to  use
for  a  season,  rather  than  the  old  false  notion
that  you  were  a  body  with  a  spirit.  This  alone
is  sufficient  to  make  it  well  worth  the  study
necessary  to  the  proper  understanding  of  the
fact.

In  conclusion  let  me  say  that  I  hope  the
day  is  not  far  distant  when  this  course  will
be  introduced  to  the  world  through  our  schools
and  colleges,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  in
general.

Respectfully  yours,

HORATIO  A.  JOHNSON.


—39—


PART  ONE


Tells  upon  what  possession  is  based,  explains  the
cause  of  all  gain,  explains  the  cause  of  loss  as  well
as  all  other  experiences  in  life.  It  explains  how
power  is  secured.  It  tells  of  a  world  within  and
how  this  world  is  governed.  It  explains  how  the
solution  for  every  problem  in  life  may  be  found.
It  tells  how  practical  men  and  women  find  the  cour-
age, power,  hope,  enthusiasm  and  confidence  by
which  they  are  given  the  intelligence  and  vrisdom
to  make  tiieir  droams  come  true.  It  tells  how  more
efficiency  is  obtained  and  retained,  and  how  our
future  may  be  placed  under  our  own  control  instead
of  being  at  the  mercy  of  any  capricious  or  uncer-
tain external  power.  It  explains  the  cause  of  every
condition,  the  reason  for  every  experience,  the
origin  of  all  power,  and  why  all  power  is  absolutely
under  ouf  own  control.


PART  T^fTO


Tells  how  and  why  the  operations  of  the  mini  are
carried  on  by  two  parallel  modes  of  activity,  the
one  conscious  and  the  other  sub-conscious.  It  ex-
plains why  the  thought  processes  of  the  sub-con-
scious are  the  theater  of  the  most  impcrtant  mental
phenomena,  v/hy  ease  and  perfection  depend  en-
tirely upon  the  degree  in  which  we  cease  to  depend
upon  the  consciousness.  It  explains  the  origin  of
all  great,  noble,  brilliant  thoughts  and  ideas,  why
we  find  ourselves  sometimes  endoTed  with  tact»
instinct,  courage,  sagacity  and  inspiration.  In  fact
it  tells  of  a  vast  mental  storehouse  in  which  ninety
percent  of  our  thought  processes  originate;  it  ex-
plains also  i.ow  this  vast  ment-il  storehouse  may
be  placed  u;;drr  the  supervision  and  in  the  keeping
of  the  cons(:;':us  mind.  It  tells  why  those  who  are
familiar  with  ihe  laws  governing  in  thi  •  larger  men-
tal domain  are  enabled  to  accomplish,  to  achieve,  to
become  writers,  authors,  artists,  ministers,  cap-
tains of  industry,  and  why  all  others  must  neces-
'arily  remain  lc"3  than  ten  percent  efficient.


—40—


PART  THEEE


Tells  why  the  necessary  action  and  interaction  of
the  conscious  and  sab-coiiscious  minds  requires
two  corresponding  systems  of  nerves.  It  explains
how  the  connection  la  made  between  these  two  sys-
tems of  nerves.  It  explains  and  tells  of  a  central
point  in  the  body  for  the  distribution  of  energy.
How  this  energy  is  distributed.  Kow  the  distri-
bution of  this  energy  gives  the  individual  pleasant
sensations,  how  the  interruption  of  this  distribu-
tion brings  discord,  inharmouy  and  lack  and  limita-
tion of  every  kind.  It  tells  of  an  arch  enemy  which
must  bo  destroyed,  and  teils  how  to  destroy  it.  It
tells  what  determines  the  experiences  in  life  with
which  we  a.re  to  meet,  and  why  these  experiences
are  under  our  own  control.  One  enthusiastic  stu-
dent says  of  this  part:  "This  document  in  my  opin-
ion la  the  greatest  single  document  beneflciai  to
mankind  ever  written  in  the  history  of  the  world;
it  is  the  first  time  that  I  have  come  into  a  true  un-
derstanding of  the  Silent  Powers  that  dominate  and
determine  one's  success."


PAKT  FOUR,

This  part  tells  what  it  is  which  controls  that
which  you  call  yourself.  "You"'  are  not  your  body,
the  body  is  simply  the  physical  instrument  which
the  ego  uses  to  carry  out  its  purpose.  "You"  are
not  your  rnJnd,  this  is  simply  another  instrument
which  the  ego  uses  to  think,  reason  and  plan.  When
you  say  "I"  go  you  tell  the  body  where  to  go,  when
you  say  "I"  think  you  tell  the  mind  what  to  think.
When  you  come  into  a  realization  of  the  true  na-
ture of  tbe  "I"  you  will  enjoy  a  sense  of  power
which  nothing  else  can  give,  because  you  v/ill  come
to  knov/  what  you  are,  who  you  are,  what  you  want,
and  how  to  get  it.


PAET  FIVE.

This  part  tells  how  the  sub-conscious  processes
are  continually  at  v/ork,  ?nd  it  tells  how  we  may
consciously  direct  this  work  instead  of  being  mere


—41  —


passive  recipients  of  its  activity.  It  tells  how  we
may  have  a  vision  of  tiie  destination  to  be  reached,
the  dangers  and  pitfalls  to  be  avoided.  It  tells  how
"the  word  has  become  flesh,"  how  we  are  constantly
creating  and  recreating  ourselves.  It  tells  of  a  men-
tal home  which  each  of  us  is  building  for  ourselves,
the  importance  of  this  home,  where  the  material  la
secured,  the  character  of  the  furnisliing,  how  and
why  many  of  us  need  a  mental  hou  ecleanlng  in
case  we  wish  to  realize  our  ideals.  It  tells  of  the
conditions  by  which  we  may  come  into  an  inherit-
ance of  health,  harmony  and  prosperity,  and  the
condition  is  one  which  demands  no  sacrifice  except
the  loss  of  our  limitations,  our  servitu(!es  and  our
weaknesses,  and  costs  only  the  labor  of  harvesting
Its  great  resources.


PART  SIX

Tells  of  the  unlimited  possibilities  of  tlie  Universal
Mind,  and  explains  how  this  mind  is  differentiated  in
form.  It  tells  of  the  most  marvellous  piece  of
mechanism,  which  has  ever  been  constructed,  and
telis  how  the  effect  which  will  be  produced  depends
entirely  upon  the  "mechanism  to  which  it  is  at-
tached." It  tells  why  we  should  all  become  fami-
liar with  the  mechanism  so  as  to  secure  the  effects
which  we  desire.  Tlie  power  to  which  it  can  be  at-
tached is  unlimited,  and  we  can  accordingly  secure
any  effect  we  desire  when  we  become  familiar  with
the  mechanism,  and  understand  how  to  make  the
proper  connections.  An  understanding  of  this  part
will  enable  you  to  plan  courageously  and  execute
fearlessy,  because  you  will  have  come  into  a  knowl-
edge of  the  source  of  all  power  and  this  will  de-
termine your  course  in  life,  bringing  you  into  con-
tact with  all  that  is  strongest  and  best  and  most  de-
sirable.


PART  SEVEN.

This  part  tells  of  a  method  by  which  you  may
construct  the  mould  or  model  from  which  your  fu-
ture v/ill  emerge.  It  tells  how  you  may  make  it
grand  and  beautiful,  it  explains  that  you  are  not
limited  as  to  cost  or  material,  that  no  one  can  place


—42—


any  limitation  on  it  but  yourself.  It  explains  that
in  the  confetruction  of  this  model,  there  is  much
work  to  be  done,  that  no  one  can  do  the  work  but
yourself,  but  it  tells  you  what  to  do  and  how  to
do  it,  it  suggests  methods  and  plans  which  if  faith-
fully and  persistently  carried  out  will  result  in  con-
ditions exactly  in  accordance  Vvith  the  purpose  and
thought.  It  telis  of  millions  of  faithful  helpers
which  will  come  to  your  aid  if  you  are  faithful  in
your  work,  and  it  tells  why  some  who  are  appar-
ently faithfully  endeavoring  to  realize  their  ideal
seem  to  fail.  It  is  sometimes  just  as  important  to
know  what  not  to  do  as  what  to  do.


PART  EIGHT.

This  part  tells  of  the  creative  principle  of  the
Universe,  what  it  is,  how  it  takes  form  and  how  it  is
brought  in  to  manifestation.  This  principle  being  the
underlying  principle  of  all  existence  must  neces-
sarily be  governed  by  an  immutable  law.  It  tells
how  the  character,  health  and  circumstances  of  the
individual  are  formed,  and  suggests  methods  where-
by desirable  conditions  and  circumstances  may  be
created.  It  tells  how  and  why  and  when  the  ma-
terial from  which  your  future  is  to  emerge  is  se-
cured. It  suggests  methods  and  exercises  by  which
you  may  secure  complete  control  of  the  power  which
governs  in  this  mighty  field  of  action.  Mighty  be-
cause it  is  the  most  important  work  which  any  in-
dividual can  undertake.  We  are  making  our  future
now,  today,  when  it  comes  we  shall  have  to  accept
what  is  given,  it  will  be  too  late  to  change  it,  but
we  can  dominate,  control  it,  make  It  what  we  want
It  to  be,  this  part,  explains  how.


PART  NESE.

This  part  tells  of  the  fundamental  principle,  the
imperative  condition,  the  immutable  law  underlying
every  successful  business  relation  or  social  condi-
tion. It  tells  of  the  law  by  which  you  m^y  make
yourself  irresistable,  by  which  you  may  sweep  away
every  form  of  discord,  inharmony  and  doubt.  It
tells  the  «ecret  of  the  solution  to  every  problem.
It  explains  that  there  are  only  three  things  which


-43—


all  mankind  requires  for  their  complete  happiness  and
development.  It  tells  what  they  "are  and  how  they
way  be  had.


PAET  TEN.

This  part  tells  of  the  Law  of  Abundance.  It
shows  that  Nature  has  provided  an  abundance  for
all,  and  why  some  seem  to  be  separated  from  this
supply.  It  tells  of  a  connecting  link  between  the
individual  and  the  supply,  explains  the  Law  of  At-
traction, the  law  by  which  your  "own"  is  brought  to
you.  It  tells  why  every  experience  in  life  is  the
result  of  this  law.  It  tells  why  and  how  you  at-
tract the  things  to  you  which  make  up  the  sum  total
of  your  existence.  It  tells  how  you  may  place
yourself  In  harmony  with  this  law  and  thereby  as-
sist in  bringing  about  desirable  conditions  in  your
health,  environment,  or  finances.  It  shows  that
this  Law  of  Attraction  is  fundamental  and  eternal
and  that  there  is  no  escape  from  the  result  of  Ita
operation.  A  knowledge  of  this  Law  is  absolutely
essential  to  those  desiring  to  make  permanent
progress.


PAET  ELEVEI^.

This  part  tells  of  the  means  by  w^hich  we  have
discovered  that  the  infinitely  small  as  well  as  the
infinitely  large  is  in  the  last  analysis  nothing  but
force,  motion  life  and  mind,  it  tells  of  the  process
by  which  we  have  become  familiar  with  the  vast
organization  by  which  we  are  identified  with  the
complex  operations  of  nature.  It  gives  concise  di-
rections for  making  use  of  the  creative  power  of
the  Universe,  the  power  by  which  all  things  are
brought  into  existence.  It  shows  how  this  marvel-
lous power  may  be  utilized,  directed  and  made
available  for  the  solution  of  every  human  problem.


PAET  TWELTE.

This  part  tells  of  numerous  counterfeits  and
perversions  by  which  many  are  led  to  think  that


—44—


something  can  be  had  for  nothing.  There  Is  no
royal  road  to  success,  we  must  give  before  we  can
get;  if  we  cannot  give  money,  we  must  give  service,
we  must  give  time  and  thought,  the  Law  of  Com-
pensation demands  an  eye  for  an  eye.  It  tells  how
we  may  create  the  implements  by  which  we  may  put
into  operation  the  laws  by  which  we  can  gain  ac-
cess to  the  unlimited  resources  of  Nature.


TART  TJiillTEEN.

This  part  tells  of  numerous  counterfeits  and
often  result  in  disaster  and  frequently  sweep  away
the  result  of  a  life  time  cf  effort  and  ex-
plains the  modern  method  of  thinking  and  shows
how  actual,  tangible  results  are  thereby  secured,
and  how  conditions  must  change  in  order  to  meet
the  requirements  of  a  changed  consciousness.  It
explains  the  process  by  which  this  change  is  brought
about  and  how  we  may  hasten  it.


PAKT  FOUKTEEN.

This  part  explains  the  source  of  all  Power,  Vv'is-
dom  and  Intelligence,  and  how  we  may  bring  it  into
harmonious  relations  in  our  affairs.  It  shows  that
those  who  understand  the  principle  get  results  in
exact  accordance  with  their  understanding  and
their  ability  to  make  the  proper  application.  This
opens  up  possibilities  hitherto  undreamed  of  and  by
an  orderly  sequence  of  law.  It  explains  the  source
of  all  energy  and  all  substance  and  the  method  by
which  this  Universal  substa,nce  is  differentiated  into
foi-m.  It  explains  the  nature  of  electrons  and  of
cells  upon  which  the  maintainance  of  health  and
life  depend,  it  explains  how  we  may  bring  about
radical  changes  in  our  life  and  what  the  result  of
auch  changes  must  necessarily  be.


PAilT  FIFTEEN.

This  part  explains  the  Law  of  Growth,  and  ox-
plains  why  we  cannot  obtain  if  v/e  tenaciously  cling
to  what  we  have,  and  that  difficulties,  inharmoniea


—45—


and  obstacles  iDdicate  that  we  are  either  refusing  t©
give  up  what  we  no  longer  need,  or  refusing  to  ac-
cept what  we  require;  v^e  are  holding  on  lo  worn
out  and  useless  material,  or  we  are  allowing  a  de-
tlciencj  to  exist  and  are  not  obtaining  the  material
necessary  for  our  growth.  It  expains  how  the  abil-
ity to  appropriate  what  we  require  for  our  growth  is
secured.  It  explains  how  vitality  is  important  to
thought,  and  what  determines  the  Importance  of
words  the  vessels  In  which  thought  is  carried.  Ho-w
abundance  may  be  secured  and  why  we  must  be
prepared  to  assume  the  responsibility  for  every
thought  and  action.  It  explains  the  necessity  of  In-
sight, lt3  value  in  examining  facts  and  conditions
at  long  range  and  in  turning  our  attention  to  profit-
able channels  instead  of  working  with  problems
which  contain  no  possibility  of  any  kind.


PART  SIXTEEN.

This  part  explains  the  nature  of  Wealth,  it  shows
how  it  is  created  and  upon  what  it  depends.  It
shows  why  success  is  contingent  upon  an  ideal
higher  than  the  mere  accumulation  of  riches,  it
shows  that  success  depends  upon  creative  ability
and  explains  the  necessary  condition  for  attain-
ment. It  explains  why  premature  wealth  is  but  the
forerunner  of  humiliation  and  disaster.  It  explains
the  methods  by  which  we  may  take  our  fate  out  of
the  hands  of  chance,  and  consciously  make  for  our-
selves the  conditions  which  we  desire,  it  tells  how
we  may  compel  success  by  the  utilization  of  scien-
tific and  exact  methods,  and  it  explains  that  while
we  have  the  ability  to  create  harmonious  and  con-
structive conditions  we  also  have  the  ability  to  cre-
ate inharmonious  and  destructive  conditions,  and
unfortunately  through  ignorance  of  the  law,  this  is
what  many  are  doing.


PART  SEYENTEEN.

This  part  tells  of  the  Law  of  Vibration  and  why
the  highest  principle  necessarily  determines  the  cir-
euznotanc&s,  aspects  and  relations  of  everything


-48


with  v/hich  it  comes  in  contact.  It  tells  why  and
how  a  knowledge  of  these  higher  forces  make  all
physical  Lorce  siiik  into  iiisigailicj^ce.  It  explains
ihQ  nature  of  concentration,  it  tells  something  of
the  practice  of  concentration,  tells  something  of  the
results  of  concentration.  Tells  how  the  mind  may
became  a  magnet,  how  it  may  Irresistably  attract
the  conditions  which  it  desires,  it  tella  v/hy  it  ie
necessary  "to  be"  in  order  "to  have,"  it  tells  how
to  unfasten  the  prison  bars  of  weakness,  impotence
and  self-belit.tlement  and  realize  the  joy  of  over-
coming obstacles.  It  tells  how  the  intuitive  power-
Is  set  in  operation  and  how  this  inevitably  leads  to
success.  It  tells  of  the  difference  between  real
power  and  the  symbols  of  power,  and  why  the  sym-
bols turn  to  ashes  just  as  we  overtake  thorn.


PART  EIiaiTKEN.

This  p?*rt  tells  of  a  chanive  in  the  thought  ot
men,  a  change  which  is  silently  transpiring  in  our
taidst  and  which  is  unparalleiod  in  the  history  of  the
world.  The  fetters  of  iradition  are  being  melted  oS
from  humanity  and  truth  is  rir.ing  full  orbed  before
an  astonished  multitude.  It  tells  >.ov,'  the  individual
is  enabled  to  control  every  form  of  intelligence
which  has  not  as  yet  reached  this  level  of  self-recog-
nition. It  telis  when  and  how  tbe  creative  power
originates,  it  tells  how  the  Universal  produces  tha
various  combinations  which  result  in  the  formation
of  phenomena,  it  exi)lains  the  principle  of  attrac-
tion by  which  thing.s  are  brought  together,  which  is
the  sole  meajis  by  which  existence  is  carried  into
effect.  It  explains  the  real  source  of  v/ealth  of  the
Individual.  It  explain^;  th??  method  by  which  atten-
tion and  concentn-.lion  may  be  .■  T.i  ^liotyt?
why  the  power  of  attention  is  the  distiugulshing
characteristic  of  every  man  of  ability.


4?


This  paii  of  iJie  search  for  truth,  which  Id

anotlier  name  lo:  liiiir-iate  caupe,  if  we  can  fmd  the
truth  we  sliall  have  found  the  cause  for  every  ef-
fect, and  having  found  the  cause  we  ahali  be  la  po-
sition to  control  the  clXect.  It  explains  tiidt  ail
things  are  finally  resolvable  into  one  thin><,  and
that  as  they  are  thus  translatable  they  must  ever
be  in  relation  and  can  never  by  in  opposition  to  oug
another.  It  explains  that  a  knowledge  of  this  pri-
mary substance  is  power,  it  explains  that  a  knowl-
edge of  cause  and  effect  is  power,  that  wealth  is
the  ofispriug  of  power,  that  events  and  condition;^
are  signilicant  only  as  they  effect  power,  and  iinaliy
that  ail  things  represent  certain  forms  and  degrees
of  power.  It  tells  of  a  certain  form  of  power  which
can  control  every  other  power,  why  it  is  superior
.Jid  bow  we  may  make  use  of  tiiis  superior  power.


TAilT  TWENTY.

This  part  tells  what  the  true  business  of  life  if?
and  the  result.  It  shows  that  we  can  obtain  no  re-
sults as  long  as  we  remain  oblivious  to  the  only
power  there  is,  an  understanding  of  the  principles,
force.s,  methods  and  combinations  of  mind  and  it?
relation  to  the  Universal  mind.  It  explains  that  the
Universal  can  act  only  through  the  Individual,  it
shows  that  we  are  the  channel  for  its  activity,  that
it  is  within  us,  that  it  is — us — we  can  of  course  fail
to  recognize  it  an.d  so  exclude  it  from  our  conscious-
ness, but  it  will  nevertheless  be  the  basic  fact  of
ail  existence.  It  tells  of  inspiration,  the  art  of  ad-
justing the  individual  mind  to  that  of  the  Universal
the  art  of  becoming  a  channel  for  the  flow  of  Infinite
Wisdom.


This  part  tells  of  the  money  cor.sciousness  8
tho  power  v/hich  sets  the  current  in  motion  whicjb
prod'ices  the  attractive  force  which  opens  the  doors
to  tlie  arteries  of  commerce.  It  tell.M  how  the  cur-
rent is  stopped  or  completely,  reversed  and  turnt^^
away  from  us.  It  tells  how  money  is  v/oven  into
the  outer  fabric  of  our  cxislcnco.  Why  it  engages
the  best  thought  of  tiie  best  minds.    How  we  make


—48—


money.  How  to  recognize  opportunity.  How  t6
make  a  money  magnet  of  yourself.  How  to  get  the
necessary  Insight  to  perceive  and  utilize  opportuni-
ties. How  to  recognize  values.  It  tells  how  to  con-
vert an  idea  into  into  an  income,  how  to  make  a
direct  connection  with  the  Universal  mind,  how  to
eecure  practical  results;  in  fact,  it  t«lls  what  tlie
only  really  practical  thing  Is.


PART  TWENTY-TWD.

This  part  explains  the  cause  of  our  present  char-
acter, our  present  environment,  our  present  ability
our  present  physical  condition,  and  tells  how  we
can  make  our  future  \>  hat  we  wish  it  to  be.  It  ex-
plains how  the  vast  panorama  of  Nature  is  being
constantly  changed  by  simply  changing  the  rate  of
vibration.  It  tells  how  the  rate  of  vibration  is  be-
ing constantly  changed  in  our  bodies,  usually  un-
consciously and  often  with  detrimental  and  disas-
trous results,  it  tells  how  we  may  do  this  con-
sciously and  thus  bring  about  only  harmonious  and
salutary  conditions.  It  explains  that  the  Law  of
Health  is  based  on  the  law  of  vibration,  and  that
with  a  proper  knowledge  of  the  law  we  may  ex-
ternalize health  conditions,  it  explains  the  operation
of  this  law  and  how  it  is  being  more  generally  un-
derstood emd  appreciated,  and  how  many  phyeiciaas
are  now  giving:  the  matter  their  earnest  attention.


PART  TWENTY-THREE.

This  part  explains  how  we  may  come  into  pos-
session of  power  sufficient  to  meet  every  situation
which  may  arise  in  life.  It  explains  that  the  ability
to  eliminate  imperfect  conditions  depends  upon  men-
tal action.  It  explains  that  great  ideas  have  a  ten-
dency to  eliminate  smaller  ideas,  so  that  it  is  well
to  hold  ideas  which  are  large  enough  to  counteract
and  destroy  all  small  or  undesirable  tendencies.
This  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  success,  one  of  the  ac-
complishments of  the  Master  Mind.  It  explains  that
the  creative  energy  finds  no  more  difficulty  in  hand-
ling a  large  situation  than  a  small  one.  It  explains
how  conditions  are  produced  in  our  lives  by  the  pre-
dominant thoughts  which  we  entertain.  It  explains
how  you  may  set  causes  in  motion  which  will  create
an  irresistable  magnetic  power  which  will  bring  the
things  you  require  to  you.


—49—


PART  TWENTT-FOUlL


This  part  explains  tlie  entire  theory  and  practice
of  every  system  of  Metaphysics,  it  tells  how  to  ex-
press harmony,  how  to  express  health,  how  to  ex-
press abundance.  It  explains  the  nature  of  all  con-
ditions, and  how  they  may  be  changed  or  removed.
It  explains  how  every  difficulty,  no  matter  what  It
is  or  where  it  is,  can  be  removed  or  dissolved,  and
it  explains  the  only  way  in  which  this  Is  ever  done
or  can  be  done.  It  also  tells  of  a  Master  Key  by
which  those  who  are  wise  enough  to  understand,
broad  enough  to  weigh  the  evidence,  firm  enough
to  follow  their  own  judgment,  and  strong  enough
to  make  the  sacrifice  exacted,  may  enter  and  par-
take.


Washington,  D.  C.
January  11,  1918.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  there
are  very  few  people  in  the  world  today
capable  of  fully  realizing  the  impor-
tance of  the  truths  revealed  in  the
Master-Key  System  or  able  to  fully  ap-
preciate the  value  they  are  receiving.

Sincerely  yours,

F.  G.  WARDEN.


-50—


Welch,  W.  Va.,
Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,        March  8,  1919.

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  now  have  Part  24  of  the  Master-Key  Sys-
tem. Like  all  other  parts  or  lessons  of  this
beautiful  philosophy,  the  twenty-fourth  lesson
of  the  Master-Key  requires  the  keenest  of
thought.  It  is  the  outcome  of  the  profoundest
intellectuality.

In  seeking  a  true  conception  of  the  great
problems  of  life  and  death  I  have  been  think-
ing many  years.  I  have  read  and  re-read  the
soberest  hypotheses  on  this  great  and  interest-
ing question  which  is  now  agitating  the  minds
of  many  thoughtful  persons,  but  never  as  yet
have  I  read  anything  that  measures  up  to  the
Master-Key.

It  is  conclusive  enough  for  the  daring  think-
er. It  needs  no  change,  in  fact,  it  is  unchange-
able. No  normal  thinker  can  read  the  Master-
Key  without  being  thrilled  with  a  self-evidence
of  an  all-powerful  Master  Spirit  from  whom
all  things  preceed.

All  the  lessons  from  first  to  last  are  so  in-
tensely interesting  that  to  continually  read
them  has  been  my  chief  aim,  because  from
these  wonderful  lessons  I  get  permanent  joy
and  enthusiasm.

If  I  had  to  part  with  all  these  lessons  except
one,  I  would  retain  Part  24.  All  of  the  lessons
attain  to  the  zenith  in  truth  and  grandeur,  but
the  twenty-fourth  is  a  star  of  the  first  magni-
tude, the  sublimest  gem  of  all.  I  say  this  with-
out momentary  enthusiasm,  fiction,  exaggera-
tion, or  poetry.

Most  truly  yours,

W.  T.  FARLEY.

Box  528,


—51—


Washington,  D.  C,
February  15,  1918.

My  dear  Mr.  llaanel; —

There  are  so  many  beautiful  prin-
ciples in  your  grand  system,  ' '  The  Mas-
ter-Key," that  it  is  difficult  for  me  to
decide  where  to  begin  to  express  my
appreciation  and  gratefulness  for  a
knowledge  of  so  many  hitherto  unre-
vealed  truths.

The  apparent  impossibilities  are  the
very  things  that  help  us  to  realize  the
possible.  We  must  go  over  the  "un-
beaten trail  of  thought,"  cross  ''the
towering  mountain  of  ignorance,"
wade  through  the  "swamp  of  supersti-
tion," and  cross  "the  canyons  of  rites
and  ceremonies,"  if  we  ever  expect  to
come  in  possession  of  "the  promised
land  of  revelation."

No  system  that  I  have  come  in  con-
tact with,  removes  so  completely  from
the  mind,  ignorance  and  superstition,
and  thereby  lifts  humanity  out  of  the
''hollow  of  conventionalism,"  and
places  it  upon  the  "king's  highway  of
reason,"  as  your  Master-Key  System.
To  insist  upon  humanity  to  ' '  know  thy-
self" is  laudable,  but  to  tell  humanity
how,  is  inspiring.

If  this  letter  or  any  portion  of  it  will
be  helpful  to  any  student  or  anyone
contemplating  taking  this  grand  course
of  study,  you  are  at  liberty  to  use  it.
Gratefully  and  sincerely  yours,
JOHN  A.  BOSTIC,
61  Florida  Ave.,  N.  W.


—52—


Master  Key  Resume

BY

MRS  COE  DIXON


The  inscription  ''Know  Thyself,"  as  written
over  the  entrance  of  the  Temple  Delhi,  600  B.
C,  does  not  apply  to  the  Greeks,  alone,  but  is
a  command  to  every  man  and  every  woman
of  every  age.  It  is  written  over  the  door  of
each  living  temple,  not  as  a  decoration,  but
is  the  passport  into  the  city  beautiful.  Every
door  that  swings  ajar  from  ignorance  to  wis-
dom, from  lack  to  plenty,  from  death  to  life,
has  done  so  because  the  Master  of  the  House
has  found  the  Master-Key.

The  Master-Key  System  came  to  me  as  an
old  friend  who  had  returned  from  a  journey
that  I  was  about  to  embark  upon.  I  found
that  it  had  carefully  catalogued  and  pigeon-
holed the  great  points  of  interest  and  truth
of  life,  and  had  them  so  systematically  and
orderly  arranged,  that,  by  the  use  of  its  guide,
I  was  enabled  to  lay  my  hands  upon  an  "ever-
present  help"  in  the  darkest  night  of  indecision.

First,  I  was  given  a  trip  to  the  inner  power-
house, shown  how  to  connect  the  great  belt
to  the  Omnipotent.  Each  department  was  vis-
ited, its  heads,  sub-heads  and  down  to  each
little  messenger  gone  over  carefully.  Next
we  inspected  the  product  of  thought.  In  this
plant  the  first  output  is  the  perfect  product  of
health,  affluence  and  harmony.  This  trinity
is  a  thing  of  beauty  as  well  as  a  joy  forever.


—53—


Now  my  attention  was  directed  to  what  is
called  "seconds,"  having  the  appearance  of
the  real  only.  Here  I  found  limitation,  lack,
inharmony,  sickness,  etc.  My  benevolent
friend  also  displayed  for  my  benefit  the  ex-
orbitant sums  paid  for  the  "seconds"  when
the  real  is  offered  at  half  the  price.

The  Master-Key,  to  the  Master's  House  with-
in the  Master  Kingdom,  is  within  the  mind  of
every  man  or  woman.  The  Key  is  the  golden
privilege  of  "It  is  given  unto  you  to  know
the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom"  within.  The
wards  of  the  lock  are  so  fitted  that  they  open
to  the  positive,  spoken  word.  Within  the  palace
are  the  royal  purple,  fine  linen,  golden  sandals
and  signet  ring.  The  feast  of  the  fatted  calf
of  substance,  supply,  health  and  harmony  is
ready  and  waiting.  The  servants  smile  a  greet-
ing and  are  calmly  waiting,  ready  and  willing
to  serve  the  prodical  with  the  best.

Like  most  students,  I  found  that  as  I  reached
the  borders  of  the  Promised  Land,  I  still  held
husks  of  the  swine  herd  that  Fear  had  thrust
into  my  hands,  knowing  well  that  these  alone
would  keep  me  standing  without  until  the
feast  was  over  and  done.  But  a  recognition
of  the  need  of  the  meat  of  the  kingdom,  and
a  "I  WILL  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,"
brought  me  within  sight  of  the  mansion.  This
modicum  of  insight  was  the  impetus  or  "lamp"
unto  my  world-weary  feet,  and  so  I  pursued  my
journey  and  passed  on.

The  Master-Key  marks  well  tJio  guide  posts
of  the  by-roads  of  this  .jouniey.  Well  estab-
lished trade-marks  indicate  the  trutli  that  the
inner  guides  offer,  and  best  of  all  it  labels
boldly  the  "seconds,"  with  their  gaudy,  in-
ferior wares  and  fleeting  pleasures.


—54—


The  Spirit  of  Life,  the  Soul  and  man's  phys-
ical entity,  are  so  clearly  and  comprehensively
mapped  before  the  student,  that  he  is  soon
able  to  discern,  trace  and  describe  the  Circle.
Then  follows  the  meaning  of  the  mystic  num-
ber ''three"  and  "one"  as  centralization.  Here
he  learns  that  life  is  one  great  verse  of  joy
and  interest,  and  that  he,  Man,  is  the  very
epilo]ne  of  it  all.

The  Master-Key  not  only  introduces  man  to
himself,  but  shows  him  his  source,  his  relatives
and  friends.  It  places  within  his  hands  the
mighty  field-glass  that  searches  out  the  loca-
tion of  the  camps,  trenches  and  movements  of
the  enemy,  "Ignorance."  "Within  this  train-
ing camp  of  the  "Key  system  he  is  taught
how  to  set  up  a  station  that  is  correctly  attuned
to  that  of  his  great  Commander-in-Chief,  ' '  Uni-
versal Mind."  Here  he  is  trained  to  concen-
trate his  army  of  constructive  thoughts,  how
to  move  and  flank  them  as  one  great,  living
unit  upon  the  outer  field  of  the  affairs  of  daily
life,  and  to  finally  come  "over  the  top"  of
what  appeared,  before  his  matriculation,  as
formidable  and  undoable.  Now  he  is  beyond
the  caviling  voices  from  the  outer  lines,  and
from  the  hill-top  of  "T  AM,"  he  find  that  "over
there"  is  not  an  idle  hymn,  that  lulls  and  as-
phixiates  the  soul,  but  is  the  God  conscious-
ness beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Egyptians
that  have  so  long  held  him  captive,  working
for  them  in  the  bricks  and  mortar  of  sense.
Hark !  For  now  there  is  wafted  to  his  ears
the  battle  hymn  of  "Peace,"  and  it  issues
from  the  tliroats  of  the  all  mighty  army  of
"Righteousness"  the  universal  company,  so
he  joins  in  Henley's —


—55—


''It  matters  not  how  straight  the  gate,
IIow  charged  with  punishment  the  scroll,
I  AM  the  Master  of  my  fate,
I  AM  the  Captain  of  my  soul."

And  all  of  this  wonderful  legacy  came  to
him  because  he  was  teachable  and  willing  to
accept  it.  Willing  to  discard  the  old,  effete
ideas;  willing  to  put  on  the  new  robe  that
was  better  fitted  to  the  needs  of  the  day,  and
as  he  looks  over  its  beauty  and  quality,  he  dis-
covers it  to  be  a  seamless  garment.  There  is
nothing  about  it  that  will  rip,  ravel,  rend  or
rot,  and  he  sees,  too,  that  it  symbolizes  a  one-
ness.

One  beautiful  point  of  the  many  in  this
System  is  this:  A  quiet,  gentle  hand  draws
aside  the  dull,  thick  curtain  of  wonderment
and  doubt  long  enough  for  the  student  to
come  face  to  face  with  the  ''CREATOR."  Now
he  is  SURE  that  the  Creator  and  the  thing
created  are  concommitant.  This  has  too  long
been  a  great,  dark,  empty  void.  Too  long  we
have  been  taught  to  look  to  the  without  rather
than  the  within  for  this  "I  AM."  For  time
immemorable  we  have  listened  to  the  "no  man
hath  seen  the  face  of  God."  Thanks  to  the
Good  Samaritan,  whose  kindly  hand  has  lifted
our  drooped  head  and  assisted  us  into  the
light,  for  here  we  see  that  "He  is  Light."

How  according  to  the  old  familiar  teaching
it  all  reasons  out.  For  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven
was  located  within.  The  Secret  Place  of  the
Most  High  must  then  be  the  throne  room.  Oh,
the  wonder  of  this  great  world  of  wealth  un-
told within  every  man.  As  we  go  on  up,  up,  up,
to  the  topmost  pinnacle  of  the  Temple,  to  the
centerage  of  that  brain  which  overhangs  the


—56—


others  like  a  veil  of  a  beautiful  trailing  garden,
we  are  able  to  view  all  of  the  kingdoms  of
the  earth,  and  to  give  them  a  correct  estima-
tion. Because  we  are  now  one  with  the  law,
we  realize  that  it  does  not  pay  to  worship
at  the  shrine  of  anything  less  than  the  Uni-
versal.

So  we  turn  to  the  Key  or  Code,  the  Truth
or  inner  guide.  Here  is  Concentration,  Ideal-
ization, Visualization;  this  well  obeyed  trinity
calls  forth  a  ''this  is  my  beloved  son  in  whom
I  AM  well  pleased."

Truly  the  Master-Key  is  the  Key-Stone,  the
Chief  Head  of  the  Corner  Stone,  in  which  suc-
cess in  all  things  is  layed.  Spell  it  however
we  may,  in  the  CAPITAL  LETTERS  of  a  cap-
ital idea,  or  in  the  outer  form  of  SUCCESS — it
is  one  and  the  same.


Dear  Mr.  Haanel :
St.  Louis,  Mo.


January  9,  1919.
Racine,  Wis.,
734  College  Ave.


I  wish  to  express  to  you  my  heart-felt
thanks  for  the  privilege  of  becoming  ac-
quainted with  the  most  wonderful  teaching
that  was  ever  conceived.

Much  indeed  has  been  written  in  regard  to
the  millennium,  and  the  return  to  the  gates
of  Paradise,  but  it  remained  for  you  to  pro-
duce with  the  tool  of  thought  a  Master-Key
wherewith  all  might  enter  and  enjoy  its  un-
limited beauties.

With  kindest  wishes,  I  remain,
Yours  sincerely,

PETER  J.  MUEHR.


—57—


Appreciations

The  letters  which  are  being  received  in
every  mail  from  enthusiastic  and  delighted
students,  indicate  that  The  Master-Key  System
is  appreciated,  in  fact  we  know  of  no  other
educational  system  Vvhich  ever  received  so
many  enthusiastic  and  hearty  endorsements
in  such  a  short  space  of  time.  They  come  from
everywhere  and  everyone,  lawyers,  ministers,
teachers,  clerks,  mechanics,  housewives;  and
they  tell  of  renewed  health,  increased  vigor,
added  finances,  additional  courage,  hope  and
inspiration,  they  tell  of  the  destruction  of  fear,
anxiety,  worry,  and  every  other  form  of  dis-
tress, physical,  mental  and  environme'ntal.

The  letters  reproduced  in  the  following
pages,  have  been  selected  from  a  very  large
number,  and  are  published  by  special  permis-
sion, but  if  the  reader  could  see  the  hundreds
of  letters  which  are  being  received  every  day,
all  the  time,  he  would  admit  that  they  are  a
most  remarkabh^  revelation  of  the  extraordin-
ary benefits  being  derived  by  students  of  The
Master-Key  System.


—58—


CHARLES  FULTON  OURSLER

PRESS  REPRESENTATIVE


New  York,  N.  Y.,
May  15,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

Ever  since  I  have  been  old  enough  to  read
I  have  been  reading  occult  and  metaphysical
literature.  I  have  waded  ears  deep  through  the
books  from  all  ages,  all  lands,  all  schools.

I  have  rejected  tons  of  lies,  oceans  of  mis-
conceptions, an  entire  universe  of  false  deduc-
tions.

I  have  found  grains  of  truth  in  inines  of  fol-
ly, and  worlds  of  truth  in  a  single  grain.  The
pursuit  was  interesting  in  itself,  and  I  do  not
regret  the  time  spent  upon  it.  But  it  was  a
genuine  surprise  to  read  your  Master-Key  Sys-
tem and  find  within  the  essence  of  all  that  I  had
read,  with  much  more  added  thereto.

In  this  extraordinary  system  you  have  sifted
the  true  from  the  false;  you  have  given  in
concrete  form  all  that  is  worth  while  in  many
schools  of  philosophy.

You  have  placed  arcane  truths  into  the  hands
of  the  uninitiated  as  weapons  they  can  learn
to  use  without  danger  to  themselves.  I  con-
gratulate you.  You  are  doing  mankind  a  serv-
ice.

Yours  very  sincerely,

CHARLES  P.  OURSLER,
501  Fifth  Avenue,


—59—


FREDERICK  W.  COLLINS,  D.  C.  Ph.,  C.

IRODOLOGIST.       CONSULTING  CHIROPRACTOR.
Astor  Court  Building.  Room  32,  18  W.  34  th  St.

New  York,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  14,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

I  am  pleased  with  your  ''Master-Key  Sys-
tem." I  have  read  the  Yogi  Philosophy
Blavatski,  Koran,  Babbit  and  studied  all  the
beautiful  works  on  the  developments  of  the
mind,  but  never  have  I  read  or  studied  any
book  or  lessons  that  have  made  me  come  into
a  realization  of  the  "I"  as  explained  in  the
Master-Key.  To  a  novice  these  lessons  are
a  revelation.

I  call  myself  a  successful  man,  but  with  the
new  instruction  I  will  double  the  work  with
better  efficiency  than  in  the  past.  I  was  the
founder  of  the  famous  New  Jersey  College  of
Chiropractic,  I  am  a  student  of  nature,  an
author,  lecturer  and  teacher,  and  at  every  op-
portunity to  the  students  of  the  Chiropractic
University  of  New  York,  where  I  am  now
lecturing,  I  shall  recommend  that  they  take
your  course.

It  will  make  them  self-reliant  and  will  teach
them  to  build  up  a  practice  as  no  other  course
in  psychology  will.

You  have  struck  the  key-note,  it  is  in  truth
"The  Master-Key."

You  have  my  permission  to  use  this.  I
want  to  help  spread  this  noble  work.  Thank-
ing you,  I  am.

Sincerely  yours

DR.  F.  W.  COLLINS.


—60—


145  Western  Avenue,
Muskegon,  Mich.,
October  19,  1918.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:—

I  have  been  a  very  close  student  for  the  past
thirty  years.  During  this  period  I  have  read
every  conceivable  kind  of  work  along  Psycho-
logical, Metaphysical  and  Theosophical  lines.
In  these  I  found  much  to  think  about.  But  my
past  reading  has  been  as  child's  play  compared
to  what  I  have  found  locked  in  the  wisdom
vaul  of  the  Master-Key.  Never  have  I  read
such  apparent  revelations  of  the  Divine  mech-
anism of  the  world  within.

Although  I  have  received  only  up  to  the
sixth  part,  yet  this  has  revealed  to  me — myself,
showing  that  my  limit  of  accomplishment  is
marked  only  by  the  limit  of  the  Infinite.  I  now
know  that  I  am  a  unit  of  that  grand  integral
known  as  the  Universal  Mind.  That  ''I  can  be
what  I  will  to  be,"  if  I  know  how,  and  the  Mas-
ter-Key certainly  shows  one  how.

Hereafter  I  shall  never  dread  the  future  nor
balk  at  life-problems.  I  shall  go  ' '  over  the  top ' '
with  a  vim  creditable  only  to  a  student  of
the  Master-Key.

The  Master-Key  System  should  be  in  the
curriculum  of  every  school  and  college  through-
out the  entire  world.

I  would  write  you  more ;  but  the  Master-Key
has  carried  my  mind  away  on  a  visit  to  the
world  within,  to  which  hitherto  I  have  been  a
stranger,  and  the  enjoyment  is  simply  indes-
cribable.

Yours  sincerelv,

J.  F.  FOWLER.


—  61—


Deep  creek  railroad  co.

WENDOVER,  UTAH.


Wendover,  Utah,  July  15,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  finished  Part  24,  of  the  Master-
Key  System  and  feel  constrained  to  say:
Surely  the  majority  have  been  lying  too  long
in  the  tomb  of  material  thought.

I  have  only  begun  to  realize  what  it  means
because  the  Master-Key  System  is  so  simple
in  its  way  of  opening  the  great  door,  which
had  seemed  impossible  prior  to  taking  up  the
study.

The  Master-Key  System  makes  me  feel  the
world  is  better  because  we  have  lived  in  it  and
are  living  in  it.  I  congratulate  everyone  who
has  become  acquainted  with  the  Master-Key
System,  as  it  opens  the  way  for  those  who
have  the  desire  without  the  attractive  force
which  sets  the  current  in  motion.

I  have  learned  to  ignore  fear  because  Truth
is  fearless.  The  finding  of  Truth  is  the  dis-
covery of  harmony,  because  it  is  the  escape
into  reality  out  of  the  discordant  conditions  of
human  beliefs.

The  application  of  the  Master-Key  System
is  solving  my  problem,  which  is  in  the  busi-
ness realm,  and  is  Avorking  wonders  for  me,
so  to  speak,  and  naturally  I  am  very  thank-
ful for  the  evidence  of  the  working  of  the
law,  which  will  surely  accomplish  other  re-
sults the  same  as  it  did  this  one.

Yours  sincerely,

J.  G.  HALLERAN.


— G2—


THE  PENN  MUTUAL  LIFE  INSURANCE
COMPANY


PHILADELPHIA,  PA.

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Aug.  19,  1918.
Dear.  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  indeed  enjoyed  the  course  of  study
very  much  and  it  has  been  of  great  assistance
to  me.  My  outlook  upon  life  has  been  broad-
ened, my  point  of  yiew  enlarged,  and  my
knowledge  of  truth  multiplied  many  times.
However,  a  statement  of  the  sum  total  of
benefit  received  from  these  lessons  is  nearly
impossible  to  make,  inasmuch  as  this  benefit
entails  practically  a  reconstruction  of  my  en-
tire life  and  thought.  On  account  of  great
difficulty  in  assimilating  radically  new  ideas,
I  have  not  kept  pace  with  the  lessons  even
with  a  week  between  them.  But  I  can  say  to
you  that  they  have  given  me  a  foothold  upon
the  everlasting  hills  which  will  one  day  bring
me  to  the  summit  of  the  peak.

^'ou  are  opening  tne  doors  of  a  new  ana
wonderful  life  to  many,  giving  them  in  under-
standable terms  the  wisdom  of  all  the  ages.
We  have  had  many  to  tell  us  what  to  do,  but
you  tell  us  also  how  to  do  it.  May  you  con-
tinue and  prosper,  and  my  best  wish  for  my
fellow  beings  is  that  they  listen  to  you  and
take  the  lesson  to  heart.

With  all  best  washes  and  many  thanks  for
the  Koy  which  your  helpful  and  brotherly
hand  has  slipped  into  mine  in  passing,  I  am,
Cordially  and  sincerely  yours,

JOHN  MUNROE.


—63—


JOHN  I.  KARAS

Laundry,  Dyers'  and  Dry  Cleaners'  Supplies
152  FEr<R/  STREET


Troy,  N.  Y.,  Sept,  13,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  finished  Part  Five  of  your
"Master-Key"  instructions  and  inclose  the
answers.  Through  the  impulse  of  gratitude
for  the  benefit  derived  from  the  first  five  in-
structions taken,  I  heartily  recommend  your
"Master-Key"  not  only  to  the  young  men  but
also  to  the  (young)  old  men  who  may,  and
most  of  them  do,  think  it  is  too  late  to  begin
life  anew.

I  have  always  been  a  thinker,  but  I  found
out  through  your  "Master-Key"  as  far  as  I
am  today,  that  there  is  a  wide  difference  be-
tween only  thinking  and  in  directing  your
thoughts  consciously,  systematically  and  con-
structively.

I  just  passed  56  years  of  what  I  call  a  con-
tinuous struggle  of  anxieties  and  fear  of
future  complication,  etc.,  as  I  had  been  chang-
ing only  conditions,  as  you  truthfully  state  in
your  "Master-Key,"  instead  of  changing  the
cause.

Today,  with  only  five  instructions  of  your
"Master-Key,"  I  am  an  entirely  different
man,  no  fear,  no  anxiety,  well  and  happy,
healthier,  wealthier  and  happier  than  ever  be-
fore in  my  life.

Truly  yours,

JOHN  I.  KARAS.


—64—


Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  July  18,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

I  have  received  the  fourth  part  of  the
Master-Key.  I  am  a  student  of  Psychic  Science
and  so  far  your  course  contains  the  mental
food  which  I  have  studied,  but  wonderfully
shaped  and  outlined,  for  which  I  can  give  you
my  most  sincere  credit.

I  am  sending  you  six  names  of  highly  re-
fined men.  I  hope  that  they  will  be  interested
in  your  wonderful  work.  You  will  find  a  true
friend  in  me  at  all  times  because  you  deserve
the  friendship  of  every  forward  thinking  man.

The  trouble  with  the  majority  of  people  is
a  lack  of  sufficient  confidence  in  themselves.
They  do  not  recognize  their  power.  A  new
self-consciousness  needs  to  be  awakened  in
them.  The  great  majority  of  people  ar  incap-
able of  thinking  and  reasoning  for  themselves.
They  are  governed  by  fear  and  ruled  by  emo-
tion. Others  go  through  life  in  a  dream-like
mental  condition.

It  is  your  wonderful  system  that  will  awaken
and  develop  and  encourage  every  bodily  cell
to  increased  function  in  those  that  understand
the  value  of  your  work  and  follow  your  in-
structions. I  recommend  the  Master-Key,  to
every  red-blooded,  forward  thinking  man  and
woman.

Wishing  you  the  greatest  success,  I  am,
Very  respectfully  and  sincerely  yours,
DR.  S.  J.  BRENNER.

220  Cheyenne  Ave.


—65—


Bartley,  Neb.,  May  30,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  finished  the  study  of  Part  24
of  the  Master-Key.  I  found  it  to  be  a  wonder-
ful exposition  of  Truth  and  to  be  very  inspir-
ing and  uplifting.

As  I  studied  each  part  I  would  think  that
the  one  just  mastered  was  certainly  the  best
one  of  the  series,  but  I  find  that  each  one  is
the  best;  comparisons  would  be  invidious.
Each  part  fills  its  own  niche  and  fills  it  per-
pectly.

I  have  studied  metaphysics  for  20  years,  but
I  have  never  found  a  greater  "Multum  in
parvo"  than  the  Master-Key  is,  and  it  does  its
work  perfectly.

When  I  commenced  its  study  I  adopted  the
monthly  payment  plan,  as,  owing  to  having
been  mixed  up  with  others  in  some  business
affairs  that  turned  out  unprofitably,  I  felt  that
plan  was  the  only  one  open  to  me.  However,
during  the  course  of  the  study  of  the  Master-
Key  the  business  outlook  has  cleared  up  won-
derfully and  I  am  rapidly  getting  clear  of
financial  entanglements.

Sincerely  yours,

J.  FLETCHER.


—66—


Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Oct.  9,  191B.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

It  is  with  genuine  regret  that  I  have  reached
the  last  lesson  in  the  "Master-Key"  and  I
feel  I  must  write  and  tell  you  how  very  much
benefit  and  help  I  have  received  from  the
study  of  the  same.

To  me  the  best  of  any  System  is  its  prac-
ticability in  one's  daily  life.  In  this  respect
the  "Master-Key"  is  the  Peer  of  any  system
of  Metaphysics  I  have  ever  come  across.

I  have  tested  its  principles  daily  in  my  own
case  and  notJiing  is  more  certain,  than  that
whosoever  studies  faithfully  and  dilligently
its  teachings,  is  sure  to  receive  lasting  benefit,
great  uplift  and  a  gradual  consciousness  of
unlimited  potentialities.

You  teach  "how  to  think"  so  that  one  may
receive  the  best  obtainable  out  of  Life.  In
this  particular  your  "Master-Key  System"  is
unique  and  in  a  class  by  itself.  I  have  recom-
mended it  to  all  seekers  after  "Truth"  and
you  can  depend  upon  me  to  do  what  I  can  in
making  its  "value"  known.

Wishing  you  all  success,

Very  cordially  yours,

DAVID  ROSS.


—67-


THE  NORTH  CAROLINA  STATE  NORMAL
AND  INDUSTRIAL  COLLEGE.
Gf<EENSB0RO.  N.  C.


January  9,  1919.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:
St.  Louis,  Mo.

As  a  benefit  to  mankind  and  a  reward  to  you
in  the  coming  New  Year  I  wish  that  the  whole
world  could  have  the  truth  you  are  teaching
in  your  wonderful  course.  The  cost  of  the
course  is  too  small  to  consider,  even  in  close
circumstances,  if  one  wishes  to  live  a  full  life
and  be  a  povvcr  in  the  World's  Work.

No  doubt  you  have  felt  that  my  progress  is
slow,  and  necessarily  it  has  been,  because  I  had
to  build  my  tools  for  the  greater  part  of  my
work.  However,  I  am  beginning  to  see  a  won-
derful light.  My  life  would  have  meant  in-
finitely more  to  the  world  if  I  had  known  its
value  sooner.  Your  crown  will  be  filled  with
bright  stars!

I  am  in  receipt,  this  morning,  of  an  appoint-
ment for  Federal  Service  which  is  a  direct
manifestation  of  a  part  of  the  ideal  I  am  hold-
ing in  mind  for  the  present  needs  of  my  State
in  meeting  the  great  world  emergency.  The
remainder  will  come.

I  thank  you  with  profound  gratitude  for
your  teaching.

Sincerely  yours,

MINNIE  Ij.  JAMISON.


5712  Catherine  St,
Philadelphia,  Pa.,
Dec.  20,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Part  three  of  the  Master-Key  System  re-
ceived a  few  days  ago,  and  I  want  to  express
my  sincere  admiration  of  the  simplicity  of
your  lessons.

I  have  always  been  a  diligent  seeker  after
the  Truth,  but  have  been  grovelling  in  dark-
ness for  many  years,  and  it  seemed  that  the
more  I  read  the  more  hopelessly  involved  I
became.

If  the  remaining  lessons  are  nearly  as  good
as  the  first  three,  there  is  a  tremendous  amount
of  pleasure  and  profit  awaiting  me,  for  I  have
already  had  m.any  thrills  of  joy,  as  one  after
another  of  perplexing  difficulties  have  van-
ished, as  the  mist  beneath  the  sun.

Many  important  truths  that  have  hitherto
been  mysterious  to  me,  are  now  unfolding
themselves  in  my  mind,  and  the  joy  experi-
enced in  the  unfoldment  is  inexpressible.

If  there  is  any  way  I  can  assist  you  in  dis-
seminating these  wonderful  revelations,  I  am
at  your  service,  for  I  want  all  to  know  the
supreme  blessings  that  are  now  mine  through
your  assistance.

If  this  letter  will  assist  you  in  getting  just
one  person  to  take  up  your  splendid  course,
I  shall  feel  delighted;  as  happiness  such  as
this  is  too  great  to  keep  to  oneself.

Yours  very  sincerely,

GEORGE  A.  PETTITT.


—69—


800  Massachusetts  Ave.
Haileyburg,  Ont.,  Canada,
Nov.  22,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  am  enjoying  the  Master-Key  lessons  very
much.  In  fact,  they  constitute  the  greatest
source  of  real  pleasure  I  have  yet  experienced
in  this  weary  world.

They  are  the  answer  to  a  hunger  and  thirst
I  have  known  all  my  life.  And  possibly  they
are  the  "more  light"  that  many  believe  to  be
now  due.

When  I  am  preparing  my  answers  T  feel
like  a  miner  searching  for  rare  gems  and  the
2CV  of  getting  what  I  feel  is  tlie  correct  one
aiid  thus  getting  a  glim])se  of  Truth  is  indeed
pure  pleasure.

From  the  first  lessons  the  thouglit  hns  been
with  me  constantly— surely  this  is  the  Master's
teachings,  only  stated  in  modern  scientific
form,  that  we  of  this  day  and  generation  may
understand.

You  have  solved  tlse  riddle  oF  life  and  put
it  into  language  and  foi-m  tliat  :dl  who  so
desire  may  understand  it.

Grateful] V  and  sineoi-ely  yours,

EDA  E.  SMITH.


Cambridge,  Mass.,  Oct.  3,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

I  do  not  know  of  any  language — I  speak,
read  and  write  several — that  has  words  which
fittingly  could  explain  the  feelings  that  the
first  lesson  of  your  "Master 'Key"  has  aroused
in  me.  I  seem  to  undergo  an  internal  revolu-
tion. Such  words  I  heretofore  found  in  the
dictionary  only,  but  never,  never  in  such
sentences  with  such  enormous  meaning.

I  always  knew  that  there  was  something
about  which  I  was  in  absolute  ignorance  and
what  this  "something"  was  I  now  begin  to
know.   Eureka !

I  often  asked  men  that  had  made  a  success,
starting  with  nothing,  as  it  were,  how  they
accomplished  their  success  but  they  never
found  time  to  tell  me,  possibly  they  could  not
account  for  it  themselves.

As  for  me,  life  appears  to  me  in  an  entirely
different  light  and  with  the  help  of  the
"Master-Key,"  I  am  going  to  follow  the  short
cut  to  success.

Yours  most  truly,

L.  LEONARD.


530  Fifth  Ave.,  Ncav  York  City,
Oct.  31,  1918.


Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Efficient  Leadership  is  the  demand  of  the
lionr:  such  is  your  leadership  in  the  Master-
Key  System  of  which  you  are  the  controlling
force.

Your  System  is  so  grand,  so  vitally  inspir-
ing, so  powerful  as  an  impetus,  that  words
seem  inadequate  to  give  a  due  need  of  praise
for  your  work  so  faithfully  and  skillfully  ac-
complished.

•    It  is  indeed  an  invaluable  grasp  upon  lite:
a  line  of  thought  which  is  a  Kevelation,  a
Criterion  and  an  inspiration  for  those  you  in-
struct. .  1  -,
As  a  student  of  Oxford  University,  England,
a  matriculant  of  Columbia  University,  New
York  City,  it  is  equally  a  pleasure  and  a  duty
to  add  these  words  to  the  many  encomiums  you
have  already  received  from  grateful  students.
Cordially,
MTEIAM  MORGAN  GREELEY,


—72-


Mansfield,  Mass.,  April  17,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Not  having  had  the  advantage  of  more  than
a  grammar  school  education,  and  never  hav-
ing read  of  or  studied  the  possibilities  of
psychology  in  its  relation  to  every  day  life
and  affairs,  your  system  has  opened  and
awakened  a  new  set  of  brain  cells.

I  want  to  say  to  you  that  after  living  thirty-
three  years  in  ignorance,  and  consequently  in
mis-directing  my  energies,  I  realize  fully  that
I  cannot  perform  the  miracle  of  changing  my
conditions  over  night.

Therefore  I  have  been  careful  in  knowing
w^hat  to  attempt.  My  health  demanded  my
first  consideration,  and  I  have  directed  my
thought  to  that  subject,  with  the  astonishing
result  that  my  conditions  no  longer  bother  me.

And  you  can  readily  understand  that  a  per-
son's health  must  be  all  right  if  he  can  for-
get about  it.  Such  has  been  my  first  experi-
ence as  a  direct  result  of  constructive  think-
ing as  taught  by  your  System.

Eespectfully  yours,

S.  ARTHUR  DOUCETTE.


—73—


Chicago,  111.,  May  16,  1918.


Dear  Mr.  Ilaanel:  ^

Many  sciences  and  ologies  have  I  studied,
partly  to  satisfy  my  curiosity,  and  partly  to
progress  not  only  financially,  but  intellectual-
ly and  spiritually,  and  while  I  added  to  my
knowledge  and  broadened  my  outlook  on  life,
it  seems  there  was  always  a  desire  for  more
information.

But  since  I  read  the  Master-Key  I  know
that  was  what  I  had  been  seeking  these  many
years.  The  Master-Key  System  is  the  best,
most  concise,  scientific  exposition  of  cause  and
effect  of  thought  that  I  have  ever  read — and
I  know  the  law  works,  for  I  have  experienced
it  often,  mostly  unconsciously;  sometimes  con-
sciously.

But  the  Master-Key  System  explained  the
hov/,  why  and  w^herefore  and  gives  one  a  firm
foothold  on  the  road  of  life  and  is  the  open
''Sesame"  to  all  there  is  in  the  store-house
of  the  world  within.  I  certainly  appreciate
the  wealth  of  knov^rledge  the  Master-Key  has
opened  to  me.

Yours  very  truly,
MRS.  DORA  CARPENSTEIN.


3019  N.  Clark  St.


345  St.  John's  Place,
Brooklyn,  New  York,
April  24,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:  -

The  vista  of  Truth  which  this  "Master-Key
System"  reveals,  is  beyond  any  ordinary
powers  of  expression.

Tliere  was  never  a  time  in  the  history  of
Uie  world  when  the  faculty  of  Thought  was
III  jre  urgently  required,  both  for  the  individual,
and  for  the  masses;  and  when  each  individual
learns  to  think  aright,  the  whole  world  will
be  governed  by  right  thought.

The  Master-Key  opens  the  way  and  fur-
nishes the  infallible  guide.  Through  the  ap-
plication of  the  principles  of  this  *'Key,"  one
can  change  not  only  his  or  her  whole  environ-
ment; but  the  entire  being,  physical,  mental
and  spiritual.  Verily,  it  is  true  that  "I  can
be  what  I  will  to  be."

I  have  been  a  student  along  psychological
and  metaphysical  lines  for  several  years;  but
I  have  never  found  anything  which  appealed
to  me  as  so  entirely  practical,  applicable,  and
efficient  as  your  teachings.  If  anything  I
can  say  or  write  will  be  of  service  at  any
time,  I  shall  be  more  than  glad  to  give  any
information  in  my  power  to  that  end.

AVith  a  most  hearty  and  sincere  desire  to
aid,  if  I  can,  in  your  success,  and  in  the  pro-
mulgation of  the  Truth  you  are  teaching,  I
am,

Faithfully  yours,

HONORE  HORTON.


THE  ROYBER  MERCANTILE  AGENCY

{Meiiihrr  11/  Hir  Anirriran  CoUrclion  Sni'ice)

Collections  and  Adjustments  Everywhere
Office,  827  Main  Street

Vallejo,  Calif.,  Sept.  12,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  IIaanel:-v

I  had  hardly  finished  the  course,  when  the
most  severe  trial  of  my  life,  that  shook  the
very  foundation  of  my  faith,  undertook  me,
so  that  I  might  prove  the  depth  of  my  soul's
wisdom.  I  believe  I  have  stood  the  test  com-
pletely and  am  convinced  that  I  owe  much  of
the  broader  and  deeper  vision  of  life,  to  the
study  of  the  ''Master-Key."

Your  course  has  indeed  been  a  revelation
to  me  and  pointed  the  path  to  a  practical  ap-
plication of  those  works  of  wonder,  any  stu-
dent of  psycholog-y  is  familiar  with,  but
familiar  only  in  theory.  I  now  know  from
actual  experience  that  the  ''I"  is  indeed  a
spirit  of  godlike  power.

To  ''Know  Thyself"  will  be  the  slogan  I
shall  follow,  because  I  believe  I  have  hardly
scratched  the  mine  of  knowledge,  but  with
the  help  of  your  wonderful  directions  I  mean
to  dig  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  pleasures
of  the  Unseen.

With  many  thanks  and  wishing  you  every
success.

Very  sincerely  yours,

T.  E.  KOYBER.

P.  S.  If  this  letter  can  be  of  any  use  to  you,
please  employ  in  any  way  you  gee  fit.


—76—


338  Main  St.,  East,
Rock  Hill,  S.  C,
July  7,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Each  lesson  is  such  an  unfoldment  of  beauty
and  the  perfect  relation  of  the  exquisite  parts
of  a  harmonious  and  complex  whole,  that  each
seems  to  have  an  individual  life — almost  or
quite  as  if  it  would  suffer  under  rough  treat-
ment.

These  lessons  ''grow  in  grace,"  they  become
more  beautiful,  more  helpful,  more  illuminat-
ing and,  may  I  add,  they  are  to  me  becoming
more  simple.  Where  at  first  I  was  afraid  of
some  species  of  new  'ism  I  find  a  beautiful
presentation  of  the  old  Truth.  That  gospel
which  has  been  so  twisted  and  warped  by  ma-
terial intellectuality — so  buried  by  false  prem
ises  that  it  has  taken  a  world  cataclysm  to
bring  it  once  more  to  the  attention  of  Man-
kind.

During  the  last  week  an  opportunity  pre-
sented itself  to  me  and  I  had  the  courage  to
grasp  it,  which  I  am  convinced  was  the  direct
result  of  my  study  of  the  system — which  is
in  truili  the  Master-Key.

]\IRS.  HAERIET  FAIRFIELD.


Boston,  Mass.,

10  Cumberland  St.,

Dec.  27,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

For  fifteen  years,  I  have  been  unfolding  to
these  higher  laws.  I  use  the  word  unfolding,
because  I  have  had  to  find  my  answer  sub-
jectively. It  is  the  custom  of  the  Masters  to
wrap  these  Truths  about  with  the  winding
sheet  of  metaphor  to  confound  and  mystify.
That  it  is  wise  we  know,  for  only  to  those  who
are  worthy  to  discover  will  the  sacred  teach-
ings be  revealed.

I  appreciate  the  concise,  clear-cut  style  in
which  you  have  given  these  laws,  and  look
forward  to  the  coming  ones  with  keen  pleas-
ure.

It  will  give  me  great  pleasure  to  place  these
in  the  hands  of  many  whom  I  know  are  flound-
ering about  amidst  the  uncertainties  of  the
metaphysical  dogma  of  the  past.

Through  these  lessons  I  have  found  the
secret  of  application,  and  the  result  has  been
so  miraculous  I  can  hardly  believe  it  to  be
true.  Like  many  others,  I  have,  in  order  to
solve  esoteric  truths,  given  myself  over  to  sub-
jective states  so  that  my  objective  senses  have
become  inert,  and  the  material  things  of  life
have  slipped  away.

I  woke  up  about  three  months  ago  to  this
fact  and  realized  the  w^onder  and  beauty  of
the  objective  life  and  that  to  raise  it  to  its
highest  expression  was  our  lesson  on  this  plane.
Therefore  you  can  know  how  opportune  these
teachings  are.  Yet  it  is  ever  so,  and  the
Masters  are  ever  ready  to  guide  us  when  we
are  ready  to  be  guided.

Yours  fraternally,
MRS.  HARRIET  DAWSON.


—78—


1303  4th  Ave.,
Eock  Island,  111.,
Sept.  12,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  received  part  seventeen  of  the
* 'Master-Key."  It  certainly  is  a  Master-Key,
which  will  surely  unlock  any  door  of  Wis-
dom and  Power  ever  dreamed  of.

In  my  opinion  the  "Master-Key"  should  be
taught  in  every  school  in  the  world.  The  ef-
fect would  be  that  all  worry,  fear,  disease  and
poverty  would  disappear  from  the  Earth,  and
at  last  the  real  Paradise  would  be  here.

I  just  received  a  letter  from  one  of  my
friends  in  Kalamazoo,  Michigan,  who  took  your
course  through  my  advice.  Here  is  what  he
writes:  "I  am  much  interested  in  the  Master-
Key  and  am  certainly  becoming  more  interested
all  the  time.  I  feel  obliged  to  you,  because
you  induced  me  to  take  this  course  of  lessons.
I  have  been  a  student  of  Psychology  for  a
number  of  years,  but  I  never  before  attempted
to  put  these  things  into  practice,  as  I  have,
since  receiving  these  lessons."

I  know  from  my  experience  that  the  Master-
Key  can  solve  any  problem  in  life,  if  applied
right.  I  believe  the  trouble  with  most  stu-
dents is,  they  give  too  much  attention  of  ex-
ternal conditions,  the  World  without.

Please,  Mr.  Haanel,  send  me  a  few  ''Master-
Key"  pamphlets  with  which  I  can  help  to
spread  this  wonderful  truth,  which  really  is
the  greatest  discovery  of  the  20th  century.
Yours  sincerely,

W.  CZAJKA.


—79—


THE  WARD  SYSTEM


Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  Doc.  IG,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  tlie  ''Master-Key"  system,  up  to  and
including  Part  8,  and  it  affords  me  great  pleas-
ure, to  acclaim — without  the  slightest  reser-
vation, that  the  "Master-Key  System"  has  no
equal,  as  a  means  of  imparting  practical,  work-
a-day  knowledge,  to  a  much  confused  people.

In  the  ''Master-Key"  you  have  arranged  in
a  condensed  form,  the  very  essence  of  truth —
as  taught  by  all  great  philosophers  from  the
daAvn  of  civilization.  I  care  not  what  one's
education  and  opportunities  have  been — the
great  truths  set  forth  in  the  "Master-Key  Sys-
tem"— will  add  immeasurably  to  his  store  of
knowledge.

Unlike  any  other  system  of  which  I  know,
you  proceed  at  once  to  the  real,  and  only  way
to  become  conscious  of  "ultimate  truth."  You
have  lifted  the  veil  of  ancient  and  modern
mysteries,  and  placed  the  scepter  of  knowledge
within  easy  reach  of  all  who  desire  to  be  master
of  their  own  destiny.

Ignorance,  superstition  and  fear  is  being
banished  from  the  world;  and  man  is  at  last
"free."

In  this  great  work  of  blessings,  know  that
my  best  thoughts  are  with  you.  If  at  any
time  you  feel  that  my  opinion  of  the  "Master-
Key"  might  be  the  means  of  bringing  the
"light"  to  a  benighted  soul — do  not  hesitate
to  quote  me.  I  have  already  interested  some
of  my  friends,  and  shall  continue  my  eff'orts.
Cordially  yours,

DR.  CHAS.  E.  WARD.


—80—


Pendleton,  New  Mexico,  Oct.  21.  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Just  a  few  words,  to  let  you  know  how  I  am
progressing  with  the  Master-Key  System.

That  the  man  may  control  and  shape  his
destiny,  through  the  proper  and  intelligent
use  of  his  powers  of  thought,  has  long  been
a  subject  of  absorbing  interest  to  me ;  but
never  before  have  I  been  able  to  get  down  to
bed  rock  principles  as  in  the  Master-Key  Sys-
tem.

All  my  life  I  have  been  afflicted  with  a  name-
less dread  and  fear  of  people  and  things,  which
amounted  to  a  positive  weakness  and  which,
unfortunately,  neutralized  and  made  inef-
fectual by  otherwise  natural  ability.

I  have  not,  yet,  reached  the  goal,  but  I  am
on  the  way;  and  I  am  sure  there  are  great
things  ahead,  because  of  the  beautiful  growth
and  unfoldment,  of  the  joyous  and  triumphant
life  made  possible  by  a  careful  study  of  the
Master-Key.

My  most  earnest  and  sincere  desire  is  that
others  seeking  the  royal  highway  to  power,
happiness  and  efficiency  may  happily  avail
themselves  of  your  splendid  instruction  in  the
matchless  philosophy  of  mind;  and,  to  this  end,
you  may  use  this  letter  in  any  way  you  see
ft.

With  all  good  wishes,  I  am.
Sincerely  yours,

ALBERT  C.  THOMAS.


—81—


715  N.  5th  St.,  Reading,  Pa.,
Dee.  21,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Have  received  the  last  lesson  of  the  Master-
Key  and  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  yon
i'or  the  pleasure  and  benefits  I  have  derived
from  the  study  and  applications  of  same.

Your  course  is  entirely  practical  and  from
the  very  first  lesson  the  principles  can  be  ap-
plied to  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life.

It  is  in  the  ready  application  that  your
course  differs  from  the  abstract  philosophies
of  all  times.

The  revelation  of  the  world  within  is  alone
worth  the  price  of  the  course.

As  a  means  for  the  attainment  of  success
and  happiness  your  course  is  more  valuable
than  a  college  education.

"Wishing  you  the  best  of  success  in  your
worthy  enterprise,  I  am,

Your  debtor,
FRANK  W.  SATTERTHWAITE.


Dayton,  Ohio,  Dec.  10,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Your  Master-Key  has  caused  me  to  look  up-
on this  grand  old  world  from  a  different
angle;  it  is  grander  than  ever,  even  though  I
have  ahvays  been  an  optimist.

I  have  been  immensely  benefited  from  the
study  of  your  lessons,  spiritually,  physically,
and  financially.

If  this  letter  will  be  of  any  ''service"  to
you,  use  it  with  my  best  wishes,
Sincerely,

R.  D.  McGregor.


—82—


Mexico,  D.  F.,  Dec.  27,  1918.
Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

The  people  over  here  are  awakening  to  a
more  spiritual  life,  and  they  hunger  for  books
on  the  subject.  They  seek  here  many  books  on
Development  of  "Will  Power,  Mind  Power,
Power  of  Thought,  Success  in  Business,  and  so
forth,  but  I  know  pretty  near  all  of  them —
some  of  these  have  been  translated  into  Span-
ish, by  me — and  they  are  words,  words,  words.

None  of  these  books  deal  with  the  subject
in  the  simple  perfect  and  comprehensive  way
as  the  Master-Key  System  does,  which  un-
doubtedly, can  be  regarded  as  classical  and
unique  and  the  best  that  has  ever  been  pub-
lished the  world  over.  Your  System  is  within
the  reach  of  the  average  intelligence  as  well
as  of  the  highest  because  it  is  not  essentially
technical  in  its  explanations.  Its  importance
is  so  great  that  I  consider  it  myself  as  ''the
leaven  that  will  leaven  the  lump."

I  studied  the  Impersonal  Life  Message  some
three  years  ago.  I  devoted  myself  to  realiza-
tion, and  having  succeeded,  I  have  been  giv-
ing lectures,  since  that  time,  nearly  every  day
at  various  places  in  this  city.  Therefore  I
am  in  position  to  appreciate  fully  the  incal-
culable amount  of  knowledge  imparted  by  your
System.  If  you  think  that  these  paragraphs
can  be  of  help  in  the  spreading  of  Truth,  you
may  use  them  freely.

Yours  very  sincerely,

J.  GONZALEZ  BURN.


—83—


9  Bluff  View,
Chattanooga,  Tenn.,
Dec.  12,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Receipt  of  your  most  excellent  little  booklet,
''The  Master-Key,"  is  hereby  acknowledged
with  pleasure.

It  is  truth  expressed  with  such  surpassing
clearness  and  force  as  that  intuitive  recogni-
tion and  acceptance  result  without  conscious
mental  process.  Its  statements  drop  into  niches
of  the  mind  that  were  created  for  them  from
the  beginning.

Its  perusal  stimulates  all  the  faculties;
quickening  the  conscience,  sharpening  the  per-
ceptive powers,  and — that  which  it  renders
unique,  and  greatly  enhances  its  practical
value — bringing  the  irresistable  force  of  truth
to  bear  upon  the  will.

One  can  no  more  avoid  benefit  from  the  read-
ing of  it  than  he  can  unknow  his  own  existence.
Its  truths  nestle  securely  in  the  profoundest
depths  of  his  subconsciousness  and  contribute
to  his  masterhood  of  all  things.

Accept  my  thanks,

Sincerely,

CHAS.  W.  CAELTON.


—84—


916  West  Main  St.,  North,
Gainesville,  Fla.,
Dec.  16,  1918.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Part  seventeen  of  your  Master-Key  System
has  just  been  received  by  me  and  I  think  that
the  grandeur  of  the  system  is  unsurpassed  by
anything  of  a  similar  kind  I  have  ever  read.

I  have  been  a  student  of  kindred  subjects
for  several  years.

Especially  do  I  commend  you  upon  the
simple  and  concise  manner  in  -which  the  les-
sons are  written.

As  a  rule,  most  authors  say  so  much  on  a
subject  that  it  wearies  one  trying  to  find  the
thought  expressed;  but  you  go  immediately
to  the  heart  of  things.

I  shall  always  consider  that  my  life  has
been  made  better  by  having  read  your  les-
sons.

If  in  any  way  this  testimonial  may  be  of
service  to  you,   kindly  consider  yourself  at
perfect  liberty  to  use  it.
Wishing  you  abundance  of  success,  I  am,
Sincerely  yours,

JNO.  W.  GASS.


--85—


Chelsa,  Mass.,  Dec.  2,  1918.


Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  am  a  Marine  Engineer,  and  I  am  a  Bachelor
of  Science,  and  I  highly  recommend  your
Master-Key  to  individuals  who  have  not  had
the  opportunity  to  gain  and  acquire  the  knov^l-
edge  of  world  known  facts.

Your  Master-Key  is  a  w^onderful  thing,  and
I  could  not  conceive  of  such  a  piece  of  litera-
ture being  on  sale  for  such  a  small  amount
of  money.  It  is  worth  far  raore  than  you  ask
for  it.

Some  people  need  the  aid  of  oculists  and
glasses  to  be  able  to  see  things,  but  your
Master-Key  is  enough  to  improve  the  eyes  of
even  the  blind.  It  relieves  that  heavy  cloud
which  hangs  over  the  ordinary  man,  it  ban-
ishes all  fear  and  will  give  a  man  a  wonder-
ful start  in  life,  it  will  broaden  his  ideas,  and
will  once  more  allow  him  to  shake  the  fear
which  binds  both  his  mind  and  limbs.

Eespectfully,

SAMUEL  OVIS,  S.  B.


Harrisburg,  Penn.,
1217  N.  2iid  St.,
February  2,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  now  completed  Part  24  of  the  Master-
Key,  and  it  is  with  extreme  pleasure  that  I
write  these  few  lines  to  express  my  appre-
ciation of  the  lessons  and  the  benefits  received
therefrom.

Were  you  to  ask  me  to  state  in  figures  how  I
have  been  benefited  by  these  lessons,  I  would
reply  that  the  knowledge  I  have  gained  is
beyond  computation  in  dollars  and  cents.  Your
system  has  taught  me  that  thought  in  har-
mony with  the  Universal  Mind  is  invincible
and  shown  me  how  to  get  in  touch  with  om-
nipotence ;  therefore,  I  have  learned  to  set  in-
visible forces  to  work  for  me.  Not  only  have
I  learned  how  to  let  them  help  me,  but  I  have
proved  to  my  etnire  satisfaction  that  your  sys-
tem is  scientifically  and  religiously  correct.  I
know  that  I  can  make  my  future  what  I  desire
it  to  be ;  and  how  to  do  this  certainly  is  price-
less knowledge  to  me.

Each  lesson  of  the  entire  course  has  certainly
been  to  me  a  most  wonderful  revelation  "Of  a
kingdom  unknown  and  unseen;  where  the  days
run  over  with  sunshine,  and  the  hours  seem
but  a  dream.'*

Wishing  you  every  success  in  your  great
work,  I  remain,

Yours  gratefully,

P.  M.  BITTNEE.

--87-^


JOHN  H.  WELSCH,  M.  D..  D.  D.

QUINCY.  ILL.

Quincy,  IlL
Jan.  31,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Your  Master-Key  System  places  Metaphysics
on  a  practical  basis  enabling  the  careful  student
to  secure  the  fullest  development  of  his  powers
of  concentration  which  means  achievement  and
success.

I  heartily  recommend  your  Master-Key  Sys-
tem to  any  and  every  one  who  would  better
their  condition  from  any  and  every  angle.
Yours  sincerely,

JOHN  A.  WELSCH,
M.  D.,  D.  C,  P.  C„

Formerly  lecturer  in  the  St  Louis  College  of
Physicians  and  Surgeons.

New  Bedford,  Mass.,
50  Princeton  Ave.,
Feb.  18,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Submitted  herewith  are  answers  to  Part  17,
in  which  are  some  of  the  most  wonderful  dis-
closures that  humanity  ever  heard.  It  is  really
a  calamity  that  this  knowledge  is  not  more
widely  understood.

Sincerely,

JOHN  B.  LANE.


—88—


Eoanoke,  Va.,
921  Tazewell  Ave.,
Jan.  27,  1919.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  completed  reading  and  answer-
ing the  questions  to  Lesson  No.  24  of  the
Master-Key,  thereby  bringing  to  a  close  what
I  consider  the  most  profitable  six  months  in
my  life.

Did  I  enjoy  the  lessons?  I  most  assuredly
did,  especially  when  I  looked  back  from  week
to  week  and  noted  my  footsteps  out  of  the
wilderness  of  ignorance.  I  also  enjoyed  the
sensations  when  the  great  truths  began  to
break  upon  my  mind,  and  when  I  realized  how
fast  I  was  gaining  knowledge,  and  wisdom  to
apply  it.  Of  course,  I  have  not  yet  reached
the  goal  I  have  set  out  for.  I  did  not  expect
to  undo  in  six  months  the  damage  I  had
wrought  during  forty  years  in  the  wilderness.
You  shall  hear  from  me  later.

The  Master-Key  furnished  me  also  with  the
Big  Stick  with  which  to  give  the  death  blow  to
that  arch  enemy  Fear.  One  instance :  For
several  years  I  had  been  desirous  of  a  better
home  than  the  one  in  which  I  lived  but  when
I  would  consider  the  debt  which  would  be
placed  upon  my  shoulders  I  would  crumple
up  and  the  new  home  would  fade  away.  But
a  month  ago  I  went  into  a  real  estate  oflSce
and  signed  up  for  a  $4,200.00  home  with  no
more  fear  than  if  I  were  buying  a  bag  of  pea-
nuts.

May  your  Master-Key  be  perpetuated  until
man  has  come  into  his  own.

Yours  truly,

C.  J.  BENNETT.


Knights  of  Columbus,
Overseas  Service,
Somewhere  in  France,
Jan.  4,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

The  ''Master-Key"  lessons  reached  me  in
good  order  a  few  days  ago.

There  are  no  words  in  the  English  language
that  would  properly  express  my  sincere  ap-
preciation for  what  you  have  done  for  me,  Mr.
Haanel.

Am  acquiring  a  wonderful  knowledge  from
the  study  of  these  lessons.

Am  still  in  the  hospital  w^ith  my  fractured
right  arm  and  utilize  every  spare  moment  in
reading  and  studying  this  excellent  course  of
instruction.

Have  read  books  now  and  then  on  psychology
but  your  lessons  far  exceed  everything  I  have
ever  seen  on  this  subject.

May  your  good  work  spread  over  the  entire
universe.

Wishing  you  great  success  in  this  undertak-
ing, I  remain,

Yours  truly,

M.  J.  HAESSLY.

American  Red  Cross  Hospital  No.  103,
American  Expeditionary  Forces,  France.


—90-:


Houston,  Texas,
Jan.  21,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Faanel:

I  have  enjoyed  every  hour  and  every  moment
with  the  Master-Key  studies,  and  will  review
them  again  and  again  until  I  have  mastered
them.

Before  taking  up  the  study,  I  realized  there
was  a  vacancy,  a  void  in  my  life,  and  I  knew
there  was  something  higher  and  better  for
me;  so  I  would  read  everything  that  I  could
find,  and  while  others  would  speak  of  these
wonderful  things,  they  would  not  explain  or
show  me  how  to  attain  them.  So  my  boat  was
drifting  until  it  had  reached  the  breakers  near
the  shore,  and  I  was  in  great  danger  of  being
dashed  on  the  rocks  or  landed  on  a  sand-bar
and  rapidly  go  to  pieces.

After  studying  Lesson  1,  I  felt  that  I  had
at  last  found  a  guide  and  compass  that  would
steer  my  boat  away  from  the  rocks;  and  les-
son by  lesson  it  has  taken  me  out  into  the  deep
waters,  where  all  is  calm  and  serene,  for  **In
the  depths  of  the  ocean  is  no  unrest;  only  in
the  shallow  places  is  turmoil  and  murmuring.
It  is  only  in  the  silence  that  we  can  think
*'Big  Thoughts,"  and  only  in  the  deep  water
can  you  find  ''Big  Fish."

So  I  want  to  thank  you  for  the  guiding
hand,  the  beautiful  thoughts,  and  to  tell  you
T  feel  that  it  is  money  well  spent,  and  time
well  applied;  also  to  wish  you  success  in  giv-
ing til©    Truth"  to  the  world.

Sincerely  yours.

MRS.  A.  MARTEN.


San  Marcial,  N.  Mei.,
Jan.  27,  1919.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  received  to  date  nineteen  parts  or  les-
sons of  your  Master-Key  System"  and  have
diligently  studied  them.  I  will  not  presume  to
state  that  I  have  learned  them,  for  every  time
I  re-read  them  I  find  something  new.  The  les-
sons are  wonderfully  helpful  and  by  applying
these  principles  I  find  that  life  is  taking  on
new  meaning.

The  ''Master-Key"  is  rightly  named.  It
clarifies  whatever  knowledge  of  the  unseen
forces  that  one  may  previously  have  had.  Be-
fore I  had  heard  of  the  "Master-Key,"  I  had
read  and  had  tried  to  apply  the  knowledge  said
to  be  contained  in  several  psychological  works,
but  found  they  lacked  something.  They  would
lead  up  to  some  point  or  other  and  there  stop.
They  didn't  seem  to  get  anywhere.  Neither
did  I.  But  I  ardently  desired  to  know;  and
now  comes  along  the  wonderful  "Master-Key
System"  and  satisfies  that  desire  by  explain-
ing all  that  those  works  tried  to  explain,  and
much  that  their  authors  "never  dreamt  of  in
all  their  philosophy."  It  unlocks  and  lays
bare  the  meaning  of  the  apparently  vague  and
mysterious  in  the  Bible,  investing  the  truths
therein  with  a  new  and  intense  interest  and
deeper  meaning.  Would  that  our  Brothers  of
the  Clergy  would  get  the  '  *  Master-Key, ' '  study
it,  and  apply  its  truths  to  their  teaching  of  the
Scriptures;  there  would  certainly  be  a  clear-
ing of  the  theological  atmosphere.

Yours  truly,

A.  W.  FARRINGTON.


—92—


Akron,  Ohio.
1004  Moeller,  Ave.
Jhan.  15,  1919.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:
St.  Louis,  Mo.

Just  what  the  Master-Key  lessons  are
beginning  to  do  for  me  I  cannot  express.
They  have  already  revolutionized  my  thought
processes — it  seems  my  whole  life.

I  am  very  young — below  the  age  usually
given  to  study  of  such  things  as  your  Sys-
tem. But  do  not  think  a  young  man  of  twenty
cannot  appreciate  your  course.  Already  I
have  found  it  the  most  valuable,  most  potent
thing  that  ever  came  into  my  life.  I  am  sure
there  has  never  been  anything  like  it  before.
The  truths  I  have  gotten  from  these  first  few
parts  are,  I  believe,  more  than  comes  into
the  life  of  the  average  man.  This  world  would
be  a  great  place  if  everyone  had  read  and
studied  your  Revelations.

I  have  returned  to  a  position  that  before  be-
ginning your  course  I  had  given  up  as  beyond
me.  I  quit  cold  because  I  was  afraid  I  could
never  master  it.  Now  it  is  easy  and  I  am  pre-
paring to  do  harder  things.

The  Master-Key  has  unlocked  the  door  and
I  am  fast  finding  the  Gems  of  Truth.

Gratefully  yours,

HENRY  C.  JOHNSON.


—93—


Quincy,  CaL,  July  18,  1917.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Enclosed  you  will  find  payment  in  full  for
The  Master-Key  System.  Part  Five  came  last
evening,  and  I  must  say  that  I  already  feel
that  I  have  my  money's  worth,  and  much  more
to  follow.

I  have  read  and  studied  a  great  deal  along
these  lines  in  the  last  few  years — but  never
seemed  to  get  anywhere.  It  seemed  to  me  a
sort  of  "ring  around  the  rosie"  proposition;
but  thanks  to  your  clear  cut  exposition  of
these  Eternal  Truths,  I  can  see  and  feel  that
at  last  I  am  on  a  straight  road  that  leads  to
success  and  the  realization  of  my  heart's  de-
sire.

I  wish  that  everyone  who  stands  where  I
stood  for  so  long,  could  have  this  Key  handed
to  them.  It  is  certainly  opening  the  door  for
me.  Part  Five  is  wonderful.  You  may  print
anything  of  mine.  I  shall  feel  doubly  grate-
ful should  this  help  anyone  who  is  searching
for  ''a  way  out"  of  that  mystic  maze  into
which  undirected  reading  oftimes  leaves  one,
or  for  anyone  who  is  hungry  for  that  mental
food  that  is  so  satisfying.

Most  respectfully,
FLORA  E.  WATEEHOUSE.


-^94—


Edwin  J.  Nixson

Manufacturing  Optometrist


Los  Angeles,  CaL,  July  5,  1917.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  received  and  read  the  last  part
of  the  Master-Key  System,  and  away  down
deep  there  is  a  feeling  as  if  a  dear  friend  were
leaving.  I  have  chummed  with  and  looked
forward  to  the  lessons  so  interestedly  and
eagerly  that  I  am  going  to  miss  them  very
much.  But  I  will  still  have  the  pleasure  of
reading  them  over  again  and  again,  as  I  al-
ready have  done  with  each  one.  From  each
successive  reading  I  gain  more  information,
more  unfoldment,  more  help  and  more  com-
fort.

Through  these  lessons  I  have  found  that
I  can  accomplish  whatever  I  set  my  mind  upon,
for  I  have  already  proven  it,  in  my  health,  in
my  disposition,  in  my  business — in  all  my  life.

No  money  consideration  could  in  any  way
pay  for  the  physical,  mental  and  spiritual  up-
lift provided  by  The  Master-Key  System,  and
to  every  person  in  the  world  who  has  a  desire
for  betterment  in  every  field  I  can  heartily
and  conscientiously  recommend  the  course.

Thanking  you  for  the  great  service  you  have
given  me,  and  with  kindest  regards  and  best
wishes  for  the  success  which  you  so  richly
deserve,  I  am,

Yours  truly,

E.  J.  NIXSON


—95—


Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,
417  Livingston  Ave.,
Feb.  15,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  just  finished  the  20th  lesson  of  your
course  and  must  say  that  words  can  scarcely
express  my  appreciation  for  the  benefit  and
inspiration  I  have  received.

For  several  years  I  have  been  a  student  of
psychology  and  a  deep  thinker,  but  the  time
I  have  devoted  to  the  study  of  the  Master-
Key"  has  been  the  most  eventful  period  in  my
life.

In  a  v^orld  of  superstition  and  strife,  your
great  message  shines  as  a  Beacon  Light  o'er
a  tempestuous  sea.  A  study  of  that  great
work,  brightens  the  intellect  and  broadens  the
mind.  A  world  of  greater  achievement  seems
to  beckon  to  me.  The  great  laws  and  truths
that  have  lain  dormant  to  the  masses  down
through  the  centuries  of  time  are  there  re-
vealed.   Truly  it  is  a  wonderful  work.

If  a  copy  of  that  great  message  could  be
placed  in  every  home  in  the  land  it  would
go  a  long  way  to  aid  education  and  civiliza-
tion. It  would  hasten  the  day  when  the  per-
fect race  shall  inhabit  the  earth.

''We  shall  know  the  truth  and  the  truth
shall  make  us  free."

Very  truly  yours,

H.  E.  BALCH.


Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  August  19,  1917.
Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Dear  Sir:

I  considered  myself  quite  an  advanced  stu-
dent in  psychology  when  I  first  took  up  your
wonderful  Master-Key  System.  I  had  read  a
great  deal  of  the  most  important  literature,
and  possess  many  of  the  best  books  on  the
subject,  besides  proving  in  many  ways  my  un-
derstanding of  the  laws,  yet  I  felt  that  the  dis-
cipline of  a  reliable  system  would  prove  very
helpful.

My  realization  has  far  exceeded  my  expecta-
tion; words  cannot  convey  my  intense  appre-
ciation— my  wonderfully  enlarged  under-
standing.

I  think  your  Master-Key  System  covers  the
ground  completely,  and  in  a  most  convincing
and  practical  manner — nothing  seems  to  be
left  out,  and  everything  is  so  clearly  explained.
I  think  it  would  be  as  hard  for  a  sincere  stu-
dent to  go  back  to  their  old  way  of  thinking,
as  for  an  oak  tree  to  return  to  its  acorn.

It  has  changed  my  whole  outlook,  and  given
me  a  new  courage  and  a  zest  for  my  life  plans,
that  is  glorious.

Wishing  you  and  your  system  the  greatest
success,

Yours  most  sincerely,

KOSE  B.  McMAHON.


—97---,


Toponas,  Colo.,
Feb.  15,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

I  have  refrained  hitherto  from  making  any
comments  upon  the  ''System"  preferring  to
wait  until  I  was  in  possession  of  it  in  its  en-
tirety in  order  that  I  might  intelligently  form
an  opinion  unbiased  by  transitory  enthusiasm.
I  am  familiar  with  most,  if  not  all,  modern
exponents  of  the  ''New  Psychology"  and  have
given  much  time  and  attention  to  Theosophy,
Yogi  philosophy  and  Metaphysics  in  general
— having  delved  into  every  "ology"  that  prom-
ised even  remotely  to  throw  a  light  upon  the
subject  in  which  every  thinking  individual  is
absorbed.

I  was  conversant  with  each  and  every  fact
contained  therein — as  a  fact,  but  (I  want  to
emphasize  the  word)  the  possession  of  tools
does  not  constitute  a  machinist  and  are  pro-
ductive of  no  results  without  the  skill  to  use
them.  And  that  I  found  to  be  the  value  of
your  system — it  instructs  how  to  obtain  con-
crete results  from  the  knowledge  it  imparts,
and  taken  altogether  it  constitutes  the  most
lucid,  concise  and  at  the  same  time  complete
exposition  of  the  subject  it  has  been  my  good
fortune  to  come  across.

Thanking  you  very  sincerely  for  the  benefit
I  have  received  from  your  course,  I  am,
Truly  yours,
J.  SCOT  HENDERSON.


—98—


26  E.  26th  St.,
New  York  City,  N.  Y.,
May  20,  1918.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

I  have  duly  received  your  first  two  lessons
and  I  am  glad,  indeed,  to  have  them.  I  know
that  your  philosophy  is  big  enough  to  see  the
good  in  everything  and  has  neither  creed  nor
dogma.

This  is  because  it  deals  with  the  energy
which  creates  things,  rather  than  with  things,
or  the  manipulation  of  things  after  they  are
created.  And  because  of  that  fact,  it  is  abso-
lutely limitless.

My  consciousness  is  absolutely  free  of  every
economical  thought,  because  I  know  that  the
practice  of  economy  is  man's  greatest  extrava-
gance.

You  may  use  any  one  of  my  letters  as  a  tes-
timonial letter  and  give  full  name  and  address.

If  there  would  be  any  possibility  to  make
personal  acquaintance  with  any  one  of  your
pupils  in  New  York  City,  I  shall  be  delighted.

I  remain,  with  all  good  wishes  and  cordial
regards.

Very  sincerely  yours,

E.  FLOOD,


Chicago,  111.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel:

It  was  with  regret  that  I  reached  the  last
lesson ;  not  because  it  was  the  end,  for  that  is
merely  the  beginning  of  the  end— or  a  begin-
ning with  no  end.

I  have  learned  that  when  thought  contains
feeling,  guided  by  truth  and  steadied  with  the
will,  that  all  things  are  possible.  Faith  is  sub-
stance, the  substance  out  of  which  all  things
are  created,  the  unseen  out  of  which  the  seen
is  brought.  ^  •

Before  taking  the  Master-Key  Course  ot  in-
structions I  had  a  very  good  knowledge  af
truth,  but  knew  nothing  of  its  operation ;  and,
while  I  was  very  successful,  I  knew  nothing  of
the  forc(  I  was  using.  In  other  words:  I  was
guessing  the  truth,  without  being  positive  of  it.

I  was  not  ignorant  of  what  I  was  doing,  but
I  longed  for  a  knowledge  of  just  how  it  was
done ;  but,  after  taking  the  Master-Key  Course,
I  have  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  operation
of  the  power  of  truth,  therefore  making  me
positive  of  results  before  any  proof  or  even
any  evidence  has  been  seen.

I  have  a  store-house  of  wonderful  knowl-
edge and  am  letting  this  knowledge  prove  that
it  is  true  by  its  works.  And  I  have  only  start-
ed, the  day  is  just  breaking;  it  is  not  sun  up
yet.

Mere  words  are  inadequate  and  space  will
not  permit  me  to  tell  of  the  immeasurable  good
that  the  Master-Key  Course  holds  for  him  who
will  study  it  with  interest  and  apply  it  with

confidence.

E.  J.  ATKINS,
2622  W.  Adams  St.


—100—


Sawtelle,  Calif.,  Oct.  9,  1917.
Chas.  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

In  all  that  I  have  ever  read  from  the  pen  of
many  writers  or  that  I  have  ever  heard  through
lecturer  or  teacher,  the  Master-Key  is  the  most
profound,  clean  and  clear,  that  it  has  ever  been
my  good  fortune  to  secure.

No  sentence  or  combination  of  words  in  the
English  or  any  other  language  has  ever  given
me  as  much  pleasure,  value,  and  a  practical
understanding  as  your  explanation  of  the  "I"
in  us,  and  especially  the  ''I"  in  me  (the  writer)
and  in  that  short  sentence  part  No  8,  the  eight
monosylable  words,  'I'  can  be  what  '1'  will
to  be"  conveyed  more  to  my  understanding
than  I  can  express  in  words — and  filled  mo  with
a  gratitude  that  I  have  never  experienced  be-
fore.

This  study  has  been  most  extraordinarily
beneficial,  pleasant  and  edifying,  and  I  thank
you  very  much  for  your  overtures  to  me  to
take  this  course  and  please  pardon  me  for  the
timidity  and  skepticism  before  doing  so,  but  it
is  much  more  than  you  have  at  any  time  rep-
resented it  to  be.

Thanking  you  again,  I  am.

Most  truly  yours,

JOHN  FREDDS.


—101—


Abbotsford,
Quebec,  Canada,
October  30,  1918.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

St.  Lous,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  find  it  very  difficult  to  say  all  I  wish  to  say
in  so  small  a  space.  The  Master  Key  opens  up
an  entirely  new  world,  a  world  full  of  the
greatest  possibilities  and  achievements.

It  explains  in  detail  some  points  which  are
often  vaguely  treated  in  other  works.  It  is
helping  me  to  adjust  myself.  I  have  had  the
feeling  that  I  was  not  properly  in  tune  with
the  great  powers  around  me.

The  secret  of  the  "Within"  is  worth  millions.
I  have  more  confidence  in  myself  than  ever  be-
fore, and  am  cheerful  and  optimistic  each  day,
whereas  before  taking  up  this  study,  I  was
always  in  doubt  about  the  future.

"With  each  re-reading  of  these  studies  comes
more  understanding;  with  added  understand-
ing comes  harmony,  and  with  harmony  comes
peace.   What  more  can  we  strive  for?

The  lessons  in  money  consciousness  are  a
revelation.  A  question  which  so  few  under-
stand is  here  made  perfectly  plain.  It  has  com-
pletely upset  the  old  tradition  that  to  be
' '  good ' '  one  must  be  ' '  poor. ' '  I  am  very  grate-
ful for  this  Imowledge  and  feel  a  certainty  of
success  in  the  future.

As  I  have  not  had  an  ordinary  high-school
education  you  may  imagine  how  these  lessons
have  helped  me  to  understand  the  real  things
of  life.  By  using  these  methods  I  will  be  able
to  overcome  the  ei-rors  of  wrong  thinking,  and
to  construct  an  efficient  and  useful  future.

Wishir^g  you  success  in  spreading  this  won-
derful message  throughout  the  world,  I  am,
Yoiu's  truly,

MURRAY  E.  FISK.


—102—


Aledo,  111.,
March  6,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
Saint  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

Physically  and  mentally  these  lessons  have
been  of  inestimable  value  to  me.  For  I  have
in  a  very  large  measure  learned  to  control  the
fear  and  sick  thoughts  that  were  a  constant
source  of  hindrance  to  me.

In  a  material  way,  I  have  greatly  increased
my  efficiency  in  my  business,  obtaining  greater
results  than  I  ever  dreamed  possible  and  bring-
ing in  increased  financial  returns.

So  much  for  the  present  benefits.

Now  I  wish  to  tell  you  the  benefits  which  are
difficult  of  explanation.  First,  the  enlarged
viewpoint,  and  the  Altruistic  ideas  so  carefully
worked  out  in  detail.  I  can  better  express
this  by  comparing  my  former  views  to  the  nar-
row horizon  line  that  encompasses  a  small
town  and  contrasting  this  with  the  vast  pano-
rama which  opens  up  to  one's  view  from  the
top  of  a  high  mountain.

For  myself,  there  have  been  opened  up  ave-
nues into  territory  which  I  have  viewed  from
afar  off,  longing  to  explore  but  fearing  to  at-
tempt.

Summing  it  all  up,  I  feel  differently  towards
others,  towards  myself,  towards  things,  cir-
cumstances, and  above  all  a  nearness  to  GOD.

I  have  talked  your  lessons  to  many ;  if  I  can
be  of  any  other  service  to  you  please  M  me
know.

Yours  gratefully,

L.  P.  DELK.


--103—


Twin  Falls,  Idaho,
Jan.  26,  1919.
Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:  .

Your  very  wonderful  lessons  up  to  and  in-
cluding part  ten  are  in  my  hands.

I  have  been  a  student  of  psychology,  Meta-
physics, philosophies,  religions,  for  a  number
of  years.  But  nowhere  have  I  found  so  com-
plete, splendid,  clear  and  convincing  a  state-
ment and  explanation  of  truth  and  of  life  as
in  these  lessons  of  yours.  And  nowhere  else
have  I  found  the  dynamic  simplicity  of  state-
ment that  almost  forces  one  into  the  actual
practical  demonstration  and  proof  of  truth.

My  own  proofs"  have  been  piling  up  so
very  rapidly  and  almost  overwhelmingly  of
late,  that  there  has  not  been  time  even  to  write
out  the  answers  to  the  questions.

I  wish  there  might  be  schools  everywhere  to
teach  this  magnificent  science  of  thought.

Yours  sincerely,

MRS.  C.  H.  BROWN.

U.  S.  S.  S.  Flusser,
March  5,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

Saint  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Hannel :

The  Master-Key  contains  in  condensed  form
the  exact  knowledge  that  I  have  been  seeking
for  some  time.  .  .

The  elimination  of  the  non  essentials  is  m
itself  a  wonderful  accomplishment  in  efficiency.

The  Master-Key  is  indeed  a  supfer-post  grad-
uate course.

Very  truly  yours.

M.  E.  TOHNSON.


— 104r-


Orange,  N.  J.,  August  14,  1917.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,
St,  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel:

The  new  hope,  life  and  inspiration  brought
into  my  life  by  your  Master-Key  lessons  have
made  these  months  very  happy  ones.

I  have  delayed  acknowledging  receipt  of
this  last  lesson  because  it  is  so  vital  and  full
of  wisdom  that  it  seemed  to  call  for  much
study  before  writing.

I  am  realizing  through  these  lessons  the
dreadful  mistakes  I  have  been  making,  and  am
gaining  courage  to  take  up  the  battle  of  life
on  a  winning  basis.

My  heart  goes  out  to  you  in  thankfulness,
not  only  for  the  lessons,  but  for  the  personal,
individual  supervision.  Your  letters  are  most
helpful.

Many  years  of  study,  reading,  lectures,  etc.,
may  have  prepared  my  mind  for  the  reception
of  your  teachings,  which  are  so  clear,  simple,
scientific  and  convincing  that  I  am  able  to
grasp  the  wonderful  message  they  bring.

In  spite  of  the  distressing  conditions  of
which  I  spoke  to  you  at  first  I  am  gaining  in
self  control  and  harmonious  conditions  ar-
now  apparent.

I  shall  re-study  and  apply  your  teaching
until  I  and  Truth  are  one.

I  cannot  fittingly  express  my  gratitude  to
you  dear  Mr.  Haanel  and  shall  have  good
things  to  tell  you  in  the  future.

If  any  word  of  mine  will  prove  helpful  to
any  other  student  pray  use  it.

Most  sincerelv  vours,

CAROLINE  M.  BELCHER.


—105—


Minneapolis,  Minn.,  April  4,  1917.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
Dear  Sir:

Your  System  is  surely  the  "Master-Key"
that  unlocks  the  Inner  World  of  Wisdom  and
Power.  Your  instructions  are  wonderfully
comprehensive,  yet  practical.  I  have  never
seen  anything  so  clear  and  concise.  You  have
the  happy  faculty  of  making  your  statements
of  truth,  of  clothing  your  most  scientific  pres-
entation in  beautiful,  simple  language.

I  found  every  lesson  interesting  and  instruct-
ive, but  your  lesson  Three  was  especially  so.
Being  interested  in  Anatomy  and  especially  in
Cerebral  Anatomy,  that  lesson  was  particular-
ly interesting  to  me.  The  very  first  paragraph
gripped  my  attention.  Your  description  of  the
connection  between  the  Cerebro-Spinal  and
Sympathetic  Systems,  and  the  interaction  of
the  conscious  and  subconscious  mind  was
very  clear  and  instructive.

Mental  Culture  surely  enhances  the  value  of
life,  and  your  instructions  teach  one  how  to
combat  mental  difficulties,  and  live  a  harmoni-
ous life.

Yours  very  truly,

MRS,  LORRAINE  GENDRON,
Stratford  Hotel,


^106-


Canton,  0.,
March  12,  1919.
Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

I  can  see  now  that  I  have  been  the
victim  of  many  conflicting  theories  and
views  in  life  which  prevented  me  from
gaining  a  firm  purpose  and  an  unswerv-
ing ideal.  But  the  main  points  now  be-
ing adjusted,  everything  else  seems  to
fall  in  line.

Last  year  I  took  a  step  which  prac-
tically meant  starting  life  all  over
again.  The  course  has  confirmed  to
my  mind  the  wisdom  of  this  step,
though  I  have  laid  myself  open  to  the
censure  of  the  unthinking  crowd.  I
know  I  am  on  the  right  way  and  am
able  to  face  the  future  with  vigorous
hope  and  dauntless  courage.  I  am
recommending  the  course  to  my  friends
and,  strange  to  say,  several  of  them
notice  my  changed  attitude  toward  life
and  the  resulting  success  along  all  lines
and  ascribe  this  to  niy  study  of  the
Master-Key.

I  fully  endorse  what  others  claim  for
the  Master-Key,  when  they  say  that  it
is  the  greatest  discovery  of  the  Twen-
tieth Century.

With  many  thanks  and  best  wishes
for  ever-increasing  success.

Very  sincerely  yours,

J.  C.  RINGWALD.

P.  S.— If  this  letter  can  be  of  any
use  for  you,  employ  in  any  way  you
see  fit.


—107—


December  10,  1917.

Worcester,  Mass.,
Mr.  Clias.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  am  getting  results  from  putting  into
practice  the  advice  found  in  the  "Les-
sons of  the  Master-Key  System."  I
have  graduated  from  an  environment
that  was  literally  speaking  Hades,  and
the  only  gleam  of  light  I  got  was  in
the  ''Lessons  of  your  Master-Key  Sys-
tem."

I  began  to  work  as  your  lessons
taught  me,  and  fcr  all  the  trials  I  went
through  while  putting  these  truths  into
practice,  I  am  grateful  because  I  learn-
ed my  lesson,  through  the  knowledge
given  me  how  to  work  aright.

I  am  now  in  much  better  circum-
stances both  as  to  finances  and  other
things  than  I  have  been  for  years.
Things  that  seemed  to  cause  discord
have  gone  and  I  am  reaping  the  results
of  harmony  by  thinking  harmonious
thoughts.

The  mistake  that  I  made  a  year  ago  is
being  righted  and  my  feet  are  fixed  on
solid  ground,  instead  of  shifting  sand.

Would  it  be  convenient  for  you
to  have  my  address  changed  to  36
Pleasant  St.,  Worcester,  Massachusetts?

You  will  find  a  money  order  enclosed
which  please  place  to  my  credit  on  ac-
ctnint.         Yours  very  sincerely,

MRS.  J.  W.  GETTY.


—108—


400  S.  Church  8t.
Van  Buren,  Ark.,
December  20,  1918.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mc.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  cannot  tell  you  how  much  I  am  en-
joying the  Master-Key,  and  slow,  but
sure,  I  am  growing  in  the  knowledge
of  ''all  that  is  real."

One  comes  sooner,  or  later  in  life,  to
the  place  where  he  must  have  some-
thing tangible,  to  satisfy  an  inquiring
mind ;  these  lessons  are  doing  this  very
thing,  and  I  hope  to  grow  with  them  to
a  complete  understanding  of  spiritual
law.  Yours  sincerely,

B.  F.  MARTIN.


Hotel  Palo  Alto,
Palo  Alto,  Cal.,
February  18,  1918.
Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo

Dear  Mr.  Haanel :

Your  course  makes  the  most  wonder-
ful reading  of  anything  I  have  ever
seen  in  print.

Very  truly  yours,

A.  B.  WIGKE.


—109  —


R.  ^  R.  CHEMICAL  COMPANY

557  C&ss  Avenue
DETROIT,  MICH


Detroit,  Michigan,
557  Cass  Ave.
Marcli  12,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanol: —

1  have  th(^  twenty-fourth  It'isnon.  The
service  has  been  perfect.

The  fact  that  I  am  still  in  business
is  owing  to  the  application  of  your
teaching  ;  although  the  application  is
very  far  from  being  all  that  it  should
be,  or  all  that  it  will  be  in  the  future.

There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  I
am  aware  of  that  would  induce  me  to
part  with  the  knowledge  so  far  obtained
and  put  into  practice.

Please  advise  prospective  students  that
my  lat€h  string  is  always  out.

Anyone  is  perfectly  welcome  to  view
the  material  results  of  the  application
of  The  Master  Key  in  my  case.

Very  truly  yours,

WILL  RODGERS,

Prop.


921  Connor  Ave.
Joplin,  Mo.,
February  4,  1918.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel  i —

I  wish  to  thank  you  for  your  kind
answer  to  my  letter.  Truly  a  very  won-
derful answer.

I  want  you  to  know  that  I  am  becom-
ing very  much  interested  in  these  les-
sons and  I  watch  for  them  eagerly  each
week.  There  has  been  a  change  in  my
affairs  that  seems  almost  miraculous.

Yes,  I  am  very  much  interested  and
feel  that  a  gold  mine  has  opened  at
my  very  feet.  I  can  feel  myself  grow-
ing brighter  intellectually,  and  visions
as  wonderful  as  Alladin's  lamp  keep
me  company.

I  certainly  feel  rrateful  to  you  for
this  wonderful  method  you  have  of  let-
ting your  light  shine.

Very  sincerely,
MRS.  MAUDE  OWENS,


—111—


Chattanooga,  Teun.,
February  22,  1918.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Sir:

The  Master-Key  is  wonderful,  it  has
brought  about  a  most  remarkable
change  in  my  environment,  attitude  to-
ward life,  mental  and  physical  condi-
tion. I  am  an  entirely  new  person  and
improving  daily,  discouragement,  lack
of  ambition,  physical  ills,  mental  dis-
tress, and  fear  are  things  of  the  past.

My  improvement  has  been  constant
without  setbacks.

When  unsatisfactory  symptoms  ap-
pear I  re-read  one  or  two  Master-Key
lessons  and  the  negative  symptoms
are  quickly  eliminated.

This  plan  is  so  effective  in  my  case
that  I  wish  the  Master-Key  could  be
had  in  a  pocket  volume  so  I  could  have
it  constantly  at  hand.

I  cannot  find  words  that  express  my
gratitude  for  all  that  the  Master-Key
has  done  for  me.

With  heartfelt  thanks  to  you,  I  am,
Yours  sincerely,

R.  J.  ARNOLD,


—112—


Clinton  A.  Leech

Real  Estate,  Loans  and  Exchanges
647  South  Flower  Street


Los  Angeles,  Cal.,
September  16,  1917.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  have  now  had  three  of  the  Master-
Key  lessons,  and  I  consider  them  worth
the  price  of  the  entire  course.

They  are  simple,  sane,  sound,  sensi-
ble, scientific,  psychological  and  philos-
ophical.

They  are  easily  understood,  and  yet
they  have  a  depth  that  seems  almost
unfathomable.

They  are  so  wonderful  it  seems  to
me  every  man,  woman  and  child  in
the  world  ought  to  be  studying  the
'  Master-Key  System.

I  have  just  closed  another  deal  for
$14,700.00.  In  fact,  I  have  had  more
success  in  the  three  weeks  since  I  be-
gan studying  the  Master-Key  lessons
than  I  have  in  the  five  years  preceding.
Yours  for  better  things,

CLINTON  A.  LEECH.


—113—


110  West  45tli  St.,
New  York  City,
March  2,  1919.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

The  first  three  parts  of  your  Master-
Key  System  have  given  me  a  mental
grasp  of  the  real  working  system  of
the  Universe  and  its  immutable  laws
that  partake  of  a  revelation.

I  have  read  a  great  deal  of  literature
on  the  subject  in  the  past  several  years,
but  never  gained  more  than  the  vaguest
kind  of  understanding  of  the  true  so-
lution.

Your  first  three  booklets  and  lessons,
however,  have  completely  banished  all
of  the  old  clouds  of  doubt,  unbelief  and
misunderstanding,  and  I  already  see
the  Truth  in  a  most  vivid  light.

Even  in  the  short  time  this  has  taken
I  have  begun  to  see  practical  results,
both  in  personal  health,  character  and
environment.  Having  a  strong  will  and
a  reasoning  brain  of  considerable  devel-
opment to  start  with,  I  now  feel  that
with  continued  study  and  faithful  prac-
tice I  shall  ultimately  become  some-
thing of  an  adept.

With  my  highest  appreciation  and
grateful  regards,  I  am,

Yours  very  sincerely,

FRANK  DUPREE.


—114—


New  York,  N.  Y.,
March  iOth,  1919.

Mr.  Cheuies  F.  Ilaanel,
St.  Lonis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

Have  just  finished  the  last  two  parts
of  the  Master-Key  System  and  can
truly  say  that  your  Master-Key  System
has  reconstructed  my  whole  life — it
cleared  my  thoughts.  I  am  able  to  con-
centrate on  my  work  much  better  now,
than  I  did  before.

I  am  only  sorry  that  I  did  not  sub-
scribe to  your  course  eighteen  (18)
months  ago,  when  I  first  inquired  about
it.

To  those  who  are  in  doubt  about  tak-
ing your  course,  I  wish  to  say  the  fol-
lowing :  Please  for  your  own  sake,  and
for  the  sake  of  those  that  you  come
in  contact  with,  do  not  delay,  subscribe
to  the  Master-Key  System  at  once.  It
will  purify  your  thoughts  and  will  re-
construct your  whole  life,  as  it  prac-
tically deals  with  nothing  more  or  less
than  Truth,  the  basis  of  life.

Wishing  you  the  greatest  success,  I
am,

Your  obedient  student,

JACOB  KUCHLIK.
187  Henry  street,

P.  S.  You  can  make  use  of  this
letter  in  any  way  you  please.

J.  K,


115-.


St.  Louis,  Mo.

Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

It  is  with  gratitude  I  write  this  let-
ter, to  express  my  deep  appreciation
for  the  ''Master-Key  System"  you  have
so  masterfully  launched  before  the
heterogeneous  thoughts  prevailing  in
the  minds  of  the  people,  which  had
scattered  their  forces,  unfocused,  cha-
otically in  the  jungle  to  pick  one  ana
another  to  satisfy  the  momentary
wants  and  leave  the  remote  results  to
toss  as  they  may,  heedless  of  conse-
quences.

You  have,  indeed,  collated  and  con-
structed with  a  master's  art  an  edifice
in  which  thought  gems  of  all  prevail-
ing doctrines,  ancient  and  modern,
saints  and  sages,  to  a  unified  whole,  un-
der whose  guidance  the  scattered  mass
of  humanity  find  a  path  on  which  they
can  travel  fearlessly  as  to  needs,  trials
and  tribulations.

Students  who  follow  the  masterly
system  will  find  it  stimulates  and  in-
spires for  greater  and  nobler  achieve-
ments and  leaves  our  heritage  to  bet-
ter progeny.

Yours  very  truly,

J.  H.  GRAIRO.


—116-


Woodbury,  Conn.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  sent  for  your  ''Master-Key  Sys-
tem'' January  12tli.  The  first  lesson
came  January  21st.

What  a  marvelous  placing  of  words !
So  much  meaning!  So  expansive!

After  several  careful  readings,  I
came  to  the  lesson  again,  reverently.
As  I  read  along  so  many  new  beauties
came  forth  that  it  seemed  as  if  I  had
never  read  it  before — and  yet,  new
meanings  continue  to  come  at  each  suc-
cessive reading.

A  sort  of  companion  letter  to  the
course    came    January    23rd  which,
•  among  much  of  interest,  gave  an  analy-
sis or  definition  of  success  that  is  un-
mistakably clear.

Yours  sincerely,

SETH  F.  MINOR.


—117—


383  E.  7th  St.,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
January  21,  1918.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

Am  enclosing  the  answers  to  Lesson
No.  24,  and  I  almost  wish  there  were
more  to  follow,  so  much  have  I  enjoyed
them.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  much
they  have  helped  me,  for  each  day
brings  a  manifestation  of  the  good  ac-
complished from  practical  application
of  their  teachings.

I  shall  go  over  them  often  during
the  coming  months.  They  are  the
greatest  help  and  inspiration  I  have
ever  received  in  mental  training  and  I
have  read  and  studied  some  during  the
past  seventeen  years  in  my  search  for
Truth.  All  the  lessons  and  books  I
have  read  have  been  a  help  but  it  took
''The  Master-Key  System"  to  open  the
door  wide  enough  for  me  to  realize  the
full  light  of  understanding.

Spiritually,  physically  and  financial-
ly, the  change  is  manifesting,  and,  to
quote  ''Pollyanna,"  I  am  glad,  glad,
GLAD  that  I  have  had  them  as  my
daily  companion  during  the  past  six
months.

Trusting  they  may  give  to  others  the
courage,  peace  and  joy  they  have  to
me,  and  wishing  you  couliniied  success
in  your  good  work,  I  am,

Yours  verv  sincrdy,

ELLEN  IIEYNEN.


—118—


National  Underwriters  Company

J.  H.  DAVIS.  President.

Cleveland,  Ohio.
June  18,  1917.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

Answering  your  inquiry  Lesson  No.
3,  permit  me  to  say  that  I  consider  this
lesson  the  most  complete  exposition  of
the  true  relations  of  God  and  man  that
it  has  ever  been  my  pleasure  to  get.

This  document  in  my  opinion  is  the
greatest  single  document  beneficial  to
mankind  ever  written  in  the  history
of  the  w^orld.

It  is  a  pity  that  the  information  con-
tained therein  is  not  readily  available
to  all  mankind,  as  the  understanding
and  the  practice  of  the  principles  elu-
cidated would  end  all  strife,  crime  and
wars.

I  have  received  a  tremendous  amount
of  benefit  from  this  lesson  and  for  the
first  time  have  come  into  a  true  under-
standing of  my  relationship  with  the
silent  powers  that  dominate  and  de-
termine one's  success.

I  am  putting  into  practice  the  knowl-
edge gained  from  reading  the  lesson
and  believe  confidently  that  a  thor-
ough application  of  these  principles
constantly  and  persistently  applied
will  bring  about  the  results  desired.

With  kindest  regards  and  best
wishes,  Very  truly  yours,

J.  H.  DAVIS.


—119—


Detroit,  Mich.,
December  2,  1917.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  wish  I  could  tell  you  how  much  the
Master-Key  is  doing  for  me ;  life  has
changed  so  wonderfully  for  my  hus-
band and  myself  that  it  is  impossible
to  express  it  in  words.

Looking  back  upon  our  lives,  we  can
see  that  Vv'hatever  desire  we  held  steadi-
ly in  mind  through  the  years  has  been
fulfilled  in  exactly  the  degree  we  dared
wish,  and  it  is  not  hard  for  us  to  be-
lieve that  with  the  knowledge  and
power  we  are  gaining  as  a  result  of
this  wonderful  course,  those  things  we
have  long  held  in  our  consciousness,
but  deemed  impossible  of  attainment
will  soon  be  realized.

For  myself,  I  find  desires  and  abil-
ities, that  I  had  buried  with  bitter
tears,  springing  up  through  the  grass
of  their  graves.  I  have  always  felt
instinctively  that  there  was  a  way  to
bring  my  desires  into  being  and  I  have
never  outgro^vn  the  feeling  that  some-
thing wonderful  would  one  day  come
into  my  life  and  change  conditions  and
set  me  free  to  pursue  my  natural  in-
stincts.

Sincerely  yours,
MRS.  FRANK  WEAVER.


—120—


Box  553,  Ardor,  Pa.,
January  10,  1918.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

Words  are  empty  things  unless  the
spirit  is  alive  back  of  them  and  I  wish
mine  to  be  few.  I  wish  to  show  my  ap-
preciation in  works.

These  lessons  have  been  the  most
satisfying  that  I  have  ever  tried  to
learn.  "Why?  Because  my  intellect
grasped  it  hungrily  and  my  heart  also
was  fed.  Although  the  thought  is  deep,
profound  and  metaphysical,  it  is  ex-
pressed in  such  a  lucid  and  masterful
way  that  it  was  easy,  fascinating,  in-
spiring to  learn.

Hitherto  when  I  thought  I  had  found
the  lessons  of  worth,  if  my  intellect
was  fed  my  heart  would  say,  *'Yes,
that  is  all  right  as  intellectual  food
but  of  what  use ;  there  is  no  salvation
in  it?"  Then  when  I  found  the  lesson
which  my  heart  wanted  to  accept,  my
intellect  would  say,  "You  are  trying
to  believe  that  stuff  because  it  soothes ;
but  you  know  it  is  unreasonable  and
illogical.

Your  lessons  have  not  caused  this
unsatisfactory  result.  They  appeal  con-
vincingly, unmistakably  to  every  center
of  my  being  and  they  are  truth  to  me.

I  am  reminded  of  how  Alexander
carried  about  with  him  in  a  valuable
box  Homer's  poems  and  in  like  spirit,
I  shall  treasure  your  lessons.  And  be-
lieve me,

Most  sincerely  yours,
MRS.  GEORGE  S.  JENKINS.


—121—


936  N.  66th  St.,
January  22,  191S.
Overbrook,  Pa.,

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel: —

I  find  the  Master-Key  System  a  most
wonderful  revelation,  for  it  has  opened
my  eyes  to  many  things  of  which  I  had
formerly  but  a  hazy  conception.

I  am  every  day  more  certain  of  my
power  to  succeed,  and  I  feel  it  all  comes
from  the  knowledge  imparted  by  the
wonderful  Master-Key  System.

I  have  just  received  lesson  fifteen,
and  the  little  Sanscrit  verse.  Both
came  just  at  a  time  when  I  needed  them
most.  Allah  bless  and  forward  the
Master-Key  System  to  the  ends  of  the
earth.

Just  how  much  the  lessons  have  help-
ed me  you  will  never  realize.  Through
them  I  have  lost  fear  and  anxiety.  So
strongly  do  I  know  that  I  can  and  will
draw  my  supply  from  the  universal  that
I  am  quietly  going  on  as  though  my
unseen  millions  were  in  my  hands.

I  have  learned  not  to  recognize  lack,
limitation,  or  any  other  destructive
thought.   I  am  a  new  young  woman.

If  you  desire  any  part  of  this  letter
to  help  other  students  you  may  use  it,
indeed  I  hope  that  you  will.

Thanking  you  for  the  Master-Key
'  System  and  your  little  enclosures  from
time  to  time  which  are  so  dear  to  my
oriental  heart— (I  am  an  Egyptian),  I
remain,  Sincerely,

NAJAYE  MAJODEH.


—122—


Callaway,  Nebr..
February  11,  1918.
Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,

St.  Louis,  Mo.
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

I  am  sending  you  the  replies  to  ques-
tions in  the  fifteenth  lesson  and  so  far,
have  not  had  to  ask  a  question,  but
have  had  to  do  some  hard  studying
which  was  good  for  me.

I  am  glad  I  took  up  the  Master-Key
System  for  it  has  taught  me  the  reason
of  success  and  failure,  and  why  I  made
so  many  failures.  It  is  a  wonderful
revelation  to  me,  and  has  opened  my
eyes  to  things  I  had  never  thought  of,
although  I  am  always  studying.

I  begin  to  think  that  the  Master-Key
System  is  going  to  help  me  solve  prob-
lems that  I  have  been  studying  for
years.

The  Master-Key  System  is  invaluable
in  these  war  times,  especially  to  the
farmer,  when  the  nation  is  demanding
all  the  foodstuff  he  can  raise,  he  will
need  all  the  brain  and  muscle  possible
and  all  the  efHciency  he  can  command,
or  the  nation  will  not  be  able  to  stand
when  the  trial  comes.

Use  this  letter  if  you  want  to,  as  it
might  help  someone  to  turn  failure  in-
to success,  and  then  it  will  bless  he
who  gives  as  well  as  he  who  receives.

Wishing  the  Master-Key  System  all
the  success  it  deserves,  I  remain.
Yours  truly,

JOHN  BAKER.


—123—


Vancouver,  B.  C,
My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

The  course  of  lessons  are  simply  im-
mense. It  makes  my  heart  ache  to
think  that  I  have  come  to  the  last  one
— that  they  will  come  no  more.  Each
lesson  is  a  new  revelation  in  Metaphys-
ics. I  have  been  over  the  same  ground
before  but  never  with  such  brilliant
company.  You  have  pointed  out  so
many  new,  bright,  sparkling  things
along  the  pathway  revealing  so  many
undiscovered  truths — that  all  things
even  in  the  up-to-date  science  of  Meta-
physics have  passed  away  and  the
whole  prospect  has  become  new  and
more  interesting  and  beautiful  than
ever.

I  have  been  lifted  in  thought  into  the
heights  of  marvelous  clear  seeing,  and
set  firm  and  steady  upon  my  thinking
legs,  and  my  face  has  been  turned  with
confidence  and  resoluteness  toward  the
mighty  upward  shining  truth  as  never
before.

You  interweave  the  wonderful  facts
of  physical  science  with  the  great  un-
seen subconscious  absolute  truths  of
the  within  with  such  illumination  and
masterfulness  that  floods  of  light  are
emitted  and  flashed  over  the  student's
mind  and  consciousness,  and  he  is  in  a
perfect  wonderland  of  entertainment,
instruction  and  allurement  so  that  he
cannot  help  but  see  and  understand  the
great  light  that  comes  to  him.

Thanking  you  always,  I  remain,
Sincerely  yours,

R.  J.  IRWIN.

—124--


THE  NEW  TRINroAD  LAKE  ASPHALT  COMPANY,  Ltd.
BRIGHTON,  TRINIDAD
B.  W.  I.


Brighton,  Trinidad,
May  7th,  1919.

Per  SS. ''Mayarow"
Sailing  May  8th.

Mr.  Chas.  F.  Haanel,
419  Granite  Bldg.,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

Up  to  the  time  of  my  writing  I  have  received
corrected  replies  of  my  lessons  from  1  to  5.

They  are  priceless  in  my  estimation.  I  find
them  to  be  the  key  to  a  real  understanding  of
the  lessons.

This  service  makes  the  course  eminently  of
value,  and  is  where  the  chasm  is  spanned  which
gives  the  correspondence  training  such  a  great
advantage  over  mere  book  reading.

I  am  enclosing  Reply  No.  8,  and  I  trust  it  will
meet  with  your  satisfaction.

Meanwhile  I  remain.

Very  truly  yours,

ERROL  ROBERTSON.

—125—


510  N.  E  Street,
Arkansas  City,  Kaus.
June  6, 1919.

Mr.  Chas.  ¥,  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr  Haanel : —

I  have  not  received  the  answers  to  part  1,
with  corrections.

I  cannot  afford  to  miss  a  single  line,  nor  even
a  word  of  this  course  of  instruction ;  neither  do
I  believe  that  you  desire  that  I  should.

From  what  I  have  already  demonstrated,  this
course  of  instructions  means  more  to  me  than
all  of  my  past  life.

I  am  devouring  each  thought  as  the  hot  sands
devour  rain  drops;  to  me  it  is  ''meat  in  due
season.'*

Persons  who  have  sufficiently  digested,  and
assimilated  the  Master  Key  System  will  find
a  unity  of  thought  unattainable  by  any  other
method  or  system  of  which  I  have  any  knowl-
edge.

If  I  could  not  obtain  them  again,  I  would  not
take  $30.00  for  the  3  parts  which  I  have  re-
ceived. '

The  possibilities  and  achievements  which  have
already  opened  up  to  my  conception  are  so  won-
derful that  they  almost  stagger  my  senses.

You  have  not  only  given  me  the  key  to  the
science  of  being,  for  which  learned  men  have
sought  in  vain  for  centuries,  but  you  have  given
me  the  key  to  creation,  to  the  prophecies,  and
the  means  by  which  the  science  of  government
will  be  understood  and  put  into  practice.

Very  sincerely  yours,

G.F.HUNT,


—126—


Detroit,  Micli.,
June  8, 1919.


Mr.  Charles  F.  Haanel,
St.  Louis,  Mo.

My  dear  Mr.  Haanel : —

I  have  long  known  that  a  pound  of  steel  was
valuable  according  to  the  use  it  was  put  to,  and
the  work  it  was  required  to  do,  whether  it
should  be  made  into  railroad  spikes,  knife
blades,  razor  blades  or  watch  springs,  but  until  I
became  conversant  with  the  Master  Key  Sys-
tem, I  did  not  know  how  to  apply  the  law  of
vibration  of  atoms  to  my  spiritual  activities;
my  thought  process.

As  a  result  of  the  continued  practice  of  your
teachings,  I  am  convinced  that  I  have  come  into
possession  of  a  new  world,  a  world  that  trans-
cends anything  that  I  could  possibly  have  hoped
for  before  I  began  this  study,  and  day  by  day
the  darkness  of  material  thought  is  being  pene-
trated, and  I  am  made  new  by  the  renewing  of
my  mind.

I  thank  the  Universal  forces  which  brought
the  Master  Key  to  my  door,  and  wish  you  every
success.

Yours  sincerely,
EGBERT  H.  MORIARTY.
Room  101,  Y.  M.  C.  A.


—127—


•—128—
