SOMNOLISM AND PSYCHEISM, otherwise Vital Magnetism, or Mesmerism:
considered Physiologically and Philosophically.
By Joseph Haddock. London: J. S. Hodson, 1849 (first edition; lectures delivered
at the Bolton Mechanics' Institution).
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b22026125).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM,

OTHERWISE

23ital  iHacncdsm,  or  iEe0meri0m :

CONSIDERED

PHY^SIOLOGICALLY  AND  PHILOSOPHICALLY:

BEING

Substance  of  ILecturee,

DELIVERED  UNDER  THE  AUSPICES  OF  THE  BOLTON  MECH.VNICS’
INSTITUTION.

WITH  AN  APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

NOTES  OF  MESMERIC  AND  PSYTHICAL  EXPERIENCE.

BY

JOSEPH  W.  HADDOCK,

Surgeon- Atothecary.


LONDON:

Published  for  the  Author  by

J.  S.  HODSON,  CLIFFORD’S  INN  PASSAGE,

FLEET  STREET.


1849.


LONDON.  PKINTED  BY  J


S HODSON,


Clifford’s  inn  PASSAGEt  fleet  street


TO


PETER  AINSWORTH,

OF  SllITHILL’S  HALL,

ESQUIRE,

THE  PRESIDENT;

AND  TO

THE  CHAIRMAN  and  COMMITTEE,

OF  THE

BOLTON  MECHANICS*  INSTITUTION,

THE  FOLLO^VING  PAGES
ARE  RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED,

BY


THE  AUTHOR.


ADVERTISEMENT.


Tins  little  work  contains  the  substance  of  two  lectures  delivered  in
the  early  part  of  1848,  partly  from  notes,  and  partly  extemporary,
before  large  audiences  in  the  Temperance  HaU,  Bolton,  under  the
auspices  of  the  Mechanic’s  Institution.  The  second  lecture  was  the
result  of  the  following  resolution  of  the  committee : — “ Resolved,  that
the  best  thanlcs  of  this  committee  be  given  to  Mr.  J.  W.  Haddock  for
his  interesting  lecture  on  mesmerism,  and  that  he  be  requested  to  de-
liver another  lecture  on  the  same  subject.”  It  was  in  many  respects,
a repetition  of  the  first.  They  are  here  presented,  in  many  places,
nearly  verbatim  as  delivered,  with  only  such  alteration  as  their  pre-
sent form  rendered  necessarjq  and  mth  such  additional  experience  as
the  author  has  since  acquired.  The  appendix  is  inserted,  first,  as  a
narrative  of  facts,  embodying  interesting  mesmeric  information,  which
may  be  implicitly  relied  on ; and,  secondly,  to  answer  the  numerous
enquiries  of  many  respectable  parties,  in  Lancashire,  and  elsewhere,
as  to  how  the  writer  discovered  the  mesmeric  capabilities  of  the  young
person  there  referred  to ; and  to  gratify  their  expressed  wish,  to  be
made  acquainted  with  some  of  the  particulars  of  the  case.

The  work  has  been  written  amidst  continued  interruptions,  and
makes  no  pretensions  to  literary  elegance : it  solicits  public  support,
on  the  ground  of  its  being,  probably,  the  first  attempt  to  explain  the
phenomena  of  vital  magnetism  or  mesmerism  on  physiological  and
philosophical  grounds,  in  hai'monj^  with  established  facts,  and  the
principles  of  divine  revelation.

Cheapside,  Bolton,

April,  1849.


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


INTRODUCTION.

1.  On'E  of  the  striking  characteristics  of  the  present
age,  is  the  vast  amount  of  knowledge  respecting  external
objects,  which  has  been  accumulated  in  a comparatively
short  period.  For  within  the  compass  of  human  life,
so  extensive  has  been  the  discovery  of  the  physical
properties  of  natural  substances,  that  Chemistry,
although  of  ancient  date,  may  be  considered  as  a new
science;  and  Geology  has  opened  a new  world  to
human  enquiry.  While  man  has  thus  been  permitted
to  increase  his  knowledge  of  the  world  without  him,
we  might  reasonably  expect  that  some  additional  know-
ledge would  be  acquired  of  the  world  within  him.
That  his  knowledge  would  not  be  confined  to  the  super-
stitions of  the  dark  ages,  or  to  the  assumptions  of  self-
constituted  authority  on  the  one  hand  ; nor  to  the
barren  negations  of  a sceptical  philosophy  on  the  other
hand.  But  that  something  real,  positive,  and  satis-
factory, should  be  learnt  respecting  his  own  constitu-
tion. For  what  knowledge  can  be  so  interesting  to
man,  as  a knowledge  of  himself? — of  the  nature,
powers,  and  capabihties  of  his  own  being.

2.  To  every  calm,  and  well-informed  enquirer,  it
wiU,  I think,  be  evident,  that  the  remarkable  phenomena
of  what  is  called  Mesmerism, — or,  as  it  is  considered
that  it  may  more  properly  be  called, — Psycheism,
rightly  interpreted,  do  afford  us  the  means  of  acquiring
a knowledge  of  the  laws  and  nature  of  the  psychical,

2


2


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSTCHEISM,


or  mental  part  of  our  being,  as  much  transcending
what  is  commonly  known,  as  the  recent  discoveries  in
magnetism  and  electricity  exceed  the  ancient  ideas  of
those  natural  powers  ; and  at  the  same  time,  they
afford  us  the  means  of  becoming  better  acquainted  with
the  more  abstruse  points  in  our  bodily  organization  also.

3.  The  discoveries  and  doctrines  of  an  enlightened
physiology,  teach  us,  that  all  the  foi’ms  and  forces  of
the  entire  universe,  are  found  in  their  highest  per-
fection in  the  bodily  form  of  man ; and  that  in  him,  as
the  Microcosm,  or  little  world,  is  to  be  found,  all  that
exists  in  the  Macrocosm,  or  great  world  of  the  uni-
verse. And  as  in  the  great  world  without  us,  the
most  astonishing  and  transforming  powers  are  dis-
played by  those  subtle,  imponderable,  and  invisible  ele-
ments, which  elude  the  most  acute  physical  senses,
even  when  aided  by  the  highest  artificial  means ; so  in
the  world  within  us,  the  most  wonderful  and  unex-
pected powers  are  manifested  by  those  psychical  or
mental  operations,  by  which  the  laws  and  developments
of  the  world  of  mind,  are  capable  of  being  openly  dis-
played before  our  physical  sight.

4.  But  the  curious  and  interesting  phenomena  dis-
played by  Mesmerism,  instead  of  being  calmly  and
carefully  investigated  by  all  enquiring  minds,  especially
by  those  whose  jDrofession  or  pursuits  ought  to  have
interested  them  in  the  enquiry,  have,  in  too  many  in-
stances, been  scornfully  and  contemptously  neglected.
Authority,  instead  of  lending  its  aid  to  elicit  the  truth,
has  rather  scowled  upon  the  attempt  which  has  been
made  to  lift  the  veil  under  Avhich  truth  has  been  con-
cealed ; and  in  some  cases,  has  misrepresented  the
character  and  intentions  of  those,  Avho,  at  any  cost,
were  determined  to  seek  her  for  themselves.  It  is
possible  indeed,  that  the  very  remarkable  results
said  to  flow  from  the  enquiry ; — results,  so  different
to  the  expectations  and  ideas  of  a materializing  age,


INTRODUCTION.  3

*

and  in  some  respects,  disclosing  matters  which  seem
to  clash  with  established  opinions, — may  have  been
the  reason,  for  this  unfair,  and  certainly  unphilo-
sophical  mode  of  proceeding.  But,  granting  that
the  most  astounding  statements  made  by  mesmeric
experimenters  are  true,  they  are  not,  when  properly
considei’ed,  more  wonderful  than  things  now  universally
admitted  as  facts.  Look  at  the  wonder-working  elec-
tric telegraph!  The  elements  on  which  that  invention
rests,  must  be  as  old  as  the  present  order  of  things :
yet  if  any  one  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century  had
ventured  to  assert,  that  by  human  ingenuity,  electricity
or  magnetism  could  be  made  to  transmit  human  thought
with  mathematical  precision,  and  yet  with  the  velocity
of  light,  he  would  have  been  set  down  by  the  practical
authorities  of  that  age,  as  a dreaming  theorist,  or
an  enthusiastic  visionary.  To  us,  however,  the  visi-
onary theory  has  become  a reality:  and  yet  what
magnetism  or  electricity  really  are,  is  no  more  known
to  us,  than  it  was  to  our  great  grandfathers.  The
truth  is,  the  mode  has  been  elicited,  by  which  certain
comparatively  unknown  mediums  may  be  practically
applied  to  subserve  the  purposes  of  social  life  ; and
herein,  and  for  all  practical  purposes,  consists  the  useful
discovery.  If  we  shall  never  know  what  magnetism
and  electricity  in  themselves  really  are,  we  certainly
do  know  much  of  the  mode  by  which  their  laws  and
powers  may  be  developed  and  manifested : — ^^ve  have
discovered  a mode  of  working  mediums  altogether  un-
known to  our  ancestors.

5.  Just  so,  I apprehend  it  is  with  the  discoveries  of
Mesmerism.  Here  is  in  fact,  a discovery  of  a new
mode  of  working  an  old  medium.  That  mind  and
matter  are  both  necessary  to  form  the  peculiar  or-
ganism we  call  man,  is  no  new  doctrine : but  the  true
nature  of  the  body,  as  the  mind’s  medium  or  instru-
ment, and  of  the  necessary  organization  of  that  superior

2*


4 SOMNOLISJI  AND  PSTCHEISII.

h

in-dwelling  j^ower, — the  soul  or  mind,  which  directs
and  controls  the  outward  form,  has  been  somewhat
overlooked.  Metaphysicians  have  studied  mind  irre-
spective of  form  or  matter  ; and  some  philosophers
would  resolve  all  things  into  material  operation,  irre-
spective of  mind.  I believe  that  fact  and  demon-
strative evidence  will  prove  both  classes  of  philosoiDhers
to  be  wrong.  From  Divine  Revelation  we  know  that
there  is  both  spirit  or  mind,  and  matter; — both  a
spiritual  body  and  a natural  body.  Tliese  cardinal
truths  will  be  found  to  lie  at  the  bottom  of  all  l\Ies-
meric  experience,  and  from  that  experience,  the  d priori
statements  of  the  Scriptures  will  receive  abundant  con-
firmation. And  we  shall  see  that  in  our  present  state
of  existence,  if  we  wish  to  study  mind  or  spirit,  we
must  study  it  as  manifested  in  its  divinely  appointed,
and  true  correspondent  instrument,  — the  material
bodily  organization.

6.  With  some  of  the  mind’s  operations,  and  the
bodily  functions  and  sensations  thence  ensuing,  we  have
become  so  familiar,  that  we  scarcely  ever  stop  to  think
of  the  perpetual  miracles  involved  in  our  daily  expe-
rience. Thus  the  great  blessing  of  sight  involves,  as
we  shall  point  out  presently,  a fact  which  all  the
philosophers  that  have  ever  lived  have  been  unable  to
explain  ! Yet  when  some  manifestation  of  mind  or
spirit  which  has  hitherto  eluded  general  notice,  is
brought  before  iTs,  although  it  may  not  be  more  inex-
plicable than  natural  sight, — ^yet  we  are  apt  to  deny
the  possibility  of  the  declared  manifestation,  simply  be-
cause we  were  not  previously  acquainted  with  it : — apt
to  make  our  present  standard  of  knowledge,  the  mea-
sure by  which  all  future  acquisitions  are  to  be  esti-
mated. Sometimes  too,  we  are  told  authoritatively,
that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  know  anything  of  mind
or  .spirit.  What,  I ask,  do  we  know  of  matter?
Simply  some  of  its  laws  and  properties;  and  from


ORIGIN  Ol^MESMERISM.


5


these  we  predicate  its  qualities.  So  it  is  with  mind
or  spirit : Mesmerism,  or  more  truely  Psycheism,  fur-
nishes us  with  a means  of  acquiring  an  experimental
acquaintance  with  some  of  its  most  distinctive  quali-
ties ; — distinctive  I mean  with  respect  to  the  qualities
of  inert  matter.  Whether  we  shall  ever  know  what
spirit  or  what  matter  really  is, — remains  for  a higher
stage  of  existence  to  determine.  It  is  privilege  enough
to  be  enabled  to  know  something  of  the  laws  and  pro-
perties of  that  higher  and  imperishable  organism,  to
which  our  outward  bodily  organism  is  subservient.


ORIGIN  OF  MESMERISM.

7.  In  the  records  of  past  ages,  we  have  many  state-
ments of  remarkable  mental  or  psychical  manifesta-
tions, and  also  of  the  performance  of  extraordinary
cures,  by  mental  or  moral  agency,  which  ignorance
and  superstition  have  ascribed  to  miracle  or  magic.
And  hence,  cases  resting  on  the  best  historical  autho-
rity, have  been  doubted,  and  even  denied  in  later  times.
Towards  the  close  of  the  last  century,  the  existence  of
some  of  these  powers  was  discovered,  partly  from  acci-
dent and  partly  from  research  ; and  to  the  agency  by
which  they  were  accomplished,  the  name  of  Animal
Magnetism  was  applied  by  its  modern  discoverer —
Mesmer.  This  individual  has  been  represented  in
works  of  authoi’ity  as  an  impostor  and  cheat,  and  as
owing  his  celebrity  entirely  to  the  silly  credulity  of
imaginative  people.  Few  persons  who  have  really
taken  the  trouble  to  enquire  into  the  matter,  would
now  hazard  such  an  assertion : yet,  whether  from
ignorance  of  the  true  cause  of  the  phenomena  he  wit-
nessed, or  from  a desire  to  mystify  the  subject,  it  must
be  admitted  that  he  both  did  and  said  many  things
which  justified  suspicion.


6


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


8.  Anton  Mesmer  was  born  in  1734,  at  Mersburg,
on  the  slioi’es  of  the  Lake  of  Constance  ; and  died  in
his  native  place  in  1815,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-
one.  At  the  age  of  forty-two  he  took  the  degree  of
Doctor  of  Medicine,  in  the  University  of  Vienna.  He
appears  to  have  been  a man  of  an  imaginative  cast  of
mind  ; for  the  inaugural  Thesis  he  published  on  ob-
taining his  degree,  was  “ On  the  influence  of  the
Planets  on  the  Human  Body.”  Such  a mind,  if  likely
to  fall  into  many  errors,  was  still  open  for  the  reception
of  any  new  ideas  wliich  might  present  themselves  ; and
was  not  so  prone,  as  men  of  a more  sceptical  cast,  to
reject  any  new  truth,  because  it  did  not  harmonize
with  preconceived  opinions.  The  then  Professor  of
Astronomy,  at  Vienna,  believed  in  the  efiicacy  of  the
loadstone  as  a remedy  in  human  disease  ; and  he  had
invented  a peculiar  form  of  magnetized  steel  plates,
which,  it  is  said,  he  applied  to  the  cure  of  disease  with
much  success.  Mesmer  obtained  from  the  Astronomer,
who  was  his  personal  friend,  these  magnets,  and  ap-
plied them  in  his  own  way  ; and  it  is  said,  with  such
striking  results,  that  he  communicated  them  to  the
Astronomer,  who  published  an  account  of  them,  but
attributed  the  cures  performed  to  the  form  of  the
plates,  and  merely  represented  IMesmer  as  a physician
employed  by  him  to  use  them.  Mesmer,  who  had  dis-
covered the  peculiar  mode  of  using  them  to  insure  suc-
cess ; — that  was  in  fact,  by  manipulations,  now  called
Passes, — was  indignant  at  this,  and  accused  his  friend
of  a violation  of  the  confldence  placed  in  him.  The
result  was  a controversy  between  the  parties  ; each  ac-
cusing the  other.  Notwithstanding  this  quarrel,  l\Ies-
mer  proceeded  in  his  own  way,  and  acquired  consider-
able popularity.  But,  whether  from  indiscretion  on
his  part,  or  jealousy  on  the  part  of  others,  he  was
opposed  by  the  scientific  authorities  of  Vienna,  and
was  ultimately  obliged  to  quit  that  city.


ORIGIN  OF  MES3IERISM.


7


9.  In  the  year  1778,  two  years  after  obtaining  his
degree,  he  arrived  at  Paris,  whither  his  popularity
appears  to  have  preceded  him ; for  we  are  told,  even
by  his  enemies,  that  upon  his  opening  public  apart-
ments in  that  gay  metropolis,  for  the  reception  of
patients,  they  were  speedily  crowded  by  the  numbers
who  daily  resorted  to  them,  including  all  classes,  from
the  peer  to  the  peasant ; and  that  hundreds  were  ready
to  testify  to  the  cures  wrought  upon  their  own  persons,
by  the  Great  Magnetizer.  Now,  making  every  allow-
ance for  imagination  or  fancy,  striking  results  must
have  followed  his  treatment,  or  no  such  enthusiasm
could  have  been  raised  in  his  behalf.  A French  phy-
sician became  a disciple  of  Mesmer,  and  is  said  speedily
to  have  acquired  the  best  practice  in  Paris.  So  great,  in
fact,  was  Mesmer’s  success,  that  the  French  Government
took  up  the  matter,  and  offered  him  a large  annual  income,
if  he  would  communicate  his  secret,  and  they  appear  to
have  thought  so  highly  of  the  use  to  which  this  new
agent  might  be  applied,  that  they  actually  proposed  to
guarantee  him  a large  sum,  even  if  a commission  ap-
pointed to  examine  the  subject  should  make  an  unfa-
vourable report ! Mesmer,  however,  did  not  accede  to
the  Government  proposal.  After  some  time,  and  divers
vicissitudes,  the  sum  of  £14,000  was  raised  by  his  dis-
ciples, whom  he  had  instructed  in  his  art,  but  whom
he  did  not  consider  entitled  to  practise  it  publicly  ; — a
right  which  they  considered  themselves  to  possess.
Mesmer  then  returned  to  his  native  place  ; and  this  has
been  represented  as  “ running  away  from  his  dupes
but  it  appears  that  he  retained  faith  in  his  views,  and
in  his  last  illness  sought  relief  from  his  own  discovery.

10.  As  Mesmer’s  discoveries  arose  out  of  the  use  of
magnets,  it  is  not  surprising  that  he  should  consider
Magnetism  as  the  agent  by  which  the  effects  he  wit-
nessed were  produced.  He  therefore  taught  that  there
was  a fluid,  or  gas,  universally  diffused,  which  influ-


8


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSTCHEISM.


enced  the  earth  and  planets  and  all  animated  bodies,
and  this  fluid  he  called  “ Animal  Magnetism.”  He
considered  that  it  was  capable  of  healing  diseases  of
the  nerves  immediately,  and  other  diseases  mediately  ;
that  it  perfected  the  action  of  medicines,  and  tended  to
promote  favourable  crises  in  disease  ; and  that  in  Ani-
mal Magnetism,  nature  presented  a universal  method
of  heahng  the  diseases,  and  preserving  the  health  of
mankind.  The  great  end  of  Mesmer’s  proceedings,
appears,  therefore,  to  have  been  Use, — the  application
of  a remedy  for  human  suffering;  and  he  does  not  ap-
j)ear  to  have  been  aware  of  the  more  curious,  and  dis-
tinctly psychical  phenomena  elicited  by  later  enquirers.
To  the  Marquis  de  Puysegur,  a French  nobleman,  one
of  Mesmer’s  disciples,  is  attributed  the  discovery  of  the
faculty  called  Clairvoyance,  in  the  year  1784.

11.  For  the  sake  of  brevity,  I omit  describing  Mes-
mer’s mode  of  operating,  save  that  among  other  means
for  acting  on  his  patients,  he  had  a sort  of  box,  filled
with  iron  filings  and  pounded  glass,  placed  in  the  centre
of  the  room  where  they  assembled  ; and  that  they  each
were  placed  in  connection  with  it,  by  means  of  polished
metal  rods  which  they  held  in  their  hands  ; and  the
patients  were  further  united  and  connected  by  means
of  a chain  encircling  them.  Wlien  the  French  Com-
missioners apphed  to  this  box  the  usual  tests  for
terrestrial  magnetism,  and  found  no  indicatibn  of  ordi-
nary magnetic  influence,  they  reported  that  the  whole
was  the  work  of  imagination,  meaning  fancg;  yet  ad-
mitting that  cures  were  effected.  This  Commission
seems  to  have  been,  both  a prejudiced  and  unfair  one.
The  name  of  Dr.  Franklin  occurs  among  the  Commis-
sioners, but  he  was  at  the  time  unwell,  and  incapable
of  attending  to  the  enquiry  ; and  while  the  Public  Ke-
port  condemned  Mesmer  and  his  proceedings,  one  of
the  Commissioners,  who  had  paid  the  greatest  atten-
tion to  the  proceedings,  published  a private  or  indivi-


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OP  MESMERISM.


9


dual  report  favourable  to  him.  But  in  the  year  1826,
the  French  Government  appointed  a second  Commi-
sion,  and  their  Report,  published  in  1831,  fully  admits
the  truth  of  all  the  phenomena  usually  ascribed  to
Animal  Magnetism.  However,  our  business  is  not  so
much  with  the  opinions  of  Mesmer,  or  that  of  his
friends  or  enemies,  as  with  that  of  the  facts  and  phe-
nomena associated  with  his  name.  It  was  soon  dis-
covered that  the  steel  rods  had  but  little  if  anything  to
do  with  the  phenomena  produced  ; but  the  name  of
Animal  Magnetism  continued  to  be  used,  and  is  still
used  on  the  continent,  and  by  this  name  the  practice
was  introduced  into  England  a few  years  ago.  But
the  English  enquirers  into  this  remarkable  human  fa-
culty, finding  that  the  use  of  a name,  which  implied
the  existence  of  a fluid  which  could  not  be  demon-
strated to  the  senses,  was  frequently  turned  into  an
argument  against  facts  which  admitted  of  complete  de-
monstration ; adopted,  out  of  respect  to  the  memory  of
Mesmer,  and  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  the  adoption
of  any  theory  of  their  own,  the  name  of  Mesmerism  ;
just  as  Magnetism  is  applied  to  the  properties  of  the
loadstone,  from  Magnes,  the  ancient  reputed  disco-
verer of  its  powers,  or  Galvanism,  to  the  discoveries
of  Galvani.  We  therefore  proceed  to  notice  the  facts
and  phenomena  associated  with  the  names  of  Mesmer-
ism, or  Animal  Magnetism,  and  shall  endeavour  to
ascertain  the  Laws  and  Causes  to  which  these  pheno-
mena may  be  referred.


PHENOMENA  AND  PHYSIOLOGY  OF
MESMERISM.

12.  There  are  several  stages  or  degrees  of  what  is
called  Mesmeric  Influence  ; or,  in  other  words,  the
Mesmeric  or  Psychic  State,  involves  a variety  of  stales,


10


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSTCnEISM.


having  one  common  character,  but  presenting  widely
differing  phenomena.  Thus,  there  is  simple  Mesmeric
Drowsiness  or  Sleep  ; — Coma,  or  more  profound
sleep  ; Insensibility  to  pain; — this,  I believe  only
occurs,  when  the  Mesmeric  Coma  is  fully  established,
and  most  of  the  external  senses,  together  with  the  pro-
per consciousness  of  external  objects  is  rendered  dor-
mant ; and  the  internal  faculty  of  imagination  is  called
into  activity,  without  the  guidance  of  true  reason.
Phantasy, — or  that  state  in  which  the  Mesmerised
person  takes  the  mere  suggestions  of  the  mind  of  the
operator  to  be  realities.  Phreno-Mesmeuism,  or  the
manifestation  of  the  Phrenological  sentiments  and  feel-
ings, which  is  but  another  form  of  simple  imaginative
action; — Transfer  op  State  and  Feeling,  or  that
Imaginative  action,  which  causes  the  patient  to  feel
what  is  done  to  the  Mesmeriser,  as  if  it  was  done  to
him : Mental  Attraction,  or  apparent  Magnetic
drawing  of  the  person  of  the  patient,  even  contrary  to
his  inclinations.  Cerebral  Lucidity,  or  apparent
illumination  of  the  Brain  ; with  other  forms  of  what  is
called  Clairvoyance  ; but  which,  I think  would  be
better  called,  Inner  Vision  ; or  Internal,  or  Spiri-
tual Sight.*  Assuming  therefore,  for  the  present,
that  these  phenomena  exhibit  a series  of  gi’eat  and
important  facts,  which  cannot  be  set  aside,  neither  by
reason  nor  ridicule,  I proceed  at  once  to  enquire,  —
How  we  are  to  understand  them  ? In  what  way  to
account  for  tlie  curious  and  interesting  manifestations,
thus  thrust  upon  our  notice?

13.  We  must  now  therefore  examine  the  medium  by
which  the  mind  acts  upon  the  bodily  organization, —
namely,  the  Brain  and  Nervous  SYSTEJi.f  It  is

* All  these  states  were  exhibited  before  the  large  audiences  to
whom  these  Lectures  were  addi-essed.  In  the  Appendix  the  reader
will  find  some  account  of  their  various  manifestations.

t When  these  Lectures  were  delivered,  the}’^  were  illustrated  by


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


11


common  to  speak  of  the  nervous  system,  as  consist-
ingly  of  the  brain,  the  spinal  marrow,  and  the  nerves
springing  from  them.  This  arrangement  is  true  enough
as  far  as  it  goes ; but  it  is  not  sufficiently  particular
for  our  purpose.  For  upon  examining  the  interior  of
a human  head,  it  will  be  found  that  every  individual
/las  two  distinct  brains.  These  two  brains  are  very
different  in  size  as  well  as  form  and  convolution.  The
upper  and  very  much  larger  portion,  and  which  in  fact
occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  cranium,  or  skull,  is
called  the  Cerebrum  ; The  smaller  portion  is  situated
in  the  hinder  part  of  the  head,  just  above  the  spinal
maiTow,  and  is  called  the  Cerebellum  ; — a word
meaning  “ the  little  brain.”  The  Cerebrum  is  later-
ally divided  into  halves,  called  hemispheres,  and  also
into  smaller  divisions,  called  lobes;  The  interior  por-
tion is  made  up  of  various  cavities,  and  delicately  ar-
ranged minute  fibres,  which  commence  in  extremely
minute  bodies  called  cortical  glands,  which  every-
where occupy  the  surface  of  the  Cerebrum  ; some  of
these  fibres  afterwards  converge,  to  form  the  spinal
marrow.  The  surface  of  the  Cerebrum,  is  also  every-
where disposed  in  wavy  furrows,  not  unlike  the  folds
of  the  Intestines.  But  the  Cerebellum,  not  only  differs
in  size  and  situation,  but  also,  in  exterior  and  interior
form : for  the  exterior,  instead  of  the  wavy  folds,  is
arranged  in  what  are  called  lamina,  or  plates ; and
the  interior  has  an  arborescent  or  tree-like  appear-
ance;— so  much  so,  that  it  is  called  arbor  vit®, — the
tree  of  life.  Now  viewing  man  as  formed  according

continual  reference  to  models  and  colossal  drawings  of  the  Brain,  and
diagrams  of  the  Sympathetic  and  Spinal  Xerv'es,  and  of  the  course  of
the  Carotid  and  Vertehral  Arteries.  The  author  regrets  that  he
could  not  introduce  engravings  of  these  drawings,  to  render  the  de-
scription plainer  to  the  reader.  But  he  would  recommend  an  exa-
mination of  the  engravings  on  those  subjects,  in  Mr.  Erasmus  Wilson's
Anatomists'  Vade  Mecum,  and  Dr.  Carpenter’s  Human  Physiology.


12


S03IN0LISJI  AND  PSYCHEISII.


to  the  Infinite  Wisdom,  and  perfect  order  of  a Divine
Creator,  we  must  expect  to  find  consummate  order  and
design  within  him,  and  that  every  organ  of  his  body
should  be  formed  for  some  specific  and  determinate
Use;  for  Use  is  the  great  end  of  all  the  Creator’s
operations.  Hence  we  may  conclude  that  each  of  these
brains  has  its  own  specific  use,  and  such  we  find  to  be
the  case  ; and  I will  endeavour  to  jjoint  out  such  of
those  uses,  as  bear  upon  the  subject  we  are  now  con-
sidering ; my  object  at  present  being,  not  to  present
yon  with  a full  view  of  the  physiology  of  the  human
brain  ; but  only  so  much  as  is  indispensably  necessary
to  be  known,  in  order  to  comprehend  the  phenomena  of
hlesmerism.

14.  On  the  base,  or  lower  part  of  the  cerebrum,  are
found  various  nerves,  which  may  be  easily  seen  in
any  good  anatomical  engraving.  Thus  in  front  are
found  the  bulbs  of  the  olfactory  nerves,  or  nerves  of
smell,  which,  to  use  a familiar  phrase,  groio  out  of  the
base  of  the  cerebrum,  and  expand  towards  the  fore-
head, and  from  these  bulbs,  a multitude  of  filaments
depend,  which  are  spread  out,  on  the  delicate  mem-
brane in  the  upper  part  of  the  nose.  The  optic
nerves,  or  nerves  of  sight,  also  issue  from  the  under
part  of  the  cerebrum,  then  approach  each  other  and
form  a union,  called  the  commissure ; they  then  se-
parate, and  proceed  in  the  form  of  a round  white  cord
to  the  ball  of  each  eye,  which  they  enter  behind,  and
then  spread  out  to  form  the  delicate  nervous  expansion
called  the  retina.  The  nerves  which  move  the  eyes
and  eyelids,  also  issue  from  the  base  of  the  cerebrum.
There  are  also  other  nerves  arising  from  different  por-
tions of  the  cerebrum  ; but  except  those  by  which
sensation  is  experienced,  they  have  no  particular  refer-
ence to  the  phenomena  of  Mesmerism.  There  are
other  important  nerves  ■which  arise  within  the  cra-
nium, but  not  from  the  cerebrum,  and  in  respect  to


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


13


mesmeric  phenomena,  the  chief  are  the  7th  and  8th
pairs,  which  arise  from  the  cerebellum ; and  the  great
sympathetic  nerves,  which,  by  means  of  the  8th  pair
of  nerves,  are  also  connected  with  the  lesser  brain.  It
is  also  worthy  of  notice,  that  all  the  nerves  of  the
cerebrum  issue  from  its  base,  thus  leaving  the  fibrous
and  cortical  portions  free ; and  by  this  means  the
General  Sensorium  is  placed  in  a region  above  the
ministering  nerves,  and  thus,  as  it  were,  midioay  be-
tween the  mind  and  outward  nature.

15.  Now  it  is  essentially  necessary  to  be  known,  in
order  to  form  any  correct  idea  of  the-  physiological
phenomena  of  INIesmerism,  that  all  the  nerves  of  the
body,  innumerable  as  they  may  appear  to  be,  arise
either  directly,  or  indirectly  from  the  cerebrum  or
cerebellum : but  in  speaking  of  the  origin  of  the
nerves,  my  remarks  have  no  reference  to  their  deve-
lopment in  the  embryo,  but  to  their  situation  and  tise
in  the  perfect  organism.  And  also,  that  whatever  may
be  the  parental  character,  so  to  speak,  of  any  nerve,
that  character  it  preserves  to  its  termination,  however
circuitous  its  course  may  be,  and  however  its  filament
may  be  mixed  up  Avith  filaments  of  nerves  of  another
order,  so  as  to  form  a compound  nerve.  This  is  one
of  those  traits  of  Divine  simplicity  which  are  so  mani-
fest in  the  Animal  Economy.  Now  all  the  nerves  by
which  we  feel  or  act ; — that  is,  all  what  are  called  the
voluntaiy  and  sensory  nerves,  may  be  said  to  arise,
either  directly  from  this  larger  portion  of  the  entire
brain,  called  the  cerebrum,  or  indirectly  from  it,  by
means  of  the  spinal  marrow;  which  may  be  con-
sidered as  a continuation  of  the  cerebrum  in  the  body.
The  vSpinae  Marrow  is  composed  of  three  distinct
columns; — the  Anterior,  or  front  column,  being  formed
of  what  are  styled  motor  nerves : that  is,  nerves  that
are  concerned  in  voluntary  motion  ; the  posterior
column,  or  hinder  part,  of  nerves  of  sensation  ; and


14


SOMNOLISM  AKD  PSYCHEISM.


the  middle  part  of  the  column  contains  the  roots  of  the
nerves  of  respiration.  If  the  brain  is  attentively  ex-
amined, portions  of  nervous  fibres  may  be  seen  pass-
ing by  and  through  other  nervous  portions,  and  yet
having  no  connection  with  them.  Thus  portions  of
the  motor  fibres  of  the  cerebrum,  may  be  traced
under  the  arch  of  the  optic  nerves,  and  tlu’ough  that
appendage  of  the  cerehellum  called  the  bridge  of
Varolius  ; and  yet  they  are  uninfluenced  by  the  Cere-
bellum, but  preserve  their  cerebral  character,  and  pass
intact  and  directly  into  the  fore  part  of  the  spinal
marrow  ; and  portions  of  se7isory  fibres,  may  be
traced  in  the  same  manner  going  hy  and  thi-ough  nerv-
ous substances  of  another  character  without  losing  their
own  specific  character,  and  then  passing  into  the  hinder
part  of  the  spinal  column.  Now  it  is  by  this  mode  of
arrangement,  that  the  true  character  of  the  nerves  at
their  origin,  is  preserved  to  their  extremities  ; and  so
carefully  is  this  distinction  preserved,  that  even  if  fila-
ments of  motor  or  sensory  nerves,  appear  to  be  united
in  one  cord,  yet  each  order  of  filaments  retains  its  ori-
ginal character.  If  I raise  my  arm,  I do  so  by  mus-
cular power,  communicated  by  nerves  having  their
true  origin  in  the  cerebrum ; the  same  may  be  said  of
walking,  or  of  any  other  action  under  the  control  of
the  will.  All  these  voluntary  and  external  actions,
are  done  by  and  through  the  medium  of  the  cerebrum.
Thus  one  great  use  of  the  cerebrum,  is  to  originate
and  control  the  voluntary  and  sensory  nerves  ; it  is
thus,  the  soiil’s  medium  for  external  knowledge,  and
voluntary  action, — the  great  organ  of  what  is  called
Animal  Life.  Hence  pressure  on  the  cerebrum,  by
paralyzing  its  action,  instantly  suspends  aU  sensation
and  capability  of  motion.

16.  But  the  office  of  the  Cerebellum,  the  smaller,
and  curiously  organized  portion  of  the  entire  hrain,  is
of  another  kind.  This  is  the  great  organ  or  fountain


rnENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


15


of  organic  life:  that  is  of  the  life  of  the  internal
organs  of  the  body,  and  of  the  involuntary  motions.
The  pulsations  of  the  heart ; the  circulation  of  the
blood ; the  digestive  actions  of  the  stomach  and
bowels;  the  action  of  the  reproductive  organs; — in
a word,  of  the  thousand  functions  performing  within
us,  and  over  which  our  'wills  have  no  control : all
these  internal  functions  are  under  the  direction  and
control  of  nerves  proceeding  either  directly,  or  indi-
rectly from  the  cerebellum,  or  its  appendages ; and
this  chiefly,  by  the  aid  of  the  great  sympathetic
nerves,  and  the  8th  pair  ah-eady  alluded  to.

17.  The  eighth  pair  of  cranial  nerves,  called  also  the
par  vagum,  arises  from  the  cerebellum,  and  its  con-
nections, and  gives  off  numerous  branches  which  ramify
plentifully  on  the  stomach  and  lungs,  and  in  fact  are
continued  to  nearly  aU  the  viscera.  The  great  sym-
pathetic nerves  differ  from  all  the  other  nerves  in  the
body,  both  in  their  arrangement  and  form:  they  are
studded  with  small  kernels  called  ganglia,  or  knots,  into
which,  and  out  of  which,  numberless  nervous  twigs
have  their  entrance  and  exit ; and  in  the  neck,  by  some
of  these  branches  they  are  connected  with  the  par
vagum,  and  thus  with  the  cerebellum.  These  two
pairs  of  important  nerves  may  be  considered  as  form-
ing the  trunk  of  the  system  of  the  cerebellum,  just  as
the  spinal  marrow  forms  the  trunk  of  the  system  of
the  cerebrum.  And  to  perfect  the  operation  of  the
animal  economy,  twigs  from  each  are  united  with
each  other ; and  from  the  great  sympathetic  with  all
the  nerves  of  the  body.  Now  the  existence,  and  dis-
tinct functions  of  these  two  brains,  and  the  systems  of
nerves  depending  on  them,  must  be  carefully  re-
membered, if  we  would  understand  the  phenomena
of  Somnolism,  or  ordinary  Mesmerism.  And  to  enable
you  to  comprehend  the  physiology  of  this  wonderful
discovery,  I wiU,  as  the  first  step,  point  out  the  prin-


16


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


cipal  difference  between  a state  of  wakefulness  and
sleep,  and  the  immediate  ‘physical  cause  of  this  differ-
ence.

18.  During  wakefulnes,  both  brains  are  more  or  less
in  a state  of  activity : but  of  the  action  of  the  larger
portion, — that  is  of  the  cerebrum,  Ave  are  conscious  ; so
tliat  our  loill  bears  rule  in  the  animal  economy,  and
the  sensory  nerves  eonvey  to  the  sensorium  Avithin
the  cerebrum,  the  various  impressions  made  by  out-
ward objeets.  But  Avhen  sleep  seals  up  the  eyelids,
the  activity  of  the  cerebrum  ceases,  aud  henee  we
become  insensible  to  outAvard  things  ; and  then  nature,
or  the  involuntary  portion  of  our  nervous  centre, —
that  is  the  Cerebellum,  with  its  derivatives,  has  the
entire  control  and  direction  of  the  animal  kingdom.
It  is  well  known  that  “ balmy  sleejA,”  is  “ tired  nature’s
kind  restorer but  it  is  not  so  generally  known,  that
one  great  reason  for  the  refreshing  and  restorative  na-
ture of  sleep,  consists  in  the  complete  suspension  of  the
faculties  of  the  cerebrum,  and  the  operations  of  nature
being  carried  on  by  the  cerebellum,  without  any  of
those  manifold  disturbing  causes,  Avhich  arise  from  our
voluntary  and  conscious  activities.  The  cerebrum  is
composed,  as  I have  already  observed,  of  innumerable
fibres  originating  in  little  lobules  or  glands.  In  the
active  state  of  this  portion  of  the  entire  brain,  or  in
other  words,  in  the  wakeful  state,  these  fibres  are
erect  and  Avith  their  lobules  or  glands  point  towai’ds
the  circumference  of  the  cranium,  aud  there  is  a capa-
bility of  moving  them  either  singly,  or  in  greater  or
lesser  groups;  and  hence  arises  the  poAver  of  the  will
to  exercise  such  an  immense  variety  of  muscular  ac-
tions, and  the  rapidity  and  delicacy  Avith  Avhich  the
behests  of  the  Avill  are  transmitted  by  the  nerves.
In  a state  of  inactivity  or  sleep,  the  fibres  collapse,
or  fall  together,  and  hence  the  capability  of  this  indivi-
dual action  ceases  ; and  a more  general  or  combined


PHEN05IENA,  ETC.,  OP  MESMERISM.


17


action  only  remains  possible.  This  general  or  combined
action,  is  similar  to  the  true  natural  action  of  the  cere-
bellum, which,  from  its  peculiar  organization,  is  inca-
pable of  the  individual  action  which  distinguishes  the
cerebrum.  But  with  the  cessation  of  individual  or
separate  action  in  the  cerebrum  all  ordinary  sensation
ceases ; and  hence  the  unconsciousness  of  a state  of
sound  sleep.

19.  Another  physical  cause  for  the  state  of  insensi-
bility in  sleep  is,  that  by  the  collapse,  or  falling  together
of  the  fibres  of  the  cerebrum,  the  blood  is  prevented
from  entering  the  finer  channels  of  the  brain ; but
courses  along  the  pia  mater,  or  membrane  investing
the  brain.  This  is  occasioned  by  a law  generally
overlooked,  namely  that  the  brain  has  an  automatic
movement  of  its  own,  synchronous,  not  with  the  action
of  the  heart,  but  with  the  respiration  of  the  lungs  ;
and  on  this  account  the  brain  has  the  control  of  tlie
blood  circulating  within  its  substance,  independant  of
the  action  of  the  heart.  Hence  the  vertebral  and
carotid  arteries,  which  supply  the  blood  to  the  brain,
have  a pecubar  erratic  course,  more  so  than  any  other
arterial  trunks,  and  every  mechanical  precaution  is
taken  to  impede  the  propulsive  force  of  the  heart ; so
that  the  brain  may  imbibe  or  reject  the  vital  and  sti-
mulating fluid,  just  according  to  the  state  induced  upon
it.  Whatever,  therefore,  induces  a change  in  the  state
of  the  fibres  and  cortical  glands  of  the  cerebrum,  changes
the  state  of  its  automatic  action,  and  thence  produces
either  somnolency  or  watchfulness.*

* See  the  representation  of  the  course  of  the  arteries  in  the  neck
and  head,  called  the  “ Circle  of  Willis,”  in  Erasmus  Wilson’s  work.
The  author  is  aware,  that  some  experiments  of  Majendie  and  others
may  appear  to  militate  against  the  doctrine  of  the  cerebrum  and
cerebellum,  briefly  expounded  in  these  lectures : but  he  is  satisfied
that  the  view  he  has  espoused,  is  nevertheless  well  founded,  and  rests
upon  the  largest  induction  of  all  the  facts  of  the  case.

3


]8


SOMNOLISM  .tND  PSYCHEISM.


20.  Now  let  US  apply  these  anatomical  and  physiolo-
gical facts  to  the  illustration  of  mesmeric  phenomena  ;
and  I think  we  shall  he  able  to  understand  something
of  the  mode  by  which  they  are  produced  : — that  we  shall
find  ourselves  in  possession  of  the  true  hey  to  unlock
these  generally  considered  mysteries.  But  first  I ^dll
briefly  describe  the  most  usual  manifestations.

21.  The  simplest  visible  state,  is  that  called  mes-
meric sleep.  This  I have  induced  both  by  the  ordinary
method,  and  also  by  Dr.  Braid’s  mode  of  making  the
patient  steadfastly  gaze  upon  some  small  fixed  object; —
called  by  him  Hypnotizing  ; but  I consider  the  mes-
meric mode  the  best  way,  where  the  patient  is  suscept-
ible of  its  influence,  and  by  it,  and,  as  far  as  my  present
experience  goes,  by  it  only,  can  the  higher  developments
be  produced.  Whatever  the  mode  of  operating  em-
ployed, the  primary  effect  is  on  the  state  of  the  cerebrum,
which,  by  modifying  the  circulation  of  its  blood,  col-
lapses in  various  degrees,  and  thus  assumes  the  som-
nolent state.  But  in  using  the  ordinary  mesmeric
mode,  I altogether  discard  those  formal  and  mystic
modes  of  proceeding  sometimes  practised  and  recom-
mended by  some  writers  on  Animal  Magnetism.  I
have  reason  to  believe,  as  I shall  point  out  in  the
sequel,  that  mind  is  the  grand  agent  in  aU  really
mesmeric  phenomena ; and  the  manijiulations  are
merely  so  many  means  of  fixing  mental  action.  My
usual  mode  of  proceeding  is  simply  to  place  the  subjects
or  patients  in  a sitting  posture,  and  take  both  their
hands  in  my  left  hand,  and  then  place  my  right  hand
on  their  head.  Where  there  is  any  degree  of  mes-
meric sensibility,  this  is  the  best  and  most  gentle  mode
of  proceeding ; but  in  more  difficult  cases,  the  desired
effect  may  be  sooner  produced  by  gentle  passes,  made
from  the  crown  of  the  head  over  the  forehead  down-
wards : or,  in  some  cases,  by  making  the  passes  over
tlie  entire  head  backwards.  In  this  simple  mesmeric


PHENOMENA,  ETC.,  OP  MESMERISM.


19


sleep,  just  as  in  ordinary  sleep,  we  find  different  degrees
of  soundness.  Some  persons  merely  feel  a little  drow-
siness : others  find  it  impossible  to  open  the  eyelids,
and  yet  are  perfectly  conscious,  and,  in  other  respects,
awake.  Other  persons  of  greater  susceptibility,  either
the  result  of  continued  experiment,  or  pecubar  nervous
temperament,  proceed  quickly  into  a state  of  profound
sleep, — or,  as  I propose  to  call  it,  Somnolism.  This
state  may  quickly  pass  into  one  having  all  the  charac-
teristics of  somnambulism,  or  what  is  commonly  called
sleep-walking ; in  fact,  I can  see  no  difference  between
this  state,  and  natural  somnambulism,  except  that  the
latter  is  the  result  of  spontaneous  natural  causes,  while
the  former  is  the  direct  result  of  human  agency.  I
have  also  reason  to  believe  that  natural  somnambulists
will  make  the  best  mesmeric  subjects.

22.  The  induction  of  the  true  somnolent  state,  is  all
that  is  required,  to  produce  the  curious  and  manifold
phenomena  of  mesmerism,  save  and  except  the  higher
stages  of  cerebral  lucidity  and  claiiwoyance.  Some  of
these  states  I will  now  proceed  to  notice : and,  first.
Insensibility  to  Light  and  Pain.  K the  eye  of  a
patient  in  the  somnolent  state  is  examined,  it  iviU  be
generally  found,  drawn  upwards  and  inwards,  and  tliis
perhaps,  in  proportion  to  the  complete  development  of
the  state : but  it  iviU  exhibit  little,  if  any,  susceptibility
to  the  influence  of  light.  In  fact,  I have  satisfied
myself  by  repeated  and  careful  observation,  that  all
external  vision  is  withdrawn.  There  is  the  perfect
visual  organ,  but  the  party  sees  not.  There  is  also  the
healthy  skin,  with  its  infinitude  of  nervous  papillfe ;
but  it  exhibits  no  sign  of  feehng.  The  most  sensitive
parts  may  be  pinched,  or  pricked  with  needles  or  pins ;
but  the  patient  will  exhibit  no  consciousness  of  suffer-
ing, or,  in  fact,  of  any  kind  of  feeling;  but  will  continue
to  converse  with  the  mcsmeriser  or  the  experimenter,
without  noticing  in  the  least  degree  the  apparently

3*


20


SOIINOLISM  AND  PSTCHEISM.


painful  experiment  to  which  he  is  being  subjected.
Nay,  more,  it  is  an  undoubted  fact,  that  the  most  se-
vere surgical  operations  have  been  performed,  both  in
this  country  and  on  the  continent,  without  the  patient
evincing  any  susceptibility.  I will  mention  one  only,
recorded  in  the  French  Medical  Journals,  and  also  in
the  Penny  Cyclopcedia,  under  the  the  article  Somnam-
bulism. An  elderly  French  lady  was  the  subject  of
cancer  in  the  breast.  Her  physician  was  a practiser
of  mesmerism,  and  he  had  frequently  employed  that
agency,  in  conjunction  with  other  means,  to  abate,  and,
if  possible,  cure  that  dreadful  malady.  But  he  found
that  although  he  could  always  allay  pain,  and  put  the
lady  into  a state  of  complete  ease  by  mesmerising  her,
yet  the  disease  continued  its  ravages,  and  the  only  hope
was  in  an  operation; — that  is,  by  amputating  the  breast.
When  this  only  alternative  was  proposed  to  her  in  the
wakeful  or  normal  state,  it  produced  the  most  intense
anguish  and  apprehension ; but  in  the  abnormal  mes-
meric state,  she  would  cahnly  discuss  the  matter  with
her  physician  and  friends.  At  last  the  operation  was
determined  on,  and  Jules  Cloquet,  the  eminent  Parisian
surgeon,  was  chosen  for  the  operator.  The  surgeon,  in
his  narrative  of  the  case,  says  that  he  found  the  lady
seated  in  a chair,  her  eyes  closed  as  if  in  sleep,  yet
conversing  with  her  physician,  who  had,  in  fact,  put
her  into  the  mesmeric  or  somnolent  state,  some  short
time  before.  She  spoke  calmly  of  the  intended  pro-
ceedings ; removed  her  own  dress  to  expose  her  bosom
to  the  surgeon’s  knife ; and  during  the  operation,
which  lasted  about  a quarter  of  an  hour,  she  conversed
cheerfully  both  with  the  surgeon  and  physician,  who
was  seated  by  her,  and  supported  the  arm  on  the  dis-
eased side,  without  exhibiting  the  slightest  pain,  or
consciousness  of  what  was  going  on.  The  lady  was
then  put  to  bed,  and  carefully  attended  to,  without
being  awaked  from  the  mesmeric  state.  On  the  next


PHENOMENA,  ETC.,  OF  MESMERISM.  21

(lay  but  one,  the  first  dressings  were  removed — usually
a most  painful  trial  to  the  patient ; the  wound  dressed
again  ; and  then,  after  the  lapse  of  some  hours,  she  was
aroused : having  been  kept  for  more  than  two  days  in
the  somnolent  state.  When  awakened  she  was  uncon-
scious of  all  that  had  transpired  since  she  was  put  into
the  sleep  more  than  two  days  before  ! When  she  found
that  her  breast  had  been  removed,  that  the  wound  had
again  been  dressed,  and  found  herself  surrounded  by
anxious  and  sympathising  relatives,  her  feelings  may
be  better  imagined  than  described ! But  I will  here
make  a cautionary  remark.  It  must  not  be  supposed
that  because  persons  in  a state  of  somnolency  feel  no
pain,  that  therefore  they  will  be  unconscious  of  any
injury  inflicted  on  them  in  that  state,  when  they
return  to  the  normal  condition : on  the  contrary,  Avhen
they  are  aroused,  theyAvill  feel  the  effect  of  any  injury,
just  in  proportion  to  its  severity.  Common  humanity
therefore  requires,  that  experiments  made  to  ascertain
the  state  of  the  sensibility,  should  be  such  as  only  to
occasion  transient  pain.

23.  Catalepsy,  or  rigidity  of  the  muscles  ; Phan-
tasy; Tr^vnsfer  of  feeling  from  the  operator  to  the
patient ; and  what  is  called  IVLignetic  Attraction. —
These  are  all  interesting  displays  of  mesmeric,  or  rather
psychic  states,  and  will  be  better  understood,  when  we
come  to  the  consideration  of  the  psychological  part
of  our  subject.  The  facility  with  Avhich  these  states
can  be  produced,  depends  entirely  on  the  susceptibility
of  the  subject.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  manipulations,
actual  contact,  or  audibly  spoken  words  are  necessary
to  produce  the  desired  result ; but  in  some  cases,  the
mere  volition  of  the  operator  is  sufficient.  Thus  in
case  of  catalepsy,  by  merely  drawing  the  hand  over  the
patient’s  arm,  that  is,  in  mesmeric  language,  making
passes  from  the  shoulder  towards  the  tips  of  the  fingers,
the  muscles  of  the  arms  may  be  rendered  perfectly


22


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


rigid,  so  that  by  no  effort  of  the  patient  could  they  be
put  down,  nor  could  a stranger  render  them  flexible :
by  the  application  of  great  force  the  shoulder  joint  may
be  moved  ; but  as  soon  as  the  pressure  is  removed,  the
arm  will  instantly  resume  the  position  in  which  it  had
been  placed  by  the  operator.  K the  hand  of  a person
of  about  the  same  physical  strength  as  the  mesmerised
subject,  is  placed  in  the  hand  of  the  subject,  and  the
fingers  made  to  clasi>  it,  it  will  be  found  almost  im-
possible to  withdraw  it,  so  tight  will  be  the  grasp  : and
yet,  notwithstanding  this  great  apparent  exertion  of  mus-
cular power,  the  mesmerised  subjects  will  continue  to
converse  on  various  topics,  and  evince  neither  mental  nor
physical  consciousness  of  the  power  they  are  displaying !
This  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  somnolent  state  can
be  most  beneficially  employed  as  a curative  agent,  in
the  restoration  to  strength  of  palsied  or  weakened
limbs,  provided  the  somnolent  state  can  be  induced  on
the  diseased  person.

24.  But  the  phenomena  above  alluded  to,  are  among
the  simplest  of  these  displays.  By  a single  touch,  the
mouth  of  the  patient  may  be  closed  so  instantaneously,  as
to  leave  a word  half  pronounced ; and  by  a single  jmss,
as  speedily  set  at  liberty.  Even  the  nostrils  may,  by  a
single  pinch,  be  partially  closed,  so  as  instantly  to  pro-
duce the  nasal  twang  common  upon  stoi^page  of  the
nasal  passages,  by  cold  or  otherwise ; and  then  as
quickly,  by  a wave  of  the  hand,  be  restored  to  perfect
freedom.  Some  patients,  while  putting  themselves
into  various  postures,  may  be  instantly  rendered  im-
moveable and  statue-like  in  any  posture.  If  a rod,  or
any  other  suitable  article  be  put  into  the  hand,  and  the
hand  closed  by  the  operator',  by  no  effort  can  the  pati-
ent let  it  go ; although  he  may  be  so  far  demesmerised
as  to  be  fully  conscious  of  his  state,  and  of  all  around
him.  On  the  other  hand,  by  a mere  pass  of  the  hand
of  the  mesmeriser,  or  it  may  be,  by  a motion  of  his


PHEK03IENA,  ETC.,  OF  MESMERISM.  23

will,  the  mesmerised  party  finds  it  equally  impossible
to  retain  his  hold.  By  a single  pass,  or  pressure,  an
individual  may  be  rooted,  as  it  were,  by  his  feet  to  the
floor  ; fixed  immoveably  in  a chair ; or  his  hands  fixed
firmly  to  a Avail  or  bench,  or  any  other  object.  Some
of  these  experiments  are  highly  interesting  and  amus-
ing ; but  the  most  wonderful,  and  apparently  inexplic-
able, are  but  varied  manifestations  of  the  simplest
forms  of  catalepsy,  and  are,  as  we  shall  see,  explain-
able by  the  same  simple  law  which  also  explains  other
phenomena.

25.  PnAXTAST.  By  this  is  meant  such  an  action  on
the  mind  of  the  mesmerised  party,  that  the  mere  sug-
gestions of  the  mesmeriser, — sometimes  not  audibly
expressed — but  merely  silently  Avilled — are  taken  for
realities.  Thus  a handkei’chief  may  be  thrown  into
the  lap,  and  silently  willed  to  be  a rabbit,  a guinea  pig,
a chUd,  or  even  any  disagreeable  object,  as  a snake,  or
other  reptile ; and  upon  directing  the  attention  to  the
object,  as  by  simply  asking  “ Avhat  have  you  got  in
your  lap?”  the  action  and  language  soon  evince  that
it  is  considered  to  be  just  the  object  the  operator  ivills
it  to  be  ; nor  can  the  subject  conceive  it  to  be  anything
else,  or  divest  himself  of  the  Phantasy.  The  effects  of
this  mere  imaginative  action  will  generally  be  more
strikingly  displayed,  by  touching  such  of  the  phreno-
logical organs  as  have  an  affinity  with  the  sentiment  or
feeling  intended  to  be  produced.  Thus  philoprogene-
tiveness  and  benevolence,  in  case  an  infant  or  an
inoffensive  animal  is  suggested ; and  cautiousness,  in
suggesting  the  idea  of  a snake,  or  other  disagreeable
objects.  Again,  an  empty  glass  may  be  offered,  and  by
stating  it  to  contain  strong  hot  brandy  and  Avatcr,'  the
same  coughing,  and  difficulty  of  swallowing  Avill  be
produced,  as  would  folloAV  the  attempt  to  swallow
such  a liquid  by  a child,  or  a person  Avholly  unac-
customed to  it.  Then  by  taking  the  glass  away,  and


24


SOMNOLISM  AND  PStCHEISM.


immediately  presenting  it  again,  saying  that  it  eontains
eold  water,  but  care  must  be  taken  lest  it  cause  tooth-
ache ; — immediately  aU  the  effects  of  an  intense  cold
draught  will  be  manifested.  Once,  a mesmerised  sub-
ject asked  me  for  a particular  drink:  I presented  an
empty  glass,  and  silently  willed  it  to  be  castor  oil.
No  sooner  liad  the  glass  touched  the  lips,  than  it  was
dashed  away  and  broken  to  atoms ; at  the  same  time
the  party  exclaiming:  “ah!  it’s  so  nasty!”  Many  more
striking  and  interesting  experiments  may  be  exhibited,
but  they  may  be  all  referred  to  the  same  primary
cause.

26.  Transfer  of  State.  By  this  is  meant,  that
remarkable  phenomenon  exhibited  by  good  mesmeric
subjects,  in  feeling  whatever  may  be  done  to  the  mes-
meriser  as  done  to  themselves.  This  I have  witnessed
so  often,  and  under  such  a variety  of  circumstances,  as
to  admit  of  no  doubt  as  to  its  correctness.  Thus,  on
one  occasion,  while  lecturing,  one  of  the  audience,  to
test  the  matter,  came  unawares  and  pricked  my  leg.  I
looked  round  for  a moment  with  surprise,  and  some
little  indignation  ; but  by  the  time  I comprehended  the
motive  of  the  seeming  offender,  the  mesmerised  subject
felt  it,  and  screamed  out  loudly,  “ that  some  one  had
pricked  her  leg and  pointing  at  the  same  time  to  the
corresponding  portion  on  her  own  leg,  whicli  had  been
pricked  in  mine.  At  the  same  time  a pin  might  have
been  thrust  really  into  her  leg,  without  lier  evincing
any  consciousness.  I have  got  individuals  to  tread  on
my  toes  ; pull  my  hair ; or  pinch  different  parts  of  the
body ; and  I invariably  found  that  with  this  subject,
not  many  seconds  would  elapse,  before  she  would  com-
plain of  exactly  similar  treatment,  and  refer  the  pain
to  the  exact  corresponding  part ; and  sometimes,  I
have  experienced  considerable  difficulty  in  dispelling
the  illusion.  These  undoubted  facts  slied  much  light
on  what  may  be  called,  the  higldy  sjiiritualized,  or


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


25


purely  mental  origin  of  some  diseases  ; and  will  afford
some  clue  to  the  apparently  miraculous  manner  in
which  some  peculiar  diseases  have  been  removed.

27.  Pheeno-Mksmerism.  This  is  the  name  usually
applied  to  the  manifestation  of  the  phrenological  senti-
ments and  feelings  in  a mesmeric  subject.  It  has  been
considered  as  affording  a triumph  to  the  materializing
class  of  phrenologists ; and  hence  has  been  decried,
and  attempted  to  be  set  aside  by  the  metaphysical
spiritualists.  Possibly  both  classes  of  reasoners  mjfy
be  wrong.  Certainly  the  mere  placing  of  the  finger
of  the  operator  on  any  part  of  the  head,  and  it  being
followed  by  the  manifestation  of  a sentiment  or  feeling
proper  to  the  organ  said  to  be  situated  in  the  part
touched,  is  no  proof  that  such  organ  is  reaUy  there ;
because  the  idea  of  the  feeling  or  sentiment  is  in  the
operator’s  mind,  and  the  fact  may  be  accounted  for,  by
mesmeric  imaginative  action,  and  the  transfer  of  feel-
ings. Again,  anatomy  reveals  nothing  within  the  cra-
nium analagous  to  the  arbitrary  divisions  marked  on
phrenological  busts.  Besides,  when  we  touch  the  head,
the  skull  prevents  us  acting  dii’ectly  on  the  brain : we
only  excite  the  extremities  of  those  cranial  nerves
which  ramify  in  the  scalp.  On  the  other  hand,  the
opportunities  I have  had  for  acquiring  experience,
enables  me  positively  to  assert,  that  contact  with  at
least  certain  parts  of  the  head,  will  produce  those  feel-
ings phrenologically  ascribed  to  those  particular  por-
tions. Thus,  for  example,  I have  seen  alimentiveness
powerfully  excited  in  a mesmerised  subject  who,  when
left  alone  for  a little  while,  accidentally  reclined,  so
that  the  portion  of  the  head  wdi’e  “ alimentiveness  ” is
situated,  was  brought  into  contact  with  the  edge  of  a
table.  Again,  I have  seen  philo-progenitiveness  ex-
cited, by  a subject  accidentally  rubbing  the  occipital
portion  of  the  head  against  a high-backed  chair ; not
to  mention  other  instances.  But  this  apparent  proof


26


SOMNOLISJI  AND  PSTCHEISJI.


of  the  material  view  of  the  question  is  not  the  whole
one.  For  I have  seen  some  of  the  phrenological  sen-
timents excited  without  touching  the  head ! Thus  upon
simply  taking  the  hand  and  silently  thinking  rever-
ently of  the  Deity,  the  mesmerised  subject  has  fallen
down  on  the  knees,  and  manifested  the  most  profound
veneration.  On  other  occasions,  when  more  than  one
subject  had  been  mesmerised,  on  touching  the  “ or-
gans ” on  the  head  of  one,  the  other,  without  any
tduch  or  connection  or  any  knowledge  of  my  action,
would  instantly  manifest  the  sentiment.  Upon  the
whole,  I think  the  real  evidence  afforded  by  mesmer-
ism is  favourable  to  phrenology ; but  I am  far  from
thinking  that  the  evidence  properly  interpreted,  ne-
cessarily leads  to  that  sort  of  materialism  which  is,  by
many  persons,  associated  wuth  phrenological  doctrines.
The  brain  is  undoubtedly  the  mind’s  organ : this  posi-
tion remains,  whether  we  suppose  the  mind  uses  the
whole  brain  in  every  mental  action,  or  only  an  appro-
priate part.

28.  It  has  been  said  that  plireno-mesmerism  is  the
result  of  electrical  action,  and  that,  in  fact,  all  mes-
meric action  is  but  an  electi’ical  phenomenon: — the
operator  being  positively  electrified; — the  23atient  nega-
tively so.  For  this,  I believe,  there  is  no  evidence
whatever.  It  is  true  that  electricity  may  be  made  to
simulate  certain  vital  actions  ; but  it  is  admitted  by  the
best  physiologists  that  there  is  no  identity  between
them.  I have  carefully  experimented,  and  cannot
find  that  there  is  any  perceptible  difterence  between
the  electrical  and  magnetic  state  of  the  mesmerised
subject,  and  that  of  the  operator; — where,  according
to  the  electrical  theory,  the  greatest  difference  ought
to  be  manifested.  IVliatever  name  or  cause,  may  be
assigned  to  mesmeric  agency,  it  is  undoubtedly  a vital
one.  It  is  true,  as  I observed  at  the  outset,  that  with-
in the  living  organism  are  collated  all  the  powers  of


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


27


the  universe ; but  they  are  in  the  organism,  in  its  own
peculiar  manner.  The  magnetism  and  chemistry,  the
attractions  and  repulsions,  and  the  other  internal  oper-
ations of  the  body,  are  not  the  magnetism  and  che-
mistry, the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  outward  na-
ture ; but  they  are  living  actions,  analogous  to  outward
cosmical  and  terrestrial  activities,  but  perfectly  distinct
from  them,  and  existing  in  a degree  altogether  above
them.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  antetypes,  of  which  the
types  are  found  in  outward  nature.

29.  With  the  exception  of  Cerebral  Lucidity, —
magnetic  vision  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  and  Clair-
voyance, the  foregoing  classification  may  be  made  to
embrace  all  ordinary  mesmeric  or  somnolent  pheno-
mena: lucid  and  clairvoyant  manifestations  are  so
evidently  of  a psychical  nature,  that  before  noticing
them,  let  us  apply  ourselves  to  the  solution  of  the  phg-
siology  of  the  states  we  have  briefly  described.

30.  We  have  seen  that  within  the  skull,  there  are
in  reality  two  distinct  brains,  although  popularly  called
the  brain:  that  there  are  two  distinct  systems  of  nerves
connected  with  these  two  brains ; that  by  the  larger
brain,  or  cerebrum,  and  its  nerves,  we  feel,  think,  and
act;  and  that  it  is,  thus,  the  soul’s  medium  of  conscious
intercourse  with  the  external  world.  That  by  the
cerebellum,  or  little  brain,  and  its  nerves,  are  directed
and  controlled  all  the  involuntary  and  vegetative  func-
tions of  our  bodies : that  the  brain  has  an  automatic,
or  in  other  words,  an  independant  action  of  its  own,
by  which  it  has  the  control  of  the  blood  circulating
within  it,  and  that  in  the  state  of  sleep  the  fibres  of
the  cerebrum  collapse  or  fall  together,  and  the  blood  is
prevented  entering  the  finer  channels,  and  thereby  sti-
mulating the  brain  to  activity,  and  that  from  this  state
of  collapse  and  altered  circulation  of  tlie  blood,  arises
the  unconsciousness  and  insensibility  of  profound  sleep.

31.  The  true  mesmeric  action,  is,  as  will  be  presently


28


SOMNOLISM  AJSTD  PSTCHEISM.


shewn,  primarily,  and  fundamentally  of  a psychologi-
cal character ; hut  it  induces  a peculiar  physiological
state.  The  direct  effect  of  the  passes,  or  whatever
means  are  employed,  is  to  produce  a somnolent  state  of
the  brain,  in  some  respects,  resembling  common  sleep,
but  in  others,  widely  differing  from  it.  "WTien  the
true  mesmeric,  or  rather  psychical,  relation  between
the  operator  and  his  subject  is  established,  the  cere-
brum of  the  latter  is  rendered  dormant;  the  cerebellum
and  its  dependencies,  alone  preserving  their  normal
state.  In  the  first  place  all  consciousness  appears  to
be  suspended ; but  by  degrees,  an  inner  consciousness,
similar  to  the  consciousness  of  dreaming,  is  awakened,
and  from  this  inner  consciousness,  the  somnolized  per-
son speaks  and  acts.  The  optic  nerves  and  the  other
nerves  of  the  eye  belong  to  the  cerebrum  : hence  one
of  the  first  visible  effects  of  mesmeric  influence,  is  an
inability  to  open  the  eyelids; — although  the  eye-ball
may  be  as  yet  uninfluenced : but  as  the  somnolent
state  continues,  the  optic  nerves,  or  nerves  of  sight,
contract,  and  the  ball  of  the  eye  rolls  upwards,  and  all
power  and  perception  of  vision  is  withdrawn.  Then,
as  observed,  with  the  increase  of  the  somnolency  the
fountain  head  of  all  the  other  sensory  nerves  becomes
dormant,  and  that  of  the  motory  too,  in  a partial  de-
gree. The  sensorium,  being  by  this  change  in  the  in-
ternal state  of  the  cerebrum,  removed  from  its  connec-
tion with  the  external  world,  all  sense  of  pain  is  of
course  absent  ; and  hence,  the  seeming  mystericAis
phenomenon  of  a person  conversing  with  another,  and
yet  being  unconscious  of  feeling,  is  at  once  solved  by  a
knowledge  of  the  simple  fact,  that  the  state  of  the  cere-
brum is  changed  by  the  somnolent  influence,  and  an
inner  consciousness  awakened.

32.  Another  physiological  state,  arising  also  prima-
rily from  a psychological  cause,  is  now  perceptible.
For  although  the  operator  and  his  subject  or  subjects.


PHENOMENA,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


29


are  of  course  two  or  more  persons ; yet,  in  respect  to
cerebral  action,  or,  more  distinctly,  in  respect  to  the  ac-
tion of  the  cerebrum,  they  are  one.  In  each  person  the
cerebellum  and  its  system  of  nerves  is  in  the  normal
condition ; but  there  is  only  one  normal  and  active
cerebrum,  namely,  that  of  the  mesmeriser,  or  operator.
Hence,  however  many  may  be  the  subjects,  if  they  have
aU  been  mesmerised  by  the  same  operator,  and  are  all  fully
susceptible  of  the  somnolent  influence,  they  are  all  so
intimately,  interiorly  blended  with  him,  that  the  absence
of  their  own  external  cerebral  consciousness,  causes
them  to  feel  liis  cerebral  consciousness  as  their  own.
Here  then,  we  discover  the  physiological  reason  for  the
strange  and  anomalous  states  exhibited.  Thus,  in
cases  of  phantasy,  the  idea  existing  externally  in  the
cerebrum  of  the  mesmeriser,  is,  when  willed  by  him,
perceived  by  the  subject,  as  if  existing  in  his  or  hcT
cerebrum.  So  also  in  cases  of  catalepsy,  the  somnolency
of  the  subjects’  cerebrum,  permits  those  muscles  which
are  influenced  by  the  voluntary  nerves,  to  be  actuated  by
the  will  of  the  operatoi’’s  cerebrum.  Hence  in  the  best
cases,  the  silent  operation  of  the  mesmeriser’s  will,
that  is,  of  the  power  of  his  cerebrum,  is  sufficient  to
throw  the  subject  into  a state  of  statue-like  rigidity  ;
but  generally,  it  requires  the  aid  of  passes,  which  deter-
mine more  efficaciously  the  downward  nervous  currents.
Hence  also,  any  pain  inflicted  on  the  operator,  which,
of  course,  he  feels  in  the  sensorium' connected  with  the
origin  of  the  sensory  nerves  ; is  felt  as  if  the  impression
was  made  on  the  cerebrum  of  the  subject.

33.  But  we  shall  generally  find,  that  although  sight
and  feeling  are  withdrawn,  the  subject  retains  a perfect
capability  of  Hearing.  He  may  sometimes  be  so
indrawn,  as  to  evince  no  perception  of  sound, — similar
in  this  respect,  to  a person  engaged  in  deep  thought.
But,  by  patiently  persevering  until  the  attention  is  ex-
cited, or  the  desire  of  the  operator  is  felt,  we  shall


30


S05IN0LISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


generally  be  able  to  demonstrate  that  the  sense  of  hear-
ing remains.  Yet  by  no  means  can  sight  and  feeling  be
restored,  except  by  partially,  or  wholly  de-mesmerising
the  subject.  This  fact  may  be  thought  to  militate
against  the  theory  of  cerebral  action  I am  endeavouring
to  inculcate,  but  it  in  reality  tends  to  confirm  it ; for
the  nerve  of  hearing,  which  is  a portion  of  the  seventh
pair  of  cranial  nerves,  has  its  roots  in  what  is  called
the  corpora  restiformia,  which  is  directly  connected
with  the  cerebellum.  Sight  is  solely  under  the  direction
of  the  cerebrum ; and  we  can  exert  that  faculty  or  not,
at  our  pleasure  : but  we  canuot  help  hearing,  if  we  are
within  the  influence  of  sound  ; that  is,  by  no  organism
connected  with  our  ears  can  we  shut  out  sound.  The
ears  of  a person  in  deep  sleep  ai'e  still  open  to  the
modulations  of  the  air,  on  which  sound  depends ; but
the  dormant  state  of  the  cerebrum  prevents  the  con-
scious perception  of  sound,  unless  it  is  so  loud,  as  to
produce  that  state  of  partial  wakefulness  on  which
dreaming  depends  ; and  the  mesmerised  party  is  con-
scious of  sound,  because,  as  we  have  ah-eady  observed,
the  state  of  inner  consciousness,  is,  in  some  respects,
analogous  to  the  state  of  dreaming.  But  hearing  is
not  so  entirely  dependant  on  the  cerebelliun,  as  the
internal  involuntary  functions ; but  is  somewhat  of  a
mixed  nature,  like  the  function  of  respiration.

34.  Here  then  is  the  xohole  physiology  of  the  mes-
meric or  somnolent  state,  and  the  reason  for  the  seeming
mystery,  and  contrariety  to  our  usual  feelings,  and
common  experience.  The  cerebrum  of  the  subject  is
dormant;  tbe  cerebellum  continues  its  normal  state  of
activity;  while,  from  the  peculiai’  relationsliip  of  the
parties,  to  Avhich  we  shall  presently  allude,  the  cere-
brum of  the  operator  dominates  over  his  subject,  and
is,  in  a degree,  the  common  cerebrum  of  both  parties.


PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.,  OF  MESMERISM,


31


PHILOSOPHY  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  OF
MESMEEISM.

35.  Clairvoyance. — Of  aU  the  extraordinary  phe-
nomena of  mesmerism,  none  appear  to  stagger  the
general  belief,  more  than  the  different  manifestations  of
clairvoyance  or  magnetic  vision,  or  to  speak  more  truly
and  plainly,  the  internal  sight  of  the  soul.  To  say
that  a person  can  see  without  the  aid  of  the  eye,  or  by
any  other  means  than  light  entering  into  the  pupil  of
the  eye,  in  the  usual  manner,  seems  like  uttering  an
absurdity,  or  declaring  the  possibility  of  an  impossi-
bility. Yet,  strange  as  it  may  sound  tojthose  who  have
had  no  experience  in  this  matter,  there  is  no  mesmeric
phenomena  more  capable  of  positive  proof,  provided  the
necessary  care  be  taken  in  making  the  experiment,  and
the  subject  be  placed  in  proper  circumstances ; and
I trust  this  evening  to  afford  you  ocular  demonstration
of  the  fact.*

36.  But  before  proceeding  furtl\er,  I wish  that  it
may  be  distinctly  impressed  upon  you,  that  when  we
carefully  examine  the  eye  and  the  brain,  we  shall  see
reason  to  acknowledge,  that  an  internal  function  of  sight,
although  remarkable  and  unexpected,  and  generally  un-
known, is  not  more  difficult  to  explain  than  ordinary
vision  when  thoroughly  examined.  On  referring  to  the
human  eye,  or  any  connect  representation  of  it,  we  .shall
find  that  it  is  an  hollow  ball,  filled  with  three  different
kinds  of  fluids,  arranged  in  a determinate  order.  In
front  is  a horny  transparent  lens,  something  like  a
small  watch-glass,  to  admit  the  rays  of  light : behind  it
is  the  small  chamber  containing  the  aqueous  humour :
then  a hole,  called  the  pupil,  through  the  iris,  to  allow

* Tliis  was  demonstrated  before  the  audience,  by  a subject  blind-
folded, describing  pictures  put  into  her  hand,  and  even  when  concealed
in  a box.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  appendix.


32


SOilNOLISil  AND  PSTCnEISil.


the  rays  of  light  from  clilferent  objects  to  pass  into
the  interior  parts  of  the  eye,  first  passing  through
the  crystalline  lens,  and  through  the  vitreous  humour,
and  then  forming  an  image  of  the  objects  on  the  deli-
cate membrane  called  the  retina,  which  is  spread  out,
on  the  back  of  the  eye.*  Now  up  to  this  point  ordi-
nary vision  may  be  explained  on  optical  principles,
and  the  eye  shewn  to  be  the  most  perfect  optical  in-
strument. But  the  moment  we  attempt  to  pass  be-
yond the  retina,  science  is  at  fault ; no  natural  philo-
sopher has  been  able  to  explain  how  the  optic  nerve
conveys  the  image  to  the  brain ; we  know  that  the
mind  is  conscious  of  the  images  formed  on  the  retina ;
or,  in  more  familiar  language,  of  the  things  seen  by  the
eyes ; but  in  what  manner  an  opaque  nervous  cord,
differing  in  no  essential  particulars  from  other  nervous
cords,  conveys  that  impression  to  the  mind,  we  ai’e  en-
tirely ignorant.  Ordinary  sight,  has,  therefore,  a psy-
chological basis  ; and  this  is  admitted  by  the  best  phy-
siologists. I

37.  Clairvoyance,  or  internal  sight,  assumes  the  same
Basis,  necessary  to  perfect  ordinary  vision ; but  as  it
acts  independently  of  the  external  visual  organs ; so  it
is  not  trammelled  by  those  natural  laws  to  which  they
are  necessarily  subject.  Thus  by  this  internal  sight,
and  by  light  issuing  from  within,  and  not  from  with-
out, as  in  common  sight,  things  may  be  seen,  which
are  out  of  the  range  of  natural  sight,  and  altogether  ^
above  its  nature.  For  instance,  our  physical  sight  can
see  the  remote  starry  orbs,  placed  at  the  distance  of
perhaps  thousands  of  millions  of  miles,  because  the
undulations  of  light  proceeding  from  them  in  straight
lines,  can  impinge,  or  strike  upon  the  retina  of  our  I
eyes.  Yet  the  intervention  of  any  opaque  body,  im-
mediately shuts  out  the  vision  of  the  object,  even  if  I

* This  was  more  plainly  she^vn  to  the  audience,  by  colossal  draw-  t
iugs  of  the  Anatomy  of  the  Eye.  |


PHILOSOPHT,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.  33

placed  ill  close  connection  with  us ; so  that  if  our
penetrating  powers  of  sight  were  immensely  increased,
whether  naturally  or  artificially,  still  the  rotundity  and
opacity  of  the  earth  would  prevent  us  seeing  beyond  a
certain  distance.  But  opacity  is  no  harrier  to  internal
sight ; objects  to  which  the  mind  is  directed,  either
designedly  or  spontaneously,  will  he  equally  visible
through  doors  and  walls,  as  if  placed  directly  before
the  face.  Nay,  to  the  higher  stages  of  clairvoyance
there  seems,  comparatively  speaking,  no  bounds ; for
whether  the  object  sought  be  in  tlie  same  house,  or
town,  or  country,  or  across  the  broad  Atlantic,  or  still
remoter  Pacific  oceans,  it  appears  to  be  found  and
seen  with  equal  facility  ; and  to  be  equally  near  to  the
internal  perceptions  of  the  truly  clairvoyant  individual.
The  human  body  is  seen  as  clearly,  and  its  living  ac-
tions described  as  plainly,  as  if  the  external  and  inter-
nal parts  were  ahke  as  transparent  as  glass ; and  this
also,  without  any  bodily  connection,  such  as  by  bring-
ing the  clairvoyant  and  the  person  to  be  described  to-
gether ; but,  as  I have  proved,  when  more  than  one
hundred  miles  have  intervened  between  them.

38.  But  we  have  now  arrived  at  a stage  in  our  en-
quiry, where  physiology  ceases  to  afford  us  light : for
physiology  as  such,  that  is,  as  the  science  of  our  out-
ward living  organism,  knows  nothing  of  an  internal
or  super-solar  light ; or  of  sight  that  can  penetrate
alike  through  opaque  and  transparent  substances.  To
psychology  and  philosophy,  we  must  therefore  look  for
aid,  in  our  endeavour  to  investigate  the  apparent  mys-
tery of  this  interesting  subject.  And  1 regret  that  the
abstruse  nature  of  the  enquiry,  the  little  tliat  is  gene-
rally known  in  this  branch  of  knowledge,  together
with  the  necessary  brevity  of  popular  lectures,  will
only  pei’mit  me  to  present  you  witli  a sketch  of  the
views  opened  to  the  eye  of  rational  research.

39.  It  is  usual  to  represent  man  as  composed  of

4


34


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


mind  and  matter ; — Soul  and  body.  This  is  correct.
And  as  we  find  that  the  body  is  not  a mere  simple  un-
compounded substance,  but  a collection  of  innumerable
parts  and  organs : so,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  we  may
conclude,  that  the  mind,  or  spiritual  body,  as  the  pa-
rent and  director  of  the  natural  body,  cannot  be  that
simple  entity,  that  abstract  nothingness,  so  generally
represented  by  metaphysical  writers ; ‘but  rather  that
the  controller  of  the  animal  organism,  must  be  itself
organized  according  to  the  laws  of  its  own  peculiar
nature,  and  capable  of  manifesting  those  laws,  under
certain  circumstances,  through  those  organs  of  the  body,
that  is,  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system,  which  are
united  with  it  by  the  law  of  correspondent  activity
and  connection.  St.  Paul,  therefore,  spoke  the  lan-
guage of  the  profoundest  philosophy,  when  he  de-
clared that  there  were  spiritual  bodies  and  natural
bodies,  and  that  the  natural  body  was  the  first  in  its
development,  and  afterwards  the  spiritual  body : and
when,  on  another  oceasion,  he  defined  the  entire  hu-
man organism,  as  existing  here,  to  be  a compound  of
“ sjDirit,  soul,  and  body;”  in  this  respect,  giving  his
apostolic  sanction  to  the  doctrine  of  the  ancient  sages
of  Greece.  The  two  first  terms  used  by  the  apostle  to
describe  the  spufitual  part  of  man,  ai’e,  in  the  original
greek,  Pneuma  and  Psyche,  and  the  latter  term,  which
in  our  version  of  the  scriptures  is,  in  the  passage  al-
luded to,  translated  sold,  is,  by  the  latin  writers,  called
the  “ animus and  this  term  is  always  used  to  signify
the  animal  soul,  as  distinguished  from  the  pneuma,  or
more  interior  human  spirit.

40.  And  here  it  will  be  as  well  to  observe,  that  no
truth  is  more  evident  to  sound  rational  enquiry,  than
that  the  Creator  has  given  to  every  department  of  his
“ handy-work,”  a specific  character ; and  that  from  the
Creator  to  the  lowest  inert  matter,  there  exists  a chain
of  DEGREES ; and  that  each  object  of  creation  can  only


PHILOSOPHr,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.  35

be  irell  and  truly  studied,  by  viewing  it  in  its  own
degree,  and  comparing  it  with  objects  in  another  de-
gree. But  if  we  confound  this  distinction  of  degrees,
we  shall  never  arrive  at  a clear  and  satisfactory  solution
of  many  important  facts.  Each  degree  will  be  found
to  have  laws  or  properties  peculiar  to  itself ; and  if  we
transcend  the  degree  of  the  object  of  our  enquiry,  by
applying  to  it  quaUties  or  properties  belonging  to  an-
other distinct  degree,  we  may  expect  nothing  but  con-
fusion and  mystery.  Now  in  our  investigation  of  the
nature  of  man,  it  is  especially  necessary  not  to  over-
look these  distinctions.  By  no  process,  can  matter  be
sublimed  into  spirit ; and  spirit  having,  according  to
apostolic  authority,  and  the  general  law  of  analogy
observable  in  all  things,  its  distinctions  and  degrees,
the  properties  of  a lower  degree  may  not  apply  to  a
higher  one.  True  philosophy  also  teaches,  that  if
spirit  in  no  degree  is  material,  that  is,  does  not
possess  those  properties  which  we  apply  to  ponderable
matter ; still  it  is  no  less  on  that  account,  a truly  real
and  substantial  existence ; more  truly  substantial  than
the  granite  rock,  because,  more  unchanging,  and  more
enduring.

41.  Now  viewing  the  spiritual  organism  of  man,  as
consisting  of  two  distinct  degrees,  called  by  the  apostle
the  pneuma  and  psyche ; or  as  possessing  both  a spiri-
tual internal  and  external,  together  forming,  while  in
this  mortal  life,  the  common  internal  of  the  natural
organism  ; the  Psyche  or  Animus  will  be  the  connect-
ing medium  between  the  pure  human  spirit,  and  the
nervous  system  of  the  natural  body.  By  its  connec-
tion, through  correspondence  and  vital  affinity,  with  the
body,  it  is  placed  in  relation  with  outward  nature  ;
while  as  a spiritual  entity,  and  by  its  indissoluble  union
with  the  higher  spiritual  principle,  it  has,  at  the  same
time,  immediate  connection  with  the  spirit-world  ; and
because  it  is  a subject  of  the  laws,  and  possesses  the

4*


36


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSi’CHEISM.


properties  of  that  world,  which  have  nothing  in  common
with  time,  space,  or  common  matter,  it  displays  those
powers,  which  can  be  explained  by  no  merely  natural  or
physiological  knowledge ; but  which  receive  an  easy,
rational,  and  satisfactory  solution,  when  man  is  really
seen  to  be,  that  which  revelation,  philosophy,  and  the
statements  of  true  clairvoyants  declare  that  he  is, —
namely,  a compound  of  spiritual  and  natural  organisms,
intimately  united  by  the  exactest  correspondence  or
analogy.  And  that  although  the  lower,  or  natural
organism,  cannot  act  without  the  continued  influence  of
the  higher  or  spiritual  organism ; nor  can  the  spiritual
organism  be  developed  without  the  medium  of  the
natural  one ; yet,  when  developed,  the  higher  organism
can  act,  not  only  by  and  through  the  lower  organism,
but  even  independently,  and  when  disconnected  fi'om  it.

42.  It  is  this  psyche  or  animus, — the  external  of  the
spirit,  that,  from  all  that  I have  yet  learned  on  the  sub-
ject, I take  to  be  the  true  seat  of  Avhat  is  called  mes-
meric influence ; the  psyche  or  animal  soul  of  the
operator,  influences  the  same  external  spiritual  organic
principle  in  the  subject ; and  from  the  animus,  the  in-
fluence flows  downwards,  to  use  analogous  natural
terms,  and  thence  atfects  the  brain  and  nervous  system:
and  hence,  I propose  to  call  that  part  of  mesmerism,
which  manifests  mental  and  super-sensual  phenomena,
by  the  name  of  Psycheism,  or,  the  Science  of  the  Soul
as  manifested  in  nature ; wdiile  to  the  lower  and  phy-
sical stages,  the  name  of  Sojinolisji  may  be  applied,  as
indicative  of  its  sleep-like  and  dream-like  character.

43.  Now  as  to  the  induced  by

mesmerism. — It  is  a common  law  of  our  being,  that
conscious  perception  should  have  its  apparent  seat  in
the  idtimate,  or  extreme,  of  every  development.  Thus,
altliough  it  is  a well  established  fimt,  that  the  sensorium
is  within  the  brain,  and  that  if  a sensory  nerve  be  di-
vided, no  sensation  will  be  experienced;  yet  it  is  as


PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


37


well  known  that  if  we  priek  a finger,  the  pain  will  he
felt  where  the  wound  is  inflicted.  So,  notwithstanding
the  body  feels  and  acts  by  and  through  the  spirit,
our  conscious  perception,  in  the  usual  normal  condition,
is  confined  to  the  bodily  organisation;  because,  while  in
the  present  state,  the  body  is  the  ultimate  development  of
the  spirit.  When  death  severs  the  connection  between
mind  and  body,  the  idtimate  of  the  immortal  man  is
the  psyche  or  animus  ; and  to  it  is  transferred  all  con-
scious perceptions  and  sensations.  It  is  from  this
differing  seat  of  the  conscious  perceptions,  that,  in  our
ordinary  state,  we  have  no  sensational  knowledge  of
the  spirit-world,  or  of  its  laws.  But  psycheism,  or  the
higher  stage  of  mesmerism,  may  aptly  be  compared  to
partial  death.  For  it  is  a closing  of  the  common  ex-
ternal of  our  being  ; a tifinsfer  of  the  serisational  per-
ception, from  the  idtimate  of  the  body  to  the  idtimate  of
the  spirit:  and  thence,  and  simply  from  this  transfer  of
ultimates,  arises  an  awakening  of  the  conscious  sensa-
tional perception  of  the  inner  man,  or  spirit.  AU
those  apparently  miraculous  powers,  which  we  some-
times see  displayed  by  good  mesmeric  subjects,  are  in
fact,  but  the  result  of  the  psyche  or  animus  being  so
far  set  free  from  the  bodily  ultimate,  as  to  enable  the
spiritual  body  to  act  nearly,  if  not  quite  independently
of  the  sensual  organs,  and  by  perception,  and  in  light
from  an  inner  world  ; but  the  connection  of  the  mind
and  body,  is  yet  sufficient  to  enable  the  soul’s  sight  and
feeling  to  he  manifested  to  our  physical  senses,  by  and
through  the  natural  organization  of  a claiiwoyant.

44.  From  this  transfer  of  consciousness  and  sensa-
tional perception,  we  may  also  account  for  the  anoma-
lous, and  often  incongruous,  statements  and  descriptions
of  clairvoyants.  They  forget  much  of  that  mode  of
speaking  of  things  which  is  common  to  our  external
condition,  but  which,  in  itself,  is  often  purely  arbitrary
and  conventional ; and  they  speak  according  to  their


38


S03IN0LISM  AND  PSTCHEISM.


newly-awakened  and  uninformed  consciousness.  As
we  have  to  learn  to  talk,  and  even  to  see,  - or  rather
rightly  to  interpret  what  the  eye  reveals  ; so  do  clair-
voyants require  a continued  exercise  of  their  peculiar
power  to  familiarize  them  with  its  use.

45.  We  now  proceed  to  explain  the  manner  by  which
the  influence  of  the  operator  is  brought  to  bear  upon
his  subject,  and  that  sometimes  too,  at  considerable
distances  ; for  I have  found  a subject  affected  by  my
influence,  even  when  mesmerising  another  party,  at  the
distance  of  a mile  : but  this  may  be  considered  an
unusual  case.  It  is  a law  of  nature  that  all  things
should  be  surrounded  by  an  efiluvium  or  sphere  which
emanates  from  them,  and  is  always  of  the  peculiar  na-
ture or  quality  of  the  body  from  which  it  emanates  ;
and  these  efiluvia  are  regulate<l  by  certain  definite  laws.
Thus  the  fragrance  which  surrounds  the  rose,  is  the
effluvium  or  sphere  emanating  from  it ; and  this  efilu-
vium, by  being  dissolved  in  the  surrounding  aerial
atmosphere,  becomes  sensible  to  our  organs  of  smell,
and  an  idea  of  its  existence  and  quality,  is  then  trans-
mitted to  our  general  sensoriuni.  But  there  are  efflu-
via of  which  we  should  for  ever  remain  ignorant,  did
we  not  perceive  them  rationally  by  their  effects.
Thus  around  magnetized  and  unmagnetized  iron,  an
effluvium  or  sphere  prevails,  of  which,  in  their  sepa-
rated state,  our  senses  give  us  no  evidence.  But  Ave
have  only  to  bring  them  into  such  proximity,  as  to  be
within  the  influence  of  the  law  regulating  the  activity
of  their  respective  spheres,  and  their  existence  may
then  be  instantly  perceived,  in  their  mutual  attraction
and  coherence.  For  it  has  been  shcAvn  by  one  of  the
profoundest  of  philosophers,  that  these  single  spheres
have  the  property  of  blending  into  one  larger  sphere,
and  that  hence  arises,  Avhat  is  called  magnetic  attrac-
tion.

46.  One  of  the  results  of  the  higher  stages  of  clair-


PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.  39

voyance,  or  independent  internal  sight,  is  the  know-
ledge, that  an  efHuvium  or  sphere,  analogous  to  what
we  have  alluded  to,  surrounds  the  mental  organism,  or
spiritual  body  of  every  individual.  Following  the  ge-
neral law  of  nature,  tWs  sphere  possesses  the  peculiar
mental  qualities  of  the  organism  from  which  it  ema-
nates. And  hence  arises  the  repugnance  which  is  felt
to  the  society  of  some  persons,  and  the  pleasure  which
is  experienced  in  the  company  of  others  ; and  to  it,  are
referrible,  all  the  remarkable  instances  of  Sympathy
and  Antipathy,  so  frequently  observed.  But  in  these
ordinary  cases,  the  active  cause,  is  latent,  or  hidden;
yet  in  the  higher  mesmeric,  or  rather  psychic  state,
it  often  becomes  sufficiently  obvious,  even  to  our  phy-
sical senses ; for  we  may  here  see,  that  similar  to  what
we  have  said  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  there  is  an
actual  blending  of  spheres.  The  magnet  induces  its
state  on  the  iron,  so  that  it  becomes  magnetical ; and
the  operator  induces  his  sphere  on  his  patient  or  sub-
ject, so  that  the  subject  becomes,  as  it  were,  one  body
with  himself ; the  egoism  or  self-consciousness  of  the
one,  being  blended  -svith  the  egoism  or  self-conscious-
ness of  the  other.

47.  Here  then  is  the  psychological  cause,  for  the
physiological  state  already  mentioned.  The  change  of
state  induced  upon  the  animus  of  the  subject,  is  the
primary  cause  of  the  change  in  the  condition  of  the
cerebrum ; the  collapse  of  the  cerebrum  closes  the  ex-
ternal consciousness,  while  the  union  of  the  spheres
emanating  from  the  animus  of  both  operator  and  sub-
ject, causes  the  latter  to  perceive,  as  in  himself,  what
really  is  felt  in  the  active  cerebrum  of  the  former.
And  this  change  of  state,  affords,  I believe,  the  true
psychological  solution  to  the  whole  apparent  mystery
of  catalepsy,  phantasy,  and  many  other  curious  mesmeric
phenomena.  As  regards  phreno-mesmerism,  the  arous-
ing into  activity  one  particular  organ  of  the  brain,  as


40


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSYCHEISM.


it  would  be  called  by  one  class  of  phrenologists,  or  fa-
culty of  the  mind,  as  it  would  perhaps  be  called  by  an-
other class,  without  the  guidance,  control,  or  balancing
powers  of  the  other  organs  or  faculties,  is  a sufficient
reason  for  the  effects  we  see  displayed.

48.  But,  although  the  transfer  of  consciousness,  and
the  blending  of  the  spheres  of  the  operator  and  subject
will  account  for  many  curious,  and  otherwise  inexpli-
cable, phenomena,  it  does  not  account  for  independent
clairvoyance.  Nor  do  I think  it  can  be  reasonably
accounted  for,  but  on  the  grounds  already  intimated ;
namely,  the  awakening  of  the  sensational  consciousness
of  the  external  of  the  immortal  body ; that  is,  of  the
psyche  or  animus.  For  I reject  as  purely  hypotheti-
cal, altogether  without  evidence,  and  contrary  to  esta-
blished laws,  that  theory  which  would  attempt  to  solve
it  by  an  imaginary  change  of  poles,  or  the  transfer  of
life  from  the  animal  to  the  organic  system.  According
to  the  latter  theory,  the  lowest  mollusk  ought  to  pos-
sess a more  extended  and  spiritual  perception  than
man ; and  man  is  to  be  spiritually  elevated  by  being
degraded  to  a level  with  the  lowest  forms  of  organic
life.

49.  The  great  difficulty  hitherto  experienced,  in
arriving  at  a knowledge  of  the  real  cause  of  clairvoy-
ance, has  arisen  from  two  causes : first,  the  different
states  of  the  clairvoyant  subject,  and  the  observer,
and  the  impossibility  of  their  having  the  same  sensa-
tional perceptions ; so  that  the  observer  cannot  sensa-
tionally perceive  how  the  clairvoyant  sees,  nor  can  the
clairvoyant  adequately  describe  his  perceptions.  And,
secondly,  the  necessity  for  the  opening  of  a higher
degree  of  consciousness,  in  order  fully  to  comprehend
the  lower.  For  instance,  an  animal  can  have  no  pro-
per idea  of  its  own  nature ; but  man  is  enabled,  by  the
possession  of  an  internal  spiritual  principle,  rationally
and  sensationally  to  investigate  his  animal  body.  Ajid


PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.


41


the  mere  induction  of  the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,  does
not  enable  the  possessor  of  that  faculty,  sensationally
to  perceive  the  cause  of  that  phenomenon ; this  re-
quires the  awakening  of  a higher  consciousness,  though
still  probably  belonging  to  the  psyche,  or  animal  part
of  the  spiritual  organism.  But  in  this  respect  I have
an  advantage  over  most  enquirers  in  possessing  a sub-
ject, who  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  induced  mesmeric
extasis  or  trance,  has  repeatedly  been  in  states  of
spontaneous  extasis  of  a far  higher  and  more  interior
character ; and  the  reality  of  these  states,  has  been
proved  to  me,  by  the  most  convincing  evidence.*  One
striking  difference  between  these  two  states  is,  that
whatever  occurs  to,  or  is  seen  by,  the  ordinary  mesmeric
extatic,  is  completely  forgotten,  or,  more  correctly,  is
altogether  unknown  upon  the  return  to  the  normal
state : while  the  true  extatic,  or  subject  of  the  Supe-
rior state,  as  Davis,  the  american  clairvoyant  styles  it,
upon  returning  to  the  normal  condition,  recollects  all
that  has  been  manifest  to  him  in  the  abnormal  condi-
tion. This  singular  fact  receives  an  easy  solution  if
we  admit  the  psychological  doctrine,  that  man  possesses
both  an  internal  and  external  memory.  In  the  normal
wakeful  condition  these  memories  act  as  a one,  and
hence  we  are  only  conscious  of  one  memory.  In  the
abnormal  state  of  induced  mesmerism,  the  internal
memory  is  active,  while  the  external  is  dormant ; and
from  this  want  of  connection  between  the  two  memo-
ries, arises  the  oblivion  invariably  witnessed.  But  in
the  superior  state,  or  true  spiritual  extasis,  both  me-
moi’ies  are  active,  but  from  a more  interior  degree
than  in  ordinary  life ; and  hence  the  extatic  subject
can  recollect  in  the  normal  state,  what  has  transpired
in  the  spontaneous  abnormal  state ; and,  at  the  same
time,  possesses  a full  consciousness  of  the  great  differ-
ence between  these  states,  so  as  not  to  confound  the
* The  reader  is  again  referred  to  the  appendix.


42


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSTCHEISM.


perceptions  and  knowledges  of  one,  witli  those  of  the
other.

50.  A remarkable  revealment  of  this  superior  state,
or  spontaneouse  xtasis,  is,  that  every  man,  while  in  this
mortal  life,  is,  by  the  very  laws  of  his  being,  and  hence
of  course,  by  the  design  of  the  Creator,  intimately,
though  unconsciously,  associated  with  the  spirit- world;
and  this  especially  by  what  may  be  styled  his  associate
spirit;  and  that  in  the  memory  of  this  associated  spirit,
is,  as  it  were,  a reflection  of  all  that  exists  in  the  me-
mory of  the  associated  man ; so  that  distinctly  to  per-
ceive the  associated  spirit  is  tantamount  to  a full  per-
ception of  the  character,  both  mentally  and  physically  of
the  associated  man,  as  well  as  of  the  information  pos-
sessed by  him.  There  is  also  a reflection  of  the  natural
organism  of  the  man,  both  externally  and  internally:
and  also  of  the  scenery  perceivable  by  his  natural
senses.

51.  A true  clairvoyant  is  one,  who,  by  the  opening
of  the  internal  consciousness,  has  a sensational  percep-
tion of  the  objects  of  an  inner,  or  spirit- world,  that
is,  provided  the  clairvoyance  exists  in  a sufficient  de-
gree. If  the  attention  of  the  clairvoyant  is  ^directed
to  any  individual,  the  effect  is  to  bring  the  clair-
voyant into  a sensational  connection  witli  the  associate
spirit  of  the  person  sought  for : and  from  the  normal
recollections  being  treasured  up  in  the  internal  me-
mory, while  the  external  memory  and  all  immediately
connected  with  it  is  quiescent,  this  associate  spirit  ap-
pears to  the  clairvoyant  to  be  the  real  individual  sought;
and  from  this  source,  and  the  reflection  of  memory
above  alluded  to,  is  often  obtained  much  of  the  in-
formation the  clairvoyant  is  able  to  communicate  re-
specting persons  and  scenery.  But  as  man,  even  in
this  mortal  life,  is  internally  a true  spiritual  organism,
and  as  such,  is,  as  we  have  already  observed,  a subject
of  the  laws  of  the  spirit-world,  a clairvoyant  may  have


K


PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  OF  MESMERIS3I.


43


a sensational  perception  of  this  spiritual  organism,  and
thence  of  the  natural  organism,  and  thus  of  the  entire
man  liimself,  however  distant  they  may  be  from  each
other,  as  to  their  natural  bodies.  Yet  still,  it  is  pro-
bable, that  this  direct  connection,  is  mediately  effected
by  the  aid  of  the  associate  spirit.  Here  then  is  the
simple  and  rational,  though  deeply  interesting  solution
of  the  undoubted  fact,  that  by  clairvoyance,  the  actual
condition  of  a person,  totally  unknown  to  the  mes-
meriser  and  his  subject,  and  across  the  broad  Atlantic,
has  been  correctly  told.  This  I have  seen  extremely
useful  in  a medicinal  view  ; for  by  directing  the  at-
tention of  a sufficiently  lucid  clairvoyant  to  a distant
patient,  the  disease  under  which  the  patient  was  la-
bouring has  been  discovered,  and  every  interior  organ
of  the  body  described,  both  as  to  its  actual  condition
and  general  action.

52.  Most  clairvoyants,  strictly  so  called,  are  also
LUCID  ; that  is,  they  can  see  natural  objects  by  an
interior  perception,  independent  of  the  usual  visual  or-
gans; and,  on  this  account,  even  when  opaque  substances
intervene.  Hoic  the  impression  of  these  outward  ob-
jects is  conveyed  to  the  sensorium  is  difficult  to  under-
stand ; the  fact  that  such  is  the  case,  cannot  be  doubted
by  any  one  who  has  carefully  examined  the  subject.
In  ordinary  vision  the  mind  does  not  actually  contem-
plate the  outward  visible  object,  but  the  perception  of
that  object  as  existing  in  the  imagination.  I do  not
use  the  term  in  the  sense  of  mere  fancy,  as  is  some-
times done  ; but  by  imagination  I mean,  the  general
power  of  the  sensorium  to  form  images  within  itself,
of  objects  that  are  without  itself.  I,  therefore,  con-
sider it  a true  and  proper  faculty  of  the  psyche  or
animal  mind,  and  thence,  as  a sense  above  the  ordinary
senses  of  the  body,  and  to  which  they  are  subservient.
For  it  is  by  the  outward  senses,  which  depend  on
nervous  influence,  and  their  connection  with  this  in-


44


SOMNOLISJr  PSYCHEISSr.


ward  image-forming  faculty,  that  mind  and  matter  are
brought  into  mutual  relationship  and  connection.
Whether,  therefore,  it  is  by  ordinary  sight,  by  cerebral
lucidity,  or  by  the  suggestions  of  another’s  mind,  that
the  ideas  of  tlie  objects  are  transmitted  to  the  senso-
rium,  they  are  equally  subjects  of  the  image-forming
faculty  when  there,  and  equally  real.  I have  partially
de-mesinerised  a lucid  subject,  so  as  to  restore  the
normal  conscious  state,  without  de-mesmerising  the
eyes,  and  by  that  means  produced  conscious  lucidity.
Everything  Avas  then  stated  to  be  seen  in  a most  bril-
liant light,  altogether  different  to  common  light,  whe-
ther solar  or  artificial  ; and  at  the  same  time  all  the
surrounding  objects  were  seen  at  once,  and  yet  a sense
of  their  separate  identity  remained.  Generally,  they
seemed  greatly  magnified,  and  to  have  more  or  less  of
brilliancy  about  them  ; all  which  seems  to  indicate  that
the  independent  action  of  the  sensorium  produces  more
vivid  images  of  the  objects  impressed  upon  it ; and  this
might  be  expected,  from  the  exaltation  of  the  senses,
by  the  opening  of  the  perceptions  of  a higher  ultimate.

53.  We  have  now  taken  a brief  survey  of  the  princi-
pal mesmeric  phenomena,  and  endeavoured  to  account
for  them,  as  far  as  experience,  observation,  and  reason,
and  necessary  brevity,  will  23ermit.  Before  concluding,  I
will  notice  two  questions  often  jiroposed,  though  not  al-
ways in  the  S2)irit  of  calm  enquiry,  but  rather  in  that  of
querulous  objection.  It  is  asked,  “ Whether  all  persons
arc  subject  to  mesmeric  influence?  and  Avhy  all  cannot
be  made  clairvoyant  ?”  In  reply  to  the  first,  I ansAver
unreservedly,  that  I believe  all  jAcrsons  are  susceptible
of  mesmeric  influence,  but  in  a very  different  degree  ;
and  this  difference  Ave  might  anticipate  from  the  Avidely
differing  nervous  temiAeraments,  and  idiosyncrasies  of
individuals.  Some  Avill  scarcely  feel  the  influence,
Avhile  others  Avill  soon  fall  into  the  “ sleep.”  But  as
aegards  the  curative  influence  of  mesmerism,  experience


PHlLOSOrHY,  ETC.  OF  MESMERISM.  45

has  fully  proved  that  very  great  benefit  may  be  derived
without  any  loss  of  consciousness,  or  even  any  percept-
ible change  of  state  Yet  the  inducing  of  the  coma,  or
mesmeric  sleep,  generally  gives  the  operator  more
power  over  the  patient.  Let  it  be  remembered,  that
the  great  use  of  mesmeric  influence  is  as  a curative
agent,  auxiliary,  or  supplemental  to  medicine  ; and  that
the  various  exhibitions  of  catalepsy,  phantasy,  phre-
no-mesmerism,  &c.,  are  only  useful  as  manifestations
of  the  true  nature,  and  capabilities  of  the  human
organism.  'With  respect  to  the  second  question,  I
would  observe,  that  I have  been  enabled  to  learn,
that  lucidity  and  clairvoyance  can  only  be  developed
in  individuals  who  possess  a peculiar  cerebral  or-
ganization. This  peculiar  organization  may  be  nor-
mal in  some  few  cases,  that  is,  it  may  consist  with
a good  state  of  health:  but  in  many  cases  it  may  be
traced  to  some  affection  of  the  brain  consequent  on
disease,  and  the  possessor  of  the  faculty  will  be  deli-
cate in  health,  and  less  fitted  for  the  ordinaiy  avocations
of  life.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a faculty  to  be  generally
looked  for,  or  desired  : but  where  it  does  exist,  it  may
be  most  beneficially  employed;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
it  may,  like  all  other  things,  be  abused  ; — though  pos-
sibly, not  without  ultimately  entailing  punishment  on
the  offender.  In  proper  hands  it  may  be  advantageously
used  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  disease,  and  the  best
method  of  eflecting  a cure : and  it  afibrds  us  a means
to  acquire  most  interesting  information  as  to  the  true
nature  of  our  indwelling  immortal  spirit.

54.  In  conclusion,  permit  me  to  observe,  that  a calm
investigation  of  the  psychical  jihenomena  developed  by
mesmerism,  may  become  of  great  use  in  furthering  the
interests  of  religion  and  morality.  By  this  means  we
may  demonstrate,  that  there  is  an  internal  way  to  the
mind,  as  well  as  the  usual  external  way  of  the  outward
senses.  This,  although  admitted  by  believers  in  the


46


SOMNOLISM  AND  PSTCHEISM.


authority  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  has  been  generally
denied  by  an  influential  class  of  writers.  It  also  tends
to  illustrate  and  confirm  some  of  those  striking  and
interesting  scripture  narratives,  which  have  been  so
often  assailed  by  scepticism  and  infidelity : and  it  pre-
sents man  to  us  both  in  his  relation  to  the  spirit-world
and  the  natural  world; — being,  even  while  tabernac-
ling in  mortal  flesh,  as  to  liis  interior,  mental,  or  spiri-
tual organism,  in  direct  communication  with  a spii’itual
world,  and  thus  capable,  by  the  very  laws  of  his  being,
of  receiving  influences  from  Grod  and  spiritual  intelli-
gences ; while  by  his  material  organism,  he  is  consti-
tuted in  direct  relation  with  all  outward  things.  Man
is  thus  presented  to  us  just  in  the  light  we  might
expect,  considering  that  he  is  the  crowning  work  of
the  Great  Creator’s  skill.  For  we  may  see  that  he  is
really  and  truly,  that  link  in  the  great  chain  of  crea-
tion, which  God  has  made,  to  join  heaven  to  earth,  and
earth  to  heaven!


APPENDIX.


MESMERIC  AND  PSYCHICAL  EXPERIENCE.

1.  E.  L.,  the  young  woman  who  is  the  chief  subject  of  the  follow-
ing notes,  is  a native  of  Worcestershire.  She  is  about  five  feet  two
inches  in  height,  rather  sallow  complexion,  and  of  a nervous-bilious
temperament.  Her  health,  although  at  times  tolerably  good,  is  not
robust,  nor  is  she  capable  of  much  continued  exertion.  Before
coming  into  my  house,  she  had  been  the  subject  of  inflammatory
disease  of  the  chest,  and  of  fever ; and  not  long  before  coming  to
Bolton,  she  had  been  an  inmate  of  the  General  Hospital,  Birming-
ham, on  account  of  an  injury  received  in  the  knee.  The  treatment
there,  had  reduced  her  general  health,  but  improved  the  knee.  She
was  in  this  state  when  I first  saw  her.  Her  head  is  well  formed,
and  fully  developed.  Before  the  time  about  to  be  referred  to,  she
was  wholly  ignorant  that  she  possessed  any  peculiar  mesmeric  sus-
septibilities.  She  has  since  expressed  an  opinion,  that  the  extra-
ordinary condition  of  her  brain,  is  the  result  of  a very  large  dose  of
opium,  which  she  once  took  by  mistake,  and  which,  for  a day  or  two,
occasioned  very  serious  symptoms.  But  this  may  be  considered  as
very  doubtful.  She  completed  her  twenty-second  year,  in  December,
1848.  She  will  be  constantly  referred  to  by  the  name  of  Emma.

2.  Towards  the  close  of  the  Autumn  of  1846,  my  attention  was
directed  to  the  action  of  the  vapour  of  ether,  in  obliterating  the  sense  of
pain;  it  having  been  recently  brought  into  public  notice  for  that  purpose.
Before  this  time,  I had  seen  the  vapour  of  ether  used  as  a substitute
for  the  nitric  oxide,  or  laughing  gas,  and  had  noticed  the  intoxicating
and  exciting  effects  it  produced ; but  I was,  like  others,  ignorant
that  it  blunted,  and  in  some  cases  entirely  removed,  the  sense  of  pain.
Hearing  me  talk  of  the  effects  of  ether,  Emma  said,  that  a cousin  of
her’s  had  “ mesmerised’’  her  and  another  young  woman  with  ether,
which  they  “ sucked”  out  of  a bottle  : indeed,  she  called  it  the  “ The
mesmerise.”  Being  anxious  to  test  the  truth  of  the  reports  then  in


48


APPENDIX.


circulation,  I asked  her  if  she  had  any  objection  to  let  me  see  her
inhale  some  of  the  vapour?  She  replied,  “ None  at  all,  for  she  had
no  fear  of  its  hurting  her.”  I,  therefore,  fitted  up  a common  Win-
chester quart  bottle,  merely  by  putting  a piece  of  brass  tubing  through
the  cork,  which  went  about  half  way  down  the  bottle,  and  two  or
three  inches  above  it.  About  half  an  ounce  of  sulphuric  ether  was
put  into  the  bottle,  and  the  bottle  well  shaken,  to  mix  the  vapour
with  the  contained  air ; I then  gave  it  her,  and  told  her  to  put  the
pipe  to  her  mouth  and  gently  draw  in  the  air  in  the  bottle  ; without
closing  the  nose,  or  using  any  of  the  valvular  apparatus  then  in  use.
In  less  than  five  minutes  I observed  that  her  hands  began  to  loosen
their  hold  of  the  bottle,  which  I then  removed ; the  pupils  of  her
eyes  became  dilated,  and  presently  the  eyelids  closed.  I now  found
her  insensible  to  pain,  or  rather  to  evince  no  feeling-,  which  was
ascertained  in  various  ways,  such  as  pinching  and  pricking  various
parts  of  the  body,  endeavouring  to  excite  tittilation,  and  even  by
thrusting  pins  under  the  finger  nails  : but  she  did  not  evince  the
slightest  consciousness  of  these  experiments.  On  the  contrary,
she  was  soon  in  a merry  mood,  and  believed  herself  to  be  among  her
old  companions  in  her  native  place,  rambling  through  fields,  and
performing,  as  she  supposed,  many  rural  and  domestic  occupations.
She  would  laugh,  dance,  sing,  and  do  many  things  which  were  sug-
gested to  her;  but  when  awakened,  she  had  scarcely  any,  if  any,
recollection  of  what  had  occurred.  These  abnormal  states  were  con-
tinued longer  than  intended,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  experienced
in  arousing  her ; for,  on  one  or  two  occasions,  nearly  two  hours  were
expended  in  fully  restoring  her.

3.  Other  individuals  were  now  tried;  but  only  one  was  found,  at
that  time,  at  all  similar  to  her  in  susceptibility  to  the  ethereal
influence,  and  that  was  a youth  who  had  been  mesmerised  by  Mr.
Spencer  Hall,  when  that  gentleman  was  lecturing  in  Bolton.  The
same  bottle,  in  like  manner,  with  about  half  an  ounce  of  ether  in  it,
was  given  to  him,  and  in  flve  minutes  he  became  insensible,  and  then
exhibited  similar  phenomena  to  Emma,  but  not  so  striking.  He
talked,  and  acted,  and,  like  her,  imagined  himself  to  be  in  another
place  than  where  he  really  was.  In  about  half  an  hour  he  spontane-

lusly  awakened.

4.  The  very  small  quantity  of  ether,  subsequently  found  sufficient,


APPENDIX.


49


merely  enough  to  scent  the  bottle,  induced  an  opinion,  that  in
Emma’s  case,  the  ether  had  very  little  to  do  with  the  strange  things
witnessed ; but  that  she  was,  in  a manner,  mesmerised,  or  rather
hypnotized,  by  looking  at  the  bottle,  while  inhaling  through  the  tube.
It  was  therefore  resolved,  to  try  another  experiment.  One  evening
I told  her  to  sit  down,  and  taking  a small  pocket  comb,  desired  her
to  look  steadfastly  at  it.  She  did  so  ; and  in  a few  minutes  fell
into  the  simple  mesmeric,  or  hypnotic  sleep.  Afterwards  a small
magnet  was  used  for  the  same  purpose,  and  with  the  same  results.
A few  days  further  on,  I mesmerised  her  in  the  usual  mode,  that  is,
by  looking  fixedly  at  her.  The  youth  mentioned  above,  was  also
submitted  to  a similar  experiment,  by  causing  him  to  gaze  stedfastly
on  a small  magnet  held  a few  inches  from  his  eyes.  In  both  cases
results  were  obtained,  similar  to  those  following  the  use  of  the  ether,
namely,  insensibility  to  pain,  and  a sort  of  somnambulic  wakeful
dreaming.  In  both  these  cases,  the  only  difference  yet  perceptible,
between  the  effects  of  the  ether,  and  those  resulting  from  hypnotizing
or  mesmerising,  was,  that  by  the  latter  mode  the  limbs  could  be
made  rigid, — cataleptic,  as  it  is  called ; while  no  such  rigidity  could
be  induced  after  the  inhalation  of  the  ether.  Up  to  this  time,
dancing,  singing,  and  doing  various  things  which  were  audibly  sug-
gested, as  if  they  were  real,  and  rigidity  of  the  limbs,  after  downward
passes,  were  the  only  phenomena  noticed ; and  it  was  thought  that
the  statements  made  by  some  writers,  of  the  personal  influence  of  the
operator  over  the  subject,  were  merely  fanciful,  and  not  warranted  by
fact.

5.  Sometime  in  the  summer  of  1847,  while  experimenting  with
Emma,  I accidentally  placed  my  hand  on  the  part  of  the  head,  marked
on  busts  as  the  organ  of  veneration;  she  immediately  began  repenting
the  Apostle’s  creed;  when  my  hand  was  removed,  she  ceased;  and
when  it  was  replaced,  she  commenced  repeating  where  she  left  off.
This  was  the  first  manifestation  I got  of  the  phrenological  .sentiments,
and  interested  me  greatly  : but  it  was  some  weeks  before  I succeeded
in  exciting  the  other  sentiments  or  feelings.  Afterwards  benevolence,
veneration,  firmness,  self-esteem,  philo-progenitiveness,  acquisitive-
ness, combativeness,  &c.,  were  easily  excited,  and  often  most  powerfully
manifested.  Up  to  this  time,  no  absolute  proof  of  personal  influence
was  discovered,  but  she  became  more  easily  and  quickly  mesmerised,
and  as  easily  awakened  into  the  normal  state.


5


50


APPENDIX.


6.  It  was  now  found  that  Emma  would  exhibit  all  the  usual  mes-
meric phenomena,  such  as  catalepsy  or  rigidity  of  the  limbs ; for  she
could  be  fixed  immoveably,  in  any  position,  by  the  action  of  a few
passes  ; she  could  be  so  far  de-mesmerised  as  to  be  restored  to  out-
ward consciousness  and  yet  be  unable  to  move  the  mesmerised  arm,
or  leg.  Attraction  she  could  also  manifest,  even  in  the  same  con-
scious state,  as  I often  had  the  opportunity  of  shewing  to  friends  and
neighbours,  who  were  as  much  surprised  as  amused.  For  example,
a piece  of  money  would  be  placed  on  a table  at  a distant  part  of  the
room,  and  it  was  told  her  she  might  have  it  for  fetching  it.  She
frequently  essayed  to  do  so ; and  would  sometimes  very  nearly  reach
the  money;  but  invariably,  my  will,  and  the  drawing  passes  I made
towards  myself,  overcame  her  power ; and,  notwithstanding  her  de-
termined efforts,  would  draw  her  to  myself,  and  render  all  her  endea-
vours to  secure  the  money  inefifectual.  On  these  occasions,  she
described  the  sensations  she  experienced,  as  being  like  cords  wound
round  her  and  drawing  her.  The  various  phenomena  of  phantasy
could  also  be  most  readily  produced;  but  when  she  became  clairvoyant,
if  she  was  desired  to  look  at  the  object  that  she  imagined  to  be  so
widely  different  to  what  it  really  was,  she  would  instantly  perceive
the  delusion,  and  dash  it  from  her  ; and  yet,  within  a minute  or  two,
she  could  be  as  easily  deluded  again.  But  the  investigation  of  these
ordinary  mesmeric  states,  was  not  confined  to  those  exhibited  by
Emma ; but  their  truthfulness  was  further  confirmed  in  the  case  of
several  youths,  who  were  experimented  upon,  both  privately  and
publicly,  and  who  exhibited  the  same  phenomena  ; but  modified  in
each  case,  by  the  general  character  of  the  individual.  Since  the
period  referred  to,  Emma’s  susceptibility  has  considerably  increased,
and  now  I can  fasten  the  arms,  bands,  or  mouth,  or  fix  her  to  the
spot  on  which  she  may  be  standing  or  sitting,  by  a single  movement,
or  pressure  of  my  hand,  without  putting  her  into  the  mesmeric  sleep.

7.  It  was  not  long,  after  Emma  became  so  fully  susceptible,  before
opportunities  occurred  for  proving  the  reality  of  personal  influence,
and  that  a highly  mesmeric  subject  may  be  acted  upon,  even  when
wholly  unaware  of  the  exertion  of  such  influence.  Many  experiments
were  tried  to  ascertain  the  truth  on  this  point ; but  I will  only
mention  three  among  many  cases  that  took  place  spontaneously,  or
ratlier,  which  occurred  without  my  mind  being  directed  to  her.  Once
a gentleman  asked  me  unexpectedly,  in  a neighbour's  house,  several


APPENDIX.


51


doors  from  mine,  to  mesmerise  him.  I tried,  but  did  not  succeed.
On  returning  home,  I found  Emma  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and,
upon  enquiry,  found  that  she  had  gone  into  that  state,  while  I was
endeavouring  to  mesmerise  the  gentleman.  On  another  occasion,  I
was  wishful  to  induce  the  mesmeric  sleep  on  a lady,  for  the  relief  of  a
rheumatic  affection,  from  which  she  was  suffering.  Finding  the  con-
tinual stare  very  fatiguing  to  my  eyes,  and  also,  expecting  to  be
called  away  by  patients,  it  occurred  to  me,  that  if  I directed  her  to
look  steadfeistly  at  something,  it  might  answer  the  same  purpose,  and
allow  me  to  leave  her,  without  interrupting  the  mesmeric  action.  I
therefore  arose,  and  took  a small  magnet  and  suspended  it  by  a wire
from  a hook  in  the  ceiling.  Emma  was  in  a room  under  where  I
was  operating,  and  knew  nothing  of  my  movements.  In  a few
minutes  the  smell  of  burning  linen  arrested  my  attention,  and  I de-
sired my  daughter  to  go  down  stairs  and  ascertain  the  cause.  She
called  to  me  quickly  to  come  down : I did  so,  and  found  Emma
mesmerised,  and  on  her  knees  before  the  fire,  engaged  in  sweeping
the  hearth,  and  her  apron  on  fire,  from  contact  with  a burning  coal
that  had  fallen  from  the  grate  ; but  of  this  she  was  unconscious,  and
her  attention  was  wholly  directed  to  a point  in  the  ceiling  of  the
room.  Having  asked  “ What  she  was  doing  or  looking  at?”  She
replied,  “ I want  that  magnet.”  Upon  enquiry,  I found  that  she
had  been  engaged,  just  under  where  I was  sitting : the  influence  had
passed  through  the  floor  and  ceiling  and  affected  her  unconsciously  in
the  room  below,  and  being  now  clairvoyant,  she  immediately  saw  the
magnet  through  the  ceiling,  &c.,  and  pointed  accurately  to  its  situa-
tion. But  from  the  locality  of  the  room,  and  the  magnet  having
been  used  without  any  previous  intimation  of  my  intention, — in  fact,
it  did  not  occur  to  me  do  so,  until  the  patient  had  been  some  time
seated, — she  could  not  possibly  know  of  its  being  in  the  situation  in
which  I had  placed  it,  by  any  normal  means.  Here  then,  was  one,
among  numerous  spontaneous  instances,  of  the  transmission  and  re-
ception of  a personal  influence,  and  of  the  reality  of  clairvoyance.
On  another  occasion,  I was  called  to  see  a patient  residing  more  than
a mile  and  a half  from  my  residence  : the  case  was  one  of  Delirium
Tremens,  and  I resolved  to  try  the  soothing  influence  of  mesmerism,
and,  in  this  instance,  succeeded  in  a few  minutes.  On  returning
home,  I found  that  Emma  had  gone  into  the  mesmeric  state,  at  the
time  I was  operating  on  my  patient ; but,  fortunately  she  was  in  a

5*


52


ATPENJUIX.


situation  where  no  harm  happened  to  her.  By  way  of  experiment,  I
frequently  mesmerised  her  when  in  another  room,  and  unknown  to
her ; but  in  the  above-named  and  other  cases,  I did  not  think  of  her ;
and  the  circumstance  can  only  be  explained  from  her  known  suscepti-
bility, and  my  being  actually  engaged  in  exerting  a mesmeric  influ-
ence and  intention.  This  extreme  susceptibility  to  my  personal  in-
fluence, for  a considerable  period,  prevented  my  using  mesmerism  as
a curative  agent ; inasmuch  as  I feared  to  exercise  the  power,  unless
I knew  that  Emma  was  in  a place  of  safety,  and  would  be  kept  from
danger,  in  case  she  should  become  unawares  mesmerised.

8.  In  the  early  part  of  1847,  Emma  wished  to  have  the  vapour  of
ether  administered,  with  the  view  of  having  an  aching  tooth  re-
moved without  pain ; but  tbe  striking  effects  I had  seen  follow  upon
mesmerising  her,  induced  me  to  refuse  the  ether,  and,  in  tbe  evening
to  mesmerise  her ; and  thus  farther  test  the  power  of  the  mesmeric
sleep  to  subdue  pain.  About  9 o’clock  that  evening  I desired  her  to
sit  down  ; induced  the  mesmeric  sleep  ; and  then  leisurely  got  the
necessary  instruments ; lanced  her  gum ; extracted  the  tooth ; as
soon  as  the  bleeding  was  arrested,  washed  her  mouth,  and  then
aroused  her.  The  entire  time  from  sitting  down  until  fully  aroused,
was  ]ust  Jif teen  minutes.  During  the  operation,  she  did  not  evince
the  slightest  sensibility  j but  as  soon  as  the  removal  of  the  instru-
ment gave  liberty  to  her  mouth,  she  began  to  hum  a tune,  even  while
the  blood  was  flowing.  On  awakening,  she  knew  nothing  of  what
had  taken  place,  after  going  into  the  sleep,  and  could  hardly  be  per-
suaded, that  the  tooth  on  the  table  before  her,  had  been  extracted
from  ber  jaw!  Sometime  afterwards,  Mr.  Patrick,  Surgeon  Dentist,
of  Bolton,  extracted  a large  decayed  molar  tooth  from  her  lower  jaw,
under  similar  circumstances.  On  the  latter  occasion,  several  friends
were  witnesses  of  tbe  operation.

9.  Discovery  ok  Ldcidity  and  Clairvoyance.  In  the  au-
tumn of  1847,  it  was  told  me,  that  there  was  a young  woman  in
Bolton,  who  had  travelled  the  country  with  a mesmeric  lecturer,  and
who  had  been  for  a long  time  Clairvoyant.  Having  heard  much
of  this  wonderful  faculty,  I was  desirous  to  see  her.  She  was  soon
afterwards  introduced  to  me  for  examination.  I found  that  she  was
very  easily  mesmerised,  and  in  that  state  she  knew  me,  and  others  in
the  room;  also  that  she  was  fully  susceptible  of  feeling;  in  these  re-
spects differing  widely  from  Emma.  I could  not,  therefore,  fully  sa-


APPENDIX.


o3


tisfy  myself,  as  to  the  reality  of  the  mesmeric  state.  Tlie  young
woman  said,  that  she  had  formerly  been  in  the  same  state  as  Emma,
but  had  passed  beyond  it ; and,  from  subsequent  experience,  I think
this  may  be  correct.  She  told  me  that  she  had  been  taken  by  several
London  physicians  to  examine  the  internal  organs  of  patients  by  the
faculty  of  clairvoyance ; but  when  I saw  her,  her  powers  seemed  to  be
conhned  to  reading  books  with  large  print,  with  the  eyes  bandaged.
I tried  the  experiment  several  times,  but  never  felt  satisfied  with  the
result ; as  from  the  position  in  which  she  placed  the  book,  the  time
occupied  in  the  endeavour,  and  the  occasional  wriggling,  I could
never  be  certain  that  she  did  not  see  under  the  bandages.  At  other
times,  I was  certainly  much  surprised  at  the  readiness  she  evinced  in
describing  a book  I had  in  my  hand.  On  the  whole,  I concluded,
that  her  possession  of  the  faculty  of  clairvoyance,  was,  to  say  the
least,  doubtful.  But  it  soon  after  occured  to  me,  that  if  she  ever
could  see  in  the  manner  she  stated,  perhaps  Emma  could  see  in  the
same  manner.  At  all  events,  I had  the  most  positive  assurance  that
she  went  into  the  mesmeric  state,  and  that  in  that  state,  she  could
not  see,  but  that  the  power  of  vision  was  wholly  withdrawn  ; the
sense  of  hearing  alone  connecting  her  consciously,  with  the  external
world.

10.  One  evening  I determined  to  try  her.  But  at  this  period  she
could  not  read,  and  was  ignorant  even  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.
I therefore  chose  pictorial  representations  for  the  test ; as  being  a
universal  language,  understood  alike  both  by  the  learned  and  the
unlearned.  I took  a school  book  belonging  to  my  daughter,  which
contained  various  wood-cuts,  and  opening  it  at  one,  I placed  it  in
her  hand,  saying,  “ Emma,  what  is  this  picture?”  She  took  the
book,  and  as  if  by  instinct,  placed  it  open  over  her  forehead,  and
upper  part  of  the  cranium,  without  the  least  attempt  to  look  at  it  in
the  ordinary  way,  and  said  almost  directly,  “ Oh  yes ! — it  is  a naughty
hoy  catching  flies  at  the  window,  and  his  mother  is  looking  at  him.”
This  was  the  subject  of  the  picture  and  the  story  annexed.  There
was  a figure  of  a boy  at  a window,  endeavouring  to  catch  a fly,  and
another  figure  of  a female  standing  in  the  room  observing  him.  I
felt  n^t  exceedingly  surprised  and  astonished  at  the  correctness  of
the  ^cription,  being  assured  that  she  could  not  see  it  by  any  ordi-
narj  use  of  the  eye ; — or  in  fact,  by  the  eye  at  all.  This  experiment
was  repeated  with  many  different  pictures,  and  invariably  with  the


54


APPENDIX.


same  result ; coloured  pictures  were  also  tried,  and  it  was  found  that
she  knew  the  different  colours  accurately ; but  on  no  occasion  did
she  attempt  to  use  the  eye : she  invariably  placed  the  object  over  her
head.

11.  It  was  now  thought,  that  as  mesmerism  evidently  rested  on  a
psychological  basis,  and  that  a manifest  connection  was  discoverable
between  the  mind  of  the  mesmeriser  and  the  mesmerised  subject,  she
might  possibly  see  these  pictures  somehow,  in  my  memory,  and  not
from  any  independent  power  of  vision.  I,  therefore,  requested  my
daughter  to  select  the  pictures,  and  then  to  put  them  into  my  hand,
without  telling  me  the  subject,  or  letting  me  see  them.  This  was
repeatedly  done,  and  the  pictures  as  accurately  described  as  when  I
knew  the  subject.  Still  it  was  thought  that  my  giving  her  the  pic-
tures might  have  some  effect  upon  her : others,  therefore,  gave  her
them,  or  she  was  allowed  to  take  them  herself  from  a number;  or  to
turn  over  the  pages  of  a book,  without  any  one  knowing  what  she
had  taken,  or  had  turned  to,  until  she  had  described  what  she  had
selected.  But  it  was  found  that  it  made  no  difference,  and  demon-
strated, that  whatever  was  the  power,  or  wherever  the  seat  of  vision,
it  was  her  own,  and  independent  of  any  one  else.

12.  These,  and  similar  experiments,  have  been  successfully  per-
formed, in  private,  before  a select  company,  and  also  before  large
public  audiences ; and  this  too,  with  her  eyes  covered  with  plaisters,
and  a bandage  tied  over  the  plasters.  Not  that  the  plasters  or
bandages  made  any  difference  ; but  they  were  used  for  the  sake  of
convincing  sceptical  people.  At  this  time,  in  ascertaining  the  sub-
ject of  a picture,  she  first  passed  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  her  right
hand  gently  over  it,  (the  left  hand  did  not  seem  to  possess  the  same
power,)  and  then  placed  it  over  that  part  of  the  head,  marked  on
phrenological  busts  as  the  organ  of  Imitation'.  If  a book  with
prints  on  the  pages  was  given  her,  she  would  pass  her  right  fingers,
gently  over  the  page,  and  if  it  was  letter-press  or  blank,  she  would
say,  “It  was  nothing.”  But  when  she  had  thus  found  out  the
situation  of  the  print,  she  would  exclaim,  “ Oh  yes!  here  it  is;”  or
“I've  got  it.”  But  whether  the  print  was  a wood-cut,  or  copper-
plate, did  not  appear  to  make  any  difference.

13.  A very  curious  phenomenon  was  now  observed.  Pictures  of
things  did  not  appear  to  her  as  pictures,  but  as  the  things  represented.
So  that  the  picture  of  a rose  would  convey  as  fin'd  and  real  an  idea


APPENDIX.


55


to  her  seasorium,  as  the  rose  itself  would  do  to  an  individual  in
the  ordinary  state.  Hence  it  was  found,  that  if  a picture  of
thistles,  teasels,  or  other  prickly  plants,  or  of  hees,  was  given  into  her
hand; — the  moment  the  tips  of  her  right  fingers  came  into  contact
with  the  picture,  she  would  exclaim  that  she  was  pricked  or  stung,
and  throw  the  picture  from  her  with  much  violence  and  passion !
Evidently  proving,  that  the  representations  of  things  were  to  her  real;
and  also  suggesting,  that  she  had  a perception  of  the  form  of  the  ob-
jects, before  placing  the  picture  on  her  head.  These  experiments
were  performed  many  times,  both  publicly,  and  privately.  And  from
her  invariable  use  of  the  tips  of  the  right  fingers,  it  was  supposed,
that  there  existed  some  unknown,  but  remarkable,  affinity,  between
the  senses  of  touch  and  sight.

14.  By  the  commencement  of  1848,  her  power  of  internal  sight
had  become  so  developed,  or  she  had  become  so  familiarized  with  her
new  faculty,  that  it  was  evident,  from  many  things  observed,  that  she
could  see  such  things  as  her  mind  was  directed  to,  without  any  con-
tact. As  an  experiment,  small  pictures,  and  various  small  objects,
were  placed  singly,  first  in  a card  box,  and  afterwards  in  a wooden
box  ; and  these  she  told,  at  times,  as  readily  as  when  out  of  the  box
and  in  her  hands.  At  other  times,  more  difficulty  was  experienced
in  satisfactorily  determining  that  she  could  see  them.  This  difficulty
arose  from  two  causes  : first,  from  the  manner  in  which  she  would
describe  what  she  saw;  and,  secondly,  from  an  obstinacy  of  temper
frequently  displayed,  when  removed  by  mesmeric  influence  from  ex-
ternal habit  and  control.  Her  usual  manner  was  to  describe  things
as  they  appeared  to  her  in  the  internal  state,  regardless  of  the  names
imposed  upon  them  by  custom ; sometimes  she  refused  to  call  things
by  their  accustomed  name,  and  would  always  describe  them  in  her
own  way,  before  she  called  them  by  the  common  name.  As  an  in-
stance, the  following  may  be  given.  At  the  second  public  lecture,  in
the  Temperance  Hall,  Bolton,  on  the  9th  of  March,  1848,  a gentle-
man in  front  of  the  platform  suggested  that  a picture,  from  among
others  lying  on  the  floor,  should  be  put  into  a box,  and  given  to  her :
she  had  then  been  bandaged  for  some  time.  A print  of  a cat  was
selected,  and  put  into  a card  box  : she  put  the  box  over  her  head,
felt  it  carefully  with  her  right  fingers,  and  then,  having  by  a smile
and  ejaculation,  evinced  that  she  saw  the  contents,  she  began  ; “ It
is  a thing  ; it  is  a dark  thing;  it  has  four  legs,  a tail,  a head  and  two


56


APPENDIX.


eyes  ; things  round  its  mouth,  and  it  sits  by  the  fire  and  says  mew,
and  its  a cat.”

15.  One  cause  of  difficulty  in  attaining  clear  descriptions  of  the
things  to  which  her  attention  was  directed,  and  sometimes  even,  in
getting  her  to  notice  them,  was  very  early  perceivable.  In  the  exalted
condition  of  mesmerism,  her  mind  was  peculiarly  susceptible  of  im-
pressions from  the  minds  of  surrounding  persona ; hence,  when  en-
vironed by  a knot  of  sceptics,  as  was  sometimes  the  case,  their
mental  influence,  unconsciously  to  themselves,  would  seriously  im-
pede the  faculties  of  the  clairvoyant;  and  then  the  feeling  that
something  was  preventing  the  usual  development  of  her  powers,
caused  irritation  and  obstinacy.  At  the  period  alluded  to,  when
Emma  was  asked  “ How  she  saw  things?”  she  would  say,  that  sud-
denly “glasses”  came  to  her,  and  also,  that  she  sees  everything  in  light
through  these  “glasses;”  and  the  situation  of  these  “glasses”  she
always  referred  to  the  organs  of  imitation.  When  this  doubting,
opposing  influence  was  brought  to  hear  upon  her,  she  would  exclaim,
“ They  are  darkening  my  glasses  ;” — or  “ They  have  taken  away  my
glasses.”  I frequently  found,  that  by  making  passes,  from  the  upper
part  of  the  head  across  the  organs  of  imitation,  I could  produce  and
increase  the  clairvoyant  power,  which  she  would  evince,  by  exclaim-
ing, “ Oh,  its  so  light  now ;”  while  by  making  longitudinal  passes,
from  the  vertex,  over  the  forehead  and  down  to  the  face,  the  sight
could  be  immediately  closed,  and  she  would  be  placed  in  a state  of
darkness.  Bodily  fatigue,  or  indisposition,  would,  at  that  time,  and
also  does  at  the  present  time,  considerably  impair  the  powers,  not
only  of  clairvoyance,  but  all  the  other  mesmeric  capabilities.

16.  Besides  the  description  of  pictures,  &c.  already  noticed,  she
frequently  described  persons  in  another  room,  and  said  what  they
were  doing ; frequently,  without  having  her  attention  directed  to  the
enquiry.  At  other  times  she  would  unexpectedly,  and  uniisked,  tell
individuals,  what  they  had  in  their  pockets,  or  what  sort  of  food  was
contained  in  their  stomach.  This  often  afforded  matter  for  interest-
ing and  amusing  experiments  ; and  has  been  witnessed  by  many  re-
spectable persons  in  the  neighbourhood.

17.  For  a considerable  time  after  she  exhibited  the  most  distinct
lucidity,  with  respect  to  objects  placed  near  her,  no  trace  could
be  found  of  that  distant  clairvoyance  manifested  by  some  mesmeric
subjects : but,  eventually  this  faculty  became  as  clearly  developed  as


APPENDIX.


57


the  other.  The  first  time  I observed  this  power,  was  in  the  case  of
some  near  relatives  in  London.  She  described  minutely  the  dress
and  appearance  of  these  parties ; their  occupation  at  a certain  time,
and  many  other  particulars,  which  was  subsequently  found  to  be  cor-
rect. Once  I directed  her  attention  to  a female  relative  in  London.
Emma  speedily  found  her,  and  began  to  describe  her  residence,  &c.
but  suddenly  her  attention  ceased  to  be  directed  to  my  relative,  and
she  became  engrossed  with  the  description  of  a magnificent  residence,
with  its  elegant  and  costly  furniture ; a lady  lying  in  a superb  bed, —
a beautifully  dressed  baby ; well  dressed  ladies  in  and  about  the
room;  and  another  room  in  which  were  older  children,  also  beauti-
fully dressed,  and  attended  by  ladies.  From  many  replies  to  my  en-
quiries, I considered  that  the  only  place  to  which  her  impassioned
descriptions  could  refer  was  Buckingham  Palace,  for  the  accouch-
ment  of  the  queen  had  then  recently  occurred.  I therefore  said,  “ Do
you  see  any  soldiers  there?”  “ Yes,”  she  replied,  “ there  are  soldiers
at  the  door.”  I then  saw  that  my  conjecture  was  correct ; but  why
she  should  have  spontaneously  gone  there,  without  any  request  on  my
part,  or,  indeed  any  thought  or  desire  in  that  respect,  I could  not
understand.  But  after  I had  informed  my  relative  of  this  occurrence,
I obtained  the  clue  to  this  singular  transition  from  one  subject  to
another.  For  I was  informed  that  she  had  been  thinking  of  the
queen,  and  the  interesting  circumstances  in  which  she  was  then
placed ; and  had  felt  desirous  that  I should,  as  an  experiment,  try
whether  Emma  had  the  power  to  visit  and  describe  the  interior  of  the
palace  at  that  time.  The  cause,  therefore,  of  Emma’s  unexpected
visit  to  royalty  was  this  : my  relative  had  wished  her  to  go  there ;
when  brought  into  mesmeric  connection  with  her,  the  active  senti-
ment of  her  mind,  was  communicated  to  Emma’s  mind  ; and  by  this
means,  her  attention  was  unconsciously  directed  to  the  royal  resid-
ence. But  there  was  further  confirmation  that  this  was  the  true
cause,  and  of  the  possibility  of  a mesmerised  subject  receiving  im-
pressions from  the  parties  to  whom  their  attention  is  directed.  For
when  I knew  from  my  relative’s  letter,  what  had  been  the  subject  of
her  thoughts,  I put  Emma  into  the  mesmeric  state,  and  then  asked
her,  “ How  and  why  she  went  to  see  the  queen  ?”  She  directly  replied,

" L took  me.”  But  how  did  you  get  in  if  there  were  soldiers  at

the  door?  ”0!  I jumped  over  the  soldiers ; but  L could  not

jump  over  them,  and  therefore  she  could  not  get  in.”


58


APPENDIX.


18.  At  this  time,  whenever  sent  on  these  distant  excursions,  she
exhibited  great  fatigue  and  excitement ; panting,  and  sufifering  from
violent  action  of  the  heart.  When  asked  why  she  panted  so?
she  would  say,  “ I’ve  gone  so  fast,” — and  “ It  is  such  a way !”  She
would  also  take  my  right  hand  and  place  it  on  her  bosom : if  I re-
moved it,  she  said,  “ They  are  gone  away  now.”  But  latterly  she
has  not  required  any  personal  contact  to  enable  her  to  exercise  this
faculty.  Very  many  experiments  were  made  to  test  this  faculty : in
some  cases  she  was  strikingly  correct ; in  others  only  approximately
so ; for  she  would  sometimes  confound  the  recollection  of  bygone
transactions  existing  in  the  minds  of  distant  individuals,  with  present
circumstances,  and  thus  present  a representation  which  required  some
explanation  to  unravel.

ly.  Having  heard  of  clairvoyants  visiting  the  planets,  I determined
to  try  the  experiment  with  Emma.  I therefore  proposed  an  excursion
to  the  moon  ; and  not  then  knowing  how  to  direct  her  attention  to
such  distant  objects  ; and  she  herself  being,  at  the  time  alluded  to,
wholly  ignorant  of  the  mode  by  which  a knowledge  of  distant  things
is  obtained ; and  fancying  that  she  actually  travelled  by  some  mode,
I suggested  the  electric  telegraph  as  an  expeditious  mode  of  convey-
ance. The  suggestion  answered  the  purpose,  and  she  was,  mentally,
soon  on  our  satelite.  But  on  that  and  subsequent  occasions,  the
great  excitement  produced  by  the  strangeness  of  what  she  saw,  and
the  distance  travelled,  caused  such  a palpitation  of  the  heart,  as  to
render  it  necessary  to  shorten  the  visit,  by  de-mesmerising  her;
being  fearful  that  the  great  physical  excitement  might  produce  some
serious  effect  on  her  health,  if  not  immediate  danger.  Her  descrip-
tion of  what  she  saw  was  conveyed  in  very  ejaculatory^  language;
from  the  surprise  and  pleasure  she  experienced.  Her  statements  were
to  the  effect,  that  the  moon  is  inhabited ; that  the  inhabitants  she
saw  were  very  small — dwarfs — not  larger  than  children  on  our  earth ;
their  heads  were  large  in  proportion  to  their  bodies,  and  the  mouth
vertical  rather  than  horizontal ; their  voices  harsh,  and  rough,  and
resembling  the  sound  of  distant  thunder ; and  when  they  spoke,  the
speech  seemed  to  come  up  from  the  bowels.  Their  “ insides”  were
not  quite  like  ours ; the  lungs  especially  were  different.  She  saw
some  food,  something  that  looked  somewhat  like  bread,  but  they  did
not  call  it  by  that  name.  She  saw  only  one  animal,  something  like  a
very  small  pig.  There  dwellings  were  constructed  of  pieces  of  rocks.


APPENDIX.


59


covered  over  with  green  stuff  resembling  gorse : they  were  very  low,
for  she  could  put  her  hand  to  the  top.  The  place  did  not  look  like
what  she  conceived  the  moon  to  be;  but  a large  place,  and  very
rocky,  with  immense  precipices,  and  lofty  mountains.  The  “ little
folks,”  as  she  called  the  inhabitants,  could  clamber  up  these  rocks
with  their  hands  and  feet,  so  fast  that  she  could  not  catch  them.
“Is  there  any  water  there?”  “Yes:  but  it  does  not  look  like  our
water,  but  more  like  milk  and  water,  and  yet  it  is  clear.  (Meaning
probably,  that  it  is  of  gi'eater  density  than  our  water.)  It  lies  in
the  bottom  of  hoUows,  and  down  the  steep  precipices.  The  ‘ little
folks  ’ can  walk  upon  this  water  and  not  sink ; they  are  very  light.
They  wear  clothes ; but  they  are  very  simple  and  all  alike.  They
seem  good  sort  of  people.  They  have  a curious  way  of  jumping  on
the  back  of  each  other.  A very  little  baby  was  seen  in  a sort  of
cradle ; it  died : they  said  what  signified  that,  it  had  gone  to  sleep ;
but  they  did  not  mean  sleep,  but  that  it  was  dead.”

20.  At  another  time,  I attempted  to  send  her  to  Jupiter;  but  the
physical  excitement  was  so  great,  that  I thought  it  prudent  to  call
off  her  attention,  before  I had  obtained  any  definite  remarks.  She
spoke  of  having  been  further  than  where  she  had  before  seen  the
“ little  folks ;”  and  of  seeing  them  as  she  came  back.

21.  Besides  tbe  power  of  seeing  by  an  internal  sight  such  things
as  were  put  into  her  hands,  or  to  which  her  attention  was  directed,
Emma  would  sometimes  manifest  a sort  of  apparently  omnipresent
vision.  Thus  she  has  frequently  been  asked  to  find  missing  or  lost
articles.  After  a few  minutes  consideration,  she  has  said  where  they
might  be  found;  or,  in  other  cases,  got  up,  and  pointed  out  the  place
where  they  lay  concealed.  And  this  she  has  repeatedly  done,  when
there  was  the  most  undoubted  evidence,  that  neither  herself,  in  the
normal  condition,  nor  the  mesmeriser,  nor  any  other  individual,  knew
the  situation  of  the  articles  she  was  desired  to  look  for.  Thus  prov-
ing, that  not  only  can  an  unusual  mode  of  seeing  be  developed  by
mesmerism,  but  also  an  exalted  degree  of  power,  which  makes  all
things,  whatever  their  local  position,  appear  directly  within  the
sphere  of  vision.  This  power  has  been  on  most  occasions  called  into
exercise  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  experiment  and  to  test  its  reality ;
but  it  has  also  been  applied  to  purposes  of  use.  The  following  is  a
remarkable  instance ; and  also  valuable  as  placing  the  reality  and
powers  of  clairvoyance,  or  internal  sight,  beyond  the  reach  of  cavil  or

contradiction.


60


APPENDIX.


22.  On  Wednesday  evening,  December  20tli,  1848,  Mr.  Wood,
grocer,  of  Cheapside,  Bolton,  had  bis  cash  box,  with  its  contents,
stolen  from  his  counting  house.  After  applying  to  the  police,  and
taking  other  precautionary  steps,  and  having  no  clue  to  the  thief,  al-
though he  suspected,  what  was  proved  to  be  an  innocent  party ; and
having  heard  of  Emma’s  powers  as  a clairvoyant,  he  applied  to  me,
to  ascertain,  whether,  by  her  means,  he  could  discover  the  party  who
had  taken  it,  or  recover  his  property.  I felt  considerable  hesitation
in  employing  Emma’s  powers  for  such  a purpose ; fearing,  that  both
the  motive  and  agency  might  be  grossly  misrepresented.  But  the
amount  at  stake,  the  opportunity  for  experiment,  and  Mr.  Wood
being  a neighbour,  induced  me  to  comply  with  his  request ; and  nine
o’clock,  next  morning,  was  appointed  for  the  trial.  At  that  hour  Mr.
Wood  came  to  my  residence,  and  I then  put  Emma,  by  mesmerism,
into  the  internal  state,  and  then  told  her  that  Mr.  Wood,  (whom  I
put  cn  rapport,  as  it  is  called,  with  her,)  had  lost  his  cash  box,  and
that  I wished  her  to  tell  us,  if  she  could,  where  the  box  was  taken
from  ? wbat  was  in  it  ? and  who  took  it  ? She  remained  silent  a few
minutes,  evidently  mentally  seeking  for  what  she  had  been  requested
to  discover.  Presently  she  began  to  talk  with  an  imaginary  person-
age, as  if  present  in  the  room  with  us ; but  as  it  subsequently  proved,
although,  invisible  and  imaginary  to  us,  he  was  both  real  and  visible
to  her ; for  she  had  discovered  the  thief,  and  was  conversing  with  his
mind  on  the  robbery.  She  described,  in  the  course  of  this  apparent
conversation,  and  afterwards  to  us,  where  the  box  was  placed ; what
the  general  nature  of  its  contents  was,  particularizing  some  documents
it  contained ; how  he  took  it,  and  that  he  did  not  take  it  away  to  his
residence  at  once,  but  hid  it  up  an  entry ; and  her  description  of  his
person,  dress,  associations,  &c.,  was  so  vivid,  that  Mr.  AV.  immediately
recognized  the  purloiner  of  his  property  in  a person  the  last  to  be
suspected.  Feeling  satisfied  from  the  general  accuracy  of  her  descrip-
tions, and  also  from  her  describing  the  contents  of  the  box,  that  she
had  really  pointed  out  the  delinquent,  Mr.  W.  went  directly  to  the
house  where  he  resided,  and  which  she  had  pointed  out,  even  to  tho
letters  on  the  door-plate ; and  insisted  on  his  accompanying  him  to  my
house ; or,  in  caso  of  refusal,  to  the  police  office.  AVhen  brought,  and
placed  in  connection  with  Emma,  she  started  back  from  him,  as  if  he
had  been  a serpent ; telling  him  that  ho  was  a bad  man,  and  observ-
ing also,  that  ho  had  not  the  same  clothes  on  as  when  he  took  the
box ; which  was  the  fact.  He  denied  strenuouslj',  all  kuowdedge  of


APPENDIX.


61


the  robbery,  then,  and  up  to  a late  hour  in  the  afternoon ; but  as  he
was  not  permitted  to  go  at  large,  and  thus  had  no  opportunity  for
destroying,  or  effectually  concealing  the  box;  and  as  Mr.  Wood  had
promised  for  the  sake  of  his  connections,  not  to  prosecute,  if  confes-
sion was  made,  and  the  box  and  contents  recovered,  he,  at  last,  ad-
mitted, that  he  had  taken  it,  and  in  the  manner  described  by  Emma ;
and  the  box  and  contents  was  found  in  the  place  where  he  had  se-
creted it ; broken  open ; but  the  property  safe.  It  should  be  observed,
that  Emma  had  pointed  out  the  place  where  the  box  was  concealed,
but  we  could  not  be  certain  of  the  place  she  meant,  without  permit-
ting her,  while  in  the  internal  state,  to  lead  us  to  it : this  the  con-
fession rendered  unnecessary.

23.  In  other  cases  Emma  has  described  articles  that  have  been  lost
by  parties  placed  en  rapport  with  her,  without  her  being  asked  to  do
so,  or,  indeed,  anything  being  said  respecting  them.  In  some  in-
stances these  have  been  most  interesting  experiments,  affording  evid-
ence of  her  being  able  to  trace  a series  of  events,  totally  unknown  to
her  in  the  normal  state,  back  through  a number  of  years.

24.  Several  times  she  has  been  directed  to  seek  for  persons  in  dis-
tant regions  of  the  globe.  Whenever  she  has  found  them,  her  state-
ments of  time  and  season,  invariably  coincided  with  the  latitude  and
longitude  of  the  places  to  which  she  has  been  directed.  At  present
one  complete  proof  only  has  been  obtained  of  her  really  having  a dis-
tinct and  truthfid  perception  of  such  distant  objects.  A young  man
had  sailed  from  Liverpool  for  New  York,  without  apprizing  his
parents  of  his  intention  of  doing  so,  until  the  day  the  ship  sailed.
His  parents  immediately  remitted  him  a sum  of  money  by  the  mail
steamer ; but  they  were  subsequently  informed,  that  he  had  not  ap-
pUed  for  it ; nor  had  anything  been  heard  of  him,  although  the  ship
in  which  he  sailed  had  long  arrived.  In  a state  of  anxiety  the
young  man’s  mother  came  twenty  miles  to  Bolton,  to  see  whether  by
Emma’s  means,  she  could  learn  anything  of  him.  After  a little  time,
Emma  found  him ; described  his  appearance  correctly ; and  entered
mto  so  many  details,  as  to  induce  his  mother  to  rely  upon  her  state-
ments ; and  to  request  me  to  make  enquiries  at  intervals  of  about  <a
fortnight.  I did  so,  and  traced  him  by  her  means  to  several  places;
and  the  information  thus  acquired,  I transmitted  to  his  parents.  On
the  24th  of  January,  in  the  present  year,  I received  a note  from  the
young  man’s  father,  informing  me  that  a letter  had  arrived  from  his
son,  and  that  “ it  was  a most  striking  confirmation  of  Emma’s  testi-
mony from  first  to  last.”


62


APPENDIX.


CLAIRVOYANCE  AS  APPLIED  TO  PHYSIOLOGY  AND
MEDICINE.

25.  For  more  than  eighteen  months,  Emma  has  been  able  to  see
the  internal  organs  of  the  human  body : at  first,  only  when  placed  in
personal  connection  with  the  individual  to  be  examined ; but  subse-
quently, w'hen  the  parties  were  many  miles  distant.  In  her  best
state,  the  human  body  seems  to  her  completely  transparent,  and
might  be  compaied  to  a watch,  whose  case  and  works  were  all  of  the
most  transparent  chrj’stal.  I discovered  this  power  from  her  remarks
on  myself.  One  evening  she  began  to  describe  my  lungs,  as  “ pinh
things,”  full  of  holes  like  a sponge,  with  air  in  the  holes,  and  thousands
of  little  veins  in  all  directions.  She  said  the  right  lung  was  not  so
good  a colour  as  the  left,  and  that  it  stuck  at  the  middle  fiap.  This
I knew  to  he  the  case,  and  thought  she  might  only  be  giving  utter-
ance to  my  own  ideas.  But  I soon  found  that  this  was  not  the  case ;
but,  as  in  the  case  of  the  pictures,  she  really  did  see  what  she  de-
scribed. I asked  her  some  questions  about  the  heart,  which  she
accurately  described,  as  to  the  auiicles  and  ventricles ; the  contained
arterial  and  venous  blood,  &c. ; but,  as  might  be  expected,  in  verj^
homely  language.  I thought  her  at  fault  once;  but  found,  that
while  I was  thinking  about  the  heart,  she  had  wandered  to  the  wind-
pipe, with  its  rings.  It  was  some  time  after  the  discovery  of  this
faculty,  before  it  could  be  used  without  inconvenience;  for  when  her
attention  was  directed  to  the  internal  organs  of  the  body,  the
strangeness  of  the  sight,  together  vdth  the  imiversal  motion,  and
circulating  blood,  so  terrified  her,  that  she  would  tremble  from  head
to  foot ; and,  when  awakened,  complained  of  being  ill  and  frightened,
without  knowing  the  cause.  But,  by  degrees,  she  became  familiarized
with  these  investigations,  and  she  will  now  calmly,  and  without  any
fear,  examine  and  describe  the  internal  organs.  Her  manner  onfthese
occasions  is  always  serious  and  kind ; her  language  soft,  but  from  her
want  of  education,  imperfect.  Had  she  received  an  anatomical
education,  her  gift  would  he  more  valuable,  or  rather,  more  accurate
descriptions  could  be  given ; but,  on  the  other  hand,  her  want  of  edu-
cation proves  that  she  does  not  derive  the  knowledge  of  the  internal
organism  of  the  body,  which  she  evinces,  from  her  previously-stored
memory.  The  application  of  this  power,  appears  to  be  one  of  the
most  legitimate  uses  of  claiiwoyance,  and  perhaps  the  most  beneficial


APPENDIX.


63


in  its  application.  By  it  an  accurate  diagnosis  may  be  formed  of
many  internal  diseases,  which  elude  the  ordinary  mode  of  research.
But  to  make  a clairvoyant  diagnosis,  truly  satisfactory,  it  often  re-
quires the  aid  of  the  medical  practitioner,  or  the  professed  anatomist
and  physiologist,  rightly  to  interpret  the  language  of  the  clairvoyant.
Many  curious  points  in  physiology,  which  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  rested  rather  upon  rational  induction,  than  positive  demonstra-
tion, have,  to  my  mind,  been  satisfactorily  determined  by  the  reveal-
ments  of  ^clairvoyance ; especially  as  regards  the  action  of  the  brain
and  nervous  system,  and  the  action  of  the  heart : and  the  knowledges
thus  obtained  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  mode  by  which  dis-
eases of  these  important  organs  may  be  cured.

26.  On  the  4th  of  August,  1848,  a gentleman  of  Bolton,  brought  a
letter  written  hy  a lady,  the  wife  of  a physician  in  Gloucestershire,
and  this  lady,  who  had  heard  of  other  clairvoyants  describing  the
diseases  of  distant  people,  merely  by  using  their  handwriting  as  a
medium  of  communication,  desired  that  it  should  be  given  to  Emma,
to  ascertain  whether  she  could  discover  the  condition  of  the  writer.
It  must  be  remembered  that  Emma  could  not  read  printing,  much
less  writing;  the  subject  matter  of  the  letter  was  of  no  consequence,
it  was  the  handwriting,  as  a medium  of  connection.  Emma  put  it
over  her  head  as  she  used  to  do  with  pictures,  and  carefully  felt  it  with
her  right  fingers,  and  then  said  “it  was  a lady’s  up  and  down  strokes,”
meaning  hy  that  phrase,  the  handwriting  of  a lady.  She  described  the
lady,  as  to  her  personal  appearance,  accurately,  even  to  a small  blemish
occasioned  by  an  accident:  the  internal  organs  of  the  body;  an
affection  of  the  spine  under  which  she  was  labouring ; the  situation
and  appearance  of  the  place  where  she  resided,  and  many  more  par-
ticulars. The  accuracy  of  her  descriptions  was  admitted  by  the
doctor ; and  subsequently,  I had  an  opportunity,  personally,  to  verify
some  of  her  statements.  The  envelope  of  the  letter  was  directed  by
the  doctor:  him  she  described  correctly,  both  as  to  his  personal  cha-
racter, general  pursuits,  and  literary  tendencies.  This  was  an  entirely
new  experiment ; and  finding  the  result  so  unexpected  and  striking,
it  led  to  many  more ; some  of  which  were,  apparently,  more  remark-
able. Among  others,  I may  mention  the  case  of  a letter  written  by
a gentleman  at  Cairo,  which  was  put  into  her  hand.  She  soon  said
it  was  written  by  a gentleman,  and  described  him,  as  to  the  condition
of  his  health,  and  the  place  where  he  was  residing,  together  with  the
chraate  and  appearance  of  the  people  there,  even  to  the  peculiar  vail


64


APPENDIX.


worn  by  the  Egyptian  ladies.  The  correctness  of  her  statement,  as  to
the  gentleman’s  condition,  was  ascertained  from  a subsequent  letter.
Locks  of  hair  have  also  been  similarly  used  as  a medium ; but  the
handwriting  appeared  to  be  the  easier  and  better  mode  of  forming
the  connection.

27.  On  the  29th  of  September,  1848,  an  opportunity  was  afforded
for  an  entirely  new  manifestation  of  Emma’s  powers.  A highly  re-
spectable gentleman  of  Manchester,  having  at  that  time,  a daughter
seriously  ill  with  a cerebral  disease,  which  baffled  the  ordinary  medi-
cal treatment,  and  which,  in  addition  to  bodily  infirmity,  had  pro-
duced a state  of  insanity,  had  been  recommended  to  try  whether  by
clairvoyance  a mode  of  cure  could  be  discovered.  He  came  on  the
previous  day ; but  Emma  then  being  in  the  state  of  trance,  to  be
presently  described,  he  could  not  obtain  the  information  sought.  He
left  with  me,  a few  pencil  marks  made  by  the  lady,  as  a means  of
forming  a medium  of  connection.  On  the  date  above,  I gave  this
piece  of  paper  to  Emma,  and  asked  her  if  she  could  find  the  person
who  made  the  mai’ks,  and  tell  me  what  was  the  matter  with  her ; for
at  that  time  I had  no  idea  of  her  selecting  any  appropriate  remedies.
She  soon  found  the  lady ; described,  accurately,  the  external  symptoms
of  her  complaint,  and  also  the  internal  condition  of  her  brain ; to
which  organ  she  referred  the  whole  cause  of  illness.  After  recom-
mending various  mesmeric  passes,  she  exclaimed,  pointing  at  the
same  time  towards  the  ceiling  of  the  room, — “ There  is  what  will  cure
that  lady,  along  with  mesmerism ; Eh ! what  little  bottles !”  These
she  described  as  containing  little  things  like  the  small  comfits,  gene-
rally called  “ thousands.”  I said,  “ Is  there  anything  like  them  in  my
shop  or  surgery  ?”  “ No ! you  have  nothing  like  them.”  “ Where  can
they  be  obtained?”  “There — in  that  big  town,  (pointing  towards
Manchester)  in  that  shop  with  a head  in  the  window ; they  are  kept
there  in  a drawer.”  It  would  not  have  occuired  to  me,  what  medicines
she  meant,  but  that  in  the  previous  month,  when  in  London,  I had
been  shewn  by  a lady,  a case  of  homeopathic  medicines.  I do  not
recollect  ever  before  seeing  any ; and  I was  quite  ignorant  at  that
time  as  to  the  mode  of  preparing  and  using  them.  I am  certain  also,
that  in  her  normal  state  Emma  knew  nothing  about,  nor  had  ever
seen,  any  of  these  medicines.  The  shop,  I subsequently  found,  was
Mr.  Turner’s,  homeopathic  chemist,  Piccadilly,  Manchester,  and  in  the
shop  window,  there  was  a bust  of  Habneman,  the  founder  of  homeo-
pathy. But  I was  ignorant  that  there  was  such  a shop  in  that  neigh-


APPENDIX.


65


bourhood,  having  seldom  occasion  to  go  to  that  part  of  the  city.  I,
wrote  to  the  gentleman,  informing  him  of  Emma’s  remarks ; and  he
directly  purchased  a case  from  Mr.  Turner,  and  came  over  to  Bolton
to  ascertain  the  particulars.  The  sealed  box  was  put  into  Emma’s
hand,  and  as  soon  as  she  had  put  it  over  her  head,  she  said  that  it
contained  the  medicines  she  before  saw;  and  pointed  especially  to
the  situation  of  one  bottle  in  the  case.  When  the  case  was  opened,
she  selected  a bottle  from  the  place  she  had  pointed  out,  and  tasted
the  globules  through,  the  glass,  without  attempting  to  draw  the  cork.
By  way  of  test,  the  bottle  was  put  into  another  part  of  the  case,  and
other  bottles  slipped  into  her  hand ; but  she  invariably  detected  the
change,  by  tasting  through  the  glass,  and  putting  the  bottle  to  her
forehead.  From  that  time,  the  prescribed  globules  were  daily  admi-
nistered, and  the  mesmeric  passes  regularly  made ; and  the  result  is,
the  restoration  of  the  lady  to  health,  both  in  mind  and  body.

28.  The  result  of  this  experiment  opened  a new  field  for  enquiry,
and  led  to  repeated  trials.  A quantity  of  the  usual  medicines  were
mixed  with  sugar,  and  put  into  small  vials,  and  given  her  with  the
homeopathic  medicines,  and  these  she  would  select  and  test  in  the
same  way ; namely,  by  tasting  them  through  the  bottle.  Sometimes
she  would  select  homeopathic  remedies;  at  other  times,  the  usual
ones.  She  invariably  calls  those  which  she  considered  suitable  for
the  disease,  nice;  the  others  she  calls  nasty;  but  I sometimes  found,
that  the  “ nice  ” medicines  were  intensely  bitter ; such,  for  instance,
as  the  sulphate  of  quinine.  How  she  obtains  this  intuitive  knowledge
of  medicines  I cannot  discover.  The  homeopathic  remedies  have  ge-
nerally been  the  best  that  could  be  selected  according  to  that  theory
of  therapeutics;  and  the  usual  medicines  have  been  quite  as  judici-
ously prescribed,  as  to  their  qualities;  but  of  the  quantity,  and  mode
of  preparation  she  was  unable  to  speak.  Sometimes  she  was  unable
to  point  out  any  remedies  for  the  disorders  she  described ; and  hence
the  necessity  for  a knowledge  of  the  properties  of  medicine,  in  some
one,  in  order  to  profit  by  her  revealments.  Her  powers  appear  to  be
chiefly  applicable  to  nervous  diseases;  and  diseases  of  the  lungs,
liver,  and  heart.  Many  cases  have  been  submitted  to  her,  from
different  parts  of  the  country ; and,  some  of  these,  of  a most  serious
character,  have  been  rapidly  cured  by  an  adoption  of  the  means  re-
commended. Since  the  period  when  this  faculty  for  examining  and
prescribing  for  distant  patients,  was  discovered,  a change  has  passed
over  her;  and  she  now  can  do  without  any  medium  of  connection;

6


66


APPENDIX.


but  requires  the  name  and  address  of  the  party  seeking  relief,  and
that  appears  to  be  sufficient  to  enable  her  to  discover  them.  But  the
handwiiting  of  the  patient,  or  the  intervention  of  some  friend,  seems
to  insure  greater  accuracy.  Upon  awakening  from  these  clairvoyant
examinations,  Emma  has  no  recollection  of  an3'thing  she  has  said  or
done;  they  being,  in  this  respect,  like  all  other  mesmeric  trances.
But  of  course,  the  information  thus  obtained,  is  available  to  the
medical  practitioner  in  all  similar  cases.

29.  Her  statements  of  the  way  in  which  some  diseases  are  removed,
and  of  the  permeability  of  the  solid  tissues  of  the  bodjq  are  very  re-
markable ; but  at  the  same  time  are  in  accordance  with  the  sug-
gestions of  profound  physiologists : and  moreover,  they  seem  to  be
borne  out  by  the  facts  of  the  case.

30.  That  exalted  sense,  before  referred  to,  which  enables  her  to  see
things  to  which  her  attention  is  directed,  as  apparently  within  the
sphere  of  vision,  whatever  their  locality,  is  also  manifest,  though  in
another  mode,  in  her  selection  of  medicines ; for  by  tasting  through  the
bottle,  she  has  been  enabled  to  identify  the  homeopathic  globules  with
the  tinctures  from  which  they  are  prepared  1 This  may  be  considered
one  of  the  strongest  proofs  that  a medicinal  virtue  resides  in  them ; for
so  highly  attenuated  are  the  dilutions  with  which  they  are  saturated,
that  to  the  ordinary  sense,  they  all  taste  alike,  and  merely  of  the
sugar  of  milk  of  which  the  body  of  the  globule  is  composed : and,  I
understand,  that  they  are  not  cognizable,  even  by  chemical  test.


SPONTANEOUS  ENTASIS,  OR  TRANCE.

31.  The  foregoing  notes  refer  to  the  phenomena  witnessed  in  the
state  of  induced  extasis,  or  mesmeric  trance ; the  ensuing  very  briefly
relate  states  of  a much  higher,  or  more  interior  character,  and  dif-
fering, in  some  respects  essentiall}',  from  the  observed  facts  of  ordinary
mesmerism.

32.  Frequently  during  the  spring  and  summer,  Emma  would,  in
the  mesmeric  state,  speak  of  the  scenery  and  nature  of  the  spirit-
world,  in  such  a way,  as  to  impress  the  beholder  with  a conviction
that  the  descriptions  she  gave,  could  not  be  the  result  of  any  pre-
viously acquired  knowledge,  or  of  an  active  imagination.  She  also,
occasionally  spoke  of  things  w'hich  had  actually  occurred,  but  w'hich
it  was  impossible  for  her  to  know  by  any  ordinaiy  means.  Her  ideas


APPENDIX.


6?


of  religion  were  principally  derived  from  the  teachings  of  a village
schoolmistress,  in  connection  with  the  Church  of  England,  and  from
occasional  attendance  at  the  pubhc  services  of  the  church.  She  had
been  taught  to  read  a little  when  a child,  but  had  lost  the  acquire-
ment through  a fever ; and,  as  before  observed,  at  this  time  she  conld
not  read,  nor  even  correctly  tell  the  letters  of  the  alphabet : and  yet
the  ideas  to  which  she  sometimes  gave  utterance,  were  of  an  elegant
and  exalted  description.  As  she  still  continued  to  have  no  recollec-
iion  of  what  she  uttered  when  she  returned  to  the  normal  state,  I
one  day  said  to  her,  “ Emma,  I have  heard  of  some  persons  having
seen  such  things  as  you  speak  of,  but  they  could  recollect  what  they
saw,  and  write  an  account  of  it  in  books.”  She  replied,  “ Yes : because
it  was  permitted  them ; and  she  should  also  he  permitted  hy  and  by  to
recollect  what  she  saw.”  I did  not  tell  her  this  when  she  awoke ;
nor  did  I expect  then,  that  her  prediction  would  be  verified.  But
subsequent  events  proved  that  she  was  correct,  in  making  this
assertion.

33.  The  first  of  these  spontaneous  states  of  extasis,  or  spiritual
trance,  occurred  on  the  3rd  of  July,  1848,  without  any  expectation  or
forewarning  on  her  part.  This  did  not  last  more  than  a quarter  of
an  hour.  Afterwards  she  had  several  which  lasted  about  half  an  hour ;
and  since  them,  some  which  have  extended  from  four  to  ten  hours.
Of  most  of  these  states,  she  had  a presentiment  while  in  the  mesmeric
state ; and  in  one  instance  foretold  the  occurrence  nearly  two  months
before  it  happened.  But  she  knew  nothing  of  what  was  forthcoming
while  in  her  ordinary  wakeful  state ; and  for  the  sake  of  experiment,
and  to  test  the  truthfulness  of  her  predictions,  she  was  never  in-
formed when  these  trances  were  to  occur ; yet  she  was  found  correct,
even  to  the  exact  time.  They  have  usually  been  preceded  by  a
feeUng  of  quietness,  and  a somewhat  confused  sensation  in  the  head,
but  no  pain.  Several  gentlemen  whom  I had  apprised  of  her  state-
ments, have  been  witnesses  of  their  accuracy,  and  of  the  genuineness
of  this  abnormal  condition.

34.  In  these  states  she  preserved  a recollection,  at  times,  of  the
place  she  was  actually  in,  and  of  the  persons  by  whom  she  was  sur-
roimded,  and  at  the  same  time,  she  had  a distinct  and  sensational
perception,  of  a higher  and  spiritual  state  of  existence,  and  of  a class
of  beings  living  in  such  a state.  She  would  speak  of  these  things
while  in  the  trance,  and  on  her  return  to  the  normal  state,  she  conld
recollect,  and  would  again  describe  what  she  had  seen  and  heard.


68


APPENDIX.


During  the  first  trance  of  four  hours  duration,  which  occurred  on  the
28th  of  September,  1848,  she  was  so  far  elevated  in  her  perceptions,
that  she  spoke  of  this  world,  as  the  other  world,  just  as  if  she  had
passed  from  this  life  by  death.  She  said  also,  that  the  persons  in  the
room  with  her,  appeared  only  like  shadows,  and  a long  away  from
her.  Upon  examination  she  was  found,  in  this  and  other  trances,
insensible  to  pain,  and  her  eyes  upturned,  as  in  the  ordinary  mes-
meric state,  and  her  limbs  continued  flexible.  At  times  she  would
seem  wholly  indrawn,  and  then  she  would,  as  it  were,  return  and
speak  of  what  was  passing  before  her  mental  vision.  But  in  the  next
trance  of  six  hours’  duration,  and  subsequently,  she  became  for  a part
of  it  quite  insensible  to  aU  outward  things,  and  perfectly  cataleptic
from  head  to  foot.  A gentleman  from  Manchester,  who  was  present
with  me  on  this  occasion,  assisted  me  to  raise  her  body,  and  we  found
it  as  stiff  and  inflexible  as  a log  of  wood.

35.  I took  the  opportunitj',  dming  one  of  these  trances,  to  ascertain
whether  she  could  see  concealed  natural  substances,  as  in  the  ordinary
mesmeric  state.  I put  my  hand  in  my  pocket  and  withdrew  it  with
a shilling  concealed  in  the  closed  fist.  I enquired,  “ What  have  I
in  my  hand  ?”  “ Only  a shilling,”  was  the  immediate  reply.  It  must
be  remembered  that  the  eyelids  were  closed,  and  the  eyeballs  up-
turned, so  as  totally  to  prevent  ordinary  vision.  I then  put  my  hand
into  my  pocket  again,  and  rvithdrew  it  with  half-a-crown  and  a
shilling  enclosed,  and  asked  her,  “ Can  you  see  what  is  now  in  my
hand?”  she  replied,  “ Stop  a little,  ’till  I’ve  seen  these,”  alluding  to
the  spiritual  objects  then  engrossing  her  attention : but,  when  I again
asked  her,  she  was  about  coming  out  of  the  trance,  and  could  not
then  see.

36.  One  instance  of  her  sight  will  be  related,  because  it  is  a proof
that  there  is  a reality  in  her  extatic  perceptions,  and  that  she  then
eminently  possesses  a super- sensual  gift.  On  the  11th  of  July  she
told  me,  when  in  the  mesmeric  state,  that  an  individual  whom  I well
knew,  but  who  had  been  dead  for  some  years,  had  told  her,  that  on
the  following  night  they  should  come  to  her,  and  shew  her  a book
with  some  writing  in,  which  she  was  to  take  and  shew  to  me.  From
some  of  her  remarks,  I concluded  that  one  of  three  books  was  in-
tended : — one,  a small  bible,  not  then  in  the  house.  Former  experience
having  convinced  me  of  the  reality  of  her  observations,  and  the  cer-
tainty of  her  predictions,  I got  this  little  bible,  and  put  it  with  the
other  books,  among  many  more.  In  the  night  she  awoke  in  a state


APPENDIX.


69


of  trance,  similar  to  somnambulism,  and  descending  two  flights  of
stairs,  selected  this  book  from  all  the  others,  and  then  brought  it  open
to  me.  Ofldng  to  the  darkness,  I inadvertently  knocked  the  book
out  of  her  hand,  while  seeking  a light.  She  speedily  found  the  place
again,  by  turning  over  the  pages  right  and  left,  over  her  head,  in  her
usual  mesmeric  manner.  The  passage  selected  was  Joshua  chap.  1st,
verses  8,  9.  Frequently  afterwards,  by  way  of  test,  this  bible  was
was  given  to  her  to  point  out  this  text ; and  this  she  invariably  did
before  many  persons,  without  attempting  to  look  at  it,  but  by  feeling
the  pages  and  turning  them  over  while  the  book  was  over  her  head.
She  also  told  me  circumstances  connected  with  the  history  of  that
book,  which  I am  positive  she  could  not  know  by  any  of  the  usual
means ; for  some  were  only  known  to  myself.  She  was  asked  to  teU
by  what  means  she  found  the  passage,  as  she  could  not  read,  and
was  also  in  the  dark  ? She  replied,  that  the  individual  alluded  to,
whom  she  said  she  saw  in  their  spiritual  body,  had  a similar  book
but  a larger  one,  open  upon  the  left  arm,  and  that  they  pointed  with
the  right  hand  to  the  pages,  and  the  same  text ; — that  her  hands
seemed  guided  in  their  movements,  and  when  she  had  got  the  right
place,  she  could  no  longer  turn  the  pages,  either  to  the  right  nor  to
the  left  I Another  instance  of  a similar  kind  occurred  a few  weeks
later.  After  the  lapse  of  some  months,  she  was  again  tried  with  the
small  bible ; but  having  then  lost  the  connecting  influence,  she  could
no  longer  find  the  passage  as  she  had  previously  done.

37.  The  subjects  of  these  trances  would  afford  matter  for  many
pages ; but  some  were  of  a private  character,  and,  although  highly
interesting  to  the  parties  concerned,  would  not  be  interesting  to
others,  except  as  illustrating  the  nature  of  the  spirit’s  home,  and
some  of  the  general  laws  by  which  spiritual  associations  are  regulated.
All  that  she  has  said,  tends  to  confirm  the  distinction  between  moral
good  and  moral  evil,  and  the  impossibility  of  those  who  depart  this
life  in  a state  of  moral  evil,  attaining  hereafter,  to  a state  of  moral
goodness : in  this  respect,  being  strikingly  dissimilar  to  the  statements
of  Davis,  the  American  clairvoyant ; but  who,  according  to  his  own
subsequent  statements,  had  never  been  in  the  state  of  true  spiritual
extasis,  when  he  delivered  his  lectures  in  the  mesmeric  state.

38.  Her  general  statements  represent  man  as  a spiritual  being
rising  from  the  shell  of  the  dead  body,  immediately  after  death,  a
perfectly  organized  existence,  and  having  a complete  sensational  per-
ception of  his  fellow  spiritual  bemgs,  and  of  the  beautiful  scenery  of


70


APPENDIX.


the  spiritual  spheres ; that  is,  provided  he  possessed  during  his  natural
life  a moral  state,  in  harmony  with  those  spheres.  The  male  and
female  sex  retaining  all  the  characteristics  necessary  to  a spiritual
state  of  existence,  and  Imng  together  in  a state  of  angelic  union.
Those  who  have  been  interiorly  united  here,  coming  again  into  a
state  of  union  hereafter.  She  represents  male  and  female  spiritual
beings,  thus  united,  as  appearing  at  a distance  as  one,  and  says  that
they  are  not  called  two,  nor  the  married,  but  the  one.  Infants  and
young  children,  who  have  passed  from  this  world  by  death,  are  stated
to  grow  to  a state  of  adolescence,  but  more  speedily  than  in  the
natural  world.  During  infancy  and  early  childhood,  they  are  confided
to  the  care  of  good  female  spirits,  or  angels,  whose  delight  it  is  to
instruct  them  by  various  methods,  especially  hy  representatives  of
things.  These  spiritual  spheres,  and  their  spiritual  inhabitants  are  in
close  association  with  us,  and  exercise  an  infiuence  over  us,  although
we  are  unconscious  of  it.  All  that  is  wanted  to  have  a sensational
knowledge  of  their  existence,  is  the  closing  of  the  external  conscious-
ness, and  a full  awakening  of  the  intenial  consciousness.  In  the
highest  state  of  trance,  she  appeared  to  herself,  to  be  among  spiritual
beings,  as  one  of  themselves : at  other  times  she  appeared  to  them
more  shadowy.  The  first  receptacle  of  the  departed  spirit  she  de-
scribes as  a sort  of  middle  place  or  state,  from  which  the  good
gradually  ascend  to  higher  and  more  delightful  places ; those  that
are  the  best  having  higher  abodes  than  the  others.  All  are  welcomed
by  angelic  spirits,  on  their  anival  in  the  spirit-world : but  the  evil
will  not  associate  with  the  good,  and  recede  of  their  o^vn  accord,  more
or  less  rapidly,  to  darker  places  below  and  to  the  left ; but  of  these
darker  places,  she  had  not  been  permitted  to  know  so  much,  as  of  the
abodes  of  the  good.

39.  Being  asked,  in  one  of  these  long  trances,  if  she  now  could
explain  Imo  she  saw  distant  individuals  in  the  mesmeric  state ; she
said,"  “Yes;  I can  see  how  it  is  now,  but  I could  not  before and
then  stated,  that  if  spirits  wished  to  see  each  other,  distance  is  no
inteiTuption ; and  words  to  the  effect,  that  spirits  arc  not  subject  to
our  laws  of  space  and  time ; and  that  man,  as  to  his  spirit,  is  a sub-
ject of  the  laws  of  the  spult-world,  even  while  united  to  the  natural
body.  The  opening  of  her  spiritual  consciousness,  gives  her  a sensa-
tional perception  of  the  spirits  of  all  to  whom  her  attention  is  directed :
and  thus,  however  distant  the  individual,  he  can  be  mentally  pre-
sent mth  her.  But  this  she  further  represented,  as  being  accom-


APPENDIX.


71


plished  by  the  aid  of  intermediate  associate  spirits,  by  whom  the
connection  is  completed ; and  she  further  represented  every  one,  as
having  a connection  with  the  spirit- world  yenerally;  and  a more  par-
ticular one,  by  means  of  this  associate  spirit.  Whenever  Emma
speaks  of  going  into  a trance,  she  always  represents  it  as  “ going
away,"  and  “ going  a very  long  loay”  Of  any  one  that  is  dead,  she
says,  “ They  have  left  their  shell  and  gone  away,”  and  will  never
admit  that  they  are  dead.

40.  In  the  mesmeric  state,  Emma  had  represented  the  fibres  of  her
brain  as  falling  forwards,  and  the  hemispheres  separating  at  the  top,
when  she  became  lucid ; and  she  further  said,  that  a brain  capable  of
these  movements  was  necessaiy  in  order  to  attain  to  a state  of
lucidity.  In  one  of  the  spontaneous  trances,  I asked  her  if  she  could
see  me  in  the  same  manner  as  when  mesmerised  ? She  replied,  “ That
she  had  no  recollection  of  the  state  of  her  brain  while  in  the  mesmeric
state ; but  that  in  the  state  she  then  was,  eveiything  seemed  light,  or
rather  was  seen  in  light.  She  knew  that  she  did  not  see  ivith  the
eye,  and  yet  somehow  she  seemed  to  use  her  eyes.  She  saw  me
plainly ; yet  I did  not  appear  as  I ordinarily  did ; she  could  not  ex-
plain the  difference,  only  that  I appeared  light.  It  appeared  to  her,
that  fight  issued  from  within,  outwards.  During  a subsequent  long
trance,  I enquired  whether  she  could  see  my  lungs  then,  as  she  had
done  when  mesmerised?  She  replied  in  the  negative,  and  said,  “ I
can  only  see  you  as  a cloud ; yet  I know  it  is  you.’’


PRACTICE  AND  USE  OF  MESMERISM.

41.  The  induction  of  the  mesmeric  sleep,  or  the  practice  of  mes-
merism as  a curative  agent,  is  a very  simple  process.  I am  inclined
to  believe,  that  the  result  depends  more  on  the  peculiar  constitution
of  the  subject,  than  the  power  of  the  mesmeriser.  All  that  is  required,
is  patience,  and  a proper  disposition  in  both  parties.  Let  the  subject
sit  down  in  the  easiest  and  most  comfortable  posture.  The  operator
should  be  seated  in  front,  and  take  both  hands  of  the  patient  in  his
left  hand,  placing  his  right  hand  on  the  head.  Then  gently  and
slowly  continue  to  make  passes  forwards  over  the  face : — the  operator
looking  steadfastly  at  the  eyes  of  the  subject.  The  room  should  not
be  too  light,  and  everything  kept  quiet.  The  subject  should  keep  his


72


APPENDIX.


eyes  fixed  on  those  of  the  operator,  and  yield  himself  unreservedly  to
his  influence.  If  this  course  is  perserved  in  for  twenty  or  thirty
minutes,  some  effect  will  generally  be  observed ; and  if  the  subject  is
susceptible,  probably  within  five  or  ten  minutes  the  sleep  may  be  in-
duced. If  the  front  passes  do  not  succeed ; then  it  will  be  well  to
try  backward  passes  from  the  forehead,  over  the  head  and  partly
down  the  spine ; each  party  steadfastly  regarding  each  other’s  eyes  as
before.

42.  As  a general  rule,  more  striking  eflfects  may  be  expected,  when
the  sleep  can  be  prodnced ; but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  good
may  be  done  where  the  patient  cannot  go  into  the  state  of  coma.
Where  the  object  is  to  relieve  pain,  first  try  to  produce  the  coma;
but  if  not  practicable,  or  the  patient  objects,  then  simply  make  passes
with  both  hands  downwards,  slowly  and  gently,  over  the  parts  affected;
allowing  the  fingers  lightly  to  touch  the  person  of  the  patient,  and
well  shaking  the  hands  after  each  pass.  This  may  be  smiled  at  by
the  incredulous  and  inexperienced  in  these  matters ; but  I have  had
proof  that  disease  may  be  put  into  the  system,  and  transmitted  by
passes  from  one  subject  to  another.  In  cases  of  what  are  called
nervous  headaches,  the  passes  should  be  made  from  the  forehead
over  the  head  to  the  nape  of  the  neck ; and  then  from  the  forehead
along  the  base  of  the  brain ; that  is,  just  over,  and  behind  the  ears
and  a little  way  down  the  neck,  and  then  shake  the  hands  after  each
pass,  as  before.  This  will  generally  relieve  headache  in  five  or  ten
minutes,  if  properly  performed.  No  fear  need  be  felt  as  to  the  arous-
ing of  the  patient.  Fresh  patients  will  generally  awaken  spontane-
ously. But  by  continued  back  and  upward  passes,  from  the  chest
over  the  face  and  head,  or  by  upwardly  fanning  the  face,  the  patient
will  be  aroused.

43.  The  curative  influence  of  mesmerism,  as  it  proceeds  primarily

from  the  will  of  the  operator,  though  generally  requiring  the  proper
manipulations  to  make  it  susceptible,  I propose  to  call  Parapsy-
CHfiiSM,  from  the  Greek  Parapsychi,  to  soothe  or  comfort,  and

psychd,  the  animal  soul  or  mind.

44.  The  diseases  to  which  pnrapsycheism,  or  the  curative  influence
of  mesmerism,  may  be  most  beneficially  applied,  are  those  of  the  brain,
and  nervous  and  functional  diseases.  Painful  afi'ections  of  the  head,
incipient  and  partial  insanity,  determinations  of  blood  to  the  brain,
giddiness  and  stupor,  deUrium  tremens,  and  other  aflfections  of  the


APPENDIX.


73


brain  may  be,  in  most  cases,  speedily  relieved  by  the  application  of  the
peirapsycheic,  or  mesmeric  influence ; especially  if  combined  with
proper  medical  treatment,  and  due  management.  But  none  of  the
old  system  of  treatment,  bleeding  and  blistering,  setoning  and  purging,
must  be  allowed.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  whole  range  of
neuralgic,  and  what  are  cedled,  rheumatic  afltections  ; and  organic,
as  well  as  functional  diseases  of  the  heart,  liver,  and  lungs.  In  all
painful  cases,  it  would  be  well  to  endeavour  to  bring  this  sjoothing
influence  into  operation.  No  harm  will  ever  be  done,  if  the  passes
are  made  in  the  manner  directed,  and  with  a proper  feeling  and  desire
to  do  good.  But  while  censuring  the  old  practice  of  medicine,  in  the
cases  above  alluded  to,  fairness  obliges  me  to  say  that  equal  blame
attaches  to  some  enthusiastic  mesmerists,  who,  from  their  partial
knowledge  are  led  to  despise  and  misrepresent  all  medical  treatment.
The  very  circumstance  of  true  clairvoyants  prescribing  medicines,
proves,  that  those  most  under  its  influence,  perceive  mesmerism  to
be  only  one  among  other  means  of  restoring  and  preserving  health.

45.  But  the  full  use  of  mesmerism,  as  a curative  agent,  will  never
be  thoroughly  known  until  there  are  better  opportunities  for  its
practice  than  at  present  exist.  It  cannot  he  expected  that  medical
men  should  generally  be  the  actual  mesmerisers,  as  they  would  not
be  able,  except  in  a few  cases,  to  bestow  the  necessary  time.  It
therefore,  requires  a class  of  trained  male  and  female  mesmerisers
to  act  under  the  superintendence  of  qualified  medical  practitioners
and  perhaps  it  would  be  most  successfully  carried  out,  in  establish-
ments similar  to  the  Hydropathic  Institutions,  but  more  universal  in
their  means  of  cure.

46.  In  conclusion,  I would  observe  to  those  who  may  read  these
pages  doubtingly, — experiment  for  yourselves,  not  confining  your
attention  to  one  or  two  cases ; but  patiently  investigating  wherever
opportunity  offers ; and  the  probability  is,  that  you  will  speedily  be
convinced,  by  actual  observation,  of  the  general  truths  of  mesmerism,
and  of  its  efficacy,  as  an  agent  for  the  relief  of  human  affliction.


7


Preparing  for  Publication,

BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THIS  WORK.

Qbservations  on  the  Structure  and  Physiology

of  the  HUMAN  BRAIN  and  NERVOUS  SYSTEM,  and  of
the  HEART,  LIVER,  and  LUNGS : containing  some  New  Views
illustrative  of  the  Functions  and  Uses  of  these  important  Organs,  and
the  Nature  and  Cure  of  the  Diseases  to  which  they  are  subject;
founded  upon  the  Revealments  of  Clairvoyance,  and  the  Inductions
of  the  Older  Philosophical  Anatomists,  and  Compared  with  Recent
Researches.
